古文：王秀之，字伯奋，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：王秀之，字伯奋，琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Xiuzhi, nicknamed "Bo Fen," is an evil-doer.

古文：祖裕，宋左光禄大夫、仪同三司。
现代文：祖父王裕是宋朝左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: Wang Yu's grandfather was a doctor of the Song Dynasty and the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：父瓒之，金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：父亲王瓒之任金紫光禄大夫。
English: His father, Wang Xizhi, was appointed as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：秀之幼时，裕爱其风采。
现代文：王秀之很小时，王裕便喜爱他的仪表举止。
English: Wang Xiuzhi was very young, and Wang Yu liked his manners.

古文：起家著作佐郎，太子舍人。
现代文：最初任著作佐郎，又为太子舍人。
English: His first post was that of Shosaku-saro, and he was also crown prince.

古文：父卒，为庵舍于墓下持丧，服阕复职。
现代文：父亲死，他在墓旁建了一间草房，住在裹面守丧，服丧期满后复职。
English: After his father's death, he built a grass hut next to the grave, lived in a shroud of mourning, and was reinstated after the mourning period.

古文：吏部尚书褚渊见秀之正洁，欲与结婚，秀之不肯，以此频转为两府外兵参军。
现代文：吏部尚书褚渊见王秀之端正清纯，想与他结为婚姻之好，王秀之不肯答应，因此在两府外兵参军的职务上频繁调动。
English: Wang Xiu refused to agree to the marriage, so he was frequently transferred between the posts of foreign soldiers from the two prefectures.

古文：迁太子洗马，司徒左西属，桂阳王司空从事中郎。
现代文：升调为太子洗马，司徒左西属，桂阳王司空从事中郎。
English: He was promoted to the position of Prince Saima, while Szeto Zuoxi and Guiyang Wang Siku were engaged as middlemen.

古文：秀之知休范将反，辞疾不就。
现代文：王秀之知道桂压旺型住筵将会谋反，藉口有病不去就任。
English: Wang Xiuzhi knew that the residents of Guihuangwang would rebel, and he used the excuse of illness to avoid taking office.

古文：出为晋平太守。
现代文：又出任为晋平太守。
English: He also served as the crown prince of the Jin dynasty.

古文：至郡期年，谓人曰： 此邦丰壤，禄俸常充。
现代文：到郡任职整一年，王秀之就对人说： 这块地方土壤肥沃，所以我的俸禄时常充裕。
English: After a full year of serving the county, Wang Xiuzhi said to people: This place has fertile soil, so my salary is often ample.

古文：吾山资已足，岂可久留以妨贤路。 
现代文：既然我资财已足够，怎么可以久留此地以妨碍贤路? 
English: Now that I have enough money, how can I stay here for a long time to hinder the virtuous path?

古文：上表请代，时人谓 王晋平恐富求归 。
现代文：于是上表请求让别人代替他，当时人称之为 王晋平怕富求归 。
English: As a result, the above table requested that someone else replace him. At that time, people called Wang Jinping afraid of wealth.

古文：还为安成王骠骑谘议，转中郎。
现代文：王秀之回京后任安成王骠骑谘议，转为中郎。
English: After Wang Xiuzhi's return to Beijing, he was appointed as the advisor to Ancheng Wang Xingjie, and became the middle brother.

古文：又为太祖骠骑谘议。
现代文：又任查太祖的骠骑谘议。
English: He was also appointed to consult on Chataizu's riding.

古文：升明二年，转左军长史、寻阳太守，随府转镇西长史、南郡太守。
现代文：升明二年，调任左军长史、寻阳太守，随军府一道转任为镇西长史、南郡太守。
English: In the second year after his promotion, he was transferred to the positions of the Left Army's commander-in-chief and the commander-in-chief of Hoyang Province, and then, together with the military government, he was transferred to the positions of the commander-in-chief of Zhenxi Province and the commander-in-chief of Nan County.

古文：府主豫章王嶷既封王，秀之迁为司马、河东太守，辞郡不受。加宁朔将军，改除黄门郎，未拜，仍迁豫章王骠骑长史。
现代文：府帅豫章王萧嶷既已封王，王秀之升任司马、河东太守，辞太守之职不肯接受，被加封为宁朔将军，改任黄门郎，尚未正式拜授，又调任逸章王骠骑长史。
English: The prefectural commander Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui had already been crowned king, Wang Xiuzhi was promoted to Sima and the governor of Hedong, but he refused to accept the post of governor, he was appointed as the general of Ningshuo, he was reappointed as Huangmenlang, he had not yet been officially conferred, and he was transferred to the post of Yizhang Wang Xue Changshi.

古文：王于荆州立学，以秀之领儒林祭酒。
现代文：豫章王在荆州设立学校，以王秀之兼任儒林祭酒。
English: Yu Zhang Wang set up a school in Jingzhou, with Wang Xiu Zhi concurrently serving as the Julin Festival liquor.

古文：迁宁朔将军、南郡王司马。
现代文：调任为宁朔将军、南郡王司马。
English: He was transferred to Ningshuo General and Nan County Wang Sima.

古文：复为黄门郎，领羽林监。
现代文：又任黄门郎，统领羽林监。
English: He was also known as Huangmenro, the leader of the feathered forest inspectors.

古文：迁长沙王中军长史。
现代文：又转调为长沙王中军长史。
English: He was also transferred to Changsha Wangzhongun Changshi.

古文：世祖即位，为太子中庶子，吏部郎，出为义兴太守，迁侍中祭酒，转都官尚书。
现代文：世祖即位后，王秀之为太子中庶子，吏部郎，出任义兴太守，迁侍中祭酒，又转任都官尚书。
English: After the Emperor ascended to the throne, Wang Xiuqin, the prince's middle child and a bureaucrat, was appointed as the governor of Yixing, moved to serve as the head of the sacrificial wine, and was transferred to the post of the capital official, Shangshu.

古文：初，秀之祖裕性贞正，徐羡之、傅亮当朝，裕不与来往。
现代文：当初，王秀之的祖父王裕，性格忠贞正直。徐羡之、傅亮把持朝政时，王裕不与他们来往。
English: At first, Wang Xiuzhi's grandfather, Wang Yu, was a loyal and honest person. When Xu Enzhi and Fu Liang were in charge of the imperial government, Wang Yu did not associate with them.

古文：及致仕隐吴兴，与子瓒之书曰： 吾欲使汝处不竞之地。 
现代文：及至辞官退隐吴兴，写给儿子王瓒之的信中说： 我想使你处于不与他人竞争的位置上。 
English: When Wu Xing retired, he wrote to his son Wang Xizhi: I want to put you in a position where you are not competing with others.

古文：瓒之历官至五兵尚书，未尝诣一朝贵。
现代文：王瓒之为官一直做到了五兵尚书，也从来没有去拜见过任何一位朝廷权贵。
English: Wang Xizhong has always been a five-soldier officer, and has never visited any dignitary of the imperial court.

古文：江湛谓何偃曰： 王瓒之今便是朝隐。 
现代文：江湛对何偃说： 像王瓒之这样就是今日的朝廷隐士。 
English: Jiang Zhan said to He Ying: Wang Yingzhi is now a retired emperor.

古文：及柳元景、颜师伯令仆贵要，瓒之竟不候之。
现代文：及至柳元景、颜师伯处在尚书令、尚书仆射这显贵重要的位置上时，王瓒之竟然不去问候他们。
English: When Liu Yuanjing and Yan Shifu were in the important position of Shang Shuling and Shang Shufu, Wang Xizhi did not even go to greet them.

古文：至秀之为尚书，又不与令王俭款接。
现代文：到了王秀之任尚书时，又不与尚书令王俭相交往。
English: When it came to Wang Xiuzhi's appointment as Shangshu, he did not interact with Wang Jian, the Shangshu.

古文：三世不事权贵，时人称之。
现代文：一家三代都不迎合权贵，深为当时人所称道。
English: Three generations did not serve the powerful and the rich, which was highly praised by the people at the time.

古文：转侍中，领射声校尉。
现代文：王秀之转调为侍中，统领射声校尉。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, and also became a captain.

古文：出为辅国将军、随王镇西长史、南郡内史。
现代文：王秀之又出任辅国将军、随王镇西长史、南郡内史。
English: Wang Xiuzhi also served as an auxiliary general of the country, followed by Wang Zhen Xi Changshi and Nan Gu Neishi.

古文：州西曹苟平遗秀之交知书，秀之拒不答。
现代文：州西曹荀丕写信给王秀之要求结为知交，王秀之拒绝了，不肯答覆。
English: Cao Wei from the western part of the state wrote to Wang Xiuzhi to ask him to establish diplomatic relations. Wang Xiuzhi refused and refused to reply.

古文：平乃遗书曰： 仆闻居《谦》之位，既刊于《易》；傲不可长，《礼》明其文。
现代文：荀丕又给他写信说： 我听说人应当处在《谦》遣一位置，这已经刊载在《周易》上了；傲气不可以助长，《礼经》上也有明白的条文。
English: Zou also wrote to him, saying: I have heard that people should be in a position of "humility," which has been published in "Zhou Yi"; arrogance should not be encouraged, and there are also clear provisions in "Li Jing."

古文：是以信陵致夷门之义，燕丹收荆卿之节，皆以礼而然矣。丈夫处世，岂可寂漠恩荣，空为后代一丘土？
现代文：因此信陵君能招来夷门监侯蠃的义行，燕太子丹能获得荆轲的高节，都是因为他们能礼贤下士的缘故啊 大丈夫处世，怎么可以独自寂寞地享受恩宠荣耀，白白地成为后世的一丘黄土呢?
English: Therefore, the reason why Xinlingjun was able to invite the Yimen warden, the righteous deed of the crane, and the reason why Yan Taizi, the Prince of Yan, was able to obtain the high festival of the crane, was because they were able to pay tribute to the corporal. Ah, it's okay to live in the world, how can you enjoy the grace and glory alone, and become a hill of loess in the afterlife for nothing?

古文：足下业润重光，声居朝右，不修高世之绩，将何隔于愚夫？
现代文：足下的事业受到曰月的润泽，声名高居于他官之上，若不建立超越世人的功绩，将与愚蠢的凡夫俗子有何睡别?
English: The cause at hand is moistened by the sun and the moon, and the reputation is higher than that of other officials. If you do not establish outstanding achievements, how can you say goodbye to stupid ordinary people?

古文：仆耿介当年，不通群品，饥寒白首，望物嗟来。
现代文：我年轻时性格耿介，不与官宦来往，至今年老，饥寒交迫，不得不希望有嗟来之食。
English: When I was young, my personality was Geng Shu, I didn't socialize with officials, but now that I'm old, I'm hungry and cold, and I have to hope for something to eat.

古文：成人之美，《春秋》所善。荐我寸长，开君尺短，故推风期德，规于相益，实非碌碌有求于平原者也。
现代文：成人之美，是《春秋》所赞扬的，推举我这位单者的长处，也可以提醒您这位高者改正短处，所以期望有德者推举的风气，原本是为了互有裨益，确实不是庸碌之辈有求于平原君所能相比的。
English: The beauty of adulthood is praised by "Spring and Autumn," and the strengths of nominating me as an individual can also remind you that this high-ranking person can correct shortcomings. Therefore, the tradition of expecting the nomination of a virtuous person was originally for mutual benefit, and it is indeed not comparable to what the mediocre generation is seeking from the plains.

古文：仆与足下，同为四海国士。
现代文：我舆阁下，同是四海的国士。
English: Your Excellency, I am a citizen of all four seas.

古文：夫盛衰迭代，理之恒数。
现代文：兴盛与衰败的相互更替，原本就是天道运行的常规。
English: The mutual replacement of prosperity and decline was originally a routine in the operation of heaven.

古文：名位参差，运之通塞，岂品德权行为之者哉？第五之号，既无易于骠骑；西曹之名，复何推于长史？
现代文：名位的高低，命运的通达与阻塞，这怎么是个人的品德行为所能决定得了的第五的称号，既然没有被骠骑将军所轻视，那么西曹的名声，又怎么值得长史您藉故推托呢?
English: The high and low of the title, the access and obstruction of fate, how is this the fifth title that can be determined by an individual's moral behavior, and since it has not been despised by the general, then how is the reputation of the Sicao, and is it worth the long history you use to excuse it?

古文：足下见答书题久之，以君若此非典，何宜施之于国士？
现代文：阁下的答覆久久不见到来，对于您遣种不合常典的举动，怎么能用来对待国士?
English: Your reply has been long overdue. How can your action of sending seeds abroad, which is not in accordance with the law, be used to treat a national hero?

古文：如其循礼，礼无不答，谨以相还，亦何犯于逆鳞哉？
现代文：如果是遵照礼仪行事，礼仪上没有不答覆这一条。仅仅以书信相往来，这怎么会触犯您的逆鳞呢?
English: If you are following the etiquette, there is no no-reply rule in the etiquette. Just by writing to each other, how can this offend you?

古文：君子处人以德不以位，相如不见屈于渑池，毛遂安受辱于郢门，造敌临事，仆必先于二子。
现代文：君子待人，应当以人品德的好坏为准则而不应该衹看其地位的高下，蔺相如在渑池会上没有被压服，毛遂在楚国郢都不肯受屈辱，赴敌临难，我一定会超过这两位先生的。
English: A gentleman should treat others according to the standards of good or bad human character, and should not look down on those higher or lower in status. Just as I was not crushed at the Dianchi Pool Meeting, Mao refused to be humiliated in Chu Province, and went to the enemy to face difficulties, I will certainly surpass these two gentlemen.

古文：未知足下之贵，足下之威，孰若秦、楚两王？
现代文：不知足下的尊贵和威势，能比得上秦、楚两王吗?
English: Can the dignity and authority of the King of Wu match that of the Qin and Chu kings?

古文：仆以德为宝，足下以位为宝，各宝其宝，于此敬宜。
现代文：我以德性为宝，足下以地位为宝，各人都认为自己的宝贝才是真正的宝贝，对之采取恭敬的态度，这也是很正常的。
English: I treasure my virtue, and I treasure my position. Everyone thinks that their treasure is the real treasure, and it is normal to have a respectful attitude towards it.

古文：常闻古人交绝，不泄恶言，仆谓之鄙。
现代文：常听说古人绝交，不会发泄恶语丑话，我说这是鄙夫之见。
English: I have often heard that the ancients cut off friendships and would not vent foul language. I say this is a despicable view.

古文：无以相贻，故荐贫者之赠。 
现代文：我拿不出什么来送给你，所以献上这篇贫困者的赠言。 
English: I don't have anything to give you, so I offer this poor man's parting words.

古文：平，颍川人。
现代文：荀丕是颖川人。
English: He is a native of Yingchuan.

古文：豫章王嶷为荆州时，平献书令减损奢丽，豫章王优教酬答。
现代文：豫章王萧嶷任荆州刺史时，荀丕进献谏书要他减少些奢侈华丽的行为，豫章王用宽容的态度答谢他。
English: When Yuanzhang Wang Xiaoqi was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou Province, he was asked to reduce his extravagant behavior in his dedication letter. Yuanzhang Wang thanked him with a tolerant attitude.

古文：尚书令王俭当世，平又与俭书曰： 足下建高世之名而不显高世之迹，将何以书于齐史哉？ 
现代文：尚书令王俭执掌朝政，荀丕又上书给王俭说： 足下建立了高出世代的美名，却没有表现出高出世代的行迹来，将来在齐国历史上会怎么记载呢? 
English: Shang Shu ordered Wang Jian to take charge of the imperial government, and Zang Shu sent a letter to Wang Jian saying: You have built a reputation of a higher generation, but you have not shown the behavior of a higher generation. How will it be recorded in the history of Qi in the future?

古文：至是南郡纲纪启随王子隆请罪平，平上书自申。
现代文：至此，南郡纲纪启奏随王萧子隆请求处罚荀丕，荀丕上书自我申辩。
English: At this point, Nan County Gangxi Qixing followed Wang Xiao Zilong's request for punishment and submitted a letter of self-defense.

古文：秀之寻征侍中，领游击将军。
现代文：王秀之不久被征聘为侍中，兼领游击将军。
English: Wang Xiuzhi was soon recruited as an aide-de-camp, concurrently leading a guerrilla general.

古文：未拜，仍为辅国将军、吴兴太守。
现代文：未正式拜授，仍然任辅国将军、吴兴太守。
English: Although he was not officially conferred the title, he was still appointed as the general of the auxiliary state and Wu Xing, the de facto ruler.

古文：秀之常云位至司徒左长史，可以止足矣。
现代文：王秀之常说，衹要官至司徒左长史，就可以满足了。
English: Wang Xiuzhi used to say that if you are an important official and have a long history, you can be satisfied.

古文：吴兴郡隐业所在，心愿为之。
现代文：吴兴郡是退隐的好地方，王秀之也愿意做隐士。
English: Wuxing County is a good place to retire, and Wang Xiuzhi is also willing to be a hermit.

古文：到郡修治旧山，移置辎重。
现代文：他到吴兴郡任职后，修整旧山，将行李箱笼都移放到那儿。
English: After he took office in Wuxing County, he repaired the old mountain and moved the luggage cages there.

古文：隆昌元年，卒官，年五十三。
现代文：隆昌元年，死于吴兴任上。时年五十三岁。
English: In the first year of Longchang, Wu Xing died in office. He was fifty-three years old.

古文：谥曰简子。
现代文：谧号筒子。
English: His nickname is Jane Wang.

古文：秀之宗人僧祐，太尉俭从祖兄也。
现代文：王秀之同宗人王僧佑，是太尉王俭的堂兄。
English: Wang Soyou, a member of the same lineage as Wang Xiuzhi, was a cousin of the first lieutenant Wang Jian.

古文：父远，光禄勋。
现代文：两人同一曾祖父。王僧佑的父亲王远任光禄勋。
English: The two share the same great-grandfather. Wang Zengyou's father, Wang Yuanren, was awarded the Order of the Star.

古文：宋世为之语曰： 王远如屏风，屈曲从俗，能蔽风露。 
现代文：宋朝时，有人说： 王远好像屏风一样，能委曲地随从流俗，可以遮挡风雨。 
English: During the Song Dynasty, some people said: Wangyuan is like a screen, he can follow the fashion, and can block the wind and rain.

古文：而僧祐负气不群，俭常候之，辞不相见。
现代文：而王僧佑却心高气傲不合群，王俭常去问候他，王僧佑都推托不肯相见。
English: On the other hand, Wang Senyu was arrogant and did not fit in with the group. Wang Jian often went to greet him, but Wang Senyu refused to meet him.

古文：世祖数阅武，僧祐献《讲武赋》，俭借观，僧祐不与。
现代文：齐世祖好几次阅兵，王僧枯献上《讲武赋》，王俭想借来看看，王僧佑就是不给。
English: Qi Shizhu held several military parades, Wang Sengai presented "Talking about Martial Arts," Wang Jian wanted to borrow it to take a look, but Wang Sengyou would not give it to him.

古文：竟陵王子良闻僧祐善弹琴，于座取琴进之，不肯从命。
现代文：竟陵王萧子良听说王僧佑很会弹琴，便从座位上取出琴来请他弹，他不肯从命。
English: In fact, Xiao Ziliang, the King of the Mausoleum, heard that Wang Soyou could play the piano very well, so he took the piano from the seat and asked him to play it. He refused to do so.

古文：永明末，为太子中舍人，在直属疾，代人未至，僧祐委出，为有司所奏，赎论。
现代文：永明末年，王僧佑任太子中舍人，值班时刚好患病，代替值班的人还没有到来，王僧枯就抛下不管私自出去，逭事被主管官员奏报了皇上，于是处以用钱物赎过。
English: At the end of the Yongming era, when Wang Soyou, one of the crown princes, was on duty, he happened to fall ill. The person on duty to replace him had not yet arrived, so Wang Soyou left him to go out on his own. The matter was reported to the emperor by the officials in charge, and he was punished by being redeemed with money and goods.

古文：官至黄门郎。
现代文：最后官至黄门郎。
English: The last official to leave was Huangmenro.

古文：时卫军掾孔逭亦抗直，著《三吴决录》，不传。
现代文：当时卫军掾孔逭也是刚直不屈，他着有《三吴决录》，没有流传下来。
English: At that time, the guardsman Gong Kongjun was also unyielding, he wrote "Three Wu Decisive Record," which was not passed down.

古文：王慈，字伯宝，琅邪临沂人，司空僧虔子也。
现代文：王慈字伯宝，琅邪临沂人，是司空王僧虔的儿子。
English: Wang Cizhi, also known as Bo Bao, was the son of King Siku, a Buddhist monk.

古文：年八岁，外祖宋太宰江夏王义恭迎之内斋，施宝物恣听所取，慈取素琴石研，义恭善之。
现代文：他八岁时，外祖父宋朝太宰江夏王刘义恭把他接到内室，要送给他实物，任凭他爱取什么就取什么，王慈拿了素琴和石砚，刘义恭很赞许他。
English: When he was eight years old, his maternal grandfather, Liu Yigong, the grand vizier of the Song Dynasty, received him in his inner chamber. He wanted to give him something in kind, and let him take whatever he liked. Wang Ci took a suqin and a stone flute, and Liu Yigong highly praised him.

古文：少与从弟俭共书学。
现代文：王慈小时候与堂弟王俭一起练字读书。
English: When Wang Ci was a child, he practiced writing and reading with his cousin Wang Jian.

古文：除秘书郎，太子舍人，安成王抚军主簿，转记室。
现代文：官拜秘书郎，太子舍人，安成王抚军主簿，转官为记室。
English: The official secretary, the prince's concubine, the main book of the Ancheng Wangfujun army, the transfer officer for the recording room.

古文：迁秘书丞，司徒左西属，右长史，试守新安太守，黄门郎，太子中庶子，领射声校尉，安成王冠军，豫章王司空长史，司徒左长史，兼侍中。
现代文：又升为秘书丞，司徒左西属，右长史，试用为新安太守，又任黄门郎，太子中庶子，领射声校尉，安成王冠军，豫章王司空长史，司徒左长史，兼侍中。
English: He was also promoted to secretary joe, Szu Zu Xizhi, right long history, probationary for the new An Taishu, also appointed Huang Menro, prince's middle child, captain, An Cheng Wang champion, Yu Zhang Wang Siku Long History, Szu Zu Long History, and attendant.

古文：出为辅国将军、豫章内史，父忧去官。
现代文：又出任为辅国将军、豫章内史，由于为父守丧而离职。
English: He also served as a general of the auxiliary state, Yuzhang Inner History, and left the post due to his father's funeral.

古文：起为建武将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：又起用为建武将军、吴郡太守。
English: He was also appointed as General Jianwu and Governor of Wu County.

古文：迁宁朔将军，大司马长史，重除侍中，领步兵校尉。
现代文：升为宁朔将军，人司马长史，又重新拜授为侍中，领步兵校尉。
English: He was promoted to Ningshuo general, and given the title of Sima Changshi. He was also re-awarded the title of chamberlain, and became an infantry captain.

古文：慈以朝堂讳榜，非古旧制，上表曰： 夫帝后之德，绸缪天地，君人之亮，蝉联日月。
现代文：王慈认为朝堂上设置避讳的牌匾，不是古代原有的制度，于是上奏说： 帝王之仁德，充满于天地；君主之光辉，与日月相连续。
English: Wang Ci thought that the plaques of shunning on the hall were not the original system of ancient times, so he said: The benevolence of the emperor is full of heaven and earth; the glory of the monarch is continuous with the sun and the moon.

古文：至于名族不著，昭自方策，号谥聿宣，载伊篇籍。
现代文：以至于在典籍中不必写出名姓，衹需记载其年号、庙号和谧号，也就很清楚明白。
English: So it is clear that it is not necessary to write the name and surname in the classics, but it is necessary to record the year, temple number and nickname.

古文：所以魏臣据中以建议，晋主依经以下诏。
现代文：所以魏臣据此提出建议，晋帝依照经籍颁下了避讳的诏书。
English: Therefore, Wei Zhen made a suggestion based on this, and Emperor Jin issued an edict of shunning in accordance with the scriptures.

古文：朝堂榜志，讳字悬露，义非绵古，事殷中世，空失资敬之情，徒乖严配之道。
现代文：但在朝堂上悬挂牌匾，高高显露出需要避讳的文字，这种做法并不是古代就有的，实在是从中世才开始的，这就徒然失去了供人敬仰的情理，违背了与天地庄严配合的意义。
English: However, the practice of hanging plaques on the chancery, which prominently displays the words that need to be avoided, did not exist in ancient times, but actually began in the Middle Ages. This in vain lost the reason for people to admire, and violated the meaning of solemn cooperation with heaven and earth.

古文：若乃式功鼎臣，赞庸元吏，或以勋崇，或由姓表。
现代文：如果需要表彰赞颂重臣元勋，或是推崇他们的卓越功绩，或是宣扬他们的姓氏。
English: If there is a need to commend and praise the senior vassals, or praise their outstanding achievements, or promote their surnames.

古文：故孔悝见铭，谓标叔舅，子孟应图，称题霍氏。
现代文：所以卫大夫孔悝见铭，说这是标榜舅氏卫基公；霍光被画上越毖迩，题称却是霍压。
English: Therefore, Wei's doctor, Kong Yiminming, said that this was an advertisement for his brother-in-law, Wei Ji Gong; Huo Guang was painted on the Yue Yao, but the title was Huo Quan.

古文：况以处一之重，列尊名以止仁；无二之贵，夤冲文而止敬。
现代文：何况处在独一无二的贵重地位上的皇帝，列尊名也衹到仁为止；表示谦和也衹到敬为止。
English: Moreover, the emperor, who is in a unique and precious position, is also honored with the title of honor; he is also honored with the expression of humility.

古文：昔东平即世，孝章巡宫而洒泣；新野云终，和熹见似而流涕。
现代文：从前束平王去世，汉章帝每巡幸到其宫中就会下泪；新野人彪死了，和熹见了像他的人就会流涕。
English: Ever since the death of the former King Sokuhei, Emperor Hanjong would shed tears every time he visited his palace; the new barbarian died, and when he saw someone like him, he would shed tears.

古文：感循旧类，尚或深心；矧观徽迹，能无恻隐？
现代文：感怀旧物，尚且如此深切，何况看见其美好的形迹，怎能不悲悯凄恻?
English: How can one feel nostalgia for the past so deeply, let alone see its beautiful traces, without pitying the wretched?

古文：今扃禁嵚邃，动延车盖，若使銮驾纡览，四时临阅，岂不重增圣虑，用感宸衷？
现代文：现在禁避的不仅是帝王的名字，而且延续到很多大臣。如果让皇上一年四季都看到这些，岂不是更增重了皇上内心的愁思?
English: Now it is not only the name of the emperor that is avoided, but also many ministers. If the emperor were to see this all year round, would it not add to the sadness in the emperor's heart?

古文：愚谓空标简第，无益于匪躬；直述朝堂，宁亏于夕惕。
现代文：我认为将它空悬在厅堂上，对于要人们舍己尽忠、不计得失并没有什么益处；如果在朝廷上直接陈述这些字，对于要人们勤勉慎戒也没有什么损害。
English: I do not think that hanging it up in the hall would do any good in urging people to be loyal and not to take chances; nor would stating these words directly in court do any harm in urging people to be diligent and cautious.

古文：伏惟陛下保合万国，齐圣群生，当删前基之弊轨，启皇齐之孝则。 
现代文：我想，陛下要保全万国，使百姓都成为圣贤，就应当删除前朝有害的规矩，开发大齐孝悌的准则。 
English: I think that if His Majesty wants to protect all nations and make the people all saints, he should remove the harmful rules of the former dynasty and develop the principles of filial piety.

古文：诏付外详议。
现代文：诏命交给外廷详细讨论。
English: The imperial edict was submitted to the Outer Court for detailed discussion.

古文：博士李捴议： 据《周礼》，凡有新令，必奋铎以警众，乃退以宪之于王宫。
现代文：博士李损说： 根据《周礼》的规定，凡是有新的法令，一定要摇响木铃以提醒百姓注意，然后回来将它在王宫中宪之。
English: Dr. Li Jia said: According to the provisions of the "Weekly Ritual," whenever there is a new decree, it is necessary to shake the wooden bell to alert the people, and then come back and sign it in the royal palace.

古文：注 宪，表悬之也， 太常丞王僴之议： 尊极之名，宜率土同讳。
现代文：注释说 宪，就是公开悬挂它， 太常丞王僩之说： 极尊贵的名字，应当是天下人共同避讳。
English: Commenting that "constitutional" means to hang it in public, Wang Shanzhi said: "A very honorable name should be shunned by everyone in the world.

古文：目可得睹，口不可言。
现代文：眼睛可以看见，但口不能说。
English: The eyes may see, but the mouth speaks not.

古文：口不可言，则知之者绝，知之者绝，则犯触必众。 
现代文：口不能说，则无人知晓，无人知晓，则触犯的人一定很多。 
English: If you can't talk about it, no one knows about it, and if no one knows about it, there must be a lot of offenders.

古文：仪曹郎任昉议： 捴取证明之文，僴之即情惟允。
现代文：仪曹郎任吻说： 李扩是用明文为证据，王僩之是从情理上推论表示赞同。
English: Yi Cao Lang Ren Kiss said: Li Zhan used plain text as evidence, and Wang Xizhi agreed with the reasoning.

古文：直班讳之典，爰自汉世，降及有晋，历代无爽。
现代文：直接颁布避讳的法令，开始于汉代，及至晋朝，历代没有差别。
English: The direct promulgation of taboo-avoiding laws began in the Han Dynasty and continued until the Jin Dynasty. There is no difference between the two dynasties.

古文：今之讳榜，兼明义训， 邦 之字 国 ，实为前事之征。
现代文：现在避讳的名单，兼明意义训诂，讳 邦，字为 国 字，确实在以前就有事例可以证明。
English: The list of taboos that are now avoided, and the clear meaning of the precepts, the taboo state, and the word as the national word, have indeed been proven in the past.

古文：名讳之重，情敬斯极，故悬诸朝堂，搢绅所聚，将使起伏晨昏，不违耳目，禁避之道，昭然易从。
现代文：名字避讳的重要，是表示情感敬仰到了极点，所以要悬挂在朝堂之上，因为这是官吏们聚集的地方，这将会使得大家从早到晚都能看见。那么应该禁避的地方，显然容易做到。
English: The importance of avoiding the name is to show that the emotion is admired to the extreme, so it should be hung above the temple, because this is where the officials gather, which will make everyone see it from morning to night. Then the place that should be avoided is obviously easy to do.

古文：此乃敬恭之深旨，何情典之或废？
现代文：这是恭敬奉事的深意之所在，怎么能按照常情或典籍而将它废除呢?
English: This is the profound meaning of respectful service. How can it be abolished according to custom or scripture?

古文：尊称霍氏，理例乖方。
现代文：认为称霍氏是尊称，这违背了当时的情理和事实。
English: He thought that calling him Ho was an honorific title, which went against the logic and facts of the time.

古文：居下以名，故以不名为重；在上必讳，故以班讳为尊。
现代文：处在下位的人才能直呼其名，所以不直接称名就是对他敬重；居在上位的人一定要讳称其名，所以颁布避讳的名字就是表示尊敬。
English: Only those who are in the lower ranks can call his name directly, so not directly calling his name is to respect him; those who are in the upper ranks must conceal his name, so promulgating the name of shunning is to show respect.

古文：因心则理无不安，即事则习行已久，谓宜式遵，无所创革。 
现代文：从心理上来说这样做就不会有不安的感觉。从事实上讲这种习惯由来已久，我认为应当遵守它，而不必改变它。 
English: Psychologically, there is no uneasiness in doing so; in fact, it's a long-standing habit that I think should be kept, not changed.

古文：慈议不行。
现代文：王慈的建议没有施行。
English: Wang Ci's suggestion was not implemented.

古文：慈患脚，世祖敕王晏曰： 慈在职未久，既有微疾，不堪朝，又不能骑马，听乘车在仗后。 
现代文：王慈患有脚疾，世祖敕王晏说： 王慈任侍中不久，既然有点小毛病，不能朝拜，又不能骑马，任凭他乘车跟随在仪仗队的后面。 
English: Wang Ci suffers from a foot ailment, said Wang Xi, the ancestor of Wang Ci: Wang Ci has been a waiter for a short time, and since he has a slight problem, he can't worship and can't ride a horse, let him ride behind the honor guard.

古文：江左来少例也。
现代文：这种特例是晋室束迁以来所少有的。
English: This kind of special case is rare since the relocation of the imperial court.

古文：以疾从闲任，转冠军将军、司徒左长史。
现代文：王慈由于有病担任闲职，又转官为冠军将军、司徒左长史。
English: Due to illness, Wang Ci took on a sideline position, and was transferred to the post of champion general, and became the longest-serving leader in history.

古文：慈妻刘秉女。
现代文：王慈的妻子是刘秉的女儿。
English: Wang Ci's wife is Liu Bing's daughter.

古文：子观，尚世祖长女吴县公主，修妇礼，姑未尝交答。
现代文：王慈的儿子王观，娶了尚世祖的长女吴县公主为妻。按照妇礼。
English: Wang Qun, the son of Wang Ci, married Princess Wu County, the eldest daughter of Shang Shizu, in accordance with the women's rite.

古文：江夏王锋为南徐州，妃，慈女也，以慈为冠军将军、东海太守，加秩中二千石，行南徐州府事。
现代文：姑未瓰主婚后去拜见公婆时，婆母没有和她交谈。江夏王萧缝任南徐州刺史，他的妃子是王慈的女儿，所以便用王慈作冠军将军、束海太守，增加俸禄到中二千石，代理南徐州事务。
English: When his aunt went to visit her mother-in-law after the wedding, her mother-in-law did not talk to her. Jiangxia Wang Xiao was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou, and his concubine was the daughter of Wang Ci, so he used Wang Ci as the champion general and the governor of Sokhai, increased his salary to 2,000 koku, and acted as the representative of South Xuzhou affairs.

古文：还为冠军将军、庐陵王中军长史，未拜，永明九年，卒。
现代文：回京后王慈任冠军将军、庐医王中军长史，未正式拜授，永明九年便去世了。
English: After returning to Beijing, Wang Ci was appointed the champion general and the chief of the army of Wang Zhong, but he did not officially receive the award, and he died in the ninth year of Yongming.

古文：年四十一。
现代文：享年四十一岁。
English: He was forty-one years old.

古文：谢超宗尝谓慈曰： 卿书何当及虔公？ 
现代文：谢超宗曾经对王慈说： 你的书法何时能赶上虔公? 
English: Xie Chao Zong once said to Wang Ci Rong: When will your calligraphy be able to catch up with Qigong?

古文：慈曰： 我之不得仰及，犹鸡之不及凤也。 
现代文：王慈说： 我赶不上虔公，就像鸡赶不上凤凰一样。 
English: Wang Ci said: I can't keep up with the pious, just as a chicken can't keep up with a phoenix.

古文：时人以为名答。
现代文：当时人认为这是很有名的回答。
English: At the time, it was considered a famous answer.

古文：追赠太常，谥懿子。
现代文：王慈死后被追封为太常，谧号盏迂。
English: After Wang Ci's death, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Taizhang" (太常).

古文：蔡约，字景捴，济阳考城人也。
现代文：蔡约字景揭，济阳考城人。
English: Cai Youzhejing is unveiled, and Jiyang Kaocheng people are on the move.

古文：祖廓，宋祠部尚书。
现代文：祖父蔡廓足宋朝祠部尚书。
English: His grandfather, Cai Guofei, was a member of the Song Dynasty Ancestral Hall.

古文：父兴宗，征西、仪同。
现代文：父亲蔡兴宗是征西将军、开府仪同三司。
English: His father, Cai Xingzong, was a general of the Western Expedition and the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong.

古文：约少尚宋孝武女安吉公主，拜驸马都尉，秘书郎，不拜。
现代文：蔡约年轻时娶宋武帝女儿安吉公主为妻，官拜驸马都尉，秘书郎，但没有正式拜授。
English: When he was young, Cai You married Princess Anji, the daughter of Emperor Songwu. He was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and secretary, but did not receive an official title.

古文：顺帝车骑骠骑行参军，通直郎，不就。
现代文：又任宋顺帝车骑骠骑行参军，通直郎，不肯就任。
English: He was also appointed as Song Shundi's chariot rider to join the army, but he refused to take office.

古文：迁太祖司空东阁祭酒，太尉主簿。
现代文：转调为齐太祖司空东合祭酒，太尉主簿。
English: It has been transferred to Qi Taizu Tsukuda Donga Festival Liquor, and is the main book of the Taiji.

古文：齐台建，为世子中舍人，仍随度东宫。
现代文：齐朝建立后，蔡约为世子中舍人，跟随世子进入柬宫。
English: After the establishment of the Qi Dynasty, Cai Yiming became the heir to the throne and followed the heir into the Cambodian Palace.

古文：转鄱阳王友，竟陵王镇北征北谘议，领记室，中书郎，司徒右长史，黄门郎，领本州中正。
现代文：调任鄱阳王友，竞陵王镇北征北谘议，领记室，中书郎，司徒右长史，黄门郎，领本州中正。
English: He was transferred to Shenyang Wangyou, Jingling Wangzhen North Expedition North Advisory, Receiving and Recording Office, Chushuro, Szeto U Changshi, Huangmenro, Leading Honshu Chuzheng.

古文：出为新安太守，复为黄门郎，领射声校尉，通直常侍，领骁骑将军，太子中庶子，领屯骑校尉。
现代文：出任新安太守，又任黄门郎，领射声校尉，通直常侍，领骁骑将军，太子中庶子，领屯骑校尉。
English: He was appointed as the new governor of An, and also as Huangmenro, leading the captain of Shao Sheng, Tsunzhi Changzhi, leading the general of the cavalry, the prince's illegitimate son, leading the captain of the cavalry.

古文：永明八年八月合朔，约脱武冠，解剑，于省眠，至下鼓不起，为有司所奏，赎论。
现代文：永明八年八月朔日，蔡约脱掉武冠，解下佩剑，在省台睡觉，到五更时还没有起来，被主管官员所奏劾，判处用钱赎过。
English: On the first day of August in the eighth year of the Yongming era, Cai You took off his military crown, laid down his sword, and slept in the provincial capital. He did not get up until five o'clock. He was impeached by the competent officials and sentenced to be redeemed with money.

古文：太孙立，领校尉如故。
现代文：皇太孙萧昭业登基，蔡约又照旧领屯骑校尉。
English: Emperor Taisun Xiao Zhaoye ascended to the throne, and Cai You continued to lead the cavalry as before.

古文：出为宜都王冠军长史、淮南太守，行府州事。
现代文：出任宜都王冠军长史、淮南太守，代理南豫州事务。
English: Wang Changshi, the champion of Yidu, and Huainan Dazhong, the acting governor of South Henan Province, were appointed.

古文：世祖谓约曰： 今用卿为近蕃上佐，想副我所期。 
现代文：齐世祖对蔡约说： 现在用你作很近的藩镇的主要辅佐官，想必你一定能符合我的期望。 
English: Qi Shizu said to Cai You: Now I am using you as the chief aide-de-camp of a nearby town. I am sure you will be able to meet my expectations.

古文：约曰： 南豫密迩京师，不治自理。
现代文：蔡约说： 南豫州非常靠近京师，我不去治理它，它自然会很安宁。
English: Cai You said, "Nanyu Prefecture is very close to Beijing, I will not govern it, it will naturally be very peaceful.

古文：臣亦何人，爝火不息。 时诸王行事多相裁割，约在任，主佐之间穆如也。
现代文：它已经处在皇上光辉的照耀之下，我算什么人，哪裹再需要我这烛光不熄去照亮它呢 当时，各藩王行事往往受到副职的节制，而蔡约在任时，主官与副官之间关系融洽。
English: It was already under the light of the emperor's glory. Who am I, and why do I need to keep the candlelight burning to illuminate it? At that time, the kings of the domain were often restrained by their deputies, but when Cai You was in office, the relationship between the commander and the deputy was harmonious.

古文：迁司徒左长史。
现代文：蔡约升任司徒左长史。
English: Cai Jiao was promoted to the post of chief historian.

古文：高宗为录尚书辅政，百僚屣履到席，约蹑屐不改。
现代文：高宗苍鸾为录尚书事辅理朝政时，百官都脱掉鞋子到他的席位上去拜见他，衹有蔡约穿着鞋子不改常态。
English: When Gao Zong Heron took office as the Vice-Chairman of the State Council, all officials took off their shoes to visit him at his seat. Even Cai You did not change the normal state by wearing shoes.

古文：帝谓江祏曰： 蔡氏故是礼度之门，故自可悦。 
现代文：郁林王对江柘说： 蔡氏原本是礼仪之家，所以随他高兴，爱怎么做就怎么做。 
English: Yu Lin Wang said to Jiang Yu: Cai's family was originally a family of etiquette, so he can do whatever he likes.

古文：祏曰： 大将军有揖客，复见于今。 
现代文：江柘说： 大将军有礼待客人的风范，今天又表现出来了。 
English: Jiang Wei said, "The general has the etiquette to treat guests with courtesy, and it showed again today.

古文：建武元年，迁侍中。
现代文：高宗建武元年，蔡约升任侍中。
English: In the first year of Gaozong Jianwu, Cai You was promoted to chamberlain.

古文：明年，迁西阳王抚军长史，加冠军将军，徙庐陵王右军长史，将军如故。
现代文：第二年，又调任西阳王抚军长史，加封冠军将军，又降为庐陵王右军长史，冠军将军照旧。
English: In the second year, he was transferred to the post of Xiyang Wangfuzhun Changshi, Gafong Champion General, and then downgraded to the post of Fuling Wangyu Army Changshi, Champion General as before.

古文：转都官尚书，迁邵陵王师，加给事中，江夏王车骑长史，加征虏将军，并不拜。
现代文：转任都官尚书，升属邵陵王师，加封给事中，辽夏王车骑长史，加封征虏将军，都没有正式拜授。
English: Shangshu, who was transferred to the capital, was promoted to Shaoling Wang Rong Shi, and was given the title of Gaofeng, while Liao Xia Wang Che Long Shi, who was given the title of General of Conscription, was not officially conferred.

古文：好饮酒，夷淡不与世杂。
现代文：墓垫喜欢饮酒，生性平淡，不与世人相交往。
English: Tombstones like to drink alcohol, have a flat nature, and do not socialize with the world.

古文：迁太子詹事。
现代文：又调任太子詹事。
English: He was also transferred to Prince Zhanji.

古文：永明元二年，卒。年四十四。
现代文：永元二年，去世，享年四十四岁。
English: He died at the age of forty-four in the second year of Yongyuan.

古文：赠太常。
现代文：追赠为太常。
English: It's all too common for gifts to follow.

古文：陆慧晓，字叔明，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆慧晓字叔明，吴郡吴县人。
English: Lu Hui Xiao Zi Shu Ming, a native of Wu County, Wuxi County.

古文：祖万载，侍中。
现代文：祖父陆万载任侍中。
English: His grandfather, Lu Wanzai, was a chamberlain.

古文：父子真，元嘉中为海陵太守。
现代文：父亲陆子真，宋元嘉年间任海陵太守。
English: His father, Lu Zizhen, served as the governor of Hailing during the Song and Yuan Dynasties.

古文：时中书舍人秋当亲幸，家在海陵，假还葬父，子真不与相闻。
现代文：当时中书舍人秋当深受皇上宠信，他家住在海陵，请假回乡安葬父亲，陆子真不与他交往。
English: At that time, the emperor was very fond of the Chinese scholar, Qiu Dang. His family lived in Hailing, and he asked for leave to return to his hometown to bury his father. Lu Zi really did not associate with him.

古文：当请发民治桥，又以妨农不许。
现代文：秋当要求派民夫修桥，陆子真又以妨碍农耕为理由不肯答应。
English: Akitane requested that a civilian be sent to repair the bridge, but Lu Zizhen refused to agree on the grounds that it would interfere with farming.

古文：彭城王义康闻而赏焉。
现代文：彭城王刘义康知道后非常赞赏他。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was very appreciative of him after he learned about it.

古文：自临海太守眼疾归，为中散大夫，卒。
现代文：他在临海太守任上，因患眼病辞官归家，后又任中散大夫，去世。
English: He resigned from the post of Linhai Taishou due to an eye disease and returned home. Later, he was appointed as the doctor of Zhongshan and passed away.

古文：慧晓清介正立，不杂交游。
现代文：陆慧晓清正耿直，有节操，不随便交朋友。
English: Lu Huixiao is upright, has discipline, and does not make friends casually.

古文：会稽内史同郡张畅见慧晓童幼，便嘉异之。
现代文：会稽太守、同郡人张畅见陆慧晓时他还是幼童，张畅便特别赞许他。
English: When Lu Huixiao was still a child, he was seen by Zhang Chang, the auditor-general and a fellow county resident, and Zhang Chang gave him special praise.

古文：张绪称之曰： 江东裴、乐也。 
现代文：张绪称赞陆慧晓说： 真是江束的裴缜、乐广啊! 
English: Zhang Xu praised Lu Huixiao, saying, "He really is the Pei Xuan and Le Guang of Jiangzhuang!

古文：初应州郡辟，举秀才，卫尉史，历诸府行参军。
现代文：他最初接受州郡的征召，被推举为秀才，任卫尉史，又历任各府行参军。
English: He initially accepted the state and county call-up, was selected as an outstanding talent, appointed as a guard lieutenant, and successively joined the army in various prefectures.

古文：以母老还家侍养，十余年不仕。
现代文：因母亲年老，陆慧晓便辞官回家奉养，十多年没有出去作官。
English: Due to her mother's old age, Lu Huixiao resigned from her post and returned home to take care of her. She did not go out to work as an official for more than ten years.

古文：太祖辅政，除为尚书殿中郎。
现代文：齐太祖辅佐宋朝朝政时，陆慧晓官拜尚书殿中郎。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qidai Zu Fu of the Song Dynasty, Lu Huixiao was a middle-ranking official of the Shang Dynasty.

古文：邻族来相贺，慧晓举酒曰： 陆慧晓年逾三十，妇父领选，始作尚书郎，卿辈乃复以为庆邪？ 
现代文：邻居及同族人都来祝贺，陆慧晓举起一杯酒说： 陆慧晓已年过三十，因妻父掌管选拔人才的事务，才得作为尚书郎，你们这些人认为这值得庆贺吗? 
English: Neighbors and compatriots came to congratulate, Lu Huixiao raised a glass of wine and said: Lu Huixiao is over thirty years old, because his wife's father is in charge of the selection of talents, he has to be Shang Shuro, do you people think this is worth celebrating?

古文：太祖表禁奢侈，慧晓撰答诏草，为太祖所赏，引为太傅东阁祭酒。
现代文：当时，齐太祖上表请求禁止奢侈之风，陆慧晓替宋顺帝草拟答韶，受到太祖的赏识，被荐举为太傅束合祭酒。
English: At that time, Qi Taizu made a request on the table to ban the luxury style, and Lu Huixiao took the place of Song Shundi to draft a reply, which was appreciated by Taizu and was recommended as Taifu Zucai sacrificial liquor.

古文：建元初，仍迁太子洗马。
现代文：齐建元初年，又改任太子洗马。
English: In the first year of the first year of Qi Jianyuan, he was reappointed as Crown Prince Saima.

古文：武陵王晔守会稽，上为精选僚吏，以慧晓为征虏功曹，与府参军沛国刘璡同从述职。
现代文：武陵王萧晕镇守会稽，皇上替他精心挑选下属官员，以陆慧晓为征虏功曹，舆郡府参军沛国人刘璀一同跟随武陵王就职。
English: Wuling King Xiao Huan was in town to attend a meeting, and the emperor carefully selected subordinate officials for him, with Lu Huixiao as the recruiting hero, and Liu Wei, a member of the county government and the military, followed the Wuling King to take office.

古文：行至吴，璡谓人曰： 吾闻张融与陆慧晓并宅，其间有水，此水必有异味。 
现代文：走到吴县，刘键对别人说： 我听说张融的宅第与陆慧晓家并排在一起，中间隔条小溪流，这水一定有特别的风味。 
English: Walking to Wuxian County, Liu Jian said to others: I heard that Zhang Rong's house and Lu Huixiao's house are side by side, with a small stream in the middle. This water must have a special flavor.

古文：遂往，酌而饮之。
现代文：于是前去，舀了一杯水喝下。
English: So he went and got a glass of water and drank it.

古文：庐江何点荐慧晓于豫章王嶷，补司空掾，加以恩礼。
现代文：庐江人何点将陆慧晓推荐给豫章王萧嶷，补任司空掾，豫章王对他很是恩宠檀待。
English: People in the Minjiang River recommended Lu Huixiao to Yu Zhang Wang Xiaohui to fill the post of Sikyong, and Yu Zhang Wang treated him very graciously.

古文：转长沙王镇军谘议参军。
现代文：又调任为长沙王镇军谘议参军。
English: He was also transferred to the Changsha Wangzhen Army for consultation on joining the army.

古文：安陆侯缅为吴郡，复礼异慧晓，慧晓求补缅府谘议参军。
现代文：安陆侯萧缅任吴郡太守，又特别礼待陆慧晓，慧晓请求补任萧缅郡府的谘议参军。
English: An Lu Hou Xiao Ming was appointed as the governor of Wu County, and Lu Huixiao was also treated with special courtesy. Huixiao requested to fill the position of Xiao Ming County Government's advisory to join the army.

古文：迁始兴王前将军安西谘议，领冠军录事参军，转司徒从事中郎，迁右长史。
现代文：又调任始兴王前将军安西谘议，领冠军录事参军，转为司徒从事中郎，又升任右长史。
English: He was also transferred to the former Shixing Wang general Anxi for consultation, led the champion to join the army, turned into a scholar to engage in the middle, and was promoted to the right long history.

古文：时陈郡谢朏为左长史，府公竟陵王子良谓王融曰： 我府二上佐，求之前世，谁可为比？ 
现代文：当时陈郡人谢肋任左长史，司徒公竟陵王萧子良对王融说： 我府上有二位上等的辅佐官，查考前代，有谁能与我相比? 
English: At that time, Chen County's Xie Li was appointed as the Left Chief Historian, and the Prince of Stutters was appointed as the King of Mausoleums. Xiao Ziliang said to Wang Rong: There are two high-ranking aides-de-camp in my palace. Looking at the previous generation, who can compare with me?

古文：融曰： 两贤同时，便是未有前例。 
现代文：王融说： 两位贤才同时作一人的辅佐官，这是没有先例的。 
English: Wang Rong said: It is unprecedented for two sages to serve as aides to one person at the same time.

古文：子良于西邸抄书，令慧晓参知其事。
现代文：萧子良在西邸聚集学士抄录典籍，命陆慧晓也参与管理这件事。
English: Xiao Ziliang gathered scholars to transcribe classics at the West Residence, and Lu Huixiao also participated in the management of this matter.

古文：寻迁西阳王征虏、巴陵王后军、临汝公辅国三府长史，行府州事。
现代文：不久，陆慧晓调任为西阳王征虏将军、巴陵王后军将军以及临汝公辅国将军等三府长史，代理府州事务。
English: He was soon transferred to be the governor of the three prefectures of Xiyang, Baling, and Linru, where he was in charge of prefectural affairs.

古文：复为西阳王左军长史，领会稽郡丞，行郡事。
现代文：又任西阳王左军长史，领会稽郡丞，代理郡事。
English: He also served as the chief historian of the Xiyang Wangza Army, the secretary of the county council, and the acting county official.

古文：隆昌元年，徙为晋熙王冠军长史、江夏内史，行郢州事。
现代文：隆昌元年，调任晋熙王冠军长史、江夏内史，代理郢州事务。
English: In the first year of the Longchang era, he was transferred to Jinxi King Champion Changshi and Jiangxia Inner History, acting as an agent for Zhangzhou affairs.

古文：慧晓历辅五政，治身清肃，僚佐以下造诣，趣起送之。
现代文：陆慧晓连续辅助五工理政，处事立身都很廉洁正直。凡同僚及下属官员前来拜访，他都要急忙起身相送。
English: Lu Huixiao has continuously assisted the five departments of the government, and he has always been a clean and honest person. Whenever colleagues and subordinate officials come to visit, he has to get up in a hurry to see them off.

古文：或谓慧晓曰： 长史贵重，不宜妄自谦屈。 
现代文：有人对陆慧晓说： 长史地位贵重，不必过分谦虚地降低自己的身份。 
English: Some people said to Lu Huixiao: Long-term historical identity is precious, and one should not be too modest.

古文：答曰： 我性恶人无礼，不容不以礼处人。 
现代文：陆慧晓回答说： 我生性厌恶别人无礼，自己就更不能不以礼待人。 
English: He replied, "I have a natural aversion to rudeness, and I can't help being polite.

古文：未尝卿士大夫，或问其故，慧晓曰： 贵人不可卿，而贱者可卿。
现代文：他从来不称士大夫为卿，有人问他这是什么原因，陆慧晓说： 尊贵的人不可称卿，衹有卑贱者才能称卿。
English: He never called the scholar a lord. When someone asked him why, Lu Huixiao said, "A noble person cannot be called a lord. Only a lowly person can be called a lord."

古文：人生何容立轻重于怀抱！ 
现代文：人生在世，怎能够在心中预先设立待人的轻重标准呢! 
English: How is it possible for a human being to have a predetermined standard of importance in his or her heart?

古文：终身常呼人位。
现代文：所以他一辈子都是称呼别人的职位。
English: Throughout his life, he was often in the position of addressing people.

古文：建武初，除西中郎长史，行事、内史如故。
现代文：建武初年，陆慧晓拜授西中郎长史，行郢州事、江夏内史等职务照旧。
English: In the first year of the Kenmu era, he was appointed to the position of Nishinakuro Choshi, and his duties of acting and internal history remained the same.

古文：俄征黄门郎，未拜，迁吏部郎。
现代文：不久徼召为黄门郎，没有正式拜授，改任吏部郎。
English: Soon he was conscripted as Huangmen Lang, and before he took office, he was transferred to the position of Liibu Lang.

古文：尚书令王晏选门生补内外要局，慧晓为用数人而止，晏恨之。
现代文：尚书令王晏选拔了很多门生充任内外要职，陆慧晓衹录用了几人，因此王晏很是怨恨他。
English: Shang Shuling selected many of Wang Yao's disciples to fill important positions at home and abroad, and Lu Hui Xiao Yao hired several people, so Wang Yao really resented him.

古文：送女妓一人，欲与申好，慧晓不纳。
现代文：王晏送给陆慧晓一位女妓，想与他交好，但陆慧晓没有接受。
English: He gave a female prostitute to Lu Huixiao and wanted to establish a good relationship with him, but Lu Huixiao did not accept it.

古文：吏曹都令史历政以来，谘执选事，慧晓任己独行，未尝与语。
现代文：吏曹都令史任职以来，一直参与商讨铨选官吏的事，而陆慧晓却总是自己一个人作出决定，从来没有和他商量过。
English: Since Cao Du Ling Shi took office, he has been involved in discussing the selection of officials, while Lu Huixiao has always made decisions on his own and has never consulted with him.

古文：帝遣左右单景俊以事诮问，慧晓谓景俊曰： 六十之年，不复能谘都令史为吏部郎也。
现代文：高宗派亲信单景俊前去责问此事，陆慧晓对单景俊说： 我已是六十岁的人了，再也不能去询问都令史我这个吏部郎做得怎么样。
English: Gao Sect's close confidant, Shan Jingjun, went to inquire about the matter. Lu Huixiao said to Shan Jingjun, "I am already sixty years old, and I can no longer ask Du Lingshi how I, a bureaucrat, am doing.

古文：上若谓身不堪，便当拂衣而退。 
现代文：如果皇上认为我不称职，我就马上辞职回去。 
English: If the Emperor thinks I am not up to the job, I should resign.

古文：帝甚惮之。
现代文：因此高宗也很怕他。
English: Emperor Ming was very afraid of him.

古文：后欲用为侍中，以形短小，乃止。
现代文：后来想用他作侍中，因为他身体矮小，才取消了这一念头。
English: Later, they wanted to use him as a waiter, but they scrapped the idea because of his short stature.

古文：出为辅国将军、晋安王镇北司马、征北长史、东海太守，行府州事。
现代文：陆慧晓出任辅国将军、晋安王镇北司马、征北长史、束海太守，代理府州事务。
English: Lu Huixiao served as an auxiliary general, Jinan Wangzhen Bei Sima, Zhengbei Changshi, and Sokhai Dazhong, acting for prefectural affairs.

古文：入为五兵尚书，行扬州事。
现代文：又回京任五兵尚书，代理扬州事务。
English: He also returned to Beijing as the representative of Yangzhou affairs.

古文：崔惠景事平，领右军将军，出监南徐州，少时，仍迁持节、督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、辅国将军、南兖州刺史。
现代文：崔惠景事件平息后，陆慧晓兼领右军将军、监南徐州。不多久，升任持节、督南兖兖徐青冀五州军事、辅国将军、南兖州刺史。
English: After the Cui Huijing incident subsided, Lu Huixiao concurrently led the right army general and supervised the southern Xuzhou. Not long after, he was promoted to Jisai, the governor of the southern Xuzhou, the military of the five states of Xuzhou, the general of the auxiliary state, and the history of the southern Xuzhou.

古文：至镇俄尔，以疾归，卒。
现代文：到任不久，便因病回京，去世。
English: Shortly after taking office, he returned to Kyoto due to illness and passed away.

古文：年六十二。
现代文：享年六十二岁。
English: He was 62 years old.

古文：赠太常。
现代文：追赠为太常。
English: It's all too common for gifts to follow.

古文：同郡顾宪之，字士思，宋镇南将军凯之孙也。
现代文：陆慧晓同郡人顾宪之，字士思，是宋朝镇军将军颜塑之的孙子。
English: Lu Huixiao is the grandson of Song Dynasty general Yan Shuxiao.

古文：性尤清直。
现代文：性格特别清廉正直。
English: His character is particularly clean and honest.

古文：永明六年，为随王东中郎长史、行会稽郡事。
现代文：永明六年，顾宪之任随王束中郎长史、代行会稽郡郡守事。
English: In the sixth year of the Yongming era, Gu Xianzhi was appointed as the deputy county governor of the Acting Association of County Auditors, following Wang Sokzhongro Changshi.

古文：时西陵戍主杜元懿启： 吴兴无秋，会稽丰登，商旅往来，倍多常岁。
现代文：当时西陵戍将杜元懿上奏说： 吴兴、会稽两郡，没有一年不是五谷丰登的。今年的商旅来往，比往常多一倍。
English: At that time, Xiling Gao made Duyuan Gao a report, saying: Wu Xing, Hui Jing two counties, there is no year that is not rich in grain. This year's business travel is twice as much as usual.

古文：西陵牛埭税，官格日三千五百，元懿如即所见，日可一倍，盈缩相兼，略计年长百万。
现代文：西陵所征收的牛埭税，按照官府的规定是每天三千五百钱，依元懿亲眼所见，实际上能够多收取一倍，一增一减就是两倍，粗略计算一下，每年可以增收一百万。
English: According to the regulations of the government, the cattle tax levied by Xiling is up to 3,500 yuan per day. According to what Yuan Qi saw with his own eyes, in fact, it can be charged twice as much, and an increase or decrease is twice as much. Roughly calculated, it can increase revenue by one million per year.

古文：浦阳南北津及柳浦四埭，乞为官领摄，一年格外长四百许万。
现代文：浦阳亩韭违以及挝擅等四处埭堰，请求都让我去统领代管，这样一年便可以额外增收四百多万。
English: I have been asked to take charge of the escrow in four places, including Poyang and Laos, so that they can receive an additional four million yuan a year.

古文：西陵戍前检税，无妨戍事，余三埭自举腹心。 
现代文：西医戍先前检查税收，并没有妨碍正常的防卫事务，其余三处埭堰，我自会举荐心腹人去管理。 
English: The previous inspection of taxes did not hinder the normal defense affairs, and I will recommend my confidant to manage the remaining three weirs.

古文：世祖敕示会稽郡： 此讵是事宜？
现代文：齐世祖敕命下达会稽郡： 怎么会有这种事情?
English: Qi Shizuo's order to the county auditor: How could this happen?

古文：可访察即启。 
现代文：应当派人去访察后立即报告。 
English: The visit should be followed by an immediate report.

古文：宪之议曰：寻始立牛埭之意，非苟逼僦以纳税也，当以风涛迅险，人力不捷，屡致胶溺，济急利物耳。
现代文：顾意之奏议说：考察刚开始设置牛埭的本意，并不是要强迫他们按运输费的多少来交税。原是因为江卜风涛迅猛险急，人力拉船很不方便，往往造成船只搁浅沉没，所以才用牛拉船，以拯救急难便利百姓。
English: Guyi's petition said: The intention of setting up the ox carts at the beginning of the investigation was not to force them to pay taxes according to the amount of transportation costs. The reason was that the river and the wind were swift and dangerous, and it was very inconvenient to pull the boat by hand, which often caused the boat to run aground and sink. Therefore, the ox carts were used to save the people in an emergency.

古文：既公私是乐，所以输直无怨。
现代文：这样于公于私都乐意，所以运输者交纳赋税也就没有什么怨言。
English: Both the public and private sectors are happy with this, so there are no complaints about the tax paid by the transporter.

古文：京师航渡，即其例也。
现代文：京师的航船渡口，就是实例。
English: The ferry port in Beijing is an example.

古文：而后之监领者不达其本，各务己功，互生理外一一或禁遏别道，或空税江行，或扑船倍价，或力周而犹责，凡如此类，不经埭烦牛者上详，被报格外十条，并蒙停寝。
现代文：但后来的监管者，不了解这事的根本，都想求取自己的功劳，所以便节外生枝。有的禁止在别处渡江，有的空船过江也要收税，有的普遍提高一倍的船价，有的对服务周到的人也进行责罚，诸如此类，并没有经过那些在埭堰用牛拉船的人的同意，就上报施行，所报超出官府标准的十条规定，都被我们给停止施行了。
English: But later supervisors, who did not understand the essence of the matter, all wanted to seek their own credit, so they sprouted extraneous branches. Some prohibited crossing the river elsewhere, some also collected taxes on empty boats crossing the river, some generally doubled the price of the boat, some also punished those who were attentive to service, and so on. Without the consent of those who used oxen to pull the boat in Weiyan, the report was implemented. The ten regulations reported that exceeded the government standards were all stopped by us.

古文：从来喧诉，始得暂弭。
现代文：所以从前那些争吵控告的事，总算暂时平息了。
English: So those old quarrels and accusations have finally subsided for the time being.

古文：案吴兴频岁失稔，今兹尤馑，去乏从丰，良由饥棘。
现代文：据审察吴兴郡多年歉收，今年更加饥荒。去年，那些昱兴渡口的百姓看似丰裕些，这实在是由于饥饿逼迫太急所造成的。
English: According to the investigation, the harvest in Wuxing County has been poor for many years, and this year's famine is even worse. Last year, the people in the Xingxing Ferry Port seemed to be more affluent, which was really caused by the urgency of starvation.

古文：或征货贸粒，还拯亲累；或提携老弱，陈力糊口。
现代文：有人收取货物出外换些粮食，回来救济亲友；有人带领全家老弱，依靠出卖劳力糊口。
English: Some people collect goods, go abroad to exchange for some grain, and come back to help their relatives and friends; some people lead the whole family, the old and the weak, and rely on selling their labor to make a living.

古文：埭司责税，依格弗降。
现代文：但是管理牛埭的官吏索取的税，依旧按照官府的规定不肯减少。
English: However, the tax collected by the official who manages the cow pasture still refuses to be reduced in accordance with the regulations of the government.

古文：旧格新减，尚未议登，格外加倍，将以何术？
现代文：旧的税收标准的减少，这件事还没有议定公布，反而额倍收取，将以怎样的办法去收取?
English: The reduction of the old tax standard, this matter has not yet been agreed to publish, but double the amount charged, how will it be collected?

古文：皇慈恤隐，振廪蠲调，而元懿幸灾榷利，重增困瘼。
现代文：皇上慈爱，体恤百姓的苦情，开仓赈济，减免租税，但杜元懿却幸灾乐祸，求取专利，更加重了百姓的困苦。
English: The emperor showed mercy, sympathized with the complaints of the people, opened warehouses to provide relief, and reduced and exempted taxes. However, Du Yuanzhang gloated and sought patents, which further aggravated the hardships of the people.

古文：人而不仁，古今共疾。
现代文：做人没有仁爱之心，是古今都非常憎恨的。
English: Being a person without a benevolent heart is something that has been hated from ancient times to the present.

古文：且比见加格置市者前后相属，非惟新加无赢，并皆旧格犹阙。
现代文：况且，每见那些增加收税标准而设置的集市，前后相连，不但新增加的税额无法收取，就连原有的税额还会欠缺。
English: Moreover, every time we see those markets that have been set up by increasing the tax collection standard, they are connected. Not only can the newly increased tax amount not be collected, but even the original tax amount will be lacking.

古文：愚恐元懿今启，亦当不殊。
现代文：我恐怕杜元懿今天的奏启，有些不同寻常。
English: I'm afraid that today's speech by Du Yuanqi is somewhat unusual.

古文：若事不副言，惧贻谴诘，便百方侵苦，为公贾怨。
现代文：如果税收结果与他所说的不相符合，由于惧怕招来谴责，便千方百计掠夺侵害百姓，从而引起商人们的公愤。
English: If the results of the tax are not in accordance with what he says, for fear of arousing condemnation, he will do everything possible to plunder the people, thus causing public indignation among businessmen.

古文：元懿禀性苛刻，已彰往效，任以物土，譬以狼将羊，其所欲举腹心，亦当虎而冠耳。
现代文：杜元懿生陆苛刻，这在以往的行事中已表现得很明显，若再任命他去管理征收牛埭税，就好比以狼去带领羊，他想推举的心腹亲信，也不过是戴帽的老虎而已。
English: Du Yuanxuan is a stern person, which has been clearly demonstrated in his previous actions. If he is appointed to manage the collection of cattle tax, it will be like using a wolf to lead a sheep. The confidant he wants to elect is just a tiger wearing a hat.

古文：书云 与其有聚敛之臣，宁有盗臣 。
现代文：书上说： 与其有横征暴敛的臣子，还不如有偷盗公物的臣子。 
English: The book said: "It is better to have a vassal who steals public property than to have a vassal who embezzles public funds."

古文：此言盗公为损盖微，敛民所害乃大也。
现代文：这裹是说偷盗公物的损害还稍微小一些，而暴敛百姓的害处更大。
English: Moreover, the trustworthy people he intends to select are no more than tigers in hats. An ancient book says, "It is better to have a minister who steals property than a minister who plunders it."

古文：今雍熙在运，草木含泽，其非事宜，仰如圣旨。
现代文：当今天运和美光明，草木深受恩泽，正如圣旨所指示的，额税是不合适的。
English: In this day of prosperity and beauty, when the trees and plants are in full bloom, it is not proper to impose a tax, as the will of God directs.

古文：然掌斯任者，应简廉平，廉则不窃于公，平则无害于民矣。
现代文：但掌管税收的官职，应当选拔廉洁公正的人担任，廉洁就不会对公家进行盗窃，公正则对百姓不会伤害。
English: However, the official position in charge of taxation should be filled by an honest and fair person. An honest person will not steal from the public, and a fair person will not harm the people.

古文：愚又以便宜者，盖谓便于公，宜于民也。
现代文：我又认为，所谓便宜行事，意思是说办事要便利于公家，适合于民情。
English: That is to say, the damage caused by the theft of state property is slightly smaller, while the damage caused by the search for people's wealth is greater.

古文：窃见顷之言便宜者，非能于民力之外用天分地也，率皆即日不宜于民，方来不便于公。
现代文：我看那些老是说要便宜行事的人，并不能在民力之外，真正地斟酌事务所宜去处理。他们办事，当时就不符合民情，将来也不会便利于公家。
English: I think that those who always say that they want to do things on the cheap cannot truly consider the appropriateness of doing things outside the power of the people. They did things that did not meet the people's needs at the time and will not be convenient for the public in the future.

古文：名与实反，有乖政体。
现代文：名与实相反违背了治政的常规。
English: Name and reality are relative, and it violates the fundamentals of governance.

古文：凡如此等，诚宜深察。
现代文：诸如此类，确实应该深深地省察。
English: Such things should indeed be deeply pondered.

古文：山阴一县，课户二万，其民赀不满三千者，殆将居半，刻又刻之，犹且三分余一。
现代文：山阴一县，每户规定征收税赋二万，但县内财产不满三千的百姓，几乎占全县人口的一半，即使紧一点算，也还有三分之一以上。
English: In Shanyin County, each household is required to collect a tax of up to 20,000, but the people with assets of less than 3,000 in the county account for almost half of the county's population, and even if it is a close calculation, there is still more than a third.

古文：凡有赀者，多是士人复除。其贫极者，悉皆露户役民。
现代文：凡是有资财者，都是现任或退职的官宦人家，而贫困至极的都是露宿在外的服役之人。
English: Those with assets are all current or former government officials, while those who are extremely poor are military personnel living in the open.

古文：三五属官，盖惟分定，百端输调，又则常然。
现代文：按照规定，他们要将自己收入的三成五成交给官府，而且各行各业都要缴纳租税，这还是通常的情况。
English: According to the regulations, they have to hand over 30% to 50% of their income to the government, and all walks of life have to pay taxes, which is still the usual situation.

古文：比众局检校，首尾寻续，横相质累者，亦复不少。
现代文：至于受到主管部门的查核，不断索求，横加扣押捆绑的人，也有不少。
English: As for those who have been inspected by the competent authorities, constantly demanded, and arbitrarily detained and tied up, there are quite a few.

古文：一人被摄，十人相追；一绪裁萌，千蘖互起。
现代文：一人被抓捕，跟着便有十人被抓捕；一种事端刚刚萌发，千种事端便都兴起。
English: One person is arrested, and then ten people are arrested; one incident has just sprouted, and a thousand incidents have arisen.

古文：蚕事弛而农业废，贱取庸而贵举责，应公赡私，日不暇给，欲无为非，其可得乎？
现代文：蚕桑之事遭到毁坏，农业也荒废了人人都以正常的劳动为贱而以借债为贵，既要交纳官府，又要赡养家小，终日忙碌也不能满足这些需要，想要他们不去做非法的事，这可能吗?
English: The silkworm and mulberry business has been destroyed, agriculture has been abandoned, and everyone regards normal labor as cheap and borrowing as expensive. They have to pay the government and support their families. Being busy all day can't meet these needs. Is it possible for them not to do illegal things?

古文：死且不惮，矧伊刑罚；身且不爱，何况妻子。
现代文：百姓死都不怕，还怕刑罚?他们连自身都不爱惜，哪裹会顾及妻小。
English: Have the people no fear of death or of punishment? They do not even spare themselves, much less their wives and children.

古文：是以前检未穷，后巧复滋，网辟徒峻，犹不能悛。
现代文：因此先前的违法之事还没有制止住，后面的欺诈之徒又产生了，法律的罗网虽然严峻，仍然不能够使他们悔改。
English: Therefore, the previous illegal things have not been stopped, the subsequent fraudsters have arisen again, and the legal net, although severe, is still unable to make them repent.

古文：窃寻民之多伪，实由宋季军旅繁兴，役赋殷重，不堪勤剧，倚巧祈优，积习生常，遂迷忘反。
现代文：据我探求，百姓中之所以有很多虚伪巧诈之人，实在是由于宋朝末年战事频繁地兴起，兵役徭役赋税众多而沉重，百姓难以承受，因此便依靠巧诈想求取丰厚的收入，经常这样干便成了习惯，于是就迷失了本性不知回返。
English: According to my research, the reason why there are a lot of hypocritical and cunning people among the people is really due to the frequent wars in the late Song Dynasty, the military service and taxes are numerous and heavy, the people are unbearable, so they rely on cunning to seek a rich income, often doing so has become a habit, so they have lost their nature and do not know how to return.

古文：四海之大，黎庶之众，心用参差，难卒澄一。
现代文：四海是那么大，百姓是那么众多，各人的心思错杂不齐，终究难以澄清划一。
English: The four seas are so vast, the people are so numerous, and everyone's thoughts are mixed, and it is ultimately difficult to clarify the same.

古文：化宜以渐，不可疾责。
现代文：对于他们，应当逐渐地感化，而不能急迫地责罚。
English: They should be gradually reformed, not hastily punished.

古文：诚存不扰，藏疾纳污，实增崇旷，务详宽简，则稍自归淳。
现代文：要诚心存有不侵扰百姓的念头，愿意接纳品行有毛病污点的人，增强其尊开朗的信心，处理一定要审慎宽大，那么民风便会稍微归于淳朴。
English: It is necessary to sincerely have the idea of not intruding on the people, be willing to accept people who have defects in their character and conduct, strengthen their respect and cheerful confidence, and deal with them carefully and generously, then the folk style will slightly return to simplicity.

古文：又被符简，病前后年月久远，具事不存，符旨既严，不敢暗信。
现代文：此外，有些档案材料，由于年月太久远，事实已经不很清楚，上面的旨意要求严格审查，经办者又不敢糊涂轻信。
English: In addition, some archival materials, due to the passage of time, the facts have not been very clear, the above intention requires strict review, and the operator does not dare to be confused and gullible.

古文：县简送郡，郡简呈使，殊形诡状，千变万源。
现代文：于是县裹便将材料送交郡，郡又送报到访察大臣手中。
English: As a result, the county sent the materials to the county, and the county sent the report to the visiting minister.

古文：闻者忽不经怀，见者实足伤骇。
现代文：案件是形形色色、千奇百怪的，奏闻者漫不经心，而审查的人看了确实感到震惊。
English: The cases are varied and bizarre, the informants are careless, and the examiners are genuinely shocked.

古文：兼亲属里伍，流离道路，时转寒涸，事方未已。
现代文：更兼有些人家，其亲属邻里有人在外逃亡，颠沛流离，虽然时间流转，已过去好多年，但事情还没有最后了结。
English: What's more, some people, their relatives, and neighbors have fled abroad and have been displaced. Although many years have passed, the matter has not yet been finally resolved.

古文：其士人妇女，弥难厝衷。
现代文：这些人家的士人妇女，便更是不得安心。
English: For these men and women, the situation is even more precarious.

古文：不简则疑其有巧，欲简复未知所安。
现代文：对于他们，若不检查，就会怀疑他们有欺骗行为；想去检查，会使他们更加提心吊胆，惶恐不安。
English: For them, if they do not check, they will suspect that they are cheating; if they want to check, they will make them more anxious and fearful.

古文：愚谓此条，宜委县简保，举其纲领，略其毛目，乃囊漏，不出贮中，庶婴疾沈痼者，重荷生造之恩也。
现代文：我认为这一条，应当委托给县裹去检查担保，材料中祇列举纲要，省略掉那些繁杂的纲目，即使有所疏漏，也漏不到哪裹去，不会有大问题。这样，那些犯有重罪的人，或许可以蒙受皇上的再造之恩，重获新生了。
English: I think that this article should be entrusted to the county to check the guarantee. The materials should only list the outline, omit those complicated outlines, and even if there are omissions, there will be no big problems. In this way, those who have committed serious crimes may be able to receive the grace of the emperor and be reborn.

古文：又永兴、诸暨离唐宇之寇扰，公私残烬，弥复特甚。傥值水旱，实不易念。
现代文：又丞垒、谴壁遭受唐寓之贼寇的骚扰，府库民家的财物丧失殆尽，又比别处更加困苦，倘若遭遇水旱灾害，则不可想像会发生什么事情。
English: In addition, the fortress and the wall were harassed by the thieves of the Tang residence, the property of the prefectural treasury and the people's homes were lost, and it was more difficult than elsewhere. If it were to suffer from droughts, it is impossible to imagine what would happen.

古文：俗谚云 会稽打鼓送恤，吴兴步檐令史。 
现代文：俗谚说： 会稽人敲锣打鼓送来救济物，吴兴县官吏亲自在走廊迎接。 
English: As the saying goes: The auditors beat gongs and drums to send relief supplies, and the officials of Wuxing County personally greeted them in the corridor.

古文：会稽旧称沃壤，今犹若此；吴兴本是脊土，事在可知。
现代文：会稽旧称富饶之乡，今天尚且衰落到如此地步；吴兴本来就是贫瘠之地，那现在的困苦更是可想而知了。
English: Wuxing used to be known as a land of plenty, but today it has fallen so far; Wuxing was originally a barren land, and the current hardships are even more imaginable.

古文：因循余弊，诚宜改张。
现代文：因循旧有的规章制度会留下很多弊病，所以确实应当进行改革。
English: Following the old rules and regulations will leave a lot of ills, so it really should be reformed.

古文：沿元懿今启，敢陈管见。
现代文：我仅仅是依照杜元懿启奏的事情，大胆地陈述一管之见。
English: I'm just boldly stating my opinion in accordance with the events of Duyuanqiao's opening.

古文：世祖并从之。
现代文：齐世祖听从采纳了顾宪之的全部意见。
English: Qi Shizu listened to and adopted all of Gu Xizhi's opinions.

古文：由是深以方直见委。
现代文：自此以后，齐世祖认为他很正直，很多事都委派他去处理。
English: Since then, Qi Shizu considered him to be very honest, and many things were delegated to him.

古文：仍行南豫、南兖二州事，签典咨事，未尝与色，动遵法制。
现代文：顾宪之仍然代行南豫、南蛮两州事务。他处治公务，从来不看签典、咨事的脸色行事，一切都遵守法制规章。
English: Gu Xizhi still acts on behalf of the affairs of the two states of South Henan and South Manchuria. He handles official business, never looks at the signatures, consults and acts, and everything abides by the legal system and regulations.

古文：历黄门郎，吏部郎。
现代文：后又历任黄门郎，吏部郎。
English: Later, successive hwangmenro and ririburo followed.

古文：永元中，为豫章内史。
现代文：东昏侯永元年间，顾宪之任豫章内史。
English: During the reign of Dongming Hou Yongyuan, Gu Xianzhi's appointment was recorded in history.

古文：萧惠基，南兰陵兰陵人也。
现代文：萧惠基，南兰陵郡兰陵县人。
English: Xiao Huiji, from South Lanling County, Lanling County.

古文：祖源之，宋前将军。
现代文：祖父萧源之是宋朝前将军。
English: His grandfather, Xiao Yuanzhi, was a former general of the Song Dynasty.

古文：父思话，征西将军、仪同三司。
现代文：父亲萧思话是征西将军、开府仪同三司。
English: His father, Xiao Siwei, was the general of the Western Conquest and the founder of the Three Departments.

古文：惠基幼以外戚见江夏王义恭，叹其详审，以女结婚。
现代文：萧惠基很小时便以外戚身份拜见过江夏王刘义恭，刘义恭赞赏他的谨慎，所以将女儿许配给他。
English: When Xiao Huiji was very young, he met Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia, as an unrelated relative. Liu Yigong appreciated his prudence, so he married his daughter to him.

古文：解褐著作佐郎，征北行参军，尚书水部，左民郎。
现代文：初任著作佐郎，又历任征北行参军，尚书水部，左民郎。
English: His first post was Saro, and he went to the north to join the army in successive posts, later becoming Shushu Suibu (Minister of Education and Culture) and Sadamiro.

古文：出为湘东内史。除奉车都尉，抚军车骑主簿。
现代文：出任湘束内史，拜授为奉车都尉，抚军车骑主簿。
English: He was assigned to the Hunan Provincial History Office, and was awarded the title of Fengche Duifeng (奉车都尉).

古文：泰始初，兄益州刺史惠开拒命，明帝遣惠基奉使至蜀，宣旨慰劳。
现代文：宋明帝泰始初年，萧惠基的兄长益州刺史萧惠开拒不受命，明帝派遣萧惠基出使到蜀地，宣布圣旨以示慰劳。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Song and Ming Dynasties, Xiao Huiqi, the elder brother of Xiao Huiqi, was sent by Emperor Taizong of Song and Ming Dynasties to Shunde, Shandong Province.

古文：惠开降而益州土人反，引氐贼围州城。
现代文：萧惠开投降，但益州土人反叛，引来氐族兵包围了州城。
English: Xiao Huikai surrendered, but the natives of Yizhou rebelled, attracting the soldiers of the Yi people to surround the state capital.

古文：惠基于外宣示朝廷威赏，于是氐人邵虎、郝天赐等斩贼帅马兴怀以降。
现代文：萧惠基到城外宣示朝廷的威势、恩赏，于是氐人邵虎、郝天赐等人斩杀了氐军首领马兴怀投降朝廷。
English: Xiao Huiji went to the outskirts of the city to announce the imperial court's prestige and reward, so Shao's men, Shao Hu and Shao Tianshui, killed the leader of the Shao army, Ma Xinghuai, and surrendered to the imperial court.

古文：还为太子中舍人。
现代文：回京后萧惠基任太子中舍人。
English: After returning to Beijing, Xiao Huiji was appointed as the prince's middle son.

古文：惠基西使千余部曲并欲论功，惠基毁除勋簿，竞无所用。
现代文：萧惠基先后出使过西部千余部落，朝廷想全都论功行赏，萧惠基便把功劳簿给毁掉，不想用它去争取些什么。
English: Xiao Huiji had successively sent more than a thousand tribes to the west, and the imperial court wanted to reward all of them for their merits. Xiao Huiji then destroyed the book of merits, not wanting to use it to win anything.

古文：或问其此意，惠基曰： 我若论其此劳，则驱驰无已，岂吾素怀之本邪？ 
现代文：有人间他这是什么意思，萧惠基说： 我如果据此去评定功劳，今后就会在外奔忙不止，遣哪裹是我原本的志向呢? 
English: When asked what he meant by this, Xiao Huiji said, "If I were to evaluate my merits based on this, I would be too busy to go out in the future. What was my original ambition?

古文：出为武陵内史，中书黄门郎。
现代文：又出任武陵内史，中书黄门郎。
English: He also served as the Wuling Inner Historian and the Huangmenro of Chinese Literature.

古文：惠基善隶书及弈棋，太祖与之情好相得，早相器遇。
现代文：萧惠基善于隶书及下围棋，齐太祖萧道成与他交情很好，对他很是中意，早就器重他。
English: Xiao Huiji was good at writing and playing Go. Grandfather Xiao Ducheng had a very good friendship with him. He was very fond of him and had long valued him.

古文：桂阳之役，惠基姊为休范妃，太祖谓之曰： 卿家桂阳遂复作贼。 
现代文：与桂阳王之战时，由于萧惠基的姐姐是桂阳王刘休范的妃子，所以齐太祖对萧惠基说： 你家桂阳又在作反贼。 
English: During the war with King Guiyang, since Xiao Huiji's sister was the concubine of King Guiyang Liu Xiufan, Qi Taizu said to Xiao Huiji: Your Guiyang is again acting as an anti-thief.

古文：太祖顿新亭垒，以惠基为军副，惠基弟惠朗亲为休范攻战，惠基在城内了不自疑。
现代文：齐太祖驻军新亭垒，以萧惠基作军副。当时，萧惠基的弟弟萧惠朗亲自替刘休范攻城作战，萧惠基在城内一点也不避嫌疑。
English: At that time, Xiao Huiji's brother Xiao Huilang personally fought for Liu Xuan in the siege of the city, and Xiao Huiji did not avoid suspicion in the city at all.

古文：出为豫章太守。
现代文：后出任豫章太守。
English: He later served as the governor of Yuzhang Province.

古文：还为吏部郎，迁长兼侍中。
现代文：回京任吏部郎，升为吏部尚书兼侍中。
English: He returned to Kyoto and was appointed to the position of Ritsuburo, rising to the position of Ritsuburo Shosho and Samurai Junior Middle Officer.

古文：袁粲、刘秉起兵之夕，太祖以秉是惠基妹夫，时直在侍中省，遣王敬则观其指趣，见惠基安静不与秉相知，由是益加恩信。
现代文：袁粲、刘秉起兵的那天晚上，齐太祖因为刘秉是萧惠基的妹夫，当时又正在侍中省值班，所以派遣王敬则去察看他的意向，见萧惠基毫无动静，并没有与刘秉互通信息，由此对他更加恩宠信任。
English: On the night that Yuan Shao and Liu Bing raised an army, Emperor Qizong sent Wang Jing to inspect Xiao Huiji's intentions, because Liu Bing was Xiao Huiji's brother-in-law and was on duty at the time. Seeing that Xiao Huiji was motionless and did not exchange information with Liu Bing, Emperor Qizong trusted Xiao Huiji even more.

古文：讨沈攸之，加惠基辅国将军，徙顿新亭。
现代文：讨伐沈攸之时，加萧惠基辅国将军衔，调他屯驻新亭。
English: At the time of the crusade against Shen You, Xiao Hui was promoted to the rank of General of Kiev and stationed in Xinting.

古文：事宁，解军号，领长水校尉。
现代文：事情平息后，解除了萧惠基的将军称号，让他兼领长水校尉。
English: After things calmed down, Xiao Huiji's title of general was removed, and he was also given the rank of captain.

古文：母忧去官。
现代文：后因母丧辞去官职。
English: After his mother's death, he was relieved of his duties.

古文：太祖即位，为征虏将军，卫尉。
现代文：齐太祖即皇帝位，任命萧惠基为征虏将军，卫尉。
English: Qi Taizu, that is, the emperor, appointed Xiao Huiji as a conscript general and guard lieutenant.

古文：惠基就职少时，累表陈解，见许。
现代文：萧惠基就任不久，便多次上表要求解除职务，获得允许。
English: Not long after Xiao Huiji took office, he repeatedly requested to be relieved of his duties and was granted permission.

古文：服阕，为征虏将军、东阳太守，加秩中二千石。
现代文：服完母丧，又任征虏将军、束阳太守，增俸为中二千石。
English: After his mother's funeral, he was also appointed conscript general and Sokyo governor, with a salary increase of 2,000 koku.

古文：凡历四郡，无所蓄聚。
现代文：他先后历任四郡太守，家中都没有什么积蓄。
English: He has successively served as the governor of four counties, and his family does not have any savings.

古文：还为都官尚书，转掌吏部。
现代文：回京任都官尚书，又转调执掌吏部。
English: He returned to Beijing and was appointed as the official of the capital, and then transferred to be in charge of the cadre department.

古文：永明三年，以久疾徙为侍中，领骁骑将军。
现代文：永明三年，以久病调为侍中，领骁骑将军。
English: In the third year of Yongming, with a long illness, he was transferred to the chamberlain, leading the cavalry general.

古文：尚书令王俭朝宗贵望，惠基同在礼阁，非公事不私觌焉。
现代文：尚书令王俭在朝中声望贵重，为人所宗仰，萧惠基与他同在台合，若非公事便从来不私下拜访他。
English: Shang Shuling Wang Jian had a high reputation in the imperial court and was highly respected. Xiao Huiji was with him in Tahe, and would never visit him privately unless it was for official business.

古文：五年，迁太常，加给事中。
现代文：永明五年，萧惠基升任太常，加给事中。
English: In the fifth year of the Yongming era, Xiao Huiji was promoted to the post of Taizang and added to the case.

古文：自宋大明以来，声伎所尚，多郑卫淫俗，雅乐正声鲜有好者。
现代文：白宋朝大明以来，声乐艺伎所推崇的，多是像郑、卫之音一样淫靡的通俗音乐，很少有人喜爱雅乐正声。
English: Since the Great Ming Dynasty of the White Song Dynasty, vocal music geisha have mostly respected the lascivious popular music like Zheng and Wei, but few people like the elegant music of Zheng.

古文：惠基解音律，尤好魏三祖曲及《相和歌》，每奏，辄赏悦不能已。
现代文：萧惠基懂得音律，特别喜爱魏世三祖曹操、曹丕、曹植所作的歌曲及《相和歌》，每次演奏，都感到赏心悦耳，不能自制。
English: Xiao Huiji knows the music, especially likes the songs made by the three patriarchs of the Wei Dynasty, Cao Cao, Cao Pi, and Cao Zhi, as well as the "Sohwa Song." Every time he plays, he feels pleasant and pleasing to the ear, and cannot control himself.

古文：当时能棋人琅邪王抗第一品，吴郡褚思庄、会稽夏赤松并第二品。
现代文：当时会下棋的人，琅邪人王抗高居第一品位，吴郡人褚思基、会稽人夏赤松并列第二品位。
English: At that time, those who could play chess, including the evil person Wang Jian, ranked high in the first grade, and the person from Wuxi County, Gu Si Ji, and the person from the auditing committee, Xia Akamatsu, ranked in the second grade.

古文：赤松思速，善于大行；思庄思迟，巧于斗棋。
现代文：夏壶拴思路敏捷，善于走大模样；褚思庄思路迟缓，但善于力战。
English: Xia Jucun is quick-thinking and good at grand gestures; Zou Shizhuang is slow-thinking, but good at fighting.

古文：宋文帝世，羊玄保为会稽太守，帝遣思庄入东与玄保戏，因制局图，还于帝前覆之。
现代文：宋文帝时代，羊玄保任会稽太守，文帝派褚思庄东进会稽与羊玄保下棋玩，并制作了对局谱，回京后在文帝前复局。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Emperor Wen appointed Yang Xuan Bao as the grand steward of the imperial court. Emperor Wen sent Gaozhuang Dongjin to the imperial court to play chess with Yang Xuan Bao, and made a game score. After returning to Beijing, the game was resumed in front of Emperor Wen.

古文：太祖使思庄与王抗交赌，自食时至日暮，一局始竟。
现代文：齐太祖让褚思庄与王抗以棋赌斗，二人从吃午饭时一直下到天黑，一局棋才下完。
English: Qi Taizhu let Juxizhuang and Wang Rong play a game of chess. The two of them played from lunch until dark, and only finished one game of chess.

古文：上倦，遣还省，至五更方决。
现代文：太祖看得很疲倦，让他们回到台省去继续下，直到五更天方决出胜负。
English: Seeing that they were very tired, the great-grandfather told them to go back to Taizhou and continue until the 5th day of the 5th month, when the winner would be decided.

古文：抗睡于局后，思庄达晓不寐。
现代文：王抗就睡在棋局后面。而褚思庄一直到天亮也没有睡。
English: Wang Huan slept after the chess game, while Gansu Zhuang did not sleep until dawn.

古文：世或云： 思庄所以品第致高，缘其用思深久，人不能对也。 
现代文：当时有人说： 褚思庄围棋的品位之所以达到那么高，是因为他思考得太久，没有人能和他相抗衡。 
English: At that time, some people said: "The reason why the grade of Juxizhuang Go player is so high is because he thinks too long, and no one can compete with him."

古文：抗、思庄并至给事中。
现代文：王抗、褚思庄官位都达到给事中。
English: Wang Quan and Gao Sizhuang have both been promoted to higher ranks.

古文：永明中，敕抗品棋，竟陵王子良使惠基掌其事。
现代文：永明年间，敕命王抗评论围棋局谱，竞陵王萧子良让萧惠基掌管这件事。
English: In the middle of the year, the king of death and resistance commented on the game of Go, and the king of competition, Xiao Ziliang, let Xiao Huiji take charge of the matter.

古文：初，思话先于曲阿起宅，有闲旷之致。
现代文：当初，萧思话先在曲阿建造住宅，有闲适旷达的情趣。
English: At the beginning, Xiao Siwei first built a house in Qu'a, and had a passion for leisure.

古文：惠基常谓所亲曰： 须婚嫁毕，当归老旧庐。 
现代文：萧惠基常对亲人说： 等你们都婚配嫁娶完了，我应该回到老家的旧宅去住。 
English: Xiao Huiji often said to his relatives: When you are all married, I should go back to my hometown to live in the old house.

古文：立身退素，朝廷称为善士。
现代文：立志归真返朴，所以朝廷称他为善士。
English: Determined to return to the truth and return to the palace, the court called him a good man.

古文：明年卒，年五十九。
现代文：第二年去世，享年五十九岁。
English: He died the following year, aged 59.

古文：追赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠金紫光禄大夫。
English: Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu as a follow-up gift.

古文：弟惠休，永明四年为广州刺史，罢任，献奉倾资。
现代文：萧惠基的弟弟萧惠休，永明四年任广州刺史。罢官时，倾尽资财奉献给朝廷。
English: Xiao Huiji's younger brother, Xiao Huixiu, served as the governor of Guangzhou for four years. When he retired, he devoted all his resources to the imperial court.

古文：上敕中书舍人茹法亮曰： 可问萧惠休。
现代文：齐武帝敕命中书舍入茹法亮说： 你可以去问问萧惠休。
English: Emperor Qiwu said, "You can ask Xiao Hui Rong.

古文：吾先使卿宣敕答其勿以私禄足充献奉，今段殊觉其下情厚于前后人。
现代文：我先派你去宣布敕命，答应他不要将私人的幸禄也补足奉献。现在倒特别觉得他的檀敬的情感比前人更加深厚。
English: I first sent you to announce his death, promising him not to add his personal happiness to his dedication. Now, I especially feel that his feelings of reverence are deeper than before.

古文：问之，故当不复私邪？
现代文：你问问他，不应该侵犯私人利益吧?
English: Ask him, shouldn't private interests be infringed upon?

古文：吾欲分受之也。 
现代文：我想部分地接受他的献奉。 
English: I would like to accept his dedication in part.

古文：十一年，自辅国将军、南海太守为徐州刺史。
现代文：永明十一年，从辅国将军、南海太守任上，调为徐州刺史。
English: In the eleventh year of Yongming, he was transferred from the general of the auxiliary province and the governor of the South China Sea to the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：郁林即位，进号冠军将军。
现代文：郁林王即位，晋封他冠军将军称号。
English: Yu Lin Wang ascended the throne and was promoted to the title of Zhang Chong Champion General.

古文：建武二年，虏围钟离，惠休拒守。
现代文：明帝建武二年，北魏围攻钟离，萧惠休率军拒守。
English: In the second year of Emperor Jianwu of the Ming Dynasty, the Northern Wei Dynasty besieged Zhongli, and Xiao Huiyu led the army to refuse to defend.

古文：虏遣使仲长文真谓城中曰： 圣上方修文德，何故完城拒命？ 
现代文：北魏派使者仲长文真对城裹说： 我皇正修明礼乐制度，为什么全城要抗拒王命? 
English: The Northern Wei emissary Zhong Changwen Zhen said to the city: My emperor is reforming the Ming ritual music system, why should the whole city resist the king's order?

古文：参军羊伦答曰： 猃狁孔炽，我是用急。 
现代文：参军羊伦回答说： 硷狁气焰非常嚣张，我因此要紧急抵抗。 
English: Sheep herder Ren replied, "He is very arrogant, so I have to urgently resist.

古文：虏攻城，惠休拒战破之。
现代文：北魏军攻城，萧惠休奋力抵挡，打败了他们。
English: The Northern Wei Army attacked the city, and Xiao Huixiu fought back and defeated them.

古文：迁侍中，领步兵校尉，封建安县子，五百户。
现代文：萧惠休调任侍中，领步兵校尉，封为建安县子，食邑五百户。
English: Xiao Huiyu was transferred to the position of chamberlain, leading infantry captain, and was given the title of Jian'an County son, with more than 500 households.

古文：永元元年，徙吴兴太守。征为右仆射。
现代文：东昏侯永元元年，又降为吴兴太守，后又征聘为尚书右仆射。
English: In the first year of Dongming Hou Yongyuan, he was reduced to Wu Xing Taishou, and then recruited as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：吴兴郡项羽神旧酷烈，世人云： 惠休事神谨，故得美迁。 
现代文：吴兴郡项羽神原本残暴严峻，世人说： 萧惠休事奉项羽神很小心，所以才能高升。 
English: Xiang Yu Shen of Wuxing County was originally cruel and severe, and people said: Xiao Huiyu was very careful in serving Xiang Yu Shen, so he was able to rise higher.

古文：二年，卒。赠金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：永元二年，去世，追赠金紫光禄大夫。
English: Yongyuan 2nd year, passed away, posthumously awarded the Gold Ziguanglu Doctor.

古文：惠休弟惠朗，善骑马，同桂阳贼叛，太祖赦之，复加序用。
现代文：萧惠休之弟萧惠朗，善于骑马，伙同桂阳贼反叛，太祖赦免了他，又依次使用他。
English: Xiao Huirong, the younger brother of Xiao Huirong, was good at riding horses and rebelled with Guiyang thieves. The great-grandfather pardoned him and used him in turn.

古文：永明九年为西阳王征虏长史，行南兖州事。
现代文：永明九年，萧惠朗任西阳王征虏长史，代行南兖州事务。
English: In the ninth year of the Ming Dynasty, Xiao Huilang was appointed as the King of Xiyang to collect the Long History, acting on behalf of the Southern Luzhou affairs.

古文：典签何益孙赃罪百万，弃市，惠朗坐免官。
现代文：典签何益孙贪污脏款达百万，被判死罪。萧惠朗受到牵连，坐罪免除官职。
English: Ho Yat-sun was sentenced to death for embezzling millions of dollars in dirty money. Xiao Huilang was implicated and removed from office for the crime.

古文：史臣曰：长揖上宰，廷折公卿，古称遗直，希之未过。
现代文：史臣曰：谦让推辞宰辅高位，当廷折服公卿大臣，这是自古以来称道的直道而行的风范遣存，仰慕这种风范并没有过错。
English: Shichen said, "Humbly giving up the high position of vice-premiership and vice-premiership, and accepting the position of court noble and minister at the time of the court, this is the preservation of the straight-forward style that has been praised since ancient times. There is no fault in admiring this style.

古文：若夫根孤地危，峻情不屈，则其道虽行，其身永废。
现代文：假如根底浅孤地位高危，仍然坚持严厉的态度不肯略微屈服，那么即使其主张能施行于世，但其本身便可能永远被废黜。
English: If the foundation is shallow, the lonely status is high-risk, and it still insists on a stern attitude and refuses to yield slightly, then even if its proposition can be implemented in the world, it may be dethroned forever.

古文：故多借路求容，逊辞自贬。
现代文：所以很多人便借路行走以求容身，用谦逊的言辞自我贬损。
English: As a result, many people take advantage of the road to make themselves look better, using self-deprecating words of modesty.

古文：高流世业，不待旁通，直辔扬镳，莫能天阏。
现代文：但名流依凭世代的祖业为根基，就不必借路从旁边通过。衹需跃马扬鞭，勇往直前，没有谁能阻挡得住。
English: However, celebrities rely on the ancestral heritage of generations as the foundation, so they do not have to take the road from the side. They need to leap forward, and no one can stop them.

古文：王秀之世守家风，不降节于权辅，美矣哉！
现代文：王秀之持守三世家风，对权贵宰辅不肯折节屈服，真是美好啊!
English: Wang Xiu Zhi adheres to the third generation family style, and refuses to give in to the powerful Zaifu, it's really wonderful!

古文：赞曰：秀处邦朝，清心直己。
现代文：赞曰：王秀之身处朝邦，能清心止己。
English: Praise said: Wang Xiu's body is in the country, he can keep a clear mind.

古文：伯宝世族，荣家为美。
现代文：王慈出身世门大族，以荣耀家门为美。
English: Wang Ci was born into a great family, and he was fascinated by the glory of his family.

古文：约守先业，观进知止。
现代文：蔡约能保持祖先的礼仪风范，上进时懂得及时止步。
English: Cai You is able to maintain the etiquette of her ancestors and knows how to stop in time when advancing.

古文：慧晓贞亮，斯焉君子。
现代文：陆慧晓有清正坚贞的节操，这是一位君子。
English: Lu Hui is a gentleman who knows how to uphold the principles of honesty and integrity.

古文：惠基惠和，时之选士。
现代文：萧惠基柔顺平和，是当时共推的良善之士。
English: Xiao Huiji was gentle and peaceful, and was a good person who was promoted at that time.

