古文：凡兵，制必先定。
现代文：凡是统率军队，必须预先建立各种制度。
English: Anyone who leads an army must establish various systems in advance.

古文：制先定则士不乱，士不乱则形乃明。
现代文：各种制度建立了，士卒就不会混乱。士卒不混乱，纪律就严明了。
English: If various systems are established, there will be no confusion among the officers and men. If there is no confusion among the officers and men, there will be strict discipline.

古文：金鼓所指，则百人尽斗。
现代文：这样，命令一经发出，成百的人都尽力战斗。
English: Thus, as soon as the order was given, hundreds of men went out to fight as best they could.

古文：陷行乱陈，则千人尽斗。
现代文：冲锋陷阵时，成千的人都尽力战斗。
English: As they charged, thousands of men fought as hard as they could.

古文：覆军杀将，则万人齐刃。天下莫能当其战矣。古者，士有什伍，车有偏列。
现代文：歼灭敌军时，成万的人都协力作战，这样，天下就没有任何力量能够与它抗衡了。古时，士兵有 什伍 的编制，战车有 偏列 的编制。
English: When annihilating the enemy army, tens of thousands of people fought together, so that there was no power in the world that could compete with it. In ancient times, soldiers were organized in groups, and chariots were organized in columns.

古文：鼓鸣旗麾，先登者未尝非多力国士也，先死者未尝非多力国士。
现代文：当击鼓挥旗发起进攻时，首先登上敌人城堡的，往往只是那些乐于为国出力的勇士，首先战死的，也往往是那些为国出力的勇士。
English: When drums are beaten and flags are waved to launch an attack, the first to climb the enemy castle are often only those warriors who are willing to work for the country. The first to die in battle are also often those warriors who work for the country.

古文：损敌一人而损我百人，此资敌而伤我甚焉，世将不能禁。
现代文：如果只杀伤一个敌人而我军却损伤一百人，这就等于大大地加强了敌人而严重地损伤了自己，可是平庸的将领却不能避免。
English: If we only kill one enemy and our army injures a hundred, this is tantamount to greatly strengthening the enemy and seriously injuring ourselves, but mediocre generals cannot be avoided.

古文：征役分军而逃归，或临战自北，则逃伤甚焉，世将不能禁。
现代文：士兵应征入伍后，刚编入部队就逃亡回家，或者刚上战场就自行溃败，这就会出现大量的逃散伤亡，可是平庸的将领却不能制止。
English: After enlisting in the army, soldiers just joined the army and fled home, or just went to the battlefield and self-defeated. This will cause a large number of casualties, but mediocre generals can't stop it.

古文：杀人于百步之外者，弓矢也。杀人于五十步之内者，矛戟也。
现代文：敌人在百步之外，就应当用弓箭杀伤他们；在五十步之内，就应当用矛、戟杀伤他们。
English: If the enemy is within a hundred paces, they should be killed with bows and arrows; within fifty paces, they should be killed with spears and halberds.

古文：将已鼓，而士卒相嚣，拗矢折矛抱戟，利后发。战有此数者，内自败也，世将不能禁。
现代文：但是将帅击鼓传令时，士兵们却互相吵闹，把箭、矛折断，把戈戟抛弃，面对敌人而畏缩不前，战斗中出现这些情况，就是自己先溃败了，可是平庸的将领却不能禁止。
English: But when the general drums out his orders, the soldiers quarrel with each other, break their arrows and spears, abandon their crossbows, and shrink back in the face of the enemy. If these things happen in battle, it means that they have been defeated first, but mediocre generals cannot be banned.

古文：士失什伍，车失偏列，奇兵捐将而走，大众亦走，世将不能禁。
现代文：战斗时士兵脱离了队伍，战车脱离了 偏列 ，机动部队抛弃他们的将领自行逃走，其他士兵也随之溃散，可是平庸的将领却不能制止。
English: During the battle, soldiers broke away from the team, the chariot broke away from the line, the mobile troops abandoned their generals and ran away on their own, and other soldiers also broke away, but the mediocre generals could not be stopped.

古文：夫将能禁此四者，则高山陵之，深水绝之，坚陈犯之。
现代文：将帅如能制止这四种情况发生，那么高山可以攀登，深水可以跨越，坚固的阵地也可以摧破。
English: If a general can prevent these four things from happening, then high mountains can be climbed, deep waters can be crossed, and strong positions can be destroyed.

古文：不能禁此四者，犹亡舟楫绝江河，不可得也。
现代文：如果不能防止这四种情况发生，就好比没有船只而想渡过江河一样，是不可能达到目的。
English: If you can't prevent these four things from happening, it's like trying to cross a river without a boat. It's impossible to achieve your goal.

古文：民非乐死而恶生也，号令明，法制审，故能使之前。
现代文：人们本来并不是好死厌生的。只是由于号令严明，法制周详，才能使他们奋勇向前。
English: People are not naturally averse to death; it is only because of the strictness of the edicts and the thoroughness of the legal system that they are able to forge ahead.

古文：明赏于前，决罚于后，是以发能中利，动则有功。
现代文：既有明确的奖赏鼓励于前，又有坚决的惩罚督促于后，所以出兵就能获胜，行动就能成功。
English: Since there is a clear reward to encourage the former and a firm punishment to urge the latter, the dispatch of troops can win and the operation can be successful.

古文：百人一卒，千人一司马，万人一将，以少诛众，以弱诛强。
现代文：如今百人设一卒长，千人设一司马，万人设一将军，这是以少数人管辖多数人，以少数将吏去治理整个部队的事务。
English: Nowadays, a hundred people have one captain, a thousand people have one sergeant, and a million people have one general. This is a matter of a few people governing the majority, and a few generals governing the entire army.

古文：试听臣言其术，足使三军之众诛一人无失刑。父不敢舍子，子不敢舍父，况国人乎？
现代文：如果能听从我的统御方法，就可以驾驭三军之众。如果做到一个违犯者也不放过，就是父亲也不敢放过儿子，儿子也不敢放过父亲，何况对于一般的人呢！
English: If you can listen to my method of governance, you can control the three armies. If you do not let go of a violator, even the father will not dare to let go of the son, and the son will not dare to let go of the father, let alone for ordinary people!

古文：一贼杖剑击于市，万人无不避之者，臣谓非一人之独勇，万人皆不肖也。
现代文：一个亡命之徒，持剑在闹市上杀人，众人没有不躲避他的。我认为这并不是由于这个人特别勇敢而众人都无能。为什么呢？
English: A desperado, armed with a sword, is killing people in a busy market, and everyone is trying to avoid him. I don't think it's because this man is particularly brave and everyone is incompetent. Why is that?

古文：何则？必死与必生，固不侔也。
现代文：因为抱必死决心的人和贪生怕死的人，本来是不相向的。
English: Because people who are determined to die and people who are greedy for life and afraid of death are not compatible.

古文：听臣之术，足使三军之众为一死贼，莫当其前，莫随其后，而能独出独入焉。
现代文：如果依照我的办法行事，可以使三军之众，就象一个持剑的亡命之徒那样，前进时敌人不敢抵抗，后退时敌人不敢追击，而能做到进退无阻。
English: If you act according to my method, you can make the three armies advance like a sword-wielding outlaw, so that the enemy does not dare to resist when advancing, and the enemy does not dare to pursue when retreating, but can advance and retreat without hindrance.

古文：独出独入者，王霸之兵也。
现代文：能够进退无阻的军队，那就是图王称霸的军队了。
English: The army that can advance and retreat unimpeded is the army that King Tu dominates.

古文：有提十万之众，而天下莫当者谁？
现代文：有统率十万军队而天下无敌的，是谁呢？
English: Who is invincible at the head of a hundred thousand troops?

古文：曰桓公也。
现代文：是齐桓公。
English: It is Lord Qi Kan.

古文：有提七万之众，而天下莫当者谁？
现代文：有统率七万军队而天下无敌的，是谁呢？
English: Who is invincible in the world with seventy thousand troops under his command?

古文：曰吴起也。
现代文：是吴起。
English: It was Wu Qi.

古文：有提三万之众，而天下莫当者谁？
现代文：有统率三万军队而天下无敌的，是谁呢？
English: Who is invincible at the head of thirty thousand troops?

古文：曰武子也。
现代文：是孙武子。
English: It was Sun Takeko.

古文：今天下诸国士，所率无不及二十万众者，然不能济功名者，不明乎禁舍开塞也。
现代文：现在各国一些杰出的将领，所统率的军队都不下二十万，其所以不能功成名就，就在于没有建立明确的奖惩制度。
English: Nowadays, some outstanding generals from various countries command no less than 200,000 troops. The reason why they cannot achieve fame is that they have not established a clear reward and punishment system.

古文：明其制，一人胜之，则十人亦以胜之也。十人胜之，则百千万人亦以胜之也。
现代文：如果明确建立了这些制度，一个人取得胜利，就会带动十个人取得胜利，十个人取得胜利，就会带动百人、千人、万人取得胜利。
English: If these systems are clearly established, the victory of one person will lead to the victory of ten people, and the victory of ten people will lead to the victory of hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands of people.

古文：故曰：便吾器用，养吾武勇，发之如鸟击，如赴千仞之溪。
现代文：所以说，改善我们的武器装备，培养我们的战斗作风，军队一旦出动，就象鸷鸟捕食那样凶猛，象倾泻到深谷的急流那样势不可当。
English: Therefore, improve our weapons and equipment, cultivate our fighting style, and once the army is sent out, it will be as fierce as the ostrich prey, and as powerful as the torrent pouring into the deep valley.

古文：今国被患者，以重宝出聘，以爱子出质，以地界出割，得天下助卒。名为十万，其实不过数万尔。
现代文：如今有的国家遇到外患的时候，总是以贵重的珍宝作为礼品，以爱子作为人质，以国土割让给别人，用这些条件去乞求别国派兵援助，而派来的援军往往名为十万，其实不过几万罢了。
English: Nowadays, when some countries encounter foreign disasters, they always use precious treasures as gifts, their beloved children as hostages, and their land as a concession to others, and use these conditions to beg other countries to send troops to help. The reinforcements sent are often called 100,000, but in fact they are only tens of thousands.

古文：其兵来者，无不谓其将曰： 无为天下先战。 
现代文：而且当其出发的时候，他们的国君总是告诉他的将领说： 不要在别人之前进入战斗 。
English: And when they set out, their sovereign always tells his generals: "Do not go into battle before the others."

古文：其实不可得而战也。
现代文：他们是根本不可能为你奋力作战的。
English: There's no way they're going to fight hard for you.

古文：量吾境内之民，无伍莫能正矣。
现代文：治理全国民众，没有什伍的制度，就没有谁能治理好他们。
English: If there is no system to govern the people of the whole country, no one can govern them well.

古文：经制十万之众，而王必能使之衣吾衣，食吾食。
现代文：编成十万大军，就必须能用它们去取胜。
English: If you muster an army of 100,000 men, you must be able to use them to win.

古文：战不胜，守不固者，非吾民之罪，内自致也。
现代文：如果这些军队，穿了国家的衣服，吃了国家的粮食，战不能胜，守不能固，这不是士兵的罪过，而是由于军内没有建立良好的制度或指挥不当的缘故。
English: If these armies, dressed in the clothes of the state and eating the grain of the state, are unable to win the war and unable to defend themselves, this is not the fault of the soldiers, but due to the fact that there is no good system established within the army or due to improper command.

古文：天下诸国助我战，犹良骥騄耳之驶，彼驽马鬐兴角逐，何能绍吾气哉？
现代文：在这种情况下，纵然有别国军队帮助作战，而敌人好象一匹飞驰的骏马，援兵却象一匹迟顿的劣马，劣马去和骏马较量，这怎能有助于我军的气势呢。
English: Under such circumstances, even if there are troops from other countries to help fight, while the enemy is like a galloping horse, the reinforcements are like a lagging inferior horse, and the inferior horse competes with the superior horse. How can this help the momentum of our army?

古文：吾用天下之用为用，吾制天下之制为制。
现代文：利用天下的财富来充实我们的国力，参考天下的制度来修订我们的制度。
English: We should take advantage of the world's wealth to enrich our national strength, and revise our system with reference to the world's system.

古文：修吾号令，明吾刑赏，使天下非农无所得食，非战无所得爵，使民扬臂争出农战，而天下无敌矣。
现代文：整肃号令，严明赏罚，使天下都知道不耕种的人不能得食，无战功的人不能得爵。鼓励民众奋勇争先地投入生产和战斗，这样就可以天下无敌了。
English: The order of rectification and the strict reward and punishment make the whole world know that those who do not cultivate cannot get food, and those who have no war merit cannot get a knighthood. Encourage the people to bravely rush into production and battle, so that the world can be invincible.

古文：故曰：发号出令，信行国内。
现代文：所以说，号令一经发出，就必须取信于民而风行全国。
English: Therefore, once the order is issued, it must gain the trust of the people and become popular throughout the country.

古文：民言有可以胜敌者，毋许其空言，必试其能战也。
现代文：如果有人说他有战胜敌人的办法，可不能轻信他的空话，必须实践中考验他。
English: If someone says that he has a way to defeat the enemy, you can't believe his empty words, you must test him in practice.

古文：视人之地而有之，分人之民而畜之，必能内有其贤者也。不能内有其贤而欲有天下，必覆军杀将。
现代文：要想兼并别国的土地，统治别国的人氏，必须国内贤才辅佐。如果在国内没有贤才辅佐，而想统一天下，必然招致兵败将亡的后果。
English: If you want to annex other countries' land and rule over other countries' people, you must be assisted by domestic talents. If there is no domestic talent to assist, and you want to unify the country, you will inevitably incur the consequences of defeat.

古文：如此，虽战胜而国益弱，得地而国益贫，由国中之制弊矣。
现代文：即使侥幸获胜，国家也会因此而更加衰弱，即使攻占别国的土地，国家也会因此而更加贫困，这些都是由于国家制度有病，
English: Even if it is a fluke victory, the country will be weaker as a result, and even if it seizes other countries' land, the country will be more impoverished as a result. These are all due to the disease of the national system,

