古文：起上章阉茂八月，尽昭阳赤奋若，凡三年有奇。
现代文：起上章阉茂八月，尽昭阳赤奋若，凡三年有奇。
English: Starting in August of the previous year, Zhaoyang was full of vigor, which is unusual in three years.

古文：睿宗玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝下
现代文：睿宗玄真大圣大兴孝皇帝下
English: Ruizong Xuan Zhen Da Da Sheng Da Xing Xiao under the Emperor

古文：景云元年庚戌，公元七一零年
现代文：唐睿宗景云元年八月庚寅，洛阳县吏前往裴巽家中检查讯问，李重福等人突然来到。
English: Tang Ruizong Jingyun's first year

古文：八月，庚寅，往巽第按问。
现代文：县吏急忙跑出裴宅，将其所见全部告诉了东都留守。
English: The county official hurriedly ran out of Pei's house and told him everything he had seen. Dongdu stayed behind.

古文：重福奄至，县官驰出，白留守；群官皆逃匿，洛州长史崔日知独帅众讨之。
现代文：东都大小衙门官员在听到这一消息后全都逃走或者躲藏起来，只有洛州长史崔日知率领部下讨伐李重福。
English: After hearing this news, all the officials of Dongdu and Shimen fled or went into hiding. Only the governor of Luo, Cui Richi, led his subordinates to fight against Li Shifu.

古文：留台侍御史李邕遇重福于天津桥，从者已数百人，驰至屯营，告之曰： 谯王得罪先帝，今无故入都，此必为乱；君等宜立功取富贵。 
现代文：留台侍御史李邕与李重福在天津桥相遇，发现李重福手下已经有了数百名追随者，便快马加鞭地赶到东都左、右屯营的驻地，告诉他们说： 谯王李重福获罪于先帝，现在突然无故进入东都，这一定是准备作乱，你们应当趁此机会为朝廷立功以博取荣华富贵。 
English: Li Yan and Li Chongfu, who stayed in Taiwan to serve the emperor, met at Tianjin Bridge and found that Li Chongfu's men already had hundreds of followers. They quickly rushed to the camps of Dongdu Left and Dongdu Right, and told them: "King Li Chongfu was convicted by the former emperor, and now he has suddenly entered Dongdu for no reason. This must be a preparation for disorder. You should take this opportunity to make a contribution to the imperial court to gain glory and wealth."

古文：又告皇城使闭诸门。
现代文：说完又跑去告诉守卫皇城的将官，让他们将所有城门全部关闭。
English: He then ran to tell the generals guarding the imperial city to close all the gates.

古文：重福先趣左、右屯营，营中射之，矢如雨下。
现代文：李重福先赶赴左、右屯营，但营中将士向他放箭，箭如雨下。
English: Li Chongfu rushed to the left and right camp first, but the middle-ranking officers of the camp shot arrows at him, and the arrows rained down.

古文：乃还趣左掖门，欲取留守兵，见门闭，大怒，命焚之。火未及然，左屯营兵出逼之，重福窘迫，策马出上东，逃匿山谷。
现代文：李重福回身走到左掖门，想征调东都留守的部队，却又见城门紧闭，便气急败坏地命令手下人放火焚烧城门，但还没等火点燃，左屯营的士兵已经冲出营地向他逼过来。李重福走投无路，只好打马跑出洛阳上东门，逃进山谷中藏匿起来。
English: Li Chongfu turned around and walked to Zuoying Gate, wanting to recruit and transfer the troops left behind in Dongdu, but he saw the gate was closed, so he lost his temper and ordered his subordinates to set fire to the gate, but before the fire was lit, the soldiers from Zuotun Camp had rushed out of the camp to force him. Li Chongfu was cornered, and he had no choice but to beat his horse and run out of Luoyang Shangdong Gate and escape into the valley to hide.

古文：明日，留守大出兵搜捕，重福赴漕渠溺死。
现代文：第二天，东都留守派出大批军队进山搜捕，李重福投漕渠自杀。
English: The next day, Dongdu sent a large number of troops into the mountains to search and arrest, and Li Chongfu committed suicide by throwing himself into a canal.

古文：日知，日用之从父兄也，以功拜东都留守。
现代文：崔日知是崔日用的堂兄，他因此次平定李重福叛乱之功而被任命为东都留守。
English: Cui Rizhi was Cui Rinyi's cousin, and he was appointed to stay behind in Dongdu for his role in suppressing Li Shifu's rebellion.

古文：郑愔貌丑多须，既败，梳髻，著妇人服，匿车中；擒获，被鞫，股栗不能对。
现代文：郑愔相貌丑陋，又长满了络腮胡子，起事失败后，他梳起了发髻，穿上妇女穿的衣服，藏在车中。被抓获受审时恐惧得两腿发抖，不能回答问题。
English: Ugly-looking and with a bushy moustache, Zheng Qi combed his hair, put on women's clothes and hid in a car after the failed uprising. When he was arrested and put on trial, his legs trembled with fear and he was unable to answer questions.

古文：张灵均神气自若，顾愔曰： 吾与此人举事，宜其败也！ 
现代文：张灵均则始终神态自若，他回头看着郑说： 我和你这样的胆小鬼一同举事，落得失败的结局是很正常的！ 
English: Zhang Lingjun, on the other hand, always looked confident. He looked back at Zheng and said: I'm a coward like you, and it's normal to fail!

古文：与愔皆斩于东都市。
现代文：张灵均和郑一起在东都洛阳闹市被处以斩刑。
English: Zhang Lingjun and Zheng were both beheaded in the eastern city of Luoyang.

古文：初，愔附来俊臣得进；俊臣诛，附张易之；易之诛，附韦氏；韦氏败，又附谯王重福，竟坐族诛。
现代文：当初，郑靠依附来俊臣而得以升迁；来俊臣被杀后，又依附张易之；张易之伏诛后，又依附韦后；韦后被杀后，又转而依附谯王李重福，最终还是因李重福起事失败而被灭族。
English: At first, Zheng relied on Lai Junchen for promotion; after Lai Junchen was killed, he also relied on Zhang Yiming; after Zhang Yiming was overthrown, he also relied on Wei; after Wei was killed, he turned to rely on the king of Wei, Li Shifu, and was finally destroyed because of the failure of Li Shifu's uprising.

古文：严善思免死，流静州。
现代文：严善思被免于死刑，流放到静州。
English: Yan Shansi was spared the death penalty and exiled to Jingzhou.

古文：万骑恃讨诸韦之功，多暴横，长安中苦之；诏并除外官。
现代文：万骑兵倚仗着讨平韦氏集团的功劳，大多横行不法，从而成为长安百姓的一大祸害。
English: Relying on the merits of the Wei group, most of the cavalrymen were lawless, thus becoming a great scourge to the people of Chang'an.

古文：又停以户奴为万骑；更置飞骑，隶左、右羽林。
现代文：唐睿宗下诏将万骑兵全部放到京外去作官，同时下令停止从官户奴隶中选拔万骑兵，并另外设置隶属于左、右羽林卫的飞骑军。
English: Emperor Tang Ruizong issued an edict to send all the cavalrymen outside of Beijing to serve as officials. At the same time, he ordered to stop the selection of cavalrymen from the slaves of official households, and also set up a flying cavalry army subordinated to the left and right feathered forest guards.

古文：姚元之、宋璟及御史大夫毕构上言： 先朝斜封官悉宜停废。 
现代文：姚元之、宋及御史大夫毕构向唐睿宗提出建议： 先朝所任命的斜封官应当全部予以废黜。 
English: Yao Yuanzhi, Song, and the imperial historian Bi Zheng made a suggestion to Tang Ruizong: the oblique seal officials appointed by the previous dynasty should all be deposed.

古文：上从之。
现代文：唐睿宗表示同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：癸巳，罢斜封官凡数千人。
现代文：癸巳，唐睿宗免去了数千名斜封官的职务。
English: Soon after, Tang Ruizong relieved thousands of officials of their posts.

古文：刑部尚书、同中书门下三品裴谈贬蒲州刺史。
现代文：刑部尚书、同中书门下三品裴谈被贬为蒲州刺史。
English: Shang Shu of the Department of Criminal Law and Sanpin Pei Dan, a disciple of Shang Shu of the Department of Criminal Law, were relegated to the history books of Puzhou.

古文：赠苏安恒谏议大夫。
现代文：唐睿宗追赠苏安恒为谏议大夫。
English: Tang Ruizong posthumously awarded Su Anheng as a doctor.

古文：九月，辛未，以太子少师致仕唐休璟为朔方道大总管。
现代文：九月辛未，唐睿宗任命已经退休的太子少师唐休为朔方道大总管。
English: In September, Tang Ruizong appointed Tang Xiu, a retired prince's apprentice, as the president of Shuo Fang Dao University.

古文：冬，十月，甲申，礼仪使姚元之、宋璟奏： 大行皇帝神主，应祔太庙，请迁义宗神主于东都，别立庙。 
现代文：冬季十月，甲申，礼仪使姚元之、宋上奏道： 已故未葬的中宗皇帝的神主应当迁入太庙受祭，请陛下下诏将义宗皇帝的神主迁到东都另外立庙祭祀。 
English: In the winter of October, in Jiaxing, the etiquette made Yao Yuanzhi and Song Shangsong recite: The deceased and unburied Emperor Zhongzong's deity should be moved to the Imperial Temple to be sacrificed. Please Your Majesty issue an edict to move Emperor Yizong's deity to the Eastern Capital to be sacrificed in another temple.

古文：从之。
现代文：唐睿宗采纳了他们的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：乙未，追复天后尊号为大圣天后。
现代文：乙未，唐睿宗下诏恢复天后武则天大圣天后的尊号。
English: In the 19th century, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to restore the honorary title of the Queen of Heaven, Wu Zetian Da Sheng Tianhou.

古文：丁酉，以幽州镇守经略节度大使薛讷为左武卫大将军兼幽州都督。
现代文：丁酉，唐睿宗任命幽州镇守经略节度大使薛讷为左武卫大将军兼幽州都督。
English: Ding Xi, Tang Ruizong appointed Xue Ne, the governor of Yuzhou Town, as the general of the Left Division of Inner Palace Guards and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：节度使之名自讷始。
现代文：节度使之名即从薛讷开始。
English: The festival takes its name from Cherne.

古文：太平公主以太子年少，意颇易之；既而惮其英武，欲更择暗弱者立之以久其权，数为流言，云 太子非长，不当立。 
现代文：太平公主认为太子李隆基还很年轻，因而起初并未把太子放在心上；不久之后又因惧怕太子的英明威武，转而想要改立一位昏庸懦弱的人作太子，以便使她自己能长期保住现有的权势地位。太平公主屡次散布流言，声称 太子并非皇帝的嫡长子，因此不应当被立为太子。 
English: Princess Taiping thought that Prince Li Longji was still very young, so at first she did not care about the prince; soon after, she was afraid of the prince's wisdom and power, so she wanted to replace the prince with a stupid and cowardly person, so that she could maintain her current position of power for a long time. Princess Taiping repeatedly spread rumors, claiming that the prince was not the eldest son of the emperor, so he should not be appointed as the prince.

古文：己亥，制戒谕中外，以息浮议。
现代文：己亥，唐睿宗颁下制书晓谕警告天下臣民，以平息各种流言蜚语。
English: At the same time, Tang Ruizong issued a book-making edict to warn the world's subjects in order to quell all kinds of rumors.

古文：公主每觇伺太子所为，纤介必闻于上，太子左右，亦往往为公主耳目，太子深不自安。
现代文：太平公主还常常派人监视太子李隆基的所作所为，即使一些细微之事也要报知唐睿宗，此外，太平公主还在太子身边安插了很多耳目，太子心里感到十分不安。
English: Princess Taiping also often sent people to monitor the actions of Prince Li Longji, and even some minor things had to be reported to Tang Ruizong. In addition, Princess Taiping also placed a lot of eyes and ears around the prince, and the prince felt very uneasy.

古文：谥故太子重俊曰节愍。
现代文：唐睿宗颁下制书，将已故太子李重俊谥为节愍。
English: Tang Ruizong awarded the book to the late Prince Li Chongjunjun as the festival gong.

古文：太府少卿万年韦凑上书，以为： 赏罚所不加者，则考行立谥以褒贬之。
现代文：太府少卿万年人韦凑上书认为： 对于那些没有受到赏赐或者处罚的人，应根据其生前的所作所为赠予谥号，以示对他们一生功过的褒贬。
English: The Taifu Shoshojin Bannenrenren Weiqi wrote: For those who have not been rewarded or punished, they should be given a nickname according to what they have done in their lifetime, to show their praise for their lifetime achievements.

古文：故太子重俊，与李多祚等称兵入宫，中宗登玄武门以避之，太子据鞍督兵自若；及其徒倒戈，多祚等死，太子方逃窜。
现代文：原太子李重俊与李多诈等人举兵闯入宫中，致使中宗不得不登上玄武门以躲避他们，太子却还能够神态自若地骑在马上督率士兵；只是到了他的徒众临阵倒戈李多祚等人已经被杀之后，太子才不得不落荒而逃。
English: The former prince Li Chongjun and Li Duozhu and others raised an army and broke into the palace, causing Zhongzong to have to board the Xuanwu Gate to avoid them. The prince was still able to ride on a horse and lead the soldiers with confidence. However, it was only after his followers had been killed and Li Duozhu and others had been killed that the prince had to flee.

古文：向使宿卫不守，其为祸也胡可忍言！
现代文：假如当时把守玄武门的侍卫抵挡不住的话，那么李重俊所造成的祸害将不堪设想！
English: If the guards who guarded the Xuanwu Gate at that time could not resist, then the evil caused by Li Chongjun would be unimaginable!

古文：明日，中宗雨泣，谓供奉官曰： 几不与卿等相见。 
现代文：第二天，中宗皇帝泪如雨下地对中书、门下两省的官员们说： 朕差一点就见不到诸位了。 
English: The next day, Emperor Zhongzong burst into tears and said to the officials of Zhongshu and his two provinces: I almost didn't get to see you.

古文：其危如此，今圣朝礼葬，谥为节愍，臣窃惑之。
现代文：当时的情形竟然危急到这种地步。现在朝廷对李重俊以礼安葬，还要将他谥为节愍，臣内心深处的确感到迷惑不解。
English: At that time, the situation was so critical that it reached this point. Now, the Imperial Court wants to give Li Chung Jun a ceremonial burial, but also wants to use him as a ceremonial shield. The minister is really puzzled in his heart.

古文：夫臣子之礼，过庙必下，过位必趋。
现代文：依据臣子侍奉君主的礼节，大臣经过太庙必须下马，经过君主的宝座必须恭恭敬敬地小步快走。
English: According to the etiquette of a vassal serving the monarch, a minister must dismount after passing the Great Temple, and must walk quickly and respectfully past the monarch's throne.

古文：汉成帝之为太子，不敢绝驰道。而重俊称兵宫内，跨马御前，无礼甚矣。
现代文：汉成帝作太子时，虽然是受到了汉元帝的紧急召见，尚且不敢横穿驰道，而太子李重俊居然敢于在皇宫之内兴兵造反，在中宗皇帝的面前横刀立马，这实在是太无礼了。
English: When Emperor Hancheng was crown prince, although he received an urgent summons from Emperor Han Yuan, he did not dare to cross the road, while Prince Li Chongjun dared to rebel within the imperial palace and stand up in front of Emperor Zhongzong, which was really too rude.

古文：若以其诛武三思父子而嘉之，则兴兵以诛奸臣而尊君父可也；今欲自取之，是与三思竞为逆也，又足嘉乎！
现代文：嘉奖他起兵诛杀武三思父子是可以，但只有在他起兵铲除奸臣是为了尊崇皇帝的时候才可以这样做。现在他是为了自己当皇帝，那就只能说明他与武三思一样，都是图谋不轨的乱臣贼子，对这样的人还值得立谥嘉奖吗！
English: To commend him for taking up arms to kill Wusansi and his son is possible, but only if he took up arms to eradicate treacherous vassals in order to honor the emperor. Now he is an emperor for his own sake, which only shows that he, like Wusansi, is a scheming ruffian and thief. Is such a person worthy of commendation?

古文：若以其欲废韦氏而嘉之，则韦氏于时逆状未彰，大义未绝，苟无中宗之命而废之，是胁父废母也，庸可乎！
现代文：如果因为他起兵是为了废掉韦后而嘉奖他，则当时韦后谋反的表现还不太明显，与太子之间母子君臣的大义尚未断绝，如果没有中宗的命令就擅自起兵废掉她，这就是胁迫父亲废弃母亲，又怎么可以呢！
English: If he was praised because he raised an army in order to depose Empress Wei, then the rebellion of Empress Wei was not very obvious at that time, and the great justice of the mother and son between the prince and the prince had not yet been severed. If there was no order from Zhongzong, he would have raised an army to depose her without authorization. This is coercion of the father to abandon the mother, and how can it be?

古文：汉戾太子困于江充之谗，发忿杀充，虽兴兵交战，非围逼君父也；兵败而死，及其孙为天子，始得改葬，犹谥曰戾。
现代文：汉武帝时期戾太子因受江充的诬陷而发泄愤懑，起兵杀死江充，虽然也动用了兵马，但戾太子并没有围困逼迫他的父亲汉武帝。戾太子兵败自杀后，一直等到他的孙子汉宣帝即位时才得以改葬，但还是将他谥为戾。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Prince Gong unleashed his anger at being framed by Emperor Jiangcheng. He raised an army and killed Emperor Jiangcheng. Although he also used soldiers and horses, Prince Gong did not besiege and persecute his father Emperor Hanwu. After Prince Gong's military defeat and suicide, he waited until his grandson Emperor Han Xuan ascended the throne before he could be reburied, but he was still buried.

古文：况重俊可谥之曰节愍乎！
现代文：何况李重俊行为如此，陛下怎么能将他谥为节愍呢！
English: What's more, if Li Chongjun behaves like this, how can His Majesty treat him as a saint!

古文：臣恐后之乱臣贼子，得引以为比，开悖逆之原，非所以彰善瘅恶也，请改其谥。
现代文：臣担心后世的乱臣贼子会援引李重俊这一先例，为违乱忤逆行为大开方便之门，这恐怕不是用来彰善惩恶的有效方法。
English: The vassals were worried that the ruffian thieves of later generations would cite the precedent of Li Chung Jun as a convenient way to commit disorderly and treasonous acts. This was probably not an effective way to promote virtue and punish vice.

古文：多祚等从重俊兴兵，不为无罪。
现代文：请陛下给李重俊改赐一个别的谥号。
English: Your majesty, please give Li Chongjun another nickname.

古文：陛下今宥之可也，名之为雪，亦所未安。 
现代文：李多祚等人追随李重俊起兵，也不能说没有罪过，陛下现在可以宽宥他们所犯的罪行，但口口声声地说为他们平反昭雪，恐怕还不太合适。 
English: Li Dorje and others who followed Li Chongjun to take up arms cannot be said to be without fault. His Majesty can now pardon the crimes they have committed, but it is not appropriate to say that they have been rehabilitated.

古文：上甚然其言，而执政以为制命已行，不为追改，但停多祚等赠官而已。
现代文：唐睿宗非常赞同他的意见，但具体主管的官员认为皇帝的制命已经颁行，因而不愿再改变谥号，只是取消给李多祚等人的赠官而已。
English: Tang Ruizong very much agreed with his opinion, but the officials in charge of the details thought that the emperor's order had already been issued, so they did not want to change the nickname again, but to cancel the bestowal of officials to Li Duojun and others.

古文：十一月，戊申朔，以姚元之为中书令。
现代文：十一月，戊申朔，唐睿宗任命姚元之为中书令。
English: In November, Wu Shengshuo, Tang Ruizong appointed Yao Yuanshi as the second-in-command.

古文：乙酉，葬孝和皇帝于定陵，庙号中宗。
现代文：己酉，唐睿宗将孝和皇帝葬于定陵，庙号中宗。
English: Tang Ruizong buried Xiao He and the emperor in the Dingling Mausoleum, and the temple was renamed Zhongzong.

古文：朝议以韦后有罪，不应祔葬。
现代文：朝廷中议论认为韦皇后犯有大罪，不应当将她的灵柩与唐中宗合葬。
English: There was discussion in the imperial court that Empress Wei had committed a great sin and that her coffin should not be buried with that of Tang Zhongzong.

古文：追谥故英王妃赵氏曰和思顺圣皇后，求其瘗，莫有知者，乃以祎衣招魂，覆以夷衾，祔葬定陵。
现代文：唐睿宗将已故英王王妃赵氏追谥为和思顺圣皇后，派人四处寻找她埋葬的地方，但没有人知道她葬在哪里，最后只得用皇后的衣来为她招魂，然后在衣上盖上覆盖尸体的被子夷衾，合葬于定陵。
English: Tang Ruizong hunted down the late British princess Zhao as the holy empress of He Shishun. He sent people everywhere to look for her burial place, but no one knew where she was buried. In the end, he had to use the queen's clothes to summon her spirit, then cover the clothes with a quilt covering the corpse, and bury them together in the Dingling Mausoleum.

古文：壬子，侍中韦安石罢为太子少保，左仆射、同中书门下三吕苏瑰罢为少傅。
现代文：壬子，侍中韦安石被罢免为太子少保；左仆射、同中书门下三品苏被罢免为太子少傅。
English: In addition, Wei Anshi, a chamberlain, was removed from his post as the prince's junior bodyguard; Zuo Fuxia, a chambermaid, was removed from his post as the prince's junior bodyguard; and Sanpin Su, a junior secretary, was removed from his post as the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：甲寅，追复裴炎官爵。
现代文：甲寅，唐睿宗下诏追复裴炎的官职爵位。
English: Qia Yin, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to restore Pei Yan's official title.

古文：初，裴伷先自岭南逃归，复杖一百，徙北庭。
现代文：当初，裴先从岭南逃回，又被杖打一百，流放到北庭。
English: At first, Pei Xian fled back from Lingnan, but was beaten with a cane and exiled to Beiting.

古文：至徙所，殖货任侠，常遣客诇都下事。
现代文：裴先在流放地北庭经商，又干一些打抱不平的侠义之事，他还常常派人到长安打听各种消息。
English: Pei Xian was doing business in the North Courtyard of the Exile, and he also did some chivalrous things to settle grievances. He also often sent people to Chang'an to inquire about various news.

古文：武后之诛流人也，伷先先知之，逃奔胡中；北庭都护追获，囚之以闻。
现代文：他事先得知武则天即将派遣使者出京诛杀被处以流刑的罪犯，便在使者到来之前逃到胡人的地盘躲避，后被北庭都护派兵捉回，关进监狱并上报武则天。
English: He learned in advance that Wu Zetian was about to send an envoy to Beijing to kill the criminals who had been sentenced to exile, so he fled to Hu's site to hide before the envoy arrived. He was later caught by soldiers sent by the Northern Palace Guards, put in prison and reported to Wu Zetian.

古文：使者至，流人尽死，伷先以待报未杀。
现代文：使者来到北庭后，流刑犯全部被杀，只有裴先因等待武则天的批示而没有立即被杀。
English: After the envoy came to the North Court, all the exiles were killed, except for Pei Xian, who was not killed immediately because he was waiting for Wu Zetian's order.

古文：既而武后下制安抚流人，有未死者悉放还，伷先由是得归。
现代文：过了一段时间武则天又下诏安抚流刑犯人，规定未被处死的全部放还原籍，裴先因此得以回到长安。
English: After a period of time, Emperor Wu Zetian issued an edict to appease the exiled prisoners, stipulating that all those who had not been executed should be returned to their place of origin. As a result, Pei Xian was able to return to Chang'an.

古文：至是求炎后，独伷先在，拜詹事丞。
现代文：到这时候，唐睿宗下食寻找裴炎的后人，只有裴先一人在世，于是将他任命为詹事丞。
English: At this time, Tang Ruizong went to dinner to look for Pei Yan's descendants. Only Pei Xian was still alive, so he was named Zhan Shizhen.

古文：壬戌，追复王同皎官爵。
现代文：壬戌，唐睿宗下令追复王同皎的官爵。
English: At the same time, Tang Ruizong ordered the recovery of Wang Tongyu's official title.

古文：庚午，许文贞公苏瑰薨。
现代文：庚午，许文贞公苏去世。
English: In the afternoon, Xu Wenzheng Su passed away.

古文：制起复其子颋为工部侍郎，颋固辞。
现代文：唐睿宗颁发制命，任命正在为父服丧的苏之子苏为工部侍郎，苏坚决推辞不受。
English: Tang Ruizong issued an order to appoint Su's son, Su, who was in mourning for his father, as an attendant of the Ministry of Industry. Su was firmly rejected.

古文：上使李日知谕旨，日知终坐不言而还，奏曰： 臣见其哀毁，不忍发言，恐其陨绝。 
现代文：唐睿宗派李日知前去传达自己的旨意，李日知在苏家坐了半晌，却只字未提自己的来意便回朝复命，他对唐睿宗回奏道： 臣见到苏悲痛欲绝的样子，实在不忍心把要说的话讲出来，担心他会发生意外。 
English: Tang Ruizong sent Li Rizhi to convey his will. Li Rizhi sat at Su's house for a while, but he did not say a word about his own intentions and returned to the North to resume his life. He echoed to Tang Ruizong: When I saw Su's grief-stricken appearance, I really could not bear to say what I wanted to say, fearing that he would have an accident.

古文：上乃听其终制。
现代文：于是唐睿宗便允许苏为其父服满三年丧期。
English: As a result, Tang Ruizong allowed Su to complete the three-year mourning period for his father.

古文：十二月，癸未，上以二女西城、隆昌公主为女官，以资天皇天后之福，仍欲于京城西造观。
现代文：十二月，癸未，为助天皇太后武则天的冥福，唐睿宗让他的两个女儿西城公主和隆昌公主作女道士，并准备在长安城西建造道观。
English: In December, in order to help the Emperor and Empress Dowager Wu Zetian rest in peace, Tang Ruizong asked his two daughters, Xicheng Princess and Longchang Princess, to become female Taoists and prepare to build Taoism in the west of Chang'an City.

古文：谏议大夫宁原悌上言，以为： 先朝悖逆庶人以爱女骄盈而及祸，新都、宜城以庶孽抑损而获全。
现代文：谏议大夫宁原悌向唐睿宗进言认为： 先朝悖逆庶人作为中宗和韦后的爱女而骄傲自满，终于难逃杀身之祸；新城公主和宜都公主作为中宗的庶出之女而谦卑自制，终于得以保全。
English: Dr. Ning Yuanxuan, the doctor of consultation, suggested to Tang Ruizong that: the rebellious commoner of the previous dynasty was proud and complacent as the beloved daughter of Zhongzong and Wei, and finally could not escape the calamity of killing herself; the princess of Xincheng and the princess of Yidu were humble and self-restrained as the daughter-in-law of Zhongzong, and were finally preserved.

古文：又释、道二家皆以清净为本，不当广营寺观，劳人费财。
现代文：再说佛教和道教均以清净为本，不应耗费大量的人力物力广造佛寺道观。
English: Moreover, both Buddhism and Taoism are based on purity, and a large amount of manpower and material resources should not be spent on building Buddhist temples and Taoism.

古文：梁武致败于前，先帝取灾于后，殷鉴不远。
现代文：南朝梁武帝佞佛招致祸败于前，中宗广营佛寺道观致使国家多难于后，这样的历史教训距今不远。
English: The Southern Dynasty Liangwu Emperor's worship of Buddha brought disaster and defeat in the past, while the Buddhist doctrine of Guangying Temple in the Chinese Dynasty made it more difficult for the country to advance in the future. Such historical lessons are not far from now.

古文：今二公主入道，将为之置观，不宜过为崇丽，取谤四方。
现代文：现在西城公主和隆昌公主作了女道士，陛下将为他们营建道观，营建时不应当过分豪华壮观，以免招来朝野士民的非议。
English: Now that Princess Saicheng and Princess Longchang have become female Taoists, His Majesty will build a Taoist philosophy for them. When building, it should not be overly luxurious and spectacular, so as not to attract the criticism of the court and the people.

古文：又，先朝所亲狎诸僧，尚在左右，宜加屏斥。 
现代文：此外，先朝中宗皇帝所宠幸的僧人们仍在陛下身边，应当一律斥退。 
English: In addition, the monks who were favored by Emperor Zhongzong of the previous dynasty are still around His Majesty, and they should all be expelled.

古文：上览而善之。
现代文：唐睿宗看了他的奏章之后，认为他说的很对。
English: After Tang Ruizong watched his performance, he thought that what he said was right.

古文：宦者闾兴贵以事属长安令李朝隐，朝隐系于狱。
现代文：宦官闾兴贵托长安令李朝隐为他办事，李朝隐将他逮捕入狱。
English: The eunuch Hao Xinggui asked Chang'an to order Li Chaoying to work for him, and Li Chaoying arrested and imprisoned him.

古文：上闻之，召见朝隐，劳之曰： 卿为赤县令，能如此，朕复何忧！ 
现代文：唐睿宗听说这件事之后，特意召见了李朝隐，慰问他说： 您作为京师万年县的县令，能够做到这样，朕还有什么可忧虑的呢！ 
English: After Tang Ruizong heard about this matter, he specially summoned Li Chaoying and consoled him, saying: You, as the county magistrate of Beijing Shiren County, can do this, I have nothing to worry about!

古文：因御承天门，集百官及诸州朝集使，宣示以朝隐所为，且下制称 宦官遇宽柔之代，必弄威权。
现代文：唐睿宗还在承天门召集文武百官和来自各州的朝集使，向他们公布李朝隐的所作所为，并且颁下制书表彰他说： 自古以来宦官每遇宽容柔弱的君主，必定会玩弄权势，擅作威福。
English: Tang Ruizong also summoned hundreds of civil and military officials and imperial envoys from various states to Chengtianmen, announced to them the deeds of Li Chaoying, and awarded him a book to commend him, saying: Since ancient times, whenever eunuchs encounter a tolerant and effeminate monarch, they will certainly play with power and abuse their power.

古文：朕览前载，每所叹息。
现代文：朕每次读前代历史时，都对此颇多感慨。
English: Every time I read the history of the previous generation, I feel quite emotional about it.

古文：能副朕意，实在斯人，可加一阶为太中大夫，赐中上考及绢百匹。 
现代文：真正能够符合朕的心意的，是像李朝隐这样的人，所以应为他进一阶，为太中大夫，将他的考核成绩定为中上，并且赐给绢一百匹。 
English: It is people like Li Chaoying who can truly meet my heart's desire. Therefore, he should be promoted to the first level, to be a mid-level doctor, and his assessment score should be set as middle-upper, and he should be given a hundred yakitori.

古文：壬辰，奚、犯塞，掠渔阳、雍奴，出卢龙塞而去。
现代文：壬辰，奚人和人进犯边塞，在渔阳、雍奴二县大肆掳掠之后，出卢龙塞而去。
English: People from Imjin, Yunnan and Shandong invaded the border fortress, and after plundering and pillaging the two counties of Yuyang and Yongnu, they left Lulong fortress.

古文：幽州都督薛讷追击之，弗克。
现代文：唐幽州都督薛讷派兵追击，未能取胜。
English: Xue Ne, the governor of Tangyuzhou, sent troops to chase them, but failed to win.

古文：旧制，三品以上官册授，五品以上制授，六品以下敕授，皆委尚书省奏拟，文属吏部，武属兵部，尚书曰中铨，侍郎曰东西铨。
现代文：唐朝旧制规定，三品以上官员，由皇帝当面用册书任命，称为册授；四品以下、五品以上官员由皇帝颁布制书任命，称为制授；六品以下官员由皇帝颁布敕书任命，称为敕授。官员的任命都委托尚书省拟定，而后上奏，文官由吏部拟定，武官由兵部拟定，两部的尚书称为中铨，侍郎二人称为东西铨。
English: According to the old system of the Tang Dynasty, officials of three or more grades were appointed by the emperor in person with a written record, called the record of appointment; officials of four grades or less and five grades or more were appointed by the emperor by issuing a written record, called the record of appointment; officials of six grades or less were appointed by the emperor by issuing a written record, called the record of appointment. The appointment of officials was entrusted to the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and then it was announced. Civil servants were appointed by the Ministry of Civil Affairs, military officers were appointed by the Ministry of Military Affairs, two books were called the middle book, and two attendants were called the east and west books.

古文：中宗之末，嬖幸用事，选举混淆，无复纲纪。
现代文：唐中宗末期，得到皇帝宠幸的奸佞小人执掌朝廷大权，所选任的官吏好坏混杂，不再有法度可言。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty, the emperor's favorite villain, the traitor Zheng Rong, held the power of the imperial court. The officials he appointed were a mixture of good and bad, and there was no longer any rule of law.

古文：至是，以宋璟为吏部尚书，李乂、卢从愿为侍郎，皆不畏强御，请谒路绝。
现代文：此时，唐睿宗任命宋为吏部尚书，李、卢从愿为吏部侍郎，三人都不畏强暴，请托告求之路从此堵塞。
English: At this time, Tang Ruizong appointed Song as the secretary of the administrative department, and Li and Lu volunteered to be the attendants of the administrative department. All three were not afraid of violence, and the road of petitioning was blocked from then on.

古文：集者万馀人，留者三铨不过二千，人服其公。
现代文：在一万多名候选官员中，经过三铨之后入选的不超过两千人，人们都对他们的公正无私深为叹服。
English: Of the more than ten thousand candidate officials, no more than two thousand were selected after three rounds, and people were deeply impressed by their fairness and selflessness.

古文：以姚元之为兵部尚书，陆象先、卢怀慎为侍郎，武选亦治。
现代文：唐睿宗又任命姚元之为兵部尚书，陆象先、卢怀慎为兵部侍郎，对武官的选拔任用也走上了正轨。
English: Tang Ruizong also appointed Yao Yuan as the secretary of the military department, Lu Xiangxian and Lu Huaixen as the attendants of the military department, and the selection and appointment of military officers also went on the right track.

古文：从愿，承庆之族子；象先，元方之子也。
现代文：卢从愿是卢承庆的同族兄弟之子；陆象先是陆元方的儿子。
English: Lu Zengcheng was the son of Lu Chengqing's brother; Lu Zengcheng was the son of Lu Yuanfang.

古文：侍御史藁城倪若水，奏弹国子祭酒祝钦明、司业郭山恽乱常改作，希旨病君；于是左授钦明饶州刺史，山恽括州长史。
现代文：侍御史藁城人倪若水，上奏弹劾国子祭酒祝钦明、国子司业郭山恽扰乱赏规、变更旧制，为迎合中宗韦后的旨意而使得中宗圣德有亏。唐睿宗因此将祝钦明降职为饶州刺史，将郭山恽降职为括州长史。
English: Ni Ruoshui, the steward of the city of Shijiazhuang, made a report to impeach Zhu Qinming, the governor's son, and Guo Shanjun, the governor's son, for disturbing the award regulations and changing the old system, in order to cater to the will of the Chinese Empress Wei, which made the Chinese holy virtues disadvantageous. Therefore, Tang Ruizong demoted Zhu Qinming to the governor of Raozhou, and demoted Guo Shanjun to the governor of the governor.

古文：侍御史杨孚，弹纠不避权贵，权贵毁之。上曰： 鹰搏狡兔，须急救之，不尔必反为所噬。
现代文：侍御史杨孚在奏劾纠察法之事时不畏权贵，因而受到权贵们的诋毁，唐睿宗说： 在老鹰搏击狡免时，必须赶紧帮助它，否则它反会被狡免咬伤。
English: Tang Ruizong said: When the eagle fights against the cunning, you must help it quickly, otherwise it will be bitten by the cunning.

古文：御史绳奸慝亦然。
现代文：御史纠举弹劾奸诈邪恶之徒也是这样。
English: This is also the case for impeachment of treacherous and evil people.

古文：敬非人主保卫之，则亦为奸慝所噬矣。 
现代文：如果没有君主对他多方保护，他也会被奸诈邪恶之徒咬伤的。 
English: If the prince had not protected him in many ways, he would have been bitten by the treacherous villain.

古文：孚，隋文帝之侄孙也。
现代文：杨孚是隋文帝杨坚的侄孙。
English: Yang Fu is the great-nephew of the Sui Emperor Yang Jian.

古文：置河西节度、支度、营田等使，领凉、甘、肃、伊、瓜、沙、西七州，治凉州。
现代文：唐睿宗设置河西节度、支度、营田等使，统辖凉、甘、肃、伊、瓜、沙、西等七州，治所在凉州。
English: Tang Ruizong set up the Hexi Festival, Preparation, Yingtian and other envoys, and oversaw the seven states of Liang, Gansu, Suzhou, Yi, Gua, Sha and Xi, with the capital in Liangzhou.

古文：姚州群蛮，先附吐蕃，摄监察御史李知古请发兵击之；既降，又请筑城，列置州县，重税之。
现代文：姚州各蛮族部落起初依附吐蕃，代理监察御史李知古请求调集军队前往讨伐；各蛮族部落归降唐朝之后，李知古又请求在姚州修筑城郭，设置州县官署，对他们征收重税。
English: At first, the barbarian tribes in Yaozhou depended on Tubo, and Li Zhigu, the acting inspector, requested to mobilize the army to go to the crusade. After the barbarian tribes returned to the Tang Dynasty, Li Zhigu also requested to build castles in Yaozhou, set up state and county government offices, and levy heavy taxes on them.

古文：黄门侍郎徐坚以为不可；不从。
现代文：黄门侍郎徐坚认为不能这样做，但他的建议没有得到采纳。
English: Huangmen waiter Xu Jian thought that this could not be done, but his suggestion was not adopted.

古文：知古发剑南兵筑城，因欲诛其豪杰，掠子女为奴婢。
现代文：李知古调集剑南道兵马修筑城池，又想趁机铲除蛮族各部落的豪杰，将他们的子女掠为奴婢。
English: Li Zhigu mobilized soldiers from South Jian Province to build the city, and also wanted to take advantage of the opportunity to eradicate the heroes of the barbarian tribes and plunder their children as slaves.

古文：群蛮怨怨，蛮酋傍名引吐蕃攻知古，杀之，以其尸祭天，由是姚、巂路绝，连年不通。
现代文：蛮族各部落极为愤恨，部落酋长傍名召引吐蕃军队进攻李知古并将他杀死，然后用他的尸体祭祀上天，从此姚、州一带通往内地的道路断绝，连续多年未能打通。
English: The barbarian tribes were extremely angry. The tribal chieftain summoned the Tubo army to attack Li Zhigu and killed him, and then used his corpse to sacrifice to the heavens. From then on, the roads to the interior of Yao and Zhou were cut off and could not be opened for many years.

古文：安西都护张玄表侵掠吐蕃北境，吐蕃虽怨而未绝和亲，乃赂鄯州都督杨矩，请河西九曲之地以为公主汤沐邑；矩奏与之。
现代文：唐安西都护张玄表侵扰掠夺吐蕃北部边境地区，吐蕃虽然对此极为不满，但却没有中断与唐和亲，于是他们贿赂唐鄯州都督杨矩，请求唐睿宗将河西九曲之地送给吐蕃作为金城公主的汤沐邑。
English: Zhang Xuan, the tutelary of Tang Anxi, invaded and plundered the northern border region of Tubo. Although Tubo was extremely dissatisfied with this, they did not break off the peace with Tang. Therefore, they bribed Yang Rui, the governor of Tang Xizhou, and asked Tang Ruizong to give the land of Hexi Jiuqu to Tubo as the princess of Jincheng.

古文：景云二年辛亥，公元七一一年
现代文：杨矩上奏唐睿宗，劝他将河西九曲之地送给吐蕃。景云二年
English: Yang Rong played for Tang Ruizong and persuaded him to give the land of the Hexi Jiuqu to Tubo. In the second year of Jingyun

古文：春，正月，癸丑，突厥可汗默啜遣使请和；许之。
现代文：春季正月，癸丑，突厥可汗默啜派遣使者前来求和，唐睿宗答应了他们的请求。
English: In the first month of spring, the Turkic khan silently sent an envoy to seek peace, and Tang Ruizong agreed to their request.

古文：己未，以太仆卿郭元振、中书侍郎张说并同平章事。
现代文：己未，唐睿宗任命太仆卿郭元振、中书侍郎张说二人为同平章事。
English: In the meantime, Tang Ruizong appointed Guo Yuan Zhen, the eunuch, and Zhang He, the chancellor's attendant, to be the co-champions.

古文：以温王重茂为襄王，充集州刺史，遣中郎将将兵五百就防之。
现代文：唐睿宗改封温王李重茂为襄王，让他充任集州刺史，并且派遣中郎将率领五百人马驻扎在集州对他加以防范。
English: Tang Ruizong changed the title of Wen Wang Li Chongmao to Xiang Wang, let him serve as the chief historian of Jizhou, and dispatched Zhong Lang Zeng to lead five hundred men and horses stationed in Jizhou to guard against him.

古文：乙丑，追立妃刘氏曰肃明皇后，陵曰惠陵；德妃窦氏曰昭成皇后，陵曰靖陵。
现代文：乙丑，唐睿宗下诏将妃子刘氏追立为肃明皇后，称她的坟墓为惠陵；将德妃窦氏追立为昭成皇后，称她的坟墓为靖陵。
English: In the second century, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to elevate the concubine Liu Cun as the Empress of Su Ming and called her tomb Huiling; to elevate the concubine Tuo as the Empress of Zhao Cheng and called her tomb Jingling.

古文：皆招魂葬于东都城南，立庙京师，号仪坤庙。
现代文：唐睿宗在为这两位妃子招魂之后，将她们安葬在东都洛阳城南，并在京师为她们立庙，称为仪坤庙。
English: After summoning the spirits of these two concubines, Tang Ruizong buried them in the eastern capital of Luoyang, and built a temple for them in Beijing, known as the Rikun Temple.

古文：窦氏，太子之母也。
现代文：窦氏是太子李隆基的生母。
English: The Dou clan is the birth mother of Crown Prince Li Longji.

古文：太平公主与益州长史窦怀贞等结为朋党，欲以危太子，使其婿唐晙邀韦安石至其第，安石固辞不往。
现代文：太平公主同益州长史窦怀贞等结成朋党，想加害于太子李隆基，便指使她的女婿唐邀请韦安石到自己的家中来，韦安石坚决推辞，没有前往。
English: Princess Taiping, together with Governor Shi Dou Huai Zhen and others, formed a crony party and wanted to harm Prince Li Longji, so she ordered her son-in-law Tang to invite Wei Anshi to her home. Wei Anshi firmly declined and did not go.

古文：上尝密召安石，谓曰： 闻朝廷皆倾心东宫，卿宜察之。 
现代文：唐睿宗曾经秘密地召见韦安石，对他说： 听说朝廷文武百官全都倾心归附太子，您应当对此多加留意。 
English: Tang Ruizong once secretly summoned Wei Anshi and said to him: I have heard that all the officials of the imperial court are devoted to the prince, you should pay more attention to this.

古文：对曰： 陛下安得亡国之言！
现代文：韦安石回答说： 陛下从哪里听到这种亡国之言呢！
English: Wei Anshi replied, "Where did your majesty hear such words about ruining the country?"

古文：此必太平之谋耳。
现代文：这一定是太平公主的主意。
English: This must have been Princess Taiping's idea.

古文：太子有功于社稷，仁明孝友，天下所知，愿陛下无惑谗言。 
现代文：太子为宗庙社稷立下了大功，而且一向仁慈明智，孝顺父母，友爱兄弟，这是天下人都知道的事实，希望陛下不要被谗言所迷惑。 
English: The crown prince has made great contributions to the establishment of the family temple, and he has always been kind and wise, filial to his parents, and brotherly to his brothers. This is a fact known to everyone in the world. I hope that His Majesty will not be fooled by gossip.

古文：上瞿然曰： 朕知之矣，卿勿言。 
现代文：唐睿宗听过这话之后十分惊异地说： 朕明白了，您不要再提这件事了。 
English: After hearing this, Tang Ruizong was very surprised and said, "I understand, please don't mention this again."

古文：时公主在帘下窃听之，以飞语陷安石，欲收按之，赖郭元振救之，得免。
现代文：当时太平公主正在帘子后面偷听他们君臣之间的谈话，事后便散布各种流言蜚语对韦安石横加陷害，想把他逮捕下狱严加审讯，多亏了郭元振的救助才得以幸免。
English: At that time, Princess Taiping was eavesdropping on the conversation between their lords and ministers behind the curtain. Afterwards, she spread all kinds of gossip and rumors to frame Wei Anshi, and wanted to arrest him, put him in prison and severely interrogate him. Thanks to Guo Yuanzhen's help, he was spared.

古文：公主又尝乘辇邀宰相于光范门内，讽以易置东宫，众皆失色，宋璟抗言曰： 东宫有大功于天下，真宗庙社稷之主，公主奈何忽有此议！ 
现代文：太平公主还曾乘辇车在光范门内拦住宰相，暗示他们应当改立皇太子，在场的宰相们全都大惊失色。宋大声质问道： 太子为大唐社稷立下了莫大的功劳，是宗庙社稷的主人，公主为什么突然提出这样的建议呢！ 
English: Princess Taiping also once stopped the prime minister in a carriage at the Guangfan Gate, suggesting that they should change the crown prince, and all the prime ministers present were shocked. Song loudly questioned: The prince has made great contributions to the Great Tang Society, and is the master of the family temple society. Why did the princess suddenly make such a suggestion?

古文：璟与姚元之密言于上曰： 宋王陛下之元子，豳王高宗之长孙，太平公主交构其间，将使东宫不安。
现代文：宋与姚元之秘密地向唐睿宗进言道： 宋王李成器是陛下的嫡长子，豳王李守礼是高宗皇帝的长孙，太平公主在他俩与太子之间互相构陷，制造事端，将会使得东宫地位不稳。
English: Song and Yao Yuan secretly approached Tang Ruizong and said: Song King Li Chengji is the eldest son of His Majesty, and Shao King Li Shouli is the eldest grandson of Emperor Gaozong. The Taiping Princess has set up a trap between the two of them and the prince, creating an incident, which will make the position of the East Palace unstable.

古文：请出宋王及豳王皆为刺史，罢岐、薛二王左、右羽林，使为左、右率以事太子。太平公主请与武攸暨皆于东都安置。 
现代文：请陛下将宋王和豳王两人外放为刺史；免去岐王李隆范和薛王李隆业所担任的左、右羽林大将军职务，任命他们为太子左、右卫率以事奉太子；将太平公主与武攸暨安置到东都洛阳。 
English: I would like to ask Your Majesty to transfer King Song and King Gong to the outside of history; to relieve King Qi Li Long Fan and King Xue Li Long Ye of their duties as Left and Right Ulin Generals, and to appoint them as the Left and Right Guards of the Crown Prince to serve the Crown Prince; and to relocate Princess Taiping and Wu Youcai to the eastern capital of Luoyang.

古文：上曰： 朕更无兄弟，惟太平一妹，岂可远置东都！
现代文：唐睿宗说： 朕现在已没有兄弟了，只有太平公主这一个妹妹，怎么可以将她远远地安置到东都去呢！
English: Tang Ruizong said, "I have no brothers now. I only have one sister, Princess Taiping. How can I send her far away to Dongdu?

古文：诸王惟卿所处。 
现代文：至于诸王则任凭你们安排。 
English: As for the kings, that's up to you.

古文：乃先下制云： 诸王、驸马自今毋得典禁兵，见任者皆改它宫。 
现代文：于是先颁下制命说： 今后诸王、驸马一律不得统率禁军，现在任职的都必须改任其他官职。 
English: Therefore, he first issued an order saying: In the future, all kings and emperors will not be allowed to lead the forbidden army, and those currently in office must be reassigned to other official positions.

古文：顷之，上谓侍臣曰： 术者言于五日当有急兵入宫，卿等为朕备之。 
现代文：过了不久，唐睿宗对身边的侍臣说： 占卜的人说五天之内将会有起事发难的军队闯入宫中，你们要为朕严加防范。 
English: After a short while, Tang Ruizong said to the attendants around him: The soothsayer said that within five days an army of trouble-makers would break into the palace. You must take strict precautions for me.

古文：张说曰： 此必谗人欲离间东宫。
现代文：张说紧接着说道： 这一定又是奸邪小人用谗言离间陛下与太子的关系。
English: Zhang said, immediately followed by, "This must be another evil villain using slander to drive a wedge between His Majesty and the Crown Prince.

古文：愿陛下使太子监国，则流言自息矣。 
现代文：希望陛下让太子代行处理政务，那么种种流言蜚语就会自然而然地消声匿迹。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will let the Crown Prince handle government affairs on his behalf, so that all kinds of gossip will naturally disappear.

古文：姚元之曰： 张说所言，社稷之至计也。 上悦。
现代文：姚元之说： 张说所提出的办法，是使社稷宗庙长治久安的上上之策。 
English: Yao Yuanzhi said: The method proposed by Zhang said is the best way to ensure the long-term stability of the Shifang Zongji Temple.

古文：二月，丙子朔，以宋王成器为同州刺史，豳王守礼为豳州刺史，左羽林大将军岐王隆范为左卫率，右羽林大将军薛王隆业为右卫率；太平公主蒲州安置。
现代文：唐睿宗听完之后十分高兴。二月，丙子朔，唐睿宗任命宋王李成器为同州刺史，豳王李守礼为豳州刺史，任命左羽林大将军岐王李隆范为左卫率，右羽林大将军薛王李隆业为右卫率；又将太平公主安置在蒲州。
English: Tang Ruizong was very happy after listening to the speech. In February, Tang Ruizong appointed Song King Li Chengji as the governor of the same prefecture, Song King Li Shouli as the governor of the same prefecture, left wing general Qi King Li Longfan as the left guard, right wing general Xue King Li Longye as the right guard, and placed the Taiping Princess in Puzhou.

古文：丁丑，命太子监国，六品以下除官及徒罪以下，并取太子处分。
现代文：丁丑，唐睿宗下诏让太子李隆基代行处理政务，规定凡是六品以下官员的任命以及对犯徒刑罪以下罪犯的审核等事，均由太子全权处理。
English: Dingwu, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to let Prince Li Longji handle government affairs on his behalf, stipulating that all matters such as the appointment of officials below the sixth grade and the review of criminals below the level of imprisonment would be handled by the prince with full authority.

古文：殿中侍御史崔莅、太子中允薛照素言于上曰： 斜封官皆先帝所除，恩命已布，姚元之等建议，一朝尽夺之，彰先帝之过，为陛下招怨。
现代文：殿中侍御史崔、太子中允薛昭素对唐睿宗说： 斜封官都是先帝任命的，制命早已颁布施行，现在却由于姚元之等人的建议而一下子全部削夺，这就彰明了先帝的过错，并且给陛下召来了很多怨言。
English: The palace attendant, Strei, and the prince's second-in-command, Xue Zhaoxu, said to Tang Ruizong: The oblique seal officials were all appointed by the former emperor, and the system of orders had already been promulgated and implemented, but now, due to the suggestion of Yao Yuanzhi and others, they were all taken away at once. This clearly showed the fault of the former emperor, and caused a lot of complaints to His Majesty.

古文：今众口沸腾，遍于海内，恐生非常之变。 
现代文：眼下全国各地怨声载道，恐怕会引发非同寻常的变故。 
English: Right now, complaints are flying all over the country, and I'm afraid it will lead to extraordinary changes.

古文：太平公主亦言之，上以为然。
现代文：太平公主也这样劝说唐睿宗，唐睿宗认为他们所说的都有道理。
English: Taiping Princess also persuaded Tang Ruizong in this way, and Tang Ruizong thought that what they said was reasonable.

古文：戊寅，制： 诸缘斜封别敕授官，先停任者，并量材叙用。 
现代文：戊寅，唐睿宗颁布制命： 凡由于斜封别敕任命之故而被停任的官员，一律可以量材叙用。 
English: Wu Yin, Tang Ruizong issued an order: All officials who have been suspended due to the appointment of oblique seals can be used.

古文：太平公主闻姚元之、宋璟之谋，大怒，以让太子。
现代文：太平公主得知姚元之与宋的计谋之后勃然大怒，并以此责备太子李隆基。
English: After learning of Yao Yuanzhi's scheme with Song, Princess Taiping flew into a rage and blamed Prince Li Longji.

古文：太子惧，奏元之、璟离间姑、兄，请从极法。
现代文：太子感到害怕，便向唐睿宗奏称姚元之和宋挑拨自己与姑母太平公主和兄长宋王李成器、豳王李守礼之间的关系，并请求对他们两人严加惩处。
English: The prince was afraid, so he told Tang Ruizong that Yao Yuanlu and Song provoked the relationship between himself and his aunt, Princess Taiping, and his elder brothers, Song Wang Li Chengji and Zou Wang Li Shouli, and requested that both of them be severely punished.

古文：甲申，贬元之为申州刺史，璟为楚州刺史。
现代文：甲申，唐睿宗将姚元之贬为申州刺史，将宋贬为楚州刺史。
English: In Jiaxing, Tang Ruizong relegated Yao Yuan to the history of Shenzhou and Song to the history of Chuzhou.

古文：丙戌，宋王、豳王亦寝刺史之命。
现代文：丙戌，宋王李成器和豳王李守礼被任命为刺史的事也停止执行。
English: The appointment of Hun Sen, Song King Licheng and Shun King Li Shouli as historical figures has also been suspended.

古文：中书舍人、参知机务刘幽求罢为户部尚书；以太子少保韦安石为侍中。
现代文：唐睿宗将中书舍人、参知机务刘幽求罢免为户部尚书；又任命太子少保韦安石为侍中。
English: Tang Ruizong removed Liu Yucui, the assistant secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, from the post of secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and appointed Prince Shao Bao Wei Anshi as an assistant secretary.

古文：安石与李日知代姚、宋为政，自是纲纪紊乱，复如景龙之世矣。
现代文：韦安石与李日知取代了姚元之、宋二人，开始主持朝廷政务，从此朝廷纲纪紊乱，又恢复到唐中宗景龙年间的老样子。
English: Wei Anshi and Li Rizhi replaced Yao Yuanzhi and Song Duo and began to preside over the government affairs of the imperial court. From then on, the discipline of the imperial court was disordered, and it returned to its old appearance during the reign of King Jinglong of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：前右率府铠曹参军柳泽上疏，以为： 斜封官皆因仆妾汲引，岂出孝和之意！
现代文：前任右卫率府铠曹参军柳泽上疏认为： 斜封官都是通过中宗皇帝身边那些小人的引进而得到任用的，哪里是出自中宗孝和皇帝的本意呢！
English: Liu Ze Shangsuo, the former head of the Right Guard, who led the troops to the palace of Cao Cao, said: The oblique seal officers were appointed through the introduction of those villains around the Emperor Zhongzong, where is the intention of Zhongzong Xiao and the Emperor!

古文：陛下一切黜之，天下莫不称明。一旦忽尽收斜，善恶不安，反覆相攻，何陛下政令之不一也！
现代文：陛下将他们全部废黜，天下人都认为明智，现在却又反过来将他们全部收录叙用，善恶不定，朝令夕改，陛下的政令为什么如此前后不一呢！
English: His Majesty deposed them all, and the whole world thought it was wise, but now, on the other hand, he has enrolled them all for use. Good and evil are uncertain, and orders change from morning to evening. Why are His Majesty's decrees so inconsistent?

古文：议者咸称太平公主令胡僧慧范曲引此曹，诳误陛下。
现代文：街谈巷议都说太平公主让胡僧慧范多方拉拢这些人，诳骗惑乱陛下。
English: Rumors on the street say that Princess Taiping let Hu Mon Hui Fan recruit these people in many ways to deceive and mislead His Majesty.

古文：臣恐积小成大，为祸不细。 
现代文：臣担心这样下去会积小恶而成大祸。 
English: The minister was worried that if things continued in this way, small evils would accumulate and turn into a big disaster.

古文：上弗听。
现代文：唐睿宗没有采纳他的建议。
English: Emperor Wen did not listen to him.

古文：泽，亨之孙也。
现代文：柳泽是柳亨的孙子。
English: Yanagisawa is the grandson of Yanagihiro.

古文：左、右万骑与左右羽林为北门四军，使葛福顺等将之。
现代文：以左、右万骑军和左、右羽林军为北门四军，唐睿宗派葛福顺等人统率这些禁卫军。
English: The four armies of the North Gate consisted of the Left and Right Ten Thousand Cavalry and the Left and Right Feather Forest Armies, with the Tang Rui sect's Ge Fushun and others leading these guards.

古文：三月，以宋王成器女为金山公主，许嫁突厥默啜。
现代文：三月，唐睿宗封宋王李成器之女为金山公主，将她许配给突厥可汗默啜。
English: In March, Tang Ruizong made the daughter of Song King Li Chengqi the princess of Jinshan and betrothed her to a Turkic khan.

古文：夏，四月，甲申，宋王成器让司徒；许之，以为太子宾客。
现代文：夏季四月，甲申，宋王李成器请求辞去司徒一职，唐睿宗答应了他的要求，任命他为太子宾客。
English: In the summer of April, Jiashen, the Song King Li Chengji asked Tang Ruizong to resign from the post of tutor, and Tang Ruizong agreed to his request and appointed him as the prince's guest.

古文：以韦安石为中书令。
现代文：任命韦安石为中书令。
English: Appointed Wei Anshi as the Chinese Calligrapher.

古文：上召群臣三品以上，谓曰： 朕素怀澹泊，不以万乘为贵，曩为皇嗣，又为皇太弟，皆辞不处。
现代文：唐睿宗召见三品以上官员，对他们说： 朕一向恬淡寡欲，并不以天子的尊位为贵，当初任皇嗣以及中宗时作皇太弟，都坚决地推辞掉了。
English: Tang Ruizong summoned more than three officials and said to them: I have always been frugal, and I do not regard the dignity of the son of heaven as precious. The original heir to the emperor and the prince of the emperor when I was the emperor have resolutely resigned.

古文：今欲传位太子，何如？ 
现代文：现在朕打算把皇位传给皇太子，你们认为怎么样！ 
English: Now I plan to pass the throne to the crown prince. What do you think?

古文：群臣莫对。
现代文：在场的大臣们都没有回答。
English: Ministers did not know how to respond.

古文：太子使右庶子李景伯固辞，不许。
现代文：太子李隆基让右庶子李景伯出面坚决推辞，唐睿宗没有同意。
English: Prince Li Longji asked his son-in-law, Li Jingbo, to make a firm refusal, but Tang Ruizong did not agree.

古文：殿中侍御史和逢尧附太平公主，言于上曰： 陛下春秋未高，方为四海所依仰，岂得遽尔！ 
现代文：殿中侍御史和逢尧向来依附太平公主，便对唐睿宗说道： 陛下年纪还不很老，正是被天下人依靠景仰的时候，怎么能急急忙忙地禅位于皇太子呢！ 
English: The palace attendants, Imperial Historian and Feng Xuan, who had always been attached to Princess Taiping, said to Tang Ruizong: Your Majesty is not very old, how can you rush to meditate on the crown prince when you are relied on and admired by the world!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：唐睿宗这才打消了这个念头。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：戊子，制： 凡政事皆取太子处分。
现代文：戊子，唐睿宗发布制命： 所有朝廷政务，一律由皇太子负责处理。
English: Emperor Wu Zi and Emperor Tang Ruizong issued an order: All the affairs of the imperial court were to be handled by the crown prince.

古文：其军旅死刑及五品已上除授，皆先与太子议之，然后以闻。 
现代文：涉及军旅重事、死刑的审核以及对五品以上官员的任命，都要先与皇太子商议，然后再上奏。 
English: Important matters involving the military, the review of the death penalty and the appointment of officials above the fifth grade must first be discussed with the crown prince before being reported.

古文：辛卯，以李日知守侍中。
现代文：辛卯，唐睿宗任命李日知守侍中。
English: Xinwu, Tang Ruizong appointed Li Ritchie as the second-in-command.

古文：壬寅，赦天下。
现代文：壬寅，唐睿宗下诏大赦天下。
English: Ren Yin, Tang Ruizong issued an edict of amnesty to the world.

古文：五月，太子请让位于宋王成器；不许。
现代文：五月，太子李隆基请求将太子之位让给宋王李成器，唐睿宗没有同意。
English: In May, Prince Li Longji requested to cede the position of prince to Song King Li Chengqi, but Tang Ruizong did not agree.

古文：请召太平公主还京师：许之。
现代文：太子又请求将太平公主召回京师。
English: The prince also requested that Princess Taiping be recalled to the capital.

古文：庚戌，制： 则天皇后父母坟仍旧为昊陵、顺陵，量置官属。 
现代文：唐睿宗表示回意。庚戌，唐睿宗颁下制命： 将则天皇后父母的坟墓恢复为昊陵、顺陵，并且酌情设置官署掌管陵园事务。 
English: Tang Ruizong replied. Geng Zi, Tang Ruizong issued the following order: to restore the tombs of the parents of the Empress Dowager to Hao Ling and Shun Ling, and to set up a government office to manage the affairs of the cemetery as appropriate.

古文：太平公主为武攸暨请之也。
现代文：这是由于太平公主为武攸暨向唐睿宗作了请求的缘故。
English: This was due to the fact that Princess Taiping had made a request to Tang Ruizong for Wuyuzhai.

古文：辛酉，更以西城为金仙公主，隆昌为玉真公主，各为之造观，逼夺民居甚多，用功数百万。
现代文：辛酉，唐睿宗将西城公主改封为金仙公主，将隆昌公主改封为玉真公主，并且为她们分别建造了金仙观和玉真观，强占了很多居民的住宅，工程耗费达数百万钱之多。
English: According to Xinhua, Tang Ruizong changed the title of Xicheng Princess to Jinxian Princess and the title of Longchang Princess to Yuzhen Princess, and separately built the Jinxian View and the Yuzhen View for them, occupying the homes of many residents, and the project cost millions of dollars.

古文：右散骑常侍魏知古、黄门侍郎李乂谏，皆不听。
现代文：右散骑常侍魏知古和黄门侍郎李进谏阻止，但唐睿宗没有采纳。
English: The right straggler, Wei Zhigu, a regular attendant, and Li Jinqi, a Yellow Gate attendant, tried to stop it, but Tang Ruizong did not adopt it.

古文：壬戌，殿中监窦怀贞为御史大夫、同平章事。
现代文：壬戌，唐睿宗任命殿中监窦怀贞为御史大夫、同平章事。
English: At the same time, Tang Ruizong appointed the supervisor of the hall, Dou Huai Zhen, as the goshi daifu, with the same rank.

古文：僧慧范恃太平公主势，逼夺民产，御史大夫薛谦光与殿中侍御史慕容珣奏弹之。
现代文：胡僧慧范倚仗着太平公主的权势，取豪夺平民百姓的财产，御史大夫薛谦光和殿中侍御史慕容上奏弹劾他。
English: Hu Monk Hui Fan relied on the power of Princess Taiping to seize the property of the common people. Grand Historian Xue Qianguang and the palace attendant Grand Historian Murong petitioned to impeach him.

古文：公主诉于上，出谦光为岐州刺史。
现代文：太平公主向唐睿宗诉说了自己对他们的不满，唐睿宗便将薛谦光外放为岐州刺史。
English: Princess Taiping complained to Tang Ruizong about her dissatisfaction with them, and Tang Ruizong then released Xue Qianguang as the leader of the history of Qizhou.

古文：明遣使按察十道，议者以山南所部阔远，乃分为东西道；又分陇右为河西道。
现代文：这时唐睿宗分遣使者赴全国十道巡视考察，有人认为山南道所辖区域太广，于是将山南道分为东西两道；又从陇右道中分出河西道。
English: At this time, Tang Ruizong dispatched an emissary to inspect ten provinces across the country. Some people thought that the area under the jurisdiction of Shannan Province was too wide, so Shannan Province was divided into two provinces, East and West; and West Hexi Province was separated from Shandong Province.

古文：六月、壬午，又分天下置汴、齐、兗、魏、冀、并、蒲、鄜、泾、秦、益、绵、遂、荆、岐、通、梁、襄、扬、安、淮、越、洪、潭二十四都督，各纠察所部刺史以下善恶，惟洛及近畿州不隶都督府。
现代文：六月，壬午，唐睿宗又下诏在全国分置汴、齐、兖、魏、冀、并、蒲？泾、秦、益、绵、遂、荆、岐、通、梁、襄、扬、安、闽、越、洪、潭二十四都督，负责纠举检察所辖区域内州县官吏的善恶得失，只有洛州以及京畿各州不隶属于都督府。
English: In June, at noon, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to appoint 24 governors in the provinces of Qi, Qi, Wei, Hebei, Nian, Pu, Qin, Yi, Mian, Sui, Jing, Qi, Tong, Liang, Xiang, Yang, An, Handan, Yue, Hong, and Tan. They were responsible for investigating the merits and demerits of officials in the counties and prefectures under the jurisdiction of the procuratorate. Only the prefectures of Luo and Gyeonggi were not subordinate to the prefectural government.

古文：太子右庶子李景伯、舍人卢俌等上言： 都督专杀生之柄，权任太重。或用非其人，为害不细。
现代文：太子右庶子李景伯、太子舍人卢等人进言说： 都督独掌生杀大权，权势太重，如果任用了不称职的人，那么所造成的危害就太严重了。
English: Li Jingbo, the prince's son-in-law, and Lu Sheren, the prince's son-in-law, and others said in their speeches: The governor has the power to kill people with his own hands. The power is too heavy. If incompetent people are appointed, the harm caused will be too serious.

古文：今御史秩卑望重，以时巡察，奸宄自禁。 
现代文：现在御史的品位俸禄都很卑微，但是声望都很高，陛下派他们按时巡察地方，为非作歹之徒自然不敢横行。 
English: Currently, the rank and salary of the Imperial Historians are very low, but their reputation is very high. His Majesty sends them to inspect places on time, and naturally, they do not dare to run amok.

古文：其后竟罢都督，但置十道按察使而已。
现代文：后来终于罢去所有新置的都督，只是设置了十道按察使而已。
English: Later, all newly appointed governors were finally dismissed, but only ten inspectors were appointed.

古文：秋，七月，癸巳，追复上官昭容，谥曰惠文。
现代文：秋季七月，癸巳，唐睿宗下诏追复上官昭容的职位，赠谥号为惠文。
English: In the autumn of July, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to restore the position of Shangguan Zhao Rong, and gave him the posthumous name Huiwen.

古文：乙卯，以高祖故宅枯柿复生，赦天下。
现代文：乙卯，由于唐高祖李渊旧宅中早已枯死的柿子树又重新发芽的缘故，唐睿宗下诏大赦天下。
English: Second, because the long-dead persimmon tree in the old house of Tang Gao's ancestor Li Yuan sprouted again, Tang Ruizong issued a general amnesty.

古文：己巳，以右御史大夫解琬为朔方大总管。
现代文：己巳，唐睿宗任命右台御史大夫解琬为朔方道大总管。
English: At that time, Tang Ruizong appointed the Right Division of the Office of the Grand Historian to be the chief administrator of Shuo Fang Dao University.

古文：琬考按三城戍兵，奏减十万人。
现代文：解琬在对三受降城的防务作了具体考察之后，上奏唐睿宗，请求将该地的戍卒减少十万人。
English: After making a detailed examination of the defense of the three cities that had been defeated, the Emperor Xizong appealed to Tang Ruizong, requesting that the number of soldiers stationed there be reduced by one hundred thousand.

古文：庚午，以中书令韦安石为左仆射兼太子宾客、同中书门下三品。
现代文：庚午，唐睿宗任命中书令韦安石为左仆射兼太子宾客、同中书门下三品。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Tang Ruizong appointed Wei Anshi, a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, as the left-hand servant and the prince's guest, and he was promoted to the third grade of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：太平公主以安石不附己，故崇以虚名，实去其权也。
现代文：由于太平公主认为韦安石拒绝趋附自己，所以用一些虚衔来表示对他的尊崇，实际上是借此削夺他的实权。
English: Because the Taiping Princess thought that Wei Anshi refused to attach himself to Cang, she used some false titles to show her respect for him, in fact, she was using this to take away his real power.

古文：九月，庚辰，以窦怀贞为侍中。
现代文：九月，庚辰，唐睿宗任命窦怀贞为侍中。
English: In September, Geng Chen, Tang Ruizong appointed Dou Huai Zhen as a chamberlain.

古文：怀贞每退朝，必诣太平公主第。
现代文：窦怀贞每次退朝后，都要到太平公主家里去。
English: Dou Huai Zhen had to go to Princess Taiping's home every time after she retired.

古文：时修金仙、玉真二观，群臣多谏，怀贞独劝成之，身自督役。
现代文：当时正在修建金仙、玉真二观，群臣纷纷谏阻，只有窦怀贞一个人对这项工程表示坚决支持，并且亲自监督服劳役的民夫。
English: At that time, the construction of the Golden Emperor and the Jade Emperor was underway, and the ministers resisted one after another. Only Dou Huai Zhen expressed strong support for this project and personally supervised the laborers.

古文：时人谓怀贞前为皇后阿，今为公主邑司。
现代文：所以当时的人们都说窦怀贞先是作韦皇后的阿，现在又作了公主的邑司。
English: Therefore, people at that time said that Dou Huai Zhen was first the queen of Wei, and now she was the princess of the princess.

古文：冬，十月，甲辰，上御承天门，引韦安石、郭元振、窦怀贞、李日知、张说宣制，责以 政教多阙，水旱为灾，府库益竭，僚吏日滋；虽朕之薄德，亦辅佐非才。
现代文：冬季十月，甲辰，唐睿宗驾临承天门，对应召而来的韦安石、郭元振、窦怀贞、李日知、张说等大臣宣布制命，责备他们说： 当今朝廷的刑赏与教化存在着很多的缺陷，各地水旱成灾，国库储备日趋枯竭，官吏日益增多，这些现象固然是朕德行浅薄所致，但也与诸位辅佐大臣不称职有关。
English: In the winter of October, Jia Chen and Tang Ruizong came to the Gate of Heir to Heaven to announce that the ministers Wei Anshi, Guo Yuan Zhen, Dou Huai Zhen, Li Rong Zhi, Zhang Xie and other ministers who had been summoned had resigned, and scolded them, saying: Today's imperial court has many defects in reward and edification, the various regions are plagued by floods and droughts, the national treasury reserves are increasingly depleted, and the number of officials is increasing. These phenomena are certainly caused by the shallowness of our moral conduct, but they are also related to the incompetence of the assistant ministers.

古文：安石可左仆射、东都留守，元振可吏部尚书，怀贞可左御史大夫，日知可户部尚书，说可左丞，并罢政事 。
现代文：从现在起韦安石担任尚书左仆射、东都留守，郭元振担任吏部尚书，窦怀贞担任左台御史大夫，李日知担任户部尚书，张说担任尚书左丞，一律免去宰相职务。 
English: From now on, Wei Anshi will serve as the left-hand man of Shangshu and Dongdu will stay at home, Guo Yuan Zhen will serve as the left-hand man of Liren, Dou Huai Zhen will serve as the left-hand man of Shishi, Li Ritchi will serve as the left-hand man of Hubei, and Zhang Xian will serve as the left-hand man of Shangshu, and all of them will be exempted from the post of prime minister.

古文：以吏部尚书刘幽求为侍中，右散骑常侍魏知古为左散骑常侍，太子詹事崔湜为中书侍郎，并同中书门下三品；书中侍郎陆象先同平章事。
现代文：任命吏部尚书刘幽求为侍中；任命右散骑常侍魏知古为左散骑常侍，太子詹事崔为中书侍郎，二人同时都任同中书门下三品；此外，任命中书侍郎陆象先为同平章事。
English: Liu Yucui, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, was appointed as an attendant; Wei Zhigu, the right-hand riding attendant, was appointed as a left-hand riding attendant, and the prince Zhan Shicui was appointed as a junior attendant of the middle school. Both of them were appointed as the junior third grade of the middle school; in addition, Lu Xiang, the junior attendant of the middle school, was appointed as a junior attendant of the middle school.

古文：皆太平公主之志也。
现代文：对上述官员的任免都是根据太平公主的意志而作出的。
English: The appointment and removal of the above-mentioned officials are made in accordance with the will of Princess Taiping.

古文：象先清净寡欲，言论高远，为时人所重。
现代文：陆象先一向清心寡欲，言辞议论高妙玄远，受到当时人的推崇。
English: Lu Xiang has always been a pure-hearted person, and his words are profound and profound. He was highly respected by the people at that time.

古文：湜私侍太平公主，公主欲引以为相，湜请与象先同升，公主不可，湜曰： 然则湜亦不敢当。 
现代文：崔私下里服侍太平公主，公主打算将他提拔为宰相，崔请求与陆象先一起提拔，太平公主不同意，崔说： 如果陆象先不能作宰相的话，那么我崔也不敢作这个宰相。 
English: Cui secretly served Princess Taiping. The princess planned to promote him to prime minister. Cui asked to be promoted together with Lu Xiangxian. Princess Taiping disagreed. Cui said, "If Lu Xiangxian cannot be prime minister, then I, Cui, would not dare to be the prime minister."

古文：公主乃为之并言于上。
现代文：太平公主只得请求唐睿宗将两人一同任命为宰相。
English: Princess Taiping had to ask Tang Ruizong to appoint both of them as prime minister.

古文：上不欲用湜，公主涕泣以请，乃从之。
现代文：唐睿宗不想用崔为相，太平公主流着眼泪请求，唐睿宗才同意。
English: Tang Ruizong did not want to use Cui as his consort. Taiping Gong made a tearful request, and Tang Ruizong agreed.

古文：右补阙辛替否上疏，以为： 自古失道破国亡家者，口说不如身逢，耳闻不如目睹。
现代文：右补阙辛替否上疏认为： 自古以来，因为君主无道而导致国破家亡的教训，实在是耳闻不如目睹，口说不如亲身经历。
English: Zuoxiu Xinsheng believes that: Since ancient times, the lesson of the country's ruin and death caused by the monarch's lack of morality is really hearing is not as good as witnessing, and word of mouth is not as good as personal experience.

古文：臣请以陛下所目睹者言之。
现代文：请允许臣根据陛下亲眼目睹的事实来阐明道理。
English: Allow me to explain based on what His Majesty saw with his own eyes.

古文：太宗皇帝，陛下之祖也，拨乱返正，开基立极；官不虚授，财无枉费；不多造寺观而有福，不多度僧尼而无灾，天地垂祐，风雨时若，粟帛充溢，蛮夷率服，享国久长，名高万古。
现代文：太宗皇帝是陛下的祖父，他使乱世纳入正轨，开创了大唐的基业，树立了中正的准则；他既不白白地把官爵俸禄赠送给任何人，也从不浪费国家的资财；他并不广建寺观，却有福分，他也没有更多地剃度僧尼，却没有灾祸，得到皇天后土的保佑，风调雨顺，五谷丰登；周边各蛮夷部落纷纷入朝进贡，在位的时间也很长久，受到千秋万代的景仰。
English: Emperor Taizong is the grandfather of His Majesty. He put the chaotic world on the right track, created the foundation of the Great Tang Dynasty, and established the principles of Zhongzheng. He did not give the official salary to anyone in vain, nor did he waste the country's wealth. He did not build a large number of temples, but he was blessed. He did not increase the number of monks and nuns, but there was no disaster. He was blessed by the Empress Dowager, the weather was good, and the grain was plentiful. The surrounding barbarian tribes paid tribute to the dynasty. He reigned for a long time and was admired by thousands of generations.

古文：陛下何不取而法之！
现代文：陛下为什么不效法太宗皇帝呢？
English: Why doesn't His Majesty emulate Emperor Taizong?

古文：中宗皇帝，陛下之兄，弃祖宗之业，徇女子之意；无能而禄者数千人，无功而封者百馀家；造寺不止，费财货者数百亿，度人无穷，免租庸者数十万，所出日滋，所入日寡；夺百姓口中之食以养贪残，剥万人体上之衣以涂土木，于是人怨神怒，众叛亲离，水旱并臻，公私俱罄，享国不永，祸及其身。
现代文：中宗皇帝是陛下的兄长，不以祖宗基业为重，一味顺从妇道人家的无理要求；没有才能却食取俸禄者达数千人，没有功劳而赐给封户的有一百余家；没有止境地营建寺庙，耗费钱财达数百亿之巨，剃度僧尼无数，不交纳租庸的人达数十万之多，府库支出日益增加，财政收入却一天天地减少；为供养贪得无厌的邪恶之徒不惜夺走百姓口中之食，为大兴土木雕梁画柱之用不惜剥掉黎民身上之衣，从而造成神人共怨，众叛亲离的严重后果，水旱天灾纷至沓来，公私财用同时告罄，不但自己在位时间无法长久，甚至还遭遇被弑身死的惨痛结局。
English: Emperor Zhongzong is the elder brother of His Majesty. He does not attach importance to the heritage of the ancestors, but simply obeys the unreasonable demands of women and men. There are thousands of people who have no talent but receive salaries, and there are more than a hundred families who have been given fiefs without merit. There is no end to the construction of temples, costing tens of billions of dollars. There are countless monks and nuns, and hundreds of thousands of people who do not pay rent. The treasury expenditure is increasing, but the financial income is decreasing day by day. In order to feed the insatiable evil doers, they do not hesitate to take away the food in the mouths of the

古文：陛下何不惩而改之！
现代文：陛下为什么不能以此为戒，立即改正错误呢！
English: Why can't His Majesty take this as a warning and immediately correct his mistake!

古文：自顷以来，水旱相继，兼以霜蝗，人无所食，未闻赈恤，而为二女造观，用钱百馀万緍。
现代文：自从陛下即位之后，近期内水旱灾害接连不断，再加上霜冻蝗虫的危害，百姓口中无食，却不曾听说陛下开仓赈济灾民，但陛下为两个女儿营建道观，却不惜耗资一百多万缗。
English: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, there have been a succession of floods and droughts in recent times, coupled with the dangers of frost and locusts. The people have no food to eat, but they have never heard of His Majesty opening a warehouse to help the victims of the disaster. However, His Majesty spent more than one million baht to build a Taoist temple for his two daughters.

古文：陛下岂可不计当今府库之蓄积有几，中外之经费有几，而轻用百馀万缗，以供无用之役乎！
现代文：陛下怎么可以不考虑当今国库中的资财到底有多少，朝廷外所需经费又是多少，就轻易地拿出一百多万缗，来供给于国计民生没有任何用处的工程支出呢！
English: How can His Majesty, without considering how much money is in the treasury today, and how much money is needed outside the court, easily come up with more than one million baht to supply project expenditures that are of no use to the national economy and people's livelihoods!

古文：陛下族韦氏之家，而不去韦氏之恶，忍弃太宗之法，不忍弃中宗之政乎！
现代文：陛下诛灭了韦氏的家族，但没有除去韦氏的恶行，难道忍心抛弃太宗的法度，却不忍心抛弃中宗的弊政吗？
English: Your Majesty annihilated the Wei family, but did not eliminate the evil deeds of the Wei clan. Can you bear to abandon the laws of Taizong, but can't bear to abandon the maladministration of Zhongzong?

古文：且陛下与太子当韦氏用事之时，日夕忧危，切齿于群凶；今幸而除之，乃不改其所为，臣恐复有切齿于陛下者也。
现代文：再说陛下与太子在韦氏集团专擅朝政之际，没日没夜地为大唐宗庙社稷和自己的身家性命担忧，对奸臣切齿痛恨，现在幸亏铲除了奸党，却不能改变他们当初的所作所为，臣担心会重新出现对陛下切齿痛恨的人。
English: Furthermore, when the Wei clique dominated the government, His Majesty and the Crown Prince worried day and night about the Great Tang Dynasty and their own wealth and lives. They hated their treacherous vassals with all their teeth. Now, fortunately, they have eliminated the treacherous vassals, but they cannot change their original behavior. The vassals are worried that the people who hate His Majesty with all their teeth will reappear.

古文：然则陛下又何恶于群凶而诛之！
现代文：如果这样的话，陛下当初又为什么要痛恨群凶并将他们诛杀殆尽呢！
English: If this is the case, why did His Majesty hate the bandits and wipe them out in the first place?

古文：昔先帝之怜悖逆也，宗晋卿为之造第，赵履温为之葺园，殚园财，竭人力，第成不暇居，园成不暇游，而身为戮没。
现代文：当初中宗皇帝喜爱悖逆庶人，宗晋卿便为她建造私宅，赵履温便为她整治园林。在耗尽了国家资财，用尽了民力之后，新建的私宅还没有来得及居住，修好的园林也没来得及游玩，悖逆庶人就被杀死。
English: At that time, Emperor Zhongzong loved the rebellious commoner, and Zong Jinqing built a private house for her, and Zhao Liwen tidied up the garden for her. After exhausting the national resources and exhausting the people's strength, the newly built private house did not have time to live, and the repaired garden did not have time to play, and the rebellious commoner was killed.

古文：今之造观崇侈者，必非陛下、公主之本意，殆有宗、赵之徒从而劝之，不可不察也。
现代文：现在营建道观，如此追求奢侈豪华，一定不会是陛下和金仙、玉真二位公主的本意，大概是因为有像宗晋卿和赵履温这样的奸臣从中推波助澜，陛下对此不可不多加留意。
English: It must not be the intention of His Majesty and the two princesses, the Golden Immortal and the Jade Emperor, to build a Taoist ideology and pursue luxury and luxury at this time. It is probably due to the fact that treacherous vassals such as Zong Jinqing and Zhao Ruiwen have contributed to this. His Majesty should pay close attention to this.

古文：陛下不停斯役，臣恐人之愁怨，不减先朝之时。
现代文：如果陛下不能中止这项工程的营建，臣担心百姓的怨恨之心，不会比中宗时期减少。
English: If His Majesty cannot stop the construction of this project, I am afraid that the resentment of the people will not be less than that in the Middle Ages.

古文：人人知其祸败，而口不敢言，言则刑戮随之。
现代文：现在每个人都明白必将造成巨大的祸患，却没有一个人敢于直言规谏，是因为担心一旦说出来就会受到严厉的惩罚。
English: Now everyone knows that it is bound to cause great harm, but no one dares to speak out for fear of being severely punished if they do.

古文：如韦月将、燕钦融之徒，先朝诛之，陛下赏之，岂非陛下知直言之有益于国乎！
现代文：像韦月将、燕钦融这样的忠臣义士，被先朝诛杀，陛下给予他们很高的奖赏，难道不是因为陛下深知直言进谏有利于国家吗！
English: Loyalists such as Wei Yuezheng and Yan Qin Rong were killed by the First Dynasty, and His Majesty gave them a high reward. Wasn't it because His Majesty knew that being outspoken was good for the country?

古文：臣今所言，亦先朝之直也，惟陛下察之。 
现代文：臣今天所说的，也像先朝的直言一样，希望陛下能够体察到这一点。 
English: What the minister said today is the same as the previous emperor's blunt speech, and I hope that His Majesty can appreciate this.

古文：上虽不能从，而嘉其切直。
现代文：唐睿宗虽然未能采纳他的建议，却也对他的恳切直率大加赞赏。
English: Although Tang Ruizong could not accept his suggestion, he also highly appreciated his earnest forthrightness.

古文：御史中丞和逢尧摄鸿胪卿，使于突厥，说默啜曰： 处密、坚昆闻可汗结昏于唐，皆当归附。
现代文：御史中丞和逢尧代理鸿胪卿职务，出使突厥，劝说默啜道： 处密、坚昆等部落听说可汗与大唐公主结婚的消息后，都会率众归附的。
English: Gishi Chujo and Feng Qian, acting as Hong Qian's deputies, sent envoys to the Turks to persuade them to acquiesce, saying: After hearing the news of Khan's marriage to Datang Princess, Shunmi, Jiankun and other tribes will lead the people to adhere to it.

古文：可汗何不袭唐冠带，使诸胡知之，岂不美哉！ 
现代文：可汗为什么不穿戴大唐的服饰，让各部落的人都知道这件事，这样不是很好吗！ 
English: Why doesn't Khan wear the attire of the Great Tang Dynasty and let the people of all tribes know about it, wouldn't that be great!

古文：默啜许诺，明日，襆头、衣紫衫，南向再拜，称臣，遣其子杨我支及国相随逢尧入朝，十一月，戊寅，至京师。
现代文：默啜表示同意这样做。第二天，默啜头戴头，身穿紫色朝服，面向南方拜了两拜，向大唐皇帝称臣，并派遣他的儿子杨我支及国相跟着和逢尧一道入朝，十一月，戊寅，一行人抵达京师。
English: The next day, Miao Miao, wearing a headdress and a purple imperial robe, bowed to the south for two prostrations, declared himself a vassal of the Great Tang Emperor, and sent his son Yang Bashi and Guo Zuo to accompany Feng Qi to the imperial court. In November, Wu Yin and his party arrived in Beijing.

古文：逢尧以奉使功，迁户部侍郎。
现代文：和逢尧因奉命出使有功，被唐睿宗任命为户部侍郎。
English: He and Feng Xuan were appointed as household attendants by Tang Ruizong for their distinguished service.

古文：壬辰，令天下百姓二十五入军，五十五免。
现代文：壬辰，唐睿宗下令天下百姓自二十五岁起须服兵役，五十五岁以上者免除兵役。
English: At that time, Tang Ruizong ordered the people of the world to serve in the military from the age of twenty-five, and those over fifty-five were exempted from military service.

古文：十二月，癸卯，以兴昔亡可汗阿史那献为招慰十姓使。
现代文：十二月，癸卯，唐睿宗任命兴昔亡可汗阿史那献为招慰十姓使。
English: In December, Emperor Ruizong of Tang appointed Xingxian deceased Khan Ashina to be the consoler of the ten emperors.

古文：上召天台山道士司马承祯，问以阴阳数术，对曰： 道者，损之又损，以至于无为，安肯劳心以学术数乎！ 
现代文：唐睿宗召见天台山道士司马承祯，向他请教关于阴阳术数的学问，司马承祯回答说： 所谓 道 ，应当是损之又损，以至于达到无为的境界，我怎么肯耗费心力去研究阴阳术数的学问呢！ 
English: Tang Ruizong summoned the Tiantai Mountain Taoist, Sima Chengyi, and asked him for advice on the knowledge of yin and yang, Sima Chengyi replied: The so-called Tao should be damaged and damaged, so that it reaches the realm of inaction, how can I expend effort to study the knowledge of yin and yang!

古文：上曰： 理身无为则高矣，如理国何？ 
现代文：唐睿宗又问道： 对于修身养性来说，无为是最高的境界，那么治理国家的最高境界又是什么呢？ 
English: Tang Ruizong also asked: For self-cultivation, inaction is the highest realm, so what is the highest realm of governing the country?

古文：对曰： 国犹身也，顺物自然而心无所私，则天下理矣。 
现代文：司马承祯回答说： 治理国家与修身养性道理一样，只要能够做到顺乎世间万物发展的自然之理，内心之中没有任何私心杂念，那么国家就可以趋于大治。 
English: Sima Chengyao replied, "Governing a country is the same as cultivating one's character. As long as you can follow the natural laws of the development of all things in the world, and do not have any selfish thoughts in your heart, then the country can tend towards great governance.

古文：上叹曰： 广成之言，无以过也。 
现代文：唐睿宗感慨地说： 广成子所说的话，没有人可以超过。 
English: Tang Ruizong said with emotion: No one can surpass what Guangcheng Zong said.

古文：承祯固请还山，上许之。
现代文：司马承祯坚决请求返回天台山，唐睿宗同意了他的要求。
English: Sima Chengyao firmly requested to return to Tiantai Mountain, and Tang Ruizong agreed to his request.

古文：尚书左丞卢藏用指终南山谓承祯曰： 此中大有佳处，何必天台！ 
现代文：尚书左丞卢藏用用手指着终南山对司马承祯说道： 这里面就有很多出家隐居的好地方，您何必一定要回到天台山呢！ 
English: Shang Shuzo Ruzang pointed his finger at the end of Nanshan and said to Sima Chengyao: There are many good places to live in seclusion here, why do you have to go back to Tiantai Mountain!

古文：承祯曰： 以愚观之，此乃仕宦之疾径耳！ 
现代文：司马承祯回答说： 在我看来，这终南山不过是入世作官的捷径罢了！ 
English: Sima Chengyi replied, "In my opinion, this Nanshan is just a shortcut to become a world-class official!"

古文：藏用尝隐终南，则天时征为左拾遗，故承祯言之。
现代文：由于卢藏用曾在终南山隐居，武则天时期被征辟为左拾遗，所以司马承祯这样回答他。
English: As Lu Zangyong had lived in seclusion in Nanshan for the rest of his life, and was conscripted to collect relics during the Wu Zetian period, Sima Chengyu answered him in this way.

古文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝上之上
现代文：玄宗至道大圣大明孝皇帝上之上
English: Emperor Xuanzong to Emperor Mingxiao

古文：先天元年壬子，公元七一二年春，正月，辛巳，睿宗祀南郊，初用谏议大夫贾曾议合祭天地。
现代文：唐玄宗先天元年春季正月，辛巳，唐睿宗到南郊合祭天地，这是首次采用谏议大夫贾曾提出的建议。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the year, Tang Xuanzong and Tang Ruizong went to the southern suburb to hold the festival. This was the first time to adopt the suggestion made by Dr. Jia.

古文：曾，言忠之子也。
现代文：贾曾是贾言忠的儿子。
English: Jia was the son of Jia Yanzhong.

古文：戊子，幸浐东，耕籍田。
现代文：戊子，唐睿宗到水东面，亲耕藉田。
English: Wuzi, Tang Ruizong went to the east of the water, and personally cultivated the fields.

古文：己丑，赦天下；改元太极。
现代文：己丑，唐睿宗下诏大赦天下，并改年号为太极。
English: He was so ugly that Tang Ruizong pardoned him and changed his era name to Taiji.

古文：乙未，上御安福门，宴突厥杨我支，以金山公主示之；既而会上传位，婚竟不成。
现代文：乙未，唐睿宗在安福门设宴款待突厥可汗默啜之子杨我支，把金山公主叫出来让他看了看；不久就赶上唐睿宗将帝位传给太子李隆基，因而这桩婚姻终于没有结成。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month, Tang Ruizong hosted a banquet at the Anfu Gate for Yang Yazhi, the silent son of the Turkic Khan, and called out the Jinshan Princess for him to see; he soon caught up with Tang Ruizong to pass the imperial throne to Prince Li Longji, so the marriage was finally not concluded.

古文：以左御史大夫窦怀贞、户部尚书岑羲并同中书门下三品。
现代文：唐睿宗任命左台御史大夫窦怀贞、户部尚书岑羲为同中书门下三品。
English: Tang Ruizong appointed Zuotai goshi daifu Dou Huai Zhen and Hube Shang Shuxuan as the three best scholars of the same school.

古文：二月，辛酉，废右御史台。
现代文：二月，辛酉，唐睿宗下诏撤消右御史台。
English: In February, in Xinjiang, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to abolish the Right Imperial Historian's Office.

古文：蒲州刺史萧至忠自托于太平公主，公主引为刑部尚书。
现代文：蒲州刺史萧至忠主动投靠太平公主，太平公主举荐他当刑部尚书。
English: Puzhou assassin Xiao Zhitong took the initiative to rely on the Taiping Princess, and the Taiping Princess recommended him to be the head of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：华州长史蒋钦绪，其妹夫也，谓之曰： 如子之才，何忧不达！
现代文：萧至忠的妹夫华州刺史蒋钦绪对他说： 凭您的才学，何必担心日后不能飞黄腾达！
English: Xiao Zhizhong's brother-in-law, Huazhou scholar Jiang Qingshu, said to him: With your talent, why worry about not being able to fly high in the future!

古文：勿为非分妄求。 
现代文：最好不要作非分之想，钻营求官。 
English: It's best not to think of yourself as a bad person, and not to run for office.

古文：至忠不应。
现代文：萧至忠听过之后没有作声。
English: Xiao Zhizhong did not make a sound after listening.

古文：钦绪退，叹曰： 九代卿族，一举灭之，可哀也哉！ 
现代文：蒋钦绪回去之后感叹道： 萧至忠九代望门，至此一朝族灭，实在是可悲呀！ 
English: After returning, Jiang Qingsu lamented: Xiao Zhizhong has been watching the gate for nine generations, and now the dynasty is destroyed, it is really pathetic!

古文：至忠素有雅望，尝自公主第门出，遇宋璟，璟曰： 非所望于萧君也。 至忠笑曰： 善乎宋生之言！ 
现代文：萧至忠一向具有美好的声望，他曾经有一次在从太平公主家里出来时与宋相遇，宋说： 这不是我对您所期望的。 萧至忠讪笑道： 宋生说得很对！ 
English: Xiao Zhizhong has always had a good reputation. He once met Song when he came out of Princess Taiping's house. Song said, "This is not what I expected from you." Xiao Zhizhong smiled and said, "Song Sheng is right!

古文：遽策马而去。
现代文：说完就急急忙忙地催马离去。
English: Having said this, he hurriedly urged the horse to leave.

古文：幽州大都督薛讷镇幽州二十馀年，吏民安之。未尝举兵出塞，虏亦不敢犯。
现代文：幽州大都督薛讷镇守幽州二十余年，当地吏民安居乐业，薛讷从未发兵出塞寻衅，胡虏也不敢入关进犯。
English: Xie Ne, the governor of Yuzhou, has been in charge of Yuzhou for more than 20 years. Local officials and citizens live and work in peace. Xie Ne has never sent troops to seek out trouble, nor has Hurui dared to break into the customs.

古文：与燕州刺史李璡有隙，璡毁之于刘幽求，幽求荐左羽林将军孙佺代之。
现代文：由于薛讷与燕州刺史李之间有矛盾，所以李向刘幽求诋毁薛讷，刘幽求便推荐左羽林将军孙取代了薛讷的职务。
English: As there was a conflict between Xue Ne and Li, the Yanzhou magistrate, Li asked Liu Youyou to slander Xue Ne, and Liu Youyou recommended General Zuo Yulin Sun to replace Xue Ne.

古文：三月，丁丑，以佺为幽州大都督，徙讷为并州长史。
现代文：三月，丁丑，唐睿宗任命孙为幽州大都督，改任薛讷为并州长史。
English: In March, Dingwuxi, Tang Ruizong appointed Sun as the grand governor of Yuzhou, and appointed Xue Ne as the governor.

古文：夏，五月，益州獠反。
现代文：夏季五月，益州獠族部落反叛。
English: In the summer of May, the Yi tribe in Yizhou rebelled.

古文：戊寅，上祭北郊。
现代文：戊寅，唐睿宗到北郊祭祀。
English: Wu Yin, Tang Ruizong went to the northern suburbs to worship.

古文：辛巳，赦天下，改元延和。
现代文：辛巳，唐睿宗下诏大赦天下，改年号为延和。
English: Soon after, Tang Ruizong issued an edict to grant amnesty to the whole country, and the year name was changed to Yanhe.

古文：六月，丁未，右散骑常侍武攸暨卒，追封定王，
现代文：六月，丁未，右散骑常侍武攸暨去世，被追封为定王。
English: In June, Ding Wei, the right horseman of the cavalry, died, and was posthumously crowned king.

古文：上以节愍太子之乱，岑羲有保护之功，癸丑，以羲为侍中。
现代文：由于岑羲在节愍太子李重俊的事变中，保护唐睿宗有功，唐睿宗于癸丑任命他为侍中。
English: Because of his role in protecting Tang Ruizong during the rebellion of Prince Li Chungjun, Tang Ruizong appointed him as an attendant to the emperor.

古文：庚申，幽州大都督孙佺与奚酋李大酺战于冷陉，全军覆没。
现代文：庚申，幽州大都督孙在冷陉与奚族酋长李大交战，全军覆没。
English: Goshun, the grand governor of Yuzhou, Sun, fought with the chief of the Yi people, Li Da, in Lengyi, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：是时，佺帅左骁卫将军李楷洛，左威卫将军周以悌发兵二万、骑八千，分为三军，以袭奚、契丹。
现代文：当时，孙统帅左骁卫将军李楷洛和左威卫将军周以悌，调集步卒二万、骑兵八千，分为三军，袭击奚和契丹。
English: At that time, Commander-in-Chief Sun, General Zuo Weiwei, General Li Kai Luo and General Zuo Weiwei, Zhou Yijun, mobilized twenty thousand infantry and eight thousand cavalry, divided into three armies, and attacked Zou and Qidan.

古文：将军乌可利谏曰： 道险而天热，悬军远袭，往必败。 
现代文：将军乌可利劝阻他说： 道路险阻，天气炎热，孤军深入敌境，进行长途奔袭，一定要打败仗的。 
English: General Ukeli dissuaded him, saying: "The road is dangerous, the weather is hot, the lone army is deep into the enemy territory, and they are making long-distance raids. They must lose the war."

古文：佺曰：薛讷在边积年，竟不能为国家复营州。
现代文：孙说： 薛讷任边镇守将达二十余年之久，竟然不能为国家收复营州。
English: Sun said, "Xie Ne has been a border town guard for more than 20 years, but he can't even recover Yingzhou for the country.

古文：今乘其无备，往必有功。 
现代文：现在我们乘其不备率兵前往，一定能获得成功。 
English: Now we are taking advantage of their lack of preparedness to lead troops to the scene, and we are sure to succeed.

古文：使楷洛将骑四千前驱，遇奚骑八千，楷洛战不利。
现代文：孙派李楷洛率领四千骑兵为前锋，李楷洛与奚族的八千骑兵相遇并交战，唐军失利。
English: Sun sent Li Kai Luo to lead four thousand cavalry as a forward, Li Kai Luo met and fought with eight thousand cavalry of the Yi people, and the Tang army was defeated.

古文：佺怯懦，不敢救，引军欲还，虏乘之，唐兵大败。
现代文：孙畏敌如虎，竟不敢发兵相救，反而想率部回撤，奚军乘胜追击，唐军惨败，孙依山布成方阵力求自保。
English: As a tiger, Sun Yishan dared not send troops to save the enemy. Instead, he wanted to lead his troops to retreat. The Shan army pursued the enemy with victory, while the Tang army suffered a disastrous defeat. Sun Yishan tried to protect himself by forming a square formation.

古文：佺阻山为方陈以自固，大酺使谓佺曰： 朝廷既与我和亲，今大军何为而来？ 
现代文：李大派遣使者前来向孙质问道： 朝廷既然与我们和亲，您为什么还要率领大军到这里来呢？ 
English: Li Da sent an envoy to come and ask Sun Quan: Since the imperial court is friendly with us, why do you want to lead a large army here?

古文：佺曰： 吾奉敕来招慰耳。
现代文：孙回答说： 我只不过是奉敕前来招抚慰问罢了。
English: Sun replied, "I'm just offering my condolences.

古文：楷洛不禀节度，辄与汝战，请斩以谢。 
现代文：李楷洛不服从我的调遣，与你们交战，请允许我将他斩首，向你们谢罪。 
English: Li Kai Luo disobeyed my order and fought with you. Please allow me to behead him and apologize to you.

古文：大酺曰： 若然，国信安在？ 
现代文：李大又问： 如果是这样的话，大唐国的符信在哪里？ 
English: Li Da also asked: If this is the case, where is the Great Tang Dynasty's seal?

古文：佺悉敛军中帛，得万馀段，并紫袍、金带、鱼袋以赠之。
现代文：孙把军中携带的所有绢帛搜集到一起，共计一万余段，连同大小将官的紫袍、金带、鱼带，统统交给了李大。
English: Sun gathered together all the plows carried by the army, a total of more than ten thousand sections, together with the purple robes, gold belts, and fish belts of generals and officers, and handed them all over to Li Da.

古文：大酺曰： 请将军南还，勿相惊扰。 
现代文：李大说： 请将军回到南边去，不要再到这里来骚扰了。 
English: Lida said, "Please ask the general to go back to the south, and don't come here to harass us anymore.

古文：将士惧，无复部伍，虏追击之，士卒皆溃。
现代文：唐军将士十分惊惧，南撤的军队再也没有任何队形，奚军又乘机相攻，因而溃不成军。
English: The Tang soldiers were very alarmed. The troops withdrawing to the south no longer had any formation. The Han army took advantage of the opportunity to attack, and thus collapsed.

古文：佺、以悌为虏所擒，献于突厥，默啜皆杀之；楷洛、可利脱归。
现代文：孙和周以悌被奚人俘获，奚人又将他们献给突厥，突厥可汗默啜将两人杀死。李楷洛和乌可利逃回唐朝境内。
English: Sun and Zhou Yixuan were captured by the Jurchens, who then offered them to the Turks, who killed them both in silence. Li Kai Luo and Wukeli fled back to the territory of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，彗星出西方，经轩辕入太微，至于大角。
现代文：秋季七月，彗星出现在西方，经过轩辕星进入太微垣，到达大角星。
English: In the autumn, in July, the comet appeared in the west, passing through the star Regulus and entering the constellation of Virgo, arriving at the star Arcturus.

古文：有相者谓同中书门下三品窦怀贞曰： 公有刑厄。 
现代文：有个看相的人对同中书门下三品窦怀贞说： 您将有刑狱之灾。 
English: A courtier said to the third grade student, Dou Huai Zhen: "You will go to prison.

古文：怀贞惧，请解官为安国寺奴；敕听解官。
现代文：窦怀贞非常害怕，上表请求解除官职，去作安国寺的寺奴。唐睿宗降敕照准。
English: Dou Huai Zhen was very afraid, and asked the emperor to relieve him of his official position and make him a temple servant of Anguo Temple. Tang Ruizong agreed to this.

古文：乙亥，复以怀贞为左仆射兼御史大夫、平章军国重事。
现代文：乙亥，唐睿宗又任命窦怀贞为尚书左仆射兼御史大夫、平章军国重事。
English: In addition to Yi Hai, Tang Ruizong also appointed Dou Huai Zhen as Shang Shuxi's left-hand servant, and also as the imperial historian, and Ping Zhang as the military governor.

古文：太平公主使术者言于上曰： 彗所以除旧布新，又帝座及心前星皆有变，皇太子当为天子。 
现代文：太平公主指使一个懂天文历法的人向唐睿宗进言说： 彗星的出现标志着将要除旧布新，再说位于天市垣内的帝座以及心前星均有变化，所主之事乃是皇太子应当登基即位。 
English: Princess Taiping instructed a person who understood the astronomical calendar to advise Tang Ruizong: The appearance of the comet indicates that the old cloth will be replaced with a new one. Furthermore, the imperial throne and the star in front of the heart, both of which are located within the celestial city wall, have changed. The main thing is that the crown prince should ascend to the throne.

古文：上曰： 传德避灾，吾志决矣！ 
现代文：唐睿宗说： 将帝位传给有德之人，以避免灾祸，我的决心已定。 
English: Tang Ruizong said: I have made up my mind to pass on the imperial throne to a virtuous person to avoid disaster.

古文：太平公主及其党皆力谏，以为不可。上曰： 中宗之时，群奸用事，天变屡臻。
现代文：太平公主和她的同伙们都极力谏阻，认为这样做不行，唐睿宗说： 中宗皇帝在位时，一群奸佞小人专擅朝政，上天屡次用灾异来表示警告。
English: Princess Taiping and her associates tried their best to dissuade him, saying that this was unacceptable. Tang Ruizong said: When Emperor Zhongzong was on the throne, a group of traitors and villains were exclusively in charge of the government, and Heaven repeatedly used disasters to warn.

古文：朕时请中宗择贤子立之以应灾异，中宗不悦，朕忧恐，数日不食。
现代文：朕当时请求中宗选择贤明的儿子立为皇帝以避免灾祸，但中宗很不高兴，朕也因此而担忧恐惧以至于几天吃不下饭。
English: At that time, I asked Zhongzong to choose a wise son as emperor to avoid disaster, but Zhongzong was very unhappy, and I was so worried and afraid that I couldn't eat for a few days.

古文：岂可在彼则能劝之，在己则不能邪！ 
现代文：朕怎么能够对中宗可以劝他禅位，对自己却不能做到这一点呢！ 
English: How can I tell him to meditate, when I can't do it myself!

古文：太子闻之，驰入见，自投于地，叩头请曰： 臣以微功，不次为嗣，惧不克堪，未审陛下遽以大位传之，何也？ 
现代文：太子李隆基知道这个消息后，赶忙入宫朝见，跪在地上边叩头边说： 臣因尺寸之功，就被破格立为皇嗣，即使是做太子还担心无法胜任，陛下又突然要将帝位传给臣，不清楚这究竟是为了什么！ 
English: After learning this news, Prince Li Longji hurried to the palace to see the emperor, kneeling on the ground and bowing his head, saying: "Because of his great stature, he was made the heir to the throne. Even though he was the prince, he was worried that he would not be able to fulfill his duties. His Majesty suddenly wants to pass the throne to him. It is not clear what this is all about!

古文：上曰： 社稷所以再安，吾之所以得天下，皆汝力也。
现代文：唐睿宗对太子说： 大唐的宗庙社稷之所以再次安然无恙，我之所以能够君临天下，都是由于你立下大功。
English: Tang Ruizong said to the prince: The reason why the Great Tang Dynasty's Zongmiao Shrine was once again safe and sound, and the reason why I was able to reign over the world, are all due to your great achievement.

古文：今帝座有灾，故以授汝，转祸为福，汝何疑邪！ 
现代文：现在帝座星有灾异出现，所以我将帝位禅让给你，以便能转祸为福，你还有什么可疑惑的呢！ 
English: Now the star of the constellation of the emperor has a disastrous appearance, so I will give you the imperial throne of Zen, so that you can turn misfortune into blessing, what else can you doubt!

古文：太子固辞。
现代文：太子李隆基还是坚决推辞不受。
English: Prince Li Longji is still adamant that he will not accept the rejection.

古文：上曰： 汝为孝子，何必待柩前然后即位邪！ 
现代文：唐睿宗说： 你是一个孝子，为什么非要等到站在我的灵柩前才能即皇帝之位呢！ 
English: Tang Ruizong said: You are a filial son, why do you have to wait until you are standing in front of my coffin before you can take the throne of the emperor!

古文：太子流涕而出。
现代文：太子只好流着眼泪走了出来。
English: The prince had to walk out in tears.

古文：壬辰，制传位于太子，太子上表固辞。
现代文：壬辰，唐睿宗颁发制命，决定将帝位传给太子李隆基，太子上表坚决推辞。
English: In Imjin, Tang Ruizong issued the imperial command and decided to pass the imperial throne to the prince Li Longji. The prince firmly declined the offer.

古文：太平公主劝上虽传位，犹宜自总大政。
现代文：太平公主劝说唐睿宗，最好在禅让之后，还要亲自执掌朝政大事。
English: Princess Taiping persuaded Tang Ruizong that it would be best to personally take charge of the important affairs of the imperial government after the abdication.

古文：上乃谓太子曰： 汝以天下事重，欲朕兼理之邪？ 
现代文：于是唐睿宗对太子说： 你是不是觉得国家事务十分繁重，要让朕帮你处理一些事务呢？
English: So Tang Ruizong said to the prince: Do you feel that the affairs of the state are very heavy, and you want me to help you deal with some affairs?

古文：昔舜禅禹，犹亲巡狩。联虽传位，岂忘家国？
现代文：想当初唐尧将帝位禅让给虞舜后，还要亲自到各地去巡视，现在朕虽然将帝位传给了你，哪里就能对家国之事漠不关心呢！
English: To think that at the beginning, after Tang Xuan ceded the imperial throne of Zen to Yu Xuan, he personally went to various places to inspect. Now, although I have passed the imperial throne to you, where can you be indifferent to the affairs of your home country?

古文：其军国大事，当兼省之。 
现代文：此后凡有军国大事，朕还是会参予处理的。 
English: After that, whenever there is a major military event, I will still be involved in handling it.

古文：八月，庚子，玄宗即位，尊睿宗为太上皇。
现代文：八月，庚子，唐玄宗即皇帝位，将唐睿宗尊奉为太上皇。
English: In August, Geng Zi, Tang Xuan Zong, that is, the emperor, revered Tang Ruizong as the emperor.

古文：上皇自称曰朕，命曰诰，五日一受朝于太极殿。
现代文：太上皇自称为 朕 ，所发布的命令称为 诰 ，每五天一次在太极殿接受群臣朝见。
English: The Retired Emperor calls himself "Wan," and the orders he issues are called "Wan." Once every five days, he receives a group of courtiers for an audience in the Taiji Hall.

古文：皇帝自称曰予，命曰制、敕，日受朝于武德殿。
现代文：皇帝自称为 予 ，所发布的命令称为 制 、 敕 ，每天都在武德殿接受群臣朝见。
English: The emperor called himself "Yu," the orders he issued were called "Sei" and "Shi," and every day he received a group of courtiers for an audience at Wude Hall.

古文：三品以上除授及大刑政决于上皇，馀皆决于皇帝。
现代文：凡涉及到三品以上官员的任命以及重大的刑狱政务由太上皇决定，其余政务均由皇帝决断。
English: All matters involving the appointment of officials with three or more court ranks and major penitentiary affairs shall be decided by the Emperor, and all other government affairs shall be decided by the Emperor.

古文：壬寅，上大圣天后尊号曰圣帝天后。
现代文：壬寅，朝廷为大圣天后武则天上尊号为圣帝天后。
English: Ren Yin, the imperial court is the great saint diva Wu Zetian heavenly honorific is the saint diva.

古文：甲辰，赦天下，改元。
现代文：甲辰，唐玄宗大赦天下，改年号为先天。
English: Jia Chen, Tang Xuan Zong, was pardoned by the world, and the year was changed to the previous day.

古文：乙巳，于漠州北置渤海军，恒、定州境置恒阳军，妫、蔚州境置怀柔军，屯兵五万。
现代文：乙巳，唐玄宗决定在州以北设置渤海军，在恒州、定州一带设置恒阳军，在妫州、蔚州境内设置怀柔军，驻扎五万军队。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang decided to set up the Yunnan Navy in the north of the state, the Hengyang Army in the area of Hengzhou and Dingzhou, and the Huairou Army in the territory of Zhangzhou and Ulshu, stationing fifty thousand troops.

古文：丙午，立妃王氏为皇后，以后父仁皎为太仆卿。仁皎，下邽人也。
现代文：丙午，唐玄宗下诏将妃子王氏立为皇后；将皇后王氏之父王仁皎任命为太仆卿，五仁皎是下人。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 3rd month, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to make the princess Wang Shiguo the empress; the father of the empress Wang Shiguo, Wang Rensheng, was appointed as the servant of the emperor, and Wu Rensheng was the subordinate.

古文：戊申，立皇子许昌王嗣直为郯王，真定王嗣谦为郢王。
现代文：戊申，唐玄宗又下诏将皇子许昌王李嗣直封为郯王，将真定王李嗣谦封为郢王。
English: In addition, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to directly appoint the prince Xu Chang Wang Li Zhi as the king of Qi, and to appoint the prince Zhen Ding Wang Li Zhi Qian as the king of Qi.

古文：以刘幽求为右仆射、同中书门下三品，魏知古为侍中，崔湜为检校中书令。
现代文：朝廷任命刘幽求为尚书右仆射、同中书门下三品，魏知古为侍中，崔为检校中书令。
English: The imperial court appointed Liu Yucui as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, and Wei Zhigu as an attendant, and Cui as the inspector of the school.

古文：初，河内王琚预于王同皎之谋，亡命，佣书于江都。
现代文：当初河内人王琚参预了王同皎等人谋杀武三思的谋画，事发后亡命出逃，在江都以代他人抄书为生。
English: At first, Wang Xizang, a native of Hanoi, anticipated the plot of murdering Wu Sansi by Wang Tongyu and others. After the incident, he fled for his life and made a living by copying books on behalf of others in Jiangdu.

古文：上之为太子也，琚还长安，选补诸暨主簿，过谢太子。
现代文：唐玄宗被立为太子以后，王琚回到了长安，被选拔任命为诸暨县主簿，上东宫去拜谢李隆基。
English: After Tang Xuan Zong was installed as the crown prince, Wang Xi returned to Chang'an, was selected and appointed as the main book of Zhuji County, and went to the East Palace to worship Xie Longji.

古文：琚至廷中，故徐行高视，宦者曰： 殿下在帘内。 
现代文：王琚走上殿廷之后，故意走得很慢，视线也放得很高，宦官说： 殿下在帘子内。 
English: After Wang Yao walked up to the palace, he deliberately walked very slowly and kept his eyes very high. The eunuch said, "Your highness is inside the curtain."

古文：琚曰： 何谓殿下？
现代文：王琚说： 什么殿下不殿下的？
English: Wang Yao said, "What is your royal highness not your royal highness?

古文：当今独有太平公主耳！ 
现代文：当今只有一个太平公主！ 
English: Today, there is only one Taiping Princess!

古文：太子遽召见，与语，琚曰： 韦庶人弑逆，人心不服，诛之易耳。
现代文：太子听后马上召见他，并与他谈话，王琚说： 先前韦庶人弑帝为逆，人心不服，杀掉她是件容易事。
English: After hearing this, the crown prince immediately summoned him and had a conversation with him. Wang Yao said, "Previously, Wei, a commoner, opposed Emperor Xizong. People were not satisfied with her. It was an easy matter to kill her.

古文：太平公主，武后之子，凶猾无比，大臣多为之用，琚窃忧之。 
现代文：太平公主是武后的女儿，再加上她无比的凶狠狡猾，大臣们大多秉承她的旨意办事，我对此十分担忧。 
English: I am very worried that the Taiping princess is the daughter of the empress dowager, and with her incomparable fierce cunning, the ministers mostly act in accordance with her will.

古文：太子引与同榻坐，泣曰： 主上同气，唯有太平，言之恐伤主上之意，不言为患日深，为之奈何？ 
现代文：太子拉他与自己同坐在一张榻上，流着眼泪对他说： 现在父皇的兄弟姊妹中，就只有一位太平公主了，如果把这些事禀告父皇的话，恐怕会让他老人家伤心，可如果不去禀告，又担心她所造成的危害会越来越严重，这可怎么办呢？ 
English: The prince pulled her to sit with him on a cot and, with tears streaming down his face, said to him: Now, among my father's brothers and sisters, there is only one Taiping Princess. If I were to report these things to my father, I'm afraid it would make the old man sad. But if I don't report it, and I'm worried that the harm she has caused will become more and more serious, what can I do?

古文：琚曰： 天子之孝，异于匹夫，当以安宗庙社稷为事。
现代文：王琚回答说： 天子所讲究的孝道，与平民百姓不同，应当考虑的是宗庙社稷的安危。
English: Wang Yao replied: The filial piety that the Son of Heaven is particular about is different from that of the common people. What should be considered is the safety and security of the family, temple and community.

古文：盖主，汉昭帝之姊，自幼供养，有罪犹诛之。
现代文：盖主是汉昭帝的姐姐，将昭帝从小养大，有了罪也还是要杀掉。
English: The owner is the sister of Han Zhaodi, who raised Zhaodi from a young age. If she commits a crime, she will still be killed.

古文：为天下者，岂顾小节！ 
现代文：治理天下的人，怎么能顾及小节呢！ 
English: How can a man who governs the whole world pay attention to minor details?

古文：太子悦曰： 君有何艺，可与寡人游？ 
现代文：太子很高兴地问他： 您有什么本事可以和寡人在一起呢？ 
English: The prince was delighted and asked him, "What skills do you have that allow you to be with so few people?"

古文：琚曰： 能飞炼、诙嘲。 
现代文：王琚回答说： 我既擅长炼丹，又能诙谐嘲谑。 
English: Wang Yao replied, "I am good at making incense, and I can also make witty jokes.

古文：太子乃奏为詹事府司直，日与游处，累迁太子中舍人；及即位，以为中书侍郎。
现代文：于是太子奏请唐睿宗将王琚任命为詹事府司直，每天与他交往相处，并逐渐将他提拔为太子中舍人；等到太子即位之后，又任命他为中书侍郎。
English: Therefore, the crown prince asked Tang Ruizong to appoint Wang Xi as the secretary of Zhanji Prefecture, and interacted with him every day, and gradually promoted him to the prince's subordinate; after the prince ascended to the throne, he also appointed him as the secretary of the book.

古文：是时，宰相多太平公主之党，刘幽求与右羽林将军张谋以羽林兵诛之，使密言于上曰： 窦怀贞、崔湜、岑羲皆因公主得进，日夜为谋不轨。
现代文：这时，宰相大多数是太平公主的党羽，刘幽求与右羽林将军张谋划调集羽林兵将他们一网打尽，并让张秘密地对唐玄宗说： 窦怀贞、崔、岑羲等人都是依仗太平公主才爬上宰相职位的，他们时时刻刻都在策划如何作乱。
English: At this time, most of the chancellors were party members of the Taiping princess. Liu Yucu and General Zhang of the Right Uhlin plotted to mobilize the Uhlin soldiers to defeat them all, and had Zhang secretly say to Tang Xuanzong: Dou Huai Zhen, Cui, and Zou all relied on the Taiping princess to climb to the position of chancellor. They were always plotting how to make trouble.

古文：若不早图，一旦事起，太上皇何以得安！
现代文：如果陛下不早点除掉他们，一旦事变突然发生，太上皇怎么能平安呢！
English: If His Majesty doesn't get rid of them soon, how can His Majesty be safe in the event of a sudden incident?

古文：请速诛之。
现代文：请快些诛杀他们。
English: Please hurry up and kill them.

古文：臣已与幽求定计，惟俟陛下之命。 
现代文：臣已经与刘幽求定好了计策，就只等陛下下命令了。 
English: The minister has already worked out a strategy with Liu Yu, and is just waiting for His Majesty to give the order.

古文：上深以为然。
现代文：唐玄宗认为他说得很对。
English: Later, Emperor Tang deeply felt that he was right.

古文：泄其谋于侍御史邓光宾，上大惧，遽列上其状。
现代文：但事后张将这一计谋泄露给了侍御史邓光宾，唐玄宗知道以后十分害怕，急忙将刘幽求等人的罪状开列出来上奏了太上皇。
English: However, after the fact, Zhang leaked this scheme to the attendant historian Deng Guangbin. Tang Xuanzong was very afraid after knowing this, and he hurriedly listed the crimes of Liu Yucu and others and reported them to the emperor.

古文：丙辰，幽求下狱。
现代文：丙辰，刘幽求被逮捕下狱。
English: Xing Chen and Liu Yucui were arrested and sent to prison.

古文：有司奏： 幽求等离间骨肉，罪当死。 
现代文：负责审理此案的官员上奏道： 刘幽求挑拨离间陛下骨肉，应当判处死刑。 
English: The official in charge of hearing the case made a report: Liu Yuqiu incited discord between His Majesty's flesh and blood, and should be sentenced to death.

古文：上为言幽求有大功，不可杀。
现代文：唐玄宗又为刘幽求等人向太上皇求情，说刘幽求为大唐朝廷立过大功，不能判处死刑。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also pleaded with the emperor for Liu Yucui and others, saying that Liu Yucui had made great contributions to the Great Tang Dynasty and could not be sentenced to death.

古文：癸亥，流幽求于封州，张于峰州，光宾于绣州。
现代文：癸亥，唐睿宗将刘幽求流放到封州，将张流放到峰州，将邓光宾流放到州。
English: Zeng Hai and Tang Ruizong exiled Liu Yucui to Fenzhou, Zhang to Fengzhou, and Deng Guangbin to Zhuzhou.

古文：初，崔湜为襄州刺史，密与谯王重福通书，重福遗之金带。
现代文：起初，崔在作襄州刺史时，曾给谯王李重福秘密写信，李重福也曾将金带送给他。
English: At first, when Cui was writing the history of Xiangzhou, he wrote a secret letter to the king of Qi, Li Shifu. Li Shifu also gave him a gold belt.

古文：重福败，湜当死，张说、刘幽求营护得免。
现代文：李重福起兵失败后，崔是应该被判处死刑，由于张说和刘幽求的多方保护才得以免死。
English: After the failure of Li Chongfu to raise an army, Cui should have been sentenced to death, but he was spared death thanks to the multi-faceted protection of Zhang Xie and Liu You.

古文：既而湜附太平公主，与公主谋罢说政事，以左丞分司东都。
现代文：不久以后崔便投靠了太平公主，与太平公主谋划罢免了张说的宰相职务，将他降为尚书左丞并派往设在东都洛阳的中央官署任职。
English: Soon after, Cui took the side of the Taiping princess, plotted with the Taiping princess to remove Zhang Said from the post of prime minister, demoted him to Shang Shuzojo and sent him to work at the Central Government Office in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：及幽求流封州，湜讽广州都督周利贞，使杀之。
现代文：等刘幽求被流放到封州以后，崔暗示广州都督周利贞杀掉刘幽求。
English: After Liu Yucui was exiled to Fenzhou, Cui hinted that Zhou Lizhen, the governor of Guangzhou, killed Liu Yucui.

古文：桂州都督景城王晙知其谋，留幽求不遣。
现代文：桂州都督王得知这一阴谋以后，便将刘幽求扣留在自己手里，不往广州发送。
English: After Guizhou Governor Wang learned of this plot, he detained Liu Yucui in his own hands and did not send him to Guangzhou.

古文：利贞屡移牒索之，晙不应，利贞以闻。
现代文：周利贞屡次发出索要刘幽求的公文，王都不予理睬，周利贞便将此事上奏给了朝廷。
English: Zhou Lizhen repeatedly sent official documents requesting Liu Yuzhu, but the king ignored them. Zhou Lizhen then reported the matter to the imperial court.

古文：湜屡逼晙，使遣幽求，幽求谓晙曰： 公拒执政而保流人，势不能全，徒仰累耳。 
现代文：崔屡次催逼王，让他遣送刘幽求。刘幽求对王说： 您违抗当权宰相的命令而保护一个被流放的人，势必无法保全，只不过是让您受牵连罢了。 
English: Cui repeatedly urged Wang to send Liu Yuzhu. Liu Yuzhu said to Wang: If you defy the order of the prime minister in power and protect an exiled person, you will certainly not be able to save him, but you will only be implicated.

古文：固请诣广州，晙曰： 公所坐非可绝于朋友者也。
现代文：于是坚决地请求王放他到广州去，王向他解释说： 您所犯的罪过还不至于让朋友与你绝交。
English: So he resolutely asked Wang to let him go to Guangzhou. Wang explained to him, "The sins you have committed are not enough to make a friend break off relations with you.

古文：晙因公获罪，无所恨！ 
现代文：我王为国家的事而获罪，也没有什么可遗憾的。 
English: My king has nothing to be sorry for, having been found guilty for the sake of the country.

古文：竟逗遛不遣。幽求由是得免。
现代文：最终还是一直将刘幽求留在桂州，没有遣送到广州。刘幽求因此而得以幸免。
English: In the end, Liu Yucui remained in Guizhou and was not sent to Guangzhou. As a result, Liu Yucui was spared.

古文：九月，丁卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，丁卯朔，出现日食。
English: In September, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛卯，立皇子嗣升为陕王。
现代文：辛亥，唐玄宗将皇子李嗣升立为陕王。
English: In Xinhai, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang elevated his son Li Zhi to the throne of Shaanxi.

古文：嗣升母杨氏，士达之曾孙也。
现代文：李嗣升的母亲杨氏，是隋朝纳言杨士达的曾孙女。
English: Li Shisheng's mother, Ms. Yang, was the great-granddaughter of Yang Shida, the Nagon of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：王后无子，母养之。
现代文：由于王皇后没有亲生儿子，所以像母亲一样地抚养他。
English: Since Queen Wang did not have a son of her own, she raised him like a mother.

古文：冬，十月，庚子，上谒太庙，赦天下。
现代文：冬季十月，庚子，唐玄宗到太庙谒见列祖列宗，颁敕大赦天下。
English: In the winter of October, Geng Zi and Tang Xuan Zong went to the Great Temple to see the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors.

古文：癸卯，上幸新丰，猎于骊山之下。
现代文：癸卯，唐玄宗到新丰，在骊山脚下狩猎。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong went to Xinfeng to hunt at the foot of Lushan Mountain.

古文：辛酉，沙陀金山遣使入贡。
现代文：辛酉，西域沙陀金山派遣使者入朝进献贡品。
English: Xinzheng, the western region of Shatou Jinshan, sent an envoy to the court to offer tribute.

古文：沙陀者，处月之别种也，姓硃邪氏。
现代文：沙陀是处月族的一个别支，姓朱邪氏。
English: Shado is another branch of the Zhengyue people, surnamed Zhu Yaxi.

古文：十一月，乙酉，奚、契丹二万骑寇渔阳，幽州都督宋璟闭城不出，虏大掠而去。
现代文：十一月，乙酉，奚与契丹合兵二万人进犯渔阳，幽州都督宋关闭城门，没有出城迎战，奚与契丹大肆掳掠之后撤军。
English: In November, 20,000 soldiers of Yixuan, Handan and Qidan invaded Yuyang. Song, the governor of Yuzhou, closed the city gate and did not go out to fight. Handan and Qidan withdrew after extensive looting.

古文：上皇诰遣皇帝巡边，西自河、陇，东及燕、蓟，选将练卒。
现代文：太上皇唐睿宗发布诰命，派唐玄宗出巡边境，巡视的地区西自河、陇，东到燕、蓟，巡行中将选择将帅、训练士卒。
English: Empress Dowager Tang Ruizong issued an imperial edict, and sent Tang Xuanzong to patrol the border, inspecting the areas west of the river and the dike, and east to the dike and the dike. The commander-in-chief selected the generals and trainers.

古文：甲午，以幽州都督宋璟为左军大总管，并州长史薛讷为中军大总管，朔方大总管，兵部尚书郭元振为右军大总管。
现代文：甲午，唐玄宗任命幽州都督宋为左军大总管，并州长史薛讷为中军大总管，朔方大总管、兵部尚书郭元振为右军大总管。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Song, the governor of Yuzhou, as the commander-in-chief of the Left Army, Governor Shi Xian'er as the commander-in-chief of the Central Army, and Shuo Fang as the commander-in-chief of the Front Army, and Shang Shuguo Yuanzhen as the commander-in-chief of the Right Army.

古文：十二月，刑部尚书李日知请致仕。
现代文：十二月，刑部尚书李日知请求退休。
English: In December, the head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Li, requested retirement.

古文：日知在官，不行捶挞而事集。刑部有令史，受敕三日，忘不行。
现代文：李日知在担任刑部尚书职务时，从来不用刑杖责打误事的官吏，但刑部的各项任务也都能够圆满地完成。曾经有一位令史在接到皇帝敕令三天后，竟然忘记去贯彻执行。
English: When Li Rizhi was in charge of the Criminal Investigation Department, he never used a cane to punish officials who did something wrong, but the various tasks of the Criminal Investigation Department were also able to be completed successfully. Once, there was a person who forgot to implement the imperial edict three days after receiving it.

古文：日知怒，索杖，集群吏，欲捶之；既而谓曰： 我欲捶汝，天下人必谓汝能撩李日知嗔，受李日知杖，不得比于人，妻子亦将弃汝矣。 
现代文：李日知十分生气，派人找出刑杖，然后集合所有的官吏，准备责打他，过了一会却又说道： 我如果下令责打你，天下人一定要说你能够惹我李日知生气，再说因延误公务而受到我李日知的杖责，与受到别人的责罚不同，恐怕连你的老婆孩子也要抛弃你了。 
English: Li Rongzhi was very angry. He sent someone to find a cane, and then gathered all the officials to prepare to beat him. After a while, he said: If I order you to be beaten, the world must say that you can make me Li Rongzhi angry. Moreover, being punished by my cane for delaying official duties is different from being punished by others. I am afraid that even your wife and children will abandon you.

古文：遂释之。
现代文：于是便放过了他这一次。
English: As a result, Wang Hanzhang was captured and presented to the emperor.

古文：吏皆感悦，无敢犯者，脱有稽失，众共谪之。
现代文：所有的官吏都非常感动，从此再也没有人敢于违犯规章，一旦有谁出现稽误失职行为，所有的人都会一起谴责他。
English: All the officials were very moved. From then on, no one dared to violate the rules, and if there was any misconduct, everyone would condemn him together.

古文：开元元年癸丑，公元七一三年
现代文：开元元年
English: In the first year of the Heian period

古文：春，正月，乙亥，诰： 卫士自今二十五入军，五十免；羽林飞骑并以卫士简补。 
现代文：春季正月，乙亥，太上皇唐睿宗颁布诰命： 从现在起卫士自二十五岁起服役，五十岁免于服役；羽林军飞骑都从卫士中选拔补充。 
English: In the first month of spring, in the Year of the Boar, Emperor Tang Ruizong issued the following edict: From now on, guardsmen will serve from the age of 25, and will be exempted from service at the age of 50; the cavalry of the Ulin Army will be selected from the guardsmen.

古文：以吏部尚书萧至忠为中书令。
现代文：朝廷任命吏部尚书萧至忠为中书令。
English: The imperial court appointed the clerk, Shang Shu Xiao Zhizhong, as the middle secretary.

古文：皇帝巡边改期，所募兵各散遣，约八月复集，竟不成行。
现代文：玄宗皇帝巡视边地的行期有所变动，各地所召募的士卒都各自遣返，约定好到八月份再集结，但玄宗皇帝最终未能成行。
English: The schedule of Emperor Xuanzong's inspection tour of the border areas was changed, and the soldiers recruited from various regions were repatriated separately, and it was agreed to regroup in August, but Emperor Xuanzong was ultimately unable to make the trip.

古文：二月，庚子夜，开门然灯，又追作去年大酺，大合伎乐。
现代文：二月，庚子夜间，长安城大开门户，点燃花灯，又补办去年玄宗登基时未曾举办的臣民大聚饮活动，并且安排了场面宏大的歌舞杂技来助兴。
English: In February, on the night of Geng Zi, the gates of Chang'an City were opened, the lanterns were lit, and a large gathering of subjects was held, which had not been held when Xuanzong ascended to the throne last year, and a spectacular song and dance acrobatics were arranged to add to the fun.

古文：上皇与上御门楼临观，或以夜继昼，凡月馀。
现代文：太上皇与玄宗皇帝来到城门楼上观赏，有时甚至不分白天黑夜地寻欢作乐，一共持续了一个多月。
English: Emperor Taejong and Emperor Xuanzong came to the castle gate to watch, and sometimes even to have fun day and night, which lasted for more than a month.

古文：左拾遗华阴严挺之上疏谏，以为： 酺者因人所利，合醵为欢。
现代文：左拾遗华阴人严挺之上疏谏阻，认为： 聚饮是按照百姓认为便利的，大家出钱共饮，以寻求欢乐。
English: The left-leaning Huayin people are strict and narrow-minded, and believe that: drinking together is convenient according to the people's opinion, everyone pays money to drink together to seek joy.

古文：今乃损万人之力，营百戏之资，非所以光圣德美风化也。 
现代文：现在陛下却耗费万民的资财来供给歌舞杂技的支出，这不是用来光大圣德和美化风俗的方法。 
English: Now your majesty is expending the resources of all the people to provide for the expenses of singing and dancing acrobatics, which is not the way to glorify holiness and beautify customs.

古文：乃止。
现代文：唐玄宗于是停止了这一活动。
English: He dismissed the idea.

古文：初，高丽既亡，其别种大祚荣徙居营州。
现代文：当初，高丽灭亡以后，它的一个分支部落酋长大祚荣率领部众迁徙到营州。
English: At first, after the fall of Goryeo, a branch tribe chief, Gong Rong, led his people to migrate to Yingzhou.

古文：及李尽忠反，祚荣与靺鞨乞四北羽聚众东走，阻险自固。尽忠死，武后使将军李楷固讨其馀党。
现代文：及至李尽忠反叛朝廷，大祚荣便与酋长乞四北羽一起聚众东逃，凭借险要的地势谋求自保，李尽忠死后，武则天派将军李楷固讨伐李尽忠的余党。
English: When Li Jianzhong rebelled against the imperial court, Dazhong Rong gathered everyone to flee east together with the chief of the four norths, seeking self-preservation by virtue of the precarious situation. After Li Jianzhong's death, Wu Zetian sent General Li Kai Gu to fight the remaining party of Li Jianzhong.

古文：楷固击乞四北羽，斩之，引兵逾天门岭，逼祚荣。
现代文：李楷固先是进攻乞四北羽并将他斩首，然后带兵越过天门岭进逼大祚荣。
English: Li Kai Gu first attacked the Beggar of the Four Norths and beheaded him, and then led his troops across the Tianmen Mountains to force Daxing Rong.

古文：祚荣逆战，楷固大败，仅以身免。
现代文：大祚荣率领部众迎击，李楷固大败，只身逃脱。
English: Daxin Rong led the team to counterattack, Li Kai Gu was defeated and escaped alone.

古文：祚荣遂帅其众东据东牟山，筑城居之。
现代文：大祚荣于是率领部众东行，占据东牟山，筑城居守。
English: Therefore, Dazhong Rong led the troops eastward, occupied Dongmou Mountain, built a city and lived there.

古文：祚荣骁勇善战，高丽、靺鞨之人稍稍归之，地方二千里，户十馀万，胜兵数万人，自称振国王，附于突厥。
现代文：由于大祚荣本人骁勇善战，因而高丽人和人也逐渐地依附于他，他的势力渐渐扩展到方圆二千里的区域，辖区之内共有十多万户，拥兵达数万人。大祚荣自称为振国王，依附于突厥。
English: Because of Dab Rong's bravery and skill in battle, the people of Goryeo and Korea gradually attached themselves to him. His power gradually expanded to an area of two thousand miles in circumference, with a total of more than one hundred thousand households and tens of thousands of soldiers within his jurisdiction. Dab Rong called himself King Zhen and attached himself to the Turks.

古文：时奚、契丹皆叛，道路阻绝，武后不能讨。
现代文：当时奚、契丹都背叛了唐朝，使得唐朝与这一区域的交通断绝，武则天也没有能力讨平他们。
English: At that time, both Zhai and Khitan betrayed the Tang Dynasty, causing the Tang Dynasty to cut off communication with this region, and Wu Zetian was not able to level them.

古文：中宗即位，遣侍御史张行岌招慰之，祚荣遣子入侍。
现代文：唐中宗即位后，派遣侍御史张行岌前来招抚，大祚荣于是派他的儿子入朝侍奉。
English: After Emperor Tang Zhongzong ascended to the throne, he sent the attendant Zhang Xing to come forward to beckon, and Daxing Rong then sent his son to serve in the imperial court.

古文：至是，以祚荣为左骁卫大将军、渤海郡王；以其所部为忽汗州，令祚荣兼都督。
现代文：现在，唐玄宗任命大祚荣为左骁卫大将军、勃海郡王，并在他的辖区内设置忽汗州，任命他兼任忽汗州都督。
English: Now, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Dai Bing Rong as General of Zuo Wei and King of Bo Hai County, and set up the state of Hukang in his jurisdiction, and appointed him as the governor of Hukang.

古文：庚申，敕以严挺之忠直宣示百官，厚赏之。
现代文：庚申，唐玄宗颁布敕令，将左拾遗严挺之敢于进谏的忠良正直行为宣示百官，并重重地赏赐了他。
English: Goshun, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an imperial edict, declaring Zuo Zhi Yi's loyal and honest behavior of daring to enter the imperial court to all officials, and rewarded him heavily.

古文：三月，辛巳，皇后亲蚕。
现代文：三月，辛巳，王皇后亲自采桑养蚕。
English: In March, Queen Wang personally harvested mulberry to raise silkworms.

古文：晋陵尉杨相如上疏言时政，其略曰： 炀帝自恃自强，不忧时政，虽制敕交行，而声实舛谬，言同尧、舜，亦如桀、纣，举天下之大，一掷而弃之。 
现代文：晋陵尉杨相如上疏议论时政，疏文的大意是： 隋炀帝自恃国家强大，不肯为时政而操心，虽然他颁发的制敕数不胜数，但言行之间却相差甚远，口说尧、舜之言，身行桀、纣之事，最后终于丢掉了整个天下。 
English: Yang Xiangru, the imperial mausoleum officer of the Jin Dynasty, discusses current politics in the following passage. The gist of the passage is as follows: Emperor Sui and Qian boasted that the country was powerful and did not want to worry about current politics. Although the number of imperial edicts he issued was countless, there was a great difference between his words and deeds. His words were empty, his deeds were empty, his deeds were empty, and finally he lost the whole world.

古文：又曰： 隋氏纵欲而亡，太宗抑欲而昌，愿陛下详择之！ 
现代文：他还说： 隋朝皇帝放纵自己的欲望以至于亡国灭家，本朝太宗皇帝抑制自己的欲望以至于国家繁荣昌盛，希望陛下能够从中慎重选择自己应走的道路。 
English: He also said: The emperor of the Sui Dynasty indulged his desires to the point of ruining the country and destroying his family, while the Emperor Taizong of this dynasty restrained his desires to the point that the country prospered. I hope that His Majesty can carefully choose the path he should take.

古文：又曰： 人主莫不好忠正而恶佞邪，然忠正者常疏，佞邪者常亲，以至于覆国危身而不寤者，何哉？
现代文：他还说： 历朝帝王没有哪一个不是喜欢忠诚正直之士，憎恶奸佞邪恶之徒的，但是事实上却是忠诚正直之士常常被疏远，奸佞邪恶之徒常常被宠幸，以至于到了国亡身危的地步还不知原因所在，这是为什么呢？
English: He also said, "Throughout the ages, there has never been an emperor who did not like loyal and honest people and detest treacherous and evil people, but in fact, the loyal and honest people were often alienated, and the treacherous and evil people were often favored, so that when the country was in danger, they did not know the reason. Why is this?

古文：诚由忠正者多忤意，佞邪者多顺指，积忤生憎，积顺生爱，此亲疏之所以分也。
现代文：真正的原因在于忠诚正直之士大多不惜触犯帝王的旨意，而奸佞邪恶之徒却大多顺从帝王的邪念，长期触犯帝王旨意就会使帝王产生憎恶之心，长期顺从帝王邪念也会使帝王产生爱怜之意，这就是亲疏所以产生的缘故。
English: The real reason is that most of the loyal and honest people do not hesitate to violate the emperor's will, while the traitors and evildoers mostly obey the emperor's evil thoughts. Long-term violation of the emperor's will will cause the emperor to have a heart of hatred, and long-term obedience to the emperor's evil thoughts will also cause the emperor to have a sense of love and pity. This is the reason for the estrangement.

古文：明主则不然。爱其忤以收忠贤，恶其顺以去佞邪，则太宗太平之业，将何远哉！ 
现代文：圣明的帝王与此相反，他们喜爱敢于触犯自己旨意的臣子，为的是得到忠正贤良之士；憎恶一味顺从自己的人，为的是除去身边的奸佞邪恶之徒，如果能够这样做，那么距离太宗皇帝的太平功业，也就不远了。 
English: The wise emperors, on the other hand, loved the vassals who dared to go against their will, in order to gain loyal and virtuous people; they hated those who only obeyed them, in order to get rid of the treacherous and evil people around them. If they could do this, then the Taizong Emperor's peaceful achievement would not be far away.

古文：又曰 夫法贵简而能禁，罚贵轻而必行；陛下方兴崇至德，大布新政，请一切除去碎密，不察小过。
现代文：他又说： 法律条文贵在简明扼要而能禁止奸邪，刑罚贵在轻缓而能坚决执行。目前陛下正彰明德教、除旧布新，希望能将所有细文苛法尽行革除，不要在臣下的细小过失上斤斤计较。
English: He also said: The legal provisions are concise and can prohibit adultery, and the punishments are light and can be resolutely enforced. At present, His Majesty is promoting the teachings of virtue and removing the old cloth, hoping to eliminate all the details and harsh methods, and not to worry about the minor faults of his subjects.

古文：小过不察则无烦苛，大罪不漏则止奸慝，使简而难犯，宽而能制，则善矣。 
现代文：对臣下的细小过失不去计较就能屏除烦琐苛刻的法律，对重大的罪行不使漏网就能制止邪恶，陛下如果能够使法律简明而难以违反，刑罚宽缓而能够制止犯罪，那么就可以称得上是善政了。 
English: If your majesty can make the laws concise and difficult to violate, and the punishment lenient and able to deter crime, then it can be said to be good governance.

古文：上览而善之。先是，修大明宫未毕，夏，五月，庚寅，敕以农务方勤，罢之以待闲月。
现代文：唐玄宗读完他的奏疏之后，认为他所提出的建议很好。在这以前，修缮大明宫尚未竣工，夏季，五月，庚寅，唐玄宗以正值农忙时节的缘故，下令暂且停工，等到农闲时分再继续修建。
English: After reading his report, Tang Xuan Zong thought that the suggestion he made was very good. Before this, the repair of Daming Palace had not yet been completed. In the summer, in May, due to the busy farming season, Tang Xuan Zong ordered to temporarily stop the construction and wait until the farming season to continue the construction.

古文：六月，丙辰，以兵部尚书郭元振同中书门下三品。
现代文：六月，丙辰，朝廷任命兵部尚书郭元振为同中书门下三品。
English: In June, the imperial court appointed Guo Yuan Zhen, a military scholar, as the third-ranked scholar of the same school.

古文：太平公主依上皇之势，擅权用事，与上有隙，宰相七人，五出其门。文武之臣，太半附之。
现代文：太平公主倚仗太上皇唐睿宗的势力专擅朝政，与唐玄宗发生尖锐的冲突，朝中七位宰相之中，有五位是出自她的门下，文臣武将之中也有一半以上的人依附她。
English: The Taiping Princess relied on the power of the Emperor Tang Ruizong to dominate the politics of the dynasty, and she came into sharp conflict with Emperor Tang Xuanzong. Five of the seven prime ministers of the dynasty were her subordinates, and more than half of the civil servants and generals also depended on her.

古文：与窦怀贞、岑羲、萧至忠、崔湜及太子少保薛稷、雍州长史新兴王晋、左羽林大将军常元楷、知右羽林将军事李慈、左金吾将军李钦、中书舍人李猷、右散骑常侍贾膺福、鸿胪卿唐晙及僧慧范等谋废立，又与宫人元氏谋于赤箭粉中置毒进于上。
现代文：太平公主与窦怀贞、岑羲、萧至忠、崔以及太子少保薛稷、雍州长史新兴王李晋、左羽林大将军常元楷、知右羽林将军事李慈、左金吾将军李钦、中书舍人李猷、右散骑常侍贾膺福、鸿胪寺卿唐和胡僧慧范等一起图谋废掉唐玄宗，此外，太平公主又与宫女元氏合谋，准备在进献给玄宗皇帝服用的天麻粉中投毒。
English: Princess Taiping, along with Dou Huai Zhen, Zhai, Xiao Zhizhong, Cui, and the prince's younger brother Xue Zhen, the governor of Yongzheng, the emerging king Li Jin, the general of the left wing Lin Changyuan Kai, the general of the right wing Lin military Li Ci, the general of the left wing Kingu Li Qin, the scribe of the left wing Li Zhen, the attendant of the right wing cavalry Jia Yifu, the chief priest of the Hongyi Temple Tang, and the monk Hu Fan, plotted to abolish Tang Xuan Zong. In addition, Princess Taiping conspired with

古文：晋，德良之孙也。
现代文：李晋是李德良的孙子。
English: Li Jin is the grandson of Li Deliang.

古文：元楷、慈数往来主第，相与结谋。
现代文：常元楷和李慈多次前往太平公主的私宅与她订下作乱的计谋。
English: Changyuan Kai and Li Ci repeatedly went to the private home of Princess Taiping to make plans with her.

古文：王琚言于上曰： 事迫矣，不可不速发！ 
现代文：王琚对唐玄宗进言道： 形势已十分紧迫，陛下不可不迅速行动了。 
English: Wang Yao said to Tang Xuan Zong: The situation has become very urgent, Your Majesty must act quickly.

古文：左丞张说自东都遣人遗上佩刀，意欲上断割。
现代文：尚书左丞张说从东都洛阳派人给唐玄宗送来了一把佩刀，意思是请玄宗及早决断，铲除太平公主的势力。
English: Shang Shuzhu Zuoxing Zhang said that he sent someone from the eastern capital Luoyang to Tang Xuan Zong to bring a sword, meaning to ask Xuan Zong to make a decision as soon as possible and eradicate the influence of Princess Taiping.

古文：荆州长史崔日用入奏事，言于上曰： 太平谋逆有日，陛下往在东宫，犹为臣子，若欲讨之，须用谋力。
现代文：荆州长史崔日用入朝奏事，对唐玄宗说： 太平公主图谋叛逆，是由来已久的事情。当初，陛下在东宫作太子时，在名分上还是臣子，如果那时想铲除太平公主，需要施用计谋。
English: The governor of Jing, Cui Rong, told Tang Xuan Zong: "Princess Taiping's plot to rebel is a long-standing matter. At the beginning, when Your Majesty was the crown prince in the East Palace, he was still a courtier in name. If you wanted to eradicate Princess Taiping at that time, you needed to use stratagems.

古文：今既光临大宝，但下一制书，谁敢不从？
现代文：现在陛下已为全国之主，只需颁下一道制书，有哪一个敢于抗命不从？
English: Now that His Majesty has become the master of the whole country, it is only necessary to issue a decree on book production. Who would dare to disobey?

古文：万一奸宄得志，悔之何及！ 
现代文：如果犹豫不决，万一奸邪之徒的阴谋得逞，那时候再后悔可就来不及了！ 
English: If you hesitate, just in case the evil plot succeeds, then it will be too late to regret!

古文：上曰： 诚如卿言。直恐惊动上皇。 
现代文：唐玄宗说： 你说得非常正确，只是朕担心会惊动太上皇。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "You are quite right, but I'm afraid I might alarm the Emperor."

古文：日用曰： 天子之孝在于安四海。
现代文：崔日用又说道： 天子的大孝在于使四海安宁。
English: Cui Rinyi also said: The great filial duty of the Son of Heaven is to make the four seas peaceful.

古文：若奸人得志，则社稷为墟，安在其为孝乎！ 
现代文：倘若奸党得志，则社稷宗庙将化为废墟，陛下的孝行又怎么体现出来呢！
English: If the traitor party wins, then the Shifang ancestral temple will be reduced to rubble, and how will His Majesty's filial piety be reflected?

古文：请先定北军，后收逆党，则不惊动上皇矣。 
现代文：请陛下首先控制住左右羽林军和左右万骑军，然后再将太平公主及其党羽一网打尽，这样就不会惊动太上皇了。 
English: Please ask Your Majesty to first control the left and right Uebayashi army and the left and right Manchukuo army, and then completely defeat Princess Taiping and her party, so that the Emperor will not be alarmed.

古文：上以为然。以日用为吏部侍郎。
现代文：唐玄宗认为他说得很对，便任命他为吏部侍郎。
English: Tang Xuan Zong thought he was right, and appointed him as the head of the cadre.

古文：秋，七月，魏知古告公主欲以是月四日作乱，令元楷、慈以羽林兵突入武德殿，怀贞、至忠、羲等于南牙举兵应之。
现代文：秋季七月，魏知古告发太平公主计划在本月四日发动叛乱，指使常元楷、李慈率领羽林军突入武德殿，另派窦怀贞、萧至忠、岑羲等人在南牙举兵响应。
English: In the autumn of July, Wei Zhigu announced that the Taiping princess planned to launch a rebellion on the 4th of this month, and ordered Changyuan Kai and Li Ci to lead the Uilin army to storm the Wude Hall, and sent Dou Huai Zhen, Xiao Zhizhong, Zou and others to raise troops in Nanya to respond.

古文：上乃与岐王范、薛王业、郭元振及龙武将军王毛仲、殿中少监姜皎、太仆少卿李令问、尚乘奉御王守一、内给事高力士、果毅李守德等定计诛之。
现代文：唐玄宗于是与岐王李范、薛王李业、郭元振以及龙武将军王毛仲、殿中少监姜皎、太仆少卿李令问、尚乘奉御王守一、内给事高力士、果毅李守德等人定计率先下手诛除太平公主集团。
English: Therefore, Tang Xuan Zong, together with Qi Wang Li Fan, Xue King Liye, Guo Yuan Zhen, Longwu General Wang Maozhong, Court Junior Warden Jiang Qian, Subordinate Servant Junior Secretary Li Ling Qian, Shang Rong Wang Shou I, Inner Assistant Gao Lixi, Guo Yi Li Shou De and others, took the lead in eliminating the Taiping Princess Group.

古文：皎，謩之曾孙；令问，靖弟客师之孙；守一，仁皎之子；力士，潘州人也。
现代文：姜皎是姜的曾孙；李令问是李靖之弟李客师的孙子；王守一是王仁皎的儿子；高力士是潘州人。
English: Jiang Rong is the great-grandson of Jiang; Li Lingyan is the grandson of Li Jing's brother Li Kejun; Wang Shouyi is the son of Wang Renyi; and Gao Lisi is from Panzhou.

古文：甲子，上因王毛仲取闲厩马及兵三百馀人，与同谋十馀人，自武德殿入虔化门，召元楷、慈，先斩之，擒膺福、猷于内客省以出，执至忠、羲于朝堂，皆斩之。
现代文：甲子，唐玄宗通过王毛仲调用闲厩中的马匹以及禁兵三百余人，从武德殿进入虔化门，召见常元楷和李慈二人先将他们斩首，在内客省逮捕了贾膺福和李猷并将他们带出，又在朝堂上逮捕了萧至忠和岑羲，下令将上述四人一起斩首。
English: First son, Tang Xuan Zong, through Wang Maozhong, summoned the horses in the idle stables and more than 300 banned soldiers, entered the Qianhua Gate from the Wude Hall, summoned Changyuan Kai and Li Ci to behead them first, arrested Jia Qianfu and Li Qian in Neige Province and brought them out, and arrested Xiao Zhizhong and Yao in the imperial court, and ordered the beheading of the above four people together.

古文：怀贞逃入沟中，自缢死，戮其尸，改姓曰毒。
现代文：窦怀贞逃入城壕之中自缢而死，唐玄宗下令斩戮他的尸休，并将他的姓改为毒氏。
English: Dou Huai Zhen fled into a trench and hanged himself to death. Emperor Xuanzong ordered his body to be chopped up and his surname to be changed to Zuo.

古文：上皇闻变，登承天门楼。
现代文：太上皇唐睿宗听到事变发生的消息后，登上了承天门的门楼。
English: After hearing the news of the incident, Emperor Tang Ruizong ascended the gate tower of the Gate of Heaven.

古文：郭元振奏，皇帝前奉诰诛窦怀贞等，无他也。
现代文：郭元振上奏唐睿宗道： 皇帝只是奉太上皇诰命诛杀窦怀贞等奸臣逆党，并没有发生什么其他的事。 
English: Guo Yuanzhen plays the role of Tang Ruizong: The emperor just asked the empress dowager to kill Dou Huai Zhen and other treacherous vassals, and nothing else happened.

古文：上寻至楼上，上皇乃下诰罪状怀贞等，因赦天下，惟逆人亲党不赦。
现代文：玄宗皇帝也随后来到门楼之上，唐睿宗于是颁发诰命列举窦怀贞等人的罪状，并大赦天下，只是逆臣的亲属党羽不在赦免之列。
English: Emperor Xuanzong also came to the gate tower afterwards. Tang Ruizong then issued an edict to enumerate the crimes of Dou Huai Zhen and others, and granted a general amnesty to the world, except that the relatives and party members of the rebellious ministers were not included in the amnesty.

古文：薛稷赐死于万年狱。
现代文：薛稷被赐死在万年县狱中。
English: Xue Yao was sentenced to die in a county prison for 10,000 years.

古文：乙丑，上皇诰： 自今军国政刑，一皆取皇帝处分。
现代文：乙丑，太上皇唐睿宗发布诰命： 从现在起，所有军国政务与刑赏教化，均由皇帝处理。
English: On the second day of the second month, Emperor Tang Ruizong issued the following order: From now on, all military affairs, state affairs, and punishment, reward, and education are to be handled by the emperor.

古文：朕方无为养志，以遂素心。 
现代文：朕正好清静无为，修心养性，以遂平生夙愿。 
English: I just happen to be calm and inactive, cultivate my mind and nurture my character, so that I can achieve my lifelong dream.

古文：是日，徙居百福殿。
现代文：在这一天，太上皇移居到百福殿居住。
English: On this day, the emperor moved to the residence of Baifu.

古文：太平公主逃入山寺，三日乃出，赐死于家，公主诸子及党与死者数十人。
现代文：太平公主逃入山寺，直到事发三天以后才出来，被唐玄宗下诏赐死在她自己的家中，她的儿子以及党羽被处死的达数十人。
English: Princess Taiping fled into a mountain temple and did not come out until three days after the incident. She was given the death sentence by Emperor Tang Xuanzong in her own home. Her son and dozens of party members were executed.

古文：薛崇简以数谏其母被挞，特免死，赐姓李，官爵如故。
现代文：薛崇简因为平日屡次谏阻其母太平公主而受到责打，所以例外地被免于死刑，唐玄守将他赐姓为李氏，并准许他留任原职。
English: Xue Chongjian was spared the death penalty on an exceptional basis because he was beaten for repeatedly obstructing his mother, Princess Taiping, from taking office. Tang Xuan gave him the surname Li and allowed him to remain in his original post.

古文：籍公主家，财货山积，珍物侔于御府，厩牧羊马、田园息钱，收之数年不尽。
现代文：唐玄宗还下令将太平公主的所有财产没收充分，在抄家时发现公主家中的财物堆积如山，珍宝器玩可以与皇家府库媲美，厩中牧养的羊马、拥有的田地园林和放债应得的利息，几年也没收不完。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also ordered the confiscation of all the property of the Taiping Princess. When the house was searched, it was found that the property of the princess's family was piled up like a mountain, the precious utensils could be compared to the royal treasury, the sheep and horses shepherded in the stables, the fields and gardens owned, and the interest earned by the money lenders. It was not completed for several years.

古文：慧范家产亦数十万缗。
现代文：胡僧慧范也拥有家产达数十万缗。
English: Hu Monk Hui Fan also has a family income of hundreds of thousands of baht.

古文：改新兴王晋之姓曰厉。
现代文：唐玄宗又下令将新兴王李晋的姓氏改为厉。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also ordered that the surname of the new king, Li Jin, be changed to Li.

古文：初，上谋诛窦怀贞等，召崔湜，将托以心腹。
现代文：当初，唐玄宗在筹画诛杀窦怀贞等人时，曾召见崔，想将他当作心腹。
English: At first, Tang Xuan Zong had summoned Cui when he was planning to kill Dou Huai Zhen and others, and wanted to use him as a confidant.

古文：湜弟涤谓湜曰： 主上有问，勿有所隐。 
现代文：崔的弟弟崔涤对他说： 无论皇帝问到你什么，你都不能有所隐瞒。 
English: Cui's younger brother, Cui Ya, said to him, "No matter what the emperor asks you, you cannot hide anything.

古文：湜不从。
现代文：崔没有采纳。
English: Cui did not accept.

古文：怀贞等既诛，湜与右丞卢藏用俱坐私侍太平公主，湜流窦州，藏用流泷州。
现代文：窦怀贞等人被杀后，崔与尚书右丞卢藏用两人都因私侍太平公主获罪，崔被流放到窦州，卢藏用被流放到泷州。
English: After Dou Huai Zhen and others were killed, Cui and Shang Shuyuan Lu Zangyong were both convicted of serving Princess Taiping, Cui was exiled to Douzhou, and Lu Zangyong was exiled to Ganzhou.

古文：新兴王晋临刑叹曰： 本为此谋者崔湜，今吾死湜生，不亦冤乎！ 
现代文：新兴王李晋临刑之际叹道： 本来提出这个主意的人是崔，现在我被处死，崔反而能够保住性命，这不是天大的冤枉吗！ 
English: When Li Jin, the new king, was about to be executed, he lamented: The person who originally proposed this idea was Cui. Now I am being executed, but Cui is able to save his life. Isn't this a huge injustice?

古文：会有司鞫宫人元氏，元氏引湜同谋进毒，乃追赐死于荆州。
现代文：适逢有关部门审讯宫女元氏，元氏供出崔与她同谋投毒谋害玄宗，唐玄宗于是重新下诏将崔赐死在他流放途中经过的荆州。
English: At the right time, the relevant departments were interrogating the palace maiden Yuan, and Yuan confessed that Cui and her accomplice had plotted to poison and kill Xuanzong. Tang Xuanzong then renewed his edict to have Cui put to death in Jingzhou, which he passed through on his way to exile.

古文：薛稷之子伯阳以尚主免死，流岭南，于道自杀。
现代文：薛稷的儿子薛伯阳由于娶公主为妻的缘故而被免于处死，流放岭南，他在流放途中自杀身死。
English: Xue Bing's son Xue Boyang was spared execution and exiled to Lingnan for marrying a princess. He committed suicide on the way to exile.

古文：初，太平公主与其党谋废立，窦怀贞、萧至忠、岑羲、崔湜皆以为然，陆象先独以为不可。
现代文：当初在太平公主与其党羽谋划废掉玄宗皇帝之时，窦怀贞、萧至忠、岑羲、崔等人都赞成此举，只有陆象先认为这样做不行。
English: At the time when Princess Taiping and her followers plotted to depose Emperor Xuanzong, Dou Huaizhen, Xiao Zhizhong, Zhai and Cui were all in favor of the move, but only Lu Xiangxian thought it was unacceptable.

古文：公主曰： 废长立少，已为不顺；且又失德，若之何不去？ 
现代文：太平公主说： 太上皇废长立少，已经不合道理，再加上皇帝失德，为什么不能将他废掉呢！ 
English: Princess Taiping said, "It is unreasonable for the emperor to abolish the emperor's position. Coupled with the emperor's immorality, why can't he be abolished?"

古文：象先曰： 既以功立，当以罪废。
现代文：陆象先说： 既然皇帝当初是以立有大功而被立为太子的，那么就只能以获罪为由将其废黜。
English: Lu Xiang said first: Since the emperor was originally established as the crown prince with great merit, then he can only be deposed on the grounds of being convicted.

古文：今实无罪，象先终不敢从。 
现代文：现在皇帝实际上没有罪，我终究不敢苟同。 
English: Now the emperor is actually not guilty, after all, I do not agree.

古文：公主怒而去。
现代文：太平公主十分生气地离去。
English: Princess Taiping left very angry.

古文：上既诛怀贞等，召象先谓曰： 岁寒知松柏，信哉！ 
现代文：唐玄宗诛杀窦怀贞等人以后，召见陆象先说： 岁寒然后知松柏之后凋。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty killed Dou Huai Zhen and others, he summoned Lu Xiang and said, "The year is cold, and the pine tree is withered.

古文：时穷治公主枝党，当坐者众，象先密为申理，所全甚多；然未尝自言，当时无知者。
现代文：这句话真是至理名言！ 当时正值严厉惩处太平公主党羽的时候，应当入狱受罚的人非常之多，陆象先悄悄地为这些人申明冤屈，很多人因而得以保全性命，但他从未自己说起过这些事，当时也没有人知道此事内情。
English: At that time, when the Taiping Princess Party was being severely punished, there were so many people who should have been sent to prison. Lu Xiang first quietly affirmed the grievances for these people, and many people were able to save their lives, but he never said these things himself, and no one knew the inside story at the time.

古文：百官素为公主所善及恶之者，或黜或陟，终岁不尽。
现代文：朝廷百官中平素受到太平公主的善待或者憎恶的人，此时有的被降职贬黜，有的受到提拔重用，这项工作总共持续了一年之久，仍未全部做完。
English: Among the hundreds of officials of the Imperial Court who were generally treated kindly or abominably by Princess Taiping, at this time some were demoted or demoted, and some were promoted and reused. This work lasted for a total of one year and has not yet been completed.

古文：丁卯，上御承天门楼，赦天下。
现代文：丁卯，唐玄宗亲自来到承天门楼，发布诏命，大赦天下。
English: Dingwu, Tang Xuan Zong personally came to the gate tower of Chengdu, issued an imperial edict, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：己巳，赏功臣郭元振等官爵、第舍、金帛有差。以高力士为右监门将军，知内侍省事。
现代文：己巳，唐玄宗赏赐有功之臣郭元振等人大小不等的官职爵位以及数量不同的田宅钱物，还任命高力士为右监门将军，让他主持内侍省事务。
English: It is said that Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty rewarded meritorious vassals such as Guo Yuan Zhen with various official ranks and titles as well as various amounts of land, houses and money. He also appointed Gao Lixi as the right guard gate general and let him preside over the affairs of the Inner Court.

古文：初，太宗定制，内侍省不置三品官，黄衣廪食，守门传命而已。
现代文：当初唐太宗曾定下制度，内侍省不设置三品官，内侍们无非是身着黄色朝服，领取皇家发放的禄米，做一些把守宫门、传达诏命之类的事情。
English: At the beginning of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Taizong had set up a system in which the Ministry of the Inner Palace did not set up a third-rank official. The inner chambermaids were nothing more than wearing yellow imperial robes, receiving royally issued rupees, and doing things such as guarding the palace gate and conveying imperial edicts.

古文：天后虽女主，宦官亦不用事。
现代文：武则天虽是女皇帝，宦官也不执掌朝政。
English: Although Wu Zetian was a female emperor, eunuchs did not hold the reins of imperial government.

古文：中宗时，嬖幸猥多，宦官七品以上至千馀人，然衣绯者尚寡。
现代文：唐中宗时期，受到他亲信宠爱的近臣很多，以至于级别在七品以上的宦官达一千余人，但是身着绯色朝服的宦官尚不多见。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, there were many courtiers who were favored by his close friends, so much so that there were more than a thousand eunuchs with the rank of Shichipon or higher. However, eunuchs wearing navy-colored imperial robes were still rare.

古文：上在籓邸，力士倾心奉之，及为太子，奏为内给事，至是以诛萧、岑功赏之。
现代文：唐玄宗任亲王的时候，高力士就对他倾心事奉，玄宗被立为太子之后，便奏请唐睿宗任命高力士为内给事，此次因诛除萧至忠、岑羲等人有功，唐玄宗又赐给他高官。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong was the prince, Gao Lixi devotedly served him. After Xuan Zong was installed as the prince, he asked Tang Ruizong to appoint Gao Lixi as an internal official. This time, Tang Xuan Zong gave Gao Lixi a high-ranking position for his contribution to the removal of Xiao Zhizhong, Zou and others.

古文：是后宦官稍增至三千馀人，除三品将军者浸多，衣绯、紫至千馀人，宦官之盛自此始。
现代文：从此以后宦官逐渐增加到三千多人，被任命为三品将军的人也越来越多，穿红、紫朝服的达到一千余人，宦官势力从此膨胀起来。
English: Since then, the number of eunuchs has gradually increased to more than three thousand, and more and more people have been appointed as three-rank generals, with more than one thousand people wearing red and purple imperial robes. The power of eunuchs has expanded since then.

古文：壬申，遣益州长史毕构等六人宣抚十道。
现代文：壬申，唐玄宗派遣益州长史毕构等六人安抚全国十道。
English: Jinshin, Tang Xuan Zong dispatched six people including Governor Yi Shi Bi Jiao to pacify the ten provinces across the country.

古文：乙亥，以左丞张说为中书令。
现代文：乙亥，唐玄宗任命尚书左丞张说为中书令。
English: Eihei, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Shangshu Zuojo Zhang as the Censer.

古文：庚辰，中书侍郎、同平章事陆象先罢为益州长史、剑南按察使。
现代文：庚辰，中书侍郎、同平章事陆象先被贬为益州长史、剑南按察使。
English: Geng Chen, the chancellor of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and Tongping Zhang were first demoted to governor of Yixing Province and inspector of Jiannan Province respectively.

古文：八月，癸巳，以封州流人刘幽求为左仆射、平章军国大事。
现代文：八月癸巳，唐玄宗任命被流放到封州去的刘幽求为尚书左仆射、平章军国大事。
English: At the end of August, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Liu Yucuo, who had been exiled to Fenzhou, to be Shangshu's right-hand man, and Pingzhang to be in charge of military affairs.

古文：丙辰，突厥可汗默啜遣其子杨我支来求昏；丁巳，许以蜀王女南和县主妻之。
现代文：丙辰，突厥可汗默啜派遣他的儿子杨我支前来求婚；丁巳，唐玄宗答应将蜀王之女南和县主嫁给默啜。
English: In the 4th century, the Turkic khan Misuo sent his son, Yang Bashi, to propose marriage; in the 5th century, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang promised to marry the daughter of King Shu, Nan He, to Misuo.

古文：中宗之崩也，同中书门下三品李峤密表韦后，请出相王诸子于外。
现代文：唐中宗驾崩之后，同中书门下三品李峤秘密地向韦皇后上表，请求将相王李旦的儿子们外放出京。
English: After the death of Tang Zhongzong, the third-ranked scholar Li Xi secretly petitioned the Empress Wei to let the sons of King Li Dan leave Beijing.

古文：上即位，于禁中得其表，以示侍臣。
现代文：唐玄宗即位之后，在宫中发现了李峤的奏表，并将它拿给侍臣们传看。
English: After Emperor Tang Xuan Zong ascended to the throne, he found Li Xi's music stand in the palace and showed it to his courtiers.

古文：峤时以特进致仕，或请诛之，张说曰： 峤虽不识逆顺，然为当时之谋则忠矣。 
现代文：李峤当时已经以特进的资格退休，有人建议将李峤处死，张说说： 李峤虽然没能分清善恶忠奸，但是他为当时的执政者出谋献策却也可以称得上是竭忠尽智了。 
English: At that time, Li Qian had already retired with the qualification of special advancement. Some people suggested that Li Qian should be put to death. Zhang said: Although Li Qian could not distinguish between good and evil, but he could also be said to be loyal and wise for the then ruler.

古文：上然之。
现代文：唐玄宗认为他说的对。
English: She wrote a very elegant and beautiful piece of music, and the emperor gladly accepted her suggestion.

古文：九月，壬戌，以峤子率更令畅为虔州刺史，令峤随畅之官。
现代文：九月壬戌，唐玄宗任命李峤之子率更令李畅为虔州刺史，并下令李峤随同其子赴任。
English: In September of the same year, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Li Chang, the son of Li Xuan, as the official historian of Qianzhou, and ordered Li Xuan to accompany his son to the post.

古文：庚午，以刘幽求同中书门下三品。
现代文：庚午，唐玄宗任命刘幽求为同中书门下三品。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed Liu Yucui as the third grade of the same middle school.

古文：丙戌，复置右御史台，督察诸州，罢诸道按察使。
现代文：丙戌，唐玄宗下诏恢复右御史台，负责对各州的督察，同时废除诸道按察使。
English: At the same time, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to restore the Right Imperial Historian's Office, which was responsible for inspecting each state, and abolished the inspectors for each province.

古文：冬，十月，辛卯，引见京畿县令，戒以岁饥惠养黎元之意。
现代文：冬季十月，辛卯，唐玄宗召见京县及畿县县令，告诫他们在饥荒之年应当关怀扶助黎民百姓。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Xinwu and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang summoned the prefectural governors of Jing County and Jixian County, warning them that in the year of famine, they should care for and support the people of Lai.

古文：己亥，上幸新丰；癸卯，讲武于骊山之下，征兵二十万，旌旗连亘五十馀里。
现代文：己亥，唐玄宗来到新丰。癸卯，唐玄宗与文武官员在骊山脚下讲习武事，共调集了兵士二十多万，旌旗连绵达五十余里。
English: At that time, Tang Xuan Zong came to Xinfeng. At the same time, Tang Xuan Zong and civil and military officials held martial arts training at the foot of Lushan Mountain. A total of more than 200,000 soldiers were mobilized, and the banner stretched for more than 50 miles.

古文：以军容不整，坐兵部尚书郭元振于纛下，将斩之。
现代文：由于军容不整的缘故，唐玄宗让兵部尚书郭元振跪在军中的大旗之下，准备将其斩首。
English: Due to the disarray of the army, Tang Xuan Zong made the military commander Guo Yuan Zhen kneel under the flag of the army and prepared to behead him.

古文：刘幽求、张说跪于马前谏曰： 元振有大功于社稷，不可杀。 
现代文：刘幽求、张说跪在玄宗的马前进谏说： 郭元振曾为大唐的江山社稷立下大功，不能杀。 
English: Liu Yucu and Zhang said that they knelt in front of the horse of Xuanzong and said: Guo Yuanzhen once made great contributions to the Jiangshan community of the Great Tang Dynasty, and cannot be killed.

古文：乃流新州。
现代文：唐玄宗于是将郭元振流放到新州。
English: Tang Xuan Zong then exiled Guo Yuan Zhen to Xinzhou.

古文：斩给事中、知礼仪事唐绍，以其制军礼不肃故也。
现代文：唐玄宗还下令将给事中、知礼仪事唐绍斩首，原因是他所制定的军礼不够整肃。
English: Tang Xuan Zong also ordered the beheading of Tang Shao, who was in charge of ceremony and etiquette, on the grounds that the military etiquette he had established was not strict enough.

古文：上始欲立威，亦无杀绍之意，金吾卫将军李邈遽宣敕斩之。
现代文：其实唐玄宗原本只是打算借此树立自己的声威，并没有杀死唐绍的意思，只是由于金吾卫将军李邈急忙宣布了将其斩首的敕命，所以才弄假成真。
English: In fact, Tang Xuan Zong originally only intended to use this to establish his prestige, and did not mean to kill Tang Shao. It was only because King Wuwei's general Li Qian hastily announced his death by beheading that the fake became real.

古文：上寻罢邈官，废弃终身。
现代文：事后不久唐玄宗便罢免了李邈的职务，将他废弃终身。
English: Soon after the incident, Tang Xuan Zong dismissed Li Yao from his post and banned him for life.

古文：时二大臣得罪，诸军多震慑失次，惟左军节度薛讷、朔方道大总管解琬二军不动，上遣轻骑召之，皆不得入其陈。
现代文：当时由于郭元振、唐绍这两位大臣都受惩处，各路军马大多震惊失措，队形凌乱，只有左军节度薛讷和朔方道大总管解琬二人所领军兵岿然不动，唐玄宗派遣轻装的骑兵宣召他们前来，但这些使者都无法进入他们的阵营。
English: At that time, because Guo Yuan Zhen and Tang Shao, the two ministers, were punished, most of the horses of the various armies were shocked and confused, and the formation was disorderly. Only the two leaders of the Left Army, Jiedu Xuan'e and Shuo Fangdao, remained motionless. Tang Xuan Zong sent light cavalry to summon them, but these messengers could not enter their camp.

古文：上深叹美，慰勉之。
现代文：唐玄宗对他们二人十分赞赏，慰问勉励了他们一番。
English: Tang Xuan Zong fully appreciated the two of them, and the condolences encouraged them the most.

古文：甲辰，猎于渭川。
现代文：甲辰，唐玄宗在渭川狩猎。
English: On the 14th, they went hunting in the Li River.

古文：上欲以同州刺史姚元之为相，张说疾之，使御史大夫赵彦昭弹之，上不纳。
现代文：唐玄宗想任用同州刺史姚元之为宰相，张说一向忌恨姚元之，便指使御史大夫赵彦昭弹劾他，但唐玄宗不理睬。
English: Tang Xuan Zong wanted to appoint Yao Yuan, the governor of the same province, as prime minister. Zhang said that he had always hated Yao Yuan, so he ordered the governor Zhao Yan Zhao to impeach him, but Tang Xuan Zong ignored him.

古文：又使殿中监姜皎言于上曰： 陛下常欲择河东总管而难其人，臣今得之矣。 
现代文：张说又指使殿中监姜皎向唐玄宗进言道： 陛下早就想任命一位河东总管，却苦于找不到合适的人选，臣现在发现了这样一位称职的人。 
English: Zhang said that he also instructed the palace supervisor Jiang Wei to make a suggestion to Tang Xuanzong: His Majesty has long wanted to appoint a chief administrator of Hedong, but struggled to find a suitable candidate. The minister has now found such a competent person.

古文：上问为谁，皎曰： 姚元之文武全才，真其人也。 
现代文：唐玄宗问他这个人是谁，姜皎回答说： 姚元之文武全才，是担任河东总管的合适人选。 
English: Tang Xuanzong asked him who this person was, and Jiang Wei replied: Yao Yuan's literary and military talent is the right person to serve as the chief administrator of Hedong.

古文：上曰： 此张说之意也，汝何得面欺，罪当死！ 
现代文：唐玄宗说： 这是张说的主意，你竟敢当面欺骗朕，应当处以死刑！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong said, "This is Zhang's idea. How dare you deceive me in front of my face! You should be sentenced to death!"

古文：皎叩头首服，上即遣中使召元之诣行在。
现代文：姜皎赶忙叩头自首谢罪，唐玄宗当即派遣宦者将姚元之征召到渭川来。
English: Jiang Yao hurriedly prostrated himself in thanksgiving, and Tang Xuan Zong immediately sent an envoy to recruit Yao Yuan to Luchuan.

古文：既至，上方猎，引见，即拜兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：姚元之抵达后，唐玄宗正在狩猎，马上召见了他，并任命他为兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: After Yao Yuan's arrival, Tang Xuan Zong was hunting. He summoned him immediately and appointed him as the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Third Rank of the Third Rank.

古文：元之吏事明敏，三为宰相，皆兼兵部尚书，缘边屯戍斥候，士马储械，无不默记。
现代文：姚元之处理政务精明干练，曾三次担任宰相，每次都兼任兵部尚书，他对于边境地区的戍兵驻屯营地和侦察了望哨所，以及士卒马匹仓储器械的数量，无不默默地记在心里。
English: Yao Yuanzhi's handling of government affairs was astute and capable. He served as prime minister three times, and each time he also served as the secretary of the military department. He kept in mind the number of garrison camps and reconnaissance outposts in the border areas, as well as the storage devices for soldiers and horses.

古文：上初即位，励精为治，每事访于元之。元之应答如响，同僚皆唯诺而已，故上专委任之。
现代文：唐玄宗刚刚即位，励精图治，遇事都要先听听姚元之的意见，元之也是每次都能对答如流，他的同僚则只能唯唯诺诺而已，所以玄宗也就一心信任他。
English: Tang Xuan Zong had just ascended the throne and was working hard to govern. In case of emergency, he had to listen to Yao Yuan's opinion first. Yuan Zong was always able to answer questions fluently, while his colleagues could only agree, so Xuan Zong trusted him wholeheartedly.

古文：元之请抑权幸，爱爵赏，纳谏诤，却贡献，不与群臣亵狎；上皆纳之。
现代文：姚元之请求唐玄宗削夺受宠的权贵之家的权势，珍惜手中的爵禄赏赐，采纳敢于犯颜直谏的臣子的建议，不按受臣下进献的贡品，不与群臣开一些轻慢无礼的玩笑。
English: Yao Yuan's request to Tang Xuan Zong was to reduce the power of the favored powerful family, cherish the peerage rewards in his hands, adopt the suggestions of the courtiers who dared to be honest, not to follow the tributes presented by the courtiers, and not to make some rude jokes with the courtiers.

古文：乙巳，车驾还京师。
现代文：唐玄宗对他的上述建议都一一采纳。乙巳，唐玄宗返回京城。
English: Suddenly, Tang Gaozong drove back to Beijing Shi Chang'an.

古文：姚元之尝奏请序进郎吏，上仰视殿屋，元之再三言之，终不应；元之惧，趋出。
现代文：姚元之曾经奏请依照顺序提拔任用郎吏，玄宗却只是盯着宫殿的屋顶不作声，姚元之几次重复，玄宗始终一言不发。姚元之感到十分恐惧，便急忙退出。
English: Yao Yuanzhi once asked for the promotion and appointment of officials in order, but Xuanzong just stared at the roof of the palace and remained silent. Yao Yuanzhi repeated this several times, but Xuanzong never said a word. Yao Yuanzhi felt very afraid and hurriedly withdrew.

古文：罢朝，高力士谏曰： 陛下新总万机，宰臣奏事，当面加可否，奈何一不省察！ 
现代文：当日罢朝以后，高力士向玄宗进谏道： 陛下刚刚总理天下大事，宰臣上奏言事，就应当面表明您自己的态度，为什么您对姚元之的建议不闻不问、一言不发呢！ 
English: After the strike on the same day, Gao Lixi approached Xuanzong and said: Your Majesty, the Prime Minister has just delivered a speech on a major event in the world, so you should show your own attitude face to face. Why don't you listen to Yao Yuan's suggestion, ask questions, or say a word?

古文：上曰： 朕任元之以庶政，大事当奏闻共议之；郎吏卑秩，乃一一以烦朕邪？ 
现代文：唐玄宗回答说： 朕让姚元之总理朝廷庶政，遇有军政大事可以当面奏闻共同的商议；郎吏是小官，这样的事也要一一打扰朕吗！ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong replied: I let Yao Yuan's prime minister handle the general affairs of the imperial court. In the event of a major military or political event, we can have a face-to-face discussion. The steward is a minor official. Should such a thing bother me one by one?

古文：会力士宣事至省中，为元之道上语，元之乃喜。
现代文：适逢高力士奉旨到省中宣谕诏命，将玄宗的话转达给了姚元之，姚元之这才转忧为喜。
English: At the right time, Gao Lixi was ordered to go to the provincial center to announce the edict, and conveyed the words of Xuanzong to Yao Yuanzhi. This made Yao Yuanzhi happy.

古文：闻者皆服上识君人之体。
现代文：知道这件事的人无不叹服玄宗深明为君之道。
English: People who know about this matter are all in awe of Xuanzong Shengming's way of being king.

古文：左拾遗曲江张九龄，以元之有重望，为上所信任，奏记劝其远谄躁，进纯厚，其略曰： 任人当才，为政大体，与之共理，无出此途。
现代文：左拾遗曲江县人张九龄，鉴于姚元之声望极高，又受到唐玄宗的信任和重用，所以写给了他一封信，劝他疏远阿谀奉承急于进取之徒，提拔任用纯正忠厚之士，这封信的大意是： 任用的人必须有才能，是治理国家的基本原则，与有才能的人共同处理政事，治理国家不能超越这一途径。
English: In view of Yao Yuan's extremely high reputation and his trust and heavy use by Tang Xuanzong, Zhang Jiuling, a resident of Qujiang County, wrote a letter to him, advising him to distance himself from the flattery of the enterprising people and promote the appointment of pure and loyal people. The gist of the letter was: The person appointed must have talent, which is the basic principle of governing the country. To deal with political affairs with talented people, governing the country cannot go beyond this way.

古文：而向之用才，非无知人之鉴，其所以失溺，在缘情之举。 
现代文：以往在任用贤才的时候，掌权者并非不具备识别人才的本领，之所以存在很多弊端，是由于考虑私情的缘故。 
English: In the past, when appointing talents, those in power did not lack the ability to identify talents. The reason why there are many drawbacks is due to the consideration of personal feelings.

古文：又曰： 自君侯职相国之重，持用人之权，而浅中弱植之徒，已延颈企踵而至，谄亲戚以求誉，媚宾客以取容，其间岂不有才，所失在于无耻。 
现代文：信中还说： 自从您担任宰相职务，执掌用人的大权以来，那些浅薄鄙陋、软弱无能的人，已经伸长了脖子，踮起了脚跟，向您围拢过来，他们或者谄媚您的亲戚以求得他们的赞誉，或者讨好您的宾客以取悦他们。我相信他们中间也许会有有才能的人，但认为他们实在是太无耻了。 
English: The letter also said: "Since you assumed the position of prime minister and wielded the great power of employment, those shallow, despicable, weak and incompetent people have stretched their necks and raised their heels to surround you, they either flatter your relatives to get their praise, or flatter your guests to please them. I believe there may be talented people among them, but I think they are too shameless.

古文：元之嘉纳其言。
现代文：姚元之十分赞赏他的建议，并予以采纳。
English: Yao Yuanzhi fully appreciated his suggestion and adopted it.

古文：新兴王晋之诛也，僚吏皆奔散，惟司功李捴步从，不失在官之礼，仍哭其尸。
现代文：在新兴王李晋被处斩的时候，他原来的部属纷纷逃散，只有司功李一人徒步跟随在他身边，没有改变当属官时的礼节，并在行刑后对故主的尸体放声痛哭。
English: When the new king, Li Jin, was executed, his former subordinates fled in droves. Only Shigong Li followed him on foot, did not change the etiquette of being an official, and wept loudly over the body of the deceased after the execution.

古文：姚元之闻之，曰： 栾布之俦也。 
现代文：姚元之听说这件事后赞道： 这才是像栾布那样的忠义之士啊！ 
English: After Yao Yuanzhi heard about this, he praised: This is a loyal person like Zibo!

古文：及为相，擢为尚书郎。
现代文：现在姚元之又担任了宰相职务，便将李提升为尚书郎。
English: Now that Yao Yuanzhi has assumed the post of prime minister, he has promoted Li to Shang Shulang.

古文：己酉，以刑部尚书赵彦昭为朔方道大总管。
现代文：己酉，唐玄宗任命刑部尚书赵彦昭为朔方道大总管。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang appointed the head of the Criminal Law Department, Shangshu Zhao Yan Zhao, as the chief administrator of the Shuo Fang Dao.

古文：十一月，乙丑，刘幽求兼侍中。
现代文：十一月，乙丑，刘幽求兼任侍中。
English: In November, the second ugly, Liu Yucui also served as an attendant.

古文：辛巳，群臣上表请加尊号为开元神武皇帝；从之。
现代文：辛巳，群臣上表请求为皇帝加上开元神武皇帝的尊号，唐玄宗同意。
English: Sincerely, Tang Xuan Zong agreed to the request of the ministers to add the honorary title of Emperor Kaiyuan Shenwu to the emperor's name.

古文：戊子，受册。
现代文：戊子，唐玄宗接受群臣进上尊号的册书。
English: Wu Zi, Tang Xuan Zong accepted the record book of the courtiers entering the honorific title.

古文：中书侍郎王琚为上所亲厚，群臣莫及。
现代文：中书侍郎王琚受到唐玄宗的亲近和厚爱，没有哪一个大臣能够与他相比。
English: Wang Yao, the secretary of the Central Committee, was very close to and loved by Emperor Xuanzong of Tang, and no other minister can be compared to him.

古文：每进见，侍笑语，逮夜方出。或时休沐，往往遣中使召之。
现代文：每次进见皇帝时，王琚都要陪玄宗谈笑，直到晚上才退出；有时休假时，也往往要派宦官宣召他入宫相会。
English: Every time he went to see the emperor, Wang Yao had to accompany Xuanzong to talk and laugh, and did not leave until the evening; sometimes when he was on vacation, he often had to send eunuchs to summon him to the palace for a meeting.

古文：或言于上曰： 王琚权谲纵横之才，可与之定祸乱，难与之守承平。 
现代文：有人对唐玄宗进言道： 王琚精通权略，是一位机巧诡诈的纵横之士，陛下可以与他一起平定祸乱，却难以与他共同治理承平之世。 
English: Some people said to Tang Xuan Zong: Wang Xuan is proficient in power strategy, and is a cunning and devious person. Your Majesty can work with him to quell the calamity, but it is difficult to govern the world of Heping together with him.

古文：上由是浸疏之。
现代文：唐玄宗因此开始逐渐疏远王琚。
English: As a result, Emperor Xuanzong of Tang began to gradually alienate Wang Xi.

古文：是月，命琚兼御史大夫，按行北边诸军。
现代文：在这个月里，玄宗任命他兼任御史大夫，派他到北部边境地区巡察各部队。
English: In this month, Emperor Xuanzong appointed him to concurrently serve as imperial historian and sent him to the northern border region to inspect the troops.

古文：十二月，庚寅，赦天下，改元。
现代文：十二月，庚寅，唐玄宗下诏大赦天下，改年号为开元。
English: In December, Emperor Go-In and Emperor Xuanzong of Tang issued an edict of amnesty, and the year was changed to the first year of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：尚书左、右仆射为左、右丞相；中书省为紫微省；门下省为黄门省，侍中为监；雍州为京兆府，洛州为河南府，长史为尹，司马为少尹。
现代文：同时下诏改尚书左、右仆射为左、右丞相；改中书省为紫微省；改门下省为黄门省，门下侍中为黄门监；改雍州为京兆府，洛州为河南府，州的长史改称为尹，州的司马改称为少尹。
English: At the same time, the lower zhao was changed to Shangshu Zuo, the right minion was changed to Zuo, the right minion was changed to Zuo; the middle zhuo was changed to Ziwei; the lower zhou was changed to Huangmen; the lower attendant was changed to Huangmen Guan; the Yongzhou was changed to Jingzhao; the Luozhou was changed to Henan; the long history of the state was changed to Yin; and the Sima of the state was changed to Shao Yin.

古文：甲午，吐蕃遣其大臣来求和。
现代文：甲午，吐蕃派遣大臣前来求和。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Tubo dispatched a minister to come and sue for peace.

古文：壬寅，以姚元之兼紫微令。
现代文：壬寅，唐玄宗任命姚元之兼任紫微令。
English: Ren Yin, Tang Xuan Zong appointed Yao Yuanzhi to concurrently serve as Zi Weirong.

古文：元之避开元尊号，复名崇。
现代文：姚元之为避开元神武皇帝尊号，便恢复其原名为姚崇。
English: Yao Yuan Zi avoided the title of Yuan Shenwu Emperor and restored his original name of Yao Chong.

古文：敕： 都督、刺史、都护将之官，皆引面辞毕，侧门取进止。 
现代文：唐玄宗发布敕命： 都督、刺史、都护准备赴任时，都要在引见当面辞别天子后，在左右侧门听候皇帝的旨意。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty issued the following order: When the prefectural governors, provincial governors, and provincial guards prepare to take office, they must listen to the emperor's will at the left and right side doors after bidding farewell to the emperor in person.

古文：姚崇即为相，紫微令张说惧，乃潜诣岐王申款。
现代文：姚崇担任宰相职务以后，紫微令张说感到担忧恐惧，便私下到岐王那里表明自己倾心依附的诚意。
English: After Yao Chong assumed the post of prime minister, Zi Wei said that he was worried and frightened by Zhang Meng, so he privately went to Qi Wang to show his sincerity of devotion.

古文：他日，崇对于便殿，行微蹇。上问： 有足疾乎？ 对曰： 臣有腹心之疾，非足疾也。 
现代文：后来有一天，姚崇在便殿回答唐玄宗的问话时，脚略微有点瘸，唐玄宗问他： 您的脚是不是有毛病？ 姚崇回答道： 臣有心病，没有脚病。 
English: Later, one day, when Yao Chong was answering Tang Xuan Zong's question in the toilet hall, his feet were a little unsteady. Tang Xuan Zong asked him, "Do you have any problems with your feet?" Yao Chong replied, "The minister has a heart disease, not a foot disease."

古文：上问其故。
现代文：玄宗问他到底是怎么回事。
English: Xuanzong asked him what was going on.

古文：对曰： 岐王陛下爱弟，张说为辅臣，而密乘车入王家，恐为所误，故忧之。 
现代文：姚崇答道： 岐王是陛下心爱的弟弟，张说是宰相，却秘密地乘车到岐王的家里去，臣担心岐王会被张说所误，所以心中很是担忧。 
English: Yao Chong replied, "Qi Wang is the beloved younger brother of His Majesty. Zhang said that he was the prime minister, but he secretly took a car to Qi Wang's home. The minister was worried that Qi Wang would be misled by Zhang's words, so he was very worried.

古文：癸丑，说左迁相州刺史。右仆射、同中书门下三品刘幽求亦罢为太子少保。
现代文：癸丑，唐玄宗将张说贬为相州刺史，右仆射、同中书门下三品刘幽求也被免去宰相职务，降职为太子少保。
English: At the same time, Tang Xuan Zong demoted Zhang Xianming to the status of a peer of the State Council, and his right-hand man, Zha, and the third-ranking official, Liu Youkui, were also removed from the post of prime minister and demoted to the post of minor prince.

古文：甲寅，以黄门侍郎卢怀慎同紫微黄门平章事。
现代文：甲寅，唐玄宗任命黄门侍郎卢怀慎为同紫微黄门平章事。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong appointed Lu Huaixin, a servant of the Yellow Gate, as the co-emperor of the Yellow Gate.

