古文：《齐民要术》：凡五谷种子，浥郁则不生；生者亦寻死。
现代文：《齐民要术》：五谷种子，凡是受了潮湿郁热便不会出苗；有的虽然可以出苗，也会很快死掉。
English: "Qiming Yaoshu": grain seeds, if subjected to humidity and heat, will not produce seedlings; although some can produce seedlings, they will soon die.

古文：种杂者，禾则早晚不均；舂复减而难熟。粜卖以杂糅见疵，炊爨失生熟之节，所以特宜存意，不可徒然。
现代文：混杂的种子，出苗必有早晚的不同；用以舂米，则出的米常较少，而且很难舂精熟；拿去出卖，则常因品种混杂，因其瑕疵而受到买方的挑剔；用来煮饭，则不易掌握生熟的火候；所以对收种要特别注意，不可轻率。
English: Mixed seeds, the emergence of seedlings must be different in the morning and evening; when used for glutinous rice, the rice is often less and it is difficult to make it ripe; when sold, it is often due to mixed varieties and is criticized by the buyer because of its defects; when used for cooking, it is not easy to grasp the raw and ripe heat; therefore, special attention should be paid to the harvest and should not be careless.

古文：粟、黍、穄、粱、秫，常岁别收：选好穗纯色者，劁才雕反。刈高悬之，以拟明年种子。
现代文：粟谷、黍子、穄子、粱米、秫米等种子，每年都要分别收取：选取长得好的纯色的穗子，劁才雕反刈下来，悬挂得高高的，作为来年的种子。
English: The seeds of millet, hazelnut, hazelnut, glutinous rice, glutinous rice and so on should be collected separately every year: the well-grown, pure-colored spikes should be selected, the stalks should be carved and cut down, and then hung high as seeds for the next year.

古文：将种前二十许日，开，水洮，浮秕去，则无莠。
现代文：将要下种前二十日左右，取出，用水淘洗，淘去浮在水面的秕谷草籽，便会不生杂草。
English: About 20 days before planting, take out and wash with water to remove the floating eucalyptus seeds, and there will be no weeds.

古文：即晒令燥，种之。
现代文：随即晒干，便可以进行播种。
English: They are then dried and can be sown.

古文：《氾胜之书》曰：牵马令就谷堆食数口，以马践过为种，无好妨等虫也。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：牵马让它就着谷堆吃上几口，然后用被马践踏过的谷子作种，可以不生虸蚄等虫。
English: "The Book of Overwhelming Victory" says: Let the horse lead the horse to eat a few mouthfuls of the pile of grain, and then use the grain that has been trampled by the horse to sow seeds, so that maggots and other insects do not grow.

古文：又种伤湿郁热，则生虫也。
现代文：一说，谷种受了浥湿和郁热也会生虫。
English: First, it is said that grain seeds exposed to dampness and heat can also produce worms.

古文：又薄田不能粪者，以原蚕矢杂禾种种之，则禾不虫。
现代文：一说，田地瘠薄而又不能上粪的，可用原蚕矢和禾种混杂在一块下种，可使禾稼不生虫。
English: The first said that if the field is thin and cannot be covered with manure, the original silkworm arrow and the grass seed can be mixed and planted in one piece, which can prevent the grass from growing insects.

古文：又取马骨，锉一石，以水三石煮之，三沸，漉去滓；以汁渍附子五枚。
现代文：一说，用锉碎的马骨头一石，加水三石，用火煮，煮三沸，将骨滓漉去；然后用附子五枚浸泡在汁中。
English: He said, "Take one stone of minced horse bone, add three stones of water, boil it in fire, boil it three times, strain the bones, and then soak five aconites in the juice.

古文：三四日，去附子，以汁和蚕矢、羊矢各等分，挠呼毛反。
现代文：三四天过后，取出附子，用等量的蚕矢和羊矢加入汁中，进行拌挠。
English: After three or four days, take out the aconite, add it to the juice with equal amounts of silkworm and sheep arrows, and stir.

古文：搅也。令洞洞如稠粥。
现代文：使成为如同稠粥状的糊糊。
English: The result is a thick, porridge-like paste.

古文：先种二十日时，以溲疏有反。
现代文：下种前二十日，用稠糊溲疏有反。
English: On the 20th day before the next planting, sprinkle with a thick paste.

古文：种，如麦饭状。
现代文：种，使种子变成如同麦饭颗一样大小的颗粒。
English: seeds, turning the seeds into pellets the size of a grain of rice.

古文：常天旱燥时溲之，立干；薄布，数挠令干。
现代文：常趁天旱燥热时溲种，可以即时晾晒干；也可以采取摊薄、勤翻的办法，让它快干。
English: When the weather is dry and hot, it is often used to sow seeds, which can be dried immediately; it is also possible to take the method of dilution and diligent turning, so that it dries quickly.

古文：明日复溲。
现代文：第二天再溲。
English: Repeat the next day.

古文：天阴雨则勿溲。
现代文：天阴下雨便不要溲。
English: If it's cloudy and raining, don't go out.

古文：六七溲而止。
现代文：溲至六七遍为止。
English: It is repeated up to six or seven times.

古文：辄曝，谨藏，勿令复湿。
现代文：即行曝晒，妥善收藏，不使受潮。
English: Immediate exposure, proper storage, not exposed to moisture.

古文：至可种时，以余汁溲而种之，则禾稼不蝗虫。
现代文：等到可以下种时，用余下的糊汁，溲过即种，如此，则禾稼不生蝗虫。
English: When it is time to plant, use the leftover paste to sprinkle over the seeds. In this way, the crops will not produce locusts.

古文：无马骨，亦可用雪汁。
现代文：无马骨时，也可以用雪水代替。
English: If there is no horse bone, snow water can be used instead.

古文：雪汁者，五谷之精也，使稼耐旱。
现代文：雪水是五谷的精华，可使禾稼耐旱。
English: Snow water is the quintessence of grain and can make crops drought-resistant.

古文：常以冬藏雪汁，器盛，埋于地中。
现代文：每年将冬天收存的雪水，用陶器盛好，埋于地下。
English: The snow water, which is collected in winter every year, is stored in earthenware containers and buried underground.

古文：治种如此，则收常倍。
现代文：采用这样的方法治理谷种，常使产量成倍地增加。
English: The use of this method to treat cereals often leads to an exponential increase in production.

古文：取麦种：候熟可获，择穗大强者斩，束立场中之高燥处，曝使极燥。
现代文：留麦种法：等麦成熟到可以收获的时候，选择穗大颗粒饱满的，斩断，缚成束，竖立于麦场的高燥处，曝晒到极干燥。
English: Wheat retention method: When the wheat is ripe enough to be harvested, choose large, full grain ears, cut them off, tie them into bundles, erect them in the high-drying area of the wheat field, and expose them to extreme dryness.

古文：无令有白鱼，有辄扬治之。
现代文：不要让它留有白鱼，发现有白鱼，立即簸扬干净。
English: Don't let it have any white fish. If you find any white fish, clean it immediately.

古文：取干艾杂藏之；麦一石，艾一把。
现代文：同干艾混杂储藏，一石麦用一把艾，用瓦器或竹器贮存。
English: It is stored mixed with dried mugwort, a stone of wheat is stored with a handful of mugwort, and it is stored with earthenware or bamboo utensils.

古文：藏以瓦器、竹器，顺时种之，则收常倍。取禾种：择高大者，斩一节下，把悬高燥处，苗则不败。
现代文：按照农时下种，产量可增加一倍。留禾种法：选择谷棵高大的，截取一节下来，缚成把，悬挂在高燥的地方，这样的谷苗，一定可茁壮成长。
English: According to the agricultural time planting, the output can be doubled. Residual grass planting method: select tall cereal trees, cut off a section, tie it into a handle, and hang it in a high and dry place. Such seedlings can certainly thrive.

古文：欲知岁所宜，以布囊盛粟等诸物种，平量之，埋阴地。
现代文：想要知道本年适宜种何谷，可用布袋若干，分别装入经过用升斗量过的、等量的五谷种子，埋在背阴的地方。
English: If you want to know what grain is suitable for planting this year, you can use several cloth bags to separately load an equal amount of grain seeds that have been measured with a lifting bucket and buried in a shady place.

古文：冬至日窖埋，冬至后五十日，发取量之，息最多者，岁所宜也。
现代文：冬至日窖埋好，等到冬至过后五十天，开窖取出逐袋平量，其中息最多的，即本年宜于种植的谷种。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the cellar is buried, and when it is fifty days after the winter solstice, the cellar is opened to take out an equal amount of each bag, of which the most breath, that is, the grain seeds suitable for planting this year.

古文：崔寔曰：平量五谷各一升，小罂盛，埋墙阴下。余法同上。
现代文：崔寔说：用升平量五谷各一升，用小罂盛装，埋在墙壁背阴的地方，余法悉同《汜书》所言。
English: Cui Yao said, "Use one litre of grain for each litre of grain, use a small bowl to hold it, and bury it in a shady place on the wall. The rest of the method is the same as that described in the "Analects."

古文：《师旷占术》曰：五木者，五谷之先；欲知五谷，但视五木。
现代文：《师旷占术》说：五木是五谷的先兆，想要知道五谷收成，只需先看五木。
English: "The Art of Divination" says: Five trees are the harbinger of five crops. If you want to know the harvest of five crops, just look at the five trees first.

古文：择其木盛者，来年多种之，万不失一也。
现代文：当年某种树木生长最茂盛，来年便多种那种谷，一万次也不会有一次失误。
English: The year a certain tree grows most luxuriantly, the next year there will be many varieties of that valley, and there will not be a single mistake in ten thousand times.

古文：《杂阴阳书》曰：禾生于枣或杨，大麦生于杏，小麦生于桃，稻生于柳或杨，黍生于榆，大豆生于槐，小豆生于李，麻生于杨或荆。
现代文：《杂阴阳书》说：禾谷，在枣树或杨树出叶的时候发芽；大麦，在杏树出叶时发芽；小麦，在桃出叶时发芽；稻，在柳树或杨树出叶时发芽；黍，在榆树出叶时发芽；大豆，在槐树出叶时发芽；小豆，在李树出叶时发芽；麻，在杨树或荆木出叶时发芽。
English: "The Book of Varieties of Yin and Yang" says: Cereals sprout when the jujube or poplar leaves; barley sprouts when the almond leaves; wheat sprouts when the peach leaves; rice sprouts when the willow or poplar leaves; alfalfa sprouts when the eucalyptus leaves; soybeans sprout when the eucalyptus leaves; red beans sprout when the plum tree leaves; and hemp sprouts when the poplar or juniper tree leaves.

古文：又，凡种禾，宜寅、午、申，忌乙、丑、壬、癸；秫忌寅；晚禾忌丙；大麦宜亥、卯、辰，忌子、丑、戊、己；小麦忌，与大麦同；稻宜戊、己、四季日，忌寅、卯、辰、甲、乙；黍宜己、酉、戌，忌寅、卯、丙、午；穄忌未、寅；大豆宜申、子、壬，忌卯、午、丙、丁、甲、乙；小豆忌，与大豆同；麻忌四季日、戊、己。
现代文：又凡播种禾谷，宜寅、午、申日，忌乙、丑、壬、癸日；秫忌寅日；晚禾忌丙日；大麦宜亥、卯、辰日，忌子、丑、戊、己日；小麦忌与大麦同；稻宜戊、己、四季日，忌寅、卯、辰、甲、乙日；黍宜己、酉、戌日，忌寅、卯、丙、午日；穄忌未、寅日；大豆宜申、子、壬日，忌卯、午、丙、丁、甲、乙日；小豆忌与大豆同；麻忌四季日和戊、己日。
English: In addition, all sowing of cereals should be done on the following days: Tue, Wed, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu, Thu,

古文：凡五谷大判宜上旬，次中旬。
现代文：凡播种五谷，最适宜的是在该月的上旬；其次是在中旬。
English: When sowing grain, it is best to do so in the first half of the month, and then in the second half.

古文：《史记》曰： 阴阳之家，拘而多忌。 
现代文：《史记》说： 阴阳家们的说法，既失于拘泥，又有许多忌讳。 
English: "Histories" said: The claims of yin and yang people are not only rigid, but also have many taboos.

古文：止可知其梗概，不可委曲从之。
现代文：只可知道他们说法的大致情况，切不可勉强地一一依照他们说的办。
English: You can only know the general situation of what they say, and you must not reluctantly do what they say.

古文：谚曰 以时其泽，为上策 也。
现代文：农谚所说的， 按农时下种，是最正确的好做法 。
English: According to the agricultural proverb, planting according to the agricultural season is the most correct and good practice.

