古文：杨廷麟，字伯祥，清江人。
现代文：杨廷麟，字伯祥，清江人。
English: Yang Tinglin, surnamed Bo Xiang, a native of Qingjiang.

古文：崇祯四年进士。
现代文：崇祯四年进士。
English: He was promoted to a priest four years later.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修，勤学嗜古，有声馆阁间，与黄道周善。
现代文：改选庶吉士，授职编修。他勤于学习，酷爱古典，在翰林院中很有名望，跟黄道周友好。
English: He is diligent in studying, loves the classics, is very famous in the Hanlin Academy, and is friendly with Zodiac Zhou.

古文：十年冬，皇太子将出阁，充讲官兼直经筵。
现代文：十年冬天，皇太子即将外就藩封，朝廷拟让廷麟充任讲官兼经筵直讲。
English: In the winter of the tenth year, the crown prince was about to be enthroned outside the domain, and the imperial court planned to have Tinglin serve as a lecturer and lecture directly.

古文：延麟具疏让道周，不许。
现代文：廷麟撰写了一篇奏疏推让道周，崇祯皇帝不允许。
English: Emperor Chongzhen did not allow Tinglin to write an article praising and praising Daozhou.

古文：明年二月，帝御经筵，问保举考选何者为得人。
现代文：第二年二月，崇祯皇帝在经筵上问保举跟考选哪一样更能取得理想的人才。
English: In February of the following year, Emperor Chongzhen asked in the imperial edict which was more effective in acquiring ideal talent, the vetting or the selection.

古文：廷麟言： 保举当严举主，如唐世济、王维章乃温体仁、王应熊所荐。今二臣皆败，而举主不问。
现代文：廷麟说： 保举应对保举者严格要求，像唐世济、王维章是由温体仁、王应熊推荐的，现在他们俩都倒台了，可是对保举他们的人却不加追究。
English: Ting Lin said, "Those who should be promoted should be subject to strict requirements. For example, Tang Shiji and Wang Weizhang were recommended by Wen Tizhen and Wang Ying Xiong. Now both of them have fallen, but there is no investigation into those who promoted them."

古文：是连坐之法先不行于大臣，欲收保举效得乎？ 
现代文：这样连坐法在大臣中已经不实行了，怎么能收到保举的效果呢？ 
English: As such, the law of consecutive seats is no longer implemented among ministers, how can they receive the effect of promotion?

古文：帝为动色。
现代文：崇祯皇帝听了这话脸色都变了。
English: Emperor Chongzhen's face changed when he heard this.

古文：其冬，京师戒严。
现代文：这年冬天，京师戒严。
English: That winter, martial law was declared in Kyoto.

古文：廷麟上疏劾兵部尚书杨嗣昌，言： 陛下有挞伐之志，大臣无御侮之才，谋之不臧，以国为戏。
现代文：廷麟上书弹劾兵部尚书杨嗣昌，说道： 陛下有攘除外患的大志，大臣却没有抵御侵略的本领，他们谋划得不得当，把国家大事当成了儿戏。
English: Ting Lin wrote a letter to impeach Yang Shichang, the secretary of the military department, and said: His Majesty has the ambition to drive out foreign invaders, but the ministers do not have the ability to resist aggression. Their plans are not proper, and they treat national events as a child's play.

古文：嗣昌及蓟辽总督吴阿衡内外扶同，朋谋误国。
现代文：嗣昌和蓟州总督吴阿衡内外相助，同谋共计，耽误了国家大事。
English: Tsuchimasa and the governor of Bozhou, Wu Aheng, aided and abetted each other at home and abroad, delaying major national events.

古文：与高起潜、方一藻倡和款议，武备顿忘，以至于此。
现代文：他们与高起潜、方一藻主张议和，一下子就把武备给放到脑后去了，以致闹成今天这个样子。
English: They discussed peace with Gao Zhizhong and Fang Yizhong, and all of a sudden they put their weapons behind their heads, resulting in the situation we see today.

古文：今可忧在外者三，在内者五。
现代文：现在值得担心的，在外有三件事，在朝廷里有五件事。
English: Right now, there are three things to worry about outside, and five things to worry about in the imperial court.

古文：督臣卢升以祸国责枢臣，言之痛心。
现代文：督臣卢象升用祸害国家的话来批评中央大臣，话说得令人痛心。
English: Governor Lu Xiangsheng criticized the Central Minister with the words of a scourge of the country, the words are heartbreaking.

古文：夫南仲在内，李纲无功；潜善秉成，宗泽殒命。
现代文：过去南仲在中央里，李纲就没能立功疆场；潜善执掌大权，宗泽就丢失了性命。
English: In the past, when Nanzhong was in the center, Li Gang failed to make a contribution; when Kuken held power, Soze lost his life.

古文：乞陛下赫然一怒，明正向者主和之罪，俾将士畏法，无有二心。
现代文：我请求陛下大发一回火气，明确纠正过去主和的罪过，使将士懂得惧怕刑法，不敢心存侥幸。
English: I ask His Majesty to unleash his fury once again, to clearly correct the sins of the past, so that soldiers know how to fear the criminal law and dare not take any chances.

古文：召见大小诸臣，咨以方略。
现代文：同时召见大小臣僚，向他们询问抵敌方略。
English: At the same time, he summoned his junior and senior ministers to ask them about the strategy for resisting the enemy.

古文：谕象升集诸路援师，乘机赴敌，不从中制。
现代文：指示象升集合各路增援部队，利用有利时机对敌开战，不要按宫廷制度派什么宦官监军。
English: He instructed Xiang Sheng to gather reinforcements from all directions, take advantage of the favorable opportunity to start a war against the enemy, and not to send any eunuchs to supervise the army according to the palace system.

古文：此今日急务也。 
现代文：这是眼下的急务啊。 
English: This is the most urgent task at the moment.

古文：时嗣昌意主和议，冀纾外患，而廷麟痛诋之。
现代文：当时嗣昌的意见主张议和，希望能借机消除外患，可是廷麟狠狠地攻击了他。
English: At that time, Shichang's opinion advocated peace talks, hoping to take the opportunity to eliminate external threats, but Tinglin viciously attacked him.

古文：嗣昌大恚，诡荐廷麟知兵。
现代文：嗣昌大为恼火，就假惺惺地推荐廷麟懂得军事。
English: Tsuchimasa was so annoyed that he falsely recommended that Tinglin understand military affairs.

古文：帝改廷麟兵部职方主事，赞画象升军。
现代文：崇祯皇帝改用廷麟为兵部职方主事，让他去象升的部队里当参谋。
English: Emperor Chongzhen switched to using Tinglin as the head of the military department and let him serve as a staff officer in Xiang Sheng's army.

古文：象升喜，即令廷麟往真定转饷济师。
现代文：象升很高兴，就让廷麟到真定去转运粮饷增发兵力。
English: Xiang Sheng was very happy, so he asked Ting Lin to go to Zhending to transfer grain and increase the number of troops.

古文：无何，象升战死贾庄。
现代文：不久，象升在贾庄战死。
English: Soon after, Xiang Sheng died in battle in Jia Zhuang.

古文：嗣昌意廷麟亦死，及闻其奉使在外，则为不怿者久之。
现代文：嗣昌料定廷麟也死掉了，后来听说他当时出使在外地没死，因此心里很多天都不痛快。
English: Tsuchang learned that Ding Tinglin had also died. Later, he heard that Ding Tinglin, who was on a mission at the time, had not died, so he was not happy for many days.

古文：初，张若麒、沈迅官刑曹，谋改兵部，御史涂必泓沮之。
现代文：起先，张若麒、沈迅在刑部的司里做官，他们准备调进兵部，御史涂必泓从中坏了他们的事。
English: At first, Zhang Ruoxuan and Shen Xun worked as officials in the department of the criminal investigation department. They were preparing to be transferred to the military department, but the imperial historian ruined their business.

古文：必泓，廷麟同里也。两人疑疏出廷麟指，因与嗣昌比而构廷麟。
现代文：必泓，是廷麟的同乡，所以他们两个怀疑必泓的奏疏出自廷麟的指使，于是就和嗣昌勾结起来一块诬陷廷麟。
English: Bifeng is a fellow villager of Tinglin, so the two of them suspect that Bifeng's subterfuge came from Tinglin's instructions, so they colluded with Tsuchimasa to frame Tinglin.

古文：会廷麟报军中曲折，嗣昌拟旨责以欺罔。事平，贬廷麟秩，调之外。
现代文：正好廷麟上书汇报军队中的复杂情况，嗣昌起草圣旨时批评他欺骗朝廷，事平以后就把他贬官调到地方上去了。
English: Just as Tinglin submitted his report on the complicated situation in the army, Tsuchimasa criticized him for deceiving the imperial court when drafting the imperial edict. After the matter was settled, he demoted him to a local post.

古文：黄道周狱起，词连廷麟，当逮。未至而道周已释，言者多荐廷麟。
现代文：黄道周一案发生时，供词中牵扯到廷麟，他本该逮捕，但差官还没到，道周本人已经被释放了，廷麟也就不能抓了。
English: When the Zodiac Monday case occurred, Tinglin was implicated in the confession. He should have been arrested, but the police officer had not yet arrived. Tao Zhou himself had already been released, and Tinglin could not be arrested.

古文：十六年秋，复授职方主事，未赴，都城失守，廷麟恸哭，募兵勤王。
现代文：朝廷中并且还有很多人上书推荐他呢。十六年秋天，廷麟官复原职任职方主事，尚未上任，都城便失守了。廷麟痛苦地大哭了一场，着手招兵买马报效君上。
English: There were also many people in the imperial court who wrote letters recommending him. In the autumn of the 16th year, Tinglin was reinstated as the official in charge of the post, but he had not yet taken office, and the capital was lost. Tinglin cried bitterly and began to recruit soldiers to serve the emperor.

古文：福王立，用御史祁彪佳荐，召为左庶子，辞不就。
现代文：福王即位后，采纳了御史祁彪佳的荐举，招廷麟担任左庶子，他推辞了，没有到任。
English: After Emperor Fu ascended to the throne, he accepted the recommendation of Emperor Shi Jia and invited Emperor Tinglin to serve as his second son, but he declined and did not take up the post.

古文：宗室朱统钅类诬劾廷麟召健儿有不轨谋，以姜曰广为内应。
现代文：宗室朱统翷上书诬陷廷麟征招一批勇敢的青年汉子图谋不轨，以姜曰广作为内应。
English: Zhu Jun's family wrote a letter accusing Ting Lin of recruiting a group of brave young men to plot evil, with Jiang Zhaigang as the inside man.

古文：王不问，而廷麟所募兵亦散。
现代文：福王虽然没追究，廷麒所招募的军队还是疏散了。
English: Although Fu Wang did not investigate, the army recruited by Ting Tong was evacuated.

古文：顺治二年，南都破，江西诸郡惟赣州存。
现代文：顺治二年，南京失守，江西各郡只有赣州保全下来。
English: In the second year of Shunzhi, Nanjing was lost, and only Bozhou was preserved in the counties of Jiangxi.

古文：唐王手书加廷麟吏部右侍郎，刘同升国子祭酒。
现代文：唐王亲撰命令加廷麟为吏部右侍郎，刘同升为国子祭酒。
English: Emperor Tang ordered that Gatinglin be appointed as the right hand man of the cadre department, and Liu Tongsheng as the son of the state.

古文：同升自雩都至赣，与廷麟谋大举。乃偕巡抚李永茂集绅士于明伦堂，劝输兵饷。
现代文：同升从雩都来到赣州，与廷麟商议大举起兵，然后他们和巡抚李永茂一起，把当地绅士召集到明伦堂里，劝他们出钱粮充作兵饷。
English: He came to Zhangzhou from Shantou at the same time, and discussed with Tinglin to raise a large army. Then, together with the inspector Li Yongmao, they gathered the local gentry to Minglun Hall and persuaded them to pay money and grain to serve as soldiers.

古文：九月，大兵屯泰和，副将徐必达战败，廷麟、同升乘虚复吉安、临江。
现代文：九月，大清兵驻扎在泰和，守城的副将徐必达战败后，这边廷麟、同升都乘机收复了吉安、临江。
English: In September, the Qing soldiers were stationed in Taihe. After the defeat of Xu Bida, the vice-commander of the city's garrison, both Tinglin and Tongsheng took the opportunity to recover Ji'an and Linjiang.

古文：加兵部尚书兼东阁大学士，赐剑，便宜从事。
现代文：唐王于是提升他为兵部尚书兼东阁大学士，赐给他尚方宝剑，给他见机行事的权力。
English: The Tang king then promoted him to be a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs and a scholar of Dongge University, gave him the sword of Shangfang, and gave him the power to act as he saw fit.

古文：十月，大兵攻吉安，必达战败，赴水死。会广东援兵至，大兵退屯峡江。
现代文：十月，大清兵攻打吉安，必达战败后投河自杀，正好广东的援兵到来，大清兵于是撤退到峡江。
English: In October, the Qing soldiers attacked Ji'an. After the defeat of Bida, they committed suicide by throwing themselves into the river. Just as the reinforcements from Guangdong arrived, the Qing soldiers retreated to the canyon.

古文：已而万元吉至赣。
现代文：后来万元吉来到赣州。
English: Later, Yuanji came to Ganzhou.

古文：十二月，同升卒。
现代文：十二月，同升死了。
English: In December, Tong Sheng died.

古文：三年正月，廷麟赴赣，招峒蛮张安等四营降之，号龙武新军。
现代文：三年正月，廷麟亲赴赣州，把峒族人张安等四营兵招降，改称龙武新军。
English: In the first month of the third year, Tinglin personally went to Bozhou, recruited four battalions of soldiers including Zhang An from the Yi people, and renamed them the Longwu New Army.

古文：廷麟闻王将由汀赴赣，将往迎王，而以元吉代守吉安。
现代文：廷麟得知唐王将从汀州来赣州，打算前往迎接，让元吉代守吉安。
English: When Tinglin learned that Tang Wang would come from Tingzhou to Zhangzhou, he planned to go to meet him and let Yuan Jie take over the defense of Ji'an.

古文：无何，吉安复失，元吉退保赣州。
现代文：不久，吉安又失陷了。
English: Soon, Ji'an fell again.

古文：四月，大兵逼城下，廷麟遣使调广西狼兵，而身往雩都趣新军张安来救。
现代文：元吉退保赣州，四月，大清军队兵临城下，廷麟派人去调广西的狼兵来增援，自己亲自到雩都去催促新军将领张安来援救。
English: In April, when the soldiers of the Great Qing Army were approaching the city, Tinglin sent someone to send wolf soldiers from Guangxi to reinforce, and personally went to Shandong to urge the new army general Zhang An to come to the rescue.

古文：五月望，安战梅林，再败，退保雩都。
现代文：五月十五日，张安在梅林战斗，两次战败，只好退保雩都。
English: On May 15, Zhang An fought in Meilin and was defeated twice, so he had to retreat to Baodu.

古文：廷麟乃散其兵，以六月入赣，与元吉凭城守。
现代文：廷麟于是解散了他的新军，于六月份进入赣州城，和元吉一起凭借城墙守御作战。
English: Tinglin then disbanded his new army, entered Zhangzhou City in June, and together with Yuanji defended the city wall.

古文：未几，援兵至，围暂解，已，复合。
现代文：不几天，援兵来了，大清兵的包围圈暂时解退，过后，又把赣州城围困起来。
English: Within a few days, reinforcements arrived, the encirclement of the Qing soldiers was temporarily lifted, and later, the city of Zhangzhou was besieged again.

古文：八月，水师战败，援师悉溃。
现代文：八月，官兵的水军战败，援兵全部溃退了。
English: In August, the naval forces of officers and soldiers were defeated, and all reinforcements were routed.

古文：及汀州告变，赣围已半年，守陴者皆懈。
现代文：到汀州发生兵变时，赣州之围已经有半年了，在城墙上防守的士兵都懈了气。
English: By the time of the mutiny in Tingzhou, the siege of Zhangzhou had been going on for half a year, and the soldiers defending the city walls were exhausted.

古文：十月四日，大兵登城。廷麟督战，久之，力不支，走西城，投水死。
现代文：十月四日，大清部队强力登城，廷麟指挥部队作战，时间长了，招架不住，败退回城西，跳河自杀了。
English: On October 4th, the Qing Dynasty troops forcefully entered the city, and Tinglin commanded the troops to fight. It took a long time, but he could not resist. He was defeated and retreated to the west of the city and jumped into the river to commit suicide.

古文：同守者郭维经、彭期生辈皆死。
现代文：一同守城的郭维经、彭期生等人都死掉了。
English: Guo Weijing, Peng Zhisheng and others who were guarding the city all died.

古文：期生，字观我，海盐人，御史宗孟子。
现代文：期生，字观我，海盐人，是御史彭宗孟的儿子。
English: He was the son of Gospodar Ponson Meng, and was born in the 3rd year of the 3rd month of the 3rd year of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 6th year of the 7th month of the 8th month of the 9th month of the 10th year of the 11th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month

古文：登万历四十四年进士。
现代文：他考中万历四十四年进士。
English: He passed the middle school entrance examination in 1944.

古文：崇祯初，为济南知府，坐失囚谪布政司照磨，量移应天推官，转南京兵部主事，进郎中。
现代文：崇祯初年，为济南知府，因为走失了囚犯贬任布政司照磨，经考评又担任了应天推官，改任南京兵部主事，又升为郎中。
English: In the first year of the reign of Chongzhen, he was the governor of Jinan Province. Because he lost the prisoners, he was demoted to the post of Secretary of the Political Bureau. After evaluation, he also served as the vice-governor, was appointed as the head of the Nanjing Military Department, and was promoted to the junior vassal.

古文：十六年，张献忠乱江西，迁湖西兵备佥事，驻吉安。
现代文：十六年，张献忠在江西作乱，朝廷提升期生为湖西兵备佥事，驻吉安。
English: Sixteen years later, Zhang Xianzhong made a disturbance in Jiangxi Province, and during the period of the imperial court's promotion, he was stationed in Ji'an as a Huxi soldier.

古文：吉安不守，走赣州，偕廷麟招降张安等，加太常寺卿，仍视兵备事。
现代文：吉安失守后，他退走赣州，和廷麒一起招降了张安等人，被提升为太常寺卿，仍负责带兵防守。
English: After the loss of Ji'an, he retreated from Zhangzhou, and together with Ting Yao, he invited Zhang An and others to surrender. He was promoted to the Lord of Taizhong Temple, and was still responsible for leading the defense.

古文：城破，冠带自缢死。
现代文：赣州失陷时，他衣冠齐楚地上吊自杀了。
English: When Zhangzhou fell, he hanged himself fully clothed.

古文：一时同殉者，职方主事周瑚，磔死。
现代文：当时以身殉难的还有职方主事周瑚，被寸割而死。
English: At that time, Zhou Hu, the leader of the Workers' Party, was also martyred. He was cut into small pieces and died.

古文：通判王明汲，编修兼兵科给事中万发祥，吏部主事龚棻，户部主事林琦，兵部主事王其狖、黎遂球、柳昂霄、鲁嗣宗、钱谦亨，中书舍人袁从鹗、刘孟鍧、刘应试，推官署府事吴国球，监纪通判郭宁登，临江推官胡缜，赣县知县林逢春，皆被戮。
现代文：通判王明汲，编修兼兵科给事中万发祥，吏部主事龚盞，户部主事林琦，兵部主事王其、黎遂球、柳昂霄、鲁嗣宗、钱谦亨，中书舍人袁从鹗、刘孟钅訇、刘应试，推官署府事吴国球，监纪通判郭宁登，临江推官胡缜，赣县知县林逢春，都被杀掉了。
English: The chief judge Wang Mingqi, the editor-in-chief Wan Faxiang, the chief judge of the personnel department, the chief judge of the household department, the chief judge Wang Qi, the chief judge Li Suiqiu, Liu Angxiao, Lu Shizong, Qian Qian Qianhengheng, the chief judge of the literature department of the People's Republic of China, Yuan Zongqi, Liu Mengqi, Liu Yingqi, the chief judge of the administration department of the People's Republic of China, Wu Guoqiu, the chief judge Guo Ningden, the chief judge of the discipline department of the People's Republic of China, the chief judge

古文：乡官卢观象尽驱男妇大小入水，乃自沉死。
现代文：乡官卢观象把当地的男女老少一齐都赶进河里淹死后，也自沉而死。
English: After Lu Guanzhang, the township official, drove all the local men, women and children into the river and drowned them, they also drowned themselves.

古文：举人刘日佺偕母妻弟妇子侄同日死。
现代文：举人刘日亻全和自己的母亲、妻子、弟媳妇、儿女和侄儿、女在一天里一起自杀了。
English: To name a few, Liu Rongquan, his mother, wife, sister-in-law, children, nephews and niece all committed suicide on the same day.

古文：参将陈烈数力战，众以其弟已降，疑之，烈益奋勇疾斗。
现代文：参将陈烈几经苦战，但大家因为他弟弟已经投降，所以怀疑他，陈烈于是更加勇猛拼杀。
English: After several hard battles, Chen Lie, the general, was doubted by everyone because his younger brother had already surrendered, so Chen Lie fought even more bravely.

古文：及见执，不屈，顾谓赣人曰： 而后乃今知我无二心也。 
现代文：被捕后，他不肯屈服，回头对赣州百姓们说： 现在该知道我没有二心了吧！ 
English: After his arrest, he refused to give in and turned to the people of Zhangzhou and said, "Now you should know that I have no second thoughts!"

古文：遂就戮。
现代文：接着就被杀而亡了。
English: He was then killed.

古文：万元吉，字吉人，南昌人。
现代文：万元吉，字吉人，南昌人。
English: Wan Yuanji, Zeki Ren, Nanchang Ren.

古文：天启五年进士。
现代文：天启五年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the fifth year of the Apocalypse.

古文：授潮州推官，补归德。
现代文：初任潮州推官，后来调补归德。
English: He was initially appointed as the Chaozhou magistrate, and later he was transferred to Chengde.

古文：捕大盗李守志，散其党。
现代文：期间他捕获了大盗李守志，解散了他聚集起来的喽罗。
English: During this time, he captured the great thief Li Shouzhi and disbanded the band of thieves he had assembled.

古文：崇祯四年大计，谪官。
现代文：崇祯四年全国官吏大考核，他被贬了官。
English: In the fourth year of the National Civil Service Examination, he was demoted.

古文：十一年秋，用曾樱荐，命以永州检校署推官事。
现代文：十一年秋天，朝廷采纳曾樱对他的举荐，让他以永州检校的身份代理推官的职责。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year, the Imperial Court accepted Zeng Ying's recommendation to him, allowing him to take on the role of Yongzhou school inspector.

古文：居二年，督师杨嗣昌荐其才，改大理右评事，军前监纪。
现代文：过了两年，督师杨嗣昌推荐他有才干，朝廷让他改任大理右评事，到杨嗣昌军队里负责监察军纪。
English: Two years later, Yang Shichang, an inspector, recommended him as talented, and the imperial court appointed him as a senior right-wing commentator, and he was responsible for supervising military discipline in Yang Shichang's army.

古文：嗣昌倚若左右手，诸将亦悦服，驰驱兵间，未尝一夕安枕。
现代文：嗣昌把他用作左右手，将领们也心悦诚服，他在部队里奔走劳作，未曾睡过一个晚上安生觉。
English: Tsuchimasa used him as his right and left hand, and the generals were also impressed. He worked hard in the army and never slept a peaceful night.

古文：嗣昌卒，元吉丁内艰归。
现代文：嗣昌死后，元吉因为替母亲守丧回乡去了。
English: After Tsuchimasa's death, Motoyoshi went back to his hometown to grieve for his mother.

古文：十六年起南京职方主事，进郎中。
现代文：十六年复出，担任南京职方主事，又升为郎中。
English: Sixteen years after his comeback, he served as the head of the Nanjing Workers' Party, and was promoted to the rank of junior vassal.

古文：福王立，仍故官。
现代文：福王登基后，他仍旧担任郎中。
English: After King Fu ascended to the throne, he continued to serve as a retainer.

古文：四镇不和，元吉请奉诏宣谕。又请发万金犒高杰于扬州，谕以大义，令保江、淮。
现代文：因为四大兵镇不和，他请求让自己奉命前往开导，又请求拨一万两银子到扬州犒劳高杰，用大义教导他，命令他驻守江、淮。
English: Because of the discord between the four major military towns, he asked to be ordered to go to Kaidong, and asked for ten thousand taels of silver to be sent to Yangzhou to pay tribute to Gao Jie, to teach him with great righteousness, and to order him to stay in Jiang and Huai.

古文：乃渡江诣诸将营。
现代文：然后万元吉渡过长江奔赴各位大将的军营中去。
English: Then he crossed the Yangtze River and rushed to the generals' camp.

古文：杰与黄得功、刘泽清方争扬州，元吉与得功书，令共奖王室。
现代文：高杰与黄得功、刘泽清三人当时正在争夺扬州，元吉给得功写了一封信，让他和大家一起辅佐朝廷，得功写了一封回信，和元吉的意思相同。
English: Gao Jie, Huang Dergong and Liu Zeqing were competing for Yangzhou at that time. Yuan Ji wrote a letter to Dergong, asking him to assist the imperial court together with everyone else. Dergong wrote a reply letter, with the same meaning as Yuan Ji.

古文：得功报书如元吉指，乃录其藁示泽清、杰，嫌渐解。
现代文：元吉于是把得功的信抄给泽清、高杰两个看，他们三个人之间的嫌疑于是逐渐消释了。
English: Yuanji then copied the letter of merit to Ze Qing and Gao Jie, and the suspicion between the three of them gradually dissipated.

古文：廷议以元吉能辑诸镇，擢太仆少卿，监视江北军务。
现代文：朝臣们讨论认为元吉能够安定各大兵镇，提拔他当了太仆少卿，让他监视长江以北的军务。
English: The courtiers discussed that Yuan Jie was able to stabilize the major military towns, promoted him to the position of Taibo Shaoqing, and let him supervise the military affairs north of the Yangtze River.

古文：元吉身在外，不忘朝廷，数有条奏。
现代文：元吉人在外边，却不忘朝廷，几次上书评议政事。
English: Yuanjian was on the outside, but he did not forget the imperial court. He wrote several times to comment on political affairs.

古文：请修建文实录，复其尊称，并还懿文追尊故号，祀之寝园，以建文配，而速褒靖难死事诸臣，及近日北都四方殉难者，以作忠义之气。
现代文：他曾请求朝廷编写《建文实录》，恢复他的皇帝尊号，并把他给原先懿文太子追加的尊号予以归还，在他的陵园中祭祀他，用建文皇帝陪享，并且立即表彰当时死难的大臣们，以及近来京师失陷时殉难的四方臣僚，以便振作臣民忠心报国的勇气。
English: He had asked the imperial court to compile the "Record of the Establishment of the State," to restore his imperial title, and to return the honorary title that he had originally added to Prince Shouwen, to sacrifice him in his cemetery, to accompany him with the Emperor Jianwen, and to immediately commend the ministers who died at that time, as well as the four-party ministers who were recently martyred when the Beijing division fell, in order to encourage the courage of the subjects to be loyal to the country.

古文：从之。
现代文：福王听从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又言：先帝天资英武，锐意明作，而祸乱益滋。
现代文：元吉还上书说： 先帝天资英武，立志振兴国家，可是事实上祸乱更加严重。
English: Yuanji also wrote: The previous emperor was talented and strong-willed, determined to revitalize the country, but in fact, the calamity was more serious.

古文：宽严之用偶偏，任议之途太畸也。
现代文：这是由于政策宽大、严厉二者的运用双方面都偏轻偏重了，听取意见的方式太偏颇了。
English: This is due to the fact that the application of both lenient and strict policies is biased, and the way of listening to opinions is too biased.

古文：先帝初惩逆珰用事，委任臣工，力行宽大。
现代文： 先帝当初惩治不法宦官的专权，任用群臣百官都力行宽大。
English: At the beginning, the former emperor had the exclusive right to punish illegal eunuchs, and he was very generous in appointing hundreds of eunuchs.

古文：诸臣狃之，争意见之异同，略绸缪之桑土，敌入郊圻，束手无策。
现代文：大臣们习惯于此，就争论意见的异同，忽略了防患措施的准备，敌人打到京郊来，他们都束手无策了。
English: The ministers are used to this, arguing about the differences and similarities of opinions, ignoring the preparation of preventive measures, the enemy hit the outskirts of Beijing, and they are helpless.

古文：先帝震怒，宵小乘间，中以用严。
现代文：先帝这下极为恼火，坏人就乘机引导他采用严厉的政策。
English: The former emperor was extremely angry at this, and the villain took the opportunity to lead him to adopt a harsh policy.

古文：于是廷杖告密，加派抽练，使在朝者不暇救过，在野者无复聊生，庙堂号振作，而敌强如故，寇祸弥张。
现代文：于是廷杖用得越来越多，对地方上增派练饷，使得在朝官员救过不暇，下边的百姓无复聊生，朝廷说起来是振作了，但是敌人还是一样的强大，盗贼的祸害更加扩大了。
English: As a result, the imperial scepter was used more and more, and more troops were sent to the provinces to practice the imperial scepter. As a result, the officials in the imperial court had no time to save themselves, and the people below had no time to live. The imperial court said that they were encouraged, but the enemy was still as strong as ever, and the scourge of thieves was even more widespread.

古文：十余年来，小人用严之效如是。
现代文：在十多年时间里，小人主张的严厉政策无非如此。
English: For more than a decade, the draconian policies advocated by the villain have been nothing short of that.

古文：先帝亦悔，更从宽大，悉反前规，天下以为太平可致。
现代文：先帝自己后来也后悔了，又采用宽大政策，一反其规，天下人都认为可以实现太平了。
English: The former emperor himself later regretted it, and adopted a lenient policy, contrary to the norm, and people around the world thought that peace could be achieved.

古文：诸臣复竞贿赂，肆欺蒙，每趋愈下，再撄先帝之怒，诛杀方兴，宗社继殁。
现代文：大臣们又开始竞行贿赂，肆意欺骗先帝，政治风气每况愈下，又一次引发了先帝的怒火。先帝正忙着开杀戒，国家紧跟着就覆灭了。
English: The ministers again began to compete in bribery and wantonly deceived the former emperor, and the political atmosphere became worse and worse, which once again aroused the anger of the former emperor. The former emperor was busy killing, and the country was immediately destroyed.

古文：盖诸臣之孽，每乘于先帝之宽；而先帝之严，亦每激于诸臣之玩。
现代文：大概说来大臣们的忤逆，经常是利用了先帝宽大的政策；而先帝的严厉政策，也经常滋生了大臣们的轻慢。
English: Presumably, the rebelliousness of the ministers often took advantage of the lenient policy of the former emperor; and the harsh policy of the former emperor often bred the light-heartedness of the ministers.

古文：臣所谓宽严之用偶偏者此也。
现代文：我所说的政策的宽大和严厉双方面的偏轻偏重就是这个样子。
English: This is what I mean when I say that the leniency and severity of the policy are both lopsided.

古文：国步艰难，于今已极。
现代文： 国家命运的艰难现在已到了极点。
English: The hardships of the country's fate have now come to the extreme.

古文：乃议者求胜于理，即不审势之重轻；好伸其言，多不顾事之损益。
现代文：可是议论的人只求道理上讲得通，就是不看看形势的轻重；只喜欢发表自己的见解，根本不考虑事情的发展。
English: However, those who argue only seek to be reasonable, that is, they do not look at the importance of the situation; they only like to express their own opinions, and do not consider the development of things at all.

古文：殿上之彼己日争，阃外之从违遥制，一人任事，众口议之。
现代文：朝堂上天天你争我吵不说，统兵在外的将领一举一动还要接受他们的遥控，一个人干事，却有许多张嘴巴在那里议论。
English: You don't argue with me in the morning hall every day, and the generals outside the general staff also accept their remote control of every move. One person is in charge, but there are many open mouths talking about it.

古文：如孙传庭守关中，识者俱谓不宜轻出，而已有以逗挠议之者矣。
现代文：就如孙传庭出守关中一事吧，明眼人都说不应让他轻易出击，可是已经有人议论他逗留、观望了。
English: Just like the case of Sun Chuanjun's appearance in court to defend Guanzhong, clear-sighted people say that he should not be allowed to attack easily, but some people have already talked about him staying and watching.

古文：贼既渡河，臣语史可法、姜曰广急撤关、宁吴三桂兵，随枢辅迎击。
现代文：贼寇渡过黄河后，我告诉史可法、姜曰广赶快撤下山海关、宁远卫吴三桂的部队，随内阁大臣迎击贼寇。
English: After the bandits crossed the Yellow River, I told Shi Kefa, Jiang Zhiguang to quickly withdraw the mountain customs, Ningyuan Wei Wu Sangui's troops, followed by the cabinet minister to meet the bandits.

古文：先帝召对时，群臣亦曾及此，而已有以蹙地议之者矣。
现代文：先帝召大臣问话时，群臣也曾讲到这一点，可是已经有人议论说这是放弃领土。
English: When the previous emperor summoned ministers for questioning, the ministers also talked about this, but some people have already argued that this is giving up territory.

古文：及贼势燎原，廷臣或劝南幸，或劝皇储监国南都，皆权宜善计，而已有以邪妄议之者矣。
现代文：等到贼寇的势力汹涌澎湃的时候，朝臣有的劝先帝到南方来，有的劝说让太子在南京开始监国，这些本来都是很好的权宜之计，可是已经有人议论说这是胡说八道。
English: When the influence of the bandits surged, some courtiers persuaded the former emperor to come to the south, and others persuaded the crown prince to start supervising the country in Nanjing. These were all good expedient measures, but some people have already said that this is nonsense.

古文：由事后而观，咸追恨议者之误国。
现代文：由事后来看，谁不恨这些议论的人亏害了国家。
English: In hindsight, who doesn't hate these talking heads for ruining the country.

古文：倘事幸不败，必共服议者之守经。
现代文：但是假使事情侥幸不失败的话，大家一定都佩服这些议论的人遵行常规。
English: But if all goes well, everyone will admire these talkers for sticking to the rules.

古文：大抵天下事，无全害亦无全利，当局者非朴诚通达，谁敢违众独行；旁持者竞意气笔锋，必欲强人从我。
现代文：大概说来天底下的事没有完全有害的，也没有全是益处的，当事人除非质朴、诚实而且通晓万事万物，否则哪个敢违众独行呢？在一边提意见的人总是争意气长短，笔锋巧拙，一定要强迫别人听从自己才成。
English: Presumably, things under the sun are not entirely harmful, nor are they all beneficial. Unless the parties are simple, honest and knowledgeable about everything, who would dare to go against the crowd? On the one hand, people who offer opinions are always competitive and skillful, and they must force others to listen to them.

古文：臣所谓任议之途太畸者此也。
现代文：这哪成呢？我所说的听取意见的方式太偏颇就是这个样子。
English: How is this possible? This is exactly what I mean when I say that the way opinions are heard is too biased.

古文：乞究前事之失，为后事之师，以宽为体，以严为用。
现代文： 我请求陛下研究以前朝政的失误，作为今后政治事务的借鉴，要以宽大做主体，以严厉求功效。
English: I ask His Majesty to study the mistakes of the previous government, as a reference for future political affairs, to be lenient as the main body, and to seek effectiveness with severity.

古文：盖崇简易、推真诚之谓宽，而滥赏纵罪者非宽；辨邪正、综名实之谓严，而钩距索隐者非严。
现代文：崇尚简易、真诚待人叫作宽大，滥赏无功、听凭放纵不叫作宽大；辨别邪正、综核名实叫作严厉，百般挑剔、吹毛求疵不叫作严厉。
English: Advocating simplicity and sincerity in dealing with others is called magnanimous, while rewarding without merit and indulging in self-indulgence are not called magnanimous. Discerning right from wrong and comprehensively verifying facts are called strict, while being picky and nitpicking in various ways are not called strict.

古文：宽严得济，任议乃合。
现代文：政策的宽大和严厉二者相辅相成，听取意见的方式才会适当。
English: Both the leniency and severity of the policy complement each other, and the way to listen to opinions is appropriate.

古文：仍请于任事之人，严核始进，宽期后效，无令行间再踵藏垢，边才久借然灰，收之以严，然后可任之以宽也。
现代文：请任用办事官员时，仍旧经严格考核后才用，但宽着期限责取成功，不要让离间计再跟着坏人的信用而得逞，使我朝的军事人才久借燃灰，委任时经过严格考核，然后就可以用宽大的政策大胆地使用他了。 
English: When appointing officials, please still use them only after strict assessment, but give them a wide time limit to succeed. Don't let the divider succeed with the bad man's trust, so that the military talent of my country can be burned for a long time. After strict assessment when appointing, then you can use him boldly with a lenient policy.

古文：诏褒纳之。
现代文：福王下诏赞扬并听取了他的意见。
English: King Fu praised Xiao Zhao and listened to his opinion.

古文：明年五月，南京覆，走福建，归唐王。
现代文：第二年，南京灭亡了，元吉跑到福建去归附唐王。
English: The following year, Nanjing fell, and Yuanji fled to Fujian to join the Tang Dynasty.

古文：六月，我大清兵已取南昌、袁州、临江、吉安。
现代文：六月，大清部队已经占领了南昌、袁州、临江、吉安。
English: In June, the Qing forces had already occupied Nanchang, Yuanzhou, Linjiang and Ji'an.

古文：逾月，又取建昌。
现代文：过了一个月，又占领了建昌。
English: A month later, they occupied Jianchang again.

古文：惟赣州孤悬上游，兵力单寡。
现代文：只有赣州孤零零地剩下在长江上流，城中兵力也很单薄。
English: Only Zhangzhou alone remained in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River, and the troops in the city were also very thin.

古文：会益府永宁王慈炎招降峒贼张安，所号龙武新军者也，遣复抚州。南赣巡抚李永茂乃命副将徐必达扼泰和，拒大兵。
现代文：益王府里永宁王朱慈炎招降峒贼张安后，这时收复了抚州。南赣巡抚李永茂于是命令副将徐必达扼守泰和，抗击大清部队。
English: After the Yongning King Zhu Cixian of the Yiwang government invited Zhang An, a bandit, to surrender, Fuzhou was recovered at this time. Li Yongmao, the governor of Nanxun, then ordered the vice-general Xu Bida to defend Taihe and resist the Qing forces.

古文：未几，战败，至万安，遇永茂。
现代文：没几天战败，退到万安，必达见到了永茂。
English: After a few days of defeat, retreating to Wan'an, Bida saw Yongmao.

古文：永茂遂奔赣。
现代文：永茂接着逃到了赣州。
English: Yongmao then fled to Ganzhou.

古文：八月，叛将白之裔入万安，江西巡抚旷昭被执，知县梁于涘死之。
现代文：八月，叛将白之裔进入万安，江西巡抚旷昭被活捉，知县梁于氵矣牺牲了。
English: In August, the traitor Baizhixiong entered Wan'an, the governor of Jiangxi, Mei Zhao, was captured alive, and Liang Yuxuan of Zhixian was sacrificed.

古文：于涘，江都人。
现代文：于氵矣，江都人。
English: In the meantime, Jiangdu people.

古文：崇祯十六年进士。
现代文：崇祯十六年进士。
English: He entered the priesthood at the age of sixteen.

古文：时唐王诏适至赣，永茂乃与杨廷麟、刘同升同举兵。
现代文：当时唐王的诏书正好传到赣州来，永茂于是和杨廷麟、刘国升一起管理军事。
English: At that time, Emperor Tang's edict came to Ganzhou, and Yongmao, together with Yang Tinglin and Liu Guosheng, managed the military.

古文：未几，王召永茂为兵部右侍郎，以张朝綖代。
现代文：不久唐王召永茂回去当兵部右侍郎，让张朝纟延来接替他。
English: Soon after, the Tang king called Yongmao back to serve as the right hand man of the military department, and asked Zhang Zhaojun to succeed him.

古文：甫任事，擢元吉兵部右侍郎兼右副都御史，总督江西、湖广诸军，召朝綖还，以同升代。
现代文：永茂刚上任就提拔元吉为兵部右侍郎兼右副都御史，总领江西、湖广的各军，又召回了朝纟延，让同升接替了他。
English: As soon as Yongmao took office, he promoted Yuanji to the position of the Right Attendant of the Military Department and the Right Vice-Governor of the Capital, the commander-in-chief of the armies of Jiangxi Province and Hunan Province, and recalled Asahiyan to let Tongsheng succeed him.

古文：元吉至赣，同升已卒，遂以元吉兼巡抚。
现代文：元吉到赣州时同升已经死了，朝廷就让元吉兼任江西巡抚。
English: When Yuanji arrived in Zhangzhou, Tongsheng was already dead, so the imperial court made Yuanji concurrently serve as the governor of Jiangxi Province.

古文：顺治三年三月，廷麟将朝王，元吉代守吉安。
现代文：顺治三年三月，廷麟将去朝见唐王，元吉代他守卫吉安。
English: In March of the third year of Shunzhi, Tinglin will go to the court to see the Tang king, and Yuan Jie will guard Ji'an on his behalf.

古文：初，崇祯末，命中书舍人张同敞调云南兵，至是抵江西，两京已相继失，因退还吉安。
现代文：起初崇祯末年朝廷命令中书舍人张同敞调发云南部队，这个时候来到了江西，两个京城已经相继失守，于是就退回到吉安来。
English: At first, in the last years of the Song Dynasty, the imperial court ordered the scholar Zhang Tongzang to dispatch the Yunnan troops. At this time, he came to Jiangxi, and the two capital cities had been lost one after another, so he retreated to Ji'an.

古文：廷麟留与共守，用客礼待之。
现代文：廷麟留下他们一起守城，用待客的礼仪对待他们。
English: Tinglin left them to guard the city together and treated them with the etiquette of a guest.

古文：其将赵印选、胡一青频立功，而元吉约束甚严，诸将渐不悦。
现代文：他们的将领赵印选、胡一清多次立功，可是元吉对他们管得很严，云南的将领慢慢地就不高兴了。
English: Their generals, Zhao Yinxuan and Hu Yiching, made many meritorious achievements, but Yuanji kept a tight rein on them, and Yunnan's generals gradually became unhappy.

古文：时有广东兵亦以赴援至。
现代文：当时广东的部队也赴援来了。
English: At that time, Guangdong troops also came to the rescue.

古文：而新军张安者，汀、赣间峒贼四营之一，骁勇善战，既降，有复抚州功，且招他营尽降。
现代文：新军将领张安本是汀州、赣州之间峒贼四营之一，勇猛善战，归降后建立过收复抚州的战功，并且把其他三营峒贼也招降了。
English: Zhang Anben, the general of the new army, was one of the four battalions of bandits between Tingzhou and Zhangzhou. He fought bravely and well. After the surrender, he established the war exploits of recovering Fuzhou, and also invited the other three battalions of bandits to surrender.

古文：元吉以新军足恃也，蔑视云南、广东军，二军皆解体。
现代文：元吉认为新军足可依赖，蔑视云南、广东的部队，所以这两支部队就人心涣散了。
English: Yuanji believed that the new army could be relied on and despised the troops of Yunnan and Guangdong, so the two forces were dispersed.

古文：然安卒故为贼，居赣淫掠，遣援湖西，所过残破。
现代文：但是张安的士兵本来就是贼盗，住到赣州照旧奸侮妇女，抢劫财物，派他们增援湖西时，一路所过之处都被烧杀抢夺光了。
English: But Zhang An's soldiers were thieves by nature. When he sent them to reinforce Huxi from Zhangzhou, where they continued to rape women and loot property, they were burned, killed and robbed everywhere they went.

古文：及是，大兵逼吉安，诸军皆内携，新军又在湖西。
现代文：到这时大清部队来打吉安，其他各路士兵都身在外无法忘家，不肯力战，新军还在湖西。
English: At this time, the Qing Dynasty troops came to fight Ji'an, and the other soldiers were unable to forget home and refused to fight. The new army was still in the west of the lake.

古文：城中军不战溃，城遂破。
现代文：所以吉安城里的部队不战而溃，城就被打下了。
English: Therefore, the troops in Ji'an City were defeated without a fight, and the city was taken down.

古文：元吉退屯皂口，檄谕赣州极言云南兵弃城罪，其众遂西去。
现代文：元吉退驻皂口，向赣州送去檄文极力讲述云南部队弃城出逃的罪行，云南部队就干脆往西边走掉了。
English: Yuanji retreated to Soekou and sent Xingwen to Zhangzhou to try to tell the Yunnan troops about the crime of abandoning the city and fleeing. The Yunnan troops simply walked away to the west.

古文：四月，大兵逼皂口，元吉不能御，入赣城。
现代文：四月，大清兵赶到皂口，元吉无力防御，就躲进了赣州城。
English: In April, the Qing soldiers arrived at Soekou, and Yuanji, unable to defend himself, hid in Zhangzhou City.

古文：大兵乘胜抵城下。
现代文：大清兵乘胜开到了赣州城下。
English: The victorious Qing soldiers drove to the outskirts of Zhangzhou.

古文：给事中杨文荐奉命湖南，过赣，入城共守御，城中赖之。
现代文：给事中杨文荐奉命到湖南去，路过赣州时就进城和大家一起守御，赣州城中很大程度上依赖他了。
English: During the incident, Yang Wenxian was ordered to go to Hunan, and when he passed Zhangzhou, he entered the city and guarded it with everyone. Zhangzhou city relied on him to a large extent.

古文：文荐，元吉门生也。
现代文：文荐是元吉的门生。
English: Wenxin is a protégé of Yuanji.

古文：元吉素有才，莅事精敏。
现代文：元吉一向很有才干，办事精明勤快。
English: Motokichi has always been very talented, shrewd and diligent.

古文：及失吉安，士不用命，昏然坐城上，对将吏不交一言。
现代文：等吉安失守后，士兵也不听命令了，他昏头昏脑地坐在城墙上面，对将吏一言不发。
English: After the loss of Jian, the soldiers did not listen to orders, and he sat on the city wall in a daze, not saying a word to the generals.

古文：隔河大营遍山麓，指为空营。
现代文：河对岸大清兵营扎遍了山麓，他都说成是空营。
English: On the other side of the river, the Daqing Battalion camped all over the foothills, and he said that they were empty.

古文：兵民从大营中至，言敌势盛，辄叱为间谍，斩之。
现代文：有士兵或有百姓从大清兵营中逃出到此的说起敌人力量强大，元吉都指斥他们是间谍，把人给斩了。
English: When a soldier or a commoner who had escaped from a military camp in the Qing Dynasty came here and said that the enemy was very powerful, the Yuan Dynasty accused them of being spies and had them beheaded.

古文：江西巡抚刘远生令张琮者，将兵趋湖东。及赣围急，远生自出城，召琮于雩都。
现代文：江西巡抚刘远生命令一个叫张琮的将领带兵增援湖东，等赣州之围紧急时远生亲自出城到雪都去叫张琮。
English: Liu Yuan, the governor of Jiangxi Province, ordered a general named Zhang Xuan to reinforce the eastern part of the lake, and when there was an emergency in Zhangzhou, he personally went out of the city to Xuedu to call Zhang Xuan.

古文：赣人曰 抚军遁矣 ，怒焚其舟，拘远生妻子。
现代文：赣州人说 巡抚大人的军队逃跑了 ，愤怒地烧了远生部队的船，收捕了他的妻子。
English: Zhangzhou people said that the governor's army ran away, angrily burned the ship of the distant troops and arrested his wife.

古文：俄远生率琮兵至，赣人乃大悔。
现代文：不久远生率领张琮的部队回城来，赣州人才十分地后悔了。
English: Soon after, Yuan Sheng led Zhang Ye's troops back to the city, and the people of Zhangzhou regretted it very much.

古文：琮军渡河，抵梅林，中伏大败，还至河，争舟，多死于水。
现代文：张琮的部队渡过河前进，到梅林时中了埋伏，大败而回，到河边时为了争船很多人死在河里了。
English: Zhang Xuan's troops crossed the river and advanced. When they reached Meilin, they were ambushed and returned defeated. When they reached the river, many people died in the river because of the boat race.

古文：远生愤甚，五月朔，渡河再战，身先士卒，遇大兵，被获，复逃归。
现代文：远生恼火极了，于五月初一渡过河再次交战，他身先士卒，遇上大批部队的还击，他被抓住了，又逃了回去。
English: Enraged, he crossed the river in early May and fought again, leading a large force that fought back. He was caught and fled back.

古文：而新军先往湖西者，闻吉安复失，仍还雩都。
现代文：以前派到湖西的新军听说吉安失守又回了雩都。
English: The new troops previously sent to Huxi heard that Ji'an had fallen and returned to Shidu.

古文：廷麟躬往邀之，与大兵战梅林，再败，乃散遣其军，而身入城，与元吉同守。
现代文：廷麟亲自去邀请他们过来，在梅林与大清部队交战，又失败了，廷麟于是疏散了新军，自己进城来和元吉一起守城。
English: Tinglin personally invited them to come over, fought with the Qing troops in Meilin, and failed again. Tinglin then evacuated the new army and went into the city to defend the city with Yuanji.

古文：自远生败，援军皆不敢前。
现代文：自从远生战败以后，各地援兵都不敢向前去交战了。
English: Since the defeat of Yuan Sheng, reinforcements from all over the country did not dare to go forward to fight.

古文：六月望，副将吴之蕃以广东兵五千至，围渐解，未几复合，城中守如初。
现代文：六月十五，副将吴之蕃带领广东兵五千人到来，城外的包围圈逐渐被解除，不久又把城给围了起来，赣州军民和以前一样进行固守。
English: On June 15th, Vice Admiral Wu Zhixuan led five thousand Guangdong soldiers to arrive. The encirclement outside the city was gradually lifted, and soon the city was surrounded again. The soldiers and citizens of Zhangzhou defended themselves as before.

古文：王闻赣围久，奖劳之，赐名忠诚府，加元吉兵部尚书，文荐右佥都御史，使尚书郭维经来援。
现代文：唐王听说赣州外围未下，就奖励、慰劳了这里的官兵，把赣州赐名为忠诚府，加封元吉为兵部尚书，文荐为右佥都御史，派尚书郭维经过来支援。
English: When the Tang Dynasty king heard that the outskirts of Zhangzhou had not yet fallen, he rewarded and consoled the officers and soldiers here. He gave Zhangzhou the name of Loyalty Palace, added the title of Yuanji to the military department of Shangshu, recommended the title of Right Wing Capital Imperial Historian, and sent Shangshu Guo Wei to support.

古文：维经与御史姚奇胤沿途募兵，得八千人。
现代文：维经和御史姚奇元沿途募兵，招到八千人。
English: Wei Jing and Mi Shi Yao Qiyuan recruited soldiers along the way and recruited eight thousand people.

古文：元吉部将汪起龙率师数千，云南援将赵印选、胡一青率师三千，大学士苏观生遣兵如之。两广总督丁魁楚亦遣兵四千。廷麟又收集散亡，得数千。
现代文：元吉的部将汪起龙率兵四千，云南援将赵印选、胡一青率兵三千，大学士苏观生也派来了这么多人，两广总督丁魁楚也派兵四千，廷麟又收集散亡，得了几千人。
English: Wang Qilong, the minister of Yuanji, led 4,000 soldiers; Zhao Yinxuan, the Yunnan aid commander, and Hu Yizhong led 3,000 soldiers; the university scholar Su Guansheng also sent so many people; the governor of the two provinces, Ding Kui Chu, also sent 4,000 soldiers; and Ting Lin collected the scattered people and gained several thousand people.

古文：先后至赣，营于城外。
现代文：这些部队先后来到赣州，在城外扎下兵营。
English: These troops first came to Zhangzhou and set up barracks outside the city.

古文：诸将欲战，元吉待水师至并击。
现代文：诸将欲战，元吉要求等水师来后一起进攻。
English: The generals wanted to fight, and Motokichi demanded that they attack together after the sailors came.

古文：而中书舍人来从谔募砂兵三千，吏部主事龚棻、兵部主事黎遂球募水师四千，皆屯南安，不敢下。
现代文：当时中书舍人来以谔招募了三千砂兵，吏部主事龚盞、兵部主事黎遂球招募了四千水兵，都驻扎在南安不敢过来。
English: At that time, the person in charge of calligraphy and calligraphy came to Yili to recruit three thousand sand soldiers, the person in charge of the personnel department and the person in charge of the military department recruited four thousand sailors, and they were all stationed in Nan'an and dared not come over.

古文：主事王其狖谓元吉曰： 水师帅罗明受海盗也，桀骜难制，棻、遂球若慈母之奉骄子。
现代文：主事王其对元吉说 ：水师将领罗明受是个海盗，凶暴难制，龚盞、遂球对他们就像慈母宠爱自己的儿子一样小心。
English: The host, Wang, said to Yuanji, "The sailor general, Luo Mingzhu, is a pirate. He is ferocious and difficult to control. Therefore, you should be as careful with him as a mother is with her son."

古文：且今水涸，臣舟难进，岂能如约。 
现代文：况且现在水浅，大船开不过来，怎么能如约赶来呢？ 
English: Besides, the water is shallow now, and the big boat can't make it, so how can we make it as promised?

古文：不听。
现代文：元吉不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：及八月，大兵闻水师将至，即夜截诸江，焚巨舟八十，死者无算，明受遁还，舟中火药戎器尽失。
现代文：到八月份，大清部队听说水师要过来，就在江面上夜截纵火，烧毁了他们八十艘大船，死人无数，明受逃回，船上的火药、兵器全丢了。
English: By August, the Qing Dynasty troops heard that the sailors were coming, so they set fire to the river at night, burned their eighty large ships, killed countless people, fled back, and lost all the gunpowder and weapons on the ship.

古文：于是两广、云南军不战而溃，他营亦稍稍散去。
现代文：于是两广、云南部队不战而逃，其他部队也稍有逃散。
English: As a result, troops from Guangxi and Yunnan fled without a fight, and other troops also fled.

古文：城中仅起龙、维经部卒四千余人，城外仅水师后营二千余人。
现代文：赣州城里只剩下起龙、维经部下的士兵四千多人，城外只剩下水师后营的两千多人。
English: Only more than four thousand soldiers from the Kailong and the Book Preservation Division remained in Zhangzhou City, and only more than two thousand from the rear battalion of sailors remained outside the city.

古文：参将谢志良拥众万余雩都不进，廷麟调广西狼兵八千人逾岭，亦不即赴。
现代文：参将谢志良在雩都拥兵万余不来援救，廷麟调广西狼兵八千人翻越山岭过来，这些狼兵也不肯赶紧赴援。
English: General Xie Zhiliang did not come to the rescue with more than ten thousand soldiers in Shudu, and Tinglin transferred eight thousand Guangxi wolf soldiers to come over the mountains. These wolf soldiers also refused to rush to the rescue.

古文：会闻汀州破，人情益震惧。
现代文：恰好这时又听说汀州被打下了，人心更加震惊恐惧。
English: Just then, they heard that Tingzhou had been defeated, and people were even more shocked and frightened.

古文：十月初，大兵用向导夜登城，乡勇犹巷战。
现代文：十月初，大清兵在向导引领下登上城墙，当地的民兵仍进行巷战抵抗。
English: At the beginning of October, the Great Qing soldiers climbed the city wall under the guidance of a guide, and the local militias were still engaged in street fighting.

古文：黎明，兵大至，城遂破，元吉死之。
现代文：黎明时分，大批部队开来，赣州城终于被打下来。元吉与城共亡了。
English: At dawn, a large number of troops came, and Zhangzhou City was finally defeated. Yuanji and the city died together.

古文：先是，元吉禁妇女出城。
现代文：在这之前元吉禁止妇女走出城门。
English: Prior to this, Motoyoshi forbade women to leave the city gates.

古文：其家人潜载其妾缒城去，元吉遣飞骑追还，捶其家人，故城中无敢出者。
现代文：他的家人偷偷把他的妾从城墙上缒下去，想逃走，元吉派人骑马去追了回来，把家人捶打了一顿，所以城中没人敢出逃了。
English: His family secretly took his concubine down from the city wall and tried to escape, but Yuanji sent a man on horseback to chase them back and beat up his family, so no one in the city dared to escape.

古文：及城破，部将拥元吉出城。
现代文：到城陷落时，元吉的部将把他护送到城外，元吉叹息说： 替我向赣州人说声对不起吧！
English: When the city fell, Motokichi's subordinates escorted him out of the city. Motokichi sighed and said, "Say I'm sorry to Zhangzhou for me!"

古文：元吉叹曰： 为我谢赣人，使阖城涂炭者我也，我何可独存！ 遂赴水死，年四十有四。
现代文：使全城生灵涂炭的，是我啊，我怎么能独自活下去呢？ 于是投水自尽了，终年四十四岁。
English: How can I live alone? So I drowned myself and died at the age of forty-four.

古文：杨文荐，字幼宇，京山人。
现代文：杨文荐，字幼宇，京山人。
English: Recommended by Yang Wen, written by Zhaoyu, from Jingshan.

古文：惟三孙得存。
现代文：由进士出身担任兵科给事中。
English: He has been in the military since he was a cadet.

古文：有小婢见之，亦投井死。
现代文：赣州城失守时，他正病得不能起床，被抓获后送到南昌，他粒米不进，绝食而死了。
English: When the defense of Zhangzhou was lost, he was so ill that he could not get out of bed. He was captured and sent to Nanchang. He could not eat a grain of rice and died of starvation.

古文：张家玉，字元子，东莞人。
现代文：张家玉，字元子，东莞人。
English: Zhang Jiayu, a native of Dongguan.

古文：崇祯十六年进士。改庶吉士。
现代文：崇祯十六年进士，改选为庶吉士。
English: He entered the priesthood in the 16th year of the Chongzhen era, and was re-elected as an associate priest.

古文：李自成陷京师，被执。
现代文：李自成打下北京后，他被捉拿住。
English: After Li Zicheng defeated Beijing, he was captured.

古文：上书自成，请旌己门为： 翰林院庶吉士张先生之庐 ，而褒恤范景文、周凤翔等，隆礼刘宗周、黄道周，尊养史可程、魏学濂。
现代文：曾上书给自成，请把自己家题为 翰林院庶吉士张先生之庐 ，并表彰、抚恤范景文、周凤翔等人，用厚礼对待刘宗周、黄道周，尊敬地赡养史可程、魏学廉。
English: Once wrote to Zicheng, please give your family the title of "Hanlin Academy's second son of Mr. Zhang," and commend and support Fan Jingwen, Zhou Fengxiang and others, treat Liu Zongzhou and Zodiac Zhou with courtesy, and respectfully support Shi Kecheng and Wei Xuelian.

古文：自称殷人从周，愿学孔子，称自成大顺皇帝。
现代文：自称他愿意像孔子一样，以殷人后裔的身份服从周朝，称自成为大顺皇帝。
English: He said that he was willing to obey the Zhou Dynasty as a descendant of the Yin people, just like Confucius, and claimed to be the Emperor of Dashun.

古文：自成怒，召之入，长揖不跪。
现代文：自成恼了，把他招进来，家玉深深作了一个揖却不肯跪拜。
English: He was annoyed with himself and invited him in. Iyadama made a deep bow but refused to kneel.

古文：缚午门外三日，复胁之降，怵以极刑，卒不动。
现代文：自成把他在午门外绑了三天，又强迫他投降，并用死刑来恫吓他，家玉最终不动摇。
English: Zicheng tied him up for three days outside the Noon Gate, forced him to surrender, and threatened him with the death penalty. In the end, Jia Yu did not waver.

古文：自成曰： 当磔汝父母！ 
现代文：自成说 ：我要把你爹娘都五马分尸！ 
English: Zicheng said, "I'm going to dismember your father and mother!"

古文：乃跪。
现代文：家玉一听就赶紧跪下来。
English: As soon as I heard it, I got down on my knees.

古文：时其父母在岭南，家玉遽自屈，人咸笑之。
现代文：当时他的父母远在岭南，家玉就因此屈服了，人们都嘲笑他。
English: At that time, his parents were far away in Lingnan, so Iegyoku gave in and people laughed at him.

古文：贼败南归。
现代文：闯贼败后他回到南方来。
English: He returned south after the break-in.

古文：阮大铖等攻家玉荐宗周、道周于贼，令收人望，集群党。
现代文：阮大铖等人攻击他把宗周、道周推荐给闯贼，让他收拢人心，招集党羽。
English: Nguyen Dai Quan and others attacked him for recommending Zong Zhou and Dao Zhou to the intruders, asking him to win over people's hearts and rally the party's ranks.

古文：家玉遂被逮。
现代文：家玉于是遭到逮捕。
English: Iyotama was then arrested.

古文：明年，南都失守，脱归。
现代文：第二年，南京失守，他逃回家乡。
English: The following year, when Nanjing fell, he fled back to his hometown.

古文：从唐王入福建，擢翰林侍讲，监郑彩军。
现代文：后来跟着唐王到了福建，唐王提升他为翰林侍讲，让他监督郑彩的军队。
English: Later, he followed Tang Wang to Fujian. Tang Wang promoted him to the position of Hanlin attendant and let him supervise Zheng Cai's army.

古文：出杉关，谋复江西，解抚州之围。
现代文：他们开出杉关，打算光复江西，解救抚州之围。
English: They set out from Sugiguan, intending to recover all of Jiangxi and relieve the siege of Fuzhou.

古文：顺治三年，风闻大兵至，彩即奔入关，家玉走新城。
现代文：顺治三年，传闻说大清兵来了，郑彩就逃出杉关，家玉跑到新城去了。
English: Shunzhi three years, rumor has it that the Qing soldiers came, Zheng Cai escaped from Sugiguan, Ieyasu went to Xincheng.

古文：大兵来攻，出战，中矢，堕马折臂，走入关。
现代文：大清兵来攻打新城，家玉出来迎战，中了一箭，从马上摔下摔断了胳膊，逃进杉关去了。
English: The Great Qing soldiers came to attack Xincheng, Jia Yu came out to fight, hit an arrow, fell off his horse and broke his arm, and fled to Sugiguan.

古文：令以右佥都御史巡抚广信。广信已失，请募兵惠、潮，说降山贼数万，将赴赣州急。
现代文：唐王命令他以右佥都御史的头衔去巡抚广信，而广信已经沦陷，他请求到惠州、潮州募兵，劝降了几万名山贼，打算奔赴赣州救急。
English: Emperor Tang ordered him to take the title of the right-hand capital governor to supervise Guangxin, and Guangxin had fallen. He requested to go to Huizhou and Chaozhou to recruit soldiers, persuade tens of thousands of bandits to surrender, and planned to rush to Zhangzhou for emergency treatment.

古文：会大兵克汀州，乃归东莞。
现代文：正好大清兵打下了汀州，他于是返回东莞。
English: Just as the Qing soldiers defeated Tingzhou, he returned to Dongguan.

古文：四年，家玉与举人韩如璜结乡兵攻东莞城，知县郑霖降，乃籍前尚书李觉斯等赀以犒士。
现代文：四年，家玉和举人韩如璜联合民兵攻打东莞城，知县郑霖投降了，于是他们抄没了前尚书李觉斯等人的家产用来犒赏士兵。
English: In four years, Jiayu and Han Ruxuan's joint militia attacked Dongguan City. Zhixian Zhenglin surrendered, so they confiscated the family property of former Shangshu Li Jies and others to reward the soldiers.

古文：甫三日，大兵至，家玉败走。
现代文：才三天功夫，大清兵到了，家玉败走。
English: After only three days of hard work, the Qing soldiers arrived, and Iyadama was defeated and left.

古文：奉表永明王，进兵部尚书。
现代文：这时他上表给永明王，被提升为兵部尚书。
English: At this time, he submitted his report to King Yongming and was promoted to the military secretary.

古文：无何，大兵来击，如璜战死，家玉走西乡。
现代文：不久，大清兵来进攻，如璜阵亡了，家玉逃往西乡。
English: Soon, the Qing soldiers came to attack, Rugao was killed, and Iyadama fled to Xixiang.

古文：祖母陈、母黎、妹石宝俱赴水死。妻彭被执，不屈死，乡人歼焉。
现代文：他的祖母陈氏、母亲黎氏、妹妹石宝都投水自杀了，他的妻子彭氏被捉后，也不屈而死，他家乡的人被全部消灭了。
English: His grandmother Chen, his mother Li, and his sister Shi Bao all committed suicide by throwing themselves into the water. His wife Peng also died after being caught. The people of his hometown were all wiped out.

古文：西乡大豪陈文豹奉家玉取新安，袭东莞，战赤冈。
现代文：西乡的一个大豪强陈文豹支持家玉占领了新安，袭击东莞，又在赤冈交战。
English: A big strongman in Xixiang, Chen Wenpan, supported Jiayu to occupy Xin'an, attack Dongguan, and fight in Akaoka.

古文：未几，大兵大至，攻数日，家玉败走铁冈，文豹等皆死。
现代文：不久，大清的大部队大举而来，攻打了几天，家玉战败，逃往铁冈，文豹等都死了。
English: Soon, the large forces of the Great Qing Dynasty came in large numbers and attacked for several days. Iyotama was defeated and fled to Tiegang, and Wenliao and others all died.

古文：觉斯怨家玉甚，发其先垄，毁及家庙，尽灭家玉族，村市为墟。
现代文：觉斯把家玉恨透了，挖了他祖先的墓地，连家庙都给他拆毁了，全部消灭了他的族人，他家所在的乡村变成了一团废墟。
English: Kyos hated his family so much that he dug up his ancestors' graveyard and even demolished his family temple. All of his relatives were wiped out, and the village where his family was located was reduced to a pile of rubble.

古文：家玉过故里，号哭而去。
现代文：家玉从故乡经过时，痛哭着离开了。
English: When Iyadama passed by his hometown, he cried bitterly and left.

古文：道得众数千，取龙门、博罗、连平、长宁，遂攻惠州，克归善，还屯博罗。
现代文：路上他招集了几千名士兵，攻占了龙门、博罗、连平、长宁，接着攻打惠州，占领了归善，收兵驻扎在博罗。
English: On the way, he gathered several thousand soldiers, captured Longmen, Borough, Lianping, Changning, and then attacked Huizhou, occupied Guizhan, and garrisoned in Borough.

古文：大兵来攻，家玉走龙门，复募兵万余人。
现代文：大清兵过来攻打他，家玉退到龙门，又招募了一万多士兵。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty came to attack him, and Jia Yu retreated to Longmen and recruited more than ten thousand soldiers.

古文：家玉好击剑，任侠，多与草泽豪士游，故所至归附。
现代文：家玉喜欢击剑，以侠客自许，跟草泽上很多豪杰有来往，因此所到之处人们都服从他。
English: Iyotama likes fencing, considers himself a knight, and has dealings with many heroes in Kusazawa, so people obey him wherever he goes.

古文：乃分其众为龙、虎、犀、象四营，攻据增城。
现代文：他就把招募来的兵士分为龙、虎、犀、象四营，攻取了增城。
English: He divided the recruited soldiers into four battalions of dragons, tigers, rhinoceroses and elephants, and captured Zengcheng.

古文：十月，大兵步骑万余来击。
现代文：十月，大清部队的步兵和骑兵一万多人过来攻打增城。
English: In October, more than ten thousand infantrymen and cavalrymen of the Great Qing Army came to attack Zengcheng.

古文：家玉三分其兵，掎角相救，倚深溪高崖自固。
现代文：家玉把他的队伍分作三部，犄角相救，凭据高山巨谷固守。
English: Iyotama divided his team into three parts, saving each other at every turn and holding fast to the mountains and valleys.

古文：大战十日，力竭而败，被围数重。
现代文：大战了十天，兵力不支，战败了，里里外外被围了几层。
English: After ten days of war, the troops were exhausted and defeated. They were surrounded several layers deep.

古文：诸将请溃围出，家玉叹曰： 矢尽炮裂，欲战无具；将伤卒毙，欲战无人。
现代文：将领们劝他突围出去，家玉叹息说 ：箭射完了，炮震裂了，想打也没武器好打了；军官受了伤，士兵死了这么多，想打也没人能打下去了。
English: The generals advised him to break out of the encirclement, and Iyotama sighed and said, "The arrows have been shot, the cannons have shattered, and there is no weapon to fight if you want to fight; the officers have been injured, and so many soldiers have died, and no one can fight if they want to fight."

古文：乌用徘徊不决，以颈血溅敌人手哉！ 
现代文：为什么还要犹豫不决，等着用脖子上的血溅在敌人手上呢？ 
English: Why even hesitate, waiting to splatter the enemy's hands with the blood from your neck?

古文：因遍拜诸将，自投野塘中以死，年三十有三。
现代文：接着一个一个地拜别手下的将领，自己跳进野塘里死了，终年只有三十三岁。
English: Then, one by one, he bowed to the generals under his command, jumped into a pond and died, only thirty-three years old.

古文：明年，永明王赠家玉少保、武英殿大学士、吏部尚书、增城侯，谥文烈。
现代文：第二年，永明王追赠家玉为少保、武英殿大学士、吏部尚书、增城侯，谥文烈。
English: In the following year, King Yongming posthumously bestowed the family jewels to Shao Bao, Wu Ying Dian Daigaku Shih, Li Bu Shang Shu, Zeng Cheng Hou, and Zou Wen Rong.

古文：陈邦彦，字令斌，顺德人。
现代文：他的父亲张兆龙还在世，就把儿子的爵位封给了他。陈邦彦，字令斌，顺德人。
English: His father, Zhang Zhaolong, gave him the title of nobility while he was still alive. Chen Bangyan, also known as Lingbin, was from Shunde.

古文：为诸生，意气豪迈。
现代文：为县学生员，为人意气豪迈。
English: He is a member of the prefectural student body and is a spirited person.

古文：福王时，诣阙上政要三十二事，格不用，唐王聿键读而伟之。既自立，即其家授监纪推官。
现代文：福王在位时，他到朝廷里递上关于国家大事的三十二条意见，遭到回绝。唐王聿键读后极为赏识，他自立为皇帝以后，派人到邦彦家里任用他为监纪推官。
English: When Fu Wang was on the throne, he went to the imperial court to submit thirty-two opinions on the state affairs, but was rejected. After reading Tang Wang's Analects, he was highly appreciated. After he became the emperor, he sent someone to Bongyan's home to appoint him as the supervisor of discipline.

古文：未任，举于乡。
现代文：尚未接到任命，邦彦就乡试中举了。
English: Before receiving the appointment, Kunihiko passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：以苏观生荐，改职方主事，监广西狼兵，援赣州。
现代文：后来因为苏观生的推荐，邦彦改任职方主事，监督广西狼兵前往救援赣州。
English: Later, because of Su Guansheng's recommendation, Kunihiko changed his position to be in charge of supervising the Guangxi wolf soldiers to go to rescue Zhangzhou.

古文：至岭，闻汀州变，劝观生东保潮、惠，不听。
现代文：到达附近的山岭，就听说汀州出了事，他劝观生马上往南去驻守潮州、惠州，观生不听。
English: When he arrived at the nearby mountains, he heard that something had happened in Tingzhou. He advised the students to immediately go south to garrison Chaozhou and Huizhou, but the students would not listen.

古文：会丁魁楚等已立永明王监国于肇庆，观生遣邦彦入贺。
现代文：正好丁魁楚等人已经拥立永明王在肇庆监国，观生派邦彦前往祝贺。
English: Just as Ding Kui Chu and others have supported Yongming Wang in Zhaoqing supervising the country, Guan Sheng sent Kunihiko to congratulate him.

古文：王因赣州破，惧逼己，西走梧州。
现代文：永明王因为赣州被打了下来，怕大清兵进逼自己，就向西到了梧州。
English: Because Yongming Wang was beaten down in Zhangzhou, he was afraid that the Qing soldiers would force themselves on him, so he went west to Wuzhou.

古文：邦彦甫入谒，而观生别立唐王聿于广州，邦彦不知也。
现代文：邦彦刚刚进见，观生却又在广州拥立了唐王聿钅粤，邦彦还不知道。
English: Kunihiko had just entered the priesthood, but Kansho had established the Tang Dynasty in Guangzhou. Kunihiko didn't know it yet.

古文：夜二鼓，王遣中使十余辈召入舟中。
现代文：晚上二更天时，永明王派了十几个宦官把邦彦召进船内。
English: At dusk, King Yongming sent a dozen eunuchs to call Kunihiko into the ship.

古文：王太后垂帘坐，王西向坐，魁楚侍，语以广州事。
现代文：王太后垂帘坐着，永明王脸朝西坐着，魁楚在一边侍立，把广州的事对邦彦讲了。
English: The empress dowager sat with the curtains drawn, King Yongming sat with his face to the west, and Qui Chu stood at one side and told Kunihiko about Guangzhou.

古文：邦彦请急还肇庆，正大位以系人心。
现代文：邦彦请永明王立即回肇庆，正式登基，以便团结人心。
English: Kunihiko asked King Yongming to immediately return to Zhaoqing and officially ascend the throne in order to unite the hearts of the people.

古文：命南雄勍卒取韶，制粤东十郡之七，而委其三于唐王，代我受敌，从而乘其敝。
现代文：命令南雄的精兵占领韶关，控制广东十郡中的七郡，把剩下的三郡丢给唐王，让他替我们挨打，然后我们再乘他战乱以后的弱势把三郡夺回来。
English: He ordered the elite soldiers of Nanxiong to occupy Shaoguan, control seven of the ten counties in Guangdong, and throw the remaining three counties to Tang Wang, let him be beaten for us, and then we will take advantage of his weakness after the war to win back the three counties.

古文：王大悦，立擢兵科给事中，赍敕还谕观生。
现代文：永明王听了十分高兴，立即提拔邦彦为兵科给事中，让他捧着敕令回去教导观生。
English: King Yongming was very pleased to hear this, and immediately promoted Kunihiko to the military science department, and let him go back to teach the students with the imperial edict.

古文：抵广州，闻使臣彭耀被杀，乃遣从人授观生敕，而自以书晓利害。
现代文：邦彦到了广州后，听说使臣彭火翟被杀了，就派随行人员把永明王的敕令送交观生，自己也写了一封信给观生讲明利害。
English: After Kunihiko arrived in Guangzhou, he heard that the envoy Peng Huan was killed, and he sent his entourage to deliver King Yongming's edict to Guan Sheng. He also wrote a letter to Guan Sheng to explain his interests.

古文：观生犹豫累日，欲议和，会闻永明王兵大败，不果。
现代文：观生犹豫了几天，正打算议和，赶巧得知永明王的部队被自己打得大败，就没有进行议和。
English: Guan Sheng hesitated for a few days, intending to negotiate a peace, but when he learned that King Yongming's troops had been defeated by his own troops, he did not negotiate a peace.

古文：邦彦遂变姓名入高明山中。
现代文：邦彦于是改名换姓进高明山隐居去了。
English: Kunihiko changed his name and went into seclusion on Mount Gaoming.

古文：顺治三年冬十二月，大兵破广州，观生死，列城悉下，邦彦乃谋起兵。
现代文：顺治三年十二月，大清兵打下广州，观生死了，周围的城镇都被打了下来，于是邦彦打算起兵。
English: In December of the third year of Shunzhi, the soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty defeated Guangzhou, Guan Sheng died, and the surrounding towns were defeated, so Kunihiko planned to raise an army.

古文：初，赣州万元吉遣族人万年募兵于广，得余龙等千余人，未行而赣州失。
现代文：起初，赣州的万元吉派族人万年在广州募兵，召到了余龙等一千多人，还没出发赣州就失陷了。
English: At the beginning, the Yuanjipai people of Zhangzhou recruited soldiers in Guangzhou, and more than a thousand people, including Yu Long, were called up. However, Zhangzhou was lost before they set out.

古文：龙等无所归，聚甘竹滩为盗，他溃卒多附，至二万余人。
现代文：余龙等人没处去，就聚集在甘竹滩当强盗，别的地方的散兵又有很多人加入，发展到了两万多人。
English: With nowhere else to go, Yulong and the others gathered at Ganzhu Beach to become bandits, and many people from other places joined them, growing to more than twenty thousand.

古文：总督朱治忄间招降之，既而噪归。
现代文：总督朱治忄间把他们予以招安，后来他们又哗变而去。
English: Governor Zhu Zhisheng temporarily gave them a safe haven, but later they mutinied and left.

古文：四年春，大兵定广州，克肇庆、梧州，败走治忄间，杀魁楚，前驱抵平乐。
现代文：四年春天，大清兵平定广州后，又打下肇庆、梧州，把治忄间打败、赶走，杀掉了魁楚，大军前锋抵达平乐。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, after the Qing soldiers had successfully subdued Guangzhou, they also defeated Zhaoqing and Wuzhou, defeated and drove away Jizhong, and killed Quichu. The vanguard of the great army arrived in Pingle.

古文：永明王方自梧道平乐，走桂林，势危甚。
现代文：永明王正从梧州取路平乐，前往桂林，形势十分危急。
English: Yongming Wang is on his way from Wuzhou to Guilin, the situation is very critical.

古文：邦彦乃说龙乘间图广州，而己发高明兵由海道入珠江与龙会。
现代文：邦彦于是劝余龙趁此机会谋取广州，他自己调高明的兵力从海路进入珠江跟余龙会合。
English: Kunihiko then advised Yulong to take advantage of this opportunity to seek Guangzhou, and he himself transferred high-ranking troops from the sea into the Pearl River to meet with Yulong.

古文：且遣张家玉书曰： 桂林累卵，但得牵制毋西，浔、平间可完葺，是我致力于此而收功于彼也。 
现代文：邦彦又给张家玉写信说 ：桂林眼下势如累卵，只要我们能牵制清兵不往西去，使浔州、平乐得以保全，就可以说是我们在这边使劲，在那边看见成功了。 
English: Kunihiko also wrote a letter to Zhang Jiayu, saying: Guilin is in a precarious situation at the moment. As long as we can restrain the Qing soldiers from going west, so that Luzhou and Pingle can be preserved, we can say that we have worked hard here and have seen success there.

古文：家玉以为然。
现代文：家玉认为是这样。
English: Iyadama thinks so.

古文：然龙卒故无纪律，大兵自桂林还救，扬言取甘竹滩，龙等顾其家，辄退，邦彦亦却归。
现代文：但是余龙的队伍原本不守纪律，大清兵从桂林回师解救广州之围，扬言说要攻打甘竹滩，余龙等要回护自己的家，就撤兵走了，邦彦也只好退回去。
English: However, Yu Long's team was not disciplined. The Qing soldiers returned from Guilin to relieve the siege of Guangzhou. They threatened to attack Ganzhu Beach, and Yu Long wanted to protect his home. They withdrew, and Kunihiko had no choice but to return.

古文：既，乃遣门人马应芳会龙军取顺德。
现代文：后来，邦彦派自己的门人马应芳联合余龙的队伍攻占了顺德。
English: Later, Kunihiko sent his protégé, Ma Yingfang, to conquer Shunde together with Yu Long's team.

古文：无何，大兵至，龙战败，应芳被执，赴水死。
现代文：不久大清兵到来，余龙战败，应芳被捉住后跳水自杀死了。
English: Soon after, the Qing soldiers arrived, Yu Long was defeated, and Ying Fang committed suicide by jumping into the water after being caught.

古文：四月，龙再战黄连江，亦败殁。
现代文：四月，余龙在黄连江再战，也兵败身死了。
English: In April, Yu Long fought again in the Huanglian River, but was defeated and died.

古文：大兵攻家玉于新安。邦彦乃弃高明，收余众，徇下江门据之。
现代文：大清兵到新安去攻打家玉，邦彦于是离开高明的队伍，收罗各地残兵余勇，沿江下去占据了江门。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty went to Xin'an to attack Iyadama. Therefore, Kunihiko left Gao Ming's team, collected the remnants of soldiers from all over the country, and went down the river to occupy Jiangmen.

古文：初，广州之围，大兵知谋出邦彦，求其家，获妾何氏及二子，厚遇之，为书招邦彦。
现代文：当初的广州之围，大清兵知道出自邦彦的策划，就搜了他的家，抓到他的妾何氏和他的两个儿子，好好款待他们，让他们写信招邦彦过来。
English: During the initial siege of Guangzhou, the Qing soldiers knew of Kunihiko's plans, so they searched his home, caught his concubine He and his two sons, treated them well, and asked them to write to Kunihiko to invite him over.

古文：邦彦判书尾曰： 妾辱之，子杀之。
现代文：邦彦在信的后边批写一笔说： 妾辱没了我，儿子要害死我了。
English: Kunihiko wrote a note at the back of the letter saying: "My mistress has humiliated me and my son is going to kill me."

古文：身为忠臣，义不顾妻子。 
现代文：我身为一名忠臣，按道理就不能管妻子、儿女的死活！ 
English: As a loyal subject, I can't control the life and death of my wife and children!

古文：七月与陈子壮密约，复攻广州。
现代文：七月，他和陈子壮秘密约定再一次攻打广州。
English: In July, he and Chen Zizhong secretly agreed to attack Guangzhou again.

古文：子壮如其计，果焚舟数十。
现代文：子壮先赶到，发现秘密已经泄漏，打算撤退。
English: Zi Zhuang arrived first, found that the secret had leaked, and planned to retreat.

古文：大兵引而西，邦彦尾之。会日暮，子壮不能辨旗帜，疑皆敌舟也，阵动。
现代文：邦彦的部队也到来，就定计在禺珠洲一侧埋下伏兵，等大清兵回头来救首府时，放火攻他们的船只。大清兵向西撤退，邦彦尾随而来。碰上天黑，子壮没能认清旗帜，怀疑都是敌船，乱了阵。
English: Kunihiko's troops also arrived, and they planned to lay an ambush on the other side of Luzhou, and when the Great Qing soldiers returned to save the capital, they set fire to their ships. The Great Qing soldiers retreated to the west, and Kunihiko followed. When it was dark, the young men could not recognize the flag, suspected that they were enemy ships, and the battle was chaotic.

古文：大兵顺风追击，遂大溃。
现代文：大清兵顺着风向追击他们，他们就大败了。
English: The Qing soldiers followed the wind and chased them, and they were defeated.

古文：子壮奔高明，邦彦奔三水。
现代文：子壮逃往高明，邦彦投奔三水。
English: Zi Zhuang fled to Gaoming, and Kunihiko fled to Sanshui.

古文：八月，清远指挥白常灿以城迎邦彦。
现代文：八月，清远指挥白常灿打开城门，迎接邦彦。
English: In August, Qingyuan commander Bai Changcan opened the city gate to welcome Kunihiko.

古文：乃入清远，与诸生朱学熙婴城固守。
现代文：邦彦就进驻清远，和童生朱学熙一起带兵环城坚守。
English: Kunihiko was stationed in Qingyuan, and together with his son Zhu Xuehui, he led troops to defend Huancheng.

古文：邦彦自起兵，日一食，夜则坐而假寐，与其下同劳苦，故军最强，尝分兵救诸营之败者。
现代文：邦彦自从起兵以后，每天只吃一顿饭，夜间就坐着假睡，跟部下一起分担劳苦，所以他的队伍最强干。他还曾经分派兵力去营救战败的其他队伍呢。
English: Ever since he joined the army, Kunihiko has only eaten one meal a day. At night, he sits and pretends to sleep, sharing the work with his subordinates, so his team is the strongest. He has also sent troops to rescue other teams that have been defeated.

古文：至是精锐尽丧，外无援军。
现代文：到现在，他的精锐兵力丧失完了，城外也没有援兵。
English: By now, he had lost all his best troops, and there were no reinforcements outside the city.

古文：越数日，城破，常灿死。
现代文：过了几天，清远城被打了下来，常灿死了。
English: A few days later, Qingyuan City was knocked down, and Changcan died.

古文：邦彦率数十人巷战，肩受三刃，不死，走朱氏园，见学熙缢，拜哭之。旋被执，馈之食，不食，系狱五日，被戮。
现代文：邦彦率领几十个人继续巷战，肩上被砍了三刀，没死，逃到朱氏的花园中，看到学熙上吊死了，就给他祭拜、哭丧，过一会儿功夫也被抓获，给他送来食品，他不吃，在牢中关了五天后，被杀掉了。
English: Kunihiko led dozens of people to continue the street battle. He was slashed three times on the shoulder, but did not die. He fled to the garden of the Zhu family. When he saw that Xuehui had hanged himself, he gave him worship and mourned. After a while, Kungfu was also captured. Food was sent to him, but he did not eat it. After five days in prison, he was killed.

古文：邦彦死，子壮被执。逾月，家玉亦自沉。
现代文：邦彦死后，子壮也被抓了，过了一个月，家玉也跳水自杀了。
English: After Kunihiko's death, Zizou was also arrested. A month later, Iyotama also committed suicide by jumping into the water.

古文：永明王赠邦彦兵部尚书，谥忠愍，荫子锦衣指挥。
现代文：永明王追赠邦彦为兵部尚书，谥忠愍，荫封他的儿子为锦衣指挥。
English: King Yongming posthumously bestowed Kunihiko with the titles of Heibu Shosho (Commander-in-Chief of the Imperial General Staff) and Shizhong Zhongxuan (Commander-in-Chief of the Korean People's Army), and his son was given the title of Komei no kami (Commander-in-Chief of the Korean People's Army).

古文：苏观生，字宇霖，东莞人。
现代文：苏观生，字宇霖，东莞人。
English: Su Guansheng, Zi Yulin, Dongguan people.

古文：年三十始为诸生。
现代文：他三十岁时才为县学生员。
English: He did not become a member of the prefectural student council until he was thirty.

古文：崇祯中，由保举授无极知县。
现代文：崇祯年间，经保举担任了无极县知县。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he was awarded the title of Wuji County Chixian.

古文：总督范志完荐其才，进永平同知，监纪军事，寻迁户部员外郎。
现代文：总督范志完推荐说他有才干，朝廷晋升他为永平同知，监察军队的作战纪律，不久升为户部员外郎。
English: Governor Fan Zhiguang recommended that he was talented, and the imperial court promoted him as Yongping's confidant, supervising the military's operational discipline, and soon he was promoted to the position of household member.

古文：十七年，京师陷，脱还南京，进郎中，催饷苏州。
现代文：十七年，京师失陷，他逃回南京，升任郎中，到苏州催收粮饷。
English: In the seventeenth year, after the fall of Beijing, he fled back to Nanjing, was promoted to junior vassal, and went to Suzhou to collect grain.

古文：明年五月，南京破，走杭州。
现代文：第二年五月，南京被打下，他逃往杭州。
English: In May of the following year, when Nanjing was defeated, he fled to Hangzhou.

古文：会唐王聿键至，观生谒王。
现代文：刚好唐王朱聿键到了，观生前往拜见。
English: Just as King Zhu Xi of Tang arrived, the students went to visit him.

古文：王与语大悦，联舟入福建。
现代文：唐王和他谈话后十分高兴，和他一道乘船到了福建。
English: Tang Wang was very happy after talking with him, and took a boat to Fujian with him.

古文：与郑芝龙、鸿逵兄弟拥立王，擢为翰林学士，旋进礼部右侍郎兼学士。
现代文：观生和郑芝龙、鸿逵兄弟两个一道拥立唐王做了皇帝，唐王提升他为翰林学士，不久升任礼部右侍郎兼学士。
English: Guan Sheng, together with Zheng Zhilong and Hongyao brothers, supported Tang Wang and made him emperor. Tang Wang promoted him to Hanlin Scholar, and soon he was promoted to Right Attendant and Scholar of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：设储贤馆，分十二科，招四方士，令观生领之。
现代文：开设了储贤馆，分十二科，招揽四方人才，由观生负责其事。
English: A hall of sages was opened, divided into twelve subjects, to recruit talents from the four directions, and the students were responsible for it.

古文：观生矢清操，稍有文学，而时望不属。
现代文：观生发誓以清廉自持，也稍微有些文采、学识，不过当时他还没有什么名望。
English: Guan Sheng swore to keep himself clean and honest, and he was also somewhat literate and learned, but at that time he did not have any reputation.

古文：王以故人，恩眷出廷臣右，乃超拜东阁大学士，参机务。
现代文：唐王因为他是老部下，对他的眷爱和恩惠超过了别的朝臣，短时间内就破格提拔他做了东阁大学士，参与国家军政大事的处理。
English: Because he was an old subordinate, Emperor Tang favored him more than other courtiers. Within a short period of time, he was promoted to become a Dongge University scholar and participated in the handling of national military and political affairs.

古文：观生数赞王出师。见郑氏不足有为，事权悉为所握，请王赴赣州，经略江西、湖广。
现代文：观生多次敦请唐王出兵，看到郑氏不能够大有作为，那里一切事权都被他们把持着，就请唐王奔赴赣州，谋划江西、湖广。
English: Guan Sheng repeatedly urged Tang Wang to send troops. Seeing that the Zheng Clan could not do much, as they held all the power there, he asked Tang Wang to rush to Ganzhou to plan for Jiangxi and Hunan.

古文：王乃议观生先行。
现代文：唐王就决定让观生先过去。
English: Tang Wang decided to let Guan Sheng go first.

古文：明年，观生赴赣州，大征甲兵。饷不继，竟不能出师。
现代文：第二年，观生到了赣州，大力征兵买马，但因为粮饷跟不上，最终还是不能出兵作战。
English: In the second year, Guan Sheng went to Zhangzhou and vigorously recruited soldiers to buy horses, but because the grain supply could not keep up, he was ultimately unable to send troops to fight.

古文：时顺治三年三月，大兵破吉安，总督万元吉乞援，观生遣二百人往。
现代文：到了顺治三年三月，大清兵打下吉安，总督万元吉请求救援，观生派了二百人过去。
English: In March of the third year of Shunzhi, the Great Qing soldiers laid siege to Ji'an, Governor Yuanji requested rescue, and Guan Sheng sent two hundred people over.

古文：元吉令协守绵津滩，遇大兵，溃走。
现代文：元吉让他们帮助守卫绵津滩，碰上大清兵，他们就溃退了。
English: Yuanji asked them to help guard Mianzin Beach, but when they encountered the Qing soldiers, they retreated.

古文：元吉乃退回赣州，大兵遂围城。
现代文：元吉于是退回到赣州，大清兵跟着就包围了赣州城。
English: As a result, Yuanji retreated back to Zhangzhou, and the Qing soldiers then surrounded Zhangzhou City.

古文：观生走南康，赣人数告急，不敢援。
现代文：观生逃往南康，赣州几次派人告急求援，他都不敢去救援。
English: Guan Sheng fled to Nankang, and Zhangzhou sent people to appeal for emergency assistance several times. He did not dare to go for rescue.

古文：六月，大兵退屯水西，观生发三千人助赣守。
现代文：六月，大清兵撤退到水西扎营，观生才派了三千人过去帮助赣州守城。
English: In June, the Qing soldiers retreated to the west of the water and set up camp. Guan Sheng then sent three thousand soldiers to help defend the city of Zhangzhou.

古文：久之，他将战败。
现代文：过了很久，别的军队中将领战败。
English: After a long time, other army generals led the defeat.

古文：九月，大兵再攻赣州，三千人皆引去。
现代文：九月份大清兵再来攻城时，他的三千人就都撤退了。
English: When the Qing soldiers came to attack the city again in September, his three thousand people all retreated.

古文：时观生移驻南安，闽中急，不能救。
现代文：当时观生移兵驻扎在南安，福建战事危急时，他也没能过去援救。
English: At that time, Guan Sheng's soldiers were stationed in Nan'an. When the war in Fujian was critical, he was not able to come to the rescue.

古文：聿键死于汀州，赣州亦破，观生退入广州。
现代文：唐王聿键死在汀州，赣州也被打了下来，观生退入广州城。
English: Tang's king, Guan Jian, died in Tingzhou. Guan Jian was also defeated and Guan Sheng retreated to Guangzhou City.

古文：监纪主事陈邦彦劝观生疾趋惠、潮，扼漳、泉、两粤可自保。
现代文：监纪主事陈邦彦劝他赶快奔赴惠州、潮州，扼守漳、泉，那么两广还可以自保。
English: Supervisor Chen Bangyan advised him to go to Huizhou and Chaozhou as soon as possible, and keep a close watch on Handan and Quan, so that the two provinces could protect themselves.

古文：观生不从。
现代文：观生没有听从。
English: Guan Sheng did not listen.

古文：会丁魁楚等议立永明王，观生欲与共事。
现代文：正好丁魁楚等人讨论立永明王做皇帝，观生想和他们一道干。
English: Just as Ding Kui Chu and others were discussing the appointment of Yongming Wang as emperor, Guan Sheng wanted to work with them.

古文：魁楚素轻观生，拒不与议，吕大器亦叱辱之。
现代文：魁楚一向瞧不起他，拒绝和他商量，吕大器也把他训斥了一番。
English: Quaichu had always looked down on him and refused to consult with him, and Lv Da'i also reprimanded him.

古文：适唐王弟聿与大学士何吾驺自闽至，南海关捷先、番禺梁朝钟首倡兄终弟及议。
现代文：又碰巧唐王的弟弟聿钅粤和大学士何吾驺从福建来了，南海人关捷先、番禺人梁朝钟首先提出哥哥去世应由弟弟即位的意见。
English: It also happened that the Tang king's younger brother Zou Yue and the university scholar He Wuxi came from Fujian. Guan Jiesi from Nanhai and Liang Zhaozhong from Panyu first put forward the opinion that the younger brother should succeed to the throne after the death of the elder brother.

古文：观生遂与吾驺及布政使顾元镜，侍郎王应华、曾道唯等以十一月二日拥立王，就都司署为行宫。
现代文：观生就和吾驺以及布政使顾元镜、侍郎王应华、曾道唯等人于十一月二日拥立聿钅粤做了皇帝，把都司署当作行宫。
English: On November 2nd, Guan Sheng, together with Emperor Wu and the cloth-making officials Gu Yuanjing, Wang Yinghua, Zeng Daowei, and others, supported the enthronement of Emperor Wu of Guangdong, and treated the capital city as an imperial palace.

古文：即日封观生建明伯，掌兵部事，进吾驺等秩，擢捷先吏部尚书，旋与元镜、应华、道唯并拜东阁大学士，分掌诸部。
现代文：当天唐王就封观生为建明伯，掌管兵部的事务，提升了吾驺等人的官职，晋用捷先为吏部尚书，不久观生又和元镜、应华、道唯一起加官为东阁大学士，分管各部的事务。
English: On the same day, the Tang Dynasty crowned Guan Sheng as Jianming Bo, in charge of the affairs of the military department, and promoted the official positions of Wu Xi and others. Jin Yijian was appointed as the first secretary of the personnel department, and soon Guan Sheng, together with Yuan Jing, Ying Hua, and Daowei, were appointed as the Dongge University scholars, in charge of the affairs of each department.

古文：时仓卒举事，治宫室、服御、卤簿，通国奔走，夜中如昼。
现代文：当时唐王仓猝之间登基，为了修建宫室，治办车马、服饰、仪仗队，全国一片繁忙，晚上像白天一样不得安宁。
English: At that time, Tang Wangcang suddenly ascended to the throne, in order to build the palace, manage the chariots and horses, clothing, honor guard, the whole country was busy, and the night was as restless as the day.

古文：不旬日，除官数千，冠服皆假之优伶云。
现代文：不到十天功夫就封了几千人做官，衣冠袍带都是从戏子们那里借来的。
English: In less than ten days, several thousand people were made officials, and the crowns, robes and sashes were all borrowed from the actors.

古文：永明王监国肇庆，遣给事中彭耀、主事陈嘉谟赍敕往谕。
现代文：永明王在肇庆监国以后，派给事中彭、主事陈嘉谟拿着敕令过去向唐王宣示。
English: After Zhao Qing became the overseer of the country, King Yongming sent Peng to the middle of the matter, and the leader, Chen Jia Mo, went to the Tang King with the imperial edict.

古文：耀，顺德人，过家拜先庙，托子于友人。
现代文：彭是顺德人，经过家乡时就祭拜祖先的家庙，把儿子托付给了友人。
English: Peng is from Shunde. When passing through his hometown, he would pay homage to the ancestral temple and entrust his son to a friend.

古文：至广州，以诸王礼见，备陈天潢伦序及监国先后，语甚切至，因历诋观生诸人。
现代文：到广州以后，他们用拜见藩王的礼节拜见唐王，详细地评论皇族的辈份、排行以及二王监国的先后次序，话说得很严肃，还一一批评了观生等人。
English: After arriving in Guangzhou, they used the etiquette of visiting the king of the clan to visit the king of Tang, commented in detail on the generation and ranking of the royal family and the order of succession of the two kings supervising the country. The words were very serious, and they also criticized the students and others one by one.

古文：观生怒，执杀之，嘉谟亦不屈死。
现代文：观生恼了，把他们抓起来杀了，彭火翟、嘉谟都不屈而死。
English: Guan Sheng became angry, arrested and killed them, and both Peng Huan and Jia Mu died.

古文：乃治兵日相攻，以番禺人陈际泰督师，与永明王总督林佳鼎战于三水。
现代文：于是唐王和永明王之间就整顿兵马天天相互攻打。观生让番禺人陈际泰担任督师，和永明王的总督林佳鼎在三水开战。
English: As a result, the armies of Tang and Yongming fought each other on a daily basis. Guan Sheng appointed Chen Jitai from Panyu as inspector, and went to war with Lin Jiading, the governor of Yongming, at Sanshui.

古文：兵败，复招海盗数万人，遣大将林察将。
现代文：战败后，又召来几万名海盗，派大将林察统帅。
English: After the defeat, tens of thousands of pirates were summoned, and General Lin Cha was sent.

古文：十二月二日，战海口，斩佳鼎。
现代文：十二月二日，双方在海口交战，杀掉了佳鼎。
English: On December 2, the two sides fought in Haikou and killed Jiading.

古文：观生意得，务粉饰为太平事，而委任捷先及朝锺。
现代文：观生得意起来，开始在朝廷里粉饰太平，并且大力重用捷先和朝钟两个。
English: Guanzheng became proud and began to whitewash Taiping in the imperial court, and vigorously reused Jiexian and the morning bell.

古文：捷先，由进士历官监司，小有才，便笔札。
现代文：捷先由进士出身后做到监司，小有才气，很能写作。
English: He rose quickly from junior clerk to supervisor. He is talented and can write well.

古文：朝锺举于乡，善谈论，浃旬三迁至祭酒。
现代文：朝钟乡试中举，能说会道，二十天里就晋升三次，做到了祭酒。
English: In the morning, he passed the junior high school entrance examination in Zhongxiang Township. He was able to speak the dialect, and was promoted three times in twenty days. He was able to make the sacrificial wine.

古文：有杨明竞者，潮州人，好为大言，诡称精兵满惠、潮间，可十万，即特授惠潮巡抚。
现代文：有一个叫杨明竞的，是潮州人，喜欢说大话，假称他在惠州、潮州一带布置了大批精兵，约十万人，就被特批为惠潮巡抚。
English: There was a man named Yang Mingjing, a native of Chaozhou, who liked to talk big. Supposing that he had deployed a large number of elite soldiers, about 100,000, around Huizhou and Chaozhou, he was specially approved as Huichao governor.

古文：朝锺语人： 内有捷先，外有明竞，强敌不足平矣。 
现代文：朝钟对人说： 朝廷里面有捷先，外面有明竞，有什么强敌不能铲平呢？ 
English: The morning bell said to the man, "Inside the imperial court, there are winners and losers, and outside there is open competition. What powerful enemy cannot be leveled?

古文：观生亦器此三人，事必咨之。
现代文：观生也很器重这三个人，遇事就向他们咨询。
English: Guanzheng is also very respectful of these three people, and consults them in case of trouble.

古文：又有梁鍙者，妄人也，观生才之，用为吏科都给事中，与明竞大纳贿赂，日荐用数十人。
现代文：还有一个叫梁的，是一个虚伪的家伙，观生认为他有本事，让他做了吏科都给事中，他和明竞两个人大胆地收取贿赂，一天里就能推荐几十个人当官。
English: There is also a guy named Liang, who is a hypocrite. Guan Sheng thought that he had the ability, so he made him a bureaucrat to give things. He and Ming Jing both boldly took bribes, and in one day they were able to recommend dozens of people to officials.

古文：观生本乏猷略，兼总内外任，益昏瞀。
现代文：观生本来没有什么有力的才略，加上总领朝廷内外的事务，就更加昏头昏脑了。
English: The fact that Guan Sheng did not have any powerful talent, coupled with the fact that he was in charge of affairs both inside and outside the imperial court, made him even more confused.

古文：招海盗资捍御，其众白日杀人，县肺肠于贵官之门以示威，城内外大扰。
现代文：他招进海盗来守护广州，那些人在大白天杀人，把死人的肠肺挂在达官贵人的家门口示威，搞得城内城外纷纷扰扰。
English: He recruited pirates to guard Guangzhou. Those people killed people in broad daylight, hung the intestines and lungs of the dead on the doorstep of dignitaries to demonstrate, and caused disturbances inside and outside the city.

古文：时大兵已下惠、潮，长吏皆降附，即用其印移牒广州，报无警。
现代文：当时大清兵已经打下了惠州、潮州，地方官都投降了，大清兵就利用他们的印信送公文到广州，汇报说没有战事发生。
English: At that time, the Qing soldiers had already defeated Huizhou and Chaozhou, and the local officials had surrendered. The Qing soldiers used their seal letters to send official documents to Guangzhou to report that there was no war.

古文：观生信之。
现代文：观生相信了。
English: Guan Sheng believed.

古文：是月十五日，聿视学，百僚咸集，或报大兵已逼。
现代文：这个月十五日，唐王聿钅粤在城里视学，百官都聚会一堂，有人报说大清兵已逼近城下了。
English: On the fifteenth day of this month, Tang Wang Shuguang was inspecting a school in the city, and all the officials gathered in one hall. Someone reported that the Qing soldiers had approached the city.

古文：观生叱之曰： 潮州昨尚有报，安得遽至此。
现代文：观生喝斥说 ：潮州昨天还有报告上来，清兵怎么可能就到了这里？
English: Guan Sheng exclaimed: Chaozhou was reported on yesterday, how could the Qing soldiers have arrived here?

古文：妄言惑众，斩之！ 
现代文：胡说八道，迷乱众听，斩了他！ 
English: Talk nonsense, confuse the audience, behead him!

古文：如是者三。
现代文：就这样搞了三回。
English: This went back and forth several times.

古文：大兵已自东门入，观生始召兵搏战。
现代文：大清兵已经从东门进城，观生才组织兵力拼搏。
English: The soldiers of the Great Qing Dynasty had already entered the city from the East Gate, and it was Guan Sheng who organized the troops to fight.

古文：兵精者皆西出，仓卒不能集。
现代文：精锐的部队都向西出征去了，仓猝之间无法回师。
English: The elite troops all went to the west, unable to return to the division in a hurry.

古文：观生走鍙所问计。
现代文：观生跑到梁的住处向他问计。
English: Guan Sheng ran to Liang's residence to ask him for advice.

古文：曰： 死尔，复何言！ 
现代文：梁说： 死吧，还说什么呢？ 
English: Liang said, "Let's die, what else can I say?"

古文：观生入东房，鍙入西房，各拒户自缢。
现代文：于是观生进入东边的房子里，梁进到西边的房子里，各自关上门上吊自杀去。
English: So Guan Sheng went into the house on the east side, Liang went into the house on the west side, and they each closed the door and hanged themselves.

古文：观生虑其诈，稍留听之。
现代文：观生怕他装假，稍停了一刻想听听他的动静。
English: Fearing that he was faking, the onlookers paused for a moment to listen to his movements.

古文：鍙故扼其吭，气涌有声，且推几仆地，久之寂然。
现代文：梁故意用手按压咽喉，气往上涌，发出响声，又把几案推倒在地，过好长时间就一点声音都没有了。
English: Liang deliberately pressed his throat with his hand, his breath surged upward, making a noise, and pushed several cases to the ground. After a long time, there was no sound at all.

古文：观生信为死，遂自经。
现代文：观生以为他真的死了，就自杀而死。
English: Thinking that he was really dead, the student committed suicide.

古文：明日，鍙献其尸出降。
现代文：第二天，梁把观生的尸体献出投降了。
English: The next day, Liang surrendered the body of Guan Sheng.

古文：朝钟闻变赴池，为邻人救出，自经死，聿方事阅射，急易服逾垣匿王应华家。
现代文：朝钟得知事变发生后跳进池塘里，被邻居救出后，又自杀了。唐王聿钅粤当时正在观看射箭演习，匆忙改换服装翻墙到王应华家里躲藏。
English: When Morning Bell learned of the incident, he jumped into the pond. After being rescued by a neighbor, he committed suicide. At that time, Tang Wang Yinghuang was watching the archery exercise. He hurriedly changed his clothes and climbed over the wall to hide in Wang Yinghua's house.

古文：俄缒城走，为追骑所获。
现代文：不久从城墙上吊下来逃跑，被骑兵抓获。
English: He soon escaped by hanging from the city wall and was caught by cavalry.

古文：馈之食，不受，曰： 我若饮汝一勺水，何以见先人地下！ 
现代文：给他东西吃，他不接受，说： 我如果喝你们一勺水，怎么到地底下去见祖先？ 
English: If I drink a spoonful of your water, how can I go down to the bottom of the earth to see my ancestors?

古文：投缳而绝。
现代文：后来悬梁自尽了。
English: He later hanged himself.

古文：吾驺、应华等悉降。
现代文：吾驺、应华等人都投降了。
English: Azuchi, Yinghua and others all surrendered.

