古文：孟珙，字璞玉，随州枣阳人。
现代文：孟珙，字璞玉，随州枣阳人。
English: Meng Xuan, Zhaojing Yu, Suizhou Zaoyang people.

古文：四世祖安，尝从岳飞军中有功。
现代文：他的四世祖孟安，曾跟从岳飞，立有战功。
English: His fourth-generation ancestor, Meng An, once followed Yue Fei and distinguished himself in battle.

古文：嘉定十年，金人犯襄阳，驻团山，父宗政时为赵方将，以兵御之。
现代文：嘉定十年，金人进犯襄阳，驻扎在围山，孟珙的父亲孟宗政当时是赵方的部将，率兵抵御金人。
English: In the tenth year of Jiading, the Jin people invaded Xiangyang and were stationed in Wai Mountain. Meng Zongzheng, Meng Yao's father, was the commander of the Zhao side at that time and led the troops to resist the Jin people.

古文：珙料其必窥樊城，献策宗政由罗家渡济河，宗政然之。
现代文：孟珙估计金人一定会窥伺樊城，向孟宗政献计由罗家渡过河，孟宗政采纳。
English: Meng Yao estimated that the Jin people would certainly spy on Lucheng, and offered a plan to Meng Zongzheng to cross the river from Luo family, which Meng Zongzheng accepted.

古文：越翼日，诸军临渡布阵，金人果至，半渡伏发，歼其半。
现代文：第三天，各军在罗家渡布阵，金人果然到来，金人渡河一半时，宋伏兵发起进攻，杀死一半金人。
English: On the third day, all the armies crossed the river at Luo Jia and set up a battle line, and the golden man arrived. When the golden man was halfway across the river, the Song ambush launched an attack and killed half of the golden man.

古文：宗政被檄援枣阳，临阵尝父子相失，珙望敌骑中有素袍白马者，曰： 吾父也。 急麾骑军突阵，遂脱宗政。
现代文：孟宗政受檄命去救援枣阳，在阵前父子离散，孟珙望见敌人骑兵中有一个穿素袍骑白马的人，说： 是我父亲。 急忙率骑兵冲入敌阵，使孟宗政脱险。
English: Meng Zongzheng was ordered to rescue Zaoyang. Before the battle, the father and son were separated. Meng Zongzheng looked at the enemy cavalry and saw a man wearing a plain robe and riding a white horse. He said, "It's my father." The cavalry rushed into the enemy lines to save Meng Zongzheng from danger.

古文：以功补进勇副尉。
现代文：孟珙因功被补为进勇副尉。
English: Meng Hao was promoted to Vice-Lieutenant Jin Yong for his service.

古文：十二年，完颜讹可步骑二十万分两路攻枣阳，环集城下，珙登城射之，将士惊服。
现代文：嘉定十二年，完颜讹可率步、骑兵二十万分两路进攻枣阳，金兵环列在城下，孟珙登上城墙射敌人，将士们都叹服。
English: In the twelfth year of Jiading, after Yan Xuan could lead the march, 200,000 cavalry attacked Zaoyang in two directions, the golden ring of soldiers was lined up under the city, Meng Xuan climbed the city wall to shoot the enemy, and the soldiers were all impressed.

古文：宗政命珙取它道劫金人，破砦十有八，斩首千余级，大俘军器以归，金人遁，以功升下班祗应。
现代文：孟宗政命令孟珙从别的地方劫杀金人，孟珙攻破敌人十八寨，斩杀一千多人，缴获大量军器回来，金人逃走，孟珙因功升为下班祗应。
English: Meng Zongzheng ordered Meng Hao to kidnap and kill Jinren from other places. Meng Hao broke through eighteen enemy villages, killed more than a thousand people, seized a large amount of military equipment, and returned. Jinren fled. Meng Hao was promoted to off-duty officer for his service.

古文：十四年，入谒制置使赵方，一见奇之，辟光化尉，转进武校尉。
现代文：嘉定十四年，孟珙拜见制置使赵方，赵方一见到他就认为他是奇才，被任为光化尉。
English: In the 14th year of Jiading, Meng Rong paid a visit to Zhao Fang. As soon as Zhao Fang saw him, he thought he was a genius and was appointed as a Guanghua lieutenant.

古文：十六年，以功特授承信郎。
现代文：嘉定十六年，孟珙因功被特别授予承信郎。
English: In the 16th year of Jiading, Meng Yao was specially awarded the title of "Joshinro" for his service.

古文：丁父忧，制置使起复之，珙辞，讫葬趣就职，又辞，转成忠郎。
现代文：遭父丧，制置使在他服丧期没满时重新起用他，他推辞，让他安葬父亲后就来任职，他又推辞，被转为成忠郎。
English: After his father's death, the system was set up to reinstate him when his mourning period was not over, but he refused, asking him to come to office after burying his father. He refused again and was transferred to Chengzhulang.

古文：理宗即位，特授忠翊郎，寻差峡州兵马监押兼在城巡检，京湖制置司差提督虎翼突骑军马，又辟京西第五副将，权管神劲左右军统制。
现代文：理宗即位后，孟珙被特授予忠翊郎，不久被差派为峡州兵马监押兼在城巡检、京湖制置司差提督虎翼突骑军马，又用他为京西第五副将，权管神劲左右军统制。
English: After Emperor Rizong ascended to the throne, Meng Jie was specially awarded the title of Zhong Yulang, and was soon sent to supervise the soldiers and horses of the Xiaozhou Province and inspect the city. He was also assigned to be the fifth vice-general of West Beijing, with the power to control the military.

古文：初，宗政招唐、邓、蔡壮士二万余人，号 忠顺军 ，命江海总之，众不安，制置司以珙代海，珙分其军为三，众乃帖然。
现代文：当初，孟宗政招唐、邓、蔡三州壮士二万多人，组成 忠顺军 ，命令由江海统领，众人不安，制置司以孟珙代替江海，孟珙分 忠顺军 为三部分，众人才服帖。
English: At the beginning, Meng Zongzheng recruited more than 20,000 strong men from Tang, Deng and Cai three states to form the Zhong Shun Army. The order was to be led by Jianghai, which made everyone uneasy. The establishment department replaced Jianghai with Meng Xi, Meng Xi divided the Zhong Shun Army into three parts, and all the talents served.

古文：绍定元年，珙白制置司创平堰于枣阳，自城至军西十八里，由八叠河经渐水侧，水跨九阜，建通天槽八十有三丈，溉田十万顷，立十庄三辖，使军民分屯，是年收十五万石。
现代文：绍定元年，孟珙向制置司建议在枣阳造平堰，从枣阳城到忠顺军西十八里，由八叠河经渐水旁，水跨越九座丘陵，建了八十三丈的通天漕，灌溉土地十万顷，设立了十庄三辖，让军民分别屯田，当年收粮食十五万石。
English: In the first year of Shaoding, Meng Xuan suggested to the Department of Construction and Installation that a flat weir should be built in Zaoyang. From Zaoyang City to the west of Zhongshun Army, it was eighteen miles. From the Eight-Stack River, the water flowed along the gradual water. The water spanned nine hills. An eighty-three-meter-high sky-bridge was built to irrigate 100,000 hectares of land. The Ten Villages and Three Districts were established to allow the military and the people to farm the land separately. The annual grain harvest was 150,000 kilos.

古文：又命忠顺军家自畜马，官给刍粟，马益蕃息。
现代文：又命令忠顺军自己养马，官府给粮草，马的数量日益增多。
English: He also ordered the Zhongshun army to raise their own horses, and the government gave them grain and grass. The number of horses increased day by day.

古文：二年，升京西第五正将、枣阳军总辖，本军屯驻忠顺三军。
现代文：绍定二年，孟珙升任京西第五正将、枣阳军总辖，在枣阳屯驻忠顺三军。
English: In the second year of Shao Ding, Meng Jun was promoted to the fifth general in the west of Beijing, in charge of the Zaoyang army, and stationed the three armies of Zhongshun in Zaoyang.

古文：明年，差京西兵马都监。
现代文：第二年，孟珙被差派为京西兵马都监。
English: In the following year, Meng Yao was sent to be the inspector of the West Beijing Terracotta Army.

古文：丁母忧。
现代文：孟珙遭母丧。
English: Every mother's death is sad.

古文：又明年，起复京西兵马钤辖、枣阳军驻札，仍总三军。
现代文：又过了一年，孟珙被重新起用为京西兵马钤辖、枣阳军驻答刂，仍然统领忠顺三军。
English: A year later, Meng Jun was reappointed to be in charge of the Beijing and Western Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and the Zaoyang Army was stationed in Dafu, still leading the three armies of Zhongshun.

古文：六年，大元将那颜倴盏追金主完颜守绪，逼蔡，檄珙戍鄂，讨金唐、邓行省武仙。
现代文：绍定六年，大元将领那颜亻奔盏追金国皇帝完颜守绪，逼近蔡州，檄命孟珙戍守鄂州，讨伐金国唐、邓行省武仙。
English: In the sixth year of the Shao Ding Dynasty, the generals of the Great Yuan Dynasty rushed to pursue the emperor of the Jin Dynasty to complete the defense of the country, approaching Caizhou, fighting for their lives to defend Ezhou, and fighting the Tang Dynasty of the Jin Dynasty and the Wuxian Dynasty of the Dengxing Province.

古文：仙时与武天锡及邓守移剌瑗相掎角，为金尽力，欲迎守绪入蜀，犯光化，锋剽甚。
现代文：武仙此时与武天锡及邓州守臣移剌瑗互为犄角之势，为金国尽力，想迎完颜守绪进入四川，进犯光化，气势很盛。
English: At this time, Wu Xian was in conflict with Wu Tianxi and Dengzhou Shouwen, and made every effort for Jin Guo to complete Yan Shouxu's entry into Sichuan, and attacked Guanghua, with great momentum.

古文：天锡者，邓之农夫，乘乱聚众二十万为边患。
现代文：武天锡，是邓州的农夫，他乘乱聚众二十万成为边患。
English: Wu Tianxi, a farmer from Dengzhou, took advantage of the disorderly gathering of 200,000 people to become a borderline case.

古文：珙逼其垒，一鼓拔之，壮士张子良斩天锡首以献。
现代文：孟珙逼近他的营盘，一鼓作气消灭了他。壮士张子良砍下武天锡头献上。
English: Meng Xuan approached his camp and annihilated him with all his might. The valiant Zhang Ziliang cut off Wu Tian's head and presented it to him.

古文：是役获首五千级，俘其将士四百余人，户十二万二十有奇，乃授江陵府副都统制，赐金带。
现代文：这次战役获首级五千，俘虏他的将士四百多人，十二万零二十多户，于是孟珙被授予江陵府副都统制，赐给他金带。
English: In this battle, he was awarded the first rank of five thousand, more than four hundred of his soldiers were captured, and more than one hundred and twenty thousand households, so Meng Hao was awarded the vice-governor of Gangneung Prefecture and given a gold belt.

古文：制置司檄珙问边事，珙曰： 金人若向吕堰，则八千人不为少，然须木查、腾云、吕堰等砦受节制乃可济。 已而刘全、雷去危两部与金人战于夏家桥，小捷。
现代文：制置司发檄书向孟珙询问边事，孟珙说 ：金人如果攻打吕堰，那么用八千人抵御也不少，但必须是木查、腾云、吕堰等寨都受节制才能成功。 不久刘全、雷去危两部在夏家桥与金人交战，取得小胜。
English: Meng Yu asked Meng Quan about the border situation. Meng Quan said: If the Jin attack the Lyu weir, then it will take eight thousand people to resist, but it must be possible to succeed if the fortifications such as Mocha, Tengyun, and Lyu weir are controlled. Soon Liu Quan and Lei Dexia fought with the Jin at Xiajiaqiao and won a small victory.

古文：有顷，金人犯吕堰，珙喜曰： 吾计得矣。 亟命诸军追击吕堰，进逼大河，退逼山险，砦军四合，金人弃辎重走，获甲士五十有二，斩首三千，马牛橐驼以万计，归其民三万二千有奇。
现代文：不久，金人进犯吕堰，孟珙高兴地说 ：我得计了。 立即命令各军追击到吕堰，金兵进就被逼到大河边，退就被逼到山险处，四面都是宋军营寨，金人丢弃辎重逃走，孟珙俘获甲兵五十二人，斩首三千人，得到马、牛、骆驼数以万计，归附的百姓三万二千多人。
English: Not long after, the Jin people invaded Lyuyan, and Meng Yao happily said, "I have a plan." He immediately ordered all the armies to pursue them to Lyuyan. When the Jin soldiers entered, they were forced to the edge of the big river, and when they left, they were forced to the edge of the mountain. There were Song military camps on all sides. The Jin people abandoned their baggage and fled. Meng Yao captured fifty-two armored soldiers, beheaded three thousand people, obtained tens of thousands of horses, cattle, and camels, and annexed more than thirty-two thousand people.

古文：瑗遣其部曲马天章奉书请降，得县五，镇二十二，官吏一百九十三，马军千五百，步军万四千，户三万五千三百，口十二万五千五百五十三。
现代文：移剌瑗派他的部曲马天章带着降书请求投降，得到五县、二十二镇，官吏一百九十三，骑兵一千五百，步兵一万四千，三万五千三百户，十二万五千五百五十三口。
English: He sent his subordinate, Qu Ma Tian Zhang, with a request to surrender, and obtained five counties, twenty-two towns, one hundred and ninety-three officials, one thousand five hundred cavalry, fourteen thousand infantry, thirty-five thousand three hundred households, and one hundred and twenty-five thousand five hundred and three households.

古文：珙入城，瑗伏阶下请死，珙为之易衣冠，以宾礼见。
现代文：孟珙进入邓州城，移剌瑗趴在台阶下请死，孟珙为他换掉衣服、帽子，以宾礼相见。
English: Meng Yao entered Dengzhou City, and Meng Yao lay down at the bottom of the steps and begged for his death. Meng Yao changed his clothes and hat for him, and they met as guests.

古文：初，仙屯顺阳，为宋军所挠，退屯马蹬。
现代文：当初，武仙驻屯在顺阳，被宋军所阻挠，退屯到马蹬。
English: At first, Emperor Wuxian was stationed in Shunyang, but was blocked by the Song army and withdrew to Malang.

古文：金顺阳令李英以县降，申州安抚张林以州降，珙言： 归附之人，宜因其乡土而使之耕，因其人民而立之长，少壮籍为军，俾自耕自守，才能者分以土地，任以职使，各招其徒以杀其势 制置司是之。
现代文：金国顺阳令李英献县投降，申州安抚张林献州投降，孟珙说： 归附的人，应该就在他们的乡土让他们耕种，就在他们的人民中设立他们的首领，少壮的就编入军籍，让他们自己耕田，自己守卫，有才能的人分给他土地，让他担任官职，各招自己的党徒以削弱他们的势力。 制置司肯定了这个建议。
English: Shunyang of Jin ordered Li Yingcheng County to surrender, Shenzhou appeased Zhang Lin to surrender Zhangzhou, and Meng Qi said: "Those who are attached should let them cultivate in their hometowns and set up their leaders among their people. The young and strong should be enrolled in the military, let them cultivate their own fields and guard themselves. Talented people should be given land and let them hold official positions, and each should recruit their own party members to weaken their power. The establishment department affirmed this suggestion.

古文：七月己酉，仙爱将刘仪领壮士二百降，珙问仙虚实，仪陈： 仙所据九砦，其大砦石穴山，以马蹬、沙窝、岵山三砦蔽其前；三砦不破，石穴未易图也。
现代文：七月七日，武仙的爱将刘仪率领二百名壮士投降，孟珙问武仙的虚实情况，刘仪说 ：武仙所据的九寨，最大的是石穴山寨，马蹬、沙窝、岵山三寨挡在它的前面；这三寨不攻破，石穴山寨也难攻破。
English: On July 7th, Liu Yi, led by two hundred strong men, surrendered to Wu Xian's love. Meng Ye asked Wu Xian about the true situation. Liu Yi said: The Jiuzhaigou based on Wu Xian is the largest stone cave village, and the three villages of Malu, Sand Cave, and Shaoshan are in front of it; these three villages cannot be broken, and the stone cave village is also difficult to break.

古文：若先破离金砦，则王子山砦亦破，岵山、沙窝孤立，三帅成禽矣。 珙翼日遣兵向离金，庐秀执黑旗帅众入砦，金人不疑为宋军，乃分据巷道，大呼纵火，掩杀几尽。
现代文：如果先攻破离金寨，那么王子山寨也可攻破，岵山、沙窝二寨孤立，三帅可以擒获了。 孟珙第二天派兵奔向离金寨，卢秀拿着黑旗率众入寨，金人没想到是宋军，宋军就分别占领各条巷道，大声喊着放起火来，把寨中金人几乎全部杀死。
English: If you break away from Jinzhai first, then the Prince's Village can also be broken, and Lushan and Shabo are isolated in the second village, and the three soldiers can be captured. Meng Wei sent troops to run away from Jinzhai on the second day, Lu Xiu took the black flag and led the crowd into the village. The Jin people did not expect it to be the Song Army, and the Song Army separately occupied each roadway, shouted loudly and set fire to it, killing almost all the Jin people in the village.

古文：是夜，壮士杨青等捣王子山砦，护帐军酣寝，王建入帐中，斩金将首囊佩之，平明视之，金小元帅也。
现代文：当夜，壮士杨青等捣王子山寨，金的护帐军正在酣睡，王建进入帐中，砍下金将的头装入口袋中佩带在身上，天亮时一看，是金的小元帅。
English: That night, the valiant Yang Qing and others raided the prince's cottage, while Kim's retinue was sleeping. Wang Jian entered the tent, cut off Kim's head, put it in his pocket and wore it on his body. At dawn, it was Kim's little marshal.

古文：丙辰，出师马蹬，遣樊文彬攻其前门，成明等邀截西路，一军围讫石烈，一军围小总帅砦，火烛天，杀僇山积，余逸去者复为成明伏军所得，壮士老少万二千三百来归。
现代文：十四日，宋军出师马蹬，派樊文彬攻打寨的前门，成明等截击西路，一军围攻讫石烈，一军围攻小总帅寨，大火冲天，被杀死的堆积如山，其余逃走的又被成明的伏兵所获，壮士老少一万二千三百人来归附。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the Song army dispatched Ma Jun, sent Yu Wenbin to attack the front gate of the castle, Cheng Ming and others to intercept the west road, one army besieged Zou Shi Rong, one army besieged Xiaosong Shuai Zhai, the fire soared to the sky, the killed piled up like a mountain, and the rest of the escapees were captured by Cheng Ming's ambush, and 12,300 strong men and women came to join.

古文：师还，至沙窝西，与金人遇，大捷。
现代文：宋军返回，到沙窝西面，和金人相遇，又取得大捷。
English: The Song army returned, went to the west of Shabo, met with the Jin people, and achieved great success.

古文：是日，三战三克。
现代文：当天，宋军三战三胜。
English: On the same day, the Song Army won three victories in three battles.

古文：未几，丁顺等又破默候里砦。
现代文：不久，丁顺等又攻破默候里寨。
English: Soon after, Ding Shun and others broke through the encampment.

古文：珙召仪曰： 此砦既破，板桥、石穴必震，汝能为我招之乎？ 仪曰： 晋德与花腿王显、金镇抚安威故旧，招之必来。 乃遣德行，仪又请选妇人三百伪逃归，怀招军榜以向，珙从之。
现代文：孟珙召来刘仪说 ：这些寨已被攻破，板桥、石穴寨必被震动，你能替我招降他们吗？ 刘仪说 ：晋德和花腿王显全是镇抚安威的老朋友，招降他们一定能来。 于是就派晋德前去，刘仪又请求选三百名妇女假装逃回去，让她们带着招降敌军的告示回去，孟珙照办了。
English: Liu Yi said: Jin De and Huashi Wang Xian are all old friends of Zhenfu Anwei, and they will surely come to invite him to surrender. So he sent Jin De forward, and Liu Yi also asked for the election of three hundred women to pretend to flee back, and let them return with the announcement of the enemy's surrender, and Meng Yi did so.

古文：威见德，叙情好甚欢，介德往见显，显即日以书乞降。
现代文：安威见到晋德，非常高兴地叙说友情，介绍晋德去见王显，王显当天就下书请求归降。
English: When Anwei saw Jin De, he was very happy to talk about their friendship, and introduced Jin De to Wang Xian. Wang Xian wrote to him that day, asking him to surrender.

古文：德复请珙遣刘仪候之。
现代文：晋德又请孟珙派刘仪等候他。
English: Jin De also asked Meng Wei to send Liu Yi to wait for him.

古文：显军约五千，犹未解甲，珙令作栲栳阵；入阵，周视良久，乃去，如素所抚循；飨以牛酒，皆醉饱歌舞。
现代文：王显军约有五千人，还没解去盔甲，孟珙下令排成栲栳阵；入阵后，他环视很久，才离开，和平时安抚士卒一样；用牛、酒犒赏他们，他们都酒足饭饱，沉浸在歌舞之中。
English: Wang Hsien's army was about five thousand strong, and he had not yet taken off his armor when Meng Yu ordered them to line up in battle formation. After entering the battle, he looked around for a long time before leaving, just as he did when he was pacifying his soldiers. He rewarded them with cattle and wine, and they were all full of wine and food, and immersed in song and dance.

古文：珙料武仙将上岵山绝顶窥伺，令樊文彬诘旦夺岵山，驻军其下，前当设伏，后遮归路。
现代文：孟珙估计武仙将上岵山顶峰察看形势，命令樊文彬次日早晨夺取岵山，军队驻扎在山下，前面设下埋伏，后面挡住退路。
English: Meng Yu estimated that Wu Xian would climb the peak of Lushan to inspect the situation, and ordered Yu Wenbin to seize Lushan the next morning. The army was stationed at the foot of the mountain, setting up an ambush in front and blocking the escape route behind.

古文：已而仙众果登山，及半，文彬麾旗，伏兵四起，仙众失措，枕藉崖谷，山为之赪，杀其将兀沙惹，擒七百三十人，弃铠甲如山。
现代文：不久武仙的部队果然登山，登到一半时，樊文彬挥旗，伏兵四起，武仙的部队不知所措，被杀死的在山谷间一个挨一个，山都被染红了，金将兀沙惹被杀，活捉七百三十人，金人丢弃的铠甲堆积如山。
English: Not long after, Wu Xian's troops did indeed climb the mountain. Halfway up the mountain, Gong Wenbin waved the flag, and the ambushes were set up on all sides. Wu Xian's troops were at a loss. Those who were killed were one by one in the valley, and the mountains were all dyed red. Jin Zhaozhaojia was killed, and seven hundred and thirty people were captured alive. The armor discarded by Jin people was piled up like a mountain.

古文：薄暮，珙进军至小水河，仪还，具言仙不欲降，谋往商州依险以守，然老稚不愿北去，珙曰： 进兵不可缓。 夜漏十刻，召文彬等受方略，明日攻石穴九砦。
现代文：傍晚，孟珙进军到小水河，刘仪回来，讲武仙不想投降，计划去商州依险死守，但老人和孩子不愿意往北去，孟珙说： 进兵不可迟缓。 夜漏十刻时，孟珙召来樊文彬等授给他们作战方略，明天攻打石穴九寨。
English: In the evening, Meng Wei marched to Xiaoshuihe, Liu Yi came back, saying that Wuxian did not want to surrender, and planned to go to Shangzhou to hold out, but the old man and the child did not want to go north, Meng Wei said: The advance must not be delayed. At ten o'clock in the evening, Meng Wei called Zou Wenbin and others to give them the battle strategy, and tomorrow they would attack the stone cave of Jiuzhaigou.

古文：丙辰，蓐食启行，晨至石穴。
现代文：丙辰日，宋军就在寝席上吃完饭后出发，早晨到达石穴。
English: On the morning of the 4th day of the 4th month, the Song army set out after eating at the bedside, and arrived at the stone cave in the morning.

古文：时积雨未霁，文彬患之，珙曰： 此雪夜擒吴元济之时也。 策马直至石穴，分兵进攻，而以文彬往来给事。
现代文：这时阴雨绵绵，樊文彬担心，孟珙说： 这正是同唐代雪夜擒拿吴元济的时机一样。 催马直奔石穴，分路进攻，以樊文彬往来传达命令，处理事务。
English: At this time, it was cloudy and rainy, and Nie Wenbin was worried. Meng Yao said, "This is exactly the same as the opportunity to seize Wu Yuanji in the snowy night of the Tang Dynasty. The horse was urged to go straight to the stone cave, the attack was divided, and Nie Wenbin was used to convey orders and deal with affairs.

古文：自寅至巳力战，九砦一时俱破，武仙走，追及于鲇鱼砦，仙望见，易服而遁。
现代文：从寅时到巳时奋力战斗，石穴九寨全被攻破，武仙逃走，追到鲇鱼寨，武仙望见，换上衣服逃跑了。
English: From the hour of the tiger to the hour of the snake, they fought hard. The stone caves of Jiuzhaigou were all breached. Wuxian fled and was chased to Eel Village. Wuxian saw them, put on his clothes and ran away.

古文：复战于银葫芦山，军又败，仙与五六骑奔。
现代文：双方又在银葫芦山交战，金军又失败，武仙和五六个骑兵逃走了。
English: The two sides fought again at Silver Gourd Mountain, the gold army failed again, and Wu Xian and five or six cavalrymen fled.

古文：追之，隐不见，降其众七万人，获甲兵无算。
现代文：追他们，他们隐藏起来没被发现，武仙部众七万人投降，缴获盔甲、兵器无数。
English: Chasing them, they hid and were not discovered. Seventy thousand warriors surrendered, and countless armour and weapons were captured.

古文：还军襄阳，转修武郎、鄂州江陵府副都统制。
现代文：孟珙回军到襄阳，转为修武郎，鄂州、江陵府副都统制。
English: Meng Xuan returned to Yangyang and became Xiu Wulang, the deputy governor of Ezhou and Jiangling.

古文：大元兵遣宣抚王楫约共攻蔡，制置使谋于珙，珙请以二万人行，因命珙尽护诸将。
现代文：大元兵派宣抚王鰗与宋相约共同攻打蔡州，制置使同孟珙商量，孟珙请求率二万人前去，于是命令孟珙统率众将。
English: The Great Yuan Army sent the procurator Wang Qian to jointly attack Caizhou with Song Xiang, and Meng Qian consulted with Meng Qian. Meng Qian requested 20,000 men to go, so he ordered Meng Qian to lead the generals.

古文：金兵二万骑繇真阳横山南来，珙鼓行而前，金人战败，却走，追至高黄陂，斩首千二百级。
现代文：金的二万骑兵由真阳横山向南来，孟珙就击鼓向前与金兵交战，金人战败退走，孟珙追到高黄陂，斩杀一千二百人。
English: When Jin's twenty thousand cavalrymen came southward from Zhenyang Hengshan, Meng Yao beat the drum and advanced to fight the Jin soldiers. The Jin were defeated and retreated. Meng Yao chased them to Gaohangyao and killed twelve hundred of them.

古文：倴盏遣兔花忒、没荷过出、阿悉三人来迓，珙与射猎，割鲜而饮，驰入其帐。
现代文：那颜亻奔盏派兔花忒、没荷过出、阿悉三人来迎接孟珙，孟珙和他们用弓箭射取禽兽，喝禽兽的鲜血，奔进他们的营帐。
English: The three of them came to meet Meng Yao, Meng Yao and they shot animals with bows and arrows, drank the blood of animals, and rushed into their camp.

古文：倴盏喜，约为兄弟，酌马湩饮之。
现代文：那颜亻奔盏很高兴，和他约为兄弟，给他喝马奶。
English: The horse was very happy, he treated him like a brother and gave him horse milk to drink.

古文：金兵万人自东门出战，珙遮其归路，掩入汝河，擒其偏裨八十有七人。
现代文：金兵一万人从东门出战，孟珙挡住他们的归路，掩杀入汝河，俘获金国的偏将八十七人。
English: Ten thousand gold soldiers went out to fight from the East Gate. Meng Yu blocked their way back, hid them in the Ye River, and captured eighty-seven of the country's top generals.

古文：得蔡降人，言城中饥，珙曰： 已窘矣，当尽死而守，以防突围。 珙与倴盏约，南北军毋相犯。决堰水，布虎落。
现代文：获得蔡州归降的人，说蔡州城缺粮，出现饥荒，孟珙说 ：蔡州已窘困了，我们应该拼死守住，以防金人突围。 孟珙和那颜亻奔盏约定，双方军队不要互相侵犯，决开堰水，设置护营的篱笆。
English: The person who won the surrender of Caizhou said that Caizhou City was short of grain and there was a famine, and Mencius said: Caizhou is already in a predicament, we should desperately hold on to prevent the Jin from breaking through.Mengcius and Nanyan agreed that the two armies should not encroach on each other, break through the water barrier, and set up a fence to protect the camp.

古文：倴盏遣万户张柔帅精兵五千人入城，金人钩二卒以往，柔中流矢如猬，珙麾先锋救之，挟柔以出。
现代文：那颜亻奔盏派万户张柔率精兵五千人入蔡州城，金人钩住二名元兵而去，张柔身上的箭就像刺猬一样，孟珙率先锋救援，把张柔救出来。
English: Nanyan sent five thousand soldiers led by Zhang Rong to enter the city of Caizhou. Jinren hooked two soldiers and left. The arrows on Zhang Rong's body were like hedgehogs. Meng Rong took the lead in the rescue and saved Zhang Rong.

古文：拨发官宋荣不肃，将斩之，众下马罗拜以请，犹杖之。
现代文：拨发官宋荣不恭敬，孟珙将要杀他，众人下马罗列而拜替他讲情，孟珙处他杖刑。
English: Song Rong, the dispatching officer, was not respectful, Meng Ye was going to kill him, everyone went down to Maro Lye to intercede for him, and Meng Ye punished him with a cane.

古文：黎明，珙进逼石桥，钩致生俘郭山，战少却。
现代文：黎明，孟珙进逼石桥，俘获郭山，稍稍退去。
English: At dawn, Meng Xuan entered the stone bridge, captured Guoshan, and retreated slightly.

古文：金人突至，珙跃马入阵，斩山以徇，军气复张，殊死战，进逼柴潭立栅，俘金人百有二，斩首三百余级。
现代文：金人突然到来，孟珙跃马进入敌阵，杀郭山示众，宋军士气又振奋起来，殊死战斗，进逼柴潭设立堡栅，俘获一百零二名金兵，杀死三百多人。
English: The Jin suddenly arrived, Meng Xuan leaped into the enemy lines, killed Guoshan and demonstrated to the public. The morale of the Song army was again invigorated, fought desperately, forced Chai Tan to set up a fortress, captured 102 Jin soldiers, and killed more than 300 people.

古文：翼日，命诸将夺柴潭楼。
现代文：第二天，孟珙命令众将夺取柴潭楼。
English: The next day, Meng Xuan ordered the generals to seize Chai Tan Lou.

古文：金人争楼，诸军鱼贯而上。
现代文：金人争夺此楼，宋军鱼贯而上。
English: Goldsmiths fought for this building, and Song soldiers and fish followed.

古文：金人又饰美妇人以相蛊，麾下张禧等杀之，遂拔柴潭楼，俘其将士五百三十有七人。
现代文：金人又打扮美女来诱宋军，被孟珙的部将张禧等人杀死，于是就攻下了柴潭楼，俘获金兵将士五百三十七人。
English: The goldsmiths also dressed up as beautiful women to lure the Song army, and were killed by Zhang Xiyi, the general of Mengqi, and others, so they captured Chai Tan Lou, and captured 537 goldsmiths.

古文：蔡人恃潭为固，外即汝河，潭高于河五六丈，城上金字号楼伏巨弩，相传下有龙，人不敢近，将士疑畏。
现代文：蔡州人凭借柴潭固守，潭外就是汝河，潭比河高五六丈，蔡州城上金字号楼设有巨弩，相传下面有龙，人不敢靠近，宋军将士疑虑害怕。
English: The people of Caizhou held fast by virtue of the Chai Lake. Outside the lake is the Ye River. The lake is five or six meters higher than the river. The Jinzha Building on the castle of Caizhou has a giant pigeon, and it is said that there is a dragon below. People dare not approach. The Song soldiers are afraid of doubts.

古文：珙召麾下饮，再行，曰： 柴潭非天造地设，楼伏弩能及远而不可射近，彼所恃此水耳，决而注之，涸可立待。 皆曰： 堤坚未易凿。 珙曰： 所谓坚者，止筑两堤首耳，凿其两翼可也。 潭果决，实以薪苇，遂济师攻城，擒其两将斩之，获其殿前右副点检温端，磔之城下，进逼土门。
现代文：孟珙召部下饮酒，又出兵，说 ：柴潭不是天造地设的，金字号楼的巨弩能射中远方而不能射中近处，敌人所凭借的是柴潭，决潭水灌城，潭水可以马上干涸。 
English: Meng Xuan called his subordinates to drink, and then sent out troops, saying: Chai Tan is not created by heaven, the giant dragonfly of the gold-lettered building can be shot in the distance but cannot be shot in the vicinity, the enemy relies on Chai Tan, Duetan water to fill the city, and the water can dry up immediately.

古文：金人驱其老稚熬为油，号 人油砲 ，人不堪其楚，珙遣道士说止之。
现代文：金人驱使城中的老少熬成油，称 人油炮 ，人们不能忍受这种痛楚，孟珙派道士劝说制止这种事。
English: The goldsmith drove the old and young in the city to boil them into oil, calling them "human oil cannons." People could not bear this pain, and Meng Yu sent a Taoist to persuade them to stop this.

古文：端平元年正月辛丑，黑气压城上，日无光，降者言： 城中绝粮已三月，鞍靴败鼓皆糜煮，且听以老弱互食，诸军日以人畜骨和芹泥食之，又往往斩败军全队，拘其肉以食，故欲降者众。 珙下令诸军衔枚，分运云梯布城下。
现代文：端平元年正月初二，黑气覆盖着蔡州城，太阳无光，归降的人说 ：城中粮绝已经三个月，马鞍、皮靴、破鼓都被煮着吃了，并听任老幼互食，金军每天以人和牲畜的骨头以及燕子筑巢的泥充饥，又往往杀整队的败军，吃他们的肉，所以想投降的人很多。 孟珙下令各军嘴里都含枚，以防喧嚣，分别运云梯布列在城下。
English: On the second day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Dengping, black gas covered the city of Caizhou, the sun was not shining, and the returnees said: the grain in the city has been absolutely three months old, the saddles, leather boots, and broken drums have been cooked and eaten, and the old and the young have been allowed to eat each other, the Golden Army is hungry every day with the bones of people and livestock and the mud of swallows' nests, and often kills the defeated army of the whole team and eats their meat, so there are many people who want to surrender.

古文：己酉，珙帅师向南门，至金字楼，列云梯，令诸将闻鼓则进，马义先登。赵荣继之，万众竞登，大战城上，降其丞相乌古论栲栳，杀其元帅兀林达及偏裨二百人。
现代文：十日，孟珙率军奔向南门，到达金字楼，布列云梯，命令众将听到鼓声就进兵，马义首先登城，赵荣随后登城，万众竞相登城，双方在城上大战，金国丞相乌古论栲栳投降，元帅兀林达及偏将二百人被杀。
English: On the 10th, Meng Rong led the army to the south gate, arrived at Jinzhi Lou, Buleyun Ladder, and ordered the generals to enter the army when they heard the drumbeat. Ma Yi entered the city first, Zhao Rong entered the city later, and all the people competed to enter the city. The two sides fought a big battle on the city. Kim Guozhong, the prime minister of Wugu, capitulated, and the marshal Yulinda and 200 generals were killed.

古文：门西开，招倴盏入，江海执其参政张天纲以归。
现代文：打开西城门，招那颜亻奔盏入城，江海抓获金国参政张天纲归来。
English: He opened the west gate of the city and invited Yan Xingbin to enter the city. Zhang Tiangang, who had participated in politics in Jin Guo, was captured by Jianghai and returned.

古文：珙问守绪所在，天纲曰： 城危时即取宝玉置小室，环以草，号泣自经，曰 死便火我 ，烟焰未绝。 珙与倴盏分守绪骨，得金谥宝、玉带、金银印牌有差。
现代文：孟珙问完颜守绪在什么地方，张天纲说： 城危时他就取来宝玉放在小屋，四周放上草，哭着上吊自杀，说 我死后就烧了我 ，烧他的烟焰没断。 孟珙和那颜亻奔盏拨开完颜守绪的遗骨，得到金国的谥宝、玉带、金银印牌不等。
English: Meng Yao asked Yan Shouxu where he was, Zhang Tiangang said: When the city was in danger, he took the treasure and put it in a hut, put grass around it, cried and hanged himself, saying that he would burn me after I died, and the smoke from his burning was not broken. Meng Yao and Yan Shouxu rushed to remove the remains of Yan Shouxu, and got the golden treasure, jade belt, gold and silver seal, and so on.

古文：太常寺簿朱杨祖、看班祗候林拓朝八陵，谍云大元兵传宋来争河南府，哨已及盟津，陕府、潼关、河南皆增屯设伏，又闻淮阃刻日进师，众畏不前。珙曰： 淮东之师，由淮、泗溯汴，非旬余不达，吾选精骑疾驰，不十日可竣事；逮师至东京，吾已归矣。 于是昼夜兼行，与二使至陵下，奉宣御表，成礼而归。
现代文：孟珙还军襄阳，被特授予武功郎、主管侍卫马军行司公事。他被提升为建康府都统制兼权侍卫马军行司职事。太常寺主簿朱杨祖、看班祗候林拓朝拜八陵，谍报说大元兵约宋来争夺河南府，前锋已到达盟津、陕府、潼关、河南，这些地方都增加了兵力，设下了埋伏，又听说淮帅约定进兵的时间，众人害怕不敢前往。孟珙说： 淮东的军队，从淮、泗逆水而上到汴京，非得十几天不能到达。我选精锐骑兵快马加鞭，不用十天就能完事；等到元兵到东京，我已归来了。 于是他们昼夜兼程，和二位使者到陵地，他们宣读御表，完成祭礼回来。
English: Meng Rong returned to the army in Xiangyang and was specially awarded the title of Wu Gong Lang, in charge of guarding the horse army. He was promoted to Jiankangfu city management system and also the right to guard the horse army. Zhu Yangzu, the master of Taizhong Temple, watched the parade and went to Lin Tuo to pay homage to the eight mausoleums. The spy report said that the great general soldiers of the Song Dynasty had come to compete for Henan Province. The vanguard had reached Mengjin, Shaanxi Province, Shaoguan and Henan. These places have increased their strength and set up ambushes. They also heard that

古文：制置司奏留珙襄阳兼镇北军都统制。
现代文：制置司奏请留孟珙在襄阳兼任镇北军都统制。
English: Meng Wei was asked to stay in Xiangyang and serve as the commander of the Northern Army.

古文：镇北军者，珙所招中原精锐百战之士万五千余人，分屯漅北、樊城、新野、唐、邓间。
现代文：镇北军，是孟珙所招的中原地区精锐的、身经百战的人一万五千人组成的，他们分别驻扎在氵巢北、樊城、新野、唐、邓一带。
English: The Zhenbei Army was composed of 15,000 elite soldiers from the Central Plains who had experienced hundreds of battles and were recruited by Meng Jue. They were stationed in the areas of North Gansu, Shicheng, Xinye, Tang, and Deng.

古文：俄令赴枢密院禀议，授带御器械。
现代文：不久命令孟珙去枢密院奏议，授予他带御器械。
English: Soon after, he ordered Meng Xuan to go to the Privy Council to make a report, and gave him the right to take his equipment.

古文：二年，授主管侍卫马军司公事，时暂黄州驻札，朝辞，上曰： 卿名将之子，忠勤体国，破蔡灭金，功绩昭著。 珙对曰： 此宗社威灵，陛下圣德，与三军将士之劳，臣何力之有？ 帝问恢复，对曰： 愿陛下宽民力，蓄人材，以俟机会。 帝问和议，对曰： 臣介胄之士，当言战，不当言和。 赐赍甚厚。
现代文：端平二年，孟珙被授予主管侍卫马军司公事，暂时在黄州驻扎，他辞别皇上，皇上说 ：你是名将的儿子，忠心、勤勉、体恤国家，攻破蔡州、灭亡金国，功绩昭著。 孟珙回答： 这是宗社的威灵，陛下的圣德和三军将士的功劳，我有什么能力？ 皇上问恢复故土的事，孟珙回答： 希望陛下放宽民力，积聚人才，等待时机。 皇上问和议的事，孟珙答 ：我是军人，应该谈论战，不应该谈论和。 
English: In the second year of Duanping, Meng Yao was assigned to be in charge of the official business of the Master of the Horse Guards and the Secretary of the Army, and was temporarily stationed in Huangzhou. He said goodbye to the emperor, and the emperor said: You are the son of a famous general, loyal, diligent, sympathetic to the country, defeated Caizhou and destroyed Jin, with outstanding achievements. Meng Yao replied: This is the will of the patriarchal society, the holiness of His Majesty and the merits of the three soldiers, what are my abilities? The emperor asked about the restoration of the motherland, Meng Yao replied: I hope that His Majesty will relax the

古文：兼知光州，又兼知黄州。
现代文：皇上给他丰厚的赏赐。孟珙兼任光州知州，又兼黄州知州。
English: The emperor gave him a rich reward. Meng Xi concurrently served as Gwangju Chizhou, and also as Huangzhou Chizhou.

古文：三年，珙至黄，增埤浚隍，搜访军实，边民来归者日以千数，为屋三万间居之，厚加赈贷。
现代文：端平三年，孟珙到黄州，增厚城墙、疏导护城河，搜集军事物资，边境前来归附的每天有千人，孟珙造了三万间房子让他们居住，对他们多加赈济。
English: In the third year of Duanping, Meng Xuan went to Huangzhou to increase the thickness of the city wall, drain the moat, and collect military supplies. Thousands of people came to the border every day. Meng Xuan built 30,000 houses for them to live in, and gave them more money.

古文：又虑兵民杂处，因高阜为齐安、镇淮二砦，以居诸军。
现代文：孟珙又担心兵民杂居，于是在高处修了齐安、镇淮二寨，让各军居住。
English: Meng Xuan was also worried about soldiers and civilians living together, so he built Qi'an and Zhenhuai Erzhai at high altitudes for the troops to live in.

古文：创章家山、毋家山两堡为先锋、虎翼、飞虎营。
现代文：建章家山、毋家山两堡作为先锋、虎翼、飞虎营。
English: The two fortresses of Jiaoshan and Baojiaoshan were built as the vanguard, the tiger wing and the flying tiger camp.

古文：兼主管管内安抚司公事，节制黄蕲光、信阳四郡军马。
现代文：孟珙兼任主管管内安抚司公事，节制黄、蕲、光、信阳四郡军马。
English: Meng Wei was also in charge of the public affairs of the Department of Pacification within the jurisdiction, and restrained Huang, Zhai, Guang, and Xinyang's four counties.

古文：大元兵攻蕲州，珙遣兵解其围；又攻襄阳，随守张龟寿、荆门守朱杨祖、郢守乔士安皆委郡去，复州施子仁死之，江陵危急。
现代文：大元兵攻打蕲州，孟珙派兵解围；元兵又进攻襄阳，随州守将张龟寿、荆门守将朱杨祖、郢州守将乔士安都弃城逃走，复州施子仁战死，江陵危急。
English: The great Yuan soldiers attacked Bozhou, and Meng Hui sent troops to relieve the siege; the Yuan soldiers also attacked Yangyang. Zhang Guishou, the governor of Suizhou, Zhu Yangzu, the governor of Jingmen, and Qiao Shian, the governor of Bozhou, all abandoned the city and fled. Fuzhou Shizhen was killed in the battle, and Jiangling was in a critical situation.

古文：诏沿江、淮西遣援，众谓无逾珙者，乃先遣张顺渡江，珙以全师继之。
现代文：皇上诏命沿江、淮西派兵救援，众人认为没有超过孟珙的将领了，于是先派张顺渡江，孟珙率全军紧随其后。
English: The emperor's edict ordered soldiers to be sent along the river and to Huaxi to help, and it was believed that there was no one more capable than Meng Xuan's generals, so Zhang Shun was sent to cross the river first, followed by Meng Xuan and his entire army.

古文：大元兵分两路：一攻复州，一在枝江监利县编筏窥江。
现代文：大元兵分两路：一路攻打复州，一路在枝江监利县造木筏准备渡江。
English: The Taiyuan soldiers were divided into two routes: one was to attack Fuzhou, and the other was to build rafts in Jianli County of the Yangtze River in preparation for crossing the river.

古文：珙变易旌旗服色，循环往来，夜则列炬照江，数十里相接。
现代文：孟珙改变旌旗和衣服的颜色，循环往来，晚上就用火把照江面，数十里相连。
English: Meng Xuan changed the colors of his flag and clothes, cycled back and forth, and used torches to illuminate the river surface at night. They were connected by dozens of miles.

古文：又遣外弟赵武等共战，躬往节度，破砦二十有四，还民二万。
现代文：又派表弟赵武等共同作战，他亲自往来指挥，攻破敌人二十四座营寨，使二万百姓回来。
English: He also sent his cousin Zhao Wu and others to fight together. He personally directed the operations, broke through the enemy's twenty-four camps, and brought twenty thousand people back.

古文：嘉熙元年，封随县男，擢高州刺史，忠州团练使兼知江陵府、京西湖北安抚副使。
现代文：嘉熙元年，孟珙被封为随县男，升为高州刺史，忠州团练使兼江陵知府，京西、湖北安抚副使。
English: In the first year of the Jiaxi Dynasty, Meng Yu was awarded the title of Suixian Male, promoted to Gaozhou Provincial Historian, Chungju Reunification Envoy and Gangneung Governor, and Beijing West and Hubei Pacification Deputy Envoy.

古文：未几，授鄂州诸军都统制。
现代文：不久，被授予鄂州诸军都统制。
English: Soon, he was awarded the command of all the armies in Ezhou.

古文：大元大将忒没入汉阳境，大将口温不花入淮甸，蕲守张可大、舒州李士达委郡去，光守董尧臣以州降。
现代文：大元大将忒没进入汉阳境内，大将口温不花进入淮甸，蕲州守臣张可大、舒州守臣李士达弃官逃走，光州守臣董尧臣献州投降。
English: General Da Yuan Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er Er

古文：合三郡人马粮械攻黄守王鉴，江帅万文胜战不利。
现代文：元兵合三郡人马、粮草、器械攻打黄州守将王鉴，江上统帅万文胜出战不利。
English: The Yuan soldiers combined manpower, horses, grain, and equipment from three counties to attack the Huangzhou garrison commander Wang Jian. The commander on the river, Wan Wen, did not fare well in the battle.

古文：珙入城，军民喜曰： 吾父来矣。 驻帐城楼，指画战守，卒全其城，斩逗留者四十有九人以徇。
现代文：孟珙进入黄州，军民高兴地说 ：我们的父亲来了。 孟珙把大帐设在城楼上，指挥战守事宜，终于保全了黄州，杀贻误军期的四十九人示众。
English: When Meng Yao entered Huangzhou, the soldiers and civilians happily said, "Our father has come." Meng Yao set up a big tent on the tower of the city to command the defense of the city, and finally saved Huangzhou, killing and displaying the 49 people who had missed their military service.

古文：御笔以战功赏将士，特赐珙金碗，珙益以白金五十两赐之诸将。
现代文：皇上按战功赏赐将士，特赐给孟珙金，孟珙加以白金五十两赐给众将。
English: The emperor rewarded the generals according to their war exploits, and gave Meng Jian gold, Meng Jian plus 50 taels of platinum to the generals.

古文：将士弥月苦战，病伤者相属，珙遣医视疗，士皆感泣。
现代文：将士们连月苦战，染病的和受伤的很多。孟珙派医生去治疗，战士们都感动地哭了。
English: The soldiers fought hard for months on end, and there were many sick and injured. Meng Hao sent doctors to treat them, and the soldiers were moved to tears.

古文：二年春，授宁远军承宣使、带御器械、鄂州江陵府诸军都统制。
现代文：嘉熙二年春，孟珙被授予宁远军承宣使、带御器械，鄂州、江陵府诸军都统制。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jiaxi, Meng Jie was awarded the title of Ningyuan army to undertake the propaganda and bring the equipment, and the armies of Ezhou and Jiangling Prefecture were controlled.

古文：珙以三军赏典未颁，表辞。
现代文：孟珙因朝廷没颁布对三军的赏赐，上表推辞。
English: Meng Xuan resigned because the court did not issue a reward to the three armies.

古文：诏曰： 有功不赏，人谓朕何？
现代文：皇上下诏说 ：不赏赐有功的人，人们认为朕怎么样？
English: The Emperor's edict said, "If I do not reward those who have meritorious deeds, what will people think of me?"

古文：三军勋劳，趣其来上。
现代文：三军的功劳，赶快呈报上来。
English: The merits of the three armies should be reported as soon as possible.

古文：封爵之序，自将帅始，卿奚辞焉？ 未几，授枢密副都承旨、京西湖北路安抚制置副使兼督视行府参谋官。
现代文：封爵的次序，从将帅开始，你为什么还推辞呢？ 不久，孟珙被授予枢密副都承旨，京西、湖北路安抚制置副使兼督视行府参谋官。
English: The order of knighthood, starting from the general, why do you still refuse? Soon, Meng Wei was awarded the Privy Vice-Governor, and the Beijing West and Hubei Road Pacification System Deputy Envoy and Supervisor of the General Staff.

古文：未几，升制置使兼知岳州。
现代文：不久，他升为制置使兼岳州知州。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of Chief of Staff of Yuezhou and Zhizhou.

古文：乃檄江陵节制司捣襄、郢，于是张俊复郢州，贺顺复荆门军。
现代文：于是檄命江陵节制司攻打襄、郢，于是，张俊收复郢州，贺顺收复荆门军。
English: As a result, he ordered the Gangneung Division of the Bureau of Statistics to attack Xiang and Handan. As a result, Zhang Jun retook Handan, and He Shun retook Jingmen.

古文：十二月壬子，刘全战于冢头，战于樊城，战于郎神山，屡以捷闻。三年春正月，曹文镛复信阳军，刘全复樊城，遂复襄阳。
现代文：十二月十一日，刘全在冢头、樊城、郎神山作战，都告捷，嘉熙三年春正月，曹文镛收复信阳军，刘全收复樊城，终于收复襄阳。
English: On December 11, Liu Quan fought in Shantou, Shicheng, and Langshenshan, all of which were successful. In the first month of the spring of the third year of Jiaxi, Cao Wenyi recovered the Xinyang Army, Liu Quan recovered Shicheng, and finally recovered Xiangyang.

古文：授枢密都承旨、制置使兼知鄂州。
现代文：孟珙被授予枢密都承旨、制置使兼鄂州知州。
English: Meng Xuan was awarded the title of Privy Councillor, and the post of Minister and Governor of Ezhou and Zhizhou.

古文：全遣谭深复光化军，息、蔡降，珙命以兵逆之，得壮士百余，籍为忠卫军。
现代文：刘全派谭深收复光化军，息、蔡二州归降，孟珙命令用士兵迎接他们，得到一百多名壮士，把他们编为忠卫军。
English: Liu Quan sent Tan Sheng to take back the Guanghua Army, and after that, Cai Erzhou surrendered. Meng Xi ordered to meet them with soldiers, get more than a hundred strong men, and make them loyal guards.

古文：初，诏珙收复京、襄，珙谓郢然后可以通馈饷得荆门然后可以出奇兵，由是指授方略，发兵深入，所至以捷闻。
现代文：起初，诏命孟珙收复京、襄，孟珙认为必须得到郢，然后可以使粮饷、军事物资的运输畅通，得到荆门然后可以出奇兵，于是他制定作战方略，发兵深入，所到之处都传来捷报。
English: At first, the emperor ordered Meng Xuan to recapture Beijing and Xiangyang. Meng Xuan thought that it was necessary to obtain Jiu, and then he could make the transportation of grain and military supplies smooth. If he obtained Jingmen, then he could make a surprise attack. Therefore, he formulated a battle strategy, sent troops in depth, and received good news everywhere he went.

古文：珙奏略曰： 取襄不难而守为难，非将士不勇也，非车马器械不精也，实在乎事力之不给尔。
现代文：孟珙的奏疏大略说 ：取得襄阳不难但守住它难，不是将士不勇敢，不是车马器械不精良，实在是力量不足。
English: Meng Xuan's Song Zuo said roughly: It is not difficult to obtain Xiangyang, but it is difficult to keep it. It is not that the soldiers are not brave, not that the vehicles and equipment are not sophisticated, but it is really a lack of strength.

古文：襄、樊为朝迁根本，今百战而得之，当加经理，如护元气，非甲兵十万，不足分守。
现代文：襄阳、樊城是朝廷的根本，如今经过百战得到了，应该加强治理，要想保住它们的元气，非得有十万士兵，否则不能分别守卫。
English: Xiangyang and Fucheng are the foundation of the imperial court. They have been gained through a hundred battles. It is necessary to strengthen governance. In order to maintain their vitality, there must be one hundred thousand soldiers, otherwise they cannot be guarded separately.

古文：与其抽兵于敌来之后，孰若保此全胜？
现代文：与其在敌人到来后抽调兵力，何不保住这全胜？
English: Instead of withdrawing troops after the arrival of the enemy, why not keep this total victory?

古文：上兵伐谋，此不争之争也。 乃置先锋军，以襄、郢归顺人隶焉。
现代文：兵家上策是破坏敌人的计划，这是不争夺的争夺。 于是设先锋军，使襄阳、郢州归降的人充当。
English: The soldiers' best strategy was to sabotage the enemy's plan, which was a non-competitive battle, so they set up a vanguard army and made the people who had surrendered from Xiangyang and Zhangzhou serve as the vanguard.

古文：庚寅，谍报大元兵欲大举临江，珙策必道施、黔以透湖湘，请粟十万石以给军饷，以二千人屯峡州，千人屯归州。
现代文：嘉熙三年正月十九日，谍报说大元兵想大举逼近长江，孟珙估计敌人一定要经过施、黔二州并穿越湖湘，他请求十万石粟米作为军饷，以二千人驻屯峡州，一千人驻屯归州。
English: On the 19th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of Jiaxi, the spy report said that the Taiyuan soldiers wanted to approach the Yangtze River in a big way. Meng Jun estimated that the enemy must pass through the two states of Shih and Qian and cross Hunan. He requested 100,000 koku of millet as military pay, with 2,000 stationed in Xiaozhou and 1,000 stationed in Guizhou.

古文：忠卫旧将晋德自光化来归，珙奖用之。
现代文：忠卫军旧将晋德从光化来归降，孟珙奖励并任用了他。
English: The Loyal Guards had demoted Jin De from Gwanghwamun, and Meng Pi rewarded and appointed him.

古文：珙弟瑛以精兵五千驻松滋为夔声援，遣于德兴增兵守归州隘口万户谷。
现代文：孟珙的弟弟孟瑛率五千精兵驻在松滋作为夔州的后援，派于德兴增兵守卫归州的关口万户口。
English: Meng Rong's younger brother Meng Rong stationed five thousand elite soldiers in Songzhi as backup for Zhangzhou, and sent Xing Zeng soldiers in De Ruo to guard the Guankou of 10,000 households in Guanzhou.

古文：大元兵自随窥江，珙密遣刘全拒敌，遣伍思智以千人屯施州。
现代文：大元兵从随州出发窥伺长江，孟珙暗中派刘全迎敌，派伍思智率一千人驻屯施州。
English: The great Yuan soldiers set out from Suizhou to spy on the Yangtze River. Meng Jian secretly sent Liu Quan to meet the enemy, and sent Wu Sizhong with a thousand people to stay in Shizhou.

古文：大元大将塔海并秃雪帅师入蜀，号八十万，珙增置营砦，分布战舰，遣张举提兵间道抵均州防遏。
现代文：大元大将塔海和秃雪率军进入四川，号称八十万军队，孟珙增设营寨，分布战舰，派张举领兵从小路到均州去防守、阻击敌人。
English: Grand Generals Ta Hai and Gao Xue led the army into Sichuan, claiming 800,000 troops, Meng Wei added camps, distributed warships, and sent Zhang He to lead the army from Xiaolu to Junzhou to defend and block the enemy.

古文：大元兵度万州湖滩，施、夔震动，珙兄璟时为湖北安抚副使、知峡州，急以书谋备御。
现代文：大元兵越过万州的湖滩，施、夔二州震动，孟珙的哥哥孟王景当时是湖北安抚副使、峡州知州，急忙写信商量防御敌人。
English: The Taiyuan soldiers crossed the lakes and beaches of Wanzhou, and the two states of Shizuoka and Shandong were shaken. Meng Yao's brother, Meng Wangjing, who was the vice-envoy for pacification of Hubei and the governor of Xiaozhou at the time, hurriedly wrote a letter to discuss the defense of the enemy.

古文：珙请于督府，帅师西上。
现代文：孟珙向督府请示，率军向西进发。
English: Meng Xuan asked the governor's office for instructions and led the army westward.

古文：璟调金铎一军迎拒于归州大〈王亚〉砦。
现代文：孟王景调金铎军在归州的大王亚寨迎敌。
English: Meng Wangjing's Jin and Qin armies met the enemy at Yazhai, the great king of Guizhou.

古文：刘义捷于马巴东县之清平村。
现代文：刘义在巴东县的清平村取胜。
English: Liu Yi wins in Qingping Village, Badong County.

古文：珙弟璋选精兵二千驻澧州防施、黔路。
现代文：孟珙的弟弟孟璋选精兵二千驻在澧州防备施、黔路。
English: Meng Yao's younger brother Meng Yao selected 2,000 elite soldiers and stationed them in Ganzhou to guard Shi and Kushiro.

古文：四年，进封子。
现代文：嘉熙四年，孟珙被进封为子爵。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jiaxi, Meng Yu was made a viscount.

古文：珙条上流备御宜为藩篱三层：乞创制副司及移关外都统一军于夔，任涪南以下江面之责，为第一层；备鼎、澧为第二层；备辰、沅、靖、桂为第三层。
现代文：孟珙逐条论述长江上游的防御应该是有三道防线：请求设立副司及调关外都统的一个军到夔州，负责涪州南面以下的江面，这是第一道防线；加强鼎、澧二州的守备，这是第二道防线；加强辰、沅、靖、桂四州的守备，作为第三道防线。
English: Meng Yao discussed the defense of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River step by step, saying that there should be three lines of defense: to request the establishment of a sub-department and the transfer of an army of the General Administration of Customs to Ganzhou, responsible for the river surface south of Ganzhou, which is the first line of defense; to strengthen the defense of Ding and Ganzhou, which is the second line of defense; to strengthen the defense of Chen, Handan, Jing and Guizhou, as the third line of defense.

古文：峡州、松滋须各屯万人，舟师隶焉，归州屯三千人，鼎、澧、辰、沅、靖各五千人，郴、桂各千人，如是则江西可保。
现代文：峡州、松滋需各屯兵万人，水军隶属它们，归州驻屯三千人，鼎、澧、辰、沅、靖几州各驻屯五千人，郴、桂二州各驻屯一千人，如此则江西可以保全。
English: Kyushu and Songzhi need 10,000 soldiers each, the navy is subordinate to them, Tongzhou has 3,000 soldiers stationed in Guizhou, Ding, Handan, Chen, Handan and Jing provinces have 5,000 soldiers each, and Handan and Guizhou have 1,000 soldiers each. In this way, Jiangxi can be preserved.

古文：又遣杨鼎、张谦往辰、沅、靖三州，同守倅晓谕熟蛮，讲求思、播、施、黔支径，以图来上。
现代文：又派杨鼎、张谦到辰、沅、靖三州，同副将晓谕熟蛮，了解和注意思、播、施、黔州的各条小路，以防敌人由此进入。
English: He also sent Yang Ding and Zhang Qian to the three prefectures of Chen, Yao and Jing, and the vice-commander and vice-commander were familiar with and learned about and paid attention to all the small roads in the three prefectures of Zhi, Bao, Shi and Zhangzhou, so as to prevent the enemy from entering through them.

古文：会谍知大元兵于襄樊随、信阳招集军民布种，积船材于邓之顺阳，乃遣张汉英出随，任义出信阳，焦进出襄，分路挠其势。
现代文：恰好侦知大元兵在襄、樊、随、信阳招集军民播种，把造船的木材堆放在邓州的顺阳，于是孟珙就派张汉英出兵随州，任义出兵信阳，焦进出兵襄阳，分路干扰敌人的势头。
English: It happened to be detected that the Taiyuan soldiers called up soldiers and civilians to sow seeds in Xiang, Min, Sui and Xinyang, and piled up the shipbuilding timber in Shunyang, Danzhou. Therefore, Mencius sent Zhang Hanying to send soldiers to Xuzhou, Renyi to send soldiers to Xinyang, Jiao Jin to send soldiers to Xiangyang, and the branching interfered with the enemy's momentum.

古文：遣王坚潜兵烧所积船材，又度师必因粮于蔡，遣张德、刘整分兵入蔡，火其积聚。
现代文：派王坚暗中率兵烧敌人所准备的造船木材，他又估计敌人一定会移兵到蔡州，就地取得给养，派张德、刘整分兵进入蔡州，烧了这里积聚的粮草。
English: Wang Jian secretly sent soldiers to burn the shipbuilding timber prepared by the enemy. He also estimated that the enemy would certainly move troops to Caizhou to obtain supplies on the spot. He sent Zhang De and Liu Heibun to enter Caizhou and burned the grain and grass accumulated here.

古文：制拜宁武军节度使、四川宣抚使兼知夔州。
现代文：皇上下制任命孟珙为宁武军节度使、四川宣抚使兼夔州知州。
English: Under the imperial hierarchy system, Meng Xi was appointed as the Ningwu Army's envoy to the Qing Dynasty and the Sichuan envoy to the Qing Dynasty.

古文：招集麻城县、巴河、安乐矶、管公店淮民三百五十有九人，皆沿边经战之士，号 宁武军 ，令璋领之。
现代文：孟珙招集麻城县、巴河、安乐矶、管公店的淮地百姓三百五十九人，这些人都是沿边地区经历过战斗的人，组成 宁武军 ，命令由孟璋统领。
English: Meng Xuan called up 359 Huai people from Macheng County, Bahe County, Anle County, and Guan Gongdian County, all of whom had experienced battles along the border, to form the Ningwu Army, with Meng Xuan in command.

古文：进封汉东郡侯兼京湖安抚制置使。
现代文：孟珙被进封为汉东郡侯兼京湖安抚制置使。
English: Meng Xi was sent to Hantong County to serve as the Prince of Hantong County and the Prince of Jinghu County.

古文：回鹘爱里八都鲁帅壮士百余、老稚百一十五人、马二百六十匹来降，创 飞鹘军 ，改爱里名艾忠孝，充总辖，乞补以官。
现代文：回鹘人爱里八都鲁率一百多壮士、一百一十五名老人和孩子、二百六十匹马来归降，孟珙设 飞鹘军 ，把爱里的名改为艾忠孝，让他任总辖，请求朝廷给爱里补官。
English: The Uighur people loved Ai Badu Lu and led more than one hundred strong men, one hundred and fifteen old men and children, and two hundred and sixty horses to surrender. Meng Yu set up the Hebei Army, changed Ai Li's name to Ai Zhongxiao, let him be the head of the administration, and asked the court to give Ai Li a supplementary post.

古文：四川制置使陈隆之与副使彭大雅不协，交章于朝。
现代文：四川制置使陈隆之与副使彭大雅不和，互相上书向朝廷告状。
English: Chen Longzhi and deputy envoy Peng Daya fell out over the establishment of the Sichuan Province, and wrote to each other to complain to the imperial court.

古文：珙曰： 国事如此，合智并谋，犹惧弗克，而两司方勇于私斗，岂不愧廉、蔺之风乎。 驰书责之，隆之、大雅得书大惭。
现代文：孟珙说： 国事这样，把大家的才智和计谋合起来，还怕不能战胜敌人，你们双方却为私事争斗，难道不愧对廉颇、蔺相如的风骨嘛。 孟珙立即写信责问他们，他二人看到书信后很惭愧。
English: Meng Xuan said, "Isn't it a fitting tribute to the integrity and similarity of character of the two of you that you should combine your talents and strategies for national affairs in such a way that you may not be able to defeat the enemy, while you both fight for private affairs?" Meng Xuan immediately wrote to reprimand them, and they were very ashamed when they saw the letter.

古文：厘蜀政之弊，为条班诸郡县，曰差除计蜀，曰功赏不明，曰减克军粮，曰官吏贪黩，曰上下欺罔。
现代文：孟珙整顿四川的弊政，做出条目颁布到各地，有委派和去掉官员要登记，有赏罚不明，有克扣军粮，有官吏贪污黩职，有上下欺骗等条文。
English: Meng Xi rectified the maladministration of Sichuan, made an article and promulgated it to all parts of the country, with provisions such as the appointment and removal of officials to be registered, unclear rewards and punishments, reduced military rations, official corruption and dereliction of duty, and fraud.

古文：又曰： 不择险要立砦栅，则难责兵以卫民；不集流离安耕种，则难责民以养兵。 乃立赏罚以课殿最，俾诸司奉行之。
现代文：他又说： 不选择险要的地方建堡寨，就难以让兵保卫人民；不招集流亡的百姓安心耕种，就难以让人民养兵。 于是他设立赏罚的规定来考核官吏的政绩，让各部门奉行。
English: He also said: "If we don't choose a place to build a fortress, it will be difficult to let soldiers protect the people; if we don't invite the exiled people to cultivate with peace of mind, it will be difficult for the people to raise soldiers." Therefore, he set up a reward and punishment regulation to assess the political performance of officials, and let all departments follow it.

古文：黎守阎师古言大理国请道黎、雅入贡，珙报大理自通邕、广，不宜取道川蜀，却之。
现代文：黎州守臣阎师古说大理国请求取道黎、雅二州向朝廷入贡，孟珙回答说大理国与邕、广二州相通，不应该取道川蜀，拒绝了这个请求。
English: The governor of Lizhou, Yan Shi Gu, said that Dali Province had requested to pay tribute to the imperial court by taking the roads of Lijiang and Yashuanzhou. Meng Wei replied that Dali Province was connected to Shandong and Guangzhou, and should not take the road of Sichuan-Shu, and refused the request.

古文：兼夔路制置大使兼屯田大使。
现代文：孟珙兼任夔路制置大使兼屯田大使。
English: Meng Wei concurrently serves as Kushiro Construction Ambassador and Tonden Ambassador.

古文：军无宿储，珙大兴屯田，调夫筑堰，募农给种，首秭归，尾汉口，为屯二十，为庄百七十，为顷十八万八千二百八十，上屯田始末与所减券食之数，降诏奖谕。
现代文：军队没有储备粮草，孟珙大兴屯田，调役夫修堤堰，募农民给他们种子，从秭归到汉口，设了二十个屯，一百七十个庄，垦田十八万八千二百八十顷，孟珙上奏屯田始末和所减去的券食数额，朝廷下诏奖励他。
English: The army did not have reserves of grain and grass. Meng Rong started to expand the farmlands, dispatched workers to repair dykes and weirs, and recruited farmers to give them seeds. He returned to Hankou from Handan and established 20 farmlands, 170 villages, and 188,280 hectares of farmland. Meng Rong reported the beginning and end of the farmlands and the amount of food stamps that had been deducted, and the court rewarded him.

古文：靖州徭林赛良为乱，遣王瑀平之。
现代文：靖州徭林赛良作乱，孟珙派王王禹平定了他。
English: Jingzhou Yulin Xie Liang made a disturbance, and the Mengye faction of Wang Wangyu suppressed him.

古文：淳祐二年，珙以京、襄死节死事之臣请于朝，建祠岳阳，岁时致祭，有旨赐名闵忠庙。
现代文：淳二年，孟珙把京、襄二地为国捐躯的人向朝廷上报，请求在岳阳为他们建祠，年年去祭祀，朝廷下旨赐名为闵忠庙。
English: In the second year of Jun, Meng Xuan reported to the imperial court the people who sacrificed their lives for the country in Beijing and Xiangyang, and requested that a small shrine be built for them in Yueyang, where they would go every year to offer sacrifices, and the imperial court gave it the name Shizhong Temple.

古文：淮东受兵，枢密俾珙应援，遣李得帅精兵四千赴之，珙子之经监军。
现代文：淮东遭受兵祸，枢密让孟珙去支援，孟珙派李得率四千精兵前去，孟珙的儿子孟之经为监军。
English: When Huaidong suffered a military disaster, the Privy Council asked Meng Xuan to go and support it. Meng Xuan sent Li De to go with four thousand elite soldiers, and Meng Xuan's son Meng Zhicheng supervised the troops.

古文：谍知京兆府也可那延以骑兵三千经商州取鹘岭关，出房州竹山，遣王令屯江陵，寻进屯郢州，刘全屯沙市，焦进提千人自江陵、荆门出襄。
现代文：谍报说京兆府的也可那延率三千骑兵经商州攻取鹘岭关，出兵房州的竹山，孟珙派王令驻军江陵，不久进兵屯驻在郢州，刘全驻军沙市，焦进率一千人从江陵、荆门出兵襄阳。
English: According to the spy report, three thousand cavalrymen from Jingzhao were dispatched to Shangzhou to capture Shulingguan, three thousand cavalrymen from Fangzhou were dispatched to Zhushan, three thousand cavalrymen from Mengye were stationed in Jiangling, three thousand cavalrymen from Liuquan were stationed in Sha, and one thousand cavalrymen were dispatched from Jiangling and Jingmen to Xiangyang.

古文：檄刘全赍十日粮，取道南漳入襄，与诸军合。
现代文：孟珙传檄让刘全带十天的粮食，取道南漳进入襄阳，同各军会合。
English: Meng Yao told Liu Quan to take ten days' worth of grain and take the Nanlu Road to enter Xiangyang to meet with the other armies.

古文：大元兵至三川，珙下令应出戍主兵官，不许失弃寸土。
现代文：大元兵到三川，孟珙下令应该出兵戍守的主兵官，不许丢弃一寸土地。
English: When the great Yuan soldiers arrived in Mikawa, Meng Xi ordered the commander-in-chief to send troops to defend the city, and not to abandon a single inch of land.

古文：权开州梁栋乏粮，请还司，珙曰： 是弃城也。 栋至夔州，使高达斩其首以徇。
现代文：权开州梁栋因缺粮，请求回制置司，孟珙说 ：这是弃城。 梁栋到夔州，孟珙让高达斩梁栋示众。
English: Liang Dong of Quanzhou, due to a shortage of grain, requested to restore the post of secretary, Meng Yao said: This is abandoning the city. Liang Dong went to Zhangzhou, Meng Yao let Gao decapitate Liang Dong to show the public.

古文：由是诸将禀令惟谨。
现代文：于是众将奉行命令十分谨慎。
English: As a result, the generals were very cautious in carrying out their orders.

古文：大元兵至泸，珙命重庆分司发兵应援，遣张祥屯涪州。
现代文：大元兵到泸州，孟珙命令重庆方面派兵支援，派张祥驻军涪州。
English: Taiyuan soldiers went to Ganzhou, Meng Wei ordered Chongqing to send troops to support, and sent Zhang Xiang to garrison Ganzhou.

古文：拜检校少保，进封汉东郡公。
现代文：孟珙被授予检校少保，进封为汉东郡公。
English: Meng Wei was awarded the title of junior guard of the inspection school and promoted to the post of Hantong County magistrate.

古文：珙言： 沅之险不如辰，靖之险不如沅，三州皆当措置而靖尤急。
现代文：孟珙说 ：沅州的险要不如辰州，靖州的险要不如沅州，三州都应加强防御而靖州最为急迫。
English: Meng Rong said: the danger of Zhangzhou is not as great as that of Chenzhou, and the danger of Jingzhou is not as great as that of Zhangzhou. All three states should strengthen their defenses, and Jingzhou is the most urgent.

古文：今三州粒米寸兵无所从出，出京湖之忧一。
现代文：现在这三州连一粒米、一个兵都不知从哪儿出，这是京湖的忧患之一。
English: Now these three prefectures do not know where even a grain of rice or a soldier came from. This is one of the worries of Beijing Lake.

古文：江防上自秭归，下至寿昌，亘二千里，自公安至峡州滩碛凡十余处，隆冬水涸，节节当防，兵讳备多，此京湖之忧二。
现代文：长江防线上自秭归，下至寿昌，绵亘二千里，从公安到峡州有十几处浅滩，隆冬时水干涸了，应该节节设防，兵家忌讳的是防线多，这是京湖的忧患之二。
English: The defense line of the Yangtze River stretches for two thousand miles from Zhucheng to Shuchang. There are more than a dozen shoals from the Public Security Bureau to Xiaozhou. When the water dries up in mid-winter, it is necessary to set up defenses every season. The soldiers are afraid of more defense lines. This is one of the worries of Beijing Lake.

古文：今尺籍数亏，既守滩碛，又守关隘，此京湖之忧三。
现代文：现在军额缺乏，既守水浅之处，又守关隘，这是京湖的忧患之三。
English: At present, there is a shortage of troops to guard both the shallows and the narrow passes, which is one of the three worries of Beijing Lake.

古文：陆抗有言： 荆州国之藩表，如其有虞，非但失一郡，当倾国争之。
现代文：陆抗说过 ：荆州是国家的屏障，如果荆州有危险，失去的不只一郡，应该用全部国力争夺它。
English: Lu Quan said: Jingzhou is a national barrier. If there is danger in Jingzhou and more than one county is lost, we should use all the national strength to fight for it.

古文：若非增兵八万并力备御，虽韩、白复生，无所展巧。
现代文：如果不增加八万兵力全力防御，即使是韩信、白起再生，也将无所作为。 
English: Without an increase of 80,000 troops for all-out defense, even Han Xin and Baiqi Regeneration will do nothing.

古文：今日事势大略相似，利害至重。 余玠宣谕四川，道过珙，珙以重庆积粟少，饷屯田米十万石，遣晋德帅师六千援蜀，之经为策应司都统制。
现代文：今日事势大略与荆州有危险相似，利害攸关。 余王介宣谕四川，途中探望了孟珙，孟珙因重庆积米少，送去屯田米十万石，派晋德率六千人支援四川，孟之经为策应司都统制。
English: Today's situation is roughly similar to that of Jingzhou, there are dangers and interests at stake.Yu Wang Jie proclaimed Sichuan, on the way he visited Meng Yao, Meng Yao, due to the shortage of rice in Chongqing, sent 100,000 koku of rice to Tonden, sent 6,000 people led by Jin De to support Sichuan, and Meng Zhi Jing's strategy was to take control of the capital.

古文：四年，兼知江陵府。
现代文：淳四年，孟珙兼任江陵知府。
English: In June of the same year, Meng Rong also served as the governor of Gangneung.

古文：珙谓其佐曰： 政府未之思耳，彼若以兵缀我，上下流急，将若之何？
现代文：孟珙对他的僚佐说： 政府没考虑这一点，敌人若是牵制我，长江上下水流湍急，我将怎么办？
English: Meng Wei said to his colleague: The government has not considered this. If the enemy holds me back, and the Yangtze River has a rapid flow, what will I do?

古文：珙往则彼捣吾虚，不往则谁实捍患。 识者是之。
现代文：我去则敌人来捣我的空虚之地，不去谁能担当抵御敌人的重任。 有见识的人认为是这样。
English: If I go, the enemy will come to attack my empty place; if I don't go, who will bear the burden of resisting the enemy?

古文：诏京湖调兵五千戍安丰，援寿春。
现代文：朝廷诏命京湖调五千兵去戍守安丰，支援寿春。
English: The imperial court ordered the transfer of five thousand soldiers from the capital to Anfeng to support Shuchun.

古文：珙遣刘全将以往。
现代文：孟珙派刘全率兵前往。
English: Meng Yao sent Liu Quan to lead the troops.

古文：继有命分兵三千备齐安，珙言： 黄州与寿昌三江口隔一水耳，须兵即度，何必预遣？
现代文：接着又有命令分三千兵去防守齐安，孟珙说 ：黄州与寿昌三江口只隔一水，需要兵马时就能立即渡过去，何必先派去？
English: Next came the order to send three thousand soldiers to defend Qi'an. Meng Wei said, "Huangzhou and Shuchang are only separated by water at the mouth of the Sanjiang River. If soldiers and horses are needed, they can cross over immediately. Why must they be sent first?"

古文：先一日则有一日之费，无益有损，万一上游有警，我军已疲，非计之得也。 不从。
现代文：早一天就有一天的费用，无益处有损害，万一上游有警报，我军已经疲劳，这不是好计划。 
English: It's not a good plan to have one day's expenses the day before. There's no benefit and there's damage. In case there's an alarm upstream, our army is already tired.

古文：五年，御笔以职事修举，转行两官，许令回授。
现代文：没听从调遣。淳五年，皇上因孟珙政绩突出，给他转行两官，允许他回授。
English: He did not listen to the dispatch. In June of the fifth year, the emperor, because of Meng Xuan's outstanding political performance, gave him two positions and allowed him to teach again.

古文：珙至江陵，登城叹曰： 江陵所恃三海，不知沮洳有变为桑田者，敌一鸣鞭，即至城外。
现代文：孟珙到江陵，登城叹道： 江陵所凭借的是三海，不知这还有变为桑田的，敌人一挥马鞭，马上就到城外。
English: Meng Wei went to Gangneung and entered the city, lamenting, "Gangneung relies on the Three Seas, but I don't know if it can be turned into a mulberry field. If the enemy waves a horse whip, they will be out of the city immediately.

古文：盖自城以东，古岭先锋直至三〈氵義〉，无所限隔。 乃脩复内隘十有一，别作十隘于外，有距城数十里者。
现代文：自城以东，古岭、光锋直到三氵义，没什么可阻碍敌人的。 于是就修复十一个内隘，另在城外建了十个关隘，有离城数十里的。
English: There was nothing to obstruct the enemy from the east of the city, from Guling and Guangfeng to Sanxingyi, so they repaired eleven inner lanes and built ten lanes outside the city, some of which were dozens of miles away from the city.

古文：沮、漳之水，旧自城西入江，因障而东之，俾绕城北入于汉，而三海遂通为一。
现代文：沮、漳二水，过去从城西入江，因有障碍从城东入江，使它绕过城北流入汉水，因此三海才通而为一。
English: In the past, the two rivers, the De and the Yangtze, entered the river from the west of the city, but due to obstacles, they entered the river from the east of the city, so that it bypassed the north of the city and flowed into the Han River. Therefore, the three seas only became one.

古文：随其高下，为匮蓄泄，三百里间，渺然巨浸。
现代文：随着水势的高下，修了蓄水池来调解水的多少，三百里之内，俨然是个大湖。
English: As the water level rose and fell, a reservoir was built to regulate the amount of water. Within three hundred miles, it was like a big lake.

古文：土木之工百七十万，民不知役，绘图上之。
现代文：土木工役有一百七十万，百姓不知有此役，孟珙把这些绘成图献给朝廷。
English: There are one million seven hundred thousand civil engineers, and the people do not know about this service. Meng Xi drew these pictures and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：珙以身镇江陵，而兄璟帅武昌，故事，无兄弟同处一路者，乞归田，不允。
现代文：孟珙亲自镇守江陵，他的哥哥孟王景镇守武昌，按惯例，没有兄弟同在一路的，孟珙请求回家务农，皇上不许。
English: Meng Xuan personally guarded Jiangling, and his brother Meng Wang Jing guarded Wuchang. According to the usual practice, if there were no brothers on the same road, Meng Xuan asked to go home to farm, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：诏以兵五千援淮，珙使张汉英帅之。
现代文：朝廷诏命孟珙派五千兵支援淮河守军，孟珙派张汉英率兵前去。
English: The imperial court ordered Meng Wei to send five thousand soldiers to support the Huai River defenders, and Meng Wei sent Zhang Hanying to lead the troops.

古文：枢密调兵五千赴广西，珙移书执政曰： 大理至邕，数千里部落隔绝，今当择人分布数郡，使之分治生夷，险要形势，随宜措置，创关屯兵，积粮聚刍于何地，声势既张，国威自振。
现代文：枢密调兵五千奔赴广西，孟珙致书执政说： 大理国到邕州，数千里内部落互相隔绝，现在应该选人分别到各郡，让他们分管生夷，根据地形的险易，可随宜处置，建关屯兵，确定在何处积粮聚草，这样，形成声势，国威自然振奋。
English: After dispatching 5,000 troops to Guangxi, Meng Rong sent a letter to the government, saying: Dali country to Zhangzhou, thousands of miles of inland settlements are isolated from each other, now it is necessary to select people separately to each county, let them be in charge of the living and the dead, according to the dangers of the terrain, can be disposed of as appropriate, build customs camps, determine where grain is accumulated, and thus form a momentum, and the national power is naturally invigorated.

古文：计不出此而闻风调遣，空费钱粮，无补于事。 不听。
现代文：不从这方面制定计划而是闻风调兵，空费钱粮，对事情无补益。 
English: Instead of drawing up plans in this regard, it is a case of following the wind and deploying troops, wasting money and grain, which is of no benefit to the situation.

古文：大元大将大纳至江陵，遣杨全伏兵荆门以战，珙先期谍知，达于枢密，檄两淮为备，两淮不知也，后果如所报。
现代文：他的意见没被采纳。大元大将大纳到江陵，派杨全在荆门布兵同宋军交战，孟珙事先侦知这情况，报告给枢密，传檄让两淮做准备，两淮不知道，后来果然如他所报的那样。
English: His opinion was not accepted. The great general Danna went to Jiangling and sent Yang Quan to fight against the Song army at Jingmen cloth soldiers. Meng Yao detected this situation in advance, reported to the privy council, and told the two Huai to prepare. The two Huai did not know, and later it was as he reported.

古文：珙奏： 襄、蜀荡析，士无所归，蜀士聚于公安，襄士聚于郢渚。臣作公安、南阳两书院，以没入田庐隶之，使有所教养。 请帝题其榜赐焉。
现代文：孟珙上奏说： 襄、蜀两地动荡不安，人民流离，士人无处安身，蜀地士人聚集在公安，襄阳士人聚集在郢渚，臣设立了公安、南阳两座书院，使那些被没收的田舍隶属书院，使士人有地方受教育。 他请皇上题写榜文赐给书院。
English: Meng Rong said: The two places of Xiang and Shu are in turmoil and unrest, the people are displaced, the scholars have nowhere to settle down, the scholars of Shu gathered in the public security, the scholars of Xiangyang gathered in Xingzhu, the minister set up the public security, Nanyang two colleges, so that those confiscated cottages belong to the college, so that the scholars have a place to be educated.

古文：初，珙招镇北军驻襄阳，李虎、王旻军乱，镇北亦溃，乃厚招之，降者不绝。
现代文：当初，孟珙招镇北军驻守襄阳，李虎、王的军队作乱，镇北军也溃散了，孟珙就用优厚的条件招抚他们，归降的人不断。
English: At the beginning, Meng Hui invited the Northern Zhen Army to garrison Xiangyang, Li Hu and Wang's army started a riot, and the Northern Zhen Army also broke up. Meng Hui invited them with generous conditions, and people kept returning.

古文：行省范用吉密通降款，以所受告为质，珙白于朝，不从。
现代文：大元行省范用吉密通降书，以所受文告为凭证，孟珙向朝廷汇报，朝廷不许。
English: Dai Yuan, acting on behalf of the provincial governors, used the letter of abdication sent by Ji Mei-tong as evidence, and Meng Xi reported to the imperial court, but the court did not allow it.

古文：珙叹曰： 三十年收拾中原人，今志不克伸矣。 病遂革，乞休致，授检校少师、宁武军节度使致仕，终于江陵府治，时九月戊午也。
现代文：孟珙叹道： 收复中原三十年的人，如今志向不能实现了。 他的病加重，请求辞官，他被授予检校少师、宁武军节度使后辞官，在江陵府治所去世，当时是九月廿六日。
English: Meng Yu sighed, "For a man who has been restoring the Central Plains for 30 years, his ambition cannot be realized now. As his illness worsened, he asked for a resignation. He was awarded the post of junior school inspector and deputy commander of the Ningwu Army. He passed away at the Gangneung Provincial Government on September 26th.

古文：是月朔，大星陨于境内，声如雷。
现代文：九月初一，有颗大星陨落在境内，声音如雷。
English: On the first day of September, a large meteorite fell on the territory, and the sound was thunderous.

古文：薨之夕，大风发屋折木。
现代文：孟珙去世的那天傍晚，大风吹毁了房屋树木。
English: In the evening of the day Meng Wei died, the strong winds blew down houses and trees.

古文：讣至，帝震悼辍朝，赙银绢各千，特赠少师，三赠至太师，封吉国公，谥忠襄，庙曰威爱。
现代文：孟珙去世的消息传到朝中，皇上震惊，停止朝政追悼他，赠给他丧葬费银绢各一千两匹、特赠他为少师，三次赠官后为太师，封他为吉国公，谥号 忠襄 ，庙名叫威爱。
English: The news of Meng Yao's death reached the imperial court. The emperor was shocked and suspended the imperial government to mourn for him. He gave him a thousand or two silver horses for funeral expenses, a special gift for him as a young teacher, three times as an official gift for him as a great teacher, and he was named the Prince of Yoshikuni, his posthumous name was Zhong Xiang, and his temple was named Wei Ai.

古文：珙忠君体国之念，可贯金石。
现代文：孟珙忠君体国的念头，可贯金石。
English: Meng Xizhong's idea of a monarchy can be traced back to the precious stone.

古文：在军中与参佐部曲论事，言人人异，珙徐以片语折衷，众志皆惬。
现代文：他在军中与部下议论事情，人们说的都不一样，孟珙慢条斯理地用简短的话进行折衷，大家都很高兴。
English: When he discussed things with his subordinates in the army, people said different things. Meng Xuan slowly and logically used short words to compromise, and everyone was happy.

古文：谒士游客，老校退卒，壹以恩意抚接。
现代文：他对拜见他的士人、游客、老军官、退役的兵卒，都是一视同仁，待以恩惠。
English: He treated everyone who came to see him, whether they were politicians, tourists, old officers or retired soldiers, with the same courtesy and kindness.

古文：名位虽重，惟建鼓旗、临将吏而色凛然，无敢涕唾者。
现代文：孟珙的名声和地位虽然显赫，但只设鼓旗这样的仪仗，在将士、官吏面前他神色凛然，没有敢轻视他的人。
English: Although Meng Xuan's reputation and status were prominent, he only held ceremonial events such as drum and flag. He looked dignified in front of soldiers and officials, and no one dared to despise him.

古文：退则焚香扫地，隐几危坐，若萧然事外。
现代文：他回到家中后就是焚香扫地，倚着几案端坐，像是超然世外。
English: After returning home, he would burn incense, sweep the floor, and sit with a few books propped up, as if he were detached from the world.

古文：远货色，绝滋味。
现代文：他不贪恋财富、美女，饮食很平常。
English: He is not greedy for wealth or beautiful women, and his diet is very ordinary.

古文：其学邃于《易》，六十四卦各系四句，名《警心易赞》。
现代文：他对《易》颇有研究，六十四卦各联系为四句话，称为《警心易赞》。
English: He has done a lot of research on Yi. Each of the sixty-four sagas consists of four sentences. It is called "Beware of Yi Zhan."

古文：亦通佛学，自号 无庵居士 。
现代文：他也通晓佛学，自号 无庵居士 。
English: He is also well-versed in Buddhism and calls himself a Muan lay practitioner.

