古文：应劭《汉官仪》载马第伯《封禅仪记》，正纪建武东封事，每称天子为国家，其叙山势峭翬、登陟劳困之状极工，予喜诵之。
现代文：应劭的《汉官仪》载录的马第伯《封禅仪记》，正是记录了建武年间到东边祭祀上天的典礼的事，每提到皇帝时就称作国家，文章叙述山势峡峭险要、登攀劳累困难的情状非常精细，我喜欢诵读它。
English: The "Hangan Rites" of Madiba, recorded in the "Han Guan Rites," is precisely the record of the ceremony of sacrificing to heaven in the east during the Jianwu period. Whenever the emperor is mentioned, it is called the country. The article describes the situation of the mountain range, the steepness of the canyon, and the difficulty of climbing and climbing very finely. I like to read it.

古文：其略云： 是朝上山，骑行；往往道峻峭，下骑步牵马，乍步乍骑且相半。
现代文：文章大致写道： 这天早上上山，骑马而行；常常道路险峭陡峭，就下马步行牵马，一会儿走路、一会儿乘马，基本上各占一半。
English: The article roughly reads: This morning, I went up the mountain, riding a horse; often the road is steep and steep, I got off the horse to walk and lead the horse, walk for a while, ride for a while, basically each half.

古文：至中观，留马，仰望天关，如从谷底仰观抗峰。
现代文：到了中观，留下马匹，抬头远望天关，好象从山谷底下仰看高峰一样。
English: At the mid-viewing, leave the horses behind and look up at the sky, as if looking up at the peak from the bottom of the valley.

古文：其为高也，如视浮云：其峻也，石壁窅窱，如无道径。
现代文：山的高耸，如同看飘浮的云彩；山的险峻，石壁深远，好似没有道路蹊径。
English: The loftiness of the mountain is like watching floating clouds; the mountain is steep, the stone wall is far away, and there seems to be no road.

古文：遥望其人，端如行朽兀，或为白石，或雪。
现代文：远远地望见山上的人，确实象行走的枯树在摇晃，有的象是白色的石头，有的象是雪。
English: Seen from afar, the people on the mountain are indeed shaking like walking dead trees, some are like white stones, some are like snow.

古文：久之，白者移过树，乃知是人也。
现代文：长时间地看着他，白色的物体移动经过树木时，不知道是人。
English: I looked at him for a long time, and when the white object moved through the trees, I didn't know it was a person.

古文：殊不可上，四布僵卧石上，亦赖赍酒脯，处处有泉水。复勉强相将行，到天关。
现代文：实在上不去时，就四散开来僵直地卧倒在山石的上面，也幸好带着酒和肉干，到处都有泉水，再努力地互相搀扶着行走，到达了天关。
English: When they really didn't want to go, they spread out and lay down stiffly on top of the rocks. Fortunately, they also brought wine and dried meat, and there were springs everywhere. They helped each other to walk and reached Tianguan.

古文：自以已至也，问道中人，言尚十余里。
现代文：我们自认为已经到了，问路上的人，却说还有十多里。
English: We thought we had arrived, but when we asked people on the road, they said there were still more than ten miles to go.

古文：其道旁山胁，仰视岸石松树，郁郁苍苍，若在云中。俯视溪谷，碌碌不可见丈尺。
现代文：在那道路旁边，山的两侧，抬头看岩石上的松树，苍翠茂盛，犹如在浮云之中，低头看山谷中的溪流，石块累累，不能看清它们的尺寸。
English: Beside that road, on either side of the mountain, look up at the pine trees on the rock, lush and green, as if among floating clouds, look down at the streams in the valley, full of stones, unable to see their size.

古文：直上七里，赖其羊肠逶迤，名曰环道，往往有絙索，可得而登也。两从者扶挟，前人相牵，后人见前人履底，前人见后人顶，如画。
现代文：又直着向上七里路，靠的是那弯曲漫长的羊肠小路，名称叫做环道，常常有绳索，可以用来攀登，两个随从的人在旁边扶着，前边的人拉着向上爬，后边的人可以看见前边的人鞋底，前边的人可以看见后边人的头顶，就象画中那样。
English: And straight up the seven-mile road, relying on the long and winding sheep gut path, called the ring road, often with ropes, which can be used for climbing, two followers supporting them, the people in front pulling them up, the people behind can see the soles of the shoes of the people in front, and the people in front can see the top of the head of the people behind, just like in the picture.

古文：初上此道，行十余步一休。
现代文：刚走上这条路，走十多步歇一次，渐渐彼乏了，喉咙嘴唇干渴，五六步就歇一次休息。
English: As soon as he set out on this path, he took more than ten steps and rested once. Gradually, he was tired, his throat and lips were thirsty, and he took five or six steps and rested once.

古文：稍疲，咽唇燋，五六步一休，牒牒据顿地，不避暗湿，前有燥地，目视而两脚不随。 
现代文：时跌跌绊终地双手支撑一下坐倒在地上，也不管坐在阴潮的湿土上，前面有干燥的地方，眼睁睁地看着，两条腿却迈不动。 
English: When stumbling and falling, he finally propped up his hands and sat down on the ground. He did not care to sit on the damp wet soil, there was a dry place in front of him, he watched with his eyes open, but his two legs did not move.

古文：又云： 封毕，诏百官以次下，国家随后。
现代文：文章又写道： 祭完上天以后，皇上命令众官员按顺序下山，皇上跟在后面。
English: The article also wrote: After the offering was completed, the emperor ordered the officials to descend the mountain in order, with the emperor following behind.

古文：道迫小，步从匍匐邪上，起近炬火，止亦骆驿。
现代文：道路拥挤窄小，随从爬着上山坡，站起来举近火把，停下来时也连接不断。
English: The road is narrow and congested. Followers climb up the hillside, stand up and hold up torches, and continue to connect when they stop.

古文：步从触击大石，石声正讙，但讙石无相应和者。肠不能已，口不能默。明日，太医令问起居，国家云： 昨上下山，欲行追前人，欲休则后人所蹈，道峻危险，国家不劳  又云： 东山名曰日观，鸡一鸣时，见日欲出，长三丈所。
现代文：随从敲击大石头，石头的声音真是响亮，但却没有谁敲石头跟他相应相和，肚肠鸣叫不能停止，嘴里也不能沉歇而气喘不止，第二天，皇帝的医官询问皇上的身体状况，皇上说： 昨天上山下山，想走就迫近前面的人，想休急就会被后边的人踩上，道路险竣危险，但我不劳累。 文章还写道： 东面的山叫做日观，鸡一叫时，就看见太阳将要开始出来了，有三丈多长。
English: The following day, the emperor's physician inquired about the emperor's physical condition. The emperor said, "Yesterday, I went down the mountain. If I wanted to walk, I would approach the people in front of me. If I wanted to rest, I would be stepped on by the people behind me. The road is dangerous, but I am not tired." The article also wrote, "The mountain to the east is called Nikko. When the rooster crows, I can see the sun is about to rise. It is as tall as three mountains."

古文：秦观者望见长安，吴观者望见会稽，周观者望见齐。 
现代文：秦观那地方可以看到长安，吴观那地方可以望见会稽，周观那地方可以望见齐地。 
English: Chang'an can be seen from the Qin viewpoint, the auditorium can be seen from the Wu viewpoint, and the square can be seen from the Zhou viewpoint.

古文：凡记文之工悉如此，而未尝见称于昔贤；秦、吴、周三观，亦无曾用之者。
现代文：大致记叙文笔的精细都象这样，可是没有被过去的贤人称引；秦、吴、周三观，也没有人曾经提到过。
English: The details of the general narrative pen are all like this, but they have not been cited by the sages of the past; Qin, Wu, and the Wednesday view, and no one has ever mentioned them.

古文：今应劭书脱略，唯刘昭补注《东汉志》仅有之，亦非全篇也。
现代文：现在应劭的书有脱漏省略，只有刘昭所补注的《东汉志》有这篇文章，也不是全篇了。
English: At present, Ying Zhe's book has omissions and omissions, only the "East Han History" supplemented by Liu Zhao has this article, and it is not the whole article.

