古文：二十日，平明饭。
现代文：二十日天大亮吃饭。
English: On the 20th, we had dinner at dawn.

古文：溯湘江而西，五里，北向入塔儿铺，始离湘岸，已入桂林界矣。
现代文：溯湘江往西走，五里，向北到塔儿铺，才离开湘江沿岸，已进入桂林府境内了。
English: Tracing the Xiangjiang River to the west, five miles, north to the pagoda, only to leave the coast of the Xiangjiang River, has entered the territory of Guilin Prefecture.

古文：有古塔，倾圮垂尽，有光华馆，则兴安之传舍也。
现代文：有座古塔，将要全部倒塌了。有个光华馆，就是兴安县的释站旅舍了。
English: There is an ancient tower, which will all collapse. There is a Guanghua Pavilion, which is the Jiefang Hostel in Xing'an County.

古文：人兴安界，古松时断时续，不若全州之连云接嶂矣。
现代文：进入兴安县境内，古松时断时续，不像全州境内那样古松一山接一山如连云天。
English: Entering the territory of Xing'an County, the ancient pines are intermittent, unlike the ancient pines in the territory of the whole state.

古文：十里，东桥铺。
现代文：十里，到东桥铺。
English: Ten miles to the East Bridge.

古文：五里，小宅，复与湘江遇。
现代文：五里，到小宅，再次与湘江相遇。
English: Five miles, to a small house, to meet the Xiangjiang River again.

古文：又五里，瓦子铺，又十里，至兴安万里桥。
现代文：又走五里，是瓦子铺，又是十里，到了兴安县城的五里桥。
English: I walked another five miles to a tile shop and another ten miles to the Wuli Bridge in Xing'an County.

古文：桥下水绕北城西去，两岸甃石，中流平而不广，即灵渠也，已为漓江，其分水处尚在东三里。
现代文：桥下的流水绕过县城北面往西流去，两岸砌着石块，河中水流平缓而且不宽，这就是灵渠了，已经是漓江，湘江与漓江的分水处还在东面三里处。
English: The flowing water under the bridge bypassed the north of the county seat and flowed westward. The two banks were paved with stones. The water flow in the river was smooth and not wide. This was the channel. It was already the Li River. The water distribution point between the Hunan River and the Li River was still three miles to the east.

古文：过桥入北门，城墙环堵，县治寂若空门，市蔬市米，唯万里桥边数家。
现代文：过桥进入北门枷城墙是环形的，县衙门寂静得好像佛寺，卖菜卖米的，仅有万里桥边的几家店铺。
English: Crossing the bridge into the north gate, the city wall is circular, the county gate is as quiet as a Buddhist temple, selling vegetables and rice, only a few shops on the edge of the bridge.

古文：炊饭于塔寺。
现代文：在塔寺中烧火做饭。
English: Cooking over a fire in a pagoda temple.

古文：饭后，由桥北溯灵渠北岸东行，已折而稍北渡大溪，则湘水之本流也，上流已堰不通舟。
现代文：饭后，从桥北溯灵渠北岸往东走，不久稍向北渡过一条大溪，就是湘江的本流了，上游已筑起堤坝不通船。
English: After the meal, I walked eastward from the north bank of the bridge to the north bank of the Lingqiu Canal. Soon, I crossed a large stream to the north, which is the main stream of the Xiangjiang River. Upstream, a dam has been built to prevent ships from passing.

古文：既渡，又东小溪，疏流若带，舟道从之。
现代文：渡过江后，又在东面有条小溪，稀疏的水流好像衣带，船道顺着这条小溪走。
English: After crossing the river, there is a creek in the east. The thin stream is like a belt, and the boat follows the creek.

古文：盖堰湘分水，既西注为漓，又东浚湘支以通舟楫，稍下复与江身合矣。
现代文：原来是筑坝使湘江分流，既往西流注成为漓江，又在东边疏通湘江的支流以便通舟船，稍微往下又与湘江主流会合了。
English: Originally, the damming caused the diversion of the Hunan River. The westward flow of the Hunan River became the Minjiang River, and the tributaries of the Hunan River were dredged in the east to allow the passage of boats. A little further down, it joined the mainstream of the Hunan River.

古文：支流之上，石桥曰接龙桥，桥南水湾为观音阁，已离城二里矣。
现代文：支流之上，有座石桥叫接龙桥，桥南的水湾处是观音阁，已离县城二里了。
English: Above the tributary, there is a stone bridge called the Dragon Bridge, and the water bay south of the bridge is the Guanyin Pavilion, which is two miles away from the county seat.

古文：又东南五里，则湘水自南来，直逼石崖下。
现代文：又向东南走五里，就见湘江自南边流来，直逼到石崖下。
English: After walking another five miles to the southeast, I saw the Hunan River flowing from the south, right up to the bottom of the cliff.

古文：其崖突立南向，曰狮子寨。路循寨脚东溯溪入，已东北入山七里，逾羊牯岭，抵状元峰下，内有邓家村，俱邓丞相之遗也。
现代文：刀陌崖向南突兀而立，叫狮子寨，路沿狮子寨脚向东溯溪延伸，随即往东北方入山中走七里，越过羊枯岭，到达状元峰下，里面有个邓家村，居民全是邓垂相的后人。
English: The Toumou Cliff juts out to the south and is called the Lion Village. The road extends eastward along the foot of the Lion Village and follows the creek. Then, go seven miles northeast into the mountains, cross the Yangkuchen Ridge, and reach the foot of the Jowuangyuan Peak. There is a Dengjia Village in it, and the residents are all descendants of Deng Lixiang.

古文：村南有静室名回龙庵，遂托宿于其中。
现代文：村南有处静室叫回龙庵，便寄宿在庵中。
English: A quiet room in the south of the village called him back to Longan, and he boarded in the hermitage.

古文：僧之号曰悟禅。
现代文：僧人的法号叫悟禅。
English: The monk's Dharma name is Gozan.

古文：二十一日，从庵右逾小山南一里，至长冲，东逼状元峰之麓。
现代文：二十一日从庵右越过小山往南走一里，来到长冲，向东逼近状元峰的山麓。
English: On the 21st, I walked one mile from the hermitage to the right, over the hill to the south, and came to Nagasho, approaching the foot of Jōgen Peak to the east.

古文：又一里，至一尼庵，有尼焉。
现代文：又行一里，到了一座尼姑庵，有个尼姑在庵中。
English: We walked another mile and arrived at a nunnery. There was a nun in the nunnery.

古文：其夫方出耕，问登山道。
现代文：她丈夫正好出外耕种，打听登山的路。
English: Her husband happened to be out farming and asked for directions to the mountain.

古文：先是，路人俱言，上茅塞，决不可登，独此有盲僧，反询客欲登大金峰、小金峰？
现代文：这以前，路上的人都说，山上茅草阻塞，决然不能上登，唯独此处有个瞎眼和尚，反而间客人想要登大金峰还是小金峰？
English: Before this, people on the road said that the mountain was blocked by thatch and could not be climbed at all, except that there was a blind monk here. On the other hand, did the guests want to climb the Great Golden Peak or the Small Golden Peak?

古文：盖此处山之杰出者，俱以 金峰 名之。
现代文：原来此处的山凡是特异出众的，全都用 金峰 来命名。
English: Originally, all the mountains in this area, which are unique and outstanding, were named after the Golden Peak.

古文：而状元峰之左，有一峰片插，亚于状元，而峭削过之。
现代文：而状元峰的左侧，有一座山峰呈片状播着，叫小金峰、比状元峰小，可峻峭陡削胜过状元峰。
English: However, on the left side of the main peak, there is a mountain that is flaky, called Xiao Jinfeng, smaller than the main peak, but steeper and steeper than the main peak.

古文：盖状元高而尖圆，此峰薄而嶙峋，故有大、小之称。
现代文：大体上状元峰高些而且又尖又圆，此峰薄些却怪石嶙峋，故而有大、小的称呼。
English: Generally speaking, the upper peak is taller and pointed and round, but the thinner peak is a strange stalagmite, so it is called large and small.

古文：二峰各而草翳之。
现代文：二峰各有路可通，不过被草遮住了道路。
English: There is a path between the two peaks, but it is blocked by the grass.

古文：余从庵后登溪垅，直东而上，二里抵翠微之间，山削草合，蛇路伏深莽中。
现代文：我从庵后登上溪畔的土垄，一直向东而上，二里抵达状元峰、翠微峰之间，山势陡削草丛密蔽，蛇形小路隐没在深草丛中。
English: I climbed up the ridge of the creek bank from behind the hermitage and continued eastward. Two miles later, I reached the area between the Jouyuan Peak and the Tsuiwei Peak. The steep mountainside was covered with thickly cut grass, and the serpentine path was hidden in the deep grass.

古文：渐转东北三里，直上逾其东北岭坳，望见其东大山层叠，其下溪盘谷嫱，即为麻川；其南层山，当是海阳东渡之脊；其北大山即里山隈矣；其西即县治，而西南海阳坪，其处山反藏伏也。
现代文：逐渐转向东北三里，直接向上越过状元峰东北的岭坳，望见它东面大山层层叠叠，山卞溪流盘绕在幽深的山谷中，这就是麻川；它南面的层层山峦，应该是从海阳山向东延伸的山脊；它北面的大山便是里山限了；它的西边就是县城言而西南方是海阳坪，那地方的山反而低伏隐藏着。
English: Gradually turn to the northeast three miles, directly up over the northeast ridge of the Jowangyuan Peak. Looking at it from the east, the mountains are superimposed, and the mountain streams are coiled in the deep valley, which is Asakawa. The layered mountains on its south side should be the ridge extending from Mount Haiyang to the east. The mountain on its north side is the limit of the mountains; its west side is the county seat and the southwest is Haiyangping, but the mountains in that place are hidden.

古文：坳北峰之下，即入九龙殿之峡。
现代文：山坳北的山峰下，就是进入九龙殿的峡谷。
English: At the foot of the peak in the northern part of the mountain, there is a canyon that leads to the Kowloon Palace.

古文：地名峡口，又曰锦霄。从坳南直跻峰顶，其峰甚狭而峭，凡七起伏，共南一里而至状元峰，则亭亭独上矣。
现代文：从山坳南径直登上峰顶，此峰十分狭窄而且陡峭，总计上下起伏七次，共往南走一里就到了状元峰，便独自亭亭屹立在上了。
English: From the southern slope of the mountain, I climbed straight to the top of the peak. This peak is very narrow and steep. In total, it rises and falls seven times. After walking one mile south, I reached Jowonbong Peak, where I stood alone.

古文：自其上西瞰湘源，东瞰麻川，俱在足底；南俯小金峰，北俯锦霄坳岭，俱为儿孙行。
现代文：从峰顶上西瞰湘江源头，东瞰麻川，全在脚底；往南俯视小金峰，向北俯瞰锦霄坳岭弓都是些儿孙辈。
English: From the top of the peak, the source of the Xiangjiang River can be seen to the west, and the Asakawa River can be seen to the east, all at the bottom of the foot; the Xiaojin Peak can be seen to the south, and the Jinshaokuling Bow can be seen to the north.

古文：但北面九峰相连，而南与小金尚隔二峰，俱峭若中断，不能飞渡，故路由其麓另上耳。
现代文：但北面九座山峰相连，而南边与小金峰还隔着两座山峰，全很陡峭好似从中断开，不能飞渡过去，所以路要另外从山麓上去。
English: However, the nine peaks in the north are connected, while the two peaks on the south side are separated from the small golden peak. They are all very steep, as if they were cut off, and cannot be flown over, so the road has to go up from the foot of the mountain.

古文：顶北第三峰，有方石台如舡首，飞突凌空。
现代文：听说此山是邓垂相升天的地方。峰顶北面的第三座山峰，有处方形石台如像船头，飞突凌空。
English: It is said that this mountain is the place where Danglishang ascended to heaven. The third peak on the north side of the peak has a prescription-shaped stone platform like the bow of a ship, soaring into the sky.

古文：旧传有竹自崖端下垂拂拭，此旁箐亦有之，未见有独长而异者。
现代文：旧时传说有竹子从山崖顶端垂下来拂拭着，此地四旁的山警中也有这种竹子，未见有此等特别修妹而奇异的。
English: In the old days, there was a legend that there was bamboo hanging down from the top of the mountain cliff and wiping it away. The rangers around here also have this kind of bamboo, but there are no such special and strange nuns.

古文：坐峰顶久之，以携饭就筐分啖。
现代文：子是向西随着溪流进去，二里到董田，是个大村子。
English: The child followed the stream to the west, two miles to Dongtian, a large village.

古文：已闻东南有雷声，乃下，二十二日，宿隐山寺。
现代文：山洞就在村北一里处，因天晚来不及上登，只好赶到东山进了隐山寺。
English: The cave is just one mile north of the village. Since it was too late to climb up, I had to rush to Higashiyama to enter the Hidden Mountain Temple.

古文：二十三日，晨起大雨，饭后少歇。出步寺后，见南向有洞，其门高悬，水由下出，西与乳洞北流之水合，从西北山腋破壁而出大岩堰焉。
现代文：出外在寺后散步，见到向南的地方有洞，洞口高悬，水从下边流出，往西与乳洞向北流的水合流，从西北方的山腰上冲破崖壁流到大岩堰。
English: When I went out for a walk behind the temple, I saw a cave to the south, with a high overhang at the mouth of the cave, water flowing out from the bottom, merging with the north-flowing water of the milk cave to the west, and breaking through the cliff wall from the northwest mountainside to the big rock weir.

古文：时日色尚高，亟缚炬从寺右入洞。
现代文：此时天色还早，急忙绑了火把从寺后进洞。
English: At this time, it was still early in the morning, so they hurriedly tied torches and entered the cave from the back of the temple.

古文：攀石崖而上，其石峭削，圮侧下垂，渊壁若裂，水不甚涌而浑，探其暗处，水石粗混，无可着足。
现代文：攀着石崖而上，那崖石峻峭陡削，倒斜下垂，石壁下的深栩好像洲道裂缝，水势不怎么汹涌却浑浊，探了探水中昏暗之处，水中石块粗大混杂，无处可播足。
English: Climbing up the rock cliff, the cliff is steep and steep, oblique and sagging, the depth under the rock wall is like a continental crack, the water is not very turbulent but turbid, I explored the dark places in the water, the stones in the water were coarse and mixed, and there was nowhere to plant my feet.

古文：出而返寺，濯足于崖外合流处，晚餐而卧。
现代文：出来后返回寺中，在山崖外合流之处洗脚，吃过晚餐就睡下。
English: After coming out, he returned to the temple, washed his feet at the confluence outside the cliff, ate dinner and went to sleep.

古文：二十四日，晨起雨不止，饭后以火炬数枚，僧负而导之。
现代文：二十四日早晨起床雨不停，饭后拿了几个火把，由僧人背着领路。
English: On the morning of the 24th, I got up and it was raining non-stop. After dinner, I took a few torches and a monk led the way on my back.

古文：一里至董田，又北一里，至下洞、中洞、上洞。
现代文：二里路来到董田，又往北一里，到了乳岩的下洞、中洞、上洞。
English: I walked two miles to Dongtian, and then one mile north to the lower, middle and upper caves of Liyan.

古文：雨中返寺午饭。
现代文：雨中返回寺中吃午饭。
English: Returned to the temple for lunch in the rain.

古文：雨愈大，遂止不行。
现代文：雨更大了，就住下来不再走。
English: As the rain got heavier, we decided to stay put and not go any further.

古文：二十五日，天色雾甚，晨餐后仍向东行。
现代文：二十五日天色十分晴朗，早餐后仍向东走。
English: On the 25th, the sky was very clear. After breakfast, we still headed east.

古文：一里，出山口，支峰兀立处，其上庵，草翳无人，非观音岩也。
现代文：一里，走出山口，一座独峰突兀而立，峰上有座寺庵，深草密蔽，没有人住，不是观音岩。
English: One mile out of the mountain pass, a single peak stands out. On the peak, there is a temple and a hermitage. It is covered with deep grass and no one lives there. It is not Guanyin Rock.

古文：从庵左先循其上崖而东，崖危草没，静闻不能从，令守行囊于石畔。
现代文：从庵左先沿寺庵上方的山崖往东走，山崖高耸，深草没路，静闻不能跟随，就叫他在石畔守行李。
English: From the left side of the hermitage, walk east along the cliff above the hermitage. The cliff is high and there is no path through the deep grass. If Jing Huan can't follow, tell him to guard the luggage on the stone side.

古文：余攀隙披窾处而入，转崖之东，则两壁裂而成门，其内上夹参九天，或合或离，俱不过咫尺；下夹坠九渊，或干或水，俱凭临数丈。
现代文：我攀着石缝钻过空处进去乍转到山崖的东面，就见两面石壁裂成门，里面剖开一线，曲折通透。其上夹谷上参九霄云天，或合或离，都不过有咫尺；下夹谷坠入九重深渊，或干或湿，全都凭临数丈深。
English: I climbed a stone crack to drill through a gap and turned to the eastern side of the cliff. I saw the two sides of the stone wall split into doors. Inside, a line was cut, and the twists and turns were transparent. The upper valley was as high as the nine heavens, and it was only a few feet away from either merging or separating. The lower valley fell into a nine-layered abyss, and it was either dry or wet, and it all depended on the depth.

古文：夹半两崖俱有痕，践足而入，肩倚隔崖，足践线痕，手攀石窍，无陨坠之虑。
现代文：夹谷半腰上两侧的崖璧上都有裂痕，把脚踩进去，两肩紧靠分开的崖壁，脚踏着线一样的裂痕，手攀着石孔，没有坠落下去的担忧。
English: There are cracks in the cliff on both sides of the cliff above the mid-waist of the cliff, step your foot in, both shoulders close to separate cliff walls, step on the line-like cracks, climb the stone hole with your hand, and do not worry about falling down.

古文：直进五六丈，夹转而东，由支峰坳脊北望，见观音崖在对崖，亦幽峭可喜。
现代文：一直进去五六丈，夹谷转向东，从独峰的坳脊往北望去，见到观音崖在对面的山崖上，也是幽深陡峭令人喜爱。
English: I went all the way into the five or six heights, turned east through the valley, looked north from the ridge of the single peak, and saw the Guanyin Cliff on the opposite cliff, which is also deep and steep and lovely.

古文：昨来时从其前盘山而转，惜未一入。今不能愈北也。
现代文：昨天来时从它前面绕着山转，可惜未能进去一次，今天不能再往北走了。
English: When I came here yesterday, I walked around the mountain in front of it, but unfortunately I couldn't go inside it once. Today, I can't go any further north.

古文：下山，东南行田塍间，水漫没岸。三里，有南而北小水，急脱下衣，涉其东，溯之南。
现代文：下山，往东南行走在田野间，水漫出来淹没了溪岸毛三里，有条由南往北的小河，急忙脱了裤子，涉到河东岸，溯流往南走。
English: Going down the mountain, walking southeast among the fields, the water came out and flooded the creek for three miles, there was a small river from south to north, I quickly took off my pants, waded to the east bank of the river, and followed the stream to the south.

古文：又二里，为秀塘，转而西南行，复涉溪而北，循山麓行。二里，又一涧自北山夹中出，涉其南，又循一溪西来入，即西岭之溪也。
现代文：又行二里，是秀塘，转向西南行，再次涉溪向北行，沿山麓走 二里路，又一条山涧从北山夹谷中流出来，涉到涧南，又顺一条西来的溪流进去，这就是源于西岭的溪流了。
English: Another two miles, it's Xiutang, turn to the southwest, wade into the stream again to the north, and walk along the foot of the mountain. Another two miles, another mountain stream flows out of the north mountain valley, wades into the south of Linyi, and follows a stream coming from the west. This is the stream that originates from Xiling.

古文：三里，越溪南，登下西岭，入口甚隘，而内有平畴，西村落焉。
现代文：三里，过到溪南，登上下西岭，入口处十分狭窄，可里面有平坦的田野，西边有村落。
English: Three miles to the south of Xi'an, climbing up and down the West Ridge, the entrance is very narrow, but there are flat fields inside and villages on the west side.

古文：西南上岭，又二里而逾上西岭，岭东复得坪焉。
现代文：从西南上岭，又走二里便越过上西岭，岭东又见到一块平地。
English: From Shangling in the southwest, I walked another two miles to cross Shangling in the west, and saw a flat land in the east of the ridge.

古文：有数家在深竹中，饭于村妪。又西南平上二里，乃东逾一坳，始东下二里，为开洲，则湘之西岸也。
现代文：有几户人家在深竹丛中，在村妇家中吃了饭 又往西南平缓地上走二里，就向东越过一个山坳，这才往东下山二里，是开洲，就是湘江的西岸了。
English: Several families ate their meals in the deep bamboo thicket, in the house of a village woman, and walked two miles to the southwest on level ground, and then crossed a mountain ridge to the east. It was only two miles to the east that they went down the mountain, to Kaizhou, which is the west bank of the Hunan River.

古文：溯湘南行五里，复入冈陀，为东刘村。
现代文：溯湘江往南行五里，再次走入起伏的山冈间，是东刘村。
English: Five miles south of the Xiangjiang River, once again walking into the undulating mountains and hills, is East Liu Village.

古文：又五里为西刘村，有水自西谷东入湘。
现代文：又走五里是西刘村，有水流自西边的山谷中往东流入湘江。
English: Another five miles away is West Liu Village, where water flows from the valley in the west to the Hunan River in the east.

古文：又西南三里为土桥，又二里大丰桥，俱有水东注于湘。又逾岭二里，宿于唐汇田。
现代文：又向西南三里是土桥，又走二里是大丰桥，两处都有水流向东注入湘江，又越岭走了二里，住宿在唐汇田。
English: Another three miles to the southwest is the earthen bridge, and another two miles is the Great Feng Bridge, both of which have water flowing east into the Hunan River, and another two miles across the ridge, with accommodation in Tanghui Tian.

古文：东有大山岿然出东界上者，曰赤耳山。
现代文：东面有座大山岿然出现在东境上的，叫赤耳山。
English: In the east, a large mountain suddenly appeared on the eastern border, called the Red Ear Mountain.

古文：二十六日，晨餐后，日色霁甚。
现代文：二十六日早餐后，天色十分晴朗。
English: After breakfast on the 26th, the sky was very clear.

古文：南溯湘流二里，渡一溪为太平堡，有堡、有营兵焉。
现代文：向南溯湘江江流走二里，渡过一溪，是太平堡，有城堡，有兵营。
English: It is a Taiping Fort, with a castle and a barracks, which is two miles south of the Xiangjiang River.

古文：山至是开而成巨坞，又南二里，曰刘田。
现代文：东西两面的山到这里开阔起来，成为巨大的山坞，一列小石峰似带子一样，并立在湘江东岸。又往南二里，叫做刘田。
English: The mountains on both the east and west sides open up here and become a huge dock, a row of small stone peaks like a ribbon, and stand on the east bank of the Hunan River. Two miles south, it is called Liu Tian.

古文：又南二里，曰白龙桥。
现代文：又向南二里，叫白龙桥。
English: Another two miles to the south is called Bai Long Qiao.

古文：又三里，逾一小岭，曰牛栏。
现代文：又走三里，越过一道小岭犷叫牛栏。
English: They walked another three miles and passed a small ridge of yakitori.

古文：二里，张村。
现代文：二里，到张村。
English: Two miles to Zhangcun.

古文：又一里至庙角，饭于双泉寺，其南即灵川界。
现代文：又一里到庙角，在双泉寺吃饭，寺南就是灵川县的辖地。
English: Another mile to the corner of the temple, eat at Shuangquan Temple, the south of the temple is the jurisdiction of Lingchuan County.

古文：又南二里，东南岐路入山，其东高峰片耸，曰白面山。
现代文：又南二里，沿东南方的岔路进山，路东高峰呈片状高耸，叫做白面山。
English: Another two miles south, along the southeastern Kushiro Road into the mountains, the east peak of the road is flaky and high, called Mount Hakumen.

古文：又南二里，渡一桥，湘水之有桥自。
现代文：又往南行二里，过一座桥，湘江上有桥从这里开始。
English: Another two miles to the south, across a bridge, there is a bridge over the Hunan River from here.

古文：循左山行，南二里，为田心寺。
现代文：沿左面的山走，向南二里，是田心寺。
English: Walking along the mountain on the left, two miles to the south, is Tanshin-ji Temple.

古文：又南一里，古龙王庙。
现代文：又向南一里，到古龙王庙。
English: Another mile to the south, to the Temple of the Ancient Dragon King.

古文：又南一里，有一石峰峙立东西两界之中，曰海阳山。有海龙庵，在峰南石崖之半。
现代文：又南走一里，有一座石峰独立在东面两境之中，叫做海阳山；有个海龙庵，在峰南石崖的半腰上。
English: A mile further south, there is a rock peak that is independent in the middle of the two territories in the east, called Haiyang Mountain; there is a sea dragon hermitage, halfway up the southern rock cliff of the peak.

古文：海龙庵已为临桂界。
现代文：海龙庵已在临桂县境内。
English: Hai Long An is now in Lin Kuei County.

古文：海龙堡在西南一里，东入山五里为季陵，西十五里，过西岭背为龙口桥，东北五里读书岩、白面山，西北十五里庙角，南五里江汇。先是，望白面山南诸峭峰甚奇，问知其下有读书岩，而急于海阳，遂南入古殿，以瓦磨墨录其碑。
现代文：海龙堡在西南一里处，向东进山五里是季陵，往西十五里越过西岭的山背是龙口桥，往东北五里是读书岩、白面山，西北十五里是庙角，南边五里是江汇，这以前，望见白面山南面陡峭的群峰非常奇特，间知峰下有个读书岩，可急于去海阳山，便向南进入古殿中，以瓦片磨墨抄录殿中的碑文。
English: Hailong Fortress is one mile to the southwest, five miles to the east into the mountain is Ji Ling, fifteen miles to the west across the mountain ridge of Xiling is Longkou Bridge, five miles to the northeast is Reading Rock and Baimen Mountain, fifteen miles to the northwest is Temple Corner, and five miles to the south is Jianghui. Previously, the view of the steep peaks on the south side of Baimen Mountain was very strange. There was a reading rock under Zhifeng Peak. If you were in a hurry to go to Haiyang Mountain, you would go south into the ancient hall and use tiles to write down the inscription in the hall.

古文：抵海龙虎，日已薄崦嵫，急卸行李于中。
现代文：到达海龙庵时，落日已迫近西山，急忙把行李卸在庵中。
English: When they arrived at Hailong's hermitage, the sunset was already approaching the West Mountain, and they hurriedly unloaded their luggage in the hermitage.

古文：乃下山，自东麓绕北至西，入龙母庙，已圮。
现代文：于是下山，从东麓的两个洞口绕过北面来到西麓，进人龙母庙，庙已经倒塌了。
English: So they went down the mountain, went around the north face from the two cave entrances at the eastern foot to the western foot, and entered the Dragon Mother Temple. The temple had already collapsed.

古文：即从流水中行，转南，水遂成汇，深者没股。
现代文：立即从流水中前行，转向南，水就汇成一股，深处淹没了大腿。
English: Immediately he stepped out of the running water and turned to the south, and the water came together in a torrent, drowning his thighs.

古文：庵下石崖壁立，下临深塘。
现代文：庵下方石崖壁立，下临深塘。
English: A stone cliff wall stands below the hermitage, with a deep pond below.

古文：由塘南水中行，转东登山。
现代文：山南面的水塘有条细细的水流，东面季陵的源头也下流到此处。
English: There is a thin stream of water in the pond on the south side of the mountain, and the source of the marshes on the east side also flows down to here.

古文：入庵，衣裈裤子俱湿，急晚餐而卧以亵衣内衣。是庵始有佛灯。
现代文：那么此山还在延伸而过的山脊的北面，水全往北流去，这是湘江的源头。
English: Then this mountain is still on the north side of the ridge that extends past, and the water all flows northward, which is the source of the Xiangjiang River.

古文：二十七日晓起，天色仍霁，亟饭。
现代文：漓江的源头还在海阳山西边的西岭角。二十七白拂晓起床，天色仍然晴朗，急忙吃了饭。
English: The source of the Li River is still in Xiling Cape on the west side of Haiyang Mountain. I got up at dawn on the 27th, the sky was still clear, and I hurriedly ate dinner.

古文：从东北二里，田心寺，又一里，东入山，又一里，渡双溪桥。
现代文：从东北方向走二里，到田心寺，又是一里，向东进山，又一里，越过双溪桥。
English: From the northeast, walk two miles to Tianxin Temple, another mile east into the mountains, and another mile over Shuangxi Bridge.

古文：又东一里，望一尖峰而登。
现代文：又往东一里，望着一座尖尖的山峰上登。
English: Another mile to the east, looking up at a sharp mountain peak.

古文：其峰在白面之西，高不及白面，而耸立如建标累塔，途人俱指读书岩在其半，竟望之而趋。
现代文：这座山峰在白面山的西面，高处赶不上白面山，可耸立着如同竖起的标杆和层层相叠的高塔，路上的人都指点读书岩在这座山峰的半腰间，竟然望着它快步赶去。
English: This peak is on the west side of Mount Paimian. The height is not as high as that of Mount Paimian, but it can stand like a erected benchmark and stacked towers. People on the road point out the reading rock in the middle of this peak, and even look at it to hurry.

古文：及登岭北坳，望山下水反自北而南，其北皆山冈缭绕，疑无容留处，意水必出洞间。
现代文：登到岭北的山坳，望见山下的水流反而自北往南流，水流北面都是山冈缭绕，怀疑没有水容留之处，意料水流必定是从洞中流出来的。
English: Climbing to the ridge in the north of the ridge, I saw that the water flow under the mountain flowed from north to south. The water flow in the north was surrounded by mountains and hills. I suspected that there was no place for the water to stay. The expected water flow must have come from the cave.

古文：时锐急切于登山，第望高而趋，已而路断，攀崖挽棘而上。
现代文：当时急切想登山，只管望着高处赶路，很快路断了，攀着山崖抓着荆棘何上爬。
English: At that time, I was eager to climb the mountain, just looking at the heights to catch the road, soon the road was broken, climbing the cliff clutching the thorns to climb.

古文：一里，透石崖之巅，心知已误，而贪于涉巅，反自快也。
现代文：一里路，钻到石崖的顶端，心知走错了路，但贪恋于爬上峰顶，反而感到很痛快。
English: One mile away, drilling to the top of the cliff, knowing that I took the wrong path, but yearning to climb to the top, I felt very happy.

古文：振衣出棘刺中，又扪崖直上，遂出其巅。
现代文：从荆棘丛中走出抖了抖衣服，又抓住石崖一直上登，便到了峰顶。
English: I walked out of the thorn bush, shaking my clothes, and grabbed the rock cliff to climb all the way up to the peak.

古文：东望白面，可与平揖；南揽巾子，如为对谈。
现代文：东望白面山，可以和它平起平坐；向南观览巾子岭，好像是在相对交谈。
English: Looking to the east at Mount Paimian, you can sit on an equal footing with it; looking south at Hanziling, it seems to be in a relative conversation.

古文：久之，仍下北岭之坳，由棘中循崖南转，扪隙践块而上，得峰腰一洞，南向岈然，其内又西裂天窟，吐纳日月，荡漾云霞，以为读书之岩必此无疑；但其内平入三四丈，辄渐隘渐不容身，而其下路复蔽塞，心以为疑。
现代文：很久之后，仍旧下到北岭的山坳，由荆棘中沿着山崖向南转，摸着石缝踏着石块而上，在山峰半腰找到一个山洞，洞口向南，十分深邃，洞内又在西边裂开一窟窿露出天空，吞吐日月，荡漾云霞，以为读书岩必定是这里无疑了；但洞内平平进去三四丈，就逐渐狭窄起来，容不下身，而且那下边的路又被遮蔽堵塞了，心里感到很疑惑。
English: After a long time, I still went down to the foothills of the North Ridge, from the thorns along the cliff to the south, touched the stone cracks and stepped on the stones, and found a cave halfway up the mountain. The cave mouth was very deep, facing south. A hole was opened on the west side of the cave, revealing the sky, swallowing the sun and moon, and rippling clouds. I thought that the reading rock must be here without a doubt. However, when I entered the cave, it gradually narrowed, and I could not lower my body. Moreover, the road below was blocked, and I felt very puzzled.

古文：出洞门，望洞左削崖万丈，插霄临渊，上有一石飞突垂空，极似一巨鼠飞空下腾，首背宛然，然无路可扪。
现代文：出了洞口，望见洞左陡削的万丈悬崖，上插云霄，下临深渊，上方有一块岩石飞突而出，垂在空中，极似一只巨鼠飞空下跃，头部背部都很逼真，然而无路可以摸到那里。
English: Out of the cave, you can see the steep cliff on the left side of the cave, with the sky above and the abyss below. Above, there is a rock that flies out and hangs in the air, very similar to a giant rat flying down. The back of the head is very realistic, but there is no way to touch it.

古文：逐下南麓。回眺巨鼠之下，其崖悬亘，古溜间驳，疑读书岩尚当在彼，复强静闻缘旧路再登。
现代文：于是下到南边的山麓，回头眺望巨鼠之下，那里的山崖悬空横亘，石壁间陈旧的水迹斑斑驳驳，怀疑读书岩还是应该在那里，重又强迫静闻沿原路再次上登。
English: So I went down to the southern foot of the mountain, looked back down to the giant rat, where the cliffs hung in the air, the old water marks dotted between the stone walls, doubted that the reading rock should still be there, and forced Jinghan to climb up again along the original road.

古文：至洞门，觅路无从，乃裂棘攀条，梯悬石而登，直至巨鼠崖之下。
现代文：到了洞上，无从找到路，于是分开荆棘抓住枝条，踩着悬空的岩石往上登，直到巨鼠状的悬崖之下。
English: When they reached the cave, they couldn't find their way, so they split thorns, grabbed branches, and climbed up the overhanging rocks until they reached the base of the giant rat-shaped cliff.

古文：仰望崖下，又有二小鼠下垂，其巨鼠自下望之，睁目张牙，变成狞面，又如猫之腾空逐前二小鼠者。
现代文：仰望悬崖下方，又有两块如小鼠的岩石下垂，那只巨鼠岩从下面去望它，睁大眼睛，张着牙齿，变成狰狞的面孔，又像是猫在腾空追逐前边两只小老鼠的样子。
English: Looking up below the cliff, there are two more mouse-like rocks hanging down, and the giant mouse rock looks at it from below, with its eyes wide open, its teeth open, its face transformed into a coy expression, and it looks like a cat chasing two small mice in front of it.

古文：崖腰有一线微痕可以着足，而下下至南麓，夸耕者已得读书岩之胜。
现代文：崖壁半腰上有一线细微的裂痕可以踏脚，而下方仍是峭壁。又在东边有块如一双巨手的岩石作出指路的姿式，手背和拇指，分开合拢的样子都可分辨出来。
English: Halfway up the cliff wall there is a thin line of cracks that can be stepped on, while the bottom is still a cliff. On the east side, there is a rock like a pair of giant hands to guide the way. The back of the hand and the thumb can be distinguished when they are closed.

古文：耕者云： 岩尚在岭坳之西，当从岭西下，不当从岭东上也。 
现代文：来到那地方，山腰上的裂痕断了不能前走。于是从原路下到南麓，向耕地的人夸耀已找到读书岩的胜境了。耕地的人说： 读书岩还在山岭坳的西边，应当从岭西下去，不应该从岭东上去的。 
English: When they came to that place, the crack on the mountainside broke and they could not go any further. So they went down to the southern foot from the original road and boasted to the farmers that they had found the winning territory of the reading rock. The farmers said: The reading rock is still on the west side of the mountain ridge, it should go down from the west of the ridge, it should not go up from the east of the ridge.

古文：乃从麓西溯涧而北，则前所涉溪果从洞中出，而非从涧来者。
现代文：于是从山麓向西溯山涧往北走，就见先前涉过的溪流果然从洞中流出来，而不是从山涧里流来的。
English: So from the foot of the mountain to the west, he traced the ridge to the north, and saw that the stream he had previously waded through actually flowed out of the cave, not from the ridge.

古文：望读书岩在水洞上，急登之。
现代文：望见读书岩在水洞上方，急忙登上洞。
English: He saw the reading rock above the cave and hurried up to the cave.

古文：其洞西向，高而不广，其内垂柱擎盖，骈笋悬莲，分门列户，颇幻而巧。
现代文：此洞向西，租高却不宽，洞内石柱下垂如伞盖高举，石笋骄列莲花悬垂，分门列户，十分奇幻而精巧。
English: This cave faces west, it is high but not wide, the stone pillars inside the cave are hanging down like an umbrella cover held high, the stalagmites are overhanging the lotus flowers, the doors are lined up, it is very magical and exquisite.

古文：三丈之内，即转而北下，坠深墨黑，不可俯视，岂与下水洞通那？
现代文：三丈之内，就向北转下去，深坠下去，墨黑一片，不可俯视，莫非是与下边的水洞相通吗？
English: Within a third of a meter, it turns northward, plunges down, turns black, and cannot be looked down. Is it connected to the water hole below?

古文：洞内左壁，有宋人马姓为秦景光大书 读书岩 三隶字。
现代文：洞内左壁上，有个姓马的宋代人为秦景光写了 读书岩 三个隶书大字。
English: On the left wall of the cave, a Song Dynasty person surnamed Ma wrote "Reading Rock" for Qin Jingguang.

古文：其下又有一洞，门张而中浅，又非出水者。
现代文：字下边又有户洞，洞口大张可洞很浅，又不是出水的洞。
English: At the bottom of the word there is also a cave, the mouth of the cave is large, but the hole is very shallow, and it is not a water hole.

古文：水从读书岩下石穴涌出，水与口平，第见急流涌溪，不见洞门也。
现代文：水从读书岩下边的石穴中涌出，水与洞口平齐，只见急流涌入溪中，望不见洞口。
English: Water gushes out of a stone hole at the bottom of Reading Rock. The water is level with the mouth of the cave. A rapid stream rushes into the stream, and the mouth of the cave cannot be seen.

古文：时已薄午，欲登白面，望之已得其梗概，恐日暮途穷，不遑升堂入室，遂遵白面西麓而南。
现代文：此时已接近中午，本打算去登白面山，远望它已得知它的梗概，担心天黑找不到路，顾不上更进一步考察了，便沿着白面山西麓往南走。
English: At this time, it was already close to noon. Originally, I had planned to climb Mount Paimian. I hoped that it had already learned its outline. I was worried that I would not be able to find the road in the dark. Since I could not investigate further, I walked south along the western foot of Mount Paimian.

古文：二里，过白源山，又二里过季陵路口，始转而西。
现代文：二里，路过白源山，又行二里经过季陵的路口，开始转向西走。
English: After two miles, I passed Baiyuan Mountain, and after another two miles, I passed the junction of Jiling, and began to turn west.

古文：一里，随山脉登海阳庵，饭而后行，已下午矣。
现代文：一里，顺山脉登上海阳庵，吃饭之后动身，已是下午了。
English: After a one-mile hike up the Shun Mountains to Shanghaiyangan, we set off after dinner. It was already afternoon.

古文：由海阳山东南过季陵东下，入堂溪桥，遂由塘南循过脊西行，一里，为海阳堡。
现代文：从海阳山东南路过季陵向东下行，走到堂溪桥，于是由水塘南边沿延伸过去的山脊往西行，一里，是海阳堡。
English: From the southeast of Haiyang Mountain, go eastward through the Jiling, go down to the Dongxi Bridge, and then go westward along the ridge that extends from the south edge of the reservoir, one mile, is Haiyang Fort.

古文：由堡西南行，则堡前又分山一支南下，与西山夹而成两界，水俱淙淙南下矣。
现代文：由海阳堡向西南行，就见堡前又分出一支山脉向南下延，与西面的山相夹而立成为两边的分界，水流全都徐棕地往南流下去了。
English: Going southwest from Haiyang Fort, I saw another mountain range extending southward in front of the fort. It stood between the mountains on the west and became the boundary between the two sides. All the water flowed slowly southward.

古文：随下一里，则西谷中裂，水破峡而出，又罗姑与西岭夹而成流越之，循水西南下三里，为江汇。
现代文：随着水流下山一里，就见西面山谷从中裂开，水流冲破山峡流出来，又有罗姑山与西岭相夹形成的水流，都是漓江的源头。越过水流，沿着流水向西南下走三里，是江汇。
English: As the water flowed down the mountain for one mile, we saw the west valley split from the middle, the water flow broke through the mountain canyon and flowed out, and the water flow formed by Luogu Mountain and Xiling were the source of the Lijiang River. Crossing the water flow and walking along the flowing water to the southwest for three miles was the river confluence.

古文：于是水注而南，路转而西，遂西逾一岭，一里，登岭坳。
现代文：到了这里水流往南流注，路转向西走，于是往西越过一岭，一里，登上岭坳。
English: At this point, the water flowed southward, and the road turned westward, so it went westward over a ridge, a mile, and ascended the ridge.

古文：三里，西循岭上行，忽有水自东南下捣成涧，路随之下。
现代文：三里，向西沿着岭上走，忽然有流水自东南下捣形成山涧，路随着山涧下行。
English: Three miles to the west, walking along the ridge, suddenly there was flowing water from the southeast down to form a ridge, and the road followed the ridge down.

古文：又一里，直坠涧底。
现代文：又走一里，一直下坠到涧底。
English: Walked another mile and fell all the way to the bottom.

古文：越桥南，其水自桥下复捣峡中，路不能随。
现代文：过到桥南，那条水流从桥下又一次下捣到峡中，路不能再跟着它走。
English: Passing to the south of the bridge, the stream of water from under the bridge once again rushes down into the gorge, and the road can no longer follow it.

古文：复逾岭一里，乃出山口，又西南行平畴中，二里，抵涧上。
现代文：又翻过山岭走一里，这才走出山口，又向西南行走在平旷的田野中，二里，抵达涧上。
English: After another mile of walking across the mountains, I finally walked out of the mountain pass, and then walked southwest in the middle of a flat field for another two miles, arriving in Shujian.

古文：乃止宿于黄姓家。
现代文：于是停下来住在姓黄的人家。
English: So they stopped and stayed at the home of a man surnamed Huang.

