古文：移剌履张万公蒲察通粘割斡特剌程辉刘玮董师中王蔚马惠迪马琪杨伯通尼庞古鉴移剌履字履道，辽东丹王突欲七世孙也。父聿鲁，早亡。
现代文：移剌履字履道，辽东丹王移剌突欲的第七世孙。
English: He is the seventh-generation descendant of King Dan of Liaodong.

古文：聿鲁之族兄兴平军节度使德元无子，以履为后。
现代文：其父移剌聿鲁，早年去世。移剌聿鲁的族兄兴平军节度使移剌德元没儿子，把移剌履作为后人。
English: His father, Yibao Lu, died early in life. Yibao Lu's elder brother, Xingping Jun, made Yibao De Yuan not have a son, leaving Yibao Lu as his descendant.

古文：方五岁，晚卧庑下，见微云往来天际，忽谓乳母曰： 此所谓 卧看青天行白云 者耶？ 
现代文：移剌履五岁的时候，躺在廊房下，见微云在天上往来，他忽然对乳母说： 这是所说的 卧看青天行白云 吗？ 
English: At the age of five, when he was lying under the hallway and saw the clouds moving in the sky, he suddenly said to his nanny: Is this the so-called "lying watching the blue sky and the white clouds"?

古文：德元闻之，惊曰： 是子当以文学名世。 
现代文：移剌德元听说这件事，很惊讶地说 ：这个孩子应当以文学名于世。 
English: When he heard about this, he was surprised and said, "This child should be born with a literary name."

古文：及长，博学多艺，善属文。
现代文：等到移剌履长大了，他博学多艺善于做文。
English: By the time he grew up, he was well-read and good at writing.

古文：初举进士，恶搜检烦琐，去之。
现代文：起初推举为进士，他厌恶那种烦琐的方式，辞去不受。
English: At first, he was promoted to the rank of junior officer. He detested the cumbersome process and refused to resign.

古文：荫补为承奉班祗候、国史院书写。
现代文：后移剌履受荫恩补为承奉班祗候、国史院书写。
English: Later, he was appointed as a member of the National Academy of History.

古文：世宗方兴儒术，诏译经史，擢国史院编修官，兼笔砚直长。
现代文：金世宗皇帝始兴儒术，诏令移剌履为译经史，擢升国史院编修官，兼笔砚直长。
English: Emperor Jin Shizong initiated the rise of Confucianism, issued the edict to translate scriptures into history, and promoted him to the position of editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History.

古文：一日，世宗召问曰： 朕比读《贞观政要》，见魏征嘉谋忠节，良可称叹。近世何故无如征者？ 
现代文：一天，世宗召唤他问： 朕接连地读《贞观政要》，见魏征谋划忠节，值得称赞，近世为什么没有像魏征那样的人？ 
English: One day, Shizong summoned him and asked: "I have been reading "The Virtue of Chastity and the Dignity of Politics" one after another, and I see that Wei Zheng is worthy of praise for planning the Loyalty Festival. Why is there no one like Wei Zheng in modern times?

古文：履曰： 忠嘉之士，何代无之，但上之人用与不用耳。 
现代文：移剌履说 ：忠诚可赞的人士，哪代都有，只是上面的人用与不用罢了。 
English: Shifeng Lu said: There are loyal and commendable people in every generation, but only those at the top use or do not use them.

古文：世宗曰： 卿不见刘仲诲、张汝霖耶，朕超用二人者，以尝居谏职，屡有忠言故也。
现代文：世宗说； 你不见刘仲诲、张汝霖吗？朕破格任用这两人，因为他们曾居谏职，多有忠言。
English: Sejong said, "Don't you see Liu Zhongyan and Zhang Rulin? I have appointed these two people in an unconventional way, because they have served in high-ranking positions, and many of them are loyal advisors.

古文：安得谓之不用，第人材难得耳。 
现代文：哪里叫不用，只是人才难得罢了。 
English: It doesn't matter where, it's just that talent is hard to come by.

古文：履曰： 臣未闻其谏也。
现代文：移剌履说 ：臣没听到他们的谏言。
English: "I didn't hear what they said," he said.

古文：且海陵杜塞言路，天下缄口，习以成风。
现代文：海陵皇帝限制言论自由，天下人都闭口不言，已经成风。
English: Emperor Hailing restricted freedom of speech, and people all over the world kept their mouths shut, which has become a common practice.

古文：愿陛下惩艾前事，开谏诤之门，天下幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下引以为戒，广开言论劝谏之门，那么天下都很幸运了。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will take this as a warning and open wide the door of speech and persuasion, then the whole world will be lucky.

古文：初议以时务策设女直进士科，礼部以所学不同，未可概称进士，诏履定其事，乃上议曰： 进士之科，起于隋大业中，始试以策。
现代文：当初讨论用时务策问设立女真进士科，礼部说因为所学的不同，不能全称进士，世宗诏令移剌履定此事，移剌履于是上奏说 ：进士科，起源于隋朝大业年间，起初用策问考试。
English: At first, there was a discussion on the establishment of the Jinshi Science of Jinshin with the help of current affairs, but the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies said that because of the difference in what was learned, it could not be called the full name of Jinshi. The Emperor issued an edict to transfer the matter, and the transfer was then reported as follows: Jinshi Science, originated during the Sui Dynasty, at first with the help of inquiry examinations.

古文：唐初因之，高宗时杂以箴铭赋诗，至文宗始专用赋。
现代文：唐朝初年沿袭隋朝，唐高宗时夹杂有规戒文体、铭文、作赋、题诗，到唐文宗才开始专用赋考试。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, it followed the Sui Dynasty. In the Tang Gaozong, there were precepts, inscriptions, essays, and poems. It was only in the Tang Wenzong that special essays were introduced.

古文：且进士之初，本专试策，今女直诸生以试策称进士，又何疑焉。 
现代文：进士的初置，本是专考试策问，现在女真诸生用考策问称进士，又有什么疑问。 
English: The initial setting of the promotion was originally a special examination, and now all the female students are called promotion with the examination. What is the doubt?

古文：世宗大悦，事遂施行。
现代文：金世宗很高兴，于是此事施行。
English: Kim Sejong was pleased, so the matter was carried out.

古文：十五年，授应奉翰林文字，兼前职，俄迁修撰。
现代文：大定十五年，移剌履被授予应奉翰林文字，兼以前的职务，不久升为修撰。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, he was awarded the title of Ying Bong Hanlin, concurrently with his previous position, and was soon promoted to Shuxian.

古文：二十年，诏提控衍庆宫画功臣像，过期，降应奉。
现代文：大定二十年，诏令移剌履管理在衍庆宫画功臣像，因为过期未完成，降为应奉。
English: Twenty years ago, the administration of the imperial edict was transferred to Yanqing Palace to paint the statues of heroes and heroines. Since the painting was not completed by the deadline, it was downgraded to a ceremonial duty.

古文：逾年，复为修撰，转尚书礼部员外郎。
现代文：一年后，又任修撰，转为尚书礼部员外郎。
English: A year later, he was appointed as Shoseki again, and changed to Shoseki etiquette club member, Gairo.

古文：章宗为金源郡王，喜读《春秋左氏传》，闻履博洽，召质所疑。
现代文：章宗为金源郡王，他喜欢读《春秋左氏传》，听说移剌履知识广博，召来向他请教问题。
English: Zhang Zong is the king of Jinyuan County. He likes to read "The Legend of Spring, Autumn and the Left," and is said to be very knowledgeable. He invited me to ask him questions.

古文：履曰： 左氏多权诈，驳而不纯。
现代文：移剌履说： 左丘明多奸诈，杂而不纯。
English: Shifu Lu said: Zuo Qiu Mingtang is more treacherous, mixed and impure.

古文：《尚书》、《孟子》皆圣贤纯全之道，愿留意焉。 
现代文：《尚书》、《孟子》都是圣贤纯洁的道理，希望您留意。 
English: "Shangshu" and "Mencius" are all about the purity of the sages, I hope you pay attention.

古文：有天下者，取其辞施诸宇内，则元元受赐。 
现代文：金源郡王高兴地接纳他的意见。大定二十六年，移剌履进升本部郎中，兼同修国史、翰林修撰，他上奏章进献宋朝司马光的《古文孝经指解》。
English: The King of Jinyuan County was pleased to accept his opinion. In the twenty-sixth year of his reign, he moved to Shifang and became a disciple of Shifang, and he also studied national history and Hanlin, and he presented Song Chaozhimaguang's "Commentary on the Classic Xiao Jing" as a chapter.

古文：俄以疾，乞补外，世宗曰： 履多病，可与便州。 
现代文：不久移剌履因为有病，请求外出任职，世宗皇帝说 ：移剌履多病，可给他便利的州。 
English: Soon after, Emperor Sejong requested that he leave the palace because he was ill. Emperor Sejong said, "Since Emperor Sejong is often ill, I can give him a convenient province."

古文：遂授蓟州刺史。
现代文：于是授予他蓟州刺史。
English: He was then awarded the title of "Lanzhou Sashimi Master."

古文：其可使万国之臣朝大行于离宫乎？ 
现代文：不久，他又被召为翰林待制、同修国史。第二年，升为尚书礼部侍郎，兼翰林直学士。
English: Soon after, he was called to be a Hanlin trainee and a student of national history. In the following year, he was promoted to the attendant of the Shoshu etiquette department and a Hanlin direct bachelor.

古文：上曰： 朕日夜思之，舍正殿而奠于别宫，情有所不忍，且于礼未安。 
现代文：金世宗皇帝去世，遗诏把灵柩移到寿安宫。章宗下诏百官议论此事，都说应当按遗诏说的做，只有移剌履独个说； 这样做是非礼。天子七月才安葬，难道让万国之臣在离宫里行悼念礼吗？ 
English: When Emperor Kim Il Sung died, he ordered the coffin to be moved to the Shouan Palace. When the emperor died, all the officials discussed the matter, and all said that it should be done according to the will, but only one said that it was improper to move the coffin. The emperor was only buried in July, so why should the ministers of all nations mourn and hold a memorial service in a place away from the palace?

古文：遂殡于大安殿。二十九年三月，进礼部尚书，兼翰林直学士，赐大定三年孟崇献榜下进士及第。
现代文：皇帝章宗说 ：朕日夜考虑此事，舍弃正殿而在别宫祭奠，感情上过不去，也不合大礼。 于是停殡在大安殿。大定二十九年三月，移剌履进升礼部尚书，兼翰林直学士，赐给大定三年孟崇献榜下进士及第。
English: Emperor Zhangzong said, "I have been thinking about this matter day and night, abandoning the main hall and holding the memorial service in another palace, which is emotionally unbearable and not appropriate. Therefore, the funeral was stopped at the Da'an Hall. In March of the 29th year of Datong, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was also awarded the title of Hanlin Zhi Bao, and was given the title of the third year of Mengzong.

古文：七月，拜参知政事，提控刊修《辽史》。
现代文：七月，移剌履被授予参知政事，掌管刊修《辽史》。
English: In July, he was awarded the title of "Senior Councilor of State" and was put in charge of the publication of "Liao Shi."

古文：明昌元年，进尚书右丞。
现代文：明昌元年，移剌履进升为尚书右丞。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was promoted to Shangshu Rongzheng.

古文：初，河溢曹州，帝问曰： 《春秋》二百四十二年，不言河决，何也？ 
现代文：起初，黄河决口水淹曹州，皇帝问： 《春秋》写了二百四十二年的历史，没有提到河流决口，为什么？ 
English: At first, the mouth of the Yellow River flooded Caozhou, and the emperor asked: "Spring and Autumn" wrote a 242-year history without mentioning the mouth of the river. Why?

古文：履曰： 《春秋》止是鲁史，所以鲜及他国事。 
现代文：移剌履回答说： 《春秋》只是鲁史，所以很少提及其他国家的事。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" is only about the history of Lu, so it rarely mentions other countries.

古文：二年六月，薨，年六十一。
现代文：明昌二年六月，移剌履去世，终年六十一岁。
English: In June of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Zhi Ronglu passed away at the age of 61.

古文：是日，履所生也。
现代文：这一天，也是移剌履的生日。
English: This day is also the birthday of Shifeng Lu.

古文：谥曰文献。
现代文：他谥号文献。
English: His nickname is Literature.

古文：履秀峙通悟，精历算书绘事。
现代文：移剌履飘逸灵悟，精通历法算术书法绘画。
English: He is fluent in arithmetic, calligraphy and painting.

古文：先是，旧《大明历》舛误，履上《乙未历》，以金受命于乙未也，世服其善。
现代文：以前，旧的《大明历》有错误，移剌履进上《乙未历》，因为金朝是在乙未年受命的，世人信服此法是好的。
English: Previously, the old "Daming Calendar" had errors, and it was gradually moved to the "Yin Wei Calendar," because the Kim dynasty was ordered in the year of Yin Wei, and the world was convinced that this method was good.

古文：初，德元未有子，以履为后，既而生子震，德元殁，尽推家赀与之。
现代文：起初，移剌德元没有儿子，把移剌履当作后代。不久移剌德元生了儿子移剌震，移剌德元死后，移剌履把家财都给了移剌震。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress.

古文：其自礼部兼直学士为执政，乃举前代光院故事，以钱五十万送学士院，学者荣之。
现代文：他从礼部兼直学士到执政，拿五十万钱送给学士院，学习的人引以为荣。张万公，字良辅，东平东阿人。
English: He rose from the Ministry of Ceremonies and the direct bachelor to the government, and gave half a million dollars to the academy, which made the students proud. Zhang Wankong, Zhe Liangfu, Dongping Donga people.

古文：张万公，字良辅，东平东阿人也。幼聪悟，喜读书。父弥学，梦至一室，榜曰 张万相公读书堂 ，已而万公生，因以名焉。
现代文：他幼年聪颖，喜欢读书。其父张弥学，做梦梦到一室，其上贴有一纸，上写 张万相公读书堂 ，不久张万公出生，就用此为名。
English: He was a bright child and loved to read. His father, Zhang Yixue, had a dream about a room, on which was pasted a piece of paper with the words "Zhang Wanshong Reading Room." Zhang Wanshong was born soon after and took this as his name.

古文：登正隆二年进士第，调新郑簿。
现代文：他登正隆二年进士第，调任新郑簿。
English: He was promoted to the third grade in the second year of Deng Zhenglong and transferred to Xin Zhengbui.

古文：以忧去。
现代文：因父去世而辞职。
English: He resigned due to his father's death.

古文：服阕，除费县簿。
现代文：服孝期满，他被授予费县簿。
English: At the end of his period of filial piety, he was awarded the county book of Fei.

古文：大定四年，为东京辰渌盐副使，课增，迁长山令。
现代文：大定四年，他为东京辰氵录盐副使，他在任时，盐税有所增加，升为长山令。
English: In the fourth year of the Taisho era, he was the deputy envoy of salt to Tokyo Tatsunebuki. When he was in office, the salt tax increased and was raised to Nagayama-rei.

古文：时土寇未平，一旦至城下者几万人，万公登陴谕以乡里亲旧意，众感悟相率而去，邑人赖之，为立生祠。
现代文：当时土匪未平，一天早上有几万百姓到城下请求保护，张万公登上城上的矮墙告诉乡亲父老相信他，人们感悟相互离去，境内人依赖他，为他建立祠堂。
English: At that time, bandits were rampant. One morning, tens of thousands of people went to the city to ask for protection. Zhang Wankong climbed the low wall on the city to tell the townspeople that they had always believed in him. People were impressed and left each other. People in the territory relied on him and built a shrine for him.

古文：久之，补尚书省令史，擢河北西路转运司都勾判官，改大理评事，就升司直，四迁侍御史、尚书右司员外郎。
现代文：很久后，他补任尚书省令使，擢升河北西路转运司都勾判官，改任大理评事，因有成就升为司直，四次升任侍御史、尚书右司员外郎。
English: After a long time, he was appointed as the Shangshu Provincial Envoy, promoted to the West Hebei Road Transportation Division of the Capital Inspection Officer, and was reassigned to the Dali Evaluation Officer. Because of his achievements, he was promoted to the Director, and was promoted four times to the Secretary of History and the right-hand man of the Secretary of Shangshu.

古文：丞相徒单克宁尝谓曰： 后代我者必汝也。 
现代文：丞相徒单克宁曾对他说 ：后代取代我的一定是你。 
English: The prime minister, Tutankhamun, once said to him: "It is you who will replace me in future generations."

古文：俄授郎中，敷奏明敏，世宗嘉之，谓侍臣曰： 张万公纯直人也。 
现代文：不久他被授予郎中，他陈述奏章清楚简练，金世宗赞扬他，对侍臣说： 张万公是纯朴正直之人。 
English: He was soon promoted to second-in-command, and his performance of the music was clear and concise. Kim Sejong praised him, saying to his attendant: "Jang Man-gong is a simple and honest person.

古文：寻迁刑部侍郎。
现代文：不久升为刑部侍郎。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of a police constable.

古文：章宗即位，初置九路提刑司，选为南京路提刑使。
现代文：章宗即皇帝位，始设立九路提刑司，张万公被选拔做南京路提刑使。
English: Zhang Zong, i.e. the emperor, began to set up the Nine-Road Criminal Investigation Division, and Zhang Wankong was selected as the Nanjing Road Criminal Investigation Envoy.

古文：以治最，迁御史中丞。
现代文：因为他管理功劳最高，升为御史中丞。
English: Because he received the highest management merit, he was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：会北边屡有警，上命枢密使夹谷清臣发兵击之。
现代文：适逢北部边疆多次有警报，皇帝章宗命令枢密使夹谷清臣发兵前去攻打。
English: At a time when there were multiple alarms on the northern border, Emperor Zhang Zong ordered the Privy Council to send soldiers to attack.

古文：万公言： 劳民非便。 
现代文：张万公说： 此次行动劳民又无利益。 
English: Zhang Wankong said: This action is of no benefit to the workers.

古文：诏百官议于尚书省，遂罢兵。
现代文：皇帝诏百官在尚书省讨论此事，于是停止发兵。
English: Emperor Zhao sent hundreds of officials to discuss the matter in Shangshu Province, and then stopped sending troops.

古文：寻为彰国军节度使。
现代文：不久张万公为彰国军节度使。
English: Soon after, Zhang Wankong became the festival envoy of the Changkuo Army.

古文：明昌二年，知大兴府事，拜参知政事。
现代文：明昌二年，张万公为知大兴府事，授职为参知政事。
English: In the second year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zhang Wankong was appointed to the post of Chidaoxing prefectural official, and was also appointed to the post of Sanchi Seiji.

古文：逾年，以母老乞就养，诏不许，赐告省亲。
现代文：一年后，张万公因为母亲年老，他请求休养，皇帝不允许，赐给他探亲。
English: A year later, Zhang Wankong, because his mother was old, he asked for a rest, the emperor did not allow, and gave him a visit to relatives.

古文：还，上问山东、河北粟贵贱，今春苗稼，万公具以实对。
现代文：张万公探亲归朝，皇帝问他山东、河北粮价贵贱，现在的春苗种植，张万公都如实回答。
English: When Zhang Wankong went to visit his relatives who had returned to the imperial court, the emperor asked him about the price of grain in Shandong and Hebei and the current situation of spring seedling planting. Zhang Wankong answered truthfully.

古文：上谓宰臣曰： 随处虽得雨，尚未沾足，奈何？ 
现代文：皇帝章宗对宰臣说 ：每个地方虽然都下了雨，但还没有完全下透，怎么办？ 
English: Emperor Zhang Zong said to the Vice-Minister: Although it has rained in every place, it has not completely drained, what should we do?

古文：万公进曰： 自陛下即位以来，兴利除害，凡益国便民之事，圣心孜孜，无不举行。
现代文：张万公进言： 自陛下即位以来，兴利除害，凡是益国便民的事情，您都勤勉操心，没有不实行的。
English: Zhang Wankong said: Since Your Majesty's accession to the throne, you have been diligent in eliminating harm and benefiting the country and the people. You have not failed to implement anything.

古文：至于旱灾，皆由臣等，若依汉典故，皆当免官。 
现代文：至于旱灾，都由于我们这些大臣们的罪过，如果按照汉朝的典故，我们都应当免官。 
English: As for the drought, it is all due to the sins of our ministers. According to the allusion of the Han Dynasty, we should all be dismissed.

古文：上曰： 卿等何罪，殆朕所行有不逮者。 
现代文：皇帝说： 你们什么罪，大概是朕的行为没达到吧。 
English: The emperor said, "Whatever your sins, it is probably because my actions did not reach them.

古文：对曰： 天道虽远，实与人事相通，唯圣人言行可以动天地。
现代文：张万公回答说 ：天道虽远，实际上与人事相关联，只有圣人的言行可以感动天地。
English: Zhang Wankong replied: Although the heavenly way is far away, it is actually related to personnel. Only the words and deeds of saints can move heaven and earth.

古文：昔成汤引六事自责，周宣遇灾而惧，侧身修行，莫不修饬人事。
现代文：昔日成汤拿六件事自责，周宣遇到灾难而怕，侧身修行，没有不是治理人事的。
English: Once upon a time, Cheng Tang took six things to blame himself, Zhou Xuan was afraid of disaster, turned sideways to practice, and did nothing but manage personnel affairs.

古文：方今宜崇节俭，不急之务、无名之费，可俱罢去。 
现代文：现在应该推崇节俭，不紧急的事务、没名份的费用，都可废除。 
English: Now is the time to embrace frugality, eliminating non-urgent tasks and unnecessary expenses.

古文：上曰： 灾异不可专言天道，盖必先尽人事耳，故孟子谓王无罪岁。 
现代文：皇帝说： 灾难不可专说是天道，大概有时可能是人为造成的，所以孟子说帝王没有罪恶的年成。 
English: The emperor said, "Disasters cannot be said to be caused by heaven, but may sometimes be caused by human beings. Therefore, Mencius said that emperors do not have evil years.

古文：左丞完颜守贞曰： 陛下引咎自责，社稷之福也。 
现代文：左丞相完颜守贞说 ：陛下引咎自责，这是国家的福呀。 
English: Zuojo minister Kanen Shuzhen said, "Your majesty should blame himself. This is a blessing for the country."

古文：上由是以万公所言下诏罪己。
现代文：皇帝因此按张万公所说的下诏治罪自己。
English: Therefore, the emperor punished himself according to Zhang Wankong's edict.

古文：进士李邦乂者上封事，因论世俗侈靡，讥涉先朝，有司议言者罪，上谓宰臣曰： 昔唐张玄素以桀、纣比文皇。
现代文：进士李邦礰上奏事情，因论世俗侈靡，讥讽涉及先朝，有司议论他说的话有罪，皇帝章宗对宰臣说： 昔日唐朝张玄素用桀王、纣王比作文皇。
English: Li Bangyao, a high-ranking official of the Tang Dynasty, played up the matter, because he talked about worldly extravagance and ridicule involving the previous dynasty. Some judges said that he was guilty of what he said. Emperor Zhang Zong said to the vice-minister: In the past Tang Dynasty, Zhang Xuan Su used to compare the composition of the king and the king.

古文：今若方我为桀、纣，亦不之罪。
现代文：今天如果把我比作桀王、纣王，也没有罪。
English: Today, if you compare me to the king of sharks, the king of sharks, there is no sin.

古文：至于世宗功德，岂容讥毁。 
现代文：至于世宗的功德，岂容讥讽诋毁。 
English: As for the merits of Shizong, it is not permissible to ridicule and denigrate him.

古文：顾问万公曰： 卿谓何如？ 
现代文：皇帝回头问张万公 ：你以为如何？ 
English: The emperor turned around and asked Zhang Mangong: What do you think?

古文：万公曰： 讥斥先朝，固当治罪，然旧无此法。
现代文：张万公说 ：讥讽斥责先朝，应当治罪，然而一直没有这种法律。
English: Zhang Wankong said: ridiculing and rebuking the first dynasty should be a crime, but there has never been such a law.

古文：今宜定立，使人知之。 
现代文：今天应该立此法，让人们知道。 
English: This law should be enacted today to let people know.

古文：乃命免邦乂罪，惟殿三举。
现代文：于是命令免去李邦礰的罪。
English: As a result, the order was issued to absolve Li Bangyao of his crime.

古文：其奏对详敏，多类此。四年，复申前请，授知东平府事，谕之曰： 卿在政府，非不称职，以卿母老，乞侍养，特畀乡郡，以遂孝养。
现代文：明昌四年，张万公又请求辞职，皇帝授予他知东平府事，并告诉他说 ：你在政府中，不是不称职，因为你母亲年老，乞求侍候赡养，特给你乡郡，以遂你的孝心赡养。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zhang Wankong again asked to resign. The emperor gave him the title of "Minister of the State of Dongping" and told him: "You are not incompetent in the government, because your mother is old and begs the attendants for support. I specially give you the township and county, so that your filial piety can be supported."

古文：朕心所属，不汝忘也。 
现代文：朕的心意，你不要忘了。 
English: My heart's desire, don't forget it.

古文：万公谢，且捧书言曰： 臣狂妄，有一言欲今日以闻，会受除未及耳。
现代文：张万公致谢，且捧着奏章说： 臣狂妄，有一句话想今天让你知道，会面结束就来不及了。
English: Zhang Wankong expressed his thanks and, holding the score, said: "You arrogant minister, there is one sentence I want to let you know today. It's too late for the meeting to be over.

古文：夫内外之职，忧责如一，畎亩之臣犹不忘君，刍荛之言，明主所择，伏望圣聪省察。 上嘉纳之。
现代文：内外的官职，担忧责罚不一，希望皇上考察此事。 
English: Officials at home and abroad are concerned about the disparity in punishments, and hope that the emperor will look into the matter.

古文：六年，改知河中府，时军兴，调发丛剧，悉为宽假，使民力易办。人为绘像于薰风楼，又建 去思堂 。
现代文：皇帝高兴地接纳了。明昌六年，张万公改任知河中府，当时军队兴盛。人们把张万公的像画在薰风楼里，又为他建 去思堂 。
English: The emperor gladly accepted. In the sixth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Zhang Wankong was transferred to Zhihe Central Government, when the army was flourishing. People painted Zhang Wankong's portrait in the Fengfeng Building and built a memorial hall for him.

古文：移镇济南，以母忧去职。
现代文：张万公移守济南，因母亲去世离职。
English: Zhang Wankong moved to Jinan and left his post due to his mother's death.

古文：卒哭，诏起复，拜平章政事，躐迁资善大夫，封寿国公。
现代文：服孝完，皇帝诏用张万公，授予平章政事，破格升为资善大夫，封为寿国公。
English: After serving the filial piety, the emperor used Zhang Wankong and awarded him the title of Pingzhang Zhengji, and he was promoted to the unprecedented position of Zi Sheng Dafu and given the title of Shou Guo Gong.

古文：时李淑妃有宠，用事，帝意惑之，欲立为后，大臣多不可。
现代文：当时李淑妃受宠，皇帝想立她为皇后，大臣大多数认为不可以。
English: At that time, Li Shuxi was favored, and the emperor wanted to make her the empress, but most of the ministers thought it was unacceptable.

古文：御史姬端修上书论之，帝怒，御史大夫张暐削一官，侍御史路铎削两官，端修杖七十，以赎论。
现代文：御史姬端上奏章讨论此事，皇帝发怒，御史大夫张日韦降官一级，侍御史路铎降官二级，姬端打七十下，以抵偿他的讨论。
English: The Grand Historian Ji Duan played a piece of music to discuss the matter, and the emperor was angry. The Grand Historian Zhang Rihwei was demoted to the first grade, and the attendant Grand Historian Lu Yao was demoted to the second grade. The Grand Historian Ji Duan played seventy strokes to compensate for his discussion.

古文：淑妃竟进封元妃。
现代文：李淑妃最终被进封为元妃。
English: Li Shufei was eventually crowned as the Empress Dowager.

古文：又大兵虽罢，而边事方殷，连岁旱，灾异数见。
现代文：军队虽然休战，然而边疆的事情很多，连年干旱，天灾多次出现。
English: Although there was a truce between the armies, there was a lot going on on the frontier, with droughts year after year and natural disasters occurring many times.

古文：又多变更制度，民以为弗便而又改之。纷纷无定。
现代文：又多次改变制度，以为不好又改过来，变来变去没有定下来。
English: They have changed the system many times, thinking that it is not good and changing it again, and it has not settled down.

古文：万公素沉厚深谨，务安静少事以为治，与同列议多不合。然颇嫌畏，不敢犯颜强谏，须帝有问，然后审画利害而质言之，帝虽从而弗行也。
现代文：张万公一向深沉谨慎，致力于安定少事为准则，他与同事们议论多不一样，然而很害怕，不敢犯龙颜强谏，皇帝问到了，就视其利害而回答，皇帝虽然听从但却不施行。
English: Zhang Wankong has always been deeply cautious, committed to stability and taking less things as the norm. He and his colleagues discuss more than different things, but he is very afraid and does not dare to make a bold move. When the emperor asks, he answers according to his interests. Although the emperor obeys, he does not implement it.

古文：万公于是两上表以衰病丐闲，诏谕曰： 近卿言数事，朕未尝行，乃朕之过。
现代文：张万公于是两次奏章用衰老有病请求休假，皇帝下诏告诉他： 近来你说了几件事，朕未曾实行，这是朕的过错。
English: Zhang Wankong then twice used the phrase "aging and ill" to request a leave of absence, and the emperor issued an edict telling him: Recently you have said several things, I have not implemented them, this is my fault.

古文：卿年未老，而遽告病，今特赐告两月，复起视事。 
现代文：你年纪不大，而急切请求休病假，现在赐给你两个月的假，然后继续出来工作。 
English: You are young and eager to ask for sick leave, and now you are given two months of leave and then continue to work.

古文：初，明昌间，有司建议，自西南、西北路，沿临潢达泰州，开筑壕堑以备大兵，役者三万人，连年未就。
现代文：起初，即明昌年间，有司建议，从西南、西北路，沿临潢到泰州，开挖大壕堑用来防备大军，三万人劳役，几年未完成。
English: At first, that is, during the Ming and Chang dynasties, there was a suggestion that from the southwest and northwest roads, along Linyi to Taizhou, a large trench should be dug to prevent a large army, with 30,000 laborers, which was not completed for several years.

古文：御史台言： 所开旋为风沙所平，无益于御侮，而徒劳民。 
现代文：御史台说 ：开挖的壕堑不久就被风沙填平，对防御侵略没有用，而只是白白劳民。 
English: The History Channel said: The trenches that were dug were soon filled with wind and sand, and were of no use in defending against invasion, but were just a waste of labor.

古文：上因旱灾，问万公所由致。
现代文：皇帝章宗因旱灾，问张万公导致的原由。
English: Emperor Zhang Zong asked Zhang Wankong the reason for the drought.

古文：万公对以 劳民之久，恐伤和气，宜从御史台所言，罢之为便 。
现代文：张万公用 劳民时间长久了，恐怕伤了和气，应该听从御史台的话，停止挖壕堑为益 做回答。
English: Zhang Wan Gongyong said that the laborers have been working for a long time, and I am afraid that the harmony has been hurt. We should listen to the words of the History Channel and stop digging trenches.

古文：后丞相襄师还，卒为开筑，民甚苦之。
现代文：后来丞相完颜襄军队还朝，又让开挖，对此百姓很受苦。
English: Later, after the prime minister completed the Yanxiang army, he returned to the court and allowed the excavation, which made the people suffer a lot.

古文：主兵者又言： 比岁征伐，军多败衄，盖屯田地寡，无以养赡，至有不免饥寒者，故无斗志。
现代文：主兵者又说 ：连年征伐，军队多次失败，这大概是因为屯田地少，没法供给，到时免不了受饥寒，所以没有斗志。
English: The commander-in-chief also said, "For years, the army has been setting out on campaigns, and has failed many times. This is probably because there are few garrisons and no way to supply them, and when the time comes, they inevitably suffer from cold and hunger, so they have no fighting spirit.

古文：愿括民田之冒税者分给之，则战士气自倍矣。 
现代文：希望收回漏税的民田分给军队，那么战士的士气就会增加一倍。 
English: Hoping to recover the tax evasion of the people's farmland to the army, then the morale of the soldiers will double.

古文：朝臣议已定，万公独上书，言其不可者五，大略以为： 军旅之后，疮痍未复，百姓拊摩之不暇，何可重扰，一也。
现代文：当朝大臣议论已定，独有张万公上奏章说此事不可行，有五种原因，大意是： 战争刚结束，战争的创伤还未恢复，无暇抚慰老百姓，不可再打扰他们，这是一条原因。
English: When the discussion between the ministers of the imperial court had been decided, Zhang Wankong alone wrote a report saying that the matter was not feasible for five reasons, to the effect that: the war had just ended, the wounds of the war had not yet recovered, there was no time to comfort the people, and they should not be disturbed again. This was one reason.

古文：通检未久，田有定籍，括之必不能尽，适足以增猾吏之敝，长告讦之风，二也。
现代文：刚通检不久，田地有固定的户籍，一定不能全部收取，否则正好增长了狡猾官吏的弊病，长了邪恶之风，这是第二条原因。
English: Shortly after the inspection, the fields have a fixed household registration, and must not be collected in full, otherwise the malady of cunning officials will increase, and the evil spirit will grow. This is the second reason.

古文：浮费侈用，不可胜计，推之以养军，可敛不及民而足，无待于夺民之田，三也。
现代文：浮用奢侈的费用，不可胜计，用它来养军队，可以补充军费的不足，而老百姓也可充足，不需要去夺取百姓的田地，这是第三条原因。
English: The third reason is that it is impossible to calculate the cost of extravagance, and it can be used to maintain the army, which can supplement the shortage of military expenditure, and the people can also be sufficient, and there is no need to seize the people's fields.

古文：兵士失于选择，强弱不别，而使同田共食，振厉者无以尽其力，疲劣者得以容其奸，四也。
现代文：军队士兵没有选择，强弱没有分别，而让他们共同耕田吃饭，勤奋的人不能尽其力，疲弱的人得以允许他的奸猾，这是第四条原因。
English: The fourth reason is that soldiers in the army have no choice, there is no difference between the strong and the weak, but they are allowed to farm and eat together, the diligent cannot do their best, and the weak can allow his treachery.

古文：夺民而与军，得军心而失天下心，其祸有不可胜言者，五也。
现代文：夺老百姓的田而给军队耕种，得了军心却失了民心，其祸患不可胜言，这是第五条原因。
English: The fifth reason is that the evil of seizing the fields of the common people and farming them for the army, which has won the hearts of the soldiers but lost the hearts of the people, cannot be overstated.

古文：必不得已，乞以冒地之已括者，召民莳之，以所入赡军，则军有坐获之利，而民无被夺怨矣。 
现代文：一定不能夺取百姓已经耕种的地，用已经收回的漏税田地，召唤百姓耕种它，用其收入的一部分供给军队，这样军队可坐收其利，而老百姓也没有被夺的怨恨。 
English: It is absolutely impossible to seize the land that has been cultivated by the people, use the fields that have been recovered from tax evasion, summon the people to cultivate it, and use part of their income to supply the army, so that the army can make a profit, and the people do not have the resentment of being robbed.

古文：皆不报。
现代文：这些都没被批准。
English: None of this has been approved.

古文：一日奏事，上谓万公曰： 卿昨言天久阴晦，亦由人君用人邪正不分。
现代文：一天上朝，皇帝章宗对张万公说： 你昨天说天下长时间阴暗，这也是因为人君用人邪正不分。
English: In the morning of the next day, Emperor Zhang Zong said to Zhang Mangong: You said yesterday that the world has been dark for a long time, this is also because people do not distinguish between right and wrong.

古文：君子当在内，小人当在外，甚有理也，然孰谓小人？ 
现代文：君子应当在朝廷内，小人应当在朝廷外，很有道理，然而谁是小人？ 
English: It makes a lot of sense that the gentleman should be in the imperial court and the villain should be outside the imperial court, but who is the villain?

古文：万公奏 张炜、田栎、张嘉贞等，虽有才干，无德可称 。
现代文：张万公奏说 ：张炜、田栎、张嘉贞等，虽有才干，没有德可称赞。 
English: Zhang Wankongsao said: Zhang Ye, Tian Ye, Zhang Jiazhen, etc., although talented, have no virtue to praise.

古文：上即命三人补外。
现代文：皇帝即命这三人到外地做官。
English: The emperor immediately ordered the three men to go abroad to work as officials.

古文：泰和元年，连章请老，不许，迁荣禄大夫，赐其子进士及第。
现代文：泰和元年，张万公连上奏章请求养老，没被批准，升为荣禄大夫，赐其子进士及第。
English: In the first year of the Taihe era, Zhang Wankong repeatedly petitioned to be granted a pension, but his request was not approved. He was promoted to honorary doctor, and his son was awarded the title of junior scholar and the first rank.

古文：明年，章再上，有旨： 得非卿有所言，朕有不从者乎？
现代文：第二年，张万公再上奏章，皇帝下旨： 难道你所说的，朕有不听从的事吗？
English: In the second year, Zhang Wankong reissued the music chapter, and the emperor made the following order: Did you say something that I did not obey?

古文：或同列情见不一，而多违卿意邪？
现代文：或者同事意见不统一，而多违背你的意愿？
English: Or do your colleagues disagree with each other, often against your wishes?

古文：不然，何求去如是之数也。 
现代文：不然，为什么多次请求辞职。 
English: Otherwise, why the multiple requests to resign.

古文：万公谢无他，第以病言。
现代文：张万公道歉说没有其他原因，只是因为有病。
English: Zhang Wankong apologized that there was no other reason, just because he was ill.

古文：三年正月，章再上，不允，加银青光禄大夫。
现代文：泰和三年正月，张万公再上奏章，未被允许，加为银青光禄大夫。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Taihe era, Zhang Wankong was not allowed to be awarded the medal again, but was awarded the title of silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：三月，历举朝臣有名者以自代，求去甚力。上知其不能留，谕曰： 朕初即位，擢卿执政，继迁相位，以卿先朝旧人，练习典故，朕甚重之。
现代文：三月，张万公列举朝中有名的人代替自己，皇帝知道不能挽留了，告诉他说 ：朕刚即皇帝位时，擢你为执政，既而升为相位，因为你是先朝的老人，熟悉典章制度，朕很看重你。
English: In March, Zhang Wankong listed the famous people in the dynasty to replace himself. The emperor knew that he could not retain him, and told him: "When I became emperor, I appointed you to govern, and you have already risen to the position, because you are an old man of the previous dynasty, familiar with the award system, I value you very much.

古文：且年虽高而精力未衰，故以机务相劳。
现代文：你年纪虽大但精力未衰，所以用政务来劳累你。
English: Although you are old, your energy has not waned, so you have been burdened with government affairs.

古文：为卿屡求退去，故勉从之，甚非朕意也。 
现代文：因为你多次请求离职，所以尽力听从你，这不是朕的意思。 
English: Since you have repeatedly asked to resign, I will do my best to obey you. This is not what I meant.

古文：加金紫光禄大夫，致仕。
现代文：张万公加为金紫光禄大夫，后退休。
English: Zhang Wankong became the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and then retired.

古文：六年，南鄙用兵，上以山东重地，须大臣镇抚之，先任完颜守贞卒，于是特起万公知济南府、山东路安抚使。
现代文：泰和六年，南疆用兵攻打宋朝，皇帝认为山东是重地，一定得大臣前去镇抚它，先任的完颜守贞死了，于是特起用张万公知济南府、山东路安抚使。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Southern Xinjiang used troops to attack the Song Dynasty. The emperor believed that Shandong was an important region and that a minister must go there to pacify it. The previous minister, Kanyanshu Zhen, died, so Zhang Wankong was specially appointed to pacify Jinan and Shandong.

古文：山东连岁旱蝗，沂、密、莱、莒、濰五州尤甚。
现代文：山东连年干旱蝗灾，沂、密、莱、莒、潍五州最厉害。
English: Shandong has been plagued by locust plagues for years, with the five prefectures of Handan, Miyang, Lai, Handan and Handan being the worst affected.

古文：万公虑民饥盗起，当预备赈济。
现代文：张万公考虑人民饥饿必生盗贼，应当准备赈济。
English: Zhang Wankong, considering that the people are starving, must be a thief, and should be prepared to help.

古文：时兵兴，国用不给，万公乃上言乞将僧道度牒、师德号、观院名额并盐引，付山东行部，于五州给卖，纳粟易换。
现代文：当时正兴兵打仗，国家不给费用，张万公于是上言乞求将僧道度牒、师德号、观院名额并盐引，交付山东行部，在五州变卖，换取粮食。
English: At that time, the Xing soldiers were fighting in the war, and the state did not pay the expenses, so Zhang Wankong made a petition and begged to take the monk's degree certificate, the master's degree certificate, the number of visits to the academy, and the salt, and deliver them to the Shandong Province, and sell them in the five states in exchange for grain.

古文：又言督责有司禁戢盗贼之方。
现代文：又说督责有司禁止盗贼的方法。
English: He also said that supervisors should have a way to ban thieves.

古文：上皆从之。
现代文：皇帝都听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed him.

古文：宋人请和，复乞致仕，许之，加崇进，仍给平章政事俸之半。
现代文：宋朝人请求议和，张万公又请求退休，皇帝批准了，并加为崇进，仍然给他平章政事一半的俸禄。
English: The Song Dynasty asked for peace, and Zhang Wankong asked to retire. The emperor approved, and added Chongjin, still giving him half of Pingzhang's government salary.

古文：泰和七年，薨。
现代文：泰和七年，张万公死。
English: In the seventh year of the Taihe era, Zhang Wankong died.

古文：命依宰臣故事，烧饭，赙葬。
现代文：皇帝命令依照宰臣旧的制度，赠给财物安葬。
English: The emperor ordered that, in accordance with the old system of zaisen, property be given to him for burial.

古文：赠仪同三司，谥曰文贞。
现代文：赠为仪同三司，谥号文贞。
English: He was given the title of Sanji and the posthumous name of Wenzhen.

古文：万公淳厚刚正，门无杂宾，典章文物，多所裁正。
现代文：张万公纯厚刚正，家中没有不纯的客人，典章文物，多由他裁正。
English: Zhang Wankong is pure, thick and upright. There are no impure guests in his family. Most of the legal documents and cultural relics are corrected by him.

古文：上尝与司空襄言秋山之乐，意将有事于春蒐也。
现代文：皇帝曾经与司空完颜襄说秋山之乐，意思是在春天打猎。
English: The emperor once said that the joy of the autumn mountain is to hunt in the spring.

古文：顾视万公，万公曰： 动何如静。 
现代文：皇帝回头看张万公，张万公说： 动不如静。 
English: The emperor looked back at Zhang Wankong. Zhang Wankong said, "Motion is not as good as stillness."

古文：上改容而止。
现代文：皇帝变了脸色而停止了。
English: The emperor turned pale and stopped.

古文：辅政八年，其所荐引，多廉让之士焉。
现代文：他辅正八年来，所推荐的人，多是廉洁谦让之士。
English: In the eight years since he became vice-premier, most of the people he recommended were honest and humble.

古文：大安元年，配享章宗庙廷。
现代文：大安元年，张万公配享章宗庙廷祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, Zhang Mankong was assigned to attend the temple and court rituals of the Zhang family.

古文：蒲察通，本名蒲鲁浑，中都路胡土爱割蛮猛安人也。
现代文：蒲察通本名蒲鲁浑，中都路胡土爱割蛮猛安人。
English: Puchatong's real name is Pru Hun, and he is a middle-of-the-road Hutu who loves to fight.

古文：熙宗选护卫，见通名，以笔识之。
现代文：熙宗皇帝挑选护卫，见到蒲察通的名字，用笔勾划了要他。
English: When Emperor Hezong was selecting guards, he saw Puchatong's name and sketched him with a pen.

古文：通以父老，恳乞就养。
现代文：蒲察通因为父亲年老，恳切要求赡养他而不当护卫。
English: Because of his father's old age, Puchatong earnestly asked to support him instead of being an escort.

古文：众讶之曰： 得充侍卫，终身荣贵，今乃辞，过人远矣。 
现代文：众人惊讶说 ：得到当护卫的差使，终身荣华富贵，现在你辞去了，亲近你的人就会疏远你。 
English: People were surprised and said, "If you are assigned to be an escort, you will be rich and famous for the rest of your life. Now that you have resigned, those who are close to you will distance themselves from you."

古文：朝廷义而从之。
现代文：朝廷议论并批准了他的要求。
English: The court discussed and approved his request.

古文：后因会葬宋王宗望于房山，以门阀，加昭信校尉，授顿舍。
现代文：后来因为适逢在房山埋葬宋王完颜宗望，依靠门阀关系，蒲察通加为昭信校尉，授予顿舍官。
English: Later, because it was the right time to bury the Song King Ganyan Zongwang in Fangshan, relying on the gate valve relationship, Pu Zhaotong was promoted to lieutenant of Zhaoxin, and was awarded the post of donjie.

古文：改御院通进。
现代文：改为御院通进。
English: Changed to Miiin-dori Street.

古文：海陵伐宋，隆州诸军尤精锐，付通总之。
现代文：海陵皇帝攻打宋朝，隆州诸军尤其精锐，交给蒲察通总领。
English: Emperor Hailing attacked the Song Dynasty, and the armies of Longzhou, which were particularly elite, were handed over to the general Pu Zha Tong.

古文：兵压淮，令通率骑二百先济觇敌。
现代文：军队逼近淮河，命令蒲察通率领二百骑兵先渡河侦察敌情。
English: The army approached the Huai River and ordered Puchatong to lead two hundred cavalry to cross the river first to investigate the enemy situation.

古文：及弇中，敌兵跃出，通按兵直前，傍有舞槊来刺者，回身射之，应弦而毙。
现代文：等到了中，敌兵跃出，蒲察通率兵直前，旁边有敌人舞长矛来刺他，他回身射之，敌人应声而毙。
English: In the middle of the waiting, the enemy soldiers jumped out, and Putsatong led the soldiers straight ahead. Next to him, there was an enemy dancing with a spear to stab him. He turned around and shot him, and the enemy died in response.

古文：诸军并击，败之。
现代文：诸军一起攻击，打败了敌军。
English: The armies attacked together and defeated the enemy army.

古文：海陵召见，喜形于色，曰： 兵事定，汝勿忧爵赏。 
现代文：海陵皇帝召见蒲察通，喜形于色说 ：战事平定后，你不要担忧爵位赏赐。 
English: Emperor Hailing summoned Puchatong and said with great joy: "After the war is over, don't worry about the reward of a peerage.

古文：至扬州，通营别屯。
现代文：到了扬州，蒲察通宿营别的屯子里。
English: They arrived in Yangzhou, and stayed at the Putsatong Camp, another settlement.

古文：是夜，海陵遇弑，有来告者，通欲执而杀之，续闻其实，哀闷仆地，众掖而起，径入营门哭之。
现代文：当天夜里，海陵皇帝被杀，有人前来报告，蒲察通想拘捕杀了他，后来继续听到消息，悲哀地躺到地上，众人把他扯了起来，他径直进到营门哭泣。
English: In the evening of the same day, Emperor Hailing was killed. Someone came to report that Puchatongtong wanted to arrest and kill him. Later, he continued to hear the news. He sadly lay down on the ground. People pulled him up, and he went straight to the camp gate to cry.

古文：军还，入见，世宗顾谓近臣曰： 朕素知是人，幼尝从游，性温厚，有识虑，又精骑射。 
现代文：班师回朝，蒲察通入朝拜见，金世宗皇帝对近臣说： 朕素知此人，幼时曾同他游玩，性情温厚，有见识，又精通骑马射箭。 
English: When his classmates returned to the Imperial Palace, Emperor Jin Shizong went to the Imperial Palace to pay his respects. The Emperor said to his courtiers, "I knew this man. I used to play with him when I was a child. He is warm-hearted, insightful, and good at horseback archery.

古文：授尚厩局副使。
现代文：授给蒲察通尚厩局副使。
English: It was awarded to the deputy envoy of the Putsadtong Mountain Stables Bureau.

古文：又谕近臣曰： 常令见朕，欲问以事而考其言，朕将用之。 
现代文：又告诉近臣说 ：常常让他见我，我想问他一些事并考察他的言论，朕将任用他。 
English: He also told his close aide: "Let him see me often, I want to ask him some questions and examine his statements, I will appoint him."

古文：窝斡反，命通佩金符，诣军前督战。
现代文：移剌窝斡谋反，命令蒲察通佩带金符到军中督战。
English: He moved to Shaoshuo to mediate the rebellion and ordered Pu Zhaotong to wear a gold badge to fight as the commander of the army.

古文：贼破，以功授世袭谋克。
现代文：叛军被打败，蒲察通因功被授予世袭谋克。
English: The rebels were defeated, and Puchatong was awarded a hereditary title for his service.

古文：奚人乱，承诏继往莅军。
现代文：奚人作乱，蒲察通奉诏前往军中。
English: There was a riot, and Puchatong was ordered to go to the army.

古文：迁本局使，以母丧免。起为殿前右卫将军，兼领闲厩。
现代文：蒲察通升为尚局局使，因为母亲去世而免职，出来后为殿前右卫将军，兼领闲厩。
English: Puchatong was promoted to the post of envoy of the Imperial Household Agency, but was dismissed because of his mother's death. After his release, he became the general of the Right Division of the Imperial Household Agency, and also the leader of the idle stables.

古文：寻命其子蒲速烈尚卫国公主。
现代文：不久命令他的儿子蒲速烈娶卫国公主。
English: Soon after, he ordered his son, Pohorye, to marry Princess Yasukuni.

古文：出为肇州防御使，赐以金带，仍谕以补外之意，因戒敕之，语在《世宗纪》中。
现代文：他出朝任肇州防御使，赏赐给金带，皇帝多次告诉他让他出朝任职的意义，并告诫嘱咐他，这些话都记录在《世宗纪》中。
English: He went to the imperial court to serve as the Zhaozhou defense envoy, and was awarded a gold belt. The emperor repeatedly told him the significance of letting him go to the imperial court, and admonished him. These words are recorded in the "Sejongji."

古文：寻擢蒲与路节度使，移镇归德军，迁西南路招讨，入知大兴府事，除殿前都点检。
现代文：不久蒲察通升为蒲兴路节度使，移防归德军，升西南路招讨，又为知大兴府事，授他殿前都点检职。
English: Soon after, Pu Zha Tong was promoted to Pu Xing Road Secession Envoy, transferred to the German army, promoted to the Southwestern Road Invitation, and was awarded the post of inspector before the palace.

古文：初，大理卿阙，世宗欲令通为之，问宰臣，对曰： 通，点检器也。 
现代文：起初，大理卿位置空缺，世宗皇帝想让蒲察通担任，因此问宰臣，宰臣回答 ：蒲察通是点检的材料。 
English: At first, the position of Dali Kei was vacant, and Emperor Sejong wanted to appoint Puchatong, so he asked the Vice-Minister. The Vice-Minister replied: "Puchatong is material for spot checks."

古文：上曰： 点检繁冗，无由显其能。通明敏才干，正掌法之官。 
现代文：皇帝说： 点检繁杂平冗，没法显示其才能，蒲察通聪明有才干，正是掌管法规的官。 
English: The emperor said, "A spot check is complicated and tedious, and cannot show one's ability. The inspector is intelligent and capable, and is the official in charge of regulations.

古文：又曰： 通之机识，崇尹不及也。 
现代文：又说 ：蒲察通的机灵博识，完颜崇尹比不了。 
English: He also said, "Puchatong's cunning and knowledge cannot be matched by Yan Chongyin."

古文：贫富分，则版籍定，如有缓急，验籍科差，富者不得隐，贫者不重困。
现代文：大定十七年，蒲察通任尚书右丞，后转为左丞。皇帝下诏议论排列猛安谋克，大臣都认为只检验现有产业，定贫富，依照旧律区分最为便利。蒲察通说： 必须通盘检验谋克人户物力多少，那样贫富自然就分开了。贫富分，那么版图就会定下来。 
English: In the 17th year of Dading, Pu Zha Tong was appointed as Shang Shu Rong Rong, and later changed to Zuo Rong. The emperor issued an edict to discuss and arrange for a vigorous peace plan, and the ministers all believed that it was most convenient to only inspect the existing industries, to determine the rich and poor, and to distinguish according to the old law. Pu Zha Tong said: It is necessary to comprehensively inspect the material resources of people and households, so that the rich and poor are naturally separated. If the rich and poor are divided, then the territory will be determined.

古文：与一例科差者，大不侔矣。 上是通言，谓宰臣曰： 议事当如通之尽心也。 
现代文：皇帝肯定了蒲察通的上奏，对宰臣说： 议论事情应当像蒲察通一样尽心。 
English: The emperor affirmed the ascension of Puchatong and said to the Vice-Minister: Discussing things should be as diligent as Puchatong.

古文：阅三岁，进平章政事，封任国公。
现代文：三年后，蒲察通进升平章政事，封为任国公。
English: Three years later, Puchatong was promoted to the post of political commissar and given the title of acting governor.

古文：世宗将幸上京，以通朝廷旧人，命为上京留守，先往镇抚之。
现代文：世宗准备到上京，因为蒲察通是朝廷旧人，任命他为上京留守，先去安定上京。
English: Sejong was preparing to go to Kyoto, and since Puchatong was an old man of the imperial court, he was appointed to stay in Kyoto and go to Kyoto first.

古文：二十五年，除知真定府事，世宗曰： 朕复欲相卿，惜卿老矣，故以此授卿。 
现代文：大定二十五年，蒲察通任真定府事，世宗说： 朕想用你为相但怜惜你年纪大了，所以授你任此职。 
English: In the twenty-fifth year of Dading, when Puchatong was appointed as a member of the Zhending government, Shizong said, "I wanted to use you as a consort, but I felt sorry for you because you are old, so I appointed you to this post."

古文：仍赐钱千贯。
现代文：仍旧赐他一千贯钱。
English: He still gave him a thousand crowns.

古文：未几，改知平阳府事，移凤翔，致仕。
现代文：尔后，蒲察通改任知平阳府事，迁到凤翔，不久退休。
English: Later, Puchatong was reassigned to Zhipingyang Prefecture, moved to Fengxiang, and retired soon after.

古文：明昌四年，上谕宰臣曰： 通先朝重臣，年虽高而未衰。 
现代文：明昌四年，皇帝章宗告诉宰臣说： 蒲察通是先朝的重臣，年纪虽大却没衰老。 
English: In the fourth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Emperor Zhang Zong told his vice-minister: "Puchatong was a senior minister of the previous dynasty. Although he is old, he has not aged.

古文：因命知广宁府事。
现代文：因此任命他知广宁府事。
English: For this reason, he was appointed to be the chief of the Guangning prefectural government.

古文：累表请老，复以开府仪同三司致仕。
现代文：他多次上书请求养老，又任他为开府仪同三司，一段时间后退休。
English: He repeatedly wrote to request a pension, and he was also appointed as the head of the three departments, and retired after a period of time.

古文：承安三年薨。谕旨于其弟曰： 旧制，致仕宰相无祭葬礼，通旧臣懿戚，故特命敕祭及葬。 
现代文：承安三年，蒲察通死去，皇帝下旨给他弟弟说： 依照旧例，退休的宰相，没有祭葬礼，蒲察通是旧臣和亲戚，所以特地命令祭祀和安葬。 
English: In the third year of Cheng'an, Puchatong died, and the emperor sent a message to his younger brother, saying, "According to the old custom, there is no funeral for a retired prime minister. Puchatong was an old minister and a relative, so he specially ordered a funeral and burial.

古文：初，通在政府，举太子率府完颜守贞、监察御史裔俱可大用，其后皆为名臣，世多其知人云。
现代文：当初，蒲察通在政府部门中，推举太子率府完颜守贞、监察御使完颜裔都可重用，后来他们都成为名臣，世人大多都知道他们。
English: At the beginning, in the government departments, Pu Zha Tong could re-use the title of prince, the title of prince-in-waiting, the title of prince-in-waiting, the title of prince-in-waiting, and the title of prince-in-waiting. Later, they all became famous courtiers, and most of the world knows them.

