古文：张子仪以秦相魏，齐、楚怒而欲攻魏。
现代文：张仪凭借秦国的势力在魏国任相国，齐、楚两国很气愤，想要攻打魏国。
English: Zhang Yi used the power of Qin to become a vassal state of Wei. Qi and Chu were very angry and wanted to attack Wei.

古文：雍沮谓张子曰： 魏之所以相公者，以公相则国家安，而百姓无患。
现代文：雍沮对张仪说： 魏国之所以让您做相国，是以为您做相国国家可以安宁。
English: Yong De said to Zhang Yi: The reason why the State of Wei allowed you to be a sister country is that it thought that you could be a peaceful country as a sister country.

古文：今公相而魏受兵，是魏计过也。
现代文：如今您做相国，魏国却遭受兵祸，这说明魏国的想法错了。
English: Now that you are a neighboring country, but Wei has suffered a military disaster, which shows that Wei's idea is wrong.

古文：齐、楚攻魏，公必危矣。 
现代文：倘若齐楚进攻魏国，您的处境就很危险了。 
English: If they launch a full-scale attack on Wei, your situation will be very dangerous.

古文：张子曰： 然则奈何? 
现代文：张仪说： 既然这样，那该怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhang Yi said: Since this is the case, what should we do?

古文：雍沮曰： 请令齐、楚解攻。 
现代文：雍沮说： 请让我去劝说齐楚两国放弃攻打魏国。 
English: Yong De said: Please let me persuade the two countries of Qi and Chu to give up attacking Wei.

古文：雍沮谓齐、楚之君曰： 王亦闻张仪之约秦王乎？
现代文：于是雍沮去对齐楚的君主说： 大王听说张仪和秦惠王订立密约的事吗？
English: So Yong De went to the monarch of Qi Chu and said: Did the great king hear about Zhang Yi and Qin Hui Wang signing a secret agreement?

古文：曰： 王若相仪于魏，齐、楚恶仪，必攻魏。
现代文：张仪说： 大王如果能让我到魏国做国相，齐楚恨我，必定攻打魏国。
English: Zhang Yi said: If the great king can make me the minister of state in Wei, Qi Chu will hate me and attack Wei.

古文：魏战而胜，是齐、楚之兵折，而仪固得魏矣；若不胜魏，魏必多秦以持其国，必割地以赂王。
现代文：若是魏国胜利了，齐、楚两国的兵力就会受损失，我就顺理成章出任魏相；若是魏国战败，魏国一定会选择投靠秦国来保全自己的国家，必然割地给大王。
English: If Wei was victorious, the military forces of Qi and Chu would suffer losses, and I would logically assume the position of Wei minister; if Wei was defeated, Wei would certainly choose to rely on Qin to preserve its country, and would inevitably give land to the great king.

古文：若欲复攻，其敝不足以应秦。 此仪之所以与秦王阴相结也。
现代文：齐、楚两国想要再想进攻魏国，但它们已十分疲惫，怎么能与周围国家周旋呢。 这就是张仪和秦王暗中勾结的原因。
English: The two countries of Qi and Chu wanted to attack Wei again, but they were very tired, how could they negotiate with the surrounding countries.This is the reason why Zhang Yi and Qin Wang secretly colluded.

古文：今仪相魏而攻之，是使仪之计当与秦也，非所以穷仪之道也。 
现代文：现在你们去攻打魏国，会促使张仪的计谋实现，而不是困厄张仪的办法。 
English: Now, if you attack Wei, you will make Zhang Yi's plan come true, but not Zhang Yi's way.

古文：齐、楚之王曰： 善。 
现代文：齐楚两国的君主都说： 对。 
English: The sovereigns of both countries said, "That's right."

古文：乃遽解攻于魏。
现代文：于是立即不攻魏国。
English: As a result, he did not attack Wei immediately.

