古文：将失：一曰，失所以往来，可败也。
现代文：统兵的将领可能出现的过失有以下各种：第种是军队调动失当，可能导致失败。
English: The possible faults of the general of the general staff are as follows: The first is the improper mobilization of the army, which may lead to failure.

古文：二曰，收乱民而还用之，止北卒而还斗之，无资而有资，可败也。
现代文：第种是收容散乱的百姓，不加训练就用去作战，或是收集刚打败仗退下来的士兵，马上又让他们去打仗，或是没有供给保障仍然一意孤行，这些都可能导致失败。
English: The first is to contain the scattered people and use them to fight without training, or to collect the soldiers who have just lost the war and retreated, and immediately let them go to war again, or to go on without providing security, which may lead to failure.

古文：三曰，是非争，谋事辨讼，可败也。
现代文：第种是爱争论是非，作计划时争论不休，可能导致失败。
English: The first type is argumentative. When making a plan, they argue endlessly, which may lead to failure.

古文：四曰，令不行，众不壹，可败也。
现代文：第种是命令不能执行，士兵不能一致行动，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the order cannot be executed, the soldiers cannot act in unison, which may lead to failure.

古文：五曰，下不服，众不为用，可败也。
现代文：第种是部下不服从、士兵不听指挥，不肯效命，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that subordinates disobey, soldiers disobey orders, and refuse to serve, which may lead to failure.

古文：六曰，民苦其师，可败也。七曰，师老，可败也。
现代文：第种是他的军队使百姓遭受痛苦，可能导致失败。第种是军队疲惫，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that his army has made the people suffer, which may lead to failure; the second is that the army is exhausted, which may lead to failure.

古文：八曰，师怀，可败也。
现代文：第种是军队思乡想家，可能导致失败。
English: The first is military homesickness, which can lead to failure.

古文：九曰，兵遁，可败也。
现代文：第种是士兵逃跑，可能导致失败。
English: The first is soldiers running away, which can lead to failure.

古文：十曰，兵□不□，可败也。
现代文：第种是士兵可能导致失败。
English: The first is that soldiers can cause failure.

古文：十一曰，军数惊，可败也。
现代文：第种是军队多次受惊吓，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the army has been frightened many times, which may lead to failure.

古文：十二曰，兵道足陷，众苦，可败也。
现代文：第种是行军的道路难以行走，使士兵常常陷脚，士兵困苦不堪，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the road of marching is difficult to walk, so that the soldiers often get their feet stuck, and the soldiers are exhausted, which may lead to failure.

古文：十三曰，军事险固，众劳，可败也。
现代文：第种是修筑险要坚固的军事设施，使士兵过度疲劳，可能导致失败。
English: The first is the construction of military facilities that are too strong, causing soldiers to be over-tired, which may lead to failure.

古文：十四，□□□备，可败也。十五曰，日暮路远，众有至气，可败也。
现代文：第种是可能导致失败。第种是天快黑了，行军路程还很远，士兵极其气愤，可能导致失贩。
English: The first is that it may lead to failure. The second is that it is getting dark, the march is still far away, and the soldiers are extremely angry, which may lead to lost sales.

古文：十六曰，可败也。
现代文：第种可能导致失败。
English: The first can lead to failure.

古文：十七，众恐，可败也。
现代文：第种是士兵恐惧，可能导致失败。
English: The first is the soldier's fear, which can lead to failure.

古文：十八曰，令数变，众偷，可败也。
现代文：第种是军令屡屡改变，士兵偷安应付，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the military order is frequently changed, and the soldiers have to cope with it, which may lead to failure.

古文：十九曰，军淮，众不能其将吏，可败也。
现代文：第种是军队军心涣散，士兵不信任他们的将领和长官，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the army is disunited, and soldiers do not trust their generals and officers, which can lead to failure.

古文：廿曰，多幸，众怠，可败也。
现代文：第种是统兵将领多数存在侥幸心理，士兵懈怠懒惰，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the majority of generals have a sense of chance, and soldiers are slack and lazy, which may lead to failure.

古文：廿一曰，多疑，众疑，可败也。
现代文：第种是将领和士兵都多疑，犹豫不决，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that both generals and soldiers are suspicious and hesitant, which may lead to failure.

古文：廿二曰，恶闻其过，可败也。
现代文：第种是将领厌恶听别人指出其过错，可能导致失败。
English: The first is a general's aversion to having his mistakes pointed out, which can lead to failure.

古文：廿三曰，与不能，可败也。
现代文：第种是任用的下级官吏无能，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the lower-level officials appointed are incompetent and may lead to failure.

古文：廿四曰，暴露伤志，可败也。
现代文：第种是长期露宿，挫伤士气，可能导致失败。
English: The first is long-term rough sleeping, which is demoralising and can lead to failure.

古文：廿五曰，期战心分，可败也。
现代文：第种是将领临战分心，可能导致失败。
English: The first is the distraction of generals before the battle, which may lead to failure.

古文：廿六曰，恃人之伤气，可败也。
现代文：第种是只想凭借敌军士气低落，可能导致失败。
English: The first is to rely only on the enemy's low morale, which may lead to failure.

古文：廿七曰，事伤人，恃伏诈，可败也。
现代文：第种是单纯依靠埋伏和施行欺骗去打败敌军，可能导致失败。第种是可能导致失败。
English: The first is to rely solely on ambush and deception to defeat the enemy, which may lead to failure.

古文：廿八曰，军舆无□，□下卒，众之心恶，可败也。卅曰，不能以成阵，出于夹道，可败也。
现代文：第种是士兵产生厌恶心理，可能导致失败。第种是不能用合适的阵势通过狭谷通道，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that the soldiers develop aversion, which may lead to failure. The second is that they cannot use the appropriate position to pass through the narrow valley passage, which may lead to failure.

古文：卅一曰，兵之前行后行之兵，不参齐于阵前，可败也。
现代文：第种是军队先出发和后出发的士兵，不能在阵前会齐集结，可能导致失败。
English: The first is the soldiers of the army departing first and departing later. If they cannot gather together before the battle, it may lead to failure.

古文：卅二曰，战而忧前者后虚，忧后者前虚，忧左者右虚，忧右者左虚，战而有忧，可败也。
现代文：第种是作战时由于担心前锋致使后卫空虚，或者由于担心后卫致使前锋空虚，或者由于担心左翼致使右翼空虚，又或是由于担心右翼致使左翼空虚，作战时总是有种种担心，可能导致失败。
English: The first is that in war, because of the fear of the front causing the rear to be empty, or because of the fear of the rear causing the front to be empty, or because of the fear of the left wing causing the right wing to be empty, or because of the fear of the right wing causing the left wing to be empty, there are always various fears in war, which may lead to failure.

