古文：令狐潮围睢阳，城中矢尽。
现代文：原文唐朝时期令狐潮围攻睢阳。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the Fox Tide besieged Poyang.

古文：张巡缚藁为人。披黑衣，夜缒城下。
现代文：城中的箭用完了，张巡让人捆扎了稻草人，穿上黑色的衣服，趁着夜晚用绳索从城墙上放下。
English: When the arrows in the city ran out, Zhang Jun had someone tie up the scarecrow, dress it in black, and take advantage of the night to lower it from the city wall with a rope.

古文：潮兵争射之，得箭数十万。
现代文：令狐潮的士兵纷纷射箭，结果从稻草人身上得到的箭总共有十万多支。
English: The soldiers of the fox tide shoot arrows one after another, and the total number of arrows obtained from the scarecrow is more than one hundred thousand.

古文：其后复夜缒人，贼笑不设备。
现代文：后来又在夜间把人从城头上悬放下来，贼兵只是大笑却不加防备。
English: Later, they hanged a man from the top of the castle at night. The robbers only laughed but did not take precautions.

古文：乃以死士五百斫潮营，焚垒幕，追奔十余里。
现代文：张巡就派了五百名勇猛的士兵去袭击令狐潮的军营，焚烧贼兵的营房，追杀了他们十多里路。
English: Zhang Jun sent five hundred brave soldiers to attack the military camp of the fox tide, burned the barracks of the thieves, and chased them for more than ten miles.

古文：开禧中，毕再遇被围于六合，军中矢尽，再遇令人张青盖往来城上，金人意主兵官也，争射之，须臾矢集楼墙如猬，获矢二十余万。
现代文：宋朝开禧年间，毕再遇被金人围困在六合。军中已经没有箭可以发射，毕再遇让人撑起青伞站在城楼上，金人以为是主将来了，争相射箭，不一会儿整个城楼就好像刺猬一般，总共有二十多万支箭。
English: In the early years of the Song Dynasty, Bi was besieged at Liuhe by the Jin people. There were no arrows left to shoot in the army, so Bi had people hold up umbrellas and stand on the castle tower. The Jin people thought it was the Lord's coming and started to shoot arrows at each other. Soon the whole castle tower looked like a hedgehog, with a total of more than 200,000 arrows.

古文：又敌尝以水柜败我，再遇夜缚藁人数千，衣以甲胄，持旗帜戈矛，俨立戎行。
现代文：还有，金人用水攻击宋军，毕再遇让人捆扎了几千个草人，利用夜晚视线昏暗，替草人穿上盔甲，手中拿着旗帜、武器，排列成行，再旁敲击战鼓。
English: In addition, the goldsmith attacked the Song army with water, and on repeated occasions, the people tied up several thousand straw men, taking advantage of the dark night to put on armor for the straw men, holding flags and weapons in their hands, lined up in rows, and then beat the war drums.

古文：昧爽，鸣鼓，敌虏惊视，急放水柜，旋知其非真也，意甚沮。
现代文：金人非常惊恐，急忙打开水库泄水，过了一会儿，才知是草人，士气大大低落。
English: The goldsmith was very alarmed and hurriedly opened the reservoir to release the water. After a while, he realized that he was a grasshopper and his morale was very low.

古文：急出师攻之，敌遂大败。
现代文：此时毕再遇下令士兵进攻，大败金人。
English: At this time, Bi again ordered the soldiers to attack, and they were soundly defeated.

古文：沅州蛮叛，荆湖制置遣兵讨之。
现代文：沅州蛮人在荆湖一带作乱，朝廷派荆湖制置使率兵平乱。
English: The barbarians from Zhangzhou made trouble in the area of Jinghu Lake, and the imperial court sent troops to Jinghu Lake to quell the trouble.

古文：蛮以竹为箭，傅以毒药，血濡缕立死。
现代文：蛮人削竹为箭，并在箭头上涂上毒药，一出血就能置人于死地。
English: The savages cut bamboo into arrows and smeared the arrows with poison, so that one drop of blood could kill a man.

古文：官军畏之，莫敢前。
现代文：官军们都非常害怕这种箭，不敢上前杀蛮敌。
English: The government troops were very afraid of this kind of arrow and did not dare to advance to kill the savage enemy.

古文：乃束藁人，罗列焜耀，蛮见之，以为官军，万矢俱发。伺其矢尽，乃出兵攻之，直捣其穴。
现代文：于是下令扎草人，排成一列，蛮人看到后以为是官军，于是万箭齐发，等到蛮人箭都射完以后，才下令进攻，一直打入了蛮人的营寨。
English: Then he ordered the grass-cutters to line up in a row, and when the barbarians saw them, they thought they were government troops, so they fired a million arrows in unison. Only after the barbarians had shot all their arrows did he order the attack, which went all the way into the barbarians' camp.

