古文：三十有二年春，城小穀。
现代文：三十二年春季，齐国在小穀筑了一座城。
English: In the spring of 32, the State of Qi built a city in Xiaogu.

古文：夏，宋公、齐侯遇于梁丘。
现代文：夏季，宋桓公、齐桓公在梁丘会见。
English: In the summer, Prince Song Huan and Prince Qi Huan met in Liangqiu.

古文：秋七月癸巳，公子牙卒。
现代文：秋季七月癸巳日，公子牙去世。
English: On the last day of autumn in July, Prince Hisa passed away.

古文：八月癸亥，公薨于路寝。
现代文：八月癸亥日，鲁庄公在正室里去世。
English: On August 5th, Lu Zhuanggong died in his sleep.

古文：冬十月己未，子般卒。
现代文：冬季十月己未日，子般被刺死。
English: It was late winter in October, and she was stabbed to death.

古文：公子庆父如齐。
现代文：公子庆父到齐国去。
English: Prince Qingfu went to Qi Province.

古文：狄伐邢。
现代文：狄人进攻邢国。
English: The Di people attacked Min Province.

古文：三十二年春，城小穀，为管仲也。
现代文：三十二年春季，齐国在小穀筑了一座城，这是为管仲而筑的。
English: In the spring of thirty-two, Qi built a city in Xiaogu, which was built for Guanzhong.

古文：齐侯为楚伐郑之故，请会于诸侯。
现代文：齐桓公由于楚国进攻郑国的缘故，请求和诸侯会见。
English: As a result of Chu's attack on Zheng, Prince Qi Huan requested a meeting with the princes.

古文：宋公请先见于齐侯。
现代文：宋桓公请求和齐桓公先行会见。
English: Song Huan Gong requested to meet with Qi Huan Gong first.

古文：夏，遇于梁丘。
现代文：夏季，在梁丘非正式会见。
English: In the summer, they meet informally in Liangqiu.

古文：秋七月，有神降于莘。
现代文：秋季，七月，有神明在莘地下降。
English: In autumn, in July, the gods descend on the ploughed field.

古文：惠王问诸内史过曰： 是何故也？ 
现代文：周惠王向内史过询问说： 这是什么原因？ 
English: Zhou Hui Wang inquired about the internal history and said: What is the reason for this?

古文：对曰： 国之将兴，明神降之，监其德也；将亡，神又降之，观其恶也。
现代文：内史过回答说： 国家将要兴起，神明下降，观察它的德行；将要灭亡，神明也会下降，观察它的邪恶。
English: The Inner Historian replied: A country will rise, and the gods will descend to observe its virtues; it will fall, and the gods will descend to observe its vices.

古文：故有得神以兴，亦有以亡。虞、夏、商、周皆有之。 
现代文：所以有的得到神明而兴起，也有的得到神明而灭亡，虞、夏、商、周都有过这种情况。 
English: Therefore, some gods gave rise to others, and some gods caused others to perish. This was the case with Yu, Xia, Shang, and Zhou.

古文：王曰： 若之何？ 
现代文：周惠王说： 怎么办呢？ 
English: Zhou Hui Wang said: What should we do?

古文：对曰： 以其物享焉，其至之日，亦其物也。 
现代文：内史过回答说： 用相应的物品来祭祀。他来到的日子，按规定，这个日子的祭祀该是什么，也就是他的祭品。 
English: Naishi replied, "Sacrifice the appropriate items. The day he comes, according to regulations, what should be the day's sacrifice, that is, his offering.

古文：王从之。
现代文：周惠王听从了。
English: King Qin agreed to Wang Yao's request.

古文：内史过往，闻虢请命，反曰： 虢必亡矣，虐而听于神。 
现代文：内史过前去祭祀，听到虢国请求神明赐予，回来说： 虢国必定要灭亡了，暴虐而听命于神明。 
English: Naishi went ahead to make a sacrifice, and when he heard that his country was asking the gods for a blessing, he came back and said, "My country will surely perish. It is tyrannical and obeys the orders of the gods."

古文：神居莘六月。虢公使祝应、宗区、史嚚享焉。
现代文：神明在莘地住了六个月，虢公派遣祝应、宗区、史嚚去祭祀。
English: The deity lived for six months in Handan, and the lord of Handan dispatched Zhu Ying, Zong Qu, and Shi Yan to offer sacrifices.

古文：神赐之土田。
现代文：神明答应赐给他疆土田地。
English: The god promised to give him the land.

古文：史嚚曰： 虢其亡乎！
现代文：史嚚说： 虢国恐怕要灭亡了吧！
English: Shi Yan said: "I'm afraid that our country is about to perish!

古文：吾闻之，国将兴，听于民；将亡，听于神。
现代文：我听说： 国家将要兴起，听百姓的；将要灭亡，听神明的。 
English: I have heard that nations rise and fall according to the will of their people, and that nations rise and fall according to the will of their gods.

古文：神，聪明正直而壹者也，依人而行。
现代文：神明，是聪明正直而一心一意的，按照不同的人而行事。
English: Gods are intelligent, honest and single-minded, and act according to different people.

古文：虢多凉德，其何土之能得！ 
现代文：虢国多的是恶德坏事，又有什么土地能够得到？ 
English: The country is full of evil and bad things. What kind of land can I get?

古文：初，公筑台临党氏，见孟任，从之。
现代文：当初，庄公建造高台，可以看到党家。在台上望见党氏的女儿孟任，就跟着她走。
English: At first, Zhuang Gong built a high platform so that the party members could be seen. When he saw Meng Ren, the daughter of the party member, on the platform, he followed her.

古文：閟，而以夫人言许之。
现代文：孟任闭门拒绝。庄公答应立她为夫人。
English: Meng Ren refused behind closed doors. Zhuang Gong agreed to make her his wife.

古文：割臂盟公，生子般焉。
现代文：她答应了，割破手臂和庄公盟誓，后来就生了子般。
English: She agreed, cut her arm and swore an oath to Prince Zhuang, and later gave birth to a son.

古文：雩，讲于梁氏，女公子观之。圉人荦自墙外与之戏。
现代文：一次正当雩祭，事先在梁家演习，庄公的女公子观看演习，圉人荦从墙外对她调戏。
English: It was a legitimate sacrificial fire. The drill was held at Liang's home beforehand. Zhuang Gong's daughter-in-law watched the drill, and the firemen played tricks on her from outside the wall.

古文：子般怒，使鞭之。
现代文：子般发怒，让人鞭打荦。
English: A child's temper makes a man whip his donkey.

古文：公曰： 不如杀之，是不可鞭。
现代文：庄公说： 不如杀掉他，这个人不能鞭打。
English: Zhuang Gong said: It is better to kill him, this man cannot be whipped.

古文：荦有力焉，能投盖于稷门。 
现代文：他很有力气，可以举起稷门的城门，能将门扇远远地扔出去。 
English: He has strength enough to lift up the doors of the city gate, and he can throw the doors wide open.

古文：公疾，问后于叔牙。对曰： 庆父材。 
现代文：庄公得了重病，向叔牙询问继承人的事。叔牙回答说： 庆父有才能。 
English: When Zhuang Gong fell seriously ill, he asked his great-uncle about his successor. The great-uncle replied, "Your father is talented.

古文：问于季友，对曰： 臣以死奉般。 
现代文：向季友询问，季友回答说： 臣用死来事奉子般。 
English: When asked about this, Ji You replied, "A vassal uses death to serve like a son."

古文：公曰： 乡者牙曰庆父材。 
现代文：庄公说： 刚才叔牙说 庆父有才能 。 
English: Zhuang Gong said: Just now Uncle Fang said that Qingfu has talent.

古文：成季使以君命，命僖叔待于鍼巫氏，使鍼季酖之，曰： 饮此则有后于鲁国，不然，死且无后。 
现代文：季友就派人用国君的名义让僖叔等待在鍼巫家里，让鍼巫用毒酒毒死叔牙，说： 喝了这个，你的后代在鲁国还可以享有禄位；不这样，你死了，后代还没有禄位。 
English: Ji You sent someone in the name of the sovereign to have Uncle Zou wait at the acupuncturist's house, and to have the acupuncturist use poisoned wine to kill Uncle Zou's teeth, saying, "If you drink this, your descendants will still be able to enjoy a lucrative position in Lu; otherwise, you will die, and your descendants will not have a lucrative position."

古文：饮之，归，及逵泉而卒。
现代文：叔牙喝了毒酒，回去，到达逵泉就死去了。
English: Uncle Tooth drank the poisoned wine, went back, and died when he reached the spring.

古文：立叔孙氏。
现代文：鲁国立他的后人为叔孙氏。
English: His descendants are the Uncles and Grandsons.

古文：八月癸亥，公薨于路寝。
现代文：八月初五日，鲁庄公死在正寝里。
English: On August 5th, Lu Zhuanggong died in his sleep.

古文：子般即位，次于党氏。
现代文：子般即位，住在党氏家里。
English: He ascended to the throne like a son and lived in the family of the party.

古文：冬十月己未，共仲使圉人荦贼子般于党氏。
现代文：冬季，十月初二日，共仲派圉人荦在党家刺死了子般。
English: In the winter, on the second day of October, a member of the Chinese People's Political Consultative Conference (CPPCC) stabbed a party member to death.

古文：成季奔陈。
现代文：成季逃亡到陈国。
English: Cheng Ji fled to Chen Province.

古文：立闵公。
现代文：立闵公为国君。
English: Prince Ritsuko became the sovereign.

