古文：临安府颜洞凡三，为典史颜姓者所开，名最著。
现代文：临安府颜洞共三个洞，是姓颜的典史所开辟的，最为著名。
English: There are a total of three caves in Yan-dong, Lin'an, which were opened by Yan, the most famous.

古文：余一至滇省，每饭未尝忘钜鹿也。
现代文：我一到云南省，时刻不曾忘游颜洞的事。
English: As soon as I arrived in Yunnan Province, I never forgot the trip to Yan Cave.

古文：遂由省中南过通海县，游县南之秀山。
现代文：于是从省城昆明往南，经过通海县，游览位于县南的秀山。
English: So from the provincial capital of Kunming to the south, through Tonghai County, to visit Xiushan, located in the south of the county.

古文：上一里半，为灏穹宫。
现代文：上山一里半，是颧弯宫。
English: A mile and a half up the mountain is the Gongcheng Palace.

古文：宫前巨山茶二株，曰红云殿。
现代文：宫前有二棵巨大的山茶，名红云殿。
English: In front of the palace, there are two huge camellia trees, known as Hongyunden.

古文：宫建自万历初，距今才六十年，山茶树遂冠南土。
现代文：颧弯宫建于万历初年，距离现在才六十年，但山茶树就已经是滇南第一了。
English: Gongcheng Palace was built in the first year of Wanli, only sixty years from now, but the camellia tree is already the first in southern Anhui.

古文：又南抵临安府。
现代文：又往南抵达临安府。
English: Further south, we arrived at Lin'an.

古文：城南临泸江；此江西自石屏州异龙湖来，东北穿出颜洞；而合郡众水，亦以此洞为泄水穴也。
现代文：府城南部临近沪江；沪江从西边的石屏州异龙湖流来，往东北穿出颜洞；全临安府的众多河流，也是以颜洞为泄水孔道。
English: The Hujiang River is close to the southern part of the prefectural capital; the Hujiang River flows from the west of the Shiping Prefecture's Yilong Lake to the northeast through Yan-dong; many rivers that are close to Anfu also use Yan-dong as a drainage channel.

古文：于是觅一导游者于城东接待寺。
现代文：于是在城东接待寺找了一名导游。
English: So I found a tour guide at the reception temple in the east of the city.

古文：颜洞大道，当循城而南，渡泸江桥；导者从寺前隔江东北小路行，遂不得渡泸江，东观三溪会合处。
现代文：去颜洞的大路，应当顺着府城向南走，过沪江桥；导游从寺前与大路隔江的小路往东北行，就没能过沪江，往东观看三股溪流会合的地方。
English: The main road to Yan-dong should follow the prefectural capital to the south and cross the Hujiang Bridge; the tour guide could not cross the Hujiang River from the small road between the temple and the main road to the northeast, and went east to see the place where the three streams meet.

古文：由寺北循塘岸东行，塘东皆红莲覆池，密不见水。
现代文：从接待寺北沿着池塘岸边往东行，池塘东部全是红莲覆盖，密密丛丛而看不见水。
English: From the north of the reception temple, follow the shore of the pond to the east. The eastern part of the pond is completely covered with red lotus, dense clumps and no water can be seen.

古文：东北十五里，渡赛公桥。
现代文：往东北走了十五里，过赛公桥。
English: I walked fifteen miles to the northeast, crossing the Saikong Bridge.

古文：水自西北来，东南入泸。
现代文：桥下的水从西北流来，往东南注入沪江。
English: The water under the bridge flows from the northwest and flows into the Hujiang River in the southeast.

古文：又五里，上山，为金鸡哨。
现代文：又走五里，上山，是金鸡哨。
English: Another five-mile walk, up the mountain, is the Golden Cockerel.

古文：哨南泸江会诸水，由此东入峡。
现代文：哨南沪江与各股水流汇合，从这里往东流入峡谷。
English: The Hujiang River flows into the canyon from its confluence with other streams to the east.

古文：峡甚逼，水倾其中，东抵洞口尚里余。
现代文：峡谷十分狭窄，江水倾泻其中，往东流到洞口还有一里左右。
English: The canyon is very narrow, river water pours into it, flowing eastward to the mouth of the cave for about a mile.

古文：望洞顶石崖双劈，如门对峙，洞正透其下，重冈回夹之，不可得见。
现代文：远远看去，洞顶两边如刀劈开的石崖，像门一样地对峙着，洞直直从门下穿过，被重重的山冈包围挟持，无法看见。
English: Looking from a distance, the stone cliff on both sides of the top of the cave, split like a knife, confronts like a door, the cave passes straight under the door, surrounded by heavy mountains and hills, and cannot be seen.

古文：求土人导入，皆曰： 水涨流急，此非游时。
现代文：请求当地人引导我进去，都说： 水位涨，水流急，现在不是游洞的季节。
English: When I asked the locals to guide me in, they all said: "The water level is rising, the current is fast, and now is not the season for swimming in caves."

古文：若两月前水涸，可不桥而入；今即有桥，亦不能进，况无桥耶！ 
现代文：如果在两个月前的枯水季节，可以不架桥就进洞了；现在即使有桥，也不能进去，更何况没有桥呢！ 
English: Two months ago, during the dry season, you could get into the cave without a bridge; now, even if there is a bridge, you can't get in, let alone without a bridge!

古文：桥非一处，每洞中水深处，辄架木以渡。
现代文：洞里的桥不只一座，洞中每一处水深的地方，都架有木桥。
English: There is more than one bridge in the cave. There are wooden bridges in every place where the water is deep in the cave.

古文：往例按君来游，架桥费且百金，他费亦百金。
现代文：从前惯例，按察使来游颜洞，架桥要花费将近百两银子，其它费用也要花费百两银子。
English: In the past, it was customary for inspectors to travel to Yan-dong, and it would cost nearly one hundred taels to build a bridge, and other expenses would also cost one hundred taels.

古文：土人苦之，乘普酋兵变，托言洞东即阿迷境，叛人尝出没此，遂绝官长游洞者。
现代文：当地人因此苦不堪言，便乘普名胜叛乱的机会，借口颜洞东边的出口是阿迷州境，叛军曾经从这一带出没，于是来游洞的官员才绝迹了。
English: As a result, the local people were so distressed that they took the opportunity of the Puyansheng Rebellion, using the excuse that the exit on the east side of Yan Cave was the Amanzhou border, and the rebels had once come from this area. As a result, the officials who came to Yu Cave disappeared.

古文：余必欲一至洞门，土人曰： 须渡江南岸，随峡入，所谓泸江桥大道也。 
现代文：我决心一定要去到洞口，当地人说： 必须渡过沪江，到江南岸，顺着峡谷进去，就是走所说的沪江桥大路。 
English: I was determined to go to the mouth of the cave. The local people said, "We must cross the Hujiang River, go to the south bank of the river, and go along the canyon, that is, take the so-called Hujiang Bridge Road."

古文：始悔为导者误，乃舍水洞，觅南明、万象二陆洞。
现代文：我才后悔被导游耽误了，于是离开水洞，去寻找南明、万象两个陆洞。
English: I only regretted that I was delayed by the tour guide, so I left the water cave and went to look for Nanming and Vientiane's two land caves.

古文：从哨东下坡，复上山登顶。
现代文：从金鸡哨往东下坡，又登上山顶。
English: From the Golden Cockerel Post, head east downhill and climb to the top.

古文：东瞰峡江环峡东入，洞门即在东峡下。
现代文：往东俯瞰，峡谷中的江水绕着峡谷往东流进洞，洞口就在东边的峡谷下面。
English: Looking down to the east, the river water in the canyon flows around the canyon to the east into the cave, and the cave entrance is just below the canyon on the east side.

古文：余所登山处，正与其上双崖平对，门犹为曲掩，但见峭崖西向，涌水东倾，捣穴吞流之势，已无隐形矣。
现代文：我所登上的山顶，正好与洞顶两边的石崖平行相对，洞口仍然被曲折的山谷遮掩，只看见陡峭的石崖向西，汹涌的江水向东倾泻，水捣洞穴、洞吞江流的气势，已经暴露无遗了。
English: The top of the mountain I climbed was exactly parallel to the cliffs on both sides of the top of the cave. The mouth of the cave was still hidden by the winding valley. I only saw the steep cliffs to the west and the raging river to the east. The power of the water rushing into the cave and the cave swallowing the river has been fully exposed.

古文：东北三里，逾岭脊下山。
现代文：往东北走三里，越过岭脊下山。
English: Walk three miles to the northeast, over the ridge and down the mountain.

古文：二里，则极东石壁回耸，如环半城，下开洞门北向。
现代文：二里，则最东面的石壁旋转着耸起，如同半圆形的城墙，下面敞开着的洞门朝北。
English: Two miles away, the easternmost stone wall swirls and rises, like a semicircular city wall, the open cave door below facing north.

古文：余望之有异，从之直下，一里，抵峡中。一又一里半，抵东壁下。
现代文：我看其地势不同寻常，从岭上直下，一里，抵达峡谷中，又走一里半，来到东面的石壁下。
English: I think the terrain is unusual, from the ridge straight down, one mile, arrived in the canyon, walked another mile and a half, came to the east under the stone wall.

古文：稍南上，洞门廓然，上大书 云津洞 ，盖水洞中门也。
现代文：稍稍往南上去，便是十分开阔的洞口，洞门上写着 云津洞 三个大字，原来是水洞的中门。
English: A little further south is the very open mouth of the cave, with the words "Yunjin Cave" written on the door. Originally, it was the middle door of the cave.

古文：游颜洞以云津为奇：从前门架桥入，出后门，约四五里，暗中傍水行，中忽辟门延景，其上又绝壁回环，故自奇绝。
现代文：游颜洞以游云津洞为奇特：从前门架桥进洞，从后门出洞，大约四五里深，在黑暗中紧靠水流而行，途中忽然辟有中门，引进日光，洞上面又有绝壁旋绕，所以自然是奇妙绝顶。
English: Yuyan Cave is peculiar to Yuyunjin Cave: from the front door bridge into the cave, from the back door out of the cave, about four or five miles deep, in the dark close to the water flow, on the way suddenly there is a middle door, the introduction of sunlight, the top of the cave has a cliff winding, so it is naturally a wonderful peak.

古文：余不能入其前洞，而得之重崿绝巚间，且但知万象、南明，不复知有云津也，诚出余意外。
现代文：我没能从前门进入水洞，却得以从重愕绝嗽之间的中门进去，而且原来只知道有万象洞、南明洞，不知道还有云津洞，游云津洞的确出乎我意料之外。
English: I was not able to enter the water cave from the front door, but I was able to enter from the middle door between the jaws of amazement, and originally I only knew about the Vientiane Cave, the Nanming Cave, and I don't know about the Yunjin Cave, but it was really unexpected for me to visit the Yunjin Cave.

古文：遂瞰洞而下。
现代文：于是俯视着洞而下。
English: So I looked down the hole.

古文：洞底水从西南穴中来，盘门内而东，复入东南穴去。
现代文：洞底的水从西南的洞穴流来，在洞门内盘绕着向东流，又从东南的洞穴流去。
English: The water at the bottom of the cave comes from the southwest cave, flows around the cave entrance to the east, and flows from the southeast cave.

古文：余下临水湄，径之，水阔三丈，洞高五六丈，而东西当门透明处，径可二十丈。
现代文：我下到水边，估量洞的大小，水面有三丈宽，洞有五六丈高，而位于东西之间正当门的透明处，洞的直径大约二十丈。
English: I went down to the water's edge and estimated the size of the hole. The water surface is three feet wide, the hole is five or six feet high, and it is located in the transparent part of the right door between east and west. The diameter of the hole is about twenty feet.

古文：但水所出入，直逼外壁，故非桥莫能行。
现代文：但水从洞中流出流进，一直逼近朝外的洞壁，所以没有桥就不能行走。
English: However, water flows out of the cave and flows in, all the time approaching the outer wall of the cave, so you can't walk without a bridge.

古文：出水西穴，渐暗不可远窥；东为水入穴处，稍旁拓，隔水眺之，中垂列乳柱，缤纷窈窕。
现代文：西边的出水洞，逐渐地暗下去而不能看得很远；东边水流进洞穴之处，旁边渐渐拓开，隔着水眺望，其中钟乳石柱直立，缤纷窈窕。
English: To the west, the watering hole gradually darkened, and it was impossible to see very far; to the east, where the water flowed into the cave, the side gradually opened up, looking across the water, in which stalactite columns stood upright and colorful.

古文：复上出洞外，上眺东南北三面，但环壁无可上。
现代文：又往上走出洞外，眺望洞口上的东南北三面，都是崖壁环绕无法上去。
English: I went up and out of the cave, looking at the three sides of the northeast and south at the mouth of the cave. They were all surrounded by cliffs and I couldn't go up.

古文：仍西出旧道，北上山。
现代文：仍然往西从原路出来，往北上山。
English: Still heading west out of the original road, heading north up the mountain.

古文：东一里，逾岭，已陟东壁回环上。
现代文：往东走一里，越岭，继而登上了东边的崖壁，回环上岭，从坞中往东走一里。
English: Walk one mile east, cross the ridge, then climb the cliff wall on the east side, loop back to the ridge, and walk one mile east from the dock.

古文：岭埠中东向一里，其地南北各起层峰，石崖时突，万象洞即在北崖上，乃导者妄谓在南崖下。
现代文：这里南面、北面分别耸起层层山峰，石崖不时地突起，万象洞就在北面石崖上，而导游却乱说在南面崖下。
English: Here, mountain peaks rise up in layers in the south and north, and cliffs rise from time to time. The Vientiane Cave is on the cliff in the north, but the tour guide talks about it under the cliff in the south.

古文：直下者一里，抵南崖。
现代文：直下一里，抵达南崖。
English: Straight down the next mile, arriving at the South Cliff.

古文：一洞东向，高四丈，水从中涌出，两崖角起，前对为峡，水出洞破峡，势极雄壮，盖水洞后门也。
现代文：一个石洞朝东，有四丈高，水从洞中涌出，两边的石崖像两只角一样耸立，在洞前对峙为峡谷，水一出洞就破峡而去，气势极其雄壮，原来是水洞的后门。
English: A stone cave facing east, four stories high, water gushing out of the cave, the stone cliffs on both sides towering like two horns, facing the cave as a canyon, the water breaks through the canyon as soon as it comes out of the cave, extremely majestic, originally the back door of the water cave.

古文：又东二里，抵老鼠村，执途人问之，万象洞在西北岭上，即前所从下山处，洞甚深，历降而下，底与水洞通。
现代文：又往东走二里，到老鼠村，拉住路人询问，万象洞在西北岭上，是先前所下山的地方，洞很深，顺着从高往低而下，洞底和水洞相通。
English: I walked another two miles to the east, to Mouse Village, and stopped passersby to inquire. Vientiane Cave is on the northwest ridge. It is the place where I went down the mountain before. The cave is very deep, and it descends from high to low. The bottom of the cave and the water cave are connected.

古文：余欲更至洞门，晚色已合，去宿馆尚十里。
现代文：我还想去到洞口，但天色已是傍晚，距离住宿的旅馆还有十里路。
English: I still wanted to go to the mouth of the cave, but it was already late in the evening and the hotel where I was staying was still ten miles away.

古文：念此三洞，慕之数十年，趋走万里，乃至而叛彝阻之，阳侯隔之，太阳促之，导人又误之，生平游屐，斯为最厄阻碍矣！
现代文：想颜洞这三个洞，思念了数十年，奔走万里路终于来到，却受彝人叛乱阻碍，大水隔绝，太阳催促，再加上导游误导，生平所经历的游览，这次是最多灾多难的啊！
English: I've been thinking about these three holes for decades and have traveled thousands of miles to finally come here, but I was hindered by the rebellion of the Xiongnu people, isolated by water, urged by the sun, and misled by the tour guide. This is the most disastrous and difficult tour I've ever experienced in my life!

