古文：刘秀之、顾琛、顾觊之
现代文：刘秀之，字道宝，东莞莒县人，是司徒刘穆之的堂兄的儿子。
English: Liu Xiu Zhi, a word treasure, from Dongguan's Jixian County, is the son of Liu Mu Zhi's cousin.

古文：刘秀之，字道宝，东莞莒人，司徒刘穆之从兄子也，世居京口。
现代文：他家先辈一直住在京口。他祖父刘爽，官至尚书都官郎，山阳县令。
English: The ancestors of his family have always lived in Kyoguchi. His grandfather, Liu Shuang, was a high-ranking government official and the governor of Sanyang County.

古文：祖爽，尚书都官郎，山阴令。父仲道，高祖克京城，以补建武参军，与孟昶留守，事定，以为余姚令，卒官。
现代文：父亲刘仲道，高祖在京城时，让他补任建武参军，和孟昶共同留守京都，事定之后，被用为余姚县令，死于任上。
English: His father, Liu Zhongdao, when Gao Zu was in Beijing, asked him to fill the post of Jianwu to join the army, and he stayed in Kyoto together with Meng Yao. After the matter was settled, he was used as Yuyao County magistrate, and died in office.

古文：秀子少孤贫，有志操。
现代文：刘秀之父亲早死，家庭贫困，他却非常有志气有道德。
English: Liu Xiu's father died early and the family was poor, but he was very ambitious and moral.

古文：十许岁时，与诸兒戏于前渚，忽有大蛇来，势甚猛，莫不颠沛惊呼，秀之独不动，众并异焉。
现代文：十多岁时，和一群孩子在江边小洲游戏，忽然有大蛇游来，势头很吓人，小孩们无不仓惶惊叫，刘秀之独自镇定不动，别人很惊异他的胆量。
English: When he was more than ten years old, he was playing with a group of children on a small island by the river. Suddenly, a large snake swam by. The momentum was very frightening. The children were all panicking and screaming. Liu Xiuzhi remained calm and motionless on his own. Others were surprised at his courage.

古文：东海何承天雅相知器，以女妻之。
现代文：东海人何承天一贯器重他，把自己的女儿嫁给他。
English: People in the East China Sea have always respected him and married their daughters to him.

古文：兄钦之为硃龄石右军参军，随龄石败没，秀之哀戚，不欢宴者十年。
现代文：刘秀之的哥哥刘钦之当朱龄石的右军参军，跟随朱龄石一起战死。刘秀之非常悲痛，不参加宴会有十多年。
English: Liu Xiuzhi's brother, Liu Qinzhi, joined Zhu Lingshi's right-wing army and died with Zhu Lingshi. Liu Xiuzhi was very sad and did not attend the banquet for more than ten years.

古文：景平二年，除驸马都尉、奉朝请。家贫，求为广陵郡丞。仍除抚军江夏王义恭、平北彭城王义康行参军，出为无锡、阳羡、乌程令，并著能名。
现代文：景平二年被调任驸马都尉，奉朝请，因家庭贫困，请求当广陵郡丞，结果被任为江夏王刘义恭的平北将军、彭城王刘义康的行参军，再出外当无锡阳羡乌程县令，都获得了能干的称誉。
English: In the second year, Jingping was transferred to the position of the captain of the imperial horse. He was invited by the imperial court, and because of the poverty of his family, he asked to be the governor of Guangling County. As a result, he was appointed as the general of Pingbei of Liu Yikong, the king of Jiangxia, and the marching army of Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, and then went abroad to be the county magistrate of Wuxi, Yang Zhen and Wucheng, and gained the reputation of ability.

古文：元嘉十六年，迁建康令，除尚书中兵郎，重除建康。
现代文：元嘉十六年，他迁建康县令，被调尚书中兵郎，再当建康县令。
English: In the 16th year of Yuan Jia, he moved to Jiankang County, was transferred to Shangshu Heiro, and then became Jiankang County.

古文：性纤密，善纠摘微隐，政甚有声。
现代文：刘秀之性格谨细严密。善于探明微小的罪行或企图。很有干练的名声。
English: Liu Xiu's character is meticulous. He is good at detecting small crimes or attempts. He has a reputation for being very capable.

古文：吏部尚书沈演之每称之于太祖。
现代文：吏部尚书沈演之多次在文帝面前称道他。
English: He was praised many times in front of Emperor Wenzong by Shangshu Shenyuan of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：世祖镇襄阳，以为抚军录事参军、襄阳令。
现代文：孝武帝镇守襄阳，让他当抚军录事参军、襄阳令。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was in charge of the defense of Xiangyang, and asked him to be in charge of the army.

古文：襄阳有六门堰，良田数千顷，堰久决坏，公私废业。
现代文：襄阳有六门堰，过去有良田几千顷。六门堰长久失修，败坏得很厉害，公家私人却没有什么收入。
English: Yangyang has a six-gate weir, and in the past there were thousands of hectares of good fields. The six-gate weir has been neglected for a long time and has deteriorated badly, but the public and private sectors have little income.

古文：世祖遣秀之修复，雍部由是大丰。
现代文：世祖派刘秀之修复六门堰，雍州此后常常大丰收。
English: The founder sent Liu Xiuzhi to repair the Liumen Weir, and since then, Yongzhou has often had a bumper harvest.

古文：改领广平太守。
现代文：他改任广平太守。
English: He was reassigned as Guangping Dazhong.

古文：二十五年，除督梁、南北秦三州诸军事、宁远将军、西戎校尉、梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：元嘉二十五年，被调为督梁、南北秦三州诸军事，宁远将军，西戎校尉，梁南秦州刺史。
English: In the 25th year of Yuan Jia, he was transferred to the military of Du Liang, the three states of North and South Qin, General Ningyuan, Lieutenant Xi Rong, and Liang Nan Qin.

古文：时汉川饥俭，境内骚然，秀之善于为政，躬自俭约。
现代文：当时汉川发生饥荒，人民没有收入，境内骚乱得很。刘秀之善于管理，过节俭的生活，作人民的榜样。
English: At that time, there was a famine in Hanchuan, the people had no income, and the country was in turmoil. Liu Xiuzhi was good at management, lived a frugal life, and served as a role model for the people.

古文：先是，汉川悉以绢为货，秀之限令用钱，百姓至今受其利。
现代文：过去汉川人全都用绢布作为货币，秀之限令用铜金银作钱用。百姓到现在还蒙受他的恩惠。
English: In the past, the people of Hanchuan all used cocoons as currency, while Shuzo ordered that copper, gold and silver be used as money. The people still receive his favor.

古文：二十七年，大举北伐，遣辅国将军杨文德、巴西、梓潼二郡太守刘弘宗受秀之节度，震荡汧、陇。
现代文：元嘉二十七年，宋国大规模北伐。朝廷派辅国将军杨文德，巴西、梓潼二郡守刘弘宗接受刘秀之指挥骚扰陇地区。
English: In the 27th year of Yuan Jia, the Song Dynasty launched a large-scale Northern Expedition. The imperial court sent the auxiliary generals Yang Mende, Brazil, and Liu Hongzong, the governor of the two counties of Zizhi, to accept the command of Liu Xiu to harass the Zizhi region.

古文：秀之遣建武将军锡千秋二千人向子午谷南口，府司马竺宗之三千人向骆谷南口，威远将军梁寻千人向斜谷南口。
现代文：刘秀之派建武将军锡千秋带二千人向子午后南谷口开进，本府司马竺宗之带三千人向骆谷南口前进，威远将军梁寻带一千人向斜谷南口前进。
English: Liu Xiu sent General Jianwu Xi Qianqiu with 2,000 men to advance to the south valley entrance of Zi Baotong, General Sima Bingzong with 3,000 men to advance to the south entrance of Luohu Valley, and General Wei Yuan Liang Xuan with 1,000 men to advance to the south entrance of Xizhu Valley.

古文：氐贼杨高为寇，秀之讨之，斩高兄弟。
现代文：氐人杨高叛乱，刘秀之讨伐他们，将杨高兄弟斩首。
English: Yang Gao rebelled, Liu Xiuzhi defeated them and beheaded Yang Gao's brother.

古文：元凶弑逆，秀之闻问，即日起兵，求率众赴襄阳，司空南谯王义宣不许。
现代文：刘邵杀文帝自称皇帝。刘秀之闻讯，当天便起兵，请求率领部队前赴襄阳，司空南谯王刘义宣不许。
English: Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen and called himself emperor. Upon hearing of Liu Xiu, he raised an army on the same day and requested to lead the troops to Xiangyang. Liu Yixuan, the King of the Southern Qi, was not allowed.

古文：事宁，迁使持节、督益宁二州诸军事、宁朔将军、益州刺史。
现代文：事平之后，迁官使持节，督益宁二州诸军事，宁朔将军，益州刺史。
English: After the matter was settled, the relocation ceremony was held, the military of the two states of Ningyizhou was supervised, the general of Ningyizhou was appointed, and the history of Yizhou was written.

古文：折留俸禄二百八十万，付梁州镇库，此外萧然。
现代文：他分下俸禄二百八十万，留付梁州镇守的军队。此外，一丝不取。
English: He distributed 2.8 million yuan in salary and retained the army of Liangzhou town guard. In addition, he did not take a single penny.

古文：梁、益二州土境丰富，前后刺史，莫不营聚蓄，多者致万金。
现代文：梁、益二州境内很富饶。前后到任的刺史，无不经营聚敛。多的达到万两黄金收入。
English: The territory of the two prefectures of Liang and Yek is very rich. The history of Liang and Yek before and after taking office is all about business agglomeration. Most of them have reached 10,000 yuan in gold income.

古文：所携宾僚，并京邑贫士，出为郡县，皆以苟得自资。
现代文：他们所带的宾客都是京城的贫寒士人，出外当郡县长官，都以搜括钱财为主要目的。
English: The guests they bring with them are all poor people from the capital. When they go abroad to serve as county magistrates, their main purpose is to collect money.

古文：秀之为治整肃，以身率下，远近安悦焉。
现代文：刘秀之管理政务严明而廉洁，以身作则，远近人民无不安宁，都非常敬爱他。
English: Liu Xiu Zhi's management and government affairs are strict and clean, leading by example, and the people near and far have no worries and are very respectful of him.

古文：南谯王义宣据荆州为逆，遣参军王曜征兵于秀之，秀之即日斩曜戒严。
现代文：南谯王刘义宣占据荆州造反，他派参军王曜从刘秀之那里征调兵员，刘秀之当天便杀王曜，整装待发。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of Nanxi, occupied Jingzhou and rebelled. He sent Wang You, who joined the army, to recruit soldiers from Liu Xiuzhi. On the same day, Liu Xiuzhi killed Wang You and prepared for departure.

古文：遣中兵参军韦山松万人袭江陵，出峡。
现代文：刘秀之派中兵参军韦山松带一万多人袭击江陵。
English: Liu Xiuzhi sent Wei Shan Song and more than ten thousand soldiers to attack Jiangling.

古文：竺超民遣将席天生逆之，山松一战，即枭其首。
现代文：韦山松只一个回合，便砍下了席天生的脑袋。前进到江陵，被鲁秀击败。
English: Wei Shansong cut off Xi Nianren's head after only one round. He advanced to Gangneung and was defeated by Lu Xiu.

古文：进至江陵，为鲁爽所败，山松见杀。
现代文：韦山松被杀，当年，刘秀之晋号征虏将军，改督任为监任，持节，刺史照旧。
English: Wei Shansong was killed. That year, Liu Xiuzhi was promoted to the rank of conscript general, and was appointed as the superintendent. He kept the festival and engraved the history as before.

古文：其年，进号征虏将军，改督为监，持节、刺史如故，以起义功，封康乐县侯，食邑六百户。
现代文：因为起义兵的功劳，被封康乐县侯，食邑六百户。
English: Because of the merits of the insurgents, he was made the lord of Kangle County, with 600 households in the county.

古文：明年，迁监郢州诸军事、郢州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：第二年，迁官监郢州诸军事，郢州刺史，将军照旧。
English: In the second year, the officials and supervisors of Bozhou were transferred to the military, the history of Bozhou was written, and the generals remained as before.

古文：未就。
现代文：他没有上任。
English: He did not take office.

古文：大明元年，征为右卫将军。
现代文：大明元年，刘秀之被调为右卫将军。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, Liu Xiuzhi was transferred to the post of General of the Right Division.

古文：明年，迁丹阳尹。
现代文：第二年迁官丹阳尹。
English: The following year, Danyang Yin was transferred.

古文：先是，秀之从叔穆之为丹阳，与子弟于事上饮宴，秀之亦与焉。
现代文：从前，刘秀之堂叔刘穆之当丹阳尹时，和他的兄弟子侄们在厅堂上宴会，刘秀之也参加了。
English: Once upon a time, Liu Xiuzhi's uncle, Liu Muzhi, and his brothers and nephews had a banquet in the hall when Danyang Yin was in power. Liu Xiuzhi also attended.

古文：事柱有一穿，穆之谓子弟及秀之曰： 汝等试以栗遥掷此柱，若能入穿，后必得此郡。 
现代文：厅堂大柱上有一个窟窿，刘穆之对他的子侄兄弟和刘秀之说： 你们试试用板栗远远地瞄准这个柱子，如果有哪个能掷进这个窟窿，将来必定当此郡长官。 
English: There is a hole in the main pillar of the hall. Liu Mu Zhi said to his nephews and Liu Xiu Zhi: "You should try to aim at this pillar from a distance with a chestnut. If anyone can throw it into this hole, they will surely become the county magistrate in the future."

古文：穆之诸子并不能中，唯秀之独入焉。
现代文：穆之的几个儿子都没有掷中，只有刘秀之一个人击中那个窟窿。
English: None of Mu Zhi's sons hit the hole, only Liu Xiu hit the hole.

古文：时赊市百姓物，不还钱，市道嗟怨，秀之以为非宜，陈之甚切，虽纳其言，竟不从用。
现代文：此时，官府经常买百姓的东西，但不给钱，百姓满口怨言。刘秀之认为这是应该改正的行为，向皇帝陈述得很恳切。
English: At this time, the government often bought things from the people, but did not pay, and the people complained loudly. Liu Xiuzhi thought that this was a behavior that should be corrected, and made a very earnest statement to the emperor.

古文：广陵王诞为逆，秀之入守东城。
现代文：孝武虽然当场接受了。但他的话，并未实行。广陵王刘诞造反，刘秀之进入皇城的东城主动防守。
English: Although Xiaowu accepted it on the spot, his words were not put into practice. Guangling King Liu Xuan rebelled, and Liu Xiuzhi entered the eastern part of the imperial city to actively defend it.

古文：其年，迁尚书右仆射。
现代文：当年迁官尚书右仆射。
English: In that year, the relocation officer, Shang Shuxu, was shot by his right-hand man.

古文：四年，改定制令，疑民杀长史科，议者谓值赦宜加徙送，秀之以为： 律文虽不显民杀官长之旨，若值赦但止徙送，便与悠悠杀人曾无一异。民敬官长，比之父母，行害之身，虽遇赦，谓宜长付尚方，穷其天命，家口令补兵。 
现代文：大明四年，朝廷修改法令，在百姓杀官长这一条上意见不一，一些人认为如果遇到大赦应该冲军远方，刘秀之认为：法令虽然没有明确人民杀害长官的条款，遇到大赦就只冲军，这便等于和轻易杀人无麻烦没有区别，人民尊重官员，把他们看成父母，亲自害死长官，纵然遇到大赦，仍应永远关在尚方营或判处他的死刑。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, the imperial court amended the decree, and opinions differed on the article of the people killing officials. Some people believed that if they encountered an amnesty, they should rush the army far away. Liu Xiuzhi believed that although the decree did not specify the terms of the people killing officials, if they encountered an amnesty, they would only rush the army, which was tantamount to easy killing without trouble. The people respected officials, regarded them as parents, and killed officials themselves. Even if they encountered an amnesty, they should still be kept in the Shangfang camp forever or sentenced to death.

古文：从之。
现代文：他的家人被充为军队仆人。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明年，领太子右卫率。
现代文：朝廷采纳了他的建议。
English: The court accepted his suggestion.

古文：五年，雍州刺史海陵王休茂反，为土人所诛，遣秀之以本官慰劳，分别善恶。事毕还都，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督雍、梁、南北秦四州、郢州之竟陵、随二郡诸军事、安北将军、宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史。
现代文：第二年兼官太子右卫帅，大明五年，雍州刺史武陵王刘休茂造反，被当地百姓杀死，朝廷派刘秀之以现任官慰劳雍州人民，对这个事件中的好人坏人进行甄别，他顺利完成任务，回到京城，再出外当使持节，散骑常侍，都督雍、梁、南北秦四州，郢州的竟、陵随二郡军事，安北将军，宁蛮校慰，雍州刺史。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, Liu Xiumao, the prince of Wuling, rebelled and was killed by the local people. The imperial court sent Liu Xiuqi, the current official, to comfort the people of Yongzhou, and screened the good and bad people in this incident. He successfully completed the task, returned to Beijing, and then went abroad to hold the festival, rode around as a regular attendant, the governor of Yong, Liang, the four states of North and South Qin, the governor of Zhangzhou, the military of the two counties, the general of Anbei, the consoler of Ningbo School, and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：上车驾幸新亭，视秀之发引，将征为左仆射，事未行，八年卒，时年六十八。
现代文：孝武帝坐车到新亭送别刘秀之赴任，想调他当左仆射，这事还未实行，八年，他便去世了，享年六十八岁。
English: Emperor Xiaowu took a car to Xinting to see Liu Xiu off to his new post. He wanted to appoint him as a left-hand man, but this was not implemented. Eight years later, he died at the age of 68.

古文：上甚痛惜之，诏曰： 秀之识局明远，才应通暢，诚著蕃朝，绩宣累岳。往岁逆臣交构，首义万里，及职司端尹，赞戎两宫，嘉谋征誉，实彰朝野。汉南法繁民嗛，属伫良牧，故暂辍心膂，外弘风规，出未逾期，德庇西服。详考古烈，旅观终始，淳心忠概，无以尚兹。
现代文：孝武帝非常痛惜他的逝世，下诏书哀悼说： 刘秀之见识深远，器局忠正，才能超群，忠诚素著，无论在朝在外，都政绩斐然，当年叛军造制祸乱，他在万里之外便率先抵抗，到了在朝为官，赞助国家，计谋如泉涌、威望服人，被朝中民间人士共同钦佩，汉南地区法令繁杂，人民痛苦，迫切希望有好的官员莅临，后来朝廷暂时放他赴西方任职，出外不长时间，西边地区人民便深深地爱戴他，我仔细回想古代的贤能之士的行为，以及回忆他的前前后后，可说他心地善良、忠义感人，没有多少人能达到这境界的。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was very sorry to hear of Liu Xiu's death. The following imperial edict expressed his condolences: Liu Xiu was a man of far-reaching insight, a man of integrity, a man of outstanding ability, and a man of great loyalty. Both in and out of the imperial court, Liu Xiu's political achievements were outstanding. When the rebels were creating havoc, Liu Xiu took the lead in the resistance from thousands of miles away. When he became an official in the imperial court, he sponsored the country. His stratagems were like a torrent, and his prestige won him the admiration of both the people of the imperial court and the people of China. The laws and

古文：方式亮皇猷，入卫根本，奄至薨逝，震恸于朕心。生荣之典，未穷宠数，哀终之礼，宜尽崇饰。
现代文：目前朝廷正需要他的补裨，国家需要他的辅助，却突然逝世，我深感悲痛，他活着时没有享受到最崇高的荣誉，死后应该受到大力地褒扬，况且他一贯生活俭朴，克己复礼，封赏不重。
English: At present, the imperial court is in need of his help, the country needs his assistance, but he died suddenly. I am deeply saddened. He did not enjoy the highest honor when he was alive, and should be praised vigorously after his death. Moreover, he always lived frugally, restrained himself, and was not rewarded heavily.

古文：兼履谦守约，封社弗广，兴言悼往，益增痛恨。
现代文：想到这些，我感到深深地悲哀，也更增加我的遗憾。
English: When I think of this, I feel deeply saddened and my regret increases.

古文：可赠侍中、司空，持节、都督、刺史、校尉如故，并增封邑为千户。谥为忠成公。 
现代文：可以追认他为侍中、司徒、持节、都督、刺史，校尉照旧。并且增加封邑一千户，谥号为忠诚公。 
English: He can be identified as a chamberlain, a tutor, a steward, a magistrate, a governor, a historian, and a captain as before. He also increased the number of fiefs by a thousand, and his posthumous name was Loyal Lord.

古文：秀之野率无风采，而心力坚正。上以其莅官清洁，家无余财，赐钱二十万，布三百匹。
现代文：刘秀之为人坦率，风格平易，不注重风度，但忠诚而坚韧，干练而卓越，孝武因为他当官时廉洁，家中没有多余的财物，赐给他家二十万钱，布三百匹。
English: Liu Xiuxing was a frank person, with a simple style, not attaching importance to demeanor, but loyal and tenacious, capable and excellent. Because he was honest when he was an official, and there was no extra wealth in his family, Xiaowu gave his family 200,000 yuan and 300 pieces of cloth.

古文：子景远嗣，官至前军将军。景远卒，子俊，齐受禅，国除。
现代文：他的儿子景远继承他。官职做到前军将军，景远死后，他儿子刘俊继承，齐国建立，他的封国被取消。
English: His son Jingyuan succeeded him. He became a general of the former army. After Jingyuan's death, his son Liu Jun succeeded him and established the State of Qi. His title was revoked.

古文：秀之弟粹之，晋陵太守。
现代文：刘秀之的弟弟刘粹之，官职做到晋陵太守。
English: Liu Xiuzhi's younger brother, Liu Zizhi, became the official governor of Jinling.

古文：顾琛，字弘玮，吴郡吴人也。曾祖和，晋司空。祖履之，父惔，并为司徒左西掾。
现代文：顾琛，字弘玮，是吴郡吴县人，曾祖顾和，是晋朝的司空，祖父顾谦之，父亲顾忄炎，都做过司徒左西掾。
English: Gu Kun, also known as Hong Kun, is a native of Wu County, Wuxi County, Wuxi County. His great-grandfather, Gu He, was the Siku of the Jin Dynasty. His grandfather, Gu Qian Zhi, and his father, Gu Kun Yan, both served as the tutors of Zuoxi School.

古文：琛谨确不尚浮华，起家州从事，驸马都尉，奉朝请。少帝景平中，太皇太后崩，除大匠丞。彭城王义康右军骠骑参军，晋陵令，司徒参军，尚书库部郎，本邑中正。
现代文：顾琛为人严谨而坚定，不喜欢浮华的东西，最先官职是州中从事，驸马都尉，奉朝请，少帝景平年中，太皇太后逝世，任大匠丞，后又任彭城王义康右军骠骑参军、晋陵县令、司徒参军、尚书库部郎、本郡中正。
English: Gu Yao was a strict and firm person, who did not like flashy things. He first served as a middle-ranking official in the state. He was a captain of the cavalry, and was invited to serve the imperial court. In the middle of the year of the young Emperor Jingping, after the death of the great empress dowager, he was appointed as a grand foreman. Later, he was appointed as a cavalryman of the right army of King Yikang of Pengcheng, the governor of Jinling County, the commander of the army of Szu, the secretary of the library of Shang, and the middle-ranking official of the county.

古文：元嘉七年，太祖遣到彦之经略河南，大败，悉委弃兵甲，武库为之空虚。后太祖宴会，有荒外归化人在坐，上问琛： 库中仗犹有几许？ 
现代文：元嘉七年，太祖派到彦之进攻魏国黄河以南大败，把所有的武器都丢了，武器仓库因此很空，之后太祖曾举行宴会，正好有外国投诚的人在座，文帝突然问顾琛： 兵器库中还有多少件武器？ 
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Wenzong sent Emperor Yan to attack Wei south of the Yellow River and was soundly defeated. He lost all of his weapons, so the weapons warehouse was empty. After that, Emperor Wenzong held a banquet, and there happened to be some people from foreign countries present. Emperor Wenzong suddenly asked Emperor Gu: How many weapons are left in the arsenal?

古文：琛诡答： 有十万人仗。 
现代文：顾琛答道： 有十万件武器。 
English: Gu Yao replied: There are 100,000 weapons.

古文：旧武库仗秘不言多少，上既发问，追悔失言，及琛诡对，上甚喜。
现代文：顾琛知武器库的武器过去一向隐秘，外人不知多少。文帝既发了问，后悔说错了话。等听到顾琛的对答，便非常高兴了。
English: Gu Xizhi knew that the weapons in the arsenal had always been kept secret in the past, and outsiders did not know how many there were. After Emperor Wen sent a question, he regretted saying the wrong thing. When he heard Gu Xizhi's answer, he was very happy.

古文：尚书寺门有制，八座以下门生随入者各有差，不得杂以人士。琛以宗人顾硕头寄尚书张茂度门名，而与硕头同席坐。
现代文：尚书省和各寺部有规定，八座以下的门生跟随入见的各有等级，不能轻易携带他人，顾琛让同宗族人顾硕头寄名在尚书张茂度门下，顾琛因此和顾硕头在同一个宴席上坐侍。
English: Shangshu Province and each temple department have regulations that the disciples below the eighth seat follow the respective levels of insight, and cannot easily carry others. Gu Yu let the same clan member Gu Shuo head send his name to the door of Shangshu Zhang Maodu. Therefore, Gu Yu and Gu Shuo head sat at the same banquet.

古文：明年，坐遣出，免中正。凡尚书官，大罪则免，小罪则遣出。遣出者，百日无代人，听还本职。
现代文：第二年，他因此事被贬到外边去，并且中正职务也被免除，凡是尚书任职的人，有大罪便被免官、有小过则被贬出，被遣出的人一百天内没有人代替的话，允许复职。
English: In the following year, he was demoted to the outer circle for this, and was also relieved of his position as Vice-Chairman of the Central Military Commission. Anyone who held a position of authority was dismissed for serious crimes and demoted for minor offenses. Those who were dismissed were allowed to return to their positions if they were not replaced within 100 days.

古文：琛仍为彭城王义康所请，补司徒录事参军，山阴令，复为司徒录事，迁少府。
现代文：顾琛仍然被彭城王刘义康邀请，被任为司徒录事参军和山阴县令，再正式当司徒录事，迁官少府长。
English: Gu Yao was still invited by Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, to join the army and serve as the governor of Shanyin County, and then he was officially appointed as the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：十五年，出为义兴太守。
现代文：十五年出外当义兴太守。
English: It's been fifteen years since he went abroad as Yixing's grand marshal.

古文：初，义康请琛入府，欲委以腹心，琛不能承事刘湛，故寻见斥外。十九年，徙东阳太守，欲使琛防守大将军彭城王义康，固辞忤旨，废黜还家积年。
现代文：当初义康邀请顾琛进入府中，希望顾琛做他的心腹，顾琛因为不能顺刘义康的意，所以不久便被排挤到外面，十七年，转任东阳太守，文帝希望他防守彭城王刘义康，顾琛坚决辞去此职，辜负了文帝的意思，于是被免官回家，有几年时间。
English: At first, Yikang invited Gu Kun into the government, hoping that Gu Kun would be his confidant. Gu Kun could not follow Liu Yikang's wishes, so he was soon pushed out. In 17th year, he was transferred to the position of the governor of Dongyang. Emperor Wen hoped that he would defend Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng. Gu Kun resolutely resigned from this position, and he failed to live up to Emperor Wen's intention. Therefore, he was dismissed from his post and allowed to return home for a few years.

古文：二十七年，索虏南至瓜步，权假琛建威将军。
现代文：二十七年，魏人南侵到瓜步，朝廷暂时让顾琛兼建威将军。
English: In the 27th year, the Wei people invaded Guapu from the south, and the imperial court temporarily let Gu Yao and Jian Wei become generals.

古文：寻除东海王祎冠军司马，行会稽郡事。随王诞代祎，复为诞安东司马。
现代文：不久他被调为东海王刘冠军司马，代管会稽郡事务，随王刘诞代替刘，顾琛再当刘诞的安东司马。
English: Soon he was transferred to the East China Sea King Liu champion Sima, the steward of the county affairs of the audit committee, followed by Wang Liu Xing to replace Liu, and Gu Wei to be Liu Xing's Anton Sima.

古文：元凶弑立，分会稽五郡置会州，以诞为刺史，即以琛为会稽太守，加五品将军，置将佐。诞起义，加冠军将军。
现代文：元凶刘邵杀文帝自立，分出会稽等五郡设置会州，让刘诞当刺史，同时让顾琛当会稽太守。顾加官五兵将军，允许设置郡官，刘诞起义反刘邵，给顾琛加官冠军将军。
English: Liu Shao, the main culprit of the assassination of Emperor Wen, stood up for himself and set up the five counties, including Liu Xing, by dividing them into counties and counties, so that Liu Xing would be the history of the assassination, and at the same time, Gu Yao would be the inspector general of the county. Gu Ga Guan was allowed to set up county officials, Liu Xing revolted against Liu Shao, and Gu Yao was given the title of champion general.

古文：事平，迁吴兴太守。
现代文：刘邵被消灭后，他迁吴兴太守。
English: After the matter was settled, he was transferred to Wu Xing Taishou.

古文：孝建元年，征为五兵尚书。未拜，复为宁朔将军、吴郡太守。以起义功，封永新县五等侯。
现代文：孝建元年，被调任五兵尚书，还未就任，再被用为宁朔将军、吴郡太守，因为起义时拥戴的功劳，被封为永新县五等侯。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, he was transferred to the post of the five soldiers of Shangshu, and before taking office, he was again used as the general of Ningshuo and the governor of Wuxi County. Because of the merits he held at the time of the uprising, he was named the fifth mayor of Yongxin County.

古文：大明元年，吴县令张闿坐居母丧无礼，下廷尉。钱唐令沈文秀判劾违谬，应坐被弹。
现代文：大明元年吴县县令张凯因为在母亲去世时期不守礼节，被逮抓到廷尉，钱塘县令沈文秀因为判案错误，应该受到弹劾。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Zhang Kai, the governor of Wuxian County, was arrested and taken to the imperial court because he did not observe the etiquette at the time of his mother's death. Shen Wenshu, the governor of Qiantang County, should be impeached because of his error in judgment.

古文：琛宣言于众： 闿被劾之始，屡相申明。 
现代文：顾琛在众人面前说： 张凯被弹劾，开始时曾多次说明他的情况。 
English: Gu Wei said in front of the crowd: Zhang Kai was impeached, and at the beginning he explained his situation many times.

古文：又云： 当启文秀留县。 
现代文：又说： 我要上奏留沈文秀在县令任上。 
English: He also said: I want to appeal to Shen Wenxiu to remain in the post of county magistrate.

古文：世祖闻之大怒，谓琛卖恶归上，免官。
现代文：世祖听说这话大怒。以为顾琛把罪过归于皇上，便把他的官职免去。
English: When the patriarch heard this, he flew into a rage. Thinking that Gu Yao was blaming the emperor, he dismissed him from his post.

古文：琛母老，仍停家。
现代文：因为顾琛的母亲年老，仍然让他呆在家里。
English: Because Gu Yao's mother is old, she still lets him stay at home.

古文：琛及前西阳太守张牧，并司空竟陵王诞故佐，诞待琛等素厚。
现代文：顾琛和前西阳太守张牧都是司空竟陵王刘诞的老部下。刘诞待顾琛等人一向不薄。
English: Gu Yao and Zhang Mu, the former governor of Xiyang, were both old subordinates of Liu Zetian, the Siku King. Liu Zetian always treated Gu Yao and others well.

古文：三年，诞据广陵反，遣客陆延稔赍书板琛为征南将军，牧为安东将军，琛子前尚书郎宝素为谘议参军，宝素弟前司空参军宝先为从事中郎，牧兄前吴郡丞济为冠军将军，从弟前司空主簿晏为谘议参军。
现代文：三年，刘诞占据广陵城造反，派他的手下陆延稔带着书信任命顾琛为征南将军，张牧为安南将军，顾琛之子、前尚书郎顾宝素为谘议参军，宝素之弟前司空参军宝先当从事中郎，张牧的哥哥前吴郡丞张洛为冠军将军，张牧堂弟前司空主簿张晏为谘议参军。
English: In the third year, Liu Xing occupied Guangling City and rebelled. He sent his subordinate, Lu Yanxuan, with a letter of trust to appoint Gu Xun as the Southern Expeditionary General, Zhang Mu as the Southern Expeditionary General, Gu Xun's son, the former Shang Shulang Gu Bao Su as the advisory member of the army, Bao Su's brother, the former Secretary of the Air Force Bao Xian Dang as the middle brother, Zhang Mu's brother, the former Wu Guanzhong Zhang Luo as the champion general, Zhang Mu's cousin, the former Secretary of the Air Force Zhang Lu as the advisory member of the army.

古文：时世祖以琛素结事诞，或有异志，遣使就吴郡太守王昙生诛琛父子。
现代文：当时世祖认为顾琛一向与刘诞的结交很深，大概也有反心，便派人叫吴郡太守王昙生杀掉顾琛父子。
English: At that time, the ancestor thought that Gu Xi had always had a deep friendship with Liu Xing, and probably also had a grudge, so he sent someone to kill Gu Xi's father and son.

古文：会延稔先至，琛等即执斩之，遣二子送延稔首启世祖曰： 刘诞猖狂，遂构衅逆，凡在含齿，莫不骇惋，臣等预荷国恩，特百常愤。
现代文：恰遇陆延稔先到，顾琛等人便先抓住陆延稔并将他斩首。派两个儿子送陆延稔的人头密告世祖说： 刘诞发疯，竟敢造反，当世人士，无不震惊，我们蒙受国家的大恩，特别感到愤恨。
English: When it happened that Lu Yanjun arrived first, Gu Xi and others first grabbed Lu Yanjun and beheaded him. The man who sent his two sons to send Lu Yanjun tipped off the patriarch, saying: "Liu Xizhao has gone mad, how dare he rebel. Contemporary people are all shocked. We have received great grace from the state, and feel particularly resentful.

古文：忽以今月二十四日中获贼诞疏，欲见邀诱。臣即共执录伪使，并得诞与抚军长史沈怀文、扬州别驾孔道存、抚军中兵参军孔璪、前司兵参军孔桓之、前司空主簿张晏书，具列本郡太守王昙生。
现代文：忽然在本月二十四日得到刘诞的书信，想邀请我们参加，我们便马上抓住他的伪使者，并得到刘延稔，抚军长史沈怀文，扬州别驾孔道存，抚军中兵参军孔，前司兵参军孔桓之，前司空主簿张晏的书信，都一同列上献给本郡太守王昙生。
English: Suddenly, on the 24th of this month, we received a letter from Liu Xing, who wanted to invite us to participate, so we immediately caught his false messenger. We also received letters from Liu Yanqi, Fuzhou army commander Shi Shenhuaiwen, Yangzhou Beijiao Kong Daozheng, Fuzhou army soldier Zengjun Kong, former Sifeng soldier Zengjun Kong Hanzhi, and former Sikuo master Zhang Qi, all of which were dedicated to the county's grand marshal Wang Xinsheng.

古文：臣即日便应星驰归骨辇毂，臣母年老，身在侍养，辄遣息宝素、宝先束骸诣阙。 
现代文：我今日马上亲赴京师投身皇上。我母亲年老，我自己亲自奉养，这里派儿子宝素、宝先绑住自己到皇宫门前谢罪。 
English: Today, I will go to Beijing to devote myself to the emperor. My mother is old and I have to take care of her myself. I have sent my sons, Bao Su and Bao Xian, to bind themselves in front of the imperial palace to apologize.

古文：世祖所遣诛琛使其日亦至，仅而获免。
现代文：世祖派的杀顾琛的使者当日也到了，顾琛勉强免除祸患。
English: On the same day, the emissary of the Sezu faction to kill Gu Yao also arrived, and Gu Yao was narrowly spared from the disaster.

古文：上嘉之，召琛出，以为西阳王子尚抚军司马，牧为抚军中兵参军。
现代文：世祖肯定了顾琛，叫他出来做官。让他当西阳王刘子尚抚军司马，张牧当抚军中兵参军。
English: The ancestor affirmed Gu Yao and asked him to come out to be an official. Let him be Xiyang King Liu Zi Shang Fu's army steward, and Zhang Mu join the army as a soldier in the army.

古文：琛母孔氏，时年百余岁。
现代文：顾琛之母孔老夫人，当时有一百多岁。
English: Gu Yao's mother, Old Lady Kong, was more than a hundred years old at the time.

古文：晋安帝隆安初，琅邪王廞于吴中为乱，以女为贞烈将军，悉以女人为官属，以孔氏为司马。
现代文：晋安帝隆安初年琅王牙王司马德文在吴郡造反，让他女儿当贞烈将军，他女儿全部让女人当部属，让孔夫人当司马，到孙恩动乱之后，东方饥荒，人们流离失所，发生了吃人的事。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Longan of the Jin and Qin Dynasties, King Sima Dewen rebelled in Wu County. He made his daughter a general of the Zhengrong, and all his daughters made women subordinates, and made Mrs. Kong a Sima. After the Sunn Disturbance, the Eastern Famine, people were displaced, and terrible things happened.

古文：及孙恩乱后，东土饥荒，人相食，孔氏散家粮以赈邑里，得活者甚众，生子皆以孔为名焉。
现代文：孔氏散发家中粮食救济乡亲，活下来的人很多。人们生儿子，儿子都以孔为名。顾琛仍然当吴兴太守。
English: The Kong family distributed food to the villagers, and many people survived. People had sons, and the sons were all named Kong. Gu Yao was still the de facto ruler of Wu Xing.

古文：琛仍为吴兴太守。明年，坐郡民多翦钱及盗铸，免官。
现代文：第二年，因本郡很多百姓偷盗和制造货币，他被免官。
English: The following year, he was removed from office because many people in the county were stealing and manufacturing money.

古文：六年，起为大司农，都官尚书，新安王子鸾北中郎司马、东海太守、行南徐州事，随府转抚军司马，太守如故。
现代文：六年，他出任大司农，都官尚书和新安王刘子鸾的中郎司马，东海太守，代管南徐州事务，又在本府转官抚军司马、太守照旧。
English: In six years, he served as the chief agronomist, the middle-ranking steward of Shangshu and Liu Ziqi, the king of Xin'an, and the governor of the East China Sea, in charge of the affairs of South Xuzhou. He was also transferred to the post of military governor in this prefecture.

古文：前废帝即位，复为吴郡太守。
现代文：前废帝做皇帝，他再当吴郡太守。
English: The former deposed emperor became emperor, and then he became the governor of Wu County.

古文：太宗泰始初，与四方同反，兵败，奉母奔会稽。
现代文：太宗泰始初年，他和四方同时反叛朝廷，最后失败了。
English: In the first year of Emperor Taizong's reign, he and the four factions simultaneously rebelled against the imperial court, but ultimately failed.

古文：台军既至，归降。
现代文：携带母亲跑到会稽，官军一到便前去投降。
English: He ran to the auditorium with his mother, and as soon as the government troops arrived, he went to surrender.

古文：宝素与琛相失，自杀。
现代文：宝素和顾琛失去联系，便自杀了。
English: After losing contact with Gu Yao, Bao Suo committed suicide.

古文：琛寻丁母忧，服阕，起为员外常侍、中散大夫。
现代文：顾琛因为母亲去世，守礼三年后，又出来做员外常侍、中散大夫。
English: Due to the death of his mother, three years after he had kept the rite, Gu Yao came out again as a non-member attendant and Zhongshan doctor.

古文：后废帝元徽三年，卒，时年八十六。
现代文：后废帝元徽三年逝世，当时他八十八岁。
English: Emperor Yuanhui died three years later, when he was 88 years old.

古文：宝先大明中为尚书水部郎。
现代文：宝先大明中当尚书礼部郎。
English: He was a member of the book club at Hozen Daiming Junior High School.

古文：先是，琛为左丞荀万秋所劾，及宝先为郎，万秋犹在职，自陈不拜。世祖诏曰： 敕违纠慢，宪司之职，若理有不公，自当更有厘正。而自顷刻无轻重，辄致私绝。
现代文：之前，顾琛被左丞荀万秋弹劾，到宝先做郎官时，万秋仍然在职，顾宝先陈述自己不应参拜荀万秋，世祖下诏书说： 弹劾错误纠正缺点，是法官的职务，如果不属实，弹劾者自然应该改正；而弹劾别人无论轻重，往往导致私交断绝。
English: Previously, Gu Zheng was impeached by Zuo Zheng, and when he became Bao Xian's vassal, Bao Xian was still in office. Gu Bao first stated that he should not visit Zheng Zheng, and the ancestor issued an edict saying: Impeachment is a judge's duty to correct shortcomings, and if it is not true, the impeacher should naturally correct it; and impeaching others, no matter how serious, often leads to the severance of personal relationships.

古文：此风难长，主者严为其科。宝先盖依附世准，不足问。 
现代文：这种风气不应该有，有关人员应明确这方面的法令。宝先大概依据常情，不值得追究。 
English: This kind of culture should not exist, and the relevant personnel should clarify the relevant laws and regulations. Bao Xian is probably based on common sense and is not worth investigating.

古文：先是，宋世江东贵达者，会稽孔季恭，季恭子灵符，吴兴丘渊之及琛，吴音不变。
现代文：以前，宋国江东人做了大官的有会稽孔季恭，季恭的儿子孔灵符，吴兴丘渊之和顾琛，他们说的方言不变。
English: In the past, people from the eastern part of the Song Dynasty who became high-ranking officials included Kong Qigong, Qigong's son Kong Lingfu, Wu Xingqiu Yuanzhi and Gu Yao. The dialect they spoke remained unchanged.

古文：渊之字思玄，吴兴乌程人也。
现代文：渊之字思玄，吴兴乌程人。
English: Yuanzhi Zi Xuan, Wu Xing Wucheng Ren.

古文：太祖从高祖北伐，留彭城，为冠军将军、徐州刺史，渊之为长史。
现代文：太祖跟随高祖北伐时，他留驻彭城，当冠军将军、兖州刺史，渊之当长史。
English: When the great-grandfather followed Gao Zu to the Northern Expedition, he stayed in Pengcheng, and became the champion general, the leader of Zhangzhou, and the leader of Yuan.

古文：太祖即位，以旧恩历显官，侍中，都官尚书，吴郡太守。卒于太常，追赠光禄大夫。
现代文：太祖做皇帝，因为老关系而做了大官，侍中、都官、尚书、吴郡太守，在太常任上去世，后被追认为光禄大夫。
English: The great-grandfather was the emperor, and because of the old relationship, he became a high-ranking official, a chamberlain, a government official, a courtier, and the governor of Wu County. He died in office, and was later regarded as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：顾觊之，字伟仁，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：顾觊之，字伟仁，吴郡吴县人。
English: Gu Xizhi, also known as Wei Ren, was from Wu County, Wuxi County.

古文：高祖谦，字公让，晋平原内史陆机姊夫。
现代文：高祖顾谦字公让，是晋代平原内史陆机的姐夫。
English: Gao Zu Gu Qian Zi Gong Zhan was the brother-in-law of a land machine in the history of the Jin Dynasty Plain.

古文：祖崇，大司农。
现代文：祖父顾崇，官至大司农。
English: His grandfather, Gu Chong, was the chief minister of agriculture.

古文：父黄老，司徒左西掾。
现代文：父亲顾黄老，官至司徒左西掾。
English: His father, Gu Huanglao, was a high-ranking official.

古文：觊之初为郡主簿。谢晦为荆州，以为南蛮功曹，仍为晦卫军参军。
现代文：顾觊之最开始做吴郡主簿，谢晦任荆州刺史时，让顾觊之当他的南蛮功曹，同时兼任他的卫军参军。
English: Gu Yanzhi was the chief accountant of Wu County at the very beginning. When Xie Yu served as the chief historian of Jingzhou, he asked Gu Yanzhi to be his Nanban gong cao, and at the same time he served as his guard to join the army.

古文：晦爱其雅素，深相知待。
现代文：谢晦欣赏他的朴素而高雅的风度，对他倍加重视。
English: Xie Wei appreciated his simple and elegant demeanor, and paid more attention to him.

古文：王弘辟为扬州主簿，仍为弘卫军参军，盐官令，衡阳王义季右军主簿，尚书都官郎，护军司马。
现代文：王弘请顾觊之当扬州主簿，同时兼任他的卫军参军和盐官令，再当衡阳王刘义季右军主簿、尚书都官郎，护军司马。
English: Wang Hong asked Gu Yao to be the chief accountant of Yangzhou, and at the same time to serve as the leader of his guards to join the army and the salt official, and then to be the chief accountant of the Hengyang King Liu Yizi's right army, the official of the capital, and the guard Sima.

古文：时大将军彭城王义康秉权，殷、刘之隙已著，觊之不欲与殷景仁久接事，乃辞脚疾自免归。
现代文：当时大将军彭城王刘义康当权，殷景仁和刘湛的矛盾已显露，顾觊之不想和殷景仁过多接触，于是以脚病的借口辞官回家。
English: At that time, General Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, was in power, and the conflict between Yin Jingren and Liu Zhan had already come to light. Gu Xizhi did not want to have too much contact with Yin Jingren, so he used the excuse of foot disease to resign and go home.

古文：在家每夜常于床上行脚，家人窃异之，而莫晓其意。
现代文：在家时每天晚上常在床上走来走去，家里其他人都非常惊异，但不知他为什么这样。
English: At home he used to walk around his bed every night and the rest of the family were very surprised but didn't know why.

古文：后义康徙废，朝廷多以异同受祸。
现代文：后来刘义康被贬谪和废去官爵，朝廷中很多人因为受牵连而遭到惩罚。
English: Later, Liu Yikang was demoted and stripped of his title, and many people in the imperial court were punished for being implicated.

古文：复为东迁、山阴令。
现代文：而顾觊之却再当东迁县令和山阴县令。
English: However, Gu Yizhi was reappointed as Dongcheng County Governor and Shanyin County Governor.

古文：山阴民户三万，海内剧邑，前后官长，昼夜不得休，事犹不举。
现代文：山阴县有百姓三万户，是海内大县，前后到任的长官，即使日夜不停地奔波，事情仍然处理不好。
English: There are 30,000 households in Sanyin County, which is a large county in China's inland. Even though the prefects who have taken office before and after have been rushing around day and night, things are still not handled well.

古文：觊之理繁以约，县用无事，昼日垂帘，门阶闲寂。
现代文：顾觊之用简单的办法对付繁杂的问题，县里因此没什么麻烦，他白天把县衙门门帘放下来，门外寂寞无声。
English: Gu Yanzhi uses a simple method to deal with complex problems, so there is no trouble in the county. During the day, he put down the curtain of the county gate, and there was no sound outside the gate.

古文：自宋世为山阴，务简而绩修，莫能尚也。
现代文：在宋朝建国以来的所有山阴政务中，这时的事务最少而政绩最突出，没有第二个人能赶上。
English: Of all the Shanyin government affairs since the founding of the Song Dynasty, this time had the fewest affairs and the most outstanding political achievements, and no second person could catch up.

古文：还为扬州治中从事史，广陵王诞、庐陵王绍北中郎左司马，扬州别驾从事史，尚书吏部郎。
现代文：接着顾觊之回京城当扬州治中从事史，然后是庐陵王刘诞、庐陵王刘绍北中郎左军司马、扬州别驾从事史，尚书吏部郎。
English: Next, Gu Xizhi returned to Beijing to study history in the middle of the reign of Yangzhou, followed by Liu Xizhi, King of Fuling, Liu Shao, King of Fuling, Bei Zhong Lang, Sima of the Left Army, and Yangzhou Beigai, who studied history and was a member of the Ministry of Education.

古文：尝于太祖坐论江左人物，言及顾荣，袁淑谓觊之曰： 卿南人怯懦，岂办作贼。 
现代文：在宋文帝主持的座谈酒会上评论江南人物，谈到顾荣时，袁淑对顾觊之说： 你们南方人胆小怕事，怎么能对付谋反的事。 
English: When commenting on Gu Rong at a symposium hosted by Emperor Song of the Southern Jiangsu, Yuan Shu said to Gu Xizhi: "You southerners are timid and afraid of things, how can you deal with the matter of plotting a rebellion?

古文：觊之正色曰： 卿乃复以忠义笑人！ 
现代文：顾觊之严肃回答： 您怎么能因您的忠诚道义而讽刺别人。 
English: Gu Yanzhi replied gravely: How can you satirize others because of your loyalty and morality?

古文：淑有愧色。
现代文：袁淑顿时面带惭愧之色。
English: Yuan Shuk has a guilty look on her face.

古文：元凶弑立，朝士无不移任，唯觊之不徙官。
现代文：元凶刘邵杀文帝自立为皇帝。朝廷人物无不迁官，只有顾觊之没有变动。
English: The main culprit, Liu Shao, killed Emperor Wen and established himself as emperor. All of the imperial court figures were transferred to other positions, but Gu Yaozhi remained unchanged.

古文：世祖即位，迁御史中丞。
现代文：孝武帝当了皇帝，顾觊之升为御史中丞。
English: Emperor Xiaowu became emperor, and Gu Xizhi was promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：孝建元年，出为义阳王昶东中郎长史、宁朔将军、行会稽郡事。
现代文：孝建元年，外出当义阳王刘昶东中郎长史、宁朔将军，且代管会稽郡事务。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, he went out as the Yiyang King Liu Yidong's middle son Changshi and Ningshuo's general, and was in charge of the county affairs of the Audit Commission.

古文：寻征为右卫将军，领本邑中正。
现代文：不久又调为右卫将军，兼领本郡中正。
English: He was soon transferred to the post of Ue no shogun (general of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards) and concurrently became the leader of the county's junior high school.

古文：明年，出为湘州刺史，善于莅民，治甚有绩。
现代文：第二年，出外当湘州刺史，他善于管理老百姓，政绩斐然。
English: In the second year, when he went abroad to write the history of Hunan Province, he was good at managing the people, and his political achievements were outstanding.

古文：大明元年，征守度支尚书，领本州中正。
现代文：大明元年，调为度支尚书，兼任本州中正。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to Doushi Shangshu and concurrently served as the head of the Honshu Middle School.

古文：二年，转吏部尚书。四年，致仕，不许。
现代文：大明二年，转任吏部尚书，大明四年，顾觊之要辞官退休，皇帝没有同意。
English: In the second year of Daming, Shang Shu was transferred to the cadre department, and in the fourth year of Daming, Gu Xizhi wanted to resign and retire, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：时沛郡相县唐赐往比村硃起母彭家饮酒还，因得病，吐蛊虫十余枚。
现代文：当时沛郡相县人唐赐到邻村人朱起的母亲彭氏家里喝酒，回来便病了，吐下蛊虫十多条。
English: At that time, Tang Zi, a resident of Xiang County, Pei County, went to drink alcohol at the home of Peng's mother, Zhu Zhi, a resident of a neighboring village. When he returned, he fell ill and vomited more than ten tapeworms.

古文：临死语妻张，死后刳腹出病。
现代文：死前对他的妻子张氏说：他死后要把他的肚子剖开弄清病的原因。
English: Before his death, he told his wife, Ms. Zhang, that after his death, he would have his stomach cut open to find out the cause of his illness.

古文：后张手自破视，五藏悉糜碎。
现代文：之后张氏亲手剖开她丈夫的肚子察看，唐赐的五脏都弄成了碎片。
English: After that, Ms. Zhang cut open her husband's stomach with her own hands and found that all of Tang Zi's internal organs were in pieces.

古文：郡县以张忍行刳剖，赐子副又不禁驻，事起赦前，法不能决。
现代文：沛郡相县的官员认为张氏竟做出剖开丈夫的肚子的事情，唐赐的儿子唐副又不阻拦，因为这事发生在大赦之前，法官们不能判决。
English: Officials in Peixian County believe that Zhang actually cut open her husband's stomach, and Tang Zi's son, Tang Zi, did not stop her, because this happened before the amnesty, and the judges could not make a decision.

古文：律伤死人，四岁刑；妻伤夫，五岁刑；子不孝父母，弃市，并非科例。
现代文：当时法律规定：伤害死人，判徒刑四年；妻子伤害丈夫，判徒刑五年；儿子不孝顺父母，判死刑，都不符合本案的条例。
English: At that time, the law stipulated that: injuring a dead person, sentenced to four years in prison; a wife injuring her husband, sentenced to five years in prison; a son who is not filial to his parents, sentenced to death, are all inconsistent with the regulations of this case.

古文：三公郎刘勰议： 赐妻痛往遵言，兒识谢及理，考事原心，非存忍害，谓宜哀矜。 
现代文：三公郎刘勰认为： 唐赐的妻子悲痛地按丈夫的话去做，他的儿子懂得逊让也懂得大理，细细体会这事的前后，他们没有伤害丈夫和父亲的动机，我认为应该原谅。 
English: Liu Wei, the third prince, said: "Tang Zi's wife did what her husband said with sorrow, and his son knew how to be submissive and understand the truth. After carefully understanding the before and after of this matter, they had no motive to hurt their husband and father. I think they should be forgiven."

古文：觊之议曰： 法移路尸，犹为不道，况在妻子，而忍行凡人所不行。不宜曲通小情，当以大理为断，谓副为不孝，张同不道。 
现代文：顾觊之认为： 法律规定移动路头的尸体，也属不合法，况且是自己的妻子儿女，竟然忍心做一般人所不敢做的事情，对他们不应顾及小的情面，应该按照法律处理，判定唐副的罪行是不孝，张氏是犯法。 
English: Gu Yanzhi believed that: The law stipulates that it is also illegal to move the dead body of the roadside, moreover, it is his own wife and children who have the nerve to do things that ordinary people dare not do. They should not take into account the small circumstances, and should be dealt with in accordance with the law. The crime of Deputy Tang is unfilial, and Mr. Zhang is a violation of the law.

古文：诏如觊之议。
现代文：诏书同意顾觊之的判决。
English: The edict was carried out in accordance with Gu's argument.

古文：加左军将军，出为吴郡太守。
现代文：接着顾觊之升任左军将军，出外当吴郡太守。
English: Next, Gu Yanzhi was promoted to the general of the Left Army, and went abroad to serve as the governor of Wu County.

古文：八年，复为吏部尚书，加给事中，未拜，欲以为会稽，不果。还为吴郡太守。
现代文：大明八年，再当吏部尚书，加官给事中，还未就任，孝武帝想让顾觊之当会稽郡太守，没有实行，仍是当吴郡太守。
English: In the eighth year of the Ming Dynasty, when Shang Shu of the cadre department was in the process of being promoted, he had not yet taken office. Emperor Xiaowu wanted to make Gu Xizhi the county magistrate, but it was not implemented, he was still the county magistrate of Wuxi.

古文：幸臣戴法兴权倾人主，而觊之未尝降意。
现代文：当时恩幸大臣戴法兴权力几乎盖过了皇帝，而顾觊之并没有屈从他。
English: At that time, the Minister of Gratitude Dai Faxing's power almost overpowered the emperor, and Gu Yizhi did not succumb to him.

古文：左光禄大夫蔡兴宗与觊之善，嫌其风节过峻。
现代文：左光禄大夫蔡兴宗和顾觊之关系很好，觉得顾觊之的性格太过严峻。
English: Zuo Guanglu's doctor Cai Xingzong is friendly with Gu Yao, but he is thought to be too severe.

古文：觊之曰： 辛毗有云：孙、刘不过使吾不为三公耳！ 
现代文：顾觊之说： 三国时辛毗曾说过：孙资、刘放不过叫我做不成三公而已。 
English: Gu Yanzhi said: At the time of the Three Kingdoms, Xin Pi once said: Sun Zi and Liu Fang only told me that I could not become the Three Kingdoms.

古文：及世祖晏驾，法兴遂以觊之为光禄大夫，加金章紫绶。
现代文：孝武帝去世时，戴法兴便让顾觊之当光禄大夫，加赏金章紫绶。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu died, Dai Faxing made Gu Yaozhi the doctor of honor, and gave him the award of the Purple Ribbon.

古文：太宗泰始初，四方同反，觊之家寻阳，寻阳王子房加以位号，觊之不受，曰： 礼年六十不服戎，以其筋力衰谢，非复军旅之日，况年将八十，残生无几，守尽家门，不敢闻命。 
现代文：明帝太始初年，四方各镇同时反叛。顾觊之家在寻阳，寻阳王刘子房给顾觊之授予爵位名号，顾觊之拒绝了，说： 礼规定年到六十不穿军装，只因精力衰退，不再能习惯军事生活。况且我年将八十，余年不多，在家里等死而已，我不敢接受您的任命。 
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, towns in all four directions rebelled at the same time. Gu Xi's family was in Xuanyang. The king of Xuanyang, Liu Zifang, conferred a title of nobility on Gu Xi. Gu Xi refused, saying, "It is the custom not to wear a military uniform until the age of sixty. It is only because of the decline of energy that I can no longer get used to military life. Moreover, I will be eighty, and I have not many years left. I am just waiting for death at home. I dare not accept your appointment."

古文：孔觊等不能夺。
现代文：孔觊等人不能说服他。
English: Confucius and others could not persuade him.

古文：时普天叛逆，莫或自免，唯觊之心迹清全，独无所与。
现代文：当时全国同时造反，几乎没有哪个人不受影响。只有顾觊之立场坚正纯贞，叛逆一个也不支持。
English: At that time, the whole country rebelled at the same time, and almost no one was unaffected. Only Gu Yao's position was firm and pure, and he did not support any of the rebels.

古文：太宗甚嘉之，东土既平，以为左将军、吴郡太守，加散骑常侍。
现代文：明帝非常赞赏他。东方平定后，让他当左将军，吴郡太守，加官散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Ming appreciated him very much. After the pacification of the East, he made him the left general, the governor of Wu County, and the official horseback rider.

古文：泰始二年，复为湘州刺史，常侍、将军如故。三年卒，时年七十六。
现代文：泰始二年，再当湘州刺史，常侍照旧。泰始三年去世，享年七十六岁。
English: In the second year of Taishi, he was appointed as the governor of Hunan Province, and continued to serve as governor. He died in the third year of Taishi, at the age of seventy-six.

古文：追赠镇军将军，常侍、刺史如故。
现代文：死后被追赠为镇军将军，常侍、刺史照旧。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of general of the town's army.

古文：谥曰简子。
现代文：谥号称为简子。
English: His nickname is Jane Wang.

古文：觊之家门雍睦，为州乡所重。
现代文：顾觊之家庭和睦平静，深为本州本乡所称道。
English: Gu Yao's family is peaceful and harmonious, which is highly praised by his hometown in Honshu.

古文：五子：约、缉、绰、缜、绲。
现代文：他的五个儿子顾约、顾缉、顾绰、顾镇、顾绲。
English: His five sons are Gu Yao, Gu Zhi, Gu Zhao, Gu Zhen and Gu Yao.

古文：绰私财甚丰，乡里士庶多负其责，觊之每禁之，不能止。
现代文：顾绰的家财非常多，乡亲父老亲戚子弟很多人欠他的债，顾觊之每每劝他不要这样作，但没有效果。
English: Gu Cao's family had a lot of money, and many people in his hometown, including his father, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law, father-in-law

古文：及后为吴郡，诱绰曰： 我常不许汝出责，定思贫薄亦不可居。
现代文：在顾觊之第二次当吴郡太守时，顾觊之骗他的儿子顾绰说： 我经常不许你放债，细细想一想，贫穷也确实不是滋味，和你有关的乡亲中还有几多人的债没有还清？
English: During his second term as the governor of Wu County, Gu Xizhong lied to his son Gu Zuo and said, "I often forbid you to lend money. Think about it, poverty is really not a good feeling. How many of your fellow villagers have not paid off their debts?"

古文：民间与汝交关有几许不尽，及我在郡，为汝督之。将来岂可得。
现代文：趁我在太守任上，为你讨回债务。等我退休了就讨不回来了。那些债券在哪里！ 
English: While I'm in office, I'll collect your debts. When I retire, I won't be able to collect them. Where are those bonds!

古文：凡诸券书皆何在？ 绰大喜，悉出诸文券一大厨与觊之，觊之悉焚烧，宣语远近： 负三郎责，皆不须还，凡券书悉烧之矣。 
现代文：顾绰大喜，把他的所有一大柜债券送给顾觊之，顾觊之将这些债券全部烧掉，并且告诉乡亲们： 凡是欠我家老三的债务，都不需要偿还，所有的债券文约我全部烧掉了。 
English: Gu Cao was overjoyed and gave all of his treasury bonds to Gu Xizhi. Gu Xizhi burned all of these bonds and told the villagers, "All debts owed to my family members do not need to be repaid. I have burned all of the bond documents."

古文：绰懊叹弥日。
现代文：顾绰悔恨哀叹了一整天。
English: Gu Zuo lamented all day long.

古文：觊之常谓秉命有定分，非智力所移，唯应恭己守道，信天任运，而暗者不达，妄求侥幸，徒亏雅道，无关得丧。
现代文：顾觊之常常觉得人生一切都是命中注定，不是个人的智慧能力可改变的。只能恭谨做人，遵循道德、信仰天命、顺从运气，但是愚蠢的人不明白这道理，胡乱地祈求幸运，只不过徒劳而已，甚至会败坏真正的大道，对于成败得失没有帮助。
English: Gu Xizhi often felt that everything in life is predetermined by fate, and cannot be changed by personal wisdom and ability. One can only be a respectful person, follow morality, believe in fate, and obey luck, but stupid people do not understand this truth, and randomly pray for luck, but it is in vain, and can even corrupt the true road, and is not helpful for success or failure.

古文：乃以其意命弟子愿著《定命论》，其辞曰：
现代文：于是把他的这些想法告诉他的弟弟的儿子顾愿，叫他写了一篇文章《定命论》，文章是这样写的：
English: So he told these thoughts to his brother's son, Gu Ren, and asked him to write an article, "Fatalism." The article was written like this:

古文：仲尼云： 道之将行，命也；道之将废，命也。 
现代文： 孔子说： 大道将要实行，是命中注定的，大道将要败乱，也是命中注定的。 
English: Confucius said: It is predestined that the Great Way will be carried out. It is also predestined that the Great Way will be disrupted.

古文：丘明又称： 天之所支不可坏，天之所坏不可支。 
现代文：左丘明也说： 老天爷支持的不能被破坏，老天爷反对的不能被维持。 
English: Zuo Qiuming also said: What God supports cannot be destroyed, and what God opposes cannot be maintained.

古文：卜商亦曰： 死生有命，富贵在天。 
现代文：子夏也说： 死亡和生存都是命中注定的，富有和高贵都是由老天爷支配的。 
English: Zixia also said, "Death and survival are predestined by fate. Wealth and nobility are controlled by God."

古文：孟轲则以不遇鲁侯为辞。
现代文：孟子则以为他不能遇到鲁国国君也是命中注定的。
English: Mencius, on the other hand, thought that it was his fate not to meet the prince of Lu.

古文：斯则运命奇偶，生数离合，有自来矣。
现代文：从这里看来，命运的亨通或蹇涩，生命的上下波动，人生的聚合分离，都是命中注定的。
English: From this point of view, the success or failure of fate, the ups and downs of life, and the aggregation and separation of life are all predestined.

古文：马迁、刘向、扬雄、班固之徒，著书立言，咸以为首，世之论者，多有不同。
现代文：司马迁、刘向、扬雄、班固等人著书立说，都把命运当成他们最关心的问题之一。
English: Sima Qian, Liu Xiang, Yang Xiong, Ban Gu and others have written books and said that they regard fate as one of their most important issues.

古文：尝试申之曰：夫生之资气，清浊异原；命之禀数，盈虚乖致。
现代文：世人谈到这个问题时，往往有不同看法，这里我试着谈谈我的看法： 人生承受天地的气息，有清和浊两种来源，人的命运承受天地的运行规律，有圆满和不足的差异。
English: When people in the world talk about this issue, they often have different opinions. Here I will try to talk about my opinion: Life bears the breath of heaven and earth, and there are two sources of light and darkness. The fate of man bears the operation law of heaven and earth, and there are differences in perfection and deficiency.

古文：是以心貌诡贸，性运舛殊，故有邪正昏明之差，修夭荣枯之序，皆理定于万古之前，事征于千代之外，冲神寂鉴，一以贯之。
现代文：所以有不同的心肠，有不同的相貌，因为人的运气不同，所以有邪恶正直、昏聩贤明的差别，有幸福光荣和不幸耻辱的变化。所有这一切便是在万古之前便已注定的，是在千年之外便已具备的，命运之神无论在哪里都是会发生这种作用的。
English: Therefore, there are different hearts and minds, different appearances, because people's fortunes are different, there are differences in wickedness, honesty, deceit, and wisdom, and there are changes in happiness, glory, misfortune, and disgrace. All of this has been predestined before the ages, has been in place for thousands of years, and the god of fate will have this effect no matter where.

古文：至乃卜相末技，巫史贱术，犹能豫题兴亡，逆表成败。
现代文：即使连卜筮相术之类的小技术，巫婆跳大神之类的下九流方法，也能够预测生死存亡和成功失败。
English: Even small techniques such as fortunetelling and trick-or-treating can predict survival, success and failure.

古文：祸福指期，识照不能徙；吉凶素著，威卫不能防。
现代文：祸害和幸福将实现的地方，贤明的人也不能不受影响；吉祥和凶恶所显示的时候，即使是权力和防卫措施也不能阻挡。
English: Where calamity and happiness are to be realized, the wise man cannot remain unaffected; when auspiciousness and evil are manifested, even power and defensive measures cannot stand in the way.

古文：若夏氓宅生于帝宫，岂蠲残伤之祟；汉臣衍货于天府，宁免喂毙之魂。
现代文：比如夏朝皇宫中长的野草，并不是靠抛弃残忍不仁的政策便能改变的；汉代朝臣们把盐铁大权集中到朝廷，并不能免除百姓的饥饿死亡。
English: For example, the long wild grass in the summer palace of the Han Dynasty could not be changed by abandoning the cruel policy; the Han Dynasty courtiers concentrated the power of salt and iron in the imperial court, which could not save the people from starving to death.

古文：且又善恶之理虽详，而祸福之验常昧；逆顺之体诚分，而吉凶之效常隐。
现代文：虽然世上善良和邪恶说得非常清晰，但是其中的善恶报应并不总是应验的。忠诚受赏，叛逆受罚这种公理，结果并不总是如此。
English: Although the world speaks very clearly of good and evil, the consequences of good and evil are not always realized, and the justice of loyalty being rewarded and rebellion being punished does not always turn out that way.

古文：智络天地，犹罹沈牖之灾；明照日月，必婴深匡之难。
现代文：有人智盖天地，却遭致坎坷不遇的结局，精通万物之理，却像孔子那样东西奔波，不遇明君。
English: Some people build heaven and earth with wisdom, but suffer a bumpy ending. They are well versed in the principles of all things, but like Confucius, they rush around and do not meet Ming Jun.

古文：增信积德，离患于长饥；席义枕仁，徼祸于促算。
现代文：坚守信用积累道德，却长期地处于饥饿之中。力行仁义，却遭致短命的结局。
English: Adhering to credit, accumulating morality, but being hungry for a long time. Striving for benevolence, but suffering a short-lived outcome.

古文：早卒。
现代文：早死。
English: He died at an early age.

