古文：唐玄宗叱金像天宝符蜀当归万里桥唐肃宗唐武宗唐宣宗迎光王唐懿宗唐僖宗李邰后唐太祖后唐明宗潞王晋高祖伪蜀主舅
现代文：唐玄宗叱金像天宝符蜀当归万里桥唐肃宗唐武宗唐宣宗迎光王唐懿宗唐僖宗李邰后唐太祖后唐明宗潞王晋高祖伪蜀主舅
English: Tang Xuan Zong chanted the golden image of Heaven's Treasure, Shu Danggu Bridge, Tang Su Zong, Tang Wu Zong, Tang Xuan Zong, Ying Guang Wang, Tang Yao Zong, Tang Yao Zong, Li Qian Hou, Tang Taizuo, Tang Ming Zong, Shu Wang, Jingao Zong, Pseudo Shu

古文：唐玄宗
现代文：唐玄宗
English: Tang Xuan Zong

古文：唐玄宗之在东宫，为太平公主所忌，朝夕伺察，纤微必闻于上。
现代文：唐玄宗在东宫的时候，太平公主很妒忌他。早晚都侦察他的行动，只要发现一点点过失就要向皇上禀告。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong was in the East Palace, Princess Taiping was very jealous of him. Sooner or later, she would spy on his activities, and if she found the slightest fault, she would report it to the emperor.

古文：而宫闱左右，亦潜持两端，以附太平之势。
现代文：而后宫的人以及他身边的人也都暗暗的持有两种态度，因太平公主的势力大，所以都靠向了太平公主一边。
English: However, the people in the harem and the people around him also secretly hold two attitudes. Because Princess Taiping's power is great, they all side with Princess Taiping.

古文：时元献皇后方姙，玄宗惧太平，欲令服药除之，而无可以语者。
现代文：当时元献皇后正怀了孕，玄宗害怕太平公主，就想要叫元献皇后吃药除掉胎儿。
English: At that time, the Empress Yuanxian was pregnant. Xuanzong was afraid of Princess Taiping and wanted to make the Empress Yuanxian take medicine to remove the fetus.

古文：张说以侍读得进见太子宫，玄宗从容谋及说，说亦密赞其事。
现代文：但却没有可靠的人商量，有个叫张说的人凭着侍读官的身份进见太子宫、玄宗不慌不忙地告诉他这件事，张说也暗中同意。
English: However, there was no reliable person to discuss the matter with. A man named Zhang said that he was going to inspect the crown prince's uterus as an attendant. Xuanzong told him about this matter unhurriedly, and Zhang said that he also secretly agreed.

古文：他日，说又入侍，因怀去胎药三煮剂以献。
现代文：过了几天，张说又来到宫里侍奉玄宗，就在怀里偷偷地带去了三付打胎的汤药献给了玄宗。
English: A few days later, Zhang said that he came to the palace to serve Xuanzong again, and secretly took the three-layered soup medicine in his arms to offer to Xuanzong.

古文：玄宗得药喜，尽去左右，独构火于殿中，煮未熟，怠而假寝。
现代文：玄宗得了药很高兴，就把身边的人都打发走了，亲自点着火在殿中熬药。
English: Xuanzong was very happy to get the medicine, so he sent the people around him away and lit a fire to boil the medicine in the hall.

古文：肸蚃之际，有神人长丈余，马具饰，身被金甲，操戈，绕药鼎三匝，煮尽覆无余焉。
现代文：药还没有熬好，就觉得有些疲累，就闭着眼睛休息一会，忽然就象有神灵感应似的，抬头一看，有个神仙有一丈多高，还有一匹装饰齐备的马。这个神仙身披金甲，手拿长戈，围着煎药的锅转了三圈，然后把煮的药全都给倒了。
English: When the medicine was not yet ready, he felt a little tired, so he closed his eyes and rested for a while. Suddenly, as if by divine inspiration, he looked up and saw a tall god and a well-decorated horse. This god, dressed in gold armor and holding a long pole, circled the pot of medicine three times, and then poured out all the boiled medicine.

古文：玄宗起视异之，复增构火，又投一剂，煮于鼎，因就榻，瞬息以伺之。而神见，复煮知初。凡三煮，皆覆之，乃止。
现代文：就这样玄宗共熬了三回，三回都彼倒了。
English: In this way, Xuanzong was boiled a total of three times, and he collapsed all three times.

古文：则明日说又至，告之。
现代文：只好停止了。第二天张说又来了，玄宗就把这件事告诉了张说。
English: It had to be stopped. The next day, Zhang said it happened again, and Xuanzong told Zhang about it.

古文：说降阶肃拜，贺曰： 天所命也，不可去之。 
现代文：张说一听就下了台阶很严肃的向玄宗下拜，并祝贺说： 这是上天的意思啊，这个胎儿不能打掉他。 
English: Zhang said that as soon as he heard this, he went down the steps, bowed very seriously to Xuanzong, and congratulated him, saying, "This is God's will, this fetus can't beat him."

古文：厥后元献皇后思食酸，玄宗亦以告说，说每因进讲，辄袖木瓜以献。
现代文：事后元献皇后想吃酸的东西，玄宗也把这件事告诉了张说，张说就借给玄宗讲课的机会，就在衣袖里带来木瓜献给玄宗。
English: After the event, the queen wanted to eat something sour, and Xuanzong also told Zhang about this. Zhang said that he would give Xuanzong the opportunity to give a lecture, and brought papaya in his sleeve to give to Xuanzong.

古文：故开元中，说恩泽莫与为此。
现代文：所以到开元年间，张说对皇家的恩德没有什么人能和他相比的。
English: So by the beginning of the first year of the year, Zhang said that there was no one who could compare with him for the royal family's benevolence.

古文：肃宗之于说子均、垍，若亲戚昆弟云。
现代文：因此肃宗和张说的儿子张均、张垍，就象亲戚兄弟一样。
English: Therefore, Su Zong and Zhang's sons, Zhang Jun and Zhang Ye, are like relatives and brothers.

古文：叱金像
现代文：叱金像
English: Zhou Jinzhu

古文：初唐有神像，用金而制，传云：周隋间有术士熔范而成之。
现代文：唐朝初年有座神像，是用金子制做的。传说是周隋两朝之间，有个术士熔铸而成的。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a statue of a god made of gold. Legend has it that between the Zhou and Sui Dynasties, a sorcerer was cast.

古文：天后朝，因命置于宫中，扃其殿宇甚严。
现代文：到了武则天做皇后时，就命人把金像放到了宫中，并把殿门关上，保管得很严密。
English: When Wu Zetian became empress, she ordered the gold statue to be placed in the palace, and the palace door was closed and kept very closely.

古文：玄宗尝幸其殿，启而观焉。
现代文：玄宗曾到过那个殿，打开门看见了金像。
English: Xuanzong once visited the hall, opened the door and saw the gold statue.

古文：时肃宗在中宫，代宗尚稚，俱侍上。
现代文：这时肃宗在中宫，代宗还很小，都侍奉玄宗。
English: At this time, Su Zong was in the middle palace, Daizong was still small, and they both served Xuanzong.

古文：上问内臣力士曰： 此神像何所异，亦有说乎？ 
现代文：有一回玄宗皇上问大臣和力士们说： 这像有什么奇特的地方，你们也对我说一说。 
English: On one occasion, Emperor Xuanzong asked the ministers and wrestlers, "What do you think is so special about this? Please tell me."

古文：力士曰： 此前代所制，可以占王者在位之几何年耳。其法当厉声而叱之，苟年甚永，则其像摇震亦久。不然，一撼而止。 
现代文：力士说： 这是前朝所制做的，可以算出做皇帝的人能在位多少年，它的办法是用严厉的声音呵叱它，若是在位的时间很长，那么那摇撼震动的时间也长，不是这样，那么摇撼一下就停止了。 
English: The wrestler said, "This was made by the previous government. It is possible to calculate how many years a person who becomes emperor can reign. Its method is to scold him with a harsh voice. If he reigns for a long time, then the shaking and shaking will last for a long time. If not, then the shaking will stop.

古文：上即严叱之，其像若有惧，摇震移时，仆于地。
现代文：玄宗皇上就很严厉的呵叱它，那神像好象有些害怕的样子。摇撼震动了多时，才仆倒在地上。
English: Emperor Xuanzong scolded it very severely. The statue seemed to be a little scared. It shook for a long time before it fell to the ground.

古文：上喜笑曰： 诚如说，我为天子几何时？ 
现代文：皇上高兴地笑着说： 果真象说的那样，那么我做皇上能有多长时间呢？ 
English: The Emperor smiled happily and said, "If it really is as you say, then how long can I be Emperor?"

古文：上曰： 吾孙似我。 
现代文：力士于是又一次叩拜祝贺。
English: Once again, the wrestler bowed and congratulated him.

古文：其后玄帝在位五十载，肃宗在位凡六年，代宗在位十九年，尽契其占也。
现代文：玄宗皇上就叫太子呵叱那神像，神象略微震动了一下。于是又叫皇孙呵叱，结果神像也震动摇摇了很长时间。玄宗皇上说： 我的孙子像我一样。 那以后，玄宗皇帝在位五十年，肃宗在位才六年，而代宗在位十九年。完全和那神像算的一样。
English: Emperor Xuanzong asked the crown prince to shake the statue, and the statue shook slightly. He then called the grandson to shake it, and the statue shook for a long time. Emperor Xuanzong said, "My grandson is just like me." Since then, Emperor Xuanzong has reigned for fifty years, Emperor Suzong for only six years, and Emperor Daizong for nineteen years. They are exactly the same as the statue.

古文：天宝符
现代文：天宝符
English: Tianbao Fu

古文：唐开元末，于弘农古函谷关得宝符，白石赤文，正成来字。
现代文：唐朝开元末年。在弘农县古函谷关得到了一个宝符，是一块白色的石头，一面写着红色的字，是个 来 字。
English: At the end of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, a white stone with a red inscription on one side was found in the ancient Hanzhong Pass in Hongnong County.

古文：识者解之云： 来者四十八，所以示圣人御历之数也。 
现代文：认识这个字的人解释这个字说： 这个 来 字是四十八的意思，是用来预示那些圣人当皇帝的历史能有多少年。 
English: People who know this word explain the word by saying: This word means forty-eight, and is used to foreshadow how many years the history of those saints as emperors can last.

古文：及帝幸蜀之来岁，正四十八年。
现代文：到皇帝到四川的第二年，正好是四十八年。
English: In the second year after the emperor arrived in Sichuan, it was exactly 48 years old.

古文：得宝之时，天下歌之曰： 得宝耶，弘农耶；弘农耶，得宝耶。 
现代文：得到宝符的时候，天下的人们都唱着歌说： 得宝耶，弘农耶；弘农耶，得宝耶。
English: When a treasure is won, people all over the world sing a song saying, "Good luck, good farmer; good farmer, good luck."

古文：得宝之年，遂改元为天宝。
现代文：得宝符的那年，就把开元年号改为了天宝年。 
English: In the year of winning the treasure, the name of the first year was changed to Tianbao year.

古文：蜀当归
现代文：蜀当归
English: Shu Danggui

古文：僧一行将卒，遗物一封，令弟子进于帝。帝发视之，乃蜀当归也。
现代文：有个叫一行的和尚临死前留下一个物件用袋封好，叫他的弟子献给皇帝，皇帝打开信一看，是蜀地的当归。
English: Before dying, a famous monk sealed an object in a bag and asked his disciple to dedicate it to the emperor. When the emperor opened the letter, he saw that it was from Shu.

古文：帝初不喻，及幸蜀回，乃知微旨，深叹异之。
现代文：感叹而称异。
English: He exclaims that it is different.

古文：万里桥
现代文：万里桥
English: Wanli Bridge

古文：玄宗幸东都，偶然秋霁，与一行师共登天宫寺阁。
现代文：玄宗到东都时，偶然间秋雨停止天气晴朗了。就和一行大师共同登上天宫寺的楼阁。
English: When Xuanzong arrived in Dongdu, the autumn rain stopped by chance and the weather became fine. He and a group of masters ascended the pavilion of Tiangong Temple.

古文：临眺久之，上遐顾凄然，发叹数四，谓一行曰： 吾甲子得终无患乎？ 
现代文：在上面向远处看了很长时间，皇帝回头感到很悲伤的样子，感叹了几声，对一行说： 我年已六十，最后还有什么祸患之事吗？ 
English: After he had been up there for a long time looking into the distance, the emperor turned around with a very sad look, sighed a few times, and said to the group: I am sixty years old, is there anything bad in the end?

古文：一行进曰： 陛下行幸万里，圣祚无疆。 
现代文：一行上前说： 陛下你已经走了万里之遥，皇位正长呢。 
English: One of the party stepped forward and said, "Your Majesty, you have traveled thousands of miles, and the throne is growing longer.

古文：西狩初至成都，前望大桥，上举鞭问左右： 是桥何名？ 
现代文：安史乱起西行刚来到成都，前面有座大桥，皇上举着马鞭子问左右的人， 这桥叫什么名子？ 
English: Just after arriving in Chengdu, there was a bridge in front of him. The emperor held up a horse whip and asked the people around him, "What is the name of this bridge?"

古文：节度崔圆跃马前进曰： 万里桥。 
现代文：节度使崔圆打马上奏说： 这桥叫万里桥。 
English: Cui Yuanda was so impressed that he immediately said: This bridge is called Wanli Bridge.

古文：上因追叹曰： 一行之言，今果符之，吾无忧矣。 
现代文：皇上就追忆慨叹地说： 一行大师的话，今天果然应验了，我没有忧虑了。 
English: The emperor recalled and said with a sigh, "The words of the great masters have come true today. I am no longer worried."

古文：唐肃宗
现代文：唐肃宗
English: Tang Su Zong

古文：肃宗在东都，为李林甫所构，势几危者数矣，无何，鬓发斑白。
现代文：肃宗在东都时，被李林甫所陷害，情势多次都很危险。很短时间，愁得两鬓都长出了白发。
English: When Su Zong was in Dongdu, he was framed by Li Linfu, and the situation was very dangerous many times. For a short time, he was so worried that his hair turned white on both sides.

古文：常早朝，上见之愀然曰： 汝疾归院，吾当幸汝。 
现代文：有一次上早朝时，皇上看见他就神色骤变说： 你有病就回宫院休养吧，我下朝后就去看你。 
English: Once, in the early morning, when the Emperor saw him, he suddenly changed his expression and said, "If you are ill, go back to the Imperial Palace to recuperate. I will come to see you in the morning."

古文：及上至，顾见宫中庭宇不洒埽，乐器屏帏，尘埃积其间，左右使令，无有女妓。
现代文：等皇上到了宫院，环视宫中庭院打扫得很不干净，乐器、屏风、帏帐等都积满了尘土，左右使用的人，连一个女子都没有。
English: When the emperor arrived at the Imperial Palace, he looked around the courtyard of the palace, which was not very clean. Musical instruments, screens, bank accounts, etc. were all covered with dust. There was not even a woman who used them.

古文：上为动容，顾谓力士曰： 太子居如此，将军盍使我闻乎？
现代文：皇上为此很生气，回头对力士说： 太子住的地方条件这样差，你为什么不禀告我。 
English: The emperor was very angry about this and turned to the wrestler and said, "The conditions where the prince lives are so bad, why don't you sue me?"

古文：力士奏曰： 臣尝欲上言，太子不许。
现代文：力士回答说： 我曾将想要禀告皇上，可是太子不允许。
English: The wrestler replied, "I tried to tell the emperor about it, but he wouldn't allow it.

古文：云： 无以动上念。  
现代文：他说： 不要惊动皇上，使皇上挂念。  
English: He said, "Don't alarm the emperor, don't worry him.

古文：上即诏力士，下京兆尹，亟选人家子女颀长洁白者五人，将以赐太子。
现代文：皇上就下诏书给力士，让他到京兆尹赶紧挑选老百姓家的、长得细高洁白女子五个人赐给太子。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to the wrestler, ordering him to go to Jingzhoyin and quickly select five tall, white women from the common people to give to the prince.

古文：力士趋去，复还奏曰： 臣他日尝宣旨京兆，阅致子女。
现代文：力士刚要走，又返回来告诉皇上说： 我过去曾经到京兆尹宣旨，挑选标致的女子，却闹得百姓喧哗吵闹。
English: Just as the wrestler was about to leave, he came back and told the emperor, "In the past, I used to go to Jingzhaoyun to make an announcement and choose a beautiful woman, but the people made a lot of noise.

古文：人间嚣嚣，而朝廷好言事者，得以为口实。
现代文：而朝中有些好说三道四的人，知道了这件事，也要把这作为借口。
English: On the other hand, some people in the DPRK and China who are fond of gossiping will use this as an excuse when they find out about this.

古文：臣以为掖庭令，故衣冠以事没入其家者，宜可备选。 
现代文：我认为就在宫嫔居住的庭院中，选些过去做官而后被没收的人家的。 皇上很高兴。
English: I think that in the courtyard where the Empress Dowager lives, they have selected the homes of people who used to be government officials and were later confiscated.

古文：上大悦，使力士诏掖庭令，按籍阅视，得三人，乃以赐太子，而章敬吴皇后在选中。
现代文：就叫力士告诉掖庭令，按人口簿子进行挑选。选出三人，就赐给了太子，结果章敬吴皇后就是这次被选的一人。
English: He asked the wrestlers to tell the court to make a selection according to the population book. Three people were selected and given the crown prince. As a result, Empress Zhang Jingwu was the one who was selected this time.

古文：顷之，后侍寝，厌不寤，吟呼若有痛，气不属者。
现代文：过些时候，吴皇后陪肃宗睡觉，她感到很满足，老是睡不醒，还发出一呻吟呼喊的声音，好象还很痛苦的样子，呼吸很困难。
English: After some time, Empress Wu accompanied Su Zong to sleep, she felt very satisfied, always could not wake up, and also made a moaning and shouting sound, as if she was still in pain, breathing was very difficult.

古文：肃宗呼之不解，窃自计曰： 上赐我，卒无状不寤，上安知非吾护视不谨耶？ 
现代文：肃宗喊叫他，但仍不醒。肃宗就暗自盘算着，皇上把她赐给了我，可是竟然没有什么原因，老也睡不醒，皇上怎么知道不是我照顾的不好呢？
English: Su Zong called out to him, but he still did not wake up. Su Zong secretly calculated that the emperor had given her to me, but there was no reason for it, he could not wake up. How did the emperor know that I was not taking good care of her?

古文：遽秉烛视之，良久乃寤。
现代文：就急忙拿着蜡烛去看她。好长时间才醒过来。
English: I rushed to see her with a candle. It took me a long time to wake up.

古文：肃宗问之，后手掩其左胁曰： 妾向梦中，有神人长丈余，介金甲而操剑，顾谓妾曰： 帝命吾与汝为子。 
现代文：肃宗就问她是什么原因，吴皇后用手捂着左胁说： 我是在做梦。有个神人有一丈多高，穿着金甲拿着宝剑，看着我，对我说： 上天命令我做你的儿子。 
English: Su Zong asked her what the reason was. Empress Wu put her hand on her left shoulder and said, "I am dreaming. There is a god-man who is as tall as I am, wearing a golden armor and holding a sword. He looked at me and said, "Heaven has ordered me to be your son."

古文：自左胁剑决而入，痛殆不可忍，及今尚未之已也。 
现代文：就把宝剑从我的左胁刺进去，我痛的实在不能忍受。到现在疼痛还没有停止。 
English: I stabbed the sword through my left temple. I couldn't bear the pain. It still hasn't stopped.

古文：肃宗检之于烛下，则若有綖而赤者存焉，遽以状闻，遂生代宗，代宗之载生三日也，上幸东宫，赐之金盆，命以浴。
现代文：肃宗就在蜡烛下检查了吴皇后的左胁，看到有一块象皇冠上的装饰的红布那样印在那上面，急忙把这种情况上奏了皇上。
English: Under the candle, Su Zong inspected the left hand rail of Empress Wu, saw a piece of red cloth printed on it like the decoration on the crown, and hurriedly reported the situation to the emperor.

古文：吴皇后年弱，皇孙龙体未舒，负妪惶惑，乃以宫中诸王子，同日诞而体貌丰硕者以进。
现代文：后来吴皇后就生下了代宗。代宗出生的第三天，皇上来到东宫赐给了吴皇后一个金盆，并叫她用金盆给代宗洗澡。这时吴皇后身体很弱，而代宗的身体还没有舒展开，负责侍奉的老婆婆十分惊慌，就把宫中各位王子以及和代宗同一天出生的而身体相貌都很丰满健康的抱来献给皇上。
English: Later, Empress Wu gave birth to Daizong. On the third day of Daizong's birth, the emperor came to the East Palace to give Empress Wu a gold basin and asked her to use the gold basin to bathe Daizong. At that time, Empress Wu was very weak, and Daizong's body had not yet fully developed. The mother-in-law who was in charge of serving was very panicked, so she gave the princes in the palace and those who were born on the same day as Daizong and who were full of health to the emperor.

古文：上视之不乐，曰： 此儿非吾儿也。 负妪叩头具服。
现代文：皇上一看就很生气说： 这个小孩不是我的孙子。 
English: The emperor looked very angry and said: This child is not my grandson.

古文：上睨曰： 非尔所知，取吾儿来！ 
现代文：老婆婆连连叩头谢罪，皇上斜着眼睛看着她说： 这不是你所能知道的，快把我的孙子抱来。 
English: The old woman bowed her head repeatedly in thanks. The emperor looked at her with slanted eyes and said, "This is not something you can know. Quickly bring my grandson to me."

古文：于是以太子进见。
现代文：于是只好把太子抱来给皇上。
English: So she had no choice but to carry the prince to the emperor.

古文：上大喜，置诸掌内，向日视之，笑曰： 此儿福禄远过甚父。 
现代文：皇上一看特别高兴，用手托着太子，面向太阳看他，笑着说： 这个孩子的福禄远远地超过他的父亲。 
English: The emperor looked particularly happy, holding the prince in his arms, facing the sun to look at him, smiling and saying: This child's fortune far exceeds that of his father.

古文：上还宫，尽留内乐，谓力士曰： 比一殿有三天子，乐乎哉！
现代文：皇上回到宫里，对力士说： 这个殿里有三个天子，真是高兴啊！
English: When the emperor returned to the palace, he said to the wrestler: "I am so happy that there are three heavenly sons in this hall!

古文：可与太子饮乎。 
现代文：可以跟太子喝酒了。 
English: I can drink with the prince.

古文：唐武宗
现代文：唐武宗
English: Tang Wuzong

古文：唐会昌末年，武宗忽改御名为火下火。
现代文：唐朝会昌末年，武宗忽然间改他的名为炎。
English: At the end of the Tang Dynasty's Heichang period, Emperor Wu suddenly changed his name to "Flame."

古文：及宣宗以光王龙飞，于古文，光字实从烡焉。
现代文：赶到宣宗时用 光王 帝号登极。在古文字中，光字确实从烡而来。
English: When he arrived at Xuanzong, he used the imperial title of Guangwang to ascend to the throne. In ancient characters, the light character did indeed come from.

古文：噫，先兆之明若是耶。
现代文：哎！先兆竟能像这样明显吗！
English: Alas! can portents be as clear as this!

古文：唐宣宗
现代文：唐宣宗
English: Tang Xuan Zong

古文：唐宣宗在藩时，常从驾回，而误坠马，人不之觉。
现代文：唐宣宗在藩地时，曾跟着皇帝回京城，一次他不慎从马上掉下来，人们都没有发觉。
English: When Tang Xuan Zong was in the domain, he once followed the emperor back to Beijing. Once, he accidentally fell off his horse, but no one noticed.

古文：比二更，方能兴。
现代文：到了二更天，才苏醒过来。
English: It was two more days before he woke up.

古文：时天大雪，四顾悄无人声。
现代文：这时天正下着大雪，向四周看了看静悄悄的一个人也没有。
English: At this time, it was snowing heavily. Looking around, there was not a single person.

古文：上寒甚，会巡警者至，大惊。
现代文：他冷得厉害。
English: He was very cold.

古文：上曰： 我光王也，不悟至此，方困且渴，若为我求水。 
现代文：一会巡逻的人到了，非常惊讶，他说： 我是光王，不明白怎么会摔到这里，现在我又困又渴，你给我找点水。 
English: After a while the patrol man arrived, very surprised, he said: I am the king of light, I don't understand how I ended up here, now I am sleepy and thirsty, can you find me some water.

古文：警者即于旁近得水以进，遂委而去。
现代文：巡逻的人就在附近弄了些水献给了他，于是就离开了。
English: The patrol made some water nearby and gave it to him, then left.

古文：上良久起，举瓯将饮，顾瓯中水，尽为芳醪矣。
现代文：他很久才起来，举起盛水的瓯要喝，看见瓯中的水全都变成了芳香醇厚的美酒了。
English: After he had been up for a long time, he lifted up the jar of water to drink, and saw that the water in the jar had all turned into a fragrant, mellow wine.

古文：上喜，独自负，举一瓯，已而体微暖有力，步归藩邸，后遂即帝位。
现代文：他很高兴，独自一个将一瓯都喝了。不一会，觉得身体暖和浑身有劲，就走回了他分封的住所。
English: He was so happy that he drank the whole bottle all by himself. After a while, feeling warm and energetic, he walked back to his assigned residence.

古文：迎光王
现代文：迎光王
English: Welcome to the light king

古文：太子宾客卢真，有犹子，曾为沙门。
现代文：太子的宾客有个叫卢真的，他的侄儿曾是个和尚。
English: The prince's guest was a man named Lu Zhen, whose nephew had once been a monk.

古文：会昌中，沙汰归俗，荫补为光王府参军。
现代文：会昌年中期，被淘汰还俗。就补做了光王府的参军。
English: In the middle of the year of Huichang, he was eliminated and returned to secular life. He made up for the entry of Guangwangfu into the army.

古文：一日，梦前师至其家而问讯焉，卢则告卑官屑屑然，非其愿也，常思落发，再披缁褐。
现代文：一天，他梦见以前的师傅到他家里询问打听他的情况，他就告诉师傅说： 做了小小的官，不是我所愿意的，经常想念当和尚的生活，希望能再披上袈裟。 
English: One day, he dreamed that his former master came to his house to inquire about him. He told his master, "Being a minor official was not what I wanted. I often missed the life of a monk and hoped to be clothed in the robe again."

古文：师曰： 汝诚有是志，像教兴复，非晚也。 
现代文：师傅说： 你如果真的有这个志向，要兴复佛教，现在也不晚。 
English: The master said, "If you really have this aspiration, it's not too late to revive Buddhism.

古文：语未竟，俄四面见日月旌旆，千乘万骑，喧言迎光王即皇帝位。
现代文：话没说完，忽然看见四面有日月旌旗，还有上千辆车、上万骑着马的人，并大声宣告说：迎接光王做皇帝。
English: Before he had finished speaking, he suddenly saw the flags of the sun, moon and stars on all four sides, as well as thousands of cars and tens of thousands of people on horseback, and loudly announced: "Welcome the King of Light as emperor."

古文：未几，武帝崩，光王果即皇帝位。
现代文：没过多久，武帝死了，光王果然做了皇帝。
English: Not long after, Emperor Wu died, and Guangwang became emperor.

古文：至是竟符其事焉。
现代文：这竟然和梦中的事相符合的。
English: It actually matched up with what happened in the dream.

古文：唐懿宗
现代文：唐懿宗
English: Tang Yanzong

古文：唐懿宗器度沈厚，形貌瑰伟。
现代文：唐懿宗为人宽宏大量、沉稳、厚道，长得也很漂亮高大。
English: Tang Yanzong was a magnanimous, calm and kind person. He was also tall and handsome.

古文：在藩邸时，疾疹方甚，而郭淑妃见黄龙出于卧内。上疾稍退，妃具以状告，上曰： 无泄是言，贵不相忘。 
现代文：他在分封的住处时，得了麻疹，病得很厉害。郭淑妃看见一条黄龙从他的卧室里出来，等皇上的病痛稍微减轻的时候，淑妃就把这件事全告诉了他。他说： 不要把这些话泄露出去，将来不会忘记你。 
English: When he was in the residence of the emperor, he got measles and was very ill. Guo Shufei saw a yellow dragon come out of his bedroom. When the emperor's illness eased slightly, Shufei told him all about it. He said, "Don't leak these words, I won't forget you in the future."

古文：更尝大雪盈尺，而上寝室辄无分寸，诸王见者无不异之。大中末，京城小儿，叠布蘸水。向日张之，谓捩晕。
现代文：一次曾经下了一尺多厚的大雪，而他的寝室却一点也没有，各位王子们见了也都感到有些奇怪，大中末年的时候，京城里的小孩们都把布叠起来蘸上水，然后再把它打开让太阳照射，还说这种法叫做 捩晕 。
English: There was a time when a foot of snow fell, but his bedroom was completely empty. The princes all felt a bit strange when they saw it. In their late teens and twenties, children in the capital would fold up a cloth, douse it with water, and then open it to let the sun shine in. They also said that this method was called "dazzling."

古文：及上自郓王即位，捩晕之言应矣。
现代文：等到他从郓王而即位的时候，捩晕的说法就应验了。
English: By the time he ascended the throne from the king of Shao, the statement of Shao Zhou came true.

古文：宣宗制《泰边陲曲》，撰其词云： 海岳晏咸通 ，上垂拱而号咸通。
现代文：宣宗写了个《泰边陲曲》，写的词说： 海岳晏咸通。 他就垂衣拱手起了年号叫咸通。
English: Xuan Zong wrote a "Thai Border Trilogy," and the words he wrote said: "Haiyue  Hamdong." He then hung up his robe and raised his hand to call the year Hamdong.

古文：上仁孝之道，出于天性。
现代文：他的仁慈孝敬之道，是他的天性决定的。
English: His benevolence and filial piety are determined by his nature.

古文：郑太后厌代，而蔬素悲毁，同士人之礼。
现代文：然而郑太后厌恶他取代尊位，待他很平常，象对士人一般。
English: However, Empress Dowager Zheng detested him for taking her place and treated him normally, as if he were a commoner.

古文：公卿奉慰者，无不动容。唐僖宗
现代文：公卿大臣辅佐他的都感到气愤不平。唐僖宗
English: The ministers of state who assisted him were furious. Tang Xizong was furious.

古文：唐丞相陇西公李蔚建大旆于广陵日，时咸通十二年也。
现代文：唐丞相陇西公李蔚建，在广陵挂起旌旗时，当时正是咸通十二年。
English: When Li Wei Jian, the Tang chancellor of the Western Han Dynasty, hoisted the national flag at Guangling, it was the twelfth year of Hamdang.

古文：泗州状言：有女僧二人，至普光寺，将祈礼者，睢盱顾视，如病风狂，云： 后二年，国有变乱，此寺大圣和尚，当履宝位。 
现代文：泗州有状子说：有两个女僧，到普光寺，对一些祈祷礼拜的人都张目环视，就象得了疯狂病似的说： 后二年国家将有变乱，这个寺的大圣和尚当登上宝位。 
English: Zhangzhou Youzhenzi said: There were two female monks who came to Fuguang Temple and looked around with wide-open eyes at some people who were praying and worshiping. They said as if they had a crazy disease: In the next two years, the country will be in turmoil, and the great saint and monk of this temple should ascend to the throne.

古文：循廊喧叫，聚人甚众，不迹其来。
现代文：一边说一边沿着走廊喧叫，围观的人聚集了很多，谁也不知道她们是从哪来的。
English: As they talked and shouted along the corridor, a large crowd of onlookers gathered, none of whom knew where they had come from.

古文：释徒大恐，且欲拘縻之际，则齐登峻塔，投身而下。
现代文：僧徒们非常害怕，正想要拘囚捆绑她们的时候，二个女僧就一齐登上了峻塔，从上面跳了下去。
English: The monks were very frightened, and just as the guards were about to tie them up, the two nuns climbed the steep tower together and jumped off.

古文：其一不救，其一坠伤，狂痛昏迷，诘问不获。
现代文：其中一个摔死了，另一个摔伤了，疼痛得昏迷了过去，问她什么，她也不说。
English: One of them fell to his death, the other was injured and went into a coma from the pain. If you asked her anything, she wouldn't tell you.

古文：丞相立命焚其状，仍牒州杖杀之。
现代文：丞相立即命令把那状子烧了。还通牒州里把摔伤的女僧打死。
English: The chancellor immediately ordered that the child be burned. He also ordered that the injured female monk be beaten to death.

古文：至十四年，果懿皇晏驾。
现代文：到了咸通十四年的时候，果然懿宗皇帝驾崩。
English: When it came to the fourteenth year of Hamdang, Emperor Yeongjong died.

古文：八月，僖宗即位，乃是普王。
现代文：八月，僖宗登上了皇位。这就是普王。
English: In August, Emperor Gojong ascended the throne. This is King Gojong.

古文：李邰
现代文：李邰
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：唐李邰为贺州刺史，与妓人叶茂莲江行。因撰《骰子选》，谓之叶子。
现代文：唐朝李邰做贺州刺史，和一个叫叶茂莲的妓女在江上游玩，撰写了《骰子选》取名 叶子 。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Li Qian made the history of Hezhou embroidery, and played with a prostitute named Ye Maolian on the river, and wrote the "Embroidery Selection" named Ye Zi.

古文：咸通以来，天下尚之，殊不知应本朝年祚。
现代文：咸通以来，天下太平，谁也不知道这个 叶子 应验了本朝的年数。
English: Since Hamdang Tong, the world has been at peace, and no one knows how many years this leaf has fulfilled this dynasty.

古文：正体书叶字，廿世木子，自武德至天祐，恰二十世。
现代文：正体写 叶 字，是 廿世木 。从武德到天祐年，正好是二十代。
English: The Chinese character for "leaf" is "Twentieth Generation Tree." From Wu De to Tian You Nian, there are exactly twenty generations.

古文：后唐太祖
现代文：后唐太祖
English: Emperor Taizu of the Later Tang Dynasty

古文：后唐太祖，在姙十三月而生。
现代文：后唐太祖，他的母亲怀了他十三个月才生。
English: His mother was pregnant with him for thirteen months before he was born.

古文：载诞之夕，母后甚危，令族人市药于雁门。
现代文：在出生的当天黄昏，他的母亲很危险，就叫家族里的人去雁门买药。
English: At dusk on the day of his birth, his mother was in danger, so she called the family members to go to Yanmen to buy medicine.

古文：遇神人，教以率部人，被介持旄，击钲鼓，跃马大噪，环所居三周而止，果如所教而生。
现代文：这时族人遇见了一个神人，告诉他回去带领部下的人，披着甲衣，拿着旗帜，敲打着乐器和战鼓，骑着马大喊大叫的围着产妇所住的房子跑三圈就停下来。
English: At this time, the tribesmen met a godman and told him to go back and lead his men, wearing armor, holding flags, beating musical instruments and war drums, riding horses and shouting, around the house where the mother lived and run three laps and stop.

古文：是时虹光烛室，白气充庭，井水暴溢，及能言，喜道军旅。
现代文：族人果然象神人所告诉的那样去做了，接着太祖也就降生了。那时虹光照亮了室内；白色的气体充满了庭院，井里的水瀑涨外流。等到太祖能说话的时候，就喜欢谈论一些有关军事上的事。
English: The people did as the man of God told them, and then the patriarch was born. At that time, the rainbow light illuminated the room; white gas filled the courtyard, the waterfall in the well rose and flowed out. When the patriarch could speak, he liked to talk about some military matters.

古文：年十二三，善骑射。
现代文：到了十二三岁的时候，他就善于骑马射箭。
English: By the time he was 12 or 13, he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：曾于新城北，酒酹于毗沙门天王塑像，请与交谈。
现代文：曾经在新城北，把酒倒在毗沙门天王塑像上，请求和他交谈。
English: Once, in the northern part of Xincheng, he poured wine on the statue of King Vishamen and asked to talk to him.

古文：天王被甲持矛，隐隐出于壁间，所居帐内，时有火聚，或有龙形，人皆异之。尝随火征庞勋，临阵出没如神，号为龙虎子。
现代文：天王披着凯甲拿着长矛，隐隐约约地出现在墙壁上。他所住的帐内大火聚拢，好象是龙的形状，人们都非常奇怪，他曾经随着去急速征讨庞勋，临阵时神出鬼没，被称做龙虎子。
English: The King of Heaven, clad in armor and holding a spear, looms on the wall. The fire inside the tent where he lives seems to be in the shape of a dragon, and people are very strange. He once went on a rapid campaign to recruit soldiers, and when he was on the verge of battle, he appeared out of nowhere and was called the Dragon Tiger.

古文：后唐明宗
现代文：后唐明宗
English: Later Tang Dynasty Ming Dynasty

古文：后唐明宗皇帝微时，随蕃将李存信巡边，宿于雁门逆旅。
现代文：后唐明宗皇帝未显贵时，跟随分封地大将李存信巡逻边境，住在了雁门的旅馆里。
English: When Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty was not yet eminent, he followed the feudal general Li Cunxin to patrol the border and stayed in a hotel in Yanmen.

古文：逆旅媪方姙，帝至，不时具食。
现代文：旅馆里的女主人正怀孕，明宗到时，女主人没有准备酒饭。
English: The hostess at the hotel was pregnant, and when she arrived, she had not prepared any food or drink.

古文：腹中儿语谓母曰： 天子至，速宜具食。 
现代文：腹中的胎儿就对他母亲说： 天子到了，应赶快准备酒饭。 
English: The fetus in the womb said to his mother: "The heavenly son has arrived, you should quickly prepare food and drink.

古文：声闻于外。
现代文：声音在外面都能听到。
English: The noise could be heard outside.

古文：媪异之，遽起亲奉庖爨，敬事尤谨。
现代文：女主人认为很奇怪，就急忙起来亲自到厨房里做饭，而且还特别恭敬小心的侍奉。
English: The hostess thought it was very strange, so she hurried to the kitchen to prepare the meal herself, and she was particularly respectful of the careful waiter.

古文：帝以媪前倨后恭，诘之，曰： 公贵不可言也。 
现代文：明宗因为女主人先傲慢而后又谦恭，就追问她是什么原因，女主人说： 你是大福大贵的人啊。 
English: Because the mistress was first arrogant and then humble, Mingzong asked her what the reason was. The mistress said: You are a very fortunate person.

古文：问其故，具道娠子腹语事。
现代文：又问她是怎么知道的，女主人就把肚子里怀的孩子说话的事全部都说了出来。
English: He asked her how she knew, and she told him everything about the baby in her womb.

古文：帝曰： 老妪逊言，慎吾辱耳。 
现代文：明宗说： 老太婆，你这样恭顺着说，是怕我屈辱你罢了。 
English: Mingzong said, "Old woman, you are only obediently saying this because you are afraid that I will humiliate you.

古文：后果如言。
现代文：后来果然象女主人说的那样，明宗做了皇帝。
English: It was later fulfilled.

古文：潞王
现代文：潞王
English: The King of Worms

古文：清泰之在岐阳也，有马步判官何某，年逾八十，忽暴卒。
现代文：清泰在岐阳的时候，有个姓何的马步判官，年龄已超过八十岁了，一天忽然死了，复苏后说有一个使者把他拘系去了。
English: When Qing Tai was in Qiyang, there was a magistrate named He Ma Bu, who was over eighty years old. He died suddenly one day. After he recovered, he said that a messenger had taken him into custody.

古文：云有使者拘录，引出，冥间见阴君曰： 汝无他过，今放汝还。
现代文：引着他到阴曹地府去见阎王，阎王说： 你没有什么过错，现在就把你放回去。
English: They led him to the underworld to see the king of hell. The king of hell said, "You have done nothing wrong, now you can go back."

古文：与吾言于潞王曰： 来年三月，当帝天下。 
现代文：替我对潞王说： 来年三月，他可当天下的皇帝。 
English: I said to Shao Wang: Next March, he can become the emperor of the same day.

古文：可速返，达吾之旨。 
现代文：你可以赶快回去，转告我的旨意。 
English: You can hurry back and tell them what I want.

古文：言讫引出，使者送归。
现代文：说完就把他带出地府，使者把他送了回去。
English: Having said this, they took him out of the underworld, and the messenger sent him back.

古文：及苏，遂以其事密白王之左右，咸以妖妄而莫之信，由是不得闻于王。
现代文：等苏醒过来，就把去地府的事偷偷地告诉了潞王身边的人，人们都认为是妖言胡说没有人相信，所以没有人向潞王说起这件事。
English: When he woke up, he secretly told the people around the skull king about going to the underworld. People all thought it was nonsense, and no one believed it, so no one told the skull king about it.

古文：月余，又暴卒入冥，复见阴君。
现代文：一个多月后，何某又突然死了，到了地府又见到了阎王。
English: More than a month later, He suddenly died again, and when he arrived at the underworld, he saw the king of hell.

古文：阴君怒而责之曰： 何故受吾教而竟不能达耶？ 
现代文：阎王气愤并责备他说： 为什么接受了我的教导而又不能替我转达呢？ 
English: Yan Wang was furious and scolded him: "Why did you accept my teaching but couldn't convey it for me?

古文：徐曰： 放汝去，可速导吾言，仍请王画吾形及地藏菩萨像。 
现代文：又轻声地说： 放你回去，可赶快传我的话给潞王。还要请潞王给我和地藏的菩萨画像。 
English: He also said softly, "Let you go back, so that you can quickly convey my words to the king, and also ask the king to give me the Bodhisattva image that is hidden in the ground."

古文：何惶恐而退。
现代文：何某惶恐不安的退了出来。
English: He backed out with trepidation.

古文：见其庭院廊庑之下，簿书杂乱，吏胥交横。何问之，使者曰： 此是朝代将变，升降去留，将来之官爵也。 
现代文：看见那庭院廊庑的下面，书簿乱七八糟的堆放着，还有一些小官吏们骄横地站在那里，何某就问是怎么回事，使者告诉他说： 这是朝代要改变了，升降去留都是将来的官爵啊。 
English: Seeing the books piled up in disarray under the verandah of the courtyard, and some petty officials standing there arrogantly, he asked what was going on. The messenger told him: This is the dynasty that needs to be changed, and those who rise and fall and stay are all future officials.

古文：及再活，托以词讼见王。
现代文：等何某再次活过来，就假借说要打官司见潞王。
English: When he came back to life, he said he wanted to sue the king.

古文：及见之，且曰： 某有密事上白。 
现代文：等见到了潞王，又说： 我有秘密的事告诉你。 
English: When he saw the king, he said, "I have a secret to tell you."

古文：王因屏左右问之，备述所见，王未之信。
现代文：潞王就让左右的人退避，然后就问他，何某就把去地府的事详细地告诉了潞王。潞王不相信。
English: The king asked the people around him to move away, and then asked him why he told the king in detail about going to the underworld. The king did not believe him.

古文：何曰： 某年逾八十，死在旦夕，岂敢虚妄也。 
现代文：何某说： 我已是八十多岁的人了，死就是眼前的事，怎么敢胡乱说呢。 
English: He said, "I am an octogenarian, and death is just around the corner. How dare you say such nonsense?"

古文：王默遣之。
现代文：潞王就默默地把他打发走了。
English: The king sent him away in silence.

古文：来春，果下诏攻岐阳，唯何叟独喜，知其必验。
现代文：来年春天，果然皇帝下诏书命令攻打岐阳，这时只有姓何的老头独自高兴，知道阎王的话一定应验了。
English: In the spring of the following year, the emperor issued an edict ordering the attack on Qiyang. At that time, only the old man surnamed He was happy alone, knowing that the king's words must have come true.

古文：至期，何叟之言，毫发无差矣。
现代文：到了日期，姓何的老头所说的话丝毫也不差，清泰果真当了皇帝。
English: When the date arrived, what the old man surnamed He said was not bad at all, and Qing Tai really became the emperor.

古文：清泰即位，擢何叟为天兴县令。
现代文：就封何老头为天兴县令。
English: He was appointed as the Tianxing County magistrate.

古文：固知冥数前定，人力其能遏之乎。
现代文：因此说人的寿考和显卑都是天意所定，哪里是人的力量所能阻止的呢？
English: Therefore, it is said that people's longevity and inferiority are determined by providence, where is the power of man to stop it?

古文：晋高祖
现代文：晋高祖
English: Jin Gao Zu

古文：清泰中，晋高祖潜龙于并部也。
现代文：清泰中，晋高祖在并部还没有得到帝位。
English: In the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Emperor Gaozu had not yet ascended the throne at the time of the merger.

古文：常一日从容谓宾佐云： 近因昼寝，忽梦若顷年在洛京时，与天子连镳于路。过旧第，天子请某入其第。
现代文：曾有一天，他很舒缓的、慢慢的对辅佐他的官吏们说： 近来白天睡觉，忽然梦见若干年前在洛阳时，我和天子坐在一辆车上在路上走，路过了他过去的住宅，天子就让我进去。
English: One day, he was very relaxed and slowly said to the officials who assisted him: Recently, I have been sleeping during the day, and suddenly dreamed that several years ago, when I was in Luoyang, I was sitting in a car with Tianzi on the road, passing by his former residence, and Tianzi let me in.

古文：其逊让者数四，不得已，即促辔而入。
现代文：他再三再四的谦让，没有办法，就只好提马进去了。
English: He repeatedly made concessions, but there was nothing he could do, so he had to take the horse in.

古文：至厅事下马，升自阼阶，西向而坐。天子已驰车去矣。 
现代文：到了厅前下马，我走上了东边的台阶，面向西坐下，这时天子已经赶着车走了。
English: When I got to the front of the hall, I got off the horse, walked up the east steps, faced west and sat down. By this time, Tenzin had already driven away.

古文：其梦如此，群僚莫敢有所答。
现代文：那个梦就是这样。 下属的官吏们没有一个敢说什么的。
English: The dream was just like that, and none of the subordinate officials dared to say anything.

古文：是年冬，果有鼎革之事。
现代文：这年冬天，果然就发生了改权变政的事。
English: This winter, the change of power really happened.

古文：伪蜀主舅
现代文：伪蜀主舅
English: The False Uncle of Shu

古文：伪蜀主之舅，累世富盛，于兴义门造宅。
现代文：伪蜀主的舅舅，世代富足昌盛。在兴义门建造了一处深宅大院。
English: The uncle of the pseudo-Shu Lord, who was rich and prosperous for generations, built a mansion complex at Xingyi Gate.

古文：宅内有二十余院，皆雕墙峻宇，高台深池，奇花异卉，丛桂小山，山川珍物，无所不有。
现代文：宅内有二十多所院落，房屋和墙壁全都用彩画装饰着。宅院里有高台深池、奇花异草，丛桂小山、山川珍物，真是无所不有。
English: There are more than twenty courtyards in the house, and the houses and walls are all decorated with paintings. There are high-level deep pools, strange flowers and grasses, cinnamon hills, and mountain and river curiosities in the courtyard. It really has everything.

古文：秦州董城村院，有红牡丹一株，所植年代深远，使人取之，掘土方丈，盛以木柜，自秦州至成都，三千余里，历九折、七盘、望云、九井、大小漫天，隘狭悬险之路，方致焉。
现代文：他叫人把它取回来，于是就挖了一丈多深的土才挖了出来。就用木柜装着，从秦州运到成都，有三千多里的路程，经过了九折、七盘、望云、九井等险要狭窄而又极为漫长的路，最后才运到了城都，就把它种在了新的宅第。
English: He asked someone to retrieve it, so he dug a very deep hole in the ground to dig it out. He put it in a wooden cabinet and transported it from Qinzhou to Chengdu, a journey of more than three thousand miles, passing through Jiufen, Qipan, Wangyun, Jiujing and other narrow and extremely long roads. Finally, he transported it to the city and planted it in a new house.

古文：乃植于新第，因请少主临幸。
现代文：便请少主来欣赏。少主感叹宅的建筑结构如此的豪华美丽，就和宫室差不多。
English: The young master exclaimed that the building structure of the house was so luxurious and beautiful that it was almost the same as the palace.

古文：少主叹其基构华丽，侔于宫室，遂戏命笔，于柱上大书一 孟 字，时俗谓孟为不堪故也。
现代文：接着就提起笔来，在柱子上大大的写了一个 孟 字。当时人们都说： 孟 字是不能忍受的意思。
English: Then he picked up his pen and wrote a big "Meng" on the pillar. At that time, people said: "Meng" means "unbearable."

古文：明年蜀破，孟氏入成都，据其第。
现代文：第二年蜀被打败，孟氏进入了城都，占据了那个宅第。
English: The next year, Shu was defeated, and the Mengs entered the capital and occupied the house.

古文：忽睹楹间有绛纱笼，迫而视之，乃一 孟 字。
现代文：忽然看见柱子上有红纱笼罩着，走到跟前一看，却是一个 孟 字。
English: Suddenly, he saw a pillar covered with red gauze. When he walked up to it, he saw the word "Meng."

古文：孟曰： 吉祥也，吾无易此居。 
现代文：孟氏说： 真是吉祥啊，我不能变换这个住处了。 
English: Mr. Meng said, "It's so auspicious. I can't change this place.

古文：孟之有蜀，盖先兆也。
现代文：孟氏得蜀，原来是有先兆的。
English: Meng's rise to power was foreshadowed.

