古文：何伯祥，易州易县人。
现代文：何伯祥，易州易县人。
English: He Boxiang, from Yizhou County.

古文：幼从军于金，从张柔来归。
现代文：自幼服役于金军中，后随张柔归附于蒙古军。
English: He served in the Golden Army from a young age, and later joined the Mongolian Army with Zhang Rong.

古文：太祖定河朔，惟保定王子昌、信安张进坚守不下。
现代文：太祖平定河朔，唯保定之王子昌、信安之张进坚守，蒙古军未攻下。
English: Taizu pacified Heshaku, only Baoding's Prince Chang and Nobuyasu's Zhangjin held out, and the Mongolian army did not conquer them.

古文：子昌，金骁将也，柔命伯祥取之。
现代文：子昌是金朝一员骁将，张柔命伯祥攻打。
English: Zichang was a great general in the Kim dynasty, and Zhang Rongmei attacked Baoxiang.

古文：兵逼其城，子昌出走，追及之，伯祥执枪驰马，子昌反射之，中手而贯枪，伯祥拔矢弃枪，策马直前，徒手搏之，擒子昌。进闻之，亦遁去。
现代文：伯祥兵逼保定城，王子昌弃城逃走，伯祥追赶，遭子昌回箭射中。伯祥拔矢弃枪与子昌徒手搏斗，生擒子昌。张进闻王子昌战败，也弃城逃跑。
English: Bo Xiang's soldiers forced Baoding City, Prince Chang abandoned the city and fled, Bo Xiang chased and was shot by Zichang's return arrow. Bo Xiang pulled the arrow and abandoned the gun and fought with Zichang with bare hands, and Zichang was born. Zhang Jin heard that Prince Chang was defeated and also abandoned the city and fled.

古文：伯祥遂攻西山诸寨，悉平之。后攻汴梁，拔洛阳，围归德，破蔡州，论功居多，授易州等处军民总管。
现代文：伯祥攻克西山诸寨，后又攻汴京，克洛阳，围归德，破蔡州，多立战功，授易州等处军民总管。
English: Bo Xiang conquered Xishan Zhuzhai, and then attacked Beijing, Klooyang, surrounded and returned to Germany, defeated Caizhou, made many war exploits, and awarded Yizhou and other military and civilian administrations.

古文：丁酉，从主帅察罕伐宋，伯祥拔三十余栅，获战舰千余艘，又破芭蕉、望乡、大洪、张家等寨，俘获甚众，器械山积。
现代文：太宗九年，随主帅察罕伐宋，伯祥攻拔三十余寨，缴获战舰千余艘。又攻破芭蕉、望乡、大洪、张家等寨，俘虏大批宋军，缴获军械堆积如山。
English: In the ninth year of Taizong's reign, he and his commanders, Chahan and Song, and Baoxiang, conquered more than 30 villages and captured more than 1,000 warships. They also conquered the villages of Basho, Wangxiang, Dahong, and Zhangjia, captured a large number of Song troops, and seized a huge amount of military equipment.

古文：察罕以其功闻，赐锦衣、金甲。
现代文：察罕上报其功，赐锦衣金甲。
English: Cahan reported his achievement and was awarded a gold medal.

古文：壬子，诸军入宋境，察罕自他道遽还，诸军仓皇失措，伯祥曰： 此必为敌所遏，不若出其不意，而遂深入其地，彼不我测，乃可出也。 
现代文：宪宗二年，蒙古诸军进入宋境，伯祥提出，乘敌人不备，深入其地。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, when the Mongolian armies entered the Song territory, Baoxiang proposed to take advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness and go deep into the territory.

古文：天将明，令士卒速行，而鸣鼓其后。
现代文：他自己率兵突然发起进攻，直抵司空寨。
English: He suddenly launched an attack with his own soldiers, and arrived directly at Si Kuzhai.

古文：宋兵果来追，伏发，惊骇溃去，追击，大破之，转战百余里，他军不能归者，皆赖以出。帝闻之，赐金二百两。
现代文：夜间以精兵埋伏于险要之地。天将明，令士卒急速前进，宋军果然追击，伏兵四起，大败宋军。宪宗闻知，赐伯祥金二百两。
English: At night, he lay in ambush in a dangerous place with his elite soldiers. As soon as it became clear that the day would come, he ordered his soldiers to advance rapidly, and the Song army successfully chased them, setting up four ambushes and defeating the Song army. He heard from the Emperor and gave him 200 taels of gold.

古文：世祖南伐，伯祥参预军事，多所献纳，卒于军。
现代文：世祖南伐，伯祥参预军机，卒于军中。
English: The ancestor of the Southern Expedition, Bo Xiang participated in the advance of the military aircraft, and died in the army.

古文：赠仪同三司、太保、上柱国，追封易国公，谥武昌。
现代文：赠仪同三司、太保、上柱国，追封易国公，谥忠毅。
English: The bestowal ceremony is the same as that of the three offices, Taiho, and Shangzhu, and is followed by the enthronement of Yi Guoguang and Zou Zhongyi.

古文：子玮。玮始袭父职，知易州。兄行军千户卒，玮复袭之，镇亳州。从围襄樊，宋将夏贵率舟师来救，玮时建营于城东北，当其冲。
现代文：何玮，何伯祥之子，承继父职为易州知州，随蒙古大军围攻襄樊时，宋将夏贵率水军来援救，何玮的军营位于城东北，首当其冲。
English: He Biao, the son of He Bo Xiang, succeeded his father as the ruler of Yizhou and Chizhou. When the Mongolian army besieged Xiangfan, Song general Xia Gui led the navy to come to the rescue. He Biao's military camp was located in the northeast of the city and took the brunt of the attack.

古文：贵兵纵火焚北关，遂进逼玮，万户脱因不花等呼玮入城，玮曰： 建功立业，此其时也，何避焉！ 
现代文：贵兵纵火烧毁北关，进逼何玮军营。万户脱因不花召玮退入城内，玮回答说： 建功立业正在此时，为何退避。 
English: The soldiers set fire to Beiguan and forced their way into He's army camp. When Wanhu Du did not invite him to retreat into the city, he replied, "This is the time to make achievements. Why did you retreat?"

古文：乃率其众，誓以死战，开营门，以身先之，贵败走。
现代文：率众誓死战斗。
English: He led his people in a fight to the death.

古文：至元十一年，丞相伯颜受命伐宋，辟玮为帐前都镇抚。
现代文：将夏贵军击溃。至元十一年，丞相伯颜受命伐宋，以何玮为帐前都镇抚。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the chancellor, Boyan, was ordered to attack the Song Dynasty, using Ho Ho as a pretext to pacify the capital.

古文：师次阳罗堡，夏贵率战舰列江上下，玮从元帅阿术，率众先渡，诸军继之，贵复败走。
现代文：大军至阳罗堡，夏贵率战舰封锁江面。玮在元帅阿术指挥下率所部先渡江，诸军随后，夏贵败走。
English: The large army reached Yangluo Fort, and Xia Gui led the warships to blockade the river. Zou, under the command of Marshal Ah Shu, led the troops to cross the river first, and then Xia Gui was defeated.

古文：宋丞相贾似道率舟师拒于丁家洲，玮将勇敢士出战，夺舟千余艘，似道遁去。授武德将军、管军总管，佩金虎符。
现代文：宋丞相贾似道率水军在丁家洲进行抵抗，玮率军出战，夺舟千余艘，贾似道逃跑，何玮因功授武德将军、管军总管，佩金虎符。
English: Song cheng Jia Liang Dao led the navy to resist in Dingjia Zhou, Zou led the army to fight, captured more than a thousand boats, Jia Liang Dao fled, He Ying was awarded the General of Martial Arts, the Chief of the Military Administration, and the Golden Tiger.

古文：宋既平，进怀远大将军、太平路军民达鲁花赤，俄升昭勇大将军、行户部尚书、两淮都转运使。
现代文：平宋之后，晋升为怀远大将军、太平路军民达鲁花赤，很快又升为昭勇大将军、行户部尚书、两淮都转运使。
English: After the Ping and Song dynasties, he was promoted to General Huaiyuan, the military and civilians of the Taiping Road were Daruhua and Red, and soon he was promoted to General Zhaoyong, Shangshu of the Household Department, and the two Huai were transferred.

古文：至元十八年，擢参议中书省事。
现代文：至元十八年，何玮提升为参议中书省事。
English: In the 18th year of the Yuan Dynasty, He Ying was promoted to the position of the councillor.

古文：二十年，擢为江浙按察使。
现代文：二十年，升为江南浙西道按察使。
English: Twenty years later, he was promoted to inspector of the West Zhejiang Province.

古文：二十二年，改大名路总管。
现代文：二十二年，改任大名路总管。
English: In 1922, he was appointed as the general manager of Daming Road.

古文：二十八年，迁湖南宣慰使。
现代文：二十八年，调湖南宣慰使。
English: In 1928, he was transferred to Hunan Province as a propaganda envoy.

古文：三十一年，拜中书参知政事。
现代文：三十一年，拜中书参知政事。
English: In the 31st year of his reign, Bai Zhongshu was appointed to the post of prefect.

古文：时宰执凡十一人，玮曰： 古者一相，专任贤也，今宰执员多，政出多门，转相疑忌，请损之。 
现代文：当时宰相共十一人，玮曰： 古时只有一个宰相，素以贤者任职，现在宰相多，政出多门，相互猜忌，请减少。 
English: At that time, there were eleven prime ministers in total, and Yu said: In the old days, there was only one prime minister, who used to be a wise man. Now there are many prime ministers, many governments, mutual suspicion, please reduce.

古文：不从，遂乞代。
现代文：此意见未被采纳，请求更换他自己职务。
English: This opinion was not accepted, and he requested to change his own position.

古文：大德四年，授侍御史，以母病辞。
现代文：大德四年，授侍御史，因母病辞职。
English: Dade served for four years and was awarded the title of Imperial Historian, but resigned due to her mother's illness.

古文：七年，授御史中丞，陈当世要务十条，成宗嘉纳之。
现代文：七年，授御史中丞，奏陈当时要务十条，成宗嘉奖并采纳了。
English: In the seventh year, he was awarded the title of Imperial Historian Junior High School, and he recited the ten important points at that time, and received the Chengzong Commendation.

古文：京师孔子庙成，玮言： 唐、虞、三代，国都、闾巷莫不有学，今孔庙既成，宜建国学于其侧。 
现代文：京师孔庙建成，何玮上书说： 唐、虞、三代，国都、闾巷都建有学校，今孔庙既成，应在其旁建立国学。 朝廷同意了。
English: When the Confucius Temple in Beijing was completed, He Zhen wrote: Tang, Yu and the three dynasties have built schools in the national capital and Xingxiang. Now that the Confucius Temple has been completed, it is necessary to establish a national school next to it. The imperial court agreed.

古文：从之。赛典赤、八都马辛等还自贬所，复相位，玮言： 奸党不可复用，宜选正人以居庙堂。 
现代文：赛典赤、八都马辛从被贬谪的地方回来恢复丞相之职。玮上书道： 奸党不可再用，应选正人在朝廷为官。 
English: Saiten Aka and Hachimatsu Masin returned from the place where they were demoted to restore the post of chancellor. On the letterhead: The traitor party can no longer be used, and a person of integrity should be elected to the imperial court.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：成宗深以为然。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：成宗崩，丞相阿忽台奉皇后旨，集廷臣议祔庙用摄政事，玮难之，阿忽台变色曰： 中丞谓不可行，独不畏死耶？ 众皆危惧，玮从容曰： 死畏不义耳，苟死于义，夫复何畏！ 未几，以疾去位。
现代文：监察御史郭章弹劾哈剌哈孙受赃，已完全服罪。但哈剌哈孙又暗中勾结权贵，诬告郭章是冤枉了他。玮率台臣陈奏皇上，辨清事实，使郭章免于诬陷之罪。九年，成宗崩，丞相阿忽台奉皇后懿旨，召集廷臣讨论将成宗列于祖庙附祭及仁宗代理朝政的事，何玮提出反对意见。阿忽台对他声色俱厉地说 ：中丞认为不可行，难道你不怕死？ 众皆畏惧，而玮从容回答说： 怕死就是不义，如果为义而死，又有何畏。 不久称病辞职。
English: Guo Zhang, the overseer of the imperial court, had already fully confessed his guilt. However, Guo Zhang had also colluded with the powerful to falsely accuse Guo Zhang of having wronged him. Guo Zhang led the Taiwanese minister Chen Suo to the emperor to clarify the facts and save Guo Zhang from the crime of false accusation. In nine years, when Cheng Zong passed away, the minister of justice, Ah Kuda, summoned the courtier to discuss the matter of listing Cheng Zong in the ancestral temple and acting as the representative of the imperial government, and he raised objections. Ah Kuda said to him with a loud voice: Zhongjo thinks it is impossible,

古文：武宗即位于上都，授太子副詹事，遣使促使就职，复遥授平章政事，商议中书省事。
现代文：武宗即位于上都，授何玮为太子副詹事，遣使催他就职，并遥授平章政事，商议中书省事。
English: Wuzong was located in Shangdu. He appointed He Zhen as the deputy of the crown prince Zhan, and sent an envoy to urge him to take office. He also conferred the title of Pingzhang on the political affairs, and discussed the provincial affairs.

古文：武宗至自上都，临朝，问曰： 孰为何中丞？ 
现代文：武宗从上都回到京师，临朝问谁是何中丞。玮出班拜见。
English: Emperor Wuzong returned to the capital from the capital, and Lin Chao asked who He Zhongzheng was. He said, "I'll see you after class."

古文：玮出拜，帝曰： 朕知卿能以忠直为国，朕有不逮，卿当勉辅。 
现代文：武宗道 ：朕知卿忠直为国，如朕有不到之处，卿当勉力辅佐。 
English: Emperor Wuzong said, "I know that you are loyal to the country. If there is anything I cannot do, you should try your best to help me."

古文：至大元年，迁太子詹事，兼卫率使。
现代文：至大元年，调任太子詹事，兼卫率使。
English: In the first year of the Taisho era, he was transferred to the position of Prince Zhanji, and also became the first envoy of the Imperial Guards.

古文：俄拜中书左丞，仍平章政事，商议中书省事。
现代文：很快就辞中书左丞，而仍为平章政事，商议中省事。
English: He soon resigned from the cabinet, but was still a member of the cabinet and was involved in deliberation and decision-making.

古文：未几，擢河南行省平章政事，佩金虎符，提调屯田事。
现代文：不久，升为河南行省平章政事，佩金虎符，主管屯田事务。
English: Soon, he was promoted to Henan Province, Pingzhang Political Affairs, Pei Jinhu Fu, in charge of tonden affairs.

古文：帝召至榻前，面谕曰： 汴省事重，屯田久废，卿当为国竭力。 
现代文：武宗召至床前面谕道： 汴省事重，且屯田久已废弛，卿当为国竭力。 
English: Wu Zong summoned him to his bedside and said, "The province is in a serious situation, and the garrison has long been abandoned. You should do your best for the country."

古文：赐黑貂裘一、锦衣二袭。
现代文：赐黑貂裘一套、锦衣二套。
English: Give me one set of black satin and two sets of brocade.

古文：玮至汴，建诸葛亮祠，立书院，以地三千亩赡之。
现代文：玮至汴后，建诸葛亮祠，设立书院，以地三千亩之租税作为书院经费。
English: After the reign of Zhuge Liang, Zhuge Liang's ancestral hall was built, a college was established, and the land tax of three thousand mu was used as the college's funds.

古文：三年，改河南行尚书省平章政事，卒。
现代文：三年，改任河南行尚书省平章政事，卒于官。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned to Henan Province, Shangshu Province, Pingzhang Province, and died in office.

古文：赠太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封梁国公，谥文正。
现代文：赠太傅、开府仪同三司、上柱国，追封梁国公，谥文正。
English: Taifu, Kaifu Yi, Sanji, Shangzhu Guo, Liang Guogong were given posthumous titles, and Wenzheng was conferred posthumous titles.

古文：金大安初，守贤暨兄庭植，弟守正、守忠，从兄伯通、伯温，归款于太师、国王木华黎，入朝太祖于行在所，即命庭植为龙虎卫上将军、右副元帅、崇义军节度使，守贤授锦州临海军节度观察使，弟守忠为都元帅，守河东。
现代文：李守贤，字才叔，大宁义州人。金大安初年，守贤及兄庭植，弟守正、守忠，堂兄伯通、伯温归附于太师、国王木华黎，在太祖行军驻所朝见。太祖命庭植为龙虎卫上将军、右副元帅、崇义军节度观察使，授守贤锦州临海军节度使，弟守忠为都元帅，守河东。
English: In the first year of the Jin Dynasty, Shou Xian and his brother Ting Zhi, his brothers Shou Zheng and Shou Zhong, and his cousins Bertong and Bo Wen were attached to the Grand Master and King Mu Huali, and met with the imperial court at the Taizu marching camp. Taizu Meiting Ting Zhi was the General of Longhu Wei, the Vice Marshal of the Right, and the Festival Observer of the Chongyi Army, awarded to Shou Xian, the Festival Ambassador of the Jin Province Navy, and his brother Shou Zhong was the Marshal of the Capital, guarding the east of the river.

古文：朝廷以全晋为要害之地，人心危疑未定，非守贤镇抚之不可，乃自锦州迁河东南路兵马都总管。
现代文：朝廷认为河东是要害之地，但其人心疑惧未定，非守贤去镇抚不可，于是从锦州调守贤为河东南路兵马都总管。
English: The imperial court believed that Hedong was a place of danger, but its people were doubtful and undecided, and it was necessary for Shouxian to pacify them. Therefore, Shouxian was transferred from Jinzhou to be the commander-in-chief of the southeastern road of Hedong.

古文：既至，河东人皆曰： 吾等可恃以生矣。 岁戊子，朝于和林，加金紫光禄大夫，知平阳府事，兼本路兵马都总管。庚寅，太宗南伐，道平阳，见田野不治，以问守贤，对曰： 民贫窘，乏耕具致然。 
现代文：太祖驾崩之后第二年，守贤至和林朝见摄政王拖雷，加官为金紫光禄大夫，知平阳府事，兼本路兵马都总管。太宗二年，蒙古军南伐，经过平阳，见田地荒芜，帝问守贤为何如此，守贤说 ：民贫穷，缺乏耕具，以致如此。 
English: In the second year after the death of his great-grandfather, Shou-Hsien and Lin Chao saw the regent, the king, dragging a mine. The regent was Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu, who was in charge of the government of Pingyang and was also the commander-in-chief of the troops and horses on this road. In the second year of Emperor Taizong, the Mongolian army was on the southern march, passing through Pingyang, and saw the fields were barren. The emperor asked Shou-Hsien why this was so. Shou-Hsien said, "The people are poor, and they lack farming tools, which has led to

古文：诏给牛万头，仍徙关中生口垦地河东。
现代文：诏令给牛万头，并令迁关中人民去开垦河东。
English: The imperial edict gave thousands of cattle, and ordered the people of Guanzhong to move to the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：辛卯，平阳当移粟万石输云中，守贤奏以 百姓疲敝，不任輓载， 帝嘉纳之。
现代文：三年，规定平阳向云中输粟万石。守贤见平阳百姓疲惫不堪，奏请免输，太宗采纳了他的建议。
English: In the third year, it was decided that Pingyang would lose millions of stone to Yunzhong. Shou Xian saw that the people of Pingyang were exhausted and asked to be exempted from losing, and Taizong accepted his suggestion.

古文：时河中未下，守贤建言，以为将士逗留沮挠，多所伤溺，臣请自北面凿城先登。
现代文：当时，河中尚未攻下，守贤认为若长期这样相持下去，将士多有伤亡，他请求自己从北面凿城先入。
English: At that time, the middle of the river had not yet been conquered, and Shou-Hsien thought that if this situation continued for a long time, there would be many casualties among the soldiers. He asked himself to enter the city first from the north.

古文：如其言，城果下，遂构浮桥。
现代文：采纳他的请求，该城果然被攻破。
English: Accepting his request, the city was indeed breached.

古文：明年，蒲津南济潼关。二月，大破赵雄兵于芮城。
现代文：第二年，自蒲津南渡黄河至潼关，二月，在芮城大破金将赵雄的军队。
English: In the second year, he crossed the Yellow River from the south of Puting to Shiguan, and in February, he defeated the army of the gold general Zhao Xiong in Shicheng.

古文：时方会师围汴，留守贤屯嵩、汝。
现代文：这时，蒙军正会师于汴京城下，而留守贤屯守嵩州、汝州。
English: At this time, the Mongolian army was assembling at the foot of the Shijing Castle, while the remaining Xianjun was guarding Songzhou and Ruzhou.

古文：金兵十余万，保少室山太平寨，守贤以三千人介其中，度其帅完颜延寿无守御之才，癸巳正月望夕，延寿击球为嬉，守贤潜遣轻捷者数十人，缘崖蚁附以登，杀其守卒，遂大纵兵入，破之，下令禁无抄掠，悉收余众以归。
现代文：金兵十余万，坚守少室山太平寨，守贤遣三千人入少室山，知道金主帅完颜延寿无守御之才，于太宗六年正月十五日夜，乘延寿玩球之时，潜遣数十人缘崖攀登而上，杀守兵，大军继入，破太平寨。守贤下令不准抢劫，将守寨的残兵余卒收编入蒙古军。
English: More than a hundred thousand gold soldiers held on to Taipingzhai of Shomuro Mountain, and Shou Xian sent three thousand men into Shomuro Mountain. Knowing that the leader of the gold army, Yan Yan Shou, had no ability to defend, on the night of the 15th day of the first month of the sixth year of Taizong, when Yan Yan Shou was playing ball, he sent dozens of people to climb up the cliff, kill the guards, and the large army followed and broke Taipingzhai. Shou Xian ordered that no robbery was allowed, and the remaining soldiers guarding the castle were incorporated into the Mongolian army.

古文：不两旬，连天、交牙、兰若、香炉诸寨，皆望风俱下，守贤未尝妄杀一人。
现代文：不过两旬，连天、交牙、兰若、香炉诸寨，相继归顺，守贤不曾妄杀一人。
English: However, in the second half of the year, Lian Tian, Jia Ya, Lan Ruo, and Incense Burner villages surrendered one after another, and Shou Xian never killed a single person.

古文：及攻河南，其渠魁强元帅者，以其众出奔，守贤追及，降之。
现代文：攻河南，金守将强元帅逃跑，为守贤追及，投降。
English: Attacking Henan Province, Marshal Jin Shou and Marshal Qiang fled, while Shou Xian pursued and surrendered.

古文：秦蓝帅王祐，聚众数万，据虢之南山，守贤使人责祐，祐素惮守贤威略，即以所部来附，关东、洛西遂定。
现代文：秦蓝帅王，拥兵数万，占据虢州之南山，他素来畏服守贤，率其部众归附，于是关东、洛西都为守贤平定。
English: King Qin Lan Shuai, supported by tens of thousands of soldiers, occupied the southern mountains of Zhangzhou. He had always been afraid of Shou Xian and led his troops to join him. As a result, Guandong and Laxi were both conquered by Shou Xian.

古文：甲午冬十月卒，年四十六。
现代文：太宗六年十月卒，年四十六岁。
English: Taizong passed away in October of the sixth year, at the age of 46.

古文：子彀嗣。
现代文：李彀，李守贤之子。
English: Li Xi, the son of Li Shouxian.

古文：岁丁酉，从太师塔海绀卜征蜀汉，有功。
现代文：太宗九年随太师塔海绀布征蜀汉。十年攻碉门。
English: In the 9th year of Taizong's reign, Taizong and his disciple Takaibao conquered Shuhan. In the 10th year, they conquered Yamen.

古文：彀谍知之，令众衔枚疾进，出其不意，贼兵败走，长驱至成都，破之。壬子，袭嘉定。
现代文：十一年克万州，会战于瞿塘，缴获战舰千余艘。十三年，授河东道行军万户兼总管。以后，由广元出葭萌，越木瓜坡，长驱入蜀，攻下成都。宪宗二年，袭击嘉定。
English: In the eleventh year of the reign of King Wanzhou, he fought in Shantang and captured more than a thousand warships. In the thirteenth year of the reign of King Zhihe, he was the host and commander-in-chief of the march of the army of 10,000 households. Later, he drove from Guangyuan to Shumeng, crossed Muguapo, and drove into Shu to capture Chengdu. In the second year of the reign of King Xianzong, he attacked Jiading.

古文：戊午秋，宪宗南伐。
现代文：宪宗八年，宪宗南伐。
English: In the eighth year of Kenzong, Kenzong went to the south.

古文：己未，入梁州，师次江上，造舟为梁，以通援兵，且断宋人往来之路。
现代文：九年，蒙军入渠州，进至江滨，造船为桥以便援兵通行，且阻止宋军通过。
English: In the ninth year, the Mongolian army entered Zhouzhou, advanced to the riverbank, built a bridge to allow reinforcements to pass, and prevented the Song Army from passing.

古文：会江涨，梁中绝，宋将率舟师万艘逆战，彀以一旅先犯之，诸军继进，遂破之。
现代文：长江水涨，浮桥中断，宋将以战舰万艘迎战，彀提一旅首先进攻，诸军继进，战败宋军。
English: The Yangtze River water rises, the pontoon bridge is interrupted, the Song Dynasty will meet the war with 10,000 warships, and a brigade will attack first. The armies will advance and defeat the Song Army.

古文：明日，帝召谓诸将曰： 汝辈平日自负鸷勇，及临敌，不能为朕立尺寸功。
现代文：第二天，宪宗对诸将说： 平时你们都自负英勇，临战不能为朕立尺寸之功。
English: The next day, Emperor Xianzong said to the generals: "In ordinary times, you are all proud of your bravery, but in the event of war, you cannot set a standard for me.

古文：独李彀身犯矢石，摧锋陷阵，视敌篾如。言勇者，如彀乃可耳。 
现代文：唯独李彀冒箭摧锋陷阵，蔑视敌人。要说英勇，像彀这样才是。 
English: Only Li Qiye defied the enemy and defied the enemy. To say that he was brave, it was only because he was like Yao.

古文：赐白金二百五十两。
现代文：赐白金二百五十两。
English: And he gave him two hundred and fifty and two talents of gold.

古文：子十一人。伯温，见《忠义传》。耶律阿海耶律阿海，辽之故族也。金桓州尹撒八儿之孙，尚书奏事官脱迭儿之子也。阿海天资雄毅，勇略过人，尤善骑射，通诸国语。
现代文：至元七年正月卒，年四十九岁。耶律阿海，原辽朝旧族，金朝桓州长官撒八儿之孙，尚书奏事官脱迭儿之子。阿海天资刚毅，勇谋过人，尤善于骑射，能通各国语言。
English: He died in the first month of the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, at the age of forty-nine. Jeru Ahai, a member of the former Liao Dynasty, the grandson of the governor of the Jin Dynasty, the grandson of the governor of the Han Dynasty, the son of the secretary of the Song Dynasty, the son of the secretary of the Song Dynasty, the son of the secretary of the Song Dynasty, the son of the secretary of the Song Dynasty, the son of the governor of the Han Dynasty, the son of the governor of the Jin Dynasty, the son of the governor of the Han Dynasty, the son of the governor of the Han Dynasty, the son of the governor of the Han Dynasty,

古文：金季，选使王可汗，见太祖姿貌异常，因进言： 金国不治戎备，俗日侈肆，亡可立待。 
现代文：金选派他出使王可汗，见太祖相貌不凡，进言道 ：金国不重军备，平时奢侈无度，不久即亡。 
English: Jin Xuan sent him as an envoy to Wang Khan, who, seeing the great-grandfather's extraordinary appearance, said: Jin Guo is not heavily armed, he is extravagant in ordinary times, and he will soon die.

古文：帝喜曰： 汝肯臣我，以何为信？ 
现代文：太祖问他： 你肯为我臣，以何为信？ 
English: The great-grandfather asked him, "What makes you so sure that you will be my vassal?"

古文：阿海对曰： 愿以子弟为质。 
现代文：阿海说： 愿以子弟做人质。 
English: And Achai said, Let me take my son as a hostage.

古文：明年，复出使，与弟秃花俱往，慰劳加厚，遂以秃花为质，直宿卫。阿海得参预机谋，出入战阵，常在左右。
现代文：第二年，金朝又派他出使蒙古，他与弟秃花同往，留秃花为人质，阿海得参与蒙古军机要之事，太祖东征西讨，他都不离左右。
English: The next year, the Kim dynasty sent him to Mongolia. He went with his brother, Bald Flower, and kept Bald Flower as a hostage. Ahide took part in the important affairs of the Mongolian military machine, the Great Ancestor's eastward and westward campaigns, and he never left his side.

古文：岁壬戌，王可汗叛盟，谋袭太祖。
现代文：金章宗泰和二年，王可汗破坏与蒙古军的盟约，阴谋袭击太祖。
English: In the second year of Jinzhang Zongtaihe, Wang Khan broke the treaty with the Mongol army and plotted to attack Taizu.

古文：太祖与宗亲大臣同休戚者，饮辨屯河水为盟，阿海兄弟皆预焉。
现代文：太祖与宗亲大臣休戚相共，在辨屯河饮水为盟，阿海兄弟皆参预。
English: The great-grandfather and the great-grandfather minister share the same blood, and are allies in drinking water in Bentun River, and the Ahai brothers are all involved.

古文：既败王可汗，金人讶其使久不还，拘家属于瀛。
现代文：打败王可汗后，金人见派往王可汗的使臣耶律阿海久不回朝，便拘留阿海家属于瀛。
English: After defeating Wang Khan, the Jin people saw that the envoy sent to Wang Khan, Yerut Ahai, did not return to the imperial court for a long time, so they detained the Ahai family.

古文：阿海殊不介意，攻战愈厉。
现代文：阿海很不介意，而是更加猛烈攻击金人。
English: Ahai didn't mind, and attacked Jinren even more fiercely.

古文：帝闻之，妻以贵臣之女，给户，俾食其赋。
现代文：太祖闻知阿海家属被金拘留，将贵臣之女配阿海为妻，分与户口，使收其赋税。
English: When the great-grandfather heard that the family members of Ahai were detained by Kim, he married the daughter of the dignitary to Ahai, assigned her to the household, and collected taxes from her.

古文：癸亥冬，进攻西夏诸国，累有功。
现代文：泰和三年冬阿海奉命，进攻西夏诸国，屡建战功。
English: In the winter of the third year of Taihe's reign, Ahai was ordered to attack the countries of Western Xia, and repeatedly built up military exploits.

古文：丙寅，帝建龙旂，即大位，敕左帅阇别略地汉南，阿海为先锋。
现代文：太祖元年，太祖称帝，命左帅别攻取汉南，阿海为先锋。
English: In the first year of the founder's reign, the founder proclaimed himself emperor and ordered his left-hand man not to conquer Hannan, with Ahai as the vanguard.

古文：辛未，破乌沙堡，鏖战宣平，大捷浍河，遂出居庸，耀兵燕北。
现代文：太祖六年，蒙古军破乌沙堡，鏖战于宣平，在浍河大捷，出居庸关，炫耀兵力于燕北。
English: In the sixth year of the founder's reign, the Mongolian army broke through the Usha Fort, fought in Xuanping, won a great victory in the Wei River, exiled to Yongguan, and showed off their military strength in Yanbei.

古文：癸酉，拔宣德、德兴，乘胜次北口，阇别攻下紫荆关。
现代文：八年，攻克宣德、德兴，乘胜进军北口，别攻下紫荆关。
English: In eight years, conquer Xuande, Dexing, take advantage of the victory to march into the north entrance, do not conquer the Bauhinia Pass.

古文：阿海奏曰： 好生乃圣人之大德也。
现代文：阿海向太祖奏道 ：好生是圣人之大德。
English: Ahai sang to Taizu: Good health is the great virtue of a saint.

古文：兴创之始，愿止杀掠，以应天心。 
现代文：兴邦创国之初，希望不要杀掠，以符合天意。 
English: At the beginning of the founding of Xingbang, it was hoped not to kill and plunder, so as to conform to the will of heaven.

古文：师还，出塞。
现代文：帝嘉奖并采纳这个意见。
English: The Tijia Award also adopted this opinion.

古文：甲戌，金人走汴，阿海以功拜太师，行中书省事；封秃花为太傅、濮国公，每宴享，必赐坐。命秃花从木华黎取中原。
现代文：于是分兵攻取燕南、山东诸郡，还军驻燕之近郊。太祖九年，金军退到汴京，阿海因功拜太师，管中书省事；封阿海之弟秃花为太傅、濮国公。太祖命秃花随木华黎取中原，阿海从帝攻西域。
English: As a result, a detachment of soldiers captured the counties of Yan'nan and Shandong, and returned to the suburbs of Yan. In the ninth year of Taizu, the gold army retreated to Shijing, and Ahai, because of the merits of the Grand Master, was in charge of the affairs of the Central Government; the younger brother of Ahai, Bald Flower, was named the Grand Master and the Prince of Shandong. According to the Grand Master's order, Bald Flower took the Central Plains along with Mu Huarai, and Ahai attacked the western region from the emperor.

古文：何实何实，字诚卿，其先北京人，曾祖抟霄，雄于赀，好施与，乡里以善人称。
现代文：在西域征讨中，俘其酋长只阑秃，攻下蒲华、寻斯干等城，留阿海于寻斯干专任抚绥之责。不久病逝，年七十三岁。至元十年，追封忠武公。何实，字诚卿，其祖先北京人。曾祖何抟霄有资财，好施舍，乡里称他为善人。
English: During the Western Regions Campaign, he captured the chieftain Zhao Zhao, captured the cities of Puhua and Qingshan, and left Ahai in Qingshan to take on the full-time duty of raising donkeys. He died of illness not long after, at the age of seventy-three. In the tenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of Zhongwu Gong. He Shi, Zi Chengqing, was his ancestor from Beijing. His great-great-grandfather He Xuan had great wealth and was good at giving alms. The village called him a good man.

古文：祖鼎敬。
现代文：祖父何鼎敬。
English: Grandfather He Dingjing.

古文：父道忠，仕金，为北京留守。
现代文：父何道忠，在金朝做官，为北京留守。
English: His father, He Daozhong, was an official in the Kim dynasty and stayed behind in Beijing.

古文：及长，通诸国译语，骁勇善骑射，倜傥不羁，远近之民，慕其雄略，咸归心焉。
现代文：何实年少时父亲去世，靠叔父抚养。他气度不凡，长大后能通诸国语言，勇敢，又善骑射，豪爽不羁，远近之民慕其雄才大略，都向往他。
English: His father died when he was young, and he was raised by his uncle. He had an extraordinary temperament, and when he grew up, he could speak all languages, he was brave, good at riding and shooting, and bold. People near and far admired his great talent and yearned for him.

古文：岁乙亥，中原盗起。
现代文：太祖十年，中原人民纷纷起来反抗金朝。
English: Ten years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, the people of the Central Plains rose up against the Kim dynasty.

古文：锦州张鲸，自立为临海郡王，遣使纳款于太祖，寻以叛伏诛。
现代文：锦州张鲸自立为临海郡王，遣使投降太祖，不久又反叛，被诛。
English: Jinzhou Zhang Jiu established himself as the king of Linhai County, sent envoys to surrender to Taizu, and soon rebelled and was captured.

古文：鲸弟致，初以叛谋于实，实厉声叱曰： 天之历数在朔方，汝等恣为不轨，徒自毙耳！ 
现代文：鲸弟张致，反叛之初与何实商议，何实厉声斥责道： 北方谁为万民之主，自有天数，你们谋图不轨，只是自讨死而已。 
English: At the beginning of the rebellion, Zhang Zhi's brother-in-whale discussed the matter with He Shih, but He Shih sternly rebuked him, saying, "In the north, whoever is the master of all the people has his own number of days. You are plotting against the right track, but you are only plotting your own death."

古文：乃籍户口一万，募兵三千，丙子春，来归。
现代文：将所领一万户百姓和兵卒三千于太祖十一年归顺于蒙古军。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he surrendered 10,000 households and 3,000 soldiers to the Mongol army.

古文：大将木华黎与论兵事，奇变百出。
现代文：大将木华黎与他谈论用兵之道，他奇变百出，木华黎拍手称赞，引见太祖。
English: General Mu Huali talked with him about the way of using soldiers. He was full of surprises. Mu Huali clapped his hands in praise and introduced him to the great ancestor.

古文：拊髀欣跃，大加称赏，遂引见太祖，献军民之数。帝大悦，赐鞘剑一，命从木华黎选充前锋。
现代文：太祖大喜，赐剑一把，命为木华黎军前锋。
English: The great-grandfather was overjoyed, gave him a sword, and ordered him to be the forward of the Muhua-Li army.

古文：时张致复据锦州，实与贼遇于神水县，挺身陷阵，殊死战，杀三百余人，获战马兵械甚众，木华黎奏赐鞍马弓矢以励之。
现代文：张致再占据锦州，何实与他战于神水县。实身先陷阵，殊死战斗，杀敌三百余人，缴获战马军械甚多，因功升帐前军马都弹压。
English: Zhang Zhi reoccupied Jinzhou, but what really happened was that he fought with him in Shenshui County. He was actually the first to fall into the battle, fought to the death, killed more than three hundred enemies, captured a lot of war horses and armaments, and because of his achievements, the former war horses were suppressed.

古文：薄濰州，与木华黎会。迁兵马都镇抚，从取大同、雁门、石、隰等州，悉平之。
现代文：木华黎封为太师、国王后，东下攻取齐地数郡，使何实率四千人取燕南、齐西之地，攻邢州，夺赵郡，取魏邺，袭击曹州、濮州、恩州、德州、泰安、济宁，势如破竹。
English: After Li Huafeng became grandmaster and king, he went to the east to capture several counties in Qi, and he actually led 4,000 men to take Yannan and Qixi, to attack Bozhou, to capture Zhao County, to take Weiwei, and to attack Caozhou, Zhangzhou, Enzhou, Dezhou, Tai'an, and Jining.

古文：引兵掠太原、平阳、河中、京兆诸城，所向款附。木华黎录其功，表实为元帅左监军。
现代文：进逼潍州，与木华黎会师。任实为兵马都镇抚，随木华黎取大同、雁门及石、隰等州，攻克太原、平阳、河中、京兆诸城。木华黎上报其功，任何实为元帅左监军。
English: He advanced to Bozhou and met the division of Mu Huali. He was appointed as the commander of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses. He followed Mu Huali to take Datong, Ganmen, Shishi and Handan and conquered the cities of Taiyuan, Pingyang, Hechong and Jingzhao. Mu Huali reported his achievement. He was appointed as the marshal of the Left Supervision Army.

古文：是夜，仙党遁去。
现代文：太祖十八年，木华黎卒，其子孛鲁嗣国王位。武仙复叛，占据邢州。
English: In the 18th year of Taizu's reign, Mu Huali died and his son Jialu Zhi ascended to the throne. Wuxian rebelled and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：实下令，敢有擅剽掠者斩，军中肃然，士民按堵。
现代文：何实率师五千围邢州，架云梯，自己身先士卒而上，攻破邢州城，武仙败走。实下令：敢有擅自剽劫者斩首，军纪严明，百姓安居。
English: He led 5,000 soldiers to encircle Zhangzhou, set up a ladder, and marched ahead of everyone else. He broke through Zhangzhou City, and the emperors were defeated. He ordered that anyone who committed robbery without authorization should be beheaded. Military discipline was strict, and the people lived in peace.

古文：孛鲁命戍于邢，多著善政，邢民敬之如神明。
现代文：孛鲁命何实戍守邢州，在邢多施善政，百姓敬他如神明。
English: The people revered him as if he were a god.

古文：甲申，孛鲁征西夏，以实分兵攻汴、陈、蔡、唐、邓、许、钧、睢、郑、亳、颍，所至有功，计枭首一千五百余级，俘工匠七百余人。孛鲁复命驻兵邢州，分织匠五百户，置局课织。
现代文：十八年，孛鲁征西夏，何实攻取汴、陈、蔡、唐、许、钧、睢、郑、亳、颍诸州，斩敌一千五百余、俘工匠七百余人。孛鲁又命他屯驻邢州，在那里设立织造局，拥有织匠五百户。
English: In the 18th year, Jielu conquered Western Xia, and in fact, he conquered the states of Min, Chen, Cai, Tang, Xu, Yao, Zheng, Gan and Gan, killing more than 1,500 enemies and capturing more than 700 artisans. Jielu also ordered him to stay in Zhangzhou, where he set up a weaving bureau and owned 500 weavers.

古文：朝于幄殿，帝欢甚，问遇盗之故，命所获寇勿杀，仍以赐实。
现代文：太祖二十二年，赐金虎符，行元帅府事。邢州因武仙之乱，年年饥荒，何实请求将织造局移于博兴州。
English: In the 22nd year of Taizu's reign, he was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge and became a marshal. Due to the Wuxian Rebellion and the annual famine in Zhangzhou, he requested that the weaving bureau be moved to Boching.

古文：是日，赐坐，与论军中故事，良久，曰： 思卿效力有年，朕欲授以征行元帅，后当重任。 
现代文：博兴州在兵乱之后，货物不畅，何实以丝织品印钞票，民获商贸之利。太宗九年，太宗多次召见，何实上贡彩缎三筐。有一日，太宗对何实说 ：念卿效力多年，朕欲授你征行元帅之职，以后当重任。 
English: After the Bo Xing Rebellion, the goods were not smooth, so Ho Shih printed banknotes with silk fabrics, and the people gained the benefits of trade. In the ninth year of Taizong, Taizong was summoned many times, and Ho Shih paid tribute in three baskets. One day, Taizong said to Ho Shih: I have served for many years, I want to give you the post of marshal, and you will be a heavy duty in the future.

古文：实叩头谢曰： 小臣被坚执锐，从事锋镝二十余年，身被十余枪，右臂不能举，已为废人矣。
现代文：实叩头辞谢： 小臣披坚执锐，奔驰战场二十余年，身受伤十余枪，右臂不能举起，已成废人。
English: He bowed his head and said, "Thank you very much. I've been a soldier for more than 20 years, and I've been wounded more than 10 times. I can't lift my right arm. I'm a useless person."

古文：臣不敢辱命。愿辞监军之职，幸得元佩金符，督治工匠，岁献织币，优游以终其身，于臣足矣。 
现代文：臣不敢辜负君命，愿辞监军之职，让我佩金符，督率工匠每年献所织缎帛，悠闲自得以终余年就满足了。 
English: The minister did not dare to live up to the king's life, and was willing to resign from the post of supervisor of the army, let me have the gold medal, supervise the craftsmen to offer the woven cocoon every year, and be satisfied with the rest of the year.

古文：帝默然不悦，令射以观其强弱，实不能射。
现代文：太宗默不做声，心中不悦，令实演习射箭以考察其身体强弱。实不能射。
English: Taizong was silent, unhappy in his heart, and ordered Jushi to practice archery to examine his physical strength. Jushi couldn't shoot.

古文：郝和尚拔都，太原人，以小字行，幼为蒙古兵所掠，在郡王迄忒麾下，长通译语，善骑射。
现代文：郝和尚拔都，太原人，和尚为其小名。幼为蒙古兵掠去，在郡王迄忒麾下效力，能译蒙汉语言，善骑射。
English: He was born in Taiyuan, and his nickname was Monk. He was captured by Mongolian soldiers when he was young, and served under the county king until his death. He could translate the Mongolian and Chinese languages, and was good at riding and shooting.

古文：太祖遣使宋，往返数四，以辩称。
现代文：太祖遣他出使宋朝，往返四次，以能言善辩著称。
English: His great-grandfather sent him as an envoy to the Song Dynasty, and he went back and forth four times. He was known for his eloquence.

古文：岁戊子，以为九原府主帅，佩金符。
现代文：太祖崩后第二年，郝和尚拔都为九原府主帅，佩金符。
English: In the second year after the death of his great-grandfather, Zou and Shangba both became the head coach of Jiuhara Prefecture, and were awarded gold and silver medals.

古文：庚寅，率兵南伐，略地潼、陕，有功。辛卯，授行军千户。
现代文：太宗二年，率兵南伐，占领潼、陕。三年，授行军千户。
English: In the second year of Taizong's reign, he led an army to invade the south and occupied Yunnan and Shaanxi provinces.

古文：乙未，从皇子南伐，至襄阳，宋兵四十万逆战汉水上。领先锋数百人，直前冲其阵，宋兵大溃。
现代文：七年，随皇子南伐，至襄阳，宋军以四十万迎战。郝和尚拔都率先领数百人直冲敌阵，宋军大溃。
English: In the seventh year, following the prince's southward march to Xiangyang, the Song army faced the battle with four hundred thousand men. Zhai and Shangbai both took the lead in leading hundreds of men straight into the enemy lines, and the Song army was routed.

古文：丙申，从都元帅塔海征蜀，下兴元。
现代文：八年，随都元帅塔海征蜀，克兴元。
English: In the eighth year, with the city marshal Tahai Zhengshu, Ke Xingyuan.

古文：宋将王连以重兵守剑阁，乃募敢死士十二人，乘夜破关，入蜀，诸城悉下。
现代文：宋将王连以重兵守剑阁，郝和尚拔都率勇士十二人，乘夜破关，进入蜀境，攻下诸城。
English: Song general Wang Lian guarded Jiange with a heavy army, while Zou Monk Baidu led twelve warriors to break through the pass at night, enter Shu territory, and capture the cities.

古文：明年，取夔府，抵大江，宋兵三十万军于南岸。
现代文：九年，夺取夔府，饮马长江。宋军三十万守于南岸。
English: In the 9th year, they captured Yefu and crossed the Yangtze River. Three hundred thousand Song troops guarded the south bank.

古文：郝和尚拔都选骁勇九人，乘轻舸先登，横驰阵中，既出复入，宋兵不能支，由是以善战名。
现代文：郝和尚拔都选勇士九人，乘轻舟先登岸，杀入敌阵，宋军不能抵御。郝和尚拔都从此以善战而著名。
English: Gong and Shangbai both selected nine warriors, boarded the shore first by light boat, and entered the enemy lines. The Song army could not resist. Gong and Shangbai have been famous for their good fighting since then.

古文：庚子岁，太宗于行在所命解衣数其疮痕二十一，嘉其劳，进拜宣德西京太原平阳延安五路万户，易佩金虎符，以兵二万属之，复赐马六骑、金锦弓铠有差。
现代文：十二年，太宗在行军驻所命郝和尚拔都解衣，数其身上疮痕二十一处，嘉奖其劳苦，进拜宣德、西京、太原、平阳、延安五路万户，佩金虎符，拨给他士卒二万，赐马六匹，还有绸缎、弓箭、铠甲等物。
English: In the twelfth year, Emperor Taizong ordered all monks and nuns to undress at the marching station, counted 21 sores on their bodies, commended their hard work, went to Xuande, Xijing, Taiyuan, Pingyang and Yan'an to pray for thousands of households, and gave them gold and tiger charms. He allocated 20,000 soldiers and six horses, as well as silk coats, bows and arrows, armor and other items.

古文：甲辰，朝定宗于宿瓮都之行宫，赐银万铤，辞以 赏过厚，臣不应独受，臣得效微劳，皆将校协力之功 ，遂奏将校刘天禄等十一人，皆赐之金银符。
现代文：太宗皇后乃马真氏三年，郝和尚拔都在宿瓮都之行宫朝见定宗，赐银万锭，他辞谢道： 奖赏过重，臣不应独受。臣之所以能效微劳，皆将校们同心协力之功。 太宗又赐其将校刘天禄等十一人金银符。
English: Emperor Taizong's empress was Ma Zhen for three years, and both Emperor Gong and Emperor Shangba visited Emperor Taizong in the Suqian capital to see Emperor Taizong and give him silver and ten thousand taels. Emperor Taizong thanked Emperor Taizong and said, "The reward is too heavy, and the vassal should not receive it alone. The reason why the vassal was able to do so little work was due to the joint efforts of all the officers. Emperor Taizong also gave his officer Liu Tianlu and eleven others gold and silver charms.

古文：戊申，奉诏还治太原，请凡远道租税监课过重者，悉蠲除之。
现代文：定宗三年，奉诏还太原掌管政务。他奏请将远道过重租税均予免除。
English: Three years after the enthronement of Emperor Jozong, Taiyuan was returned to political control by imperial edict. He requested that all excessive taxes be exempted.

古文：岁饥，出白金六十铤、粟千石、羊数千，以助国用。
现代文：逢饥荒年，他以自己的白金六十锭、粟千石、羊数千只以助国用。
English: In every year of famine, he used his white gold to buy sixty mu, thousands of millet, and thousands of sheep to help the country.

古文：瑨自幼不羁，闲习武事。
现代文：九年，升万户府为河东北路行省，有权自行决定该省事务，在该省凡四年。
English: In nine years, Shengmanyufu became the province of Northeast Heze Road, with the right to decide on the province's affairs at its own discretion. It has been in the province for four years.

古文：癸酉，太祖南伐，先锋至飞狐，城中不知所为。
现代文：宪宗二年三月卒。追赠太保、仪同三司、冀国公，谥忠定。赵瑨，云中蔚州人，自幼放任不羁，好习武。太祖八年，蒙古大军南伐中原，先锋至飞狐，城中官吏不知所为。
English: He died in March of the second year of Kenzong. He was posthumously given the titles of Taibo, Jidong Sanji, and Hebei Guogong. Zhao Yao, a native of Ulshu in the clouds, had been free from restraint since childhood and was good at martial arts. In the eighth year of Taizu, the Mongolian army was in the south of the Central Plains, the vanguard was flying foxes, and the officials in the city did not know what they were doing.

古文：瑨诣县曰： 大兵压境，不降何待！ 
现代文：瑨到县府说： 大军压境，不降还等待什么？ 
English: He went to the county government and said, "A large army is pressing on the border. If we don't surrender, what are we waiting for?"

古文：众从之。
现代文：于是全城降于蒙古。
English: As a result, the entire city fell to the Mongols.

古文：丁丑，太师、国王木华黎驻兵桓州，署为百户，从攻蠡州。
现代文：太祖十二年，太师、国王木华黎驻兵桓州，任命赵瑨为百户长，随大军攻蠡州。
English: In the twelfth year of King Taizu, Grand Master and King Mu Huali stationed soldiers in Hanzhou, appointed Zhao Jun as the head of a hundred households, and followed the large army to attack Bozhou.

古文：金兵闭城拒守，国王裨将石抹也先战死，王怒，将屠其城，瑨泣曰： 母与兄在城中，乞以一身赎一城之命。 
现代文：金军闭城坚守，国王偏将石抹也先战死。木华黎大怒，要屠杀全城，瑨哀求道 ：我母亲与兄都在城中，请求以我一身来赎一城之命。 
English: The gold army closed the city and held fast, and the king was the first to die in the battle. Mu Huali was furious and wanted to slaughter the whole city, crying and begging, "My mother and brother are in the city, I beg you to use me to redeem the life of the city."

古文：瑨让其兄珪，朝廷从之，改授瑨军民总管，稍迁易州达鲁花赤，佩金符。
现代文：恳求再三，木华黎允许。随大军攻相州，瑨勇往直前，流矢从鼻侧透穿至脑后，他拔出箭再战。连攻七日破其城，论功，授冀州行军都元帅。后改任军民总管，又迁易州达鲁花赤，佩金符。
English: After repeated entreaties, Mu Huali gave his permission. With a large army attacking Xiangzhou, Yao ventured forward. The arrow penetrated from the side of his nose to the back of his head, and he pulled out the arrow to fight again. He attacked the city for seven days in a row, and was awarded the title of Marshal of the Jizhou March. Later, he was appointed as the Chief of the Military and Civil Affairs, and moved to Yizhou.

古文：太宗下河南，瑨自易州驰驿输矢二十余万至行在，帝大喜，命权中都省事。
现代文：太宗攻河南，瑨自易州急速送去箭二十余万至皇上驻地，太宗大喜，命他暂理中都省事。
English: Emperor Taizong attacked Henan and quickly sent more than 200,000 arrows from Yizhou to the emperor's residence. Emperor Taizong was overjoyed and ordered him to temporarily control the situation.

古文：癸巳，赵扬据兴州叛，瑨进军平之，迁中山、真定二路达鲁花赤。
现代文：太宗五年，赵、扬据兴州反叛，瑨进军平叛，因功升中山、真定二路达鲁花赤。
English: In the fifth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, Zhao and Yang were promoted to Zhongshan and Zhending respectively.

古文：中统元年，诏立十道宣慰司，以瑨为顺天宣慰使。
现代文：中统三年，设立十道宣慰司，任命瑨为顺天宣慰使。
English: Three years after the unification of China and Korea, the Ten-District Proclamation and Consolation Division was established, and Zou was appointed as the proclamation and consolation envoy.

古文：至元元年，转淄莱路总管。
现代文：至元元年，转为淄秉路总管。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was transferred to the general manager of Zoubing Road.

古文：六年，改太原路总管。
现代文：六年，改任太原路总管。
English: Six years later, he was appointed as the general manager of Taiyuan Road.

古文：十二年，升燕南道提刑按察使。
现代文：十二年，升燕南道提刑按察使。
English: In 2000, he was appointed as the inspector of Shengyan South Road.

古文：十四年，迁河南道。
现代文：十四年改河南道提刑按察使。
English: It has been 14 years since Henan Province changed the way of handing down punishments to inspectors.

古文：十六年，致仕。
现代文：十六年辞官。
English: After 16 years as a magistrate.

古文：明年卒，年八十。
现代文：十七年卒，年八十岁。
English: Seventeen years old, eighty years old.

古文：皇庆元年，赠仪同三司、太保、上柱国，追封定国公，谥襄穆。
现代文：皇庆元年，赠仪同三司、太保、上柱国，追封定国公，谥襄穆。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, he was bestowed with the titles of Sanji, Taibo and Shangzhu Guo, followed by the title of Ding Guo Guo and the title of Xiangmu.

古文：子秉温。
现代文：赵秉温，赵瑨之子，曾在世祖王府效力。
English: Zhao Bingwen, the son of Zhao Yao, once served in the ancestral palace.

古文：秉温，事世祖潜邸，命受学于太保刘秉忠，从征吐蕃、云南大理。中统初，诏行右三部事。
现代文：世祖命他受学于太保刘秉忠，又随蒙古军征吐蕃、云南大理。中统初年，诏令他行右三部事。
English: The patriarch ordered him to study under the eunuch Liu Bingzhong, and he also went with the Mongol army to Tibet and Yunnan. In the first year of the unification of China, he was ordered to do three things.

古文：至元七年，创习朝仪，阅试称旨，授尚书礼部侍郎、知侍仪司事。
现代文：至元七年，授尚书礼部侍郎、知侍仪司事。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of the attendant of the ceremony department and the secretary of the ceremony.

古文：明年，授秘书少监，购求天下秘书。
现代文：至元十年，授秘书少监，购求天下秘书。
English: In the 10th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the junior superintendent of secretaries was awarded, and the secretary of the whole country was purchased.

古文：十九年，迁昭文馆大学士、知太史院侍仪司事。
现代文：十九年，升昭文馆大学士、知太史院侍仪司事。
English: In 1919, he became a scholar of the Shosho Bunkan University and a secretary of the Chita Academy of History.

古文：《授时历》成，赐钞二百锭，进阶中奉大夫。
现代文：《授时历》成书后，赐秉温钞二百锭，官阶进为中奉大夫。
English: After the book "Giving the Calendar" was published, Bing Wen was given a 200-baht banknote and promoted to the rank of middle-ranked doctor.

古文：二十九年，编《国朝集礼》成，帝特命其子慧袭侍仪使。
现代文：二十九年，编纂《国朝集礼》，书成后，世祖特命其子赵慧承袭侍仪使之职。
English: In the 29th year, he compiled the "National and Imperial Collection of Rites," and after the book was completed, the founder specifically ordered his son Zhao Hui to succeed him as an attendant.

古文：皇庆元年，赠金紫光禄大夫、司徒、云国公，谥文昭。
现代文：皇庆元年，赠金紫光禄大夫、司徒、定国公，谥文昭。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, Dr. Ziguanglu, Sitou, Dingguo, and Zou Wenzhao were presented with gold.

古文：既长，叹曰： 士生于世，当立功名、书竹帛，以传无穷，宁肯碌碌无闻，与草木同腐邪！ 
现代文：石抹明安，桓州人。性宽厚，不拘小节，年青时就曾叹息说： 人生于世，当立功名，著书立说，传于后代，不能碌碌无为，与草木同腐！ 
English: Shi Miao Ming'an, a resident of Hanzhou, is a generous and open-minded person. When he was young, he once said with a sigh: "When you are born, you should make a name for yourself, write a book, and pass it on to future generations. You can't be idle and rot with the plants and trees!"

古文：岁壬申，太祖率师攻破金之抚州，将遂南向，金主命招讨纥石烈九斤来援，时明安在其麾下，九斤谓之曰： 汝尝使北方，素识蒙古国主，其往临阵，问以举兵之由，不然即诟之。 明安初如所教，俄策马来降，帝命缚以俟战毕问之。
现代文：太祖七年，太祖率大军攻破金之抚州，向南进军，金卫绍王命招讨纥石烈九斤抵御。当时明安在九斤军中，派他去询问太祖出兵的理由。明安去蒙古军中指责他们入侵，回去不久又驰马来投降，太祖命将他监禁起来，等战事完毕后再审问。
English: In the seventh year of King Taejo's reign, King Taejo led a large army to break through Jin's Fuzhou and marched southward. King Kim Weishao ordered him to fight against the nine-pounder army. At that time, Mingan was in the nine-pounder army and sent him to inquire about the reasons for King Taejo's departure. Mingan went to the Mongol army to accuse them of invading, and soon returned to surrender on horseback. King Taejo ordered him to be imprisoned and interrogated after the war was over.

古文：既败金兵，召明安诘之曰： 尔何以詈我而后降也？ 
现代文：打败金兵后，太祖召明安责问道： 你为何先责骂我，而后又投诚？ 
English: After defeating the golden soldier, the great-grandfather summoned Ming An and asked: Why did you scold me first, and then surrender?

古文：对曰： 臣素有归志，向为九斤所使，恐其见疑，故如所言。不尔，何由瞻奉天颜？ 
现代文：明安回答说 ：臣素有归向蒙古的意图，然而为九斤所差使，恐怕他怀疑我，故先责骂，要不然何以能仰瞻陛下天颜。 
English: Ming'an replied: "The minister had the intention of returning to Mongolia, but he was sent by the Nine Kings. I'm afraid he doubted me, so he scolded me first. Otherwise, how could I look up to His Majesty's face.

古文：帝善其言，释之，命领蒙古军，抚定云中东西两路。
现代文：太祖认为他说得好，不仅释放了他，还命他领蒙古军，安抚云中东西两路。
English: The great-grandfather thought he spoke well, and not only released him, but also ordered him to lead the Mongol army to pacify both the east and the west.

古文：既而帝欲休兵于北，明安谏曰： 金有天下一十七路，今我所得，惟云中东西两路而已，若置不问，待彼成谋，并力而来，则难敌矣。
现代文：太祖打算蒙古大军停止南下，在北休整，明安进谏道： 金国共有一十七路，今我所得只是云中东西两路而已，若对金其他地方置之不问，等到金的战略确定后，合力来对付我们，那时就难敌了。
English: The great-grandfather planned to stop the Mongolian army from going south, rest in the north, and enter the new road in Ming'an: There are seventeen roads in China. Now I only have two roads, east and west. If I don't ask about other parts of China, when China's strategy is determined and they join forces to deal with us, then it will be difficult to fight.

古文：且山前民庶，久不知兵，今以重兵临之，传檄可定，兵贵神速，岂宜犹豫！ 
现代文：而且山前之民已久未经战争，今以重兵至其境，则一道命令就可平定。兵贵神速，岂能犹豫不决！ 
English: Moreover, the people in front of the mountain have not been at war for a long time, and now that heavy troops have arrived at their borders, they can be pacified with a single order.

古文：帝从之。即命明安引兵南进，所至，民皆具箪食壶浆以迎，尽有河北诸郡而还。
现代文：太祖听取他的意见，即命他引兵南进。蒙古大军所至，百姓拿着饮食来迎接，占有河北诸郡。
English: The great-grandfather listened to his opinion and ordered him to lead the army southward. The Mongolian army arrived, the people greeted them with food and drink, and occupied the counties of Hebei.

古文：帝复命明安及三合拔都，将兵由古北口徇景、蓟、檀、顺诸州。
现代文：太祖又命明安及三合拔都领兵由古北口攻占景、蓟、檀、顺诸州。
English: The great-grandfather also ordered Ming'an and Sanhe Batu to lead the troops from the ancient North to capture Jing, Handan, Dan and Shun provinces.

古文：诸将议欲屠之，明安奏曰： 此辈当死，今若生之，则彼之未附者，皆闻风而自至矣。 
现代文：诸将要大肆屠杀这些攻克的州郡，明安劝止道： 这些地方的人本当处死，但若不杀他们，那些尚未归附的人将都来归附。 
English: To the states and counties that were about to be massacred, Mian An said, "The people of these places are really to be put to death, but if you do not kill them, those who have not yet surrendered will all come to surrender."

古文：帝从之。
现代文：太祖采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：乙亥春正月，取通州，金右副元帅蒲察七斤以其众降，明安命复其职，置之麾下，遂驻军于京南建春宫。
现代文：太祖十年正月，蒙军夺取了通州，金右副元帅蒲察七斤降，明安仍命他任原职，置于他的麾下，屯驻于京南建春宫。
English: In the first month of the tenth year of Taizu's reign, the Mongolian army captured Tongzhou, and the vice-marshal of the Jin Dynasty, Pu Cha, was demoted seven pounds. However, Ming An still appointed him to his original post, placed him under his command, and stationed him in Jianchun Palace in Jingnan.

古文：金御史中丞李英、元帅左都监乌古论庆寿，领兵护军食，以援中都。
现代文：金御史中丞李英、元帅左都监乌古论庆寿，领兵护送军粮援助中都。
English: Vice-Commander of the Imperial General Staff Li Ying and Marshal Zuo Guan Ugu talked about the celebration of life, and led the troops to escort the military food aid to the capital.

古文：帝遣右副元帅神撒将四百骑迎战，明安将五百骑继之，遇于永清。
现代文：太祖遣右副元帅神撒率四百骑兵迎战，明安率五百骑断其后，在永清遇金军。
English: The great-grandfather sent Vice Marshal Shen Sa with 400 cavalry to meet the battle, and Ming An with 500 cavalry, and then met the Golden Army in Yongqing.

古文：将战，命士卒佯败，金兵来追，回击，大破之，死及溺水者甚众，获李英及所佩虎符，得粮千余车。
现代文：明安命士卒假败，待金兵来追，回马袭击，大败金军，俘李英，缴获军粮千余车，招降永清，不降，攻下后屠城。
English: The Ming and An soldiers pretended to be defeated, waited for the gold soldiers to chase them, attacked back to Ma, defeated the gold army, captured Li Ying, seized more than a thousand cars of army rations, invited Yongqing to surrender, did not surrender, and captured Hou Tu Cheng.

古文：辛酉，城中官属父老缁素，开门请降，明安谕之曰： 负固不服，以至此极，非汝等罪，守者之责也。 
现代文：金将完颜合住、监军阿兴松哥，再以步兵一万二千人、粮车五百辆来援救中都。明安率三千骑迎击，在涿州宣封寨大败金援军，俘虏了松哥，合住逃走，缴获其全部辎重，然后回军屯于建春宫。四月，攻克万宁宫，夺取富昌、丰宜二关，攻拔固安县。五月，明安进攻中都，金相完颜复兴饮药自杀，城中官民父老开门投降。
English: In April, he conquered Wanning Palace, captured Fuchang and Fengyi Second Pass, and attacked Gu'an County. In May, Ming'an attacked Zhongdu, and Kim Sang-hwan defeated Song's reinforcements, captured Song's brother, and fled to Jianchun Palace. In April, he conquered Wanning Palace, captured Fuchang and Fengyi Second Pass, and attacked Gu'an County. In May, Ming'an attacked Zhongdu, Kim Sang-hwan defeated Song's reinforcements, captured Song's brother, fled to Jianchun Palace, captured all of his baggage, and then returned to the capital.

古文：悉令安业，仍以粟赈之，众皆感悦。
现代文：明安令各安其业，并以粟赈济贫民。
English: Ming and An decreed that everyone should secure his business and feed the poor with millet.

古文：明安早从军旅，料敌制胜，算无遗策，虽祁寒盛暑，未尝不与士卒均劳逸，同甘苦。
现代文：明安早年从军，熟知敌情，计策周密，战无不胜。虽严寒酷暑，都是与士卒均劳逸，共甘苦。
English: Ming'an served in the army in his early years, was familiar with the enemy's situation, had a well-planned strategy, and was invincible in battle. Although it was extremely cold and hot, he and his soldiers worked and rested equally, and shared the joys and sorrows.

古文：其得金府库珠玉锦绮，明安悉具其数上进，未尝以纤毫为己有。
现代文：所得金朝府库中的珠玉锦缎，明安都全数上交，未曾丝毫占为己有。
English: All the precious jade brocades in the treasury of the Jin Dynasty were handed over to the Ming and Han dynasties, and they never took any of them for themselves.

古文：次忽笃华，太宗时，为金紫光禄大夫、燕京等处行尚书省事，兼蒙古汉军兵马都元帅。张荣张荣，字世辉，济南历城人，状貌奇伟。
现代文：攻下中都后，加明安为太傅、邵国公，兼管蒙古、汉军兵马都元帅。太祖十一年，因病卒于燕城，年五十三岁。张荣，字世辉，济南历城人，相貌奇伟。
English: After the capture of the Central Capital, Kamingan was the Taifu, the Lord of Shao, and the Marshal of the Mongolian and Chinese armies. The great-grandfather was eleven years old and died of illness in Yancheng at the age of fifty-three. Zhang Rong, known as Shihui, was from Licheng, Jinan, and had a magnificent appearance.

古文：尝从军，为流矢贯訾，拔之不出，令人以足抵其额而拔之，神色自若。
现代文：曾从军作战，眼眶为箭所中，自己拔不出来，令人用脚抵其额而拔出，他却神色自若。
English: He had fought in the army, and his eyelids had been hit by arrows. He couldn't pull them out by himself, so he asked someone to put their foot on his forehead and pull them out. However, he looked confident.

古文：金季，山东群盗蜂起，荣率乡民据济南黉堂岭，众稍盛，遂略章丘、邹平、济阳、长山、辛市、蒲台、新城及淄州之地而有之，兵至，则清野入山岁丙戌，东平、顺天皆内属，荣遂举其兵与地纳款于按赤台那衍，引见太祖，问以孤军数载，独抗王师之故，对曰： 山东地广人稠，悉为帝有。臣若但有倚恃，亦不款服。 
现代文：金末，山东盗贼蜂起，张荣也率乡民占据济南之堂岭。后来人渐多，便攻占章丘、邹平、济阳、长山、辛市、蒲台、新城及淄州。官军来，便退入山中，坚壁清野。太祖二十一年，东平、顺天皆为蒙古军所有，张荣便率领其军队和所占地盘归顺蒙古，按赤台那衍将他引见太祖，问他孤军数年独抗蒙古大军的缘故。他回答说： 山东地广人稠，全为陛下所有，臣若有依恃，也不会归顺了。 
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, the thieves of Shandong revolted, and Zhang Rong also led the villagers to occupy Dongling in Jinan. Later, the number of people gradually increased, and they captured Zhangqiu, Suiping, Jiyang, Changshan, Xin City, Putai, Xincheng and Ganzhou. When the official army came, they retreated into the mountains, and the walls were clear. In the twenty-first year of Taizu, Dongping and Shuntian were all owned by the Mongol army, and Zhang Rong led his army and the occupied territory to submit to Mongolia. According to Akdai Nayan, he introduced him to Taizu and asked

古文：太祖壮之，拊其背曰： 真赛因八都儿也。 授金紫光禄大夫、山东行尚书省，兼兵马都元帅，知济南府事。
现代文：太祖称赞他，授金紫光禄大夫、山东行尚书省兼兵马都元帅、知济南府事。
English: The great-grandfather praised him and awarded him the titles of Doctor of Ziguanglu, Shandong Province of Xiangshan and Marshal of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and Governor of Jinan Province.

古文：时贸易用银，民争发墓劫取，荣下令禁绝。
现代文：当时贸易用银，民争相掘墓盗银，荣下令严禁。
English: At that time, Rong ordered that the use of silver in trade and the theft of silver from tombs should be strictly prohibited.

古文：庚寅，朝廷集诸侯议取汴，荣请先六军以清跸道，帝嘉之，赐衣三袭，诏位诸侯上。
现代文：太宗二年，朝廷召集诸侯商议攻取汴京，荣请先于六军清除皇上前进道上的障碍，帝予以嘉奖，赐衣三套，令位列诸侯之上。
English: In the second year of Emperor Taizong's reign, the imperial court convened the lords to discuss the capture of Beijing, and requested the six armies to clear the obstacles on the emperor's way forward. The emperor gave him a commendation, three sets of clothes, and ranked him above the lords.

古文：癸巳，汴梁下，从阿术鲁为先锋，攻睢阳，议欲杀俘虏，烹其油以灌城，又力止之。既而城下，荣单骑入城抚其民。
现代文：三年，荣率勇士抢渡黄河。天明，敌兵列阵而来，荣驰马冲杀，夺战船五十艘，大军渡河，乘胜攻破张、盘二山寨，俘敌万余人。大将阿术鲁恐俘虏反抗，欲斩尽杀绝，荣竭力劝止。五年，攻下汴梁后，荣随河术鲁攻睢阳，又要杀尽俘虏，再度为荣劝止。睢阳攻下后，荣单骑入城抚慰百姓。
English: In the third year, Rong led the warriors to cross the Yellow River. At dawn, the enemy soldiers lined up, Rong rode his horse to kill, captured fifty warships, crossed the river with a large army, defeated Zhang and Pan's two villages, and captured more than 10,000 people. General Ah Shulu was afraid of the prisoners' resistance, and wanted to kill them all, and Rong tried his best to dissuade him. In the fifth year, after the capture of Zhaoliang, Rong followed the river Shulu to attack Fenyang, and wanted to kill all the prisoners, and again dissuaded him. After the capture of Fenyang, Rong rode

古文：甲午，攻沛，沛拒守稍严，其将唆蛾夜来捣营，荣觉之，唆蛾返走，率壮士追杀之，乘胜急攻，城破。就攻徐州，守将国用安引兵突出，荣逆击之，亦破其城，用安赴水死。
现代文：六年，蒙军攻沛。沛城防御较严，守将唆蛾夜来偷营，被荣发觉，追杀唆蛾，乘胜攻下沛县。接着攻徐州，守将国用安领兵出城袭击，被荣战败，徐州攻破，用安投水自尽。
English: In the sixth year, the Mongolian army attacked Pae. The defense of Peicheng was relatively strict. The commander of the garrison, Zuo Moth, came to steal the camp at night, was discovered by Rong, chased and killed Zuo Moth, and took advantage of the victory to attack Pae County. Next, he attacked Xuzhou. The commander of the garrison led the soldiers out of the city, was defeated by Rong, broke through Xuzhou, and committed suicide by throwing water into An.

古文：乙未，拔邳州。
现代文：七年，攻克邳州。
English: Seven years later, he conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：丙申，从诸王阔端破宋枣阳、仇城等三县。
现代文：八年，荣随诸王阔端出攻破宋之枣阳等三县。
English: In the eighth year, Rong accompanied the kings to attack Zaoyang and other three counties in the Song Dynasty.

古文：时河南民北徙至济南，荣下令民间，分屋与地居之，俾得树畜，且课其殿最，旷野辟为乐土。
现代文：这时，河南民北迁至济南，荣下令民间分房屋土地与移民。是年，中书考核各地政绩，济南位列第一。
English: At this time, the Henan people moved north to Jinan, and Rong ordered the people to divide the houses, land and immigrants. It was the year when the Chinese book assessed the political achievements of various regions, and Jinan ranked first.

古文：后十九年，世祖即位，封济南公，致仕，卒，年八十三。
现代文：六十一岁时请求辞官。世祖即位，封为济南公，年八十三岁而卒。
English: At the age of sixty-one, he asked to be demoted. He ascended the throne and was named the Duke of Jinan. He died at the age of eighty-three.

