古文：二年春，王正月，葬简王。
现代文：二年春季，周历正月，安葬简王。
English: In the spring of the second year, the first month of the lunar calendar, King Jianwen was buried.

古文：郑师伐宋。
现代文：郑国军队攻打宋国。
English: The Zheng army attacked Song.

古文：夏五月庚寅，夫人姜氏薨。
现代文：夏季五月庚寅日，齐姜去世。
English: In the summer of May, on Geng Yin Day, Qi Jiang passed away.

古文：六月庚辰，郑伯睔卒。
现代文：六月庚辰日，郑成公去世。
English: Zheng Chenggong passed away on Geng Chen Day in June.

古文：晋师、宋师、卫甯殖侵郑。
现代文：晋国军队、宋国军队、卫国的甯殖一起入侵郑国。
English: The armies of Jin, Song, and Wei invaded Zheng together.

古文：秋七月，仲孙蔑会晋荀罃、宋华元、卫孙林父、曹人、邾人于戚。
现代文：秋季七月，仲孙蔑与晋国的荀罃、宋国的华元、卫国的孙林父、曹国人、邾国人在戚地会见。
English: In the autumn of July, Zhong Sun Zi met with Zou of Jin Province, Hua Yuan of Song Province, Sun Lin father of Wei Province, the people of Cao Province, and the people of Shan Province at their relatives' places.

古文：己丑，葬我小君齐姜。
现代文：己丑日，安葬我国小君齐姜。
English: On the day of his death, Xiaojun Qi Jiang was laid to rest.

古文：叔孙豹如宋。
现代文：叔孙豹去宋国。
English: Uncle Sun Leopard went to Song.

古文：冬，仲孙蔑会晋荀罃、齐崔杼、宋华元、卫孙林父、曹人、邾人、滕人、薛人、小邾人于戚，遂城虎牢。
现代文：冬季，仲孙蔑与晋国的荀罃、齐国的崔杼、宋国的华元、卫国的孙林父、曹国人、邾国人、滕国人、薛国人、小邾国人在戚地会见，于是就在虎牢筑城。
English: In the winter, Zhong Sun Zi met with Zou of Jin, Cui Zou of Qi, Hua Yuan of Song, Sun Lin father of Wei, the people of Cao, the people of Yao, the people of Teng, the people of Xue, and the people of Xiaoqi in their relatives' lands, so they built the city in the tiger's stronghold.

古文：楚杀其大夫公子申。
现代文：楚国杀了自己国家的大夫公子申。
English: The state of Chu killed its own country's doctor, Kuniko Shin.

古文：二年春，郑师侵宋，楚令也。
现代文：二年春季，郑国的军队侵袭宋国，这是受楚国的命令。
English: In the spring of the second year, the army of Zheng attacked Song, which was ordered by Chu.

古文：齐侯伐莱，莱人使正舆子赂夙沙卫以索马牛皆百匹，齐师乃还。
现代文：齐灵公进攻莱国，莱国人派正舆子把精选的马和牛各一百匹赠送给夙沙卫，齐军就退兵回去。
English: Qiling attacked Lai, and the Lai people sent Zheng Yuzi to present a hundred selected horses and cattle to Basha Wei, and the Qi army withdrew.

古文：君子是以知齐灵公之为灵也。
现代文：君子因此而知道了齐灵公所以谥为 灵 的缘故。
English: As a result, the gentleman knew that it was because of this that Lord Qiling had become a ghost.

古文：夏，齐姜薨。
现代文：夏季，齐姜去世。
English: In the summer, Qi Jiang passed away.

古文：初，穆姜使择美槚，以自为榇与颂琴。季文子取以葬。
现代文：当初，穆姜派人选择上好的槚木，为自己作了内棺和颂琴，季文子把它拿来安葬齐姜。
English: At first, Mu Jiang sent someone to choose the best eucalyptus and made an inner coffin and a carillon for himself. Ji Wen Zi took it to bury Qi Jiang.

古文：君子曰： 非礼也。
现代文：君子说： 这是不合于礼的，礼不能有所不顺。
English: The gentleman said, "This is not in keeping with proper etiquette, and proper etiquette does not allow things to go wrong."

古文：礼无所逆，妇，养姑者也，亏姑以成妇，逆莫大焉。
现代文：媳妇是奉养婆婆的人，亏损婆婆以成全了媳妇，没有比这再大的不顺了。
English: The daughter-in-law is the one who supports the mother-in-law, the loss of the mother-in-law to complete the daughter-in-law, there is no greater misfortune than this.

古文：《诗》曰： 其惟哲人，告之话言，顺德之行。 
现代文：《诗》说： 只有明智的人，才可以把好话告诉他，要他顺着道德而行事。 
English: "Poetry" says: Only a wise person can tell him good words and ask him to act in accordance with morality.

古文：季孙于是为不哲矣。且姜氏，君之妣也。《诗》曰： 为酒为醴，烝畀祖妣，以洽百礼，降福孔偕。  
现代文：季孙在这件事情上就很不明智了，而且穆姜还是国君的祖母。《诗》说： 酿造甜酒，敬献祖妣，合于礼仪，遍降福气。  
English: Qisun was very unwise in this matter, and Mujang was still the grandmother of the sovereign. "Poem" said: Brewing sweet wine, honoring ancestors, conforming to etiquette, and bestowing blessings everywhere.

古文：齐侯使诸姜、宗妇来送葬。
现代文：齐灵公派遣嫁给齐大夫的宗女和同姓大夫的妻子前来鲁国送葬，召见莱子。
English: Lord Qi Ling sent his granddaughter, who was married to Dr. Qi, and Dr. Qi's wife, who had the same surname, to Lu to attend the funeral and summon Lai Zi.

古文：召莱子，莱子不会，故晏弱城《东阳》以偪之。
现代文：莱子不参加会见，所以晏弱在东阳筑城来逼迫莱国。
English: Lai Zi did not attend the meeting, so Yan Weak built a city in Dongyang to persecute Lai Guo.

古文：郑成公疾，子驷请息肩于晋。
现代文：郑成公生病，子驷请求服从晋国来解除对楚国的负担。
English: When Zheng Chenggong fell ill, Zi Yan requested to obey Jin to relieve the burden on Chu.

古文：公曰 楚君以郑故，亲集矢于其目，非异人任，寡人也。
现代文：郑成公说： 楚国的国君由于郑国的缘故，他的眼睛被箭射中。不是为了别人，是为了我啊！
English: Zheng Chenggong said: The sovereign of Chu was shot in the eye with an arrow for the sake of Zheng. Not for others, but for me!

古文：若背之，是弃力与言，其谁暱我？
现代文：如果背弃他，这是丢弃了人家的功劳和自己的誓言，还有谁来亲近我？
English: If I turn my back on him, I'm throwing away someone else's merit and my own oath. Who else will come close to me?

古文：免寡人，唯二三子！ 
现代文：使我免于过错，就是看你们几位的了。 
English: It's up to a few of you to save me from my mistakes.

古文：秋七月庚辰，郑伯睔卒。
现代文：秋季，七月庚辰，郑成公仑去世。
English: In autumn, in July, Geng Chen, Zheng Chenggong passed away.

古文：于是子罕当国，子驷为政，子国为司马。
现代文：于是由子罕掌政，由子驷处理政务，子国出任司马。
English: As a result, Tsohan took the reins of government, Tsukuda handled government affairs, and Kogoku served as Sima.

古文：晋师侵郑，诸大夫欲从晋，子驷曰： 官命未改。 
现代文：当时晋军侵略郑国，郑大夫都主张服从晋国。子驷说： 国君的命令没有改变。 
English: At that time, the Jin army invaded Zheng, and Dr. Zheng advocated obedience to the Jin. Zibo said: The order of the sovereign has not changed.

古文：会于戚，谋郑故也。孟献子曰： 请城虎牢以偪郑。 知武子曰： 善。
现代文：仲孙蔑和晋国荀罃、宋国华元、卫国孙林父、曹国人、邾国人在戚地会见，这是为了商讨征服郑国的办法。仲孙蔑说： 请在虎牢筑城以逼迫郑国。 知武子说： 好。
English: Zhong Sun Zi met with Emperor Jin, Emperor Song, Emperor Lin, Emperor Cao, and Emperor Yao at a relative's place to discuss how to conquer Zheng. Zhong Sun Zi said, "Please build a city at the Tiger's Stronghold to persecute Zheng." Zhi Wu Zi said, "Good."

古文：鄫之会，吾子闻崔子之言，今不来矣。
现代文：鄫地的盟会，您听到了齐国代表崔杼的话，现在他不来了。
English: You have heard the words of the representative of Qi State, Cui Wei, and now he is not coming.

古文：滕、薛、小邾之不至，皆齐故也。
现代文：滕国、薛国、小邾国的都不来了，都是由于齐国的缘故。
English: Teng, Xue, and Xiao'an did not come, all because of Qi.

古文：寡君之忧不唯郑。
现代文：寡君的忧虑不仅在于郑国。
English: The widower's worries are not limited to Zhengzhou.

古文：罃将复于寡君，而请于齐。
现代文：罃准备向寡君报告并向齐国请求会见。
English: He is preparing to report to the widower and request a meeting with Qi Guo.

古文：得请而告，吾子之功也。
现代文：得到允许后而告诉诸侯在虎牢筑城，这是大夫的功劳。
English: It is to the doctor's credit that he got permission and then told the lords to build a city in the tiger's stronghold.

古文：若不得请，事将在齐。
现代文：如果得不到允许，战争就会在齐国发生。
English: If it is not allowed, there will be war in Qi.

古文：吾子之请，诸侯之福也，岂唯寡君赖之。 
现代文：大夫的请求，是诸侯的福气，岂独寡君依靠这些？ 
English: A doctor's request is a prince's blessing. Do only the rich and powerful rely on these?

古文：穆叔聘于宋，通嗣君也。
现代文：穆叔到宋国聘问，通告新君即位的事。
English: Mu Xiu went to Song to inquire about the new emperor's enthronement.

古文：冬，复会于戚，齐崔武子及滕、薛、小邾之大夫皆会，知武子之言故也。
现代文：冬季，再次在戚地会见，齐国的崔武子和滕国、薛国、小邾国的大夫都参加会见，这是由于知武子这一番话的缘故。
English: In the winter, they met again at a relative's place. The doctors from Qi, Cui Wuzi, Teng, Xue, and Xiaoqi all attended the meeting, which was due to the words of Zhimuzi.

古文：遂城虎牢，郑人乃成。
现代文：于是就在虎牢筑城。郑国人这才要求讲和。
English: Therefore, they built the city in the Tiger Stronghold. This is when the people of Zheng asked for peace.

古文：楚公子申为右司马，多受小国之赂，以偪子重、子辛，楚人杀之。
现代文：楚国的公子申做右司马，接受了小国很多财礼，以逼迫子重、子辛。
English: The prince of Chu, Shin, acted as the right-hand man, and received a lot of money and gifts from the small country, in order to coerce Zi Chong and Zi Xin.

古文：故书曰： 楚杀其大夫公子申。 
现代文：楚国人杀了他，所以《春秋》记载说 楚杀其大夫公子申。 
English: The people of Chu killed him, so the "Spring and Autumn" recorded that Chu killed his doctor, Prince Shen.

