古文：令孤楚，字壳士，自言国初十八学士德棻之裔。
现代文：令狐楚字壳士，自称是立朝之初的十八学士之一令狐德的后裔。
English: Ling Foochu, surnamed Shell, claimed to be a descendant of Ling Foo De, one of the 18 scholars at the beginning of the founding of the dynasty.

古文：祖崇亮，绵州昌明县令。
现代文：他的祖父令狐崇亮，曾任绵州昌明县令。
English: His grandfather, Ling Juxongliang, was once the county magistrate of Mianzhou Changming County.

古文：父承简，太原府功曹。
现代文：其父令狐承简，是太原府功曹。
English: His father, Fox Chengjian, was a military hero in Taiyuan.

古文：家世儒素。
现代文：世代书香门第。
English: It has been a popular haunt for generations.

古文：楚兒童时已学属文，弱冠应进士，贞元七年登第。
现代文：令狐楚儿童时已学写文章，二十岁左右应考进士，贞元七年考中进士。
English: Ling Fuchu had already learned to write articles when he was a child. Around the age of twenty, he should take the examination to become a scholar, and in the seventh year of Zhenyuan, he should take the examination to become a scholar.

古文：桂管观察使王拱爱其才，欲以礼辟召，惧楚不从，乃先闻奏而后致聘。
现代文：桂管观察使王拱爱重他的才华，想以礼相待征召他入仕，怕令狐楚不同意，于是先奏报朝廷而后征聘。
English: Gui Guan's observation made Wang Gong cherish his talent, and he wanted to treat him with courtesy and conscript him into service. Fearing that the fox would not agree, he first reported to the imperial court and then recruited him.

古文：楚以父掾太原，有庭闱之恋，又感拱厚意，登第后径往桂林谢拱。
现代文：令狐楚因为父亲在太原担任佐吏，有眷恋双亲之情，又感戴王拱的厚意，考中进士后直接去往桂林向王拱致谢。
English: Because his father served as a military officer in Taiyuan, Ling Xuchu was attached to his parents and felt the kindness of Wang Gong. After passing the junior high school entrance examination, he went directly to Guilin to thank Wang Gong.

古文：不预宴游，乞归奉养，即还太原，人皆义之。
现代文：他没有参加朝廷为新科进士举行的宴饮活动，敬求返回太原奉养双亲，旋即回到太原，人们都认为他重节义。
English: He did not participate in the banquet held by the imperial court for the new science students, but asked to return to Taiyuan to support his parents. He immediately returned to Taiyuan, and people all thought he was a troublemaker.

古文：李说、严绶、郑儋相继镇太原，高其行义，皆辟为从事。
现代文：李说、严绶、郑儋相继镇守太原，都推崇他重节义的操行，先后征召他担任从事官。
English: Li said that Yan Xuan and Zheng Xuan, successively the town guards of Taiyuan, all respected his righteous conduct, and successively conscripted him to serve as an officer.

古文：自掌书记至节度判官，历殿中侍御史。
现代文：由掌书记到节度判官，后越级提升为殿中侍御史。
English: He was promoted from the secretary to the judge of the festival, and later he was promoted to the history of the palace.

古文：楚才思俊丽。德宗好文，每太原奏至，能辨楚之所为，颇称之。
现代文：令狐楚才气过人、文思横逸，德宗爱好文学，太原每次有奏章呈送朝廷，他能辨别出哪些是令狐楚拟制的，对它们颇为称赞。
English: Ling Fuchu was an extremely talented person, with a wide range of thoughts and ideas. Emperor Dezong loved literature. Every time Taiyuan presented a musical composition to the imperial court, he was able to distinguish which ones were made up by Ling Fuchu, and he was quite complimentary about them.

古文：郑儋在镇暴卒，不及处分后事，军中喧哗，将有急变。
现代文：郑儋在镇守太原时暴病去世，来不及安排身后事宜，军中喧哗，将会发生严重变故。
English: Zheng Qi died of a violent illness while he was the town guard of Taiyuan. It was too late to make arrangements for his successor. The army was in an uproar, and serious changes would occur.

古文：中夜十数骑持刃迫楚至军门，诸将环之，令草遗表。
现代文：半夜，十几名军官骑马持刀胁迫令狐楚去到军营门前，众将领将他团团围住，让他起草郑儋的遗表。
English: In the middle of the night, more than a dozen officers on horseback with knives forced the fox to go to the front of the barracks. The generals surrounded him and asked him to draft Zheng Xuan's will.

古文：楚在白刃之中，搦管即成，读示三军，无不感泣，军情乃安。
现代文：令狐楚在利刃圈中，挥毫即成，向三军将士宣读，无不感动落泪，军中情势方才安定。
English: The situation in the army was stabilized only after he made the fox chu in the sharp-edged circle and read it out to the three soldiers, which moved them all to tears.

古文：自是声名益重。
现代文：从此声望名气更高。
English: Since then, its reputation has only grown.

古文：丁父忧，以孝闻。
现代文：他父亲去世，令狐楚以尽孝闻名。
English: The death of his father made Fuchu famous for his filial piety.

古文：免丧，征拜右拾遗，改太常博士、礼部员外郎。
现代文：守孝期满，朝廷征召他担任右拾遗，后改任太常博士、礼部员外郎。
English: At the end of his term of filial piety, the Imperial Court called him to serve as the Right Reverend, and later he was reassigned to the position of the Grand Chancellor and the member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：母忧去官。
现代文：母亲去世，他守丧免官。
English: After his mother's death, he was relieved of his duties.

古文：服阕，以刑部员外郎征，转职方员外郎、知制诰。
现代文：服丧期满，他被征召为刑部员外郎，后调任职方员外郎、知制诰。
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was conscripted as a member of the criminal investigation department, and later transferred to the post of party member, and then to the post of secretary.

古文：楚与皇甫镈、萧俛同年登进士第。
现代文：令狐楚与皇甫、萧俛同一年考中进士。
English: Ling Xuchu passed the junior high school entrance examination in the same year as Huang Fu and Xiao Wei.

古文：元和九年，镈初以财赋得幸，荐俛、楚俱入翰林，充学士，迁职方郎中、中书舍人，皆居内职。
现代文：元和九年，皇甫靠大肆聚敛财货赋税刚刚得到皇帝宠信，便举荐免萧、亻令狐楚进入了翰林院，担任学士，晋职为职方郎中、中书舍人，同在朝廷内担任官职。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, just after the emperor's favorite letter was received by the imperial father, who relied on the tax collection of wealth and goods, he was recommended by Meng Xiao and Ziling Xuchu to enter the Hanlin Academy, served as a bachelor, promoted to the position of Fang Langzhong and Chinese scholar, and also served as an official position in the imperial court.

古文：时用兵淮西，言事者以师久无功，宜宥贼罢兵，唯裴度与宪宗志在殄寇。
现代文：当时朝廷正派兵讨伐淮西逆贼吴元济，奏议、进谏的官员认为朝廷长期用兵而不见成效，应当宽赦逆贼，停止继续用兵，只有裴度与宪宗皇帝誓志剿灭贼寇。
English: At that time, the imperial court was sending troops to fight against the Huaixi rebel Wu Yuanji. The officials who made a report and went into exile believed that the imperial court had been using troops for a long time without any results, and should pardon the rebel and stop using troops. Only Pei Du and Emperor Xianzong vowed to destroy the rebel army.

古文：十二年夏，度自宰相兼彰义军节度、淮西招抚宣慰处置使。
现代文：元和十二年夏，裴度以宰相兼任彰义军节度使、淮西招抚宣慰处置使。
English: In the summer of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Pei Du, as the prime minister, also served as the envoy of the Zhangyi Army Festival and the envoy of the Huaixi Invitation and Consolation Campaign.

古文：宰相李逢吉与度不协，与楚相善。
现代文：宰相李逢吉与裴度不和，与令狐楚交情很好。
English: Prime Minister Li Fengji is at odds with Pei Du, and is on good terms with Ling Fuchu.

古文：楚草度淮西招抚使制，不合度旨，度请改制内三数句语。
现代文：令狐楚拟制委任裴度为淮西招抚使的诏令，不符合裴度的意愿，裴度奏请皇帝修改委任诏中的三、四句文字。
English: The imperial edict of appointing Pei Du as the envoy of the Emperor of Huaixi was not in accordance with Pei Du's wishes. Pei Du requested the Emperor to amend three or four sentences in the imperial edict.

古文：宪宗方责度用兵，乃罢逢吉相任，亦罢楚内职，守中书舍人。
现代文：宪宗正取用裴度出兵，于是免除了李逢吉的宰相职务，同时也免去了令狐楚在朝廷的职务，代理中书舍人。
English: Kenzong Zheng used Pei Du to send troops, and thus relieved Li Fengji of his position as prime minister, and also relieved Ling Xuchu of his position in the imperial court, acting as a mediator between the two.

古文：元和十三年四月，出为华州刺史。
现代文：元和十三年四月，将令狐楚调出京都任华州刺史。
English: In April of the thirteenth year of the Yuan and the thirteenth year of the Heian period, Ling Xuchu was transferred from Kyoto to Huazhou.

古文：其年十月，皇甫镈作相，其月以楚为河阳怀节度使。
现代文：同年十月，皇甫做了宰相，当月委派令狐楚任河阳、怀州节度使。
English: In October of the same year, Emperor Fu became the prime minister. That month, he appointed Ling Fuchu as the envoy to the Kheyang and Waizhou festivals.

古文：十四年四月，裴度出镇太原。
现代文：元和十四年四月，裴度被调出朝廷镇守太原。
English: In April of the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Pei Du was transferred from the imperial court to the town of Taiyuan.

古文：七月，皇甫镈荐楚入朝，自朝议郎授朝议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事，与镈同处台衡，深承顾待。
现代文：七月，皇甫举荐令狐楚入朝任职，由朝议郎授官朝议大夫、中书侍郎、同平章事，与皇甫同处于宰辅大臣的高位，深受皇甫的照顾优待。
English: In July, he was recommended by the Empress Dowager to serve in the Imperial Court. He was promoted from Choheiro to Chohei hakase, Chushushijiro, and Tongpei Shoji. He held the high position of vice-minister together with the Empress Dowager, and was well taken care of and favored by the Empress Dowager.

古文：十五年正月，宪宗崩，诏楚为山陵使，仍撰哀册文。
现代文：元和十五年五月，宪宗逝世，令狐楚奉诏担任山陵使，并撰制迁移宪宗棺木的册书。
English: In May of the 15th year of the Yuan and the 15th year of the Heian period, Emperor Xianzong died, and Fox Chu Bonghao was appointed as the envoy to the tomb, and compiled a register of the relocation of Emperor Xianzong's coffin.

古文：时天下怒皇甫镈之奸邪。穆宗即位之四日，群臣素服，班于月华门外，宣诏贬镈，将杀之。
现代文：这时全国上下愤怒谴责皇甫的奸邪谄媚恶行，穆宗即位的第二日初四那天，群臣身穿白衣列班于月华门外，奏请下达诏书贬斥皇甫，并准备杀掉他。
English: At this time, the whole country angrily condemned the imperial father's treachery, evil, and evil deeds. On the second day of Mu Zong's enthronement, on the fourth day of the first month, a group of courtiers dressed in white lined up outside the Yuehua Gate, requesting an edict to denounce the imperial father, and prepared to kill him.

古文：会萧俛作相，托中官救解，方贬崖州。
现代文：适逢萧俛任宰相，托情宦官解救，才将皇甫贬至崖州做司户参军。
English: It was only when Xiao Yu was appointed prime minister and rescued by the eunuchs that he demoted the emperor to Jiaozhou to become a steward and join the army.

古文：物议以楚因镈作相而逐裴度，群情共怒。
现代文：众人议论：令狐楚通过皇甫做宰相而放逐裴度，群情共愤。
English: Everyone was discussing: Let the fox become the prime minister through the emperor and banish Pei Du, and the crowd was outraged.

古文：以萧俛之故，无敢措言。
现代文：因为萧俛担任宰相，大家才未敢多言。
English: Because Xiao Wei served as prime minister, everyone did not dare to say more.

古文：其年六月，山陵毕，会有告楚亲吏赃污事发，出为宣歙观察使。
现代文：同年六月，令狐楚担任山陵使的任务结束，正值有人告发令狐楚的亲信佐吏贪赃枉法，将他调出朝廷任宣歙观察使。
English: In June of the same year, the task of appointing Fuchu as the envoy to the mountains was over, just as someone accused Fuchu's trusted aide-de-camp of corruption, and he was transferred out of the imperial court to be appointed as the envoy to observe the proclamation.

古文：楚充奉山陵时，亲吏韦正牧、奉天令于翚、翰林阴阳官等同隐官钱，不给工徒价钱，移为羡余十五万贯上献。
现代文：令狐楚充当山陵使期间，他的亲近佐吏韦正牧、奉天县令于和翰林院的阴阳官等人一同隐瞒官府钱财，不发给匠人工钱，改作为无名税收十五万贯献给朝廷取媚邀功。
English: During the time that Ling Xuchu was acting as a mausoleum envoy, his close aide Wei Zhengmu and the magistrate of Fengtian County, Ling Yu, and the yin and yang officials of Hanlin Court, together with others, concealed the government's money and wealth, did not issue artificial money to the craftsmen, and instead dedicated 150,000 yuan to the court as an anonymous tax.

古文：怨诉盈路，正牧等下狱伏罪，皆诛。楚再贬衡州刺史。
现代文：怨愤的控诉声遍处皆是，韦正牧等人下狱伏法，全被处死，令狐楚再度被贬任衡州刺史。
English: The complaints of resentment were everywhere. Wei Zhengmu and others went to prison and were all put to death, so that the fox was once again relegated to the position of Hengzhou stabbing history.

古文：时元稹初得幸，为学士，素恶楚与镈胶固希宠，稹草楚衡州制，略曰： 楚早以文艺，得践班资，宪宗念才，擢居禁近。
现代文：这时元稹初得皇帝宠信，任翰林学士，一向痛恶令狐楚与皇甫紧密勾结希求取得皇帝宠信，元稹在拟制委派令狐楚担任衡州刺史的制令时，隐约其词地说： 令狐楚早年凭文章技艺，获得官位，宪宗念其才，提拔他官居宫廷近臣之职。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao was the first to obtain the Emperor's favorite letter. He was a scholar of Hanlin, and he had always hated Lingering Fox and closely cooperated with the Emperor to obtain the Emperor's favorite letter. When Yuan Shao sent Lingering Fox to serve as the editor of the history of Hengzhou, he said vaguely: Lingering Fox gained his official position in his early years by virtue of his writing skills. Gensong was impressed by his talent and promoted him to the position of a court vassal.

古文：异端斯害，独见不明，密隳讨伐之谋，潜附奸邪之党。
现代文：邪辟之徒如此为害，独他一人所见不明，秘密毁败讨伐逆贼的谋略，暗中阿附奸邪谄佞的结党。
English: The evil-doers have done so much harm, but only one of them saw the unknown, secretly destroyed the strategy of fighting against the traitors, and secretly joined the party of the traitors.

古文：因缘得地，进取多门，遂忝台阶，实妨贤路。 
现代文：攀附获取地位，多方谋求进身，尽辱三公之位，实是诸塞贤路。 
English: Clinging to obtain status, seeking advancement in many ways, and abusing the position of the three nobles are all virtuous ways.

古文：楚深恨稹。
现代文：因此令狐楚极恨元稹。
English: Therefore, he hated Yuan Zang intensely.

古文：长庆元年四月，量移郢州刺史，迁太子宾客，分司东都。
现代文：长庆元年四月，令狐楚遇赦将其向京城近向移任郢州刺史，后升为太子宾客，分派在东都任职。
English: In April of the first year of the Changqing era, Ling Fuchu was pardoned and transferred to the capital city of Zhangzhou, and later he was promoted to the prince's guest and assigned to work in Dongdu.

古文：二年十一月，授陕州大都督府长史、兼御史大夫、陕虢观察使。
现代文：长庆二年十一月，授予他陕州大都督府长史、兼御史大夫、陕虢观察使职务。
English: In November of the second year of Changqing, he was awarded the posts of the governor of the capital of Shaanxi Province, the doctor of history, and the observer of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：制下旬日，谏官论奏，言楚所犯非轻，未合居廉察之任。
现代文：任命诏令下达后十天，谏官呈奏论议，称：令狐楚所犯罪过不轻，不该担任廉察官员。
English: Ten days after the appointment decree was issued, the eunuch submitted a report, saying: the crime committed by Ling Fuchu was not minor, and he should not serve as an anti-corruption official.

古文：上知之，遽令追制。
现代文：穆宗得知后，立即下令追回任命诏书。
English: When Mu Zong learned of this, he immediately ordered the return of the imperial edict of appointment.

古文：时楚已至陕州，视事一日矣。复授宾客，归东都。
现代文：这时令狐楚已经抵达陕州，并处理政务一天了，又改授为太子宾客，仍回东都。
English: At this time, Ling Fuchu has arrived in Shaanxi, and has been dealing with government affairs for a day, and has been reclassified as the prince's guest, but still returns to Dongdu.

古文：时年逢吉作相，极力援楚，以李绅在禁密沮之，未能擅柄。
现代文：这时李逢吉当宰相，极力援助令狐楚，由于李绅在宫中暗地阻止，李逢吉才未能独断专行。
English: At this time, when Li Fengji became the prime minister, he tried his best to help Ling Fuchu. However, Li Fengji was not able to act arbitrarily because Li Sheng secretly stopped him in the palace.

古文：敬宗即位，逢吉逐李绅，寻用楚为河南尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：敬宗就位，李逢吉贬黜了李绅，不久任用令狐楚为河南尹、兼御史大夫。
English: Keizong took his place, Li Fengji demoted Li Sheng, and soon appointed Ling Fuchu as Henan Yin, and also as Imperial Historian.

古文：其年九月，检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史、宣武军节度、汴宋亳观察等使。
现代文：同年九月，令狐楚任检校礼部尚书、汴州刺史、宣武军节度使，汴、宋、亳诸州观察使。
English: In September of the same year, Ling Xuchu was appointed as the inspector of the ceremonial department of Shangshu, the inspector of Zhangzhou, the inspector of the Xuanwu army, and the observer of Zhuzhou.

古文：汴军素骄，累逐主帅；前后韩弘兄弟，率以峻法绳之，人皆偷生，未能革志。
现代文：汴州的军队历来骄横，屡屡驱逐主帅，韩弘兄弟先后任军帅，均以严峻的刑法约束他们。人们偷生苟活，却未能改变心性。
English: The military of Zhangzhou has always been arrogant, repeatedly expelling the commander, and the Hanhong brothers have successively served as commanders, all of whom have been constrained by severe criminal laws. People are stealing a living, but they have not been able to change their mentality.

古文：楚长于抚理，前镇河阳，代乌重胤移镇沧州，以河阳军三千人为牙卒，卒咸不愿从，中路叛归，又不敢归州，聚于境上。
现代文：令狐楚长于使用安抚手段施行治理，以前镇河阳时，替代乌重胤迁移镇守沧州，调派三千名河阳军士充任衙卒，被调任衙卒的军士全都不愿随从去沧州，中途叛逃返回，又不敢回到本州，集聚在州境一带。
English: Lingering foxes are better at using pacifying means to implement governance. Previously, when the town of Heyang was transferred to the town of Cangzhou instead of Wu Chungyan, three thousand Heyang sergeants were transferred to serve as pawns. The sergeants who were transferred to the pawns were all unwilling to follow to Cangzhou, defected halfway and returned, and dared not return to Honshu, and gathered around the state border.

古文：楚初赴任，闻之，乃疾驱赴怀州，溃卒亦至，楚单骑喻之，咸令橐弓解甲，用为前驱，卒不敢乱。
现代文：令狐楚刚赴任，听说后，于是立即快马疾驰赶赴怀州，逃散的军士也正好到达这里，令狐楚只身单骑前去劝晓他们，让他们全部解下军装、收藏弓箭，将他们用作自己的前导，军士们再不骚乱。
English: Ling Fuchu had just taken office. After hearing this, he immediately galloped to Huizhou. The escaped sergeants also arrived here. Ling Fuchu rode alone to persuade them, let them all take off their uniforms, collect bows and arrows, and use them as their guides. The sergeants would no longer riot.

古文：及莅汴州，解其酷法，以仁惠为治，去其太甚，军民咸悦，翕然从化，后竟为善地。
现代文：到了汴州，令狐楚解除原先的严酷法令，以仁慈宽惠的办法进行治理，去掉那些过于苛严的条令，当地军民全都心悦诚服，一致听从教化，后来这里终于成为一个民风和顺的地方。
English: When he arrived in Zhangzhou, he ordered the fox to lift the original harsh decrees, to govern with mercy and leniency, and to remove those overly harsh regulations. The local soldiers and civilians were all pleased and convinced, and unanimously obeyed the enlightenment. Later, it finally became a place where the people's customs were harmonious.

古文：汴帅前例，始至率以钱二百万实其私藏，楚独不取，以其羡财治廨舍数百间。
现代文：汴州军帅以往的惯例，总是一到任就从官府拿出钱二百万作为私人财产，惟独令狐楚不私取这笔钱财，将它作为余财修建了官吏衙署和住所数百间。
English: In the past, it was customary for the commander of the Zhangzhou Military Region to take out two million yuan from the government as private property as soon as he took office. However, he did not take this money for himself, but used it as surplus money to build hundreds of residences and offices for government officials.

古文：太和二年九月，征为户部尚书。
现代文：太和二年九月，令狐楚被征召任户部尚书。
English: In September of the 2nd year of the Taiwa era, Ling Fuchu was called up to serve as the household secretary.

古文：三年三月，检校兵部尚书、东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
现代文：三年三月，任检校兵部尚书、东都留守、东畿汝州都防御使。
English: In March of the third year, he was appointed as the inspector of the military department of Shangshu, the east was left behind, and the east was the defense of Ruzhou.

古文：其年十一月，进位检校右仆射、郓州刺史、天平军节度、郓曹濮观察等使。
现代文：同年十一月，晋升为检校右仆射、郓州刺史、天平军节度使、郓曹濮诸州观察使。
English: In November of the same year, he was promoted to the school inspector, the right-hand shooting, the Zhangzhou stabbing history, the Tianping Army Festival Envoy, and the Zhuzhou Observation Envoy.

古文：奏故东平县为天平县。
现代文：他奏请朝廷将原东平县改为天平县。
English: He petitioned the Imperial Court to change the original Dongping County to Tianping County.

古文：属岁旱俭，人至相食，楚均富赡贫，而无流亡者。
现代文：这时许多地区连年干旱歉收，乃至发生人吃人的事情，令狐楚采取调节富余救济贫困的办法，而使辖区内没有逃荒流亡者。
English: At this time, many regions suffered from consecutive years of drought and poor harvests, and even incidents of cannibalism occurred, prompting Fuchu to adopt the method of regulating surplus and relieving poverty, so that there were no refugees fleeing from the desert in the jurisdiction area.

古文：六年二月，改太原尹、北都留守、河东节度等使。
现代文：太和六年二月，令狐楚改任太原尹、北都留守、河东节度使等职。
English: In February of the 6th year of Tahe, Ling Xuchu was reassigned to the posts of Taiyuan Yin, Beidou Remnant, and Hedong Festival Envoy.

古文：楚久在并州，练其风俗，因人所利而利之，虽属岁旱，人无转徙。
现代文：他长期在并州，熟悉当地民情风俗，顺随百姓认为有利的事因势利导，尽管连年旱灾，百姓无人迁徙。
English: He has been in Bozhou for a long time, is familiar with the local folk customs, and follows what the people think is beneficial. Despite years of drought, the people have not migrated.

古文：楚始自书生，随计成名，皆在太原，实如故里。
现代文：令狐楚从一介书生起始，顺随考核功绩而成名，都在太原，太原如同他的故乡。
English: From his humble beginnings as a high school student to his rise to fame as a result of his performance in examinations, Ling Xuchu was born in Taiyuan. Taiyuan is like his hometown.

古文：及是垂旄作镇，邑老欢迎。
现代文：待到这时，他执掌兵权担任太原镇使，当地乡民父老对他非常欢迎。
English: By this time, he held the military power and served as the Taiyuan Town Envoy. Local villagers welcomed him very much.

古文：楚绥抚有方，军民胥悦。
现代文：令狐楚安定、治理有方，军民尽皆欢悦。
English: It makes the country stable and well-governed, and the military and the people are all happy.

古文：七年六月，入为吏部尚书，仍检校右仆射。
现代文：太和七年六月，他入朝任吏部尚书，仍为检校右仆射。
English: In June of the seventh year of the Taika era, he entered the imperial court as a member of the Imperial Secretariat, and was still the right-hand man of the inspection.

古文：故事，检校高官者，便从其班。
现代文：按旧例，加 检校 衔于高一级官位的官员，即就列高位班序。
English: According to the old practice, officials who have been promoted to a higher-level official rank after passing the inspection will be placed in the high-ranking order.

古文：楚以正官三品不宜从二品之列，请从本班，优诏嘉之。
现代文：令狐楚以自己的正官为三品不应当从就二品班列，奏请从就三品本官班列，文宗下诏嘉奖他。
English: It is not proper for a fox to be promoted from the second-ranked to the third-ranked official. He should be promoted from the third-ranked to the first-ranked official. The Emperor should commend him.

古文：九年六月，转太常卿。
现代文：太和九年六月，令狐楚转任太常卿。
English: In June of the ninth year of the Taihei era, Ling Fuchu was transferred to the post of Tai Changqing.

古文：十月，守尚书左仆射，进封彭阳郡开国公。
现代文：十月，代理尚书左仆射，晋封为彭阳郡开国公。
English: In October, the agent, Shang Shuzhaopu, was promoted to be the founding father of Pengyang County.

古文：十一月，李训兆乱，京师大扰。
现代文：十一月，李训开始作乱，京都极其不安。
English: In November, Ri Hun started a riot, which made Kyoto extremely uneasy.

古文：训乱之夜，文宗召右仆射郑覃与楚宿于禁中，商量制敕，上皆欲用为宰相。
现代文：李训肇乱的当夜，文宗将右仆射郑覃与令狐楚召进宫内住宿，商量拟制敕令；皇帝打算将他二人都任用为宰相。
English: On the night of Li Xun's rebellion, Emperor Wenzong summoned his right-hand man, Zheng He, and his second-in-command, Ling Xuchu, to the palace for lodging and to discuss the drafting of the imperial edict; the emperor intended to appoint both of them as prime ministers.

古文：楚以王涯、贾餗冤死，叙其罪状浮泛，仇士良等不悦，故辅弼之命移于李石。
现代文：令狐楚觉得王涯、贾饣束遭冤而死，列叙他们的罪状浮泛含糊。宦官仇士良等很不高兴，因此将宰相的任命转移给了李石。
English: The eunuchs, such as Qiu Shiliang, were very unhappy, so the appointment of the prime minister was transferred to Li Shih.

古文：乃以本官领盐铁转运等使。
现代文：令狐楚于是以本官职位兼任盐铁转运使。
English: Therefore, Ling Xuchu concurrently served as the Salt and Iron Transportation Envoy in his official position.

古文：先是，郑注上封置榷茶使额，盐铁使兼领之，楚奏罢之，曰：
现代文：在此之前，郑注曾上密奏设置榷茶使官额，由盐铁使兼领榷茶使之职，令狐楚奏请取消设置榷茶使这一做法，奏文说：
English: Prior to this, Zheng Zhu had secretly set up the post of tea steward, and the salt and iron steward also led the tea steward, so the fox and chu should please cancel this practice of tea steward, the report said:

古文：伏以江、淮数年已来，水旱疾疫，凋伤颇甚，愁叹未平。
现代文： 臣窃以为：江、淮数年以来，水旱灾害、疫病流行，百姓遭受摧残损伤十分严重，忧愁苦叹未平。
English: The minister thought that the floods, droughts and epidemics had been raging along the Yangtze River and the Huai River for several years, and the people had suffered very serious destruction and damage, and their sorrow and anguish had not been alleviated.

古文：今夏及秋，稍校丰稔，方须惠恤，各使安存。
现代文：今岁夏秋，略微丰收，正须宽厚体恤，以使各各安身。
English: This year's summer and autumn, slightly bumper harvest, it is necessary to be generous, so that everyone can settle down.

古文：昨者忽奏榷茶，实为蠹政。
现代文：目前突然实行茶叶官府专营，这实在是败坏朝廷政事。
English: At present, the sudden implementation of the tea monopoly by the government is really corrupting the political affairs of the imperial court.

古文：盖是王涯破灭将至，怨怒合归，岂有令百姓移茶树于官场中栽植，摘茶叶于官场中造作，有同兒戏，不近人情。
现代文：因为王涯刚刚将茶叶官营破除殆尽，民间的怨怒之心尽都和顺，怎能又让百姓将茶树移至官营茶圃种植，将茶叶摘去官营茶场制作？这种做法如同儿戏，不近人情。
English: Because Wang Ya had just eliminated the official tea plantations, and the resentment of the people was completely amicable, how could the people be allowed to move the tea trees to the official tea plantations and remove the tea leaves from the official tea plantations? This practice is like a child's play and is not close to human feelings.

古文：方在恩权，孰敢沮议？
现代文：奏请者正在恩宠当权之际，有谁敢提出阻止执行之议？
English: At a time when the petitioner is in the ascendancy, who would dare to raise a motion to block the execution?

古文：朝班相顾而失色，道路以目而吞声。
现代文：朝廷大臣为此相顾失色，平民百姓对此侧目吞声。
English: The ministers of the imperial court were discredited for this, and the common people turned a blind eye to it.

古文：今宗社降灵，奸凶尽戮，圣明垂祐，黎庶合安。
现代文：如今神灵降福国家，奸贼凶徒除尽，圣君赐福百姓，黎民和顺安泰。
English: Now the gods have blessed the country, the traitors and criminals have been eliminated, and the saint has blessed the people, Limin and Shun Antae.

古文：微臣蒙恩，兼领使务，官衔之内，犹带此名。
现代文：微臣承蒙皇恩，兼任多项使臣，官衔之中，仍有此名。
English: Owing to the grace of the emperor, the minor vassal also served as a number of envoys, and this name is still among the official titles.

古文：俯仰若惊，夙宵知惧。
现代文：一举一动感到惶恐，早早晚晚深有忧惧。
English: Every move is met with trepidation and, sooner or later, deep apprehension.

古文：伏乞特回圣听，下鉴愚诚，速委宰臣，除此使额。
现代文：敬祈陛下破格改变圣明决策，明鉴愚臣一片恳诚，速派宰辅大臣，撤销榷茶使名。
English: I respectfully pray that His Majesty will make an unprecedented change in the decision-making of the Holy Grail, clearly recognize the foolishness of a sincere minister, quickly dispatch the deputy minister, and revoke the name of the tea ceremony.

古文：缘军国之用或阙，山泽之利有遗，许臣条疏，续具闻奏。
现代文：若因军国费用有所短缺，自然资源遗漏开发，敬请允许微臣上疏，继续条陈圣上知道。
English: If there is a shortfall due to military and national expenses, or if natural resources are not developed, please allow the Weizhong minister to go up and continue to know.

古文：采造将及，妨废为虞。
现代文：采制茶叶季节即将到来，妨碍贻误采制令人忧虑。
English: The tea harvesting season is just around the corner, and it is worrisome that improper harvesting is hampering the harvest.

古文：前月二十一日，内殿奏对之次，郑覃与臣同陈论讫。
现代文：前月二十一日，在内殿奏对策问中间，郑覃与臣一同尽皆陈论。
English: On the 21st of the previous month, in the middle of playing a counter-strategy in the inner hall, Zheng Yu and his minister discussed everything together.

古文：伏望圣慈早赐处分，一依旧法，不用新条。
现代文：敬望圣上仁慈及早处置，一概依从旧法，不用新的条令。
English: It is hoped that the divine mercy will deal with the matter as soon as possible, and the old law will be followed in all cases, and no new regulations will be needed.

古文：唯纳榷之时，须节级加价，商人转卖，必校稍贵，即是钱出万国，利归有司。
现代文：只是在收缴茶税时，必须按茶叶等级依次加价，商人转卖，必定稍贵，这就是钱出万方，利在官家。
English: However, when the tea tax is collected, the price must be increased according to the grade of the tea, and the merchant must resell it at a slightly higher price. This is where the money comes from, and the profits go to the government.

古文：既不害茶商，又不扰茶户，上以彰陛下爱人之德，下以竭微臣忧国之心。
现代文：既不损害茶商，又不骚扰茶农，上可显扬陛下爱民的仁德，下能竭尽微臣忧国的苦心。
English: Neither harming the tea merchants nor harassing the tea farmers, His Majesty's benevolence of loving the people can be shown on the top, and the painstaking efforts of Weizhong can be exhausted on the bottom.

古文：远近传闻，必当感悦。
现代文：远近四方传播，必定感戴欢悦。 
English: Spread far and wide, it is sure to bring joy.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝听从了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：先是，元和十年，出内库弓箭陌刀赐左右街使，充宰相入朝以为翼卫，及建福门而止。
现代文：起先，在宪宗元和十年，拿出皇宫府库的弓箭长刀赐给左右街使，供宰相入朝时用作护卫，到建福门止。
English: At first, in the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Gensong, a long sword with a bow and arrow from the treasury of the Imperial Palace was given to the left and right street messengers, to be used as an escort when the prime minister entered the court, ending at the Jianfu Gate.

古文：至是，因训、注之乱，悉罢之。
现代文：到这时，因李训、郑注作乱，全部取消。
English: At this time, due to Li Xun and Zheng Zhu creating a disturbance, all performances were cancelled.

古文：楚又奏： 诸道新授方镇节度使等，具帑抹，带器仗，就尚书省兵部参辞。
现代文：令狐楚又进奏： 各道新任的方镇、节度使等，置备仪仗，携带兵器，到尚书省参拜告别。
English: Ling Xuchu played again: the newly appointed Fangzhen, festival envoys, etc. in each province prepared for the ceremonial battle, carried weapons, and went to Shangshu Province to visit and bid farewell.

古文：伏以军国异容，古今定制，若不由旧，斯为改常。
现代文：窃以为：军队与朝堂仪容各不相同，从古到今已成定制，若不遵从历久的规范，这就叫作改变常态。
English: He thought: The military and the imperial court have different appearances, which have been customized from ancient times to the present. If they do not follow the long-standing norms, it is called changing the normal state.

古文：未闻省阁之门，忽内弓刀之器。
现代文：从未听说宫禁门中，随意带进弓刀兵器。
English: I've never heard of anyone bringing a bow and sword into the Forbidden Palace.

古文：郑注外蒙恩宠，内蓄凶狂，首创奸谋，将兴乱兆。
现代文：郑注身蒙皇帝恩宠，心怀凶狂恶念，率先倡导奸邪谋议，蓄意发动作乱祸兆。
English: Zheng Zhushin was favored by the emperor, harboring ferocious evil thoughts, taking the lead in advocating treachery and evil, and deliberately making chaotic moves.

古文：致王璠、郭行余之辈，敢驱将吏，直诣阙庭。
现代文：致使王播、郭行余之辈，胆敢驱使军官，直抵宫廷朝堂。
English: As a result, Wang Bo and Guo Xingyu dared to drive the officers all the way to the palace.

古文：震惊乘舆，骚动京国，血溅朝路，尸僵禁街。
现代文：皇帝大受惊吓，京都骚动不安，血溅朝廷的道路，尸横宫内的街市。
English: The emperor was greatly alarmed, there was unrest in Kyoto, blood spattered the streets of the imperial court, and corpses lined the streets of the palace.

古文：史册所书，人神共愤，既往不咎，其源尚开。
现代文：史册所载，人神共愤，过去的事情不予追究，肇祸的根源更将大开。
English: As recorded in the annals of history, people and gods are indignant together, the things of the past are not investigated, and the root causes of the disaster will be more open.

古文：前件事宜，伏乞速令停罢，如须参谢，即具公服。 
现代文：前件所奏事宜，敬乞速令停止，新近授职的方镇、节度使如须参谒谢恩，即应穿著官吏礼服。 
English: With regard to the matters mentioned in the preceding paragraph, the fast-track order of obeying and begging should be stopped, and the newly-appointed Fangzhen and Jiedu envoys should wear official dress if they need to show their gratitude.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又奏请罢修曲江亭绢一万三千七百匹，回修尚书省，从之。
现代文：令狐楚还奏请取消进献修饰曲江亭的绢一万三千七百匹，改用为修理尚书省，皇帝同意。
English: Ling Xuchu also asked the emperor to cancel the donation of 13,700 horses to decorate the Qujiang Pavilion, and instead use it to repair Shangshu Province. The emperor agreed.

古文：开成元年上巳，赐百僚曲江亭宴。
现代文：开成元年上巳节，文宗赏赐百官在曲江亭聚宴。
English: At the Snake Festival in the first year of the year, Wenzong rewarded hundreds of officials with a banquet at Qujiangting.

古文：楚以新诛大臣，不宜赏宴，独称疾不赴，论者美之。
现代文：令狐楚认为新近诛杀大臣，不宜赏赐欢宴，仅其一人称病不去赴宴，议论者都称赞他。
English: Ling Xuchu thought that it was not appropriate to give a banquet to the newly assassinated minister. He was the only one who said that he was sick and would not go to the banquet. The commentators all praised him.

古文：以权在内官，累上疏乞解使务。
现代文：由于权柄掌握在宦官、近臣手中，令狐楚接连上疏请求解除使臣职务。
English: As the power was in the hands of eunuchs and close vassals, Ling Xuchu successively requested Shang Shu to dismiss the envoy.

古文：其年四月，检校左仆射、兴元尹，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：同年四月，令狐楚任检校左仆射、兴元尹，担任山南西道节度使。
English: In April of the same year, Ling Xuchu appointed Zuo Shuai and Xing Yuanyin as inspectors of the school, and served as the festival envoy of Shannan West Road.

古文：二年十一月，卒于镇，年七十二，册赠司空，谥曰文。
现代文：开成二年十一月，在镇所去世，终年七十二岁，策封赠官为司空，谥号 文 。
English: In November of the second year of Kaecheng, he died in the town hall, he was seventy-two years old. The official who presented him with the imperial seal was Siku, and his posthumous name was Wen.

古文：楚风仪严重，若不可犯；然宽厚有礼，门无杂宾。
现代文：令狐楚风度仪态严肃庄重，俨然不可侵犯，但实际上待人宽厚有礼，家中没有闲杂外客。
English: He has a serious and solemn demeanor that makes him seem inviolable, but in reality, he treats people generously and courteously, and there are no foreign guests in his home.

古文：尝与从事宴语方酣，有非类偶至，立命彻席，毅然色变。
现代文：曾有一次他与佐吏聚宴交谈兴致正浓，有不正派的人偶然到来，他立即让人撤去宴席，神情严厉勃然色变。
English: There was a time when he was in the middle of a conversation with a group of officials at a banquet. Someone who was not a member of the right faction happened to arrive, and he immediately had the banquet removed. His stern expression suddenly changed.

古文：累居重任，贞操如初。
现代文：令狐楚长期官居要职，节操坚贞如初。
English: Let the fox Chu long-term officials occupy important positions, and the discipline is as firm as ever.

古文：未终前三日，犹吟咏自若。
现代文：临终的前三天，仍然吟咏诗文不改常态。
English: Three days before his death, he was still chanting poetry and not changing his normal state.

古文：疾甚，诸子进药，未赏入口，曰： 修短之期，分以定矣，何须此物？ 
现代文：病情危重，其子进药，从不服用，说： 寿命长短的期限，命中早已注定了，何须这些药物。 
English: His son, who is critically ill and takes medication but never takes it, said: "The length of his life is predetermined, so why do we need these drugs?

古文：前一日，召从事李商隐曰： 吾气魄已殚，情思俱尽，然所怀未已，强欲自写闻天，恐辞语乖舛，子当助我成之。 
现代文：临终前一天，他召来佐吏李商隐说： 我的气息魂魄已到尽头，才情文思俱都衰竭，但心中的思念未了，想勉强自成文字奏禀天子，又担心语无伦次，你一定要协助我写完它。 
English: On the day before his death, he summoned his secretary, Li Shangyin, and said: "My breath and soul have come to an end, my talents and thoughts have all been exhausted, but my thoughts are not over, I want to compose a poem of my own, and I am worried about incoherence, you must help me finish writing it.

古文：即秉笔自书曰：臣永惟际会，受国深恩。
现代文：当即自己拿笔写道： 臣久逢机遇，深受国恩。
English: He immediately took out his pen and wrote: "I have been given the opportunity for a long time, and I am deeply grateful to the nation.

古文：以祖以父，皆蒙褒赠；有弟有子，并列班行。
现代文：祖辈父辈，都曾蒙受褒奖封赠；兄弟儿子，一并受封居官任职。
English: The ancestors of the ancestors have all received awards and gifts; brothers and sons have all been appointed as feudal officials.

古文：全腰领以从先人，委体魄而事先帝，此不自达，诚为甚愚。
现代文：微臣免遭刑诛保全名节而随先人之后，托身朝廷而得以侍奉先帝，对此恩德倘若不能自明，那也实在愚蠢至极。
English: If it is not self-evident, it would be extremely foolish if we did not show our gratitude to the former emperor for allowing us to serve him by entrusting ourselves to the imperial court, following in the footsteps of our predecessors.

古文：但以永去泉扃，长辞云陛，更陈尸谏，犹进瞽言。
现代文：只是微臣即将永赴泉台，长辞陛下，因而再次以死相谏，打算进奏无知妄言。
English: It's just that Weizong is about to go to Quan Tai forever, to make a long speech to His Majesty, so he's once again trying to play ignorant nonsense with death.

古文：虽号叫而不能，岂诚明之敢忘？
现代文：纵想呼喊已不可能，竭诚明志哪里敢忘？
English: Even though shouting is no longer possible, how dare we forget our sincerity?

古文：今陛下春秋鼎盛，寰海镜清，是修教化之初，当复理平之始。
现代文：如今陛下年岁正旺，四海之内清平如镜，这是使教化美善的初步成效，使天下更加太平的开始。
English: Today, His Majesty is in the prime of his life, and the four seas are as smooth as a mirror. This is the initial effect of enlightening and beautifying the world, and the beginning of making the world more peaceful.

古文：然自前年夏秋已来，贬谴者至多，诛戮者不少，望普加鸿造，稍霁皇威。
现代文：然而自从前年夏秋以来，被贬斥的大臣极多，遭杀戮的官员不少，恳望陛下广施再造的鸿恩，稍敛皇帝的威严。
English: However, since the summer and autumn of the previous year, a great number of ministers have been reviled, and many officials have been killed, imploring His Majesty to restore the honor and dignity of the emperor.

古文：殁者昭洗以云雷，存者沾濡以雨露，使五谷嘉熟，兆人安康。
现代文：以云雷之势为死者昭雪洗冤，施雨露之恩让生者普受惠泽，使五谷丰美，万民安康。
English: Using the potential of clouds and thunderstorms to clear up the wrongs of the dead, and to grant the grace of rain and dew so that the living can receive universal benefits, so that the grain is plentiful and the people are healthy.

古文：纳臣将尽之苦言，慰臣永蛰之幽魄。
现代文：恳祈容受微臣临终的苦言，以期抚慰微臣死后的幽魂。 
English: Pray earnestly for the acceptance of Weizhong's dying words, with a view to soothing the ghost of Weizhong after his death.

古文：书讫，谓其子绪、綯曰： 吾生无益于人，勿请谥号。
现代文：写毕，对他的儿子令狐绪、令狐綯说： 我生平对人无所补益，死后不要请赠谥号。
English: When he had finished writing, he said to his sons, Ling Fuxuxu and Ling Fuxuan: I have done nothing to benefit mankind in my life, so please do not give me a posthumous name after I die.

古文：葬日，勿请鼓吹，唯以布车一乘，余勿加饰。
现代文：殡葬那天，不要请用鼓吹奏乐，仅用布帐丧车一辆，此外不要再加装饰。
English: On the day of the funeral, please do not use the trumpet to play music, only use a cloth mourning wagon, and do not add any decorations.

古文：铭志但志宗门，秉笔者无择高位。 
现代文：碑铭墓志只记宗族，撰写碑文不请高官。 
English: Epitaphs and epitaphs only record the clan, and high-ranking officials are not invited to write epitaphs.

古文：当殁之夕，有大星陨于寝室之上，其光烛廷。
现代文：逝世的当晚，有大星殒落在寝室之上，星光照耀庭院。
English: On the night of his death, a large star fell on his bedroom and the stars shone down on the courtyard.

古文：楚端坐与家人告诀，言已而终。
现代文：令狐楚端身正坐与家人告别永诀，说完话后逝去。
English: Ling Xuchu, who was sitting with his family, said his goodbyes, and then passed away.

古文：嗣子奉行遗旨。
现代文：嫡长子遵从父亲遗愿治丧。
English: The eldest son followed his father's last wishes.

古文：诏曰： 生为名臣，殁有理命。
现代文：文宗下诏说： 生为贤能著称的官吏，死有合情合理的遗言。
English: The imperial edict under the text said: The official who was born famous for his virtue died with a reasonable last words.

古文：终始之分，可谓两全。
现代文：终于初始奉行的原则，称得上在世、寿终两全。
English: Finally, the principle that was initially pursued can be said to be the best in life and the best in death.

古文：卤簿哀荣之末节，难违往意；诔谥国家之大典，须守彝章。
现代文：殡葬仪仗盛俭的细节，难于违拗临终遗嘱；祭文赠谥是国家大典，必须遵守常行典章。
English: It is difficult to go against the last will and testament due to the lavish details of the funeral rites. The offering of offerings is a national ceremony and must comply with the regular rules.

古文：卤簿宜停，易名须准旧例。 
现代文：殡葬仪仗可予不用，立谥必须遵从惯例。 
English: Funeral rites may be dispensed with, and the laying of wreaths must follow customary practice.

古文：后綯贵，累赠至太尉。
现代文：日后，其子令狐綯居官显贵，令狐楚的追赠爵号加至太尉。
English: In the future, his son would make Foo Xiu a distinguished official, and make Foo Chu's posthumous title of knighthood be added to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：有文集一百卷，行于时。
现代文：有文集一百卷，流行于当时。
English: There were a hundred volumes of anthologies, which were popular at the time.

古文：綯字子直。太和四年登进士第，释褐弘文馆校书郎。
现代文：他所撰写的《宪宗哀册文》，辞采情致典雅丰美，被文士们所推重。令狐綯字子直，文宗太和四年中进士，初入仕途任弘文馆校书郎。
English: The "Kenzong lamentation book" he wrote, with its elegant and beautiful words, was highly valued by the scribes. To make matters worse, he was promoted to a scholar in his fourth year of study, and was appointed as a school scribe at the Hongwu Museum for the first time in his career.

古文：开成初为左拾遗。
现代文：开成初年任左拾遗。
English: Kaisei's first year in office left a lot to be desired.

古文：二年，丁父丧。
现代文：二年，其父令狐楚去世，守丧免职。
English: Two years later, his father, Ling Xuchu, passed away, and he was relieved of his duties.

古文：服阕，授本官，寻改左补阙、史馆修撰，累迁库部、户部员外郎。
现代文：服丧期满，授予原官职，不久，改任左补阙、史馆修撰，加官晋职为库部、户部员外郎。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was awarded his former official position, and soon he was reassigned to the post of Left Supplementary Secretary and Historian, and was promoted to the Treasury Department and the Household Department.

古文：会昌五年，出为湖州刺史。
现代文：武宗会昌五年，调出朝廷任湖州刺史。
English: In the fifth year of Wuzong Huichang, he was transferred from the imperial court to serve as the governor of Huzhou.

古文：大中二年，召拜考功郎中，寻知制诰。
现代文：宣宗大中二年，召回朝廷授官考功郎中，不久任知制诰。
English: In the second year of his junior high school, he was recalled to the Imperial Court as a meritorious student, and was soon appointed to the position of chishojo.

古文：其年，召入充翰林学士。
现代文：同年，奉召进宫任翰林学士。
English: In the same year, he was called to the palace to serve as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：三年，拜中书舍人，袭封彭阳男，食邑三百户，寻拜御史中丞。
现代文：大中三年，授官中书舍人，承袭封爵为彭阳男，享受食邑三百户，不久任御史中丞。
English: In the third year of high school, he was awarded the title of junior high school student, inherited the title of knight as Pengyang man, enjoyed the food of three hundred households, and soon became the junior high school student.

古文：四年，转户部侍郎，判本司事。
现代文：大中四年，升任户部侍郎，兼任本部司事。
English: In his senior year of high school, he was promoted to the position of the head waiter and concurrently served as the secretary of the headquarters.

古文：其年，改兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：同年，改任兵部侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the same year, he was reappointed as the attendant of the military department, and was promoted to the position of the junior secretary of the same department.

古文：綯以旧事带尚书省官，合先省上。
现代文：令狐綯以旧职兼任尚书省官署职务，应当先问候职居上位的大臣。
English: If Ling Xuxuan concurrently holds the post of the Shangshu Provincial Government Office in his old position, he should first greet the higher-ranking minister.

古文：上日同列集于少府监。
现代文：初一，同位官员在少府监集合。
English: On the first day of the school year, the same officials gathered at the office of the Junior Prefectural Supervisor.

古文：时白敏中、崔龟从曾为太常博士，至相位，欲荣其旧署，乃改集于太常礼院，龟从手笔志其事于壁。
现代文：当时白敏中、崔龟从曾任太常博士，官居宰相之位，想使其旧日任职的官署荣显，于是改在太常礼院会集，崔龟从将这件事亲笔题写在太常礼院墙壁上。
English: At that time, Bai Minzhong and Cui Gui, who had been a doctor of Tai Chang and lived in the position of prime minister, wanted to make the government office they had served in the past glorious, so they changed it to the Taizhang Academy. Cui Gui wrote the matter in his own handwriting on the walls of the Taizhang Academy.

古文：綯辅政十年，累官至吏部尚书、右仆射、凉国公，食邑二千户。
现代文：令狐綯辅佐朝政十年，加官至吏部尚书、右仆射、凉国公，享受食邑二千户。
English: In the 10th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was promoted to the posts of Shangshu (尚書), Umenoya (右仆射) and Liangguogong (凉国公), and enjoyed the hospitality of 2,000 households.

古文：十三年，罢相，检校司空、同中书门下平章事、河中尹、河中晋绛等节度使。
现代文：大中十三年，免去宰相职务，任检校司空、同中书门下平章事、河中尹、河中晋绛等地节度使。
English: In the thirteenth year of high school, he was relieved of the post of prime minister and appointed as the inspector of the school, the secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school, the deputy secretary of the school.

古文：咸通二年，改汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。
现代文：懿宗咸通二年，改任汴州刺史、宣武军节度使。
English: In the second year of Xizong Hamdong, he was transferred to the post of Xizhou Sashishi and the Xuanwu Army Festival Envoy.

古文：三年冬，迁扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：咸通三年冬，升任扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、执掌节度大使职事。
English: In the winter of the third year of Hamdang Tong, he was promoted to the post of governor of Yangzhou, deputy ambassador of Huainan Festival, and ambassador in charge of the festival.

古文：累加开府仪同三司、检校司徒，进食邑至三千户。
现代文：晋爵加衔为开府仪同三司、检校司徒，食邑加至三千户。
English: He was promoted to Kaifu-gi, Sanji, and Kengakko-ji, and the number of his households increased to 3,000.

古文：九年，徐州戍兵庞勋自桂州擅还。
现代文：咸通九年，从徐州调至边防军队的武宁军节度粮料判官庞勋擅自从桂州返回。
English: In the ninth year of Hamdong, Pang Xun, the judge of the grain ration of the Wu Ning Army, who was transferred from Xuzhou to the border defense army, returned from Guizhou.

古文：七月至浙西，沿江自白沙入浊河，剽夺舟船而进。
现代文：七月返抵浙西，沿长江由白沙进入浊河，抢夺舟船前进。
English: In July, he returned to western Zhejiang and advanced along the Yangtze River from Baisha into the Fen River, seizing boats.

古文：綯闻勋至，遣使慰抚，供给刍米。
现代文：令狐綯听说庞勋到来，派使者前往安抚，供给粮草。
English: Upon hearing of Pang Xun's arrival, Ling Xuan sent an envoy to appease him and supply grain and grass.

古文：都押衙李湘白綯曰： 徐兵擅还，必无好意。
现代文：都押衙李湘对令狐綯说： 徐州戍边的军队擅自返回，必定不怀好意。
English: Li Xiang, the governor of the capital, said to Ling Fuxi: It is definitely not in good faith for the army of Xuzhou to return without permission.

古文：虽无诏命除讨，权变制在籓方。
现代文：尽管没有朝廷诏令授命讨伐，随机应变的决断权力在方镇。
English: Although there is no imperial edict ordering a crusade, the power to decide on a random contingency rests with Fangzhen.

古文：昨其党来投，言其数不逾二千，而虚张舟航旗帜，恐人见其实。
现代文：目前他的同伙来降，说庞勋的人马不足二千，却虚张舟船旗帜，怕人看出他的实力。
English: At present, his accomplices have come to surrender, saying that Pang Xun's manpower is less than two thousand, but they are bluffing, afraid that people will see his strength.

古文：涉境已来，心颇忧惴。
现代文：入境以来，让人忧虑不安。
English: Since entering the country, people have been worried and anxious.

古文：计其水路，须出高邮县界，河岸斗峻而水深狭。
现代文：计算水路进程，他必须越过高邮县界，这一带河岸陡峭而河窄水深。
English: To calculate the course of the waterway, he had to cross the Gaoyou County border, where the river bank is steep and the river is narrow and deep.

古文：若出奇兵邀之，俾荻船纵火于前，劲兵奋击于后，败走必矣。
现代文：如果出奇兵拦劫攻打他，先用载草船只在前火攻，再以强劲的兵力接踵猛击，他必定败逃。
English: If a surprise attack is made on him, first with a grass-carrying boat, and then with a strong force, he will certainly flee.

古文：若不于此诛锄，俟济淮、泗，合徐人负怨之徒，不下十万，则祸乱非细也。 
现代文：若不在这时将他诛除，等他渡过淮河、泗水，纠合徐州的怀怨在心之徒，人马将不下十万，那么酿成的祸乱就不是小事了。 
English: If he is not eliminated at this time, there will be no less than one hundred thousand people waiting for him to cross the Huaihe River and Surabaya to deal with the grudge-bearers in Xuzhou, and the resulting disaster will be no small matter.

古文：綯性懦缓，又以不奉诏命，谓湘曰： 长淮已南，他不为暴。
现代文：令狐綯性格软弱宽和，又因为没有接到诏命，便对李湘说： 庞勋在长淮以南，没有行凶作恶。
English: Ling Xuxuan's character was weak and broad, and because he did not receive the imperial order, he said to Li Xiang: Pang Xun was south of Changhuai and did not commit evil.

古文：从他过去，余非吾事也。 
现代文：听由他过去，其他的就不是我的事了。 
English: Let him go, the rest is none of my business.

古文：其年冬，庞勋杀崔彦曾，据徐州，聚众六七万。
现代文：这年冬天，庞勋杀了观察使崔彦曾，占据徐州，聚集军众六、七万人。
English: This winter, Pang Xun killed the observation envoy Cui Yan Zeng, occupied Xuzhou, and gathered an army of sixty to seventy thousand people.

古文：徐无兵食，乃分遣贼帅攻剽淮南诸郡，滁、和、楚、寿继陷。
现代文：徐州没有军队吃的粮食，庞勋便分别派遣叛军的将帅攻打、抢劫淮南各郡，滁、和、楚、寿几个州相继失陷。
English: Xuzhou had no grain for the army to eat, so Pang Xun sent rebel generals to attack and loot Huainan counties separately, and several counties of Quzhou, He, Chu and Shou were successively lost.

古文：谷食既尽，淮南之民多为贼所啖。
现代文：粮食谷物吃尽后，淮南百姓多有被庞勋贼军吃掉的。
English: After running out of grain, the people of Huainan were mostly eaten by Pang Xun's army of thieves.

古文：时两淮郡县多陷，唯杜慆守泗州，贼攻之经年，不能下。
现代文：这时两淮的郡县大多失陷，只有杜忄舀镇守的泗州，贼军经久攻打不下。
English: At this time, most of the counties of the two Huai were lost, and only the cuckoo town of Zhangzhou could not be attacked by the thief army for a long time.

古文：初，诏綯为徐州南面招讨使。贼攻泗州急，綯令李湘将兵五千人援之。
现代文：这时诏令委任令狐綯为徐州南面招讨使，贼军攻打泗州急迫，令狐綯命李湘率领五千士兵援救泗州。
English: At this time, the imperial edict ordered Foxtrot to recruit envoys for the south side of Xuzhou. The bandits were in a hurry to attack Ganzhou, so Foxtrot ordered Li Xiang to lead five thousand soldiers to rescue Ganzhou.

古文：贼闻湘来援，遣人致书于綯，辞情逊顺，言： 朝廷累有诏赦宥，但抗拒者三两人耳，旦夕图去之，即束身请命，愿相公保任之。 
现代文：贼军听说李湘率军来泗州救援，庞勋派人送信给令狐綯，言辞态度恭顺，信称 朝廷屡有诏书宽赦，抗拒者仅三、两个人而已，我将尽快设法除掉他们，立即归顺请求处置，希望相公替我担保 。
English: The bandit army heard that Li Xiang led an army to rescue Zhangzhou. Pang Xun sent a person to send a letter to Ling Fuxiong. His words were courteous and obedient. The letter said that the imperial court had repeatedly issued an edict of clemency, and there were only three or two people who resisted. I would try to get rid of them as soon as possible, immediately submit to the request for disposition, and hope that my brother-in-law would guarantee me.

古文：綯即奏闻，请赐勋节钺，仍诫李湘但戍淮口，贼已招降，不得立异。
现代文：令狐綯立即奏报朝廷，请求赐给庞勋执掌兵权的符节斧钺，同时告诫李湘：只许驻守淮口，庞勋已经招降，不得违反命令。
English: Ling Xuxuan immediately reported to the imperial court, requesting that Pang Xun be given the right to hold military power. At the same time, he warned Li Xiang: You are only allowed to stay in Huaikou, Pang Xun has already surrendered, and you must not violate the order.

古文：由是湘军解甲安寝，去警彻备，日与贼军相对，欢笑交言。
现代文：因此，李湘率领的军士脱下战衣安心就寝，撤去警卫防备，天天与贼军相对而处，欢笑交谈。
English: Therefore, the sergeants led by Li Xiang took off their battle clothes and went to bed with peace of mind, removed the guards and precautions, and stood opposite the thief army every day, laughing and talking.

古文：一日，贼军乘间，步骑径入湘垒，淮卒五千人皆被生絷送徐州，为贼蒸而食之。
现代文：一天，贼军乘虚袭击，步卒骑兵径直闯入李湘的军营，淮南士卒五千人全部被生擒押往徐州，被贼军蒸煮吃掉。
English: One day, the invaders took advantage of a false attack, and the foot soldiers and cavalry broke straight into Li Xiang's military camp. All five thousand soldiers from Huainan were forced to go to Xuzhou and were boiled and eaten by the invaders.

古文：湘与监军郭厚本为庞勋断手足，以徇于康承训军。
现代文：李湘与监军郗厚本被庞勋砍断手脚，庞勋将他们押到徐泗行营兵马都招讨使康承训的军前巡行示众。
English: Li Xiang and the overseer Zou Houben had their hands and feet chopped off by Pang Xun. Pang Xun sent them to the camp of Xu Bingxing to invite soldiers and horses to parade in front of the army.

古文：时浙西杜审权发军千人，与李湘约会兵，大将翟行约勇敢知名。
现代文：这时浙西的杜审权发兵一千人与李湘相约会合，大将翟行约以勇敢闻名。
English: At this time, the West Zhejiang Du Xunquan dispatched a thousand soldiers to meet with Li Xiang, and General Min Xing was famous for his bravery.

古文：浙军未至而湘军败。
现代文：浙西军队尚未到达，李湘的军队已经覆灭。
English: The western Zhejiang army has not yet arrived, and Li Xiang's army has been destroyed.

古文：贼乃分兵，立淮南旗帜，为交斗之状。
现代文：庞勋于是将自己的军众分开，一方树起淮南军队的旗帜，假装成交战的样子。
English: Pang Xun then separated his army from the crowd, while raising the flag of the Huainan army and pretending to be at war.

古文：行约军望见，急趋之，千人并为贼所缚。送徐州。
现代文：翟行约的军队见后，急行军奔赴投入战斗，一千人马全被贼军活捉，押送徐州。
English: After meeting the army, the express marching army rushed into battle. One thousand horses were captured alive by the thief army and escorted to Xuzhou.

古文：綯既丧师，朝廷以左卫大将军、徐州西南面招讨使马举代綯为淮南节度使。
现代文：令狐綯葬送军队后，朝廷派左卫大将军、徐州西南面招讨使马举取代令狐綯担任淮南节度使。
English: After Ling Fuxi buried and sent away the troops, the imperial court sent General Zuo Wei and the southwestern side of Xuzhou to solicit Ma He to replace Ling Fuxi as the Huainan Festival envoy.

古文：十二年八月，授检校司徒、太子太保，分司东都。
现代文：咸通十二年八月，令狐綯被授官为检校司徒、太子太保，作为分设在东都的中央官员任职。
English: In August of the 12th year of Hamdang Tong, Ling Juxuan was awarded the post of school inspector and prince's bodyguard, and served as a central official stationed in Dongdu.

古文：十三年，以本官为凤翔尹、凤翔陇节度使，进封赵国公，食邑三千户，卒。
现代文：咸通十三年，令狐綯以本官职担任凤翔尹、凤翔陇州节度使，晋爵封为赵国公，享受食邑三千户。
English: In the thirteenth year of Hamdang Tong, he made Foxtong serve as Fengxiang Yin and Fengxiang Zhangzhou's festival envoy with his official position, and was awarded the title of Zhao Guogong, enjoying the food of three thousand households.

古文：子滈、涣、沨。
现代文：当年去世。
English: He died that year.

古文：滈，少举进士，以父在内职而止。
现代文：令狐滈年轻时被举荐为进士，因为其父令狐腍在朝廷任职遭到阻止。
English: When he was young, Ling Xuxuan was recommended for promotion because his father, Ling Xuxuan, was prevented from serving in the imperial court.

古文：及綯辅政十年，滈以郑颢之亲，骄纵不法，日事游宴，货贿盈门，中外为之侧目。
现代文：到令狐腍在朝辅政十年，令狐滈由于与驸马都尉郑颢的姻亲关系，骄横放纵不守法纪，天天放肆游乐聚饮，收受财礼宾客满门，朝廷内外对此皆有怨怒。
English: During the 10 years of Ling Xuxuan's tenure as an aide-de-camp to the emperor, Ling Xuxuan, due to his relationship as the in-law of the imperial equerry Captain Zheng Qi, arrogantly indulged in non-compliance with laws and regulations, indulged in drinking and gambling every day, and received a full house of guests. There was resentment both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：以綯党援方盛，无敢措言。
现代文：因为令狐腍攀附结党势力正当强盛之际，没有人敢插嘴訾议。
English: Because no one dares to interrupt and discuss when the party's power is justifiably strong.

古文：及懿宗即位，讼者不一，故綯罢权轴。既至河中，上言曰： 臣男滈，爰自孩提，便从师训，至于词艺，颇及辈流。
现代文：待到懿宗即位，责备纷纭，因此令狐腍被免去在朝廷中枢所担任的要职，调出朝廷到河中任职后，他上书皇帝说： 为臣的儿子令狐滈，从幼年起，即受师训，文章、才能，超过同辈。
English: When Emperor Xizong ascended to the throne, there were various accusations. Therefore, Ling Fuxiong was removed from the important position he held at the center of the imperial court. After he was transferred out of the imperial court to serve in the middle of the river, he sent a letter to the emperor saying: "As the son of a vassal, Ling Fuxiong, from an early age, that is, he was trained by a teacher, and his skills and talents exceeded his peers.

古文：会昌二年，臣任户部员外郎时，已令应举，至大中二年犹未成名。
现代文：会昌二年臣任户部员外郎时，已让他参加科举考试，直到大中二年尚未成就功名。
English: In the second year of Huichang, when his subordinate was appointed as a member of the household department, he had him take the imperial examination, but he did not achieve fame until the second year of junior high school.

古文：臣自湖州刺史蒙先帝擢授考功郎中、知制诰，寻充学士。
现代文：臣由湖州刺史恩蒙先帝提拔授职考功郎中、知制诰，不久后充任翰林学士。
English: The vassal was promoted by Emperor Shenshun of Huzhou to the rank of meritorious junior and honorable senior, and was soon appointed as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：继叨渥泽，遂忝枢衡，事体有妨，因令罢举，自当废绝，一十九年。
现代文：接连叨蒙皇上恩惠，因而愧居中枢要职，为臣之子应举有碍体制，因此让他停止参加科举考试，自此中断应举，前后一十九年。
English: He was favored by the emperor one after another. As a result, he rose to a central and important position. As the son of a vassal, he was hindered by the examination system. Therefore, he was stopped from taking the imperial examination. Since then, the imperial examination has been suspended for nineteen years.

古文：每遣退藏，更令勤励。
现代文：每次让他谦让引退，臣更教他勤苦励志。
English: Every time he was asked to retire, the minister taught him to work harder.

古文：臣以禄位逾分，齿发已衰。男滈年过长成，未沾一第，犬马私爱，实切悯伤。
现代文：臣因官位超过本分，年纪业已衰老，儿子令狐滈年龄已过成人，尚未受恩获得一次应考评等机会，犬马之臣心中爱子，实在深感哀怜伤悲。
English: The minister has exceeded his duty due to his official position, his age has aged, his son has passed the age of adulthood, and he has not yet received the opportunity to be evaluated, etc. The dog and horse minister loves his son in his heart, and he is really deeply saddened.

古文：臣二三年来，频乞罢免，每年取得文解，意待才离中书，便令赴举。
现代文：近二、三年来，臣频频敬乞免职，每年希求得到解职文书，心中打算一离开中书省的职位，就让他去参加科举考试。
English: Over the past two or three years, the minister has frequently begged to be relieved of his duties. Every year, he hopes to get the dismissal document. In his heart, he plans to let him take the entrance examination as soon as he leaves the position of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：昨蒙恩制，宠以近籓。
现代文：日前承蒙皇恩下诏，授臣近处藩镇荣职。
English: Recently, thanks to the grace of the emperor, it was decreed that vassals would be honored in the nearest hanzhen.

古文：伏缘已逼礼部试期，便令就试。
现代文：我因临近礼部的考期，便让他前往应试。
English: I let him go to take the exam because the examination period of the etiquette department was approaching.

古文：至于与夺，出自主司，臣固不敢挠其衡柄。
现代文：至于录取与否，由主考试官决定，臣决不敢干扰考官的选拔权力。
English: As for admission or not, it is up to the chief examiner to decide, and the minister will never dare to interfere with the examiner's selection power.

古文：臣初离机务，合具上闻。
现代文：臣刚刚离开机务要职，应当将情况详细呈报皇上知道。
English: A minister who has just left an important position in the machinery should report the situation in detail to the emperor.

古文：昨延英奉辞，本拟面奏，伏以恋恩方切，陈诚至难。
现代文：前几天我到延英殿谢恩辞行，原本打算当面陈奏，臣因思念陛下的恩情心意至切，因此当面陈奏此事的内心真情十分困难。
English: A few days ago, I went to Yan Ying's palace to thank him for his resignation. Originally, I had planned to express my gratitude in person, but since I miss His Majesty very much, it was very difficult to express my true feelings about the matter in person.

古文：伏冀宸慈，察臣丹恳。 
现代文：敬望圣上慈爱，明察为臣的恳诚赤心。 
English: Look up to the Holy One, blessed be He, and see the sincerity and uprightness of a subject.

古文：诏令就试。
现代文：懿宗下诏准许令狐滈应试。
English: Emperor Xizong issued an edict to allow the fox to take the exam.

古文：是岁，中书舍人裴坦权知贡举，登第者三十人。
现代文：这年，中书舍人裴坦主持选拔进士，录取了三十个人。
English: This year, the person in charge of the Chinese school, Pei Tan, presided over the selection of new students, and admitted thirty people.

古文：有郑羲者，故户部尚书浣之孙，裴弘余，故相休之子，魏綯故相扶之子，及滈，皆名臣子第，言无实才。
现代文：其中，郑羲是原户部尚书郑瀚的孙子，裴弘余是原宰相裴休的儿子，魏階是原宰相魏扶的儿子，还有令狐滈，尽都是有名望的大臣的子弟，没有真才实学。
English: Among them, Zheng Hao was the grandson of the former head of the household, Zheng Han, Pei Hongyu was the son of the former prime minister, Pei Xiu, Wei Qi was the son of the former prime minister, Wei Fu, and Ling Huxuan, all of whom were the sons of famous ministers. They did not have real talent and real learning.

古文：谏议大夫崔瑄上疏论之曰： 令狐滈昨以父居相位，权在一门。求请者诡党风趋，妄动者群邪云集。
现代文：谏议大夫崔王宣上疏评论说： 令狐滈以往因父亲官居相位，权势尽在他家，求告请官者诡诈结伙风从趋附，非分举动者奸邪成群会集如云。
English: Choi Wang Xuan Shang So, a doctor of public opinion, commented: In the past, because his father was in a position of authority, the power was concentrated in his family, and the fraudulent gangs of those who appealed to officials became more and more common, and the groups of evil-doers gathered like clouds.

古文：每岁贡闱登第，在朝清列除官，事望虽出于綯，取舍全由于滈。
现代文：每年应试被录取者，在朝廷排列名次授任官职，职事的权衡虽然由令狐腍做出决定，但取舍何人完全在于令狐滈。
English: Every year, those who pass the entrance examination are ranked higher in the imperial court and are appointed to official positions. Although the weighting of official duties is decided by the lordship, it is entirely up to the lordship to decide who to choose.

古文：喧然如市，旁若无人，权动寰中，势倾天下。
现代文：如入闹市，旁若无人，权力震动四海，威势倾压天下。
English: If you enter a busy city, even if no one is around, your power will shake the four seas, and your might will overwhelm the world.

古文：及綯罢相作镇之日，便令滈纳卷贡闱。
现代文：待到令狐腍罢除相位任职方镇之时，就让令狐滈赴试场交卷应考。
English: When it was time for Ling Xuxuo to remove the phase from Fangzhen, he let Ling Xuxuo go to the test site to submit the exam.

古文：岂可以父在枢衡，独挠文柄？
现代文：怎么可以依仗其父官在朝政中心，擅自干预考选文士的职权？
English: How could he rely on his father, who was at the center of imperial politics, to interfere in the selection of scribes without authorization?

古文：请下御史台按问文解日月者。 
现代文：请将令狐滈放到御史台去审察讯问他被举荐备选进士的呈文的时间。 
English: Please put Ling Xuchang on the History Channel to examine the time of the petition questioning his nomination as a candidate for promotion.

古文：奏疏不下。
现代文：崔王宣的奏疏被留在宫中不下达交议。
English: Cui Wangxuan's report was left in the palace without being submitted for discussion.

古文：滈既及第，释褐长安尉、集贤校理。
现代文：令狐滈录取为进士后，初入仕途长安尉、集贤校理。
English: After Ling Xuxuan was admitted as a scholar, the first to enter the career were Chang Anfei and Ji Xian.

古文：咸通二年，迁右拾遗、史馆修撰。
现代文：懿宗咸通二年被提升为右拾遗、史馆修撰。
English: Gongzong Hamdong was promoted to Right Repository and Historian in the second year.

古文：制出，左拾遗刘蜕、起居郎张云，各上疏极论滈云： 恃父秉权，恣受货赂。
现代文：委任制令发出后，左拾遗刘蜕、起居郎张云，各自分别上疏透彻地揭露令狐滈说： 依仗其父掌权，恣意收受贿赂。
English: After the appointment order was issued, Zuo Zhiwei, Liu Wei, and Qi Jiu Lang, Zhang Yun, each separately and thoroughly exposed the order of the fox saying: Relying on his father to hold power, arbitrarily accepting bribes.

古文：取李琢钱，除琢安南都护，遂致蛮陷交州。 
现代文：收取李琢钱财，委任李琢为安南都护，致使南蛮攻破了交州。 
English: Li Taku received the money and appointed Li Taku as the protector of Annan, which led to Nanban's invasion of Jiaozhou.

古文：张云言： 大中十年，襜以谏议大夫豆卢籍、刑部郎中李鄴为夔王已下侍读，欲立夔王为东宫，欲乱先朝子弟之序。
现代文：张云称： 大中十年，令狐腍以为谏议大夫豆卢籍、刑部郎中李邺已任用为夔王李滋的侍读，想立夔王为东宫太子，打算打乱先朝王室子弟的长幼次序。
English: Zhang Yun said: In the 10th year of high school, Ling Yuxuan thought that Li Xuan, a member of the Ministry of Justice, had been appointed as the attendant of King Xuan Li Zhi, and wanted to establish King Xuan as the prince of the East Palace, intending to disrupt the order of the eldest and youngest children of the royal children of the previous dynasty.

古文：涣、沨俱登进士第。
现代文：令狐滈在宫内倚仗郑颢的权势，有谁敢说话？ 
English: Who dares to speak out against the power of Zheng He, who has made the fox cubs rely on Zheng He in the palace?

古文：涣位至中书舍人。
现代文：这时令狐腍已在淮南，多次上表替自己辩白。
English: At this time, Ling Xuxuan was already in Huainan, and he repeatedly went to the table to defend himself.

古文：定子缄，缄子澄、湘。澄亦以进士登第，累辟使府。
现代文：懿宗不轻易伤害大臣的感情，将张云贬为兴元少尹，贬刘蜕为华阴县令，将令狐滈改任为詹事府司直。令狐滈被群臣非难，官声不振。
English: Emperor Taizong did not easily hurt the feelings of the ministers, demoted Zhang Yunrui to Xingyuan Shaoyin, demoted Liu Ye to Huayin County, and changed Ling Xuzheng to Zhanjifu Sizhong. Ling Xuzheng was criticized by the ministers, and his official reputation was not strong.

古文：牛僧孺，字思黯，隋仆射奇章公弘之后。
现代文：牛僧孺字思黯，是隋仆射奇章公牛弘的后代。
English: The cow monk, Xuan Zi Si Ying, is a descendant of the Sui and Qizhang bulls.

古文：祖绍。父幼简，官卑。
现代文：祖父牛绍，父亲牛幼简，官职低下。
English: His grandfather, Niu Shao, and his father, Niu Youjian, were low-ranking officials.

古文：僧孺进士擢第，登贤良方正制科，释褐伊阙尉，迁监察御史，转殿中，历礼部员外郎。
现代文：牛僧孺考中进士，应试贤良方正科目被录取，被派任伊阙县尉，后提升为监察御史，转殿中省任职，历任礼部员外郎。
English: The Cow Monk entered the middle school of the imperial examination, was admitted to the examination of the virtuous and upright subjects, was assigned to the Ili County Lieutenant, and later promoted to the Supervisor of History, transferred to the palace to serve in the province, and successively served as a ceremonial member.

古文：元和中，改都官，知台杂，寻换考功员外郎，充集贤直学士。
现代文：宪宗元和年间，改任都官，主管台阁杂官，不久换任考功员外郎，充任集贤直学士。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gensong Yuanhe, he was appointed to the post of the capital official, in charge of the cabinet of miscellaneous officials, and soon he was appointed to the post of the examiner Gairo, and he was appointed to the post of the scholar of merit.

古文：长庆元年，宿州刺史李直臣坐赃当死，直臣赂中贵人为之申理，僧孺坚执不回。
现代文：穆宗登基，牛僧孺以库部郎中官职主管拟制诏令。长庆元年，宿州刺史李直臣犯贪赃罪判死刑，李直臣贿赂有权势的宦官为他申辩，牛僧孺坚持执法不改。
English: Mu Zong ascended to the throne, and Niu Sang Hui drafted the edict with the vice-minister of the treasury. In the first year of Changqing, Li Nao-chen, the governor of Shuzhou, was sentenced to death for corruption. Li Nao-chen bribed a powerful eunuch to defend him, and Niu Sang Hui insisted on enforcing the law.

古文：穆宗面喻之曰： 直臣事虽僭失，然此人有经度才，可委之边任，朕欲贷其法。 
现代文：穆宗当面对他说： 李直臣行事虽有过失，但此人有经营规划的才干，可委派他去边疆任职，朕想放宽对他的执法。 
English: Mu Zong said to him directly: Although Li Jiaochen acted negligently, this person has the ability of business planning, he can be assigned to the frontier, I want to relax the enforcement of his law.

古文：僧孺对曰： 凡人不才，止于持禄取容耳。
现代文：牛僧孺回答说： 平庸的人没有才干，只不过是保持禄位讨好上司罢了。
English: "Mediocre people don't have talent, they just want to keep their positions and please their bosses," replied the cowherd.

古文：帝王立法，束缚奸雄，正为才多者。
现代文：帝王立法，约束奸雄，正是因为他们多有才干。
English: Emperors legislate and restrain rogues precisely because they are so capable.

古文：禄山、硃泚以才过人，浊乱天下，况直臣小才，又何屈法哉？ 
现代文：安禄山、朱氵此因有过人的才干，才搅乱了天下。何况李直臣只是小才，又何必枉法迁就呢？ 
English: An Lushan and Zhu Xi thus disturbed the world because of their superior talent. What's more, Li Nao-chen was only a minor talent, so why did he have to compromise?

古文：上嘉其守法，面赐金紫。
现代文：穆宗赞扬他严守法纪，当面赏赐他金符紫服。
English: Mu Zong praised him for his strict adherence to the law and discipline, and presented him with a golden purple robe in person.

古文：二年正月，拜户部侍郎。
现代文：次年正月，委任他做户部侍郎。
English: In the first month of the following year, he was appointed to be the steward of the household.

古文：三年三月，以本官同平章事。
现代文：长庆三年三月，他以本官任同平章事。
English: In March of the third year of Changqing, he was promoted to the same rank as his superior.

古文：初，韩弘入朝，以宣武旧事，人多流言，其子公武以家财厚赂权幸及多言者，班列之中，悉受其遗。
现代文：起初韩弘进入朝廷任职，因他任宣武节度使时的旧事，流言蜚语颇多；他儿子韩公武用家财以重礼贿赂帝王宠幸的权臣及诽议多的人，同在朝班的官员尽都受到他的馈赠。
English: At first, Han Hong took office in the imperial court, and there were a lot of rumors about the old days when he was the envoy of the proclamation of martial law. His son, Han Gongwu, used his family's wealth to bribe the emperor's favored vassals with heavy gifts and those who gossiped a lot, and the officials in the imperial office all received gifts from him.

古文：俄而父子俱卒，孤孙幼小，穆宗恐为厮养窃盗，乃命中使至其家，阅其宅簿，以付家老。
现代文：不久，韩弘和他儿子都去世了，遗孙年幼，穆宗担心他的家财被仆役盗窃，便派宦官到他家，查阅他的家产簿册，将它交给族中长者。
English: Soon after, both Han Hong and his son passed away, leaving behind a young grandchild. Fearing that his family's wealth was being stolen by servants, Mu Zong sent eunuchs to his home to examine his family's property register and hand it over to the elders of the clan.

古文：而簿上具有纳赂之所，唯于僧孺官侧硃书曰： 某月日，送牛侍郎物若干，不受，却付讫。 
现代文：在簿册上都记有受贿人的处所，只有牛僧孺的官衔旁用红笔写着： 某月某日，送牛侍郎财物若干，他不收，全部退回。 
English: The place of the bribe-taker was recorded in the book, but next to the official title of the cow priest, it was written with a red pen: "On a certain day of a certain month, some of the cow servant's property and belongings were returned to him if he did not accept them.

古文：穆宗按簿甚悦。
现代文：穆宗审阅簿册后十分高兴。
English: Mu Zong was very happy after reviewing the book.

古文：居无何，议命相，帝首可僧孺之名。
现代文：过了不久，朝廷商议任命宰相的人选，穆宗首先认可对牛僧孺的提名。
English: Soon after, the imperial court deliberated on the appointment of the prime minister's nominee, and Mu Zong first approved the nomination of the cow monk.

古文：敬宗即位，加中书侍郎、银青光禄大夫，封奇章子，邑五百户。
现代文：敬宗登基后，牛僧孺升官为中书侍郎、银青光禄大夫，封爵奇章子，食邑五百户。
English: After Emperor Keizong ascended to the throne, Niu Xiangyong was promoted to the position of Chushushushijiro, Yin Qingguanglu Dafu, knighted Qi Zhangzi, and had 500 households.

古文：十二月，加金紫阶，进封郡公、集贤殿大学士、监修国史。
现代文：同年十二月，他被提升为佩金符著紫衣的三品官阶，晋封为郡公、集贤殿大学士、监修国史。
English: In December of the same year, he was promoted to the rank of the third grade of the official rank of Peijin with a purple robe, promoted to the county official, the scholar of Jixianden University, and the supervisor of national history.

古文：宝历中，朝廷政事出于邪幸，大臣朋比。僧孺不奈群小，拜章求罢者数四。帝曰： 俟予郊礼毕放卿。 
现代文：宝历年间，由不正派的宠臣决定朝廷政事，大臣依附勾结他们，牛僧孺对众小人无可奈何，三番四次呈递奏章请求免职，敬宗说： 等我祭祀天地的大礼完毕就放你走。 
English: During the Horyu era, the affairs of state of the imperial court were decided by the favored vassals of the unrighteous faction, the ministers attached themselves to and colluded with them, and the cow-monk Shun had no choice but to deal with all the villains. He submitted a petition to be relieved of his duties three times and four times, and Keizong said, "I will let you go when I have finished the grand ritual of sacrificing heaven and earth."

古文：吏缘为奸，蠹弊绵岁。僧孺至，计茆苫板筑之费，岁十余万，即赋之以专，以当苫筑之价。
现代文：穆宗举行完向祖庙报德的祭祀后，牛僧孺又上奏陈请退职，朝廷便在鄂州设立武昌军编制，委任牛僧孺为检校礼部尚书、同中书门下平章事、鄂州刺史、武昌军节度，鄂、岳、蕲、黄四州观察等使。江夏城的土性不粘，难砌城墙，每年加筑，都征收青茅草袋盛土加层。
English: After Mu Zong held the ceremony to pay tribute to the ancestral temple, Niu Xiangtao also appealed to Chen to retire, and the imperial court set up the Wuchang army in Ezhou, and appointed Niu Xiangtao as the inspector of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection, the official of the school inspection.

古文：凡五年，墉皆甃葺，蠹弊永除。
现代文：地方官吏借此巧取，侵吞修城资财年复一年。
English: Local officials have taken advantage of this to embezzle funds for city construction year after year.

古文：属郡沔州与鄂隔江相对，虚张吏员，乃奏废之，以其所管汉阳、汶川两县隶鄂州。
现代文：牛僧孺到任后，计算草袋、修筑费用，每年十余万贯，便改征土砖，用以抵偿应征的草袋、修筑费。前后五年，城墙全部筑得如同井壁，侵吞征收资财的事从此根除。
English: After he took office, he calculated the cost of straw bags and construction costs, which amounted to more than 100,000 yuan per year, and changed the levy of earthen bricks to offset the levy of straw bags and construction costs. In the past five years, all the city walls have been built like the walls of a well, and the embezzlement of funds has been eradicated.

古文：文宗即位，就加检校吏部尚书，凡镇江夏五年。
现代文：文宗登基，就牛僧孺原职加授检校吏部尚书衔，镇守江夏共五年。
English: When Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, he was given the title of "Cow Monk" and the additional title of "School Official" and served as the town guard of Jiangxia for a total of five years.

古文：太和三年，李宗闵辅政，屡荐僧孺有才，不宜居外。
现代文：太和三年，李宗闵辅佐皇帝主政，屡屡举荐牛僧孺有才，不宜任地方官。
English: In the third year of Tahe, Li Zongyu assisted the emperor in governing, and repeatedly recommended that Niu Sangyu was talented and not suitable to serve as a local official.

古文：四年正月，召还，守兵部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：太和四年正月，将他召回朝廷，代理兵部尚书、任同平章事。
English: In the first month of the 4th year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was recalled to the imperial court, acting as the representative of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and was appointed by Ren Tongping.

古文：五年正月，幽州军乱，逐其帅李载义。
现代文：太和五年正月，幽州范阳军队骚乱，兵马副使杨志诚驱逐了主帅李载义。
English: In the first month of the fifth year of the Taihe era, there was a riot in the Fanyang army in Yuzhou. Yang Zhicheng, deputy commander of the soldiers and horses, expelled the commander Li Zaiyi.

古文：文宗以载义输忠于国，遽闻失帅，骇然，急召宰臣谓之曰： 范阳之变奈何？ 
现代文：文宗认为李载义对朝廷忠心，骤然听说该州失去这样的主帅，大惊，紧急召见宰相等大臣说： 范阳兵变怎么办？ 
English: Wen Zong thought that Li Zaiyi was loyal to the imperial court. Suddenly, he heard that the state had lost such a coach. He was shocked and urgently summoned the prime minister and other ministers to say: What about Fan Yang's mutiny?

古文：僧孺对曰： 此不足烦圣虑。
现代文：牛僧孺回答说： 这不值得烦劳圣上忧虑。
English: The cowherd replied, "It is not worth the trouble and worry.

古文：且范阳得失，不系国家休戚，自安、史已来，翻覆如此。
现代文：范阳的得或失，不关系到国家的安危祸福，自安史之乱以来，翻来覆去都是这样。
English: Fan Yang's gain or loss is not related to the country's safety and well-being. This has been the case over and over again since the Anshi Rebellion.

古文：前时刘总以土地归国，朝廷耗费百万，终不得范阳尺帛斗粟入于天府，寻复为梗。
现代文：先前刘总将范阳地域归附中国，朝廷耗费钱财百万，却始终未得范阳的尺布斗粮入收国库，不久又成为祸害。
English: Previously, General Liu had annexed the Fanyang region to China. The imperial court spent millions of money, but never received Fanyang's grain into the national treasury. Soon it became a scourge again.

古文：至今志诚，亦由前载义也，但因而抚之，俾扞奚、契丹不令入寇，朝廷所赖也。
现代文：现今的杨志诚也就是以往的李载义，只需因势安抚他，使他抵御奚和契丹不让他们入侵，这才是朝廷的利益所在。
English: Today's Yang Zhicheng is the same as Li Zaiyi in the past. It is only necessary to appease him due to the situation and make him resist the invasion of the Mongols and Khitans. This is where the interests of the imperial court lie.

古文：假以节旄，必自陈力，不足以逆顺治之。 
现代文：给予他朝廷的符节，他必定施展才能效力国家，毋需以叛逆、顺从的问题对付他。 
English: If he is given the insignia of the imperial court, he will surely exert his ability to serve the country. There is no need to deal with him with the problem of rebellion and obedience.

古文：帝曰： 吾初不祥，思卿言是也。 
现代文：文宗说： 我起初未审慎思考，你说得对。 
English: "I didn't think about it carefully at first, you're right," Wenzong said.

古文：即日命中使宣慰。
现代文：当即派遣宫中使臣前往宣旨抚慰。
English: Imperial envoys were immediately dispatched to comfort the emperor.

古文：寻加门下侍郎、弘文馆大学士。
现代文：不久，牛僧孺被提升为门下侍郎、弘文馆大学士。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of his disciple's attendant, and became a scholar of the Kobunkan University.

古文：六年，吐蕃遣使论董勃义入朝修好。
现代文：太和六年，吐蕃派使臣论董勃义来朝与中国建立亲善关系。
English: In the sixth year of the Tahe period, the envoy of the Tubo faction, Tong Bo Yi, came to the DPRK to establish friendly relations with China.

古文：俄而西川节度李德裕奏，吐蕃维州守将悉怛谋以城降。
现代文：不久西川节度使李德裕奏报：吐蕃的维州守将悉怛谋献城归降。
English: Soon after, the Nishikawa festival made Li Deyu report that the Victorian governor of Tubo was plotting to surrender the city.

古文：德裕又上利害云： 若以生羌三千，出戎不意，烧十三桥，捣戎之腹心，可以得志矣。 
现代文：李德裕还陈述利害关系说： 如派羌兵三千人，出其不意，烧掉十三桥，直捣其心腹要地，就可达到降服吐蕃的目的了。 
English: Li Deyu also stated the stakes, saying: If you send 3,000 soldiers to Tibet, take it by surprise, burn 13 bridges, and directly attack its key areas, you can achieve the goal of surrendering Tibet.

古文：上惑其事，下尚书省议，众状请如德裕之策。
现代文：文宗对此事疑惑不定，下令尚书省商议，众大臣陈请照李德裕的计策办。
English: Wenzong was uncertain about the matter and ordered Shangshu Province to discuss it. He asked the ministers to act according to Li Deyu's plan.

古文：僧孺奏曰： 此议非也。
现代文：牛僧孺进言说： 这种议论不对。
English: "This kind of talk is not right," said Niu Sangyu.

古文：吐蕃疆土，四面万里，失一维州，无损其势。
现代文：吐蕃的疆域，四周万里，丢失一个维州，无损于它的势力。
English: The territory of Tubo, surrounded by thousands of miles, lost a Victorian state, but it did not damage its power.

古文：况论董勃义才还，刘元鼎未到，比来修好，约罢戍兵。
现代文：况且论董勃义刚回去，刘元鼎还未到，近来两国修和，约定停止用兵。
English: Moreover, Dong Bo Yi had just returned, and Liu Yuan Ding had not yet arrived. Recently, the two countries made peace and agreed to stop using troops.

古文：中国御戎，守信为上，应敌次之，今一朝失信，戎丑得以为词。
现代文：中国防御西戎，应以遵守信义为重，军事对敌在次；而今一旦失信，西戎就能以此为口实用兵。
English: China's defense of Si Rong should be based on the principle of keeping faith, and military confrontation with the enemy should be secondary. But now, if Xi Rong loses faith, Si Rong can use it as a mouthpiece for practical soldiers.

古文：闻赞普牧马茹川，俯于秦、陇。
现代文：听说吐蕃首领正在茹川一带牧马，蛰伏在秦、陇附近。
English: It was heard that the leader of the Tubo was herding horses in the area of the Ruchuan River and staying in the vicinity of Qin and Handan.

古文：若东袭陇坂，径走回中，不三日抵咸阳桥，而发兵枝梧，骇动京国。
现代文：如若他向东袭击陇坂，直奔回中要道，不用三日即抵达咸阳桥；如果我朝派兵抗拒，势必使京都震骇。
English: If he attacked Shizaka to the east and headed straight back to Chuo-michi-do, he wouldn't need three days to reach Hamyang Bridge; if I sent troops to resist in the morning, Kyoto would surely be shocked.

古文：事或及此，虽得百维州，亦何补也。 
现代文：事情如若到此地步，纵然得到一百个维州，又有何用呢？ 文宗说： 对。 
English: If things get to this point, what's the use of getting a hundred Victorian dollars?Wenzong said, "Yes."

古文：上曰： 然。 遂诏西川不内维州降将。
现代文：于是诏令西川不得接纳维州降将。
English: As a result, Saikawa was ordered not to accept Victoria's surrender.

古文：僧孺素与德裕仇怨，虽议边公体，而怙德裕者以僧孺害其功，谤论沸然，帝亦以为不直。
现代文：牛僧孺一向与李德裕有仇怨，虽是商议边防公事，而依靠李德裕的人们认为牛僧孺是妒忌李德裕建立功业，指责牛僧孺的议论沸腾一时，文宗也认为这不公平。
English: Niu Sang Hui had always had a grudge against Li Deyu. Although they were discussing border defense, the people who relied on Li Deyu thought that Niu Sang Hui was jealous of Li Deyu's achievements. They accused Niu Sang Hui of stirring up controversy. Wenzong also thought this was unfair.

古文：其年十二月，检校左仆射、兼平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使、知节度事。
现代文：这年十二月，牛僧孺任检校左仆射、兼平章事、扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度副大使，主持节度事务。
English: In December of that year, Niu Xiangyu was appointed as the chief of the inspection of the school, the chief of the Yangzhou Grand Duchy, and the deputy ambassador of the Huainan Festival, presiding over the festival affairs.

古文：时中尉王守澄用事，多纳纤人，窃议时政，禁中事密，莫知其说。
现代文：这时护军中尉、宦官王守澄当权，大量收纳小人，私下妄议朝政，内宫事情秘密，不知他们说些什么。
English: At this time, the lieutenant of the escort, the eunuch Wang Shoucheng, took power, received a large number of villains, privately discussed the government of the court, and the affairs of the inner palace were secret. I do not know what they said.

古文：一日，延英对宰相，文宗曰： 天下何由太平，卿等有意于此乎？ 
现代文：一天，在延英殿召见宰相询问对策，文宗说： 天下怎样能达到太平，卿等留心过这个问题吗？ 
English: One day, the prime minister was summoned to Yan Ying Dian to inquire about countermeasures, and Wenzong said: How can the world achieve peace, sir, have you paid attention to this problem?

古文：僧孺奏曰： 臣等待罪辅弼，无能康济，然臣思太平亦无象。
现代文：牛僧孺说： 臣等愧任宰相，无能安民济世，但臣想太平也没有法式。
English: Niu Xiangyao said: "Vassals are ashamed to be appointed prime minister, they are incapable of bringing peace and prosperity to the people, but there is no formula for a vassal who wants peace.

古文：今四夷不至交侵，百姓不至流散；上无淫虐，下无怨讟；私室无强家，公议无壅滞。
现代文：现今四方异族不来交相侵犯，黎民百姓不至于流离失散，在上位者没有滥施暴虐，处下位者没有忿恨怨言，仕宦门中没有强梁之家，公众议论不受阻止梗塞。
English: Nowadays, the foreign ethnic groups in the four directions do not come to interfere with each other, the Lebanese people do not become displaced and dispersed, the higher-ranking person does not commit violence and abuse, the lower-ranking person does not have resentment and complaints, there is no strong family in the cabinet, and public discussion is not blocked.

古文：虽未及至理，亦谓小康。
现代文：即使未至太平盛世，也还可称小康景象。
English: Even before the Taiping prosperity, it can still be called a well-off scene.

古文：陛下若别求太平，非臣等所及。 
现代文：陛下如若另求太平，不是臣等力所能及的事。 
English: Your Majesty, if you are looking for peace, it is not within the power of your ministers.

古文：既退至中书，谓同列曰： 吾辈为宰相，天子责成如是，安可久处兹地耶？ 
现代文：回到中书省，牛僧孺对同列的大臣说： 我等任宰相，天子如此督责，哪能久处此地呢？ 
English: Returning to the Central Literature Department, Niu Xiangyao said to the ministers in the same row: We are waiting for the appointment of the prime minister, the son of heaven is so responsible, how can we stay here for a long time?

古文：旬日间，三上章请退，不许。
现代文：十天内，他三次奏请辞职，文宗不许。
English: Within ten days, he submitted his resignation three times, and Wen Zong was not allowed to resign.

古文：会德裕党盛，垂将入朝，僧孺故得请。
现代文：适逢李德裕一党得势，即将入朝主持政事，牛僧孺因此获准辞职。
English: When Li Deyu's party gained power and was about to enter the imperial court to preside over political affairs, Niu Sangyu was allowed to resign.

古文：上既受左右邪说，急于太平，奸人伺其锐意，故训、注见用。
现代文：文宗已经接受近身侍臣的邪说，急于求得 太平 ，奸佞之徒窥得其意向坚定，因此李训、郑注得被重用。
English: Wenzong had already accepted the evil theories of his close attendants, and was anxious to obtain peace, and the traitors had made their intentions firm. Therefore, Li Xun and Zheng Zhu had to be reused.

古文：数年之间，几危宗社，而僧孺进退以道，议者称之。
现代文：几年时间，几乎危及社稷安全，而牛僧孺按一定准则求进退，为议论者称道。
English: For several years, it has almost endangered the safety of the society, and Niu Sanzhang has been praised by the commentators for advancing and retreating according to a certain standard.

古文：开成初，搢绅道丧，阍寺弄权，僧孺嫌处重籓，求归散地，累拜章不允，凡在淮甸六年。
现代文：文宗开成初年，士大夫丧失道义，众宦官把持权柄，牛僧孺厌弃位处重要藩镇，请求返回自己的封地任个闲职，屡屡奏请，未得获准，共在淮甸任职六年。
English: In the first year of the establishment of the Wenzong, the scholar-officials lost their morality, the eunuchs held the power, and the cow-priest-monk abdicated the important township. He requested to return to his fief to take up a sinecure, and repeatedly asked for permission, but was not allowed. He served in Huadian for a total of six years.

古文：开成二年五月，加检校司空，食邑二千户，判东都尚书省事、东都留守、东畿汝都防御使。
现代文：开成二年五月，牛僧孺加封检校司空衔，食邑二千户，兼任低于他本官的东都尚书省事、东都留守、东畿的汝州都防御使。
English: In May of the second year of Kaechon, Niu Sanghyeon was promoted to the vacant post of the inspector of the school, feeding two thousand households in the village, and also serving as the lower-ranking Dongdu Shangshu Minzhi, Dongdu Remaining, and Donggui Ruzhoudu Defense Envoy.

古文：僧孺识量弘远，心居事外，不以细故介怀。
现代文：牛僧孺见识远器量大，心在尘世事务之外，不把小事放在心上。
English: Niu Zengyu is a man of far-sightedness. His heart is outside of worldly affairs, and he does not care about trifles.

古文：洛都筑第于归仁里。
现代文：在洛都的归仁里建造了府第。
English: A prefectural government office was built in Kujin-ri, Lodo.

古文：任淮南时，嘉木怪石，置之阶廷，馆宇清华，竹木幽邃。
现代文：在淮南任职期间，他就在庭院亭台间，布置美树奇石，房舍居室清幽美丽，竹丛树林幽雅深邃。
English: During his tenure in Huainan, he arranged beautiful trees and strange stones in the courtyard pavilion, the house and living room were quiet and beautiful, and the bamboo grove was deep and elegant.

古文：常与诗人白居易吟咏其间，无复进取之怀。
现代文：常和诗人白居易在这里吟咏诗歌，不再有仕途进取的意念。
English: Chang and the poet Bai Juyi chanted poetry here, and they no longer had the idea of making a career.

古文：三年九月，征拜左仆射，仍令左军副使王元直赍告身宣赐。
现代文：开成三年九月，朝廷征召委任他为左仆射，接着就派左军副使王元直带着委任凭书前往宣布赐予他的官职。
English: In September of the following year, the imperial court conscripted and appointed him as Zuo Minzhao, and then sent the deputy envoy of the Left Army, Wang Yuan Zhi, with the certificate of appointment to announce the official position given to him.

古文：旧例，留守入朝，无中使赐诏例，恐僧孺退让，促令赴阙。
现代文：按惯例，地方长官入朝任职，没有宫中使臣宣布诏书的先例；因怕牛僧孺推辞，以此促使他入朝。
English: According to the usual practice, there is no precedent for an envoy from the palace to announce an imperial edict when a local governor takes office in the DPRK; for fear of the cow monk's refusal, this is the way to encourage him to enter the DPRK.

古文：僧孺不获已入朝。
现代文：牛僧孺不得已入朝。
English: Niu Zengyao had no choice but to join the imperial court.

古文：属庄恪太子初薨，延英中谢日，语及太子，乃恳陈父子君臣之义，人伦大经，不可轻移国本。上为之流涕。
现代文：适逢庄恪太子李永刚刚去世，牛僧孺到延英殿向文宗致谢任用之恩，谈到太子的事，便恳切陈述父子君臣的道义，尊卑长幼的常规，不可轻易更改皇储的道理，文宗听后为之潸然泪下。
English: It was a time when the Prince of Zhuang, Li Yong, had just passed away. Niu Xiangyu went to Yan Ying Palace to thank Wen Zong for his appointment. When he talked about the prince, he earnestly stated the moral principles of father and son, and the convention of respect for elders and children, and that it was not easy to change the principle of the crown prince. Upon hearing this, Wen Zong burst into tears.

古文：是时宰辅皆僧孺僚旧，未尝造其门。上频宣召，托以足疾。
现代文：这时的宰辅大臣都是牛僧孺的故旧同僚，但他从不登门拜会；文宗频繁召见，他以脚有毛病推托。
English: At that time, all the vice-ministers were old colleagues of Niu Son Hui, but he never came to the meeting; Wen Zong was frequently summoned to the meeting, but he put it down to a foot problem.

古文：久之，上谓杨嗣复曰： 僧孺称疾，不任趋朝，未可即令自便。 
现代文：时间久了，文宗对杨嗣复说： 僧孺称说有病，不能上朝趋拜，不可就此听其自便。 
English: After a long time, Wenzong said to Yang Shifu, "Sang Ye said that he was ill and could not go to the Imperial Palace to worship. You should not let him do as he pleases.

古文：四年八月，复检校司空、兼平章事、襄州刺史、山南东道节度使，加食邑至三千户。
现代文：开成四年八月，又任命他为检校司徒、兼平章事、襄州刺史、山南东道节度使，将他的食邑增至三千户。
English: In August of the same year, he was also appointed as the school inspector, the chief secretary, the governor of Xiangzhou, and the host of the Shannan Festival, increasing his food village to 3,000 households.

古文：辞日，赐觚、散、樽、杓等金银古器，令中使喻之曰： 以卿正人，赐此古器，卿且少留。 
现代文：辞行之日，文宗赏赐他觚、散、樽、杓等金银古器，并派宫中使臣告诉他说： 因为你廉洁正派，赐予这些古器，望你暂留一时。 
English: On the day of his resignation, Emperor Wenzong rewarded him with ancient gold and silver utensils such as jars, jars, barrels and urns, and sent an envoy from the palace to tell him: "Because you are honest and upright, I give you these old utensils and hope you will stay for a while."

古文：僧孺奏曰： 汉南水旱之后，流民待理，不宜淹留。 
现代文：牛僧孺启奏说： 汉南水旱灾害之后，流民亟待治理，不宜停留。 
English: "After the floods and droughts in Hannan, the displaced people are in urgent need of treatment, and it is not appropriate for them to stay.

古文：再三请行，方允。
现代文：经再三请求放行，文宗才同意他走。
English: After repeated requests for his release, Wenzong finally agreed to let him go.

古文：武宗即位，就加检校司徒。
现代文：武宗登基，就牛僧孺原职加封检校司徒。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, adding the post of inspector of schools to the original post of cow monk.

古文：会昌二年，李德裕用事，罢僧孺兵权，征为太子少保，累加太子少师。
现代文：会昌二年，李德裕当权，免除了牛僧孺的兵权，征聘他为仅有荣衔的太子少保，后晋升为太子少师。
English: In the second year of Huichang, when Li Deyu was in power, he exempted Niu Xiangyu from military service, recruited him as a crown prince minor protector with only the title of honor, and later promoted him to crown prince minor division.

古文：大中初卒，赠太子太师，谥曰文贞。
现代文：宣宗大中初年，牛僧孺逝世，追赠他太子太师衔，谥号文贞。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zong University, Niu Zangyu passed away, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Prince and Grand Master, and his posthumous name was Wen Zhen.

古文：僧孺少与李宗闵同门生，尤为德裕所恶。
现代文：牛僧孺年轻时与李宗闵同科试，尤为李德裕憎恶。
English: When he was young, he took the same exam as Li Zongyao. Li Deyu especially hated him.

古文：会昌中，宗闵弃斥，不为生还。
现代文：武宗会昌年间，李宗闵被贬斥，死在郴州任所。
English: During the reign of Wu Zong Huichang, Li Zongyao was reviled and died in his post in Zhangzhou.

古文：僧孺数为德裕掎摭，欲加之罪，但以僧孺贞方有素，人望式瞻，无以伺其隙。
现代文：牛僧孺多次遭李德裕指摘，李德裕想加罪于他，但因牛僧孺素来正直，受人敬仰，无从寻其漏洞。
English: Cowherd was pointed out by Li Deyu many times. Li Deyu wanted to punish him, but since Cowherd was always honest and admired by others, there was no way to find his loophole.

古文：襄王之乱，避地太原，卒。子蟜，位至尚书郎。
现代文：李德裕被贬到南方，所撰著的《穷愁志》，援引民间牧童的谶语指斥牛僧孺，还称他为 太牢公 ，对他憎恨到如此地步。
English: Li Deyu was relegated to the south, and the "Poor Sorrow" written by him, quoted the slang of folk herdsmen to denounce the cow monk, and also called him a too strong man, hating him to such an extent.

古文：萧俛，字思谦。
现代文：萧俛字思谦。
English: Xiao Yao's character, Si Qian.

古文：曾祖太师徐国公嵩，开元中宰相。
现代文：曾祖父太师、徐国公萧嵩，是开元年间宰相。
English: His great-grandfather, Grand Master Xu Guogong Xiaosong, was the prime minister in the early 1900s.

古文：祖华，袭徐国公，肃宗朝宰相。
现代文：祖父萧华，承袭徐国公爵位，是肃宗朝的宰相。
English: Grandfather Xiao Hua, heir to the Dukedom of Xu, was the prime minister of the Su Zong Dynasty.

古文：父恆，赠吏部尚书。
现代文：父亲萧恒，是死后封赠的吏部尚书。
English: His father, Xiao Heng, was posthumously awarded the title of Li Bu Shang Shu.

古文：皆自有传。俛，贞元七年进士擢第。元和初，复登贤良方正制科，拜右拾遗，迁右补阙。
现代文：俛在德宗贞元七年考中进士。宪宗元和初年，又考中贤良方正制科，授官右拾遗，晋职右补阙。
English: In the seventh year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year

古文：元和六年，召充翰林学士。
现代文：元和六年，奉诏任翰林学士。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, he was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate.

古文：七年，转司封员外郎。
现代文：七年，转任司封员外郎。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the post of Shifuken Wairo.

古文：九年，改驾部郎中、知制诰，内职如故。
现代文：九年，改任驾部郎中、知制诰，朝廷内的职位不变。
English: In the ninth year, he was reassigned to the posts of chauffeur, junior vassal, and privy councillor, but his positions within the imperial court remained unchanged.

古文：坐与张仲方善，仲方驳李吉甫谥议，言用兵征发之弊，由吉甫而生。宪宗怒，贬仲方。俛亦罢学士，左授太仆少卿。
现代文：因与张仲方友善，张仲方反驳李吉甫所做的谥议，说用兵征讨、征调民力民财的弊端，是由李吉甫引发的，宪宗恼怒，贬黜了张仲方，萧俛也免去了学士职务，降级担任太仆少卿。
English: Because of his friendship with Zhang Zhongfang, Zhang Zhongfang refuted the slanderous suggestion made by Li Jifu, saying that the drawbacks of conscripting soldiers and conscripting people's power and money were caused by Li Jifu. Enraged by this, Xianzong belittled Zhang Zhongfang, and Xiao Wei was also relieved of his bachelor's position and demoted to the position of a servant of the young lord.

古文：十三年，皇甫镈用事，言于宪宗，拜俛御史中丞。
现代文：元和十三年，皇甫当权，向宪宗建议，委任萧俛为御史中丞。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Yuan Dynasty, when the Emperor was in power, he proposed to the Emperor to appoint Xiao Jie as the Grand Historian.

古文：俛与镈及令狐楚，同年登进士第。
现代文：萧俛与皇甫和令狐楚，同年考中进士。
English: Xiao Yao and Wang Fu and Ling Fuchu passed the junior high school entrance examination in the same year.

古文：明年，镈援楚作相，二人双荐俛于上。
现代文：次年，皇甫引荐令狐楚做宰相，他二人又双双向皇帝举荐萧俛。
English: The following year, Emperor Fu recommended and appointed Fuchu as prime minister, and the two of them both recommended Xiao Qi to the emperor.

古文：自是，顾眄日隆，进阶朝议郎、飞骑尉，袭徐国公，赐绯鱼袋。
现代文：从此宪宗对萧俛眷顾日重一日，晋升他为朝议郎、飞骑尉，承袭徐国公爵位，赐给他标示五品以上官阶的绯衣、银鱼袋。
English: From then on, Emperor Xianzong took care of Xiao Yao day by day, promoted him to the highest rank of chancellor and flying cavalry officer, inheriting the title of Duke of Xuguo, and gave him a silk robe and a silver fish bag with five or more official ranks.

古文：穆宗即位之月，议命宰相，令狐楚援之，拜中书侍郎、平章事，仍赐金紫之服。
现代文：穆宗即位的当月，下诏大臣议论宰相的任命，令狐楚举荐萧俛，穆宗授予萧俛中书侍郎、平章事官职，并赐给他标示二品官员的紫衣、金鱼袋官服。
English: In the same month of Emperor Muzong's enthronement, the lower-ranking ministers discussed the appointment of the prime minister, causing the fox to recommend Xiao Yao. Emperor Muzong awarded Xiao Yao the posts of junior secretary and secretary, and gave him a purple robe and a goldfish bag official uniform with two official ranks.

古文：八月，转门下侍郎。
现代文：八月，升迁门下侍郎。
English: In August, he was promoted to junior chamberlain.

古文：十月，吐蕃寇泾原，命中使以禁军援之。
现代文：同年十月，吐蕃进犯泾原，朝廷派宫中使臣率领禁军前往泾原援助。
English: In October of the same year, when Tubo invaded Hahara, the imperial court sent envoys from the palace to lead the imperial army to Hahara for assistance.

古文：穆宗谓宰臣曰： 用兵有必胜之法乎？ 
现代文：穆宗询问宰相们说： 用兵打仗有必定取胜的法则吗？ 
English: Muzong asked the prime ministers, "Is there a law of victory in using soldiers to fight a war?

古文：俛对曰： 兵者凶器，战者危事，圣主不得已而用之。
现代文：萧俛回答说： 兵器是伤人的凶器，打仗是凶险的事情，圣明的君主迫不得已才用兵打仗。
English: Xiao Yao replied: Weapons are deadly weapons, and war is a perilous affair. The sacred and wise sovereign only uses soldiers to fight when he has to.

古文：以仁讨不仁，以义讨不义，先务招怀，不为掩袭。
现代文：以仁爱之师讨伐残暴凶徒，以正义之军讨伐不义行径，务必事先以仁德感召、安抚招降，不乘人不备突然袭击。
English: With the teacher of benevolence and love to fight brutal thugs, with the army of justice to fight injustice, it is imperative to inspire and appease in advance with benevolence, and not to use people to prepare a surprise attack.

古文：古之用兵，不斩祀，不杀厉，不擒二毛，不犯田稼。
现代文：古代用兵打仗，不攻打祭祀场所，不肆意滥杀施虐，不擒获年老的人，不损坏农田庄稼。
English: In ancient times, soldiers were used to fight wars, not to attack places of worship, not to kill indiscriminately, not to capture the elderly, and not to damage farmland and crops.

古文：安人禁暴，师之上也。
现代文：安抚人民，禁绝暴虐，是最好的军队。
English: The best army is the one that pacifies the people and forbids tyranny.

古文：如救之甚于水火。
现代文：前往援救，紧急之势超过救水火之灾。
English: Go to the rescue, the emergency situation exceeds the flood and fire disaster.

古文：故王者之师，有征无战，此必胜之道也。
现代文：因此王者的军队，有征讨之举而没有杀伐之事，这就是必胜之道。
English: Therefore, the king's army, there is no need to fight, there is no need to kill, this is the way to win.

古文：如或纵肆小忿，轻动干戈，使敌人怨结，师出无名，非惟不胜，乃自危之道也。
现代文：如若不克制小的怨愤，轻易地动用干戈，使敌人郁积怨恨，师出无名，不但不能取胜，反而是自招危难之途。
English: If one does not restrain petty grudges and easily resort to armed conflict, causing the enemy to accumulate grudges and leaving no one to blame, not only can one not win, but one is actually inviting danger.

古文：固宜深慎！ 
现代文：用兵打仗实在应当极其慎重！ 
English: The use of soldiers in war should really be done with extreme caution!

古文：帝然之。
现代文：穆宗认为这种见解很对。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：时令狐楚左迁西川节度使，王播广以货币赂中人权幸，求为宰相。而宰相段文昌复左右之。
现代文：这时令狐楚降职任西川节度使，王播以钱财广行贿赂得宠有势的宦官，谋求担任宰相，而宰相段文昌还帮助他。
English: At this time, Wang Bo sought to become the prime minister by bribing the favored and powerful eunuch with money and property, and the prime minister Duan Wenchang also helped him.

古文：俛性嫉恶，延英面言播之纤邪纳贿，喧于中外，不可以污台司。
现代文：萧俛憎恨邪恶，在延英殿向穆宗当面陈述王播的奸邪行贿劣迹，使宫廷内外一片喧腾，不应容许这种人玷污宰相官署。
English: Xiao Yao hated evil, and in front of Mu Zong at Yan Ying Hall, he exposed Wang Bo's treachery and bribery, which caused an uproar both inside and outside the palace. Such a person should not be allowed to tarnish the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：事已垂成，帝不之省，俛三上章求罢相任。
现代文：但王播谋求相位的事已快要成功，皇帝又不醒悟，于是萧俛接二连三呈上奏章请求免去自己的宰相职务。
English: However, Wang Bo's pursuit of the position was about to succeed, and the emperor did not wake up, so Xiao Rong successively submitted a petition to request to be relieved of his position as prime minister.

古文：长庆元年正月，守左仆射，进封徐国公，罢知政事。
现代文：长庆元年正月，萧俛被委任兼左仆射，进封为徐国公，免去他主持政务。
English: In the first month of the first year of the First Year of the Long Qing Dynasty, Xiao Yao was appointed as the second-in-command and the left-hand man, and was given the title of Xu Guogong, which exempted him from presiding over government affairs.

古文：俛居相位，孜孜正道，重慎名器。
现代文：萧俛官居相位，孜孜不怠地循守恰当的准则，看重、慎守等级称号和车服仪制。
English: Xiao Ying, who is a government official, diligently adheres to the appropriate standards, values and carefully observes the rank title and car clothing ceremony system.

古文：每除一官，常虑乖当，故鲜有简拔而涉克深，然志嫉奸邪，脱屣重位，时论称之。
现代文：每授予一个官职，总是一再考虑是否失误，因此少有人被选拔而近乎陷入苛刻严厉，但一心憎恨奸邪，看轻高官显位，当时的舆论很称赞他。
English: Every time an official post was awarded, it was always reconsidered whether it was a mistake or not. Therefore, few people were selected and almost fell into a harsh and severe, but they hated treachery and despised the appearance of high officials. At that time, the public opinion praised him very much.

古文：穆宗乘章武恢复之余，即位之始，两河廓定，四鄙无虞。
现代文：穆宗依靠宪宗平定藩镇叛逆的余威，在登位之初，两河安定，四方无忧。
English: Mu Zong relied on Xianzong to quell the lingering power of the rebellion in the towns of the domain. At the beginning of his reign, the two rivers were stable, and there was no worry in any direction.

古文：而俛与段文昌屡献太平之策，以为兵以静乱，时已治矣，不宜黩武，劝穆宗休兵偃武。
现代文：因而萧俛与段文昌多次呈献太平之策，认为用兵是为了平息暴乱，现在已经太平，不应滥用武力，劝穆宗停止用兵、收缩武备。
English: As a result, Xiao Yu and Duan Wenchang repeatedly proposed a pacification strategy, arguing that the use of troops was to quell the riots, and now it is peaceful, and force should not be abused. They advised Mu Zong to stop the use of troops and reduce armaments.

古文：又以兵不可顿去，请密语天下军镇有兵处，每年百人之中，限八人逃死，谓之 消兵 。
现代文：又因军队不能立即去掉，便奏请皇帝下达密诏给全国各军镇有军队的地方，每一百人之中，限定八人以 逃亡、死去 名义减员，叫作 消兵 。
English: Also, since the troops could not be removed immediately, he asked the emperor to issue a secret edict to all military towns across the country where there were troops, limiting the reduction of personnel to eight out of every hundred in the name of escape or death, known as "liquidating the troops."

古文：帝既荒纵，不能深料，遂诏天下，如其策而行之。而籓籍之卒，合而为盗，伏于山林。
现代文：穆宗荒废政务放纵游乐，不能从长远思考问题，于是诏令全国各军镇，按萧俛、段文昌的献策行事。因而列籍藩镇的 消兵 士卒，纠合成为盗寇，隐伏山林之中。
English: Mu Zong abandoned the desolate government affairs, indulged in pleasure, and could not think about the problem from a long-term perspective, so he ordered the military towns across the country to act according to Xiao Wei and Duan Wenchang's suggestions. As a result, the soldiers from the provinces and towns became thieves and hid in the mountains and forests.

古文：明年，硃克融、王廷凑复乱河朔，一呼而遗卒皆至。
现代文：穆宗登基的第二年，朱克融、王廷凑再次在河朔作乱，他们一声呼唤就将被弃离的士卒全都召来。
English: In the second year after Emperor Muzong ascended to the throne, Zhu Ke Rong and Wang Tingpai once again started a riot in Hexuo. They called out for all the abandoned soldiers to come.

古文：朝廷方征兵诸籓，籍既不充，寻行招募。
现代文：朝廷正要向各藩镇征调军队，在籍士兵已不充裕，只好重新招募士兵。
English: The imperial court was about to recruit and transfer troops to the provinces and towns. There were not enough soldiers enrolled, so soldiers had to be recruited anew.

古文：乌合之徒，动为贼败，由是复失河朔，盖 消兵 之失也。
现代文：这些乌合之众，动辄被叛军打败，因此又一次丧失了河朔，这是 消兵 策略造成的失误。
English: The ragtag force was easily defeated by the rebels, and once again lost Heshaku, a result of a miscalculation in the strategy of disengagement.

古文：俛性介独，持法守正。
现代文：萧俛性格耿直，不随流俗，执行法令，坚守正道。
English: Xiao Yao's character is straightforward, does not follow the trend, implements laws and regulations, and adheres to the right path.

古文：以己辅政日浅，超擢太骤，三上章恳辞仆射，不拜。
现代文：认为自己辅佐朝政时间不长，越级提拔太快，三次上奏恳切辞去仆射职务，不接受任命。
English: He thought that he had only been an aide to the imperial government for a short time, and that he had been promoted too quickly, so he earnestly resigned his post three times and did not accept the appointment.

古文：诏曰： 萧俛以勤事国，以疾退身，本末初终，不失其道，既罢枢务，俾居端揆。
现代文：穆宗下诏称： 萧俛勤勉办理国家事务，因病主动辞去职务，从始至终，不离正道，免去宰相要务后，让他担任尚书省长官。
English: Mu Zong issued an edict, saying: Xiao Tong handled state affairs diligently, resigned voluntarily due to illness, and never deviated from the right path from beginning to end. After he was relieved of the important duties of the prime minister, he was appointed as the governor of Shangshu Province.

古文：朕欲加恩超等，复吾前言。
现代文：朕想超等级施予恩惠，履行我在先的诺言。
English: I want to grant favors above grade and fulfill my earlier promise.

古文：而继有让章，至于三四，敦谕颇切，陈乞弥坚。
现代文：而他继续呈上谦让的奏章，乃至于再三再四恳请让职，笃诚的表白十分恳切，求免的陈情更加坚定。
English: And he continued to present a modestly conceding report, and as for the repeated and fourfold entreaty to relinquish his post, his sincere confession was very earnest, and his plea for forgiveness was more firm.

古文：成尔谦光，移之选部，可吏部尚书。 
现代文：现今成全你的谦逊礼让，将其职务迁至吏部，担任吏部尚书。 
English: Now fulfill your humble courtesy and transfer his position to the personnel department, and serve as the personnel department's secretary.

古文：俛又以选曹簿书烦杂，非摄生之道，乞换散秩。
现代文：萧俛又认为吏部簿册文书繁杂，不适合养生之道，请求改换闲散而又无一定职守的官职。
English: Xiao Wei also thought that the paperwork of the personnel department was complicated and unsuitable for the way of life, and requested to change the idle official position without a certain duty.

古文：其年十月，改兵部尚书。
现代文：同年十月，改为兵部尚书。
English: In October of the same year, it was changed to Hyobu Shosho.

古文：二年，以疾表求分司，不许。
现代文：长庆二年，萧俛以有病为由，上表奏请派往东都担任朝廷的分设职务，未获准许。
English: In the second year of the Long Qing Dynasty, on the grounds that he was ill, Xiao Yao requested to be sent to Dongdu to serve as a subordinate post of the imperial court, but he was not allowed.

古文：三月，改太子少保，寻授同州刺史。
现代文：三月，改任太子少保，不久授职任同州刺史。
English: In March, he was reassigned to the position of the Prince's Junior Bodyguard, and soon after, he was appointed to the post of Tongzhou Provincial Historian.

古文：宝历二年，复以少保分司东都。
现代文：宝历二年，仍以太子少保职务调至东都。
English: In the second year of the lunar calendar, he was still transferred to Dongdu from the position of minor security guard.

古文：文宗即位，授检校左仆射、守太子少师。
现代文：文宗登基，授予萧俛检校左仆射、兼太子少师官职。
English: Emperor Wenzong ascended to the throne, and conferred the posts of Left Footman of the Xiaoqi Inspection School and Junior Teacher of the Crown Prince.

古文：俛称疾笃，不任赴阙，乞罢所授官。
现代文：萧俛声称病重，不去朝廷任职，请求免去所授予的官职。
English: Xiao Wei claimed that he was seriously ill and did not want to serve in the imperial court, and requested to be exempted from the official post.

古文：诏曰： 新除太子少师萧俛，代炳台耀，躬茂天爵。
现代文：文宗下诏说： 新委任的太子少师萧俛，几朝居官显耀台省生辉，力行仁义忠信好善不倦。
English: The imperial edict said: "The newly appointed young prince Xiao Wei, who has been in office for several dynasties, has shown great brilliance, and has never tired of practicing benevolence, loyalty, and kindness.

古文：文可以经纬邦俗，行可以感动神祇。
现代文：文才可以治国理民，品行足以感动神灵。
English: Literary talent can govern the country and the people, and moral conduct is enough to move the gods.

古文：夷澹粹和，精深敏直，进退由道，周旋令名。
现代文：他为人恬静淡泊、纯良和顺，思想精密深邃、敏捷端正，进退遵循正道，应酬依从名分。
English: He is a quiet and unassuming person, pure and harmonious, his thoughts are precise and profound, agile and correct, and he follows the right path when advancing and retreating.

古文：近以师傅之崇，畴于旧德，俾从优逸，冀保养颐。
现代文：近来，因为太子傅这样崇高的职位，适于授给国老耆旧，想让他悠闲安逸的供职以保育元气颐养天年。
English: Recently, because such a lofty position as the prince's tutor is suitable for conferring on the country's elders, he wants to let him work leisurely and comfortably to nurture his vitality and raise his age.

古文：而抗疏恳辞，勇退知止，尝亦敦谕，确乎难拔。
现代文：然而他还是上疏恳请辞职，勇退止于当止。朕也曾笃诚劝谕，但其志确难移易。
English: However, he still earnestly asked to resign and bravely stopped at the time. I also sincerely advised him, but his will is really difficult to move.

古文：遂兹牢让，以厚时风，可银青光禄大夫、守尚书左仆射致仕。 
现代文：顺从这种坚决辞让的愿望，以期推重良好教化的风气，可按银青光禄大夫、兼尚书左仆射的职位辞官归居。 
English: In order to comply with this desire for resolute resignation, and with a view to promoting a culture of good education, the resigning officials can return to their posts according to the positions of silver Qingguanglu doctor and concurrently Shangshuzhouzo.

古文：俛趣尚简洁，不以声利自污。
现代文：萧俛崇尚为人质朴、洁身自好，不为名利而玷污自己。
English: Xiao Yu advocated that people should be simple, clean and self-respecting, and not tarnish themselves for fame and fortune.

古文：在相位时，穆宗诏撰《故成德军节度使王士真神道碑》，对曰： 臣器褊狭，此不能强。
现代文：在身居相位时，穆宗下诏让他撰写《故成德军节度使王士真神道碑》，他回答说： 为臣器量狭隘，此事不能勉强。
English: When Mu Zong issued an edict ordering him to write "The Imperial German Army's Festival and the King's True Shinto Monument," he replied, "As a vassal with a narrow mind, this cannot be forced.

古文：王承宗先朝阻命，事无可观，如臣秉笔，不能溢美。
现代文：王承宗在先朝时拒抗命令，没有可以炫耀的事迹，如果让我执笔撰写，不能违背实情夸奖。
English: Wang Chengzong resisted orders during the last dynasty, and there are no deeds that can be flaunted. If I were to write, I would not be able to praise contrary to the facts.

古文：或撰进之后，例行贶遗。臣若公然阻绝，则违陛下抚纳之宜；僶俛受之，则非微臣平生之志。
现代文：即或写成进献之后，按照例规给我赏赐，臣如公然拒绝，就将违背陛下抚慰进献的适宜做法；为臣勉强接受，却又不是微臣平素为人所立的志向。
English: Even if, after the offering is written, I am given a reward according to the rules, if the vassal openly refuses, he will violate the appropriate practice of His Majesty's consolation offering; for the vassal to reluctantly accept, but it is not the ambition of the vassal.

古文：臣不愿为之秉笔。 
现代文：微臣不愿意执笔撰写碑文。 
English: Weixin did not want to write the inscription.

古文：帝嘉而免之。俛家行尤孝。
现代文：穆宗对他表示嘉许，并且免去他撰写这个碑文的任务。萧俛在家内尤其注重孝行。
English: Mu Zong expressed his appreciation to him and relieved him of the task of writing this inscription. Xiao Yao paid special attention to filial piety at home.

古文：母韦氏，贤明有礼，理家甚严。
现代文：母亲韦氏贤明重礼，治家甚严。
English: His mother, Wei, was wise and respected, and ruled the family very strictly.

古文：俛虽为宰相，侍母左右，不异褐衣时。
现代文：萧俛即使做了宰相，在母亲身边侍奉，与未做官时一样。
English: Even though Xiao Wei became prime minister, he served alongside his mother, just as he did when he was not an official.

古文：丁母丧，毁瘠逾制。
现代文：其母故去，他守丧哀伤过度以致身体消瘦，超过通常的规定。
English: When his mother died, he was so grief-stricken that his body wasted away beyond normal limits.

古文：免丧，文宗征诏，恳以疾辞。
现代文：文宗免去他遵制守丧，下诏征召任用，他以有病为由恳切推辞。
English: Emperor Wenzong exempted him from observing the mourning period, and issued a decree to conscript him, but he earnestly declined on the grounds of illness.

古文：既致仕于家，以洛都官属宾友，避岁时请谒之烦，乃归济源别墅，逍遥山野，啸咏穷年。
现代文：辞官隐退在家后，因为东都洛阳的属下官吏、宾朋好友众多，为了躲开逢年过节这些人前来进见问候的烦劳，于是返回济源别墅，在草野生活中自在度日，在吟诗啸歌中终其一生。
English: After the official retired, because there were many subordinate officials and friends in Luoyang, the eastern capital, in order to avoid the hassle of seeing and greeting these people every year, he returned to Jiyuan Villa to spend his days freely in the grassland life and end his life in chanting.

古文：八年，以庄恪太子在东宫，上欲以耆德辅导，复以少师征之。俛令弟杰奉表京师，复纳制书，坚辞痼疾。
现代文：文宗太和八年，因为庄恪太子李永已被立为皇太子，文宗想让年老而又有德望的大臣给他帮助教导，再次征召萧俛为太子少师，萧俛让他的弟弟萧杰赴京都奉呈奏表，缴还任命他的诏令，以痼疾在身坚决推辞。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Wenzong's reign, because Prince Li Yong of Zhuang had been appointed crown prince, Emperor Wenzong wanted the old and respected minister to help and teach him, and once again recruited Xiao Jie as the prince's tutor. Xiao Jie asked his brother Xiao Jie to go to Kyoto to submit a report form, return the imperial decree appointing him, and resolutely refuse to do so due to illness.

古文：诏曰： 不待年而求谢，于理身之道则至矣，其如朝廷之望何？
现代文：文宗复诏说： 不到年岁而求辞官，在养生之道来说，当然是最好的了；可是它对朝廷的期望来讲，又如何呢？
English: In his reply, Emperor Wenzong said, "In terms of health, it is of course best to seek a post when you are younger, but what about the expectations of the imperial court?

古文：朕以肇建元良，精求师傅，遐想汉朝故事，玄成、石庆，当时重德，咸历此官。
现代文：朕因为初立皇太子，为他精心访求师傅，遥想汉朝旧事，玄成、石庆，当时德高望重，都曾担任此官。
English: Because I was crown prince for the first time, I meticulously visited the master for him, and thought about the old Han Dynasty. At that time, both Geng Cheng and Shi Qing, who were highly respected, had served as this official.

古文：吾以元子幼冲，切于师训，欲以敕汝发明古今，冀忠孝之规，日闻于耳。
现代文：我因嫡长子年幼，迫切需要师傅训教，想依赖你阐明古今治国之道，希望尽忠尽孝的规劝，让他天天听到。
English: Because my eldest son is young, I urgently need a teacher to teach him. I want to rely on you to clarify the ancient and modern ways of governing the country, and I hope to listen to your loyal and filial advice every day.

古文：特遣左右，至于林园。
现代文：特派身边近臣，亲赴你的疏林园。
English: Send your close vassals to visit your sparsely wooded garden.

古文：而卿高蹈翛然，屏绝趋进，复遣令弟还召诏书。
现代文：然而你仍然隐居超脱，屏弃仕进，还派令弟归还我的诏书。
English: However, you still live in seclusion, refuse to go to work, and send your younger brother to return my imperial edict.

古文：天爵自优，冥鸿方远，不转之志，其坚若山。
现代文：以乐善不倦自足，避世隐居远方，毫不改变志向，坚毅如山屹立。
English: To be self-sufficient, avoid the world, live in seclusion far away, never change one's aspiration, and stand firm like a mountain.

古文：循省来章，致烦为愧。
现代文：恭阅你所呈的奏章，深为给你添烦惭愧。
English: I am deeply ashamed to have bothered you by reading the score you submitted.

古文：终以吕尚之秩，遂其疏旷之心。
现代文：终身赐给吕尚那样的太师俸禄，顺从你的疏旷的心愿。
English: I will give you the salary of a great teacher like Lushang for life, and I will obey your distant wish.

古文：励俗激贪，所补多矣。
现代文：你的高风对于激励风气、阻遏贪欲，已多有补益了。
English: Your high winds have done much to stimulate morale and discourage avarice.

古文：有益于政，寄声以闻，亦有望于旧臣矣。
现代文：有益于朝政的意见，请口头传报给我知道，这也就是我对你这样的先朝老臣的期望了。
English: If you have any opinions that would be beneficial to the imperial government, please let me know by word of mouth. This is what I would expect from a former imperial minister like you.

古文：可太子太傅致仕。 
现代文：宜以太子太傅的职级辞官归居。 
English: It is appropriate that a dignitary of the same rank as Emperor Taifu returns home.

古文：开成二年，俛弟俶授楚州刺史。
现代文：开成二年，萧俛的弟弟萧亻叔被授予楚州刺史官职。
English: Two years later, Xiao Yao's younger brother, Xiao Yao's uncle, was awarded the post of official historian of Chuzhou.

古文：辞日，文宗谓俶曰： 萧俛先朝名相，觔力未衰，可一来京国。
现代文：向皇帝谢恩辞行时，文宗对萧亻叔讲： 萧俛是先朝的有名宰相，身体精力尚未衰颓，可让他来京都。
English: At the time of his resignation to Emperor Shenn, Wenzong said to Uncle Xiao Yao: Xiao Yao was a famous prime minister of the previous dynasty, and his physical strength has not yet declined, so he can come to Kyoto.

古文：朕赐俛诏书匹帛，卿便赍至济源，道吾此意。 
现代文：朕赐给萧俛的诏书、布帛，你就便送到济源，向他说明我的这番心意。 
English: I will give Xiao Yao's imperial edict and cloth to you, and you will take it to Jiyuan and explain to him my intention.

古文：诏曰： 卿道冠时髦，业高儒行。
现代文：文宗给萧俛的诏书说： 你的道德为一时俊杰之冠，学业超越儒林的同辈。
English: Wen Zong's edict to Xiao Yao said: Your morality is the crown of the moment, and your academic performance surpasses that of your peers in the Ju-lin school.

古文：著作砺济川之效，弘致君匡国之规，留芳岩廊，逸老林壑。
现代文：显示了激励奋发的功效，弘扬了忠君扶国的法度，美名传布朝廷，告老隐逸林涧。
English: It has shown the effectiveness of motivating people to work hard, promoted the principle of loyalty to the emperor and support for the country, spread the good name of the imperial court, and encouraged the elderly to retire.

古文：累降褒诏，亟加崇秩，而志不可夺，情见乎辞。
现代文：屡屡下达褒奖诏令，一再加封高官厚禄，但你坚定的志向不可更改，真挚的情意溢于言表。
English: You have repeatedly issued orders of commendation and awards, and you have repeatedly been awarded high ranks and rich rewards, but your firm aspiration cannot be changed, and your sincere feelings are overflowing in your words.

古文：鸿飞入冥，吟想增叹。
现代文：鸿雁高飞已杳远，吟咏思念更叹息。
English: The wild goose has flown high and far away, and the thought of ginger is even more sighing.

古文：今赐绢三百匹，便令萧俶宣示。 
现代文：现赐予绢三百匹，趁便命萧亻叔宣布。 
English: Xiao Yu's uncle took the opportunity to announce that Xiao Yu would be given 300 horses.

古文：俛竟不起，卒。
现代文：萧俛竟然卧病不起而去世。
English: Xiao Yao actually passed away after being bedridden.

