古文：元年春，王正月，公即位。
现代文：元年春周历正月，鲁桓公继位。
English: In the spring of the first year, the first month of the lunar calendar, Wenkong succeeded to the throne.

古文：三月，公会郑伯于垂，郑伯以璧假许田。
现代文：同年三月，三月,鲁桓公与郑庄公会于垂地，郑庄公用玉璧向鲁国借许田。
English: In March of the same year, Lu Huan Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong would meet at the hanging ground, and Zheng Zhuang Gong used Jade Bi to borrow the promised land from Lu.

古文：夏四月丁未，公及郑伯盟于越。
现代文：夏季四月丁未日，鲁桓公和郑庄公在越地结盟。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fourth month in summer, Lu Huan and Zheng Zhuang made an alliance in Yue.

古文：秋，大水。
现代文：秋季，鲁国发大水。
English: In autumn, there is a lot of flooding.

古文：冬十月。
现代文：冬十月，无事。
English: Winter, October, nothing.

古文：元年春，公即位，修好于郑。
现代文：元年春季，鲁桓公即位，继续与郑交好。
English: In the spring of the first year of the year, Prince Lu Huan ascended the throne and continued his friendship with Zheng.

古文：郑人请复祀周公，卒易祊田。
现代文：郑人请求重新祭祀周公、完成祊田的交换。
English: Zhengren requested that Zhou Gong be re-sacrificed and the exchange of rice fields be completed.

古文：公许之。
现代文：桓公答应了。
English: Sadagimi allowed it.

古文：三月，郑伯以璧假许田，为周公，祊故也。
现代文：三月，郑庄公用璧玉来作许田的交易，这是为了请求祭祀周公和以祊交换许田的缘故。
English: In March, Zhengzhuanggong used Bi jade to make the transaction of Xu Tian, which was to request the sacrifice of Zhou Gong and the exchange of Xu Tian with jade.

古文：夏四月丁未，公及郑伯盟于越，结祊成也。
现代文：夏季，四月初二日，鲁桓公和郑庄公在越地结盟，这是为了祊田的交换表示友好。
English: In the summer, on the 2nd day of the 4th month, Lu Huan and Zheng Zhuang made an alliance in Viet, which was to express friendship for the exchange of Putian.

古文：盟曰： 渝盟无享国。 
现代文：誓辞说： 如果违背盟约，就不能享有国家。 
English: "If you violate the covenant, you will not have a state," the pledge said.

古文：秋，大水。凡平原出水为大水。
现代文：秋季，发大水，凡是平原上被水淹了叫做大水。
English: In autumn, there is a lot of water. If the plain is flooded, it is called a flood.

古文：冬，郑伯拜盟。
现代文：冬季，郑庄公前来拜谢结盟。
English: In winter, Zheng Zhuanggong came to pray for alliance.

古文：宋华父督见孔父之妻于路，目逆而送之，曰： 美而艳。 
现代文：宋国的华父督在路上见到孔父的妻子，他目迎她从对面走过来，又回头从后面盯着她走过去，说： 美丽又光彩动人。 
English: Song Dynasty's Emperor Hua saw Confucius's wife on the road. He saw her coming from the opposite direction and stared at her from behind, saying, "Beautiful and radiant."

