古文：内族宗浩，字师孟，本名老，照祖四世孙，太保兼都元帅汉国公昂之子也。
现代文：皇亲内族宗浩，字师孟，本名是老，是昭祖的四世孙，太保兼都元帅汉国公昂的儿子。
English: Zonghao, a member of the imperial family and the scribe Meng, whose real name was Lao, was the fourth-generation grandson of Zhao Zu and the son of Han Guogongang, the grand marshal.

古文：贞元中，为海陵庶人入殿小底。
现代文：贞元中，是海陵时的庶人入殿做了一名供差遣的 小底 。
English: Among the Sadamoto, it was a commoner who entered the temple at the time of the burial and made a small bottom for dispatch.

古文：世宗即位辽阳，昂遣宗浩驰贺。
现代文：世宗在辽阳即位，昂派遣宗浩乘车马疾行去拜贺。
English: Sejong ascended to the throne in Liaoyang, and Aung dispatched Jongho to pay homage by horse and carriage.

古文：世宗见之喜，命充符宝祗候。
现代文：世宗见了宗浩很高兴，命令他充实符宝恭敬地侍候。
English: Sejong was pleased to see Jongho and ordered him to serve him respectfully with plenty of treasure.

古文：大定二年冬，昂以都元帅置幕山东，宗浩领万户从行，仍授山东东路兵马都总管判官。
现代文：大定二年冬天，宗浩的父亲昂以都元帅的身份在山东设置营帐，宗浩拜领万户这一军职随行，并授予他山东东路兵马都总管判官。
English: In the winter of the 2nd year of Dading, Zonghao's father, Ang Yidu, set up camp in Shandong as a marshal, and Zonghao accompanied him on this military post, and awarded him the title of judge of Shandong East Road.

古文：丁父忧，起复，承袭因闵斡鲁浑猛安，授河南府判官。
现代文：遇到父亲丧事，服丧未满，应召任职，承袭因闵斡鲁浑猛安，受授河南府判官。
English: Encountered his father's funeral, did not complete the funeral, was called to serve, inherited the turbulent peace due to his good offices, and was awarded the post of Henan Provincial Judge.

古文：以母丧解，服阕，授同知陕州防御使事。
现代文：因为母亲丧事而解除了职务，为母亲守丧期满除去丧服，受授同知陕州防御使事。
English: Because of his mother's funeral, he was relieved of his duties, removed his mourning clothes at the end of the mourning period for his mother, and was awarded the title of Shaanxi Defense Envoy.

古文：察廉能第一等，进官一阶，升同知彰化军节度使事，累迁同签枢密院事，改曷苏馆节度使。
现代文：考察他廉洁、才能都是第一等的，晋官一级，迁升同知彰化军节度使事，累迁同签枢密院事，改任曷苏馆节度使。
English: His probity and talent were all first-class, and he was promoted to the first rank. He was promoted to the same position as his acquaintance, the Changhua Military Festival Envoy, and was successively transferred to the same position as the Privy Councillor, and was reappointed as the Bishu Pavilion Festival Envoy.

古文：世宗谓宰臣曰： 宗浩有才干，可及者无几。 
现代文：世宗对宰相大臣说： 宗浩有才干，能够赶上他的没有几个人。 
English: Sejong said to the Prime Minister, "Jongho has talent, and there are not many people who can catch up with him.

古文：二十三年，征为大理卿，逾年授山东路统军使，兼知益都府事。
现代文：二十三年，任命宗浩为大理卿，过了一年授山东路统军使，兼理益都府事。
English: In 233, he appointed Munehiro as the Lord of Dali, and a year later, he was appointed as the envoy of the Shandong Road Unification Army, and also the prefectural governor of Dali and Yixing.

古文：陛辞，世宗谕之曰： 卿年尚少，以卿近属，有治迹，故以此授卿，宜体朕意。 
现代文：宗浩在阶下辞行，世宗告诉他说： 卿年纪还轻，因为卿是近亲，又有治政成绩，所以把这个职位授给卿，卿要体会朕的深意。 
English: When Zong Hao resigned from his post, Shizong told him: You are still young, because you are a close relative, and you have made achievements in governance, so I will give this position to you. You should understand my deep meaning.

古文：因赐金带遣之。
现代文：又赐给宗浩金带差遣他上路。
English: He also gave Dzong Ho a gold belt and sent him on his way.

古文：二十六年，为赐宋主赵甗生日使。
现代文：二十六年，宗浩被派往宋国作为赐宋主赵慎生日使。
English: In the 26th year, Zong Hao was sent to Song as an envoy to celebrate the birthday of Zhao Shen, the Lord of Song.

古文：还，授刑部尚书，俄拜参知政事。
现代文：归来后，被授为刑部尚书，很快又拜为参知政事。
English: After his return, he was awarded the title of Shosho of the Penal Department, and soon became a member of the Council of State.

古文：章宗即位，出为北京留守，三转同判大睦亲府事。
现代文：章宗即位，宗浩出任北京留守，三转同判大睦亲府事。
English: Zhang Zong ascended to the throne, Zong Hao stayed in Beijing, and the three of them jointly decided on the government affairs.

古文：北方有警，命宗浩佩金虎符驻泰州便宜从事。
现代文：北方有敌情警报，章宗命令宗浩佩金虎符驻在泰州见机行事。
English: There was a hostile situation alert in the north, and Zhang Zong ordered Zong Hao Pei Jinhu Fu to stay in Taizhou to act as soon as possible.

古文：朝廷发上京等路军万人以戍。
现代文：朝廷派出上京等路军队万人来戍守。
English: The imperial court sent an army of ten thousand men to defend Kyoto.

古文：宗浩以粮储未备，且度敌未敢动，遂分其军就食隆、肇间。
现代文：宗浩以粮食未有储备，况且敌军并不敢行动为理由，把军队分散在隆、肇之间就餐。
English: On the grounds that there were no reserves of grain and that the enemy troops did not dare to act, Zonghao dispersed the troops to dine between Long and Zhao.

古文：是冬，果无警。
现代文：这年冬天，果然没有打仗的危机。
English: This winter, there was indeed no danger of war.

古文：北部广吉剌者尤桀骜，屡胁诸部入塞。
现代文：北部有个广吉刺尤其桀骜不驯，屡次威胁诸部落进入边塞。
English: In the north, there is a Guangji thorn that is particularly unruly, repeatedly threatening the tribes to enter the border fortress.

古文：宗浩请乘其春暮马弱击之。
现代文：宗浩请求乘着他们暮春马弱的时候攻击他们。
English: Zong Hao asked to attack them when they were weak in late spring.

古文：时阻珝亦叛，内族襄行省事于北京，诏议其事。
现代文：当时阻礩也叛变，皇室内族一个叫襄的行省事于北京，皇帝诏令他进宫讨论这件事。
English: At that time, there was a mutiny in the imperial household. A member of the imperial household named Xiang went to Beijing to mediate, and the emperor ordered him to come to the palace to discuss the matter.

古文：襄以谓若攻破广吉剌，则阻珝无东顾忧，不若留之，以牵其势。
现代文：襄以所谓 如果攻破广吉刺，那么阻礩没有了东顾之忧 为理由，主张 不如留下广吉刺，用来牵扯阻礩的力量 。
English: Taking the so-called "if you break through the Guangji thorn, then the obstruction will not have the worries of the East Gu" as the reason, Xiang advocated that it would be better to leave the Guangji thorn to be used to involve the power of obstruction.

古文：宗浩奏： 国家以堂堂之势，不能扫灭小部，顾欲藉彼为捍乎？
现代文：宗浩秉奏道 ：国家以堂皇的气概，不能扫灭一个小部落，还留恋凭借那个广吉刺来捍卫吗？
English: Zonghao Bing recited: Can the country, with its majestic spirit, not wipe out a small tribe, but still retain the memory of defending it with the help of that Guangji thorn?

古文：臣请先破广吉剌，然后提兵北灭阻珝。 
现代文：臣请求先攻破广吉刺，然后调兵向北去消灭阻礩。 
English: The minister requested to break through the Guangji spike first, and then send troops to the north to eliminate the obstruction.

古文：章再上，从之。诏谕宗浩曰： 将征北部，固卿之诚，更宜加意，毋致后悔。 
现代文：奏章再呈上，皇帝听从了他的意见，并诏令宗浩说： 即将去征伐北部，本来是卿的诚意，更应该谨慎留意，不要最后后悔。 
English: After the report was resubmitted, the emperor listened to his opinion and ordered Zong Hao to say: "It was Sir's sincere intention to go to the north, and you should be careful not to regret it in the end.

古文：宗浩觇知合底忻与婆速火等相结，广吉剌之势必分，彼既畏我见讨，而复掣肘仇敌，则理必求降，可呼致也。
现代文：宗浩探得合底忻与婆速火相勾结，广吉刺的兵势必然分散，他们既然惧怕我去征讨，而又有掣肘的仇敌，那么按道理他们一定请求投降，可以去呼唤他们这样做。
English: Zong Hao discovered that He Di and his mother-in-law quickly colluded, and Guangji Zang's army was inevitably dispersed. Since they were afraid of me going to fight, and they had a constrained enemy, it was logical that they would ask for surrender, and they could call on them to do so.

古文：因遣主簿撒领军二百为先锋，戒之曰： 若广吉剌降，可就征其兵以图合底忻，仍侦余部所在，速使来报，大军当进，与汝击破之必矣。 
现代文：因此宗浩派遣主簿撒带领二百兵士当先锋，告诫他说： 如果广吉刺投降，可以就地征用他的兵来争取合底忻部，继续侦察他的余部在什么地方，速派人来报告，大军便可进发，和你共同击破他们是一定可以成功的。 
English: Therefore, Zong Hao sent his secretary Zhao to lead two hundred soldiers to be the vanguard, and warned him: "If Guangji Sting surrenders, you can recruit his soldiers on the spot to fight for the base of the base, continue to investigate where the rest of him is, quickly send someone to report, the army can go in, and together with you they can be successful.

古文：合底忻者，与山只昆皆北方别部，恃强中立，无所羁属，往来阻珝、广吉剌间，连岁扰边，皆二部为之也。
现代文：这个叫合底忻的部落，与山只昆都是北方特殊的部落，依仗强盛而保持中立，不隶属哪个国家，在阻礩、广吉刺之间往来，连年骚扰边疆，都是这两个部落干的。
English: This tribe, called the He Di Zang, and the Shan Du Kun, are both special tribes in the north. They rely on their strength to remain neutral and do not belong to any country. They come and go between the Zang Di Zang and Guangji Zang, and have been harassing the border for years. Both of these tribes did it.

古文：撒入敌境，广吉剌果降，遂征其兵万四千骑，驰报以待。
现代文：主簿撒入敌方境内，广吉刺果然投降，于是征用他的兵马一万四千骑，然后派人骑马飞驰向宗浩报告，并待命。
English: The master ledger was scattered into the enemy territory, and Guangjizhang finally surrendered, so he requisitioned 14,000 of his soldiers and horses, and then sent a man on horseback to report to Zonghao, and be on standby.

古文：宗浩北进，命人赍三十日粮，报撒会于移米河共击敌，而所遣人误入婆速火部，由是东军失期。
现代文：宗浩率军向北挺进，命令专人给军队准备三十天的粮食，通报撒在移米河会师，共同攻击敌人。但是所派的人误入婆速火部，于是东军没按规定日期会师。
English: Zonghao led the army to advance to the north and ordered a special person to prepare thirty days of grain for the army, inform the army to gather at the Yimihe River and attack the enemy together. However, the person sent mistakenly entered the rapid-fire department, so the Eastern Army did not meet the division according to the prescribed date.

古文：宗浩前军至忒里葛山，遇山只昆所统石鲁、浑滩两部，击走之，斩首千二百级，俘生口车畜甚众。
现代文：宗浩的先头部队到忒里葛山，遇到山只昆所统领的石鲁、浑滩两部，把他们击败逃走了，斩下敌人首级一千二百，擒获俘虏，缴获战车、牲畜很多。
English: The vanguard of Zonghao's troops went to the Ge Mountains in Baili, encountered the Shilu and Hentan two units led by Shan Zhu Kun, defeated them and fled, cut off 1200 heads of the enemy, captured prisoners, and captured many chariots and livestock.

古文：进至呼歇水，敌势大蹙，于是合底忻部长白古带、山只昆部长胡必剌及婆速火所遣和火者皆乞降。
现代文：进军到呼歇水，敌人锐气大减，于是合底忻部落长白古带、山只昆部落长胡必刺以及婆速火所派遣的合伙者都乞请投降。
English: When they marched to Huhe, the enemy's spirit was greatly weakened, so the partners sent by the He Diwei Tribe, the Changbai Ancient Belt Tribe, the Yamadu Kun Tribe, the Changhu Bisa Tribe, and the Bao Hui Hui all begged for surrender.

古文：宗浩承诏，谕而释之。
现代文：宗浩接受皇上诏令，告诉让释放他们。
English: Zonghao accepted the emperor's edict and told him to release them.

古文：胡必剌因言，所部迪列土近在移米河不肯偕降，乞讨之。
现代文：胡必刺说，所属部落迪列土近日在移米河活动，不肯一起投降，请求去讨伐他。
English: Hu Bijin said that his tribe, the Dilletus, had recently been active in the Yimihe River. They refused to surrender together and asked him to fight them.

古文：乃移军趋移米，与迪列土遇，击之，斩首三百级，赴水死者十四五，获牛羊万二千，车帐称是。
现代文：于是转移部队靠近移米，和迪列土的军队遭遇，斩了迪列土军的首级三百，敌军落水淹死的十四、五人，缴获牛羊一万二千头，以及数目相称的车、帐。
English: As a result, the transferred troops came close to Shimei and encountered the army of Dili, cutting off the heads of the Turkish army of Dili by three hundred, the enemy army drowned fourteen or five people, captured twelve thousand heads of cattle and sheep, and a corresponding number of cars and carts.

古文：合底忻等恐大军至，西渡移米，弃辎重遁去。
现代文：合底忻等人唯恐大军到来，向西渡过移米河，丢弃辎重逃跑了。
English: Hoping to avoid the arrival of the large army, He Di Yao and others crossed the Yiming River to the west, abandoned their baggage and fled.

古文：撒与广吉剌部长忒里虎追蹑及之，于窊里不水纵击大破之。婆速火九部斩首、溺水死者四千五百余人，获驼马牛羊不可胜计。
现代文：撒和广吉刺部落长忒里虎追赶上了他们，在纞里不水纵向攻击把他们杀得大败，婆速火九部斩敌首，赶敌入水溺死的有四千五百多人，缴获骆驼、马匹、牛、羊无计其数。
English: The Baili Tiger, the tribal leader of the Saha and Guangji Tribes, chased them down and defeated them in a longitudinal attack without water in Baili. He decapitated nine of his enemies with rapid fire, drowned more than 4,500 people, and captured countless camels, horses, cattle, and sheep.

古文：军还，婆速火乞内属，并请置吏。
现代文：军队凯旋，婆速火乞请归属我朝，并请求在当地设置官吏。
English: The army returned in triumph, and my mother-in-law immediately begged to belong to my country, and requested that officials be set up in the local area.

古文：上优诏褒谕，迁光禄大夫，以所获马六千置牧以处之。
现代文：皇上诏令表彰宗浩，将他升迁光禄大夫，把所缴获的六千匹马放在牧区饲养。
English: The Emperor's edict commended Zonghao, promoted him to Guanglu doctor, and placed the captured six thousand horses in the pasture for rearing.

古文：明年，宴赐东北部，寻拜枢密使，封荣国公。
现代文：第二年，在东北部排宴，不久拜宗浩为枢密使，并封为荣国公。
English: In the second year, a banquet was held in the northeast, and soon Baizonghao became a confidential envoy and was named the Prince of Rongguo.

古文：初，朝廷置东北路招讨司泰州，去境三百里，每敌入，比出兵追袭，敌已遁去。
现代文：当初，朝廷在泰州设置东北路招讨司，距离边境三百里，每逢有敌军入侵，很快出兵追踪袭击，敌人已逃遁离去。
English: At first, the imperial court set up the Northeast Road Recruitment and Investigation Division in Taizhou, three hundred miles away from the border. Whenever there was an invasion by enemy forces, troops were quickly dispatched to track the attack, and the enemy had fled.

古文：至是，宗浩奏徙之金山，以据要害，设副招讨二员，分置左右，由是敌不敢犯。
现代文：到现在，宗浩奏请将招讨司迁徙到金山，用来占据要害之地，并设副招讨二人，分别驻扎在招讨司左右两方，于是敌人不敢进犯。
English: To this day, Zong Hao-soo has requested that the recruiting office be moved to Jinshan, so that it can be used to occupy a key location, and two deputy recruiting offices have been set up, stationed separately on the left and right sides of the recruiting office, so that the enemy does not dare to attack.

古文：会中都、山东、河北屯驻军人地土不赡，官田多为民所冒占，命宗浩行省事，诣诸道括籍，凡得地三十余万顷。
现代文：适逢中都、山东、河北屯驻军人而田地不能供养，官田多数被百姓所冒占，圣上命令宗浩去查处此事，宗浩到各道把军人户籍分别括进去，这样屯驻军队大概总共得到田地三十余万顷。
English: When soldiers were stationed in Zhongdu, Shandong, and Hebei, and the fields could not be maintained, and most of the government-owned fields were occupied by the people, the saint ordered Zonghao to investigate the matter. Zonghao went to each province to include the soldiers' household registration separately. In this way, the stationed troops probably got a total of more than 300,000 hectares of fields.

古文：还，坐以倡女自随，为宪司所纠，出知真定府事。
现代文：宗浩返回，因为有妓女相随被问罪，由于被宪司纠查，派出任知真定府事。
English: Zong Hao returned because a prostitute had been found guilty of soliciting, and because he had been investigated by the registrar, he was sent out to settle the affairs of the government.

古文：徙西京留守，复为枢密使，进拜尚书右丞相，超授崇进。
现代文：后来迁任西京留守，又任枢密使，进拜尚书右丞相，超授崇进。
English: Later, he was transferred to stay in West Beijing, and also served as a privy councilor, and was promoted to Shangshu, the minister of the right, and then to super-junior vice-minister, and finally to super-junior vice-minister.

古文：时惩北边不宁，议筑壕垒以备守戍，廷臣多异同。
现代文：当时惩治北部边境的不安宁，讨论建筑壕垒用来戍守，朝廷大臣的意见多数不一致。
English: At that time, the uneasiness on the northern border was punished, and the construction of a trench was discussed to guard the border. The opinions of the ministers of the Imperial Court were mostly inconsistent.

古文：平章政事张万公力言其不可，宗浩独谓便，乃命宗浩行省事，以督其役。
现代文：平章政事张万公极力主张不可以这样做，宗浩坚持认为这样做很方便，于是圣上命令宗浩去行使这件事，监督这项工程。
English: Zhang Wankong, the political leader of Pingzhang, strongly advocated that this should not be done, and Zonghao insisted that it was convenient to do so, so the saint ordered Zonghao to exercise this matter and supervise this project.

古文：功毕，上赐诏褒赉甚厚。
现代文：大功告成，皇上赐诏表彰他，赏品很丰厚。
English: His great achievement was complete, and the Emperor gave him a certificate of commendation, and the reward was very rich.

古文：撒里部长陀括里入塞，宗浩以兵追蹑，与仆散揆军合击之，杀获甚众，敌遁去。
现代文：撒里部长礫括里进入边塞，宗浩带兵追踪，和仆散揆的军队联合攻击，敌人逃遁离去了。
English: The Sarri minister entered the border fortress, Zong Hao led the soldiers to pursue, and the army of the servant scattered attacked together, and the enemy fled away.

古文：诏征还，入见，优诏奖谕，躐迁仪同三司，赐玉束带一、金器百两、重币二十端，进拜左丞相。
现代文：皇帝诏令宗浩回朝，表彰他，逾越等级提升他仪同三司，赐玉束带一条、金器一百两、重币二十端，进拜左丞相。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Zonghao to return to the imperial court, commended him, and promoted him to the same level as the three divisions, gave him a jade cords belt, a hundred and two pieces of gold, and twenty coins, and promoted him to the left minister.

古文：宋人畔盟，王师南伐，会平章政事揆病，乃命宗浩兼都元帅往督进讨。
现代文：宋人制造事端，破坏联盟，金国军队南下讨伐，不巧平章政事揆正在生病，于是皇上命令宗浩兼任都元帅去总督南下进讨的事。
English: The Song people caused trouble, destroyed the alliance, and the Jin army went to the south to fight. Unfortunately, Pingzhang Zhengjiu was ill, so the emperor ordered Zonghao to also serve as the capital marshal to go to the south to discuss the matter with the governor.

古文：宗浩驰至汴，大张兵势，亲赴襄阳巡师而还。
现代文：宗浩乘马车到达汴京，摆开兵势，亲自赴襄阳视察前线军队之后归来。
English: Zonghao arrived in Beijing by horse-drawn carriage, set up the troops, and personally went to Xiangyang to inspect the front-line troops before returning.

古文：宋人大惧，乃命知枢密院事张岩以书乞和。
现代文：宋人极为恐惧，这才命令枢密院事张岩带书信来乞求和解。
English: Song was so afraid that he ordered the Privy Council to send Zhang Yan a letter begging for reconciliation.

古文：宗浩以辞旨未顺却之，仍谕以称臣、割地、缚送元谋奸臣等事。
现代文：宗浩以他们的书信中语意不顺而拒绝了，宋人仍然来告诉要向金国称臣、割地、绑送元谋奸臣等条件。
English: Zonghao rejected their letter because it was written in an unsatisfactory Chinese, but the Song people still came to tell him that they wanted to offer him as a vassal to Jin, divide his land, and kidnap the traitorous vassals of the Yuan.

古文：岩复遣方信孺赍其主赵扩誓稿来，且言扩并发三使，将贺天寿节及通谢，仍报其祖母谢氏殂，致书于都元帅宗浩曰：
现代文：张岩又派遣方信孺带着他的君主赵扩的誓言前来，并且说赵扩同时派出三位使者，将要贺天寿节以及道谢，仍报其祖母谢氏逝世，向都元帅宗浩致书说：
English: Zhang Yan also sent Fang Xinyan to come with the oath of his monarch Zhao Zhan, and said that Zhao Zhan sent three messengers at the same time to congratulate the birthday and give thanks, still reported the death of his grandmother Xie, and sent a letter to the Grand Marshal Zong Hao saying:

古文：方信孺还，远贻报翰及所承钧旨，仰见以生灵休息为重，曲示包容矜轸之意。
现代文： 方信孺回去，远贻报翰及所承钧旨，仰见以生灵休息为重，曲示包容矜轸之意。
English: Fang Xinzhu went back, far away, to report the good deed and the good will he had received. Looking up, he took the rest of the living beings as the most important thing, distorting the meaning of tolerance.

古文：闻命踊跃，私窃自喜，即具奏闻，备述大金皇帝天覆地载之仁，与都元帅海涵春育之德。
现代文：闻命踊跃，私窃自喜，即具奏闻，备述大金皇帝天覆地载之仁，与都元帅海涵春育之德。
English: He was excited to hear of his own death, and pleased with his theft, so he wrote a report, describing the benevolence of Emperor Daikin, and the virtue of Imperial Marshal Haikan Shunyu.

古文：旋奉上旨，亟遣信使通谢宸庭，仍先令信孺再诣行省，以请定议。
现代文：旋奉上旨，亟遣信使通谢宸庭，仍先令信孺再诣行省，以请定议。
English: He sent a courier to express his thanks to the court, but still asked the shillings to be returned to the ministry, so that the matter could be resolved.

古文：区区之愚，实恃高明，必蒙洞照，重布本末，幸垂听焉。
现代文：区区之愚，实恃高明，必蒙洞照，重布本末，幸垂听焉。
English: If you are foolish, if you are wise, you will be enlightened, if you are wise, you will be enlightened, if you are wise, you will be enlightened.

古文：兵端之开，虽本朝失于轻信，然痛罪奸臣之蔽欺，亦不为不早。
现代文： 交兵的开端，虽然是本朝失于轻信，然而痛恨罪恶奸臣的蒙蔽欺骗，也不是觉悟的不早。
English: At the beginning of the war, although this dynasty lost its credulity, it hated the deception of the evil and treacherous vassals, and it was not too early to wake up.

古文：自去岁五月，编窜邓友龙，六月又诛苏师旦等。是时大国尚未尝一出兵也，本朝即捐已得之泗州，诸军屯于境外者尽令彻戍而南，悔艾之诚，于兹可见。
现代文：自从去年五月，放逐了邓友龙，六月又诛杀苏师旦等，那个时候贵大国尚不曾出一次兵，本朝就捐出已经得到的泗州，屯驻在境外的军队命令他们全部向南撤出戍守，我朝悔改的决心，从这里可以看得出。
English: Since last May, when Deng Youlong was exiled, and in June, when Su Shidan was assassinated, your great country has not sent a single soldier. This morning, you donated Zhangzhou, which you had already obtained, and ordered the troops stationed outside your borders to withdraw southward. You can see from this my determination to repent.

古文：惟是名分之谕，今昔事殊，本朝皇帝本无佳兵之意，况关系至重，又岂臣子之所敢言？
现代文：只是名分的说法，现在和过去的情况不一样，本朝皇帝本来没有好用兵的意思，况且关系极其重大，做臣子的又怎么敢说发兵？
English: It's just a way of saying that the situation is different now than it was in the past. The emperor of this dynasty originally had no intention of sending troops. Moreover, the relationship is extremely important. As a courtier, how dare he say that he would send troops?

古文：江外之地，恃为屏蔽，傥如来谕，何以为国？
现代文： 长江以北之地，依仗它是屏障可以遮蔽，倘若来传谕，拿什么来卫国？
English: The land to the north of the Yangtze River can be shielded by relying on it as a barrier. If you were to preach, what would you use to defend the country?

古文：大朝所当念察。
现代文：大朝还是应当理解体察。
English: The Imperial Court should still understand this.

古文：至于首事人邓友龙等误国之罪，固无所逃，若使执缚以送，是本朝不得自致其罚于臣下。
现代文：至于首先肇事的邓友龙等人犯了误国之罪，本来没有地方可逃，如果让我们捆绑了他们送过去，因为本朝是臣下不得自行处罚。
English: As for Deng Youlong and others who were the first to commit the crime of misleading the country, there was no place to escape, if we tied them up and sent them over, because this court is a vassal and cannot punish itself.

古文：所有岁币，前书已增大定所减之数，此在上国，初何足以为重轻，特欲藉手以见谢过之实。
现代文：所有年内应交钱币，前封书信里已表示增加大定年间所减下来的数目，这些对于上国来说当初何足以为轻重，特此借手来表示谢过的诚意。
English: In the previous letter, he had already indicated that he would increase the number of coins to be paid during the year, which had been reduced during the Taisho period. These were very important to Shangguo at the beginning, and he took this opportunity to express his sincere gratitude.

古文：傥上国谅此至情，物之多寡，必不深计。
现代文：倘若上国谅解这种至诚的情意，贡物的多少，一定不会计较。
English: If Shangguo understands this sincere sentiment, it will not care how much the tribute is.

古文：矧惟兵兴以来，连岁创残，赋入屡蠲，若又重取于民，岂基元元无穷之困，窃计大朝亦必有所不忍也。
现代文：况且兴兵打仗以来，连年遭受损失，赋税收入屡次减少，如果再从百姓那里加收，难道让百姓永陷无穷的贫困？私下认为大朝也一定有所不忍啊。
English: Moreover, since the rise of the army to fight the war, it has suffered losses year after year, and the tax revenue has repeatedly decreased. If we collect more from the people, will it make the people fall into endless poverty? Privately, I think that the Great Dynasty must also have something to endure.

古文：于通谢礼币之外，别致微诚，庶几以此易彼。
现代文：在通谢礼品钱币之外，另致微诚，差不多拿这些去换那些不足。
English: In addition to the thank-you gift coins, there are also small gifts, almost taking these to exchange for those deficiencies.

古文：其归投之人，皆雀鼠偷生，一时窜匿，往往不知存亡，本朝既无所用，岂以去来为意。
现代文： 那些归顺投降的人，都像麻雀和老鼠一样苟且偷生，一时逃窜藏匿，往往不知存亡，本朝既然没有任用他们，难以去来为意。
English: Those who have surrendered are like sparrows and mice, they live in hiding, they flee and hide for a while, they often do not know whether they are alive or dead, and since they have not been appointed this morning, it is difficult for them to come to mind.

古文：当隆兴时，固有大朝名族贵将南来者，洎和议之定，亦尝约各不取索，况兹琐琐，诚何足云。
现代文：在隆兴时候，固然有大朝名族贵将到南方来的，等到和议签定，也曾经约定各不索取，况兹琐琐，诚何足云。
English: At the time of prosperity, of course, there was a great dynasty of famous people who would come to the south, and when the peace was signed, it was also agreed that they would not ask for anything, the situation was trivial, and the sincerity was clouded.

古文：傥大朝必欲追求，尚容拘刷。
现代文：倘若大朝一定要追求，尚容拘刷。
English: If the great dynasty must pursue, it is still possible to be restrained.

古文：至如泗州等处驱掠人，悉当护送归业。
现代文：至于像泗州等地方驱逐掠劫人，全部应当护送回去让他们安居乐业。
English: As for the expulsion of looters in places such as Zhangzhou, they should all be escorted back to let them live and work in peace.

古文：夫缔新好者不念旧恶，成大功者不较小利。
现代文： 缔结新的友好条约的人不要再记住旧的怨恨，大功告成的人不要再计较小的利益。
English: Those who conclude new treaties of friendship should no longer remember old grudges, and those who have accomplished great feats should no longer count minor benefits.

古文：欲望力赐开陈，捐弃前过，阔略他事，玉帛交驰，欢好如初，海内宁谧，长无军兵之事。
现代文：希望大力赐予畅开陈述的机会，放弃以前的罪过，宽恕那些小事，玉帛交驰，欢好如初，海内宁谧，长久没有兴兵打仗之事。
English: I hope that I will be given the opportunity to make a smooth presentation, give up my previous sins, forgive those little things, be happy as ever, be peaceful at sea, and not have to fight for a long time.

古文：功烈昭宣，德泽洋溢，鼎彝所纪，方册所载，垂之万世，岂有既乎！
现代文：功烈昭宣，德泽洋溢，鼎彝所纪，方册所载，垂之万世，岂有既乎。
English: Glorious proclamation, overflowing with virtue, the greatest of all the sayings, recorded in the book of records, preserved for all time, how could it be otherwise?

古文：重惟大金皇帝诞节将临，礼当修贺，兼之本国多故，又言合遣人使，接续津发，已具公移，企望取接。
现代文：重要的事只有大金皇帝寿诞之节日即将来临，应当重礼祝贺，又兼因为本国多事，又说合在一起派人来祝贺，连续从津地出发，已经全部运在途中，企望按时取接。
English: The only important thing is that the festival of the birthday of the Daikin Emperor is approaching, and congratulations should be made, and also because of the many things in the country, and also because they sent people together to congratulate, continuously from Tsu, they have all been transported on the way, hoping to pick up on time.

古文：伏冀鉴其至再至三有加无已之诚，亟践请盟之诺，即底于成，感戴恩德永永无极。
现代文：伏冀鉴其至再至三有加无已之诚，亟践请盟之诺，即底于成，感戴恩德永永无极。
English: It is the utmost sincerity to learn from the past, to learn from the present, to learn from the future, and to earnestly fulfill the promise of the alliance, that is, to achieve the bottom, and the feeling of grace will never end.

古文：誓书副本虑往复迁延，就以录呈。
现代文：誓书副本虑往复迁延，就以录呈。 
English: A copy of the affidavit was submitted as a record due to the delay.

古文：初，信孺之来，自以和议遂成，辄自称通谢使所参议官。
现代文：起初，信孺到来，自以为和议就会成功，则自称通谢使所参议官。
English: At first, when Nobuchika arrived, he thought that the peace talks would be successful, and he called himself the Counsellor of Tsuneishi.

古文：大定中，宋人乞和，以王抃为通问使所参议官，信孺援以为例。
现代文：大定中期，宋人请求议和，派王扌卞为通问使所参议官，信孺援引这件事作为例子。
English: In the middle of the Dading period, the Song people petitioned for peace and sent Wang Qian as the envoy's counselor, and the letter cited this incident as an example.

古文：宗浩怒其轻妄，囚之以闻。
现代文：宗浩恼怒他的轻浮狂妄，把他囚禁起来并传报到朝廷。
English: Angered by his recklessness, Zonghao imprisoned him and reported him to the imperial court.

古文：朝廷亦以其为行人而不能孚两国之情，将留之，遣使问宗浩。
现代文：朝廷也认为他的行为不能孚两国之情，打算留下他，派使者去问宗浩的意见。
English: The imperial court also believed that his actions could not help the situation between the two countries, and planned to keep him and send an envoy to ask Zonghao's opinion.

古文：宗浩曰： 今信孺事既未集，自知还必得罪，拘之适使他日有以藉口。
现代文：宗浩说 ：现在信孺的任务既然没有完成，自知回去一定是要获罪，我们拘留他反而会使他们日后以此为借口。
English: Zonghao said, "Now that Nobuchika's mission is not complete, he knows that he will be punished if he goes back. If we detain him, they will use this as an excuse in the future."

古文：不若数其恌易，而释遣之使归，自穷无辞以白其国人，则扩、侂胄必择谨厚者来矣。 
现代文：不如苟且释放让他回去，他自己无言去告诉他的国人，那么赵扩、胄一定选择谨慎厚重的人再来。 
English: If it is not possible to release him and let him go back, and he does not have the words to tell his compatriots, then Zhao Zhan and Zou must choose a cautious person to come back.

古文：于是遣之，而复张岩书曰：
现代文：于是让信孺回去了。宗浩并且写信回复张岩说：
English: So he sent the letter back. Zonghao also wrote back to Zhang Yan, saying:

古文：方信孺重以书来，详味其辞，于请和之意虽若婉逊，而所画之事犹未悉从，惟言当还泗州等驱掠而已。
现代文： 方信孺庄重地拿着信函前来，详细品味其中的言辞，在请求议和的意思方面虽然像是委婉谦逊，但是对所计划的事并没全部服从，只说是应当归还泗洲等掠夺的地方而已。
English: Fang Xinyu solemnly came forward with the letter, and thoroughly savored the words in it. Although it seemed to be euphemistic and humble in terms of the meaning of requesting peace talks, it did not fully comply with the planned matter, but only said that the plundered places such as Luzhou should be returned.

古文：至于责贡币，则欲以旧数为增，追叛亡，则欲以横恩为例，而称臣、割地、缚送奸臣三事，则并饰虚说，弗肯如约。
现代文：至于责贡币，则企图在旧数上增加一些；追叛逃，则企图按横恩的例子去做，而称臣、割地、缚送奸臣三件事，则是一并掩饰虚说，不肯像约定的那样。
English: As for the tribute money, they tried to add some to the old amount; as for the pursuit of defectors, they tried to follow the example of disloyalty; and as for the three things of praising the vassal, cutting the land, and sending the treacherous vassal to prison, they all concealed the lies and refused to do as agreed.

古文：岂以为朝廷过求有不可从，将度德量力，足以背城借一，与我军角一日胜负者哉？
现代文：难道以为朝廷过分要求有可以不服从的，而要衡量一下自己的德望、力量而背离都城借一方之地，与我军争一日之胜负吗？
English: Do they really think that the imperial court's excessive demands are something that can be disobeyed, but they want to measure their own prestige and strength, and turn away from the capital to borrow one side of the land, and fight with our army for a day's victory or defeat?

古文：既不能强，又不能弱，不深思熟虑以计将来之利害，徒以不情之语形于尺牍而勤邮传，何也？
现代文：既不能比我朝强，又不甘比我朝弱，不深思熟虑来计划将来的利害关系，白白拿无情的话，表现在信函中而频繁邮传，为什么呢？
English: He cannot be stronger than I am, but he is not willing to be weaker than I am, he does not plan future interests thoughtfully, and he takes merciless words in vain, which manifests itself in letters and is frequently sent by mail. Why?

古文：兵者凶器，佳之不祥，然圣人不得已而用之，故三皇、五帝所不能免。
现代文： 兵器是凶器，对于美好的人来说它不吉祥，然而圣人往往不得已而用它，所以三皇、五帝也在所难免。
English: A weapon is a deadly weapon. It is not auspicious for a beautiful person. However, a saint often uses it as a last resort. Therefore, the three kings and five emperors are also inevitable.

古文：夫岂不以生灵为念，盖犯顺负义有不可恕者。
现代文：难道不以生灵为念，犯顺负义有不可饶恕的罪行。
English: Isn't it an unpardonable crime to commit the crime of flouting justice with no thought for living beings?

古文：乃者彼国犯盟，侵我疆埸，帅府奉命征讨，虽未及出师，姑以逐处戍兵，随宜捍御，所向摧破，莫之敢当，执俘折馘，不可胜计，余众震慑靡然奔溃。
现代文：往日你们国家违犯盟约，侵犯我国疆场，我军帅府奉命征讨，虽然没来得及出兵，暂且拿各处戍守部队根据情况捍卫和抵御，所指之处全部摧破入侵敌军，没有能阻挡的，抓获斩首的不可胜计，剩余的众兵士受到震撼和威慑纷纷溃散逃命。
English: In the past, when your country violated the covenant and encroached on our territory, our military commanders were ordered to take action. Although they did not have time to send troops, they temporarily took all the garrison troops to defend and resist according to the situation. They destroyed the invading enemy forces in all the places indicated. There was no way to stop them. They were captured and beheaded. The remaining soldiers were shocked and deterred. They scattered and fled for their lives.

古文：是以所侵疆土，旋即底平，爰及泗州，亦不劳而复。
现代文：所以你们所侵犯的疆土旋即就被扫平，影响到泗州也不劳动兵而收复。
English: Therefore, the territorial encroachment you violated was immediately leveled, and the affected Bozhou was recovered without the use of labor soldiers.

古文：今乃自谓捐其已得，敛军彻戍，以为悔过之效，是岂诚实之言！
现代文：今天却自称损失的已经又得到，缩减军队撤出戍卫，作为悔过的表现，难道这是诚实之言吗？
English: Is it honest to say today that what was lost has been regained, that the army has been reduced and withdrawn from defense as a sign of repentance?

古文：据陕西宣抚司申报，今夏宋人犯边者十余次，并为我军击退，枭斩捕获，盖以亿计。
现代文：据陕西宣抚司申报，今年夏季宋人侵犯我边境达十余次，并且被我军击退，杀头的、俘获的要以亿计。
English: According to the Shaanxi Propaganda and Guidance Department, this summer the Song people invaded our border more than ten times, and were repulsed by our army, killing and capturing hundreds of millions.

古文：夫以悔艾罪咎，移书往来丐和之间，乃暗遣贼徒突我守圉，冀乘其不虞，以徼幸毫末，然则所为来请和者，理安在哉！
现代文：那么你们以悔过罪责歉疚为名，在往来传书请求讲和的过程中，仍然暗中派遣贼徒突袭我军防线，企图乘我方不备，以侥幸捞点毫末，然而这样你们来请和的所作所为，道理在哪里？
English: Then, in the name of repenting for your sins and apologizing for your guilt, in the process of sending letters to each other to request peace, you still secretly sent bandits to raid our military defense line, attempting to take advantage of our lack of preparedness and take advantage of a fluke. However, what is the reason for your actions to invite peace?

古文：其言名分之谕，今昔事殊者，盖与大定之事固殊矣。
现代文： 你们信函中所谓名分的说法，现在和过去不同，并且和大定年间的做法根本不同。
English: In your letter, you talk about the so-called prestige points, which is different from the past, and is fundamentally different from the practice in the Dading years.

古文：本朝之于宋国，恩深德厚，莫可殚述，皇统谢章，可概见也。
现代文：本朝对于宋国，恩深德厚，不可能全部陈述，从皇统年间的谢章中可以看出大概情况。
English: It is impossible to fully describe the deep gratitude of this dynasty to the Song Dynasty, but the general situation can be seen from the letters of thanks issued during the years of imperial rule.

古文：至于世宗皇帝俯就和好，三十年间恩泽之渥，夫岂可忘？
现代文：至于世宗皇帝俯就，三十年间你们沐浴的恩泽，怎么能够忘记。
English: As for Emperor Sejong's abdication, how can you forget the grace you have been showered with for the past thirty years?

古文：江表旧臣于我，大定之初，以失在正隆，致南服不定，故特施大惠，易为侄国，以镇抚之。
现代文：江表旧臣于我，大定之初，发现已在正隆年间失去关系，致南服不定，所以特意施予大的恩惠，改换为侄国，以便镇抚他。
English: At the beginning of the Great Reform, Jiang's former vassal found that he had lost his relationship with Zhenglong during the Zhenglong era, and his service to the south was uncertain. Therefore, he specially granted a great favor and changed it to a nephew country in order to appease him.

古文：今以小犯大，曲在于彼，既以绝大定之好，则复旧称臣，于理为宜。
现代文：现在以小犯大，错误在于你们，既然断绝了大定年间确定的友好关系，那么要恢复旧的关系以臣相称，从道理上讲还是合适的。
English: Since you have broken off the friendly relations established during the Taisho era, it is logically appropriate to restore the old relations in a manner befitting a vassal.

古文：若为非臣子所敢言，在皇统时何故敢言而今独不敢，是又诚然乎哉！
现代文：如果是非臣子所敢讲的话，在皇统时期为什么敢说而现在独独不敢，这又是有诚意吗？
English: If non-vassals dare to speak out, why did they dare to speak out during the period of imperial rule, but not now? Is this sincere?

古文：又谓江外之地将为屏蔽，割之则无以为国。
现代文：又说长江以外之地将作为屏蔽，割这片地则没有可以作为国家的立足之地了。
English: It was also said that the land beyond the Yangtze River would serve as a shield, and if this land was cut off, there would be no place for the country to stand on.

古文：夫藩篱之固，当守信义，如不务此，虽长江之险，亦不可恃，区区两淮之地，何足屏蔽而为国哉！
现代文：门户的巩固，要看是否守信义，如果不守信义，虽然是长江天险，也不能仗恃，区区两淮之地，又怎么足以作为屏蔽而护国呢？
English: The consolidation of the gateway depends on whether it keeps the faith. If it does not keep the faith, although it is the Yangtze River natural hazard, it cannot be protected. How can it be enough to protect the country as a shield?

古文：昔江左六朝之时，淮南屡尝属中国矣。
现代文：从前江左六朝的时候，淮南曾经屡次属于中国。
English: From the time of the Six Dynasties, Huainan has repeatedly belonged to China.

古文：至后周显德间，南唐李景献庐、舒、蕲、黄，画江为界，是亦皆能为国。
现代文：到后周显德年间，南唐李景献出庐、舒、蕲、黄，划江为界，这样做也都能各自成为一国。
English: Later, during the reign of Zhou Xiande, Li Jing of Southern Tang offered the territories of Yunnan, Shu, Yunnan, and Hwang, and made the river the boundary. In this way, they could each become a country.

古文：既有如此故实，则割地之事，亦奚不可！
现代文：既然有这些典故史实，那么，割地的事情，也没什么不可以的！
English: Since there are these allusions to historical facts, then there is nothing wrong with cutting land!

古文：自我师出疆，所下州军县镇已为我有，未下者即当割而献之。
现代文： 自从我军出师边疆，所攻克的州郡县镇已经归我朝所有，尚未攻克的地方就应当割献给我们。
English: Since our army left the division's frontier, all the conquered prefectures, counties and towns have belonged to our dynasty, and the places that have not yet been conquered should be allocated to us.

古文：今方信孺赍到誓书，乃云疆界并依大国皇统、彼之隆兴年已画为定，若是则既不言割彼之地，又翻欲得我之已有者，岂理也哉！
现代文：现在方信孺送到的誓书说疆界依照大国皇统年间即你们的隆兴年间已经划定的为准，如果是这样，那么既不说割你们的地，反而又想得到已经归我国所有的地，真是岂有此理！
English: Now, the oath letter sent by Fang Xinyu says that the boundaries are based on the years of the great country's imperial rule, that is, the years of your prosperity. If this is the case, then it would not be fair to cut off your land, but to want to get the land that is already owned by our country.

古文：又来书云通谢礼币之外，别备钱一百万贯，折金银各三万两，专以塞再增币之责，又云岁币添五万两疋，其言无可准。
现代文：又来信说通谢礼金之外，另外准备一百万贯钱，折合金、银各三万两，专门拿来应付再增币的责任，又说年金添五万两匹，他的话没有准头。
English: Another letter said that in addition to the thanksgiving gift, another million yuan was prepared, 30,000 taels of alloy and 30,000 taels of silver, specifically to meet the responsibility of re-increasing coins, and that the pension was increased by 50,000 taels. His words were not accurate.

古文：况和议未定，辄前具载约，拟为誓书，又直报通谢等三番人使，其自专如是，岂协礼体。
现代文：况且是否和议没定，则前面说的都写成条约，拟为誓书，又三番派人通报直谢，自专到这种地步，难道符合协议的礼仪体统吗？
English: Moreover, if there is no agreement, then all of the above is written as a treaty, intended as an oath, and three people are sent to inform the direct thanks, from the college to such a level, is it consistent with the etiquette of the agreement?

古文：此方信孺以求成自任，臆度上国，谓如此径往，则事必可集，轻渎诳绐，理不可容。
现代文：这是方信孺以求成作为己任，猜度臆断上国，说如此行径，事情一定可以办成，这是轻侮亵渎、欺骗、谎言，理不可容。
English: This is Fang Xinyan taking the pursuit of success as his own responsibility, guessing and presuming to go to the country, saying that by doing so, things can definitely be done. This is contemptuous, blasphemous, deceitful, and a lie, and cannot be tolerated.

古文：寻具奏闻，钦奉圣训： 昔宣、靖之际，弃信背盟，我师问罪，尝割三镇以乞和。
现代文： 寻具奏闻，钦奉圣训： 昔宣、靖之际，弃信背盟，我师问罪，曾经割三镇以乞和。
English: Seeking out the record, admiring the hadith: In the past, at the time of Xuan and Jing, I renounced my faith and reneged on the alliance, and my teacher asked for punishment. I once cut three towns to beg for peace.

古文：今既无故兴兵，蔑弃信誓，虽尽献江、淮之地，犹不足以自赎。
现代文：今既无故兴兵，蔑弃信誓，虽然献出全部江、淮之地，还是不足以赎出自身之罪。
English: Now, since there is no reason to raise an army, and he has abandoned his oath, although he has offered all the rivers and valleys, it is still not enough to atone for his sins.

古文：况彼国尝自言，叔父侄子与君臣父子略不相远，如能依应称臣，即许以江、淮之间取中为界。
现代文：况你国曾经自己说过，叔父侄子与君臣父子相差不远，如能依应称臣，即同意在江、淮之间取中为界。
English: Moreover, your country once said itself that the difference between uncle and nephew and father and son is not far away, and if you can adhere to it, you agree to take the middle between Jiang and Huai as the boundary.

古文：如欲世为子国，即当尽割淮南，直以大江为界。
现代文：如果打算世代当子国，就应当全部割献淮南，直接以大江为界。
English: If you want to be a leading country for generations to come, you should give up Huainan completely and take the Dajiang River as your boundary.

古文：陕西边面并以大军已占为定据。
现代文：陕西边疆地面我大军已占领据守。
English: The Shaanxi frontier has been occupied and defended by our army.

古文：元谋奸臣必使缚送，缘彼恳欲自致其罚，可令函首以献。
现代文：元谋奸臣一定要派人绑缚送来，根据你们想自己惩罚他们的恳求，可以命令人把他们的头颅包裹献来。
English: If you want to punish them yourselves, you can order someone to wrap their heads and present them to you.

古文：外岁币虽添五万两疋，止是复皇统旧额而已，安得为增？
现代文：另外年金虽然添加五万两匹，只是恢复皇统年间所定旧额而已，怎么说是增加了？
English: In addition, although the pension was increased by fifty-two thousand, it was only the restoration of the old amount set during the imperial era. How can it be said to have increased?

古文：可令更添五万两疋，以表悔谢之实。
现代文：可以命令再添五万两匹，用来表示悔过请罪的诚意。
English: He can order another fifty-two thousand animals to show his sincerity of repentance.

古文：向汴阳乞和时尝进赏军之物，金五百万两、银五千万、表段里绢各一百万、牛马骡各一万、驼一千、书五监。
现代文：你们向汴阳请求议和时曾进献犒赏军队的东西，黄金五百万两，白银五千万两，表缎裹绢各一百万匹，牛、马、骡一万匹，骆驼一千匹，书五监。
English: When you requested peace from Shanyang, you offered five million taels of gold, fifty million taels of silver, one million tablecloths each, ten thousand oxen, horses and mules, one thousand camels, and five inspectors.

古文：今即江表一隅之地。与昔不同，特加矜悯，止令量输银一千万两以充犒军之用。
现代文：现在就是江表一隅之地，和从前不一样，特加矜悯，只限量交银一千万两作为犒赏军队之用。
English: Now it is a corner of the river table, and unlike in the past, it is a special mercy, with only a limited amount of silver ten million two as a reward for the army.

古文：方信孺言语反复不足取信，如李大性、朱致知、李璧、吴琯辈似乎忠实，可遣诣军前禀议。
现代文：方信孺言语反覆无常不足听取，像李大性、朱致知、李璧、吴王官之辈似乎忠实，可差遣他们在军前禀议。
English: Fang Xinyan's words were repetitive and impermanent, and officials such as Li Dasheng, Zhu Zhizhi, Li Bi, and Wu Wang seemed to be loyal and could be sent to discuss matters before the army.

古文：据方信孺诡诈之罪，过于胡昉，然自古兵交，使人容在其间，姑放令回报。 
现代文：根据方信孺的诡诈之罪，超过了胡窻，然而自古两国交兵，容许使臣在中间传话，姑且放了他回去禀报。 
English: According to Fang Xinyan's crime of treachery, it exceeded that of Hu Yao, however, since the ancient war between the two countries, the envoy was allowed to pass the message in the middle, and he was allowed to go back and report.

古文：伏遇主上圣德宽裕光大，天覆地容，包荒宥罪，其可不钦承以仰副仁恩之厚！
现代文： 伏遇主上圣德宽裕光大，天覆地容，包荒宥罪，其可不钦承以仰副仁恩之厚！
English: The Lord's holiness is broad, vast and glorious, His countenance transcends the heavens and the earth, His forgiveness of sins is all-encompassing, and He is worthy of all praise and adoration.

古文：傥犹有所稽违，则和好之事，勿复冀也。
现代文：倘若还是有所拖延或违背，那么和好之事，不再有什么希望。
English: If there is delay or reneging, there is no hope for reconciliation.

古文：夫宋国之安危存亡，将系于此，更期审虑，无贻后悔！
现代文：宋朝的安危存亡，将系于此，更希望审慎考虑，不要留下遗憾！ 
English: The safety and survival of the Song Dynasty will depend on this, and we hope that it will be carefully considered and no regrets will be left behind!

古文：泰和七年九月，薨于汴。
现代文：泰和七年九月，宗浩在汴京逝世。
English: In September of the seventh year of the Taihe era, Zonghao passed away in Beijing.

古文：其后宋人竟请以叔为伯，增岁币，备犒军银，函奸臣韩侂胄、苏师旦首以献而乞盟焉。
现代文：之后宋人竟然请求将原来向金称呼的 叔 改称 伯 ，增加年贡金，备下犒劳军队的钱物，封献奸臣韩胄、苏师旦的首级请求联盟。
English: After that, the Song people even requested that the uncle who originally called Kim change his name to Bo, increase the annual tribute, prepare money and goods for the army, and seal the first-level request alliance of the treacherous vassals Han Xuan and Su Shidan.

古文：讣闻，上震悼，辍朝，命其子宿直将军天下奴奔赴丧所，仍命葬毕持绘像至都，将亲临奠。
现代文：宗浩逝世的讣告传来，圣上震惊，深痛哀悼，退朝，命令自己的儿子宿直将军天下奴奔赴丧所，并且命令安葬完毕后把宗浩画像带回都城，自己将亲临祭奠。
English: When the obituary of Zonghao's death was announced, the Holy Father was shocked, deeply mourned, and withdrew from the imperial court. He ordered his son, General Succession, to rush to the funeral home. He also ordered that after the burial, Zonghao's portrait be brought back to the capital, and he himself would come to pay his respects.

古文：以南京副留守张岩叟为敕祭兼发引使，莒州刺史女奚列孛葛速为敕葬使，仍摘军前武士及旗鼓笛角各五十人，外随行亲属官员亲军送至葬所，赙赠甚厚。
现代文：南京副留守张岩作为敕祭兼发引使，莒州刺史女奚列孛葛速当敕葬使，并且挑选军前武士和司旗鼓笛角各五十人，外加随行、亲属、官员、亲军等护送宗浩灵柩到下葬的地点，皇上赠予办丧事的财物很厚重。
English: Zhang Yan, the deputy stay-at-home of Nanjing, acted as the guide of the wreath-laying ceremony, and Zhang Zishi, the daughter of Zhang Zhou, led the funeral procession, and selected fifty ex-soldiers and flag-bearers, as well as officials and relatives, to escort Zong Hao's coffin to the place of burial. The emperor gave a lot of wealth to carry out the funeral.

古文：谥曰通敏。
现代文：宗浩的谥号是通敏。
English: Zonghao's nickname is Tongmin.

