古文：富弼文彦博
现代文：富弼字彦国，河南人。
English: Togashi Aza Hikokuni, from Henan Province.

古文：富弼，字彦国，河南人。初，母韩有娠，梦旌旗鹤雁降其庭，云有天赦，已而生弼。
现代文：起初，他的母亲韩氏身怀有孕，梦见旌旗鹤大雁降落在庭院中，说是上天赦免，不久生下富弼。
English: At first, his mother, Han, was pregnant. She dreamed of a white-crowned crane landing in the courtyard, saying that it was God's mercy, and soon gave birth to Fuxi.

古文：少笃学，有大度，范仲淹见而奇之，曰： 王佐才也。 以其文示王曾、晏殊，殊妻以女。
现代文：年轻时坚持学习，气量大度，范仲淹见到他后十分惊奇，说： 帝王的辅佐之才。 将他所写的文章拿给王曾、晏殊看，晏殊将女儿嫁给他。
English: When he was young, he insisted on studying and had a generous spirit. When Fan Zhongran saw him, he was very surprised and said, "He is the emperor's assistant. He showed the articles he wrote to Wang Zeng and Zou Shu, and Zou Shu married his daughter to him."

古文：仁宗复制科，仲淹谓弼： 子当以是进。 举茂材异等，授将作监丞、签书河阳判官。
现代文：仁宗恢复制科，范仲淹对富弼说： 你应当通过这种途径进入仕途。 推举茂才异等，授将作监丞、签书河阳判官。
English: When Rinzong restored the academic system, Fan Zhongran said to Fuxuan: "You should enter the career path through this way.

古文：仲淹坐争废后事贬，弼上言： 是一举而二失也，纵未能复后，宜还仲淹。 不听。
现代文：范仲淹由于争论废除皇后之事而遭贬，富弼上书说： 这是一举而二失，即使不能恢复皇后之位，也应该将职位归还给范仲淹。 没被采纳。
English: Fan Zhongyun was demoted due to the controversy over the abolition of the empress, and Fuxi wrote: This is a double loss, even if the position of the empress cannot be restored, the position should be returned to Fan Zhongyun.

古文：通判绛州，迁直集贤院。
现代文：任绛州通判，升任直集贤院。
English: He was appointed as the general magistrate of Zhangzhou, and was promoted to the highest rank of Jixi Xian Academy.

古文：赵元昊反，弼疏陈八事，乞斩其使者。召为开封府推官、知谏院。
现代文：赵元昊叛乱，富弼上疏陈述八件事，请求斩杀赵元昊派来的使者，奉召任开封府推官、知谏院。
English: When Zhao Yuanhao rebelled, Fuxi Shangso stated eight things, requested to kill the envoy sent by Zhao Yuanhao, and was called to serve as the governor of Kaifeng and Zhisheng.

古文：康定元年，日食正旦，弼请罢宴彻乐，就馆赐北使酒食。
现代文：康定元年，正月初一发生了日食，富弼请求撤销宴会和舞乐，在别馆中赐予元昊使者酒饭。
English: In the first year of Kangding, a solar eclipse occurred on the first day of the first month of the year. Fuxi requested to cancel the banquet and dance, and gave the Yuanhao envoy wine and rice in another hall.

古文：执政不可，弼曰： 万一契丹行之，为朝廷羞。 后闻契丹果罢宴，帝深悔之。
现代文：执政认为不行，富弼说： 万一契丹这样做，是朝廷的羞辱。 后来听说契丹果然撤除了宴会，仁宗深感后悔。
English: The government thought it was unacceptable, and Fuxiong said, "If the Khitan were to do this, it would be a humiliation for the imperial court." Later, when he heard that the Khitan had indeed cancelled the banquet, Rinzong felt deep regret.

古文：时禁臣僚越职言事，弼因论日食，极言应天变莫若通下情，遂除其禁。
现代文：这时禁止大臣超越职位上书言事，富弼因此议论日食，极力声明应付天象变化还不如使下情畅通，于是解除了禁令。
English: At this time, the minister was prohibited from going beyond the written words and deeds of his position. Therefore, Fuxi talked about the solar eclipse and strongly stated that it was better to deal with the changes in the celestial body than to smooth out the lower feelings, so the ban was lifted.

古文：元昊寇鄜延，破金明，钤辖卢守懃不救，内侍黄德和引兵走，大将刘平战死，德和诬其降贼。
现代文：赵元昊进犯延，攻占金明，钤辖卢守鉞不救助，内侍黄德和带兵逃走，大将刘平战死，黄德和诬陷他向敌人投降。
English: Zhao Yuanhao attacked Yan, occupied Jinming, and took control of Lu Shuxuan without any help. Huang Dehe, the palace attendant, fled with his soldiers. General Liu Ping was killed in the battle, and Huang Dehe framed him to surrender to the enemy.

古文：弼请按竟其狱，德和坐要斩。
现代文：富弼请求巡按审理此案，黄德和被腰斩。
English: Huang Dehe was beheaded after Fuxi requested that the case be heard by the circuit court.

古文：夏守赟为陕西都部署，又以入内都知王守忠为钤辖。
现代文：夏守斌贝任陕西都部署，又以入内都知王守忠为钤辖。
English: Xia Shoubin Bei was deployed to Shaanxi Province, and Wang Shouzhong was assigned to the Inner Capital.

古文：弼言： 用守赟既为天下笑，今益以守忠，殆与唐监军无异。
现代文：富弼说 ：任用夏守斌贝就已经被天下人讥笑，如今又对王守忠加以任用，这大概与唐朝监军没有什么差异。
English: Fuxi said: The appointment of Xia Shou Binbei has already been ridiculed by the world, and now Wang Shouzhong has been appointed, which is probably no different from the supervision of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：守勤、德和覆车之辙，可复蹈乎！ 诏罢守忠。
现代文：卢守勤心、黄德和失败的事情，还能重复吗？ 诏令罢免王守忠。
English: Can the story of Lu Shou's diligence, yellow virtue and failure be repeated? The imperial edict dismissed Wang Shouzhong.

古文：又请令宰相兼领枢密院。
现代文：又请求让宰相兼领枢密院。
English: He also requested that the Prime Minister also head the Privy Council.

古文：时西夏首领二人来降，位补借奉职。
现代文：这时西夏有二位首领前来归降，朝廷对他们只是补借奉职。
English: At this time, two leaders from Western Xia came to surrender, and the imperial court only lent their positions to them.

古文：弼言当厚赏以劝来者。
现代文：富弼说应当给他们丰厚的赏赐以便规劝人前来降服。
English: He said they should be rewarded handsomely in order to persuade people to come forward.

古文：事下中书，宰相初不知也。
现代文：事情下到中书，宰相起初不知此事。
English: The Prime Minister was initially unaware of the matter until it was made public.

古文：弼叹曰： 此岂小事，而宰相不知邪！ 更极论之，于是从弼言。
现代文：富弼叹息说： 这难道是一件小事吗？
English: Fuxi sighed and said, "Is this really a small matter?"

古文：除盐铁判官、史馆修撰，奉使契丹。
现代文：而宰相却不知道！ 更加极力论说此事，这样就听从了富弼的建议。授职盐铁判官、史馆修撰，奉命出使契丹。
English: But the prime minister didn't know! He argued the matter even more vigorously, thus heeding Fuxi's suggestion. He was assigned to be a salt and iron adjudicator and a historian, and was ordered to send an envoy to Khitan.

古文：庆历二年，为知制诰，纠察在京刑狱。
现代文：庆历二年，为知制诰，纠察在京师的刑事案件。
English: In the second year of Qing Lian, in order to prevent corruption, he picketed the criminal cases of teachers in Beijing.

古文：堂吏有伪为僧牒者，开封不敢治。
现代文：官吏中有伪造僧侣名册，开封府不敢治罪。
English: Some officials falsified the roster of monks, and the Kaifeng government did not dare to punish them.

古文：弼白执政，请以吏付狱，吕夷简不悦。
现代文：富弼告诉执政者，请求将官吏捉拿交付狱吏，吕夷简不高兴。
English: Lyu Yijian was not happy when Fuxi told the ruler that he had requested that the officials be arrested and handed over to prison officials.

古文：会契丹屯兵境上，遣其臣萧英、刘六符来求关南地。
现代文：正好契丹在边境驻扎军队，派遣大臣萧英、刘六符前来索要关南土地。
English: Just as Khitan was stationing troops at the border, he sent ministers Xiao Ying and Liu Liufu to claim the land south of the pass.

古文：朝廷择报聘者，皆以其情叵测，莫敢行，夷简因是荐弼。
现代文：朝廷选择聘答的人员，都认为契丹情形不能预测，不敢前行，吕夷简因此推荐富弼。
English: The people whom the imperial court chose to hire and answer all believed that the Khitan situation could not be predicted and did not dare to move forward. Lu Yijian therefore recommended Fuxi.

古文：欧阳修引颜真卿使李希烈事，请留之，不报。
现代文：欧阳修引用颜真卿让李希烈出使之事，请将富弼留在京师，吕夷简没有上报朝廷。
English: Ouyang Xiu quoted Yan Zhenqing to ask Li Xirei to send him the matter, and asked him to keep Fuxi in Beijing Division. Lu Yijian did not report to the imperial court.

古文：弼即入对，叩头曰： 主忧臣辱，臣不敢爱其死。 帝为动色，先以为接伴。
现代文：富弼就入朝进对，叩头说： 人主忧虑臣下耻辱，臣下不敢爱惜生命贪生怕死。 仁宗为此深受感动，先让富弼接待陪伴契丹使者。
English: Fusang entered the court and bowed to the emperor, saying, "The lord is worried about the disgrace of his vassals, and his vassals dare not cherish life, they are greedy for life and afraid of death." Rinzong was deeply moved by this, and first let Fusang receive and accompany the Khitan envoy.

古文：英等入境，中使迎劳之，英托疾不拜。
现代文：萧英等进入宋朝境内，中使迎接慰劳他们，萧英声称有病不答谢。
English: Xiao Ying and others entered the territory of the Song Dynasty. The Chinese envoy greeted and comforted them. Xiao Ying claimed to be ill and did not say thank you.

古文：弼曰： 昔使北，病卧车中，闻命辄起。
现代文：富弼说： 从前出使北方，病卧在车中，听到命令就起来了。
English: Fuxi said, "I was sent to the north before, and I was sick in the car, but I got up when I heard the order.

古文：今中使至而君不拜，何也？ 英矍然起拜。
现代文：如今中使到而你不拜谢，什么原因呢？ 萧英慌忙起来拜谢。
English: Now that the mid-term exam has arrived and you don't say thanks, what's the reason? Xiao Ying got up in a hurry to say thanks.

古文：弼开怀与语，英感悦，亦不复隐其情，遂密以其主所欲得者告曰： 可从，从之；不然，以一事塞之足矣。 弼具以闻。
现代文：富弼与萧英敞开胸怀尽情而谈，萧英十分感动高兴，也不再隐瞒实情，就将契丹君主所要求的一切暗中告诉给了富弼说 ：能顺从，就顺从他，不能顺从，就用一件事情来搪塞他就足够。 
English: Fuxi and Xiao Ying had a heart-to-heart talk. Xiao Ying was very moved and happy, and no longer concealed the truth. She secretly told Fuxi everything the Khitan monarch had asked for, saying, "If you can obey, then obey him. If you can't obey, then it's enough to fob him off with one thing."

古文：帝唯许增岁币，仍以宗室女嫁其子。
现代文：富弼将这些全部汇报给仁宗。仁宗只答应增加岁币，并将宗室女子嫁给契丹皇子。
English: Fuxi reported all of this to Nianzong, who only agreed to increase the annuity and marry the heiress to Prince Qidan.

古文：进弼枢密直学士，辞曰： 国家有急，义不惮劳，奈何逆以官爵赂之。 遂为使报聘。
现代文：任富弼为枢密直学士，富弼辞谢说： 国家有难，按理应不害怕烦劳，为什么反而用官爵来授人呢？ 于是担任使者聘答。
English: Appointing Fuxi as a privy direct bachelor, Fuxi said with a grin: The country is in difficulty, it should not be afraid of fatigue, why should it be conferred with a peerage instead? So he acted as an envoy to answer.

古文：既至，六符来馆客。
现代文：到契丹后，刘六符到别馆设宴。
English: After arriving in Khitan, Liu Liufu went to another hall to hold a banquet.

古文：弼见契丹主问故，契丹主曰： 南朝违约，塞雁门，增塘水，治城隍，籍民兵，将以何为？
现代文：富弼见契丹主问好，契丹主说： 南朝违背盟约，堵塞雁门，增加塘水，修治城隍，让老百姓成为士兵，想要干什么？
English: Fulong said hello to the Khitan lord, and the Khitan lord said: The Southern Dynasty violated the covenant, blocked the wild goose gate, increased the pond water, repaired the city wall, and let the people become soldiers. What do you want to do?

古文：群臣请举兵而南，吾以谓不若遣使求地，求而不获，举兵未晚也。 弼曰： 北朝忘章圣皇帝之大德乎？
现代文：群臣请求兴兵南下，我对他们说不如派遣使者索要土地，索求而没有获得，兴兵也不为晚。 富弼说 ：北朝忘记了章圣皇帝的大恩大德吗？
English: I told them that it would be better to send an envoy to ask for land, but since they did not get it, it was not too late to raise an army.Fusang said: Has the Northern Dynasty forgotten the great kindness of Emperor Zhang Sheng?

古文：澶渊之役，苟从诸将言，北兵无得脱者。
现代文：澶渊战役，如果听从各位将领的建议，北朝军队将一个也不能脱逃。
English: In that year's Battle of Pengyuan, if Emperor Zhenzong had adopted the generals' opinions, who of the Northern Dynasty soldiers would have been able to return alive?

古文：且北朝与中国通好，则人主专其利，而臣下无获；若用兵，则利归臣下，而人主任其祸。
现代文：而且北朝与中原互通友好，这样作为人主独享其好处，但臣下一无所有。如果要发动战争，就会利益全部归于臣下，而人主就要承担祸患。
English: Moreover, the Northern Dynasty and the Central Plains were friendly to each other, so as the master of the people, he enjoyed its benefits exclusively, but the vassal had nothing. If a war was to be launched, all the benefits would go to the vassal, and the master would bear the disaster.

古文：故劝用兵者，皆为身谋耳。 契丹主惊曰： 何谓也？ 弼曰： 晋高祖欺天叛君，末帝昏乱，土宇狭小，上下离叛，故契丹全师独克，然壮士健马物故太半。
现代文：因此奉劝发动战争的人都是替自己考虑罢了。 契丹主惊讶说 ：这是什么意思？ 富弼说 ：晋高祖欺骗上天背叛君主，末帝昏乱，土地疆域狭小，上下离心叛乱，因此契丹能保全军队而战胜他们，但壮士健马物资也失去一大半。
English: Therefore, the people who were advised to start the war were only thinking about themselves. Surprised, the Khitan lord said, "What does this mean?" Fulong said, "Jing Gao Zu deceived the heavens and betrayed the monarch, the last emperor was in a daze, the land territory was small, and the top and bottom were in a centrifugal rebellion, so the Khitan was able to preserve the army and defeat them, but the strong men and horse-building materials also lost more than half.

古文：今中国提封万里，精兵百万，法令修明，上下一心，北朝欲用兵，能保其必胜乎？
现代文：如今中国疆域万里，精兵百万，法令严明，上下一心，北朝打算发动战争，能保住一定能获胜吗？
English: Today, China has thousands of miles of territory, millions of elite soldiers, strict laws and regulations, and a single-minded determination. The Northern Dynasty is planning to start a war. Can it be guaranteed to win?

古文：就使其胜，所亡士马，群臣当之欤，抑人主当之欤？
现代文：即使获胜，损失的军队马匹，是群臣负责，还是人主负责？
English: Even if you win, are the vassals responsible for the loss of the army's horses, or are the masters?

古文：若通好不绝，岁币尽归人主，群臣何利焉？ 契丹主大悟，首肯者久之。
现代文：如果互通友好不断绝，岁币全部归人主，群臣又能享有什么利益呢？ 契丹主彻底觉悟，不断地点头加以肯定。
English: If the mutual communication and friendship continue to be cut off, and all the money of the year belongs to the master, what benefits can the ministers enjoy? The Khitan master was thoroughly enlightened and kept nodding his head in affirmation.

古文：弼又曰： 塞雁门者，以备元昊也。
现代文：富弼又说 ：堵塞雁门，是为了防备赵元昊。
English: Fuxi also said: Blocking the wild goose gate is to prevent Zhao Yuanhao.

古文：塘水始于何承矩，事在通好前。
现代文：塘水开始于何承矩，这件事在互通友好之前就有了。
English: Tangshui began with He Zheng Mom, and this matter existed before the exchange of friendship.

古文：城隍皆修旧，民兵亦补阙，非违约也。 契丹主曰： 微卿言，吾不知其详。然所欲得者，祖宗故地耳。
现代文：城隍都是修理好的，让老百姓当士兵也是为了补充军队的缺额，并不是违背盟约。 契丹主说 ：没有你的话，我不知道其中的详情，但所要求的土地，是祖宗过去的地盘。 
English: The battlements were all repaired, and the use of civilians as soldiers was also to supplement the army's shortage, and was not a violation of the covenant. The Khitan lord said: Without your words, I do not know the details, but the land requested is the ancestral territory.

古文：弼曰： 晋以卢龙赂契丹，周世宗复取关南，皆异代事。若各求地，岂北朝之利哉？ 
现代文：富弼说： 晋以卢龙送给契丹，周世宗又攻取关南，都是不同时代的事情，如果各自索要土地，难道对北朝有利吗？ 
English: Fuxi said: Jin sent Lulong to Khitan, and Zhou Shizong conquered Guannan, both of which were things of different eras. If they each asked for land, would it be beneficial to the Northern Dynasty?

古文：既退，六符曰： 吾主耻受金帛，坚欲十县，何如？ 弼曰： 本朝皇帝言，朕为祖宗守国，岂敢妄以土地与人。
现代文：从契丹主处出来后，刘六符说： 我们的君主感到接受金帛是耻辱，坚决要求十县，怎么办？ 富弼说： 本朝皇帝说，朕替祖宗坚守国土，怎能随便将土地送给别人呢。
English: After coming out from the Khitan master, Liu Liufu said: Our monarch felt it was a disgrace to accept the gold ingot, and insisted on ten counties, what should we do? Fuxi said: This emperor said, I hold fast to the land for my ancestors, how can I give the land to others?

古文：北朝所欲，不过租赋尔。
现代文：北朝要求的，不过是租赋而已。
English: What the Northern Dynasty asked for was merely a lease.

古文：朕不忍多杀两朝赤子，故屈己增币以代之。
现代文：朕不忍心多杀死两朝赤心之臣，因此委屈自己增加岁币来代替。
English: I did not have the heart to kill more than two dynasties of red-hearted vassals, so I wronged myself by adding coins to replace them.

古文：若必欲得地，是志在败盟，假此为词耳。
现代文：如果一定要索取土地的话，这就是一定要破坏盟约，假借这点作为托词罢了。
English: If they must take the land, they must break the covenant, and they are using this as a pretext.

古文：澶渊之盟，天地鬼神实临之。
现代文：澶渊盟会，天地鬼神亲自看到了。
English: I have seen heaven and earth, ghosts and gods in person at the Abyssal League.

古文：今北朝首发兵端，过不在我。
现代文：如今北朝先发兵挑起事端，过错不在我们。
English: Now, the North Korean army is the first to start trouble, and we are not to blame.

古文：天地鬼神，其可欺乎！ 明日，契丹主召弼同猎，引弼马自近，又言得地则欢好可久。
现代文：天地鬼神，难道能欺骗吗？ 第二天，契丹主召富弼一同打猎，将富弼的马靠近自己，又说获得土地就可以长久欢乐友好。
English: Is it possible to deceive the gods and spirits of heaven and earth? The next day, Khitan summoned the rich man to go hunting with him, brought the rich man's horse close to him, and said that obtaining land would lead to long-term happiness and friendship.

古文：弼反覆陈必不可状，且言： 北朝既以得地为荣，南朝必以失地为辱。
现代文：富弼反复陈述不能这样，并且说： 北朝既然以获得土地当作荣耀，南朝一定会以失去土地为耻辱。
English: Fuxi repeatedly stated that this could not be so, and said: Since the Northern Dynasty regards the acquisition of land as glory, the Southern Dynasty will certainly regard the loss of land as a disgrace.

古文：兄弟之国，岂可使一荣一辱哉？ 猎罢，六符曰： 吾主闻公荣辱之言，意甚感悟。
现代文：兄弟之国，又怎能一国荣耀一国耻辱呢？ 打完猎后，刘六符说： 我们君主听到您所说的荣辱的话，意向十分感动觉悟。
English: Brotherly country, how can one country glory and one country disgrace? After the hunt, Liu Liufu said: Our monarch heard the words of honor and disgrace you said, and was very moved and enlightened.

古文：今惟有结昏可议耳。 弼曰： 婚姻易生嫌隙。
现代文：如今只有结成婚姻才能够商议了。 富弼说： 婚姻容易产生埋怨隔阂。
English: Now, the only way to have a discussion is to get married, said Fu Yao: "Marriage is likely to produce grumbling and estrangement.

古文：本朝长公主出降，赍送不过十万缗，岂若岁币无穷之利哉？ 契丹主谕弼使归，曰： 俟卿再至，当择一受之，卿其遂以誓书来。 
现代文：本朝长公主出嫁，所送聘礼不超过十万缗，哪里有像岁币那样无穷的利益呢？ 契丹主告诉富弼让他回去，说： 等你再来时，应当选择一项能接受的条件，你就将盟誓书约带来。 
English: This morning, the eldest princess got married, and the bride price did not exceed one hundred thousand baht. Where is there such an infinite benefit as a year's money? The Khitan lord told the rich man to let him go back, saying: When you come back, you should choose an acceptable condition, and you will bring the oath contract.

古文：弼归复命，复持二议及受口传之词于政府以往。
现代文：富弼回朝传达契丹主的要求，又从朝廷得到两条盟约及口传之词前往契丹。
English: Fuxi returned to the DPRK to convey the request of the Khitan lord, and received two covenants and oral words from the imperial court to go to Khitan.

古文：行次乐寿，谓副使张茂实曰： 吾为使者而不见国书，脱书词与口传异，吾事败矣。 启视果不同，即驰还都，以晡时入见，易书而行。
现代文：在乐寿驻扎，对副使张茂实说： 我作为使者而不看国书，假如国书言词与口传之词不同，我的事情就失败了。 打开国书看果然与口传之词不同，立即骑马回到京师，在晚上请求觐见，改换国书才前行。
English: Stationed in Leshou, he said to the deputy envoy Zhang Moushi: I, as an envoy, do not read the state book, if the words of the state book are different from the words of oral transmission, my business will fail. Open the state book and see that it is different from the words of oral transmission, immediately ride back to Beijing Division, request an audience in the evening, and change the state book before moving forward.

古文：及至，契丹不复求婚，专欲增币，曰： 南朝遗我之辞当曰 献 ，否则曰 纳 。 弼争之，契丹主曰： 南朝既惧我矣，于二字何有？
现代文：等到达时，契丹不再商议结婚之事，一心要增加岁币，说 ：南朝将东西给我们时言辞应当说 献 ，否则就说 纳 。 富弼为此争执，契丹主说： 南朝既然害怕我们，对这两个字又有什么关系呢？
English: When they arrived, Khitan no longer discussed the matter of marriage, but only wanted to increase the annuity, saying: When the Southern Dynasty gives us something, the words should be "offer" or "pay." In response to this dispute, Khitan said: Since the Southern Dynasty is afraid of us, what does it matter about these two words?

古文：若我拥兵而南，得无悔乎！ 弼曰： 本朝兼爱南北，故不惮更成，何名为惧？
现代文：如果我们率领军队南下，不后悔吗？ 富弼说： 本朝兼爱南北，因此惮烦于更改和约，又怎能叫作害怕呢？
English: If we lead the army to the south, won't we regret it? Fulong said, "This dynasty loves both the north and the south, so it is reluctant to change the peace treaty. How can it be called fear?

古文：或不得已至于用兵，则当以曲直为胜负，非使臣之所知也。 契丹主曰： 卿勿固执，古亦有之。 弼曰： 自古唯唐高祖借兵于突厥，当时赠遗，或称献纳。
现代文：即使不得已要动用武力，那么应当以理由充足和无理来作为胜负，这不是出使的臣下所能知道的。 契丹主说： 你不要固执，古代也有过这种事情。 富弼说： 自古以来只有唐高祖向突厥借用军队，当时赠送东西，或许称作献纳。
English: Even if it is necessary to use force, it should be justified and unjustified as a victory or defeat, which is not something that the emissary's vassals can know. The Khitan lord said: Don't be stubborn, there was such a thing in ancient times. Fuxi said: Since ancient times, only Tang Gaozu borrowed troops from the Turks, and at that time he gave something, perhaps called a donation.

古文：其后颉利为太宗所擒，岂复有此礼哉！ 弼声色俱厉，契丹知不可夺，乃曰： 吾当自遣人议之。 复使刘六符来。
现代文：后来颉利被太宗捉拿，难道还有这样的礼节吗？ 富弼脸色言词都十分严肃，契丹知道不能改变其想法，就说： 我自会派遣人商议此事。 又派刘六符前来。
English: Later, Keli was captured by Taizong, is there still such etiquette? Fugu's face and words were very serious, Qidan knew that he could not change his mind, so he said: I will send someone to discuss this matter. He also sent Liu Liufu to come.

古文：弼归奏曰： 臣以死拒之，彼气折矣，可勿许也。 朝廷竟以 纳 字与之。
现代文：富弼回来上奏说 ：臣下用死来拒绝他们，他们的气焰已受到遏制，可以不允许。 朝廷竟然将 纳 字赠与契丹。
English: When Fusang returned, he reported, "Our vassals rejected them with death, and their arrogance has been curbed, so it can't be allowed. The imperial court even gave the title of naga to Khitan."

古文：始受命，闻一女卒；再命，闻一子生，皆不顾。
现代文：刚开始接受朝命，听说一女死亡；再受朝命，听说生下一个儿子，都不顾。
English: When he first received the imperial command, he heard that a woman had died; when he received the imperial command again, he heard that a son had been born, but he ignored it.

古文：又除枢密直学士，迁翰林学士，皆恳辞，曰： 增岁币非臣本志，特以方讨元昊，未暇与角，故不敢以死争，其敢受乎！ 
现代文：又授职枢密直学士，升为翰林学士，都诚恳地辞谢，说 ：增加岁币不是臣下本来的愿望，只是因为正在讨伐赵元昊，没有时间与契丹较量，因此不敢以死争执，怎敢接受呢！ 
English: He was also awarded the post of Privy Direct Bachelor, and was promoted to Hanlin Bachelor. They all sincerely thanked him and said, "Increasing the annual allowance is not the original wish of the vassals, but because we are fighting against Zhao Yuanhao, we do not have time to compete with Khitan, so we dare not argue with death. How dare we accept it!"

古文：三年，拜枢密副使，辞之愈力，改授资政殿学士兼侍读学士。
现代文：庆历三年，授职枢密副使，更加坚决辞谢，改授资政殿学士兼侍读学士。
English: In the third year of the celebration calendar, the post of vice-minister of the privy council was conferred, and the resignation was more resolute, and it was changed to the bachelor of the palace of the governor and the bachelor of attendance.

古文：七月，复拜枢密副使。
现代文：七月，又授职枢密副使。
English: In July, he was appointed Deputy Privy Counsellor.

古文：弼言： 契丹既结好，议者便谓无事，万一败盟，臣死且有罪。
现代文：富弼言： 契丹已与中原互通友好，议者就说平安无事了，万一契丹破坏盟约，臣下即使死了都还有罪。
English: Fuxuan said: The Khitan had already established friendly relations with the Central Plains, and the speaker said that everything was safe. In the unlikely event that the Khitan broke the covenant, his vassals would still be guilty even if they died.

古文：愿陛下思其轻侮之耻，坐薪尝胆，不忘修政。 以诰纳上前而罢。
现代文：希望陛下考虑契丹轻视侮辱我们的耻辱，卧薪尝胆，不忘修治朝政。 将制诰交纳仁宗，被罢职。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will consider that the Khitan despised the humiliation of insulting us, and will not forget to govern the imperial government.

古文：逾月，复申前命，使宰相谕之曰： 此朝廷特用，非以使辽故也。 弼乃受。
现代文：一个月后，又重申以前的任命，让宰相告诉他说 ：这是朝廷特地任用，不是由于出使辽国的缘故。 富弼才接受任命。
English: A month later, he reiterated his previous appointment and asked the prime minister to tell him: "This is a special appointment by the imperial court, not because of the dispatch of an envoy to Liao.

古文：帝锐以太平责成宰辅，数下诏督弼与范仲淹等，又开天章阁，给笔札，使书其所欲为者；且命仲淹主西事，弼主北事。
现代文：仁宗急切地用天下太平来督责宰相辅臣们，多次下诏督责富弼与范仲淹等，又打开天章阁，给予笔和纸，让他们写下要办的事情；并且任命范仲淹主管西部边境之事，富弼主管北部边境之事。
English: Renzong eagerly used the world peace to supervise and supervise the vice-ministers and vice-ministers, repeatedly issued edicts to supervise and supervise Fuxi and Fan Zhongyan, and opened the Tianzhang pavilion to give them pens and paper to write down the things to be done; and appointed Fan Zhongyan to be in charge of the western border and Fuxi to be in charge of the northern border.

古文：弼上当世之务十余条及安边十三策，大略以进贤退不肖、止侥幸、去宿弊为本，欲渐易监司之不才者，使澄汰所部吏，于是小人始不悦矣。
现代文：富弼上奏当世的事务十余条和安定边防的策略十三条，大致内容是进纳贤才斥退无能、阻止侥幸之徒、革除过去的弊端为根本，打算逐步更换监司中没有才能的人，让监司裁减所属各部的官吏，这样小人就开始不高兴了。
English: More than ten articles on current affairs and thirteen articles on the strategy of stable border defense were submitted by Fuxuan. The general content was to recruit talents and reject incompetents, prevent lucky ones, and eliminate the drawbacks of the past as the fundamental, intending to gradually replace people without talent in the supervision department, and let the supervision department reduce the officials of each department, so that the villain began to be unhappy.

古文：元昊遣使以书来，称男不称臣。
现代文：赵元昊派遣使者带来书信，称男不称臣。
English: Zhao Yuanhao sent an envoy to bring a letter, saying that the man did not deserve to be a minister.

古文：弼言： 契丹臣元昊而我不臣，则契丹为无敌于天下，不可许。 乃却其使，卒臣之。
现代文：富弼说 ：契丹臣服元昊而元昊不向我们称臣，这样契丹就是天下无敌了，不能允许。 于是斥退其使者，终于向宋朝称臣。
English: Fuxi said, "If the Khitan subjects himself to Yuan Hao, but Yuan Hao does not offer himself as a subject to us, then the Khitan is invincible and cannot be allowed, so he rejected his envoy and finally offered himself as a subject to the Song Dynasty."

古文：四年，契丹受礼云中，且发兵会元昊伐呆儿族，于河东为近，帝疑二边同谋。
现代文：庆历四年，契丹在云中受礼，而且出动军队与赵元昊一起讨伐呆儿族，这里离河东很近，仁宗怀疑二边共同谋划。
English: In the fourth year of the lunar calendar, Khitan received a salute in the clouds, and the army was dispatched together with Zhao Yuanhao to fight the Nuer people. This is very close to the east of the river, and Renzong suspected that the two sides were planning together.

古文：弼曰： 兵出无名，契丹不为也。
现代文：富弼说： 没有理由出兵，契丹是不会干的。
English: Fuxi said: There is no reason to send troops, the Khitan will not do it.

古文：元昊本与契丹约相左右，今契丹独获重币，元昊有怨言，故城威塞以备之。
现代文：赵元昊本来与契丹相约互为左右，如今契丹单独享有大量的岁币，赵元昊有怨言，因此在威塞筑城加以防备。
English: Zhao Yuanhao had originally agreed with Khitan to be mutually dependent, but now Khitan alone enjoys a large amount of rupees. Zhao Yuanhao has a complaint, so he built a city in Wessai to guard against it.

古文：呆儿屡寇威塞，契丹疑元昊使之，故为是役，安能合而寇我哉？ 或请调发为备，弼曰： 如此正堕其计，臣请任之。 帝乃止，契丹卒不动。
现代文：呆儿族多次进犯威塞，契丹怀疑是赵元昊指使的，因此造成了这场战争，怎会联合起来进犯我们呢？ 有人请求调动军队加以防备，富弼说： 这样正好中了他的计，臣下请求任其如此。 仁宗于是停止发兵，契丹终于没有进犯宋朝。
English: Some people asked for the mobilization of troops to be prepared, and Fuxi said: "This is exactly what he wanted, and his vassals asked him to do so." Renzong then stopped sending troops, and the Khitan finally did not invade the Song Dynasty.

古文：夏竦不得志，中弼以飞语。
现代文：夏竦不得志，用流言蜚语来中伤富弼。
English: Xia Yao was discouraged and used rumors to slander Fu Yao.

古文：弼惧，求宣抚河北，还，以资政殿学士出知郓州。
现代文：富弼害怕，请求宣抚河北，回到京师后，以资政殿学士出知郓州。
English: Fuxi was afraid and asked for help from Hebei Province. After returning to Beijing to study, he went to Zhangzhou as a scholar of the Palace of the Grand Vizier.

古文：岁余，谗不验，加给事中，移青州，兼京东路安抚使。
现代文：一年多后，谗言没有得到效果，加给事中，移青州，兼任京东路安抚使。
English: More than a year later, the reproach did not have any effect, and in the middle of the matter, he moved to Qingzhou and concurrently served as the Beijing East Road pacification envoy.

古文：河朔大水，民流就食。
现代文：河朔发生大水，老百姓到处流浪讨饭。
English: There was a big flood in Heshou, and people were wandering around begging for food.

古文：弼劝所部民出粟，益以官廪，得公私庐舍十余万区，散处其人，以便薪水。
现代文：富弼规劝所部属的老百姓拿出粮食，加以政府的粮食，获得公私庐舍十余万栋，将流民各地安排，以供给柴水。
English: Fuxi exhorted the people under his command to take out grain, add government grain, obtain more than 100,000 public and private houses, and arrange the displaced people in various regions to supply firewood and water.

古文：官吏自前资、待缺、寄居者，皆赋以禄，使即民所聚，选老弱病瘠者廪之，仍书其劳，约他日为奏请受赏。
现代文：官吏中前资、待缺、寄居的都给予俸禄，让他们在老百姓聚集的地方，对老病衰弱者给予粮食，记载这些官吏的功劳，约定到时候替他们上奏请求赏赐。
English: The government officials, including those who have been promoted, those who have vacancies, and those who are sojourners, are all given a salary. Let them give food to the old, sick, and infirm in the places where the common people gather, record the merits of these officials, and make an appointment at the right time to appeal for their reward.

古文：率五日，辄遣人持酒肉饭糗慰藉，出于至诚，人人为尽力。
现代文：一般五天，就派人拿着酒肉饭菜进行慰问，出于最大的诚心，人人都尽力而为。
English: It usually takes five days to send someone with food and wine to offer condolences. Out of the greatest sincerity, everyone does their best.

古文：山林陂泽之利可资以生者，听流民擅取。死者为大冢葬之，目曰 丛冢 。
现代文：山泽森林池塘之出产有利于老百姓生活的，都听任流民自行获取，死了的人用大坑合葬，将它叫作 丛冢 。
English: The output of the lakes and ponds in the mountains and forests is beneficial to the lives of the common people. The displaced people are allowed to obtain it on their own. The dead are buried together in a large pit, and it is called "Conglu."

古文：明年，麦大熟，民各以远近受粮归，凡活五十余万人，募为兵者万计。
现代文：第二年，麦子成熟，老百姓依路的远近接受粮食回家，共救活五十余万人，招募流民为兵达万人。
English: In the second year, when the wheat was ripe, the common people accepted grain from far and near along the road to go home, saving more than half a million people in total, and recruiting up to ten million refugees as soldiers.

古文：帝闻之，遣使褒劳，拜礼部侍郎。
现代文：仁宗听说后，派遣使者嘉奖慰问，授礼部侍郎。
English: After hearing the news, Nanzong sent an envoy to express his condolences and offer awards.

古文：弼曰： 此守臣职也。 辞不受。
现代文：富弼说 ：这是守臣的职责。 辞谢不予接受。
English: Togashi said, "This is the duty of a retainer, and I will not accept a resignation."

古文：前此，救灾者皆聚民城郭中，为粥食之，蒸为疾疫，及相蹈藉，或待哺数日不得粥而仆，名为救之，而实杀之。
现代文：在此之前，救灾的都将老百姓聚集在城中，给流民煮粥吃，结果导致疾病，以及互相践踏，有的等待救济数天都不能吃到粥而饿倒，名义是救济灾民，实际上是杀死灾民。
English: Prior to this, disaster relief workers gathered people in the city and cooked porridge for the displaced people to eat, resulting in illness and trampling on each other. Some people could not eat porridge for several days while waiting for relief and starved. In the name of relief for the victims, they actually killed the victims.

古文：自弼立法简便周尽，天下传以为式。
现代文：自从富弼立法简便周到详尽，天下相传来作为样板。
English: Since the Fuxi legislation is simple, thoughtful and detailed, it has been passed down as a model.

古文：王则叛，齐州禁兵欲应之，或诣弼告。
现代文：王则叛乱，齐州禁兵打算响应，有人到富弼处进行禀告。
English: Wang Zi rebelled, and the Qizhou Forbidden City soldiers planned to respond. Someone went to Fuxi to make an obituary.

古文：齐非弼所部，恐事泄变生，适中贵人张从训衔命至青，弼度其可用，密付以事，使驰至齐，发吏卒取之，无得脱者。
现代文：齐州禁兵不归富弼统领，担心事情泄露发生变乱，刚好宦官张从训受命来到青州，富弼考虑他可以任用，暗中将此事交付给他，让他骑马到齐州，发动士卒攻取齐州，结果兵败，没有一人得以逃脱。
English: Fusang, the commander of the banned soldiers in Qiuzhou, did not return to Fusang, fearing that the matter would leak out and cause turmoil. It just so happened that Zhang, the eunuch, came to Qingzhou from training. Fusang considered that he could be appointed, secretly handed the matter to him, let him ride to Qiuzhou, and mobilize the soldiers to capture Qiuzhou. As a result, the soldiers were defeated, and no one was able to escape.

古文：即自劾颛擅之罪，帝益嘉之，复以为礼部侍郎，又辞不受。
现代文：立即自己弹劾所犯专擅的过失，仁宗更加奖赏他，又让他任礼部侍郎，又辞谢不接受。
English: He immediately impeached himself for the blunder committed by the expert, and Rinzong rewarded him even more. He also appointed him as the attendant of the etiquette department, and did not accept his resignation.

古文：迁大学士，徙知郑、蔡、河阳，加观文殿学士，改宣徽南院使、判并州。
现代文：升为大学士，调任知郑州、蔡州、河阳，加观文殿学士，改宣徽南院使、判并州。
English: He was promoted to a university bachelor, transferred to Zhengzhou, Caizhou, and Heyang, added a bachelor's degree from the Academy of Civil Engineering, and changed his title to an envoy of the South Hebei Academy.

古文：至和二年，召拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，与文彦博并命。
现代文：至和二年，诏令授职同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士，与文彦博同时被任命。
English: In 1902, he was awarded the post of the junior high school teacher Shimohei Shoji and the junior high school teacher Shishinden Daigaku by imperial decree, and was appointed at the same time as Fumihiko Bo.

古文：宣制之日，士大夫相庆于朝。
现代文：宣制那天，士大夫在朝廷互相庆贺。
English: On the day of the proclamation of martial law, the shidafu celebrated with each other at the imperial court.

古文：帝微觇知之，以语学士欧阳修曰： 古之命相，或得诸梦卜，岂若今日人情如此哉？ 修顿首贺。
现代文：仁宗暗中观察知道此事，对学士欧阳修说： 古人看命观相，有的从梦中和占卜中得知，难道像如今人情这样吗？ 欧阳修叩头致贺。
English: Rinzong secretly observed and knew about this, and said to the scholar Ouyang Xiu: The ancients looked at the outlook on life, and some learned from dreams and divination. Is this how people are today? Ouyang Xiu bowed his head in congratulation.

古文：帝弗豫，大臣不得见，中外忧栗。
现代文：仁宗身体不适，大臣不能得见，中外忧虑害怕。
English: Nizong is unwell, the minister cannot be seen, and both China and abroad are worried and afraid.

古文：弼、彦博入问疾，因托禳禬事止宿连夕，每事皆关白乃行，宫内肃然，语在《彦博传》。
现代文：富弼、文彦博入朝询问病情，于是假祭祀之事住宿到晚上，每件事都禀报后才做，宫内严肃整齐，事在《文彦博传》中。
English: Fumimaro and Fumihiko went to the emperor to inquire about his illness, and so the matter of the fake sacrifice was put off until the evening. Everything had to be reported to the emperor before it was carried out. The imperial court was serious and orderly, and the matter is described in "Biographies of Fumihiko."

古文：嘉祐三年，进昭文馆大学士、监修国史。
现代文：嘉三年，进昭文馆大学士、监修国史。
English: Jia three years, Jin Zhaobing University, supervising the national history.

古文：弼为相，守典故，行故事，而傅以公议，无容心于其间。
现代文：富弼当宰相，遵守礼仪，按过去的办法处理问题，顺从公众议论，没有任何偏心。
English: When he was prime minister, he observed etiquette, dealt with problems according to the past methods, followed the public discussion, and did not have any bias.

古文：当是时，百官任职，天下无事。
现代文：在这时，百官尽职，天下平安。
English: At this time, hundreds of officials fulfilled their duties, and the world was safe.

古文：六年三月，以母忧去位，诏为罢春宴。
现代文：嘉六年三月，由于母亲丧事离职，诏令为此免除春宴。
English: In March of the sixth year of Jia's reign, due to his departure from office due to the death of his mother, he was exempted from the spring banquet.

古文：故事，执政遭丧皆起复。
现代文：按过去惯例，宰相遇到丧事都起任官复原位。
English: According to past practice, when the prime minister met with a death, the post was reinstated.

古文：帝虚位五起之，弼谓此金革变礼，不可施于平世，卒不从命。
现代文：仁宗空着职位五次起用他，富弼说这是金革变礼，在太平之世不能施行，终于不听从任命。
English: Rinzong appointed him to the vacant post five times, but Fuxi said that this was a change of fortune and could not be implemented in a peaceful world, and finally did not obey the appointment.

古文：英宗立，召为枢密使。
现代文：英宗即位，召为枢密使。
English: Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, and he was called to be a privy councilor.

古文：居二年，以足疾求解，拜镇海军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判扬州，封祁国公，进封郑。
现代文：过了二年，由于脚病请求解除任职，授职镇海军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判扬州，封为祁国公，又受封为郑国公。
English: Two years later, due to his foot disease, he requested to be relieved of his duties, and he was appointed as the naval festival envoy of the town, and he was awarded the title of Yangzhou, and he was appointed as the governor of Shandong Province and the governor of Zhengzhou Province.

古文：熙宁元年，徙判汝州。
现代文：熙宁元年，调任汝州判官。
English: In the first year of Xi'ning, he was transferred to the post of Ruzhou magistrate.

古文：诏入觐，许肩舆至殿门。
现代文：诏令入朝觐见，允许坐轿到殿门。
English: The imperial edict came into the imperial court, and it was allowed to take a sedan chair to the palace gate.

古文：神宗御内东门小殿，令其子掖以进，且命毋拜，坐语，从容访以治道。
现代文：神宗御内东门小殿，让其儿子从宫门进入，而且命令他们不要跪拜，坐下谈话，从容地向富弼询问治国之道。
English: Emperor Jinzong let his sons enter the small hall of the East Gate of the Imperial Household from the palace gate, and ordered them not to kneel, to sit down and talk, and to calmly ask Fusang about the way of governing the country.

古文：弼知帝果于有为，对曰： 人主好恶，不可令人窥测；可测，则奸人得以傅会。
现代文：富弼知道神宗果敢有所作为，上对说： 人主的喜好和厌恶，不能让人窥测到；能窥测，那样奸人就会逢迎。
English: Knowing that Shenzong had the courage to do something, Fusheng said to him, "The likes and dislikes of a human master cannot be seen by others; if they can be seen, then the traitor will be welcomed.

古文：当如天之监人，善恶皆所自取，然后诛赏随之，则功罪无不得其实矣。 又问边事，对曰： 陛下临御未久，当布德行惠，愿二十年口不言兵。 帝默然。
现代文：应当像天监视人一样，善恶都自取，然后进行惩罚奖赏，这样功劳和罪恶都各得其实情。 又询问边疆之事，富弼说 ：陛下即位不久，应当广布恩德施行恩惠，希望二十年不提用兵之事。 
English: He should, like a heavenly watchman, take good and evil into his own hands, and then punish and reward, so that the merits and evils are all true. Also, when asked about the frontier, Fuxi said: His Majesty will soon be on the throne, he should do a lot of favors, and hope that he will not mention the use of soldiers for twenty years.

古文：至日昃乃退。
现代文：神宗沉默不语。到日影西移才告退。
English: Shenzong was silent. He moved to the west of the shadow of the sun before retiring.

古文：欲以集禧观使留之，力辞赴郡。
现代文：神宗打算将他以集禧观使留在京师，极力推辞，到郡县赴任。
English: Shenzong intended to keep him in the Beijing division as the leader of the Confucianism, but he strongly declined the offer and went to work in the county.

古文：明年二月，召拜司空兼侍中，赐甲第，悉辞之，以左仆射、门下侍郎同平章事。
现代文：熙宁二年二月，诏授职司空兼侍中，赏赐上等府第，全部辞谢，任以左仆射、门下侍郎同平章事。
English: In February of the 2nd year of the Heian period, he was awarded the title of the highest-ranking official of the prefectural government. He resigned from his posts and was appointed as the left-hand servant of the Emperor and the junior attendant of the Emperor.

古文：时有为帝言灾异皆天数，非关人事得失所致者。
现代文：这时有人向神宗说灾异都是天数，不是人事得失所导致的。
English: At this time, someone said to Shenzong that disasters are caused by the number of days, not the loss of personnel.

古文：弼闻而叹曰： 人君所畏惟天，若不畏天，何事不可为者！
现代文：富弼听后叹息说 ：人君害怕的只有天，如果不畏惧苍天，又有什么事不能干呢？
English: After listening, Fuxi sighed and said, "The only thing people fear is the sky. If you don't fear the sky, what can't you do?"

古文：此必奸人欲进邪说，以摇上心，使辅拂谏争之臣，无所施其力。
现代文：这一定是奸人想进邪说，来动摇皇帝的意志，让辅佐谏争的大臣，没有地方施展他们的才能。
English: This must have been the work of traitors who wanted to introduce heresies to shake the emperor's will, so that the ministers who assisted in the struggle would have no place to exercise their talents.

古文：是治乱之机，不可以不速救。 即上书数千言，力论之。
现代文：这是治乱的关键，不能不尽快救治。 就上书数千言，极力论说此事。
English: This is the key to controlling the turmoil, and it must be remedied as soon as possible. As for the thousands of words submitted, I will do my best to discuss this matter.

古文：又言： 君子小人之进退，系王道之消长，愿深加辨察，勿以同异为喜怒、喜怒为用舍。
现代文：又说： 君子小人的进退，关系到皇帝治道的消退与增长，希望仔细辨察，不要以相同为喜相异为怒、以喜怒决定任用取舍。
English: He also said: The advance and retreat of the nobles and villains is related to the decline and growth of the emperor's governance. I hope you can carefully distinguish between the two, and do not take the same as joy and anger, and decide to appoint and choose with joy and anger.

古文：陛下好使人伺察外事，故奸险得志。
现代文：陛下喜欢派人侦察外边的事情，因此奸邪险恶之人得志。
English: His Majesty likes to send people to scout out the outside world, which is why treachery and sinister people are encouraged.

古文：又多出亲批，若事事皆中，亦非为君之道；脱十中七八，积日累月，所失亦多。
现代文：又发布很多亲自写的批文，如果每件事都正确，这也不是做君主的办法；假如十分之七八正确，积日累月，过失也就多了。
English: If everything is correct, this is not the way to be a monarch; if seven or eight out of ten are correct, accumulated over time, there will be more mistakes.

古文：今中外之务渐有更张，大抵小人惟喜生事，愿深烛其然，无使有悔。 是时久旱，群臣请上尊号及用乐，帝不许，而以同天节契丹使当上寿，故未断其请。
现代文：如今朝廷内外的事务逐步有所变化，大抵是小人喜欢制造事端，希望陛下仔细观察，不要有后悔的地方。 这时很长时间发生干旱，群臣请求奉尊号和使用祭乐，神宗不允许，而以同天节契丹使者应当给皇帝做寿，因此没有拒绝他的请求。
English: At this time, there was a drought for a long time, and the courtiers asked for the name of the emperor and the use of sacrificial music, but Shenzong did not allow it, and on the same day, the Khitan envoy should celebrate the emperor's birthday, so he did not refuse his request.

古文：弼言此盛德事，正当以此示之，乞并罢上寿。
现代文：富弼说这是扩大德行的，正应当用这个来在天下显示，乞求一并罢免上寿。
English: Fuxi said that this was an expansion of virtue, and it should be used to show this to the world, and to beg for the removal of longevity.

古文：帝从之，即日雨。
现代文：神宗听从了富弼的建议，当天就下雨。
English: Shenzong listened to Fuxi's suggestion, and it rained that day.

古文：弼又上疏，愿益畏天戒，远奸佞，近忠良。
现代文：富弼又上疏，希望更加畏惧上天的警戒，疏远奸邪佞恶，亲近忠良。
English: Fuxi and Shangxiao, hope to be more afraid of heaven's vigilance, alienate evil and evil, and be close to good and loyal.

古文：帝手诏褒答之。
现代文：神宗亲自书写诏书进行褒奖答谢。
English: Shenzong personally wrote an imperial edict to praise and thank them.

古文：王安石用事，雅不与弼合。
现代文：王安石任宰相，向来与富弼不和。
English: Wang Anshi was appointed prime minister and has always been at odds with Fuxi.

古文：弼度不能争，多称疾求退，章数十上。
现代文：富弼考虑不能和他争执，多次声称有病告退，数十次上章。
English: Fusang considered that he could not argue with him, repeatedly claimed to be ill and resigned, and was promoted dozens of times.

古文：神宗将许之，问曰： 卿即去，谁可代卿者？ 弼荐文彦博，神宗默然，良久曰： 王安石何如？ 弼亦默然。
现代文：神宗将允许他告退，问他说： 你告退，谁能够代替你？ 富弼推荐文彦博，神宗沉默不语，很久了才说 ：王安石怎么样？ 富弼也沉默不语。
English: Shenzong allowed him to resign and asked him: If you resign, who can replace you? Fusheng recommended Wen Yanbo. Shenzong was silent for a long time before saying: What about Wang Anshi? Fusheng was also silent.

古文：拜武宁节度使、同中书门下平章事、判河南，改亳州。
现代文：授职武宁军节度使、同中书门下平章事、判河南，改任亳州。
English: He was awarded the post of the secretary of the military festival of the Wu Ning Army, and was awarded the title of Henan Province, and was reassigned to Zhangzhou.

古文：青苗法出，弼以谓如是则财聚于上，人散于下，持不行。
现代文：青苗法颁布后，富弼认为这样就会财利聚集于朝廷，而人心分散，坚持不执行。
English: After the promulgation of the Law on Young Seedlings, Fuxuan believed that this would concentrate financial interests in the imperial court, while people's hearts were scattered, and insisted on not implementing it.

古文：提举官赵济劾弼格诏旨，侍御史邓绾又乞付有司鞫治，乃以仆射判汝州。
现代文：提举官赵济弹劾富弼不执行圣旨，侍御史邓绾又乞求交付有司进行审问处理，于是以仆射判汝州。
English: The nominating official, Zhao Ji, impeached Fuxi for not carrying out the sacred will, and the steward, Deng Yao, also begged to be handed over to the magistrate for interrogation, so he was sentenced to Ruzhou.

古文：安石曰： 弼虽责，犹不失富贵。
现代文：王安石说： 富弼虽受责罚，还不失于富贵。
English: Wang Anshi said: Although Fuxi was punished, he did not lose his wealth.

古文：昔鲧以方命殛，共工以象恭流，弼兼此二罪，止夺使相，何由沮奸？ 帝不答。
现代文：从前鲧由于违命被诛杀，共工由于貌似恭敬而内心傲狠被流放，富弼同时犯有这两条罪行，只夺去相位，又怎能阻止奸邪呢？ 神宗不答应。
English: Once upon a time, the eunuch was beaten to death for disobeying orders, and the co-worker was banished for seeming to respect the eunuch but being arrogant in his heart. However, if the rich eunuch committed these two crimes at the same time, and only deprived the eunuch of his position, how could the evil-doer be stopped? Shenzong did not agree.

古文：弼言： 新法，臣所不晓，不可以治郡。
现代文：富弼说： 新法，臣下不知晓，不能用来在我的郡县实行。
English: Fuxi said, "The new law is unknown to my subjects and cannot be used to implement it in my county.

古文：愿归洛养疾。 许之。
现代文：愿回洛阳养病。 神宗同意了这一请求。
English: He wished to return to Luoyang to recuperate. Shenzong agreed to this request.

古文：遂请老，加拜司空，进封韩国公致仕。
现代文：于是请求告老回乡，加拜司空，进封韩国公致仕。
English: Therefore, he requested to go back to his hometown, add Bai Si Quan, and enter the Korean public service.

古文：弼虽家居，朝廷有大利害，知无不言。
现代文：富弼虽然居住在家，朝廷有大事，富弼都知无不言。
English: Although Fusang lives at home, the imperial court has major events, and Fusang knows everything.

古文：郭逵讨安南，乞诏逵择利进退，以全王师；契丹争河东地界，言其不可许；星文有变，乞开广言路；又请速改新法，以解倒县之急。
现代文：郭逵征讨安南，乞求诏令郭逵选择有利地位以便进退，来保全军队；契丹争执河东地边界，对朝廷说不能允许；星象发生变化，请求广开言路；又请求尽快更改新法，来解除百姓倒悬之急。
English: Guo Junzheng pleaded with Annan and begged the emperor to order Guo Junzheng to choose a favorable position for advancing and retreating in order to protect the army; the Khitan disputed the eastern border of the river and told the court that it could not be allowed; the stars changed and asked for a broad way to speak; and he also requested that the new law be changed as soon as possible to relieve the urgency of the people.

古文：帝虽不尽用，而眷礼不衰，尝因安石有所建明，却之曰： 富弼手疏称 老臣无所告诉，但仰屋窃叹 者，即当至矣。 其敬之如此。
现代文：神宗虽然没有全部采用，但眷念礼待没有减少，曾经因为王安石要推行某种新措施，神宗推辞说： 富弼亲手书写上疏称 老臣无所告诉，只望着屋顶私下叹息 的那种情形，很快就会出现了。 
English: Although Shenzong did not adopt all of them, the consideration and courtesy did not decrease. Once, because Wang Anshi wanted to implement a certain new measure, Shenzong rebutted, saying: "The situation in which Fuxi writes in his own handwriting that the old minister has nothing to tell, only looking at the roof and privately sighing, will soon appear.

古文：元丰三年，王尧臣之子同老上言： 故父参知政事时，当仁宗服药，尝与弼及文彦博议立储嗣，会翌日有瘳，其事遂寝。 帝以问彦博，对与同老合，帝始知至和时事。
现代文：神宗对他如此敬重。元丰三年，王尧臣的儿子王同老上书朝廷说： 先父任参知政事时，正当仁宗服药，曾经与富弼和文彦博商议立皇储之事，正巧第二天仁宗病重，此事就作罢。 神宗询问文彦博，文彦博所对与王同老相符，神宗才能得以知道至和时的事情。
English: In the third year of Yuanfeng, Wang Tonglao, the son of Wang Xiancheng, wrote to the imperial court, saying, "When my father was a member of the council of state, he took medicine just as Rinzong did, and he discussed the matter of appointing a crown prince with Fuxi and Fumihiko, but the next day, Rinzong fell seriously ill, and the matter was dropped.

古文：嘉弼不自言，以为司徒。
现代文：神宗嘉奖富弼不自夸，任命他为司徒。
English: Shenzong commended Fusheng for not boasting and appointed him as a disciple.

古文：六年八月，薨，年八十。
现代文：元丰六年八月，去世，终年八十岁。
English: Yuan Feng passed away in August, 1866, at the age of 80.

古文：手封遗奏，使其子绍庭上之。其大略云：
现代文：亲手封存遗奏，让他的儿子富绍庭敬献给朝廷，大致内容是说：
English: He sealed the remains of the music with his own hands and had his son, Fushao Ting, dedicate it to the imperial court, saying roughly:

古文：陛下即位之初，邪臣纳说图任之际，听受失宜，上误聪明，浸成祸患。
现代文： 陛下即位的时候，正是邪臣采纳进言任命官员的时候，听受不适宜，致使陛下失聪误明，逐渐养成祸患。
English: At the time of His Majesty's accession to the throne, it was precisely the time when evil ministers adopted suggestions to appoint officials, and it was not appropriate to listen, resulting in His Majesty's deafness and confusion, gradually developing into a disaster.

古文：今上自辅臣，下及多士，畏祸图利，习成敝风，忠词谠论，无复上达。
现代文：如今上自辅臣，下到士人，都害怕祸乱图谋利益，长久以来成了一种败坏的风气，忠诚正直之言，不能再让陛下听到。
English: Nowadays, from the vice-minister down to the scholar, everyone is afraid of evil and seeks profit. It has long been a corrupt culture, and the words of loyalty and honesty can no longer be heard by His Majesty.

古文：臣老病将死，尚何顾求？
现代文：臣下年老害病将要死了，还有什么要求呢？
English: Your vassal is old and ill and about to die. What more do you want?

古文：特以不忍上负圣明，辄倾肝胆，冀哀怜愚忠，曲垂采纳。
现代文：只是不忍心陛下辜负圣明，于是倾尽肝胆，希望陛下哀惜怜悯愚臣，对愚臣之议加以采纳。
English: However, he could not bear to let his majesty down, so he tried his best, hoping that his majesty would pity and have mercy on the foolish minister and accept his suggestion.

古文：去年永乐之役，兵民死亡者数十万。
现代文： 去年永乐之役，士兵和百姓死亡之人达数十万。
English: Last year, hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians died in the Yongle Campaign.

古文：今久戍未解，百姓困穷，岂讳过耻败不思救祸之时乎？
现代文：如今长期战争没有停止，难道能讳言过失，由于失败感到耻辱而不考虑挽救当时的祸患吗？
English: Now that the long war has not ended, is it possible to conceal one's mistakes, to feel the shame of defeat, and not to think about saving the calamity of that time?

古文：天地至仁，宁与羌夷校曲直胜负？
现代文：天地是最仁慈的，难道会和羌夷较量曲直胜负吗？
English: Heaven and earth are the most benevolent. Will they be able to compete with the barbarians and win?

古文：愿归其侵地，休兵息民，使关、陕之间，稍遂生理。
现代文：希望归还侵占的土地，停止战争让老百姓得到休息，让关、陕之间，慢慢地产生生机。
English: It is hoped that the occupied land will be returned, the war will be stopped so that the people can have a rest, and life will slowly come to life between Guan and Shaanxi.

古文：兼陕西再团保甲，又葺教场，州县奉行，势侔星火，人情惶骇，难以复用，不若寝罢以绥怀之。
现代文：加上陕西又设置保甲，修葺教场，州县都实行，势头犹如星星之火形成燎燃之势，人人都惶恐害怕，很难再任用，还不如罢免停止来怀柔安抚。
English: In addition, Shaanxi has also set up a guarantee of armor, repairing the school, and the state and county have implemented it. The momentum is like a star fire to form a flaming trend. Everyone is terrified and afraid, it is difficult to reappoint, it is better to stop the dismissal to pacify Huairou.

古文：臣之所陈，急于济事。
现代文：臣下所陈述的事情，都是对于国事的济助立竿见影的。
English: The events described by the vassal had an immediate impact on the development of state affairs.

古文：若夫要道，则在圣人所存，与所用之人君子、小人之辨耳。
现代文：至于最重要的道理，则在于圣人的遗教，以及所用的是君子、小人的辨别。
English: As for the most important reason, it lies in the teachings of the saints, and the distinction between a gentleman and a villain.

古文：陛下审观天下之势，岂以为无足虑邪？
现代文：陛下审查观看天下形势，难道认为不值得担忧吗？ 
English: Your Majesty, after reviewing the situation around the world, don't you think it's worth worrying about?

古文：帝览奏震悼，辍朝三日，内出祭文致奠，赠太尉，谥曰文忠。
现代文：神宗看完上奏感到震惊痛悼，停止上朝三天，由宫中发布祭文致以祭奠，赠太尉称号，谥号叫 文忠 。
English: After watching the first performance, Shenzong was shocked and mourned. He stopped the performance for three days, and the palace issued an offering to pay tribute, and gave him the title of captain, and his nickname was Wenzhong.

古文：弼性至孝，恭俭好修，与人言必尽敬，虽微官及布衣谒见，皆与之亢礼，气色穆然，不见喜愠。
现代文：富弼生性十分孝顺，恭敬勤俭喜欢修行道德，与人说话一定毕恭毕敬，即使官位很低的官员和一般平民求见，都一样隆礼相待，表情十分庄重严肃，看不出喜怒之情。
English: Fuxin's nature is very filial, respectful, diligent and frugal, and likes to practice morality. When talking to people, he must be respectful and respectful. Even if low-ranking officials and ordinary civilians seek his opinion, they treat each other with the same pomp and ceremony. The expression is very solemn and serious, and there is no sign of emotion.

古文：其好善嫉恶，出于天资。
现代文：富弼喜欢善人嫉恨恶人，这是出于他的本性。
English: It is in his nature to love the good and hate the wicked.

古文：常言： 君子与小人并处，其势必不胜。
现代文：富弼经常说 ：君子和小人相处，一定不能得胜。
English: Togashi often said: If a gentleman and a villain get along, they can't win.

古文：君子不胜，则奉身而退，乐道无闷。
现代文：君子不能得胜，就洁身而退，乐于正道没有怨恨。
English: If a gentleman can't win, he retreats with a clean slate. He is happy to be on the right path and bears no grudges.

古文：小人不胜，则交结构扇，千岐万辙，必胜而后已。
现代文：小人不能得胜，就互相勾结挑拨散布谣言，千方百计，一定要获胜才罢休。
English: If villains can't win, they will collude with each other to stir up and spread rumors. They will do whatever it takes to win.

古文：迨其得志，遂肆毒于善良，求天下不乱，不可得也。 其终身皆出于此云。
现代文：等到小人得志，就放肆毒害善良之人，希望天下不乱，是不可能的。 富弼终身总是依此而行。
English: It is impossible for a villain to wait until he has achieved his ambition, and then wantonly poison a good person, hoping that the world will not be in turmoil.

古文：元祐初，配享神宗庙庭。
现代文：元初年，配享神宗庙庭。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, they were allotted to enjoy the Shinshu temple garden.

古文：哲宗篆其碑首曰： 显忠尚德 ，命学士苏轼撰文刻之。
现代文：哲宗亲自篆其碑首为 显忠尚德 ，让学士苏轼撰文刻写。
English: Zhezong personally inscribed the head of his monument as Xianzhong Shande, and let the bachelor Su Xi write and engrave it.

古文：绍圣中，章惇执政，谓弼得罪先帝，罢配享。
现代文：绍圣中，章执掌朝政，说富弼得罪神宗，免除了他配享庙庭的资格。
English: In Shaosheng, Zhang, who was in charge of the imperial government, said that Fusheng had offended the gods, and he was exempted from the qualification of enjoying the temple garden.

古文：子直柔，绍兴中，同知枢密院事，别有传。文彦博，字宽夫，汾州介休人。其先本敬氏，以避晋高祖及宋翼祖讳改焉。
现代文：到靖康初年，诏令恢复过去的典制。文彦博字宽夫，汾州介休人，他的祖先本姓敬，因避晋高祖石敬塘和宋翼祖的名讳而改姓文。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, the imperial edict was issued to restore the previous system. Fumihiko Bo, also known as Kazuo, was appointed as the governor of Bozhou Province. His ancestor, whose original surname was Kei, changed his surname to Wen in order to avoid the names of his ancestors, Shih Kei Tang and Song Ying Zu.

古文：少与张昪、高若讷从颍昌史炤学，炤母异之，曰： 贵人也。 待之甚厚。
现代文：少年时他和张、高若讷跟颍昌史火召学习，史火召的母亲觉得文彦博不同寻常，跟人说，文彦博有贵人气质。对他十分宽厚。
English: When he was a boy, he studied with Zhang, Gao Rongna and Yu Chang Shi Huizhong. Shi Huizhong's mother thought that Wen Yanbo was unusual and told people that Wen Yanbo had a noble temperament. She was very generous to him.

古文：及进士第，知翼城县，通判绛州，为监察御史，转殿中侍御史。
现代文：文彦博考中进士后，为翼城县知县，通判绛州，后被任命为监察御史，并升为殿中侍御史。
English: After he was admitted to the junior high school of Fumihiko Gakuin University, he was appointed as the magistrate of Yeongseong County and the magistrate of Yeonju County. Later, he was appointed as the inspector of history and promoted to the attendant of history in the palace.

古文：西方用兵，偏校有监陈先退、望敌不进者，大将守著令皆申覆。
现代文：当时西部边疆连年交战，军队中若有副将临阵先退、望敌不进的，按照常规，大将应向朝廷请示后才作处理。
English: At that time, the western frontier was at war for years on end. If there was a vice-general in the army who retreated ahead of the front line, hoping that the enemy would not advance, according to the usual practice, the general should ask the imperial court for instructions before dealing with it.

古文：彦博言： 此可施之平居无事时尔。
现代文：文彦博说 ：这种办法在平居无事之时还可行。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi said: This approach is still feasible when there is no problem.

古文：今拥兵数十万，而将权不专，兵法不峻，将何以济？ 仁宗嘉纳之。
现代文：但现在连年作战，将领带兵数十万，如果没有权力自主处置这些事情，将权不集中，军法不严峻，怎么能成功呢？ 宋仁宗认为他说得很有道理，吸取他的意见。
English: But now they are fighting for years on end, with hundreds of thousands of generals and soldiers. If they don't have the power to independently deal with these matters, if they don't have centralized authority, and if military law isn't strict, how can they succeed? Song Renzong thought he was making a lot of sense, so he took his opinion.

古文：黄德和之诬刘平降虏也，以金带赂平奴，使附己说以证。
现代文：当时黄德和与刘平有矛盾，诬告刘平投降于辽朝，并用金带贿赂刘平的奴仆，使他附和己说证实刘平投敌。
English: At that time, Huang Dehua had a conflict with Liu Ping, falsely accused Liu Ping of surrendering to the Liao Dynasty, and bribed Liu Ping's slave with a gold belt to make him agree and confirm that Liu Ping had joined the enemy.

古文：平家二百口皆械系。
现代文：刘平一家二百多人因此而被捆起来投入监狱。
English: As a result, more than 200 members of Liu Ping's family were tied up and thrown into prison.

古文：诏彦博置狱于河中，鞫治得实。
现代文：宋仁宗命文彦博在河中设法庭进行审理。
English: Song Renzong ordered Fumihiko to set up a court in the middle of the river for the trial.

古文：德和党援盛，谋翻其狱，至遣他御史来。
现代文：通过仔细审查，文彦博了解了事情的真相。但黄德和的同党很多，图谋推翻文彦博的审理结论，以至于动员朝廷另派御史来河中办案。
English: Through careful examination, Fumihiko learned the truth of the matter. However, many of Huang Dehe's fellow party members attempted to overturn Fumihiko's trial conclusion, to the point of mobilizing the imperial court to send another official to Hechu to investigate the case.

古文：彦博拒不纳，曰： 朝廷虑狱不就，故遣君。
现代文：文彦博拒不接纳，说： 朝廷忧虑此案办不成功，所以才派你来。
English: Fumihiko Bo refused to accept, saying: The Imperial Court is worried that this case will not be successful, so they sent you here.

古文：今案具矣，宜亟还，事或弗成，彦博执其咎。 德和并奴卒就诛。
现代文：现在案情已审出结果，你应该马上回朝廷。倘使此案现有反复，我文彦博宁愿承担责任。 黄德和及刘平的奴仆最后因此而被正法。
English: Now that the case has been adjudicated, you should return to the imperial court immediately. If there is a repetition of this case, I, Wen Yanbo, would rather take responsibility. Huang Dehua and Liu Ping's slave were finally punished for this.

古文：以直史馆为河东转运副使。
现代文：不久，文彦博以直史馆的身份任河东转运副使。
English: Soon after, Fumihiko Hiroshi assumed the post of deputy envoy for transportation to and from Hedong in his capacity as a member of the direct history museum.

古文：麟州饷道回远，银城河外有唐时故道，废弗治，彦博父洎为转运使日，将复之，未及而卒。
现代文：麟州运粮饷的路曲折遥远，而银城河外有唐时运粮饷的故道，被废弃没有疏理。文彦博的父亲文洎在任转运使职期间，曾考虑修复唐时故道，没来得及动工就死了。
English: The road of Linzhou Grain Transport Depot is long and tortuous, while the old road of Tang Dynasty Grain Transport Depot outside Yincheng River has been abandoned and has not been cleared up. Fumihiko's father, Fumihiko, considered repairing the old road of Tang Dynasty Grain Transport Depot while he was in charge of transportation, but he died before he could start construction.

古文：彦博嗣成父志，益储粟。
现代文：文彦博继承他父亲的志愿，修复了唐时故道。
English: Fumihiko inherited his father's will to restore the Tang Dynasty.

古文：元昊来寇，围城十日，知有备，解去。
现代文：并由此而储备了大量粮饷。辽兵入寇，把麟州围了十日，知道城中做了准备，撤围而退。
English: As a result, a large amount of grain was stored. The Liao soldiers invaded and besieged Linzhou for ten days. Knowing that preparations had been made in the city, they withdrew.

古文：迁天章阁待制、都转运使，连进龙图阁、枢密直学士、知秦州，改益州。
现代文：不久改任天章阁待制、都转运使，连升龙图阁、枢密直学士、秦州知州，不久又改为益州知州。
English: Soon he was transferred to Tianzhang Pavilion, which was under construction at the time, and later to the Shilong Pavilion, the Privy Direct Bachelor Pavilion, Qinzhou Zhizhou Pavilion, and soon he was transferred to Yizhou Zhizhou Pavilion.

古文：尝击球钤辖廨，闻外喧甚，乃卒长杖一卒，不伏。
现代文：曾在钤辖官舍踢球，听到门外喧嚣，一打听，乃知是卒长鞭打一兵士，兵士不认罪。
English: He once kicked a ball in a magistrate's house in Handan and heard a commotion outside the door. When he inquired, he learned that it was a petty officer who had whipped a soldier. The soldier pleaded not guilty.

古文：呼入问状，令引出与杖，又不受，复呼入斩之，竟球乃归。
现代文：文彦博让他们进来，询问了事情的原委，命人把兵士拉出去接受鞭打，但这个兵士还是不认罪，文彦博叫人把他斩了，踢完球后才回家。
English: Wen Yanbo let them in, inquired about the original commission of the matter, ordered someone to pull the soldier out to receive a whipping, but the soldier still pleaded not guilty. Wen Yanbo ordered someone to behead him, and only went home after kicking the ball.

古文：召拜枢密副使、参知政事。
现代文：仁宗把文彦博召到朝廷，任命他为枢密副使、参知政事。
English: Ninsong summoned Fumihiko Hiroshi to the imperial court and appointed him as Privy Vice-Minister and Councilor of State.

古文：贝州王则反，明镐讨之，久不克。
现代文：贝州王则反叛，明镐对王则进行讨伐，很久也攻不下来。
English: King Bechu rebelled, and the Ming and Qiang waged a crusade against the king, but were unable to conquer him for a long time.

古文：彦博请行，命为宣抚使，旬日贼溃，槛则送京师。
现代文：文彦博请求去贝州讨伐，被任命为宣抚使，十多天内叛兵就崩溃了，文彦博把王则囚送京师。
English: Fumihiko requested to go to Bechu to fight, and was appointed as the envoy. Within ten days, the rebels collapsed, and Fumihiko sent Wang Ze prisoner to the Beijing division.

古文：拜同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：升为同中书门下平章事、集贤殿大学士。
English: He was promoted to Shimon Shitai Shokuji and Shikenden Daigakuin Shokuji.

古文：荐张环、韩维、王安石等恬退守道，乞褒劝以厉风俗。
现代文：他向朝廷推荐张瑰、韩维、王安石，说他们恬淡名利，有道德讲原则，请求对他们进行褒奖以激励风俗。
English: He recommended Zhang Gui, Han Wei, and Wang Anshi to the imperial court, saying that they were indifferent to fame and fortune, had moral principles, and requested that they be commended to encourage customs.

古文：与枢密使庞籍议省兵，凡汰为民及给半廪者合八万，论者纷然，谓必聚为盗，帝亦疑焉。
现代文：并同枢密使庞籍商议裁省兵员，总计裁撤为民以及支付原俸禄一半的士兵和将佐共八万人，对这件事，当时议论纷纷，有人认为这些人一定会聚为盗贼，仁宗对此也感到疑虑。
English: He also negotiated with the Privy Councilor Pang to reduce the number of soldiers in the province. In total, 80,000 soldiers and generals were dismissed as civilians and paid half of their original salary. There was a lot of discussion about this at the time. Some people thought that these people would certainly gather as thieves, and Rinzong was also doubtful about this.

古文：彦博曰： 今公私困竭，正坐兵冗。
现代文：文彦博说： 现在公私困竭，就是因为兵员过多。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi said, "Nowadays, both the public and private sectors are exhausted because there are too many soldiers.

古文：脱有难，臣请死之。 其策讫行，归兵亦无事。
现代文：假使这些裁撤的兵士要作乱，我死也要把这事平定下去。 他的谋划终于执行，而裁撤的兵士也没有闹事。
English: If these abolished soldiers wanted to make trouble, I would do my best to quell it. His plan was finally carried out, and the abolished soldiers did not make trouble.

古文：进昭文馆大学士。
现代文：他被升为昭文馆大学士。
English: He was promoted to Shobunkwan University Scholar.

古文：御史唐介劾其在蜀日以奇锦结宫掖，因之登用。
现代文：御史唐介弹劾他在蜀时曾以奇锦跟宫廷里进行结交，所以才有被任命为昭文馆大学士的机会。
English: He was only able to be appointed as a scholar of the Shouwen Museum because he had made friends with the court with his "Wonder Brocade" when he was in Shu.

古文：介既贬，彦博亦罢为观文殿大学士、知许州，改忠武军节度使、知永兴军。
现代文：唐介被罢职，而文彦博也降职，为观文殿大学士、许州知州，改为忠武军节度使，主管永兴军。
English: Tang Jie was dismissed from his post, and Fumihiko Fumihiko was also demoted from his post. He was appointed as a member of the Academy of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master.

古文：至和二年，复以吏部尚书同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，与富弼同拜，士大夫皆以得人为庆，语见《弼传》。
现代文：至和二年，再任吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事、昭文馆大学士，这次是与富弼一同被任命，士大夫都以朝廷得人为庆幸。具体情况可参见《富弼传》。
English: In the 2nd year of the Heian period (794-1185), he was reappointed as the Rikibu Shoshu, the Chushu Shomon Shimohei Shoshoji, and the Shobunkan Daigaku Shoshi. This time, he was appointed together with Fushimi. The Shidafu were all happy to have been chosen by the Imperial Court. For details, please refer to "Fushimi's Biography."

古文：三年正月，帝方受朝，疾暴作，扶入禁中。
现代文：至和三年正月，仁宗正在临朝受文武百官参拜时，突然发生疾病，被扶入宫廷。
English: In the first month of the 3rd year of the Heian period, while Rinzong was being worshipped by hundreds of military and civilian officials in the Imperial Court, he suddenly fell ill and was brought to the Imperial Court.

古文：彦博呼内侍史志聪问状，对曰： 禁密不敢漏言。 彦博叱之曰： 尔曹出入禁闼，不令宰相如天子起居，欲何为邪？
现代文：文彦博叫来内侍史志聪了解情况。史志聪说： 宫廷里的事我不能向外泄露。 文彦博叱喝他说 ：你们在宫廷里来来往往，却不让宰相知道天子的身体状况，目的何在？
English: Fumihiko called the palace attendant, Shizuchin, to find out the situation. Shizuchin said, "I can't divulge what's going on in the palace." Fumihiko scolded him, "You come and go in the palace, but you don't let the prime minister know about the Emperor's health condition. What is your purpose?"

古文：自今疾势增损必以告，不尔，当行军法。 又与同列刘沆、富弼谋启醮大庆殿，因留宿殿庐。
现代文：自今天开始，若皇上病情加剧，一定要告诉我，否则，以军法从事。 他还与同列刘沆、富弼计谋开启大庆殿，设醮祈祷，并留宿大庆殿外的小屋。
English: Starting today, if the emperor's condition worsens, he must tell me, otherwise, he will use military law. He also planned to open the Daqing Palace, set up a shrine to pray, and stay in a hut outside the Daqing Palace with Liu Xi and Fuxi.

古文：志聪曰： 无故事。 彦博曰： 此岂论故事时邪？ 知开封府王素夜叩宫门上变，不使入；明旦言，有禁卒告都虞候欲为乱。
现代文：史志聪说： 从来就没有这样的先例。 
English: Shi Zhicong said: There has never been such a precedent.

古文：沆欲捕治，彦博召都指挥使许怀德，问都虞候何如人，怀德称其愿可保。
现代文：刘沆主张逮捕都虞候，加以审理。文彦博把都指挥使许怀德叫来，问都虞候到底是什么样的人。
English: Liu Wei advocated the arrest of the magistrate and put him on trial. Wen Yanbo sent the magistrate to summon Xu Huide to ask the magistrate what kind of person he was.

古文：彦博曰： 然则卒有怨，诬之耳。当亟诛之以靖众。 乃请沆判状尾，斩于军门。
现代文：许怀德说他可担保都虞候不会谋反，文彦博说： 那么这事是禁卫有怨仇，诬告都虞候而已，应该立即把这禁卫杀了以安定众心。 于是请刘沆把案情做个结论，把禁卫在军门前斩了。
English: Xu Huaide said that he could guarantee that the guards would not rebel, and Fenyangbo said: Then this is a matter of the guards having a grudge and falsely accusing the guards, and the guards should be killed immediately to stabilize the hearts of the people. So he asked Liu Bei to make a conclusion of the case and cut the guards in front of the military gate.

古文：先是，弼用朝士李仲昌策，自澶州商胡河穿六漯渠，入横垅故道。
现代文：在这以前，富弼采纳朝士李仲昌的计策，从澶州商胡河贯穿六漯渠，使之流入横垅旧道。
English: Prior to this, Fuxi adopted the strategy of the Asashi Li Zhongchang to pass through the Liuzhou Shanghu River through the Liuzhou Canal and make it flow into the old road of Hengduan.

古文：北京留守贾昌朝素恶弼，阴约内侍武继隆，令司天官二人俟执政聚时，于殿庭抗言国家不当穿河于北方，致上体不安。
现代文：北京留守贾昌朝一向讨厌富弼，暗中勾结内侍武继隆，指使司天官二人等执政在一起讨论朝廷大事时，于殿廷宣扬国家不应该在北方开河渠，开河渠导致皇上身体欠安。
English: The Jia Chang Dynasty, which remained in Beijing, had always hated Fuxi. They secretly colluded with the inner chamberlain Wu Jilong, and instructed the two chief magistrates to rule together. When discussing important matters of the imperial court, they preached in the imperial court that the country should not open a canal in the north. Opening the canal led to the emperor's poor health.

古文：彦博知其意有所在，然未有以制之，后数日，二人又上言，请皇后同听政，亦继隆所教也。
现代文：文彦博明白了他们用意所在，但没有采取办法加以制止。过了几天，这二个司天官又上书，请仁宗皇后一同处理政事，这也是武继隆所指使的。
English: Fumihiko understood their intentions, but did nothing to stop them. A few days later, the two magistrates sent another letter, asking Empress Nanzong to join them in handling political affairs, which was also ordered by Emperor Wu Jilong.

古文：史志聪以其状白执政。
现代文：史志聪把司天官的上书拿给执政大臣看。
English: Shi Zhicong showed the minister's letter to the ruling minister.

古文：彦博视而怀之，不以示同列，而有喜色，徐召二人诘之曰： 汝今日有所言乎？ 曰： 然。 彦博曰： 天文变异，汝职所当言也。
现代文：文彦博看了以后，把它藏起来，不给其他同列看，而表现出很高兴的样子，不慌不忙地把二位司天官叫来盘问，说： 你们今天有些话要讲吧？ 二位司天官回答： 是的。 文彦博说： 天文变异，你们的职责就是要如实反映。
English: After reading it, Fumihiko hid it and did not show it to the others in the same row, but showed a happy look. He calmly called the two magistrates for questioning and said: Do you have anything to say today? The two magistrates replied: Yes. Fumihiko said: Astronomical variation, your duty is to reflect it truthfully.

古文：何得辄预国家大事？
现代文：但怎么随便参预国家大事？
English: But how can you casually participate in a national event?

古文：汝罪当族！ 二人惧，色变。
现代文：你们的罪行应该株连一族。 二位司天官害怕，面色都变了。
English: The two magistrates were afraid, and their faces changed.

古文：彦博曰： 观汝直狂愚耳，未忍治汝罪，自今无得复然。 二人退，乃出状示同列。
现代文：文彦博说： 我看你们不过是狂狷愚蠢罢了，不忍心治你们的罪行，但以后不能再这样了。 二位司天官退出去后，文彦博才把司天官的上书给同列看。
English: After the two magistrates left, Fumihiko said, "I think you are just crazy and stupid, and I can't bear to deal with your crimes, but I can't do this anymore."

古文：同列皆愤怒曰： 奴敢尔僣言，何不斩之？ 彦博曰： 斩之，则事彰灼，于中宫不安。 众皆曰： 善。 既而议遣司天官定六漯方位，复使二人往。
现代文：同列都非常气愤，说： 这些家伙竟敢如此僭越而上书，你怎么不把他们给斩了？ 文彦博说 ：把他们斩了，事情也弄大了，恐怕引起皇后不安。 众人都说 ：想得周到。 不久朝廷议定派遣司天官核实六漯渠的方位，并派二人前往。
English: The same people were very angry and said, "These guys dared to be so arrogant and submit a letter, why didn't you cut them off?" Fumihiko said, "If you cut them off, the matter will get bigger, and I'm afraid it will cause anxiety to the queen." Everyone said, "It was well thought out." Soon, the imperial court agreed to send a magistrate to verify the location of the six canals and send two people.

古文：继隆白请留之，彦博曰： 彼本不敢妄言，有教之者耳。 继隆默不敢对。
现代文：武继隆代表他们请求留下，文彦博说： 他们本来不敢乱说，有人指使他们这样干罢了。 武继隆沉默不敢回答。
English: On behalf of them, Wu Jilong asked to stay, and Fenyangbo said, "They didn't dare to say anything, someone told them to do so.

古文：二人至六漯，恐治前罪，更言六漯在东北，非正北也。
现代文：二位司天官至六漯，害怕究治前面所犯罪行，改而说六漯的方位在东北，不是在京师正北面。
English: The two magistrates were afraid to investigate the crime committed in front of them, and instead said that the position of Liuchuan was in the northeast, not in the north of Beijing.

古文：帝疾愈，彦博等始归第。
现代文：仁宗病愈，文彦博等才从大庆殿回家。
English: When Ninsong recovered from his illness, Fumihiko and others returned home from Daqing Palace.

古文：当是时，京师业业，赖彦博、弼持重，众心以安。
现代文：在仁宗生病的这些日子里，京师吏民担心害怕，靠文彦博、富弼老成持重，吏民的心情才得安宁。
English: In these days of Rinzong's illness, the officials and people of Beijing were worried and afraid. By relying on Wen Yanbo and Fuxi Lao Cheng, the mood of the officials and people was calm.

古文：沆密白帝曰： 陛下违豫时，彦博擅斩告反者。 彦博闻之，以沆判呈，帝意乃解。
现代文：刘沆在仁宗病愈后偷偷告诉仁宗说 ：陛下身体不好时，文彦博曾擅自诛斩报告谋反的人。 文彦博听到了后，把刘沆的判词呈给仁宗，仁宗的疑虑才消除了。
English: After Rinzong had recovered from his illness, Liu Ye secretly told Rinzong that when his majesty was not well, Wen Yanbo had arbitrarily executed a person who had plotted a rebellion. After hearing this, Wen Yanbo presented Liu Ye's verdict to Rinzong, and Rinzong's doubts were eliminated.

古文：御史吴中复乞召还唐介。
现代文：御史吴中复请求把唐介召回朝廷。
English: Governor Wu Zhongfu requested that Tang Jie be recalled to the imperial court.

古文：彦博因言，介顷为御史，言臣事多中臣病，其间虽有风闻之误，然当时责之太深，请如中复奏。
现代文：文彦博说，唐介过去做御史，弹劾我的事大多都针对我的毛病，其中有些是道听途说，难免不实，但当时我也过分责备了他，请皇上按中复的奏折办理。
English: Wen Yanbo said that most of the things that Tang Jie did in the past to impeach me were aimed at my faults, some of which were hearsay and inevitably untrue, but at that time I also blamed him excessively and asked the emperor to handle it according to the report.

古文：时以彦博为厚德。
现代文：当时都认为文彦博品德高尚。
English: At that time, they all believed that Fumihiko Hiroshi was a man of high moral character.

古文：久之，以河阳三城节度使同平章事、判河南府，封潞国公，改镇保平、判大名府。
现代文：过了很久，文彦博以河阳三城节度使同平章事、判河南府，被封为潞国公，改镇保平，判大名府。
English: After a long time, Wen Yanbo was awarded the title of Henan Prefecture at the three-city festival of Heyang. He was made the governor of Shandong Province, changed his town to Baoping, and was awarded the title of Daimyo Prefecture.

古文：又改镇成德，迁尚书左仆射、判太原府。
现代文：不久改镇成德，升为尚书左仆射、判太原府。
English: He soon changed his town to Chengde and was promoted to Shangshu Zuopuzha and Han Taiyuanfu.

古文：俄复镇保平、判河南。
现代文：不久再镇保平，判河南府。
English: Soon after, the town of Baoping was awarded the title of Henan Prefecture.

古文：丁母忧，英宗即位，起复成德军节度使，三上表乞终丧，许之。
现代文：因母亲去世而辞官守丧，英宗即位，任命为成德军节度使，文彦博多次上表，请求守完丧，朝廷允许了。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post to attend the funeral. When Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the representative of the Chengde Army for the National Day. Wen Yanbo repeatedly petitioned the court to allow him to attend the funeral.

古文：初，仁宗之不豫也，彦博与富弼等乞立储嗣。
现代文：当初仁宗身体不好，文彦博与富弼等人请求立太子。
English: At first, Ninsong was not in good health, and Fumihiko Hiroshi, Fusako, and others requested the crown prince.

古文：仁宗许焉，而后宫将有就馆者，故其事缓。
现代文：仁宗答应了。但后宫将有生产的，这件事拖了下来。
English: Rinzong agreed, but the harem was to be productive, and the matter dragged on.

古文：已而彦博去位，其后弼亦以忧去。
现代文：不久，文彦博离职，后来，富弼亦以守丧离职。
English: Soon after, Fumihiko Fumihiko left the company, and later, Fumihiko Fumihiko also left the company.

古文：彦博既服阕，复以故官判河南，有诏入觐。
现代文：文彦博守丧礼完毕。官复原职，判河南府，英宗有诏命到朝廷拜见。
English: Funeral ceremony for Fumihiko Hokushu completed. The official was reinstated, Henan Prefecture was awarded, and Yingzong was ordered to visit the Imperial Court.

古文：英宗曰： 朕之立，卿之力也。 彦博竦然对曰： 陛下入继大统，乃先帝圣意，皇太后协赞之力，臣何闻力之有？
现代文：英宗对他说： 我被立为太子，是你的功劳。 文彦博严肃地回答 ：陛下立为太子，承继帝统，是仁宗皇帝的意愿，也是皇太后襄赞之功，臣子没有什么功劳。
English: Emperor Yingzong said to him, "It is to your credit that I was made crown prince." Wen Yanbo solemnly replied, "It was Emperor Renzong's wish and Empress Dowager Yang Zhan's merit that His Majesty was made crown prince and succeeded to the throne. There is no merit in being a courtier.

古文：兼陛下登储纂极之时，臣方在外，皆韩琦等承圣志受顾命，臣无与焉。 帝曰： 备闻始议，卿于朕有恩。 彦博逊避不敢当。
现代文：而且陛下被立为太子以及继统之时，臣子不在朝廷，都是韩琦等人根据先帝意愿而受命行事，臣子没有参与。 英宗说： 使先帝有所裁择，以及开始创议，你都对我有恩。 文彦博谦逊地回避，不敢认为有功于英宗。
English: Moreover, when His Majesty was enthroned as Crown Prince and succeeded to the throne, the courtiers were not in the court, and Han Zheng and others were ordered to act according to the wishes of the former emperor, and the courtiers did not participate.Ying Zong said: You have been kind to me in enabling the former emperor to make choices, and in initiating proposals.Fumihiko humbly evaded, not daring to think that it was due to Ying Zong.

古文：帝曰： 暂烦西行，即召还矣。 寻除侍中，徙镇淮南、判永兴军，入为枢密使、剑南西川节度使。
现代文：英宗说 ：你暂且西去任职，不久就会把你召回朝廷。 不久即升为侍中，改镇淮南府，判永兴军，入朝廷为枢密使、剑南西川节度使。
English: Yingzong said, "If you go to the west for the time being, you will soon be called back to the imperial court, and you will soon be promoted to attendant, transferred to Huainan Prefecture, assigned to the Yongxing Army, and enter the imperial court as a privy envoy and Jianan West River Festival envoy.

古文：熙宁二年，相陈升之，诏： 彦博朝廷宗臣，其令升之位彦博下，以称遇贤之意。 彦博曰： 国朝枢密使，无位宰相上者，独曹利用尝在王曾、张知白上。
现代文：神宗熙宁二年，以陈升之为宰相。诏书说： 文彦博是朝廷历朝臣子，令陈升之位在文彦博之下，以符合朕礼贤之意。 文彦博说： 宋朝枢密使职，没有在宰相上面的。只有曹利用曾经在王曾、张知白上。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Jinzong, Chen Sheng was appointed prime minister. The imperial edict said: Fumihiko was a courtier of the imperial court, so Chen Sheng's position was below Fumihiko, in accordance with the will of the wise. Fumihiko said: Song Dynasty privy councilors did not serve above the prime minister. Only Cao Rong was once on Wang Zeng and Zhang Zhibai.

古文：臣忝知礼义，不敢效利用所为，以紊朝著。 固辞乃止。
现代文：臣下对礼义难说全懂，但不敢仿效曹利用所为，以紊乱朝廷礼法。 
English: It is difficult for a vassal to fully understand the etiquette, but they dare not imitate Cao Cao's actions and disrupt the imperial court etiquette.

古文：夏人犯大顺，庆帅李复圭以陈图方略授钤辖李信等，趣使出战。
现代文：坚决推辞才没有使自己位在陈升之之上。夏人进犯大顺，将帅李复圭把阵图和方略授给钤辖李信等人，命令他们出战。
English: It was only by resolutely refusing that he did not place himself above Chen Shengzhu. Xia people attacked Dashun, and the commander Li Fugui gave the battle plan and the strategy to Li Xin and others under his command and ordered them to go to war.

古文：及败，乃妄奏信罪。
现代文：等到失败，却诬奏李信有罪。
English: Wait until it fails, but falsely play Li Xin guilty.

古文：彦博暴其非，宰相王安石曲诛信等，秦人冤之。
现代文：文彦博把其中的是非暴露出来，而宰相王安石曲意诛杀李信等，秦人认为他们都冤枉。
English: Wen Yanbo exposed the rights and wrongs of it, while the Prime Minister Wang Anshi deliberately killed Li Xin, etc. The Qin people believed that they were all wronged.

古文：庆州兵乱，彦博言于帝曰： 朝廷行事，务合人心，宜兼采众论，以静重为先。
现代文：庆州兵乱，文彦博对神宗说： 朝廷施政，务必符合人心。应该兼采各种意见，以静重为第一要务。
English: During the Gyeongju War, Fumihiko said to Shinso, "When the imperial court is making policy, it must be in line with the will of the people. Various opinions should be taken into consideration, with calmness as the first priority.

古文：陛下厉精求治，而人心未安，盖更张之过也。
现代文：陛下励精图治，而人心不安，恐怕是法令改变太大的缘故。
English: I'm afraid it's because the laws have changed too much that His Majesty is trying so hard to govern, but people are worried.

古文：祖宗法未必皆不可行，但有偏而不举之敝尔。 安石知为己发，奋然排之曰： 求去民害，何为不可？
现代文：祖宗之法未必都不能实行，不过是有偏而不全的弊端而已。 王安石知道这些话是针对他来说的，起来反驳道： 谋求为百姓除害，怎么做都行。
English: Wang Anshi knew that these words were directed at him, and he stood up and retorted, "You can do anything to seek to eliminate harm for the people.

古文：若万事隳脞，乃西晋之风，何益于治？ 御史张商英欲附安石，摭枢密使他事以摇彦博，坐不实贬。
现代文：若万事都拖拖沓沓，那是西晋亡国之风，对国家的治理有什么好处？ 御史张商英欲依附王安石，指使枢密院以其他事动摇文彦博，由于事实不真而被贬斥。
English: If everything is delayed, it is the style of the West Jin Dynasty to ruin the country, what is the benefit to the governance of the country? Historian Zhang Shangying wanted to cling to Wang Anshi, ordered the Privy Council to shake Fumihombo with other things, and was disparaged because the facts were not true.

古文：彦博在枢府九年，又以极论市易司监卖果实，损国体敛民怨，为安石所恶，力引去。
现代文：文彦博在枢密府九年，终因激烈地争论，说市易司监卖果实，有伤国体，并引起百姓怨恨，引起王安石的嫉恨，最后请求辞职。
English: After nine years in the Privy Council, Wen Yanbo finally asked to resign after a heated argument, saying that the city's fruit sales department had hurt the national body, aroused the resentment of the people, and aroused the jealousy of Wang Anshi.

古文：拜司空、河东节度使、判河阳，徙大名府。
现代文：神宗任命他为司空、河东节度使、判河阳，徙大名府。
English: Shenzong appointed him as the Siku, the Hedong Festival envoy, the sentence to Heyang, and the migration to the great name palace.

古文：身虽在外，而帝眷有加。
现代文：身虽不在朝廷，神宗对他的关注却有增无减。
English: Although he was not at the Imperial Court, Shinzō's interest in him continued unabated.

古文：时监司多新进少年，转运判官汪辅之辄奏彦博不事事，帝批其奏以付彦博曰： 以侍中旧德，故烦卧护北门，细务不必劳心。
现代文：当时监司多新提拔的少年，转运判官汪辅之就奏告文彦博不办事，神宗批示了这个奏折，并把它交给文彦博，说： 因为你的旧恩德，故请你守护京师北门，细小的事情不必劳心。
English: At that time, the supervisor was a newly-promoted boy, and the transportation judge, Wang Zuozhi, reported that Fumihimbo did not work. Shenzong ordered this report, and handed it to Fumihimbo, saying: Because of your old grace, I ask you to guard the north gate of Beijing Division, small things do not have to work hard.

古文：辅之小臣，敢尔无礼，将别有处置。 未几，罢去。
现代文：汪辅之官小位卑，竟敢如此无礼，将会另加处置。 没过多久，就罢掉了汪辅之的官。
English: Wang Zuo's low-ranking official, who dared to be so rude, will be dealt with separately. It didn't take long to remove Wang Zuo's official.

古文：初，选人有李公义者，请以铁龙爪治河，宦者黄怀信沿其制为浚川杷，天下指笑以为儿戏，安石独信之，遣都水丞范子渊行其法。
现代文：当初，有个叫李公义的选人，请求以铁龙爪治黄河，宦官黄怀信承袭铁龙爪的做法，制作浚川耙，天下都笑着谈论浚川耙，以为拿它治理黄河等于儿戏，而王安石独相信它。派遣都水丞范子渊实行此法。
English: At the beginning, there was a selector named Li Gongyi, who requested that the Yellow River be ruled with the claws of an iron dragon, and the eunuch Huang Huaixin inherited the practice of the claws of an iron dragon and made dredging rafts. The whole world laughed and talked about dredging rafts, thinking that using it to govern the Yellow River was a child's play, while Wang Anshi believed in it. He sent Du Shui Rong Fanzi Yuan to implement this method.

古文：子渊奏用杷之功，水悉归故道，退出民田数万顷。
现代文：范子渊奏称田浚川耙的功用，使河水都回原道。退出被淹没的民田有数万顷。
English: Fan Ziyuan said that the function of dredging the river was to make the river return to its original path. Tens of thousands of hectares of flooded farmland have been evacuated.

古文：诏大名核实，彦博言： 河非杷可浚，虽甚愚之人，皆知无益，臣不敢雷同罔上。 疏至，帝不悦，复遣知制诰熊本等行视，如彦博言。
现代文：神宗诏命大名府核实。文彦博说 ：黄河不是浚川耙就可疏通的，即使愚蠢至极的人，都知道没有效果，我不敢跟着别人胡说以欺骗皇上。 文彦博的奏疏呈上，神宗看完不高兴。另派知制诰熊本等去考察，考察的结果如文彦博所说。
English: Shenzong Zhao ordered the daimyofu to verify. Fumihiko Bo said: the Yellow River can be dredged without dredging the river, even the most stupid people know that there is no effect, I dare not follow other people's nonsense to deceive the emperor. Fumihiko Bo's report was incomplete, Shenzong was not happy after reading it. He also sent Chisei Shinkumamoto and others to investigate, and the results of the investigation were as Fumihiko Bo said.

古文：子渊乃请觐，言本等见安石罢，意彦博复相，故傅会其说。
现代文：范子渊于是请求拜见皇上，说熊本等人看到王安石被罢相，臆测文彦博将为宰相，故意附会文彦博的说法。
English: Fan Ziyuan then asked to see the emperor, saying that Kumamoto and others saw Wang Anshi was dismissed as prime minister, speculated that Fumihiko Bo would be prime minister, and deliberately added Fumihiko Bo's statement.

古文：御史蔡确亦论本奉使无状。
现代文：御史蔡确也弹劾熊本等人受命考察时不守法纪。
English: Ms Tsai also accused Mr Kumamoto and others of failing to observe the law when they were ordered to investigate.

古文：本等皆得罪，独彦博勿问。寻加司徒。
现代文：熊本等都得到处罚，唯独不涉及文彦博。不久加官司徒。
English: Kumamoto and the others were all punished, except that Fumihiko was not involved. He was soon promoted to official magistrate.

古文：元丰三年，拜太尉，复判河南。
现代文：元丰三年，文彦博被拜官太尉，复判河南。
English: In the third year of Yuanfeng, Wen Yanbo was promoted to the rank of second lieutenant and sent to Henan Province for retrial.

古文：于是王同老言至和中议储嗣事，彦博适入朝，神宗问之，彦博以前对英宗者复于帝曰： 先帝天命所在，神器有归，实仁祖知子之明，慈圣拥佑之力，臣等何功？ 帝曰： 虽云天命，亦系人谋。
现代文：当此时王同老说起仁宗至和年间议论立皇太子的事，文彦博恰好入朝。神宗问他，文彦博还是以从前对英宗说的话对神宗说 ：英宗皇帝天命所在，国家政权有归宿。这实在是仁宗皇帝了解儿子的贤明，慈圣太皇太后拥佑之力，臣下有什么功劳可言？ 
English: At this time, Wang Tonglao spoke of the discussion between Emperor Renzong and Empress Dowager Cixi about the establishment of a crown prince, and Fumihiko just happened to enter the imperial court. Shintsong asked him if Fumihiko still said to Shintsong what he had said to Emperor Yingzong: Emperor Yingzong's destiny lies in heaven, and the national power has a destination. This is really Emperor Renzong's understanding of his son's wisdom, and the power of patronage of the Holy Empress Dowager Cixi. What merit can be said of his vassals?

古文：卿深厚不伐善，阴德如丙吉，真定策社稷臣也。 彦博曰： 如周勃、霍光，是为定策。
现代文：神宗说： 虽然是天命，但也靠人谋，你品性深厚，不宣扬自己的善德，阴德如丙吉，真是定策的大臣，是国家的依靠。 文彦博说： 像周勃、霍光等，才可算是定策的臣子。
English: Shenzong said: Although it is the destiny of heaven, it also depends on human strategy. Your character is profound, and you do not proclaim your own virtue. Your virtue is like that of Bijie. You are truly a policy-making minister, and you are the country's reliance. Wen Yibo said: Like Zhou Bo and Huo Guang, you can only be considered a policy-making minister.

古文：自至和以来，中外之臣献言甚众，臣等虽尝有请，弗果行。
现代文：自至和以来，朝廷内外建议立皇太子的人很多，臣下虽然也有建议，但并没有立即实行。
English: Since the end of World War II, there have been many people inside and outside the Imperial Court who have proposed the establishment of a crown prince. Although there have been suggestions from vassals, they have not been implemented immediately.

古文：其后韩琦等讫就大事，盖琦功也。 帝曰： 发端为难，是时仁祖意已定，嘉祐之末，止申前诏尔。
现代文：后来，韩琦等终于把大事办成，主要是韩琦的功绩。 神宗说： 开端更难，当时仁宗高皇帝的意向已定。嘉之末，只不过是把以前的诏命再复述一遍而已。
English: Later, Han Zong and others finally accomplished great things, mainly due to the efforts of Han Zong. Shenzong said: The beginning was more difficult, at that time Emperor Nizonggao's intention had already been determined. At the end of the auspicious day, it was just a repetition of the previous imperial edict.

古文：正如丙吉、霍光，不相掩也。 遂加彦博两镇节度使，辞不拜。
现代文：正好像丙吉、霍光，不致相互掩盖功劳。 于是加文彦博两镇节度使，文彦博推辞不受。
English: Just like Bingji and Huo Guang, they would not cover up each other's merits. Therefore, Wen Yanbo was added to the two town festival envoys, and Wen Yanbo was not rejected.

古文：将行，赐宴琼林苑，两遣中谒者遗诗祖道，当世荣之。
现代文：将到河南府任职，神宗赐宴琼林苑，并两次派宦官送给文彦博他写的诗。
English: He will work in Henan Province. Shenzong will give a banquet to Qiong Linyuan, and twice send eunuchs to present poems written by him to Fumihiko Botero.

古文：王中正经制边事，所过称受密旨募禁兵，将之而西。
现代文：当时都以这事十分荣耀。王中正经管边事，凡所到之处都宣称受密旨招募禁兵，而把他们向西边带去。
English: Wang Zhong was in charge of border affairs, and everywhere he went, he announced that he had received a secret order to recruit forbidden soldiers and take them to the west.

古文：彦博以无诏拒之，中正亦不敢募而去。
现代文：文彦博以没有看到诏令拒绝在河南府招募。王中正也不敢招募而离开。
English: Fumihiko Bo refused to recruit in Henan because he did not see the edict. Wang Zhongzheng did not dare to recruit and left.

古文：久之，请老，以太师致仕，居洛阳。
现代文：过了很长一段时间，求请回家退休，以太师职位退休，居在洛阳。
English: After a long time, please go home to retire, retire from the position of etheric teacher, and live in Luoyang.

古文：元祐初，司马光荐彦博宿德元老，宜起以自辅。
现代文：哲宗元初年，司马光推荐文彦博，说他是宿德元老，应该重新起用，来辅佐朝廷。
English: In the first year of Zhe Zongyuan, Sima Guang recommended Wen Yanbo, saying that he was a veteran and should be reappointed to assist the imperial court.

古文：宣仁后将用为三省长官，而言事者以为不可，及命平章军国重事，六日一朝，一月两赴经筵，恩礼甚渥。
现代文：宣仁后将任命文彦博为三省长官，而言事的人认为不行，于是任命他为平章军国重事，六天朝觐一次，一月两次到皇宫讲经书，皇帝对他恩礼有加。
English: After Xuanren, he was going to appoint Wen Yanbo as the governor of the three provinces, but the person in charge of the matter thought it was not possible, so he appointed him as the military governor of Pingzhang. He made a six-day pilgrimage and went to the imperial palace twice a month to lecture on scriptures. The emperor was very gracious to him.

古文：然彦博无岁不求退，居五年，复致仕。
现代文：但文彦博每年都要求告退，在朝廷任官五年后，又请退休。
English: However, Fumihiko demanded to retire every year, and after five years of service in the imperial court, he was asked to retire.

古文：绍圣初，章惇秉政，言者论彦博朋附司马光，诋毁先烈，降太子少保。
现代文：哲宗绍圣年间，章控制政治，言官议论文彦博与司马光是朋党，对神宗诋毁，降太师为太子少保。
English: During the reign of Zhezong Shao Sheng, Zhang controlled politics, and he and Sima Guang were friends and partisans. They slandered the Shenzong and demoted the Grand Master to the position of Prince Minor Protector.

古文：卒，年九十二。
现代文：死时九十二岁。
English: He was ninety-two when he died.

古文：崇宁中，预元祐党籍。
现代文：崇宁年间，被列入元党籍。
English: During his time in Chongning, he was listed as a former party member.

古文：后特命出籍，追复太师，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：后来哲宗特别命令从党籍中除名，追复太师之官。
English: Later, Tetsuzo issued a special order to expel him from the party and reinstate him as Grand Master.

古文：彦博逮事四朝，任将相五十年，名闻四夷。
现代文：文彦博历事仁宗、英宗、神宗、哲宗四朝，任将相共五十年，声名闻于四夷。
English: Fumihiko Haku served the four dynasties of the Rinzong, Yingzong, Shenzong, and Zhezong for a total of fifty years, and was well-known in Shii.

古文：元祐间，契丹使耶律永昌、刘霄来聘，苏轼馆客，与使入觐，望见彦博于殿门外，却立改容曰： 此潞公也邪？ 问其年，曰： 何壮也！
现代文：苏轼回答后，使者说： 年寿如此高，但身体怎么这么健壮。 
English: After Su Shi answered, the messenger said, "You are so old, but how is your body so robust?"

古文：轼曰： 使者见其容，未闻其语。
现代文：苏轼说 ：使者还只看到了他的容貌，没有听见他说话。
English: Su Shi said: The messenger only saw his appearance, and did not hear him speak.

古文：其综理庶务，虽精练少年有不如；其贯穿古今，虽专门名家有不逮。 使者拱手曰： 天下异人也。 既归洛，西羌首领温溪心有名马，请于边吏，愿以馈彦博，诏许之。
现代文：他综理各种事情，极其精练，即使少年也赶不上；他学问贯古通今，即使专门名家也有不如。 使者崇敬地说 ：文彦博真是天下异人。 文彦博回洛阳后，西羌首领温溪心有匹名马，请求边境官吏，愿意把名马赠送给文彦博，哲宗特诏允许。
English: He comprehends all kinds of things, is extremely concise, even if he is a boy, he cannot keep up; his knowledge runs from ancient times to the present, even if it is a famous family, it is not as good. The envoy said reverently: Fumihiko Bo is really a stranger in the world. After Fumihiko Bo returned to Luoyang, the leader of Xidi, Wenxi, had a famous horse in his heart and asked the border officials to be willing to give the famous horse to Fumihiko Bo, and Tetsuzong allowed it.

古文：其为外国所敬如此。
现代文：文彦博为外国人崇重达到了如此程度！
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi has reached such a level of reverence for foreigners!

古文：彦博虽穷贵极富，而平居接物谦下，尊德乐善，如恐不及。其在洛也，洛人邵雍、程颢兄弟皆以道自重，宾接之如布衣交。
现代文：文彦博虽然官职很高，也很富裕，但平常接待人谦逊下士，尊德乐善，生怕做得不好，他退居洛阳后，洛阳人邵雍、程颢兄弟都以儒家道统自重，对待文彦博如布衣之交。
English: Although Fumihiko was a high-ranking official and very wealthy, he was usually received by a humble corporal who respected virtue and was kind, for fear of doing a bad job. After he retired to Luoyang, Luoyang people Shaoyong and Cheng Yao brothers all respected Confucianism and treated Fumihiko like a cloth friend.

古文：与富弼、司马光等十三人，用白居易九老会故事，置酒赋诗相乐，序齿不序官，为堂，绘像其中，谓之 洛阳耆英会 ，好事者莫不慕之。
现代文：他和富弼、司马光等十三人，根据白居易九老会故事，置酒赋诗相互取乐，只以年龄大小论长幼，而不以职位高低排名位，建造了一个大堂，在其中绘有十三人之像，称为 洛阳耆英会 ，好事者都很羡慕。
English: He and thirteen other people, including Fuxi and Sima Guang, according to the story of Bai Juyi Nine Old Men's Association, drank wine and played poetry to make fun of each other. Only according to the age of the eldest and youngest, but not according to the rank of the position, they built a lobby, in which there are thirteen people's portraits, known as Luoyang Xingying Association. Good people are very envious.

古文：神宗导洛通汴，而主者遏绝洛水，不使入城中，洛人颇患苦之。
现代文：神宗想把洛水通过汴京，但主管者却堵绝洛水，不使入洛阳，洛阳城里的人都为此事烦忧。
English: Shenzong wanted to bring Luo water through Beijing, but the person in charge blocked Luo water and did not allow it to enter Luoyang. People in Luoyang are worried about this.

古文：彦博因中使刘惟简至洛，语其故，惟简以闻。
现代文：文彦博趁宦官刘惟简至洛阳的机会，把其中的情况反映了，刘惟简告诉了皇上。
English: Wen Yanbo took the opportunity of eunuch Liu Weijian's visit to Luoyang to reflect on the situation, and Liu Weijian told the emperor.

古文：诏令通行如初，遂为洛城无穷之利。
现代文：皇上特诏洛水如以前照样通行，于是洛阳城得到了无穷的便利。
English: The emperor's special edict allowed Luoshui to be passed as before, so Luoyang City gained endless convenience.

古文：彦博八子，皆历要官。
现代文：文彦博有八个儿子，都担任重要官职。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi had eight sons, all of whom held important official positions.

古文：第六子及甫，初以大理评事直史馆，与邢恕相善。
现代文：第六个儿子文及甫，开始靠大理评事直史馆的身份，与邢恕两人很友好。
English: The sixth son, Wen Ji Fu, began to rely on the identity of the Dali Commentator Zhi Shi Museum, and the two were very friendly with Zou Shou.

古文：元祐初，为吏部员外郎，以直龙图阁知同州。
现代文：元初年，成为吏部员外郎，以直龙图阁知同州。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, he became the second son of a member of the cadre department, and went to Tongzhou with the title of Zhi Long Tu Ge.

古文：彦博平章军国，及甫由右司员外郎引嫌改卫尉、光禄少卿。
现代文：文彦博为平章军国，文及甫由右司员外郎为了避免嫌疑改任卫尉、光禄少卿。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi was a member of the Taira no Shosho army, and in order to avoid suspicion, Fumihiko was immediately reassigned from the post of right-hand man to the post of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard and to the post of Koroku Shoko.

古文：彦博再致仕，及甫知河阳，召为太仆卿，权工部侍郎，罢为集贤殿修撰、提举明道宫。
现代文：文彦博再次退休，文及甫担任河阳知州，奉诏担任太仆卿，代理工部侍郎，降为集贤殿修撰、提举明道宫。
English: Fumihiko retired again, and Fumihiko took up the post of Kawayan Chishu, and was given the title of Taiko-kyo (Grand Chamberlain) and Acting Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, and was demoted to the position of Shisen-dono Shusan and Toshihiko Myondo-gu Shrine.

古文：蔡渭、邢恕持及甫私书造梁焘、刘挚之谤，逮诣诏狱，及甫有憾于元祐，从而实之，亦坐夺职。
现代文：蔡渭、邢恕拿着文及甫的私人书信制造对梁焘、刘挚的诽谤，后来下诏书要狱官捉拿到监狱，文及甫对元年间政治不满意，也跟随他们参加了此事，也由于犯罪被剥夺官职。
English: Cai Qi and Zou Shou took the private letters of Wen and Fu to slander Liang Qi and Liu Zhengyi. Later, they issued an edict to the prison officers to arrest and take them to the prison. Wen and Fu were dissatisfied with the politics in the first year of the year, and also followed them to participate in the matter. They were also deprived of their official posts due to the crime.

古文：未几，复之，卒。
现代文：不久，又恢复官职，后来就死了。
English: He was soon reinstated and later died.

