古文：杨洪，字宗道，六合人。
现代文：杨洪，字宗道，六合人。
English: Yang Hong, Zi Zong Dao, is a six-person group.

古文：祖政，明初以功为汉中百户。
现代文：祖父杨政，明初因功成为汉中百户。
English: Yang Zheng, grandfather, became one of the top 100 households in Hanzhong at the beginning of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：父璟，战死灵璧。
现代文：父亲杨璟，战死于灵璧。
English: His father, Yang Hui, died in the battle against Ling Bi.

古文：洪嗣职，调开平。
现代文：杨洪承袭职位，调往开平。
English: Yang Hong inherited the position and was transferred to Kaiping.

古文：善骑射，遇敌辄身先突阵。
现代文：他善于骑射，遇敌时总是身先突阵。
English: He is good at riding and shooting, and is always the first to rush into battle when encountering the enemy.

古文：初，从成祖北征，至斡难河，获人马而还。
现代文：当初，杨洪随成祖北征，到达斡难河，俘获人马而还。
English: At the beginning, Yang Hong followed Cheng Zu on the Northern Expedition, reached the Yandan River, captured people and horses, and returned.

古文：帝曰： 将才也。 
现代文：皇上说道： 真是将才啊！ 
English: The Emperor said: What a great talent!

古文：令识其名，进千户。
现代文：便下令记住他的名字，进升为千户。
English: He ordered that his name be remembered, and the number of households was raised to one thousand.

古文：宣德四年命以精骑二百，专巡徼塞上。
现代文：宣德四年，杨洪奉命率精骑二百，专门巡察塞上。
English: In the four years of Xuande, Yang Hong was ordered to ride 200 horses and make a special inspection.

古文：继命城西猫儿峪，留兵戍之。
现代文：紧接着又奉命在西猫儿峪筑城，留兵戍守。
English: Immediately afterwards, he was ordered to build a castle in the West Cat Village and stay there as a soldier.

古文：败寇于红山。
现代文：并在红山击败敌寇。
English: and defeated the enemy raiders in Hongshan.

古文：英宗立，尚书王骥言边军怯弱，由训练无人，因言洪能。
现代文：英宗即位，尚书王骥说边军怯弱，是因为缺乏训练，并趁机推荐杨洪的才能。
English: When Emperor Yingzong ascended to the throne, Shangshu Wang Yao said that the weakness of the border troops was due to lack of training, and took the opportunity to recommend Yang Hong's talent.

古文：诏加洪游击将军。
现代文：皇上于是下诏加封杨洪为游击将军。
English: Therefore, the emperor issued an edict to add Yang Hong as a guerrilla general.

古文：洪所部才五百，诏选开平、独石骑兵益之，再进都指挥佥事。
现代文：杨洪所部才五百人，皇上下诏挑选开平、独石的骑兵增补，杨洪再进升为都指挥佥事。
English: There were only five hundred people in Yang Hong's headquarters. The emperor issued an edict to select cavalry from Kaiping and Duoshi, and Yang Hong was promoted to commander of the capital.

古文：时先朝宿将已尽，洪后起，以敢战著名。为人机变敏捷，善出奇捣虚，未尝小挫。
现代文：当时先朝宿将已尽，杨洪是后起之将，以敢战闻名，为人机警敏捷，善于出奇捣虚，从未受过小挫。
English: At that time, Yang Hong was a rising star. He was known for his courage in battle, his alertness, his ability to deal with the unexpected, and he had never suffered a minor setback.

古文：虽为偏校，中朝大臣皆知其能，有毁之者，辄为曲护，洪以是得展其才。
现代文：杨洪虽为偏校，但朝中大臣都知道他的才能，如果有人诽谤，总有人保护着他，杨洪因此得以施展其才。
English: Although Yang Hong is an outsider, the ministers of the DPRK and China are aware of his talent. If someone slanders him, there is always someone to protect him, so Yang Hong is able to show his talent.

古文：尚书魏源督边事，指挥杜衡、部卒李全皆讦奏洪罪。
现代文：尚书魏源督察边事时，指挥杜衡、部卒李全都上奏揭发杨洪之罪。
English: When inspector Wei Yuan was on duty, commander Du Heng and subordinate Li all reported Yang Hong's crime.

古文：帝从源言，谪衡广西，执全付洪自治。
现代文：皇上听从魏源所言，将杜衡贬至广西，将李全逮捕交给杨洪自己处置。
English: The emperor listened to Wei Yuan's words, demoted Du Heng to Guangxi, and arrested Li Quan and put it at the disposal of Yang Hong.

古文：寻命洪副都督佥事李谦守赤城、独石。
现代文：随即命杨洪协助都督佥事李谦守赤城、独石。
English: Yang Hong was then immediately ordered to assist Li Qian in the defense of Akagi and Dokdo.

古文：谦老而怯，故与洪左。
现代文：李谦年老胆怯，因而与杨洪意见相左。
English: Li Qian is old and timid, so he disagrees with Yang Hong.

古文：洪每调军，谦辄阴沮之。
现代文：杨洪每次调军，李谦总是暗中阻止。
English: Every time Yang Hong transferred troops, Li Qian always secretly prevented it.

古文：洪尝励将士杀敌，谦笑曰： 敌可尽乎？
现代文：杨洪曾激励将士杀敌，李谦却笑道： 敌人能杀尽吗？
English: Yang Hong once encouraged his generals to kill the enemy, but Li Qian laughed and said: Can the enemy be killed?

古文：徒杀吾人耳。 
现代文：只会白白送死而已。 
English: They will only die in vain.

古文：御史张鹏劾罢谦，因命洪代，洪益自奋。
现代文：御史张鹏弹劾罢免了李谦，因此命杨洪代替他，杨洪自己更加发奋。
English: Grand Historian Zhang Peng impeached and dismissed Li Qian, so he ordered Yang Hong to replace him. Yang Hong himself was even more excited.

古文：朝廷亦厚待之，每奏捷，功虽微必叙。
现代文：朝廷也厚待他，每次上奏捷报，功劳虽小，朝廷也一定给予他奖励。
English: The imperial court also treated him well. Every time he reported a success, although the merit was small, the imperial court would certainly give him a reward.

古文：洪初败兀良哈兵，执其部长朵栾帖木儿。
现代文：杨洪当初击败兀良哈兵，俘获其部长朵栗帖木儿。
English: At first, Yang Hong defeated the Qiliang soldiers and captured their minister, Dorong Timur.

古文：既代谦任，复败其兵于西凉亭。
现代文：他代替李谦之职后，又在西凉亭击败其兵。
English: After he replaced Li Qian, he defeated his soldiers in the West Pavilion.

古文：帝赐敕嘉奖。
现代文：皇上赐诏嘉奖。
English: The Emperor bestowed the Imperial Commendation Award on Moro.

古文：又敕宣大总兵官谭广等曰： 此即前寇延绥，为指挥王祯所败者，去若军甚迩，顾不能扑灭，若视洪等愧不？ 三年春，击寇于伯颜山。
现代文：又下诏对宣大总兵官谭广等说： 这就是以前骚扰延绥，为指挥王祯所败者，他们离你军很近，你们却不能将其消灭，与杨洪相比，你们不觉得惭愧吗？  三年春，杨洪在伯颜山袭击贼寇。
English: He also issued an edict to Tan Guang, the chief military officer of Xuanda University, and others, saying, "These are the people who harassed Yan Xun in the past and were defeated by the commander Wang Qian. They are very close to your army, but you can't destroy them. Compared to Yang Hong, don't you feel ashamed?" In the spring of the third year, Yang Hong attacked the bandits in Boyan Mountain.

古文：洪马蹶伤足，战益力，擒其部长也陵台等四人。
现代文：他因马倒而伤了脚，但却更拼力战斗，擒获其部长也陵台等四人。
English: He fell from his horse and hurt his foot, but he fought harder and captured four people, including his minister, Yalingtai.

古文：追至宝昌州，又擒阿台答剌花等五人。
现代文：并追击至宝昌州，又擒获阿台答刺花等五人。
English: They also chased them to Baochang Prefecture, where they captured five people, including Atai Atsushihua.

古文：寇大败，遁去。
现代文：贼寇大败而逃。
English: The bandit fled in defeat.

古文：玺书慰劳，遣医视，进都指挥同知，赐银币。
现代文：皇上赐玺书慰劳，并派遣医生前去看望杨洪，进升他为都指挥同知，还赐给他银币。
English: The emperor gave him a letter of condolence, and sent a doctor to visit Yang Hong, who was a close friend of the commander, and also gave him silver coins.

古文：寻以谭广老，命充右参将佐之。
现代文：随即又以谭广年老为由，命杨洪充任右参将辅助他。
English: Then, citing Tan Guang's old age, Yang Hongzheng was appointed as his right-hand man to assist him.

古文：洪建议加筑开平城，拓龙门所，自独石至潮河川，增置堠台六十。
现代文：杨洪建议加筑开平城，拓广龙门所，从独石至潮河川，增设六十个土堡。
English: Yang Hong proposed to build Kaiping City, expand the Longmen Station, from Dokushi to the Tide River, and add sixty earthen fortifications.

古文：寻进都指挥使。
现代文：杨洪随即进升为都指挥使。
English: Yang Hong was immediately promoted to the post of capital commander.

古文：与兀良哈兵战三岔口。又尝追寇至亦把秃河。
现代文：他与兀良哈军战于三岔口，又曾追击贼寇至亦把秃河。
English: He fought with the Hailiangha army at Sanluokou, and once chased a bandit to the Bald River.

古文：再迁都督同知。
现代文：再升为都督同知。
English: He was later promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：九年，兀良哈寇延绥，洪与内臣韩政等出大同，至黑山迤北，邀破之克列苏。
现代文：九年，兀良哈侵犯延绥，杨洪与内臣韩政等出大同，至黑山迄北，在克列苏拦击并打败了兀良哈。
English: In the ninth year, Yan Liangha invaded Yancheng. Yang Hong and his vassal Han Zheng marched from Datong to as far north as Montenegro, where they intercepted and defeated Yan Liangha at Kulesu.

古文：进左都督，军士蒙赏者九千九百余人。
现代文：杨洪进升为左都督，受赏的将士达九千九百余人。
English: Yang Hongjin was promoted to left-wing governor, and more than 9,900 soldiers were awarded.

古文：洪尝请给旗牌，不许。乃自制小羽箭、木牌令军中。
现代文：杨洪曾请求发给他旗牌，未被允许，便自制小羽箭、木牌，号令军中。
English: Yang Hong had requested to be given a flag, but was not allowed, so he made small feathered arrows and wooden plaques and called out to the troops.

古文：有司论其专擅，帝不问。
现代文：有关官员告他不经请命而擅自行事，皇上却不予追究。
English: Officials accused him of acting on his own without being asked, but the emperor did not pursue the matter.

古文：十二年充总兵官，代郭竑镇宣府。
现代文：十二年，杨洪充任总兵官，代替郭玄镇守宣府。
English: In 2012, Yang Hongcheng was appointed as the chief military officer, replacing Guo Xuanzhen as the governor of Xuanfu.

古文：自宣德以来，迤北未尝大举入寇。惟朵颜三卫众乘间扰边，多不过百骑，或数十骑。
现代文：自宣德以来，迄北军队未曾大举人侵，唯有朵颜三卫部众寻找机会骚扰明朝边境，来者最多也不过百名骑兵，或数十名骑兵。
English: Since the proclamation of the Republic of China, the North Korean army has not made any large-scale incursions so far. Only Doan and the three guardsmen are looking for opportunities to harass the border of the Ming Dynasty, with no more than a hundred cavalrymen, or dozens of cavalrymen.

古文：他将率巽軿，洪独以敢战至大将。
现代文：其他将领一般都很怯懦，唯独杨洪以敢战升为大将。
English: Other generals are generally cowardly, except for Yang Hong, who rose to the rank of general by daring to fight.

古文：诸部亦惮之，称为 杨王 。
现代文：诸部也十分害怕他，称他为 杨王 。
English: The various ministries were also very afraid of him and called him King Yang.

古文：瓦剌可汗脱脱不花、太师也先皆尝致书于洪，并遗之马。
现代文：瓦刺可汗脱脱不花、太师也先都曾致信给杨洪，并赠送马匹。
English: Vajrakhan did not take off his clothes, and the Grand Master also sent a letter to Yang Hong and presented him with a horse.

古文：洪闻于朝，敕令受之而报以礼。
现代文：杨洪上报朝廷，皇上命他接受而以礼相报。
English: Yang Hong reported to the imperial court, and the emperor ordered him to accept and report to the emperor.

古文：嗣后数有赠遗，帝方倚任洪，不责也。
现代文：随报屡有赠物，皇上当时正倚重杨洪，所以对此不予指责。
English: There were many gifts accompanying the report. The emperor was leaning heavily on Yang Hong at the time, so he did not criticize this.

古文：帝既北狩，道宣府，也先传帝命趣开门。
现代文：英宗被俘后，途经宣府，也先矫传皇上命令，催促开门。
English: After Emperor Yingzong was captured, he went through the Xuanwu government office and first delivered the emperor's order to open the door.

古文：城上人对曰： 所守者主上城池。
现代文：城上守兵回答说： 我们所守的是主上的城池。
English: And the keepers of the city said, We are keepers of the city of the Lord.

古文：天已暮，门不敢开。
现代文：现在天色已晚，我们不敢开门。
English: It's getting late and we don't dare open the door.

古文：且洪已他往。 
现代文：而且总兵官已经去别处了。 
English: And the commanding officer has gone elsewhere.

古文：也先乃拥帝去。
现代文：也先只得拥着皇上离去。
English: He also had to leave first with the emperor in his arms.

古文：景帝监国，论前后功，封昌平伯。
现代文：景帝监国后，论前后之功，封杨洪为昌平伯。
English: After Emperor Jing oversaw the country, Yang Hong was awarded the title of Changping Bo.

古文：也先复令帝为书遗洪，洪封上之。
现代文：也先又让皇上致信给杨洪，杨洪将信封好，上奏朝廷。
English: First, he asked the emperor to send a letter to Yang Hong. Yang Hong sealed the envelope and sent it to the imperial court.

古文：时景帝已即位，驰使报洪： 上皇书，伪也。
现代文：当时景帝已经即位，速派使者告知杨洪： 英宗的信是假的。
English: At that time, Emperor Jing had already ascended to the throne, and quickly sent an envoy to tell Yang Hong: Yingzong's letter was fake.

古文：自今虽真书，毋受。 
现代文：从今以后即使是真信，你也不要接受。 
English: From now on, don't accept even if it's a true belief.

古文：于是洪一意坚守。
现代文：于是杨洪一意坚守。
English: As a result, Yang Hong resolutely held on.

古文：也先逼京师，急诏洪将兵二万入卫。
现代文：也先逼近京城，皇上急命杨洪率兵二万入京保卫。
English: They also approached the capital first, and the emperor ordered Yang Hong to lead 20,000 soldiers to enter and defend the capital.

古文：比至，寇已退。
现代文：当杨洪赶到时，贼寇已退。
English: When Yang Hong arrived, the bandits had already retreated.

古文：敕洪与孙镗、范广等追击余寇。至霸州破之，获阿归等四十八人，还所掠人畜万计。
现代文：杨洪与孙镗、范广等奉命追击余寇，在霸州击败也先兵，俘获阿归等四十八人，夺还贼寇所掠人畜数以万计。
English: Yang Hong, Sun Yat-sen, Fan Guang and others were ordered to pursue the remaining bandits, defeat the vanguard in Bazhou, capture forty-eight people including Ah Gui, and recapture tens of thousands of people and animals that the bandits had looted.

古文：及关，寇返斗，杀官军数百人，洪子俊几为所及。
现代文：到达关口时，贼寇返回再战，杀死官军数百人，杨洪之子杨俊差一点被杀。
English: When they reached the pass, the bandits returned to fight again, killing hundreds of government troops. Yang Hong's son, Yang Jun, was almost killed.

古文：寇去，以功进侯，命率所部留京师，督京营训练，兼掌左府事。
现代文：贼寇离去后，杨洪因功进升为侯，奉命率所部留在京城，监督京营训练，兼管左府事务。
English: After the thief and robber left, Yang Hong was promoted to marquis for his merits. He was ordered to stay in Beijing to supervise the training of the Beijing camp and also manage the affairs of the left province.

古文：朝廷以洪宿将，所言多采纳。
现代文：朝廷因杨洪是宿将，对他所提的建议大多予以采纳。
English: Since Yang Hong was a retired general, the imperial court mostly accepted his suggestions.

古文：尝陈御寇三策，又奏请简汰三千诸营将校，不得以贫弱充伍，皆从之。
现代文：杨洪曾陈述抵御贼寇的三条计策，又奏请裁汰三千诸营将校，不能让赢弱之人充斥军中，朝廷都听从了他的意见。
English: Yang Hong had presented three strategies for resisting the bandits, and also petitioned for the dismissal of three thousand battalion officers, so that the army would not be filled with weak people, and the imperial court listened to his opinion.

古文：景泰元年，于谦以边警未息，宜令洪等条上方略。
现代文：景泰元年，于谦认为边境紧急情况还未平息，应当命令杨洪等上奏方略。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, Yu Qian thought that the border emergency had not yet subsided, and Yang Hong should be ordered to come up with a strategy.

古文：洪言四事，命兵部议行。
现代文：杨洪提出四个建议，皇上命兵部商议执行。
English: Yang Hong put forward four proposals, and the Emperor ordered the military department to discuss and implement them.

古文：都督宫聚、王喜、张斌先坐罪系狱，洪与石亨荐三人习战，请释令立功。
现代文：都督宫聚、王喜、张斌事先因罪下狱，杨洪与石亨推荐说他们三人熟悉战事，请求放了他们，命他们立功赎罪。
English: The governor, Gongju, Wang Xi, and Zhang Bin were previously imprisoned for their crimes. Yang Hong and Shi Heng recommended that the three of them be familiar with the war, asked for their release, and ordered them to make meritorious deeds to atone for their sins.

古文：诏已许，而言官劾其党邪挠政。
现代文：皇上已经下诏同意，但言官却弹劾他们结党扰政。
English: The emperor had already given his consent by imperial edict, but the speaker impeached them for forming a party and disrupting the government.

古文：帝以国家多事，务得人，置不问。
现代文：皇上因国家正处于多事之秋，急需用人，而搁置不问。
English: The emperor did not ask, because the country was in the midst of many events and urgently needed to hire people.

古文：上皇还，洪与石亨俱授奉天翊卫宣力武臣，予世券。
现代文：英宗返回后，杨洪与石亨都被授为奉天诩卫宣力武臣，并给予世袭凭证。
English: After Emperor Yingzong's return, Yang Hong and Shi Heng were both awarded the title of Feng Tianyi Xuanli Wushen, and were given hereditary certificates.

古文：明年夏，佩镇朔大将军印，还镇宣府。
现代文：第二年夏，杨洪佩带镇朔大将军印，仍镇守宣府。
English: In the summer of the following year, Yang Hongpei took the seal of Zhenshuo Grand General and was still the commander of Xuanfu.

古文：从子能、信充左右参将，其子俊为右都督，管三千营。
现代文：其堂侄杨能、杨信充任左右参将，其子杨俊为右都督，掌管三千营。
English: His nephews and nieces, Yang Neng and Yang Xin, served as the left and right sanshin generals, and his son, Yang Jun, was the right viceroy, in charge of three thousand battalions.

古文：洪自以一门父子官极品，手握重兵，盛满难居，乞休致，请调俊等他镇。
现代文：杨洪自己感到一门父子官级太高，又手握重兵，担心势头太盛，难以任职办事，便请求退休，并请求将杨俊等调往他处。
English: Yang Hong himself felt that one of his father-son officials was too high-ranking and had a heavy hand, worried that the momentum was too strong and it was difficult to serve, he asked to retire, and requested that Yang Jun and others be transferred to another place.

古文：帝不许。
现代文：皇上不许。
English: The emperor would not allow it.

古文：八月，以疾召还京，逾月卒。
现代文：八月，杨洪因病应诏返京，一个月后去世。
English: In August, Yang Hong returned to Beijing due to illness, and died a month later.

古文：赠颍国公，谥武襄。
现代文：被赠为颖国公，谥号武襄。
English: He was given the posthumous title of Ying Guo Gong, and his posthumous name was Wu Xiang.

古文：传子至孙崇猷。李自成陷京师，被杀。石亨，渭南人。
现代文：杨洪又十分爱好文学，曾经请求在宣府设立学校，教育诸将子弟。石亨，渭南人。
English: Yang Hong was also very fond of literature, and once requested that a school be set up in Xuanfu to educate the sons and sons of generals.

古文：生有异状，方面伟躯，美髯及膝。
现代文：相貌奇特，四方脸膛，身材雄伟，美髯及膝。
English: A strange-looking, square-jawed man with a majestic physique and a beauty that reaches to his knees.

古文：其从子彪魁梧似之，须亦过腹。
现代文：其堂侄石彪身材像他一样魁梧，须也过腹。
English: His great-nephew, Shi Biao, is as big as he is, and must also be overweight.

古文：就饮酒肆，相者曰： 今平也，二人何乃有封侯相？ 
现代文：他俩去酒家饮酒，有一相面者说道： 现在是太平之世，你们二人为什么会有封侯之相呢？ 
English: The two of them went to a pub for a drink. One of them said, "It's a peaceful world now. Why do you two have the look of a feudal lord?"

古文：亨嗣世父职，为宽河卫指挥佥事。
现代文：石亨承袭父职，为宽河卫指挥佥事。
English: Shi Heng took over his father's position and became the commander of the Guanghe Guards.

古文：善骑射，能用大刀，每战辄摧破。
现代文：他善长骑射，能用大刀，每次作战总能冲锋陷阵。
English: He is good at long-distance riding and shooting, can use a big sword, and can always charge into battle every time.

古文：正统初，以获首功，累迁都指挥佥事。
现代文：正统初年，石亨因获首功，累升为都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Shi Heng was promoted to the post of metropolitan conductor because he won the first merit.

古文：败敌黄牛坡，获马甚众。
现代文：他在黄牛坡打败敌人，俘获许多马匹。
English: He defeated the enemy at the Yellow Cow Slope and captured many horses.

古文：三年正月，敌三百余骑饮马黄河，亨追击至官山下，多所斩获。
现代文：三年正月，三百余名敌军骑兵饮马黄河，石亨追击至官山下，俘斩甚多。
English: In the first month of the third year, more than three hundred enemy cavalrymen drank the Yellow River, and Shi Heng pursued them to the foot of Guan Mountain, capturing many.

古文：进都指挥同知。
现代文：他进升为都指挥同知。
English: His promotion to the post of metropolitan conductor was a mutual acquaintance.

古文：寻充左参将，佐武进伯朱冕守大同。
现代文：随即充任左参将，辅佐武进伯朱冕驻守大同。
English: He immediately assumed the position of General of the Left, and was assisted by General of the Armies Bu Jin and General of the Armies Bozhu Guan stationed in Datong.

古文：六年上言： 边饷难继，请分大同左右、玉林、云川四卫军，垦净水坪迤西旷土，官给牛种，可岁增粮万八千石。 
现代文：六年，石亨上书说道： 边晌缺乏，请求分调大同左、右、王林、云川四卫军，前去开垦净水坪迄西的荒土，由官府供给耕牛和种子，这样每年便可增加粮食一万八千石。 
English: In the sixth year, Shi Heng wrote: "There is a shortage of border reeds. I request that the four guards of Datong Left, Right, Wanglin and Yunchuan be dispatched to reclaim the wasteland to the west of Qingsuiping, and that the government supply farm cattle and seeds. In this way, 18,000 koku of grain can be increased every year."

古文：明年又言： 大同西路屯堡，皆临极边。
现代文：第二年又上奏说： 大同西路屯堡，都临边境。
English: The next year, another report said: Datong West Road, Tunbao, close to the border.

古文：玉林故城去右卫五十里，与东胜单于城接，水草便利。
现代文：玉林旧城离右卫达五十里，与东胜单于城相接，水草便利。
English: Yulin Old Town is 50 miles away from the right bank of the Wei River, and is connected to Dongshengdan in the city, which is convenient for aquatic plants.

古文：请分军筑垒，防护屯种。 
现代文：请求调军前去修筑堡垒，保护屯种。 
English: A request was made to move troops forward to build a fortress to protect the settlement.

古文：诏皆允行。
现代文：皇上下诏都同意实行他的建议。
English: The imperial edicts at all levels agreed to implement his suggestion.

古文：寻以败敌红城功，进都指挥使。
现代文：石亨随即以红城败敌之功，进升为都指挥使。
English: Shi Heng was then promoted to the position of Metropolitan Commander-in-Chief for his role in defeating the enemy in Hongcheng.

古文：敌犯延安，追至金山败之，再迁都督佥事。
现代文：敌人进犯延安，石亨追至金山败之，再升为都督佥事。
English: The enemy attacked Yan'an, and Shi Heng was chased to Jinshan and defeated. He was then promoted to the post of governor.

古文：亨以国制搜将才未广，请仿汉、唐制，设军谋宏远、智识绝伦等科，令人得自陈，试验擢用，不专保举。
现代文：石亨认为国家未能广泛地寻求将才，便请求仿效汉、唐之制，设立军谋宏远、智识绝伦等科，使人得以自陈其能，经测试后提拔任用，而不再专凭推举。
English: Shi Heng believed that the country was unable to widely search for generals, so he requested to follow the example of the Han and Tang dynasties and set up military strategy, intelligence and other disciplines, so that people could demonstrate their abilities and be promoted after testing, rather than being elected.

古文：报可。
现代文：皇上答复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：十四年，与都督佥事马麟巡徼塞外。
现代文：十四年，石亨与都督佥事马麟巡察塞外。
English: In the 14th year, Shiheng and Marin, who had an affair with the governor, went on a tour to inspect the outside of the fortress.

古文：至箭豁山，败兀良哈众，进都督同知。
现代文：到达箭豁山，击败兀良哈部众，石亨进升为都督同知。
English: He reached Qianhuai Mountain, defeated the Qianliang Habeshu, and promoted Shi Heng to the post of governor.

古文：是时，边将智勇者推杨洪，其次则亨。
现代文：这时，边将中智勇双全者首推杨洪，其次便是石亨。
English: At this time, Yang Hong was the first to be promoted, followed by Shi Heng.

古文：亨虽偏将，中朝倚之如大帅，故亨亦尽力。
现代文：石亨虽为偏将，但朝中却像大帅一样倚重他，因此石亨也十分尽力。
English: Although Shi Heng is a partial captain, the government and the people rely on him like a general, so Shi Heng is also doing his best.

古文：其秋，也先大举寇大同，亨及西宁侯宋瑛、武进伯朱冕等战阳和口。瑛、冕战没，亨单骑奔还。
现代文：这年秋天，也先大举侵犯大同，石亨及西宁侯宋瑛、武进伯朱冕等与敌人战于阳和口，宋瑛、朱冕战死，石亨独自一人骑马逃回。
English: In the autumn of the same year, he first invaded Datong in a big way. Shi Heng, Xining Hou Song Ying, Wu Jin Bo Zhu Guan and others fought with the enemy in Yanghekou. Song Ying and Zhu Guan were killed in the battle, and Shi Heng fled back alone on horseback.

古文：降官，募兵自效。
现代文：石亨被降职，他便自己募兵为国效力。
English: When Shi Heng was demoted, he recruited his own soldiers to serve the country.

古文：郕王监国，尚书于谦荐之。
现代文：郕王监国后，尚书于谦推荐石亨。
English: After Shao Wang supervised the country, Shang Shu recommended Shi Heng to Yu Qian.

古文：召掌五军大营，进右都督。
现代文：他应诏掌管五军大营，进升为右都督。
English: In response to the edict, he took charge of the Five Great Military Camps and was promoted to the post of right-hand governor.

古文：无何，封武清伯。
现代文：不久，被封为武清伯。
English: Soon, he was given the title of Wu Qingbo.

古文：也先逼京师，命偕都督陶瑾等九将，分兵营九门外。
现代文：也先逼近京城，皇上命石亨偕同都督陶瑾等九名将领，分兵扎营九门外。
English: They also approached the capital first, and the emperor ordered nine generals, including Shi Hengjun and the governor Tao Jun, to camp nine gates away.

古文：德胜门当敌冲，特以命亨。
现代文：德胜门正挡敌军要冲，因而特命石亨把守。
English: The Desheng Gate was blocking the enemy's rush, so Shi Heng was specially ordered to guard it.

古文：于谦以尚书督军。
现代文：于谦以尚书的身份督军。
English: Yu Qian led the troops as Shang Shu.

古文：寇薄彰义门，都督高礼等却之。
现代文：敌寇进逼彰义门，被都督高礼等击退。
English: The enemy raiders forced their way into the gates of Changyi and were repulsed by the local governor Gao Li.

古文：转至德胜门外，亨用谦令，伏兵诱击，死者甚众。
现代文：又转至德胜门外，石亨用于谦之命，伏兵诱击，敌寇死者甚多。
English: It was also transferred to outside the Desheng Gate, and the stone cairn was used to lure the ambush, resulting in a large number of enemy deaths.

古文：既而围孙镗西直门外，以亨救引却。
现代文：不久又在西直门外围攻孙镗，因石享前来救援才退却。
English: Soon after, they besieged Sun Yat-sen outside the Xizhimen Gate, but only retreated when Shi Xuan came to their rescue.

古文：相持五日，寇敛众遁。
现代文：相持五日后，敌寇收众而逃。
English: After a five-day standoff, the enemy bandits gathered their forces and fled.

古文：论功，亨为多，进侯。
现代文：论功时，石亨为多，进升为侯。
English: When it comes to meritorious service, Shih Heng is superior, and Jin Sheng is superior.

古文：景泰元年二月命佩镇朔大将军印，帅京军三万人，巡哨大同。
现代文：景泰元年二月，石亨奉命佩带镇朔大将军印，率京军三万人，巡哨大同。
English: In February of the first year of Jing-Tai, Shi Heng was ordered to wear the seal of Zhenshuo Grand General, lead the Beijing army of 30,000 people, and patrol Datong.

古文：遇寇，败之。
现代文：遭遇敌寇，击败之。
English: Encountered an invader, defeated it.

古文：其秋，予世袭诰券。
现代文：这年秋天，皇上授予石亨世袭诰券。
English: In the autumn of that year, the emperor awarded Shi Heng with a hereditary ticket.

古文：易储，加亨太子太师。
现代文：更换皇储之后，又加封石亨为太子太师。
English: After the replacement of the crown prince, he also added Shi Heng as the crown prince.

古文：于谦立团营，命亨提督，充总兵官如故。
现代文：于谦设立团营，命石亨任提督，仍充任总兵官。
English: Yu Qian set up a regimental battalion, appointed Shi Heng as admiral, and still served as the chief military officer.

古文：八年，帝将郊，宿斋宫，疾作不能行礼，召亨代。
现代文：八年，皇上将往郊外祭天，住在斋宫，因疾病发作不能行礼，召石亨代替。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor will go to the suburbs to offer sacrifices, live in the temple, due to the onset of illness can not perform the salute, and call Shiheng instead.

古文：亨受命榻前，见帝病甚，遂与张軏、曹吉祥等谋迎立上皇。
现代文：石亨受命榻前，见皇上病得很重，于是便与张辄、曹吉祥等商议迎立英宗。
English: Before Shih Heng was ordered to lie down, he saw that the emperor was very ill, so he discussed with Zhang Ye, Cao Jixiang and others to welcome Yingzong.

古文：上皇既复辟，以亨首功，进爵忠国公。
现代文：英宗复辟后，以石亨为首功，进封他为忠国公。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Shi Heng was the first to be awarded the title of Prince Loyal to the State.

古文：眷顾特异，言无不从。
现代文：并对他特别眷顾，言无不从。
English: And he took special care of him, and obeyed his every word.

古文：其弟侄家人冒功锦衣者五十余人，部曲亲故窜名 夺门 籍得官者四千余人。
现代文：其弟、侄家人中冒功成为锦衣卫官员的有五十余人，部曲、亲戚、故旧在 夺门 名册上篡改名字而获得官职者达四千余人。
English: Among his younger brothers and nephews, there are more than 50 people who have made meritorious achievements as brocade and clothing protection officials, and there are more than 4,000 people who have obtained official positions by tampering with their names on the roster.

古文：两京大臣，斥逐殆尽。
现代文：两京大臣，却被斥逐殆尽。
English: The ministers of the two capitals, however, were completely ousted.

古文：纳私人重贿，引用太仆丞孙弘，郎中陈汝言、萧璁、张用瀚、郝璜、龙文、朱铨，员外郎刘本道为侍郎。
现代文：石亨还收纳私人重贿，引用太仆承孙弘，郎中陈汝言、萧璁、张用瀚、郝璜、龙文、朱锉，员外郎刘本道为侍郎。
English: Shi Heng also accepted heavy bribes from private individuals, citing the great servant Zheng Sunhong, his vassals Chen Ruyan, Xiao Qi, Zhang Yihang, Zou, Longwen, Zhu Xi, and the outside vassal Liu Hondo as attendants.

古文：时有语曰 朱三千，龙八百 。
现代文：当时有 朱三千，龙八百 之说。
English: At that time, it was said that there were three thousand cranes and eight hundred dragons.

古文：势焰熏灼，嗜进者竞走其门。
现代文：石亨势焰熏天，希望获得进升的人竞相奔走其门下。
English: Shi Heng is very powerful, and people who hope to get promoted are competing to go under his door.

古文：既以私憾杀于谦、范广等，又以给事中成章、御史甘泽等九人尝攻其失，贬黜之。
现代文：他以私怨杀了于谦、范广等之后，又因给事中成章、御史甘泽等九人曾指责其过失，而贬黜了他们。
English: After he killed Yu Qian, Fan Guang and others out of personal grudge, he belittled them because nine people, including Cheng Zhang and Gu Shi Gan Ze, had accused him of negligence.

古文：数兴大狱，构陷耿九畴、岳正，而戍杨瑄、张鹏，谪周斌、盛颙等。
现代文：石亨屡兴大狱，拘陷耿九畴、岳正，而将杨瑄、张鹏戍边，并贬滴了周斌、盛等。
English: Shi Heng was repeatedly jailed, and Geng Jiuzhong and Yue Zheng were detained, while Yang Hui and Zhang Penghu were detained, and Zhou Bin and Sheng were detained.

古文：又恶文臣为巡抚，抑武臣不得肆，尽撤还。
现代文：又厌恶文臣为巡抚，且使武臣不得放肆，而将他们全部撤回。
English: He also disliked the fact that a civil servant was the governor, and forbade his vassals to act recklessly, withdrawing all of them.

古文：由是大权悉归亨。
现代文：由此朝中大权全部归于石亨。
English: As a result, all the power in the Korean and Chinese dynasties belonged to Shi Heng.

古文：亨无日不进见，数预政事。
现代文：石亨无日不进宫见皇上，屡屡干预政事。
English: Shi Heng never entered the palace to see the emperor, and repeatedly intervened in political affairs.

古文：所请或不从，艴然见于辞色。
现代文：他所提出的请求，皇上如果不从，他在声色之中便显露不满之情。
English: If the Emperor did not accede to his request, he showed his displeasure in his tone of voice.

古文：即不召，必假事以入，出则张大其势，市权利。
现代文：即使不被召见，他也一定要借事而人，出则扩大其势，以权力做交易。
English: Even if he is not summoned, he is sure to take advantage of the situation to expand his influence and bargain with power.

古文：久之，帝不能堪，尝以语阁臣李贤。
现代文：久之，皇上不堪忍受，曾对阁臣李贤说起此事。
English: After a long time, the emperor could not bear it any longer and mentioned the matter to his courtier Li Xian.

古文：贤曰： 惟独断乃可。 
现代文：李贤说道： 只有做一决断才行。 
English: Li Xian said: Only a decision can be made.

古文：帝然之。
现代文：皇上认为他说得有理。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：一日语贤曰： 阁臣有事，须燕见。
现代文：一天，皇上对李贤说： 阁臣有事，必须等待召见。
English: One day, the emperor said to Li Xian: "Your excellency has something to do, you must wait to be summoned."

古文：彼武臣，何故频见？ 
现代文：而他是一名武臣，为什么如此频繁来见呢？ 
English: But he is a samurai retainer, so why does he come to see me so often?

古文：遂敕左顺门，非宣召毋得纳总兵官。
现代文：于是诏令左顺门，未经宣召不得让总兵官进入。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered the gate to be left open, and the commander-in-chief was not allowed to enter without being summoned.

古文：亨自此稀燕见。
现代文：石亨从此很少被召见。
English: Ishihiro has rarely been seen since.

古文：亨尝白帝立碑于其祖墓。
现代文：石亨曾向皇上请求在其祖墓立碑。
English: Shi Heng once asked the emperor to erect a monument at his ancestor's grave.

古文：工部希亨指，请敕有司建立，翰林院撰文。
现代文：工部顺着石亨的意思，请求下诏命有关官员立碑，翰林院撰文。
English: In accordance with Shi Heng's intention, the Ministry of Works requested the relevant officials to erect a monument and Hanlin Academy to write an article.

古文：帝以永乐以来，无为功臣祖宗立碑故事，责部臣，而令亨自立。
现代文：皇上以永乐年以来，没有为功臣祖宗立碑的旧例为由，命石亨自立。
English: On the grounds that since the Yongle era, there was no precedent for erecting a monument to a meritorious ancestor, the emperor ordered Shiheng to stand up for himself.

古文：初，帝命所司为亨营第。
现代文：当初，皇上命官府为石亨营造府第。
English: At first, the emperor ordered the government office to be built in Sekihotake.

古文：既成，壮丽逾制。
现代文：建成之后，其壮丽超越了皇上当初的命令。
English: After its completion, its magnificence surpassed the emperor's original order.

古文：帝登翔凤楼见之，问谁所居。
现代文：皇上登翔凤楼时见到它，问这是谁的住所。
English: When the emperor ascended the phoenix tower, he saw it and asked whose residence it was.

古文：恭顺侯吴瑾谬对曰： 此必王府。 
现代文：恭顺侯吴瑾误答道： 这一定是王府。 
English: Gongshun Hou Wu Yao mistakenly replied, "This must be the royal palace."

古文：帝曰： 非也。 
现代文：皇上说： 不是王府。 
English: The emperor said, "It's not the royal palace."

古文：瑾曰： 非王府，谁敢僣逾若此？ 
现代文：吴瑾又说： 如果不是王府，谁敢像这样僭越呢？ 
English: Wu Yao also said, "If it wasn't for the royal court, who would dare to make such a move?

古文：帝颔之。
现代文：皇上点头表示赞同。
English: The emperor nodded yes.

古文：亨既权侔人主，而从子彪亦封定远侯，骄横如亨。
现代文：石亨权比君主，其堂侄石彪也被封为定远侯，像石亨一样骄横。
English: Shi Heng is the sovereign, and his grandnephew Shi Biao is also known as Dingyuan Hou. He is as arrogant as Shi Heng.

古文：两家蓄材官猛士数万，中外将帅半出其门。
现代文：叔侄两家蓄养材官猛士数万，朝中将帅一半出自其门。
English: Tens of thousands of warriors from the two families of uncles and nephews, and half of the generals of the dynasty, came from his family.

古文：都人侧目。
现代文：都人为之侧目。
English: It's all contrived side-eye.

古文：三年秋，彪谋镇大同，令千户杨斌等奏保。
现代文：三年秋，石彪企图镇守大同，命千户杨斌等奏保。
English: In the autumn of the third year, Shi Biao attempted to defend Datong, and the lives of thousands of households such as Yang Bin were saved.

古文：帝觉其诈，收斌等拷问得实，震怒，下彪诏狱。
现代文：皇上察觉其中有诈，便将杨斌等逮捕，拷问后获知实情，皇上震怒不已，下诏将石彪下狱。
English: The emperor noticed that there was fraud, so he arrested Yang Bin and others. After being tortured and learning the truth, the emperor was furious and ordered Shi Biao to be imprisoned.

古文：亨惧，请罪。
现代文：石亨心中害怕，前往请罪，皇上安慰他。
English: Shih Heng was afraid in his heart and went to plead guilty. The emperor consoled him.

古文：帝慰谕之。亨请尽削弟侄官，放归田里。
现代文：石亨请求削除其弟、侄的官职，将他们放归故乡，皇上也未答应。
English: Shi Heng requested that his brother and nephew be removed from their official positions and sent back to their hometown, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：帝亦不许。及鞫彪，得绣蟒龙衣及违式寝床诸不法事，罪当死。
现代文：审讯石彪之后，获得其私有绣蟒龙衣及违式寝床等违法之事，罪当处死。
English: After interrogating Shi Biao, he obtained illegal things such as his private embroidered dragon robe and illegal bed, and the crime should be executed.

古文：遂籍彪家，命亨养病。
现代文：于是抄没石彪家，并命石亨居家养病。
English: So he confiscated Shi Biao's house and ordered Shi Heng to stay at home to recover.

古文：亨尝遣京卫指挥裴瑄出关市木，遣大同指挥卢昭追捕亡者。
现代文：石亨曾派遣京卫指挥裴瑄出关购买木材，派遣大同指挥卢昭追捕逃亡者。
English: Shi Heng once sent Beijing Guard Commander Pei Jun out to buy timber, and sent Datong Commander Lu Zhao to hunt down fugitives.

古文：至是事觉，法司请罪亨，帝犹置不问。
现代文：到这时事情败露，司法官们请求将石亨治罪，皇上仍然搁置不问。
English: By this time, the matter had been exposed, and the judicial officials requested that Shi Heng be punished, but the emperor still did not ask.

古文：法司再鞫彪，言彪初为大同游击，以代王增禄为己功，王至跪谢。
现代文：司法官再次审讯石彪，说石彪当初为大同游击将军时，以代王增加食禄为己之功，代王前来跪谢。
English: The judicial officer interrogated Shi Biao again, saying that when Shi Biao was originally a Datong guerrilla general, he took it upon himself to increase the king's food allowance, and the king came to kneel and thank him.

古文：自是数款彪，出歌妓行酒。
现代文：代王此后多次招待石彪，让歌妓依次为他斟酒。
English: After that, the deputy king invited Shi Biao several times and asked the geisha to pour wine for him in turn.

古文：彪凌侮亲王，罪亦当死。
现代文：石彪凌辱亲王，罪也当死。
English: Shi Biao insulted the prince, and the crime is punishable by death.

古文：因劾亨招权纳赇，肆行无忌，与术士邹叔彝等私讲天文，妄谈休咎，宜置重典。
现代文：并趁机弹劾石亨招权纳贿，肆无忌惮，与术士邹叔彝等私下讲解天文，妄谈吉凶，应当以重典处置他。
English: And he took the opportunity to impeach Shi Heng for soliciting power and accepting bribes, unscrupulously explaining astronomy in private with the sorcerer Zou Shuxuan and others, and talking about fortune and misfortune. He should be punished with a heavy sentence.

古文：帝命锢彪于狱，亨闲住，罢朝参。
现代文：皇上于是下令将石彪禁锢于狱中，石亨在家闲住，罢免朝参。
English: The emperor then ordered that Shi Biao be confined to prison, and that Shi Heng stay idle at home, dismissing Asosan.

古文：时方议革 夺门 功，穷治亨党，由亨得官者悉黜，朝署一清。
现代文：当时朝廷正商议要革除 夺门 之功，彻底惩处石亨党羽，由于石亨而获得官职的人全被罢黜，从而使朝署一清。
English: At that time, the imperial court was deliberating on eliminating the merits of seizing the throne, thoroughly punishing Shi Heng's followers, and all those who obtained official positions because of Shi Heng were dismissed, thus clearing the imperial office.

古文：都督杜清出亨门下，后造妖言，有 土木掌兵权 语，盖言杜也。
现代文：第二年正月，锦衣卫指挥录杲上奏说石亨心中怨恨，与其侄孙石后等制造妖言，蓄养无赖，专门窥视朝廷动静，图谋不轨的迹象已很明显。
English: In the first month of the second year, the commander of the Jin Yi Wei Regiment recorded on the gong that Shi Heng had resentment in his heart, and that he and his grandnephew Shi Hou had fabricated gossips, cultivated scoundrels, and specialized in spying on the movements of the imperial court. The signs of scheming were already obvious.

古文：事觉，后伏诛，清亦流金齿。
现代文：廷臣都说不能轻易宽恕，皇上这才下诏将石亨下狱，将以谋反罪处斩，并抄没其家产。
English: The courtiers all said that they could not easily forgive, and it was only then that the emperor issued an edict to put Shi Heng in prison, execute him for the crime of plotting treason, and confiscate his family property.

古文：郭登，字元登，武定侯英孙也。
现代文：一个月后，石亨在狱中病死，石彪、石后一并被处死。郭登，字元登，武定侯郭英之孙。
English: A month later, Shi Heng died of illness in prison, and Shi Biao and Shi Hou were both executed. Guo Deng, Ziyuan Deng, the grandson of Wuding Hou Guo Ying.

古文：幼英敏。
现代文：他年幼便聪颖出众。
English: He was brilliant from a young age.

古文：及长，博闻强记，善议论，好谈兵。
现代文：长大后，博闻强记，善长议论，喜欢谈论军事。
English: When he grew up, he was a good listener and a good talker, and he liked to talk about the military.

古文：洪熙时，授勋卫。
现代文：洪熙年时，被授为勋卫。
English: He was awarded the title of Grand Marshal of the People's Liberation Army at the age of Hong Xi.

古文：正统中，从王骥征麓川有功，擢锦衣卫指挥佥事。
现代文：正统年间，郭登跟随王骥征麓川有功，被提拔为锦衣卫指挥佥事。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, Guo Deng was promoted to the rank of the commander of the Jinling Guards after he had distinguished himself in the capture of the Luchuan River by Wang Hui.

古文：又从沐斌征腾冲，迁署都指挥佥事。
现代文：又随沐斌征腾冲，升为代理都指挥佥事。
English: In addition, with the rise of Mubin Zhengtengchong, he was promoted to the post of deputy commander.

古文：十四年，车驾北征，扈从至大同，超拜都督佥事，充参将，佐总兵官广宁伯刘安镇守。
现代文：十四年，皇上北征，郭登以扈从的身份随行至大同，被越级授为都督佥事，充任参将，辅佐总兵官广宁伯刘安镇守大同。
English: In the 14th year of the emperor's Northern Expedition, Guo Deng accompanied the emperor to Datong as an attendant. He was awarded the title of the governor of Datong, served as a general, and assisted the chief military officer Guangningbo Liu An, the town guard of Datong.

古文：朱勇等军覆，仓猝议旋师。
现代文：朱勇等军覆没，便仓促商议回师。
English: Zhu Yong's army was wiped out, so they hastily negotiated to return to the division.

古文：登告学士曹鼐、张益曰 车驾宜入紫荆关 ，王振不从，遂及于败。
现代文：郭登告诉学士曹鼐、张益说： 皇上应该进入紫荆关。 王振不听，由于这样几乎是败局已定。
English: Guo Deng told the scholars Cao Pi and Zhang Yi: The emperor should enter the Bauhinia Pass. Wang Zhen did not listen, as this was almost a foregone conclusion.

古文：当是时，大同军士多战死，城门昼闭，人心汹汹。
现代文：那个时候，大同守军许多已战死，城门紧闭，人心惶惶。
English: At that time, many of the Datong defenders had been killed in battle, the city gates were closed, and people were panicking.

古文：登慷慨奋励，修城堞，缮兵械；拊循士卒，吊死问伤，亲为裹创傅药。曰： 吾誓与此城共存亡，不令诸君独死也。 
现代文：郭登慷慨激昂，整修城墙，修缮兵器，安抚士卒，悼死问伤，亲自为伤兵裹伤敷药，并说道： 我誓与此城共存亡，决不会只让你们去死。 
English: Guodeng was impassioned, repaired the city walls, repaired weapons, pacified soldiers, mourned the dead and injured, and personally bandaged the wounded soldiers, and said: I swear to coexist with this city, I will never let you die alone.

古文：八月，也先拥帝北去，经大同，使袁彬入城索金币。
现代文：八月，也先拥着皇上北去，经过大同时，派袁彬入城索要金币。
English: In August, he also went to the north with the emperor, and after a long time, he sent Yuan Bin to the city to ask for gold coins.

古文：登闭城门，以飞桥取彬入。
现代文：郭登紧闭城门，让袁彬从飞桥而人。
English: Guo Deng closed the gate tightly and let Yuan Bin escape from the fly bridge.

古文：登与安及侍郎沈固、给事中孙祥、知府霍瑄等出谒，伏地恸哭。以金二万余及宋瑛、朱冕、内臣郭敬家资进帝，以赐也先等。
现代文：郭登与刘安及侍郎沈固、给事中孙祥、知府霍瑄等出城拜渴，伏地痛哭，将二万余两黄金及宋瑛、朱冕、内臣郭敬的家产进献给皇上，赐给也先等。
English: Guo Deng, Liu An, and his attendant Shen Guo, as well as Sun Xiang, who was in charge of the ceremony, and the prefect of the prefecture, Huo Yao, went out of the city to pray for thirst, and wept bitterly. They donated more than 20,000 taels of gold and the family property of Song Ying, Zhu Guanyin, and the vassal Guo Jing to the emperor, and also gave it to others.

古文：是夕，敌营城西。
现代文：这天晚上，敌军在城西扎营。
English: That night, the enemy camped to the west of the city.

古文：登谋遣壮士劫营迎驾，不果。
现代文：郭登企图派壮士前去劫营迎驾，没有成功。
English: Guo Deng's attempt to send a strong man to rob the camp was not successful.

古文：明日，也先拥帝去。
现代文：第二天，也先拥帝而去。
English: The next day, he also left with the emperor.

古文：景帝监国，进都督同知，充副总兵。
现代文：景帝监国后，郭登进升为都督同知，充任副总兵。
English: After Emperor Jing oversaw the country, Guo Dengjin was promoted to the same rank as the governor and served as deputy general.

古文：寻令代安为总兵官。
现代文：随即奉命代替刘安为总兵官。
English: He was then ordered to replace Liu An as chief military officer.

古文：十月，也先犯京师，登将率所部入援，先驰蜡书奏。
现代文：十月，也先进犯京城，郭登准备率所部人援，事先迅速以蜡书上奏。
English: In October, Guo Deng was also the first to commit a crime in Beijing. Guo Deng led the preparation of the department's personnel assistance, and quickly recorded it in wax beforehand.

古文：奏至，敌已退。
现代文：奏书到时，敌军已退。
English: By the time the report arrived, the enemy had retreated.

古文：景帝优诏褒答，进右都督。
现代文：景帝仍下诏褒奖，进升他为右都督。
English: Emperor Jing still issued an imperial edict of commendation, and he was promoted to the post of right-hand governor.

古文：登计京兵新集，不可轻用，上用兵方略十余事。
现代文：郭登估计京兵才刚刚招集，不能轻易使用，于是献上十多个用兵方略。
English: Guo Deng estimated that the Beijing soldiers had just been called up and could not be used easily, so he presented more than ten military strategies.

古文：景泰元年春，侦知寇骑数千，自顺圣川入营沙窝。
现代文：景泰元年春，郭登侦察得知数千名敌军骑兵，从顺圣川进入沙窝扎营。
English: In the spring of the first year of Jing Tai, Guo Deng's reconnaissance learned that thousands of enemy cavalry had entered Shaoshan River from Shunsheng River to set up camp.

古文：登率兵蹑之，大破其众，追至栲栳山，斩二百余级，得所掠人畜八百有奇。
现代文：郭登率兵跟踪而至，大破敌军，追至拷佬山，斩杀二百余人，获得所掠人畜八百多人。
English: Guo Deng led his soldiers to follow the enemy, defeated the enemy, chased them to Cui Lai Mountain, killed more than two hundred people, and captured more than eight hundred people and animals.

古文：边将自土木败后，畏缩无敢与寇战。
现代文：边将自从土木堡兵败后，都畏缩不前，无人敢与敌寇交战。
English: Since the defeat of the Civil Fort soldiers, the border generals have been cowering, and no one dares to fight with the enemy bandits.

古文：登以八百人破敌数千骑，军气为之一振，捷闻，封定襄伯，予世券。
现代文：郭登以八百人打败敌军数千骑兵，使士气为之一振。捷报传来，皇上封郭登为定襄伯，并授予世袭凭证。
English: Guodeng defeated the enemy's several thousand cavalrymen with eight hundred men, which gave a boost to morale. News of the victory came that the emperor had made Guodeng his brother-in-law and granted him a hereditary certificate.

古文：四月，寇骑数千奄至，登出东门战。
现代文：四月，数千敌军骑兵突至，郭登出东门而战。
English: In April, thousands of enemy cavalry rushed in, and Guo Deng left the East Gate to fight.

古文：佯北，诱之入士城。
现代文：佯装战败，将敌军诱人土城。
English: Pretending to be defeated, he lured the enemy troops to Tucheng.

古文：伏起，敌败走。
现代文：伏兵冲出，敌军败逃。
English: The ambush soldiers rushed out, and the enemy troops fled in defeat.

古文：登度敌且复至，令军士赍毒酒、羊豕、楮钱，伪为祭冢者，见寇即弃走。
现代文：郭登估计敌军还会来，于是命令士兵带上毒酒、猪羊、纸币，伪装成祭坟的人，见到敌军便丢下东西逃走。
English: Guodeng estimated that the enemy would still come, so he ordered the soldiers to bring poisoned wine, pigs and sheep, paper money, and people disguised as tombs. When they saw the enemy, they left their things and fled.

古文：寇至，争饮食之，死者甚众。
现代文：敌军到后，争相饮食酒肉，死者甚多。
English: After the arrival of the enemy troops, there was a scramble for food, wine and meat, and many died.

古文：六月，也先复以二千骑入寇，登再击却之。
现代文：六月，也先又率二千骑兵人侵，郭登再次击退之。
English: In June, Guo Deng led 2,000 cavalrymen to invade again. Guo Deng repulsed them again.

古文：越数日，奉上皇至城外，声言送驾还。
现代文：数日之后，也先奉英宗到达城外，声言是送英宗回来。
English: A few days later, Feng Yingzong also arrived outside the city, claiming to send Yingzong back.

古文：登与同守者设计，具朝服候驾月城内，伏兵城上，俟上皇入，即下月城闸。
现代文：郭登与一同守城者设计，穿上朝服在月城内候驾，同时在城上埋伏军队，一待英宗进入，马上放下月城闸门。
English: Guo Deng and his fellow defenders devised a plan. They put on imperial robes and waited in the moon city. At the same time, they ambushed the army on the city. As soon as Yingzong entered, they immediately lowered the moon city gate.

古文：也先及门而觉，遂拥上皇去。
现代文：也先快到门边时发觉了，于是拥着英宗离去。
English: He also found out when he was about to reach the door, so he hugged Ying Zong and left.

古文：时镇守中官陈公忌登。
现代文：当时镇守的宦官陈公嫉妒郭登。
English: Chen Gong, the eunuch of the town guard at that time, was jealous of Guo Deng.

古文：会有发公奸赃者，公疑登使之，遂与登构。
现代文：正有人揭发陈公贪财受贿，陈公怀疑是郭登指使的，于是与郭登构怨。
English: Someone was exposing Chen Gong's money-grubbing and bribe-taking. Chen Gong suspected that Guo Deng was the instigator, so he started a feud with Guo Deng.

古文：帝谓于谦曰： 大同，吾藩篱也。
现代文：皇上对于谦说道： 大同是我国的屏障。
English: The emperor said to Qian: Datong is the barrier of our country.

古文：公与登如是，其何以守！ 
现代文：陈公与郭登关系如此，怎么能守得住呢？ 
English: If the relationship between Chen Gong and Guodeng is like this, how can it be maintained?

古文：遣右监丞马庆代公还，登愈感奋。
现代文：于是便派右监承马庆将陈公替回，郭登越发感奋。
English: As a result, the right supervisor Ma Qing was sent to replace Chen Gong, and Guo Deng became more and more excited.

古文：初，也先欲取大同为巢穴，故数来攻。
现代文：当初，也先想攻取大同作为巢穴，所以屡次来攻。
English: At first, I also wanted to capture Datong as a lair, so I attacked it repeatedly.

古文：及每至辄败，有一营数十人不还者。敌气慑，始有还上皇意。
现代文：可是每至必败，有的一营中几十人不能返回，敌军被慑服，才有送回英宗之意。
English: However, every time there is a certain defeat, dozens of people in a battalion cannot return, and the enemy army is deterred, only to be sent back to Yingzong.

古文：上皇既还，代王仕壥颂登功，乞降敕奖劳。
现代文：英宗返回后，代王仕廛赞扬郭登有功，请求降旨奖励慰劳。
English: After Yingzong's return, the acting Wang Shijun praised Guo Deng for his service and requested that Guo Deng be rewarded for his efforts.

古文：兵部言登已封伯，乃止。
现代文：兵部则说郭登已被封伯，此事才作罢。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs said that Guo Deng had been knighted, and the matter was dropped.

古文：二年，登以老疾乞休，举石彪自代，且请令其子嵩宿卫。
现代文：二年，郭登以年老有疾为由，请求退休，推举石彪代替自己，并且请求让其子郭嵩宿卫宫中。
English: In the second year, Guo Deng, on the grounds of old age and illness, asked for retirement, nominated Shi Biao to replace him, and requested that his son Guo Song stay in the palace.

古文：帝以嵩为散骑舍人，不听登辞。
现代文：皇上因郭嵩为散骑舍人，未听郭登的话。
English: The emperor did not listen to Guo Deng's words because Guo Song was a lone rider.

古文：是时边患甫息，登悉心措置，思得公廉有为者与俱。
现代文：这时边患刚息，郭登悉心安排，想让公正廉明的有为者与他共事。
English: At this time, Guo Deng, who was on the verge of death, carefully arranged to have a person of integrity work with him.

古文：遂劾奏沈固废事，而荐尚书杨宁、布政使年富。
现代文：于是上奏弹劾沈固办事不力，而推荐尚书杨宁、布政使年富。
English: As a result, the impeachment of Shen Gu was not effective, but the recommendation of Shangshu Yangning and Bu Zheng made Nianfu rich.

古文：又言大同既有御史，又有巡按御史，佥都御史任宁宜止巡抚宣府。
现代文：又说大同既有御史，又有巡按御史，佥都御史任宁应当只任宣府巡抚。
English: It is also said that Datong has both a governor and a governor of patrol, and the governor of Xingtou should only be the governor of Xuanfu.

古文：帝悉从之，以年富代固，而征还固及宁。
现代文：皇上全都听从了他，以年富代替沈固，而召回沈固和任宁。
English: The emperors all obeyed him, replacing Shen Guo with Nian Fu, and recalling Shen Guo and Ren Ning.

古文：其秋，以疾召还。
现代文：这年秋天，郭登因病应诏回京。
English: In the autumn of that year, Guo Deng returned to Beijing due to illness.

古文：登初至大同，士卒可战者才数百，马百余匹。
现代文：郭登刚到大同时，能作战的士兵才数百人，马也只有百余匹。
English: When Guo Deng arrived at university, there were only a few hundred soldiers who could fight, and only a hundred or so horses.

古文：及是马至万五千，精卒数万，屹然成巨镇。
现代文：而现在马匹已达一万五千，精兵数万，屹然成为一巨镇。
English: Now, with 15,000 horses and tens of thousands of elite soldiers, it has become a huge town.

古文：登去，大同人思之。
现代文：郭登离开后，大同人十分想念他。
English: After Guo Deng left, Datong people missed him very much.

古文：初，英宗过大同，遣人谓登曰： 朕与登有姻，何拒朕若是？ 
现代文：当初，英宗经过大同，派人对郭登说： 肤与你是姻亲，你为什么要如此拒我于城外呢？ 
English: At first, after passing through Datong, Yingzong sent someone to Guodeng to say, "You and I are in-laws. Why do you keep me out of the city like this?

古文：登奏曰： 臣奉命守城，不知其他。 
现代文：郭登上奏道： 臣奉命守城，不知其他。 
English: Guo Dengsong said: I was ordered to guard the city, I don't know anything else.

古文：英宗衔之。
现代文：英宗因而怀恨在心。
English: Thus, Yingzong held a grudge.

古文：及复辟，登惧不免，首陈八事，多迎合。
现代文：当英宗复辟后，郭登担心不能幸免，便首陈八件事，大多迎合英宗的心意。
English: When Yingzong was restored to power, Guo Deng was worried that he would not be spared, so he first listed eight things, most of which catered to Yingzong's intentions.

古文：寻命掌南京中府事。
现代文：随即奉命掌管南京中府事务。
English: He was then ordered to take charge of the affairs of Nanjing Central Prefecture.

古文：明年召还。
现代文：第二年应诏返京。
English: He returned to Beijing the following year.

古文：言官劾登结陈汝言获召，鞫实论斩。
现代文：言官弹劾郭登因勾结陈汝言才得以获诏，审讯属实，被判死刑。
English: The magistrate impeached Guo Deng for colluding with Chen Ruyan before the verdict was issued, the trial was true, and he was sentenced to death.

古文：宥死，降都督佥事，立功甘肃。
现代文：皇上宽恕其死罪，将他降为都督佥事，命他去甘肃立功赎罪。
English: The emperor pardoned his capital crime, reduced him to the rank of vassal, and ordered him to go to Gansu to make meritorious deeds and atone for his sins.

古文：宪宗即位，诏复伯爵，充甘肃总兵官。
现代文：宪宗即位后，下诏恢复郭登为伯，命他充任甘肃总兵官。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xianzong, Guo Deng was restored to the post by imperial edict, and he was appointed to serve as Gansu's chief military officer.

古文：奏边军偿马艰甚，至鬻妻子。乞借楚、庆、肃三王府马各千匹，官酬其直。
现代文：郭登上奏说边军买马十分艰难，以至于卖掉妻子儿女来筹钱，因而请求借用楚、庆、肃三王府的马各一千匹，由官府付钱。
English: Guo Dengxiao said that it was very difficult for the border troops to buy horses, so much so that they sold their wives and children to raise money. Therefore, he asked to borrow a thousand horses each from Chu, Qing and Su Three Kingdoms, and the government would pay for it.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上采纳了他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：用朱永等荐，召掌中府事，总神机营兵。
现代文：由朱永等推荐，郭登应诏掌管中府事务，并统领神机营兵。
English: Recommended by Zhu Yong and others, Guo Deng took charge of the affairs of the central government and led the army.

古文：成化四年复设十二团营，命登偕朱永提督。
现代文：成化四年，朝廷复设一二团营，命郭登偕同朱永提督。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, the imperial court re-established one or two regimental battalions and ordered Guo Dengyu and Admiral Zhu Yong.

古文：八年卒。
现代文：八年，郭登去世。
English: Ham Jun died eight years later.

古文：赠侯，谥忠武。
现代文：被赠为侯，谥号忠武。
English: He was given the title of "Hō" and the posthumous name of "Tadanobu."

古文：登仪观甚伟，髯垂过腹。
现代文：郭登仪表雄伟，美髯过腹。
English: Guodeng has a majestic appearance and is very beautiful.

古文：为将兼智勇，纪律严明，料敌制胜，动合机宜。
现代文：他智勇双全，纪律严明，预测敌情，相机而动，克敌制胜。
English: He has both wisdom and courage, is disciplined, predicts the enemy situation, moves the camera, and defeats the enemy.

古文：尝以意造 搅地龙 、 飞天网 。凿深堑，覆以土木如平地。
现代文：他曾设计制造 搅地龙 、 飞天纲 ，挖掘深壕，再盖上土木，使它就如平地一样。
English: He has designed and manufactured "earth-shaking dragons," "sky-flying dragons," dug deep trenches, and then covered them with earthworks to make it look like flat land.

古文：敌入围中，发其机，自相撞击，顷刻皆陷。
现代文：当敌军进入包围圈，便发动机关，使其自相撞击，顷刻全陷。
English: When the enemy entered the encirclement, the engine was shut down, causing it to collide with itself and collapse in an instant.

古文：又仿古制造偏箱车、四轮车，中藏火器，上建旗帜，钩环联络，布列成阵，战守皆可用。
现代文：又仿效古人制造偏箱车、四轮车，中藏火器，上树旗帜，钩环联络，布列成阵，攻守都能用。
English: They also imitated the ancients to make boxcars, four-wheeled vehicles, Chinese and Tibetan firearms, flags, hooks and loops, laid out in rows, and can be used for both offensive and defensive purposes.

古文：其军以五人为伍，教之盟于神祠，一人有功，五人同赏，罚亦如之。
现代文：其军队以五人为一伍，郭登教他们在神祠发誓，一人有功，五人一同领赏，受罚时也是一样。
English: Guo Deng made his soldiers swear an oath in front of a shrine that one of them would receive a reward and the other five would receive a punishment.

古文：十伍为队，队以能挽六十斤弓者为先锋。
现代文：十伍为一队，队中以能拉开六十斤重弓的人为先锋。
English: Ten teams formed a team, with the person who could draw a sixty-kilo heavy bow as the vanguard.

古文：十队领以一都指挥，令功无相挠，罪有专责，一时称善。
现代文：十队由一名都指挥统领，使他们功不相挠，罪有专责，这种做法一时称好。
English: Ten teams are commanded and led by one person, so that they do not compete with each other and have special responsibilities. This approach was praised at the time.

古文：登事母孝，居丧秉礼。
现代文：郭登十分孝顺母亲，居丧时谨守礼仪。
English: Guo Deng is very filial to his mother, and he strictly observes the etiquette when he is in mourning.

古文：能诗，明世武臣无及者。
现代文：他善长写诗，明朝武臣无人能比。
English: He was good at writing poetry, and no other vassal of the Ming Dynasty could match him.

古文：无子，以兄子嵩为子。
现代文：郭登无子，以其兄之子郭嵩为子。
English: Guo Deng had no children, but was the father of his brother's son, Guo Song.

古文：登谪甘肃，留家京师，嵩窘其衣食。
现代文：郭登被贬至甘肃时，将家人留在京城，郭嵩衣食艰难。
English: When Guo Deng was demoted to Gansu, he left his family behind in Beijing. Guo Song struggled to feed and clothe himself.

古文：登妾缝纫自给，几殆，弗顾。
现代文：郭登之妾靠缝纫自给，几乎活不下去了，他也不关心。
English: Guo Deng's concubine barely survives by sewing for herself, and he doesn't care.

古文：登还，欲黜之，以其婿于会昌侯，侯尝活己，隐忍不发。
现代文：郭登回京后，想废黜他，因为他是会昌侯的女婿，会昌侯曾救过自己的命，所以才忍住没有发作。
English: After Guo Deng returned to Beijing, he wanted to depose him, because he was the son-in-law of Huichang Hou, and Huichang Hou had saved his own life, so he could not help but have a fit.

古文：及卒，嵩遂袭爵。
现代文：郭登死后，郭嵩承袭爵位。
English: After Guo Deng's death, Guo Song inherited the title.

古文：后以非登嫡嗣，止嵩身。子参降锦衣卫指挥使。
现代文：后来因为不是郭登嫡子继嗣，所以只有郭嵩一人承袭爵位，其子郭参被降为锦衣卫指挥使。
English: Later, because he was not Guo Deng's legitimate son and heir, only Guo Song inherited the title, and his son Guo San was demoted to the rank of commander of the Jin and Wei armies.

古文：朱谦，夏邑人。
现代文：硃谦，夏邑人。
English: Hao Qian, a native of Xiayun.

古文：永乐初，袭父职，为中都留守左卫指挥佥事。
现代文：永乐初年，他承袭父职，为中都留守左卫指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he inherited his father's post, and was left in charge of the left guard.

古文：洪熙时，隶阳武侯薛禄，征北有功，进指挥使。
现代文：洪熙时，硃谦隶属阳武侯薛禄，北征有功，进升为指挥使。
English: At the time of Hong Xi, Zou Qian was subordinate to Yangwuo marquis Xue Lu. He had distinguished himself in the Northern Expedition and was promoted to commander.

古文：宣德元年进万全都指挥佥事。
现代文：宣德元年，进升为万全都指挥佥事。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：正统六年，与参将王真巡哨至伯颜山，遇寇击走之。
现代文：正统六年，硃谦与参将王真巡哨至伯颜山，遭遇敌寇，将其击走。
English: After six years of orthodoxy, Zou Qian and General Wang Zhen went on a patrol to Baoyan Mountain, encountered an enemy invader, and drove it away.

古文：次闵安山，遇兀良哈三百骑，又败之。
现代文：驻扎阂安山时，遇上兀良哈的三百骑兵，又将其击败之。
English: When he was stationed in the Qianshan Mountains, he met the three hundred cavalrymen of Qian Liangha and defeated them.

古文：追至莽来泉，寇越山涧遁去，乃还。
现代文：追至莽来泉，敌寇越过山涧逃走了，硃谦这才率军返回。
English: They chased them to the Menglai Spring, and the enemy bandits fled over the mountains. It was only then that Zou Qian led the army back.

古文：时谦已迁都指挥同知，乃以为都指挥使。
现代文：当时硃谦已升为都指挥同知，于是被任命为都指挥使。
English: At that time, Zou Qian had been promoted to the same rank as the capital commander, so he was appointed as the capital commander.

古文：八年充右参将，守备万全左卫。
现代文：八年，硃谦充任右参将，守备万全左卫。
English: In eight years, Zou Qian was appointed as the right assistant captain, guarding the perfect left guard.

古文：明年与杨洪破兀良哈兵于克列苏，进都督佥事。
现代文：第二年，他与杨洪在克列苏打败兀良哈的军队，进升为都督佥事。
English: In the following year, he and Yang Hong defeated the army of Qianliangha in Queresu, and was promoted to the post of governor.

古文：所部发其不法事，帝以方防秋，宥之。
现代文：硃谦的部属揭发他的违法事，皇上因为正需要防守的将领，便宽恕了他。
English: Zou Qian's subordinates exposed his illegal activities, and the emperor pardoned him because he was a general in need of protection.

古文：复以北征功，进都督同知。
现代文：硃谦又因北征有功，升为都督同知。
English: Because of his meritorious service in the Northern Expedition, Zou Qian was also promoted to the post of governor.

古文：帝北狩，也先拥至宣府城下，令开门。
现代文：皇上北巡，也先拥着英宗来到宣府城下，下令开门。
English: The Emperor's Northern Patrol, also accompanied by Emperor Yingzong, arrived at the foot of Xuanfu Castle and ordered the gates to be opened.

古文：谦与参将纪广、都御史罗亨信不应，遂去。
现代文：硃谦与参将纪广、都御史罗亨信不予回答，也先于是离去。
English: Zou Qian, together with the commander Ji Guang and the governor Luo Hengxin, did not answer, and left first.

古文：进右都督。
现代文：硃谦升为右都督。
English: He was promoted to the position of the right-hand governor.

古文：与杨洪入卫，会寇已退，追袭之近畿。
现代文：他与杨洪人卫京城，恰逢敌寇兵退，硃谦率军在近畿追击。
English: He and Yang Hongren defended the capital city, which coincided with the retreat of the enemy corsairs. Zou Qian led the army in pursuit in the Kinki region.

古文：战失利，洪劾之。兵部并劾洪不救。
现代文：战斗失利，杨洪弹劾他，而兵部一起弹劾杨洪不去援救。
English: After losing the battle, Yang Hong impeached him, and the military also impeached Yang Hong for not coming to the rescue.

古文：景帝俱弗问。
现代文：景帝对他俩都不追究。
English: Emperor Jing did not pursue either of them.

古文：洪入总京营，廷议欲得如洪者代之，咸举谦。
现代文：杨洪入京统领京营后，廷臣商议要找一位代替杨洪原职的人，大家一致推举硃谦。
English: After Yang Hong entered Beijing to lead the Beijing camp, the courtiers discussed to find a person to replace Yang Hong's original position, and everyone unanimously nominated Zou Qian.

古文：乃进左都督，充总兵官，镇守宣府。
现代文：硃谦于是进升为左都督，充任总兵官，镇守宣府。
English: Therefore, Zou Qian was promoted to the left governor, appointed as the chief military officer, and became the town guard of Xuanfu.

古文：景泰元年四月，寇三百骑入石烽口，复由故道去，降敕切责。
现代文：景泰元年四月，敌军三百名骑兵从石烽口进入，又由原路离去，皇上降旨切责硃谦。
English: In April of the first year of King Taejo's reign, three hundred enemy cavalrymen entered the castle from the entrance of the stone gate, and then left by the original route. The emperor issued an order to punish and humble them.

古文：逾月，复入犯。
现代文：一个月后，敌寇再次人侵。
English: A month later, the enemy raiders invaded again.

古文：谦率兵御之，次关子口。
现代文：硃谦率兵抵御，驻扎关子口。
English: Zou Qian led the troops to resist and stationed at Guanzikou.

古文：寇数千骑突至，谦拒以鹿角，发火器击之，寇少却，如是数四。
现代文：敌寇数千骑兵突至，硃谦以鹿角阻止敌军前进，又发火器攻击，敌寇稍微后退，就这样重复了四次。
English: Thousands of enemy cavalry charged, Zou Qian used antlers to stop the enemy's advance, and fired weapons to attack, the enemy withdrew slightly, and this was repeated four times.

古文：谦军且退，寇复来追。
现代文：硃谦军将退时，敌寇又来追击。
English: When Zou Qian's army retreated, the enemy bandits came to chase them.

古文：都督江福援之，亦失利。谦卒力战，寇不得入。
现代文：都督江福来援，也失利，硃谦最后拼力奋战，敌寇才未能进入。
English: Governor Jiang Fu came to the rescue, but also lost. Zou Qian fought hard in the end, and the enemy bandits were unable to enter.

古文：六月复有二千骑南侵。
现代文：六月，又有二千敌骑南侵。
English: In June, another two thousand horsemen invaded the south.

古文：谦遣都指挥牛玺等往御，战南坡。
现代文：硃谦命都指挥朱玺等前往抵御，战于南坡。
English: Zou Qian commanded Zhu Xi and others to go to resist and fight on the south slope.

古文：谦见尘起，率参将纪广等驰援。
现代文：硃谦见灰尘四起，便率参将纪广等迅速赴援。
English: When Zou Qian saw the dust rising, he quickly went to the rescue with other generals such as Ji Guang.

古文：自巳至午，寇败遁。
现代文：从上午九时一直到中午十二时，敌寇才战败而逃。
English: From nine o'clock in the morning until twelve o'clock in the afternoon, the enemy robbers were defeated and fled.

古文：论功，封抚宁伯。
现代文：论功时，硃谦被封为抚宁伯。
English: On the basis of merit, Zou Qian was awarded the title of "Fu Ning Bo."

古文：是时，寇气甚骄，屡扰宣府、大同，意二城且旦夕下。
现代文：这时，敌寇气势十分嚣张，屡次骚乱宣府、大同，希望很快攻下二城。
English: At this time, the momentum of the enemy invaders was very arrogant, and they repeatedly rioted in Xuanfu and Datong, hoping to quickly capture the two cities.

古文：而谦守宣府，郭登守大同，数挫其众。
现代文：但硃谦防守宣府，郭登防守大同，屡挫敌军。
English: However, Zou Qian defended Xuanfu, Guo Deng defended Datong, and repeatedly defeated the enemy.

古文：也先知二人难犯，始一意归上皇。
现代文：也先才知二人难犯，这才一意送回英宗。
English: It was only when they realized that the two of them would not be able to commit the crime that they decided to send Heitor back to Japan.

古文：八月，上皇还。道宣府，谦率子永出见，厚犒其使者。
现代文：八月，英宗返回，途经宣府，硃谦率其子朱永出城拜见，重赏其使者。
English: In August, Yingzong returned, passing through Xuanfu, and Zou Qian led his son Zhu Yong out of the city to meet and reward his envoy.

古文：既而谦谬报寇五千骑毁墙入。
现代文：不久，硃谦误报有五千敌寇骑兵毁墙而人。
English: Soon, Zou Qian mistakenly reported that five thousand enemy cavalrymen had destroyed the wall.

古文：察之，则也先贡使也。
现代文：结果仔细一看，原来是也先派来的进贡使者。
English: On closer inspection, it turned out to be a tribute messenger who had been sent earlier.

古文：诏切责之，谦惶恐谢。
现代文：皇上下诏切责他，硃谦惶恐谢罪。
English: The emperor and empress sternly reprimanded him, and he humbly confessed his sins.

古文：明年二月，卒于镇。
现代文：第二年二月，硃谦死于宣府。
English: In February of the following year, Zou Qian died in Xuanfu.

古文：诏捕其门客及缮疏者下狱，停禄如初。
现代文：被赠为侯，由其子朱永承袭。硃谦守边已久，善于作战。
English: He was given as a gift and was succeeded by his son Zhu Yong. Zou Qian has been guarding the border for a long time and is good at fighting.

古文：及至南京，进保国公。乃与马士英、阮大铖相结，以讫明亡。孙镗，字振远，东胜州人。
现代文：但他勇而无谋，所以他的名声不如杨洪、石亨、郭登。成化年间，赠谥号武襄。孙镗，字振远，东胜州人。
English: But he was brave and reckless, so his reputation was not as good as that of Yang Hong, Shi Heng and Guo Deng. During the Chenghua period, he was given the posthumous name Wu Xiang.

古文：袭济阳卫指挥同知。
现代文：承袭济阳卫指挥同知之职。
English: He inherited the position of Jiyangwei's conductor and confidant.

古文：用朱勇荐，进署指挥使。
现代文：由于朱勇的推荐，他升为代理指挥使。
English: As a result of Zhu Yong's recommendation, he was promoted to acting commander.

古文：正统末，擢指挥佥事，充左参将，从总兵官徐恭讨叶宗留。
现代文：正统末年，孙镗被提拔为指挥佥事，充任左参将，跟随总兵官徐恭平定叶宗留。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, Sun Yat-sen was promoted to commander of the army and served as the left adjutant general, followed by the commander-in-chief Xu Gongping and Dingye Zongrui.

古文：败贼金华，复破之乌龙岭。
现代文：在金华打败义军后，又在乌龙岭将其击败。
English: After defeating the rebels in Jinhua, they defeated them again in Wulongling.

古文：英宗北狩，景帝召镗还，超擢都督佥事，典三千营。
现代文：英宗被俘后，景帝召回孙镗，越级提拔他为都督佥事，命他主管三千营。
English: After Yingzong was captured, Emperor Jing recalled Sun Yat-sen, promoted him to the rank of prefectural governor, and ordered him to be in charge of the three thousand battalions.

古文：也先将入犯，进右都督，充总兵官，统京军一万御之紫荆关。
现代文：也先即将进犯，孙镗进升为右都督，充任总兵官，率领一万京军前往紫荆关抵御。
English: They were also about to attack first, and Sun Yat-sen was promoted to the right-hand governor, appointed commander-in-chief, and led ten thousand Beijing troops to Bijie Pass to resist.

古文：将发，寇已入，遂营都城外。
现代文：将要出发时，敌寇已经人侵，孙镗于是在都城外扎营。
English: When they were about to set out, the enemy raiders had already invaded, so Sun Yat-sen set up camp outside the capital.

古文：寇薄德胜门，为于谦等所却，转至西直门。
现代文：敌寇逼近德胜门，被于谦等击退，又转至西直门。
English: The enemy raiders approached Desheng Gate, were repulsed by Yu Qian and others, and then turned to Xizhimen.

古文：镗与大战，斩其前锋数人。寇稍北，镗逐之，寇益兵围镗。
现代文：孙镗与之大战，斩杀数名前锋，敌寇稍退，孙镗追杀，敌寇增兵包围了孙镗。
English: Sun Yat-sen fought a big war with them, killed several forwards, the enemy bandits retreated slightly, Sun Yat-sen chased them down, and the enemy bandits surrounded Sun Yat-sen with more soldiers.

古文：镗力战不解。
现代文：孙镗拼力作战也不能突围。
English: Even if Sun Yat-sen fought hard, he could not break through.

古文：高礼、毛福寿来援，礼中流矢。
现代文：高礼、毛福寿来援，高礼被飞箭射中。
English: Gao Li and Mao Fushu came to help, and Gao Li was hit by flying arrows.

古文：会石亨兵至，寇乃退。
现代文：恰好石亨率军赶到，敌寇才撤退。
English: Just as Shi Heng and his army arrived, the enemy raiders retreated.

古文：诏镗副杨洪追之，战于涿州深沟，颇有斩获。
现代文：皇上诏令孙镗协助杨洪率军追击，与敌寇战于琢州深沟，斩获颇多。
English: The emperor ordered Sun Yat-sen to assist Yang Hong in leading the army to pursue, and fought with the enemy bandits in the deep ditch of Takuzhou, gaining quite a lot.

古文：师还，仍典营务。
现代文：回师之后，孙镗仍主管营务。
English: After returning to school, Sun Yat-sen was still in charge of the camp.

古文：景泰初，杨洪劾镗下狱。
现代文：景泰初年，杨洪将孙镗弹劾下狱。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, Yang Hong impeached Sun Yat-sen and sent him to prison.

古文：石亨请赦镗，江渊亦言城下之役，惟镗战最力，乃释之。
现代文：石亨请求赦免孙镗，江渊也说城下之役，只有孙镗战得最猛，皇上这才释放了他。
English: Shi Heng asked for a pardon for Sun Yat-sen, and Jiang Yuan also said that it was Sun Yat-sen who fought the hardest during the siege of the city, and it was only then that the emperor released him.

古文：三年冬充副总兵，协郭登镇大同。
现代文：三年冬，孙镗充任副总兵，协助郭登镇守大同。
English: In the winter of the third year, Sun Hao served as deputy commander-in-chief and assisted Guodeng Town to defend Datong.

古文：登节制严，镗不得逞，欲与分军，且令子百户宏侮登。
现代文：郭登节制极严，孙镗不能得逞，便想与他分军，并让其子百户孙宏侮辱郭登。
English: Guodeng's self-restraint was extremely strict. When Sun Yat-sen was unable to succeed, he wanted to split the army with him and have his son, Sun Hong, humiliate Guodeng.

古文：帝械宏，竟以镗故贳之。
现代文：皇上下令用镣铐拘禁孙宏，后来又因为孙镗的缘故而赦免了他。
English: The emperor ordered Sun Hong to be detained with shackles, and later pardoned him because of Sun Yat-sen.

古文：召还，典三千营如故。
现代文：孙镗应诏回京，仍旧主管三千营。
English: In response, Sun Yat-sen returned to Beijing and remained in charge of the three thousand battalions.

古文：英宗复辟，以 夺门 功封怀宁伯，寻予世券。
现代文：英宗复辟后，以 夺门 之功封孙镗为怀宁伯，随即又授予他世袭诰券。
English: After the restoration of the Yingzong, Sun Yat-sen was awarded the title of Huainingbo for his achievements in seizing the gate, and he was also awarded the hereditary vouchers.

古文：天顺初，甘肃告警，诏镗充总兵官，帅京军往讨。
现代文：天顺初年，甘肃告急，皇上诏令孙镗充任总兵官，率京军前去征讨。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Gansu was in a hurry, and the emperor ordered Sun Yat-sen to be appointed as the chief military officer and lead the Beijing army to go to collect.

古文：将陛辞，病宿朝房。
现代文：孙镗前去向皇上辞行时，因病夜宿朝房。
English: When Sun Yat-sen went to tender his resignation to the emperor, he had to spend the night at the Imperial Palace due to illness.

古文：夜二鼓，太监曹吉祥、昭武伯曹钦反。
现代文：当夜二更时分，太监曹吉祥、昭武伯曹钦谋反。
English: At two o'clock that night, the eunuchs Cao Jixiang and Zhaowu Bo Caoqin plotted a rebellion.

古文：其部下都指挥马亮告变于恭顺侯吴瑾，瑾趋语镗。
现代文：其部下都指挥马亮向恭顺侯吴瑾告变，吴瑾急忙告诉孙镗。
English: His subordinates all commanded Ma Liang to report the change to Gong Shun Hou Wu Xi, and Wu Xi hurriedly told Sun Yat-sen.

古文：镗草奏，叩东长安门，自门隙投入内廷，始得集兵缚吉祥，守皇城诸门。
现代文：孙镗草拟奏书，叩响东长安门，从门缝将奉书投人内廷，才得以招集军队捆住曹吉祥，防守皇城诸门。
English: Sun Yingcao played a piece of music, knocked on the East Chang'an Gate, and from a crack in the door threw a scroll into the inner court. Only then was he able to summon an army to tie up Cao Jixiang and defend the gates of the imperial city.

古文：镗走太平侯张瑾家，邀兵击贼，瑾不敢出。
现代文：孙镗前往太平侯张瑾家，求兵击贼，张瑾不敢派兵。
English: Sun Yat-sen went to the Taiping marquis Zhang Ye's home to ask for soldiers to fight the bandits, but Zhang Ye did not dare to send soldiers.

古文：镗仓猝复走宣武街，急遣二子辅、軏呼征西将士，绐之曰： 刑部囚反狱，获者重赏。 
现代文：孙镗又仓促赶往宣武门，急派他的两个儿子孙辅、孙軏去呼叫征西将士，哄骗他们说： 刑部囚徒逃狱，抓获者有重赏。 
English: Sun Yat-sen also hurried to the Xuanwu Gate, and dispatched his two sons, Sun Su and Sun Yat-sen, to call the Western Conquest soldiers and trick them into saying, "The prisoners of the Criminal Investigation Department have escaped from prison, and there is a big reward for those who capture them."

古文：众稍聚至二千人，始语之故。
现代文：慢慢聚集了二千人，孙镗这才告诉他们其中原故。
English: Two thousand people slowly gathered, and it was only then that Sun Yat-sen told them what had happened.

古文：时已黎明，遂击钦。
现代文：这时已是黎明，孙镗于是率领他们去攻击曹钦。
English: At this time it was already dawn, so Sun Yat-sen led them to attack Cao Qin.

古文：钦方攻东长安门，不得入，转攻东安门。
现代文：曹钦正攻打东长安门，未能攻人，转攻东安门。
English: Cao Qin was attacking the East Chang'an Gate, failed to attack, and turned to attack the East An'an Gate.

古文：镗兵追及，贼稍散。
现代文：孙镗军追至，贼军才慢慢散去。
English: Sun Yat-sen's army chased them, and the bandits slowly dispersed.

古文：軏斫钦中膊，軏亦被杀。
现代文：孙軏砍中曹钦的胳膊，孙纂也被杀。
English: Cao Qin's arm was chopped off by Sun Hao, and Sun Cao was also killed.

古文：钦知事不成，窜归其家，犹督众拒镗力战，至晡始定。
现代文：曹钦知道事情不成，便窜回家中，仍率众拼力抗拒孙镗，直到午后才被平定。
English: Cao Qin knew that things would not work out, so he went home, still leading the crowd to resist Sun Yat-sen with all his might, until he was subdued in the afternoon.

古文：论功第一，进爵世侯，仍典三千营。
现代文：论功时，孙镗为第一，进封为世袭侯爵，仍主管三千营。
English: In terms of merit, Sun Yat-sen was the first to be awarded the title of hereditary marquis, and he was still in charge of the three thousand battalions.

古文：赠軏百户，世袭。
现代文：孙軏被赠为百户，允许世袭。
English: Sun Yat-sen was given one hundred households and allowed hereditary succession.

古文：镗粗猛善战，然数犯法。
现代文：孙镗性情鲁莽，勇猛善战，但屡次犯法。
English: Sun Yat-sen was reckless, brave and good at fighting, but he repeatedly broke the law.

古文：初贿太监金英，得迁都督。
现代文：当初他贿赂太监金英，得以升为都督。
English: At first, he bribed the eunuch Jin Ying to be promoted to the governor.

古文：事觉，论斩，景帝特宥之。
现代文：事情暴露后，被判死罪，景帝特赦了他。
English: After the affair was exposed, he was sentenced to death, but Emperor Jingdi pardoned him.

古文：天顺末，以受将士贿，屡被劾。
现代文：天顺末年，他因接受将士贿赂，屡次被弹劾。
English: At the end of Tianshun, he was repeatedly impeached for accepting bribes from generals.

古文：不自安，求退。
现代文：孙镗自己心中不安，请求辞去官职。
English: Uneasy in his heart, Sun Yat-sen asked to resign from his post.

古文：诏解营务及府军前卫事，犹掌左府。
现代文：皇上下诏解除他主管营务及府军前卫事务之权，仍命他掌管左府。
English: The Emperor issued an imperial edict relieving him of the power to be in charge of camp affairs and the vanguard affairs of the prefectural army, but still ordered him to take charge of Saifu.

古文：宪宗即位，中官牛玉得罪。
现代文：宪宗即位后，宦官牛玉获罪。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, the eunuch Niuyu was found guilty.

古文：镗坐与玉婚，停禄闲住。
现代文：孙镗因与牛玉是姻亲而受牵连，被停支俸禄，闲住家中。
English: Sun Yat-sen was implicated because he and Niu Yu were relatives by marriage. He was suspended from receiving his salary and lived idly at home.

古文：兴、义、聚自有传。赵胜，字克功，迁安人。
现代文：被赠为沫国公，谥号武敏。赵胜，字克功，迁安人。
English: He was given the title of Miao Guogong and the posthumous name of Wu Min. Zhao Sheng, also known as Ke Gong, was from Qian'an.

古文：袭职为永平卫指挥使。
现代文：承袭永平卫指挥使之职。
English: He succeeds Yong Pingwei as commander and assumes his duties.

古文：正统末，御寇西直门，进都指挥佥事。
现代文：正统末年，他在西直门抵御敌寇，进升为都指挥佥事。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, he resisted the enemy invasion at Xizhimen and rose to become the commander of the capital.

古文：天顺初，与孙镗等预 夺门 功，超迁都督佥事。
现代文：天顺初年，赵胜与孙镗等参预 夺门 有功，越级升为都督佥事。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, Zhao Sheng and Sun Qian, who participated in the preliminaries, made great achievements and were promoted to the rank of prefectural governors.

古文：又与镗击反者曹钦，进同知。
现代文：他又与孙镗打击谋反者曹钦，进升为都督同知。
English: He also knew Cao Qin, who fought against the rebel plotters with Sun Yat-sen, and was promoted to the position of governor.

古文：孛来犯甘肃，胜与李杲充左右参将，从白圭西征至固原，击寇，却之。
现代文：李来侵犯甘肃，赵胜与李杲充任左、右参将，从白圭西征至固原，打击贼寇，将其击退。
English: Li Lai invaded Gansu, and Zhao Sheng and Li Yuchong were appointed as the left and right sanshin generals. They marched from the west of Baigui to Guyuan to fight against the bandits and repel them.

古文：宪宗立，典鼓勇营训练。
现代文：宪宗即位后，赵胜负责训练鼓勇营。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Gensong, Zhao Sheng was in charge of training the Drum Corps.

古文：成化改元，山西告警，拜将军。
现代文：成化改元，山西告急，赵胜被授为将军。
English: With the change of era, Shanxi was in a hurry, and Zhao Sheng was awarded the rank of general.

古文：次雁门，寇已退，乃还。
现代文：他率军驻扎雁门，当时敌寇已退，于是回师。
English: He led the army stationed in the Wild Goose Gate, when the enemy bandits had retreated, so he returned to his division.

古文：明年复出延绥御寇。
现代文：第二年，赵胜又出延绥抵御敌寇。
English: In the second year, Zhao Sheng again went to Yancheng to resist the enemy.

古文：会方纳款，遂旋师。
现代文：正遇上敌寇前来投诚，遂班师回朝。
English: Encountering an enemy corsair who was about to defect, the squadron returned to the North.

古文：寻典耀武营。
现代文：赵胜随即主管耀武营。
English: Zhao Sheng was immediately put in charge of Yaowuying.

古文：四年充总兵官，镇辽东。
现代文：四年，赵胜充任总兵官，镇守辽东。
English: For four years, Zhao Shengchong served as the chief military officer and the town guard of Liaodong.

古文：七年召典五军营，已，改三千营。
现代文：七年，他应诏主管五军营，不久，改管三千营。
English: In seven years, he was put in charge of five military camps, and soon he was put in charge of three thousand camps.

古文：癿加思兰犯宣府，诏胜为将军，统京兵万人御之，亦以寇遁召还。
现代文：扎加思兰进犯宣府，皇上下诏命赵胜为将军，统率一万京兵前往抵御，他也以敌寇逃走而应诏回京。
English: Zagasiran attacked the Xuanfu, and the emperor issued an edict ordering Zhao Sheng to become a general and lead ten thousand soldiers to defend the capital. He also fled with the enemy and returned to Beijing.

古文：久之，进左都督，加太子太保。
现代文：久之，赵胜被升为左都督，加封太子太保。
English: After a long time, Zhao Sheng was promoted to the left governor, and the crown prince and the grand tutor were added.

古文：十九年封昌宁伯。
现代文：十九年，他被封为昌宁伯。
English: In nineteen years, he was given the title of Changningbo.

古文：胜初与李杲并有名。
现代文：赵胜开始与李杲齐名。
English: Zhao Sheng began to be as famous as Li Xi.

古文：后屡督大师，未见敌，无功，夤缘得封，名大损。
现代文：后来他屡率大军，未见敌寇，没有功劳，却攀附权要，得以受封，使自己名声大损。
English: Later, he repeatedly led a large army, did not see any enemy raiders, did not have any merit, but clung to power, was able to be sealed, and made his reputation suffer greatly.

古文：后加太保，营万贵妃茔，堕崖石间死。
现代文：赵胜后被加封为太子太保，因营造万贵妃之墓，坠落于崖石间而死。
English: Zhao Sheng was later given the additional title of Crown Prince and Protector of the Realm. He died after falling from a cliff while building the tomb of Princess Mangui.

古文：赠侯，谥壮敏。
现代文：他被赠为侯，谥号壮敏。
English: He was given the posthumous name of Hou and the nickname Zhuangmin.

古文：弘治初，孙鉴乞袭爵。
现代文：弘治初年，其孙赵鉴请求继承爵位。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, his grandson Zhao Jian requested to inherit the title.

古文：吏部言胜无功，不当传世，乃授锦衣卫指挥使。
现代文：吏部却说赵胜无功，不应世袭，于是授赵鉴为锦衣卫指挥使。
English: The cadre department, however, said that Zhao Sheng was useless and should not be hereditary, so Zhao Jian was awarded the post of the commanding officer of the Imperial Guards.

古文：范广，辽东人。
现代文：范广，辽东人。
English: Fan Guang, from Liaodong Province.

古文：正统中嗣世职，为宁元卫指挥佥事，进指挥使。
现代文：正统年间，他承袭世袭职位，为宁远卫指挥佥事，后进升为指挥使。
English: During the years of orthodoxy, he inherited the hereditary position and served as the commanding officer of Ningyuanwei. Later, he was promoted to the commanding officer.

古文：十四年，积功迁辽东都指挥佥事。
现代文：十四年，他积功升至辽东都指挥佥事。
English: Fourteen years later, he rose through the ranks to command the Liaodong capital.

古文：广精骑射，骁勇绝伦。
现代文：范广精于骑射，骁勇绝伦。
English: Fan Guang is good at riding and shooting, and he is very brave.

古文：英宗北狩，廷议举将材，尚书于谦荐广。
现代文：英宗被俘后，廷臣商议推举将才时，尚书于谦推荐范广。
English: After Emperor Yingzong was captured, when the courtiers deliberated on the appointment of generals, Shang Shu recommended Fan Guang.

古文：擢都督佥事，充左副总兵，为石亨副。
现代文：范广因此被提拔为都督佥事，充任左副总兵，为石亨的副将。
English: As a result, Fan Guang was promoted to the post of prefectural governor of Anji, serving as the left deputy commander-in-chief and the vice-commander of Shiheng.

古文：也先犯京师，广跃马陷阵，部下从之，勇气百倍。
现代文：也先进犯京城，范广跃马上前，冲锋陷阵，部下紧随着他，勇气百倍。
English: He also advanced to the capital, Fan Guangyue immediately advanced, stormed the front, his subordinates followed him closely, courage a hundred times.

古文：寇退，又追败之紫荆关。
现代文：敌寇后退，范广又追至紫荆关，将敌击败。
English: The enemy corsairs retreated, and Fan Guang chased them to Bauhinia Pass and defeated them.

古文：录功，命实授。
现代文：朝廷给他记功，并实授官职。
English: The imperial court gave him a commendation and conferred an official post on him.

古文：俄进都督同知，出守怀来。
现代文：范广随即进升为都督同知，出守怀来。
English: As a result, Fan Guang was promoted to the same rank as the governor and came to defend the capital.

古文：寻召还。
现代文：随后又应诏回京。
English: Subsequently, he returned to Beijing.

古文：景泰元年二月，亨出巡边。
现代文：景泰元年二月，石亨出巡边境。
English: In February of the first year of Jing Tai, Shi Heng went out to patrol the border.

古文：时都督卫颖统大营，命广协理。
现代文：当时都督卫颖统领大营，范广奉命协理。
English: At that time, Governor Wei Ying led the large battalion, and Fan Guang was ordered to be an assistant.

古文：三月，寇犯宣府。
现代文：三月，敌寇进犯宣府。
English: In March, the enemy raiders attacked Xuanwu.

古文：敕兵部会诸营将遴选将材，佥举广。
现代文：皇上诏令兵部会合军中诸营将领遴选将才，他们一致推举范广。
English: The emperor decreed that the generals of all the battalions in the army should meet and select generals, and they unanimously selected Fan Guang.

古文：命充总兵官偕都御史罗通督兵巡哨，驻居庸关外。
现代文：于是范广奉命充任总兵官偕同都御史罗通督兵巡哨，驻扎于居庸关外。
English: As a result, Fan Guang was ordered to serve as the chief military officer and inspector of soldiers patrolling the capital city, stationed outside Juyongguan.

古文：数月还京，副石亨提督团营军马。
现代文：数月之后，他返回京城，协助石亨提督团营兵马。
English: A few months later, he returned to Beijing to assist Admiral Shi Heng in raising a battalion of soldiers.

古文：亨所为不法，其部曲多贪纵，广数以为言。
现代文：石亨所为不法，其部属大多贪财骄纵，范广多数劝说石亨。
English: Shi Heng's actions were illegal, most of his subordinates were greedy and arrogant, and most of them tried to persuade Shi Heng.

古文：亨衔之，谮罢广，止领毅勇一营。
现代文：石亨怀恨心中，制造谗言使朝廷罢免了范广，使他只能统领毅勇一营。
English: With hatred in his heart, Shi Heng fabricated slanders to make the imperial court dismiss Fan Guang, so that he could only lead Yi Yong's battalion.

古文：广又与都督张軏不相能。
现代文：范广又与都督张轧不和。
English: Fan Guang is also at loggerheads with Governor Zhang.

古文：及英宗复辟，亨、軏恃 夺门 功，诬广党附于谦，谋立外藩，遂下狱论死。
现代文：英宗复辟后，石亨、粥瓢依仗 夺门 之功，诬陷范广党附于谦，谋立外藩，于是将范广下狱，处以死刑。
English: After the restoration of Emperor Yingzong, Shi Heng and Congee Yao, relying on their success in seizing the gate, framed Fan Guang's party to attach to Qian and seek to establish a foreign domain, so they put Fan Guang in prison and sentenced him to death.

古文：子升戍广西，籍其家，以妻孥第宅赐降丁。
现代文：将其子贬戍广西，抄没其家，以其妻儿、府宅赐给降人。
English: He exiled his son to Guangxi, confiscated his house, and gave his wife, children, and mansion to the exiles.

古文：明年春，軏早朝还，途中为拱揖状。
现代文：第二年春，粥瓢早朝之后回家，在途中拱手作揖。
English: In the spring of the following year, after returning home from porridge in the early morning, he decided to make some porridge on the way.

古文：左右怪问之，曰： 范广过也。 
现代文：左右奇怪地问他，他回答说： 范广刚才经过这里。 
English: He replied, "Fan Guang just passed by here.

古文：遂得疾不能睡，痛楚月余而死。
现代文：于是便生病不能人睡，痛苦了一个多月后去世。
English: As a result, he fell ill and was unable to sleep, and died after suffering for more than a month.

古文：成化初，廷臣讼广冤。
现代文：成化初年，廷臣为范广辩冤。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, the courtiers argued for Fan Guang.

古文：命子升乃袭世职。
现代文：朝廷才命其子范升继承世袭职位。
English: The imperial court only ordered his son, Fan Sheng, to succeed to the hereditary position.

古文：广性刚果。
现代文：范广性情刚毅果敢。
English: Fan Guang's disposition is resolute and courageous.

古文：每临阵，身先士卒，未尝败衄。
现代文：每次上阵，总是身先士卒，未曾败烟，一时诸将尽在其下。
English: Every time they go into battle, they always lead the way, they have never been defeated, and for a while they will be at their mercy.

古文：一时诸将尽出其下，最为于谦所信任，以故为侪辈所忌。
现代文：他最受于谦所信任，因此为同辈所嫉妒。
English: He is most trusted by the humble and therefore envied by his peers.

古文：赞曰：杨洪、石亨辈，遭时多事，奋爪牙之力，侯封世券，照耀一门，酬庸亦过厚矣。
现代文：赞曰：杨洪、石亨等人，遭遇当时国家多事，奋勇士之力，封侯给予世袭的铁券，光彩照耀一族，酬劳也太过于丰厚了。
English: Zang said: Yang Hong, Shi Heng and others encountered many national events at that time, fought with the strength of warriors, were given hereditary iron coupons, shined with glory, and were rewarded too richly.

古文：洪知盛满可惧，而亨邪狠粗傲，怙宠而骄，其赤族宜哉。
现代文：杨洪知道盛满可怕，而石亨奸邪狠毒粗暴傲慢，恃仗宠幸而骄横，其被诛灭全族是应该的。
English: Yang Hong knew that Shengman was terrible, while Shihong was evil, cruel, rude, arrogant, arrogant, and arrogant. The whole family should have been annihilated.

古文：朱谦勇略不及郭登，登乃无后，而谦子永，进爵上公，子孙世侯勿绝。
现代文：朱谦勇猛谋略赶不上郭登，郭登没有后代，而朱谦之子朱永，晋爵上公，子孙世代为侯不绝。
English: Zhu Qian couldn't match Guo Deng's bravery and fierce strategy, and Guo Deng had no descendants, while Zhu Qian's son Zhu Yong, who was raised to the peerage, had many descendants.

古文：孙镗、范广善战略相等，而广以冤死。
现代文：孙镗、范广善战大略相等，而范广因冤屈而死。
English: Sun Yat-sen and Fan Guangshan were roughly equal, but Fan Guang died as a result of grievances.

古文：所遇有幸有不幸，相去岂不远哉！
现代文：所遇有幸有不幸，相距难道不远吗！
English: The fortunate and the unfortunate are not far apart, are they?

