古文：平公六年，箕遗及黄渊、嘉父作乱，不克而死。
现代文：晋平公六年，箕遗、黄渊、嘉父发动叛乱，没有成功就被杀了。
English: In the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Jinping, Zou You, Huang Yuan and Jiacheng launched a rebellion, which was unsuccessful and they were all killed.

古文：公遂逐群贼，谓阳毕曰： 自穆侯以至于今，乱兵不辍，民志不厌，祸败无已。
现代文：平公于是驱逐了他们的同党，对阳毕说： 自从穆侯以来到现在，叛乱没有停止过，民心不足，祸乱不断。
English: Ping Gong then expelled their co-partisans and said to Yang Bi: "Since the time of Mu Hou until now, the rebellion has not stopped, the people's will is lacking, and the calamity continues.

古文：离民且速寇，恐及吾身，若之何？ 
现代文：背弃百姓将召致外患，恐怕要落在我身上，怎么办？ 
English: If I turn my back on the people, I will invite foreign disaster, and I'm afraid it will fall on me. What should I do?

古文：阳毕对曰： 本根犹树，枝叶益长，本根益茂，是以难已也。
现代文：阳毕回答说： 祸乱的本根还树立在那里，枝叶越长，本根也就更加茂盛，因此祸乱难以止息。
English: Yang Bi replied, "The root of the calamity is still there. The longer the branches and leaves are, the more luxuriant the root is. Therefore, it is difficult to stop the calamity."

古文：今若大其柯，去其枝叶，绝其本根，可以少闲。 
现代文：现在如果用大斧，砍去它的枝叶，断绝它的本根，可以稍微平息一下。 
English: Now if you use a big axe, chop off its branches and leaves, and sever its root, you can calm it down a bit.

古文：公曰： 子实图之。 
现代文：平公说： 请你设法谋划这件事。 
English: Heigong said, "Please try to plan for this.

古文：对曰： 图在明训，明训在威权，威权在君。
现代文：阳毕回答说： 谋划的关键在于有明确的教令，明确的教令在于是否有权威，权威掌握在国君手中。
English: Yang Bi replied: The key to planning lies in having a clear edict, a clear edict lies in whether there is authority, authority is in the hands of the sovereign.

古文：君抡贤人之后有常位于国者而立之，亦抡逞志亏君以乱国者之后而去之，是遂威而远权。
现代文：国君要选择那些世代对晋国有功的贤人的后代扶持起来，还要挑出那些肆意妄为损君乱国者的后代予以驱逐，这样就能申展国君的权威，使政权长存。
English: The sovereign should select those generations to support the descendants of the sages who contributed to the glory of the Jin Dynasty, and also select the descendants of those who wantonly undermined the monarchy and ruined the country to expel them. In this way, the sovereign's authority can be asserted, and the regime can be perpetuated.

古文：民畏其威，而怀其德，莫能勿从。
现代文：百姓害怕国君的权威，怀念他的思德，就没有不服从的了。
English: The people fear the authority of the sovereign and miss his wisdom, so there is no disobedience.

古文：若从，则民心皆可畜。
现代文：如果都服从的话，那民心就可以培养教导了。
English: If everyone obeys, then the people's will can be cultivated and taught.

古文：畜其心而知其欲恶，人孰偷生？
现代文：培养教导民心而知道他们的欲望好恶，那谁还会苟且偷生呢？
English: If you cultivate and educate the hearts of the people and know their desires, likes and dislikes, then who would want to live a secret life?

古文：若不偷生，则莫思乱矣。
现代文：如果不苟且偷生，那民心就不会思乱了。
English: If you are meticulous and stealthy, then people's minds will not be confused.

古文：且夫栾氏之诬晋国久也，栾书实覆宗，弑厉公以厚其家，若灭栾氏，则民威矣，今吾若起瑕、原、韩、魏之后而赏立之，则民怀矣。
现代文：而且栾氏欺罔晋国已经很久了，栾书颠覆了晋国的大宗，杀害了厉公增加了他自家的权势。如果消灭了栾氏，那百姓就害怕国君的权威了。现在如果重新起用瑕嘉、原轸、韩万、毕万的后代，赏赐扶持他们，那么百姓就会怀念君王的恩德。
English: Moreover, it has been a long time since the Shih clan has been bullying Jin. Shih Shu subverted the majority of Jin, killed Li Gong and increased the power of his own family. If the Shih clan were eliminated, then the people would be afraid of the authority of the sovereign. Now, if the descendants of Ke Jia, Yuan Shao, Han Wan and Bi Wan were to be used again to reward and support them, then the people would miss the grace of the monarch.

古文：威与怀各当其所，则国安矣，君治而国安，欲作乱者谁与？ 
现代文：权威与怀恩各得其所的话，那国家就安定了，您治国而国家安定，尽管有想搞叛乱的人，又有谁来附和他呢？ 
English: If authority and wisdom find their place, then the country will be stable. If you govern the country, the country will be stable. Even if there are people who want to rebel, who will join them?

古文：君曰： 栾书立吾先君，栾盈不获罪，如何？ 
现代文：平公说： 栾书曾拥立我的先君，栾盈本身也并没有犯罪，怎么能够灭绝栾氏呢？ 
English: Ping Gong said: Zou Shu once supported my ancestor, and Zou Ying himself did not commit a crime. How could he exterminate the Zou clan?

古文：阳毕曰： 夫正国者，不可以暱于权，行权不可以隐于私。
现代文：阳毕回答说： 治国的人，不能只图眼前的权宜之计，谋划国家大事，不可以因为有私恩便隐蔽罪过。
English: Yang Bi replied, "A person who governs a country must not only seek immediate expedient measures and plan national events, and must not hide his sins because of personal favors.

古文：暱于权，则民不导；行权隐于私，则政不行。
现代文：只图眼前的权宜之计，百姓便得不到训导；因为有私恩便隐蔽罪过，政事便不能推行。
English: The people will not be instructed if they only think of the immediate expedient; because personal favor conceals sins, political affairs cannot be carried out.

古文：政不行，何以导民？
现代文：政事不能推行，那用什么来训导人民？
English: If you can't govern, how can you teach the people?

古文：民之不导，亦无君也，则其为暱与隐也，复害矣，且勤身。
现代文：人民不可训导，也就等于没有君主一样。只图眼前权宜之计与由于私恩而隐蔽罪过，反而害国，而且还要劳苦君主。
English: If the people cannot be instructed, it is the same as not having a ruler. If they only look for the immediate expedient and conceal their sins through favoritism, they will harm the country, and the ruler will have to work hard.

古文：君其图之。
现代文：您好好考虑考虑吧。
English: Think about it carefully!

古文：若爱栾盈，则明逐群贼，而以国伦数而遣之，厚箴戒图以待之。
现代文：如果喜爱栾盈，那就公开驱逐他的同党，用治国的大道理说明他的罪过，然后把他打发走，严厉地规诫他，防备他图谋不轨。
English: If you like Zou Ying, then you should publicly expel his fellow party members, use the great principle of governing the country to explain his sins, and then send him away, sternly admonish him, and prevent him from plotting.

古文：彼若求逞志而报于君，罪孰大焉，灭之犹少。
现代文：如果栾盈肆意妄为要报复您的话，那罪行就没有比它再大了，即使灭绝了他的宗族还嫌不够。
English: If Hao Ying wants to take revenge on you, there is no greater crime than that, even if the extermination of his people is not enough.

古文：彼若不敢而远逃，乃厚其外交而勉之，以报其德，不亦可乎？ 
现代文：如果他不敢谋反而逃到远方，那就给他所逃往的国家多送些礼物，请他们给予照顾，以此来报答他的恩德，这样做不是也可以吗？ 
English: If he did not dare to plot and instead fled far away, would it not be possible to repay his kindness by sending more gifts to the country he fled to and asking them to take care of him?

古文：公许诺，尽逐群贼而使祁午及阳毕适曲沃逐栾盈，栾盈出奔楚。
现代文：平公同意了阳毕的建议，驱逐了栾氏所有的党羽，并派祁午、阳毕到曲沃去驱逐栾盈，栾盈出奔到了楚国。
English: Ping Gong agreed to Yang Bi's suggestion and expelled all the followers of the Xing clan. He also sent Xiang Bao and Yang Bi to Quwo to expel Xing Ying, and Xing Ying fled to Chu.

古文：遂令于国人曰： 自文公以来有力于先君而子孙不立者，将授立之，得之者赏。 
现代文：平公于是对国人下令说： 自从晋文公以来，凡是对先君有功而他的子孙没有做官的，将授予爵位官职，能访得有功者子孙的给以奖赏。 
English: Ping Gong then issued an order to the people of the country, saying, "Since the ascension of Emperor Jinwen, anyone who has rendered meritorious service to the former emperor, but whose descendants have not served as officials, will be awarded a title of nobility and an official post, and those who can visit the descendants of those who have rendered meritorious service will be given a reward.

古文：居三年，栾盈昼入，为贼于绛。
现代文：过了三年，栾盈在大白天进入晋国，到首都绛城作乱。
English: Three years later, Hao Ying entered Jin Province in broad daylight and rioted in the capital, Shicheng.

古文：范宣子以公入于襄公之宫，栾盈不克，出奔曲沃，遂刺栾盈，灭栾氏。
现代文：范宣子把平公送到襄公的祀庙去避难，栾盈没有成功，逃到曲沃，于是晋军杀死了栾盈，灭掉了栾氏的族党。
English: Fan Xuan Zi sent Ping Gong to the temple of Xiang Gong to take refuge, but Pu Ying did not succeed and fled to Quwo, so the Jin army killed Pu Ying and eliminated the clan party of the Pu clan.

古文：是以没平公之身无内乱也。
现代文：因此直到平公死，晋国没有发生过内乱。
English: As a result, there was no civil unrest in Jin until the death of Ping Gong.

