古文：起阏逢摄提格，尽昭阳大渊献，凡十年。
现代文：起，止，一共十年。
English: From start to finish, a total of ten years.

古文：高皇后元年元年
现代文：高皇后元年
English: In the first year of Empress Gao

古文：冬，太后议欲立诸吕为王，问右丞相陵。陵曰： 高帝刑白马盟曰： 非刘氏而王，天下共击之。 
现代文：冬季，高太后吕雉在朝议时，提出准备册封几位吕氏外戚为诸侯王，征询右丞相王陵的意见，王陵回答说： 高帝曾与群臣杀白马饮血盟誓： 假若有不是刘姓的人称王，天下臣民共同消灭他。 
English: In the winter, when the empress dowager Lyu Qian was discussing with the imperial court, she proposed that preparations be made to anoint several maternal relatives of the Lyu clan as princes and queens, and solicited the opinion of the minister of the right, Wang Ling. Wang Ling replied: Emperor Gao had sworn with his vassals to kill and drink the blood of the white horse: If there is anyone who is not surnamed Liu who claims to be a king, all the subjects of the world will exterminate him together.

古文：今王吕氏，非约也。 
现代文：现在分封吕氏为王，不符合白马之盟所约。 
English: To crown the son of the Lü clan as king now is a violation of the oath.

古文：太后不说，问左丞相平、太尉勃，对曰： 高帝定天下，王子弟；今太后称制，王诸吕，无所不可。 
现代文：太后很不高兴，又问左丞相陈平、太尉周勃，二人回答说： 高帝统一天下，分封刘氏子弟为王；现在太后临朝管理国家，分封几位吕氏为王，没有什么不可以的。 
English: The empress dowager was very unhappy, and asked the minister of the left, Chen Ping, and the captain of the left, Zhou Bo. The two replied: Emperor Gao unified the country, and appointed the sons of the Liu clan as kings; now the empress dowager is in charge of the country, and appointed several members of the Lü clan as kings. There is nothing wrong with this.

古文：太后喜，罢朝。
现代文：太后听了很高兴。
English: The empress dowager was delighted and returned to the palace.

古文：王陵让陈平、绛侯曰； 始与高帝疌血盟，诸君不在邪？
现代文：朝议结束后，王陵责备陈平、周勃说： 当初与高皇帝饮血盟誓时，你们二位不在场吗？
English: After the conclusion of the imperial council, Wang Ling reproached Chen Ping and Zhou Bo, saying, "Weren't you two present when you swore a blood oath with Emperor Gao?

古文：今高帝崩，太后女主，欲王吕氏；诸君纵欲阿意背约，何面目见高帝于地下乎？ 
现代文：现在高帝驾崩了，太后以女主当政，要封吕氏为王，你们即使是要逢迎太后意旨而背弃盟约，可又有何脸面去见高帝于地下呢？ 
English: Now that Emperor Gao has passed away, the empress dowager is ruling with her mistress and wants to crown Lv as king. Even if you were to meet the empress dowager's wishes and renege on the covenant, how many of you would go underground to see Emperor Gao?

古文：陈平、绛侯曰： 于今，面折廷争，臣不如君；全社稷，定刘氏之后，君亦不如臣。 
现代文：陈平、周勃对王陵说： 现在，在朝廷之上当面谏阻太后，我二人确实不如您；可将来安定国家，确保高祖子孙的刘氏天下，您却不如我二人。 
English: Chen Ping and Zhou Bo said to Wang Ling, "Nowadays, when it comes to confronting the Empress Dowager in front of the imperial court, the two of us are indeed not as good as you; however, you are not as good as the two of us when it comes to stabilizing the country in the future and ensuring that Gao's descendants, the Liu family, will rule the world.

古文：陵无以应之。
现代文：王陵无言答对。
English: Wang Ling was speechless.

古文：十一月，甲子，太后以王陵为帝太傅，实夺之相权。陵遂病免归。
现代文：十一月，甲子，太后明升王陵为皇帝的太傅，实际上剥夺了他原任右丞相的实权；王陵于是称病，被免职归家。
English: In November, Emperor Gao's son, Empress Dowager Ming, promoted Wang Ling to the position of the emperor's taifu, effectively stripping him of his real power as the right-hand minister; Wang Ling then called in sick and was relieved of his duties to return home.

古文：乃以左丞相平为右丞相，以辟阳侯审食其为左丞相，不治事，令监宫中，如郎中令。
现代文：太后升左丞相陈平为右丞相；任命辟阳侯审食其为左丞相，但不执行左丞相的职权，只负责管理宫廷事务，同郎中令一样。
English: The empress dowager promoted the minister of the left, Chen Ping, to the minister of the right; appointed the minister of the left, Biyang Hou Xun, but he did not carry out the duties of the minister of the left, he was only responsible for managing the affairs of the palace, just like the middle son.

古文：食其故得幸于太后，公卿皆因而决事。
现代文：但审食其早就得到太后宠幸，公卿大臣都要通过审食其裁决政事。
English: However, the eunuch had long been favored by the empress dowager, and the court nobles and ministers had to pass the eunuch's ruling on political affairs.

古文：太后怨赵尧为赵隐王谋，乃抵尧罪。上党守任敖尝为沛狱吏，有德于太后，乃以为御史大夫。
现代文：太后对赵尧当年为高祖设谋保全赵王刘如意之事，一直耿耿于怀，便借故罗织罪名，罢免了他御史大夫的官职。上党郡的郡守任敖，曾做过沛县的狱吏，对太后有恩德，太后就任用任敖为御史大夫。
English: The empress dowager had always harbored a grudge against Zhao Yao, who had plotted for Gao Zu to preserve the wishes of Zhao Wang Liu, so she dismissed him from the post of imperial historian on the grounds that he had fabricated the charges against her. Shangdang County's county governor, Ren Yao, who had been a prison guard in Pei County, was kind to the empress dowager, and the empress appointed Ren Yao as imperial historian.

古文：太后又追尊其父临泗侯吕公为宣王，兄周吕令武侯泽为悼武王，欲以王诸吕为渐。
现代文：太后追尊其去世的父亲临泗侯吕公为宣王，追尊其兄周吕令武侯吕泽为悼武王，打算以此作为分封吕氏为王的开端。
English: The empress dowager honored the memory of her deceased father, Linyi Hou Lyu Gong, as the proclamation king, and honored the memory of her brother, Zhou Lyu Ling Wuhou Lyu Ze, as the mourning king, intending to use this as the beginning of the subordination of the Lyu clan to the king.

古文：春，正月，除三族罪、妖言令。
现代文：春季，正月，太后下令废除 三族罪 和 妖言令 。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the empress dowager ordered the abolition of the Three-Nation Crime and the Evil-Speaking Order.

古文：夏，四月，鲁元公主薨。封公主子张偃为鲁王，谥公主曰鲁元太后。
现代文：夏季，四月，太后的女儿鲁元公主去世，封公主之子张偃为鲁元王，议定公主的谥号为鲁元太后。
English: In the summer, in April, the empress dowager's daughter, Princess Lu Yuan, passed away, and the princess' son, Zhang Ye, was named King Lu Yuan. It was agreed that the princess' nickname would be Empress Dowager Lu Yuan.

古文：辛卯，封所名孝惠子山为襄城侯，朝为轵侯，武为壶关侯。
现代文：辛卯，太后晋封号称是孝惠帝之子的刘山为襄城侯，刘朝为轵侯，刘武为壶关侯。
English: Xinwu, the Dowager Empress Jingu, claimed to be the son of Emperor Xiao Hui, Liu Shan was the mayor of Xiangcheng, Liu Zha was the mayor of Jiuyuan, and Liu Wu was the mayor of Juguan.

古文：太后欲王吕氏，乃先立所名孝惠子强为淮阳王，不疑为恒山王；使大谒者张释风大臣。
现代文：太后图谋分封吕氏为王，为了安抚刘氏宗室，就先立号称是孝惠帝之子的刘强为淮阳王，刘不疑为恒山王。又指使宦官大谒者张释，委婉巧妙地向大臣们说明太后分封吕氏为王的本意。
English: The empress dowager plotted to make the Lv clan the king. In order to appease the Liu family, she first made Liu Qiang, who claimed to be the son of Emperor Xiao Hui, the king of Huaiyang, and Liu was undoubtedly the king of Hengshan. She also ordered Zhang Xie, the eunuch grand eunuch, to tactfully explain to the ministers the intention of the empress dowager to make the Lv clan the king.

古文：大臣乃请立悼武王长子郦侯台为吕王，割齐之济南郡为吕国。
现代文：于是，大臣们识趣地奏请太后立悼武王吕泽的长子郦侯吕台为吕王，把属于齐国的济南郡割出来，另立为吕国。
English: As a result, the ministers wisely asked the empress dowager to set up the eldest son of the mourning King Wu Lutzer, the eunuch Lutetia, as King Lutzer, to cut out Jinan County, which belonged to the State of Qi, and set it up as the State of Lutzer.

古文：五月，丙申，赵王宫丛台灾。
现代文：五月，丙申，赵王宫中的丛台，发生了火灾。
English: In May, a fire broke out in the pagoda of Zhao Wang's palace, Bishen.

古文：秋，桃、李华。
现代文：秋天，桃树、李树都不合时令地开了花。
English: In autumn, the peach tree and the plum tree both bloomed out of season.

古文：高皇后二年
现代文：高皇后二年
English: 2nd year of high school

古文：冬，十一月，吕肃王台薨。
现代文：冬季，十一月，吕肃王吕台去世。
English: In the winter, in November, King Lutetia of Lusu died.

古文：春，正月，乙卯，地震；羌道、武都道山崩。
现代文：春季，正月，乙卯，发生大地震；羌道、武都道山体崩裂。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, a major earthquake occurred; the mountains of Shandong and Wudu collapsed.

古文：夏，五月，丙申，封楚元王子郢客为上邳侯，齐悼惠王子章为硃虚侯，令入宿卫，又以吕禄女妻章。
现代文：夏季，五月丙申，太后封楚元王之子刘郢客为上邳侯，封齐悼惠王之子刘章为朱虚侯，令二人入宫担任侍卫，并把吕禄的女儿嫁给刘章为妻。
English: In the summer, in May, the Empress Dowager made Liu Yingke, the son of King Chu Yuan, the Prince of Shang, and Liu Zhang, the son of King Hui, the Prince of Zhu, both of whom entered the palace to serve as bodyguards, and married Lu Lu's daughter to Liu Zhang.

古文：六月，丙戌晦，日有食之。
现代文：六月丙戌晦，出现日食。
English: In the waning days of June, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：秋，七月，恒山哀王不疑薨。
现代文：秋季，七月，恒山哀王刘不疑去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, Hengshan mourned the death of King Liu.

古文：行八铢钱。
现代文：朝廷下令，发行八铢钱。
English: The court ordered the issuance of eight-baht coins.

古文：癸丑，立襄成侯山为恒山王，更名义。
现代文：癸丑，太后晋封原襄成侯刘山为恒山王，并为他改名刘义。
English: Ugly, the Empress Dowager promoted the former Xiangcheng Prince Liu Shan to the King of Hengshan, and changed his name to Liu Yi.

古文：高皇后三年
现代文：高皇后三年丙辰，公元前年
English: Empress Gao in 3 B.C.

古文：夏，江水、汉水溢，流四千余家。
现代文：夏季，长江、汉水泛滥成灾，淹没了四千多户人家。
English: In the summer, the Yangtze River and the Han River flooded, inundating more than 4,000 homes.

古文：秋，星昼见。
现代文：秋季，星星在白昼出现。
English: In autumn, the stars come out during the day.

古文：伊水、洛水溢，流千六百余家。
现代文：伊水、洛水泛滥，冲毁了一千六百多户人家的房屋。
English: The flooding of the Yishui River and the Luo River has destroyed the houses of more than 1,600 families.

古文：汝水溢，流八百余家。
现代文：汝水泛滥，冲毁了八百户人家的房屋。
English: The water overflowed and washed away the houses of eight hundred families.

古文：高皇后四年
现代文：高皇后四年
English: Four years of Queen Gao

古文：春，二月，癸未，立所名孝惠子太为昌平侯。
现代文：春季，二月，癸未，太后封立号称为孝惠帝之子的刘太为昌平侯。
English: In the spring, in February, the Empress Dowager Liu Tai, known as the son of Emperor Xiao Hui, was crowned as the Prince of Changping.

古文：夏，四月，丙申，太后封女弟嬃为临光侯。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙申，太后封立她的妹妹吕为临光侯。
English: In the summer, in April, the Empress Dowager Bishen appointed her sister Lv as the Prince of Lin.

古文：少帝浸长，自知非皇后子，乃出言曰： 后安能杀吾母而名我！
现代文：少帝渐渐长大，自知并非惠帝张皇后的儿子，就发牢骚说： 皇后怎么能杀了我的生身之母而冒充我的母亲！
English: As the young emperor grew older, he realized that he was not the son of Empress Dowager Zhang, and he complained, "How could the empress kill my biological mother and pretend to be my mother!

古文：我壮，即为变！ 
现代文：我成人之后，就要复仇！ 
English: When I grow up, I'm going to get revenge!

古文：太后闻之，幽之永巷中，言帝病，左右莫得见。
现代文：太后得知，就把少帝幽禁于后宫的永巷中，宣称少帝患病。任何人不得与少帝相见。
English: When the empress dowager learned of this, she confined the young emperor to Yongxiang in the harem and declared that the young emperor was ill. No one was allowed to meet the young emperor.

古文：太后语群臣曰： 今皇帝病久不已，失惑昏乱，不能继嗣治天下；其代之。 
现代文：太后告诉群臣说： 如今皇帝长期患病不愈，精神失常，不能继承皇统治理天下了；应该另立皇帝。 
English: The empress dowager told her courtiers: "Nowadays, the emperor has been ill for a long time and is mentally deranged. He cannot succeed to the imperial rule; a new emperor should be set up."

古文：群臣皆顿首言： 皇太后为天下齐民计，所以安宗庙、社稷甚深。群臣顿首奉诏。 
现代文：群臣都顿首回答： 皇太后的旨意，是为天下百姓着想，对于安宗庙、保国家必定产生深远影响；群臣顿首奉诏。 
English: The ministers all replied at once: The empress dowager's will is for the sake of the people of the world, and will surely have a far-reaching impact on the Anzong Temple and the protection of the country; the ministers all obeyed the edict.

古文：遂废帝，幽杀之。
现代文：于是就废掉少帝，并暗中杀死。
English: As a result, the young emperor was deposed and secretly killed.

古文：五月，丙辰，立恒山王义为帝，更名曰弘，不称元年，以太后制天下事故也。
现代文：五月，丙辰，太后立恒山王刘义为皇帝，改名为刘弘。由于太后称制治理天下，所以新皇帝即位不称元年。
English: In May, Hsin-Chen, the empress dowager, made Hengshan King Liu Yi the emperor and changed his name to Liu Hong. Since the empress dowager claimed to rule the world, the new emperor's enthronement did not take place in the first year of the year.

古文：以轵侯朝为恒山王。
现代文：太后立轵侯刘朝为恒山王。
English: The Empress Dowager appointed Prince Liu to be the King of Hengshan.

古文：是岁，以平阳侯曹窋为御史大夫。
现代文：这一年，太后任命平阳侯曹为御史大夫。
English: In this year, the empress dowager appointed Pingyang Hou Cao as the imperial historian.

古文：有司请禁南越关市、铁器。
现代文：有关官员奏请太后禁止南越国的关市中的铁器输出。
English: Officials petitioned the empress dowager to ban the export of ironware from the South Vietnamese city of Quang Tri.

古文：南越王佗曰： 高帝立我，通使物。
现代文：南越王赵佗说： 高帝立我为王，使节往来，贸易不断。
English: The king of South Vietnam, Zhao Wei, said: Emperor Gao made me king, envoys came and went, and trade continued.

古文：今高后听谗臣，别异蛮夷，隔绝器物，此必长沙王计，欲倚中国击灭南越而并王之，自为功也。 
现代文：现在高后听信谗言，视我南越为蛮夷之国，禁绝物品贸易交流；这一定是长沙王的计谋，他想倚仗朝廷的势力击灭我南越国，统治长沙和南越两国之地，自己立功。 
English: Now, Queen Gao listens to the advice, regards my South Vietnam as a barbarian country, and forbids the exchange of goods. This must be the strategy of the King of Changsha, who wants to rely on the power of the imperial court to destroy my South Vietnam, rule the land of Changsha and South Vietnam, and make his own contribution.

古文：高皇后五年
现代文：高皇后五年戊午，公元前年
English: Empress Gao in the 5th year of the Bo era, BC

古文：春，佗自称南越武帝，发兵攻长沙，败数县而去。
现代文：春季，赵佗自称南越武帝，发兵进攻长沙国，打败几个县的守军之后离去。
English: In the spring, Zhao Wei, who called himself Emperor Wu of South Vietnam, sent troops to attack Changsha Province, defeated the defenders in several counties, and then left.

古文：秋，八月，淮阳怀王强薨，以壶关侯武为淮阳王。
现代文：秋季，八月，淮阳王刘强去世，太后立壶关侯刘武为淮阳王。
English: In the autumn, in August, Liu Qiang, King of Huaiyang, died, and the Empress Dowager made Liu Wu, Prince of Guanzhou, King of Huaiyang.

古文：九月，发河东、上党骑屯北地。
现代文：九月，征发河东郡和上党郡的骑兵，屯守北地郡。
English: In September, the cavalry of the Eastern and Western parties were transferred to the North.

古文：初令戍卒岁更。
现代文：朝廷首次下令实行戍卒每年一轮换的制度。
English: For the first time, the Imperial Court ordered the implementation of a system of annual rotation of courtesans.

古文：高皇后六年
现代文：高皇后六年
English: High school queen gets six years

古文：冬，十月，太后以吕王嘉居处骄恣，废之。
现代文：冬季，十月，太后因为吕王吕嘉在生活上骄恣乱法，废其王位。
English: In the winter, in October, the empress dowager abdicated the throne because King Lujia of Lü was arrogant and lawless in his life.

古文：十一月，立肃王弟产为吕王。
现代文：十一月，太后改立吕肃王吕台的弟弟吕产为吕王。
English: In November, the empress dowager changed the name of King Lyu Su to King Lyu Sang, the younger brother of King Lyu Tai.

古文：春，星昼见。
现代文：春季，星星白昼出现于天空。
English: In spring, stars appear in the sky during the day.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，赦天下。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁酉，大赦天下。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Zhen, the great amnesty.

古文：封硃虚侯章弟兴居为东牟侯，亦入宿卫。
现代文：太后封朱虚侯刘章的弟弟刘兴居为东牟侯，又诏令他参预宫廷宿卫。
English: Liu Xingju, the younger brother of Liu Zhang, the Empress Dowager's vassal of Zhu Xiu, was made the vassal of Dong Mou, and he was also ordered to join the palace guards.

古文：匈奴寇狄道，攻阿阳。
现代文：匈奴侵略狄道，进攻阿阳。
English: The Xiongnu invaded Dido and attacked Heyang.

古文：行五分钱。
现代文：朝廷下令，发行五分钱。
English: exercise of the five-cent piece.

古文：宣平侯张敖卒，赐谥曰鲁元王。
现代文：宣平侯张敖去世，赐谥号为鲁元王。
English: Xuanping marquis Zhang Ye passed away, and he was given the title of Lu Yuan Wang.

古文：高皇后七年
现代文：高皇后七年
English: Seven years of Queen Gao

古文：冬，十二月，匈奴寇狄道，略二千馀人。
现代文：冬季，十二月，匈奴发兵进攻狄道，掳掠去两千多人。
English: In winter, in December, the Huns attacked Didao, taking more than two thousand people captive.

古文：春，正月，太后召赵幽王友。
现代文：春季，正月，太后召赵幽王刘友进京。
English: In the first month of spring, the empress dowager summoned Zhao Youwang Liu You to Beijing.

古文：友以诸吕女为后，弗爱，爱他姬。
现代文：刘友娶吕家之女为王后，但不爱她，而爱其他姬妾。
English: Liu You married the daughter of the Lyu family as a queen, but he did not love her, but loved other concubines.

古文：诸吕女怒，去，谗之于太后曰： 王言 吕氏安得王！
现代文：这位吕姓王后一怒之下，离开赵国，向太后诬告刘友说： 赵王曾说： 吕氏怎么能称王！
English: In a fit of anger, the queen, surnamed Lv, left Zhao and falsely accused Liu You to the empress dowager, saying: Zhao Wang once said: How can the Lv clan be called a king!

古文：太后百岁后，吾必击之。  
现代文：待太后百年之后，我必定击灭吕氏。  
English: After waiting for the empress dowager for a hundred years, I will surely destroy the Lv clan.

古文：太后以故召赵王，赵王至，置邸，不得见，令卫围守之，弗与食；其群臣或窃馈，辄捕论之。
现代文：太后因此召赵王。赵王刘友到京，被安置于官邸中，见不到太后。太后令卫士包围其官邸，断绝饮食供应；赵国群臣有悄悄去给刘友偷送饮食的，一概逮捕论罪。
English: The empress dowager therefore summoned Zhao Wang. Zhao Wang Liu You came to Beijing and was placed in the official residence, unable to see the empress dowager. The empress dowager ordered the guards to surround her official residence and cut off the supply of food and drink; if any of Zhao Guo's ministers secretly went to smuggle food and drink to Liu You, they would all be arrested and tried.

古文：丁丑，赵王饿死，以民礼葬之长安民冢次。
现代文：丁丑，赵王刘友饿死，按平民的礼仪，葬于长安城外的平民墓地。
English: Ding Ugly and Zhao Wang Liu You starved to death and were buried in a civilian cemetery outside Chang'an City according to civilian etiquette.

古文：己丑，日食，昼晦。
现代文：己丑，发生日食，白昼之时一片晦暗。
English: On the 30th day, the sun will be eclipsed, and the daytime will be dark.

古文：太后恶之，谓左右曰： 此为我也！ 
现代文：太后很厌恶这次日食，对左右侍从说： 这是因为我而发生的！ 
English: The Empress Dowager detested the eclipse and said to her attendants: "It happened because of me!"

古文：二月，徙梁王恢为赵王，吕王产为梁王。
现代文：二月，太后改封梁王刘恢为赵王，改封吕王吕产为梁王。
English: In February, the empress dowager changed the title of Liang Wang Liu Wei to Zhao Wang, and the title of Lv Wang Lv Sheng to Liang Wang.

古文：梁王不之国，为帝太傅。
现代文：梁王吕产并不到封国去，而在朝中做皇帝太傅。
English: Liang Wang Lushan did not go to the feudal state, but became the Emperor Taifu in the court.

古文：秋，七月，丁巳，立平昌侯太为济川王。
现代文：秋季，七月，丁巳，太后立平昌侯刘太为济川王。
English: In the autumn, in July, Ding Si, the empress dowager, established the Pyeongchang marquess Liu Tai as the king of Jecheon.

古文：吕嬃女为将军、营陵侯刘泽妻。
现代文：吕之女是将军、营陵侯刘泽的妻子。
English: Lv's daughter is the wife of Liu Ze, a general and the commander of the camp.

古文：泽者，高祖从祖昆弟也。
现代文：刘泽是高祖的远支堂弟。
English: Liu Ze is Gao Zu's distant cousin.

古文：齐人田生为之说大谒者张卿曰： 诸吕之王也，诸大臣未大服。
现代文：齐人田生为刘泽向大谒者张卿说： 太后封诸吕为王，诸位大臣并不全都心服。
English: Qi Rong Tian Sheng, Liu Zhe's assistant, said to Zhang Jing, the person who made the decision to abdicate, "The Empress Dowager has made Zhu Lyu the king, and the ministers are not all convinced.

古文：今营陵侯泽，诸刘最长；今卿言太后王之，吕氏王益固矣。 
现代文：营陵侯刘泽，在刘氏宗室中年龄最长，如果你现在能向太后建议封刘泽为王，那么，吕氏受封为王的格局就会更加稳定了。 
English: Liu Ze, the lord of Yingling, is the oldest member of the Liu family. If you can now suggest to the empress dowager that Liu Ze be crowned king, then the pattern of Lv's crowning will be more stable.

古文：张卿入言太后，太后然之，乃割齐之琅邪郡封泽为琅邪王。
现代文：张卿入宫报告太后，太后以为很有道理，就分割齐国的琅邪郡为诸侯国，封刘泽做了琅邪王。
English: Zhang Qing entered the palace to report to the empress dowager, and the empress dowager thought it was very reasonable, so she divided the evil counties of Qi into vassal states, and made Liu Ze the evil king.

古文：赵王恢之徙赵，心怀不乐。
现代文：赵王刘恢自从被改封到赵地之后，心情郁郁不乐。
English: Zhao Wang Liu Wei has been in a gloomy mood since he was transferred to Zhao Di.

古文：太后以吕产女为王后，王后从官皆诸吕，擅权，微伺赵王，赵王不得自恣。
现代文：太后把吕产的女儿配给刘恢为王后，王后左右从官都是吕氏，擅权干政，并暗地监视赵王言行，赵王不能自己做主，处处受到限制。
English: The empress dowager assigned the daughter of Liusan to Liu Hui as the queen. The officials around the queen were all from the Liusi clan. They had the power to interfere in politics and secretly monitored Zhao Wang's words and deeds. Zhao Wang could not make decisions on his own and was restricted everywhere.

古文：王有所爱姬，王后使人鸩杀之。
现代文：赵王宠爱的一个美姬，也被王后派人用毒酒毒死。
English: One of Zhao Wang's favorites, Mei Ji, was also poisoned with poisoned wine by the queen.

古文：六月，王不胜悲愤，自杀。
现代文：六月，赵王刘恢无法克制悲愤而自杀。
English: In June, Zhao Wang Liu Wei could not control his grief and anger and committed suicide.

古文：太后闻之，以为王用妇人弃宗庙礼，废其嗣。
现代文：太后闻知此事，认为赵王因一妇人而轻弃事奉宗庙的大礼，不许他的后人继承赵国王位。
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she thought that King Zhao had abandoned the ancestral etiquette for the sake of a woman, and would no longer allow his descendants to inherit the throne.

古文：是时，诸吕擅权用事。硃虚侯章，年二十，有气力，忿刘氏不得职。
现代文：这一时期，诸吕把持朝政；朱虚侯刘章，年方二十，身强力壮，对刘氏宗室不能执掌政权心怀不满。
English: During this period, Zhu Lv was in charge of the imperial government; Zhu Xuhou Liu Zhang, who was twenty years old and physically strong, was dissatisfied with the inability of the Liu family to hold power.

古文：尝入侍太后燕饮，太后令章为酒吏。
现代文：他曾经在后宫侍奉太后参加酒宴，太后令刘章为监酒官。
English: He once served the Empress Dowager at a wine banquet in the harem, and the Empress Dowager appointed Liu Zhang as the overseer.

古文：章自请曰： 臣将种也，请得以军法行酒。 
现代文：刘章自己请求说： 我本是将门之后，请太后允许我按军法监酒。 
English: Liu Zhang himself pleaded: "I am the commander-in-chief, please ask the empress dowager to allow me to serve wine according to military law."

古文：太后曰： 可。 
现代文：太后回答： 可以。 
English: The Empress Dowager replied: "Yes."

古文：酒酣，章请为《耕田歌》，太后许之。
现代文：酒酣之时，刘章请求吟唱一首《耕田歌》；太后准许。
English: While drinking wine, Liu Zhang asked to sing a "Cultivation Song"; the Empress Dowager approved.

古文：章曰： 深耕穊种，立苗欲疏；非其种者，锄而去之！ 
现代文：刘章吟唱道： 深耕播种，株距要疏；不是同种，挥锄铲除！ 
English: Liu Zhang chanted: deep ploughing and sowing, plant spacing should be sparse; not the same species, waving the plough to eradicate!

古文：太后默然。
现代文：太后知其歌中所指，默然无语。
English: The empress dowager listened in silence.

古文：顷之，诸吕有一人醉，亡酒，章追，拔剑斩之而还，报曰： 有亡酒一人，臣谨行法斩之！ 
现代文：一会儿，参加宴席的诸吕中有一人醉酒，避席离去，刘章追上来，拔剑斩了此人，还报太后说： 有一人逃酒而走，我以军法将他处斩！ 
English: After a while, one of the Zhu Lius who were attending the banquet got drunk and left the table. Liu Zhang caught up with him, drew his sword and beheaded the man. He also reported to the Empress Dowager: "There is a man who ran away from drinking, I will execute him according to military law!"

古文：太后左右皆大惊，业已许其军法，无以罪也，因罢。
现代文：太后及左右人等都大吃一惊，但因业已同意他以军法监酒，也就无法将他治罪；于是散度。
English: The empress dowager and those around her were taken aback, but since they had already agreed to let him serve his sentence under military law, they could not punish him; so they let him go.

古文：自是之后，诸吕惮硃虚侯，虽大臣皆依硃虚侯，刘氏为益强。
现代文：从此之后，诸吕都很惧怕朱虚侯刘章，即便是朝廷大臣也都要倚重他，刘氏宗室的势力由此而增强。
English: From then on, Zhu Xiu and Liu Zhang, Prince of Zhu Xiu, were feared by all the princes of Lü, and even the ministers of the imperial court had to rely on him. As a result, the power of the Liu family was strengthened.

古文：陈平患诸吕，力不能制，恐祸及己。
现代文：陈平担忧诸吕横暴，自己又无力制止，恐怕大祸临头，曾独居静室，苦思对策。
English: Chen Ping was worried about Zhu Lv's violence and his inability to stop it. Fearing that a catastrophe was imminent, he once lived alone in a quiet room and thought hard about countermeasures.

古文：尝燕居深念，陆贾往，直入坐，而陈丞相不见。
现代文：恰在此时陆贾来访，未经通报直入室中坐下，陈丞相正苦思冥想，竟未察觉。
English: Just at this time, Lu Jia came to visit and sat down in the room without notice. Chen Zhengxiang was thinking hard, but he did not notice.

古文：陆生曰： 何念之深也！ 
现代文：陆贾说： 丞相思虑何事，竟然如此全神贯注！ 
English: Lu Jia said, "What are you thinking about, you are so engrossed!"

古文：陈平曰： 生揣我何念？ 
现代文：陈平说： 先生猜测我思虑何事？ 
English: Chen Ping said: Guess what I'm worried about?

古文：陆生曰： 足下极富贵，无欲矣；然有忧念，不过患诸吕、少主耳。 
现代文：陆贾说： 您富贵无比，不会有什么欲望了；但是，您却有忧虑，不外乎是担心诸吕和皇上年幼罢了。 
English: Lu Jia said, "You are extremely wealthy and have no desires; however, you do have worries, nothing more than worrying about Zhu Lu and the emperor's young age.

古文：陈平曰： 然！
现代文：陈平说： 先生猜得对。
English: Chen Ping said: The teacher guessed correctly.

古文：为之奈何？ 
现代文：此事应该怎么办呢？ 
English: If I let you go, I'll lose a meal.

古文：陆生曰： 天下安，注意相；天下危，注意将。
现代文：陆贾说： 天下安，注意相；天下危，注意将。
English: Lu Jia said: When the world is at peace, we should pay attention to it; when the world is in danger, we should pay attention to it.

古文：将相和调，则士豫附；天下虽有变，权不分。
现代文：将与相关系和谐，士人就会归附；天下即使有重大变故，大权也不会被瓜分。
English: If the relationship is harmonious, the scholars will adhere to it; even if there are major changes in the world, the great power will not be divided.

古文：为社稷计，在两君掌握耳。
现代文：安定国家的根本大计，就在你们二位文武大臣掌握之中。
English: Considering the great cause of the country, this matter is in the hands of you and Zhou Bo.

古文：臣常欲谓太尉绛侯，绛侯与我戏，易吾言。
现代文：我曾想对太尉绛侯周勃说明这一利害关系，绛侯平素与我常开玩笑，不会重视我的话。
English: I often wanted to make these words clear to Lieutenant Zhou Bo, but he always joked with me and did not pay much attention to my words.

古文：君何不交欢太尉，深相结？ 
现代文：丞相为何不与太尉交好，密崐切联合呢！ 
English: Why doesn't the chancellor make friends with the captain and form a close alliance?

古文：因为陈平画吕氏数事。
现代文：接着陆贾为陈平谋划将来平定诸吕的几个关键问题。
English: Next, Lu Jia planned several key issues for Chen Ping to pacify Zhu Lu in the future.

古文：陈平用其计，乃以五百金为绛侯寿，厚具乐饮；太尉报亦如之。
现代文：陈平采纳陆贾的计谋，用五百斤黄金为绛侯周勃祝寿，举办丰盛的宴席，太尉周勃也以同样的礼节回报。
English: Chen Ping adopted Lu Jia's stratagem and held a sumptuous banquet with five hundred catties of gold to celebrate Zhou Bo's birthday, and Taifeng Zhou Bo also reciprocated with the same courtesy.

古文：两人深相结，吕氏诸益衰。
现代文：陈平与周勃互相紧密团结，吕氏图谋篡国的心气渐渐衰减。
English: Chen Ping and Zhou Bo were closely united with each other, and Lu's spirit of plotting to usurp the country gradually waned.

古文：陈平以奴婢百人、车马五十乘、钱五百万遗陆生为饮食费。
现代文：陈平送给陆贾一百个奴婢、五十乘车马、五百万钱做为饮食费。
English: Chen Ping gave Lu Jia a hundred slaves, fifty chariots and horses, and five million yuan for food expenses.

古文：太后使使告代王，欲徙王赵。
现代文：太后派使臣告知代王刘恒，准备改封他到赵国为王。
English: The empress dowager sent an envoy to inform the acting king, Liu Heng, that she was preparing to change his title to king of Zhao.

古文：代王谢之，愿守代边。
现代文：代王谢绝了，自称愿守代地边境。
English: The acting king declined, saying that he was willing to guard the border on his behalf.

古文：太后乃立兄子吕禄为赵王，追尊禄父建成康侯释之为赵昭王。
现代文：于是，太后封立其兄之子吕禄为赵王，追尊吕禄的父亲建成侯吕释之为赵昭王。
English: As a result, the empress dowager crowned her brother's son, Lulu, as Zhao Wang, and named Lulu's father, Jiancheng Hou Liusi, as Zhao Zhao Wang.

古文：九月，燕灵王建薨，有美人子，太后使人杀之。
现代文：九月，燕王刘建去世；刘建本有美人所生一子，太后派人将其子杀死。
English: In September, Yan Wang Liu Jian died; Liu Jian had a son by a beautiful woman, and the Empress Dowager sent someone to kill his son.

古文：国除。
现代文：燕国被废除。
English: His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：遣隆虑侯周灶将兵击南越。
现代文：太后派遣隆虑侯周灶领兵进攻南越国。
English: The empress dowager dispatched Prince Zhou Zhao to lead the troops to attack South Vietnam.

古文：高皇后八年
现代文：高皇后八年
English: Eight years of Queen Gao

古文：冬，十月，辛丑，立吕肃王子东平侯通为燕王，封通弟庄为东平侯。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛丑，太后封立吕肃王之子东平侯吕通为燕王；封吕通之弟吕庄为东平侯。
English: In the winter, October, Xinwuxi, the Dowager Empress appointed the son of King Lv Su, Dongping Marquis Lv Tong, as the Prince of Yan; the younger brother of Lv Tong, Lv Zhuang, as the Dongping Marquis.

古文：三月，太后礻犮，还，过轵道，见物如苍犬，撠太后掖，忽不复见。
现代文：三月，太后参加了除恶的祭仪后还宫，途经轵道，见到类似于灰狗的动物，猛扑太后腋窝，转眼间消失不再出现。
English: In March, the empress dowager was returning to the palace after taking part in a ceremony to eliminate evil. While passing through a side street, she saw an animal similar to a greyhound, which pounced on the empress dowager's armpit and disappeared in the blink of an eye.

古文：卜之，云 赵王如意为祟 。
现代文：太后令人占卜此事，回答说： 这是赵王刘如意在闹鬼。 
English: The empress dowager asked for a divination on the matter, and replied: This is Zhao Wang Liu Ruyi being haunted.

古文：太后遂病掖伤。
现代文：从此，太后腋窝伤痛不止。
English: Since then, the Empress Dowager's armpit has been in constant pain.

古文：太后为外孙鲁王偃年少孤弱，夏，四月，丁酉，封张敖前姬两子侈为新都侯，寿为乐昌侯，以辅鲁王。
现代文：太后因为外孙鲁王张偃年少孤弱，夏季，四月，丁酉，封张敖姬妾所生二子张侈为新都侯、张寿为乐昌侯，以辅助鲁王张偃。
English: The empress dowager, because her grandchild Lu Wang Zhang Ye was too young and weak, in the summer, April, Ding Ye, Zhang Ye Ji's concubine's second son Zhang Yi was the new capital, and Zhang Shou was the capital of Lechang, to assist Lu Wang Zhang Ye.

古文：又封中大谒者张释为建陵侯，以其劝王诸吕，赏之也。
现代文：太后又封中大谒者张释为建陵侯，以奖赏他从前劝大臣奏请封立诸吕为王的功劳。
English: The empress dowager also made Zhang Xizhi, a member of the Central Great Council of State, the governor of Jianling, as a reward for his service in persuading the minister to petition for the enthronement of Zhu Lv as king.

古文：江、汉水溢，流万馀家。
现代文：长江、汉水泛滥成灾，冲毁了一万多户百姓家园。
English: The Yangtze River and the Han River flooded, destroying the homes of more than 10,000 people.

古文：秋，七月，太后病甚，乃令赵王禄为上将军，居北军；吕王产居南军。
现代文：秋季，七月，太后病重，于是下令任命赵王吕禄为上将军，统领北军；吕王吕产统领南军。
English: In the autumn, in July, the empress dowager was seriously ill, so she ordered the appointment of Zhao Wang Lulu as a general to lead the Northern Army; Lyu Wang Liushong led the Southern Army.

古文：太后诫产、禄曰： 吕氏之王，大臣弗平。
现代文：太后告诫吕产、吕禄说： 封立吕氏为王，大臣心中多不服。
English: The empress dowager admonished Lü Sheng and Lü Lu, saying, "Many ministers are not satisfied with the enthronement of the Lü clan as king.

古文：我即崩，帝年少，大臣恐为变。
现代文：我就要去世，皇帝年幼，恐怕大臣们乘机向吕氏发难。
English: I am about to die, the emperor is still young, and I am afraid that the ministers will start a rebellion.

古文：必据兵卫宫，慎毋送丧，为人所制！ 
现代文：你们务必要统率禁军，严守宫廷，千万不要为送丧而轻离重地，以免被人所制！ 
English: You must be sure to lead the forbidden army, strictly guard the palace, and never leave the important place lightly for the funeral, so as not to be controlled by others!

古文：辛巳，太后崩，遗诏：大赦天下，以吕王产为相国，以吕禄女为帝后。
现代文：辛巳，太后去世，留下遗诏：大赦天下，命吕王吕产为相国，以吕禄之女为皇后。
English: Soon after, the empress dowager passed away, leaving a last will and testament: to grant amnesty to the whole world, to appoint King Lyu of Lushan as a sister country, and to make Lulu's daughter the empress.

古文：高后已葬，以左丞相审食其为帝太傅。
现代文：高后丧事处理完毕，朝廷改任左丞相审食其为皇帝太傅。
English: After the burial of Gao Hou, he was crowned as the emperor's grand tutor by the left prime minister.

古文：诸吕欲为乱，畏大臣绛、灌等，未敢发。
现代文：诸吕打算作乱，因惧怕大臣周勃、灌婴等人，未敢贸然行事。
English: Zhu Lü intended to cause a disturbance, but he did not dare to act rashly for fear of the ministers Zhou Bo and Huan Ying and others.

古文：硃虚侯以吕禄女为妇，故知其谋，乃阴令人告其兄齐王，欲令发兵西，硃虚侯、东牟侯为内应，以诛诸吕，立齐王为帝。
现代文：朱虚侯刘章娶吕禄之女为妻，所以得知吕氏的阴谋，就暗中派人告知其兄齐王刘襄，让齐王统兵西征，朱虚侯、东牟侯为他做内应，图谋诛除吕氏，立齐王为皇帝。
English: Zhu Xiu marries Liu Zhang, the daughter of Lu Lu, so when he learns of Lu's plot, he secretly sends someone to inform his brother, Qi Wang Liu Xiang, to let Qi Wang lead the army to the west, Zhu Xiu and Dong Mou do the inner work for him, and try to remove Lu and make Qi Wang the emperor.

古文：齐王乃与其舅驷钧、郎中令祝午、中尉魏勃阴谋发兵。
现代文：齐王就与他舅父驷钧、郎中令祝午、中尉魏勃暗中密谋发兵。
English: King Qi secretly conspired with his uncle Zhai, his second-in-command Zhuo, and his lieutenant Wei Bo to send troops.

古文：齐相召平弗听。
现代文：齐相召平反对举兵。
English: They all called for peace and opposed the raising of troops.

古文：八月，丙午，齐王欲使人诛相。相闻之，乃发卒卫王宫。
现代文：八月，丙午，齐王准备派人杀国相召平；召平得知，就发兵包围了王宫。
English: In August, on the afternoon of the third day, King Qi was preparing to send someone to assassinate the king and summon Ping. When Ping learned of the summoning, he sent troops to surround the royal palace.

古文：魏勃绐召平曰： 王欲发兵，非有汉虎符验也。
现代文：魏勃欺骗召平说： 齐王没有汉朝廷的发兵虎符，就要发兵，崐这是违法的。
English: Wei Bo lied to Ping Zhao and said: The great king wants to send troops, but there is no imperial tiger symbol verification.

古文：而相君围王固善，勃请为君将兵卫王。 
现代文：您发兵包围了齐王本是对的，我请求为您带兵入宫软禁齐王。 
English: You were right to send troops to surround King Qi. I request that you take the troops to the palace and place King Qi under house arrest.

古文：召平信之。
现代文：召平信以为真，让魏勃指挥军队。
English: He took Pingxin's summons to be true and allowed Wei Bo to command the army.

古文：勃既将兵，遂围相府，召平自杀。
现代文：魏勃掌握统兵权之后，就命令包围相府；召平自杀。
English: After Wei Bo seized the power of commanding the army, he ordered the encirclement of the cabinet of ministers; Zhao Ping then committed suicide.

古文：于是齐王以驷钧为相，魏勃为将军，祝午为内史，悉发国中兵。
现代文：于是，齐王命驷钧为相，魏勃为将军，祝午为内史，征发齐国的全部兵员。
English: As a result, the king of Qi was appointed as the prime minister, Wei Bo as the general, and Zhu Niao as the internal historian, and all the soldiers of Qi were conscripted.

古文：使祝午东诈琅邪王曰： 吕氏作乱，齐王发兵欲西诛之。
现代文：齐王派祝午到东面的琅邪国，欺骗琅邪王刘泽说： 吕氏在京中发动变乱，齐王发兵，准备西入关中诛除吕氏。
English: He sent Zhu Yu to the east to deceive the evil king, saying, "The people of the Lv clan rebelled, and the king of Qi sent soldiers to the west to fight and kill them.

古文：齐王自以年少，不习兵革之事，愿举国委大王。
现代文：齐王因为自己年轻，又不懂得军旅战阵之事，自愿把整个齐国听命于大王的指挥。
English: King Qi, because he was young and did not know how to lead an army in battle, voluntarily put the whole of Qi under the command of the great king.

古文：大王，自高帝将也。请大王幸之临菑，见齐王计事。 
现代文：大王您在高祖时就已统兵为将，富有军事经验；请大王光临齐都临淄，与齐王面商大事。 
English: Great King, when you were Gaozu, you were already a general and had rich military experience. Please come to Linyi, the capital of Qi, and meet with King Qi to discuss important matters.

古文：琅邪王信之，西驰见齐王。
现代文：琅邪王信以为真，迅速赶往临淄见齐王。
English: Believing it to be true, he quickly rushed to Linyi to see King Qi.

古文：齐王因留琅邪王，而使祝午尽发琅邪国兵，并将之。
现代文：齐王乘机扣留了琅邪王，而指令祝午全部征发琅邪国的兵员，一并由自己统领。
English: King Qi seized the opportunity to detain the evil king, and ordered that all the soldiers of the evil country should be sent out in the afternoon, and they should be led by himself.

古文：琅邪王说齐王曰： 大王，高皇帝適长孙也，当立。今诸大臣狐疑未有所定，而泽于刘氏最为长年，大臣固待泽决计。
现代文：琅邪王对齐王说： 大王是高皇帝的嫡长孙，应当立为皇帝；现在朝中大臣对立谁为帝犹豫不定，而我在刘氏宗室中年龄最大，大臣们本当等着由我决定择立皇帝的大计。
English: The evil king said to the king of Qi: The great king is the eldest grandson of Emperor Gao, and should be made emperor; now the ministers of the dynasty are hesitant to oppose who will be the emperor, and I am the oldest in the Liu family, the ministers are really waiting for me to decide on the grand plan of electing the emperor.

古文：今大王留臣，无为也，不如使我入关计事。 
现代文：现在大王留我在此处，我无所作为，不如让我入关计议立帝之事。 
English: Now that the great king is keeping me here, and I'm doing nothing, it's better to let me go to the gate to discuss the matter of establishing the emperor.

古文：齐王以为然，乃益具车送琅邪王。
现代文：齐王认为他说得有道理，就准备了许多车辆为琅邪王送行。
English: King Qi thought it was right and prepared many cars to take the evil king to the imperial court.

古文：琅邪王既行，齐遂举兵西攻济南。遗诸侯王书，陈诸吕之罪，欲举兵诛之。
现代文：琅邪王走后，齐王就出兵向西攻济南国；齐王还致书于各诸侯王，历数吕氏的罪状，表明自己起兵灭吕的决心。
English: After the departure of the evil king, King Qi sent troops to the west to attack Jinan Province; King Qi also sent a letter to the princes of various states, listing the crimes of the Lv clan and expressing his determination to raise an army to destroy Lv.

古文：相国吕产等闻之，乃遣颍阴侯灌婴将兵击之。
现代文：相国吕产等人闻讯齐王举兵，就派颍阴侯灌婴统兵征伐。
English: When the people of the neighboring country, Lushan, and others heard that the king of Qi had raised an army, they sent the soldiers of the unified army of Jianyin, Hou, and Han to conquer the country.

古文：灌婴至荥阳，谋曰： 诸吕拥兵关中，欲危刘氏而自立。
现代文：灌婴率军行至荥阳，与其部下计议说： 吕氏在关中手握重兵，图谋篡夺刘氏天下，自立为帝。
English: Guanzhong led the army to Fenyang, and discussed with his subordinates: "The Lü clan is holding a heavy army in Guanzhong, plotting to usurp the Liu clan from the world and establish themselves as emperors.

古文：今我破齐还报，此益吕氏之资也。 
现代文：如果我们现在打败齐军，回报朝廷，这就增强了吕氏的力量。 
English: If I now defeat Qi's army and return to fulfill my mission, this will further strengthen the power of the Lü clan.

古文：乃留屯荥阳，使使谕齐王及诸侯与连和，以待吕氏变，共诛之。
现代文：于是，灌婴就在荥阳屯兵据守，并派人告知齐王和诸侯，约定互相联合，静待吕氏发起变乱，即一同诛灭吕氏。
English: As a result, Gan Zi took up a garrison in Fenyang, and sent someone to inform King Qi and the princes that they had agreed to unite with each other and wait for the Lv clan to initiate a rebellion, that is, to destroy the Lv clan together.

古文：齐王闻之，乃还兵西界待约。
现代文：齐王得知此意，就退兵到齐国的西部边界，待机而动。
English: After King Qi heard the news, he withdrew his army to the western border of Qi, waited for the news, and acted according to the agreement.

古文：吕禄、吕产欲作乱，内惮绛侯、硃虚等，外畏齐、楚兵，又恐灌婴畔之。欲待灌婴兵与齐合而发，犹豫未决。
现代文：吕禄、吕产想发起变乱，但内惧朝中绛侯周勃、朱虚侯刘章等人，外怕齐国和楚国等宗室诸王的重兵，又恐手握军权的灌婴背叛吕氏，打算等灌婴所率汉兵与齐军交战之后再动手，所以犹豫未决。
English: Lulu and Liusan wanted to start a rebellion, but they were afraid of the middle-ranking vassals of the dynasty, such as Zhou Bo and Zhu Xuchang, as well as the powerful soldiers of the royal families of the states of Qi and Chu. They were also afraid that Gu Ying, who held the military power, would betray the Lv clan. They planned to wait until the Han soldiers led by Gu Ying fought against the Qi army, so they hesitated.

古文：当是时，济川王太、淮阳王武、常山王朝及鲁王张偃皆年少，未之国，居长安；赵王禄、梁王产各将兵居南、北军。皆吕氏之人也。
现代文：此时，济川王刘太、淮阳王刘武、常山王刘朝及鲁王张偃，都年幼，没有就职于封地，居住于长安；赵王吕禄、梁王吕产分别统率南军和北军，都是吕氏一党。
English: At this time, King Liu Tai of Jichuan, King Liu Wu of Huaiyang, King Liu Cha of Changshan and King Zhang Ye of Lu were all young, did not take office in the fiefdom, and lived in Chang'an; King Lulu of Zhao and King Lushang of Liang led the Southern Army and the Northern Army, respectively, and were all one party of the Lv clan.

古文：列侯群臣莫自坚其命。
现代文：列侯群臣没有人能自保安全。
English: None of the vassals felt sure that they could save their own lives.

古文：太尉绛侯勃不得主兵。
现代文：太尉绛侯周勃手中没有军权。
English: There is no military power in the hands of Lieutenant Gong Hou Zhou Bo.

古文：曲周侯郦商老病，其子寄与吕禄善。
现代文：曲周侯郦商年老有病，其子郦寄与吕禄交好。
English: Qu Zhou Hou Yi Shang was old and sickly, and his son Mi Ying was friendly with Lu Lu.

古文：绛侯乃与丞相陈平谋，使人劫郦商，令其子寄往绐说吕禄曰： 高帝与吕后共定天下，刘氏所立九王，吕氏所立三王，皆大臣之议，事已布告诸侯，皆以为宜。
现代文：绛侯就与丞相陈平商定一个计策，派人劫持了郦商，让他儿子郦寄去欺骗吕禄说： 高帝与吕后共同安定天下，立刘氏九人为诸侯王，立吕氏三人为诸侯王，都是经过朝廷大臣议定的，并已向天下诸侯公开宣布，诸侯都认为理应如此。
English: The princes agreed on a strategy with the prime minister Chen Ping. They sent someone to kidnap the merchants, and sent his son Min to deceive Lu Lu, saying: Emperor Gao and Empress Lu jointly stabilized the world. The nine Liu clans were established as princes, and the three Lu clans were established as princes. All of this was agreed upon by the ministers of the imperial court, and it was publicly announced to the princes of the world. The princes all believed that this was the right thing to do.

古文：今太后崩，帝少，而足下佩赵王印，不急之国守籓，乃为上将，将兵留此，为大臣诸侯所疑。
现代文：现在太后驾崩，皇帝年幼，您身佩赵王大印，不立即返回封国镇守，却出崐任上将，率兵留在京师，必然会受到大臣和诸侯王的猜忌。
English: Now the empress dowager is dead, the emperor is young, and you wear the Zhao Wangyin, do not hurry to return to defend the country, but as a general, lead the army to stay here, and are suspected by ministers and princes.

古文：足下何不归将印，以兵属太尉，请梁王归相国印，与大臣盟而之国。
现代文：您为何不交出将印，把军权还给太尉，请梁王归还相国大印给朝廷，您二人与朝廷大臣盟誓后各归封国？
English: Why don't you hand over the seal of generalship, return the military power to Captain Cho, and ask King Liang to return the Great Seal of the Fatherland to the Imperial Court. After the two of you and the Minister of the Imperial Court have sworn an oath, each of you will return to the fiefdom?

古文：齐兵必罢，大臣得安，足下高枕而王千里，此万世之利也。 
现代文：这样，齐兵必会撤走，大臣也得以心安，您高枕无忧地去做方圆千里的一国之王，这是造福于子孙万代的事。 
English: In this way, the soldiers can retreat, the ministers can rest assured, and the foot pillow is king in the land of a thousand miles, this is the benefit of a lifetime!

古文：吕禄信然其计，欲以兵属太尉。使人报吕产及诸吕老人，或以为便，或曰不便，计犹豫未有所决。
现代文：吕禄相信了郦寄的计谋，想把军队交给太尉统率；派人把这个打算告知吕产及吕氏长辈，有人同意，有人反对，计策犹豫未决。
English: Lulu believed the envoy's scheme and wanted to put the army under the command of the eunuch; he sent someone to inform Liusan and the elders of the Lue clan of this plan. Some agreed, some opposed, and the plan was left undecided.

古文：吕禄信郦寄，时与出游猎，过其姑吕嬃。
现代文：吕禄信任郦寄，经常结伴外出游猎，途中曾前往拜见其姑母吕。
English: Lulu trusted the messengers and often went out hunting with them. On the way, she went to visit her aunt Lulu.

古文：嬃大怒曰： 若为将而弃军，吕氏今无处矣！ 
现代文：吕大怒说： 你身为上将而轻易地离军游猎，吕氏如今将无处容身了！ 
English: Lu Da Rong said angrily, "You, as a general, easily left the army to go hunting. Lu Shi will have nowhere to hide now!"

古文：乃悉出珠玉、宝器散堂下，曰： 毋为他人守也！ 
现代文：吕把家中的珠玉、宝器全拿出来，抛散到堂下，说： 不要为别人守着这些东西了！ 
English: Lü took out all the jewels and precious objects in the house and scattered them under the hall, saying, "Don't keep these things for others!

古文：九月，庚申旦，平阳侯窋行御史大夫事，见相国产计事。
现代文：九月，庚申清晨，行使御史大夫职权的平阳侯曹，前来与相国吕产议事。
English: In the early morning of September, Goshun, Pingyang Hou Cao, who exercised the power of the imperial historian, came to discuss with his brother-in-law, Liusan.

古文：郎中令贾寿使从齐来，因数产曰： 王不早之国，今虽欲行，尚可得邪！ 
现代文：郎中令贾寿出使齐国返回，批评吕产说： 大王不早些去封国，现在即便是想去，还能够吗！ 
English: His brother-in-law, Jia Shou, sent an envoy to Qi to return, criticizing Liusang, saying: If the great king did not go to the country earlier, even if he wants to go now, can he do it?

古文：具以灌婴与齐、楚合从欲诛诸吕告产，且趣产急入宫。
现代文：贾寿把灌婴已与齐、楚两国联合欲诛灭吕氏的事告诉了吕产，并且催吕产迅速入据皇宫，设法自保。
English: Jia Shou told Liusang that Guanzhong had joined Qi and Chu in a joint effort to exterminate the Lv family, and urged Liusang to quickly enter the imperial palace and try to protect himself.

古文：平阳侯颇闻其语，驰告丞相、太尉。
现代文：平阳侯曹听到了贾寿的话，快马加鞭，赶来向丞相和太尉报告。
English: When Pingyang Hou Cao heard Jia Shou's words, he whipped his horse and came to report to the prime minister and the captain.

古文：太尉欲入北军，不得入。
现代文：太尉想进入北军营垒，但被阻止不得入内。
English: The captain wanted to join the Union Army, but couldn't get in.

古文：襄平侯纪通尚符节，乃令持节矫内太尉北军。
现代文：襄平侯纪通负责典掌皇帝符节，太尉便命令他持节，伪称奉皇帝之命允许太尉进入北军营垒。
English: Xiangping Hou Jitong was in charge of the Emperor's Palm Festival, and the captain ordered him to hold the festival, falsely claiming that he was ordered by the emperor to allow the captain to enter the Northern Army camp.

古文：太尉复令郦寄与典客刘揭先说吕禄曰： 帝使太尉守北军，欲足下之国。
现代文：太尉又命令郦寄和典客刘揭先去劝说吕禄： 皇帝指派太尉代行北军指挥职务，要您前去封国。
English: The captain also ordered Liu Jie, the messenger and the guest of honor, to go first to persuade Lu Lu: The emperor assigned the captain to act as the commander of the Northern Army and asked you to go to the country.

古文：急归将印辞去。
现代文：立即交出将印，告辞赴国！
English: Immediately hand over your military rank and leave for the country!

古文：不然，祸且起。 
现代文：否则，将有祸事发生！ 
English: Otherwise, something bad will happen!

古文：吕禄以为郦况不欺己，遂解印属典客，而以兵授太尉。
现代文：吕禄认为郦寄不会欺骗自己，就解下将军印绶交给典客刘揭，而把北军交给太尉指挥。
English: Lulu thought that the courier would not deceive himself, so he released the general's seal and gave it to the pawnbroker Liu Jie, and gave the Northern Army to the captain's command.

古文：太尉至军，吕禄已去。
现代文：太尉进入北军时，吕禄已经离去。
English: When the captain entered the Northern Army, Lulu had already left.

古文：太尉入军门，行令军中曰： 为吕氏右袒，为刘氏左袒！ 
现代文：太尉进入军门，下令军中说： 拥护吕氏的袒露右臂膀，拥护刘氏的袒露左臂膀！ 
English: The captain entered the gate of the army, ordered the troops and said: "Support the right arm of Lv, and support the left arm of Liu!

古文：军中皆左袒，太尉遂将北军。
现代文：军中将士全都袒露左臂膀。太尉就这样取得了北军的指挥权。
English: The lieutenants all bared their left arms, and the captain assumed command of the Union army.

古文：然尚有南军。
现代文：但是，还有南军未被控制。
English: However, there was still no Confederate control.

古文：丞相平乃召硃虚侯章佐太尉，太尉令硃虚侯监军门，令平阳侯告卫尉： 毋入相国产殿门。 
现代文：丞相陈平召来朱虚侯刘章辅佐太尉。太尉令朱虚侯监守军门，又令平阳侯曹告诉统率宫门禁卫军的卫尉说： 不许相国吕产进入殿门！ 
English: Chen Ping, the chancellor, summoned Liu Zhang, the assistant captain of Zhu Xun, and the captain ordered Zhu Xun to guard the military gate, and ordered Pingyang Hou Cao to tell the guard who led the palace gate guard to say: Don't let Lushan, the neighboring country, enter the palace gate!

古文：吕产不知吕禄已去北军，乃入未央宫，欲为乱。
现代文：吕产不知吕禄已离开北军，进入未央宫，准备作乱。
English: Lu Zhanzhong did not know that Lu Lu had left the Northern Army and entered the Weiyang Palace to prepare for a riot.

古文：至殿门，弗得入，徘徊往来。
现代文：吕产来到殿门前，无法入内，在殿门外徘徊往来。
English: When Liusang came to the front of the palace gate, he was unable to enter and wandered around outside the palace gate.

古文：平阳侯恐弗胜，驰语太尉。
现代文：平阳侯恐怕难以制止吕产入宫，策马告知太尉。
English: Fearing that he could not win, Pingyang Hou ran on horseback and told the captain about the situation.

古文：太尉尚恐不胜诸吕，未敢公言诛之，乃谓硃虚侯曰： 急入宫卫帝！ 
现代文：太尉还怕未必能战胜诸吕，没敢公开宣称诛除吕氏，就对朱虚侯说： 立即入宫保卫皇帝！ 
English: The captain was still afraid that he might not be able to defeat Zhu Lyu, and did not dare to publicly declare the elimination of the Lyu clan, so he said to Zhu Xuhou: Immediately enter the palace to defend the emperor!

古文：硃虚侯请卒，太尉予卒千馀人。
现代文：朱虚侯请求派兵同往，太尉拨给他一千多士兵。
English: Zhu Xuhou asked for some troops, and the captain assigned more than a thousand soldiers to him.

古文：入未央宫门，见产廷中。
现代文：朱虚侯进入未央宫门，见到吕产正在廷中。
English: Zhu Xuhong entered the gate of the Weiyang Palace and saw that Liusang was in the court.

古文：日饣甫时，遂击产，产走。
现代文：时近傍晚，朱虚侯立即率兵向吕产冲击，吕产逃走。
English: Near evening, Zhu Huhou immediately led his troops to attack Liusan, and Liusan fled.

古文：天风大起，以故其从官乱，莫敢斗，逐产，杀之郎中府吏厕中。
现代文：天空狂风大作，因此吕产所带党羽亲信慌乱，都不敢接战搏斗；朱虚侯等人追逐吕产，在郎中府的厕所中将吕产杀死。
English: The wind blew wildly in the sky. As a result, Lyu Sang-soo and his party members panicked and did not dare to fight. Zhu Xuhou and others chased Lyu Sang-soo and killed him in the toilet of Langzhongfu.

古文：硃虚侯已杀产，帝命谒者持节劳硃虚侯。
现代文：朱虚侯已杀吕产，皇帝派谒者持皇帝之节前来慰劳朱虚侯。
English: Zhu Xuhong had killed Liusan, and the emperor sent an envoy to come and console Zhu Xuhong on the emperor's birthday.

古文：硃虚侯欲夺其节，谒者不肯。硃虚侯则从与载，因节信驰走，斩长乐卫尉吕更始。
现代文：朱虚侯要夺皇帝之节，谒者不放手，朱虚侯就与持节的谒者共乘一车，凭着皇帝之节，驱车疾驰，斩长乐卫尉吕更始。
English: Zhu Xuhong wanted to seize the emperor's festival, but the eunuchs would not let go, so Zhu Xuhong shared a car with the eunuchs who held the festival. With the emperor's festival, he drove at high speed and killed Changle Weiyi.

古文：还，驰入北军报太尉。
现代文：事毕返回崐，驰入北军，报知太尉。
English: After the incident, he returned to Handan, entered the Northern Army, and reported to the captain.

古文：太尉起，拜贺硃虚侯曰： 所患独吕产。
现代文：太尉起立向朱虚侯拜贺说： 最令人担忧的就是吕产。
English: The captain stood up and said to Zhu Xuhou Baihe, "The most worrying thing is Liusan.

古文：今已诛，天下定矣！ 
现代文：现在吕产被杀，天下已定！ 
English: Now that Liusang has been killed, the fate of the world is decided!

古文：遂遣人分部悉捕诸吕男女，无少长皆斩之。
现代文：于是，太尉派人分头逮捕所有吕氏男女，不论老小一律处斩。
English: Then they immediately sent people to arrest the men and women of the Lv men and women separately, regardless of age, and all of them were executed.

古文：辛酉，捕斩吕禄而笞杀吕嬃，使人诛燕王吕通而废鲁王张偃。
现代文：辛酉，捕斩吕禄，将吕乱棒打死，派人杀燕王吕通，废除鲁王张偃。
English: Xin Xi, captured and beheaded Lu Lu, beat Lu Ranzhang to death, sent people to kill Yan Wang Luitong, and abolished Lu King Zhang Ye.

古文：戊辰，徙济川王王梁。遣硃虚侯章以诛诸吕事告齐王，令罢兵。
现代文：戊辰，改封济川王刘太为梁王，派朱虚侯刘章去告知齐王，吕氏已被诛灭，令齐罢兵。
English: Wuchen changed the title of Liu Ta, the king of Jichuan, to Liang Wang, and sent Liu Zhang, the prince of Zhuxu, to inform the king of Qi that the Lü clan had been annihilated, and ordered Qi to strike.

古文：灌婴在荥阳，闻魏勃本教齐王举兵，使使召魏勃至，责问之。
现代文：灌婴驻扎荥阳，闻知魏勃原先教唆齐王举兵，便派人召魏勃来见，加以责问。
English: Guan Yu stationed in Fenyang, when he heard that Wei Bo had originally incited Qi Wang to raise an army, he sent someone to summon Wei Bo to meet and interrogate him.

古文：勃曰： 失火之家，岂暇先言丈人而后救火乎！ 
现代文：魏勃回答说： 家中失火的时候，哪有空闲时间先请示长辈而后才救火呢！ 
English: Weber replied: "When there is a fire in the house, who has the free time to consult the elders before putting out the fire?"

古文：因退立，股战而栗，恐不能言者，终无他语。
现代文：随即退立一旁，两腿颤抖不止，吓得说不出话来，直到最后也说不出别的话，为自己辩解。
English: When he had finished, he stood aside, his legs trembling, as if speechless with fright, and said nothing else until the very end.

古文：灌将军熟视笑曰： 人谓魏勃勇，妄庸人耳，何能为乎！ 
现代文：灌将军仔细审视魏勃，笑着说： 人说魏勃武勇，其实不过是个狂妄而平庸的人罢了，能有什么作为呢！ 
English: General Gan looked at him for a long time and said with a smile: People say that Wei Bo is very brave, but in fact he is just a mediocre and incompetent person. What can he do?

古文：乃罢魏勃。
现代文：于是赦免魏勃不加追究。
English: As a result, he was relieved of his duties without being charged with a crime.

古文：灌婴兵亦罢荥阳归。
现代文：灌婴所统率的军队也从荥阳撤回长安。
English: The army under the command of the Infants' Home also withdrew from Shenyang to Chang'an.

古文：班固赞曰：孝文时，天下以郦寄为卖友。
现代文：班固赞曰：孝文帝时，天下人都批评郦寄出卖朋友。
English: Ban Guzan said, "When Emperor Xiaowen came to power, people all over the world criticized him for selling out his friends.

古文：夫卖友者，谓见利而忘义也。
现代文：所谓出卖朋友，是指见利忘义。
English: The so-called betrayal of a friend is a case of seeing the benefit and forgetting the meaning.

古文：若寄父为功臣而又执劫，虽摧吕禄以安社稷，谊存君亲可也。
现代文：至于郦寄，他的父亲本是汉室开国功臣，而且又被周勃等人劫持；郦寄的行为，虽使朋友吕禄被杀，却安定了国家，顾全了君臣父子的伦理大义，还是可以的。
English: As for Miao Ying, his father was originally a hero of the Han Dynasty who founded the country, and was also kidnapped by Zhou Bo and others; Miao Ying's actions, although his friend Lu Lu was killed, stabilized the country and took care of the ethical principles of the prince and his son, are still possible.

古文：诸大臣相与阴谋曰： 少帝及梁、淮阳、恒山王，皆非真孝惠子也。吕后以计诈名他人子，杀其母养后宫，令孝惠子之，立以为后及诸王，以强吕氏。
现代文：诸位大臣暗地共同商量说： 少帝和梁王、淮阳王、恒山王，都不真是孝惠帝的儿子，当年吕后设计取他人的儿子，杀死他们的生母，把他们收养在后宫中，令孝惠帝认做儿子，立为继承人和诸侯王，用来加强吕氏的力量。
English: The ministers secretly discussed together and said: The young emperor and the kings of Liang, Huaiyang, and Hengshan are not really the sons of Emperor Xiao Hui. That year, Empress Dowager Lv devised a plan to take the sons of others, kill their birth mothers, and adopt them into her harem, so that Emperor Xiao Hui would recognize them as his sons and set them up as heirs and princes to strengthen the power of the Lv clan.

古文：今皆已夷灭诸吕，而所立即长，用事，吾属无类矣。
现代文：现在，吕氏已被灭族，但吕氏所立的人，很快就要长大，等他们掌握实权，我们恐怕都要被灭族！
English: Now, the Lv clan has been exterminated, but the people established by the Lv clan will soon grow up, and when they seize real power, I am afraid we will all be exterminated!

古文：不如视诸王最贤者立之。 
现代文：不如从诸侯王中另选最贤者立为皇帝。 
English: It would be better to choose the wisest of the kings and make him emperor.

古文：或言： 齐王，高帝长孙，可立也。 
现代文：有人说： 齐王，是高帝的长孙，可立他为帝。 
English: Some people said: King Qi is the eldest grandson of Emperor Gao, he can be made emperor.

古文：大臣皆曰： 吕氏以外家恶而几危宗庙，乱功臣。今齐王舅驷钧，虎而冠。即立齐王，复为吕氏矣。
现代文：大臣们都说： 吕氏正因为外戚强横，几乎危及皇帝宗庙，摧残功臣，现在齐王的舅舅驷钧，为人暴恶好像戴着冠帽的老虎，假若立齐王为帝，驷钧一族就会成为第二个吕氏。
English: The ministers all said, "It is because of the domineering maternal relative that the Lv clan almost endangered the emperor's ancestral temple and destroyed the meritorious vassals. Now, King Qi's uncle, Yao, is as cruel as a tiger wearing a crown. If King Qi were to become emperor, the Yao clan would become the second Lv clan."

古文：代王方今高帝见子最长，仁孝宽厚，太后家薄氏谨良。
现代文：代王是高帝在世诸子中年龄最大的一位，为人仁孝宽厚，太后薄氏一家谨慎温良。
English: The acting king was the oldest of Emperor Gao's living sons, a benevolent, filial and generous man, while the Empress Dowager Bo's family was prudent and gentle.

古文：且立长固顺，况以仁孝闻天下乎！ 
现代文：立年长的本来就名正言顺，更何况代王又以仁孝而闻名于天下呢！ 
English: Rissho the Elder was originally known as righteous and obedient, not to mention that the king was also famous for his benevolence and filial piety!

古文：乃相与共阴使人召代王。
现代文：于是，大臣们共同议定拥立代王为帝，并暗地派人召代王入京。
English: So they conspired to have the king summoned to the capital.

古文：代王问左右，郎中令张武等曰： 汉大臣皆故高帝时大将，习兵，多谋诈。
现代文：代王就此征询左右亲信大臣意见，郎中令张武等人说： 汉廷大臣都是当年高帝开国时的大将，精通军事，多有诡诈奇计。
English: The acting king asked the opinion of the ministers who were close to him about this, and Zhang Wu, the second-in-command, and others said: The ministers of the Han Dynasty were all generals at the time of the founding of the country by Emperor Gao. They were well versed in military affairs, and many of them were cunning and devious.

古文：此其属意非止此也，特畏高帝、吕太后威耳。
现代文：这些人的愿望并不止于已有的权位，只是畏惧高帝、吕太后的严威罢了。
English: The aspirations of these people did not stop at the already existing positions of power, they were only afraid of the authority of Emperor Gao and Empress Dowager Lyu.

古文：今已诛诸吕，新疌血京师，此以迎大王为名，实不可信。
现代文：现在，他们已诛除诸吕，刚喋血京师，此来以迎接大王为名，实在不可轻信。
English: Now that they have eliminated Zhu Lv, the bloodthirsty emperor of Beijing, they come here in the name of welcoming the great king, which is really not to be trusted.

古文：愿大王称疾毋往，以观其变。 
现代文：希望大王自称有病，不要前去长安，静观政局变化。 
English: It is hoped that the great king will not go to Chang'an, claiming to be ill, and watch the political situation change.

古文：中尉宋昌进曰： 群臣之议皆非也。
现代文：中尉宋昌却说： 各位的意见都是错误的。
English: Lieutenant Song Changjin said: The opinions of the ministers are all wrong.

古文：夫秦失其政，诸侯、豪桀并起，人人自以为得之者以万数，然卒践天子之位者，刘氏也，天下绝望，一矣。
现代文：当年，秦失去了政权，诸侯、豪杰蜂拥而起，自以为可以得天下的人，数以万计，但最后登上天子之位的是刘氏；天下人不敢再有称帝的奢望，这是第一条。
English: In that year, Qin lost political power, lords and heroes flocked, and tens of thousands of people thought they could win the world, but it was the Liu clan that finally ascended to the throne of heaven. People around the world no longer dare to have the luxury of praising the emperor. This is the first article.

古文：高帝封王子弟，地犬牙相制，此所谓磐石之宗也，天下服其强，二矣。
现代文：高帝分封子弟为诸侯王，封地犬牙交错，可以控制天下，这就是所谓宗族稳如磐石，天下人信服它的强大，这是第二条。
English: Emperor Gao divided his vassals into princes and princes, and the fiefdoms were intertwined, and they could control the world. This is the so-called clan stable as a rock, and people around the world were convinced of its power. This is the second article.

古文：汉兴，除秦苛政，约法令，施德惠，人人自安，难动摇，三矣。
现代文：汉朝建立之后，废除秦的苛政，简省法令，推行德政，百姓安居乐业，很难动摇，这是第三条。
English: The rise of the Han Dynasty, the abolition of the harsh decrees of the Qin Dynasty, the simplification of laws and regulations, the benevolence of the people, everyone lives in peace, and it is difficult to shake. This is the third point.

古文：夫以吕太后之严，立诸吕为三王，擅权专制；然而太尉以一节入北军一呼，士皆左袒为刘氏，叛诸吕，卒以灭之。
现代文：以吕太后的威严，封立吕氏三人为王，独掌大权专制朝政，然而，太尉仅凭一个符节，进入北军一呼，军士全都左袒，拥护刘氏，背叛诸吕，终于消灭了吕氏。
English: With the majesty of Empress Dowager Lv, the three members of the Lv clan were crowned as kings, holding the supreme power of the autocratic imperial government. However, the captain entered the Northern Army with only one rune, the sergeants were all left-handed, supported the Liu clan, betrayed Zhu Lv, and finally eliminated the Lv clan.

古文：此乃天授，非人力也。
现代文：刘氏的帝位，来源于天授，不是靠人力争夺而得。
English: This is what God has given us, not what man can do.

古文：今大臣虽欲为变，百姓弗为使，其党宁能专一邪？
现代文：现在，即使大臣另有异谋，百姓也不会为其所用，他们的党羽难道能够统一吗！
English: Now, even if the minister wants to rebel, the people will not be driven by them. Can their followers unite with one heart and one mind?

古文：方今内有硃虚、东牟之亲，外畏吴、楚、淮阳、琅邪、齐、代之强。
现代文：现在，朝内有朱虚侯、东牟侯这样的宗室大臣，外面又畏惧吴、楚、淮阳、琅邪、齐、代等强大的宗室诸国，大臣谅必不敢另生他念。
English: At present, the imperial court has powerful lineage ministers such as Zhu Xuhong and Dong Muhong, and the outside world is afraid of powerful lineage countries such as Wu, Chu, Huaiyang, Suye, Qi, and Dai. The minister must not dare to have another son.

古文：方今高帝子，独淮南王与大王。大王又长，贤圣仁孝闻于天下，故大臣因天下之心而欲迎立大王。
现代文：高帝诸子，现在只有淮南王与大王健在，大王又年长，天下人都知道您的贤圣仁孝，所以大臣们顺应天下人之心，要迎立大王为皇帝。
English: Emperor Gao's sons, only King Huainan and the Great King are still alive, and the Great King is elderly. The whole world knows your wisdom, benevolence and filial piety. Therefore, the ministers should conform to the hearts of the world and welcome the Great King as emperor.

古文：大王勿疑也。 
现代文：大王不必猜疑！ 
English: Don't doubt the Great King!

古文：代王报太后计之。
现代文：代王禀报太后商议此事，犹豫未定。
English: The acting king reported to the empress dowager to discuss the matter, but hesitated and was undecided.

古文：犹豫未定，卜之，兆得大横。占曰： 大横庚庚，余为天王，夏启以光。 
现代文：卜问凶吉，得到了 大横 的征兆，所得卜辞说： 横线直贯多强壮，我做天王，夏启的事业得到光大发扬。 
English: Boo asked for bad luck, got a sign of arrogance, and received a boo saying: How strong is the horizontal line, I am a heavenly king, and Xiaqi's career has been greatly promoted.

古文：代王曰： 寡人固已为王矣，又何王？ 
现代文：代王说： 我本来就是王了，又做什么王？ 
English: The acting king said: I am already the prince of princes, what else should I be?

古文：卜人曰： 所谓天王者，乃天子也。 
现代文：占卜的人说： 所谓天王，是指天子。 
English: The Buddha said, "The so-called Heavenly King in the sutras is the Son of Heaven!

古文：于是代王遣太后弟薄昭往见绛侯，绛侯等具为昭言所以迎立王意。
现代文：于是，代王派太后之弟薄昭前去拜见绛侯。绛侯等人向薄昭详细说明迎立代王为帝的本意。
English: As a result, the acting king sent Bo Zhao, the younger brother of the empress dowager, to pay homage to Gong Hou. Gong Hou and others explained to Bo Zhao in detail the intention of welcoming the acting king as emperor.

古文：薄昭还报曰： 信矣，无可疑者。 
现代文：薄昭还报代王说： 迎立之事是真实的，没有什么可疑之处。 
English: Bo Zhao also reported on behalf of the king: "The welcoming is real, there is nothing suspicious about it.

古文：代王乃笑谓宋昌曰： 果如公言。 
现代文：代王就笑着对宋昌说： 果然如您所说。 
English: The acting king then smiled and said to Song Chang: "It's just like you said.

古文：乃命宋昌参乘，张武等六人乘传，从诣长安。
现代文：代王于是命令宋昌做为自己的陪乘，同车而行，张武等六人乘坐官府驿车，一起随代王到长安。
English: The acting king then ordered Song Chang to accompany him in the car, and Zhang Wu and six others rode in a government car to accompany the acting king to Chang'an.

古文：至高陵，休止，而使宋昌先驰之长安观变。
现代文：行至高陵县，暂停休整，代王命宋昌先驰入长安观察动静。
English: He went to Gaoling County, paused for a rest, and ordered Song Chang to enter Chang'an first to observe the situation.

古文：昌至渭桥，丞相以下皆迎。
现代文：宋昌行至渭桥，丞相及以下百官都来迎接。
English: When Song Chang arrived in Handan Bridge, officials at all levels from the prime minister on down came to greet him.

古文：昌还报。
现代文：宋昌回来报告。
English: Song Chang came back to report.

古文：代王驰至渭桥，群臣拜谒称臣，代王下车答拜。
现代文：代王驰车赶到渭桥，群臣跪拜进见，俯首称臣，代王下车还礼。
English: On behalf of the king, the chariot arrived at the bridge. The courtiers knelt down and bowed their heads to show their respect. The king got off the chariot and returned the salute.

古文：太尉勃进曰： 愿请间。 
现代文：太尉周勃近前说： 希望与您单独谈话。 
English: Second Lieutenant Zhou Bo Jin said, "Ask for the secret.

古文：宋昌曰： 所言公，公言之；所言私，王者无私。 
现代文：宋昌回答说： 您要说的，如果是公事，就公开说；如果是私事，做王的人是没有私情的。 
English: Song Chang said, "If what the captain says is a public matter, please say it in front of all your subjects; if it is a private matter, the king is selfless.

古文：太尉乃跪上天子玺、符。代王谢曰： 至代邸而议之。 
现代文：太尉才跪下，呈上天子所专用的玺和符，代王辞谢说： 到代国官邸再商量此事。 
English: Only then did the captain kneel down and present the sign of peace used exclusively by the heavenly son. On behalf of the king, he thanked him and said: Come to the official residence of the state to discuss the matter again.

古文：后九月，己酉晦，代王至长安，舍代邸，群臣从至邸。
现代文：闰九月，己酉晦，代王刘恒进入都城长安，住在长安的代国官邸，朝廷群臣都护送到官邸。
English: In late September, Liu Heng, the acting king, entered the capital city of Chang'an and lived in the official residence of the acting state in Chang'an. The court courtiers were escorted to the official residence.

古文：丞相陈平等皆再拜言曰： 子弘等皆非孝惠子，不当奉宗庙。
现代文：丞相陈平等人再次跪拜启奏说： 刘弘等人都不是孝惠帝的儿子，不应侍奉宗庙做天子。
English: Premier Chen Rongren knelt again and said: Liu Hong and others are not the sons of Emperor Xiao Hui, and should not serve the ancestral temple as gods.

古文：大王，高帝长子，宜为嗣。
现代文：大王是高帝的年长之子，应继承皇统。
English: The great king was the eldest son of Emperor Gao and should succeed to the throne.

古文：愿大王即天子位。 
现代文：我们恭请大王登基做皇帝！ 
English: We respectfully invite the great king to ascend to the throne as emperor!

古文：代王西乡让者三，南乡让者再，遂即天子位。群臣以礼次侍。
现代文：代王谦逊地按宾主的礼仪面向西，辞谢了三次，又按君臣之仪面向南，辞谢了两次，于是，即皇帝位；群臣按朝见皇帝的礼仪和官秩高低排班侍立。
English: The representative of the king humbly faced west according to the etiquette of the host, bowed down three times, and faced south according to the etiquette of the monarch and the minister, bowed down twice, thus, the emperor; the ministers stood in attendance according to the etiquette of the emperor and the high and low ranks.

古文：东牟侯兴居曰： 诛吕氏，臣无功，请得除宫。 
现代文：东牟侯刘兴居说： 诛除吕氏，我没有立功，请皇帝允许我前去清理皇宫。 
English: Liu Xingju, the Prince of Dongmou, said: "I did not do any meritorious service in eliminating the Lü clan. I ask the emperor to allow me to go and clean up the imperial palace."

古文：乃与太仆汝阴侯滕公入宫，前谓少帝曰： 足下非刘氏子，不当立！ 
现代文：他和太仆汝阴侯滕公夏侯婴一道进入皇宫，逼近少帝说： 您不是刘氏后崐代，不应做皇帝！ 
English: He entered the imperial palace together with his great-great-grandson, Prince Tengxia, approaching the young emperor and saying, "You are not the empress Dowager Liu, you should not be the emperor!"

古文：乃顾麾左右执戟者掊兵罢去；有数人不肯去兵，宦者令张释谕告，亦去兵。
现代文：接着，刘兴居转身命令左右持戟卫士，放下兵器退出皇宫；有几个卫士不愿放下兵器，宦者令张释告知情由，他们也随之放下了兵器。
English: Next, Liu Xingju turned around and ordered the guards holding the shields left and right to put down their weapons and leave the palace; several guards did not want to put down their weapons, and the executioner ordered Zhang Xie to tell the reason, and they also put down their weapons.

古文：滕公乃召乘舆车载少帝出。
现代文：滕公夏侯婴命令用车子将少帝送出宫外。
English: Teng Gong called a car to drive the young emperor out of the court.

古文：少帝曰： 欲将我安之乎？ 
现代文：少帝问： 你们要把我安置到何处？ 
English: The young emperor said, "Where do you want to take me?"

古文：滕公曰： 出就舍。 
现代文：滕公说： 让您住到皇宫外面。 
English: Teng Gong said: Let you live outside the palace.

古文：舍少府。
现代文：就把他安置在少府的官衙中。
English: Xiao Di was placed in accommodation in Xiaofu.

古文：乃奉天子法驾迎代王于邸，报曰： 宫谨除。 
现代文：于是，刘兴居和夏侯婴排列天子法驾前来代王官邸，恭迎代王入宫，他们报告说： 清理皇宫已毕。 
English: As a result, Liu Xingju and Xia Houyi lined up the heavenly law to come to the king's official residence to welcome the king into the palace. They reported: The cleaning of the royal palace has been completed.

古文：代王即夕入未央宫。
现代文：代王于当晚进入未央宫。
English: On the evening of the same day, the crown prince entered the Miang Palace.

古文：有谒者十人持戟卫端门，曰： 天子在也，足下何为者而入？ 
现代文：有十位持戟守卫端门的谒者阻拦说： 天子居住于宫中，您是干什么的，竟要入宫！ 
English: Ten men with halberds guarded the main gate, saying, "Son of God, what are you doing here?

古文：代王乃谓太尉。太尉往谕，谒者十人皆掊兵而去，代王遂入。
现代文：代王告知太尉周勃，周勃便前来谕告谒者有关废立皇帝的事，十位谒者都放下兵器离去，代王于是进入未央宫。
English: The deputy king told the lieutenant Zhou Bo, and Zhou Bo then came to tell the informers about the dethronement of the emperor. The ten informers all put down their weapons and left, and the deputy king then entered the Weiyang Palace.

古文：夜，拜宋昌为卫将军，镇抚南北军；以张武为郎中令，行殿中。
现代文：当天夜间，代王就任命宋昌为卫将军，指挥南军和北军；任命张武为郎中令，负责管理殿中事务。
English: On the night of the same day, the acting king appointed Song Chang as the general of the Guards, commanding the Southern Army and the Northern Army; appointed Zhang Wu as the second-in-command, responsible for managing the affairs of the palace.

古文：有司分部诛灭梁、淮阳、恒山王及少帝于邸。
现代文：有关机构分别派人在梁王、淮阳王、恒山王和少帝的住处杀死他们。
English: Relevant agencies separately sent people to kill them at the residences of King Liang, King Huaiyang, King Hengshan and the young emperor.

古文：文帝还坐前殿，夜，下诏书赦天下。
现代文：文帝返回未央宫前殿就坐，当夜颁布诏书，大赦天下。
English: Emperor Wen returned to the front hall of the Miao Palace and sat down. That night, he issued an edict of amnesty to the whole world.

古文：太宗孝文皇帝上
现代文：太宗孝文皇帝上
English: Emperor Taizong and Emperor Xiaowen

古文：孝文帝元年
现代文：孝文帝元年
English: Emperor Xiaowen's first year

古文：冬，十月，庚戌，徙琅邪王泽为燕王；封赵幽王子遂为赵王。
现代文：冬，十月，庚戌，徙琅邪王泽为燕王；封赵幽王子遂为赵王。
English: In winter, October, Geng Zi, and Yue Zi, the evil king Zhe became the king of swallows; the prince Zhao Yu became the king of Zhao.

古文：陈平谢病。上问之，平曰： 高祖时，勃功不如臣，及诛诸吕，臣功亦不如勃，愿以右丞相让勃。 
现代文：陈平谢病；上问之，平曰： 高祖时，勃功不如臣，及诛诸吕，臣功亦不如勃；愿以右丞相让勃。 
English: Chen Ping Xie illness; when asked about it, Ping said: When Gao Zu, Bo's achievement was not as good as that of the minister, and Zizhullu, the minister's achievement was also not as good as that of Bo; I would like to give Bo the position of the minister of the right.

古文：十一月，辛巳，上徙平为左丞相，太尉勃为右丞相，大将军灌婴为太尉。
现代文：十一月，辛巳，上徙平为左丞相，太尉勃为右丞相，大将军灌婴为太尉。
English: In November of the same year, Shang Yu Ping was appointed as the left minister, Tai Fong Bo was appointed as the right minister, and Da Gen Rin Zi was appointed as Tai Fong.

古文：诸吕所夺齐、楚故地，皆复与之。
现代文：诸吕所夺齐、楚故地，皆复与之。
English: ZhuLu's conquests are all in line with Chu's, and they all return to it.

古文：论诛诸吕功，右丞相勃以下益户、赐金各有差。
现代文：丞相的职务让给周勃担任。 十一月，辛巳，文帝将陈平调任为左丞相，任命太尉周勃为右丞相，大将军灌婴为太尉。
English: In November, Emperor Wen transferred Chen Ping to the position of Left Minister of War, appointed Lieutenant Zhou Bo to the position of Right Minister of War, and appointed General Guan Yu to the position of Lieutenant.

古文：绛侯朝罢趋出，意得甚。
现代文：文帝还下令，把吕后当政时割夺齐、楚两国封立诸吕的封地，全部归还给齐国和楚国。
English: Emperor Wen also ordered that the fiefdoms of Zhu Lue, which had been seized from Qi and Chu when Lugu was in power, were all returned to Qi and Chu.

古文：上礼之恭，常目送之。郎中安陵袁盎谏曰： 诸吕悖逆，大臣相与共诛之。
现代文：朝廷对诛灭诸吕的人论功行赏，右丞相周勃以下，都被增加封户和赐金，数量各有差别。绛侯周勃散朝时小步疾行退出，十分得意；文帝对绛侯以礼相待，很为恭敬，经常目送他退朝。担任郎中的安陵人袁盎谏阻文帝说： 诸吕骄横谋反，大臣们合作将吕氏诛灭。
English: The imperial court rewarded the merits of those who eliminated Zhu Lyu. The number of fiefs and the amount of money awarded varied from one person to the next, from Zhu Lyu to the Minister of the Right, Zhou Bo. Zhou Bo was very proud of the fact that Zhou Bo left the imperial court in small steps; Emperor Wen treated Zhu with courtesy, was very respectful, and often saw him leave the imperial court. Yuan Wanzhong, who served as a retainer of Emperor Wen, said: Zhu Lyu was arrogant and plotted to rebel, and the ministers cooperated to eliminate the Lyu clan.

古文：是时丞相为太尉，本兵柄，适会其成功。
现代文：那时，丞相身为太尉，掌握兵权，才天缘凑巧建立了这番功劳。
English: At that time, the chancellor, as a captain, controlled the military power, and it was only by chance that he established this merit.

古文：今丞相如有骄主色，陛下谦让。臣主失礼，窃为陛下弗取也！ 
现代文：现在，丞相好像已有对人主骄矜的神色，陛下却对他一再谦让；臣子和君主都有失礼节，我私下认为陛下不该如此！ 
English: Now, the prime minister seems to have taken on an air of arrogance towards his master, but Your Majesty has repeatedly made allowances for him; both ministers and monarchs have their faux pas, and I privately think that Your Majesty should not be like that!

古文：后朝，上益庄，丞相益畏。
现代文：以后朝会时，文帝越来越庄重威严，丞相周勃也就越来越敬畏。
English: Later, at the imperial court meeting, the emperor gradually became more dignified, and the prime minister gradually became more reverent.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 法者，治之正也。
现代文：十二月，文帝下诏说： 法律，是治理天下的依据。
English: In December, Emperor Wen issued the following edict: Law is the basis for governing the world.

古文：今犯法已论，而使无罪之父母、妻子、同产坐之，及为收帑，朕甚不取！
现代文：现在的法律对违法者本人做了处罚之后，还要株连到他本来没有犯罪的父母、妻子、兄弟，以至将他们收为官奴婢，朕认为这样的法律十分不可取！
English: After the current law punishes the violator himself, it also wants to link him to his parents, wife, and brother, who did not commit a crime, and even take them as official slaves. I think such a law is very undesirable!

古文：其除收帑诸相坐律令。 
现代文：自今以后废除各种收罪犯家属为奴婢及各种相连坐的律令！ 
English: From now on, abolish all kinds of laws and decrees that make the family members of criminals into slaves and maids, and all kinds of laws and decrees that make them sit in a row!

古文：春，正月，有司请蚤建太子。
现代文：春季，正月，有关官员请求文帝早日确立太子。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the relevant officials requested Emperor Wen to establish the crown prince as early as possible.

古文：上曰； 朕既不德，纵不能博求天下贤圣有德之人而禅天下焉，而曰豫建太子，是重吾不德也。
现代文：文帝说： 朕已不德，不能博求天下贤圣有德的人，将帝位禅让给他，而又说 早立太子 ，这是加重我的不德行为；还是暂缓议定吧！ 
English: Emperor Wen said, "I am no longer virtuous, and I cannot beg the wise, holy, and virtuous people of the world to cede the imperial throne of Zen to him, and yet I say that I will crown the prince early, which is an aggravation of my immoral behavior; let's postpone the agreement!

古文：其安之！ 有司曰： 豫建太子，所以重宗庙、社稷，不忘天下也。 
现代文：有关官员说： 预先确立太子，是为了尊重宗庙和国家，不忘天下。 
English: Officials said: "Establishing a crown prince in advance is to respect the ancestral temple and the country, and not to forget the world."

古文：上曰： 楚王，季父也；吴王，兄也；淮南王，弟也，岂不豫哉？
现代文：文帝说： 楚王，是我的叔父；吴王，是我的兄长；淮南王，是我的弟弟；难道他们不是早就存在的继承人吗？
English: Emperor Wen said: King Chu is my uncle; King Wu is my elder brother; King Huainan is my younger brother. Aren't they the long-established heirs?

古文：今不选举焉，而曰必子，人其以朕为忘贤有德者而专于子，非所以忧天下也！ 
现代文：如果我现在不选择贤能之人为帝位继承人，而说必须传位给儿子，世人将认为我忘记了崐贤能有德的人，而专私于自己的儿子，这不是以天下为重的作法！ 
English: If I do not choose a virtuous person to be the heir to the throne now, but say that the throne must be passed on to my son, the world will think that I have forgotten the virtuous person, and that I am only interested in my son. This is not a way of putting the weight of the world on my shoulders!

古文：有司固请曰： 古者殷、周有国，治安皆千馀岁，用此道也。立嗣必子，所从来远矣。
现代文：有关官员坚持请求说： 古代殷、周建国之后，都经历了一千多年的长治久安，它们都采用了早立太子的制度；天子必须从儿子之中确立继承人，这是由来已久的了。
English: The officials concerned insisted on the request, saying: After the founding of the ancient Yin and Zhou Dynasties, both of which have experienced more than a thousand years of long-term peace and stability, they all adopted the system of early establishment of the crown prince; the Son of Heaven must establish the successor from among the sons, which has a long history.

古文：高帝平天下为太祖，子孙继嗣世世不绝，今释宜建而更选于诸侯及宗室，非高帝之志也。
现代文：高帝平定天下而为汉室太祖，应当子孙相传世代不绝，如果现在舍弃了理应继承的皇子，不立太子，而另从诸侯王和宗室中选择继承人，这是违背高帝愿望的。
English: Since Emperor Gao had pacified the world and was the great-grandfather of the Han family, it should be passed down from generation to generation. If he now abandons the prince who should inherit, does not appoint a prince, and chooses a successor from the princes and the family, this is contrary to the wishes of Emperor Gao.

古文：更议不宜。
现代文：在皇子之外另议继承人是不应该的。
English: It is not appropriate to re-establish someone else's practice.

古文：子启最长，纯厚慈仁，请建以为太子。 
现代文：陛下诸子中，以刘启年龄最大，他为人纯厚仁慈，请陛下立刘启为太子。 
English: Among His Majesty's sons, Liu Qi is the oldest. He is a pure and benevolent person. I would like to ask His Majesty to make Liu Qi the crown prince.

古文：上乃许之。
现代文：文帝至此才同意臣下的奏请。
English: The Emperor agreed.

古文：三月，立太子母窦氏为皇后。
现代文：三月，立太子生母窦氏为皇后。
English: In March, the crown prince's biological mother, Dou, became empress.

古文：皇后，清河观津人。
现代文：窦皇后是清河郡观津县人。
English: Empress Dou is from Qinghe County, Guanzhou County.

古文：有弟广国，字少君，幼为人所略卖，传十馀家，闻窦后立，乃上书自陈。
现代文：她有位弟弟窦广国，字少君，幼年时被人拐卖，先后转换了十多家，听说窦氏被立为皇后，便上书自言身世。
English: She has a younger brother Dou Guangguo, known as Shao Jun, who was abducted and sold as a child, and has converted more than ten people in succession. When she heard that Dou was made empress, she wrote a letter to tell her story.

古文：召见，验问，得实，乃厚赐田宅、金钱，与兄长君家于长安。
现代文：窦皇后召见他，核验询问，证实无误，就赐给他大量的田宅和金钱，与其兄长君在长安安家居住。
English: Empress Dou summoned him, checked and questioned him, and after verifying that there was no mistake, she gave him a large number of farmhouses and money to live with his elder brother in Chang'an.

古文：绛侯、灌将军等曰： 吾属不死，命乃且县此两人。
现代文：绛侯、灌将军等人议论说： 我等不死，命运就将取决于此两人。
English: Zhou Bo, Gen. Guan Yu and others said, "We cannot die, but our lives are in the hands of the two Dou brothers."

古文：两人所出微，不可不为择师傅、宾客；又复效吕氏，大事也！ 
现代文：他们两人出身微贱，不可不为他们慎选师傅和宾客；否则，他们又有可能效法吕氏以外戚专权，这是大事！ 
English: Both of them came from humble backgrounds, so they had to carefully choose their teachers and guests. Otherwise, they might have followed the example of the Lv clan and had relatives with exclusive power, which is a big deal!

古文：于是乃选士之有节行者与居。
现代文：于是，大臣们从士人中精选有节行的人与二人同住。
English: As a result, the ministers handpicked from among the nobles those who had the stamina to live with the two.

古文：窦长君、少君由此为退让君子，不敢以尊贵骄人。
现代文：窦长君、窦少君由此成为退让君子，不敢以皇后至亲的尊贵地位对人骄矜。
English: Since then, Dou Changjun and Shao Jun have become humble and courteous gentlemen, and dare not rely on their dignity to be arrogant.

古文：诏振贷鳏、寡、孤、独、穷困之人。
现代文：文帝下诏救济鳏、寡、孤、独和穷困的人。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict to provide relief for the destitute, widows, orphans, and the poor.

古文：又令： 八十已上，月赐米、肉、酒；九十已上，加赐帛、絮。
现代文：文帝还下令： 年龄八十岁以上者，每月赐给米、肉、酒若干；年龄九十岁以上的老人，另外再赐给帛和絮。
English: Emperor Wen also ordered: Those who are over the age of eighty should be given rice, meat, and wine every month; those who are over the age of ninety should be given ginger and horseradish.

古文：赐物当禀鬻米者，长吏阅视，丞若尉致；不满九十，啬夫、令史致；二千石遣都吏循行，不称者督之。 
现代文：凡是应当赐给米的，各县的县令要亲自检查，由县丞或县尉送米上门；赐给不满九十岁的老人的东西，由啬夫、令史给他们送去；郡国二千石长官要派出负责监察的都吏，循环监察所属各县，发现不按诏书办理者给以责罚督促。 
English: The county magistrate of each county should personally inspect everything that should be given to the rice, and the county magistrate or the county lieutenant should send the rice to the door; the things given to the old people under the age of ninety should be sent to them by the miser and the warden; the governor of the county of two thousand koku should send the officials in charge of supervision, and the circular supervision of the counties, and find that those who do not follow the edict should be punished and urged.

古文：楚元王交薨。
现代文：楚元王刘交去世。
English: Chu Yuan Wang Liu Jiao passed away.

古文：夏，四月，齐、楚地震，二十九山同日崩，大水溃出。
现代文：夏季，四月，齐国、楚国发生地震，二十九座山在同一天中崩裂，大水溃涌而出。
English: In the summer, in April, an earthquake occurred in the provinces of Qi and Chu. Twenty-nine mountains collapsed on the same day, and large amounts of water gushed out.

古文：时有献千里马者。
现代文：这时，有人向皇帝进献日行千里的宝马。
English: At this time, someone presented the emperor with a BMW that had travelled thousands of miles in a day.

古文：帝曰： 鸾旗在前，属车在后，吉行日五十里，师行三十里。朕乘千里马，独先安之？ 
现代文：汉文帝说： 每当天子出行，前有鸾旗为先导，后有属车做护卫，平时出行，每日行程不超过五十里，率军出行，每日只走三十里；朕乘坐千里马，能先单独奔到何处呢？ 
English: Han Wendi said: Every day when I travel, there is a banner in front as a guide, followed by a vehicle as an escort. In normal times, I travel no more than fifty miles a day. When I travel with the army, I only walk thirty miles a day. I travel thousands of miles, where can I go alone first?

古文：于是还其马，与道里费，而下诏曰： 朕不受献也。
现代文：于是，文帝把马还给了进献者，并给他旅途费用；接着下诏说： 朕不接受贡献之物。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wen returned the horse to the donor and gave him the travel expenses; then he said: I do not accept contributions.

古文：其令四方毋求来献。 
现代文：命令全国不必要求前来进献。 
English: Ordering the whole country to come forward without being asked.

古文：帝既施惠天下，诸侯、四夷远近欢洽。乃修代来功，封宋昌为壮武侯。
现代文：文帝即位，先对天下普施恩惠，远近的诸侯和四夷部族与朝廷的关系都很融洽；然后，文帝才表彰和赏赐跟随他从代国来京的旧部功臣，封立宋昌为壮武侯。
English: When Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, he first extended favors to the world, and the relations between the princes and the Shi'i tribes near and far and the imperial court were very harmonious. Then, Emperor Wen commended and rewarded the meritorious vassals of the old ministry who had followed him to Beijing from the country, and enthroned Song Chang as the Prince of Zhuang.

古文：帝益明习国家事。
现代文：文帝越来越明习国家政事。
English: Emperor Wen is becoming more and more familiar with national politics.

古文：朝而问右丞相勃曰： 天下一岁决狱几何？ 
现代文：朝会时，文帝问右丞相周勃说： 全国一年内判决多少案件？ 
English: At the morning meeting, Emperor Wen asked the Minister of Justice Zhou Bo: How many cases are adjudicated nationwide in a year?

古文：勃谢不知。又问： 一岁钱谷出入几何？ 
现代文：周勃谢罪说不知道；文帝又问： 一年内全国钱谷收入有多少？ 
English: Zhou Bo Xie said that he did not know; Wen Di also asked: How much is the national Qian Gu income in one year?

古文：勃又谢不知，惶愧，汗出沾背。
现代文：周勃又谢罪说不知道；紧张和惭愧之下，周勃汗流浃背。
English: Zhou Bo and Xie Sin said that they did not know; under the tension and shame, Zhou Bo sweated profusely.

古文：上问左丞相平。
现代文：文帝又问左丞相陈平。
English: Emperor Wen also asked the Minister of the Left, Chen Ping.

古文：平曰： 有主者。 
现代文：陈平说： 有专门主管这些事务的官员。 
English: Chen Ping said: There is a supervisor in charge.

古文：上曰： 主者谓谁？ 
现代文：文帝问： 由谁主管？ 
English: The emperor said: Who is the person in charge?

古文：曰： 陛下即问决狱，责廷尉；问钱谷，责治粟内史。 
现代文：陈平回答： 陛下如果要了解诉讼刑案，应该责问廷尉；如果要了解钱谷收支，应该责问治粟内史。 
English: Chen Ping replied, "Your Majesty, if you want to know about the criminal proceedings, you should ask the court lieutenant; if you want to know about the income and expenditure of Qiangu, you should ask Zhi Mao's internal history.

古文：上曰： 苟各有主者，而君所主者何事也？ 
现代文：文帝说： 假若各事都有主管官吏，那么您是负责什么事情的呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "If each of you has a person in charge, then what is it that you are in charge of?

古文：平谢曰： 陛下不知其驽下，使待罪宰相。
现代文：陈平谢罪说： 陛下由于不知道我的平庸低能，任命我为宰相。
English: Chen Ping Xie Sin said: Your Majesty, not knowing my mediocrity and incompetence, appointed me as prime minister.

古文：宰相者，上佐天子，理阴阳，顺四时；下遂万物之宜；外镇抚四夷诸侯；内亲附百姓，使卿大夫各得任其职焉。 
现代文：宰相的职责，对上辅佐天子，理通阴阳，顺应四季变化；对下使万物各得其所；对外安抚四夷和诸侯，对内使百姓归附，使卿大夫各自得到能发挥其专长的职务。 
English: The duties of the Prime Minister are, on the one hand, to assist the Son of Heaven, to reason with the yin and yang, and to conform to the changes of the four seasons; on the other hand, to make everything have its place; to appease the four barbarians and the princes, on the other hand, to make the people adhere, so that the doctors can each get a position that can play their expertise.

古文：帝乃称善。
现代文：文帝这才赞好。
English: Emperor Wen only approved of this.

古文：右丞相大惭，出而让陈平曰： 君独不素教我对！ 
现代文：右丞相周勃极为惭愧，退朝之后责备陈平说： 就是您平素不教我如何回答！ 
English: Minister of the Right Zhou Boda was ashamed and complained to Chen Ping after he retired from the imperial court, saying: "Why didn't you teach me these words in peacetime!

古文：陈平笑曰： 君居其位，不知其任邪？
现代文：陈平笑着说： 您身为宰相，却不知宰相的职责是什么吗？
English: Chen Ping said with a smile, "You are in a position of authority, don't you know your duties?

古文：且陛下即问长安中盗贼数，君欲强对邪？ 
现代文：况且，如果陛下问长安城中有多少盗贼，您能勉强回答吗？ 
English: Moreover, if His Majesty asks how many thieves there are in Chang'an City, can you answer reluctantly?

古文：于是绛侯自知其能不如平远矣。
现代文：由此，绛侯周勃自知能力比陈平差得很远。
English: As a result, Zhou Bo's self-knowledge ability is far worse than that of Chen Ping.

古文：居顷之，人或说勃曰： 君既诛诸吕，立代王，威震天下。
现代文：过了一段时间，有人劝周勃说： 您诛灭吕氏，扶立代王为帝，威名震动天下。
English: After a period of time, someone advised Zhou Bo to say: You annihilate the Lv clan, set up the king as emperor, and shake the world with your prestige.

古文：而君受厚赏，处尊位，久之，即祸及身矣。 
现代文：现在您接受朝廷厚赏，担任职位尊崇的右相，时间一长，将要大祸临头了。 
English: Now that you are receiving a rich reward from the imperial court and holding the position of the revered right-hand man, a long time will pass, and a great disaster will be at hand.

古文：勃亦自危，乃谢病，请归相印，上许之。
现代文：周勃也为自己担忧，就自称有病，请求辞去丞相职务，文帝批准了他的请求。
English: Zhou Bo was also worried about himself. He claimed to be ill and asked to resign from the post of chancellor. Emperor Wen approved his request.

古文：秋，八月，辛未，右丞相勃免，左丞相平专为丞相。
现代文：秋季，八月，辛未，文帝罢免了右丞相周勃，左丞相陈平一人担任丞相。
English: In the autumn, in August, Xin Wei, Emperor Wen dismissed the Minister of the Right, Zhou Bo, and the Minister of the Left, Chen Ping, became the Minister of the Left.

古文：初，隆虑侯灶击南越，会暑湿，士卒大疫，兵不能隃领。
现代文：当初，隆虑侯周灶领兵进攻南越国，正值暑热潮湿，士卒中流行瘟疫，军队无法越过阳山岭。
English: At the beginning, Longxian Hou Zhou Zhao led the troops to attack South Vietnam. It was hot and humid, and there was an epidemic of plague among the soldiers. The troops could not cross the Yangshan Mountains.

古文：岁馀，高后崩，即罢兵。
现代文：过了一年多，高后去世，便撤兵了。
English: After more than a year, Gao Hou died, and the Chinese army stopped attacking.

古文：赵佗因此以兵威财物赂遗闽越、西瓯、骆，役属焉。
现代文：赵佗乘此机会，用兵威胁迫并以财物引诱闽越、西瓯、骆，使它们归属南越统治。
English: Taking advantage of this opportunity, Zhao Jun used the threat of soldiers to coerce and lure Xidi, Luo, and Yunnan with wealth to make them belong to the South Vietnamese rule.

古文：东西万馀里，乘黄屋左纛，称制与中国侔。
现代文：南越国东西长达万余里，赵佗乘坐供天子专用的黄屋左纛车，自称皇帝，与汉朝皇帝相同。
English: South Vietnam stretches for more than ten thousand miles from east to west. Zhao Wei rode in the Huangya left-hand carriage, which was used exclusively for the emperor. He claimed to be the emperor, which was the same as the emperor of the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝乃为佗亲冢在真定者置守邑，岁时奉祀；召其昆弟，尊官、厚赐宠之。
现代文：汉文帝于是下令，为赵佗在真定的父母亲的坟墓设置专司守墓的民户，按每年四季祭祀；又召来赵佗的兄弟，用尊贵的官位和丰厚的赏赐表示优宠。
English: Emperor Hanwen then issued an order to set up a special tomb-guarding private household for Zhao Zhen at the grave of his parents in Zhendi, and to offer sacrifices according to the four seasons of the year; he also summoned Zhao Zhen's brother to express his favor with a distinguished official position and a rich reward.

古文：复使陆贾使南越，赐佗书曰： 朕，高皇帝侧室之子也，弃外，奉北籓于代。
现代文：文帝又派遣陆贾出使南越国，带去文帝致赵佗的一封书信，信中说： 朕是高皇帝侧室所生之子，被安置于外地，在北方代地做藩王。
English: Emperor Wen also sent Lu Jia as an envoy to South Vietnam, bringing with him a letter from Emperor Wen to Zhao Xuan, which said: I am the son of Emperor Gao's concubine, and I have been placed in a foreign land to act as the king of the domain in the north.

古文：道里辽远，壅蔽朴愚，未尝致书。
现代文：因路途辽远，加上我眼界不开阔，朴实愚鲁，所以那时没有与您通信问侯。
English: Due to the long distance and my naivety, I did not write to you at that time.

古文：高皇帝弃群臣，孝惠皇帝即世；高后自临事，不幸有疾，诸吕为变，赖功臣之力，诛之已毕，朕以王、侯、吏不释之故，不得不立。今即位。
现代文：高皇帝不幸去世，孝惠帝也去世了；高后亲自裁决国政，晚年不幸患病，诸吕乘机谋反，幸亏有开国功臣之力，诛灭了吕氏。朕因无法推辞诸侯王、侯和百官的拥戴，不得不登基称帝，现已即位。
English: Emperor Gao unfortunately passed away, and Emperor Xiao Hui also passed away; Emperor Gao personally adjudicated state affairs, and unfortunately fell ill in his later years. Zhu Lv took advantage of the opportunity to plot a rebellion, and fortunately had the power of the founding heroes to destroy the Lv clan. Because I could not refuse the support of princes, princes and officials, I had to ascend the throne and become emperor, and I have now ascended the throne.

古文：乃者闻王遗将军隆虑侯书，求亲昆弟，请罢长沙两将军。
现代文：前不久，得知大王曾致书于将军隆虑侯周灶，请求寻找您的亲兄弟，请求罢免长沙国的两位将军。
English: I once heard that you wrote to General Long Xian Hou Zhou Zhao, asking him to find your brother in Zhending and withdraw the two generals in Changsha.

古文：朕以王书罢将军博阳侯；亲昆弟在真定者，已遣人存问，修治先人冢。
现代文：朕因为您的这封书信，已罢免了将军博阳侯；您在真定的亲兄弟，朕已派人前去慰问，并修整了您先人的坟墓。
English: Because of this letter of yours, I have removed General Boyang Hou from his post; I have sent someone to offer my condolences to you, my true brother, and I have repaired the grave of your ancestor.

古文：前日闻王发兵于边，为寇灾不止。
现代文：前几日听说大王在边境一带发兵，不断侵害劫掠。
English: I had heard that you had sent troops to attack the border and constantly caused trouble.

古文：当其时，长沙苦之，南郡尤甚。虽王之国，庸独利乎！
现代文：当时长沙国受害，而南郡尤其严重；即便是大王治理下的南越王国，难道就能在战争中只获利益而不受损害吗！
English: At that time, Changsha suffered, and Nan County was particularly serious; even the Kingdom of South Vietnam under the rule of the Great King, can it only benefit from the war without being damaged!

古文：必多杀士卒，伤良将吏，寡人之妻，孤人之子，独人父母，得一亡十，朕不忍为也。
现代文：战事一起，必定使许多士卒丧生，将吏伤身，造成许多寡妇、孤儿和无人赡养的老人；朕不忍心做这种得一亡十的事情。
English: A large number of soldiers must be sacrificed, good generals and officials must be injured, the people's wives must lose their husbands, their sons must lose their fathers, their parents must lose their sons, and one must lose ten. This is what I cannot bear to do.

古文：朕欲定地犬牙相入者，以问吏，吏曰： 高皇帝所以介长沙土也。 朕不得擅变焉。
现代文：朕本来准备对犬牙交错的地界做出调整，征求官员意见，回答说 这是高皇帝为了隔离长沙国而划定的 ，朕不崐得擅自变更地界。
English: I was originally prepared to make adjustments to the dog-tooth staggered geographical boundaries and solicit the opinions of officials, and replied that this was the Emperor Gao's delineation in order to isolate the country of Changsha, and I could not change the geographical boundaries without authorization.

古文：今得王之地，不足以为大；得王之财，不足以为富。
现代文：现在，汉若夺取大王的领地，并不足以增加多少疆域；夺得大王的财富，也不足以增加多少财源。
English: Now, if Han seizes the territory of the great king, it is not enough to increase the number of territories; if Han seizes the wealth of the great king, it is not enough to increase the number of financial resources.

古文：服领以南，王自治之。
现代文：五岭以南的土地，大王尽可自行治理。
English: The land south of the Wuling Mountains can be governed by the Great King himself.

古文：虽然，王之号为帝。两帝并立，亡一乘之使以通其道，是争也；争而不让，仁者不为也。
现代文：即便大王已有皇帝的称号，但两位皇帝同时并立，互相之间没有一位使者相互联系，这是以力相争；只讲力争而不讲谦让，这是仁人所不屑于做的。
English: In spite of this, you claim to be the emperor, the two emperors stand side by side, and you have not even sent a courier car. This is jockeying for position; competing but not conceding. People with benevolence do not do this.

古文：愿与王分弃前恶，终今以来，通使如故。 
现代文：愿与大王共弃前嫌，自今以后，互通使者往来，恢复原有的良好关系。 
English: We are willing to abandon the past with the great king, and from now on, exchange envoys and restore the original good relations.

古文：贾至南越，南越王恐，顿首谢罪，愿奉明诏，长为籓臣，奉贡职。
现代文：陆贾到达南越。南越王赵佗见了文帝书信，十分惶恐，顿道谢罪；表示愿意遵奉皇帝明诏，永为藩国臣属，遵奉贡纳职责。
English: Lu Jia arrived in South Vietnam. South Vietnam's King Zhao Bin saw Emperor Wen's letter, was very frightened, and immediately confessed his sins; he expressed his willingness to comply with the emperor's edict, to always be a vassal of the domain, and to comply with the duty of tribute.

古文：于是下令国中曰： 吾闻两雄不俱立，两贤不并世。
现代文：赵佗随即下令于国中说： 我听说，两雄不能同时共立，两贤不能一时并存。
English: At the same time, he gave an order to the junior high school students, saying, "I heard that two great men cannot stand side by side, and two great men cannot live side by side.

古文：汉皇帝，贤天子。
现代文：汉廷皇帝，是贤明天子。
English: Emperor Hanting was the son of Emperor Xianming.

古文：自今以来，去帝制、黄屋、左纛。 
现代文：从今以后，我废去帝制、黄屋、左纛。 
English: From now on, I will abolish the imperial system, the Yellow House and the Left Hand Path.

古文：因为书，称： 蛮夷大长、老夫臣佗昧死再拜上书皇帝陛下：老夫，故越吏也，高皇帝幸赐臣佗玺，以为南越王。
现代文：于是写了一封致汉文帝的回信，说： 蛮夷大长、老夫臣赵佗昧死再拜上书皇帝陛下：老夫是供职于旧越地的官员，幸得高皇帝宠信，赐我玺印，封为南越王。
English: Therefore, he wrote a reply letter to Emperor Hanwen, saying: After the death of the barbarian warlord and the old man's vassal Zhao Yimai, I wrote a letter to His Majesty the Emperor: My old man was an official who served in the former Viet Nam, and I was fortunate to receive the Emperor's favorite letter, and he gave me the seal and crowned me as the King of South Vietnam.

古文：孝惠皇帝即位，义不忍绝，所以赐老夫者甚厚。
现代文：孝惠皇帝即位后，根据道义，不忍心断绝与南越的关系，所以对老夫有十分丰厚的赏赐。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiao Hui, according to morality, he could not bear to break off relations with South Vietnam, so he gave the old man a very rich reward.

古文：高后用事，别异蛮夷，出令曰： 毋与蛮夷越金、铁、田器、马、牛、羊。
现代文：高后当政，歧视和隔绝蛮夷之地，下令说： 不得给蛮夷南越金铁、农具、马、牛、羊；如果给它牲畜，也只能给雄性的，不给雌性的。 
English: After Gao Gao took office, he discriminated against and isolated the barbarians, and issued an order: "The barbarians should not be given gold, iron, agricultural tools, horses, cattle, and sheep; if they are given livestock, they should only be male, not female."

古文：即予，予牡，毋予牝。 老夫处僻，马、牛、羊齿已长。自以祭祀不修，有死罪，使内史籓、中尉高、御史平凡三辈上书谢过，皆不反。
现代文：老夫地处偏僻，马、牛、羊也已经老了，自以为未能行祭祀之礼，犯下死罪，故派遣内史藩、中尉高、御史平等三批人上书朝廷谢罪，但他们都没有返回。
English: The old man's land was in a remote area, and the horses, cattle, and sheep were already old. They thought that they had failed to perform the ritual and had committed a capital crime, so they sent three groups of people, including Naishi, Lieutenant Gao, and Mishi, to write to the imperial court to apologize, but they did not return.

古文：又风闻老夫父母坟墓已坏削，兄弟宗族已诛论。
现代文：又据风闻谣传，说老夫的父母坟墓已被平毁，兄弟宗族人等已被判罪处死。
English: According to rumors, the graves of the old man's parents have been destroyed, and his brothers and relatives have been sentenced to death.

古文：吏相与议曰： 今内不得振于汉，外无以自高异。 
现代文：官员一同议论说： 现在对内不能得到汉朝尊重，对外没有自我显示与众不同的地方。 
English: Officials discussed together and said: Now we cannot get the respect of the Han Dynasty domestically, and there is no place to show ourselves to be different from others.

古文：故更号为帝，自帝其国，非敢有害于天下。
现代文：所以才改王号，称皇帝，只在南越国境内称帝，并无为害天下的胆量。
English: That's why he changed his title from king to emperor. He only called himself emperor within the borders of South Vietnam. He didn't have the guts to do anything harmful to the world.

古文：高皇后闻之，大怒，削去南越之籍，使使不通。
现代文：高皇后得知，勃然大怒，削去南越国的封号，断绝使臣往来。
English: When Empress Gao learned of this, she flew into a rage, removed the seal of South Vietnam and cut off diplomatic relations.

古文：老夫窃疑长沙王谗臣，故发兵以伐其边。
现代文：老夫私下怀疑是长沙王阴谋陷害我，所以才发兵攻打长沙国边界。
English: The old man privately suspected that the king of Changsha was plotting to frame me, so he sent troops to attack the border of Changsha.

古文：老夫处越四十九年，于今抱孙焉。
现代文：老夫在越地已生活了四十九年，现在已抱孙子了。
English: The old man has been living in Viet Nam for 49 years and now has a grandchild.

古文：然夙兴夜寐，寝不安席，食不甘味，目不视靡曼之色，耳不听钟鼓之音者，以不得事汉也。
现代文：但我夙兴夜寐，睡觉难安枕席，吃饭也品尝不出味道，目不视美女之色，耳不听钟鼓演奏的音律，就是因为不能侍奉汉廷天子。
English: However, I wake up early and go to bed late, my sleep is not good, my meal is not fragrant, my eyes do not dare to see the gorgeous colors, and my ears do not dare to listen to the sound of the bell and drum. All of this is caused by not being able to be a subject of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今陛下幸哀怜，复故号，通使汉如故；老夫死，骨不腐。
现代文：现在，有幸得到陛下哀怜，恢复我原来的封号，允许我像过去一样派人出使汉廷；老夫即是死去，尸骨也不朽灭。
English: Now, I am fortunate to have received Your Majesty's mercy to restore my original seal and allow me to send people to Hanting as in the past; the old man is dead, and the bones are immortal.

古文：改号，不敢为帝矣！ 
现代文：改号为王，不敢再称帝了！ 
English: He changed his title to king, and no longer dared to call himself emperor!

古文：齐哀王襄薨。
现代文：齐哀王刘襄去世。
English: Liu Xiang, the king of mourning, has passed away.

古文：上闻河南守吴公治平为天下第一，召以为廷尉。
现代文：文帝得知河南郡守吴公治理地方的政绩为天下第一，就召他入朝做廷尉。
English: Emperor Wen learned that Wu Gong, the governor of Henan County, was the first in the world in terms of political achievements in local governance, and invited him to join the imperial court as a court lieutenant.

古文：吴公荐洛阳人贾谊，帝召以为博士。
现代文：吴公推荐洛阳人贾谊，文帝就召贾谊进京做博士官。
English: Wu Gong recommended Luoyang resident Jia Yi, and Emperor Wen summoned Jia Yi to Beijing to become a doctoral officer.

古文：是时贾生年二十馀。
现代文：当时贾谊年仅二十多岁。
English: At that time, he was only in his twenties.

古文：帝爱其辞博，一岁中，超迁至太中大夫。
现代文：文帝很赏识贾谊的文辞可观和知识渊博，一年之中，就破格提升他做了太中大夫。
English: Emperor Wen was very appreciative of Jia Yi's impressive words and profound knowledge. Within a year, he was promoted to the position of Grand Vice Admiral.

古文：贾生请改正朔，易服色，定官名，兴礼乐，以立汉制，更秦法。
现代文：贾谊请文帝改历法，变换朝服颜色，重新审定官名，确定汉室的礼仪和音乐，以建立汉朝制度，更改秦朝法度。
English: Jia Yi asked Emperor Wen to change the calendar, change the color of the court dress, re-examine the official name, and determine the etiquette and music of the Han Dynasty, in order to establish the Han Dynasty system and change the Qin Dynasty law.

古文：帝谦让未遑也。
现代文：文帝以谦让治国，无暇顾及这些事情。
English: Emperor Wen, who governed the country with modesty, did not have time to consider these matters.

古文：孝文帝二年
现代文：孝文帝二年
English: The second year of Emperor Xiaowen

古文：冬，十月，曲逆献侯陈平薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，曲逆侯陈平去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Qu Qigong master Chen Ping passed away.

古文：诏列侯各之国，为吏及诏所止者，遣太子。
现代文：汉文帝下诏，令列侯各自离京到所封领地去；身为朝廷官员和受诏书崐留居京师的列侯，则派遣他们的太子到封地去。
English: Emperor Hanwen issued an edict, ordering the lords to leave Beijing and go to their fiefdoms; as imperial officials and lords who were ordered to stay in Beijing, they sent their princes to their fiefdoms.

古文：十一月，乙亥，周勃复为丞相。
现代文：十一月，乙亥，周勃再次出任丞相。
English: In November, in the Year of the Ox, Zhou Bo again served as chancellor.

古文：癸卯晦，日有食之。
现代文：癸卯晦，发生日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurs.

古文：诏： 群臣悉思朕之过失及知见之所不及，匄以启告朕。
现代文：文帝下诏书说： 群臣都要认真思考朕的过失和朕所未知、未见的问题，并请大家告知朕。
English: Emperor Wen issued an edict saying, "All ministers should seriously think about my mistakes and unknown and unseen problems, and please inform me.

古文：及举贤良、方正、能直言极谏者，以匡朕之不逮。 
现代文：还请大家向朝廷荐举贤良、方正、能直言极谏的人，以便帮助朕的不足。 
English: I also ask you all to recommend to the Imperial Court a person who is virtuous, upright, and can speak frankly, in order to help me with my shortcomings.

古文：因各敕以职任，务省繇费以便民，罢卫将军。太仆见马遗财足，馀皆以给传置。
现代文：于是派他们分别任职。命令务必减轻徭役赋税以便利百姓；罢废卫将军；太仆将现有马匹仅留下够朝廷使用的，其余马匹全部拨给驿站使用。
English: Therefore, they were sent to serve separately. The order was to reduce the tax on servants in order to facilitate the people; the general of the guards was dismissed; the eunuchs left only enough horses for the use of the imperial court, and all the remaining horses were allocated to the station.

古文：颍阴侯骑贾山上书言治乱之道曰： 臣闻雷霆之所击，无不摧折者；万钧之所压，无不糜灭者。
现代文：颍阴侯的骑从贾山上书文帝，谈论治乱之道： 我听说在雷霆的轰击下，无论什么都会被摧毁；在万钧之力的重压下，无论什么都会被压碎。
English: "I have heard that under the thunder's bombardment, everything will be destroyed; under the pressure of overwhelming force, everything will be crushed.

古文：今人主之威，非特雷霆也；执重，非特万钧也。
现代文：君主的威严，远远超过了雷霆；君主的权势之重，也远远超过了万钧。
English: The majesty of the monarch far exceeds the thunder; the weight of the monarch's influence also far exceeds the thunder.

古文：开道而求谏，和颜色而受之，用其言而显其身，士犹恐惧而不敢自尽；又况于纵欲恣暴、恶闻其过乎！
现代文：君主即便是主动地请求大家进谏，和颜悦色地接受臣下的批评意见，采纳批评者意见并给以重用，臣子仍然惧怕而不敢将自己的意见和盘托出；更何况君主纵欲残暴，又不愿听到别人议论他的过失呢！
English: Even if the monarch actively solicits everyone's opinion, graciously accepts the criticisms of his subjects, adopts the critics' opinions and gives them great use, the courtiers are still afraid and dare not reveal their own opinions; not to mention that the monarch indulges in cruelty and does not want to hear others talk about his mistakes!

古文：震之以威，压之以重，虽有尧、舜之智，孟贲之勇，岂有不摧折者哉！
现代文：在严威的震慑和权势的重压之下，即使人有尧和舜那样的智谋，有孟贲那样的勇力，难道能不被摧毁吗！
English: Under the severe deterrence and the heavy pressure of power, even if there are people with the wit and wisdom of Yao and Yao, and the courage of Meng Yao, can they not be destroyed?

古文：如此，则人主不得闻其过，社稷危矣。
现代文：这样，君主就听不到别人对他的过失的批评，国家就危险了。
English: In this way, the sovereign does not hear the criticism of his faults, and the country is in danger.

古文：昔者周盖千八百国，以九州之民养千八百国之君，君有馀财，民有馀力，而颂声作。
现代文： 过去，在周朝时大约有一千八百个封国，用九州的百姓，奉事一千八百国的君主，君主有多余的财富，百姓也有宽裕的力量，到处都有歌功颂德的声音。
English: In the past, during the Zhou Dynasty, there were approximately 1,800 fiefdoms, and the people of Kyushu were used to serve the monarchs of 1,800 countries. The monarchs had excess wealth, and the people also had abundant power. Everywhere there was the sound of songs praising merits.

古文：秦皇帝以千八百国之民自养，力罢不能胜其役，财尽不能胜其求。
现代文：秦始皇用一千八百国的百姓奉养自己，百姓筋疲力竭，负担不起他的徭役；倾家荡产，缴纳不足他的赋税。
English: Qin Shi Huang used the people of 1,800 princes to support himself, but the people exhausted their physical strength and could not complete their service, and exhausted their property and could not meet his needs.

古文：一君之身耳，所自养者驰骋弋猎之娱，天下弗能供也。
现代文：秦始皇只不过一位君主，他自己享受的也不过驰骋弋猎的娱乐，天下却无法供应他的需求。
English: Emperor Qin Shihuang was just a monarch, and he himself enjoyed nothing more than the entertainment of galloping and hunting, but the world could not supply his needs.

古文：秦皇帝计其功德，度其后嗣世世无穷；然身死才数月耳，天下四面而攻之，宗庙灭绝矣。
现代文：秦始皇自认为功德无量，估计他的子孙会世代相传以至于无穷；但是，他死后不过几个月，天下人四面进攻，宗庙就毁灭了。
English: Qin Shihuang considered himself to be of immeasurable merit, and estimated that his descendants would be passed down from generation to generation to infinity; however, only a few months after his death, the world attacked on all sides, and the ancestral temple was destroyed.

古文：秦皇帝居灭绝之中而不自知者，何也？
现代文：秦始皇处于被灭绝的危机之中，却没有察觉，原因何在？
English: Qin Shi Huang was in danger of being exterminated, but he did not realize it. What was the reason for this?

古文：天下莫敢告也。
现代文：就在于天下人都不敢告知他实际情况。
English: Because no one in the world dares to tell him.

古文：其所以莫敢告者，何也？
现代文：不敢告知他实情的原因，又是什么呢？
English: What is the reason for not daring to tell him the truth?

古文：亡养老之义，亡辅弼之臣，退诽谤之人，杀直谏之士。
现代文：秦王朝没有尊老养老的道义，没有能够辅佐的大臣，罢免了批评朝政的官员，杀害了敢当面批评谏阻的士人。
English: The Qin Dynasty did not have the morality of respecting the elderly, did not have a minister who could assist, dismissed officials who criticized the government, and killed scholars who dared to criticize and obstruct in person.

古文：是以道谀、媮合苟容，比其德则贤于尧、舜，课其功则贤于汤、武；天下已溃而莫之告也。今陛下使天下举贤良方正之士，天下皆欣欣焉曰： 将兴尧舜之道、三王之功矣。 
现代文：所以那些谄谀逢迎、只求自保利禄的无耻小人，吹捧秦始皇的德政高于尧舜，功业超过商汤和周武；天下已将土崩瓦解，而没有人告知秦始皇。 现在，陛下命令天下人荐举贤良方正的人士，天下人都为之欢欣鼓舞，说： 皇帝将复兴尧舜治理天下之道，造就三王的功业了。 
English: Therefore, those shameless villains, who only sought Paulillo, touted the Qin Shihuang Emperor's virtuous politics as superior to that of Zhou, and his achievements as superior to those of Shang Tang and Zhou Wu; the world had collapsed, but no one told the Qin Shihuang Emperor. Now, His Majesty ordered the world to recommend virtuous and upright people, and the world was delighted and encouraged, saying: The emperor will revive the way of governing the world and create the achievements of the three kings.

古文：天下之士，莫不精白以承休德。
现代文：天下的人才，莫崐不努力自我完善以求能被皇帝选用。
English: No talented person in the world would not work hard to improve himself in order to be selected by the emperor.

古文：今方正之士皆在朝廷矣；又选其贤者，使为常侍、诸吏，与之驰驱射猎，一日再三出。
现代文：现在方正之士，都已被选入朝廷了；又从中选择贤能者，让他们做常侍、诸吏，陛下与他们共同驰驱射猎，一天之内再三出宫。
English: Now, the Founder's men have all been elected to the Imperial Court; and from them, the wise and capable are chosen to be the attendants and officials. His Majesty drives and hunts with them, and leaves the palace three times a day.

古文：臣恐朝廷之解驰，百官之堕于事也。
现代文：我担忧朝政由此而懈弛，百官因此而玩忽职守。
English: I am worried that the government will be weakened as a result of this and that hundreds of officials will neglect their duties as a result.

古文：陛下即位，亲自勉以厚天下，节用爱民，平狱缓刑；天下莫不说喜。
现代文：陛下自即位以来，自我勉励，厚养天下，节省开支，慈爱臣民，断案公平，刑罚宽缓；对此，天下人莫不喜悦。
English: Since his accession to the throne, His Majesty has encouraged himself, nurtured the nation, saved expenses, been kind to his subjects, adjudicated cases fairly, and given lenient punishments; this has not displeased anyone.

古文：臣闻山东吏布诏令，民虽老羸癃疾，扶杖而往听之，愿少须臾毋死，思见德化之成也。
现代文：我听说崤山以东官吏公布诏令时，百姓即使是老弱病残的人，也都拄着手杖前去聆听，希望暂时不死，想看到仁德教化的成功。
English: I heard that when the officials east of Lushan issued the edict, the people, even the old, the weak and the sick, went to listen with their canes, hoping not to die for the time being, and wanting to see the success of benevolence and moral education.

古文：今功业方就，名闻方昭，四方乡风而从；豪俊之臣，方正之士，直与之日日猎射，击兔、伐狐，以伤大业，绝天下之望，臣窃悼之。
现代文：现在功业刚刚建立，好名声刚刚传播，四方仰慕跟从；在此关键时刻，陛下却只与豪俊之臣、方正之士，天天射猎，击兔捉狐，从而伤害国家大业，断绝天下人的期望，我私下为陛下痛惜！
English: At this critical moment, when His Majesty's achievements have just been established, his good reputation has just been spread, and he is admired and followed by people from all over the world, His Majesty is only shooting and hunting rabbits and foxes every day with his gallant subjects, the people of Fang Zheng, thus harming the great cause of the country and shattering the expectations of the world. I privately feel sorry for His Majesty!

古文：古者大臣不得与宴游，使皆务其方而高其节，则群臣莫敢不正身修行，尽心以称大体。
现代文：古代规定大臣不得参预安闲的游乐，为的是让他们都致力于保持大臣的品格和节操，这样，群臣就无人胆敢不严格约束自己，提高品行修养，尽心事君按君臣大礼办事。
English: In ancient times, ministers were not allowed to participate in leisurely recreation, so that they would all be committed to maintaining the minister's character and discipline. In this way, no minister would dare not to strictly restrain himself, improve his moral character, and do his best to act according to the dignity of the monarch and the minister.

古文：夫士，修之于家而坏之于天子之廷，臣窃愍之。
现代文：士的品行，养成于自己家中，却在天子的朝廷之上被破坏，我私下为之惋惜。
English: I privately deplore the fact that a man's moral character, nurtured in his own home, is destroyed in the court of the Son of God.

古文：陛下与众臣宴游，与大臣、方正朝廷论议，游不失乐，朝不失礼，议不失计，轨事之大者也。 
现代文：陛下与群臣消闲游乐，与大臣、方正在朝廷之上议论国事，游娱不失乐，朝会不失礼，这是极为重大的事体。 
English: It is an extremely important matter for His Majesty to have leisure and recreation with his ministers, and to discuss state affairs with his ministers and officials at the Imperial Court. It is not a bad thing to have leisure and recreation, and it is not a bad thing to have a meeting with the Imperial Court.

古文：上嘉纳其言。
现代文：文帝赞许并采纳了他的意见。
English: Emperor Wen approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：上每朝，郎、从官上书疏，未尝不止辇受其言。
现代文：文帝每次上朝，郎官和从官进呈奏疏，他从来都是停下辇车接受。
English: Whenever Emperor Wen came to the palace in the morning, his vassals and subordinates were reluctant to come forward. He always stopped his carriage to receive them.

古文：言不可用置之，言可用采之，未尝不称善。
现代文：奏疏所说的，如不可采用就放过一边，如可用就加以采用，未尝不深加赞赏。
English: As Sonos said, if it cannot be used, it should be put aside, if it can be used, it should be used, and it is deeply appreciated.

古文：帝从霸陵上欲西驰下峻阪。
现代文：汉文帝从霸陵上山，想要向西纵马奔驰下山。
English: Emperor Hanwen went up the mountain from Badaling and wanted to go down the mountain in a horse-drawn carriage.

古文：中郎将袁盎骑，并车揽辔。
现代文：中郎将袁盎骑马上前，与文帝车驾并行伸手挽住马缰绳。
English: Zhong Lang rode Yuan Ang to the front of the horse and reached out to take hold of the horse's bridle in parallel with Wen Di's driving.

古文：上曰： 将军怯邪？ 
现代文：文帝说： 将军胆怯了吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "Is the general afraid?"

古文：盎曰： 臣闻 千金之子，坐不垂堂 。
现代文：袁盎回答： 我听说 家有千金资财的人，不能坐在堂屋的边缘 。
English: Yuan Ang replied: I heard that people who have a lot of money cannot sit on the edge of the house.

古文：圣主不乘危，不徼幸。
现代文：圣明的君主不能冒险，不求侥幸。
English: A saintly monarch must not take chances.

古文：今陛下骋六飞驰下峻山，有如马惊车败，陛下纵自轻，奈高庙、太后何！ 
现代文：现在陛下要想放纵驾车的六匹骏马，奔驰下险峻的高山，如果马匹受惊，车辆被撞毁，陛下纵然是看轻自身安危，又怎么对得起高祖的基业和太后的抚育之恩呢！ 
English: Now if His Majesty wants to indulge in driving six fine horses, galloping down a steep mountain, if the horses are frightened and the vehicle is crashed, even if His Majesty is careless of his own safety, how can he be worthy of Gaozu's inheritance and the empress dowager's nurturing grace!

古文：上乃止。
现代文：文帝这才停止冒险。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：上所幸慎夫人，在禁中常与皇后同席坐。
现代文：文帝所宠幸的慎夫人，在宫中经常与皇后同席而坐。
English: Lady Shin, the favorite of Emperor Wen, often sat at the same table with the empress in the palace.

古文：及坐郎置，袁盎引却慎夫人坐。
现代文：等到她们一起到郎官府衙就坐时，袁盎把慎夫人的坐席排在下位。
English: When they arrived at the palace together, Yuan Ang put Mrs. Shan's seat at the bottom of the table.

古文：慎夫人怒，不肯坐；上亦怒，起，入禁中。
现代文：慎夫人恼怒，不肯入坐；文帝也大怒，站起身来，返回宫中。
English: Lady Shan was angry and refused to sit down; Emperor Wen was also furious, stood up and returned to the palace.

古文：盎因前说曰： 臣闻 尊卑有序，则上下和 。
现代文：袁盎借此机会上前规劝文帝说： 我听说 尊卑次序严明，就能上下和睦 。
English: Yuan Ang took this opportunity to come forward and persuade Emperor Wen, saying, "I have heard that if there is a clear order of superiority and inferiority, there will be harmony between the upper and lower ranks.

古文：今陛下既已立后，慎夫人乃妾。妾、主岂可与同坐哉！
现代文：现在，陛下既然已册立了皇后，慎夫人只是妾，妾怎么能与主人同席而坐呢！
English: Now, since Your Majesty has already appointed a queen, and Lady Shin is only a concubine, how can a concubine sit at the same table with her master!

古文：且陛下幸之，即厚赐之。陛下所以为慎夫人，适所以祸之也。陛下独不见 人彘 乎！ 
现代文：况且如果陛下真的宠爱慎夫人，就给她丰厚的赏赐；而陛下现在宠爱慎夫人的做法，恰恰会给慎夫人带来祸害。陛下难道不见 人彘 的悲剧吗！ 
English: Moreover, if His Majesty really favors Lady Shin, he will give her a rich reward; and the way His Majesty favors Lady Shin right now will bring disaster to Lady Shin. Doesn't His Majesty see the tragedy of the human tragedy!

古文：于是上乃说，召语慎夫人，慎夫人赐盎金五十斤。
现代文：文帝这才醒悟，转怒为喜，召来慎夫人，把袁盎的话告诉了她。慎夫人赐给袁盎黄金五十斤以示感谢。
English: Emperor Wen finally came to his senses, turned his anger into joy, summoned Lady Shen, and told her Yuan Ang's words. Lady Shen gave Yuan Ang fifty jin of gold as a token of thanks.

古文：贾谊说上曰： 《管子》曰： 仓廪实而知礼节，衣食足而知荣辱。 
现代文：贾谊对文帝说： 《管子》书中说： 仓库充实人们才会讲究礼节，衣服粮食充足人们才有荣辱观念。 
English: Jia Yi said to Emperor Wen: It is said in the book "The Pipe": People will only pay attention to etiquette if the warehouse is full, and people will only have the concept of honor and shame if they have enough clothes and food.

古文：民不足而可治者，自古及今，未之尝闻。
现代文：假若百姓的温饱问题没有解决，却乐意听命于君主的统治，这种事情，从古到今，我都没有听说过。
English: From ancient times to the present, it has never been heard of that the people's material resources are insufficient but manageable.

古文：古之人曰： 一夫不耕，或受之饥；一女不织，或受之寒。 
现代文：古代有人说： 一个农夫不耕作，就有人要挨饿；一个女子不织布，就有人要挨冻。 
English: The ancients said: If a man does not cultivate, someone will suffer from hunger; if a woman does not weave, someone will suffer from cold.

古文：生之有时而用之亡度，则物力必屈。
现代文：无论什么产品，生产它都有一定的季节时令，用起来如果毫无限制，物资就必会缺乏。
English: No matter what the product, its production has a certain season. If there is no limit to its use, there will be a shortage of materials.

古文：古之治天下，至纤至悉，故其畜积足恃。
现代文：古人治理天下，安排得很细微，很周到，所以国家的积贮足以仗恃。
English: The ancients governed the world in a very delicate and thoughtful manner, so the country's reserves were sufficient to defend itself.

古文：今背本而趋末者甚众，是天下之大残也！淫侈之俗，日日以长，是天下之大贼也！
现代文：现在，脱离农桑本业而从事工商业的人太多了。这是危害天下的一大流弊；追求奢侈的风俗，日益增长，这是危害天下的一大公害。
English: Nowadays, there are too many people who are engaged in industry and commerce instead of farming and weaving. This is a great evil that harms the world. The custom of pursuing luxury is growing day by day. This is a great harm that harms the world.

古文：残、贼公行，莫之或止；大命将泛，莫之振救。
现代文：这两种流弊和公害盛行，没有谁给以制止；政权面临毁坏，没有谁能挽救。
English: These two evils and evils are rampant, and no one can stop them; the regime is facing destruction, and no one can save it.

古文：生之者甚少而靡之者甚多，天下财产何得不蹷。
现代文：天下财富，生产的人很少而挥霍的人却崐很多，怎能不枯竭！
English: How can the world's wealth, produced by so few and squandered by so many, not be exhausted?

古文：汉之为汉，几四十年矣，公私之积，犹可哀痛。
现代文： 大汉建国以来，已近四十年了，国库和私人积贮数量之少，仍然令人悲哀痛惜。
English: It has been nearly forty years since the founding of the Great Han Dynasty, and it is still sad and regrettable that the amount of national treasury and private reserves is so small.

古文：失时不雨，民且狼顾；岁恶不入，请卖爵子。
现代文：一旦老天不按时降雨，百姓就惶恐不安；年景不好，没有收成，百姓或者出卖爵位，或者自卖儿女，换粮度日；此类事情，陛下已经听到了。
English: If God does not send the rain in time, the people will panic; if the year is bad and there is no harvest, the people will either sell their titles or their children in exchange for food; His Majesty has heard of such things.

古文：既闻耳矣，安有为天下阽危者若是而上不惊者！世之有饥、穰，天之行也；禹、汤被之矣。
现代文：哪有天下如此危险而主上不惊惧的！ 世上有丰年有歉年，这是自然规律；古代圣王夏禹和商汤也都曾经历过。
English: There is nothing so dangerous in the world that the Lord is not alarmed! There are good years and bad years in the world, this is the law of nature; the ancient holy king Xia Yu and Shang Tang also experienced it.

古文：即不幸有方二三千里之旱，国胡以相恤？
现代文：假若不幸出现了方圆二三千里的大面积旱灾，国家靠什么去救济百姓？
English: If, by some misfortune, there is a drought two or three thousand miles in circumference, what will the state use for relief?

古文：卒然边境有急，数十百万之众，国胡以馈之？
现代文：突然间边境有紧急情况，征调数十百万将士，国家用什么供应军需？
English: Suddenly there is an emergency on the border, hundreds of thousands to millions of troops, what does the country take as food?

古文：兵、旱相乘，天下大屈，有勇力者聚徒而衡击，罢夫、羸老，易子上咬其骨。
现代文：战争和旱灾同时发生，国家财力无法应付，就会天下大乱，有勇力的人啸聚部众劫掠地方，疲困和老弱的人，就相互交换子女吃人肉。
English: If war and drought occur at the same time, and the country's financial resources cannot cope, there will be chaos in the world. People with courage will gather in large numbers to plunder the country. The tired and the weak will exchange their children to eat human flesh.

古文：政治未毕通也，远方之能僭拟者并举而争起矣；乃骇而图之，岂将有及乎！
现代文：政事的治理没有完全通畅，远方那些势力强大有称帝野心的人，就会一起举兵争着起事；若发展到这般田地才大吃一惊图谋制止，怎能来得及呢！
English: The governance of political affairs is not completely smooth, and those who are powerful and have imperial ambitions in the distance will raise troops together and fight for the uprising; if it develops to such an extent, they will be surprised and try to stop it, how can they do it in time!

古文：夫积贮者，天下之大命也。苟粟多而财有馀，何为而不成！
现代文：积贮是国家的命脉；如果国家积贮了大量粮食而钱财有余，还有什么办不成的事情！
English: Stockpiling is the lifeblood of the country; if the country has stockpiled a large amount of grain and has enough money, what else can be done!

古文：以攻则取，以守则固，以战则胜，怀敌附远，何招而不至！
现代文：以它为依凭，进攻就攻取，防守就牢固，作战就胜利，要感化、安抚敌人，或者吸引远方部族归附朝廷，怎么会招而不到！
English: Relying on it, the attack is attacked, the defense is solid, the battle is victorious, and it is impossible to influence, appease the enemy, or attract distant tribes to join the imperial court!

古文：今驱民而归之农，皆著于本。使天下各食其力，末技、游食之民转而缘南畮则畜积足而人乐其所矣。
现代文： 现在如果驱使民众归返农事，都依附于土地，让天下人都从事生产满足本人生活需要，让工商业者、游民都改为从事农耕，那么，国家就会有充裕的积贮，百姓就会安居乐业了。
English: Now, if the people are driven to return to farming, and all are attached to the land, so that everyone in the world is engaged in production to meet their own living needs, and so that industrialists and merchants and wanderers are engaged in farming, then the country will have sufficient reserves, and the people will live and work in peace.

古文：可以为富安天下，而直为此廪廪也，窃为陛下惜之！ 
现代文：可以使国家富足，安定天下，而却做出了这种令人危惧的事情，我私下为陛下感到惋惜！ 
English: You can make the world rich, strong and stable, but you have created such a dangerous situation. Privately, I feel sorry for Your Majesty!

古文：上感谊言，春，正月，丁亥，诏开藉田，上亲耕以率天下之民。
现代文：文帝被贾谊的话所打动，春季，正月，丁亥，下诏举行 藉田 仪式，皇帝亲自耕作，为天下臣民做出表率。
English: Emperor Wen was moved by Jia Yi's words. In the spring, the first month of the year, the year of the boar, and the following year, he held a ceremony to lease the fields. The emperor personally cultivated the fields and set an example for all the subjects in the world.

古文：三月，有司请立皇子为诸侯王。
现代文：三月，有关官员请求文帝立皇子为诸侯王。
English: In March, officials requested that the prince be made vassal king.

古文：诏先立赵幽王少子辟强为河间王，硃虚侯章为城阳王，东牟侯兴居为济北王；然后立皇子武为代王，参为太原王，揖为梁王。
现代文：文帝下诏，先立赵幽王的小儿子刘辟强为河间王，立朱虚侯刘章为城阳王，立东牟侯刘兴居为济北王；然后才立皇子刘武为代王，刘参为太原王，刘揖为梁王。
English: Emperor Wen decreed that Liu Biqiang, the youngest son of King Zhao Yu, should be made the king of Hebei, Liu Zhang, the prince of Zhuxu, should be made the king of Chengyang, Liu Xingju, the prince of Dongmou, should be made the king of Jibei, and then the prince Liu Wu should be made the acting king, Liu San should be made the king of Taiyuan, and Liu Xi should be made the king of Liang.

古文：五月，诏曰： 古之治天下，朝有进善之旌，诽谤之木，所以通治道而来谏者也。
现代文：五月，文帝下诏说： 古代明君治理天下，朝廷专设鼓励献计献策的旌旗，树立书写批评意见的木柱，这样做的目的，是为了保证朝政的清明，鼓励臣民前来进谏。
English: In May, Emperor Wen issued the following edict: The ancient Ming Dynasty ruled the world. The imperial court specially set up a banner to encourage the submission of plans and suggestions, and set up wooden pillars to write critical opinions. The purpose of doing this was to ensure the clarity of the imperial government and encourage subjects to come to the court.

古文：今法有诽谤、妖言之罪，是使众臣不敢尽情而上无由闻过失也，将何以来远方之贤良！
现代文：现在的法律中，有 诽谤罪 和 妖言罪 ，这就使得群臣不敢畅所欲言地批评朝政，皇帝无从得知自己的过失，这怎么能吸引远方的贤良之士到朝廷来呢！
English: Among the current laws, there are libel and slander, which makes the courtiers dare not freely criticize the imperial government, and the emperor can not know his own fault. How can this attract the wise men from far away to the imperial court!

古文：其除之！ 
现代文：废除这些罪名！ 
English: Abolish these crimes!

古文：九月，诏曰： 农，天下之大本也，民所恃以生也；而民或不务本而事末，故生不遂。
现代文：九月，文帝下诏说： 农业，是天下的根本，百姓依靠它而生存；有的百姓不从事农耕的本业，却去从事工商末业，所以百姓生活艰难。
English: In September, Emperor Wen issued the following edict: "Agriculture is the foundation of the world, and the people rely on it to survive; some people do not engage in the main business of farming, but engage in the secondary business of industry and commerce, so the people's life is difficult.

古文：朕忧其然，故今兹亲率群臣农以劝之；其赐天下民今年田租之半。 
现代文：朕对此甚为担忧，所以现在亲自率领群臣从事农业耕作，以提倡重视农业；今年只向天下百姓征收田租的一半。 
English: I am very worried about this, so I am now personally leading my ministers to engage in agricultural farming to promote the importance of agriculture; this year, only half of the land rent will be collected from the people of the world.

古文：燕敬王泽薨。
现代文：燕王刘泽去世。
English: Yan Wang Liu Ze passed away.

