古文：聘礼。
现代文：聘礼的礼仪。
English: The etiquette of the bride price.

古文：君与卿图事，遂命使者，使者再拜稽首辞，君不许，乃退。
现代文：国君和三卿谋议聘问的事，于是任命卿为使者。卿再拜稽首辞让，国君不准许，于是退回原位。
English: The sovereign and the three lords discussed the matter of the appointment, and then appointed the lord as the envoy. The lord again offered his resignation, but the sovereign did not allow it, so he returned to his original position.

古文：既图事，戒上介，亦如之。宰命司马戒众介，众介皆逆命，不辞。
现代文：已经谋议出使之事，也同任命使者一样任命上介。宰命令司马任命众介，众介都接受命令，不推辞。
English: The matter was discussed, and a mediator was appointed in the same way as an envoy. The king ordered Sima to appoint mediators, and all the mediators accepted the order and did not refuse.

古文：宰书币，命宰夫官具。
现代文：宰写下行聘礼物的数目，命令宰夫让众官吏准备。
English: The mayor wrote down the number of gifts and ordered the mayor to have all the officials prepare them.

古文：及期，夕币。
现代文：到出使的前一天傍晚，陈列礼物。
English: By the evening of the day before the mission, the gifts are on display.

古文：使者朝服，帅众介夕。
现代文：使者穿上朝服，率领众介，傍晚拜见国君。
English: The envoys put on their imperial robes, led the representatives, and went to see the sovereign in the evening.

古文：管人布幕于寝门外。
现代文：馆人在寝门外铺幕。
English: The librarian put up a curtain outside the bedroom door.

古文：官陈币，皮北首，西上，加其奉于左皮上；马则北面，奠币于其前。
现代文：准备聘礼的人陈列礼物，兽皮，头朝北，以西边为上位。在两边的兽皮上放上进献的物品。马就面对北方，在马前的幕上放上束帛玄纁。
English: The man who prepares the bride price displays the gifts, animal skins, the head facing north, with the west as the upper side. Put the donated items on the animal skins on both sides. The horse faces north, and put a bunch of yakitori on the curtain in front of the horse.

古文：使者北面，众介立于其左，东上。
现代文：使者面朝北，众介站在他的左边，以东边为上位。
English: The messenger faced north, the mediators stood to his left, with the eastern side at the top.

古文：卿、大夫在幕东，西面北上。
现代文：卿大夫在幕的东边，面朝西，以北边为上位。
English: Sir Doctor is on the east side of the curtain, facing west, with the north side at the top.

古文：宰入，告具于君。
现代文：冢宰进入路门向国君报告准备情况。
English: Gongzai entered the gate to report to the sovereign on the state of preparations.

古文：君朝服出门左，南乡。
现代文：国君穿着朝服从路门的左边出来，面朝南。
English: The sovereign, dressed in morning attire, came out from the left side of the gate, facing south.

古文：史读书展币。
现代文：太史读簿书，核对礼物。
English: Taishi reading books, check the gifts.

古文：宰执书，告备具于君，授使者。
现代文：冢宰拿着簿书向国君报告准备完毕，把簿书交给使者。
English: He took the book and reported to the sovereign. When he was ready, he handed the book to the envoy.

古文：使者受书，授上介。
现代文：使者接过簿书，把它交给上介。
English: The messenger took the book and handed it to the petitioner.

古文：公揖入。
现代文：国君拱手行礼，进入路门。
English: The sovereign bowed his head and entered the gate.

古文：官载其币，舍于朝。
现代文：随行官吏把礼物装在车上，停放在寝门外。
English: The accompanying officials loaded the gifts onto the car and parked it outside the bedroom door.

古文：上介视载者、所受书以行。
现代文：上介监视装车的人。把簿书收妥。
English: The agent monitors the person loading the car. Take the books.

古文：厥明，宾朝服释币于祢。
现代文：第二天，主宾穿朝服在祢庙陈列礼物。
English: The next day, the chief guest put on the imperial robes and displayed the gifts in Your Temple.

古文：有司筵几于室中。
现代文：有司在室中铺席设几。
English: There are a few tables in the middle of the room.

古文：祝先入，主人从入。
现代文：祝先进入室中，主人跟随着进入。
English: Please enter the room first, and the owner will follow.

古文：主人在右，再拜，祝告，又再拜。
现代文：主人在右边，两次行拜礼。祝向祢祷告。
English: Lord on the right, two prostrations. I pray to you.

古文：释币，制玄纁束，奠于几下，出。
现代文：主人又两次行拜礼。祝陈列礼物，把长一丈八尺的黑色、浅红色帛共十卷放在几的下边。祝和主人走出室。
English: The host performs two more prostrations. Congratulates the display of gifts, and places a total of ten rolls of eight-foot-long black and light red bamboo shoots at the bottom of the pile. Congratulates and the host leave the room.

古文：主人立于户东。
现代文：主人站在室门的东边。
English: The owner was standing on the east side of the door.

古文：祝立于牖西，又入，取币，降，卷币，实于□，埋于西阶东。
现代文：祝站在窗户西边。祝又走进室内取礼物，下堂，把束帛卷起放在竹器里，埋到西阶的东边。
English: Wish to stand on the west side of the window. Wish to go into the room to pick up the gift, go down the hall, roll up the bunch and put it in a bamboo container and bury it on the east side of the west steps.

古文：又释币于行。
现代文：又在庙门外向行神陈列礼物。
English: Outside the temple gate, gifts were displayed for the departed deities.

古文：遂受命。上介释币亦如之。
现代文：然后接受命令，上介陈列礼物也是如此。
English: They then accept the order, as does the sender of the gift.

古文：上介及众介俟于使者之门外。
现代文：上介和众介等候在使者的门外。
English: Intercessors and mediators waited outside the messenger's door.

古文：使者载旃，帅以受命于朝。君朝服，南乡。
现代文：使者在车上插着旃旗，率领上介和众介在朝门接受命令。国君穿朝服面向南。
English: The envoys planted a banner on the car, and led the crown prince and all the deputies to receive orders at the imperial gate. The sovereign, dressed in imperial robes, faced south.

古文：卿、大夫西面北上。
现代文：卿大夫面朝西，以北为上位。
English: Kyo-dokufu faces west, with north at the top.

古文：君使卿进使者。
现代文：国君派卿让使者进入。
English: The sovereign sent his secretary to let the envoy in.

古文：使者入，及众介随入，北面东上。
现代文：使者进入，众介随着进入，面朝北以东边为上位。
English: Envoys enter, mediators follow, facing north to east for the top.

古文：君揖使者，进之，上介立于其左，接闻命。
现代文：国君拱手施礼，使者进前，上介站在使者的左侧，接续听命。
English: The sovereign bowed and saluted, the envoy advanced, and the high commissioner stood on the left side of the envoy, continuing to follow orders.

古文：贾人西面坐启椟，取圭垂缫，不起而授宰。
现代文：贾人面朝西坐下，打开木匣，拿出圭玉、缫垂悬，不站起而交给冢宰。
English: Jia Ren sat down facing west, opened the wooden box, took out the jade and pendant, did not stand up and handed it over to Zou Zai.

古文：宰执圭屈缫，自公左授使者。
现代文：冢宰拿着圭，把缫折起，从国君的左边交给使者。
English: The aide-de-camp took the clavicle, folded it up, and handed it to the envoy from the sovereign's left.

古文：使者受圭，同面，垂缫以受命。
现代文：使者接受圭，和冢宰面朝同一方向。把缫垂悬，接受使命。
English: The messenger accepts the mission and faces the same direction as the commander. He hangs up the scepter and accepts the mission.

古文：既述命，同面授上介。
现代文：向上介陈述使命后，和上介面朝同一方向把圭、缫交给他。
English: After explaining the mission to the delegate, give him the key and the shovel in the same direction as the delegate.

古文：上介受圭屈缫，出，授贾人，众介不从。
现代文：上介接受圭，折起缫，出门交给随行的贾人。众介不跟随出门。
English: The petitioner accepted the offer, folded the envelope, and handed it to the attendant Jia Ren. The mediators did not follow him out the door.

古文：受享束帛加璧，受夫人之聘璋，享玄纁束帛加琮，皆如初。
现代文：接受进献用的束帛和放在上面的璧，接受国君夫人的聘璋，进献用的黑色、浅红色束帛和放在上面的琮，都和受圭的礼仪相同。
English: It is the same etiquette to receive the cassock for dedication and the brooch placed on top of it, to accept the engagement ring from the wife of the sovereign, and to receive the black and light red cassock for dedication and the brooch placed on top of it.

古文：遂行，舍于郊，敛旃。
现代文：然后出行，在郊外住宿。
English: Then they travel and stay in the suburbs.

古文：若过邦，至于竟，使次介假道，束帛将命于朝，曰： 请帅。 
现代文：把旃旗收起。如果路过邻国，到达边境时，使者派次介借道。次介拿着束帛到邻国的外朝，说： 请引导。 
English: If you are passing through a neighboring country and arrive at the border, the envoy will send a second emissary to take a detour. The second emissary will take a sheaf of straw and go to the foreign emperor of the neighboring country and say: Please guide.

古文：奠币。
现代文：把束帛放在地上。
English: Put the bundles of straw on the ground.

古文：下大夫取以入告，出许，遂受币。
现代文：邻国的下大夫拿着束帛进去报告，出来说 允许 ，于是接受束帛。
English: A junior doctor from a neighbouring country went in with a bundle of cocoons to report, came out and said "permission," and accepted the bundle of cocoons.

古文：士没其竟。誓于其竟，宾南面，上介西面，众介北面东上，史读书，司马执策立于其后。
现代文：邻国按照礼节馈赠，给上宾杀好的牛羊豕三牲，路上用的粮食、草料。众介都得到馈赠，邻国的士引导他们走到国境。在邻国的国境上立《誓》。使者面朝南，上介面朝西，众介面朝北，以东边为上位。史读《誓书》，司马拿着马鞭站在史的身后。
English: In accordance with the etiquette, the neighboring countries gave gifts to the guests, including cattle and sheep that had been slaughtered well, grain and grass for the road. The mediators all received gifts, and the taxi of the neighboring country guided them to the border. On the border of the neighboring country, the "oath" was set up. The messenger faced south, the upper mediator faced west, the lower mediator faced north, and the east side was superior. Shi read the "oath," and Sima stood behind Shi with a horse whip.

古文：未入竟，壹肄。为壝坛，画阶，帷其北，无宫。
现代文：没有进入所聘国的国境，演习一次行聘的礼仪，堆土为坛，画上台阶，帷幕在坛的北边，没有宫。
English: He did not enter the border of the country to which he was invited, he did not practice the etiquette of a single invitation, he used a pile of earth as an altar, he painted steps, the curtain was on the north side of the altar, and there was no palace.

古文：朝服无主，无执也。
现代文：穿朝服，没有立主人，没有拿玉。
English: Wearing the imperial robes, he did not appoint a master and did not take the jewels.

古文：介皆与，北面西上。
现代文：众介都参加演习，面朝北，以西边为上位。
English: All the intermediaries participated in the exercise, facing north, with the west side as the upper side.

古文：习享，士执庭实习夫人聘享，亦如之。
现代文：演习进献，士拿着庭实。演习进献国君夫人的聘礼也是如此。
English: When presenting an engagement gift, the groom holds the court record. This is also the case when presenting the bride price for the wife of the sovereign.

古文：习公事，不习私事。
现代文：演习公事礼仪，不演习私事礼仪。
English: Practice business etiquette, not private etiquette.

古文：及竟，张旃，誓。
现代文：到达所聘国的国境，把旃旗系在车上，立誓不违犯礼仪。
English: When arriving at the border of the country of employment, tie the national flag to the car and swear not to violate etiquette.

古文：乃谒关人。
现代文：然后向守关的人通报。
English: Then inform the guards.

古文：关人问从者几人，以介对。
现代文：守关的人问明随从的有几个人，使者让介回答。
English: The gatekeeper asked the envoy how many people were with him, and the envoy let the envoy answer.

古文：君使士请事，遂以入竟。
现代文：所聘国的国君派士询问来聘的原因。
English: The sovereign of the country of employment sent an envoy to inquire about the reason for the appointment.

古文：入竟，敛旃，乃展。
现代文：于是让人引导来聘者入境。进入所聘国国境，收起旃旗，然后展视礼物。
English: As a result, someone had to guide the invitee into the country, enter the border of the invited country, take down the national flag, and then show off the gift.

古文：布幕，宾朝服立于幕东，西面，介皆北面东上。
现代文：铺幕，主宾穿朝服站在幕的东边，面朝西。介都面朝北，以东为上位。
English: The curtain was set up, and the chief guest, dressed in court attire, stood on the east side of the curtain, facing west.

古文：贾人北面，坐拭圭，遂执展之。
现代文：贾人面朝北，坐下擦拭圭，然后拿着圭展示它。
English: Jia Ren, facing north, sat down to wipe the mark, and then held the mark to show it.

古文：上介北面视之，退复位。
现代文：上介面朝北查视，退回原位。
English: Check the upper interface facing north and return to the original position.

古文：退圭。
现代文：贾人把圭退回匣中。
English: Jia Ren put Gui back in the box.

古文：陈皮，北首，西上，又拭璧，展之，会诸其币，加于左皮上。
现代文：陈列兽皮，头部朝北，以西边为上位。又擦拭璧，展示璧。和束帛一起放在左边的兽皮上。
English: Display the hides, with the head facing north and the top on the west side. Wipe the skin and display the skin. Place it on the hides on the left side with the cormorants.

古文：上介视之，退。
现代文：上介查视，退回。
English: Referral for inspection, returned.

古文：马则幕南、北面，奠币于其前。
现代文：马则在幕的南边，马头朝北，在马前的幕上放上束帛。
English: The horse is on the south side of the curtain, the horse's head facing north, and a sash is placed on the curtain in front of the horse.

古文：展夫人之聘享，亦如之，贾人告于上介，上介告于宾。
现代文：展示国君夫人的行聘进献礼物也是如此。贾人向上介报告，上介向主宾报告。
English: The same applies to the presentation of the gifts presented by the wife of the sovereign. The jia person reports to the delegate, and the delegate reports to the chief guest.

古文：有司展群币以告。
现代文：有司展示众人的束帛，自己报告主宾。
English: There is a steward who shows everyone's bundles and announces the chief guest.

古文：及郊，又展，如初。
现代文：到达远郊，又展示一次行聘、进献的礼物，如同入境后所做的一样。
English: When they reach the outskirts, they display the gifts they have been hired to bring, just as they did after entering the country.

古文：及馆，展币于贾人之馆，如初。
现代文：到达馆舍，在贾人住的馆舍展示行聘、进献的礼物，如同入境后所做的一样。
English: Upon arrival at the embassy, they will display the gifts they received and donated at the embassy where Jia Ren lives, just as they did after entering the country.

古文：宾至于近郊，张旃。
现代文：主宾到所聘国的近郊，让人系好旃旗。
English: The chief guest goes to the outskirts of the country he has been invited to, and has people tie the flags.

古文：君使下大夫请行，反。
现代文：所聘国的国君派下大夫问 到哪儿去？ 
English: The monarch of the country of employment sent a doctor to ask, "Where are you going?"

古文：君使卿朝服，用束帛劳。
现代文：返回。所聘国的国君派卿穿朝服拿束帛慰劳来宾者。
English: Returning. The sovereign of the invited country sent a nobleman wearing a court dress and a sash to console the guests.

古文：上介出请。入告。
现代文：上介出门请问何事，进门报告主宾。
English: Please ask the hostess what's going on when you go out, and report the guest of honor when you come in.

古文：宾礼辞，迎于舍门之外，再拜。
现代文：主宾依礼辞谢。在馆舍门外迎接来慰劳的卿。
English: The chief guest gave a speech of thanks. Outside the door of the building, he greeted the lord who had come to offer consolation.

古文：劳者不答拜。
现代文：两次行拜礼。来慰劳的人不回拜。
English: Pray twice. Those who come to offer consolation do not pray back.

古文：宾揖，先入，受于舍门内。
现代文：主宾拱手行礼，先进入门内，在馆舍的门内接受慰劳品。
English: The chief guest bowed his head, entered the door first, and accepted the consolation prize at the door of the building.

古文：劳者奉币入，东面致命。
现代文：来慰劳的人捧着礼物进入，面朝东向主宾表达自己国君的命令。
English: Those who came to offer consolation entered with gifts, facing east to express their sovereign's orders to the main guests.

古文：宾北面听命，还，少退，再拜稽首，受币。
现代文：主宾面朝北听取命令。转身稍后退，再拜稽首，接受礼物。
English: The chief guest listened to the order facing north. He turned around and retreated a little, then bowed his head and accepted the gift.

古文：劳者出。
现代文：来慰劳的人出门。
English: Those who came to offer consolation went home.

古文：授老币，出迎劳者。劳者礼辞。
现代文：主宾把礼物交给属下。出门迎请来慰劳的人，来慰劳的人依礼辞谢。
English: The chief guest hands over the gift to his subordinates. He goes out to welcome those who have come to console him, and those who have come to console him leave with a polite thank you.

古文：宾揖，先入，劳者从之。
现代文：主宾拱手行礼，先进门，来慰劳的人跟随他。
English: The chief guest bowed his head and went to the door, and the people who came to console him followed him.

古文：乘皮设。
现代文：在门内摆设四张麋鹿皮。
English: Four elk skins are displayed inside the door.

古文：宾用束锦傧劳者，劳者再拜稽首受。
现代文：主宾用束锦酬劳来慰劳的人。来慰劳的人再拜稽首，接受束锦。
English: The chief guest rewards those who come to comfort him with a bundle of brocade. Those who come to comfort him bow their heads and accept the bundle of brocade.

古文：宾再拜稽首，送币。
现代文：主宾为送上礼物再拜，稽首。
English: The chief guest bows his head as he hands over the gifts.

古文：劳者揖皮出，乃退。
现代文：来慰劳的人向拿糜鹿皮的人拱手行礼，然后出门。
English: The man who had come to offer consolation bowed to the man with the elk skin and then left.

古文：宾送再拜。
现代文：于是拿麋鹿皮的人退下，主宾送来慰劳的人，两次行拜礼。
English: So the man with the elk hide retreated, and the guest of honor, who had come to offer consolation, bowed twice.

古文：夫人使下大夫劳以二竹簋方，玄被纁里，有盖，其实枣蒸栗择，兼执之以进。
现代文：受聘国国君的夫人派下大夫来慰劳，拿着二个方竹簠，有黑色面子、浅红色里子的遮盖物，有盖子，里边装着枣和栗子。
English: The wife of the newly appointed sovereign sent a doctor to comfort her, holding two square bamboo baskets, with a black face, a light red lining, a cover, and a lid containing dates and chestnuts.

古文：宾受枣，大夫二手授栗。宾之受，如初礼。
现代文：右手拿着枣，左手拿着栗子进前，主宾接受枣，大夫用双手把栗子交给主宾，主宾接受，如同接受来慰劳的卿的礼仪。
English: With the right hand holding the dates and the left hand holding the chestnuts, the chief guest accepts the dates. The doctor hands the chestnuts to the chief guest with both hands, and the chief guest accepts them, as is the etiquette for receiving a lord who has come to offer consolation.

古文：傧之如初。下大夫劳者遂以宾入。
现代文：招待下大夫的礼仪如同招待来慰劳的卿的礼仪。下大夫来慰劳的人于是随主宾进入。
English: The etiquette of inviting a junior doctor is the same as that of inviting a lord who is coming to console. The person who is coming to be consoled by the junior doctor then enters with the main guest.

古文：至于朝，主人曰： 不腆先君之祧，既拚以俟矣。 宾曰： 俟间。 
现代文：到达外朝，主国国君说： 我先君的祧不好，已经打扫干净等待。 
English: Arriving at the foreign court, the host country's sovereign said: My predecessor's yakitori is not good, it has been cleaned and is waiting.

古文：宾迎，再拜。
现代文：主宾说： 今日得到国君有闲暇时间。 
English: The chief guest said, "Today, the crown prince has leisure time.

古文：卿致命，宾再拜稽首。卿退，宾送再拜。
现代文：宾说： 俟闲。 大夫引导主宾等到馆舍，卿到馆舍，主宾出迎，两次行拜礼。
English: The guest said, "It is idle. The doctor leads the chief guest to the guesthouse, the lord goes to the guesthouse, the chief guest greets him, and two prostrations are performed.

古文：宰夫朝服设飧：饪一牢，在西，鼎九，羞鼎三；腥一牢，在东，鼎七。
现代文：宰夫穿朝服设便宴。煮熟的牛羊豕三牲在西边，鼎九个，陪鼎三个。生的牛羊豕三牲在东边，鼎七个。
English: The butler, dressed in court attire, is holding a banquet. The boiled beef and mutton stew is on the west side, with nine rings and three side rings. The raw beef and mutton stew is on the east side, with seven rings.

古文：堂上之馔八，西夹六。
现代文：堂上的饭食有八簋、六铏、两簠、八壶。
English: Meals in the hall come in eight yakitori, six yakitori, two yakitori and eight pots.

古文：门外米、禾皆二十四，薪刍倍禾。
现代文：上介是煮熟的牛羊豕三牲，在西边，鼎七个，陪鼎三个。
English: The main course is cooked beef and mutton stew with three side dishes. On the west side, there are seven side dishes and three side dishes.

古文：上介：饪一牢，在西，鼎七，羞鼎三；堂上之馔六；门外米、禾皆十车，薪刍倍禾。
现代文：堂上的饭食有六簋、四铏、两簠、六壶。门外的米、禾都是十车。柴、草二十车。
English: The meals in the hall are six yakitori, four yakitori, two yakitori, and six yakitori. Outside the door, there are ten carts of rice and grain, and twenty carts of firewood and grass.

古文：众介皆少牢。
现代文：众介都是煮熟的羊豕。
English: All the entrees were boiled mutton stew.

古文：厥明，讶宾于馆。
现代文：第二天，下大夫到馆舍迎接主宾。
English: The next day, the junior doctor went to the guesthouse to greet the chief guest.

古文：宾皮弁聘，至于朝。宾入于次，乃陈币。
现代文：主宾穿皮弁服朝聘主国国君，到朝，主宾进入，有司在门外西边依次陈列礼物。
English: The chief guest is dressed in a leather dinner jacket of the host country's sovereign, and when the morning comes, the chief guest enters, and the host displays the gifts in turn on the west side of the door.

古文：卿为上摈，大夫为承摈，士为绍摈。
现代文：卿做为上摈，大夫为承摈，士做为绍摈。
English: The host country receives the invited guests, with the lord as the host, the doctor as the host, and the scholar as the guest.

古文：摈者出请事。
现代文：摈是出门问事并传话的人。
English: A deaf person goes out to ask what's going on.

古文：公皮弁，迎宾于大门内。
现代文：国君穿皮弁服，在大门内迎宾。
English: The sovereign, dressed in leather, greets the guests at the gate.

古文：大夫纳宾。
现代文：大夫引主宾进入。
English: The doctor ushered the chief guest in.

古文：宾入门左，公再拜，宾辟，不答拜。
现代文：主宾由门的左侧进入。主国国君两次行拜礼，主宾辞谢，不回拜。
English: The chief guest enters from the left side of the door. The host country's sovereign performs two prostrations. The chief guest declines and does not return the prostration.

古文：公揖入，每门每曲揖。
现代文：主国国君拱手行礼进入中门。每到一门一曲都拱手行礼。
English: The host country's sovereign entered the middle gate with a bow. He bowed his head at every gate.

古文：及庙门，公揖入，立于中庭；宾立接西塾。
现代文：到庙门，主国国君拱手行礼进入，站立在中庭。主宾接近西塾站立。
English: At the temple gate, the host country's sovereign enters with a bow and stands in the atrium. The guest of honor stands near the West Juku.

古文：几筵既设，摈者出请命。
现代文：几、筵已经设好。上摈出来转达国君的命令。
English: At this point, the anchor has been set up. The anchor comes out to convey the sovereign's order.

古文：贾人东面坐启椟，取圭垂缫，不起而授上介。
现代文：贾人面朝东坐下，打开木匣，取出圭玉，丝垫悬垂，把圭玉交给上介，不站起。
English: Jia Ren sat down facing east, opened the wooden box, took out Gui Yuping, the silk cushion was suspended, and handed Gui Yuping to the superintendent without standing up.

古文：上介不袭，执圭屈缫，授宾。
现代文：上介不加穿袭衣，拿着圭，折起丝垫，交给主宾。
English: The hostess doesn't have to wear a suit, but takes the key chain, folds up the silk cushion, and hands it to the chief guest.

古文：宾袭，执圭。
现代文：主宾加穿袭衣，拿着圭。
English: The chief guest also wears a suit and holds a torch.

古文：摈者入告，出辞玉。
现代文：上摈进来告诉主宾，出来，辞谢圭玉。
English: The hostess came in and told the chief guest to come out and thank her.

古文：纳宾，宾入门左。
现代文：引主宾进入，主宾由门的左侧进入。
English: Lead the guest of honor in. The guest of honor enters from the left side of the door.

古文：介皆入门左，北面西上。
现代文：介也都从门的左侧进入，面朝北，以西为上位。
English: The representatives also entered from the left side of the door, facing north, with the west as the upper level.

古文：三揖，至于阶，三让。
现代文：三次拱手行礼，到台阶，三次谦让。
English: Three times bow, to the steps, three times humbly.

古文：公升二等，宾升，西楹西，东面。摈者退中庭。
现代文：主国国君先登上二个台阶，主宾登堂，站在西楹柱的西边，面朝东，上摈退到中庭。
English: The host country's sovereign ascended two steps first, and the chief guests entered the hall, standing on the west side of the west pillar, facing east, and retreated to the atrium.

古文：宾致命。公左还，北乡。
现代文：主宾转达自己国君的 命令 ，主国国君向左转身，面向北。上宾进前。
English: The chief guest conveyed the order of his sovereign, the chief sovereign turned to the left and faced north. The chief guest stepped forward.

古文：摈者进。公当楣再拜。
现代文：主国国君对着堂上的横梁，两次行拜礼。
English: The host, the sovereign, faced the beams of the hall and prayed twice.

古文：宾三退，负序。
现代文：主宾三次退避，背向西墙。
English: The chief guest retreated three times, turning his back to the western wall.

古文：公侧袭，受玉于中堂与东楹之间。
现代文：主国国君独自加穿袭衣，在中堂与东楹之间接受圭玉。
English: The head of the host country, the sovereign, is the only one to wear a ceremonial robe, and receives the key beads between the middle hall and the east gallery.

古文：摈者退，负东塾而立。
现代文：上摈退回，背向东塾站立。
English: Go back up the stairs and stand with your back to the East Wing.

古文：宾降，介逆出。
现代文：主宾下堂，介按与进门时相反的顺序出门。
English: The chief guest will leave the hall in the opposite order to that in which he entered.

古文：宾出。
现代文：主宾出门。
English: The chief guest is leaving.

古文：公侧授宰玉，裼，降立。
现代文：主国国君独自把玉交给太宰。主国国君露出裼衣，下堂站立。
English: The host, the sovereign, gave the ball to Dazai alone. The host, the sovereign, exposed his robe and stood up.

古文：摈者出请。
现代文：上摈出来请主宾。
English: If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to ask.

古文：宾裼，奉束帛加璧享。
现代文：主宾露出裼衣，捧着束帛，上边放着璧，进献。
English: The chief guest shows off his ceremonial robe, holds a bunch of scepters, and presents a gem on the upper side.

古文：摈者入告，出许。
现代文：上摈进去报告，出来接受。
English: If someone knocks on the door, report it and come out and say, "Allowed."

古文：庭实，皮则摄之，毛在内；内摄之，入设也。
现代文：放在庭中的礼物：兽皮，右手拿着前足，左手拿着后足，兽毛在里边，两手相向拿着，进门陈设。
English: Gifts placed in the garden: animal skin, holding the front paw in the right hand, holding the hind paw in the left hand, animal hair inside, holding both hands facing each other, displayed at the entrance.

古文：宾入门左，揖让如初，升致命，张皮。
现代文：主宾由门的左边进入，拱手行礼，谦让，像原先一样。
English: The chief guest enters from the left side of the door, bowing and bowing, as before.

古文：公再拜受币。
现代文：登堂转达自己国君的命令。
English: to convey the orders of his sovereign.

古文：士受皮者自后右客；宾出，当之坐摄之。
现代文：拿兽皮的人打开兽皮。主国国君两次行拜礼接受礼物。接受兽皮的士在右边由客人的身后过到客人的左边。主宾出门。
English: The person with the animal skin opens the animal skin. The host country's sovereign performs two prostrations to receive the gift. The taxi that receives the animal skin passes from the guest's back to the guest's left on the right. The main guest leaves.

古文：公侧授宰币，皮如入，右首而东。
现代文：士对着主宾坐下，把兽皮折叠。国君独自把礼物交给太宰，兽皮如同进来时一样，兽皮头朝右向东。
English: The host sits down opposite the chief guest and folds up the hide. The sovereign gives the gift to the dazai alone. The hide is just as it was when he came in, with the head of the hide facing to the right and east.

古文：聘于夫人，用璋，享用琮，如初礼。
现代文：向主国国君的夫人行聘用璋，进献用琮。如同原初的礼仪。
English: It is the same as the original etiquette to pay homage to the wife of the sovereign.

古文：若有言，则以束帛，如享礼。
现代文：如果有话转达，就用束帛，如同进献的礼仪。
English: If there is something to be conveyed, it is done with a bunch of bamboo shoots, just like the etiquette of offering.

古文：摈者出请事，宾告事毕。
现代文：上摈出来问主宾事情，主宾告诉他公事结束。
English: The host came out to ask the guest of honor about something, and the guest of honor told him that the business was over.

古文：宾奉束锦以请觌。摈者入告，出辞，请礼宾。
现代文：主宾捧着束锦请求私人拜见主国国君，上摈进内报告，出来辞谢，请求按礼招待主宾。
English: The chief guest, holding a bunch of brocade, requests a private meeting with the host country's sovereign, reports to the host country, comes out to say thank you, and requests that the chief guest be invited according to etiquette.

古文：宾礼辞，听命。
现代文：主宾依礼辞谢，听从主国国君的命令。
English: The chief guest gave a speech of thanks and obeyed the orders of the host country's sovereign.

古文：摈者入告。
现代文：上摈进内报告国君主宾答应。
English: The monarch guests of the reporting country agreed.

古文：宰夫彻几改筵。
现代文：宰夫撤去几，改设筵席。
English: The steward removed a few seats and replaced them with tables.

古文：公出，迎宾以入，揖让如初。
现代文：主国国君出门迎接主宾进入，拱手行礼谦让如同原先一样。
English: The host country's sovereign went out to welcome the guest of honor, bowing and bowing as before.

古文：公升，侧受几于序端。
现代文：主国国君登堂，在东墙的前端单独接受几。
English: The sovereign of the host country enters the hall and receives several guests individually at the front of the east wall.

古文：宰夫内拂几三，奉两端以进。
现代文：宰夫向内拂试几三次，拿着几的两端进前。
English: Zayu swung the whisk inwards a few times, holding the two ends of the whisk and moving forward.

古文：公东南乡，外拂几三，卒，振袂，中摄之，进，西乡。
现代文：国君面向东南，向下拂撢几三次，拂撢完毕，抖抖衣袖，拿着几的中间，进前，面向西。
English: Guojun faced southeast, whisked downwards a few times, and after whisking, shook his sleeves, holding the middle of a few, walked forward, facing west.

古文：摈者告。宾进，讶受几于筵前，东面俟。公壹拜送。
现代文：上摈报告主宾，主宾走到筵前接过几，面朝东等待国君为送上几行一次拜礼，主宾用几避闪。
English: The chief guest reports to the eunuch, the chief guest walks to the front of the eunuch to receive the eunuch, faces east to wait for the sovereign to send a few lines of a prayer, the chief guest uses a few dodges.

古文：宾以几辟，北面设几，不降，阶上答再拜稽首。
现代文：面朝北放下几，不下堂，在台阶上回拜两次拜礼，两次稽首礼。
English: Face north, put down a few, do not go down the hall, on the steps back to worship twice, twice bow.

古文：宰夫实觯以醴，加柶于觯，面枋。
现代文：宰夫在觯中斟上甜洒，在觯中放上报甜洒的勺。
English: Zaif pours sweet sprinkles into the urn, and places a spoon with sweet sprinkles in the urn.

古文：公侧受醴。
现代文：小端在前。
English: Small end in front.

古文：宾不降，壹拜，进筵前受醴，复位。
现代文：国君自己接过甜酒。主宾不下堂，行一次拜礼，进到筵前接受甜酒，回到原位。
English: The sovereign himself received the sweet wine. The chief guest did not leave the hall, performed a prayer, entered the antechamber to receive the sweet wine, and returned to his original place.

古文：公拜送醴。
现代文：国君为送上甜酒行拜礼。
English: The sovereign performs a ceremony to present the sweet wine.

古文：宰夫荐笾豆脯醢，宾升筵，摈者退负东塾。
现代文：宰夫进献笾、豆、干肉、肉酱，主宾登上筵席，上摈退下背朝东塾。
English: The head waiter brings dumplings, beans, dried meat, and meat sauce. The chief guest ascends to the banquet table, then retreats to the back of the table.

古文：宾祭脯醢，以柶祭醴三，庭实设。
现代文：主宾祭干肉、肉酱，用柶祭甜酒三次。牵四匹马到庭中。
English: The chief guest offers dried meat, meat sauce, and sweet wine three times. He leads four horses into the courtyard.

古文：降筵，北面，以柶兼诸觯，尚擸，坐啐醴。
现代文：主宾走下席位，面朝北，把柶和觯合在一起，拿着柶柄，坐下尝甜酒。
English: The chief guest stepped down from the seat, facing north, put the gourd and pestle together, took the pestle handle, sat down and tasted the sweet wine.

古文：公用束帛。
现代文：国君用束帛酬谢。
English: The sovereign rewarded him with a bunch of strawberries.

古文：建柶，北面奠于荐东。
现代文：把柶插在觯中，面朝北，放在祭物的东边。
English: And you shall put the burnt offering in the middle of the burnt offering on the north side, on the east side of the burnt offering.

古文：摈者进相币。
现代文：上摈进前佐助赠送礼物。
English: Those who did not come forward were presented with gifts by the assistant governor.

古文：宾降辞币，公降一等辞。
现代文：主宾下堂，为赠送礼物辞谢。
English: The chief guest came down the hall to say thank you for the gift.

古文：栗阶升，听命，降拜，公辞。
现代文：国君走下一级台阶辞谢主宾下堂。
English: The sovereign stepped down one step to thank the chief guest.

古文：升，再拜稽首，受币，当东楹，北面，退，东面俟。
现代文：主宾登堂，两次行拜礼，行稽首礼，面朝北，与东楹柱平齐接受礼物。主宾退回，面朝东等待。
English: The chief guest enters the hall, performs two prostrations, performs the ceremonial head bow, faces north, and receives the gift level with the east pillar. The chief guest returns and waits facing east.

古文：公壹拜，宾降也。公再拜。
现代文：国君行一次拜礼，主宾下堂，国君两次行拜礼。
English: The sovereign performs one prayer, the chief guest leaves the hall, and the sovereign performs two prayers.

古文：宾执左马以出。
现代文：主宾牵着左边的马出门。
English: The chief guest leads the horse on the left out of the door.

古文：上介受宾币，从者讶受马。
现代文：上介接过主宾的礼物，跟随的人迎过来接过马。
English: The hostess received a gift from the chief guest, and the people who followed her came to greet her and take the horse.

古文：宾觌，奉束锦，总乘马，二人赞。入门右，北面奠币，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾拜见，捧着束锦。二人牵着有装饰的四匹马，从门的右边进入，面朝北放下束锦，再拜稽首。
English: The chief guest bids farewell, holding the brocade. Two people, leading four decorated horses, enter from the right side of the door, face north, put down the brocade, and bow their heads.

古文：摈者辞。
现代文：摈者辞谢。
English: Thank you for your resignation.

古文：宾出。
现代文：主宾出门。
English: The chief guest is leaving.

古文：摈者坐取币出，有司二人牵马以从，出门，西面于东塾南。
现代文：摈者坐下拿取束锦，出门。有司二人牵着马跟随着出门，面朝西站立在东塾的南边。
English: The bridegroom sits down, takes the brocade, and goes out. Two grooms, leading the horse, follow him out, and stand facing west on the south side of the East Juku.

古文：摈者请受。宾礼辞，听命。
现代文：主宾依礼辞谢，听从命令。
English: The chief guest bowed politely and obeyed the order.

古文：牵马，右之。
现代文：右手牵着马进入中庭陈列。
English: She led the horse with her right hand into the atrium display.

古文：入设。宾奉币，入门左，介皆入门左，西上。
现代文：主宾捧着束锦从门的左边进入，介都从门的左边进入，以西边为上位。
English: The chief guest enters from the left side of the door holding a bunch of brocade, and everyone enters from the left side of the door, with the west side as the upper side.

古文：公揖让如初，升。
现代文：国君拱手行礼如同初时一样。
English: The sovereign bowed his head as he did at the beginning of the ceremony.

古文：公北面再拜。
现代文：登堂，国君面朝北两次行拜礼。
English: Upon entering the church, the sovereign faced north and performed two prostrations.

古文：宾三退，反还负序。振币进授，当东楹北面。
现代文：主宾三次退避，转身向西，又转身向东，背向西墙站立。
English: The chief guest retreated three times, turned to the west, turned to the east, and stood with his back to the west wall.

古文：士受马者，自前还牵者后，适其右，受。
现代文：主宾用衣袖向内撢拂束锦进前与东楹柱平齐，面朝北交给国君。接受马的士，由前边转身，从牵马人的身后到他的右边接过马。
English: The chief guest swept the brocade with the sleeve towards the inner hoop and advanced in line with the eastern pillar, and handed it to the sovereign, facing north. Accepting the horse taxi, he turned from the front and took the horse from the back of the horse-puller to his right.

古文：牵马者自前西，乃出。
现代文：牵马的人由前边往西然后出门。
English: The man leading the horse goes from the front to the west and then out the door.

古文：宾降阶东拜送。
现代文：主宾下堂，在西阶的东边为送马行拜礼。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall and worships the horse on the east side of the west steps.

古文：君辞。
现代文：国君辞谢。
English: The Emperor withdrew his thanks.

古文：拜也，君降一等辞。
现代文：主宾行拜礼，国君走下一级台阶辞谢。
English: The chief guest made a prayer, and the sovereign stepped down one step to say thank you.

古文：摈者曰： 寡君从子，虽将拜，起也。 
现代文：上摈说： 敝国国君跟随您走下台阶，将要行拜礼，请您登堂。 
English: The chief priest said, "Your majesty, I will follow you down the steps. We are going to worship. Please come into the church."

古文：栗阶升。
现代文：主宾一步一级台阶登堂。
English: The chief guest entered the hall step by step.

古文：公西乡。
现代文：国君面向西。
English: The sovereign faces west.

古文：宾阶上再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾在台阶上再拜稽首。
English: The chief guest bowed his head again on the steps.

古文：公少退。
现代文：国君稍退避。
English: The sovereign retreated a little.

古文：宾降出。
现代文：主宾走下台阶出门。
English: The chief guest went down the steps and out the door.

古文：公侧授宰币。马出。
现代文：国君独自把束锦交给太宰，让人牵马出门。
English: The sovereign gave the brocade to Dazai alone and let him lead the horse out of the house.

古文：公降立。
现代文：国君下堂站立。
English: The sovereign left the hall and stood up.

古文：摈者出请。
现代文：摈者出门问事。
English: If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to ask.

古文：上介奉束锦，士介四人皆奉玉锦束，请觌。
现代文：上介捧着束锦，士介四人都捧着玉锦束请求接见。
English: The upper mediator is holding a bunch of brocade, and the four judges are holding a bunch of jade brocade to request an audience.

古文：摈者入告，出许。
现代文：摈者进门报告，出来说 允许 。
English: If someone knocks on the door, report it and come out and say, "Allowed."

古文：上介奉币，俪皮，二人赞；皆入门右，东上，奠币，皆再拜稽首。
现代文：上介捧着束锦，让二人帮助拿着两张鹿皮，都由门的右边进入，以东为上位，放下礼物，都行两次稽首礼。
English: The superintendent held the brocade, let the two help hold the two deer skins, both entered from the right side of the door, with the east as the upper level, put down the gift, and both performed two bowing ceremonies.

古文：摈者辞，介逆出。
现代文：摈者辞谢。
English: When the offender says thank you, the judges go out in the opposite order to when they came in.

古文：摈者执上币，士执众币；有司二人举皮，从其币。出请受。
现代文：上介、众介按与进来相反的顺序出门。摈者拿着上介的束锦，士拿着士介的玉锦，有司二人举着鹿皮，跟随着拿束锦的摈者，出门，向上介请求接受。
English: The petitioner and the mediators go out in the opposite order to the order in which they came in. The petitioner takes the bundle brocade of the petitioner, the scholar takes the jade brocade of the scholar, and the two judges hold the deer skin and follow the petitioner who takes the bundle brocade. They go out and ask the petitioner to accept.

古文：委皮南面；执币者西面北上。
现代文：有司放下鹿皮，面朝南站立。拿玉锦的人面朝西，以北边为上位。
English: Yushi put down the deerskin and stood facing south. The person who took the jade brocade faced west, with the north side being superior.

古文：摈者请受。
现代文：摈者向上介请示接受。
English: The offender shall request the superior to accept it.

古文：介礼辞，听命。
现代文：上介依礼辞谢。听从命令。
English: Submit according to etiquette. Obey orders.

古文：皆进，讶受其币。
现代文：上介和众介都进前接受束锦。
English: Both the sender and the sender's agents step forward to receive the bundle.

古文：上介奉币，皮先，入门左，奠皮。
现代文：上介捧着束锦、鹿皮先从门的左边进入，放下鹿皮。
English: Shousuke, holding a bundle of brocade and deer skin, enters from the left side of the door and puts down the deer skin.

古文：公再拜。
现代文：国君两次拜谢。
English: The sovereign offered his thanks twice.

古文：介振币，自皮西进，北面授币，退复位，再拜稽首送币。介出。
现代文：上介用衣袖撢拂束锦，由鹿皮的西边进前，面朝北交给国君。退回原位，为献上束锦行两次稽首礼。上介出门。
English: Shousuke whisks the brocade with his sleeve broom, steps forward from the west side of the deer skin and hands it to the sovereign, facing north. He returns to his original position and performs two bowing ceremonies to present the brocade. Shousuke leaves.

古文：宰自公左受币，有司二人坐举皮以东。
现代文：太宰由国君的左边接过束锦，有司二人坐下，举起鹿皮往东去。
English: Dazai took the brocade from the left side of the sovereign, and the two men sat down and lifted the buckskin to the east.

古文：摈者又纳士介。
现代文：摈者又引导士介进入。
English: The assailant then led the judge's assistant inside.

古文：士介入门右，奠币，再拜稽首。
现代文：士介由门的右边进入，放下玉锦，行两次稽首礼。
English: The judges enter from the right side of the door, put down the brocade, and perform two bowing ceremonies.

古文：摈者辞，介逆出。
现代文：摈者辞谢，士介按与进来时相反的顺序出门。
English: When the offender says thank you, the judges go out in the opposite order to when they came in.

古文：摈者执上币以出，礼请受，宾固辞。
现代文：摈者拿着士介之长的玉锦出来，依礼请求按客人的礼节接受。主宾代为辞谢。
English: The hostess comes out with the long brocade and accepts the guest's request according to etiquette. The guest of honor takes the stage to say thank you.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君两次回拜。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：摈者出，立于门中以相拜，士介皆辟。
现代文：摈者出门，站立在门的中间把国君的回拜告诉士介。士介都避开。
English: The eunuch went out, stood in the middle of the door and told the courtier of the sovereign's obeisance. The courtier avoided him.

古文：士三人，东上，坐取币，立。
现代文：主国的士三人，以东边为上位，坐下拿玉锦，站起。
English: The three taxi drivers of the host country, with the east side as the higher side, sat down to take the jade brocade and stood up.

古文：摈者进。
现代文：摈者走近国君。
English: The eunuch approached the sovereign.

古文：宰夫受币于中庭，以东，执币者序从之。摈者出请，宾告事毕。
现代文：宰夫在中庭接过玉锦往东走。拿着玉锦的三个士依次跟随着。摈者出门问事，主宾告诉说事情已完毕。
English: Zaif picked up the brocade in the atrium and walked east. The three gentlemen holding the brocade followed in turn. The deceased went out to ask questions, and the chief guest told him that the matter was over.

古文：摈者入告，公出送宾。
现代文：摈者进门报告国君，国君出门送主宾。
English: The host enters the door to report to the sovereign, and the sovereign goes out to see off the chief guest.

古文：及大门内，公问君。
现代文：到大门内，国君问询主宾的国君居处如何，主宾回答。
English: Once inside the gate, the sovereign asked the chief guest where the sovereign lived, to which the chief guest replied.

古文：公劳介，介皆再拜稽首，公答拜。宾出，公再拜送，宾不顾。
现代文：国君两次行拜礼。国君问候大夫，主宾回答。国君问候主宾路途劳苦，主宾再拜稽首。主宾出大门，国君两次行拜礼送行，主宾不回视。
English: The sovereign performs two prostrations. The sovereign greets the doctor, the chief guest answers. The sovereign greets the chief guest, who labors on the road, and the chief guest bows his head again. The chief guest leaves the gate, the sovereign performs two prostrations to see him off, and the chief guest does not look back.

古文：宾请有事于大夫，公礼辞，许。
现代文：主宾向大夫问卿先到馆舍酬劳的事。国君依礼辞谢。允许。
English: The chief guest asked the doctor if he could come to the pavilion first. The sovereign politely declined. Permission granted.

古文：宾即馆。
现代文：主宾到馆舍。
English: The chief guest arrives at the building.

古文：卿、大夫劳宾，宾不见。
现代文：卿、大夫慰劳主宾，主宾不见。
English: Sir, the doctor is consoling the guest of honor, but the guest of honor is missing.

古文：大夫奠雁再拜，上介受。
现代文：大夫放下雁，两次行拜礼，上介接受。
English: The doctor put down the goose, prayed twice, and accepted the referral.

古文：劳上介，亦如之。
现代文：慰劳上介，也是如此。
English: The same applies to the comfort work referral.

古文：君使卿韦弁，归饔饩五牢。
现代文：国君让卿穿韦弁服，馈赠主宾煮熟的牛羊豕各一具，未煮的牛羊豕各两具，活的牛羊豕各两具。
English: The sovereign let the emperor wear Wei-ben clothes, and presented the chief guests with one cooked beef and mutton chop, two uncooked beef and mutton chops, and two live beef and mutton chops.

古文：上介请事，宾朝服礼辞。
现代文：上介问是何事，主宾穿朝服依礼辞谢。
English: The host asked what was going on, and the chief guest, dressed in a morning suit, politely declined.

古文：有司入陈。
现代文：有司进到主宾馆舍的庙陈列。
English: Some of them went to the temple exhibition in the main hotel building.

古文：饔，饪一牢，鼎九，设于西阶前，陪鼎当内廉，东面北上，上当碑，南陈。
现代文：饪与腥。煮熟的牛羊豕，九个鼎，摆放在西阶前，陪鼎对着堂中间的堂边摆放，朝东，以北边为上位。
English: Boiled beef and mutton stew, nine rings, placed in front of the west steps, with the ring placed against the middle of the hall, facing east, with the north side as the uppermost.

古文：牛、羊、豕、鱼、腊，肠、胃同鼎，肤、鲜鱼、鲜腊，设扃鼏。
现代文：上位的鼎与碑一齐，向南陈列，牛、羊、豕、鱼、腊、肠、臐同在一鼎，肤、鲜鱼、鲜腊摆在有横杠的鼎中，有鼎盖。
English: The top-ranking Ding and the monument are displayed together, facing south. Cattle, sheep, yakitori, fish, pork, intestines, and pork are all in one Ding. The skin, fresh fish, and fresh pork are placed in the Ding with horizontal bars, and there is a Ding cover.

古文：膷、臐、膮，盖陪牛、羊、豕。
现代文：膷、臐、膮三鼎，陪牛、羊、豕三鼎。
English: There are three kinds of yakitori: stewed yakitori, boiled yakitori, and simmered yakitori. The three kinds of yakitori are served with beef, sheep, and yakitori.

古文：腥二牢，鼎二七，无鲜鱼、鲜腊，设于阼阶前，西面，南陈如饪鼎，二列。
现代文：未煮的牛、羊、豕三牲各两具，鼎十四只，没有鲜鱼、鲜腊，摆放在东阶前，朝西，向南陈列如同盛煮熟的牛羊豕的鼎。都是二列。
English: Uncooked cattle, sheep, and donkeys, two each of the three animals, ding fourteen, no fresh fish, no fresh wax, placed in front of the east steps, facing west, southward displayed like the ding of boiled beef and mutton. All are in two rows.

古文：堂上八豆，设于户西，西陈，皆二以并，东上韭菹，其南醓醢，屈。
现代文：堂上的饭食有八个豆，摆放在室门的西边，向西陈列。都分为二行并列，以东边为上位。东边上位的是腌韭菜，它的南边是肉酱。
English: The meal in the hall has eight beans, placed on the west side of the room door and displayed to the west. They are divided into two rows side by side, with the east side being the uppermost. The uppermost on the east side is the stew, and its south side is the meat sauce.

古文：八簋继之，黍其南稷，错。
现代文：腌菜和肉酱交错摆放。八簋挨着它们向西摆放，黍的南边是稷，交错摆放。
English: The leeks and meat sauce are arranged in a staggered manner. The octopus is placed next to them to the west, and the clams are placed on the south side of the clams, in a staggered manner.

古文：六鉶继之，牛以西羊、豕，豕南牛，以东羊、豕。
现代文：六个盛羹的小鼎挨着往西摆放，牛羹的西边是羊羹、豕羹，豕羹的南边是牛羹，牛羹往东是羊羹、豕羹。
English: Six small jars of yakitori are placed next to each other to the west. To the west of the yakitori is yakitori and yakitori soup, to the south of the yakitori is yakitori, and to the east of the yakitori is yakitori and yakitori soup.

古文：两簠继之，粱在北，八壶设于西序，北上，二以并，南陈。
现代文：两簠挨着往西摆放。
English: The two urns were placed next to each other facing west.

古文：西夹六豆，设于西墉下，北上韭菹，其东醓醢，屈。
现代文：粱在北边。八个酒壶摆放在堂上的西墙边，以北边为上位，二个并排往南陈列。
English: The urn is on the north side. Eight wine jugs are placed on the west wall of the hall, with the north side on top and two side by side to the south.

古文：六簋继之，黍其东稷，错。
现代文：西夹屋有六个豆，设放在夹屋的西墙下，以北为上位。腌韭菜的东边是肉酱，交错摆放。
English: There are six beans in the west clamp room, placed under the west wall of the clamp room, with the north being the uppermost. The east side of the stew is meat sauce, staggered.

古文：四鉶继之，牛以南羊，羊东豕，豕以北牛。
现代文：六簋挨着它们往南摆放，黍的东边是稷，交错摆放。
English: Six cormorants are placed next to them to the south, and cormorants are placed on the east side of the cormorants, staggered.

古文：两簠继之，粱在西。皆二以并，南陈。
现代文：四铏挨着它们摆放，粱在西边，都是二排并列，向南陈列。
English: The four cymbals were placed next to them, and the cymbals on the west side, all two rows side by side, facing south.

古文：六壶西上，二以并，东陈。
现代文：六个酒壶以西边为上位，二个并列，向东陈列。
English: The six wine jugs are arranged with the west side at the top and the two side-by-side to the east.

古文：馔于东方，亦如之，西北上。壶东上，西陈。
现代文：东夹屋的饭食摆放也是如此，以西、北为上位，酒壶以东边为上位，向西陈列。
English: The same is true for the placement of food in the East Annex, with the west and north as the upper level, and the wine jugs with the east as the upper level, and displayed to the west.

古文：醯醢百瓮，夹碑，十以为列，醯在东。
现代文：醋、酱百罋在碑的东西两边摆放，十罋为一列，醋在东边。
English: Vinegar and soy sauce are placed on both sides of the monument, and vinegar is on the east side.

古文：饩二牢，陈于门西，北面东上。
现代文：牛羊豕三牲各二具，陈列在门的西边，朝北，以东边为上位。
English: Cattle, sheep and goats, two of each of the three animals, are displayed on the west side of the gate, facing north, with the east side being the uppermost.

古文：牛以西羊、豕，豕西牛、羊、豕。
现代文：牛的西边是羊、豕，豕的西边是牛、羊、豕。
English: To the west of the ox is the sheep and the donkey, and to the west of the donkey is the ox, the sheep and the donkey.

古文：米百筥，筥半斛，设于中庭，十以为列，北上。
现代文：米一百筥，一筥五斗，摆放在中庭，十筥为一列，以北边为上位。
English: One hundred rice baskets, one basket of five buckets, are placed in the atrium, ten baskets in a row, with the north side being the highest.

古文：黍、粱、稻皆二行，稷四行。
现代文：黍、粱、稻都是二行，稷是四行。
English: Ginger, ginger and rice all have two rows, and ginger has four rows.

古文：门外，米三十车，车秉有五籔。设于门东，为三列，东陈；禾三十车，车三秅。设于门西，西陈。
现代文：门外，米三十车，每车二百四十斗，摆放在门的东边，分为三列，向东陈列。禾三十车，每车六万四千斗，摆放在门的西边，向西陈列。
English: Outside the gate, thirty carts of rice, each weighing 240 catties, were placed on the east side of the gate, divided into three rows and displayed to the east. Thirty carts of wheat, each weighing 64,000 catties, were placed on the west side of the gate and displayed to the west.

古文：薪刍倍禾。
现代文：柴、草各六十车。
English: Sixty carts of firewood and grass each.

古文：宾皮弁迎大夫于外门外，再拜，大夫不答拜。
现代文：主宾穿着皮弁服，在外门的外边迎接大夫，两次行拜礼。大夫不回拜。
English: The chief guest, dressed in a leather jacket, greets the doctor outside the outer gate and performs two prostrations. The doctor does not return the prostration.

古文：揖入。及庙门，宾揖入。
现代文：拱手行礼进门，到庙门，主宾拱手行礼进入。
English: Entering the door with a bow, to the temple gate, the guest of honor enters with a bow.

古文：大夫奉束帛，入，三揖，皆行。
现代文：大夫捧着束帛进入，三次揖手行礼，同时进入。
English: The doctor entered holding a bundle of scissors. He bowed three times and entered.

古文：至于阶，让，大夫先升一等。宾从，升堂，北面听命。
现代文：到达台阶，主宾让大夫先上一级台阶，主宾从后跟随，登堂，面朝北听候主国国君的命令。
English: On reaching the steps, the chief guest asked the doctor to go up the first step first, and the chief guest followed, entering the hall, facing north and waiting for the orders of the sovereign.

古文：大夫东面致命，宾降，阶西再拜稽首，拜饩亦如之。
现代文：大夫面朝东转达国君的命令，主宾下堂，在东阶的西边再拜稽首，拜谢馈赠饩也是如此。
English: The doctor conveyed the sovereign's order facing east, and the chief guest went down the hall and bowed his head again on the west side of the east steps. This was also the case for the thanksgiving gift urn.

古文：大夫辞，升成拜。受币堂中西，北面。
现代文：大夫辞谢，登堂再拜稽首，面朝在堂中的西边接受束帛。
English: The doctor declined, bowed his head as he entered the hall, and received the shackles face down on the west side of the hall.

古文：大夫降，出。
现代文：大夫下堂，出门。
English: The doctor left the hall and went out.

古文：宾降，授老币，出迎大夫。
现代文：主宾下堂，把束帛交给家臣，出门迎接大夫。
English: The chief guest goes down to the hall, hands the satchel to his vassal, and goes out to meet the doctor.

古文：大夫礼辞，许。
现代文：大夫依礼辞谢，答应。
English: The doctor thanked me politely and agreed.

古文：入，揖让如初。
现代文：进门，拱手行礼谦让如初。
English: Enter the door, shake hands, bow and be as humble as before.

古文：宾升一等，大夫从，升堂。
现代文：主宾先上一级台阶，大夫跟随着，登堂。
English: The chief guest goes up the first step, followed by the doctor, and enters the hall.

古文：庭实设，马乘。
现代文：庭上陈四匹马。
English: Four horses are grazing in the yard.

古文：宾降堂，受老束锦，大夫止。
现代文：主宾下堂，从家臣手中接过束锦，大夫不下堂。
English: The chief guest goes down to the hall and receives the brocade from his vassal, but the doctor does not go down.

古文：宾奉币西面，大夫东面。
现代文：主宾捧着束锦面朝西，大夫面朝东。
English: The chief guest holds a bunch of brocade and faces west, while the doctor faces east.

古文：宾致币。
现代文：主宾向大夫送上束锦。
English: The chief guest presented the doctor with a bunch of brocade.

古文：大夫对，北面当楣，再拜稽首，受币于楹间，南面，退，东面俟。
现代文：大夫致谢辞，面朝北与横梁齐，两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。在楹柱中间，面朝南接受束锦，退回，面朝东等待。
English: The doctor gave a speech of thanks, facing north with the crossbeam, performed two prostrations, performed the head bow. In the middle of the pillar, facing south, he received the brocade, returned, and waited facing east.

古文：宾再拜稽首送币。
现代文：主宾为送上束锦两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: The chief guest performs two prostrations to present the brocade, and performs the first prostration.

古文：大夫降，执左马以出。
现代文：大夫下堂，牵着左边的马出庙门。
English: The doctor went down the hall and led the horse on the left out of the temple gate.

古文：宾送于外门外，再拜。
现代文：主宾送到大门的外边，两次行拜礼。
English: The chief guest is brought to the outside of the gate, and two prostrations are performed.

古文：明日，宾拜于朝，拜饔与饩，皆再拜稽首。
现代文：第二天，主宾到主国国君的大门外行拜礼，拜谢馈赠饔与饩，都是两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: On the second day, the chief guest went to the gate of the host country to offer prayers, thanks and gifts, bowing and prostrating twice, and perform the ceremonial head bow.

古文：上介饔饩三牢。饪一牢在西，鼎七，羞鼎三。
现代文：馈赠上介，杀了和活的牛羊豕各三具，煮熟的牛羊豕各一具，摆放在西边。鼎七个，羞鼎三个。
English: As a gift to the superintendent, three pieces of live and dead beef and mutton, and one piece of cooked beef and mutton, were placed on the west side.

古文：腥一牢，在东，鼎七。
现代文：未煮的牛羊豕台一具，在东边，鼎七个。
English: Uncooked beef and mutton stew one, in the east, ding seven.

古文：堂上之馔六，西夹亦如之。筥及瓮，如上宾。
现代文：堂上的饭食有六个豆。西夹屋也是如此，筥和罋数如同主宾。
English: The meal in the hall has six beans, and so does Nishizakiya, and the number of clams and oysters is the same as the number of guests.

古文：饩一牢。
现代文：活的牛羊豕各一具。
English: One live calf and one live lamb each.

古文：门外米、禾视死牢，牢十车，薪刍倍禾。
现代文：门外的米、禾数量视煮熟和未煮熟的牛羊豕的数量定，三牲有十车，柴、草二十车。
English: The amount of rice and grain outside the gate depends on the number of cooked and uncooked cattle and sheep. There are ten carts of livestock and twenty carts of firewood and grass.

古文：凡其实与陈，如上宾。
现代文：凡是陈列的物品和顺序，如同上宾的一样。
English: All the items on display and the order in which they are displayed are the same as for the guests of honour.

古文：下大夫韦弁，用束帛致之。上介韦弁以受，如宾礼。
现代文：下大夫穿韦弁服，用束帛送上，上介穿韦弁服接受，如同主宾的礼仪。
English: The junior doctor will wear a loincloth and send it with a bunch of bamboo shoots, and the senior doctor will wear a loincloth and accept it, just like the etiquette of the chief guest.

古文：傧之两马束锦。士介四人，皆饩大牢，米百筥，设于门外。
现代文：庭中陈列两匹马和束锦，士介四人，都赠活着的牛羊豕各一具，米一百筥，摆放在门外。
English: Two horses and a bundle of brocade were displayed in the courtyard, and the four judges were each given a live ox and goat, and a hundred bags of rice, which were placed outside the door.

古文：宰夫朝服，牵牛以致之。士介朝服，北面再拜稽首受。
现代文：宰夫穿着朝服，牵着牛送给士介，士介穿朝服，面朝北再拜稽首接受。
English: Zaif, wearing a morning suit and leading a cow, gave it to Shisuke. Shisuke, wearing a morning suit and facing north, bowed his head and accepted it.

古文：无傧。
现代文：没有傧。
English: There are no crickets.

古文：宾朝服问卿。
现代文：主宾穿朝服拜访主国的卿。
English: The chief guest visits the lord of the host country in court dress.

古文：卿受于祖庙。
现代文：卿在祖庙中接受。
English: Kyo accepted it at the ancestral temple.

古文：下大夫摈。
现代文：下大夫为摈者。
English: The junior doctor was the first to die.

古文：摈者出请事；大夫朝服迎于外门外，再拜。宾不答拜，揖。
现代文：摈者出门问何事。大夫在大门外迎接，两次行拜礼，主宾不回拜。
English: The doctor greets him outside the gate and performs two prostrations, but the chief guest does not return the prostration.

古文：大夫先入，每门每曲揖。
现代文：拱手行礼。大夫先进门，每个门每个转弯处都拱手行礼。
English: A bow of the hand. The doctor enters through the front door, a bow of the hand at every turn of every door.

古文：及庙门，大夫揖入。
现代文：到庙门，大夫拱手行礼进门。
English: At the temple gate, the doctor entered the gate with a bow.

古文：摈者请命。
现代文：摈者请求命令。
English: The executioner calls for the order.

古文：庭实设四皮。
现代文：庭上摆设四张麋鹿皮。
English: Four elk skins are displayed in the yard.

古文：宾奉束帛入。三揖，皆行，至于阶，让。
现代文：主宾捧着束帛进门，三次拱手行礼，同时前行，到台阶，相互谦让。
English: The chief guest enters the door holding a bunch of bamboo shoots, bowing three times, and at the same time moving forward to the steps, making mutual concessions.

古文：宾升一等；大夫从，升堂，北面听命。宾东面致命。
现代文：主宾登上一级台阶，大夫跟随，登堂。大夫面朝北听候命令，主宾面朝东转达自己国君的命令。
English: The chief guest ascends the first step, the doctor follows and enters the hall. The doctor faces north to listen for orders, while the chief guest faces east to convey the orders of his sovereign.

古文：大夫降，阶西再拜稽首。
现代文：大夫下堂，在台阶的西边再拜稽首。
English: The doctor went down the hall and bowed his head again on the west side of the steps.

古文：宾辞，升成拜。
现代文：主宾辞谢。大夫登堂，再拜，稽首。
English: The chief guest is bowing out. The doctor enters the hall, bids farewell, and makes his bow.

古文：受币堂中西，北面。
现代文：面朝北，在堂中央的西边接受束锦。
English: Facing north, receiving the bundle brocade on the west side of the center of the hall.

古文：宾降，出。
现代文：主宾下堂，出门。
English: The chief guest leaves the hall.

古文：大夫降，授老币，无傧。
现代文：大夫下堂，把束锦交给家臣。没有傧。
English: The doctor went down to the hall and handed the brocade to his vassal. There was no fuss.

古文：摈者出请事。宾面，如觌币。
现代文：摈者出门问何事，主宾请求私人拜见卿，礼物同拜见国君的相同。
English: The guest of honor requests a private meeting with the lord, and the gift is the same as that for meeting the sovereign.

古文：宾奉币，庭实从，入门右。
现代文：主宾奉着束锦，庭中陈列四匹马，从门的右边进入。
English: The chief guest enters from the right side of the door, wearing brocade and with four horses on display in the courtyard.

古文：大夫辞。
现代文：大夫辞谢。
English: The doctor declined.

古文：宾遂左。
现代文：主宾于是从门的左边进入。
English: The chief guest then enters from the left side of the door.

古文：庭实设，揖让如初。
现代文：在庭中陈列，拱手谦让和原先相同。
English: Displayed in the courtyard, it is the same as before.

古文：大夫升一等，宾从之。
现代文：大夫登上一级台阶，主宾跟随着。
English: The doctor ascends the first step, followed by the guest of honour.

古文：大夫对，北面当楣再拜，受币于楹间，南面，退，西面立。
现代文：大夫面朝西，主宾表述拜见之辞，大夫回答，面朝北与横梁齐两次行拜礼。在楹柱间面朝南接受束锦，退回，面朝西站立。
English: The doctor faces west, the guest of honor says his or her greeting, the doctor answers, performs two prostrations, facing north and the crossbeam. Receives the brocade between the pillars, facing south, returns, and stands facing west.

古文：宾当楣再拜送币，降，出。
现代文：主宾与横梁齐为送上束锦两次行拜礼，下堂，出门。
English: The chief guest and the crossbeam go to the altar together twice to present the brocade, and then go out of the hall.

古文：大夫降，授老币。
现代文：大夫下堂，把束锦交给家臣。
English: The doctor went down to the hall and handed the brocade to his vassal.

古文：摈者出请事。上介特面，币如觌。
现代文：摈者出门问是何事，上介单独请求私人拜见卿，拜见的礼物同拜见国君的相同。
English: The eunuch went out to inquire what had happened, and the messenger separately asked to see the lord in private. The gift for the visit was the same as that for the visit to the sovereign.

古文：介奉币。皮，二人赞。入门右，奠币，再拜。
现代文：上介捧着束锦，二人帮着拿着两张鹿皮，从门的右边进入，放下束锦，两次行拜礼。
English: The superintendent held the brocade, and the two helped to hold the two deerskins. They entered from the right side of the door, put down the brocade, and prayed twice.

古文：大夫辞。
现代文：大夫辞谢。
English: The doctor declined.

古文：摈者反币。
现代文：摈者出门把束锦、皮送还上介。
English: Those who fail to do so must return the brocade and leather to the sender.

古文：庭实设，介奉币入，大夫揖让如初。
现代文：陈列庭实，上介捧着束锦进入，大夫拱手行礼谦让如同原先一样。
English: The court was on display, the court usher entered holding the brocade, and the doctor bowed his head as before.

古文：介升，大夫再拜受。
现代文：上介登堂，大夫两次行拜礼接受。
English: The petitioner entered the hall, and the doctor bowed twice to receive it.

古文：介降拜，大夫降辞。
现代文：上介下堂拜谢，大夫下堂辞谢。
English: The superintendent bowed in thanks, and the doctor bowed in resignation.

古文：介升，再拜送币。
现代文：上介登堂，为送上束锦两次行拜礼。
English: Shosuke enters the hall and performs two prostrations to receive the brocade.

古文：摈者出请。众介面，如觌币，入门右，奠币，皆再拜。
现代文：摈者出门问何事，众介请求私人拜见卿，拜见的礼物同拜见国君的礼物相同，由门的右边进入，放下玉锦，都两次行拜礼。
English: The eunuch went out to inquire about something, and the mediators requested a private meeting with the lord. The gift for the meeting was the same as the gift for the meeting with the sovereign. They entered from the right side of the door, put down the brocade, and prayed twice.

古文：大夫辞，介逆出。
现代文：大夫辞谢，众介按与进来时相反的顺序出门。
English: The doctor declined, and the assistants left the house in the opposite order to when they came in.

古文：摈者执上币出，礼请受，宾辞。
现代文：摈者拿着众介之长的玉锦出门，依礼请求接受，主宾代为辞谢。
English: The host goes out with the jade brocade, which is the longest of all the brocades, and accepts the request according to the etiquette. The chief guest takes over as a thank you.

古文：大夫答再拜。
现代文：大夫回拜两次。
English: The doctor bowed twice.

古文：摈者执上币，立于门中以相拜，士介皆辟。
现代文：摈者拿着众介之长的玉锦站立在门中，转达大夫的拜谢。
English: The eunuch stood in the doorway, holding the jade brocade that was the longest of all the mediums, and conveyed the doctor's thanks.

古文：老受摈者币于中庭，士三人坐取群币以从之。
现代文：士介都避开，家臣在中庭接受摈者手中的玉锦。士三人坐下拿众介的玉锦跟随他。
English: The magistrates all avoided him, and the vassals accepted the jade brocade from him in the atrium. The three magistrates sat down and took the jade brocade from all the magistrates to follow him.

古文：摈者出请事。
现代文：摈者出门问何事。
English: A deaf person goes out to ask what's going on.

古文：宾出，大夫送于外门外，再拜。宾不顾。
现代文：主宾出来，大夫在大门外送主宾，两次行拜礼，主宾不回头。
English: The chief guest comes out, the doctor escorts the chief guest out of the gate, performs two prostrations, and the chief guest does not look back.

古文：摈者退，大夫拜辱。
现代文：摈者退回。大夫拜谢他屈尊帮助自己。
English: The paralytic retreated. The doctor thanked him for deigning to help himself.

古文：下大夫尝使至者，币及之。上介朝服、三介，问下大夫，下大夫如卿受币之礼。
现代文：主国的下大夫曾经出使到过行聘国的，来行聘的人拿着礼物到下大夫那里，上介穿着朝服，三介，拜访下大夫，下大夫如同卿接受礼物的礼仪。
English: The host country's junior doctor was once sent to the host country, and the person who came to the host country took the gift to the junior doctor. The upper doctor wore a court dress, and the three middle doctors visited the junior doctor. The lower doctor accepted the gift like a gentleman.

古文：其面，如宾面于卿之礼。
现代文：来聘的人请求私人见面，如同主宾同卿私人见面的礼仪。
English: The invitee requests a private meeting, as is the etiquette for the chief guest to meet privately with the lord.

古文：大夫若不见，君使大夫各以其爵为之受，如主人受币礼，不拜。
现代文：如果主国大夫因故不能见面，主国国君让大夫各按自己的爵位相同的人代为接受，如同主人接受礼物的礼仪。代替的人不行拜礼。
English: If the host country's doctor cannot meet for some reason, the host country's sovereign should have the doctor accept it on behalf of each person according to his or her peerage, as is the etiquette for the host to accept a gift. Substitutes may not perform the prayer.

古文：夕，夫人使下大夫韦弁归礼。
现代文：拜访卿的当晚，主国国君夫人派下大夫穿韦弁服来行馈赠礼仪。
English: On the evening of the visit, the wife of the sovereign sent a doctor to wear a Wei Ben costume to perform the gift-giving ceremony.

古文：堂上笾豆六，设于户东，西上，二以并，东陈。
现代文：堂上的笾豆有六个，摆放在室门的东边，以西为上位，两两并列，向东摆放。
English: There are six peas in the hall, placed on the east side of the door, with the west being the uppermost, two by two, and placed to the east.

古文：壶设于东序，北上，二以并，南陈。醙、黍、清，皆两壶。
现代文：酒壶摆放在堂上东墙下，以北为上位，两两并列，向南摆放，稻米酒，黍米酒，高粱酒，三酒清、白各一壶。
English: The wine jugs are placed under the east wall of the hall, with the north at the top, two by two, side by side, facing south. There is one jug each of rice wine, glutinous rice wine, sorghum wine, white wine, and white wine.

古文：大夫以束帛致之。
现代文：下大夫献上束帛，转达夫人的命令。
English: The junior doctor presented the sash and conveyed his wife's order.

古文：宾如受饔之礼，傧之乘马束锦。
现代文：主宾如同接受饪腥的礼仪。在堂上陈列四匹马和束锦。
English: The chief guest seems to accept the bizarre etiquette. Four horses and brocades are displayed in the hall.

古文：上介四豆、四笾、四壶，受之如宾礼；傧之两马束锦。
现代文：上介是四豆、四笾、四壶，接受这些如同主宾的礼仪。堂上陈列两匹马和束锦。
English: The presentation is four beans, four ladles and four pots, and it is the etiquette of the chief guest to accept these. Two horses and brocade are displayed in the hall.

古文：明日，宾拜礼于朝。
现代文：第二天，主宾到朝行拜谢礼。
English: The next day, the chief guest went to the morning prayer.

古文：大夫饩宾大牢，米八筐。
现代文：大夫馈赠给主宾活的牛、羊、豕各一具，米八筐。
English: The doctor presented the chief guest with a live cow, sheep and donkey, and eight baskets of rice.

古文：宾迎，再拜。老牵牛以致之，宾再拜稽首受。
现代文：主宾迎出，两次行拜礼，大夫的贵臣牵着牛送给主宾，主宾再拜稽首接受。
English: The chief guest is ushered out, and two prostrations are performed. The doctor's vassal takes the ox and gives it to the chief guest, who then bows before the chief priest to accept it.

古文：老退，宾再拜送。
现代文：大夫的贵臣退下，主宾两次行拜礼送行。
English: The doctor's dignitaries withdrew, and the chief guest made two pilgrimages to see them off.

古文：上介亦如之。
现代文：上介也是如此。
English: The same is true for referral.

古文：众介皆少牢，米六筐，皆士牵羊以致之。
现代文：众介都是羊豕各一具，米六筐，都是士牵着羊送上。
English: The attendants were all shepherds, each with a yoke of oxen and six baskets of rice.

古文：公于宾，壹食，再飨。
现代文：主国国君对主宾行一次食礼，两次飨礼。
English: The host country's sovereign performs a meal and two prostrations to the chief guest.

古文：燕与羞，俶献，无常数。
现代文：燕礼用熟禽，开始献的没有定数。
English: Yanli uses cooked poultry, and there is no fixed number for the beginning of the offering.

古文：宾介皆明日拜于朝。
现代文：主宾和随介第二天到朝行拜礼。
English: The chief guest and his entourage went to the morning service the next day.

古文：上介壹食壹飨。
现代文：对上介行一食礼，一飨礼。
English: A meal and a bowl of rice are offered to the superior.

古文：若不亲食，使大夫各以其爵、朝服致之以侑币。如致饔，无傧。
现代文：如果国君不亲自献食，就派大夫各按自己的爵位，穿朝服献上食礼的酬谢礼物，如同送上饪腥的礼仪。没有傧。
English: If the sovereign does not personally offer the meal, he sends doctors, each according to his rank, to wear the imperial robes and offer the gift of thanks for the meal, as if it were a formal ceremony. There is no ceremony.

古文：致飨以酬币，亦如之。
现代文：进献飨礼的酬谢礼物也是如此。
English: The same applies to the gift of thanksgiving for the offering of a burnt offering.

古文：大夫于宾，壹飨壹食。
现代文：主国的大夫对主宾行一次食礼，一次飨礼。
English: The host country's doctor gives the chief guest a meal and a bow.

古文：上介，若食，若飨；若不亲飨，则公作大夫致之以酬币，致食以侑币。
现代文：对上介或者一次食礼或者一次飨礼。如果不能亲自行飨礼，那么国君就让大夫献上酬谢的礼物，献上食礼的宥助的礼物。
English: For the referral, it is either a meal or a gift. If you cannot make a gift yourself, then the sovereign will ask the doctor to present a gift of gratitude, a gift of food.

古文：君使卿皮弁，还玉于馆。
现代文：主国国君派卿穿皮弁服到馆舍还玉圭。
English: The lord of the country, the sovereign, sent the lord to wear a leather bento to the palace to return Gyokkei.

古文：宾皮弁，袭，迎于外门外，不拜；帅大夫以入。
现代文：主宾穿皮弁服，加穿袭衣，在外门外迎接，不行拜礼，引导大夫进门。
English: The chief guest will wear a leather jacket, plus a suit, and will be greeted outside the outer door, and will not be able to pray, and will guide the doctor through the door.

古文：大夫升自西阶，钩楹。宾自碑内听命，升自西阶，自左，南面受圭，退负右房而立。
现代文：大夫由西阶登堂，从西楹柱西边绕过往东到堂中，主宾在碑的北面听取主国国君的命令，由西阶登堂，从大夫的左边过来，面朝南接受圭玉，退后背向右房站立。
English: The doctor enters the hall from the west steps, and goes around the west side of the west pillar to the east to the middle of the hall. The main guest listens to the order of the sovereign of the host country on the north side of the monument, enters the hall from the west steps, comes from the left side of the doctor, faces south to receive the gem, and stands with his back to the right room.

古文：大夫降中庭。
现代文：大夫下到中庭。
English: The doctor went down to the courtyard.

古文：宾降，自碑内，东面，授上介于阼阶东。
现代文：主宾由碑的北面下堂，面朝东，在东阶的东边把圭玉交给上介。
English: The chief guest goes down the hall from the north side of the monument, faces east, and hands the key to the gem to the superintendent on the east side of the east steps.

古文：上介出请，宾迎，大夫还璋，如初入。
现代文：上介出去问有何事，主宾迎接。大夫送还璋玉，如同初进时一样。
English: The representative went out to ask what was the matter, and was greeted by the chief guest. The doctor returned the orbs, just as he did when he first entered.

古文：宾裼，迎。
现代文：主宾露出褐衣，迎接。
English: The chief guest, dressed in a revealing brown suit, greets them.

古文：大夫贿用束纺。礼玉、束帛、乘皮，皆如还玉礼。
现代文：大夫把一束纺丝送给主宾，行聘礼用的璧、束帛、四张鹿皮，都按送还玉圭的礼仪送还。
English: The doctor gave a bundle of spun silk to the chief guest, and the ceremonial broom, bundle of reeds, and four deerskins were all sent back according to the etiquette of returning the yakitori.

古文：大夫出，宾送，不拜。
现代文：大夫出门，主宾送行，不行拜礼。
English: The doctor goes out, the chief guest sees him off, and there is no church service.

古文：公馆宾，宾辟，上介听命。
现代文：主国国君到馆舍拜见主宾，主宾避开，上介代主宾听取国君的命令。
English: The host country's sovereign comes to the guest house to meet the guest of honor, the guest of honor avoids him, and the guest of honor listens to the sovereign's orders.

古文：聘享，夫人之聘享，问大夫，送宾，公皆再拜。
现代文：向行聘国的国君行聘问进献礼，向国君夫人行聘问进献礼，拜访卿大夫，送主宾回国，国君都两次行拜礼。
English: He made an offering to the sovereign of the country he was visiting, made an offering to the sovereign's wife, visited the royal doctor, and sent the chief guest back to the country. The sovereign made two pilgrimages.

古文：公退，宾从，请命于朝。公辞，宾退。
现代文：国君退下，主宾跟从，在朝门外请命。国君辞谢，主宾退回。
English: The sovereign retreated, the chief guest followed, and begged for his life outside the imperial gate. The sovereign declined, and the chief guest returned.

古文：宾三拜乘禽于朝，讶听之。
现代文：主宾返回前在朝门外为国君赠送的四只禽鸟三次行拜礼。主国侍奉宾客的人听凭他行礼。
English: Before the chief guest returned, he performed three prostrations for the four birds presented to the sovereign outside the imperial gate. Those who served the guests in the host country deferred to him to perform the prostrations.

古文：遂行，舍于郊。
现代文：然后启程，在主国的近郊住宿。
English: They will then travel to stay in accommodation on the outskirts of the host country.

古文：公使卿赠，如觌币。
现代文：主国国君派卿赠送束帛如同相见时送的礼物。
English: The lord of the country, the sovereign, sent his lord to present a bunch of bamboo shoots as a gift when they met.

古文：受于舍门外，如受劳礼，无傧。
现代文：主宾在住处的门外接受，如同接受慰劳时的礼仪。没有傧。
English: The chief guest is received outside the door of the residence, as is the etiquette when receiving consolation. There is no curfew.

古文：使下大夫赠上介，亦如之。
现代文：主国国君派下大夫馈赠上介、也是如此。
English: The same is true for the gift of a doctor sent by the sovereign.

古文：使士赠众介，如其觌币。
现代文：派士馈赠众介，如同他们相见时的礼物。
English: Pais gives gifts to everyone, as if they were gifts when they met.

古文：大夫亲赠，如其面币，无傧，赠上介亦如之。
现代文：大夫亲自馈赠，如同他拜访时的礼物，没有傧。馈赠上介也是如此。
English: Gifts given by the doctor himself, as well as gifts given during his visits, do not carry a fee. The same applies to gifts given by a referral.

古文：使人赠众介，如其面币。
现代文：派人馈赠众介，如同他拜访时的礼物。
English: He sent gifts to the media, just as he did when he visited.

古文：士送至于竟。
现代文：主国的士送他们到达国境。
English: Domestic taxis took them to the border.

古文：使者归，及郊，请反命。
现代文：使者回国到近郊，请郊人报告国君请求回命。
English: The envoy returned to the outskirts of the country and asked the people in the suburbs to report that the Emperor was pleading for his life.

古文：朝服，载旃，禳，乃入。
现代文：穿上朝服，在车上插上旃旗，行禳祭后进入国都。
English: Put on the imperial robes, put the imperial banner on the car, and enter the national capital after the imperial ceremony.

古文：乃入陈币于朝，西上。
现代文：然后入朝，把礼物陈列在朝堂，以西为上。
English: Then they enter the Imperial Palace and display the gifts in the main hall, facing west.

古文：上宾之公币、私币皆陈，上介公币陈，他介皆否。
现代文：主宾的所聘国国君赠送的礼物，卿大夫赠送的礼物都陈列，上介是所聘国国君赠送的礼物陈列，其他介都不陈列。
English: The gifts presented by the sovereign of the invited country and the gifts presented by the noble doctor of the chief guest are all on display, and the gifts presented by the sovereign of the invited country are on display, and other gifts are not on display.

古文：束帛各加其庭实，皮左。
现代文：束帛各自放在他们的庭实上，兽皮在左边。
English: The bundles of straw each lay on their pallets, the hides on the left.

古文：公南乡。
现代文：国君面向南。
English: The sovereign faces south.

古文：卿进使者，使者执圭垂缫，北面；上介执璋屈缫，立于其左。
现代文：卿让使者进入，使者拿着圭玉垂着丝垫，面朝北，上介拿着璋，丝垫折着，站在使者的左边。
English: The lord let the messenger enter. The messenger held a jade pendant with a silk cushion and faced north. The upper messenger held a scepter with a folded silk cushion and stood to the left of the messenger.

古文：反命，曰： 以君命聘于某君，某君受币于某宫，某君再拜。以享某君，某君再拜。 
现代文：回复使命说： 按国君的命令向某国国君行聘礼，某国国君在他的某宫里接受礼物，某国国君两次行拜礼，把礼物进献给某国国君，某国国君两次行拜礼。 
English: The reply to the mission said: According to the order of the sovereign, a betrothal was made to a sovereign of a certain country, a sovereign of a certain country received a gift in his palace, a sovereign of a certain country worshiped twice, a gift was presented to a sovereign of a certain country, and a sovereign of a certain country worshiped twice.

古文：宰自公左受玉。
现代文：冢宰从国君左边接过圭玉。
English: Hanzai took over the key role from the left of the sovereign.

古文：受上介璋，致命亦如之。
现代文：接过上介的璋，转达被行聘国国君的命令也是如此。
English: The same applies to the order to accept the offer of mediation and the order to convey the order of the sovereign to whom the offer was made.

古文：执贿币以告，曰： 某君使某子贿。 
现代文：主宾拿着被行聘国国君在近郊馈赠的礼物报告说： 某国国君让某子馈赠。 
English: The chief guest, holding the gift given by the invited sovereign in the suburbs, reported: The sovereign of a certain country gave a gift to a certain child.

古文：授宰。礼玉亦如之。
现代文：交给冢宰，拿着放有璧玉的束帛，报告也是如此。
English: Handed over to the steward, holding a bunch of jade beads, the report is the same.

古文：执礼币，以尽言赐礼。
现代文：拿着被聘国国君初次赠给主宾的礼物，把赐予礼物的过程全部报告。
English: Take the gift given by the invited sovereign to the chief guest for the first time, and report the entire process of giving the gift.

古文：公曰： 然。而不善乎！ 
现代文：国君说： 好，你不是善于出使四方吗？ 
English: The sovereign said, "Well, aren't you good at dispatching quartets?

古文：授上介币，再拜首，公答再拜。
现代文：使者把礼物交给上介，上介再拜稽首。国君回两次行拜礼。
English: The messenger hands the gift to the higher-ranking official, who then bows his head. The sovereign then bows twice.

古文：私币不告。
现代文：卿大夫赠予的礼物不报告。
English: The gifts given by the noble doctor will not be reported.

古文：君劳之，再拜稽首，君答再拜。
现代文：国君慰劳使者，使者再拜稽首。国君回两次拜礼。
English: The sovereign consoles the envoy, the envoy bows his head again, and the sovereign bows twice.

古文：若有献，则曰： 某君之赐也。君其以赐乎？ 
现代文：如果被聘国有进献之物，就说： 某国国君的馈赐，国君接受他的馈赐吗？ 
English: If there is a gift from the host country, say: "A gift from the sovereign of a certain country. Does the sovereign accept his gift?"

古文：上介徒以公赐告，如上宾之礼。
现代文：上介空手向国君报告被聘国国君的赐予，如同上宾的礼仪。
English: As is the etiquette of the guest of honor, the host karate instructor reports to the sovereign on the gift of the invited sovereign.

古文：君劳之。再拜稽首。
现代文：国君慰劳他，再拜稽首。
English: The sovereign consoled him and then bowed his head.

古文：君答拜。
现代文：国君回拜。
English: The sovereign returns the salute.

古文：劳士介亦如之。
现代文：慰劳上介也是如此。
English: The same is true for comfort work referrals.

古文：君使宰赐使者币，使者再拜稽首。
现代文：国君命冢宰赐予使者礼物，使者再拜稽首。
English: The sovereign gave the messenger a gift, and the messenger bowed his head.

古文：赐介，介皆再拜稽首。
现代文：赐予介，介都再拜稽首。
English: If you give a promotion, you have to bow your head again.

古文：乃退，介皆送至于使者之门，乃退揖。使者拜其辱。
现代文：然后退出。皆都送使者到他的门外，然后退回，拱手行礼辞别使者，使者拜谢他们屈尊佐助自己。
English: Then he withdrew. They all sent messengers to his door, then returned, bowing their heads and saying farewell to the messengers. The messengers thanked them for deigning to help them.

古文：释币于门，乃至于祢，筵几于室，荐脯醢。觞酒陈。
现代文：使者把礼物放在大门外，然后到祢庙，在室中摆设筵几，进献干肉、肉酱，陈放酒觞。
English: The messenger placed the gift outside the gate, then went to Your temple and set up a table in the room, offering dried meat, meat sauce, and wine.

古文：席于阼，荐脯醢，三献。
现代文：在东阶上设席，进献干肉、肉酱，室老二献，士三献，主人自酢。
English: Seats are set up on the east steps, and dry meat and meat sauce are served, with the second serving for the maids, the third serving for the judges, and the vinegar for the host.

古文：一人举爵，献从者，行酬，乃出。
现代文：一人举起酒爵，献给随从的人，酬谢随行的人都要谢遍，于是出庙门。
English: One of them held up a wine goblet and offered it to his attendant. The attendant thanked him profusely and left the temple.

古文：上介至，亦如之。
现代文：上介到他的家庙也是如此。
English: The same applies to his family temple.

古文：聘遭丧，入竟，则遂也。
现代文：行聘礼遇上主国国君去世，已经进入国境，就继续前行。
English: After entering the country, they continued on their way, as a courtesy for the death of the head of state of their home country.

古文：不郊劳。不筵几。不礼宾。
现代文：不举行郊劳，不摆设筵、几，不用醴酒招待主宾。
English: There will be no outdoor work, no tables and chairs set up, and no alcohol will be served to the chief guests.

古文：主人毕归礼，宾唯饔饩之受。
现代文：主人丧事结束，对主宾行归礼，主宾只接受杀了的和活的牛羊豕。
English: At the end of the master's funeral, he bowed to the chief guest. The chief guest only accepted the slaughtered and live cattle and sheep.

古文：不贿，不礼玉，不赠。
现代文：不赠送纺丝素绢，不送束帛、鹿皮。
English: There will be no gifts of spun silk cocoons, no gifts of bundles of cocoons or deerskins.

古文：遭夫人、世子之丧，君不受，使大夫受于庙，其他如遭君丧。
现代文：使者返国住宿郊外不赠送礼物。遇上国君的夫人、世子去世，国君不接受礼物，派大夫在庙中接受礼物，其他和遇上国君去世相同。
English: When the wife or son of the sovereign dies, the sovereign does not accept the gift, but sends a doctor to accept the gift in the temple, and the rest is the same as when the sovereign dies.

古文：遭丧，将命于大夫，主人长衣练冠以受。
现代文：遇上主国国君去世，国君夫人去世、世子去世，就命大夫代主人穿素色长衣，戴练冠接受。
English: In the event of the death of the sovereign of the home country, the death of the sovereign's wife, or the death of the heir, the doctor was ordered to wear a plain-colored long coat and a crown to accept the position.

古文：聘，君若薨于后，入竟则遂。
现代文：行聘国国君如果在使者出发后去世，进入被聘国国境就继续进行下去。
English: If the sovereign of the country to which the envoy is sent dies after the envoy's departure, the envoy will continue on to the border of the country to which the envoy is sent.

古文：赴者未至，则哭于巷，衰于馆；受礼，不受飨食。
现代文：行聘国报丧的人没有到，就在巷门哭泣，在馆舍穿丧服。接受礼物，不接受飨礼、食礼。
English: If the person who has been invited by the state to report on the funeral has not arrived, they will cry at the entrance to the alley, wear funeral clothes in the hall, and accept gifts, but not funeral gifts or food gifts.

古文：赴者至，则衰而出。
现代文：报丧的人到后，就穿丧服出去。
English: When the mourners arrived, they put on their mourning clothes and went out.

古文：唯稍，受之。
现代文：只接受米谷之类的食物。
English: They only accept foods like yakitori.

古文：归，执圭覆命于殡，升自西阶，不升堂。
现代文：使者归国，拿着圭玉在殡宫复命，从西阶登阶，不登堂。
English: When the envoy returned to China, he took Guiyu to the funeral parlor to receive his death warrant. He climbed the steps from the west side, but did not enter the hall.

古文：子即位，不哭。
现代文：世子就其哭泣的位置，不哭。
English: The world does not weep in the place where it weeps.

古文：辩覆命，如聘。
现代文：使者及介一一复命如同平时聘问回来。
English: The envoys and mediators were called back as usual.

古文：子臣皆哭。
现代文：复命后，子、臣都哭。
English: After his life was restored, his son and vassal were both in tears.

古文：与介入，北乡哭。
现代文：使者和介稍进灵枢，面朝北哭。
English: The messenger and the mediator entered the spiritual center a little and wept facing north.

古文：出，袒括发。入门右，即位踊。
现代文：出殡宫门，露出左臂，束起头发，从门的右边进入，站在东阶下自己的位置上如同奔丧的礼仪。
English: Leaving the door of the mortuary, exposing the left arm, tying up the hair, entering from the right side of the door, standing in their own position under the east steps is like the etiquette of mourning.

古文：若有私丧，则哭于馆，衰而居，不飨食。
现代文：如果主宾遇到自己的父亲或母亲去世，就在馆舍中哭泣，在居住处穿丧服，不参加飨礼、食礼。
English: If the chief guest encounters the death of his father or mother, he will cry in the guesthouse, wear mourning clothes in the residence, and not attend the funeral or meal.

古文：归。使众介先，衰而从之。
现代文：在归国时，让众介在前，自己穿丧服跟随着。
English: When returning home, let the crowd go ahead and wear mourning clothes to follow.

古文：宾入竟而死，遂也。主人为之具，而殡。
现代文：主宾进入被聘国国境后去世，聘问之事继续进行。
English: The chief guest passed away after entering the border of the host country, and the interview continued.

古文：介摄其命。
现代文：主国国君为他提供丧敛、殡仪之物。
English: His master, the sovereign, provided him with a funeral gift.

古文：君吊，介为主人。
现代文：上介代行主宾的使命。主国国君来吊丧，上介充当主人。
English: The host country's sovereign comes to mourn, and the host acts as host.

古文：主人归礼币，必以用。
现代文：主国国君馈赠的祭奠、送葬的器物必合奠赠诸事之用。
English: The offerings given by the host country's sovereign for the memorial service and the objects sent for the funeral must be used for all purposes.

古文：介受宾礼，无辞也。
现代文：上介接受主国用主宾的礼仪待己，没有辞谢。
English: The petitioner accepted the host country's hospitality with the etiquette of a chief guest, without a word of thanks.

古文：不飨食。
现代文：不参加飨礼、食礼。
English: They do not participate in the feast or meal.

古文：归，介覆命，柩止于门外。
现代文：回国后，上介回复聘问使命，主宾的灵枢停在大门外。
English: After returning to China, the sender replied to the invitation, and the spirit of the chief guest stopped outside the gate.

古文：介卒覆命，出，奉柩送之。
现代文：上介回报完聘问使命，出大门，上介送主宾的灵柩到主宾家。
English: After the return of the referral, the mission is completed, the door is opened, and the referral sends the guest's casket to the guest's home.

古文：君吊，卒殡。
现代文：国君亲自吊丧，殡事结束。
English: The Emperor himself conducted the funeral, and the funeral service was over.

古文：若大夫介卒，亦如之。
现代文：如果是大夫介去世，也是如此。
English: The same applies if the assistant physician dies.

古文：士介死，为之棺敛之，君不吊焉。
现代文：如果是士介去世，为他提供棺木入敛，国君不吊。
English: In the event of the death of a Shisuke, a coffin should be provided for him, but the sovereign should not be hanged.

古文：若宾死，未将命，则既敛于棺，造于朝，介将命。
现代文：如果主宾没有转达国君的命令就去世了，就用棺木收敛，抬到朝门外，上介转达国君的命令。
English: If the chief guest dies without conveying the sovereign's order, he is restrained in a coffin, carried outside the Imperial Palace, and conveyed the sovereign's order.

古文：若介死，归覆命，唯上介造于朝。
现代文：如果介去世，回国回复使命，只有上介的灵柩抬到朝门外。
English: If the mediator dies and returns to the country to resume the mission, only the coffin of the mediator will be carried outside the Imperial Palace.

古文：若介死，虽士介，宾既覆命，往，卒殡乃归。小聘曰问。
现代文：如果介去世，即使是士介，主宾回复完使命，跟随灵柩到介家，殡事结束，然后回自己家。小聘叫作 问 。
English: If the mediator dies, even if it is a lay mediator, the chief guest should complete his mission, follow the coffin to the mediator's home, conclude the funeral service, and then return to his own home.

古文：不享，有献，不及夫人，主人不筵几，不礼。
现代文：不进献加上璧玉的束帛。向主国大臣进献束锦和马，不向国君的夫人进献。主国国君不在庙中摆设筵几，不用酒招待主宾。
English: Don't present a bouquet of brocade and horses to the minister of the host country, and don't present it to the wife of the sovereign. The sovereign of the host country does not set up a table in the temple, and does not use wine to invite the chief guest.

古文：面不升。
现代文：私人见面不登堂。
English: Private meetings are not allowed.

古文：不郊劳。
现代文：不到近郊慰劳主宾。
English: Not far from the suburbs to comfort the guests of honor.

古文：其礼，如为介，三介。
现代文：主国对待主宾的礼仪，如同大聘时对待上介的礼仪，士三人做为介。
English: The host country treats the chief guest with the same etiquette as it treats the mediator in the case of a major appointment. Three judges act as mediators.

古文：记。久无事，则聘焉。
现代文：长时间没有盟会之类的事，就派使者聘问。
English: For a long time there was no such thing as a confederation, so they sent an envoy to inquire.

古文：若有故，则卒聘。
现代文：如果有灾患，就急速聘问。
English: If there is a natural disaster, they will be quickly dispatched.

古文：束帛加书将命，百名以上书于策，不及百名书于方。
现代文：用束帛放上书简转达国君的命令，百字以上就写在简策上，不到百字就写在一个板上。
English: The Emperor's orders were conveyed by means of a booklet placed on a bundle of sticks. If there were more than a hundred words, they were written on the booklet. If there were less than a hundred words, they were written on a board.

古文：主人使人与客读诸门外。
现代文：主国国君派内史和主宾在庙门外宣读。
English: The lord of the country, the sovereign of the country, sent the internal history and the chief guest to be read outside the temple gate.

古文：客将归，使大夫以其束帛反命于馆。
现代文：主宾将回国，主国国君派大夫用主宾的束帛到馆舍复命。
English: The chief guest will return to his country, and the sovereign of the host country will send a doctor to the residence to use the chief guest's bundle to save his life.

古文：明日，君馆之。
现代文：第二天，主国国君到馆舍看望主宾。
English: The next day, the host country's sovereign went to the guest house to visit the chief guest.

古文：既受行，出，遂见宰，问几月之资。
现代文：已经接受出使的任命，出来去见冢宰，问出使几个月的费用。
English: Having accepted the appointment of the envoy, he went out to see the vizier and inquired about the expenses of the envoy for several months.

古文：使者既受行日，朝同位。
现代文：使者已经接受出使的任命，在陈列礼物和出发的那天，上朝站立的位置相同。
English: The envoy has accepted the appointment of the envoy, and on the day of the display of gifts and departure, the position of the upper court is the same.

古文：出祖，释軷，祭酒脯，乃饮酒于其侧。
现代文：出发开始，祭路神，把酒和干肉放在神位前，然后在神位旁饮酒。
English: At the start of the journey, the god of the road is worshipped, wine and dried meat are placed in front of the god's seat, and then alcohol is drunk next to the god's seat.

古文：所以朝天子，圭与缫皆九寸，剡上寸半，厚半寸，博三寸，缫三采六等，朱白仓。问诸侯，朱绿缫，八寸。
现代文：所用来朝见天子的圭玉和彩色缫都是九寸长，上部左右各削寸半，厚半寸，宽三寸。缫是红、白、青三种颜色相间成为六等，拜见诸侯，是红、绿二种颜色相间的缫，长八寸。
English: The jade and colored beads used to see the emperor in the morning are both nine inches long, with the upper and left sides each cut half an inch, half an inch thick, and three inches wide. The beads are red, white, and blue in three colors to become six, and to see the princes, the beads are red and green in two colors, eight inches long.

古文：皆玄纁系，长尺，绚组。问大夫之币，俟于郊，为肆。又□皮马。
现代文：朝见天子和拜见诸侯的缫玉都用上红下黑的帛做垫，系玉和垫子的带子是五色的丝带，长一尺。拜见大夫的礼物放在近郊。分行陈列，等使者到来，又把鹿皮和马交给使者。
English: The jadeite for the morning visit to the emperor and the visit to the princes are both cushioned with red and black cocoons. The band of the jade and the cushion is a five-colored ribbon, one foot long. The gift for the doctor is placed in the suburbs. The branches are displayed, and when the messenger arrives, the deer skin and horse are handed over to the messenger.

古文：辞无常，孙而说。
现代文：聘问的言词没有定则，但要谦逊而和悦。
English: There is no rule for the words you use in an interview, but they should be humble and pleasant.

古文：辞多则史，少则不达。辞苟足以达，义之至也。辞曰： 非礼也。敢？ 
现代文：言词多就策祝，言词少则不能表达意思，言词如果足以表达意思，意思就达到了极至。主宾说： 不合乎礼，不敢。 
English: If you use more words, you can make a wish. If you use fewer words, you can't express your meaning. If words are enough to express your meaning, then your meaning has reached its peak. The guest of honor said, "It's not polite. I wouldn't dare."

古文：对曰： 非礼也。
现代文：主人回答： 不合乎礼，不敢。 
English: The host replied: "It's not polite, I wouldn't dare."

古文：敢辞？ 卿馆于大夫，大夫馆于士，士馆于工商。
现代文：卿在大夫的家庙中住宿，大夫在士的家庙中住宿，士在工商的家庙中住宿。
English: The lord lodges in the house temple of the doctor, the doctor lodges in the house temple of the scholar, the scholar lodges in the house temple of the businessman.

古文：管人为客，三日具沐，五日具浴。
现代文：掌管客馆的人为使者和士介三天准备一次洗发的水，五天准备一次洗澡的水。
English: The person in charge of the guest house prepares three days of shampooing water and five days of bathing water for the envoys and magistrates.

古文：飧不致，宾不拜，沐浴而食之。
现代文：便宴不用送上束帛转达国君的命令，主宾不行拜礼。沐浴后吃准备好的便宴。
English: There is no need to bring a bunch of bamboo shoots to the banquet to convey the sovereign's order. The chief guest may not perform a religious service. The prepared banquet should be eaten after bathing.

古文：卿，大夫讶。大夫，士讶。士，皆有讶。
现代文：卿，由大夫迎候，接待；大夫，由士迎候接待；士，都有迎候接待的人。
English: Sir, the doctor greets and receives; the doctor greets and receives; the doctor greets and receives; and the doctor greets and receives.

古文：宾即馆，讶将公命，又见之以其挚。
现代文：主宾到馆舍，主国国君派来迎候接待的人就把国君命令自己迎待的命令告诉主宾。又拿着礼物拜见主宾。
English: When the chief guest arrives at the guesthouse, the person sent by the host country's sovereign to welcome the guest tells the chief guest the order that the sovereign ordered him to welcome the guest. He also greets the chief guest with a gift.

古文：宾既将公事，复见讶以其挚。
现代文：主宾已经把聘问的公事办完，拿着礼物回报迎待的人。
English: The chief guest has completed the official business of the invitation, and returns the gift to the host.

古文：凡四器者，唯其所宝，以聘可也。
现代文：凡是圭、璋、壁、琮，只要是自己国家的国宝，就可以用作聘问的礼物。
English: Any gui, gong, mural, or gong, as long as it is a national treasure of one's own country, can be used as a gift.

古文：宗人授次。次以帷。
现代文：掌管设置顺序位子的宗人为主宾设置顺序位子。
English: The person in charge of setting the order of seats sets the order of seats for the main guests.

古文：少退于君之次。上介执圭，如重，授宾。宾入门，皇；升堂，让；将授，志趋；授如争承，下如送；君还，而后退。
现代文：将要把圭交给主国国君时审慎前行。交给国君时如同与人争接拿取，恭敬献上如同国君送时。国君转身把圭玉交给太宰，然后主宾退下。
English: When it is time to hand over the gem to the host country's sovereign, proceed with caution. When handing it over to the sovereign, it is as if you are competing with someone to take it, and when handing it over respectfully, it is as if you are giving it to the sovereign. The sovereign turns around and hands the gem to the Dazai, and then the guest of honor retreats.

古文：下阶，发气，怡焉；再三举足，又趋。
现代文：走下台阶，呼出一口长气，神态怡然。
English: He walked down the steps, exhaled a long breath, and looked pleased.

古文：及门，正焉。执圭，入门，鞠躬焉，如恐失之。
现代文：再三抬脚安定心神，然后快走，到达大门，神态正常。拿着圭玉，进入庙门，恭敬谨慎地捧着圭玉，如同怕失落它。
English: He repeatedly raised his foot to steady his mind, and then walked quickly, arriving at the gate with a normal demeanor. Taking the gem, he entered the temple gate, respectfully and cautiously holding the gem, as if afraid of losing it.

古文：及享，发气焉，盈容。
现代文：到进献时，呼出一口长气，神态从容。
English: When it's time for the offering, exhale a long breath and take it easy.

古文：众介北面，跄焉。
现代文：众介面朝北，神态舒扬。
English: Many interfaces face north, with a relaxed demeanor.

古文：私觌，愉愉焉。
现代文：私人拜见，容貌和敬。
English: See you in private, appearance and respect.

古文：出，如舒雁。皇，且行；入门主敬，升堂主慎。
现代文：出门，如同大雁舒展翅膀，威仪自然地行走。进入大门以恭敬为主，登堂以谨慎为主。
English: When going out, it is like a goose stretching its wings and walking naturally with dignity. Entering the gate is respectful, and entering the hall is cautious.

古文：凡庭实，随入，左先，皮马相间，可也。
现代文：凡庭实都相随抬入，在左边的先抬入，鹿皮和马相互代换是可以的。
English: All the pieces are carried in together, with the left piece being carried in first. Deerskin and horse can be substituted for each other.

古文：宾之币，唯马出，其馀皆东。
现代文：主宾的礼物，只有马牵出庙门，其余的都往东收藏在内府。
English: The chief guest's gift, only the horse is led out of the temple gate, the rest are collected in Naifu.

古文：多货，则伤于德。币美，则没礼。
现代文：玉多就有损于德性，束帛华美就掩没了礼的本意。
English: Too much pomp detracts from virtue, and too much pomp conceals the true meaning of the ceremony.

古文：贿，在聘于贿。
现代文：主国馈赠主宾礼物，当着主宾聘问的礼物而定。
English: The host country presents the guest of honor with a gift, depending on the gift requested by the guest of honor.

古文：凡执玉，无藉者袭。
现代文：凡是拿着圭玉，没有缫做玉垫的，拿圭玉的人要加穿袭衣。
English: Anyone holding a gui yu, without a shovel to make a jade cushion, the person holding the gui yu should also wear a shirt.

古文：礼，不拜至。
现代文：聘享完毕，招待主宾，主人不为主宾到来行拜礼。
English: After the feast is over, the chief guests are invited. If the host is not the chief guest, he or she must come to the church service.

古文：醴尊于东箱，瓦大一，有丰。
现代文：盛放甜酒的酒尊放在东厢，瓦大一个，有丰。
English: In the east wing, there is a large, well-stocked vat of sweet wine.

古文：荐脯五胑，祭半胑横之。
现代文：进献的是五条干肉条。祭用的半条横放在上边。
English: The offering consisted of five strips of dried meat, with half of the sacrificial cow placed horizontally on top.

古文：祭醴，再扱始扱一祭，卒再祭。
现代文：祭甜酒时两次舀取，开始舀取祭一次，后来舀取祭二次。
English: At the time of the sweet wine festival, two raffles were held. The first raffle was held once, and then the second raffle was held.

古文：主人之庭实，则主人遂以出，宾之士讶受之。既觌，宾若私献，奉献，将命。摈者入告，出礼辞。
现代文：主宾的士介迎上来，接过主宾牵着的马。已经拜访，如果主宾有私人的礼物进献，奉献时要称转达君命，摈者进去报告，出来，依礼辞谢。
English: The chief guest's chauffeur came up and took over the horse led by the chief guest. If the chief guest has a personal gift to offer, it should be said to convey the sovereign's life when offering, and those who go in should report, and those who come out should thank the host according to etiquette.

古文：宾东面坐奠献，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾面朝东坐下放下进献的礼物。再拜稽首。
English: The chief guest sat down facing east and put down his gift. He bowed his head again.

古文：摈者东面坐取献，举以入告，出礼请受。
现代文：摈者面朝东坐下拿取进献的礼物，举着礼物进去报告，出来，依主宾的礼节接受。
English: The host sits down, facing east, to receive the gifts brought in. Holding the gifts, he goes in to report, comes out, and accepts them according to the etiquette of the chief guest.

古文：宾固辞，公答再拜。
现代文：主宾辞谢。主国国君回拜两次。
English: The chief guest withdrew his thanks. The host, the sovereign, bowed twice.

古文：摈者立于阈外以相拜，宾辟。
现代文：摈者站在门槛的外边把国君的回拜转告主宾，主宾避开。
English: The eavesdropper stands outside the threshold and relays the sovereign's return greeting to the chief guest. The chief guest avoids him.

古文：摈者授宰夫于中庭。若兄弟之国，则问夫人。
现代文：摈者在中庭把礼物交给宰夫，如果是同姓或婚姻甥舅有亲戚关系的国家，就要馈赠国君夫人礼物。
English: If it is a country that has a relative with the same surname or a nephew by marriage, it is necessary to give a gift to the sovereign's wife.

古文：若君不见，使大夫受。
现代文：如果国君不能见使者，就派大夫接受主宾的聘享。
English: If the sovereign cannot see the envoy, he will send a doctor to accept the invitation of the chief guest.

古文：自下听命，自西阶升受，负右房而立。宾降亦降。
现代文：大夫在堂下听命，由西阶登堂接受聘享，背向右房站立，主宾下堂也跟着下堂。
English: The doctor obeyed his orders in the hall and came up from the west steps to the hall to accept the appointment, standing with his back to the right room. The chief guest also followed him down the hall.

古文：不礼。
现代文：不招待主宾。
English: The chief guest is not invited.

古文：币之所及，皆劳，不释服。
现代文：接到主宾礼物的人都来慰劳主宾，没有脱下皮弁服。
English: Everyone who received a gift from the chief guest came to comfort the chief guest, without taking off their leather jackets.

古文：赐饔，唯羹饪。
现代文：予杀死的牛羊豕，只有煮熟的要祭。
English: Only boiled sacrificial offerings of oxen and sheep are allowed to be slaughtered.

古文：筮一尸，若昭若穆。
现代文：用蓍草占卜尸的人选，或昭或穆。
English: The candidates for divination of the corpse with reeds are either Zhao or Mu.

古文：仆为祝，祝曰： 孝孙某，孝子某，荐嘉礼于皇祖某甫、皇考某子。 
现代文：大夫的臣下充当祝，祝说： 孝孙某某，孝子某某，进献美好的礼物给皇祖某甫、皇孝某子。 
English: The doctor's vassals act as well-wishers, saying: "Dear grandson, dear son, bring a nice gift to the emperor's ancestor, the emperor's son."

古文：如馈食之礼。
现代文：如同馈赠食物的礼仪。
English: Like the etiquette of gifting food.

古文：假器于大夫。
现代文：向大夫借祭器。
English: Borrow the altar from the doctor.

古文：盼及廋车。
现代文：祭毕，分赐肉给众人及廋人、巾车。
English: When the sacrifice was finished, the meat was divided among the people, and the eunuchs and charioteers came out.

古文：聘日致饔。明日，问大夫。夕，夫人归礼。
现代文：行聘礼的当天送杀死和活的牛羊豕，第二天拜访大夫，第二天傍晚，国君夫人派人馈赠主宾礼物。
English: On the day of the betrothal ceremony, the dead and living oxen and sheep were given to the bridegroom, the next day the doctor was visited, and on the evening of the second day, the sovereign's wife sent someone to present the guest of honor with a gift.

古文：既致饔，旬而稍，宰夫始归乘禽，日如其饔饩之数。
现代文：在馈赠牛羊豕十天后送来粮米。宰夫开始送成双的雉、雁等，每天送上的雉、雁的数目同牛羊豕的数目相同。
English: Ten days after the gifts of oxen and goats, grain and rice were sent. Zaif began to send pairs of quail, geese, etc. The number of quail and geese sent every day was the same as the number of oxen and goats.

古文：士中日则二双。
现代文：士介是隔一天送二只。
English: Two magistrates are sent every other day.

古文：凡献，执一双，委其馀于面。
现代文：凡是献雉、雁等，拿一双转达君命，其余的放在面前。
English: Whenever you offer a partridge, goose, etc., take a pair of cranes to convey the king's life, and place the rest in front of you.

古文：禽羞，俶献。比归大礼之日，既受饔饩，请观。
现代文：进献煮熟的禽类和四时的鲜美食物，比照进献雉、雁的礼仪。馈赠杀死和活的牛羊豕的那天，主宾接受后，请求观瞻宗庙。
English: Cooked poultry and fresh food at four o'clock are presented, following the etiquette of presenting egrets and geese. On the day of the gift of killed and live cattle and sheep, after the main guest accepts it, he asks to visit the ancestral temple.

古文：讶帅之，自下门入。
现代文：主国派人迎接并引导主宾等由便门进入。
English: The host country sent someone to greet and guide the main guests, who entered through a side door.

古文：各以其爵，朝服。
现代文：凡致送礼物的人各按自己的爵位穿朝服。
English: Everyone who brings a gift will wear a royal robe according to their rank.

古文：士无饔。无饔者无傧。
现代文：士介没有杀好的牛羊豕等礼物，没有这些礼物的人，没有傧。
English: Judges do not have gifts such as cattle, sheep and donkeys that have been killed, and those who do not have these gifts do not have donkeys.

古文：大夫不敢辞，君初为之辞矣。
现代文：主宾要拜见大夫，大夫不敢推辞。国君在开始时已经为他推辞。
English: The chief guest wanted to see the doctor, and the doctor did not dare to refuse. The sovereign had already refused for him at the beginning.

古文：凡致礼，各以其爵，朝服。
现代文：凡是致送礼物，都用飨礼的笾、豆，里面放有食物。
English: Whenever gifts are given, they are made from bean sprouts and beans, which contain food.

古文：皆用其飨之加笾豆。无饔者无飨礼。
现代文：没有被馈赠杀好的牛羊豕的礼物的人，没有飨礼。
English: He who has not been given the gift of a slaughtered cow or sheep, has no khutbah.

古文：凡饩，大夫黍、粱、稷，筐五斛。
现代文：凡是大夫馈赠主宾和上介粮食，大夫用黍、粱、稷，每筐五斛。
English: Generally, when the doctor gives gifts of food to the chief guest and the hostess, the doctor will use five yakitori per basket of yakitori, yakitori and yakitori.

古文：既将公事，宾请归。
现代文：已经办完聘享公事，主宾请求回国。
English: The guest of honor has requested to return to the country after the business of employment and enjoyment has been completed.

古文：凡宾拜于朝，讶听之。
现代文：在外朝为主国的赐予行拜礼，接待主宾的人听凭他行拜礼。
English: In other dynasties, the bestowal of the host country is worshipped, and those who receive the chief guest are at his mercy to worship.

古文：燕，则上介为宾，宾为苟敬。
现代文：燕礼就让上介充当主宾，主宾充当苟敬。
English: In the Yan ceremony, the host acts as the chief guest, and the chief guest acts as the guest of honor.

古文：宰夫献。
现代文：宰夫进献。
English: Zayu's offering.

古文：无行，则重贿反币。
现代文：主宾只到主国，不再到他国聘问，就送重礼，把束帛返还。
English: If the chief guest only comes to the host country and no longer goes to another country to ask questions, he will send a heavy gift and return the satchel.

古文：曰： 子以君命在寡君，寡君拜君命之辱。 
现代文：主国国君到馆舍拜谢主宾，辅佐的人说， 您按贵国国君的命令来问候敝国国君，敝国国君为您按贵国国君之命屈尊到来行拜礼。
English: The host country's sovereign came to the pavilion to offer his thanks to the guest of honor. The attendant said, "You have come to greet the host country's sovereign as ordered by your sovereign. The host country's sovereign has deigned to come to perform a religious service for you as ordered by your sovereign."

古文：君以社稷故，在寡小君，拜。 
现代文：贵国国君为社稷的缘故问候敝国国君夫人，敝国国君行拜礼。
English: For the sake of society, the sovereign of your country sends greetings to the wife of the sovereign of your country, and the sovereign of your country performs a prayer.

古文： 君贶寡君，延及二三老，拜。 
现代文：贵国国君赐予敝国国君礼物，还延及到敝国的二三位大夫，敝国国君行拜礼。
English: The king of your country gave a gift to the king of my country, and also extended to the two or three doctors of my country, and the king of my country went to worship.

古文：又拜送。宾于馆堂楹间，释四皮束帛。
现代文：又为送主宾您回国，敝国国君行拜礼。 
English: In addition, to see off the chief guest on his return to Japan, the country's sovereigns will perform a prayer service.

古文：宾不致，主人不拜。大夫来使，罪，飨之；过，则饩之。
现代文：主宾在馆舍的堂上的两楹柱中间放下四张鹿皮和束帛，主宾不致送，馆舍主人不行拜礼。大夫来聘问中，没有犯法行为，如大夫行飨礼。
English: The chief guest put down four deer skins and a bundle of yakitori in the middle of the two pillars on the hall of the guesthouse. The chief guest did not send them, and the owner of the guesthouse did not worship. During the doctor's interview, there was no illegal act, such as the doctor performing a bow.

古文：其介为介。
现代文：有过失，就只送杀好的牛羊豕三牲。
English: If there is a mistake, only the best cattle and sheep will be sent for slaughter.

古文：有大客后至，则先客不飨食，致之。
现代文：有诸候后到，就对先到的客人不行飨礼、食物，把礼物送给他。
English: If there are guests who arrive later, do not serve the first guest with food or drink, but give him a gift.

古文：唯大聘有几筵。
现代文：只有在接受聘享等大聘时，有几和筵。
English: It is only when they are offered a big job, such as a promotion, that they are somewhat conciliatory.

古文：十斗曰斛，十六斗曰籔，十薮曰秉，二百四十斗，四秉曰筥，十筥曰稯，十稯曰秅，四百秉为一秅。
现代文：十斗叫斛。十六斗叫籔。十籔叫秉。一车米二百四十斗。四秉叫筥。十筥叫稯。十稯叫秅。四百秉为一秅。
English: Ten bucks is a bait. Sixteen bucks is a bait. Ten bucks is a bait. A cart of rice is two hundred and forty buys. Four buys a bait. Ten buys a bait. Ten buys a bait. Four hundred buys a bait.

