古文：王孙圉聘于晋，定公飨之，赵简子鸣玉以相，问于王孙圉曰： 楚之白珩犹在乎？ 
现代文：王孙圉到晋国访问，晋定公设宴招待他，赵简子佩带着丁冬作声的玉饰担任傧相，问王孙圉说： 楚国的白珩还在吗？ 
English: Wang Sun Rong visited Jin Province, and Jin Ding held a public banquet to invite him. Zhao Jian Zi, wearing a jade ornament with Ding Dong's voice, served as an attendant. He asked Wang Sun Rong, "Is Chu's egret still there?"

古文：对曰： 然。 
现代文：王孙圉回答说： 在。 
English: Zi Lu said: Yes.

古文：简子曰： 其为宝也，几何矣。 
现代文：简子说： 它作为楚国的珍宝，有多久了？ 
English: Janeko said: How long has it been a treasure of Chu?

古文：曰： 未尝为宝。
现代文：王孙圉说： 并未曾把它当作珍宝。
English: Wang Sunye said, "I never thought of it as a precious treasure.

古文：楚之所宝者，曰观射父，能作训辞，以行事于诸侯，使无以寡君为口实。
现代文：楚国所宝贵的，叫观射父，他擅长辞令，能到各诸侯国交往办事，使诸侯无法拿我们国君作为话柄。
English: The precious treasure of the State of Chu is called Guan Shifu. He is good at rhetoric and can go to the various states to do business, so that the states cannot use our sovereign as a bargaining chip.

古文：又有左史倚相，能道训典，以叙百物，以朝夕献善败于寡君，使寡君无忘先王之业；又能上下说于鬼神，顺道其欲恶，使神无有怨痛于楚国。
现代文：又有位左史倚相，能述说古代的典籍，来说明各种事物，早晚向国君提供成败得失的教训，使国君不忘记先王的功业；又能取悦于天上地下的鬼神，顺应它们的好恶，使神灵对楚国没有怨恨。
English: There is also a left-wing historian, who can narrate ancient classics, explain various things, and sooner or later provide the prince with a lesson of success and failure, so that the prince does not forget the work of the former king; he can also please the ghosts and gods in heaven and earth, conform to their likes and dislikes, so that the gods have no resentment towards the state of Chu.

古文：又有薮曰云连徒洲，金木竹箭之所生也。
现代文：又有个大泽叫云连徒洲，是金、木、竹、箭出产的地方。
English: There is also a large lake called Yunlianchuzhou, where gold, wood, bamboo and arrows are produced.

古文：龟、珠、角、齿、皮、革、羽、毛，所以备赋，以戒不虞者也。
现代文：又有龟甲、珍珠、兽角、象牙、虎豹皮、犀牛皮、鸟羽和牦牛尾，是用来提供兵赋，预防不测之患的。
English: There are also tortoise shell, pearl, horn, ivory, tiger and leopard skin, rhinoceros skin, bird feathers and yakitori, which are used to provide military equipment and prevent accidents.

古文：所以共币帛，以宾享于诸侯者也。
现代文：还可提供币帛，用来招待献赠给诸侯。
English: Coins could also be provided, which were used to invite and give gifts to the lords.

古文：若诸侯之好币具，而导之以训辞，有不虞之备，而皇神相之，寡君其可以免罪于诸侯，而国民保焉。
现代文：如果诸侯喜爱这些物品，而又用辞令来疏导，有预防不测的准备，又得到天神的保佑，那我们国君就可以避免得罪诸侯，而国家、百姓也得以保全了。
English: If the lords loved these items, and used words to guide them, prepared to prevent accidents, and received the blessing of the angels, then our sovereign could avoid offending the lords, and the country and the people could be preserved.

古文：此楚国之宝也。
现代文：这些才是楚国的珍宝。
English: These are the treasures of Chu.

古文：若夫白珩，先王之玩也，何宝之焉？
现代文：至于洁白的玉珩，不过是先王的玩物，有什么可宝贵的呢？
English: As for the pure white jade bowl, it was just a toy of the former king. What could it be precious for?

古文： 圉闻国之宝六而已。
现代文： 我听说国家的珍宝不过六种而已。
English: I've heard that there are only six national treasures.

古文：明王圣人能制议百物，以辅相国家，则宝之；玉足以庇荫嘉谷，使无水旱之灾，则宝之；龟足以宪臧否，则宝之；珠足以御火灾，则宝之；金足以御兵乱，则宝之；山林薮泽足以备财用，则宝之。
现代文：明智的人能裁断评议各种事物，用来辅佐治理国家，就把他作为珍宝；祭祀的玉器足以庇荫嘉美的五谷，使没有水旱灾害，就把它作为珍宝；龟甲足以表明善恶凶吉，就把它作为珍宝；珍珠足以防御火灾，就把它作为珍宝；金属足以抵御兵乱，就把它作为珍宝；山林湖泽足以提供财物器用，就把它作为珍宝。
English: Wise people can judge and evaluate all kinds of things, and use them to assist the governance of the country, and regard them as precious; the sacrificial jade is enough to protect the shade and beauty of the grain, so that there is no drought disaster, and regard it as precious; the tortoise shell is enough to show the good and evil, and regard it as precious; the pearl is enough to prevent fire, and regard it as precious; the metal is enough to resist the military turmoil, and regard it as precious; the mountains, forests and lakes are enough to provide wealth and utensils, and regard it as precious.

古文：若夫哗嚣之美，楚虽蛮夷，不能宝也。 
现代文：至于发出喧哗声响的美玉，楚国虽然是蛮夷之邦，也不能把它当作珍宝啊。 
English: As for the beautiful stone that makes a loud noise, although Chu is a barbarian country, it cannot be regarded as a precious treasure.

