古文：刘昶萧宝夤萧正表
现代文：刘昶，字休道，刘义隆第九个儿子。
English: Liu Yao, also known as Xiu Dao, is Liu Yilong's ninth son.

古文：刘昶，字休道，义隆第九子也。
现代文：刘义隆在世时，刘昶被封为义阳王。
English: When Liu Yilong was alive, Liu Ye was named the King of Yiyang.

古文：义隆时封义阳王。兄骏以为征北将军、徐州刺史、开府。
现代文：其兄刘骏为征北将军、徐州刺史、开府。
English: His elder brother Liu Ye was a general who conquered the north, ruled Xuzhou, and founded the capital.

古文：及骏子子业立，昏狂肆暴，害其亲属，疑昶有异志。
现代文：等到刘骏的儿子刘子业继父爵位，子业昏愦狂妄、肆无忌惮、暴虐成性，残害自己亲属，他怀疑刘昶另有野心。
English: When Liu Yao's son, Liu Ziye, became the stepfather of a peer, and Ziye became delirious, arrogant, unscrupulous, and tyrannical, and killed his relatives, he suspected that Liu Yao had other ambitions.

古文：昶闻甚惧，遣典签虞法生表求入朝，以观其意。
现代文：刘昶听说，十分惊恐，派掌管文书典签的虞法生上表请求入朝，以观察刘子业的意图。
English: Hearing of this, Liu Bei was so alarmed that he sent the official in charge of signing legal documents, Jufang Sheng, to request permission to enter the North to observe Liu Zicheng's intentions.

古文：子业曰： 义阳与太宰谋反，我欲讨之，今知求还，甚善。 
现代文：刘子业说： 义阳王与太宰谋反，我本想讨伐他，今天知道他请求还朝，很好。 
English: Liu Ziye said: King Yiyang plotted a rebellion with Dazai. I originally wanted to fight him, but today I know that he asked for the restoration of the dynasty, which is great.

古文：又屡诘法生： 义阳谋事，汝何故不启？ 
现代文：又屡屡诘问法生： 义阳王谋反一事，你怎么不禀报？ 
English: He also repeatedly asked Fa Sheng: Why didn't you report that King Yiyang was plotting a rebellion?

古文：法生惧祸，走归彭城。
现代文：法生害怕惹祸，逃到彭城。
English: Afraid of getting into trouble, Haseo fled to Pengcheng.

古文：昶欲袭建康，诸郡并不受命。和平六年，遂委母妻，携妾吴氏作丈夫服，结义从六十余人，间行来降。
现代文：刘昶想袭击建康，各郡都不同意，和平六年，于是丢下母亲妻子，携同女扮男装的妾吴氏，结义随从六十多人，从小路投降朝廷。
English: Liu Bei wanted to attack Jiankang, but the counties did not agree, and there was peace for six years, so he left his mother and wife, took his concubine Wu, who was dressed as a man, and was accompanied by more than sixty people, and surrendered to the imperial court from a side road.

古文：在路多叛，随昶至者二十许人。
现代文：一路上，随从多有背叛的，跟随刘昶到朝廷的只有二十来个人。
English: Along the way, many of Liu Bei's followers betrayed him, and only about twenty people followed Liu Bei to the imperial court.

古文：昶虽学不渊洽，略览子史，前后表启，皆其自制。
现代文：刘昶虽然学问不很渊博广阔，只是略读子史之类，但前后上表启奏，都是他自己亲手写的。
English: Although Liu Xuan's learning was not very profound and extensive, he only skimmed through the history of his son, but he wrote the opening notes of the table in his own hand.

古文：朝廷嘉重之，尚武邑公主，拜侍中、征南将军、驸马都尉，封丹阳王。
现代文：朝廷嘉许器重他，让他与武邑公主结婚，拜授侍中、征南将军、驸马都尉，封丹阳王。
English: The imperial court honored him, let him marry Princess Wuyi, awarded him the titles of Chamberlain, General of the Southern Expedition, Captain of the Horse, and King of Danyang.

古文：岁余而公主薨，更尚建兴长公主。
现代文：一年多后公主逝世，又改娶建兴长公主。
English: More than a year later, the princess died, and he remarried Princess Jian Xing.

古文：皇兴中，刘彧遣其员外郎李丰来朝，显祖诏昶与彧书，为兄弟之戒。
现代文：皇兴年间，刘派员外郎李丰到魏朝廷，显祖召刘昶给刘写信，以兄弟的身份劝诫他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xing, Liu sent his son-in-law Li Feng to the Wei court. Xianzu called Liu Xi to write a letter to Liu, exhorting him as a brother.

古文：彧不答，责昶以母为其国妾，宜如春秋荀对楚称外臣之礼。
现代文：刘不回答，责备刘昶以母为国妾，与《春秋》中记载的荀对楚称外臣之礼的情况没什么两样。
English: Liu did not answer, and scolded Liu Xuan for using his mother as a concubine, which was no different from the situation of Xuan calling Chu a foreign minister as recorded in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：寻敕昶更与彧书。
现代文：不久，皇帝又让刘昶再给刘写信。
English: Soon after, the emperor asked Liu Xuan to write to Liu again.

古文：昶表曰： 臣植根南伪，托体不殊，秉旄作牧，职班台位。
现代文：刘昶上表说： 臣根植南方刘伪政权，托体虽不特殊，但任官为牧守，朝廷之中职位也高。
English: Liu Bei said on the table: The Southern Liu puppet regime is rooted in the Southern Liu puppet regime. Although the supporting body is not special, the appointed official is the pastor, and the position is also high in the imperial court.

古文：天厌子业，夷戮同体，背本归朝，事舍簪笏。
现代文：天杀的刘子业，杀害同宗族人，我只好离本还归皇魏，放弃先前官爵。
English: Liu Ziye, who was killed by heaven, killed people of the same clan, so I had to return to the Emperor Wei and give up my former title.

古文：臣弟彧废侄自立，彰于遐迩。
现代文：我的弟弟刘废弃侄子，自立为王，恶迹昭彰，远近皆知。
English: My brother Liu abandoned his nephew and established himself as king. His evil deeds are well-known far and wide.

古文：孔怀之义难夺，为臣之典靡经，棠棣之咏可修，越敬之事未允。
现代文：而今皇上大义难传递，为臣之礼难以背弃，锦绣文章可撰，但背弃之事也不容臣再做。
English: Nowadays, the emperor's great righteousness is difficult to pass on, and it is difficult to betray the courtesy of a vassal. An embroidered article can be written, but a vassal is not allowed to do it again.

古文：臣若改书，事为二敬；犹修往文，彼所不纳。
现代文：臣如若再写，就是不敬；重写旧信，对方又不接纳。
English: If a minister rewrites, it is disrespectful; if he rewrites an old letter, the other side will not accept it.

古文：伏愿圣慈，停臣今答。 
现代文：臣恳求皇恩浩荡，免臣再答。 
English: If a vassal pleads with the emperor for a great favor, the vassal is not allowed to reply.

古文：朝廷从之。拜外都坐大官。
现代文：朝廷答应了他的请求，拜授他为外都坐大官。
English: The imperial court agreed to his request and appointed him to a high-ranking position.

古文：公主复薨，更尚平阳长公主。
现代文：公主又死了，又改配平阳长公主。
English: The princess died again, and the eldest princess was reassigned to Pingyang.

古文：昶好犬马，爱武事。入国历纪，犹布衣皁冠，同凶素之服。
现代文：刘昶喜爱犬马，热爱战事，进入皇魏经历数朝，仍是布衣皂冠，衣着简朴，如同凶丧素服。
English: Liu Bei loved dogs and horses, loved warfare, and went through several dynasties into the imperial Wei dynasty. He still wore a cloth and soap crown, and his clothes were simple, like a fierce plainclothes.

古文：然呵詈童仆，音杂夷夏。
现代文：但是他呵斥责骂侍童奴仆，声音中杂夹夷夏多种口音。
English: But he yelled at and scolded the servant boy, his voice a jumble of different accents.

古文：虽在公坐，诸王每侮弄之，或戾手啮臂，至于痛伤，笑呼之声，闻于御听。
现代文：他即使在宫廷之上，诸位王公也经常戏弄他，打打闹闹，或捏手扭臂，以至嗷嗷直叫，大笑呼喊的声音，常常传到皇帝耳中。
English: Even when he was at court, the princes would often tease him, play pranks on him, or twist his arms and wring his hands, to the point that the Emperor would hear their screams, laughter and shouts.

古文：高祖每优假之，不以怪问。
现代文：魏高祖每每总是宽容他，从不追究。
English: Wei Gaozu always tolerated him and never pursued him.

古文：至于陈奏本国事故，语及征役，则能敛容涕泗，悲动左右。
现代文：但是到了他上书陈奏本国政事，谈及征伐之事，他则能收敛笑容，常常涕泪雨下，以至悲切感动左右大臣。
English: But when it came to his report on the state of affairs in his country, and when he talked about the conquest, he was able to restrain his smile and often shed tears, so much so that the ministers around him were deeply moved.

古文：而天性褊躁，喜怒不恆，每至威忿，楚朴特苦，引待南士，礼多不足，缘此人怀畏避。
现代文：但他本人天性狭隘急躁，喜怒无常，每每发起脾气鞭打起人来，痛苦难当，对待南方士人，礼节多不周全，由于这些，别人都很怕他，躲他躲得远远的。
English: But his own nature is narrow and impatient, he is moody, he lashes out at people whenever he feels like it, he is a pain in the neck, and he treats Southern scholars with less than perfect etiquette. Because of this, others are afraid of him and avoid him at all costs.

古文：太和初，转内都坐大官。
现代文：太和初年，转任内都坐大官。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, they all became grand officials.

古文：及萧道成杀刘准，时遣诸将南伐，诏昶曰： 卿识机体运，先觉而来。
现代文：等到萧道成杀了刘准，皇魏派遣众将讨伐南方，皇帝下诏刘昶说： 卿先见高远，早来皇魏。
English: When Xiao Daocheng killed Liu Jun, Emperor Wei sent generals to fight in the south, and Emperor Liu Bei issued an edict saying, "Your foresight is far-reaching, come to Emperor Wei at an early date."

古文：卿宗庙不复血食，朕闻斯问，矜忿兼怀。
现代文：卿宗庙不复血食，朕听说此问，忿怒满怀。
English: I was filled with anger when I heard that the Emperor's ancestral temple would not return to bloodshed.

古文：今遣大将军率南州甲卒，以伐逆竖，克荡凶丑，翦除民害。
现代文：现在派遣大将军率领南州士卒，讨伐逆竖，荡除凶顽丑恶之人，为民除害。
English: Now, we are sending a general to lead the Nanzhou soldiers to fight against the rebels, eliminate the vicious and ugly people, and eliminate the harm to the people.

古文：氛秽既清，即胙卿江南之土，以兴蕃业。 
现代文：南州清平之后，朕即赏赐你南方的土地，让你重振往日基业。 
English: After the Qingping of Nanzhou, I will reward you with the land in the south, so that you can revive the foundation of the past.

古文：乃以本将军与诸将同行。
现代文：于是刘昶以本将军与众将一起同行。
English: So Liu Bei took this general along with the other generals.

古文：路经徐州，哭拜其母旧堂，哀感从者。
现代文：路经徐州，在其母旧堂上哭拜，哀痛之情，感动随从人员。
English: Passing through Xuzhou, he wept and worshiped at his mother's old hall, and his followers were moved by his sorrow.

古文：乃遍循故居，处处陨涕，左右亦莫不辛酸。
现代文：于是刘昶遍寻故居，处处伤心落泪，左右之人也无不辛酸落泪。
English: As a result, Liu Xuan searched for the former residence and shed tears of sadness everywhere. People around him also shed tears of bitterness.

古文：及至军所，将欲临陈，四面拜诸将士，自陈家国灭亡，蒙朝廷慈覆，辞理切至，声气激扬，涕泗横流，三军咸为感叹。
现代文：到了军队所在地，准备战斗之前，刘昶四面拜过众将士，自陈家国灭亡，蒙受朝廷恩抚的经过，语辞真诚，义理恳切，声音气势激荡昂扬，涕泪横流，三军将士都为之感叹不已。
English: Before arriving at the location of the army and preparing for battle, Liu Ye bowed to the soldiers on all sides. Since the demise of Chenjiakou and the process of being favored by the imperial court, his words were sincere and sincere, his voice was full of vigor and tears, and the soldiers of the three armies were full of admiration.

古文：后昶恐雨水方降，表请还师，从之。
现代文：后来刘昶担心雨水季节来到，上表请求还师，皇帝答应了。
English: Later, Liu Bei was worried about the rainy season, so he asked the emperor to reinstate him, and the emperor agreed.

古文：又加仪同三司，领仪曹尚书。
现代文：朝廷又加授他为仪同三司，领仪曹尚书。
English: The imperial court also awarded him the title of the third secretary of the ceremony and the title of Cao Shangshu.

古文：于时改革朝仪，诏昶与蒋少游专主其事。
现代文：当时改革朝廷仪典，皇帝下诏让刘昶与蒋少游两人专管此事。
English: At that time, the imperial ceremony was being reformed, and the emperor issued an edict that Liu Bei and Jiang Shaoyou should be in charge of the matter.

古文：昶条上旧式，略不遗忘。
现代文：刘昶逐条陈述旧时仪式，无一遗忘。
English: Liu Ye went through the old rituals one by one, never forgetting a single one.

古文：高祖引见于宣文堂，昶启曰： 臣本国不造，私有虐政，不能废昏立德，扶定倾危，万里奔波，投廕皇阙，仰赖天慈，以存首领。
现代文：魏高祖在宣文堂召见刘昶，刘昶启奏说： 为臣原来本国不争气，私有暴政，不能废除昏邪选立有德之人，扶整倾倒危覆，为臣万里奔波，投归皇魏，仰赖圣皇天慈，才得保全性命。
English: Wei Gao Zu summoned Liu Wei in the Xuanwen Hall, and Liu Wei Kai said: "As a vassal, the country is not competitive, the private tyranny cannot be abolished, it is impossible to choose a virtuous person, it is necessary to rectify and overthrow the danger, it is necessary to travel thousands of miles for the vassal, return to the Emperor Wei, and rely on the Divine Mercy of the Holy Emperor to preserve one's life.

古文：然大耻未雪，痛愧缠心。
现代文：然而臣本国大耻未雪，痛楚惭愧时常折磨为臣。
English: However, the great shame of the vassal country has not yet snowed, and the pain and shame often torment the vassal.

古文：属逢陛下厘校之始，愿垂曲恩，处臣边戍，招集遗人，以雪私耻。
现代文：正逢陛下厘校旧仪之始，臣希望陛下能略垂恩慈，把为臣安置边关，让臣招集旧人，以雪奇耻。
English: It was at the beginning of His Majesty's old rite, and I hoped that His Majesty would be kind enough to set a boundary for me and let me call up the old people.

古文：虽死之日，犹若生年。 
现代文：即使臣死，也胜过忍辱而活的有生之年。 
English: Even the death of a vassal is better than a lifetime of humiliation.

古文：悲泣良久。
现代文：悲痛哭泣了很久。
English: I cried for a long time.

古文：高祖曰： 卿投诚累纪，本邦湮灭，王者未能恤难矜灾，良以为愧。
现代文：魏高祖说： 爱卿你投诚于魏，已经过了几个朝代了，但你自己本邦破灭，作为王者的你不能赈难救灾，的确多有愧意。
English: Wei Gaozu said, "Aiqing, you have devoted yourself to Wei, and several dynasties have passed, but your own kingdom has collapsed. As a king, you can't help the disaster. You really have a lot of shame.

古文：出蕃之日，请别当处分。 
现代文：但出朝任官之事，应当改日再论。 
English: However, the matter of being appointed to the imperial court should be discussed another day.

古文：后以昶女为乡君。
现代文：后来朝廷以刘昶的女儿为乡君。
English: Later, the imperial court made Liu Ye's daughter the head of the village.

古文：高祖临宣文堂，见武兴王杨集始。
现代文：魏高祖到宣文堂，见武兴王杨集始。
English: Wei Gao Zu went to Xuanwen Hall and saw Wu Xing Wang Yang Ji Shi.

古文：既而引集始入宴，诏昶曰： 集始边方之酋，不足以当诸侯之礼。但王者不遗小国之臣，况此蕃垂之主，故劳公卿于此。 
现代文：既而引杨集始入宴，下诏给刘昶说： 杨集始是边境的一方酋长，不足以当受诸侯的礼节，然而作为王者不遗漏掉小国之臣，何况这一蕃之主，所以朕烦劳公卿于此。 
English: Having already ushered Yang Jizhi into the banquet, he issued the following edict to Liu Xuan: Yang Jizhi is the chief of one side of the border, not enough to be subject to the etiquette of the princes, however, as a king, he does not omit the vassals of a small country, not to mention the lord of this egret, so I am bothering the nobles here.

古文：昶对曰： 陛下道化光被，自北而南，故巴汉之雄，远觐天阙。
现代文：刘昶回答说： 陛下您道德教化光被远近，从北而南，所以巴汉之雄，仍远敬皇魏天阙。
English: Liu Bei replied, "Your Majesty, the light of moral enlightenment has been spread far and wide, from the north to the south. Therefore, the Baha'is still respect Emperor Wei Tianyao from afar.

古文：臣猥瞻盛礼，实忻嘉遇。 
现代文：臣参加盛礼，实在感谢皇上知遇。 
English: The vassal attended the grand ceremony and was truly grateful to the Emperor for the opportunity.

古文：高祖曰： 武兴、宕昌，于礼容并不闲备，向见集始，观其举动，有贤于弥承。 
现代文：魏高祖说： 武兴、宕昌，对礼节并不熟悉，多有不合礼节之处，刚才朕见到集始，观察他的行为举止，比弥承强多了。 
English: Wei Gaozu said: Wu Xing and Gaochang are not familiar with etiquette, and there are many things that are not proper etiquette. Just now, I saw Ji Xing and observed his behavior. He is much stronger than Yixing.

古文：昶对曰： 陛下惠洽普天，泽流无外。武兴蕞尔，岂不食椹怀音。 
现代文：刘昶回答说： 陛下您慈惠接达普天之下，恩泽流被四海之内，武兴这样的蕞尔小国，哪能不食椹怀音。 
English: Liu Bei replied, "Your Majesty, your benevolence reaches all over the world, the flow of grace is within the four seas, and a small country like Wuxing can't help but cherish it.

古文：又为中书监。
现代文：朝廷又命他为中书监。
English: The Imperial Court also appointed him as the Central Library Supervisor.

古文：开建五等，封昶齐郡开国公，加宋王之号。
现代文：开建五等，封刘昶为齐郡开国公，加授宋王之号。
English: The construction of the fifth-class, Liu Ye was named the founding father of Qi County, and was awarded the title of King Song.

古文：十七年春，高祖临经武殿，大议南伐，语及刘、萧篡夺之事，昶每悲泣不已。
现代文：太和十七年春，魏高祖临经武殿，大议南伐，谈到齐、萧篡权的事情，刘昶每每悲泣不已。
English: In the spring of the seventeenth year of Tahe, the Wei Gao Zu went to the Jingwu Palace to discuss the Southern Expedition, and when he talked about the matter of Qi and Xiao usurping power, Liu Bei was in tears.

古文：因奏曰： 臣本朝沦丧，艰毒备罹，冀恃国灵，释臣私耻。 
现代文：因而启奏说： 为臣本朝沦丧，备遭艰毒，希望凭借魏国灵德，以释为臣私耻。 
English: Therefore, the prelude said: As a subject of this dynasty, I am ruined, I am prepared to suffer hardships, and I hope that by virtue of Wei Guolingde, I will be released from the shame of being a subject.

古文：顿首拜谢。
现代文：顿首拜谢。
English: He bowed his head in thanks.

古文：高祖亦为之流涕，礼之弥崇。
现代文：魏高祖也为之流下眼泪，礼待他更为优厚。
English: Wei Gaozu also shed tears for him, and treated him more generously.

古文：萧赜雍州刺史曹虎之诈降也，诏昶以兵出义阳，无功而还。
现代文：萧赜的雍州刺史曹虎诈降，皇帝下诏让刘昶兵出义阳，终而无功而回。
English: Xiao Yao's Yongzhou stabbed Cao Hu for fraud, and the emperor issued an edict to let Liu Ye's soldiers leave Yiyang, but they eventually returned without success.

古文：十八年，除使持节、都督吴越楚彭城诸军事、大将军，固辞，诏不许，又赐布千匹。
现代文：太和十八年，朝廷授他为使持节，都督吴、越、楚、彭城诸军事，大将军，刘昶坚决推辞，魏帝不许，又赐给他布千匹。
English: In the 18th year of the Taisho era, the imperial court awarded him the title of the commander-in-chief of Wu, Yue, Chu, and Pengcheng militaries. The great general, Liu Bei, resolutely refused it. Emperor Wei did not allow it, and gave him a thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：及发，高祖亲饯之，命百僚赋诗赠昶，又以其《文集》一部赐昶。
现代文：到出发时，魏高祖亲自为他饯别，高祖命群僚佐赋诗赠予刘昶，又把自己所撰的一部文集赐给他。
English: At the time of departure, Wei Gaozu himself bade him farewell. Gaozu's close associates presented Liu Bei with poems, and also gave him a collection of his own writings.

古文：高祖因以所制文笔示之，谓昶曰： 时契胜残，事钟文业，虽则不学，欲罢不能。
现代文：高祖拿出他自己的文集对刘昶说： 我业余时间，热衷文学，虽然学识粗浅，但也欲罢不能。
English: Gaozu took out his own anthology and said to Liu Wei, "In my spare time, I am passionate about literature. Although my knowledge is shallow, I can't stop reading.

古文：脱思一见，故以相示。
现代文：如有一见，便行成文，送给你看。
English: If I see something, I'll write it down and show it to you.

古文：虽无足味，聊复为笑耳。 
现代文：文章虽无足味，只供爱卿一笑而已。 
English: Although the article is worthless, it is just for Ai Qing to laugh.

古文：其重昶如是。
现代文：其重视刘昶于此可见一斑。
English: The importance he places on Liu Ye is evident here.

古文：自昶之背彭城，至是久矣。
现代文：自从刘昶离开彭城，到他上任，相隔已经很久了。
English: It has been a long time since Liu Wei left Pengcheng and he took office.

古文：其昔斋宇山池，并尚存立，昶更修缮，还处其中。
现代文：彭城中过去的斋宇山池，都还存在，刘昶又加修缮，仍居止其中。
English: In Pengcheng, all the ponds and ponds of the past still exist, and Liu Ye has repaired them and still lives in them.

古文：不能绥边怀物，抚接义故，而闺门喧猥，内外奸杂，前民旧吏，莫不慨叹焉。
现代文：刘昶到彭城，不能安定边境，心怀人物，抚接义故，而闺门之内喧嚣猥事，内外奸邪杂处，以前百姓旧时吏卒见到这种情况，无不感慨叹惜。
English: When Liu Bei came to Pengcheng, he was unable to stabilize the border. He was concerned with personalities and tending to virtuous causes, while there was a clamor of indecency inside the gate, and a miscellany of internal and external treachery. In the past, the people and officials in the old days saw this situation, and they all felt regret.

古文：豫营墓于彭城西南，与三公主同茔而异穴。
现代文：刘昶又营造坟墓于彭城西南，自己墓穴与三位公主的同茔而异穴。
English: Liu Ye also built a tomb in the southwest of Pengcheng, and his own tomb was different from that of the three princesses.

古文：发石累之，坟崩，压杀十余人。
现代文：挖掘石头，垒起坟茔，坟墓崩溃，压死了十几个人。
English: Digging stones, erecting graves, the graves collapsed, crushing more than a dozen people to death.

古文：后复移改，为公私费害。
现代文：后来又移改他处，公私浪费很多，危害不小。
English: Later, it was moved to another place. There was a lot of waste, both public and private, and the damage was not small.

古文：高祖南讨，昶候驾于行宫，高祖遣侍中迎劳之。
现代文：魏高祖南讨，刘昶在皇帝行宫候驾，高祖派侍中迎接慰劳。
English: Wei Gao's ancestor traveled to the south, Liu Ye waited for the emperor at the imperial palace, and Gao Zu sent his attendants to welcome the consolation.

古文：昶讨萧昭业司州，虽屡破贼军，而义阳拒守不克，昶乃班师。
现代文：刘昶讨伐萧昭业于司州，虽然屡屡破败敌军，但义阳拒守，攻而不克，刘昶只好撤军。
English: Liu Bei fought against Xiao Zhaoye in Shizhou, and although he repeatedly defeated the enemy army, Yiyang refused to defend and was unable to attack, so Liu Bei had to withdraw.

古文：十九年，高祖在彭城，昶至入见。
现代文：太和十九年，魏高祖在彭城，刘昶入见。
English: In the 19th year of the Taihe era, Wei Gao Zu was in Pengcheng and met Liu Xuan.

古文：昶曰： 臣奉敕专征，克殄凶丑，徒劳士马，久淹岁时，有损威灵，伏听斧钺。 
现代文：刘昶说： 为臣奉命征讨，剿灭凶邪，但却徒劳士卒马匹，久拖时日，不见战功，实在有损陛下威灵，臣请接受刑罚。 
English: Liu Yao said, "I was ordered to collect taxes for my vassal to eliminate the evil, but I have been working in vain. I have been waiting for a long time, and I have not seen any war achievements. This is really detrimental to His Majesty's dignity. My vassal, please accept the punishment."

古文：高祖曰： 朕之此行，本无攻守之意，正欲伐罪吊民，宣威布德，二事既暢，不失本图。朕亦无克而还，岂但卿也。 
现代文：魏高祖说： 朕此番前来，本无攻守之意。正想讨伐罪恶，吊慰民众，宣扬皇威布施帝德，二事既做好，也不失本来打算，朕也无所成就，只好还师，岂只是爱卿你呢。 
English: Wei Gaozu said: I came here this time, but I had no intention of attacking or defending. I just wanted to fight evil, comfort the people, and promote the virtue of Emperor Wibshidi. If I do these two things well, I won't lose my original intention, and I won't achieve anything. I had to return to my teacher. Isn't it just Aiqing you?

古文：十月，昶朝于京师。
现代文：十月，刘昶在京城朝见皇帝。
English: In October, Liu Bei went to see the emperor in Beijing.

古文：高祖临光极堂大选。
现代文：高祖幸临光极堂大选人士。
English: Gao Zu Xinglin is a member of the general election of Guangji Hall.

古文：高祖曰： 朝因月旦，欲评魏典。
现代文：高祖说： 月初会朝，想让大家品评魏典。
English: Gao Zu said: At the beginning of the month, we will have a morning meeting, and I want everyone to evaluate Wei Dian.

古文：夫典者，为国大纲，治民之柄。
现代文：大凡称为典的，都是作为国家的大纲，治理百姓的柄把。
English: What is commonly known as the Constitution is nothing more than the outline of the country and the framework for governing the people.

古文：君能好典则国治，不能则国乱。
现代文：一国之君能喜好法典则国家定会大治，不喜好法典则国家定会乱套。
English: If the ruler of a country can like the code, the country will make great progress, and if he does not like the code, the country will make a mess.

古文：我国家昔在恆代，随时制作，非通世之长典。
现代文：我魏过去在恒、代时，典制都是随时制作，所造的都不是通世的长久典章。
English: In the past, in the Heian and Qing dynasties, the award system was made at any time, and what was created was not a universal long-term award.

古文：故自夏及秋，亲议条制。
现代文：所以从夏到秋，朕总是亲议条文。
English: Therefore, from summer to autumn, I am always personally discussing the articles.

古文：或言唯能是寄，不必拘门，朕以为不尔。
现代文：或言惟能是寄，不必拘于门庭，朕以为不尔。
English: Or words can only be sent, do not have to stick to the courtyard, I think not.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：当今之世，仰祖质朴，清浊同流，混齐一等，君子小人，名品无别，此殊为不可。
现代文：是因为当今之世，本当仰祖质朴，然而清浊同流，混淆不分，君子与小人也是名位品级没有区别，这尤为不可。
English: It is because in today's world, people really look up to the ancestor's simplicity, however, there is no difference between a gentleman and a villain, and there is no distinction between a gentleman and a villain. This is especially true.

古文：我今八族以上，士人品第有九，九品之外，小人之官，复有七等。
现代文：我皇魏现在八族以上，士人品第有九等，九品以外，细小官职，又有七等。
English: I, Emperor Wei, now have more than eight ethnic groups, and the first rank of judges has nine grades, and beyond the nine grades, there are seven grades for minor officials.

古文：若苟有其人，可起家为三公。
现代文：如真有贤人，可以起家为三公之列。
English: If there is a truly wise man, he can start a family and become one of the Three Wise Men.

古文：正恐贤才难得，不可止为一人，浑我典制。
现代文：朕正是担心贤才难得，不能只为一人，浑我典制。
English: I'm just worried about the scarcity of talented people, I can't be the only one, I'm stuck with the system.

古文：故令班镜九流，清一朝轨，使千载之后，我得仿像唐虞，卿等依俙元、凯。 
现代文：所以今令大家区分九流，清纯统一朝轨，以使千年之后，我能够与唐、虞之名仿佛，卿等可比拟元、凯。 
English: Therefore, I now ask everyone to distinguish between the nine streams and the pure and unified morning track, so that after a thousand years, I can be compared with Tang and Yu, and can be compared with Yuan and Kai.

古文：昶对曰： 陛下光宅中区，惟新朝典，刊正九流为不朽之法，岂唯仿像唐虞，固以有高三代。 
现代文：刘昶对答说： 陛下圣德披及中区，更新朝典，修正九流，编议不朽法典，岂只是与唐、虞相仿佛，肯定会德高三代之君。 
English: Liu Bei replied, "Your majesty's virtue has spread to the central region, he has updated the imperial code, amended the ninth line, and compiled the immortal code. Isn't he just like Tang and Yu, and will surely be the prince of the third generation of virtue?"

古文：高祖曰： 国家本来有一事可慨。
现代文：魏高祖说： 国家本来有一件事情可以感慨。
English: Wei Gaozu said: The country originally had one thing to be moved by.

古文：可慨者何？
现代文：可以感慨的是什么呢？
English: What is there to be sad about?

古文：恆无公言得失。
现代文：总是没有人在大众场合说人得失。
English: There is always no one to talk about the pros and cons in public.

古文：今卿等各尽其心。
现代文：今天，卿等都得说出自己的心里话。
English: Today, everyone has to say what's on their mind.

古文：人君患不能纳群下之谏，为臣患不能尽忠于主。
现代文：作为人君担心不能接纳群臣谏奏，作为人臣担心不能尽忠于主。
English: As a vassal, he was worried that he would not be able to accept his vassals, and as a vassal, he was worried that he would not be able to be loyal to the Lord.

古文：朕今举一人，如有不可，卿等尽言其失；若有才能而朕所不识者，宜各举所知。
现代文：朕今天每举一人，他如果有什么不是，你们尽可说出他的过失在什么地方；如他有才能而朕没有认识到的，你们也应各自说出自己所了解的。
English: Today I will name each one of you, and if there is something wrong with him, you can tell me where his fault lies; if he has a talent that I do not recognize, you should also tell each other what you know.

古文：在寿春，坐谋杀刺史王肃以寿春叛，事发伏法。
现代文：朕该当虚心接受意见。如能这样，能尽举他人得失的受赏，不说话则有罪。 等到议论大将军，高祖说： 刘昶就是充其职的人。 
English: I should accept opinions with an open mind. If I can do so, I will be able to appreciate the gains and losses of others, and if I do not speak, I will be guilty. When discussing the general, Gao Zu said: Liu Ye is a person who performs his duties well.

古文：有通直郎刘武英者，太和十九年从淮南内附，自云刘裕弟长沙景王道怜之曾孙，赐爵建宁子，司徒外兵参军，稍转步兵校尉、游击将军，卒于河内太守。而昶不以为族亲也。萧宝夤，字智亮，萧鸾第六子，宝卷母弟也。
现代文：后来高祖又赐给刘昶班剑二十人。太和二十一年四月，刘昶在彭城去世，享年六十二岁。高祖亲自为他举哀，赐给温明秘器、钱百万、布五百匹、蜡三百斤、朝服一套、衣一套，赠其为假黄钺、太傅，领扬州刺史，加以特殊礼节，备具九锡，赐给前后部羽葆鼓吹，丧制礼数都按晋代琅笽武王司马亻由的样式办理，谥称明。萧宝夤，字智亮，萧鸾的第六个儿子，萧宝卷的同母弟弟。
English: Later, Gao Zu also gave Liu Xuan twenty swords. In April of the 21st year of Tahe, Liu Xuan died in Pengcheng at the age of sixty-two. Gao Zu personally mourned for him, giving Wenming secret utensils, a million of money, five hundred pieces of cloth, three hundred pounds of wax, a set of imperial robes, a set of clothes, giving it as a fake Huang Xuan, Taifu, leading Yangzhou stabbing history, with special etiquette, preparing Jiuxi, giving it to the front and back of the feathered trumpet, and the number of funeral rites were handled according to the style

古文：鸾之窃位，封宝夤建安王。
现代文：萧鸾窃居皇位之后，封萧宝夤为建安王。
English: After Xiao Tong stole the throne, Xiao Baojun was crowned King of Jianan.

古文：宝卷立，以为车骑将军、开府，领石头戍军事。
现代文：宝卷继位后，任命他为车骑将军、开府，领石头城戍守军事。
English: After succeeding to the throne, Bao Vulin appointed him as the general of chariot and cavalry, the head of the government, and the leader of the military garrison of the Stone City.

古文：宝卷昏狂，其直后刘灵运等谋奉宝夤，密遣报宝夤，宝夤许之。
现代文：宝卷昏愦狂虐，其直后刘灵运等人谋求奉立萧宝夤，秘密派人报告宝夤，宝夤答应了这件事。
English: Bao Zhuan was delirious with rage, and immediately after that, Liu Lingyun and others sought to appoint Xiao Baoqi, secretly sent someone to report to Baoqi, and Baoqi agreed to the matter.

古文：遂迎宝夤，率石头文武向其台城，称警跸，百姓随从者数百人。
现代文：于是迎接萧宝夤率领石头城文武官员兵卒向宝卷所居的台城进发，号称清理君侧，百姓随从的有数百人。
English: As a result, Xiao Baojun led the officers and soldiers of Stone Town to march into Taicheng, where Baotan lived, claiming to clean up the monarch's side, with hundreds of people following.

古文：会日暮，城门闭，乃烧三尚及建业城，城上射杀数人，众乃奔散。
现代文：当时正好是傍晚，城门关闭，宝夤于是焚烧三尚以及建邺城，城上射下的箭矢杀死了数人，大家于是奔散而去。
English: At that time, it was just evening, the city gate was closed, so Baodi burned the Three Kingdoms and Jianye City. The arrows shot from the city killed several people, so everyone ran away.

古文：宝夤弃车步走，部尉执送之，自列为人所逼，宝卷亦不罪责也。
现代文：萧宝夤弃车奔逃，被部尉捉拿送到宝卷那里，宝夤自己申述是被人所逼，宝卷也就不再怪罪他。
English: Xiao Bao abandoned the car and ran away. He was caught by a lieutenant and sent to Bao Zhuan. Bao Zhuan himself said that he was forced by others, and Bao Zhuan no longer blamed him.

古文：宝卷弟宝融僭立，以宝夤为卫将军、南徐州刺史、改封鄱阳王。
现代文：宝卷弟弟宝融继立，任命宝夤为卫将军、南徐州刺史，改封鄱阳王。
English: Baozhong's younger brother Bao Rong succeeded him and appointed Baozhong as the general of Wei and the governor of South Xuzhou, and changed his title to the King of Shenyang.

古文：萧衍既克建业，杀其兄弟，将害宝夤，以兵守之，未至严急。
现代文：萧衍攻克建业，杀其兄弟，准备加害萧宝夤，以兵守候他，但攻迫不太紧急。
English: Xiao Yan attacked Jianye, killed his brother, prepared to harm Xiao Baojun, and waited for him with soldiers, but the attack was not urgent.

古文：其家阉人颜文智与左右麻拱、黄神密计，穿墙夜出宝夤。
现代文：他家太监颜文智与左右麻拱、黄神密谋，穿破墙壁，让宝夤在夜里逃了出去。
English: Yan Wenzhi, the eunuch of Xiaofu, and his attendants Ma Gong and Huang Shen secretly decided to dig a hole in the wall at night to send out the treasure.

古文：具小船于江岸，脱本衣服，著乌布襦，腰系千许钱，潜赴江畔，蹑屩徒步，脚无全皮。
现代文：在江岸边准备好小船，脱下原来衣服，穿上乌布襦衣，腰间系上千文左右的钱，偷偷溜到江边，脱掉鞋子，光脚行走，脚上的皮都走掉了。
English: Prepare a small boat on the riverbank, take off the original clothes, put on a Ubud robe, tie about a thousand money around the waist, sneak to the river, take off your shoes, walk barefoot, and the skin on your feet will be gone.

古文：防守者至明追之，宝夤假为钓者，随流上下十余里，追者不疑，待散，乃度西岸。
现代文：防守的人到天亮时才发现，追到江边，宝夤装扮成钓鱼的，随流漂浮上下十余里，追赶的人没有怀疑，等到他们散去，才渡到长江西岸。
English: The defenders didn't find out until dawn that when they chased the rafts to the river's edge, the Baojun, disguised as fishermen, floated up and down with the current for more than ten miles. The pursuers didn't suspect a thing, and it wasn't until they dispersed that they reached the west bank of the Yangtze River.

古文：遂委命投华文荣。
现代文：于是宝夤委命投奔华文荣。
English: As a result, the Baojun Committee ordered to rush to Hua Wen Rong.

古文：文荣与其从子天龙、惠连等三人，弃家将宝夤遁匿山涧，赁驴乘之，昼伏宵行。景明二年至寿春之东城戍。
现代文：文荣与其养子天龙、惠连等三人，弃家把萧宝夤藏在山涧之中，租来驴子让他坐上，昼伏夜行，景明二年到了皇魏寿春的东城戍。
English: Wen Rong, together with his adopted son Tian Long and Hui Lian, and three others, left home and hid Xiao Baojun in the mountains, rented a donkey for him to ride on, and traveled day and night. In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, they arrived at the East City of the Emperor Wei Shuchun.

古文：戍主杜元伦推检知实萧氏子也，以礼延待，驰告扬州刺史、任城王澄，澄以车马侍卫迎之。
现代文：戍主杜元伦查寻一番，知其确实是萧氏之子，便以礼相待，驰马禀告扬州刺史、任城王元澄，元澄以车马侍卫迎接他。
English: The lord of the castle, Du Yuanlun, did a thorough search and found out that he was indeed the son of Xiao, and treated him with courtesy. He rode out on horseback to tell Yangzhou's history and the king of the city, Yuancheng, and Yuancheng greeted him with chariots and horsemen.

古文：时年十六，徒步憔悴，见者以为掠卖生口也。
现代文：当时宝夤十六岁，长时的徒步行走，使他形容憔悴，见到的人都以为他是被掠夺出卖的奴隶。
English: He was only 16 years old at the time. He walked on foot, his face was very gaunt, and people who saw him thought he was someone else who had been stolen and sold.

古文：澄待以客礼。
现代文：元澄以客礼待他。
English: Motosumi received him with the etiquette of a distinguished guest.

古文：乃请丧居斩衰之服，澄遣人晓示情礼，以丧兄之制，给其齐衰，宝夤从命。
现代文：宝夤请求元澄给他服丧的衣服，元澄派人晓示情礼，按丧兄的礼制，给他齐衰丧制的衣服，宝夤从命。
English: Baojun asked Yuancheng to give him mourning clothes. Yuancheng sent someone to show him the funeral rites. According to the funeral brother's etiquette, he gave him the clothes of mourning, and Baojun obeyed.

古文：澄率官僚赴吊，宝夤居处有礼，不饮酒食肉，辍笑简言，一同极哀之节。
现代文：元澄率领官僚前去吊唁，宝夤居处有礼，不饮酒不吃肉，不笑寡言，全同极哀的礼节。
English: Yuancheng led the bureaucrats to pay their condolences. Baojun's residence is polite, he does not drink, does not eat meat, does not smile and is taciturn. They all have the same extremely sad etiquette.

古文：寿春多其故义，皆受慰唁，唯不见夏侯一族，以夏侯同萧衍故也。
现代文：寿春城有许多故旧，都受其慰唁，只是不见夏侯一族，因为夏侯苟同于萧衍的缘故。
English: There are many old-fashioned things in Shuchuncheng, all of which are comforted by it, but there is no Xia Hou family, because Xia Hou is exactly the same as Xia Yan.

古文：改日造澄，澄深器重之。
现代文：改日萧宝夤到元澄那里，元澄深深地器重他。
English: A few days later, Baojun went to pay homage to the king of Rencheng, Rencheng was very fond of him.

古文：景明三年闰四月，诏曰： 萧宝夤深识机运，归诚有道，冒险履屯，投命绛阙，微子、陈韩亦曷以过也。
现代文：景明三年闰四月，帝下诏曰： 萧宝夤深识大理，归诚我魏，实属有道之举，他冒险履艰，投命朝廷，微子、陈、韩也不能超过他。
English: In April of the third year of the Jingming era, the emperor issued an edict saying: Xiao Baolu was a man of profound knowledge and sincerity, and it was indeed a wise move. He risked hardship and gave his life for the imperial court, and no child, no Chen, no Han, could surpass him.

古文：可遣羽林监、领主书刘桃符诣彼迎接。
现代文：可派遣羽林监、领主书刘桃符到任城王那里迎接。
English: You can send Liu Taofu, the forester and lord of the manor, to meet the new king.

古文：其资生所须之物，及衣冠、车马、在京邸馆，付尚书悉令预备。 
现代文：其资生所需之物，以及衣冠、车马、在京的住房，交尚书都把它们准备好。 
English: They have everything they need for their children, as well as clothes, cars, a house in Kyoto, and a letter of introduction.

古文：及至京师，世宗礼之甚重。
现代文：等萧宝夤到了京城，魏世宗很优厚地对待他。
English: When Xiao Baojun arrived in Beijing, Wei Shizong treated him very generously.

古文：至晨，备礼策授，赐车马什物，给虎贲五百人，事从丰厚，犹不及刘昶之优隆也。
现代文：宝夤伏诉皇阙之下，请兵向南征伐，虽遇暴风大雨，他始终不移动。这年冬天，萧衍江州刺史陈伯之与其长史褚胄等自寿春前来投降，萧宝夤请军立即前去受降。
English: This winter, Xiao Yan, the governor of Jiangzhou, Chen Bozhi, and his long-term secretary, Zhou Chun, came to surrender, and Xiao Baozhu invited the army to immediately go and surrender.

古文：又任其募天下壮勇，得数千人。以文智三人等为积弩将军，文荣等三人为强弩将军，并为军主。
现代文：魏世宗以宝夤所述十分诚恳以及伯之所述，觉得时不可失，景明四年二月，世宗于是召集高级官员到宫内讨论部署兵力的方法。四月，除萧宝夤为使持节，都督东扬、南徐、兖三州诸军事，镇东将军，东扬州刺史，丹阳郡开国公，齐王，配置兵力一万人。任命文智等三人为积驽将军，文荣等三人为强驽将军，都为军主。
English: Wei Shizong took Baojun's words very sincerely and felt that the time was not to be lost. In February of the fourth year of Jingming, Shizong then summoned high-ranking officials to the palace to discuss the method of deploying troops. In April, in addition to Xiao Baojun, the military of the three states of Dongyang, Nanxu and Handan, the general of Zhendong, the general of Dongyang, the founding father of Danyang County, and the king of Qi, allocated 10,000 troops. He appointed three generals such as Wen Zhi as the general of Jian, and three generals such as Wen Rong as the general of Qiang

古文：宝夤虽少羁流，而志性雅重，过期犹绝酒肉，惨形悴色，蔬食粗衣，未尝嬉笑。
现代文：萧宝夤虽然少被流俗所羁，但他志性雅重，过了丧服之期他仍然不食酒肉，惨形悴色，蔬食粗衣，从不嬉笑。
English: Although Xiao Baojun was rarely restrained by popular customs, he was ambitious and elegant. After the period of mourning, he still did not eat meat and wine. He was gaunt and pale, ate vegetables and coarse clothing, and never laughed.

古文：及被命当南伐，贵要多相凭托，门庭宾客若市，书记相寻，宝夤接对报复，不失其理。
现代文：等到受命南伐，贵臣显要多前来凭托，他府上门庭宾客若市，掌管书写记录的官员也相寻而来，萧宝夤接对应答，分毫不失其理。
English: When he was ordered to go to the south, many dignitaries came to visit him, and the officials in charge of written records also came to visit him. Xiao Bao answered their questions in a timely manner, without missing a beat.

古文：正始元年三月，宝夤行达汝阴，东城已陷，遂停寿春之栖贤寺。
现代文：正始元年三月，萧宝夤到了汝阴，东城已被攻陷，于是停驻在寿春栖贤寺。
English: At the beginning of March in the first year of the year, Xiao Baojun arrived in Ruyin, and Dongcheng had already been conquered, so he stopped at Shushunxixian Temple.

古文：值贼将姜庆真内侵，士民响附，围逼寿春，遂据外郭。
现代文：这时，正逢敌姜庆真侵犯国境，老百姓纷纷归附，敌人围逼寿春，攻占据守在外城。
English: At this time, just as the enemy Jiang Qingzhen invaded the border, the common people joined in, the enemy besieged Shuchun, and attacked and occupied the outer city.

古文：宝夤躬贯甲胄，率下击之，自四更交战，至明日申时，贼旅弥盛。
现代文：宝夤亲穿战甲，率领部下打击敌人，两军自四更交战，战斗持续到第二天晚上申时，敌人越来越多。
English: Baojun put on his battle armor and led his subordinates to attack the enemy. The two armies fought from the 4th, and the battle continued until the evening of the next day, when there were more and more enemies.

古文：宝夤以众寡无援，退入金城。
现代文：萧宝夤因兵少无援，退兵入金城。
English: With few soldiers and no support, Xiao Baojun retreated to Jincheng.

古文：又出相国东门，率众力战，始破走之。
现代文：然后，又率军出相国东门，督军力战，才把敌人打退。
English: Then, he led the army to the east gate of the neighboring country and led the army to fight, only to drive the enemy back.

古文：当宝夤寿春之战，勇冠诸军，闻见者莫不壮之。
现代文：萧宝夤寿春一战，勇冠诸军，闻见之人无不觉得他非常英勇。
English: Xiao Bao fought in the First Battle of Shouchun, winning the bravery of all the armies. People who heard about it all felt that he was very brave.

古文：七月，还京师，改封梁郡开国公，食邑八百户。
现代文：七月，还军京师，朝廷改封其为梁郡开国公，食邑八百户。
English: In July, when he returned to the capital, the imperial court changed his title to Liang County, the founding father of the country, with 800 households in the food village.

古文：及中山王英南伐，宝夤又表求征。
现代文：等到中山王元英南伐，萧宝夤又上表请征。
English: When Zhongshan Wang Ying led the troops to march south, Baojun also requested to go to the front.

古文：乃为使持节、镇东将军、别将以继英，配羽林、虎贲五百人。
现代文：于是朝廷任命他为使持节、镇东将军、别将以继元英，配备羽林、虎贲五百人。
English: As a result, the imperial court appointed him as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of Zhendong, and the successor of Yuan Ying, and equipped him with 500 men, including Ulin and Tigress.

古文：与英频破衍军，乘胜遂攻钟离。
现代文：与元英一起频频破败萧衍部队，乘胜又攻打钟离。
English: Together with Yuan Ying, he frequently defeated Xiao Yan's troops, and took advantage of the victory to attack Zhong Li.

古文：淮水泛溢，宝夤与英狼狈引退，士卒死没者十四五。
现代文：可正逢淮河洪水泛滥，萧宝夤与元英狼狈引退，士兵被淹死的十成有四五成。
English: However, when the Huai River flooded, Baodi and Zhongshan Wang Yinglu led the troops to retreat. Four-fifths of the soldiers were killed or drowned in the flood.

古文：有司奏宝夤守东桥不固，军败由之，处以极法。
现代文：有关部门启奏萧宝夤据守东桥不力，才导致军败，理应处之以极刑。
English: Relevant departments revealed that Xiao Baojun's failure to defend the East Bridge led to the military defeat, and he should be sentenced to capital punishment.

古文：诏曰： 宝夤因难投诚，宜加矜贷，可恕死，免官削爵还第。 
现代文：帝诏曰： 萧宝夤因难投诚，宜假以宽贷，可免死，免官削爵放还归家。 
English: The imperial edict said: "Since it is difficult for Xiao Baojun to invest in sincerity, it is appropriate to grant him a lenient loan, he can be exempted from death, exempted from official demotion, and allowed to return home."

古文：寻尚南阳长公主，赐帛一千匹，并给礼具。
现代文：不久，萧宝夤娶南阳公主，帝赐帛一千匹，并赐给礼具。
English: Soon after, Xiao Baojun married Nanyang Princess, and the emperor gave her a thousand yakitori and a gift.

古文：公主有妇德，事宝夤尽肃雍之礼，虽好合积年，而敬事不替。
现代文：公主有妇德，侍奉萧宝夤竭尽夫妇之礼，虽然二人成亲多年，而她仍恭敬如初。
English: The princess had a womanly virtue, and she served Xiao Baojun with all the courtesy of a husband and wife. Although the two had been married for many years, she was still as respectful as ever.

古文：宝夤每入室，公主必立以待之，相遇如宾，自非太妃疾笃，未曾归休。
现代文：萧宝夤每每回家入室，公主必定站在门口等着他，相遇如宾，不是太妃病重，她从来没有回娘家去过。
English: Whenever Breguet enters the room, the princess must stand up to greet him, and the two respect each other as guests. If it were not for the illness of the Empress Dowager, the princess would never return to her daughter's house.

古文：宝夤器性温顺，自处以礼，奉敬公主，内外谐穆，清河王怿亲而重之。
现代文：宝夤性情温顺，待妻以礼，奉敬公主，夫妻和和睦睦，清河王元怿看在眼里，亲近而看重他。
English: Baojun had a docile disposition, treated his wife with courtesy, honored the princess, and the husband and wife lived in harmony. Qinghe Wangyuan was close to him and valued him.

古文：永平四年，卢昶克萧衍朐山戍，以琅邪戍主傅文骥守之。
现代文：永平四年，卢昶攻克萧衍朐山戍，让琅笽戍主傅文骥驻守那里。
English: In the fourth year of Yongping, Lu Yu conquered Xiao Yan's Shan Yu, and let his master Fu Wenyu stay there.

古文：衍遣师攻文骥，卢昶督众军救之，诏宝夤为使持节、假安南将军、别将，长驱往赴，受卢昶节度。
现代文：萧衍派兵攻打傅文骥，卢昶督军救助，皇帝下诏让萧宝夤为使持节、假安南将军、别将，长驱救战，听从卢昶调遣。
English: Xiao Yan sent troops to attack Fu Wenyi and Lu Ye's governor's army to rescue him. The emperor issued an edict to let Xiao Baoyi be the envoy of Ji Jie, the fake Annan general, and the non-commissioned officer to lead the rescue battle and obey Lu Ye's dispatch.

古文：赐帛三百匹，世宗于东堂饯之。
现代文：帝赐给帛三百匹，世宗在东堂与他饯别。
English: The emperor gave him three hundred yakitori, and Sejong bade him farewell in the East Hall.

古文：诏曰： 萧衍送死，连兵再离寒暑。卿忠规内挺，孝诚外亮，必欲鞭尸吴墓，戮衍江阴，故授卿以总统之任，仗卿以克捷之规，宜其勉欤？ 
现代文：诏书曰： 萧衍送死，连兵再犯我境，卿忠规内树，孝诚外亮，此番前去，必欲鞭尸吴墓，戮衍江阴，因此授卿以总统之职，朕完全依仗卿而静候喜报，卿应勉力征战。 
English: The imperial edict said: Xiao Yan was sent to death, the company of soldiers again violated our territory, the lord was loyal to the inner tree, the filial piety was bright, this time he went forward, he would like to whip the corpse of Wu tomb, and destroy the Yan River. Therefore, the lord was awarded the post of president. I completely rely on the lord and wait for the good news. The lord should strive to fight.

古文：宝夤对曰： 仇耻未复，枕戈俟旦，虽无申包之志，敢忘伍胥之心？
现代文：萧宝夤回答说： 仇耻未报，枕戈待旦，为臣虽无申包之志，但臣不敢忘伍子胥报仇之心。
English: Xiao Baojun replied, "The vendetta has not been reported, and I have been waiting for it to happen. Although I have no desire to report it, I dare not forget Wu Zixuan's desire for revenge.

古文：今仰仗神谋，俯厉将帅，誓必拉彼奸勍，以清王略。
现代文：而今仰仗陛下神谋，为臣督促将帅，誓必摧敌气势，完成君王重托。
English: And now, relying on His Majesty's divine counsel, as a vassal urging the general, he vowed to destroy the enemy's momentum and complete the king's heavy entrustment.

古文：圣泽下临，不胜悲荷。 
现代文：陛下亲为臣饯行，为臣不胜感泣。 
English: His majesty himself was a vassal and wept for his vassal.

古文：因泣涕横流，哽咽良久。
现代文：说着泪如雨下，哽咽良久。
English: With tears streaming down his face, he choked for a long time.

古文：于后，卢昶军败，唯宝夤全师而归。
现代文：后来，卢昶军队惨败，只有萧宝夤全师而还。
English: Later, Lu Wei's army suffered a crushing defeat, and only Xiao Baojun's entire division survived.

古文：延昌初，除安东将军、瀛州刺史，复其齐王。
现代文：延昌初年，朝廷提拔他为安东将军、瀛州刺史，复其齐王爵位。
English: In the first year of Yanchang, the imperial court promoted him to General Anton, the governor of Zhangzhou, and restored his peerage.

古文：四年，迁抚军将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：延昌四年，迁任抚军将军、冀州刺史。
English: In the fourth year of Yanchang, he was transferred to the post of general of Fuzhou army and the post of chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：及大乘贼起，宝夤遣军讨之，频为贼破。
现代文：等到大乘发生叛乱，萧宝夤派兵讨伐，屡屡被敌人战败。
English: When the Mahayana bandits attacked, Baojun led the army to fight, but was repeatedly defeated by the bandits.

古文：台军至，乃灭之。
现代文：大军到后，灭了敌人。
English: It was only after the arrival of the Guotai army that the Kleptocrats were eliminated.

古文：灵太后临朝，还京师。
现代文：灵太后临朝，萧宝夤大军还归京师。
English: When the Empress Dowager Ling was in Beijing to listen to the government, she returned to the capital.

古文：萧衍遣其将康绚于浮山堰淮以灌扬徐。
现代文：萧衍派他的将领康绚在浮山拦起堤坝，蓄淮河水准备灌淹扬州、徐州。
English: Xiao Yan sent his general Kang Hua to build a dam on Fushan to store water from the Huai River in preparation for flooding Yangzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：除宝夤使持节、都督东讨诸军事、镇东将军以讨之。
现代文：朝廷提升萧宝夤为使持节、都督东讨诸军事、镇东将军以讨伐康绚。
English: The imperial court promoted Xiao Baojun as the envoy of the festival, the governor of the east to fight the military, and the general of the east to fight Kanghua.

古文：寻复封梁郡开国公，寄食济州之濮阳。
现代文：不久又封他为梁郡开国公，封邑在济州濮阳。
English: Soon after, he was named the founding father of Liang County, with his fiefdom located in Fenyang, Jeju.

古文：熙平初，贼堰既成，淮水滥溢，将为扬徐之患；宝夤于堰上流，更凿新渠，引注淮泽，水乃小减。
现代文：熙平初年，敌人修成水坝，淮河水乱流，眼看就要危及扬州、徐州，萧宝夤在堰坝上游，更开新渠，引水注入淮泽，水势稍微减小。
English: In the first year of Heiping, the enemy built dams, and the turbulent flow of the Huaihe River threatened Yangzhou and Xuzhou. Xiao Baojun opened a new canal in the upper reaches of the dam to divert water into Huai Ze, and the water potential decreased slightly.

古文：乃遣轻车将军刘智文、虎威将军刘延宗率壮士千余，夜渡淮，烧其竹木营聚，破贼三垒，杀获数千人，斩其直阁将军王升明而还，火数日不灭。
现代文：他又派轻车将军刘智文、虎威将军刘延宗率领千余名壮士，乘着黑夜渡过淮河，放火焚烧敌人的竹木营寨，攻破敌人三处营垒，斩杀俘获敌人数千名，斩杀敌人的直将军王升明后还归本营，大火连烧数日。
English: He also sent more than a thousand strong men led by Liu Zhiwen, general of the Light Brigade, and Liu Yanzong, general of the Tiger Forces, to cross the Huaihe River in the dark, set fire to the enemy's bamboo camp, broke through the enemy's three camps, killed and captured thousands of enemies, and killed the enemy's direct general Wang Shengming and returned to the home camp, and the fire burned for several days.

古文：衍将垣孟孙、张僧副等水军三千，渡淮，北攻统军吕叵。
现代文：萧衍将领垣孟孙、张僧副等率水军三千人，渡过淮河，北攻统军吕叵。
English: General Xiao Yan led the 3,000-man naval force under the command of Captain Meng Sun and Vice-Commander Zhang Zeng and crossed the Huai River to lead the northern attack army to Lvong.

古文：宝夤遣府司马元达、统军魏续年等赴击，破之，孟孙等奔退。
现代文：萧宝夤派府中司马元达、统军魏续年等率军攻打，消灭了敌人，孟孙等人奔散退去。
English: Xiao Baojun sent Sima Yuanda of the Central Military Commission and Wei Liannian of the United Army to lead the army to attack and annihilate the enemy, and Meng Sun and others scattered and retreated.

古文：乃授左光禄大夫、殿中尚书。
现代文：朝廷授他为左光禄大夫、殿中尚书。
English: The Imperial Court awarded him the title of Sako Roku no daibu, or doctor of letters.

古文：宝夤又遣军主周恭叔率壮士数百，夜渡淮南，焚贼徐州刺史张豹子等十一营，贼众惊扰，自杀害者甚众。
现代文：萧宝夤又派军主周恭叔率领数百壮士，乘夜晚渡到淮河以南，焚烧萧衍的徐州刺史张豹子等十一座大营，敌人受到惊扰，互相杀害的很多。
English: Xiao Baojun also sent the military leader Zhou Jiong, leading hundreds of strong men, to cross to the south of the Huai River at night and burn eleven large camps such as Xiao Yan's Xuzhou Jishi Zhang Leopard. The enemy was disturbed and many killed each other.

古文：宝夤还京师，又除使持节、散骑常侍、都督荆囗东洛三州诸军事、卫将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：萧宝夤还归京城，又被朝廷除任为使持节、散骑常侍、都督荆、□、东洛三州诸军事、卫将军、荆州刺史。
English: Xiao Baojun also returned to Beijing, and was also removed by the imperial court as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the governor of Jing, □, the military of the three states of Dongluo, the guard general, and the Jingzhou stabbing history.

古文：不行，复为殿中尚书。
现代文：宝夤未前去就任，又被任命为殿中尚书。
English: Baojun did not go forward to take office, and he was appointed to be the chief scribe in the palace.

古文：宝夤之在淮堰，萧衍手书与宝夤曰： 谢齐建安王宝夤。
现代文：萧宝夤在淮堰的时候，萧衍给他写了一封信说： 朕谢罪齐建安王宝夤。
English: When Xiao Baojun was in Huaiyan, Xiao Yan wrote a letter to him, saying: "I thank you for your service to Jianan Wang Baojun.

古文：亡兄长沙宣武王，昔投汉中，值北寇华阳，地绝一隅，内无素畜，外绝继援，守危疏勒，计逾田单，卒能全土破敌，以弱为强。
现代文：您的亡兄长沙宣武王，过去曾任职汉中，当时正值北边寇侵华阳，他身处绝隅，内无蓄积兵粮，外无救援之军，真可谓是守危疏勒，但他计超田单，却终能保全境域破灭敌人，以弱为强。
English: Your late brother, Changsha Xuanwu Wang, used to be an official of the Han dynasty. At that time, the northern invaders were invading Huayang. He was in a corner, with no food reserves inside and no rescue army outside. He could truly be described as a watcher of danger, but he tried to go beyond the field, but he was eventually able to preserve the territory and destroy the enemy.

古文：使至之日，君臣动色，左右相贺，齐明帝每念此功，未尝不辍箸咨嗟。
现代文：朝廷使者到州之日，君臣动色，左右相贺，齐明帝每每念及此功，未尝不停箸嗟叹。
English: On the day of the imperial envoy's arrival in Suzhou, the princes and courtiers were in high spirits, congratulating each other left and right. Emperor Qiming always remembered this achievement, and never ceased to sigh.

古文：及至张永、崔慧景事，大将覆军于外，小将怀贰于内，事危累卵，势过缀旒。
现代文：等到张永、崔慧景事出，大将覆军于外，小将怀异心于内，事态危为累卵，形势急迫过于一发千钧。
English: When Zhang Yong and Cui Huiqing's affair broke out, the general covered the army from the outside, and the junior general harbored dissent within. The situation was fraught with danger, and the urgency of the situation was too great.

古文：亡兄忠勇奋发，旋师大岘，重围累日，一鼓鱼溃，克定慧景，功逾桓文。
现代文：您的亡兄忠诚勇敢，精神奋发，旋师大岘，累日重围敌人，一鼓作气，击溃敌人，平定慧景之乱，他的功劳超过齐桓晋文。
English: Your late brother was loyal and brave, he worked hard, he was a great teacher, he encircled the enemy for a long time, he worked hard, he defeated the enemy, and he quelled the Huijing Rebellion. His achievements exceed those of Qi Kuan Jinwen.

古文：亡弟卫尉，兄弟戮力，尽心内外。
现代文：您的亡弟卫尉，兄弟同心戮力，尽心于帝廷内外。
English: Your late brother, Lieutenant of the Guards, brothers with one heart and one mind, devoted himself to the imperial court and beyond.

古文：大勋不报，翻罹荼酷，百口幽执，祸害相寻。
现代文：然而，你们巨大的功劳不见回报，反而全家却遭劫难，家中百口尽被处死。
English: However, there was no reward for your great service, but instead the whole family was attacked, and every member of the family was executed.

古文：朕于齐明帝，外有龛敌之力，内尽帷幄之诚，日自三省，曾无寸咎，远身边外，亦复不免。
现代文：朕于齐明帝外有戡敌之力，内尽帷幄之诚，日自三省，自己没有些微过错，虽然自己身处边外，也不免受到牵涉。
English: In Emperor Qiming, I have the power to defeat the enemy outside and the sincerity to do my best inside, and I am from the three provinces. I have not made any mistakes. Although I am on the outskirts, I am inevitably involved.

古文：遂遣刘山阳轻舟西上，来见掩袭。
现代文：齐明帝派刘山阴轻舟西上，被朕掩袭擒拿。
English: Emperor Qiming sent Liu Shanyin on a light boat to the west, but he was ambushed and captured.

古文：时危事迫，势不得已。
现代文：当时形势危急，事情紧迫，确为不得已才那样做的。
English: At that time, the situation was critical, the matter was urgent, and it was really done as a last resort.

古文：所以誓众樊邓，会逾孟津，本欲翦除梅虫兒、茹法珍等，以雪冤酷，拔济亲属，反身素里。
现代文：当时朕所以要誓师樊邓，会击孟津，本是想剪除梅虫儿、茹法珍等，以雪冤酷，拔济您身家亲属，以求还清白之身。
English: At that time, I wanted to swear that I would attack Mengjin, because I wanted to cut off the plums, mushrooms, and other insects, and use the snow to help your relatives, in order to pay off the innocent body.

古文：属张稷、王珍国已建大事，宝晊、子晋屡动危机，迫乐推之心，应上天之命，事不获已，岂其始愿。
现代文：可适逢张稷、王珍国已建大事，宝日至、子晋屡动危机，朕迫于乐推之心，顺应上天之命，迫不得已才就帝位，岂是朕当初本意。
English: But when Zhang Zhen and Wang Zhenguo had accomplished great things, and Bao Di and Zi Jin were repeatedly in crisis, I was forced to follow my heart, to comply with God's order, and to ascend to the throne only as a last resort. Wasn't that my original intention?

古文：所以自有天下，绝弃房室，断除滋味，正欲使四海见其本心耳。
现代文：之所以君临天下，绝弃房室，断除滋味，正是为了使四海之民见我为君本心而已。
English: The reason why you are ruling the world, abandoning your room, and cutting off the taste, is precisely to make the people of the four seas see that I am your true heart.

古文：勿谓今日之位，是为可重，朕之视此，曾不如一芥。
现代文：不要说今天朕的位置是那么重要，其实朕之视此，它还不如一草一芥的份量。
English: Don't say that my position today is so important. In fact, in my opinion, it is not as important as a mustard seed.

古文：虽复崆峒之踪难追，汾阳之志何远？
现代文：虽说崆峒之迹难追，但汾阳之志何远。
English: Although it is difficult to follow the footsteps of Zhai, the aspirations of Zhaiyang are far away.

古文：而今立此堰，卿当未达本意。
现代文：而今朕筑造此堰，卿您当还不了解朕的用意。
English: But now that I am building this weir, sir, you do not yet understand my intention.

古文：朕于昆虫，犹不欲杀，亦何急争无用之地，战苍生之命也！
现代文：朕即使对昆虫，犹且不欲加害，哪里谈得上急于争夺无用之地，以苍生之命去打仗呢！
English: Even if I don't want to harm insects, how can I be in a hurry to fight for useless land and go to war with my life!

古文：正为李继伯在寿阳，侵犯边境，岁月滋甚。
现代文：正是由于李继伯在寿阳，侵犯我边境，日滋月甚。
English: It is precisely because Li Jibo violated our border in Shouyang that the situation is getting worse by the day.

古文：或攻小城小戍，或掠一村一里。
现代文：或攻小城小戍，或抢一村一里。
English: Or attack a small town, or rob a village of a mile.

古文：若小相酬答，终无宁日，边邑争桑，吴楚连祸。
现代文：如果朕小相应付，国境终无宁日，会导致边邑争桑、吴楚连祸的局面。
English: If we pay accordingly, there will be no peace on the border, which will lead to the situation of border towns competing for San and Wuzhulian disaster.

古文：所以每抑镇戍，不与校计。
现代文：所以朕每每制止镇戍将帅，不与计较。
English: Therefore, I always restrain the commander-in-chief and do not quarrel with him.

古文：继伯既得如此，滥窃弥多。
现代文：李继伯既知朕这个想法，越发窃土更多。
English: Li Jibo is aware of this idea and is stealing more and more land.

古文：今修此堰，止欲以报继伯侵盗之役，既非大举，所以不复文移北土。
现代文：而今修造此堰，只是为了报答李继伯侵略盗取之罪，这既不是什么大事，所以朕便不再移书告知魏廷。
English: Now, the construction of this weir is just to repay the crime of Li Jibo's invasion and theft, which is not a big deal, so I will no longer transfer the letter to inform Wei Ting.

古文：卿幼有倜傥之心，早怀纵横之气。
现代文：卿您幼年即有倜傥之心，早怀纵横之气。
English: Sir, when you were a child, you had a strong heart, and you had an early inclination to be ambitious.

古文：往日卿于石头举事，虽不克捷，亦丈夫也。
现代文：从前卿您在石头城举事，虽然不即成功，但行为亦是大丈夫之举。
English: Once upon a time, sir, you held an event in Stone Town. Although it was not a success, it was a good deed.

古文：今止河洛，真其时矣。
现代文：而今羁留河、洛，确实与当年情形相似。
English: However, the current situation in Yurukawa and Kyoto is indeed similar to that of that year.

古文：虽然，为卿计者，莫若行率此众，袭据彭城，别当遣军以相影援。
现代文：即使这样，朕为卿着想，您还不如率领部队，袭据彭城，朕当别遣军马与卿呼应。
English: Even so, for the sake of my lord, you might as well lead the troops to attack Pengcheng. I should not send troops to echo my lord.

古文：得捷之后，便遣卿兄子屏侍送卿国庙、并卿室家及诸侄从。
现代文：成功之后，朕便派您兄长子屏侍送卿国庙，并您家室以及诸侄从人。
English: After the success, I sent your brother and eldest son Ping to escort you to the National Temple, and your family and nephews followed suit.

古文：若方欲还北，更设奇计，恐机事一差，难重复集，勿为韩信，受困野鸡。 
现代文：如果您打算归北廷，当更设奇计，以防机事差失，灾难又会来到，您千万别像当年韩信，出现受困于野鸡的局面。 
English: If you are planning to return to Beijing, you should make a special plan to prevent the plane from being lost and the disaster from coming again. You must not be trapped in the pheasant situation like Han Xin was.

古文：宝夤表送其书，陈其忿毒之意。
现代文：萧宝夤上表把这封信送给朝廷，陈奏他的仇恨之意。
English: Baojun sent these letters to the imperial court, exposing Liang's poisonous scheme.

古文：朝廷为之报答。
现代文：朝廷下诏应答。
English: The Imperial Court issued a reply.

古文：宝夤志存雪复，屡请居边。
现代文：萧宝夤立志报仇雪恨，屡屡请求居边。
English: Xiao Baojun was determined to avenge the grudge and repeatedly asked to be sidelined.

古文：神龟中，出为都督徐南兗二州诸军事、车骑将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：神龟年间，出任都督徐州、南兖州诸军、车骑将军、徐州刺史。
English: During the years of the Divine Turtle, he served as the governor of Xuzhou, the army of South Luzhou, the general of the cavalry, and the history of Xuzhou.

古文：乃起学馆于清东，朔望引见土姓子弟，接以恩颜，与论经义，勤于政治，吏民爱之。
现代文：于是在清河东建起学馆，月初月中引见当地百姓的子弟，和颜悦色，与他们一起讨论经义，萧宝夤勤于政治，吏卒百姓都很敬爱他。
English: So he built a school in the east of Qinghe. In the middle of the first month of the month, he introduced the children of the local people to him. He was friendly and discussed with them the meaning of the sutras. Xiao Baojun was devoted to politics, and the officials and the people all loved him.

古文：凡在三州，皆著名称。
现代文：共历治三州，都以治绩出名。
English: They have jointly governed three states and are famous for their achievements in governance.

古文：正光二年，征为车骑大将军、尚书左仆射。
现代文：正光二年，朝廷征拜他为车骑大将军、尚书左仆射。
English: In the second year of Zhengguang, the imperial court enlisted him as a chariot and cavalry general, Shang Shuzhe Zuofu.

古文：善于吏职，甚有声名。
现代文：萧宝夤善于衙门公务，很有名声。
English: He has a reputation for good governance.

古文：四年，上表曰：
现代文：四年，萧宝夤上表说：
English: In the fourth year of Masamitsu's reign, he told the imperial court:

古文：臣闻《尧典》有黜陟之文，《周书》有考绩之法，虽其源难得而寻，然条流抑亦可知矣。
现代文： 臣听说《尧典》有升贬之文，《周书》有考检吏绩之法，虽然其源头难以寻探，但其道理也许可以寻知。
English: The minister heard that there was a promotion and demotion text in the "Shuan" and a method of examining the performance of officials in the "Zhou Shu." Although its source is difficult to find, its reason may be known.

古文：大较在于官人用才，审于所莅；练迹校名，验于虚实。
现代文：大致在于官人用才，审于其人所在的状况；练迹校名，验于政事虚实。
English: Roughly, it is the ability of officials that is judged by the situation in which they are located; the name of the school is judged by the truth and falsity of political affairs.

古文：岂不以臧否得之余论，优劣著于历试者乎？
现代文：哪能不以褒贬得之余论，优劣著于历试的呢？
English: How can you not discuss the merits and demerits of a book based on the results of an exam?

古文：既声穷于月旦，品定于黄纸，用效于名辈，事彰于台阁，则赏罚之途，差有商准；用舍之宜，非无依据。
现代文：既声誉尽于月初品评，品位定于黄纸，用效于名辈，事彰于台阁，则赏罚标准，就有区别；是用还是不用，并不是没有依据。
English: Even if the reputation is fully evaluated at the beginning of the month, the grade is determined by the yellow paper, the effect is used for celebrities, and the matter is highlighted in the table, there is a difference in the reward and punishment standard; whether it is used or not is not without basis.

古文：虽复勇进忘退之俦，奔竞于市里；过分亡涯之请，驰骛于多门；犹且顾其声第，慎其与夺。
现代文：即使是勇进无退之辈，奔竞于市里之中；过分无边之请，奔驰于高门；显贵之人还是要顾及到自己的声誉品第，慎其予夺。
English: Even if they are daring and enterprising, they will rush into the city; if they are excessively and boundlessly invited, they will rush to the high gate; if they are distinguished, they should still take into account their reputation and quality, and be careful to win.

古文：器分定于下，爵位悬于上，不可妄叨故也。
现代文：器分定于下，爵位悬于上，不可妄自叨拈的缘故使其这样。
English: A knighthood hangs above, a knighthood hangs below, and you can't have it both ways.

古文：今窃见考功之典，所怀未喻，敢竭无隐，试陈万一。
现代文： 而今臣窃见考检功绩的典制，义理未明，臣敢尽衷言，试陈万一。
English: However, now that the system of the examination of merit has been stolen by the minister, the principle is not clear, and the minister dares to speak his heart out, just in case.

古文：何者？
现代文：什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：窃惟文武之名，在人之极地；德行之称，为生之最首。
现代文：臣窃思文武的名实，是人生的最高境界；德行的称呼，为人们最重要的东西。
English: Privately, I thought that to be famous in both the arts and martial arts was the highest achievement of a human being, and to be praised for one's character and behavior was the most important aspect of life.

古文：忠贞之美，立朝之誉，仁义之号，处身之端，自非职惟九官，任当四岳，授曰尔谐，让称俞往，将何以克厌大名，允兹令问？
现代文：忠贞之美，是为朝的美誉，仁义之号，是立身首端，自己不是职在九官之列，任充四域之职，授给这些称号，赋予过誉大名，这将何以克止大名，应对询问。
English: The beauty of loyalty is the reputation of the dynasty, the virtue of benevolence is to stand at the top, and he is not in the ranks of the nine officials, he is appointed to the four regions, awarded these titles, and given the reputation of the daimyo. This will not stop the daimyo and should be inquired.

古文：自比已来，官罔高卑，人无贵贱，皆饰辞假说，用相褒举。
现代文：一段时间以来，官不论高下，人无论贵贱，全都饰辞假说，夸饰其美。
English: For some time now, officials, both high and low, and people, both high and low, have all been embellishing the hypothesis and extolling its beauty.

古文：泾渭同波，薰莸共器，求者不能量其多少，与者不复核其是非。
现代文：泾渭同处一波，香恶共容一器，求官的人不能衡量己才大小，予官的人不能校其是非。
English: The same place is a wave, and the same evil is contained in the same container. Those who seek office cannot measure their talents, and those who are appointed cannot check their rights and wrongs.

古文：遂使冠履相贸，名与实爽，谓之考功，事同泛涉，纷纷漫漫，焉可胜言。
现代文：于是便使官士相混，名与实错，虽说是考校功绩，然事同普调，纷纷漫漫，哪能说得尽。
English: As a result, officials and cadres are mixed up, and the real and the false are mixed up. Although it is a school examination achievement, it is the same as the general tone, and they are intertwined. It is hard to say.

古文：又在京之官，积年一考。
现代文： 又在京官员，一年一考。
English: In addition, officials in Beijing have to take an exam once a year.

古文：其中或所事之主迁移数四，或所奉之君身亡废绝，或具僚离索，或同事凋零；虽当时文簿，记其殿最，日久月深，驳落都尽。人有去留，谁复掌其勤堕？
现代文：其中或有所事之主迁移数四，或所奉之君身名废绝，或同僚离索，或同事凋零，虽然当时文簿，记下其事，然日久月深之后，剥落都已干净，同时之人都有去留，谁再掌握其当初勤还是堕？
English: Among them, there are four cases in which the owner of the property has moved, or the name of the lord has been abolished, or the colleague has left the rope, or the colleague has withered. Although the book was written down at the time, after a long time, the peeling has been clean. At the same time, everyone has to stay. Who will control his original diligence or fall?

古文：或停休积稔，或分隔数千，累年之后，方求追访声迹，立其考第。
现代文：或是停官休息数年，或是分离隔绝数千里，累年之后，朝廷才追访其人声迹，立其考功品第。
English: Either suspended for several years, or separated and isolated for thousands of miles, it was only after many years that the imperial court traced his footsteps and set up a merit test.

古文：无不苟相悦附，共为脣齿，饰垢掩疵，妄加丹素，趣令得阶而已，无所顾惜。
现代文：这些人无不苟相悦附，共为唇齿，饰垢掩疵，妄加善评，只求得到官职就行了，其余什么都不顾惜。
English: These people are unscrupulously attached to each other, they are all lips and teeth, they embellish and cover up, they exaggerate good comments, they just want to get an official position, and they don't care about anything else.

古文：贤达君子，未免斯患；中庸已降，夫复何论。
现代文：即使是贤达的君子，也难免染上这种病患；中人以下，还有什么好说的。
English: Even the wisest gentleman is inevitably infected with this disease; below the middle class, there is nothing to say.

古文：官以求成，身以请立，上下相蒙，莫斯为甚。
现代文：官以求请而得到，身以请品而得立，上下互相蒙骗，再没有比这更厉害的了。
English: There is nothing more excessive than officials seeking and obtaining, holding themselves up by their elbows, and deceiving each other.

古文：又勤恤人隐，咸归守令；厥任非轻，所责实重。
现代文： 又经常查访人民的忧隐，都是守令的事，这种工作担子不轻，责任也实在很重大。
English: In addition, he often visits the concerns of the people, all of which is a matter of following orders. This kind of work is not easy, and the responsibility is really great.

古文：然及其考课，悉以六载为程，既而限满代还，复经六年而叙。是则岁周十二，始得一阶。
现代文：然而等到考校他们吏绩，却都以六年为一期，既而限满代还，又要经过六年才叙职，这样就经过了十二年，才能得到一个官阶。
English: However, when they were examined for their performance as officials, they were all given a six-year term. Even though the term was up, it still took six years to be promoted, so it took twelve years to get a rank.

古文：于东西两省、文武闲职、公府散佐、无事冗官，或数旬方应一直，或朔望止于暂朝，及其考日，更得四年为限。
现代文：而东西两省，文武闲职、公府散佐、无事冗官，或者数旬才值一次班，或是一月才上两次朝，等到考课之日，却以四年为限。
English: However, in the two provinces of the East and West, the civil and military leisure posts, the public office assistant posts, and the non-dutiful officials, or they are only on duty once a week, or they are only on duty twice a month, but they are limited to four years until the day of the examination.

古文：是则一纪之中，便登三级。
现代文：这样十二年中，便会升三级。
English: In this way, in twelve years, they can be promoted to the third level.

古文：彼以实劳剧任，而迁贵之路至难；此以散位虚名，而升陟之方甚易。
现代文：外任之官以职任辛劳，而升官之路至难；而此类散位虚名上的人，升官的路子却很宽易。
English: The way of promotion is very difficult for the officials who are appointed from outside, but the way of promotion is very easy for those who are appointed in a fictitious position.

古文：何内外之相悬，令厚薄之如是！
现代文：凭什么内官外职的升迁悬殊，厚薄如此之大！
English: Why is there such a large disparity in promotion between the inner and outer offices, from the top to the bottom?

古文：又闻之，圣人大宝曰位，何以守位曰仁。
现代文： 臣又听说，圣人的大宝叫位，想什么办法守住位子叫仁。
English: The minister also heard that a saint's greatest treasure is his position, and the way to keep it is called benevolence.

古文：孟子亦曰：仁义忠信天爵也，公卿大夫人爵也。
现代文：孟子也说：仁义忠信是天的爵位，公卿大夫是人的爵位。
English: Mencius also said: "Righteousness, loyalty and faithfulness are the titles of heaven, while the title of noble doctor is a human title.

古文：古之人修其天爵而人爵从之。
现代文：古代的人修立天爵而人爵随之。
English: The ancients set up the peerage and the peerage followed.

古文：故虽文质异时，污隆殊世，莫不宝兹名器，不以假人。
现代文：所以虽然文饰质朴异时不同，污浊隆盛殊世各异，各代无不实其名器，不随便交人掌管。
English: Therefore, although the appearance and inner quality vary from time to time, and the favors and insults vary from world to world, they all cherish this title and do not want to give it to others easily.

古文：是以赏罚之柄，恆自持也。
现代文：所以赏罚的权柄，无不是君主自持的。
English: Therefore, the power to reward and punish is held exclusively by the monarch.

古文：至乃周之蔼蔼，五叔无官；汉之察察，馆陶徒请。
现代文：以至周代如此和蔼，五叔却无官职；汉代察举，馆陶徒请无复。
English: So much so that the Zhou Dynasty was so amiable, but the Five Uncles had no official position; the Han Dynasty inspected and investigated, and there was no reply from the Pavilion Taoists.

古文：岂不重骨肉、私亲亲？
现代文：这难道是那时的君主不重骨肉、厚私亲？
English: Could it be that the monarchs of that time were cold-hearted and selfish?

古文：诚以赏罚一差，则无以惩劝；至公暂替，则觊觎相欺。
现代文：确实因为赏罚之间，一念之差，则无以劝勉勤劳；至公做法稍有松懈，则邀官之徒便蠢动相欺。
English: Indeed, because of the discrepancy between reward and punishment, there is no way to encourage diligence; if there is a slight slackness in the practice of fairness, then those who invite officials will fool around and deceive each other.

古文：故至慎至惜，殷勤若此。
现代文：所以人主至慎至惜，殷情考验如此。
English: So we must be very careful and cherish it.

古文：况乎亲非肺腑，才乖秀逸；或充单介之使，始无汗马之劳；或说兴利之规，终惭十一之润。
现代文：而况那些亲非同脉，才非秀逸；或充他国之使，始无汗马之劳；或说兴利之策，终无十一之用。
English: Moreover, those relatives who are not in the same lineage are not outstanding; or acting as envoys of other countries, there is no hard work at the beginning; or the strategy of prosperity, there is no use of eleven.

古文：皆虚张无功，妄指赢益，坐获数阶之官，藉成通显之贵。
现代文：都是虚张无功，妄指赢益，坐以获数阶之官，冒成显耀贵势。
English: They are all bluff and bluster, vainly pointing to profits and gains, pretending to be officials of several ranks, and pretending to show their prestige.

古文：于是巧诈萌生，伪辩锋出；役万虑以求荣，开百方而逐利。
现代文：这样就会使巧诈萌生，诡辞蜂出，大家都挖空心思以求荣耀，千方百计去追逐名利。
English: In this way, trickery will sprout, cunning words will emerge, and everyone will hollow out their hearts to seek glory, and do everything possible to chase fame and fortune.

古文：握枢秉钧者，亦知其苦，斯但抑之则其流已注，引之则有何纪极。
现代文：而掌握权柄的人，也知道这些情况，但是，抑制吧，其流已经漫溢，引导吧，那还有什么纲纪而言。
English: And those who wield power know this, but restrain the flow, for it is overflowing, and guide it, for there is no discipline.

古文：夫琴瑟在于必和，更张求其适调。
现代文： 大凡琴瑟之音在于和谐，更张是为求其适合音调。
English: The zither must seek the harmony of the sound, change the strings and stretch to get the right tone.

古文：去者既不可追，来者犹或宜改。
现代文：去者既不可追，来者犹或宜改。
English: Things in the past are difficult to recover, but things in the future can still be corrected.

古文：按《周官》太宰之职：岁终，则令官府各正所司，受其会计，听其致事，而诏于王；三岁，则大计群吏之治而诛赏之。
现代文：臣查《周官》太宰之职：年终，则令官府各正其司守，接受大家评议，听其述职，而诏于王；三年，则衡查群官的治绩而决定诛赏。
English: At the end of the year, the government offices are ordered to each appoint their own secretary, accept everyone's comments, listen to their testimony, and issue a decree; three years later, the performance of the group officials is evaluated and the reward is decided.

古文：愚谓：今可粗依其准，见居官者，每岁终，本曹皆明辨在官日月，具核才行能否，审其实用而注其上下，游辞宕说，一无取焉。
现代文：愚臣以为：今天可以大致依照其标准，在职官员，每年年终，本部门都明辨其居职日期，记述其才干德行好坏，审核其事实而注明上下，无稽说法，一律不取。
English: The foolish minister thought: Today, it is possible to roughly follow the standards of serving officials. At the end of each year, this department will clearly distinguish the dates of their service, record their talents and virtues, and check their facts and indicate the upper and lower. No evidence will be accepted.

古文：列上尚书，覆其合否。
现代文：列举交给尚书，检查其与事实符合与否。
English: The names will be listed, reported to Shangshu, and verified again by Shangshu.

古文：如有纰谬，即正而罚之，不得方复推诘委否，容其进退。
现代文：如果有纰缪，即纠正过来并处罚他们，不得又行推诿拖延，容其进退。
English: If there is any wrongdoing, it must be corrected and punished, and there must be no more procrastination.

古文：既定其优劣，善恶交分。
现代文：既定其优劣，善恶交分。
English: Its merits and demerits have been established, and good and evil are intertwined.

古文：庸短下第，黜凡以明法；干务忠清，甄能以记赏。
现代文：平庸下第之官，黜于凡俗以明王法；干练忠清的官员，选拔到重要岗位以记赏赞。
English: Mediocre lower-ranking officials, who live in the mundane with the law of Ming Wang; able and loyal officials, selected to important positions to reward praise.

古文：总而奏之。
现代文：汇总奏上。
English: Summing up, let's play.

古文：经奏之后，考功曹别书于黄纸、油帛。
现代文：既奏之后，考功曹另外在黄纸、油帛上记写。
English: After the performance, Cao Gong Cao also wrote on yellow paper and linoleum.

古文：一通则本曹尚书与令仆印署，留于门下；一通则以侍中、黄门印署，掌在尚书。
现代文：一份交给本部门的尚书与令、仆的官署，留府存档；一份则交给侍中、黄门衙门，让尚书掌管。
English: One copy is handed over to the department's official office, which will keep it on file; one copy is handed over to the Chamberlain's Office and the Yellow Gate, which will keep it under control.

古文：严加缄密，不得开视，考绩之日，然后对共裁量。
现代文：这些要严加保管，不得开视，考核官绩的时候，才能一起对照定夺。
English: These must be strictly kept and must not be open to the public. When assessing official performance, they can only be compared and decided together.

古文：如此则少存实录，薄止奸回。
现代文：像这样，就可保存实录，制止奸诈行为。
English: In this way, a record can be kept and fraudulent activities can be stopped.

古文：伏愿圣慈，少垂察览，访议槐棘，论其是非。
现代文：其内官外职考定的办法，裁定非庸职所管，臣请求引朝臣博议，以确立统一的办法。
English: As for the method of internal and external job appraisal, it is under the jurisdiction of the non-commissioned officer, and the vassal requests the vassal to hold a broad discussion to establish a unified method.

古文：使秋霜春露，施之有在；《相鼠》攸刺，遄死有归。
现代文：像那些有殊谋异策、做的事情关系国家兴废，远近之人都众口皆碑，物无异议的，自可临时斟酌，不必拘泥常例。
English: Like those who have special plans and do things related to the country's prosperity and waste, people from near and far are unanimous. If there is no objection, it can be considered on an ad hoc basis, and there is no need to stick to the rules.

古文：无令申伋受笑于苟存，曾闵沦名于盛世。
现代文：至于那些引比他人的诉求，贪荣求级的祈请，如果不把好关口，让其溜过去了，则会蔓草难除，细流逐积，侵害国家大宪，扰乱美好章规。
English: As for those who cite the demands of others, covet glory and seek rank, if you do not take a good pass and let it slip past, it will be difficult to remove the weeds, trickle down, infringe on the country's constitution, and disrupt the beautiful rules.

古文：正德既至京师，朝廷待之尤薄。
现代文：臣以为应明加禁止断除，以保全至治，开返本之路，杜塞弊端之门。
English: The minister thought that it should be explicitly prohibited to cut off, so as to preserve the rule of law, open the road to return to the original, and close the door to Duce's malpractice.

古文：岁余，还叛。
现代文：像这样那就会使吉士满朝，优劣焕然明晰了。 
English: Like this, it will make the advantages and disadvantages of the Kishimanto era very clear.

古文：五年，萧衍遣其将裴邃、虞鸿等率众寇扬州，诏宝夤为使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、都督徐州东道诸军事，率诸将讨之。
现代文：皇帝下诏交付官员广泛讨论，以定永恒法式，竟没有结局。正光五年，萧衍派其将裴邃、虞鸿等人率军侵犯扬州，皇帝下诏令萧宝夤为使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、都督徐州东道诸军事，率领诸将统兵讨伐。
English: In the fifth year of Zhengguang, Xiao Yan sent him to invade Yangzhou with Pei Yao, Yu Hong and others, and the emperor ordered Xiao Baojun to be the military commander of the Envoys Festival, the cavalrymen, the cavalry generals, and the governor of Xuzhou, and led the soldiers to fight.

古文：既而扬州刺史长孙稚大破邃军，斩鸿，贼遂奔退。
现代文：接着扬州刺史长孙稚大破裴邃军马，斩杀虞鸿，敌人于是奔散退去。
English: Then, Yangzhou chief historian Sun Wechi defeated Pei's army and killed Yu Hong. The enemy then scattered and retreated.

古文：初，秦州城人薛珍、刘庆、杜迁等反，执刺史李彦，推莫折大提为首，自称秦王。
现代文：当初，秦州城人薛珍、刘庆、杜迁等人反叛，杀了刺史李颜，推举莫折大提为首，自称秦王。
English: At the beginning, Qinzhou citizens Xue Zhen, Liu Qing, Du Qian and others rebelled, killed the assassin Li Yan, and elected Moreno Dati as their leader, calling himself Qin Wang.

古文：大提寻死，其第四子念生窃号天子，改年曰天建，置立官僚，以息阿胡为太子，其兄阿倪为西河王，弟天生为高阳王，伯珍为东郡王，安保为平阳王。
现代文：大提不久死去，他的第四子念生窃取天子之号，改年号为 天建 ，设立官员，以子阿胡为太子，其兄阿倪为西河王，弟天生为高阳王，伯父莫折珍为东郡王，伯父安保为平阳王。
English: Dati died soon after, and his fourth son Nian Sheng stole the title of Tian Zi, changed the year name to Tian Jian, and set up officials, with his son Ahu as the prince, his brother Anni as the king of the West River, his brother Nian Sheng as the king of Gaoyang, his uncle Mo Renzhen as the king of Dong Guan, and his uncle Baoan as the king of Pingyang.

古文：遣天生率众出陇东，攻没汧城，仍陷岐州，执元志、裴芬之等，遂寇雍州，屯于黑水。
现代文：派天生率领部众出陇东，攻陷氵开城，又攻下岐州，逮住元志、裴芬之等，于是侵犯雍州，屯军黑水。
English: Pa Tian Rong led his troops out of Shandong, attacked and captured the city of Lugao, attacked and captured Qizhou, captured Yuan Zhi, Pei Fen and so on, and then invaded Yongzhou and the Black Water Garrison.

古文：朝廷甚忧之，乃除宝夤开府、西道行台，率所部东行将统，为大都督西征。
现代文：朝廷十分担忧，于是除任萧宝夤为开府、西道行台，率所部东行将统，为大都督西征西贼。
English: The imperial court was very worried, so Xiao Baojun was appointed as the head of the capital and the west road, the leader of the east-bound general, and the grand governor of the west to conquer the west.

古文：肃宗幸明堂，因以饯之。
现代文：魏肃宗到明堂为他饯别。
English: Wei Su Zong went to Myeongdong to bid him farewell.

古文：宝夤与大都督崔延伯击天生，大破之，斩获十余万。
现代文：萧宝夤与大都督崔延伯攻击莫折天生，大破敌军，斩获敌人数十万。
English: Xiao Baojun and Grand Dictator Cui Yanbo attacked the enemy relentlessly, defeated the enemy army, and captured hundreds of thousands of enemies.

古文：追奔至于小陇，军人采掠，遂致稽留，不速追讨，陇路复塞。
现代文：追奔到了小陇，军人掠夺民财，以致稽留不前，不速追讨敌人，陇中道路又堵塞起来了。
English: The pursuit reached Xiaotang, the soldiers plundered the people's wealth, so that they did not go forward, did not immediately pursue the enemy, and the roads in Yanzhong were blocked again.

古文：仍进讨高平贼帅万俟丑奴于安定，更有负捷。
现代文：又进军讨伐高平贼帅万俟丑奴于安定，更有败战。
English: He also marched to fight Gaoping, the handsome thief, Wanlu, the ugly slave, and Ding'an, but was defeated.

古文：时有天水人吕伯度兄弟，始共念生同逆，后与兄众保于显亲聚众讨念生，战败，降于胡琛。
现代文：当时有天水人吕伯度兄弟，开始与念生一起叛逆，后来与兄吕众在显亲自保，又聚众讨伐念生，战败之后，降归胡琛。
English: At that time, there was a brother named Lü Bodu from Tianshui, who began to rebel together with Nian Sheng. Later, he and his brother Lü Zongxian personally protected Nian Sheng and gathered a crowd to fight Nian Sheng. After the defeat, they surrendered to Hu Rong.

古文：琛以伯度为大都督、秦王，资其士马，还征秦州，大败念生将杜粲于成纪，又破其金城王莫折普贤于永洛城，遂至显亲。
现代文：胡琛任命吕伯度为大都督、秦王，给他提供士兵马匹，又征秦州，在成纪大败念生的将领杜粲，又破其金城王莫折普贤于水洛城，于是到显亲。
English: Hu Yao appointed Lü Bodu as the grand governor and the king of Qin, provided him with soldiers and horses, and conquered Qin State. Du Yao, the general who had been defeated in the Battle of Chengji, defeated the king of Jin City, Mo Rui Puxian, in Shuiluo City, and then went to Xian Kinship.

古文：念生率众，身自拒战，又大奔败。
现代文：念生率领人马，亲自迎战，伯度又被打得大败。
English: Led by Nian Sheng, he personally faced the battle, and Baidu was defeated again.

古文：伯度乃背胡琛，袭琛将刘拔，破走之，遣其兄子忻和率骑东引国军。
现代文：于是吕伯度背着胡琛，袭击胡琛的将领刘拔，打败击退刘拔，派其兄子吕忻和率领人马东引国军。
English: As a result, Lü Bodu, with Hu Yao behind him, attacked Hu Yao's general Liu Batu, defeated and repulsed Liu Batu, and sent his brother Lü Yao and leader Ma Dong to lead the national army.

古文：念生事迫，乃诈降于宝夤。
现代文：莫折念生迫于情急，于是诈降于萧宝夤。
English: Feeling that things were not good, I had to pretend to surrender to Xiao Baojun.

古文：朝廷喜伯度立义之功，授抚军将军、泾州刺史、平秦郡开国公，食邑三千户。
现代文：朝廷喜伯度立义之功，授给他抚军将军、泾州刺史、平秦郡开国公的官爵，食邑三千户。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of Fuzhun General, Zhangzhou Sisi, Pingqin County Kaifuogong, and 3,000 households of food villages.

古文：而大都督元修义、高聿，停军陇口，久不西进。
现代文：而大都督元修义、高聿，停军陇口，久久不行西进。
English: However, the great governors, Yuan Xiuyi and Gao Qi, halted their troops at the mouth of the pass and did not advance westward for a long time.

古文：念生复反，伯度终为丑奴所杀。
现代文：莫折念生又反，吕伯度终被丑奴所杀。
English: Despite his best efforts and resistance, Lü Bo Du was eventually killed by the Ugly Bastard.

古文：故贼势更甚，宝夤不能制。
现代文：所以贼势更甚。萧宝夤不能制止。
English: As a result, the banditry became even more powerful. Xiao Baojun could not stop it.

古文：孝昌二年四月，除宝夤侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、假大将军、尚书令，给后部鼓吹，增封千户。
现代文：孝昌二年四月，朝廷除授萧宝夤为侍中、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、假大将军、尚书令，赐予后部鼓吹，增加封邑千户。
English: In April of the second year of Xiaochang, the imperial court conferred Xiao Baojun as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, an eunuch of the three departments, a fake general, and an imperial edict, bestowed the rear propaganda, and increased the fiefs of a thousand households.

古文：宝夤初自黑水，终至平凉，与贼相对，数年攻击，贼亦惮之。关中保全，宝夤之力矣。
现代文：萧宝夤初自黑水，终至平凉，与敌相对，数年攻战，敌人也很惧怕他，关中地域得以保全，全赖宝夤之力。
English: Xiao Baojun initially from Heishui, eventually to Pingliang, opposed the enemy, fought for several years, the enemy was also afraid of him, Guanzhong area was preserved, thanks to Baojun's strength.

古文：三年正月，除司空公。
现代文：孝昌三年正月，除授司空公。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Xiaochang, he was awarded the title of Sikuo.

古文：出师既久，兵将疲弊，是月大败，还雍州。
现代文：萧宝夤出师既久，兵将疲惫，这个月大败，还军雍州。
English: As he had been away for a long time, the soldiers were very tired, so this month they were defeated by the enemy and returned to Yongzhou.

古文：仍停长安，收聚离散。
现代文：仍停长安，收拾离散的人马。
English: It still stopped at Chang'an to pick up the scattered people and horses.

古文：有司处宝夤死罪，诏恕为民。
现代文：有关部门议处宝夤死罪，帝诏恕罪削职为民。
English: Relevant departments discussed the death penalty for Baojun, and the emperor issued an edict pardoning the crime and cutting jobs for the people.

古文：四月，除使持节、都督雍泾岐南豳四州诸军事、征西将军、雍州刺史、假车骑大将军、开府、西讨大都督，自关以西，皆受节度。
现代文：四月，朝廷又除授其为使持节，都督雍、泾、岐、南豳四州诸军事，征西将军，雍州刺史，假车骑大将军，开府，西讨大都督，关西军马，都受其节度。
English: In April, the imperial court also awarded it as the Festival of Enlistment, and the military of the four prefectures of Yong, Handan, Qi, and Nan'an, the general of the Western Expedition, the general of the Yongzhou Expedition, the general of the fake carriage ride, the governor of Kaifu, the grand governor of the Western Expedition, and the horses of the Kansai Campaign all received its festival.

古文：九月，念生为其常山王杜粲所杀，合门皆尽。
现代文：九月，莫折念生被其常山王杜粲所杀，一门尽被斩戮。
English: In September, he was killed by his subordinate, Changshan Wang Dujuan, and his entire family was killed.

古文：粲据州请降于宝夤。
现代文：杜粲据州请求归降萧宝夤。
English: According to the request of the state, Du Qian returned to Xiao Baojun.

古文：十月，除散骑常侍、车骑将军、尚书令，复其旧封。
现代文：十月，朝廷除授他为散骑常侍、车骑将军、尚书令，恢复旧封。
English: In October, the Imperial Court stripped him of his titles as stagiaire, cavalry general, and imperial edict, and restored his former seal.

古文：是时，山东、关西寇贼充斥，王师屡北，人情沮丧。
现代文：这时，太行山东、关西、寇贼横行，王师屡屡败北，人情沮丧。
English: At this time, bandits were rampant in Shandong and Kansai, and Wang Shi was repeatedly defeated and depressed.

古文：宝夤自以出军累年，糜费尤广，一旦覆败，虑见猜责，内不自安。
现代文：萧宝夤自觉出军累年，费损很大，一旦兵败，恐怕要遭猜忌罪责，心里很不安稳。
English: Xiao Baojun realized that he had been in the army for many years and had suffered great losses. If he was defeated, he would probably suffer from suspicion and blame, and his heart would be very unstable.

古文：朝廷颇亦疑阻，乃遣御史中尉郦道元为关中大使。
现代文：朝廷又派御史中尉郦道元为关中大使。
English: The Imperial Court also sent Lieutenant Michimoto Kaji as ambassador to Guanzhong.

古文：宝夤谓密欲取己，弥以忧惧。
现代文：宝夤说这是朝廷想算计他，更加惶恐不安。
English: Baojun said that the imperial court was trying to trick him, and he became even more frightened and anxious.

古文：而长安轻薄之徒，因相说动。
现代文：而长安轻薄之徒，又加劝说。
English: Chang'an's frivolous people, on the other hand, need more persuasion.

古文：道元行达阴盘驿，宝夤密遣其将郭子恢等攻而杀之，诈收道元尸，表言白贼所害。
现代文：道元行到阴盘驿，萧宝夤密派其将郭子恢等攻而杀之，诈收道元尸体，上表谎称其为敌人所害。
English: When Dogen went to Yinpanyu, Xiao Baojun secretly sent him to attack and kill Guo Zikai and others, and fraudulently collected Dogen's body, falsely claiming that it was the enemy's victim.

古文：又杀都督、南平王仲冏。
现代文：又杀了都督、南平王仲礒。
English: He also killed the governor of the capital, Nanping Wang Zhongyao.

古文：是月，遂反，僭举大号，赦其部内，称隆绪元年，立百官。
现代文：这个月，萧宝夤反叛朝廷，僭立帝号，大赦部管域内，称号隆绪元年，设置百官。
English: This month, Xiao Baojun rebelled against the imperial court, established the imperial title, within the jurisdiction of the Amnesty Department, the title of the first year of Longxu, and set up a hundred officials.

古文：乃遣郭子恢东寇潼关，行台张始荣围华州刺史崔袭。
现代文：又派郭子恢东侵潼关，行台张始荣围攻华州刺史崔袭。
English: He also sent Guo Ziwei to invade Shouguan in the east, and Zhang Shirong to besiege Huazhou in the west.

古文：诏尚书仆射行台长孙稚讨之。
现代文：帝下诏让尚书仆射行台长孙稚讨伐。
English: Emperor Taizong ordered Shang Shuxu's servants to attack Sun Chih, the governor of Taizong.

古文：时北地人毛鸿宾与其兄遐纠率乡义，将讨宝夤。
现代文：当时北地人毛鸿宾与其兄毛遐招集义民为兵，准备讨伐萧宝夤。
English: At that time, the northerner Mao Hongbin and his brother Mao Jun called up volunteers as soldiers and prepared to fight against Xiao Baojun.

古文：宝夤遣其大将军卢祖迁等击遐，为遐所杀。
现代文：宝夤派其大将军卢祖迁等攻打毛遐，被遐所杀。
English: Baojun sent his general Lu Zuqian and others to attack Mao Kun, and was killed by Mao Kun.

古文：又遣其将侯终德往攻遐。
现代文：宝夤又派其将侯终德前去攻打毛遐。
English: Baojun also sent his general, Hou Shende, to attack Mao Tong.

古文：会子恢为官军所败，长孙稚又遣子子彦破始荣于华州，终德因此势挫，还图宝夤。
现代文：恰逢郭子恢被官军打败，长孙稚又派子长孙子彦在华州攻破始荣，终德因此受挫，回戈复取萧宝夤。
English: At the same time that Guo Zikang was defeated by the government army, the eldest grandson of Guo Zikang sent his eldest son, Sun Zihang, to defeat Shi Rong in Huazhou. As a result, Guo Zikang suffered a setback and returned to China to recapture Xiao Baojun.

古文：军至白门，宝夤始觉，与终德交战，战败，携公主及其少子与部下百余骑，从后门出走，渡渭桥，投于宁夷巴张宕昌、刘兴周舍。
现代文：军队到了白门，萧宝夤方才觉察到，率军与终德交战，战败，宝夤携公主以及小儿子与百余名部下，从城后门出逃，渡过渭桥，投奔宁夷巴人张宕昌、刘兴周家。
English: When the army arrived at the White Gate, Xiao Baojun only realized that he had led the army into battle with the Germans and was defeated. Baojun, together with the princess, his youngest son and more than a hundred subordinates, fled from the back gate of the city, crossed the Fen Bridge, and joined the Ningba people Zhang Gaochang and Liu Xing Zhou.

古文：寻奔丑奴，丑奴以宝夤为太傅。
现代文：不久奔归丑奴，丑奴以萧宝夤为太傅。
English: He soon returned to the villain, with Xiao Baojun as his master.

古文：永安三年，都督尔朱天光遣贺拔岳等破丑奴于安定，追擒丑奴、宝夤，并送京师。
现代文：永安三年，都督尔朱天光派贺拔岳等在安定大破丑奴，追擒丑奴、宝夤，一并送到京城。
English: In the third year of Yongan, Zhu Tianguang sent He Baturu and others to the capital to destroy the ugly people, chase the ugly people and treasure, and send them to the capital.

古文：诏置阊阖门外都街之中，京师士女，聚共观视，凡经三日。
现代文：帝诏安置在阊阖门外都街之中，京师百姓，都来观看，一共经历三天。
English: The imperial edict was placed in the middle of the capital street outside the city gate, and the people of Beijing came to watch, experiencing a total of three days.

古文：吏部尚书李神俊、黄门侍郎高道穆并与宝夤素旧，二人相与左右，言于庄帝，云 其逆迹事在前朝 ，冀得赦免。
现代文：吏部尚书李神俊、黄门侍郎高道穆都与萧宝夤素有旧情，二人相约，一同言于庄帝，说 其叛逆也是前朝的事 ，希望能赦免死罪。
English: Li Shenjun, the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and Gao Daomu, the steward of the Yellow Gate, both had an old love affair with Xiao Baojun. The two made an appointment, and together they appealed to Emperor Zhuang, saying that their rebellion was also a matter of the previous dynasty, hoping to be pardoned from the death penalty.

古文：会应诏王道习时自外至，庄帝问道习在外所闻。
现代文：恰逢应诏王道习当时从外面进来，庄帝问道习在外面听说了什么。
English: At this time, King Daoxi came in from outside. Zhuangdi asked him if he heard anything outside.

古文：道习曰： 唯闻陛下欲不杀萧宝夤。 
现代文：道习说： 只听说陛下不想杀掉萧宝夤。 
English: Daoxi said: I only heard that His Majesty did not want to kill Xiao Baojun.

古文：帝问其故。
现代文：帝问缘故。
English: Emperor Hanwu asked Dongfang Shuo what the reason was.

古文：道习曰： 人云：李尚书、高黄门与宝夤周款，并居得言之地，必能全之。 
现代文：道习说： 人们说：李尚书、高黄门与萧宝夤交情很好，二人都身处近臣位置，必定能够保全宝夤性命。 
English: Daoxi said: People say: Li Shangshu, Gao Huangmen and Xiao Baojun have a good relationship. Both of them are in the position of close vassals, and they must be able to save Baojun's life.

古文：道习因曰： 若谓宝夤逆在前朝，便将恕之。
现代文：道习说： 如说宝夤叛逆是在前朝，便可宽恕他。
English: Daoxi said: If it is said that Baojun's rebellion took place in the previous dynasty, then he can be forgiven.

古文：宝夤败于长安，走为丑奴太傅，岂非陛下御历之日？
现代文：但萧宝夤败于长安，走为丑奴太傅，难道不是陛下您临治之日？
English: But Xiao Baozhen was defeated in Chang'an and became an ugly villain. Isn't it the day of your coronation, Your Majesty?

古文：贼臣不翦，法欲安施？ 
现代文：贼臣不杀，法律怎么实施呢？ 
English: If you don't expel traitors, how can you enforce the law?

古文：帝然其言，乃于太仆驼牛署赐死。
现代文：庄帝觉得有道理，于是赐宝夤在太仆碆牛署自杀。
English: Emperor Zhuang agreed with him and ordered Xiao Baojun to be taken to the Camels and Cows Office to be put to death.

古文：宝夤之将死，神俊携酒就之以叙旧故，因对之下泣。
现代文：萧宝夤将死时，李神俊提酒前来与他叙旧，二人对之，李神俊泪下。
English: When Xiao Baojun was about to die, Li Shenjun came to have a drink with him and talk about the past. The two of them looked at each other, and Li Shenjun burst into tears.

古文：而宝夤夷然自持，了不忧惧，唯称 推天委命，恨不终臣节 而已。
现代文：而萧宝夤泰然自若，一点也不害怕，只说 推天委命，只恨不能终其臣节 而已。
English: But Xiao Baojun was calm and self-assured, not afraid at all. He only said, "God willing, I hope I can live out my days as a vassal."

古文：公主携男女就宝夤诀别，恸哭极哀。
现代文：公主携家眷与萧宝夤诀别，痛哭极哀。
English: The princess and her family bid farewell to Xiao Baojun, weeping bitterly.

古文：宝夤死，色貌不改。
现代文：宝夤死时，面不改色。
English: When Baojun died, his face did not change color.

古文：宝夤有三子，皆公主所生，而并凡劣。
现代文：萧宝夤有三个儿子，都是公主所生，但都平庸陋劣。
English: Xiao Baojun had three sons, all of whom were born to princesses, but they were all mediocre and inferior.

