古文：王玄谟，字彦德，太原祁人也。
现代文：王玄谟，字彦德，太平郡祁县人。
English: Wang Xuanmu, also known as Yan De, was from Min County, Taiping County.

古文：六世祖宏，河东太守，绵竹侯，以从叔司徒允之难，弃官北居新兴，仍为新兴、雁门太守，其自叙云尔。
现代文：六世祖王宏，官至河东太守，封爵绵竹侯，因为堂叔司徒王允遇乱，辞官回家在新兴居住。后又继续当新兴雁门两郡太守，这是王玄谟自己说的。
English: Wang Xuanmu himself said that Wang Hong, the sixth-generation ancestor of Wang Hong, who was appointed as the governor of Hedong and given the title of Mianzhu Marquis, went back home to Xinxing to live because his great-uncle Wang Yun, a scholar, was in trouble. Later, he continued to serve as the governor of the two counties of Xinxing and Yanmen.

古文：祖牢，仕慕容氏为上谷太守，陷慕容德，居青州。父秀，早卒。
现代文：祖父王牢，在慕容氏那里做上谷太守。后被慕容德攻陷俘虏，住在青州，父亲王彦，早逝。
English: His grandfather, Wang Diao, was Shanggu Dazhong of the Murong clan. He was later captured by Murong and lived in Qingzhou. His father, Wang Yan, died young.

古文：玄谟幼而不群，世父蕤有知人鉴，常笑曰： 此兒气概高亮，有太尉彦云之风。 
现代文：玄谟小时候便与众不同，族父王蕤颇会相人之术，常常微笑着对人说： 这孩子气概不凡，有我们家祖中的太尉王允的风格。 
English: When he was a child, Han Moo was different from the others. His father, Wang Xuan, was quite good at the art of making people like him. He would often smile and say to people, "This boy has an extraordinary temperament. He has the style of our family's ancestor, First Lieutenant Wang Yun."

古文：武帝临徐州，辟为从事史，与语异之。
现代文：宋武帝巡察徐州。选他为从事史，和他谈话时觉得他气概不凡。
English: Emperor Song Wudi inspected Xuzhou. He chose him to be engaged in history, and when talking with him, he felt that his spirit was extraordinary.

古文：少帝末，谢晦为荆州，请为南蛮行参军、武昌太守。
现代文：少帝末年，谢晦当荆州刺史，请求他当南蛮行参军，武宁太守。
English: At the end of the young emperor's life, Xie Yu, when Jingzhou stabbed history, asked him to go to the south to join the army, and Wu Ning became the governor.

古文：晦败，以非大帅见原。元嘉中，补长沙王义欣镇军中兵将军，领汝阴太守。
现代文：谢晦造反失败，因为他不是主帅而被原谅，元嘉年中，补任长沙王刘义欣镇军中兵参军兼任汝阳太守。
English: Xie Hui's rebellion failed because he was not the commander, and he was forgiven. In the middle of the Year of the Dragon, Yuan Jia took the position of Liu Yixin, the king of Changsha, and joined the army. He also served as the governor of Ruyang.

古文：时虏攻陷滑台，执硃修之以归。玄谟上疏曰： 王途始开，随复沦塞，非惟天时，抑亦人事。虎牢、滑台，岂惟将之不良，抑亦本之不固。
现代文：当时魏人攻陷滑台，俘虏朱修之而去，王玄谟上了一道奏章说： 国家的土地刚开拓，马上便沦陷了，不仅有天时的原因，更是人力之故，虎牢、滑台的失守，不仅仅是将军的无能，更是因为国家根基不牢。
English: At that time, the Wei people attacked and captured the slide, and the prisoner Zhu Xiu went away. Wang Xuanmu wrote a musical composition saying: The country's land was just opened up and immediately fell, not only for natural reasons, but also for human reasons. The loss of the tiger's stronghold and the slide was not only the general's incompetence, but also because the country's foundation was not solid.

古文：本之不固，皆由民惮远役。
现代文：国家根基不牢，则是因百姓害怕远方的征役。
English: The foundation of the country is not solid, because the people are afraid of distant conscription.

古文：臣请以西阳之鲁阳，襄阳之南乡，发甲卒，分为两道，直趣淆、渑，征士无远徭之思，吏士有屡休之歌。
现代文：臣下请求从西阳的鲁阳、襄阳的南乡征调武器和士兵，分为两路，直接攻崤山，渑池，军队没有远距离运输的担心。将士们有经常休息的快乐。
English: Subordinates requested that weapons and soldiers be transferred from Luyang in Xiyang and Nanxiang in Xiangyang. It was divided into two routes, directly attacking Shaoshan and Dianchi. The army did not have to worry about long-distance transportation. The soldiers had the joy of regular rest.

古文：若欲以东国之众，经营牢、洛，道途既远，独克实难。 
现代文：如果让我国东方部队来攻取虎牢和洛阳，道路遥远，攻克就更难了。 
English: If we allow our Oriental troops to capture Hougou and Luoyang, the road is far away, and it will be more difficult to conquer.

古文：玄谟每陈北侵之策，上谓殷景仁曰： 闻王玄谟陈说，使人有封狼居意。 
现代文：王玄谟多次呈进北伐的计策。文帝对殷景仁说： 听到王玄谟上来的奏策，让人有封狼居胥的气概。 
English: Emperor Wen said to Yin Jingren, "Hearing Wang Xuanmu's report on the Northern Expedition has given me the courage to stand up to him.

古文：后为兴安侯义宾辅国司马、彭城太守。
现代文：以后他当义安侯刘义宾辅国司马，彭城太守。
English: Later, he served as Liu Yibin, the governor of Yian, the vice-governor of the state, and the governor of Pengcheng.

古文：义宾薨，玄谟上表，以彭城要兼水陆，请以皇子抚临州事，乃以孝武出镇。
现代文：义宾死后，王玄谟上疏说由于彭城正当水路陆路的中心，请求让皇帝的儿子镇抚徐州，于是文帝让武帝刘骏来此镇守。
English: After the death of Yibin, Wang Xuanmu said that since Pengcheng was the center of the waterway and land route, he asked the emperor's son to govern Xuzhou, so Emperor Wen asked Emperor Wu to come to guard this town.

古文：及大举北征，以玄谟为宁朔将军，前锋入河，受辅国将军萧斌节度。玄谟向确磝，戍主奔走，遂围滑台，积旬不克。
现代文：到了大举北伐的时候，朝廷让王玄谟做宁朔将军，率前锋进入黄河，接受辅国将军萧斌的指挥，王玄谟率兵攻向石高石敖，敌人戍守的将领逃走。
English: When it came to the time of the great Northern Expedition, the imperial court made Wang Xuanmu the general of Ningshuo, led the vanguard into the Yellow River, and accepted the command of the auxiliary general Xiao Bin. Wang Xuanmu led the troops to attack Shigao Shizhao, and the enemy's generals fled.

古文：虏主拓跋焘率大众号百万，鞞鼓之声，震动天地。
现代文：于是进围滑台，好几十天还没攻下，魏国皇帝拓跋焘正率领大军号称百万向南进攻。军鼓的声音，震动天地。
English: As a result, they encircled the plateau and did not capture it for dozens of days. Emperor Tuoba of Wei was leading a large army to attack the south, claiming to have a million soldiers. The sound of the military drum shook the world.

古文：玄谟军众亦盛，器械甚精，而玄谟专依所见，多行杀戮。
现代文：王玄谟率领的军队也很严肃整齐，武器精锐，但王玄谟刚愎自用经常杀人立威。
English: The army led by Wang Xuanmu was also very serious and neat, and the weapons were elite, but Wang Xuanmu's self-restraint often killed people.

古文：初围城，城内多茅屋，众求以火箭烧之，玄谟恐损亡军实，不从。
现代文：刚开始包围石高石敖时城内有很多茅屋，将领们请求用火矩绑在箭上射进去烧毁它们。王玄谟怕减少我们战利品的数量，没有听从。
English: At the beginning of the siege of Shigao, when there were many huts in the city, the generals asked to burn them with torches tied to arrows. Wang Xuanmu was afraid to reduce the number of our trophies and did not listen.

古文：城中即撤坏之，空地以为窟室。
现代文：而城中的人马上便把这些茅屋撤掉。
English: But the people in the city immediately removed these huts.

古文：及魏救将至，众请发车为营，又不从。
现代文：魏国诸将的救兵将到的时候，将领们请求用兵车筑成堡垒自保，王玄谟又不听从，将士们很有怨言。
English: When the rescue of the Wei generals was about to arrive, the generals asked to use the chariot to build a fortress for self-protection, but Wang Xuanmu did not listen, and the soldiers complained a lot.

古文：将士多离怨，又营货利，一匹布责人八百梨，以此倍失人心。
现代文：他捞取各种钱财一匹布要求调换人家八百只梨子，因为这些大失人心。
English: He got all kinds of money and asked for 800 pears to be exchanged for one cloth, because these were very unpopular.

古文：及拓跋焘军至，乃奔退，麾下散亡略尽。
现代文：到拓跋焘的军队来时，于是迅速退兵，他手下的士兵逃亡死亡光了。
English: When Tuobao's army arrived, he quickly retreated, and his soldiers fled and died.

古文：萧斌将斩之，沈庆之固谏曰： 佛狸威震天下，控弦百万，岂玄谟所能当。且杀战将以自弱，非良计也。 
现代文：萧斌要杀掉他，沈庆之说： 拓跋焘威震天下，率百万大军南来，王玄谟怎么能抵挡，杀掉自己的将领削弱自己，不是好计策！ 
English: Xiao Bin wanted to kill him, Shen Qingzhi said, "How could Wang Xuan Mue resist when he expanded his territory and came south with a million-strong army? Killing his own generals and weakening himself is not a good strategy!"

古文：斌乃止。
现代文：萧斌才没有杀。
English: Xiao Bin didn't kill him.

古文：初，玄谟始将见杀，梦人告曰： 诵《观音经》千遍，则免。 
现代文：当初王玄谟刚要被杀，梦到人家告诉他： 朗颂观音经一千遍便可以免除这个灾难。 
English: At that time, Wang Xuan Mu was about to be killed. He dreamt that someone told him, "If you chant the Avalokiteshvara Sutra a thousand times, you will be spared this calamity."

古文：既觉，诵之得千遍，明日将刑，诵之不辍，忽传呼停刑。
现代文：醒了，朗颂它正好一千遍，明日他将被处决，仍然朗颂不停。突然有人传呼停止行刑。
English: He woke up, chanted it exactly a thousand times, and tomorrow he will be executed, still chanting non-stop. Suddenly, there were calls to stop the execution.

古文：遣代守确磝，江夏王义恭为征讨都督，以为确磝不可守，召令还，为魏军所追，大破之，流矢中臂。
现代文：他被派代替别人戍守石高石敖。江夏王义恭，当征讨都督，认为石高石敖不能防守，召他回来，他被魏军追击，王玄谟大败敌军，飞箭射中他的肩膀。
English: He was sent in place of others to guard the Shigao crags. King Yigong of Jiangxia, when recruiting the governor, thought that the Shigao crags could not be defended and called him back. He was chased by the Wei army. Wang Xuanmu defeated the enemy army and was shot in the shoulder by an arrow.

古文：二十八年正月，还至历城，义恭与玄谟书曰： 闻因败为成，臂上金疮，得非金印之征也。 
现代文：元嘉八年正月回到历城，刘义恭给王玄谟写的信说： 我听说你反败为胜，肩膀上的金疮，未必不是金印的前兆！ 
English: When Liu Yikong returned to Licheng in the first month of the eighth year of the Yuan Jia, he wrote a letter to Wang Xuanmu saying: I heard that you have turned defeat into victory, and the gold sores on your shoulders may not be a precursor to the gold seal!

古文：元凶弑立，玄谟为益州刺史。
现代文：刘邵杀文帝时，王玄谟当冀州刺史。
English: When Liu Shao killed Emperor Wen, Wang Xuanmu made history in Jizhou.

古文：孝武伐逆，玄谟遣济南太守垣护之将兵赴义。
现代文：孝武帝讨伐刘邵。
English: Emperor Xiaowu led a crusade against Liu Shao.

古文：事平，除徐州刺史，加都督。及南郡王义宣与江州刺史臧质反，朝庭假玄谟辅国将军，拜豫州刺史，与柳元景南讨。
现代文：王玄谟派洛南太守垣护之率兵参加讨伐行动大事平定，调他当徐州刺史，加都督号，在南郡王刘义宣和江州刺史臧质造反时，朝廷暂任王玄谟辅国将军，拜官豫州刺史和柳元景共同向南讨伐。
English: Wang Xuanmu sent Luo Nan Taishou and his soldiers to participate in the crusade to pacify the situation, and he was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou and the governor of the capital. When Liu Yixuan, the governor of Nan County, and the governor of Jiangzhou rebelled, the imperial court temporarily appointed Wang Xuanmu as the vice-governor of the country, and the vice-governor of Yuzhou and Liu Yuanqing jointly went to the south to fight.

古文：寻复为豫州刺史。
现代文：他的军队驻守梁山。
English: His army is stationed in Liangshan.

古文：淮上亡命司马黑石推立夏侯方进为主，改姓李名弘，以惑众，玄谟讨斩之。
现代文：夹着大江修成弯月形的堡垒。不久又当豫州刺史，淮河流域的亡命之徒，司马黑石推举夏侯方进当皇帝，改他的姓为李弘，用此蛊惑众人。
English: He built a fortress in the shape of a crescent moon between two large rivers. Soon, he became a historical figure in Henan Province. He was a fugitive in the Huai River Valley. Sima Heishi elected Xiao Fangjin as emperor and changed his surname to Li Hong, using this to bewitch everyone.

古文：迁宁蛮校尉、雍州刺史，加都督。雍土多侨寓，玄谟请土断流民，当时百姓不愿属籍，罢之。
现代文：王玄谟攻打并消灭他们，升官宁蛮校尉，雍州刺史加上都督，雍州的人多是北方迁来的侨居者，王玄谟请求以当地的地界为线划这些人为当地人。
English: Wang Xuanmu attacked and eliminated them. He was promoted to the rank of captain of Ningban, the governor of Yongzhou, and the governor of Yongzhou. Most of the people in Yongzhou were expatriates who had moved from the north. Wang Xuanmu requested that these people be classified as local people according to the local geographical boundaries.

古文：其年，玄谟又令九品以上租，使贫富相通，境内莫不嗟怨。
现代文：当时的百姓不愿属于当地籍贯，此事作罢，当年，王玄谟又叫九品以上的官员上交租税，缩小穷富之间的距离。
English: At that time, the people did not want to belong to the local origin, and the matter was put to rest. That year, Wang Xuanmu also ordered more than nine officials to pay taxes, narrowing the distance between the rich and the poor.

古文：民间讹言玄谟欲反，时柳元景当权，元景弟僧景为新城太守，以元景之势，制令南阳、顺阳、上庸、新城诸郡并发兵讨玄谟。
现代文：雍州境内的官员无不怨恨，民间谣传王玄谟想造反，当时柳元景正掌权，元景的弟弟僧景做新城太守，柳僧景借助元景的声望，下令南阳、顺阳、上潘新城各郡同时调集军队讨伐王玄谟。
English: At that time, Liu Yuanjing was in power, and Yuanjing's younger brother, Monk Jing, was the governor of Xincheng. With the help of Yuanjing's reputation, Liu Monk Jing ordered the counties of Nanyang, Shunyang, and Shangpan New City to simultaneously mobilize troops to fight against Wang Xuanmu.

古文：玄谟令内外晏然，以解众惑，驰启孝武，具陈本末。
现代文：王玄谟叫他手下的人安静不动，以解除众人的怀疑，又派人迅速向孝武帝报讯。
English: Wang Xuanmu told his subordinates to remain calm in order to dispel the suspicions of the crowd, and sent someone to quickly report the news to Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：帝知其虚，驰遣主书吴喜公抚慰之，又答曰： 梁山风尘，初不介意，君臣之际，过足相保，聊复为笑，伸卿眉头。 
现代文：陈述事情的来龙去脉，孝武帝知道真情，迅速派主书吴喜公安慰他，又写信谈梁山的问题， 开始时我并不在乎，君臣之间正应相互保护，你姑且开心一笑，让你眉头开朗 。
English: After describing the background of the matter, Emperor Xiaowu knew the truth and quickly sent the main writer Wu Xigong to comfort him, and also wrote a letter about the problem of Liangshan. At the beginning, I did not care. The monarchs and ministers should protect each other. You should smile happily and let your brow be bright.

古文：玄谟性严，未尝妄笑，时人言玄谟眉头未曾伸，故帝以此戏之。
现代文：王玄谟性格严肃，从未轻笑，当时的人说王玄谟眉眼从来没有舒畅过。
English: Wang Xuanmu had a serious personality and never smiled. People at the time said that Wang Xuanmu's eyebrows had never been smooth.

古文：后为金紫光禄大夫，领太常。及建明堂，以本官领起部尚书，又领北选。
现代文：所以孝武帝用这来戏答，以后他又当金紫光禄大夫。兼任太常官职，创建明堂时，又以本官兼起部尚书。再领北方人的选拔工作。
English: Therefore, Emperor Xiaowu used this play to answer, and later he became the doctor of Jin Ziguanglu. He also served as the permanent official, and when the Ming Dynasty was founded, he also started the department of Shangshu with his official. He then led the selection of northerners.

古文：孝武狎侮群臣，随其状貌，各有比类，多须者谓之羊。颜师伯缺齿，号之曰齴。
现代文：孝武帝亲近和侮辱群臣，根据各人的相貌安排每人的外号，须多的人称他为羊，颜师伯缺几颗牙齿，称他为齿彦。
English: Emperor Xiaowu befriended and insulted his courtiers, arranging each person's nickname according to their appearance. Most people called him a sheep, and Yan Shi Bo, who was missing several teeth, called him Zhi Yan.

古文：刘秀之俭吝，呼为老悭。
现代文：刘秀之吝啬，称为老悭。
English: Liu Xiu's miserliness is known as Laojiao.

古文：黄门侍郎宗灵秀体肥，拜起不便，每至集会，多所赐与，欲其瞻谢倾踣，以为欢笑。
现代文：黄门侍郎宗灵秀身体肥胖，朝拜起立不方便，每到君臣集会时，总是赐给他很多物品。想叫他谢恩。
English: Zong Lingxiu, the attendant of the Yellow Gate, was obese and it was inconvenient for him to stand up for worship. Whenever he went to gatherings of princes and ministers, he was always given a lot of goods. He wanted to thank him.

古文：又刻木作灵秀父光禄勋叔献像，送其家事。
现代文：拜跪时翻倒在地，作为笑话。又刻画木头做宗灵秀父亲光禄勋宗叔献像，送到他家厅堂正中树立起来，柳元景垣护之都是北方人。
English: He fell to the ground while kneeling, as a joke. He also carved a piece of wood to make a memorial statue of his father, Emperor Guanglu, which was sent to his family hall and erected in the middle of the hall. All of Liu Yuan's guardians were northerners.

古文：柳元景、垣护之并北人，而玄谟独受 老伧 之目。
现代文：而只王玄谟被称为老伧。
English: However, only Wang Xuanmu is known as Lao Zong.

古文：凡所称谓，四方书疏亦如之。尝为玄谟作四时诗曰： 堇荼供春膳，粟浆充夏飧。瓟酱调秋菜，白醝解冬寒。 
现代文：孝武帝的称谓在下给各地的文告都照样，有次孝武帝替王玄谟作了一首四时诗说： 堇荼花供应春季的饮食，细粟的浆当做夏天的餐食，瓞瓜酱当做秋天的菜羹，白醋解除冬天的寒凉。 
English: The title of Emperor Xiaowu is still used in his proclamations to various regions. Once upon a time, Emperor Xiaowu composed a four-syllable poem for Wang Xuanmu, saying, "The camellia flowers supply the spring diet, the millet pulp is used as a summer meal, the cucumber paste is used as a vegetable soup in autumn, and the white vinegar relieves the cold in winter."

古文：又宠一昆仑奴子，名曰主。常在左右，令以杖击群臣，自柳元景以下，皆罹其毒。
现代文：孝武帝又宠爱一个山昆山仑奴隶，名叫白主，常常安排在左右，叫他拿拐杖打众大臣，从柳元景以下都遭到毒打。
English: Emperor Xiaowu also favored a slave named Bai Shuzhu, who was often placed on his right and left, and ordered him to beat the ministers with a cane. From Liu Yuanjing on down, they were all severely beaten.

古文：玄谟寻迁平北将军、徐州刺史，加都督。
现代文：王玄谟，不久升官平北将军，徐州刺史加上都督号。
English: Wang Xuanmu, soon to be promoted to the rank of General of Pingbei, Xuzhou Zhishi plus the title of governor.

古文：时北土饥馑，乃散私谷十万斛、牛千头以振之。
现代文：当时北方正在发生饥荒。于是他散发自家的谷物十万斗，牛一千头用来拯救饥民。
English: There was a famine in the north at the time, so he distributed 100,000 barrels of his own grain and 1,000 head of cattle to save the starving people.

古文：转领军将军。
现代文：又兼官领军将军。
English: He also served as the general leading the army.

古文：孝武崩，与柳元景等俱受顾命，以外监事委玄谟。
现代文：孝武帝逝世，他和柳元景都接受临终托付。外面的军事事务委托王玄谟。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, both he and Liu Yuanjing were entrusted with the military affairs of the outside world.

古文：时朝政多门，玄谟以严直不容，徙青、冀二州刺史，加都督。
现代文：当时朝廷权力出自好几个人。王玄谟因为严肃刚正不被容纳。转官青州、冀州二州刺史，加都督号，前废帝已屠杀了颜师伯、柳元景等。
English: At that time, the power of the imperial court came from several people. Wang Xuanmu was not accepted because of his seriousness and uprightness. Transferred to Qingzhou, Jizhou, two states, Tashi history, Kaddu number, the former deposed emperor had slaughtered Yan Shi Bo, Liu Yuanjing and so on.

古文：少帝既诛颜师伯、柳元景等，狂悖益甚，以领军征玄谟。
现代文：犯乱一天比一天狠，又用领军将军的职号征调王玄谟。
English: He became more and more violent day by day, and transferred Wang Xuanmu with the title of leading general.

古文：子侄咸劝称疾，玄谟曰： 吾受先帝厚恩，岂可畏祸苟免。 
现代文：他的儿子侄儿都劝他称自己有病，王玄谟说： 我蒙受先帝的大恩，怎么能怕灾难。 
English: His sons and nephews all advised him to say that he was ill. Wang Xuanmo said, "I have received the great grace of the former emperor, how can I be afraid of disaster?"

古文：遂行。
现代文：于是即日起程。
English: So he went to Qi Province without hesitation.

古文：及至，屡表谏诤，又流涕请缓刑去杀，以安元元。少帝大怒。
现代文：到后多次上书进谏劝说。又当面流泪请求缓和刑罚不要屠杀，来安定天下人民，前废帝大怒。
English: After his arrival, he wrote to Emperor Jin several times to persuade him. He also pleaded with tears in his face to mitigate the punishment and not to slaughter, in order to stabilize the people of the world. The former emperor was furious.

古文：明帝即位，礼遇甚优。时四方反叛，以玄谟为大统，领水军南讨，以脚疾，听乘舆出入。
现代文：明帝即位，对他待遇很好，当时四方反叛，朝廷让王玄谟做大元帅率领水军向南讨伐，因为脚有病，允许他乘车出入。
English: When Emperor Ming ascended the throne, he was treated very well. At that time, there was a four-way rebellion, and the court made Wang Xuanmu the grand marshal to lead the navy to the south. Because his feet were ill, he was allowed to enter and leave by car.

古文：寻除车骑将军、江州刺史，副司徒建安王于赭圻，赐以诸葛亮筒袖铠。
现代文：不久被调为车骑将军，江州刺史，在赭圻做建安王的副将。并赐给他诸葛亮的紧袖铠甲。
English: He was soon transferred to be the general of cavalry and chariots, the governor of Jiangsu Province, and the vice-general of King Jian'an in Shandong Province. He was also given Zhuge Liang's tight-sleeved armor.

古文：顷之，为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，领护军。
现代文：不久，做左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，兼护军将军。
English: Soon, he became the doctor of Sakoroku, the secretary of Kaifu and the three departments, and the general of the escorting army.

古文：迁南豫州刺史，加都督。
现代文：再任南豫州刺史。
English: He was reappointed as the first president of South Henan Province.

