古文：问曰：病有太阳阳明，有正阳阳明，有少阳阳明，何谓也？
现代文：问：有太阳阳明、有正阳阳明、有少阳阳明三种不同的病症，各是指的什么？
English: Q: There are three different diseases of the sun and the moon, the positive sun and the positive moon, and the negative sun and the negative moon. What do they refer to?

古文：答曰：太阳阳明者，脾约是也。
现代文：答：太阳阳明证，就是指脾约证，即胃燥津伤而引起的便秘证。
English: A: The sun and the sun are clear, that is, the spleen is clear, that is, the constipation caused by the stomach injury is clear.

古文：正阳阳明者，胃家实是也。
现代文：正阳阳明，就是指胃家实证，即肠胃燥热积滞成实证。
English: Zhengyang Yangming refers to the empirical evidence of gastroenterologists, that is, the empirical evidence of the stagnation of gastrointestinal dry heat accumulation.

古文：少阳阳明者，发汗，利小便已，胃中燥烦实，大便难是也。
现代文：少阳阳明，是指误用发汗、利小便之法，损伤津液，导致津枯肠燥而成实，形成大便难以解出的病症。
English: Xiaoyangyangming refers to the misuse of the method of sweating and benefiting urination, damaging the sexual fluid, causing the sexual fluid to dry and solidify, forming a disease that is difficult to resolve.

古文：阳明之为病，胃家实也。
现代文：阳明病的主要病变特征，是胃肠燥热实。
English: The main pathological feature of Yangming disease is that the gastrointestinal tract is hot and dry.

古文：问曰：何缘得阳明病？
现代文：问：阳明病是什么原因引起的呢？
English: Q: What is the cause of Yangming disease?

古文：答曰：太阳病发汗，若下、若利小便，此亡津液，胃中干燥，因转属阳明。不更衣，内实，大便难者，此名阳明也。
现代文：答：患太阳表证，如果发汗太过，或误用攻下，或误用利小便之法，导致津液损伤，肠胃干燥，病邪因而传入阳明，出现不解大便、肠胃燥结成实、大便困难的，这就叫阳明病。
English: A: If you suffer from solar plexus syndrome, if you sweat too much, or misuse the method of defecation, or misuse the method of beneficial urination, resulting in fluid damage, dry intestine and stomach, the disease will be transmitted to Yangming, and there will be incomprehensible stool, dry intestine and stomach, and difficulty in defecation, this is called Yangming disease.

古文：问曰：阳明病，外证云何？
现代文：问：阳明病外在症候表现怎么样？
English: Q: What are the outward symptoms of Yangming disease?

古文：答曰：身热，汗自出，不恶寒，反恶热也。
现代文：答：是身体发热，自汗，不怕冷，反而怕热。
English: A: It is the body that heats up, sweats, and is not afraid of cold, but is afraid of heat.

古文：问曰：病有得之一日，不发热而恶寒者，何也？
现代文：问：有这种情况，在刚患阳明病的第一天，出现不发热而怕冷的，是为什么呢？
English: Q: If there is such a situation, why is it that on the first day of suffering from sunstroke, there is no fever but cold?

古文：答曰：虽得之一日，恶寒将自罢，即自汗出而恶热也。
现代文：答：虽然是阳明病开始的第一天，这种怕冷的症状也会自行停止，旋继出现自汗而怕热的症候表现。
English: A: Although it is the first day of the onset of Yangming disease, this symptom of fear of cold will also stop on its own, and symptoms of self-sweat and fear of heat will appear.

古文：问曰：恶寒何故自罢？
现代文：问：怕冷为什么会自行停止呢？
English: Q: Why does the cold stop it on its own?

古文：答曰：阳明居中，土也，万物所归，无所复传。始虽恶寒，二日自止，此为阳明病也。
现代文：答：这是因为，阳明在方位上居于中央而隶属于土，就像万物归土一样，六经之邪，均可传入阳明，而很少再传入其他经，同时，阳明主燥土，邪传阳明，多从燥热而化。
English: Answer: This is because the Yang Ming is located in the center and is subordinate to the earth. Just as all things return to the earth, the evil of the Six Classics can be transmitted to the Yang Ming, but rarely to other classics. At the same time, the Yang Ming's main dry land, the evil transmitted to the Yang Ming, is mostly from the dry heat.

古文：本太阳初得病时，发其汗，汗先出不彻，因转属阳明也。
现代文：由于邪从燥化，燥热势必会很快显露于外，所以在阳明病刚开始的时候虽然会出现短暂怕冷的症状，第二天就会自行停止，这就是阳明病的特征。
English: Since the evil is from drying, the dry heat is bound to be quickly revealed to the outside world, so although there will be a short-term cold symptoms at the beginning of the Yangming disease, it will stop on its own the next day, which is the characteristic of Yangming disease.

古文：伤寒发热无汗，呕不能食，而反汗出濈濈然者，是转属阳明也。
现代文：本来属太阳病，在刚起病的时候，使用了发汗的方法，由于汗出得不透彻，因而导致邪气内传阳明。患外感病，症见发热无汗、呕吐、不能进食，是伤寒邪热亢盛的表现，如果反而出现不断汗出的，是邪传阳明的标志。
English: Originally, it was a sun disease. At the beginning of the disease, the method of sweating was used. Because the sweat was not thorough, it led to the evil spirit of the sun. Suffering from an exogenous disease, the symptoms are fever without sweat, vomiting, and inability to eat, which is a manifestation of typhoid fever. If, on the other hand, continuous sweating occurs, it is a sign of the evil spirit of the sun.

古文：伤寒三日，阳明脉大。
现代文：外感病的第三天，阳明病的脉象为大。
English: On the third day of exogenous disease, the pulse of Yangming disease was large.

古文：伤寒脉浮而缓，手足自温者，是为系在太阴。
现代文：外感病，脉象浮而缓，手足温暖的，这是病属太阴。
English: Exogenous disease, the pulse is slow, the hands and feet are warm, this is a yin disease.

古文：太阴者，身当发黄；若小便自利者，不能发黄。至七八日，大便硬者，为阳明病也。
现代文：太阴寒湿内郁，病人身体应当发黄，如果小便通畅的，则湿有出路，就不会发黄；到了第七、八天，如果大便硬结的，则是湿邪化燥，已转成为阳明病。
English: Too gloomy, cold, wet and depressed, the patient's body should turn yellow, if the urine is smooth, then the wet has a way out, it will not turn yellow; by the seventh or eighth day, if the stool is hard, it is wet and dry, and has turned into Yangming disease.

古文：伤寒转系阳明者，其人濈然微汗出也。
现代文：患外感病，邪由其它经转属阳明的，病人就会出现不断汗出的症状。
English: Suffering from extrinsic diseases, the symptoms of continuous sweating will appear in patients who have been transferred to the Yang Ming from other causes.

古文：阳明中风，口苦咽干，腹满微喘，发热恶寒，脉浮而紧；若下之，则腹满、小便难也。
现代文：阳明感受风邪，症见口苦，咽喉干燥，腹部胀满，微微气喘，发热怕冷，脉象浮紧的，不能攻下。如果误行攻下，就会使腹部胀满更加厉害，小便难以解出。
English: Yang Ming felt a cold, the symptoms were dry mouth, dry throat, bloated abdomen, slight asthma, fever afraid of cold, pulse was tight and could not be captured. If it was captured by mistake, it would make the bloated abdomen more severe, and it would be difficult to urinate.

古文：阳明病，若能食，名中风；不能食，名中寒。
现代文：阳明病，如果能够饮食的，示胃中有热，能够消化水谷，这就叫中风；如果不能饮食的，示胃中虚寒，不能消化水谷，这就叫中寒。
English: Yangming disease, if you can eat, indicates that there is heat in the stomach and can digest trough, which is called stroke; if you can't eat, indicates that there is cold in the stomach and can't digest trough, which is called hypothermia.

古文：阳明病，若中寒，不能食，小便不利，手足濈然汗出，此欲作固瘕，必大便初硬后溏。
现代文：阳明中寒证，不能饮食，小便不通畅，手足不断汗出的，这是将要形成固瘕的征兆，大便一定初出干硬，后见稀溏。
English: Yangming in cold symptoms, can not eat and drink, urination is not smooth, hands and feet continue to sweat, this is a sign of the formation of hard stool, stool must be hard at the beginning, and it is rare.

古文：所以然者，以胃中冷，水谷不别故也。
现代文：之所以这样，是因为胃中寒冷，不能泌别水谷的缘故。
English: The reason for this is because the stomach is cold and cannot secrete troughs.

古文：阳明病，欲食，小便反不利，大便自调，其人骨节疼，翕翕如有热状，奄然发狂，濈然汗出而解者，此水不胜谷气，与汗共并，脉紧则愈。
现代文：阳明病，初起病时想进食，小便反而不通畅，大便正常，病人骨关节疼痛，身上好象皮毛复盖一样有发热的感觉，忽然发狂的，这是水湿郁滞肌表的表现，如果全身畅汗而病解的，这是正与邪争，正能胜邪，邪随汗解的缘故，此时若见脉紧的，疾病就会痊愈。
English: Yangming disease, at the initial onset of the disease want to eat, urinate, but not smooth, feces are normal, the patient's bone and joint pain, the body seems to have a feeling of fever like a fur cover, suddenly mad, this is a manifestation of watery and stagnant muscle surface, if the whole body sweats and dissolves, this is due to the struggle with evil, the ability to defeat evil, and the dissolution of evil with sweat, at this time if the pulse is tight, the disease will be cured.

古文：阳明病欲解时，从申至戌上。
现代文：阳明病将要解除的时间，多在下午时到时之间。
English: The time when the Yangming disease will be relieved is mostly between the afternoon and the morning.

古文：阳明病，不能食，攻其热必哕。
现代文：阳明中寒证，不能进食，如果误用苦寒药泻热，就会产生呃逆。
English: Yangming in cold symptoms, can not eat, if the misuse of bitter cold medicine diarrhea, it will produce hiccups.

古文：所以然者。胃中虚冷故也。
现代文：之所以这样，是因为胃中虚寒的缘故。
English: The reason for this is due to the coldness in the stomach.

古文：以其人本虚，故攻其热必哕。
现代文：由于病人胃气本虚，又再用苦寒泻热，必使胃气更虚而产生呃逆的变证。
English: Because the patient's gastric qi is inherently deficient, and then the bitter cold and diarrhea fever are used, the gastric qi will be more deficient and the hiccup inverse variation will occur.

古文：阳明病脉迟，食难用饱，饱则微烦，头眩，必小便难，此欲作谷疸，虽下之，腹满如故。
现代文：阳明病，脉象迟，饮食不能吃饱，如果饱食就会微感心烦、头目昏眩，小便必不通畅，腹部胀满，这是将要形成谷疸。
English: Yangming disease, the pulse is slow, the diet can not be full, if the food is full, it will be slightly upset, the head will be dizzy, the urine will not flow smoothly, the abdomen will be full, which will form the valley.

古文：所以然者，脉迟故也。
现代文：用了泻下法治疗，而腹部胀满丝毫不减轻。
English: He was treated with a laxative, but the distended abdomen did not improve at all.

古文：阳明病法多汗，反无汗，其身如虫行皮中状者，此以久虚故也。
现代文：究其原因，是因为病人脉迟，迟脉主寒，其证属寒湿内郁，所以攻下无效。阳明病，本应当汗出多，却反而无汗，病人身痒好象虫在皮内爬行一样的，这是长期正气虚弱的缘故。
English: The reason is that the patient's pulse is slow, and the main cause of the slow pulse is cold, and the symptom is cold and damp depression, so the attack is ineffective. Yangming disease should have sweated a lot, but there is no sweat, and the patient's body is itchy like an insect crawling inside the skin. This is due to long-term qi weakness.

古文：阳明病，反无汗，而小便利，二三日，呕而咳，手足厥者，必苦头痛；若不咳不呕，手足不厥者，头不痛。
现代文：阳明病，若属实热证，应当汗多，现却反而无汗，并见小便通畅，是属阳明中寒证。病至二三日，出现呕吐、咳嗽、手足冷的，为寒邪上逆，一定会发头痛；如果不咳嗽，不呕吐，手足不冷的，为寒邪不上逆，就不会发头痛。
English: Yangming disease, if it is a real heat symptom, should be sweating a lot, but now there is no sweat, and the urination is smooth, it is a Yangming middle cold symptom. If it is sick for two or three days, vomiting, coughing, and cold hands and feet occur, it is the opposite of cold, and it will definitely cause a headache; if it does not cough, does not vomit, and the hands and feet are not cold, it is not the opposite of cold, and it will not cause a headache.

古文：阳明病，但头眩，不恶寒，故能食而咳，其人必咽痛；若不咳者，咽不痛。
现代文：阳明病，头目昏眩，不怕冷，是属阳明中风证，所以能够饮食。如果出现咳嗽的，为热邪上攻，病人咽喉一定疼痛；如果不咳嗽的，则热邪不上攻，咽喉就不会疼痛。
English: Yangming disease, dizziness at the top of the head, not afraid of cold, is a Yangming stroke certificate, so it can eat and drink. If there is a cough, it is a fever attack, and the patient's throat will have a certain pain; if there is no cough, the fever will not attack, and the throat will not have pain.

古文：阳明病无汗，小便不利，心中懊憹者，身必发黄。
现代文：阳明病，无汗，小便不通畅，心中烦闷至极的，是阳明湿热内郁，一定会出现肌肤发黄。
English: Yangming disease, no sweat, urination is not smooth, the heart is extremely bored, it is Yangming moist heat depression, and the skin will definitely appear yellow.

古文：阳明病，被火，额上微汗出，小便不利者，必发黄。
现代文：阳明病，误用火法治疗，火邪内迫，出现微微汗出，小便不通畅的，一定会出现肌肤发黄。
English: Yangming disease, misuse of fire treatment, fire evil compulsion, slight sweating, urination is not smooth, the skin will definitely appear yellow.

古文：阳明病，脉浮而紧者，必潮热，发作有时。但浮者，必盗汗出。
现代文：阳明病，脉象浮而紧的，主胃燥成实，所以一定会出现潮热定时发作；只见脉浮的，主邪热内盛、实邪未成，所以一定会出现盗汗。
English: Yangming disease, the pulse is like floating and tight, the main stomach is dry and solid, so there will definitely be hot flashes at regular intervals; only the pulse is floating, the main evil is feverish, the real evil is not achieved, so there will definitely be night sweats.

古文：阳明病，口燥，但欲漱水不欲咽者，此必衄。
现代文：阳明病，口中干燥，但只想用水漱口，却不想吞咽下去的，这是热在血分的表现，一定会出现衄血。
English: Yangming disease, dry mouth, but only want to gargle with water, but do not want to swallow, this is the performance of heat in the blood, there will be bleeding.

古文：阳明病，本自汗出，医更重发汗，病已差，尚微烦不了了者，此大便必硬故也。
现代文：阳明病，本来就有自汗出，医生又重复发汗，疾病虽然得以解除，但还微感心烦不舒适的，这一定是大便干结坚硬的缘故。
English: Yangming disease, originally there is self-sweating, the doctor sweats repeatedly. Although the disease can be relieved, it is still slightly irritated and uncomfortable. This must be due to the hardness of the stool.

古文：以亡津液，胃中干燥，故令大便硬。
现代文：大便之所以干燥，是因为汗出过多，损伤津液，津液亏乏，肠中干燥所致。
English: The reason why the stool is dry is due to excessive perspiration, injury to the body fluids, lack of body fluids, and dryness in the intestines.

古文：当问其小便，日几行。若本小便日三四行，今日再行，故知大便不久出；今为小便数少，以津液当还入胃中，故知不久必大便也。
现代文：此时，应当询问病人一天解几次小便，如果原来为一天三四次，现在只有二次，就可以推知大便不久将要解出。究其原因，是因小便次数较原来减少，津液应当还于肠中，肠中津液势必增加，硬便得以濡润，则大便一定会很快解出。
English: At this time, the patient should be asked how many times a day he urinates. If it was originally three or four times a day, but now only twice, it can be inferred that the stool will soon be dissolved. The reason is that because the number of urinations is less than before, the fluid should still be in the intestine, and the fluid in the intestine is bound to increase. If the hard stool can be moistened, the stool will surely be dissolved quickly.

古文：伤寒呕多，虽有阳明证不可攻之。
现代文：伤寒病，呕吐剧烈的，虽然有阳明府实证，也不能用攻下法治疗。
English: Typhoid fever, vomiting is violent, although there is Yangmingfu empirical evidence, it can not be treated by attacking.

古文：阳明病，心下硬满者，不可攻之。
现代文：阳明病，胃脘部痞满硬结的，不能用攻下法治疗。
English: Yangming disease, the stomach and hips are full of hard knots, which can not be treated by attacking.

古文：攻之，利遂不止者死，利止者愈。
现代文：如果误用攻下，就会损伤脾胃而致腹泻。假如腹泻不停的，就有生命危险，假如腹泻停止的，疾病就会痊愈。
English: If it is misused, it will damage the spleen and stomach and cause diarrhea. If the diarrhea continues, there is a risk to life, and if the diarrhea stops, the disease will be cured.

古文：阳明病，面合赤色，不可攻之，必发热色黄，小便不利也。
现代文：阳明病，满面通红的，不能用攻下法治疗。误用攻下就会产生发热、肌肤发黄、小便不通畅的变证。
English: Yangming disease, flushed face, can not be treated with the attack method. Misuse of attack will produce fever, yellow skin, and urinary incontinence.

古文：阳明病，不吐不下，心烦者，可与调胃承气汤。
现代文：阳明病，没有使用涌吐或泻下法治疗，外邪内入，化热化燥成实，而见心中烦躁不安的，可用调胃承气汤治疗。
English: Yangming disease, without the use of effusion or laxative treatment, the external evil enters, the heat and dryness become solid, and if the heart is restless, it can be treated with stomach tonic soup.

古文：阳明病脉迟，虽汗出，不恶寒者，其身必重，短气腹满而喘，有潮热者，此外欲解，可攻里也，手足濈然而汗出者，此大便已硬也，大承气汤主之；若汗多微发热恶寒者，外未解也，其热不潮，未可与承气汤；若腹大满不通者，可与小承气汤，微和胃气，勿令大泄下。
现代文：阳明病，脉象迟，汗出而不怕冷，身体沉重，短气，腹部胀满，喘息，如果发潮热的，这是表证将要解除而里实已成，可以攻下里实；如果手足不断出汗的的，这是大便已经硬结的标志，用大承气汤主治。如果出汗较多，有轻微发热而怕冷的，这是表证未解，病人不发潮热，不能用承气汤攻下。如果腹部胀满厉害、大便不通的，可用小承气汤轻微泻下来和畅胃气，不可用峻泻药攻下。
English: Yangming disease, the pulse is slow, sweating but not afraid of cold, heavy body, shortness of breath, bloated abdomen, wheezing, if hot flashes, this is a sign that the symptoms will be relieved and the condition has been achieved, you can attack the condition; if the hands and feet are constantly sweating, this is a sign that the stool has hardened, and it is mainly treated with Dazhengqi soup. If there is more sweating, there is a slight fever and it is afraid of cold, this is an unsolved symptom, the patient does not have hot flashes, and it cannot be attacked with Dazhengqi soup. If the abdomen is

古文：大承气汤方
现代文：大承气汤方
English: Dasheng qi soup

古文：大黄四两厚朴半斤枳实五枚芒硝三合右四咪，以水一斗，先煮二物，取五升，去滓，内大黄，煮取二升，去滓，内芒硝，更上微火一两沸，分温再服。
现代文：大黄四两，用酒洗厚朴半斤，炙，去皮枳实五枚，炙芒硝三合以上四味药，用水一斗，先加入厚朴、枳实煎煮至五升，去掉药渣，再加入大黄，煎煮成二升，去掉药渣，加入芒硝，然后放在小火上煮一、二开，分两次温服。
English: Four or two pieces of rhubarb, washed with half a kilo of thick buckwheat with wine, roasted, peeled and pickled five pieces, roasted and salted three or more four-flavor medicine, boiled with water one bucket, first add thick buckwheat, pickled and boiled to five liters, remove the medicinal residue, then add rhubarb, boiled to two liters, remove the medicinal residue, add mango, and then boiled on low heat one or two times, divided into two warm dishes.

古文：得下，余勿服。
现代文：服药后如果大便已通，停止再服剩余的药。
English: After taking the medicine, if the stool has passed, stop taking the remaining medicine.

古文：小承气汤方
现代文：小承气汤方
English: Xiao Chengqi soup side

古文：大黄四两厚朴二两枳实三枚以上三味，以水四升，煮取一升二合，去滓，分温二服。
现代文：大黄四两厚朴二两，炙，去皮枳实大的三个，炙以上三味药，用水四升，煎煮成一升二合，去掉药渣，分两次温服。
English: Rhubarb four two thick, parsley two two, roasted, peeled and stewed three large, roasted more than three herbs, with four liters of water, boiled into one liter of two, remove the residue, divided into two warm.

古文：初服汤，当更衣，不尔者，尽饮之；若更衣者，勿服之。
现代文：服第一次药应当解大便，如果服药后大便不解，可将剩下的药服完，如果大便已通，不要再服剩下的药。
English: The first dose of medicine should dissolve the stool. If the stool does not dissolve after taking the medicine, you can take the rest of the medicine. If the stool has passed, do not take the rest of the medicine.

古文：阳明病，潮热，大便微硬者，可与大承气汤；不硬者，不与之。
现代文：阳明病，发潮热，大便微有硬结的，为燥屎内阻、里实已成，可以用大承气汤攻下里实；如果大便不硬结的，是内无燥屎，不能用大承气汤。
English: Yangming disease, hot flashes, slightly hard stool, for dry feces, the inner resistance, the inner solid has been formed, the inner solid can be captured with the large bearing gas soup; if the stool is not hard, it is the inner dry feces, and the large bearing gas soup cannot be used.

古文：若不大便六七日，恐有燥屎，欲知之法，少与小承气汤，汤入腹中，转矢气者，此有燥屎，乃可攻之；若不转矢气者，此但初头硬，后必溏，不可攻之，攻之，必胀满不能食也。欲饮水者，与水则哕。
现代文：如果六七天不解大便，恐有燥屎内阻，预测的方法，可给予少量小承气汤。服药后如果屎气转动而放屁的，这是有燥屎的症象，才能够攻下；如果服药后不放屁的，则是大便初出硬结、后部稀溏，不能攻下，如果攻下就会形成腹部胀满，不能进食，甚至饮水就呃逆的变证。
English: If the stool does not resolve for six or seven days, there may be dry stool obstruction, and the method of prediction can be given a small amount of Xiao Cheng Qi soup. After taking the medicine, if the stool turns and farts, this is a symptom of dry stool, and can only be attacked; if the medicine is not taken after taking the medicine, the stool is initially hard and the back is thin, and can not be attacked. If it is attacked, it will form a swollen abdomen, can not eat, and even drink water, which is the opposite of the variance.

古文：其后发热者，必大便复硬而少也，以小承气汤和之。
现代文：假如攻下后又出现发热的，这一定是燥屎复结，大便再次变硬而量较少，此时，应当用小承气汤和畅胃气而攻下。
English: If fever occurs again after the attack, it must be a dry feces complex, the stool becomes hard again and the amount is small. At this time, it should be attacked with Xiao Chengqi soup and stomach gas.

古文：不转矢气者，慎不可攻也。
现代文：总而言之，如果服小承气汤不转屎气的，千万不能攻下。
English: All in all, if you don't turn your shit into soup, you will never be able to capture it.

古文：夫实则谵语，虚则郑声。
现代文：谵语一般属实，郑声一般属虚。
English: Slang is generally true, Zhengxing is generally false.

古文：郑声重语也。
现代文：所谓郑声，是指语言重复、声低息微的症候。
English: The so-called Zheng voice refers to the symptoms of language repetition and low-pitched voice.

古文：直视谵语，喘满者死。下利者亦死。
现代文：两眼直视谵语，并见喘喝胀满的，属于死候，并见下利的，也是死候。
English: Those who look straight into the eyes of the slang, and see the panting and the swollen, belong to the death, and see the downside, is also the death.

古文：发汗多，若重发汗者，亡其阳，谵语脉短者死；脉自和者不死。
现代文：发汗太过，或重复发汗，阳气大伤，出现谵语，脉象短的，属于死候；如果脉与证相应的，不属死候。
English: Excessive sweating, or repeated sweating, yang qi is severely injured, slang appears, pulse is short, it is death; if the pulse corresponds to the certificate, it is not death.

古文：伤寒若吐、若下后，不解，不大便五六日，上至十余日，日晡所发潮热，不恶寒，独语如见鬼状。
现代文：伤寒表证，误用吐法或下法之后，病仍然不解除，出现五六天甚至十余天不解大便，午后发潮热，不怕冷，谵言妄语，如见鬼神一样。
English: Signs of typhoid fever, misuse of the vomiting method or after the method, the disease is still not relieved, there are five or six days or even more than ten days of unresolved stool, hot flushes in the afternoon, not afraid of cold, abusive language, like seeing ghosts.

古文：若剧者，发则不识人，循衣摸床，惕而不安，微喘直视，脉弦者生，涩者死，微者但发热谵语者，大承气汤主之，若一服利，止后服。
现代文：病情严重的，就会出现神志昏糊、目不识人、两手无意识地乱摸衣被床帐、惊惕不安、微微喘息、两目直视，如果脉象弦的，尚有一线生机；如果脉象涩的，属于死候。如果病情较轻，只见发潮热、谵语等证，用大承气汤主治。服药后，如果大便已通，就要停止服用剩下的药。
English: If the disease is severe, there will be confusion, blindness, two hands unconsciously groping the bedclothes, startled anxiety, slight wheezing, and staring straight ahead. If the pulse is like a string, there is still a ray of vitality; if the pulse is like astringency, it is death. If the disease is mild, only hot flashes, slang and other symptoms are seen, it is treated with Dasheng qi soup. After taking the medicine, if the stool has passed, stop taking the rest of the medicine.

古文：阳明病，其人多汗，以津液外出，胃中燥，大便必硬，硬则谵语，小承气汤主之。
现代文：阳明病，病人汗出太多，导致津液外泄，肠中干燥，大便势必硬结；大便硬结，府气不通，浊邪上扰，则发生谵语，用小承气汤主治。
English: Yangming disease, the patient sweats too much, causing the secretion to leak out, the intestine is dry, and the stool is bound to harden; the stool is hard, the house gas does not pass, and the bad breath is disturbed, then the slang occurs, and the Xiao Chengqi soup is used as the main treatment.

古文：若一服谵语止，更莫复服。
现代文：如果服一次药谵语就停止的，就不要再服剩余的药。
English: If you stop taking a medicine, do not take the rest of the medicine.

古文：阳明病，谵语发潮热，脉滑而疾者，小承气汤主之。
现代文：阳明病，谵语，发潮热，脉象滑而疾的，用小承气汤主治。
English: Yangming disease, slang, hot flashes, slippery pulse, with Xiao Chengqi soup as the main treatment.

古文：因与承气汤一升，腹中转矢气者，更服一升；若不转矢气，勿更与之。
现代文：于是给病人服小承气汤一升，服药后腹中转矢气而放屁的，可以再服一升；服药后腹中不转矢气的，就不要再服用。
English: Therefore, the patient should take one liter of Xiao Cheng Qi soup. If the patient farts after taking the medicine, he can take another liter. If the patient does not fart after taking the medicine, he should not take it again.

古文：明日不大便，脉反微涩者，里虚也，为难治，不可更与承气汤也。
现代文：如果第二天又不解大便，脉象反见微弱而滞涩的，这是正气虚弱而实邪阻滞，正虚邪实，攻补两难，治疗起来十分棘手，不能再用承气汤了。
English: If the next day, the stool is still not resolved, and the pulse is weak and stagnant, it is because the positive energy is weak and the real evil is blocked, and the real evil is weak and the real evil is blocked, and the real evil is weak and the real evil is blocked. It is very difficult to cure, and it is no longer possible to use the soup.

古文：阳明病，谵语有潮热，反不能食者，胃中必有燥屎五六枚也。若能食者，但硬耳，宜大承气汤下之。
现代文：阳明病，谵语，发潮热，反而不能进食的，是肠中燥屎已成，宜用大承气汤攻下燥屎；如果尚能进食的，只是大便硬结，宜用小承气汤和畅胃气。
English: Yangming disease, slang, hot flashes, but can not eat, is the dry feces in the intestine has been formed, it is advisable to use the large bearing gas soup to capture the dry feces; if you can still eat, but the stool is hard, it is advisable to use the small bearing gas soup and stomach gas.

古文：阳明病，下血谵语者，此为热入血室；但头汗出者，刺期门，随其实而泻之，濈然汗出则愈。
现代文：阳明病，经行下血而谵语的，这是热入血室，如果只见头部出汗，可以针刺期门，以泻血室的实邪，使血热得以宣泄，则周身畅汗而痊愈。
English: Yangming disease, through the lower blood and slang, this is hot into the blood chamber, if you only see the head sweating, you can acupuncture the door, with the real evil of the blood chamber, so that the blood heat can be vented, then the whole body sweats and heals.

古文：汗出谵语者，以有燥屎在胃中，此为风也，须下之，过经乃可下之。
现代文：汗出谵语的，这是外有太阳中风，内有燥屎阻结。燥屎内结必须用泻下法治疗，但是须待太阳表证解除后才能攻下。
English: In the case of sweating, it is a sun stroke on the outside and a dry excrement blockage on the inside. The dry excrement blockage must be treated with a laxative, but it can only be tackled after the sun watch certificate is lifted.

古文：下之若早，语言必乱，以表虚里实故也。下之则愈，宜大承气汤。
现代文：如果攻下过早，就会导致表邪尽陷而里实益甚，出现神昏语言错乱。如果表证已解而里实未去，用攻下法治疗就会痊愈，可用大承气汤。
English: If the attack is too early, it will lead to the appearance of delirium and language disorder. If the symptoms have been resolved but have not really gone away, the treatment will be cured by the attack method, and Dazheng Qi Soup can be used.

古文：伤寒四五日，脉沉而喘满。
现代文：外感病四五天，症见脉沉、气喘、腹部胀满。
English: Four or five days of motion sickness, with symptoms of a weak pulse, asthma, and a distended abdomen.

古文：沉为在里，而反发其汗，津液越出，大便为难，表虚里实，久则谵语。
现代文：脉沉主里，可知其病在里，却反而用发汗法治疗，汗出津液外泄，津伤肠燥成实，所以大便硬结难以解出。津液外越而虚，津伤肠燥成实，时间一长，就会发生谵语。
English: If the patient's pulse is weak, it can be known that the disease is in the body, but on the contrary, it is treated by sweating. Sweat leaks out, and the injured intestine dries solid, so the hard stool is difficult to solve. The more fluid leaks out, the more the injured intestine dries solid, and the longer the time, the more slang will occur.

古文：三阳合病，腹满身重，难以转侧，口不仁而面垢，谵语遗尿。发汗则谵语，下之则额上生汗，手足逆冷。若自汗出者，白虎汤主之。
现代文：太阳、阳明、少阳三经合病，腹部胀满，身体沉重，转侧困难，口中麻木不仁，面部垢浊，谵语，小便失禁，如见身热、自汗出的，是邪热偏重于阳明，用白虎汤主治。
English: Sun, Yang Ming, and Shao Yang are three concomitant diseases. The abdomen is bloated, the body is heavy, it is difficult to turn the side, the mouth is insensitive, the face is dirty, slang, and urinary incontinence. If you see body heat and sweat, it is evil heat that is more important than Yang Ming. It is mainly treated with white tiger soup.

古文：二阳并病，太阳证罢，但发潮热，手足汗出，大便难而谵语者，下之则愈，宜大承气汤。
现代文：如果用发汗法治疗，就会使谵语更甚；如果妄行攻下，就会造成额上出汗，四肢冰冷的变证。太阳阳明两经并病，太阳表证已解，仅只见发潮热，手足微微出汗，大便解出困难而谵语的，是属阳明里实，攻下里实就可痊愈，适宜用大承气汤。
English: If you use the sweating method of treatment, it will make the slang even worse; if you try to attack it, it will cause sweating on the forehead and cold extremities. The sun and the moon are concomitant diseases, the sun sign has been resolved, only hot flashes, slight sweating of hands and feet, and difficulty in resolving the stool and slang, belong to the sun and the moon, and the sun and the moon can be cured by attacking the sun and the moon. It is suitable to use Dasheng qi soup.

古文：阳明病，脉浮而紧，咽燥口苦，腹满而喘，发热汗出，不恶寒，反恶热，身重。
现代文：阳明病，脉象浮而紧，咽喉干燥，口中感觉苦，腹部胀满，喘息，发热，汗出，不怕冷，反而怕热，身体沉重，是属阳明里热证。
English: Yangming disease, the pulse is floating and tight, the throat is dry, the mouth feels bitter, the abdomen is swollen, wheezing, fever, sweating, not afraid of cold, but afraid of heat, the body is heavy, is a Yangmingli fever.

古文：若发汗则躁，心愦愦，反谵语。若加烧针，必怵惕烦躁，不得眠；若下之，则胃中空虚，客气动膈，心中懊憹，舌上胎者，栀子豉汤主之。
现代文：如果误发其汗，就会出现心中烦乱不安、甚或神昏谵语的变证；如果误用温针，就会导致恐惧不安、烦躁失眠的变证；如果误行攻下，就会损伤胃气，致邪热扰于胸膈，出现心中烦躁厉害，舌上生薄黄苔，用栀子豉汤主治。
English: If the sweat is mistakenly released, there will be a disturbance in the heart and anxiety, or even a hallucination of slang; if the warm needle is misused, it will lead to a disturbance of fear, anxiety, and insomnia; if it is misused, it will damage the gastric gas, cause evil heat to disturb the chest, and there will be severe irritability in the heart, thin yellow moss will grow on the tongue, and it will be mainly treated with hazelnut soup.

古文：若渴欲饮水，口干舌燥者，白虎加人参汤主之。
现代文：如果误下后热盛津伤，出现口渴想喝水，口干舌燥的，用白虎加人参汤主治。
English: If you have a fever after a mistake, you are thirsty and want to drink water, and your mouth is dry, use white tiger and ginseng soup.

古文：若脉浮发热，渴欲饮水，小便不利者，猪苓汤主之。
现代文：如果误下后出现脉浮、发热、口渴想喝水、小便不通畅的，属阴伤有热、水热互结于下焦，用猪苓汤主治。
English: If there is a pulse floating, fever, thirst to drink water, urination is not smooth after a mistake, it is a yin wound with heat, water and heat are interconnected in the lower heat, and it is mainly treated with pig stew soup.

古文：猪苓汤方
现代文：猪苓汤方
English: Pork Belly Soup

古文：猪苓茯苓阿胶滑石泽泻各一两右五味，以水四升，先煮四味，取二升，去滓，内下阿胶烊消，温服七合，日三服。
现代文：猪苓去皮茯苓泽泻阿胶滑石打碎，各一两以上五味药，用水四升，先加入猪苓、茯苓、泽泻、滑石四味药煎煮至二升，去掉药渣，再加入阿胶烊化溶解，每次温服七合，一日服三次。
English: Boar brisket peeled and crushed, one or two or more five-flavor medicine, four liters of water, first add boar brisket, wolfberry, boar brisket, and four-flavor medicine, boil to two liters, remove the residue, and then add the gelatinization and dissolution of the gelatin. Take seven doses each time, and take three times a day.

古文：阳明病，汗出多而渴者，不可与猪苓汤，以汗多胃中燥，猪苓汤复利其小便故也。
现代文：阳明病，汗出多而口渴的，属汗多津伤、胃津不足的口渴，不能用猪苓汤治疗。因为猪苓汤能够通利病人小便，使津液进一步损伤。
English: Yangming disease, sweating a lot and thirsty, is a kind of sweat injury, stomach deficiency of thirst, can not be treated with pig stew soup. Because pig stew soup can benefit patients to urinate, so that the body fluid is further damaged.

古文：脉浮而迟，表热里寒，下利清谷者，四逆汤主之。
现代文：脉象浮而迟，外有假热内有真寒，腹泻完谷不化的，用四逆汤主治。
English: The pulse is sluggish, there is a false fever on the outside and a real cold on the inside, and the diarrhea has not gone away, and it is mainly treated with four kinds of soup.

古文：若胃中虚冷，不能食者，饮水则哕。
现代文：如果胃中虚寒不能进食的，饮水后就会出现呃逆。
English: If it is too cold in the stomach to eat, the opposite will occur after drinking water.

古文：脉浮发热，口干鼻燥，能食者则衄。
现代文：脉浮发热，口干鼻燥，能够饮食的，为阳明气热炽盛，气病及血，迫血妄行，就会出现衄血。
English: If the pulse is hot, the mouth is dry and the nose is dry, and the person is able to eat and drink, the yang is hot and the qi is hot, the qi is sick and the blood is hot, and the blood pressure is too high, there will be blood stains.

古文：阳明病下之，其外有热，手足温，不结胸，心中懊憹，饥不能食，但头汗出者，栀子豉汤主之。
现代文：阳明病，经用泻下法治疗，身热未除，手足温暖，没有结胸的表现，心中烦躁异常，嘈杂似饥而不能进食，仅见头部汗出的，用栀子豉汤主治。
English: Yangming disease, treated by laxative, body heat not removed, warm hands and feet, no chest symptoms, abnormal irritability in the heart, noisy like hunger and unable to eat, only head sweating, mainly treated with hazelnut soup.

古文：阳明病，发潮热，大便溏，小便自可，胸胁满不去者，小柴胡汤主之。
现代文：阳明病，发潮热，大便稀溏，小便正常，胸胁胀闷不除的，为少阳之邪未尽，宜用小柴胡汤治疗。
English: Yangming disease, hot flashes, loose stools, normal urination, chest distension, not removed, for the evil of the sun is not exhausted, it is advisable to use small chaihu soup treatment.

古文：阳明病，胁下硬满，不大便而呕，舌上白胎者，可与小柴胡汤。
现代文：阳明病，胁下痞硬胀满，不解大便，呕吐，舌苔白的，为柴胡证未除，可给予小柴胡汤治疗。
English: Yangming disease, under duress, the lower eyelid is hard and swollen, unable to excrete stool, vomiting, the tongue is white, for the wood mustache is not removed, can be treated with small wood mustache soup.

古文：上焦得通，津液得下，胃气因和，身濈然而汗出解也。
现代文：用药后，上焦经气得以畅通，津液能够下达，胃肠机能得以恢复，就会周身畅汗而病解。
English: After taking the medicine, the qi can flow smoothly, the juice can be released, the gastrointestinal function can be restored, and the whole body will sweat and the disease will be resolved.

古文：阳明中风，脉弦浮大而短气，腹都满，胁下及心痛，久按之气不通，鼻干不得汗，嗜卧，一身及面目悉黄，小便难，有潮热，时时哕，耳前后肿，刺之小差。
现代文：阳明中风，脉象弦浮而大，全腹胀满，两胁及心下疼痛，按压很久而气仍不畅通，鼻中干燥，无汗，嗜睡，全身肌肤及目都发黄，小便解出困难，发潮热，呃逆不断，耳前后部肿胀。
English: Yangming stroke, pulse like a string floating and large, full abdomen bloated, double hernia and pain under the heart, pressure for a long time and the breath is still not smooth, dry in the nose, no sweat, drowsiness, whole body skin and eyes are yellow, difficulty in urinating, hot flashes, constant urination, swelling in the front and back of the ear.

古文：外不解，病过十日，脉续浮者，与小柴胡汤。
现代文：证属三阳合病，治疗当先用针刺法以泄里热。刺后里热得泄，病情稍减，而太阳、少阳证未除，病经过了十天，脉象弦浮的，可给予小柴胡汤以解少阳之邪。
English: The disease is caused by the combination of the three suns. The first treatment is to use acupuncture to relieve the fever. After the acupuncture, the fever is relieved and the condition is slightly reduced. However, the sun and the lesser sun have not been removed, and the disease has lasted for ten days. If the pulse is like a string floating, Xiao Chai Hu Tang can be given to solve the evil of the lesser sun.

古文：脉但浮，无余证者，与麻黄汤；若不尿，腹满加哕者，不治。
现代文：如果服小柴胡汤后少阳证已解，只见脉象浮等表证，无其他经见证的，可给予麻黄汤治疗。如果病情恶化，出现无尿、腹部胀满并且呃逆更甚的，属不治之候。
English: If after taking Xiaochaihu decoction, the symptoms of Shao Yang have been resolved, and only the symptoms of pulse like floating are seen, and there are no other witnesses, ephedra decoction can be given. If the condition worsens, there is no urine, the abdomen is swollen and the hiccups are even worse, it is incurable.

古文：蜜煎导方
现代文：蜜煎方
English: Recipe for honey roasted cream

古文：蜜七合一味，内铜器中微火煎之，稍凝似饴状，搅之勿令焦著，欲可丸，并手捻作挺，令头锐，大如指，长二寸许，当热时急作，冷则硬。
现代文：食蜜七合上一味药，倒进铜器里，用小火煎熬，待熬炼至能凝结得象饴糖一样即成。煎熬时，要不断搅拌，以免焦糊粘着，煎熬到可以作丸的程度时，用双手捻蜜做成头部尖锐、大小如指头、长二寸左右的棒状物，必须趁蜜热时马上做，冷却后就会变硬。
English: When the honey is cooked, it should be stirred constantly to prevent the paste from sticking. When the honey is cooked to the point that it can be made into a ball, the honey should be twisted with both hands to make a sharp, finger-sized stick about two inches long. It must be done immediately when the honey is hot, and it will harden after it cools.

古文：以内谷道中，以手急抱，欲大便时乃去之。
现代文：使用时，将所做的药棒塞进肛门里，用手急转，待病人想要解大便时就拔出去掉。
English: When used, the stick is inserted into the anus, twisted by hand, and pulled out when the patient wants to defecate.

古文：猪胆汁方
现代文：怀疑此方不是仲景的原意，已经试用效果很好。猪胆汁方
English: Suspect that this side is not the original intention of the juxtaposition, have already tried the effect is very good.

古文：大猪胆一枚，泻汁，和醋少许，以灌谷道中，如一食顷，当大便出。
现代文：用大猪胆汁一个，取汁，与少许米醋混合，灌进肛门里，维持一顿饭左右的时间，用药后，即可解除宿食及腐败物等，十分有效。
English: Take a large pig's bile, extract the juice, mix it with a little rice vinegar, pour it into the anus, maintain a meal time or so. After using the medicine, you can get rid of food poisoning and spoilage, etc. It is very effective.

古文：阳明病脉迟，汗出多，微恶寒者，表未解也，可发汗，宜桂枝汤。
现代文：阳明病，脉象迟，汗出很多，微微怕冷的，这是表证尚未解除，可以发汗，适宜用桂枝汤。
English: Yangming disease, pulse is slow, sweat a lot, slightly afraid of cold, this is the certificate has not been lifted, you can sweat, suitable with cinnamon soup.

古文：阳明病脉浮，无汗而喘者，发汗则愈，宜麻黄汤。
现代文：阳明病，脉象浮，无汗而气喘的，是太阳表实证仍在，用发汗法就会痊愈，可用麻黄汤。
English: Yangming disease, pulse is like floating, no sweat but breathless, is the sun watch positive evidence is still in, with sweating method will be cured, can be used ephedra soup.

古文：阳明病，发热汗出，此为热越，不能发黄也。
现代文：阳明病，发热汗出的，这是热邪能够发越于外，不能形成发黄证。
English: Yangming disease, sweating from heat, this is the heat evil can be sent to the outside, can not form a yellowing certificate.

古文：但头汗出，身无汗，剂颈而还，小便不利，渴引水浆者，此为瘀热在里，自必发黄，茵陈汤主之。
现代文：如果仅见头部出汗，到颈部为止，身上无汗，小便不通畅，口渴想喝汤水，这是湿热郁滞在里，势必出现肌肤发黄，用茵陈蒿汤主治。
English: If you only see the head sweating, up to the neck, there is no sweat on the body, the urine does not flow smoothly, and you are thirsty and want to drink soup, this is a hot and humid stay, the skin is bound to be yellow, and it is mainly treated with Yin Chen's soup.

古文：茵陈蒿汤方
现代文：茵陈蒿汤方
English: 茵陈汤方

古文：茵陈蒿六两栀子十四枚大黄二两右三味，以水一斗，先煮茵陈，减六升，内二味，煮取三升，去滓，分温三服，小便当利，尿如皂角汁状，色正赤，一宿腹减，黄从小便去也。
现代文：茵陈蒿六两栀子十四枚，剖开大黄二两，去皮以上三味药，用水一斗二升，先加入茵陈煎煮，煮去水分六升，再加另二味药，煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，分三次温服。服药后小便应当通畅，并见尿色红，象皂荚汁一样，经过一晚上后，腹胀应当减轻，这是因为湿热之邪从小便而去的缘故。
English: Rinse 14 lozenges, cut 2 rhubarb, peel and add 3 drops of medicine, boil 2 liters of water, add 6 liters of water, add 2 drops of medicine, boil 3 liters of water, remove the residue, and take 3 times. After taking the medicine, urinate should be smooth, and the urine color should be red, like soapwort juice. After one night, the bloating should be reduced, because the evil of damp heat goes away from the urine.

古文：阳明证，其人喜忘者，必有畜血。
现代文：阳明病，病人健忘的，是体内一定有蓄血。
English: Yangming disease, the patient is forgetful, there must be blood accumulation in the body.

古文：所以然者，本有久瘀血，故令喜忘，屎虽硬，大便反易，其色必黑，宜抵当汤下之。
现代文：由于瘀血久停，气血阻滞，所以使人健忘。其大便虽然硬结，但容易解出，并且颜色一定是黑的，宜用抵当汤攻下瘀血。
English: Due to the stagnation of blood stasis and the blockage of qi and blood, it makes people forgetful. Although the stool is hard, it is easy to solve, and the color must be black. It is advisable to use the soup to capture the blood stasis.

古文：阳明病，下之，心中懊憹而烦，胃中有燥屎者可攻。
现代文：阳明病，用泻下药攻下后，出现心中烦躁异常，如果是肠中燥屎阻结所致的，可以攻下，适宜用大承气汤。
English: Yangming disease, after being attacked with laxative medicine, there is abnormal irritability in the heart. If it is caused by blockage of dry feces in the intestine, it can be attacked. It is suitable to use Dasheng Qi soup.

古文：腹微满，初头硬，后必溏，不可攻之。
现代文：如果腹部轻微胀满，大便始出干硬，后出稀溏的，则不能攻下。
English: If the abdomen is slightly swollen and the stool starts out hard and then becomes loose, it cannot be captured.

古文：若有燥屎者，宜大承气汤。病人不大便五六日，绕脐痛，烦躁，发作有时者，此有燥屎，故使不大便也。
现代文：病人不解大便五六天，脐腹部疼痛，烦躁不安，定时发作，这是肠中有燥屎阻结，所以导致大便秘结。
English: For five or six days, the patient has not been able to empty his bowels. He has pain in his abdomen, irritability, and periodic attacks. This is due to the blockage of dry feces in the intestine, which leads to constipation.

古文：病人烦热，汗出则解，又如疟状，日晡所发热者，属阳明也。
现代文：病人心烦、发热，经过发汗，病已解除。现又出现午后发潮热，好象发疟疾一样的，这是邪传阳明。
English: The patient is upset, feverish, sweating, the disease has been relieved. Now there is a hot flush in the afternoon, as if it were malaria, this is the evil sun.

古文：脉实者宜下之；脉浮虚者，宜发汗。
现代文：如果脉象实的，宜用攻下法治疗；如果脉象浮虚的，宜用发汗法治疗。
English: If the pulse is solid, it is advisable to use the capture method for treatment; if the pulse is deceptive, it is advisable to use the sweating method for treatment.

古文：下之与大承气汤，发汗宜桂枝汤。
现代文：攻下用大承气汤，发汗用桂枝汤。
English: If you are captured, use Dazheng Qi soup, if you are sweating, use Guizhi soup.

古文：大下后，六七日不大便，烦不解，腹满痛者，此有燥屎也。所以然者，本有宿食故也，宜大承气汤。
现代文：用峻泻药攻下后，病人又出现六七天不解大便，烦躁不解，腹部胀满疼痛的，这是肠中有燥屎的缘故，之所以这样，是因为下后余热未尽，与肠内宿食相结合而成燥屎，适宜用大承气汤治疗。
English: After being attacked with the steep laxative, the patient had six or seven days of unresolved stool, irritability, abdominal distension and pain. This is due to the presence of dry feces in the intestine. The reason for this is that the residual heat is not exhausted after the fall, and combined with the enteral food, it becomes dry feces. It is suitable to use Dasheng Qi soup for treatment.

古文：病人小便不利，大便乍难乍易，时有微热，喘冒不能卧者，有燥屎也，宜大承气汤。
现代文：病人小便不通畅，大便忽而困难，忽而容易，时而有轻度发热，气喘，头昏目眩，不能平卧的，这是肠中有燥屎，宜用大承气汤攻下燥屎。
English: The patient's urination is not smooth, the stool is suddenly difficult, suddenly easy, and sometimes mild fever, asthma, dizziness, and cannot lie flat. This is because there is dry excrement in the intestine. It is advisable to use Dasheng Qi soup to capture the dry excrement.

古文：食谷欲呕者，属阳明也，吴茱萸汤主之。
现代文：进食后想呕吐的，属阳明胃寒证，可用吴茱萸汤主治。
English: If you want to vomit after eating, it is a symptom of a cold stomach, which can be treated with wu jujube soup.

古文：得汤反剧者，属上焦也。
现代文：如果服吴茱萸汤后呕吐反而增剧的，则不属胃中虚寒，而是上焦有热。
English: If vomiting is more severe after taking the soup, it is not a cold in the stomach, but a fever.

古文：吴茱萸汤方
现代文：吴茱萸汤方
English: Wu Juyao Tang Fang

古文：吴茱萸一升人参三两生姜六两大枣十二枚
现代文：吴茱萸一升，洗人参三两生姜六两，切片大枣十二枚。
English: 1 litre of wu jujube, 3 washes of ginseng, 2 washes of ginger, 6 slices of jujube, 12 slices of jujube.

古文：右四味，以水七升，煮取二升，去滓，温服七合，日三服。
现代文：剖开以上四味药，用水七升，煎煮成二升，去掉药渣，每次温服七合，每天服三次。
English: Cut the above four-flavor medicine, boil it with seven liters of water, boil it to two liters, remove the drug residue, warm it seven times, and take it three times a day.

古文：太阳病，寸缓、关浮、尺弱，其人发热汗出，复恶寒，不呕，但心下痞者，此以医下之也。
现代文：太阳病，寸部脉缓，关部脉浮，尺部脉弱，病人发热，汗出，怕冷，不呕吐，心下痞满不适的，这是医生误用攻下所致。
English: This is caused by the doctor's improper grasp of the patient's symptoms, such as sunstroke, slow pulse at the base, fast pulse at the base, weak pulse at the base, fever, sweating, fear of cold, not vomiting, and the heart is full of discomfort.

古文：如其不下者，病人不恶寒而渴者，此转属阳明也。
现代文：假如没有误下，病人出现不怕冷而口渴的，这是邪传阳明。
English: If there is no mistake, the patient appears not afraid of cold and thirsty, this is the evil sun.

古文：小便数者，大便必硬，不更衣十日，无所苦也。
现代文：如果小便次数多的，大便一定干硬，其人虽然十余天不解大便，也没有什么痛苦。
English: If the frequency of urination is high, the stool must be hard and dry. Although the person has not been able to defecate for more than ten days, there is no pain.

古文：渴欲饮水，少少与之，但以法救之。
现代文：如果是胃中津液不足所致的口渴想要喝水的，可以给予少量汤水，以补充津液，津液恢复，则病可愈。
English: If you are thirsty and want to drink water due to insufficient fluid in the stomach, you can give a small amount of soup water to supplement the fluid. If the fluid is restored, the disease can be cured.

古文：渴者，宜五苓散。脉阳微而汗出少者，为自和也；汗出多者，为太过。
现代文：如果是水饮内蓄、气不化津所致的口渴的，宜用五苓散通阳化气行水。如果是其它原因所致口渴的，可根据病情，依法施治。脉象浮取微弱和缓、汗出少时，是正气驱邪，津液未伤，邪去正安，病得痊愈。如果汗出多的，则是汗出太过，津液势必损伤。
English: If the thirst is caused by the accumulation of water and qi in the drink, and the qi does not dissolve the qin, it is advisable to use the five gongs to dissipate the yang qi and walk on the water. If the thirst is caused by other reasons, it can be treated according to the condition and according to the law. When the pulse is weak and slow, and the sweat is small, it is the positive qi that drives the evil, the qin liquid is not injured, the evil is removed and the disease is cured. If the sweat is too much, it is sweating too much, and the qin liquid is bound to be damaged.

古文：阳脉实，因发其汗出多者，亦为太过。
现代文：脉象浮而充实有力，主表有实邪，当用发汗解表法治疗，如果汗出多的，也是汗出太过。
English: The pulse is buoyant, full and powerful, the main table has real evil, when treated with sweating table method, if sweating a lot, it is also sweating too much.

古文：太过为阳绝于里，亡津液，大便因硬也。
现代文：汗出太过，就会导致津液损伤，阳热盛于里，大便因而硬结。
English: If you sweat too much, it will cause fluid damage, heat from the sun, and your stool will become hard.

古文：脉浮而芤，浮为阳，芤为阴，浮芤相搏，胃气生热，其阳则绝。
现代文：脉浮而芤，浮主阳气盛，芤主阴血虚，浮脉与芤脉相合，胃气偏亢则生热，阳热亢盛至极，阴液亏虚，因而形成大便硬结之证。
English: While the pulse is buoyant, the buoyant yang qi is strong, the buoyant yang qi is weak, the buoyant vein is in line with the umbilical vein, the gastric qi is partial to the umbilical vein, which causes fever, the yang qi is extremely strong, and the yin fluid is weak, thus forming the evidence of hard stool.

古文：趺阳脉浮而涩，浮则胃气强，涩则小便数，浮涩相搏，大便则难，其脾为约，麻人丸主之。
现代文：趺阳脉浮而涩，浮主胃热亢盛，涩是小便频数，阴液不足。胃热津亏，肠中干燥，大便因而硬结。
English: The supine yang vein is buoyant and astringent, the buoyant main stomach is hot and bloated, the astringency is the frequency of urination, the yin fluid is insufficient. The stomach is hot and dry in the intestine, and the stool is hard.

古文：麻人丸方
现代文：这是脾不能为胃转输津液所致，用麻子仁丸主治。
English: This is the result of the spleen not being able to transfer to the stomach, and is mainly treated with Asago Jin Maru.

古文：麻子人二升芍药半斤枳实半斤大黄一斤厚朴一斤杏仁一斤右六味，为末，炼蜜为丸，桐子大，饮服十丸，日二服，渐加，以知为度。
现代文：麻子仁丸方麻子仁二升芍药半斤枳实半斤，炙大黄一斤，去皮厚朴一尺，炙，去皮杏仁一升，去皮尖，炒，另外研成膏脂状以上六味药，共为细末，炼蜜为丸，如梧桐子大，每次服十丸，每日服三次，并逐渐加量，直至病愈为度。
English: Matzoh balls are made from two liters of matzoh powder, half a catty of solid matzoh powder, half a catty of roasted rhubarb powder, peeled and thickly sliced matzoh, roasted and peeled almonds, peeled and fried, and then further processed into a paste-like six-flavor medicine, all of which are fine powder, and the honey is made into pills, such as pampas grass, and ten pills are taken at a time, three times a day, and the amount is gradually increased until the disease is cured.

古文：太阳病三日，发汗不解，蒸蒸发热者，属胃也，调胃承气汤主之。
现代文：太阳病，经过三天，用发汗法治疗而病不解除，高热炽盛的，是转属阳明，用调胃承气汤主治。
English: Sun disease, after three days, is treated with sweating method, but the disease is not relieved. If the high fever is raging, it is transferred to Yangming, and it is mainly treated with stomach tonic soup.

古文：伤寒吐后，腹胀满者，与调胃承气汤。
现代文：伤寒表证，使用吐法后，出现腹部胀满硬痛的，用调胃承气汤主治。
English: For typhoid fever symptoms, after using the vomiting method, if the abdomen is swollen and stiff, use the stomach tonic soup as the main treatment.

古文：太阳病，若吐、若下、若发汗，微烦，小便数，大便因硬者，与小承气汤和之愈。
现代文：太阳表证，用催吐、攻下或发汗后，出现轻微心烦，小便频数，大便硬结的，用小承气汤和畅胃气、攻下里实，就可痊愈。
English: According to the sun meter, after vomiting, sweating or sweating, there is a slight upset, frequent urination, hard stool, with a small qi soup and a smooth stomach, and a solid attack, it can be cured.

古文：得病二三日，脉弱，无太阳柴胡证，烦躁，心下硬，至四五日，虽能食，以小承气汤少少与，微和之，令小安，至六日，与承气汤一升。
现代文：患病二、三天，脉象弱，无太阳、少阳见证，烦躁不安，胃脘部痞胀硬结，到了四五天，虽见能够饮食，也应先给予少量小承气汤，以微微调畅胃气，使病情稍挫，到了第六天，再给予小承气汤一升。
English: After two or three days of illness, the pulse is weak, there is no sun, less sun, irritability, and the stomach and neck are swollen and hard. At four or five days, although you can eat and drink, you should first give a small amount of Xiao Cheng Qi soup to fine-tune the stomach gas and make the condition slightly worse. On the sixth day, give one liter of Xiao Cheng Qi soup.

古文：若不大便六七日，小便少者，虽不能食，但初头硬，后必溏，未定成硬，攻之必溏，须小便利，屎定硬，乃可攻之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：如果大便不解六七天，而小便短少的，则津液当还于肠中，虽然不能饮食，也不是燥屎内结，而是大便初出干硬，后出稀溏，如果攻下必成溏泄。必须小便通利，大便始会坚硬，才可攻下，宜用大承气汤。
English: If the stool does not dissolve for six or seven days, and the urination is short, the juice should still be in the intestine, although it can not be eaten, it is not a dry stool knot, but the stool is initially hard, then it is thin, and if it is captured, it will become exudation. It is necessary to urinate well, and the stool will be hard at first, and then it can be captured. It is advisable to use Dasheng qi soup.

古文：伤寒六七日，目中不了了，睛不和，无表里证，大便难，身微热者，此为实也。急下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：外感病六七天，出现视物模糊不清，眼球转动不灵活，既无头痛畏寒等表证，又无谵语、腹满痛等里证，大便难以解出，体表有轻微发热的，这是燥热内结成实，而又真阴欲涸，应急下急阴，适宜用大承气汤。
English: Six or seven days of extrinsic disease, blurred vision, inflexible eye movement, no headache or cold symptoms, no slang, abdominal pain or other symptoms, difficult to excrete stool, slight fever on the body surface, which is a dry heat, but the real yin is dry, and the emergency is urgent yin, it is suitable to use Dasheng Qi soup.

古文：发热，阳明汗多者，急下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：阳明府实证，又见发热、汗出多的，应急下存阴，宜用大承气汤。
English: Yangmingfu empirical evidence, also see fever, sweat a lot, in an emergency, there is yin, it is advisable to use Dasheng qi soup.

古文：发汗不解，腹满痛者，急下之，宜大承气汤
现代文：发汗以后，不仅病未解除，反而出现腹部胀满疼痛，是发汗伤津，燥热迅速内结成实，应急下存阴，宜用大承气汤。
English: After sweating, not only is the disease not relieved, but the abdomen is swollen and painful. Sweating is painful, the heat quickly solidifies inside, and there is a yin under emergency conditions. It is advisable to use Dasheng qi soup.

古文：腹满不减，减不足言，当下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：腹部胀满持续不减轻，即使减轻，也微不足道的，是实邪内阻的征象，应当攻下，可用大承气汤。
English: Abdominal bloating persists and does not lessen, and even if it does lessen, it is insignificant. It is a sign of real internal obstruction and should be tackled. You can use Dasheng Qi Soup.

古文：阳明少阳合病，必下利。
现代文：阳明少阳两经合病，邪热下迫大肠，势必发生腹泻。
English: Yang Ming and Shao Yang are two concomitant diseases, and the evil fever presses the large intestine, and diarrhea is bound to occur.

古文：其脉不负者，顺也；负者，失也。互相克贼，名为负也。
现代文：如果木不克土，而见实大滑数之脉，与阳明实热相符的，是顺证；如果木邪克土，纯见少阳弦脉的，是逆证。
English: If the wood does not match the soil, but the vein of the real large slip number is in line with the sun, it is a positive proof; if the wood is not in line with the soil, but the vein of the real large slip number is in line with the sun, it is a negative proof.

古文：脉滑而数者，有宿食也，当下之，宜大承气汤。
现代文：现脉象滑而数，是阳明有宿食内停、宿滞内阻，应当攻下宿滞，可用大承气汤。
English: The current pulse is like a slippery number, it is the yangming that has a lingering stagnation, a lingering stagnation, it should capture the lingering stagnation, and it can be used as a large bearing gas soup.

古文：病人无表里证，发热七八日，虽脉浮数者，可下之。
现代文：病人发热七、八天，既无头痛、畏寒等太阳表证，又无腹满谵语等阳明里证，虽然脉象浮数，也可用泻下法泄热。
English: The patient had a fever for seven or eight days. There were no symptoms of the sun, such as headache or chills, and no symptoms of the sun, such as a full stomach. Although the pulse was erratic, it was possible to relieve the fever by laxation.

古文：假令已下，脉数不解，合热则消谷喜饥，至六七日，不大便者，有瘀血，宜抵当汤。
现代文：假如已经攻下，脉浮已除，而脉数不解，是气分之热已解而血分之热未除，邪热与瘀血相合，所以出现容易饥饿，能够饮食，六七天不解大便。这是瘀血停蓄，宜用抵当汤攻下瘀血。
English: If it has been captured, the pulsation has been removed, but the number of pulses is not clear, it is the heat of the gas that has been dissolved and the heat of the blood that has not been removed, the evil heat is compatible with the blood stain, so it is easy to be hungry, it can be eaten, and it will not dissolve the stool for six or seven days. This is blood stasis, it is advisable to use the soup to capture the blood stain.

古文：若脉数不解，而下不止，必胁热而便脓血也。
现代文：如果攻下后脉数不除，而又腹泻不止的，是热邪下迫，势必会出现协热下利、解脓血便的变证。
English: If the number of the posterior pulse is not reduced, and the diarrhea does not stop, it is a fever, and it is bound to cause co-fever and bloody stool.

古文：伤寒，发汗已，身目为黄，所以然者，以寒湿在里，不解故也。以为不可下也，于寒湿中求之。
现代文：伤寒病，发汗以后，出现全身及两目发黄，这是因为发汗太过，损伤中阳，寒湿郁滞在里不解的缘故，治疗应当温化寒湿，不可用攻下法。
English: In typhoid fever, after sweating, the whole body and both eyes appear to be yellow. This is because the sweating is too much, the damage is too severe, and the cold and dampness cannot be resolved. The treatment should be to warm up the cold and dampness, and it is not possible to use the attack method.

古文：伤寒七八日，身黄如橘子色，小便不利，腹微满者，茵陈蒿汤主之。
现代文：外感病七八天，皮肤发黄如橘子色，小便不通畅，腹部稍感胀满的，用茵陈蒿汤主治。
English: If you have been suffering from motion sickness for seven or eight days, your skin is yellow and orange-colored, your urine is not clear, and your abdomen feels a little bloated, use Yin Chen's soup as the main treatment.

古文：伤寒身黄发热者，栀子蘖皮汤主之。
现代文：外感病，症见皮肤发黄，发热的，用栀子柏皮汤主治。
English: Exogenous diseases, symptoms of skin yellowing, fever, mainly treated with hazelnut and birch soup.

古文：栀子蘖皮汤方
现代文：栀子柏皮汤方
English: Braised hazelnut and turnip soup

古文：栀子一十五个甘草一两黄蘖二两右三味，以水四升，煮取一升半，去滓，分温再服。
现代文：肥栀子十五个，剖开甘草一两，炙黄柏二两以上三味药，用水四升，煎煮成一升半，去掉药渣，分两次温服。
English: Fifteen fat hazelnuts, one or two pieces of liquorice, two or more pieces of roasted yellow cypress, four liters of water, boiled to one and a half liters, remove the residue, and warm it twice.

古文：伤寒瘀热在里，身必发黄，麻黄连轺赤小豆汤主之。
现代文：外感病，湿热郁滞在里，身体必定发黄，如果兼有头痛、畏寒、无汗、身痒等表证的，用麻黄连轺赤小豆汤主治。
English: Exogenous diseases, staying in hot and humid conditions, the body will definitely turn yellow. If you also have headache, chills, no sweat, itching and other symptoms, use ephedra with red bean soup as the main treatment.

古文：麻黄连轺赤小豆汤方
现代文：麻黄连轺赤小豆汤方
English: Egg yolk and bean curd red bean soup

古文：麻黄二两赤小豆一升连轺二两杏仁四十个大枣十二枚生梓白皮一升生姜二两甘草二两以上八味，以潦水一斗，先煮麻黄，再沸，去上沫，内诸药，煮取三升，分温三服，半日服尽。
现代文：麻黄二两，去节连轺二两，即连翘根杏仁四十个，去皮尖赤小豆一升大枣十二枚，剖开生梓白皮切细，一升生姜二两，切片甘草二两，炙以上八味药，用雨水一斗，先加入麻黄煎煮一、二滚，除去上面的白沫，再加入其他药物，共煎煮成三升，去掉药渣，分三次温服，半天服完。
English: Two dashes of ephedra, two dashes of cumin, that is, forty almond roots, peeled red adzuki beans, one liter of jujube twelve pieces, cut open and finely slice the white skin of raw azusa, two dashes of ginger, two dashes of sliced licorice, roasted yakitori, one bucket of rainwater, first add ephedra, boil one or two, remove the foam above, then add other drugs, boil a total of three liters, remove the drug residue, divide into three warm treatments, and take half a day.

