古文：齐桓公问于管子曰： 自燧人以来，其大会可得而闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 从燧人氏以来，历史上的重大经济筹算，可以讲给我听听么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "Can you tell me about the major economic calculations in history since the time of the Hayato clan?"

古文：管子对曰： 燧人以来，未有不以轻重为天下也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 从燧人氏以来，没有不运用轻重之术治理天下的。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Since the time of the Hayato clan, there has never been a time when the world was governed without the use of the art of balance.

古文：共工之王，水处什之七，陆处什之三，乘天势以隘制天下。
现代文：共工当政的时代，天下水域占十分之七，陆地占十分之三，他就利用这个自然形势来控制天下。
English: When the Communists were in power, seven-tenths of the world was covered by water and three-tenths by land. He took advantage of this natural situation to control the world.

古文：至于黄帝之王，谨逃其爪牙，不利其器，烧山林，破增薮，焚沛泽，逐禽兽，实以益人，然后天下可得而牧也。
现代文：到了黄帝当政的时代，努力除掉各地的武装，限制他们制造武器，烧山林、毁草薮、火焚大泽、驱逐禽兽，实际上都是为控制他人，这然后才得以统治天下。
English: In the era when the Yellow Emperor was in power, efforts were made to disarm the armed forces of various regions, restrict them from manufacturing weapons, burn mountains and forests, destroy grasslands, set fire to forests, and drive out animals. In fact, all of these were done to control others, and only then was it possible to rule the world.

古文：至于尧舜之王，所以化海内者，北用禺氏之玉，南贵江汉之珠，其胜禽兽之仇，以大夫随之。 
现代文：至于尧舜当政，之所以能把天下治好，是因为在北方取用禺氏的玉石，从南方取用江汉的珍珠，他们还在驱捕野兽时，使大夫参与其事。 
English: As for Zhai when he was in power, the reason why he was able to heal the world was because he used the jade of the Zhai clan in the north and the pearls of the Jianghan from the south. When they were hunting wild animals, they also involved doctors in the matter.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这是什么意思？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What does this mean?

古文：管子对曰： 令： 诸侯之子将委质者，皆以双武之皮，卿大夫豹饰，列大夫豹幨。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 他们命令： 各国诸侯之子到本朝为臣的，都要穿两张虎皮做成的皮裘。国内上大夫要穿豹皮袖的皮裘，中大夫要穿豹皮衣襟的皮裘。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "They ordered that the sons of princes of various countries who came to this country to serve as subjects should wear two coats of fur made of tiger skin. In the country, the senior doctor should wear a coat of leopard skin sleeves, and the junior doctor should wear a coat of leopard skin collar.

古文：大夫散其邑粟与其财物以市虎豹之皮，故山林之人刺其猛兽若从亲戚之仇，此君冕服于朝，而猛鲁胜于外；大夫已散其财物，万人得受其流。
现代文：这样，大夫们就都卖出他们的粮食、财物去购买虎豹皮张，因此，山林百姓捕杀猛兽就象驱逐父母的仇人那样卖力。这就是说，国君只消冠冕堂皇地坐在堂上，猛兽就将被猎获于野外；大夫们散其财物，百姓都可在流通中得利。
English: In this way, the doctors all sold their grain and property to buy the skins of tigers and leopards. Therefore, the people of the mountains and forests hunted and killed the beasts of prey as hard as they drove out their parents' enemies. That is to say, the king only had to sit in the hall in all his glory, and the beast would be hunted in the wild; the doctors scattered their property, and the people could profit from the circulation.

古文：此尧舜之数也。 
现代文：这就是尧舜曾经用过的轻重之术。 
English: This is the heavy and light technique that the dragonfly once used.

古文：桓公曰，  事名二、正名五而天下治 ，何谓 事名二 ？ 
现代文：桓公说： 在 事名二正名五而天下治 这句话里，什么叫作 事名二 呢？ 
English: Kanko said, "In this sentence, 'the name of the thing is two, the name of the righteous is five, and the kingdom of heaven is at hand,' what is called 'the name of the thing is two'?

古文：对曰： 天策阳也，壤策阴也，此谓 事名二 。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 天道为阳，地道为阴，这就是事名二。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "The way of heaven is yang, and the way of earth is yin. This is the second name of things.

古文： 何谓 正名五 ？ 
现代文： 什么叫正名五呢？ 
English: What is Zhengyuan 5?

古文：对曰： 权也，衡也，规也，矩也，准也，此谓 正名五 。
现代文：回答说： 权、衡、规、矩、准，这就是正名五。
English: He answered, "Weight, measure, rule, conduct, and standard, these are the five righteous names.

古文：其在色者，青黄白黑赤也；其在声者，宫商羽徵角也；其在味者，酸辛咸苦甘也。
现代文：它们体现在颜色上，就分青、黄、白、黑、赤；体现在声音上，就分宫、商、羽、微、角；体现在味觉上，就分酸、辣、咸、苦、甜。
English: They are reflected in the color, they are divided into blue, yellow, white, black and red; they are reflected in the sound, they are divided into branch, merchant, feather, micro and horn; they are reflected in the taste, they are divided into sour, spicy, salty, bitter and sweet.

古文：二五者，童山竭泽，人君以数制之人。
现代文：这里的利用 二五 ，同上面的 童山竭泽 一样，都是人君用来控制人们的。
English: The use of "25" here, just like the above-mentioned "Children's Mountain," is used by people to control people.

古文：味者所以守民口也，声者所以守民耳也，色者所以守民目也。人君失二五者亡其国，大夫失二五者亡其势，民失二五者亡其家。
现代文：五味，是用来控制人们饮食的；五声是用来控制人们听欲的；五色，是用来控制人们观赏的。人君丢掉了 二五 ，就会亡国；大夫丢掉了 二五 ，就丧失权势；普通人丢掉了 二五 ，也不能治理一家。
English: Five tastes are used to control people's diet; five sounds are used to control people's desire to listen; five colors are used to control people's viewing. If a prince loses twenty-five, he will lose the country; if a doctor loses twenty-five, he will lose power; if an ordinary person loses twenty-five, he cannot govern a family.

古文：此国之至机也，谓之国机。 
现代文：这是国家国家最重要的，所以叫作 国机 。 
English: This is the most important thing for the country, so it is called the national machine.

古文：轻重之法曰： 自言能为司马不能为司马者，杀其身以衅其鼓；自言能治田土不能治田土者，杀其身以衅其社；自言能为官不能为官者，劓以为门父。 
现代文：轻重家的法典上讲： 自己说能作司马的官，但作起来不称职的，就杀掉他以血祭鼓；自己说能作农业的官，但作起来不称职的，就杀掉他以血祭祀社神；自己说能作一般官吏，但作起来不称职的，就砍掉他的双脚罚他守门。 
English: According to the code of the most important family members: If you say that you can be an official of Sima, but you are not competent, you will kill him with a blood sacrifice drum; if you say that you can be an official of agriculture, but you are not competent, you will kill him with a blood sacrifice to the social god; if you say that you can be a general official, but you are not competent, you will cut off his feet and punish him for guarding the door.

古文：故无敢奸能诬禄至于君者矣。
现代文：这样，就不会有人敢在君主面前吹嘘自己以骗取禄位了。
English: In this way, no one would dare to boast in front of the monarch that he had cheated his way to the throne.

古文：故相任寅为官都，重门击柝不能去，亦随之以法。
现代文：这样，无论被人推荐当官的，或者守门小事都不称职的，也都可以依法处理了。
English: In this way, no matter who is recommended to be an official, or who is incompetent in gatekeeping, they can also be dealt with according to law.

古文：桓公问于管子曰， 请问大准。 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 请问失准的问题。 
English: When Kan Gong asked Guanzhong, he said, "Please stop asking inaccurate questions.

古文：管子对曰： 大准者，天下皆制我而无我焉；此谓大准。 
现代文：管仲回答说； 失准就是天下各国都控制我们，而我们无能为力，这就叫作失准。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "To be inaccurate means that all countries in the world control us, and we can do nothing. This is called being inaccurate."

古文：桓公曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这是什么意思呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What does this mean?

古文：管子对曰： 今天下起兵加我，臣之能谋厉国定名者，割壤而封；臣之能以车兵进退成功立名者，割壤而封。
现代文：管仲回答说： 如果天下各国起兵进攻我们，对于凡能谋划利国定民的大臣，就要割地而封；凡能作战成功立名的大臣，也要割地而封。
English: Guanzhong replied: "If all the countries in the world raise their armies to attack us, any minister who can plan to benefit the country and settle the people will have his land confiscated; any minister who can succeed in battle will also have his land confiscated.

古文：然则是天下尽封君之臣也，非君封之也。
现代文：这样。实际上是天下在封赏您的大臣了，而不是您本人封赏。
English: So, in fact, it is the world that is rewarding your minister, not you personally.

古文：天下已封君之臣十里矣，天下每动，重封君之民二十里。
现代文：天下已经使您把十里土地封给大臣，而随着天下每一次动兵，又要把二十里土地再次 封给 富民商人。
English: The world has already made you grant ten li of land to the minister, and with every time the world mobilizes, it will again grant twenty li of land to the rich merchant.

古文：君之民非富也，邻国富之。
现代文：您国的富民不是您使他发财致富，而是天下使他们致富。
English: The rich people in your country are not made rich by you, but by the world.

古文：邻国每动，重富君之民，贫者重贫，富者重富。失准之数也。 
现代文：邻国每动一次兵，都会造成您国的富民商人多发一次财，最后导致贫者更贫，富者更富，这就是失准的必然结局。 
English: Every time a neighboring country mobilizes troops, it will cause your country's rich businessmen to make more money, and eventually lead to the poor getting poorer and the rich getting richer. This is the inevitable result of miscalculation.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这又是什么意思呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What does this mean?

古文：管子对曰： 今天下起兵加我，民弃其耒耜，出持戈于外，然则国不得耕。此非天凶也，此人凶也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 如果天下各国出兵攻打我国，百姓放下农具，拿起武器出外打仗，那么举国不能种地，就不是天灾，而是人祸。
English: Guanzhong replied: "If all the countries in the world send troops to attack our country, and the people put down their farm tools and take up weapons to fight abroad, then the whole country cannot farm the land. This is not a natural disaster, but a man-made disaster.

古文：君朝令而夕求具，民肆其财物与其五谷为雠，厌而去。
现代文：国君在战时，早晨下令征税晚上就要交齐，百姓只好抛卖财物、粮食，折价一半脱手。
English: During wartime, the sovereign decreed in the morning that taxes must be paid in full by the evening, and the people had no choice but to sell their property and grain at half price.

古文：贸人受而廪之，然则国财之一分在贾人。
现代文：商人买进而加以囤积，那么， 国内的一半财货就到了商人手中。
English: Merchants buy them and then hoard them, so half of the country's goods end up in the hands of merchants.

古文：师罢，民反其事，万物反其重。
现代文：战争结束，百姓复归旧业，物价会回到战前水平。
English: When the war is over, people will return to their old jobs, and prices will return to pre-war levels.

古文：贾人出其财物，国币之少分廪于贾人。
现代文：商人在此时售出他所囤积的财物，可以把国内市场一少半的货币积藏在自己手里。
English: At this time, the merchant sold the property he had hoarded and was able to keep a small amount of money from the domestic market in his own hands.

古文：若此则币重三分，财物之轻重三分，贾人市于三分之间，国之财物尽在贾人，而君无策焉。
现代文：这样一来，币值可以提高十分之三，货物价格可以下跌十分之三。商人就在这贵贱十分之三中买来卖去，国家财物将全部落入商人之手，国君是束手无策的。
English: In this way, the value of the currency can be increased by three-tenths, and the price of goods can be reduced by three-tenths. Merchants buy and sell in this high and low three-tenths, and the national wealth will all fall into the hands of merchants. The sovereign is helpless.

古文：民更相制，君无有事焉。此轻重之大准也。 
现代文：百姓贫富之间不断地互相奴役，国君无能为力，这些就是轻重的失准。 
English: The people, rich and poor, are constantly enslaving each other, and the sovereign is powerless. These are serious inaccuracies.

古文：管子曰： 人君操本，民不得操末；人君操始，民不得操卒。
现代文：管仲说： 人君掌握了本，富民商人就抓不到末；人君掌握了开始，富民商人就抓不到结局。
English: Guanzhong said: If you grasp the beginning, you cannot grasp the end; if you grasp the middle, you cannot grasp the end.

古文：其在涂者，籍之于衢塞；其在谷者，守之春秋；其在万物者，立赀而行。
现代文：对于贩运过程的商品，必须在通衢要道市场上谋取收入；对于粮食，必须在春秋两季来掌握；对于其他物质，则订立预购合同。
English: For goods in the process of trafficking, it is necessary to seek income in the main market; for grain, it is necessary to grasp it in the spring and autumn; for other substances, it is necessary to conclude a pre-purchase contract.

古文：故物动则应之。
现代文：这样，商品一动，措施就跟上去。
English: In this way, as soon as the goods move, the measures will follow.

古文：故豫夺其涂，则民无遵；君守其流。则民失其高。
现代文：预先阻断买卖的途径，商人就无法行事；君主控制流通，商人就无法太高物价。
English: If the means of buying and selling are blocked in advance, the merchants cannot act; if the monarch controls the circulation, the merchants cannot raise prices too high.

古文：故守四方之高下，国无游贾，贵贱相当，此谓国衡；以利相守，则数归于君矣。 
现代文：所以，掌握好各地物价的涨落，国内没有投机商人，商品贵贱相当，这就叫作 国衡 。能够用理财之法来掌握，财利就自然归于君主了。 
English: Therefore, to have a good grasp of the rise and fall of prices in various regions, there are no speculators in the country, and the goods are relatively high and low, which is called the national balance. If it can be mastered by the method of financial management, the financial gain will naturally belong to the monarch.

古文：管子曰： 善正商任者省有肆，省有肆则市朝闲，市朝闲则田野充，田野充则民财足，民财足则君赋敛焉不穷。
现代文：管仲说： 善于管理商业的，就要由国家同时办商业；国家办商业，市场就清淡冷落；市场清淡冷落，农业劳动力就充足；农业劳力充足，百姓财物就丰富；百姓财物丰富，君主的税收就取之不竭了。
English: Guanzhong said: If you are good at managing business, the state should also run business; if the state runs business, the market will be light and cold; if the market is light and cold, agricultural labor will be sufficient; if agricultural labor is sufficient, the people's property will be abundant; if the people's property is abundant, the monarch's tax revenue will be inexhaustible.

古文：今则不然，民重而君重，重而不能轻；民轻而君轻，轻而不能重。
现代文：现在的情况则不然，商人贵卖，君主跟着贵买，贵而不能使之贱；商人贱卖，君主跟着贱买。贱而不能使之贵。
English: The present situation is different. Merchants sell at a high price, the sovereign buys at a high price, and cannot make it cheap. Merchants sell at a low price, the sovereign buys at a low price, and cannot make it expensive.

古文：天下善者不然，民重则君轻，民轻则君重，此乃财余以满不足之数也。
现代文：天下善于管理的不是这样，私商卖贵则国家商业卖得贱，私商买贱则国家商业买得贵。这乃是损有余以补不足的理财方法。
English: It is not the case that the world is good at management. If a private trader sells expensive goods, the national commerce will be sold cheaply, and if a private trader buys cheap goods, the national commerce will be bought expensively. This is a financial management method that loses more than it gains.

古文：故凡不能调民利者，不可以为大治。不察于终始，不可以为至矣。
现代文：所以，凡国家不能调剂民财，就不能做到大治；不洞察商业始终，就不能把管理做得最好。
English: Therefore, where the state cannot adjust the people's wealth, it cannot achieve great governance; if it does not always understand business, it cannot do the best management.

古文：动左右以重相因，二十国之策也；盐铁二十国之策也；锡金二十国之策也。
现代文：由国家掌握利用物价涨跌，可取相当二十个财政年度的收入；由国家经营盐铁商业，也可取得相当二十个财政年度的收入；由国家经营锡金商业，又可取得相当二十年财政年度的收入。
English: If the state controls the rise and fall of prices, it can obtain income equivalent to twenty fiscal years; if the state operates the salt and iron business, it can also obtain income equivalent to twenty fiscal years; if the state operates the Sikkim gold business, it can also obtain income equivalent to twenty fiscal years.

古文：五官之数；不籍于民。 
现代文：这五种官商的理财之道，都不是向民间直接征税的。 
English: These five ways of financial management of government and business are not from direct taxation to the people.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 轻重之数恶终？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 轻重之术何时终止？ 
English: Kan Gong asked Guanzhong, "When will the heavy and light martial arts end?"

古文：管子对曰： 若四时之更举，无所终。
现代文：管仲回答说： 有如四季周而复始的运转一样，没有终止之时。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Like the cycle of the four seasons, there is no time when it ends.

古文：国有患忧，轻重五谷以调用，积余臧羡以备赏。
现代文：当国家遭遇战争忧患时，就调节粮价高低来解决国家用度，积累余财赢利来筹备战士奖赏。
English: When the country was in the throes of war, grain prices were adjusted to meet the needs of the country, and surplus money and profits were accumulated to reward soldiers.

古文：天下宾服，有海内，以富诚信仁义之士，故民高辞让，无为奇怪者，彼轻重者，诸侯不服以出战，诸侯宾服以行仁义。 
现代文：当天下归服海内统一时，就加富诚信仁义的人士，使百姓崇尚礼让，而不搞轨外的活动。可见，轻重之术的用处，在各诸侯国尚不则帧时，可以为战争服务；在各诸侯国归顺时，就可用来推行仁义的政教。 
English: When the whole world submitted to the unification at sea, it enriched the people of integrity, benevolence and righteousness, and made the people advocate courtesy, rather than engage in off-track activities. It can be seen that the use of light and heavy techniques can be used for war service when the various states are still different; when the various states submit, it can be used to promote benevolence and righteousness.

古文：管子曰： 一岁耕，五岁食，粟贾五倍。一岁耕，六岁食，粟贾六倍。
现代文：管仲说： 要做到一年耕种，够五年吃，就把粮价提高五倍来促进；要做到一年耕种，够六年吃，就把粮价提高六倍来促进。
English: Guanzhong said, "If we want to make one year of farming be enough to eat for five years, we should increase grain prices fivefold to promote it; if we want to make one year of farming be enough to eat for six years, we should increase grain prices sixfold to promote it."

古文：二年耕而十一年食。
现代文：果能这样，两年耕作的产量就可能够十一年的消费了。
English: In this way, the output of two years of cultivation may be enough for eleven years of consumption.

古文：夫富能夺，贫能予，乃可以为天下。
现代文：对富者能够夺取，对贫者能够给予，才能够主持天下。
English: If you can take from the rich and give to the poor, then you can rule the world.

古文：且天下者，处兹行兹，若此而天下可壹也。
现代文：而对天下的人们，能使之安于这项政策，遵行这项政策，这样，就可以统一调度了。
English: And for the people around the world, if they can be made comfortable with this policy and follow this policy, then we can have unified scheduling.

古文：夫天下者，使之不使，用之不用。
现代文：对于天下的人们，驱使他们不要明白表示驱使，利用他们不要明白表示利用。
English: For people around the world, drive them not to express drive clearly, and use them not to express use clearly.

古文：故善为天下者，毋曰使之，使不得不使；毋曰用之，用不得不用也。 
现代文：因此，善治天下的君主，不直接说出驱使的语言，使百姓不得不为所驱使；不直接说出利用的语言，使百姓不得不为所利用。 
English: Therefore, the monarch who governs the world well does not directly speak the language of driving, so that the people have to be driven; does not directly speak the language of use, so that the people have to be used.

古文：管子曰： 善为国者，如金石之相举，重钧则金倾。
现代文：管仲说： 善于主持国家的，就象把黄金和秤锤放在天秤上一样，只要加重秤锤，金子就能够倾跌下来。
English: Guanzhong said: "Being good at presiding over the country is like putting gold and a balance hammer on a balance scale. As long as you increase the weight of the balance hammer, the gold can fall down.

古文：故治权则势重，治道则势羸。
现代文：所以，讲求通权达变则国家力量强盛，讲求遵循常道则国家力量衰弱。
English: Therefore, the country's strength is strong when it seeks to achieve the right to change, and weak when it seeks to follow the normal way.

古文：今谷重于吾国，轻于天下，则诸侯之自泄，如原水之就下。
现代文：现在，粮食在我国价高，在其他诸侯国价低，各国的粮食就象水源向下一样流入我国。
English: At present, grain prices are high in our country, but low in other principalities. Grain from other countries flows into our country like water.

古文：故物重则至，轻则去。有以重至而轻处者，我动而错之，天下即已于我矣。
现代文：所以，价格高则财货聚来，价格低则财货散走，有因高价聚来而跌价尚未散走的物资，我们及时动手掌握之，天下的这项财富就归于我们了。
English: Therefore, if the price is high, the goods will be gathered, if the price is low, the goods will be dispersed, and if there are materials that have not been dispersed due to the high price, we will grasp them in time, and this wealth of the world will belong to us.

古文：物臧则重，发则轻，散则多。
现代文：把财货囤积起来则价格上涨，发售出去则价格下降，放散于民间则显得充足。
English: If goods are hoarded, prices will rise, if they are sold, prices will fall, and if they are dispersed among the people, there will be plenty.

古文：币重则民死利，币轻则决而不用，故轻重调于数而止。 
现代文：钱币贵重则人们拼命追求，钱币贬值则人们弃而不用。所以，总是要把钱物贵贱的幅度调整到合乎理财之术的要求而后止。 
English: People desperately pursue high-valued coins, and people discard depreciated coins. Therefore, it is always necessary to adjust the range of high and low values to meet the requirements of financial management.

古文： 五谷者，民之司命也；刀币者，沟渎也；号令者，徐疾也。 令重于宝，社稷重于亲戚 ，胡谓也？ 
现代文： 粮食，是人们生命的主宰；钱币，是物资流通的渠道；号令，是控制经济过程缓急的。所谓 号令重于宝物，社稷重于父母 ，这些话都是什么意思呢？ 
English: Grain is the mainstay of people's lives; money is the channel for the circulation of goods; and orders are given to control the economic process. So-called orders are more important than treasures, society is more important than parents, what do all these words mean?

古文：对曰： 夫城郭拔，社稷不血食，无生臣。亲没之后，无死子。
现代文：回答说： 当城郭陷落，国家宗庙不能继续血食时，大臣都要殉难；但父母死亡，却没有殉死的儿子。
English: He answered: When the city walls fall and the national ancestral temple cannot continue to feed on blood, the ministers will all be martyred; but when parents die, there is no martyred son.

古文：此社稷之所重于亲戚者也。
现代文：这就是社稷重于父母的例证。
English: This is an example of society taking precedence over parents.

古文：故有城无人，谓之守平虚；有人而无甲兵而无食，谓之与祸居。 
现代文：而且，卫国者有人而无城，等于是空守平墟；有人而无武器和粮食，也只是与灾祸同居而已。 
English: Moreover, if the defenders of the country have men but no city, it is tantamount to guarding empty ruins; if they have men but no weapons and food, they are just living with disaster.

古文：桓公问管子曰： 吾闻海内玉币有七策，可得而闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我听说海内珍贵货币的利用有七种办法，可以讲给我听听么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: I have heard that there are seven ways to use the precious currency at home. Can you tell me about them?

古文：管子对曰： 阴山之礝碈，一策也；燕之紫山白金，一策也；发、朝鲜之文皮，一策也；汝、汉水之右衢黄金，一策也；江阳之珠，一策也；秦明山之曾青，一策也；禺氏边山之玉，一策也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 使用阴山所产的需，是一种办法；使用燕地紫山所产的白银，是一种办法；使用发和朝鲜所产带花纹的皮张，是一种办法；使用汝水、汉水所产的黄金，是一种办法；使用江阳所产的珍珠，是一种办法；使用秦地明山所产的曾青，是一种办法；使用禺氏边山所产的玉石，是一种办法。
English: Guanzhong replied: It is one way to use the nectar produced by the Yin Mountains; it is one way to use the silver produced by the Zishan Mountains in Yan; it is one way to use the patterned furs produced by the Hwa and Korea; it is one way to use the gold produced by the Ru Water and the Han Water; it is one way to use the pearls produced by the Jiangyang; it is one way to use the Zengqing produced by the Ming Mountains in Qin; it is one way to use the jade produced by the mountains in the Shou Dynasty.

古文：此谓以寡为多，以狭为广。
现代文：这些都是以少掌握多，以狭掌握广的办法。
English: These are all methods of grasping more with less, and grasping more widely with narrowness.

古文：天下之数尽于轻重矣。 
现代文：天下的理财之法，莫过于轻重之术了。 
English: There is no better way to manage one's finances.

古文：桓公问于管子曰： 阴山之马具驾者千乘，马之平贾万也，金之平贾万也。吾有伏金千斤，为此奈何？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 阴山的马，可供驾驶兵车之用的有四千匹。每匹马的价格是一万钱，每斤黄金也是一万钱，我只存有黄金一千个，应当怎么办？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "There are four thousand horses in Yinshan that can be used to drive chariots. The price of each horse is ten thousand yuan, and the price of each kilo of gold is also ten thousand yuan. I only have one thousand pieces of gold. What should I do?"

古文：管子对曰： 君请使与正籍者，皆以币还于金，吾至四万，此一为四矣。
现代文：管仲回答说： 君上可以命令所有纳税的人们，必须按钱数交纳黄金。我们就可因金价上涨而得到四万钱的收入，这就一变为四了。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Your Majesty can order all tax payers to pay gold according to the number of money. We can get an income of forty thousand dollars due to the rise in the price of gold, which will become four.

古文：吾非埏埴摇炉櫜而立黄金也，今黄金之重一为四者，数也。
现代文：我们并没有使用冶金柑涡和鼓风炉来冶炼黄金，现在黄金之所以一变为四，只是运用理财之术的结果。
English: We did not use the metallurgical mandarin vortex and the blast furnace to smelt gold, and now the reason why gold has become four is only the result of applying the art of financial management.

古文：珠起于赤野之末光，黄金起于汝汉水之右衢，玉起于禺氏之边山。
现代文：珍珠来自赤野的末光，黄金出在汝水、汉水的右衢，玉石出在禺氏的边山。
English: Pearls come from the twilight of Akano, gold comes from the right bank of the Urusui and Hansui rivers, and jade comes from the mountains on the outskirts of Shizuoka.

古文：此度去周七千八百里，其涂远，其至阨。
现代文：这些地方估计距离周都七干八百里，路途遥远，来之不易。
English: These places are estimated to be seven to eight hundred miles away from the capital, a long way away and hard to come by.

古文：故先王度用其重而因之，珠玉为上币，黄金为中币，刀布为下币。
现代文：所以先王按其贵重程度而加以利用，规定珠玉为上币，黄金为中币，刀布为下币。
English: Therefore, the first king used it according to its degree of preciousness, stipulating that the jewel was the upper coin, the gold was the middle coin, and the knife cloth was the lower coin.

古文：先王高下中币，利下上之用。 
现代文：先王正是通过提高或降低中币黄金的币值，制约着下币刀布、上币珠玉的作用。 
English: It was by raising or lowering the monetary value of the gold in the Chinese currency that the previous king restricted the role of the knife cloth in the lower currency and the jewels in the upper currency.

古文：百乘之国，中而立市，东西南北度五十里。
现代文：百乘之国，在中央地区建立市场，离四周边境估计五十里路。
English: The country of a hundred horsemen has established a market in the central region, an estimated fifty miles from the surrounding border.

古文：一日定虑，二日定载，三日出竟，五日而反。
现代文：一天确定计划，两天装载货物，三天运出国境，五天可以来回。
English: One day to determine the plan, two days to load the goods, three days to transport them out of the country, and five days to go back and forth.

古文：百乘之制轻重，毋过五日。
现代文：百乘之国要制约邻国物价高低，不超过五天。
English: A country with a hundred advantages should restrict the rise and fall of prices in neighboring countries to no more than five days.

古文：百乘为耕田万顷，为户万户，为开口十万人，为分者万人，为轻车百乘，为马四百匹。
现代文：百乘之国，拥有耕地一万顷，户数一万户，人口十万人，有纳税义务的一万人，兵车百乘，战马四百匹。
English: A country of a hundred horsemen, with ten thousand hectares of cultivated land, ten thousand households, a population of a hundred thousand, ten thousand people with tax obligations, a hundred chariots, and four hundred horses.

古文：千乘之国，中而立市，东西南北度百五十余里。
现代文：干乘之国，在中央地区建立市场，离四周边境估计一百五十里路。
English: It is estimated that it is 150 miles away from the surrounding border.

古文：二日定虑，三日定载，五日出竟，十日而反。
现代文：两天确定计划，三天装载货物，五天运出国境，十天可以来回。
English: It takes two days to determine the plan, three days to load the goods, five days to ship out of the country, and ten days to go back and forth.

古文：千乘之制轻重，毋过一旬。
现代文：干乘之国制约邻国物价高低，不超过十天。
English: The country of transit restricts the high and low prices of neighboring countries, not exceeding ten days.

古文：千乘为耕田十万顷，为户十万户，为开口百万人，为当分者十万人，为轻车千乘，为马四千匹。
现代文：干乘之国，拥有耕地十万顷，户数十万户，人口百万人，有纳税义务的十万人，兵车千乘，战马四千匹。
English: It is a country of 100,000 hectares of cultivated land, hundreds of thousands of households, a million people, 100,000 people with tax obligations, a thousand chariots, and 4,000 horses.

古文：万乘之国，中而立市，东西南北度五百里。
现代文：万乘之国，在中央建立市场，离四周边境估计五百里路。
English: The country of Manchuria established a market in the center, an estimated five hundred miles from the surrounding border.

古文：三日定虑，五日定载，十日出竟，二十日而反。
现代文：三天确定计划，五天装载货物，十天运出国境，二十天来回。
English: Three days to determine the plan, five days to load the goods, ten days to ship out of the country, twenty days to go back and forth.

古文：万乘之制轻重，毋过二旬。
现代文：万乘之国制约邻国物价高低，不超过二十天。
English: The country of Manchuria restricts the high and low prices of neighboring countries, not exceeding twenty days.

古文：万乘为耕田百万顷，为户百万户，为开口千万人，为当分者百万人，为轻车万乘，为马四万匹。
现代文：万乘之国，拥有耕地百万顷，户数百万户，人口千万人，有纳税义务的百万人，兵车万乘，战马四万匹。
English: The country of Manchuria has a million hectares of cultivated land, millions of households, a population of ten million people, a million people with tax obligations, a million chariots, and forty thousand horses.

古文：管子曰： 匹夫为鳏，匹妇为寡，老而无子者为独。
现代文：管仲说： 单身男子叫作鳏，单身女子叫作寡，老而没有儿女的叫独。
English: Guanzhong said: A single man is called a bachelor, a single woman is called a widow, and an old man without children is called a bachelor.

古文：君问其若有子弟师役而死者，父母为独，上必葬之：衣衾三领，木必三寸，乡吏视事，葬于公壤。若产而无弟兄，上必赐之匹马之壤。
现代文：国君要调查了解凡有子弟因兵役而死亡的，父母也算作 独 ，必须由政府负丧葬之责：衣食要有三领，棺木要厚三寸，乡中官吏亲管其事，葬于公家墓地；战死者如是独生，还要赏给父母一匹马一天所能耕种的土地。
English: The sovereign must investigate and understand that if any child dies as a result of military service, the parents are also counted as "independent," and the government must be responsible for the funeral: clothing and food must have three collars, the coffin must be three inches thick, the township officials must personally take care of the matter and be buried in the public cemetery; if the war dead are only children, they must also award the parents a horse and land that can be cultivated for one day.

古文：故亲之杀其子以为上用，不苦也。
现代文：因此，作父母的即使牺牲自己的儿子为君主效力，也不引以为苦了。
English: Therefore, it is not a hardship for parents to sacrifice their sons to serve the monarch.

古文：君终岁行邑里，其人力同而宫室美者，良萌也，力作者也，脯二束、酒一石以赐之；力足荡游不作，老者谯之，当壮者遣之边戍：民之无本者贷之圃强。
现代文：国君每到年终都视察邑里，看到劳力与别户相同而住房独好的人家，一定是好百姓，是努力耕作的人，要用两束干肉、一石酒奖赏他们。对于体力充足而闲游不肯劳动的，如是老年人，则遣责之，如是壮年，则遣送边疆服役。对于无本经营农业的，则贷与土地和钱币。
English: At the end of each year, the sovereign would inspect the towns and see that the people who had the same amount of labor as other households, but better housing, must be good people and hard workers. He would reward them with two bundles of dried meat and a stone of wine. For those who were physically fit but idle and did not want to work, if they were elderly, they would be reprimanded, and if they were middle-aged, they would be sent to serve on the frontier. For those who did not engage in agriculture, they would be given land and money.

古文：故百事皆举，无留力失时之民。
现代文：由此，百业皆兴，没有懒惰和失掉农时的百姓。
English: As a result, all walks of life are thriving, and there is no laziness or people who have lost their farm time.

古文：此皆国策之数也。 
现代文：这都是国家政策的具体办法。 
English: These are all concrete measures of national policy.

古文：上农挟五，中农挟四，下农挟三。
现代文：上等劳力的农民可负担五口人吃饭，中等劳力可负担四口，下等劳力可负担三口。
English: Farmers with high-level labor can afford to feed five people, those with medium-level labor can afford four, and those with low-level labor can afford three.

古文：上女衣五，中女衣四，下女衣三。
现代文：上等劳力的妇女可供应五口人穿衣，中等劳力可供应四口，下等劳力可供应三口。
English: An upper-class woman can provide clothing for five people, a middle-class woman for four, and a lower-class woman for three.

古文：农有常业，女有常事。
现代文：农民要经常耕作，妇女要经常纺织。
English: Farmers should always be farming, and women should always be weaving.

古文：一农不耕，民有为之饥者；一女不织，民有为之寒者。
现代文：一农不耕，人民就可能有挨饿的；一女不织，人民就可能有受冻的。
English: If a farmer does not plough, the people may starve; if a woman does not weave, the people may freeze.

古文：饥寒冻饿，必起于粪土。
现代文：饥寒冻饿总是起因于土地经营。
English: Hunger, cold and frost are always caused by land management.

古文：故先王谨于其始，事再其本，民无者卖其子。
现代文：所以先王认真对待这个起因。农事收获达到成本的二倍。
English: Therefore, the late king took this cause seriously, and the agricultural harvest reached twice the cost.

古文：三其本，若为食。四其本，则乡里给。五其本，则远近通，然后死得葬矣。
现代文：农民才没有卖儿卖女的；达到三倍，才可以正常备粮吃饭；达到四倍，乡里富裕；达到五倍，则余粮远近流通，死人也得到妥善安葬了。
English: It is only when farmers do not sell their sons and daughters that they can normally prepare grain for meals; when it reaches three times, the countryside is rich; when it reaches four times, the countryside is rich; when it reaches five times, the surplus grain is distributed far and near, and the dead are also properly buried.

古文：事不能再其本，而上之求焉无止，然则奸涂不可独遵，货财不安于拘。
现代文：如果农事收入达不到成本的二倍，君主再征敛不止，那么，为非作歹的路上，单人都不敢出行，财货放在手上也不安宁了。
English: If the agricultural income does not reach twice the cost, and the monarch continues to collect more and more, then, on the way to do evil, single people will not dare to travel, and the goods will not rest in their hands.

古文：随之以法，则中内民也，轻重不调，无之民不可责理，鬻子不可得使，君失其民，父失其子，亡国之数也。
现代文：随着用法律镇压，就等于自己在残害百姓。物价失调，饥民不能管理，百姓卖出的儿子，自己不能依靠使用，君失其民，父失其子，这乃是亡国之道。
English: With the use of law to suppress, it is tantamount to killing the people. Prices are out of kilter, the hungry cannot be managed, the sons sold by the people cannot be used by themselves, the ruler loses his people, the father loses his son, this is the way to ruin the country.

古文：管子曰： 神农之数曰： 一谷不登，减一谷，谷之法什倍。二谷不登，减二谷，谷之法再十倍。 
现代文：管仲说： 神农之术告诉我们： 一种粮食无收成，则缺少一种粮食，粮食的卖价将上涨十倍；两种粮食无收成，则缺少两种粮食，粮食的卖价将上涨二十倍。 
English: Guanzhong said: Shennong's art tells us: If there is no harvest of one kind of grain, if there is a shortage of one kind of grain, the selling price of grain will increase tenfold; if there is no harvest of two kinds of grain, if there is a shortage of two kinds of grain, the selling price of grain will increase twentyfold.

古文：夷疏满之，无食者予之陈，无种者贷之新，故无什倍之贾，无倍称之民。 
现代文：遇此情况，国家应当提倡用瓜菜补充民食。而对于没有口粮的农户，由国家供给旧年的陈粮；对于没有种籽的农户，由国家贷给可用的新粮。这样，才不会出现赢利十倍的奸商，也不会出现加倍收息的高利贷者。 
English: In this case, the state should promote the use of melons and vegetables to supplement folk food. For farmers who do not have rations, the state will supply old grain; for farmers who do not have seeds, the state will lend available new grain. In this way, there will be no profiteers who make ten times the profit, and there will be no usurers who double the interest.

