古文：明元皇帝七男。
现代文：明元皇帝有七个儿子。
English: Emperor Mingyuan had seven sons.

古文：杜密皇后生世祖太武皇帝。
现代文：杜密皇后生世祖太武皇帝。
English: Empress Doumei's ancestor was Emperor Taivu.

古文：大慕容夫人生乐平戾王丕。
现代文：大慕容夫人生乐平戾王丕。
English: Mrs. Daumurong's life is going well.

古文：安定殇王弥阙母氏。
现代文：安定殇王左迩的母亲记载缺略。
English: The record of the mother of Wang Zuoqi, a stable scholar, is incomplete.

古文：慕容夫人生乐安宣王范。
现代文：慕容夫人生乐安宣王元范。
English: Mrs. Murong's life is a happy one.

古文：尹夫人生永昌庄王健。
现代文：尹夫人生永昌庄王元健。
English: Mrs. Yin's life is forever changed by Mr. Wang Yuanjian.

古文：建宁王崇、新兴王俊二王，并阙母氏。
现代文：建宁王元崇、新兴王五俊二王，母亲的记载都缺略。
English: Jianning Wang, Yuan Chong, and the emerging Wang Wujun are the two kings, but the records of their mothers are omitted.

古文：乐平王丕，少有才干，为世所称。
现代文：乐平王元丕，年轻时有才干，为世人所称赞。
English: Leping Wang Yuanjun, who was talented when he was young, was praised by the world.

古文：太宗以丕长，爱其器度，特优异之。
现代文：太宗因元丕年长，喜爱他的才能气量，格外优待看重他。
English: Emperor Taizong, who was fond of Yuan Xuan's talent and energy due to his advanced age, treated him with special favor.

古文：泰常七年封，拜车骑大将军。
现代文：泰常七年封为王，任命乌车骑大将军。
English: After seven years of service, Tai Chang was appointed as the General of Chariot and Cavalry.

古文：后督河西、高平诸军讨南秦王杨难当，军至略阳，禁令齐肃，所过无私，百姓争致牛酒。
现代文：后来统领黄河以西、高平各军讨伐南秦王杨难当，军队到达略阳，令行禁止整齐严肃，所过之处没有私人行动，百姓争相送牛酒。
English: Later, he led the armies west of the Yellow River and Gaoping to fight against the Southern Qin King Yang Nantang. When the army reached Liaoyang, he ordered that the march should be orderly and serious, and there should be no private actions in the places they passed. The people rushed to send cattle wine.

古文：难当惧，还仇池。
现代文：难当畏惧，回到仇池。
English: Yang Nandong was very scared, so he retreated back to Qiuchi.

古文：而诸将议曰： 若不诛豪帅，军还之后，必聚而为寇；又以大众远出，不有所掠，则无以充军实，赏将士。 
现代文：逭时各将领议论说，如果不诛杀他们的头领，军队返回以后，必定聚集为贼寇，又认为大军远出，不有所掳掠，就无法来充实军用物资，赏赐将士。
English: At that time, the generals argued that if they did not fight and kill their leaders, after the army returned, they would certainly gather as thieves and robbers. They also believed that the great army was far away, and if there was no plunder, they could not replenish military supplies and reward soldiers.

古文：将从之。
现代文：元丕将要听从将领们的意见。
English: Yuan Shao was going to listen to the generals.

古文：时中书侍郎高允参丕军事，谏曰： 今若诛之，是伤其向化之心，恐大军一还，为乱必速。 
现代文：遣时中书侍郎高允参谋元丕的军队事务，规劝说： 现在如果诛杀他们，是损伤他们归向教化的心意，恐怕大军一返回，必定马上作乱。 
English: Gao Yun, the chief of the General Staff of the Yuan Dynasty, who was in charge of military affairs at the time of the dispatch, advised: If we kill them now, it will damage their will to convert to Christianity. I am afraid that as soon as the great army returns, it will immediately cause trouble.

古文：丕以为然，于是绥怀初附，秋毫无犯。
现代文：元丕以为他说得对，于是安抚怀柔新归附的人，秋毫无犯。
English: Yuan Shao thought he was right, so he appeased Huairou's new adherents, and there was no fall.

古文：初，冯弘之奔高丽，世祖诏遣送之。高丽不遣。世祖怒，将讨之。
现代文：当初，冯弘投奔高丽，世祖诏令遣返遇弘，直丽不遣送，世担发怒，将要讨伐产麈。
English: At the beginning, Feng Hongtou went to Goryeo, the emperor issued an edict to repatriate Fang Hongtou, but did not send Naoli. The emperor was angry and was going to crack down on the imperial concubines.

古文：丕上疏，以为和龙新定，宜优复之，使广修农殖，以饶军实，然后进图，可一举而灭。
现代文：亘至上奏疏，认为安定，应该优待免除赋役，使农民广泛修治农田，来充实军用物资，然后进军图取，可一举消灭高丽。
English: For a long time, it has been said that stability should be given preferential treatment and exempted from military service, so that farmers can extensively cultivate farmland to enrich military supplies, and then march to take pictures, which can eliminate Korea at one stroke.

古文：帝纳之，乃止。
现代文：皇帝采纳他的意见，于是作罢。
English: The emperor took his advice and put a stop to the idea of collecting taxes.

古文：后坐刘洁事，以忧薨。
现代文：元丕后来因刘洁的事获罪，忧郁而死。
English: Yuan Xuan was later found guilty of Liu Jie's murder and died of depression.

古文：事在《洁传》。
现代文：事情记载在《刘洁传》。
English: The incident was recorded in "Liu Jie Biographies."

古文：谥曰戾王。
现代文：谧号为戾王。
English: His posthumous name was Shao Wang.

古文：子拔，袭爵。
现代文：儿子元拔，继承爵位。
English: His son, Genpaku, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：后坐事赐死，国除。
现代文：后来因事获罪被赐令自杀，封国削除。
English: Later, he was sentenced to death for the incident, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：丕之薨及日者董道秀之死也，高允遂著《筮论》曰： 昔明元末起白台，其高二十余丈，乐平王尝梦登其上，四望无所见。
现代文：为元丕的逝世和卜筮者董道秀的死，高允撰作《筮论》说： 从前明元帝末年修建白台，高有二十多丈，乐平王曾经梦见登到上面，四面张望没有见到什么。
English: Regarding the death of Yuan Shao and the death of Dong Daoxiu, the soothsayer, Gao Yun wrote "The Analects of Confucius" and said: In the last years of the Ming and Yuan Dynasties, a white platform was built, more than 20 meters high. King Leping once dreamed of climbing to the top, but when he looked around, he saw nothing.

古文：王以问日者董道秀，筮之曰： 大吉 。
现代文：王问卜筮者董道秀，道秀卜筮后说： 大为吉祥。 
English: The king asked Dong Daoxiu, the soothsayer, and Dong Daoxiu said, "This is very auspicious.

古文：王默而有喜色。
现代文：王不出声而有欢喜的神色。
English: King Leping was silent, but his face was radiant with joy.

古文：后事发，王遂忧死，而道秀弃市。
现代文：后来事情泄露，王因之忧虑而死，而道秀被斩首示众。
English: Later, it was revealed that Leping Wang died of grief, while Dong Daoxiu was also executed, and his body was exposed on the street.

古文：道秀若推六爻以对王曰： 《易》称 亢龙有悔 ，穷高曰亢，高而无民，不为善也。 夫如是，则上宁于王，下保于己，福禄方至，岂有祸哉？
现代文：道秀如果推算六爻来回答王说： 《周易》中说 亢龙有悔 ，高飞穷极叫做亢，高了没有民众，不是好事，假如这样，则上可安定乐乎王，下可保全自己，福禄将到，哪有祸患呢?
English: If Tao Xiu were to calculate the six elements to answer Wang, he would say: "In the Zhou Yi, it is said that the dragon has regrets, the high-flying extreme is called the dragonfly, and the high without the people is not a good thing. If this is the case, then the upper can be stable and happy, and the lower can protect itself, the fortune will come, what is the disaster?

古文：今舍于本而从其末，咎衅之至不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：现在舍弃根本而依从未节，罪过的到来不也是适宜的吗? 
English: Isn't it appropriate to abandon the fundamental principle and adhere to the principle of non-adherence now, so that the arrival of sin is also appropriate?

古文：安定王弥，泰常七年封。
现代文：安定王元弥，泰常七年封。
English: Wang Yuanya of Anding, Tai Chang seven years later.

古文：太宗讨滑台，留守京师。
现代文：太宗讨伐滑台，五迩留守京城。
English: Taizong fought against the slide, and Wuchang stayed in the capital.

古文：薨，谥殇王。
现代文：逝世，谧为疆王。
English: He died and was crowned emperor.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：没有儿子，封国被削除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：乐安王范，泰常七年封。
现代文：乐安王元范，泰常七年封。
English: Le An Wang Yuan Fan, Tai Chang seven years.

古文：雅性沉厚，宽和仁恕。
现代文：他一向性格沉稳忠厚，和顺仁恕。
English: He has always been a calm, loyal and kind person.

古文：世祖以长安形胜之地，非范莫可任者，乃拜范都督五州诸军事、卫大将军、开府仪同三司、长安镇都大将，高选才能，以为僚佐。
现代文：世祖因长安是形势优越便利的地方，非元范不能胜任，就任命元范为都督五州诸军事、卫大将军、开府仪同三司、长安镇都大将，高规格选拔有才能的人，作为僚属。
English: Because Chang'an is a place with a superior and convenient situation, if Yuan Fan is not competent, the patriarch appointed Yuan Fan as the military governor of the five states, the general of Wei, the general of Kaifu, the general of the three departments, and the general of Chang'an Town, and selected talented people with high standards as his subordinates.

古文：范谦恭惠下，推心抚纳，百姓称之。
现代文：元范谦虚恭敬地对待下属，推心置腹地安抚接纳，百姓称颂他。
English: Yuan Fan treated his subordinates humbly and respectfully, put his heart into appeasing and accepting them, and the people praised him.

古文：时秦土新罹寇贼，流亡者相继，范请崇易简之治，帝纳之。
现代文：当时三秦地区刚遭受贼寇战乱，流亡的人接连不断，元范请求崇尚简易的治理法则，皇帝采纳了他的意见。
English: At that time, the Sanqin region had just suffered from the war of thieves and robbers, and the exiles continued one after another. Yuan Fan requested that a simple rule of governance be advocated, and the emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：于是遂宽徭，与人休息。
现代文：于是就减轻徭役，给予民众休养生息的机会。
English: As a result, the work of the guards was reduced, giving the people a chance to rest and recuperate.

古文：后刘洁之谋，范闻而不告。
现代文：后来刘洁的谋划，元范听说后而不告发。
English: Later, after hearing about Liu Jie's plan, Yuan Fan did not report it.

古文：事发，因疾暴薨。
现代文：事情泄露，因病突然逝世。
English: The affair leaked out and he died suddenly due to illness.

古文：长子良。
现代文：长子元良。
English: The eldest son, Motoyoshi.

古文：世祖未有子，尝曰： 兄弟之子犹子也。 
现代文：世祖没有儿子时，曾经说： 兄弟的儿子如同儿子。 
English: When the patriarch had no son, he said, "A brother's son is a son's son."

古文：亲抚养之。
现代文：亲自抚养元良。
English: He personally raised Motoyoshi.

古文：长而壮勇多知，常参军国大计。
现代文：元良成人后强壮勇敢多智慧，时常参预军国大事。
English: After becoming an adult, Yuan Liang was strong, brave and wise, and often participated in pre-military events.

古文：高宗时，袭王。
现代文：高宗时，继承王爵。
English: At the time of Emperor Gaozong, he succeeded to the title of crown prince.

古文：拜长安镇都大将、雍州刺史，为内都大官。
现代文：被任命为长安镇都大将、雍州刺史，担任内都大官。
English: He was appointed as the general of Chang'an Town and the chief historian of Yongzhou, and served as the highest-ranking official in the Inner Capital.

古文：薨，谥曰简王。
现代文：逝世，谧号为简王。
English: After his death, his nickname was Jane Wang.

古文：永昌王健，泰常七年封。
现代文：永昌王元健，泰常七年封。
English: Yongchang Wang Yuanjian, Tai Chang seven years.

古文：健姿貌魁壮，善弓马，达兵法，所在征战，常有大功。
现代文：元健身材魁伟强壮，善于射箭骑马，通晓兵法，各处征战，时常有大功劳。
English: The former gymnasts were powerful and strong, good at archery and horseback riding, well versed in military law, fought everywhere, and often had great merits.

古文：才艺比陈留桓王，而智略过之。
现代文：才能技艺和陈留桓王相等，而智谋超过他。
English: His talents and skills are equal to those of Chen LiuKuan, but his wit surpasses him.

古文：从世祖破赫连昌，遂西略至木根山。
现代文：跟随世祖打败赫连昌，于是向西攻打到木根山。
English: He followed his ancestor to defeat Herenchang, and then attacked to the west to Mount Mugen.

古文：讨和龙，健别攻拔建德。
现代文：讨伐和龙，元健另外攻打下建德。
English: To fight against dragons, Yuan Jian also attacked and defeated Jian De.

古文：后平叛胡白龙余党于西河。世祖袭蠕蠕，越涿邪山。
现代文：后来在西河平定叛乱的胡人白龙的余党。世祖袭击蠕蠕，越过涿邪山。
English: Later, in the West River, he put down the remnants of the Hu people's rebellion against Bai Long. Shizu attacked Creep Creep and crossed the Yanzha Mountain.

古文：车驾还，诏健殿后。蠕蠕万骑追之，健与数十骑击之，矢不虚发，所中皆应弦而毙，遂退。
现代文：皇帝返回，诏令元健在后拦截，蠕蠕一万骑兵追击，元健和几十名骑兵攻打他们，箭无虚发，所射中的都随着弦声而倒仆，于是撤退。
English: When the emperor returned, he ordered Yuan Jian to intercept them, and ten thousand cavalrymen chased after them. Yuan Jian and dozens of cavalrymen attacked them. The arrows were flawless, and all of them fell to the ground with the sound of strings, so they retreated.

古文：威震漠北。
现代文：元健声威震动沙漠以北。
English: Yuan Jian Shengwei shook the north of the desert.

古文：寻从平凉州，健功居多。
现代文：不久跟随平定凉州，元健功劳为多。
English: Soon followed the pacification of Liangzhou, with Yuan Jian receiving most of the credit.

古文：又讨破秃发保周，自杀，传首京师；复降沮渠无讳。无疾薨，谥曰庄王。
现代文：又讨伐打败秃发保周，保周自杀，将他的首级传送到京城；又降伏沮渠热讳没有疾病而逝世，谧号为庄王。
English: He also fought and defeated the bald Baozhou, Baozhou committed suicide and sent his head to the capital; he also surrendered and died without illness, his nickname was Zhuangwang.

古文：子仁，袭。
现代文：儿子元仁，继承爵位。
English: His son, Motohito, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：仁亦骁勇，有父风，世祖奇之。
现代文：元仁也勇敢，有父亲的风采，世祖认为他奇特。
English: Motohito was also brave and had his father's grace. His grandfather thought he was strange.

古文：后与濮阳王闾若文谋为不轨，发觉，赐死，国除。
现代文：后来和濮阳王阎若文谋划作乱，被发觉，赐令自杀，封国削除。
English: Later, he plotted with the king of Shenyang, Yan Ruowen, to start a riot, which was discovered, he was ordered to commit suicide, and the state seal was removed.

古文：建宁王崇，泰常七年封，拜辅国将军。
现代文：建宁王崇，泰常七年封，被任命为辅国将军。
English: Jianning Wang Chong, the seventh generation of Tai Chang, was appointed as an auxiliary general.

古文：从讨北虏有功。
现代文：跟随征讨北方贼寇有功劳。
English: He is credited with following the campaign against the northern bandits.

古文：高宗时，封崇子丽济南王。
现代文：高宗时，封儿子子丽为济南王。
English: When Gaozong was in power, he made his son Zili the king of Jinan.

古文：后与京兆王杜元宝谋逆，父子并赐死。
现代文：后来和京兆王杜元宝谋反，父子都被赐令自杀。
English: Later, he plotted against the King of Jingzhao, Du Yuanbao, and both father and son were ordered to commit suicide.

古文：新兴王俊，泰常七年封，拜镇东大将军。
现代文：新兴王元俊，泰常七年封，被任命为镇束大将军。
English: The up-and-coming Wang Yuanjun, the seventh generation of Tai Chang, was appointed as the general of Zhenzhuang.

古文：少善骑射，多才艺。
现代文：年轻时善于骑马射箭，才能技艺多。
English: When he was young, he was good at horseback riding and archery.

古文：坐法，削爵为公。
现代文：因犯法，削王爵为公。
English: He was stripped of his royal title for breaking the law.

古文：俊好酒色，多越法度。
现代文：元俊喜好酒色，多违背法度。
English: Yuan Jun likes to drink alcohol, which is against the law.

古文：又以母先遇罪死，而己被贬削，恆怀怨望，颇有悖心。
现代文：又因母亲先犯罪死去，而自己被贬黜削爵，时常心怀怨恨，很有背叛的心思。
English: Also, because his mother died of a crime first, and he was demeaned and stripped of his title, he often harbored resentment and had a spirit of betrayal.

古文：后事发，赐死，国除。
现代文：后来事情泄露，被赐令自杀，封国削除。
English: Later, the affair leaked out, and he was ordered to commit suicide, and the state seal was removed.

