古文：孝昭孝昭皇帝演，字延安，神武皇帝第六子，文宣皇帝之母弟也。
现代文：孝昭皇帝高演，字延安，神武皇帝的第六个儿子，文宣皇帝的同母弟弟。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhao Gao Yuan, also known as Yan'an, was the sixth son of Emperor Shenwu and the half-brother of Emperor Wenzhen.

古文：幼而英特，早有大成之量，武明皇太后早所爱重。
现代文：小时候才智超群，很早就有能成大事的器量，武明皇太后早就宠爱看重他。
English: When he was a child, he was extremely intelligent and had the ability to achieve great things very early on. Empress Dowager Wu Ming loved and valued him from an early age.

古文：魏元象元年，封常山郡公。
现代文：魏国元象元年，封为常山郡公。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Changshan.

古文：及文襄执政，遣中书侍郎李同轨就霸府为诸弟师。
现代文：等到文襄帝执掌国政，派遣中书侍郎李同轨到霸府作弟弟们的老师。
English: When Emperor Wenxiang took charge of state affairs, he sent Li Tongliao, the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, to Bafu to be a teacher for his younger brothers.

古文：帝所览文籍，源其指归而不好辞彩。
现代文：皇帝阅读图书，弄清它的本旨而不喜欢辞采。
English: The emperor read the book to find out what it was about, but he didn't like the description.

古文：每叹云： 虽盟津之师，左骖震而不衄。 
现代文：常常感叹说： 虽然盟津的军队，左边的马震动而不致挫败。 
English: He often lamented: Although the army of Metsu, the horse on the left shook but did not cause defeat.

古文：以为能。
现代文：认为能够做到。
English: They think it can be done.

古文：遂笃志读《汉书》，至《李陵传》，恒壮其所为焉。
现代文：于是专心阅读《漠书》，读到《李陵传》，一直赞赏他的行为。
English: As a result, he read "The Book of the Desert" and "The Biography of Li Ling" intently, and has always appreciated his actions.

古文：聪敏过人，所与游处，一知其家讳，终身未尝误犯。
现代文：聪明过人，和他交游过的人，一旦知道了他们祖辈的名讳，终身不再不慎冒犯。
English: The wisest of men, and those who have been his companions, once they know the name of their forefathers, will never again offend them.

古文：同轨病卒，又命开府长流参军刁柔代之，性严褊，不适诱训之宜，中被遣出。
现代文：李同轨病死，又命令开府长流参军刁柔代替他，刁柔性格严厉偏狭，不适合诱导训诲人，中途被遣送出来。
English: Li Tongyong died of illness, and he also ordered the governor of Kaifu to join the army to replace him. Gong Rongyong's character was strict and narrow, and he was not suitable for inducing and training people. He was sent out halfway.

古文：帝送出阁，惨然敛容，泪数行下，左右莫不歔欷。
现代文：皇帝送他出门，表情悲伤，流下了眼泪，旁边的人没有不叹息的。
English: The emperor sent him out with a sad expression and shed tears, and the people around him could not help but sigh.

古文：其敬业重旧也如此。
现代文：他敬重学业重视旧交就像这样。
English: He valued his studies and valued old friendships like this.

古文：天保初，进爵为王。
现代文：天保初年，晋升爵位为王。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, he was promoted to the peerage.

古文：五年，除并省尚书令。
现代文：天保五年，授任并省尚书令。
English: In the 5th year of the Tenpo era, he was appointed to the post and issued a written order.

古文：帝善断割，长于文理，省内畏服。
现代文：皇帝善于决断，擅长文辞义理，省内的人害怕并服从他。
English: The emperor is good at decision-making, good at rhetoric and logic, and the people in the province are afraid of and obey him.

古文：七年，从文宣还邺。
现代文：天保七年，跟随文宣帝返回邺城。
English: In the seventh year of the Tenpo era, he followed Emperor Wenxuan back to Shicheng.

古文：文宣以尚书奏事，多有异同，令帝与朝臣先论定得失，然后敷奏。
现代文：文宣帝认为尚书上奏政事，有很多不一致的地方，命令皇帝和朝中大臣先讨论确定是非，然后陈述奏上。
English: Emperor Wenxuan thought that there were many inconsistencies in the record of government affairs, and ordered the emperor and the ministers of the DPRK and China to first discuss and determine the rights and wrongs, and then report the statement.

古文：帝长于政术，剖断咸尽其理，文宣叹重之。
现代文：皇帝擅长执政的方法，分析判断都合乎道理，文宣帝赞叹器重他。
English: The emperor is good at the method of governing, the analysis and judgment are reasonable, and the Emperor Wenxuan admires him.

古文：八年，转司空、录尚书事。
现代文：天保八年，转任司空、录尚书事。
English: Tenpo eight years, transferred to the Secretary of the Air Force, and recorded the records.

古文：九年，除大司马，仍录尚书。
现代文：天保九年，授任大司马，仍任绿尚书。
English: In the ninth year of the Tenpo era, he was awarded the post of Daisima, and still held the post of Green Sangshu.

古文：时文宣溺于游宴，帝忧愤表于神色。文宣觉之，谓帝曰： 但令汝在，我何为不纵乐？ 
现代文：当时文宣帝沉溺于游乐宴饮，皇帝忧伤气愤流露在表情上，文宣帝觉察到，对皇帝说： 祇要让你在，我为什么不放纵行乐? 
English: At that time, Emperor Wenzhong indulged in entertainment and feasting. The emperor's sad and angry expression showed on his face. Emperor Wenzhong noticed this and said to the emperor: If I only want you to stay, why don't I indulge in entertainment?

古文：帝唯啼泣拜伏，竟无所言。
现代文：皇帝祇是哭泣拜倒在地上，始终不说话。
English: The emperor only wept and prostrated himself on the ground, never speaking.

古文：文宣亦大悲，抵杯于地曰： 汝以此嫌我，自今敢进酒者，斩之！ 
现代文：文宣帝也十分悲伤，把酒杯推到地下说： 你以此嫌我，从今以后敢送酒来的人，斩了他! 
English: Emperor Wenxuan was also very sad, he pushed his wine glass into the ground and said, "You disgust me with this, from now on, anyone who dares to bring me wine, behead him!"

古文：因取所御杯尽皆坏弃。
现代文：于是取来所用的酒杯全都砸坏丢弃。
English: As a result, all the wine glasses used were smashed and thrown away.

古文：后益沉湎，或入诸贵贱家角力批拉，不限贵贱。
现代文：后来更加沉湎于游乐宴饮，有时到各皇亲国戚家比武搏击，不分贵贱。
English: Later, they indulged more in entertainment and feasting, and sometimes went to the relatives of the emperors to fight, regardless of rank.

古文：唯常山王至，内外肃然。
现代文：衹是常山王一到，裹裹外外都静了下来。
English: As soon as the King of Changshan arrived, everything fell silent.

古文：帝又密撰事条，将谏，其友王晞以为不可。
现代文：皇帝又秘密撰写条例，将要进谏，他的朋友王晞认为不可。
English: The emperor also secretly wrote regulations and was about to enter the palace, but his friend Wang Yao thought it was impossible.

古文：帝不从，因间极言，遂逢大怒。
现代文：皇帝没有听从，藉机会竭力劝说，于是文宣帝大怒。
English: The emperor did not listen, and took the opportunity to try to persuade him, so Emperor Wenxuan was furious.

古文：顺成后本魏朝宗室，文宣欲帝离之，阴为帝广求淑媛，望移其宠。
现代文：顺成后本来是魏朝宗室，文宣帝想要皇帝离开她，私下为皇帝广泛寻求美好的女子，希望转移他对顺成后的宠爱。
English: After Shuncheng, she was originally the imperial consort of the Wei Dynasty. Emperor Wenxuan wanted the emperor to leave her, and privately sought a beautiful woman for the emperor, hoping to transfer his favor to Shuncheng.

古文：帝虽承旨有纳，而情义弥重。
现代文：皇帝虽然接受旨意接纳，但和顺成后的情意更加深厚。
English: Although the emperor accepted the will, his feelings for Shuncheng were even deeper.

古文：帝性颇严，尚书郎中剖断有失，辄加捶楚，令史奸慝，便即考竟。
现代文：皇帝的性格十分严厉，尚书郎中分析判断有失误，就加以鞭打，令史干了不法的事，就刑讯追究。
English: The emperor's character was very severe. If any of Shang Shuro's subordinates made mistakes in their analysis and judgment, they were whipped. If any of his subordinates did something illegal, they were investigated for torture.

古文：文宣乃立帝于前，以刀环拟胁召被帝罚者，临以白刃，求帝之短，咸无所陈，方见解释。
现代文：文宣帝就让皇帝站在面前，用刀头上的环抵住皇帝的肋部。召来被皇帝惩罚的人，用刀子逼着，要求说出皇帝的不是，全都没什么可说的，才被放了出来。
English: Emperor Wenxuan let the emperor stand in front of him, and used the ring on the head of the sword to hold against the emperor's ribs. Those who were punished by the emperor were called in, forced with a knife, and asked to say whether they were the emperor's or not. They all had nothing to say, and were then released.

古文：自是不许笞箠郎中。
现代文：从此不许鞭打郎中。
English: From now on, you are not allowed to whip your child.

古文：后赐帝魏时宫人，醒而忘之，谓帝擅取，遂以刀环乱筑，因此致困。
现代文：后来文宣帝赐给皇帝魏时的宫女，醒来后忘了遣事，说是皇帝擅自带走的，于是用刀头上的环乱打一气，因此受伤。
English: Later, Emperor Wenxuan gave the imperial concubine of the Wei Dynasty to the emperor. When she woke up, she forgot to send the letter and said that the emperor had taken her away without permission. Therefore, she used the ring on the tip of the knife to strike randomly, and was injured.

古文：皇太后日夜啼泣，文宣不知所为。
现代文：皇太后日夜哭泣，文宣帝不知怎么办才好。
English: The empress dowager cried day and night, and Emperor Wenxuan did not know what to do.

古文：先是禁友王晞，乃舍之，令侍帝。帝月余渐瘳，不敢复谏。
现代文：在造之前囚禁了皇帝的朋友王晞，就放了他，让他侍奉皇帝皇帝一个多月渐渐康复，不敢再进谏。
English: Wang Yao, a friend of the emperor who had been imprisoned before the construction, was released and allowed to serve the emperor for more than a month. He gradually recovered and did not dare to enter the palace again.

古文：及文宣崩，帝居禁中护丧事，幼主即位，乃即朝班。
现代文：等到文宣帝去世，皇帝住在宫中料理丧事，幼主登帝位，于是进入朝见的班列。
English: When Emperor Wenxuan died, the emperor lived in the palace to prepare for the funeral, and the young lord ascended to the throne, so he entered the procession of the imperial court.

古文：除太傅、录尚书，朝政皆决于帝。月余，乃居藩邸，自是诏敕多不关帝。
现代文：授任太傅、录尚书，朝中政事都由孝昭帝决断，一个多月后，就住到藩王的住宅，从此皇帝的韶书命令大多和孝昭帝没有关系。
English: After the appointment of Taifu and Rokusho, the political affairs of the dynasty were decided by Emperor Xiaozhao. More than a month later, he lived in the residence of the king of the domain. From then on, most of the emperor's written orders had nothing to do with Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：客或言于帝曰： 鸷乌舍巢，必有探卵之患，今日之地，何宜屡出。 
现代文：客人有的对孝昭帝说： 惊鸟舍弃了窝，一定有被掏乌蛋的灾祸，今天的地方，怎么应该屡屡出去。 
English: Some of the guests said to Xiao Zhaodi: "If a frightened bird abandons its nest, there must be a disaster of being robbed of its eggs. In today's place, how can you go out repeatedly?"

古文：乾明元年，从废帝赴邺，居于领军府。
现代文：干明元年，跟随废帝到邺城，住在领军府。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he followed the deposed emperor to Shicheng and lived in the leader's residence.

古文：时杨愔、燕子献、可朱浑天和、宋钦道、郑子默等以帝威望既重，内惧权逼，请以帝为太师、司州牧、录尚书事；长广王湛为大司马、录并省尚书事，解京畿大都督。
现代文：当时杨情、燕子献、可朱浑天和、宋钦道、郑子默等人因孝昭帝威望已经很高，心裹害怕权力受到威胁，请求任命孝昭帝为太师、司州牧、绿尚书事；长广王高湛为大司马、绿并省尚书事，解除京畿大都督。
English: At that time, Yang Rong, Yan Zi Xian, Ke Zhu Hun Tian He, Song Qin Dao, Zheng Zi Mu and others, because the prestige of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi was already high, were afraid of the power being threatened, and requested the appointment of Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi as the Grand Master, the Governor of the State, and the Secretary of the State; Changguang Wang Gaotan as the Grand Secretary of the State, the Secretary of the State, and the Governor of the State, and the dismissal of the Governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：帝时以尊亲而见猜斥，乃与长广王期猎，谋之于野。
现代文：孝昭帝当时因是皇帝地位尊贵的亲属而被猜疑排斥，于是和长广王相约打猎，在野地裹设下计谋。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiao Zhaodi was suspected and ostracized because he was a distinguished relative of the emperor, so he made a hunting appointment with King Changguang and plotted in the field.

古文：三月甲戌，帝初上省，旦发领军府，大风暴起，坏所御车幔，帝甚恶之。
现代文：三月甲戌，孝昭帝刚刚到官署，早上从领军府出发，大风突起，刮壤了所用的车幔，孝昭帝十分憎恶。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaozhao had just arrived at the government office. In the morning, he set out from the military headquarters. A gale blew up, blowing away the cart he was using. Emperor Xiaozhao hated it very much.

古文：及至省，朝士咸集。
现代文：等到了官署，朝中官员都会集在一起。
English: When they arrive at the government office, officials from North Korea and China will gather together.

古文：坐定，酒数行，执尚书令杨愔、右仆射燕子献、领军可朱浑天和、侍中宋钦道等于坐。
现代文：坐好后，酒喝了几巡，在座位上将尚书令杨情、右仆射燕子献、领军可朱浑天和、侍中宋钦道等抓了起来。
English: After they were seated, they drank several rounds of wine. On the seats, they grabbed Shang Shuling Yang Rong, his right-hand servant, Yan Zi Xian, the leader, Zhu Hun Tianhe, and the middle-ranking waiter, Song Qin Dao.

古文：帝戎服与平原王段韶、平秦王高归彦、领军刘洪徽入自云龙门，于中书省前遇散骑常侍郑子默，又执之，同斩于御府之内。
现代文：孝昭帝穿着军服和平原王段韶、平秦王高归彦、领军刘洪徽从云龙门进入宫中，在中书省前遇到散骑常侍郑子默，又抓了起来，在御府内一起杀了。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao entered the palace from the Cloud Dragon Gate wearing a military uniform, together with the Plains King Duanzhang, the Pingqin King Gao Guihang, and the leader of the army Liu Honghui. In front of the Central Library, he met the strolling equestrian Zheng Zimiao, and caught up with him and killed him together in the imperial palace.

古文：帝至东閤门，都督成休宁抽刃呵帝。
现代文：孝昭帝来到束阁门，都督成休宁拔出刀呵斥孝昭帝。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhao came to the Sokaku Gate, the governor, Cheng Huning, drew his sword and rebuked Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：帝令高归彦喻之，休宁厉声大呼不从。
现代文：孝昭帝命令高归彦说服他，成休宁高声大叫不肯听从。
English: Xiao Zhaodi ordered Gao Guihang to persuade him, but Cheng Huining shouted loudly and refused to obey.

古文：归彦既为领军，素为兵士所服，悉皆弛仗，休宁叹息而罢。
现代文：高归彦已是领军，向来被士兵敬服，全都放下兵器，成休宁叹息著作罢。
English: Gao Guihiko is already the leader of the army, has always been respected by the soldiers, all put down their weapons, and become quiet and sighing.

古文：帝入至昭阳殿，幼主、太皇太后、皇太后并出临御坐。
现代文：孝昭帝来到昭阳殿，幼主、太皇太后、皇太后都出来坐在御座上。
English: Xiao Zhaoyi came to Zhaoyang Palace, and the young lord, the grand empress dowager, and the empress dowager all came out to sit on the throne.

古文：帝奏愔等罪，求伏专擅之辜。
现代文：孝昭帝呈奏杨情等人的罪状，为擅自杀了他们请求处罚。
English: Xiao Zhaodi presented the charges against Yang Rong and others, and asked for punishment for their unauthorized suicide.

古文：时庭中及两廊下卫士二千余人皆被甲待诏，武卫娥永乐武力绝纶，又被文宣重遇，抚刃思效。
现代文：当时庭院中和两边的走廊下卫士两千多人都穿着鉴甲等待皇帝的命令，武卫娥永乐武力超群，又受过文宣帝的优待，抚弄着刀刃正想效力。
English: At that time, more than two thousand guards in the courtyard and under the corridors on both sides were waiting for the emperor's order wearing armor-piercing armor. Wu Wei E Yong Le had superior force and received preferential treatment from Emperor Wenxuan. He was fondling the blade to be effective.

古文：废帝性吃讷，兼仓卒不知所言。
现代文：废帝本来：吃，加上事出突然不知说什么。
English: Emperor Wasteland originally: eat, plus things suddenly do not know what to say.

古文：太皇太后又为皇后誓，言帝无异志，唯去逼而已。
现代文：太皇太后又对皇太后发誓，说孝昭帝没有异心，衹是去掉威胁罢了。
English: The great empress dowager also swore to the empress dowager, saying that Emperor Xiao Zhao did not have any ulterior motives, but only wanted to remove the threat.

古文：高归彦敕劳卫士解严，永乐乃内刀而泣。
现代文：高归彦命令并慰劳卫士让他们解除戒备，娥永乐于是把刀放入刀鞘而哭泣。
English: Gao Guihang ordered and consoled the labor guards to let them disarm, and E Yongle then put the knife into the sheath and cried.

古文：帝乃令归彦引侍卫之士向华林园，以京畿军入守门阁，斩娥永乐于园。
现代文：孝昭帝于是命令产旦睦带领侍卫的士兵去茎垫鱼，派京畿的军队入宫守住合门，在华林园裹杀了娥永乐。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao then ordered Zokutan Mutsu to lead the soldiers of the guards to the stalk cushion fish, sent the army of Gyeonggi to enter the palace to guard the gate, and killed E Yongle in the Waring Garden.

古文：诏以帝为大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事，相府佐史进位一等。
现代文：下诏书任命孝昭帝为大丞相、都督中外诸军、绿尚书事，相府僚属都晋升职位一等。
English: In the following imperial edict, Emperor Xiao Zhaodi was appointed as the grand chancellor, the military governor of China and foreign countries, and the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and the cabinet ministers were all promoted to the first grade.

古文：帝寻如晋阳，有诏军国大政咸谘决焉。
现代文：孝昭帝不久到晋阳，有诏书军队和国家大事都由他来决断。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao soon arrived in Jinyang, and issued an edict that the army and national affairs would be decided by him.

古文：帝既当大位，知无不为，择其令典，考综名实，废帝恭己以听政。
现代文：孝昭帝已经占据重位，知道了没有不去做的，选择好的典章法度，综合考察名义和事实，废帝恭谨律己听取政事。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaoyi has occupied an important position, knows what not to do, chooses good regulations and laws, comprehensively examines names and facts, and listens to political affairs.

古文：太皇太后寻下令废少主，命帝统大业。
现代文：太皇太后不久下令废掉少主，命令孝昭帝继承帝位。
English: Soon after becoming empress dowager, she decreed the abolition of shoshu and ordered Emperor Xiao Zhao to succeed to the throne.

古文：皇建元年八月壬午，皇帝即位于晋阳宣德殿，大赦，改乾明元年为皇建。
现代文：皇建元年八月壬午，皇帝在晋阳宣德殿登帝位，大赦天下，改干明元年为皇建。
English: In August of the first year of the Emperor Jian, at noon, the Emperor ascended the throne at the Xuande Hall in Jinyang, pardoned the whole world, and was reappointed as the Emperor Jian for the first year of the next year.

古文：诏奉太皇太后还称皇太后，皇太后称文宣皇后，宫曰昭信。
现代文：下诏书尊奉太皇太后恢复称皇太后，皇太后称文宣皇后，宫殿名叫昭信宫。
English: According to the following imperial edict, the Empress Dowager was restored to the title of Empress Dowager, the Empress Dowager was called Empress Wensun, and the palace was named Shoshin Palace.

古文：乙酉，诏自太祖创业已来，诸有佐命功臣子孙绝灭，国统不传者，有司搜访近亲，以名闻，当量为立后；诸郡国老人各授版职，赐黄帽鸠杖。
现代文：乙酉，下诏书说：从太祖创立基业以来，各辅佐太祖的功臣子孙断绝，封国的统绪不能传下去的，有关官员搜求访问近亲，将名字奏上，应该比量立为后嗣；各郡国的老人各授版职，赐给黄帽子和鸠头手杖。
English: Second, the next imperial edict said: Since the founding of the foundation by the great-grandfather, the descendants of the heroes who assisted the great-grandfather have been cut off, and the unification of the country cannot be passed on. Relevant officials should search for and visit close relatives and record their names, and they should be set up as heirs; the elderly of each county and province should be given printing posts, and yellow hats and shantou canes should be given.

古文：又诏謇正之士并听进见陈事；军人战亡死王事者，以时申闻，当加荣赠；督将、朝士名望素高，位历通显，天保以来未蒙追赠者，亦皆录奏；又以廷尉、中丞，执法所在，绳违按罪，不得舞文弄法；其官奴婢年六十已上免为庶人。
现代文：又下诏书说：忠贞正直的人都让他们进见陈述政事；军人奉行王朝公事作战死亡的，及时申报，应该追加荣誉赠号；督将、朝士名望向来很高，职位历来很高、影响很大的，天保以来没有蒙受追赠封号的，也应该记录上奏；又因廷尉、中丞，是执行法律的职务，纠正违法惩处罪人，不得歪曲法律徇私枉法；官府奴婢年纪在六十岁以上的免为平民。
English: The imperial rescript also said that the loyal and honest people should let them come forward to present their political affairs; the military personnel who died in battle while performing the official duties of the dynasty should be reported in a timely manner, and the honorary award number should be added; the viceroy and the courtier have always been highly respected, the position has always been high and the influence is great, and those who have not received the posthumous seal number since Tianbao should also be recorded in the record; and because the courtier and the junior middle officer are the duties of enforcing the law, correcting illegalities and punishing criminals, they must not distort the law and abuse the law; the slaves of the government

古文：戊子，以太傅、长广王湛为右丞相，以太尉、平阳王淹为太傅，以尚书令、彭城王浟为大司马。
现代文：戊子，任命太傅、长广王高湛为右丞相，任命太尉、平阳王高淹为太傅，任命尚书令、茎继王直邀为大司马。
English: Wu Zi appointed Taifu, Changguang Wang Gaotan as the Minister of the Right, appointed Taifu, Pingyang Wang Gaotan as the Taifu, and appointed Shang Shuling and Zhuji Wang as the grand steward.

古文：壬辰，诏分遣大使巡省四方，观察风俗，问人疾苦，考求得失，搜访贤良。
现代文：壬辰，下韶书分别派遣大使巡视检查四方，观察民间习俗，访问人民的疾苦，探求研究得失，搜寻咨询有才德的人。
English: At that time, the imperial edict separately dispatched ambassadors to inspect the four directions, observe folk customs, visit the people's sufferings, explore the advantages and disadvantages of research, and search for talented people for consultation.

古文：甲午，诏曰： 昔武王克殷，先封两代，汉、魏、二晋，无废兹典。
现代文：甲午，下韶书说： 以前周武王打败殷朝，先封了前朝两代王，漠、魏二晋，没有废除这个制度。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the next imperial edict said: "Previously, King Zhou Wu defeated the Yin Dynasty and first sealed the two kings of the former dynasty, Mu and Wei and the Second Jin Dynasty, but did not abolish this system.

古文：及元氏统历，不率旧章。
现代文：等到元压继承国运，不再沿袭旧的规章。
English: Wait until the Yuan Dynasty succeeds the National Movement, and no longer follow the old rules.

古文：朕纂承大业，思弘古典，但二王三恪，旧说不同，可议定是非，列名条奏。
现代文：朕继承宏大的基业，想要光大古代的典制，但对前朝两代王和前代三王朝的子孙，旧有的说法不一致，可以商议定出是非，列出名单奏上。
English: I am the inheritor of a grand heritage, and I want to carry on the ancient imperial system. However, for the descendants of the two kings of the previous dynasty and the three dynasties of the previous dynasty, the old statements are inconsistent. We can discuss the rights and wrongs and make a list.

古文：其礼义体式亦仰议之。 
现代文：礼仪格式也希望商议出来。 
English: The format of the ceremony is also expected to be discussed.

古文：又诏国子寺可备立官属，依旧置生，请习经典，岁时考试。
现代文：又下韶书国子监可以设立官员属吏，按照以往安置学生，讲授研习经典，每年进行考试。
English: In addition, the State Children's Supervisor may set up an official subordinate, place students in accordance with the past, teach and study classics, and conduct examinations every year.

古文：其文襄帝所运石经，宜即施列于学馆。
现代文：那些文襄帝运来的石经，应该陈列在学馆裹。
English: Those stone sutras brought by Emperor Wenzhong should be displayed in the school hall.

古文：外州大学亦仰典司勤加督课。
现代文：外州的大学也依靠主管人督察考核。
English: Out-of-state universities also rely on superintendent inspections.

古文：丙申，诏九州勋人有重封者，听分授子弟，以广骨肉之恩。
现代文：丙申，下诏书九州立下功勋的人有大量封地的，让他们分出授给自己的子弟，以推广骨肉至亲的恩德。
English: In other words, according to the edict, the nine state meritorious people have a large number of fiefs, so they should allocate them to their children to promote the benevolence of the flesh and blood.

古文：九月壬申，诏议定三祖乐。
现代文：九月壬申，下韶书商议确定三祖的乐曲。
English: In September, Jinshin, the next imperial edict deliberated to determine the music of the three ancestors.

古文：冬十一月辛亥，立妃元氏为皇后，世子百年为皇太子。
现代文：冬十一月辛亥，立妃子元氏为皇后，世子高亘年为皇太子。
English: In the winter, in November of Xinhai, the Empress Dowager Motouji became the Empress, and the heir Takato became the Crown Prince.

古文：赐天下为父后者爵一级。
现代文：赐给天下作为父亲继承人的爵位一级。
English: Give the world a first-class knighthood to a man who has become a father and has an heir.

古文：癸丑，有司奏太祖献武皇帝庙宜奏《武德》之乐，舞《昭烈》之舞；世宗文襄皇帝庙宜奏《文德》之乐，舞《宣政》之舞；显祖文宣皇帝庙宜奏《文正》之乐，舞《光大》之舞。
现代文：癸丑，有关官员上奏太祖献武皇帝庙应该奏《武德》的音乐，跳昭烈》的舞蹈；世宗文塞皇童庙应该奏《文德》的音乐，跳《宣政》的舞蹈；颢祖文宣皇帝应该奏《文正》的音乐，跳《光大》的舞蹈。
English: The officials concerned suggested that the temple of Emperor Taizu Xianwu should play the music of "Wu De" and dance the dance of "Zhao Li"; the temple of Emperor Shizong Wensai should play the music of "Wen De" and dance the dance of "Xuan Zheng"; and the temple of Emperor Xianwu should play the music of "Wenzheng" and dance the dance of "Guan Da."

古文：诏曰可。
现代文：下韶书说可以。
English: The lower court said yes.

古文：庚申，诏以故太师尉景、故太师窦泰、故太师太原王娄昭、故太宰章武王厍狄干、故太尉段荣、故太师万俟普、故司徒蔡俊、故太师高乾、故司徒莫多娄贷文、故太保刘贵、故太保封祖裔、故广州刺史王怀十二人配飨太祖庙庭，故太师清河王岳、故太宰安德王韩轨、故太宰扶风王可朱浑道元、故太师高昂、故大司马刘丰、故太师万俟受洛干、故太尉慕容绍宗七人配飨世宗庙庭，故太尉河东王潘相乐、故司空薛脩义、故太傅破六韩常三人配飨显祖庙庭。
现代文：庚申，下诏书将已故太尉尉量、已故太师宣台、已故太师塞愿王室胆、已故太宰童亘眶匣盏、已故太尉垦茔、已故太师亘俊萱、已故司徒蓝但、已故太师产茎、已故司徒莫多娄贷文、已故太保型责、已故太保堑童旦童、已故卢州刺史王坛十三人在塞担庙配祭，已故太师清河王高岳、已故太宰安德王整轨、已故太宰迭凰王可朱浑道元、已故太师产显、已故大司马费恺、已故太师万俟受洛干、已故太尉慕容绍宗七人在世宗庙配祭，已故太尉河东王逻翅堂、已故司空整垃盏、已故太傅破六韩常三人在玺担庙配祭。
English: According to Goshun, the following imperial rescript will be issued: the late Taifu Zhiguo, the late Taifu Xuan Tai, the late Taifu Shijian, the late Taifu Shijian, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taifu Shijian, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taizai Tong, the late Taiz

古文：是月，帝亲戎北讨库莫奚，出长城，虏奔遁，分兵致讨，大获牛马，括总入晋阳宫。
现代文：遣一月，耋压童亲征向北讨伐尘墓圣，出了长城，敌人奔逃，分兵讨伐，捕获大量牛马，查验汇总后收入置屋宣。
English: In January of the following year, he led the children's parents to the north to fight against the Great Wall, the enemy fled, a detachment of soldiers fought, a large number of cattle and horses were captured, and after inspection and summary, the revenue was announced.

古文：十二月丙午，车驾至晋阳。
现代文：十二月丙午，孝昭帝到晋阳。
English: On the afternoon of December 3rd, Emperor Xiaozhao arrived in Jinyang.

古文：二年春正月辛亥，祀圆丘。
现代文：皇建二年春正月辛亥，在圆丘祭天。
English: In the spring of the second year of Emperor Jian, in the first month of Xinhai, there was a festival in the round mound.

古文：壬子，禘于太庙。
现代文：壬子，在太庙举行祭祀。
English: In Imago, a religious service was held at Taimyo.

古文：癸丑，诏降罪人各有差。
现代文：癸丑，下韶书减轻罪犯的刑罚各有差别。
English: However, there are differences in the lower court's decision to reduce the criminal's sentence.

古文：二月丁丑，诏内外执事之官从五品已上及三府主簿录事参军、诸王文学、侍御史、廷尉三官、尚书郎中、中书舍人，每二年之内各举一人。
现代文：二月丁丑，下诏书朝廷内外主管事务的官员从五品以上到三府主簿绿事参军、诸王文学、侍御史、廷尉三官、尚书郎中、中书舍人，每两年内各推举一人。
English: In February of Dingwu, the imperial edict was issued that the officials in charge of affairs inside and outside the imperial court from the Fifth Rank and above to the Three Prefectures of the Master of the Green Book, the Military, the Literature of the Kings, the Attendants and Historians, the Three Officials of the Imperial Court, the Junior Officials of the Imperial Academy, and the Junior Officials of the Chinese Academy of Letters would be elected every two years.

古文：冬十月丙子，以尚书令、彭城王浟为太保，长乐王尉粲为太尉。
现代文：冬十月丙子，任命尚书令、彭城王高澈为太保，长乐王尉粲为太尉。
English: In the winter of October, he appointed Shang Shuling, Pengcheng Wang Gaochu as Taibo, and Changle Wang Rong as Taifu.

古文：己酉，野雉栖于前殿之庭。
现代文：己酉，野鸡停留在前殿的庭院裹。
English: The pheasants stay in the courtyard of the front hall.

古文：十一月甲辰，诏曰： 朕婴此暴疾，奄忽无逮。
现代文：十一月甲辰，下诏书说： 朕被这种突发的疾病缠身，将不久于人世。
English: In the first hour of November, the next imperial edict said: "I am afflicted with this sudden illness and will soon die.

古文：今嗣子冲眇，未闲政术，社稷业重，理归上德。
现代文：现在儿子幼小，不能熟习执政的方法，国家事业重大，理应交给有高尚品德之人。
English: Now that his son is young, he cannot familiarize himself with the methods of governing, and the national cause is very important. It should be handed over to a person with high moral character.

古文：右丞相、长广王湛研机测化，体道居宗，人雄之望，海内瞻仰，同胞共气，家国所凭，可遣尚书左仆射、赵郡王睿喻旨，征王统兹大宝。
现代文：右丞相、长广王高湛穷究精微预测变化，躬行正道位在同宗，是英雄豪杰的期望，天下敬慕，同胞共愿，是家族和国家的依靠，可派遣尚书左仆射、赵郡王高散告知旨意，征召王继承帝位。
English: Wang Gaotan, the Minister of the Right, and Changguang Wang Gaotan, carefully studied the subtle changes in the forecast, and followed the correct path in the same sect. It is the expectation of the hero, the admiration of the world, the common wish of the compatriots, and the reliance of the family and the country. They can send Shangshu Zuopuxi and Zhao Guo Wang Gaoshan to inform the will and recruit the king to inherit the throne.

古文：其丧纪之礼一同汉文，三十六日悉从公除，山陵施用，务从俭约。 
现代文：丧事的礼节一律和汉文帝相同，三十六天后全按公事除丧，陵墓用品，一定从简。 
English: The etiquette of the funeral is the same as that of the Han Emperor. Thirty-six days later, the funeral will be conducted in accordance with official business, and the mausoleum supplies must be simple.

古文：先是帝不豫而无阙听览，是月，崩于晋阳宫，时年二十七。
现代文：在这之前皇帝身体患病而没有中断听取观览政事，当月，在晋阳宫去世，当时年纪二十七岁。
English: Prior to this, the emperor had been suffering from a physical illness and had not stopped listening to the political affairs. That month, he died at the Jinyang Palace, at the age of twenty-seven.

古文：大宁元年闰十二月癸卯，梓宫还邺，上谥曰孝昭皇帝。
现代文：大宁元年闰十二月癸卯，棺椁回到邺城，谧号叫孝昭皇帝。
English: In the intercalary December of the first year of the Danying Dynasty, the coffin returned to Shicheng. His posthumous name was Emperor Xiaozhao.

古文：庚午，葬于文靖陵。
现代文：庚午，安葬在文靖陵。
English: He was buried in the Wenjing Mausoleum at noon.

古文：帝聪敏有识度，深沉能断，不可窥测。
现代文：孝昭帝聪明有见识和器度，沉着持重能作出决断，不可窥伺揣测。
English: Xiao Zhaodi is intelligent, insightful and well-mannered, and can make decisions with composure and weight. It is impossible to speculate.

古文：身长八尺，腰带十围，仪望风表，迥然独秀。
现代文：身高八尺，腰阔十围，仪表风度，和常人绝然不同。
English: He is eight feet tall, has a waist ten times wider, and his appearance and demeanor are completely different from those of ordinary people.

古文：自居台省，留心政术，闲明簿领，吏所不逮。
现代文：自从位居尚书台，留心执政的方法，熟悉簿册文书，官吏都赶不上。
English: Since the reign of Shang Shudi, pay attention to the method of governing, familiar with the books and documents, officials can not keep up.

古文：及正位宸居，弥所克励。
现代文：等到登帝位住在宫中，更加刻苦努力。
English: Wait until the emperor lives in the palace, and work harder.

古文：轻徭薄赋，勤恤人隐。
现代文：减轻徭役降低赋税，关心人民的疾苦。
English: We will reduce the number of bureaucrats, lower taxes, and show concern for the suffering of the people.

古文：内无私宠，外收人物，虽后父位亦特进无别。
现代文：对内没有个人的宠爱，对外收揽人才，即使是皇后的父亲官位也是特进没有特别。
English: There is no personal favouritism within the country, and talent is recruited from abroad. Even the position of the father of the empress is a special promotion, nothing special.

古文：日昃临朝，务知人之善恶，每访问左右，冀获直言。
现代文：太阳偏西时仍在朝廷处理政事，一定要知道人的好壤，每次咨询身边的人，希望得到直截了当的话。
English: When the sun is in the west, the imperial court is still dealing with political affairs. It is necessary to know the good soil of people, consult the people around you every time, and hope to get straightforward words.

古文：曾问舍人裴泽在外议论得失。
现代文：曾经问舍人裴泽外面如何议论朝政的得失。
English: I once asked my colleague, Baize, how the outside world discussed the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：泽率尔对曰： 陛下聪明至公，自可远侔古昔，而有识之士，咸言伤细，帝王之度，颇为未弘。 
现代文：裴泽急急忙忙地回答说： 陛下聪明而最为公正，自然可以远和古代的圣明帝王相比，可是有识之士，都说不足是琐碎，帝王的大度，很是没有得到弘扬。 
English: Pei Ze hurriedly replied, "Your Majesty is the wisest and most just, and naturally can be compared to the ancient Emperor Shengming. However, people with insight say that the shortcomings are trivial, and the magnanimity of the emperor has not been promoted.

古文：帝笑曰： 诚如卿言。
现代文：孝昭帝笑着说： 果然像卿所说的。
English: Xiao Zhaodi said with a smile: It is indeed as you said.

古文：朕初临万机，虑不周悉，故致尔耳。
现代文：朕刚开始处理众多的政事，考虑不周全，所以导致了这种情况。
English: I've just been in the machine, and I'm always worried that I'm not thoughtful enough, so that's what caused this situation.

古文：此事安可久行，恐后又嫌疏漏。 
现代文：这种事怎么可以长久地进行下去，恐怕以后又嫌疏忽遗漏。 
English: How can this style of handling things too meticulously be allowed to go on for so long? I will change it as I see fit, but I'm afraid that in the future I will be accused of being negligent in my dealings.

古文：泽因被宠遇。
现代文：裴泽因此受到恩宠优待。
English: As a result, Baizhe was favored with preferential treatment.

古文：其乐闻过也如此。
现代文：他乐意听到自己的过失就像这样。
English: He likes to hear his mistakes like that.

古文：赵郡王睿与厍狄显安侍坐，帝曰： 须拔我同堂弟，显安我亲姑子，今序家人礼，除君臣之敬，可言我之不逮。 
现代文：赵郡王高敷和犀狄颢安陪着孝昭帝坐着。孝昭帝说： 须拔是我的堂弟，显安是我姑妈的儿子，今天依照一家人的礼节，不用君臣之间的恭敬严肃，可以说说我的不足。 
English: Zhao County's Wang Gao Jiki and his son Di Yu'an sat next to Xiao Zhaotong. Xiao Zhaotong said, "Subar is my cousin, Xian An is my aunt's son. Today, according to the family's etiquette, we don't need to be respectful and serious between the monarchs and the ministers. It can be said that this is my shortcoming."

古文：显安曰： 陛下多妄言。 
现代文：库狄显安说： 陛下多说假话。 
English: Kudisyanian said, "Your majesty is always saying things that are not true.

古文：曰： 若何？ 
现代文：孝昭帝说： 怎么回事呢? 
English: Xiao Zhaodi said: What's going on?

古文：对曰： 陛下昔见文宣以马鞭挞人，常以为非，而今行之，非妄言耶？ 
现代文：犀狄显安回答说： 陛下以前看见文宣帝用马鞭打人，一直认为不对，可是现在这样做，不是假话吗? 
English: His son Di Xian'an replied, "Your Majesty, you have seen Emperor Wenxuan whip people with a horse before, and always thought it was wrong, but isn't it a lie to do so now?

古文：帝握其手谢之。
现代文：孝昭帝握着他的手表示感谢。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao shook his hand and thanked him.

古文：又使直言。
现代文：又让他有话直接说出来。
English: And let him have something to say directly.

古文：对曰： 陛下太细，天子乃更似吏。 
现代文：库狄显安回答说： 陛下太琐碎，身为天子却更像个官吏。 
English: Kudisyanian replied: "Your majesty is too petty. As the son of heaven, he is more like a bureaucrat.

古文：帝曰： 朕甚知之，然无法来久，将整之以至无为耳。 
现代文：孝昭帝说： 朕深深地知道遣一点，可是没有法度由来已久，将整顿后而达到无为而治了。 
English: Xiao Zhaodi said: I am deeply aware of one point, but there has been no law for a long time. After rectification, there will be no action.

古文：又问王晞，晞答如显安，皆从容受纳。
现代文：又询问王晞，王晞回答的如同库狄显安，都表情平静地接受下来。
English: He also asked Wang Yao, and Wang Yao answered like Cudi Xian'an, with a calm acceptance.

古文：性至孝，太后不豫，出居南宫，帝行不正履，容色贬悴，衣不解带，殆将四旬。
现代文：天性十分孝顺，太后患病，出来住在南宫，孝昭童走起路来脚步歪歪倒倒，面容神色憔悴，睡觉没脱遇衣服，大约将近四十天。
English: His nature is very filial. When the empress dowager fell ill, she went to live in the Southern Palace. Xiao Zhaodong walked with a lopsided gait, his face was haggard, and he slept without taking off his clothes for nearly forty days.

古文：殿去南宫五百余步，鸡鸣而去，辰时方还，来去徒行，不乘舆辇。
现代文：宫殿距离南宫五百多步，孝昭帝鸡叫时去，到辰时才回来，来去都是步行，不乘坐车子。
English: The palace is more than five hundred steps away from the South Palace. Xiao Zhaotian would go when the rooster crowed, and would only return when it was time. He would come and go on foot, and did not take a car.

古文：太后所苦小增，便即寝伏閤外，食饮药物尽皆躬亲。
现代文：太后的病痛略有增加，就睡在门外，饮食药物全都亲自侍候。
English: As the illness of the empress dowager increased slightly, she slept outside the door, and all the food and medicine were personally served.

古文：太后常心痛不自堪忍，帝立侍帷前，以爪掐手心，血流出袖。
现代文：太后经常心痛得不能忍受，孝昭帝站在床帷前伺候，用手指掐手心，血流出了袖子。
English: The Empress Dowager often suffered unbearable heartache. Emperor Xiao Zhaodi stood in front of the bed curtain and rubbed his hands with his fingers until the blood flowed out of his sleeves.

古文：友爱诸弟，无君臣之隔。
现代文：同弟弟们相友爱，没有君臣间的隔阂。
English: He is also very friendly to his younger brothers, and there is no barrier between him and his ministers.

古文：雄断有谋，于时国富兵强，将雪神武遗恨，意在顿驾平阳，为进取之策。
现代文：勇武果断而有计谋，当时国家富裕军队强盛，打算要洗雪神武的遣恨，意图是在乎阳驻留，为征伐作准备。
English: At that time, when the country's rich army was strong, he planned to wash the hatred of Xue Shenwu, intending to stay in Guiyang and prepare for the conquest.

古文：远图不遂，惜哉！
现代文：远大的谋略未能实现，可惜啊!
English: It's a shame that the ambitious plan didn't come to fruition!

古文：初，帝与济南约不相害。
现代文：起初孝昭帝和济南王约定不杀他。
English: At first, Emperor Xiaozhao and the King of Jinan agreed not to kill him.

古文：及舆驾在晋阳，武成镇邺，望气者云邺城有天子气。
现代文：等到孝昭童驻在置肠，武旦秘查镇守五聋噬，观察云气预测吉凶的人说三腿有天子的气象。
English: Wait until the Xiao Zhaodong is stationed in the intestine, the Wudang secret investigation of the town guard is five deaf and mute, and the person who observes the clouds and predicts the auspicious and inauspicious says that the weather has three legs.

古文：帝常恐济南复兴，乃密行鸠毒，济南不从，乃扼而杀之。
现代文：耋堕童一直担心遭南王会重新兴起，于是秘密下毒，济南王不肯听从。就掐住他的脖子杀了他。
English: Fallen boy has always been worried that the South King will rise again, so he secretly poisoned, Jinan King refused to listen. He grabbed his neck and killed him.

古文：后颇愧悔。
现代文：后来感到很愧疚悔恨。
English: Afterwards, I felt very guilty and remorseful.

古文：初苦内热，频进汤散。
现代文：当初遭受内热的痛苦，连续吃了汤药和散丸。
English: At first, he suffered from the pain of internal heat, and continuously ate soup medicine and loose pills.

古文：时有尚书令史姓赵，于邺见文宣从杨愔、燕子献等西行，言相与复仇。
现代文：当时有个姓赵的尚书令史，在邺城看见文宣帝跟着杨情、燕子献等人向西走去，说要一起报仇。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling Shi, surnamed Zhao, saw Emperor Wenxuan following Yang Rong, Yan Zi Xian and others to the west in Lucheng, saying that he wanted to take revenge together.

古文：帝在晋阳宫，与毛夫人亦见焉。
现代文：孝昭帝在晋阳宫，和毛夫人也看见了。
English: Emperor Xiaozhao was at the Jinyang Palace, and Mrs. Mao also saw it.

古文：遂渐危笃。
现代文：于是病情渐渐危重。
English: As a result, his condition gradually became critical.

古文：备禳厌之事，或煮油四洒，或持炬烧逐。
现代文：准备了驱除邪恶灾祸的仪式，有时把油煮沸四处洒去，有时拿着火把燃烧着追赶。
English: A ritual was prepared to drive away the evil scourge, sometimes boiling oil and sprinkling it around, sometimes chasing it with burning torches.

古文：诸厉方出殿梁，骑栋上，歌呼自若，了无惧容。
现代文：厉鬼们才出现在宫殿的大梁上，骑在屋栋上，唱着呼喊着满不在乎，没有一点害怕的样子。
English: Only then did the spirits appear on the beams of the palace, riding on the roofs, singing and shouting carelessly, without a hint of fear.

古文：时有天狗下，乃于其所讲武以厌之。
现代文：当时有天狗下来，于是在讲习武功的地方举行仪式镇住它。
English: At that time, a tengu came down, so a ceremony was held in the place where martial arts were taught to subdue it.

古文：有兔惊马，帝坠而绝肋。
现代文：有只兔子使马受惊，孝昭帝从马上摔下来跌断了肋骨。
English: A rabbit frightened the horse, and Emperor Xiao Zhaodi fell from the horse and broke his ribs.

古文：太后视疾，问济南所在者三，帝不对。
现代文：太后探视伤情，三次问到济南王在什么地方，孝昭帝不能回答。
English: The Empress Dowager visited the injured and asked three times where the King of Jinan was, but Emperor Xiaozhao could not answer.

古文：太后怒曰： 杀之耶？
现代文：太后愤怒地说： 杀掉了吧?
English: The empress dowager said angrily: Did you kill it?

古文：不用吾言，死其宜矣！ 
现代文：不听我的话，该死啊! 
English: If you don't listen to me, you deserve to die!

古文：临终之际，唯扶服床枕，叩头求哀。
现代文：临死的时候，衹是匍匐在床的枕头上，磕着头乞求哀告。
English: At the time of his death, he was lying on the pillow of his bed with his head down, begging and pleading.

古文：遣使诏追长广王入纂大统，手书云： 宜将吾妻子置一好处，勿学前人也。 
现代文：派遣使者诏令追回长广王继承帝位，亲笔写到： 应该将我的妻子儿女安置在一个好地方，不要仿效前人。 
English: He wrote in his own hand: I should place my wife and children in a good place, and not follow the example of my predecessors.

古文：论曰：神武平定四方，威权在己，迁邺之后，虽主器有人，号令所加，政皆自出。
现代文：论曰：神武平定四方，威严的权势掌握在自己手上，迁都到邺城以后，虽然有入主持国家的权柄，但发号施令，政事都由自己决定。
English: On the other hand, it is said that: Shenwu has subdued the four directions, and the majestic power is in his own hands. After moving the capital to Shicheng, although he has the power to preside over the country, he will issue orders, and the government affairs will be decided by himself.

古文：文宣因循鸿业，内外叶从，自朝及野，群心属望，东魏之地，举国乐推，曾未期月，遂登宸极。
现代文：文宣帝继承宏大的基业，内外协力追随，从朝廷到民间，人心所望。束魏的地方，全国上下乐意推举，不到一个月，就登上了皇位。
English: Emperor Wenxuan inherited a great foundation, and people at home and abroad made concerted efforts to follow, from the imperial court to the people, which was expected by the people. The whole country was happy to elect him, and he ascended to the throne in less than a month.

古文：始则存心政事，风化肃然，数年之间，朝野安出。
现代文：开始时有心政事，良好的社会风尚井然有序，几年的时间，朝野安宁。
English: At the beginning, there were political affairs, a good social style and good order. After a few years, there was peace and tranquility.

古文：其后纵酒肆欲，事极猖狂，昏邪残暴，近代未有，飨国不永，实由斯疾。
现代文：他后来放纵饮酒肆意纵欲，猖狂到了极点，昏昧邪恶残忍凶暴，是近代以来没有过的。享用国家不能长久，实际上是由于他的疾病。
English: Later, he indulged in drinking, indulged in wanton indulgence, rampant to the extreme, dim, evil, cruel and ferocious, which has not been seen since modern times. He could not enjoy the country for a long time, actually due to his illness.

古文：济南继业，大革其弊，风教粲然，搢绅称幸。
现代文：济南王继承基业，大力革除其中的弊病，风俗教化焕然一新，士大夫们表示幸运。
English: The King of Jinan inherited the family business and made great efforts to eliminate the ills in it, and the customs and education were completely renewed. The scholars and doctors said they were lucky.

古文：股肱辅弼，虽怀厥诚，既不能赞弘道德，和睦亲懿，又不能远虑防身，深谋卫主，应断不断，自取其咎。
现代文：左右大臣辅佐，虽然怀着他们的忠诚，既不能弘扬道德，使最密切的亲戚和睦相处，又不能从长远考虑防护自身，深入谋划保卫君主，该决断时不作出决断，自己得到罪责。
English: The vice-ministers of the left and right, although they are loyal, can neither promote morality and make the closest relatives live in harmony, nor can they protect themselves from a long-term perspective and make in-depth plans to protect the monarch. If they do not make a decision when making this decision, they will be held responsible.

古文：臣既诛夷，君寿废辱，皆任非其器之所致尔。
现代文：臣子被诛杀，君主不久遭受废黜的耻辱，都是用人不当所导致的啊。
English: The fact that a courtier was beaten to death and that the monarch soon suffered the ignominy of being deposed were all caused by improper employment.

古文：孝昭早居台阁，故事通明，人吏之间，无所不委。
现代文：孝昭帝早就在尚书台，旧时的典章制度通晓明了，官吏之间，没有不托付的。
English: Emperor Xiao Zhaodi has long been on Shang Shudai, the old-time award system is well known, and there is no trust between officials.

古文：文宣崩后，大革前弊。
现代文：文宣帝崩逝以后，大力革除以前的弊病。
English: After the death of Emperor Wenxuan, he made great efforts to eliminate the previous ills.

古文：及临尊极，留心更深，时人服其明而识其细也。
现代文：等到登上帝位，用心更加深切，当时的人佩服他的精明而讥讽他的琐碎。
English: When he ascended to the throne, his intentions were more profound, and people at that time admired his shrewdness and ridiculed his pettiness.

古文：情好稽古，率由礼度，将封先代之胤，且敦学校之风，征召英贤，文武毕集。
现代文：生性喜欢考察古代，遵循礼仪制度：将要封前代王朝的后裔，并且推重兴学办教的风气，征召杰出的人才，文的武的都会集起来。
English: By nature, he likes to investigate ancient times and follow the etiquette system: he will seal the descendants of the previous dynasty, and promote the revival of the tradition of running schools and teaching, recruit outstanding talents, and gather the literati.

古文：于时周氏朝政移于宰臣，主将相猜，不无危殆。乃眷关右，实怀兼并之志，经谋宏远，实当代之明主，而降年不永，其故何哉？
现代文：在当时周氏的朝政已转移到宰相手裹，主将们互相猜疑，情形十分危急，于是关注关右，实际上怀有兼并的意愿，经营策划宏大广远，确实是当代的英明君主，可是上天给的寿命不长久，其中的缘故是什么呢?
English: At that time, the Zhou Dynasty's political power had already shifted to the other side. The generals were suspicious of each other, and the situation was very critical. Therefore, they were concerned about Guan Zheng. In fact, he had the intention of annexation, and his business planning was grand and far-reaching. He was indeed a contemporary wise monarch, but the life span given by God was not long. What was the reason for this?

古文：岂幽显之间，实有报复，将齐之基宇止在于斯，帝欲大之，天不许也？
现代文：难道是人间和阴间之间，果然有因果报应，将齐国的基业在逭时中止，皇帝想要扩大它，上天不允许吧?
English: Could it be that between the human world and the underworld, there is indeed a karmic retribution, the foundation of Qi is suspended at the time of death, the emperor wants to expand it, and heaven does not allow it?

