古文：代宗代宗睿文孝武皇帝讳豫，肃宗长子，母曰章敬皇太后吴氏。以开元十四年十二月十三日生于东都上阳宫。
现代文：代宗睿文孝武皇帝名豫，肃宗皇帝的长子。母亲章敬皇太后吴氏，在开元十四年十二月十三日在东都上阳宫出生。
English: Emperor Nanyuan, the eldest son of Emperor Suizong, was born in Shangyang Palace, Dongdu, on December 13th in the 14th year of the first millennium. His mother, Empress Dowager Wu, was Zhang Jing.

古文：初名俶，年十五封广平王。
现代文：当初名叫亻叔，年十五岁封为广平王。
English: At first, he was called Uncle Zou, and at the age of 15, he was given the title of Guangping Wang.

古文：玄宗诸孙百余，上为嫡皇孙。
现代文：玄宗所有孙子一百多个，李豫为嫡亲皇孙。
English: There are more than one hundred grandchildren of Emperor Xuanzong, and Li Yu is the eldest grandchild.

古文：宇量弘深，宽而能断。喜惧不形于色。
现代文：器宇度量宽广深厚，宽容而善于决断，喜忧不流露在表面。
English: The measurement of the universe is wide, broad and deep, tolerant and good at making decisions, and the joys and sorrows do not show on the surface.

古文：仁孝温恭，动必由礼。幼而好学，尤专《礼》、《易》，玄宗钟爱之。
现代文：仁爱忠孝温顺严肃，行动必依照礼教，年幼好学，尤其精通《礼》、《易》，玄宗十分疼爱他。
English: Benevolence, loyalty, filial piety, meekness, seriousness, actions must be in accordance with etiquette, young and eager to learn, especially proficient in "Rite," "Ease," Xuanzong loved him very much.

古文：禄山之乱，京城陷贼，从肃宗搜兵灵武，以上为天下兵马元帅。
现代文：安禄山之乱，京城沦陷于贼手，李豫跟从肃宗在灵武阅兵，肃宗以李豫为天下兵马元帅。
English: During the An Lushan Rebellion, Beijing fell into the hands of thieves. Li Yu followed Su Zong in a military parade. Su Zong made Li Yu the marshal of the world's soldiers and horses.

古文：时朝廷草创，兵募寡弱，上推心示信，招怀流散，比至彭原，兵众数万。
现代文：当时朝廷在灵武开始建立，招募的军队又少又弱。皇上对李豫深信不疑，招集还归的士兵和流散的百姓，等到到了彭原，军队已经拥有数万人了。
English: At that time, the imperial court began to be established in Lingwu, and the recruited troops were few and weak. The emperor had deep faith in Li Yu, and recruited returned soldiers and scattered people. By the time he arrived in Pengyuan, the army already had tens of thousands of people.

古文：及肃宗回幸凤翔，时房琯、郭子仪继战不利，贼锋方锐，屡来寇袭。
现代文：等到肃宗返回凤翔，当时房、郭子仪继续与贼作战失利，贼势浩大，锐气十足，多次前来侵犯骚扰。
English: When Su Zong returned to Fengxiang, at that time, Fang and Guo Ziyi continued to fight against the thieves and lost. The thieves were powerful and full of vigor, and they came to encroach and harass many times.

古文：上选求勇干，频挫其锋，圣虑遑宁，士心大振。
现代文：皇上选拔求取勇敢干练之士，多次挫折敌人的锐气，皇上的惊惧忧虑才得以安定，士气大振。
English: The emperor's selection sought brave and capable people, repeatedly frustrated the enemy's sharpness, and the emperor's fear and anxiety were stabilized and morale was greatly boosted.

古文：及师进讨，百官辞送，步出阙门，方始乘马。
现代文：到了王师出去讨伐贼人，百官送行，李豫步出宫门，方才乘马。
English: When Wang Shi went out to fight against the thieves, hundreds of officials saw him off, Li Yu walked out of the palace gate, and then rode a horse.

古文：回纥叶护王子率兵入助，勇冠诸蕃，上接以优恩，结为兄弟，故香积之战，贼徒大败，遂委西京而遁。
现代文：回纥叶护王及其太子率兵四千前来帮助，其勇敢为所有蕃人之第一，李豫以恩情奖励优待，和回纥王及太子结为兄弟，所以香积之战，贼兵大败，贼人于是抛弃西京而逃。
English: Huizhou Ye Guo Wang and his prince led four thousand soldiers to come to help, and his bravery was the first of all the Xiang people. Li Yu rewarded him with kindness and preferential treatment, and became brothers with Huizhou Wang and the prince. Therefore, in the war of incense, the bandits were defeated, and the bandits abandoned West Beijing and fled.

古文：虽子仪、嗣业之奋命，由上恩信结于士心，故人思自效。
现代文：虽然胜利是由于郭子仪、李嗣业奋发效命，也是由于李豫对官员吏士结恩相信，所以人人想为国效力。
English: Although the victory was due to the hard work of Guo Ziyi and Li Shihe, it was also due to Li Yu's belief in officials and officials, so everyone wanted to serve the country.

古文：既收京城，令行禁止，民庶按堵，秋毫不犯，耆老欢迎，对之歔欷。
现代文：已经收复了京城，有令即行，有禁就止，百姓安居，秋毫不犯，老人欢迎，对着王朝的军队，感激流泪。
English: The capital has been recaptured. People obey orders and stop at prohibitions. The people live in peace, do not commit crimes, and welcome the elderly. They shed tears of gratitude to the imperial army.

古文：闻贼残众犹保陕郊，即日长驱，东趋虢洛。新店之役，一战大捷，庆绪之党，十歼七八。
现代文：后听说贼人残部还保留在陕西一带，马上又长驱直入，直接打向虢州、洛州，新店一战，大获全胜，安庆绪贼党，被王师歼灭了十之七八。
English: Later, I heard that the remnants of the bandits still remained in the Shaanxi area. They immediately drove straight in again, directly to Luzhou, Loshou, Xindian, and won a complete victory. The Anqing Xue bandit party was annihilated by Wang Shi.

古文：数旬之间，河南底定，两都恢复，二圣回銮，统率之功，推而不受。
现代文：数十天之间，河南平安，东京、西京两个国都收复，玄宗、肃宗二圣君回驾返京，统率军队战胜敌人之功，李豫推辞而不接受。
English: Within a few dozen days, Henan Province was safe, Tokyo and Xijing were both recovered, and the two holy men, Xuanzong and Suizong, returned to Beijing and led the army to defeat the enemy. Li Yu did not accept the resignation.

古文：肃宗还京，大赦，改封楚王。
现代文：肃宗回京，大赦天下，改封李豫为楚王。
English: Su Zong returned to Beijing, pardoned the world, and changed Li Yu's title to King of Chu.

古文：乾元元年三月，改封成王。
现代文：乾元元年三月，改封为成王。
English: In March of the first year of the Qian Dynasty, he was renamed Chengwang.

古文：四月庚寅，立为皇太子，改名豫。
现代文：五月十九日，立为皇太子，改名为豫。
English: On May 19, he became crown prince and changed his name to Yu.

古文：上元末年，两宫不豫，太子往来侍疾，躬尝药膳，衣不角带者久之，及承监国命，流涕从之。
现代文：上元末年，玄宗、肃宗身体不适，太子李豫在两个皇上之间来往奔跑，侍候他们的疾病，亲自尝药尝饭，衣不解带日夜侍候很久，等到接受代理国政的任命时，是流着泪听从的。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, when Emperor Xuanzong and Emperor Suizong were unwell, Prince Li Yu ran back and forth between the two emperors, attended to their illnesses, personally tasted medicine and food, and waited for a long time day and night with his clothes unbuttoned. When he accepted the appointment of acting state affairs, he obeyed with tears.

古文：宝应元年四月，肃宗大渐，所幸张皇后无子，后惧上功高难制，阴引越王系于宫中，将图废立。
现代文：宝应元年四月，肃宗病危，肃宗所宠信的张皇后没有儿子，张皇后害怕李豫功劳大难以控制，暗中将越王亻系带入宫中，将图谋废除太子李豫。
English: In April of the first year of the Baoying Dynasty, Emperor Su Zong was gravely ill. Empress Zhang, who was a favorite of Emperor Su Zong, did not have a son. Empress Zhang was afraid that Li Yu's achievements would be too difficult to control. She secretly brought the Yue Wang Yi line into the palace and plotted to abolish Prince Li Yu.

古文：乙丑，皇后矫诏召太子。
现代文：十六日，张皇后用伪诏书召太子李豫。
English: On the 16th, Empress Zhang summoned Prince Li Yu with a fake imperial edict.

古文：中官李辅国、程元振素知之，乃勒兵于凌霄门，俟太子至，即卫从太子入飞龙厩以俟其变。
现代文：太监李辅国、程元振平素知道张皇后的阴谋，于是带兵在凌霄门，等到太子李豫一到，就保卫跟从太子进入飞龙厩以等待事情的发展变化。
English: The eunuchs Li Shuoguo and Cheng Yuan Zhenping knew about the plot of Empress Zhang, so they led the soldiers to Lingxiao Gate. As soon as the prince Li Yu arrived, they followed the prince into the flying dragon stable to wait for the development of the situation.

古文：是夕，勒兵于三殿，收捕越王系及内官硃光辉、马英俊等禁锢之，幽皇后于别殿。
现代文：这一晚，就率兵在三殿，收捕越王亻系及太监朱光辉、马英俊等关押，将皇后张氏关押在另外的宫殿。
English: That night, he led his soldiers to the Third Palace to arrest and detain the lineage of King Yue and the eunuchs Zhu Guanghui and Ma Yingjun, and to detain the Empress Zhang in another palace.

古文：丁犯，肃宗崩，元振等始迎上于九仙门，见群臣，行监国之礼。
现代文：十八日，肃宗去世，程元振等人才在九仙门迎接李豫，会见群臣，行了代管国政之大礼。
English: On the 18th day of Su Zong's death, Cheng Yuan Zhen and other talents greeted Li Yu at the Nine Immortals Gate, met with the ministers, and performed the grand ceremony of taking charge of state affairs.

古文：己巳，即皇帝位于柩前。
现代文：二十日，太子李豫在肃宗灵柩前登皇帝位。
English: On the 20th, Daizong ascended the throne in front of Su Zong's coffin.

古文：甲戌，诏： 国之大事，戎马为先，朝有旧章，亲贤是属。
现代文：二十五日，下诏书： 国家的大事，兵马为先，朝廷有老的章程，依赖委托的是亲人贤人。
English: On the 25th, the following edict was issued: In the important affairs of the state, soldiers and horses come first. The imperial court has an old charter, and relies on relatives and sages for entrustment.

古文：故求诸必当，用制于中权；存乎至公，岂惭于内举。
现代文：所以求贤人必须恰当，在中枢机构用权；一心要大公，难道由于推举亲人而内心惭愧。
English: Therefore, the seeker of wisdom must be appropriate and use the power in the central organization; if he is determined to be the grand duke, is he ashamed of his heart because of the nomination of his relatives?

古文：特进、奉节郡王适可天下兵马元帅。 
现代文：特进、奉节郡王李适适合任天下兵马元帅。 
English: King Li Shih of Fengjie County, a special envoy, is fit to serve as the world's field marshal.

古文：凡庶在位，宜悉哀怀。 宰臣苗晋卿等三上表请依遗制，方听政。
现代文：二十六日，以兵部尚书、兼任元帅行军闲厩等使的李辅国晋号为尚父，飞龙闲厩副使程元振为右监门将军。
English: On the 26th, Li Yuxuo Guojin, with the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Military Affairs and the concurrent title of Marshal of the Marching Idle Stables and other envoys, was the Shang father, and Cheng Yuan Zhen, the deputy envoy of the Flying Dragon Idle Stables, was the right guard gate general.

古文：丙戌，嗣鲁王宇改封邹王，奉节郡王适进封鲁王，李光弼进封临淮王。
现代文：宦官朱光辉、啖庭瑶、陈仙甫等人发配到黔中。五月一日，以李辅国为司空兼中书令，其余官职依旧。八日，嗣鲁王宇改封为邹王，奉节郡王李适晋封为鲁王，李光弼晋封为临淮王。
English: The eunuchs Zhu Guanghui, Zou Tingyu, Chen Xianfu and others were assigned to the middle eunuchs. On May 1, Li Shuoguo was appointed as the secretary of the air and the secretary of the middle eunuchs, and the other official positions remained the same. On the 8th, Zilu Wang Yu was appointed as the king of the eunuchs, Fengjie County King Li Shijin was appointed as the king of the eunuchs, and Li Guangyu was appointed as the king of the eunuchs.

古文：贬礼部尚书萧华为陕州司马。
现代文：贬礼部尚书萧华为陕州司马。
English: Shangshu Xiao and Sima Shaozhou from the Ministry of Etiquette.

古文：改行乾元钱。重棱小钱一当二，重棱大钱一当三。
现代文：改行乾元钱，重迭棱角小钱一文当二文，重迭棱角大钱一文当三文。
English: Change the line to dry yuan money, overlap the corners of small money to be worth two, overlap the corners of big money to be worth three.

古文：丙申，以户部侍郎元载同中书门下平章事，充度支转运使。
现代文：十八日，以户部侍郎元载任同中书门下平章事，充任度支转运使。
English: On the 18th, the head of the Household Division was appointed to the position of Shimon Shimohei Shoshoji, and was promoted to the position of Doushi-to-Yunshi.

古文：改乾元大小钱一当一。
现代文：改乾元大钱和小钱都一文当一文。
English: If the yuan is reformed, big money and small money will be worth every penny.

古文：丁酉，御丹凤楼，大赦。
现代文：十九日，皇上驾到丹凤楼，大赦。
English: On the 19th, the emperor drove to the Danfeng Building and granted amnesty.

古文：子仪、光弼、李光进诸道节度使并加实封。
现代文：郭子仪、李光弼、李光进各道节度使都加给实际封户。
English: Guo Zi Yi, Li Guangyao, and Li Guangjin were added to the actual sealing of households.

古文：四月十七日立功人并号 宝应功臣 。
现代文：四月十七日立功的人都号称为 宝应功臣 。
English: Those who performed meritorious deeds on April 17th are called Baoying meritorious heroes.

古文：内外文武官三品已上进爵，四品已下加阶。
现代文：内外文武官员三品以上晋升爵位，四品以下加一阶。
English: Foreign and domestic civil and military officials with three or more pins are promoted to a peerage, and those with four or fewer pins are promoted to the first rank.

古文：诸州防御使并停。
现代文：各州防御使之职都撤销。
English: All state defense positions have been eliminated.

古文：内外官三考一转。
现代文：内外官员必须九年考三次才能转官或明确升降。
English: Foreign and domestic officials must take the nine-year examination three times before they can be transferred or promoted.

古文：益昌郡王邈进封郑王，延庆郡王迥进封韩王。
现代文：益昌郡王邈晋封为郑王，延庆郡王迥晋封为韩王。
English: In Yichang County, Wang Xi Jinfeng was named Zheng Wang, and in Yanqing County, Wang Xi Jinfeng was named Han Wang.

古文：故庶人皇后王氏、故诬人太子瑛、鄂王瑶、光王琚并宜复封号。
现代文：已故世之庶人皇后王氏、已故世庶人太子瑛、鄂王瑶、光王琚都应恢复原封号。
English: The late commoner Empress Wang, the late commoner Prince Eying, Prince Hwanghae, and Prince Kwanghae should all restore their original seal names.

古文：棣王琰、永王璘并与昭雪。建昌王追封齐王，崇恩王追封卫王，灵昌王追封郓王。
现代文：棣王琰、永王瞞都给予昭雪冤屈，建昌王追封为齐王，崇恩王追封为卫王，灵昌王追封为郓王。
English: Shao Xue and Yong Wang Xie both gave unfavorable treatment to Shao Xue, Jian Chang Wang was posthumously named Qi Wang, Chong En Wang was posthumously named Wei Wang, and Ling Chang Wang was posthumously named Zhai Wang.

古文：壬寅，以来瑱复为襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以来王员再次任襄州刺史山南东道节度使。
English: On the 24th, since then, Wang Jian has once again served as the host festival envoy of Xiangzhou Zhishi Shannan.

古文：六月己酉朔，百僚临于西宫，上不视朝。
现代文：六月一日，百官到西宫，皇上不上朝。
English: On June 1, hundreds of officials arrived at the Western Palace, but the Emperor did not attend.

古文：自是每朔望皆如之，迄于山陵。
现代文：从此每月初一、十五日两天都如此。
English: Since then, this has been the case on the first and fifteenth days of every month.

古文：凡人臣有事辞见，先临西宫，然后诣朝。
现代文：凡是臣下有事辞行或朝见，必须先到西宫跪拜，然后到朝堂朝见皇上。
English: Whenever a vassal has to leave on business or see the emperor, he must first kneel in the West Palace, and then go to the Imperial Court to see the emperor.

古文：改豫州为蔡州，避上名也。
现代文：改豫州为蔡州，为的是避讳皇上的名字。
English: He changed Yuzhou to Caizhou in order to avoid the emperor's name.

古文：待中苗晋卿以老疾，请三日一入中书，从之。
现代文：侍中苗晋卿因为年老多病，请求三天才到一次中书省，皇上同意了。
English: The Emperor agreed to the request of Miao Jinqing, a courtier, to come to the Ministry of Literature only once every three days due to his old age and illness.

古文：己未，罢尚父李辅国判元帅行军及兵部尚书、闲厩等使。
现代文：十一日，罢免尚父李辅国兼元帅行军及兵部尚书、闲厩使等职务。
English: On the 11th, he dismissed his father, Li Shuoguo, who was also marshal of the marching army, as well as the secretary of the military department and the idle stable attendant.

古文：辅国请逊位。
现代文：李辅国请求让出官职爵位。
English: Li Yuxuo requested to give up his official title and rank.

古文：辛酉，以辅国为博陆王，罢中书令，许朝朔望。
现代文：十三日，以李辅国为博陆王，罢免中书令，同意他每月初一、十五日两天朝见皇上。
English: On the thirteenth day, Li Yuxuo was appointed as the king of Bolu, revoked the imperial edict, and agreed to meet the emperor in the morning on the first and fifteenth day of every month.

古文：壬申，以通州刺史刘晏为户部侍郎、兼御史大夫、京兆尹，充度支转运盐铁诸道铸钱等使。
现代文：二十四日，以通州刺史刘晏为户部侍郎、兼御史大夫、京兆尹，充任度支使、转运使、盐铁使、诸道铸钱使。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Tongzhou chief historian Liu Wei was appointed as the head of the household, concurrently the chief historian, and Jing Zhaoyun was appointed as the chief envoy, the envoy of transportation, the envoy of salt and iron, and the envoy of minting money.

古文：秋七月己卯朔。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of autumn and the first day of July are the same day.

古文：辛巳，观军容使鱼朝恩封冯翊郡开国公，宦官程元振为镇军大将军、保定郡开国公。
现代文：四日，观军容使鱼朝恩封冯翊郡开国公，宦官程元振为镇军大将军、保定郡开国公。
English: On the fourth day, Gu Jun Rong made Yu Chao grant Feng Ye County the title of founding governor, and eunuch Cheng Yuan Zhen became the general of the town army and the founding governor of Baoding County.

古文：乙酉，襄州剌史裴长流费州，赐死于蓝田驿。
现代文：八日，襄州刺史裴罫远远地流放到费州，在蓝田驿被赐死。
English: On the eighth day, the Xiangzhou assassin Pei Yao was exiled far away to Feizhou, and he was sentenced to death in Lantian.

古文：庚寅，诏不许匭使阅投匭人文状，赐道州司马敬羽自尽。
现代文：十三日，诏令不准匦使拆阅投递人向上报告的文书。赐道州司马敬羽自尽。
English: On the 13th, the imperial edict forbade officials from reading the documents submitted by the submitter of the report, and ordered the provincial governor Ma Jingyu to commit suicide.

古文：来瑱自襄州来朝。
现代文：来王员从襄州前来朝见。
English: The prince's entourage came from Xiangzhou to see him in the morning.

古文：郭子仪自河中来朝。
现代文：郭子仪从河中来朝见。
English: Guo Zi Yi came from the river to see the morning.

古文：八月己酉朔。自七月不雨，至此月癸丑方雨。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，从七月不下雨，到这个月七日才下雨。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day. From July, there is no rain, and it only rains on the seventh day of the month.

古文：庚午夜，西北有赤光亘天，贯紫微，渐移东北，弥漫半天。
现代文：二十四日半夜十二时，西北方有赤色光横贯天空，贯穿了紫微星，渐渐移往东北，弥漫了半边天。
English: At midnight on the 24th, a red light streaked across the sky in the northwest, penetrating the violet star, and gradually moved to the northeast, filling half of the sky.

古文：贬太子少傅李遵为袁州刺史。
现代文：贬太子少傅为袁州刺史。
English: The dethronement of the young prince Fu was a turning point in the history of Yuanzhou.

古文：台州贼袁晁陷台州，连陷浙东州县。
现代文：台州贼人袁晁攻陷台州，接连攻陷浙东的州县。
English: The robber of Taizhou, Yuan Shao, invaded Taizhou and successively invaded the counties in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：九月丁丑朔，鲁王适改封雍王。
现代文：九月一日，鲁王李适改封雍王。
English: On September 1st, the king of Lu, Li Si, changed his title to the king of Yong.

古文：以山南东道节度使来瑱为兵部尚书，同中书门下平章事，节度如故。
现代文：以山南东道节度使来王员为兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事，节度使仍然像原来一样兼任。
English: With Shannan as the host, the king's envoy to the festival served as the commander of the military department and the commander of the middle school, and the festival envoy still concurrently served as before.

古文：程元振进封邠国公。
现代文：程元振晋封国公。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhenjin was appointed as the Prince of the State.

古文：丙申，右仆射、山陵使裴冕贬施州刺史。
现代文：二十日，左仆射、山陵使裴冕贬为施州刺史。
English: On the 20th, Zuo Fuxia and Shan Lingzhi reduced Pei Guan to Shizhou Shishi.

古文：戊戌，回纥登里可汗率众来助国讨逆，令御史大夫尚衡宣慰之。
现代文：二十二日，回纥登里可汗率领部众来帮助唐朝讨伐叛逆，命令御史大夫尚衡安抚慰问他们。
English: On the 22nd, Hui Dunli Khan led his troops to help the Tang Dynasty fight against the rebels, and ordered the Grand Historian Shang Heng to comfort and console them.

古文：甲午，太州至陕州二百余里黄河清，澄澈见底。
现代文：十八日，太州至陕州二百多里黄河清澈，可以见底。
English: On the 18th, more than 200 miles from Taizhou to Shaanxi, the Yellow River was so clear that it was possible to see the bottom.

古文：甲午，秘书监韩颖、中书舍人刘烜配流岭表，寻赐死，坐狎昵李辅国也。
现代文：秘书监韩颖、中书舍人刘火亘流放到岭表，不久被赐死，犯的是与李辅国过分亲热而不庄重的罪。
English: Secretary-supervisor Han Ying and Chinese scholar Liu Huowatong were exiled to Ling table, and were soon put to death for the crime of being too intimate with Li Yuxu.

古文：冬十月辛酉，诏天下兵马元帅雍王统河东、朔方及诸道行营、回纥等兵十余万讨史朝义，会军于陕州。
现代文：冬十月十六日，诏天下兵马元帅雍王统领河东、朔方及各道行营、回纥等兵十多万讨伐史朝义，将军队会集在陕州。
English: On the 16th day of October in winter, it was decreed that the world's horse and cavalry marshal, Yong Wang, would lead more than one hundred thousand soldiers from Hedong, Shuo, and various provinces to march and march to Huizhou to fight against Shichongyi and gather the army in Shaanxi.

古文：加朔方行营节度使、大宁郡王仆固怀恩同中书门下平章事。
现代文：加朔方行营节度使、大宁郡王仆固怀恩同中书门下平章事。
English: Gashuo Fangxing Festival, the king of Danying County, Gu Wai'en, and Zhongshumen came to a peaceful conclusion.

古文：丁卯夜，盗杀李辅国于其第，窃首而去。
现代文：二十日夜，盗贼在李辅国的府第将他杀死，提头而去。
English: On the evening of the 20th day, the thieves killed him in the courtyard of Li Yuxu's mansion and took him away.

古文：戊辰，元帅雍王率诸军进发，留郭英乂、鱼朝恩镇陕州。
现代文：二十三日，元帅雍王率领各军进发，留下郭英、鱼朝恩镇守陕州。
English: On the 23rd, Marshal Yong Wang led the army to advance, leaving Guo Ying and Yu Chaon to defend Shaanxi.

古文：壬申，王师次洛阳北郊。
现代文：二十七日，雍王的军队驻扎在洛阳北郊。
English: On the 27th, Yong Wang's army was stationed in the northern suburb of Luoyang.

古文：甲戌，战于横水，贼大败，俘斩六万计。
现代文：二十九日，与贼兵在横水大战，俘虏及斩敌人首级以六万来计算。
English: On the 29th, with the robber soldiers in the cross-water war, the captives and the beheading of the enemy were counted at sixty thousand.

古文：史朝义奔冀州。
现代文：史朝义奔逃到冀州。
English: Shi Chao fled to Jizhou.

古文：乙亥，雍王奏收东京、河阳、汴、郑、滑、相、魏等州。
现代文：三十日，雍王上奏说，已收复东京、河阳、汴、郑、滑、相、魏等州。
English: On the 30th, Yong Wang reported that he had recovered Tokyo, Heyang, Handan, Zheng, Nome, Sang, Wei and other provinces.

古文：乙酉，陕西节度使郭英乂权知东京留守。
现代文：十一月十日，陕西节度使郭英暂代东京留守。
English: On November 10th, the Shaanxi Festival made Guo Ying temporarily absent from Tokyo.

古文：丁酉，伪恆州节度使张忠志以赵、定、深、恆、易五州归顺，以忠志检校礼部尚书、恆州刺史，充成德军节度使，赐姓名曰李宝臣。
现代文：二十二日，伪恒州节度使张忠志率赵、定、深、恒、易五州归顺，以忠志任检校礼部尚书、恒州刺史，充任成德军节度使，赐姓名曰李宝臣。
English: On the 22nd, the pseudo-Hangzhou Festival made Zhang Zhongzhi lead Zhao, Ding, Sheng, Heng and Yi five states to surrender, and appointed Zhongzhi as the school inspection ceremony department Shangshu, Hengzhou stabbing history, and appointed him as the German military festival envoy, and gave him the name Li Baochen.

古文：于是河北州郡悉平。
现代文：于是河北州郡全部平定。
English: As a result, all counties in Hebei Province were pacified.

古文：贼范阳尹李怀仙斩史朝义首来献，请降。
现代文：贼人范阳尹李怀仙斩史朝义首级来献，请求归降。
English: The thief Fan Yang Yin Li Huai Xian cut off the head of the historical Chou Yi and came to present it, asking for surrender.

古文：十二月庚戌，太子太师，邠国公韦见素薨。
现代文：十二月六日，太子太师、国公韦见素去世。
English: On December 6th, the Crown Prince and Grand Master, Guogong Wei Mingsu passed away.

古文：辛未，仆固怀恩为尚书左仆射、兼中书令，灵州大都督府长史、河北副元帅。
现代文：二十七日，仆固怀恩为尚书左仆射、兼中书令、灵州大都督府长史、河北副元帅。
English: On the 27th, Gu Wai's servant Gu Wai was Shang Shuxi Zuo Shuxia, concurrently the middle secretary, the governor of Lingzhou, and the deputy marshal of Hebei.

古文：邛州新置镇南军。
现代文：邛州新近设置镇南军。
English: The Zhennang Army was recently set up in Zhangzhou.

古文：是岁，江东大疫，死者过半。
现代文：这年，江东发生瘟疫，死的人超过一半。
English: That year, a plague broke out in the eastern part of the Yangtze River, killing more than half of the people.

古文：吐蕃陷我临、洮、成、渭等州。
现代文：吐蕃攻陷我临、洮、秦、成、渭等州。
English: Tujia invaded and occupied Linyi, Shandong, Qin, Chengdu, Handan and other provinces.

古文：二年春正月丁亥朔。
现代文：宝应二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring of Baoying is the New Year's Day.

古文：甲午，户部尚书、兼御史大夫、都统淮南节度观察等使、越国公李峘卒。
现代文：二十日，户部尚书、兼御史大夫、都统淮南节度使观察使、越国公李土亘去世。
English: On the 20th, the head of the household, Shangshu, who was also the chief historian, the observer of the Huainan Festival and the governor of Yue, Li Duwu, passed away.

古文：国子祭酒、兼御史大夫、京兆尹刘晏为吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，度支诸使如故。
现代文：国子祭酒、兼御史大夫、京兆尹刘晏为吏部尚书、同中书门下平章事，任度支使、转运盐铁使、诸道铸钱使和原来一样。
English: Guo Zi held the ceremony of offering wine, and also acted as the chief historian. Jing Zhaoyun Liu Wei was the secretary of the personnel department, and he was also the secretary of the middle school, and he was appointed as the chief of the transportation department, the chief of the salt and iron transportation department, and the chief of the minting department.

古文：壬寅，制开府仪同三司、行兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事、充山南东道节度观察处置等使、上柱国、颍国公来瑱削在身官爵，长流播州，寻赐死于路。
现代文：二十九日，皇上下诏，开府仪同三司、兼任兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事、充任山南东道节度使、观察处置使、上柱国、颍国公来王真削除本身官职爵位，远远地流放到播州，不久在半路被赐死。
English: On the 29th, the emperor issued an edict, and Wang Zhen removed his official titles and ranks, and he was sent far away to Banzhou, where he was soon given up for dead in the middle of the road.

古文：闰月戊申，以史朝义下降将李宝臣为检校礼部尚书、兼御史大夫、恆州刺史、清河郡王，充成德军节度使；薛嵩为检校刑部尚书、相州刺史、相卫等州节度使；李怀仙检校兵部尚书、兼侍中、武威郡王、幽州节度使；田承嗣检校户部尚书、魏州刺史、雁门郡王、魏博等州都防御使。
现代文：闰正月四日，以史朝义部下将李宝臣为检校礼部尚书、兼御史大夫、恒州刺史、清河郡王、充任成德军节度使；薛嵩为检校刑部尚书、湘州刺史、相、卫等州节度使；李怀仙为检校兵部尚书、兼侍中、武威郡王、幽州节度使；田承嗣任检校户部尚书、魏州刺史、雁门郡王、魏州、博州都防御使。
English: On the 4th day of the intercalary month, Li Baochen was appointed by the Ministry of History and Culture as the inspector of the ceremonial department, and also as the inspector of the history department, the governor of Hengzhou and the king of Qinghe County, and was appointed as the festival envoy of the Chengde Army; Xue Song was appointed as the inspector of the criminal department, the governor of Hunan, the governor of the Xiang Province, the governor of the Xiang Province and the Wei Province; Li Huaixian was appointed as the inspector of the military department, and also as the attendant, the governor of Wuwei and the governor of Yuzhou;

古文：二月甲午，回纥登里可汗辞归蕃。
现代文：二月二十一日，回纥登里可汗辞别回归蕃邦。
English: On February 21st, Hui Dunli Khan resigned and returned to Shan State.

古文：三月甲辰朔，襄州右兵马使梁崇义杀大将李昭，据城自固，仍授崇义襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
现代文：三月一日，襄州右兵马使梁崇义杀大将李昭，占据城池自己坚守，于是就授予梁崇义襄州刺史、山南东道节度使。
English: On March 1, the right-wing soldiers and horses of Xiangzhou sent Liang Chongyi to kill the general Li Zhao, occupy the city and hold on to it, and then awarded Liang Chongyi as Xiangzhou's chief historian and Shannan's host festival envoy.

古文：丁未，袁傪破袁晁之众于浙东。
现代文：四日，袁亻参在浙东攻破袁晁的部众。
English: On the 4th, Yuan Shanshan defeated Yuan Shanshan's subordinates in eastern Zhejiang.

古文：玄宗、肃宗归祔山陵。
现代文：玄宗肃宗同时安葬，玄宗安葬在泰陵，肃宗在建陵。
English: Xuanzong Su Zong was buried at the same time, Xuanzong was buried in Tai Ling, and Su Zong was buried in Jian Ling.

古文：自三月一日废朝，至于晦日，百僚素服诣延英门通名起居。
现代文：三月一日起皇上不上朝，一直到三月底，百官穿素服到延英门报上姓名向先皇问安。
English: From March 1st, the emperor did not go to the imperial court, and until the end of March, hundreds of officials wore plain clothes and went to Yan Yingmen to greet the first emperor.

古文：四月戊寅朔，太州依旧为华州，太阴县为华阴县。
现代文：四月一日是朔日，太州依旧为华州，太阴县依旧为华阴县。
English: April 1 is New Year's Day. Taizhou is still Huazhou, and Taiyin County is still Huayin County.

古文：庚辰，河南副元帅李光弼奏生擒袁晁，浙东州县尽平。
现代文：六日，河南副元帅李光弼上奏说，已活捉袁晁，浙东州县全部平定。
English: On the 6th, Henan Vice-Marshal Li Guangya said in his report that Yuan Qi had been captured alive, and all of Zhejiang Dongzhou County had been pacified.

古文：辛巳，属臣请上尊号。
现代文：七日，群臣请求奉上尊号。
English: On the seventh day, the ministers requested to be given the honorific title.

古文：五月癸卯朔。
现代文：五月一日是朔日。
English: May 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丙寅，尚书省试制举人，命左右丞、侍郎对试，赐食如旧仪。
现代文：二十四日，尚书省考试应考的举人，命令左右丞、侍郎当面考试，赐给他们的食物和旧有规定一样。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the examiners of the Shangshu examination ordered the left and right jockeys and waiters to take the examination in person, and the food given to them was the same as the old regulations.

古文：太常卿杜鸿渐奏： 婚葬合给卤簿，望于国立大功及二等已上亲则给，余不在给限。 从之。
现代文：太常卿杜鸿渐上奏曰： 婚姻、安葬应给予仪仗，希望对国立大功及二等功以上皇族亲人就给予，其余不在给仪仗的范围之内。 
English: Grand Councilor Du Hongqian made a report, saying, "Marriage and burial should be accorded the highest honor, and it is hoped that the relatives of the imperial family who have made great contributions to the country and second-class contributions or higher will be given the highest honor, and the rest are not within the scope of the highest honor.

古文：六月癸酉朔。
现代文：皇上听从了他的意见。六月一日是朔日。
English: The Emperor followed his advice. June 1st was the New Year's Day.

古文：癸未，以陈郑泽潞节度使李抱玉检校司空，封武威郡王；河中节度使王昂检校刑部尚书，封云阝国公；同华节度使李让检校工部尚书。同日入省，宰相送上。
现代文：以陈、郑、泽、潞节度使李抱玉任检校司空，封武威郡王；河中节度使王昂任检校刑部尚书，封邛国公；同华节度使李怀让任检校工部尚书；三人同时进入尚书省，宰相亲自为他们送上尚书职称。
English: Chen, Zheng, Ze, and Zou made Li Baoyu the inspector of the school and the king of Wuwei County; Huazhong made Wang Ang the inspector of the school and the king of Guizhou; Tonghua made Li Huai the inspector of the school and the king of Guizhou; three people entered the inspector of the school at the same time, and the prime minister personally presented them with the title of inspector.

古文：甲申，以前淮西节度使王仲升为右羽林大将军，兼御史大夫。
现代文：十二日，以前任淮西节度使王伸升为右羽林大将军，兼御史大夫。
English: On the 12th, Wang Xinsheng, the former Huaxi governor, was promoted to the rank of General of the Right Feather Forest, and concurrently to the position of Grand Historian.

古文：六军将军兼大夫，自仲升始也。
现代文：六军将军兼御史大夫，从王仲升开始。
English: General of the Sixth Army and Chief Historian, starting with Wang Zhongsheng.

古文：甲午，观军容使鱼朝恩自陕州入朝。
现代文：二十二日，观军容使鱼朝恩从陕州入朝。
English: On the 22nd, Guanzhong Rong brought Yuchao En from Shaanxi into the imperial court.

古文：上御达礼门，命公卿百僚观兵马。
现代文：皇上驾到达礼门，命令公卿百官观看兵马。
English: The emperor arrived at the ceremonial gate and ordered the nobles and officials to watch the soldiers and horses.

古文：同华节度使李怀让自杀，为程元振所构。
现代文：同华节度使李怀让自杀，他是被程元振所陷害。
English: He was framed by Cheng Yuan Zhen.

古文：秋七月壬寅朔。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of autumn in July is New Year's Day.

古文：戊申，群臣上尊号曰宝应元圣文武皇帝，御含元殿受册。
现代文：七日，群臣上尊号曰宝应元圣文武皇帝，皇上驾到含元殿接受册封。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor, called Baoying Yuan Shengwenwu, arrived at the Hall of Han Yuan to accept the investiture.

古文：壬子，御宣政殿宣制，改元曰广德，大赦天下，常赦不原者咸赦除之。
现代文：十一日，皇上驾到宣政殿宣读诏令，改纪元曰广德，大赦天下，固定不能赦免者都加以赦免。
English: On the 11th day, the emperor drove to the Xuancheng Palace to read out the edict. The era was changed to the era of Guangde, the world was pardoned, and those who could not be pardoned were pardoned.

古文：安禄山、史思明亲族应在诸道，一切原免不问。
现代文：安禄山、史思明亲族应征在各道，一切都原谅免除不问。
English: Anlu Mountain, Shisiming relatives enlisted in each province, all forgive and exempt without question.

古文：民户三丁免一丁庸，租税依旧每亩二升。
现代文：民户三个男丁免除一个男丁的赋税，租税依据每亩二升。
English: Households with three men are exempt from paying one man's tax. The tax is based on two liters per mu.

古文：男子二十成丁，五十入老。
现代文：男子二十岁成为丁壮，五十岁进入老年。
English: Men become strong at the age of twenty and old at the age of fifty.

古文：丁巳，仆固瑒兼御史大夫，充朔方行营节度。
现代文：元帅雍王兼尚书令、河北副元帅仆固怀恩加太保，回纥登里可汗进加徽号。
English: Marshal Yong Wang and Shang Shuling, Hebei Vice-Marshal Minion Gu Wai Nga Taibao, and Hui Dengli Khan Jin Jia Hui.

古文：是月，吐蕃大寇河、陇，陷我秦成、渭三州，入大震关，陷兰、廓、河、鄯、洮、岷等州，盗有陇右之地。
现代文：功臣都赐给铁券，把名字收藏在太庙，在凌烟阁上画上图像。刺史、县令从今以后改职迁转，刺史以三年为限，县令以四年为限。十六日，仆固蠩兼御史大夫，充任朔方行营节度使。这月，吐蕃大举入侵河、陇，攻陷我秦、鄯、洮、岷等州，吞没了陇右之地。
English: The meritorious vassals were all given iron coupons, their names were collected in the Great Temple, and images were drawn on the Lingyaku Pavilion. Historians and county magistrates were henceforth transferred to different positions, historians to a three-year term, and county magistrates to a four-year term. On the 16th, the servant Gu Yao, who was also the chief historian, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Shuo-Fangxing Battalion. This month, Tu Yao launched a large-scale invasion of He, Yao, and invaded the provinces of I Ch'in, Yao, Yao, and Yao, engulfing the

古文：八月，以荆南节度使李岘为宗正卿。
现代文：八月，以荆南节度使李岘为宗正卿。
English: In August, the Jingnan Festival was held to make Li Jie the Zongzheng Emperor.

古文：九月壬戌朔，仆固怀恩拒命于汾州，遣宰臣裴遵庆往宣抚之。
现代文：九月一日是朔日，仆固怀恩在汾州拒绝王命，皇上派宰相裴遵庆前往安抚他。
English: The first day of September was the New Year's Day. The servant Gu Wai En refused the king's order in Zhangzhou. The emperor sent the prime minister Pei Zunqing to pacify him.

古文：已丑，吐蕃寇泾州，刺史高晖以城降，因为吐蕃乡导。
现代文：十九日，吐蕃入侵泾州，刺史高晖带城池投降，并且替吐蕃当向导。
English: On the 19th day of the month, the Tuobao invaded Zhangzhou, and Gaozhi Gaozhuo surrendered the city and acted as a guide for the Tuobao.

古文：冬十月庚午朔。辛未，高晖引吐蕃犯京畿，寇奉天、武功、盩厔等县。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日，二日，高晖引吐蕃侵犯京畿，入侵奉天、武功、銩稨等县。
English: The first day of October in winter is the New Year's Day. On the second day, Gao Jiuquan invaded Gyeonggi, and invaded the counties of Mukden, Wukong and Ye.

古文：蕃军自司竹园渡渭，循南山而东。
现代文：吐蕃军从司竹园渡过渭河，顺南山往东进攻。
English: The Tubo army crossed the Tuo River from Sizhuyuan and attacked eastward along the Nanshan Mountain.

古文：丙子，驾幸陕州，上出苑门，射生将王献忠率四百骑叛，胁丰王已下十王归京。
现代文：七日，皇上驾到陕州。皇上出宫苑门，善于射击的官员射生将王献忠率四百骑兵叛乱，胁迫丰王以下十王返归京城。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor drove to Shaanxi. The emperor went out of the palace garden gate, and the officials who were good at shooting shot Wang Xianzhong and led 400 cavalrymen to rebel, forcing Feng Wang and the following ten kings to return to Beijing.

古文：从官多由南山诸谷赴行在。
现代文：随从官员大多由南山各山谷奔赴皇上的临时驻地。
English: Most of the accompanying officials rushed from the valleys of the Nanshan Mountains to the emperor's temporary residence.

古文：郭子仪收合散卒，屯于商州。
现代文：郭子仪收集散兵，屯扎在商州。
English: Guo Ziyi gathers scattered soldiers and settles in Shangzhou.

古文：丁丑，次华州，官吏藏窜，无复储拟。
现代文：八日，驻扎在华州，官吏们藏匿逃窜，不再有皇上登位的打算。
English: On the 8th, stationed in Huazhou, the officials hid and fled, and there was no longer any intention of the emperor ascending the throne.

古文：会鱼朝恩领神策军自陕来迎驾，乃幸朝恩军。
现代文：恰值鱼朝恩率领神策军从陕州来迎接皇上，皇上于是驾到鱼朝恩军中。
English: Just at the right time, Yu Chaon led the Shensha army from Shaanxi to meet the emperor, and the emperor then drove to Yu Chaon's army.

古文：戊寅，吐蕃入京师，立广武王承宏为帝，仍逼前翰林学士于可封为制封拜。
现代文：九日，吐蕃攻入京师，立广武王承宏为皇帝，仍旧逼迫先前任过翰林学士的于可封写出制来封拜。
English: On the 9th, Tubo invaded Beijing and installed Guangwu Wang Chenghong as emperor, still forcing the former Hanlin scholar Yu Kefeng to write out the system and worship it.

古文：辛巳，车驾至陕州。
现代文：十二日，皇上驾到陕州。
English: On the 12th, the emperor drove to Shaanxi.

古文：子仪在商州会六军使张知节，乌崇福、长孙全绪等率兵继至，军威遂振。
现代文：郭子仪在商州，恰巧六军使张知节、乌崇福、长孙全绪等率兵相继到来，军威于是大振。
English: Guo Ziyi was in Shangzhou, and it just so happened that the envoys of the Six Armies, Zhang Zhijie, Wu Chongfu, and the eldest son Quanxu, arrived one after another, and the military power was greatly shaken.

古文：旧将王甫诱聚京城恶少，齐击街鼓于硃雀街，蕃军震慑，狼狈奔溃。
现代文：旧将王甫诱聚集京城中不务正业之少年，一起在朱雀街同时击鼓，吐蕃军震惊害怕，狼狈奔逃。
English: The former general Wang Fu lured young boys from the capital who were not engaged in any serious business to play the drums together in Suzaku Street. The Tubo troops were shocked and frightened, and fled in panic.

古文：庚寅，子仪收京城。
现代文：二十一日，郭子仪收复京城。
English: On the twenty-first day, Guo Ziyi recaptured Beijing.

古文：壬辰，以宰臣元载判天下元帅行军司马，京兆尹、兼吏部侍郎严武为黄门侍郎，朗州刺史第五琦为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：二十三日，以宰辅之大臣元载兼任地位较小的元帅行军司马，京兆尹、兼吏部侍郎严武为黄门侍郎，郎州刺史第五琦为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
English: On the 23rd, Genzai, the minister of Zaisuke, also served as a marshal marching Sima with a lesser status, Jing Zhaoyin, concurrently the attendant of the personnel department, Yan Wu, was the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and the 5th grade of the attendant of the provincial governor was Jing Zhaoyin, concurrently the attendant of the provincial governor.

古文：癸巳，以郭子仪为京留守。
现代文：二十四日，以郭子仪为京师留守。
English: On the 24th, Guo Ziyi left for Beijing.

古文：高晖闻吐蕃溃，以三百骑东奔至潼关，为关守李伯越所杀。
现代文：高晖听说吐蕃崩溃，率三百骑兵往东逃到潼关，被潼关守将李伯越所杀。
English: Hearing of the collapse of Tubo, Gao Yao led 300 cavalrymen to flee east to Shaoguan. He was killed by the guard of Shaoguan, Li Bo Yue.

古文：十一月辛丑朔，太常博士柳伉上疏，以蕃寇犯京师，罪由程元振，请斩之以谢天下。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日，太常博士柳伉上疏，因为吐蕃入侵京师，这是由于程元振犯罪所致，请斩他以向天下谢罪。
English: The first day of November is the New Year's Day. Dr. Tachang Liu Xuan Shang Zuo, because of the invasion of Beijing Division, this is due to the crime of Cheng Yuan Zhen, please behead him to thank the world for the crime.

古文：上甚嘉纳，以元振有保护之功，削在身官爵，放归田里。
现代文：皇上对柳伉非常赞许，而且采纳他的建议，只是因为程元振有保护皇上登位之功劳，仅仅削除本身官职爵位，放他归还乡里。
English: The emperor was very appreciative of Liu Xuan, and adopted his suggestion only because Cheng Yuan Zhen had the merit of protecting the emperor's ascension to the throne. He only removed his official title and rank, and let him return to his hometown.

古文：十二月甲辰，宦官市舶使吕太一逐广南节度使张休，纵下大掠广州。
现代文：三日，宦官市舶使吕太一驱逐广南节度使张休，纵使部下大肆掳掠广州。
English: On the third day, the eunuch city's naval envoy, Lü Taichi, expelled the Guangnan festival envoy, Zhang Xiu, even though his subordinates plundered Guangzhou.

古文：丁亥，车驾发陕郡还京。
现代文：十二月十九日，皇上车驾从陕郡出发回京。
English: On December 19th, the imperial car drove back to Beijing from Shaanxi.

古文：辛卯，鄂州大风，火发江中，焚船三千艘，焚居人卢舍二千家。
现代文：二十三日，鄂州大风，大火从江中燃烧，焚烧船只三千艘，焚烧民房二千家。
English: On the 23rd, there was a strong wind in Ezhou, and the fire burned from the middle of the river, incinerating three thousand ships and two thousand houses.

古文：甲午，上至自陕州。
现代文：二十六日，皇上从陕州到来。
English: On the 26th, the emperor arrived from Shaanxi.

古文：乙未，以侍中苗晋卿为太保，黄门侍郎、同平章事裴遵庆为太子少傅，并罢知政事；宗正卿、梁国公李岘为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：二十七日，以侍中苗晋卿为太保，黄门侍郎、同平章事裴遵庆为太子少傅，两人都罢免知政事；宗正卿、梁国公李岘为黄门侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: On the 27th, Miao Jinqing, the middle-ranked attendant, was appointed as the grand chamberlain, Huangmen waiter, and Tongping Zhangji Pei Zunqing was appointed as the prince's junior tutor. Both of them were dismissed from the political affairs; Zong Zhengqing and Liang Guogong were appointed as Huangmen waiter and Tongping Shumen lower-ranked attendant.

古文：丙申，放广武王承宏于华州，一切不问。
现代文：二十八日，流放广武王承宏到华州，其他一切罪责不加追究。
English: On the 28th, Guangwu Wang Chenghong was exiled to Huazhou, and all other criminal responsibilities were not pursued.

古文：丁酉，朔方行营节度使仆固瑒为帐下枭首来献。
现代文：二十九日，朔方行营节度使仆固蠩被帐下人杀了头前来奉献。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the festival of the Shuo Fangxing Festival made the servant Gu Yao come forward to be sacrificed after he was killed by his subordinates.

古文：怀恩闻瑒死，烧营遁入吐蕃。
现代文：仆固怀恩听说仆固蠩死了，烧毁了营盘逃入吐蕃。
English: When Minion Gu Wai Yan heard that Minion Gu Yao had died, he burned down the camp and fled to Tubo.

古文：朝臣称贺，上不悦，曰： 朕之凉德，信不及人，致勋臣颠覆，用增愧恧，何至贺焉！ 
现代文：朝廷大臣祝贺，皇上不悦，道： 朕的德薄，诚信不被人相信，以致大臣叛逃，这只能增加我的惭愧，哪里值得祝贺！ 
English: The minister of the court congratulates, the emperor is not pleased, saying: My virtue is weak, my integrity is not believed, so that the minister defected, this can only increase my shame, what is worth congratulating!

古文：程元振自三原县衣妇人服入京城，京兆府擒之以闻，乃下御史台鞫问。
现代文：程元振从三原县穿妇人服装进入京城，京兆府将他捉住报告皇上，于是将程元振下到御史台审问。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen entered Beijing from Mihara County wearing women's clothing. Beijing Zhao Prefecture caught him, reported to the emperor, and then sent Cheng Yuan Zhen down to the Imperial History Museum for interrogation.

古文：吐蕃陷松州、维州、云山城、笼城。
现代文：吐蕃攻陷松州、维州、云山城、笼城。
English: In Tubo, Songzhou, Wizhou, Yunshan City, and Jiecheng were captured.

古文：二年春正月己亥朔。
现代文：广德二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of the second year of the Guangde Spring is the New Year's Day.

古文：壬寅，御史台以程元振狱状闻，配流溱州。
现代文：四日，御史台把程元振案件情况报告皇上，皇上将程元振发配到溱州。
English: On the fourth day, the Imperial History Channel reported the situation of Cheng Yuan Zhen's case to the emperor, and the emperor sent Cheng Yuan Zhen to Zhangzhou.

古文：既行，追念旧勋，特矜遐裔，令于江陵府安置。
现代文：程元振已经发配了，皇上追念旧的功劳，特别怜悯他的后代，令他们在江陵府安置。
English: Cheng Yuan Zhen had already been dispatched, the emperor remembered his old merits, especially pitied his descendants, and ordered them to be resettled in Gangneung.

古文：甲辰，复置京畿观察使，以御史中丞领之。
现代文：六日，重新设置京畿观察使，由御史中丞负责。
English: On the 6th, the Gyeonggi Observation Mission was re-established, and Goshi Chujo was put in charge.

古文：癸卯，尚书右丞颜真卿为刑部尚书、兼御史大夫，充朔方宣慰使。
现代文：五日，尚书右丞颜真卿为刑部尚书、兼御史大夫，充任朔方宣慰使。
English: On the fifth day, Yan Zhenqing, the right-hand man of Shangshu, was appointed as the official secretary of the criminal department and also the chief historian, and was appointed as the consolation envoy of the Shuo side.

古文：癸亥，吏部尚书、同平章事、度支转运使刘晏为太子宾客，黄门侍郎、同平章事李岘为太子詹事，并罢知政事。
现代文：二十五日，吏部尚书、同平章事、度支转运使刘晏为太子宾客，黄门侍郎、同平章事李岘为太子詹事，都罢免知政事。
English: On the 25th, the officials Shang Shu, Tong Ping Zhang Jie, and Du Shi Zhunun made Liu Ye the prince's guest, and Huangmen Zhi Rong, Tong Ping Zhang Jie, and Li Wei were the prince's guests. They were all removed from the position of chancellor.

古文：以前右散骑常侍王缙为黄门侍郎，太常卿杜鸿渐为兵部侍郎，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：以先前的右散骑常侍王缙为黄门侍郎，太常卿杜鸿渐为兵部侍郎，都同时任同中书门下平章事。
English: With the previous right-hand rider, Wang Qian, as the Yellow Gate attendant, and Grand Secretary Du Hongqian as the Hyobus attendant, they were both simultaneously appointed to the same position as the Zhongshumen lower level.

古文：罢度支使，以户部侍郎第五琦专判度支及诸道盐铁、转运铸钱等使。
现代文：撤销度支使，以户部侍郎第五琦专门兼任度支及诸道盐铁、转运、铸钱等使。
English: The post of imperial envoy was abolished, and the fifth grade of the Household Division's chamberlains were appointed to serve as imperial envoys, as well as envoys for salt, iron, transportation, and minting.

古文：甲子，元帅，尚书令雍王三上章让皇太子。
现代文：二十六日，元帅、尚书令雍王三次上奏章辞让皇太子。
English: On the 26th, the marshal and Shang Shuxu ordered Yong Wang to make a speech to the crown prince three times.

古文：第五琦奏诸道置常平仓使司，量置本钱和籴，许之。
现代文：第五琦上奏请求各道设置常平仓使司，根据情况设置本钱和买米，皇上同意了。
English: In the fifth imperial edict, it was requested that each province should set up a Jangpingang envoy, and set up capital and buy rice according to the situation. The emperor agreed.

古文：丁卯，司徒、兼中书令郭子仪充河东副元帅、河中等处观察，兼云州大都督、单于镇北大都护。
现代文：二十九日，司徒、兼中书令郭子仪充任河东副元帅、河中等处观察使，又兼云州大都督、单于镇北大都护。
English: On the 29th, Sito and Guo Ziyi, also the Chinese envoy, were appointed as the vice-marshal of Hedong, the observation envoy of the middle section of the river, the governor of Yunnan Province, and the guard of the northern capital of Shanyu Town.

古文：二月己巳朔，册天下兵马元帅，尚书令，雍王适为皇太子。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，册封天下兵马元帅、尚书令、雍王适为皇太子。
English: February 1st is the New Year's Day, and Marshal of the Horse and Cavalry, Shang Shuling, and Yong Wang Sui were proclaimed crown princes.

古文：癸酉，上亲荐献太清宫、太庙。
现代文：五日，皇上亲自在太清宫、太庙祭祀。
English: On the fifth day, the emperor himself held a religious service at the Imperial Palace and the Imperial Temple.

古文：乙亥，祀昊天上帝于圆丘，即日还宫。
现代文：七日，在圆丘祭祀昊天上帝，当天回宫。
English: On the seventh day, they offered sacrifices to Haotian God in the round mound, and returned to the palace on the same day.

古文：戊寅，以沣州刺史裴冕为左仆射兼御史大夫，充东都、河南、江南、淮南转运使。
现代文：十日，以澧州刺史裴冕为左仆射兼御史大夫，充任东都、河南、江南、淮南转运使。
English: On the 10th, he appointed Zhangzhou Zishi Pei Guan as his left-hand man and also as his chief historian, and served as the transfer envoy to Dongdu, Henan, Jiangnan and Huainan.

古文：乙未，第五琦开决汴河。
现代文：二十七日，第五琦挖决汴河。
English: On the 27th day, the fifth trench was dug to break the Weihe River.

古文：五月丁酉朔。戊午，敕中书、门下两省加置散骑常侍四员，官为正三品。
现代文：五月一日是朔日，二十二日，命令中书、门下两省增加设置散骑常侍四名，官阶为正三品。
English: The first day of May was the New Year's Day, and on the 22nd day, the order was issued to increase the number of horseback riding attendants in the two provinces, and the official rank was Senior Third Rank.

古文：庚申，罢岁贡孝悌力田、童子等科。
现代文：二十九日，撤销每年科举考试中的孝悌力田、童子等科。
English: On the 29th, the subjects of filial piety, children and other subjects in the annual examination were revoked.

古文：甲子，禁钿作珠翠等，委所司切加捉搦。
现代文：二十八日，禁止镶嵌珠宝翡翠等装饰器物，委任有关部门对违禁者加以拘留。
English: On the 28th, it banned the inlaying of jewelry, jade and other decorative objects, and appointed relevant departments to detain those who violated the ban.

古文：癸未，制： 太保、兼中书令、灵州大都督府长史、单于镇北副大都护、充朔方节度、关内度支营田盐池押诸蕃部落副大使、知节度事、六城水运使、河北副元帅、上柱国、大宁郡王仆固怀恩，先任灵州大都督府长史、单于镇北副元帅、朔方节度使宜并停，其太保、兼尚书令、大宁郡王如故。
现代文：六月十七日，皇上下制： 太保、兼中书令、灵州大都府长史、单于、镇北副大都护、充任朔方节度使、关内度支使、营田使、盐池使、押诸蕃部落副大使、知节度事、六城水运使、河北副元帅、上柱国、大宁郡王仆固怀恩，先前任灵州大都督府长史、单于、镇北副元帅、朔方节度使都应撤销，太保、兼尚书令、大宁郡王仍旧担任。 
English: On June 17th, the Emperor's subordinate and subordinate positions were abolished: Taipo, concurrently the Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, the Governor of Lingshou, Zanyu, the Deputy Governor of Zhenbei, the Deputy Governor of Shuo, the Deputy Governor of Guanzhong, the Deputy Governor of Guanzhong, the Deputy Governor of Yingtian, the Deputy Governor of Yanchi, the Deputy Ambassador of Zhouzhuang, the Deputy Governor of Zhucheng, the Deputy Governor of Liucheng, the Vice-Marshal of Hebei, the Vice-Marshal of Shangzhuang, the Vice-Marshal of Guhu

古文：七月己酉，河南副元帅、太尉、兼侍中、临淮王李光弼薨于徐州，废朝三日。
现代文：七月十四日，河南副元帅、太尉、兼侍中、临淮王李光弼在徐州去世，皇上三日停止不上朝。
English: On July 14th, Li Guangyao, Henan Vice-Marshal, First Lieutenant, Concurrent Vice-Marshal, and Linhuai King, passed away in Xuzhou. On the 3rd, the emperor stopped visiting the imperial court.

古文：判度支第五琦兼京兆尹、御史大夫。
现代文：兼任度支使的第五琦兼任京兆尹、御史大夫。
English: The fifth generation, who also served as the imperial envoy, also served as the emperor's secretary and chief historian.

古文：八月丁卯，宰臣王缙为侍中，持节都统河南、淮西、淮南、山南东道节度行营事，进封太原郡公。
现代文：八月二日，宰辅之臣王缙为侍中，持符节都统河南、淮西、淮南、山南东道节度行营事，晋封为太原郡公。
English: On August 2, Wang Xi, a vassal of the vice-governor, became an attendant, and held festivals in Henan, Huaixi, Huainan, and Shannan, and was promoted to Taiyuan County.

古文：固让侍中，从之。
现代文：王缙坚决辞让侍中，皇上同意了。
English: Wang Yao resolutely resigned as an attendant, and the emperor agreed.

古文：宰相杜鸿渐判门下省事。
现代文：宰相杜鸿渐兼任较低的门下省事职务。
English: The prime minister, Du Hongqian, also holds a lower-ranking provincial post.

古文：癸巳，王缙兼领东京留守。
现代文：二十八日，王缙兼任较低的东京留守一职，但不到任居其位。
English: On the 28th, Wang Qian concurrently served as a lower-ranking official in Tokyo, but did not take up his post.

古文：九月乙未朔。
现代文：九月一日是朔日。
English: September 1st is New Year's Day.

古文：丙申，诏征河中兵讨吐蕃，将发，是夜军众喧噪，劫节度使崔寓家财及民家财产殆尽，皆重装而行，吏不能禁。
现代文：二日，皇上下诏书征调河中兵讨伐吐蕃，军队将要出发，这一夜军队喧哗闹事，将节度使崔寓的家财及百姓财产几乎抢光，都带着抢来的沉重包袱出发，官员们不能禁止。
English: On the second day, the emperor issued an imperial edict to conscript and dispatch soldiers from the middle of the river to fight against the Tibetans, and the army was about to set out. That night, the army made a lot of noise and trouble, and almost robbed the family wealth and people's property of the Cui family. They all set out with the heavy burden they had robbed. The officials could not forbid it.

古文：自七月大雨未止，京城米斗值一千文。
现代文：从七月份起下大雨不止，京城内大米一斗值一千文。
English: Since July, it has been raining heavily, and a barrel of rice in the capital costs 1,000 mon.

古文：蝗食田。
现代文：蝗虫吃田中庄稼。
English: Locusts eat crops in the fields.

古文：丙午，河东节度使辛云京检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事、太原尹、北京留守。
现代文：十二日，河东节度使辛云京任检校尚书右仆射、同中书门下平章事、太原尹、北京留守。
English: On the 12th, the Hedong Festival made Xin Yunjing, who was in charge of the inspection of the school, send Shang Shuxu to the right to shoot, and Ping Zhang to the left, and Taiyuan Yin to Beijing.

古文：己酉，江南西道观察，洪州刺史张镐卒。
现代文：十五日，江南西道观察、洪州刺史张镐去世。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Ye, an observer of the West Road of the South Yangtze River and a historian of Hongzhou, passed away.

古文：辛亥，河东副元帅、中书令、汾阳郡王郭子仪加太尉，充北道邠宁、泾原、河西已东通和吐蕃及朔方招抚使；陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉进位司徒，充南道通和吐蕃使、凤翔秦陇临洮已东观察使。
现代文：七日，河东副元帅、中书令、汾阳郡王郭子仪给予太尉的加官，充任北道宁、泾原、河西以东通和吐蕃及朔方招抚使；陈郑、泽潞节度使李抱玉晋位司徒的加官，充任南道通和吐蕃使、凤翔、秦、陇、临洮以东观察使。
English: On the 7th, the Vice-Marshal of Hedong, the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and Wang Guo Ziyi of Shenyang County were promoted to the rank of captain, and served as the recruiting envoys for Ning, Yuyuan, Hedong and Dongtong in the North, and for Tuy and Shuo in the West; Chen Zheng and Zeyong Jiedu were promoted to the rank of Sidu, and served as the recruiting envoys for Tongtong and Tuy in the South, and the observation envoys for Fengxiang, Qin, Handan and Linyi in the East.

古文：子仪三表恳让太尉，许之。
现代文：郭子仪三次上表恳请辞让太尉的加官，皇上同意了。
English: Guo Ziyi asked the emperor for his resignation three times, and the emperor agreed.

古文：己未，剑南节度严武攻拔吐蕃当狗城，破蕃军七万。
现代文：二十五日，剑南节度使严武攻克吐蕃当狗城，打破吐蕃军七万之众。
English: On the 25th, the Jian'nan Festival sent troops to invade and defeat the 70,000-strong Tujia army.

古文：尚书左丞杨绾知东京选，礼部侍郎贾至知东都举。两都分举选，自此始也。
现代文：尚书左丞杨绾主持东京科举事，礼部侍郎贾至主持东都科举事，两都分别选拔科举人才，从此开始。
English: Shangshu Zuorong Yang Jie presided over the Tokyo Science Fair, and Jia, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, presided over the East-Tokyo Science Fair. Both of them selected talent for the science fair, starting from here.

古文：辛酉，以太子詹事李岘为吏部尚书、兼御史大夫，知江南东西及福建道选，并观农宣慰使。仍命洪州刺史李勉副知选事。
现代文：二十七日，以太子詹事李岘为吏部尚书、兼任御史大夫，主持江南东道、江南西道及福建道选拔科举人才事，并任观农宣慰使；仍然命令洪州刺史李勉为副，主持选拔科举人才事。
English: On the 27th, the ethereal son of Zhan Zhi, Li Qian, was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department and concurrently served as the chief historian, presided over the selection of candidates for the Jiangnan host, Jiangnan West Road and Fujian Road, and served as the consoling ambassador for the peasants; he still ordered the Hongzhou chief historian Li Qian to be the deputy and preside over the selection of candidates for the scientific examination.

古文：是秋，蝗食田殆尽，关辅尤甚。米斗千钱。
现代文：这年秋天，蝗虫将农田庄稼吃光了，关中及京城附近地区虫灾尤其厉害，大米一斗一千文。
English: This autumn, the locusts ate up the farmland crops. The insect infestation was particularly severe in Guanzhong and the areas near the capital city. One barrel of rice cost 1,000 mon.

古文：冬十月丙寅，仆固怀恩引吐蕃二万寇邠州，节度使白孝德闭城拒守。
现代文：冬十月二日，仆固怀恩带领吐蕃军队二万人入侵州，州节度使白孝德关闭城门坚守。
English: In winter, on October 2nd, the servant Gu Wai Yan led the Tujing army of 20,000 people to invade the state, and the state festival made Bai Xiaode close the city gate and stand firm.

古文：丁卯，寇奉天，京师戒严。
现代文：三日，吐蕃入侵奉天，京师戒严。
English: On the third day, Tubo invaded Mukden, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：先锋郭晞斩贼营于邠州西，俘斩数百计。
现代文：先锋郭在州西攻破贼营，俘虏、杀掉的敌人以数百来计算。
English: Pioneer Guo attacked and broke the bandit camp in the west of the state, and the number of captured and killed enemies was counted in the hundreds.

古文：子仪屯泾阳，蕃军挑战，子仪不出。
现代文：郭子仪屯扎在泾阳，吐蕃军挑战，郭子仪不出战。
English: Guo Ziyi camped in Fenyang and challenged the Tubo army. Guo Ziyi did not go to war.

古文：甲申，河南尹苏震卒。
现代文：二十日，河南尹苏震去世。
English: On the 20th, Henan Yin Suzhen passed away.

古文：剑南严武奏收吐蕃盐川城。
现代文：剑南节度使严武上奏报告收复了吐蕃盐川城。
English: The Jian'nan Festival made Yanwu recapture the city of Tubo Yatcheon.

古文：十一月乙未，怀恩与蕃军自溃，京师解严。
现代文：十一月二日，仆固怀恩与吐蕃军自我崩溃，京师解严。
English: On November 2nd, Gu Wai En's minions and the Tubo army self-destructed, and the Beijing division was relieved.

古文：丁未，子仪自泾阳入觐，诏宰臣百僚迎之于开远门，上御安福寺待之。
现代文：十四日，郭子仪从泾阳入朝朝见皇上，皇上下诏命令宰辅诸臣及百官在开远门迎接，皇上驾到安福寺等待郭子仪到来。
English: On the 14th, Guo Ziyi entered the imperial court from Shenyang to meet the emperor. The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering all the subordinate vassals and officials to meet at the open gate. The emperor drove to Anfu Temple to wait for Guo Ziyi's arrival.

古文：十二月乙丑，加子仪关内、河中副元帅兼尚书令，吏部侍郎暢璀为左散骑常侍、河中尹。
现代文：十二月二日，又赐予郭子仪关内、河中副元帅兼尚书令的加官，吏部侍郎畅璀为左散骑常侍、河中尹。
English: On December 2nd, Guo Ziyi was also given the additional post of Guanzhong, Vice-Marshal of the Central Military Commission, and Vice-Marshal of the Central Military Commission, and the additional post of Shang Shuling.

古文：子仪三表让尚书令，词情恳切，优诏从之。
现代文：郭子仪三次上表章请求辞让尚书令，词语恳切，皇上十分体谅，下诏书听从了他的请求。
English: Guo Ziyi's request to abdicate the throne three times was recorded in the imperial rescript. The words were earnest, the emperor was very considerate, and the imperial rescript complied with his request.

古文：丁卯夜，星流如雨。
现代文：四日，流星像雨一般。
English: On the fourth day, meteors fell like rain.

古文：戊辰，子仪于都省领副元帅事，宰臣百僚送，仍令射生五百戎服自光范门送至省门。右仆射郭英乂以乐迎之。
现代文：五日，郭子仪在尚书省接受领副元帅事，宰辅大臣及百官送行，仍旧命令善于射生物的射生将五百骑兵身穿军服从光范门送到尚书省省门，右仆射郭英又以音乐迎接他。
English: On the fifth day, Guo Ziyi received the post of vice-marshal in Shangshu Province and saw off the vice-minister and 100 officials. He still ordered the good archer to send 500 cavalrymen dressed in military uniforms to the provincial gate of Shangshu Province. His right-hand man, Guo Ying, also greeted him with music.

古文：今将大振纲维，益明惩劝，肇举改元之典，弘敷在宥之泽，可大赦天下，改广德三年为永泰元年。
现代文：这天郭子仪到奉天上任。这年，户部统计人口账簿，所管户数是二百九十三万三千一百二十五户，人口一千六百九十二万三百八十六人。永泰元年春正月一日是朔日，改广德三年为永泰元年。
English: On this day, Guo Zi Yi was appointed to the post. In this year, the number of households under the control of the Household Department's Statistical Population Account Book was 2,933,125, with a population of 16,923,386. The first day of the first month of spring in the first year of Yongtai was the New Year's Day, and the third year of Guangde was the first year of Yongtai.

古文：是日雪盈尺。
现代文：这天下大雪满满一尺厚。
English: On this day, the snow was a foot thick.

古文：戊申，泽潞李抱玉兼凤翔陇右节度使，兼南道通和吐蕃、凤翔 秦陇，临洮已东 ，观察处置等使。仍命四镇行营节度使马璘为副和吐蕃使。
现代文：十六日，泽潞节度使李抱玉兼任凤翔陇右节度使，兼任南道通和吐蕃、凤翔、秦、陇、临洮以东观察使、处置使，仍旧命令四镇行营节度使马瞞为副通和吐蕃使。
English: On the 16th, the Zecheng Festival made Li Baoyu concurrently serve as the right-hand festival envoy of Fengxiang Festival, and also served as the observation and disposition envoy of Nandaotong and the east of Tubo, Fengxiang, Qin, Handan and Linyi, and still ordered the four-town festival to make Ma Xie the vice-channel and Tubo Festival envoy.

古文：癸丑，罢岐州之凤翔县，并入天兴县。
现代文：二十一日，撤销岐州之凤翔县，并入天兴县。
English: On the 21st, Fengxiang County of Qizhou was revoked and merged into Tianxing County.

古文：乙卯，左散骑常侍高适卒。
现代文：二十三日，左散骑常侍高适去世。
English: On the 23rd, Gaoshi, the left rider, passed away.

古文：戊午，剑南节度使严武加检校吏部尚书，山南节度使张献诚加检校工部尚书。
现代文：二十六日，剑南节度使严武加检校吏部尚书，山南节度使张献诚加检校工部尚书。
English: On the 26th, the Jiannan Festival made Yanwu increase the inspection of school officials, and the Shannan Festival made Zhang Xiancheng increase the inspection of school workers.

古文：以前袁州刺史李遵为太子少保，听朝朔望。
现代文：以前任太子少保王王与为太子少师，前任袁州刺史李遵为太子少保，在每月初一、十五两天上朝拜见皇上。
English: Wang Wang, who was formerly the young prince's tutor, and Li Zun, who was the young prince's tutor, formerly the young prince's tutor, visited the emperor on the first and fifteenth day of every month.

古文：二月甲子夜。雷霆震击。
现代文：二月二日夜，雷霆震动轰鸣。
English: On the night of February 2nd, thunder shook and roared.

古文：丁丑，内出宫女千人，品官六百人守洛阳宫。
现代文：十五日，从宫内放出宫女千人。有品级的官员六百人守卫洛阳宫。
English: On the 15th, a thousand palace maids were released from the palace, and six hundred dignified officials guarded Luoyang Palace.

古文：戊寅，党项羌寇富平；焚定陵寝殿。
现代文：十六日，党项、羌人入侵富平，焚烧定陵陵基后殿。
English: On the 16th, the party members and ruffians invaded Fuping and burned down the Dingling Mausoleum.

古文：庚辰，仪王璲薨。
现代文：十八日，仪王王遂去世。
English: On the 18th, the king of ceremonies, King Li, passed away.

古文：诸陵署复隶太常寺。
现代文：所有陵墓之官署重又隶属于太常寺。
English: All the mausoleums are under the jurisdiction of the Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：戊子，河西党项永、定等十二州部落内属，请置宜、芳等十五州，许之。
现代文：二十六日，河西党项、永、定等十二个州部落归附，请求设置宜、芳等十五个州，皇上同意了。
English: On the 26th, twelve state tribes such as the Hexi Party, Yong and Ding were annexed, and the request was made to set up fifteen states such as Yi and Fang, and the emperor agreed.

古文：三月壬辰朔，诏左仆射裴冕、右仆射郭英乂、太子少傅裴遵庆、检校太子少保白志贞、太子詹事臧希让、左散骑常侍暢璀、检校刑部尚书王昂高升、检校工部尚书崔涣、吏部侍郎李季卿王延昌、礼部侍郎贾至、泾王傅吴令瑶等十三人，并集贤院待诏。
现代文：三月一日是朔日，皇上下诏，令左仆射裴冕、右仆射郭英、太子少傅裴遵庆、检校太子少保白志贞、太子詹事臧希让、左散骑常侍畅璀、检校刑部尚书王昂、高升、检校工部尚书崔涣、吏部侍郎李季卿、王延昌、礼部侍郎贾至、泾王傅吴令瑶等十三人，在集贤院待命供奉内廷。
English: The first day of March was the New Year's Day. The emperor issued an imperial edict, ordering the left attendant, Sha Pei Guan, the right attendant, Sha Guo Ying, the prince's younger brother, Fu Pei Zunqing, the prince's younger brother, Bao Bai Zhizhen, the prince's son, Zhan Shijun Xijan, the left attendant, Chang Qi, the inspector of the school, Wang Ang, Gao Sheng, the inspector of the school, the inspector of the school, Choi Qi, the attendant of the office, Li Jiqing, Wang Yanchang, the attendant of the office

古文：上以另臣罢节制者，京师无职事，仍合于禁门书院，间以文儒公卿，宠之也。
现代文：皇上因为有功勋之臣撤销了节制调度的军事大权，在京中又无职事官做，于是将他们集合在禁门书院，而且还间杂着文儒和公卿，以此表示对他们的宠信。
English: The emperor revoked the military prerogative of restraint and scheduling because of meritorious vassals, and there were no officials in Beijing to do so, so he gathered them in the Kinmen Academy, and also mixed with writers and nobles, thus expressing his favor to them.

古文：仍特给飧本钱三千贯。
现代文：仍旧特别给他们伙食费用三千贯。
English: The cost of the special meal for them is still 3,000 Korean Won.

古文：庚子夜，降霜，木有冰。
现代文：九日夜，降霜，树上结冰。
English: For nine days and nights, the frost fell and the trees froze.

古文：岁饥，米斗千钱，诸谷皆贵。
现代文：荒年，大米一斗一千文钱，所有谷类都昂贵。
English: In a bad year, rice costs a thousand yuan a barrel, and all cereals are expensive.

古文：丙午，凤翔李抱玉让司徒，从之，授左仆射、同平章事。
现代文：十五日，凤翔陇右节度使李抱玉辞让司徒，皇上同意了，授予他左仆射、同平章事。
English: On the fifteenth day, Feng Xiang's right scepter caused Li Baoyu to resign and give the scepter to the emperor, and the emperor agreed, awarding him the title of Zuoying and Tongping.

古文：庚戌，吐蕃请和。
现代文：十九日，吐蕃请求讲和。
English: On the 19th, Tubo sued for peace.

古文：诏宰臣元载、杜鸿渐与蕃使同盟于兴唐寺。
现代文：皇上诏令宰辅之臣元载、杜鸿渐与吐蕃使者在兴唐寺结为同盟。
English: The emperor decreed that the vassals of Zaisuke, Motosho, Du Hongqian and the envoy from Tubo should form an alliance at Xingtang Temple.

古文：辛亥，大风拔木。
现代文：二十日，大风拔起树木。
English: On the 20th, high winds uprooted trees.

古文：是春大旱，京师米贵，斛至万钱。
现代文：这年春天大旱灾，京师大米昂贵，一斗米价一万文钱。
English: In the spring of this year, there was a severe drought, and rice in Beijing was expensive, with a barrel of rice costing 10,000 yuan.

古文：夏四月己巳，乃雨。
现代文：夏四月八日，才下雨。
English: In summer, it doesn't rain until April 8th.

古文：戊子，太保致仕苗晋卿薨。
现代文：二十七日，以太保身份辞官的苗晋卿去世。
English: On the 27th, Mr. Miao Jinqing, an ether identity protection officer, passed away.

古文：庚寅，剑南节度使、检校吏部尚书严武卒。
现代文：二十九日，剑南节度使、检校吏部尚书严武去世。
English: On the 29th, Shangshu Yanwu, the chief envoy of the Jianan Festival and the school inspection officer, passed away.

古文：五月癸丑，以尚书右仆射、定襄郡王郭英乂为成都尹、御史大夫，充剑南节度使。
现代文：五月二十二日，以尚书右仆射、定襄郡王郭英为成都尹、御史大夫、充剑南节度使。
English: On May 22, Wang Guo Ying, the right-hand man of Shang Shuxu and the king of Dingxiang County, was appointed as the Chengdu Yin, the chief historian, and the southern festival envoy of Fengjian.

古文：是月麦稔。
现代文：这月麦熟。
English: The barley is ripe this month.

古文：判度支第五琦奏请十亩税一亩，效古什一而征，从之。
现代文：以大官兼任度支使的第五琦上奏请求每十亩地收税一亩，仿效上古征税十分之一的方法，皇上听从了。
English: On the 5th day of the month, the imperial envoy, who was also a high-ranking official, requested the emperor to collect one mu of tax for every ten mu of land, following the ancient method of taxing one tenth, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：六月癸亥，吏部尚书李岘南选回，至江陵，贬衢州刺史。
现代文：六月三日，吏部尚书李岘在江南选拔科举而返回，到了江陵，贬为衢州刺史。
English: On June 3rd, Li Wei, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, returned from the Southern Yangtze River to Jiangling, and was relegated to the status of a minor official of Zhangzhou.

古文：自春无雷，至此月甲申，大风而雷。
现代文：从春天不打雷，到本月二十二日，刮大风打雷。
English: From the spring without thunder, to the 22nd of this month, the wind blows and thunder.

古文：代州置代北军，平州置柳城，析通州石鼓县置巴渠县。
现代文：代州设置代北军，平州设置柳城，分通州石鼓县而设置巴渠县。
English: The Northern Army was stationed in Daizhou, Liucheng was stationed in Pingzhou, Shigou County was stationed in Dentongzhou, and Bacchu County was stationed in Zengdu.

古文：秋七月辛卯朔，淄青节度使侯希逸为副将李怀玉所逐。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日。淄青节度使侯希逸被副将李怀玉所驱逐。
English: The first day of July in autumn is the New Year's Day. Because of the indigo festival, Hou Xiyi was expelled by Vice Admiral Li Huaiyu.

古文：制以郑王邈为平卢、淄青节度大使，令怀玉权知留后事。
现代文：皇上下制：以郑王邈为平卢、淄青节度大使，命令李怀玉暂代淄青留后事。
English: Emperor-subordinate system: with Zheng Wangtao as the ambassador of Pinglu and Jiaqing, Li Huaiyu was ordered to stay in Jiaqing temporarily.

古文：以久旱，遣近臣分录京城诸狱系囚。
现代文：因为长久干旱，派遣近臣分别审察记录京城所有监狱被关押的囚犯。
English: Because of the long drought, close advisers were dispatched to separately inspect and record the prisoners held in all prisons in Beijing.

古文：甲午，升平公主出降驸马都尉郭暧。
现代文：四日，升平公主下嫁给驸马都尉郭暧。
English: On the fourth day, Princess Seungpyeong married Lieutenant Guo Jun, a horse officer.

古文：庚子，雨。
现代文：十日，下雨。
English: On the 10th, it rained.

古文：时久旱，京师米斗一千四百，他谷食称是。
现代文：当时长期干旱，京师大米一斗一千四百文，其他谷类食物都是这样昂贵。
English: At that time, there was a long-term drought, and the price of rice in Beijing was as high as 1,400 yuan per barrel. Other cereal foods were similarly expensive.

古文：八月乙亥，河南道副元帅、泾原节度使马璘封扶风郡王。
现代文：八月十六日，河南道副元帅、泾原节度使马瞞封为扶风郡王。
English: On August 16th, the deputy marshal of Henan Province, Gongyuan Jiedu, made Ma Xiefeng the king of Fufeng County.

古文：九月辛卯，太白经天。
现代文：九月二日，太白星直穿天空。
English: On September 2, a brilliant white star streaked across the sky.

古文：丁酉，仆固怀恩死于灵州之鸣沙县。
现代文：八日，仆固怀恩死在灵州之鸣沙县。
English: On the 8th, the servant Gu Wai En died in Ming Sha County of Lingzhou.

古文：时怀恩诱吐蕃数十万寇邠州，客将尚品息赞磨、尚悉东赞等寇奉天、醴泉，党项羌、浑、奴剌寇同州及奉天，逼凤翔府、盩厔县，京师戒严。
现代文：当时仆固怀恩引诱吐蕃数十万众入侵州，外邦到吐蕃做客将的尚品息赞磨、尚悉东赞等入侵奉天、醴泉，党项羌、浑、奴剌入侵同州及奉天，逼迫凤翔府銩稨县，京师戒严。
English: At that time, Gu Wai's servant Gu Wai lured hundreds of thousands of people from Tubo to invade the prefecture. Foreigners who came to Tubo as guests, such as Shang Pinxi, Zhanma, and Shang Siyongzang, invaded Bingtian and Quanquan. Party members Xiang Yu, Hun Yu, and Nong Yu invaded the same prefecture and Bingtian, forcing Fengxiang County, Beijing Division to impose martial law.

古文：时以星变，羌虏入寇，内出《仁王佛经》两舆付资圣、西明二佛寺，置百尺高座讲之。
现代文：当时由于太白星的变化，羌人吐蕃等入侵，从宫内取出《仁王佛经》两车交给资圣、西明两座佛寺，设立一百尺的高座来讲经。
English: At that time, due to the change of the white star, the intrusion of baboons, spiders, and other insects, two carts of the "Nio Sutra" were taken out of the palace and handed over to two Buddhist temples in Zhisheng and Ximing, and a hundred-foot high seat was set up to recite the sutra.

古文：及奴虏寇逼京畿，方罢讲。
现代文：等到吐蕃、羌人入侵逼近京城附近，方才停止讲经。
English: It was not until the invasion of the Tubo and Yao people approached the vicinity of the capital that they stopped preaching.

古文：己酉，郭子仪自河中至，进屯泾阳，李忠臣屯东渭桥，李光进屯云阳，马璘、郝玉屯便桥，骆奉仙、李伯越屯盩厔，李抱玉屯凤翔，周智光屯同州，杜冕屯坊州。
现代文：十五日，郭子仪从河中到来，进驻泾阳，李忠臣屯扎在东渭桥，李光进屯扎在云阳，马瞞、郝玉屯扎在便桥，骆奉仙、李伯越屯扎在腟腡，李抱玉屯扎在凤翔，周智光屯扎在同州，杜冕屯扎在坊州。
English: On the 15th, Guo Ziyi arrived from Hechu and was stationed in Shenyang, Li Zhongchen was stationed in Dongluqiao, Li Guangjin was stationed in Yunyang, Ma Xie and Yao Yu were stationed in Benqiao, Luo Fengxian and Li Bo Yue were stationed in Handan, Li Bao Yu was stationed in Fengxiang, Zhou Zhiguang was stationed in Tongzhou, and Du Rong was stationed in Fangzhou.

古文：上亲率六军屯苑内。
现代文：皇上亲率六军屯扎在皇宫花园内。
English: The emperor's relatives and their six armies were encamped in the palace garden.

古文：庚戌，下诏亲征。
现代文：十六日，皇上下诏书亲自率领大军征讨。
English: On the 16th, the Emperor issued an imperial edict to personally lead a large army to investigate.

古文：内官鱼朝恩上言，请括私马，京城男子悉皁衣团结，塞京城二门之一。
现代文：太监鱼朝恩上奏道，请搜集私人马匹，京城男子全部穿黑衣应募前来，春夏归农，秋冬聚集给予粮菜，以补充京城二分之一的守卫。
English: The eunuch Yu Chaon gave a speech, saying, "Please collect private horses. All men in the capital should wear black and come to be recruited. In spring and summer, they should return to farming, and in autumn and winter, they should gather to provide grain and vegetables to supplement one-half of the guards in the capital."

古文：士庶大骇，有逾垣凿窦出城者，吏不能禁。
现代文：士民大为惊骇，有人越过城墙，有人打洞出城，官员们不能禁止。
English: The townspeople were horrified. Some people crossed the city wall, others dug a hole to get out of the city. The officials couldn't stop them.

古文：自丙午至甲寅大雨，平地水流。
现代文：从十二日到二十日，下大雨，平地大水横流。
English: From the 12th to the 20th, it rained heavily, and large amounts of water flowed across the plain.

古文：丁巳，吐蕃大掠京畿男妇数万计，焚庐舍而去。同华节度周智光以兵追击于澄城，破贼万计。
现代文：二十三日，吐蕃大肆掠夺京城附近男女数万人，焚烧房屋而去，同华节度使周智光率兵追击到澄城，打破贼人以上万来计算。
English: On the 23rd, Tubo plundered tens of thousands of men and women near the capital city, burned houses and left. The Tonghua Festival caused Zhou Zhiguang to pursue the soldiers to Chengcheng, breaking more than ten thousand thieves.

古文：冬十月己未，复讲《仁王经》于资圣寺。
现代文：冬十月一日，再次在资圣寺讲《仁王佛经》。
English: On the first day of October in winter, "Nio Sutra" was once again taught at Shisho-ji Temple.

古文：吐蕃至邠州，与回纥相遇，复合从入寇。
现代文：吐蕃到州，与回纥军相遇，又会集在一起入侵。
English: When they arrived in Zhuzhou, they met with the Uighur army and gathered together to invade.

古文：辛酉，逼奉天。
现代文：三日，逼近奉天。
English: On the third day, it approached Mukden.

古文：癸亥，党项攻同州，焚州民庐舍。
现代文：六日，党项攻打同州，焚烧同州居民房屋。
English: On the sixth day, the party attacked Tongzhou and burned the houses of the residents of Tongzhou.

古文：丁丑，郭子仪说谕回纥，令与吐蕃疑贰。
现代文：十九日，郭子仪说服回纥，令他与吐蕃分离。
English: On the 19th, Guo Ziyi persuaded Hui Tong to separate from Tu Tong.

古文：庚辰，子仪先锋将白元光合回纥军击吐蕃之众于灵台县之西原，斩首五万级，俘获人畜凡三百里不绝。
现代文：二十二日，郭子仪先锋将白元光会合回纥军在灵台县之西原击破吐蕃之军众，斩首级五万个，俘虏的人、牲畜连接三百里长。
English: On the 22nd, Guo Ziyi, the vanguard, gathered Bai Yuanguang back to the Han army in the West Plains of Lingtai County, defeated the army of Tu Wei, beheaded 50,000 people, and connected the captives and livestock for 300 miles.

古文：辛巳，京师解严。
现代文：二十三日，京师解严。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict was lifted.

古文：壬午，仆固怀恩大将仆固名臣以千骑来降。
现代文：二十四日，仆固怀恩的大将仆固名臣率一千多骑兵来归降。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the general and more than one thousand cavalrymen led by Min Gu Wai Yan surrendered.

古文：诏税百官钱；市绢十万以赏回纥。
现代文：皇上诏令抽百官的税钱，买绢绸约十万匹以赏赐回纥。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to take the tax money of the hundred officials and buy about one hundred thousand pieces of cocoon silk to reward the cocoon.

古文：乙酉，回纥首领胡禄都督来朝。
现代文：二十七日，回纥首领胡禄都督前来朝见。
English: On the 27th, the leader of the Uighurs, Hu Luo Tudou, came to see the emperor.

古文：癸卯，朔方将李回方奏收灵武郡。
现代文：朔方将李回方上奏说收复灵武郡。
English: The Shuo side reported back to the Li side that it would recover Lingwu County.

古文：丁亥，分宣饶、歙户口于秋浦县置池州，分信州弋阳置贵溪县。
现代文：分宣、饶、歙的户口在秋浦县设置池州。分信州弋阳而设置贵溪县。
English: The hukou of Xuanxuan, Rao and Handan was set as Chizhou in Qiupu County, and that of Handan, Xuanxuan and Handan was set as Guixi County.

古文：闰十月辛卯，以京兆少尹黎干为京兆尹。
现代文：闰十月三日，以京兆少尹黎干为京兆尹。
English: On leap October 3rd, Jing Zhao Shao Yin Ligan was cast as Jing Zhao Yin.

古文：丙午，封朔方大将孙守亮等九人为异姓王，李国臣等十三人为同姓王。
现代文：十八日，封朔方大将孙守亮等九人为异姓王。李国臣等十三人为同姓王。
English: On the 18th, nine people, including Sun Shouliang, the general of the Shuo Fang, were kings with different surnames, and thirteen people, including Li Guoqin, were kings with the same surname.

古文：丁未，百僚上表，以军兴急于粮，请纳职田以助费，从之。
现代文：十九日，百官上表，以军队征调打仗急需粮食薪饷，请收取官吏的稻米田的租税以帮助军费，皇上采纳了这一意见。
English: On the 19th, hundreds of officials came up with the idea of conscripting the army to fight the war and urgently needing grain payroll. They asked for the collection of taxes from officials' rice fields to help with military expenses, and the emperor adopted this opinion.

古文：戊申，进封渭北节度使李光进为武威郡王。以刑部侍郎路嗣恭检校工部尚书、兼御史大夫、灵州大都督府长史，充关内副元帅，兼知朔方节度等使。
现代文：二十日，晋封渭北节度使李光进为武威郡王；以刑部侍郎路嗣恭为检校工部尚书、兼御史大夫、灵州大都督府长史，并充任关内副元帅，兼主持朔方节度使等工作。
English: On the 20th, Li Guangjin was appointed as the king of Wuwei County by the Northern Song Dynasty; Lu Cigong, the attendant of the Criminal Law Department, was appointed as the inspector of the school inspection department, the chief historian, and the governor of Lingzhou, and served as the deputy marshal of Guanai and presided over the work of the Northern Song Dynasty.

古文：剑南节度使郭英乂为其检校西山兵马使崔旰所杀，邛州柏茂林、泸州杨子琳、剑南李昌巙皆起兵讨旰，蜀中乱。
现代文：剑南节度使郭英被他的检校西山兵马使崔旰所杀害，邛州柏茂林、泸州杨子琳、剑南李昌都起兵讨伐崔旰，蜀中大乱。
English: The Jiannan Festival caused Guo Ying to be killed by his inspector Xishan Terracotta Warriors and Horses envoy Cui Yao, and Bozhou Bao Maolin, Bozhou Yang Zilin, and Jiannan Li Chang all raised an army to fight Cui Yao, leading to a major riot in Shuzhong.

古文：十一月，宰臣河南都统王缙请减诸道军资钱四十万贯修洛阳宫，从之。
现代文：十一月，宰辅之臣河南都统王缙请求减少各道军费钱四十万贯以上以修缮洛阳宫，皇上同意了。
English: In November, the Emperor agreed to the request of Wang Tong, the Vice-Minister of the Henan Provincial Government, to reduce the military expenditure of each province by more than 400,000 yuan to repair Luoyang Palace.

古文：丙戌，以户部尚书刘晏充东都京畿、河南、淮南、江南东西道、湖南、荆南、山南东道转运、常平、铸钱、盐铁等使，以户部侍郎第五琦充京畿、关内、河东、剑南西转运、常平、铸钱、盐铁等使。
现代文：十二月二十二日，皇上命令： 如听到了各州各道的节度使、观察使已接到公文，仍然征收百姓赋税差役，以致户口大量减少，此后命令转运使察访上报。 永泰二年春正月一日是朔日，大雪铺盖平地有二尺高。减少子孙们继承实封者一半的租税，永远成为常规。三十日，以户部尚书刘晏充任东都京畿、河南、淮南、江南东道、江南西道、湖南、荆南、山南东道转运使、常平使、铸钱使、盐铁使，以户部侍郎第五琦充任京畿、关内、河东、剑南西道转运使、常平使、铸钱使、盐铁使。
English: On December 22nd, the emperor issued an order: If, after listening to the official documents received by the state and provincial tax inspectors and observation officers, the people's tax officials were still levied, resulting in a large reduction in the number of households, then the order was issued for the transfer envoy to visit and report. The first day of the first month of the second year of Yongtai was the new moon, and the snow was two feet high on the flat ground. Reducing the tax of the children and grandchildren who inherited the sealed half became the norm forever. On the 30th, with the head of the household department, Shangshu Liu, he was appointed as the transfer envoy, Changping

古文：至是天下财赋，始分理焉。
现代文：至此天下财赋，才开始分头管理。
English: At this point, the world's wealth began to be managed separately.

古文：二月丁亥朔，释奠于国学，赐宰臣百官飧钱五百贯，于国学食。
现代文：二月一日是朔日，皇上在国子学祭祀先圣先师，赐给宰辅之臣及百官伙食钱五百贯，在国学吃饭。
English: February 1st was the New Year's Day. The emperor held a memorial service for the first saint and the first teacher at Kokugaku, and gave the vassal of the vice-premier and a group of 100 officials 500 kan as food money to eat at Kokugaku.

古文：壬辰，镇南都护依旧为安南都护府。
现代文：六日，镇南都护依旧为安南都护府。
English: On the 6th, the Zhenan tutelage was still the Annan tutelage.

古文：乙未，贬刑部尚书颜真卿为峡州员外别驾，以不附元载，载陷之于罪也。
现代文：九日，贬刑部尚书颜真卿为陕州员外别驾，因为他不依附元载，元载陷害他，使他获罪。
English: On the 9th, the Penal Correction Department singled out Shang Shuxuan Zhenqing as a Shaanxi member, because he did not adhere to Yuan Zai, Yuan Zai framed him and made him guilty.

古文：壬子，命黄门侍郎、同平章事杜鸿渐兼成都尹，持节充山南西道、剑南东川等道副元帅，仍充剑南西川节度使，以平郭英乂之乱也。
现代文：二十六日，命令黄门侍郎、同平章事杜鸿渐兼任成都尹，持符节充任山南西道、剑南东川等道副元帅，仍然充任剑南西川节度使，以平息杀郭英之叛乱。
English: On the 26th, he ordered Du Hongqian, Huangmen's attendant and Tongping's subordinate, to concurrently serve as Chengdu Yin, and to serve as deputy marshal of Shannan West Road, Jianan East River and other roads, and to continue to serve as Jianan West River's deputy marshal, in order to quell Guo Ying's rebellion.

古文：以四镇行营节度使马璘兼邠州刺史。癸丑，以山南西道节度使、梁州刺史张献诚兼充剑南东川节度观察使，邛州刺史柏茂林充邛南防御使，剑南西山兵马使崔旰为茂州刺史、充剑南西山防御使，从杜鸿渐请也。三月辛未，张献诚与崔旰战于梓州，为旰所败，仅以身免。
现代文：以四镇行营节度使、梁州刺史张献诚兼任剑南东川节度观察使，邛州刺史柏茂林充任邛南防御使，剑南、西山兵马使崔旰为茂州刺史、充任剑南西山防御使，这是皇上听从了杜鸿渐的请求。三月十六日，张献诚与崔旰在梓州作战，被崔旰击败，仅仅本人逃脱而免难。
English: The emperor listened to Du Hongqian's request to appoint Zhang Xiancheng of Liangzhou Province as the inspector of the Dongchuan Festival of Jianan Province, Bao Maolin of Zhangzhou Province as the inspector of the Southern Fujian Festival of Jianan Province, and Cui Gan of Jianan Province and Xishan Province as the inspector of the Western Jianan Festival of Jianan Province. On March 16, Zhang Xiancheng and Cui Gan fought in Zizhou Province and were defeated by Cui Gan. Only Zhang Xiancheng escaped.

古文：夏四月辛亥，诏尚书省郎中授中州刺史，员外郎授下州刺史，为定制。
现代文：夏四月二十六日，皇上诏令，尚书省的郎中可授予中等州郡的刺史，尚书省的员外郎可授予下等州郡的刺史，成为定规。
English: On the 26th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor decreed that the highest-ranking vassal of the Ministry of Education and Culture could be awarded the title of the middle-ranking county magistrate, and the lowest-ranking vassal of the Ministry of Education and Culture could be awarded the title of the lower-ranking county magistrate, which became a fixed rule.

古文：五月丙辰，税青苗地钱使、殿中侍御韦光裔诸道税地回。是岁得钱四百九十万贯。
现代文：五月二日，税青苗地钱使、殿中侍御韦光裔从各道青苗地亩上酌情收取税钱，这年得钱四百九十万贯。
English: On May 2, Wei Guangxiong, the young seedlings tax money envoy and the palace attendant, collected tax money from the young seedlings of each province as appropriate. This year, the money was 4.9 million yuan.

古文：自乾元已来，天下用兵，百官俸钱折，乃议于天下地亩青苗上量配税钱，命御史府差使徵之，以充百官俸料，每年据数均给之，岁以为常式。
现代文：从乾元以来，天下用兵打仗，百官薪俸钱减少，于是议定在天下地亩青苗上酌情提取税收，命御史府差使者征收，以充当百官薪俸。每年依据摊派的数字平均给他们，每年以此作为常规。
English: Since the Qianyuan, the world has been using soldiers to fight wars, and the salaries of the hundred officials have been reduced. Therefore, it was agreed that the tax should be collected as appropriate on the young seedlings of the world's mu, and the emissaries sent by the government should be collected to serve as the salaries of the hundred officials. They should be given on an annual basis according to the apportioned figures, and this should be the norm every year.

古文：六月戊戌，以淮南节度使崔圆检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：六月十四日，以淮南节度使崔圆任检校尚书右仆射。
English: On June 14th, Cui Yuanren was sent to inspect the school on the occasion of the Huainan Festival.

古文：自春旱，此月庚子始雨。
现代文：从春天以来一直干旱，这月十六日才开始下雨。
English: It has been dry since spring, and it only started to rain on the 16th of this month.

古文：丁未，日重轮。其夜，月重轮。
现代文：二十三日，圆如车轮的太阳有两道圆轮。
English: On the 23rd, the sun, which is round like a wheel, has two round wheels.

古文：秋七月辛酉，检校兵部尚书、衢州刺史李岘卒。
现代文：秋七月八日，检校兵部尚书、衢州刺史李岘去世。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the inspector of the school, the military department, Shangshu, and the state inspector of Zhangzhou, Li Yao passed away.

古文：自五月大雨，洛水泛溢，漂溺居人庐舍二十坊。
现代文：从五月下大雨，洛水泛滥猛涨，冲漂了平民住房五十坊。
English: Since the heavy rain in May, the flood of Luo water has soared, and fifty wards of civilian housing have been washed away.

古文：河南诸州水。
现代文：河南各州大水。
English: Every prefecture in Henan Province is facing serious water shortages.

古文：加荆南节度使卫伯玉检校工部尚书。
现代文：加给荆南节度使卫伯玉检校工部尚书之职。
English: The Jingnan Festival was given the task of making the inspection department of the Wei Bo Yuping School keep records.

古文：癸未，太庙二室芝草生。
现代文：三十日，太庙有二室长出灵芝草。
English: On the 30th, two rooms of the Great Temple sprouted Ganoderma lucidum.

古文：八月丁亥，国子监释奠复用牲牢。
现代文：八月四日，国子监祭祀先圣先师重又使用猪、牛、羊三牲。
English: On August 4th, the provincial overseer of the national children's day held a sacrificial rite for the first saint and the first teacher, in which pigs, cattle, and sheep were used.

古文：上元二年，诏诸祠献熟，至是鱼朝恩请复旧制。
现代文：上元二年，皇上诏令所有春祭都献熟食，至此鱼朝恩请求恢复旧制。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, the emperor issued an edict ordering all spring festivals to offer cooked food, at which point Yu Chaon requested the restoration of the old system.

古文：壬寅，以茂州刺史崔旰为成都尹、兼御史大夫、剑南西川节度行军司马，邛南防御使、邛州刺史柏茂林为邛南节度使，从杜鸿渐所请也。
现代文：十九日，以茂州刺史崔旰为成都尹、兼御史大夫、剑南西川节度行军司马，邛南防御使、邛州刺史柏茂林为邛南节度使，这是听从了杜鸿渐的请求也。
English: On the 19th, with the Mengzhou cutter Shi Cui Wei as the Chengdu Yin, concurrently the imperial doctor of history, the Jianan Nishikawa festival as the marching steward, the southern defense envoy, and the Bozhou cutter Shi Bai Maolin as the southern festival envoy, this was also in accordance with the request of Du Hongyan.

古文：癸卯，太子少保裴遵庆为吏部尚书，吏部尚书崔寓为太子少傅。
现代文：二十日，太子少保裴遵庆为吏部尚书，吏部尚书崔寓为太子少傅。
English: On the 20th, the prince's younger brother, Bae Zunqing, became the secretary, and the secretary, Cui Yue, became the prince's younger brother.

古文：甲辰，以开府仪同三司、右监卫大将军、观军容宣慰处置使、神策军兵马使、上柱国、冯翊郡开国公鱼朝恩加内侍监、判国子监事，充鸿胪礼宾等使，进封郑国公。
现代文：二十一日，以开府仪同三司、右监卫大将军、观军容处置使、神策军兵马使、上柱国、冯翊郡开国公鱼朝恩加任内侍监、兼任较小职责的国子监事，并充任鸿胪礼宾使，晋封为郑国公。
English: On the 21st, with the title of Kaifu Yi Tong 3rd Division, Right Supervisor General, Guan Jun Rong Disposition Envoy, Shen Cai Army Terracotta Warriors and Horses Envoy, Shangzhuang Province, Fengye County Kaifu Gongyu Cho Enga served as the internal supervisor, concurrently served as the provincial son supervisor with minor responsibilities, and served as the Hongye Protocol Envoy, he was promoted to Zheng Guogong.

古文：辛亥，以检校礼部尚书裴士淹充礼仪。
现代文：二十八日，以检校礼部尚书裴士淹充任礼仪使。
English: On the 28th, Shangshu Pei, a member of the proctoring department of the school, was appointed as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：九月庚申，京兆尹黎干以京城薪炭不给。奏开漕渠，自南山谷口入京城，至荐福寺东街，北抵景风、延喜门入苑，阔八尺，深一丈。
现代文：九月七日，京兆尹黎干因为京城木炭不能供给，上奏章请求挖决漕河和渠道，从南山、谷口引入京城，直到荐福寺东街，往北抵达景风、延喜门进入皇宫花园，宽八尺，深一丈。
English: On September 7th, because the Beijing Municipal Government could not supply charcoal to the capital city, the Beijing Municipal Government requested to dig a canal and channel from Nanshan and Taniguchi to the capital city, up to the east street of Jianfu Temple, north to Jingfeng, and from Yanxi Gate to the palace garden, with a width of eight feet and a depth of one.

古文：渠成，是日上幸安福门以观之。
现代文：渠道修成，这天皇上驾到安福门来观看。
English: The canal was completed, and the emperor drove up to the Anfu Gate to watch.

古文：丙子，宣州刺史李佚坐赃二十四万贯，集众杖死，籍没其家。
现代文：二十三日，宣州刺史李佚犯贪赃之法，贪污了二十四万贯。聚集众人，当众用棍棒打死，抄他的家并没收全部财产。
English: On the 23rd, Xuanzhou assassin Li Xuan committed the crime of corruption and embezzled 240,000 yuan. Gathered people, publicly clubbed him to death, ransacked his home and confiscated all his property.

古文：冬十月癸未朔。
现代文：冬十月一日是朔日。
English: In winter, the first day of October is New Year's Day.

古文：己丑，宗正卿吴王祗奏上《皇室永泰新论》二十卷，太常博士柳芳撰。
现代文：七日，宗正卿吴王李祗上奏章奉上《皇室永泰新论》二十卷，由太常博士柳芳撰写。
English: On the 7th, Zong Zhengqing Wu Wang Lijuan Shang Zongzhang presented the "Imperial Family Yongtai New Theory" twenty volumes, written by Dr. Liu Fang.

古文：甲子，日长至，上御含元殿，下制大赦天下，改永泰二年为大历元年。
现代文：和蕃使者杨济与蕃使论位藏等人前来朝见。二十四日，皇上命令宰辅之臣在中书省宴请论位藏。十一月二日，乾陵令在陵墓官署获得赤色兔献给皇上。十一日，是夏至，日长，皇上驾到含元殿，下诏令大赦天下，改永泰二年为大历元年。
English: On the 24th, the emperor ordered Zaisuke's vassals to invite him to a banquet in Chusho. On the 2nd of November, Qianlinglingling obtained a red rabbit to present to the emperor at the mausoleum. On the 11th day, the summer solstice, the sun is long, the emperor drove to Hanyuan Hall, issued a decree to pardon the world, and changed Yongtai 2 to the first year of the great calendar.

古文：十二月己亥，彗起匏瓜，其长尺余，犯宦者星。
现代文：十二月十八日，彗星从匏瓜星座处升起，长一尺多，侵犯宦者星。
English: On December 18th, the comet rose from the Mushroom constellation, grew more than a foot long, and encroached on the Pleiades.

古文：癸卯，同华节度使周智光专杀陕州监军张志斌、前虢州刺史庞充，据华州谋叛。
现代文：二十二日，同华节度使周智光私自杀害了陕州监军张志斌。前任虢州刺史庞充占据华州图谋叛乱。
English: On the 22nd, the Tonghua Festival made Zhou Zhiguang commit suicide and killed Zhang Zhibin, the supervisor of the Shaanxi troops. The former Zhangzhou assassin Pangchong occupied Huazhou to plot a rebellion.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：二年春正月壬子朔。
现代文：大历二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of the second year of the Chinese calendar is the new moon.

古文：丁巳，密诏关内、河东副元帅郭子仪治兵讨周智光。
现代文：六日，皇上秘密下诏给关内、河东副元帅郭子仪，让他出兵讨伐周智光。
English: On the sixth day, the emperor secretly issued an edict to Guanai and Hedong Vice-Marshal Guo Ziyi, asking him to send troops to fight Zhou Zhiguang.

古文：壬戌，贬智光为沣州剌史。
现代文：十一日，贬周智光为澧州刺史。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhou Zhiguang was demoted to the status of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁丑，升魏州为大都督府，戊寅，敕： 同、华两州，顷因盗据，民力凋残，宜给复二年，一切蠲免。 
现代文：十三日，以兵部侍郎张仲光为华州刺史、潼关防御使，大理卿敬括为同州刺史、长春宫使。这天，周智光帐下将领砍掉周智光和他的儿子元耀、元干的三个首级，示众以后献给朝廷。十八日诏令潼关设置军队三千。二十六日，升魏州为大都督府。二十七日，皇上敕令道 ：同、华两州，近来因为叛贼占据，百姓生活穷困，应免除两年徭役，其他一切赋税都免除。 
English: On the 13th, Zhang Zhongguang, an attendant of the military department, was appointed as the governor of Huazhou and the defense envoy of Shaoguan, and Dali Sir was appointed as the governor of the same state and the ambassador of Changchun Palace. On this day, the generals under Zhou Zhiguang cut off the three heads of Zhou Zhiguang and his sons, Yuan Yao and Yuan Gan, and presented them to the imperial court. On the 18th, Shaoguan was ordered to set up 3,000 troops. On the 26th, Weizhou was promoted to the grand governor's office. On the 27th, the emperor ordered: In the same way,

古文：庚辰，禁王公、宗子、郡县主之家，不得与军将婚姻交好，委御史台察访弹奏。
现代文：二十九日，禁止王公、宗亲之子及郡主、县主之家与率兵将领结为婚姻友好关系，并委任御史台察访弹劾上奏。
English: On the 29th, Wang Gong, the son of a grandparent, the son of a county magistrate, the son of a county magistrate, and the leader of the soldiers were forbidden to tie a bow tie for marriage and friendship, and the Historian's Office was appointed to investigate and report on the impeachment.

古文：二月壬午，幸昆明池踏青。
现代文：二月二日，皇上驾到昆明池踏青游春。
English: On February 2, the emperor drove to Kunming Lake to visit the Spring Festival.

古文：丙戌，封华州牙将姚怀为感义郡王，李延俊为承化郡王，以斩智光之功也。
现代文：六日，封华州牙将姚怀为感义郡王，李延俊为承化郡王，由于他们有杀周智光的功劳。
English: On the sixth day, Huazhou Fang crowned Yao Huai as the king of Xiangyi County and Li Yanjun as the king of Chenghua County, because they had the merit of killing Zhou Zhiguang.

古文：郭子仪自河中来朝。
现代文：郭子仪从河中来朝见。
English: Guo Zi Yi came from the river to see the morning.

古文：癸卯，宰臣元载王缙、左仆射裴冕、户部侍郎第五琦、京兆尹黎干各出钱三十万，置宴于子仪之第。
现代文：二十三日，宰辅之臣元载、王缙、左仆射裴冕、户部侍郎第五琦、京兆尹黎干各出钱三十万，在郭子仪府中设宴款待郭子仪。
English: On the 23rd, the vassals of the vice-governor, Yuan Zai, Wang Qian, the left-hand servant, Sha Fei Guan, the fifth-ranked servant of the household, and Jing Zhao Yin Ligan each paid 300,000 yuan to hold a banquet to entertain Guo Ziyi in Guo Ziyi's residence.

古文：三月辛亥夜，大风。
现代文：三月一日夜，起大风。
English: On the night of March 1st, a strong wind blew.

古文：丁巳，河中府献玄狐。
现代文：七日，河中府献上黑狐。
English: On the 7th, the black fox was presented by the prefectural government of Kawagoe.

古文：汴宋节度使田神功来朝。
现代文：汴、宋节度使田神功前来朝见。
English: In the Song Dynasty and Song Dynasty festivals, Tian Shengong came to see the emperor.

古文：戊辰，贬太子少保李遵永州司马，坐赃也。
现代文：十八日，贬太子少保李遵为永州司马，因为犯了贪污的罪。
English: On the 18th, the crown prince Shao Bao Li Zun was demoted to Yongzhou Sima for committing the crime of corruption.

古文：甲戌，鱼朝恩宴子仪、宰相、节度、度支使、京兆尹于私第。
现代文：二十四日，鱼朝恩在私人府第宴请郭子仪、宰相、节度使、度支使、京兆尹等人。
English: On the 24th, Yu Chaon held a banquet at his private residence, inviting Guo Zi Yi, the Prime Minister, the Minister of Ceremonies, the Minister of Finance, and others.

古文：乙亥，子仪亦置宴于其第。
现代文：二十五日，郭子仪也在私人府第设宴招待。
English: On the 25th, Guo Ziyi also held a banquet at a private residence.

古文：戊寅，田神功宴于其第。
现代文：二十八日，田神功也在私人府第设宴招待。
English: On the 28th, Tian Sheng Gong also held a banquet at a private residence.

古文：时以子仪元臣，寇难渐平，蹈舞王化，乃置酒连宴。
现代文：当时由于郭子仪是元老大臣，敌寇叛乱渐渐平息，庆贺全国统一，服从王化，于是连连设酒庆贺。
English: At that time, since Guo Ziyi was the Minister of the Elders, the rebellion of the enemy corsairs gradually subsided, celebrating national unification and obedience to the king, so there was a continuous celebration of wine.

古文：酒酣，皆起舞。
现代文：喝酒喝得酣畅愉快之时，都起来舞蹈。
English: They all get up and dance when they've had a good, long drink.

古文：公卿大臣列坐于席者百人。
现代文：公卿大臣排列在座次中者上百人。
English: There are over a hundred ministers of state in the line of succession.

古文：子仪、朝恩、神功一宴费至十万贯。
现代文：郭子仪、鱼朝恩、田神功一次宴会的费用到了十万贯。
English: The cost of a banquet for Guo Ziyi, Yu Chaon and Tian Shengong reached 100,000 yuan.

古文：夏四月巳亥，以江面西道都团练观察等使、洪州刺史李勉为京兆尹，刑部侍郎魏少游为洪州刺史、兼御史大夫、江西观察团练等使。
现代文：夏四月二十日，以江南西道都团练观察使、洪州刺史李勉为京兆尹，刑部侍郎魏少游为洪州刺史、兼御史大夫、江西观察使、团练使。
English: On the 20th day of the 4th month of the summer, the observation envoy for the group training in the west of the Yangtze River Province and the Hongzhou magistrate Li Tsuen were named as Jing Zhaoyun, and the attendant of the criminal justice department Wei Shaoyou was appointed as the Hongzhou magistrate, concurrently the magistrate, the Jiangxi observation envoy, and the group training envoy.

古文：庚子，宰臣内侍鱼朝恩与吐蕃同盟于兴唐寺。
现代文：二十一日，宰辅之臣内侍鱼朝恩在兴唐寺与吐蕃使者结为同盟。
English: On the twenty-first day, Yao Chaon, a vassal of Zaisuke, formed an alliance with the emissary of Tubo at Xingtang Temple.

古文：丙午，加田神功检校右仆射。
现代文：二十七日，加田神功为检校右仆射。
English: On the 27th, Kata Shingo was selected as the school's right-handed shooter.

古文：癸酉，以工部侍郎徐浩为广州刺史、岭南节度观察使。
现代文：以工部侍郎徐浩为广州刺史、岭南节度观察使。
English: Xu Hao, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as the chief historian of Guangzhou and the observer of the Lingnan Festival.

古文：六月戊戌，山南、剑南副元帅杜鸿渐自蜀入朝。
现代文：六月二十日，山南、剑南副元帅杜鸿渐从蜀入朝。
English: On June 20, Vice-Marshal Du Hongqian of Shannan and Jiannan marched from Shu into the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，荆南节度使卫伯玉封城阳郡王。
现代文：二十四日，荆南节度使卫伯玉封为城阳郡王。
English: On the 24th, the Jingnan Festival made Wei Bo Yu the king of Chengyang County.

古文：癸卯，御史大夫王翊卒。
现代文：二十五日，御史大夫王翊去世。
English: On the 25th, Wang Yao, the chief historian, passed away.

古文：秋七月戊申朔，以右散骑常侍于休烈为检校工部尚书、知省事。
现代文：秋七月一日是朔日，以右散骑常侍于休烈为检校工部尚书，并主持尚书省事。
English: The first day of autumn in July is the New Year's Day, with the right horseback rider often serving as the inspector of the school inspection department, and presiding over the inspection of the school.

古文：时方面勋臣升八座者多非正员。朝命正员者以知省事为名。
现代文：当时方面大员功勋之臣升入六部尚书、令、仆射的八名高级官员都不是正职，朝廷便命令正员以主持尚书省为名义。
English: At that time, the eight high-ranking officials who were promoted to the six departments of Shangshu, Ling, and Hubei were not official positions, and the imperial court ordered the official to preside over Shangshu in the name.

古文：以中书舍人张延赏检校河南尹。
现代文：以中书舍人张延赏为检校河南尹。
English: Zhang Yanbo, a middle school teacher, is used as the inspector Henan Yin.

古文：丙寅，以剑南西川节度行军司马崔旰为剑南西川节度观察等使，遂州刺史杜济为剑南东川节度观察等使。
现代文：十九日，以剑南、西川节度行军司马崔旰为剑南、西川节度使、观察使，遂州刺史杜济为剑南东川节度使、观察使。
English: On the 19th, Sima Cui Rong, the secretary of the troops marching to the Jiannan and West River festivals, was the envoy and observer of the Jiannan and West River festivals, and Suizhou Sisi Duji was the envoy and observer of the Jiannan and East River festivals.

古文：以杭州刺史张伯仪为安南都护。
现代文：以杭州刺史张伯仪为安南都护。
English: Zhang Bo Yi from Hangzhou is the protector of the capital city of Annan.

古文：癸酉，析道州延唐县置大历县。
现代文：二十六日，分道州延唐县而设置大历县。
English: On the 26th, Dairi County was established as a subdivision of Yantang County.

古文：甲戌酉时，有白气竟天。
现代文：二十七日晚十八点至十九点，有白色气体布满天空。
English: From 18:00 to 19:00 on the evening of the 27th, white gas filled the sky.

古文：八月庚辰，凤翔节度使李抱玉来朝。
现代文：八月三日，凤翔节度使李抱玉前来朝见。
English: On August 3, the Fengxiang Festival made Li Baoyu come to see the morning.

古文：壬午，月入氐。
现代文：五日，月亮进入氐星星座。
English: On the 5th, the moon will enter the constellation of Eridanus.

古文：丙戌，渤海朝贡。
现代文：九日，渤海前来朝贡。
English: On the 9th, Bohai came to pay tribute.

古文：辛卯，潭、衡水灾。
现代文：十四日，潭州、衡州发生水灾。
English: On the 14th, flooding occurred in Tanzhou and Hengzhou.

古文：丙申，月犯毕。
现代文：十九日，月亮侵犯毕星。
English: On the 19th, the moon encroached upon the star.

古文：壬寅，太常卿、驸马都尉姜庆初得罪，赐自尽。
现代文：二十五日，太常卿、驸马都尉姜庆初得罪，赐他自尽。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Tai Changqing, the lieutenant of the Horse Guards, Jiang Qing, was first offended, and he was ordered to commit suicide.

古文：敕陵庙署复隶宗正寺。
现代文：皇上诏令，在陵庙负责管理的官署仍旧隶属宗正寺。
English: According to the imperial edict, the government office responsible for the management of the mausoleum still belongs to Sojo-ji Temple.

古文：九月戊申朔，岁星守东井七日。
现代文：九月一日是朔日，岁星守在东井星座七天。
English: The first day of September is New Year's Day, and the New Year's Star is in the constellation of the East Well for seven days.

古文：甲寅，吐蕃寇灵州，进寇邠州。
现代文：七日，吐蕃入侵灵州，进犯州。
English: On the seventh day, Tubo invaded Lingzhou.

古文：诏子仪率师三万，自河中镇泾阳，京师戒严。
现代文：皇上诏令郭子仪率三万军队从河中出发镇守泾阳，京师戒严。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Guo Ziyi to lead 30,000 troops to defend the town of Fenyang from the river, and the capital was placed under martial law.

古文：戊午夜，白雾起西北竟天。
现代文：十一日夜，白雾从西北起来布满天空。
English: On the night of the 11th, a white mist rose from the northwest and covered the sky.

古文：子仪移镇奉天。
现代文：郭子仪从泾阳移军队镇守奉天。
English: Guo Ziyi moved troops from Shenyang to guard Fengtian.

古文：乙丑昼，有大流星出于午，没于亥。
现代文：十八日白昼，有个大流星从中午一点出来，半夜二十三点才隐没。
English: On the 18th day of the month, in broad daylight, a large meteor appeared at one o'clock in the afternoon, and did not disappear until midnight on the 23rd.

古文：命左丞李涵宣慰河北。
现代文：命令左丞李涵安抚河北。
English: He ordered General of the Left Li Han to pacify Hebei.

古文：荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches on the Southern Dipper.

古文：辛未，靺鞨使来朝。
现代文：二十四日，使者前来朝见。
English: On the 24th, the emissary came to see me in the morning.

古文：桂州山獠陷州城，刺史李良遁去。
现代文：桂州山獠攻陷州县，刺史李良逃走。
English: Guizhou Shanshan invaded Zhoushu County, stabbed Shi Li Liang and fled.

古文：十月戊寅，灵州奏破吐蕃二万，京师解严。
现代文：十月一日，灵州上奏章，攻破吐蕃人马两万，京师解除戒严。
English: On October 1st, Lingshou issued a proclamation, breaking through the 20,000-strong crowd, and Beijing lifted the martial law.

古文：甲申，减京官职田三分之一，给军粮。
现代文：七日，减少在京官员禄米田三分之一，用来供给军粮。
English: On the 7th, a third of the rice fields allocated to officials in Beijing were reduced to supply military rations.

古文：乙酉，醴泉出于栎阳，饮之愈疾。
现代文：八日，有甘泉从栎阳流出，饮了以后可以治病。
English: On the eighth day, there was a sweet spring flowing out of Shenyang. After drinking it, you can cure yourself.

古文：其侍中、中书令宜升入正二品，门下、中书侍郎升入正三品。 
现代文：回纥、党项派遣使者前来朝见。二十六日，皇上驾到紫宸殿，当面出策论考试茂才异行、安贫乐道、孝悌力田、高蹈不仕等四科举人。十一月十四日，依旧改黄门侍郎为门下侍郎。
English: On the 26th, the Emperor drove to Shishinden, and in front of the Emperor, he held a four-subject examination, including Shosei-hitsugyo, Anpo-le-do, Takahata-ritsa, and Takahata-nushi. On the 14th of November, the Yellow Gate attendant was still changed to the door attendant.

古文：壬戌夜，月晕南北河、东井，镇星入舆鬼，久之方散。
现代文：十六日夜，在天上南北天河、东井星座发生月晕，镇星进入舆鬼星座，很久才散去。
English: On the night of the 16th, a lunar eclipse occurred in the constellations of the South and North Celestial Rivers and the East Well in the sky, and the town star entered the ghost constellation, and it took a long time to disperse.

古文：甲子，月去轩辕一尺。
现代文：十八日，月亮距离轩辕星只一尺。
English: On the 18th, the moon was only one foot away from the star.

古文：己丑，率百官京城士庶出钱以助军。
现代文：十九日，皇上率领百官及京城百姓出钱来助军打仗。
English: On the 19th, the emperor led hundreds of officials and the people of the capital to pay money to help the army fight.

古文：壬申，京师地震，自东北来，其声如雷。
现代文：二十六日，京师地震，开始从东北方向起来，地震声音像打雷。
English: On the 26th, the Beijing earthquake began to rise from the northeast, and the earthquake sounded like thunder.

古文：十二月甲申，凤翔李抱玉来朝。
现代文：十二月八日，凤翔李抱玉前来朝见。
English: On December 8, Fengxiang Li hugged Yu and came to see him in the morning.

古文：丁酉，太原节度使辛云京来朝。
现代文：二十一日，太原节度使辛云京前来朝见。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Taiyuan Festival made Xin Yunjing come to see the morning.

古文：荧惑入壁垒。
现代文：荧惑星进入壁垒星座。
English: The fluorescent planet enters the barrier constellation.

古文：戊戌黑气如尘，竟北方。
现代文：二十二日，黑色气体像尘土，覆盖了整个北方。
English: On the 22nd, the black gas, like dust, covered the entire north.

古文：是秋，河东、河南、淮南、浙江东西、福建等道五十五州奏水灾。
现代文：这年秋天，河东、河南、淮南、浙江东、西、福建等道五十五州水灾。
English: In the autumn of that year, flooding occurred in 55 prefectures, including Hedong, Henan, Huainan, East and West Zhejiang, and Fujian.

古文：三年春正月丙午朔。
现代文：大历三年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the third year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：辛亥，剑南西山置乾州，管招武、宁远二县。
现代文：六日，剑南、西山设置乾州，管辖招武、宁远二县。
English: On the 6th, Jiangnan and Xishan were set up as Qianzhou, with jurisdiction over Zhaowu and Ningyuan counties.

古文：壬子夜，月掩毕。
现代文：七日夜晚，月亮遮掩了毕星。
English: On the evening of the seventh day, the moon covered the stars.

古文：甲子，册新罗国王金乾运母为太妃。
现代文：十九日，册封新罗国王金乾运之母为太妃。
English: On the 19th, the mother of King of Silla, King Jin Kianyun, was crowned as Empress Dowager.

古文：甲戌，以工部侍郎蒋涣为尚书左丞，浙西团练观察使、苏州刺史韦元甫为尚书右丞。左丞李涵、右丞贾至并为兵部侍郎。
现代文：二十四日，以工部侍郎蒋涣为尚书左丞，浙西团练观察使、苏州刺史韦元甫为尚书右丞，左丞李涵、右丞贾至都为兵部侍郎。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the attendant of the Ministry of Industry, Jiang Jie, was appointed as the attendant of the Ministry of War as the attendant of the Ministry of War, the observer of the Western Zhejiang Reunification and the observer of the Western Suzhou Reunification as the attendant of the Ministry of War, the attendant of the Ministry of War as the attendant of the Ministry of War as the attendant of the Ministry of War, and the attendant of the Ministry of War as the attendant of the Ministry of War.

古文：乙亥，永和公主薨。
现代文：三十日，永和公主去世。
English: On the 30th, Princess Yonghe passed away.

古文：二月己卯，以常州刺史李栖筠为苏州刺史、兼御史中丞、浙西团练观察使。
现代文：二月四日，以常州刺史李栖筠为苏州刺史、兼御史中丞、浙江团练观察使。
English: On February 4th, Li Qianqian, the historian of Changzhou, was appointed as the historian of Suzhou, as well as the vice-president of history, and the observer of the group exercise in Zhejiang.

古文：壬午，邠宁节度使马璘来朝。
现代文：七日，宁节度使马瞞前来朝见。
English: On the seventh day, Ning Jiedu asked Ma Xie to come and see him in the morning.

古文：三月乙巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月一日，有日蚀。
English: On March 1st, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：壬申，割恆州行唐县置泜州，以灵寿、恆阳隶之。
现代文：二十八日，分割开恒州行唐县而设氵氐州，使灵寿、恒阳隶属它管辖。
English: On the 28th, Hengzhou and Tang County were split off to form Ganzhou, and Lingshou and Hengyang were placed under its jurisdiction.

古文：夏四月戊寅，以山南西道节度使、邓国公张献诚为检校户部尚书。以疾辞位也。
现代文：夏四月四日，以山南西道节度使、邓国公张献诚为检校户部尚书，因为他以疾病辞去节度使职位。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Deng Guokong Zhang Xiancheng, the festival secretary of Shannan West Road, was appointed as the inspector of the school, because he resigned from the post of festival secretary due to illness.

古文：右羽林将军张献恭为梁州刺史、兼御史中丞，充山南西道节度观察使。兄献诚所荐也。
现代文：右羽林将军张献恭为梁州刺史、兼任御史中丞，充任山南西道节度观察使，这是由他的哥哥张献诚所推荐。
English: Zhang Xianqiong, the general of the Right Uhlin, was appointed as the chief historian of Liangzhou, concurrently served as the vice-president of the imperial history, and served as the observer of the Shannan West Road festival, which was recommended by his brother Zhang Xiancheng.

古文：壬寅，滑亳节度使令狐彰加检校工部尚书。
现代文：二十八日，滑、亳节度使令狐彰给予检校工部尚书的加官。
English: On the 28th day of the month, with the arrival of the Spring Festival and the Mid-Autumn Festival, Ling Foo-Chang was given the additional post of inspector of the inspection department.

古文：剑南西川节度使、兼御史大夫崔旰来朝。
现代文：剑南、西川节度使、兼御史大夫崔旰前来朝见。
English: Jian'nan, Nishikawa Setsudo's envoy, and Goshi no daifu Cui Yao came to see him in the morning.

古文：五月戊申，加崔旰检校右散骑常待。
现代文：五月五日，赐给崔旰检校右散骑常侍的加官。
English: On May 5th, Choe Son Gyeong Gwan was given the additional post of Right Hand Cavalryman.

古文：乙卯，追谥故齐王倓为承天皇帝，兴信公主亡女张氏为恭顺皇后，祔葬。
现代文：十二日，追加谥号给齐王亻炎为 承天皇帝 ，追谥兴信公主已死去的女儿张氏为 恭顺皇后 ，两人一起合葬。
English: On the 12th, the additional honorary title was given to Qi Wang Benyan as the Emperor Chengtian, and the deceased daughter of Princess Xingxin Zhang as the Empress Gongshun, and the two were buried together.

古文：辛酉，改桂州临源县为全义县。
现代文：十八日，改桂州临源县为全义县。
English: On the 18th, Guizhou Linyuan County was changed to QuanYi County.

古文：癸酉，以左散骑常侍崔昭为京兆尹。
现代文：三十日，以左散骑常侍崔昭为京兆尹。
English: On the 30th, the left horseback riding attendant Cui Zhao became Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：是日地震。
现代文：这天地震。
English: There was an earthquake that day.

古文：戊辰，以剑南西川节度使崔旰检校工部尚书，改名宁。宁为柏茂林、杨子琳所攻，宁既入朝，子琳乘虚袭据成都府。
现代文：二十五日，以剑南西川节度使崔旰为检校工部尚书，改名为宁，崔宁被柏林茂、杨子琳所攻打，崔宁已经入朝做官，杨子琳乘虚袭击并占领了成都府。
English: On the 25th, the Jian'nan Xichuan Festival was used to make Cui Yao the inspector of the inspection department of Shangshu, and changed his name to Ning. Cui Ning was attacked by Berlin Mao and Yang Zilin. Cui Ning had already entered the court as an official, and Yang Zilin took advantage of the false attack and occupied Chengdu Prefecture.

古文：朝廷忧之，即日诏宁还成都。
现代文：朝廷为此十分忧虑，当日便下诏命令崔宁返回成都。
English: The imperial court was very worried about this, and on the same day issued an edict ordering Cui Ning to return to Chengdu.

古文：庚午，以邛州剌史鲜于叔明为梓州刺史，充剑南东川节度使。
现代文：二十七日，以邛州刺史鲜于叔明为梓州刺史，充任剑南东川节度使。
English: On the 27th, Shen Yu Shuming, the chief historian of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the chief historian of Zizhou, and served as the chief envoy to the Jian'nan Dongchuan Festival.

古文：六月戊子，承天皇帝祔奉天皇帝庙，同殿异室，庚寅，太子少师王玙卒。
现代文：六月六日，承天皇帝的灵位附在奉天皇帝庙中合祭，两个神位同殿而不同室。八日，太子少师王王与去世。
English: On June 6, the spiritual throne of Emperor Jingtian was attached to the Fengtian Emperor Temple for the festival, and the two divine thrones were in the same hall but in different rooms. On the 8th, the young prince Wang Wang passed away.

古文：壬辰，幽州节度使、检校侍中、幽州大都督府长史李怀仙为麾下兵马使硃希彩所杀。
现代文：十日，幽州节度使、检校侍中、幽州大都督府长史李怀仙被部下兵马使朱希彩所杀。
English: On the 10th day of the month, Shi Lihuaixian, Yuzhou's festival envoy, inspector of schools, and Yuzhou's governor, was killed by Zhu Xisai, a subordinate envoy.

古文：庚子，淮南节度使检校尚书左仆射、知省事、扬州大都督府长史、赵国公崔圆卒。
现代文：二十八日，淮南节度使、检校尚书左仆射、主持尚书省事、扬州大都督府长史、赵国公崔圆去世。
English: On the 28th, Zhao Guogong Cui Yuan, Minister of Huainan Festival, Inspector of Schools Shang Shuxi Zuo Fu Sha, Moderator of Shang Shuxi Provincial Affairs, Governor of Yangzhou, passed away.

古文：闰月己酉，郭子仪加司徒。
现代文：闰六月七日，又给予郭子仪司徒的加官。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month, Guo Zi Yi was also given the additional post of the leader.

古文：庚申，宰臣充河南副元帅王缙兼幽州节度使。
现代文：十八日，宰辅之臣充任河南副元帅王缙兼任幽州节度使。
English: On the 18th, the vassal of the Vice-Marshal of Henan, Wang Qi, was appointed as the Vice-Marshal of Henan and also as the Yuzhou Festival envoy.

古文：以尚书右丞韦元甫扬州大都督府长史，兼御史大夫，充淮南节度观察等使。
现代文：以尚书右丞韦元甫任扬州大都督府长史、兼御史大夫，充任淮南节度使、观察使。
English: Wei Yuanfu, with the title of Shang Shuyuan, served as the governor of Yangzhou and the chief historian, as well as the chief historian, and served as the Huainan Festival envoy and the observation envoy.

古文：西卯，以幽州节度副使、试太常卿硃希彩知幽州留后。
现代文：二十五日，以幽州节度副使、试用太常卿朱希彩主持幽州留后的工作。
English: On the 25th, Zhu Xicai, Vice-Envoy of the Yuzhou Festival and Probationary Grand Marshal, presided over the work after his stay in Yuzhou.

古文：遣兵部侍郎李涵兼御史大夫，使河北宣慰，以幽州乱故也。
现代文：派遣兵部侍郎李涵兼任御史大夫，前往河北安抚，这是因为幽州大乱的原因。
English: He dispatched Li Han, the attendant of the military department, who also served as the chief historian, to pacify Hebei, which was the reason for the Yuzhou Rebellion.

古文：庚午，相州薛嵩、魏州田承嗣、恆州李宝臣并加左右仆射。
现代文：二十八日，相州薛嵩、魏州田承嗣、恒州李宝臣都赐予左仆射或右仆射的加官。
English: On the 28th, Xue Song of Xiangzhou, Tian Heizi of Weizhou, and Li Baochen of Hengzhou were all given additional posts for shooting left-handed or right-handed.

古文：七月壬申，崔宁弟宽攻破杨子琳，收复成都府。
现代文：七月一日，崔宁之弟崔宽攻破杨子琳，收复成都府。
English: On July 1, Cui Nings younger brother Cui Guang defeated Yang Zilin and recovered Chengdu.

古文：是月，五星并聚于东井，占曰：中国之利也。
现代文：这月，金、木、水、火、土五大行星都聚集在东井星座。卜卦的人占卦说： 这是唐王朝有利了。 
English: This month, the five planets of gold, wood, water, fire and earth are gathered in the constellation of the East Well. The fortune-teller said: This is advantageous to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：乙亥，王缙赴镇州。
现代文：四日，王缙奔赴镇州。
English: On the fourth day, Wang Qian rushed to Zhenzhou.

古文：八月己未，月掩毕。
现代文：八月十八日，月亮遮掩毕星。
English: On August 18th, the moon eclipsed the stars.

古文：辛酉，月入东井。
现代文：二十日，月亮进入东井星座。
English: On the 20th, the moon entered the constellation of the East Well.

古文：壬戌，吐蕃十万寇灵武。
现代文：二十一日，吐蕃十万兵入侵灵武。
English: On the 21st, 100,000 soldiers from Tubo invaded Lingwu.

古文：荧或犯太微垣。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯太微垣星座。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches on the constellation of the Too Small Wall.

古文：丁卯，吐蕃寇邠宁，节度使马璘破吐蕃二万于邠州。
现代文：二十六日，吐蕃入侵州，京师戒严。二十七日，宁节度使马瞞在州攻破吐蕃军队三万之众。
English: On the 26th, the Tubo invaded the prefecture, and the Beijing division was placed under martial law. On the 27th, the Ning Festival made Ma Xizhe break through the 30,000 troops of the Tubo army in the prefecture.

古文：御史大夫崔涣为税地青青钱使。给百官俸钱不平，诏尚书左丞蒋涣按鞫，贬崔涣为道州刺史。
现代文：御史大夫崔涣为税地青苗钱使，由于供给百官薪俸钱不公平，皇上诏令尚书左丞蒋涣检举审讯，贬崔涣为道州刺史。
English: Since the provision of salary money to hundreds of officials was unfair, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering Shang Shuzhong, the left-hand man of Chiang Kai-shek, to investigate and interrogate, and demoted Cui Wei to the position of prefectural historian.

古文：庚午，河东节度使、检校左仆射、太原尹、同中书门下平章事辛云京卒。
现代文：二十九日，河东节度使、检校左仆射、太原尹、同中书门下平章事辛云京去世。
English: On the 29th day of the month, Xin Yunjing, the festival envoy of Hedong, the school inspector Zuofusa, Taiyuan Yin, and the junior high school student Xia Ping Zhang, passed away.

古文：门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、兼幽州长史、持节、河南副元帅、都统河南淮西山南东道诸节度行营、兼幽州卢龙等军节度使、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、兼东都留守、齐国公王缙兼太原尹、北都留守，充河东军节度，余官使并如故。
现代文：门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、兼幽州长史、持节、河南副元帅、都统河南、淮西、山南东道诸节度行营、兼幽州卢龙等军节度使、太微宫使、弘文馆大学士、兼东都留守、齐国公王缙兼太原尹、北都留守，充任河东军节度使，其余官职使节都像原来一样。
English: His subordinate attendants, subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate subordinate

古文：辛未，以门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、山剑副元帅、太清宫使、崇玄馆大学士杜鸿渐兼东都留守。
现代文：三十日，以门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、山、剑副元帅、太清宫使、崇玄馆大学士杜鸿渐兼任东都留守。
English: On the 30th, Du Hongxian, who concurrently held the posts of junior chamberlain, junior secretary of the same school, deputy marshal of the mountain, deputy marshal of the sword, palace envoy of the Taiqing Dynasty, and scholar of the Chongyuan Museum, was absent from Dongdu.

古文：九月壬申。郭子仪自河中移镇奉天。
现代文：九月一日，郭子仪率军从河中移兵镇守奉天。
English: On September 1, Guo Ziyi and his army moved from the middle of the river to guard the town of Fengtian.

古文：岁星入舆鬼。
现代文：岁星进入舆鬼星座。
English: The year star enters the constellation of the ghost.

古文：丁丑，济王环薨。
现代文：六日，济王环去世。
English: On the 6th, Ji Wanghuan passed away.

古文：荧惑入太微垣。
现代文：荧惑星进入太微垣星座。
English: The fluorescent planet enters the constellation of the Great Wall.

古文：壬午，吐蕃寇灵州。
现代文：十一日，吐蕃入侵灵州。
English: On the 11th, the Tuoba invaded Lingzhou.

古文：甲申，以尚书左丞蒋涣为华州刺史，充镇国军潼关防御使。
现代文：十三日，以尚书左丞蒋涣为华州刺史，充任镇国军潼关防御使。
English: On the 13th, with Shang Shuzhanzhong Jiang Qi as the historian of Huazhou, he served as the defense envoy of the town and country army of Shaoguan.

古文：丙戌，检校户部尚书、知省事、邓国公张献诚卒。
现代文：十五日，检校户部尚书、主持尚书省事、邓国公张献诚去世。
English: On the 15th, the head of the inspection department of the school, Shang Shu, the chairman of the inspection department, and Deng Guokong Zhang Xiancheng passed away.

古文：丁亥。工部尚书赵国珍卒。
现代文：十六日，工部尚书赵国珍去世。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Guozhen passed away.

古文：庚寅，以华州刺史张重光为尚书左丞。
现代文：十九日，以前任华州刺史张重光为尚书左丞。
English: On the 19th, Zhang Jiguang, the former vice-governor of Huazhou, became the vice-governor of Shangshu.

古文：壬辰，灵州将白元光破吐蕃二万于灵武。
现代文：二十一日，灵州将白元光在灵武攻破吐蕃二万多军队。
English: On the twenty-first day, Lingshou defeated Baiyuan Guang in Lingwu and drove out more than twenty thousand troops.

古文：戊戌，灵武奏破吐蕃六万，百僚称贺，京师解严。
现代文：二十七日，灵武唐军上奏说攻破吐蕃军队六万，百官祝贺，京师解除戒严。
English: On the 27th, the Lingwu Tang army reported that it had defeated the 60,000-strong Tubo army. Hundreds of officials congratulated, and the Beijing division lifted the martial law.

古文：冬十月甲寅，朔方留后、灵武大都督府长史常廉光加检校工部尚书。
现代文：冬十月十四日，朔方留后、灵武大都督府长史常谦光赐予检校工部尚书的加官。
English: In the winter of October 14th, after Shuo Fang left, Lingwu Dadu Governor Shi Chang Qianguang gave Shang Shu's promotion to the inspection department of the school.

古文：乙未，以京兆尹李勉为广州刺史，充岭南节度使。
现代文：十九日，以京兆尹李勉为广州刺史，充任岭南节度使。
English: On the 19th, with Jing Zhaoyun and Li Mian as the history of Guangzhou, he was appointed as the Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：丁卯，子仪自奉天来朝。
现代文：二十七日，郭子仪从奉天前来朝见。
English: On the 27th, Guo Ziyi came from Mingtian to see the emperor.

古文：十一月丁亥，幽州留后硃希彩为幽州长史，充幽州卢龙节度使，癸巳，加廊下百官厨料，增旧五分之一。
现代文：十一月五日，幽州留后朱希彩为幽州长史，并充任幽州、卢龙节度使。二十三日，赐给殿廊下侍候的百官厨房食料，比旧有的增加五分之一。
English: On November 5th, after Zhu Xicai stayed in Yuzhou, he became the governor of Yuzhou, and served as the Yuzhou and Lulong Festival envoy. On the 23rd, he gave the hundred official kitchen food to waiters under the hallway, an increase of one-fifth compared to the old one.

古文：十二月壬寅，道州刺史崔涣卒。
现代文：十二月二日，道州刺史崔涣去世。
English: On December 2nd, the Daozhou assassin Cui Xuan passed away.

古文：己酉，以邠宁节度使马璘为泾原节度，移镇泾州，其邠宁割隶朔方军。
现代文：九日，以宁节度使马瞞为泾原节度使，移兵镇守泾州，宁军分给朔方军管辖。
English: On the 9th, the Ning Festival made Ma Xie the commander of the Xingyuan Festival, moved troops to guard Zhangzhou, and the Ning Army was assigned to the jurisdiction of the Shuo Army.

古文：邠州将吏以烧马坊为乱，兵马使段秀实斩其凶首八人，方定。
现代文：州将官以烧马厩制造混乱，兵马使段秀实斩了为首凶犯八人，州这才安定。
English: The state generals created chaos by burning stables, and the soldiers and horses made Duan Xiusheng behead eight criminals as the leader, and the state was stable.

古文：四年春正月庚午朔。
现代文：大历四年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the fourth year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：甲戌，大风。
现代文：五日，大风。
English: On the fifth day, the wind picked up.

古文：乙亥，大雪，平地盈尺。
现代文：六日，下大雪，平地下雪满满一尺高。
English: On the 6th, it snowed heavily, and the snow on the ground was over a foot high.

古文：甲申，日有蚀之。
现代文：十五日，有日蚀。
English: On the 15th, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：子仪回河中。
现代文：郭子仪回到河中。
English: Guo Ziyi returned to the river.

古文：戊子，敕有司定王公士庶每户税钱，分上、中、下三等。
现代文：十九日，皇上命令有关部门确定王公、士子、庶人百姓每户缴纳的税钱，交税分上、中、下三等。
English: On the 19th, the emperor ordered the relevant departments to determine the amount of tax paid by princes, nobles and commoners in each household, and to pay tax in the upper, middle and lower tiers.

古文：宗室颍州刺史李岵专杀，法司以议亲，宜赐自尽。
现代文：宗室颍川刺史李岵擅自杀人，审判官员议罪，认为是皇家宗室，应该赐他自尽。
English: Court officials found the family of the royal family guilty of committing suicide. They believed that the family of the royal family should be given the right to commit suicide.

古文：乙未，福建观察使李承昭请徙汀州于长汀县之白石村，从之。黑衣大食国使朝贡。
现代文：二十六日，福建观察使李承昭请求把汀州迁到长汀县之白石村，皇上听从了这个建议，黑衣大食国派使者前来朝贡。
English: On the 26th, the Fujian Observer sent Li Chengzhao to request the transfer of Tingzhou to Baishi Village in Changting County. The emperor listened to this suggestion and sent an envoy to pay tribute.

古文：二月乙巳，以泸州刺史杨子琳为陕州刺史。
现代文：二月六日，以泸州刺史杨子琳为陕州刺史。
English: On February 6th, Yang Zilin from Zhangzhou was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi Province.

古文：乙卯，宰臣杜鸿渐让山剑副元帅，从之。
现代文：十六日，宰辅大臣杜鸿渐辞让山、剑副元帅，皇上同意了。
English: On the 16th, Vice-Minister Du Hongxuan resigned to make Shan and Jian vice-marshals, and the emperor agreed.

古文：丙辰夜，地震，有声如雷者三。
现代文：十七日夜晚，发生地震，地震声音如雷一般响了三次。
English: On the evening of the 17th, an earthquake occurred. The earthquake sounded like thunder three times.

古文：辛酉，以湖南都团练观察使、衡州刺史韦之晋为潭州刺史。因是徙湖南军于潭州。
现代文：二十二日，以湖南都团练观察使、衡州刺史韦之晋为潭州刺史，因此迁移湖南军到潭州。
English: On the 22nd, Hunan's regimental training observation envoy, Hengzhou's Zhishui, was promoted to the post of Tanzhou's Zhishui, so the Hunan army was relocated to Tanzhou.

古文：江西团练使魏少游来朝。
现代文：江西团练使魏少游前来朝见。
English: Jiangxi Rehearsal Makes Wei Shaoyou Come to See the Morning Star.

古文：三月壬申，诏：
现代文：三月四日，皇上下诏曰：
English: On March 4, the Emperor issued the following edict:

古文：夫计人而置官，度事而赋任，因时立制，损益在焉。
现代文： 依据人而设置官吏，根据事而赋予职务，根据时代的特点而订立制度，害处和益处都在这里。
English: The harm and benefit of setting officials according to people, assigning positions according to things, and establishing a system according to the characteristics of the times are all here.

古文：吏足以理人，人足以奉吏，则官称其禄，禄当其秩，然后上下相乐，公私不匮。
现代文：官吏完全可以治理人民，人民完全可以供养官吏，那么官吏的职责和俸禄就相称；俸禄和官职相称，这样以后，上下融洽，公、私双方都不会匮乏。
English: Officials are fully capable of governing the people, and the people are fully capable of supporting officials. Then the duties of officials and their salaries will be commensurate, and the salaries will be commensurate with their official positions. In this way, there will be harmony between the upper and lower levels, and there will be no shortage of both public and private sectors.

古文：昔汉光武时及魏太和中，并减吏员，兼省乡邑，致理之道，此其一隅。
现代文：过去汉光武帝的时代和魏国太和中期，都减少了官员，而且减少和兼并了乡镇，如何治理的方法，这是举一反三的例证。
English: In the past, the era of Emperor Han Guangwu and the mid- and late-periods of the Wei Dynasty, officials were reduced, and townships and townships were reduced and annexed. This is an example of how to govern.

古文：今连岁治戎，天下凋瘵，京师近甸，烦苦尤重，比屋流散，念之恻然。
现代文：现在连年打仗，天下凋敝穷困，京师及附近地区，烦恼困苦尤其严重，很多家室，人们流散，想起来，令人伤感。
English: Now we have been at war for years on end, the country is withered and impoverished, and Beijing and the surrounding areas are particularly troubled and impoverished. Many families and people are scattered, which is sad to think about.

古文：人寡吏多，困于供费，欲其苏息，不可得也，设令廉耻守分，以奉科条，犹有录廪之烦，役使之弊；而况贪猾纵欲，而动逾典章，作威以虐下，厚敛以润已者乎！
现代文：人少官多，供给粮食和费用十分困难，想要让人民休养生息，是不可能的。即使让人民懂得廉耻，敬守本分，奉法守纪，还是有提供禄米的烦扰，还是有役使百姓的弊端。更何况是贪赃奸猾放纵欲望，而且动辄越过法令界限，作威作福来暴虐百姓，残酷剥削苛捐杂税来中饱私囊的呢？
English: There are fewer people and more officials, and it is very difficult to supply food and expenses. It is impossible to let the people rest and recuperate. Even if the people know how to be honest, honor their duties, and abide by the law and discipline, there is still the trouble of providing lumens, and there are still the drawbacks of serving the people. What's more, there are those who are greedy, treacherous, and indulge their desires, and often cross the boundaries of laws and regulations, tyrannize the people by acting as a tyrant, and brutally exploit and tax the people to enrich themselves.

古文：古者县置大夫一员，足以为治，奚必贰佐分掌而后治耶？
现代文：古时县设大夫一名，足够用来治理百姓，哪里需要设置一些副职分掌权力而后治呢？
English: In ancient times, the county set up a doctor, which was enough to govern the people. Where is there a need to set up some deputy posts to hold power and govern later?

古文：且京畿户口，减耗大半，职员如旧，何以堪之？
现代文：再说京师及其附近的户口，减少消耗大半，官职众多仍然像以前一样，国家何以负担得了？
English: Moreover, the number of hukou in Beijing and its vicinity has been reduced by more than half, and the number of government posts remains the same as before. How can the country afford this?

古文：岂可以重困之人，供不给之费。
现代文：难道可以让饱受战乱灾祸的人，供给不需要供给的费用。
English: Is it possible that people who have suffered from the scourge of war can be provided with expenses that do not need to be provided?

古文：使人不倦，其在变通，制事之宜，式从省便。
现代文：要使人们不疲于奔命，关键在于变通，制定政事是否适宜，应检验它是否简省方便。
English: In order to make people work tirelessly, the key lies in flexibility. Whether it is appropriate to formulate policies should be tested to see if it is simple and convenient.

古文：其京兆府长安、万年宜各减丞一员、尉两员，余县各减丞、尉一员。
现代文：现在我命令京兆府之长安、万年两县应各减县丞一名、县尉两名，其余县各减县丞、县尉一名。
English: Now, I order the Chang'an of Jingzhao Prefecture and the two counties of Wanli to each reduce one county magistrate and two county lieutenants, and the remaining counties to each reduce one county magistrate and one county lieutenant.

古文：馀委吏部条件处分。
现代文：其余地方命令吏部根据情况处理。 
English: The remaining local orders will be handled by the cadre department according to the situation.

古文：吏部尚书裴遵庆为右仆射，刘晏改吏部尚书。
现代文：吏部尚书裴遵庆为右仆射，刘晏改任为吏部尚书。
English: Pei Zunqing was appointed as the right-hand man of the secretary of the personnel department, and Liu Xi was appointed as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：庚寅，江西团练使魏少游封赵国公。
现代文：二十二日，江西团练使魏少游封为赵国公。
English: On the 22nd, the Jiangxi regimental drill promoted Wei Shaoyou to Zhao Guogong.

古文：丙申复置仙州。
现代文：二十八日，重新设置仙州。
English: On the 28th, Xianzhou was re-established.

古文：夏四月壬寅，陕州虞邑县复为安邑县，虢州天平县复为湖城县。
现代文：夏四月四日，陕州虞邑县重又恢复为安邑县，虢州天平县重又恢复为湖城县。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of summer, Yuyi County of Shaanxi Province was reinstated as Anyi County, and Tianping County of Ganzhou Province was reinstated as Hucheng County.

古文：五月丙戌，京师地震。
现代文：五月十九日，京师地震。
English: On May 19, the Beijing Chang'an earthquake occurred.

古文：辛卯，以仆固怀恩女为崇徽公主，嫁回纥可汗，仍命兵部侍郎李涵往册命。
现代文：二十四日，皇上以仆固怀恩之女为崇徽公主，嫁给回纥可汗，仍旧命令兵部侍郎李涵前往宣布皇上册封命令。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor named the daughter of the servant Gu Wai En as the princess of Chonghui, married to Hui Khan, and still ordered Li Han, the attendant of the military department, to go to announce the emperor's appointment order.

古文：六月丁酉，以太子詹事臧希让检校工部尚书，充渭北节度；以渭北节度李光进为太子太保。
现代文：六月一日，以太子詹事臧希让任检校工部尚书，充任渭北节度使；以渭北节度使李光进为太子太保。
English: On June 1st, Emperor Taizong's son, Zhan Shijian Xi, gave up his post as inspector of the School Inspection Department to Shang Shu, and served as the envoy of the Northern Wei Dynasty; with the help of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Li Guangjin became the prince's bodyguard.

古文：自今已后，非灼然蠹害，不得辄加非理，所司严加纠察以闻。
现代文：十五日，升辰州为都督府，分辰、巫、溪、锦、业等州而设置团练观察使。秋七月四日，以澧州刺史崔馞为潭州刺史、湖南团练观察使。十八日，因为天下法官滥用刑法，命令有关部门严加纠察而后向上报告。
English: On the 15th, a group training observation envoy was set up for the prefectural governor of Shentian, and the prefectural governors of Fengtian, Wuxi, Xixi, Jin and Ying. On the 4th of July, a group training observation envoy was set up for the prefectural governor of Hunan and the group training observer for the prefectural governor of Hunan. On the 18th, because of the abuse of criminal law by judges around the world, the relevant departments were ordered to strictly picket and then report to the top.

古文：先是，皇姨弟薛华因酒色之急，手刃三人，弃尸于井，事发系狱，赐自尽，故有是诏。
现代文：先前皇姨弟薛华因为酒色的忿恨，亲手杀了三人，丢尸到井中，事情发生以后，被关押在监狱，赐他自杀，所以才有这道诏令。
English: The imperial edict was issued after the previous emperor's uncle and younger brother, Xue Hua, killed three people with his own hands in a fit of drunken rage and threw the bodies into a well. After the incident, he was imprisoned and told to commit suicide.

古文：八月丙申朔。
现代文：八月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of August is New Year's Day.

古文：自夏四月连雨至此月，京城米斗八百文。
现代文：从夏天四月起连续下雨直到这个月，京城大米每斗八百文。
English: From the summer of April, it rained continuously until this month, and the capital city rice rose by 800 mon per dou.

古文：官出米二万石，减估而粜，以惠贫民。
现代文：官府拿出大米二万石，减价而卖，以有利于贫民。
English: The government took out 20,000 koku of rice and sold it at a reduced price to benefit the poor.

古文：己卯，虎入长寿坊元载家庙，射生将周皓引弩毙之。
现代文：二十日，老虎跑入长寿坊元载的家庙，善于射杀生物的射生将周皓用弓箭射死了老虎。
English: On the 20th, the tiger ran into the home temple of Yuan Zang of Changshoufang. Zhou Yu, who was good at shooting creatures, shot the tiger with a bow and arrow.

古文：冬十月乙卯，以汝州刺史孟皞为京兆尹。
现代文：冬十月二十一日，以汝州刺史孟白皋为京兆尹。
English: On October 21st in winter, Meng Bailuan, the Prince of Ruzhou, was proclaimed as the Prince of Zhao Yin.

古文：十一月辛未，禁畿内弋猎。
现代文：十一月二日，禁止在京城附近地区打猎。
English: On the 7th day of the 11th month, shooting is prohibited in the territory of Beijing and its surrounding towns.

古文：乙亥，门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、卫国公杜鸿渐卒。
现代文：十一日，门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事、卫国公杜鸿渐去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Du Hongyan, a junior chamberlain, a junior high school teacher, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a junior high school student, a senior high school student, and a senior high school student passed away.

古文：丙子以左仆射、冀国公裴冕同中书门下平章事，充东都留守、河南淮南淮西山南东道副元帅。
现代文：十二日，以左仆射、冀国公裴冕任同中书门下平章事，充任东都留守、河南、淮南、淮西、山南东道副元帅。
English: On the 12th, he was appointed as the Vice Marshal of the Eastern Capital, Henan Province, Huainan Province, Huaixi Province, and Shannan Province, with Zuoying Zhao and Jiji Guofei as his subordinates.

古文：十二月乙未，敕左右补阙、拾遗、内供奉员左右各置两员，余罢之。
现代文：十二月一日，皇上诏令左补阙、右补阙、左拾遗、右拾遗，内供奉员左右各置两员，其余都不设左右两员。
English: On the first day of December, the emperor issued an imperial edict to set up the left and right compiling posts, the left and right collecting relics, and the left and right collecting relics. There were two left and two right staff members for each of the staff members, and there were no left and right staff members for the rest.

古文：戊戌，裴冕卒。
现代文：四日，裴冕去世。
English: On the fourth day, Fei Guan died.

古文：辛酉，敕京兆府税宜分作两等，上等每亩税一斗，下等税六升，能耕垦荒地者税二升。
现代文：二十一日，皇上命令京兆府的税应分作两等，上等田每亩税一斗，下等田每亩税六升，能够垦荒耕种的田地每亩税二升。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the emperor ordered that the taxes of Jingzhao Prefecture should be divided into two classes. The upper-class fields should be taxed one bucket per mu, the lower-class fields should be taxed six liters per mu, and the fields that can be ploughed and cultivated should be taxed two liters per mu.

古文：五年春正月乙丑朔。
现代文：大历五年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the fifth year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：辛卯，以陕州节度使皇甫温判凤翔尹，充凤翔、河陇节度使；凤翔节度使李抱玉判梁州事，充山南西道节度使。
现代文：二十七日，以陕州节度使皇甫温兼任职务较低的凤翔尹，并充任凤翔、河陇节度使；凤翔节度使李抱玉兼任职务较低的梁州事，并充任山南西道节度使。
English: On the 27th, on the occasion of the festival of Shaanxi Province, Emperor Fu Wen was assigned to the lesser post of Feng Xiang Yin, and served as the festival delegate of Fengxiang and Hebei Province; on the occasion of the festival of Fengxiang Province, Li Baoyu was assigned to the lesser post of Liangzhou Province, and served as the festival delegate of Shannan West Road.

古文：壬申，河南尹张延赏兼御史大夫，充东都留守。
现代文：二十八日，河南尹张延赏兼任御史大夫，充任东都留守。
English: On the 28th, Yin Zhang Yanbo from Henan Province was awarded the post of imperial historian and stayed in Dongdu.

古文：罢河南、淮西、山南东道副元帅，所管军隶东都留守。
现代文：撤销河南、淮西、淮南、山南东道副元帅，这些地方所管辖的军队隶属于东都留守。
English: The vice-marshals of Henan, Huaixi, Huainan and Shannan were revoked. The military forces under the jurisdiction of these places were subordinated to Dongdu.

古文：二月戊戌，李抱玉移镇，凤翔军仇，纵兵大掠，数日乃止。
现代文：二月五日，李抱玉移兵镇守銩稨，凤翔军忿怒，放纵军队大肆抢劫掠夺，抢了数天以后才停止。
English: On February 5th, Li Baoyu transferred his troops to guard the city of Handan. The Fengxiang troops were furious and allowed the troops to loot and plunder freely. The looting only stopped after several days.

古文：己亥。废仙州，以襄城、叶县隶汝州。
现代文：六日，废除仙州，以襄城、叶县隶属汝州。
English: On the 6th, Xianzhou was abolished, and Xiangcheng and Ye County were attached to Ruzhou.

古文：诏罢鱼朝恩观军容使。
现代文：皇上诏令罢免鱼朝恩的观军容使。
English: Emperor's edict dismisses Yucho En's envoy to observe the war.

古文：己巳，朝恩自缢而死。
现代文：三月十日，鱼朝恩自缢而死。
English: On March 10, Yucho En committed suicide.

古文：戊寅，诏定京兆府户税。
现代文：十五日，诏令确定京兆府户税。
English: On the 15th, the imperial edict confirmed that the Beijing-Shanghai prefectural household tax.

古文：思与百辟卿士，励精于理，俾国经王道，可举而行，各宜承式，以恭尔位。
现代文：夏天的税收，上等田亩每亩税六升，下等田每亩税四升。秋天的税，上等田每亩税五升，下等田每亩税三升。
English: In the summer, the tax is six liters per mu for higher-grade fields and four liters per mu for lower-grade fields. In the fall, the tax is five liters per mu for higher-grade fields and three liters per mu for lower-grade fields.

古文：诸州置屯亦宜停。
现代文：荒田开垦后的田地每亩税二升。
English: After the reclamation of wasteland, the field tax is up to two liters per mu.

古文：于是悉以度支之务委于宰相。
现代文：于是全部以度支之任务委托给宰相。
English: As a result, all tasks related to the budget were delegated to the Prime Minister.

古文：辛卯，以兵部侍郎贾至为京兆尹。
现代文：二十八日，以兵部侍郎贾至为京兆尹。
English: On the 28th, Jia Zhi, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：以京西兵马使李忠臣为凤翔尹，代皇甫温。温移镇陕州。
现代文：以京西兵马使李忠臣为凤翔尹，代替皇甫温；皇甫温移兵镇守陕州。
English: Li Zhongchen was appointed as Feng Xiangyin to replace Emperor Fuwen; Emperor Fuwen moved his troops to guard Shaanxi.

古文：夏四月庚子，湖南都团练使崔旰为其兵马使臧玠所杀，玠据潭州为乱，沣州刺史杨子琳、道州刺史裴虬、衡州刺史杨漳出军讨玠。
现代文：夏四月八日，湖南都团练使崔馞被他的兵马使臧所杀。
English: On the 8th day of the 4th month of the summer, Cui Yao, the commander of the Hunan Provincial Military Region, was killed by his soldiers.

古文：乙巳夜，岁星入轩辕。
现代文：十三日夜晚，岁星进入轩辕星座。
English: On the evening of the 13th day, the year star entered the constellation of Aries.

古文：丙午，复置先农、马祖坛，祀之。
现代文：十四日，重新设立先农坛和马祖坛，加以祭祀。
English: On the 14th, the Farmer's Altar and the Mazu Altar were re-established and dedicated.

古文：丁未，封幽州节度使硃希彩为高密郡王。
现代文：十五日，封幽州节度使朱希彩为高密郡王。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Fenyuzhou Festival made Zhu Xisai the king of Gaomi County.

古文：己未夜，彗起五车，长三丈。
现代文：二十七日，彗星从五车星座升起，长有三丈。
English: On the 27th, the comet rose from the constellation of the Five Chariots and grew three feet tall.

古文：庚申，宰臣太原尹王缙入朝。
现代文：二十八日，宰相太原尹王缙入朝。
English: On the 28th, Prime Minister Taiyuan Yin Wangjun entered the imperial court.

古文：五月辛未，刑部侍郎黎干为桂州刺史、桂管防御经略招讨观察等使。
现代文：五月九日，刑部侍郎黎干为桂州刺史、桂管防御使、经略使、招讨使、观察使。
English: On May 9, Li Gan, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, was appointed as the Guizhou chief historian, the Guizhou defense envoy, the economic envoy, the solicitation envoy, and the observation envoy.

古文：己卯夜，彗起北方，其色白。
现代文：十七日夜，彗星起于北方，白颜色。
English: On the night of the 17th, the comet rose in the north, white in color.

古文：庚辰，贬礼仪使、礼部尚书裴士淹为虔州刺史，户部侍郎、判度支第五琦为饶州刺史。皆鱼朝恩党也。
现代文：十八日，贬礼仪使、礼部尚书裴士淹为虔州刺史，户部侍郎、兼任较低职务的度支使第五琦为饶州刺史，这是因为他们都是鱼朝恩的党羽。
English: On the 18th, the etiquette envoy, the etiquette department's Shang Shu Pei Ruan, was demoted to the status of Kenzhou's secretary, and the housekeeper of the household department, who also served as a lower-ranking official, the fifth-ranked official, was demoted to the status of Raozhou's secretary. This was because they were all party members of Yu Chaon.

古文：元载既诛朝恩，下制罢使，仍放黜之。
现代文：元载已经杀了鱼朝恩，下达皇帝的命令，罢免他们虔州刺史、礼仪使、饶州刺史等官职，仍旧放逐罢免了他们。
English: Yuan Zang had already killed Yu Chaon and issued the emperor's order to dismiss them from the posts of Qianzhou Jishi, Ceremonial Envoy, and Raozhou Jishi, and still banished and dismissed them.

古文：癸未，以羽林大将军辛京杲为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
现代文：二十一日，以羽林大将军辛京杲为潭州刺史、湖南观察使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Xin Jingyao, a general of the Yulin army, was appointed as the historian of Tanzhou and the observer of Hunan.

古文：甲申，西北白气竟天。
现代文：二十二日，西北方白气布满整个天空。
English: On the 22nd, white gas from the northwest filled the entire sky.

古文：徙置当、悉、柘、静、恭五州于山险要害地，备吐蕃也。
现代文：改移设置当、悉、柘、静、恭五州到山险要害之地，以防备吐蕃。
English: Five prefectures, including Dang, Siyi, Min, Jing and Gong, will be moved to the critical areas in order to prevent floods.

古文：六月己未彗星始灭，赦天下见禁囚徒。
现代文：六月二十八日，彗星开始熄灭，皇上赦免天下被关押的囚犯。
English: On June 28, the comet began to fade, and the emperor pardoned all prisoners.

古文：秋七月丁卯，以浙东观察使、越州刺史、御史大夫薛兼训为检校工部尚书、太原尹、北都留守，充河东节度使。
现代文：秋七月七日，以浙东观察使、越州刺史、御史大夫薛兼训为检校工部尚书、太原尹、北都留守，充任河东节度使。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of autumn, Shang Shu, Taiyuan Yin and Beidou from the inspection department of the school were left behind, with the East Zhejiang observation envoy, the Yuezhou chief historian and the chief historian Xue Jianxun, acting as the envoy of the festival in Hedong.

古文：是月，京城斗米千文。
现代文：这月，京城一斗大米一千文。
English: This month, a barrel of rice in Beijing costs 1,000 mon.

古文：八月辛卯，宰臣元载上疏请置中都于河中府，秋杪行幸，春中还京，以避蕃戎侵寇之患。
现代文：八月一日，宰相元载上奏疏请求把中都归到河中府，可以回避吐蕃入侵的祸患。上奏的疏章没有回音。
English: On August 1st, Prime Minister Yuan Zang requested that the capital be moved to Hechuan, so as to avoid the threat of invasion from Tibet. There was no response to his request.

古文：疏入不报。载疏大旨以关辅、河东等十州户税入奉京师，创置精兵五万，以威四方。辞多捭阖，欲权归于己也。
现代文：元载又上奏分析这大略旨要是因为京畿、河东等十州户税入奉到京师，可以创立五万精兵，以此威震四方，辞句多分化、拉拢之意，是想要大权归于自己。
English: In the Yuan Zhao, it was analyzed that if this grand plan was because the household taxes of ten states, such as Gyeonggi and Hedong, were sent to Beijing, it would be possible to create fifty thousand elite soldiers, so that they would be powerful in all directions. The meaning of the phrase "multiply" and "attract" is to want to have great power to oneself.

古文：九月丁丑，以宣、歙、池等州都团练观察使、宣州刺史、兼御史中丞陈少游充浙江东道团练观察使。
现代文：九月十八日，以宣、歙、池等州都团练观察使、宣州刺史、兼御史中丞陈少游充任浙江东道团练观察使。
English: On September 18th, with Xuan, Zou, Chi and other prefectures as the observation envoys for the group exercise, and Chen Shaoyou, the vice-president of Xuan, Zou and Zhou prefectures, as the host observation envoy for the group exercise in Zhejiang.

古文：吐蕃寇永寿。
现代文：吐蕃入侵永寿。
English: The invasion of the Tibetan mastiff into Yongshou.

古文：汴州田神功来朝。
现代文：汴州田神功前来朝见。
English: Zhangzhou Tian Shengong came to see the morning.

古文：十二月乙未，改巫州为溆州，业州为蒋州。
现代文：十二月七日，改巫州为溆州，业州为蒋州。
English: On December 7, Wuzhou was changed to Zhangzhou, and Yezhou to Jiangzhou.

古文：六年春正月己未朔。
现代文：大历六年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the sixth year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：戊寅，于鄜州之鄜城置肃戎军。
现代文：二十日，在州之城设置肃戎军。
English: On the 20th, the Imperial Army was set up in Suzhou City.

古文：二月乙酉御史大夫敬括卒。
现代文：二月二十二日，御史大夫敬括去世。
English: On February 22nd, Dr. Mishi passed away.

古文：夏四月丁巳，上御宣政殿试制举人，至夕，策未成者，令太官给烛，俾尽其才。
现代文：夏四月一日，皇上驾到宣政殿考试应制举人。到晚上，策论尚没有写成者，皇上命令太官供给蜡烛，以便使他们各尽其才。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the emperor arrived at the Xuancheng Palace to examine the candidates for the examination. By the evening, the policy had not yet been written, and the emperor ordered the eunuchs to provide candles so that they could do their best.

古文：五月癸卯，以河南尹张延赏为御史大夫。
现代文：三日，澧州刺史杨子琳前来朝见，皇上赐名为猷。二十一日，改果州为充州。五月十八日，以河南尹张延赏为御史大夫。
English: On the third day, Yang Zilin, the Empress Dowager of Zhangzhou, came to see the emperor, and the emperor gave her the title of Empress Dowager. On the 21st day, Guozhou was changed to Chengzhou. On May 18th, Yin Zhang Yan of Henan Province was awarded the title of Grand Historian.

古文：秋七月乙巳，月掩毕。
现代文：秋七月二十一日，月亮遮掩了毕星。
English: On the 21st day of the 7th month of autumn, the moon covered the stars.

古文：八月乙卯，淮南节度使韦元甫卒。
现代文：八月二日，淮南节度使韦元甫去世。
English: On August 2, Huainan Festival, Wei Yuanfu passed away.

古文：庚午，以御史大夫张延赏为扬州大都督府长史、淮南节度使。
现代文：三日，以东都副留守常休明为检校左散骑常侍、河阳三城使。
English: On the third day, Jokyu Ming, the deputy governor of Dongdu, left for the inspection of the school, and his attendants rode on horseback to the left, and the envoys from the three cities of Kayan came.

古文：丙午、以苏州刺史、浙江观察使李栖筠为御史大夫。
现代文：二十三日，以苏州刺史、浙江观察使李栖筠为御史大夫。
English: On the 23rd, with Suzhou chief historian and Zhejiang observation envoy Li Jiechi as chief historian.

古文：丁丑，获白兔于太极殿之内廊。
现代文：二十四日，在太极殿之内廊获得一只白兔。
English: On the 24th, a white rabbit was found in the inner corridor of the Taiji Hall.

古文：庚辰夜，月入紫微垣。
现代文：二十七日夜，月亮侵入紫微垣星座。
English: On the evening of the 27th, the moon entered the constellation of Violet Weak Wall.

古文：九月壬辰夜，荧惑犯哭星。
现代文：九月九日夜，荧惑星侵犯哭星。
English: On the night of September 9th, the crying star was invaded by a fluorescent planet.

古文：自八月连雨，害秋稼。
现代文：从八月以来，连续下雨，危害了庄稼。
English: Continuous rains since August have damaged crops.

古文：戊申，于轮台置静塞军。
现代文：二十五日，在轮台设置静塞军。
English: On the 25th, the garrison was set up at the wheelhouse.

古文：辛亥，荧惑入壁垒。冬十月壬午，沧州置横海军。
现代文：冬十月三十日，沧州设置横海军。
English: In the winter of October 30th, Cangzhou set up a horizontal navy.

古文：十一月己亥，文单国王婆弥来朝，献驯象一十一。
现代文：十一月十七日，文单国王婆弥前来朝见，贡献驯服好的大象十一头。
English: On November 17th, King Bhumibol Adulyadej came to see the emperor and donated eleven tame elephants.

古文：壬寅夜，月入太微，又掩氐。
现代文：二十日夜，月亮侵入太微星座，又遮掩了氐星。
English: On the night of the 20th, the moon entered the faint constellation and occulted the bright star.

古文：十二月己未，江西观察使、检校刑部尚书魏少游卒。
现代文：十二月七日，江西观察使、检校刑部尚书魏少游去世。
English: On December 7, Shangshu Wei Shaoyou, the Jiangxi observation envoy and head of the school inspection and punishment department, passed away.

古文：庚午，制以文单王婆弥开府仪同三司、试殿中监。
现代文：十八日，皇上下令以文单王婆弥为开府仪同三司，试用为殿中监。
English: On the 18th, the emperor ordered that Wenshan Wangbaya be appointed as the keeper of ceremonies and the third secretary, and he was put on probation as the palace middle supervisor.

古文：是岁春旱，米斛至万钱。
现代文：这年春天大旱灾，大米一斛达到一万钱。
English: In the spring of this year, there was a severe drought, and the price of a bushel of rice rose to ten thousand yuan.

古文：七年春正月癸未朔。
现代文：大历七年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the seventh year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：戊子，于魏州顿邱县置澶州。
现代文：六日，在魏州顿丘县设置澶州。
English: On the 6th, in Dongqiu County, Weizhou, set up Zhangzhou.

古文：以顿邱县之观城店置观城县，以张之清丰店置清丰县，并割魏州之临黄县，并隶澶州。
现代文：以顿丘县之观城店设置观城县，以张县之清丰店设清丰县，并且分割魏州之临黄县，一起隶属澶州。
English: Set up Guancheng County with Guancheng Store in Dongqiu County, set up Qingfeng County with Qingfeng Store in Zhang County, and divided Linhuang County in Weizhou, all of which belong to Ganzhou.

古文：以贝州临清县之张桥店置永济县。
现代文：以贝州临清县之张桥店设置永济县。
English: The Zhangqiao store in Linqing County, Beizhou, was moved to Yongji County.

古文：乙未，月犯轩辕。
现代文：八日，月亮侵犯轩辕星座。
English: On the 8th, the moon will invade the constellation of Regulus.

古文：庚子，以检校户部尚书路嗣恭为洪州刺史、兼御史大夫、江西观察使。
现代文：十三日，以检校户部尚书路嗣恭为洪州刺史、兼御史大夫、江西观察使。
English: On the 13th, with the inspection of the school, the head of the household department, Shang Shul, Zhi Qiong, was appointed as the chief historian of Hongzhou, concurrently the chief historian, and the observation envoy of Jiangxi.

古文：辛丑，太常卿杨绾兼充礼仪使。
现代文：十四日，太常卿杨绾兼任礼仪使。
English: On the 14th, Yang Jie, the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission, also served as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：甲辰，回纥使出鸿胪寺劫坊市，吏不能禁止，复三百骑犯金光、硃雀等门。
现代文：十七日，回纥使者走出鸿胪寺抢劫掳掠市场，官吏不能禁止，又用三百骑兵侵犯金光、朱雀等门。
English: On the 17th, the emissaries of the Hui Dynasty came out of Hongye Temple to rob and plunder the market. The officials could not forbid them, and they also used three hundred cavalrymen to invade Jin Guang, Suzaku and other gates.

古文：是日皇城诸门皆闭，慰谕之方止。
现代文：这天皇城各门都关闭，安抚以后才停止侵扰。
English: All the gates of the emperor's castle were closed, and the intrusion only stopped after it was pacified.

古文：二月甲寅，以兵部侍郎李涵为苏州剌史、兼御史中丞，充浙西观察使。
现代文：二月三日，以兵部侍郎李涵为苏州刺史、兼御史中丞，充任浙西观察使。
English: On February 3, Li Han, the attendant of the Ministry of Military Affairs, was appointed as the Suzhou chief historian and vice-chancellor of history, and served as the western Zhejiang observation envoy.

古文：镇星临太微。
现代文：镇星临近太微星。
English: Zhenxing is close to Taimixing.

古文：戊午夜，月掩天关。
现代文：七日夜，月亮掩盖了天关星。
English: On the night of the seventh day, the moon covered the celestial body.

古文：三月壬辰，诏谏议大夫置四员为定。
现代文：三月十一日，诏令谏议大夫设置四员为定准。
English: On March 11th, the Emperor issued an edict ordering the Council of Doctors to set four members as the standard.

古文：可大赦天下，见禁囚徒，罪无轻重，一切释放。
现代文：夏四月四日，回纥王子李秉义去世，他是归国在宫廷宿卫赐予的中原名。五月五日，下冰雹，大风吹断了树。六日夜，月亮进入了太微星。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Prince Li Bingyi of Hubei died. He was the original name given by the palace guards when he returned to China. On the 5th day of the 5th month, hailstorms and high winds broke trees. On the night of the 6th day, the moon entered Taimixing.

古文：癸亥，以检校礼部尚书蒋涣充东都留守。
现代文：十一日，把忻州的七位帝王的画像迁徙到太原府之紫极宫。以检校礼部尚书蒋涣充任京都留守。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the portraits of the seven emperors of Bozhou were moved to the Shiji Palace in Taiyuan Prefecture.

古文：六月庚戌，有司言日蚀，阴云不见。
现代文：六月一日是朔日，有关官员说有日蚀，阴云太多看不见。
English: The first day of June is New Year's Day. Officials say there will be a solar eclipse, but there are too many clouds to see it.

古文：丁丑，诏诫薄葬，不得造假花果及金手脱宝钿等物。
现代文：二十八日，皇上下诏告诫要薄葬，不得制造假花果以及金手和宝钿等物。
English: On the 28th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to exhort people to have a thin funeral, and not to make fake flowers and fruits, gold bracelets, treasure chests and other things.

古文：秋七月癸巳，回纥蕃客夺长安县令邵说所乘马，人吏不能禁。
现代文：秋七月十四日，回纥蕃人客商夺取长安县令邵说所乘之马，人们和官吏不能禁止。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Uighur merchants seized the horse of Chang'an County, and the people and officials could not stop them.

古文：八月庚戌，赐北庭都护曹令忠姓名曰李元忠。
现代文：八月二日，皇上赐北庭都护曹令忠姓名叫李元忠。
English: On August 2nd, the emperor bestowed the title of North Court Protector to Cao Lingzhong, whose name was Li Yuanzhong.

古文：九月乙未，工部尚书于休烈卒。
现代文：九月十七日，工部尚书于休烈去世。
English: On September 17th, Shang Shu of the Engineering Department passed away in Huling.

古文：冬十月壬子，上畋于苑中，矢一发贯二兔，从臣皆贺。
现代文：冬十月五日，皇上在御花园中打猎，一箭射穿了两只兔子，侍从之臣都祝贺。
English: On the 5th of October in winter, the emperor was hunting in the imperial garden. He shot an arrow through two rabbits, and his attendants congratulated him.

古文：辛未，以权知幽州卢龙节度留后硃泚检校左散骑常侍，充幽州卢龙节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以暂代幽州、卢龙节度留后朱氵此为检校左散骑常侍，充任幽州、卢龙节度使。
English: On the 24th, after staying in Yuzhou and Lulong for the temporary Yuzhou and Lulong festivals, Zhu Xi became the left rider of the school inspection, and served as the Yuzhou and Lulong festival envoy.

古文：丙子，以太府卿吕崇贲为广州都督，充岭南节度使。
现代文：二十九日，以太府卿吕崇贲为广州都督，充任岭南节度使。
English: On the 29th, Lv Chongyong, the governor of Yue Prefecture, became the governor of Guangzhou and served as the delegate to the Lingnan Festival.

古文：十一月庚辰，诏：自顷蕃戎入寇，巴南屡多征役。其巴、蓬、渠、集、壁、充、通、开等州，宜放二年租庸。
现代文：十一月四日，皇上下诏：自从近来吐蕃、回纥等蕃人军队入侵，巴南屡次征战，巴、蓬、渠、壁、充、通、开等州，应该免除两年赋税。
English: On November 4th, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Since the recent invasion of the Hunnic armies of Tubo and Hui, Banan has been repeatedly invaded, and the provinces of Ba, Peng, Qu, Wai, Chong, Tong, and Ka should be exempted from two years of taxation.

古文：甲申，以福建观察使李承昭为礼部尚书，华州刺史李琦为福州刺史、福建都团练观察使。
现代文：八日，以福建观察使李承昭为礼部尚书，华州刺史李琦为福州刺史、福州都团练观察使。
English: On the 8th, Li Chengzhao, the Fujian observation envoy, was appointed as the ceremonial secretary, and Li Wei, the Huazhou observation envoy, was appointed as the Fuzhou observation envoy and the Fuzhou capital group exercise observation envoy.

古文：辛卯，以岭南节度李勉为工部尚书。
现代文：十五日，以岭南节度使李勉为工部尚书。
English: On the 15th, with the Lingnan Festival, Li Qian was appointed as the Minister of Industry.

古文：十二月丙寅，雨士。
现代文：十二月二十日，下黄土。
English: December 20th, Lower Loess.

古文：是夜，长星出于参。
现代文：这一夜，长星从参星生出。
English: On this night, a star is born from a star.

古文：辛未，滑州置永平军。
现代文：二十五日，滑州设置永平军。
English: On the 25th, Yongping Army was set up in Nanzhou.

古文：壬子，禁铸铜器。
现代文：二十六日，禁止铸造铜器。
English: On the 26th, the casting of bronze ware was prohibited.

古文：癸酉，大雪。
现代文：二十七日，下大雪。
English: On the 27th, it snowed heavily.

古文：是秋稔。
现代文：这年秋天丰收。
English: This autumn was a bumper harvest.

古文：回纥、吐蕃、大食、渤海、室韦、靺鞨、契丹、奚、牂柯、康国、石国并遣使朝贡。
现代文：回纥、吐蕃、大食、渤海、室韦、革末革曷、契丹、奚、柯、康国、石国都派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: Huizhou, Tubo, Daxing, Bohai, Murowe, Qumuqin, Qidan, Yao, Ke, Kangguo and Shiguo all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：八年春正月丁丑朔，壬午，昭义军节度、检校右仆射、相州刺史薛嵩卒。
现代文：大历八年正月一日是朔日。六日，昭义军节度、检校右仆射、相州刺史薛嵩去世。
English: The first day of the first month of the eighth year of the lunar calendar is the new moon day. On the sixth day, the Shouyi Army Festival, the inspection of the school, and the death of Xue Song.

古文：癸卯，敕天下青苗地头钱每亩十五文，率京畿三十文，自今一例十五文。
现代文：二十七日，皇上命令天下青苗地头钱每亩交十五文，京城附近原先是每亩三十文，从今起一律都交十五文。
English: On the 27th, the emperor ordered the young seedlings in the world to pay 15 mon per mu of land, and the area near the capital was originally 30 mon per mu. From now on, they will all pay 15 mon.

古文：京官三品已上郎官御史，每年各举一人堪为刺史县令者。
现代文：京官三品以上郎官、御史，每年各举一人完全能胜任刺史县令的人。
English: Every year, one person who is fully capable of serving as the county magistrate of Shishi will be appointed to the post of lokan and goshi above the rank of kyokan sanbon.

古文：二月甲子，御史大夫李栖筠弹吏部侍郎徐浩。
现代文：二月十九日，御史大夫李栖筠弹劾吏部侍郎徐浩。
English: On February 19th, the chief historian, Li Qisheng, impeached Xu Hao, the secretary of the cadre department.

古文：丁卯，幽州节度使硃泚加检校户部尚书，封怀宁郡王。
现代文：二十二日，赐给幽州节度使朱氵此检校户部尚书的加官，封为怀宁郡王。
English: On the 22nd, the Yuzhou Festival gave Zhu Xi the additional post of inspecting the school's household department, and he was named the king of Huaining County.

古文：徐浩、薛邕违格，并停知选事。
现代文：徐浩、薛邕违法，都停止主持选拔官员之事。
English: Xu Hao and Xue Yao both violated the law and ceased to preside over the selection of officials.

古文：壬申，永平军节度使、检校右仆射、滑州刺史、霍国公令狐彰卒，遣表荐刘晏、李勉代己。
现代文：二十七日，永平军节度使、检校右仆射、滑州刺史、霍国公令狐彰去世，遗留下的表章推荐刘晏、李勉代替自己。
English: On the 27th, the Yongping Army's commander-in-chief, the inspector-in-chief, the right-hand man, the inspector-in-chief, the inspector-in-chief of Leshou, the inspector-in-chief of Huo, and the official of Huo, the official of the State Council, the official of the State Council, the official of the State Council, the official of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the official of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the official of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, the official of the State Council of the People's Republic of

古文：三月丙子，以工部尚书李勉兼御史大夫、滑州刺史，充永平军节度、滑亳观察等使。
现代文：三月一日，以工部尚书李勉兼御史大夫、滑州刺史，并充任永平军节度使、滑州、亳州观察使。
English: On March 1st, he was appointed as Shangshu Li Tsun of the Ministry of Industry and Mines, as well as the chief historian and the historian of Nanzhou, and served as the Yongping Army's festival envoy, and the observation envoy of Nanzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月戊申，乾陵上仙观天尊殿有双鹊衔紫泥补殿之隙缺，凡十五处。
现代文：夏四月三日，乾陵上仙观、天尊殿有一双喜鹊口衔紫泥弥补宫陵殿上的缝隙缺损，总计补了十五处。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, there was a pair of magpie mouth-shaped purple mud to make up for the gaps on the Qianling Mausoleum, and a total of fifteen places were made up.

古文：戊午，以太仆卿吴仲孺为鄂州刺史、鄂岳沔等州团练观察使。
现代文：十三日，以太仆卿吴仲孺为鄂州刺史、鄂州、岳州、沔州的团练使、观察使。
English: On the 13th, Ether Servant Wu Zhongya was appointed as the group training envoy and observation envoy for the Ezhou Sashih, Ezhou, Yuezhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：五月乙酉，贬吏部侍郎徐浩明州别驾，薛邕歙州刺史，京兆尹杜济杭州刺史，皆坐典选也。
现代文：五月十一日，贬吏部侍郎徐浩为明州别驾，薛邕为歙州刺史，京兆尹杜济为杭州刺史，他们都犯了错选官员的罪。
English: On May 11th, Xu Hao, the secretary of the Department of Censors, was appointed as the governor of Mingzhou, Xue Yao was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Jing Zhaoyin Duji was appointed as the governor of Hangzhou. They all committed the crime of wrongly electing officials.

古文：以太府卿于颀为京兆尹。
现代文：以太府卿于颀为京兆尹。
English: With the Taifu-kyo Yu Shun as the leader, he became known as Keizhoin.

古文：辛卯，郑王邈薨，赠昭静太子。
现代文：十七日，郑王邈去世，赠为昭静太子。
English: On the 17th, Zheng Wangtao passed away and was presented to Prince Zhao Jing.

古文：壬辰，曲赦京城系囚。
现代文：十八日，特别赦免京城中被关押的囚犯。
English: On the 18th, a special amnesty was granted to prisoners held in Kyoto.

古文：癸卯，诏赦天下系囚，死罪降从流，流已下并放。
现代文：二十九日，皇上诏令赦免天下被关押的囚犯，死罪减轻为流放，流放以下的罪人都释放。
English: On the 29th, the emperor issued a decree to pardon all the prisoners in the world. The death penalty was reduced to banishment, and all the criminals below banishment were released.

古文：六月陇州华亭县置义宁军。
现代文：六月，陇州华亭县设置义宁军。
English: In June, the Yining Army was set up in Huating County, Zhangzhou.

古文：癸亥，户部侍郎、判度支韩滉奏安邑盐池生乳盐。
现代文：十九日，户部侍郎、兼任度支使韩上奏说安邑盐池产出了乳盐。
English: On the 19th, Han Sang-soo, the chief steward of the household and concurrently the chief of staff, reported that milk salt had been produced in the salt ponds of Ami.

古文：是夏，城奉天以备蕃寇。
现代文：这年夏天，在奉天筑城墙以防备蕃人入侵。
English: In the summer of this year, the city wall was built in Bongtian to prevent the invasion of the Xiongnu.

古文：秋七月己卯，太白入东井。
现代文：秋七月六日，太白星进入东井。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Taibai Xing entered the East Well.

古文：乙未，月掩毕。
现代文：二十二日，月亮遮掩了毕星。
English: On the 22nd, the moon eclipsed the star.

古文：八月甲寅，诏吏部尚书刘晏知三铨选事。
现代文：八月十一日，皇上诏令吏部尚书刘晏主持考核选拔官员事。
English: On August 11th, the emperor issued an imperial edict ordering the librarian, Shangshu Liu Wei, to preside over the examination and selection of officials.

古文：己未，吐蕃寇灵武。
现代文：十六日，吐蕃入侵灵武。
English: On the 16th, the Tuoba invaded Lingwu.

古文：庚午，灵武奏蕃军退去。
现代文：二十七日，灵武地方上奏吐蕃侵略军退走。
English: On the 27th, the invading troops withdrew from Lingwu.

古文：辛未，幽州节度使硃泚弟滔率五千骑来朝，请河西防秋。
现代文：二十八日，幽州节度使朱氵此弟朱滔率领五千骑兵前来朝见，请求到河西秋防。
English: On the 28th, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Yao's younger brother Zhu Tao lead five thousand cavalry to come to see the emperor and request to go to the autumn defense in Hexi.

古文：诏千骑迓于国门，许自皇城南面出开远门，赴泾州行营。
现代文：诏令一千骑兵在国门迎接。同意他们从皇城南面出开远门，奔赴泾州行营。
English: The emperor ordered a thousand cavalry to meet them at the gate of the country, and agreed that they should leave the southern part of the imperial city and go to the camp in Zhangzhou.

古文：九月癸酉，临晋公主薨。
现代文：九月一日，临晋公主去世。
English: On September 1, Princess Linjin passed away.

古文：壬午，岭南节度使、广州刺史吕崇贲为部将哥舒晃所杀。
现代文：十日，岭南节度使、广州刺史吕崇贲被部将哥舒晃所杀。
English: On the 10th day of the month, the Lingnan Festival envoy, the Guangzhou chief of staff, Lv Chongyong, was killed by the general of the department, Goshukang.

古文：癸未，晋州男子郇谟以麻辫发，持竹筐及苇席，哭于东市，请进三十字，如不称旨，请裹尸于席筐。
现代文：十一日，晋州男子郇谟以麻系住头上发辫，拿着竹筐和苇席，在东市哭，请求向皇上进献三十个字，如果不符合皇上旨意，请求自杀将尸体裹在竹筐苇席中。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Jinzhou man Zou Meng tied a hairpin around his head with a hemp cord, took a bamboo basket and a feast, cried in Dongshi, asked to present 30 words to the emperor, and if it did not meet the emperor's will, asked to commit suicide by wrapping the body in a bamboo basket and a feast.

古文：上召见，赐衣馆之禁中。
现代文：皇上召见，赐给衣服，在宫中给他一馆住下。
English: The emperor summoned him, gave him clothes, and gave him a palace to live in.

古文：内二字曰 监团 ，欲去诸道监军、团练使也。
现代文：皇上采纳了二字曰 监团 ，想免除各道监军和团练使。
English: The emperor adopted the two words "supervisory group" in order to exempt the supervisors of each province and the group training envoys.

古文：丁亥，贬左巡使、殿中侍御史杨护，以其抑郇谟而不上闻也，戊子，诏京官五品以上各上封事，议政得失。
现代文：十五日，贬左巡使、殿中侍御史杨护，因为他压抑郇谟而不使皇上听闻。十六日，诏令京官五品以上官员各上密封的章奏，谈论政事得失。
English: On the 15th, the left-wing envoy and palace attendant Shi Yangfu was demoted, because he suppressed the rumor and did not let the emperor hear it. On the 16th, the imperial edict ordered the officials of the Beijing government above the fifth grade to each play a sealed chapter and discuss the gains and losses of political affairs.

古文：己丑夜，太白入太微。
现代文：十七日夜，太白星进入太微星座。
English: On the evening of the 17th, the Taibai Star entered the Taibai constellation.

古文：甲午，东都留守蒋琼兼知东都贡举。
现代文：二十二日，东都留守蒋琼兼任主持东都科举考试。
English: On the 22nd, Jiang Qiong stayed in Dongdu to preside over the Dongdu Science Examination.

古文：戊戌，以辰、锦观察使李昌巙为桂州刺史、桂管防御观察使。
现代文：二十六日，以辰、锦观察使李昌为桂州刺史、桂管防御观察使。
English: On the 26th, with the observation of Chen and Jin, Li Chang was appointed as the Guizhou history and Guizhou defense observation envoy.

古文：大鸟见武功，肉翅狐首，四足有爪，爪长四尺三寸，毛赤如蝙蝠，群鸟随而噪之。
现代文：有一只大鸟在武功出现，肉翅膀，狐狸的头，四只脚有爪子，爪长四尺三寸，毛赤红色如蝙蝠，群鸟随着它鸣叫。
English: A large bird appeared in the martial arts. It had fleshy wings, the head of a fox, and four clawed feet. The claws were four feet and three inches long. Its fur was red and red like a bat. The birds chirped along with it.

古文：神策将张日芬射毙以献。
现代文：神策将张日芬将它射死献给皇上。
English: Shinsaku had Zhang Rifen shoot it dead and present it to the emperor.

古文：冬十月癸卯，魏博田承嗣加同平章事。
现代文：冬十月一日，魏博田承嗣加任同平章事。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Wei Botian Shouji was appointed to the position of Tongping Zhangji.

古文：丁巳夜，月掩毕。
现代文：十五日夜，月亮遮掩了毕星。
English: On the evening of the fifteenth day, the moon covered the stars.

古文：吐蕃寇泾州、邠州。
现代文：吐蕃入侵泾州、州。
English: The pigeons have invaded Zhangzhou and Zhouzhou.

古文：甲子，子仪先锋将珲瑊与吐蕃战于宜录，我师不利。
现代文：二十二日，郭子仪的先锋将浑王咸在宜禄与吐蕃作战，我军不利。
English: On the 22nd, Guo Ziyi's vanguard sent Hun Wang Xian to fight against Tubo in Yilu. Our army was at a disadvantage.

古文：瑊与泾原马璘极力追蹑，蕃军溃去。
现代文：浑王咸与泾原马瞞极力跟踪追赶，吐蕃军溃退而去。
English: Hun Wangxian and Qianyuan Ma Xie tried their best to follow and catch up, but the Tubo army broke and retreated.

古文：乙丑，以江西观察使路嗣恭为广州刺史，充岭南节度使，封翼国公。
现代文：二十三日，以江西观察使路嗣恭为广州刺史，并充任岭南节度使，封翼国公。
English: On the 23rd, Jiangxi observation envoy Lu Shigong made history in Guangzhou, and served as the Lingnan festival envoy, sealing the wings of the country.

古文：以浙东观察使、越州刺史陈少游为扬州大都督府长史，充淮南节度使。
现代文：以浙东观察使、越州刺史陈少游为扬州大都督府长史，充任淮南节度使。
English: Chen Shaoyou, the observer of East Zhejiang and the chief historian of Yuezhou, was appointed as the governor of Yangzhou and the chief historian of Huainan.

古文：戊辰，郭子仪奏破吐蕃十万，百僚称贺。
现代文：二十六日，郭子仪上奏攻破吐蕃十万兵，百官向皇上祝贺。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Guo Ziyi made a speech about defeating 100,000 soldiers of Tu Wei, and hundreds of officials congratulated the emperor.

古文：己卯夜，月入羽林。
现代文：二十七日夜，月亮进入羽林星座。
English: On the evening of the 27th, the moon entered the constellation of the Feathered Forest.

古文：癸巳，月入太微。
现代文：三十日，月亮进入太微星座。
English: On the 30th, the moon entered the Taimu constellation.

古文：十一月壬寅朔。
现代文：十一月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of November is Jinsin Day.

古文：庚戌，汴宋节度使田神功来朝。
现代文：九日，汴宋节度使田神功前来朝见。
English: On the 9th, the Song Dynasty festival made Tian Shengong come to see the emperor.

古文：辛酉，淮西节度使李忠臣来朝。
现代文：二十日，淮西节度使李忠臣前来朝见。
English: On the 20th, the Huaxi Festival made Li Zhongchen come to see the emperor.

古文：十二月癸酉，月入羽林。
现代文：十二月三日，月亮进入羽林星座。
English: On December 3rd, the moon will enter the constellation of Aquila.

古文：是冬无雪。
现代文：这年冬天无雪。
English: There was no snow this winter.

古文：是岁大有年。
现代文：这年是丰收年。
English: This year is a bumper year.

古文：九年正月庚子朔。
现代文：大历九年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the ninth year of the lunar calendar is the new year's day.

古文：壬寅，汴宋节度使、太子少师、检校尚书右仆射、兼御史大夫、汴州刺史田神功卒。
现代文：三日，汴宋节度使、太子少师、检校尚书右仆射、兼御史大夫、汴州刺史田神功去世。
English: On the third day of the month, Sheng Tian Shengong, an envoy of the Song and Song Dynasty, a young teacher of the prince, a school inspector, a scholar, and a historian, passed away.

古文：沣朗两州镇遏使、沣州刺史杨猷擅浮江而下，至鄂州。
现代文：澧、朗两州镇遏使、澧州刺史杨猷擅自浮江而下，到了鄂州。
English: The towns of the two prefectures of Handan and Lang, and the prefectural governor of Handan, Yang Jie, went down the Floating River without permission and arrived in Ezhou.

古文：诏许赴汝州，遂溯汉而上，复、郢、襄等州皆闭城拒之。
现代文：皇上诏令让他奔赴汝州，于是杨猷逆汉江而上，复、郢、襄等州都关闭城门抗拒他，不让他进城。
English: The emperor's edict ordered him to rush to Ruzhou, so Yang Xuan sailed up the Han River, and Fuzhou, Handan and Xiangzhou all closed their gates to resist him and not let him enter the city.

古文：二月己丑，以田神功弟神玉权知汴宋留后。
现代文：二月二十日，以田神功之弟田神玉暂代汴宋留后。
English: On February 20th, Tian Shengyu, the younger brother of Yida Shengong, became the temporary successor of Song.

古文：癸巳，郭子仪自邠州来朝，李抱玉自凤翔来朝。
现代文：二十四日，郭子仪从州前来朝见，李抱玉从凤翔前来朝见。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Guo Ziyi came from the state to see the morning, and Li Baoyu came from Fengxiang to see the morning.

古文：三月丙午，禁畿内渔猎采捕，自正月至五月晦，永为常式。
现代文：三月七日，禁止在京城附近捕猎野兽打鱼，从正月到五月底，永远成为常规。
English: On March 7, the hunting of wild animals and fishing in the vicinity of the capital were banned, and from the first month to the end of May, it will always be the norm.

古文：戊子，以沣州刺史杨猷为洮州刺史。
现代文：十九日，以澧州刺史杨猷为洮州刺史。
English: On the 19th, Yang Jie, the governor of Zhangzhou, was named governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：夏四月丁丑，月入太微。
现代文：夏四月九日，月亮进入太微星座。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the moon entered the Taimu constellation.

古文：己卯，以桂管观察使黎干为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
现代文：十一日，以桂管观察使黎干为京兆尹、兼御史大夫。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Gan was appointed as the Keizhao Yin and the Imperial Historian.

古文：甲申，中书舍人常衮率两省官一十八人诣阁请论事，诏三人各尽所怀。
现代文：十六日，中书舍人常衮率领中书省门下省两省官员十八人到内阁请求论述朝事，皇上诏令三人各人尽量抒发个人的怀抱。
English: On the 16th, 18 officials from the two provinces under the leadership of the CLS, led by the CLS's deputy, Chang Qi, went to the cabinet to request a discussion of the situation in Korea. The emperor ordered the three officials to express their personal feelings as much as possible.

古文：乙酉，诏郭子仪等大阅兵师以备吐蕃。
现代文：十七日，诏令郭子仪等大阅兵以防备吐蕃。
English: On the 17th, he ordered Guo Ziyi and others to hold a large military parade to prevent the outbreak of war.

古文：壬辰，诏赦大辟以下系囚，无轻重释放。
现代文：二十四日，皇上诏令赦免死刑以下被关押的罪犯，无论轻重都释放。
English: On the 24th, the emperor issued an imperial edict to pardon prisoners sentenced to death or less, releasing them regardless of their severity.

古文：乙未，华阳公主薨，上悲惜之，累日不听朝，宰臣抗疏陈请。
现代文：二十七日，华阳公主去世，皇上悲痛怜惜她，几天不听朝，宰辅大臣上书劝谏请求皇上上朝。
English: On the 27th, Princess Huayang passed away. The Emperor grieved and pitied her. He did not listen to the Imperial Court for several days. The Vice-Minister of the Imperial Court sent a letter to the Emperor asking him to come to the Imperial Court.

古文：五月庚戌，废泜州。
现代文：五月十二日，撤销氵氐州。
English: On May 12, Zhangzhou was revoked.

古文：庚申，诏度支使支七十万贯、转运使五十万贯和籴，岁丰谷贱也。
现代文：二十二日，皇上诏令度支使支钱七十万贯、转运使支五十万贯来购买人民粮食，因为年成丰收谷物太便宜了。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor issued an imperial edict to spend 700,000 kroner for transportation and 500,000 kroner for transshipment to purchase grain for the people, because the annual bumper harvest of grain was too cheap.

古文：乙丑，诏：四海之内，方协大宁，西戎无厌，独阻王命，不可忘战，尚劳边事。
现代文：二十七日，皇上诏曰： 四海之内，四方诣和，非常安宁，西戎却不满足，独独抗拒王命，我们不可忘记战争，还要勤于防备边境战事。
English: On the 27th, the emperor issued an edict saying: "Within the four seas, peace has been made on all sides, and it is very peaceful. However, the West is not satisfied, and it alone resists the king's order. We must not forget the war, and we must also diligently prepare for border wars.

古文：朕顷以兵革之后，军国空耗，躬率节俭，务勤农桑。上玄储休，仍岁大稔，益用多愧，不知其然。
现代文：朕因为近来战争之后，军队、国家勤劳于农桑。上天等待和平，连年丰收，越发使人深感惭愧，不知道上天为什么这样。
English: Because recently, after the war, the army and the country have been working hard on the farm. Heaven is waiting for peace, and the harvest has been plentiful for years. It makes people feel more and more ashamed. I don't know why Heaven is like this.

古文：虽属此人和，近于家给，而边谷未实，戎备犹虚。
现代文：虽然现在属于人民和谐之时，接近于家给人足，然而边境谷粮还不充实，军备还很空虚。
English: Though this is a time of harmony for the people, and sufficiency close to home, yet the borders are barren of grain and empty of arms.

古文：因其天时，思致丰积，将设平籴，以之餽军。
现代文：朕要依靠天时之利，想到丰收而积存粮食，将设立平价采购，以此送给军队作为军粮。
English: We should rely on the benefit of time, think of the bumper harvest and accumulate grain, will set up a parity purchase, in order to send to the army as military grain.

古文：然以中都所供，内府不足，粗充常入之数，岂齐倍余之收。
现代文：然而由于中都所供应，朝廷储备不充足，粗略地充当常规收入的数字，难道能够和加倍多余的收入齐平。
English: However, due to the fact that it is supplied by the central government, the imperial reserve is not sufficient, and the figure that roughly serves as regular income can only be equal to the double surplus income.

古文：其在方面荩臣，成兹大计。共佐公家之急，以资塞下之储。
现代文：那些在各地忠诚的大臣，应该成就这些国家大计，共同帮助解决国家的急难，以此来资助边疆粮食的储备。
English: Those ministers who are loyal in various regions should accomplish these national plans and jointly help solve the country's urgent problems, so as to fund the frontier grain reserves.

古文：每道岁有防秋兵马，其淮南四千人，浙西三千人，魏博四千人，昭义二千人，成德三千人，山南东道三千人，荆南二千人，湖南三千人，山南西道二千人，剑南西川三千人，东川二千人，鄂岳一千五百人。宣歙三千人，福建一千五百人。其岭南、浙东、浙西，亦合准例。
现代文：每个道每年有秋天防务的兵马，淮南四千人，浙西三千人，魏博四千人、昭义二千人，成德三千人，山南东道三千人，荆南二千人，湖南三千人，山南西道二千人，剑南西川三千人，东川二千人，鄂岳一千五百人，宣歙三千人，福建一千五百人，其余岭南、浙东、浙西，也应符合上述地方的例子为标准。
English: Each province has 4,000 soldiers for autumn defense every year, including 4,000 from Huainan Province, 3,000 from West Zhejiang Province, 4,000 from Weibo Province, 2,000 from Zhao Yi Province, 3,000 from Chengde Province, 3,000 from Shannan Host Province, 2,000 from Jingnan Province, 3,000 from Hunan Province, 2,000 from West Shannan Province, 3,000 from West Jianan Province, 2,000 from East Sichuan Province, 1,500 from Hougou Province, 3,000 from Xuanfan Province, and 1,500 from Fujian Province. The remaining soldiers from Lingnan Province, East Zhejiang Province, and West Zhejiang Province should also meet the above-mentioned standards.

古文：恐路远往来增费，各委本道每年取当使诸色杂钱及回易利润、赃赎钱等，每人计二十贯。
现代文：恐怕路远往来增加费用，各委托本道每年应当使用各色杂例钱和交易买卖的利润以及贪赃受贿的罪人的赎罪钱等等，每人合计二十贯。
English: I am afraid that the long-distance travel will increase the cost, and each trustee should annually use all kinds of miscellaneous money and the profits of trading and buying and selling, as well as the atonement money of the corrupt and bribe-taking criminals, etc., for a total of twenty yuan per person.

古文：每道据合配防秋人数多少，都计钱数，市轻货送纳上都，以备和籴，仍以秋收送毕。
现代文：每道依据配合秋防人数的多少，总计钱数，购买较轻的货物缴纳到上都，以准备购买粮食，供给军用，仍然在秋收时送完。 
English: Each way is based on the number of people participating in the autumn defense, the total amount of money, the purchase of lighter goods paid to Shangdu to prepare for the purchase of grain and supply to the military, and still sent at the autumn harvest.

古文：泾原节度使马璘来朝。
现代文：泾原节度使马瞞前来朝见。
English: The Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：丙寅，加马璘尚书左仆射、知省事。
现代文：二十八日，赐予马瞞尚书左仆射、主持尚书省事的职衔。
English: On the 28th, Ma Shide was given the title of the left-hand man of Shangshu, presiding over the affairs of Shangshu.

古文：璘讽将士进状求宰相，故有是授。
现代文：这是由于马瞞暗示将士进上陈述的文件请求做宰相，所以有这样的授予。
English: This was because Machethi had hinted that he wanted him to be the prime minister in the document he had submitted.

古文：幽州节度使硃泚遣弟滔奉表请自入朝，兼自率五千骑防秋。
现代文：幽州节度使朱氵此派遣弟弟朱滔奉上表章，请求自己入朝，并且亲自率领五千骑兵作为秋防。
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Xi send his younger brother Zhu Tao to present the badge, ask him to enter the imperial court, and personally lead five thousand cavalry as the autumn defense.

古文：许之，诏所司筑第待之。
现代文：皇上同意，诏有关部门建筑住宅以等待他。
English: The emperor agreed and ordered the relevant departments to build a residence to wait for him.

古文：六月己卯，月掩南斗。
现代文：六月十一日，月亮遮掩了南斗星。
English: On June 11, the moon eclipsed the Southern Dipper.

古文：庚辰，月入太微。
现代文：十二日，月亮进入太微星座。
English: On the 12th, the moon entered the faint constellation.

古文：秋七月甲辰，月掩房，又入羽林。久旱，京兆尹黎干历祷诸祠，未雨。
现代文：秋七月七日，月亮遮掩了房星，又进入羽林星座，长久干旱，京兆尹黎干到各类祠堂祈祷，没有下雨。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of autumn, the moon covered the house star and entered the constellation of the feather forest. There was a long drought, and Jing Zhao Yin Li went to various ancestral halls to pray. There was no rain.

古文：又请祷文宣庙，上曰 丘之祷久矣。 
现代文：又请求在文宣庙祈祷，皇上道： 孔丘祈祷已经很久了！ 
English: He also asked to pray at the Wen Xuan Temple. The emperor said, "It's been a long time since Confucius prayed!

古文：八月辛未，以虢州刺史宋晦为同州刺史，充长春宫营田等使。
现代文：八月四日，以虢州刺史宋晦为同州刺史，并充任长春宫营田使。
English: On August 4th, Song Gui, the governor of Zhangzhou, was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and also served as the field marshal of the Changchun Palace.

古文：戊寅，以陕州大都督府长史皇甫温为越州剌史，充浙东观察使。
现代文：十一日，以陕州大都督府长史皇甫温为越州刺史，充任浙东观察使。
English: On the 11th, the governor of the great capital of Shaanxi Province, Shi Huangfuwen, was appointed as the ambassador of Yuezhou and the observer of East Zhejiang.

古文：辛卯，月掩轩辕。
现代文：二十四日，月亮遮掩了轩辕星座。
English: On the 24th, the moon obscured the constellation of Virgo.

古文：九月庚子，幽州节度使硃泚来朝。
现代文：九月四日，幽州节度使朱氵此前来朝见。
English: On September 4, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Xi come to see the emperor.

古文：乙巳，渭北节度使、坊州刺史臧希让卒。
现代文：九日，渭北节度使、坊州刺史臧希让去世。
English: On the 9th, the chief envoy of the Northern Song Dynasty and the chief envoy of the Southern Song Dynasty died.

古文：是秋大雨。
现代文：这年秋天下大雨。
English: It rained heavily in the autumn of that year.

古文：冬十月壬申，信王瑝薨。
现代文：冬十月六日，信王王皇去世。
English: On the 6th of October in winter, Emperor Shinno passed away.

古文：乙亥，梁王璿薨。
现代文：九日，梁王去世。
English: On the 9th, Liang Wang passed away.

古文：以前宣州刺史季广琛为右散骑常侍。
现代文：以前任宣州刺史季广琛为右散骑常侍。
English: Former Xuanzhou magistrate Ji Guangyao was the right rider.

古文：十一月戊戌，大雪。平地盈尺。
现代文：十一月三日，下大雪，平地雪满满一尺。
English: On November 3rd, heavy snow fell, and the flat ground was covered with a foot of snow.

古文：庚子，以商州刺史李国清为陕州大都督府长史，充陕州观察使。
现代文：五日，以商州刺史李国清为陕州大都督府长史，并充任陕州观察使。
English: On the 5th, Li Guoqing, the chief historian of Shangzhou, was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi, and served as the Shaanxi observation envoy.

古文：十二月庚寅，以中书舍人杨炎、秘书少监韦肇并为吏部侍郎，中书舍人常衮为礼部待郎。
现代文：十二月二十五日，以中书舍人杨炎、秘书少监韦肇都任吏部侍郎，中书舍人常衮任礼部侍郎。
English: On December 25th, Yang Yan, a junior high school teacher, and Wei Zhaodu, a junior high school secretary, were appointed as the attendants of the cadre department, and the junior high school teacher, Jang Hao, was appointed as the attendant of the ceremony department.

古文：壬辰，赦京系囚，死罪降从流，流已下并释放。
现代文：二十七日，赦免京师被关押的囚犯，死罪降低为流放，流放以下罪人都全部释放。
English: On the 27th, the prisoners held by the Beijing Division were pardoned, the death penalty was reduced to banishment, and all the criminals below banishment were released.

古文：十年春正月乙未朔。
现代文：大历十年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the tenth year of the lunar calendar is the new moon.

古文：己酉，昭义牙将裴志清逐其帅薛摐，薛摐奔洺州，上章待罪。
现代文：十五日，昭义牙将裴志清驱逐他的大帅薛逃到了州，上奏章等待皇上判罪。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhao Yiga expelled Pei Zhiqing and his general Xue fled to the state, awaiting the emperor's sentence.

古文：志清率众归田承嗣。
现代文：裴志清率众军归附了田承嗣。
English: Pei Zhiqing led the troops and annexed Tian Cheng He.

古文：壬寅，寿王瑁薨。
现代文：八日，寿王李瑁去世。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the birthday king, Li Xi, passed away.

古文：乙未，硃泚抗表乞留京师，西征吐蕃，请以弟滔权为幽州留后，许之。
现代文：十一日，朱氵此极力上表请求离开京师，往西去攻打吐蕃，请求以弟弟朱滔暂代幽州留后，皇上同意了。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Xi made a strong request to leave the capital division and go west to attack Tujia. After requesting that his brother Zhu Tao temporarily stay in Yuzhou, the emperor agreed.

古文：以昭义将薛择为相州刺史，薛雄为卫州刺史，薛坚为洺州刺史，皆嵩之族人也。
现代文：以昭义的部将薛择为相州刺史，薛雄为卫州刺史，薛坚为州刺史，他们都是薛的族人。
English: Zhao Yi's general, Xue, was chosen as the chief historian of Xiangzhou, Xue Xiong as the chief historian of Weizhou, and Xue Jian as the chief historian of Xuzhou. They were all Xue's people.

古文：戊申，遣使慰谕田承嗣，令各守封疆，承嗣不奉诏。
现代文：十四日，皇上派遣使者安抚田承嗣，命令他们各人守护好封疆，而田承嗣不接受诏令。
English: On the 14th, the emperor sent an envoy to appease Tian Heung Hee, ordering each of them to guard the sealed territory, but Tian Heung Hee did not accept the edict.

古文：壬子，充州复为果州。
现代文：十八日，充州重又恢复为果州。
English: On the 18th, the status of Chenzhou was changed back to that of Guozhou.

古文：癸丑。田承嗣盗取洺州，又破卫州。
现代文：十九日，田承嗣盗取州，又攻破了卫州。
English: On the 19th, Tian Cheng He stole the state and broke through the state of Weizhou.

古文：二月乙丑，盗杀卫州刺史薛雄。
现代文：二月一日，盗贼杀害了卫州刺史薛雄。
English: On February 1, thieves killed Wei Zhou's assistant, Xue Xiong.

古文：丙寅，罢辰、锦、溪、奖、溆五州经略使，复隶黔中。
现代文：二日，罢免了辰、锦、溪、奖、溆五州经略使。让五州重新隶属黔中。
English: On the second day, the five provincial economic commissioners of Chen, Jin, Xixi, Shou and Handan were dismissed, and the five provinces were re-subordinated to Handan.

古文：辛未，制第四子述封睦王，充岭南节度度支营田、王府经略观察处置等大使。
现代文：七日，皇上下令，第四个儿子李述封为睦王，充任岭南节度使、度支使、营田使、王府经略使、观察处置使。
English: On the seventh day, the emperor issued an order, and the fourth son, Li Shufeng, was appointed as King Mugu, and was appointed as the Lingnan Festival Envoy, Doushi Envoy, Yingtian Envoy, Wangfujing Envoy, and Observation and Disposition Envoy.

古文：第五子逾可封郴王，充渭北鄜坊等州节度大使。
现代文：第五个儿子李逾封为郴王，并充任渭北、坊等州节度大使。
English: The fifth son, Li Chaofeng, became the king of Shandong, and served as the ambassador of the state festival in Shandong North, Fang and other provinces.

古文：第六子连封恩王。
现代文：第六个儿子李连封为恩王。
English: The sixth son, Li Lianfeng, became the King of Grace.

古文：第七子韩王迥可充汴宋节度大使。
现代文：第七个儿子韩王迥充任汴宋节度大使。
English: The seventh son, Han Wang Yuchong, served as the ambassador to the Song Dynasty.

古文：第八子遘可封鄜王。
现代文：第八个儿子李遘封为王。
English: The eighth son, Li Yufeng, became king.

古文：第十三子造封忻王，充昭义节度大使。
现代文：第十三个儿子李造封为忻王，并充任昭义节度大使。
English: The thirteenth son, Li Zoufeng, became the king of Shanshan and served as the ambassador of the Shouyi Festival.

古文：十七子遹封循王。
现代文：第十四个儿子李逻封为韶王。
English: The fourteenth son, Li Luo, was crowned the Dragon King.

古文：十八子通封恭王。
现代文：第十五个儿子李运封为嘉王。
English: The fifteenth son, Li Yunfeng, became King Jia.

古文：十九子达封原王。
现代文：第十六个儿子李遇封为端王。
English: The sixteenth son, Li Yufu, was crowned the Dragon King.

古文：二十子逸封雅王。
现代文：第十七个儿子李封为循王。
English: The seventeenth son, Li Feng, became King Xu.

古文：并可开府仪同三司，不出阁。
现代文：都适合任开府仪同三司，但都不实际任开府仪同三司之实职。
English: All of them are suitable for holding the office of Kaifu Yi and the three departments, but none of them actually hold the office of Kaifu Yi and the three departments.

古文：丙子，以华州刺史李承昭为相州刺史。知昭义兵马留后。时田承嗣尽盗入相、卫所管四州之地，自署长吏。
现代文：十二日，以华州刺史李承昭为相州刺史，主持昭义兵马留后的工作，当时田承嗣已经全部劫掠了相州、卫州所管辖的田州之地，自己任命地位较高的官吏。
English: On the twelfth day, Li Chengzhao, the historian of Huazhou, was appointed as the historian of Xiangzhou to preside over the work after the soldiers and horses of Zhao Yi left. At that time, Tian Chengzhe had already plundered all the land of Tianzhou under the jurisdiction of Xiangzhou and Weizhou, and appointed high-ranking officials himself.

古文：是日河阳军乱，逐城使常休明，迫牙将王惟恭为留后，军士大掠数日，休明奔东都。
现代文：这天河阳军乱，驱逐了城使常休明，逼迫牙将王惟恭为留后，军士大肆抢掠数天。常休明奔逃到东都。
English: On this day, there was a mutiny in the Kawayan army, and after expelling the city envoy, Jokyu Ming, and forcing the commander, Wang Weigong, to stay behind, the sergeants plundered and pillaged for several days. Jokyu Ming fled to the eastern capital.

古文：甲申，以平卢淄青节度观察海运押新罗渤海两蕃等使、检校工部尚书、青州刺史李正己检校尚书左仆射；前陇右节度副使、陇州刺史马燧为商州刺史，充本州防御使。
现代文：二十六日，以平卢、淄青节度使、观察使、海运押新罗使、押渤海使、检校工部尚书、青州刺史李正己为检校尚书左仆射；前任陇右节度副使、陇州刺史马燧为商州刺史，充任本州防御使。
English: On the 26th, with Pinglu, Handan and Qingdao as the dispatching envoys, observation envoys, shipping envoys to Silla, and Handan and Qingdao as the dispatching envoys, Shang Shu of the inspection department and Li Zhengyi of Qingdao as the dispatching envoys left and right; the former deputy envoy of Handan and Qingdao as the dispatching envoys, and Handan and Qingdao as the dispatching envoys of Shangzhou, he served as the defense envoy of this state.

古文：三月甲午，陕州军乱，逐观察使李国清，纵兵大掠。
现代文：三月一日，陕州军大乱，驱逐观察使李国清，放纵唆使军队大肆抢掠。
English: On March 1, the Shaanxi army rioted. Li Guoqing was forced to expel the observers and encouraged the troops to loot and pillage.

古文：国清卑词遍拜将士，方免祸，一夕而定。
现代文：李国清低三下四遍拜所有将士，方才免祸，一晚上才安定。
English: Li Guoqing bowed low three times and bowed four times to all the soldiers, only then was he spared from disaster, and only then was he stable overnight.

古文：乙巳，薛崿、常休明至阙下，素服待罪。
现代文：十二日，薛、常休明到了宫阙之下，身穿白色素衣待罪朝廷。
English: On the twelfth day, Xue and Changhui went to the palace, dressed in white plain clothes, and waited for the court.

古文：丁未，以左散骑常侍孟皞为华州刺史，充潼关防御使。
现代文：十四日，以左散骑常侍孟白皋为华州刺史，充任潼关防御使。
English: On the 14th, Meng Baiyao, a left-handed horseback rider and a regular attendant, was appointed as the official historian of Huazhou and served as the defense envoy of Shaoguan.

古文：庚戌，荧惑入壁垒。
现代文：十七日，荧惑星进入壁垒星座。
English: On the 17th, the fluorescent planet entered the barrier constellation.

古文：四月，太常寺奏：诸州府所用斗秤，当寺给铜斗秤，州府依样制造而行，从之。
现代文：四月，太常寺上奏：各州府所用斗和秤，应当是太常寺给的铜斗秤，各州府应该依照样品制造使用施行。
English: In April, Taejon-ji Temple announced that the scales and buckets used by prefectural governments should be the bronze scales and buckets given by Taejon-ji Temple, and that prefectural governments should use the scales and buckets according to the samples made.

古文：乙丑，制：魏博节度使、开府仪岵司、太尉、检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、魏州大都督府长史、上柱国、雁门郡王田承嗣可贬永州刺史。
现代文：皇上听从了。三日，皇上下诏令：魏博节度使、开府仪同三司、太尉、检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、魏州大都督府长史、上柱国、雁门郡王田承嗣贬为永州刺史。
English: The emperor obeyed. On the third day, the emperor issued an imperial edict: Wei Bo festival envoy, Kaifu ceremony with three divisions, captain, school inspection Shang Shuxu Zuo Shuai, with the middle school door down Ping Zhangji, the governor of the governor of Wei Province, Shangzhuo Province, and Wang Tian Chengzhi of Ganmen County were reduced to Yongzhou sashimi.

古文：仍诏河东、镇冀、幽州、淄青、淮西、滑毫、汴宋、泽潞、河阳道出师进讨。
现代文：仍旧诏令河东、镇冀、幽州、淄青、淮西、滑亳、汴宋、泽潞、河阳道出军队讨伐田承嗣。
English: The imperial edict still ordered troops from the provinces of Hedong, Zhenji, Yuzhou, Jiaqing, Huaxi, Nanzhuang, Jiaosong, Zeyu and Heyang to fight against the felling of rice fields.

古文：甲申，大雨雹，暴风拔树，飘屋瓦，落鸱吻，人震死者十之二，京畿损稼者七县。
现代文：二十二日，下大雨，下大冰雹，暴风拔起树木，吹走了屋瓦，吹落了屋脊上的装饰物，人们被震死者十分之二，京城附近庄稼受损的有七个县。
English: On the 22nd, there was heavy rain, large hailstones, and the storm uprooted trees, blew away roof tiles, and blew down decorations on the roof. Two-tenths of the people were killed by the earthquake, and crops near the capital were damaged in seven counties.

古文：五月乙未，田承嗣部将霍荣国以磁州归。
现代文：五月三日，田承嗣的部将霍荣国带领磁州归附。
English: On May 3rd, Tian Chengzhi's troops led by Huo Rong Guo annexed Magnetized Prefecture.

古文：癸卯，剑南置昌州。
现代文：十一日，在剑南设置昌州。
English: On the 11th, Changzhou was set up in Jianan.

古文：罢两都贡举，都集上都，停童子科。
现代文：撤销东都、西都的科举考试，全部集中到上都考试，停止童子科。
English: Revoke the East and West Capital Examinations, concentrate them all on the Shanghai Capital Examinations, and stop the children's department.

古文：六月辛未，田承承嗣遣其党裴志清攻围冀州，为李宝臣所败。
现代文：六月九日，田承嗣派遣他的党羽裴志清包围攻打冀州，被李宝臣击败。
English: On June 9, Tian Chengzhi sent his followers to encircle and attack Jizhou, and was defeated by Li Baochen.

古文：秋七月己未。户部尚书暢璀卒。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，户部尚书畅璀去世。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, the head of the household, Shangshu Changyao, passed away.

古文：杭州大风，海水翻潮，溺州民五千家，船千艘。
现代文：杭州起大风，海水翻起潮水，漂死杭州民众五千家，漂没船只一千艘。
English: A gale blew up in Hangzhou, the sea turned tidal, and five thousand people in Hangzhou were swept away, and a thousand ships were lost.

古文：八月丁卯，田承嗣上表请束身归朝。
现代文：八月六日，田承嗣上表请求捆缚自己归附朝廷请罪。
English: On August 6th, Tian Chengzhi went to the court and asked to be bound to the court to plead guilty.

古文：戊子夜，月入太微。
现代文：二十七日夜，月亮进入太微星座。
English: On the evening of the 27th, the moon entered the faint constellation.

古文：己丑，田承嗣将卢子期攻磁州。
现代文：二十八日，田承嗣的部将卢子期攻打磁州。
English: On the 28th, Tian Chengzhi's army led by Lu Ziqi attacked Magengzhou.

古文：九月戊戌，荆南节度使卫伯玉来朝。
现代文：九月七日，荆南节度使卫伯玉前来朝见。
English: On September 7, the Jingnan Festival made Wei Boyu come to see the emperor.

古文：月晕，荧惑犯昴、五车、参、东井等星。
现代文：十一日，宽恕京城被关押囚犯。十七日，回纥兵在市场上白昼杀人，官吏将他们捕捉住，关押在万年监狱。
English: On the 17th, Uighur soldiers killed people in the market in broad daylight. Officials caught them and detained them in the 10,000-year prison.

古文：癸丑，吐蕃寇陇州，凤翔李抱玉击之。
现代文：回纥的首领赤心手持兵器进入县城，抢劫囚犯而出，砍伤了监狱官员。二十二日，吐蕃入侵陇州，凤翔府事李抱玉将他击退。
English: The leader of the Uighurs, Chikshin, entered the county seat with a weapon in his hand, robbed prisoners, and slashed prison officials. On the 22nd, the Tibetans invaded Zhangzhou, and the Fengxiang prefect Li Baoyu repelled him.

古文：戊午，幽州节度使硃泚镇奉天。
现代文：二十七日，幽州节度使朱氵此镇守奉天。
English: On the 27th, the Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Xi this town guard Feng Tian.

古文：冬十月辛酉日，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬十月一日，有日蚀。
English: In winter, on October 1st, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：癸亥，以商州刺史马燧检校左散骑常侍、河阳三城使。
现代文：三日，以商州刺史马燧任检校左散骑常侍、河阳三城使。
English: On the third day, he was appointed as the Left Sanzhong riding attendant of the inspection school and the envoy of the three cities of Hebei and Yangzhou.

古文：甲子，昭义节度使李承昭与卢子期战于磁州清水县，大破之，生擒子期以献。
现代文：四日，昭义节度使李承昭与卢子期在磁州清水县大战，大破敌军，活捉卢子期献给朝廷。
English: On the 4th, the Shouyi Festival made Li Chengzhao and Lu Ziqi fight a great battle in Qingshui County, Gansu Province. They defeated the enemy army and captured Lu Ziqi alive and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：丙寅，贵妃独孤氏薨，追赠曰贞懿皇后。
现代文：六日，贵妃独孤氏去世，追赠封号曰贞懿皇后。
English: On the 6th, Guifei Doko died, and was posthumously given the title of Empress Zhenyao.

古文：己丑，尚书右仆射裴遵庆卒。
现代文：二十四日，尚书右仆射裴遵庆去世。
English: On the 24th, Shang Shuxu's right-hand man Sha Pei Zunqing passed away.

古文：十一月辛卯，新平公主薨。
现代文：十一月一日，新平公主去世。
English: On November 1, Princess Sinping passed away.

古文：丁酉，田承嗣所署瀛州刺史吴希光以城降。
现代文：七日，田承嗣任命的瀛州刺史吴希光率城投降。
English: On the 7th, Wu Xiguang, the governor of Zhangzhou who was appointed by Tian Chengxi, surrendered the city.

古文：丁未，路嗣恭攻破广州，擒哥舒晃，斩首以献。
现代文：十七日，路嗣恭攻破广州，活捉哥舒晃，斩了他的头颅前来贡献。
English: On the seventeenth day, Lu Tsigong invaded Guangzhou, captured Brother Shu alive, cut off his head and came to contribute.

古文：十一年春正月庚寅朔，田承嗣上表请罪。
现代文：十一年春正月一日是朔日，田承嗣上奏请罪。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the eleventh year was the new moon day, and Tian Chengzhi went to appeal for punishment.

古文：壬辰，遣谏议大夫杜亚使魏州宣慰，许其自新。
现代文：三日，皇上派遣谏议大夫杜亚出使魏州安抚，同意让他改过自新。
English: On the third day, the emperor sent Duya, the doctor of deliberation, to pacify Weizhou, and agreed to let him reform.

古文：辛亥。剑南节度使崔宁奏大破吐蕃二十万，斩首万级，生擒首领一千一百五十人，献于阙下。
现代文：二十二日，剑南节度使崔宁上奏说，大破吐蕃军二十万，斩敌首一万个，活捉敌首领一千一百五十人，献到朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, the Jian'nan Festival made Cui Ning make a report, saying that he had defeated 200,000 Tuyun troops, decapitated 10,000 enemies, captured 150 enemy leaders alive, and presented them to the imperial court.

古文：二月癸亥，荆南节度使卫伯玉卒于京师。
现代文：二月五日，荆南节度使卫伯玉在京师去世。
English: On February 5, Jingnan Festival, Wei Boyu passed away in Beijing.

古文：戊子，河阳军复乱，大掠三日，监军使冉廷兰率兵斩其乱首。方定。
现代文：三月一日，河阳军重又大乱，大肆抢劫三天，监军使冉廷兰率兵斩了动乱的首领，大乱才平定。
English: On the first day of March, there was heavy fighting and chaos in Kheyang, and there was large-scale looting for three days. The leader of the turmoil was beheaded by the supervising army commander, Ran Tinglan, and the turmoil was finally quelled.

古文：戊申，昌乐公主薨。
现代文：二十一日，昌乐公主去世。
English: On the 21st, Princess Changle passed away.

古文：辛亥，御史大夫李栖筠卒。
现代文：二十四日，御史大夫李栖筠去世。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Dr. Li Qisheng passed away.

古文：夏四月戊午朔。
现代文：夏四月一日是朔日。
English: In summer, the first day of April falls on a Saturday.

古文：丙子，以浙西观察使、苏州刺史、御史大夫李涵知台事，充京畿观察使。
现代文：十九日，以浙西观察使、苏州刺史、御史大夫李涵主持台省事，充任京畿观察使。
English: On the 19th, he presided over the affairs of Taiwan Province as the Western Zhejiang Observer, the Suzhou Chief Historian, and the Chief Historian, Li Han, and served as the Gyeonggi Observer.

古文：己卯，以前淮南节度使、阳州大都督府长史、御史大夫张延赏为江陵尹、兼御史大夫充荆南节度使。
现代文：二十二日，以前任淮南节度使、扬州大都护府长史、御史大夫张延赏为江陵尹、兼御史大夫，充任荆南节度使。
English: On the 22nd, Zhang Yanbo, the former Huainan Festival Envoy, Yangzhou Metropolis Protectorate Chief Historian and Grand Historian, was awarded as Jiangling Yin, also Grand Historian, and appointed as Jingnan Festival Envoy.

古文：五月癸巳，以永平军节度使李勉为汴州刺史，充汴宋等八州节度观察留后，时汴将李灵耀专杀濮州刺史孟鉴，北连田承嗣。故命勉兼领汴州。
现代文：五月七日，以永平军节度使李勉为汴州刺史，充任汴、宋等八州节度使、观察留后。当时汴州将李灵耀擅自杀害濮州刺史孟鉴，往北勾结田承嗣，所以命令李勉兼任汴州刺史的职衔。
English: On May 7, at the Yongping Army Festival, Li Tsuen was appointed as the chief historian of Bozhou, and served as the chief historian and observer of eight state festivals such as the Song Dynasty and the Song Dynasty. At that time, Bozhou ordered Li Lingyao to commit suicide without permission, kill the chief historian of Bozhou, Meng Jian, and collude with Tian Hei He to the north, so Li Tsuen was also ordered to serve as the chief historian of Bozhou.

古文：授灵耀濮州刺史，灵耀不受诏。
现代文：皇上授予李灵耀为濮州刺史，李灵耀不接受命令。
English: The emperor awarded Li Lingyao to write the history of Zhangzhou, but Li Lingyao did not accept the order.

古文：六月戊戌，以李灵耀为汴州刺史，充节度留后。
现代文：六月二日，以李灵耀为汴州刺史，充任节度留后。
English: On June 2nd, Li Lingyao was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, leaving Mao as the head of the festival.

古文：秋七月戊子夜，暴澍雨，平地水深盈尺，沟渠涨溢，坏坊民千二百家。
现代文：秋七月三日夜，降下暴雨，平地水深一尺，沟渠涨满，破坏民房一千二百家。
English: On the evening of the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, torrential rain fell, the water depth of the flat land was one foot, the ditch was full, and 1200 houses were damaged.

古文：庚寅，田承嗣兵寇滑州，李勉拒战而败。
现代文：五日，田承嗣的军队入侵滑州，李勉抗拒失败。
English: On the fifth day, Tian Chengzhi's army invaded the city of Nanzhou, and Li Mian's resistance failed.

古文：八月丙寅，幽州节度使硃泚加同中书门下平章事。
现代文：八月十一日，幽州节度使朱氵此给予同中书门下平章事的加官。
English: On August 11th, the Yuzhou Festival caused Zhu Xi to give an additional post to the same middle school.

古文：李灵耀据汴叛。
现代文：李灵耀占据汴州叛乱。
English: Li Lingyao occupied Zhangzhou rebellion.

古文：甲申，命淮西李忠臣、滑州李勉、河阳马燧三镇兵讨之。
现代文：二十九日，命令淮西李忠臣、滑州李勉、河阳马燧率三镇的军队讨伐他。
English: On the 29th, he ordered Li Zhongchen of Huaxi, Li Mian of Nanzhou, and Ma Jun of Heyang to lead the troops of the three towns to fight against him.

古文：闰月丁酉，太白经天。
现代文：闰八月十二日，太白星从天空横贯而过。
English: On the twelfth day of the eighth month, a very white star streaked across the sky.

古文：九月乙丑，李忠臣等兵进营郑州，灵耀之众来薄战。
现代文：九月十一日，李忠臣等的军队进兵屯扎在郑州，李灵耀的部众逼近来作战。
English: On September 11, the army of Li Zhongchen and others marched into Zhengzhou, and Li Lingyao's troops approached to fight.

古文：淮西兵乱，乃退军于荥泽。
现代文：淮西兵大乱，于是退军到荥泽。
English: The soldiers of Huaixi fell into chaos, so they retreated to Heze.

古文：戊辰，淄青李正己奏取郓、濮二州。
现代文：十四日，淄青刺史李正己上奏说已经攻取了郓州和濮州。
English: On the 14th, Li Zhengyi, the amethyst-studded historian, reported that he had captured Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：冬十月乙酉，忠臣等宫破贼于中牟，进军，又败贼于汴州郭外，乃攻之。
现代文：冬十月一日，李忠臣等人的军队在中牟大破贼兵，继续进军攻击，又在汴州城外打败贼兵，于是就继续进攻。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the army of Li Zhongchen and others defeated the bandits in Zhongmuda, continued to march and attack, and defeated the bandits outside the city of Zhangzhou, and then continued to attack.

古文：乙丑，承嗣遣侄悦率兵三万援灵耀。
现代文：十九日，田承嗣派侄儿田悦率兵三万援救李灵耀。
English: On the 19th, Tian Chengxi sent his nephew Tian Yue and 30,000 soldiers to rescue Li Lingyao.

古文：丙午，淮西、河阳之师合击田悦营，其众大败，悦脱身北走。
现代文：二十二日，淮西、河阳之军会合起来攻击田悦军营，田悦军大败，田悦逃脱向北逃走。
English: On the 22nd, the armies of Huaxi and Heyang rallied to attack Tian Yue's camp. Tian Yue's army was soundly defeated, and Tian Yue escaped to the north.

古文：灵耀闻悦之败，弃城遁走。
现代文：李灵耀听说田悦失败，于是弃城而逃。
English: When Li Lingyao heard that Tian Yue had failed, he abandoned the city and fled.

古文：汴州平。丁未，滑将杜如江生擒灵耀而献。
现代文：汴州平定，二十三日，滑州将领杜如江活捉李灵耀献给朝廷。
English: Bozhou was pacified, and on the 23rd, the general Du Rujiang captured Li Lingyao alive and presented him to the imperial court.

古文：十二月丁亥，加平卢淄青节度使、检校尚书左仆射、青州刺史、饶阳王李正己为检校司空、同中书门下平章事，成德军节度使、太子太傅、检校尚书左仆射、陇西郡王李宝臣检校司空、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：十二月十一日，加给平卢、淄青节度使、检校尚书左仆射、青州刺史、饶阳王李正己为检校司空、同中书门下平章事的职衔。成德军节度使、太子少傅、检校尚书左仆射、陇西郡王李宝臣给予检校司空、同中书门下平章事的职衔。
English: On December 11, the titles of "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school inspector," "school

古文：庚寅，泾原节度使、检校尚书左仆射、知省事、扶风郡王马璘卒。
现代文：七日，泾原节度使、检校尚书左仆射、主持御史台省事、扶风郡王马瞞去世。
English: On the seventh day of the month, Wang Ma Xie of Fu Feng County, the secretary of the Ebara Festival, the inspector of the school, Shang Shou Zuopu, the chairman of the Ministry of History, passed away.

古文：丁酉，以泾原节度副使、试太常卿、张掖郡王段秀实权知河东节度留后，北都留守薛兼训病故也。
现代文：十四日，以泾原节度副使、试用太常卿、张掖郡王段秀实暂代主持河东节度留后的工作，这是因为北都留守薛兼训害病的原因。
English: On the 14th, Wang Duan Hsiushi of Zhangye County temporarily presided over the work of the Hedong Festival as deputy envoy of the Gongyuan Festival, probationary Taizhongqing, and Zhangye County Wang Duan Hsiushi. This was because Xue Kanxun, who stayed in the north, was ill.

古文：昭义节度使李承昭搞表称疾，以泽潞行军司马李抱真权知磁、邢兵马留后。
现代文：昭义节度使李承昭坚决上表称病请求辞职，皇上以泽、潞行军司马李抱真暂代主持磁、邢兵马留后的工作。
English: The Shouyi Festival made Li Chengzhao resolutely declare his illness and request to resign. The Emperor Ize and the commander of the Shunhang Army, Ma Li Po Zhen, temporarily presided over the work of the soldiers after they left.

古文：庚戌，加淮西节度、检校右仆射、安州刺史、西平郡王李忠臣检校司空、同中书门下平章事，仍兼汴州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，封给淮西节度、检校右仆射、安州刺史、西平郡王李忠臣以检校司空、同中书门下平章事的职衔，仍旧兼任汴州刺史。
English: On the 27th, the titles of Huaxi Festival, Inspection of the Right Hand, Inspection of Anzhou, Inspection of Xiping County, Wang Li Zhongcheng as the inspection of the school and the inspection of the middle school, and still concurrently as the inspection of Zhangzhou.

古文：十二年春正月甲寅朔。
现代文：大历十二年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 12th year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：辛酉，以四镇北庭泾原节度副使、知节度使事、张掖郡王段秀实为泾州刺史、兼御史大夫，充本州团练使。
现代文：八日，以四镇、北庭、泾原节度副使、主持节度使事、张掖郡王段秀实为泾州刺史、兼御史大夫，充任本州团练使。
English: On the 8th, Wang Du Hsiu-sheng of Zhangye County was appointed as the Vice-Envoy of the Four Towns, Beiting, and Zhangyuan Festival, and the Head of the Festival Envoy, and Wang Du Hsiu-sheng of Zhangyuan County was appointed as the Chief Historian of Zhangyuan County and the Chief Historian, and served as the Honshu Rehearsal Envoy.

古文：月掩轩辕。
现代文：月亮遮掩了轩辕星座。
English: The moon hides the constellation of Virgo.

古文：渤海使献日本国舞女十一人。
现代文：渤海国派使者奉献日本国舞女十一人。
English: Bohai Province sent an envoy to dedicate eleven dancing girls from Japan.

古文：癸酉夜，月掩心前大星，又入南斗魁。
现代文：二十日夜，月亮掩盖了心前大星，又进入了南斗魁星。
English: On the evening of the 20th, the moon covered the great star in front of the heart and entered the Southern Dipper.

古文：京师旱，分命祈祷。
现代文：京师旱灾，分别命令有关官员祈祷求雨。
English: Beijing declared a drought and separately ordered officials to pray for rain.

古文：二月戊子，淄青节度使李正己之子纳为青州刺史，充淄青节度留后。
现代文：二月六日，淄青节度使李正己之子李纳为青州刺史，充任淄青节度留后。
English: On February 6, Gongqing Jiedu made Li Zhengyi's son, Li Na, leave Qingzhou to serve as Gongqing Jiedu.

古文：丁未，以朗州刺史李国清为黔州刺史、经略招讨观察使。
现代文：二十五日，以朗州刺史李国清为黔清刺史、经略招讨观察使。
English: On the 25th, with the help of the historian of Langzhou, Li Guoqing, as an observer.

古文：三月乙卯，河西陇右副元帅、凤翔怀泽潞秦陇等州节度观察等使、兵部尚书门下平章事、潞州大都督府长史、知凤翔府事、上柱国、凉国公李抱玉卒。
现代文：三月三日，河西陇右副元帅、凤翔、怀、泽、潞、秦、陇等州节度使、观察使、兵部尚书、同中书门下平章事、潞州大都督府长史、主持凤翔府事、上柱国、凉国公李抱玉去世。
English: On March 3rd, Li Baoyu, Vice-Marshal of Hexi, Fengxiang, Huai, Zhe, Zang, Qin, Zang and other state festival envoys, observation envoys, Hyobusho, Tongzhongshumen Shimoheizhangji, governor of Zhangzhou, presiding over Fengxiang, Shangzhu and Liangguo, passed away.

古文：壬戌，月入太微。
现代文：十日，月亮进入太微星座。
English: On the 10th, the moon entered the faint constellation.

古文：癸亥，以太原少尹、河东节度行军司马、权知河留后鲍防为太原尹、御史大夫，充北都留守、河东节度使。
现代文：十一日，以太原少尹、河东节度行军司马、暂代主持河东留后鲍防为太原尹、御史大夫、并充任北都留守、河东节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Taiyuan Shao Yin, the commander of the troops marching to the Hedong Festival, temporarily presided over the event after staying in Hedong, and Bao Bao was Taiyuan Yin, the chief historian, and also served as the delegate to the North Capital and the Hedong Festival.

古文：戊辰夜，月逼心前星。
现代文：十六日夜，月亮迫近心前星。
English: On the night of the 16th, the moon approached the pre-dawn star.

古文：庚午，左降官永州刺史田承嗣复授魏博节度使，余官并如故。承嗣侄悦、子绾绪纶并复旧官。
现代文：十八日，降职官员永州刺史田承嗣重新授予他魏博节度使之职，其余官职同前一样，田承嗣的侄儿田悦、儿子田绾、田绪、田纶都恢复旧有官职。
English: On the 18th, the demoted official Yongzhou Shishi Tian Chengzhi re-awarded him Wei Bo Festival to make him a post, and the remaining posts were the same as before. Tian Chengzhi's nephew Tian Yue, son Tian Yao, Tian Xiu, and Tian Yao all resumed their former official posts.

古文：庚辰，宰相元载、王缙得罪下狱，命吏部尚书刘晏讯鞫之。
现代文：二十八日，宰相元载、王缙得罪下到监狱，命令吏部尚书刘晏审讯他们。
English: On the 28th, the prime minister, Yuan Zai, and the minister of justice, Wang Xingde, went to the prison and ordered the official, Shangshu Liu Jie, to interrogate them.

古文：辛巳，制：中书侍郎、平章事元载赐自尽，门下侍郎、平章事王缙贬括州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，皇上诏令：中书侍郎、平章事元载赐自杀，门下侍郎、平章事王缙贬为括州刺史。
English: On the 29th, the emperor issued an imperial decree: Zhongshu's attendant, Pingzhang Jiji, committed suicide, and his subordinate attendant, Pingzhang Jiji Wang, was relegated to the status of bracketed history.

古文：夏四月壬午，以朝议大夫、守太常卿、兼修国史杨绾为中书侍郎，尚书礼部郎、集贤院学士常衮为门下侍郎，并同中书门下平章事。
现代文：夏四月一日，以朝议大夫、守太常卿、兼修撰国史杨绾为中书侍郎，尚书礼部侍郎、集贤院学士常衮为门下侍郎，并都任同中书门下平章事。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, with the doctor of the Imperial Court Council, the governor of the Imperial Court, and the concurrently studying and compiling the national history Yang Xi as the junior attendant, the junior attendant of the Shoshu Rite Department, and the junior attendant of the scholar of the Jixian Academy, and all of them were appointed as junior subordinate officers of the same junior attendant.

古文：癸未，以右庶子潘炎为礼部侍郎。
现代文：二日，以右庶子潘炎为礼部侍郎。
English: On the second day, he appointed his son-in-law, Pan Yan, as a ceremonial attendant.

古文：贬吏部侍郎杨炎为道州司马，元载党也。
现代文：贬吏部侍郎杨炎为道州司马，因为他是元载一党。
English: Yang Yan, the attendant of the Ministry of Decrees, is the Sima of Daozhou, because he was a member of the party in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：谏议大夫、知制诰韩洄王定包佶徐璜，户部侍郎赵纵，大理少卿裴翼，太常少卿王紞，起居舍人韩会等十余人，皆坐元载贬官也。
现代文：谏议大夫、知制诰韩洄、王定、包佶、徐璜，户部侍郎赵纵，大理少卿裴翼，太常少卿王，起居舍人韩会等十多人，都由于元载的罪而牵连犯罪贬官也。
English: More than a dozen people, including 议大夫,知制韩,王定,包,徐,户部侍郎赵纵,大理少卿裴翼,太常少卿王,起居舍人韩会 and so on, were implicated in the crime and demoted due to the crime of Yuan Zai.

古文：给事中杜亚使魏州，赐田承嗣铁券。
现代文：给事中杜亚出使魏州，赐给田承嗣世代享受特权的铁券。
English: In the middle of the matter, Duya sent an envoy to Weizhou, and gave Tian Chengzhe's generation the privilege of iron coupons.

古文：癸巳，以前秘书监李揆为睦州刺史。
现代文：十二日，以前任秘书监的李揆为睦州刺史。
English: On the 12th, the former secretary supervisor, Li Xuan, made history in Mutsu.

古文：揆故宰相，为元载所忌，二十年流落丐食江湖间，载诛，方得为郡。
现代文：李揆原来是宰相，由于被元载猜忌，二十年来流落江湖乞讨食物，形同乞丐，元载被杀后，才能重新任为郡守。
English: Li Yan was originally the prime minister, but because he was suspected by Yuan Zai, he wandered around for twenty years begging for food, like a beggar. Only after Yuan Zai was killed could he be reappointed as county governor.

古文：又召颜真卿于湖州，亦载所忌斥外也。
现代文：皇上又从湖州召回颜真卿，他也是遭元载猜忌而被贬斥到外地去的。
English: The emperor also recalled Yan Zhenqing from Huzhou. He also suffered from the suspicion of the Yuan Zai and was relegated to other places.

古文：乙未，月掩心前星。
现代文：十四日，月亮遮掩了心前星。
English: On the 14th, the moon obscured the foreground star.

古文：丁酉，西川破吐蕃于望汉城，擒蕃将大笼官论器然以献。
现代文：十六日，西川在望汉城攻破了吐蕃，活捉吐蕃大将大笼官论器然献给朝廷。
English: On the 16th, Nishikawa defeated the Tujue in the city of Bongseong, captured the Tujue alive, and presented the Tujue to the imperial court.

古文：壬寅，以前商州刺史乌崇福为安南都护、本营经略使。
现代文：二十一日，以前任商州刺史乌崇福为安南都护、本管经略使。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Wu Chongfu, the former governor of Shangzhou, was appointed as the guardian of the capital of Annan and the special envoy of the governor.

古文：渤海、奚、契丹、室韦、靺鞨并遣使朝贡。
现代文：渤海、奚、契丹、室韦、革末革曷等国都派遣使者前来朝贡。
English: Countries such as Bohai, Min, Khitan, Murowe, and Qamdo Qamdo all sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：己酉，加京官料钱，文武班诸司共二千七百九十六员，文官一千八五十四员，武官九百四十二员，岁加给一十五万六千贯，并旧给凡二十六万贯。
现代文：二十八日，皇上加给京官薪俸以外的料钱，文武两班各司共二千七百九十六名官员，其中文官一千八百五十四员，武官九百四十二员，每年加给一十五万六千贯，连旧有料钱一共二十六万贯。
English: On the 28th, the emperor increased the salary of officials in Beijing to a total of 2,796 officials, including 1,854 civil servants and 942 military attaches. The annual salary was increased to 156,000 kun, with the old salary amounting to 260,000 kun.

古文：以关内副元帅、兵马使浑瑊兼邠州刺史。
现代文：以关内副元帅、兵马使浑王咸兼任州刺史。
English: In addition to being the vice-marshal of Kwanai and the commander of the troops and horses, Hun Wangxian also served as the prefectural governor.

古文：五月辛亥。罢天下州团练守捉使名。
现代文：五月一日，撤销天下各州团练守捉使的职务名称。
English: On May 1st, the job title of the world's top regimental training officer was revoked.

古文：甲寅，诸道邸务在上都名曰留后，改为进奏院。
现代文：四日，各道在上都的官邸负责的职务名叫留后，改为进奏院。
English: On the 4th, the official residence in Shangdu that each province was responsible for was renamed "Zuruo" and changed to "Jinsoin."

古文：丙辰夜，月入太微。
现代文：六日夜，月亮进入太微星座。
English: On the evening of the sixth day, the moon entered the faint constellation.

古文：辛酉，贬刑部尚书王昂连州刺史，昂至万州卒。
现代文：十一日，贬刑部尚书王昂为连州刺史，王昂到万州时去世。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Ang, a member of the Penal Correction Department, wrote a history of Lianzhou. Wang Ang died when he arrived in Wanzhou.

古文：庚午，敕毁元载祖、父坟，剖棺弃骸，焚毁私庙主于大宁里。
现代文：二十日，皇上命令毁掉元载的祖父、父亲的坟墓，剖开棺木，弃掉尸骨，在大宁里烧毁私家庙宇神主。
English: On the 20th, the emperor ordered the destruction of the tomb of Yuan Zai's grandfather and father, opened the coffin, discarded the bones, and burned the private temple of the god in Daningli.

古文：甲戌，以前安南都护张伯仪为广州刺史、兼御史大夫，充岭南节度使。
现代文：二十四日，以前任安南都护张伯仪为广州刺史、兼任御史大夫，并充任岭南节度使。
English: On the 24th, Zhang Bo Yi, the former Annan Metropolitan Protector, was appointed as the Guangzhou Historian, concurrently serving as the Imperial Historian, and acting as the Lingnan Festival Envoy.

古文：六月癸巳，时小旱，上斋居祈祷，圣体不康，是日不视朝。
现代文：六月十三日，当时有小小干旱，皇上更衣、沐浴、吃素、独居而祈祷。皇上身体不适，这天不上朝。
English: On June 13th, when there was a small drought, the emperor changed clothes, bathed, ate vegetarian, lived alone and prayed. The emperor was unwell and did not go to the court that day.

古文：秋七月戊午，罢润州丹阳军、苏州长洲军。
现代文：秋七月九日，撤销润州丹阳军、苏州长洲军。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Danyang Army of Rongzhou and the Changzhou Army of Suzhou were revoked.

古文：己巳，中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士、兼修国史杨绾卒。
现代文：二十日，中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事、集贤殿崇文馆大学士、兼修国史杨绾去世。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Yang Xi, the attendant of the Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics, the disciple of the same Chinese classics.

古文：八月癸巳，赐东川节度使鲜于叔明姓李氏。
现代文：八月十四日，赐东川节度使鲜于叔明姓李。
English: On August 14th, the Dongchuan Festival was given to Shun Yu Shu Ming surnamed Li.

古文：癸卯，宰臣让赐食。
现代文：二十四日，宰相对皇上赐给的食物谦让辞谢。
English: On the 24th, the head steward humbly declined the food given by the emperor.

古文：先是元载、王缙辅政，每日赐食，因为故事。
现代文：先前元载、王缙辅政，皇上每天赐给食物，因此成为旧例。
English: Previously, the emperor gave food to the emperor every day during the reign of Wang Xiufu, so it became an old case.

古文：至是，常衮等上表云： 飧钱已多，更颁御膳，胡颜自安，乞停赐食。 
现代文：至此，常衮等人上表曰： 夕食之钱已经很多，又颁赐皇上御用之食，哪有颜面安心享受，请求停止赐食。 
English: At this point, Tsuneyoshi and others came up to the table and said, "There is already a lot of money for dinner, and the emperor's food has been given out. How can you enjoy it without shame? We request that you stop giving out food."

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上依从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：甲辰，以湖州刺史颜真卿为刑部尚书。
现代文：二十五日，以湖州刺史颜真卿为刑部尚书。
English: On the 25th, Yan Zhenqing of Huzhou Province was appointed as the head of the Criminal Law Department.

古文：乙巳，以久雨宥常参百僚，不许御史点班。
现代文：二十六日，因为长期下雨，原谅经常参见皇上的百官，不许御史点班点名。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, because of the long-term rain, forgive the hundred officials who often see the emperor, and do not allow the history class to call names.

古文：九月乙卯，许以庶人礼葬元载。
现代文：九月七日，皇上同意以平民之礼遇安葬元载。
English: On September 7, the Emperor agreed to be buried with the courtesy of a commoner.

古文：辛酉，以泾原节度副使段秀实为四镇北庭行营、泾原郑颍等节度使。
现代文：十三日，以泾原节度副使段秀实为四镇、北庭行营、泾原、郑、颍等州节度使。
English: On the 13th, Duan Xiushi, deputy envoy of the Xingyuan Festival, was appointed as the delegate of the Xingyuan Festival in four towns, Beiting Xingyuan, Xingyuan, Zheng and Handan.

古文：庚午，吐蕃寇坊州，掠党项羊马而去。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃入侵坊州，抢夺党项羊、马而去。
English: On the 22nd, Tubo invaded Fangzhou, robbed the party's sheep and horses and left.

古文：是秋，宋、亳、陈、滑等州水。
现代文：这年秋天，宋、亳、陈、滑等州发大水。
English: In the autumn of that year, Song, Min, Chen, Nanning and other prefectures were hit by floods.

古文：冬十月丁亥，户部待郎、判度支韩滉言解县两池生瑞盐，乃置祠，号宝应灵庆池。
现代文：冬十月九日，户部侍郎兼任度支郎韩说解县有两个池子生出吉祥之盐，于是设置祠堂，号曰宝应灵庆池。
English: On the 9th of October in winter, the head of the household, who also served as the head of the household, Han said that there were two ponds in the county that produced auspicious salt, so the ancestral hall was set up, called Baoying Lingqing Pond.

古文：壬寅夜，月掩昴，又入太微。
现代文：二十四日夜，月亮遮掩昴星，又进入太微星座。
English: On the night of the twenty-fourth day, the moon covered the bright star and entered the faint constellation.

古文：乙巳，以滑州牙将刘洽为宋州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，以滑州牙将刘洽为宋州刺史。
English: On the 27th, the history of Songzhou was written with the help of Liu Cai, the leader of the Nanzhou Fang.

古文：京兆尹黎干奏水损田三万一千顷。
现代文：京兆尹黎干上奏说，大水损田三万一千顷。
English: Jing Zhaoyun Li Gan reported that the flood had damaged 31,000 hectares of fields.

古文：度支使韩滉奏所损不多。
现代文：度支使韩上奏说所损不多。
English: There is not much damage to be said about the degree of support for South Korea.

古文：兼渭南令刘藻曲附滉，亦云部内田不损。
现代文：兼任渭南令刘灌附会韩，也说渭南内田没有损失。
English: Liu Guanzhong, who also serves as the commander of South Shandong Province, also said that there was no loss to South Shandong Province.

古文：差御史赵计检渭南田，亦附滉云不损。
现代文：皇上派遣御史赵计检验渭南田，也附会韩说不曾损失。
English: The emperor dispatched the imperial historian Zhao Jie to inspect the southern fields, and the Han Dynasty also said that there was no loss.

古文：上曰： 水旱咸均，不宜渭南独免。 
现代文：皇上说 ：水灾旱灾各地都应一样，不应该渭南独自免除灾害。 
English: The emperor said, "Floods and droughts should be the same everywhere, and southern Shandong should not be exempted from disasters.

古文：复命御史硃敖检之，渭南损田三千顷。
现代文：再次命令御史朱敖检验，结果报告说，渭南损失田地三千顷。
English: He once again ordered the inspector Zhu Xi to inspect, and the results reported that the loss of fields in southern Anhui amounted to three thousand hectares.

古文：上叹息曰： 县令职在字人，不损亦宜称损，损而不闻，岂有恤隐之意耶！
现代文：皇上叹息道： 县令的职责在于爱人，没有损失田地也应说损失，损失田地然而还不上报，难道有同情怜恤百姓之意吗？ 
English: The emperor sighed, "The duty of a county magistrate is to love his people. If there is no loss of farmland, it should be said to be a loss. However, if there is a loss of farmland, it is not reported. Is there any sympathy or mercy for the people?

古文：刘藻、赵计皆贬官。
现代文：刘藻、赵计都贬官。
English: Liu Mo and Zhao Jie were both demoted.

古文：十一月癸丑，太白临哭星。
现代文：十一月五日，太白星驾临大哭星之上。
English: On November 5th, Taibai Xing rode on the top of the Big Weeping Star.

古文：乙卯夜，月入羽林。
现代文：七日夜，月亮进入羽林星。
English: On the night of the seventh day, the moon entered the constellation of the Feathered Forest.

古文：癸酉，以右散骑常侍萧昕为工阅尚书。
现代文：二十五日，以右散骑常侍萧昕为工部尚书。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the right horseback riding attendant Xiao Wei was appointed as the official of the work department.

古文：刑部尚书颜真卿献所著《韵海镜源》三百六十卷。
现代文：刑部尚书颜真卿献上所著《韵海镜源》三百六十卷。
English: Shang Shuxuan Zhenqing of the Criminal Investigation Department presented 360 volumes of his book "Rhyme Sea Mirror Source."

古文：十二月丁亥，西川崔宁奏于西山破吐蕃十万，斩首八千，生擒九百人。
现代文：十二月九日，西川崔宁上奏说，在西山攻破吐蕃兵十万人，斩敌首八千人，活捉九百人。
English: On December 9, Cui Ning of Xichuan reported that he had defeated 100,000 Tuoba soldiers in Xishan, beheaded 8,000 enemy soldiers, and captured 900 alive.

古文：己亥，天下仙洞灵迹禁樵捕。
现代文：二十一日，天下仙洞和神灵遗迹严禁砍柴捕捉野兽鱼类。
English: On the twenty-first day, it is strictly forbidden to cut firewood to catch wild fish in the world of fairy caves and relics of gods.

古文：庚子，以幽州节度使硃泚兼陇右节度副大使，权知河西、泽潞行营兵马事。
现代文：二十二日，以幽州节度使朱氵此兼任陇右节度副大使，暂代主持河西、泽、潞行营兵马事。
English: On the 22nd, with the Yuzhou Festival, Zhu Xi was concurrently appointed as the vice ambassador of the Shiyu Festival, temporarily presiding over the soldiers and horses of the Hexi, Ze and Minhang camps.

古文：京兆尹请修六门堰，许之。
现代文：京兆尹请求修建六门堰，皇上同意了。
English: Jing Zhaoyun requested the construction of the Six-Gate Weir, and the emperor agreed.

古文：十三年春正月戊申朔。
现代文：大历十三年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 13th year of the lunar calendar is the New Year's Day.

古文：辛酉，坏白渠碾硙八十余所，以夺农溉田也。
现代文：十四日，破坏白渠机械水磨八十多处，因为它们夺取了农业灌溉。
English: On the 14th, more than 80 Baiquan mechanical water mills were destroyed, because they seized agricultural irrigation.

古文：壬戌，刑部尚书、鲁郡公颜真卿三抗章乞致仁，不允。
现代文：十五日，刑部尚书、鲁郡公颜真卿三次极力上表章请求辞官，皇上不许。
English: On the 15th, Shang Shu of the Criminal Investigation Department and Gongyan Zhenqing of Lu County went to the emperor three times to ask for his resignation, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：淄青节度使李正己请附属籍，从之。
现代文：淄青节度使李正己请求附到宗族名册上，皇上同意了。
English: The Emperor agreed to Li Zhengji's request to add him to the family register.

古文：戊辰，回纥寇太原，鲍防与之战，我师不利。
现代文：二十一日，回纥入侵太原，鲍防与回纥作战，我军不利。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Uighurs invaded Taiyuan, Bao Bao fought with the Uighurs, and our army was at a disadvantage.

古文：硃泚徙封遂宁郡王。
现代文：朱氵此改封为遂宁郡王并迁徙到遂宁去。
English: Zhu Xi changed his title to King of Suining County and moved to Suining.

古文：二月庚辰，代州都督张光晟击回纥，战于羊武谷，破之，北人乃安。
现代文：二月三日，代州都督张光晟打击回纥，在羊武谷大战，打败了回纥军，北方人这才安定。
English: On February 3, Zhang Guangya, the governor of Daizhou, launched a strike against the Uighurs and defeated the Uighur army in the Battle of Yangwu Valley. Only then did the northerners become stable.

古文：己亥，吐蕃寇灵武。
现代文：二十二日，吐蕃入侵灵武。
English: On the 22nd, the Tuoba invaded Lingwu.

古文：甲辰，太仆寺佛堂有小脱空金刚右臂忽有黑汁滴下，以纸承之，色类血。
现代文：二十七日，太仆寺佛堂有小脱空金刚右臂忽然有黑汗滴下，以纸接着，颜色类似血。
English: On the 27th, in the Buddhist hall of the Taipo Temple, there was a sudden drop of black sweat on the right arm of Xiao Zhukong, followed by paper, and the color was similar to blood.

古文：三月甲戌，河阳将士劫回纥辎重，因与相斗，纵兵大掠，久之方定。
现代文：三月二十八日，河阳将士抢劫回纥粮食辎重，因而与回纥相打斗，回纥便放纵士兵大肆抢掠，很久才平定。
English: On March 28th, the soldiers from Hebei robbed the soldiers from Huizhou of a large amount of grain. As a result, they fought with the soldiers from Huizhou. The soldiers from Huizhou indulged in large-scale looting and pillaging, and it took a long time to subdue the situation.

古文：四月丁亥，以浙西观察留后李道昌为苏州刺史、兼御史中丞，充浙西都团练观察使。
现代文：四月十一日，以浙西观察留后李道昌为苏州刺史、兼御史中丞，并充任浙西都团练观察使。
English: On April 11th, Li Daochang, who stayed in western Zhejiang to observe, became the Suzhou chief historian and also the vice-president of history, and served as the observer of the western Zhejiang Duan exercise.

古文：己丑，以前浙西观察使李涵为御史大夫。
现代文：十三日，以前任浙西观察使李涵为御史大夫。
English: On the 13th, Li Han, the former director of the West Zhejiang Observation Station, was appointed as the chief historian.

古文：甲辰，吐蕃寇灵州，朔方留后常谦光击败之。
现代文：二十八日，吐蕃入侵灵州，朔方留后常谦光将他们击败。
English: On the 28th, Tubo invaded Lingshou, and Chang Xianguang defeated them after the Shuo side stayed.

古文：五月戊午，宦官刘清潭赐名忠翼。
现代文：五月十三日，宦官刘清潭被皇上赐名忠翼。
English: On May 13, the eunuch Liu Qingtan was given the title of "loyal wing" by the emperor.

古文：六月戊戌，陇右节度使硃泚于军士赵贵家得猫鼠同乳不相害，笼而献之。
现代文：六月四日，陇右节度使朱氵此在军士赵贵家中看到猫和鼠在一起生养，小猫小鼠不互相侵害的奇事，他将猫和老鼠装在一个笼子里进献给皇上。
English: On the 4th of June, Zhu Xizhe saw a miracle in the house of Sergeant Zhao Gui: a cat and a mouse were raised together, and the kittens and mice did not encroach on each other. He put the cat and mouse in a cage and presented it to the emperor.

古文：秋七月壬子，中书舍人崔祐甫知吏部选事。
现代文：秋七月八日，中书舍人崔佑甫主持吏部科举选拔之事。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of autumn, Cui Youfu, the person in charge of Chinese literature, presided over the selection of cadres.

古文：癸丑，剑南节度使崔宁加检校司空，东川李叔明加检校工部尚书。辛未，吐蕃寇盐州、庆州。
现代文：九日，剑南节度使崔宁给予检校司空的加官，东川节度使李叔明给予检校工部尚书的加官，二十七日，吐蕃入侵盐州、庆州。
English: On the 9th, the Jian'nan Festival caused Cui Ning to give the additional post of inspector of schools to Wu, and the Dongchuan Festival caused Li Shuming to give the additional post of inspector of schools to Shang Shu, and on the 27th, Tubo invaded Yanzhou and Gyeongju.

古文：八月甲戌朔，成德军节度使李宝臣抗章请复本姓张氏，从之。
现代文：八月一日是朔日，成德军节度使李宝臣强烈上表请求恢复本姓张氏，皇上同意了。
English: August 1 was the New Year's Day, and the German Army Day made Li Baochen strongly request to restore the original surname Zhang, and the emperor agreed.

古文：冬十月丁酉，葬贞懿皇后于庄陵。
现代文：这年冬十月二十五日，在庄陵安葬贞懿皇后。
English: On October 25th of this winter, Empress Zhengyi was buried in Zhuangling.

古文：十一月丁卯，日长至，有司礼昊天上帝于南郊，上不视朝故也。
现代文：十一月二十五日，冬至日到来，有关官员在南郊祭祀昊天上帝，因为皇上不视朝的原因。
English: On November 25, when the winter solstice arrived, the officials concerned offered sacrifices to Haotian God in the southern suburbs, because the emperor did not consider the reasons for the rise of the North.

古文：十二月丙戌，以吏部尚书刘晏为左仆射，判使如故。以给事中杜亚为洪州刺史、兼御史中丞，充江西观察使。
现代文：十二月十四日，以吏部尚书刘晏为左仆射，并像原来一样兼任节度使，以给事中杜亚为洪州刺史、兼御史中丞、充任江西观察使。
English: On December 14th, Shangshu Liu Jia of the cadre department was appointed as the left-hand man, and, as before, he also served as the delegate to the festival, and Duya, who was in charge of the event, was appointed as the Hongzhou chief historian, and also the chief historian, and served as the Jiangxi observation envoy.

古文：以江西观察使路嗣恭为兵部尚书。
现代文：以江西观察使路嗣恭为兵部尚书。
English: The observation of Jiangxi Province made Lu Shigong become a military strategist.

古文：是岁，郴州黄芩山崩，压死者有数百人。
现代文：这年，郴州黄芩山崩塌，压死数百人。
English: This year, Mount Huangpi in Zhangzhou collapsed, crushing hundreds of people to death.

古文：十四年春正月壬寅朔。
现代文：大历十四年春正月一日是朔日。
English: The first day of the first month of spring in the 14th year of the lunar calendar is New Year's Day.

古文：壬戌，以楚州刺史李泌为澧州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，以楚州刺史李泌为澧州刺史。
English: On the 21st, Li Jie, the Chuzhou stabbing historian, was appointed as the Zhangzhou stabbing historian.

古文：二月癸未，魏博七州节度使、太尉、检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、魏州大都督府长史田承嗣卒。
现代文：二月十二日，魏博七州节度使、太尉、检校尚书左仆射、同中书门下平章事、魏州大都督府长史田承嗣去世。
English: On February 12th, the Wei Bo seven-state festival envoy, captain, school inspector Shang Shu Zuo Fu Sha, the same middle school student Xia Ping Zhang, and the governor of the Wei State Grand Duchy, Shi Tian Cheng He, passed away.

古文：甲申，以魏博中军兵马使、左司马田悦兼御史中丞，充魏博节度留后。
现代文：十三日，以魏博中军兵马使、左司马田悦兼御史中丞，充任魏博节度留后。
English: On the 13th, Wei Bo's military envoy to the Middle Kingdom of Wei Bo, Zuo Si Ma Tian Yue and Mi Shi Zhongzheng, stayed behind to serve as Wei Bo's commander of the festival.

古文：三月丁未，汴宋节度使李忠臣为麾下将族侄李希烈所逐，忠臣狼狈归朝。
现代文：三月六日，汴宋节度使李忠臣被部下将领族侄李希烈所驱逐，李忠臣狼狈逃回朝廷。
English: On March 6, the Song Dynasty Festival caused Li Zhongcheng to be expelled by his subordinate general's nephew Li Xilai, and Li Zhongcheng fled back to the imperial court.

古文：上以忠臣立功于国，乃授检校司空、同平章事。
现代文：皇上以李忠臣对国有功，乃授予他检校司空、同平章事。
English: The emperor honored Li Zhongchen for his contribution to the state, and awarded him the title of "Inspector of Schools" and "Dongping."

古文：庚戌，以河南尹严郢为京兆尹，河中少尹、知府事赵惠伯为河南尹。
现代文：七日，以河南尹严郢为京兆尹，河中少尹、主持京兆府事的赵惠伯为河南尹。
English: On the 7th, Henan Yin Yanqian was designated as the Beijing Zhaoying, and the minor Yin in the middle of the river and Zhao Huibo, who presided over the affairs of the Beijing Zhaoying, were designated as the Henan Yin.

古文：辛酉，以前容管经略使、容州刺史王翃为河中少尹、知府事。
现代文：二十日，以前任容管经略使、容州刺史王罖为河中少尹、主持河中府事。
English: On the 20th, Wang Yao, who had previously held the position of Deputy Commissioner of the Yungguan Economic Affairs Bureau and Yungju Sashi Wang, was appointed as the Junior Vice-Minister of the Central Government and presided over the affairs of the Central Government.

古文：夏四月癸未，成德军节度使张宝臣复请姓李，从之。
现代文：夏四月十三日，成德军节度使张宝臣再次请求姓李，皇上同意了。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Chengde Army Festival made Zhang Baochen once again request the surname Li, and the emperor agreed.

古文：五月癸卯，上不康，至辛亥，不视朝。
现代文：五月三日，皇上有病，直到十一日，不上朝视事。
English: On May 3, the emperor fell ill and did not attend court until the 11th.

古文：北都留守鲍防以北庭归朝。
现代文：北都留守鲍防率北庭归附朝廷。
English: The northern court was annexed to the imperial court with Bao Guo leading the northern court.

古文：辛酉，诏皇太子监国。
现代文：二十一日，诏令皇太子代行国政。
English: On the 21st, the Emperor ordered the Crown Prince to take over state affairs.

古文：是夕，上崩于紫宸之内殿。
现代文：这天晚上，皇上在紫宸宫之内殿去世。
English: On this evening, the Emperor passed away in the inner hall of Shishin Palace.

古文：遗诏皇太子柩前即位。
现代文：皇上遗诏：皇太子在灵柩前即皇帝位。
English: Emperor's last will and testament: The crown prince ascends the throne before the coffin.

古文：壬戌，迁神柩于太极殿，发丧。
现代文：二十二日，把皇上灵柩迁到太极殿，发布丧事。
English: On the 22nd, the emperor's coffin was moved to the Taiji Hall, and the funeral was announced.

古文：八月庚申，群臣上尊谥曰睿文孝武皇帝，庙号代宗。
现代文：八月二十三日，群臣奉上尊谥曰睿文孝武皇帝，庙号代宗。
English: On August 23rd, a group of courtiers paid their respects to Emperor Rui, Emperor Wen, Emperor Wu, and Emperor Daizong.

古文：十月己酉，葬于元陵。
现代文：十月十三日，安葬在元陵。
English: On October 13, he was buried in the original mausoleum.

古文：十二月丁酉，祔于太庙。
现代文：十二月一日，奉代宗神主纎祭于太庙。
English: On the first day of December, the hosannas for the chief god of the Bongdai Sect were held at the Imperial Temple.

