古文：桓公问管子曰： 有虞策乘马已行矣，吾欲立策乘马，为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 古代虞国是早已实行经济的计算筹划了，我也想实行它，该怎么办？ 
English: Kuan Gong asked Guanzhong, "Ancient Yugo Kingdoms have already implemented economic calculation and planning. I also want to implement it. What should I do?"

古文：管子对曰： 战国修其城池之功，故其国常失其地用。
现代文：管仲回答说： 从事战争的国家致力于城池的修建，所以，这类国家常常耽误它们的农业生产。
English: Guanzhong replied: Countries engaged in war are committed to the construction of cities, so such countries often delay their agricultural production.

古文：王国则以时行也。 
现代文：成王业的国家则按照因时制宜的原则行事。 
English: Succesful countries, on the other hand, act in accordance with the principle of adapting to the times.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓以时行？ 
现代文：桓公说： 何谓按因时制宜的原则行事？ 
English: Kanko said: What does it mean to act in accordance with the principle of the time-based system?

古文：管子对曰： 出准之令，守地用人策，故开阖皆在上，无求于民。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 发布平准的号令，既及时掌握农业生产，又及时掌握物价政策，因而经济上开放收闭的主动权全在国家，不直接求索于百姓就是了。 
English: Guanzhong replied: To issue a standard order is to grasp both agricultural production and price policy in a timely manner. Therefore, the initiative of economic opening and closing is entirely in the state, without directly asking the people.

古文： 霸国守分，上分下游于分之间而用足。
现代文： 成霸业的国家只能掌握财富的一半，君主与民间总是游动在半数之间来保持国用充足。
English: The country that dominates the industry can only control half of the wealth, and the monarch and the people always swim between the halves to keep the country sufficient.

古文：人君之守高下，岁藏三分，十年则必有五年之余。若岁凶旱水泆，民失本，则修宫室台榭，以前无狗后无彘者为庸。
现代文：成王业的国家，由于掌握财富产生的开始，使国家财用缺一补一，缺二补二，缺三补三，缺四补四，缺五补五，缺六补六，缺七补七，缺八补八，缺九补九，缺十补十。国君控制物价的高低，可以做到每年贮备粮食十分之三，十年必有三年的积蓄。如果遇上大旱大水的灾年，百姓无法务农，则修建宫室台树，雇用那些养不起猪狗的穷人以做工为生。
English: The countries that have become kings and queens, because they have mastered the beginning of wealth generation, have made the country's financial use lack one supplement one, lack two supplement two, lack three supplement three, lack four supplement four, lack five supplement five, lack six supplement six, lack seven supplement seven, lack eight supplement eight, lack nine supplement nine, lack ten supplement ten. The sovereign controls the level of prices, and can store 30 percent of grain every year. In ten years, there must be three years of savings. If there is a drought and flood disaster year, and the people are unable to farm, they will build palatial trees and employ the poor who cannot afford to keep pigs and dogs to work for

古文：故修宫室台榭，非丽其乐也，以平国策也。
现代文：所以，修建宫室台榭，不是为观赏之乐，而是实行国家的经济政策。
English: Therefore, the construction of the Palace Terrace was not for viewing pleasure, but to implement the country's economic policy.

古文：今至于其亡策乘马之君，春秋冬夏，不知时终始，作功起众，立宫室台榭。
现代文：至于那种不懂得运用计算筹划的国君，春秋冬夏，不分年始年终，兴工动众；建筑宫室台榭。
English: As for the kind of sovereign who does not know how to use calculation and planning, in spring, autumn, winter and summer, regardless of the beginning and end of the year, construction is popular; the construction of Miyamurodai Tower.

古文：民失其本事，君不知其失诸春策，又失诸夏秋之策数也。
现代文：百姓不能经营农事，君主还不知道他已失去了春天的理财时机，又丢掉了夏天、秋天的理财时机。
English: The people cannot manage agricultural affairs, and the monarch does not yet know that he has lost the opportunity for financial management in spring, and has also lost the opportunity for financial management in summer and autumn.

古文：民无卖子数矣。
现代文：人民饥饿而卖儿卖女的多起来了。
English: People are hungry, and the number of children being sold has increased.

古文：猛毅之人淫暴，贫病之民乞请，君行律度焉，则民被刑僇而不从于主上。
现代文：强悍的人发生严重暴乱，贫病之民乞讨求食，国君若动用法律制裁，人民则宁受刑杀也不肯服从君主。
English: Violent people have serious riots, poor and sick people beg for food, and if the sovereign uses legal sanctions, the people would rather be killed than obey the monarch.

古文：此策乘马之数亡也。 
现代文：这都是没有运用计算筹划理财方法的结果。 
English: All of this is the result of not applying the method of calculating, planning and managing finances.

古文： 乘马之准，与天下齐准。
现代文： 经过计算筹划的物价标准，应当同各诸侯国的标准保持一致。
English: The price standards calculated and planned should be consistent with the standards of each vassal state.

古文：彼物轻则见泄，重则见射。
现代文：各类商品，价格偏低则泄散外流，偏高则别国倾销取利。
English: All kinds of commodities, if the price is low, the outflow will be released, if the price is high, other countries will dump and take profits.

古文：此斗国相泄，轻重之家相夺也。
现代文：这便是对立国家互相倾销商品，理财家互相争利的由来。
English: This is the origin of opposing countries dumping goods on each other and financial planners competing for profits.

古文：至于王国，则持流而止矣。 
现代文：至于成王业的统一国家，控制住国内市场流通就可以了。 
English: As for the unification of the country, it is enough to control the domestic market circulation.

古文：桓公曰： 何谓持流？ 
现代文：桓公说： 何谓控制流通？ 
English: Kanko said: What is controlled circulation?

古文：管子对曰： 有一人耕而五人食者，有一人耕而四人食者，有一人耕而三人食者，有一人耕而二人食者。
现代文：管仲回答说： 有一人种田而粮食可供五人食用的，有一人种田而粮食可供四人食用的，有一人种田而粮食可供三人食用的，有一人种田而粮食只够两人食用的。
English: Guanzhong replied, "There is a man who cultivates land and his grain can feed five people, another cultivates land and his grain can feed four people, another cultivates land and his grain can feed three people, and another cultivates land and his grain can only feed two people.

古文：此齐力而功地。
现代文：他们都是花费同样劳力种地的。
English: They all farm with the same amount of labour.

古文：田策相圆，此国策之时守也。
现代文：掌握他们的农业生产与掌握国家的物价政策相辅而行，这就是国家理财政策在按时进行控制了。
English: The control of their agricultural production and the control of the state's price policy complement each other, which means that the state's financial management policy is under control on time.

古文：君不守以策，则民且守于下，此国策流已。 
现代文：如果君上不用政策去控制流通，富民商人就会在下面控制，这样，国家的理财政策就落空了 
English: If the ruler does not use policy to control circulation, the rich merchants will control it from below, so the country's financial management policy will fail

古文：桓公曰： 乘马之数尽于此平？ 
现代文：桓公说： 计算筹划的理财方法，就到此为止了么？ 
English: Kanko said: Is this the end of the financial management method of calculation and planning?

古文：管子对曰： 布织财物，皆立其赀。
现代文：管仲回答说： 对布帛和各种物资，也都要规定价格。
English: Guanzhong replied: For cloth and all kinds of materials, we must also set prices.

古文：财物之货与币高下，谷独贵独贱。 桓公曰： 何谓独贵独贱？ 
现代文：各种物资的价格，要与所值的货币多少相当。粮食则单独定其贵贱。 桓公说； 单独定其贵贱是什么意思？ 
English: The price of all kinds of materials should be more or less equivalent to the value of the currency. Grain, on the other hand, is valued separately. Huan Gong said; What does it mean to value separately?

古文：管子对曰： 谷重而万物轻，谷轻而万物重。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 粮价高则百物贱，粮价贱则百物贵。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "When grain prices are high, everything is cheap, and when grain prices are low, everything is expensive.

古文：公曰： 贱策乘马之数奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 经常运用计算筹划的理财方法还要怎么办？ 
English: Huan Gong said: What else should you do if you often use the financial management method of calculation and planning?

古文：管子对曰： 郡县上臾之壤守之若干，间壤守之若干，下壤守之若干。
现代文：管种回答说： 对郡县上等土地，掌握它相当数量的粮食。中等土地掌握它相当数量的粮食。
English: Guanzheng replied: For the county and county high-grade land, it has a considerable amount of grain. The medium-grade land has a considerable amount of grain.

古文：故相壤定籍而民不移，振贫补不足，下乐上。
现代文：下等土地掌握它相当数量的粮食。由此，按土地好坏确定征收，则百姓安定；贩济贫困而补助不足，百姓也对君主满意。
English: The lower land holds a considerable amount of grain. Therefore, if the land is good or bad, the people will be stable; if the land is poor and the subsidy is insufficient, the people will also be satisfied with the monarch.

古文：故以上壤之满补下壤之众，章四时，守诸开阖，民之不移也，如废方于地。
现代文：所以，国家用上等土地提供的盈余，补下等土地的空虚，控制四时的物价变化，掌握市场的收放大权，则百姓的安定，就象把方形的东西放在平地上一样、这就叫作运用计算筹划的理财方法。 
English: Therefore, if the state uses the surplus provided by the high-grade land to make up for the emptiness of the low-grade land, control the four-hour price changes, and grasp the market's expansion and contraction power, then the stability of the people is like putting a square thing on the flat ground. This is called the financial management method of using calculation and planning.

