古文：陆法和王梵志王守一李子牟吕翁管子文袁嘉祚郑相如
现代文：陆法和王梵志王守一李子牟吕翁管子文袁嘉祚郑相如
English: The Law of the Land and the King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Heaven and Earth, the King of Heaven and Earth

古文：陆法和
现代文：陆法和
English: law of the land and

古文：陆法和隐于江陵百里洲。
现代文：陆法和隐居在江陵的百里洲。
English: The law of the land and seclusion in Gangneung's Baizhou.

古文：衣食居处，与沙门同，自号居士，不至城廓，容色常定，人莫测也。
现代文：衣食住行等生活方式都与出家修道的人相同，自称居士，不到城市里去，面容神色总是一个样儿，毫无喜怒哀乐的变化，谁也猜不透他的心理活动和感情变化。
English: The way of life, such as food, clothing, housing and transportation, is the same as that of an ordained monk. He calls himself a layman, does not go to the city, his face is always the same, there is no change in his emotions, and no one can guess his psychological activities and emotional changes.

古文：侯景始降于梁，法和谓南郡朱元英曰： 贫道应共檀越击侯景，为国立效。 
现代文：侯景刚刚投降了梁国，法和对南郡朱元英说： 贫道我应当与施主共同打击侯景，为国效力。 
English: Houjing had just surrendered Liangguo, and Fa said to Zhu Yuanying of Nanshun: I should fight against Houjing together with my benefactor and work for the country.

古文：元英问击之何也，法和曰： 正自如此。 
现代文：元英问他打击侯景干什么，法和说： 正该这样做。 
English: When Yuan Ying asked him what he was doing to crack down on Hou Jing, Fa said, "This is exactly the right thing to do.

古文：及景渡江，法和时在清溪山，元英往问之曰： 侯景今图城，其事云何？ 
现代文：等到侯景过江的时候，法和正住在清溪山，元英前去问他道： 侯景现在要攻城，这件事应当怎样对待？ 
English: By the time Hou Jing crossed the river, Fa Zheng was living in Qingxi Mountain. Yuan Ying went to ask him, "Hou Jing is now going to attack the city. How should this matter be handled?"

古文：法和曰： 宜待熟时，不撩自落。
现代文：法和说： 应当等到时机成熟的时候，他会不打自败。
English: Dharma and said: Should wait until the time is ripe, he will not self-defeat.

古文：檀越但待侯景熟，何劳问也。 
现代文：施主只管等待侯景给予一个好机会，您不必问我。 
English: Donors just have to wait for Houjing to give them a good opportunity, you don't have to ask me.

古文：因问克不，乃曰： 亦克，亦不克。 
现代文：元英又问他能不能攻下来，他说： 也可能攻下来，也可能攻不下来。 
English: Yuan Ying also asked him if he could attack it, and he said: It may or may not be attacked.

古文：景遣将任约，众号五万，伐湘东王于江陵。
现代文：侯景派遣部将任约率领五万人马，进军江陵讨伐湘东王。
English: The dispatching department of Houjing will lead about fifty thousand horses to march into Gangneung to fight the East King of Hunan.

古文：兵将逼，法和乃出诣湘东云： 自有兵马，乞征任约。 
现代文：当任约的军队逼近江陵时，法和出山去见湘东王说： 我自有兵马，今向您请命出战任约。 
English: When Yuan Shao's army was approaching Gangneung, Fa went out of the mountains to see the king of eastern Hunan and said, "I have my own soldiers and horses. Now I ask you to order me to go out to fight for Yuan Shao."

古文：召诸蛮弟子八百人，在江津，二日便发，王遣胡僧袩，领千余人与之同行。
现代文：他召集了各处蛮夷弟子八百人驻扎在江津，两天之后便出发了，湘东王派遣胡僧袩带领一千余人与法和同行。
English: He gathered 800 barbarian disciples from all over the country and stationed them in Jiangjin. Two days later, he set out. The King of Eastern Hunan dispatched Hu Sangyu to lead more than a thousand people to accompany him.

古文：法和登舰大笑曰： 无量兵马。 
现代文：法和登上兵船大笑说： 我们有无数的人马。 
English: "We have an infinite number of men and horses," Fa He said, laughing as he boarded the warship.

古文：江陵多神祠，人俗常所祈祷，自法和军出，无复一验，人以为诸神皆从行故也。
现代文：江陵一带有很多神殿寺庙，当地人的风俗是经常到这些地方祈祷，自从法和的军队出发之后，人们再不去寺庙祈祷了，因为他们都以为各位神灵都跟从法和出兵打仗去了。
English: There are many shrines and temples in the Gangneung area. The local custom is to go to these places often to pray. Since the departure of the law and the army, people no longer go to the temple to pray, because they all think that all the gods have gone to fight with the law and the army.

古文：至赤洲湖，与任约相对。
现代文：法和的军队到了赤洲湖，与任约的军队形成对峙。
English: The troops of France and Japan arrived at Lake Akasawa and confronted the troops of Japan.

古文：法和乘轻舟，不介胄，沿流而下，去约军一里。
现代文：法和乘坐轻便小船，不披戴盔甲，沿流而下，到离任约军队一里远的地方。
English: Law and took a small boat, not wearing armor, down the river to a place about a mile away from any troops.

古文：乃远谓将士曰： 观彼龙睡不动，吾军之龙甚自踊跃，即攻之。 
现代文：便远远地对将士们说： 看到对方的龙旗像睡了一样并不飘动，而我军的龙旗则挥舞踊跃的时候，要立即发起进攻。 
English: He said to his soldiers from a distance, "When you see that the other side's dragon flag does not flutter as if it were asleep, but our army's dragon flag is waving enthusiastically, you should immediately launch an attack.

古文：纵火舫于前，而逆风不便，法和执白羽扇以麾风。
现代文：法和的军队起动大船冲在前面，因为逆风不便于行动，法和便手持白色羽毛扇子指挥风向。
English: Law and Ho's troops launched a large boat and rushed to the front. Because the headwind made it difficult to move, Law and Ho held a white feather fan to direct the wind.

古文：风势即反，约众皆见梁兵步于水上，于是大溃，皆投水。
现代文：风向顿时反移过来，任约的部下都看见梁国的战士正布置在水上。见到大船顺风冲来，立即溃败，纷纷跳进水里。
English: The wind suddenly shifted to the opposite direction, and Ren Ying's subordinates all saw Liang Guo's soldiers being arranged on the water. When they saw the big ship rushing with the wind, they were immediately defeated and jumped into the water one after another.

古文：约逃窜不知所之。
现代文：任约逃窜了，不知逃到了什么地方。
English: Renjo ran away and I don't know where he went.

古文：法和曰： 明日午时当得。 
现代文：法和说： 明日中午时就能抓到他。 
English: "We can catch him by noon tomorrow," Mr. Hawa said.

古文：及期未得。
现代文：第二天中午并没有抓到任约。
English: By noon the next day, no appointment had been made.

古文：人问之，法和曰： 吾前于此洲水干时，建一刹，语檀越等，此虽为刹，实是贼摽，今何不白摽下求贼也。 
现代文：人们便问法和。他说： 我以前在这个洲里水干的时候修建了一座佛塔，我对施主们说，这虽是一座佛塔，实际上是个贼摽。现在何不现成地去摽下抓贼呢。 
English: He said, "I once built a pagoda on this island when the water was dry, and I told the donors that although it was a pagoda, it was actually a thief's trap. Now, why not catch the thief right under the trap."

古文：如其言，果见任约在水中，抱刹柱头，才出鼻，遂擒之。
现代文：像他说的一样，果然看见任约正在水里抱住塔柱的顶端，刚刚露出鼻孔，有人便上去捉住了他。
English: As he said, he actually saw Ren Io hugging the top of the tower pillar in the water. He had just exposed his nostrils when someone went up and caught him.

古文：约言求就师目前死，法和曰： 檀越有相，必不死，且于王有缘，决无他虑，王于后微得檀越力。 
现代文：任约请求让他死在法和大师面前，法和说： 施主面有吉相，肯定不会死的，而且与湘王有缘分，请不要有任何顾虑，湘东王以后还要稍稍借助施主的力量呢。 
English: Any request to let him die in front of the Fa and the master, the Fa said: the donor has a auspicious face, will certainly not die, and has a predestined relationship with the king of Hunan, please do not have any concerns, the king of Hunan will have to use the donor's power a little later.

古文：果释，用为郡守。
现代文：任约果然被释放了，湘东王用他当了郡守。
English: Ren Yao was indeed released, and the King of Shandong used him as the county governor.

古文：及西军围江陵，约以兵赴救，力战焉。
现代文：待西军围江陵时，任约出兵援救，与敌军奋力作战。
English: While waiting for the Western Army to encircle Jiangling, Ren roughly sent troops to rescue and fought hard against the enemy.

古文：法和既平任约，乃还谓湘东王曰： 侯景自然平矣。
现代文：法和平息了任约的军队后，便回报湘东王说： 侯景自然而然就会平息的。
English: After Fa had pacified Ren Yu's army, he replied to the king of eastern Hunan, saying: "Hou Jing will naturally be pacified."

古文：一无可虑。 
现代文：用不着有半点忧虑。 
English: There's nothing to worry about.

古文：蜀贼将至，法和乃请守巫峡待之，乃总诸军而往。
现代文：蜀贼快要攻上来了，法和又请命镇守巫峡等待贼军。
English: The Shu bandits were about to attack, so Fa and I asked for orders to guard Wuxia and wait for the bandits.

古文：先运石以填江，三日，水遂分流，横之以铁鏁。
现代文：他统领各路军队前往巫峡，先运石头填到江里，三天之后江水便为石头堵截分散流淌，他们又在水上拉上了铁锁链。
English: He led all the armies to Wuxia, and first filled the river with stones. Three days later, the river water was blocked and dispersed by the stones, and they put iron chains on the water.

古文：萧纪果遣蜀将渡峡口，势蹙，进退不可。
现代文：萧纪果然命令蜀将率军渡过峡口，但形势险阻，陷于进退两难的境地。
English: Xiao Ji ordered Shu to lead the army across the mouth of the gorge, but the situation was perilous and he was caught in a dilemma.

古文：王琳与法和经略，一战而歼之。
现代文：王琳与法和运筹谋略，一战而歼灭了他们。
English: Wang Lin cooperated with the law and operational planning, and annihilated them in the First World War.

古文：山中多毒虫猛兽，法和授其禁戒，不复噬螫。
现代文：巫峡附近的山里有许多毒虫猛兽，法和教给将士如何防范，他们便不再遭受咬伤中螫的痛苦。
English: There are many venomous and ferocious beasts in the mountains near Wuxia. The law teaches soldiers how to prevent them, so they no longer suffer the pain of being bitten by midges.

古文：所近江湖，必于岸侧结草，云此处放生，渔者皆无得。
现代文：他让兵士在江湖岸边驻扎，说这里能够避免杀害生灵，有人想要扑杀生灵也得不到它们。
English: He stationed soldiers on the banks of the river and lake, saying that the killing of living beings could be avoided here, and those who wanted to kill living beings could not get them.

古文：时将兵，犹禁诸军渔捕，有窃为者，中夜猛兽必来欲噬之，有弟子戏截蛇头，来诣法和，法和曰： 汝何意杀蛇？ 
现代文：他又告诫将士禁止随意扑杀，如有偷着扑杀的，半夜猛兽必来咬他吃他。有个弟子砍掉蛇的脑袋玩耍，召来见法和时，法和说： 你为什么杀蛇？ 
English: He also admonished the soldiers not to kill at will. If anyone killed by stealth, a ferocious beast would come and bite him in the middle of the night. One disciple cut off a snake's head and played with it. When he was summoned to the Fa, the Fa said, "Why did you kill a snake?"

古文：因指以示之，弟子乃见蛇头齚袴裆而不落。
现代文：说着指给这个人看，这个人便见蛇的脑袋咬住自己的裤裆不放。
English: He pointed it out to the man, who saw the snake's head clamp down on his crotch.

古文：又有人以牛试刀，一下而头断，来诣法和，法和曰： 有一断头牛，就卿徵命殊急，若不为作功德，一月内报至。 
现代文：又有个人拿牛试刀的锋利与否，一刀下去牛头被砍断了，来见法和时，法和说： 有一头断了脑袋的牛，十分着急地向你索求它的命。你如果不为它作功德祈祷谢罪，一月之内必有报应降临。 
English: There was also a man who took a cow to test the sharpness of the knife, and when the head of the cow was cut off, he went to see the Fa. The Fa said, "There is a cow with its head cut off, and it is very anxious to ask you for its life. If you do not pray for its merits and sins, retribution will surely come within a month."

古文：其人不信，数日果死。
现代文：那个人不相信，几天之后果然死了。
English: The man did not believe it and died a few days later.

古文：其言多验。
现代文：法和的话，大多数应验了。
English: Most of the promises of the peace treaty have been fulfilled.

古文：元帝以法和为郢州刺史，法和不称臣，其启文印名上自称居士。
现代文：元帝任命法和为郢州刺史，法和并不在皇帝面前称臣，在他的公文和印鉴上他自称居士。
English: Emperor Yuan appointed Fa to write the history of Zhangzhou. Fa did not claim to be a vassal in front of the emperor. In his official documents and seal, he called himself a layman.

古文：后乃自称司徒，帝谓仆射王褒曰： 我来未尝有意用陆为三公，而自称何也？ 
现代文：后来又自称司徒，元帝跟仆射王褒说： 我从未有意任用陆法和为三公，他却以三公自称，这是怎么回事？ 
English: Later, he also called himself Sito. The former emperor praised his servant, the king, saying, "I never intended to appoint Lu Fa and the Three Kings, but he called himself the Three Kings. What's going on?"

古文：褒曰： 彼即以道术自命，容是先知。 
现代文：王褒说： 他既然以道术自命，可能这是他的先见。 
English: Wang Bao said: Since he is a self-proclaimed Taoist, perhaps this is his foresight.

古文：帝曰： 法和功业稍重。 
现代文：元帝说： 法和的功业确实比较重。 
English: Emperor Yuan said, "It is true that Fa He's work is relatively heavy.

古文：遂就拜为司徒。
现代文：于是就拜他为司徒。
English: So they worshipped him as a saint.

古文：后大聚兵舰，欲袭襄阳而入武关，帝使止之，法和乃尽致其兵，谓使者曰： 法和求道之人，尚不希释梵天王，岂窥人主之位，但与主有香火因缘救援耳。
现代文：之后，他大量聚集兵船，准备袭击襄阳而挺进武关。元帝派人制止他，法和便把全部兵权交出来，对使者说： 法和是求道的人，对佛道天王尚不希求，岂能把人主的位子放在眼里，我只因与君主有香火的缘分才来援救他罢了。
English: After that, he gathered a large number of warships and prepared to attack Xiangyang and advanced to Wuguan. The Yuan Emperor sent someone to stop him, and Fa handed over all military power and said to the messenger: Fa and is a seeker of the way, he does not seek the heavenly king of Buddhism, can he put the seat of the human master in his eyes, I only came to rescue him because of the fate of incense with the monarch.

古文：今既被疑，是业定不可改也。 
现代文：现在既然被他怀疑，这番功业是肯定成就不了了。 
English: Now that he is under suspicion, this feat will definitely not be accomplished.

古文：于是设供养，具大包薄饼。
现代文：于是，他就摆上供品，都是薄薄的大蒸饼。
English: So he set out his offerings, all of which were large, thin steamed cakes.

古文：及西魏举兵，法和赴江陵，帝使人逆之曰： 此自能破贼，但镇郢州，不须动也。 
现代文：等到西魏举兵讨伐梁国时，法和急忙赶赴江陵，元帝派人挡住他说： 这次自能破贼，你只要镇守郢州就行，不用你出动了。 
English: When the Western Wei Dynasty raised an army to fight against Liang, Fa and Qu rushed to Jiangling. The Yuan Emperor sent someone to stop him and said, "This time, you can defeat the bandits by yourself. You only need to guard Zhangzhou. You don't need to go out.

古文：法和乃还州，垩其城门，着粗白布衫布袴，邪中，大绳束腰，坐苇席，终日乃脱之。及闻梁灭，复取前凶服，着之受吊，梁人西入魏，果见包饼焉。王梵志
现代文：法和便返回郢州，用白色垩粉涂刷城门，身穿白色粗布大衫和裤子，斜系着头巾，腰上束着大麻绳，坐在苇席上，过了整整一天才脱掉这身打扮，后来听说梁国灭亡了，他又把前面穿过的那套凶服拿出来穿上，接受人们的吊丧。梁人进入西魏时，果然看到当初法和所摆放的大包饼。王梵志
English: Fa He then returned to Zhangzhou, painted the city gate with white enamel powder, dressed in a white coarse cloth shirt and trousers, wearing a headscarf diagonally and a hemp rope tied around his waist, and sat at a banquet. It took him a whole day to take off this dress. Later, when he heard that Liang Guo had perished, he took out and put on the suit of clothes he had worn before to accept people's mourning. When Liang people entered the West Wei Dynasty, they indeed saw the original law and the large cakes placed. Wang Fanzhi

古文：王梵志，卫州黎阳人也。
现代文：王梵志是卫州黎阳人。
English: Wang Fanzhi is a native of Liyang, Weizhou.

古文：黎阳城东十五里，有王德祖，当隋文帝时，家有林檎树，生瘿大如斗，经三年朽烂，德祖见之，乃剖其皮，遂见一孩儿抱胎，而德祖收养之。
现代文：在黎阳城东面十五里处有个人叫王德祖，隋文帝在位时，他家里有棵林檎树，树上生了个斗大的瘤子，过了三年腐烂了，德祖看见后便剖开这个瘤子的外皮，看到里面有个胎儿，便把他收养了起来。
English: Fifteen miles to the east of Liyang City, there was a man named Wang Dezhu. When the Sui Dynasty was on the throne, there was an eucalyptus tree in his home. A large tumor grew on the tree, and after three years it rotted away. When Dezhu saw it, he cut open the skin of the tumor, saw a fetus inside, and adopted him.

古文：至七岁，能语，曰： 谁人育我，复何姓名？ 
现代文：这个小孩长到七岁时，会说话了，他说： 谁生养了我，叫什么名字？ 
English: When the child was seven years old and could speak, he asked, "Who gave birth to me, and what is my name?"

古文：德祖具以实语之，因名曰林木梵天，后改曰梵志。
现代文：德祖便将他的身世如实跟他说了，于是起名叫林木梵天，后来改叫梵志。
English: De Zu then told him the truth about his origins, and he called the forest tree "Brahma," which was later changed to "Brahma."

古文：曰王家育我，可姓王也。
现代文：他说： 王家养育了我，我就姓王吧。 
English: He said, "The Wang family raised me, so I'll call myself Wang."

古文：梵志乃作诗示人，甚有羲旨。
现代文：梵志作诗给别人看，诗写得很有义理和旨趣。
English: Sanskrit poetry is written for others to see, and the poems are written with a great sense of justice and meaning.

古文：王守一
现代文：王守一
English: Wang Shouyi

古文：唐贞观初，洛城有一布衣，自称终南山人，姓王名守一，常负一大壶卖药。人有求买之不得者，病必死，或急趁无疾人授与之者，其人旬日后必染沉痛也。
现代文：唐朝贞观初年，洛阳城有个平民百姓叫王守一，自称是终南山人，经常背着个大壶卖药，有人求他买药买不到的，必然病重而死；如果他急忙赶着没病的人送给他药，这人十天后必定染上重病。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan of the Tang Dynasty, there was a commoner in Luoyang City named Wang Shouwu, who claimed to be a native of the Nanshan Mountains. He often carried a large pot on his back to sell medicine. If someone begged him to buy medicine and he couldn't, he would inevitably become seriously ill and die. If he hurried to get someone who wasn't sick to give him medicine, that person would definitely become seriously ill ten days later.

古文：柳信者，世居洛阳，家累千金，唯有一子。
现代文：有个叫柳信的，祖祖辈辈住在洛阳，他家有万贯财产，却只有一个儿子。
English: There is a man named Liu Xin, whose ancestors have lived in Luoyang for generations. His family has a lot of property, but only one son.

古文：既冠后，忽于眉头上生一肉块。
现代文：儿子成年后，忽然在眉头生出个肉块。
English: After his son became an adult, he suddenly developed a lump of flesh on his brow.

古文：历使疗之，不能除去，及闻此布衣，遂躬自祷请，既至其家，乃出其子以示之。
现代文：多次让人治疗，肉块也不能除掉，听说有这么个王守一，他便亲自登门祈求，请到家里后，便叫出儿子让他看。
English: He had been treated many times, and the lump of flesh could not be removed. When he heard that there was such a Wang Shouyi, he personally went to the door to pray. When he got home, he called out his son to let him see.

古文：布衣先焚香，命酒脯，犹若祭祝，后方于壶中探一丸药，嚼傅肉块，复请具樽俎。
现代文：王守一先点上香，叫人摆上酒肴果脯，就像祭奠什么一样，然后才从药壶里取出一丸药。用嘴嚼一嚼摊敷在肉块上，又叫摆上酒肉筵席。
English: Wang Shou first lit incense and asked people to set out wine and fruit jellies, as if it were a ritual, and then he took a pill from the medicine pot. He chewed it with his mouth and spread it on the pieces of meat, and then ordered a feast of meat and wine.

古文：须臾间，肉块破，有小蛇一条突出在地，约长五寸，五色烂然，渐渐长及一丈已来。
现代文：不多时，肉块破了，有一条小蛇露出来掉在地上，长约五寸，五彩斑斓，渐渐长到一丈左右长。
English: Not infrequently, a piece of meat breaks, and a small snake emerges and falls to the ground. It is about five inches long, multicolored, and gradually grows to about a foot long.

古文：其布衣乃尽饮其酒，叱蛇一声，其蛇腾起，云雾昏暗。
现代文：王守一把筵席上摆的酒喝光了，对着蛇呵叱一声，那条蛇便腾空跃起，顿见云露缭绕天色昏暗。
English: Wang Shou had drunk all the wine at the banquet. He scolded the snake, and the snake leapt into the air. Suddenly, he saw clouds and dew surrounding the dark sky.

古文：布衣忻然乘蛇而去，不知所在。
现代文：王守一忻然自得地骑着蛇飞去，不知飞到了什么地方。
English: Wang Shou took it in his stride and rode away on the snake. I don't know where he went.

古文：李子牟
现代文：李子牟
English: Li Zimou

古文：李子牟者，唐蔡王第七子也，风仪爽秀，才调高雅，性闲音律，尤善吹笛，天下莫比其能。
现代文：李子牟是唐朝蔡王的第七个儿子，他的风度仪表清爽俊秀，才调高雅，爱好音乐精通音律，尤其善于吹笛子，天下没有能赶上他的。
English: Li Zimou was the seventh son of King Cai of the Tang Dynasty. His demeanor was crisp and handsome, his talent was refined, he loved music and was well versed in musical notation. He was especially good at playing the flute. No one in the world could catch up with him.

古文：江陵旧俗，孟春望夕，尚列影灯。
现代文：江陵一带的旧俗，每逢正月十五日夜晚，江边挂起一排排的彩灯。
English: According to the old custom in the Gangneung area, every night on the 15th day of the first month, rows of colored lanterns are hung along the river.

古文：其时士女缘江，軿阗纵观。
现代文：两岸挤满了前来观灯的男男女女和他们乘坐的彩车。
English: Both banks of the river were crowded with men and women who came to see the lanterns and the floats they rode in.

古文：子牟客游荆门，适逢其会，因谓朋从曰： 吾吹笛一曲，能令万众寂尔无哗。 
现代文：子牟客游于荆门，正赶上这个热闹的场面，便对同游的朋友说： 我吹奏一支笛子曲，能叫万人寂静无声。 
English: Zimou, a tourist in Jingmen, was just catching up with this lively scene, and said to a friend who was also on the tour: I play a flute song, which can make everyone silent.

古文：于是同游赞成其事。
现代文：同游者深表赞成。
English: Fellow travelers expressed their deep approval.

古文：子牟即登楼，临轩回奏，清声一发，百戏皆停，行人驻愁，坐者起听，曲罢良久，众声复喧。
现代文：子牟便登上楼去临窗独奏，清脆悦耳的笛声一响，各种喧声吵语立即停止，行人止住脚步，坐者站立起来，全都沉浸在他的笛声之中，一曲吹罢很久，各种声音才又恢复了喧哗。
English: Zimu then went upstairs to the window to play a solo, the crisp and pleasant flute sounded, all kinds of noises and quarrels immediately stopped, pedestrians stopped walking, sitters stood up, all immersed in his flute sound, one song blew for a long time, and all kinds of sounds resumed the noise.

古文：而子牟恃能，意气自若，忽有白臾，自楼下小舟行吟而至，状貌古峭，辞韵清越，子牟洎坐客，争前致敬。
现代文：而子牟也因很相信自己的才能，神气悠然自得，忽然有个白发白须的老头儿从楼下小船上边行边吟来到面前，他相貌古朴严峻，话音清亮激越，子牟及在座的客人争着上前致敬。
English: As for Tsimou, he was confident of his talent and had a relaxed air. Suddenly, an old man with white hair and a white mustache came to him from a small boat downstairs, walking and chanting. His appearance was simple and austere, and his voice was clear and stirring. Tsimou and the guests present rushed forward to pay their respects.

古文：臾谓子牟曰： 向者吹笛，岂非王孙乎？
现代文：老翁对子牟说： 刚才吹笛子的莫不是王孙么？
English: The old man said to Zimu: Isn't it Wang Sun who was playing the flute just now?

古文：天格绝高，惜者乐器常常耳。 
现代文：格调实在绝高，可惜的是乐器太平常了。 
English: The standard is really very high, but unfortunately the instruments are too ordinary.

古文：子牟则曰： 仆之此笛，乃先帝所赐也，神鬼异物，则仆不知，音乐之中，此为至宝，平生视仅过万数，方仆所有，皆莫能知，而臾以为常常，岂有说乎？ 
现代文：子牟则说： 我的这支笛子乃是先帝所赐给的，神鬼所有的奇异之物我不知道是什么样子，但我知道这支笛子在乐器之中算是至宝，有生以来我所见到的乐器仅仅超过一万种，但没有什么能比上这支笛子的。而你却认为这很平常，莫非有什么说道呢？ 
English: Zimo said, "This flute of mine was given to me by the former emperor. I don't know what it looks like, but I know that this flute is a treasure among musical instruments. Since I was born, I have only seen more than ten thousand musical instruments, but nothing can compare to this flute. And you think this is normal. What can you say?

古文：臾曰： 吾少而习焉，老犹未倦，如君所有，非吾敢知，王孙以为不然，当为一试。 
现代文：老翁说： 我从小就学习吹笛子，老了仍没有倦怠。像您所用的这支笛子，不是我敢于知道的，王孙如以为不是这样，应当让我为您试一试。 
English: The old man said, "I've been learning to play the flute since I was a child, and I'm still not tired when I'm old. This flute, like the one you are using, is not something I dare to know. If Wang Sun thinks otherwise, he should let me try it for you."

古文：子牟以授之，而臾引气发声，声成而笛裂。
现代文：子牟把笛子递给他，老翁引气发声，声音刚刚吹出来笛子便破裂了。
English: Zimou handed him the flute, and the old man breathed a sigh of relief and began to play. Just as the sound came out, the flute broke.

古文：四座骇愕，莫测其人，子牟因叩颡求哀，希逢珍异。臾对曰： 吾之所贮，君莫能吹。 
现代文：周围的人见了十分惊讶，猜不透他是什么人，子牟也急忙叩头哀求，希望能见到珍贵奇异的笛子，老翁对他说： 我所保存的笛子您都不能吹。 
English: The people around him were very surprised to see him. They couldn't figure out who he was, and Tsimou also hurriedly bowed down and begged, hoping to see the precious and strange flute. The old man said to him, "You can't play the flute I saved."

古文：即令小僮，自舟赍至，子牟就视，乃白玉耳，臾付子牟，令其发调，气力殆尽，纤响无闻，子牟弥不自宁，虔恭备极。
现代文：便令小僮从船里拿了来，子牟上去一看，乃是一支白玉笛子。老翁交给子牟，叫他吹出声调，他用尽气力吹出的声音却纤弱细小得听不到，子牟更加心情不宁静，虔诚恭敬到了极点。
English: The old man gave it to Zimo and told him to play the melody, but the sound he made with all his strength was too weak and small to be heard. Zimo was even more restless, and his piety was at its peak.

古文：臾乃授之微弄，座客心骨冷然。
现代文：老翁接过笛子轻轻吹弄，在座的人便感到透心彻骨的寒冷。
English: The old man took the flute and played it gently, and everyone present felt chilled to the bone.

古文：臾曰： 吾愍子志尚，试为一奏。 
现代文：老翁说： 我同情您的志趣和爱好，现在为您试着吹奏一下。 
English: The old man said: I sympathize with your interests and hobbies, now try to play for you.

古文：清音激越，遐韵泛溢。
现代文：只听到清亮的笛音激昂腾越，余韵飞扬充溢。
English: I only heard the clear flute sound soaring and soaring, and the remaining rhyme flying and overflowing.

古文：五音六律，所不能偕，曲未终，风涛喷腾，云雨昏晦，少顷开霁，则不知臾之所在矣。
现代文：为普通的五音六律所不能比拟，一曲未终，只见风涛喷腾，云而迅至，天空昏暗，转眼之间云散天晴，这位吹笛子的老翁却不知去了什么地方。
English: It is incomparable to the ordinary five-tone and six-law system. The piece is not over, only the wind and waves are spewing, the clouds are fast approaching, the sky is dim, and the sky is clear in the blink of an eye. However, this flute-playing old man does not know where he went.

古文：吕翁
现代文：吕翁
English: Lyuon

古文：开元十九年，道者吕翁，经邯郸道上邸舍中，设榻施席，担囊而坐。
现代文：开元十九年，道家吕翁经过邯郸道上的一个客店，设床铺席解开包袱坐下来休息。
English: In the 19th year of the 1st century, the Taoist priest Lü Weng passed by an inn on the road, set up a bed booth, unpacked his luggage and sat down to rest.

古文：俄有邑中少年卢生，衣短裘，乘青驹，将适于田，亦止邸中，与翁接席。
现代文：一会儿来了个县邑里的少年卢生，他身穿短袄，骑一匹青马，要到乡下田庄去，也是路过客店住宿休息的，与吕翁的铺位紧挨着。
English: After a while, Lu Sheng, a young man from the county town, came. He was wearing a short coat and riding a blue horse. He wanted to go to a country farm. He was also passing by the inn to stay and rest, right next to Lu Weng's booth.

古文：言笑殊畅，久之，卢生顾其衣袋弊亵，乃叹曰： 大丈夫生世不谐，而因如是乎。 
现代文：他口若悬河，谈笑自如，说笑了一阵之后，看看自己的衣着打扮，觉得有些破旧寒酸，叹道： 大丈夫生在世上不顺利，而困顿潦倒到这步！ 
English: He was in full flow, talking and laughing freely. After a while of talking and laughing, he looked at his clothes and felt a bit shabby and shabby. He sighed: It's okay to be born into a world that is not going well, but to be in this situation!

古文：翁曰： 观子肤极腧，体胖无恙，谈谐方适；而叹其困者，何也？ 
现代文：吕翁说： 看你肤色舒展滋润，体魄肥壮强健，言谈诙谐舒畅；你却慨叹自己困顿，这是为什么？ 
English: Lu Weng said: Look at you, your skin color is stretched and moisturized, your physique is fat and strong, and your speech is witty and comfortable; but you lament that you are in trouble. Why is this?

古文：生曰： 吾此苟生耳，何适之为。 
现代文：卢生说： 我这不过是苟且活着罢了，有什么舒适可言呢！ 
English: Lu Sheng said: I'm just trying to stay alive, what comfort can I say!

古文：翁曰： 此而不适，而何为适？ 
现代文：吕翁说： 像你这样都不感到舒适，怎样才叫舒适呢？ 
English: Lu Weng said, "If you don't feel comfortable like this, how can you call it comfortable?"

古文：生曰： 当建功树名，出将入相，列鼎而食，选声而听，使族益茂而家用肥，然后可以言其适。
现代文：卢生道： 应当建功立业名声四扬，出为将帅入为宰相，列鼎而食，选声而听，使氏族更加兴旺发达而家用更为丰盛富裕，然后才可以谈舒适。
English: Lu Sheng said: It is necessary to make contributions and establish a reputation for fame. It is necessary to become a prime minister, to eat well, to choose and listen to voices, to make the clan more prosperous and the home more affluent, and then we can talk about comfort.

古文：吾志于学而游于艺，自惟当年，朱紫可拾，今已过壮室，犹勤田畆。
现代文：我本有志于经学而遍习六艺。自应在年富力强时就可得到高官厚禄，无奈如今已经过了壮年却仍然奔波于田亩之间。
English: Originally, I was interested in studying and studied the six arts. I should have been able to get a high-ranking position when I was rich and strong, but now I have passed my prime, but I still run between the fields.

古文：非困而何？ 
现代文：这不是困顿又是什么？ 
English: It's not a hardship, so what is it?

古文：言讫，目昏思寐，是时主人蒸黄粱为馔，翁乃探囊中枕以授之曰： 子枕此，当令子荣适如志。 
现代文：说完，两眼朦胧，昏昏欲睡，这时店主人已蒸上黄粱要做饭，吕翁便从自己包裹里拿出一个枕头递给他，说： 你枕上它，就可以叫你如愿以偿地得到荣华舒适。 
English: When he had finished speaking, his eyes were hazy and he was drowsy. By this time, the owner of the shop had already steamed the scallions to make rice. Lü Weng then took out a pillow from his package and handed it to him, saying, "If you put it on your pillow, you can make your wish come true and achieve glory and comfort."

古文：其枕瓷而窍其两端，生俯首枕之，寐中，见其窍大而明朗可处，举身而入，遂至其家。
现代文：那个枕头是瓷的，两端有孔洞，卢生接过来倒头便睡，很快就进入了梦乡。睡梦中，他见枕头两端的孔洞大而明朗可以进人，便抬起身来走了进去，于是到了自己的家。
English: The pillow was made of porcelain and had holes at both ends. Lu Sheng fell asleep and soon fell asleep. In his sleep, he saw that the holes at both ends of the pillow were large and clear enough for people to enter, so he got up and walked in, and then he arrived at his home.

古文：娶清河崔氏女，女容甚丽而产甚殷。
现代文：他娶了清河崔氏的女儿为妻，其妻姿容十分美丽，又能一个接着一个地给他频频生孩子。
English: He married the daughter of Qinghe Cui, a beautiful woman who bore him many children one after another.

古文：由是衣裘服御，日已华侈，明年，举进士，登甲科，解褐授校书郎，应制举，授渭南县尉，迁监察御史起居舍人，为制诰。
现代文：从此，衣着车骑日益奢华，第二年便举进士登甲科，脱掉布衣换上官服授为校书郎，应制举又授渭南县尉，迁任监察御史起居舍人兼制诰衔。
English: From then on, he became more and more extravagant in his dress and riding. In the following year, he was promoted to a knight of the first class, took off his robe and put on an official uniform to be awarded as a school scribe. He was promoted again and was awarded the title of the lieutenant of Yinan County. He was transferred to the position of the inspector of the imperial history and concurrently held the title of a layman.

古文：三年即真。
现代文：三年后即为实职。
English: Three years later, he became a full-time employee.

古文：出典同州，寻转陕州。
现代文：出典同州，又转陕州。
English: The source is the same as the state, but it is changed to Shaanxi.

古文：生好土功，自陕西开河八十里以济不通。邦人赖之，立碑颂德。
现代文：卢生喜好在土地上作功夫，于是自陕西开通黄河，引水八十里用来接济水利不通的地方，当地居民由此获益不浅，便为他立碑颂德歌功。
English: Lu Sheng liked to work hard on the land, so he opened the Yellow River from Shaanxi, diverting 80 miles of water to connect places where water is not available. Local residents benefited a lot from this and erected a monument in his honor.

古文：迁汴洲岭南道采记使，入京为京兆尹。
现代文：之后迁任汴州岭南道采记使，又入京都为京兆尹。
English: After that, he was transferred to the post of the secretary for the collection of records of Lingnan Road in Zhangzhou, and then he went to Kyoto as the successor of Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：是时神武皇帝方事夷秋，吐蕃新诺罗、龙莽布攻陷爪沙，节度使王君夐新被叙投河隍战恐，帝思将帅之任，遂除生御史中丞河西陇右节度使，大破戎虏七千级，开地九百里，筑三大城以防要害，北边赖之，以石征功焉，归朝策勋，恩礼极崇，转御史大夫吏部侍郎。
现代文：这时神武皇帝正在用心对付夷狄、吐蕃的新诺罗与龙莽布发兵攻陷爪沙，节度使王君夐跟他们在河隍交战失败，皇帝正想任命新的将帅，便封卢生为御史中丞河西陇右节度使，他统兵大破戎虏七千，开拓疆土九百里，在要害处建起三座大城楼，北部边境的居民得以休养生息，便为他刻石记功，回到朝廷后记功行赏，皇帝以恩礼相待，任命他为御史大夫吏部侍郎。
English: At this time, Emperor Shenwu was trying to deal with the Yidi, the New Noro and the Long Mangbu of Tubo, and sent troops to capture the Jaws. Wang Junyao and his troops were defeated in the Battle of Hebei. The emperor was thinking of appointing a new commander, so he appointed Lu Sheng as the commander of the Mid-Historic War in the West. He led his troops to defeat seven thousand soldiers, open up nine hundred miles of territory, and built three large towers at the key points. The residents of the northern border were able to rest and recuperate. They engraved a stone for him to record his service, and returned to the

古文：物望清重，群情翕习，大为当时宰相所忌，以飞语中之，贬端州刺史，三年征还，除户部尚书。未几，拜中书侍郎同中书门下平章事，与萧令嵩、裴侍中光庭同掌大政，十年，嘉谋密命，一日三接，献替启沃，号为贤相。同列者害之，遂诬与边将交结，所图不轨，下狱，府吏引徒至其门，追之甚急，生惶骇不测。
现代文：他在朝廷中位显权重名望高，是文武群臣瞩目的核心人物，大为当时宰相所忌恨，便以流言蜚语中伤他，结果被贬为端州刺史，三年后又被召回朝廷，任为户部尚书，没过多久又拜中书侍郎同中书门下平章事，与萧令嵩，裴光庭共同执掌国家大政，十年间，他参与了大政方针及机密命令的策划制定工作，一日三接旨，十分操劳，号称贤相，同辈中有人要害他，诬告他与边镇守将互相勾结图谋不轨，结果他被关进监狱，衙役领着人到他门前，追究盘问逼得很紧，他惧怕有什么不测之灾祸就要临头。
English: He was highly respected in the imperial court. He was a central figure who attracted the attention of the civil and military courtiers. He was greatly hated by the prime minister at the time, who slandered him with gossip. As a result, he was relegated to the position of the governor of Danzhou. Three years later, he was recalled to the imperial court and appointed as the head of the Household Department. Not long after that, he began to worship the attendant of the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee and the General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and together with Xiao Lingtao and Pei Guangting, he presided over the national politics. For ten years, he participated

古文：注其妻子曰： 吾家本山东，良田数顷，足以御寒馁，何苦求禄，而今及此，思复衣短裘，乘青驹，行邯郸道中，不可得也。 
现代文：哭着对妻说： 我家本住山东，有良田数顷，不愁温饱，何苦自寻烦恼偏去追求高官厚禄，如今落到这个地步，再想过那种穿短袄骑青马走在邯郸道上的自在日子，已经得不到了。 
English: Crying, he said to his wife: My family is originally from Shandong, we have several hectares of good farmland, we do not worry about food and clothing, and we have gone to great lengths to pursue high-ranking officials and high salaries. Now we have come to this point. If you ever think about the days when you could wear short pants and ride a horse, you will never get it.

古文：引刀欲自裁，其妻救之得免。
现代文：说完，抽刀要自杀，幸被老婆抢救自杀未遂。
English: After that, he tried to commit suicide with a knife, but was luckily saved by his wife.

古文：共罪者皆死，生独有中人保护，得减死论，出授欢牧。
现代文：与他一起犯罪的人都被处死了，唯独卢生有人保护得以免除死刑，授衔欢牧，逐出朝廷。
English: Those who committed crimes with him were all executed, except for Lu Sheng, who was protected from the death penalty, awarded the title of "happy herdsman" and expelled from the imperial court.

古文：数岁，帝知其冤，复起为中书令，封赵国公，恩旨殊渥，备极一时。
现代文：数年之后，皇帝知道他冤枉，又起任他为中书令，封为赵国公，皇恩极重，为一时之最。
English: A few years later, the emperor knew that he had wronged him, and appointed him to the position of Zhongshuling and named him Zhao Guogong. The imperial favor was extremely heavy, and it was the most for a while.

古文：生有五子。僔、倜，俭、位、倚。僔为考功员外，俭为侍御史，位为太常丞，季子倚最贤。年二十四，为右补阙。
现代文：他有五个儿子：僔、倜、俭、位、倚，僔为考功员外，俭为侍御史，位为太常丞，小儿子倚最为贤能，年仅二十四，为右补阙。
English: He had five sons: Zou, Zou, Zhen, Zi, Zi, Zi. Zou was an examiner, Zhen was a courtier, Zi was a chancellor, Zi was the most capable, Zi was only twenty-four years old, and Zi was the right assistant.

古文：其姻媾皆天下望族。
现代文：他们的老丈人家也都是天下有名的望族。
English: Their parents-in-law are also world-renowned celebrities.

古文：有孙十余人，凡两窜岭表，再登台铉，出入中外。回翔台阁，三十余年间，崇盛赫奕，一时无比。
现代文：卢生有孙子十余人，三十多年以来，卢生两次远放岭南又重登宰相职位，出入于朝廷内外，回翔于台阁之间，高官厚禄，恩崇显赫，一时无比。
English: Lu Sheng has more than ten grandchildren. Since more than thirty years ago, Lu Sheng has been sent to Lingnan twice and re-ascended to the post of prime minister. He has been in and out of the imperial court, and back and forth between the cabinets. He is a high-ranking official with a high salary, and is highly respected. He is incomparable.

古文：末节颇奢荡，好逸乐，后庭声色皆第一。
现代文：生活末节也十分奢侈放荡，他喜欢玩乐，家里的歌伎女色都是第一流的。
English: At the end of his life, he was also very extravagant and debauched. He liked to have fun, and the Kabuki actresses in his family were all first-rate.

古文：前后赐良田甲第，佳人名马，不可胜数。
现代文：前后两次由皇帝赐给他的良田甲第、美人名马等，不计其数。
English: There are innumerable good rice fields, good horses, and beautiful women that were given to him twice by the emperor.

古文：后年渐老，屡乞骸骨，不许，及病，中人候望，接踵于路，名医上药毕至焉。
现代文：后期年纪渐渐老了，他屡次请求告老还乡，均未应允，到有病的时候，前来看望问候的人络绎不绝，站满了门前的道路，名医纷纷登门诊治，名贵药品应有尽有。
English: Later, as he grew older, his repeated requests to return to his hometown were not granted. When he was ill, there was an endless stream of people who came to visit and greet him. The road in front of his house was full of people, famous doctors came to his house for treatment, and expensive medicines were everywhere.

古文：将终，上疏曰： 臣本山东书生，以田圃为娱，偶逢圣运，得到官序。
现代文：临终之前，卢生给皇帝上书道： 臣本是山东一介书生，以管理园为乐业，偶逢圣朝时运，得列官宦之序。
English: Before his death, Lu Sheng wrote to the emperor: My father-in-law was a scholar from Shandong Province, and he enjoyed managing gardens. He met the auspicious time of the Holy Dynasty, and he was awarded the Order of the Grand Cordon.

古文：过蒙荣奖，特受鸿私，出拥旄钺，入升鼎辅，周旋中外，绵历岁年，有忝恩造，无裨圣化。负乘致寇，履薄战竟，日极一日，不知老之将至。
现代文：过蒙圣上荣宠奖掖，特受吾皇鸿恩偏爱，出为将帅得拥重兵，入登相位荣升首辅，周旋于朝廷内外，连绵而历岁年。深感有愧于恩造而无益于圣化；唯恐因负乘而致寇，终日如履薄冰战战兢兢，如此日甚一日，不觉老之将至。
English: After receiving the sacred honor and favor award, he was especially favored by our emperor Hong En, and he became a handsome general holding a heavy army, entered the ascending phase, and was promoted to chief aide. He has been in and out of the imperial court for years. He deeply felt that he was unworthy of the grace and did not benefit from sanctification; he feared that he would be robbed because of the burden, and he was treading on thin ice and trembling all day long. Every day was like this, and he did not realize that he was getting old.

古文：今年逾八十，位历三公，钟漏并歇，筋骸俱弊，弥留沉困，殆将溘尽。
现代文：今已年过八十，官位历任过三公，钟漏都到了停歇之时了，精疲力尽，弥留沉困，殆将溘尽。
English: I am now over eighty years old, I have held three official positions, and the clock has stopped ticking. I am exhausted, depressed, and almost exhausted.

古文：顾无诚效，上答休明，空负深恩。永辞圣代，无任感恋之至。
现代文：顾无诚效以上答休明，空负深恩而永辞圣代，无住感念留恋之至。
English: In view of the lack of sincerity, the above answer is clear, the empty burden of deep gratitude and the eternal resignation of the saint, no feeling of nostalgia.

古文：谨奉表称谢以闻。
现代文：此谨奉表称谢以闻。 
English: I would like to take this opportunity to express my gratitude.

古文：诏曰： 卿以俊德，作余元辅，出雄藩坦，入赞缉熙，升平二纪，实卿是赖。
现代文：皇帝传下诏书说： 卿以俊才贤德为我的重要辅佐，出师称雄于藩国，旦入朝相赞于缉熙，我朝二世升平。实赖爱卿之力。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict saying, "With his talent and virtue, my lord is my important assistant. He has become a master of the domain. When he entered the imperial court, he was praised by the emperor. I was promoted to the second rank in the imperial court. I truly rely on the power of my lord."

古文：比因疾累，日谓痊除，岂遽沉顿，良深悯默，今遣骠骑大将军高力士就第候省，其勉加针灸，为余自爱，燕冀无妄，期丁有喜。 
现代文：在你疾病绕身之后，天天听说即将痊愈，不料突然如此沉重，我心深感同情怜悯，今特派遣大将军高力士前往府上慰问，你要勉加针灸，为我而自爱，愿我的希望不会落空，盼望你的喜讯！ 
English: After being surrounded by your illness, I heard every day that you were about to recover, but it suddenly became so heavy. My heart is deeply sympathetic and compassionate. Now I am sending General Corliss to your home to offer condolences. You should practice acupuncture and moxibustion, and love yourself for me. May my hope not be in vain, and I look forward to your good news!

古文：其夕卒。
现代文：那天晚上就死了。
English: He died that night.

古文：卢生欠伸而寤。见方偃于邸中，顾吕翁在傍，主人蒸黄粱尚未熟，触类如故，蹶然而兴曰： 岂其梦寐耶。 
现代文：卢生翻了翻身就醒过来了，发现自己正躺在客店里，又看到吕翁也在自己身边，店主人蒸着的黄粱米饭尚未做熟呢，用手触摸周围的东西时也都依然如故，这才顿然醒悟道： 这不是做了一场梦么！ 
English: Lu Sheng turned over and woke up, found himself lying in the inn, and saw Lu Weng beside him. The yellow glutinous rice steamed by the innkeeper had not yet been cooked, and everything around him was still the same when he touched it with his hand. Only then did he suddenly realize: This is not a dream!

古文：翁笑谓曰： 人世之事，亦犹是矣。 
现代文：吕翁笑着说： 人世间的事也跟你梦里的情况一个样呀！ 
English: Lü Weng smiled and said, "Things in the human world are also similar to the situation in your dream!"

古文：生然之。
现代文：卢生点头称是。
English: Lu Sheng nodded and said yes.

古文：良久谢曰： 夫宠辱之数，得丧之理，生死之情，尽知之矣。
现代文：他沉思好长时间之后，向吕翁致谢道： 人生在世，宠辱之际遇，得失之道理，生死之感情，通过这场梦，我算全都知道了。
English: After pondering for a long time, he expressed his thanks to Lü Weng: Through this dream, I know everything about life in the world, the ups and downs, the principles of gain and loss, and the feelings of life and death.

古文：此先生所以窒吾欲也，敢不受教。 
现代文：这就是先生不让我胡思乱想的原因，晚生岂敢不接受您的教诲！ 
English: This is the reason why my teacher doesn't let me think out of the box. How dare a latecomer not accept your teachings!

古文：再拜而去。
现代文：说罢，再拜而去。
English: Bye-bye, bye-bye, gone.

古文：管子文
现代文：管子文
English: by Guanzi Wen

古文：李林甫为相初年，有一布衣诣谒之，阍吏谓曰： 朝廷新命相国，大僚尚未敢及门，何布衣容易谒之耶。 
现代文：李林甫刚当宰相的头一年，有一个未入仕途的书生登门拜见他，守门人对这位书生说： 朝廷新任命的相国公，连文武大臣都还没敢登门，你一个平民百姓要见此谈何容易啊！ 
English: In Li Linfu's first year as prime minister, a student who had not yet been promoted came to see him. The gatekeeper said to the student: "The newly appointed imperial prince, even the minister of literature and armed forces, has not yet dared to come to the door. How easy it is for you, a commoner, to see and talk about this!"

古文：布衣执刺，待于路旁，高声自称曰： 业八体书生管子文，欲见相国伸一言。 
现代文：书生拿着名帖站在路旁等待，高声自报来意说： 专修八体书法的书生管子文，要见相国公申述一句话。 
English: The calligrapher stood by the roadside with a famous postcard and waited. He announced in a loud voice that he wanted to say: "As a calligrapher specializing in eight-character calligraphy, I would like to see a word from the king of the country."

古文：林甫召之于宾馆，至夜静，月下揖之。
现代文：林甫把他召到宾馆里，到夜深人静时，在月光下面召见了他。
English: Lin Fu called him to the hotel and summoned him in the dead of night under the moonlight.

古文：生曰： 仆实老于书艺，亦自少游图籍之圃，尝窃见古昔兴亡，明主贤臣之事，故愿谒公，以伸一言。 
现代文：书生说： 我其实熟悉的是书法艺术，但因自小漫游在图书典籍堆里，也曾涉及古往历代的兴亡和明君贤臣的事情，所以愿意拜见相国公，向您申述一句话。 
English: The student said, "Actually, I am familiar with the art of calligraphy, but since I have been wandering around in piles of books and classics since I was a child, and I have also been involved in the rise and fall of ancient dynasties and wise men and women, I would like to visit my country and say a few words to you."

古文：林甫曰： 仆偶各位于辅弼，实非才器，已恐不胜大任，福过祸随也。
现代文：林甫说： 老臣偶然列入宰相之位，实在不是我的才器够当宰相的资格，我曾深恐不能胜此大任，担心福过头了灾祸就会跟随而来。
English: Lin Fu said: The old minister's accidental inclusion in the position of prime minister is really not my talent enough to be the prime minister's qualification. I was deeply afraid that I would not be able to cope with this great responsibility. I was worried that if the blessing went too far, the disaster would follow.

古文：君幸辱玉趾，敢授教于君，君其无惜药石之言，以惠鄙人。 
现代文：有幸见到您不辞劳苦前来赐教，我才敢向您请教，您尽管不惜以药石之言赐恩于我这鄙薄之人。 
English: I was fortunate enough to see you go to great lengths to give me advice, so I dared to ask you for advice. You did not hesitate to give me, a despicable person, words of healing stone.

古文：生曰： 古人不容易而谈者，盖知谈之易听之难也。
现代文：管生说： 古人之所以认为不容易与别人说话，是因为他们知道说话容易而听话难呀。
English: Guanzheng said: The reason why the ancients thought that it was not easy to talk to others was because they knew that it was easy to speak but difficult to listen.

古文：必能少览容易之言，而不容易而听，则涓尘皆可以裨海岳也。
现代文：必能少听容易听的话，而选择不容易听的话而听之，才能使轻如灰尘的话也可以对重如海岳的事都有所裨益。
English: One must be able to listen less to what is easy to listen to, and choose what is not easy to listen to and listen to it, so that words as light as dust can also be of benefit to things as heavy as mountains.

古文：况圣哲云： 一言可以兴邦，一言可以丧邦。 
现代文：况且圣哲早已说过： 一言可以兴邦，一言可以丧邦。 
English: Moreover, the sage had already said: "One word can make a nation, one word can destroy a nation."

古文：公若闻一言即欲奉而行之，临一事即悉心狥意，如此，则虽日纳献言之士，亦无益也。 
现代文：相国公如果每听到一句话就想去奉行，每面临一件事情就全心全意地去对待；那么，虽然天天接纳向您进献意见的人士，也是无补于事的。 
English: If you want to follow up every word you hear, if you want to treat every situation wholeheartedly, then it's no use accepting people who give you advice every day.

古文：林甫乃容恭意谨而言曰： 君但一言教仆，仆当书绅而永为箴诫。 
现代文：听到这里，林甫变得神情恭顺态度庄重起来，说： 请您只将一句话赐教于我，我当写在外衣的大带子上永远作为自己的信条和警诫之言。 
English: Hearing this, Lin Fu became submissive and solemn, saying: "Please teach me just one sentence. I should write it on the large strap of my coat forever as my creed and words of warning.

古文：生曰： 君闻美言必喜，闻恶言必怒。
现代文：管生说： 您听到好听的话必然欢喜，听到不好听的话必定生气。
English: Guanzheng said, "You are bound to be happy when you hear good things, and you are bound to be angry when you hear bad things.

古文：仆以美言誉君，则无裨君之事。以恶言讽君，既犯君之颜色，既犯君之颜色，君复怒我。
现代文：我用好听的话夸您，对您的事情则毫无裨益；用不好听的话讽劝您，必然使您脸上不光彩；既然使您脸上不光彩，您更生我的气。
English: I praise you with pleasant words, but they are of no use in your case; I cajole you with unpleasant words, which inevitably discredit your face; and since I discredit your face, you are even more angry with me.

古文：即不得尽伸恶言矣。
现代文：这就不能尽说不好听的话了。
English: That's not all the bad things that can be said.

古文：美言狥而损，恶言直而益。君当悉察之。
现代文：美言曲折而有损害，恶言直率而有裨益，您要仔细观察分析之。
English: You should carefully observe and analyze the damage caused by the twists and turns of good words and the benefits brought by the directness of bad words.

古文：容我之言，勿复加怒。 
现代文：既然让我说话，就请不要生我的气。 
English: Since you let me speak, please don't be angry with me.

古文：林甫不觉膝席而听。
现代文：林甫不知不觉地双膝抵席洗耳恭听。
English: Lin Fu unconsciously knelt down to listen.

古文：生曰： 君为相，相天子也，相天子，安宗社保国也。宗社安。万国宁，则天子无事。天子无事，则君之无事。
现代文：管生说： 您为宰相，相的是天子；相天子就是安顿宗社保护国家；宗社安定万国宁静，天子便没有事情；天子无事，您就无事。
English: Guanzheng said, "You are the prime minister, and the relative is the heavenly son; the relative heavenly son is to establish the patriarchal society to protect the country; the patriarchal society is stable and the country is peaceful, and the heavenly son has nothing to do; the heavenly son has nothing to do, and you have nothing to do.

古文：设或天下有一人失所，即罪在天子，罪在天子，焉用君相。
现代文：假设天下有一个人不能得其所，其罪过就在于天子；罪过即在天子，还用您去相他干什么？
English: Suppose there is a person in the world who cannot get his place, his sin lies in the Son of Heaven; the sin is in the Son of Heaven, and what is the use of you to see him?

古文：夫为相之道，不必独任天下事，当举文治天下之民，举武定天下之乱，则仁人抚疲瘵，用义士和斗战。
现代文：为相之道就在于不必独任天下事，应当推举通晓文治的人去管理天下之民，推举通晓武略的人去平定天下之乱，仁德之人能够体恤和解除天下的痛苦，义勇之士能够和解与平息天下的争斗。
English: The way to be a good neighbor is not to be in charge of the affairs of the world alone. It is necessary to choose a person who knows the rule of law to manage the people of the world, a person who knows the strategy of war to quell the chaos of the world, a person of benevolence to be able to sympathize and relieve the suffering of the world, and a man of courage to be able to reconcile and quell the struggles of the world.

古文：自修节俭，以讽上，以化下，自守忠贞，以事主，以律人，固不暇躬勤庶政也。
现代文：您只管自修节俭，以节俭讽劝皇上，用以教化百姓；只要自守忠贞，用以服务于君主，用以要求于别人，这样，您就没有时间去亲自管理行政事务了。
English: All you have to do is to cultivate frugality, use frugality to persuade the emperor, and use it to educate the people; as long as you keep yourself loyal, use it to serve the monarch, and use it to require others, then you will not have time to personally manage administrative affairs.

古文：庶政得人即治，苟不得人，虽才如伊吕，亦不治。
现代文：行政庶务只要选好恰当的人才他就管理好，如果没有合适的人才，您就是才如伊吕，自己也管不过来，管不到好处。
English: In general administrative affairs, as long as you choose the right talent, you can manage it well. If you don't have the right talent, you are just like Ily, you can't manage yourself, you can't manage the benefits.

古文：噫，相公慎之。 
现代文：好了，相国您要好好想想我说的这些。 
English: Well, my countrymen, you should think about what I am saying.

古文：林甫听之骇然，遽起拜谢之。
现代文：林甫听了这些话，很是惊讶，立即起来拜谢管生。
English: Lin Fu was very surprised to hear these words and immediately got up to thank Guan Sheng.

古文：生又曰： 公知斯运之通塞耶。 
现代文：管生又说： 您知道时运之通与塞的变化规律吧。 
English: The supervisor also said: Do you know the law of change of the flow and stop of time?

古文：林甫曰： 君当尽教我，我当终身不忘。 
现代文：林甫说： 您应当全都教给我，我一定终生不忘。 
English: Lin Fu said: You should teach me everything, I will never forget it.

古文：生曰： 夫治生乱，乱生治，今古不能易也。
现代文：管生说： 治生乱，乱生治，这是古往今来不变的规律。
English: Guanzheng said: "Ruling creates chaos, and chaos creates ruling. This is an unchanging law from ancient times to the present.

古文：我国家自革隋乱而治，至于今日，乱将生矣。
现代文：那大唐国家通过革除隋朝的动乱走上了安定的局面，到了今天，动乱将要发生了。
English: The Great Tang Dynasty achieved a stable situation by eliminating the turmoil of the Sui Dynasty. Today, the turmoil is about to happen.

古文：君其记之。 
现代文：您可一定要记住这件事啊！ 
English: You must remember this!

古文：林甫又拜谢。
现代文：林甫又一次拜谢他。
English: Lin Fu thanked him again.

古文：至曙，欲闻于上，縻从一爵禄，令左右潜守之。
现代文：到天亮时，李林甫想把这次与管生的谈话奏禀皇上，封给管生一个爵位，便让左右的暗中看守着他。
English: By dawn, Li Linfu wanted to play this conversation with the steward to the emperor and give the steward a peerage, so he let the left and right secretly watch him.

古文：坚求退曰： 我本柢欲达一言于公，今得竭愚悃，而又辱见纳，又何用阻野人之归也。 
现代文：他却非要回去不行，说： 我本来只是想送一句话给您，现在已将愚思竭诚奉告，而又蒙您屈尊接见和采纳，怎么还不让我回去呀。 
English: But he could not bear to go back, and said, "I only wanted to send you a word, but now that I have told you all about my foolish thoughts, and you have condescended to meet me and accept me, why won't you let me go back?"

古文：林甫坚留之不得，遂去。
现代文：林甫强留不得，他便走了。
English: Lin Fuqiang couldn't stay, so he left.

古文：林甫令人暗逐之，生至南山中一石洞，其人寻亦入石洞，遽不见生。唯有故旧大笔一。
现代文：林甫派人暗中跟着他，管生走进南山之中的一个石洞里，跟他的人待了一会儿也进了石洞，管生突然不见了，只有他过去用过的一支大毛笔。
English: Lin Fu sent someone to secretly follow him. Guan Sheng went into a stone cave in the Nanshan Mountains. He stayed with his people for a while and also went into the stone cave. Guan Sheng suddenly disappeared, leaving only a large brush that he had used in the past.

古文：其人携以白林甫，林甫以其笔置于书阁，焚香拜祝。
现代文：这个人便带着这支毛笔回去，把经过情况报告给李林甫，林甫把这支毛笔放在书房里，点上香叩拜祷告。
English: The man then went back with the brush and reported the situation to Li Linfu. Linfu put the brush in his study, lit incense, bowed down and prayed.

古文：其夕，笔忽化为一五色禽飞去。不知所之。
现代文：当天夜晚，那支毛笔忽然化为一只五彩斑斓的禽鸟飞走了，不知飞到了什么地方。
English: That night, the brush suddenly turned into a multicolored bird and flew away, I don't know where it went.

古文：袁嘉祚
现代文：袁嘉祚
English: Yuan Jiayuan

古文：唐宁王傅袁嘉祚，为人正直不阿，能行大节，犯颜悟主，虽死不避。
现代文：唐宁王的师傅袁嘉祚，为人正直不阿，能够奉行大节，敢于直言犯上，虽死也不回避。
English: The master of Tangning Wang, Yuan Jiayu, was an honest person, able to pursue the Great Festival, dare to speak out and commit crimes, and did not shy away even though he died.

古文：后为盐州刺史，以清白尤异升闻。
现代文：后来成为盐州刺使，因出奇的清白而闻名。
English: He later became the assassin of Yanzhou and was famous for his amazing innocence.

古文：时岑羲、萧至忠为相，授嘉祚开州刺史，嘉祚恨之，频言其屈。
现代文：当时，岑羲与萧至忠当宰相，任命嘉祚为开州刺史，嘉祚非常恨他们，一再声明自己委屈。
English: At that time, Zhai and Xiao Zhizhong were the prime ministers and appointed Jiayu as the governor of Kaizhou. Jiayu hated them very much and repeatedly stated his grievances.

古文：二相大怒，诟嘉祚曰： 愚夫，叱令去。 
现代文：二相大为恼怒，辱骂嘉祚说： 纯粹是个笨蛋，把他赶出朝廷！ 
English: The two emperors were very angry and insulted Jiayu, saying, "He is a pure idiot, throw him out of the court!"

古文：嘉祚方惆怅，饮马于义井，有一人背井坐，以水濯手，故溅水。
现代文：嘉祚正惆怅生气，一天他去义井饮马，有个人背对井坐着，用水洗手，故意溅起水来几次惊吓嘉祚的马。
English: Jiayu Zhengyao was angry. One day he went to Yijing to water his horse. There was a man sitting with his back to the well, washing his hands with water, and deliberately splashing the water several times to scare Jiayu's horse.

古文：数惊嘉祚马，嘉祚忿之，骂曰： 臭卒伍，何事惊马。 
现代文：嘉祚气坏了，骂道： 臭当兵的，为什么惊吓我的马！ 
English: Jiayu lost his temper and scolded, "You stinking soldier, why did you scare my horse!

古文：其人顾嘉祚曰： 眼看使于蠮蠛国，未知死所，何怒我焉。 
现代文：那人看了看嘉祚说： 眼看你就要出使去蠮蠛国，不知道将来死在什么地方，还对我发火呢！ 
English: The man looked at Jiayu and said, "Looking at you, you are about to be sent on a mission to Shandong Province. You don't know where you will die in the future, and you are still angry with me!

古文：嘉祚思其言不能解，异之。
现代文：嘉祚想来想去感到他的话不能理解，对此大为惊异。
English: Thinking about it, Jiayu felt that she couldn't understand his words, which surprised her.

古文：明复至朝，果为二相所召，迎谓曰： 知公迹素高，要公衔朝命充使。
现代文：第二天嘉祚又上了朝，果然被两个宰相所召见，二相迎士前来对他说： 我们知道您的行为功绩向来很高，所以让您带上朝廷的使命去充当使节。
English: The next day, Jiayu again went to the court, and was indeed summoned by the two prime ministers. The two attendants came to greet him and said, "We know that your deeds and achievements have always been very high, so let you take the mission of the court to serve as an envoy."

古文：今以公为卫尉少卿，往蠮蠛国报聘，可乎？ 
现代文：现在以您为卫尉少卿，前往蠮蠛国报到上任，可以吗？ 
English: Now, with you as the Junior Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, can you go to Shandong Province to report for duty?

古文：嘉祚辞以不才，二相日行文下。
现代文：嘉祚以自己没有能力为由极力推辞，两位宰相便在当天下达了行文命令。
English: Jiayu strongly declined on the grounds that he did not have the ability, and the two prime ministers issued a written order on the same day.

古文：嘉祚大恐，行至义井，复遇昨惊马人，谓嘉祚曰： 昨宰相欲令使远国，信乎。 
现代文：嘉祚非常恐惧，他走到义井，又遇见昨天惊吓他马的那个人，那人对嘉祚说： 昨天我就知道宰相要命令你出使遥远的国家，果然如此吧？ 
English: Jiayu was very frightened. He walked to Yei and met the man who had scared his horse yesterday. The man said to Jiayu: Yesterday I knew that the prime minister was going to order you to go to a faraway country. Is that really true?

古文：嘉祚下马拜之，异人曰： 公无忧也，且止不行。
现代文：嘉祚下马向他行礼，这个异人说： 您不用担忧，只管拖着不上路就是了。
English: When Jiayu dismounted and bowed to him, the stranger said, "You don't have to worry, just drag it and it won't get in the way."

古文：其二相头已悬枪刃矣，焉能怒公。 
现代文：那两个宰相的脑袋已经悬挂在枪刃上了，哪里还能对您发火呢？ 
English: The heads of those two prime ministers are already hanging on the edge of the gun, where else can they be angry with you?

古文：言毕不知所之。
现代文：说完，便不知去向了。
English: After that, I don't know where I'm going.

古文：间一日，二相皆诛，果如异人言矣。
现代文：隔了一天，两个宰相都被杀死了，果然像那个异人所说的一样。
English: A day later, both prime ministers were killed, just as the stranger had said.

古文：其蠮蠛国在大秦国西数千里，自古未尝通，二相死，嘉祚竟不去。
现代文：那个蠮蠛国远在大秦国以西数千里，自古以来未曾沟通过，两个宰相既然死了，嘉祚也就一直没有去。
English: That Qin State is thousands of miles to the west of the Great Qin State, and there has been no communication since ancient times. Since the two prime ministers have died, Jiayu has never been there.

古文：郑相如
现代文：郑相如
English: Zheng Xiangru

古文：郑虔工诗嗜酒，性甚闲放。
现代文：郑虔工于诗而嗜于酒，性格非常闲散豪放。
English: Zheng Qian is a poet with a penchant for alcohol. He is a very laid-back person.

古文：玄宗爱其旷达，欲致之郎署，又以其不事事，故特置广文馆，命虔为博士，名籍甚著。
现代文：唐玄宗喜爱他的旷达，想让他到官署里作郎中主持一个部门的工作，又因他不善于管理事务，所以就把他安置在广文馆，授给他博士衔，他的名声和职衔十分昭著。
English: Tang Xuan Zong loved his open-mindedness and wanted him to work in the government office as an assistant to preside over the work of a department, and because he was not good at managing affairs, he placed him in the Guangwen Museum and awarded him the title of doctor. His reputation and title are very well known.

古文：门庭车马，无非才俊。
现代文：门庭上来往出入的车马，座上客都是当时的才子学者。
English: The chariots and horses that came and went in and out of the gate courtyard, and the guests on the seats were all talented scholars of the time.

古文：有郑相如者，沧州人，应进士举入京，闻虔重名，以宗姓因谒，虔因之叙叔侄，见其老倒，未甚敬之，后数日谒，虔独与坐，问其艺业，相如笑谓虔曰： 叔未知相如，应以凡人遇，然人未易知。
现代文：有个叫郑相如的，是沧州人，参加选拔进士的考试来到京城，听说郑虔的赫赫大名，便以同宗同姓的名义去拜见他，郑虔因此与他以叔侄相称，见他老气横秋，并不怎么敬重他。过了几天相如又来拜见郑虔，郑虔一个人与他对坐，问他学的是哪门学问，相如笑着对他说： 叔并不了解相如，故用平常眼光看待我；然而，一个人确实不容易被别人了解。
English: There was a man named Zheng Xiangru, a native of Cangzhou, who came to Beijing to take part in the examination for the selection of young scholars. When he heard of Zheng Qian's great name, he went to visit him in the name of the same family and surname. Zheng Qian was therefore commensurate with him as an uncle and nephew. Seeing that he was old-fashioned, he did not respect him much. A few days later, Zheng Xiangru came to visit Zheng Qian again. Zheng Qian sat alone with him and asked him what kind of learning he was studying. Zheng Qian smiled and said to him: Uncle does not

古文：既见问，敢不尽其词，相如若在孔门，当处四科，犹居游、夏之右，若叔在孔门，不得列为四科。
现代文：既然问我，怎敢不把话说透彻呢？相如如果是孔门弟子，就该处在四科之列，居于游、夏之上；如果叔是孔门弟子，就不能列入四科。
English: Since you are asking me, how dare you not speak clearly? For example, if you are a disciple of Confucius, you should be in the four disciplines, above Yu and Xia; if you are a disciple of Confucius, you cannot be included in the four disciplines.

古文：今生不遇时而应此常调，但销声晦迹而已。 
现代文：我现在是因为生不逢时才应付这种科举考试的流行方式，为的是让自己的真相销声匿迹而已。 
English: I'm dealing with this popular method of the imperial examinations now because I was born at the wrong time, in order to make my own truth disappear.

古文：虔闻之甚惊，请穷其说。
现代文：郑虔听了非常惊异，便请他继续说下去。
English: Hearing this, Zheng Qian was very surprised and asked him to continue.

古文：相如曰： 孔子称其或继周者，虽百世可知之也，今相如亦知之。
现代文：相如说： 孔子自称有谁继承周朝大业，即使一百年后的事他也知道；如今相如也知道这件事情。
English: Zongru said, "Confucius claimed that he knew who would succeed the great cause of the Zhou Dynasty, even if it was a hundred years later; now Zongru also knows this.

古文：然国家至开元三十年，当改年号，后十五年，当有难。天下至此，兵革兴焉，贼臣篡位。
现代文：我看大唐国家到开元三十年就会改变年号，再往后十五年，国家当有灾难，至此，天下战争兴起，贼臣篡夺皇位。
English: I think that the Great Tang Dynasty will change its era name in the 30th year of the first century, and in the next 15 years, there will be a disaster in the country. At this point, a world war will break out, and a traitor will usurp the imperial throne.

古文：当此时，叔应授伪官，列在朝省，仍为其累。愿守臣节，可以免焉。
现代文：到那时，叔就会被任为叛贼政权的官员，排列在朝廷省署之中，后来仍然为此事受到拖累，尽管您愿意恪守为臣的节操，得以免除重罚。
English: At that time, my uncle would have been appointed as the top official of the traitor regime, ranked among the imperial departments, and later still be dragged down by this matter, although you are willing to abide by the discipline of being a vassal and be exempted from heavy punishment.

古文：此后苍生涂炭未已。
现代文：从今以后，黎民百姓将无休止地遭受涂炭践踏。
English: From now on, the people of Lebanon will be endlessly trampled on.

古文：相如今年进士及第，五选得授衢州信安尉，至三考，死于衢州。
现代文：相如今年能够考中进士，五选被授为衢州信安尉，到了三考，死于衢州。
English: Just like this year, he was able to pass the junior high school entrance examination, and he was awarded the title of Zhangzhou Xinyan Lieutenant for the fifth time. When he passed the third examination, he died in Zhangzhou.

古文：官禄如此，不可强致也。 
现代文：官禄命中就是这样，不能强求呀！ 
English: That's how it is with the official rank hit, you can't force it!

古文：其年果进士及第，辞虔归乡，及期而选，见虔京师，为吏部一注信安尉，相如有喜色，于是辞虔赴任。
现代文：那年相如果然考中了进士，辞别郑虔返回故乡，到了考期时又参加选拔，在京师见到郑虔，在吏部注册为信安尉，相如面带喜色，于是辞别郑虔前去赴任。
English: That year, Zheng Qian passed the entrance examination and returned to his hometown. When the examination period came, he participated in the selection. He saw Zheng Qian in the Beijing division and registered as a Xin'an lieutenant in the personnel department. He was so happy, so he said goodbye to Zheng Qian and went to work.

古文：初一考，问衢州考吏曰： 郑相如何。 
现代文：第一考时，郑虔询问衢州考官道： 郑相如怎么样？ 
English: During the first examination, Zheng Qian asked the Bozhou examiner: How is Zheng Xiangru?

古文：曰： 甚善。 
现代文：答道： 非常好。 
English: Answer: Very good.

古文：问其政，曰： 如古人。 
现代文：问其政绩，答道： 跟古人一样。 
English: Asked about his political achievements, he replied: Just like the ancients.

古文：二考又考之，曰，无恙。三考又问之，考吏曰： 相如校考后，暴疾不起。 
现代文：第二考时又参加了，说是身体尚好，第三考时郑虔又打听他的情况，考官说： 相如考试之后，暴病不起。 
English: During the second examination, he took part again, saying that his health was still good. During the third examination, Zheng Qian inquired about his condition, and the examiner said: Just like after the examination, he is very ill.

古文：虔甚惊叹，方思其言。
现代文：郑虔大为惊叹，于是想起相如原先说的话。
English: Zheng Qian was greatly surprised, and then remembered what he had said.

古文：又天宝十五年，禄山反，遣兵入京城，收诸官吏赴洛阳。
现代文：天宝十五年安禄山造反，派兵进入京城，收罗朝廷官吏送到了洛阳。
English: In the fifteenth year of Tianbao, An Lushan rebelled, sent troops into the capital, and sent imperial court officials to Luoyang.

古文：虔时为著作郎，抑授水部郎中。
现代文：郑虔当时是著作郎，被强行授予水部郎中职位。
English: Zheng Qian was a scholar at the time and was forcibly given the post of junior minister of water resources.

古文：及克复，贬衢州司户，至任而终。
现代文：安史之乱被平定之后，郑虔被贬为衢州司户，到了任上就死了。
English: After the Anshi Rebellion was quelled, Zheng Qian was demoted to the position of the governor of Zhangzhou and died in office.

古文：竟一如相如之言也。
现代文：这些情况竟然都像相如原先所说的一样。
English: All of these things turned out to be exactly as originally stated.

