古文：晏婴东方朔边韶袁次阳伊籍张裔张裕薛综诸葛恪费祎王戎妻邓艾安陵人杨修孙子荆蔡洪陆机
现代文：晏婴东方朔边韶袁次阳伊籍张裔张裕薛综诸葛恪费祎王戎妻邓艾安陵人杨修孙子荆蔡洪陆机
English: Baby in the East Yuan in the East Yuan in the East Zhang in the East Zhang in the East Zhang in the East Wang in the East Wang in the East Wang in the East Wang in the East Wang in the East

古文：晏婴
现代文：晏婴
English: 婴

古文：齐晏婴短小，使楚。
现代文：春秋时期，齐国晏婴身材矮小，出使楚国。
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the short-statured infant of Qi was sent to Chu.

古文：楚为小门于大门侧，乃延晏子。
现代文：楚国在大门旁边开一个小门迎请晏婴。
English: Chu opened a small gate next to the main gate to welcome the baby.

古文：婴不入，曰：使狗国，狗门入。
现代文：晏婴不走小门，说：出使狗国，入狗门。
English: The toddler refused to go through the small door, saying: "If you are sent to a dog country, go through the dog door."

古文：今臣使楚，不当从狗门入。
现代文：现在晏婴出使的是堂堂的楚国，不应当从狗门走进去。
English: It is the dignified state of Chu that is now being dispatched by the infant, and one should not enter it through the doggie door.

古文：王曰：齐无人耶？
现代文：楚王问：齐国没有人吗？
English: King Chu asked: Is there no one from Qi?

古文：对曰：齐使贤者使贤王，不肖者使不肖王。
现代文：晏婴回答说：齐国派遗贤德高尚的人出使贤德高尚的国王，派遣品德不好的人出使品德不好的国王。
English: Zou Ying replied, "Qi sent a man of high moral character to send a king of high moral character, and a man of low moral character to send a king of low moral character.

古文：婴不肖，故使王耳。
现代文：晏婴品德不好，因此出使楚王您哪。
English: You are a child with a bad moral character, and that is why King Chu has sent you.

古文：王谓左右曰：晏婴辞辩，吾欲伤之。
现代文：楚王对身旁的大臣们悄声说：晏婴善于雄辩，我想治治他。
English: King Chu said in a whisper to the ministers around him, "Xun Ying is good at eloquence. I want to cure him."

古文：坐定，缚一人来。
现代文：于是，楚王坐好后，武士们从外面绑着一个人进来。
English: As a result, after King Chu was seated, the samurai came in from the outside with a man tied up.

古文：王问：何谓者。
现代文：楚王指着阶下绑着的人问：他是什么人？
English: King Chu pointed to the man tied under the steps and asked: Who is he?

古文：左右曰：齐人坐盗。王视婴曰：齐人善盗乎？
现代文：左右回答说：是个犯偷窃罪的齐国人。楚王看着晏婴，问：齐人擅长偷窃吗？
English: Both sides replied, "He is a thief from Qi." King Chu looked at the baby and asked, "Are Qi people good at stealing?"

古文：对曰：婴闻桔生于江南，至江北为枳。
现代文：晏婴回答说：我听说桔生长在江南，移植到江北就变成了枳。
English: The toddler replied, "I heard that oranges grow in the south of the Yangtze River, and if they are transplanted to the north of the Yangtze River, they turn into toads.

古文：枝叶相似，其实味且不同。水土异也。
现代文：枝干，叶片都相似，它结的果实的味道却不同，是因为水土不一样啊。
English: The branches and leaves are similar, but the taste of its fruit is different, because the water and soil are different.

古文：今此人生于齐，不解为盗。
现代文：大王阶下绑着的这个人，在齐国时不懂得偷盗。
English: This man, who was tied up under the dao, did not know how to steal when he was in Qi.

古文：入楚则为盗，其实不同，水土使之然也。
现代文：来到楚国后就成了盗贼，本质变坏了。这是楚国的水土使他变坏的啊！
English: After coming to Chu, he became a thief, and his nature became bad. It was the soil and water of Chu that made him bad!

古文：王笑曰：寡人反取病焉。
现代文：楚王听后笑着说：我反倒被你给戏弄了！
English: After listening, King Chu smiled and said, "On the contrary, you played a trick on me!

古文：东方朔
现代文：东方朔
English: Dongfangshuo

古文：汉武帝尝问东方朔曰：先生视朕何如主？
现代文：汉武帝有一次问东方朔：先生看我是什么样的君主啊？
English: Emperor Hanwu once asked Dongfang Shuo: Sir, what kind of monarch am I?

古文：朔对曰：自唐虞之后，成康之际，未足以喻。
现代文：东方朔回答说：自唐虞之后，到周朝的成康盛世，没有一位国君可以和您相比。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "From the Tang Dynasty to the Zhou Dynasty, there is no ruler who can be compared to you.

古文：臣伏观陛下功德，陈五帝之上，在三王之右。
现代文：以臣看，皇上的功勋与品德、德居黄帝、颛顼、帝喾、康尧、虞舜五帝之上，功在夏禹、商汤、周武王之前。
English: In the eyes of the courtier, the emperor's merits and virtues ranked higher than those of the five emperors: Huangdi, Qi, Di, Kangxi, and Yu, and ahead of Xia Yu, Shang Tang, and King Zhou.

古文：非徒若此而已。
现代文：并非仅仅如此啊！
English: It's not just that!

古文：诚得天下贤士，公卿在位，咸得其人矣。
现代文：以诚待人，就能广泛地得到普天下仁人志士的支持和拥戴，朝中的文武百官，都能任用这些贤达的人。
English: If you treat people with sincerity, you will be able to widely receive the support and support of the benevolent people all over the world. Hundreds of civil and military officials in the court can appoint these sages.

古文：警若以周邵为丞相，孔丘为御史大夫，太公为将军，毕公高拾遗于后，卞严子为卫尉，皋陶为大理，后稷为司农，伊尹为少府，子贡使外国，彦闵为博士，子夏为太常，益为右扶风，季路为执金吾，契为鸿胪，龙逢为宗正，伯夷为京兆，管仲为冯翊，鲁般为将作，仲山甫为光禄，申伯为太仆，延陵季子为水衡，百里奚为典属国，柳下惠为大长秋，史鱼为司直，孔父为詹事，蘧伯玉为太傅，孙叔敖为诸侯相，王庆忌为期门，子产为郡守，夏育为鼎官，羿为旌头，宋万为式道侯上乃大笑，复问：今公孙丞相、儿大夫、董仲舒、夏侯始昌、司马相如、吾仁寿王、主父偃、朱买臣、严助、汲黯、胶仓、终军、严安、徐乐、司马迁之伦，皆辨知闳达，溢于文辞。
现代文：比如任周公、召公为丞相，任孔丘孔仲尼为御史大夫，任姜太公为将军，任周文王第十五子毕公高为拾遗在您身后检查有无遗漏，任骁勇的鲁国大夫卞严子为卫尉，任虞舜的臣子皋陶为大理寺卿，任虞舜的农官后稷为司农卿，任成谒的名臣伊尹为少府，任孔子的门生能言善辩的子贡为使节出使外国，任孔子的门生颜渊、闵指为博士，任擅长文字的子夏为太常卿，任伯益为右扶风，任季路为执金吾，任帝喾的儿子契为鸿胪卿，任龙逢为宗正掌管皇室亲族事物，任商朝孤竹君的儿子伯夷为京兆尹，任齐国的宰相管仲为拱已京师的冯翊郡守，任鲁国的巧匠公输班为掌管土木管透的将作大匠，任鲁献公次子德高望重的仲山甫为光禄大夫，任炎帝四狱的后裔申伯为太仆，任春秋时延陵吴公子季札为水衡都尉，任秦穆公的贤相百里奚为典属国，任鲁国大夫柳下惠为大长秋服侍皇后，任卫国大夫史鱼为协助丞相检举不法之事的司直，任宋国大夫孔父为詹事掌管皇后、太子的家事，任卫国人蘧瑗为太傅。任楚国令尹孙叔敖为诸侯相，任王庆忌为期门掌执兵麾从护卫，任郑国丞相公孙侨为郡守，任卫国勇士夏育为鼎官，任后羿为皇帝仪仗的排头兵，任宋万为司道侯为皇上在前开道汉武帝听到这里大笑不止，又问：现在在我朝为官的公孙丞相，儿大夫，董仲舒、夏侯昌、司马相如、吾仑寿王、主父偃、朱买臣、严助、汲黯、胶仓、终军、严安、徐乐、司马迁一类的人，他们都能言善辩，渊博通达，擅长文章辞赋。
English: For example, he appointed Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong as chancellor, he appointed Kongqiu Kongzhongni as minister of history, he appointed Jiang Taigong as general, he appointed Bi Gonggao, the fifteenth son of Zhou Wen Wang, as a scavenger to check whether there are any omissions behind you, he appointed the courageous Lu Guo Daofu, Yan Yan Zi, as a guard lieutenant, he appointed Yu Tao, a vassal of Yu Yu, as the master of Dali Temple, he appointed the agronomist Hou Yi, a vassal of Yu Yu, as the secretary of agriculture, he appointed Yi Yin, a famous vassal of

古文：先生自视。何与比哉？
现代文：先生看看你自己，在哪些方面可以和这些人相比？
English: Sir, look at yourself. In what ways can you be compared to these people?

古文：对曰：臣观其函齿牙，树颊胲，吐唇吻，擢项颐，结股脚，连脽尻，遗蛇其迹，行步禹旅。臣朔虽不肖，尚兼此数子者。
现代文：东方朔回答说：我看到他们的包牙齿，长而多毛的脸，往外翻的嘴唇，长脖突下巴，罗圈腿，大肥庇股，象蛇行的歪歪斜斜的脚印，一瘸一拐的走路的姿式，我虽然长相不怎么样，还能兼有上述这些人的这些特征。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "I saw their capped teeth, long, hairy faces, protruding lips, long, protruding necks, bowed legs, big fat thighs, serpentine, crooked footprints, and limping gait. Although I am not good-looking, I can still have these characteristics of these people.

古文：朔之进退澹词，皆此类也。
现代文：东方朔讲的，都是这样一类能进能退、随机应变的俏皮废话。
English: What Dongfang Shuo is talking about is all this kind of playful nonsense about being able to advance and retreat, and random contingency.

古文：上尝使诸数家射覆，置守宫于盆下。
现代文：一次，汉武帝让几位大臣玩猜物游戏。
English: Once, Emperor Hanwu let several ministers play a guessing game.

古文：射之，皆不能中。
现代文：汉武帝在盆内扣放着一只壁虎，让几位大臣们猜，都没有猜中。
English: Emperor Hanwu kept a gecko in a pot, and asked several ministers to guess, but none of them guessed correctly.

古文：朔自讚曰：臣尝受易，请射之。
现代文：东方朔自我吹虚说：我曾学习周易，请皇上让我猜猜。
English: Dongfang Shuo boasted: I once studied Zhou Yi, please let me guess.

古文：乃别蓍布卦而对曰：臣以为龙又无角，谓之为蛇又有足。
现代文：于是，他另用著草卜算一卦，回答说：我认为它是条龙又没有长角，我说它是条蛇又长着脚。
English: So he made another guess with the grass and answered, "I think it's a dragon without horns. I think it's a snake with legs."

古文：跂跂脉脉善缘壁，非是守宫即蜥蜴。
现代文：连续不断地爬行而且善于攀缘墙壁，不是壁虎就是蜥蜴。
English: Continuous crawling and good at climbing walls, either geckos or lizards.

古文：帝曰善，赐帛十匹，复使射他物。
现代文：汉武帝说：好！果然让你猜中了。
English: Han Wudi said, "Good! You've guessed it.

古文：连中，辄赐帛。时有幸倡郭舍人滑稽不穷，常侍左右。
现代文：当时，有一位汉武帝特别宠爱的歌舞杂技艺人叫郭舍人，能表演出各种各样的滑稽动作，经常伴侍在汉武帝身边。
English: At that time, there was a song and dance acrobatic artist named Guo Sheren, who was a special favorite of Emperor Hanwu. He could perform all kinds of antics and often accompanied Emperor Hanwu.

古文：曰：朔狂幸中耳，非至数也。
现代文：郭舍人喊叫道：东方朔侥幸猜中啦，不是真本事啊！
English: Guo Shiren shouted, "Dongfang Shuo guessed by chance, it's not a real skill!

古文：臣愿令朔复射。
现代文：我请求皇上让我放物叫东方朔猜。
English: I asked the emperor to let me cast a spell to guess the East.

古文：朔中之，臣榜百。不能中，臣赐帛。
现代文：他猜中了，打我一百板子；他没有猜中，请皇上赏赐给我帛。
English: If he guessed right, he would give me a hundred boards; if he didn't, he would ask the emperor to give me a gong.

古文：乃覆树上寄生，令朔射之。
现代文：于是，郭舍人将依附树上生长的寄生置放在盆底下，让东方朔来猜。
English: As a result, Guo Sheren placed the parasite growing on the tree under the bottom of the basin, and let Dongfang Shuo guess.

古文：朔曰：是窭薮也。
现代文：东方朔说：是头上顶盆用的垫圈。
English: Dongfang Shuo said, "It's a washer for the basin on top of the head."

古文：舍人曰：果知朔不能中也。
现代文：郭舍人大叫：我就知道你东方朔不能猜中嘛！
English: Guo Xieren shouted: I knew you couldn't guess correctly!

古文：朔曰：生肉为脍，干肉为脯。
现代文：东方朔说：生肉叫脍，干肉叫脯。
English: Dongfang Shuo said: raw meat is yakitori, dry meat is yakitori.

古文：著树为寄生，盆下为窭薮。
现代文：放在树上就叫寄生，放在顶盆底下就叫垫圈。
English: If it is placed on a tree, it is called a parasite, and if it is placed under the top basin, it is called a washer.

古文：上令倡监榜舍人，舍人不胜痛，呼謈。
现代文：汉武帝听了让倡人的主管杖打郭舍人。郭舍人被打得疼痛难忍，大声呼叫。
English: Emperor Hanwu listened and ordered the head of the advocates to beat Guo She'er with a cane. Guo She'er was beaten so painfully that he cried out loudly.

古文：朔笑之曰：咄，口无毛，声嗷嗷，尻益高。
现代文：东方朔笑着说：啊！嘴上没毛，喊声嗷嗷，屁股越抬越高！
English: Dongfang Shuo smiled and said: Ah! There is no hair on my mouth, my voice is hoarse, and my butt is getting higher and higher!

古文：舍人恚曰：朔擅抵欺天子从官，当弃市。
现代文：郭舍人非常生气，说：东方朔随意诽谤皇上的侍从官，罪当斩首示众！
English: Guo Sheren was very angry and said, "Dongfang Shuo slandered the emperor's attendants at will. He should be beheaded for his crime!"

古文：上问朔：何故诋之？
现代文：汉武帝问东方朔：你为什么诽谤我的侍从官啊？
English: Emperor Hanwu asked Dongfang Shuo: Why did you slander my attendant?

古文：对曰：臣非敢诋之，乃与为隐耳。
现代文：东方朔回答说：我不敢诽谤皇上的侍从官啊，我说的是隐语呀！
English: Dongfang Shuo replied: "I dare not slander the emperor's attendants, I am speaking in code!

古文：上曰：隐云何？
现代文：汉武帝问：你隐示的是什么啊？
English: Han Wudi asked: What are you implying?

古文：朔曰：夫口无毛者，狗窦也。
现代文：东方朔回答说：口无毛，指的狗洞。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "Mouth hairless, refers to the dog hole."

古文：声嗷嗷者，乌哺彀也。
现代文：声嗷嗷，指的是母鸟哺育小鸟崽。
English: Song thrush, refers to the mother bird feeding the chicks.

古文：尻益高者，鹤俯啄也。
现代文：尻益高，指的是鹤俯身吸食兔子。
English: The tail is high, referring to the crane leaning over to suck the rabbit.

古文：舍人不服，因曰：臣愿复问朔隐语，不知亦当榜。
现代文：郭舍人不服气，说：我请求再问东方朔隐语，如果说不出来也应该打板子。
English: Guo Xian was not convinced and said, "I request you to ask Dongfangshuo again. If you can't say it, you should hit the board."

古文：即妄为谐语曰：令壶龃，老柏涂，伊优亚，狋吽牙。
现代文：随即胡乱说道：今壶龃，老柏涂，伊优亚，狋吽呀。
English: Then he said randomly: "Now it's pottery, old pottery, Iyoa, and so on.

古文：何谓也？
现代文：你说说都隐含的什么？
English: What does that mean?

古文：朔曰：令者命也，壶者所以盛也。龃者齿不正也，老者人所敬也。柏者之廷也，涂者渐洳径也。伊优亚者，辞未穷也。狋吽呀者，两犬争也。
现代文：东方朔回答说： 令 是命， 壶 是盛器， 龃 齿不正， 老 人要敬， 柏 长在院庭中的树， 涂 渐渐潮湿的路径， 伊优亚 是词未穷， 狋吽呀 是两狗相争斗。
English: Dongfang Shuo replied, "Order is life, pot is a vessel, teeth are not right, the elderly should be respected, the cypress tree grows in the courtyard, the road is getting wet, Iouya is inexhaustible, and the fight is between two dogs.

古文：舍人所问，朔应声辄对，变诈鏠出，莫能穷者。
现代文：郭舍人胡乱问的这些话，东方朔立即应声，对答如流，一点也问不住他。
English: Guo Shiren asked these words randomly, Dongfangshuo immediately responded, and the answer was so fluent that he could not ask him at all.

古文：左右大惊。
现代文：所有在场的文武大臣们都非常惊讶。
English: All the ministers of culture and armed forces present were very surprised.

古文：以上朔为常侍郎，遂得爱幸。
现代文：汉武帝任命东方朔为常侍郎，长期得到宠爱。
English: Emperor Hanwu appointed Dongfang Shuo as a regular attendant, and he was favored for a long time.

古文：久之，伏日诏赐从官肉。大官丞日晏不来。
现代文：进入伏天后，一次，汉武帝下诏赏赐侍从官们肉，主持分肉的御膳总笼天很晚了也没有来。
English: Once, when Emperor Hanwu entered the Fuxun Dynasty, he issued an edict to reward his attendants with meat, but the head of the meal, who presided over the division of the meat, did not come until very late.

古文：朔独拔剑，谓其同官曰：伏日当蚤归，请受赐。
现代文：东方朔拔出宝剑对他的同事们说：伏天热肉容易坏，应当早点将肉拿回家去，请你们赶快接受赏赐吧。
English: Dongfang Shuo pulled out his sword and said to his colleagues: Fudian hot meat is easy to deteriorate, you should take the meat home early, please accept the reward quickly.

古文：即怀肉去。
现代文：说完，用剑砍块肉拿着走了。
English: After saying this, he chopped up a piece of meat with his sword and took it with him.

古文：大官奏之。朔入，上曰：昨赐肉，不待诏，以剑割肉而去之。
现代文：主管分肉的御膳总管将这件事情上报给汉武帝。东方朔来了后，汉武帝问：昨天我赏赐给你们肉，你不等着总管去分，自己割一块拿走，是怎么一回事啊？
English: The chief steward of the Imperial Cuisine, who was in charge of dividing the meat, reported the matter to Emperor Han Wudu. After Dongfang Shuo arrived, Emperor Han Wudu asked: Yesterday I rewarded you with meat, you didn't wait for the chief steward to divide it, you cut a piece and took it away. What's going on?

古文：何也？朔免冠谢。
现代文：东方朔摘下帽子表示敬意。
English: Dongfang Shuo took off his hat to show his respect.

古文：上曰：先生起自责。
现代文：汉武帝说：先生请起，自己责备自己吧。
English: Han Wudi said: Sir, please go ahead and blame yourself.

古文：朔再拜曰：朔来朔来，受赐不待诏，何无礼也？
现代文：东方朔再次拜谢，说：朔来朔来，受赏赐不等待分，怎么是无礼呢？
English: Dongfang Shuo thanked him again and said, "Shuo Lai Shuo Lai, how is it rude to receive a reward without waiting for it?

古文：拔剑割肉，一何壮也。
现代文：拔出宝剑割肉是何等豪壮的义举啊！
English: Pulling out a sword to cut meat is such a heroic act of righteousness!

古文：割之不多，又何廉也。
现代文：没有多割肉，又是何等廉洁啊！
English: There is not much meat cut, and what an incorruptible cow!

古文：归遗细君。又何仁也。
现代文：回到家中交给妻子，又是何等的仁爱啊！
English: Returning home and handing it over to his wife, what kindness!

古文：上笑曰：使先生自责，乃反自誉。
现代文：汉武帝笑着说：本来是让先生自己责备自己，你反而自己夸奖自己了啊！
English: Emperor Hanwu smiled and said, "Instead of letting you blame yourself, you praised yourself!

古文：复赐酒一石，肉百斤，归遗细君。
现代文：汉武帝说完，又赏赐给东方朔酒一石，肉百斤，让他拿回家中交给妻子。
English: When Emperor Hanwu had finished speaking, he also rewarded Dongfang Shuo with a stone of wine and a hundred pounds of meat, and told him to take it home and give it to his wife.

古文：边韶
现代文：边韶
English: Bentham

古文：后汉边韶字孝先，教授数百人。
现代文：五代时期，后汉有个叫边韶的人，字孝先，教授几百个弟子。
English: During the Five Dynasties period, there was a man in the Later Han Dynasty named Bentham, also known as Xiaoxian, who taught hundreds of disciples.

古文：曾昼日假寐，弟子私嘲之曰：边孝先，腹便便，懒读书，但欲眠。
现代文：一次，边韶白天睡觉。他的弟子暗中编一首顺口溜嘲笑他：边孝先，腹便便，懒读书，但欲眠。
English: On one occasion, when he was sleeping during the day, his disciple secretly made up a jingle to mock him: "Beng Xiaoxian is lazy, he has diarrhea, he doesn't want to study, but he wants to sleep."

古文：孝先潜闻之，应曰：边为姓，孝为字，腹便便，五经笥。
现代文：边韶偷偷听到弟子们说这首顺口溜后，应和道：边是姓，孝是字，大腹便便，那是装书的箱子。
English: After secretly overhearing his disciples talking about this jingle, Bentham agreed: "Bentham is a surname, filial piety is a character, a paunch is a poo, and that is a box to hold a book."

古文：但欲眠，思经事。
现代文：想睡觉，是为了思考经书上的事。
English: If I want to sleep, it's to think about what's in the Bible.

古文：寐与周公通梦，静与孔子同意。
现代文：睡时跟周公在梦中相互勾通，静卧是在跟孔老夫子交换怎样理解经义。
English: Sleep with Zhou Gong in a dream to hook up with each other, lying down is to exchange with the old man how to understand the meaning of the sutra.

古文：师而可嘲，出何典记。
现代文：你们随便嘲弄师长，这是那本经书上告诉你们的啊？
English: You mock the head teacher at will. Is this what the scripture tells you?

古文：嘲者大惭。袁次阳
现代文：编顺口溜嘲弄边韶的弟子们，听了后感到非常羞愧。袁次阳
English: Yuan Ziyang was very ashamed after listening to Hen's disciples mocking him.

古文：后汉袁次阳妻，扶风马季长女。
现代文：东汉时，扶风袁次阳的妻子，是扶风马季长的女儿。
English: In the Eastern Han Dynasty, the wife of Fu Feng Yuan Ziyang was the daughter of Fu Feng Ma Ji Chang.

古文：初婚装遣甚盛，次阳曰：妇奉箕帚而已，何乃过珍丽乎？
现代文：刚结婚时，娘家陪送的嫁妆特别丰厚，袁妻每天都精心梳妆打扮。袁次阳问妻子：已经作了媳妇，每天只是捧着箕畚、扫帚，料理家务而已。为什么这样过于打扮呢？
English: Yuan Ziyang asked his wife: "You have become a daughter-in-law, every day you just hold a broom and a broom and do housework. Why are you so overdressed?"

古文：对曰：慈亲垂爱，不敢违命。
现代文：袁妻回答说：我的父母陪送这么多的嫁妆是他们对我这个女儿的慈爱，我不能忤逆父母不用这些嫁妆。
English: Yuan's wife replied, "My parents sent such a large dowry as a token of their love for me, their daughter. I can't go against my parents and not use the dowry.

古文：君若欲慕鲍宣、梁鸿之高者，妾亦请从少君、孟光之事矣。
现代文：郎君如果想仰慕汉朝的鲍宣、梁鸿的高尚志节，为妻也一定效仿鲍宣的妻子少君、梁鸿的妻子孟艺，将饭菜高高地奉举到眉间来侍奉你啊！
English: If the husband wants to admire the high-mindedness of Bao Xuan and Liang Hong of the Han Dynasty, his wife must also follow the example of Bao Xuan's wife, Shao Jun, and Liang Hong's wife, Meng Yi, and serve you with the meal held high up to the eyebrows!

古文：次阳又问曰：弟先兄举，世以为笑。今处姊未适，先行可乎？
现代文：袁次阳又问：弟弟先于哥哥结婚，会被世人耻笑，现在你的姐姐还未出嫁呢，你先出嫁好吗？
English: Yuan Ziyang also asked: If a younger brother married before his elder brother, it would be laughed at by the world. Now your elder sister is still unmarried. Would you like to get married first?

古文：曰：妾姊高行殊邈，未遭良匹。
现代文：袁妻回答说：我姐姐品德高尚卓异，到现在还没有寻找到可以嫁给他的好丈夫。
English: Yuan's wife replied, "My sister is of high moral character and has not yet found a good husband to marry.

古文：不如鄙薄，苟然而已。
现代文：不象我啊这么卑下，管他好赖呢，找个男人嫁给他就算了。
English: Unlike me, who is so lowly, I don't care how much he hates me, I'll just find a man and marry him.

古文：次阳默然，不能屈。
现代文：袁次阳听了后沉默不语，但还不服气。
English: Yuan Ziyang was silent after listening, but he was still not convinced.

古文：帐外听者为惭。
现代文：在新房外面偷听人，很为袁次阳感到惭愧。
English: Yuan Ziyang was ashamed of eavesdropping on people outside the new house.

古文：伊籍
现代文：伊籍
English: Mexican nationality

古文：蜀先主以伊籍为左将军从事中郎，使吴。
现代文：蜀汉先主刘备任用伊籍为左将军行事中郎将，派他出使东吴。
English: Liu Bei, the ancestor of Shu Han, appointed an Iraqi as the left general and sent him as an envoy to Dongwu.

古文：孙权闻其才辨，欲逆折其辞。
现代文：吴王孙权听说他很有辩才，想逆着说话，借以打乱伊籍的思维。
English: Wu Wang Sun Quan heard that he was a great debater, and he wanted to speak out of turn in order to disrupt the thinking of the Iraqis.

古文：籍适入拜，权曰：劳事无道之君。
现代文：伊籍刚刚进入吴宫正殿叩拜吴主孙权，孙权开口说道：你这不是徒劳事奉无道的昏君吗？
English: The I Ching had just entered the main hall of the Wu Palace to worship the Lord of Wu, Sun Quan. Sun Quan opened his mouth and said, "Isn't it in vain that you serve the senseless, dim-witted prince?

古文：籍应声对曰：一拜一起，未足为劳。
现代文：伊籍应声回答道：一拜一起，不算什么操劳。
English: The Iraqi citizen replied, "It's not a big deal to pray together."

古文：吴主大惭，无语对。
现代文：吴主孙权听了深感惭愧，无话可答。
English: Wu Shuzhong Sun Quan was deeply ashamed and had nothing to say.

古文：张裔
现代文：张裔
English: Zhang Zi

古文：蜀张裔为益州太守，为郡人雍闿缚送孙权。
现代文：蜀汉益州太守张裔，被本郡人雍闿暗中绑架到东吴欲送给吴主孙权。
English: Zhang Zihong, the governor of Yizhou of Shu Han, was secretly kidnapped by the people of this county to East Wu to give it to Wu Shuzhu Sun Quan.

古文：武侯遣邓芝使吴，令言次从权请裔。
现代文：诸葛亮派遣邓芝出使东吴，让邓芝拜见孙权时在言谈中向孙权提出请张裔回蜀。
English: Zhuge Liang dispatched Deng Zhi to send an envoy to Dongwu, and when Deng Zhi met with Sun Quan, he proposed to Sun Quan to invite Zhang He to return to Shu.

古文：裔自至吴，流徙伏匿。
现代文：张裔自从被绑架到东吴后，便从雍闿手里逃出来各处流落躲藏。
English: After Zhang Rong was abducted to Dongwu, he escaped from Yongkang and went into hiding.

古文：权未之知，故许芝遣。
现代文：孙权并不知道他被绑架来，因此允许邓芝带他离吴回蜀。
English: Sun Quan did not know that he had been kidnapped, so he allowed Deng Zhi to take him away from Wu back to Shu.

古文：裔临发，乃引见。
现代文：临行前，张裔被引见去拜辞吴主孙权。
English: Before leaving, Zhang Xuan was introduced to the eulogy of Wu Shuzhongquan.

古文：问裔曰：蜀卓氏寡女，亡奔相如。
现代文：孙权问张裔：蜀中卓氏寡妇卓文君，跟司马相如私奔。
English: Sun Quan asked Zhang Zi: Zhuo Wenjun, the widow of Zhuo in Shuzhong, ran away with Sima Xiangru.

古文：贵土风俗，何以乃尔。
现代文：贵地的风俗怎么这样呢？
English: What is it with your customs?

古文：裔对曰：愚以为卓氏寡女，犹贤于买臣之妻。
现代文：张裔回答说：我认为卓氏寡妇卓文君，尽管跟人私奔，还比贵国吴县朱买臣的妻子嫌贫爱富易夫而嫁贤慧多了呢！
English: Zhang Rong replied, "I think that Zhuo's widow, Zhuo Wenjun, although she ran away with someone, is still much wiser than the wife of your country's Wuxian County, Zhu Mai Sheng, who hates poverty, loves wealth, and marries a rich man!

古文：张裕
现代文：张裕
English: Zhang Yu

古文：刘璋会涪，时张裕为从事，侍坐。
现代文：蜀汉先主刘备与刘璋在涪州相见。当时，张裕任刘障的从事，在旁边坐陪。
English: Liu Bei, the first lord of Shu Han, met Liu Ye in Ganzhou. At that time, Zhang Yu was engaged in Liu Ye's business and sat next to him.

古文：其人饶须，先主嘲之曰：吾涿县特多毛姓，东西南北，皆诸毛也。
现代文：张裕脸上长着连鬓胡须，刘备嘲笑他说：我的家乡河北涿县姓毛的特别多，东西南北，都是毛啊。
English: Zhang Yu's face was bearded, and Liu Bei laughed at him and said, "In my hometown of Handan County, Hebei Province, there are many surnames with the surname Mao. From east to west and north to south, they are all Mao."

古文：涿令称曰： 诸毛绕涿居乎！
现代文：涿县的县令自称为： 众多的毛绕着涿而居住啊！ 
English: The county magistrate of Handan County described himself as: "A lot of people live around Handan!

古文：裕即答曰：昔有作上党潞长，迁为涿令者，去官还家。
现代文：张裕听了反唇相讥说：从前有个人任上党潞长，后迁任涿县县令，辞官回家了。
English: Zhang Yu listened to the backlash and said: Once upon a time, there was a person who was appointed as the party secretary, and then moved to the county of Shixian, and then returned home.

古文：时人与书，欲署潞则失涿，署涿则失潞，乃署曰潞涿君。
现代文：当时有人给他写信，想在信头写 潞 就遗漏下 涿 ，写 涿 就遗下 潞 。于是，所兴写上 潞涿君 。
English: At that time, someone wrote to him that if he wanted to write  on the letterhead, he would omit, and if he wrote, he would omit. Therefore, he was interested in writing 君.

古文：先主大笑。
现代文：刘备听了后哈哈大笑。
English: Liu Bei laughed out loud after listening.

古文：先主无须，故裕云及之。
现代文：刘备脸上没长胡须，因此张裕这样讲。
English: Liu Bei did not have a long beard on his face, so Zhang Yu said this.

古文：薛综
现代文：薛综
English: Xue Siming

古文：吴薛综见蜀使张奉，嘲尚书令阚泽姓名，泽不能答。薛综下行乃云：蜀者何也？
现代文：东吴的薛综见到蜀汉的使臣张奉嘲笑尚书令阚泽的姓名，阚泽一时反驳不了，于是走到张奉面前说： 蜀 是什么？
English: Xue Zhan of Eastern Wu saw Zhang Bong, the envoy of Shu Han, mocking the name of Shang Shuling Heze. Heze could not refute it for a moment, so he walked up to Zhang Bong and said: What is Shu?

古文：有犬为独，无犬为蜀。横目句身，虫入其腹。
现代文：旁边有犬念 独 ，没有犬念 蜀 ；横 目  句 身， 虫 进入它的腹中。
English: Next to it, there is a dog named Sudoku, but no dog named Shu; next to it, an insect enters its belly.

古文：奉曰：不当复嘲君吴耶？
现代文：张奉说：我不应当再嘲笑您吴国的大臣啊。
English: Zhang Feng said, "I should no longer laugh at you, Minister of the State of Wu."

古文：综应声曰：无口为天，有口为吴。君临万邦，天子之都。
现代文：薛综应声回答说：无 口 为天，有 口 为吴，我们吴国君临在万邦之上，是天子的国都啊！
English: Xue Zomei replied in response: "There is no mouth for heaven, but there is a mouth for Wu. We, the king of Wu, are present above all nations, and are the capital of the son of heaven!

古文：于是众坐喜笑，而奉无以对也。
现代文：在坐的人听后哈哈大笑。张奉却没话可讲了。
English: After listening to the people sitting there, they burst into laughter. Zhang Feng had nothing left to say.

古文：诸葛恪
现代文：诸葛恪
English: Zhuge Ke

古文：诸葛恪对南阳韩文晃，误呼其父字。晃诘之曰：向人子而字父，子为是礼也？
现代文：诸葛恪有一次无意中失口叫了韩文晃父亲的名字，韩文晃责问他：当着儿子的面叫父亲的名子，您认为这样做有礼貌吗？
English: Zhuge once inadvertently blurted out the name of Han Wen Ao's father. Han Wen Ao scolded him: "Do you think it's polite to call your father by his name in front of your son?"

古文：恪大笑，答曰：向天穿针而不见者，非不明，意有所在耳。
现代文：诸葛恪大笑着说：农历七月七日夜，妇女们向天穿纫七孔针，不是不知道天是黑的，难纫针，而是另有寓意啊！
English: Zhuge Ke laughed loudly and said: On the night of the seventh day of the seventh lunar month, women thread a seven-hole needle to the sky. It is not that they do not know that the sky is dark and it is difficult to thread the needle, but it has another meaning!

古文：孙权使太子嘲恪曰：诸葛元逊食马矢一石。
现代文：吴主孙权指使太子孙亮嘲弄诸葛恪说：诸葛之逊吃马粪一石！
English: The grandson of the Lord of Wu, Sun Quan, instructed the prince's son, Liang, to mock Zhuge, saying: "The son of Zhuge eats one stone of horse manure!

古文：恪答曰：臣得戏君，子得戏父。
现代文：诸葛恪问：做臣子的可以戏弄国君吗？做儿子的可以戏弄父亲吗？
English: Zhuge Ke asked: Can a courtier play tricks on the sovereign? Can a son play tricks on his father?

古文：答曰：明太子未敢。
现代文：太子明回答说：我不敢这样做啊。
English: Prince Akira replied, "I wouldn't dare to do that."

古文：上曰：可。
现代文：吴主孙权接口说：可以这样做。
English: Wu Shuzhong and Sun Quan said to each other: You can do this.

古文：恪曰：乞令太子食鸡卵三百枚。
现代文：诸葛恪听了后，说：请皇上命令太子吃鸡蛋三百只。
English: After listening attentively, Zhuge said, "Please ask the emperor to order the prince to eat 300 eggs."

古文：上问恪曰：人令君食马矢，君令人食鸡卵，何也？
现代文：孙权问：太子让你吃马粪，你让太子吃鸡蛋，这是为什么呀？
English: Sun Quan asked: The prince asked you to eat horse manure, and you asked the prince to eat eggs. Why is that?

古文：恪答曰：所出同耳。
现代文：诸葛恪回答说：都出自同一缘由啊！
English: Zhuge Ke replied, "They all come from the same source!"

古文：吴主大笑。
现代文：孙权听了，哈哈大笑。
English: Sun Quan listened and laughed out loud.

古文：费祎
现代文：费祎
English: Fei Yao

古文：孙权尝飨蜀使费祎，逆敕群臣：使至，伏食勿起。祎至，权为辍食，而群下不起。
现代文：一次，吴主孙权宴请蜀汉使臣费祎，事先告诉参加宴会的群臣们说：呆会儿，费祎来了，诸位爱卿装成没看见，继续低头吃喝，不用站起来迎接。
English: On one occasion, Emperor Wu Sun Quan invited the Shu Han envoy Fei Yao to a banquet, and told the attendants of the banquet in advance: "Wait a minute, Fei Yao is coming, everyone, pretend you didn't see him, continue to eat and drink with your heads down, and don't stand up to greet him."

古文：祎嘲云：凤凰来翔，麒麟吐哺；驴骡无知，伏食如故。
现代文：费祎来了后，只孙权一个人停下杯筷，其他人没有一人起身迎接他。费祎看到这种情形，立即嘲讽地说：凤凰飞来了，麒麟停下杯筷表示欢迎。愚昧无知的驴骡，却照旧在那里闷头继续吃。
English: After Fei Yao arrived, only Sun Quan stopped the cup and chopsticks, and no one else got up to greet him. Fei Yao saw this situation and immediately mockingly said: The phoenix flew in, and the unicorn stopped the cup and chopsticks to welcome him. The ignorant donkey continued to eat there.

古文：诸葛恪曰：爱植梧桐，以待凤凰。
现代文：诸葛恪听后抬起头来，说：我们喜爱裁植梧桐树，是为了迎接凤凰来。
English: After listening to Zhuge Ke, he looked up and said: We like to plant sycamore trees in order to welcome the phoenix.

古文：有何燕鸟，自称来翔。
现代文：从哪飞来的燕雀，自称是凤凰？
English: Where did the sparrow come from, claiming to be a phoenix?

古文：何不弹射，使还故乡。
现代文：为什么不同弹弓射它，将它赶回它的家乡去。
English: Why not shoot it with a slingshot and drive it back to its homeland?

古文：咸称善。
现代文：众臣起身叫好。
English: All the courtiers stood up and cheered.

古文：王戎妻
现代文：王戎妻
English: Wang Rongzuma

古文：晋王戎妻。语戎为卿。
现代文：晋人王戎的妻子，称王戎为卿。
English: The wife of Jin man Wang Rong, she called Wang Rong her lord.

古文：戎谓曰：妇那得卿婿，于礼不顺。
现代文：王戎对妻子说：妻子怎么能称丈夫为卿呢？这样称呼在礼上讲不通啊。
English: Wang Rong said to his wife: "How can a wife call her husband a lord? Such a name is not clear in the ceremony."

古文：答曰：我亲卿爱卿，是以卿卿；我不卿卿，谁当卿卿。
现代文：妻子回答说：我亲卿爱卿，所以才卿卿。我不卿卿，那么谁来卿卿？
English: The wife replied, "My dear sir, I love sir, that's why I'm sir. I'm not sir, so who is sir?

古文：戎笑遂听。邓艾
现代文：王戎听后笑了。邓艾
English: Wang Rong smiled after listening. Deng Ai was startled.

古文：邓艾口吃，语称艾艾。晋文王戏之曰：艾艾为是几艾？
现代文：邓艾口吃，经常说：艾艾晋文王戏虐邓艾说：艾艾到底是几个艾呀？
English: Deng Ai stuttered and often said, "Ai Ai Jin," Wang Wen playfully abused Deng Ai and said, "How many Ai Ai are there?

古文：对曰：凤兮凤兮，故是一凤。
现代文：邓艾回答说：哦凤兮哦凤兮因此只是一凤。
English: Deng Ai replied: Oh phoenix Oh phoenix So it's just a phoenix.

古文：安陵人
现代文：安陵人
English: Anling people

古文：晋钟毓兄弟警悟过人，每嘲谑，未尝困踬。
现代文：晋朝时，钟毓兄弟机敏、顿悟超过一般的人，每次与人戏谑，从未被难倒过。
English: During the Jin Dynasty, the Zhongyu brothers were more astute and insightful than the average person. Every time they joked with others, they were never stumped.

古文：尝语会，闻有女善调谑，往观之。
现代文：一次，钟毓对钟会道：听说有个女人非常会调笑戏谑，咱们去会会她啊？
English: Once, Zhongyao said to Zhonghui: I heard that there is a woman who is very good at teasing, let's meet her?

古文：于是盛饰共载，行至西门。一女子笑曰：车中央殊高。
现代文：于是两兄弟穿着华美的衣服，乘坐一辆车去会这个女子。他们走到西门，遇见一个女人指着他们笑着说：车中央怎么那么高哇？
English: So the two brothers dressed in fancy clothes and rode in a car to meet the woman. They went to the west gate and met a woman who pointed at them and smiled and said: "How come the middle of the car is so high?

古文：毓等初不觉，车后门生云：向已被嘲。
现代文：两兄弟起初一点也没有察觉出什么来。坐在车后面的弟子说：方才你们已经被人家戏谑啦！
English: The two brothers didn't notice anything at first. The disciple sitting in the back of the car said, "You've just been made fun of!"

古文：钟愕然。
现代文：钟氏兄弟听后怔住了。
English: The Chung brothers choked up.

古文：门生曰：中央高，两头低也，盖言羝也。
现代文：弟子说：那个女人说 中央高，两头低 意思是说 原来是两头公羊 。
English: The disciple said, "That woman said, 'The middle is high and the two ends are low,' meaning that it was actually two rams.

古文：兄弟多髯故云。杨修
现代文：钟毓兄弟二人，都长着浓密的胡须，因此被那个女人戏称为两头公羊。杨修
English: The two Zhongyao brothers both had thick beards, so the woman jokingly called them two rams.

古文：晋杨修九岁，甚聪慧。
现代文：晋朝时，有个叫杨修的男孩，才九岁，特别聪明、慧颖。
English: At the time of the Jin Dynasty, there was a boy named Yang Xiu, only nine years old, who was particularly clever and clever.

古文：孔君平诣其父，不在。
现代文：一次，孔君平到家来找杨修的父亲。
English: Once, Kong Junping came home to find Yang Xiu's father.

古文：杨修时为君平设。
现代文：偏巧杨父不在家，杨修代父亲摆放便宴招待孔君平。
English: Coincidentally, Yang's father was not at home, so Yang Xiu arranged a banquet on behalf of his father to invite Kong Junping.

古文：有果杨梅，君平以示修：此实君家果。
现代文：餐桌上有一道菜是鲜杨梅。孔君平指着桌上的杨梅问杨修：这杨梅是你杨家的果吗？
English: One of the dishes on the table was fresh poplar. Kong Junping pointed to the poplar on the table and asked Yang Xiu: Is this poplar your fruit?

古文：应声答曰：未闻孔雀是夫子家禽也。
现代文：杨修应声回答说：我没听说过孔雀是您孔家的家禽啊！
English: Yang Xiu replied in response: "I haven't heard that peacocks are the poultry of your Kong family!

古文：孙子荆
现代文：孙子荆
English: Sun Zi Jing

古文：晋孙子荆年少时欲隐，语王武子云：当枕石漱流。
现代文：晋朝人孙子荆，年轻时想当隐士，对王武子说：应当头枕石头，口饮溪水。
English: Sun Zi Jing, a man of the Jin Dynasty, who wanted to be a hermit when he was young, said to Wang Wu Zi: "You should put your head under a stone and drink stream water.

古文：误曰漱石枕流。
现代文：失口说成了 应当口饮石头，头枕溪水。
English: He ended up saying that he should drink stones by mouth and brook water by the head.

古文：王曰：流可枕，石可漱乎？
现代文：王武子问：溪水可以头枕，石头怎么可饮呢？
English: Wang Wu Zi asked: Creek water can be used as a pillow, but how can stone be used as a drink?

古文：子荆曰：所以枕流，欲洗其耳；所以漱石，欲砺其齿。
现代文：孙子荆这才知道刚才失口说错了，于是狡辩道：我之所以头枕溪水，是为了洗耳朵；之所以饮石头，是想磨砺牙齿啊！
English: It was only then that Sun Zi Jing knew that he had just made a slip of the tongue, and so he made a cunning argument: The reason why I put my head under the brook was to wash my ears; the reason why I drank the stone was to sharpen my teeth!

古文：蔡洪
现代文：蔡洪
English: Cai Hong

古文：晋蔡洪赴洛，洛中问曰：募府初开，群公辟命。
现代文：晋朝人蔡洪从江南去京城洛阳应举。洛阳城里有人问他：现今刚开始招幕僚，你们这些人就拼命挤入京城。
English: Cai Hong, a member of the Jin Dynasty, went from the south of the Yangtze River to Luoyang, the capital, to answer the call. Someone in Luoyang asked him: "You have just begun to recruit staff, and you people are desperately crowding into the capital.

古文：求英奇于仄陋，采贤俊于岩穴。
现代文：这里在卑微的人中选拔英才奇士，在山野岩洞中招览贤人俊杰。
English: Here, the wizards and sages are selected from among the humble, and the wise men and wizards are recruited from the caves in the mountains and fields.

古文：君吴楚之士，亡国之余，有何异才，而应斯举？
现代文：你们这些从江南吴、楚之地来到京城的人，原本是国破之家后侥幸生存下来的人，有什么特殊的才能来应此召？
English: Those of you who came to Beijing from the south of the Yangtze River, from the land of Wu and Chu, who were originally lucky to survive after the collapse of the nation, what special talents do you have to answer this call?

古文：蔡答曰：夜光之珠，不必出于盟津之河；盈握之璧，不必采于昆仑之山。
现代文：蔡洪回答说：价值连城的夜光宝珠，不必产在周武王会盟诸侯的孟津水中；一手握不过来的美玉，不必采在昆仑山上。
English: Cai Hong replied: The priceless glow-in-the-dark gems don't have to be produced in the Mengjin water of the Zhou Dynasty; the gems that can't be grasped with one hand don't have to be mined on Mount Kunlun.

古文：大禹生于东夷；文王生于西羌。
现代文：有名的贤君大禹出生在东边夷人的蛮荒之地，以贤德著称的周文王出生在西羌胡人居住的地方。
English: The famous sage King Dayu was born in the wild land of the barbarians in the east, and King Zhou Wen, famous for his virtue, was born in the place where the Xishu Hu people lived.

古文：圣贤所出，何必常处。
现代文：圣明贤良的人，为什么必得产生在一个固定的地方。
English: Why do holy, virtuous people have to be born in a fixed place?

古文：昔武王伐纣，迁顽民于洛邑，诸君得无是其苗裔乎？
现代文：当年周武王伐纣胜利后，迁移顽固不化的人到洛阳来。那么，你们这些现在的洛阳人，能不是这些顽民的后裔吗？
English: In that year, after the victory of King Zhou of Wu, the stubborn people migrated to Luoyang. So, can you, the current Luoyang people, be the descendants of these stubborn people?

古文：陆机
现代文：陆
English: Land plane

古文：陆机诣王武子，武子有百斛羊酪。
现代文：陆机到王武子家作客，王武子家存有一百斛羊奶酪。
English: The land plane went to Wang Wuzi's house as a guest. Wang Wuzi's house has a hundred yakitori cheeses.

古文：指以示之曰：卿东吴何以敌此。
现代文：王武子指着这些羊奶酪问陆机：在你们东吴，有什么名菜可以跟羊奶酪相媲美？
English: Wang Wu Zi pointed to these sheep cheeses and asked the lander: In your Dongwu, what famous dish can be compared to sheep cheese?

古文：陆曰：有千里莼羹，未下盐豉耳。
现代文：陆机回答说：我们东吴有千里那儿产的莼菜烹制的羹汤、未下那儿产的盐豆豉，都是跟羊奶酪一样好吃的佳肴啊！
English: The land machine replied, "In East Wu, we have yakitori soup made from leeks grown thousands of miles away, and yakitori made from soybeans grown thousands of miles away, which are as delicious as goat cheese!"

古文：机在坐，潘安至，陆便起。
现代文：陆机正坐着呢，潘安来了，陆机站起身来。
English: The land plane was sitting, Pan An arrived, and the land plane stood up.

古文：安仁曰：清风至，乱物起。
现代文：潘安说：清风吹来了，各种废弃东西都被刮起来了。
English: Pan An said, "The wind is blowing, and all kinds of waste things are being blown up.

古文：陆应声答曰众鸟集。
现代文：陆机听后应声回答说：群鸟集到一块儿来啦！
English: After listening, the lander responded: "The birds have gathered together!

