古文：来阿八赤
现代文：来阿八赤，宁夏人。
English: Come to Ahacheng, Ningxia.

古文：来阿八赤，宁夏人。父术速忽里，归太祖，选居宿卫，继命掌膳事。
现代文：父术速忽里归附太祖。
English: His father, Jutsu Sokuryo, was made the grand ancestor.

古文：宪宗即位，大举伐宋，攻钓鱼山，命诸将议进取之计，术速忽里言于帝曰： 川蜀之地，三分我有其二，所未附者巴江以下数十州而已，地削势弱，兵粮皆仰给东南，故死守以抗我师。
现代文：宪宗即位，大举伐宋，攻钓鱼山，命诸将商议进取之计，术速忽里建议 ：川蜀之地，三分我有其二，还未归附的只是巴江以下数十州而已，地小势弱，兵粮皆靠东南供给，故死守以抗我师。
English: When Emperor Xianzong ascended to the throne, he launched a large-scale campaign against the Song Dynasty and attacked the Diaoyu Mountains. He ordered his generals to discuss the best strategy, and they quickly came up with a suggestion: In the land of Sichuan and Shandong, I have two-thirds of the land, and only a few dozen states below the Bajiang River have not yet been annexed. The land is small and weak, and the soldiers' grain is supplied from the southeast, so they must defend themselves against my division.

古文：蜀地岩险，重庆、合州又其藩屏，皆新筑之城，依险为固，今顿兵坚城之下，未见其利。
现代文：蜀地险要，重庆、合州又为其屏障，且都是新筑之城，依险固守。今我虽屯兵于城下，不能夺取。
English: Shu is in danger, Chongqing and Hezhou are its barriers, and they are all newly built cities, and they are firmly defended by danger. Although I have troops under the city now, I can't capture it.

古文：曷若城二城之间，选锐卒五万，命宿将守之，与成都旧兵相出入，不时扰之，以牵制其援师。
现代文：何不于二城之间，选精兵五万，命有威望的老将镇守，与成都我军相呼应，不时出兵侵扰，以牵制敌人的援军。
English: Why not between the two cities, select 50,000 elite soldiers, and have a prestigious veteran guard the town, echoing Chengdu's army, and from time to time send troops to intrude to contain the enemy's reinforcements.

古文：然后我师乘新集之锐，用降人为乡导，水陆东下，破忠、涪、万、夔诸小郡，平其城，俘其民，俟冬水涸，瞿唐三峡不日可下，出荆楚，与鄂州渡江诸军合势，如此则东南之事一举可定。
现代文：然后我军用降人为向导，水陆东下，破忠、涪、万、夔诸小郡，平其城，俘其民。俟冬季水小，瞿塘三峡不日可攻下。然后出荆州，与鄂州渡江军会师，如此则东南之事一举可定。
English: Then, our military forces will act as a guide, go eastward by land and sea, break the small counties of Zhongzhong, Yunnan, Wanzhou, and Shandong, level their cities, and capture their people. In winter, the water is small, and the Three Gorges of Shantang can be conquered in no time. Then, go to Jingzhou, and join the division with the Ezhou Wujiang Army, so the southeast can be decided in one fell swoop.

古文：其上流重庆、合州，孤危无援，不降即走矣。 
现代文：上游重庆、合州孤立无援，守军不降即逃。 
English: Upstream Chongqing and Hezhou were isolated and helpless, and the defenders fled without surrendering.

古文：诸将曰 攻城则功在顷刻 ，反以其言为迂，卒不用。
现代文：然而诸将认为 攻城则功在顷刻 ，术速忽里是迂腐之谈，不用。
English: However, the generals thought that attacking the city would be done in an instant, and that it was unnecessary to be pedantic.

古文：宋都统甘顺自夔州溯流西上，乘舟来攻。
现代文：于是，阿八赤奉命去监元帅纽邻军，以遏止宋人援兵，驻于重庆下游之铜罗峡，夹江依山建垒。宋都统甘顺自夔州逆江西上，救援重庆。
English: As a result, Ahacheng was ordered to supervise the neighboring army of Marshal Nu to stop the reinforcement of the Song people, stationed in Tongluo Gorge in the lower reaches of Chongqing, and built a fortress between the river and the mountain.

古文：阿八赤预积薪于二垒，明火鼓噪，矢石如雨，顺流而进。
现代文：阿八赤已预先积薪于两岸，宋军至，燃火呐喊，箭石如雨，从上游顺流进攻。
English: The Ahacheng Red Army had already accumulated pay on both sides of the Straits. The Song Army arrived, shouting with fire and arrows like rain, and attacked from upstream.

古文：宋人力战不能支，退保西岸，敛兵自固。
现代文：宋军不能抵抗，退保西岸，收兵固守。
English: Unable to resist, the Song army withdrew to the west coast and conscripted soldiers to defend it.

古文：黎明复至，阿八赤身率精兵，缘崖而下，战舰复进，宋人败走，杀伤数千人。
现代文：第二天黎明，宋军又发起进攻，阿八赤亲率精兵，缘山边而下，战舰顺流进击，宋军败走。宪宗崩，阿八赤随父赶回燕京。
English: At the dawn of the next day, the Song Army launched another attack. Ahachi Chikara led his elite soldiers down the mountainside, and the warships advanced down the river. The Song Army was defeated and fled. When Emperor Xianzong died, Ahachi Chikara followed his father back to Yanjing.

古文：帝闻而壮之，赐银二铤。宪宗崩，阿八赤从父倍道归燕。
现代文：世祖即位，询问川蜀战事，阿八赤详细报告战况，并奏告他父亲曾提出的战略。
English: When Shizu ascended the throne, he inquired about the war in Sichuan and Shandong, and Aba Red Army reported the war situation in detail, and reported the strategy that his father had proposed.

古文：世祖即位，问以川蜀之事，阿八赤历陈始末，诵其父前所言以对，世祖抚掌曰： 当时若从此策，东南其足平乎！
现代文：世祖感慨说： 当时若采纳你父亲的战略，足以平定东南。
English: The ancestor said with emotion: If your father's strategy had been adopted at that time, it would have been enough to pacify Southeast Asia.

古文：朕在鄂渚，日望上流之声势耳。 
现代文：朕在鄂州每天在盼望上游军势之进展。 
English: In Ezhou, I am looking forward to the progress of the upstream army every day.

古文：至元七年，南征襄樊，发河南、北器械粮储悉聚于淮西之义阳。
现代文：至元七年，元军南征襄樊，调发河南、河北的军械粮草于淮西之义阳。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army went south to conquer Xiangfan, and the military grain and grass of Henan and Hebei were transferred to Yiyang in Huaxi.

古文：虑宋人剽掠，命阿八赤督运，二日而毕。
现代文：怕宋军剽掠，命阿八赤督运，只两天就运完了。
English: Afraid of Song's army's plunder, he ordered the Ahachi Red Admiral's transport, which was completed in just two days.

古文：十四年，立尚膳院，授中顺大夫、同知尚膳院事。
现代文：十四年，设立尚膳院，授阿八赤为中顺大夫、同知尚膳院事。
English: Fourteen years later, the Shangzheng Institute was established, and Ah Hacheng was awarded the title of Zhongshun Doctor and Tongzhi Shangzheng Institute.

古文：十八年，佩三珠虎符，授通奉大夫、益都等路宣慰使、都元帅。
现代文：十八年，授通奉大夫、益都等路宣慰使、都元帅，佩三珠虎符。
English: In the 18th year, he was awarded the titles of Feng Dafu, Yidu and so on, and Marshal of the Capital, wearing the three-bead tiger emblem.

古文：发兵万人开运河，阿八赤往来督视，寒暑不辍。
现代文：发兵万人开运河，由阿八赤督工，寒暑不停。
English: Millions of soldiers were sent to open the canal, and the work was supervised by the Aba Red Guards. The cold and heat were incessant.

古文：有两卒自伤其手，以示不可用，阿八赤檄枢密并行省奏闻，斩之以惩不律。运河既开，迁胶莱海道漕运使。
现代文：士兵们反对，有两卒自伤其手以表示不肯服役，阿八赤斩之以警告其他人。运河竣工后，阿八赤任胶莱海道漕运使。
English: The soldiers objected, and two of them cut their hands to show their unwillingness to serve, so the Aba Red Army sent a warning to the others. After the completion of the canal, the Aba Red Army was appointed as the ferryman of the Jiaolai Canal.

古文：二十一年，调同佥宣徽院事。
现代文：二十一年，调同佥宣徽院事。
English: In the twenty-first year, he was transferred to the Su Xuan Hui Academy.

古文：辽左不宁，复降虎符，授征东招讨使。
现代文：辽左人民反对元朝的统治，朝廷再降虎符，授阿八赤为征东招讨使，率兵镇压。
English: The people of Liao and Zuo opposed the rule of the Yuan Dynasty. The imperial court then lowered the banner of the tiger and appointed Ahacheng as the envoy to recruit soldiers for the eastern campaign. He led the troops to suppress the rebellion.

古文：阿八赤招徕降附，期以自新，远近帖然。
现代文：阿八赤用招降的办法，平息辽左的反抗。
English: Ahacheng used the method of inviting surrender to quell Liao Zuo's resistance.

古文：二十二年，授征东宣慰使、都元帅。
现代文：二十二年，授征东宣慰使、都元帅。
English: In 1922, he was awarded the title of Dong Xuan Yue Envoy and Do Marshal.

古文：皇子镇南王征交趾，授湖广等处行中书省右丞，召见，世祖亲解衣衣之，并金玉束带及弓矢甲胄赐焉。
现代文：皇子镇南王征交趾，授阿八赤为湖广等处行中书省右丞。世祖召见他，把自己的衣服脱下来给他穿上，赐金玉带及弓箭甲胄，二十四年，改任湖广等处行尚书省右丞。
English: The Emperor summoned him, took off his own clothes and put them on him, gave him a gold and jade belt and a bow and arrow armor, and in 24 years, he was reappointed as the right-hand man of the book of the book of the book of the book of the book of the book of the book of the book.

古文：二十四年，改湖广等处行尚书省右丞，诏四省所发士马，俾阿八赤阅视。九月，领中卫亲军千人，翊导皇子至思明州。贼阻险拒守，于是选精锐与贼战于女儿关，斩馘万计，余兵弃关走。
现代文：诏令四省所调发来征交趾兵马，均由阿八赤检阅。九月，阿八赤率领中卫亲军千人陪同皇子至思明州。敌军恃险拒守，元军选精锐与交趾军战于女儿关，斩敌万人，其余弃关而逃。
English: The imperial edict ordered the four provinces to send soldiers and horses to collect the cousins, all of which were reviewed by the Aba Red Army. In September, the Aba Red Army led a thousand soldiers of the central guard to accompany the prince to Siming. The enemy army refused to defend, and the elite of the former army and the cousins fought in the daughter pass, killing tens of thousands of enemies, while the rest abandoned the pass and fled.

古文：于是大军深入，进至交州，陈日烜空其城而遁。
现代文：元军深入，进至交州。交趾王陈日火亘弃城而逃。
English: The Yuan army advanced deep into Jiaozhou, and the king of Jiaozhou, Chen Rongfei, abandoned the city and fled.

古文：阿八赤曰： 贼弃巢穴而匿山海者，意待吾之敝而乘之耳。
现代文：阿八赤说： 贼弃巢穴而藏于山海，是想等我军不利之时乘机反攻。
English: Ahacheng said: Thieves abandon their nests and hide in the mountains and seas, hoping to take advantage of the opportunity to counterattack when our army is at a disadvantage.

古文：将士多北人，春夏之交瘴疠作，贼弗就擒，吾不能持久矣。
现代文：我军将士多是北方人，春夏之交这里疾病流行，我军不能在此持久不去。
English: Most of the soldiers in our army are northerners. Diseases are prevalent here in spring and summer, and our army cannot stay here for long.

古文：今出兵分定其地，招降纳附，勿纵士卒侵掠，急捕日烜，此策之善者也。 
现代文：如今应分兵攻占其地，招降士民，切禁士卒劫掠百姓，急捕日火亘，此为良策。 
English: Nowadays, it is a good strategy to divide the army to occupy the land, recruit and demote the soldiers and civilians, forbid the soldiers and civilians to loot and plunder the people, and quickly capture the enemy.

古文：时日烜屡遣使约降，欲以赂缓我师。诸将皆信其说，且修城以居而待其至。
现代文：这时，日火亘多次遣使来约降，欲以钱物来延缓元军的进攻，诸将皆相信日火亘是诚心投降，修城定居等待。
English: At this time, Nikka Watanabe repeatedly sent envoys to negotiate a surrender, wanting to delay the attack of the Yuan army with money and goods. All generals believed that Nikka Watanabe was sincerely surrendering, rebuilding the city, settling down and waiting.

古文：调万安军达鲁花赤。
现代文：日长月久，军队缺粮，日火亘不仅未来降，而且拥众占据竹洞、安邦海口。
English: The days are long, the army is short of grain, and the fire is not only in the future, but also the fans occupy the bamboo cave and Anbang Haikou.

古文：平黎蛮有功，迁雷州路总管，卒。
现代文：阿八赤率兵进攻。日夜奋战，交趾军败逃。
English: Ahachi led the attack. They fought day and night, but were defeated and fled.

古文：孙完者不花，同知潮州路总管府事；次秃满不花、也先不花、太不花。纽璘纽璘，珊竹带人。
现代文：而元军将士多染疾病，不能再守，所得的关隘皆失守，只得准备班师。在班师回国途中，遭交趾军不断袭击，阿八赤中毒箭而死。纽璘，珊竹带人。
English: However, many of the former soldiers contracted diseases and were no longer able to defend themselves, and all of the gains they had made were lost, so they had to prepare a squadron. On the way back to the country, the squadron was constantly attacked by the Koji army, and Abaka died of arrow poisoning. Nyuchon, Shantake and others accompanied him.

古文：祖孛罗带，为太祖宿卫，从太宗平金，戍河南。
现代文：祖父孛罗带为太祖宿卫，随太宗平金国，戍守河南。
English: His grandfather, Yao Luo, was the great-grandfather of Sukui, and he followed the great-grandfather to Pingjin Province and governed Henan Province.

古文：父太答儿，佐宪宗征阿速、钦察等国有功，拜都元帅。
现代文：父亲太答儿，辅佐宪宗征阿速、钦察等国有功，拜都元帅。
English: His father, Ta Ta'er, assisted Zongzheng Zongzheng Ahao, Qincha and other national heroes, and became a marshal of Baidu.

古文：岁壬子，率陕西西海、巩昌诸军攻宋，入蜀。癸丑，与总帅汪田哥立利州。甲寅，攻碉门、黎、雅等城。乙卯，入重庆，获都统制张实。
现代文：宪宗二年，太答儿率陕西西海、巩昌诸军征讨宋属四川地区；三年与总帅汪田哥建立利州；四年攻碉门、黎、雅等城；五年，入重庆，俘获宋都统制张实。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Emperor Tadateru led the armies of Shaanxi, the West Sea and Gongchang to conquer the Song-ruled Sichuan region; in the third year, Emperor Tadateru established Lizhou with the commander-in-chief Wang Tiange; in the fourth year, Emperor Tadateru attacked the cities of Shimen, Lijiang and Ya; in the fifth year, Emperor Tadateru entered Chongqing and captured the Song capital Zhangshi.

古文：是岁卒。
现代文：这年去世。
English: He died that year.

古文：纽璘伟貌长身，勇力绝人，且多谋略，常从父军中。
现代文：纽璘体格魁伟，勇力过人，足智多略，常随父亲征战。
English: Niulong has a great physique, great courage, and great footwork. He often goes to war with his father.

古文：丁巳岁，宪宗命将兵万人略地，自利州下白水，过大获山，出梁山军直抵夔门。
现代文：宪宗七年，奉诏领兵万人经略四川，自利州下白水，过大获山，出梁山军，直抵夔门。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, he issued an edict to lead ten thousand soldiers through Sichuan, from Lishu to Shimo-Baishui, and from Shimo-Baishu to Shan.

古文：戊午，还钓鱼山，引军欲会都元帅阿答胡等于成都。
现代文：八年，回到钓鱼山，计划与都元帅阿答胡会师成都。
English: Eight years later, when he returned to Diaoyu Mountain, he planned to visit Chengdu with Marshal Ata Hu.

古文：宋制置使蒲择之，遣安抚刘整、都统制段元鉴等，率众据遂宁江箭滩渡以断东路。
现代文：宋制置使蒲择之遣安抚使刘整、都统制段元鉴等据守遂宁江之箭滩渡，截断纽璘去成都的道路。
English: During the Song Dynasty, Pu Zi was sent to pacify Liu Ching and Duan Yuan Jian was sent to pacify Liu Ching and Duan Yuan Jian to defend the Jiantan Wadu of Suining River and cut off the road to Chengdu.

古文：纽璘军至，不能渡，自旦至暮大战，斩首二千七百余级，遂长驱至成都。
现代文：纽璘与宋军大战，自晨至暮斩杀宋军二千七百余人，长驱直至成都。
English: From the morning to the evening, more than 2,700 soldiers of the Song Army were killed in the great battle between New Taipei and the Song Army. They were driven to Chengdu.

古文：成都、彭、汉、怀、绵等州悉平，威、茂诸蕃亦来附。
现代文：蒲择之又命杨大渊等守剑门及灵泉山，自己率四川兵攻成都。阿答胡死，推纽璘为都元帅。纽璘率诸将大破敌军于灵泉山，乘胜追杀韩勇，蒲择之兵大溃。
English: Pu Zi also ordered Yang Dayuan and others to guard Jianmen and Lingquan Mountain, and he led the Sichuan soldiers to attack Chengdu. Atahu died, pushing Niu Wei to be the marshal of the capital. Niu Wei led the troops to defeat the enemy army in Lingquan Mountain, chased Han Yong with victory, and the soldiers of Pu Zi were routed.

古文：纽璘奉金银、竹箭、银销刀，遣速哥入献。
现代文：纽璘进围云顶山以堵住宋军归路，云顶山守将投降。
English: New Taipei encircled Yunding Mountain to block the Song Army's way back, and the Yunding Mountain guards surrendered.

古文：密旨督战，不得已出师，大败文焕军，获其将二人，斩之，遂班师。
现代文：于是成都、彭、汉、怀、绵等州均平定，威、茂诸蕃也归附。朝廷正式拜纽璘为都元帅。这时纽璘军只有二万人，分五千命拜延八都鲁等守成都，自率一万五千由马湖开赴重庆。
English: As a result, Chengdu, Peng, Han, Huai, Mian and other prefectures were all conquered, and Wei and Mao Zhulun were also annexed. The imperial court officially made Niu Jun the marshal of the capital. At this time, Niu Jun's army was only twenty thousand, with five thousand lives to defend Chengdu, and fifteen thousand from Ma Hu to Chongqing.

古文：文焕以兵袭其后，纽璘战却之。中统元年，世祖即位，纽璘入朝，赐虎符及黄金五十两、白金二千五百两、马二匹。
现代文：宪宗八年冬，帝进军至大获山，纽璘率其步骑军号称五万，战船二百艘从成都出发，遣张威率五百人为前锋，水陆并进，计划封锁重庆江面，以断绝吴、蜀间的通道。纽璘放舟东下，至涪州，造浮桥，屯军于桥之南北两岸，以截断宋军的援兵。宋将吕文焕攻打涪之浮桥，被纽璘大败，俘获二将。中统元年，世祖即位，纽璘入朝，赐他虎符及黄金五十两、白金二千五百两、马二匹。
English: In the winter of the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the imperial army marched to Dafu Mountain. Niu Jun, leading his cavalry and infantry, claimed to have fifty thousand men. Two hundred warships set out from Chengdu. Zhang Wei, leading five hundred men, was sent as the vanguard. They marched on land and sea, planning to blockade the Chongqing River to cut off the passage between Wu and Shu. Niu Jun sailed eastward to Zhangzhou, and built a floating bridge. The troops were stationed on the north and south banks of the bridge to cut off the reinforcements of the Song Army. Song attacked Lu Wenhuan on the floating bridge, was defeated

古文：纽璘遣梁载立招降黎、雅、碉门、岩州、偏林关诸蛮，得汉、番二万余户。
现代文：纽璘派梁载立去招降黎、雅、碉门、岩州、偏林关等地的诸民族，得汉、番地二万余户。
English: New Taipei sent Liang Zi Li to recruit all ethnic groups in Lijiang, Ya, Shimen, Iwashu, Yuelin Pass and other places, and more than 20,000 households were recruited.

古文：四年，为刘整所谮，征至上都，验问无状，诏释之。
现代文：不久，又诏令速哥将其四川兵收陕西诸军隶属于纽璘，使他镇守奉、巩，唐兀等地。
English: Soon after, he also ordered Hayago to subordinate his Sichuan soldiers to the armies of Shaanxi Province and subordinate them to Niugong, making him the garrison of Feng, Gong, Tang and other places.

古文：还至昌平，卒。
现代文：三年，在沪州击败宋吕文焕军，将泸州民迁于成都和潼州。
English: Three years later, he defeated Song Lvwenhuan's army in Huzhou and moved the people of Zhangzhou to Chengdu and Zhangzhou.

古文：子也速答儿。
现代文：四年，自上都还归昌平而卒。
English: Four years later, it was returned to Changping from the top.

古文：也速答儿勇智类其父，至元十一年，入见世祖，以属行枢密院火都赤，使习兵事。
现代文：也速答儿，纽璘之子，其智勇同他父亲一样。至元十一年入见世祖，令他隶属于行枢密院火都赤学习军事。
English: He was also quick to reply that the son of Nu Nu was as wise and courageous as his father. In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, he entered the world of ancestors, making him subordinate to the Imperial Privy Council to study military affairs.

古文：从围嘉定，以三千人至三龟、九顶山相地形势，败宋安抚昝万寿兵，斩首五百级，以功赐虎符，授六翼达鲁花赤。
现代文：后参加进攻嘉定的战争，他带领三千人至三龟、九顶山侦察地势，击败宋安抚昝万寿军，斩敌五百人，因功赐虎符，授六翼达鲁花赤。
English: After that, he took part in the attack on Jiading. He led 3,000 men to the Three Turtles and the Nine Peak Mountains to reconnoiter the terrain, defeated the Song and Wan Shou armies, and killed 500 enemies. He was awarded the Tiger Emblem and the Six Wings of the Red Dahlia for his service.

古文：昝万寿寻遣部将李立以嘉定、三龟、九顶、紫云诸城寨降。
现代文：昝万寿遣部将李立献嘉定、三龟、九顶、紫云诸寨投降。
English: Zou Wanzhong's troops surrendered the villages of Li Li Xian, Jiading, Sanche, Jiuding and Ziyun.

古文：又从行枢密副使忽敦率兵徇下流诸城，皆望风来附。
现代文：也速答儿又随行枢密副使忽敦率兵攻取下游诸城。
English: He also hastily replied that he would accompany the vice-envoy of the Privy Council, Hu Dun, to lead the troops to capture the downstream cities.

古文：忽敦以兵二万会东川行枢密院合答围重庆，岁余不下，帝命行枢密副使不花代将。
现代文：忽敦以二万兵力会合东川行枢密院合答的军队围攻重庆，一年多也未攻下。世祖命行枢密副使不花取代忽敦等。
English: Hudong gathered 20,000 troops and marched to Dongchuan. The army of the Privy Council besieged Chongqing, but did not capture it for more than a year. Shizu ordered the vice-minister of the privy council to replace Hudong and so on.

古文：不花将兵万余至城下，也速答儿率二十余骑攻其门。
现代文：不花领兵万余至重庆城下，也速答儿率二十余骑攻城，宋军都统赵安出战。
English: It didn't cost more than 10,000 yuan to lead the troops to the outskirts of Chongqing, and more than 20 cavalrymen were quickly dispatched to attack the city. Zhao An, the general of the Song Dynasty, took part in the battle.

古文：宋都统赵安出战，也速答儿三入其军，再挟猛士以出。
现代文：也速答儿攻宋军阵营三进三出，斩首五百余人，大军四集，赵安开城门投降，制置使张珏逃跑，元军追至涪州擒获。
English: He also quickly attacked the Song Army camp three times in and three times out, beheaded more than five hundred people, four sets of troops, Zhao An opened the city gate and surrendered, made Zhang Ye escape, and chased the Yuan Army to Zhangzhou and captured it.

古文：大兵四集，斩首五百余级。赵安开门降，制置使张珏遁，追至涪州擒之。捷闻，帝赐玉带、钞五千贯，授西川蒙古军马六翼新附军招讨使，迁四川西道宣慰使，加都元帅。
现代文：捷报传至京师，世祖赐也速答儿玉带及钞五千贯，授西川蒙古军马六翼新附军招讨使，后调任四川西道宣慰使，加都元帅。
English: The news of the victory spread to the Beijing division, and the founder of the dynasty also quickly gave him a jade belt and five thousand rupees in banknotes. He was awarded the West Sichuan Mongolian Army Horse Six Wings New Attached Army Recruiting Envoy, and later transferred to the Sichuan West Road Recruiting Envoy, and the Katu Marshal.

古文：罗氏鬼国亦奚不薛叛，诏以四川兵会云南、江南兵讨之。
现代文：罗氏鬼国之亦奚不薛反叛，世祖诏令四川、云南、江南合力征讨。
English: Luo's ghost country also rebelled against Xue, and Emperor Zhao ordered Sichuan, Yunnan, and Jiangnan to fight together.

古文：至会灵关，亦奚不薛遣先锋阿麻、阿豆等将数万众迎敌，也速答儿驰入其军，挟阿麻、阿豆出，斩之。
现代文：大军至会灵关，亦奚不薛遣先锋阿麻、阿豆等率兵数万迎战。也速答儿冲入敌军，俘阿麻、阿豆斩之。
English: When a large army arrived at Lingguan, he sent the vanguard Ama, Azu, and tens of thousands of soldiers to fight. He also rushed into the enemy army, captured Ama and Azu, and killed them.

古文：亦奚不薛惧，率所部五万余户降。
现代文：亦奚不薛害怕了，率所部五万余户投降。
English: Yixing Bu Xue was afraid, and led more than 50,000 households to surrender.

古文：以功拜西川等处行中书省右丞，加赐金帛鞍辔。
现代文：也速答儿因功拜四川行中书省右丞，加赐金帛鞍辔。
English: He was also quickly awarded the title of Shusho Ujo for his service in the Sichuan campaign, as well as the title of Kinkaku Kansho.

古文：西南夷雄左、都掌蛮得兰右叛，诏以兵讨降之，改四川等处行枢密副使。
现代文：西南夷雄左、都掌蛮之得兰右反叛，也速答儿奉命讨平，因改任四川行枢密副使。
English: He was ordered to quell the right-wing rebellion in the southwestern part of Yixiong Province and the right-wing rebellion in the central part of Yixiong Province, and was appointed as the vice-minister of the privy council in Sichuan Province.

古文：冬，乌蒙蛮阴连都掌蛮以叛，诏以兵会云南行院拜答力进讨。
现代文：是年冬，乌蒙蛮暗中联合都掌蛮反叛，也速答儿奉诏率兵与云南行院拜答力共同进讨，擒乌蒙蛮。
English: In the winter of the year, the Wumeng rebels secretly united and rebelled, and they also hastened to march forward together with the Yunnan Gangyuan and Baidu.

古文：也速答儿擒乌蒙蛮，帝赐玉带、织金服，迁蒙古军都万户，复赐银鼠裘，镇唐兀之地。
现代文：也速答儿因功升为蒙古军都万户，镇守唐兀之地。
English: He was also quickly promoted to the Mongolian army due to his merits, and became the town guard of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：进同知四川等处行枢密院事，仍居镇。成宗即位，拜四川等处行中书省平章政事。
现代文：后又进为同知四川行枢密院事。成宗即位，拜四川行中书省平章政事。
English: Later, he went to Sichuan as a member of the Privy Council. Chengzong ascended to the throne, and Heungzang, the Minister of Education and Culture, visited Sichuan to pay homage.

古文：武宗时，由四川迁云南，加左丞相，仍为平章政事。
现代文：武宗时，也速答儿由四川调至云南，加左丞相，仍为平章政事。
English: At the time of Wu Zong, he was also quickly transferred from Sichuan to Yunnan, and he was promoted to minister of the left, but he was still a member of the Taira clan.

古文：父也柳干，幼隶皇子岳里吉为卫士长。
现代文：南征叛蛮中感染瘴毒，回到成都病卒。阿剌罕，姓札剌儿氏。祖父拨彻，侍奉太祖，攻城夺地，累有战功。
English: He was infected with scabies during the Southern Expedition and returned to Chengdu as an invalid. He was born in Ajhang, surnamed Zhaoyer. His grandfather, Zichie, served the great-grandfather, attacked the city and conquered the land, and gained a lot of military exploits.

古文：岁乙未，从皇子阔出、忽都秃南征，累功授万户，迁天下马步禁军都元帅。及大将察罕卒，也柳干领其职，拜诸翼军马都元帅，统大军攻淮东、西诸郡。
现代文：太宗时征陇北、陕西，拨彻身先士卒，以身殉国。父也柳干，太宗七年，随皇子阔出、忽都秃南征，因有功为天下马步禁军都元帅，大将察罕死后，又拜为诸翼军马都元帅，统大军攻淮东、淮西诸郡。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong's conquest of northern Shandong and Shaanxi, Liu Gan, the father of Emperor Taizong, was seven years old. He followed Emperor Gaozong to conquer the south, and was awarded the title of Marshal of the Imperial Horse Cavalry, and after the death of General Cao Han, he was awarded the title of Marshal of the Imperial Horse Cavalry, and led the army to invade eastern Huai and western Huai.

古文：戊午，战死扬州。
现代文：宪宗八年战死于扬州。
English: Kenzong died in the eight-year war in Yangzhou.

古文：阿剌罕与璮战于老仓口，败之。璮伏诛，授都元帅，赐金虎符、银印。
现代文：中统三年，李王举兵反叛，朝廷派大军讨伐，阿剌罕败李王于老仓口，因功授都元帅，赐金虎符、银印。
English: In the third year of the Middle Reunification, King Li raised an army to rebel, and the imperial court sent a large army to fight against him. The emperor defeated King Li at Laokangkou, and awarded him the title of Marshal of the Capital, the Golden Tiger, and the Silver Seal.

古文：至元四年春，改上万户，从都元帅阿术伐宋。
现代文：至元四年春，随都元帅阿术伐宋。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Marshal Ah Jiu of the Song Dynasty accompanied the capital.

古文：九月，师次襄阳西安阳滩，逆战宋兵，败之。
现代文：九月，率军至襄阳西之安阳滩，击败宋军。
English: In September, he led his army to Anyang Beach west of Yangyang and defeated the Song army.

古文：五年，大军围襄樊，阿剌罕守南面百丈山、漫河滩，兵累交，宋不能师。十年春，樊城破，襄阳降。
现代文：五年，蒙军围襄樊，阿剌罕守南面百丈山、漫河滩，多次打败宋军。十年春，大军攻克襄、樊。
English: In the fifth year, the Mongolian army besieged Xiangfan, and the Ao Han defended the southern Baizhang Mountain and the Manhe Beach, repeatedly defeating the Song Army. In the spring of the tenth year, the army conquered Xiangfan and Yunnan.

古文：十一年秋，丞相伯颜与阿术会师襄阳，遣阿剌罕率诸翼军攻郢、复诸州。十月，夺郢州南门堡。
现代文：十一年秋，丞相伯颜与阿术会师襄阳，遣阿剌罕率诸翼军攻郢、复诸州，十月夺取郢州之南门堡。
English: In the autumn of the eleventh year, the chancellor Bo Yan and the teacher of the Ah Jiu Hui, Yang Yang, sent the winged army led by Ah Yuhan to attack and restore Zhoushou, and in October to seize the southern gate of Zhoushou.

古文：丞相伯颜、阿术亲率骑兵行视汉阳城壁，欲取汉口渡江。
现代文：丞相伯颜、阿术亲率军视察汉阳城堡，欲取汉口渡江。
English: The prime minister, Bo Yan, and the army led by Ah Xiu Qian inspected the Hanyang Castle and wanted to take Hankou across the river.

古文：宋人以精兵扼汉口，乃遣阿剌罕帅蒙古骑兵倍道兼行，击破沙芜堡，遂入江，取鄂州。
现代文：宋以精兵扼守汉口，伯颜遣阿剌罕率蒙古骑兵攻占沙芜堡，得以入大江，攻取鄂州。
English: Song guarded Hankou with his elite soldiers, while Bo Yan sent the Mongolian cavalry under the command of Ajanghan to capture Shajing Fort, which enabled him to enter the Dajiang River and capture Ezhou.

古文：阿剌罕同断事官杨仁风东略寿昌，得米四十万斛，遂统左翼军顺流东下，沿江州郡悉降，乃抚辑其人民。十二年六月，加昭毅大将军、蒙古汉军上万户，屯驻建康。
现代文：阿剌罕同断事官杨仁风向东攻取寿昌，得米四十万斛，统左翼军顺流而下，沿江州郡相继降服。至元十二年六月，加阿剌罕昭毅大将军、蒙古汉军上万户，屯驻建康。
English: In June of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, together with the adjudicator Yang Renfeng, the general Akhan conquered Shuchang to the east, gained 400,000 baht of rice, led the left-wing army down the river, and surrendered successively along the Jiangzhou County. By June of the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the general Akhan Zhaoyi and the Mongolian Han army had settled in Jiankang.

古文：先是，宋广德守张濡杀国信使廉希贤、严忠范等于独松关，及阿剌罕军次安吉州上柏镇，濡率兵来拒战，大败之，斩首二千级，生擒其副将冯翼，戮于军前。
现代文：丞相伯颜奉诏回朝，由阿剌罕治理行省事务，拜中奉大夫、参知政事。伯颜回军后，分三路并进，阿剌罕率部由西路趋溧水、溧阳，攻破银树东坝，在护牙山庆丰坊一带与宋军多次战斗，共斩杀敌军二万余人，擒将校七十余人。接着又破建平县，进攻广德军独松关，至抵安吉州上柏镇，大败宋广德守将张濡，斩首二千级，擒杀副将冯翼，濡逃走，元军追杀于途中。
English: After returning to the army, he marched in three directions at the same time. He led his troops from the west to Surabaya and Shenyang, and broke through the East Yinchuan Dam. He fought with the Song Army many times in the vicinity of Qingfengfang, Foga Mountain, and killed more than 20,000 enemy troops and more than 70 officers. He then broke through Jianping County and attacked the Guangde Army at Dusongguan, and arrived at Shangbai Town, Anji Province. He defeated the Song Guangde Commander Zhang Nul, beheaded 2,000 soldiers, killed the Vice-Commander Feng Ying, and fled.

古文：濡遁走，追斩之。十三年春，宋以国降，诏阿剌罕同左丞董文炳率高兴等，攻浙东温、台、衢、婺、处、明、越及闽中诸郡，降其运使、提刑等五百人。
现代文：十三年春，宋朝降元，阿剌罕奉诏同左丞董文炳率高兴等攻浙东温、台、衢、婺、处、明、越及福建州郡。
English: In the spring of the 13th year, when the Song Dynasty was downgraded to the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Anhan, with the approval of the Emperor Zhao and the left-handed general Dong Wenjun, was pleased to attack the counties of East Zhejiang, Taiwan, Yunnan, Shandong, Sichuan, Ming, Yue and Fujian.

古文：追袭宋嗣秀王赵与〈木睪〉至安福县，与〈木睪〉以军三万来拒战，阿剌罕身先士卒，率高兴、撒里蛮等渡江，鏖战四十余里，斩其步帅观察使李世达，生擒与〈木睪〉及其将吏百八十人，悉斩之，获其铜印五、军资器仗无算。
现代文：追击宋秀王赵与鉳至安福县。赵与鉳以三万兵进行抵抗，阿剌罕身先士卒，率高兴、撒里蛮等渡江，鏖战四十余里，斩宋军步帅观察使李世达，生擒秀王赵与鉳及将吏百八十余人，全部斩首。缴获铜印五颗及无数军械。
English: They chased Zhao and Yao of Song Xiu Wang to Anfu County. Zhao and Yao resisted with thirty thousand soldiers, with Ah Nhan being the first to cross the river. They fought for more than forty miles, and beheaded Li Shida, the Song army's field marshal, Zhao and Yao and more than one hundred and eighty generals. They captured five bronze seals and countless pieces of military equipment.

古文：泉州蒲寿庚降。
现代文：至泉州，蒲寿庚降。
English: To Quanzhou, Pudong downgraded.

古文：江南平，以参知政事佩金虎符，行江东宣慰使。
现代文：江南平。阿剌罕作为参知政事兼江东宣慰使，佩金虎符。
English: Nanping, Jiangsu Province. As a member of the Council of Elders and an envoy to the east of the Yangtze River, Ah Gan wears a gold tiger emblem.

古文：十四年，入觐，进资善大夫、行中书省左丞，俄迁右丞，仍宣慰江东。
现代文：十四年，入朝，晋升为资善大夫、行中书省左丞，不久升为右丞，仍兼江东宣慰使。
English: In his 14th year, he entered the imperial court and was promoted to Shizen no daibu (assistant doctor) and Shusho no zojo (assistant secretary of the left) during his service. He was soon promoted to Ujo no zojo (assistant secretary of the right) and continued to serve as Koto no senju no suke.

古文：既袭千户，从大帅兀良合歹征云南，身先行阵。
现代文：承袭其父卜花千户之职。曾随大帅兀良合台征云南，回来后侍奉太子世祖。
English: He inherited the position of his father, Bu Hwa Chun Hwa. He had accompanied the great general, Hao Liang, to conquer Yunnan, and after his return he served the prince's ancestor.

古文：师还，事世祖于潜邸。至元九年，命驰驿督诸军攻襄阳。
现代文：至元九年，阿塔海奉命督军攻襄阳。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Atahai was ordered to lead the army to attack Xiangyang.

古文：襄阳下，第功授镇国上将军、淮西行枢密院副使。筑正阳东西城。
现代文：襄阳攻克后，因功授镇国上将军、淮西行枢密院副使，筑正阳东西城。
English: After the conquest of Xiangyang, he was awarded the title of General of the State, Vice-Minister of the Privy Council of Huaixi, and built the east and west cities of Zhengyang.

古文：五月霖雨，宋将夏贵乘淮水溢，来争正阳。
现代文：五月大雨，宋将夏贵乘淮河水涨，来攻正阳。
English: During the heavy rains in May, Song general Xia Gui took advantage of the rising waters of the Huai River to attack Zhengyang.

古文：阿塔海率众御之，贵走，追至安丰城下而还。
现代文：阿塔海率众抵御，贵军退走，元军追至安丰城而还。
English: Attahai led the crowd to resist, your army retreated, the Yuan army chased to Anfeng City and returned.

古文：拜中书右丞、行枢密院事。
现代文：阿塔海拜为中书右丞、行枢密院事。
English: Atahai Bai was a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the Privy Council.

古文：渡江，与丞相伯颜军合。克池州。
现代文：率军渡江与丞相伯颜会师，攻克池州。
English: He led the army of Watarie to meet the division of the Prime Minister Bo Yan and conquered Chishu.

古文：十二年，师次建康。宋镇江摄守石祖忠遣使乞降。
现代文：至元十二年，元军进至建康，宋镇江守将石祖忠遣使乞降。
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Yuan army advanced to Jiankang, and Song Zhenjiang sent Shi Zu Zhong to beg for surrender.

古文：扬州守将李庭芝闻之，遣兵突围出击。阿塔海率师救之，宋兵望风退走。
现代文：扬州守将李庭芝闻讯，遣兵突围出击，阿塔海率师援救石祖忠，宋兵望风退走。
English: Yangzhou garrison commander Li Tingzhi heard the news, sent troops to break out of the encirclement and attack, Atahai led a division to rescue Shi Zuzhong, and Song soldier Wang Feng retreated.

古文：时真、泰诸城尚为宋守，镇江地扼襟喉，城壁不固，阿塔海乃立木栅，以保障居民。
现代文：此时，真州、泰州诸城尚为宋朝所有，镇江地扼长江咽喉，但城墙不坚固，阿塔海建立木栅以保障居民。
English: At this time, the cities of Zhenzhou and Taizhou were still owned by the Song Dynasty, and the Zhenjiang region was the throat of the Yangtze River, but the city walls were not strong, and Atahai built wooden grates to protect the residents.

古文：又分兵屯瓜洲，以绝扬州之援。
现代文：又分兵屯驻瓜洲，切断扬州的援兵。
English: Another detachment was stationed in Guazhou, cutting off reinforcements from Yangzhou.

古文：宋将张世杰、孙虎臣帅舟师陈于江中焦山下，其势甚张，阿塔海与平章阿术登南岸督诸军大破之。
现代文：宋将张世杰、孙虎臣率水军列阵于焦山之下，声势甚大，阿塔海与平章阿术登南岸督军大破宋师。
English: Song ordered the naval forces led by Zhang Shijie and Sun Huchen to line up at the foot of Mount Jiao, and they made a great noise. Atahai and Pingzhang Ahshu landed on the south coast and defeated Song's army.

古文：宋殿帅张彦与平江都统刘师勇袭吕城，遣万户怀都击之，斩彦。
现代文：宋殿帅张彦与平江都统刘师勇袭击吕城，阿塔海遣万户击败他们，斩张彦。
English: Zhang Yan, the general of the Song Dynasty, and Liu Shiyong, the governor of Pingjiang, attacked Lucheng. Attahai sent thousands of troops to defeat them and killed Zhang Yan.

古文：诏复趋瓜洲，与阿术议淮南事宜，淮南平。
现代文：十月，将行枢密院并于行中书省，仍以阿塔海为右丞。元军先后攻克常州、平江、嘉兴。
English: In October, the Yuan army conquered Changzhou, Pingjiang, and Jiaxing successively.

古文：详见伯颜、阿术传。
现代文：至元十三年，大军会师临安，宋朝皇帝投降，阿塔海送宋皇帝及母后至燕京。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the great army gathered in Lin'an, the Emperor of the Song Dynasty surrendered, and Atahai sent the Emperor of the Song Dynasty and his mother to Yanjing.

古文：十四年，授荣禄大夫、平章政事、行中书省事。
现代文：又奉诏回到瓜洲，与阿术一同平定淮南。十四年，授阿塔海荣禄大夫、平章政事、行中书省事。
English: He also returned to Guazhou after receiving the imperial edict, and together with Ah Shu, he subdued Huainan. In the 14th year, he was awarded the titles of Atahai Ronglu Doctor, Pingzhang Political Affairs, and Xingzhong Shuxuan Affairs.

古文：十五年二月，召赴阙，拜光禄大夫、行中书省左丞相，移治临安。
现代文：十五年二月，召赴朝廷，拜光禄大夫、行中书省左丞相，移省会于临安。
English: In February of the fifteenth year, he was summoned to the imperial court, and Dr. Baiguanglu, the Minister of the Left of the Ministry of Education, moved the provincial assembly to Lin'an.

古文：二十年，迁征东行省丞相，征日本。遇风，舟坏，丧师十七、八。
现代文：二十年，调任征东行省丞相，征讨日本，因遭飓风，船坏，丧师十之七八。
English: Twenty years later, he was transferred to be the minister of the eastern provinces of the expedition to conquer Japan. Due to a hurricane, shipwreck, he lost seventy-eight out of ten of his teachers.

古文：二十二年，行同知沿江枢密院事。
现代文：二十二年。行同知沿江枢密院事。
English: Twenty-two years later, he became a member of the Riverside Privy Council.

古文：二十三年，行江西中书省事，入朝。
现代文：二十三年，行江西中书省事，是年被召入朝。
English: In 233, he traveled to Jiangxi Province to study Chinese calligraphy. He was summoned to the imperial court.

古文：二十四年，扈从征乃颜。
现代文：二十四年，扈从世祖征乃蛮。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, it was a great honor to be selected from the ancestors.

古文：唆都唆都，紥剌儿氏。
现代文：二十六年十二月卒于京师，终年五十六岁。
English: He passed away in December of 2016 at the age of 56.

古文：骁勇善战，入宿卫，从征花马国有功。
现代文：赠推忠翊运宣力功臣、开府仪同三司、太师、上柱国，追封顺昌王，谥 武敏 。唆都，姓扎剌儿氏，骁勇善战，征花马国有功。
English: Prizes were given to the most loyal, the most successful propagandists in the movement, the first three officials of the Kaifu ceremony, the grandmaster, and the highest-ranking officials of the state, the king of Shunchang was posthumously crowned, and Wu Min, surnamed Zha Yu'er, was awarded the title of Grand Marshal of the Republic of China for his bravery in battle and his contribution to the conquest of China.

古文：李璮叛山东，从诸王哈必赤平之。还，言于朝曰： 郡县恶少年，多从间道鬻马于宋境，乞免其罪，籍为兵。 
现代文：随诸王哈必赤平定山东李王叛乱，还朝后陈奏说： 那里郡县有一些不务正业的少年，多从小路偷偷到宋境卖马，请不要治罪，而把他们收为兵丁入伍。 
English: After the rebellion of Li Wang in Shandong was put down, Chen Soo said: There are some young boys in counties and counties who are not engaged in legitimate business, and most of them sneak into Song territory from back roads to sell horses. Please do not punish them, but enlist them as soldiers.

古文：从之，得兵三千人。
现代文：朝廷采纳这意见而得兵三千人。
English: The imperial court accepted this opinion and received three thousand soldiers.

古文：以千人隶唆都，为千户，命守蔡州。
现代文：这些人都隶属于唆都，唆都因而为千户，奉命镇守蔡州。
English: These people are all affiliated with the sub-district, and the sub-district is therefore a thousand households, and they are ordered to guard Caizhou.

古文：入见，升郢复等处招讨使。十一年，移戍郢州之高港，败宋师，斩首三百级，获裨校九人。
现代文：至元五年，阿术领兵围攻襄阳，命唆都巡逻，夺占宋金刚台寨、筲基窝、青涧寨、大洪山、归州洞诸要害之地。六年，宋将范文虎率舟师驻灌子滩，丞相史天泽命唆都击退。九年，攻樊城时，唆都先登城而入，因功升为郢、复等处招讨使。十一年，在郢州之高港击败宋军斩杀三百余人，俘偏校军官九人。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, A Shiu led the troops to besiege Xiangyang, and ordered his subordinates to patrol and seize the key locations of Song King Kong Taizhai, Sujiwo, Qingzhai Zhai, Dahongshan, and Guizhou Dong. In the sixth year, Song stationed Fan Wenhu and his boatmen at Hanzhidang, and ordered his subordinates to repel the troops. In the ninth year, when the city of Hanzhong was attacked, his subordinates entered the city first, and because of their merits, they were promoted to the posts of commander and commander. In the eleventh year, they defeated the Song army in Ga

古文：从大军济江，鄂、汉降。
现代文：随大军渡江，迫使鄂州、汉阳投降。
English: He crossed the Yangtze River with a large army and forced Ezhou and Hanyang to surrender.

古文：宋平，诏伯颜以宋主入朝，留参政董文炳守临安，令其自择可副者，文炳请留唆都，从之。时衢、婺诸州皆复起兵，文炳谓唆都曰： 严州不守，临安必危，公往镇之。 
现代文：至元十二年，建康降，参政塔出命唆都入城，任他为建康安抚使。唆都攻下平江、嘉兴，率水军于皋亭山与伯颜会师。宋亡后，伯颜奉诏送宋朝皇帝、太后入京朝见世祖，留唆都辅助参政董文炳留守临安。这时，衢、婺诸州人民起兵反元，文炳对唆都说： 若严州不守，临安就受到威胁，公去镇守严州。 
English: In the 12th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jiankang surrendered, and the Sanzhong Pagoda issued an order to Su Tongdu to enter the city, and he was appointed as the pacifying envoy of Jiankang. Su Tongdu conquered Pingjiang and Jiaxing, and led the naval forces to meet with Bo Yan on Shuting Mountain. After the death of Song, Bo Yan sent the Emperor of the Song Dynasty and the Empress Dowager to Beijing to meet the founder of the dynasty, and Su Tongdu assisted the Sanzhong Pagoda and Dong Wenyu to stay in Lin'an. At this time, the people of Yunnan and Shandong provinces

古文：至严方十日，衢、婺、徽连兵来攻，唆都战却之，获章知府等二十二人。
现代文：唆都至严州方十天，衢、婺、徽三州反元势力连兵进攻严州，为唆都击退，章知府等二十二人被俘。
English: Ten days after the capital was moved to Yanzhou, the anti-Yuan forces of the three states of Zhai, Lu and Hui led a company of soldiers to attack Yanzhou. In order to repel the capital, 22 people, including Zhang Chifu, were captured.

古文：复婺州，败宋将陈路钤于梅岭下，斩首三千级。又复龙游县。
现代文：唆都又击败宋将陈路钤于梅岭下，斩首三千级，收复婺州及龙游县。
English: He also defeated the Song general Chen Luqun in Meiling, beheaded three thousand, and recovered Zhangzhou and Longyou County.

古文：攻衢州，衢守备甚严，唆都亲率诸军鼓噪登城，拔之，宋丞相留梦炎降。
现代文：又亲率军攻衢州，宋丞相留梦炎降。
English: In addition, his relatives led the army to invade Bozhou, and the Song Dynasty's prime minister, Liu Meng, went down in flames.

古文：攻处州，斩首七百级。又攻建宁府松溪县、怀安县，皆下之。
现代文：其后相继攻克处州、建宁府松溪县、怀安县等地。
English: After that, they successively conquered Zhouzhou, Jianning County, Songxi County, Huai'an County and other places.

古文：十四年，升福建道宣慰使，行征南元帅府事，听参政塔出节制。
现代文：十四年，唆都升为福建道宣慰使，行征南元帅府职务，听参政塔出节制。
English: In the 14th year, he was promoted to Fujian Provincial Propaganda and Consolation Envoy, performed the duties of the Southern Field Marshal's Office, and became a member of the Politburo.

古文：塔出令唆都取道泉州，泛海会于广州之富场。
现代文：塔出命唆都取道泉州，从海路会师于广州之富阳。
English: The tower was ordered to take Quanzhou as the capital, and from the sea, it will be built in Fuyang, Guangzhou.

古文：乃遣周万户等往招降之。唆都趋建宁，遇宋兵于崇安，军容甚盛。
现代文：正准备出发，信州守臣来求援，并称邵武方面宋朝残余力量正聚集，俟机进攻信州。唆都便派周万户去招降邵武宋军，他自己趋往建宁。
English: While preparing to set out, Shinshu Shoucheng came to ask for help, and said that the remnants of the Song Dynasty were gathering in Shouwu's direction to launch an attack on Shinshu. At the suggestion of Shouwu, he sent Zhou Wanyu to recruit and demote the Shouwu Song Army, and he himself headed for Jianning.

古文：令其子百家奴及杨庭璧等数队夹击之，范万户以三百人伏祝公桥，移剌答以四百人伏北门外。
现代文：途中在崇安与宋军遭遇，命其子百家奴、杨庭璧率队夹攻，又命范万户率三百人埋伏于祝公桥，移剌答率四百人埋伏于崇安城北门外。
English: Encountering the Song army in Chong'an on the way, he ordered his son Bai Jia Nong and Yang Ting Bi to lead a pincer attack. He also ordered Fan Wanyu to lead 300 men to ambush Zhu Gong Bridge, and he sent 400 men to ambush the north gate of Chong'an City.

古文：发潜遣人焚之，二十余日不能下，唆都令于众曰： 有能先登者拜爵，已仕者增秩。 总管兀良哈耳先登，诸将继之，战至夕，宋兵溃，潮州平。进参知政事，行省福州。
现代文：庭璧军杀入敌阵，宋军又遭伏兵袭击，损失千余人败走。唆都到达建宁后，宋丞相文天祥、南剑州都督张济合兵袭击建宁，被唆都伏兵击败。又转战南剑，击败宋将张清，夺其城，接着占领福州，攻克兴化、漳州。攻潮州未下，因怕误了会师富阳期限，放弃潮州，直趋广州。
English: Ting Bi's army entered the enemy lines, and the Song army was attacked by ambushes, losing more than a thousand people. After the capital arrived in Jianning, the Song chancellor Wen Tianxiang and the governor of South Jianzhou, Zhang Jiahe, attacked Jianning and were defeated by the ambush. They also turned to Nanjian, defeated the Song general Zhang Qing, captured his city, and then occupied Fuzhou, defeated Xinghua and Zhangzhou. Before attacking Chaozhou, for fear of missing the deadline for the meeting with Fuyang, they abandoned Chaozhou and headed straight for Guangzhou.

古文：征入见，帝以江南既定，将有事于海外，升左丞，行省泉州，招谕南夷诸国。
现代文：十五年，到达广州后，奉塔出之命，回师攻下潮州。江南平定后，升唆都为泉州行省左丞，命招谕南夷诸国。
English: Fifteen years later, after arriving in Guangzhou, he was ordered by Bonta to go out and return to the division to conquer Chaozhou. After the south of the Yangtze River was pacified, he was promoted to Quanzhou to the left of Quanzhou, and was ordered to invade the Nanyi countries.

古文：十八年，改右丞，行省占城。
现代文：十八年，改任占城行省右丞。
English: In 18 years, he was reassigned to the position of Zhancheng Xingzhou Rongzheng.

古文：十九年，率战船千艘，出广州，浮海伐占城。
现代文：十九年，唆都率战船千艘，从广州出发去征伐占城。
English: In the 19th year, he led a thousand warships from Guangzhou to conquer and occupy the city.

古文：占城迎战，兵号二十万。
现代文：占城以二十万兵力迎战。
English: Zhancheng entered the war with 200,000 troops.

古文：唆都率敢死士击之，斩首并溺死者五万余人。
现代文：唆都率敢死队冲击，敌军被杀和溺死者五万余人。
English: He led death squads to storm the capital, killing enemy soldiers and drowning more than 50,000 people.

古文：又败之于大浪湖，斩首六万级。
现代文：又败敌于大浪湖，杀敌六万，占城降。
English: He also defeated the enemy at the Great Wave Lake, killed sixty thousand of the enemy, and captured the city.

古文：交趾使人告之，弗信，及至大营，则空矣。交趾遮之于乾满江，唆都战死。事闻，赠荣禄大夫，谥襄愍。
现代文：乘胜征伐鸟里、越里诸小夷。二十一年，与镇南王脱欢会师征交趾。唆都败交趾军于清化府，夺占义安关，交趾臣彰宪、昭显投降。其后于乾满江阵亡。朝廷赠荣禄大夫，谥 襄愍 。
English: He took advantage of the victory to conquer and cut down the small barbarians in the Tori and Echigo regions. In the 21st year, he fought against the Jinan Wang Dehuanhui division. He defeated the Jinan Wang Dehuanhui army in Qinghua Prefecture, occupied Yian Pass, and surrendered to the Jinan Wang Dehuanhui, and the Jinan Wang Dehuanhui surrendered to the Jinan Wang Dehuanhui. Later, he died in the Battle of Qianmanjiang River. The imperial court gave him a doctor's salary,  襄.

古文：子百家奴。
现代文：百家奴，唆都之子。
English: Son of a hundred families, son of the capital.

古文：百家奴至元五年从元帅阿术攻襄阳，筑新城，数立功。
现代文：至元五年，随从元帅阿术攻襄阳，筑新城，多次立功。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he followed the marshal Ah Jiu to attack Xiangyang, build a new city, and made many contributions.

古文：七年，以质子从郡王合达，败宋兵于灌子滩。
现代文：七年，随郡王合达败宋军于灌子滩。
English: In the seventh year, he defeated the Song army at Guanzi Beach with the county king Heda.

古文：八年夏四月，宋殿帅范文虎等督促粮运，输之襄阳，昼夜不绝。百家奴乘战船顺流至鹿门山，欲塞宋粮道，出击范文虎军，累获战功，于是河南行省命为管军总把。
现代文：八年四月，宋殿帅范文虎等率军运粮至襄阳，百家奴在鹿门山出击范文虎军，因功被河南行省任命为管军总把。
English: In April of the eighth year, Fan Wenhu, the general of the Song Dynasty, led the army to transport grain to Yangyang, and hundreds of slaves attacked Fan Wenhu's army in Lumen Mountain. He was appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army by Henan Province for his service.

古文：宋制置夏贵来迎战，百家奴与暗答孙突入敌阵击之，宋兵奔溃，遂登江南岸，获其战船、器甲甚多。
现代文：后隶属于丞相伯颜麾下，升为知印，随大军进攻鄂州，败宋都统赵五所率诸军，他自己也身受数伤。攻沙洋，百家奴率军从东角楼登城，夺敌军旗帜、弓箭、衣甲。接着又攻克新城，宋守将王安抚弃城逃走。伯颜将其战功上报朝廷，深受世祖重视。随大军围攻汉阳，自沙芜口入江，战败宋制置夏贵部，登上南岸，缴获战船、器甲甚多。
English: Later, he was subordinate to the Minister of War, Bo Yan, and was promoted to Zhiyin. He attacked Ezhou with a large army and defeated the army led by Zhao Wushang of the Song Dynasty, and he himself was injured several times. Attacking the sand and sea, he led the army from the East Angle Tower to the city and captured the enemy's flag, bow and arrow, and clothing. Then he conquered the new city, and the Song governor abandoned Wang Anfu and fled the city. Bo Yan reported his war exploits to the court and was highly valued by his ancestors. He besieged Hanyang with a large army, entered the river from the mouth of the

古文：转战至黄州，会日暮，追击夏贵至白虎山，夜分乃还。未几，复攻破金牛坝。
现代文：又转战黄州，追击夏贵至白虎山，攻破金牛坝。
English: He also turned to fight in Huangzhou, pursued Xia Gui to Baihu Mountain, and broke through the Jinniu Dam.

古文：十二年春正月，与千户薛赤干取鸡笼洞，还至瑞昌县，遇夏贵溃兵，复击败之。
现代文：十二年正月，与千户薛赤干攻取鸡笼洞，在回师攻瑞昌县时，又遇到夏贵军，再次击败。
English: In the first month of the 12th year, he and Chihou Xue Chakgan led the attack on Chicken Cage Cave. When they returned to attack Ruichang County, they encountered Xia Gui's army and were defeated again.

古文：是时，宋遣兵救瑞昌，未至而县已下矣。
现代文：未等到宋发援兵，瑞昌已被百家奴攻克。
English: Before Song Dynasty sent reinforcements, Ruichang had been conquered by hundreds of slaves.

古文：俄从伯颜入朝，加进义校尉，赐银符，为管军总把。攻丹阳、吕城，破常州，皆有功。至苏州，宋守臣王安抚以城降。
现代文：进围江州，宋安抚吕师夔开城投降。随大军东进，攻下池州，在丁家洲击败宋平章贾似道及孙虎臣的军队，追逐百余里，夺战船五艘及旗帜、军械、铠甲，生擒宋统制王文虎，平定黄池。蒙军进攻宣州，以百家奴为前锋，败敌军于喃呢湖，夺得战船三百艘，太平州望风投降。不久，随伯颜入朝，加进义校尉，赐银符，仍为管军总把。其后在攻丹阳、吕城、常州的战斗中均有功。
English: He besieged Jiangzhou, and Song Anbo Lyu Shih and Lu Kaicheng surrendered. He marched east with a large army and captured Chizhou. He defeated the army of Song Ping Zhang Jia Lian Dao and Sun Huchen in Dingjia Zhou, chased more than 100 miles, captured five warships and flags, ordnance, and armor. He defeated Wang Wenhu, the ruler of the Song Dynasty, and pacified Huangchi. The Mongolian army attacked Xuanzhou, with a hundred slaves as the vanguard, defeated the enemy army in Murong Lake, captured three hundred warships, and surrendered in Taiping Prefecture. Soon after, he entered the

古文：秀州、湖州皆不烦兵而下。诸军乘胜直趋临安，宋主出降。
现代文：苏州、秀州、湖州相继投降，元军乘胜直趋临安，宋朝皇帝投降。
English: Suzhou, Xiuzhou and Huzhou surrendered one after another, the Yuan army headed straight for Lin'an, and the Emperor of the Song Dynasty surrendered.

古文：十三年，领新附军守镇江。
现代文：至元十三年，百家奴率领新归附军守镇江。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Hyakkenaru led the newly annexed army to defend Zhenjiang.

古文：未几，复从平章博鲁欢攻泰、寿二州，中疮，遂罢攻。
现代文：不久，又随平章博鲁欢攻泰、寿二州，因受伤而停止。
English: Soon, he followed Ping Zhang Boru in attacking Tai and Shou Erzhou, but was stopped due to injury.

古文：后数日，与万户叶了虔将兵攻泰州新城，百家奴力疾先登，破之，复被两疮。
现代文：过了几天，与万户叶了虔领兵攻泰州新城，百家奴率先登城，身受两伤，城被攻破。
English: A few days later, he led the troops to attack Taizhou New Town with Wanhu Ye Liqian, and the hundred slaves were the first to enter the city. They were wounded twice, and the city was breached.

古文：已而从阿术攻下扬州诸郡，得宋制置李庭芝、都统姜才，以功升武略将军，赐金符，为管军总管，镇高邮白马湖。
现代文：其后，随阿术攻下扬州诸郡，俘宋制置李庭芝、都统姜才，因功升武略将军，赐金符，仍为管军总管，镇守高邮白马湖。
English: After that, he conquered the counties of Yangzhou with the help of Ah Shu, captured Li Tingzhi and Doutong Jiangcai from the Song Dynasty, was promoted to General Wu Liang for his merits, and was awarded a gold medallion. He was still the commander-in-chief and the town guard of Gaoyou Baima Lake.

古文：是时，行省以百家奴袭父唆都郢复州招讨使、建康宣抚使，仍领本翼军。
现代文：这时，行省让百家奴承袭其父唆都为郢复州招讨使、建康宣抚使。
English: At this time, the provincial government allowed hundreds of slaves to succeed their father, and all of them became the envoys for the restoration of Fuzhou and the promotion of health.

古文：攻陷南剑州，张清、聂文庆遁去。闽清、怀安二县传檄而定。
现代文：不久，征讨福建，平定衢、婺、信等州的城池，在新安县击毙宋赵监军、詹知县，生擒江通判。
English: Soon, he conquered Fujian, pacified the cities and villages in the states of Jiangxi, Shandong and Xinjiang, killed Song Zhao Jianjun and Zhanchi in Xin'an County, and was sentenced to live in the Lijiang River.

古文：至福州，谕以威德，王安抚率众出降。
现代文：再向东进军，建宁府之沈安抚投降。接着攻克南剑州、闽清县、怀安县。福州王安抚率众投降。
English: Then they marched eastward, and Shen Anfu of Jianningfu surrendered at the top. Next, they conquered Nanjianzhou, Suqing County, and Huai'an County. Fuzhou Wang Anfu led the crowd to surrender.

古文：攻破兴化，擒陈安抚及白牒都统。
现代文：又攻破兴化，擒陈安抚及白牒都统。
English: He also defeated Xinghua, pacified Chen and pacified Baicho.

古文：明年春正月，振旅而还，复攻下德胜等寨。至蒲仙江，聂文庆复败走。攻潮州，破之，诛马发等数人，广东遂平。
现代文：诸郡县先后归降。十四年正月，百家奴回师攻下德胜等寨，在蒲仙江击败聂文庆，攻破潮州，诛马发等数人，广东平定。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, the Hundred-Craftsmen's Return Division captured Desheng and other villages, defeated Zou Wenqing in the Buxian River, defeated Chaozhou, Baimafa and several others, and Guangdong was pacified.

古文：三月，引宙奉降表来朝，未至，授昭勇大将军，赐虎符，管军万户。
现代文：三月，授昭勇大将军，赐虎符，任管军万户。
English: In March, he was awarded the title of General Zhaoyong, given the Tiger Badge, and put in charge of the army of 10,000 households.

古文：七月，遂朝于上都，升镇国上将军、海外诸蕃宣慰使，兼福建道市舶提举，仍领本翼军守福建，俄兼福建道长司宣慰使都元帅。
现代文：七月，在上都朝见世祖，升为镇国上将军、海外诸蕃宣慰使兼福建道市舶提举，领本部人马镇守福建。不久，又兼任福建道长司宣慰使都元帅。
English: In July, he met his ancestor in Shangdu, and was promoted to Zhenguo Shangzheng (town and country superior general) and overseas proclamation and consolation envoy of Fujian Province, and led the headquarters of Fujian. Soon, he also served as Marshal of Fujian Province and proclamation and consolation envoy.

古文：是时，福建多水灾，百家奴出私钱市米以赈，贫民全活者甚众。十七年，朝京师，加正奉大夫、宣慰使、都元帅。
现代文：当时，福建多水灾，百家奴用自己的钱买米赈济饥民。十七年，入京师朝拜，加正奉大夫、宣慰使、都元帅。
English: At that time, there were many floods in Fujian, and hundreds of slaves used their own money to buy rice to feed the hungry. In the seventeenth year, he went to Beijing to worship, and was promoted to doctor, consoler, and marshal.

古文：二十五年，驿召至南京宣慰司，命括五路民马。二十七年，除建康路总管。
现代文：二十二年，随父亲唆都征交趾。唆都战死，百家奴与脱飀在交趾境内转战，多立战功。二十七年，授建康路总管。
English: In 1922, he went with his father to Yingdu to enlist in Kota. Yingdu was killed in the battle, and Hyakka Nong and Deyu fought in the territory of Kota, and made great achievements in the war. In 1927, he was awarded the post of general manager of Jian Kang Road.

古文：武宗即位，迁镇江路总管。
现代文：武宗即位，调镇江路总管，至大四年病卒。
English: Emperor Wuzong ascended to the throne, transferred to the post of chief administrator of Zhenjiang Road, and died of illness four years after graduation.

古文：李璮反涟海，恒从其父弃家入告变，璮怒，系恒阖门狱中。璮诛，得出。
现代文：李恒，字德卿，其祖先姓于弥氏，唐末赐姓李，世世代代为西夏国王。
English: Li Heng, known as Deqing, whose ancestors were surnamed Yu Mi and given the surname Li at the end of the Tang Dynasty, was the king of Western Xia for generations.

古文：世祖嘉其功，授淄莱路奥鲁总管，佩金符，并偿其所失家资。
现代文：李恒的父亲名李唯忠，太祖征河西时为蒙古军所俘，从此归附于蒙古，在经略中原中有功，授淄川达鲁花赤。中统三年，李王反叛，李恒与父亲报告了朝廷，世祖嘉奖，授李恒为淄莱路奥鲁总管，佩金符。
English: Li Heng's father's name is Li Weizhong. His great-grandfather was captured by the Mongolian army during the Western Conquest of Heze and was later annexed to Mongolia. He was awarded the Red Star for his contribution to the Central Plains. During the three years of the Central Plains Unification, when King Li rebelled, Li Heng and his father reported to the imperial court. He was awarded the Distinguished Father Award, and Li Heng was awarded the title of General Manager of Bailai Road Oulu and the Pei Jin Fu.

古文：至元七年，改宣武将军、益都淄莱新军万户，从伐宋。
现代文：至元七年，升李恒为宣武将军、益都淄莱新军万户，随大军伐宋。
English: In the seventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Heng was promoted to General of the Xuanwu army, and the new army of Bailai, accompanied by a large army, entered the Song Dynasty.

古文：十一年，丞相伯颜大会师襄阳，进至郢州。宋以舟师截汉水，伯颜由唐港入汉，舍郢而进攻沙洋、新城，留恒为后拒，败其追兵。
现代文：在襄阳围攻战斗中，恒率本军筑堡于万山以控扼城西，断绝宋军从陆路的支援。襄阳守将吕文焕等乘渔船渡汉水以窥伺蒙军形势，被李恒设伏兵击败，并断其水路。十年春，蒙军攻樊城，李恒率精兵渡汉水，自南面首先攻入樊城，随后襄阳降，世祖因功升李恒为明威将军，佩金虎符。十一年，丞相伯颜大会师于襄阳，进攻郢州，未下，转攻沙洋、新城，留李恒断后，打败宋之追兵。
English: In the siege battle of Xiangyang, Heng led his army to build a fortress in Wanshan to control the west of the city and cut off the Song army's support from the land. Xiangyang's governor, Lu Wenhuan, and others took a fishing boat to cross the Han River to spy on the situation of the Mongolian army. He was defeated by Li Heng, who set an ambush and cut off his waterway. In the spring of the tenth year, the Mongolian army attacked Lushan City, Li Heng led the elite soldiers to cross the Han River, and first invaded Lushan City from the south, and then fell to Xiangyang. Li Heng was promoted to

古文：至阳罗堡，宋制置夏贵遣其子松来逆战，恒先陷阵，额中流矢，伯颜止之，恒战益力，卒射松杀之。
现代文：元军进至阳逻堡，宋制置夏贵派其子夏松来迎战，李恒首先冲入敌阵中，虽受箭伤，还是愈战愈猛，直至射杀夏松。
English: The Yuan army marched into Yangluo Fort, and Song Ziqi Xia Gui sent his son Xia Song to meet the battle. Li Heng first rushed into the enemy line, and although he was wounded by arrows, the battle became fiercer and fiercer until he shot Xia Song.

古文：诸军渡江，恒与宋兵战，自寅至申，夏贵败走，鄂州、汉阳俱下。
现代文：元军渡江后，李恒与宋军大战，从寅时一直战斗到申刻，打败夏贵，攻克鄂州、汉阳。
English: After the Yuan Army crossed the Yangtze River, Li Heng fought with the Song Army in the Great War, from Yinshi to Shenke, defeated Xia Gui, and conquered Ezhou and Hanyang.

古文：十二年，从右丞阿里海牙至洞庭，擒高世杰。下岳州，进攻沙市，拔之。宋制置高达以江陵降，留恒镇守。
现代文：因功迁升为宣威将军，赐白金五百两。十二年春，宋将高世杰乘元大军东下，再次进犯汉、沔，伯颜命李恒守鄂州。十二年，随右丞阿里海牙至洞庭，擒高世杰，攻克岳州、沙市，宋制置高达开江陵城门降元。
English: In the spring of the 12th year, the Song Dynasty sent Gao Shijie to the east with the Yuan Dynasty's army to invade Hanzhong, Shandong, and Hebei, and ordered Li Heng to defend Ezhou. In the 12th year, he went to Dongting with U.S. Marshal Ali Hague, and sent Gao Shijie to conquer Yuezhou and Shashi, and the Song Dynasty set up the Gao-Kai-Jiangling City Gate to reduce Yuan.

古文：传檄归、峡、辰、沅、靖、澧、常德诸州，皆下。
现代文：李恒留守江陵，归、峡、辰、沅、靖、漕、常德诸州相继投降。
English: Li Heng stayed in Jiangling, and Gui, Xia, Chen, Zou, Jing, Cao, and Changde Zhoushou surrendered one after another.

古文：未几，徙镇常德，以扼湖南之冲。
现代文：调李恒镇守常德以扼湖南之要冲。
English: Li Hengzhen was transferred to guard Changde with the key of Hunan Province.

古文：广东经略徐直谅奉蜡书纳其所部十四郡，前江西制置黄万石亦以邵武降。
现代文：朝廷有旨，命元军分三路东进。李恒为左副都元帅随都元帅逊都台出江西。十二年九月，设元帅府于江州。
English: The imperial court had a will, and ordered the Yuan army to advance eastward in three directions. Li Heng was the left deputy metropolitan marshal with the metropolitan marshal Sun Du Tai out of Jiangxi. In September of the 12th year, the marshal's office was set up in Jiangzhou.

古文：隆兴帅府诬富民与敌连，已诛百三十家，恒还，审其非罪，尽释之。
现代文：江西元军一路攻克建昌州、瑞州、抚州、建昌路、吉州、赣州、南安。与此同时，宋朝之广东经略徐直谅将所领十四郡献降，前江西制置黄万石也将邵武献降。
English: The Jiangxi Yuan Army conquered Jianchang Prefecture, Ruizhou, Fuzhou, Jianchang Road, Jizhou, Zhangzhou, and Nan'an. At the same time, the Song Dynasty's Guangdong Province surrendered fourteen counties, and the former Jiangxi Province also surrendered Shaowu.

古文：宋丞相陈宜中及其大将张世杰立益王鸑于闽中，郡县豪杰争起兵应之。恒遣将破吴浚兵于南丰。
现代文：宋丞相陈宜中及大将张世杰在福建立益王赵曰正为帝，各郡县豪杰起兵响应，李恒击败吴浚军于南丰。
English: Song chen minister Chen Yizhong and general Zhang Shijie established the Yizhong Kingdom in Fuxi. Zhao Jizheng became the emperor, and the county heroes responded by raising an army. Li Heng defeated the Wu Junjun army in Nanfeng.

古文：世杰遣都统张文虎与浚合兵十万，期必复建昌。恒复遣将败之兜港。
现代文：张世杰遣都统张文虎与吴浚合兵十万，力图收复建昌，李恒又败宋军于兜港。
English: Zhang Shijie sent a combined force of 100,000 soldiers led by Zhang Wenhu and Wu Jun to the capital in an attempt to recapture Jianchang, and Li Heng defeated the Song army at Taobao.

古文：浚走从文天祥于瑞金，又破之，天祥走汀州。
现代文：吴浚与文天祥退至瑞金，又被李恒击败，天祥退往汀州。
English: Wu Jun and Wen Tianxiang retreated to Ruijin, but were defeated by Li Heng, and Tianxiang retreated to Tingzhou.

古文：遣镇抚孔遵追之，并破赵孟瀯军，取汀州。
现代文：李恒遣镇抚孔遵追击，大败赵孟氵营军，攻克汀州。
English: Li Hengjun chased and defeated Zhao Mengyao's battalion in the town of Fucongzong, and went on to conquer Jingzhou.

古文：元帅府罢，授昭勇大将军、同知江西宣慰司事，加镇国上将军，迁福建宣慰使，改江西宣慰使。
现代文：元帅府撤销后，授恒为昭勇大将军、同知江西宣慰司事，加镇国上将军。后调任福建宣慰使，又改为江西宣慰使。
English: After the revocation of the Marshal's Office, he was awarded the title of General Zhaoyong, the same title as the Jiangxi Consolation Secretary, and the title of General Zhenguo. Later, he was transferred to the Fujian Consolation Envoy, and then changed to the Jiangxi Consolation Envoy.

古文：恒曰： 王师讨不服耳，岂有发人坟墓之理！ 
现代文：文天祥又克复汀州，进攻兴国，连破诸县，围攻赣州尤急。
English: Wen Tianxiang also recovered Tingzhou, attacked Xingguo, broke through the counties, and besieged Bozhou.

古文：乃分兵援赣，自率精兵潜至兴国。天祥走，追至空坑，获其妻女，擒招讨使赵时赏已下二十余人，降其众二十万。
现代文：李恒一面遣兵援赣州，一面自率精兵至兴国，文天祥退走，李恒追击至空坑，俘文天祥妻女，又擒宋招讨使赵时赏等将校二十余人，收纳降兵二十万。
English: On the one hand, Li Heng sent troops to aid Bozhou, on the other hand, he led his own elite soldiers to Xingguo, Wen Tianxiang retreated, Li Heng chased to the empty pit, captured Wen Tianxiang's wife and daughter, and also recruited more than 20 officers such as Zhao Shi Rong, and received 200,000 soldiers.

古文：有旨令与右丞阿里罕、左丞董文炳合兵追益王。
现代文：接着奉旨与右丞阿里罕、左丞董文炳合兵追击益王。
English: Then, by order of the emperor, he joined forces with the right-hand man, Arikhan, and the left-hand man, Dong Wenyi, to pursue King Yi.

古文：十四年，拜参知政事，行省江西。
现代文：元军采纳李恒的建议，由福建、广东两路夹攻。李恒军至梅岭，大败宋军。十四年，拜江西行省参知政事。
English: The Yuan army adopted Li Heng's suggestion and attacked from Fujian and Guangdong. Li Heng's army went to Meiling and defeated the Song army. In 1914, Bai Jiangxi went to the province to participate in the political affairs.

古文：十五年，益王殂，其枢密张世杰、陆秀夫等复立卫王昺，守广东诸郡，诏以恒为蒙古汉军都元帅经略之。恒进兵取英德府、清远县，败其制置凌震、运使王道夫，遂入广州，世杰等移屯崖山。
现代文：至元十五年，宋益王死，枢密张世杰、陆秀夫等立卫王赵籨为帝，固守广东诸郡。李恒奉旨进军广东，攻取英德府、清远县，击败宋制置凌震、转运使王道夫，进入广州，张世杰移驻崖山。
English: In the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, Song Yi Wang died, and the secretaries Zhang Shijie and Lu Xiufu set up the king of Wei, Zhao Wei, as the emperor, and adhered to the counties of Guangdong. Li Heng marched into Guangdong, captured Yingde Prefecture and Qingyuan County, defeated the Song system, set up Lingzhen and transferred Wang Daofu, entered Guangzhou, and Zhang Shijie moved to Jiaoshan.

古文：时都元帅张弘范舟师未至，恒按兵不动，分遣诸将略定梅、循诸州。
现代文：十六年二月，都元帅张弘范率水军从漳州直指崖山，李恒也率所部与之会师。
English: In February of the 16th year, Marshal Zhang Hongfan led the navy from Zhangzhou straight to the cliff, and Li Heng also led the headquarters to join the division.

古文：凌震等复抵广州，恒击败之，皆弃舟走，赴水死，夺其船三百艘，擒将吏宋迈以下二百余人，又破其余军于茭塘越。
现代文：张世杰集海舰千余艘抗战。李恒与张弘范南北合击，大败宋军。陆秀夫抱卫王籨投海而死，随之投海死者十余万人。宋将翟国秀、凌震皆降。张世杰溺死于海陵港。广东平定。
English: Zhang Shijie assembled more than a thousand ships for the war of resistance. Li Heng and Zhang Hongfan fought together north and south, and defeated the Song army. Lu Xiufu threw himself into the sea with Wang Wei and died, followed by more than 100,000 people who died at sea. Song general Zhang Guoxiu and Ling Zhen both surrendered. Zhang Shijie drowned in Hailing Port. Guangdong was pacified.

古文：恒封其宫庭府库，追袭于海洋，败之，得船二百艘，几获其世子。会盛夏，军中疾作，霖潦暴涨，浸濯营地。
现代文：十七年，拜李恒为资善大夫、湖广行中书省左丞。李恒在湖广禁止军士掳掠平民为奴婢；发粮赈济常德、漕、辰、沅、靖五郡饥民；官府所管猎户除留一千户外，其余释为民。至元十九年，元军征讨占城，恒奉旨供给粮饷器械、海船百艘。不久，诏命李恒随皇子镇南王征交趾，乘船渡海，夺取了天长府。
English: In the seventeenth year, Li Heng was promoted to the position of Senior Physician, and became the left-hand man of the book department in Hukang. In Hukang, Li Heng forbade the soldiers to kidnap civilians as slaves; he distributed food to the starving people in Changde, Cao, Chen, Shan and Jing counties; the hunters under the jurisdiction of the government left a thousand outdoors, and the rest were released to the people. In the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the former army conquered and occupied the city, and Heng was ordered to supply grain harvesting equipment and a hundred ships. Soon, Li Heng was ordered by the emperor to follow the prince of the town of N

古文：议者谓交趾且降，请班师，恒弗能夺，遂还。蛮兵追败后军，王乃改命恒殿后，且战且行。毒矢贯恒膝，一卒负恒而趋。至思明州，毒发，卒，年五十。
现代文：交趾国王航海而逃。恒封闭其宫廷府库，追击交趾国王，夺得船二百艘。因盛夏时节，南方多雨，军中疾病流行，元军班师回国。交趾军追击，恒奉命殿后，膝中毒箭，行至思明州毒发而卒，终年五十岁。
English: King Kota fled by sea. He always sealed his palace treasury, pursued King Kota, and captured two hundred ships. Due to the midsummer season, the south was rainy, and diseases were prevalent in the army, the former military squadron returned to the country. After the Kota army pursued, he was ordered to the palace, his knee was poisoned by arrows, he went to Siming and died, he was fifty years old.

古文：后赠银青荣禄大夫、平章政事，谥武愍；再赠推忠靖远功臣、太保、仪同三司，追封滕国公。
现代文：后赠银青荣禄大夫、平章政事，谥 武愍 ；再赠推思靖远功臣、太保、仪同三司，追封滕国公。
English: Later, he was given the titles of Yinqing Ronglu Daifu, Pingzhang Zhengji, and Zou Wuyuan; he was also given the titles of Yinqing Ronglu Daifu, Pingzhang Zhengji, and Zou Wuyuan; he was given the titles of Yinqing Ronglu Daifu, Pingzhang Zhengji, and Zou Wuyuan; he was given the titles of Yinqing Ronglu Daifu, Pingzhang Zhengji, and Zou Wuyuan; and he was given the titles of Yinqing Ronglu Daifu, Pingzhang Zhengji, and Zou Wuyuan

