古文：武承嗣、三思营求为太子，狄仁杰从容言于太后曰： 姑侄与子母孰亲？
现代文：原文武则天中立一人为太子。狄仁杰知道武后的想法，对武后说： 姑侄与母子，哪两种关系较为亲密？
English: According to the original text, Wu Zetian made only one person the crown prince. Di Renjie knew the thoughts of Wu Guo and said to Wu Guo: "Uncle and mother and son, which two relationships are more intimate?

古文：陛下立子，则千秋万岁后配食太庙；若立侄，则未闻侄为天子，而祔姑于庙者也。 
现代文：陛下立自己儿子为太子，那么即使太后崩逝后，仍能拥有自己的宗庙，享受万代子孙太牢的供奉；若太后立武三思等人为太子，三思是太后侄儿，臣从未听说侄儿成为天子后，会在太庙中供奉姑妈的。 
English: His Majesty appointed his son as the crown prince, so even after the death of the empress dowager, he can still have his own ancestral temple and enjoy the worship of all generations of descendants; if the empress dowager appointed Wu San Si and others as the crown prince, San Si is the niece of the empress dowager, I have never heard that after the nephew becomes the son of heaven, he will worship his aunt in the imperial temple.

古文：太后乃寤。
现代文：太后于是明白过来。
English: The Empress Dowager then came to understand.

古文：议论到十分醒快处，虽欲不从而不可得。
现代文：狄仁杰对武后所说的这番话，真是一针见血，说到武后心中痛处，武后想不理会都不行。
English: Di Renjie's words to Empress Wu are really to the point. When it comes to the pain in Empress Wu's heart, Empress Wu can't ignore it.

古文：庐陵反正，虽因鹦鹉折翼及双陆不胜之梦，实姑侄子母之说有以动之。
现代文：武后后来立庐陵为太子，虽说和梦到鹦鹉折断翅膀以及玩双陆棋不胜的梦境有关，但从根本上却是被狄仁杰这番姑侄、母子的议论所打动。
English: Empress Wu later made Gong Ling the crown prince. Although it was related to the dream of the parrot breaking its wings and the dream of playing backgammon without defeat, it was fundamentally moved by the discussion of Di Renjie's first cousin, mother and son.

古文：凡恋生前，未有不计死后者。
现代文：大凡生前贪恋荣乐的人，很少不在意死后的尊荣。
English: Those who are greedy for glory before death are seldom careless of glory after death.

古文：时王方庆居相位，以其子为眉州司士参军，天后问曰： 君在相位，子何远乎？ 对曰： 庐陵是陛下爱子，今犹在远；臣之子，安敢相近？ 
现代文：王方庆位居宰相时，武后曾询问他，何以会允许自己的儿子被派远赴眉州当司士参军。王方庆回答说： 庐陵是陛下疼爱的儿子，尚且远在他乡，臣的儿子怎敢留在身边？ 
English: When Wang Fangqing was prime minister, Empress Wu once asked him why he would allow his son to be sent far away to Meizhou to join the army as a sergeant. Wang Fangqing replied: Fuling is the beloved son of His Majesty, but he is still far away from his hometown. How dare a minister's son stay by his side?

古文：此亦可谓善讽矣。
现代文：这也可说是对武后的一次很好的讽谏。
English: This can also be said to be a good satire on Empress Wu.

古文：然慈主可以情动，明主当以理格，则天明而不慈，故梁公辱昌宗而不怒，进张柬之而不疑，皆因其明而用之。
现代文：然而，有感性的君王，人臣进谏可以动之以情；有理性的君王，人臣进谏可以说之以理。所以狄仁杰虽曾以言辞侮辱张昌宗而不会因此激怒武后，举用张柬之而不会受到武后疑心不忠，就因为武后是个理性的人。
English: However, a sentimental king and his vassals can be moved by emotion; a rational king and his vassals can be moved by reason. Therefore, although Di Renjie had insulted Zhang Changzong with words without angering Empress Wu, he would not be suspected of disloyalty by Empress Wu by using Zhang Kham, because Empress Wu was a rational person.

