古文：王阳明以勘事过丰城，闻逆濠之变，兵力未具，亟欲溯流趋吉安。
现代文：原文王守仁因为勘事的原因经过丰城，听说朱宸濠发兵叛乱，由于兵力没有集结，因此想要尽快溯江而上赶往吉安征调兵力。
English: The original text Wang Shuren passed through Fengcheng because of the reasons for the investigation, and heard that Zhu Xi sent troops to rebel. Since the troops were not assembled, he wanted to go upstream to Ji'an as soon as possible to recruit and transfer troops.

古文：舟人闻濠发千余人来劫公，畏不敢发，公拔剑馘其耳，遂行。
现代文：船家听说朱宸濠派出一千多人，想要截杀王守仁，害怕得不敢让他乘船，王守仁拔出佩剑割下船家一只耳朵，船家才发船。
English: The boatman heard that Zhu Xi had sent more than a thousand people to intercept Wang Shuren, and was so afraid that he did not dare to let him take the boat. Wang Shuren pulled out his sword and cut off one of the boatman's ears, and the boatman sent the boat.

古文：薄暮，度不可前，潜觅渔舟，以微服行，留麾下一人，服己冠服，居舟中。
现代文：傍晚的时候，王守仁估量着自己已经没有办法再搭乘大船继续向前走了，于是就暗中雇了一条小渔船，换上普通百姓的服装，然后留下一名属下让他穿上自己的朝服，继续留在大船上面。
English: In the evening, Wang Shouren estimated that he could no longer take the big boat to go forward, so he secretly hired a small fishing boat, put on ordinary people's clothes, and then left a subordinate to let him put on his own royal uniform and continue to stay on the big boat.

古文：濠兵果犯舟，得伪者，知公去远，乃罢。
现代文：朱宸濠果然派人前来拦截搜捕，抓到了那个假扮的王守仁，知道真正的王守仁已经走远了，这才作罢。
English: Zhu Xi sent someone to intercept the manhunt and caught the fake Wang Shouren. He knew that the real Wang Shouren had already gone far away, so he had to give up.

古文：公至中途，恐濠速出，乃为间谍，假奉朝廷密旨，行令两广、湖襄都御史及南京兵部，各命将出师，暗伏要害地方，以俟宁府兵至袭杀。
现代文：王守仁在往吉安的途中，害怕朱宸濠迅速出兵，于是派出间谍，假装奉朝廷密旨，命令两广、湖襄都御史和南京兵部，命令各个将领率领士兵在各个出入要道进行埋伏，看到宁王府朱宸濠的兵卒就袭击斩杀。
English: On the way to Ji'an, Wang Shuren was afraid of Zhu Xi's rapid deployment of troops, so he sent spies, pretending to follow the secret order of the imperial court, ordered the two Guang, Huxiang and Nanjing military departments, and ordered each general to lead soldiers to ambush in each entrance and exit road. When they saw Zhu Xi's soldiers in Ningwangfu, they attacked and killed them.

古文：复取优人数辈，各将公文置夹衣絮中。
现代文：王守仁又招来乐工，暗中将公文放置在他们所带的行李、夹衣之中。
English: Wang Shouren also invited musicians and secretly placed official documents in their luggage and jackets.

古文：将发间，又捕捉伪太师家属至舟尾，令其觇知，公即佯怒，牵之上岸处斩，已而故纵之，令其奔报。
现代文：要派间谍的时候故意让捉到的朱宸濠的太师家属们看见这一幕，然后王守仁装作生气的样子要上岸斩杀他们，等快要行刑的时候，却又故意制造出机会，好让他们趁机逃走，将所看到的情况报告给朱宸濠。
English: When he wanted to send spies, he purposely let the captured family members of Zhu Xi's grandmaster see this scene. Then Wang Shouren pretended to be angry and wanted to go ashore to kill them. When the execution was about to take place, he deliberately created an opportunity for them to escape and report what they saw to Zhu Xi.

古文：濠获优，果于衣中搜得公文，遂迟疑不发。
现代文：朱宸濠捕捉到那些乐工，果然在他们的行李中搜到了公文，于是犹疑不决，不敢贸然发兵。
English: Zhu Xi caught those musicians and found official documents in their luggage, so he hesitated and did not dare to send troops.

古文：公至吉安，调度兵粮粗备，始传檄征兵，暴濠罪恶。
现代文：王守仁到了吉安之后，调度粮草刚完备，就开始发布檄文征兵，同时揭发朱宸濠的罪行，并昭告天下。
English: After Wang Shouren arrived in Ji'an, the dispatch of grain and grass had just been completed, and he began to issue the enlistment notice, at the same time exposing Zhu Xi's crime and announcing it to the world.

古文：濠知为公所卖，愤然欲出。
现代文：这时朱宸濠才明白自己被王守仁骗了，十分气愤，想立即发兵。
English: At this time, Zhu Xi understood that he had been deceived by Wang Shouren, and he was very angry and wanted to send troops immediately.

古文：公谓： 急犯其锋，非计也。宜示以自守不出之形，必俟其出，然后尾而图之。
现代文：王守仁说： 这时候和朱宸濠硬碰硬地对打不是最好的选择，应当摆出坚守不战的姿态，等到朱宸濠率军往别的地方的时候，再尾随在他的后面，创造好机会。
English: Wang Shouren said: At this time, it is not the best choice to fight hard against Zhu Xi. We should take a stance of not fighting, and wait until Zhu Xi leads the army to other places, and then follow behind him to create a good opportunity.

古文：先复省城，以倾其巢。彼闻，必回兵来援，我则出兵邀而击之，此全胜之策。 
现代文：首要的应先光复南昌，攻击朱宸濠的老巢，朱宸濠一定会回兵救援，这时再出击迎战，才是必胜的上策。 
English: The most important thing is to recover Nanchang first, attack Zhu Xi's old nest, Zhu Xi will certainly return to the rescue, then attack again, is the best way to win.

古文：濠果使人探公不出，乃留兵万余守省城，而自引兵东下，公闻濠已出，遂急促各府兵，刻期会于丰城，时濠兵已围安庆，众议宜急往救。
现代文：朱宸濠果然派人来侦察王守仁的动向，知道王守仁坚守不战，于是留下一万名部属守卫南昌，而自己却率领大军东下。王守仁听说朱宸濠已经率兵东下，就急忙下令各府兵马，约定日期在丰城会师。当时朱宸濠的大军已经包围了安庆，诸将都认为应救援安庆。
English: Zhu Xi sent someone to spy on Wang Shuren's movements. Knowing that Wang Shuren would not fight, he left ten thousand subordinates to guard Nanchang, while he himself led a large army to the east. When Wang Shuren heard that Zhu Xi had led his army to the east, he hastily ordered soldiers and horses from all provinces to meet at Fengcheng on the agreed date. At that time, Zhu Xi's army had surrounded Anqing, and all generals believed that Anqing should be rescued.

古文：公谓： 九江、南康皆已为贼所据，而南昌城中精悍万余，食货重积，我兵若抵安庆，贼必回军死斗，安庆之兵仅足自守，必不能出而夹攻。
现代文：王守仁说： 九江、南康都已经被朱宸濠攻陷了，而南昌城中有一万名精兵，粮食充足，我军如果前往安庆救援，叛贼一定会回军拼死迎战的，而安庆的兵力仅仅能够自保而已，不能出城和我军配合夹击叛贼。
English: Wang Shouren said: Jiujiang and Nankang have been conquered by Zhu Xi, and Nanchang has 10,000 elite soldiers and sufficient grain. If our army goes to Anqing for rescue, the traitors will certainly return to the army to fight to the death, while Anqing's troops can only protect themselves, they cannot leave the city and cooperate with our army to pin down the traitors.

古文：贼令南昌兵绝我粮道，九江、南康合势挠摄，而四方之援又不可望，事其危矣!
现代文：如果叛贼命令南昌派兵断绝我军的粮道，再联合九江、南康的兵力骚扰我军，我军如果得不到外地援军，就会处于非常不利的境地。
English: If the traitors order Nanchang to send troops to cut off our army's food supply, and then join forces from Jiujiang and Nankang to harass our army, our army will be in a very unfavorable situation if it does not receive reinforcements from abroad.

古文：今我师骤集，先声所加，城中必恐，并力急攻，其势必下，此孙子救韩趋魏之计也! 
现代文：现在我军在丰城会师，声势夺人，南昌的贼兵必定会心生恐惧，我军一起进攻，必定能一举破城，这是孙膑围魏救韩的计谋。 
English: Now our army has joined the division in Fengcheng, and the momentum is overwhelming. The thieves in Nanchang will certainly be afraid. Our army will attack together and will certainly be able to break the city at one stroke. This is Sun Yat-sen's strategy to surround Wei and save Korea.

古文：侦者言： 新、旧厂伏兵万余，以备犄角。 
现代文：这时探员报告： 新旧厂附近，各有万名伏兵，形成了犄角之势。 
English: At this time, the investigator reported: In the vicinity of the old and new factories, there were 10,000 ambushes each, forming a corner situation.

古文：公遣兵从间道袭破之，溃卒入城，城中知王师雨集，皆大骇，遂一鼓下之。
现代文：于是王守仁派兵从小路袭击，贼兵迅速溃败，退入城中。城中人知道各路官军大会师，大为吃惊，因此一举攻破南昌。
English: As a result, Wang Shou-Ren sent soldiers to attack from a side road. The robber soldiers were quickly defeated and retreated into the city. The people in the city were very surprised to know that there were large divisions of officials and soldiers from all directions, so they defeated Nanchang in one fell swoop.

古文：濠闻我兵至丰城，即欲回舟，李士实谏，以为， 必须径往南京，既登大宝，则江西自服。 
现代文：朱宸濠听说官军会师丰城，就想要搭船回城，李士实谏阻，认为， 必须直接进攻南京，夺得天子之位，江西自然归服。 
English: When Zhu Xi heard that the government army was gathering in Fengcheng, he wanted to take a boat back to the city, but Li Shishi opposed this, believing that it was necessary to directly attack Nanjing, win the position of the son of heaven, and Jiangxi would naturally submit.

古文：濠不听，遂解安庆之围，移兵泊阮子江，为归援计。
现代文：但是朱宸濠不听，从安庆撤军，先驻扎在阮子江边，策划回师救援南昌。
English: However, Zhu Xi did not listen and withdrew his troops from Anqing, first stationed on the banks of the Ruanzi River, planning to return to the division to rescue Nanchang.

古文：公闻濠兵且至，召众议之。众云： 宜敛兵入城，坚壁待援。 
现代文：王守仁听说朱宸濠的救兵就要到了，就召集部下将领商议，诸将说： 我们不如将军队退入城中，坚守不战，等待援军的到来。 
English: When Wang Shouren heard that Zhu Xi's relief army was about to arrive, he called together his subordinate generals for discussion. The generals said, "We'd better withdraw the army into the city, hold firm and not fight, and wait for reinforcements to arrive."

古文：公曰： 不然，彼闻巢破，胆已丧矣，先出锐卒，要其惰归，一挫其锐，将不战而溃，所谓 先声有夺人之气 也。 
现代文：王守仁说： 不可以，贼兵听说老巢已经被攻破，已经丧胆，先派精锐出战，攻击敌人的怠惰之师，挫败他们的锐气，他们就会不战而败，这就是所谓的 先发制人，能够夺人气势 。 
English: Wang Shouren said, "No, the robber soldiers have heard that the old nest has been breached, and they have lost heart. They will send the elite to fight first, attack the enemy's lazy division, frustrate their sharpness, and they will be defeated without a fight. This is the so-called pre-emptive strike, which can win popularity.

古文：乃指授伍文定等方略，先以游兵诱之，复佯北以致之，俟其争前趋利，然后四面合击，伏兵并起，又虑城中宗室或内应为变，亲慰谕之，出给告示，凡胁从者不问，虽尝受贼官职，能逃归者，皆免死，能斩贼徒归降者，皆给赏，使内外居民及乡导人等四路传布。
现代文：于是指示伍文定等诸将应战的方略，先以游击兵诱敌，然后假装敌不过而败逃，等贼兵为了抢夺战功而奋力追击的时候，四面包围埋伏的士卒群起而攻之。王守仁又顾虑城中的皇室宗亲，也可能是朱宸濠的内应，于是就亲自一一对他们进行拜访，并发布公文告示，凡是过去曾被宸濠胁迫而跟随叛乱的，一律不予追究；虽然曾接受过朱宸濠的任职，但如果现在能投诚返正的，也一律免去死罪；而能杀叛贼投降的，都要论功行赏。王守仁命令人将此告示四处张贴散布。
English: Therefore, he instructed Wu Wenting and others to devise a strategy for the upcoming battle. First, they would lure the enemy with guerrilla soldiers, and then pretend to be overpowered by the enemy and flee. When the robber soldiers chased them in order to snatch the war exploits, the ambushed soldiers surrounded them and attacked them. Wang Shouren was also concerned about the royal relatives in the city, who might also be Zhu Xi's inner circle, so he personally visited them one by one and issued a public notice that anyone who had been coerced into following the rebellion in the past would not be prosecuted; although they had accepted Zhu Xi's post, if they could now

古文：又分兵攻九江、南康，以绝其援。于是群力并举，逆首就擒。
现代文：另一方面又派兵分别攻打九江、南康，以断绝两地的救援，终于群策合力擒获朱宸濠。
English: On the other hand, he also sent troops to attack Jiujiang and Nankang separately, in order to cut off the rescue of the two places, and finally, they worked together to capture Zhu Xi.

古文：按陈眉公《见闻录》，谓宸濠之败，虽结于江西，而实溃于安庆。
现代文：陈眉公《见闻录》中记载，朱宸濠兵败虽然是在江西结束的，但实际上却是在安庆埋下的败因。
English: It is recorded in Chen Meigong's "Introduction" that although Zhu Xi's military defeat ended in Jiangxi, it was actually buried in Anqing.

古文：虽收功于王阳明，而实得力于李梧山。
现代文：虽然战功首推王守仁，而实际上却应该归功于李梧山。
English: Although the credit for the war goes to Wang Shuren, it should actually be credited to Li Wushan.

古文：李讳充嗣，四川内江人，正德十四年巡抚南畿，闻宸濠请增护卫，叹曰： 虎而翼，祸将作矣。 
现代文：李梧山名叫李充嗣，四川内江人。正德十四年，他巡抚南畿之时，听说朱宸濠请求增加护卫，叹息说： 猛虎添翼，恐怕即将出现兵祸。 
English: Li Wushan's name was Li Chengzhi, a native of Sichuan's Neijiang River. In the 14th year of the Zhengde era, when he was the governor of Nanki, he heard that Zhu Xi had asked for more guards, and he said with a sigh, "If a ferocious tiger gains more wings, I'm afraid there will be a military disaster."

古文：遂力陈反状，廷议难之。
现代文：于是上书极力反对，但大臣都不赞同。
English: As a result, the petition was strenuously opposed, but the minister did not agree.

古文：公乃旦夕设方略，饬武备，以御贼为念。
现代文：李梧山日夜加紧防备，整饬军队，时刻不忘防御贼人。
English: Li Wushan stepped up preparations day and night, organized the army, and did not forget to defend against thieves.

古文：谓安庆畿辅，适当贼冲，非得人莫守。
现代文：他认为安庆位置正当要冲，一定要选择合适的将领进行防卫。
English: He believed that Anqing's position is right to rush, and must choose the right general to defend.

古文：当诸将庭参，于众中独揖指挥使杨锐而进之曰： 皖城保障，委之于子，毋负我! 
现代文：当时诸将齐集参拜的时候，他唯独选中并推荐指挥使杨锐，说： 我将防卫皖城的重任交给你，你不要辜负我对你的期望。 
English: At that time, when all the generals gathered to visit, he was the only one to choose and recommend the commander Yang Rui, saying: I will give you the important task of defending Shicheng, you should not live up to my expectations.

古文：十五年，贼兵陷九江，公自将万人，屯采石，以塞上游之路。飞檄皖城，谕以忠义。
现代文：正德十五年，朱宸濠攻陷九江。李梧山一面派一万名士兵驻守采石，以堵塞上游的道路，一面派人紧急通知皖城进行戒备，并以忠孝节义勉励杨锐。
English: In the 15th year of Zhengde, Zhu Xi attacked and occupied Jiujiang. On the one hand, Li Wushan sent ten thousand soldiers to garrison the quarry to block the upstream road, on the other hand, he sent an urgent notice to Lucheng to be on the alert, and encouraged Yang Rui with the loyalty and filial piety festival.

古文：锐感激思奋，相机应敌，发无不捷。
现代文：杨锐万分感激，更加努力奋发，随机应变，战无不胜。
English: Yang Rui is immensely grateful, makes more efforts, adapts at random, and is invincible.

古文：节发间谍火牌云： 为紧急军情事，该钦差太监总兵等官，统领边官军十万余，一半将到南京，一半径趋安庆，并调两广狼兵，湖广土兵，即日水陆并进，俱赴安庆会集，刻期进攻江西叛贼。
现代文：另外伪造火牌令说： 因为军情紧急，特命钦差太监为总兵，统领十余万官军，一半派往南京，一半派往安庆，并征调两广狼兵，湖广的土兵，即日起分由水、陆同时进发，在安庆会师，限期内进攻江西，剿灭叛贼。
English: In addition, the forged fire order said: Because of the urgent military situation, the special envoy Qinzha Eunuch was appointed as the general, leading more than 100,000 government troops, half of which were sent to Nanjing, half to Anqing, and recruiting two broad wolf soldiers, Hukang's local soldiers. From now on, they will advance simultaneously from the water and the land, meet the division in Anqing, attack Jiangxi within the time limit, and exterminate the traitors.

古文：今将火牌飞报前路官司，一体同心防守，预备粮草，听候应用等因。 
现代文：今天以火牌飞报，前路各将领需要同心防守戒备，囤积粮草，准备应战。 
English: Today, with fire and lightning, the generals on the front line need to concentrate on defense and alertness, hoard grain and grass, and prepare for battle.

古文：宸濠舟至李阳河，遇火牌，览之惊骇，由是散亡居半。
现代文：朱宸濠的战船行至李阳河的时候，遇到火牌，看后大为惊慌，贼兵散亡一半。
English: When Zhu Xi's warship sailed to the Li Yang River, it encountered a fire sign. After seeing it, he was greatly alarmed, and half of the robber soldiers were killed.

古文：继又发水卒千人，盛其标帜，乘飞舰百余艘，鼓噪而进，声为安庆应援，城中望见，士气百倍，锐即开门出敌，水陆夹攻，贼遂大溃。
现代文：李梧山又派了一千名水兵，搭乘一百多艘船舰，在船上升起军旗，命令船上的军士们大声喊叫，为安庆声援，城中的守兵看到之后，士气大振。杨锐立即打开城门率兵迎敌，水陆两路进行夹攻，大败贼兵，贼兵开始溃逃。
English: Li Wushan also sent a thousand sailors aboard more than a hundred ships, raised the military flag on the ship, and ordered the sergeants on the ship to shout loudly to support Anqing. After the guards in the city saw it, their morale was greatly boosted. Yang Rui immediately opened the city gate and led the soldiers to meet the enemy, and carried out a pincer attack on both land and water. He defeated the bandits, and the bandits began to flee.

古文：时宸濠营于黄石矶，闻败将遁，公自将兵逐北，宸濠奔入鄱阳湖，适遇巡抚王公阳明引兵至湖，遂成擒焉。
现代文：当时朱宸濠在黄石矶驻扎下来，听说士兵们溃逃，就要趁夜逃逸，李梧山又亲自率兵追击，朱宸濠逃到鄱阳湖的时候，正巧遇到王守仁率兵到鄱阳湖，于是将其擒获。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi was stationed in Yellowstone, and when he heard that the soldiers were fleeing, he had to take advantage of the night to escape. Li Wushan personally led the soldiers to pursue. When Zhu Xi fled to Poyang Lake, he happened to meet Wang Shuren leading the soldiers to Poyang Lake, so he captured him.

古文：后论功竟不及公，胡御史洁目击其事，特为论列，不报。
现代文：后世论功竟然没有提及李梧山，御史胡洁曾目睹了整个事件的发生过程，还特别加以论述，但是并没有向朝廷奏禀这件事。
English: Li Wushan was not even mentioned in the discussion of the merits of later generations. The Grand Historian Hu Jie had witnessed the entire process of the incident and also discussed it in particular, but did not report the matter to the imperial court.

古文：故今人盛称阳明，而不及梧山，亦有幸有不幸欤？
现代文：一般人只是极力地称赞王守仁，却将李梧山的功绩遗忘了。唉，人幸运与否的差异真是太大了!
English: Ordinary people only praise Wang Shouren as much as possible, but forget Li Wushan's achievements. Alas, the difference between people who are lucky and those who are not is really huge!

古文：又按宸濠兵起，声言直取南京，道经安庆。
现代文：朱宸濠兵变的初期，曾经声明要直攻南京。
English: In the early days of Zhu Xi's mutiny, he had declared that he would attack Nanjing directly.

古文：太守张文锦与守备杨锐等合谋，令军士鼓噪登城大骂，激怒逆濠，使顿兵挫锐于坚城之下。
现代文：路上经过安庆的时候，太守张文锦和守备杨锐等人商议，下令军士们大声叫喊，并登上城楼对朱宸濠进行辱骂，使得朱宸濠因为愤怒转而攻城，杨锐死守安庆坚城，因此朱宸濠大军受到挫败。
English: When passing through Anqing on the way, Zhang Wenjin, the governor of Taizhou, consulted with Yang Rui, the commander of the garrison, and ordered the sergeants to shout loudly and climb the tower to abuse Zhu Xi, which made Zhu Xi turn to attack the city because of anger, Yang Rui defended Anqing Jiancheng, so Zhu Xi's army was defeated.

古文：而阳明得成其功，虽天夺其魄，而张、杨诸公之智，亦足述矣。
现代文：最后王守仁才能够一举擒获朱宸濠，虽然说朱宸濠之败是天意，但是张文锦、杨锐等人的智谋，也是非常值得称道的。
English: In the end, it was Wang Shouren who was able to capture Zhu Xi in one fell swoop. Although Zhu Xi's defeat was God's will, the wisdom of Zhang Wenjin, Yang Rui and others is also very commendable.

