古文：世居荆州，为主帅，征伐蛮、蜒。
现代文：徐世谱字兴宗，巴东鱼复人。祖上世世代代居住在荆州，担任主帅，征伐蛮人、蜒人。
English: Xu Shishu Zi Xingzong, Badong Yu Fu Ren. Ancestors lived in Jingzhou for generations, served as head coach, and conquered barbarians and meanderers.

古文：至世谱，尤敢勇有膂力，善水战。
现代文：传到徐世谱，尤其勇猛无畏而富有体力，善于水战。
English: Passed down to the Xu family tree, especially brave and fearless, rich in physical strength, good at water warfare.

古文：梁元帝之为荆州刺史，世谱将领乡人事焉。
现代文：梁元帝担任荆州刺史时，徐世谱率领乡勇前往效力。
English: When Emperor Liang Yuan served as the prefect of Jingzhou, Xu Shifu led Xiangyong to serve.

古文：侯景之乱，因预征讨，累迁至员外散骑常侍。
现代文：侯景作乱，徐世谱因参与征讨，多次升官至员外散骑常侍。
English: Hou Jing caused a riot, and Xu Shifu was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer several times for his participation in the requisition.

古文：寻领水军，从司徒陆法和讨景，与景战于赤亭湖。
现代文：不久率领水军，随从司徒陆法和讨伐侯景，与侯景大战于赤亭湖。
English: Soon, he led the navy, followed Stulfa and fought against Houjing, and fought with Houjing in Chateung Lake.

古文：时景军甚盛，世谱乃别造楼船、拍舰、火舫、水车以益军势。
现代文：当时侯景兵力很强，徐世谱就另造楼船，抛掷石、火的抛物舰船，火舫，水车以加强自己军队的威力。
English: At that time, the military strength of Houjing was very strong, and Xu Shifu built another building ship, a stone-throwing ship, a fire-throwing ship, a fire raft, and a waterwheel to strengthen the power of his army.

古文：将战，又乘大舰居前，大败景军，生擒景将任约，景退走。
现代文：大战开始，又亲乘大舰当先，结果大败了侯景的军队，活捉了侯景的将领任约，侯景败退逃走。
English: At the beginning of the great war, he personally took the lead of the big ship. As a result, he defeated Hou Jing's army and captured Hou Jing's general alive. Hou Jing was defeated and fled.

古文：因随王僧辩攻郢州，世谱复乘大舰临其仓门，贼将宋子仙据城降。
现代文：于是随从王僧辩进攻郢州，徐世谱又乘大舰逼近仓门，贼将宋子仙献城投降。
English: As a result, Wang Sangyan attacked Zhangzhou, and Xu Shifu approached Cangmen with a large ship. The thief surrendered Song Zixian to the city.

古文：以功除使持节、信武将军、信州刺史，封鱼复县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：因为有战功被任命为使持节、信武将军、信州刺史，封鱼复县侯，食邑五百户。
English: Because of his war exploits, he was appointed as the envoy of Ji Jie, the general of Xinwu, the historian of Xinzhou, the county magistrate of Fengyu Fu County, and the 500 households of the food village.

古文：仍随僧辩东下，恒为军锋。
现代文：仍然随从王僧辩东下，常常担任先锋。
English: He still followed Wang Sangye to the east and often served as a vanguard.

古文：又破景将侯子鉴于湖熟。
现代文：又在姑孰打垮了侯景的将领侯子鉴。
English: Hou Zi Jian, the general who defeated Hou Jing, also defeated him in Gushan.

古文：侯景平后，以功除通直散骑常侍、衡州刺史资，领河东太守，增邑并前一千户。
现代文：侯景被消灭后，因为有战功徐世谱被授予通直散骑常侍、衡蛆刺史资格，兼河东太守，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千户。
English: After the elimination of Houjing, because of his war service, Xu Shifu was awarded the qualifications of Zongzhizhanzhong riding attendant, Hengyao stabbing history, and also the governor of Hedong, and the total number of a thousand households previously awarded was increased.

古文：西魏来寇荆州，世谱镇马头岸，据有龙洲，元帝授侍中、使持节、都督江南诸军事、镇南将军、护军将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：酉垄来犯翅蛆，涂世趱镇守区玺岸，控制了垄绌，銮五童任命他为侍中、使持节、都督江南诸军事、镇南将军、护军将军，赏给鼓吹乐一部。
English: Zhaorong came to attack Zhen, Tu Shizhen guarded the Zhen coast and controlled Zhaorong. Zhaoguodong appointed him as an attendant, envoy, military governor of the south of the Yangtze River, Zhenan general, and escort general, and awarded him a part of the propaganda music.

古文：江陵陷没，世谱东下依侯瑱。
现代文：堰失陷后，徐世赞束下依附翅。
English: After the collapse of the weir, Xu Shizan's bundle was attached to the wings.

古文：绍泰元年，征为侍中、左卫将军。
现代文：多睦元年，天子征召他入朝担任侍中、左卫将军。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tōmu, the emperor called him to the imperial court to serve as a chamberlain and general of the left guard.

古文：高祖之拒王琳，其水战之具，悉委世谱。
现代文：直狙抗御王继的时候，水战的武器装备，全部委交给徐世谱准备。
English: When the direct aim was to resist Wang Jie, the water warfare weapons and equipment were all handed over to Xu Shifu for preparation.

古文：世谱性机巧，谙解旧法，所造器械，并随机损益，妙思出入。
现代文：徐世谱天性机灵乖巧，熟知制造各种战具的传统方法，他所做的器械，都能仿照原件而有所改进，奇妙的构思超越常人。
English: Xu Shiguang is naturally clever and well-behaved. He is familiar with the traditional methods of manufacturing various war tools. The instruments he makes can be imitated from the original and improved. His wonderful ideas are beyond ordinary people.

古文：永定二年，迁护军将军。
现代文：永定二年，升任护军将军。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was promoted to General of the Guards.

古文：世祖嗣位，加特进，进号安右将军。
现代文：世祖继承帝位后，加任他为特进，提升官号为安右将军。
English: After the ancestor succeeded to the throne, he was appointed as a special envoy, and his official title was promoted to General An Yu.

古文：天嘉元年，增邑五百户。
现代文：天嘉元年，增赐食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, an additional 500 households were given food villages.

古文：二年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督宣城郡诸军事、安西将军、宣城太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：二年，调出京城担任使持节、散骑常侍、都督宣城郡诸军事、安西将军、宣城太守，俸禄中二干石。
English: In the second year, he was transferred out of Kyoto to serve as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military of the governor of Xuancheng County, the general of Anxi, and the governor of Xuancheng, with a salary of two dry stones.

古文：还为安前将军、右光禄大夫。
现代文：又调回朝廷担任安前将军、右光禄大夫。
English: He was also transferred back to the Imperial Court to serve as Anzen Shogun and Uko Roku no daibu.

古文：寻以疾失明，谢病不朝。
现代文：之后不久因患病而双目失明，托病请求免朝。
English: Soon after, he became blind due to an illness, and asked to be excused from morning prayers.

古文：四年卒，时年五十五。
现代文：四年去世，这年五十五岁。
English: He died four years later, at the age of 55.

古文：赠本官，谥曰桓侯。
现代文：以去世时的官职封赠他，谧号是桓侯。
English: When he died, he was presented with an official title, and his posthumous name was Kanhou.

古文：世谱从弟世休，随世谱自梁征讨，亦有战功。
现代文：徐世谱的堂弟徐世休，跟随徐世谱在梁朝征讨，也有战功。
English: Xu Shixu, the cousin of Xu Shiguan, followed Xu Shiguan to fight in the Liang Dynasty, and also had military achievements.

古文：官至员外散骑常侍、安远将军，枳县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：官做到员外散骑常侍、安远将军，封为枳县侯，食邑八百户。
English: He was appointed as a non-commissioned officer, a knight-errant, and a general of the Anyuan army, and was given the title of county magistrate of Handan County, with more than 800 households in his hometown.

古文：光大二年，隶都督淳于量征华皎。
现代文：光大二年，附属于都督淳于量征讨华皎。
English: He was a second-year student at Gwangju National University when he was attached to the provincial governor, Chun Yu, to solicit funds for the construction of the Great Wall of China.

古文：卒，赠通直散骑常侍，谥曰壮。
现代文：去世后，追赠为通直散骑常侍。谧号是壮。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the title of Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi. His posthumous name was Zhuang.

古文：鲁悉达，字志通，扶风郿人也。
现代文：鲁悉达字志通，扶风郡郡县人。
English: Lu Sida Zhi Tong, a resident of Fufeng County.

古文：祖斐，齐通直散骑常侍、安远将军、衡州刺史，阳塘侯。
现代文：祖父鲁斐，是齐朝的通直散骑常侍、安远将军、衡州刺史，封阳塘侯。
English: His grandfather, Rufi, was a regular attendant of the Qi Dynasty, a general of Anyuan, a historian of Hengzhou, and a feudal lord of Yangtang.

古文：父益之，梁云麾将军、新蔡、义阳二郡太守。
现代文：父亲鲁益之，是梁朝的云麾将军、新蔡义阳二郡太守。
English: His father, Lu Yizhi, was the general of the Liang Dynasty and the new governor of the two counties of Cai and Yiyang.

古文：悉达幼以孝闻，起家为梁南平嗣王中兵参军。
现代文：鲁悉达早年以孝道而远近闻名，在家中以平民的身份出任为梁朝南平嗣王中兵参军。
English: In his early years, Ru Sida was known far and wide for his filial piety. At home, he served as a civilian and joined the army as a soldier of the King of the Liang Dynasty, Nanping Zhi.

古文：侯景之乱，悉达纠合乡人，保新蔡，力田蓄谷。
现代文：侯景作乱，鲁悉达聚集乡里人，保护新蔡，又努力耕种蓄存粮食。
English: Houjing made a disturbance, and Lu Sida gathered the villagers to protect Xin Cai, and also worked hard to cultivate and store grain.

古文：时兵荒饥馑，京都及上川饿死者十八九，有得存者，皆携老幼以归焉。
现代文：当时战祸连接灾荒，京都和上的人饿死了十分之八九，有幸存的，都带着老幼前来归附他。
English: At that time, the disaster of war was connected to the disaster of famine. Eighty-nine out of ten people in Kyoto and Kyoto died of starvation. Those who survived brought their children and grandchildren to join him.

古文：悉达分给粮廪，其所济活者甚众，仍于新蔡置顿以居之。
现代文：鲁悉达分发粮米给灾民，靠他的救济而活下来的人非常之多。
English: Rusilda distributed grain and rice to the victims of the disaster, and many people survived thanks to his relief.

古文：招集晋熙等五郡，尽有其地。
现代文：接下来他在新蔡修建住所让流民住下来。他招附了晋熙等五郡，完全掌握了这些地区。
English: Next, he built residences in Xin Cai for the displaced people to live in. He invited five counties such as Jinxi and completely controlled these areas.

古文：使其弟广达领兵随王僧辩讨侯景。
现代文：又派他的弟弟鲁广达领兵随从王堂峦讨伐蓉还。
English: He also sent his younger brother, Lu Guangda, to lead the troops to follow Wang Dongyao to fight back.

古文：景平，梁元帝授持节、仁威将军、散骑常侍、北江州刺史。
现代文：娄基被消灭后，凿远童任命他为持节、仁威将军、散骑常侍、北江州刺史。
English: After Xingji was eliminated, he appointed him as the general of Jinwei, the knight errant, and the governor of Northern Jiangzhou.

古文：敬帝即位，王琳据有上流，留异、余孝顷、周迪等所在蜂起，悉达抚绥五郡，甚得民和，士卒皆乐为之用。
现代文：敬帝即位后，王琳控制了长江上游，留异、余孝顷、且迪等也在各地蜂起反叛，叠悉达安抚五郡，很得民众拥戴，士卒都心甘情愿地为他效力。
English: After Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, Wang Lin took control of the upper reaches of the Yangtze River. Liu Yi, Yu Xiaohao, and Qi Di also rebelled in various places, and they were able to pacify the five counties. They were very popular with the people, and the nobles were willing to serve him.

古文：琳授悉达镇北将军，高祖亦遣赵知礼授征西将军、江州刺史，各送鼓吹女乐，悉达两受之，迁延顾望，皆不就。
现代文：王继任命叠迁达为镇北将军，直担也派厘翅擅任命他为征西将军、江州刺史，各方又都赐赠了鼓吹乐和歌姬舞女，鲁悉连接受了两方的任命，但却拖延时日观察形势，不表态归附任何一方。
English: Wang Ji appointed Lian Qian Da as the general of Zhenbei, and directly sent Li Ying Tong to appoint him as the general of Western Conquest and the historian of Jiangzhou. All parties also presented propaganda music and a singer. Lu Xilian accepted the appointment of both parties, but delayed the time to observe the situation and did not declare his position to either side.

古文：高祖遣安西将军沈泰潜师袭之，不能克。
现代文：高祖派安西将军沈泰暗中进兵突然袭击，却没能打败他。
English: Gaozhu sent General Anxi Shen Tai secretly to attack, but failed to defeat him.

古文：齐遣行台慕容绍宗以众三万来攻郁口诸镇，兵甲甚盛，悉达与战，败齐军，绍宗仅以身免。
现代文：齐人派遣行台慕容绍宗率兵三万进攻郁口各集镇，兵势非常强盛，鲁悉达与之大战，打败了齐军，慕容绍宗仅仅是只身逃脱。
English: The Qi people dispatched Murong Shaosong and his 30,000 soldiers to attack the market towns in Ikutou. The army was very strong, and Rusilda fought with it and defeated the Qi army. Murong Shaosong only escaped by himself.

古文：王琳欲图东下，以悉达制其中流，恐为己患，频遣使招诱，悉达终不从。
现代文：王琳打算顺江而下向东进军，但因为鲁悉达控制了中游，担心他会阻挠作梗，于是多次派遣使者招引诱惑他归顺，鲁悉达始终不答应。
English: Wang Lin planned to march down the river to the east, but since Lu Xida controlled the middle reaches of the river, fearing that he would obstruct and hinder, he repeatedly sent emissaries to entice and tempt him to submit, but Lu Xida always refused.

古文：琳不得下，乃连结于齐，共为表里，齐遣清河王高岳助之。
现代文：王琳无法东进，就与齐人联合，互为呼应互相支援，齐人派遣清河王高岳帮助工琳。
English: Wang Lin was unable to go east, so he united with Qi people and supported each other. Qi people sent Qinghe Wang Gao Yue to help Gong Lin.

古文：相持岁馀，会裨将梅天养等惧罪，乃引齐军入城。
现代文：双方相持一年多，恰遇偏将梅天养等有罪害怕惩治，就勾引齐军攻入城内。
English: The two sides have been at loggerheads for more than a year, and when Mei Tianyao and other guilty parties are afraid of being punished, they lure the Qi army into the city.

古文：悉达勒麾下数千人，济江而归高祖。
现代文：鲁悉达指挥部下敷千人渡江归匾高祖。
English: Lu Sida commanded his subordinates to cross the river and return to Gaozu.

古文：高祖见之，甚喜，曰： 来何迟也。 
现代文：高祖见了他，非常高兴，说： 怎么来得这样迟啊? 
English: Gaozu was very happy to see him and said, "How come you're so late?"

古文：悉达对曰： 臣镇抚上流，愿为蕃屏，陛下授臣以官，恩至厚矣，沈泰袭臣，威亦深矣，然臣所以自归于陛下者，诚以陛下豁达大度，同符汉祖故也。 
现代文：鲁悉达回答说： 我在上游镇抚，希望成为保护陛下的屏障，陛下给我以官职，恩惠是很大的了，但派沈泰袭击我，威力也是够厉害的了，然而我主动地归顺陛下的原因，是我确实认为陛下胸怀开阔气度宽宏，跟汉高祖相同的缘故。 
English: Rusilda replied, "I am upstream, hoping to become a barrier to protect Your Majesty. Your Majesty has given me an official post. The favor is great, but sending Shen Tai to attack me is powerful enough. However, the reason why I voluntarily submit to Your Majesty is that I truly believe that Your Majesty is broad-minded and broad-minded, the same reason as Han Gaozu.

古文：高祖叹曰： 卿言得之矣。 
现代文：高祖赞叹地说： 你的话说对了啊! 
English: Gaozu said admiringly, "You are right!

古文：授平南将军、散骑常侍、北江州刺史，封彭泽县侯。
现代文：任命他为平南将军、散骑常侍、北江州刺史，封为彭泽县侯。
English: He was appointed as the general of Pingnan, the cavalryman, the governor of North Jiangzhou, and the lord of Pengze County.

古文：世祖即位，进号安左将军。
现代文：世祖即位，提升他的官号为安左将军。
English: Emperor Taizu ascended the throne, and his official title was raised to General Anzo.

古文：悉达虽仗气任侠，不以富贵骄人，雅好词赋，招礼才贤，与之赏会。
现代文：鲁悉达虽然任性行事，喜欢打抱不平，却不会因为自己富贵就鄙视别人，而且很爱好词赋，还招揽礼遇贤才，与他们聚会共同鉴赏辞章。
English: Although Lu Sida is headstrong and likes to hold grudges, he does not despise others because he is rich. Moreover, he is very fond of words. He also invites courteous and talented people and gathers with them to appreciate words.

古文：迁安南将军、吴州刺史。
现代文：升任安南将军、吴州刺史。
English: Promoted to General Annan, Wuzhou stabbed history.

古文：遭母忧，哀毁过礼，因遘疾卒，时年三十八。
现代文：遭逢母亲去世而服丧，哀伤过度以致形销骨立，因而得病而亡，这年三十八岁。
English: At the age of thirty-eight, he was overcome with grief at the death of his mother, and his grief was so overwhelming that he became paralyzed. As a result, he fell ill and died.

古文：赠安左将军、江州刺史，谥曰孝侯。
现代文：追赠为安左将军、江州刺史，谧号是孝侯。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of General Anza and Jiangzhou Sashi, and his posthumous name was Takaharu.

古文：子览嗣。
现代文：儿子鲁览继承。
English: His son, Rusan, succeeded him.

古文：弟广达，别有传。
现代文：弟弟鲁广达，另外有传。
English: A younger brother, Lu Guangda, is also said to have been involved.

古文：周敷，字仲远，临川人也。
现代文：周敷字仲远，临川人。
English: Zhou Shiki is from Zhongyuan and Linchuan.

古文：为郡豪族。
现代文：是郡裹的豪门大族。
English: They are the county's local heroes.

古文：敷形貌眇小，如不胜衣，而胆力劲果，超出时辈。
现代文：周敷身形短小，就像还撑不起成人衣服的小孩，但是胆量勇力以及坚强果毅的气质，却胜过当时的成名人物。
English: Zhou Jiki is short and small, like a child who can't hold up adult clothes, but his courage, strength and strong determination are better than the famous figures at that time.

古文：性豪侠，轻财重士，乡党少年任气者咸归之。
现代文：生性豪放任侠，不重资财钱物却敬重能人志士，乡里那些意气用事的青年人都归向他。
English: He is a free-spirited hero by nature. He does not care about money or possessions, but respects those who have a strong will. The young people in the village who are full of energy are drawn to him.

古文：侯景之乱，乡人周续合徒众以讨贼为名，梁内史始兴王毅以郡让续，续所部内有欲侵掠于毅，敷拥护之，亲率其党捍卫，送至豫章。
现代文：侯景作乱时，乡里人周续以讨贼的名义纠集了许多人，梁朝内史始兴藩王萧毅把郡守的职权退让给周续，周续的部下有人想侵犯抢掠萧赵，且苏保护他，亲自带领手下人抵御防卫，把他送到了豫章。
English: When Houjing made a disturbance, the villagers gathered many people in the name of trying to catch the thief. Wang Xiaoyi, the first ruler of the Liang Dynasty, relinquished the authority of the county governor to Zhou Lian. Some of Zhou Lian's subordinates wanted to invade and rob Xiao Zhao, and the Soviet Union protected him. He personally led his subordinates to resist the defense and sent him to Yuzhang.

古文：时观宁侯萧永、长乐侯萧基、豊城侯萧泰避难流寓，闻敷信义，皆往依之。
现代文：当时观宁侯萧永、长乐侯萧基、丰城侯萧泰因避难而流离失所，听说周敷守信用讲道义，都前来投靠他。
English: At that time, Xiaoyong of Guanning, Xiaoji of Changle, and Xiaotai of Fengcheng were displaced due to refuge, and they heard that Zhou Shiki kept his word and preached morality, and they all came to support him.

古文：敷愍其危惧，屈体崇敬，厚加给恤，送之西上。
现代文：周敷怜悯他们处境危险可怕，对他们礼拜尊敬，周济了很多财物，护送他们溯江西上。
English: Zhou Shiki pitied their dangerous and terrible situation, paid homage to them, gave them a lot of wealth, and escorted them to the west of Jiangxi Province.

古文：俄而续部下将帅争权，复反，杀续以降周迪。
现代文：不久周续部下的将领争权夺利，再次造反，杀掉了周续向周迪投降。
English: Not long after, the generals under Zhou Di fought for power and profit, rebelled again, killed Zhou Di and surrendered to Zhou Di.

古文：迪素无簿阀，恐失众心，倚敷族望，深求交结。
现代文：周迪因祖辈先代向来没有达官贵人而缺少名望，恐怕吸引不住人心，就想依仗周敷在本族中的声望，所以非常想与周敷结交。
English: Zhou Di wanted to rely on Zhou Shiki's reputation among his own people because his ancestors had never been high-ranking officials and lacked fame, and he was afraid that he would not be able to attract people. Therefore, he very much wanted to make friends with Zhou Shiki.

古文：敷未能自固，事迪甚恭，迪大凭仗之，渐有兵众。
现代文：周敷这时还不能自保，于是就恭敬地对待周迪。周迪大藉他的威望，陆续招集了大量兵员。
English: Zhou Shiki could not protect himself at that time, so he treated Zhou Di with respect. Zhou Di, thanks to his prestige, successively recruited a large number of soldiers.

古文：迪据临川之工塘，敷镇临川故郡。
现代文：周迪占据了临川的工塘，周敷镇守在临川的旧郡城。
English: Zhou Di occupied the work pond in Linchuan, and Zhou Shiki Zhengu was in the old county seat of Linchuan.

古文：侯景平，梁元帝授敷使持节、通直散骑常侍、信武将军、宁州刺史，封西豊县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：侯景被消灭后，梁元帝任命周敷为使持节、通直散骑常侍、信武将军、宁州刺史，封为西丰县侯，食邑一千户。
English: After the elimination of Houjing, Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Zhou Shiki as the envoy of the festival, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, the general of the cavalry, and the general of the cavalry.

古文：高祖受禅，王琳据有上流，余孝顷与琳党李孝钦等共图周迪，敷大致人马以助于迪。迪擒孝顷等，敷功居多。
现代文：高祖受禅为帝，王琳控制了上游，余孝顷与王琳的党羽李孝钦等联合围攻周迪，周敷派遣大量人马援助周迪周迪抓获余孝顷等，以周敷的功劳最多。
English: Gaozu was made emperor by Zen, Wang Lin controlled the upstream, Yu Xiaoha and Wang Lin's henchman Li Xiaoqin jointly besieged Zhou Di, Zhou Shiki sent a large number of men and horses to assist Zhou Di, Zhou Di captured Yu Xiaoha, and so on. Zhou Shiki deserves the most credit.

古文：熊昙朗之杀周文育，据豫章，将兵万馀人袭敷，径至城下，敷与战，大败之，追奔五十馀里，昙朗单马获免，尽收其军实。
现代文：熊昙朗杀了周文育后，占据了豫章。带兵一万余人袭击周敷，一直杀到城下，周敷与他大战，彻底打败了他，追逐败兵五十余里，熊昙朗单人匹马逃脱，周敷缴获了他军中的全部物资。
English: After Xiong Binglang killed Zhou Wenyu, he occupied Yuzhang. He led more than ten thousand soldiers to attack Zhou Shiki and killed him all the way to the city. Zhou Shiki fought with him and defeated him completely. He chased the defeated soldiers for more than fifty miles. Xiong Binglang escaped alone on horseback. Zhou Shiki captured all the materials in his army.

古文：昙朗走巴山郡，收合馀党，敷因与周迪、黄法等进兵围昙朗，屠之。
现代文：熊昙塱逃入巴山郡，收拢他的余党，周敷就与周迪、黄法抃等进兵围剿熊昙朗，杀掉了他。
English: Xiong Yao fled to Bashan County and gathered his remaining followers. Zhou Shiki, together with Zhou Di and Huang Fahui, surrounded Xiong Yao Lang and killed him.

古文：王琳平，授散骑常侍、平西将军、豫章太守。
现代文：王琳被消灭后，周敷被任命为散骑常侍、平西将军、豫章太守。
English: After Wang Lin was eliminated, Zhou Shiki was appointed as straggler, general of Pingxi, and governor of Yuzhang.

古文：是时南江酋帅并顾恋巢窟，私署令长，不受召，朝廷未遑致讨，但羁縻之，唯敷独先入朝。
现代文：这时南江的部落首领依恋山寨洞穴，擅自安排县令僚吏，不接受召见，朝廷无暇征讨问罪，只好笼络他们免生变乱，衹有周数一人先到京城朝拜。
English: At this time, the tribal leaders of the Nanjiang River clung to the cottage cave, arranged county officials without authorization, and did not accept the summons. The court had no time to collect and investigate the crime, so they had to entice them to avoid chaos. For weeks, one person first went to the capital to worship.

古文：天嘉二年，诣阙，进号安西将军，给鼓吹一部，赐以女乐一部，令还镇豫章。
现代文：天嘉二年，拜见朝廷，朝廷提升他的官号为安西将军，赏给鼓吹乐一部。赐给女乐一部，派他回豫章镇守。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he visited the imperial court, and the imperial court promoted his official title to General Anxi, awarded him a part of the propaganda music, gave him a part of the women's music, and sent him back to Yuanzhang as the town guard.

古文：周迪以敷素出己下，超致显贵，深不平，乃举兵反，遣弟方兴以兵袭敷。
现代文：周迪认为周敷出仕任职之初本在自己的下位，如今显赫尊贵胜过自己，因而十分愤怒不平，就发兵造反，派弟弟周方兴袭击周敷。
English: Zhou Di thought that Zhou Jiki was originally subordinate to him when he served as a minister, but now he was superior to him, so he was very angry and disgruntled. He sent an army to rebel and sent his brother Zhou Fangxing to attack Zhou Jiki.

古文：敷与战，大破方兴。
现代文：周敷舆他作战，彻底打垮了周方兴。
English: Zhou Shiki fought against him and completely defeated Zhou Fangxing.

古文：仍率众从都督吴明彻攻迪，破之，擒其弟方兴并诸渠帅。
现代文：接着率领人马随从都督吴明彻攻讨周迪，打垮了他，活捉他弟弟周方兴和许多高级将领。
English: Next, he led the troops and horses to attack Zhou Di, defeating him and capturing his brother Zhou Fangxing and many senior generals alive.

古文：诏以敷为安西将军、临川太守，馀并如故。
现代文：天子下诏书任命周敷为安西将军、临太守，其余封赏仍旧。
English: Zhou Shiki was appointed as the general of Anxi and the crown prince in the imperial edict issued by the emperor, and the rest of the rewards remained the same.

古文：寻征为使持节、都督南豫、北江二州诸军事、镇南将军、南豫州刺史，增邑五百户，常侍、鼓吹如故。
现代文：随后天子又征召他担任使持节、都督南豫北江二州诸军事、镇南将军、南豫州刺史，增赐食邑五百户。常侍官职、赏赐的鼓吹乐仍旧。
English: Subsequently, the Son of Heaven also called him to serve as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the two states of South Henan and North Jiangsu, the general of Zhenan, and the historian of South Henan, and awarded 500 households of food villages. The propaganda of the regular attendant position and reward is still the same.

古文：五年，迪又收合馀众，还袭东兴。
现代文：五年，周迪又收拢余党，回袭束兴。
English: Five years later, Zhou Di closed the remaining parties and struck back at Sokxing.

古文：世祖遣都督章昭达征迪，敷又从军。
现代文：世祖派都督章昭达征讨周迪，周敷又随军进发。
English: The founder sent the governor Zhang Zhaoda to recruit Zhou Di, and Zhou Shiki followed the army.

古文：至定川县，与迪相对。
现代文：到了定皿墨，舆且迪对面相遇。
English: When it came to the ink on the set dish, they met on the opposite side.

古文：迪绐敷曰： 吾昔与弟戮力同心，宗从匪他，岂规相害。
现代文：且迪欺骗且堑说： 我以前和贤弟你合力同心，既是同宗兄弟不是外人，怎么能圃谋相害?
English: And he lied, and said, With thy brother David I have walked in thy ways: as a brother, and not as a stranger, wherefore then should I plot evil against thee?

古文：今愿伏罪还朝，因弟披露心腑，先乞挺身共立盟誓。 
现代文：现在我愿意服罪回朝，藉重贤弟表白我的忠心诚意，先请你决断无疑地共发誓言订立盟约。 
English: Now that I am willing to return to the Imperial Court to confess my sins, and to demonstrate my loyalty and sincerity through the example of a great scholar, I would first like to ask you to swear an oath and enter into a covenant with me.

古文：敷许之，方登坛，为迪所害，时年三十五。
现代文：周敷答应了他，正当登上盟誓高台时，被周迪杀害，这年才三十五岁。
English: Zhou Shiki agreed, but just as he was about to ascend the oath-swearing platform, he was killed by Zhou Di, who was only thirty-five years old.

古文：诏曰： 使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫州缘江诸军事、镇南将军、南豫州刺史西豊县开国侯敷，受任遐征，淹时违律，虚衿奸诡，遂贻丧仆。
现代文：天子下诏书说： 使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫州缘红诸军事、镇南将军、亩辽州刺史西丰县开国侯旦苏，领受重任出师远征，迟误时机违失军纪与敌人盟誓缔约，心中又缺乏对诡诈歹徒的警惕，以至于身殁命硕而遗体迄今未葬。
English: The imperial edict issued by the Son of Heaven said, "On the occasion of the Festival of Consecration, the knight-errant, the governor of Southern Yuzhou, Yuanhong, the military, the general of Zhenan, the mu of Liaozhou, the prince of Xifeng County, the founder of the state, Dansu, received the important assignment of dispatching an expeditionary force, delayed the time, violated the military discipline, and made an oath with the enemy, and lacked the vigilance against the treacherous gangsters, so that his body was full of life and his remains have not been buried.

古文：但夙著勤诚，亟劳戎旅，犹深恻怆，愍悼于怀。
现代文：但他早年的确勤劳王事忠诚为国，戎马生涯军务累累，他的不幸至今还令人悲痛不已，怜悯在心。
English: In his early years, however, he was indeed a diligent royalist and loyal to his country, and his military career was full of military affairs. His misfortune is still saddening, and his heart is full of pity.

古文：可存其茅赋，量所赙恤，还葬京邑。 
现代文：应该保存他的茅土封爵和食邑租赋，现在赠恤他全部丧事费用，骸骨运回京都安葬。 
English: It was necessary to preserve his feudal title and the feudal rent, and now he is being given all the funeral expenses, and his skeleton is being transported back to Kyoto for burial.

古文：谥曰脱。
现代文：谧号是脱。
English: The nickname is Tsuchimoto.

古文：子智安嗣。
现代文：儿子周智宣继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son Zhou Zhixuan.

古文：敷兄彖，共敷据本乡，亦授临川太守。
现代文：且邀的哥哥屋叁，因为曾经和旦堑一道据守本乡，也任命为临川太守。
English: Moreover, the invited brother, Yakuza, because he had once defended his hometown together with Tansu, was also appointed as the governor of Linkawa.

古文：荀朗，字深明，颍川颍阴人也。祖延祖，梁颍川太守，父伯道，卫尉卿。
现代文：苞趋字鲤旦，墨业题堕入。祖父苞型，是凿塑的垄伹太守，父亲苞值道，是卫尉卿。
English: My grandfather, Zou, was a chiseled and sculpted ruler, and my father, Zou, was an officer of the Imperial Guard.

古文：朗少慷慨，有将帅大略，起家梁庐陵王行参军。
现代文：苞塱年轻时就胸怀壮志，有将帅的远大谋略。在家中以布衣身份直接出任为梁朝庐陵王代理参军。
English: When he was young, he was ambitious and had a far-reaching strategy to become a general. At home, he directly served as a representative of the Liang Dynasty's Mausoleum King to join the army.

古文：侯景之乱，朗招率徒旅，据巢湖间，无所属。
现代文：堡量作乱时，萤舆招集和带领了一帮人马，控制住垦迩一带，不归属于谁。
English: When the castle was in turmoil, Firefly summoned and led a group of people and horses to control the area around the castle, and did not belong to anyone.

古文：台城陷后，简文帝密诏授朗云麾将军、豫州刺史，令与外籓讨景。
现代文：台城失陷以后，简文童秘密地下了一道诏书任命荀朗为云麾将军、豫丛刺史，命令他与京城之外的侯王们一道讨伐侯量。
English: After the fall of Taichung, Jian Buntong secretly issued an edict appointing Yao Lang as the general of Yunnan, and Yu Cong as the historian, and ordered him to fight against Houyao together with the princes outside the capital.

古文：景使仪同宋子仙、任约等频往征之，朗据山立砦自守，子仙不能克。
现代文：鳄派仪同塞王业、任垫等多次前去攻打他，苞舆据山扎寨固守，宋子仙没能攻下来。
English: The crocodile faction, together with Sai Wangye, Ren Mat and others, went to attack him many times. According to public opinion, Shanzazhai held fast, and Song Zixian failed to attack him.

古文：时京师大饥，百姓皆于江外就食，朗更招致部曲，解衣推食，以相赈赡，众至数万人。
现代文：当时京都一带发生了严重的饥荒，民众都流离到江北谋食求生，茎朗连续多次招收他们成为自己的私人武装，同他们共穿衣、同饮食，互相救助，多到数万人。
English: At that time, there was a severe famine in the Kyoto area, and the people were all displaced to the north of the river to find food and survive. Tsuchiro recruited them several times in a row to become his own private armed forces, dressing and eating together with them, and helping each other, up to tens of thousands.

古文：侯景败于巴陵，朗出自濡须截景，破其后军。
现代文：谴在旦医失败，苞塑从逻须出击截杀尽量败兵，打垮了他的后军。
English: The doctor failed in the battle, and Zou Shuping had to go out to intercept and kill the defeated soldiers as much as possible, and defeated his rearguard.

古文：王僧辩东讨，朗遣其将范宝胜及弟晓领兵二千助之。
现代文：王僧辩向东征讨，荀朗派遣将领范实胜和弟弟荀晓带二千士卒协助。
English: Wang Sangye marched eastward, and Hulan dispatched General Fan Shisheng and his brother Zou Xiao with two thousand soldiers to assist.

古文：侯景平后，又别破齐将郭元建于踟蹰山。
现代文：侯景被消灭后，荀朗另在踟蹰山打垮了齐将郭元建。
English: After Houjing was eliminated, Hailang defeated the Qi general Guo Yuanjian in Shaoshan.

古文：梁承圣二年，率部曲万馀家济江，入宣城郡界立顿。
现代文：梁朝承圣二年，他率领部属一万多家渡江，进入宣城郡范围驻扎。
English: In the second year of Liang Chao's succession to the throne, he led a detachment of more than 10,000 soldiers to cross the Yangtze River and stationed in Xuancheng County.

古文：梁元帝授朗持节、通直散骑常侍、安南将军、都督南兗州诸军事、南兗州刺史。
现代文：梁元帝任命荀朗为持节、通直散骑常侍、安南将军、都督南兖州诸军事、南兖州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan appointed Yao Lang as a regular attendant, general of Annan, military governor of Nanluozhou, and historian of Nanluozhou.

古文：未行而荆州陷。
现代文：他还没有起程赴任荆州就陷落了。
English: He had not yet set off for Jingzhou when the city fell.

古文：高祖入辅，齐遣萧轨、东方老等来寇，据石头城。
现代文：高祖到达京都辅佐梁朝时，齐人派遣萧轨、塞左圭等来犯，占据了互玺球。
English: When Gaozu arrived in Kyoto to assist Liang Chao, Qi dispatched Xiao Lei, Xie Zagui, and others to attack, and they occupied each other's territory.

古文：朗自宣城来赴，因与侯安都等大破齐军。
现代文：苞塑从宣继前往救援，于是舆侯安都等一道彻底打垮了齐军。
English: Zou Shou from Xuanjie went to the rescue, so Liu Hou, An Du and others together completely defeated the Qi army.

古文：永定元年，赐爵兴宁县侯，邑二千户，以朗兄昂为左卫将军，弟晷为太子右卫率。
现代文：永室元年，赐给爵位为兴宁县侯，食邑二千户，任命苞塑的哥哥苞显为左卫将军，弟弟苞垒为太子右卫率。
English: In the first year of the Yongshu era, he was given the title of lord of Xingning County, with 2,000 households in the county. He appointed his elder brother, Zou Xian, as the left guard general, and his younger brother, Xuan Rong, as the right guard of the prince.

古文：寻遣朗随世祖拒王琳于南皖。
现代文：随后朝廷派遣荀朗随从世祖到南皖抵御王继。
English: Subsequently, the imperial court sent Gong Lang to follow the ancestor to Nanlu to resist Wang Ji.

古文：高祖崩，宣太后与舍人蔡景历秘不发丧，朗弟晓在都微知之，乃谋率其家兵袭台。
现代文：直塑崩时，宣太后与舍人墓星压封锁消息不向天下公开丧事，苞朗弟弟荀晓在京都探询到这一情况，就打算率领家兵袭击朝廷禁省。
English: When the dowager empress died, the news of the blockade of the Empress Dowager Xuan and the tombs of the nobles was not publicly announced to the world. When Gong Lang's brother Gong Xiao inquired about this situation in Kyoto, he planned to lead the family soldiers to attack the Imperial Forbidden Province.

古文：事觉，景历杀晓，仍系其兄弟。
现代文：逭事被发觉了，基基历杀掉了苞堕，接着又拘捕了他的兄弟。
English: When the affair was discovered, Kikili killed the girl and then arrested his brother.

古文：世祖即位，并释之。
现代文：世担即位后，把他的兄弟都释放了。
English: When he came to the throne, he set his brothers free.

古文：因厚抚慰朗，令与侯安都等共拒王琳。
现代文：进而优厚地抚慰苞塱，派他与侯安都等共同抵御王继。
English: He then graciously consoled Yao and sent him and Hou Andu to jointly resist Wang Ji.

古文：琳平，迁使持节、安北将军、散骑常侍、都督霍、晋、合三州诸军事、合州刺史。
现代文：玉继被消灭后，升任他为使持节、安北将军、散骑常侍、都督霍晋合三州诸军事、合州刺史。
English: After Yulong was eliminated, he was promoted to the post of envoy, general of Anbei, straggler, governor of Huo Jin, military commander of the three states, and historian of the three states.

古文：天嘉六年卒，时年四十八。
现代文：丢台六年去世，这年四十八岁。
English: He died six years after losing power, at the age of 48.

古文：赠南豫州刺史，谥曰壮。
现代文：追赠为南豫州刺史，谧号是壮。
English: His posthumous name is Nan Yu Zhou Zhishi, and his nickname is Zhuang.

古文：子法尚嗣。
现代文：儿子荀法尚继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son 法.

古文：法尚少倜傥，有文武干略，起家江宁令，袭爵兴宁县侯。
现代文：荀法尚青年时期就卓越不凡，有文武两方面的才干谋略，在家中以布衣身份直接出任为江宁昼县令，继承父亲兴宁县侯的爵位。
English: When he was young, Gong Fa Shang was outstanding and extraordinary. He had the ability to strategize in both literary and military aspects. At home, he directly served as the governor of Jiangning County, inheriting his father's title as the marquis of Xingning County.

古文：太建五年，随吴明彻北伐。
现代文：左建五年，随从吴明彻北伐。
English: Zuo Jian spent five years accompanying Wu Mingche on the Northern Expedition.

古文：寻授通直散骑侍郎，除泾令，历梁、安城太守。
现代文：不久被任命为通直散骑侍郎，实授为迳逊县令。历任銮、安城太守。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as Tsuchizane Sanzhijijiro, and was given the title of Shoson County magistrate, and successively served as Shoson and Anjo Taishu.

古文：祯明中，为都督郢、巴、武三州诸军事、郢州刺史。
现代文：祯明年间，担任都督坚旦茎三州诸军事、郢州刺史。
English: During the next year, he served as the military governor of the three states and the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：及隋军济江，法尚降于汉东道元帅秦王。
现代文：到膑军渡辽南下，荀法尚向莲墓道元帅台王降顺。
English: When the Wei army went to the south of Liao Province, the Wei faction was still subordinated to the marshal Tai Wang of Lian Tomb Road.

古文：入隋，历邵、观、绵、豊四州刺史，巴东、燉煌二郡太守。
现代文：在瞪朝，历任邵、塑、钨、丰四州刺史，巴束、炖煌二郡太守。
English: In the Gaze Dynasty, the successors of Shao, Shuo, Zou and Feng made history in the four states, and Ba Zuo and Zou Huang were the governors of the two counties.

古文：周炅，字文昭，汝南安城人也。祖强，齐太子舍人、梁州刺史。
现代文：且旦字塞岖，迪直窒越人。祖父旦彊，在查塑任太子舍人、銮刺史。
English: His grandfather, Danzhao, was the crown prince at the time of the founding of the People's Republic of China.

古文：父灵起，梁通直散骑常侍、庐、桂二州刺史，保城县侯。
现代文：父亲周灵起，在凿曲担任通直散骑常侍、庐挂二州刺史，封为堡继墨继。
English: His father, Zhou Lingqi, served as a regular attendant in the chiseled music, hanging the two-state engraved history, and was sealed as a castle.

古文：炅少豪侠任气，有将帅才。
现代文：周炅青少年时就豪放侠义而又任性行事，有将帅的才干。
English: When he was a teenager, Zhou Yuxuan was chivalrous and headstrong. He had the ability to be a great general.

古文：梁大同中为通直散骑侍郎、硃衣直阁。
现代文：梁朝大同年间担任通直散骑侍郎、朱衣直合。
English: In the same year, Liang Chao served as Tsunzhi Sanzhi Jiro and Zhu Yi Naohe.

古文：太清元年，出为弋阳太守。
现代文：太清元年，调出京城担任弋阳太守。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, he was transferred from the capital to serve as the governor of Shenyang.

古文：侯景之乱，元帝承制改授西阳太守，封西陵县伯。
现代文：侯景作罱时，梁元帝秉承皇帝的旨意调任他为西阳太守，封为西陵县伯。
English: When Hou Jing was enthroned, Emperor Liang Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, transferred him to be the governor of Xiyang and made him the governor of Xiling County.

古文：景遣兄子思穆据守齐安，炅率骁勇袭破思穆，擒斩之。
现代文：侯景派他哥哥的儿子侯思穆据守齐安，周炅率领勇猛强悍的士卒袭击打垮了侯思穆，将他活捉斩首。
English: Hou Jing sent his brother's son, Hou Simu, to defend Qi'an. Zhou Ye, led by a brave and powerful soldier, attacked and defeated Hou Simu, captured him alive and beheaded him.

古文：以功授持节、高州刺史。
现代文：因为有战功，周炅被任命为持节、高州刺史。
English: Because of his war exploits, Zhou Qi was appointed as a "Hanging Section" and a "High-level State Historian."

古文：是时炅据武昌、西阳二郡，招聚卒徒，甲兵甚盛。
现代文：这时周炅控制了武昌、西阳二郡，招集兵员，军力强盛。
English: At this time, Zhou Enlai controlled the two counties of Wuchang and Xiyang, recruited soldiers, and had a strong military force.

古文：景将任约来据樊山，炅与宁州长史徐文盛击约，斩其部将叱罗子通、赵迦娄等。
现代文：侯景将领任约来抢占樊山，周炅舆宁州长史徐文盛痛击任约，斩杀他的部将叱罗子通、趟迦娄等。
English: General Hou Jing led the charge to seize Lushan, and Governor Shi Xu Wensheng of Zhouyuning led the charge to defeat the charge, killing his subordinate generals Zhaozitong and Wei Jiaqi.

古文：因乘胜追之，频克，约众殆尽。
现代文：于是乘胜追击，连打胜仗，任约的人马近乎全歼。
English: As a result, they took advantage of the victory to pursue and win consecutive battles, nearly wiping out almost all the people and horses.

古文：承圣元年，迁使持节、都督江、定二州诸军事、戎昭将军、江州刺史，进爵为侯，邑五百户。
现代文：承圣元年，周炅升任使持节、都督江定二州诸军事、戎昭将军、江州刺史，提升爵位为侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year of the celebration of the saint, Zhou Qi was promoted to the position of the envoy, the military governor of Jiangding and two states, the general of the army Zhao, the governor of Jiangzhou, the promotion of the peerage to the marquis, and the 500 households of the food village.

古文：高祖践祚，王琳拥据上流，炅以州从之。
现代文：高祖登基为帝时，王琳占据了江水上游，周炅归顺了他并献出了江州。
English: When Gaozu ascended to the throne as emperor, Wang Lin occupied the upper reaches of the river, Zhou Qi submitted to him and offered Jiangzhou.

古文：及王琳遣其将曹庆等攻周迪，仍使炅将兵掎角而进，为侯安都所败，擒炅送都。
现代文：到王琳派遣将领曹庆等攻打周迪时，又派周炅带兵与曹庆互成掎角之势进军，但被侯安都打败，周炅也被抓获并送到京都。
English: When Wang Lin dispatched Cao Qing and other generals to attack Zhou Di, he also sent Zhou Qi to march with soldiers and Cao Qing into a corner, but he was defeated by Hou Andu, and Zhou Qi was also captured and sent to Kyoto.

古文：世祖释炅，授戎威将军、定州刺史，带西阳、武昌二郡太守。
现代文：世祖释放了周炅，还任命他为戎威将军、定州刺史，兼西阳、武昌二郡太守。
English: The founder released Zhou Qi, and also appointed him as the general of Rong Wei, the governor of Dingzhou, and the governor of Xiyang and Wuchang.

古文：天嘉二年，留异据东阳反，世祖召炅还都，欲令讨异。
现代文：天嘉二年，留异控制束阳反叛，世祖召令周炅回到京都，想派他讨伐留异。
English: In the second year of Tian Jia, when the Ruyong controlled the Sakuyang rebellion, the patriarch summoned Zhou Qi back to Kyoto and wanted to send him to fight the Ruyong.

古文：未至而异平，炅还本镇。
现代文：他还没有到达京都留异就已经平定，周炅回到自己的镇所。
English: Before he even arrived in Kyoto, he had already settled down, and Zhou Yu returned to his own town.

古文：天康元年，预平华皎之功，授员外散骑常侍。
现代文：天康元年，因参与平定华皎有功，被任命为员外散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of Tiankang, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer riding horseback because of his participation in the successful suppression of Huayu.

古文：太建元年，迁持节、龙骧将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：主建元年，升任持节、龙骧将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of the main building, he was promoted to Jisetsu, Longjing General, and Tsundo Sanzhiyi Samurai.

古文：五年，进授使持节、西道都督安、蕲、江、衡、司、定六州诸军事、安州刺史，改封龙源县侯，增邑并前一千户。
现代文：五年，升任使持节、西道都督安蕲江衡司定六州诸军事、室姐刺史，改封为龙源县侯，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千户。
English: In the fifth year, he was promoted to the position of envoy, and the military of the six prefectures of Anhui Province and the sister-in-law of Zhang Shi, the governor of the West Province, were promoted to Longyuan County, and a total of one thousand households that had been previously awarded were awarded.

古文：其年随都督吴明彻北讨，所向克捷，一月之中，获十二城。
现代文：这年随从都督吴明彻北伐，所攻即克，一月之中，连取十二城。
English: This year, he followed the Northern Expedition led by Governor Wu Mingche, and captured 12 cities in January.

古文：齐遣尚书左丞陆骞以众二万出自巴、蕲，与炅相遇。
现代文：蛮人遣尚书左丞陆骞领兵二万从巴、蕲出发，与且星相遇。
English: The barbarians sent Shangshu Zuo Jie to lead 20,000 soldiers from Ba and Handan, and met with Qixing.

古文：炅留羸弱辎重，设疑兵以当之，身率精锐，由间道邀其后，大败骞军，虏获器械马驴，不可胜数。
现代文：凰垦留下疲弱士卒和辎重，布置疑兵正面抵挡，自己却亲率精锐士卒通过偏僻小路拦击对方后军，把陆骞全军打得大败，缴获的器械马驴，难以计数。
English: He left weak soldiers and baggage behind, and placed doubtful soldiers in front to resist. However, he personally led elite soldiers to intercept the enemy's rear army through a remote path, and defeated the whole army of Lu Wei. It is difficult to count the number of captured equipment.

古文：进攻巴州，克之。
现代文：继续前进攻取巴州，攻下来了。
English: Continue to advance and capture Bazhou. We have captured Wuzhong.

古文：于是江北诸城及谷阳士民，并诛渠帅以城降。
现代文：于是江北各城和谷阳的士人及民众。一齐行动诛杀当地首领献城投降。
English: As a result, the officials and people of the cities in the north of the Yangtze River and Guiyang worked together to kill the local leaders and surrender the city.

古文：进号和戎将军、散骑常侍，增邑并前一千五百户。
现代文：朝廷提升他的官号为和戎将军、散骑常侍，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千五百户。
English: The Imperial Court promoted his official title to General of Wairoa, and he was given the additional title of Zangai Zenshishi, and he was given additional shokimura, bringing the total number of shokimura previously given to a total of 1,500 households.

古文：仍敕追炅入朝。
现代文：接着又下诏书将周炅追调入朝。
English: Next, Zhou Enlai was transferred to the imperial court by imperial decree.

古文：初，萧詧定州刺史田龙升以城降，诏以为振远将军、定州刺史，封赤亭王。
现代文：当初，萧察的定州刺史田龙升献城投降。天子下诏书任命田龙升为振远将军、定州刺史，封为赤亭王。
English: At the beginning, Tian Longsheng, the governor of Dingzhou, surrendered the city. Tian Longsheng was appointed General Zhenyuan, governor of Dingzhou, and crowned King of Akatei by imperial edict.

古文：及炅入朝，龙升以江北六州七镇叛入于齐，齐遣历阳王高景安帅师应之。于是令炅为江北道大都督，总统众军，以讨龙升。
现代文：到且星入朝任职，且蓝丑反叛向蛮人献出了辽韭六州镇，齐人派堡遇王产量垄领兵接应他于是朝廷指令周炅为道大都督，总领各路军马，讨伐田龙升。
English: When Xing Rong took office in the imperial court, and the Blue and Ugly rebels offered Liaoning and six counties to the barbarians, the Qi people sent a fortress to meet the king's production and led the troops to meet him, so the imperial court ordered Zhou Qi to be the governor of the province, the general leader of all roads and horses, and to fight against Tian Longsheng.

古文：龙升使弋阳太守田龙琰率众二万阵于亭川，高景安于水陵、阴山为其声援，龙升引军别营山谷。
现代文：田龙升派阳太守田龙琰率兵二万在皇贝排开阵势，直量圭驻扎在困、堕山一带作为声援，田龙升率领另一支军队在山谷安营。
English: Tian Longsheng sent Yang Daju Tian Longyu and twenty thousand soldiers to take up positions in the imperial palace, while Dang Quan Gui was stationed in the area of the trapped and fallen mountains as a show of solidarity, and Tian Longsheng led another army to camp in the valley.

古文：炅乃分兵各当其军，身率骁勇先击龙升，龙升大败，龙琰望尘而奔，并追斩之，高景安遁走，尽复江北之地。以功增邑并前二千户，进号平北将军，定州刺史，持节、都督如故，仍赐女妓一部。太建八年卒官，时年六十四。赠司州刺史，封武昌郡公，谥曰壮。子法僧嗣，官至宣城太守。
现代文：于是周炅就兵分数路抵抗各路敌军，自己则亲自带领勇猛精壮的士卒首先进击田垄丑，田龙升大败，且篮壁闻风丧胆不战而逃，两人都被迫兵斩杀，高景安逃脱，于是完全收复了辽韭地区，因为有战功增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共二千户，提升宫号为平北将军，任命为定州刺史，持节、都督：职仍旧，又赏赐女妓一一部；左建八年在任上去世，造年六十四岁，追赠为司州刺史，追封为武昌郡公，谧号是壮儿千周法僧继承，官至宣城太守
English: As a result, Zhou Bei took the road of dividing the soldiers and resisted the enemy forces from all directions. He personally led the brave and powerful soldiers to attack Tian Rengushi first, Tian Longsheng was defeated, and the basket wall was discouraged and fled without a fight. Both of them were forced to kill the soldiers, Gao Jing'an escaped, and then completely recovered the Liaoning region. Because of the war service, a total of two thousand households were awarded a total of two thousand households, and the palace was promoted to the general of Pingbei. He was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, holding the festival, the governor: the post was still held, and a prostitute was

古文：史臣曰：彼数子者，或驱驰前代，或拥据故乡，并识运知归，因机景附，位升列牧，爵致通侯，美矣。
现代文：史臣曰：这几个人，有的奔走效力于前朝，有的拥兵割地在故乡，但都深晓天命所在懂得归顺方向，各自乘藉机缘如影随形地依附陈朝，官职升至州牧，爵位封到通侯，这实在是美事啊。
English: Shichen said, "These few people, some of whom were active in the former dynasty, and some of whom were in their hometowns, but all of whom were well aware of the direction of destiny and knew how to submit, each took advantage of the opportunity to adhere to the Chen dynasty, the official position rose to the state pastor, and the peerage was sealed to Tonghou, which is really a beautiful thing.

古文：昔张耳、陈馀自同于至戚，周敷、周迪亦誓等昵亲，寻锋刃而诛残，斯甚夫胡越矣。
现代文：先前的亟互、座篮自以为交情如至亲，周敷、周迪也发誓要亲近相处，但后来他们却兵戎相见互相残杀，远甚于古时的塱垫之战。
English: In the past, Zhou Shiki and Zhaoshan thought that their friendship was like a close relative, and Zhou Shiki and Zhou Di also vowed to get along closely, but later they fought and killed each other, far more than the ancient battle of Shushan.

古文：雠隙因于势利，何其鄙欤！
现代文：他们的仇怨因权势利益而产生，人品怎么这样卑贱呢?
English: Their enmity arises from the interests of the powerful. How can human beings be so despicable?

