古文：十一日登仙猿岭。
现代文：十一日攀登仙猿岭。
English: On the 11th day, I climbed Xianren Ridge.

古文：十余里，有枯溪小桥，为郧县境，乃河南、湖广界。
现代文：走了十多里，到枯溪小桥，属于郧县境，是河南、湖广布政司的分界处。
English: After walking more than ten miles, we arrived at the small bridge of the dry creek, which belongs to the border of Handan County and is the demarcation point between Henan Province and Hunan Province.

古文：东五里，有池一泓，曰青泉，上源不见所自来，而下流淙淙，地又属淅川。
现代文：往东走五里，有一片澄澈的池水，名青泉，不见水源从哪里流来，却见下游徐涂流淌。这地方又属于渐川县了。
English: Five miles to the east, there is a clear pool of water, known as a green spring. I can't see where the water comes from, but I can see it trickling downstream. This place belongs to Qianchuan County.

古文：盖二县界址相错，依山溪曲折，路经其间故也。
现代文：因为郧县、浙川两县边界互相交错，依照山势、溪流曲折划分，所以道路在两县之间穿行。
English: Because the borders of the two counties of Lixian County and Zhechuan are interlaced and divided according to the mountains and meandering streams, the road passes between the two counties.

古文：五里，越一小岭，仍为郧县境。
现代文：走五里，翻过一道小岭，仍然属于郧县境。
English: If you walk five miles and turn over a small ridge, you still belong to Min County.

古文：岭下有玉皇观、龙潭寺。
现代文：岭下有玉皇观、龙潭寺。
English: At the foot of the ridge are the Jade Emperor's View and Longtan Temple.

古文：一溪滔滔自西南走东北，盖自郧中来者。
现代文：一股溪水滔滔不绝地从西南往东北奔流，大概是郧县中部流过来的。
English: A stream of water rushes ceaselessly from the southwest to the northeast, probably coming from the central part of Handan County.

古文：渡溪，南上九里冈，经其脊而下，为蟠桃岭，溯溪行坞中十里，为葛九沟。
现代文：渡过溪水，往南登九里冈，越过冈脊往下走，为蟠桃岭。溯溪水沿山坞行十里，为葛九沟。
English: Cross the stream, go south to climb Jiuligang, cross the ridge and go down, it is Jintao Ridge. Trace the stream along the dock for ten miles, it is Gejiugou.

古文：又十里，登土地岭，岭南则均州境。
现代文：又走十里，攀登土地岭，岭南边是均州境。
English: Walk another ten miles and climb the Land Ridge. The southern edge of the ridge is the border of Jeonju.

古文：自此连逾山岭，桃李缤纷，山花夹道，幽艳异常。
现代文：从这里接连不断地翻山越岭，沿途桃花、李花缤纷，山花盛开在道路两旁，景色异常幽雅、艳丽。
English: From here, one after another, the road climbs up and over the mountains. Along the way, peach blossoms and plum blossoms are in full bloom, and mountain flowers bloom on both sides of the road. The scenery is unusually elegant and gorgeous.

古文：山坞之中，居庐相望，沿流稻畦，高下鳞次，不似山、陕间矣。
现代文：山坞之中，居庐相望，溪流两岸的一块块稻田，高低分布得如同鱼鳞一样整齐，和山西、陕西一带的稻田不一样。
English: The rice paddies on both sides of the stream are neatly distributed like fish scales, unlike the rice paddies in Shanxi and Shaanxi.

古文：但途中蹊径狭，行人稀，且闻虎暴叫，日方下舂，竟止坞中曹家店。
现代文：只是途中所走的小路很狭窄，行人稀少，而且听说有老虎害人，太阳正要落山，于是就在坞中的曹家店住宿。
English: However, the path along the way is very narrow and there are few pedestrians, and I heard that there are tigers harming people, and the sun is about to set, so I stayed at the Cao Jia Store in the dock.

古文：十二日行五里，上火龙岭。
现代文：十二日行五里，登上火龙岭。
English: On the 12th, I walked five miles and climbed up to the Fire Dragon Ridge.

古文：下岭随流出峡，四十里，下行头冈。
现代文：下岭后顺着水流走出峡谷，四十里，下到行头冈。
English: After descending the ridge, I followed the water flow out of the canyon, forty miles, down to Xitou Mountain.

古文：十五里，抵红粉渡，汉水汪然西来，涯下苍壁悬空，清流绕面。
现代文：又走十五里，抵达红粉渡，汉水水势浩瀚地从西边流来，岸边苍壁悬空，清流环绕。
English: After another fifteen miles, we arrived at Honghuandu. The Han River was flowing from the west with tremendous force, and the banks were overhanging and surrounded by clear water.

古文：循汉东行，抵均州。
现代文：沿汉水往东走，到达均州。
English: Walk east along the Han River to reach Junzhou.

古文：静乐宫当州之中，踞城之半，规制宏整。
现代文：静乐宫位于州城正中，占据了一半城，规模宏大、建筑庄严。
English: Jingle Palace is located in the middle of the state capital, occupying half of the city, with a grand scale and solemn architecture.

古文：停行李于南城外，定计明晨登山。
现代文：把行李放在南城外，决定明天早晨登山。
English: I left my luggage outside Nancheng and decided to climb the mountain tomorrow morning.

古文：十三日骑而南趋，石道平敞。
现代文：十三日骑马往南急行，石头路平坦宽敞。
English: On the 13th, we rode southbound express, the stone road was flat and spacious.

古文：三十里，越一石梁，有溪自西东注，即太和下流入汉者。
现代文：走三十里，越过一座石桥，桥下的水从西向东流，就是从太和山流入汉水的溪流。
English: Walk thirty miles, cross a stone bridge, the water under the bridge flows from west to east, that is, the stream flowing from Mount Taihe into the Han River.

古文：越桥为迎恩宫，西向。
现代文：过桥后是迎恩宫，宫门向西。
English: After crossing the bridge is the Ying'en Palace, with the palace gate facing west.

古文：前有碑大书 第一山 三字，乃米襄阳即宋代著名书画家米芾笔，书法飞动，当亦第一。
现代文：前面有一块书写着 第一山 三个大字的石碑，是襄阳人米莆的手笔，书法飞扬灵活，应当也是天下第一。
English: In front of it, there is a stone tablet inscribed with the first mountain and three large characters. It is the handwriting of Yangyang people, and the calligraphy is flying and flexible. It should also be the first in the world.

古文：又十里，过草店，襄阳来道，亦至此合。
现代文：又走十里，经过草店，从襄阳伸来的路，也在这里会合。
English: After walking another ten miles, passing through the grass shop, the road stretching from Xiangyang also meets here.

古文：路渐西向，过遇真宫，越两隘下，入坞中。
现代文：道路渐渐朝西走，经过遇真宫，越过两处险要的地方往下走，进入山坞。
English: The road gradually heads west, passing the Imperial Palace, crossing two critical areas and descending to the dock.

古文：从此西行数里，为趋玉虚道；南跻上岭，则走紫霄间道也。
现代文：从这里往西行数里，是去玉虚宫的路；往南向上登岭，则是去紫霄宫的小路。
English: From here, a few miles to the west is the road to the Jade Emperor's Palace; to the south, up the ridge, is the path to the Purple Mountain Palace.

古文：登岭。
现代文：登岭。
English: Climbing the mountain.

古文：自草店至此，共十里，为回龙观。
现代文：从草店到这里，一共走十里，为回龙观。
English: From the grass shop to here, a total of ten miles to walk, for the Huilong view.

古文：望岳顶青紫插天，然相去尚五十里。
现代文：遥望山顶，呈一片青紫色，插入云天，但相距还有五十里。
English: A distant view of the top of the mountain, a bluish-purple color, inserted into the sky, but still fifty miles apart.

古文：满山乔木夹道，密布上下，如行绿慕中。
现代文：满山都是高大的树木，夹在道路两旁，密布山上山下，上山如同在绿幕中穿行。
English: The mountain is full of tall trees, sandwiched on both sides of the road, densely covering the mountain up and down, and going up the mountain is like passing through a green curtain.

古文：从此沿山行，下而复上，共二十里，过太子坡。
现代文：从这里沿山行走，下了又上，一共二十里，经过太子坡。
English: From here, walk along the mountain, down and up, a total of twenty miles, passing the Prince slope.

古文：又下入坞中，有石梁跨溪，是为九渡涧下流。
现代文：又下到坞中，有座石桥横跨溪水，这是九渡涧的下游。
English: Further down to the dock, there is a stone bridge across the stream, this is the lower reaches of the Jiutang River.

古文：上为平台十八盘，即走紫霄登太和大道；左入溪，即溯九渡涧，向琼台观及八仙罗公院诸路也。
现代文：往上为平台十八盘，就是去紫霄宫、攀登太和山的大路；往左边顺溪水往里走，就是溯九渡涧，到琼台观和八仙罗公院等处的路。
English: Going up is Platform 18, which is the road to the Purple Sky Palace and the climb to the top of Taihe Mountain; going down the left side of the stream, is the road to the nine ferries, to Qiong Tai Guan and the Eight Immortals Luo Public School and other places.

古文：峻登十里，则紫霄宫在焉。
现代文：攀登了十里陡峻的山路，就到紫霄宫所在地。
English: After climbing ten miles of steep mountain road, we arrived at the location of the Purple Mountain Palace.

古文：紫霄前临禹迹池，背倚展旗峰，层台杰殿，高敞特异。
现代文：紫霄宫前面正对禹迹池，背后傍靠展旗峰，平台层叠，殿宇非凡，特别高大宽敞。
English: The front of the Zishang Palace faces the Yuqi Pond, the back is next to the Flag Tower, the platforms are stacked, the palace is extraordinary, especially tall and spacious.

古文：入殿瞻谒。
现代文：进殿观览、祭拜。
English: Enter the hall for viewing and worship.

古文：由殿右上跻，直造展旗峰之西。
现代文：从殿右往上攀，直接上到展旗峰的西面。
English: Climb up from the right side of the hall and go directly to the west side of Zhanqi Peak.

古文：峰畔有太子洞、七星岩，俱不暇问。
现代文：峰附近有太子洞、七星岩，都没有时间光顾。
English: There are Taizi Cave and Qixing Rock near the peak, but there is no time to visit them.

古文：共五里，过南岩之南天门。
现代文：一共走五里，经过南岩的南天门。
English: We walked a total of five miles, passing the South Gate of Nanyan Rock.

古文：舍之西，度岭，谒榔仙祠。
现代文：放弃游南天门而往西走，越过岭，到榔仙祠渴拜。
English: Give up the tour of the South Gate of Heaven and go west, cross the ridge, and worship at the Ancestral Hall.

古文：祠与南岩对峙，前有榔树特大，无寸肤，赤干耸立，纤芽未发。
现代文：榔仙祠和南岩正对而峙，祠前有棵特别高大的榔树，一点树皮也没有，光滑地耸立着，没发一丝芽。
English: The Ancestor's Shrine and Nanyan are facing each other. In front of the shrine, there is a particularly tall eucalyptus tree. It has no bark at all, stands up smoothly, and has not produced a single bud.

古文：旁多榔梅树，亦高耸，花色深浅如桃杏，蒂垂丝作海棠状。
现代文：旁边有很多榔梅树，也都高高耸立，榔梅花的颜色和桃花杏花一样深浅，垂丝的花蒂则是海棠花形状。
English: Next to it, there are many jujube trees, all of them towering high. The color of the jujube flowers is as deep and light as that of the peach and apricot flowers, and the filaments of the flower buds are in the shape of the begonia flower.

古文：梅与榔本山中两种，相传玄帝插梅寄榔将梅嫁接于榔，成此异种云。
现代文：梅树和榔树本来是山中的两种树，相传真武帝折梅花寄生在榔树上，形成了榔梅这奇异的树种。
English: Plum trees and eucalyptus trees were originally two types of trees in the mountains. According to legend, the plum blossom parasitized on the eucalyptus tree, forming the strange tree species known as the jujube.

古文：共五里，过虎头岩。
现代文：一共走五里，经过虎头岩。
English: We walked a total of five miles, passing through the Hougou Rock.

古文：又三里，抵斜桥。
现代文：又三里，到斜桥。
English: Another three miles to the cable-stayed bridge.

古文：突峰悬崖，屡屡而是，径多循峰隙上。
现代文：陡峰悬崖，屡屡皆是，道路大多沿着峰崖之间的缝隙而上。
English: Steep peaks and cliffs are frequent occurrences, and the road mostly follows the gap between the peaks and cliffs.

古文：五里，至三天门，过朝天宫，皆石级曲折上跻，两旁以铁柱悬索。
现代文：走五里，来到三天门，过朝天宫，都是石阶路曲折地往上伸，两旁有铁柱悬索。
English: After walking for five miles, you will come to the Three-Day Gate and pass through the Imperial Palace. All are stone steps winding their way up, with iron pillars suspended on both sides.

古文：由三天门而二天门、一天门，率取径峰坳间，悬级直上。
现代文：从三天门到二天门，再到一天门，路大多取道山峰间的坳地，陡梯直上。
English: From the three-day gate to the two-day gate, and then to the one-day gate, the road mostly takes the ridge between the peaks, and the steep stairs go straight up.

古文：路虽陡峻，而石级既整，栏索钩连，不似华山悬空飞度也。
现代文：路虽然陡峻，但石阶很整齐，有栏索牵引，不像登华山那样悬空飞越。
English: Although the road is steep, the stone steps are very neat, and there is a railing to pull, unlike Denghua Mountain.

古文：太和宫在三天门内。
现代文：太和宫在三天门内。
English: The Imperial Palace is three days away.

古文：日将晡ū黄昏，竭力造金顶，所谓天柱峰也。
现代文：接近黄昏时，我竭尽全力登金顶，就是所说的天柱峰。
English: Near dusk, I did my best to climb the Golden Peak, the so-called Tianzhu Peak.

古文：山顶众峰，皆如覆钟峙鼎，离离攒立；天柱中悬，独出众峰之表，四旁崭绝。
现代文：顶上众多的山峰，都如同钟倒置、鼎峙立一般，成行成列地汇聚在一起；天柱峰悬立在正中，独自突出于众峰之上，四周特别险峻。
English: The numerous peaks at the top, like a clock turned upside down and a spire standing upright, come together in rows and rows; Tianzhu Peak hangs in the middle, stands out above the other peaks, and is particularly precipitous all around.

古文：峰顶平处，纵横止及寻丈。
现代文：峰顶上有块平地，长宽都只有八尺到一丈。
English: At the top of the peak there is a flat area, the length and width of which are only eight feet to one height.

古文：金殿峙其上，中奉玄帝及四将，炉案俱具，悉以金为之。
现代文：金殿峙立在平地上，殿中供奉真武帝及其四将，香炉几案都很齐备，全部用金铸造。
English: The gold hall stands on a flat ground. The hall is dedicated to Emperor Zhenwu and his four generals. Several incense burners are available, all of which are cast in gold.

古文：督以一千户、一提点，需索香金，不啻御夺。
现代文：朝廷设一个千户、一个提点在此监督，索取香金，这无异于巧取豪夺。
English: The imperial court set up a thousand households and a reference point to supervise this, and to ask for incense, which is tantamount to skillful plunder.

古文：余入叩匆匆，而门已阖，遂下宿太和宫。
现代文：我匆匆忙忙想进殿叩拜，但殿门已关，于是下到太和宫住宿。
English: I hurriedly wanted to enter the hall to worship, but the hall door was closed, so I went down to Taihegu to stay.

古文：十四日更衣上金顶。
现代文：十四日换衣服登金顶。
English: On the 14th, I changed my clothes and climbed to the top.

古文：瞻叩毕，天宇澄朗，下瞰诸峰，近者鹄ú天鹅峙，远者罗列，诚天真奥区也实在是未受人世礼俗影响的中心腹地！
现代文：游览叩拜完毕时，天空澄碧晴朗，往下俯瞰众峰，近处的好似天鹅引颈屹立，远处的层层排列，实在是大自然幽深玄妙的中心。
English: When the tour is over, the sky is clear and bright, and you can look down on the peaks. The nearby peaks look like swans, and the distant ones are arranged in layers. It is truly the center of nature's profound and mysterious.

古文：遂从三天门之右小径下峡中。
现代文：于是沿三天门右边的小路下到峡谷中。
English: So I followed the path to the right of the three-day gate down into the canyon.

古文：此径无级无索，乱峰离立，路穿其间，迥觉幽胜。
现代文：这条小路没有石阶，也没有拦索，山峰散乱无序地各自耸立，小路在山峰间穿行，令人觉得特别幽雅。
English: There are no stone steps or ropes on this path, and the peaks are scattered in a disorderly manner. The path runs between the peaks, which makes people feel particularly elegant.

古文：三里余，抵蜡烛峰右，泉涓涓溢出路旁，下为蜡烛涧。
现代文：走了三里多，来到蜡烛峰右侧，涓涓泉水从小路旁溢出，下去是蜡烛涧。
English: After walking more than three miles, I came to the right side of the candle peak. The spring water overflowed from the side of the path, and the candles were floating down.

古文：循涧右行三里余，峰随山转，下见平丘中开，为上琼台观。
现代文：沿涧右岸行三里多，峰随着山转，再下就看见平整的山丘中有一块开阔的地势，是上琼台观。
English: Walking along the right bank of the river for more than three miles, the peak turns with the mountain, and then you can see a piece of open terrain in the flat hills, which is the view of Shanghongdaiguan.

古文：其旁榔梅数株，大皆合抱，花色浮空映山，绚烂岩际。
现代文：观察旁边的几株榔梅，都有一人围抱粗大，满树榔梅花竞相开放，花色映照山冈，使山岩边绚丽灿烂。
English: Observe the several neem trees next to each other, all of which are surrounded by a person holding a large neem tree. The trees are full of neem flowers competing to open, and the flower color reflects the mountains and hills, making the edge of the mountain rock brilliant.

古文：地既幽绝，景复殊异。
现代文：这地方幽雅到了极点，景物又特别不同寻常。
English: It is a place of exquisite beauty, and the scenery is particularly unusual.

古文：余求榔梅实，观中道士噤不敢答。
现代文：我求要榔梅的果实，观中的道士闭口不敢答应。
English: I asked for the fruit of the jujube, but the Taoist monk did not dare to say yes.

古文：既而曰： 此系禁物。
现代文：过了一会才说： 这是禁物。
English: After a while, he said: "This is forbidden."

古文：前有人携出三四枚，道流即道士株连破家者数人。 
现代文：从前有人带出去三四枚，有数名道士因此受株连而家破败。 
English: In the past, some people took out three or four pieces, and several Taoists were ruined by this.

古文：余不信，求之益力，出数枚畀ì给予余，皆已黝烂，且订约定无令人知。
现代文：我不相信，索求得更起劲，道士取出几枚送我，都已变黑腐坏，而且叮嘱不要让人知道。
English: I didn't believe it, and demanded more vigorously. The priest took out several cards and gave them to me. They had all turned black and rotten, and he told me not to let anyone know.

古文：及趋中琼台，余复求之，主观仍辞谢弗有。
现代文：等走到中琼台观时，我又索要榔梅果实，观主仍然辞谢，说没有。
English: When I got to the Zhongxiong observation deck, I again asked for the nettle fruit, but the observer still declined and said no.

古文：因念由下琼台而出，可往玉虚岩，便失南岩紫霄，奈何得一失二，不若仍由旧径上，至路旁泉溢处，左越蜡烛峰，去南岩应较近。
现代文：因为考虑到从下琼台观走出去，能去玉虚岩，便不能去南岩、紫霄宫，为什么要得一失二呢，不如仍然从原路上去，走到路旁泉水溢出的地方，往左翻越蜡烛峰，距离南岩应当比较近。
English: Because taking into account that if you go out from the lower Qiongdaiguan, you can go to the Jade Hollow Rock, but you can't go to the South Rock and the Purple Mountain Palace. Why should you get one or two mistakes? It is better to still go from the original road, go to the place where the roadside spring water overflows, and turn over the candle peak to the left. The distance from the South Rock should be relatively close.

古文：忽后有追呼者，则中琼台小黄冠即小道士以师命促余返。
现代文：忽然后面有人呼叫追赶，原来是中琼台观的小道士奉呼命令，催我返回去。
English: Suddenly, someone in front of me called out for me to run after them. It turned out to be a minor Taoist from Zhongxiong Taiguan who was following orders and urging me to go back.

古文：观主握手曰： 公渴求珍植，幸得两枚，少慰公怀。
现代文：观主握着我的手说： 您渴求的珍贵树种，幸好有两枚，可以稍稍满足您的愿望。
English: The onlooker held my hand and said, "Fortunately, there are two precious tree species that you are longing for, which can slightly satisfy your wish.

古文：但一泄于人，罪立至矣。 
现代文：只是一旦泄露出去，罪马上就降临了。 
English: It's just that once it's leaked, the fallout is immediate.

古文：出而视之，形侔ó相同金橘，漉ù渗以蜂液，金相玉质，非凡品也。
现代文：拿出来后仔细观看，形状和金橘相同，渗出蜂蜜一样的液汁，金的外表、玉的质地，不是一般的物品。
English: Take it out and look at it carefully. It has the same shape as a kumquat and oozes honey-like juice. It has the appearance of gold and the texture of jade. It is not an ordinary item.

古文：珍谢别去。
现代文：我真诚地道谢然后离去。
English: I thanked him sincerely and left.

古文：复上三里余，直造蜡烛峰坳中。
现代文：又往上走三里多，直达蜡烛峰山坳中。
English: I walked more than three miles further up, straight to the middle of the Candle Peak Mountains.

古文：峰参差廉利棱角锋利，人影中度，兀兀欲动。
现代文：山蜂高低不齐，棱角锋利，人在峰间穿越，影影绰绰，仿佛山峰在晃动。
English: The hills are unevenly high and low, the edges and corners are sharp, people cross between the peaks, the shadows are fleeting, as if the peaks are swaying.

古文：既度，循崖宛转，连越数重。
现代文：穿越蜡烛峰后，沿着山崖转来转去，接连越过数重山崖。
English: After crossing Candlestick Peak, I walked along the cliff and over several cliffs in succession.

古文：峰头土石，往往随地异色。
现代文：峰顶上的土、石，处处随地势变幻颜色。
English: The soil and stone on the peak change color depending on the terrain.

古文：既而闻梵颂声，则仰见峰顶遥遥上悬，已出朝天宫右矣。
现代文：不一会听见教徒诵读经文的声音，于是抬头一看，峰顶悬立在遥远的上空，已经出到朝天宫右侧了。
English: After a while, he heard the voices of the believers chanting the scriptures, so he looked up and saw that the peak was hanging in the distant sky, and had already reached the right side of the Asatien Palace.

古文：仍上八里，造南岩之南天门，趋谒正殿，右转入殿后，崇崖嵌空，如悬廊复道，蜿蜒山半，下临无际，是名南岩，亦名紫霄岩，为三十六岩之最，天柱峰正当其面。
现代文：仍旧往上走，八里，到达南岩的南天门，赶忙去正殿祭拜。往右转到正殿背后，高峻的崖石镶嵌在空中，如同长廊悬空、阁道凌空，弯弯曲曲地延伸在山腰，下临无底的深壑，这就是南岩，也叫紫霄岩，是武当山三十六岩中最美的，天柱峰正好屹立在对面。
English: Still walking up, eight miles, reached the South Heaven Gate of Nanyan Rock, and hurried to the main hall to worship. Turn right to the back of the main hall, the steep cliff stones are embedded in the air, like a long corridor hanging in the air, a lofty path, curving and stretching on the mountainside, down to the bottomless depths. This is Nanyan Rock, also called Zixiao Rock, is the most beautiful of the thirty-six rocks of Wudang Mountain, and Tianzhu Peak stands just opposite.

古文：自岩还至殿左，历级坞中，数抱松杉，连阴挺秀。
现代文：从南岩返回到正殿左侧，顺着石阶在坞中走，有棵几人围抱粗的松杉，枝叶遮天敝日，挺拔秀丽。
English: Returning from Nanamiiwa to the left side of the main hall, walking along the stone steps in the dock, there is a thick pine cedar tree surrounded by several people, the branches and leaves cover the sun, and it is beautiful.

古文：层台孤悬，高峰四眺，是名飞昇台。
现代文：一座平台孤悬而立，向四周眺望高峰，这是飞升台。
English: A platform stands alone, looking out over the surrounding peaks. This is the flying platform.

古文：暮返宫，贿其小徒，复得榔梅六枚。
现代文：傍晚回到朝天宫。用财物收买小道士，又得到六枚榔梅。
English: In the evening, he returned to the Court of the Morning Star. He used his wealth to bribe a minor Taoist and received six jujube fruits.

古文：明日再索之，不可得矣。
现代文：第二天再去索要，没能要到。
English: I went back the next day to ask for it, but it didn't arrive.

古文：十五日从南天门宫左趋雷公洞。
现代文：十五日从南天门宫往左直奔雷公洞。
English: On the 15th, go straight from the South Gate Palace to the left to Lei Gong Cave.

古文：洞在悬崖间。
现代文：洞在悬崖中间。
English: The hole is in the middle of the cliff.

古文：余欲返紫霄，由太子岩历不二庵，抵五龙。
现代文：我想返回紫霄岩，由太子岩经过不二庵，到达五龙宫。
English: I want to go back to Zizhongyan, from Taiziyan to Wulong Palace, passing through Fuxian.

古文：舆者轿夫谓迂曲不便，不若由南岩下竹笆桥，可览滴水岩、仙侣岩诸胜。
现代文：抬轿的人说迂回绕路不方便，不如从南岩下竹笆桥，可以观赏滴水岩、仙侣岩等胜景。
English: The people carrying the sedan said that it was inconvenient to take a detour. It would be better to take the Bamboo Bridge under Nanyan Rock, where you can enjoy the spectacular views of Dripping Rock, Fairy Rock and other scenic spots.

古文：乃从北天门下，一径阴森，滴水、仙侣二岩，俱在路左，飞崖上突，泉滴沥于中，中可容室，皆祠真武。
现代文：于是从北天门往下走，一条阴森的小路，滴水岩、仙侣岩两景，都在小路左侧，悬崖向上飞突，泉水滴沥崖中，悬崖中能容下静室，供奉的都是真武帝。
English: So I walked down from the North Heaven's Gate, a gloomy path, dripping rock, fairy rock two views, both on the left side of the path, cliff flying up, spring water dripping in the cliff, the cliff can accommodate a quiet room, and all are dedicated to Emperor Wu.

古文：至竹笆桥，始有流泉声，然不随涧行。
现代文：下到竹笆桥，开始听到泉水流淌的声音，但路不顺山涧行。
English: Down to the bamboo bridge, I began to hear the sound of spring water flowing, but the road did not go through the mountain.

古文：乃依山越岭，一路多突石危岩，间错于乱蒨野草丛翠中，时时放榔梅花，映耀远近。
现代文：于是靠着山走，翻越山岭，一路上多是突起的石头、高高的岩石，杂乱的分布在繁茂的草木丛中，不时有开放的榔梅花，绚丽的色彩映照远近。
English: As a result, I walked along the mountains and climbed over the mountains. Along the way, there were mostly protruding stones and high rocks, randomly distributed in the lush grass and trees. From time to time, there were open thistles and plum blossoms, and the brilliant colors reflected far and near.

古文：过白云、仙龟诸岩，共二十余里，循级直下涧底，则青羊桥也。
现代文：经过白云岩、仙龟岩等处，一共走了二十多里，顺石阶一直下到涧底，就是青羊桥。
English: After passing through Baiyun Rock, Turtle Rock and other places, we walked a total of more than twenty miles, down the stone steps to the bottom of the ravine, which is Qingyang Bridge.

古文：涧即竹笆桥下流，两崖蓊葱蔽日，清流延回，桥跨其上，不知流之所云。
现代文：涧水就是竹笆桥水的下游，两岸山崖上草木繁盛、树荫蔽日，长长的清流弯弯曲曲，一座桥横跨在上面，不知道涧水流到什么地方。
English: Surabaya is the downstream of the water of the Bamboo Bridge. On the cliffs on both sides of the river, the vegetation is flourishing, the shade of the trees covers the sun, the long clear stream bends and curves, a bridge spans above, I do not know where the Surabaya water flows to.

古文：仰视碧落，宛若瓮口。
现代文：抬头仰望天空，形状如同瓮口一般。
English: Looking up at the sky, the shape is like a cornice.

古文：度桥，直上攒天岭。
现代文：过了桥，径直登上攒天岭。
English: After crossing the bridge, we went straight to the top of Nan Tian Ling.

古文：五里，抵五龙宫，规制与紫霄南岩相伯仲。
现代文：走五里，抵达五龙宫，宫殿的规模和格式与紫霄宫、南岩相仿。
English: Walk five miles and arrive at the Wulong Palace. The size and format of the palace is similar to that of the Zishang Palace and Nanyan.

古文：殿后登山里许，转入坞中，得自然庵。
现代文：从宫殿背后登山，走一里多，转进山坞，到自然庵。
English: From the back of the palace, climb the mountain, walk more than a mile, turn into the dock, to the nature hermitage.

古文：已还至殿右，折下坞中，二里，得凌虚岩。
现代文：不久返回五龙宫殿右面，转下坞中，走两里，到凌虚岩。
English: Soon return to the right side of the Wulong Palace, turn down the dock, walk two miles to Lingyi Rock.

古文：岩倚重峦，临绝壑，面对桃源洞诸山，嘉木尤深密，紫翠之色互映如图画，为希夷即唐末隐士陈抟，号希夷先生习静处。
现代文：凌虚岩背靠重重山峦，面临极深的沟壑，正对桃源洞众山峰，满山嘉树特别茂密，紫色翠色互相辉映，犹如图画，是希夷先生修炼的地方。前面有传经台，孤零零地俯视深壑，可以和飞升台相媲美。
English: Lingyue Rock is backed by mountains and faces a very deep ravine. It is facing the peaks of Taoyuan Cave. The mountains are full of lush trees, and the purple and emerald colors reflect each other. It is like a picture. It is Mr. Xi Yi's place of cultivation. There is a prayer platform in front, overlooking the depths in solitude, which can be compared to a flying platform.

古文：前有传经台，孤瞰壑中，可与飞蒨作匹。
现代文：返回时经过五龙宫殿左面，攀登榔梅台，于是下山到达草店。
English: When returning, go past the left side of the Wulong Palace, climb Jimeidai, and then go down the mountain to the grass shop.

古文：还过殿左，登榔梅台，即下山至草店。华山四面皆石壁，故峰麓无乔枝异干；直至峰顶，则松柏多合三人围者；松悉五鬣，实大如莲，间有未堕者，采食之，鲜香殊绝。
现代文：华山四周都是石壁，所以山脚没有高大奇特的树木；一直上到峰顶，则松柏大多有三人围抱粗；松树全是五针松，松子和莲子一般大，间或遇到没掉落的松果，采下来吃，鲜味、香味都特别好。
English: Huashan is surrounded by stone walls, so there are no tall and strange trees at the foot of the mountain; up to the peak, most of the pine and cypress trees are surrounded by three people; the pine trees are all five-needle pines, pine nuts and lotus seeds are generally large, occasionally encountering pine cones that have not fallen, harvested and eaten, and the umami and fragrance are particularly good.

古文：太和则四山环抱，百里内密树森罗，蔽日参天；至近山数十里内，则异杉老柏合三人抱者，连络山坞，盖国禁也。
现代文：太和山则是四面群山环抱，百里以内茂盛的森林丛密分布，大树遮天蔽日、高耸入云；靠近太和山的数十里范围内，三人围抱粗的奇异杉树和老柏树，连续不断地长满山坞，是因为朝廷禁止砍伐。
English: Mt. Taihe is surrounded by mountains on all sides. Within a hundred miles, lush forests are densely distributed, and large trees shade the sky and tower into the clouds. Within a few dozen miles of Mt. Taihe, the three of them are surrounded by thick strange cedar trees and old cypress trees, which are continuously growing all over the mountain dock, because the court has banned felling.

古文：嵩、少之间，平麓上至绝顶，樵伐无遗，独三将军树巍然杰出耳。
现代文：嵩山、少室山之间，从平缓的山脚上到绝顶，树木被砍伐得所剩无遗，只有三棵将军树巍然耸立着。
English: Between Songshan Mountain and Shomuro Mountain, from the gentle foothills to the very top, trees have been cut down to nothing. Only three generals' trees stand tall.

古文：山谷川原，候同气异。
现代文：山峰、峡谷、河川、平原各种地势，季节相同而天气物象不一样。
English: Mountains, canyons, rivers, plains, and various terrains have the same seasons but different weather phenomena.

古文：余出嵩、少，始见麦畦青；至陕州，杏始花，柳色依依向人；入潼关，则驿路既平，垂杨夹道，梨李参差矣；及转入泓峪，而层冰积雪，犹满涧谷，真春风所不度也。
现代文：我从嵩山、少室山出来时，才看到田里麦苗青青；到了陕州，杳树刚刚开花，嫩绿的柳枝随风摇摆，十分动人；进入渔关，大路平坦，高大的杨树立在道路两旁，梨树、李树高低不齐；等到转到私峪，却是层层的冰冻积雪遍布山谷沟涧，真是春风不度的地方啊。
English: When I came out of Songshan and Shomuroshan, I only saw the wheat seedlings in the fields; when I arrived in Shaanxi, the eucalyptus trees had just bloomed, and the tender green willow branches swayed with the wind, very moving; when I entered Yugang, the road was flat, tall poplars stood on both sides of the road, and pear trees and plum trees were uneven in height; when I turned to Shifang, it was layers of frozen snow all over the valleys and ravines, it was really a place where the spring breeze did not pass.

古文：过坞底岔，复见杏花；出龙驹寨，桃雨柳烟，所在都有。
现代文：经过坞底岔时，又看到香花开放；从龙驹寨出去，桃红柳绿，所到之处一片春色。
English: When passing through the dock at the bottom of the pier, I saw the fragrant flowers open again; when I went out from Longjing Village, the peach and willow were green, and everywhere I went was a spring color.

古文：忽忆日已清明，不胜景物悴忧伤情。
现代文：忽然想起已到清明时节，不由触景生情。
English: Suddenly remembering that it was the Qingming Festival, I couldn't help but be moved.

古文：遂自草店，越二十四日，浴佛后一日抵家。
现代文：于是从草店启程，经过二十四天，在浴佛节第二天到家。
English: So he set off from the herbalist's shop, and after twenty-four days, he arrived home on the second day of the Bathing Buddha Festival.

古文：以太和榔梅为老母寿。
现代文：用太和山的榔梅为老母亲祝寿。
English: Using Taihe Mountain's jujube to wish his elderly mother a happy birthday.

