古文：续生张佐陆鸿渐贾耽治针道士贞元末布衣柳成苏州义师吴堪
现代文：续生张佐陆鸿渐贾耽治针道士贞元末布衣柳成苏州义师吴堪
English: Zhang Salu's successor, Hong Qian, Jia Tanji, Ji Daoist, Zhen Yuan, Mudu Bu Yi, Liu Cheng, Suzhou Yishi, Wu Kan

古文：续生
现代文：续生
English: Continued

古文：濮阳郡有续生者，莫知其来，身长七八尺，肥黑剪发，留二三寸，不着褌裤，破衫齐膝而已。
现代文：濮阳郡有个叫续生的，没人知道他是从哪里来的，身长七八尺，又黑又胖，留着二三寸长的头发，连开裆裤子都不穿，一件破衣衫垂到膝盖而已。
English: No one knows where he comes from, but there is a boy in Fenyang County called Zong Sheng. He is seven or eight feet tall, dark and fat, with two or three inches of hair. He doesn't even wear open-crotch trousers, just a tattered shirt that hangs down to his knees.

古文：人遗财帛，转施贫穷，每四月八日。市场戏处，皆有续生。
现代文：别人送给他财物衣服，他转而送给贫穷的人。每逢四月八日，市场上的所有游戏之处，都有续生在那里。
English: Other people gave him money and clothes, and he in turn gave them to the poor. On April 8th, all the games in the market have a sequel there.

古文：郡人张孝恭不信，自在戏场，对一续生，又遣奴子往诸处看验，奴子来报，场场悉有。
现代文：郡中有个叫张孝恭的人，不相信会是真的，便自己坐在一个戏场里面对着一个续生，又派仆人往各处去察看，仆人回来向地报告说场场都有个续生。
English: There was a man in the county named Zhang Xiaoqiong. He did not believe that it was real, so he sat in a theater facing a sequel. He also sent his servant to inspect everywhere. The servant came back and reported that there was a sequel in the theater.

古文：以此异之。
现代文：由此便以为续生确实是个奇异的人。
English: This led to the belief that Shōsei was indeed a strange person.

古文：天旱，续生入兴泥涂，偃展久之，必雨。土人谓之猪龙。
现代文：天旱的时候。续生钻到泥土里，绻缩伸展一阵子，肯定就下雨，当地人称他为猪龙。
English: When the weather is dry. Continuously drill into the soil, contract and stretch for a while, it will definitely rain, the locals call him a pig dragon.

古文：市内有大坑，水潦停注，常有群猪止息其间，续生向夕来卧。
现代文：市内有个大坑，水流到这里就不再往外淌了，常有一群群的猪躺在里面休息，续生到了夜晚也来躺着。
English: There is a large pit in the city, and when the water reaches it, it no longer flows out. There is often a group of pigs lying down to rest in it, and when night falls, they also come to lie down.

古文：冬月飞霜着体，睡觉则汗气冲发。
现代文：冬天时，雪花落在他的身上，就被他睡觉时的汗气融化蒸发了。
English: In winter, when snowflakes fell on his body, they were melted and evaporated by the sweat of his sleep.

古文：无何。夜中有人见北市灶火洞赤，径往视之，有一蟒蛇，身在灶里，首出在灶外，大于猪头，并有两耳。
现代文：没过多久，夜间有人看见北市场火光通红，走到跟前一看，见一条大蟒，身子在灶中脑袋在灶外，脑袋跟猪头一般大，并且长着两个耳朵。
English: It wasn't long before someone saw the North Market glowing red in the night. They walked over to it and saw a large donkey, its body in the stove, its head outside the stove. Its head was as big as a pig's head, and it had two ears.

古文：伺之平晓，乃是续生，拂灰而去，后不知所之。
现代文：等到天亮一看，原来是续生，只见他拂去身上的灰就出来了，后来，不知续生到什么地方去了。
English: When he looked at it in the morning, it turned out to be the afterbirth. When he brushed the ash off his body, it came out. Later, I don't know where the afterbirth went.

古文：张佐
现代文：张佐
English: Zhang Zuo

古文：开元中，前进士张佐常为叔父言，少年南次鄠杜，郊行，见有老父，乘青驴。四足白，腰背鹿革囊，颜甚悦怿，旨趣非凡。
现代文：开元中年，前科进士张佐，常跟叔父讲述那个自己亲见亲闻的故事。张佐少年时旅居南方鄠杜，一次在郊外走路，看到一个老头儿，骑着四蹄雪白的青驴，背着鹿皮包，和颜悦色，旨趣非凡。
English: In the middle of the first year of the 21st century, Zhang Zu, a former forensic scientist, often told his uncle about the story he had seen and heard. Zhang Zu lived in southern Shidu when he was a boy. Once, when he was walking in the suburbs, he saw an old man, riding a four-hoofed snow-white donkey, carrying a buckskin bag, with a pleasant appearance and extraordinary taste.

古文：始自斜迳合路。佐甚异之。试问所从来，叟但笑而不答。
现代文：刚从小路走上大道，张佐对他颇为惊异，试探着问他是从什么地方来的，老头儿听了只是笑而不答。
English: As soon as he stepped onto the main road from the path, Zhang Zuo was quite surprised by him. He probed and asked him where he came from. The old man just laughed and did not answer.

古文：至再三。叟忽怒叱曰： 年少子乃敢相逼。
现代文：张佐再三询问，老头儿突然愤怒地呵叱道： 好你个少年小子，竟敢如此相逼！
English: Zhang Zuo asked repeatedly. The old man suddenly got angry and scolded him, "Good boy, how dare you push me like that!

古文：吾岂盗贼椎埋者耶，何必知从来？ 
现代文：我难道是死了椎埋起来的盗贼不成，有什么必要知道我是从哪里来的？ 
English: Am I a dead and buried thief, and what need is there to know where I come from?

古文：佐逊谢曰： 向慕先生高躅，愿从事左右耳，何赐深责？ 
现代文：张佐谦逊地致礼说： 只因一向仰慕先生的行迹高超，甘愿在您身边服务而已，为什么如此严厉地责备我呢？ 
English: Zhang Zuo bowed humbly and said, "Just because I have always admired Mr. Yu's excellent conduct and am willing to serve by your side, why do you blame me so severely?

古文：叟曰： 吾无术教子，但寿永者，子当嗤吾潦倒耳。 
现代文：老头儿说： 老朽并无什么法术可以教给你，我只是个长寿的人，你恐怕是在嘲笑我年迈潦倒罢。 
English: The old man said, "There is no magic that old age can teach you. I am just a man who has lived a long life. I am afraid you are mocking my old age."

古文：遂复乘促走，佐亦扑马趁之，俱至逆旅，叟枕鹿囊，寝未熟，佐乃疲，贳白酒将饮，试就请曰： 单瓢期先生共之。 
现代文：说完又骑上驴急急奔去，张佐也跳上马去追赶他，两人都到客店里住下来，老头儿枕着鹿皮包还没睡熟，张佐因疲劳赊了白酒要喝，便试探着邀请老头儿说： 就用这一只瓢请先生与我共饮。 
English: After saying this, he rode on a donkey and sped away. Zhang Zuo also jumped on a horse to chase him. Both of them stayed at the inn. The old man had not yet fallen asleep with his deerskin bag on his pillow. Zhang Zuo had drunk white wine due to fatigue, so he tried to invite the old man and said, "Please use this gourd to drink with me."

古文：叟跳起曰： 此正吾之所好，何子解吾意耶。 
现代文：老头儿跳起来说： 这正是我的爱好。你怎么如此了解我的心意呢！ 
English: The old man jumped up and said, "That's exactly what I like to do. How do you know my heart so well?"

古文：饮讫，佐见翁色悦，徐请曰： 小生寡昧。愿先生赐言，以广闻见，他非所敢望也。 
现代文：酒喝完后，张佐见老翁满脸喜悦，便小声请求道： 小生愚昧寡闻，愿听先生赐言以广见闻，不敢有什么别的非份之想。 
English: After drinking the wine, Zhang Sa saw the old man's face full of joy, so he whispered a request: "I am young and ignorant, I would like to listen to what you have to say, I dare not think of anything else.

古文：叟曰： 吾之所见，梁隋陈唐耳，贤愚治乱，国史已具，然请以身所异者语子。
现代文：老头儿说： 我所见到的，不外是梁隋陈唐几代的事情罢了，其中的贤愚和治乱，在国史书上都已记载；我只把与史书不同的亲身经历讲给你听听吧。
English: The old man said, "What I have seen is nothing more than the events of the Liang, Sui, Chen, and Tang dynasties, of which the wise and the foolish, as well as the management of chaos, have all been recorded in the national history books. I will only tell you my personal experience, which is different from the history books.

古文：吾宇文周时居歧，扶风人也，姓申名宗，慕齐神武，因改宗为观。
现代文：我在宇文周时居住于岐地，是扶风人，姓申名宗，因仰慕齐代神武而改宗为观。
English: I lived in Qiji at the time of Uwen Zhou. I was a follower of Feng and my family name was Shenmeizong. I converted to Buddhism because of my admiration for the Qidai Shenwu.

古文：十八，从燕公子谨征梁元帝于荆州，州陷，大将军旋，梦青衣二人谓余曰： 吕走天年，人向主，寿不千。 
现代文：十八岁时跟从燕公子谨到荆州去征伐梁元帝，荆州攻陷后大将军凯旋而回，我与部队留守在江陵。有一天，梦见穿着青衣的两个人对我说： 吕走天年，人向主，寿不千。 
English: At the age of eighteen, I followed Yan Gongzong to Jingzhou to conquer Emperor Liangyuan. After the fall of Jingzhou, the general returned in triumph, and I stayed with the troops in Gangneung. One day, I dreamed of two men in blue suits who said to me: "It's a great age to be alive, everyone is turning to the Lord, life is short.

古文：吾乃诣占梦者于江陵市，占梦者谓余曰： 吕走回字也，人向主住字也，岂子住乃寿也。 
现代文：我便到江陵市去找占梦的，占梦的对我说：  吕走 ， 回 字也； 人向主 ， 往 字也。岂不是说你回家居住便能长寿吗？ 
English: I went to Gangneung City to find a fortune-teller. The fortune-teller said to me, "If you go home, you will live a long life; if you go to the Lord, you will live a long life."

古文：时留兵屯江陵。吾遂陈情于校尉拓跋烈，许之，因却诣占梦者曰： 住即可矣。寿有术乎？ 
现代文：当时留下的兵驻扎在江陵，我便向校尉拓跋烈陈情返乡，被批准了。我又到占梦的那里去告别说： 回家去住已经可以了，要想长寿还有什么方法呢？ 
English: The soldiers left behind at that time were stationed in Gangneung, so I made a passionate appeal to Lieutenant Tuoba to return home, which was approved. I also went to the place where I had a dream to say goodbye and said: It's okay to go home and live, what else can I do to live longer?

古文：占者曰： 汝前生梓潼薛君胄也，好服术蕊散。多寻异书。日诵黄老一百纸，徙居鹤鸣山下，草堂三间，户外骈植花竹。泉石萦绕。
现代文：占梦的说： 你的前身是梓潼的薛君胄，好服用道术炼制的药散，多寻奇异之书，日诵黄老一百页，迁居于鹤鸣山下，有草堂三间，门外遍植奇花修竹，有泉水与山石。
English: The dream teller said, "Your predecessor was Xue Junlun of Zizhao. He was fond of taking herbal medicine made from Taoism. He often searched for strange books. He read a hundred pages of Huanglao every day. He moved to the foot of Crane Mountain. There are three grass halls. Outside the door, there are strange flowers and bamboo, and there are springs and rocks.

古文：八月十五日，长啸独饮，因酣畅。大言曰： 薛君胄疏澹若此，岂无异人降止。 
现代文：萦绕在其中，有一年的八月十五日，一个人坐在那里长啸独饮，喝到酣畅时高声喊道： 薛君胄疏淡若此，难道没有异人降临到我的面前！ 
English: On the fifteenth day of August one year, a man sat there and drank alone for a long time. When he had drunk enough, he shouted loudly: "Xue Junya, if you are absent-minded like this, isn't there a stranger in front of me?"

古文：忽觉两耳中有车马声。因颓然思寝。
现代文：忽然觉得两只耳朵里有车马的声音，于是颓然想睡。
English: Suddenly I felt the sound of chariots and horses in both ears, and I suddenly wanted to sleep.

古文：头才至席。遂有小车，朱轮青盖，驾赤犊，出耳中，各高三二寸，亦不觉出耳之难，车有二童，绿帻青帔，亦长二三寸。凭轼呼御者，踏轮扶下，而谓君胄曰： 吾自兜玄国来，向闻长啸月下，韵甚清激，私心奉慕，愿接清论。 
现代文：脑袋刚刚沾席，便见眼前出现了小车，红色车轮青色车盖，前面驾着红色的牛犊，小车从自己的耳朵里出来，各高两三寸，也不觉得从耳朵里出来时怎么困难，车上有两个小童，绿头巾青披肩，也是长两三寸，依着车上的栏杆呼唤车夫，踏着车轮扶下车后对君胄说： 我们从兜玄国来，以前听到您长啸于月下，声韵十分清彻激越，内心深表敬慕，很愿接受您的清高之论。 
English: My head had just sunk into the seat, when I saw a small car appear in front of me. The red wheels had a blue cover, and a red ox was driving in front. The small car came out of my ears, each two or three inches high, and I did not feel how difficult it was to come out of my ears. There were two children in the car, with a green scarf and a blue shawl, also two or three inches long, leaning on the railing of the car to call the driver, stepping on the wheel to get out of the car and saying to Junya: We come from the land of the moon, we have heard you howling under the moon before, the

古文：君胄大骇曰： 君适出吾耳，何谓兜玄国来？ 
现代文：君胄大惊道： 你们刚才从我的耳朵里出来。怎么说是从兜玄国来呢。 
English: Junya was shocked: You just came out of my ear. How can you say you came from overseas?

古文：二童子曰： 兜玄国在吾耳中，君耳安能处我？ 
现代文：二童子说： 兜玄国是在我们的耳朵里面，您的耳朵里哪能住下我们？ 
English: The two boys said, "The kingdom of heaven is within our ears. How can we live in your ears?"

古文：君胄曰： 君长二三寸，岂复耳有国土，傥若有之，国人当尽焦螟耳？ 
现代文：君胄说： 你们的身长只有二三寸，哪能再在耳朵里有国土。就算有的话，那么国人也该都是干巴小虫罢了。
English: Junya said: You are only two or three inches tall, how can you have a country in your ears. Even if there were, then the Chinese people would just be dry worms.

古文：二童曰： 。
现代文：二童说： 怎么能那个样？
English: The two boys said, "How can that be?"

古文：胡为其然，吾国与汝国无异。
现代文：我们国家与你的国家并无不同。
English: Our country is no different from yours.

古文：不信，请从吾游，或能便留，则君离生死苦矣。 
现代文：如果不信就请跟着我们去看看，有可能就留在那里，那您脱离了生死之苦了。 
English: If you don't believe it, please come with us to see it, and possibly stay there, then you are free from the suffering of life and death.

古文：一童因倾耳示君胄，君胄觇之，乃别有天地，花卉繁茂，甍栋连接。清泉萦绕，岩岫杳冥。
现代文：一个小童便侧过耳朵来让君胄观看，君胄往里面一瞧，但见别有天地，花卉繁密茂盛，瓦屋一栋接着一栋，清泉盘旋萦绕，山崖高耸入云。
English: A little boy passed his ear to let Junya look at it. Junya peered inside, but saw a different world, with lush flowers, brick houses one after another, clear springs circling around, and mountains and cliffs soaring into the clouds.

古文：因扪耳投之。已至一都会，城池楼堞，穷极壮丽。
现代文：于是摁下自己的两耳走了进去，很快便来到一个都会，只见城池楼阁，无比壮观华丽。
English: So he put his two ears under his armpits and went in. Soon he came to a city, and all he could see was a castle, which was spectacular and gorgeous.

古文：君胄彷徨，未知所之，顾见向之二童，已在其侧，谓君胄曰： 此国大小于君国，既至此，盍从吾谒蒙玄真伯。
现代文：君胄正彷徨于街头，不知道该往哪里走，在向周围张望时看见原先见过的那两个小童已经站在自己身边，小童对君胄说： 这个国家与你的国家相比，到底哪个大哪个小？既然到了这里，何不跟我们去拜见蒙玄真伯。 
English: Junyao was wandering the streets, not knowing where to go. When he looked around, he saw that the two children he had seen earlier were already standing next to him. The child said to Junyao, "Compared to your country, how big and small is this country? Since we are here, why not come with us to visit Meng Xuan Zhenbo."

古文：蒙玄真伯居大殿，墙垣阶陛，尽饰以金碧，垂翠帘帷幔。
现代文：蒙玄真伯居住在一座大宫殿里，墙壁与台阶都装饰得金碧辉煌，室内挂着翠帘帷帐。
English: Meng Xuan Zhenbo lived in a large palace. The walls and steps were decorated with brilliant gold, and the interior was hung with green curtains.

古文：中间独坐。真伯身衣云霞日月之衣，冠通冠，垂旒，皆与身等。
现代文：蒙玄真伯端坐在正殿中央，身穿绣满云霞日月的锦绣衣服，头上戴着通天冠，冠上下垂的流苏可与身体等长。
English: Meng Xuan Zhenbodu sat in the center of the main hall, wearing an embroidered dress full of clouds, sun and moon, with a crown on his head. The crown's hanging tassels were as long as his body.

古文：玉童四人，立侍左右，一执白拂，一执犀如意。
现代文：四个玉童侍立在真伯左右，一对手执白拂尘，一对手执犀角如意。
English: Four jade children stand around Zhen Bo, one holding a white whisk, the other holding a rhinoceros horn.

古文：二人既入，拱手不敢仰视，有高冠长裾缘绿衣人，宣青纸制曰： 肇分太素，国既有亿。
现代文：小童与君胄走进大殿之后，个个拱手行礼不敢抬头仰视，一个头顶高帽身穿长裙围着绿衣服的人走上前来，高声宣读青纸文书道： 肇分太素，国既有亿。
English: After the children and the princes and princesses entered the main hall, they all bowed their heads and did not dare to look up. A person with a tall hat on his head, wearing a long skirt and surrounded by green clothes, came forward and read aloud the blue paper textbook way: "The score is too simple, the country already has billions."

古文：尔沦下土，贱卑万品，聿臻于如此，实由冥合，况尔清乃躬诚，叶于真宰，大官厚爵，俾宜享之，可为主箓大夫。 
现代文：尔沦于下土，贱卑万品，聿臻于如此，实由冥合，况尔清乃躬诚，叶于真宰，大官厚爵，俾宜享之，可为主箓大夫。 
English: He descended to the lower earth, lowly and humble, and attained to such a degree that he became a high-ranking dignitary, and it was appropriate for him to enjoy it, he could be the main doctor.

古文：君胄拜舞出门，即有黄帔三四人，引至一曹署。
现代文：君胄起舞拜谢，然后走出门来，门外有身着黄帔的三四人给他引路，领到一处官署。
English: He danced and bowed, and then walked out the door. Outside the door, three or four people in yellow coats led the way to a government office.

古文：其中文簿，多所不识，每月亦无请受，但意有所念，左右必先知，当便供给。
现代文：这里面的文牍簿册他大都不能认识，每月也没有人前来请示和领受什么，但只要他心里想的东西，没等自己开口吩咐，身边的侍从便预先知道，当即奉献上来满足他的需求。
English: He could not recognize most of the books and manuscripts in it, and no one came to ask for or receive anything every month, but as long as he had something in mind, without waiting for him to speak, the attendants around him knew in advance and immediately offered to meet his needs.

古文：因暇登楼远望，忽有归思，赋诗曰： 风软景和煦，异香馥林塘。
现代文：一日闲暇无事，他便登楼远望，忽然产生了回归故乡的念头，提笔赋诗道： 风软景和煦，异香馥林塘。
English: After a day of leisure with nothing to do, he went upstairs to look into the distance, and suddenly had the idea of returning to his hometown. He took up his pen to write a poem: The wind is soft, the scenery is warm, and the forest pond is fragrant.

古文：登高一长望，信美非吾乡。 
现代文：登高一长望，信美非吾乡。 
English: A longing to go to high school, believing that America is not my hometown.

古文：因以诗示二童子，童子怒曰： 吾以君质性冲寂，引至吾国，鄙俗余态，果乃未去。
现代文：写成后送给两个童子传阅，不料童子愤怒地说： 原以为你性情冲淡平静，所以引渡到我们国家，没想到你的鄙俗余态，至今仍未除去。
English: After it was written, it was given to two boys to read, but the boy said angrily: I thought your disposition was calm, so I extradited you to our country. I didn't expect your vulgarity, which has still not been removed.

古文：乡有何忆耶？ 
现代文：故乡有什么值得怀念的呢？ 说完急忙驰逐君胄。
English: What do you miss most about your hometown?

古文：遂疾逐君胄，如陷落地，仰视，乃自童子耳中落，已在旧去处。
现代文：君胄觉得好似从什么地方落到了地上，抬头一看，原来是从童子的耳朵里掉落下来，依然回到了旧地方。
English: Junya felt as if she had fallen to the ground from somewhere. Looking up, she saw that she had fallen from the boy's ear and still returned to the old place.

古文：随视童子，亦不复见。
现代文：回头再看童子时，已经踪影全无。
English: When I looked back at the boy, there was no trace of him.

古文：因问诸邻人，云失君胄已七八年矣，君胄在彼如数月，未几而君胄卒。
现代文：询问各位邻居，都说君胄已失踪七八年了，而君胄在那边仅仅住了几个月，没过多久君胄便去世了。
English: If you ask the neighbours, they will all say that Junya has been missing for seven or eight years, but Junya only lived there for a few months, and died not long after.

古文：生于君家，即今身也。 
现代文：后来又出生在君家，也就是现在的他。 
English: Later, he was born into the Kim family, which is where he is now.

古文：占者又云： 吾前生乃出耳中童子，以汝前生好道，以得到兜玄国，然俗态未尽，不可长生，然汝自此寿千年矣。
现代文：占梦的又说： 我的前身就是从耳朵里出来的那个童子，因为你的前身爱好道术，所以能到兜玄国去，但因你俗态尚未脱尽，不可长生不老；然而自此以后你可长寿一千年。
English: The dream teller also said, "My predecessor is the boy who came out of my ear. Because your predecessor was fond of Taoism, he was able to go to Tibet. However, since you have not yet shed your vulgarity, you cannot live forever. However, from now on, you can live for a thousand years."

古文：吾受汝符，即归。 
现代文：我交给你符箓之后，立即回去。 
English: After I give you the seal, go back immediately.

古文：因吐朱绢尺余，令吞之，占者遂复童子形而灭。
现代文：说完。从嘴里吐出一尺多长的红绢子，令我吞下，占梦的随即恢复童子原形而幻灭了。
English: With that, he spat out a foot-long piece of red braid from his mouth, which I swallowed. The fortune-teller was immediately disillusioned as he regained the boy's original form.

古文：自是不复有疾，周行天下名山，迨兹向二百余岁。然吾所见异事甚多，并记在鹿革中。 
现代文：从此之后我再不生病，周游了天下的名山，至今已经活了二百余岁，见到的奇异事情非常多，都记载在鹿皮包里呢。 
English: Since then, I have never been sick again. I have traveled around the world's famous mountains. I have lived for more than two hundred years so far. There are many strange things I have seen, all recorded in the moose skin bag.

古文：因启囊，出二轴书甚大，字颇细，佐不能读，请叟自宣，略述十余事，其半昭然可记。
现代文：说着，老头儿就去打开鹿皮包，取出特别大的两轴书，字极细小，张佐不能认读，便请老头儿自己宣讲，老头儿约略讲述了十余件事，其中一半明了可记。
English: Saying this, the old man went to open the deerskin bag and took out a particularly large two-spindle book. The words were so small that Zhang Zuo couldn't read them, so he asked the old man to read them himself. The old man roughly recounted more than ten things, half of which were clear and could be memorized.

古文：其夕将佐略寝，及觉已失叟。
现代文：那天夜晚张佐听完老头儿讲的故事之后，就迷迷糊糊地睡着了，醒来一看，老头儿已失踪了。
English: That night, after listening to the old man's story, Zhang Zuo fell into a drowsy sleep. When he woke up, the old man had disappeared.

古文：后数日。有人于灰谷湫见之，叟曰： 为我致意于张君。 
现代文：过了几天，有人在灰谷湫看见过他，他说： 替我向张佐致意。 
English: A few days later, someone who had seen him in Haeundae said, "Say hello to Zhang Sa for me."

古文：佐遽寻之，已不复见。
现代文：张佐听说后，急忙去找他，但已在也看不到他了。
English: After hearing the news, Zhang Zuo hurried to find him, but he was already out of sight.

古文：陆鸿渐
现代文：陆鸿渐
English: Lu Hongzhan

古文：竟陵僧有于水边得婴儿者，育为弟子，稍长，自筮得蹇之渐，繇曰： 鸿渐于陆，其羽可用为仪。 
现代文：竟陵有个和尚在河边拾到一个婴儿，把他收养起来作为自己的弟子，稍稍长大之后自己占卜得卦 蹇之渐 ，卜词是 鸿渐于陆，其羽可用为仪。 
English: In fact, there was a monk who found a baby dragonfly by the river and adopted it as his disciple. When he was a little older, he divined the dragonfly, whose feathers could be used as a charm.

古文：乃姓陆，字鸿渐，名羽。
现代文：于是确定姓陆，字鸿渐，名羽。
English: As a result, the surnames Lu, Hung-chien, and Mei-yu were determined.

古文：羽有文学，多意思，状一物，莫不尽其妙，茶术最著。
现代文：陆羽颇具文学天赋，思想很活跃，每描述一件事物，无不淋漓尽致地表达出它的微妙之处，尤其精通茶术。
English: Lu Yu is quite gifted in literature, his thoughts are very active, and every time he describes a thing, he expresses its subtleties in the most vivid way. He is especially proficient in tea ceremony.

古文：巩县陶者多为瓷偶人，号陆鸿渐，买十器，得一鸿渐。市人沽茗不利，辄灌注之。
现代文：巩县的陶瓷匠人大都会制作瓷人玩偶，他们就把瓷人称为陆鸿渐，每买十件陶器就可以得到一个鸿惭，人们感到买了来装茶不吉利，所以都把买到的鸿惭装满了水。
English: Gongxian's ceramic artisan metropolis produces porcelain dolls. They call the porcelain dolls Lu Hongzhen. For every ten pieces of pottery bought, one Hongzhen can be obtained. People feel that it is unlucky to buy them to hold tea, so they fill the purchased Hongzhen with water.

古文：羽于江湖称竟陵子，于南越称桑苎公。贞元末卒。
现代文：陆羽在江湖上号称竟陵子，在南越则称他为桑苎公，他死于贞元末年。
English: Lu Yu was known as the son of a mausoleum on the river and lake, and in South Vietnam he was called Mulberry Lord. He died at the end of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：贾耽
现代文：贾耽
English: Jia Tan

古文：贾耽相公镇滑台日，有部民家富于财，而父偶得疾，身体渐瘦。糜粥不通，日饮鲜血半升而已。
现代文：贾耽相公镇守滑台的时候，有个人家里有很多财富，而老父亲偶然得了病，老头儿的身体逐渐消瘦，水米不进，只靠每天喝半升鲜血维持生命而已。
English: When Jia Tan Xiang Gongzhen was guarding the slide, there was a person who had a lot of wealth in his family, and his old father accidentally got sick. The old man's body gradually wasted away, and he could only drink half a liter of blood every day to sustain his life.

古文：其家忧惧，乃多出金帛募善医者，自两京及山东诸道医人，无不至者，虽接待丰厚，率皆以无效而旋。
现代文：家里人忧虑害怕，便出高价招聘看病的，从东西两个京城到山东各道的医生没有不来的，但是，尽管他给予医生以丰厚的待遇。医生却都因诊治无效而告退。
English: Worried and afraid, his family members paid high prices to recruit doctors to see him. Doctors came from the two capital cities to Shandong Province. However, despite the generous treatment he gave the doctors, they all quit due to the ineffectiveness of the diagnosis and treatment.

古文：后有人自剑南来，诊候旬日，亦不识其状，乃谓其子曰： 某之医，家传三世矣，凡见人之疾，则必究其源。
现代文：后来有个从剑南来的人，诊断观察了十来天也不能识别是什么症状，便对患者的儿子说： 我的医术已经家传三代了，凡是给人看病，必定追究清楚患病的根源。
English: Later, there was a man who came from Jian'nan. After observing the diagnosis for ten days, he could not identify what the symptoms were, so he said to the patient's son: My medical skills have been passed down for three generations. Anyone who sees a patient must investigate the root cause of the illness.

古文：今观叟则惘然无知，岂某之艺未至，而叟天降之灾乎？ 
现代文：这次观察老头儿的病则什么也看不明白；是我的医术不到家。还是老人的病属于天降的灾难呢？
English: This time, observing the old man's illness, I don't understand anything; is it my medical skill that is lacking, or is the old man's illness a natural disaster?

古文：然某闻府帅博学多能，盖异人也。
现代文：我听说本府统帅博学多能，他是个异人呵！
English: I've heard that our commander-in-chief is very knowledgeable, he's a rarity!

古文：至于卜筮医药，罔不精妙，子能捐五十千乎？ 
现代文：至于卜卦相命行医问药等等学问，没有他不精通的。你能捐钱五十千吗？ 
English: As for the knowledge of divination, fortune-telling, medicine and so on, there is nothing he is not proficient in. Can you donate fifty thousand?

古文：其子曰： 何用？ 
现代文：老头儿的儿子说： 干什么用？ 
English: The old man's son said, "What's it for?"

古文：曰： 将以遗御吏，候公之出，以车载叟于马前，使见之，傥有言，则某得施其力矣。 
现代文：这位医生说： 用来送给御史。等到相公出门时，你用车子载着老人到他的马前面，使他能看见，如果他能对老人的病说点什么，我就可以施展我的能力了。 
English: The doctor said, "It's for the emperor. When the emperor goes out, you should drive the old man in front of his horse so that he can see. If he can say something about the old man's illness, then I can use my ability."

古文：子如其言，公果出行香，见之注视，将有言。为监军使白事，不觉马首已过。
现代文：老头儿的儿子照他的话办了，相公果然出门烧香祭庙，看到老头儿时注视了一看，刚要说什么，恰好监军使报告事情，不知不觉间相公的马就走过去了。
English: The old man's son did as he said, and the father-in-law went out to burn incense in the temple. When he saw the old man, he stared at him. Just as he was about to say something, the overseer reported the matter, and before he knew it, the father-in-law's horse passed by.

古文：医人遂辞去。
现代文：这位医生也只好告辞而去。
English: The doctor also had to leave.

古文：其父后语子曰。吾之疾是必死之徵，今颇烦躁，若厌人语，尔可载吾城外有山水处置之，三日一来省吾。
现代文：老头儿后来对儿子说： 我的病是死症，现在心里很烦躁，好像厌烦听人说话，你可把我载到城外有山有水的地方，把我安置在那里，三天去看我一次。
English: Later, the old man said to his son: "My illness is terminal. My mind is very restless now, as if I were tired of listening to people. You can take me outside the city to a place with mountains and water, place me there, and visit me once every three days.

古文：如死则葬之于彼。 
现代文：如果死了，就安葬在那个地方。 
English: If you die, you will be buried in that place.

古文：其子不获已，载去。得一盘石近池，置之，悲泣而归。
现代文：他儿子不得已，只好把他载了去，我找到一块靠近水池的大石头，就把老头儿安置下来，悲痛哭泣着回了家。
English: His son had no choice but to carry him. I found a big rock near the pool and set the old man down. He cried bitterly and went home.

古文：其父忽见一黄犬来池中，出没数四，状如沐浴。
现代文：老头儿忽然看见一只黄毛狗来到水池中，几出几没，好像在洗澡的样子。
English: The old man suddenly saw a yellow-haired dog come into the pool, a few steps away, as if it were taking a bath.

古文：既去，其水即香，叟渴欲饮，而气喘力微，乃肘行而前，既饮，则觉四体稍轻，饮之不已，既能坐，子惊喜，乃复载归家。
现代文：黄毛狗走了之后，池水就有了香味，老头儿口渴了想去喝，但因气力弱站不起来，只好用两肘支地爬行到池边，喝了几口之后便觉得四肢渐渐轻松起来，于是坚持天天饮用，儿子见他能够坐起来了，惊喜不已，于是又把他载回家里。
English: After the yellow-haired dog left, the pool water had a fragrance. The old man was thirsty and wanted to drink, but he could not stand up because of his weak strength, so he had to crawl to the edge of the pool with his elbows. After drinking a few sips, he felt that his limbs gradually relaxed, so he insisted on drinking every day. His son was surprised to see that he could sit up, so he took him home.

古文：则能饮食，不旬日而愈。
现代文：回家之后就能正常饮食了，不到十天便已痊愈。
English: After returning home, he was able to eat normally, and he recovered in less than ten days.

古文：他日，贾帅复出，至前所置车处，问曰： 前度病人在否，吏报今已平得。
现代文：过了几天，贾耽元帅又出来了，走到原先放车子的地方便问道： 上次在这里看到的那个病人还在不在？ 身边的人告诉他那个人现在已经康复了。
English: A few days later, Marshal Jia Tan came out again, walked to the place where the car was originally parked and asked: Is the patient I saw here last time still there? The people around him told him that the man had now recovered.

古文：公曰： 人病固有不可识者。
现代文：相公说： 人的疾病确实有不可识别的。
English: Sangong said: There are indeed unrecognizable causes of human diseases.

古文：此人是虱症，世间无药可疗，须得千年木梳烧灰服之，不然，即饮黄龙浴水，此外无可治也，不知何因而愈。 
现代文：这个人患的是虱症，世上没有药能治，必须用千年的木梳烧成灰服下去，不然，就得饮用黄龙洗澡的水；此外无法可治。不知他是怎么治愈的。 
English: This man suffers from porphyria, for which there is no cure in the world. He must be burnt to ashes with a thousand-year-old wooden comb, or else he must drink the water from the dragon's bath; there is no cure for anything else. I don't know how he was cured.

古文：遣吏问之，叟具以对。
现代文：派人去询问，老头儿便将详细情形告诉了他。
English: He sent someone to inquire, and the old man told him the details.

古文：公曰： 此人天与其疾，而自致其药，命矣夫。 
现代文：相公说道： 这个人是天降疾病给他，而他自己又碰到了那种药。这就是命运呀！ 
English: The father-in-law said, "This man was given a disease from heaven, and he himself came across that medicine. This is fate!"

古文：时人闻之，咸服公之博识，则医工所谓异人者信矣。
现代文：当时的人听了，都佩服相公的学识博广，原先那位医生说他是异人，真是名副其实呀。
English: People at the time listened and were impressed by the wide-ranging knowledge of the father-in-law. The doctor originally said that he was a stranger, and it really lived up to the name.

古文：治针道士
现代文：治针道士
English: Jizhi Daoist

古文：德宗时，有朝士坠马伤足，国医为针腿，去针，有气如烟出，夕渐困惫，将至不救，国医惶惧。
现代文：德宗在位的时候，有位朝廷官员从马上跌下来伤了脚，国医为他针灸，针扎下去见有气体像烟一样冒了出来，到晚上他就渐渐困乏昏迷起来，眼看就要咽气，国医惊慌恐惧。
English: When Emperor Dezong was on the throne, a court official fell from his horse and hurt his foot. The state doctor gave him acupuncture. When the needle went down, he saw gas coming out like smoke. By the evening, he was gradually tired and unconscious. He looked like he was going to choke, and the state doctor was alarmed and afraid.

古文：有道士诣门云： 某合治得。 
现代文：有一位道士走进门来说： 我正好能治。 
English: A Taoist monk walked through the door and said, "I happen to be able to rule."

古文：视针处，责国医曰： 公何容易，死生之穴，乃在分毫，人血脉相通如江河，针灸在思其要津。
现代文：他看了看扎针的地方，责备国医道： 您把这事看得太容易了！死穴与活穴只差分毫，人的血脉就像江河一样互相联通，针灸时要仔细准确地辨认其要害部位。
English: He looked at the place where the needle was placed and reproached the state doctor: "You see this too easily! The dead spot is only a millimeter away from the live spot. A person's blood vessels are connected to each other like rivers. When doing acupuncture, you should carefully and accurately identify the key areas.

古文：公亦好手，但误中孔穴。 
现代文：您也是针灸好手，但是扎错了穴位。 
English: You are also a good acupuncturist, but you stuck the needle in the wrong place.

古文：乃令舁床就前，于左腿气满处下针曰： 此针下，彼针跳出，当至于檐板。 
现代文：便叫人把病床抬到跟前，在病人左腿气体饱满的地方下针道： 这一针下去，那根针就跳出来，能跳到天棚板。 
English: Then he asked someone to lift the sickbed up to him and place a needle where the patient's left leg was full of gas: If this needle goes down, that needle will jump out and can jump to the ceiling.

古文：言讫，遂针入寸余，旧穴针拂然跃至檐板，气出之所，泯然而合，疾者当时平愈。
现代文：说完，针已下去一寸多，旧穴位的那根针一下子跳到天棚板，出气的那个地方自然地合上了，患者当时就恢复了健康。
English: After that, the needle had gone down more than an inch, and the needle at the old acupoint suddenly jumped to the ceiling board. The place where the gas came out naturally closed, and the patient was then restored to health.

古文：朝士与国医拜谢。
现代文：他与国医向道士频频致谢。
English: He and the state doctor frequently expressed their gratitude to Taoist monks.

古文：以金帛赠遗，道士不受，啜茶一瓯而去，竟不知所之矣
现代文：患者赠送金银丝帛，道士不收，喝了一杯茶就走了，不知到底去了什么地方。
English: The patient presented gold and silver silk brooches, but the Taoist did not accept them. He drank a cup of tea and left, and I don't know where he went.

古文：韶年即宛若春，及老耄即如秋。 
现代文：等到这样的秋天来临时，又未曾不感到伤怀与悲哀。令我悲伤的，不是秋色而是人生呀。
English: When such an autumn comes, I have never felt sad and sorrowful. What makes me sad is not the autumn color, but life.

古文：因朗吟曰： 阳春时节天地和，万物芳盛人如何。
现代文：青春年华就好像明媚的春天，老态龙钟的暮年则如脱尽芳华的秋天。 说到这里，他便朗声吟道： 阳春时节天气和，万物芳尽人如何。
English: The years of youth are like a bright spring, and the twilight years of an old man are like an autumn that has lost all its beauty.Speaking of this, he intoned: How is the weather in the Yangchun season, and how are all things beautiful?

古文：素秋时节天地肃，荣秀丛林立衰促。
现代文：素秋时节天地肃，荣秀丛林立衰促。
English: During the autumn season, the world is solemn and solemn, and the glory of the jungle is waning.

古文：有同人世当少年，壮心仪貌皆俨然。
现代文：有同人世当少年，壮心仪貌皆俨然。
English: They are like-minded when they are young, and their strong-mindedness and good looks are astounding.

古文：一旦形羸又发白。旧游空使泪连连。 
现代文：一里形羸又发白，旧游空使泪连连。 
English: The mile-long eyelid turned white again, and the old skydiver burst into tears.

古文：老叟闻吟是诗，亦泣下沾襟。
现代文：老头儿听他吟完这首诗后，自己也不觉泪下沾襟。
English: After the old man heard him recite the poem, he burst into tears.

古文：布衣又吟曰： 有形皆朽孰不知，休吟春景与秋时。
现代文：这位平民书生又吟道： 有形皆朽孰不知，休吟春景与秋时。
English: This commoner and scholar also chanted: Tangible things are impermanent and imperceptible. He stopped chanting about spring and autumn.

古文：争如且醉长安酒，荣华零悴总奚为。 
现代文：争如且醉长安酒，荣华零悴总奚为。 
English: Controversial and drunk with Chang'an wine, Ronghua is the overall winner.

古文：老叟乃欢笑，与布衣携手同醉于肆。
现代文：老头儿听罢这一首便开怀大笑起来，与书生手拉手来到酒店，一块儿醉在那里。
English: After listening to this song, the old man laughed heartily and went hand in hand with the student to the hotel, where they got drunk together.

古文：后数日，不知所在，人有于西蜀江边见之者。
现代文：过了几天，这位平民书生不知到哪里去了，有人曾在西蜀的江边看见过他。
English: A few days later, the civilian student did not know where he had gone. Someone had seen him on the banks of the river in West Shul.

古文：柳城
现代文：柳城
English: Willow City

古文：贞元末，开州军将冉从长轻财好士，儒生道者多依之。
现代文：贞元末年，开州军将冉从长不重财物而喜爱有知识有本领的人，有许多儒家弟子和道家先生纷纷去投靠他。
English: At the end of the Zhengyuan era, the commander of the Keshu army, Ran, was fond of people with knowledge and ability, and many Confucian disciples and teachers of Taoism came to his aid.

古文：有画人宁采，图为竹林会，甚工。
现代文：有位画师叫宁采，画了一幅《竹林会》，很有功夫。
English: An artist named Ning Cai painted a "Bamboo Forest Society," which was very hard work.

古文：坐客郭萱、柳城二秀才。每以气相轧，柳忽眄图，谓主人曰： 此画巧于体势，失于意趣，今欲为公设薄伎，不施五色，令其精彩殊胜，如何。 
现代文：坐客之中有两个秀才郭萱和柳城，两人总是互不服气而互相争强，柳城忽然看了看《竹林会》，然后对主人说： 这幅画巧于体裁姿势，失于意趣，我现在为您表演一个小小的技巧，不使用五色就让画里的人神采更好。怎么样？ 
English: Among the guests were two talented artists, Guo Jun and Liucheng. The two were always competing with each other. Liucheng suddenly looked at "The Bamboo Grove," and then said to his host: "This painting is good at genre poses, but it's boring. I'll show you a little trick to make the people in the painting look better without using the five colors. What do you think?"

古文：冉惊曰： 素不知秀才此艺。
现代文：冉公惊奇地说： 从来不知道秀才有这种技艺。
English: Ran Gong said in surprise: I never knew that Xiu had this kind of skill.

古文：然不假五色，其理安在？ 
现代文：但不用五色就能作画，哪有这种道理？ 
English: But you can paint without the five colors, so what is the reason for this?

古文：柳叹曰。我当出入画中治之。 
现代文：柳城叹道： 我要出入于这幅画中来做给您看。 
English: Liu Cheng sighed, "I want to go in and out of this painting to show it to you."

古文：萱抵掌曰： 君欲绐三尺童子乎？ 
现代文：郭萱拍着他的手掌说： 你想欺骗三尺高的小孩子吗？ 
English: Guo Yao patted his palm and said, "Do you want to deceive a three-foot-tall child?"

古文：柳因要其赌，郭请以五千抵负，冉亦为保。
现代文：柳城便请他与自己赌胜负，郭萱表示自己输了可以五千钱相抵，冉公也愿为他们作保。
English: Liu Cheng then asked him to gamble with him. Guo Wei said that if he lost, he could make up for it with five thousand yuan. Ran Gong was also willing to vouch for them.

古文：柳乃腾身赴图而灭，坐客大骇。图表于壁，众摸索不获。
现代文：讲好之后，柳城便飞起身体奔向图画，然后不见了，坐客们大惊，图画仍然贴在墙上，大家去摸索了半天什么也没找到。
English: After the talk, Liucheng flew up and ran to the picture, and then disappeared. The guests were shocked. The picture was still stuck on the wall. Everyone groped around for half a day and found nothing.

古文：久之，柳忽语曰： 郭子信未？ 
现代文：过了好长时间，柳城忽然说起话来： 郭萱，你到底相信不相信？ 
English: After a long time, Liu Cheng suddenly began to speak: Guo Wei, do you believe or not?

古文：声若出画中也。
现代文：声音好像从画里出来的。
English: The sound seems to come out of the painting.

古文：食顷，瞥自图上坠下，指阮籍像曰： 工夫祗及此。 
现代文：又过了一顿饭的工夫，忽然看到柳城从画上掉了下来，指着阮籍的图像说： 我刚才的功夫只涉及到他。 
English: After another meal, he suddenly saw Liucheng fall off the painting, pointing at the image of Ruan Qi and saying: The effort I just made only involved him.

古文：众视之，觉阮籍图像独异，唇若方啸，宁采睹之，不复认。
现代文：众人一看，都感到阮籍的图像跟别的相比已经变了样儿，嘴唇好像要大叫的样子，宁采仔细看了看，也认不出原来的样子了。
English: At a glance, everyone felt that the image of Nguyen Quan had changed compared to the others. The lips seemed to be screaming. Ning Ce took a closer look and could not recognize the original appearance.

古文：冉意其得道，与郭俱谢之。
现代文：冉公认为柳城是得了道的人，便与郭萱都向他致谢。
English: Ran Gong thought that Liucheng was a person who had attained the Way, and both he and Guo Gan thanked him.

古文：数日竟他去。
现代文：过了几天，柳城终于辞别冉公而去了别处。
English: After a few days, Liu Cheng finally said goodbye to Ran Gong and went elsewhere.

古文：宋存寿处士在冉家时，目击其事。
现代文：宋存寿处士住在冉公家里的时候，亲眼看到了上边发生的事情。
English: When Officer Song Cunshou was staying at Ran Gong's home, he saw with his own eyes what was going on upstairs.

古文：苏州义师
现代文：苏州义师
English: Suzhou Yishi

古文：苏州贞元中，有义师状如风狂。
现代文：贞元年间，苏州有一位义师，模样儿就像个疯子。
English: In the first year of Zhengyuan, there was a teacher in Suzhou who looked like a madman.

古文：有百姓起店十余间，义师忽运斤坏其檐。禁之不止。
现代文：有一家百姓盖起店房十余间，义师忽然抡起斧子砍坏店的房檐，有人上去阻拦也挡不住。
English: There was a family of people who had built more than ten store rooms. Yishi suddenly picked up an axe and chopped down the store's eaves. Even if someone went up to stop them, they couldn't.

古文：主人素知其神。礼曰： 弟子活计赖此。 
现代文：主人一向知道他有神力，向他施礼道： 弟子的生活全靠这几间店房呢。 
English: The owner had always known that he had spiritual power, and bowed to him, saying, "A disciple's life depends entirely on these few stores."

古文：顾曰： 尔惜乎。 
现代文：义师看了看他，说： 你感到惋惜吗？ 
English: The guru looked at him and said, "Do you feel regret?

古文：乃掷斤于地而去。
现代文：便把斧子扔到地上走了。
English: He threw the axe to the ground and walked away.

古文：其夜市火，唯义师所坏檐屋数间存焉。
现代文：那天夜里市内起了火，只有被义师砍坏房檐的那几间屋子没被火烧坏而保存了下来。
English: That night, a fire broke out in the city, and only the few houses that were not destroyed by the fire were saved.

古文：常止于废寺殿中，无冬夏常积火，烧幡木像悉火之。
现代文：义师经常住在残破寺庙的神殿里，无论冬天与夏天殿堂里总点着火，供神用的纸幡和木像他都拿来当柴烧。
English: Yishi often lived in the shrine of a ruined temple. No matter whether it was winter or summer, he always lit a fire in the temple, and he used paper flags and wooden statues for the gods as firewood.

古文：好活烧鲤鱼，不具汤而食。
现代文：他喜欢火烧活鲤鱼，一点汤也不填就吃。
English: He likes to cook live eels on the fire and eat them without any soup.

古文：垢面不洗，洗之辄雨，其中以为雨候。
现代文：脸脏了也不洗，一洗脸就下雨，他洗不洗脸就成为下雨与否的天气预报。
English: If he does not wash his face, it will rain. If he does not wash his face, it will become a weather forecast of whether it will rain or not.

古文：将死，饮灰汁数斛，乃念佛坐，不复饮食，百姓日观之，坐七日而死。
现代文：临死前，他喝了几杯灰浆，便坐下来念佛，再也不进饮食，当地百姓天天去看他，坐了七天就死了。
English: Before his death, he drank a few cups of mortar and sat down to pray to Buddha. He no longer ate or drank. Local people came to see him every day. He sat there for seven days and died.

古文：时盛暑，色不变，支不摧。
现代文：当时正值炎热的暑季，但他死后，颜色毫无变化，肢体也不倒塌。
English: It was during the hot summer season, but when he died, his color did not change and his body did not collapse.

古文：吴堪
现代文：吴堪
English: Wu Kan

古文：常州义兴县，有鳏夫吴堪，少孤无兄弟，为县吏，性恭顺。
现代文：常州义兴县有个鳏夫吴堪，少年丧父又无兄弟，在县衙当小官吏，为人性情恭顺。
English: There is a widower Wu Kan in Changzhou Yixing County. The boy lost his father and had no brothers. He was a minor official in the county magistrate and had a submissive personality.

古文：其家临荆溪，常于门前，以物遮护溪水，不曾秽污。
现代文：他家面临荆溪，他常常在门前用什么东西遮护着溪水，使这里的溪水从不污染。
English: His house faces the Jing Creek, and he often shields the stream water in front of the door with something, so that the stream water here is never polluted.

古文：每县归，则临水看玩，敬而爱之。
现代文：每当他从县衙回来，就到溪水边看着玩儿，对待溪水敬而爱之。
English: Whenever he comes back from the county seat, he goes to the stream to watch and play, treating the stream with respect and love.

古文：积数年，忽于水滨得一白螺，遂拾归，以水养。
现代文：过了几年，他忽然从水边拾到一只白螺，便带回家里用水养起来。
English: A few years later, he suddenly picked up a white snail from the water's edge and took it home to raise it with water.

古文：自县归，见家中饮食已备，乃食之，如是十余日。
现代文：他从县里回来，见家里已经备好了饮食，于是坐下便吃，这样过了十多天。
English: He came back from the county and saw that his family had prepared a meal, so he sat down and ate it. This went on for more than ten days.

古文：然堪为邻母哀其寡独，故为之执爨，乃卑谢邻母。
现代文：但吴堪以为是邻居大妈可怜他是个单身汉，特意为他烧火做饭，便客客气气地感谢邻居大妈。
English: But Wu Kan thought it was the neighbor's aunt who pitied him for being a bachelor. She deliberately lit a fire to cook for him, and he politely thanked the neighbor's aunt.

古文：母曰： 何必辞，君近得佳丽修事，何谢老身。 堪曰： 无。 
现代文：大妈说： 用不着说这些话，你近日得到一个好女子为你收拾家务，为什么来谢我？ 吴堪说： 没有的事。 
English: My aunt said, "There's no need to say these things, you recently got a good woman to do your housework for you, why are you thanking me?" Wu Kan said, "It's nothing.

古文：因问其母，母曰： 子每入县后，便见一女子，可十七八，容颜端丽，衣服轻艳，具馔讫，即却入房。 
现代文：又问大妈到底是怎么回事，大妈说： 你每天进了县衙后，便见一个女子，有十七八岁，模样儿端庄秀丽，穿戴轻快鲜艳，饭菜都做好了就退到卧房里去。 
English: I also asked my aunt what was going on. She said: Every day, after you enter the county hall, you see a woman, seventeen or eighteen years old, with a dignified and beautiful appearance, dressed in light and bright clothes. When the meals are ready, she retreats to her bedroom.

古文：堪意疑白螺所为，乃密言于母曰： 堪明日当称入县，请于母家自隙窥之。可乎？ 母曰： 可。 
现代文：吴堪心里怀疑是那只白螺干的，便偷着对大妈说： 我明天照常说要去县里，请让我在大妈家里从空隙中偷着看看到底是怎么回事，可以吗？ 大妈说： 可以。 
English: Wu Kan suspected in his heart that it was the white snail that did it, so he secretly said to his aunt: I will go to the county tomorrow as usual, please let me sneak through the gap in my aunt's house to see what's going on, okay?

古文：明旦诈出，乃见女自堪房出，入厨理爨。
现代文：第二天早上吴堪诈称出门上班去了，便见一个女子从他卧房里出来，进入厨房料理做饭的事。
English: The next morning, Mr. Wu said he had left for work when he saw a woman come out of his bedroom and go into the kitchen to cook.

古文：堪自门而入，其女遂归房不得，堪拜之，女曰： 天知君敬护泉源，力勤小职，哀君鳏独，敕余以奉媲，幸君垂悉，无致疑阻。 
现代文：吴堪突然从门口闯入，那个女子想回房去已来不及，吴堪对她行礼，女子说， 上天知道你敬重保护泉源、殷勤对待小小的职务，可你鳏夫孤独，叫我来作你的伴侣侍奉你，望你能够理解，不要有什么怀疑。 
English: Wu Kan suddenly burst in through the door. The woman was too late to go back to her room. Wu Kan bowed to her. The woman said, "Heaven knows that you respect the protection of springs and are diligent in handling small duties, but you are a lonely widower. I am here to serve you as your partner. I hope you can understand and do not have any doubts."

古文：堪敬而谢之。
现代文：吴堪恭敬地表示感谢。
English: Wu Kan respectfully expressed his thanks.

古文：自此弥将敬洽。
现代文：自此之后，两人相处得更为融洽，互敬互爱。
English: Since then, the two have been getting along more harmoniously, respecting and loving each other.

古文：闾里传之，颇增骇异。
现代文：乡里人将此事互相传告，颇感惊异。
English: The villagers reported the incident to each other and were quite surprised.

古文：时县宰豪士闻堪美妻，因欲图之。
现代文：这时，县宰与豪士听说吴堪有个漂亮妻子，便想弄到自己的手里。
English: At this time, the county magistrate and the great man heard that Wu Kan had a beautiful wife, and they wanted to get their hands on her.

古文：堪为吏恭谨，不犯答责。宰谓堪曰： 君熟于吏能久矣，今要暇蟆毛及鬼臂二物，晚衙须纳，不应此物，罪责非轻。 
现代文：吴堪为吏谦恭勤谨，犯不着被打被骂，县宰对吴堪说： 你早就熟悉自己的职能了，今天我向你要两件东西：蛤蟆毛和鬼的胳膊，限你晚上回衙交纳。不答应交纳此物，罪责不轻。 
English: Wu Kan is a courteous and diligent official, and is not guilty of being beaten and scolded. The county magistrate said to Wu Kan: You have long been familiar with your functions, today I ask you for two things: a mane and a ghost's arm, as long as you return it at night. If you do not agree to pay this thing, the guilt is not light.

古文：堪唯而走出，度人间无此物，求不可得，颜色惨沮，归述于妻，乃曰： 吾今夕殒矣。 
现代文：吴堪顺从地接受了任务后走出大门，心想人间并无此物，根本求不到。他神情沮丧，回家把这件事告诉了妻子，然后叹道： 我今天晚上就要死了！ 
English: Wu Can obediently accepted the task and walked out of the gate, thinking that there is no such thing in the world, and it is impossible to ask for it. He looked depressed, went home and told his wife about it, and then sighed: I'm going to die tonight!

古文：妻笑曰： 君忧余物，不敢闻命，二物之求，妾能致矣。 
现代文：妻子笑着说： 你为别的东西而犯愁，我不敢听你的命令。要求这两件东西，我能给你弄到。 
English: My wife smiled and said, "You're worried about something else, so I don't dare to follow your orders. I can get you the two things you asked for."

古文：堪闻言。
现代文：吴堪听了，忧郁的神情稍稍宽解。
English: Wu Kan listened, and his gloomy expression softened slightly.

古文：忧色稍解，妻曰： 辞出取之。
现代文：妻子说： 我现在就此与你告辞出去取这两件东西。 
English: My wife said, "I'm breaking up with you now and going out to get these two things."

古文：少顷而到。
现代文：不大一会儿她就取回来了。
English: She got it back in no time.

古文：堪得以纳令，令视二物，微笑曰： 且出。 
现代文：吴堪得到手后就拿回去交给县令，县令看这两件东西，微笑道： 你且出去吧。 
English: After Wu Kan got his hands on it, he took it back and handed it to the county magistrate. The county magistrate looked at the two items and smiled and said, "You should go out."

古文：然终欲害之。
现代文：这一次虽然没有难倒他，但县令终归要加害于他的。
English: Although he was not stumped this time, the county order eventually came to harm him.

古文：后一日。又召堪曰： 我要蜗斗一枚，君宜速觅此，若不至，祸在君矣。 
现代文：过了一天，又召见吴堪说： 我跟你要蜗斗一枚，你要速速找到此物，如果找不到，当心灾祸落到你的头上呵！ 
English: A day later, he summoned Wu Kan again and said, "I want to have a duel with you. You must quickly find this thing. If you can't find it, beware of disaster falling on your head!"

古文：堪承命奔归，又以告妻，妻曰： 吾家有之，取不难也。 
现代文：吴堪秉承命令急忙跑回家，又把此事告诉了妻子。妻子说： 这件东西我家里有，取来并不难。 
English: Wu Kan hurried home following the order and told his wife about it. She said, "I have this thing at home. It's not hard to get it."

古文：乃为取之，良久，牵一兽至，大如犬，状亦类之，曰： 此蜗斗也。 堪曰： 何能。 
现代文：说完就去给他取去。过了好久，牵回来一只兽，大小像只狗，形状也与狗类似，妻子说： 这就是蜗斗。 吴堪说： 能做什么？ 
English: After saying this, he went to fetch it. After a long time, he brought back an animal, the size of which was like a dog, and the shape was also similar to a dog. His wife said, "This is a dragonfly." Wu Kan said, "What can I do?"

古文：妻曰： 能食火，奇兽也，君速送。 
现代文：妻子答道： 能吃火。这是一只奇兽，你赶快送了去。 
English: The wife replied, "It can eat fire. It's a wonderful beast. You should send it away immediately."

古文：堪将此兽上宰，宰见之怒曰： 吾索蜗斗，此乃犬也。 
现代文：吴堪把此兽奉送给县宰，县宰见到此兽愤怒地说： 我跟你要的是蜗斗，这乃是一只狗！ 
English: Wu Kan sent the beast to the county magistrate. When the county magistrate saw the beast, he angrily said, "What I want from you is a fight. This is a dog!"

古文：又曰： 必何所能？ 
现代文：又说： 要它干什么？ 
English: He also said: What does it want?

古文：曰： 食火。
现代文：答道： 吃火。
English: He replied: "Eating fire."

古文：其粪火。 
现代文：屙的粪便也是火。 
English: Grasshopper droppings are also fire.

古文：宰遂索炭烧之，遣食，食讫，粪之于地，皆火也。宰怒曰。用此物奚为。 
现代文：县宰便要木炭点着火，让那只兽去吃，吃完之后屙在地上，都是火。县宰恼怒道： 用这东西做什么！ 
English: The county magistrate then asked for the charcoal to be lit on fire, and told the beast to eat it. After eating it, it crawled on the ground. It was all fire. The county magistrate became angry and said, "What do you want to do with this thing!"

古文：令除火埽粪，方欲害堪，吏以物及粪，应手洞然，火飚暴起，焚爇墙宇，烟焰四合，弥亘城门，宰身及一家，皆为煨烬，乃失吴堪及妻。
现代文：并命令清除火堆打扫粪便，正要加害吴堪，差吏拿着器具走近粪堆，一动手就出现了孔洞，火与风暴起，烧着了墙壁和房子，浓烟与火焰从四面合拢过来，堵塞了城门，县宰本人及其全家都化为灰烬，吴堪及其妻子也走失了。
English: He also ordered the fire to be cleared and the excrement to be cleaned up. Just as they were about to harm Wu Kan, the officials approached the dung heap with tools. As soon as they touched it, a hole appeared. The fire and storm started, burning the walls and the house. Thick smoke and flames closed in from all sides and blocked the gate. The county magistrate himself and his entire family were reduced to ashes. Wu Kan and his wife were also lost.

古文：其县遂迁于西数步，今之城是也。
现代文：这个县城的地址便往西边迁移了许多步，如今的县城就是迁移之后新建的。
English: The address of the county seat was moved many steps to the west, and today's county seat was built after the move.

