古文：陈拟陈详陈慧纪
现代文：陈拟，字公正，高祖的远亲。
English: Painted, word justice, distant relative of Gao Zu.

古文：陈拟，字公正，高祖疏属也。少孤贫，性质直强记，高祖南征交趾，拟从焉。
现代文：少年时孤独、贫苦，性格质朴直爽，记忆力强。高祖南征交趾，陈拟随从他。
English: When he was a boy, he was lonely and poor. His character was simple and straightforward, and he had a strong memory. Gao Zu and Nan Zheng were friends, and Chen Qi followed him.

古文：又进讨侯景，至豫章，以拟为罗州刺史，与胡颖共知后事，并应接军粮。
现代文：高祖又进而讨伐侯景，到豫章，封陈拟为罗州刺史，与胡颖共同掌管后方事，同时应接军粮。
English: Gaozu then went on to fight against Houjing, and arrived at Yuzhang, where he sealed Chen's proposal for the history of Luozhou, and together with Hu Ying, he was in charge of affairs in the rear, and at the same time received military supplies.

古文：高祖作镇硃方，拟除步兵校尉、曲阿令。
现代文：高祖镇守朱方，陈拟任步兵校尉、曲阿令。
English: Gaozu Zhengu Zhu Fang, Chen Qiu as an infantry lieutenant, Qu A Ling.

古文：绍泰元年，授贞威将军、义兴太守。
现代文：绍泰元年，授陈拟贞威将军、义兴太守。
English: In the first year of the Shao Tai Dynasty, Chen Qiu Zhenwei was awarded the title of general and Yixing the title of governor.

古文：二年，入知卫尉事，除员外散骑常侍、明威将军、雍州刺史资，监南徐州。
现代文：二年，入知卫尉事，封员外散骑常侍、明威将军、雍州刺史资，监南徐州。
English: In the second year, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant of the Imperial Guards in Chizhi, and was assigned to the posts of non-commissioned officer of the cavalry, general of Mingwei, Yongzhou, and inspector of South Xuzhou.

古文：高祖践祚，诏曰： 维城宗子，实固有周，盘石懿亲，用隆大汉。故会盟则异姓为后，启土则非刘勿王，所以纠合枝干，广树蕃屏，前王懋典，列代恒规。
现代文：高祖登位，下诏道： 皇族子弟连城守卫，实是有周的固石，至亲是磐石，起用他们使大汉隆盛，因而会盟时异姓者应在后，开国时非同姓勿做王，正因此才纠合宗族，广树藩屏，这是前王的大典，列代的常规。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, and issued the following edict: The imperial family's children, even the guards of the city, are actually the solid stone of Zhou, and the closest relatives are the rock, and they are used to make the Han Dynasty prosperous. Therefore, those with different surnames at the time of the alliance should be in the rear, and those with different surnames should not be kings at the time of the founding of the country. This is why the family was entangled, Guangshu Hanping. This is the great book of the former king, the general rule of all generations.

古文：从子持节、员外散骑常侍、明威将军、雍州刺史、监南徐州拟，持节、通直散骑侍郎、贞威将军、北徐州刺史褒，从子晃、炅，从孙假节、员外散骑常侍、明威将军訬，假节、信威将军、北徐州刺史吉阳县开国侯諠，假节、通直散骑侍郎、信武将军祏，假节、散骑侍郎、雄信将军、青州刺史、广梁太守详，贞戚将军、通直散骑侍郎慧纪，从孙敬雅、敬泰，并枝戚密近，劬劳王室，宜列河山，以光利建。
现代文：侄子持节、员外散骑常侍、明威将军、雍州刺史、监南徐州陈拟，持节、通直散骑侍郎、贞威将军、北徐州刺史陈褒，侄子陈晃、陈炅，侄孙假节、员外散骑常侍、明威将军陈抄，假节、信威将军、北徐州刺史吉阳县开国侯速垄，假节、通直散骑侍郎、信武将军陈柘，假节、散骑侍郎、雄信将军、青蛆刺史、卢里太守速登，贞威将军、通直散骑侍郎陈慧纪，侄孙陈敬雅、速亟台，都是皇室亲近的亲戚，对王室辛劳有功，应列之于河山之中，以光大利于建树。
English: Nephew Mochizeki, non-commissioned officer strolling attendant, General Mingwei, Yongzhou Zhishi, Jiannan Xuzhou Chenqiu, Mochizeki, Tongzhi strolling attendant, General Zhengyi, North Xuzhou Zhishi Chen Bo, Nephew Chen Xiao, Chen Yao, Nephew Sun Holiday, non-commissioned officer strolling attendant, General Mingwei Chen Zuo, False Festival, General Xinwei, North Xuzhou Zhishi Jiyang County Kaiguo Houhai Ridge, False Festival, Tongzhi strolling attendant, General Xinwu Chen Yao, False Festival, Strolling

古文：拟可永修县开国侯，褒钟陵县开国侯，晃建城县开国侯，炅上饶县开国侯，訬虔化县开国侯，諠仍前封，祏豫章县开国侯，详遂兴县开国侯，慧纪宜黄县开国侯，敬雅宁都县开国侯，敬泰平固县开国侯，各邑五百户。 
现代文：陈拟可封永脩县开国侯，陈褒封钟匿历开国侯，速垦封建撼逊开国侯，速垦封上钟题开国侯，速丝封卢化壁开国侯，速谴仍依照前封，速茧封建童历开国侯，速谨封遂堡逊开国侯，陈慧纪封宜黄县开国侯，陈敬雅封宁都县开国侯，陈敬泰封平固县开国侯，各人食邑五百户。 
English: Chen Qian can be sealed Yonglian County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Zhongnian County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Xiaojun County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Xiaojun County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Xiaojun County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Xiaojun County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Xiaojun County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Luhua County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed Luhua County to open the country, Chen Baofeng can be sealed

古文：拟寻除轻车将军，兼南徐州刺史，常侍如故。
现代文：陈拟不久任轻车将军，兼南徐州刺史，常侍照旧。
English: Chen Zi, soon to be the general of light vehicles, and also the history of Southern Xuzhou, will continue to serve as before.

古文：其年，授通直散骑常侍、中领军。
现代文：这一年，又授通直散骑常侍、中领军。
English: In the same year, he was also awarded the title of "Zhongxanzhong" (straight horseback riding) "servant" and "middle leader."

古文：三年，复以本官监南徐州。
现代文：绍泰三年，又以本官监南徐州。
English: After three years in Shao Tai, he was transferred to the Southern Xuzhou District.

古文：世祖嗣位，除丹阳尹，常侍如故。
现代文：世祖继位，任丹阳尹，常侍照旧。
English: The founder succeeded to the throne as Danyang Yin, and the regular attendants continued as before.

古文：坐事，又以白衣知郡，寻复本职。
现代文：因事牵连获罪，又以布衣身份执掌郡事，不久恢复本职。
English: He was implicated in a crime, took charge of county affairs as a civilian, and soon resumed his duties.

古文：天嘉元年卒，时年五十八。
现代文：天嘉元年陈拟死，其时五十八岁。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, Chen Qi died, at the age of fifty-eight.

古文：赠领军将军，凶事所须，并官资给。
现代文：赠领军将军，丧事所需，均由官府供给。
English: The general leading the army was given a gift, and everything needed for the funeral was provided by the government.

古文：谥曰定。
现代文：谧号为定。
English: The nickname is final.

古文：二年，配享高祖庙廷。
现代文：天嘉二年，配享高祖庙廷。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, he was assigned to the Gaozhu Temple.

古文：子党嗣。
现代文：儿子陈党继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Chen Du.

古文：陈详，字文几，少出家为桑门。
现代文：陈详，字文几，少年时出家为僧。
English: Chen Zhi, Zhi Wen Jia, became a monk when he was a boy.

古文：善书记，谈论清雅。
现代文：善于书写记录，谈论清雅。
English: Good at writing records, talking about elegance.

古文：高祖讨侯景，召详，令反初服，配以兵马，从定京邑。
现代文：高祖讨伐侯景，召陈详，命令他脱下僧服，配上兵马，随从平定京城。
English: Gaozu fought against Houjing, summoned Chen Zhe, ordered him to take off his monk's robe, equipped with soldiers and horses, and followed him to pacify the capital.

古文：高祖东征杜龛，详别下安吉、原乡、故鄣三县。
现代文：高祖束征杜宠，陈详别向攻下安吉、原乡、故鄣三县。
English: Gao Zu, Zoku, and Du Zhaoping, Chen Zhaobing, and Zhou Zhaobing were the first to conquer Anji, Yuanxiang, and the three counties of the late Qin Dynasty.

古文：龛平，以功授散骑侍郎、假节、雄信将军、青州刺史资，割故鄣、广德置广梁郡，以详为太守。
现代文：被平定，陈详因功授散骑侍郎、假节、雄信将军、青州刺史资，高祖割故鄣、广德置广梁郡，命陈详为郡太守。
English: After being subdued, Chen Jie was awarded the title of County Governor of Guangliang County for his services to the county. He was also awarded the titles of Sanzhijishi-ro, Fusetsu, Xiongxin-zheng, Qingzhou Shishi-zu, Gao Zui-gu, and Guangde-gu.

古文：高祖践祚，改广梁为陈留，又以为陈留太守。
现代文：高祖登位，改广梁为陈留，又任命陈详为陈留太守。
English: Gao Zu ascended the throne, changed Guang Liang to Chen Rui, and appointed Chen Jie as Chen Rui Taishu.

古文：永定二年，封遂兴县侯，食邑五百户。
现代文：永定二年，封陈详遂兴县侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the second year of Yongding, Suixing County, with 500 households in food villages, was sealed.

古文：其年除明威将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：这一年，封为明威将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: In the same year, he was given the title of Mingwei General and the title of Zongzhi Sanzhi Zong.

古文：三年，随侯安都破王琳将常众爱于宫亭湖。
现代文：永定三年，陈详随侯安都在宫亭湖击破王琳部将常众爱。
English: In the third year of Yongding, Chen Zhe, along with Hou An, defeated Wang Linbu in Gongting Lake and won the love of the people.

古文：世祖嗣位，除宣城太守，将军如故。
现代文：世祖继位，封陈详为宣城太守，将军之职照旧。
English: The ancestor succeeded to the throne, and Chen Zhao was appointed the governor of Xuancheng, and his duties as a general remained the same.

古文：王琳下据栅口，详随吴明彻袭湓城，取琳家口，不克，因入南湖，自鄱阳步道而归。
现代文：王琳南下占据栅口，陈详随吴明彻袭击湓城，掠取王琳家人，没能攻下，便入南湖，从鄱阳小路返归。
English: Wang Lin went south to occupy the gate, Chen Zhe followed Wu Mingche to attack Shicheng, plundered Wang Lin's family, failed to capture, then entered the South Lake and returned from Fenyang Road.

古文：琳平，详与明彻并无功。
现代文：王琳被平定，陈详与吴明彻均无功。
English: Wang Lin was subdued, Chen Zhe and Wu Mingcher were both unsuccessful.

古文：天嘉元年，随例增邑并前一千五百户。
现代文：天嘉元年，随惯例，陈详增邑到一千五百户。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, according to the usual practice, Chen Ji increased to 1,500 households.

古文：仍除通直散骑常侍，兼右卫将军。
现代文：仍封为通直散骑常侍，兼右卫将军。
English: He was still given the title of Tsuchida Sanshiro no Tsuneishi, and also the title of Ue no Shogun.

古文：三年，出为假节、都督吴州诸军事、仁威将军、吴州刺史。
现代文：天嘉三年，出任假节、都督吴州诸军事、仁威将军、吴州刺史。
English: In the three years of Tian Jia, he served as the head of the military, the governor of Wuzhou, the general of Ren Wei, and the historian of Wuzhou.

古文：周迪据临川举兵，详自州从他道袭迪于濡城别营，获其妻子。
现代文：周迪占据临起兵，陈详从州的其他路袭击旦迪于的别营，捕获了他的妻儿。
English: Zhou Di occupied the advance guard, Chen Zhe attacked Dandi Yu's camp from other roads in the state, and captured his wife and child.

古文：迪败走，详还复本镇。
现代文：周迪败逃，陈详返回本镇。
English: Zhou Di was defeated and fled, Chen Zhao returned to the town.

古文：五年，周迪复出临川，乃以详为都督，率水步讨迪。
现代文：天嘉五年，周迪又从临川出兵，便命速登为都督，率领水兵步兵讨伐凰迪。
English: In the fifth year of Tian Jia, Zhou Di also sent troops from Linchuan, and he was quickly appointed as the governor, leading the sailors and infantry to fight against Huang Di.

古文：军至南城，与贼相遇，战败，死之，时年四十二。
现代文：军队到达南城，与周迪兵相遇，陈详战败而死，此时速谨四十二岁。
English: The army arrived at Nancheng, met with Zhou Di soldiers, and Chen Zhi was defeated and died. At this time, Xu Jian was forty-two years old.

古文：以所统失律，无赠谥。
现代文：因为所统领军队失利，陈详没有获得赠谧。
English: Because of the defeat of the army led by him, Chen Zhe did not receive the award.

古文：子正理嗣。
现代文：儿子陈正理继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son Chen Zhengli.

古文：陈慧纪，字元方，高祖之从孙也。
现代文：陈慧纪，字元方，高祖的侄孙。
English: Chen Hui Ji, Zhi Yuan Fang, Gao Zu's grandnephew.

古文：涉猎书史，负才任气。
现代文：陈慧纪涉猎书史，颇以才气自负。
English: Chen Huiji dabbles in the history of books, quite conceited with talent.

古文：高祖平侯景，慧纪从焉。
现代文：高祖平定侯景，陈慧纪随从他。
English: Gaozu subdued Houjing, and Chen Huiji followed him.

古文：寻配以兵马。
现代文：不久配以兵马。
English: They were soon joined by soldiers and horses.

古文：景平，从征杜龛。
现代文：侯景被平定，陈慧纪又随从征伐杜宠。
English: Houjing was subdued, and Chen Huiji followed the conquest of Duzhao.

古文：除贞威将军、通直散骑常侍。
现代文：封贞威将军、通直散骑常侍。
English: He was given the title of General Zhenwei and became a regular attendant.

古文：高祖践祚，封宜黄县侯，邑五百户，除黄门侍郎。
现代文：高祖登位，封他为宜黄县侯，食邑五百户，任黄门侍郎。
English: Gao Zu ascended to the throne, he was named the lord of Yihuang County, with 500 households in the county, and he served as the steward of Huangmen.

古文：世祖即位，出为安吉县令。
现代文：世祖登位，出任安吉县令。
English: The founder ascended the throne and became the governor of Anji County.

古文：迁明威将军军副。
现代文：改任明威将军军副。
English: He was transferred to the post of Vice-Commander of the Mingwei Army.

古文：司空章昭达征安蜀城，慧纪为水军都督，于荆州烧青泥船舻。
现代文：司空章昭达征伐安蜀城，陈慧纪任水军都督，在荆州烧青泥船鲈。
English: Siku Zhang Zhaoda conquered Anshu City, Chen Huiji served as the governor of the navy, and burned the blue-and-white mud boat anchor in Jingzhou.

古文：光大元年，以功除持节、通直散骑常侍、宣远将军、豊州刺史，增邑并前一千户。
现代文：光大元年，因功封持节、通直散骑常侍、宣远将军、丰州刺史，增邑到一千户。
English: In the first year of the Guangda era, the number of villages increased to one thousand due to the holding of the festival, the regular attendants of the Zongzhi Sanzhi, the general of the Xuanyuan, and the history of Toyosu.

古文：太建十年，吴明彻北讨败绩，以慧纪为持节、智武将军、缘江都督、兗州刺史，增邑并前二千户，馀如故。
现代文：太建十年，吴明彻北伐失败，封陈慧纪为持节、智武将军、缘江都督、兖州刺史，增邑到二千户，其余照旧。
English: In the tenth year of the Great Leap Forward, Wu Mingche's Northern Expedition failed, Chen Huiji was appointed as the leader of the Northern Expedition, General Zhiwu, the governor of the Yangtze River, and the governor of Zhangzhou, and the number of counties increased to 2,000, while the rest remained the same.

古文：周军乘胜据有淮南，江外骚扰，慧纪收集士卒，自海道还都。
现代文：北周军乘胜占据淮南，在江外骚扰，陈慧纪召集士兵，从海道返还京城。
English: The Northern Zhou army took advantage of the victory to occupy Huainan, harassed outside the river, Chen Huiji called up soldiers, and returned the capital from the highway.

古文：寻除使持节、散骑常侍、宣毅将军、都督郢、巴二州诸军事、郢州刺史，增邑并前二千五百户。
现代文：不久封为使持节、散骑常侍、宣毅将军、都督郢巴二州诸军事、郢州刺史，增邑到二千五百户。
English: Soon, the number of envoys, horseback riding attendants, General Xuan Yi, the military of the two prefectures of Duba, and the history of Zhangzhou, increased to 2,500 households.

古文：至德二年，迁使持节、散骑常侍、云麾将军、都督荆、信二州诸军事、荆州刺史，赐女伎一部，增邑并前三千户。
现代文：至德二年，改任使持节、散骑常侍、云麾将军、都督荆信二州诸军事、荆州刺史，赐女伎一部，增邑到三千户。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, he was reappointed as the envoy of the Jisi Festival, the horseback riding attendant, the general of the Cloud Dragonfly, the military governor of the two states of Jingxin, the military governor of the two states of Jingxin, and the historian of the two states of Jing, and he gave a part to the female geisha, increasing the number of villages to three thousand.

古文：祯明元年，萧琮尚书左仆射安平王萧岩、晋熙王萧献等，率其部众男女二万馀口，诣慧纪请降，慧纪以兵迎之。
现代文：祯明元年，萧琮尚书左仆射安平王萧岩、晋熙王萧珊等人，率领部众男女二万余人，向陈慧纪请求投降，陈慧纪以兵迎接。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Xiao Ying Shangshu's left-hand servant, Anping King Xiao Yan, Jinxi King Xiaoshan and others, led more than 20,000 men and women to request Chen Huiji to surrender, and Chen Huiji greeted them with soldiers.

古文：其年，以应接之功，加侍中、金紫光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、征西将军、增邑并前六千户，馀如故。
现代文：逭一年，因为应接的功劳，陈慧纪被加封侍中、金紫光禄大夫、开府仪同三司、征西将军，增邑到六千户，其余照旧。
English: In the following year, Chen Huiji was awarded the title of Junior Chamberlain, Gold, Purple, and Gold Doctor, Kaifu Rites and Ceremonies Third Division, and Western Conquest General for his services. The number of villages was increased to 6,000 households, while the rest remained the same.

古文：及隋师济江，元帅清河公杨素下自巴硖，慧纪遣其将吕忠肃、陆伦等拒之，战败，素进据马头。
现代文：到隋军渡江，元帅清河公杨素自巴硖出发南下，陈慧纪派他的将领吕忠肃、陆伦等人阻拒他们，战败，杨素进而占据了马头。
English: When the Sui army crossed the Yangtze River, Yang Su, the marshal of Qinghe, set out from Baju to the south. Chen Huiji sent his generals Lv Zhong Su and Lu Lun to resist them, but they were defeated. Yang Su then occupied Ma Tou.

古文：是时，隋将韩擒虎及贺若弼等已济江据蒋山，慧纪闻之，留其长史陈文盛等居守，身率将士三万人，楼船千馀乘，沿江而下，欲趣台城。
现代文：此时，隋军将领韩擒虎舆贺若弼等人已渡过江，占据了蒋山，陈慧纪听说后，留下他的长史陈文盛等居守，亲自率领将士三万人，战船千余艘，沿江而下，欲取台城。
English: At this time, the Sui generals Han Xinghu, Hemei Ruoqi and others had already crossed the river and occupied Mount Jiang. After Chen Huiji heard about this, he left his long history Chen Wensheng and others to stay, personally led 30,000 soldiers and more than 1,000 warships down the river, and wanted to take Taicheng.

古文：至汉口，为秦王军所拒，不得进，因与湘州刺史晋熙王叔文、巴州刺史毕宝等请降。
现代文：到汉口，被秦王军所阻挡，不得前进，便与湘州刺史晋熙王叔文、巴州刺史毕实等请求投降。
English: When they reached Hankou, they were blocked by Qin Wang's army and could not advance, so they asked for surrender together with the Hunan governor, Jinxi Wang Shouwen, and the Bazhou governor, Bisi.

古文：入隋，依例授仪同三司。
现代文：入隋，依惯例，授陈慧纪仪同三司。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, according to the usual practice, Chen Hui Ji Ji was awarded with the Third Division.

古文：顷之卒。
现代文：不久即死。
English: He died a short time later.

古文：子正平，颇有文学。
现代文：儿子陈正平，颇有文学才华。
English: His son, Chen Zhengping, is quite talented in literature.

古文：史臣曰：《诗》云： 宗子维城，无俾城坏。 
现代文：史臣曰：《诗》说 宗族子弟连城守卫，不会使城破坏 。
English: Shichen said: "The poem says that the children of the clan will guard the city and will not destroy the city.

古文：又曰： 绵绵瓜瓞，葛藟累之。 
现代文：又说 绵绵不绝的大瓜小瓞 ， 葛藤攀缘连系它们 。
English: It is also said that they are connected by an endless stream of conflicts.

古文：西京皆豊、沛故人，东都亦南阳多显，有以哉！
现代文：玺塞都是丰、迹地方故人，塞都也是卢堕人多显扬，有例可证。
English: There are many rich and famous people who have passed away in Fujian and Sichuan, and there are also many famous people who have fallen from heaven in Sichuan, which can be proved by examples.

