古文：李棱豆卢署孟君卢常师韩滉李頧崔造薛邕
现代文：李棱豆卢署孟君卢常师韩滉李頧崔造薛邕
English: Li Renzhu Lu, Meng Junlu, Han Qi, Li Yingcui, Zou Xuejun

古文：李棱
现代文：李棱
English: by Li Ren

古文：故殿中侍御史李棱，贞元二年擢第。
现代文：曾经担任过殿中侍御史的李棱，贞观二年科举考试中榜。
English: Li Ren, who once served as an attendant in the imperial court, and Zhenguan topped the list in the second-year examination.

古文：有别业在江宁，其家居焉。
现代文：他有别墅在江宁，供其家属居住。
English: He has a villa in Jiangning for his family to live in.

古文：是岁浑太师瑊镇蒲津，请棱为管记从事。
现代文：这一年，太师浑瑊镇守蒲津关，请李棱担任管记从事。
English: That year, Grand Master Hunyu Zhen, who was in charge of Pudong Pass, asked Li Ren to be in charge of record-keeping.

古文：棱乃曰： 公所欲棱者，然奈某不闲检束。夙好蓝田山水，据使衔合得畿尉。
现代文：李棱对浑瑊说： 你要求我做的很清楚，但是无奈我不善于检点约束自己，平常喜好的只是蓝田的山水，只想在这靠近京城的地方做个县尉，但是我的资历不够。
English: Li Ren said to Hun Rong, "What you are asking me to do is very clear, but unfortunately I am not good at checking points and restraining myself. I usually like only the landscape of Lantian. I only want to be a county lieutenant in this place close to the capital, but my qualifications are not enough.

古文：虽考秩浅，如公勋望崇重，特为某奏请，必谐矣。某得此官，江南迎老亲，以及寸禄，即某之愿毕矣。 
现代文：您德高望重，如果肯特意为我向皇帝推荐，必然能使我如愿，我如果当了这个官，从江南把亲属接来领受俸禄，我平生的愿望也就满足了。 
English: You are highly respected. If Kent specifically recommends me to the emperor, he will surely make my wish come true. If I become this official and bring my relatives from the south of the Yangtze River to receive my salary, my lifelong wish will be satisfied.

古文：浑遂表荐之，德宗令中书商量，当从浑之奏。
现代文：于是浑瑊向皇帝推荐了他，德宗命令中书研究怎么办。
English: So Hunhyun recommended him to the emperor, and Emperor Dezong ordered him to study Chinese books.

古文：棱闻桑道茂先生言事神中，因往诣焉。问所求成败。
现代文：李棱听说桑道茂先生料事如神，便前往请教，问推荐能否成功。
English: Li Ren heard that Mr. Sando Mao's material was excellent, so he went to consult and asked if the recommendation could be successful.

古文：茂曰： 公求何官？ 
现代文：桑道茂问他： 您想当什么官？ 
English: Sando asked him: What kind of official do you want to be?

古文：棱具以本末言之。
现代文：李棱便把事情的来龙去脉讲了。
English: Li Ren then explained the ins and outs of the matter.

古文：对曰： 从此二十年，方合授此官，如今则不得。 
现代文：桑道茂回答说： 从现在算起二十年，您才能被授予这个官职，现在得不到。 
English: Sandomao replied: "Twenty years from now, you can only be awarded this post, you can't get it now.

古文：棱未甚信。
现代文：李棱不太相信。
English: Li Ren didn't quite believe it.

古文：经月余，棱诣执政，谓曰： 足下资历浅，未合入畿尉。如何凭浑之功高，求侥幸耳？ 
现代文：一个月后，李棱去询问，主管官员回答说： 你资历浅，不适合担任京城附近的县尉，怎么可以凭借浑瑊的功高来求得侥幸呢？ 
English: A month later, Li Ren went to inquire, and the responsible official replied: You are not senior enough, and you are not suitable to serve as a county lieutenant near the capital. How can you rely on obscure merits to get lucky?

古文：遂检吏部格上。
现代文：遂即把他的名字写在吏部的表格上。
English: He immediately wrote his name down on the form at the registry office.

古文：元和元年冬，始入选，吏曹果注得蓝田县尉。
现代文：这时皇帝正留意很多军国大事，浑瑊推荐李棱的奏章就放下了没有批。李棱回到江南，先是老人死了守孝，七八年后又忽然得了腿疾，瘸了差不多十年。
English: At this time, the emperor was paying attention to many military and national events, and he did not approve of Li Ren's performance. Li Ren returned to the south of the Yangtze River. First, the old man died of filial piety, and seven or eight years later, he suddenly got a leg disease and was paralyzed for almost ten years.

古文：一唱，忻而授之。乃具说于交友。豆卢署
现代文：一直到元和元年冬天，才开始被选中任职，命书上果然写的是蓝田县尉，宣读后欣然接受此衔，于是李棱将这件事的前后经过详细告诉了朋友。
English: It was not until the winter of the first year of the Yuan and the first year of the year that he began to be selected for office. The death certificate indeed wrote that he was a lieutenant of Lantian County, and he gladly accepted this title after it was read out, so Li Ren told his friend the details of this matter.

古文：豆卢署，本名辅真。
现代文：豆卢署豆卢署原名辅真。
English: Doulu StationDoulu Station's original name is Fu Zhen.

古文：贞元六年，举进士下第。将游信安，以文谒郡守郑武瞻。
现代文：贞元六年，考进士落榜，随即游览信安，并拿自己的诗文拜见郡守郑武瞻。
English: In the sixth year of Zhenyuan, he failed the entrance examination, and immediately visited Xin'an, and took his poems to meet the county governor Zheng Wuzhun.

古文：瞻甚礼之，馆给数日，稍狎，因谓署曰： 子复姓，不宜两字为名。将改之，何如？ 
现代文：郑武瞻对他很客气，留他住了数日。比较熟悉以后对他说： 你是复姓，不适合起两个字的名字，改了怎么样？ 
English: Zheng Wuzhan was very polite to him and let him stay for a few days. After getting to know him better, he said to him: You have a double-barrelled surname, it's not suitable to have a two-character name, how about changing it?

古文：署因起谢，且求其所改。
现代文：豆卢署起身致谢，并请郑武瞻为其改名。
English: The Doulu Department rose to thank him and asked Zheng Wuzhun to change his name.

古文：武瞻书数字，若著者、助者、署者，曰： 吾虑子宗从中有同者，故书数字，当自择之。 
现代文：郑武瞻写了几个字，有著、助、署字，然后说： 我考虑为了避免同你的亲属重名，所以写了好几个字，请你自己选择。 
English: Zheng Wuzhun wrote a few words, including the characters "support," "help" and "signature," and then said: "I thought about avoiding the same name as your relatives, so I wrote a few words. Please choose your own."

古文：其夕宿于馆，梦一老人谓署曰： 闻使君与子更名，子当四举成名，四者甚佳。
现代文：当晚豆卢署睡在客房，梦见一个老头对他说： 听说郡守为你改名，你再考四次才能中榜。四字最好。
English: That night, Zhu Lu slept in the guest room and dreamed of an old man who said to him, "I heard that the county governor changed your name. You have to take the exam four times before you can get into the list. Four letters are the best."

古文：后二十年，为此郡守。
现代文：再过二十年，你是这里的郡守。 
English: In another twenty years, you will be the county governor here.

古文：因指郡隙地曰，此可以建亭台。 
现代文：老头又指着一块空地说： 此地可以建一座亭台。 
English: The old man pointed to an empty space and said, "A pavilion can be built here."

古文：既寤思之，四者署字也，遂以为名。
现代文：醒了以后豆卢署想， 四者 就是署字呀！于是将自己的名字改为署字。
English: After waking up, he thought, "Four is a signature!" so he changed his name to a signature.

古文：既二年，又下第。以为梦无征。知者或诮之。
现代文：考了两年，豆卢署仍未中榜，以为所做梦不准，知道这件事的人也嘲讽他。
English: After two years of taking the exam, he still hasn't made it to the top of the list. He thinks his dream is unrealistic, and people who know this also mock him.

古文：后二年，果登第。盖自更名后四举也。
现代文：接着又考两年，终于中榜成名，算起来正是改名后的第四次考试。
English: Then he took the exam for another two years, and finally became famous in the middle of the list, which was the fourth exam after the name change.

古文：大和九年，署自秘书少监为衢州刺史。
现代文：大和九年，豆卢署从秘书少监调任衢州刺史。
English: In 1911, he was transferred from the secretary of the Doulu District Office to the secretary of the Zhangzhou District Office.

古文：既至，周览郡内，得梦中所指隙地，遂构一亭，因名之曰 征梦亭 矣。孟君
现代文：上任后巡视郡府内外，发现了梦中所说的那块空地，便命人造了一座亭子，并命名为 征梦亭 。孟君
English: After taking office, he inspected inside and outside the county seat, found the vacant lot mentioned in the dream, and ordered a pavilion to be built, which was named Dream Pavilion. Meng Jun

古文：贞元中，有孟员外者，少时应进士举，久不中第，将罢举，又无所归。托于亲丈人省郎殷君宅，为殷氏贱厌，近至不容。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，有个孟员外，年轻时考取进士，多次未中。想要不考了，又无处可归，寄居在他的一个长辈姓殷的亲戚家里，为姓殷的所轻视厌烦。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of the Tang Dynasty, there was a Meng member who, when he was young, took the entrance examination and failed several times. When he wanted to skip the examination, he had nowhere to return to, so he stayed at the home of one of his elder relatives surnamed Yin. He was tired of being despised by the surname Yin.

古文：染瘴疟日甚。乃白于丈人曰： 某贫薄，疾病必不可数。恐污丈人华宇，愿委运，乞待尽他所。 
现代文：达到不能相容的程度，这时孟又得了瘴疟，并且一天天严重。他对姓殷的长辈说： 我命薄，这病必然不可求治，恐怕弄脏您老人家的豪华住宅，我愿意听从命运的安排，离开你们家死到其它的地方。 
English: He said to the elder surnamed Yin, "I am frail, this disease cannot be cured, I am afraid that I will make your old man's luxurious house dirty, I am willing to follow the arrangement of fate and leave your home to die in other places.

古文：殷氏亦不与语，赠三百文。出门不知所适。
现代文：殷也不说话，只给了他三百文钱，孟离开之后不知道应该去什么地方。
English: Yin didn't say anything and only gave him 300 yuan. Meng didn't know where to go after he left.

古文：街西有善卜者，每以清旦决卦，尽后则闭肆下帘。
现代文：街西有一个算命的，每天清早给人算卦，算完后就放下帘子关门。
English: There is a fortune-teller on the west side of the street. Every morning, he tells fortunes to people. When he is finished, he puts down the curtain and closes the door.

古文：孟君乃谒之，具陈羁蹇，将填沟壑，尽以所得三镮环为卜资。
现代文：孟便去拜会他，将自己的坎坷经历和就要病死填沟的困境详细叙述一遍，并将仅有的三百文钱作为卦钱。
English: Meng then went to visit him, recounted in detail his own bumpy experience and the predicament of being sick and dying, and took the only three hundred coins as gua money.

古文：卜人遂留宿，及时为决一卦。封成惊曰： 郎君更十日，合处重职，俸入七十千钱，何得言贫贱？ 
现代文：算命人留他住下，并立即为他算了一卦，算完后惊讶地说： 您再过十天，在此地有重要职位，每月俸禄就有七十千钱，为什么还说自己贫穷下贱呢！ 
English: The fortune-teller let him stay and immediately made a prediction for him. After the calculation, he said in surprise: "In ten days, you will have an important position here, with a monthly salary of seventy thousand yuan. Why do you say that you are poor and inferior?"

古文：卜人遂留厚供给。
现代文：算命人留他居住，并热情款待。
English: The fortuneteller let him stay and gave him a warm welcome.

古文：已至九日，并无消息。
现代文：可是到了第九天，仍没有任何消息。
English: But on the ninth day, there was still no news.

古文：又却往殷君宅，殷氏见甚薄之，亦不留连，寄宿马厩。
现代文：孟又回到姓殷的家里，殷更加瞧不起他，也不挽留接待，晚上他就睡在马厩里。
English: Meng went back to Yin's home. Yin despised him even more and refused to receive him. At night, he slept in the stables.

古文：至明，有敕以禁兵将为贼境观察使，其人与殷友善，驰扣殷氏之门。武人都不知书，云。 便须一谢表，兼镇抚寇勷。
现代文：等到天明，有皇帝任命的一名禁军将领到贼境当观察使。这个人与姓殷的是朋友，亲自来敲殷家的大门，对殷说： 武将不通文墨，需要给皇帝写一个表示感谢的文书，同时写一个安抚边境敌寇的信函，需要处理的事物很多。
English: At dawn, a general of the Forbidden Army, who had been appointed by the emperor, arrived in the Thieves' Territory as an observer. This man and his friend, surnamed Yin, came to knock on the door of the Yin family and said to Yin: "The general does not know how to read and write, he needs to write a thank-you letter to the emperor, and at the same time write a letter to appease the border enemy, there are many things that need to be dealt with."

古文：事故颇多，公有亲故文士，颇能相助否？ 
现代文：您有没有熟悉的文人，帮助我推荐一个？ 
English: Do you have any well-known writers to help me recommend one?

古文：殷良久思之，无可应者。忽记得孟君久曾应举，可以充事。
现代文：殷想了一会儿，没有想到可以推荐的人，忽然想起孟曾多次应试，可以担当这个差事。
English: After thinking for a while, I did not think of anyone who could be recommended, and suddenly remembered that Meng had taken the exam many times and could take on this assignment.

古文：遽引见之，令草一表，词甚精敏。
现代文：遂给他们引见，命令孟起草一篇向皇帝报送的 表 。
English: He then introduced them and ordered Meng to draw up a report for the emperor.

古文：因请为军中职事，知表奏。
现代文：孟的文笔精美准确。
English: Meng's writing is beautifully precise.

古文：数日授官，月俸正七十千。
现代文：于是聘请孟到军中任职，并上报皇帝，几天后被授予官职，每月的俸禄正好七十千文钱。
English: So he hired Meng to serve in the army, and reported to the emperor. A few days later, he was awarded an official post, with a monthly salary of exactly seventy thousand mon.

古文：乃卜后十日也。
现代文：孟员外命运的转机正是算卦后第十天开始的。
English: The turning point in the fate of Meng Jianwei began on the tenth day after the calculation.

古文：卢常师
现代文：卢常师
English: Lu Chang Division

古文：秘书少监卢常师，进士擢第。
现代文：秘书少监卢常师，进士出身。
English: The secretary, Junior Supervisor Lu Changshi, was born in Jinshi.

古文：性淡薄，不乐轩冕。于世利蔑然，弃官之东洛。
现代文：但他却生性淡薄，不追求官位爵禄，蔑视名利，终于辞了官来到东洛。
English: However, he was naturally light-hearted, did not pursue official titles and honors, despised fame and fortune, and finally resigned from his post and came to Dongluo.

古文：谓所亲曰： 某浙西鱼尚书故旧，旬日看去。 
现代文：他对亲属说： 我是浙西鱼尚书的老朋友，过几天去看一看。 
English: He said to his relatives: I am an old friend of West Zhejiang Yu Shangshu, I will take a look in a few days.

古文：又曰： 某前生是僧，座禅处犹在会稽，亦拟自访遗迹。 
现代文：又说： 我前生是个和尚，修行的地方还在会稽。打算去寻找前世留下的遗迹。
English: He also said, "I was a monk in my previous life, and the place where I practiced is still haunted. I plan to search for the remains of my previous life."

古文：家人亦怪其欲远行而不备舟楫。不逾旬遂殁矣。
现代文：家里的人奇怪他要出远门为什么不准备船只，不过十天，卢常师就死了。
English: People at home wondered why he didn't prepare a boat if he was going far away, but ten days later, Lu Changshi died.

古文：韩滉
现代文：韩滉
English: Han Zheng

古文：韩晋公晃在中书，尝召一吏。
现代文：晋公韩滉在中书府，叫一名官员来见他。
English: Jin Gong Han Ye was in the Central Library and called an official to come and see him.

古文：不时而至，公怒将挞。
现代文：这人没有按时赶到，韩滉生气命人用鞭子打他。
English: The man did not arrive on time, and Han Yu got angry and ordered someone to beat him with a whip.

古文：吏曰： 某有所属，不得遽至，乞宽其罪。 
现代文：这个人说： 我还有归属，不能应时而来，请求宽恕。 
English: This person said: I still belong, I can't come at the right time and ask for forgiveness.

古文：晋公曰： 宰相之吏，更属何人？ 
现代文：韩滉说： 你是宰相手下的人，还能归谁管？ 
English: Han Zheng said: You are a person under the control of your opponent, who else can be in charge?

古文：吏曰： 某不幸兼属阴司。 
现代文：这个人说： 我不得已还归阴间管。 
English: This person said: I had to go back to the underworld.

古文：晋公以为不诚，乃曰： 既属阴司，有何所主？ 
现代文：韩滉认为他的话不诚实，就对他说： 既然归阴间管，你有什么职责？ 
English: Han Xuan thought his words were dishonest, so he said to him: "Since you've returned to the Underworld, what are your duties?

古文：吏曰： 某主三品已上食料。 
现代文：这个人说： 我负责管理三品以上官员的饮食。 
English: This person said: I am responsible for managing the diet of officials with three or more dishes.

古文：晋公曰： 若然，某明日当以何食？ 
现代文：韩滉说： 既然如此，我明天应该吃什么？ 
English: Han Yu said, "In that case, what should I eat tomorrow?"

古文：吏曰： 此非细事，不可显之。请疏于纸，过后为验。 
现代文：这个人说： 这可不是小事，不能随便说出来，请让我写在纸上，过后再验证。 
English: This person said: This is not a small matter, it cannot be said casually, please let me write it down on paper and then verify it.

古文：乃恕之而系其吏。
现代文：于是韩没有鞭打他，而是将他关了起来。
English: So instead of whipping him, Han locked him up.

古文：既退而腹胀，归私第，召医者视之曰： 有物所壅，宜服少橘皮汤。
现代文：第二天，突然皇帝召见韩滉。见到皇帝后，正遇见太官给皇帝送饮食。
English: The next day, the emperor suddenly summoned Han Zheng. After seeing the emperor, he met the eunuch who was bringing food to the emperor.

古文：至夜，可啖浆水粥。
现代文：其中有一盘糕点，皇帝将一半赏给韩滉吃，味道很美，随后又将另一半也赏给他吃了，韩滉退下去后感到腹胀，回到家里后找医生来看病。医生说： 是食物堵塞，可以喝少量的橘子皮汤。 
English: One of them was a plate of pastries. The emperor gave half of it to Han Yan to eat, and it tasted delicious. Later, he also gave him the other half to eat. Han Yan felt bloated after he retreated. When he returned home, he went to see a doctor. The doctor said, "It's a food blockage. You can drink a small amount of orange peel soup."

古文：明旦疾愈。 思前夕吏言，召之，视其书，则皆如其所云。因复问： 人间之食，皆有籍耶？ 
现代文：当晚，便可以喝粥了，天亮后病就好了，韩滉想起前天那个人说的话，便将他召来，要过他写的纸一看，吃的东西全都跟他写的一样。便又问那人道： 人间的饮食，都有人预先安排吗？ 
English: That night, he was able to drink porridge, and after dawn, his illness was cured. Thinking of what the man had said the day before yesterday, Han Zheng called him in, asked for the paper he had written on, and when he looked at it, everything he had eaten was exactly as he had written. He then asked the man: Is everyone's diet pre-arranged?

古文：答曰： 三品已上日支，五品已上而有权位者旬支，凡六品至于九品者季支，其有不食禄者岁支。
现代文：回答说： 三品以上的官员，其饮食每天一安排；五品以上有权位的官员，一旬一安排；六品至九品的官员，每季安排一次；如果是不领俸禄的老百姓，则是每年安排一次。
English: He replied, "For officials with three or more official ranks, meals are arranged once a day; for officials with five or more official ranks, meals are arranged once a day; for officials with six to nine official ranks, meals are arranged once a quarter; and for ordinary citizens who do not receive a salary, meals are arranged once a year."

古文：李頧
现代文：李頧
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：贞元中，有举人李頧，方就举，声价极振。
现代文：贞元年间，有个举人叫李頧。正应试，声望和身价很高。
English: In the first year of the reign of the Empress Dowager Zhen, there was a person named Li Yan. He was preparing for an exam, and his reputation and worth were very high.

古文：忽梦一人紫衣云： 当礼部侍郎顾少连下及第。 
现代文：一天他忽然梦见一个穿紫衣服的人对他说： 你只能在礼部侍郎顾少连的主考下考试中榜。 
English: One day, he suddenly dreamed of a man in purple who said to him, "You can only be ranked in the middle of the examination under the main examination of the etiquette attendant Gu Shorian."

古文：寐觉，省中朝并无姓顾者。
现代文：醒后，想到朝中没有姓顾的侍郎。
English: After waking up, I thought that there was no waiter named Gu in the morning.

古文：及顷，有人通刺，称进士顾少连谒。
现代文：不一会儿，有人告诉他说进士顾少连来访。
English: Not long after, someone told him that Gu Shao Lian had come to visit.

古文：頧惊而见之，具述当为门生。顾曰： 某才到场中，必无此事。
现代文：李頧非常惊讶，见面后，頧向顾少连说自己应当是顾的门生，顾少连说刚到考场，决不可能有你说的事。 
English: Li Yao was very surprised. After the meeting, Yao said to Gu Shaolian that he should be Gu's protégé. Gu Shaolian said that he had just arrived at the examination hall, and there was no way he would have anything to do with you.

古文：来年，頧果落第。自此不入试，罢归。
现代文：第二年，李頧果然落第，从此他不愿参加考试，回到家乡去了。
English: The following year, Li Yao failed the exam. Since then, he did not want to take the exam and returned to his hometown.

古文：至贞元九年，顾少连自户部侍郎权知贡举，頧犹未第，因潜往造焉。
现代文：一直到贞元九年，顾少连以户部侍郎暂时代理贡举，李頧仍未考中。
English: Until the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, Gu Shorian was temporarily appointed as the head of the household, and Li Yao was still unable to pass the examination.

古文：临放榜，时相特嘱一人，頧又落，但泣而已。
现代文：于是他暗中去拜见顾少连进行通融。临到发榜时，当朝宰相又特别嘱咐要照顾一个人，所以李頧又落榜了，他只能偷偷哭泣。
English: So he secretly went to see Gu Shao Lian to make amends. When it came to releasing the list, the prime minister specifically ordered to take care of one person, so Li Qian fell off the list again, and he could only secretly cry.

古文：来年秋，少连拜礼部侍郎，頧乃登第。
现代文：第二年秋天，顾少连调任礼部侍郎。李頧这才中榜成名。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Gu Shao Lian was transferred to the position of the etiquette department's waiter. This is how Li Yao became famous in the middle ranks.

古文：崔造
现代文：崔造
English: Cui Zou

古文：崔丞相造，布衣时，江左士人号为白衣夔。
现代文：丞相崔造，还是平民的时候，江左一带的人都称他为 白衣夔 。
English: When the prime minister, Cui Zou, was still a commoner, people in the area around the Yangtze River called him the White-Coated Dragonfly.

古文：时有四人，一是卢东美，其余亡姓字。
现代文：当时有四个人，一个叫卢东美，其余两个记不清姓名了。
English: At that time, there were four people, one was named Lu Dongmei, and the other two could not remember their names.

古文：崔左迁在洪州，州帅曹王将辟为頧。
现代文：后来崔造做官被降职调到洪州。洪州的主帅曹王想要聘任他为副使。
English: Later, Cui Zuo was demoted and transferred to Hongzhou. The head coach of Hongzhou, Cao Wang, wanted to hire him as a vice envoy.

古文：时德宗在兴元，以曹王有功且亲，奏无不允。
现代文：当时德宗在兴元府，因为曹王有功劳并且是皇亲，所以所请示的事情没有不批准的。
English: At that time, Dezong was in Xingyuanfu, because Cao Wang had merit and was an imperial relative, so there was nothing that was not approved.

古文：时有赵山人言事多中。
现代文：当时有个算命的人姓赵，所预测的事情很准。
English: At that time, there was a fortune-teller surnamed Zhao, whose predictions were very accurate.

古文：崔问之曰： 地主奏某为副使，且得过无？ 
现代文：崔造问他： 曹王上报我为副使，能不能批准？ 
English: Cui Zou asked him, "Cao Wang has reported that I am the deputy envoy, can you approve it?"

古文：对曰： 不过。 
现代文：回答说： 不能。 
English: And he said, I cannot.

古文：崔诘曰： 以时以事，必合得时。 
现代文：崔造又问： 那么这件事，会得个什么样的结果？ 
English: Cui Zou asked again: So, what will be the outcome of this matter?

古文：山人曰： 却得一刺史，不久敕到，更远于此。 
现代文：回答说： 能得到一个刺史，不久公文就会到，地方比这里还要远。 
English: He replied, "If you can get a postcard, a letter will soon arrive from a place even farther away than here."

古文：崔不信，再问： 必定耳，州名某亦知之，不可先言。 
现代文：崔造不信，又问了一次。回答说： 必定如此，你要去的州名我也知道，但不能说。 
English: Cui Zou didn't believe him and asked him again. He replied, "It must be so. I know the name of the state you're going to, but I can't say it."

古文：且曰： 今月某日敕到，必先吊而后贺。 
现代文：又告诉崔造这个月的哪一天公文能到，并且要他先吊唁，然后再庆贺。
English: He also told Cui Zong which day of the month the official document would arrive, and asked him to first express his condolences and then celebrate.

古文：崔心惧久之，盖言其日，既崔之忌日也。
现代文：崔造心中害怕，因为算命的人所说的日子，正是他亲人死亡的忌日。
English: Cui Zuo was scared because the day the fortune-teller said was the day of his relative's death.

古文：即便呼赵生谓曰： 山人言中，奉百千；不中则轻挞五下，可乎？ 
现代文：于是他对算命的人说： 您如果言中了，我给您一百千钱，说的不对，则要用鞭子轻轻打五下，可以吗？ 
English: So he said to the fortune-teller: "If you say the right thing, I will give you a hundred thousand dollars. If you say the wrong thing, I will give you five strokes of the whip. Is that okay?"

古文：山人哂曰： 且某不合得崔员外百千，只合得崔员外起一间竹屋。 
现代文：算命的人微笑着说： 我不应该要崔员外的一百千钱，只想要崔员外您给我造一间竹屋。 
English: The fortune teller smiled and said, "I shouldn't ask you for a hundred thousand dollars, I just want you to build me a bamboo house."

古文：其语益奇。
现代文：话说的越来越奇怪。
English: It gets weirder and weirder.

古文：崔乃问之： 且我有宰相分否？ 
现代文：崔造又问： 你看我有没有当宰相的命？ 
English: Cui Zou also asked: Do you think I have a destiny to be the prime minister?

古文：曰： 有。 
现代文：回答说： 有。 
English: And he said, I have.

古文：即远近，曰： 只隔一雨政官，不致三矣。 
现代文：又问： 需要多长时间？ 回答说： 只隔您做官一任或两任的时间，不会超过三任的时间。 
English: He was also asked: "How long will it take?" He replied: "You only have one or two terms of office, but not more than three.

古文：又某日私忌，同僚诸公皆知其说。其日夕矣，悉至江亭，将慰崔忌。众皆北望人信。
现代文：到了崔造家里忌日这一天，因为同僚们都知道这件事，等到太阳偏西的时候，便一同来到江边的亭子里。先祭奠崔造的亲人，然后一齐注视江北，等待消息。
English: On the day of the death of Cui Zou's family, because his colleagues all knew about it, they waited until the sun was in the west to go to the pavilion by the river together. First, they paid tribute to Cui Zou's relatives, and then they all watched the north of the river, waiting for news.

古文：至酉时，见一人从北岸入舟，袒而招舟甚急。
现代文：等到酉时，只见一人从北岸上船，袒胸催促渡船迅速向南岸驶来。
English: While waiting for the boat to dock, I saw a man get on the boat from the north shore, beating his chest and urging the ferry to sail quickly to the south shore.

古文：使人遥问之，乃曰： 州之脚力。 
现代文：崔造等人叫人远远地向那人发问，那人回答说是州里来送信的。
English: Cui Zou and the others sent someone far away to question the man, who replied that he had sent the letter from the state.

古文：将及岸，问曰： 有何除政？
现代文：船快靠岸了，他们又问： 有什么人事任免之事？
English: As the ship neared the shore, they asked again: What is the matter with the appointment and dismissal of personnel?

古文：且有崔员外奏副使过否？ 
现代文：可有崔员外做副使的批文吗？ 
English: Is there any approval document for Cui Jianwen to be a vice envoy?

古文：曰： 不过。 却得虔州刺史敕牒在兹。
现代文：回答说： 没有，却有任命虔州刺史的公文在此。 
English: He replied, "No, but there is an official document appointing Kenzhou's chief historian here."

古文：诸公惊笑。
现代文：大家惊奇地笑了。
English: Everyone laughed in surprise.

古文：其暮果先慰而后贺焉。
现代文：整个过程真是和算命的人说的一样，先祭奠悲伤而后欣喜庆贺。
English: The whole process was exactly as the fortune-teller said, first mourning and then rejoicing.

古文：崔明日说于曹王，曹王与赵山人镪百千，不受。
现代文：第二天，崔造将这件事告诉了曹王，曹王给算命的人一百千成串的钱。
English: The next day, Cui Zong told Cao Wang about this, and Cao Wang gave the fortune-teller one hundred thousand strings of money.

古文：崔与起竹屋一间，欣然徙居之。
现代文：算命的人不要。崔造为他建造了一间竹屋，他很高兴地搬进去住了。
English: Not for fortune-tellers. Cui Zou built a bamboo house for him and he happily moved in.

古文：又谓崔曰： 到虔州后，须经大段惊惧，即必得入京也。 
现代文：并且又对崔造说： 到虔州以后，你必须经过很大的惊惧之事，然后才可以进京城做官。 
English: He also said to Cui Zou: "After you go to Qianzhou, you must go through a great deal of fear before you can go to Beijing to work as an official.

古文：既而崔舅源休与朱泚为宰相，忧闷，堂帖追入，甚忧惕。
现代文：后来由于崔造的舅舅源休给叛逆朱泚做宰相，怕受牵连，心情忧闷，宰相府的公文到了，他更加惊忧。
English: Later, because Cui Zong's uncle Yuan Xiu made the traitor Zhu Xi prime minister, he was afraid of being implicated and was in a gloomy mood. When the official document from the prime minister's office arrived, he was even more worried.

古文：时故人窦参作相，拜兵部郎中，俄迁给事中平章事，与齐映相公同制。
现代文：这时崔造的老朋友窦参做宰相，崔造官拜兵部郎中，不久又升任事中平章。也就是宰相，与齐映相公时的体制一样。
English: At this time, Choizong's old friend Dou Zhan became the prime minister, Choizong was promoted to the position of the middle-ranking official in the Ministry of Military Affairs, and soon he was promoted to the position of the middle-ranking official in the Ministry of Civil Affairs. In other words, he became the prime minister, which was the same system as that of Choizong.

古文：薛邕
现代文：薛邕
English: Xue Ying

古文：薛邕侍郎，有宰相望。
现代文：侍郎薛邕，有当宰相的愿望。
English: His valet, Xue Yao, has aspirations of becoming prime minister.

古文：时有张山人善相。
现代文：当时有个姓张的很会给人看相。
English: At that time, there was a man named Zhang who was very good at reading people's faces.

古文：崔造方为兵部郎中，与前进士姜公辅同在薛侍郎坐中。
现代文：一天，兵部郎中崔造和前科进士姜公辅一同在薛邕那里做客。
English: One day, Cui Zou, a middle-ranking official in the Ministry of Military Affairs, and Jiang Gongfu, a former KGB officer, were guests at Xue Yao's home.

古文：薛问张山人： 且坐中有宰相否？ 
现代文：薛邕问姓张的相士说： 坐上这几个人有没有宰相？ 
English: Xue Yao asked the attendant surnamed Zhang: Are there any prime ministers among these people?

古文：心在己身多矣。张答云： 有。 
现代文：心里想，如果有应该是自己。张回答说： 有。 
English: He thought to himself, "If there is, it should be me." Zhang replied, "Yes."

古文：薛曰： 几人？ 
现代文：薛邕问： 几人？ 
English: Xue Yao asked: How many people are there?

古文：曰： 有两人。 
现代文：回答说： 有两人。 
English: And he answered, There were two men.

古文：薛意其一人即己也。曰： 何人？ 
现代文：薛邕心想其中一个就是自己。又问： 哪两个人？ 
English: Xue Yao thought to himself that one of them was him. He also asked: Which two?

古文：曰： 崔姜二公必宰相也，同时耳。 
现代文：回答说： 崔姜两位必然当宰相，并且是同时。 
English: He replied: The two Cui Jangs must become prime ministers, and at the same time.

古文：薛讶忿之，默然不悦。
现代文：薛邕即惊讶又气愤，沉默着不高兴。
English: Xue Yao was both surprised and angry, silently unhappy.

古文：既而崔郎中徐问张曰： 何以同时？ 
现代文：随后崔造问： 为什么是同时？ 
English: Then Cui Zou asked: Why at the same time?

古文：意谓姜公今披褐，我已正郎，势不相近也。
现代文：意思是说，姜公辅现在还没有官职，我已是正郎，不应该同一个时期当宰相。
English: That is to say, Jiang Gongsu has no official position now, I am the eldest son, and I should not be the prime minister at the same time.

古文：张曰： 命合如此，事须同时，仍郎中在姜后。 
现代文：张说： 命该如此，并且是郎中在姜公辅之后。 
English: Zhang said, "It is my destiny, and I am the second-in-command after Jiang Gongfu.

古文：后姜为京兆功曹，充翰林学士。
现代文：后来姜公辅做了京兆功曹，并且兼任翰林学士。
English: Later, Jiang Gongfu became the Beijing Zhao Gong Cao, and also served as a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：时众知泾将姚令言入城取朱泚，泚曾帅泾，得军人心。
现代文：这时人们传说泾阳的将军姚令要进城捉朱泚，朱泚曾在泾阳为帅，很得军心。
English: At this time, it was rumored that the general Yao Ling of Fenyang wanted to enter the city to catch Zhu Xi, who had been a handsome man in Fenyang and was very popular with the soldiers.

古文：姜乃上疏请察之。
现代文：姜公辅上书请皇帝派人去调查。
English: Jiang Gongfu wrote to the emperor asking him to send someone to investigate.

古文：疏入十日，德宗幸奉天，悔不纳姜言，遂于行在擢姜为给事中平章事。
现代文：上书后十天，德宗去了奉天，后悔没有采纳姜公辅的意见。于是在行宫下令提升姜公辅为给事中平章事，即丞相。
English: Ten days after the letter was published, Dezong went to Mukden, regretting that he did not adopt Jiang Gongfu's opinion. Therefore, he ordered Jiang Gongfu to be promoted to the position of Zhongping Zhangji, that is, the prime minister.

古文：崔后姜半年，以夕郎拜相。果同时而在姜之后。
现代文：崔造在半年后，从郎中升任丞相，果然是同一时期而在姜公辅之后。
English: After half a year, Cui Zuo was promoted to the position of chancellor from that of his brother-in-law. It was indeed during the same period and after Jiang Gongyu.

古文：薛竟终于列曹。
现代文：薛邕后来竟一直没能当上丞相。
English: Later, Xue Ye was never able to become prime minister.

古文：始知前辈不可忽后辈。
现代文：从这件事可以看出前辈不应忽视后辈。
English: From this incident, it can be seen that the elders should not ignore the younger generation.

