古文：惊蛰二月节指甲春分二月中指卯
现代文：惊蛰二月节指甲春分二月中指卯
English: February Mid-Autumn Festival Spring Equinox February Mid-Autumn Festival

古文：清明三月节指乙谷雨三月中指辰
现代文：清明三月节指乙谷雨三月中指辰
English: The Ching Ming and March Festival refers to the time in mid-March after the rain in Yigu

古文：立夏四月节指巽小满四月中指巳
现代文：立夏四月节指巽小满四月中指巳
English: The first day of summer, April Fools' Day, is just around the corner.

古文：芒种五月节指丙夏至五月中指午
现代文：芒种五月节指丙夏至五月中指午
English: From the summer solstice to the middle of May

古文：小暑六月节指丁大暑六月中指未
现代文：小暑六月节指丁大暑六月中指未
English: Little heat in June, no heat in mid-June

古文：立秋七月节指坤处暑七月中指申
现代文：立秋七月节指坤处暑七月中指申
English: The Mid-Autumn Festival and the Mid-July Festival

古文：白露八月节指庚秋分八月中指酉
现代文：白露八月节指庚秋分八月中指酉
English: White Dew August Festival refers to the autumn equinox in the middle of August

古文：寒露九月节指辛霜降九月中指戌
现代文：寒露九月节指辛霜降九月中指戌
English: The cold dew of the September Festival means that the spicy frost will fall in mid-September.

古文：立冬十月节指乾小雪十月中指亥
现代文：立冬十月节指乾小雪十月中指亥
English: The beginning of winter, the October Festival, means dry and light snow, and the middle of October means boar.

古文：大雪十一月节指壬冬至十一月中指子
现代文：大雪十一月节指壬冬至十一月中指子
English: Heavy Snowfall: Midwinter to Mid-November

古文：小寒十二月节指癸大寒十二月中指丑
现代文：小寒十二月节指癸大寒十二月中指丑
English: Small cold December fingers  big cold December middle fingers ugly

古文：阴阳大论云：春气温和，夏气暑热，秋气清凉，冬气冷冽，此则四时正气之序也。
现代文：《阴阳大论》说：春天气候温暖，夏天气候炎热，秋天气候凉爽，冬天气候严寒，这是四季正常气候的变化规律。
English: "The Great Yin and Yang Theory" says: the spring climate is warm, the summer climate is hot, the autumn climate is cool, and the winter climate is cold, which is the normal climate change pattern of the four seasons.

古文：冬时严寒，万类深藏，君子固密，则不伤于寒。
现代文：冬季严寒，自然界各种生物深深地潜藏、伏匿，懂得养生的人能顺应自然之性而防护固密，所以不能被寒邪所伤。
English: In the severe cold of winter, all kinds of creatures in nature are deeply lurking and hiding. People who know how to take care of themselves can conform to the nature of nature and protect themselves tightly, so they cannot be hurt by the cold evil.

古文：触冒之者，乃名伤寒耳。
现代文：如果不慎感受了寒邪，这就叫伤寒。
English: If you accidentally feel the cold, it's called typhoid fever.

古文：其伤于四时之气，皆能为病。
现代文：四时之气皆能伤人而致病。
English: All four types of qi can hurt people and cause illness.

古文：以伤寒为毒者，以其最成杀厉之气也。
现代文：但伤寒这种邪气，是最为凛冽、肃杀的邪气，所以为害最烈。
English: However, typhoid fever is the most severe and deadly evil, so it is the most harmful.

古文：中而即病者，名曰伤寒；不即病者，寒毒藏于肌肤，至春变为温病，至夏变为暑病。
现代文：感邪后立即发病的，名叫伤寒。感邪后不立即发病，寒毒邪气藏于肌肤之内，到了春季发病的，就成为温病；到夏季发病的，就成为暑病。
English: Typhoid fever is a disease that occurs immediately after the onset of a cold. If it does not occur immediately after the onset of a cold, the cold poison is hidden in the skin. If it occurs in the spring, it will become a fever; if it occurs in the summer, it will become a heat illness.

古文：暑病者，热极重于温也。
现代文：所谓暑病，是热甚而重于温病的病症。
English: The so-called heat illness is a disease caused by heat, even more so than heatstroke.

古文：是以辛苦之人，春夏多温热病，皆由冬时触寒所致，非时行之气也。
现代文：所以辛苦劳累的人，春夏季之所以多患温热病，并不是感受了时行之气，而是由于冬季触犯了寒邪，寒邪伏藏所致。
English: Therefore, the reason why hard-working people suffer from hyperthermia in spring and summer is not because they feel the spirit of the times, but because of the cold spell in winter, caused by the cold spell in Tibet.

古文：凡时行者，春时应暖，而复大寒；夏时应大热，而反大凉；秋时应凉，而反大热；冬时应寒，而反大温。
现代文：所谓时行之气，是指时令的反常气候，如春季天气应该温暖却反而很冷，夏季天气应该炎热却反而很凉爽，秋季天气应该凉爽却反而酷热，冬季天气应该寒冷却反而温暖异常。
English: The so-called seasonal climate refers to seasonal abnormal weather, such as spring weather should be warm but very cold, summer weather should be hot but very cool, autumn weather should be cool but very hot, winter weather should be cold but warm abnormally.

古文：此非其时而有其气，是以一岁之中，长幼之病多相似者，此则时行之气也。
现代文：人们如果感受了时行邪气，不论男女老幼，就会患相似的病症，这就是时行病。
English: People of all ages, both men and women, will suffer from a similar illness if they feel the evil of wandering. This is wandering sickness.

古文：夫欲候知四时正气为病，及时行疫气之法，皆当按斗历占之。
现代文：如果要想知道四时正常气候致病及四时不正常的疫疬之气致病的规律，可以按历法来推算。
English: If you want to know the regularity of the four o'clock normal climate causing disease and the four o'clock abnormal pestilence causing disease, you can calculate it according to the calendar.

古文：九月霜降节后，宜渐寒，向冬大寒，至正月雨水节后，宜解也。
现代文：一般来说，农历九月霜降节以后，气候应当逐渐变冷。渐至冬季严寒，一直到正月雨水节前后，寒冷才渐渐解除。
English: Generally speaking, after the Frost Festival in September of the lunar calendar, the climate should gradually become colder. Gradually, it will be cold in winter, and until around the New Year's Rainy Day, the cold will gradually be relieved.

古文：所以谓之雨水者，以冰雪解而为雨水故也。
现代文：之所以叫 雨水节 ，是因为冰雪融化而变为雨水的缘故。
English: The reason why it is called Rainy Day is because snow and ice melt and turn into rainwater.

古文：至惊蛰二月节后，气渐和暖，向夏大热，至秋便凉。
现代文：到了二月惊蛰节前后，气候渐渐温暖，渐至夏季炎热，到了秋季气候又变凉爽。
English: In February, around the Dragon Boat Festival, the weather gradually warms up, gradually becoming hot in the summer, and cool again in the autumn.

古文：从霜降以后，至春分以前，凡有触冒霜露，体中寒即病者，谓之伤寒也。
现代文：从霜降节以后到春分节以前，凡是触犯霜雪雾露，感受寒邪后，立即就病的，叫做伤寒。
English: From after the Frost Festival to before the Spring Equinox, if you are exposed to frost, snow and fog, and feel cold, you will immediately get sick, which is called typhoid fever.

古文：九月十月，寒气尚微，为病则轻；十一月十二月，寒冽已严，为病则重；正月二月，寒渐将解，为病亦轻。
现代文：九月十月间寒气还较轻，致病也较轻微；十一月十二月间严寒凛冽，致病就重；正月二月间寒冷渐渐消退，致病也较轻。
English: Between September and October, the cold is still light and causes less illness; between November and December, the cold is severe and causes more illness; between January and February, the cold gradually subsides and causes less illness.

古文：此以冬时不调，适有伤寒之人，即为病也。
现代文：这些都是冬季调摄不当，恰好感受寒邪，立即就病的病症。
English: These are all symptoms of improper winter adjustment, just feeling the cold, and immediately getting sick.

古文：其冬有非节之暖者，名曰冬温。
现代文：如果冬季有反常的温暖，触犯而致病的，就叫冬温。
English: If there is abnormal warmth in winter that causes illness, it is called winter fever.

古文：冬温之毒，与伤寒大异，冬温复有先后，更相重沓，亦有轻重，为治不同，证如后章。
现代文：冬温毒邪与伤寒根本不同。冬温的发病有先有后，或交相重叠，病情有轻有重，其治法也就不同，它的症候表现如后章所述。
English: Winter fever is fundamentally different from typhoid fever. The onset of winter fever is preceded and followed, or overlapping, the disease is mild and severe, and the treatment is different. Its symptoms are described in the next chapter.

古文：从立春节后，其中无暴大寒，又不冰雪；而有人壮热为病者，此属春时阳气，发于冬时伏寒，变为温病。
现代文：在立春节以后。如果没有突然出现严寒天气而又没有结冰下雪，却发生了高热的疾病，这是春天的阳气升发，引动了冬季伏藏的寒邪，变成了温病。
English: After the Spring Festival, if there is no sudden severe cold weather without freezing and snowing, but there is a high fever disease, this is the yang qi rising in spring, which causes the cold evil of winter Fuzang and becomes a fever disease.

古文：从春分以后，至秋分节前，天有暴寒者，皆为时行寒疫也。
现代文：从春分节以后到秋分以前，气候突然变冷，因而致病的，都是时行寒疫。
English: From after the vernal equinox to before the autumnal equinox, when the weather suddenly turns cold and causes illness, it is a seasonal cold epidemic.

古文：三月四月，或有暴寒，其时阳气尚弱，为寒所折，病热犹轻；五月六月，阳气已盛，为寒所折，病热则重；七月八月，阳气已衰，为寒所折，病热亦微。
现代文：三月四月间，有时天气骤然寒冷，此时人体阳气还较弱，若被寒邪所伤，患热病尚较轻。五月六月人体阳气已经旺盛，一旦感受了寒邪，产生的热病就重。七月八月人体的阳气已经减弱，此时感受寒邪，产生的热病也轻。
English: In March and April, sometimes the weather is suddenly cold, at this time the yang of the human body is still weak, and if it is injured by the cold evil, the heat illness is still light. In May and June, the yang of the human body has been strong, and once the cold evil is felt, the heat illness is severe. In July and August, the yang of the human body has weakened, at this time the cold evil is felt, and the heat illness is also light.

古文：其病与温及暑病相似，但治有殊耳。
现代文：这种疾病与温病、暑病相似，但治疗却有区别。
English: This disease is similar to hyperthermia and heatstroke, but the treatment is different.

古文：十五日得一气，于四时之中，一时有六气，四六名为二十四气也。
现代文：在一年四季中，每十五天为一节气，每一季度有六个节气，一年共有二十四个节气。
English: In the four seasons of the year, there is a solar term every 15 days. There are six solar terms in each quarter, and a total of 24 solar terms in a year.

古文：然气候亦有应至而不至，或有未应至而至者，或有至而太过者，皆成病气也。
现代文：一般说来，气候应与节气相应。但是气候的变化异常复杂，有时节气已到，而此时的气候却没有到；有时节气未到，而此时的气候却提前到来；有时气候虽应时而至，但表现太过，这些都能成为致病的邪气。
English: Generally speaking, the climate should correspond to the solar terms. However, the changes in the climate are extremely complex. Sometimes the solar terms have arrived, but the climate at this time has not arrived; sometimes the solar terms have not arrived, but the climate at this time has arrived ahead of schedule; sometimes the climate should come from time to time, but it is too much, which can become a disease-causing evil.

古文：但天地动静，阴阳鼓击者，各正一气耳。
现代文：然而，天地之间，阴阳之气相互鼓动推进，各自禀受一气。
English: However, between heaven and earth, the yin and yang of qi encourage and promote each other, and each receives the same qi.

古文：是以彼春之暖，为夏之暑；彼秋之忿，为冬之怒。
现代文：所以气候会由春天的温暖，变为夏天的炎热；由秋天的凉爽，变为冬季的严寒。
English: Therefore, the climate will change from warm in spring to hot in summer; from cool in autumn to cold in winter.

古文：是故冬至之后，一阳爻升，一阴爻降也。
现代文：冬至以后，阴气最盛，阴极则阳生，所以阳气开始上升，阴气开始下降。
English: After the winter solstice, yin is at its peak, and the cathode is yang, so yang begins to rise and yin begins to fall.

古文：夏至之后，一阳气下，一阴气上也。
现代文：夏至以后，阳气最盛，阳极则阴生，所以阳气开始下降，阴气开始上升。
English: After the summer solstice, the yang is at its peak, and the anode is yin, so the yang begins to decline and the yin begins to rise.

古文：斯则冬夏二至，阴阳合也；春秋二分，阴阳离也。
现代文：这样，到了冬至夏至，是阴阳二气相合之时；春分秋分，是阴阳二气相离之期。
English: Thus, at the winter solstice and summer solstice, it is the time when yin and yang meet; at the vernal equinox and autumnal equinox, it is the time when yin and yang separate.

古文：阴阳交易，人变病焉。
现代文：当阴阳转换之时，人如果不能适应就会生病。
English: When yin and yang change, if people can't adapt, they will get sick.

古文：此君子春夏养阳，秋冬养阴，顺天地之刚柔也。
现代文：所以，懂养生的人在春夏季养阳、秋冬季养阴，以与自然界的变化相适应。
English: Therefore, people who know about health care should raise the sun in spring and summer, and raise the shade in autumn and winter, in order to adapt to the changes in nature.

古文：小人触冒，必婴暴疹。
现代文：不懂养生的人，就不能顺应自然界的变化，触冒四时邪气，就会患急性热病。
English: People who don't know how to take care of their health can't adapt to the changes in the natural world, and if they come into contact with the four evil spirits, they will suffer from acute fever.

古文：须知毒烈之气，留在何经，而发何病，详而取之。
现代文：若要知道这些毒烈的邪气侵害哪一经，产生什么病，就必须详细诊察，才能得出正确结论。
English: If you want to know what kind of disease is caused by these poisonous evil spirits, you must make a detailed diagnosis in order to draw the correct conclusion.

古文：是以春伤于风，夏必飧泄；夏伤于暑，秋必病疟；秋伤于湿，冬必咳嗽；冬伤于寒，春必病温。
现代文：所以，春季感受风邪，夏天就发生泄泻；夏天感受暑邪，秋冬就会发疟疾；秋天感受湿邪，冬天就会发咳嗽；冬天受寒，春天就会产生温病。
English: Therefore, if you have a cold in spring, you will have diarrhea in summer; if you have a heat illness in summer, you will have malaria in autumn and winter; if you have a cold in winter, you will have a cough in winter; if you have a cold in winter, you will have a fever in spring.

古文：此必然之道，可不审明之。
现代文：这是正常的规律，医者务须深究明白。
English: This is a normal rule, and doctors should understand it thoroughly.

古文：伤寒之病，逐日浅深，以施方治。
现代文：伤寒这种病，是逐渐由浅向深发展的，所以应当根据病情的发展来施治处方。
English: Typhoid fever is a disease that develops gradually from shallow to deep, so it should be treated according to the development of the disease.

古文：今世人伤寒，或始不早治，或治不对病，或日数久淹，困乃告医。医人又不依次第而治之，则不中病。
现代文：现今社会上的人患伤寒病，初起时不及时治疗，或者治疗不对证，或者拖延日久，直到病情危重了才去就医，医生又不按规律和次序施治，当然就没有效果。
English: In today's society, people suffering from typhoid fever are not treated promptly at the beginning, or the treatment is not proven, or it is delayed for a long time, and they do not go to the doctor until the condition is critical. If the doctor does not treat according to the rules and order, of course there will be no effect.

古文：皆宜临时消息制方，无不效也。
现代文：如果医生能够根据病情变化，随证处方施治，就没有不收到效果的。
English: If the doctor can treat according to the change of the disease and prescribe according to the certificate, there will be no effect.

古文：今搜采仲景旧论，录其证候诊脉声色，对病真方，有神验者，拟防世急也。
现代文：现在我搜集整理张仲景原着，记录其症候和诊察疾病的方法，以及有良效的方剂，以备社会急需。
English: Now I collect and organize Zhang Zhongjing's original works, record his symptoms and methods of diagnosing diseases, as well as effective prescriptions, in preparation for the urgent needs of society.

古文：又土地温凉，高下不同；物性刚柔，餐居亦异。
现代文：此外，地域有温凉高低不同，物体属性有刚有柔的差异，人们的饮食起居也不相同，病症与治法也应有别。
English: In addition, regions have different temperature and coolness, object attributes have different hardness and softness, people's diet and living are also different, and the disease and treatment should also be different.

古文：是黄帝兴四方之问，岐伯举四治之能，以训后贤，开其未悟者。临病之工，宜须两审也。
现代文：所以黄帝提出四方居民治法不同的问题，岐伯则列举了砭石、毒药、微针、灸火芮等四种不同的治疗方法及其作用，以教诲后代有知识的人，启发不知道变通的人，诊病的医生，必须一一明察。
English: Therefore, Huang Di raised the issue of different treatment methods for residents in the four directions, while Qi Bo listed four different treatment methods and their effects, including vermiculite, poison, micro-needling, and moxibustion, in order to teach future generations who have knowledge, inspire those who do not know the workarounds, and doctors who diagnose diseases must examine them one by one.

古文：凡伤于寒，则为病热，热虽甚，不死。
现代文：大凡感受寒邪，则会形成发热的疾病。发热虽然很甚，也不会导致死亡。
English: If you feel very cold, you will develop a feverish illness. Although the fever is very severe, it will not lead to death.

古文：若两感于寒而病者，必死。
现代文：但是如果是相表里的两经同时感受寒邪而发病，就容易死亡。
English: However, if it is the two meridians in the phase table that feel the cold at the same time and become ill, it is easy to die.

古文：尺寸俱浮者，太阳受病也，当一二日发。
现代文：消泺：消，散也。泺，热灼津液之谓，又有邪气留滞难除之意。
English: Qixing: Qixing, also known as Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing, Qixing.

古文：以其脉上连风府，故头项痛，腰脊强。
现代文：针此穴可解除上述疾患，故名之。有疏经活络，清三焦热之功。
English: This hole can relieve the above-mentioned diseases, hence the name. There is a sparse meridian activity, which is the effect of clearing the three-focal fever.

古文：尺寸俱长者，阳明受病也，当二三日发。
现代文：尺部寸部脉象都长的，是阳明受邪患病，大多在二三天发病。
English: The length and width of the pulse are both long, and it is the yang and the light that are affected by the evil, and most of them become ill in two or three days.

古文：以其脉侠鼻、络于目，故身热、目疼、鼻干、不得卧。
现代文：因为阳明经脉起于鼻旁，行于目下，所以有身体发热、目痛、鼻干燥、不能安卧等症状。
English: Because the Yang Ming meridian starts at the side of the nose and travels to the present, there are symptoms such as body fever, eye pain, dry nose, and inability to lie down.

古文：尺寸俱弦者，少阳受病也，当三四日发。
现代文：尺部寸部脉象都弦的，是少阳受邪患病，大多在三四天发病。
English: If the length, width, and depth of the pulse are all like a chord, it is Shao Yang who is affected by the evil, and most of them become ill in three or four days.

古文：以其脉循胁络于耳，故胸胁痛而耳聋。
现代文：因为少阳经脉循行胸胁、出入耳中，所以有胸胁疼痛而又耳聋的症状。
English: Because Shao Yang meridians travel along the thoracic diaphragm and enter and exit the ear, there are symptoms of pain in the thoracic diaphragm and deafness.

古文：此三经皆受病，未入于府者，可汗而已。
现代文：太阳、阳明、少阳这三经患病，为病在经脉，邪气尚未传入腑，可以用发汗法治愈。
English: The Sun, Yang Ming, and Shao Yang are the three meridians that are affected by the disease. Since the disease is in the meridians and the evil spirit has not yet entered the gills, it can be cured by sweating.

古文：尺寸俱沉细者，太阴受病也，当四五日发。
现代文：尺部寸部脉象都沉细的，是太阴受邪生病，大多在四五天发病。
English: The length, width, and depth of the pulse are all heavy and thin. It is the yin that is affected by the evil, and most of them become ill in four or five days.

古文：以其脉布胃中，络于嗌，故腹满而嗌干。
现代文：因为太阴经脉络于胃，循行咽部，所以有腹部胀满，咽喉干燥的症状。
English: Because the Taiyin meridian runs through the stomach and follows the pharynx, there are symptoms of bloated abdomen and dry throat.

古文：尺寸俱沉者，少阴受病也，当五六日发。
现代文：尺部寸部脉象都沉的，是少阴受邪生病，大多在五六天发病。
English: The length and width of the pulse are all heavy, it is the minor yin that is affected by the evil, and most of them become ill in five or six days.

古文：以其脉贯肾，络于肺，系舌本，故口燥舌干而渴。
现代文：因为少阴经脉穿过肾、络于胸膈，连系舌根，所以少阴病见舌燥、口渴。
English: Because the meridians of the lesser yin pass through the kidneys, connect to the pectoral fins, and connect to the base of the tongue, the disease of the lesser yin is characterized by a dry tongue and thirst.

古文：尺寸俱微缓者，厥阴受病也，当六七日发。
现代文：尺部寸部脉象都微缓的，是厥阴受邪生病，大多在六七天发病。
English: The length, width, and depth of the pulse are all slightly slow. It is the jueyin that is affected by the evil, and most of them become ill in six or seven days.

古文：以其脉循阴器、络于肝，故烦满而囊缩。
现代文：因为厥阴的经脉环绕阴器，入属于肝，所以有烦闷、阴囊缩入的症状。
English: Because the jueyin's meridians encircle the clitoris and enter the liver, there are symptoms of boredom and shrinking of the scrotum.

古文：此三经皆受病，己入于府，可下而已。
现代文：太阴、少阴、厥阴这三经患病，邪气已经传入胃腑，可用泄下法治愈。
English: Taiyin, Shaoyin and Jueyin are the three diseases, and the evil spirit has been transmitted to the stomach, which can be released and cured.

古文：若两感于寒者，一日太阳受之，即与少阴俱病，则头痛、口干、烦满而渴；二日阳明受之，即与太阴俱病，则腹满身热、不欲食、谵语；三日少阳受之，即与厥阴俱病，则耳聋，囊缩而厥，水浆不入，不知人者，六日死。
现代文：至于说到两感病，是指互为表里的阴阳两经同时感受寒邪而发病。例如，第一天太阳受邪，就与少阴同时发病，出现头痛、口干、心烦、腹部胀满而渴等病；第二天阳明受邪，就与太阴同时发病，出现腹部胀满、身体发热、不想进食，谵语等症；第三天少阳受邪，就与厥阴同时发病，出现耳聋、阴囊缩入、四肢冰冷、汤水喝不进、不省人事等症，大约六天就会死亡。
English: For example, on the first day, if the sun is affected, it will be affected at the same time as the yin and yang, resulting in headaches, dry mouth, irritability, bloated abdomen and thirst; on the second day, if the sun is affected, it will be affected at the same time as the yin and yang, resulting in bloated abdomen, fever, not wanting to eat, and slang; on the third day, if the sun is affected, it will be affected at the same time as the yin and yang, resulting in deafness, scrotal indentation, cold limbs, inability to drink soup, and unconsciousness, and will die in about six days

古文：若三阴三阳、五藏六府皆受病，则荣卫不行，府藏不通，则死矣。
现代文：如果三阴三阳、五脏六腑都受邪患病，导致营卫之气不流行，脏腑不通，则必死无疑。
English: If the three yin and three yang and the five viscera and six glands are all affected by evil and become ill, resulting in the qi of the camp guard not being prevalent and the viscera not being able to pass, then there is no doubt that one will die.

古文：其不两感于寒，更不传经，不加异气者，至七日太阳病衰，头痛少愈也；八日阳明病衰，身热少歇也；九日少阳病衰，耳聋微闻也；十日太阴病衰，腹减如故，则思饮食；十一日少阴病衰，渴止舌干，已而嚏也；十二日厥阴病衰，囊纵，少腹微下，大气皆去，病人精神爽慧也。
现代文：如果病人不是两感病，又没有发生传经，并且未再感受新的致病邪气的，到第七天，太阳病就会衰退，头痛就会好转；第八天，阳明病衰退，发热就会稍退；第九天，少阳病衰退，耳聋渐渐恢复，就能听得见声音；第十天，太阴病衰退，腹部胀满减轻，恢复到正常，并想吃东西；十一天少阴病衰退，口渴就会停止，舌干消失，并且打喷嚏；十二天厥阴病衰退，缩入的阴囊就会松弛复原，少腹拘急缓解，邪气均去，病人精神爽慧。
English: If the patient is not a dual-sensory disease, has not had menstruation, and no longer feels a new disease-causing evil spirit, on the seventh day, the sun disease will decline and the headache will improve; on the eighth day, the sunshine disease will decline and the fever will subside slightly; on the ninth day, the Yang deficiency disease will decline and the deafness will gradually recover, and the voice can be heard; on the tenth day, the yin deficiency disease will decline, the abdominal distension will decrease, return to normal, and want to eat; on the eleventh day, the Yin deficiency disease will decline, the thirst will stop, the tongue will disappear, and sneeze;

古文：若过十三日以上不间，尺寸陷者，大危。
现代文：如果经过了十三天病情仍继续发展，寸关尺三部脉均沉伏不显的，则预后险恶。
English: If, after thirteen days, the disease still continues to develop, and all three parts of the pulse are still subdued, the prognosis is grim.

古文：若更感异气，变为他病者，当依旧坏证病而治之。
现代文：如果又感受其它邪气，变成其它疾病的，应当依据后述坏病症进行施治。
English: If you feel other evil spirits and develop other diseases, you should be treated according to the following bad diseases.

古文：若脉阴阳俱盛，重感于寒者，变成温疟。
现代文：如果尺寸脉都紧而有力，又感受寒邪的，就会转变成温疟。
English: If the dimensional veins are tight and powerful, and feel cold, it will turn into puerperal fever.

古文：阳脉浮滑，阴脉濡弱者，更遇于风，变为风温。
现代文：如果寸脉浮滑、尺脉濡弱，感受风邪的，就会转变成风温。
English: If the inch vein is slippery, the ulnar vein is wet and weak, and you feel windy, it will turn into wind temperature.

古文：阳脉洪数，阴脉实大者，遇温热，变为温毒。
现代文：如果寸脉洪数、尺脉实大，再感受温热，就会转变成温毒。
English: If the number of inch veins and the number of foot veins are large, and then feel warm, it will turn into warm poison.

古文：温毒为病最重也。
现代文：温毒是最严重的一种病。
English: Hypothermia is the most serious form of the disease.

古文：阳脉濡弱，阴脉弦紧者，更遇温气，变为温疫。
现代文：如果寸脉濡弱、尺脉弦紧的，又感受温邪，就会转变成温疫。
English: If the ulnar vein is wet and weak, the ulnar vein is tight, and you feel cold sores, it will turn into a fever.

古文：以此冬伤于寒，发为温病，脉之变证，方治如说。
现代文：这些都是冬季感受寒邪，而变成温病的疾病。总之，必须详加诊察所变之证，因证立法处方，随证施治。
English: These are all diseases of feeling cold in winter and turning into hypothermia. In short, it is necessary to examine the symptoms in detail, prescribe according to the symptoms, and treat according to the symptoms.

古文：凡人有疾，不时即治，隐忍冀差，以成痼疾。
现代文：大凡人们有了疾病，往往不及时就医，却隐瞒忍耐，希望能够侥幸痊愈，结果成了顽固难治的疾病。
English: When ordinary people have a disease, they often do not seek medical treatment in time, but conceal their patience, hoping to be cured by chance. The result is a stubborn and incurable disease.

古文：小儿女子，益以滋甚。
现代文：小孩及妇女，尤其如此。
English: This is especially true for children and women.

古文：时气不和，便当早言，寻其邪由，及在腠理，以时治之，罕有不愈者。
现代文：因此，一旦感受时令不正之气而身体不适，就应该及早告诉医生，及时找出病因，趁邪尚在肌表、病势尚轻浅时，及时进行治疗，多能治愈。
English: Therefore, as soon as you feel unwell due to the bad weather, you should tell the doctor as soon as possible, find out the cause of the disease in time, and take advantage of the evil while it is still on the skin and the disease is still mild, timely treatment, and more can be cured.

古文：患人忍之，数日乃说，邪气入藏，则难可制，此为家有患，备虑之要。
现代文：如果患病的人隐瞒忍耐，多天后才找医生，邪气已经深入脏腑，就难于治疗了。这是那些有患病人的人家，应当注意的要点。
English: If a sick person conceals his patience and takes many days to find a doctor, the evil spirit has already penetrated deep into the internal organs, and it is difficult to treat. This is a key point that those who have sick patients should pay attention to.

古文：凡作汤药，不可避晨夜，觉病须臾，即宜便治，不等早晚，则易愈矣。
现代文：凡是制作汤药，要不拘时间，不避早晚，发觉病后，不论早晨晚上，马上就煎汤服药治疗，那么疾病就容易痊愈。
English: Whenever decoction is made, regardless of the time, it should be taken in the morning or evening, and after the disease is found, regardless of the morning or evening, the decoction should be taken immediately for treatment, then the disease will be easily cured.

古文：若或差迟，病即传变，虽欲除治，必难为力。
现代文：如果稍有迟误，疾病就会传变，虽然想根治，也无能为力了。
English: If there is a slight delay, the disease will be transmitted, and although we want to cure it, there is nothing we can do.

古文：服药不如方法，纵意违师，不须治之。
现代文：此外，服药不遵法度，随意违反医嘱，还不如不治疗。
English: In addition, if you do not comply with the law when taking medicine and violate the doctor's order at will, it is better not to treat.

古文：凡伤寒之病，多从风寒得之。
现代文：大凡伤寒病，多为感受风寒所致。
English: Most cases of typhoid fever are caused by exposure to cold wind.

古文：始表中风寒，入里则不消矣。
现代文：风寒开始侵袭肌表，渐至由表入里，病邪入里就不容易解除了。
English: The wind chill began to invade the skin surface, gradually moving from the surface to the inside, and the disease was not easily resolved.

古文：未有温覆而当不消散者。不在证治，拟欲攻之，犹当先解表，乃可下之。
现代文：因此，凡风寒在表，应及时治疗，施用发汗解表，并注意服药后适当复盖衣被，使周身温暖而得汗，病邪就会消散。如果不遵循表里先后的证治规律，一起病就行攻下，就会引起变证。因此，如果表证尚未解除，还应当先解表，表解后，才能使用攻下的方法。
English: Therefore, whenever the cold and wind are on the table, it should be treated in time, apply the perspiration relief table, and pay attention to the proper cover of the quilt after taking the medicine, so that the whole body is warm and sweaty, and the disease will dissipate. If you do not follow the rules of the previous and subsequent treatment of the table, and attack the disease at the same time, it will cause deformation. Therefore, if the table has not been released, you should also solve the table first, and after the table is solved, you can use the method of attack.

古文：若表已解，而内不消，非大满，犹生寒热，则病不除。
现代文：如果表证已解而里证未除，一般可用下法。
English: If the certificate has been resolved and the certificate has not been removed, the following method can generally be used.

古文：若表已解，而内不消，大满大实，坚有燥屎，自可除下之。
现代文：但若里实未成，未见大满大实之证，则不可攻下，若过早攻下，则病不能解除，如果表证已解，而里实已甚，肠中燥屎已成，而见大满大实之证，就应攻下燥屎，燥屎得去，则病可愈。
English: However, if the truth has not been achieved, if there is no evidence of the truth, then it cannot be attacked. If it is attacked too early, then the disease cannot be relieved. If the proof has been solved, but the truth has been lost, the dry shit in the intestine has been formed, and the evidence of the truth has been seen, then the dry shit should be attacked. If the dry shit has to go, then the disease can be cured.

古文：虽四五日，不能为祸也。若不宜下，而便攻之，内虚热入，协热遂利，烦躁诸变，不可胜数，轻者困笃，重者必死矣。
现代文：如果不能攻下，而妄行攻下，致正气损伤，邪热内入，而产生协热下利、烦躁等各种变证的，不可胜数，病变轻的就会加重，重的就会死亡。
English: If you can't attack, but attack in a reckless manner, it will cause damage to the positive energy, the evil heat will enter, and various variations such as co-heating, irritability, etc. will occur, which are innumerable. The disease will be aggravated if it is light, and it will die if it is heavy.

古文：夫阳盛阴虚，汗之则死，下之则愈；阳虚阴盛，汗之则愈，下之则死。
现代文：阳热炽盛阴液亏虚的症候，误用发汗法治疗就会导致死亡，用泻下法治疗就会痊愈。寒邪外盛、卫阳被遏的症候，用发汗法治疗就会痊愈，用泻下法治疗就会导致死亡。
English: For the symptoms of yang fever, hot flush, and deficiency of yin fluid, the misuse of the sweating method will lead to death, and the treatment with the laxative method will be cured. For the symptoms of coldness, coldness and deficiency of yin fluid, the treatment with the sweating method will be cured, and the treatment with the laxative method will lead to death.

古文：夫如是，则神丹安可以误发？
现代文：如果明白这些道理，那么怎么会误用神丹来发汗？
English: If you understand these principles, then how can you misuse Shintan to sweat?

古文：甘遂何可以妄攻？
现代文：又怎么会妄用甘遂来泻下？
English: How can you use sweetness and sweetness in vain to lose weight?

古文：虚盛之治，相背千里，吉凶之机，应若影响，岂容易哉！
现代文：治疗得当与否与疾病吉凶的变化，真可以说是如影随形，如响应声。由此可见，治病是多么不容易的事啊?
English: Whether the treatment is appropriate or not and the changes in the fortunes of the disease can truly be said to follow each other like a shadow, like a response. This shows how difficult it is to cure the disease.

古文：况桂枝下咽，阳盛则毙；承气入胃，阴盛以亡，死生之要，在乎须臾，视身之尽，不暇计日。
现代文：更何况阳热盛的人服下桂枝汤，就会毙命；阴寒盛的人服下承气汤，就会死亡。死亡与生存的关键，发生在倾刻间，甚至在很短的时间内就会眼看着病人死亡。
English: What's more, if a person with a strong yang were to take cinnamon soup, he or she would die; if a person with a strong yin were to take ginger soup, he or she would die. The key to death and survival happens in the blink of an eye, and even in a very short period of time, you can watch a patient die.

古文：此阴阳虚实之交错，其候至微；发汗吐下之相反，其祸至速，而医术浅狭，懵然不知病源，为治乃误，使病者殒殁，自谓其分，至今冤魂塞于冥路，死尸盈于旷野，仁者鉴此，岂不痛欤！
现代文：这些阴阳虚实、错综复杂的症候，其表现相差极其微小，如果发汗、吐下正好颠倒，那么灾祸马上就会到来。而一些医术浅薄、知识狭窄的医生，看病懵懵懂懂，不知病的根源，一治疗就发生错误，从而导致病人的死亡，还妄称病人该死。至使冤魂堵塞了阴间的道路，死尸堆满了旷野。仁慈的人看到这种情况，怎么能不痛心呢?
English: The manifestations of these complex and intricate symptoms of yin and yang are extremely subtle. If sweating and vomiting are exactly reversed, then the disaster will come immediately. And some doctors with shallow medical skills and narrow knowledge, do not understand the patient, do not know the root of the disease, and make mistakes as soon as they treat, thus leading to the death of the patient, and also falsely saying that the patient deserves to die. So that the evil spirits blocked the road to the underworld and the dead bodies piled up in the wilderness. How can a merciful person not feel sad when he sees this?

古文：凡两感病俱作，治有先后，发表攻里，本自不同，而执迷妄意者，乃云神丹、甘遂，合而饮之，且解其表，又除其里，言巧似是，其理实违。
现代文：凡属两感病表里同病的，治疗应当有先有后。解表与攻里，本来就属两种不同的治法，但固执错误，主观臆断的人，却说什么神丹甘遂混合服用，既解表邪，又除里邪，言语虽巧，道理却根本不通。
English: For those who have the same disease in the two-sensory table, the treatment should be the first and the last. Deciphering the table and attacking the table are originally two different methods of treatment, but those who are stubborn, wrong, and subjectively assume, but say that ginseng is good for mixed use, not only to solve the table evil, but also to remove the inside evil. Although the language is clever, the reason is not clear at all.

古文：夫智者之举错也，常审以慎；愚者之动作也，必果而速。
现代文：聪明人的举止行动，常审查周严、谨慎从事；而愚蠢人的行为举止，往往鲁莽急躁。
English: The manners and actions of clever people are often scrutinized and cautious; while the manners and actions of stupid people are often reckless and impetuous.

古文：安危之变，岂可诡哉！
现代文：医生的行为直接关系到病人的安危，怎么可以置病人安危于不顾，而强行狡辩呢?
English: The doctor's behavior is directly related to the patient's safety, how can the patient's safety be ignored and forced to argue?

古文：世上之士，但务彼翕习之荣，而莫见此倾危之败，惟明者，居然能护其本，近取诸身，夫何远之有焉。
现代文：现今社会上有地位的人，只知追求显赫的荣华富贵，却看不到身体有死亡的危险。只有明白事理的人，才懂得爱护自己的生命，而不为名利所动摇。
English: People of status in today's society only know how to pursue conspicuous glory and wealth, but they do not see the danger of physical death. Only those who understand things can know how to cherish their lives without being shaken by fame and fortune.

古文：凡发汗温服汤药，其方虽言日三服，若病剧不解，当促其间，可半日中尽三服。
现代文：凡是温服发汗的汤药，处方后虽然说明一日服三次，但如果病情严重，服一次药后病不能解除的，应当适当缩短服药间隔时间，可以在半天内服完三次。
English: For all the decoctions for sweating, although it is stated that they should be taken three times a day after prescription, if the condition is serious and the disease cannot be relieved after taking one dose, the dosage interval should be appropriately shortened, and it can be taken three times in half a day.

古文：若与病相阻，即便有所觉，重病者，一日一夜，当日卒时观之，如服一剂，病证犹在，故当复作本汤服之。
现代文：如果药不对证，服药后就会有不适的感觉。病情重的，应该昼夜服药，并严密观察小时，以防病情变化。如果服完一剂药后，病症还在的，应当再煎制汤药服用。
English: If the medicine is not proven, there will be a feeling of discomfort after taking the medicine. If the condition is severe, the medicine should be taken day and night, and the hours should be closely observed to prevent changes in the condition. If the condition is still present after taking a dose of medicine, the decoction should be made and taken again.

古文：至有不肯汗出，服三剂乃解；若汗不出者，死病也。
现代文：此外，有的病人服药后不易汗出，直至服完三剂药后才汗出病解。
English: In addition, some patients find it difficult to perspire after taking the medicine, and only perspire after taking three doses of the medicine.

古文：凡得时气病，至五六日，而渴欲饮水，饮不能多，不当与也，何者？
现代文：如果服药后始终不出汗的，属于危险的症候。凡是患时气病，到了五六天，病人口渴想饮水，却又不能多喝的，就不应给病人喝。
English: If you do not sweat after taking the medicine, it is a dangerous symptom. If you are suffering from jet lag, and the patient is thirsty for water after five or six days, but cannot drink more, you should not give it to the patient.

古文：以腹中热尚少，不能消之，便更与人作病也。
现代文：为什么呢?因为此时病人里热未甚，饮水后不能消耗掉，就会产生疾病。
English: Why? Because at this time, the patient is not very hot, and after drinking water can not be consumed, it will cause disease.

古文：至七八日，大渴，欲饮水者，犹当依证与之。
现代文：到了七八天，口渴厉害想要喝水的，应当依病情酌情给与，但不能让病人喝满喝足。
English: After seven or eight days, if the patient is very thirsty and wants to drink water, it should be given according to the patient's condition, but the patient should not be allowed to drink too much.

古文：与之常令不足，勿极意也。
现代文：譬如，病人说要饮一斗水，只给予五升。
English: For example, if a patient says he wants to drink a bucket of water, he is only given five litres.

古文：言能饮一斗，与五升。若饮而腹满，小便不利，若喘若哕。不可与之。忽然大汗出，是为自愈也。
现代文：如果喝水后病人感觉腹部胀满，小便不通畅，或气喘，或呃逆，就不能再给予了，如果喝水后突然大汗出的，这是病要自愈的征兆。
English: If, after drinking water, the patient feels that his abdomen is bloated, his urination is not smooth, or he has asthma, or vice versa, he can no longer be given it. If he suddenly sweats after drinking water, this is a sign that the disease is self-healing.

古文：凡得病，反能饮水，此为欲愈之病。
现代文：一般说来，虚寒证口多不渴，如果反而出现口渴能饮水的，这是阳气恢复、阴寒邪去、疾病将愈之兆。
English: Generally speaking, most of the hypothermia sufferers are not thirsty. If, on the other hand, they are thirsty and can drink water, this is a sign that the yang will be restored, the cold will go away, and the disease will be cured.

古文：其不晓病者，但闻病饮水自愈，小渴者，乃强与饮之，因成其祸，不可复数。
现代文：如果有不懂医道的人，偶听说患病能喝水，就会痊愈，于是稍见口渴的，就勉强给病人喝水，因而酿成变证，不可胜数。
English: If someone who does not understand medicine hears that a sick person can drink water, he will be cured, so if he sees someone who is thirsty, he will reluctantly give the patient water to drink, thus causing innumerable deviations.

古文：凡得病厥，脉动数，服汤药更迟；脉浮大减小；初躁后静，此皆愈证也。
现代文：大凡患病，病人脉象动数，服汤药后变成迟脉；或者原来的脉象浮大，现在变成小脉；或者初起神情躁烦不安，后来转为神情安静，这都是疾病将要痊愈的征象。
English: In general, when a patient is ill, the patient's pulse is like a dynamic number, and after taking the decoction, it becomes a delayed pulse; or the original pulse is like a floating large pulse, and now it becomes a small pulse; or at first, the patient has a restless and anxious look, and later it turns into a quiet look. These are all signs that the disease will be cured.

古文：凡治温病，可刺五十九穴。
现代文：大凡治疗温热病，可以针刺人体的五十九个穴位。
English: In the treatment of hyperthermia, the body's fifty-nine acupuncture points can be pricked.

古文：又身之穴，三百六十有五，其三十九穴，灸之有害；七十九穴，刺之为灾，并中髓也。凡脉四损，三日死。
现代文：人体的穴位共有三百六十五个，其中三十个穴位禁用艾灸，如果误灸就会对人造成损害；七十九个穴位禁用针刺，如果针刺就会造成灾祸，这是因为针刺或艾灸这些穴位，都会损伤骨髓。凡出现四损之脉的，三天就会死亡。
English: There are 365 acupoints in the human body, of which 30 acupoints are off-limits to moxibustion, and if moxibustion is performed incorrectly, it will cause harm to the person; 79 acupoints are off-limits to acupuncture, and if acupuncture is performed, it will cause disaster. This is because acupuncture or moxibustion can damage the bone marrow at these acupoints. Anyone with four damaged veins will die within three days.

古文：平人四息，病人脉一至，名曰四损。脉五损，一日死。
现代文：所谓 四损 ，是指正常人呼吸四次，病人脉搏来一次。如出现五损之脉的，一天就会死亡。
English: The so-called quadriplegia means that a normal person breathes four times, and a patient has a pulse once. If there is a quintiplegia, the patient will die within a day.

古文：平人五息，病人脉一至，名曰五损。
现代文：所谓 五损 ，是指正常人呼吸五次，病人脉搏来一次。
English: The so-called "five losses" means that a normal person breathes five times, and a patient has a pulse once.

古文：脉六损，一时死。
现代文：如出现六损之脉的，一个时辰就会死亡。
English: If there are six damaged veins, one hour will be dead.

古文：平人六息，病人脉一至，名曰六损。
现代文：所谓 六损 ，是指正常人呼吸六次，病人脉搏来一次。
English: The so-called "six losses" means that a normal person breathes six times, and a patient has a pulse once.

古文：脉盛身寒，得之伤寒；脉虚身热，得之伤暑。
现代文：脉象盛大而身体怕冷，是患的伤寒病；脉象虚软而身体发热，是患的中暑病。
English: If the pulse is large and the body is cold, it is typhoid fever; if the pulse is weak and the body is hot, it is heatstroke.

古文：脉阴阳俱盛，大汗出，不解者，死。
现代文：脉象尺寸部都盛大，大汗淋漓而病不解的，为正不胜邪之兆，属于死亡的症候。
English: If the pulse is large and sweating profusely, it is a sign of illness. It is a symptom of death.

古文：脉阴阳俱虚，热不止者，死。
现代文：脉尺部寸部都呈虚象，发热不停止的，为正虚邪热亢极，属于危险的症候。
English: If the fever does not stop, it is a positive, false, and evil fever, which is a dangerous symptom.

古文：脉至乍疏乍数者，死。
现代文：脉搏跳动忽快忽慢的，是心气将竭、营卫之气断绝之象，病情危重。
English: If the pulse beats fast and slow, it is a sign of exhaustion of the spirit and the breaking of the spirit of Yingwei, and the condition is critical.

古文：脉至如转索者，其日死。
现代文：脉搏跳动坚硬搏指，如扭转的绳索的，是真脏脉现之兆，预后不良。
English: The beating of the pulse by a rigid finger, such as that of a twisted rope, is a sign of the appearance of a true visceral pulse, and the prognosis is poor.

古文：谵言妄语，身微热，脉浮大，手足温者，生。逆冷，脉沉细者，不过一日，死矣。
现代文：病人神昏谵言妄语，身体轻微发热，脉象浮大，手足温暖的，尚有生机；如果手足厥冷，脉象沉细的，则预后不良。
English: The patient is delirious, babbling incoherently, slightly feverish, with a large pulse and warm hands and feet. If the hands and feet are cold and the pulse is thin, the prognosis is poor.

