古文：邹忌修八尺有余，而形貌昳丽。
现代文：邹忌身高八尺多，而且外形、容貌光艳美丽。
English: She is more than eight feet tall, and her appearance is radiant and beautiful.

古文：朝服衣冠窥镜，谓其妻曰： 我孰与城北徐公美? 
现代文：早晨穿戴好衣帽，照着镜子，对他妻子说： 我和城北徐公相比，谁更美？ 
English: In the morning, he put on his cap and gown, looked in the mirror, and said to his wife, "Compared with Chengbei Xugong, who is more beautiful?

古文：其妻曰： 君美甚，徐公何能及公也！ 
现代文：他的妻子说： 您非常美，徐公怎么能比得上您？ 
English: His wife said: You are very beautiful, how can Xu Gong match you?

古文：城北徐公，齐国之美丽者也。
现代文：城北的徐公是齐国的美男子。
English: Xu Gong from the north of the city is an American man from Qi.

古文：忌不自信，而复问其妾曰： 吾孰与徐公美? 妾曰： 徐公何能及君也！ 
现代文：邹忌不相信自己比徐公美，于是又问他的妾： 我和徐公相比，谁更美？ 妾回答说： 徐公哪能比得上您？ 
English: Zou Yi did not believe that he was more beautiful than Xu Gongmei, so he asked his concubine: Compared with Xu Gongmei, who is more beautiful? The concubine replied: How can Xu Gongmei compare with you?

古文：旦日，客从外来，与坐谈，问之客曰： 吾、徐公孰美? 
现代文：第二天，有客人从外面来拜访，邹忌与他相坐而谈，问客人： 我和徐公比，谁更美？ 
English: The next day, a guest from outside came to visit. He was afraid to sit and talk with him. He asked the guest: I am more beautiful than Xu Gongli, who is more beautiful?

古文：客曰： 徐公不若君之美也！ 
现代文：客人说： 徐公不如您美丽。 
English: The guest said: Xu Gong is not as beautiful as you.

古文：明日，徐公来。孰视之，自以为不如；窥镜而自视，又弗如远甚。
现代文：又过了一天，徐公来了，邹忌仔细地看着他，自己认为不如徐公美；再照镜子看着自己，更是觉得自己与徐公相差甚远。
English: A day later, Xu Gong arrived. Yan Boi looked at him carefully and thought that he was not as beautiful as Xu Gong. Looking at himself in the mirror, he felt that he was very different from Xu Gong.

古文：暮，寝而思之曰： 吾妻之美我者，私我也；妾之美我者，畏我也；客之美我者，欲有求于我也。 
现代文：晚上他躺在床上休息时想这件事，说： 我的妻子认为我美，是偏爱我；我的妾认为我美，是害怕我；我的客人认为我美，是有事情有求于我。 
English: At night, when he lay in bed at rest, he thought about it and said: My wife thinks I'm beautiful because she likes me; my mistress thinks I'm beautiful because she's afraid of me; my guests think I'm beautiful because they want something from me.

古文：于是入朝见威王曰： 臣诚知不如徐公美，臣之妻私臣，臣之妾畏臣，臣之客欲有求于臣，皆以美于徐公。
现代文：于是邹忌上朝拜见齐威王，说： 我知道自己确实比不上徐公美。可是我的妻子偏爱我，我的妾害怕我，我的客人有事想要求助于我，所以他们都认为我比徐公美。
English: So, on the day of his death, he bowed down to King Qi Wei and said, "I know that I am really no match for Xu Gongmei, but my wife prefers me, my concubine is afraid of me, and my guests want to ask me for help, so they all think that I am better than Xu Gongmei.

古文：今齐地方千里，百二十城，宫妇左右，莫不私王；朝廷之臣，莫不畏王；四境之内，莫不有求于王。
现代文：如今齐国有方圆千里的疆土，一百二十座城池。宫中的姬妾及身边的近臣，没有一个不偏爱大王的，朝中的大臣没有一个不惧怕大王的，全国的百姓没有不对大王有所求的。
English: Today, Qi has a thousand-mile-square territory and one hundred and twenty cities. There is not a concubine in the palace or a close vassal around who does not favor the great king. There is not a minister in the court who does not fear the great king. There is no people in the whole country who does not have something to ask of the great king.

古文：由此观之，王之蔽甚矣！ 
现代文：由此看来，大王您受到的蒙蔽太严重了！ 
English: From this point of view, Your Majesty, the deception you have suffered is too serious!

古文：王曰： 善。 
现代文：齐威王说： 你说的很好！ 
English: Japan is preparing to send an envoy to South Korea.

古文：乃下令： 群臣吏民，能面刺寡人之过者，受上赏；上书谏寡人者，受中赏；能谤议于市朝，闻寡人之耳者，受下赏。 
现代文：于是就下了命令： 大小的官吏，大臣和百姓们，能够当面批评我的过错的人，给予上等奖赏；上书直言规劝我的人，给予中等奖赏；能够在众人集聚的公共场所指责议论我的过失，并传到我耳朵里的人，给予下等奖赏。 
English: So the order was given: Officials, ministers, and common people of all ranks and sizes, who could criticize my faults to my face, were to be given the highest reward; those who could write to me and advise me frankly, were to be given a medium reward; those who could criticize and discuss my faults in a public place where many people gathered, and spread the news to my ears, were to be given the lowest reward.

古文：令初下，群臣进谏，门庭若市。数月之后，时时而间进。期年之后，虽欲言，无可进者。
现代文：命令刚下达，许多大臣都来进献谏言，宫门和庭院像集市一样喧闹；几个月以后，还不时地有人偶尔进谏；满一年以后，即使有人想进谏，也没有什么可说的了。
English: As soon as the order was issued, many ministers came to offer advice, and the palace gates and courtyards were as noisy as a market. A few months later, there were still people occasionally entering the palace; after a year, even if someone wanted to enter the palace, there was nothing to say.

古文：燕、赵、韩、魏闻之，皆朝于齐。
现代文：燕、赵、韩、魏等国听说了这件事，都到齐国朝拜齐威王。
English: When Yan, Zhao, Han, Wei and other countries heard about this, they all came to Qi to pay homage to King Qiwei.

古文：此所谓战胜于朝廷。
现代文：这就是所说的在朝廷之中不战自胜。
English: This is what is meant by winning without a fight in the imperial court.

