古文：刘彦宗，子鲁开，大兴宛平人。
现代文：刘彦宗字鲁开，大兴宛平人。
English: Liu Yanzong, Lu Kai, Daxing, Wanping.

古文：远祖怦，唐卢龙节度使。
现代文：其远祖怦，为唐朝卢龙节度使。
English: Its distant ancestor, Zou, was the Tang Dynasty Lulong Jiedu envoy.

古文：石晋以幽、蓟入辽，刘氏六世仕辽，相继为宰相。
现代文：石晋把幽、蓟划入辽国，刘氏六代做辽国的官，相继任宰相。
English: Shi Jin put Yu and Zou into Liao, and the six generations of the Liu family served as officials of Liao and successively served as prime ministers.

古文：父霄，至中京留守。
现代文：刘彦宗父亲刘霄官至中京留守。
English: Liu Yanzong's father, Liu Xiaoguan, left for Beijing.

古文：彦宗擢进士乙科。
现代文：刘彦宗擢进士乙科。
English: Liu Yanzong was promoted to the Eighth Division.

古文：天祚走天德，秦晋国王耶律捏里自立于燕，擢彦宗留守判官。
现代文：辽天祚帝逃到天德。秦晋国王耶律捏里在燕自立为帝，提升刘彦宗做留守判官。
English: Emperor Liao Tianyao fled to Tiande. In the reign of Qin Jin King Yerutpin, Yan established himself as emperor and promoted Liu Yanzong as the chief judge.

古文：萧妃摄政，迁签书枢密院事。
现代文：萧妃掌握朝政时，升为签书枢密院事。
English: When Empress Xiao took control of the imperial government, she was promoted to the post of Privy Counsellor.

古文：太祖至居庸关，萧妃自古北口遁去，都监高六送款于太祖。
现代文：金太祖到居庸关，萧妃从古北口逃走，都监高六送名帖给金太祖。
English: Jin Taizu went to Juyongguan, Xiaofei fled from Gubeikou, and the superintendent of the Sixth High School sent a name card to Jin Taizu.

古文：太祖奄至，驻跸城南，彦宗与左企弓等奉表降。
现代文：金太祖忽然驾到辽境，车驾驻城南面，刘彦宗与左企弓等奉上奏章投降。
English: King Taizu suddenly drove to the Liao territory and stationed himself in the south of the city. Liu Yanzong and Zuo Jianyu were presented with the surrender letter.

古文：太祖一见，器遇之，俾复旧，迁左仆射，佩金牌。
现代文：金太祖一见，很器重他，使他依然如故，并升为左仆射，佩带金牌。
English: At first sight, King Taizu valued him very much, so that he still remained the same, and was promoted to left-handed archer, wearing a gold medal.

古文：张觉为南京留守，太祖闻觉有异志，使彦宗、斜钵宣慰之。
现代文：张觉任南京留守，金太祖听说张觉有不忠的心理，即派刘彦宗、完颜斜钵宣诏抚慰他。
English: Zhang JueRen stayed in Nanjing, and King Taizu heard that Zhang Jue was disloyal, so he sent Liu YanZong and Guan YanZhang to comfort him.

古文：太祖至鸳鸯泺，不豫，还上京，留宗翰都统军事，留彦宗佐之。
现代文：金太祖到鸳鸯泺后，闷闷不乐，于是返回上京，留完颜宗翰都统军事，让刘彦宗辅助他。
English: After Kim Taejo arrived at the capital, he was sullen and unhappy, so he returned to Beijing, and after Yan Zonghan left for the capital, he asked Liu Yanzong to assist him.

古文：及张觉败奔于宋，众推张敦固为都统，杀使者，乘城拒守，攻之不肯下。
现代文：到张觉被金军打败逃到宋朝时，城中士兵推举张敦固做都统，并杀了金国的使者，凭城拒守，没有被攻下。
English: When Zhang Jue was defeated by the Golden Army and fled to the Song Dynasty, the soldiers in the city elected Zhang Dungu to be the capital, and killed the envoy of the Kingdom of China. The city refused to defend itself and was not captured.

古文：彦宗同中书门下平章事，知枢密院事，加侍中，佐宗望军。
现代文：此时刘彦宗任同中书门下平章事、知枢密院事，加为侍中，辅助完颜宗望统率军队。
English: At this time, Liu Yanzong was appointed to the same position as Zhongshumen Shimo Pingzhang, Zhizhu Secret Academy, and was added as a chamberlain to assist Yan Zongwang in leading the army.

古文：宗望奏，方图攻取，凡州县之事委彦宗裁决之。
现代文：不久完颜宗望向皇帝上奏，南京周围已被攻取，大凡州县的事情都委托刘彦宗裁决。
English: Soon after Yan Zongwang appealed to the emperor, the area around Nanjing had been captured, and the affairs of Dafanzhou County were entrusted to Liu Yanzong for adjudication.

古文：天会二年，诏彦宗曰： 中京等两路先多拒命，故遣使抚谕，贳其官民之罪，所犯在降附前者勿论。
现代文：天会二年，金太宗皇帝召见刘彦宗说 ：中京等两路军以前多抗命不从，所以派遣使臣去安抚他们，赦免其官吏百姓的罪，愿意改过的人也既往不咎。
English: In the second year of the Heavenly Assembly, Emperor Jin Taizong summoned Liu Yanzong and said, "In the past, the two armies in Beijing and other cities often disobeyed orders, so he sent envoys to appease them and pardon the sins of their officials and people. Those who are willing to change are not to blame.

古文：卿等选官与使者往谕之，使勤于稼穑。 
现代文：你们选择官员和使者前去办理此事，使当地军民勤于农业生产。 
English: You should select officials and envoys to deal with this matter and make the local military and civilians work hard in agricultural production.

古文：未几，大举伐宋，彦宗画十策，诏彦宗兼领汉军都统。
现代文：不久，金朝大举攻打宋朝，刘彦宗写下十种进攻策略，皇帝看后即下诏刘彦宗兼任汉军都统。
English: Soon after, the Kim dynasty launched a large-scale attack on the Song dynasty, and Liu Yanzong wrote down ten offensive strategies. After reading them, the emperor immediately issued an edict that Liu Yanzong would also serve as the commander of the Han army.

古文：蔡靖以燕山降。
现代文：蔡靖在燕山投降金军。
English: Cai Jing surrenders to the Golden Army at Yanshan.

古文：诏彦宗凡燕京一品以下官皆承制注授，遂进兵伐宋。
现代文：皇帝诏令刘彦宗说，凡是燕京一品以下的官吏都可以继承以前的财产，于是进兵攻打宋朝。
English: Emperor Zhao ordered Liu Yanzong to say that all officials below the rank of Yanjing Yipin could inherit the previous property, so he marched into the Song Dynasty.

古文：至汴，宋少帝割地纳质，师还。
现代文：金兵攻到汴京，宋少帝钦宗割地并交纳人质，于是金朝军队撤回。
English: The Jin soldiers attacked Suijing, the Song Emperor Qin cut the land and took hostages, so the Jin army withdrew.

古文：宗望分将士屯安肃、雄、霸、广信之境，留阇母、彦宗于燕京节制诸军。
现代文：尔后完颜宗望把将士分散在安肃、雄、霸、广信的境内驻守，并把完颜母、刘彦宗留在燕京节制各路大军。
English: Later, Emperor Yan Zongwang stationed his soldiers in the territories of Ansu, Xiong, Ba, and Guangxin, and kept Emperor Yan's mother, Liu Yan Zong, in Yanjing to control the armies of all directions.

古文：明年，再伐宋，已围汴京，彦宗谓宗翰、宗望曰： 萧何入关，秋毫无犯，惟收图籍。
现代文：第二年，金朝再次进攻宋朝，金军已经把汴京团团包围，此时刘彦宗对完颜宗翰、完颜宗望说： 萧何入关，秋毫无犯，只收集地图和户籍册。
English: The following year, the Kim dynasty attacked the Song dynasty again, and the Kim army had already encircled the capital city of Beijing. At this time, Liu Yanzong said to Guan Yan Zonghan and Guan Yan Zongwang: Xiao He has entered the pass, Qiu has committed no crime, he only collects maps and household registration books.

古文：辽太宗入汴，载路车、法服、石经以归，皆令则也。 
现代文：辽太宗入汴，把路车、法服、石经载了回去，这是县令的做法。 
English: Liao Taizong entered the coffin and carried back the carriage, the legal uniform and the sutras. This was the practice of the county magistrate.

古文：二帅嘉纳之，执二帝以归。
现代文：二位主帅很高兴地接纳了刘彦宗的建议，挟持宋朝二帝回到金朝。
English: The two coaches gladly accepted Liu Yanzong's suggestion and took the second emperor of the Song Dynasty back to the Kim Dynasty.

古文：天会六年薨，年五十三，追封郓王。
现代文：天会六年，刘彦宗死去，终年五十三岁，追封郓王。
English: In the sixth year of the Heavenly Reunion, Liu Yanzong died at the age of fifty-three, and was posthumously awarded the title of Shao Wang.

古文：起为太子詹事，迁太子少师。
现代文：正隆二年，依旧例降封为开府仪同三司。大定十五年，追封兖国公，谥号英敏。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, he was still demoted to Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji. In the fifteenth year of Dading, he was posthumously awarded the title of Shiguo, and his posthumous name was Yingmin.

古文：詹事院欲辟广东宫周墙，頍请于皇太子曰： 师旅饥馑之际，何为兴此役。 遂止。寻卒。
现代文：刘彦宗儿子叫刘萼、刘薚。
English: Liu Yanzong's sons are named Liu Calyp and Liu Yao.

古文：时立爱，字昌寿，涿州新城人。
现代文：时立爱，字昌寿，涿州新城人。
English: Shi Li'ai, Zi Changshou, both from Xincheng, Ganzhou.

古文：父承谦，以财雄乡里，岁饥发仓廪赈贫乏，假贷者与之折券。
现代文：其父时承谦，因为财产丰实而闻名乡里，一遇荒年他就开仓济贫，并把以往向他借贷的人的契约也撕毁，免去债务。
English: His father, Jicheng Qian, was well-known in the village for his wealth. In a bad year, he opened a warehouse to help the poor, and also tore up the contracts of those who had borrowed from him in the past, freeing them from debt.

古文：辽太康九年，中进士第，调泰州幕官。
现代文：辽太康九年，时立爱中进士第，调任泰州幕官。
English: In the ninth year of Liao Taikang's reign, he was promoted to the rank of scholar at Shili Ai Middle School and transferred to the Taizhou shogunate.

古文：丁父忧，服除，调同知春州事。
现代文：他父亲去世时，他行孝服丧，期满后，调任同知春州事。
English: When his father died, he performed filial piety and mourning, and after the expiration of the term, he was transferred to Tongzhi Chunzhou.

古文：未逾年，迁云内县令，再除文德令。枢密院选为吏房副都承旨，转都承旨。
现代文：不到一年，升迁云内县令，再被任命为文德令，不久被枢密院选为史房副都承旨，转都承旨。
English: Less than a year later, he was promoted to the position of Yunnan County magistrate, and then he was appointed to the position of Wende County magistrate. Soon after, he was selected by the Privy Council to be the deputy chief historian of Yunnan, and then he was transferred to the position of chief magistrate of Yunnan.

古文：累迁御史中丞，刚正敢言，忤权贵。
现代文：后官至御史中丞之职，他刚正敢言，不顺从权贵。
English: When he was promoted to the post of goshi chujo, he was forthright and dared to say that he would not obey the powerful.

古文：除燕京副留守，丁母忧，起复旧职，迁辽兴军节度使兼汉军都统。
现代文：由于他耿直被提升为燕京副留守，此间其母去世，他服丧期满，又官复原职，后来升做辽国兴军节度使，兼汉军都统。
English: As he Geng Zhi was promoted to the vice-resident of Yanjing, his mother passed away during this time, his mourning period expired, and he was restored to his post. Later, he was promoted to the Liao Guo Xingjun Festival envoy, as well as the Han Army.

古文：太祖已定燕京，访求得平州人韩询持诏招谕平州。
现代文：金太祖平定了燕京，查询得平州人韩询，命他持诏招安平州。
English: King Taizu conquered Yanjing, asked the Pingzhou people to inquire about Han Zhen, and ordered him to hold the edict to recruit Anpingzhou.

古文：是时，奚王回离保在卢能岭，立爱未敢即朝见，先使人来送款曰： 民情愚执，不即顺从，愿降宽恩，以慰反侧。 
现代文：这时，奚王回离保在卢龙岭，时立爱未敢立即去拜见，先派人送上名帖说： 百姓性情愚笨固执，不会立刻顺从，愿意投降接受你的大恩德，以慰我的担心。 
English: At this time, Shao Wang returned to Lulongling, but Shili Ai did not dare to visit him immediately. She first sent a famous postcard saying: "The people are stupid and stubborn, they will not obey immediately, they are willing to surrender and accept your great kindness to comfort my worries."

古文：诏曰： 朕亲巡西土，底定全燕，号令所加，城邑皆下。
现代文：皇帝金太祖下诏说 ：我亲自巡视西部疆土，彻底平定了燕国，只要号令下达，城邑就会立刻攻下。
English: Emperor Jin Taizu issued an edict saying: I personally inspected the western territory and completely leveled Yan Province. As long as the order is issued, the towns will be immediately captured.

古文：爰嘉忠款，特示优恩，应在彼大小官员可皆充旧职，诸囚禁配隶并从释免。 
现代文：届时嘉奖忠臣，显示特别恩惠，那里的大小官都可以做原来的官职，囚犯释放，奴隶免除。 
English: At that time, loyal subjects will be rewarded, special favors will be shown, officials of all ranks can perform their original duties, prisoners will be released, and slaves will be exempted.

古文：于是，辽帝尚在天德，平州虽降，民心未固。
现代文：此时，辽国皇帝还在天德，平州虽然投降，但民心还没稳固。
English: At this time, the Emperor of Liao was still in Tiande, and although Pingzhou surrendered, the people's hearts were not yet stable.

古文：奚王回离保军所在保聚，蓟州已降复叛。
现代文：奚王回离保军驻在小城村落里，已降的蓟州再次叛乱。
English: The Shan king withdrew from the Bao army stationed in small towns and villages, and the already defeated Shan state rebelled again.

古文：民间流言谓： 金人所下城邑，始则存抚，后则俘掠。 
现代文：民间传言说 ：金国人攻下城邑后，开始时给予抚恤，后来就掳掠。 
English: Folk legend says that after the Jin people conquered the towns, they first gave them a pension, and later took them as plunder.

古文：时立爱虽开谕而不肯信，乃上表： 乞下明诏，遣官分行郡邑，宣谕德义。
现代文：时立爱知道此言却不肯相信，于是上奏章说 ：乞求皇上下诏，派官员到各个郡邑，宣诏让人知道您的恩德道义。
English: Although she knew this, she did not want to believe it, so she wrote in the record: "Beg the emperor to issue an edict, send officials to all counties and towns, and issue an edict to let people know about your benevolence and morality."

古文：他日兵临于宋，顺则抚之，逆则讨之，兵不劳而天下定矣。 
现代文：以后攻打宋朝时，顺我者安抚他，逆我者就讨伐他，这样不用军队费力天下就可安定了。 
English: In the future, when attacking the Song Dynasty, those who follow me will pacify him, and those who oppose me will fight him. In this way, the world can be stable without the need for an army.

古文：上览表嘉之，诏答曰： 卿始率吏民归附，复条利害，悉合朕意，嘉叹不忘。
现代文：金太宗皇帝看完时立爱的奏章大加赞美，随后给时立爱下诏说： 你最初率官吏百姓归附于我，现在又上奏章写出利害，都合我意，嘉奖不能忘。
English: Emperor Jin Taizong praised Shili Ai's musical composition after reading it, and then issued an edict to Shili Ai, saying, "You first led the officials and people to join me, and now you have written your interests on the musical composition, which is convenient for me. I cannot forget the praise."

古文：山西部族缘辽主未获，恐阴相连结，故迁处于岭东。
现代文：山西部族因为辽国君主没有被俘获，恐怕暗中与他有来往，所以迁到岭东居住。
English: Because the monarch of Liao was not captured, the Shanxi people moved to Lingdong to live, fearing that they might secretly have dealings with him.

古文：西京人民既无异望，皆按堵如故。
现代文：西京人民已经没有了叛乱的愿望，都像过去一样生活。
English: The people of Xijing have lost their desire to rebel and are living as they did in the past.

古文：或有将卒贪悍，冒犯纪律，辄掠降人者。
现代文：也许有的将士贪婪蛮横，冒犯纪律，动不动就掠夺投降的人。
English: Perhaps some soldiers are greedy and rude, offend discipline, and plunder those who surrender at every turn.

古文：已谕诸部及军帅，约束兵士，秋毫有犯，必刑无赦。
现代文：我已下诏告谕各部及军中统帅，约束士兵，秋毫有犯者，必斩无赦。
English: I have issued an edict to all ministries and commanders of the army to discipline soldiers, and those who commit crimes will not be pardoned.

古文：今遣斡罗阿里等为卿副贰，以抚斯民，其告谕所部，使知朕意。 
现代文：现在派斡罗阿里等做你的副贰官，用来安抚百姓。你告诉所领各部，让他们知道我的意思。 
English: Now appoint as your deputy eunuchs such men as Joram and Ali to pacify the people, and you shall speak to the rulers of the provinces, that they may know what I mean.

古文：其后，以平州为南京，用张觉为留守，时立爱遂去平州。
现代文：后来，把平州改为南京，用张觉做留守，于是时立爱离开平州。
English: Later, the name of Pingzhou was changed to Nanjing, and Zhang Jue was used to stay behind. Therefore, Shi Liai left Pingzhou.

古文：而张觉遂因燕京人东徙，其众怨望，觉遂叛入于宋。
现代文：而张觉因为燕京人东迁，大多数怨恨，而叛逃到宋朝。
English: Zhang Jue, however, defected to the Song Dynasty because he resented the eastward migration of Yanjing people.

古文：立爱既去平州归乡里，太祖以燕、蓟与宋，新城入于宋。
现代文：时立爱离开平州回到乡里，金太祖把燕、蓟给宋朝，新城也纳入宋朝版图。
English: Shi Li Ai left Pingzhou to return to the countryside. Jin Taizu gave Yan and Zou to the Song Dynasty, and Xincheng was also included in the Song Dynasty territory.

古文：宋累诏立爱，立爱见宋政日坏，不肯起，戒其宗族不得求仕。
现代文：宋朝多次下诏召时立爱入朝做官，而时立爱见宋朝政事一天天坏下去，不肯应诏，并告诫宗族人不得做官。
English: The Song Dynasty repeatedly issued an edict calling Shi Li Ai to enter the court to become an official, but Shi Li Ai saw that the Song Dynasty's political affairs were deteriorating day by day, refused to comply with the edict, and warned the clan members not to become officials.

古文：及宗望再取燕山，立爱诣幕府上谒，拜同中书门下平章事，任其子侄数人。
现代文：等到完颜宗望再次夺取燕山时，时立爱到幕府上拜见他，完颜宗望授时立爱为同中书门下平章事，并任命了时立爱的儿子和侄子数人。
English: When Yan Zongwang conquered Yanshan again, Shi Li'ai went to the shogunate to meet him, and after Yan Zongwang conferred on Shi Li'ai the title of a scholar, and appointed several sons and nephews of Shi Li'ai.

古文：立爱从宗望军数年，谋画居多，封陈国公。
现代文：时立爱跟从完颜宗望军队数年，谋划很多大事，被封为陈国公。
English: Shi Li'ai followed the army of Wanyan Zongwang for several years, planned many important events, and was named Chen Guogong.

古文：表求解机务，不从。
现代文：后来时立爱上奏章请求辞职，没被批准。
English: Later, Shiori fell in love with the score and asked for his resignation, which was not approved.

古文：九年，为侍中、知枢密院事。
现代文：天会九年，时立爱做了侍中、知枢密院事。
English: In the ninth year of the Heavenly Assembly, Shi Li'ai served as an attendant and a member of the Privy Council.

古文：久之，加中书令。
现代文：后加为中书令。
English: Later, it was changed to Zhongshirong.

古文：天会十五年，致仕，加开府仪同三司、郑国公。
现代文：天会十五年，时立爱退休，加为开府仪同三司、郑国公。
English: In the fifteenth year of the Heavenly Society, Shi Li Ai retired and was added to the founding ceremony with the three departments and Zheng Guogong.

古文：薨于家，年八十二。
现代文：最后时立爱寿终正寝，终年八十二岁。
English: In the end, Shi Li Aishu finally went to bed, and lived to be eighty-two years old.

古文：赙赠钱布缯帛有差。
现代文：很多人都送给他财物、丝布用以治丧。
English: Many people sent him money and silk cloth for his funeral.

古文：诏同签书燕京枢密院事赵庆袭护丧事，葬用皆官给之。
现代文：皇上下诏令同签书燕京枢密院事赵庆袭治理时立爱的丧事，丧葬费用由官府支付。
English: The imperial edict and the imperial edict of Yanjing Privy Council were signed by Zhao Qingyi to govern the funeral of Zhili Ai, and the funeral expenses were paid by the government.

古文：韩企先，燕京人。
现代文：韩企先，燕京人。
English: Korean companies first, Yanjing people second.

古文：九世祖知古，仕辽为中书令，徙居柳城，世贵显。
现代文：九世祖韩知古，做辽国的中书令，韩家从燕京迁住柳城，世代都很显贵。
English: The ninth-generation ancestor, Han Zhi Gu, was the Chinese scribe of Liao, and the Han family moved from Yanjing to Liucheng. His generation was very distinguished.

古文：乾统间，企先中进士第，回翔不振。
现代文：乾统年间，韩企先中进士第。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qian, Korean companies were the first to enter the country.

古文：都统杲定中京，擢枢密副都承旨，稍迁转运使。
现代文：金朝都统完颜杲平定中京，提拔韩企先为枢密副都承旨，后升为转运使。
English: After the unification of the capital of the Kim dynasty and the subjugation of Beijing, the South Korean company was first promoted to the position of vice-commander of the privy council, and later to the position of transfer envoy.

古文：宗翰为都统经略山西，表署西京留守。
现代文：宗翰做都统巡视山西，表奏推荐韩企先做了西京留守。
English: Zonghan made a tour of Shanxi as a member of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, and stayed in West Beijing after recommending Korean companies.

古文：天会六年，刘彦宗薨，企先代之，同中书门下平章事、知枢密院事。
现代文：天会六年，刘彦宗死去，韩企先代替他为同中书门下平章事、知枢密院事。
English: Six years after the heavenly meeting, Liu Yanzong died, and Han Kui first replaced him as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.

古文：七年，迁尚书左仆射兼侍中，封楚国公。
现代文：天会七年，韩企先升为尚书左仆射兼侍中，封为楚国公。
English: In the seventh year of the Heavenly Reunion, Han Kui was first promoted to Shang Shu's left-hand man and second-in-command, and was given the title of Duke of Chu.

古文：初，太祖定燕京，始用汉官宰相赏左企弓等，置中书省、枢密院于广宁府，而朝廷宰相自用女直官号。
现代文：当初，金太祖平定燕京，开始用汉人的宰相官称赏给左企弓等人，并在广宁府设置中书省、枢密院，而朝廷的宰相仍用女真官称。
English: At the beginning, King Taizu conquered Yanjing and began to use the Chinese title of chancellor to reward people such as Zuo Kegyu, and set up the Central Literature Department and the Privy Council in Guangningfu, while the chancellor of the imperial court was still called the female chancellor.

古文：太宗初年，无所改更。
现代文：金太宗初年，官称没有改变。
English: In the first year of King Taejong's reign, the official title remained unchanged.

古文：及张敦固伏诛，移置中书、枢密于平州，蔡靖以燕山降，移置燕京，凡汉地选授调发租税皆承制行之。
现代文：等到张敦固被杀后，金朝把中书省、枢密院迁到平州，当蔡靖在燕山投降后，又把中书省、枢密院迁到燕京，凡是汉人地域的选拔、授予、调遣、租税等政务都沿用旧体制去施行。
English: After Zhang Dungu was killed, the Kim dynasty moved the Chinese Literature Ministry and the Privy Council to Pingzhou, and when Cai Jing surrendered in Yanshan, he moved the Chinese Literature Ministry and the Privy Council to Yanjing. All government affairs such as selection, awarding, dispatching, and taxation in the Han region continued to be implemented using the old system.

古文：故自时立爱、刘彦宗及企先辈，官为宰相，其职大抵如此。
现代文：所以像时立爱、刘彦宗和韩企先那代人，职位虽是宰相，大体也不过如此。
English: Therefore, like Shi Li Ai, Liu Yanzong and the previous generation of Korean companies, although the position is prime minister, it is generally just that.

古文：斜也、宗干当国，劝太宗改女直旧制，用汉官制度。
现代文：完颜斜也、完颜宗主持国政时，劝金太宗把女真旧官制改为汉人官职制度。
English: When Kanyanshu assumed the presidency of the country, he advised King Taizong to change the old female official system to the Chinese official system.

古文：天会四年，始定官制，立尚书省以下诸司府寺。
现代文：天会四年，开始确定官职制度，设立尚书省下面的各个司、府、寺等机构。
English: In the fourth year of the Tenkage, the system of government posts began to be established, and various departments, prefectures, temples and other institutions under the Ministry of Education and Culture were established.

古文：十二年，以企先为尚书右丞相，召至上京。入见，太宗甚惊异曰： 朕畴昔尝梦此人，今果见之。 
现代文：天会十二年，因韩企先是尚书右丞相，被召到上京，待上朝后，金太宗皇帝很惊异地说 ：我以前曾经梦到过此人，今天果然见到了他。 
English: In the twelfth year of the heavenly meeting, because the Korean company was first Shang Shujuo, he was called to Beijing, and after staying in the imperial court, Emperor Jin Taizong said in surprise: I had dreamed of this person before, and today I really saw him.

古文：于是，方议礼制度，损益旧章。
现代文：于是，韩企先和皇帝一起讨论礼制，对其进行了删除和增补。
English: As a result, the Korean company first discussed the etiquette with the emperor and deleted and added to it.

古文：企先博通经史，知前代故事，或因或革，咸取折衷。
现代文：韩企先博通经史，知晓以前朝代的旧事，有的因袭它，有的改变它，取舍得很恰当。
English: Korean enterprises are well-versed in history and know the old things of previous dynasties. Some follow it, some change it, and the choice is very appropriate.

古文：企先为相，每欲为官择人，专以培植奖励后进为己责任。
现代文：韩企先做宰相时，常常想，做官要选拔人才，他专以培养扶植奖励后学者为己任。
English: When he was the prime minister of South Korea, he often thought that it was necessary to select talent to be an official, and he dedicated himself to nurturing and rewarding post-academics.

古文：推毂士类，甄别人物，一时台省多君子。
现代文：韩企先推举了很多重要人士，也培养了很多人才，一时间台省官府里多君子。
English: Korean enterprises first nominated a lot of important people, and also trained a lot of talents. At one time, there were many gentlemen in the provincial government.

古文：弥缝阙漏，密谟显谏，必咨于王。
现代文：修葺宫阙，秘密谋略，上谏，韩企先都同王侯商量。
English: The repair of the palace gate, the secret strategy, the upper gate, and the Korean enterprises were all discussed with the prince.

古文：宗翰、宗干雅敬重之，世称贤相焉。
现代文：完颜宗翰、完颜宗干很敬重他，当时都称他为贤相。
English: Gan Yan Zong Han and Gan Yan Zong Gan held him in high esteem and called him a sage at the time.

古文：皇统元年，封濮王。
现代文：皇统元年，韩企先被封为濮王。
English: In the first year of imperial rule, Han Kui was crowned as the king of eunuchs.

古文：六年，薨，年六十五。
现代文：六年，韩企先去世，终年六十五岁。
English: Six years later, Han Kui died at the age of 65.

古文：正隆二年，例降封齐国公。
现代文：正隆二年，依照旧例降封为齐国公。
English: In the second year of Zhenglong, he was demoted to Qi Guogong in accordance with the old practice.

古文：大定八年，配享太宗庙廷。
现代文：大定八年，配给他享受金太宗庙廷的祭祀。
English: In the 8th year of Dading, he was assigned to enjoy the sacrificial rites of the Jin Taizong Temple Court.

古文：十年，司空李德固孙引庆求袭其祖猛安，世宗曰： 德固无功，其猛安且阙之。
现代文：大定十年，司空李德固的孙子李引庆请继承其祖父的猛安，金世宗说 ：李德固没有功绩，让他做猛安尚且是个错误。
English: In the tenth year of Dading, the grandson of Sikyong Li Degu, Li Qianqing, asked to succeed his grandfather Meng'an. Kim Shizong said: Li Degu has no merit, and it is a mistake to let him do Meng'an.

古文：汉人宰相惟韩企先最贤，他不及也。 
现代文：汉人做宰相只有韩企先最贤能，李敦固不及韩企先。 
English: Of the Chinese prime ministers, only Han Enxian was the most capable, while Li Dongguo was not as capable as Han Enxian.

古文：十一年，将图功臣像于衍庆宫，上曰： 丞相企先，本朝典章制度多出斯人之手，至于关决大政，与大臣谋议，不使外人知之，由是无人能知其功。
现代文：十一年，金国准备把功臣的图像画在衍庆宫中，金世宗皇帝说： 丞相韩企先，制定了本朝的绝大部分典章制度，至于关心决断大政，同大臣谋议，外人都不知道，因此没有人能知道他的功绩。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jin Dynasty, when the country was preparing to paint the images of heroes in the Yanqing Palace, the Emperor Kim Sejong said: "The Prime Minister Han Kuo-sung first formulated the vast majority of the ceremonial system of this dynasty. As for his concern for deciding major policies and consulting with ministers, foreigners do not know, so no one can know his achievements.

古文：前后汉人宰相无能及者，置功臣画像中，亦足以示劝后人。 
现代文：前前后后做宰相的汉人都不能同他相比，把他的画像置在功臣画像中，足可以勉励后人。 
English: All the Chinese who have been prime ministers before and after him cannot be compared to him. Placing his portrait among the portraits of heroes can only encourage future generations.

古文：十五年，谥简懿。
现代文：大定十五年，韩企先谥号简懿。
English: In the fifteenth year of Dading, a Korean company was the first to enter the market.

