古文：梁王魏婴觞诸侯于范台。
现代文：魏惠王魏婴在范台宴请各国诸侯。
English: Wei Hui Wang Wei Yu invited princes from all over the world to a banquet at the Great Hall.

古文：酒酣，请鲁君举觞。
现代文：酒兴正浓的时候，魏惠王向鲁共公敬酒。
English: When the wine boom was in full swing, Wei Hui Wang made a toast to Lu Gonggong.

古文：鲁君兴，避席择言曰： 昔者帝女令仪狄作酒而美，进之禹，禹饮而甘之，遂疏仪狄，绝旨酒，曰： 后世必有以酒亡其国者。 
现代文：鲁共公站起身，离开自己的坐席，正色道： 从前，舜的女儿仪狄擅长酿酒，酒味醇美。仪狄把酒献给了禹，禹喝了之后也觉得味道醇美。但因此就疏远了仪狄，戒绝了美酒，并且说道： 后代一定有因为美酒而使国家灭亡的。 
English: Lu Gonggong stood up and left his seat, straightening up: Once upon a time, Yao's daughter, Yi Di, was good at making wine, and the wine tasted delicious. Yi Di gave the wine to Yu, and after Yu drank it, he also found the taste delicious. But because of this, he became estranged from Yi Di and gave up drinking wine, and said: There must be future generations who will ruin the country because of wine.

古文：齐桓公夜半不嗛，易牙乃煎敖燔炙，和调五味而进之，桓公食之而饱，至旦不觉，曰： 后世必有以味亡其国者。 
现代文：齐桓公有一天夜里觉得肚子饿，想吃东西。易牙就煎熬烧烤，做出美味可口的菜肴给他送上，齐桓公吃得很饱，一觉睡到天亮还不醒，醒了之后说： 后代一定有因贪恋美食而使国家灭亡的。 
English: One night, King Qi Huan felt hungry and wanted to eat. Yi Zha grilled a carp and made delicious dishes to send to him. King Qi Huan was so full that he slept until dawn and did not wake up. After waking up, he said, "There must be future generations who will ruin the country because they are greedy for food."

古文：晋文公得南之威，三日不听朝，遂推南之威而远之，曰： 后世必有以色亡其国者。 
现代文：晋文公得到了美女南之威，三天没有上朝理政，于是就把南之威打发走了，说道： 后代一定有因为贪恋美色而使国家灭亡的。 
English: Prince Jinwen got a beautiful woman, Nan Zhiwei, and did not go to the court to administer the government for three days, so he sent Nan Zhiwei away, saying: Future generations must have destroyed the country because they were greedy for beauty.

古文：楚王登强台而望崩山，左江而右湖，以临彷徨，其乐忘死，遂盟强台而弗登，曰： 后世必有以高台陂池亡其国者。 
现代文：楚灵王登上强台远望崩山，左边是长江，右边是大湖，登临徘徊，惟觉山水之乐而忘记人之将死，于是发誓不再沉醉于山水。后来他说： 后代一定有因为修高台、山坡、美池，而使国家灭亡的。 
English: King Chuling ascended the strong platform to look far and wide at the collapsed mountain, with the Yangtze River on the left and the Great Lake on the right. He wandered up and down, only to feel the joy of the landscape and forget that people will die, so he vowed not to indulge in the landscape. Later, he said: Future generations must have caused the country to perish because of the construction of the high plateau, mountain slope, and beautiful pond.

古文：今主君之尊，仪狄之酒也；主君之味，易牙之调也；左白台而右闾须，南威之美也；前夹林而后兰台，强台之乐也。
现代文：现在您酒杯里盛的好似仪狄酿的美酒；桌上放的如同易牙烹调出来的美味佳肴；您左边的白台，右边的闾须，都是南之威一样的美女；您前边有夹林，后边有兰台，都是如强台一样的游乐之地。
English: Now the wine in your wine glass is like a fine wine; the dishes on the table are like delicious dishes cooked by Ito; the white table on your left, the whiskers on your right, are all beautiful women like Nan Zhiwei; there is a forest in front of you, and there is a lantern table behind you, all of which are places of amusement like strong tables.

古文：有一于此，足以亡其国。今主君兼此四者，可无戒与！ 
现代文：这四者中占有一种，就能够使国家灭亡，可是现在您四样都有，能不警戒吗？ 
English: If any one of these four things is lacking, the country will perish, but now that you have all four, can you not be on your guard?

古文：梁王称善相属。
现代文：魏惠王听后连连称赞谏言非常之好。
English: After listening to Wei Hui Wang, he repeatedly praised and said that the performance was very good.

