古文：昏礼。
现代文：婚事的礼仪：男家先遣媒向女家提亲，女家许亲厚，然后行纳采礼，用雁作求婚的礼物。
English: Wedding etiquette: The man sends an advance messenger to the woman to propose marriage, the woman accepts the proposal, and then makes a gift of a goose as a marriage proposal.

古文：下达。纳采，用雁。主人筵于户西，西上，右几。
现代文：女家主人在祢庙堂上户西布设筵席。筵席以西为上，几设置于右方。
English: The lady owner of the house set up a table in the west of the upper house of the temple. The table is set up with the west as the top, and a few are set up on the right.

古文：使者玄端至。
现代文：男家的使者身着玄端服到来。
English: A messenger from the man's family arrives dressed in black.

古文：摈者出请事，入告。
现代文：女家主人的摈者出门询问因何事而来，然后入内告诉主人。
English: The housemaster's deaf-mute went out to inquire why she had come, and then went in to tell the housemaster.

古文：主人如宾服，迎于门外，再拜，宾不答拜。
现代文：主人身穿与宾相同的礼服，出大门外迎接。主人两拜，宾不答拜。
English: The host wears the same dress as the guest and goes out to greet them outside the gate. The host bows twice, but the guest does not respond.

古文：揖入。
现代文：宾主相揖，然后进入大门。
English: The guests mingle with each other and then enter the gate.

古文：至于庙门，揖入；三揖，至于阶，三让。主人以宾升，西面。
现代文：到达庙门前，宾主又相揖而入。如此相对三揖，到达堂前阶下，谦让三番，主人与宾一同登堂，面朝西。
English: Arriving in front of the temple gate, the host and the guest again enter together. In this way, the host and the guest enter the hall together, facing west.

古文：宾升西阶。当阿，东面致命。
现代文：宾从西阶登堂，至栋下面朝东致辞，说明自己受命前来纳彩之意。
English: The guests entered the hall from the west steps and made a speech from the east to the west below the building, explaining that they had been ordered to come to receive gifts.

古文：主人阼阶上北面再拜；授于楹间，南面。
现代文：主人在阼阶上方面朝北两拜。使者在堂上两楹之间授雁给主人，授雁的时候宾主都面朝南而立。
English: The host prostrated twice facing north on the dais, and the messenger gave the host the goose between the two dais in the hall. When giving the goose, the guests all stood facing south.

古文：宾降，出。
现代文：宾下堂，出庙门。
English: The chief guest leaves the hall.

古文：主人降，授老雁。
现代文：主人也下堂，把雁交给年长的家臣。
English: The master also went down to the hall and gave the goose to the older vassal.

古文：摈者出请。
现代文：摈者出门问宾还有什么事。
English: If you have any questions, please do not hesitate to ask.

古文：宾执雁，请问名，主人许。
现代文：宾又拿一只雁作为礼物，告诉摈者，想询问主人之女的名字。
English: Bin also took a goose as a gift and told the eunuch that he wanted to inquire about the name of the owner's daughter.

古文：宾入，授，如初礼。
现代文：宾入门授雁等仪式，与纳采的礼节相同。
English: The ceremonies, such as the introduction of geese to the guests, are the same as the etiquette of Natchitoches.

古文：摈者出请，宾告事皆。入告，出请醴宾。
现代文：摈者出门问宾客还有什么事，宾告知事已完毕，摈者入告主人，然后出门请宾接受醴礼。
English: The host goes out to ask the guests what else is going on, the guests are informed that the event is over, the host is notified, and then the host goes out to invite the guests to accept the toast.

古文：宾礼辞，许。
现代文：宾推辞一番然后答应。
English: The host bowed to the guests, and then gave a speech inviting them to attend.

古文：主人彻几，改筵，东上。
现代文：主人撤几，重新布设筵席，改变方向，以东为上首，又在房中设置一甒醴。
English: The host withdrew a few tables, rearranged the tables, changed the direction, with the east as the top, and set up a table in the room.

古文：侧尊甒醴于房中。主人迎宾于庙门外，揖让如初，升。
现代文：主人至庙门外迎宾，进门以后与宾行揖、让的礼节，与纳彩时一样。
English: The host greets the guests outside the temple gate, and after entering the door, the etiquette of walking with the guests and letting them go is the same as that of the lottery.

古文：主人北面，再拜，宾西阶上北面答拜。
现代文：然后宾主登堂。主人在东阶上面朝北方两拜，宾在西阶上面朝北答拜。
English: Then the guest master enters the hall. The master bows twice to the north on the east step, and the guest bows twice to the north on the west step.

古文：主人拂几授校，拜送。
现代文：主人拂去几上的灰尘，两手握着几的中间，把几足的一端授给宾，授毕行拜送礼。
English: The host brushes the dust off the table, holds the middle of the table with both hands, and gives the guests one end of the table, and then presents the gifts.

古文：宾以几辟，北面设于坐，左之，西阶上答拜。
现代文：宾手中拿着几谦退避让一番，然后面朝北把几设置于坐席的左边，再回到西阶上方回礼答拜主人。
English: The guest should hold the Qian Qian in his or her hand, step back and give way, then place the Qian Qian facing north on the left side of the seat, and then return to the top of the west staircase to return the bow and bow to the host.

古文：赞者酌醴，加角柶，面叶，出于房。
现代文：赞者在东房中用觯酌醴，在觯上加放一只角柶，使柶的大端朝前，送出房来。
English: In the east room, the praiser used a gong to drink the gong, and added a horn gong to the gong, so that the big end of the gong faced forward, and sent it out of the room.

古文：主人受醴，面枋，筵前西北面。
现代文：主人从赞者手中接过醴觯，使觯上的柶柄朝前，然后来到宾席前面朝西北以等待授给宾。
English: The host takes the gong from the celebrant, moves the handle of the gong forward, and then comes to the front of the table, facing northwest, to wait for the gong to be given to the guest.

古文：宾拜受醴，复位。
现代文：宾先在西阶行拜受礼，然后接受醴觯，再回原位。
English: The guests first bowed and received prayers on the west steps, then received the urn, and then returned to their original positions.

古文：主人阼阶上拜送。
现代文：主人在阼阶的上方行拜送礼。
English: The master bows at the top of the stairs.

古文：赞者荐脯醢。宾即筵坐，左执觯，祭脯醢，以柶祭醴三，西阶上北面坐，啐醴，建柶，兴，坐奠觯，遂拜。主人答拜。
现代文：然后将祭插置觯中，起身，又坐下，把觯放在地上，行拜礼向主人致谢。主人答拜。宾即席，将觯放置于脯醢的左边。
English: Then he inserts the offering into the urn, gets up, sits down again, and places the urn on the ground. He thanks the host with a prayer. The host responds with a prayer. The guest, now seated, places the urn to the left of the urn.

古文：宾即筵，奠于荐左，降筵，北面坐取脯；主人辞。
现代文：下筵席，在席的南边面朝北坐下，取脯。主人辞让一番。
English: At the next table, sit down facing north on the south side of the table and take the gong. The host is the first to give up.

古文：宾降，授人脯，出。
现代文：宾下堂，将脯交付从者，然后出门。
English: The guests go down to the hall, hand the gongs to the acolytes, and then go out.

古文：主人送于门外，再拜。
现代文：主人送宾至大门外，向宾再拜礼。
English: The host escorted him outside the gate, and he bowed twice.

古文：纳吉用雁，如纳采礼。
现代文：纳吉，以雁为礼物，礼节与纳采礼相同。
English: In Naji, geese are given as gifts, and the etiquette is the same as for the Natsei.

古文：纳征：玄纁束帛，俪皮。如纳吉礼。
现代文：纳徵，以黑、红两色的五匹帛和鹿皮两张作礼物，礼节与纳吉礼相同。
English: For the tax collection, five black and red yakitori noodles and two pieces of deer skin are given as gifts. The etiquette is the same as that for the naginata.

古文：请期，用雁。
现代文：请期，仍以雁作为见面礼。
English: The geese are still used as a welcome gift.

古文：主人辞。宾许，告期，如纳征礼。
现代文：女家主人推辞，宾表示同意，然后告诉女家主人迎娶的吉期。其礼节与纳徵礼相同。
English: The hostess declines, the guest agrees, and then informs the hostess of the auspicious date of the wedding. The etiquette is the same as that of giving a gift.

古文：期，初昏，陈三鼎于寝门外东方，北面，北上。
现代文：在迎娶之日，天色黄昏时，在夫家寝门外的东边陈放三只鼎，鼎面朝北，以北边为上位。
English: On the day of the wedding, when the sky is at its dusk, three tripods are placed on the east side of the husband's house outside the sleeping door. The tripod faces north, with the north side as the upper side.

古文：其实特豚，合升，去蹄。
现代文：三只鼎中所盛之物有：一只杀死的小猪，除去蹄甲，合左右体盛于鼎中。
English: The three trifles contained in the trifle were: a piglet that had been killed, its hooves removed, and its left and right halves placed together in the trifle.

古文：举肺脊二、祭肺二、鱼十有四、腊一肫。
现代文：举肺脊、祭肺各一对，都盛在最北边的鼎中；鱼十四尾，盛在豚鼎南边的鼎中；除去尾骨部分的干兔一对，盛在最南边的鼎中。
English: A pair of raised lung ridges and a pair of sacrificed lungs are all in the northernmost ding; a fish with 14 tails is in the southernmost ding of the pig ding; and a pair of dried rabbits, with the tailbone removed, is in the southernmost ding.

古文：髀不升。皆饪。
现代文：以上各物，皆为熟食。
English: All of the above are cooked foods.

古文：设扃鼏。
现代文：鼎耳中放置抬扛和鼎盖。
English: Place the handle and lid in the middle of the ear.

古文：设洗于阼阶东南。
现代文：洗设置在阼阶的东南面。
English: It is located on the southeast side of the staircase.

古文：馔于房中：醯酱二豆，菹醢四豆，兼巾之：黍稷四敦，皆盖。
现代文：房中所设置的食物有，醯酱两豆、肉酱四豆，六豆共用一条巾覆盖着。黍稷分别盛在四敦中，敦上都有盖子盖着。
English: The food set up in the room includes two beans with dipping sauce, four beans with meat sauce, and six beans, all covered with a common towel.

古文：大羹湆在爨。
现代文：灶上煮着肉羹。酒尊设在室中北墙下，尊下有禁。
English: Meat broth is simmering on the stove. The liquor store is located under the north wall in the middle of the room, and it is forbidden to drink there.

古文：尊于室中北墉下，有禁，玄酒在西，綌幂，加勺，皆南枋。
现代文：玄酒置于酒尊的西面。用粗葛布为盖巾，酒尊上放置酒勺，勺柄都朝南。
English: The wine is placed on the west side of the wine holder. A coarse cloth is used as a cover, and a wine spoon is placed on the wine holder, with the spoon handle facing south.

古文：尊于房户之东，无玄酒，篚在南，实四爵合卺。
现代文：在堂上房门的东侧置酒一尊，不设玄酒。篚在酒尊南边，内装四只酒爵和合卺。
English: On the east side of the door to the upper room of the hall, there is a statue of sake, but no wine. On the south side of the statue of sake, there are four wine goblets and a goblet.

古文：主人爵弁，纁裳缁袘。
现代文：新婿身着爵弁服、饰以黑色的下缘的浅绛色裙。
English: The new son-in-law is dressed in a suit, a light navy skirt with a black trim at the bottom.

古文：从者毕玄端。
现代文：随从皆身穿玄端服。
English: The attendants are all dressed in black.

古文：乘墨车，从车二乘，执烛前马。
现代文：新婿乘坐墨车，并有两辆随从的车子。随从人役手执灯烛在车前照明。
English: The new son-in-law rode in a chariot and was accompanied by two chariots. The attendants held candles to light the chariot.

古文：妇车亦如之，有示炎。
现代文：新妇的车子与新婿相同，并且加有车帷。
English: The bride's carriage is the same as the groom's, with the addition of curtains.

古文：至于门外。
现代文：男家车队到女家大门外停下。
English: The men's motorcade stopped outside the woman's front door.

古文：主人筵于户西，西上，右几。
现代文：女家主人在堂上房门西面布设筵席，席的首端朝西，几放在席的右边。
English: The female owner of the house placed a table on the west side of the door of the upper room of the hall. The first end of the table faced west, and several were placed on the right side of the table.

古文：女次，纯衣纁袡，立于房中，南面。
现代文：新妇梳理好头发，穿上饰有浅绛色衣缘的丝衣，面朝南站立于房中。
English: The bride combed her hair, put on a silk dress with a light navy trim, and stood facing south in the middle of the room.

古文：姆纚笄宵衣，在其右。
现代文：女师以簪子和头巾束发，身穿黑色丝质礼服，站在新妇的右边。
English: A woman with braided hair and a headscarf, wearing a black silk dress, stands to the bride's right.

古文：女从者毕袗玄，纚笄，被纚黼，在其后。
现代文：从嫁的娣侄皆身着黑色礼服，头戴籫子和束发巾，肩着绣有花纹的单披肩，跟随于新妇之后。
English: The bride's nieces and nephews, all dressed in black gowns, with braids and headscarves, and single shawls with embroidered patterns on their shoulders, followed behind the bride.

古文：主人玄端迎于门外，西面再拜，宾东面答拜。
现代文：主人身穿玄端服到大门外迎接，面朝西向宾行再拜礼。新婿面朝东答拜。
English: The host, dressed in formal attire, greets the guests outside the gate, facing west, and then bows to the guests. The bridegroom bows to the guests facing east.

古文：主人揖入，宾执雁从。
现代文：主人揖新婿，入门。新婿执雁随后入门。
English: The master's new son-in-law, Zou, starts the class. The new son-in-law, Xiyan, then starts the class.

古文：至于庙门，揖入。三揖，至于阶，三让。
现代文：到庙门前，相揖而入，如此三揖，到达堂下阶前。
English: In front of the temple gate, enter together, and so on, until you reach the front of the lower level of the hall.

古文：主人升，西面。
现代文：谦让三番，主人上堂，面朝西而立。
English: After the third round of bowing, the host enters the hall and stands facing west.

古文：宾升，北面，奠雁，再拜稽首，降，出。
现代文：宾上堂，面朝北，把雁放置于地，行再拜稽首礼。
English: The guests enter the hall, face north, place the geese on the ground, and perform the ceremonial first salute.

古文：妇从，降自西阶。
现代文：新婿下堂出门。新妇随后，从西阶下堂。
English: The new son-in-law goes down the hall. The bride then goes down the hall from the west steps.

古文：主人不降送。
现代文：主人不下堂相送。
English: The master does not go down the hall to see them off.

古文：婿御妇车，授绥，姆辞不受。
现代文：新婿亲自为新妇驾车，把引车绳交予新妇。
English: The new son-in-law personally drove the car for the bride and handed the rope to the bride.

古文：妇乘以几，姆加景，乃驱。
现代文：女师推辞不接引车绳。
English: The female instructor refused to pull the rope.

古文：御者代。婿乘其车先，俟于门外。妇至，主人揖妇以入。
现代文：新妇登几上车，女师为新妇披上避风尘的罩衣，婿于是为妇驾车，等车轮转够三周后，再由御者代替新婿为新妇驾车。新婿乘坐自己的马车，行驶在前，先期到达，在大门外等候妇车的到来。
English: The bride gets on the carriage several times, the mistress puts on a windproof smock for the bride, the husband-to-be then drives the carriage for her, and after the wheels have been turned for three weeks, the driver replaces the new husband-to-be in driving the carriage for the bride. The new husband-to-be takes his own carriage, drives ahead, arrives ahead of time, and waits for the arrival of the woman's carriage outside the gate.

古文：乃寝门，揖入，升自西阶，媵布席于奥。
现代文：新妇到夫家大门外，新婿对妇一揖，请她进门。
English: When the bride arrived outside the gate of her husband's house, the new husband gave her a kiss and invited her in.

古文：夫入于室，即席，妇尊西，南面。媵御沃盥交。
现代文：媵与御相互交换：媵为新婿浇水盥洗，御则为新妇浇水盥洗。
English: The bridegroom and the bride exchange water with each other: the bridegroom pours water on the bridegroom and the bride on the bride.

古文：赞者彻尊幂。
现代文：赞者撤除酒尊上的盖巾。
English: The reviewer removed the cover from the bottle.

古文：举者盥，出，除，举鼎入，陈于阼阶南，西面，北上。
现代文：抬鼎人盥洗后出门，撤去鼎盖，抬鼎入内，盛放再阼阶之南，面朝西，以北为上。
English: After washing, lift the lid and go out, remove the lid, lift the lid and go inside, and then put it on the south side of the staircase, facing west, with the north facing up.

古文：匕俎从设，北面载，执而俟。匕者逆退，复位于门东，北面，西上。
现代文：执匕人和执俎人随鼎而入，把匕、俎放置于鼎旁，执俎人面朝北把牲体盛置于俎上，执俎立待。执匕人从后至前，依次退出，回到寝门外东侧原来的位置，面朝北，年长者站在西边上位。
English: The person holding the yakitori and the person holding the yakitori come in with the yakitori, place the yakitori and yakitori next to the yakitori, the person holding the yakitori faces north and places the animal on the yakitori, and the person holding the yakitori stands by. The person holding the yakitori goes from the back to the front, exits in turn, and returns to the original position on the east side outside the sleeping door, facing north, and the older person stands on the upper west side.

古文：赞者设酱于席前，菹醢在其北。
现代文：赞者在席前设酱，肉酱放在酱的北边。
English: The admirer places the sauce in front of the table, and the meat sauce is placed on the north side of the sauce.

古文：俎入，设于豆东。
现代文：执俎人入内，把俎设置于肉酱的东边。
English: The person holding the tongs goes inside and places the tongs on the east side of the meat sauce.

古文：鱼次。腊特于俎北。
现代文：鱼依序设置在俎东。
English: The fish are sequentially set up in the east of Shandong.

古文：赞设黍于酱东，稷在其东。
现代文：兔腊单独陈放在俎的北面。赞把黍敦设置在酱的东边，稷敦更在黍敦之东。
English: The rabbit was placed on the north side of the yakitori, the yakitori was placed on the east side of the sauce, and the yakitori was placed on the east side of the yakitori.

古文：设湆于酱南。
现代文：肉羹放在酱南边。
English: Place the broth on the south side of the sauce.

古文：设对酱于东，菹醢在其南，北上。
现代文：在稍靠东边的地方为新妇设酱，肉酱在酱之南，以北为上首。
English: In a place slightly to the east, the bride is served sauce. The meat sauce is placed in the south of the sauce, with the north at the top.

古文：设黍于腊北，其西稷。
现代文：黍敦设置于兔腊北边，稷敦在黍敦之西。
English: Shandong is located in the north of the country, and Shandong is in the west of Shandong.

古文：设湆于酱北。
现代文：肉羹陈放在酱的北边。
English: Place the jerky on the north side of the sauce.

古文：御布对席，赞启会，却于敦南，对敦于北。
现代文：御在婿席的对面为新妇设席。赞者打开婿敦的盖子，仰置于敦南地上，妇敦的敦盖，则仰置于敦北。
English: On the opposite side of the bridegroom's seat, a seat is set up for the bride. The celebrant opens the lid of the bridegroom's seat and places it upside down on the south side of the seat, while the bride's seat is placed upside down on the north side of the seat.

古文：赞告具。
现代文：赞报告新婿馔食已安排完毕。
English: I am pleased to report that arrangements for the new son-in-law's reception have been completed.

古文：揖妇，即对筵，皆坐。
现代文：新婿对新妇作揖请她入对面筵席，然后一起坐下，都进行祭祀。
English: The bridegroom makes an offering to the bride, invites her to the opposite table, and then they sit down together to perform the sacrifice.

古文：皆祭，祭荐、黍、稷、肺。
现代文：依次祭黍稷和肺。
English: The umbilicus and lungs are sacrificed in turn.

古文：赞尔黍，授肺脊，皆食，以湆酱，皆祭举、食举也。
现代文：赞将黍移置席上，并把肺脊进授与新婿新妇。新婿新妇就着肉汁和酱进食。二人一起祭举肺，食举肺。
English: Zhan moved the bowl to the table, and presented the pulmonary spine to the bride and groom. The bride and groom ate with gravy and sauce. The two raised their lungs together, and raised their lungs together.

古文：三饭，卒食。
现代文：取食三次进食便告结束。
English: After eating three times, the meal is over.

古文：赞洗爵，酌酳主人，主人拜受，赞户内北面答拜。
现代文：赞洗爵，斟酒请新婿漱口安食。新婿拜而接受，赞在室门之内面朝北答拜。
English: Zhan baptised, poured wine and invited his new son-in-law to have a good meal. The new son-in-law bowed and accepted, and Zhan bowed to the north within the door.

古文：酳妇亦如之。
现代文：又请新妇漱口安食，礼节如上。
English: In addition, the bride is asked to gargle and eat with ease, following the etiquette above.

古文：皆祭。赞以肝从，皆振祭。
现代文：二人皆祭酒，赞进肝以佐酒。
English: Both of them drank the sacrificial wine, and drank the yakitori.

古文：哜肝，皆实于菹豆。
现代文：新婿、新妇执肝振祭，尝肝后放置于菹豆中。
English: The bride and groom hold a liver-shaking ceremony, taste the liver and then place it in the peas.

古文：卒爵，皆拜。
现代文：干杯，皆拜。
English: Cheers, everyone.

古文：赞答拜，受爵，再酳如初，无从，三酳用卺，亦如之。
现代文：赞答拜，接过酒爵，第二次服侍新婿新妇漱口饮酒，礼节与第一次相同。
English: Praise and worship, received the wine baron, the second time serving the new son-in-law bride gargle drinking, etiquette is the same as the first time.

古文：赞洗爵，酌于户外尊，入户，西北面奠爵，拜。皆答拜。
现代文：赞洗爵，在室外的尊中斟酒。进门，面朝西北，置爵于地一拜，新婿、新妇皆答拜。
English: The baptizer praises and pours wine in the outer sanctuary. Entering the door, facing northwest, the baptizer bows to the ground, and the bridegroom and bride both bow.

古文：坐祭，卒爵，拜。皆答拜。
现代文：赞坐地祭酒，然后干杯，一拜，新婿、新妇皆答拜。
English: A toast is made to the newlyweds, followed by a toast, a bow, and the bride and groom both bow.

古文：兴。
现代文：站立起来。
English: Stand up.

古文：主人出，妇复位。
现代文：新婿出室；新妇则回复到原位。
English: The new son-in-law leaves the room; the new wife returns to her original position.

古文：乃彻于房中，如设于用室，尊否。
现代文：撤去室中筵席食物，按照原来的布局设置在房中，不设酒尊。新婿在房中脱去礼服，交与媵。
English: Remove the banquet food in the room, set it in the room according to the original layout, and do not set the wine. The groom takes off his dress in the room and has sex with the bride.

古文：主人说服于房，媵受；妇说服于室，御受。
现代文：新妇在室中脱掉礼服，交与御。女师将佩巾交与新妇。
English: In the room, the bride takes off her gown and hands it to the priest. The priestess passes the handkerchief to the bride.

古文：姆授巾。御衽于奥，媵衽良席在东，皆有枕，北止。主人入，亲说妇之缨。
现代文：御在室中西南角铺设卧席，媵在稍东的位置为新婿铺设卧席，都设有枕头，脚朝北，新婿入室，亲自为新妇解缨。
English: In the middle and south-west corner of the room, a couch is laid, and in the slightly east position, a couch is laid for the bridegroom. Both are equipped with pillows, with the feet facing north. The bridegroom enters the room and personally undresses the bride.

古文：烛出。
现代文：撤出灯烛。
English: Pull out the candles.

古文：媵餕主人之馀，御餕妇余，赞酌外尊酳之。
现代文：媵吃新婿余下的食物；御则吃新妇余下的食物。赞斟房外尊的酒为媵和御漱口安食。
English: The groom eats the groom's leftover food; the bridegroom eats the bride's leftover food.

古文：媵侍于户外，呼则闻。
现代文：媵在室门外伺侯，呼唤能够听得到。
English: The crickets wait outside the door, their calls can be heard.

古文：夙兴，妇沐浴，纚笄、宵衣以俟见。
现代文：第二天清早起床，新妇沐浴之后，以簪子和头巾束发，身穿黑色丝质礼服，等候拜见公婆。
English: The next day, the bride got up early in the morning. After taking a bath, she wore her hair in braids and a headscarf, a black silk dress, and waited to meet her in-laws.

古文：质明，赞见妇于舅姑。
现代文：等到天亮的时候，赞者引新妇拜见公婆。
English: When it was dawn, the well-wishers brought the bride to see her parents-in-law.

古文：席于阼，舅即席。
现代文：在阼阶上方设席，公公即席。
English: A seat was set up at the top of the stairs, and my father-in-law took his place.

古文：席于房外，南面，姑即席。
现代文：在房外设席，面朝南，婆婆入席。
English: A seat was set up outside the room, facing south, and my mother-in-law sat down.

古文：妇执□枣、栗，自门入，升自西阶，进拜，奠于席。
现代文：新妇手执一笲枣栗，从寝门入内。从西阶上堂，向东前至公公席前一拜，把枣栗放置于席上。
English: The bride holds a bunch of jujube in her hand and enters through the bedroom door. From the west steps to the hall, walk east to the front of the public seat and place the jujube on the seat.

古文：舅坐抚之，兴，答拜。
现代文：公公坐下以手抚摸枣栗笲，然后站起，对新妇答拜。
English: The father-in-law sat down and stroked the jujube with his hand, then stood up and bowed to the bride.

古文：妇还，又拜，降阶，受□腶脩，升，进，北面拜，奠于席。
现代文：新妇回至原位，对公公又一拜。新妇下西阶，从侍者手中接过腶脩笲。然后上堂，向北前至婆婆席前，面朝北拜，把笲放置席上。
English: The bride returned to her original position and bowed again to her father-in-law. The bride went down the west steps and took the gong from the waiter's hand. Then she went up the hall, walked north to the grandmother's table, faced north, and placed the gong on the table.

古文：姑坐举以兴，拜，授人。
现代文：婆婆坐下，手持腶脩笲站起，拜，把笲交与从侍者。
English: My mother-in-law sat down, stood up with the bowl in her hand, bowed, and handed the bowl to the waiter.

古文：赞醴妇。
现代文：赞者代公婆设筵酬答新妇。
English: The admirer set up a reward for the bride on behalf of her in-laws.

古文：席于户牖间，侧尊甒醴于房中。
现代文：在堂上室的门、窗之间布设筵席，在房中设置一甒醴。
English: Between the door and window of the room above the hall, there is a table, and in the room there is a bed.

古文：妇疑立于席西。
现代文：新妇端正安静地站立在席的西边。
English: The bride stood straight and quiet on the west side of the pew.

古文：赞者酌醴，加柶，面枋，出房，席前北面。
现代文：赞者斟醴于觯，在觯上放置小匙，匙柄朝前。从房中出来至席前，面朝北方。
English: The admirer places a small spoon on the spoon, with the handle facing forward, and comes out of the room to the front of the table, facing north.

古文：妇东面拜受。赞西阶上北面拜送。
现代文：新妇面朝东拜，接觯，赞者在西阶上方，面朝北拜送。
English: The bride faces east and bows before the groom, while the groom stands at the top of the west steps and bows to the bride facing north.

古文：妇又拜。
现代文：新妇复又一拜。
English: The bride bowed again.

古文：荐脯醢。
现代文：赞者将脯醢进置于席前。
English: The steward put the bowl in front of his seat.

古文：妇升席，左执觯，右祭脯醢，以柶祭醴三，降席，东面坐，啐醴，建柶，兴，拜。
现代文：新妇入席，左手持觯，右手祭脯醢。用小匙祭醴三次。下筵席面朝东坐下尝醴。
English: The bride enters the table, holding the gong in her left hand and the offering gong in her right hand. She offers the offering gong three times with a small spoon. At the end of the meal, she sits facing east and tastes the offering gong.

古文：赞答拜。妇又拜，奠于荐东，北面坐取脯；降，出，授人于门外。
现代文：把小题插置于觯中，站立起来，一拜，赞者答拜，新妇又一拜。把醴觯放置于脯醢的东边，面朝北坐下，取脯在手。下堂出门，在寝门外把脯交给从人。
English: Insert the small question mark into the urn, stand up, bow, the celebrant bows, and the bride bows again. Place the urn on the east side of the urn, sit down facing north, take the urn in your hand. Go out of the hall and give the urn to the servant outside the bedroom door.

古文：舅姑入于室，妇盥馈。
现代文：公婆进入寝室，新妇伺候公婆盥洗进食。
English: The mother-in-law went into the bedroom, and the bride-to-be waited for the mother-in-law to wash and eat.

古文：特豚，合升，侧载，无鱼腊，无稷。并南上。
现代文：一只小猪，被分开的左右两半盛于鼎中，放在俎上的时候，只单独食用右半边。不设鱼、兔腊和稷，都以南为上首。
English: A small pig, the left and right halves of which have been separated, is placed in the middle of the cake, and when placed on the yoke, only the right half is eaten separately. Fish, rabbit and yakitori are not included, and all are placed at the top.

古文：其他如取女礼。
现代文：其它食物的设置和迎娶时的布局相同。
English: The rest of the food is set out in the same way as at a wedding.

古文：妇赞成祭，卒食，一酳，无从。
现代文：新妇佐助公婆完成祭食之礼，吃完饭，则侍奉公婆以酒漱口安食，不用佐酒的菜肴。
English: After the bride, Sasuke, and her in-laws have completed the food offering ceremony and finished eating, they serve the in-laws with wine to refresh their mouths and a light meal, without the use of sake.

古文：席于北墉下。妇撤，设席前如初，西上。
现代文：新妇在室中北墙下设席，撤去公婆的馔食，按照原先的次序设置于新设的席前，以西为上。
English: The bride sets a seat under the north wall in the middle of the room, removes the nibbles of the in-laws, and sets it in front of the newly set seat in accordance with the original order, with the west facing up.

古文：妇餕，舅辞，易酱。
现代文：新妇吃公公的余食，公公辞谢，并为新妇更换酱。
English: The bride ate her father-in-law's leftovers, thanked him, and changed the sauce for the bride.

古文：妇餕姑之馔，御赞祭豆、黍、肺、举肺、脊，乃食，卒。
现代文：新妇又吃婆婆食余之物。御侍奉新妇祭豆、黍、肺、举肺脊。
English: The bride also eats the leftovers from her grandmother's meal. The bride's attendants offer beans, ginger, lung, and lung-raising radish.

古文：姑酳之，妇拜受，姑拜送。
现代文：然后进食，吃毕，婆婆为新妇的酒漱口安食，新妇拜而接受，婆婆拜送。
English: Then, after eating, the mother-in-law rinsed her mouth with wine for the bride. The bride bowed and accepted, and the mother-in-law bowed and gave her away.

古文：坐祭，卒爵，姑受，奠之。
现代文：新妇坐下祭酒，然后干杯。
English: The bride sits down to a celebratory drink, followed by a toast.

古文：妇撤于房中，媵御餕，姑酳之，虽无娣，媵先。
现代文：婆婆接过酒爵放置于地。新妇把食物撤置于房中，媵和御吃这些余食，婆婆亲自为她们酌酒漱口安食。即使没有娣从嫁，也要让媵先食。
English: The mother-in-law took over the wine jar and placed it on the ground. The bride removed the food and placed it in the room. The bride and the bridegroom ate the leftover food. The mother-in-law herself drank wine for them to rinse their mouths. Even if there is no bride and groom, let the bride and groom eat first.

古文：于是与始饭之错。
现代文：至此，媵与御相互交错：媵吃公公的余饭，御则吃婆婆的余饭。
English: At this point,  and 御 are interlaced with each other:  eats his father-in-law's leftovers, and 御 eats his mother-in-law's leftovers.

古文：舅姑共飨妇以一献之礼。
现代文：公婆共同以 一献之礼 来款待新妇。
English: The parents-in-law jointly presented a gift to the bride.

古文：舅洗于南洗，姑洗于北洗，奠酬。舅姑先降自西阶，妇降自阼阶。
现代文：公公在庭中所设的南洗洗爵，婆婆则在北堂所设的北洗洗爵，酬酒后一献礼成，新妇把酒爵放置于荐的东边。饮酒完毕，公婆先从西阶下堂，然后新妇从阼阶下堂。
English: The father-in-law was christened in the south in the courtyard, while the mother-in-law was christened in the north in the north hall. After the wine was offered, the bride placed the bottle on the east side of the altar. After drinking, the father-in-law went down the hall from the west side first, and then the bride went down from the north side.

古文：归妇俎于妇氏人。舅飨送者以一献之礼，酬以束锦。
现代文：有司把妇俎之牲交与女家送亲的人，以便向新妇的父母复命。公公又以 一献之礼 来款待送亲的人，酒至酬宾，又以一束锦相赠。
English: A steward would give the bride and groom's dowry to the family of the bridegroom's parents, so that the bride's parents would be given their lives back. The father-in-law would also give a gift to the family of the bridegroom's parents, wine to the guests of honor, and a bunch of brocade as a gift.

古文：姑飨妇人送者，酬以束锦。
现代文：婆婆酬劳女送亲者，酬宾时亦以一束锦相赠。
English: If the mother-in-law rewards a woman who sends a relative, she will also give a bouquet of brocade as a gift.

古文：若异邦，则赠丈夫送者以束锦。
现代文：如果是与别国通婚，则另外赠送男送亲人一束锦。
English: If it is a mixed marriage with another country, the man is also given a bouquet of brocade to give to his relatives.

古文：若舅姑既没，则妇入三月，乃奠菜。席于庙奥，东面，右几。
现代文：如果是公婆去世后结婚，新妇则在婚礼三个月之后择日到公婆庙中，具素食供献公婆的神主。在庙室内西南角设席，面朝东，几在右边。
English: If the bride marries after the death of her in-laws, the bride chooses a day three months after the wedding to go to the in-laws' temple and offer vegetarian food to the in-laws' god. Seats are set up in the southwest corner of the temple, facing east, a few on the right.

古文：席于北方，南面。
现代文：又在室内北墙下设席，面朝南。
English: There are also seats under the north wall of the room, facing south.

古文：祝盥，妇盥于门外。妇执□菜，祝帅妇以入。
现代文：祝和新妇各自盥洗完毕，新妇手执菜笲立于庙门外，祝引导着新妇入内。
English: After the bride and groom have washed themselves, the bride stands outside the temple gate holding a dish in her hand, and the groom leads the bride inside.

古文：祝告，称妇之姓，曰： 某氏来妇，敢奠嘉菜于皇舅某子。 
现代文：祝口称新妇的姓氏对公公的神主祷告说： 某氏来做您家的媳妇，冒昧前来向尊敬的公公敬献精美的菜蔬。
English: He said, "A certain lady has come to be the daughter-in-law of your family, and has dared to come and offer exquisite vegetables to your respected father-in-law.

古文：妇拜扱地，坐奠菜于几东席上，还，又拜如初。
现代文：新妇下拜至地，坐下，将菜供献于几东边的席上。回至原位，与上次一样又一次下拜。
English: The bride bows to the ground, sits down and offers the dish to the table a few paces to the east. She returns to her original position and bows again, as she did last time.

古文：妇降堂，取□菜，入，祝曰： 某氏来妇，敢告于皇姑某氏。 
现代文：新妇下堂，另取一份笲菜，进入室内。祝祷告说： 某氏来做您家的媳妇，冒昧告知尊敬的婆婆。 
English: After the bride leaves the hall, she takes another portion of stew and enters the room. Pray and say: A certain gentleman has come to be the daughter-in-law of your family, dare to tell your respected mother-in-law.

古文：奠菜于席，如初礼。
现代文：把菜供献于席上，礼仪与前相同。
English: Serve the dish at the table, the etiquette is the same as before.

古文：妇出，祝阖牖户。
现代文：新妇退出之后，祝关闭上门窗。
English: After the bride has left, please close the doors and windows.

古文：老醴妇于房中，南面，如舅姑醴妇之礼。
现代文：年长的家臣代公婆在房中设席酬答新妇，与赞者代公婆醴妇的礼节相同。
English: It is the same etiquette for the elder vassal to set up a seat in the room for the bride's mother-in-law to answer the bride, and for the approver to stand in for the mother-in-law.

古文：婿飨妇送者丈夫、妇人，如舅姑飨礼。
现代文：新婿酬劳新妇的男、女送者，与公婆酬劳送者的礼仪相同。
English: It is the same etiquette for the groom to reward the man or woman who delivers the bride, as it is for the in-laws to reward the deliverer.

古文：记士昏礼，凡行事必用昏昕，受诸祢庙，辞无不腆，无辱。
现代文：士婚礼，事情都在早晨和黄昏时举行，必在祢庙中受命，然后行事，免去诸如 不腆之币 、 辱临敝舍 一类的客套话。
English: For the wedding of a prince, which takes place both in the morning and in the evening, it is necessary to receive the order in your temple and then to perform the ceremony, avoiding such pleasantries as the giving of money and the desecration of the sacred place.

古文：挚不用死，皮帛必可制。
现代文：挚礼要用活雁，帛和鹿皮必须已经加工，可直接用以制作衣物。
English: The live geese must be used for the ceremonial offering, and the donkey and deer skins must have been processed so that they can be used directly to make clothing.

古文：腊必用鲜，鱼用鲋，必殽全。
现代文：兔腊必须新鲜，鱼要体肉完好的鲫鱼。
English: The rabbit wax must be fresh, and the fish must be sturgeon with its flesh intact.

古文：女子许嫁，笄而醴之，称字。
现代文：对已经许嫁的女子，要为她举行表示已成年的笄礼，用醴法，称呼她的表字。
English: For a woman who has been betrothed, it is necessary to hold an adult ceremony for her, and call her by her name.

古文：祖庙未毁，教于公宫，三月。
现代文：与国君同高祖以内的同族女子，都要在国君宫中接受三个月的婚前教育。
English: Women of the same ethnicity as the sovereign and within the same ancestry as the sovereign must receive three months of pre-marriage education in the sovereign's palace.

古文：若祖庙已毁，则教于宗室。
现代文：如果高祖庙已经迁毁，则在大宗之家接受婚前教育。
English: If the Gaozhu Temple has been relocated and destroyed, they will receive pre-marital education at the Daizong Home.

古文：问名。主人受雁，还，西面对。
现代文：问名：主人接过雁以后，回到阼阶上方，面朝西把女子之名告知宾。
English: Name: After the host has received the goose, he returns to the top of the stairs and, facing west, tells the guests the name of the girl.

古文：宾受命乃降。
现代文：宾受命后下堂。
English: After receiving the order, the guest left the hall.

古文：祭醴，始扱一祭，又扱再祭。
现代文：祭醴的方法，用小匙舀醴，祭醴一次，插匙于觯。
English: The method of offering the yakitori is to dip the yakitori in a small spoon, then dip the yakitori in the yakitori once, then insert the spoon into the yakitori.

古文：宾右取脯，左奉之；乃归，执以反命。
现代文：第二次祭醴时，再度用小匙舀醴，祭毕，仍插匙于觯。宾用右手取脯，并兼用左手捧脯；然后带着脯回去向主人复命。
English: For the second offering, the small spoon is used again. When the offering is finished, the spoon is still inserted into the yakitori. The guest takes the yakitori with his right hand and holds the yakitori with his left hand; then he takes the yakitori back to the host.

古文：纳征：执皮，摄之，内文；兼执足，左首；随入，西上；参分庭一，在南。
现代文：纳徵：执皮的人要把鹿皮折迭起来，纹在里面，两手兼握其四足，头向左边。两位执皮人相随而入，以西为上首，在庭南端的三分之一处站定。
English: Admission: The person holding the skin has to fold the deer skin over itself, tattoo it on the inside, hold its four legs with both hands, and turn its head to the left. Two people holding the skin then enter, with the west at the top, and stand in the southern third of the courtyard.

古文：宾致命，释外足，见文。
现代文：宾致辞时，执皮人放开鹿皮外面二足，使皮张开，皮毛显露于外。
English: During the guest's speech, the person holding the skin let go of the two outer legs of the deer skin, causing the skin to open and the fur to be exposed.

古文：主人受币，士受皮者自东出于后，自左受，遂坐摄皮。逆退，适东壁。
现代文：主人接受礼物时，主人属吏中奉命受皮的人从东边经执皮人的身后出来，在执皮人的左边接过鹿皮，随后坐下，仍将鹿皮折迭起来，然后依照自后至前的顺序，退至东墙边。
English: When the host accepted the gift, the person from the host's staff who had been ordered to receive the skin came out from the east side behind the person receiving the skin, took the buckskin on the left side of the person receiving the skin, then sat down, still folded the buckskin up, and then, in order from back to front, retreated to the east wall.

古文：父醴女而俟迎者，母南面于房外。
现代文：新妇的父亲设筵用醴款待女儿，等候来迎亲的新婿，母亲的位置在房外堂上，面朝南。
English: The bride's father set up an urn to entertain his daughter, waiting to welcome the bridegroom. The mother's place was outside the house in the hall, facing south.

古文：女出于母左，父西面戒之，必有正焉。若衣，若笄，母戒诸西阶上，不降。
现代文：新妇由母亲的左边出房门，父亲面朝西训诫女儿，并授与衣、笄等物作为依凭，使她不忘训诫之言。母亲在西阶的上方教导女儿，不下堂。
English: The bride goes out of the door on the left side of the mother. The father faces west and admonishes his daughter, and gives her clothes, shoes, and other things as evidence so that she does not forget the words of admonition. The mother teaches her daughter at the top of the west staircase and does not go down.

古文：妇乘以几，从者二人坐持几，相对。
现代文：新妇踏着几上车。两个从者相对而坐把几扶稳。
English: The bride steps onto the carriage. Two attendants sit opposite her and hold her steady.

古文：妇入寝门，赞者彻尊幂，酌玄酒，三属于尊，弃余水于堂下阶间，加勺。
现代文：新妇进入寝门时，赞者撤掉酒尊的盖巾，以勺取玄酒三次注于尊中，把剩余的水泼在堂下两阶之间。
English: When the bride enters the bedroom door, the celebrant removes the lid of the wine altar, takes the wine with a spoon and pours it three times into the middle of the altar, and pours the remaining water between the two steps below the altar.

古文：□，缁被纁里，加于桥。
现代文：把勺子放置于尊上。笲上盖有黑面绛里饰巾，放置于桥上。
English: Place the spoon on the statue. Cover the spoon with a black satin cloth and place it on the bridge.

古文：舅答拜，宰彻□。
现代文：公公答拜毕，属吏把笲撤下。
English: His father-in-law bowed in response, and his subordinate officers removed the shackles.

古文：妇席荐馔于房。
现代文：醴妇和飨妇的筵席未设时，席和脯醢先安排在房中。
English: When the hostess and the hostess's table are not set up, the table and the hostess are arranged in the room.

古文：飨妇，姑荐焉。
现代文：在公婆款待新妇时，婆婆要亲自把脯醢进置于新妇的席前。
English: When the mother-in-law entertains the bride, the mother-in-law should personally place the yakitori in front of the bride's seat.

古文：妇洗在北堂，直室东隅；篚在东，北面盥。
现代文：妇人所用的洗设置在北堂上，东西与室的东墙角相对；篚放置在洗的东边，面朝北盥洗。
English: The washer used by the woman was set up on the north hall, with the east corner of the room facing the east corner of the room. The basin was placed on the east side of the washer, facing north.

古文：妇酢舅，更爵，自荐；不敢辞洗，舅降则辟于房；不敢拜洗。
现代文：新妇斟酒回敬公公，要更换酒爵，自荐脯醢。公公为新妇洗爵，新妇不敢，辞谢。公公下堂，新妇要退避于房中，不敢，拜谢公公为自己洗爵。
English: The bride is pouring wine to pay tribute to her father-in-law, she wants to change the wine title, she recommends herself. The father-in-law baptizes the bride, the bride does not dare, she resigns. The father-in-law leaves the hall, the bride wants to retreat to the room, she does not dare, she thanks the father-in-law for baptizing herself.

古文：凡妇人相飨，无降。
现代文：大凡妇人以酒食相款待，不要下堂。
English: Do not go down the hallway when a great woman is entertaining you with food and wine.

古文：妇入三月，然后祭行。
现代文：新妇在婚礼三个月以后，逢祭事即可参与助祭。
English: Three months after the wedding, the bride can take part in assisting the priest at every religious service.

古文：庶妇，则使人醮之。
现代文：对庶子的新妇，则使人用酒来酬答她。
English: For the bride of the son of the bondwoman, let them give her wine to drink.

古文：妇不馈。
现代文：庶子之妇不向公婆行进食之礼。
English: The wife of the son-in-law does not give thanks to the mother-in-law.

古文：昏辞曰： 吾子有惠，贶室某也。某有先人之礼，使某也请纳采。 
现代文：行纳采礼时，男方使者说： 您家先生惠赐女儿为某某的妻室，某某先生按照先人的礼法，命在下来敬请您家先生笑纳采礼。 
English: When performing the acceptance of gifts, the man's emissary said: Your husband has given his daughter to be the wife of so-and-so. Mr. So-and-so, in accordance with the etiquette of the ancients, is commanded to come down and respectfully invite your husband to accept the gift.

古文：对曰： 某之子舂愚，又弗能教。
现代文：摈者回答说： 某某的女儿天性愚钝，又未能很好地教育。
English: The eavesdropper replied: So-and-so's daughter is stupid by nature and has not been well educated.

古文：吾子命之，某不敢辞。 
现代文：但先生有命，在下不敢推辞。 
English: But my master has his life in his hands, and he dare not refuse.

古文：致命，曰： 敢纳采。 
现代文：使者致辞说： 冒昧奉上采礼。 
English: In his speech, the envoy said: "Don't you dare to offer a gift.

古文：问名，曰： 某既受命，将加诸卜，敢请女为谁氏？ 
现代文：问名，使者说： 在下既已接受先生之命，要回去卜问于神灵，冒昧请问令女的名字。 
English: When asked for her name, the messenger said, "I have accepted my master's command to go back and consult the gods, and I would like to ask for your daughter's name."

古文：对曰： 吾子有命，且以备数而择之，某不敢辞。 
现代文：女子的父亲回答说： 先生有命，并且把贱女当作候选的对象，在下不敢推辞。 
English: The girl's father replied: "The teacher has a life, and he dares not turn down a lowly girl as a candidate.

古文：醴，曰： 子为事故，至于某之室。某有先人之礼，请醴从者。 
现代文：醴宾之辞说： 先生有事到某某家，某某按照先人的礼法，设席酬劳先生一行。 
English: The guest's speech said: Mr. has something to so-and-so's house, so-and-so, in accordance with the etiquette of the ancients, set a seat for Mr. and his party.

古文：对曰： 某既得将事矣，敢辞。 
现代文：使者回答说， 在下既已办完事情，就此告辞。 
English: The envoy replied that he was leaving now that the matter had been settled.

古文： 先人之礼，敢固以请。 
现代文： 谨遵先人礼法，冒昧再次请先生即席。 
English: In accordance with the etiquette of our predecessors, I would like to take the liberty of asking you to take your seats again.

古文： 某辞不得命，敢不从也？ 
现代文： 在下推辞得不到准许，不敢不听从先生。 
English: If you don't get permission to decline, don't you dare disobey your teacher.

古文：纳吉，曰： 吾子有贶命，某加诸卜，占曰。
现代文：纳吉，使者说： 按先生赐命，某某进行了占卜，占卜的结果是 吉 。
English: Naji, the messenger said: According to the order given by the master, so-and-so performed divination, and the result of divination was auspicious.

古文：使某也敢告。 
现代文：派在下冒昧告知先生。 
English: Mr. Pai had the temerity to tell me.

古文：对曰： 某之子不教，唯恐弗堪。
现代文：女子的父亲说： 在下教女无方，只怕不配。
English: The girl's father said: "There's no way I can send my daughter there, I'm afraid I don't deserve it.

古文：子有吉，我与在。某不敢辞。 
现代文：先生的吉利，我也荣幸有一份，因此不敢推辞。 
English: Mr. Geely, I am also honored to have a copy, so I dare not refuse.

古文：纳征，曰： 吾子有嘉命，贶室某也。
现代文：纳徵，使者说： 先生美意，惠赐令女为某某妻室。
English: On receiving the tribute, the messenger said: "Master, you have been kind enough to give your daughter in marriage to so-and-so.

古文：某有先人之礼，俪皮束帛，使某也请纳征。 
现代文：某某依照先人礼法，派在下奉上鹿皮两张、帛五匹作为定亲的礼物，敬请笑纳。 致辞，说： 冒昧奉上定亲的礼物。 
English: So-and-so, in accordance with the ancestral etiquette, sent two deer skins and five yakitori as a betrothal gift. Please accept it. Speech, said: I dare to present a betrothal gift.

古文：致命，曰： 某敢纳征。 对曰： 吾子顺先典，贶某重礼，某不敢辞，敢不承命？ 
现代文：主人回答说： 先生遵从先人常法，惠赐在下重礼。在下不敢推辞，不敢不遵命。 
English: The master replied: "Sir, you are following the common law of our ancestors, and you are bestowing a great honor on me. I dare not refuse, I dare not disobey.

古文：请期，曰： 吾子有赐命，某既申受命矣。
现代文：请期，使者说： 先生先前已赐命与我，在下已多次谨遵先生之命。
English: The messenger said, "Sir, you have commanded me before, and I have obeyed you many times.

古文：惟是三族之不虞，使某也请吉日。 
现代文：只因三代人中难免会有不测之事发生，所以某某派我请先生及早确定迎娶的吉日。
English: Just because it is inevitable that something unexpected will happen in the three generations, so I asked my husband to determine the auspicious date of marriage as early as possible.

古文：对曰： 某既前受命矣，唯命是听。 
现代文：女子的父亲回答说： 在下以前既已遵从您家先生意旨，这次也唯命是听。 
English: The girl's father replied: I have obeyed your master's wishes in the past, but this time I will do as you say.

古文：曰： 某命某听命于吾子。 
现代文：使者说： 某某命在下请先生来作决定。 
English: The messenger said: So-and-so ordered me to ask you to make a decision.

古文：对曰： 某固唯命是听。 
现代文：女子的父亲回答说： 在下只愿唯命是听。 
English: The girl's father replied: "From now on, I will only obey orders."

古文：使者曰： 某使某受命，吾子不许，某敢不告期？ 
现代文：使者说： 某某派在下来请先生决定吉日，先生不肯这样做，在下不敢不告知迎娶的日期。 
English: The messenger said: "A certain faction came down to ask my husband to decide on a auspicious date. My husband refused to do so, and dared not not to inform me of the date of the wedding.

古文：曰某日。
现代文：使者告知某日迎娶。
English: The messenger told them that they would be married one day.

古文：对曰： 某敢不敬须？ 
现代文：女子父亲回答说： 在下安敢不恭候。 
English: The girl's father replied: I dare not wait.

古文：凡使者归，反命，曰： 某既得将事矣，敢以礼告。 
现代文：凡是使者回来复命，这样说： 卑职已完成使命，现以脯复命。 
English: And it shall be, when the messenger cometh, that he shall speak, saying, The vile work is done: now therefore let him die.

古文：主人曰： 闻命矣。 
现代文：主人说： 知道了。 
English: The owner said, "I see.

古文：父醮子，命之，曰： 往迎尔相，承我宗事。
现代文：亲迎之前，父亲为儿子设筵饮酒，告诉他说： 去吧，迎接你的内助，继承我家宗庙之事。
English: Before the welcome, the father arranged for his son to drink alcohol and told him: "Go, welcome your inner helper, and inherit my family's ancestral temple."

古文：勖帅以敬，先妣之嗣。
现代文：勉力引导她，敬慎妇道，继承先妣。你要始终如此，不可懈怠。 儿子说： 是。
English: Strive to guide her, be respectful and prudent in the way of a woman, and inherit the firstborn. You should always be like this and not slack off. My son said, "Yes."

古文：若则有常。 
现代文：只怕力所不及，不敢忘记父命。 
English: Afraid of being overwhelmed, I dared not forget my father's life.

古文：子曰： 诺。
现代文：新婿亲迎至女家，摈者问事。
English: The new son-in-law was welcomed to the woman's home, and the woman asked questions.

古文：唯恐弗堪，不敢忘命。 宾至摈者请，对曰： 吾子命某，以兹初昏，使某将，请承命。 
现代文：新婿回答说： 某某依照您家先生之命，在今天黄昏时举行婚礼，遣在下前来迎娶，请予准允。 摈者回答说： 某某早已准备完毕在此恭候。 
English: The new son-in-law replied, "Please allow Mr. So-and-so to perform the wedding ceremony at dusk today, as ordered by your master, and to come down to marry you." The bridegroom replied, "Mr. So-and-so has already prepared and is waiting here."

古文：对曰： 某固敬具以须。 
现代文：父亲送女儿，告诫她说： 敬慎行事，从早到晚都不要违背公婆的教命。 
English: The father sent his daughter and admonished her: "Be cautious and do not disobey your mother-in-law's orders from morning to night.

古文：父送女，命之曰： 戒之敬之，夙夜毋违命！ 
现代文：母亲为女儿束好衣带，结上佩巾，告诫女儿说： 勤勉谨慎，家内之事，从早到晚，不违夫命。 
English: The mother bundled up her daughter, tied a scarf around her neck, and admonished her daughter, saying, "Be diligent and prudent. In family affairs, from morning to night, do not violate your husband's orders.

古文：母施衿结帨，曰： 勉之敬之，夙夜无违宫事！ 庶母及门内，施鞶，申之以父母之命，命之曰： 敬恭听，宗尔父母之言。
现代文：庶母送至庙门内，为女儿系上盛物的小囊，对她重申父母之命。告诫她： 恭敬地听着，遵奉父母的话，从早到晚不要有过失。看一看父母的赐物，就会想起父母的教导。 
English: The stepmother sent her to the temple gate, tied a small bag of gifts for her daughter, and reiterated the parents' orders to her. She warned her: Listen respectfully, obey your parents' words, and do not make mistakes from morning to night. If you look at your parents' gifts, you will remember your parents' teachings.

古文：夙夜无愆，视诸衿鞶！ 婿授绥，姆辞曰： 未教，不足与为礼也。 
现代文：新婿递给女师引车绳，她推辞说： 没有尽到教人的职责，不敢当此礼。 
English: The bridegroom handed the driving rope to his mistress, but she declined, saying: "I didn't do my duty as a teacher, I don't dare to do this."

古文：宗子无父，母命之。
现代文：父亲已死的宗子，母亲来派遣使者。
English: His father is dead, and his mother has come to send a messenger.

古文：亲皆没，己躬命之。
现代文：父母亲都已去世，自己亲自派遣使者。
English: Both of his parents are dead, and he sent the messenger himself.

古文：支子，则称其宗。
现代文：支子，则以宗子的名义命使者。
English: Shishi, on the other hand, is a messenger sent in the name of a son.

古文：弟，则称其兄。
现代文：宗子的同母弟，则以其兄长的名义派遣使者。
English: Sonoko's younger brother by the same mother sent an envoy in the name of his elder brother.

古文：若不亲迎，则妇入三月，然后婿见，曰： 某以得为外昏姻，请觌。 
现代文：如果举行婚礼时新婿因故未去亲迎，则在婚后三月往见新妇的父母。说： 晚辈因为姻亲之故，请求赐见。 
English: If, for some reason, the groom did not go to meet the bride's parents at the time of the wedding, he would go to see the bride's parents in March after the wedding.

古文：主人对曰： 某以得为外昏姻之数，某之子未得濯溉于祭祀，是以未敢见。
现代文：主人的答辞是： 在下与先生缔结姻亲，只因贱女尚未奉侍先生宗庙祭事，所以未敢前往一见。
English: The owner's reply was: I'm marrying my husband's cousin, but I haven't dared to go and see her because she hasn't yet attended the ceremony at her husband's family temple.

古文：今吾子辱，请吾子之就宫，某将走见。 
现代文：今天先生辱临敝舍，请先生回家，在下将前往相见。 
English: Today, I'd like to invite you to my house. Please go home. I'll meet you downstairs.

古文：对曰： 某以非他故，不足以辱命，请终赐见。 
现代文：新婿的答辞是： 晚辈并非外人，岳父之言实不敢当，最终还请赐见。 
English: The new son-in-law's reply was: The younger generation are not outsiders, my father-in-law's words are not to be taken seriously, and finally, I would like to meet you.

古文：对曰： 某得以为昏姻之故，不敢固辞，敢不从！ 
现代文：主人的答辞说： 在下由于姻亲的关系，不敢再推辞，哪敢不从！ 
English: The owner's reply said: Due to the relationship between the in-laws, I no longer dare to refuse, how dare I not follow!

古文：主人出门左，西面。
现代文：主人从寝门东侧出来，面朝西站定。
English: The owner came out from the east side of the sleeping door and stood facing west.

古文：婿入门，东面，奠挚，再拜，出。
现代文：新婿进入大门，面朝东放下礼物，两拜，退出大门。
English: The new son-in-law entered the gate, facing east, put down the gift, bowed twice, and left the gate.

古文：摈者以挚出，请受。
现代文：摈者拿着礼物出门，请新婿接过礼物。
English: The bridegroom goes out with the gift and asks the bridegroom to take it.

古文：婿礼辞，许，受挚，入。
现代文：新婿推辞一番，表示同意，接过礼物进入门内。
English: The new son-in-law declined, expressed his consent, accepted the gift and entered the door.

古文：主人再拜受，婿再拜送，出。
现代文：主人两拜接受礼物，新婿两拜送礼，退出门外。
English: The host accepted the gift twice, the groom gave the gift twice, and left the door.

古文：见主妇，主妇阖扉，立于其内。婿立于门外，东面。
现代文：然后拜见主妇。主妇站在关闭着东边一扇门的寝门之内；新婿面朝东站在门外。
English: Then I met the housewife, who was standing inside the bedroom door, which was closed by a door on the east; the new husband was standing outside the door, facing east.

古文：主妇一拜。
现代文：主妇对新婿一拜，新婿拜两次作答。
English: The housewife bowed to her new son-in-law once, and he bowed to her twice.

古文：婿答再拜，主妇又拜，婿出。
现代文：主妇又对新婿一拜，新婿退出。
English: The housewife also bowed to the new son-in-law, and the new son-in-law withdrew.

古文：主人请醴，及揖让入。醴以一献之礼。
现代文：主人请新婿饮醴，与新婿相揖相让而入，以 一献之礼 款待新婿。
English: The master invited the new son-in-law to drink tea, and entered with the new son-in-law, and treated the new son-in-law with a gift.

古文：主妇荐，奠酬，无币。
现代文：主妇把脯醢进置新婿席前。
English: The housewife places the urn in front of the newlyweds.

古文：婿出，主人送，再拜。
现代文：新婿出门，主人两拜相送。
English: The new son-in-law went out, and the master sent them both away.

