古文：屠维单阏，一年。
现代文：屠维单阏，一年。
English: Tu Wei Shanqi, one year old.

古文：东昏侯上永元元年
现代文：齐东昏侯永元元年
English: Qidong passed away in the first year of the reign of Emperor Yongle

古文：春，正月，戊寅朔，大赦，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，戊寅朔，南齐大赦天下，改年号为永元。
English: Spring, the first month of the year, Wu Yin Shuo, Nanqi general amnesty to the world, changed the year to Yongyuan.

古文：太尉陈显达督平北将军崔慧景等军四万击魏，欲复雍州诸郡；癸未，魏遣前将军元英拒之。
现代文：南齐太尉陈显达督率平北将军崔慧景四万大军出击北魏，想要收复雍州诸郡。癸未北魏派遣前将军元英前去抵抗。
English: Lieutenant Chen Xianda of Nanqi led the 40,000-strong army of General Cui Huijing of the Northern Wei Dynasty to attack the Northern Wei Dynasty, trying to recover the counties of Yongzhou. However, the Northern Wei Dynasty sent the former general Yuan Ying to resist.

古文：乙酉，魏主发鄴。
现代文：乙酉，北魏孝文帝从邺城出发返回洛阳。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty set out from Shicheng and returned to Luoyang.

古文：辛卯，帝祀南郊。
现代文：辛卯，南齐皇帝萧宝卷在南郊祀天。
English: Xinwu and Chen Kuaiyi went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：戊戌，魏主至洛阳，过李冲家。
现代文：戊戌，北魏孝文帝回到洛阳，路过了李冲的坟墓。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty returned to Luoyang, he passed Li Chong's tomb.

古文：时卧疾，望之而泣；见留守官，语及冲，辄流涕。
现代文：当时，孝文帝因病而不能起身，所以望着李冲的坟墓而哭泣。回宫之后，孝文帝见到当时与李冲一同留守洛阳的其他官员，说到李冲，他泪流满面，不胜思念。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen was unable to get up due to illness, so he looked at Li Chong's grave and cried. After returning to the palace, Emperor Xiaowen saw other officials who were staying in Luoyang with Li Chong at that time. When he talked about Li Chong, he was tearful and full of longing.

古文：魏主谓任城王澄曰： 朕离京以来，旧俗少变不？ 
现代文：孝文帝问任城王元澄： 朕离开京城以来，旧的风俗习惯多少得到改变没有？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen asked the appointed king of the city, Yuancheng: Since I left the capital, have the old customs and habits been changed to some extent?

古文：对曰： 圣化日新。 
现代文：元澄回答说： 在圣上的教化之下，风俗日新月异。 
English: Motosumi replied, "Under the enlightenment of the Holy Spirit, customs are changing rapidly.

古文：帝曰： 朕入城，见车上妇人犹戴帽、著小袄，何谓日新！ 
现代文：孝文帝又反问： 朕入城时，看见车上坐的妇女们还戴着帽子，穿着小袄，还是老习俗，这怎么能说是日新月异呢？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowen also asked back: When I entered the city, I saw the women sitting in the car still wearing hats, wearing small coats, or old customs, how can this be said to be changing with each passing day?

古文：对曰： 著者少，不著者多。 
现代文：元澄又回答说： 穿戴的人少，不穿戴的人多。 
English: Motosumi also replied, "Few people wear them, but many don't.

古文：帝曰； 任城，此何言也！
现代文：孝文帝道： 任城王呀，你这说的是什么话呀？
English: Emperor Xiaowen said, "Ren Chengwu, what are you talking about?

古文：必欲使满城尽著邪！ 
现代文：难道你还想让满城妇女都戴帽、穿小袄吗？ 
English: Do you still want women all over the city to wear hats and skirts?

古文：澄与留守官皆免冠谢。
现代文：元澄和其他留守官们都免冠向孝文帝谢罪。
English: Motosumi and the other officials who stayed behind were all pardoned by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：甲辰，魏大赦。
现代文：甲辰，北魏大赦天下。
English: Jia Chen, the Northern Wei Dynasty general amnesty to the world.

古文：魏主之幸鄴也，李彪迎拜于鄴南，且谢罪。
现代文：孝文帝去邺城之时，李彪在邺城南边迎拜了他，并且表示服罪。
English: When Emperor Xiaowen went to Lucheng, Li Biao greeted him on the south side of Lucheng and expressed his repentance.

古文：帝曰： 朕欲用卿，恩李仆射而止。 
现代文：孝文帝对李彪说： 朕想要重新使用你，但是一想起仆射李冲就不打算这样做了。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen said to Li Biao, "I want to use you again, but as soon as I think of shooting Li Chong, I won't do it.

古文：慰而遣之。
现代文：于是，安慰了几句，最后打发他走了。
English: So I consoled him with a few words and finally sent him on his way.

古文：会御史台令史龙文观告： 太子恂被收之日，有手书自理，彪不以闻。 
现代文：恰在这时，御史台令史龙文观报告说： 太子元恂被拘收之日，有一封亲笔信为自己申辩，但是李彪私自押下没有上报。 
English: Just at this time, the imperial historian Shi Longwenqun reported: On the day of Prince Yuancheng's detention, there was a handwritten letter to defend himself, but Li Biao did not report it.

古文：尚书表收彪赴洛阳。
现代文：尚书上表要求拘押李彪到洛阳来审理此事。
English: Shang wrote a petition asking for Li Biao to be detained and brought to Luoyang for trial.

古文：帝以为彪必不然；以牛车散载诣洛阳，会赦，得免。
现代文：孝文帝却认为李彪一定不会那样做的，所以让他坐牛车来洛阳。正好遇上大赦天下，李彪得以幸免。
English: Emperor Xiaowen, however, thought that Li Biao would never do that, so he had him come to Luoyang in an ox-drawn carriage. Li Biao was spared just in time for the amnesty.

古文：魏太保齐郡灵王简卒。
现代文：北魏太保齐郡灵王元简去世。
English: Ling Wang Yuanjian of Qi County, Taipo of the Northern Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：二月，辛亥，魏以咸阳王禧为太尉。
现代文：二月，辛亥，北魏任命咸阳王元禧为太尉。
English: In February, Xinhai, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Xianyang Wang Yuanxi as a lieutenant.

古文：魏主连年在外，冯后私于宦官高菩萨。
现代文：北魏孝文帝连年在外奔忙，冯皇后私通于宦官高菩萨。
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty was busy traveling abroad year after year, and Empress Feng had an affair with eunuch Gao Bodhisattva.

古文：及帝在悬瓠病笃，后益肆意无所惮，中常侍双蒙等为之心腹。
现代文：到了孝文帝在悬瓠病重之时，冯皇后更加肆意乱，无所忌惮，中常侍双蒙等人是她的心腹。
English: By the time Emperor Xiaowen was gravely ill, Empress Feng was even more reckless and unscrupulous, and her closest confidants included Vice Admiral Shuang Meng.

古文：彭城公主为宋王刘昶之妇，寡居。
现代文：北魏彭城公主是宋王刘昶的儿媳妇，守寡而居。
English: Princess Pengcheng of the Northern Wei Dynasty was the daughter-in-law of Song King Liu Bei and lived as a widow.

古文：后为其母弟北平公冯夙求婚，帝许之；公主不愿，后强之。
现代文：冯皇后想要让彭城公主再嫁给她的胞弟北平公冯夙，特意求婚，孝文帝答应了。
English: Empress Feng wanted Princess Pengcheng to remarry her brother Beiping Gong Feng Yao, and specifically proposed marriage. Emperor Xiaowen agreed.

古文：公主密与家僮冒雨诣悬瓠，诉于帝，且具道后所为。
现代文：但是，彭城公主却不愿意，冯皇后就强迫她，彭城公主只好秘密地与家中的仆人一起冒雨赶到悬瓠，把冯皇后逼婚的情况告诉了孝文帝，并且还把冯皇后与人私通的事也讲了。
English: However, Princess Pengcheng did not want to, so Empress Feng forced her to leave. Princess Pengcheng had no choice but to secretly drive to the gallows in the rain with the servants of the family. She told Emperor Xiaowen about the forced marriage of Empress Feng, and also told about Empress Feng's adultery.

古文：帝疑而秘之。
现代文：孝崐文帝听后心有疑端，但秘而不宣。
English: After hearing this, the filial piety Emperor Wen had doubts, but he kept it a secret.

古文：后闻之，始惧。阴与母常氏使女巫厌祷，曰： 帝疾若不起，一旦得如文明太后辅少主称制者，当赏报不赀。 
现代文：冯皇后知道风声之后，开始害怕了，因此私下里经常与自己的母亲常氏在一起让女巫祈祷鬼神降灾于孝文帝，诅咒他快快死去，许愿说： 皇帝的病如果好不了，一旦我能象文明太后那样辅佐少帝垂帘听政的话，定将重加赏报，不计其量。 
English: After learning of the rumor, Empress Feng began to be afraid. Therefore, in private, she often went with her mother, Changshi, to have the witch pray for evil spirits to fall on Emperor Xiaowen, curse him to die soon, and make a wish: "If the emperor's illness does not get better, once I can assist the young emperor in listening to the government like the Empress Dowager of Civilization, I will definitely be rewarded heavily, beyond measure."

古文：帝还洛，收高菩萨、双蒙等，案问，具伏。
现代文：孝文帝回到洛阳之后，收拘了高菩萨、双蒙等人，加以审问，全都招供认罪。
English: After Emperor Xiaowen returned to Luoyang, he arrested Gao Bodhisattva, Shuang Meng and others, interrogated them, and they all confessed.

古文：帝在含温室，夜引后入，赐坐东楹，去御榻二丈馀，命菩萨等陈状。
现代文：于是，孝文帝坐在含温室，到了夜间让冯皇后进去，叫她坐在东边屋子里，离自己的坐榻有两丈多远，然后命令高菩萨等人坦白交待与皇后乱之事。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen sat in the conservatory, and at night he let Empress Feng in, and told her to sit in the east room, how far away from his own bed, and then ordered Gao Bodhisattva and others to confess to the queen.

古文：既而召彭城王勰、北海王详入坐，曰： 昔为汝嫂，今是路人，但入勿避！ 
现代文：然后，孝文帝又把彭城王元勰、北海王元详两人召进去，让他们坐下，并且指着冯皇后对他们说： 过去她是你们的嫂子，从今开始就是两旁路人了，所以只管进来勿须回避。 
English: Then, Emperor Xiaowen called Wang Yuanjun of Pengcheng and Wang Yuanjie of Beihai into the room, made them sit down, and said to them, pointing to Empress Feng, "In the past, she was your sister-in-law. From now on, she is a passer-by, so just come in and don't avoid her."

古文：又曰： 此妪欲手刃吾胁！吾以文明太后家女，不能废，但虚置宫中，有心庶能自死；汝等勿谓吾犹有情也。 
现代文：接着又说： 这老妇人想要拿刀刺我的胁下，我因她是文明太后家的女儿，不能废掉她，只是把她虚置在宫中，她如果有廉耻之心的话，或许能自取一死。所以，你们不要以为我还对她有什么情份。 
English: Then he added: "This old woman is threatening to stab me with a knife. I cannot dispose of her because she is the daughter of the Empress Dowager. I have only placed her in the palace. If she had a sense of shame, she might have taken her own life. Therefore, don't think that I have any feelings for her.

古文：二王出，赐后辞诀；后再拜，稽首涕泣。入居后宫。
现代文：彭城王和北海王出去了，孝文帝问冯皇后最后还有什么话要说，冯皇后再次向孝文帝行拜礼，跪地磕头，涕泣不已，然后离开了孝文帝。
English: After King Pengcheng and King Beihai left, Emperor Xiaowen asked Empress Feng what she had to say at the end. Empress Feng once again bowed to Emperor Xiaowen, kneeled, bowed her head and cried, and then left Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：诸嫔御奉之犹如后礼，唯命太子不复朝谒而已。
现代文：冯皇后回到后宫幽居，诸嫔妃们还照样对她施行皇后之礼，只是命令太子不再每天早晨去向她请安。
English: Empress Feng returned to live in seclusion in the harem, and the concubines still gave her the salute of empress, but ordered the prince not to go to her every morning to greet her.

古文：初，冯熙以文明太后之兄尚恭宗女博陵长公主。
现代文：起初，冯熙以文明太后哥哥的身份娶景穆太子的女儿博陵长公主为妻。
English: At first, Feng Xi married Princess Boling, the daughter of Prince Jingmu, as the elder brother of the Empress Dowager.

古文：熙有三女，二为皇后，一为左昭仪，由是冯氏贵宠冠群臣，赏赐累巨万。
现代文：冯熙有三个女儿，两个为皇后，一个是左昭仪，因此冯氏家族宠贵冠于群臣之上，仅朝廷所给之赏赐就累计在亿万之上。
English: Feng Xi has three daughters, two are empresses, one is Zuo Zhaoyi, so the Feng family is favored above the courtiers, and the rewards given by the court alone have accumulated to hundreds of millions.

古文：公主生二子： 诞、修。
现代文：博陵长公主生了两个儿子，即冯诞和冯。
English: The eldest princess of Baoling gave birth to two sons, namely Feng Xing and Feng.

古文：熙为太保，诞为司徒，修为侍中、尚书，庶子聿为黄门郎。
现代文：冯熙本人任太保，其子冯诞任司徒，冯任侍中、尚书，冯熙的妾所生儿子冯聿任黄门郎。
English: Feng Xi himself held the position of eunuch, his son Feng Zhizhong held the position of tutor, Feng served as chamberlain and secretary, and the son of Feng Xi's concubine, Feng Yu, held the position of huangmenlang.

古文：黄门侍郎崔光与聿同直，谓聿曰： 君家富贵太盛，终必衰败。 
现代文：黄门侍郎崔光与冯聿一同在禁中当值，崔光对冯隶说： 您家荣华富贵太过头了，物极必反，最后一定要衰败。 
English: Huangmen waiter Cui Guang and Feng Qi were on duty together in the Forbidden City. Cui Guang said to Feng Li: Your family's glory and wealth are too over the top, it is bound to backfire, and eventually it must decline.

古文：聿曰： 我家何所负，而君无谅诅我！ 
现代文：冯聿一听不高兴了，回答说： 我家有何对不起您的地方，您为什么要这样无缘无故地诅咒我呢？ 
English: Unhappy to hear this, Feng Xuan replied: "What is it about my family that makes you feel sorry for me? Why would you curse me like this for no reason?

古文：光曰： 不然。
现代文：崔光又说： 哪里是诅咒你。
English: Cui Guang also said: Where is the curse on you?

古文：物盛必衰，此天地之常理。
现代文：世上万事万物，盛极而衰，这是天地的常理。
English: All things in the world rise and fall, this is the common sense of heaven and earth.

古文：若以古事推之，不可不慎。 
现代文：如果以古事来推论，您对此不可不慎重呀。 
English: If you're going to extrapolate from the past, you have to be careful.

古文：后岁馀而修败。
现代文：果然，一年多之后，冯就出事垮台了。
English: Sure enough, more than a year later, Feng had an accident and collapsed.

古文：修性浮竞，诞屡戒之，不悛，乃白于太后及帝而杖之。
现代文：冯性情浮华，好争好斗，冯诞屡次告戒他，然而终无悔改之迹，于是就上告文明太后和孝文帝，用棍杖狠狠教训了他一顿。
English: Feng Xizhong repeatedly warned Feng Xizhong, who had a flashy and combative nature, but there was no sign of repentance. Therefore, Feng Xizhong sued the Empress Dowager of Civilization and Emperor Xiaowen, and gave him a severe beating with a cane.

古文：修由是恨诞，求药，使诞左右毒之。
现代文：因此，冯非常记恨冯诞，于是找来毒药，让冯诞左右的人下药毒死冯诞。
English: Therefore, Feng hated Feng Zhao very much, so he found poison and let the people around Feng Zhao poison Feng Zhao.

古文：事觉，帝欲诛之，诞自引咎，恳乞其生。
现代文：事情败露之后，孝文帝准备杀掉冯，冯诞却引咎自责，恳切地乞求孝文帝放他一条生路。
English: After the affair was exposed, Emperor Xiaowen prepared to kill Feng, but Feng Xizhe blamed himself and earnestly begged Emperor Xiaowen to let him live.

古文：帝亦以其父老，杖修百馀，黜为平城民。
现代文：孝文帝也考虑到他们的父亲年事已高，就饶冯不死，而只是打了他一百多杖，贬为平城平民。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also considered that their father was too old, so he did not kill Rao Feng, but only beat him with more than a hundred canes and reduced him to a civilian of Pingcheng.

古文：及诞、熙继卒，幽后寻废，聿亦摈弃，冯氏遂衰。
现代文：等到冯诞、冯熙相继去世之后，不久冯皇后被废，冯聿也被摒弃不用，于是冯氏家族从此衰落。
English: After the deaths of Feng Xizhun and Feng Xi in succession, Empress Feng was soon dethroned, and Feng Yao was also abandoned, and the Feng family fell into decline.

古文：癸亥，魏以彭城王勰为司徒。
现代文：北魏任命彭城王无勰为司徒。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Pengcheng Wang Wuzhong as a scholar.

古文：陈显达与魏元英战，屡破之。
现代文：南齐陈显达与北魏元英交战，陈显达屡胜元英。
English: Southern Qi Chen Xianda fought against Northern Wei Yuan Ying. Chen Xianda repeatedly defeated Yuan Ying.

古文：攻马圈城四十日，城中食尽，啖死人肉及树皮。
现代文：南齐军队围攻马圈城，整整围困了四十天，城中粮食尽绝，只好吃死人肉和树皮。
English: The Nanqi army besieged the city of Ma Hui, completely besieged for forty days. There was no food in the city, so they had to eat dead human flesh and tree bark.

古文：癸酉，魏人突围走，斩获千计。
现代文：癸酉，北魏人马突围逃走，被南齐军队斩获上千人。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei people broke out of the encirclement and fled, and the Nanqi army captured thousands of people.

古文：显达入城，将士竞取城中绢，遂不穷追。
现代文：陈显达率部入城，将士们争相掠取城中的绢匹，因此没有去追击北魏逃兵。
English: Chen Xianda led his troops into the city, and the soldiers scrambled to loot the horses in the city, so they did not go after the Northern Wei deserters.

古文：显达又遣军主庄丘黑进击南乡，拔之。
现代文：陈显达又派军主庄丘黑进击南崐乡，也占领了该地。
English: Chen Xianda also sent the commander Zhuang Qiuhe to attack Nanlu Township and occupied the place.

古文：魏主谓任城王澄曰： 显达侵扰，朕不亲行，无以制之。 
现代文：北魏孝文帝对任城王元澄说： 陈显达率兵来侵扰，朕如果不亲自出征，就无法抵制住他。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty said to the king of Rencheng, Yuancheng: Chen Xianda led an army to invade, if I did not personally go to war, I could not resist him.

古文：三月，庚辰，魏主发洛阳，命于烈居守，以右卫将军宋弁兼祠部尚书，摄七兵事以佐之。
现代文：三月庚辰，孝文帝率兵从洛阳出发，命令于烈留守洛阳，又任命右卫将军宋弁兼任祠部尚书，代理尚书七兵曹事，协助于烈。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaowen led an army from Luoyang and ordered Yu Rong to stay in Luoyang. He also appointed the right guard general Song Ben to serve as the chief priest of the ancestral hall, acting as the chief priest and seven sergeants to assist Yu Rong.

古文：弁精勤吏治，恩遇亚于李冲。
现代文：宋弁为人兢兢业业，尽职尽责，孝文帝对他的恩遇仅次于李冲。
English: Song Ben was a conscientious and diligent person. Emperor Xiaowen's favor to him was second only to Li Chong.

古文：癸未，魏主至梁城。
现代文：癸未，北魏孝文帝到达梁城。
English: Soon after, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived in Liangcheng.

古文：崔慧景攻魏顺阳，顺阳太守清河张烈固守；甲申，魏主遣振威将军慕容平城将骑五千救之。
现代文：南齐崔慧景进攻北魏顺阳，顺阳太守清河人张烈顽强固守。甲申，孝文帝派遣振威将军慕容平城率领骑兵五千去援救张烈。
English: Nanqi Cui Huijing attacked Shunyang in the Northern Wei Dynasty, Shunyang's eunuch Zhang Lie stubbornly defended. In Jiaxing, Emperor Xiaowen sent Zhenwei General Murong Pingcheng with 5,000 cavalry to rescue Zhang Lie.

古文：自魏主有疾，彭城王勰常居中侍医药，昼夜不离左右，饮食必先尝而后进，蓬首垢面，衣不解带。
现代文：自从孝文帝患病之后，彭城王元勰经常住在宫中，侍奉孝文帝看病吃药，昼夜不离其左右，凡是给孝文帝的饮食，他一定先尝一下然后才进上，如此日夜辛劳，以致蓬首垢面，衣不解带，不能好好地睡上一觉。
English: Ever since Emperor Xiaowen fell ill, Wang Yuanjun of Pengcheng often lived in the palace. He served Emperor Xiaowen to see the doctor and take medicine. He never left his side day and night. He always tasted the food given to Emperor Xiaowen before he ate it. He worked so hard day and night that his head was dirty, his clothes were untied, and he couldn't sleep well.

古文：帝久疾多忿，近侍失指，动欲诛斩。勰承颜伺间，多所匡救。
现代文：孝文帝由于久病而脾气急躁，在身旁侍奉他的人稍稍有点不如意，动不动就让斩了，元勰瞅他情绪好的时候乘机言劝，救了不少人的性命。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was short-tempered due to his long-term illness. The people who served him around him were a little unsatisfactory, and they were cut off at every turn. When Yuan Shao was in a good mood, he took the opportunity to persuade and saved the lives of many people.

古文：丙戌，以勰为使持节、都督中外诸军事。勰辞曰： 臣侍疾无暇，安能治军！
现代文：丙戌，孝文帝任命元勰为使持节、都督中外诸军事，元勰辞而不受，说： 我要侍奉护理圣上养病，没有闲暇，怎么还能统管军队呢？
English: On the other hand, Emperor Xiaowen appointed Yuan Shikun as the envoy of the festival and the military governor of various provinces. Yuan Shikun did not accept the resignation, saying: I want to serve the nursing saint to recover from illness, I have no leisure time, how can I still control the army?

古文：愿更请一王，使总军要，臣得专心医药。 
现代文：希望另外请一个藩王，让他来掌握军权，以便我能专心护理圣上。 
English: I hope to invite another lord of the domain to take over the military power, so that I can concentrate on the care of the saint.

古文：帝曰： 侍疾、治军，皆凭于汝。
现代文：孝文帝不同意，说： 护理、掌管军队两样事情，全都依托于你。
English: Emperor Xiaowen disagreed, saying: "The two things of nursing and controlling the army all depend on you.

古文：吾病如此，深虑不济；安六军、保社稷者，舍汝而谁！
现代文：我病到这个样子，深深地感到恐怕不行了，而安定六军、保卫社稷者，除了你还能有谁呢？
English: I am so ill that I deeply feel that I can't do it any more, but who else can there be but you, the leader of the Stable Sixth Army and the protector of society?

古文：何容方更请人以违心寄乎！ 
现代文：你哪能让我违背自己的心意而另外再请别人来担当此重托呢？ 
English: How can you make me go against my own wishes and ask someone else to take on this important task?

古文：丁酉，魏主至马圈，命荆州刺史广阳王嘉断均口，邀齐兵归路。
现代文：丁酉，北魏孝文帝到达马圈，并命令荆州刺史广阳王元嘉截断均口，以阻拦南齐军队的退路。
English: Ding Jun, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen arrived at the stables, and ordered the Jingzhou prince Guangyang Wang Yuanjia to cut off the average mouth, in order to block the retreat of the Nanqi army.

古文：嘉，建之子也。
现代文：元嘉是元建的儿子。
English: Yuan Jia is the son of Yuan Jian.

古文：陈显达引兵渡水西，据鹰子山筑城；人情沮恐，与魏战，屡败。
现代文：陈显达领兵渡过均水，到达西岸，占据了鹰子山，并在山上修筑城堡。但是，由于士气不振，人人情绪沮丧，心存恐惧，所以与北魏军队交战，屡战屡败。
English: Chen Xianda led the troops across the Hunshui River and reached the west coast, occupied Yingzi Mountain and built a castle on the mountain. However, due to low morale, everyone was depressed and fearful, so they fought with the Northern Wei army and lost many battles.

古文：魏武卫将军元嵩免胄陷陈，将士随之，齐兵大败。
现代文：北魏武卫将军元嵩除去甲胄，带头冲锋陷阵，其他将士们紧随而上，打得南齐军队溃不成军。
English: Northern Wei Wuwei General Yuan Song removed his armor and took the lead in the charge, other soldiers followed, and the Nanqi army was defeated.

古文：嵩，澄之弟也。
现代文：元嵩是元澄的弟弟。
English: Mototake is Motosumi's younger brother.

古文：戊戌，夜，军主崔恭祖、胡松以乌布幔盛显达，数人担之，间道自分碛山出均水口南走。
现代文：戍戌，南齐军主崔恭祖、胡松用乌布幔把陈显达装进去，几个人抬着，抄小道从分碛山出均水口向南逃去。
English: At that time, the leader of the South Qi Army, Cui Gongzu, and Hu Song loaded Chen Xinda into a wicker basket, and several people carried him, and they fled southward along a path from the junction of the Fenwei Mountains.

古文：己亥，魏收显达军资亿计，班赐将士，追奔至汉水而还。
现代文：己亥，北魏收缴陈显达丢弃下的军用物资以亿计数，全部分赐给将士们，又追击南齐逃军至汉水，然后才返回。
English: At the same time, the Northern Wei Dynasty collected hundreds of millions of military supplies abandoned by Chen Xianda, and gave all of them to the soldiers. They also chased the fleeing troops from Nanqi to Hanshui, and then returned.

古文：左军将军张千战死，士卒死者三万馀人。
现代文：南齐左军将军张千战死，士卒阵亡的有三万多人。
English: Zhang Qian, the general of the Nanqi Left Army, was killed in the battle, and more than 30,000 soldiers were killed.

古文：显达之北伐，军入汋均口。广平冯道根说显达曰： 汋均水迅急，易进难退；魏若守隘，则首尾俱急。
现代文：陈显达率部北伐时，军队进入均口，广平人冯道根劝说陈显达： 均水水流湍急，前进容易，后退却难，北魏如果据守隘关，那么我们的部队首尾崐都会受挫。
English: When Chen Xianda led the Northern Expedition, the army entered the average mouth, and the Guangping people, Feng Dogen, persuaded Chen Xianda: The average water flow is rapid, it is easy to advance, but it is difficult to retreat. If the Northern Wei maintains the pass, then our troops will be frustrated at every turn.

古文：不如悉弃船于酂城，陆道步进，列营相次，鼓行而前，破之必矣。 
现代文：所以，不如弃船于城，改由陆路步行而进，军营前后相次，擂鼓进军，一定能攻破对方。 
English: Therefore, it is better to abandon the ship in the city and advance on foot by land instead. The military camps will advance one after another, and the drums will march in. They will surely be able to break through the other side.

古文：显达不从。
现代文：然而，陈显达没有采纳。
English: However, Chen Xianda did not adopt it.

古文：道根以私属从军，及显达夜走，军人不知山路，道根每及险要，辄停马指示之，众赖以全。
现代文：冯道根是以陈显达的私属的身份随军，陈显达夜间逃跑，军人们不熟悉山路，每到险要地方，冯道根都要停下马来给他们指路，众人全凭他才得以生还。
English: Feng Dogen followed the army as Chen Xianda's personal servant. Chen Xianda fled at night. The soldiers were not familiar with the mountain roads. Whenever they came to a dangerous place, Feng Dogen had to stop his horse to show them the way. All of them were able to survive thanks to him.

古文：诏以道根为汋均口戍副。
现代文：因此，朝廷诏令冯道根为均口戍副。
English: As a result, the imperial court decreed that Feng Dogen should be promoted to vice-premier.

古文：显达素有威名，至是大损。
现代文：陈显达素有威名，但是这次却一败涂地。
English: Chen Xianda has a reputation, but this time he failed miserably.

古文：御史中丞范岫奏免显达官，显达亦自表解职；皆不许，更以显达为江州刺史。
现代文：御史中丞范岫上奏朝廷请求罢免陈显达的官职，陈显达也自动上表请求解除职务，但是都没有得到批准，改任陈显达为江州刺史。
English: The imperial court requested the dismissal of Chen Xianda, and Chen Xianda also automatically petitioned to be relieved of his duties. However, neither request was approved, and Chen Xianda was appointed as the official historian of Jiangzhou.

古文：崔慧景亦弃顺阳走还。
现代文：崔慧景也丢弃顺阳逃跑回来。
English: Cui Huijing also abandoned Shunyang and fled back.

古文：庚子，魏主疾甚，北还，至谷塘原，谓司徒勰曰： 后宫久乖阴德，吾死之后，可赐自尽，葬以后礼，庶免冯门之丑。 
现代文：庚子，北魏孝文帝病危，只好北还，到达谷塘原时，孝文帝对司徒元勰说： 冯皇后长久以来不守妇道，乖违后德，我死之后，可以赐她自尽，以皇后之礼仪加以安葬，庶可免去冯氏家门之丑。 
English: Geng Zi, Northern Wei Emperor Xiaowen was critically ill, so he had to return to the north. When he arrived in Gutangyuan, Emperor Xiaowen said to Stowe Yuan Zang: Empress Feng has not followed the women's way for a long time, and disobeyed the posterity. After I die, I can let her commit suicide and be buried with the queen's etiquette, and I can get rid of the ugliness of the Feng family.

古文：又曰： 吾病益恶，殆必不起。
现代文：又说道： 我的病越来越严重了，大约一定好不了的。
English: He also said, "My illness is getting worse and worse, and I probably won't get better."

古文：虽摧破显达，而天下未平，嗣子幼弱，社稷所倚，唯在于汝。
现代文：这次虽然打垮了陈显达，然而天下并没有平定，继位的儿子又年纪幼小，所以江山社稷就全依靠你了。
English: Although Chen Xianda was defeated this time, the world has not been pacified, and the son who succeeded to the throne is still very young. Therefore, the country and society are entirely dependent on you.

古文：霍子孟、诸葛孔明以异姓受顾托，况汝亲贤，可不勉之！ 
现代文：当年霍光、诸葛孔明都以外姓人的身份而分别受到汉武帝、昭烈帝刘备之重托，况且你是骨肉之亲，能不勉力承担吗？ 
English: At that time, Huo Guang and Zhuge Kongming were both entrusted by Emperor Hanwu and Emperor Liu Bei, respectively, as people with foreign surnames. Moreover, you are a flesh-and-blood relative, can you not bear it?

古文：勰泣曰： 布衣之士，犹为知己毕命；况臣托灵先帝，依陛下之末光乎！
现代文：元勰哭着说道： 布衣之士，还能做到为知己而死，况且我又是先帝的儿子，又是陛下的兄弟呢！
English: Wailing, Yuan said, "A man of the cloth can still die for his friend. Moreover, I am the son of the former emperor and the brother of His Majesty!"

古文：但臣以至亲，久参机要，宠灵辉赫，海内莫及；所以敢受而不辞，正恃陛下日月之明，恕臣忘退之过耳。
现代文：但是，我以至亲的身份，长期参于朝廷的机要大事，由于得到圣上不平常的宠遇，身重朝野，举国上下没有谁能比得上，之所以敢于接受圣上的重任而不加推辞，正是有恃于陛下之圣明，可以宽恕我知进忘退之过失。
English: However, I, as a close relative, have long participated in the important affairs of the Imperial Court. Due to the unusual favors received from His Holiness, there is no one in the country who can match the weight of the court and the country. The reason why I dared to accept the important duties of His Holiness without hesitation is precisely because of His Holiness's holiness, which can forgive my mistake of forgetting to advance.

古文：今复任以元宰，总握机政；震主之声，取罪必矣。
现代文：现在，圣上又委任我为朝臣之首，总握军机朝政大权，这样势必有人要议论我震主越上，一定会因此而获罪。
English: Now, His Holiness has appointed me to be the head of the Imperial Court and to hold the supreme military and political power of the Imperial Court. As a result, there are bound to be people who want to discuss my ascension to the throne, and they will certainly be punished for doing so.

古文：昔周公大圣，成王至明，犹不免疑，而况臣乎！
现代文：过去周公是大圣之人，周成王也是圣明之君，但是犹不免对周公产生疑心，何况是我呢？
English: In the past, Zhou Gong was a holy man, and Zhou Cheng Wang was also a holy king, but I still have doubts about Zhou Gong, let alone me?

古文：如此，则陛下爱臣，更为未尽始终之美。 
现代文：这样的话，那么陛下虽然爱我，可是并不能自始自终一以贯之，最终怕要害了我呀。 
English: In that case, although His Majesty loves me, he cannot be consistent from beginning to end, and he may end up harming me.

古文：帝默然久之，曰： 详思汝言，理实难夺。 
现代文：孝文帝听了之后，沉思良久，最后说： 细细思量你说的话，从道理上实在难以反驳。 
English: After listening to him, Emperor Xiaowen pondered for a long time, and finally said: "If you carefully consider what you said, it is really difficult to refute it from the point of view of reason.

古文：乃手诏太子曰： 汝叔父勰，清规懋赏，与白云俱洁；厌荣舍绂，以松竹为心。
现代文：于是，孝文帝亲手给太子写下诏令： 你的叔父元勰，以自己的言行树立了一个很好的榜样，所以被授官以资勉励，其节操如白云一样纯洁；他不贪图荣华富贵，以官爵为身外之物，其素心如松柏翠竹。
English: As a result, Emperor Xiaowen personally wrote an edict to the prince: Your uncle Yuan Zheng, with his words and deeds, has set a good example, so he was awarded a post to encourage him. His discipline is as pure as a white cloud; he does not covet glory and wealth. He regards the peerage as an external thing, and his heart is like a pine tree.

古文：吾少与绸缪，未忍睽离。
现代文：我自小与他一起相处，从来不忍心分离。
English: I've been with him since I was a child and I've never had the heart to leave him.

古文：百年之后，其听勰辞蝉舍冕，遂其冲挹之性。 
现代文：我离开人世之后，你要准许元勰辞去官职，脱身俗务，以便顺从他谦虚自抑的性格。 
English: After I pass away, you should allow Yuan Xuan to resign from his official position and withdraw from worldly affairs in order to follow his humble and self-restrained character.

古文：以侍中、护军将军北海王详为司空，镇南将军王肃为尚书令，镇南大将军广阳王嘉为左仆射，尚书宋弁为吏部尚书，与侍中、太尉禧、尚书右仆射，尚书宋弁为吏部尚书，与侍中、太尉禧、尚书右仆射澄等六人辅政。
现代文：孝文帝又任侍中、护军将军北海王元详为司空，镇南将军王肃为尚书令，镇南大将军广阳王元嘉为左仆射，尚书宋弁为吏部尚书，令他们与侍中、太尉元禧以及尚书右仆射元澄等六人共同辅佐朝政。夏季，四月，丙午朔，孝文帝病死于谷塘原。
English: Emperor Xiaowen also appointed the attendant and escort general Beihai Wangyuan Ju as the deputy commander, the Zhenan general Wang Su as the secretary, the Zhenan general Guangyang Wangyuan Jia as the left-hand servant, and the secretary Song Ben as the official, so that they and the attendant, the lieutenant Yuanxi and the right-hand servant of the secretary Yuan Cheng and other six people jointly assisted the imperial government. In the summer, in April, at noon, Emperor Xiaowen died of illness in Gu Tangyuan.

古文：夏，四月，丙午朔，殂于谷塘原。高祖友爱诸弟，始终无间。
现代文：孝文帝对他的几个弟弟非常爱护，彼此始终没有产生隔阂。
English: Emperor Xiaowen was very fond of his younger brothers, and there was never any estrangement between them.

古文：尝从容谓咸阳王禧等曰： 我后子孙解逅不肖，汝等观望，可辅则辅之，不可辅则取之，勿为它人有也。 
现代文：一次，他曾从崐容地对咸阳王元禧等说： 我死之后，子孙们如果不肖，你们看情况而办，可以辅佐则辅佐，不可辅佐则取而代之，千万不要让江山为他人所有。 
English: On one occasion, he said to Xianyang King Yuanxi and others with a straight face: "After my death, if my descendants are not good-looking, you can do it according to the situation, you can assist, you can assist, you can't assist, you can replace them. Don't let the country be owned by others.

古文：亲任贤能，从善如流，精勤庶务，朝夕不倦。常曰： 人主患不能处心公平，推诚于物。能是二者，则胡、越之人皆可使如兄弟矣。 
现代文：孝文帝能亲近贤士，选用才能，从善如流，精勤庶务，朝夕不倦，常常说： 一国之主患在不能用心公平，以诚待人，如果能做到这两点的话，即使是胡、越之人也可以使他们成为兄弟。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen was able to get close to the sages, select talent, follow the virtuous path, diligently do general affairs, and never get tired. He often said: The main problem of a country is that it cannot be fair and treat people with sincerity. If these two points can be achieved, even the Hu and Yue people can make them brothers.

古文：用法虽严，于大臣无所容贷，然人有小过，常多阔略。
现代文：他用法虽然严厉，对于大臣们，只要有罪，绝不姑且宽容。但是，如果别人有小过失，又常能宽大而不计较。
English: His use of the law, though severe, was by no means indulgent to ministers, as long as they were guilty. However, if others had minor faults, they were often lenient and did not care.

古文：尝于食中得虫，又左右进羹误伤帝手，皆笑而赦之。
现代文：有一次，他在饭中发现了虫子，又有一次手下人进羹时不小心烫了他的手，他都笑而宽恕，没有治罪。
English: Once, he found a worm in his meal, and another time a subordinate accidentally burned his hand when he was making soup. He laughed and forgave, and did not punish.

古文：天地五郊、宗庙二分之祭，未尝不身亲其礼。
现代文：凡是天地五郊、宗庙二分的祭祀，他都亲自参加。
English: He personally participated in all the rituals that took place in the five suburbs of heaven and earth and in the two sub-temples of the patriarchate.

古文：每出巡游及用兵，有司奏修道路，帝辄曰： 粗修桥梁，通车马而已，勿去草铲令平也。 
现代文：每次出外巡游以及用兵讨伐，有关官员奏告要修筑道路，孝文帝总是说： 简单修理一下桥梁，能通过车马就行了，不要铲除杂草、填修平整。 
English: Every time he went on a foreign tour or sent troops to fight, the officials concerned would report that a road needed to be built. Emperor Xiaowen always said, "Simply repair the bridge so that it can be used by horses and carriages. Don't remove weeds, fill in and level it."

古文：在淮南行兵，如在境内，禁士卒无得践伤粟稻；或伐民树以供军用，皆留绢偿之。
现代文：他在淮南行军讨伐时，如在本国境内一样，严禁士卒们践踏损坏稻谷作物，如果要砍伐百姓的树木以供军用，都留下绢帛作为抵偿。
English: When he went on a crusade in Huainan, as in his own country, it was strictly forbidden for soldiers to trample on damaged rice crops, and if they wanted to cut down people's trees for military use, they had to leave earthworms as compensation.

古文：宫室非不得已不修，衣弊，浣濯而服之，鞍勒用铁木而已。
现代文：他所住的宫室不到万不得已之时不许修理，衣服穿旧了，浆洗一下仍旧穿用，坐骑的鞍勒唯用铁木而已。
English: The palace room he lived in was not allowed to be repaired until it was absolutely necessary. His clothes were worn out and could still be worn after being washed. The saddles on his horse were made of ironwood only.

古文：幼多力善射，能以指弹碎羊骨，射禽兽无不命中；及年十五，遂不复畋猎。
现代文：他少年时候力气大，善于射箭，能用手指头弹碎羊的骨头，射猎禽兽没有不射中的。
English: When he was a boy, he was strong and good at archery. He could use his fingers to break the bones of sheep, and he could not miss when shooting game animals.

古文：常谓史官曰： 时事不可以不直书。人君威福在己，无能制之者；若史策复不书其恶，将何所畏忌邪！ 
现代文：到了十五岁时，他就不再射猎了，常常对史官说： 当朝时事，不可不如实记载，皇帝的威福由己，没有能制止他的，如果史官再不记录下他的恶行的话，那他还有什么可畏忌的呢？ 
English: When he reached the age of fifteen, he stopped shooting. He often said to the historian: It is impossible to record the current affairs of the day as truthfully as possible. The emperor's power was his own and nothing could stop him. If the historian does not record his evil deeds, then what else is there to be afraid of?

古文：彭城王勰与任城王澄谋，以陈显达去尚未远，恐其覆相掩逼，乃秘不发丧，徙御卧舆，唯二王与左右数人知之。
现代文：彭城王元勰与任城王元澄一起商谋，考虑到陈显达逃离还不太远，恐怕他知道孝文帝的死讯后要回过头来攻击，所以决定不向外宣布孝文帝的死讯，秘不发丧，而照样把孝文帝的尸身置于他平时用的车舆之中赶路，只有彭城王、任城王以及左右的几个人知道实情。
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng conspired together. Considering that Chen Xianda was not far from fleeing, I am afraid that he knew that he would turn back to attack after the death of Emperor Xiaowen. Therefore, he decided not to announce the death of Emperor Xiaowen to the outside world, and not to grieve secretly. Instead, he still placed the body of Emperor Xiaowen in the middle of his usual car to hurry. Only Pengcheng King, Rencheng King and a few people around them knew the truth.

古文：勰出入神色无异，奉膳，进药，可决外奏，一如平日。
现代文：元勰出入其中神色如同平常，又是奉侍膳食，又是进药送汤，处理外面的各种启奏，一如平日那样。
English: In and out of the room, Geng Yao looked as usual, serving meals, giving medicine and soup, and dealing with the various incidents outside, just as on an ordinary day.

古文：数日，至宛城，夜，进卧舆于郡听事，得加棺敛，还载卧舆内，外莫有知者。
现代文：数日之后，到达宛城，乘着夜间，把载有其尸体的车舆拉到郡署中庭，才把他装敛入棺材之中，然后仍将棺材载于车舆之中，外人没有知道其实情的。
English: A few days later, he arrived at Wancheng, and during the night, he pulled the wagon containing his body to the courtyard of the county station, and then he was placed in a coffin, and then the coffin was still carried in the wagon. Outsiders did not know the circumstances.

古文：遣中书舍人张儒奉诏征太子；密以凶问告留守于烈。
现代文：他们又派遣中书舍人张儒奉旨召太子前来，并且秘密地把孝文帝的死讯告知留守洛阳的于烈。
English: They also sent the Chinese scholar Zhang Ru to summon the prince, and secretly informed Yu Lie, who was staying in Luoyang, of Emperor Xiaowen's death.

古文：烈处分行留，举止无变。
现代文：于烈安排布置谁随同前去，谁留守洛阳，举止形态一如平常。
English: Yu Li arranged the arrangement of who would go with him and who would stay in Luoyang, and their behavior was as usual.

古文：太子至鲁阳，遇梓宫，乃发丧；丁巳，即位，大赦。
现代文：太子到达鲁阳，遇上了孝文帝的灵柩，这才正式为孝文帝发丧。丁巳，太子元恪即位，大赦天下。
English: When the prince arrived in Luyang, he encountered the coffin of Emperor Xiaowen, and it was only then that the funeral was officially held for Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：彭城王勰跪授遣敕数纸。
现代文：彭城王元勰跪着交给元恪数页写有孝文帝的遗敕的纸张。
English: Pengcheng Wang Yuanjun kneeled down and handed Yuanku several pages of paper with the widow of Emperor Xiaowen written on it.

古文：东宫官属多疑勰有异志，密防之，而勰推诚尽礼，卒无间隙。
现代文：元恪为东宫太子时手下的属官们大都怀疑元勰有异心，因此严加防范，然而元勰对这些东宫官属们推诚布公，礼数周到，终于消除了相互之间的间隙。
English: When Yuan Ke was the crown prince of the Eastern Court, most of the subordinate officials under his command suspected that Yuan Ke had other intentions, so they took strict precautions. However, Yuan Ke was sincere and sincere to these subordinate officials of the Eastern Court, and the etiquette was thoughtful, and finally eliminated the gap between each other.

古文：咸阳王禧至鲁阳，留城外以察其变。久之，乃入，谓勰曰： 汝此行不唯勤劳，亦实危险。 
现代文：咸阳王元禧到达鲁阳，没有进城，留在城外观察有无事变，很久之后，见元勰不存异图，方才进入城内。元禧进城之后，对元勰说： 你的这一次行动，不但操劳辛苦，而且实在危险。 
English: Xianyang King Yuanxi arrived in Luyang, but did not enter the city. He stayed outside the city to observe whether there were any incidents. After a long time, he saw that Yuanxi did not have any plans and entered the city. After Yuanxi entered the city, he said to Yuanxi: This action of yours is not only hard work, but also really dangerous.

古文：勰曰： 兄年长识高，故知有夷险；彦和握蛇骑虎，不觉艰难。 
现代文：元勰回答说： 兄长年纪大、见识高，所以知道有危险，彦和我此番经历，不啻于握蛇骑虎，然而不觉有多么艰难。 
English: Yuan Yuan replied, "My elder brother is older and more knowledgeable, so he knew there was danger. What Hiko and I experienced this time was like holding a snake and riding a tiger, but we didn't realize how difficult it would be.

古文：禧曰： 汝恨吾后至耳。 
现代文：元禧说： 你这是怨恨我来的晚了吧。 
English: Yuanxi said, "You hate me for being late!

古文：勰等以高祖遗诏，赐冯后死。
现代文：元勰等人以孝文帝的诏令赐冯皇后死。
English: Empress Feng was given death by Emperor Xiaowen's edict by Yuan Zang and others.

古文：北海王详使长秋卿白整入授后药，后走呼，不肯饮，曰： 官岂有此，是诸王辈杀我耳！ 
现代文：北海王元详派长秋卿白整进去给冯皇后送毒药，冯皇后一边跑一边大声呼喊，不肯饮药，说道： 皇上那里会有这样的诏令，这是诸王之辈们要谋杀我呀！ 
English: The King of the North Sea, Yuan Diao, sent the Chief of the Autumn Court, Bai Cheng, to go in and deliver the poison to Empress Feng. Empress Feng, while running, shouted loudly and refused to drink the medicine, saying: "The Emperor will have such a decree, this is the generation of kings who want to murder me!"

古文：整执持强之，乃饮药而卒。
现代文：白整无奈，只好把她抓住，强迫她把毒药喝下去，即刻毙命。
English: In desperation, he grabbed her and forced her to drink the poison, killing her instantly.

古文：丧至洛城南，咸阳王禧等知后审死，相视曰： 设无遗诏，我兄弟亦当决策去之；岂可令失行妇人宰制天下，杀我辈也！ 
现代文：孝文帝的灵柩到达洛阳南郊之时，咸阳王元禧等人知道冯皇后确实已死，就互相对视着说道： 假如没有先帝的遗诏，我们兄弟几个人也要想方设法把她除掉，岂可以让这个失去贞操的妇人宰制天下、杀崐害我辈呢？ 
English: When Emperor Xiaowen's coffin arrived in the southern suburbs of Luoyang, King Yuanxi of Xianyang and others knew that Empress Feng had indeed died, and they looked at each other and said: If there had been no last will and testament of the former emperor, several of our brothers would have tried their best to get rid of her. Would they have allowed this woman who had lost her chastity to rule the world and kill and harm our generation?

古文：谥曰幽皇后。
现代文：冯皇后死后，谥号为幽皇后。
English: After the death of Empress Feng, her posthumous name was Yu Qingwen.

古文：五月，癸亥，加抚军大将军始安王遥光开府仪同三司。
现代文：五月，癸亥，南齐加封始安王萧遥光开府仪同三司。
English: In May, in the Year of the Rooster, Xiao Yaoguang, King of Southern Qi and the first emperor of the An Dynasty, held the ceremony of opening the capital with three divisions.

古文：丙申，魏葬孝文帝于长陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：丙申，北魏安葬孝文帝于长陵，庙号为高祖。
English: Bishen, the Northern Wei An buried Emperor Xiaowen in Changling, the temple name is Gao Zu.

古文：魏世宗欲以彭城王勰为相；勰屡陈遗旨，请遂素怀，帝对之悲恸。
现代文：北魏宣武帝元恪想任命彭城王元勰为宰相，元勰屡次陈述孝文帝的遗诏，请求能顺遂自己素来的志向，宣武帝对着他悲伤号哭。
English: Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty wanted to appoint Pengcheng Wang Yuanlu as prime minister. Yuanlu repeatedly stated the last will and testament of Emperor Xiaowen, and asked to be able to fulfill his original ambition. Emperor Xuanwu cried with sadness at him.

古文：勰恳请不已，乃以勰为使持节、侍中、都督冀、定等七州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、定州刺史。勰犹固辞，帝不许，乃之官。
现代文：元勰一再恳切请求不担任朝职，于是宣武帝就任命他为使持节，侍中，都督冀，定等七州诸军事，骠骑大将军，开府仪同三司，定州刺史，元勰还一再推辞，但是宣武帝不准许，于是只好去上任。
English: Yuan Shao repeatedly and earnestly requested not to hold the imperial post, so Emperor Xuanwu appointed him as the envoy to hold the festival, the chamberlain, the governor of Hebei, the military of the seven states, the cavalry general, the governor of the capital and the three departments, and the governor of Dingzhou. Yuan Shao also repeatedly refused, but Emperor Xuanwu did not allow it, so he had to take office.

古文：魏任城王澄以王肃羁旅，位加己上，意颇不平。
现代文：北魏任城王元澄认为王肃本为江南之人而奔投北魏，官位却在自己之上，所以心中颇为不平。
English: Wang Yuancheng, the king of the Northern Wei, thought that Wang Su was originally a person from the south of the Yangtze River and rushed to the Northern Wei, but the official position was above him, so he was quite dissatisfied.

古文：会齐人降者严叔懋告肃谋逃还江南，澄辄禁止肃，表称谋叛；案验无实。
现代文：正好由南齐投降过来的严叔懋报告王肃密谋逃回江南去，于是元澄就把王肃拘禁起来，并且上表说王肃密谋反叛。但是，经过立案查验，并非属实。
English: Yan Shuxuan, who had just surrendered from Nanqi, reported that Wang Su was plotting to escape back to the south of the Yangtze River. Therefore, Yuancheng detained Wang Su and said that Wang Su was plotting to rebel. However, after investigation, this was not true.

古文：咸阳王禧等奏澄擅禁宰辅，免官还第，寻出为雍州刺史。
现代文：因此，咸阳王元禧等人就上奏皇帝，告元澄擅自拘禁宰辅之臣，元澄被免官还府，不久出任雍州刺史。
English: Therefore, Xianyang King Yuanxi and others appealed to the emperor and sued Yuancheng for arbitrarily detaining the vassal of the vice-premier. Yuancheng was dismissed from his post and returned to the capital, and soon he was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：六月，戊辰，魏追尊皇妣高氏为文昭皇后，配飨高祖，增修旧冢，号终宁陵。
现代文：六月戊辰，北魏追封宣武帝之母高氏为文昭皇后，配享孝文帝，并且增修其旧墓，号为终宁陵。
English: In June, the Northern Wei Dynasty enthroned Gao, the mother of Emperor Xuanwu, as Empress Wenzhao, with Emperor Xiaowen as her consort, and renovated her old tomb, renaming it Shenning Mausoleum.

古文：追赐后父飏爵勃海公，谥曰敬，以其嫡孙猛袭爵；封后兄肇为平原公，肇弟显为澄城公；三人同日受封。
现代文：又追赐高氏之父高扬爵号为勃海公，谥号为敬，让其嫡孙高猛袭爵位。又封高氏之兄高肇为平原公，弟弟高显为澄城公，三个人同一天受封。
English: Gao's father, Gao Yang, was posthumously given the title of Bo Haigong, and his great-grandson, Gao Rong, was posthumously given the title of Jing. Gao's older brother, Gao Zhao, was given the title of Pingyuan Gong, and his younger brother, Gao Xian, was given the title of Chengcheng Gong. All three were awarded the title on the same day.

古文：魏主素未识诸舅，始赐衣帻引见，皆惶惧失措；数日之间，富贵赫奕。
现代文：宣武帝从来没有见过几位舅舅，这次才赐赏他们衣服头巾，并且接见了他们，弟兄三人都不免惶惧失措。然而，数日之间，富贵显赫一世。
English: Emperor Xuanwu had never met several uncles before, but this time he rewarded them with clothes and turbans, and received them. All three brothers were panicked. However, within a few days, they became rich and famous.

古文：秋，八月，戊申，魏用高祖遗诏，三夫人以下皆遣还家。
现代文：秋季八月，戊申，北魏依照孝文帝的遗诏，后宫中凡三夫人以下者全部遣送回家。
English: In the autumn of August, the Northern Wei Dynasty, in accordance with Emperor Xiaowen's last will and testament, sent all those in the harem below the Third Lady home.

古文：帝自在东宫，不好学，唯嬉戏无度；性重涩少言。
现代文：南齐皇帝萧宝卷，在做东宫太子时就不好学，只喜欢玩耍，嬉戏无度，并且性格沉闷寡言。
English: Nanqi Emperor Xiao Baowan, when he was the prince of the East Palace, was not easy to learn, he only liked to play, play without restraint, and his personality was dull and taciturn.

古文：及即位，不与朝士相接，专亲信宦官及左右御刀、应敕等。
现代文：即位之后，他不爱与朝臣们接触往来，专门亲信宦官以及身边左右御刀和应敕侍从。
English: After his accession to the throne, he did not like to come into contact with courtiers, preferring to confide in eunuchs and attendants around him.

古文：是时，扬州刺史始安王遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、右仆射江祏、右将军萧坦之、侍中江祀，卫尉刘暄更直内省，分日帖敕。
现代文：这时候，扬州刺史始安王萧遥光、尚书令徐孝嗣、右仆射江、右将军萧坦之、侍中江祀、卫尉刘暄等六人轮留在朝中内省当值，轮到谁当值，谁就在当天的敕令后面签署执行意见。
English: At this time, six people, including Yangzhou engraving historian Shi An Wang Xiao Yaoguang, Shang Shuling Xu Xiaozhi, right-hand man Sha Jiang, right-hand general Xiao Tan Zhi, attendant Zhong Jiang Zi, and guard Liu Wei, took turns to stay on duty in the central province of the DPRK. Whoever was on duty signed the implementation opinion behind the edict of the day.

古文：雍州刺史萧衍闻之，谓从舅录事参军范阳张弘策曰： 一国三公犹不堪，况六贵同朝，势必相图，乱将作矣。
现代文：雍州刺史萧衍知道了这一情况之后，对他的担任录事参军的堂舅、范阳人张弘策说： 一国有三公已经不堪其乱，何况如今六贵同朝，他们之间势必要互相图谋，因此必定会发生动乱。
English: After Xiaoyan, the chief of Yongzhou, learned of this situation, he said to his cousin Zhang Hongze, a Fanyang person, who served as a recorder and joined the army: One country has three princes who are already unbearable. What's more, now that the six princes are in the same dynasty, they are bound to conspire with each other, so there will definitely be turmoil.

古文：避祸图福，无如此州，但诸弟在都，恐罹世患，当更与益州图之耳。 
现代文：要说避祸图福，那里也比不上这个州，但是我的几个弟弟都在京城，恐怕会遭受乱世之患，所以我还要与吾兄益州刺史萧懿有所计议。 
English: To say that it's better to be safe than sorry, it's not as good as this state, but several of my younger brothers are in Beijing, and I'm afraid they will suffer from the troubles of the world, so I'll have to discuss it with my brother, Yizhou stabber Shi Xiaoqi.

古文：乃密与弘策修武备，它人皆不得预谋。
现代文：于是，萧衍秘密地与张弘策加强武备，其他人则一律不得参与。
English: As a result, Xiao Yan secretly worked with Zhang Hongzhe to strengthen the armed forces, while everyone else was not allowed to participate.

古文：招聚骁勇以万数，多伐材竹，沉之檀溪，积茅如冈阜，皆不之用。
现代文：又招集会聚骁勇之夫上万人众，大量砍伐树木、竹子，沉于檀溪之中，茅草堆积的如山冈一般，然而都不使用。
English: They also called for a gathering of tens of thousands of brave men, cut down a large number of trees and bamboo, sank into the sandalwood, and the thatch piled up like a mountain, but they were not used.

古文：中兵参军东平吕僧珍觉其意，亦私具橹数百张。
现代文：中兵参军东平人吕僧珍觉察出了萧衍的用意，也私自准备了船橹数百张。
English: Lv Sozhen, a Dongping soldier who joined the army, sensed Xiao Yan's intention, and also privately prepared hundreds of boat anchors.

古文：先是，僧珍为羽林监，徐孝嗣欲引置其府，僧珍知孝嗣不能久，固求从衍。
现代文：早先之时，吕僧珍任羽林监，徐孝嗣想让他参加自己的幕府，但是吕僧珍知道徐孝嗣不会久长，所以再三请求跟随萧衍。
English: At an earlier time, Lü Sozhen was in charge of the Wu Lin, and Xu Xiaozhi wanted him to join his shogunate, but Lü Sozhen knew that Xu Xiaozhi would not last long, so he repeatedly asked to follow Xiao Yan.

古文：是时，衍兄懿罢益州刺史还，仍行郢州事，衍使弘策说懿曰： 今六贵比肩，人自画敕，争权睚眦，理相图灭。
现代文：这时候，萧衍的哥哥萧懿被免去益州刺史之职而返回，但仍然掌管郢州事务，萧衍派张弘策去游说萧懿： 如今朝中六位权贵当朝，各自发号施号，互相争权夺利，反目成仇，理当会相互图灭。
English: At this time, Xiao Yan's brother Xiao Yan was removed from the post of Yizhou chief historian and returned, but still in charge of Yizhou affairs. Xiao Yan sent Zhang Hongze to lobby Xiao Yan: Today, the six powerful people in the imperial court, each of them give orders, compete with each other for power and profit, become enemies, and should be able to destroy each other.

古文：主上自东宫素无令誉，媟近左右，慓轻忍虐，安肯委政诸公，虚坐主诺！
现代文：而皇上则从做太子起就没有好声誉，他轻慢身边的人，悍残忍，怎么肯把朝政委托于他们六人，而自己只有虚位，凡事但作允诺而已呢？
English: The Emperor, on the other hand, has not had a good reputation since he became the Crown Prince. He is contemptuous of the people around him and cruel. How could he entrust the government of the Imperial Court to six of them, while he himself only has a false position and only promises everything?

古文：嫌忌积久，必大行诛戮。
现代文：时间一长，皇上猜忌之心必生，而猜忌积久，必定要大行诛戮。
English: As time goes on, the emperor's suspicions are bound to grow, and if suspicions continue for a long time, there is bound to be a great slaughter.

古文：始安欲为赵王伦，形迹已见；然性猜量狭，徒为祸阶。
现代文：始安王萧遥光想充当晋代赵王司马伦的角色，其形迹已经可以看得出来，然而其性格猜疑、气量狭小，只能白白地成为祸害之由。
English: Shi'an King Xiao Yaoguang wanted to play the role of the Jin Dynasty Zhao Wang Simarun, and his traces can already be seen. However, his suspicious character and small stature can only be the cause of evil.

古文：萧坦之忌克陵人，徐孝嗣听人穿鼻，江祏无断，刘暄暗弱；一朝祸发，中外土崩，吾兄弟幸守外籓，宜为身计；及今猜防未生，当悉召诸弟，恐异时拔足无路矣。
现代文：萧坦之忌妒才能，处处想凌驾于别人之上，而徐孝嗣受人牵使，江则犹柔寡断，刘暄则更是个糊涂软弱之人。有朝一日，祸乱爆发，朝廷内外必将土崩瓦解，支离破碎。我们兄弟幸好驻守外藩，应该为自身有所计谋。趁现在他们互相之间的猜忌、提防还没有开始，我们应当把几个弟弟全都叫到身边来，不然的话，恐怕到那时候就会拔足无路了。
English: Xiao Tan's talent for jealousy makes him want to be superior to others at all times, while Xu Xiaozhi is driven by others, Jiang is indecisive, and Liu Ye is even more of a weakling. One day, disaster will break out, and both the imperial court and the outside world will collapse and be fragmented. Fortunately, our brothers are stationed in foreign domains, so they should have a plan for themselves. Taking advantage of the current suspicion and caution between them has not yet begun, we should call all the brothers to our side, otherwise, I'm afraid that by that time we will have no way out.

古文：郢州控带荆、湘，雍州士马精强，世治则竭诚本朝，世乱则足以匡济；与时进退，此万全之策也。
现代文：郢州在地理上可以辖控荆、湘，雍州则兵马精干强壮，如果天下太平，我们就竭诚为朝廷效力；如果天下大乱，凭我们的力量足以能够匡济天下；审时度势，该进则进，该退则退，这是确保万无一失的计策。
English: Geographically, Bozhou can control Jing and Hunan, while Yongzhou has strong and capable soldiers and horses. If the world is peaceful, we will wholeheartedly work for the imperial court; if the world is in turmoil, our strength is enough to help the world; when judging the situation, the advance is the advance, and the retreat is the retreat, which is a foolproof strategy.

古文：若不早图，后悔无及。 
现代文：如不及早打算，到时候后悔就来不及了。 
English: If you don't plan early, you won't have time to regret it.

古文：弘策又自说懿曰： 以卿兄弟英武，天下无敌，据郢、雍二州，为百姓请命，废昏立明，易于反掌，此桓、文之业也。
现代文：张弘策自己又对萧懿说： 以你们兄弟二人的英武，天下没有人能够匹敌的，如果依据郢、雍二州，为老百姓请命，废去昏庸之主，另立圣明之主，确实易如反掌，不愁不能成功。
English: Zhang Hongze himself also said to Xiao Yao: With the bravery of your two brothers, there is no one in the world who can match it. If you ask for the lives of the common people in accordance with the two states of Yao and Yong, abolish the Lord of Dimyang and establish the Lord of Shengming, it is indeed as easy as the palm of your hand, and you will not fail to succeed.

古文：勿为竖子所欺，取笑身后。
现代文：此事如果获得成功，可以比得上历史上齐桓公、晋文公所创立的业绩。
English: If this matter is successful, it can be compared to the achievements created by Qi Huan Gong and Jinwen Gong in history.

古文：雍州揣之已熟，愿善图之！ 
现代文：所以，应该立意创此大业，不要被竖子鼠辈所欺，以致在身后被人所取笑。
English: Therefore, we should set out to create this great cause, and not be deceived by the hawks and mice, so that we are ridiculed behind us.

古文：懿不从。衍乃迎其弟骠骑外兵参军伟及西中郎外兵参军憺至襄阳。
现代文：雍州这一方面已经考虑成熟，希望您也好好地思谋一番。 萧懿不听从。于是，萧衍迎接其弟弟骠骑外兵参军萧伟以及西中郎外兵参军萧到了襄阳。
English: This aspect of Yongzhou has been maturely considered, and I hope you will also think about it. Xiao Yao did not listen. Therefore, Xiao Yan welcomed his brother Xiao Wei, who joined the army as a foreign soldier, and Xiao Zhonglang, who joined the army as a foreign soldier, to Yangyang.

古文：初，高宗虽顾命群公，而多寄腹心在江祏兄弟。二江更直殿内，动止关之。
现代文：起初，齐明帝虽然在临终遗诏中把朝政委托于朝中诸大臣，但是最信任的是江兄弟二人，把更多的遗命嘱托于他们二人。
English: At first, although Emperor Qiming entrusted the government of the dynasty to the ministers of the dynasty in his last will and testament, he trusted the two Jiang brothers the most, entrusting more of his will to them.

古文：帝稍欲行意，徐孝嗣不能夺，萧坦之时有异同，而祏执制坚确，帝深忿之。
现代文：所以，萧宝卷即位以之后，江氏兄弟二人轮流在殿内当值，皇帝的一举一动都要通过他们的同意。萧宝卷渐渐想要自行其意，徐孝嗣不能加以制止，萧坦之有时也表示不同意，而江则坚决限制，不许其自作主张，萧宝卷对此非常忿恨。
English: Therefore, after Xiao Baozhuan ascended the throne, the two Jiang brothers took turns to be on duty in the hall, and the emperor's every move had to be approved by them. Xiao Baozhuan gradually wanted to do his own thing, Xu Xiaozhuan could not stop him, Xiao Tan Zhi sometimes disagreed, and Jiang resolutely restricted him and did not allow him to make his own claims. Xiao Baozhuan was very angry about this.

古文：帝左右会稽茹法珍、吴兴梅虫儿等，为帝所委任，祏常裁折之，法珍等切齿。
现代文：萧宝卷左右心腹会稽人茹法珍和吴兴人梅虫儿等人，受主上委任办理一些事情，江常常对他们施以控制、阻挡，以致使茹法珍等人对江恨得咬牙切齿。
English: Xiao Baozhong's right and left confidants, such as the auditor of the association, Ru Fazhen, and Wu Xingren Meizhu'er, were appointed by the Lord to handle some matters. Jiang often controlled and blocked them, so that Ru Fazhen and others hated Jiang.

古文：徐都嗣谓祏曰： 主上稍有异同，讵可尽相乖反！ 
现代文：因此，徐孝嗣就对江说： 皇上稍微有些自己的主张，这也是正常的，怎么可以一概加以反对阻拦呢？ 
English: Therefore, Xu Xiaozhi said to Jiang: "It is normal for the emperor to have a little bit of his own opinion. How can you oppose and block everything?

古文：祏曰： 但以见付，必无所忧。 
现代文：江不以为然，说： 只要把事情交给我，完全没有什么可忧虑的。 
English: Jiang disagreed and said, "As long as you leave the matter to me, there is absolutely nothing to worry about."

古文：帝失德浸彰，祏议废帝，立江夏王宝玄。
现代文：东昏侯失德作恶的情况越来越严重，江就商议要废去他，而另立江夏王萧宝玄为帝。
English: The situation of Dongwu Hou's immorality and evil deeds became more and more serious. Jiang deliberated to depose him, and set up Jiangxia King Xiao Baoxuan as the emperor.

古文：刘暄尝为宝玄郢州行事，执事过刻。
现代文：刘暄曾经做过萧宝玄的郢州行事，处理事情过于死板、苛刻。
English: Liu Wei once acted like Xiao Baoxuan's Zhangzhou, dealing with things too rigidly and harshly.

古文：有人献马，宝玄欲观之，暄曰： 马何用观！ 
现代文：有人向萧宝玄献了一匹马，萧宝玄想去观看一下，刘暄不准许他去，并说： 一匹马，有什么值得看呢？ 
English: Someone offered a horse to Xiao Baoxuan. Xiao Baoxuan wanted to take a look at it, but Liu Ye did not allow him to go, and said: A horse, what is worth seeing?

古文：妃索煮肫，帐下咨暄，暄曰： 旦已煮鹅，不烦复此。 
现代文：萧宝玄的妃子要吃煮鸡肫，手下的人向刘暄请示，他却说： 早上已经吃了煮鹅，不必再麻烦做这个了。 
English: Xiao Baoxuan's concubine wanted to eat boiled chicken giblets. His subordinates asked Liu Yao for instructions, but he said, "I already ate boiled goose in the morning. You don't need to go to the trouble of making it again."

古文：宝玄恚曰： 舅殊无渭阳情。 
现代文：气得萧宝玄骂道： 刘暄根本没有一点舅舅的情义了。 
English: Enraged, Xiao Baoxuan scolded, "Liu Ye has lost all of his uncle's feelings.

古文：暄由是忌宝玄，不同祏议，更欲立建安王宝寅。
现代文：由此，刘暄对萧宝玄非常怨恨，所以就不同意江的主张，而想立建安王萧宝寅为帝。
English: As a result, Liu Bei was very resentful of Xiao Baoxuan, so he did not agree with Jiang's proposition and wanted to establish Xiao Baoxuan, the King of An, as emperor.

古文：祏密谋于始安王遥光，遥光自以年长，意欲自取，以微旨动祏。
现代文：江与始安王萧遥光秘密计谋，可是萧遥光自以为年长，想自己取而代之，把这个意思隐约地向江表示了。
English: Jiang secretly plotted with King Xiao Yaoguang of Shi'an, but Xiao Yaoguang thought he was older and wanted to replace him, and vaguely expressed this intention to Jiang.

古文：祏弟祀亦以少主难保，劝祏立遥光。
现代文：江的弟弟也认为年幼的皇帝难以保得住，就劝说江立萧遥光为帝。
English: Jiang's younger brother also thought that the young emperor was hard to keep, so he persuaded Jiang to make Xiao Yaoguang emperor.

古文：祏意回惑，以问萧坦之。
现代文：江一时也拿不定主意，就去同萧坦之商量，萧坦之当时正为其母守丧，仍让他担任领军将军。
English: Unable to make up his mind for a moment, Jiang went to consult with Xiao Tan, who was mourning his mother at the time, and still let him serve as the leading general.

古文：坦之时居母丧，起复为领军将军，谓祏曰： 明帝立，已非次，天下至今不服。
现代文：萧坦之对江说： 明帝自立为帝，已经是没有按照嗣立次序进行，至今天下还不服气。
English: Xiao Tanzhi said to Jiang: "Ming Emperor's independence as emperor was not carried out according to the order of succession, and to this day I am still not convinced.

古文：若复为此，恐四主瓦解，我期不敢言耳。 
现代文：如果现在再这么来一次的话，恐怕天下要大乱，我是不敢对此表示意见的。 
English: If this were to happen again, I'm afraid the world would be in chaos, and I wouldn't dare to express an opinion about it.

古文：遂还宅行丧。
现代文：于是，又回到家中为其母守丧去了。
English: So she returned home to grieve for her mother.

古文：祏、祀密谓吏部郎谢朓曰： 江夏年少，脱不堪负荷，岂可复行废立！
现代文：江和江祀暗中对吏部郎谢说： 江夏王萧宝玄年龄幼小，如果立他为帝，或许不堪承负此重任，但是岂能到时再把他废去呢？
English: Jiang and Jiang worshipers secretly said to the chief of staff Lang Xie: Jiangxia King Xiao Baoxuan is young. If he is made emperor, he may not be able to bear the heavy responsibility, but will he be able to abolish him at that time?

古文：始安年长，入纂不乖物望。
现代文：始安王萧遥光年长，如果由他继承大统，不会违背众望。
English: King of Shian, Xiao Yaoguang, is old. If he succeeds to the throne, he will not go against the public's wishes.

古文：非以此要富贵，政是求安国家耳。 
现代文：我们并不是要以此来获得富贵，正是为了让国家获得安定。 
English: We're not doing this to get rich, we're doing this to stabilize the country.

古文：遥光又遣所亲丹阳丞南阳刘祏密致意于祏，欲引以为党，祏不答。
现代文：萧遥光又派遣自己的亲信丹阳丞南阳人刘暗中向谢转达意思，想让谢作为同党，但是谢不回答。
English: Xiao Yaoguang also sent his close confidant Danyang Rong and Nanyang man Liu to secretly convey his intention to Xie, wanting Xie to be a member of the same party, but Xie did not answer.

古文：顷之，遥光以朓兼知卫尉事，朓惧，即以祏谋告太子右卫率左兴盛，兴盛不敢发。
现代文：不久，萧遥光任命谢兼管卫尉的事务，谢害怕了，以为已经被萧遥光拉下水了，就把江的阴谋报告了太子右卫率左兴盛，左兴盛不敢再往上告发。
English: Soon, Xiao Yaoguang appointed Xie to be in charge of the affairs of the captain of the guards. Xie was afraid and thought that he had been dragged down by Xiao Yaoguang. He reported the conspiracy of the river to Prince Uwei and Zuo Xingsheng. Zuo Xingsheng did not dare to report further.

古文：朓又说刘暄曰： 始安一旦南面，则刘沨、刘晏居卿今地，但以卿为反覆人耳。 
现代文：谢又游说刘暄，对他说： 始安王萧遥光一旦南面称帝，则刘、刘晏就会居于你如今的地位，而把你当作变心之人。 
English: Xie also lobbied Liu Yao, saying to him: "Once Emperor Xiao Yaoguang of the First An Dynasty was crowned in the south, Liu and Liu Yao would live in your current position and regard you as someone who had a change of heart.

古文：晏者，遥光城局参军也。
现代文：刘晏是萧遥光手下的城局参军。
English: Liu Wei joined the army from the city bureau under Xiao Yaoguang.

古文：暄阳惊，驰告遥光及祏。
现代文：刘暄听谢这么一说，假装十分惊讶，但实则马上报告了萧遥光和江。
English: Hearing Xie say this, Liu Ye pretended to be very surprised, but in fact immediately reported Xiao Yaoguang and Jiang.

古文：遥光欲出朓为东阳郡，朓常轻祏，祏尉议除之。
现代文：萧遥光想把谢弄出去到东阳郡做太守，但是因为谢常常轻视江，所以江坚决请求把谢除掉。
English: Xiao Yaoguang wanted to make Xie the governor of Dongyang County, but because Xie often belittled Jiang, Jiang firmly requested that Xie be removed.

古文：遥光乃收朓付廷尉，与孝嗣、祏、暄等连名启 朓扇动内外，妄贬乘舆，窃论宫禁，间谤亲贤，轻议朝宰。 
现代文：于是，萧遥光就把谢抓起来送到了廷尉那里，并与徐孝嗣、江、刘暄等人联名上告 谢在朝廷内外进行煽动，妄自贬低皇帝，私自议论宫禁，同时还诽谤亲贤，轻视议论朝中大臣。 
English: As a result, Xiao Yaoguang arrested Xie and sent him to the imperial lieutenant, and together with Xu Xiaozhi, Jiang, Liu Wei and others jointly appealed to Xie to incite inside and outside the imperial court, arrogantly belittle the emperor, privately discuss the palace ban, and at the same time slander relatives and despise the discussion of the ministers of the DPRK and China.

古文：朓遂死狱中。
现代文：于是，谢死于狱中。
English: As a result, Xie died in prison.

古文：暄以遥光若立，己失元舅之尊，不肯同祏议；故祏迟疑久不决。
现代文：刘暄认为萧遥光如果立为皇帝，自己就要失去皇舅之尊，所以不肯赞同江的意见，因此江也迟疑而久不能决定。
English: Liu Bei thought that if Xiao Yaoguang became emperor, he would lose the respect of his uncle, so he refused to agree with Jiang's opinion. Therefore, Jiang hesitated and could not decide for a long time.

古文：遥光大怒，遣左右黄昙庆刺暄于青溪桥。
现代文：为此，萧遥光大怒，派遣手下人黄昙庆在青溪桥刺杀刘暄。
English: For this reason, Xiao Yaoguang was furious and dispatched his subordinate Huang Jieqing to assassinate Liu Yao at the Qingxi Bridge.

古文：昙庆见暄部伍多，不敢发；暄觉之，遂发祏谋，帝命收祏兄弟。
现代文：黄昙庆因见刘暄的部下特别多，不敢前去，而刘暄察觉了，于是告发了江的阴谋，东昏侯命令拘捕江兄弟俩。
English: Seeing that there were so many of Liu Bei's subordinates, Huang Yaoqing did not dare to go forward, but Liu Bei noticed, so he denounced Jiang's plot, and Dong Dou Hou ordered the arrest of the two Jiang brothers.

古文：时祀直内殿，疑有异，遣信报祏曰： 刘暄似有异谋。今作何计？ 
现代文：当时，江祀正在内殿值守，怀疑情况有异常，派人报信给江说： 刘暄似乎有别的阴谋，现在作何计议呢？ 
English: At that time, Jiang Rong was on duty in the inner hall. He suspected that there was something unusual about the situation and sent someone to report to Jiang and say: Liu Bei seems to have another plot. What should we do now?

古文：祏曰： 政当静以镇之。 
现代文：江说： 正应该以静待不动而镇之。 
English: Jiang said: It is time to calm down by staying still.

古文：俄有诏召祏入见，停中书省。
现代文：一会儿，就有诏令传江入见，江进朝之后停在中书省等待。
English: In a moment, the imperial edict was issued for Jiang to enter the court, and after entering the court, Jiang stopped at Zhongshuo to wait.

古文：初，袁文旷以斩王敬则功当封，祏执不与；帝使文旷取祏，文旷以刀环筑其心曰： 复能夺我封不！ 
现代文：当初，袁文旷由于斩了王敬则有功，应当封官，但是江执意不给，东昏侯就让袁文旷去杀江，袁文旷去执行，他用刀环击江的心口，说道： 看你还能夺去我受封之官否？ 
English: At first, Yuan Wenkui should have been given an official title because he had made a great contribution to the death of Wang Jing, but Jiang was adamant that he would not give it to him. Dongwu Hou ordered Yuan Wenkui to kill Jiang and Yuan Wenkui to carry out the order. He struck Jiang's heart with a sword ring and said, "See if you can take away my official title."

古文：并弟祀皆死。
现代文：江连其弟弟江祀一并被杀。
English: Jiang Lian and his younger brother Jiang Shi were both killed.

古文：刘暄闻祏等死，眠中大惊，投出户外，问左右： 收至未？ 
现代文：刘暄知江等人已死，在床上大惊而起，奔出门外，问左右说： 抓捕的人来了没有？ 
English: Liu Xizhe knew that Jiang and the others were dead. He woke up in bed, panicked, ran out of the door, and asked: "Have the arresting officers come yet?

古文：良久，意定，还坐，大悲曰： 不念江，行自痛也！ 
现代文：过了许久才定下心来，重新回到屋中坐下，十分悲哀地说： 我并非是怀念江氏弟兄，而是自知祸将及身，故而痛心啊！ 
English: It took me a long time to compose myself, so I returned to the room, sat down, and said very sadly, "It's not that I miss Mr. Jiang's brothers, but it's because I know that evil will befall me. That's why I'm so sad!"

古文：帝自是无所忌惮，益得自恣，日夜与近习于后堂鼓叫戏马。
现代文：帝自是无所忌惮，益得自恣，日夜与近习于后堂鼓叫戏马。
English: The emperor himself was unscrupulous, indulged in self-indulgence, day and night, and studied in the back hall, playing the tambourine.

古文：常以五更就寝，至晡乃起。
现代文：常以五更就寝，至晡乃起。
English: Often go to bed at five, and wake up at six.

古文：群臣节、朔朝见，晡后方前，或际暗遣出。
现代文：群臣节、朔朝见，晡后方前，或际暗遣出。
English: On the Day of Retainers, see you in the morning of the New Year's Day, go to the rear, or secretly sent out.

古文：台阁案奏，月数十日乃报，或不知所在；宦者以裹鱼肉还家，并是五省黄案。
现代文：台阁案奏，月数十日乃报，或不知所在；宦者以裹鱼肉还家，并是五省黄案。
English: In the Taigou case, the case was reported for dozens of months, or the whereabouts were unknown; the victim returned home with fish meat, and it was the Huang case in five provinces.

古文：帝常习骑致适，顾谓左右曰： 江祏常禁吾乘马；小子若在，吾岂能得此！ 
现代文：帝常习骑致适，顾谓左右曰： 江常禁吾乘马；小子若在，吾岂能得此！ 
English: The emperor was accustomed to riding horses, and Gu Zhe said: "The emperor often forbade me to ride a horse; if a boy were here, I would not be able to do so!"

古文：因问： 祏亲戚馀谁？ 对曰： 江祥今在冶。 
现代文：因问： 亲戚余谁？ 对曰： 江祥今在冶。 
English: Interrogative: Who are Yu's relatives? Answer: Jiang Xiang is currently in exile.

古文：帝于马上作敕，赐祥死。
现代文：东昏侯就立刻在马背上发出诏令，赐江祥自杀。
English: Dong Dou Hou immediately issued a decree on horseback, ordering Jiang Xiang to commit suicide.

古文：始安王遥光素有异志，与其弟荆州刺史遥欣密谋举兵据东府，使遥欣自江陵引兵急下，刻期将发，而遥欣病卒。
现代文：始安王萧遥光向来心怀异意，觊觎皇位，与他的弟弟荆州刺史萧遥欣密谋策划，准备发兵拥据东府，争夺帝位，决定让萧遥欣率兵从江陵直下建康，但是就在按规定日期将要出发之时，萧遥欣却病死了。
English: Xiao Yaoguang, the King of Shi'an, had always harbored a different opinion, coveted the imperial throne, and conspired with his younger brother Xiao Yaoxin, the Prince of Jingzhou, to prepare to send troops to occupy Dongfu and compete for the imperial throne. It was decided to let Xiao Yaoxin lead the troops from Gangneung to Jiankang, but just when they were about to leave on the specified date, Xiao Yaoxin died of illness.

古文：江祏被诛，帝召遥光入殿，告以祏罪，遥光惧，还省，即阳狂号哭，遂称疾不复入台。
现代文：江被杀之后，东昏侯召萧遥光进殿，把江的罪行告诉了他。萧遥光听了之后，心中惧怕了，回到中书省，就开始假装发疯，号哭狂闹，于是借口有病回到东府，从此不再入朝了。
English: After Jiang was killed, Dongdimou summoned Xiao Yaoguang to the palace and told him of Jiang's crime. After listening to him, Xiao Yaoguang was afraid in his heart, and when he returned to Zhongshuo, he began to pretend to be mad, crying wildly, so he returned to Dongfu on the pretext of being ill, and no longer entered the imperial court.

古文：先是，遥光弟豫州刺史遥昌卒，其部曲皆归遥光。
现代文：早先之时，萧遥光的弟弟豫州刺史萧遥昌死了，其部曲全部归属于萧遥光。
English: Earlier, Xiao Yaoguang's younger brother, Yuzhou poet Xiao Yaochang, died, and all of his works belong to Xiao Yaoguang.

古文：及遥欣丧还，停东府前渚，荆州众力送者甚盛。
现代文：萧遥欣的灵柩从荆州运回来之后，停于东府前奏淮河的河边上，荆州方面来送灵的人力特别多。
English: After Xiao Yaoxin's coffin was transported back from Jingzhou, it was parked on the edge of the Huaihe River in front of Dongfu, and there were a lot of people from Jingzhou to send the coffin.

古文：帝既诛二江，虑遥光不自安，欲迁为司徒，使还第，召入谕旨。
现代文：东昏侯杀了江兄弟之后，考虑到萧遥光难以自安，就准备把他升任为司徒，使他回到自己的府第中休养不问朝政，因此就召他进朝宣谕这一旨令。
English: After Dongdimou killed the Jiang brothers, considering that Xiao Yaoguang could not be at peace, he was ready to promote him to the position of a tutor, so that he could go back to his capital to recuperate without asking the imperial government, and therefore he summoned him to the imperial court to proclaim this edict.

古文：遥光恐见杀，乙卯晡时，收集二州部曲于东府东门，召刘沨、刘晏等谋举兵，以讨刘暄为名。
现代文：但是，萧遥光担心进朝后被杀，就于乙卯傍晚，召集从荆州和豫州来的部属到东府的东门之前，又叫来刘、刘晏等人一起谋划如何举兵起事，并决定以讨伐刘暄为名义。
English: However, Xiao Yaoguang was worried that he would be killed after entering the imperial court, so on the evening of the 2nd day of the 3rd month, before summoning his subordinates from Jingzhou and Yuzhou to the east gate of Dongfu, he called Liu, Liu Hui and others together to plan how to raise an army to rise up, and decided to fight against Liu Hui.

古文：夜，遣数百人破东冶，出囚，于尚方取仗。
现代文：这天夜间，萧遥光派遣几百人打进东冶，放出狱中的囚徒，从尚方那里取出兵械。
English: On this night, Xiao Yaoguang sent several hundred men to break into Dongye, release the prisoners in the prison, and take out the weapons from Shangfang.

古文：又召骁骑将军垣历生，历生随信而至。
现代文：同时，又召骁骑将军垣历生前来，垣历生见信后随即到达。
English: At the same time, he also summoned the cavalry general Gao Lisheng to come, and Gao Lisheng arrived immediately after seeing the letter.

古文：萧坦之宅在东府城东，遥光遣人掩取之，坦之露袒逾墙走向台。
现代文：萧坦之的宅第在东府城东面，萧遥光派人乘其不备而迅速前去抓获他，萧坦之来不及戴上头巾，光着膀子，越墙而逃，跑向朝廷禁城中去报信，道上遇上了巡逻头目颜端，见他这副样子，以为有罪逃窜，就抓住了他。
English: Xiao Tianzhi's residence was in the east of Dongfu Town. Xiao Yaguang sent people to take advantage of his unpreparedness and quickly went to catch him. Xiao Tianzhi had no time to put on a headscarf, bare-armed, fled over the wall, ran to the Imperial Forbidden City to report the news. On the way, he met the patrol leader. Seeing him like this, he thought he was guilty of fleeing and caught him.

古文：道逢游逻主颜端，执之，坦之告以遥光反，不信；自往詷问，知实，乃以马与坦之，相随入台。
现代文：萧坦之连忙把萧遥光反叛之事对颜端讲了，但是颜端不相信，就亲自前去刺探，知道萧坦之所说情况属实，于是就把马给了萧坦之，一块去朝廷中报告。
English: Xiao Tianzhi hurriedly told Yan Duan about Xiao Yaoguang's rebellion, but Yan Duan did not believe him, so he went to spy on Xiao Tianzhi in person. He knew that what Xiao Tianzhi said was true, so he gave the horse to Xiao Tianzhi and went to the court to report.

古文：遥光又掩取尚书左仆射沈文季于其宅，欲以为都督，会文季已入台。
现代文：萧遥光又派人出其不意地去尚书左仆射沈文季的府上抓他，想逼他做都督，恰巧沈文季已经到朝廷中去了，所以扑了个空。
English: Xiao Yaoguang also sent someone out of the blue to seize the palace of Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, Shen Wenzhi, and wanted to force him to become the governor. It just so happened that Shen Wenzhi had already gone to the imperial court, so he was out of luck.

古文：垣历生说遥光帅城内兵夜攻台，辇荻烧城门，曰： 公但乘舆随后，反掌可克！ 
现代文：垣历生劝说萧遥光率城内之兵乘夜攻打朝廷宫禁，并且用车拉来芦苇焚烧城门，他对萧遥光说： 大人您只管乘车随后而行，攻下禁城易如反掌，转眼之间即可成功。 
English: After persuading Xiao Yaoguang to lead the soldiers in the city to attack the palace of the imperial court at night, and to use the car to pull the reeds to burn the city gate, he said to Xiao Yaoguang: "Adult, you only need to follow by car. It is easy to capture the forbidden city, and you can succeed in the blink of an eye.

古文：遥光狐疑不敢出。
现代文：但是，萧遥光心中没有把握，迟疑而不敢出军。
English: However, Xiao Yaoguang did not have confidence in his heart and hesitated to go to the army.

古文：天稍晓，遥光戎服出听事，命上仗登城行赏赐。
现代文：天渐渐亮了，萧遥光穿着战服出来布置事情，命令安排仪仗，要登城对部下进行赏赐。
English: As the day began to dawn, Xiao Yaoguang, dressed in his battle uniform, came out to arrange things, ordered to arrange a ceremonial battle, and went to the city to reward his subordinates.

古文：历生复劝出军，遥光不肯，冀台中自有变。
现代文：这时，垣历生再次劝说萧遥光出兵攻打禁城，但是他仍旧不肯，只希望朝廷自身发生变故。
English: At this time, Gu Lisheng once again persuaded Xiao Yaoguang to send troops to attack the Forbidden City, but he still refused, only hoping that the imperial court itself would change.

古文：及日出，台军稍至。
现代文：到了日出之时，朝崐廷军队逐渐到来。
English: By sunrise, the imperial army had gradually arrived.

古文：台中始闻乱，众情惶惑；向晓，有诏召徐孝嗣，孝嗣入，人心乃安。
现代文：朝中刚听到萧遥光叛乱的消息时，大伙情绪惶惑，不知所措。天快亮之时，皇帝有旨召徐孝嗣，直到徐孝嗣进来后，人心才安定下来。
English: When the news of Xiao Yaoguang's rebellion was first heard in the court, everyone was confused and at a loss for what to do. At dawn, the emperor had the intention to summon Xu Xiaozhi, and it was only after Xu Xiaozhi came in that people's hearts settled down.

古文：左将军沈闻变，驰入西掖门。或劝戎服，约曰： 台中方扰攘，见我戎服，或者谓同遥光。 
现代文：左将军沈约听到事变消息之后，骑马奔入西掖门，有人劝他穿上战服，他却说： 朝廷中正成一窝蜂，要是看见我穿着战服进来，或者会把我当作萧遥光的同伙呢！ 
English: After General Zuo Shenyo heard the news of the incident, he rushed into the West Gate on horseback. Some people advised him to put on a uniform, but he said: The imperial court is a swarm of bees. If they saw me wearing a uniform, would they think I was an associate of Xiao Yaoguang?

古文：乃硃衣而入。
现代文：于是，沈约就穿着红色公服进朝。
English: As a result, Shen Yotong went to the North wearing a red official uniform.

古文：丙辰，诏曲赦建康，中外戒严。
现代文：丙辰，东昏侯诏令，因特殊情况而赦免建康的囚徒，朝廷内外戒严。
English: By the edict of the Eastern Dynasties, the Eastern Dynasties, the prisoners of Jiankang were pardoned due to special circumstances, and martial law was imposed inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：徐孝嗣以下屯卫宫城，萧坦之帅台军讨遥光。
现代文：从徐孝嗣以下都驻扎在宫城外保护，萧坦之率朝廷兵众讨伐萧遥光。
English: From Xu Xiaoji on down, they were stationed outside the palace to protect, and Xiao Tan led the imperial soldiers to fight Xiao Yaoguang.

古文：孝嗣内自疑惧，与沈文季戎服共坐南掖门上，欲与之共论世事，文季辄引以他辞，终不得及。
现代文：徐孝嗣心中既疑虑，又惧怕，穿着战服，同沈文季一起坐在南掖门上面。徐孝嗣想同沈文季一起议论时局，但是沈文季总是用别的话题岔开，避而不谈，所以最终也没有谈成。
English: With both doubts and fear in his heart, Xu Xiaozhi, wearing a military uniform, sat on the top of the South Gate with Shen Wenzhi. Xu Xiaozhi wanted to discuss the current situation with Shen Wenzhi, but Shen Wenzhi always used other topics to avoid talking, so in the end there was no negotiation.

古文：萧坦之屯湘宫寺，左兴盛屯东篱门，镇军司马曹虎屯青溪大桥。
现代文：萧坦之驻扎在湘宫寺，左兴盛驻扎在东篱门，镇军司马曹虎驻扎在青溪大桥。
English: Xiao Tan Zhi was stationed at Xianggong Temple, Zuo Xingsheng was stationed at Dongzhenmen, and Ma Cao Hu, the town's military commander, was stationed at Qingxi Bridge.

古文：众军围东城三面，烧司徒府。
现代文：众路军队把东城围住，三面用火烧东府之侧的司徒府。
English: The troops surrounded Dongcheng and set fire to Shitoufu on three sides of Dongfu.

古文：遥光遣垣历生从西门出战，台军屡败，杀军主桑天爱。
现代文：萧遥光派遣垣历生从西门出战，朝廷军队屡战屡败，军主桑天爱被垣历生部所杀。
English: Xiao Yaoguang sent Gaki Lisheng to fight from the West Gate, the imperial army repeatedly lost battles, and the commander, Sang Tian'ai, was killed by Gaki Lisheng's troops.

古文：遥光之起兵也，问咨议参军萧畅，畅正色不从。
现代文：萧遥光起兵之前，曾经问过谘议参军萧畅，请他一起行动，但萧畅颜正辞严地加以拒绝，坚决不从。
English: Before Xiao Yaoguang raised an army, he once asked Xiao Chang, a member of the army, for advice and asked him to act together, but Xiao Changyuan sternly refused and resolutely refused.

古文：戊午，畅与抚军长史沈昭略潜自南门出，诣台自归，众情大沮。
现代文：戊午，萧畅与抚军长史沈昭略偷偷地从南门出去，去往朝廷，自动投归，由此而东府内众人的情绪一落千丈。
English: In the afternoon, Xiao Chang sneaked out of the south gate with the commander of the army, Shen Zhao, and went to the imperial court, and returned voluntarily. As a result, the mood of the people in the eastern prefecture plummeted.

古文：畅，衍之弟；昭略，文季之兄子也。
现代文：萧畅是萧衍的弟弟，沈昭略是沈文季哥哥的儿子。
English: Xiao Chang is Xiao Yan's younger brother, and Shen Zhaoyu is the son of Shen Wenzhi's older brother.

古文：己未，垣历生从南门出战，因弃槊降曹虎，虎命斩之。
现代文：己未，垣历生从南门出战，他借此机会而弃槊投降了曹虎，但是曹虎命令人把他斩了。
English: Before he died, Gao Lisheng went to fight from the south gate. He took this opportunity to surrender to Cao Hu, but Cao Hu ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：遥光大怒，于床上自踊，使杀历生子。
现代文：萧遥光知道垣历生投降的消息之后，气的七窍生烟，从坐榻上跳起来，让人把垣历生的儿子杀掉。
English: After Xiao Yaoguang learned the news of Gaki Lisheng's surrender, he was overcome with rage, jumped up from his bed, and ordered someone to kill Gaki Lisheng's son.

古文：其晚，台军以火箭烧东北角楼。
现代文：这天晚上，朝廷军队射发火箭烧了城东北的角楼。
English: That evening, the imperial army fired rockets and burned the corner building in the northeast of the city.

古文：至夜，城溃，遥光还小斋帐中，著衣帢坐，秉烛自照，令人反拒，斋阁皆重关，左右并逾屋散出。
现代文：到了夜间，城被攻破，萧遥光回到自己的小斋帐中，穿着衣服，戴着便帽，坐着不动，手里拿着点燃的蜡烛照明，命令人抵抗朝廷军队，还把斋中的门全部关严，但是手下的人却跑出屋子而逃散了。
English: At night, when the city was breached, Xiao Yaoguang returned to his small tent, dressed in clothes and wearing a cap, sat still, holding a lighted candle in his hand, ordered people to resist the imperial army, and closed all the doors of the tent, but his men ran out of the house and fled.

古文：台军主刘国宝等先入，遥光闻外兵至，灭烛扶匐床下。军人排阁入，于暗中牵出，斩之。
现代文：朝廷军队中的军主刘国宝等人率先进入，萧遥光听到外面来兵了，熄灭蜡烛，爬进床底下躲起来，军人破门而入，黑暗中把他从床下拉出来，立即斩首。
English: Liu Guobao, the commander of the imperial army, and others entered first. Xiao Yaoguang heard the soldiers coming from outside, extinguished the candle, crawled under the bed and hid. The soldiers broke in, pulled him out from under the bed in the dark, and immediately beheaded him.

古文：台军入城，焚烧室屋且尽。
现代文：朝廷军队进城之后，放火把房屋全部焚烧了。
English: After the imperial army entered the city, they set fire to all the houses.

古文：刘沨走还家，为人所杀。
现代文：刘逃回家中，也被人所杀。
English: Liu fled home and was also killed.

古文：荆州将潘绍闻遥光作乱，谋欲应之。
现代文：荆州将领潘绍知道萧遥光叛乱的消息之后，也策划想要响应。
English: After Jingzhou General Pan Shao learned the news of Xiao Yaoguang's rebellion, he also planned to respond.

古文：西部郎司马夏侯详呼绍议事，因斩之，州府以安。
现代文：西中郎司马夏侯详传叫潘绍前来议事，借此而斩了他，荆州西中郎府因此得以安定。
English: The West Middle Langsi, Ma Xia Hou, sent word to Panshao to come to the meeting, and by doing so, he was beheaded. As a result, the West Middle Langsi of Jingzhou was stabilized.

古文：己巳，以徐孝嗣为司空；加沈文季镇军将军，侍中、仆射如故；萧坦之为尚书右仆射、丹阳尹，右将军如故；刘暄为领军将军；曹虎为散骑常侍、右卫将军。
现代文：己巳，朝廷任命徐孝嗣为司空。加任沈文季为镇军将军，他原来所担任的侍中、仆射之职不变。又任命萧坦之为尚书右仆射、丹阳尹，原来的右将军官职照旧不动。又任命刘暄为领军将军，曹虎为散骑常侍、右卫将军。
English: At this time, the imperial court appointed Xu Xiaozhi as Siku. Shen Wenzhi was appointed as the general of the town army, and his original positions of attendant and footman remained unchanged. Xiao Tan was appointed as Shangshu right footman and Danyang Yin, and the original right officer position remained unchanged. Liu Wei was appointed as the leading general, and Cao Hu was appointed as the cavalryman and right guard general.

古文：皆赏平始安之功也。
现代文：上述封官，都是为了奖赏他们在平定始安王萧遥光叛乱中的功劳。
English: The above-mentioned seals of office were all to reward their merits in the suppression of the rebellion of King Xiao Yaoguang of Shi'an.

古文：魏南徐州刺史沈陵来降。
现代文：北魏南徐州刺史沈陵前来投降南齐。
English: Northern Wei, Southern Xuzhou, Zhishi, and Shenling came to surrender to Nanqi.

古文：陵，文季之族子也。
现代文：沈陵是沈文季本家侄子。
English: Shen Ling is a nephew of the Shen Wenzhong family.

古文：时魏徐州刺史京兆王愉年少，军府事皆决于兼长史卢渊。
现代文：当时，北魏徐州刺史京兆王元愉年龄小，府中事情全部决定于长史卢渊。
English: At that time, the Northern Wei Emperor Xuzhou assassinated the historian Jing Zhao Wang Yuan Yu at a young age, and all the affairs of the government were decided in Changshu Luyuan.

古文：渊知陵将叛，敕诸城潜为之备；屡以闻于魏朝，魏朝不听。
现代文：卢渊得知沈陵将要反叛，就告戒各城秘密加以防备，并且多次把沈陵要叛变的情报向朝廷报告，但是朝廷不予理睬。
English: When Lu Yuan learned that Shenling was going to rebel, he warned all the cities to prepare secretly, and repeatedly reported the information that Shenling was going to rebel to the imperial court, but the imperial court ignored it.

古文：陵遂杀将佐，帅宿预之众来奔，滨淮诸戊以有备得全。
现代文：于是，沈陵杀了手下的将佐，带领宿预的部下投奔崐南齐，北魏在淮河边上的各个戍所由于有所防备而得以保全，没有丢失。
English: As a result, Shen Ling killed his subordinate generals, and led his subordinates to rush to Nanqi, and the Northern Wei Dynasty's fortresses on the edge of the Huai River were preserved and not lost due to their preparedness.

古文：陵在边历年，阴结边州豪杰。
现代文：沈陵在南徐州多年，秘密交结了州中的许多豪杰。
English: Shen Ling has been in South Xuzhou for many years, and has secretly met many heroes in the state.

古文：陵既叛，郡县多捕送陵党，渊皆抚而赦之，唯归罪于陵，众心乃安。闰月，丙子，立东陵公宝览为始安王，奉靖王后。
现代文：沈陵叛变之后，州中各郡县捕送来大量沈陵的党徒，卢渊对他们都加以抚慰，赦免释放，只归罪于沈陵一人，众人之心于是安定下来闰八月，丙子，南齐封立江陵公萧宝览为始安王，并过继为始安靖王之后代。
English: After the Shenling Rebellion, a large number of Shenling Party members were captured and sent to various counties and counties in the state. Lu Yuan consoled them all, pardoned and released them, and only one person was found guilty of Shenling. The hearts of the people then settled down. In August of the leap year, Cunzi, Nanqi, enthroned Jiangling Prince Xiao Baochan as the King of Shi'an, and adopted him as the descendant of the King of Shi'an Jing.

古文：以沈陵为北徐州刺史。
现代文：南齐任命沈陵为北徐州刺史。
English: Nanqi designated Shenling as the historical center of North Xuzhou.

古文：江祏等既败，帝左右捉刀、应敕之徒皆恣横用事，时人谓之 刀敕 。
现代文：江等人失败之后，东昏侯身边拿刀和应敕的一帮子人全都恣意纵横，想怎么办就怎么办，无有忌惮，当时人们称他们为 刀敕 。
English: After the failure of Jiang and others, a group of people with swords and swords around Dongdimou were all arbitrary, doing whatever they wanted to do, without fear. At that time, people called them swords and swords.

古文：萧坦之刚很而专，嬖幸畏而憎之；遥光死二十馀日，帝遣延明主帅黄齐济将兵围坦之宅，杀之，并其子秘书郎赏。
现代文：萧坦之刚愎自用，凶狠残忍，专横独断，东昏侯周围的宠信之徒们因害怕而特别憎恨他，在萧遥光死后二十多天，东昏侯派遣延明殿主帅黄文济率兵包围了萧坦之的住宅，将其杀掉，他的儿子秘书郎萧赏也一起被杀。
English: Xiao Tan's arrogance was self-serving, vicious, cruel, and arbitrary. The favorites around Dong Dumo particularly hated him out of fear. More than 20 days after Xiao Yaoguang's death, Dong Dumo sent Yanming Palace commander Huang Wenzhi and his soldiers to surround Xiao Tan's house and kill him. His son, secretary Lang Xiaoyan, was also killed.

古文：坦之从兄翼宗为海陵太守，未发，坦之谓文济曰： 从兄海陵宅故应无它。 
现代文：萧坦之的堂兄萧翼宗做海陵太守，还没有去赴任，萧坦之对黄文济说： 我的堂兄在海陵的府中不应该有什么事吧？ 
English: Xiao Tan Zhi's cousin Xiao Ying Zong became the governor of Hailing. Before he took office, Xiao Tan Zi said to Huang Wenzhi, "Isn't there something wrong with my cousin in the government of Hailing?"

古文：文济曰： 海陵宅在何处？ 
现代文：黄文济问道： 他的住宅在什么地方？ 
English: Huang Wenzhi asked: Where is his residence?

古文：坦之以告。
现代文：萧坦之如实以告。
English: Xiao Tan told the truth.

古文：文济白帝，帝仍遣收之。
现代文：黄文济报告东昏侯，东昏侯派遣黄文济去抓捕萧翼宗。
English: Huang Wenzhi reported to Dongdimou, and Dongdimou sent Huang Wenzhi to arrest Xiao Yongsong.

古文：检其家，至贫，唯有质钱贴数百，还以启帝，原其死，系尚方。
现代文：黄文济去后搜查了萧翼宗的家，发现他穷得可怜，只有典当东西的质票数百张，就回去报告东昏侯，于是东昏侯免他不死，拘囚于尚方署中。
English: After Huang Wenzhi went there, he searched Xiao Yizong's home and found that he was very poor and only had hundreds of pawn tickets. He went back to report to Dong Dumo, and Dong Dumo pardoned him from death, and he was detained in Shangfang Detention Center.

古文：茹法珍等谮刘暄有异志，帝曰： 暄是我舅，岂应有此？ 
现代文：茹法珍等人诬陷刘暄有谋逆的意图，东昏侯说： 刘暄是我的舅舅，哪里可能如此呢？ 
English: Zhufazhen and others framed Liu Yao as having a traitorous intention. Dongdimou said: Liu Yao is my uncle, how could this be?

古文：直阁新蔡徐世标曰： 明帝乃武帝同堂，恩遇如此，犹灭武帝之后；舅焉可信邪！ 
现代文：直新蔡人徐世标说： 明帝与武帝乃是堂兄弟，他受到武帝那样的恩待，但是还杀尽了武帝的后代，舅舅哪里值得信任呢？ 
English: Xu Shibo, a direct descendant of Emperor Cai, said: Emperor Ming and Emperor Wu are cousins. He received the same kind treatment from Emperor Wu, but he also killed all of Emperor Wu's descendants. How can an uncle be trusted?

古文：遂杀之。
现代文：于是，杀掉了刘暄。
English: The man then killed Yasuko.

古文：曹虎善于诱纳，日食荒客常数百人。
现代文：曹虎善于吸引、招纳人，每天供食好几百从蛮地或域外来的人。
English: Cao Hu is good at attracting and recruiting people, and feeds hundreds of people from the wild or outside the region every day.

古文：晚节吝啬，罢雍州，有钱五千万，它物称是。
现代文：但是，他到晚年之时，却极其吝啬，结束雍州任时，敛集有钱五千万，其他财物合价也有这么多。
English: However, in his later years, he was extremely stingy. At the end of his tenure in Yongzhou, he amassed 50 million yuan in money and other assets.

古文：帝疑虎旧将，且利其财，遂杀之。
现代文：东昏侯因曹虎是前朝老将而对他有疑心，并且贪上了他的财富，于是也杀了他。
English: Dongdim Hou was suspicious of Cao Hu because he was a veteran of the former dynasty, and coveted his wealth, so he also killed him.

古文：坦之、暄、虎所新除官，皆未及拜而死。
现代文：至此，萧坦之、刘暄、曹虎这几位新被任命的官员，都没有来得及上任就被杀害。
English: At this point, Xiao Tanzhi, Liu Wei and Cao Hu, several newly appointed officials, were killed before they could take office.

古文：初，高宗临殂，以降昌事戒帝曰： 作事不可在人后。 
现代文：当初，齐明帝临死之时，以萧隆昌的事件告戒东昏侯： 做事行动不可以落在他人之后。 
English: At first, when Emperor Qiming was about to die, he used the incident of Xiao Longchang as a warning to Dongwu Hou: Do not fall behind others in doing things.

古文：故帝数与近习谋诛大臣，皆发于仓猝，决意无疑。
现代文：所以，东昏侯数次同身边亲近密谋诛杀大臣之事，每次都突然行动，主意坚定，没有半点迟疑之心。
English: Therefore, several times, Dong Wuhou got close to his friends and plotted to kill the minister. Each time, he suddenly acted, his mind was firm, and there was no hesitation.

古文：于是大臣人人莫能自保。
现代文：于是，搞得大臣们人人自危，难能自我保全。
English: As a result, it is difficult for ministers to protect themselves, as everyone is at risk.

古文：九月，丁未，以豫州刺史裴叔业为南兗州刺史，征虏长史张冲为豫州刺史。
现代文：九月，丁未，南齐任命豫州刺史裴叔业为南兖州刺史，任命征虏长史张冲为豫州刺史。
English: In September, Ding Wei and Nanzhi appointed Pei Shuhei, the chief historian of Yuzhou, as the chief historian of Nanluozhou, and appointed Zhang Chong, the chief historian of the Conquest, as the chief historian of Yuzhou.

古文：壬戌，以频诛大臣，大赦。
现代文：壬戌，东昏侯因频繁地诛杀大臣，为了稳定人心，诏令大赦天下。
English: In order to stabilize the hearts of the people, Emperor Dahal issued a general amnesty to the world.

古文：丙戌，魏主谒长陵，欲引白衣左右吴人茹皓同车。皓奋衣将登，给事黄门侍郎无匡进谏，帝推之使下，皓失色而退。
现代文：丙戌，北魏宣武帝元恪谒拜长陵，元恪想使身边人、没有任命官职的江南人茹皓与自己同车而行，茹皓高兴地整理了一下衣服，赶紧上车，但给事黄门侍郎元匡谏言宣武帝不可这样，于是元恪又推茹皓让他下去，茹皓羞愧万分，气的脸色都变了，只好退下。
English: For example, Emperor Xuanwu of the Northern Wei Dynasty was the first to pay homage to the Long Mausoleum. Yuanwu wanted to make people around him, people from the south of the Yangtze River who had not been appointed to official positions, to go with him in the car. Rui happily sorted out his clothes and quickly got on the car, but the Yellow Gate waiter Yuan Kuang said that Emperor Xuanwu could not do so. So Yuanwu pushed Rui to let him go down. Rui was ashamed, his face changed, and he had to retreat.

古文：匡，新城之子也。
现代文：元匡是元新城的儿子。
English: Yuan Kuang is the son of Yuan Xincheng.

古文：益州刺史刘季连闻帝失德，遂自骄恣，用刑严酷，蜀人怨之。
现代文：益州刺史刘季连知道东昏侯没有君德，于是自己也骄横恣纵起来了，滥用刑法，异常严酷，蜀人对他特别怨恨。
English: Liu Jilian, the governor of Yizhou, knew that Dongdimou had no virtue, so he became arrogant and arbitrary, abused the criminal law, and was extremely harsh. The people of Shu were particularly resentful of him.

古文：是月，遣兵袭中水，不克。
现代文：在本月，刘季连派兵去袭击中水，没有取胜。
English: This month, Mr. Liu sent troops to attack Zhongshui, without success.

古文：于是蜀人赵续伯等皆起兵作乱，季连不能制。
现代文：于是，蜀人赵绩伯等人纷纷起兵叛乱，刘季连没办法制服他们。
English: As a result, people from Shu, such as Zhao Zibo and others, started a mutiny, and Liu Qilian was unable to subdue them.

古文：枝江文忠公徐孝嗣，以文士不显同异，故名位虽重，犹得久存。
现代文：枝江文忠公徐孝嗣，由于是个文士，待人处事圆滑周到，不露棱角，因此虽然官高名显，但犹自得以久存，未被除去。
English: Because he was a scholar, Xu Xiaozhi, a scholar of the Yangtze River, was tactful and discreet in his dealings with others. Therefore, although he was a high-ranking official, he was able to survive for a long time and was not removed.

古文：虎贲中郎将许准为孝嗣陈说事机，劝行废立。
现代文：虎贲中郎将许准给徐孝嗣讲述时事要害，劝说他废去东昏侯，另立新帝。
English: The middle brother of Tigress will allow Xu Xiaozhe to tell him the key points of current affairs and persuade him to abolish Dongdimou and set up a new emperor.

古文：孝嗣迟疑久之，谓必无用干戈之理；须帝出游，闭城门，召百僚集议废之。
现代文：徐孝嗣长久迟疑难决，以为欲行此事一定不能动用干戈，必须是等待皇帝出游的机会，关闭城门，召集群臣百官在一起商议，把东昏侯废掉。
English: Xu Xiaozhi hesitated for a long time, thinking that if he wanted to do this, he must not use the sword, but must wait for the opportunity for the emperor to travel, close the city gate, convene a group of ministers and hundreds of officials to discuss together, and abolish Dongdimhou.

古文：虽有此怀，终不能决。
现代文：他虽然有此想法，但是终究不能决策而行。
English: Although he has this idea, he can't make a decision.

古文：诸嬖幸亦稍憎之。
现代文：东昏侯身边的那帮宠信之徒也对徐孝嗣渐渐厌憎。
English: The group of favorites around Dongdimou also gradually detested Xu Xiaozhi.

古文：西丰忠宪侯沈文季自托老疾，不豫朝权，侍中沈昭略谓文季曰： 叔父行年六十，为员外仆射，欲求自免，岂可得乎！ 
现代文：西丰忠宪侯沈文季以年纪大且有病在身为由，不参与朝政，侍中沈昭略对他说： 叔父你年纪才六十，身为仆射而不管事，你想以此而免祸自保，岂能办得到呢？ 
English: Shen Wenzhi, the loyal constitutional prince of Xifeng, did not participate in the imperial government, citing his old age and illness as the reason. The aide-de-camp Shen Zhaoyu said to him: Uncle, you are only sixty years old, and as a foot soldier, you do not care about anything. If you want to protect yourself from harm, how can you do it?

古文：文季笑而不应。
现代文：沈文季笑着不吭声。
English: Shen Wencai laughed and remained silent.

古文：冬，十月，乙未，帝召孝嗣、文季、昭略入华林省。文季登车，顾曰： 此行恐往而不反。 
现代文：冬季，十月，乙未，东昏侯把徐孝嗣、沈文季、沈昭略三人召入华林省，沈文季上了车子，回过头来说： 此行恐怕有去无回了。 
English: In the winter, in October, in the middle of the year, Dong Douhou summoned three people, Xu Xiaozhi, Shen Wenzhi and Shen Zhaoliu, to Hualin Province. Shen Wenzhi got on the car and looked back and said, "I'm afraid there is no going back from this trip."

古文：帝使外监茹法珍赐以药酒，昭略怒，骂孝嗣曰： 废昏立明，古今令典；宰相无才，致有今日！ 
现代文：东昏侯指使外监茹法珍赐他们毒酒。沈昭略愤怒不已，骂徐孝嗣说： 废掉昏君，另立明主。这是从古到今的宪章大法，全因你这做宰相的无能，以致我们才有今日。 
English: Dongdimou ordered the overseer Ru Fa Zhen to give them poisoned wine. Shen Zhaoyuan was furious and scolded Xu Xiaozhi, saying: "Abolish Dimun and set up a new ruler. This has been the Great Law of the Charter from ancient times to the present. It is all because of your incompetence as prime minister that we have today.

古文：以瓯掷其面曰： 使作破面鬼！ 
现代文：接着把酒瓯砸到徐孝嗣脸上，并且说： 我让你死了也做一个破了面的鬼！ 
English: Then he smashed the wine gourd into Xu Xiaozhi's face and said, "I let you die and become a ghost with a broken face!"

古文：孝嗣饮药酒至斗馀，乃卒。
现代文：徐孝嗣喝药酒，一气喝了一斗多才死去。
English: Xu Xiaozhi drank medicinal liquor. He drank more than a barrel at a time before he died.

古文：孝嗣子演尚武康公主，况尚山阴公主，皆坐诛。
现代文：徐孝嗣的儿子徐演娶了武康公主为妻，另一个儿子徐况娶了山阴公主为妻，但是都受父亲牵连而被杀。
English: Xu Xiaozhi's son, Xu Yuan, married Princess Wu Kang, and another son, Xu Fang, married Princess Shanyin, but they were both implicated by their father and killed.

古文：昭略弟昭光闻收至，家人劝之逃。昭光不忍舍其母，入，执母手悲泣，收者杀之。
现代文：沈昭略的弟弟沈昭光听说抓捕的人来了，家中人劝他逃走，但是他不忍心丢下自己的母亲，就进入屋中，拉着母亲的手悲声哭泣，抓捕者进来把他杀了。
English: Shen Zhaoguang, the younger brother of Shen Zhaoyao, heard that the arresting officers were coming. His family members urged him to escape, but he couldn't bear to leave his mother. He went into the house, holding his mother's hand and crying in grief. The arresting officers came in and killed him.

古文：昭光兄子昙亮逃，已得免，闻昭光死，叹曰： 家门屠灭，何以生为！ 
现代文：沈昭光的哥哥的儿子沈昙亮逃走了，已经得以幸免，但是听说沈昭光死了，叹息地说： 家门遭受如此屠灭，我还活着干什么叫？ 
English: Shen Zhaoguang's brother's son, Shen Guoliang, escaped and has been spared, but when he heard that Shen Zhaoguang had died, he said with a sigh, "My family suffered such a massacre, why am I still alive?"

古文：绝吭而死。
现代文：于是扼断自己的喉咙而死。
English: He then strangled himself to death.

古文：初，太尉陈显达自以高、武旧将，当高宗之世，内怀危惧，深自贬损，常乘朽弊车，道从卤簿止用羸小者十数人。
现代文：当初，太尉陈显达因自己是高帝、武帝时候的旧将，所以在明帝之时，心存危惧，自己使劲地贬损自己，经常乘坐一辆破破烂烂的车子，出外时扈从的仪仗队也只有又弱又小的十多个人。
English: At first, because he was an old general at the time of Emperor Gao and Emperor Wu, First Lieutenant Chen Xianda was apprehensive at the time of Emperor Ming, and he tried hard to belittle himself. He often rode in a tattered car, and when he went out, he was accompanied by a weak and small honor guard of more than ten people.

古文：尝侍宴，酒酣，启高宗借枕，高宗令与之。
现代文：一次，他曾经陪侍明帝宴饮，酒酣之时，启奏明帝要借用一下枕头，明帝命令别人给他一个。
English: On one occasion, he once accompanied Emperor Ming for a banquet, and when the wine was flowing, he asked Emperor Ming to borrow a pillow, and Emperor Ming ordered someone else to give him one.

古文：显达抚枕曰： 臣年衰老，富贵已足，唯欠枕枕死，特就陛下乞之。 
现代文：枕头拿来后，陈显达用手摸着枕头说： 我年老体衰，享受的荣华富贵已经足够了，只欠一个枕头枕着而死，所以特意来向陛下乞求一个。 
English: After the pillow was brought, Chen Xianda touched the pillow with his hand and said: I am old and weak, I have enjoyed enough glory and wealth, I only owe one pillow to die on, so I specifically came to beg for one from His Majesty.

古文：高宗失色曰： 公醉矣！ 
现代文：明帝听了陈显达这一番言语，不禁失色，对他说： 您喝醉了。 
English: After listening to Chen Xianda's words, the Ming Emperor lost his temper and said to him, "You are drunk."

古文：显达以年礼告退，高宗不许。
现代文：陈显达以自己已经年届七十，而请求辞官，但是崐明帝不予准许。
English: Chen Xianda claimed that he was already 70 years old and asked to be demoted, but Emperor Ming did not allow it.

古文：及王敬则反，时显达将兵拒魏，始安王遥光疑之，启高宗欲追军还；会敬则平，乃止。
现代文：在王敬则反叛之时，陈显达正率兵抵抗北魏，始安王萧遥光怀疑陈显达，就启奏明帝，想把陈显达的军队召回，恰好王敬则叛乱被平定，于是就没有进行。
English: At the time of Wang Jingzhe's rebellion, Chen Xianda was leading an army to resist the Northern Wei Dynasty. King Xiao Yaoguang of the First An Dynasty suspected Chen Xianzhe and sent a message to Emperor Ming to recall Chen Xianzhe's army. Wang Jingzhe's rebellion was put down, so it did not take place.

古文：及帝即位，显达弥不乐在建康。得江州。
现代文：到了东昏侯即位之后，陈显达越发不愿意住在建康，被派做江州刺史，他十分高兴。
English: After he ascended to the throne of Dongguan, Chen Xianda became more and more reluctant to live in Jiankang. He was very happy to be assigned to be the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：甚喜。尝有疾，不令治，既而自愈，意甚不悦。
现代文：陈显达曾经得病，但是他不让医治，不久自己好了，可是他心中却非常不高兴。
English: Chen Xianda was once ill, but he refused to be cured. He soon recovered, but he was very unhappy in his heart.

古文：闻帝屡诛大臣，传云当遣兵袭江州，十一月，丙辰，显达举兵于寻阳，令长史庾弘远等与朝贵书，数帝罪恶，云 欲奉建安王为主，须京尘一静，西迎大驾。 
现代文：陈显达知道了东昏侯多次诛杀大臣，并且听人传说朝廷肯定要派兵来袭击江州，所以，于十一月，丙辰，陈显达在寻阳起兵，命令长史庾弘远等人给朝廷中的新贵们送去一封信，信中列举了东昏侯的罪恶行径，并且说道： 准备拥立建安王萧宝寅为帝，待京中诸害一除，就西迎建安王登基。 
English: Chen Xianda knew that Dongwu Hou repeatedly killed ministers, and heard rumors that the imperial court would definitely send troops to attack Jiangzhou. Therefore, in November, Bing Chen and Chen Xianda raised an army in Xianyang and ordered Chang Shi and Hongyuan to send a letter to the new nobles in the imperial court. The letter listed the evil deeds of Dongwu Hou, and said: Prepare to support the establishment of King Jian'an Xiao Baoying as emperor, and wait for all the harm in Beijing to be eliminated, and welcome King Jian'an to the throne.

古文：乙丑，以护军将军崔慧景为平南将军，督众军击显达；后军将军胡松、骁骑将军李叔献帅水军据梁山；左卫将军左兴盛督前锋军屯杜姥宅。
现代文：乙丑，南齐任命护军将军崔慧景为平南将军，督率诸路军队攻击陈显达，后军将军胡松、骁骑将军李叔献统领水军占据梁山，左卫将军左兴盛督率前锋军队驻扎在杜姥宅。
English: In the second year, the Southern Qi appointed the escort general Cui Huijing as the leader of the Pingnan general, and he led the troops to attack Chen Xianda. The rear army general Hu Song and the cavalry general Li Shuxian led the territorial navy to occupy Liangshan. The left guard general Zuo Xing Sheng led the forward army and stationed in Du Bao's house.

古文：十二月，癸未，以前辅国将军杨集始为秦州刺史。
现代文：十二月，癸未，南齐任命从前的辅国将军杨集始为秦州刺史。
English: In December, Yang Jishu, the former general of the Auxiliary State, was appointed as the chief historian of Qin.

古文：陈显达发寻阳，败胡松于采石，建康震恐。
现代文：陈显达从寻阳发兵，在采石打败了胡松，消息传到建康，朝中一片震惊，惶恐不安。
English: Chen Xianda sent troops from Xuanyang and defeated Hu Song at the quarry. The news reached Jiankang, and the entire court was shocked and panicked.

古文：甲申，军于新林，左兴盛帅诸军拒之。
现代文：甲申，陈显达率部到了新林，左兴盛统率诸路军队抵挡陈部。
English: Gao Shen, Chen Xianda led the troops to Xinlin, Zuo Xing Sheng led the troops to resist Chen.

古文：显达多置屯火于岸侧，潜军夜渡，袭宫城。
现代文：陈显达在长江岸边设置了许多火堆，夜间率军偷渡过江，去袭击宫城。
English: Chen Xianda set up many fires on the banks of the Yangtze River, and at night he led his army to sneak across the river to attack Miyagi.

古文：乙酉，显达以数千人登落星冈，新亭诸军闻之，奔还，宫城大骇，闭门设守。
现代文：乙酉陈显达带领数千人马登上落星冈，驻守在新亭的诸路军队得知之后，拔腿往回跑，宫城之内大为恐惧，只好闭门设守。
English: Chen Xianda led thousands of people to climb the rocking star hill, and after the troops stationed in Xinting learned about it, they ran back. Miyagi was very afraid and had to close the gate.

古文：显达执马槊，从步兵数百，于西州前与台军战，再合，显达大胜，手杀数人，槊折；台军继至，显达不能抗，退走，至西州后，骑官赵潭注刺显达，坠马，斩之，诸子皆伏诛。
现代文：陈显达骑马执槊，带领儿百名步兵，与朝廷军队开战，两次交战，陈显达大胜，亲手斩杀好几人，但是不幸的是手中的槊折断了。这时，朝廷军队开过来了，陈显达抵抗不住，只好逃跑。陈显达逃到西州之后，骑官赵潭用手中之槊投刺他，陈显达中槊坠马，被赵潭斩首。陈显达的几个儿子也都伏法被斩。
English: Chen Xianda rode a donkey, led a hundred infantrymen, and fought with the imperial army, fought twice, Chen Xianda won a great victory, personally killed several people, but unfortunately the donkey broke in his hand. At this time, the imperial army came, Chen Xianda could not resist and had to flee. After Chen Xianda fled to Xizhou, the cavalry officer Zhao Tan stabbed him with the donkey in his hand. Chen Xianda fell from his horse and was beheaded by Zhao Tan. Several of Chen Xianda's sons were also beheaded.

古文：长史庾弘远，炳之之子也，斩于硃雀航。
现代文：长史庾弘远是庾炳之的儿子，在朱雀航被斩。
English: Changshi Zou Hongyuan, the son of Zou Zi, was beheaded in Suzakhang.

古文：将刑，索帽著之，曰： 子路结缨，吾不可以不冠而死。 
现代文：将要行刑之时，庾弘远要来帽子戴上，说道： 当年子路把冠缨系好而死。我也不可以不戴帽子死去。 
English: When he was about to be executed, Gong Hongyuan wanted to put on his hat and said, "Back then, Zilu died with his crown on. I can't die without wearing my hat."

古文：谓观者曰： 吾非贼，乃是义兵，为诸军请命耳。
现代文：他又对观看的人说： 我不是反贼，而是起义军，为的是替诸军请命。
English: And he said unto them that looked on, I am no rebel, but an avenger of the people.

古文：陈公太轻事；若用吾言，天下将免涂炭。 
现代文：陈显达太轻率了，如果他采纳了我的意见的话，天下就可以免于陷入水火之中了。 
English: Chen Xianda is too rash, if he adopts my opinion, the world can be saved from falling into the water and fire.

古文：弘远子子曜，抱父乞代命，并杀之。
现代文：庾弘远的儿子庾子曜，抱着他的父亲乞求代父一死，但是与其父一并遭杀害。
English: Zou Ziyou, the son of Zou Hongyuan, held his father in his arms and begged for his father's death, but was killed together with his father.

古文：帝既诛显达，益自骄恣，渐出游走，又不欲人见之；每出，先驱斥所过人家，唯置空宅。
现代文：东昏侯诛杀了陈显达之后，越发骄横恣意。他渐渐开始喜欢出外游走，但又不想让人看见，每次出外，总是事先把所要经过地方所住的人家赶走，只留崐下空房子。
English: After Dongwu Houyi killed Chen Xianda, he became more and more arrogant and arbitrary. He gradually began to like to travel, but he did not want people to see that every time he went out, he always drove away the people who lived in the place he was going to pass in advance, leaving only the empty house under his arm.

古文：尉司击鼓蹋围，鼓声所闻，便应奔走，不暇衣履，犯禁者应手格杀。
现代文：他出游时，先由尉司敲着鼓沿途走一大圈，居民们凡是听到鼓声，就应立即跑开，连衣服和鞋都来不及穿好，违反禁令的人就被随手格杀。
English: When he went on a trip, he was preceded by a lieutenant who beat a drum and walked in a large circle along the way. Whenever residents heard the drum, they should immediately run away. They didn't even have time to put on their clothes and shoes, and those who violated the ban were killed at random.

古文：一月凡二十馀出，出辄不言定所，东西南北，无处不驱。
现代文：一月之中，东昏侯要出去二十多次，而且从来不说个具体的去处，东西南北，无处不去。
English: In the middle of January, Dongdimou would go out more than 20 times, and he would never say a specific place to go, from east to west, north to south, there was nowhere to go.

古文：常以三四更中，鼓声四出，火光照天，幡戟横路。
现代文：他还常常在夜间三四更时分出游，弄得鼓声四出，火光照天，幡仪兵戟横路。
English: He also often went out in the night at three or four o'clock, making the drums sound, the fire light up the sky, and the flag ceremony cross the road.

古文：士民喧走相随，老小震惊，啼号塞道，处处禁断，不知所过。
现代文：这时，士人民众们喧叫奔路，前后相随，老人小孩惊慌失措，哭喊成一片，拥挤在路上，但是处处禁止通行，所以都不知道何处可以经过。
English: At this time, people were running noisily along the road, running back and forth, old people and children panicked, crying and shouting together, crowded on the road, but traffic was prohibited everywhere, so they did not know where to pass.

古文：四民废业，樵苏路断，吉凶失时，乳妇寄产，或舆病弃尸，不得殡葬。
现代文：就这样，搞得四方的民众无法从业，连去打柴割草都无路可行，红白喜事不能按时进行，一些孕妇不能把孩子生在家里，甚至有的人抱病躲逃，结果死在路上，不能得到殡葬。
English: In this way, the people in the four directions could not be employed, and even there was no way to cut grass, the Red and White Festival could not be carried out on time, some pregnant women could not give birth to children at home, and even some people were sick and fled, and as a result died on the road and could not be buried.

古文：巷陌悬幔为高鄣，置伏人防守，谓之 屏除 ，亦谓之 长围 。
现代文：东昏侯还让人在小巷和田间小道悬挂布幔以成为高高的屏障，并且布置人手执兵器守护，称作是 屏除 ，也叫做 长围 。
English: Dongwu also had people hang cloth curtains in alleys and field lanes to form a high barrier, and set up guards holding weapons, known as "screening," also known as "long perimeter."

古文：尝至沈公城，有一妇人临产，不去，因剖腹视其男女。
现代文：有一次，东昏侯来到沈公城，有一个妇人因临产而没有躲逃，于是剖开产妇的腹部看是男孩还是女孩。
English: Once upon a time, Dong Wuhou came to Shen Gongcheng. There was a woman who did not escape because she was about to give birth, so she cut open the abdomen of the mother to see if it was a boy or a girl.

古文：又尝至定林寺，有沙门老病不能去，藏草间；命左右射之，百箭俱发。
现代文：又有一次，东昏侯来到定林寺，有一个老和尚因年老患病不能离去，藏在草丛中，他就命令随从用箭射老和尚，百名弓手一起发射。
English: On another occasion, when Dong Dou Hou came to Dinglin Temple, there was an old monk who could not leave because of old age and illness, hiding in the grass. He ordered his followers to shoot the old monk with arrows, and a hundred archers fired together.

古文：帝有膂力，牵弓至三斛五斗。
现代文：东昏侯臂力过人，能拉开三斛五斗力的弓。
English: Dong Dou Hou's arm strength is superior to others, and he can pull open a bow with the strength of three cymbals and five barrels.

古文：又好担幢，白虎幢高七丈五尺，于齿上担之，折齿不倦。
现代文：东昏侯还喜好顶方，高七丈五尺的白虎，放在牙齿上顶着，把牙齿折断了还没玩够。
English: Dongwu Hou also likes the white tiger at the top, which is seven feet high and five feet tall. He puts it on his teeth and holds it up. If he breaks the teeth, he hasn't played with it enough.

古文：自制担幢校具，伎衣饰以金玉，侍卫满侧，逞诸变态，曾无愧色。
现代文：东昏侯自己制做了顶器械，表演时穿的服装上饰以金玉，每次表演侍卫站满两侧，使出各种技能把戏，从来不感到不好意思。
English: Dongdimou made the top equipment himself. The costume he wore during the performance was decorated with gold. Every time he performed, the guards stood on both sides, using various skill tricks. He never felt embarrassed.

古文：学乘马于东冶营兵俞灵韵，常著织成袴褶，金薄帽，执七宝槊，急装缚袴，凌冒雨雪，不避坑阱。
现代文：东昏侯跟东冶营兵俞灵韵学骑马，经常穿着编织的衣裤，不穿外服，头戴薄金制的帽子，手执七宝槊，戎装束裤，冒着雪，遇上陷坑，也不避开，总是一跃而过。
English: Dongwu Hou and Dongye battalion soldiers rhyme on horseback, often wearing woven clothes and trousers, not wearing outerwear, wearing a thin gold hat, holding cloisonné, military dress pants, braving the snow, encountering traps, not avoiding, always jumping over.

古文：驰骋渴乏，辄下马，解取腰边蠡器，酌水饮之，复上马驰去。
现代文：他纵马驰骋得渴乏了，就从马上下来，解下腰侧挂的马杓，盛水喝一通，又上马狂奔而去。
English: Thirsty from his long ride, he dismounted from his horse, took off the bridle that hung around his waist, filled a pitcher with water, drank it, and then mounted his horse and galloped away.

古文：又选无赖小人善走者为逐马左右五百人，常以自随。
现代文：东昏侯又选择那些善于长跑的无赖痞子五百个，称为逐马左右，经常让他们随马而跑。
English: Dongdimou also chose five hundred ruffian mules who were good at long-distance running, known as horse-by-horse, and often let them run with the horse.

古文：或于市侧过亲幸家，环回宛转，周遍城邑。
现代文：他或者在市中自己亲近宠幸的人家中游玩，从这家转到那家，来回转悠，能转遍全城。
English: He would also visit the homes of people he was close to and favored in the city, going from house to house, going back and forth, and being able to travel all over the city.

古文：或出郊射雉，置射雉场二百九十六处，奔走往来，略不暇息。
现代文：他或者去郊外射野鸡，布置了射雉场二百九十六处，奔走往来，从一处到另一处，忙得没有暇息之时。
English: Or he would go out to the countryside to shoot pheasants, setting up two hundred and ninety-six shooting sites, running back and forth, from one place to another, so busy that he had no time to rest.

古文：王肃为魏制官品百司，皆如江南之制，凡九品，品各有二。
现代文：王肃为北魏制定官职品位和各种机构，全部按照江南的制度，共分九品，每一品又分正、从二品。
English: For the Northern Wei Dynasty, Wang Sui established official ranks and various institutions, all in accordance with the system of the south of the Yangtze River, divided into nine products, each product is divided into two products.

古文：侍中郭祚兼吏部尚书。祚清谨，重惜官位，每有铨授，虽得其人，必徘徊久，然后下笔，曰： 此人便己贵矣。 
现代文：侍中郭祚兼任吏部尚书，他清廉公正，办事谨慎，重惜官位，每次诠选授官，虽然发现有合适人选，一定还要反复考虑很久，然后才下笔签署，并且嘴里还说道： 这个人便已经富贵了。 
English: The chamberlain Guo Wei, who also served as the secretary of the cadre, was honest and fair, prudent in his work, and cherished his official position. Every time he selected and appointed an official, although he found a suitable candidate, he had to repeatedly consider it for a long time before signing it, and he also said in his mouth: This person is already rich.

古文：人以是多怨之；然所用者无不称职。
现代文：因此，人们对他多有怨心，但是经他所录用的官员无有不称职者。
English: As a result, there is a lot of resentment against him, but none of the officials hired by him are incompetent.

