古文：李惟燕孙明三刀师宋参军刘鸿渐张嘉猷魏恂杜思讷龙兴寺主陈哲丰州烽子张镒崔宁
现代文：李惟燕孙明三刀师宋参军刘鸿渐张嘉猷魏恂杜思讷龙兴寺主陈哲丰州烽子张镒崔宁
English: Li Wei, Yan Yan, Sun Ming, the three-tool master of the Song Dynasty, Liu Hongqian, Liu Hongzhang, Zhang Jiaxuan, Wei Wei, Du Si, Ne Longxing, Chen Zhe, the head of the Longxing Temple, Feng Zhou, Zang Zi, Zhang Jiaxuan, Cui Ning

古文：李惟燕
现代文：李惟燕
English: Li Weiyan

古文：建德县令李惟燕，少持金刚经。
现代文：建德县县令李惟燕，年少读金刚经。
English: Li Weiyan, the county magistrate of Jiande County, read the Diamond Sutra from a young age.

古文：唐天宝末，惟燕为余姚郡参军。
现代文：唐朝天宝末年，惟燕做余姚郡的参军。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Tianbao, Wei Yan joined the army in Yuyao County.

古文：秩满北归，过五丈店，属上虞江埭塘破，水竭。
现代文：满了十年而回，过五丈店，到了上虞江，坝塘损坏，水流干了。
English: Ten years later, after passing through Wuzhongdian and arriving at Shangyu River, the dam was damaged and the water flow dried up.

古文：时中夜晦暝，四回无人，此路旧多劫盗。
现代文：当时正是半夜，天色昏暗，四处无人。这条路过去多有盗贼。
English: It was the middle of the night, the sky was dark, there was no one around, and there were many thieves on this road.

古文：惟燕舟中有吴绫数百匹，惧为贼所取，因持一剑，至船前诵经。三更后，见堤上两炬火，自远而至。
现代文：惟燕的船上有吴地的绫几百匹，害怕被贼抢走，于是就拿着一短剑，到船的前面吟诵真经，三更以后，看见堤坝上有两支火炬，从远处来。
English: However, Yan's ship had hundreds of horses from Wudi on board, and he was afraid of being robbed by thieves. Therefore, he took a short sword and went to the front of the ship to chant the sutras. After three days, he saw two torches on the dike, coming from a distance.

古文：惟燕疑是村人卫己，火去船百步，便却复回，心颇异之。
现代文：惟燕疑心是村里自卫的人，火炬离船有百步远，便退了回去。
English: But Yan Qixin was the village's self-defence man. The torch was a hundred paces away from the boat, so he retreated back.

古文：愈益厉声诵经，亦窃自思云：火之所为，得非金刚经力乎！
现代文：惟燕心里很疑惑，更加大声地诵经。也私下里暗想：火的出现，难道是金刚经的威力吗？
English: However, Yan Yan was very puzzled and chanted more loudly. He also secretly thought: Is the appearance of fire the power of the Diamond Sutra?

古文：时塘水竭而塘外水满，惟燕便心念：塘破当得水助。
现代文：当时坝塘中的水已流尽而塘外的水满，惟燕便在心里盼着坝塘破了，应当得到水来救助。
English: At that time, the water in the dam pond had run out and the water outside the pond was full, but Yan was hoping in his heart that the dam pond would break and he should get water to help.

古文：半夕之后，忽闻船头有流水声，惊云： 塘阔数丈，何由得破？ 
现代文：半夜之后，忽然听到船头有流水声，他惊讶地说： 坝塘宽有几丈，从什么地方破的呢？ 
English: After midnight, he suddenly heard the sound of rushing water at the bow of the boat. He said in surprise: How wide is the dam? Where did it break?

古文：久之，稍觉船浮，及明，河水已满。
现代文：过了很久，觉得船稍微浮起来了。等到天亮，河水已经满了。
English: After a long time, I felt the boat float a little. By dawn, the river was full.

古文：对船所一孔，大数尺，乃知诵金刚经之助云。
现代文：正对着停船处地方有一个大孔，有几尺之大。才知道是金刚经的帮助。
English: There was a large hole, several feet in size, directly opposite the boat stop. It was only then that I knew it was the Diamond Sutra that had helped me.

古文：惟燕弟惟玉见任虔州别驾，见其兄诵经有功，因效之。
现代文：惟燕的弟弟惟玉任虔州别驾。看见他的哥哥吟诵经书有功，于是也效法他。
English: Wei Yan's younger brother, Wei Yu Ren, was a devout Christian. Seeing his brother's merit in chanting scriptures, he also followed his example.

古文：后泛舟出峡，水急橹折，船将欲败，乃力念经。
现代文：以后他乘船出峡，水急而橹断，船将要遇难。于是全力念经。
English: Later, he took a boat out of the gorge, the water rushed and broke, and the boat was about to be wrecked. So he read the sutra with all his might.

古文：忽见一橹随流而下，遂获济。
现代文：忽然看见一橹随水而来。于是船得救了。
English: And, behold, there came a shoot out of the water: and the ship was saved.

古文：其族人亦常诵金刚经。
现代文：他的亲人也常常诵读金刚经。
English: His relatives also often recite the Diamond Sutra.

古文：遇安禄山之乱，伏于荒草，贼将至，思得一鞋以走，俄有物落其背，惊视。乃新鞋也。
现代文：结果遇到安禄山的叛乱，躲到荒草中。贼寇将要到了，他想得到一双鞋好逃走，不一会就有一个东西落在他的背上，他惊讶地看，原来是一双新鞋子。
English: As a result, he encountered the rebellion of Anlu Mountain and hid in the weeds. The bandits were about to arrive, and he wanted to get a pair of shoes to escape. Soon, something landed on his back, and to his surprise, it turned out to be a new pair of shoes.

古文：孙明
现代文：孙明
English: Sun Ming

古文：唐孙明者，郑州阳武人也，世贫贱，为卢氏庄客，善持金刚经，日诵二十遍，经二十年。
现代文：唐代孙明是郑州阳武县人。世代贫贱，做了卢氏的庄客，善学金刚经，每天吟诵二十遍，过了二十年。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Sun Ming was a native of Yangwu County, Zhengzhou. He was born into a poor family and became a Zhuang guest of the Lu clan. He was a good student of the Gangjeong, reciting the Gangjeong twenty times a day. Twenty years have passed.

古文：自初持经，便绝荤血。
现代文：从开始念经，就断绝荤肉。
English: From the beginning of the sutra recitation, you should give up eating meat.

古文：后正念诵次，忽见二吏来追，明意将是县吏，便县去。
现代文：后来，正念诵经书时，忽然看见两个官吏来拘捕。孙明认为是县吏，便跟着去了。
English: Later, when he was chanting the scripture, he suddenly saw two officials come to arrest him. Sun Ming thought they were county officials, so he followed them.

古文：行可五六里，至一府门，门人云： 王已出巡。 
现代文：走了有五六里路，到了一个府门。门人说： 王已经出巡去了。 
English: When they had gone about five or six miles, they came to a gate, and the gatekeeper said, "The king has gone on a journey."

古文：吏因闭明于空室中，其室从广五六十间，盖若阴云。
现代文：官吏于是把孙明关在一个空屋子里。那个屋子宽敞足有五六十间。大概象阴云一样。
English: The officials then locked Sun Ming in an empty room. The room was spacious, with fifty or sixty rooms. It looked like a dark cloud.

古文：经七日，王方至，吏引明入府。王问： 汝有何福？
现代文：又过了七天。王才回来，官吏领孙明入府见王，王问： 你有什么福事？ 
English: After another seven days, the king returned. The officials brought Sun Ming into the palace to see the king. The king asked, "What is your good fortune?"

古文：答云： 持金刚经已二十年。 
现代文：回答到： 念金刚经已经二十年了。 
English: Answer: It has been 20 years since I recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：王言此大福也，顾谓左右曰： 昨得只洹家牒，论功也。 
现代文：王说这是大福事。回头告诉左右的人说： 昨天得到只洹家的帖子，说孙明念诵经书勤恳，请求延长寿命二十年，才知道修道是不可思议的，延长的寿命二十年，以此来补偿你的功德。 
English: The king said that this was a great blessing. He turned to the people around him and said, "Yesterday, I received a postcard from the family of Sun Myung Moon, saying that Sun Myung Moon was diligent in reading and chanting scriptures, and asked to extend his life by twenty years. Only then did I know that it is inconceivable to practice cultivation and extend your life by twenty years in order to compensate for your merits.

古文：令吏送还舍。
现代文：就叫官吏把他送回家去。
English: So he ordered the officers to take him to his home.

古文：其家殡明已毕，神虽复体，家人不之知也。
现代文：他家人已把孙明出殡完了。神魂虽然又归复他的身体，可家人不知道这件事。
English: His family had already completed the funeral of Sun Ming. Although the divine soul had returned to his body, the family did not know about it.

古文：会猎者从殡宫过，闻号呼之声。投其家人，因尔得活矣。
现代文：正赶上打猎的人从他的坟前过，听见哭喊的声音，报告了他的家人，因而才得活。
English: A hunter who was passing by his grave heard his cries, alerted his family, and he survived.

古文：天宝末，明活已六七年，甚无恙也。
现代文：天宝末年，孙明已活了六七年了，一点病也没有。
English: At the end of Tianbao, Sun Ming had lived for sixty-seven years, without any illness.

古文：三刀师
现代文：三刀师
English: The Three Swordsmen

古文：唐三刀师者，俗姓张，名伯英，乾元中，为寿州健儿。性至孝，以其父在颍州，乃盗官马往以迎省。
现代文：唐朝的三刀师，俗姓张，名叫伯英。乾元年中，是寿州的强壮少年，本性是非常孝顺，因他的父亲在颍州，于是他偷了官马去探望父亲。
English: A three-pronged sword master of the Tang Dynasty, his common surname was Zhang, and his name was Bo Ying. In the middle of the first year of the Qian Dynasty, he was a strong young man from Shoushou, and he was very filial by nature. Since his father was in Zhangzhou, he stole an official horse to visit his father.

古文：至淮阴，为守遏者所得，刺史崔昭令出城腰斩。
现代文：到了淮阴，被守门人阻止抓到了他，刺史崔昭令推出城斩首。
English: When he arrived in Huaiyin, he was stopped by the gatekeeper, who caught him and ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：时屠刽号 能行刀 ，再斩，初不伤损；乃换利刀，罄力砍，不损如故。
现代文：当时行刑的人称 能行刀 。开斩，起初三刀师没有损伤。又用尽力量砍，还是象先前那样没有损伤。
English: At that time, the executioner claimed to be able to wield a sword. At the beginning of the beheading, the three swordsmen were not injured. They also cut with all their strength, but there was still no injury as before.

古文：刽者惊曰： 我用刀砍，至其身则手懦，不知何也？ 
现代文：行刑的人惊讶地说： 我用刀砍，刀落到他的身上就感到手没有劲，不知道是什么原因？ 
English: The executioner was surprised and said, "I used a knife to cut him. When the knife fell on his body, I felt my hands were weak. I don't know why."

古文：遽白之，昭问所以，答曰： 昔年十五，曾绝荤血，诵金刚经十余年。
现代文：便急忙告诉崔昭，崔昭问他原因。三刀师回答： 过去十五岁时，我曾断绝荤肉，诵读了十多年的金刚经。
English: Then he hurriedly told Cui Zhao, and Cui Zhao asked him the reason. The three swordsmen replied: In the past fifteen years, I had broken off the meat, and had recited the Diamond Sutra for more than ten years.

古文：自胡乱以来，身在军中，不复念诵。
现代文：从胡人作乱以来，我在军中，不再诵读。
English: Since the Hu people's rebellion, I have been in the army, and I no longer recite.

古文：昨因被不测罪，唯志心念经尔。 
现代文：昨天因遭到不幸的罪过，所以只一心念经罢了。 
English: Yesterday, due to the sin of misfortune, I was only able to recite the sutras.

古文：昭叹息舍之，遂削发出家，着大铁铃乞食，修千人斋供，一日便辨。时人呼为三刀师，谓是起敬菩萨。
现代文：崔昭叹息，放了他。于是三刀师就削发为僧，摇大铁铃化斋，募化一千人的斋供，一日之内就变了，当时的人就称他为三刀师，说这是起敬菩萨。
English: Cui Zhao sighed and let him go. So the Three Swordsman cut off his hair and became a monk, shook a large iron bell to make a fast, and collected a thousand people's offerings. Within a day, he changed. People at the time called him the Three Swordsman, saying that this was to honor the Bodhisattva.

古文：宋参军
现代文：宋参军
English: Song Joins the Army

古文：唐坊州宋参军少持金刚经，及之官，权于司士宅住。
现代文：唐代坊州宋参军年少读金刚经，等到做了官，暂且住在司士的房子里。
English: In Tang Dynasty Fangzhou, Song Sangjun read the Diamond Sutra when he was young. When he became an official, he temporarily lived in the house of a magistrate.

古文：旧知宅凶，每夕恒诵经。
现代文：先前就知道房子出凶事。每天晚上总是诵读金刚经。
English: She always recited the Diamond Sutra every night.

古文：忽见妇人立于户外，良久，宋问： 汝非鬼耶？ 
现代文：忽然看见一个妇人站在门外，很久，宋问她： 你不是鬼吗？ 
English: Suddenly, Song saw a woman standing outside the door for a long time. Song asked her, "Aren't you a ghost?"

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：回答到： 是鬼。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：又问： 幽明理殊，当不宜见，得非有枉屈之事乎？ 
现代文：又问： 阴间阳间的理是不同的，你不应当来看我，难道你有冤枉的事吗？ 
English: He also asked, "The reason between the sun and the underworld is different. You shouldn't have come to see me. Do you have a grievance?

古文：妇人便悲泣曰： 然。 
现代文：妇人便悲痛地说： 是的。 
English: The woman said sadly, "Yes."

古文：言身是前司士之妇，司士奉使，其弟见逼，拒而不从，因此被杀，以毡裹尸，投于堂西北角溷厕中，不胜秽积。
现代文：说她的前身是司士的妻子，司士奉命出差，他的弟弟想奸污她，她拒绝而不从，所以才被杀死，用毡子裹着尸体，投到堂西北角的厕所里，说不尽的肮脏。
English: She said that her predecessor was the wife of a magistrate. The magistrate was ordered to go on a business trip. His brother wanted to rape her. She refused and did not comply. That's why she was killed, wrapped in lice and thrown into the toilet in the northwest corner of the church. It was unspeakably filthy.

古文：人来多欲陈诉，俗人怯懦，见形必惧，所以幽愤不达。
现代文：我对世人诉说，大家都胆小软弱。看见我一定害怕，这就是我幽怨愤懑不能上达的原因。
English: I told the world that everyone is timid and weak. Seeing me must have been scary, which is why I couldn't let my anger get the better of me.

古文：凶恶骤闻，执事以持念为功，当亦大庇含识，眷言枉秽，岂不悯之。 
现代文：突然知道了这凶恶的事，希你为我念经立功，应当保护弱小。眷属都说冤枉了，难道我不可怜吗？ 
English: Suddenly I learned of this evil deed. I hope you will recite the sutra for me and do your duty to protect the weak. My relatives all say I was wronged. Shouldn't I be pitied?

古文：宋云： 己初官位卑，不能独救，翌日，必为上白府君。 
现代文：宋说： 我初为官位低不能独自救你，明天我一定为你上奏府君。 
English: Song said, "I'm a low-ranking official and I can't save you on my own. I'll definitely go to the capital for you tomorrow."

古文：其鬼乃去。
现代文：那个鬼才走了。
English: The devil just left.

古文：及明具白，掘地及溷，不获其尸。宋诵经，妇人又至，问何以不获，答云： 西北只校一尺，明当求之，以终惠也。 
现代文：宋又诵经，妇人又到了，问她为什么找不到尸体，妇人答到： 往西北方向只进一尺，就应当找到了，这是你对我的大恩惠。 宋按她的话做。
English: Song recited the sutra again. The woman came again and asked her why she couldn't find the body. The woman replied, "If you go just one foot to the northwest, you should be able to find it. This is your great favor to me." Song did as she said.

古文：依言及获之，毡内但余骨在，再为洗濯，移于别所。
现代文：于是找到了她的尸体。毡内只有余骨，又为她清洗，移葬别的地方。
English: Her body was found, with only bones remaining in the coffin, cleaned and buried elsewhere.

古文：其夕又来拜谢，欢喜诣曰： 垂庇过深，难以上答，虽在冥昧，亦有所通。
现代文：那天晚上妇人又来拜谢，高兴地对他说： 你的护爱太深，难以报答，即使是在冥昧处，也有所相通。
English: That evening the woman came again to thank him, and said to him with joy: "Your love is too deep to be repaid. Even in the darkness, there is a connection.

古文：君有二子，大者难养，小者必能有后，且有荣位。 
现代文：你有两个儿子，大的难以养活，小的一定能有后代，并且有地位。 
English: You have two sons. The older one is difficult to support, while the younger one is sure to have offspring and a position.

古文：兼言宋后数改官禄，又云： 大愧使君，不知何以报答， 宋见府君，具叙所记。府君令问，己更何官。
现代文：又说到宋以后几年的执政官禄。又说： 实在对不起使君，不知道用什么来报答他。 宋见府君，把她所说的都告诉了府君，府君让问，自己能换什么官职。
English: She also spoke of the consul's salary in the years after Song. She also said, "I'm really sorry to the governor, I don't know how to repay him. When Song saw the governor, she told him everything she had said. The governor asked what official position he could change.

古文：至夕，妇人又至，因传使君意，云： 一月改官，然不称意，当迁桂州别驾。 
现代文：到了晚上，妇人又到了。宋又传达使君的意思。妇人说： 一月改官，然而不如意，应当迁做桂州别驾。 
English: In the evening, the woman came again. Song also conveyed the meaning of the messenger. The woman said: January change of post, but not satisfactory, should be moved to Guizhou.

古文：宋具白，其事皆有验。
现代文：宋都告诉了府君，那些事也都有验证。
English: Song Du told the prefectural governor, and all of those things have been verified.

古文：初，宋问身既为人所杀，何以不报。云： 前人今尚为官，命未合死，所以未复云也。 
现代文：当初，宋问他被人所杀之后，为什么不报仇，她说： 他现在还做官，命还不当死，所以没有去报复他。 
English: At first, Song asked why he did not take revenge after he was killed by someone. She said: He is still an official, his life is not worth dying for, so I did not take revenge on him.

古文：刘鸿渐
现代文：刘鸿渐
English: Liu Hongzhan

古文：刘鸿渐者，御史大夫展之族子。
现代文：刘鸿渐，是御史大夫展氏家族的儿子。
English: Liu Hongzhan is the son of the family of Dr. Zhan.

古文：唐乾元初，遇乱南徙，有僧令诵金刚经，鸿渐日诵经。
现代文：唐朝乾元年初，遇战乱而南迁。有个和尚让他念金刚经。鸿渐每天念诵经书。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Qian moved south in the face of war. A monk asked him to recite the Diamond Sutra. Hong Qian recited the scripture every day.

古文：至上元年，客于寿春。
现代文：到了上元年间，客居于寿春。
English: In the first year of the new year, he lived as a guest in Shuchun.

古文：一日出门，忽见二吏云： 奉太尉牒令追。 
现代文：一天出门，忽然看见两个官吏说： 奉太尉的命令，缉拿你！ 
English: One day, when he was out, he suddenly saw two officials and said: "By order of the lieutenant, I'm looking for you!"

古文：鸿渐云： 初不识太尉，何以见命？ 
现代文：鸿渐说： 当初我不认识太尉，凭什么有这样的命令？ 
English: "I didn't know the captain at first, so why did he give me such an order?" said Hong Qian.

古文：意欲抗拒。二吏忽尔直前拖曳，鸿渐请著衫，吏不肯放，牵行未久，倏过淮，至一村。
现代文：想要抗拒，两个官吏忽然一直上前去拽他，鸿渐请求去穿衣衫，官吏不肯放他，拉着他走了不久，很快地过了淮河，到了一个村子。
English: Wanting to resist, two officials suddenly went all the way forward to drag him away. Hong Qian asked him to put on a shirt. The officials refused to let him go. After a short while, he quickly crossed the Huai River and arrived at a village.

古文：须臾，持大麻衫及腰带令鸿渐著，笑云： 真醋大衫也 。
现代文：不一会，拿了一件大麻衫和腰带让鸿渐穿。并笑着说： 真是措大的衣衫。 
English: After a while, he took a hemp shirt and a belt for Hong Chen to wear, and said with a smile, "This is a really big shirt."

古文：忽见向劝读经之僧从署中出，僧后童子识鸿渐，经至其所，问十六郎何以至此，因走白和尚云： 刘十六郎适为吏追，以诵经功德，岂不往彼救之。 
现代文：和尚后面的童子认识鸿渐。一直到了刘的住处。问十六郎为什么到了这里，于是跑去告诉和尚说： 刘十六郎正在被官吏追拿，他诵读经书有功德，难道你不去救他吗？ 
English: The boy behind the monk knew Hung Chien. He went all the way to Liu's residence. He asked Liu Jizheglang why he had come here, so he ran to tell the monk: Liu Jizheglang is being chased by officials, he has merits in reciting scriptures, won't you go and save him?

古文：鸿渐寻至僧所，虔礼求救，僧曰： 弟子行无苦。 
现代文：鸿渐找到了和尚的住处，虔诚地以礼求救。和尚说： 弟子走吧，没有什么痛苦。 
English: Hung-chien found the monk's residence and reverently prayed for help. The monk said, "Disciple, let's go, there is no pain."

古文：须臾，吏引鸿渐入诣厅事。案后有五色浮图，高三四尺，回旋转动。
现代文：不一会，官吏领着鸿渐进到厅事，几案后五颜六色的浮图，高三四尺，回环转动。
English: After a while, the officials led Hung gradually into the office, and after a few cases, the colorful floats, three or four feet high, turned around.

古文：未及考问，僧已入门，浮图变成美丈夫，年三十许，云是中丞，降阶接僧。
现代文：还没来得及拷问刘，和尚已经入门了。浮图就变成了美男子，年龄三十左右说是中丞。走下台阶迎接和尚。
English: Before he had a chance to interrogate Liu, the monk had already made his entrance. Float turned into a handsome man, about thirty years old and said to be a junior high school student. He walked down the steps to meet the monk.

古文：问和尚何以复来，僧云： 刘鸿渐是己弟子，持金刚经，功力甚至，其算又未尽，宜见释也。
现代文：问和尚为什么又回来了，和尚说： 刘鸿渐是自己的弟子，念金刚经，功力很大。他的寿命又没尽，应当被释放。 
English: When he asked the monk why he had returned, the monk said, "Liu Hongqian is his own disciple, recites the Diamond Sutra, and has great power. His life is not over, and he should be released."

古文：王曰： 若持金刚经，当愿闻耳。 
现代文：王说： 如果读金刚经，愿意听一听。 
English: The king said, "If you read the Diamond Sutra, I would like to listen to it."

古文：因令跪诵，鸿渐诵两纸讫，忽然遗忘。
现代文：于是就叫他跪诵。鸿渐才诵读完两页，忽然遗忘了。
English: So he asked him to kneel down and recite. Hung Chien only finished reciting two pages and suddenly forgot.

古文：厅西有人，手持金钩龙头幡，幡上碧字，书金刚经，布于鸿渐前，令分明诵经毕，都不见人，但余堂宇阒寂。
现代文：厅西有人，手拿金钩龙头幡，幡上写着碧绿色的字，写的是金刚经，放在鸿渐前面，让他分别当众诵读完，再没有看见人，只留下寂静的堂宇。
English: Someone in the west of the hall, holding a gold-hooked dragon head banner, wrote a turquoise-green word on the banner, writing the Diamond Sutra, placed in front of Hong Chen, let him finish reading in front of the crowd, and then did not see anyone, leaving only a silent hall.

古文：因尔出门，唯见追吏，忽有物状如两日，来击鸿渐。
现代文：于是就出门去。只看见追拿的官吏，忽然有个东西形状象两个太阳，来打鸿渐，鸿渐惊慌奔走。
English: So he went out, only to see the officials chasing after him. Suddenly, something shaped like two suns came to beat Hung-chien, and Hung-chien panicked and ran away.

古文：鸿渐惶惧奔走，忽见道傍有水，鸿渐欲止而饮之。
现代文：忽然看见道傍有水，鸿渐想要停下来喝水。追拿的官吏说： 这是人膏。
English: Suddenly seeing water on the side of the road, Hung-chien wanted to stop and drink. The official said, "This is human ointment."

古文：追吏云： 此是人膏，澄久上清耳，其下悉是余皮烂肉，饮之不得还矣。 
现代文：沉淀久了上面很清罢了，那下面都是沤烂的肉和皮，饮了就不能回去了。 
English: After a long time of sedimentation, the top is very clear, but the bottom is rotten meat and skin. Once you drink it, you can't go back.

古文：须臾至舍，见骸形卧在床上，心颇惆怅。
现代文：一会刘便到了家，看见他的形体躺在床上，心里感到很惆怅。
English: After a while, Liu arrived home and saw his body lying on the bed. He felt very embarrassed.

古文：鬼自后推之，冥然如入房户，遂活。
现代文：鬼从后面推他，忽然象进入房门一样，于是就复活了。
English: And the spirit thrust him from behind, and suddenly he was in the middle of the room as if he were at the door, and he came to life.

古文：鬼得钱乃去也。
现代文：鬼得到了钱就走了。
English: The ghost got the money and left.

古文：张嘉猷
现代文：张嘉猷
English: Zhang Jiayuan

古文：广陵张嘉猷者，唐宝应初为明州司马，遇疾卒，载丧还家，葬于广陵南郭门外。
现代文：广陵的张嘉猷，唐朝宝应年初做明州司马，得病死了。运他的尸体回家，葬在广陵南城门外。
English: Guangling's Zhang Jiayu, a Tang Dynasty treasure who was appointed as the Sima of Mingzhou at the beginning of the year, fell ill and died. His body was transported home and buried outside the South Gate of Guangling.

古文：永泰初，其故人有劳氏者，行至郭南，坐浮图下，忽见猷乘白马自南来。
现代文：永泰年初，他的老朋友有一个叫劳氏的走到城南，坐在和尚旁边，忽然看张嘉猷乘着白马从南面来。
English: At the beginning of Yongtai, an old friend of his named Law walked to the south of the city, sat next to the monk, and suddenly saw Zhang Jiayu riding a white horse from the south.

古文：见劳下马，相尉如平生，然不脱席帽，低头而语。
现代文：看见劳氏便下马，象平常那样互相慰问，然而不脱席帽，低着头说话。
English: When they saw Mr. Law, they dismounted and, as usual, consoled each other, but without taking off their hats and talking with their heads bowed.

古文：劳问冥中有何罪福，猷云： 罪福昭然，莫不随所为而得。但我素持金刚经，今得无累，亦当别有所适，在旬月间耳。
现代文：劳氏问在冥间有什么罪福。猷说： 罪福是很明显的，没有不随着你的所做所为而得到的，只是我一向念金刚经，才能没有被牵累，今天将另有所去，只是在十天到一月间罢了。
English: Mr. Lau asked what the merits and demerits are in the netherworld. Zou said, "The merits and demerits are very obvious. There is nothing that you can get without following your actions. However, I have always recited the Diamond Sutra so that I would not be entangled. Today, I will go somewhere else, but only for ten days to one month."

古文：卿还，为白家兄，令为转金刚经一千遍，何故将我香炉盛诸恶物？
现代文：你回去，替我告诉哥哥，让他为我写金刚经一千遍。为什么将我的香炉里盛上许多的脏物？
English: Go back and tell my brother to write the Diamond Sutra for me a thousand times. Why did you fill my incense burner with so much filth?

古文：卿家亦有两卷经，幸为转诵，增己之福。 
现代文：你家也有两卷经书。望能习诵，增加自己的福事。 
English: You also have two volumes of scriptures at home. I hope you can learn to recite them and increase your blessings.

古文：言讫，遂诀而去。
现代文：说完，就诀别而去。
English: After saying this, he bade them farewell and left.

古文：劳昏昧，久之方寤云。
现代文：劳氏昏迷，很久才醒过来。
English: Mr Law was in a coma for a long time before he woke up.

古文：魏恂
现代文：魏恂
English: Wei Wei

古文：唐魏恂，左庶子尚德之子，持金刚经。
现代文：唐代的魏恂，是左虚子尚德的儿子，念金刚经。
English: Wei Zheng of the Tang Dynasty, the son of Zuo Jiazi and Shande, recited the Diamond Sutra.

古文：神功初，为监门卫大将军。
现代文：神功初年，做了监门卫大将军。
English: In the first year of Shengong, he became the general guard of the prison.

古文：时京有蔡策者，暴亡，数日方苏。
现代文：当时京城有个蔡策，突然死了，几天才苏醒过来。
English: At that time, there was a Cai Ce in Beijing, who died suddenly and only woke up a few days later.

古文：自云： 初至冥司，怪以追人不得，将挞其使者。
现代文：自己说： 刚到冥司，责怪因追拿不到人，要打鬼使。 
English: He said to himself, "I have just arrived at Hades, and I blame myself for not being able to catch up with someone, and I want to fight the evil spirit.

古文：使者云： 将军魏恂持金刚经，善神拥护，追之不得。 
现代文：使者说： 将军魏恂念金刚经，善神保护着他，就抓不到他。 
English: The messenger said, "General Wei Jun is reciting the Diamond Sutra. The good God is protecting him, so he can't be caught."

古文：即别遣使复追，须臾还报并同。冥官曰： 且罢追。  
现代文：就又派另一个使者再去追拿，不一会回来报告的和前一个相同。冥官说： 暂且停止追拿。  
English: So he sent another messenger after him, who soon returned with the same report as the first. The necromancer said, "Let's stop the pursuit for now."

古文：恂闻，尤加精进。
现代文：恂听说之后，更加精心念经。
English: After hearing this, he recited the sutra more carefully.

古文：杜思讷
现代文：杜思讷
English: Dusne

古文：唐潞州铜鍉县人杜思讷，以持金刚经力，疾病得愈。每至持经之日，必觌神光。
现代文：唐朝潞州铜鍉县人杜思讷，凭念金刚经的神力，病重也能痊愈，每当到了念经的日子，就一定看见神光。
English: Du Sena, a native of Tonglu County, Bozhou in the Tang Dynasty, could cure his serious illness with the power of reciting the Diamond Sutra. Whenever the day came to recite the sutra, he would surely see the divine light.

古文：龙兴寺主
现代文：龙兴寺主
English: The head of the Longxing Temple

古文：唐原州龙兴寺，因大斋会，寺主会僧。
现代文：唐朝原州龙兴寺，因为斋戒大会，寺主会集众僧。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, because of the fasting conference, the head of the temple would gather all the monks at Longxing Temple.

古文：夏腊既高，是为宿德，坐丽宾头下。
现代文：年高德劭。最有功德，坐在丽宾座下。
English: The most virtuous, the most meritorious, sat under the throne of Libin.

古文：有小僧者，自外后至，以无坐所。
现代文：有一个小和尚，从外面来迟了因为没有坐的地方，只有寺主下面空了一个位。
English: There was a small monk who came late from outside because there was no place to sit, only one seat was empty below the head of the temple.

古文：唯寺主下旷一位，小僧欲坐，寺主辄叱之，如是数次。小僧恐斋失时，竟来就坐。
现代文：小和尚欲坐，寺主总是呵叱他。象这样几次叱责他。小和尚怕误了斋戒的时辰，一直走过来坐下。
English: The little monk wanted to sit down, but the temple master always scolded him. He scolded him like this several times. The little monk was afraid of missing the hour of fasting, so he kept coming over to sit down.

古文：寺主怒甚，倚柱而坐，以掌掴之。
现代文：寺主很生气，倚着柱子而坐，用手掌去打他。
English: The abbot of the temple was very angry. He sat leaning against a pillar and hit him with the palm of his hand.

古文：方欲举手，大袖为柱所压，不得下，合掌惊骇。
现代文：正要举手，大袖子却被柱子压住，拿不下来，合掌惊讶。
English: He was about to raise his hand, but the big sleeve was held down by the pillar, he couldn't get it down, and he clasped his hands in surprise.

古文：小僧惭沮，不斋而还房。
现代文：小和尚渐愧沮丧，不斋戒而回房去了。
English: The little monk gradually felt ashamed and depressed, and went back to his room without fasting.

古文：众议恐是小僧道德所致，寺主遂与寺众同往礼敬。
现代文：大家议论，恐怕是小和尚的道德造成，寺主就和寺僧们一同去礼拜。
English: Everyone argued that it was probably due to the little monk's morality, and the head of the temple went to worship with the monks.

古文：小僧惶惧，自言初无道行，不敢滥受大德礼数，逡巡走去。
现代文：小和尚惊慌害怕，自己说起初没有行什么道，不敢滥受这么多的大礼，徘徊地走了。
English: The little monk panicked and was afraid. He said that at first he did not do anything, he did not dare to abuse so many gifts, and wandered away.

古文：因问平生作何行业，云： 二十年唯持金刚经。 
现代文：于是就问他一生作了什么事？他说： 二十年来只念金刚经。 
English: So he asked him what he had been doing all his life. He said, "I have only been reciting the Diamond Sutra for twenty years."

古文：众皆赞叹，谓是金刚护持之力，便于柱所焚香顶礼，咒云： 若是金刚神力，当还此衣。 
现代文：大家都赞叹说这是金刚经护卫的力量。就在柱子上焚香礼拜。念咒语： 如果是金刚经的神力，应当送还这件衣服。 
English: Everyone marveled that this was the power of the escort of the Diamond Sutra. They burned incense and prayed on the pillar. They recited a spell: If it is the power of the Diamond Sutra, this dress should be returned.

古文：于是随手而出也。
现代文：于是随手就扯出压在柱下的衣服。
English: So he immediately pulled out the clothes that were pressed under the pillar.

古文：陈哲
现代文：陈哲
English: Chen Zhe

古文：唐临安陈哲者，家住余杭，精一练行，持金刚经。
现代文：唐代临安的陈哲，家住余杭，精通一种行业，念金刚经。
English: Chen Zhe of Lin'an in the Tang Dynasty, who lived in Yuhang, was proficient in an industry, reciting the Diamond Sutra.

古文：广德初，武康草贼朱潭寇余杭，哲富于财，将搬移产避之。
现代文：广德初年，武康的草贼入侵余杭，哲富而有财产，将要搬走财产躲避草贼。
English: In the first year of Guangde, the grass thieves of Wu Kang invaded Yuhang. Zhe Fu, who had property, was going to move his property to avoid the grass thieves.

古文：寻而贼至，哲谓是官军，问贼今近远。
现代文：正在寻找藏处而草贼就到了。哲认为是官军，就问贼现在离的远近。
English: While searching for a hiding place, the thief arrived. Zhe thought it was the government army and asked the thief how far away he was.

古文：群贼大怒曰： 何物老狗，敢辱我！ 
现代文：群贼大怒说： 你这老狗是什么东西，竟敢侮辱我？ 
English: The bandits were furious and said: "What are you, you old dog, how dare you insult me?

古文：争以剑刺之。每下一剑，则有五色圆光经五六尺以蔽哲身，刺不能中。
现代文：争着用剑刺他，每当刺下一剑，就有五色的圆光直径有五六尺来遮蔽陈哲的身子，不能刺中。
English: They fought to stab him with their swords, and every time they stabbed him with a sword, there was a five-colored halo with a diameter of five or six feet to cover Chen Zhe's body and prevent him from being stabbed.

古文：贼惊叹，谓是圣人，莫不惭悔，舍之而去。
现代文：群贼惊叹，说他是圣人，没有不惭愧后悔的，就放了他而走了。
English: The bandits were astonished and said that he was a saint, and that they were not ashamed to regret it, so they let him go.

古文：丰州烽子
现代文：丰州烽子
English: Toyosu Choshi

古文：唐永泰初，丰州烽子暮出，为党项缚入西蕃养马。
现代文：唐永泰初年，丰州烽子晚上出去，被党项人抓到西蕃养马。
English: In the first year of Tang Yongtai, Fengzhou Zizi went out in the evening and was caught by party officials to raise horses in Xidi.

古文：蕃王令穴肩骨，贯以皮索，以马数万蹄配之。经半岁，马息一倍，蕃王赏以羊革数百。
现代文：蕃王叫人在他的肩骨里穿上皮绳，并把几百匹马归他喂养，结果半年后，马繁殖了一倍，蕃王就赏给他几百羊皮。
English: The king of Sheba had a leather cord put around his shoulders, and hundreds of horses were given to him to feed. After half a year, the horses had doubled in number, and the king of Sheba rewarded him with hundreds of sheepskins.

古文：因转近牙帐，赞普子爱其了事，遂令执纛左右，有剩肉余酪与之。
现代文：于是他又转到近边的牙帐来，赞普的儿子看他做事勤快，就命他在左右执旗，有剩肉余酪就给他吃。
English: Then he went to the nearby stockade, and when Zamp's son saw how diligent he was, he ordered him to hold the flags on either side, and to eat any leftover meat and cheese.

古文：又居半年，因与酪肉，悲泣不食。
现代文：又过了半年，又给他剩肉和余酪，他悲伤不吃。
English: After another six months, he was given leftover meat and cheese, which he sadly refused to eat.

古文：赞普问之，云有老母，频夜梦见。
现代文：赞普问他，他说家有老母，几夜梦见她。
English: Zamp asked him. He said he had an old mother at home and had dreamed about her for several nights.

古文：赞普颇仁，闻之怅然，夜召帐中语云： 蕃法严，无放还例。我与尔马有力者两匹，于某道纵尔归，无言我也。 
现代文：赞普很仁义，听他说了之后也很惆怅。夜里把他叫到帐中说： 蕃王的法严，没有放回去的先例，我给你两匹有力的马，你从某某道走放你回去。不要说是我给的。 
English: Zamp was very kind, and after listening to him, he was also very shy. At night, he was called to the account and said: "King Zamp's law is strict, there is no precedent for putting it back, I will give you two powerful horses, you can go back from such and such a road. Don't say I gave it to you."

古文：烽子得马极骋，俱乏死，遂昼潜夜走。
现代文：烽子得了马就急速奔驰逃走。马都疲乏累死。于是昼夜潜逃。
English: When the mule caught the horse, it galloped away at high speed. The horse was exhausted and died. So it ran away day and night.

古文：数日后，为刺伤足，倒碛中，忽风吹物窸窣过其前，因揽之裹足。
现代文：几天后，被刺伤了脚，倒在沙漠中。忽然风吹一个东西窸窣的响着掠过他的面前，他抓到后裹上了脚。
English: A few days later, he was stabbed in the foot and fell to the ground in the desert. Suddenly, the wind blew something swooshing in front of him. He caught it and wrapped it around his foot.

古文：有顷，不复痛，试起，步走如故，经宿方及丰州界。
现代文：过了一会。他不再感到疼痛，试着起来，走路又象先前一样。经过了一宿才到丰州界，回到家里。
English: After a while, he no longer felt pain, tried to get up, and walked again as before. After an overnight stay, he reached the Toyosu area and returned home.

古文：归家，其母尚存，悲喜曰： 自失尔，我唯念刚经，寝食不废，以祈见尔，今果其誓。 
现代文：他的母亲还在，悲喜地说： 自从失掉你后，我只念金刚经。白天黑夜的都不停来祈求见到你，现在果然应验了。 
English: His mother was still there and said sadly and joyfully, "Since I lost you, I have only been reciting the Diamond Sutra. Day and night, I kept praying to see you, and now it has come true."

古文：因取经，缝断，亡数幅，不知其由。
现代文：于是就拿出经书，书线断了，少了数幅经，不知道什么原因。
English: So he took out a scripture book. The book's thread was broken, and several pages were missing. I don't know why.

古文：子因道碛中伤足事，母令解足视之，裹疮乃数幅经也，其疮亦愈。张镒
现代文：他的儿子把在沙漠中伤了脚的事说一遍后，母亲让他解开脚看，原来包着脚的是数页经。他的伤也好了。张镒
English: After his son recounted how he had injured his foot in the desert, his mother asked him to open his foot to see that it was originally covered with several pages of scripture. His injury was also healed.

古文：唐丞相张镒，父齐丘，酷信释氏。
现代文：唐代丞相张镒，父亲叫齐丘，特别信奉释氏。
English: Zhang Ye, the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty, whose father was named Qi Qiu, was particularly devoted to the Shih clan.

古文：每旦更新衣，执经于像前，念金刚经十五遍，积数十年不懈。
现代文：每天早晨穿上新衣服，拿着经书在像前，念金刚经十五遍，坚持不懈几十年。
English: Every morning, put on new clothes, hold the scripture in front of the statue, recite the Diamond Sutra fifteen times, and persevere for decades.

古文：永泰初，为朔方节度使。
现代文：永泰年初，做了北方的节度使。
English: At the beginning of Yongtai, he served as the North's delegate to the festival.

古文：衙内有小将负罪，惧事露，乃扇动军人数百，定谋反叛。
现代文：衙门内有一个小将犯了罪，怕事情败露。于是就煽动几百个军人，商定要谋反。
English: A young general in the imperial court committed a crime, and fearing that the matter would be exposed, he incited several hundred soldiers and agreed to rebel.

古文：齐丘因衙退，于小广闲行，忽有兵数十，露刃走入。
现代文：齐丘退出衙门，在小厅里闲走，忽然有几十个兵士，亮出兵刃走进去。
English: Qi Qiu left the gate and was idling in the small hall, when suddenly dozens of soldiers walked in, their swords flashing.

古文：齐丘左右唯奴仆，遽奔宅门，过小厅数步，回顾，又无人，疑是鬼物。将及宅，其妻女奴婢复叫呼出门，云： 有两甲士，身出厅屋上。 
现代文：齐丘的左右只有奴仆，急忙奔向房门，走过小厅几步，回头看，又没有人，疑心是鬼，等到了房里，他的妻子女儿、奴婢又叫喊着冲出门来，说： 有两个甲士，从厅屋上出来。 
English: On the right and left of Qiqiu, there were only servants. He hurried to the door, walked a few steps through the small hall, looked back, and there was no one. He suspected it was a ghost. When he got to the room, his wife, daughter, slaves and maids rushed out of the door, shouting, "There are two knights, coming out of the hall roof."

古文：时衙队军健闻变，持兵乱入，至小厅前，见十余人，仡然庭中，垂手张口，投兵于地，众遂擒缚。
现代文：当时衙内的军健听说兵变，带兵器闯入，走到小厅前，看见十几个人，站在院子里，垂手而张口，把兵器扔在地下，大家就把他们擒住了。
English: At that time, a military man in Handan heard about the mutiny, broke in with weapons, walked to the front of the small hall, saw more than a dozen people, standing in the yard, hanging their hands and opening their mouths, throwing their weapons underground, and everyone choked them.

古文：五六人喑不能言，余者具首云： 欲上厅，忽见二甲士长数丈，瞋目叱之，初如中恶。 
现代文：有五六个人不能说出话来。其余的人都自首说： 欲要上厅，忽然看见两个甲士几丈高，瞪着眼睛叱责。起初就象中毒一样。 
English: Five or six were speechless. The rest gave themselves up, saying: "I wanted to go into the hall, but suddenly I saw two officers several feet tall, staring at me and scolding me. At first it was like being poisoned."

古文：齐丘闻之，因断酒肉。
现代文：齐丘听说之后，于是断绝了酒肉。
English: After hearing this, Qiqiu gave up drinking and eating meat.

古文：崔宁
现代文：崔宁
English: Choi Ning

古文：唐崔宁，大历初镇西蜀。
现代文：唐朝的崔宁，大历年初镇守西蜀。
English: At the beginning of the lunar calendar, the Tang Dynasty's Trining became the first town guard of Xishu.

古文：时会杨林反，健儿张国英与战，射中腹，镞没不出。
现代文：当时正赶上杨林谋反。健儿张国英和他交战，射中了腹部。
English: At that time, he was catching up with Yang Lin's rebellion. Jian'er Zhang Guoying fought with him and was shot in the abdomen.

古文：医曰： 一夕必死。 
现代文：箭头射进去拿不出来，医生说： 一晚之后必定死。 
English: The arrow went in and the doctor couldn't get it out. The doctor said, "After one night, you will surely die."

古文：家人将备葬具，与同伍泣别。
现代文：家人将准备棺材，他和他同伍的人诀别。
English: His family will prepare the coffin and he will say goodbye to his comrades.

古文：国英常持金刚经。至夜。梦胡僧与一丸药。
现代文：国英常常念金刚经，到了夜里，梦见胡僧给他一丸药。
English: Guoying often recited the Diamond Sutra. At night, he dreamed that the monk gave him a pill.

古文：至旦，泻箭镞出。疮便合瘥。
现代文：到了早晨，箭头就泻出来，伤口便愈合了。
English: In the morning, the arrow came out and the wound was healed.

