古文：○理宗四二年春正月乙亥朔，大元城利州、阆州。诏湘潭县民陈克良孝行，表其门。
现代文：宝二年春正月初一，元军在利州、间州筑城。下诏湘潭县百姓陈克良孝行，表彰其家。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Spring of Bao, the Yuan army built cities in Lizhou and Yanzhou. The following is an edict from the people of Xiangtan County to Chen Keliang for his filial piety and commend his family.

古文：二月甲辰朔，诏太常厘正秦桧谥，因谕辅臣曰： 谥 缪狠 可也。 
现代文：二月初一，下诏太常寺更改秦桧溢号，于是对辅臣说： 溢 缪狠 可也。 
English: On the first day of February, the Taijō-ji Temple changed its name from Qinzang to Qinzang, so he said to his aide: "It's all right to be extravagant.

古文：荧惑犯权星。
现代文：荧惑星侵犯权星。
English: Fluorescent planet encroaches on star.

古文：乙巳，诏利州统制吕达战没，赠官四转，官一子承信郎，一子下班祗应。
现代文：初二，下诏：利州统制吕达战死，赠转四官，任其子一人为承信郎，一子为下班抵应。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the following edict was issued: Lü Da, the governor of Lishu, died in battle, and four officials were transferred to him. One of his sons was designated as the successor to the emperor, and the other son was designated as the successor to the emperor.

古文：己酉，余晦兼四川屯田使。
现代文：初六，余晦兼四川屯田使。
English: In his sixth year of junior high school, Yu Gui also became the Sichuan Military Attaché.

古文：庚申，诏饶州布衣饶鲁不事科举，一意经学，补迪功郎、饶州教授。
现代文：十七日，下诏：饶州布衣饶鲁，不事科举，一意经学，补为迪功郎、饶州教授。
English: On the 17th, the following edict was issued: "Raozhou cloth, Raolu, no matter science education, only study, supplement as a meritorious person, Raozhou professor."

古文：辛酉，日晕周匝。
现代文：十八日，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the 18th, there was a halo around the sun.

古文：戊辰，故直华文阁李燔，先儒朱熹门人，赐谥文定。
现代文：二十五日，已故直华文阁李播，是先儒朱熹的门人，赐给溢号文定。
English: On the 25th, the late Zhaohua Wenge Li Biao, a disciple of the first Zhu Xi, bestowed the title of "excess number" to Wending.

古文：三月壬午，王元善使大元，留七年来归。
现代文：三月初九，王元善出使元朝，被扣留七年后回国。
English: On the 9th day of the 3rd month, Wang Yuanshan sent an envoy to the Yuan Dynasty. He was detained for seven years and then returned to China.

古文：戊子，雪。
现代文：十五日，降雪。
English: Snow fell on the 15th.

古文：诏蠲江、淮今年二税。
现代文：下诏免除江、淮今年二税。
English: The following edict exempts Jiang and Huai from paying two taxes this year.

古文：己丑，诏录襄城功，高达带行环卫官、遥郡团练使，职任依旧；王登行军器监丞、制司参议官；程大元、李和以下将士六千六百一十三人补转官资有差。
现代文：十六日，下诏记录守卫襄城战功，高达带行环卫官、遥郡团练使，职任依旧；王登行军器监承、制司参议官；程大元、李和以下将士六千六百一十三人补转官资不等。
English: On the 16th, the following records were issued to record the war service of guarding Xiangcheng. The highest-ranking officers were Guo Xingguan and Yao County regimental drill sergeant, and their positions remained the same; Wang Dengxing was the supervisor of military equipment and the deputy director of the General Office of the People's Liberation Army; Cheng Dayuan, Li He and the following 6,613 soldiers were promoted and transferred to other positions.

古文：甲午，城东海，贾似道以图来上。
现代文：二十一日，在东海筑城，贾似道呈上地图。
English: On the twenty-first day, in the East China Sea, Jiaxiang Road was presented on the map.

古文：夏四月辛亥，诏边兵贫困可闵，闲田甚多，择其近便者分给耕种，制司守臣治之。
现代文：夏四月初九，下诏：边境士兵贫困可怜，闲田很多，选择近便者分给他们耕种，制司守臣负责治理。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the summer, the following edict was issued: the soldiers at the border were poor, there were many idle fields, those who chose the most convenient ones were assigned to cultivate them, and officers and retainers were responsible for governance.

古文：乙丑，以徐清叟知枢密院兼参知政事，董槐参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，以徐清雯知枢密院兼参知政事，董槐参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, with Xu Qingwen Zhi as Privy Councillor and Councillor of State, and Dong Jun as Councillor of State.

古文：六月壬寅朔，罢临安府临平镇税场。
现代文：六月初一，罢除临安府临平镇税场。
English: On the first day of June, the tax office in Linping Town, Lin'an Prefecture, was abolished.

古文：甲辰，四川制司言：合州、广安军北兵入境，王坚、曹世雄等战御有功。
现代文：初三，四川制司说：合州、广安军有元军进人境内，王坚、曹世雄等抵抗有功。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, the Sichuan Provincial Party Secretary said: the Hezhou and Guang'an armies have entered the territory of the people, and Wang Jian, Cao Shixiong and others have made contributions to the resistance.

古文：诏坚官两转，余各补转官资。
现代文：下诏王坚转两官，其余分别补转官资。
English: Wang Jian will be transferred to two posts, and the rest will be transferred separately.

古文：甲寅，侍御史吴燧等论故蜀帅余玠聚敛罔利七罪，玠死，其子如孙尽窃帑庾之积以归。
现代文：十三日，侍御史吴隧等弹勃已故四川将帅余聚敛财富牟利七条罪状，余死后，其子余如孙窃取全部格仓积蓄回家。
English: On the 13th, the late Sichuan general Yu Shuai Yu gathered wealth and profited from seven crimes. After Yu's death, his son Yu Ruxun stole all the storeroom savings and went home.

古文：诏簿录玠家财。
现代文：下诏登记清查余家的财产。
English: The property of the Yu family will be registered and investigated in the following.

古文：以李曾伯为资政殿学士，依旧节制四川。
现代文：任命李曾伯为资政殿学士，依旧节制四川。
English: Appointed Li Zengbo as the Vice-President of the Academy of Sciences, he still restrained Sichuan.

古文：丙辰，利州王佐坚守孤垒，降将南永忠以兵薄城下，佐骂之，永忠流涕而退。
现代文：十五日，利州王佐坚守孤城，降将南永忠率兵抵达城下，王佐唾骂他，南永忠哭着退走。
English: On the fifteenth day, Lizhou Wang Zuo held fast to the lonely city, and led the troops under the command of Nan Yongzhong to the city. Wang Zuo swore at him, and Nan Yongzhong cried and retreated.

古文：初，隆庆教授郑炳孙不从南永忠降，先缢死其妻女，亦朝服自缢。
现代文：起初，隆庆教授郑炳孙没有跟从南永忠投降元军，先杀死他的妻子儿女，然后也穿上朝服自杀。
English: At first, Longqing professor Zheng Bingsun did not follow Nan Yongzhong to surrender to the Yuan army, first killed his wife and children, and then put on the imperial uniform to commit suicide.

古文：诏奖谕：佐进官一秩，炳孙赠朝奉郎、直秘阁，仍访其子，官以文资。
现代文：下诏奖谕：王佐进官一级；郑炳孙赠朝奉郎、直秘阁，并且寻访其子任命为文资官。
English: The following imperial edict was issued: Wang Sa Jin was promoted to the first rank of official; Zheng Yansun presented him with the title of imperial servant and direct secretary, and visited his son to appoint him as a civil servant.

古文：王伯大乞致仕，诏进一秩，允所请。
现代文：王伯大请求退休，下诏进官一级，理宗批准他的请求。
English: Wang Boda requested to retire and was promoted to the first-level official under the imperial edict, and Li Zong approved his request.

古文：丁巳，以贾似道同知枢密院事，职任依旧。
现代文：十六日，任命贾似道同知枢密院事，职任依旧。
English: On the 16th, Jia Xiangdao Tongzhi was appointed to the Privy Council, and his position remains the same.

古文：庚午，诏余晦赴阙。
现代文：二十九日，下诏余晦到朝廷。
English: On the 29th, Emperor Yu came to the Imperial Court.

古文：闰六月壬申，董槐疏：蜀事孔棘，愿假臣宣抚之名，置司夔门，以通荆、蜀。
现代文：闰六月初二，董槐上疏说：蜀事紧急，愿借臣宣抚之名，在夔门置司，以通连荆、蜀两地。
English: On the second day of the second lunar month of June, Dong Xuan Shang So said: "Shu is in an urgent situation. In the name of minister Xuan Fu, I would like to set up a department in Shimen to connect the two places of Jing and Shu.

古文：上优诏答曰： 士大夫以事功自勉者鲜，卿请帅蜀，足见忠壮。然经理西事，当在庙堂，宜竭谋猷，以副委任。 
现代文：理宗优给诏书回答说： 士大夫以事功自勉者少，你请求担任蜀地将帅，足见忠壮；然而经理西事，当在庙堂，应该尽力向朝廷陈述战略策略，以符合朝廷委任你重任的意愿。 
English: In his reply to the imperial edict, Rizong You replied, "There are few scholar-bureaucrats who have distinguished themselves by their achievements. Your request to serve as the commander-in-chief of Shu is evidence of your loyalty. However, as the manager of the western affairs of the temple, you should do your best to present strategic strategies to the imperial court in accordance with the wishes of the imperial court to appoint you to this important position.

古文：诏蒲择之暂权四川制置司事。
现代文：下诏蒲择之暂代理四川制置司事。
English: The following is the provisional deputy of the Sichuan Provincial Party Secretary.

古文：甲戌，录嘉定战功。
现代文：初四，录嘉定战功。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, he was awarded the Distinguished Service Order.

古文：先是，大元兵围城五旬，帅守俞兴、元用等夜开关力战而围解。
现代文：先是，元兵围城五十天，帅守俞兴、元用等人夜晚开关力战元军，从而解除了元军的围攻。
English: First, the former soldiers besieged the city for fifty days, and the guards of Suixing and Yuan used the night to fight the former army, thus lifting the siege of the former army.

古文：诏俞兴等十六人各官五转，将士补转有差。
现代文：下诏俞兴等十六人各自转五官，将士补转不等。
English: The following sixteen people, including Zhao Xingxing, were each transferred to five officials, and the transfer of generals varied.

古文：以包恢提点浙西刑狱，招捕荻浦盐寇。
现代文：任命包恢提点浙西刑狱，招捕荻浦盐寇。
English: He was appointed as the head of the West Zhejiang Penal Prison, recruiting and arresting the salt pirates of Ningbo.

古文：乙亥，台州海寇积年，民罹其害，路分董橚洎进士周自中等擒获，诏橚官一转，余推赏有差。
现代文：初五，台州海寇兴起多年，百姓遭受其害，路分都监董啸和进士周自中等擒获，下诏董啸转一官，其余给予恩赏不等。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Taizhou sea pirates have been on the rise for many years, and the people have suffered from it. Dong Xiao and Zhou Jinshi, the supervisors of the capital, were captured from the middle school, and Dong Xiao was transferred to a post, and the rest were given rewards.

古文：壬午，以李曾伯为四川宣抚使兼京湖制置大使，进司夔路，诏赐曾伯同进士出身。
现代文：十二日，任命李曾伯为四川宣抚使兼京湖制置大使，进司夔路，下诏赐李曾伯同进士出身。
English: On the 12th, Li Zengbo was appointed as the Sichuan envoy and the ambassador to Beijing Lake, and was born in Jinshi Road. Li Zengbo was awarded the imperial edict.

古文：罢江湾浮盐局，戊戌，大元使离扬州北归。
现代文：废罢江湾浮盐局。二十八日，元朝使臣离开扬州北归。
English: On the 28th, the Yuan Dynasty envoys left Yangzhou and returned to the north.

古文：秋七月己酉，诏 前蜀帅余玠镇抚无状，兵苦于征戌，民困于征求，兹俾其家输所取蜀财，犒师振民；并边诸郡田租，其复三年。 
现代文：秋七月初九，下诏： 前蜀帅余，镇抚没有成绩，士兵苦于征戍，百姓困于征求，命令他的家属输纳所取蜀财，搞赏军队，贩济百姓；沿边境各郡田租，免除三年。 
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the following edict was issued: Former Shu Shu Shu Yu, the governor of the town had no achievements, the soldiers were struggling to collect money, and the people were struggling to solicit it. He ordered his family members to accept the Shu wealth they had taken, reward the army, and help the people; the county land rent along the border was exempted for three years.

古文：诏思、播两州连年捍御，其守臣田应庚、杨文各官一转，余推恩。
现代文：下诏：思、播两州，连年抵抗元军，守臣田应庚、杨文各转一官，其余给予恩赏。
English: The following edict was issued: Si and Bo of the two prefectures had resisted the Yuan army for years, and the guards, Tian Yingge and Yang Wen, were each promoted to a higher position, while the rest were rewarded.

古文：诏贾似道开阃，以枢密行府为名。
现代文：下诏贾似道在外统兵，以枢密行府为名。
English: In the following edict, Jia Li Dao was appointed as a soldier of foreign troops, with the name of the Privy Council.

古文：庚戌，有流星大如太白。
现代文：初十，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, there was a meteor as big as a white star.

古文：甲寅，故光禄大夫贾涉谥忠肃。
现代文：十四日，已故光禄大夫贾涉溢号忠肃。
English: On the 14th, the late Dr. Guanglu Jiazhu was awarded the Medal of Honor.

古文：壬戌，复安西堡。
现代文：二十二日，收复安西堡。
English: On the 22nd, Anse Fort was recaptured.

古文：己巳，荻浦海寇平，包恢进直龙图阁，刘达授横行、带遥郡。
现代文：二十九日，荻浦海寇平定，包恢进直龙图阁，刘达授横行带遥郡。
English: On the 29th day of the month, the Mengpu sea pirates were subdued, Bao Wei entered the Zhilong Pagoda, and Liu Dazhu rampaged through Yao County.

古文：李性传赴阙，以王坚为兴元都统兼知合州。
现代文：李性传到朝廷，以王坚为兴元都统兼合州知州。
English: Li Xing passed to the imperial court, with Wang Jian as the leader of Xingyuan and Hezhou and Zhizhou.

古文：八月乙亥，诏以前知阆州兼利西安抚王惟忠付大理狱，寻命台臣监鞫。
现代文：八月初五，下诏以前间州知州兼利西安抚王惟忠交付大理寺置狱，不久命令台臣监视审讯。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, the emperor issued an edict to send the pacifier of Zhouzhou and Lixi, Wang Weizhong, to the Dali Temple for imprisonment, and soon ordered the Taizhen to monitor the trial.

古文：辛巳，徐清叟乞罢机务，诏不允。
现代文：十一日，徐清雯请求罢除职任，下诏不允。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Xu Qingwen requested to be removed from office, which was denied.

古文：癸巳，谢方叔等上《玉牒》、《日历》、《会要》及《七朝经武要略》、《中兴四朝志传》，诏方叔、徐清叟、董槐等各进秩。
现代文：二十三日，谢方叔等呈上《玉牒》、《日历》、《会要》及《七朝经武要略》、《中兴四朝志传》，下诏谢方叔、徐清雯、董槐等分别进职。
English: On the 23rd, Xie Fangxiu and others presented "Jade Ultimatum," "Calendar," "Memorandum" and "Outline of the Seven Dynasties" and "History of the Four Dynasties," and then Xie Fangxiu, Xu Qingwen, Dong Jun and others were promoted to their posts.

古文：戊戌，籍王惟忠家财。
现代文：二十八日，籍没王惟忠家财。
English: On the 28th, Wang Weizhong lost his family fortune.

古文：九月辛亥，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：九月十二日，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On September 12th, the sacrificial Myeongdong ended, and there was a general amnesty.

古文：辛酉，诏诣西太一宫，为国祈祥，起居郎牟子才再疏谏而止。
现代文：二十三日，下诏到西太一宫，为国祈祷安样，因起居郎牟子才两次上疏劝谏而停止。
English: On the 23rd, he went to the West Taichi-gu Shrine to pray for the peace of the country, but was stopped by the fact that he had to go up to the shrine twice to plead for peace.

古文：丙寅，诏戒外戚毋干请。
现代文：二十七日，下诏外戚不得干预朝政。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that relatives of the emperor should not interfere in imperial politics.

古文：诏：山阴、萧山、诸暨、会稽四县水，其除今年田租。
现代文：下诏：山阴、萧山、诸暨、会稽四县发生水灾，免除今年田租。
English: The following edict: If floods occur in the four counties of Sanyin, Xiaoshan, Zhuji and Huiqi, this year's field rent will be exempted.

古文：丁卯，太白昼见。
现代文：二十八日，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 18th, the too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸酉，皇子禥进封忠王。
现代文：冬十月初一，谢方叔等进呈宝编使部七司续降条令。初四，皇子赵甚进封忠王。
English: On the first day of October in the winter, Uncle Xie Fang and others submitted an order for the seven divisions of the treasure compiling and dispatching department to continue to lower the article. On the fourth day of the first month, the prince Zhao Jin Fuzhong Wang.

古文：甲午，斩王惟忠于都市。
现代文：二十五日，在闹市斩杀王惟忠。
English: On the 25th, Wang Weizhong was beheaded in downtown.

古文：丁酉，追削余玠资政殿学士，夺余晦刑部侍郎告身。
现代文：二十八日，追夺余资政殿学士，追夺余晦刑部侍郎的任命书。
English: On the 28th, they chased down the appointment letter of Yu Yuanzheng, a bachelor of the Imperial Palace, and the appointment letter of Yu Yuanzhang, a waiter of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：戊戌，段元鉴上隆庆堡战功。
现代文：二十九日，段元鉴上报隆庆堡战功。
English: On the 29th, the Duan Yuan Ji reported the war exploits of Longqing Fort.

古文：十一月壬寅，日南至。忠王冠。
现代文：十一月初三，冬至，忠王举行成人礼。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, the winter solstice, King Zhongwang held a coming-of-age ceremony.

古文：丁未，大元城光化旧治。
现代文：初八，元军在光化旧治筑城。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Yuan army began to govern and build the old city in Gwanghwamun.

古文：十二月庚午，排保甲，行自实法。
现代文：十二月初二，编排保甲，实行自实法。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the arrangement of armour-plating will come to an end, and the self-realization method will be implemented.

古文：癸未，雷。
现代文：十五日，打雷。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was thunder.

古文：四川苦竹隘捷至。
现代文：四川苦竹隘捷报传到朝廷。
English: The Sichuan Bitter Bamboo Narrow Pass was reported to the imperial court.

古文：甲午，隆庆部兵周荣被获归北，密约段元鉴入隘解围，事觉就禽，不屈而死，马徽、白端战殁。
现代文：二十六日，隆庆堡统兵将领周荣被元军俘虏北上，密约段元鉴人隘解围，事情泄露被俘，不屈而死，马徽、白端战死。
English: On the 26th, Zhou Rong, commander-in-chief of the Longqing Fort, was captured by the Yuan army and marched north. He made a secret agreement to relieve the siege, but the matter was leaked and he was captured. He died unyielding, and Ma Hui and Baidu died in battle.

古文：诏四川宣抚司为之立庙。
现代文：下诏四川宣抚司为之立庙。
English: The following is the edict of the Sichuan Propaganda Department to establish a temple for it.

古文：安西堡受攻五月，将士力战解围，居民以资粮助军实。
现代文：安西堡遭受元军攻击五个月，将士力战解围，居民以资粮辅助军费。
English: Anxi Fort was attacked by the Yuan Army for five months, the siege of Shili was lifted, and the residents assisted the military expenses with supplies.

古文：诏四川宣抚司具名推恩，在城人并赏一资，复租赋五年。
现代文：下诏四川宣抚司开列名单施加恩赏，在城人普赏一资，免除租赋五年。
English: The following edict of the Sichuan Propaganda and Guidance Department lists the rewards to be imposed, including a general reward of one capital for citizens, and a five-year exemption from rent.

古文：余玠男如孙征所认钱三千万将足。诏如孙削三秩、勒停。
现代文：余儿子余如孙收集所认钱三千万将足额，下诏余如孙削夺三秩，勒令停职。
English: Yu's son, Yu Ruzun, collected the full amount of 30 million yuan, and the next day, Yu Ruzun was stripped of three ranks and suspended.

古文：三年春正月己未，迅雷。
现代文：宝三年春正月二十一日，疾雷。
English: On the 21st day of the first month of the spring of the third year of Bao, lightning struck.

古文：巴州捷至。
现代文：巴州抗元捷报传到朝廷。
English: The news of Bazhou's victory against Yuan spread to the imperial court.

古文：庚申，城均州龙山。
现代文：二十二日，在均州龙山筑城。
English: On the 22nd, a city was built in Yongshan, Junzhou.

古文：起居郎牟子才上疏言： 元夜张灯侈靡，倡优下贱，奇技献笑，媟汙清禁，上累圣德。
现代文：起居郎牟子才上疏说： 元宵张灯结彩实属侈靡，歌舞艺人下贱，靠奇技献笑迎合观者，轻慢站污皇宫，连累皇上圣德。
English: Kijiro Murakami said: The lanterns hung at the Lantern Festival are really extravagant, the singers and dancers are low-class, the audience is catered to by means of magic tricks, the imperial palace is polluted, and the emperor's virtue is tarnished.

古文：今因震霆示威，臣愿圣明觉悟，天意可回。 
现代文：今因震霆示威，臣愿皇上明智觉悟，挽回天意。 
English: Now, due to the angry demonstrations, the subjects hope that the emperor will wise up and restore the will of heaven.

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：理宗采纳了他的建议。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：壬戌，诏宗正寺所拟宗子名，以用、宜、季、次、绍五字，续大、由、友、嗣、甫之下。
现代文：二十四日，下诏宗正寺所拟宗子名，以用、宜、季、次、绍五字，续大、由、友、嗣、甫之下。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the names of the sons of the Emperor Zhao Zongzheng, as drawn up by the Zhao Zongzheng Temple, are as follows, with the following five characters: 用,宜,季,次,绍,续大,由,友,嗣,甫下.

古文：二月乙亥，诏右千牛卫上将军乃猷授蕲州防御使，奉沂靖惠王祠事。
现代文：二月初八，下诏右千牛卫上将军赵乃酞授为薪州防御使，奉沂靖惠王祠事。
English: On the eighth day of the second month of the second month of the year, Zhao Naixun, General of the Right Qian Niu Guards, was awarded the title of Defense Minister of Zhouzhou, and was honored with the Jing Hui Wang Ancestral Shrine.

古文：兼给事中王野言： 国家与大元本无深仇，而兵连祸结，皆原于入洛之帅轻启兵端。
现代文：兼给事中王眺说： 国家与元朝本无深仇，而兵连祸结，都是因为人洛之师轻启兵端。
English: The king also said: The country had no deep-rooted enmity with the Yuan Dynasty, and the soldiers were in trouble because the teachers of human love did not care about the soldiers.

古文：二三狂妄如赵楷、全子才、刘子澄辈，轻而无谋，遂致只轮不返。
现代文：几个狂妄之辈如赵楷、全子才、刘子澄之流，轻率而无谋，于是导致全军覆没。
English: A few arrogant people, such as Zhao Kai, Quanzi Cai, and Liu Zicheng, were rash and reckless, which led to the destruction of the entire army.

古文：全子才诞妄惨毒，今乃援刘子澄例自陈改正，乞寝二人之命，罢其祠禄，以为丧师误国之戒。 
现代文：全子才妄诞惨毒，今援用刘子澄例，自陈改正，请求停二人之命，罢其祠禄，以为丧师误国之戒。 
English: It is only a child that can be born with a fatal disease. Now, citing the example of Liu Zicheng, he corrected himself, asked for the lives of the two to be stopped, gave up his ancestral land, and thought that he had lost his teacher and misled the country.

古文：从之。
现代文：理宗采纳这个建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：己卯，复广陵堡城，贾似道以图来上。
现代文：十二日，收复广陵堡城，贾似道呈上地图。
English: On the 12th, Guangling Fort was recovered, and Jiaxiang Road was put on the map.

古文：壬午，诏发缗钱二百万给四川调度。
现代文：十五日，下诏发络钱二百万，给四川调度使用。
English: On the 15th, the next emperor issued 2 million yuan to be used for Sichuan dispatching.

古文：乙酉，诏以告身、祠牒、新会、香、盐，命临安府守臣马光祖收换两界旧敝会子。
现代文：十八日，下诏命令临安府守臣马光祖以告身、祠碟、新会、香、盐收换两界旧破会子。
English: On the 18th, Ma Guangzu, the governor of Lin'an, issued an imperial edict to exchange the two old broken members of the guild for his own body, a plate from the ancestral hall, a new guild, incense and salt.

古文：三月己酉，诏沿边耕屯，课入登羡，管屯田官推赏，荆襄、两淮及山砦如之。
现代文：三月十二日，下诏：沿边地区耕屯，税收超了规定数目，管理屯田官给予赏赐，荆襄、两淮和山寨地区也如此。
English: On March 12th, the following edict was issued: along the border areas, the tax revenue exceeded the prescribed number, and the management officials of the farmlands gave rewards. This was also the case in Jingxiang, Liahuai and Shanzhai areas.

古文：庚戌，邵武寇平。
现代文：十三日，邵武寇盗平定。
English: On the 13th, Shao Wuko's bandits were defeated.

古文：癸丑，诏自实法宜宽期限，监司、守臣其严戢吏奸，毋烦扰民。
现代文：十六日，下诏自实法应延长期限，监司守臣严格查处赃吏，不得烦扰百姓。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued, stating that the effective period of the law should be extended, the supervisors and supervisors should strictly investigate and deal with the corrupt officials, and they should not bother the people.

古文：以吴渊为观文殿学士、京湖制置使、知江陵府。
现代文：任命吴渊为观文殿学士、京湖制置使、江陵知府。
English: Wu Yuan was appointed as an academician of the Academy of Confucianism, an envoy to Beijing and Hubei Province, and governor of Gangneung Province.

古文：己未，雨土。
现代文：二十二日，降土。
English: On the 30th, the earth fell.

古文：夏四月乙酉，以江万里知福州、福建安抚使。
现代文：夏四月十九日，任命江万里为福州知州、福建安抚使。
English: On April 19th, Jiang Wanli was appointed as the Fuzhou, Chizhou and Fujian Pacifying Envoy.

古文：五月，久雨。
现代文：五月，降雨已经持续很久时间。
English: In May, it has been raining for a long time.

古文：丁未，以监司、州郡辟书冗滥，诏申严禁止。
现代文：十二日，因临司、州郡辟书冗滥，下诏申明严厉禁止。
English: On the 12th, due to the profligacy of the provincial governors and prefectural governors, the following edict stated that it was strictly prohibited.

古文：己酉，李性传薨。
现代文：十四日，李性传去世。
English: On the 14th, Li Shongsheng passed away.

古文：辛酉，太阴入毕。
现代文：二十六日，月亮进人毕宿。
English: On the 26th, the moon sets.

古文：嘉定大雨、雹，与叙南同日地震。浙西大水。
现代文：嘉定大规模降冰雹。与叙南同一天发生地震；浙西发生大水灾。
English: Large-scale hailstones fell in Jiading. An earthquake occurred on the same day as in southern Syria; a major flood occurred in western Zhejiang.

古文：六月辛未，大风。
现代文：六月初六，刮大风。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, a strong wind blew.

古文：甲戌，太阴入氐。
现代文：初九，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, the moon enters Mr. Jin's house.

古文：甲戌，李全子松寿葺旧海城，窥海道，贾似道调兵败之，敕书奖谕，趣上立功等第、姓名推赏。
现代文：二十一日，李全的儿子李松寿修缮旧海城，窥视海道，贾似道调兵打败他，致书予以奖赏，督促报上姓名和立功等第给予奖赏。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Songshou, the son of Li Quan, began to repair the old sea city and peep into the sea road. Jia Lian Dao dispatched troops to defeat him, sent a letter to reward him, and urged the newspaper to give him a reward for his name and meritorious service.

古文：戊子，洪天锡劾内官卢允叔、董宋臣，疏不报，竟去，诏迁太常少卿。
现代文：二十三日，洪天锡弹勃内官卢允叔、董宋臣，没有得到回答，终于离去，下诏迁为太常少卿。
English: On the 23rd, Hong Tianxi shot and captured the inner officials Lu Yunshu and Dong Songchen, but they did not get an answer, and finally left, and were transferred to the position of Taizhong Shaoqing.

古文：辛卯，王野以御史胡大昌言罢给事中，依旧端明殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：二十六日，王眺因御史胡大昌弹论罢给事中，依旧为端明殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, Wang Qian was still a graduate of Duanming Palace and was promoted to Dongxiao Palace due to the dismissal of the scholar Hu Dachang.

古文：秋七月辛丑，太阴入氐。
现代文：秋七月初七，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the 7th month of the autumn.

古文：癸丑，以吕文德知鄂州，节制鼎、澧、辰、沅、靖五州。
现代文：十九日，任命吕文德为鄂州知州，节制鼎、遭、辰、沉、靖五州。
English: On the 19th, Lu Wende was appointed as the Ezhou Chizhou, and the five states of temperance were Ding, Seng, Chen, Shen and Jing.

古文：丙辰，谢方叔、徐清叟以御史朱应元言罢。
现代文：二十二日，谢方叔、徐清雯因御史朱应元议论罢免。
English: On the 22nd, Xie Fangxiong and Xu Qingwen were removed from their posts due to their criticism of Zhu Yingyuan.

古文：辛酉，有流星大如太白。
现代文：二十七日，有流星大如太白星。
English: On the 27th, there was a meteor as big as the Great White Star.

古文：诏三省枢府机政，令董槐、程元凤轮日判事取旨。
现代文：下诏三省枢府机政，命令董槐、程元凤轮流取旨处理政事。
English: He issued the following decree on the mechanism of the three provincial capitals, and ordered Dong Xuan and Cheng Yuanfeng to take turns in dealing with political affairs.

古文：壬戌，以谢方叔为观文殿大学士、提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：二十八日，任命谢方叔为观文殿大学士、提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: On the 28th, Uncle Xie Fang was appointed as a scholar of Guanwenden University, and Lin'an Dongxiao Palace was promoted.

古文：八月乙丑朔，以董槐为右丞相兼枢密使，程元凤签书枢密院事、权参知政事，蔡抗为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，徐清叟资政殿学士、提举玉隆万寿宫、任便居住。
现代文：八月初一，任命董槐为右承相兼枢密使，程元凤签书枢密院事、代理参知政事，蔡抗为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，徐清雯为资政殿学士、提举玉隆万寿宫，任便居住。
English: On the first day of August, he appointed Dong Hao as the Vice-Minister of the Right and the Minister of the Privy Council, Cheng Yuanfeng as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council and the Acting Vice-Minister of the State Council, Cai An as the Academician of the Duanming Palace and the Academician of the Privy Council, and Xu Qingwen as the Academician of the Capital of the State Council and the President of the Yulong Palace of Longevity.

古文：丁卯，岁星、荧惑在柳。
现代文：初三，岁星、荧惑星合在柳宿。
English: In the third year of junior high school, the year star and the fluorescent planet converge in Yanagisuku.

古文：己巳，太阴在氐。
现代文：初五，月亮停在氏宿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the moon stopped at Ujiyado.

古文：马光祖兼节制和州、无为、安庆三郡屯田使。
现代文：马光祖兼节制和州、无为、安庆三郡屯田使。
English: Ma Guangzu was also the tutelary envoy to the three counties of Wazhou, Muwae and Anqing.

古文：丙子，郑性之薨。
现代文：十二日，郑性之去世。
English: On the 12th, Zheng Xizong passed away.

古文：庚寅，福建安抚江万里以台臣李衢言罢新命、提举武夷山冲佑观。
现代文：二十六日，福建安抚使江万里，因台臣李瞥议论罢除新的任命，提举武夷山冲佑观。
English: On the 26th, Fujian's pacifying envoy, Jiang Wanli, revoked the new appointment because of Taiwanese minister Li Biao's discussion, and promoted Wuyishan Chongyou Guan.

古文：辛卯，应彳繇薨。
现代文：二十七日，应租去世。
English: On the 27th, Ying Rentong passed away.

古文：九月甲午朔，雷。
现代文：九月初一，打雷。
English: On the first day of September, thunder.

古文：丙午，以徐清叟为资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
现代文：十三日，以徐清雯为资政殿学士、提举洞霄宫。
English: On the 13th, Xu Qingwen was appointed as the vice-president of the Academy of Sciences, and Dongxiao Palace was promoted.

古文：丙辰，陈显伯兼资善堂翊善，皮龙荣兼资善堂赞读。
现代文：二十三日，陈显伯兼资善堂诩善，皮龙荣兼资善堂赞读。
English: On the 23rd, Chen Xianbo and Shao Shan, and Pirong Rong and Shao Shan were commended.

古文：壬戌，权中书舍人陈大方言： 刘子澄端平入洛之师，贾勇赞决，北兵方入唐州界，子澄巳率先遁逃，一败涂地，二十年来，为国家患者，皆原于此，宜投之四裔。 
现代文：二十九日，代理中书舍人陈大方说： 刘子澄对端平人洛之师，以余勇待售，坚决支持出兵，而元兵进人唐州境时，刘子澄已经率先逃跑，一败涂地，二十年来，国家所遭受的祸患，都缘于此，应将其流放边远地区。 
English: On the 29th, Chen Dafang, the acting person in charge of the Chinese school, said: Liu Zicheng was brave enough to stand up to Luo's division, and firmly supported the dispatch of troops. However, when the Yuan soldiers entered the border of Tangzhou, Liu Zicheng had already taken the lead in escaping and was completely defeated. In the past 20 years, all the disasters suffered by the country were caused by this. He should be exiled to a remote area.

古文：诏罢子澄祠禄。
现代文：下诏罢除刘子澄祠禄官。
English: The following is the edict to remove Liu Zicheng from the post of vicar of the shrine.

古文：冬十月甲戌，太白昼见。
现代文：冬十月十一日，太白星白天出现。
English: On October 11th, winter, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁丑，有流星出自毕。
现代文：十四日，有流星出自毕宿。
English: On the 14th, a meteor came out of Ijuku.

古文：十一月丁巳，荧惑犯太微垣上相星。
现代文：十一月二十四日，荧惑星侵犯太微垣、上相星。
English: On November 24th, the fluorescent planet encroached on the too small wall and the upper phase star.

古文：十二月乙丑，嗣濮王善奂薨。
现代文：十二月初二，嗣攫王赵善灸去世。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, Zhao Zenshu, the heir to the throne, passed away.

古文：丙子，少傅、节度使与欢薨，赠少师，追封奉化郡王。
现代文：十三日，少傅、节度使赵与腿去世，赠少师，追封为奉化郡王。
English: On the thirteenth day, Shao Fu and Jiedu caused the death of Zhao Yiming, bestowed him with Shao Shi, and posthumously made him the king of Fenghua County.

古文：四年春正月乙未，诏谢方叔夺职罢祠，谢修削三秩勒停。
现代文：宝四年春正月初三，下诏谢方叔夺职罢祠，谢修削夺三秩，勒令停职。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Bao, the following edict was issued: Xie Fangshu seized the post and went to the temple, Xie Xiu won three ranks, and was ordered to suspend his duties.

古文：乙巳，太阴犯岁星。
现代文：十三日，月亮侵犯岁星。
English: On the 13th, the moon encroaches on the year star.

古文：己酉，太阴犯荧惑。
现代文：十七日，月亮侵犯荧惑星。
English: On the 17th, the moon encroached on the fluorescent planet.

古文：辛亥，以吴渊为京湖制置使兼夔路策应使，军马急切，便宜行事。
现代文：十九日，以吴渊为京湖制置使兼夔路策应使，军事情况紧急时，可以不上奏自行处理有关事宜。
English: On the 19th, Wuyuan was designated as the Beijing Lake construction and diversion strategy, so that when the military situation is urgent, it can deal with the relevant matters on its own without reporting.

古文：庚申，蜀阃奏捷。
现代文：二十八日，四川上报打败元军。
English: On the 28th, Sichuan reported that it had defeated the Yuan army.

古文：辛酉，诏史嵩之观文殿大学士，依前金紫光禄大夫、永国公致仕。
现代文：二十九日，下诏史篙之为观文殿大学士，依前以金紫光禄大夫、永国公退休。
English: On the 29th, he was posthumously awarded the title of "Master of the Academy of the Academy of Fine Arts," and retired with the title of "Doctor of the Golden and Purple Star" and the title of "Governor of Yongguo."

古文：二月戊辰，雨雹。
现代文：二月初六，降冰雹。
English: On the sixth day of the second month, hail fell.

古文：丙子，诏袭封衍圣公孙孔洙添差通判吉州，不厘务。
现代文：十四日，下诏袭封衍圣公孙孔沫添差通判吉州，不管具体事务。
English: On the 14th day of the month, the following edict was issued to seal the lineage of Saint Gongsun, regardless of the specific affairs.

古文：三月壬寅，以少师、嗣荣王与芮为太傅。
现代文：三月十一日，以少师、嗣荣王赵与丙为太傅。
English: On March 11th, the young master, the heir to the throne, Zhao Wang and C were appointed as Tai Fu.

古文：乙卯，日晕周匝。
现代文：二十四日，太阳周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the 24th, the sun is surrounded by a halo.

古文：丙辰，帝制《字民训》赐改秩亲民官。
现代文：二十五日，理宗撰制序民切卜，赐给改秩亲民官。
English: On the twenty-fifth day of the month, the Risshong-compiled prefect, Chebu, was given to the civil servant who had changed his rank.

古文：夏四月庚午，月晕周匝。
现代文：夏四月初九，月亮周围有光圈环绕。
English: On the ninth day of the fourth month of summer, the moon is surrounded by a halo.

古文：癸未，以程元凤参知政事；蔡抗同知枢密院事；贾似道参知政事，职任依旧；李曾伯资政殿大学士、福建安抚使；吴渊进二秩，职任依旧；吴潜沿海制置使、判庆元府；马光祖焕章阁直学士，职任依旧。
现代文：二十二日，以程元凤参知政事；蔡抗同知枢密院事；贾似道参知政事，职任依旧；李曾伯为资政殿大学士、福建安抚使；吴渊晋升二级，职任依旧；吴潜为沿海制置使、判庆元府；马光祖为焕章阁直学士，职任依旧。
English: On the 22nd, Cheng Yuanfeng was appointed to the post of political advisor; Cai Antongchi was appointed to the post of Privy Councillor; Jia Lian Dao was appointed to the post of political advisor, and his position remained unchanged; Li Zengbo was appointed to the post of Vice-President of the State Council of the People's Republic of China and the post of Fujian Peaceful Envoy; Wu Yuan was promoted to the second level, and his position remained unchanged; Wu Xian was appointed to the post of the coastal system and the post of Qingyuan prefecture; Ma Guangzu was appointed to the post of the direct bachelor of Huan Zhangge, and

古文：五月甲午，孙梦观兼资善堂赞读，章鉴兼资善堂直讲。
现代文：五月初四，孙梦观兼资善堂赞读，章鉴兼资善堂直讲。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth lunar month, Sun Mengguan and Shizen-tang praised the reading, and Zhang Jian and Shizen-tang spoke directly.

古文：先圣五十代孙孔元龙赐迪功郎，授初品官。
现代文：先圣孔子五十代孙元龙赐迪功郎，授为七品官。
English: The forefather of Confucius, the fiftieth generation grandson of Yuanlong, gave Di Gonglang the title of Shichihonkan.

古文：甲辰，罗氏鬼国遣报思、播言：大元兵屯大理国，取道西南，将大入边。
现代文：十四日，罗氏鬼国派人报告思州、播州说：元军屯驻大理国，取道西南，将大举进攻宋朝边境。
English: On the 14th, Luo's ghost country sent people to report to Shizhou and Banzhou, saying: The former army is stationed in Dali Province, taking the southwestern route, and will aggressively attack the Song Dynasty border.

古文：诏以银万两，使思、播结约罗鬼为援。
现代文：下诏给银万两，让思州、播州联合罗鬼为援。
English: The following edict gave silver 10,000 taels, and let Sizhou and Banzhou unite with Luo Ji for assistance.

古文：徐清叟夺资政殿大学士、罢祠禄，王野夺端明殿学士罢祠，仍褫执政恩数。
现代文：徐清雯削夺资政殿大学士罢除祠禄，王眺削夺端明殿学士罢除祠禄，并且取消执政待遇。
English: Xu Qingwen cut the stipend of the scholars of the Capital and Politics Hall, and the stipend of the ancestral hall, and Wang Qian cut the stipend of the scholars of the Capital and Politics Hall, and the stipend of the scholars of the Capital and Politics Hall, and canceled the ruling treatment.

古文：丁未，太白昼见。
现代文：十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 23rd, a too-white Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：诏申严老鼠隘防戍。
现代文：下诏申严老鼠隘的防守。
English: The next edict stated that a strict and narrow defense would prevail.

古文：襄、樊阃臣奏捷。
现代文：襄、樊统兵将领上报战胜元军。
English: The generals of the Xiang and Han unified armies reported victory over the Yuan army.

古文：甲寅，赐礼部进士文天祥以下六百一人及第、出身有差。
现代文：二十四日，赐礼部进士文天样以下六百零一人及第、出身不等。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, there were six hundred and one people from different ranks and backgrounds who were promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：六月甲戌，朱禩孙太府寺簿、知泸州兼潼川路安抚，任责泸、叙、长宁边防。
现代文：六月十五日，朱祀孙为太府寺簿、沪州知州兼撞川路安抚，担任沪、叙、长宁边防的重任。
English: On June 15th, Zhu Shishisun was appointed as the governor of Taifu, the governor of Huzhou, the governor of Chizhou and the pacifier of Qianchuan Road, and held the important position of the border defense of Shanghai, Syria and Changning.

古文：浙江堤成。
现代文：浙江堤竣工。
English: Zhejiang dike completed.

古文：癸未，董槐罢。
现代文：二十四日，董槐被罢免。
English: On the 24th, Mr. Dong was removed from office.

古文：台臣丁大全既累疏击之，辞极诋毁，且以台牒役隅兵夜半迫槐出关，物论殊骇；三学生屡上书以为言，诏以槐为观文殿大学士、提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：台臣丁大全多次上疏攻击董槐，极力低毁，而且以台谏部门的公文强使隅兵在半夜逼迫董槐出关，对此大家议论纷纷；三学生多次上书论及此事，下诏以董槐为观文殿大学士、提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: There was a lot of discussion about the fact that the Taiwanese minister Ding Daquan repeatedly attacked Dong Xuan from above and tried his best to minimize the damage, and used official documents from the Taiwanese government department to force the soldiers to force Dong Xuan out of the customs in the middle of the night; the three students repeatedly wrote about this matter, and the next edict was to make Dong Xuan a scholar of the Academy of Confucianism, and to raise the Lin'an Duxiao Palace.

古文：诏程元凤、蔡抗可轮日判事，军国重务取旨。
现代文：下诏程元凤、蔡抗轮流处理政事，军国要务取旨决定。
English: According to the following edict, Cheng Yuanfeng and Cai Qi will take turns to deal with political affairs, and the military and state affairs will be decided.

古文：丁亥，太白入井。
现代文：二十八日，太白星进人井宿。
English: On the 28th, Tai Bai Xing entered the Jinjing Inn.

古文：秋七月甲寅，知叙州史俊调舟师与大元兵战，凡十三合，诏俊官三转，仍带阁门行宣赞舍人。
现代文：秋七月二十五日，知叙州史俊调遣水军与元军作战，共战十三个回合，下诏史俊转三官，仍带阁门行宣赞舍人。
English: On the 25th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhishuzhou Shijun dispatched a naval force to fight against the Yuan army, fighting a total of thirteen rounds. Shijun was transferred to the third rank, but he still took the pavilion door to proclaim his resignation.

古文：乙卯，以程元凤为右丞相兼枢密使，蔡抗参知政事，张磻端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十六日，以程元凤为右承相兼枢密使，蔡抗参知政事，粥番为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: On the 26th, Cheng Yuanfeng was appointed as the Minister of the Right and the Minister of the Privy Council, Cai Yan participated in the political affairs of the President, and Congee Ban was the academician of the Duanming Palace and the signer of the Privy Council.

古文：八月甲子，程元凤上疏言正心、待臣、进贤、爱民、备边、守法、谨微、审令八事。
现代文：八月初六，程元凤上疏论正心、待臣、进贤、爱民、备边、守法、谨微、审令八事。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month of the lunar calendar, Cheng Yuan and Feng Shangsuo discussed the eight matters of sincerity, being a good subject, being a virtuous person, loving the people, being prepared, abiding by the law, being cautious, and judging.

古文：九月壬辰，西南蕃吕告蛮目宁名天兄弟慕义与乌苏蛮合力为国御难，诏各补承信郎。
现代文：九月初五，西南蕃吕告蛮称宁名天兄弟向慕义气，与乌苏蛮合力抵御国难，下诏各补承信郎。
English: On the 5th day of the 9th month of the lunar calendar, the southwestern state of Shili announced to the barbarians that they were brothers of the famous god Ning, and that they should show their loyalty to him, and that they should join forces with the barbarian state of Usu to resist the national calamity.

古文：丙申，知邕州程芾以贪暴，诏削二秩罢之。
现代文：初九，琶州知州程莆，因贪暴下诏削夺二秩，罢免。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 9th month of the 1st year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11

古文：甲寅，监察御史朱熠言： 境土蹙而赋敛日繁，官吏增而调度日广。景德、庆历时，以三百二十余郡之财赋，供一万余员之奉禄；今日以一百余郡之事力，赡二万四千余员之冗官。边郡则有科降支移，内地则欠经常纳解。
现代文：二十七日，监察御史朱熠说： 国家土地减少了，赋税征敛却日益繁多，官吏增加而调度日益广泛，景德、庆历时以三百二十多郡之财富，供给一万多官员的棒禄；今天以一百多郡的财力，供养二万四千多冗官，边境各郡还有科降支移，内地各郡也经常欠负官府的钱物。
English: On the 27th, Inspector-General Zhu Xi said: The national land has decreased, but the tax collection has become more and more numerous, the number of officials has increased and the dispatch has become more and more extensive. Jingde and Qinglian used the wealth of more than 320 counties to provide more than 10,000 officials with bonuses; today, the financial resources of more than 100 counties are used to support more than 24,000 redundant officials. The border counties also have tax reductions and transfers, and the inland counties often owe money and goods to the government.

古文：欲宽民力，必汰冗员。 
现代文：要想宽缓民力，必须裁汰冗官。 
English: If you want to appease the people, you have to get rid of redundant officials.

古文：帝纳焉。
现代文：理宗采纳了。
English: Emperor Shun accepted his opinion.

古文：冬十月壬戌，太阴犯斗。
现代文：冬十月初五，月亮侵犯斗宿。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of winter, the moon invaded Douju.

古文：十一月戊子朔，荆、襄阃臣以功状来上，诏推赏将士。
现代文：十一月初一，荆、襄统兵将领上报战功情况，下诏赏赐将士。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the generals of Jing and Xiang made a report on the performance of the war, and awarded the soldiers.

古文：戊戌，京湖继上战功。
现代文：十一日，京湖接着上报战功。
English: On the 11th day, Jinghu then reported its war exploits.

古文：诏： 蜀罹兵革，吾民重困，所当劳来抚摩，使之乐业。
现代文：下诏： 四川遭受兵火，百姓重困，应当安抚慰问，使百姓乐业。
English: The following edict: Sichuan has suffered from war, and the people are in dire straits. It is necessary to offer consolation and make the people happy.

古文：比闻官吏乃肆诛求，殊失培植邦本之意。
现代文：近来听说官吏肆意诛求，这严重地损害了朝廷培植邦本的本意。
English: Recently, it has been heard that officials have been making unreasonable requests, which has seriously undermined the intention of the imperial court to cultivate the nation.

古文：自今四川制司戒饬属郡，违者罪无赦，御史台其严觉察。 
现代文：从今以后四川制司警告所属各郡，违反者治罪，不予赦免，御史台要严格检查。 
English: From now on, the Sichuan System Division will warn the counties it belongs to that violators will be punished and will not be pardoned, and the History Station will be strictly inspected.

古文：乙巳，以监察御史吴衍、翁应弼劾太学武学生刘黻等八人不率，诏拘管江西、湖南州军，宗学生与亻匈等七人并削籍，拘管外宗正司。
现代文：十八日，因监察御史吴衍、翁应弼弹勃太学武学生刘敝等八人不遵守纪律，下诏拘管江西、湖南州军，宗室学生赵与询等七人削夺学籍，拘管外宗正司。
English: On the 18th, due to the failure of eight people to comply with discipline, including the superintendent Wu Yan and the martial arts student Liu Wei, who was shot by the inspector Weng Ying, seven people, including the Jiangxi and Hunan State Army, and the student Zhao Hezheng, were stripped of their student status, and Gaozong Zhengji was arrested.

古文：癸丑，以张磻同知枢密院事，丁大全端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，马天骥端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十六日，以粥番同知枢密院事，丁大全为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事，马天骥为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事。
English: On the 26th, Tong Zhi Privy Councillor with the title of Congee Fan, Ding Daquan with the title of Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate, and Ma Tianyao with the title of Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate and Duan Ming Dian Baccalaureate.

古文：诏戒群臣洗心饬行，毋纵于货贿，其或不悛，举行淳熙成法。
现代文：下诏告诫大臣要端正心术，洁身自好，不要纵于货贿，有不改正过失的，按淳熙成法论处。
English: The following edict admonished the minister to be upright in mind and body, not to indulge in bribery, and if he did not correct his mistakes, he would be dealt with according to the law.

古文：又开国以来勋臣之裔，有能世济其美而不世其禄者，所在州郡以闻。
现代文：又开国以来功臣的后代，有能世济其美而不世其禄者，所在州郡上报朝廷。
English: Since the founding of the People's Republic of China, the descendants of meritorious vassals, who have been able to make the world a better place, have reported to the imperial court from their home prefectures.

古文：参知政事蔡抗辄擅去国，勉留不返，诏授职予祠，寻以林存言，寝其命。
现代文：参知政事蔡抗曾擅自离职，勉留不返，下诏授职予祠，不久因林存议论，停发命令。
English: Cai Nan, a political officer of the prefectural government, resigned from his post without authorization, but reluctantly did not return, and issued a decree to award the post to the shrine. Soon, due to the controversy, the order was suspended.

古文：十二月戊午朔，荧惑犯填星。
现代文：十二月初一，荧惑星侵犯填星。
English: On the first day of December, the fluorescent planet intruded and filled the sky.

古文：庚申，大元城枣阳。
现代文：初三，元军在枣阳筑城。
English: On the third day of the first month, the Yuan army built a city in Zaoyang.

古文：乙丑，以张磻兼参知政事。
现代文：初八，任命粥番兼参知政事。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he was appointed congee server and political advisor.

古文：甲戌，奖谕荆阃吴渊，其有功将士，趣上姓名、等第推赏。
现代文：十七日，奖赏荆州统兵将领吴渊，有功将士，尽快上报姓名、等第给予奖赏。
English: On the 17th, Wu Yuan, the general of the Jingzhou Army, was awarded the award, and meritorious soldiers should report their names and ranks as soon as possible to receive the award.

古文：五年春正月丁亥朔，以赵葵为少保、宁远军节度使、京湖宣抚使、判江陵府兼夔路策应大使，进封卫国公；贾似道进知枢密院事、职任依旧；吴渊参知政事；李曾伯荆湖南路抚使兼知潭州；吴潜、赵与各官一转。
现代文：宝五年春正月初一，以赵葵为少保、宁远军节度使、京湖宣抚使、判江陵府兼夔路策应使，进封卫国公；贾似道升知枢密院事，职任依旧；吴渊参知政事，李曾伯为荆湖南路安抚使兼潭州知州；吴潜、赵与袜各转一官。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fifth year of the Bao Dynasty, Zhao Kwai was appointed as the Minor Protector, the Ningyuan Army Festival Envoy, the Jinghu Proclamation Envoy, the Jiangling Prefecture and the Shandong Road Policy Envoy, and was promoted to the Minister of National Defense; Jia Lian Dao was promoted to the Privy Council, and his position was still the same; Wu Yuan was appointed to the Minister of Political Affairs, Li Zengbo was appointed to the Jinghu South Road Pacification Envoy and the Tanzhou Chizhou; Wu Qian, Zhao and Soxing were each transferred to another position.

古文：乙巳，雷。
现代文：十九日，打雷。
English: On the 19th, it thundered.

古文：丙午，禁奸民作白衣会，监司、郡县官等失觉察者坐罪。
现代文：二十日，禁止奸民作白衣会，监司、郡县官等没有觉察者治罪。
English: On the 20th, it was forbidden for ruffians to form a white-shirted group, and supervisors, county and prefectural officials, and others who were not aware of it were punished.

古文：辛亥，吴渊薨，赠少师，谥庄敏。
现代文：二十五日，吴渊去世，赠少师，溢号庄敏。
English: On the 25th, Wuyuan passed away, and was presented with a young teacher, Zhuo Min.

古文：二月戊午，四川嘉定上战功。
现代文：二月初二，四川嘉定上报战功。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Sichuan Jiading reported its war exploits.

古文：以贾似道为两淮安抚使。
现代文：任命贾似道为两淮安抚使。
English: Jia Xinduo was appointed as the two Huai appeasement envoy.

古文：辛酉，命赵葵兼湖广总领财赋，余晦淮西总领财赋。
现代文：初五，命令赵葵兼湖广总领财赋，余晦为淮西总领财赋。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered Zhao Kwai-Ken Huguang to be the general leader of the financial endowment, and Yu Ya to be the general leader of the Huaixi financial endowment.

古文：壬戌，筑思州三隘。
现代文：初六，修筑思州三隘。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the new year, the construction of the Shizhou Three Gorges was completed.

古文：五月庚申，雨。
现代文：祈祷降雨。五月初六，降雨。
English: Pray for rain. On the sixth day of the fifth month, it rains.

古文：丁卯，城荆山，置怀远军荆山县。
现代文：十三日，在荆山筑城，设置怀远军荆山县。
English: On the 13th, the Huaiyuan Army was set up in Jingshan County.

古文：诏贾似道官两转。
现代文：下诏贾似道转两官。
English: The next edict was that Jia Liang Dao would be transferred to another post.

古文：戊寅，诏京湖、沿江、海道严备舟师防遏。
现代文：二十四日，下诏京湖、沿江、海道备水军严密防守。
English: On the 24th, the order was issued to prepare the naval forces for a strict defense of the Beijing Lake, the riverside and the sea road.

古文：辛巳，复剑门垒，赏蒲择之官两转，朱禩孙、蒲黼、杨大渊、韩勇各官四转。
现代文：二十七日，收复剑门垒，赏蒲择之转两官，朱祀孙、蒲敞、杨大渊、韩勇各转四官。
English: On the 27th, the Jianmen bastion was recaptured, and Pu Zizhi was rewarded with two posts, while Zhu Shisun, Pu Zhan, Yang Dayuan, and Han Yong each received four posts.

古文：壬午，夏贵正任吉州刺史、带御器械、镇江驻扎都统制、知怀远军。
现代文：二十八日，夏贵正式任吉州刺史、带御器械、镇江驻扎都统制、怀远知军。
English: On the 28th, Xia Gui was officially appointed as the official historian of Jizhou, with his instruments, Zhenjiang stationed in the capital, and Huaiyuan Zhijun.

古文：六月丙戌，太白、岁星合于翼。
现代文：六月初三，太白星、岁星合于翼宿。
English: On the 3rd day of the 6th month, Taibai Star and New Year's Star converge at the Winged Lodge.

古文：辛卯，太阴入氐。
现代文：初八，月亮进人氏宿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the moon enters Hitoshi's house.

古文：丁酉，祈雨。
现代文：十四日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 14th, pray for rain.

古文：马天骥以台臣言罢，诏依旧端明殿学士、提举临安洞霄宫。
现代文：马天骥因台臣议论被罢免，下诏依旧为端明殿学士、提举临安洞霄宫。
English: Ma Tianyao was ousted because of the Taishin debate, and the following edict is still a bachelor of the Duanming Palace and a promotion of the Lin'an Cave Palace.

古文：秋七月丙辰，祈雨。
现代文：秋七月初三，祈祷降雨。
English: Autumn On the third day of the seventh month, pray for rain.

古文：戊午，雨。
现代文：初五，降雨。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, it rained.

古文：己未，太白昼见。
现代文：初六，太白星白天显现。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丁卯，有流星大如桃。
现代文：十四日，有流星大如桃。
English: On the 14th, there was a meteor as big as a peach.

古文：丙子，太阴入井。
现代文：二十三日，月亮进人井宿。
English: On the 23rd, the moon entered the well.

古文：八月丙戌，光化军奏捷。
现代文：八月初四，光化军传来捷报。
English: On the fourth day of the eighth month, the Gwanghaebol army reported a victory.

古文：台州火。
现代文：台州发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in Taizhou.

古文：癸巳，诏谢方叔仍旧职，蔡抗以资政殿学士并领祠在京。
现代文：十一日，下诏谢方叔职任依旧，蔡抗以资政殿学士和领祠的身份留在京城。
English: On the 11th day of the following month, Xie Fang's uncle's position remained the same, and Cai An stayed in Beijing as the scholar of the Capital Hall and the leader of the ancestral shrine.

古文：甲午，给事中邵泽等言谢方叔罪状，诏寝祠命。
现代文：十二日，给事中邵泽等议论谢方叔罪状，下诏停止祠禄官的任命。
English: On the 12th, Shao Ze and others discussed Xie Fang's guilt in the case, and issued an edict to stop the appointment of the ancestral hall official.

古文：丙申，京城火。
现代文：十四日，京城发生火灾。
English: On the 14th, a fire broke out in Kyoto.

古文：庚子，以张磻参知政事，丁大全同知枢密院事兼权参知政事。
现代文：十八日，以粥番参知政事，丁大全同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事。
English: On the 18th, Porridge Fan was appointed to participate in the political affairs, and Ding Daquan was appointed to participate in the political affairs as the Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor.

古文：己酉，史嵩之薨，赠少师，谥庄肃。
现代文：二十七日，史篙之去世，赠少师，溢号庄肃。
English: On the 27th, Shi Xizhi passed away, and was given the title of "Junior Teacher."

古文：九月壬子朔，诏今后台臣迁他职，辄出关，以违制论，仍著为令。
现代文：九月初一，下诏今后台臣迁他职，动辄出关，以违制论处，并且著为令。
English: On the first day of September, the following edict was issued: In the future, the Taishin will be transferred to another post, will leave the customs at will, will be punished for violation of the system, and will be ordered to be written.

古文：辛酉，祀明堂，大赦。
现代文：初十，祭祀明堂，大赦。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, a memorial service was held at Myodo, and a general amnesty was declared.

古文：冬十月庚寅，张磻薨，赠少师。
现代文：冬十月初九，粥番去世，赠少师。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, Congee Fan passed away and was given to a young teacher.

古文：癸巳，雷。
现代文：十二日，打雷。
English: On the 26th, thunder.

古文：甲午，虹见。
现代文：十三日，虹显现。
English: On the 13th, the rainbow appeared.

古文：丁酉，以林存签书枢密院事。
现代文：十六日，以林存签书枢密院事。
English: On the 16th, Lin Jian signed the document of the Privy Council.

古文：庚子，诏皇子忠王禥授镇南、遂安军节度使，皇女进封升国公主。
现代文：十九日，下诏皇子忠王赵甚授为镇南、遂安军节度使，皇女进封升国公主。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that the prince Zhongwang Zhao Jinju would be the festival envoy of the Zhenan and Su'an armies, and the princess would be promoted to princess of the country.

古文：十一月丙辰，李曾伯兼节制广南，任责边防。
现代文：十一月初五，李曾伯兼节制广南，担任边防守责。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Li Zengbo, concurrently the governor of Guangnan, assumed the responsibility of border defense.

古文：乙丑，奖谕安南国，赐金器币、香茗。
现代文：十四日，奖谕安南国，赐给金器币、香茗。
English: On the 14th, the award went to Annan Province, which was given gold coins and champagne.

古文：乙亥，诏京湖帅臣，黄平、清浪、平溪分置屯戍。
现代文：二十四日，下诏京湖帅臣，黄平、清浪、平溪分置屯戍。
English: On the 24th day of the month, Qinghu Shuaiyin, Huangping, Qinglang, and Pingxi were divided into separate settlements.

古文：庚辰，诏三边郡县官毋擅离职守，诸制帅臣其严纠察。
现代文：二十九日，下诏三边郡县官不得擅离职守，各制帅臣要严格纠察。
English: On the 29th, it was decreed that county and prefectural officials of the three sides should not leave their posts without permission, and that officials of all systems should strictly picket.

古文：十二月壬午，李曾伯依旧资政殿学士、湖南安抚使兼广南制置使，移司静江府。
现代文：十二月初二，李曾伯依旧为资政殿学士、湖南安抚使兼广南制置使，移司静江府。
English: On the 2nd day of December, Li Zengbo was still the Vice-President of the Academy, the Hunan Pacifying Envoy and the Guangnan Appointment Envoy, and was transferred to Jingjiang Prefecture.

古文：丁未，荧惑入氐。
现代文：二十七日，荧惑星进人氏宿。
English: On the 27th, the fluorescent planet entered Mr. Jin's house.

古文：六年春正月辛亥朔，以丁大全参知政事兼同知枢密院事，林存兼权参知政事。
现代文：宝六年春正月初一，以丁大全参知政事兼同知枢密院事，林存兼代理参知政事。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year of the Bao Dynasty, Ding Daquan was appointed to the post of political leader and Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and Lin Cun was appointed to the post of political leader and acting political leader.

古文：癸亥，诏出封桩库银万两付蜀阃。
现代文：十三日，诏令出封桩库银一万两给付四川统兵将领。
English: On the 13th, a decree was issued to seal the piles of silver and pay ten thousand taels of silver to the generals of the Sichuan army.

古文：辛未，诏授成穆皇后弟太师郭师禹孙善庸承务郎，仍免铨注差。
现代文：二十一日，下诏授成穆皇后弟太师郭师禹孙郭善庸为承务郎，并且免锉注差。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, the Empress Chengmu conferred the title of Zengyurong (承务郎) on Guo Zenshong, the younger brother of Guo Shi and grandson of Guo Yu, and exempted him from military service.

古文：癸酉，罢李曾伯广西经略，以广南制置大使兼知静江府。其经略司官属，改充制司官属。
现代文：二十三日，罢免李曾伯广西经略使，以他为广南制置大使兼静江知府，其经略司官属，改充制司官属。
English: On the 23rd, Li Zengbo was dismissed as the Guangxi Minister of Economic Affairs, and he was appointed as the Ambassador of Guangnan Province and the Governor of Jingjiang Province. His position of the Minister of Economic Affairs was changed to that of the Minister of Finance.

古文：甲戌，诏枢密院编修官吕逢年诣蜀阃，趣办关隘、屯栅、粮饷，相度黄平、思、播诸处险要缓急事宜，具工役以闻。
现代文：二十四日，下诏枢密院编修官吕逢年到四川兵营，督办关隘、屯栅、粮晌，视察黄平、思州、播州各处险要缓急事宜，开列工役事项上报。
English: On the 24th, Lu Feng, the editor-in-chief of the Privy Council, went to the Sichuan barracks to supervise Guanqiao, Tunza, and Granary, inspect the urgent matters of Huangping, Shizhou, and Banzhou, and report on the construction work.

古文：戊寅，雷。
现代文：二十八日，打雷。
English: On the 28th, there was thunder.

古文：二月辛巳朔，以马光祖为端明殿学士、京湖制置使、知江陵府，兼夔路策应、湖广总领财赋屯田事。
现代文：二月初一，以马光祖为端明殿学士、京湖制置使、江陵知府，兼夔路策应、湖广总领财赋和屯田事宜。
English: On the first day of February, Ma Guangzu was appointed as the first academician of the Ming Dynasty, the first envoy of the Beijing-Hubei system, the governor of Gangneung, and the general leader of Hubei, Guizhou, Guizhou and Guangxi provinces.

古文：壬辰，雨土。
现代文：十二日，降土。
English: On the twelfth day, the earth came down.

古文：三月辛亥朔，祈雨。
现代文：三月初一，祈祷降雨。
English: On the first day of March, pray for rain.

古文：丙辰，马光祖请以吕文德、王鉴、王登、汪立信等充制司参议官及辟制司准备差使等官，诏光祖开阃之初，姑从所请。
现代文：初六，马光祖请求任命吕文德、王鉴、王登、汪立信等担任制司参议官和辟制司准备差使等官，下诏马光祖开间之初，姑且采纳他的建议。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Ma Guangzu requested the appointment of Lü Wende, Wang Qian, Wang Deng, Wang Lixin, etc. to serve as the system department councillor and the preparation of the system department. At the beginning of the next day, Ma Guangzu accepted his suggestion.

古文：戊辰，以马光祖兼荆湖北路安抚使。
现代文：十八日，以马光祖兼荆湖北路安抚使。
English: On the 18th, with Ma Guangzu and Jinghu North Road pacification envoy.

古文：庚午，荧惑退入氐。
现代文：二十日，荧惑星退人氏宿。
English: On the 20th, the fluorescent planet left the man's house.

古文：甲戌，诏湖北提点刑狱文复之移司江陵，兼京湖制司参议官。
现代文：二十四日，下诏湖北提点刑狱文复之移司江陵，兼京湖制司参议官。
English: On the 24th, Jiangling, who was transferred to Hubei Province in accordance with the decision of the Hubei Provincial People's Procuratorate to postpone the execution of the sentence of imprisonment, was also appointed as the Councillor of the Beijing Lake System.

古文：夏四月庚辰朔，诏：自冬徂春，天久不雨，民失东作。自四月一日始，避殿减膳，仰答谴告。
现代文：夏四月初一，下诏：自冬至春，久不降雨，百姓失去了春耕的大好时机，从四月一日起，避殿减膳，表示对上天谴责的敬意。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, the following edict was issued: Since the winter to spring, it has not rained for a long time, and the people have lost the great opportunity of spring plowing. From the first day of April, they will avoid the palace and reduce meals to show their respect for the condemnation of heaven.

古文：癸未，程元凤等以久旱乞解机务，诏不允。
现代文：初四，程元凤等因久早请求解除职务，下诏不允。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Cheng Yuanfeng and others requested to be relieved of their duties for a long time, but were not allowed.

古文：甲申，大雨。
现代文：初五，降大雨。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, heavy rain fell.

古文：丙申，群臣三表请御正殿，从之。
现代文：十七日，大臣三次上表请理宗上正殿，理宗应允。
English: On the 17th, the minister made three requests to the emperor to come to the Imperial Palace, to which the emperor agreed.

古文：丁酉，诏田应己思州驻扎御前忠胜军副都统制，往播州共筑关隘防御。
现代文：十八日，诏令田应己为思州驻扎御前忠胜军副都统制，前往播州共筑关隘防御。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Taizong ordered Tian Ying himself to be the deputy commander of the imperial loyal victory army stationed in Shizhou, and went to Banzhou to jointly build the defense of Guanxi.

古文：己亥，台臣朱熠劾沿江制置副使吕好问黄州之役贪酷误事，诏褫职。
现代文：二十日，台臣朱熠弹勃沿江制置副使吕好问，黄州之役贪酷误事，下诏革除职务。
English: On the 20th, the Taiwanese minister Zhu Rongbiao ordered the deputy minister Lü Haoqian to be stationed along the Yangtze River. He was removed from his post under the pretext that he had been greedy and made a mistake in the Yellow River Campaign.

古文：乙巳，程元凤罢，以观文殿学士判福州，寻提举洞霄宫。
现代文：二十六日，程元凤被罢免，以观文殿学士判福州，不久提举洞霄宫。
English: On the 26th, Cheng Yuanfeng was dismissed, and Fuzhou was awarded the title of "Master of the Academy of Fine Arts," and Dongxiao Palace was soon promoted.

古文：丙午，赵葵三辞免福建安抚使，诏授醴泉观使兼侍读。
现代文：二十七日，赵葵三次辞免福建安抚使，下诏授为醛泉观使兼侍读。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Kwai resigned from the post of Fujian's pacification envoy for the third time, and was appointed to the post of Yongdequan's observation envoy and attendant.

古文：丁未，以丁大全为右丞相兼枢密使，林存同知枢密院事兼权参知政事，朱熠端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十八日，以丁大全为右承相兼枢密使，林存同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，朱熠为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: On the 28th, Ding Daquan was appointed as the Minister of the Right and the Privy Counsellor, Lin Cun Tongzhi as the Privy Counsellor and the Acting Councillor, and Zhu Xi as the Tuanmingdian Scholar and the Signing of the Privy Counsellor.

古文：五月庚戌朔，诏襄、樊解围，高达、程大元应援，李和城守，皆有劳绩，将士用命，深可嘉尚，其亟议行赏激。
现代文：五月初一，下诏： 襄、樊解围，高达、程大元应援，李和守城，都有功劳，将士用命，值得歌颂，应尽快予以奖赏。 
English: On the first day of May, the following edict was issued: Xiang, Yan lifted the siege, Gao and Cheng Da Yuan came to help, and Li and Guo defended the city. All of them made great contributions and risked their lives. They are worthy of praise and should be rewarded as soon as possible.

古文：癸丑，诏怀远、涟水相继奏功，夏贵官两转，兼河南招抚使。毛兴转右武大夫，并依旧任。
现代文：初四，下诏怀远、涟水军相继上报战功，下诏夏贵转两官，兼河南招抚使，毛兴转右武大夫，并依旧任职。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the following day, Huaiyuan and the Ershui Army successively reported their war exploits, the following day, Xia Gui was transferred to two posts, and also became the Henan Recruitment Envoy, and Mao Xing was transferred to the Right Military Doctor, and still served.

古文：丁巳，李曾伯言： 广西多荒田，民惧增赋不耕，乞许耕者复三年租，后两年减其租之半，守令劝垦辟多者赏之。 
现代文：初八，李曾伯说： 广西多荒田，百姓害怕增收赋税，所以不敢耕种，请求允许耕种者免除三年租税，后两年减除租税一半，守令劝耕多者加以奖赏。 
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Li Zengbo said: There are more barren fields in Guangxi. People are afraid of increasing taxes, so they dare not cultivate. He requested that cultivators be exempted from tax for three years, and the tax would be reduced by half in the next two years. He also recommended that those who cultivate more should be rewarded.

古文：奏可。丙寅，命嗣荣王与芮判大宗正事。
现代文：十七日，命令嗣荣王赵与丙判大宗正事。
English: On the seventeenth day, he ordered the heir to the throne, Zhao and C, to make a major decision.

古文：丁卯，嗣秀王师弥薨。
现代文：十八日，嗣秀王赵师弥去世。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Shiya, the heir to the throne, passed away.

古文：六月癸巳，台臣戴庆炣劾淮东总领赵与时，夺职镌秩。
现代文：六月十五日，台臣戴庆卿弹勃淮东总领赵与髻，夺职削秩。
English: On June 15th, the Taiwanese vassal Dai Qingqing pummelled the general leader of the Eastern Huai Dynasty, Zhao Youjun, and took away his position and rank.

古文：秋七月庚戌，城凌霄山，诏朱禩孙进一秩，易士英带行阁门宣赞，余转官有差。
现代文：秋七月初三，在凌霄山筑城，下诏朱祀孙进升一级，易士英带行阎门宣赞，其余转官不等。
English: On the third day of the first month of the autumn and the third day of the seventh month, in Lingxiao Mountain, Zhu Xi and Sun Jin were promoted to the first level, Yi Shi Ying led the proclamation of the gates of hell, and the remaining officials were transferred.

古文：癸丑，荧惑犯房宿。
现代文：初六，荧惑星侵犯房宿。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, a fluorescent planet invaded the room.

古文：戊午，赵葵四辞免醴泉观使兼侍读，乞外祠，从之。
现代文：十一日，赵葵四次辞免醛泉观使兼侍读，请求任在外祠禄官，理宗应允。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhao Kwai resigned four times from his post as the attendant of the Yuansheng Quanjun, and requested to be appointed as an official of the foreign ancestral shrine. Li Zong agreed.

古文：戊辰，蜀郡刘整上捷，诏推恩赏。
现代文：二十一日，蜀郡刘整上报战胜元军，诏令给予奖赏。
English: On the twenty-first day, Liu Jie of Shu County reported victory over the Yuan army, and issued a decree to give a reward.

古文：癸酉，知平江府余晦，以台臣戴庆炣言曩败绩于蜀，误国欺君，诏夺宝章阁待制罢任，追冒支官钱。
现代文：二十六日，知平江府余晦，因台臣戴庆呵议论说，从前在蜀有败绩，误国欺君，下诏夺宝章阁待制，罢除职任，追回冒领的官钱。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Zhipingjiang Prefecture was in turmoil, because the Taiwanese minister Dai Qingtao argued that in the past, Shu had failed, misled the country and cheated the king, and issued an edict to seize the treasure, suspend the cabinet, remove the post, and recover the fraudulent government money.

古文：甲戌，诏前福建漕臣高斯得已夺职镌官，其赃百余万严限征偿，以惩贪吏。
现代文：二十七日，下诏前福建槽臣高斯得已经夺职削官，其贪赃一百多万严格期限，予以收回，以惩贪吏。
English: On the 27th, it was announced that the former Fujian minister Gao Sidi had been removed from his post as a corrupt official, and his bribe of more than one million was strictly time-limited, and it was taken back to punish the corrupt official.

古文：乙亥，吕文德入播州，诏京湖给银万两。
现代文：二十八日，吕文德进人播州，下诏京湖给银万两。
English: On the 28th, Lü Wende entered Banzhou, and ordered Jinghu to pay ten thousand taels of silver.

古文：八月癸未，太阴行犯荧惑。
现代文：八月初六，月亮侵犯荧惑星。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the moon will invade the fluorescent planet.

古文：戊戌，诏上流锁江防御。
现代文：二十一日，下诏上流封锁长江，全面防御。
English: On the 21st, the lower and upper reaches of the Yangtze River were cordoned off for all-round defense.

古文：癸卯，诏申严倭船入界之禁。
现代文：二十六日，下诏申严楼船人境的禁令。
English: On the 26th, the emperor issued an edict to strictly enforce the ban on the ship's crew.

古文：九月壬子，诏蜀、广、海道申严防遏。
现代文：九月初六，下诏蜀、广、海道申严防御。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, the defense of Dahshu, Guangyuan and Caohejing was tightened.

古文：甲寅，诏安南情状叵测，申饬边防。
现代文：初八，下诏安南情况不可预料，命令加强边防。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Annan announced that the situation in South Korea was unpredictable and ordered the strengthening of border defenses.

古文：戊辰，安丰上战功。
现代文：二十二日，安丰上报战功。
English: On the 22nd, Anfeng reported its war achievements.

古文：有流星透霞。
现代文：有流星放射光芒。
English: There is a meteor radiant glow.

古文：冬十月丙子朔，诏蜀中将帅虽未克复成都，而暴露日久，战功亦多，宜与序升，其亟条具以闻。
现代文：冬十月初一，下诏： 四川将帅虽没能收复成都，但长期野外作战，多立战功，应该按等级升迁，尽快陈述上报。 
English: On the first day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: Although the Sichuan generals failed to recapture Chengdu, they should be promoted according to their ranks and report their performance as soon as possible.

古文：丁丑，以俞兴为四川制置副使、知嘉定府兼成都安抚副使。
现代文：初二，以俞兴为四川制置副使、嘉定知府兼成都安抚副使。
English: On the second day of the first semester, He Xing was appointed as the deputy envoy of Sichuan Province, and the deputy envoy of Jiading Prefecture and Chengdu Pacification.

古文：乙酉，诏知隆庆府杨礼守安西堡有功，官两转。
现代文：初十，下诏隆庆知府杨礼守卫安西堡有功，转两官。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Yang Li, the governor of Longqing prefecture, who had served as the guard of Anxi Fort, was promoted to the second rank.

古文：戊子，大元兵攻通、泰州。
现代文：十三日，元兵进攻通州、泰州。
English: On the 13th, Yuan soldiers attacked Tongzhou and Taizhou.

古文：庚寅，广南刘雄飞奏横山之功，诏雄飞官三转，部兵将校官两转。
现代文：十五日，广南刘雄飞奏报横山之功，下诏刘雄飞转三官，部兵将校转两官。
English: On the 15th, Liu Xiongfei of Guangnan reported the achievement of Hengshan, and it was announced that Liu Xiongfei would be transferred to three officers, and the officers of the division would be transferred to two officers.

古文：辛卯，诏常州、江阴、镇江发米振赡淮民。
现代文：十六日，下诏常州、江阴、镇江发米贩济淮民。
English: On the 16th, rice traders from Changzhou, Jiangyin and Zhenjiang were ordered to help the people.

古文：十一月己酉，林存罢，以资政殿学士知建宁府。
现代文：十一月初四，林存被罢免，以资政殿学士知建宁府。
English: At the beginning of November 4, Lin Cun was removed from his post, and he was appointed as the vice-governor of Jianningfu.

古文：癸丑，颍州上战功，诏亟推赏，以示激厉。
现代文：初八，颖州上报战功，下诏尽快给予奖赏，用来激励士卒勇敢作战。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Yingzhou reported its war exploits, and issued an edict to give rewards as soon as possible to encourage soldiers to fight bravely.

古文：诏追复余玠官职。
现代文：下诏追复余官职。
English: The following edict reinstates Yu's official position.

古文：甲寅，筑黄平，赐名镇远州，吕逢年进一秩。
现代文：初九，修筑黄平，赐名镇远州，吕逢年晋升一级。
English: In the early 9th century, Huangping was built, the famous town of Yuzhou was given, and it was promoted to the first level every year.

古文：诏抚谕沿边将士。
现代文：下诏抚谕沿边将士。
English: The following edict was issued to the soldiers along the border.

古文：丙辰，给事中张镇言：徐敏子曩帅广右，嗜杀黩货，流毒桂府。
现代文：十一日，给事中张镇说：徐敏子前统帅广右，嗜杀默武，流毒桂府。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhang Zhen said in the case: Xu Tinsi's former commander Guang Yu, who was addicted to killing, poisoned Guifu.

古文：甲子，太阴犯权星。
现代文：下诏仍旧羁管隆兴府。
English: The following edict still governs Longxing Prefecture.

古文：丁卯，东海失守，贾似道抗章引咎，诏令以功自赎，特与放罪。
现代文：十二日，叶梦鼎依旧职知隆兴府。十七日，以朱熠同知枢密院事兼代理参知政事，饶虎臣为端明殿学士、同签书枢密院事，贾似道抗章引咎，下诏以功自赎，特与免罪。
English: On the twelfth day, Ye Mengding was still a functionary of Longxingfu. On the seventeenth day, Zhu Xi Tongzhi, Privy Councillor and Acting Councillor of State, and Rao Huchen, who was a graduate of Duanming Palace and a Privy Councillor who signed the same letter, were given the Jiaxing Road Anti-Chapter, and they were pardoned for their merits.

古文：甲戌，淮东帅臣奏大元兵退。
现代文：二十九日，淮东帅臣奏报元军退兵。
English: On the 29th, Huai Dong Shuai's vassal reported the withdrawal of the Yuan army.

古文：填星、荧惑在危。
现代文：填星、荧惑星在危宿。
English: Star-filling, fluorescent planets are in danger.

古文：十二月戊寅，诏改来年为开庆元年。
现代文：十二月初三，下诏改来年为开庆元年。
English: On the third day of the first month of December, the following edict changed the coming year to the first year of the celebration.

古文：庚辰，大元兵渡马湖入蜀，诏马光祖时暂移司峡州，六郡镇抚向士璧移司绍庆府，以便策应。
现代文：初五，元兵渡马湖进人四川，下诏马光祖暂时移司峡州，六郡镇抚向士璧移司绍庆府，以便策应。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Yuan soldiers marched into Sichuan via Mahu Lake, and the following day, Ma Guangzu temporarily moved to Shijiangxia Prefecture, and the six counties of Zhenfu moved to Shibi and Shaoqing Prefecture in order to cope with the situation.

古文：癸未，房州上战功。
现代文：初八，房州上报战功。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Fangzhou reported its war exploits.

古文：丙戌，诏置横山屯。
现代文：十一日，下诏设置横山屯。
English: On the 11th day, the following edict was issued to set up Yokoyamato.

古文：丁亥，向士璧不俟朝命进师归州，捐赀百万以供军费；马光祖不待奏请招兵万人。捐奉银万两以募壮士，遂有房州之功。
现代文：十二日，向士璧不等朝廷命令进师归州，捐资一百万以供军事。马光祖不等奏请招兵一万人，捐棒禄银一万两以募壮士，于是有房州之功。
English: On the 12th, the imperial court ordered Xiang Shi Bi to return to Fuzhou and donate one million yuan for the military. Ma Guangzu did not wait for the invitation to recruit ten thousand soldiers, and donated ten thousand rupees in silver and ten thousand rupees in silver to recruit strong men, so he had the merit of Fuzhou.

古文：诏士璧、光祖各进一秩。
现代文：下诏向士璧、马光祖各进升一级。
English: The following edict promoted Xiang Shibi and Ma Guangzu to the next level.

古文：辛丑，诏李曾伯城筑关隘，训练民兵峒丁，申严防遏。
现代文：二十六日，下诏李曾伯筑城关隘，训练民兵酮丁，申严边防。
English: On the 26th, Li Zengbo ordered the construction of the Chengguan Pass, the training of militia, and the establishment of a strict border defense.

古文：填星、太白、荧惑合于室。
现代文：填星、太白星、荧惑星合于室宿。
English: A star-filled, too-white star, and a fluorescent planet converge on Murojuku.

古文：开庆元年春正月乙巳朔，诏饬中外奉公法，图实政。
现代文：开庆元年春正月初一，下诏告戒中外官吏奉公守法，创建实政。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the year, the following edict warned Chinese and foreign officials to abide by the law and create real politics.

古文：马光祖与执政恩数。
现代文：马光祖赐予执政待遇。
English: Ma Guangzu granted the ruling treatment.

古文：李曾伯进观文殿学士。
现代文：李曾伯进升为观文殿学士。
English: Li Zengbo was promoted to be a scholar of the Academy of Confucius.

古文：己酉，大元兵攻忠、涪，渐薄夔境，诏蒲择之、马光祖战守调遣，便宜行事。
现代文：初五，元兵进攻忠、涪，接近夔州疆界，诏令蒲择之、马光祖，战守调遣，自行决定。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yuan soldiers attacked Zhong and Lu, approaching the border of Luzhou, and issued a decree to dispatch Pu Zizhi and Ma Guangzu to defend the war, at their own discretion.

古文：辛亥，诏： 戍蜀将士，频年战御，暴露可闵。
现代文：初七，下诏： 守卫四川的将士，接连多年战守防御，暴露在外，值得同情。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the following edict was issued: The soldiers guarding Sichuan, who have been defending the defense for many years in a row, are exposed and deserve sympathy.

古文：今申命蒲择之从优犒师，春防毕日即与更戍，其辄逃归者从军令。 
现代文：今特命令蒲择之从优搞劳士卒，等春防完毕，即与调换防务，有逃跑者按军令处罚。 
English: Now, the special order is to select the best laborers, and when the spring defense is completed, they will be transferred to the defense, and those who have escaped will be punished according to the military order.

古文：癸丑，诏吕文德城黄平，深入蛮地，抚辑有方，与官三转。
现代文：初九，下诏：吕文德筑城黄平，深人蛮地，抚集有方，给转三官。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the following edict was issued: Lü Wende built the city of Huangping, was a man of great courage, had the ability to gather, and was promoted to the third rank.

古文：庚申，诏知宾州吕振龙，知象州奚必胜，兵至闻风先遁，兵退乃返，并追毁出身文字，窜远郡。
现代文：十五日，下诏： 知宾州吕振龙、知象州奚必胜，元兵到达，闻风先逃，元兵退走才返回，两人都追毁出身文字，流放远方。
English: On the fifteenth day, the following edict was issued: Lv Zhenlong of Zhibin Prefecture and Zhaoxiang of Zhizhou Prefecture were sure to win. The Yuan soldiers arrived and fled when the wind blew, and only returned when the Yuan soldiers retreated. Both of them were chased away and exiled far away.

古文：横州守臣刘清卿设隘坚守，与官一转。
现代文：横州守臣刘清卿设隘坚守，给转一官。 
English: The governor of Yokosuka, Liu Qingqing, set up a narrow defense and was transferred to another post.

古文：壬戌，监察御史章士元言谢方叔帅蜀误国，诏方叔更与镌秩，其子修窜广南。
现代文：十七日，监察御史章士元说谢方叔帅蜀误国，下诏谢方叔再次削夺官品，其子谢修流窜广南。
English: On the seventeenth day, the inspector of the History Department, Zhang Shiyuan, said that Uncle Xie Fang was the ruler of the wrong country, and then Uncle Xie Fang won the official prize again, and his son Xie Xiu went to Guangnan.

古文：癸亥，左司谏沈炎言余晦坏蜀，幕属李卓、王克己济恶敛怨，诏晦、卓、克己各夺两官。
现代文：十八日，左司谏沈炎说余晦破坏四川抗元，幕僚属官李卓、王克己济恶敛怨，下诏余晦、李卓、王克己分别削夺两官。
English: On the 18th, Zuo Jian Shen Yan said that Yu Guo had sabotaged the Sichuan Anti-Yuan Movement, and that the staff officers Li Zhuo and Wang Keji had harbored evil grudges. The next order was that Yu Guo, Li Zhuo, and Wang Keji were to be stripped of their posts.

古文：丙寅，印应飞依旧职知鄂州兼湖北转运使。
现代文：二十一日，印应飞依旧担任鄂州知州兼湖北转运使。
English: On the 21st, Yingfei still served as the Ezhou Chizhou and Hubei transfer envoy.

古文：丁卯，贾似道以枢密使为京西湖南北四川宣抚大使、都大提举两淮兵甲、湖广总领、知江陵府。
现代文：二十二日，贾似道以枢密使为京西湖南北四川宣抚大使、都大提举两淮兵甲、湖广总领、江陵知府。
English: On the 22nd, Jia Liangdao was appointed as the Beijing-Xihu North-South Sichuan Proclamation Ambassador with the title of Privy Envoy, and the capital raised two armies, the commander-in-chief of Hunan and Guangxi, and the governor of Gangneung.

古文：蜀帅蒲择之以重兵攻成都，不克。
现代文：蜀帅蒲择之率重兵进攻成都，没有获胜。
English: Shu Shuai attacked Chengdu at the rate of heavy troops, but did not win.

古文：大元兵破利州、隆庆、顺庆诸郡，阆、蓬、广安守将相继纳降，又造浮梁于涪州之蔺市。
现代文：大元军队攻破利州、隆庆、顺庆诸郡，间州、蓬州、广安军守将相继纳土投降，又在涪州的蔺市建造浮桥。
English: The Taiyuan army broke through the counties of Lizhou, Longqing and Shunqing, and the garrisons of Yanzhou, Pengzhou and Guang'an surrendered successively, and built a floating bridge in the city of Handan in Handan.

古文：戊辰，以李庭芝权知扬州。
现代文：二十三日，以李庭芝代理扬州知州。
English: On the 23rd, Yangzhou Chizhou was represented by Li Tingzhi.

古文：二月乙亥朔，诏京西提刑王登提兵援蜀，功未及成，赍志以殁，赠官五转，致仕恩外，仍官一子。 
现代文：二月初一，下诏： 京西提刑王登率兵援蜀，未及成功，怀抱志向而死，赠转五官，恩外退休，并且任其一子为官。 
English: On the first day of February, the following edict was issued: The Beijing-Shanghai-Shanghai-Tibet-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Tibet-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Shanghai-Sh

古文：庚辰，以赵与为观文殿学士、两淮安抚制置使兼知扬州。
现代文：初六，以赵与袜为观文殿学士、两淮安抚制置使兼扬州知州。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Zhao and Sox were awarded the title of "Master of the Academy of Confucianism" and "Master of Yangzhou and Zhizhou" respectively.

古文：乙酉，出内库缗钱三千万助边用。
现代文：十一日，出内库钱三千万络补助边防费用。
English: On the 11th, 30 million yuan in online subsidies for border defense costs came out of the treasury.

古文：丙戌，以马光祖为资政殿学士、沿江制置使、江东安抚、知建康府、行宫留守。
现代文：十二日，以马光祖为资政殿学士、沿江制置使、江东安抚使、建康知府、行宫留守。
English: On the 12th, with Ma Guangzu as the treasurer of the palace of politics, the envoy for the construction of the riverside, the envoy for the pacification of the east river, the governor of Jiankang, left the palace.

古文：己丑，诏蠲建康、太平、宁国、池州、广德等处沙田租。
现代文：十五日，下诏免除建康、太平、宁国、池州、广德等地区沙田租税。
English: On the 15th, the following edict exempted Jiankang, Taiping, Ningguo, Chizhou, Guangde and other regions from Shatin tax.

古文：壬辰，诏蠲涟水军制司所收屯田租。
现代文：十八日，下诏免除涟水军制司所收屯田租税。
English: On the 18th, he issued an edict exempting the Surabaya Military Government from paying the military land tax.

古文：乙未，发平粜仓米三万，减直振在京民。
现代文：二十一日，发平桌仓米三万石，减价贩桌在京百姓。
English: On the twenty-first day, the flat-rate table rice warehouse reached 30,000 koku, and the price-reduction selling table was in Beijing.

古文：辛丑，涪州报大元兵退。
现代文：二十七日，涪州报告元军退走。
English: On the 27th, Zhangzhou reported that the Yuan army had retreated.

古文：三月庚戌，诏印应雷、黄梦桂赴都堂禀议。
现代文：三月初六，下诏印应雷、黄梦桂赴都堂汇报情况。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, Huang Menggui went to Tudang to report the situation.

古文：命有司县重赏募将士，毁蔺市浮梁。
现代文：命令有关部门悬重赏召募将士，毁坏蔺市浮桥。
English: He ordered the relevant departments to offer heavy rewards to recruit soldiers and destroy the pontoon bridge in Handan.

古文：癸丑，诏：蜀死节臣、云顶山诸处将士，咸褒录其后。
现代文：初九，下诏：四川死节守臣、云顶山各处将士，褒录他们的后代。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, the following edict was issued: The descendants of Sichuan's dead festival retainers and soldiers from all over Yundian Mountain should be recorded.

古文：丁巳，以吕文德为保康军节度使、四川制置副使兼知重庆府。
现代文：十三日，任命吕文德为保康军节度使、四川制置副使兼重庆知府。
English: On the 13th, Lu Wende was appointed as the military envoy of the Qing Dynasty, the deputy envoy of Sichuan Province and the governor of Chongqing.

古文：庚申，马光祖奏大元兵自乌江还北。
现代文：十六日，马光祖奏报元军从乌江回到北方。
English: On the 16th, Ma Guangzu reported that the Yuan army had returned to the north from Wujiang.

古文：辛酉，雨土。
现代文：十七日，降土。
English: On the seventeenth day, the descent began.

古文：夏四月甲戌朔，以段元鉴、杨礼坚守城壁，殁于王事，诏各赠奉国军节度使，封 二字 侯，立庙赐额。致仕恩外，更官一子成忠郎。
现代文：夏四月初一，因段元鉴、杨礼坚守城壁，为国捐躯，诏令各赠奉国军节度使，封 二字 侯，立庙赐额，恩外致仕，另外再任其一子为成忠郎。
English: On the first day of the fourth month of the summer, because Duan Yuanjian and Yang Li held fast to the city wall and sacrificed their lives for the country, the imperial edict ordered that each of them should be given an envoy to the national army festival, a two-character "Hou" seal, a stipend for the establishment of a temple, an honorable discharge, and one of their sons should be appointed as Chengzhuro.

古文：丁丑，以向士璧为湖北安抚副使、知峡州，兼归、峡、施、珍、南平军、绍庆府镇抚使。
现代文：初四，以向士璧为湖北安抚副使、峡州知州，兼归、峡、施、珍、南平军、绍庆府镇抚使。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Xiang Shibi was appointed as the deputy envoy of pacification in Hubei Province, the deputy envoy of pacification in Qiaozhou, Chizhou, Guifu, Qiaozhou, Shi, Zhen, Nanping, and the deputy envoy of pacification in Shaoqing.

古文：甲申，诏：守合州王坚婴城固守，百战弥厉，节义为蜀列城之冠，诏赏典加厚。
现代文：十一日，下诏：合州守臣王坚婴城固守，百战更坚，节义为四川各城守将之冠，下诏重加奖赏。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the following edict was issued: Hechu's castle keeper Wang Jian's infant city was firmly held, and it was even more firmly held in a hundred battles, and its steadfastness was the crown of every castle keeper in Sichuan, and the following edict increased the reward.

古文：乙酉，知施州谢昌元自备缗钱百万，米麦千石，筑郡城有功，诏官一转。
现代文：十二日，施州知州谢昌元自备络钱一百万，米麦千石，修筑郡城有功，下诏转一官。
English: On the 12th day of the month, Shizhou Zhizhou Xie Changyuan prepared a million yuan of net money, a thousand stones of rice and barley, built a county seat, and was transferred to a post.

古文：乙未，诏赐夏贵溧阳田三十顷。
现代文：二十二日，下诏赐夏贵漂阳田三十顷。
English: On the 22nd, Xia Gui was granted 30 hectares of Yangming fields.

古文：丙申，以吕文德兼四川总领财赋。
现代文：二十三日，以吕文德兼四川总领财赋。
English: On the 23rd, he was appointed as Lu Wende and the general leader of Sichuan Province.

古文：五月甲辰朔，城金州、开州。
现代文：五月初一，筑金州、开州城。
English: On the first day of May, Tsukuginoshu and Kaeshu-jo will rise.

古文：辛亥，雨雹。
现代文：初八，降冰雹。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, hail fell.

古文：乙卯，达州上吕文德等战功，诏迁补有功将士。
现代文：十二日，达州上报吕文德等人战功，下诏迁补有功将士。
English: On the 12th, Dazhou reported the war exploits of Lü Wende and others, and the next move was to supplement the meritorious soldiers.

古文：丁巳，诏湖北诸郡去年旱潦饥疫，令江陵、常、澧、岳、寿诸州发义仓米振粜，仍严戢吏弊，务令惠及细民。
现代文：十四日，下诏：湖北各郡，去年早涝饥疫，命令江陵、常、遭、岳、寿各州，发义仓米贩济贩桌，并且要严禁官吏从中为弊，务必使小民得到实惠。
English: On the 14th, the following edict was issued: All counties in Hubei, where the famine broke out early last year, ordered the provinces of Jiangling, Chang'an, Hebei, Yue and Shou to set up rice warehouses and tables for rice traders, and to strictly prohibit government officials from taking advantage of the situation, and to ensure that the common people received real benefits.

古文：乙丑，行开庆通宝钱。
现代文：二十三日，推行开庆通宝钱。
English: On the 23rd, the implementation of the opening ceremony of the treasure money.

古文：辛未，赐礼部进士周震炎以下四百四十二人及第、出身有差。
现代文：二十八日，赐礼部进士周震炎以下四百四十二人及第、出身不等。
English: On the 28th, four hundred and forty-two people from various ranks and backgrounds, including Zhou Zhenyan, a member of the Ceremonial Department, were awarded.

古文：婺州大水，发义仓米振之。
现代文：姿州发生大水，发义仓米贩济。
English: Flooding occurs in Zhouzhou, rice traders flee.

古文：六月甲戌，吕文德兵入重庆。
现代文：六月初二，吕文德率兵进人重庆。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, Lü Wende led an army into Chongqing.

古文：诏谕四川军民共奋忠勇，效死勿去，有功行赏，靡间迩遐。有能效顺来归，悉当宥过加恤。
现代文：下诏要求四川军民共同奋战，为国效力，战死沙场也不逃走，有功行赏，不管远近，有投奔朝廷者，都要赦免罪失，加以抚恤。
English: The following edict required the soldiers and civilians of Sichuan to fight together, to serve the country, to die in battle and not run away, to be rewarded for their meritorious deeds, and to be pardoned for their sins and faults, and to be given a pension, regardless of whether they were near or far, or whether they had defected to the imperial court.

古文：仍奖吕文德断桥通道之功，命兼领马军行司。
现代文：奖赏吕文德断桥通道之功，命令兼领马军行司。
English: Lu Wende was rewarded for his work in breaking the bridge passage, and he was also ordered to lead the cavalry.

古文：辛巳，以朱熠参知政事，饶虎臣同知枢密院事。
现代文：初九，以朱熠参知政事，饶虎臣同知枢密院事。
English: On the first day of the ninth month of the year, Zhu Xi was appointed to the post of prefectural governor, and Rao Hu Chen was appointed to the post of privy councillor.

古文：丙戌，南平来报战功。
现代文：十四日，南平来报战功。
English: On the 14th, Nanping came to report its war exploits.

古文：戊戌，诏申严海道防御。
现代文：二十六日，下诏申严海道防务。
English: On the 26th, the decree on strict defense of the sea route was issued.

古文：己亥，诏奖谕贾似道。
现代文：二十七日，下诏奖谕贾似道。
English: On the 27th, Jia Li Dao received the award.

古文：壬寅，以李庭芝直宝谟阁、湖北安抚副使兼知峡州。
现代文：三十日，以李庭芝直宝漠阁、湖北安抚副使兼峡州知州。
English: On the 30th, Li Tingzhi, the Vice-Minister of Pacification of Hubei Province and the Vice-Minister of Qiaozhou Province, visited Chizhou.

古文：太白昼见。
现代文：太白星白天显现。
English: Too white Venus appears in the daytime.

古文：秋七月辛亥，太白入井。
现代文：秋七月初九，太白星进人井宿。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Tai Bai Xing entered Jin Rong Inn.

古文：癸亥，蔡抗薨，赠少保，谥文肃。
现代文：二十一日，蔡抗去世，赠少保，溢号文肃。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Cai Qi passed away. He was awarded the title of "Junior Protector" and promoted to "Senior Constable."

古文：以知播州杨文、知思州田应庚守御勤劳，诏各官一转。
现代文：因播州知州杨文、思州知州田应庚守御勤劳，下诏各转一官。
English: Due to the hard work of Yang Wen of Banshu Chizhou and Tian Ying Geng of Shizhou Chizhou, they were each transferred to a different post.

古文：八月甲申，以濠州统制张斌柘塘之战，殁于王事，赠官三转，仍与一子下班祗应。
现代文：八月十三日，因壕州统制张斌拓塘之战，为国捐躯，赠转三官，并且任命其子一人为下班抵应。
English: On August 13th, as a result of the Battle of Tuotang led by Zhang Bin, the governor of Nezhou, he sacrificed his life for the country, transferred three officials, and appointed one of his sons as an off-duty arrival.

古文：乙酉，降人来言：大元宪宗皇帝崩于军中。
现代文：十四日，投降人来说：大元宪宗在军中去世。
English: On the 14th, the surrendering soldiers said, "Da Yuan Xianzong died in the army."

古文：戊子，诏吴潜开阃海道，勤劳三年，屡疏求退，仍旧观文殿大学士、判宁国府、特进、崇国公。
现代文：十七日，下诏吴潜开间海道，勤劳三年，屡次上疏求退，依旧为观文殿大学士、判宁国府、特进、崇国公。
English: On the seventeenth day of the month, Wu Qian opened the sea road, worked hard for three years, repeatedly went upstream to ask for retreat, and still became a scholar of Guanwen Temple University, a judge of Ning Prefecture, a special envoy, and a revered statesman.

古文：辛卯，命吕文德兼湖北安抚使。
现代文：二十日，命吕文德兼湖北安抚使。
English: On the 20th, he ordered Lü Wende and the pacification envoy to Hubei to leave.

古文：庚子，太白犯权星、荧惑。
现代文：二十九日，太白星侵犯权星、荧惑星。
English: On the 29th, Taibai Star violated the rights of stars and fluorescent planets.

古文：九月壬子，贾似道表言大元兵自黄州沙武口渡江？中外震动。
现代文：九月十一日，贾似道上表说元军从黄州沙武口渡江，中外震动。
English: On September 11th, Jia Xiandao publicly announced that the Yuan Army had crossed the river from Huangzhou's Savukou.

古文：己未，嗣濮王善腾薨。
现代文：十八日，嗣攫王赵善腾去世。
English: On the 18th, Zhao Shentong, the heir to the throne, passed away.

古文：庚申，以吴潜兼侍读、奉朝请，戴庆炣端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
现代文：十九日，以吴潜兼侍读，逢一日、五日朝见皇上，戴庆卿为端明殿学士、签书枢密院事。
English: On the 19th, with Wu Qian and attendant reading, every day and the morning of the 5th, he met with the emperor. Dai Qingqing was a scholar of the Tangming Palace and a signer of the Privy Council.

古文：下诏责己，勉谕诸阃进兵。
现代文：理宗下诏罪己，勉谕各位统兵将领进军。
English: Emperor Rizong issued an edict condemning himself and exhorting all generals to march into the army.

古文：壬戌，诏出内府缗钱千万、银五万两、帛五万匹给宣司，缗钱五百万、银三万两、帛三万匹给沿江副司犒师。
现代文：二十一日，下诏出内府络钱一千万、银五百万两、帛五万匹给宣司，络钱五百万、银三万两、帛三万匹给沿江副司，搞赏军队。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, an edict was issued to award ten million rupees in rupees, five million rupees in silver, and fifty thousand rupees in horses to Xuan Zi, and five million rupees, thirty thousand rupees in silver, and thirty thousand horses to the deputy governor along the Yangtze River to reward the troops.

古文：诏：已命御史陈寅趣淮东调兵五万，应援上流。
现代文：下诏：已命御史陈寅督促淮东调兵五万，应援长江上游。
English: The following edict: Chen Yin, the imperial historian, has been ordered to urge Huaidong to transfer fifty thousand troops to support the upper reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：癸亥，赵葵特进、观文殿大学士，封卫国公，判庆元府、沿海制置使。
现代文：二十三日，赵葵为特进、观文殿大学士，封为卫国公，判庆元府、沿海制置使。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Kwai was promoted to the rank of "Special Promotion" and "Master of the Academy of the Confucian Academy of Literature" and was awarded the title of "Defender of the Fatherland." He was also awarded the title of "Envoy to Qingyuanfu and the Coastal Provinces."

古文：命侍御史沈炎往沿江制置副司趣兵援鄂渚。
现代文：命令侍御史沈炎前往沿江制置副司督促军队救援鄂诸。
English: He ordered his aide-de-camp, Grand Historian Shen Yan, to go to the riverside and set up a vice-director to urge the army to rescue E Zhu.

古文：再出内库缗钱五百万、银二万两、帛二万匹给两淮制司，缗钱三百万、银万两、帛万匹给沿江制司，以备军赏。
现代文：再出内库络钱五百万、银二万两、帛二万匹给两淮制司，络钱二百万、银万两、帛万匹给沿江制司，作为各用军费。
English: In addition, five million rupees, twenty thousand rupees in silver, and twenty thousand rupees in copper were given to the two Huai production departments, and two million rupees, ten thousand rupees in silver, and twenty thousand rupees in copper were given to the production departments along the river, as military expenses for each use.

古文：戊辰，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：二十七日，太白星侵犯荧惑星。
English: On the 27th, the Taibai Star invaded the fluorescent planet.

古文：己巳，诏贾似道兼节制江西、二广人马，通融应援上流。
现代文：二十八日，下诏贾似道兼节制江西、二广人马，通融应援长江上游。
English: On the 28th, Jiaxing issued an edict to control Jiangxi and Guangxi provinces simultaneously, and to support the upstream of the Yangtze River.

古文：庚午，合州解围，诏王坚宁远军节度使，依前左领军卫上将军、兴元府驻扎御前诸军都统制兼知合州、节制军马，进封清水县开国伯。
现代文：二十九日，合州解围，下诏王坚为宁远军节度使，依前为左领军卫上将军、兴元府驻扎御前诸军都统制兼合州知州，节制军马，进封清水县开国伯。
English: On the 29th, the siege of Hezhou was lifted, and Wang Jian was appointed as the Ningyuan Army's commander-in-chief. He was previously the left leader of the army, General Wei Shang, and stationed in Xingyuanfu. He controlled the capital of Hezhou and Zhizhou, restrained the army and horses, and went to Qingshui County to open the country.

古文：冬十月辛未朔，丁大全罢，以观文殿大学士判镇江府。
现代文：冬十月初一，丁大全被罢免，以观文殿大学士判镇江府。
English: On the first day of October in winter, Ding Daquan was removed from his post and sentenced to Zhenjiang Prefecture as a scholar of the Academy of Fine Arts.

古文：壬申，以吴潜为左丞相兼枢密使，进封相国公；贾似道为右丞相兼枢密使，进封茂国公，宣抚大使等如旧。
现代文：初二，以吴潜为左承相兼枢密使，进封相国公；贾似道为右承相兼枢密使，进封茂国公，宣抚大使如旧。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Wu Qian was appointed as the left successor and envoy to the emperor; Jia Li Dao was appointed as the right successor and envoy to the emperor, and remained the same as before.

古文：癸酉，命赵葵为江东宣抚使，马光祖移司江州应援鄂州，史岩之沿江制置副使，移司寿昌军应援鄂州。
现代文：初三，命令赵葵为江东宣抚使，马光祖移司江州应援鄂州，史岩之为沿江制置副使移司寿昌军应援鄂州。
English: On the third day of the first month, he ordered Zhao Kwai to be the envoy to the east of the Yangtze River, Ma Guangzu to be transferred to Jiangzhou to support Ezhou, and Shi Yan Bing to set up a deputy envoy along the Yangtze River to transfer to Shuchang Army to support Ezhou.

古文：丙子，改封吴潜为庆国公。
现代文：初六，改封吴潜为庆国公。
English: In the sixth year of junior high school, Wu Qian was renamed Qing Guogong.

古文：丁丑，诏给还浙西提举常平司岁收上亭户沙地租二百万，永勿复征。
现代文：初七，下诏给还浙西提举常平司每年征收上亭户沙地租税二百万，永远不征。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Changping, the second-highest-ranking official in Zhejiang and the west, issued an edict to levy an annual tax of 2 million yuan on Shangting households, which would never be levied.

古文：庚辰，诏合州围解，宣阃制臣及二三大将之功，宜加优赏。
现代文：初十，下诏：合州围解，统兵将领和二三大将的功劳，应该加以奖赏。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, the following edict was issued: "For the encirclement and liberation of Hechu, the merit of the commander-in-chief and the two major generals should be rewarded."

古文：吕文德授检校少师，李遇龙进三秩、权刑部侍郎，各赐金币；将佐以下，进秩、赐金有差。
现代文：吕文德为检校少师，李遇龙进升三级、代理刑部侍郎，分别赐给金币；将佐以下，进秩、赐金不等。
English: Lu Wende was the junior teacher of the inspection school, Li Yulong was promoted to the third grade, and the acting criminal investigation department waiter, respectively, were given gold coins; below the rank of vice-commander, they were promoted to the rank and given money.

古文：诏自今月十一日始，避殿减膳彻乐。
现代文：下诏从本月十一日开始，避殿减膳彻乐。
English: According to the following edict, starting from the 11th day of this month, meals will be reduced and entertainment will be reduced.

古文：又诏： 比者蜀道稍宁，然干戈之余，疮痍未复，流离荡析，生聚何资。
现代文：又下诏： 近年蜀地稍稍安宁，但战争之后，被破坏地区经济没有恢复，百姓流离失所，生活仍无着落。
English: He also said: In recent years, there has been a little bit of peace in Shu, but after the war, the economy of the destroyed areas has not recovered, the people have been displaced, and life is still not settled.

古文：咨尔旬宣之寄，牧守之臣，轻徭薄赋，一意抚摩，恤军劳民，庶底兴复。
现代文：要求各地统帅和守臣，轻摇薄赋，专心安抚，恤军劳民，尽快使该地社会经济全面恢复。
English: It requires the commanders and retainers of various regions to be frivolous and weak, to concentrate on appeasing, to support the military workers and the people, and to fully restore the social economy of the region as soon as possible.

古文：其被兵百姓，迁入城郭，无以自存者，三省下各郡以财粟振之。 
现代文：遭兵火之苦的百姓，迁人城郭，没有办法维持生计的，三省拨下财粟给各地进行贩济。 
English: The people who suffered from the war, moved to the city, and had no way to make a living, the three provinces allocated money for poppies to be sold around the country.

古文：壬午，御史陈寅言：知江州袁玠贪赃不悛，残贱州邑。
现代文：十二日，御史陈寅说：知江州袁贪赃不改，残害州县百姓。
English: On the 12th, Grand Historian Chen Yin said: Zhijiang Province's Yuan Qianqian did not change, and brutalized the people of the province and county.

古文：诏削玠五秩、窜南雄州。
现代文：下诏削夺五级官品，流放南雄州。
English: In the following edict, he was stripped of his fifth-class official decoration and exiled to Nanxiong Prefecture.

古文：癸未，丁大全落职、罢新任。
现代文：十三日，丁大全免职，罢除新任。
English: On the 13th, Ding Daquan was relieved of his duties and the new appointee was dismissed.

古文：乙酉，雷。
现代文：十五日，打雷。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was thunder.

古文：丙戌，以赵葵为沿江、江东宣抚使，置司建康，任责捍御。
现代文：十六日，以赵葵为沿江、江东宣抚使，置司建康，担任防守责任。
English: On the 16th, Zhao Kwai was appointed as the envoy along the Yangtze River and the east of the Yangtze River, and Jiankang was appointed as the secretary to assume the responsibility of defense.

古文：癸巳，向士璧权兵部侍郎、湖南安抚使兼知潭州，任责广西边防。
现代文：二十三日，向士璧代理兵部侍郎、湖南安抚使兼潭州知州，担负广西边防重任。
English: On the 23rd, Xiang Shibi, acting as the military attache and the pacification envoy of Hunan Province and Chizhou of Tanzhou, took on the important task of Guangxi border defense.

古文：十一月壬寅，以朱熠权知枢密院事，饶虎臣、戴庆炣并权参知政事。
现代文：十一月初三，以朱熠代理知枢密院事，饶虎臣、戴庆呵代理参知政事。
English: On the 3rd day of the first month of November, Zhu Xi was appointed as the Acting President of the Privy Council, and Rao Huomin and Dai Qinghao were appointed as the Acting Vice Presidents of the State Council.

古文：癸卯，吕文福带遥郡防御使、河南招抚使、知淮安军。
现代文：初四，吕文福带遥郡防御使、河南招抚使、淮安知军。
English: On the fourth day of the first grade, Lu Wenfu led the defense envoys to Yao County, the Henan Zhaofu Envoy, and the Huai'an Zhijun.

古文：诏追毁袁玠出身以来文字，除名不叙，移万安军。
现代文：下诏追毁袁出身以来文字，除名不再录用，移住万安军。
English: The following edict persecuted and destroyed the characters since Yuan's birth, removed from the list and no longer recruited, and relocated to the Wan'an Army.

古文：戊申，诏求直言。
现代文：初九，诏求直言。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, let's speak frankly.

古文：辛亥，舟师战浒黄洲。
现代文：十二日，水军在浒黄洲作战。
English: On the 12th, the navy fought in the Battle of Huangzhou.

古文：乙卯，诏赵葵授少保、观文殿大学士、江东西宣抚使，进封益国公，其饶、信、袁、临、抚、吉、隆兴官军民兵，并听节制调遣，谘访、罢行、黜陟皆得便宜行事。
现代文：十六日，下诏赵葵授为少保、观文殿大学士、江东西宣抚使，进封益国公，饶、信、袁、临、抚、吉、隆兴官军民兵，都听从他指挥调遣，咨访、罢行、升降都自行处理决定。
English: On the 16th, it was decreed that Zhao Kwai Jiu would be promoted to the rank of Junior Public Security Officer, Scholar of the Guanwen Hall of the Imperial Academy of Sciences, and the Vice-Minister of the East and West of the Yangtze River, as well as the Vice-Minister of the East and West of the Yangtze River, the Vice-Minister of the East and West of the Yangtze River, the Vice-Minister of the East and West of the Yangtze River, the Vice-Minister of the East and West of the Yangtze River, the Vice-Minister of the East and West of the Yangtze River

古文：以缗钱五百万、银五万两给其用。
现代文：以络钱五百万、银五万两给其调用。
English: Five million yuan and 50,000 taels of silver were used to pay for it.

古文：丙辰，诏选精锐招信、泗州千人，扬州拱卫军千人，安丰、濠州各千五百人，赴京听调遣。
现代文：十七日，下诏选精锐招信、泅州千人，扬州拱卫军千人，安丰、壕州各一千五百人，前往京城听从调遣。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the following elite troops were selected and sent to Beijing: a thousand from Zhangzhou, a thousand from Yangzhou Arch Guards, and 1,500 each from Anfeng and Hezhou.

古文：庚申，夏贵入见，帝抚劳甚至。
现代文：二十一日，夏贵朝见理宗，理宗多方抚劳慰问。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, Shagui met with Rizo in the morning, and Rizo sent condolences from many directions.

古文：闰十一月甲戌，诏出内帑缗钱五千万犒内外诸军。
现代文：闰十一月初五，下诏出内格络钱五千万搞赏内外诸军。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th lunar month, the government issued a decree to reward the troops at home and abroad with 50 million yuan.

古文：丁丑，以向士璧为湖南制置副使，余职仍旧，赐金带。
现代文：初八，以向士璧为湖南制置副使，余职仍旧，赐给金带。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, Xiang Shibi was appointed deputy envoy to Hunan Province, and the remaining post was still given to Jin Biao.

古文：己卯，荧惑入氐。
现代文：初十，荧感星进人氏宿。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the fluorescent star enters the person's lodging.

古文：癸未，诸将陶林、文通进兵有功，诏林带行遥郡刺史，文通转武功大夫，赐银有差。
现代文：十四日，诸将陶林、文通进兵有功，下诏陶林带行遥郡刺史，文通转武功大夫，赐银不等。
English: On the 14th, the generals Tao Lin and Wentsong made meritorious entry into the army, and the following edict was issued: Tao Lin was to be taken to Yao County to write history, Wentsong was to become a doctor of military merit, and silver was to be awarded.

古文：甲申，以印应雷为军器监、淮西总领财赋兼江东转运判官，吕文德检校少保、京西湖北安抚使兼制置使、知鄂州兼侍卫马军都指挥使。
现代文：十五日，以印应雷为军器监、淮西总领财赋兼江东转运判官，吕文德检校少傅、京西湖北安抚使兼制置使、鄂州知州兼侍卫马军都指挥使。
English: On the 15th, with Yingying Lei as the military equipment supervisor, Huaxi general leader of wealth and transportation judge of the East River, Lü Wende inspection school major, Beijing West Hubei pacification envoy and installation envoy, and Ezhou Chizhou and guard Ma Junjun all command envoy.

古文：己丑，皮龙荣兼资善堂翊善。
现代文：二十日，皮龙荣兼资善堂诩善。
English: On the 20th, Pirrong Rong and Shizentang Shizentang were crowned.

古文：庚寅，陶林奏沼山寺战功。
现代文：二十一日，陶林奏报沼山寺战功。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Tao Lin gave a report on the war exploits of the Nushan Temple.

古文：癸巳，向士璧连以功状来上。
现代文：二十四日，向士璧连续上报战功情况。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Xiang Shibi continuously reported on the performance of the war.

古文：乙未，诏降周震炎第四甲出身。
现代文：二十六日，下诏降周震炎第四甲出身。
English: On the 26th, he was promoted to the 4th grade of Zhou Zhenyan.

古文：丙申，贾似道表：大战数合，皆有功。
现代文：二十七日，贾似道表奏：与元军大战多次都取胜。
English: On the 27th, Jia Xian Dao played the trumpet: he won many times against the Yuan army.

古文：十二月己亥朔，贾似道言鄂州围解，诏论功行赏。
现代文：十二月初一，贾似道说鄂州围解除，下诏论功行赏。
English: On the first day of December, Jia Xi Dao said that the siege of Ezhou had been lifted, and the next edict was to reward meritorious service.

古文：丁未，荧惑犯房宿、钩钤星。
现代文：初九，荧惑星侵犯房宿、钩铃星。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, the fluorescent planet invaded the house, and the hook bell star.

古文：辛亥，诏改来年为景定元年。
现代文：十三日，下诏改明年为景定元年。
English: On the 13th, the following edict changed the next year to the first year of Jingding.

古文：壬子，改封吴潜为许国公，贾似道为肃国公。
现代文：十四日，改封吴潜为许国公，贾似道为肃国公。
English: On the 14th, Wu Qian was renamed Xu Guogong, and Jia Lian Dao was renamed Su Guogong.

