古文：颇便书疏，闲明簿领，出入郡中，为乡闾所惮。侯景之乱，于乡里合徒众。
现代文：黄法戴字仲昭，巴山新建人。年轻时就强劲敏捷有胆量和勇力，一天能步行三百里，一跳三丈远。又很熟习书札奏疏，也深知文簿登记的有关事项，在郡中出入，为乡人所畏惧。侯景作乱的时候，他在乡里招人聚众。
English: Huang Fa Dai Zi Zhong Zhao, Bashan new construction person. When he was young, he was strong, agile, courageous and brave. He could walk three hundred miles a day and jump three feet high. He was also very familiar with calligraphy, and was well aware of the relevant matters of book registration. He went in and out of the county and was feared by the villagers. When Hou Jing made a disturbance, he gathered people in the countryside.

古文：太守贺诩下江州，法抃监知郡事。
现代文：太守贺翔外出下江州，黄法抃代为主持郡中事务。
English: Taishu He Xiang went out to the Lower Jiangzhou, and Huang Fa Ying took charge of the affairs of the county middle school.

古文：高祖将逾岭入援建业，李迁仕作梗中途，高祖命周文育屯于西昌，法抃遣兵助文育。
现代文：高祖打算越过五岭援救建业，但李迁仕在中途作梗，高祖就命令周文言在西昌防守，黄法抃也派兵帮助周文育。
English: Gaozu planned to cross the Wuling Mountains to rescue Jianye, but Li Qianshi got in the way. Gaozu ordered Zhou Wenyan to defend Xichang, and Huang Fahui also sent troops to help Zhou Wenyu.

古文：时法抃出顿新淦县，景遣行台于庆至豫章，庆分兵来袭新淦，法抃拒战，败之。
现代文：逭时黄法抃出兵驻扎在新淦县，侯景派行台于庆到豫章，于庆分兵袭击新淦，黄法抃进行抵抗，挫败了这次袭击。
English: At that time, Huang Fahui stationed troops in Xinlu County. Hou Jing sent troops to Yuzhang in Qingdao, and the soldiers attacked Xinlu in Qingdao. Huang Fahui resisted and defeated the attack.

古文：高祖亦遣文育进军讨庆，文育疑庆兵强，未敢进，法抃率众会之，因进克笙屯，俘获甚众。
现代文：高祖也派周文育进军讨伐于庆，周文育疑虑于庆的兵力强大，不敢前进，黄法抃率领人马舆周文育会合，于是进兵攻克了笙屯，俘获了大量敌兵。
English: Gao Zu also sent Zhou Wenyu to march to fight against Ying. Zhou Wenyu was suspicious of Ying's strong army and did not dare to advance. Huang Fahu led the Zhou Wenyu Association, and the marching army conquered Putun and captured a large number of enemy soldiers.

古文：梁元帝承制授超猛将军、交州刺史资，领新淦县令，封巴山县子，邑三百户。
现代文：梁元帝秉承皇帝的旨意，授予黄法抃超猛将军、交州刺史资格，兼新淦县县令，封巴山县子，食邑三百户。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan, adhering to the emperor's will, awarded Huang Fahui with the qualifications of "super-mighty general" and "history-making governor of Jiaozhou," as well as the title of "prefect of Xinyi County," "prefect of Fengbashan County" and "300 households of food villages."

古文：承圣三年，除明威将军、游骑将军，进爵为侯，邑五百户。
现代文：承圣三年，任命为明威将军、游骑将军，提升爵级为侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the third year after the consecration, he was appointed as Mingwei General and Ranger General, promoted to the peerage as a marquis, and had 500 households.

古文：贞阳侯僭位，除左骁骑将军。
现代文：贞阳侯越轨称帝，也任命他为左骁骑将军。
English: Prince Zhengyang defected and proclaimed himself emperor, and also appointed him as the general of the Left Division of Cavalry.

古文：敬帝即位，改封新建县侯，邑如前。
现代文：敬帝即位，改封他为新建县侯，食邑仍旧。
English: When Emperor Kei ascended the throne, he was given the title of newly created county magistrate, but the food court remained the same.

古文：太平元年，割江州四郡置高州，以法抃为使持节、散骑常侍、都督高州诸军事、信武将军、高州刺史，镇于巴山。
现代文：太平元年，把江州的四郡划分出来组建成高州，任命黄法抃为使持节、散骑常侍、都督高州诸军事、信武将军、高州刺史，在巴山镇守。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, the four counties of Jiangzhou were divided and formed into Gaozhou, and Huang Fahui was appointed as the envoy, the cavalryman, the military governor of Gaozhou, the general of the letter, and the history of Gaozhou, and the town guard in Bashan.

古文：萧勃遣欧阳頠攻法抃，法抃与战，破之。
现代文：萧垫派欧阳顿进攻黄法抃，黄法抃舆他作战，打垮了欧阳顿。
English: Xiao Jian sent Ouyang Dong to attack Huang Fa Yu, Huang Fa Yu fought against him, and defeated Ouyang Dong.

古文：永定二年，王琳遣李孝钦、樊猛、余孝顷攻周迪，且谋取法抃，法抃率兵援迪，擒孝顷等三将。
现代文：丞室二年，王壁派奎耋麸、余孝顷进攻周迪，并且圃谋消灭黄法抃，黄法抃率兵支援周迪，抓获了余孝顷等三个将领。
English: In the second year of Zhou's reign, Wang Qibai sent Kuijun and Yu Xiaohao to attack Zhou Di, and they plotted to eliminate Huang Fahui. Huang Fahui led an army to support Zhou Di, and captured three generals including Yu Xiaohao.

古文：进号宣毅将军，增邑并前一千户，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：提升官号为宣毅将军，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千户，赏给鼓吹乐一部。
English: He was promoted to the official title of General Xuan Yi, and a total of one thousand households that had previously been given food and wine were awarded, and a part of the propaganda music was awarded to everyone.

古文：又以拒王琳功，授平南将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：又因为抵御王琳有功，任命他为平南将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In addition, because he had the merit of resisting Wang Lin, he appointed him as General Pingnan, Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：熊昙朗于金口反，害周文育，法抃共周迪讨平之，语在昙朗传。
现代文：熊昙朗在金口反叛，杀害了周文育，黄法抃和周迪一道讨伐平定了他，记叙遣一史实的文字在熊昙朗传中。
English: Xiong Yulang rebelled in Jinkou and killed Zhou Wenyu. Huang Fahui and Zhou Di fought together to pacify him. A historical text is recorded in the biography of Xiong Yulang.

古文：世祖嗣位，进号安南将军。
现代文：世祖继承帝位，又提升他的官号为安南将军。
English: The patriarch succeeded to the throne, and his official title was raised to General Annan.

古文：天嘉二年，周迪反，法抃率兵会都督吴明彻，讨迪于工塘。
现代文：天嘉二年，周迪反叛，黄法抃率兵跟都督吴明彻会合，在工塘讨伐周迪。
English: In the second year of Tianjia, when Zhou Di rebelled, Huang Fahui led an army to meet with the governor Wu Mingcher to fight Zhou Di in Gongtang.

古文：迪平，法抃功居多，征为使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐州诸军事、镇北大将军、南徐州刺史，仪同、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：平定周迪，黄法抃功劳最多。天子征召为使持节、散骑常侍、都督南徐州诸军事、镇北大将军、南徐州刺史，仪同、鼓吹乐的赏赐仍旧。
English: Huang Fahui did the most to pacify Zhou Di. Tianzi was called to be the envoy of the festival, the rider of the cavalry, the military governor of South Xuzhou, the general of Zhenbei, and the historian of South Xuzhou. The rewards of the ceremony and the propaganda music are still the same.

古文：未拜，寻又改授都督江、吴二州诸军事、镇南大将军、江州刺史。
现代文：他还没有赴任，又改任都督江吴二州诸军事、镇南大将军、江州刺史。
English: Before he took office, he was appointed as the military governor of Jiangxi and Wuzhou, the general of Zhenan, and the chief historian of Jiangxi.

古文：六年，征为中卫大将军。
现代文：六年，天子征召为中卫大将军。
English: In the sixth year, Tenshi was conscripted as a middle guard general.

古文：废帝即位，进爵为公，给扶。
现代文：废帝即位，提升他的爵级为公，赏给扶护人员。
English: The deposed emperor ascended the throne, promoted his peerage as a public act, and rewarded his supporters.

古文：光大元年，出为使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：光大元年，调出京城担任使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Guangda era, he was transferred to Beijing to serve as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of South Xuzhou, the general of Zhenbei and the history of South Xuzhou.

古文：二年，徙为都督郢、巴、武三州诸军事、镇西将军、郢州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：二年，调任都督郢巴武三州诸军事、镇西将军、郢州刺史，使持节一职仍旧。
English: Two years later, he was reassigned as the military governor of the three prefectures of Zibo, Zhenxi, and Zhangzhou, but he still held the post of Jishie.

古文：太建元年，进号征西大将军。
现代文：太建元年，提升官号为征西大将军。
English: In the first year of the Tai Jian era, he was promoted to the title of General of the Western Expedition.

古文：二年，征为侍中、中权大将军。
现代文：二年，天子征召为侍中、中权大将军。
English: Two years later, Tenshi was conscripted as a samurai, middle-ranking general.

古文：四年，出为使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫州诸军事、征南大将军、南豫州刺史。
现代文：四年，调出京城任使持节、散骑常侍、都督南豫州诸军事、征南大将军、南豫州刺史。
English: In the fourth year, the Beijing-appointed envoy Ji Jie, the strolling equerry, the military governor of South Yuzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the historian of South Yuzhou were transferred.

古文：五年，大举北伐，都督吴明彻出秦郡，以法抃为都督，出历阳。
现代文：五年，大规模北伐，都督吴明彻向秦郡出兵，用黄法抃为都督，向历阳出兵。
English: In the fifth year, the large-scale Northern Expedition, the governor Wu Mingche sent troops to Qin County, using Huang Faqi as the governor, and sent troops to Liyang.

古文：齐遣其历阳王步骑五万来援，于小岘筑城。法抃遣左卫将军樊毅分兵于大岘御之，大破齐军，尽获人马器械。
现代文：齐派历阳王率领步兵骑兵五万救援历阳，在小岘构筑城堡，黄法抃派左卫将军樊毅分兵在大岘抵御，彻底地打垮了齐军，俘获了全部人马军械。
English: Qi sent Liyang Wang, leading 50,000 infantry and cavalry, to rescue Liyang and build a castle in Xiaohui. Huang Fahui sent the Left Guard General Zou Yi's detachment to resist in Dahui, completely defeated the Qi army and captured all the men, horses and armaments.

古文：于是乃为拍车及步舰，竖拍以逼历阳。
现代文：又制造了抛物机和步舰，高高竖起拍竿，向城中抛石抛火，逼攻历阳城。
English: They also made a parachute machine and a walking ship, erected a clapper pole high up, threw stones and fire into the city, and forced Liyang City.

古文：历阳人窘蹴乞降，法抃缓之，则又坚守，法抃怒，亲率士卒攻城，施拍加其楼堞。
现代文：历阳人处于困境十分惊恐请求投降，黄法抃减轻了攻城的强度，历阳人又顽固防守，黄法抃大怒，亲自率领士卒攻城，用抛物机把火球抛到城楼和女墙上。
English: The Liyang people were in a difficult situation and were very frightened and asked to surrender. Huang Fa Jun reduced the intensity of the siege of the city. The Liyang people were stubbornly defensive, and Huang Fa Jun was furious. He personally led the soldiers to attack the city and used a parabola to throw fireballs onto the city tower and the female wall.

古文：时又大雨，城崩，克之，尽诛戍卒。
现代文：逭时又下大雨，城墙倒塌，终于攻破了历阳城，杀掉了守城的全部士卒。
English: At dusk, it rained heavily again and the city wall collapsed, finally breaking through Liyang City and killing all the soldiers guarding the city.

古文：进兵合肥，望旗降款，法抃不令军士侵掠，躬自抚劳，而与之盟，并放还北。
现代文：接着进兵合肥，合肥人望旗降服，黄法抃不许士卒骚扰抢掠，亲自安抚宽慰百姓，又与降兵发誓结盟，把他们全部放回北方。
English: Then the marching troops entered Hefei, the people of Hefei surrendered to the flag, Huang Fa Yu did not allow the soldiers to harass and loot, personally pacified and comforted the people, and swore an alliance with the soldiers, and put them all back to the north.

古文：以功加侍中，改封义阳郡公，邑二千户。
现代文：因有战功加任侍中，提升爵位为义阳郡公，食邑二千户。
English: Due to his war service, he was appointed as a chamberlain, promoted to the peerage of Yiyang County, and served two thousand households.

古文：其年，迁都督合、霍二州诸军事、征西大将军、合州刺史，增邑五百户。
现代文：这年，调任都督合霍二州诸军事、征西大将军、合州刺史，增赐食邑五百户。
English: In the same year, he was appointed as the military governor of Hubei Province, the general of the Western Expedition, and the historian of Hubei Province, and granted an additional 500 households of food villages.

古文：七年，徙都督豫、建、光、朔、合、北徐六州诸军事、豫州刺史，镇寿阳，侍中、散骑常侍、持节、将军、仪同、鼓吹、扶并如故。
现代文：七年，升任都督豫建光朔合北徐六州诸军事、豫州刺史，镇守寿阳，侍中、散骑常侍、持节、将军、仪同、鼓吹乐、扶护人员这些封赏仍旧。
English: In the seventh year, he was promoted to the governor of Yunnan, Guangshuo, North Hebei, Hebei, Shuzhou, Shouyang, Zhenguo, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia, Zhanjia and Zhanjia.

古文：八年十月，薨，时年五十九。
现代文：八年十月，去世，遣年五十九岁。
English: He passed away in October, 2008, at the age of 59.

古文：赠侍中、中权大将军、司空，谥曰威。
现代文：追赠为侍中、中权大将军、司空，谧号是威。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Middle Officer, Central Powers General, and Empress Dowager, and his posthumous name was Wei.

古文：子玩嗣。
现代文：儿子黄玩继承。
English: He was succeeded by his son Huang Yu.

古文：淳于量，字思明。其先济北人也，世居京师。
现代文：淳于量字思明，他的先祖是济北人氏，世世代代居住在京都。
English: His ancestors are from the Hokujin clan, and they have lived in Kyoto for generations.

古文：父文成，仕梁为将帅，官至光烈将军、梁州刺史。
现代文：父亲淳于文成在梁朝出仕任将帅，官至光烈将军、梁州刺史。
English: His father, Jun Yu Wencheng, served as commander-in-chief in the Liang Dynasty, and was promoted to the rank of general and governor of Liang Province.

古文：量少善自居处，伟姿容，有干略，便弓马。
现代文：淳于量少年时就善于自我处置，姿容壮美，有才干谋略，熟习骑射。
English: When Jun was a teenager, he was good at self-discipline, had a magnificent appearance, was a talented strategist, and was familiar with riding and shooting.

古文：梁元帝为荆州刺史，文成分量人马，令往事焉。
现代文：梁元帝任荆州刺史，淳于文成拨一部分人马给淳于量，叫他为梁元帝效力。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan designated Jingzhou as the capital, and Jun Yu Wensheng assigned a part of his manpower to Jun Yu Qian and asked him to serve Emperor Liang Yuan.

古文：起家湘东王国常侍，兼西中郎府中兵参军。
现代文：在家中以布衣身份直接出任为湘东王国常侍，兼西中郎府中兵参军。
English: At home, he directly served as a regular attendant of the Kingdom of Shandong as a clothed person, and also joined the army as a Nishi chūrofu chūhei.

古文：累迁府佐、常兼中兵、直兵者十馀载，兵甲士卒，盛于府中。
现代文：十多年间连续升任府佐、常兼中兵、直兵等职，他的兵甲士卒，在府中是最为强盛的。
English: For more than ten years, he was successively promoted to the posts of prefectural deputy, regular and middle-ranking soldiers, and direct soldiers, and his soldiers were the most powerful in the prefectural government.

古文：荆、雍之界，蛮左数反，山帅文道期积为边患，中兵王僧辩征之，频战不利，遣量助之。
现代文：荆州、雍州的边界上，蛮人多次反叛，山帅塞道期聚拢这些蛮人在边界上作乱为患，中兵王僧辩征剿他们，屡战不利，梁元帝派淳于量前往助战。
English: On the border of Jingzhou and Yongzhou, the barbarians rebelled many times. The Mountain General Saido gathered these barbarians together to make trouble on the border. The Chinese soldiers, the monks, and the monks fought against them. Repeated wars were unfavorable. Emperor Liangyuan sent Junyong to help in the war.

古文：量至，与僧辩并力，大破道期，斩其酋长，俘虏万计。
现代文：淳于量到了，与王僧辩合力作战，彻底打垮了塞道趋，斩杀了他们的酋长，俘虏蛮人数以万计。
English: Chun Yu took the measure, and fought with Wang Sangye in a joint effort, completely defeated the Sai Daocheng, killed their chiefs, and captured tens of thousands of people.

古文：以功封广晋县男，邑三百户，授涪陵太守。
现代文：因为有战功，淳于量被封为广晋县男，食邑三百户，被任命为涪陵太守。
English: Because of his war exploits, Jun Yuquan was named the man of Guangjin County, with 300 households in the county, and was appointed the governor of Fuling.

古文：历为新兴、武宁二郡太守。
现代文：后又历任新兴、武宁二郡太守。
English: Later, successive new governors were appointed, and the governors of the two counties in Wu Ning were promoted.

古文：侯景之乱，梁元帝凡遣五军入援京邑，量预其一。
现代文：侯景作乱，梁元帝总共调派了五路军马向京都进发救援，淳于量是参与救援者之一。
English: As a result of the disturbance caused by Hou Jing, Emperor Liang Yuan dispatched a total of five army horses to Kyoto for rescue. Jun Yuryo was one of the participants in the rescue.

古文：台城陷，量还荆州。
现代文：台城失陷后，淳于量返回荆州。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, Jun Yudong returned to Jingzhou.

古文：元帝承制以量为假节、通直散骑常侍、都督巴州诸军事、信威将军、巴州刺史。
现代文：元帝秉承皇帝旨意任命婆王量为假节、通直散骑常侍、都督旦丛诸军事、信威将军、巴州刺史。
English: The Yuan Emperor, adhering to the emperor's will, appointed the mother-in-law Wang Rong as the false festival, the straight-line horseback riding attendant, the military governor Dan Cong, the general Xin Wei, and the Baju stabbing history.

古文：侯景西上攻巴州，元帝使都督王僧辩入据巴陵。
现代文：侯景西上攻打巴州，凿五童派都督王垣盘进军旦堕据守。
English: Hou Jing went to the west to attack Bazhou, and the Five Children sent the governor Wang Qiban to march into the army.

古文：量与僧辩并力拒景，大败景军，擒其将任约。
现代文：涅王量与王坛避合力抗击谜，彻底打垮了他的军队，抓获了他的将领任约。
English: Ne Wang Rong and Wang Danzhu jointly resisted the attack, completely defeated his army, and captured his general.

古文：进攻郢州，获宋子仙。
现代文：继而进攻郢州，俘获了宋子仙。
English: He then attacked Zhangzhou and captured Song Zisen.

古文：仍随僧辩克平侯景。
现代文：之后仍然随从王僧辩平定侯景。
English: After that, he still followed Wang Sangye and Pingding Houjing.

古文：承圣元年，以功授左卫将军，封谢沐县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：承圣元年，因为有战功被任命为左卫将军，封谢沐县侯，食邑五百户。
English: In the first year after the enthronement of the saint, he was appointed as the General of the Left Guards for his military exploits, given the title of Prince of Mu County, and became the ruler of five hundred households.

古文：寻出为持节、都督桂、定、东、西宁等四州诸军事、信威将军、安远护军、桂州刺史。
现代文：不久调出朝廷担任持节、都督桂定东酉空共四州诸军事、信威将军、安远护军、桂州刺史。
English: Soon after, the imperial court was transferred to hold the festival, and the military of the four states, General Xinwei, the Anyuan escort, and the history of Guizhou were transferred to the governor of Guiding East Guizhou.

古文：荆州陷，量保据桂州。
现代文：趔业失陷后，淳于量保守挂业。
English: After the collapse of his business, Jun started his own business in a conservative manner.

古文：王琳拥割湘、郢，累遣召量，量外虽与琳往来，而别遣使从间道归于高祖。
现代文：墅坠割据湘、郢，多次派人招引淳于量归顺，淳于量虽然舆王琳往来敷衍，却另外派遣使者从偏僻小路到高祖那裹表示归附。
English: According to the records of the Xiang and Qiang dynasties, the emperor sent emissaries many times to persuade Jun to submit to him, and although the emperor and the empress did not communicate with each other, he sent another emissary from a remote path to Gaozunabai to express his submission.

古文：高祖受禅，授持节、散骑常侍、平西大将军，给鼓吹一部，都督、刺史并如故。
现代文：高祖受禅为帝后，任命他为持节、散骑常侍、平西大将军，赏给鼓吹乐一部，都督、刺史两职仍旧。
English: Gaozhu accepted Zen as the empress dowager, appointed him as the festival-keeping, horseback riding attendant, and the general of the Western Regions, and awarded him a part of the propaganda music. The two posts of the governor and the chief historian still remain.

古文：寻进号镇南将军。
现代文：不久提升官号为镇南将军。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of General Zhenan.

古文：仍授都督、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：随后又任命为都督、镇西大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Subsequently, he was also appointed as the governor, the general of Zhenxi, the head of the prefectural government and the three departments.

古文：世祖嗣位，进号征南大将军。
现代文：世祖继承帝位后，提升官号为征南大将军。
English: After the ancestor succeeded to the throne, he was promoted to the official title of General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：王琳平后，频请入朝，天嘉五年，征为中抚大将军，常侍、仪同、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：王琳被消灭后，淳于量多次请求入朝任职，天嘉五年，天子征召他为中抚大将军，常侍、仪同、鼓吹乐等封赏都依旧。
English: After Wang Lin was eliminated, Jun Yu Quan repeatedly requested to be appointed to the imperial court. In the fifth year of Tian Jia, Tian Zi conscripted him as the general of the Middle Court, and the rewards such as the regular attendants, the ceremonial, and the music were still the same.

古文：量所部将帅，多恋本土，并欲逃入山谷，不愿入朝。
现代文：淳于量部下的将领大多留恋故乡，一起想逃入山谷，不愿入朝为官。
English: Most of the generals under Junyu's command were nostalgic for their hometowns and wanted to escape to the valley together, but were reluctant to enter the imperial court as officials.

古文：世祖使湘州刺史华皎征衡州界黄洞，且以兵迎量。
现代文：世祖命令湘州刺史华皎征讨衡州地区的黄洞，并派武装人员迎接淳于量入朝。
English: The founder of the dynasty ordered the conquest of Huangdong in the Hengzhou region by Xiangzhou Zhishi Huayu, and sent armed personnel to meet Jun Yu's entry into the imperial court.

古文：天康元年，至都，以在道淹留，为有司所奏，免仪同，馀并如故。
现代文：天康元年，淳于量到达京都，以在进京路上停留迟缓为罪名，被有关官员奏劾，免去了仪同遣一官职，其他的保留。
English: In the first year of Tian Kang, Jun arrived in Kyoto ahead of schedule, and was impeached by the relevant officials on the charge of being late on the way to Beijing, and was exempted from the ceremony and the appointment to an official post, and other reservations.

古文：光大元年，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：光大元年，赏给鼓吹乐一部。
English: In the first year of Kwangda University, he was awarded a part of the drumming music.

古文：华皎构逆，以量为使持节、征南大将军、西讨大都督，总率大舰，自郢州樊浦拒之。
现代文：华皎作乱，皇帝派淳于量为使持节、征南大将军、西讨大都督，总领舰队，在郢州樊浦抵御。
English: When the Huayuan Rebellion broke out, the emperor sent Jun Yuquan as the commander of the expeditionary force, the general of the Southern Expedition, the governor of the Western Expedition, and the commander-in-chief of the fleet to defend Zhangzhou's Zhangpu.

古文：皎平，并降周将长胡公拓跋定等。
现代文：结果平定了华皎，并且降服了周将长胡公拓跋定等。
English: As a result, Huayuan was pacified, and the Zhou general Hu Gongtuo was subdued.

古文：以功授侍中、中军大将军、开府仪同三司，进封醴陵县公，增邑一千户。
现代文：因为有战功被任命为侍中、中军大将军、开府仪同三司，提升爵位为醴陵县公，增赐食邑一千户。
English: Because of his war exploits, he was appointed as a chamberlain, general of the Chinese army, Kaifu ceremony and three departments, promoted to the peerage of Fuling County, and awarded a thousand households of food villages.

古文：未拜，出为使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史，侍中、仪同、鼓吹并如故。
现代文：但他还没有赴任，又调出朝廷担任使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、镇北将军、南徐州刺史，侍中、仪同、鼓吹乐这些封赏仍旧。
English: However, he has not yet taken office, and he has also been transferred out of the imperial court to serve as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of South Xuzhou, the general of Zhenbei, the history of South Xuzhou, the attendant, the ceremony, and the propaganda. These rewards are still in place.

古文：太建元年，进号征北大将军，给扶。
现代文：太建元年，提升官号为征北大将军，赏给扶护人员。
English: In the first year of Tai Jian, he was promoted to the title of General of the Northern Expedition and awarded to the support staff.

古文：三年，坐就江阴王萧季卿买梁陵中树，季卿坐免，量免侍中。
现代文：三年，因为向江阴王萧季卿买梁朝帝王陵墓中的树木而获罪，萧季卿因罪被免去王位。
English: Three years later, he was found guilty of buying trees from the mausoleum of Emperor Liang of the Liang Dynasty from King Xiao Jicheng of Jiangyin Province. Xiao Jicheng was removed from the throne for this crime.

古文：寻复加侍中。
现代文：淳于量被免去侍中一职。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：五年，征为中护大将军，侍中、仪同、鼓吹、扶并如故。
现代文：不久又加任为侍中。五年，天子征召他为中护大将军，侍中、仪同、鼓吹乐、扶护人员的封赏仍旧。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain, and five years later, the emperor called him to be the general of the Middle Guards. The rewards for chamberlains, ceremonial guards, musicians, and supporters are still the same.

古文：吴明彻之西伐也，量赞成其事，遣第六子岑率所领从军。
现代文：吴明彻向西征伐，堕王量辅助了这次进军，派第六个儿子淳于岑率领所部随军征战。
English: Wu Mingche marched westward, and the fallen king assisted this march by sending his sixth son, Jun Yuxuan, to lead his troops into battle.

古文：淮南克定，量改封始安郡公，增邑一千五百户。
现代文：淮南平定后，淳于量改封为始安郡公，增赐食邑一千五百户。
English: After Huainan was pacified, Jun Yuquan was given the title of Shi'an County Governor, and an additional 1,500 households were granted food villages.

古文：六年，出为使持节、都督郢、巴、南司、定四州诸军事、征西大将军、郢州刺史，侍中、仪同、鼓吹、扶并如故。
现代文：六年，调出朝廷任命为使持节、都督郢巴直司室四州诸军事、征西大将军、竖业刺史，侍中、仪同、鼓吹乐、扶护人员的封赏仍旧。
English: In the sixth year, the imperial court was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military of the four states, the general of the Western Expedition, the history of the industry, the attendants, the ceremony, the music and the support personnel were still rewarded.

古文：七年，征为中军大将军、护军将军。
现代文：七年，天子征召为中军大将军、护军将军。
English: In the seventh year, Tianzi was conscripted as the general of the Chinese army and the general of the escort.

古文：九年，以公事免侍中。
现代文：九年，因为公家事务而免去侍中遣一官职。
English: Nine years later, he was exempted from being sent to an official post as an aide-de-camp because of public affairs.

古文：寻复加侍中。
现代文：不久又加任侍中。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：十年，吴明彻陷没，加量使持节、都督水陆诸军事，仍授散骑常侍、都督南北兗、谯三州诸军事、车骑将军、南兗州刺史，馀并如故。
现代文：十年，吴明彻失败后，加任淳于量为使持节、都督水陆诸军事，随即又任命为散骑常侍、都督南兖北兖谯三州诸军事、车骑将军、南兖州刺史，其余封赏仍旧。
English: Ten years later, after the defeat of Wu Mingche, Jun Yuquan was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the military governor of the water and land, and then he was appointed as the cavalryman, the military governor of the three states of the South, North and South, the cavalry general, and the history of the Southern Luzhou, and the remaining rewards are still the same.

古文：十三年，加左光禄大夫，增邑五百户，馀并如故。
现代文：十三年，加任左光禄大夫，增赐食邑五百户，其余封赏都依旧。
English: In the thirteenth year, he was appointed as the doctor of Zuoganglu, and awarded 500 households with food villages. The rest of the awards are still the same.

古文：十四年四月薨，时年七十二。
现代文：十四年四月去世，这年七十二岁。
English: He died on April 14, at the age of seventy-two.

古文：赠司空。
现代文：追赠为司空。
English: The after-gift is Siku.

古文：章昭达，字伯通，吴兴武康人也。
现代文：章昭达字伯通，吴兴武康人。
English: Zhang Zhaoda is called Bertong, and Wu Xing is called Wukang.

古文：祖道盖，齐广平太守。
现代文：祖父章道盖，在齐朝任广平太守。
English: His grandfather, Zhang Daogai, served as Guangping Dazhou in the Qi Dynasty.

古文：父法尚，梁扬州议曹从事。
现代文：父亲章法尚，在梁朝任扬州议曹从事。
English: His father, Zhang Fa Shang, served as Yangzhou councillor in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：昭达性倜傥，轻财尚气。
现代文：章昭达秉性卓越不俗，轻财重义。
English: Zhang Zhaoda's character is outstanding, and he values money above all else.

古文：少时，尝遇相者，谓昭达曰： 卿容貌甚善，须小亏损，则当富贵。 
现代文：少年时，曾经遇到一个看相的人，他对章昭达说： 你的容貌非常好，不过要等略微破相以后，就该当富贵了。 
English: When he was a boy, he once met a person who looked at his face. He said to Zhang Zhaoda, "Your face is very good, but you should wait until your face is slightly broken before you become rich and famous."

古文：梁大同中，昭达为东宫直后，因醉坠马，鬓角小伤，昭达喜之，相者曰： 未也。 
现代文：梁朝大同年间，章昭达担任束宫直后，因醉酒跌下马来，鬓角上有点小伤，章昭达很高兴，看相的人说： 还没有到富贵的时候呢。 
English: In the same year of Liang's reign, Zhang Zhaoda fell from a horse due to drunkenness right after he assumed the position of corsair. He had a slight injury on his shin. Zhang Zhaoda was very happy. The person who saw his face said, "It's not time to be rich yet."

古文：及侯景之乱，昭达率募乡人援台城，为流矢所中，眇其一目，相者见之，曰： 卿相善矣，不久当贵。 
现代文：到侯景作乱时，章昭达招募并率领乡里人援救台城，被流矢射中，瞎了一只眼睛，看相的人见了，说： 你的相貌可以了，不久就会富贵了。 
English: At the time of the Houjing Disturbance, Zhang Zhaoda recruited and led the villagers to rescue Taicheng. He was shot by a stray arrow and was blinded in one eye. When the photographer saw him, he said, "Your appearance is fine, you will soon be rich and famous."

古文：京城陷，昭达还乡里，与世祖游，因结君臣之分。
现代文：京城失陷后，章昭达回到乡里，舆世祖交往，就此确定了君臣的名分。
English: After the fall of the capital, Zhang Zhaoda returned to the countryside and made contact with the world's ancestors, thereby confirming his status as a prince and a minister.

古文：侯景平，世祖为吴兴太守，昭达杖策来谒世祖。
现代文：侯景被消灭后，世祖担任吴兴太守，章昭达执鞭乘马来拜见世祖。
English: After the elimination of Houjing, the ancestor served as Wu Xing governor, Zhang Zhaoda took the whip to visit the ancestor on horseback.

古文：世祖见之大喜，因委以将帅，恩宠优渥，超于侪等。
现代文：世祖见了他非常喜欢，即委任他为将帅，对他的亲近宠爱优待，超过同等名分的其他人。
English: The patriarch liked him so much that he appointed him as a commander, and he was treated with great favor by his relatives, more so than others of the same rank.

古文：及高祖讨王僧辩，令世祖还长城招聚兵众，以备杜龛，频使昭达往京口，禀承计划。
现代文：高祖讨伐王僧辩时，派世祖回长城招聚兵员，以防备杜宠，世祖多次派章昭达往来京听命受计。
English: When Gaozu was fighting against Wang Sofen, he sent his ancestor back to the Great Wall to recruit soldiers in order to prevent Du Zhao. His ancestor sent Zhang Zhaoda back and forth to Beijing many times to obey his orders.

古文：僧辩诛后，龛遣其将杜泰来攻长城，世祖拒之，命昭达总知城内兵事。
现代文：王僧辩受诛以后，杜宠派将领杜泰来攻长城，世祖抗战抵御，委派章昭达全盘主管城内军事。
English: After Wang Sangye was captured, Du Ji sent the general Du Tai to attack the Great Wall, the ancestor resisted the war, and appointed Zhang Zhaoda to be in overall charge of the military in the city.

古文：及杜泰退走，因从世祖东进，军吴兴，以讨杜龛。
现代文：到杜泰退走后，章昭达就随从束进军，驻扎在吴堡，讨伐拄鑫。
English: After Du Tai retreated, Zhang Zhaoda marched into the army with Sokou, stationed in Wubo, and fought against Yuxin.

古文：龛平，又从世祖东讨张彪于会稽，克之。
现代文：平定拄鑫后，又跟随世担束到盒擅讨伐蛋座，获胜。
English: After subduing Yu Xin, he followed Shitan Shu to the box to fight Egg-Cutter, and won.

古文：累功除明威将军、定州刺史。
现代文：累计战功被任命为明威将军、定州刺史。
English: He was named General Ming Wei and Chief Historian of Dingzhou for his accumulated military exploits.

古文：是时留异拥据东阳，私署守宰，高祖患之，乃使昭达为长山县令，居其心腹。
现代文：逭时留异控制了东阳郡，自作主张任命官员，产塑忧虑逭一情况，就派章昭达为长山县县令，占据柬阳郡的中心位置。
English: At that time, the dissidents controlled Dongyang County, and appointed officials at their own initiative. When the production and plastic industry was worried about the same situation, they sent Zhang Zhaoda to be the county magistrate of Changshan County, occupying the central position of Jianyang County.

古文：永定二年，除武康令。
现代文：永定二年，任命他为逮尘毖县令。
English: In the second year of Yongding, he was appointed as the magistrate of Fangcheng County.

古文：世祖嗣位，除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：继承帝位，任命他为员外散骑常侍。
English: When he succeeded to the throne, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer of the Imperial Cavalry.

古文：天嘉元年，追论长城之功，封欣乐县侯，邑一千户。
现代文：丢台元年，评议以前在长城的战功，封他为欣乐县侯，食邑一千户。
English: In the first year of the Taiping Rebellion, he was awarded the title of the lord of Xingle County for his military exploits on the Great Wall.

古文：寻随侯安都等拒王琳于栅口，战于芜湖，昭达乘平虏大舰，中流而进，先锋发拍中于贼舰。
现代文：不久随从侯安都等在栅口抗击王琳，大战于芜湖，章昭达乘平虏大舰，向中流挺进，担任先锋拨动抛物机抛火烧中贼舰。
English: Soon followed by Hou Andu waiting at the gate to resist Wang Lin, the great war in Wuhu, Zhang Zhaoda took the flat-capture ship, advanced to the middle stream, and served as the pioneer to move the parabola to throw fire and burn the pirate ship.

古文：王琳平，昭达册勋第一。
现代文：平定王琳后，章昭达的战功在天子封赏的诏书中名列第一。
English: After vanquishing Wang Lin, Zhang Zhaoda's war exploits ranked first in the imperial edict of the emperor's reward.

古文：二年，除使持节、散骑常侍、都督郢、巴、武沅四州诸军事、智武将军、郢州刺史，增邑并前千五百户。
现代文：二年，被任命为使持节、散骑常侍、都督郢巴武沅四州诸军事、智武将军、郢州刺史，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共一千五百户。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the horseback riding attendant, the military governor of the four states, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, the general of the army, and the general of the army.

古文：寻进号平西将军。
现代文：随后又提升官号为平西将军。
English: Subsequently, he was promoted to the rank of General Hiranishi.

古文：周迪据临川反，诏令昭达便道征之。
现代文：周迪盘据临反叛，天子韶令章昭达从近便的小路进兵讨伐。
English: Zhou Di Pan was close to the rebellion, and the Son of Heaven ordered Zhang Zhaoda to march into the crusade from a convenient path.

古文：及迪败走，征为护军将军，给鼓吹一部，改封邵武县侯，增邑并前二千户，常侍如故。
现代文：到周迪败逃，天子征召章昭达为护军将军，赏给鼓吹乐一部，改封为邵武县侯，增赐食邑合计以前赐予的共二千户，常侍一职仍旧。
English: When Zhou Di was defeated and fled, Tianzi conscripted Zhang Zhaoda as a military escort general, rewarded him with a portion of propaganda music, changed his title to the lord of Shouwu County, and gave him a total of two thousand households in addition to the previously given food villages. He still held the position of a regular attendant.

古文：四年，陈宝应纳周迪，复共寇临川，又以昭达为都督讨迪。
现代文：四年，陈宝应收容周迪，又一道侵犯临，天子又任命章昭达为都督讨伐周迪。
English: In four years, Chen Bao was supposed to receive Zhou Di, and together they invaded Lin, and Tianzi also appointed Zhang Zhaoda as the governor to fight Zhou Di.

古文：至东兴岭，而迪又退走。
现代文：兵到东兴岭，旦迪又退走。
English: The soldiers went to Dongxingling, but Dandi retreated again.

古文：昭达仍逾岭，顿于建安，以讨陈宝应。
现代文：章昭达于是就跨越过塞垦岭，驻军在叁室，讨伐速直尘。
English: Zhang Zhaoda then crossed the Saiyuan Mountains, garrisoned troops in Yiming, and the crusade was over in a flash.

古文：宝应据建安、晋安二郡之界，水陆为栅，以拒官军。
现代文：速宾尘盘据在建塞、置塞二郡的边界地区，水陆两路都设置了栅栏，抗拒官军。
English: In the border areas of the two counties of Jiancai and Jiecai, fences were set up on both land and water to resist the government army.

古文：昭达与战不利，因据其上流，命军士伐木带枝叶为筏，施拍于其上，缀以大索，相次列营，夹于两岸。
现代文：章昭达与之作战不利，于是就控制水流的上游，命令士卒连躯干带枝叶砍伐树木做成木筏，在筏上装好了抛物机，又用粗大绳索，将许多木筏依次连结成为营垒，停在江水两岸待用。
English: Zhang Zhaoda was not good at fighting against it, so he controlled the upstream of the water flow, ordered the officers and men to cut trees with their trunks and branches to make rafts, installed a parabola on the raft, and used thick ropes to connect many rafts in turn to form a camp, stopping on both sides of the river to be used.

古文：宝应数挑战，昭达按甲不动。
现代文：陈宝应多次挑战，童堕达都按兵不动。
English: Chen Bao was challenged many times, but the boy did not budge.

古文：俄而暴雨，江水大长，昭达放筏冲突宝应水栅，水栅尽破。
现代文：不久暴雨猛下，辽水大涨，章昭达放筏顺流急奔猛撞陈宝应的水栅，水栅全部攻破了。
English: Soon after, torrential rain fell, and the water level rose sharply. Zhang Zhaoda and Fanzhu raced down the stream and slammed into Chen Baoying's water gate. The water gate was completely broken.

古文：又出兵攻其步军。
现代文：又出兵攻击陈实应的陆军。
English: Troops were also dispatched to attack Chen Shizhe's army.

古文：方大合战，会世祖遣余孝顷出自海道。
现代文：两军正在大会战之际，恰逢世担派余孝顷从海路进兵。
English: The two armies were in the midst of a large-scale battle when Shitan sent Yu Xiaoha to march in troops by sea.

古文：适至，因并力乘之，宝应大溃，遂克定闽中，尽擒留异、宝应等。
现代文：金茎厘刚一到达，两人就合力进击，阵寅应全线崩溃，于是平定了闽生，里墨、速宜尘等全部被抓获。
English: As soon as Jin Xi Li arrived, the two of them joined forces to attack, and the entire line collapsed. As a result, the twins were leveled, and all of them were captured.

古文：以功授镇前将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：童堕湩以战功被任命为镇前将军、开府仪同三司。
English: Thanks to his war exploits, Tong Jiaxuan was appointed as the town's former general, and was given the title of Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi.

古文：初，世祖尝梦昭达升于台铉，及旦，以梦告之。
现代文：以前，世担曾经梦见章昭达升官为宰相三公，到天亮时，把梦况告诉了章昭达。
English: Previously, Shetan had dreamt that Zhang Zhaoda was promoted to the post of prime minister. At dawn, he told Zhang Zhaoda about the dream.

古文：至是侍宴，世祖顾诏达曰： 卿忆梦不？
现代文：到此时奉陪酒宴时，世担面向章昭达说： 你还记得那个梦吗?
English: At this time, during the banquet, Shitan said to Zhang Zhaoda: Do you still remember that dream?

古文：何以偿梦？ 
现代文：用什么来报答这个梦? 
English: What is the reward for this dream?

古文：昭达对曰： 当效犬马之用，以尽臣节，自馀无以奉偿。 
现代文：章昭达回答说： 我应当效犬马之劳，尽心尽力于臣子的礼节，其余就无可报答了。 
English: Zhang Zhaoda replied, "I should do my best and devote myself to the etiquette of a courtier, and there is no way to repay the rest.

古文：寻又出为使持节、都督江、郢、吴三州诸军事、镇南将军、江州刺史，常侍、仪同、鼓吹如故。
现代文：不久又调出京城担任使持节、都督逗郢星三州诸军事、镇南将军、江州刺史，常侍、仪同、鼓吹乐的封赏仍旧。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the capital city to serve as the envoy of the festival, the military of the three states of the military, the general of Zhenan, and the history of Jiangzhou, and the rewards for the attendants, the ceremony, and the music were still the same.

古文：废帝即位，迁侍中、征南将军，改封邵陵郡公。
现代文：历童即位，升任他为侍中、征南将军，改封爵位为邵陵郡公。
English: After his accession to the throne, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain and general of the Southern Expedition, and his title was changed to Lord of Sholing County.

古文：华皎之反也，其移书文檄，并假以昭达为辞，又频遣使招之，昭达尽执其使，送于京师。
现代文：茎堕反叛，他写的谴责信声讨书之类的文告，都以章昭达为藉而成文，又多次派遣使者招诱他归顺，章昭达把使者全部扣留，押送到京师。
English: He used Zhang Zhaoda to write the proclamations such as "Stem of a Fallen Rebel," "Letter of Condemnation" and "Plea for a Book," and repeatedly sent emissaries to persuade him to submit. Zhang Zhaoda detained all the emissaries and sent them to Beijing.

古文：皎平，进号征南大将军，增邑并前二千五百户。
现代文：华皎平定后，提升他的官号为征南大将军，增赐食邑合并以前赐予的共计二千五百户。
English: After the subjugation of Huaying, he was promoted to the official title of General of the Expedition to the South, and the total of 2,500 households that had been given before the merger were given additional food villages.

古文：秩满，征为中抚大将军，侍中、仪同、鼓吹如故。
现代文：任期满后，天子征召为中抚大将军，侍中、仪同、鼓吹乐这些封赏仍旧。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, Tianzi was conscripted as the General of the Middle Fusiliers, and the rewards such as the Chamberlain, the Ceremonial, and the Eulogy are still in place.

古文：高宗即位，进号车骑大将军，以还朝迟留，为有司所劾，降号车骑将军。
现代文：高宗即位，提升他的官号为车骑大将军，但因为回朝路上迟缓停留，被有关官员弹劾，降官号为车骑将军。
English: Gao Zong ascended the throne and was promoted to the rank of General of Chariots and Cavalry. However, he was impeached and demoted to General of Chariots and Cavalry by the officials concerned because he was late in returning to the North.

古文：欧阳纥据有岭南反，诏昭达都督众军讨之。
现代文：欧阳纥占据岭亩反叛，天子下韶书派童压达统率各路军马前往讨伐。
English: Ouyang Kun occupied Lingmu and rebelled, and the Heavenly Father sent Tong Dada to lead the army and horses to fight.

古文：昭达倍道兼行，达于始兴。
现代文：章昭达以双倍的速度急行军，到达垃兴。
English: Zhang Zhaoda marched at double speed and reached Laxing.

古文：纥闻昭达奄至，恇扰不知所为，乃出顿洭口，多聚沙石，盛以竹笼，置于水栅之外，用遏舟舰。
现代文：欧阳纥闻知童堕达突然杀到，恐惧惊慌不知所措，就出兵屯守沤口，积聚了大量沙石，用竹笼装满，投放在水栅外侧用来阻拦对方战舰。
English: Ouyang Xuan heard that the boy had died suddenly and was overwhelmed with fear and panic, so he sent troops to guard the gate, accumulated a large amount of sand and stone, filled it with bamboo cages, and placed it on the outside of the water gate to block the other side's warships.

古文：昭达居其上流，装造拍，以临贼栅。
现代文：童晅达占据上游，装备战船制作抛物拍，逼近敌人水栅。
English: Tong Yunda occupied the upstream, equipped the warship to make a parabola, and approached the enemy watchtower.

古文：又令军人衔刀，潜行水中，以斫竹笼，笼篾皆解。
现代文：又命令军士中街刀，水底潜泳，砍斫竹笼，竹笼的篾片全都散了。
English: He also ordered the sergeant to use a street knife, swim underwater, and cut the bamboo cage. The bamboo cage's shingles were all scattered.

古文：因纵大舰随流突之，贼众大败，因而擒纥，送于京师，广州平。
现代文：于是就纵放大舰顺流冲撞，贼军大败，因而抓获了欧阳纬，押送到京师，庐业被平定了。
English: As a result, the longitudinally enlarged ship collided with the downstream, and the thief army was defeated. As a result, Ouyang Wei was captured, escorted to the Beijing Division, and Xingye was leveled.

古文：以功进车骑大将军，迁司空，馀并如故。
现代文：室里崖以战功提升官号为车骑大将军，升任为司空，其余封赏仍旧。
English: Muroriya was promoted to the rank of General of Cavalry and Cavalry for his war achievements, and promoted to the rank of Air Vice Marshal. The rest of his awards remain the same.

古文：太建二年，率师征萧岿于江陵。
现代文：基建二年，率领军队到工堕征讨董岩。
English: After two years of construction, he led the army to Dongyan.

古文：时萧岿与周军大蓄舟舰于青泥中，昭达分遣偏将钱道戢、程文季等，乘轻舟袭之，焚其舟舰。
现代文：当时芦蛊舆旦军储备了大量舟艋在青泥水中停泊待用，童鳄崖分别派遣偏将钱潮鉴、担塞至等，乘驶轻舟进袭，焚烧了这些舟舰。
English: At that time, the Lushan-Mingtan army had a large number of boats anchored in the blue muddy water, and Tonghuakou separately dispatched the money tide gauge, the carrying plug, etc., and attacked by sailing light boat and burned these boats.

古文：周兵又于峡下南岸筑垒，名曰安蜀城，于江上横引大索，编苇为桥，以度军粮。
现代文：周兵又在峡下南岸构筑城垒，名叫安蜀城，又在南岸舆城垒之间的红水上空横拉粗大绳索，编笔为桥，用来运送军粮。
English: Zhou soldiers also built a fortress on the south bank of the gorge, called Anshu City, and pulled a thick rope across the red water between the fortresses on the south bank, making a bridge, used to transport military food.

古文：昭达乃命军士为长戟，施于楼船之上，仰割其索，索断粮绝，因纵兵以攻其城，降之。
现代文：童胆崖于是命令士卒手持长戟，站在楼船的最高层高高举起，割断上空的绳索，绳断粮尽，童里达乘势发兵攻打城垒，迫使守军投降。
English: Tong Yiliqiao then ordered his soldiers to stand on the highest level of the tower ship, holding a long pole, and cut the ropes in the sky. When the ropes ran out of food, Tong Lida took advantage of the situation to send troops to attack the fortress and force the defenders to surrender.

古文：三年，遘疾，薨，时年五十四。
现代文：三年，得病，去世，这年五十四岁。
English: Three years later, he fell ill and died at the age of fifty-four.

古文：赠大将军，增邑五百户，给班剑二十人。
现代文：追赠为大将军，增赐食邑五百户，赏给班剑仪仗二十人。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of grand general, an additional 500 households were given food, and 20 people were given ceremonial swords.

古文：昭达性严刻，每奉命出征，必昼夜倍道；然有所克捷，必推功将帅，厨膳饮食，并同于群下，将士亦以此附之。
现代文：章昭达生性严厉峻刻，每次奉命出征，必定日夜行军倍速而进；但打了胜仗，必定推让功劳给将帅，饭食酒菜都舆部属相同，将士也因此拥护他。
English: Zhang Zhaoda had a stern and stern nature. Every time he was ordered to go to war, he would march forward at double speed day and night. However, if he won the war, he would certainly give the credit to the general. The food, wine and vegetables all belonged to the same department, so the soldiers also supported him.

古文：每饮会，必盛设女伎杂乐，备尽羌胡之声，音律姿容，并一时之妙，虽临对寇敌，旗鼓相望，弗之废也。
现代文：每次饮食宴会，必定大规模地安排歌姬舞女表演多种歌舞，羌胡曲调也应有尽有，歌曲的音律和女乐的姿容，都是那时的最佳者，即使是临阵对敌，两军旗鼓相望的紧张时刻，也不会取消这种宴乐。
English: For every meal banquet, there must be a large-scale arrangement of geisha dancers performing a variety of songs and dances, and there should be all kinds of haiku tunes. The melody of the song and the appearance of the female music are the best at that time. Even if it is a battle against the enemy, a tense moment when the two armies are facing each other, it will not cancel this banquet.

古文：四年，配享世祖庙庭。
现代文：四年，配享在世祖祭庙。
English: For four years, it has been on display at the ancestral temple.

古文：子大宝，袭封邵陵郡公，累官至散骑常侍、护军。
现代文：儿子章大实，继承邵陵郡公的封爵，相继任职官至散骑常侍、护军。
English: His son, Zhang Dashi, inherited the official title of Baron of Sholing County, and successively served as an official, a horseback riding attendant, and a military escort.

古文：出为豊州刺史，在州贪纵，百姓怨酷，后主以太仆卿李晕代之。
现代文：调出京城担任丰州刺史，在州中贪脏恣纵，百姓非常怨恨，后主派太仆卿李晕代替他。
English: He was transferred out of the capital to serve as the sheriff of Fengzhou. He was greedy and arbitrary in the state, and the people were very resentful. Later, the master sent the servant Li Huan to replace him.

古文：至德三年四月，晕将到州，大宝乃袭杀晕，举兵反，遣其将杨通寇建安。
现代文：至德三年四月，李晕将到任，章大实竟然突然袭击杀死了李晕，起兵反叛，派将领荡通侵犯垩叁圭。
English: In April of the following year, when Li Huan was about to take office, Zhang Daxin suddenly attacked and killed Li Huan, raised an army to rebel, and sent the general Wang Tong to invade Gonggui.

古文：建安内史吴慧觉据郡城拒之，通累攻不克。
现代文：建室内史呈墓量据守郡城抵御，杨通累攻不下。
English: The history of the building's interior shows that the number of tombs is the highest in the county, and Yangtong cannot be conquered.

古文：官军稍近，人情离异，大宝计穷，乃与通俱逃。
现代文：官军逐渐逼近，人心叛离，章大实无计可施，就衹得与杨通一道逃走。
English: The government army was gradually approaching, people were defecting, and Zhang Dazhi had no choice but to flee with Yang Tong.

古文：台军主陈景详率兵追蹑大宝。
现代文：台军主陈景详率兵追踪章大宝。
English: The head of the Taiwanese army, Chen Jing, led the soldiers to track down the great treasure.

古文：大宝既入山，山路阴险，不复能行，通背负之，稍进。
现代文：章大实逃入山中，山路险要，再也不能前行，杨通背着他，慢慢前进。
English: Zhang Daxin fled into the mountains. The mountain road was dangerous and he could no longer move forward. Yang Tong carried him on his back and slowly moved forward.

古文：寻为追兵所及，生擒送都，于路死，传首枭于硃雀航，夷三族。
现代文：随即被迫兵赶上，捕获后押送去京都，在路上死了，首级被传送到京都并在朱雀航上悬挂示众，三族也被诛灭。
English: The forced soldiers caught up with them immediately, captured and escorted them to Kyoto, where they died on the way. Their heads were transported to Kyoto and displayed on the Suzaku ferry. The three ethnic groups were also annihilated.

古文：史臣曰：黄法抃、淳于量值梁末丧乱，刘、项未分，其有辩明暗见是非者盖鲜，二公达向背之理，位至鼎司，亦其智也。
现代文：史臣曰：黄法抃、淳于量生逢梁朝末年天下大乱的时代，这时胜利者、失败者并不分明，能够从中明辨贤愚暗识良莠的人大概少有吧，而遣两人深晓去从取舍的原理，后来人臣之位达到鼎司逭一极限，这正是他们聪明智慧的表现。
English: Shi Zhen said: Huang Fa Zhen and Jun Yu Jie were born at the end of the Liang Dynasty in the era of great turmoil in the world. At that time, the winners and losers were not clear, and there were probably few people who could clearly distinguish the wise from the foolish and the good from the bad. However, the two of them were deeply aware of the principle of choosing and discarding, and later the position of the vassal reached the limit of the three officials, which is exactly the performance of their cleverness and wisdom.

古文：昭达与世祖乡壤惟旧，义等邓、萧，世祖纂历，委任隆重，至于战胜攻取，累平寇难，斯亦良臣良将，一代之吴、耿矣。
现代文：章昭达与世担怀念乡土交往的故旧情谊，遵守邓禹、萧何的人臣道德，坐旦继承天命以后，也把尊贵重要的位置委任给他，至于战必胜攻必取，多次平息外贼内乱，这也是良臣良将一流的人物，是那个时代的吴汉、耿贪了。
English: Zhang Zhaoda cherished the old-fashioned friendship with the world, remembered the hometown exchanges, observed Deng Yu's and Xiao He's vassal morality, and after inheriting the fate of heaven, also entrusted him with an important position. As for winning the war, he quelled the alien civil strife many times. This is also a first-class person who is a good minister and a good general. He is the Wu Han and Geng Kui of that era.

