古文：裴氏子崔炜
现代文：裴氏子崔炜
English: Bae's son, Choe Ryong

古文：裴氏子
现代文：裴氏子
English: Bae's son

古文：唐开元中，长安裴氏子，于延平门外庄居，兄弟三人未仕，以孝义闻，虽贫好施惠。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，长安有一个姓裴的，在延平门外居住。他兄弟三人都没有做官，因为孝顺老人为人仁义而远近闻名。他家虽然贫困，但是喜欢施舍。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a man named Pei in Chang'an, who lived outside the Yanping Gate. None of his three brothers were officials, because the filial old man was known far and wide for his benevolence. Although his family was poor, they liked to give alms.

古文：常有一老父过之求浆，衣服颜色稍异。
现代文：有一回一个老头路过他家要水喝。这老头的衣服、面色与常人略有不同。
English: Once, an old man passed by his house to ask for water. The old man's clothes and complexion were slightly different from those of ordinary people.

古文：裴子待之甚谨，问其所事。
现代文：姓裴的对他很恭敬，很周到。
English: Pei is very respectful and thoughtful.

古文：云： 以卖药为业。 
现代文：姓裴的问老人是干什么的，老人说自己以卖药为业。
English: Ms. Pei asked the old man what he did for a living. The old man said he sold medicine.

古文：问其族。曰： 不必言也。 
现代文：他又问老人的家族如何，老人说不必讲了。
English: He also asked the old man how his family was, and the old man said there was no need to talk about it.

古文：因是往来憩宿于裴舍，积数年而无倦色。
现代文：因此，这位老人来来往往经常住在裴家，好几年之后裴家也没有厌烦的表示。
English: Therefore, the old man often came and went to live in the Bae family, and after several years, the Bae family did not show boredom.

古文：一日谓裴曰： 观君兄弟至窭，而常能恭己不倦于客，君实长者，积德如是，必有大福。
现代文：有一天，老人对姓裴的说： 我见你家里极其贫困简陋，而对客人能长期不疲倦地恭敬、照顾，你实在是一位长者。你积德如此，一定会有大福的。
English: One day, the old man said to the man surnamed Pei: I see that your family is extremely poor and humble, but you can respect and take care of your guests tirelessly for a long time. You are truly an elder. If you have such virtues, you will surely have great fortune.

古文：吾亦厚君之惠，今为君致少财物，以备数年之储。 
现代文：我也受到你很多恩惠，现在给你弄一点财物来，用来作为今后几年的储备。 
English: I have also received many favors from you, and now I would like to get you a little property to use as a reserve for the next few years.

古文：裴敬谢之。
现代文：姓裴的表示感谢。
English: Ms. Pei expressed her gratitude.

古文：老父遂命求炭数斤，坎地为炉，炽火。
现代文：老头于是让人找来几斤炭，在地上挖了个坑当炉灶，点上火。
English: The old man then asked someone to find a few pounds of charcoal, dug a hole in the ground to use as a stove, and lit a fire.

古文：少顷，命取小砖瓦如手指大者数枚，烧之，少顷皆赤，怀中取少药投之，乃生紫烟，食顷变为金矣，约重百两，以授裴子，谓裴曰： 此价倍于常者，度君家事三年之蓄矣。
现代文：不一会儿，又让人拿来几块手指大小的砖瓦，放在火里烧。片刻之间全都烧红。老人从怀里取出一点药来扔到里边，火上冒出来一股紫烟，一顿饭的时间砖块就变成金子了。金子的重量大约有一百两，老人全给了姓裴的。老人说： 这些金子的价格，是一般金子的一倍，估计够你家花用三年了。
English: After a while, someone brought a few finger-sized bricks and placed them in the fire to burn. Within a few moments, they were all glowing red. The old man took out a bit of medicine from his arms and threw it in. A puff of purple smoke came out of the fire, and within one meal, the bricks turned into gold. The weight of the gold was about a hundred and two, and the old man gave it all to someone named Pei. The old man said, "The price of this gold is twice that of ordinary gold, and it is estimated that it will last your family for three years."

古文：吾自此去，候君家罄尽，当复来耳。 
现代文：我现在要离开这里，等到你家的金子用光了，我再来。 
English: I'm leaving now. I'll come back when your family's gold is gone.

古文：裴氏兄弟益敬老父，拜之。
现代文：姓裴的兄弟们更加敬重老人。他们拜他，问他住在哪里。
English: Bae's brothers respect the old man even more. They bow to him and ask him where he lives.

古文：因问其居。
现代文：老人说： 以后我会让你们知道的。 
English: The old man said, "I'll let you know later."

古文：曰： 后当相示焉，诀别而去。 
现代文：说完，老人就告别而去。
English: After saying this, the old man said goodbye and left.

古文：裴氏乃货其金而积粮。
现代文：姓裴的就卖了黄金，买了许多粮食积存起来。
English: Mr. Pei sold his gold and bought a lot of grain to save.

古文：明年遇水旱，独免其灾。
现代文：第二年遇上水灾旱灾，只有他家没受到饥饿。
English: The following year saw floods and drought, but his family was the only one that did not go hungry.

古文：后三年，老父复至，又烧金以遗之。
现代文：三年后，老头又来了，又烧了些金子送给他们。
English: Three years later, the old man came again and burned some more gold to give to them.

古文：裴氏兄弟一人愿从学。
现代文：裴氏兄弟中有一个愿意跟着老头学道，老头就领着他往西去了。
English: One of Bae's brothers was willing to study with the old man, and the old man led him west.

古文：老父遂将西去，数里至大白山西岩下，一大盘石，左有石壁。
现代文：走了几里，来到太白山的西岩下。这里有一块大磐石，右边有石壁，老头用拐杖敲了敲。
English: After walking for a few miles, he came to the West Rock of Taibai Mountain. There was a large rock here, with a stone wall on the right. The old man tapped it with his cane.

古文：老父以杖叩之，须臾开。乃一洞天。有黄冠及小童迎接。
现代文：磐石立刻就移开了，原来这是一个洞口，有道士和小童出来迎接。
English: The rock immediately moved away. It turned out to be a cave entrance, and Taoists and children came out to greet them.

古文：老父引裴生入洞。
现代文：老头领姓裴的走进洞中，一开始觉得黑暗，渐渐地变得明亮，就看到了城郭和人物。
English: When the old man surnamed Pei walked into the cave, he felt dark at first, but gradually became brighter and saw the castle and the figures.

古文：初觉暗黑，渐即明朗，乃见城郭人物，内有宫阙堂殿，如世之寺观焉。道士玉童仙女无数，相迎入，盛歌乐。诸道士或琴棋讽诵言论。
现代文：这里面有殿堂宫阙，和人世间的寺观差不多。这里边的道士、玉童、仙女，不计其数。姓裴的被迎了进去，歌声乐声大作，道士们有的弹琴，有的下棋，有的读书，有的谈论。
English: There is a hall of worship here, which is similar to the view of a temple in the human world. There are countless Taoists, jade children, and fairies here. Pei was welcomed in, singing and playing music, some Taoists play the piano, some play chess, some read, and some talk.

古文：老父引裴氏礼谒，谓诸人曰： 此城中主人也。 
现代文：老头领着姓裴的见礼，对人们说： 这是长安城中的主人。 
English: The old man led a procession with the surname Pei and said to the people: This is the master of the city of Chang'an.

古文：遂留一宿，食以胡麻饭、麟脯、仙酒。
现代文：于是就留姓裴的住了一宿，拿胡麻饭给他吃，拿麟脯给他吃，还给他酒喝。
English: So he stayed with the surname Pei for one night, gave him sesame rice to eat, unicorns to eat, and wine to drink.

古文：裴告归。
现代文：姓裴的要回家，大家和他告别。
English: Pei wants to go home, so everyone says goodbye to him.

古文：相与诀别。老父复送出洞，遗以金宝遣之。谓裴曰： 君今未合久住，且归。后二十年，天下当乱。此是太白左掩洞，君至此时，可还来此，吾当迎接。
现代文：老头把他送出洞来，送给他一些金银珠宝让他上路，对他说： 你现在不应该久住，暂且回去，二十年之后，天下将会大乱，这是太白山左掩洞，你到了那个时候，可以自来这里，我会迎接你的。 
English: The old man sent him out of the cave, gave him some gold, silver and jewels to set him on his way, and said to him: You should not stay long now, go back for the time being, after twenty years, there will be great chaos in the world, this is the hidden cave on the left of Mount Tai. When you get to that time, you can come here yourself, I will welcome you.

古文：裴子拜别。
现代文：姓裴的拜谢告别。
English: Bae's farewell is over.

古文：比至安史乱，裴氏全家而去，隐于洞中数年。
现代文：等到了安史之乱，姓裴的全家都去了，隐居在洞中好几年。
English: After the Anshi Rebellion, Bae's entire family went into hiding in a cave for several years.

古文：居处仙境，咸受道术。
现代文：住在仙境中，全都学到了道术。
English: Living in a fairyland, they all learned Taoism.

古文：乱定复出。兄弟数人，皆至大官；一家良贱，亦蒙寿考焉。崔炜
现代文：叛乱平定之后，他们又出来居住，兄弟几人都做了大官。这一家人，不管主人与仆人，全都得到长寿。崔炜
English: After the rebellion was quelled, they came out to live again, and several brothers became high-ranking officials. This family, regardless of the master and the servants, all got a long life. Cui Gan

古文：贞元中，有崔炜者，故监察向之子也。
现代文：唐德宗贞元年间，有一个叫崔炜的人，是以前的监察史崔向的儿子。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Tang, there was a man named Cui Qi, who was the son of the former inspector Cui Xiang.

古文：向有诗名于人间，终于南海从事。
现代文：崔向是个诗人，在世间挺有名气，死在南海从事的任上。
English: Cui Xiang was a poet, quite famous in the world, and died in the South China Sea.

古文：炜居南海，意豁然也，不事家产，多尚豪侠。
现代文：崔炜住在南海，性情豁达，不管理家产，很崇尚豪士侠客。
English: Cui Wei lives in the South China Sea, has an open-minded nature, does not manage household assets, and is a great admirer of heroes.

古文：不数年，财业殚尽，多栖止佛舍。
现代文：不几年，他家的财产全都用光，经常住在寺庙里。
English: Within a few years, all of his family's property was used up, and he often lived in a temple.

古文：时中元日，番禺人多陈设珍异于佛庙，集百戏于开元寺。
现代文：当时正是七月十五日，番禺县人大多都在庙里陈设珍肴异味，在开元寺中同时集中许多人唱戏。
English: At that time, it was July 15th, most of the people in Panyu County were in the temple to display delicacies, and at the same time, many people were gathered in Kaiyuan Temple to sing.

古文：炜因窥之，见乞食老妪，因蹶而覆人之酒瓮。
现代文：崔炜于是就去看热闹。他看到一位要饭的老太太，因为跌倒，碰倒了人家的酒缸。
English: He saw an old lady begging for food, and because she fell, she knocked over someone's wine glass.

古文：当垆者殴之。
现代文：卖酒的打老太太。
English: There's an old lady selling alcohol.

古文：计其直仅一缗耳，炜怜之，脱衣为偿其所直。
现代文：计算一下酒的价钱，仅仅一千钱而已。崔炜可怜那老太太，脱下衣服作价来替老太太赔还了。
English: After calculating the price of the wine, it was only one thousand yuan. Cui Yao felt sorry for the old lady and took off his clothes to pay the price for the old lady.

古文：妪不谢而去。
现代文：老太太没有表示感谢就走了。
English: The old lady left without a word of thanks.

古文：异日又来告炜曰： 谢子为脱吾难。
现代文：另一天老太太来告诉崔炜说： 感谢你替我摆脱困难处境。
English: Another day, an old lady came to tell Choi Min, "Thank you for getting me out of a difficult situation.

古文：吾善灸赘疣。
现代文：我善于灸治肿瘤。
English: I'm good at moxibustion and treating tumors.

古文：今有越井冈艾少许奉子，每遇疣赘，只一炷耳，不独愈苦，兼获美艳。
现代文：现在我有一些越井冈的艾蒿送给你，每次遇上长肿瘤的人，只用象灯心那么粗一小缕就可以治好。
English: Now I have some mountain ash from Koshiioka to give to you. Every time you encounter a person with a long tumor, you can cure it with just a small strand as thick as the core of a lamp.

古文：炜笑而受之。
现代文：不光能给人治好病痛，还能使你得到美女为妻。 
English: Not only can it cure a person's illness, it can also make you get a beautiful woman as a wife.

古文：妪倏亦不见。
现代文：崔炜笑着接了过来。老太太忽然就不见了。
English: With a smile, Cui Yao picked her up. Suddenly, the old lady disappeared.

古文：后数日，因游海光寺。遇老僧赘于耳。炜因出艾试灸之，而如其说。
现代文：几天后，因为到海光寺游览，遇见一位老和尚耳朵上长了一个瘤，崔炜就拿出艾蒿来试着给他灸治。
English: A few days later, while visiting Haiguang Temple, she met an old monk who had a lump on his ear, so Cui Gan took out a wormwood to try to moxibustion him.

古文：僧感之甚，谓炜曰： 贫道无以奉酬。但转经以资郎君之福祐耳。
现代文：就象老太太说的那样，只用了很少一点艾蒿就治好了。老和尚非常感激，对崔炜说： 贫僧没有什么酬谢你，只能念经求神仙保佑你多福了。
English: Just as the old lady said, it only took a little bit of mugwort to cure him. The old monk was very grateful and said to Cui Yao: "The poor monk has nothing to thank you for, he can only recite the sutras and ask the gods to bless you with many blessings."

古文：此山下有一任翁者，藏镪巨万，亦有斯疾，君子能疗之，当有厚报。请为书导之。 炜曰： 然。 
现代文：这山下有一个姓任的老头，家里非常有钱，他也有这种病。你要能给他治好，一定能有厚报，请让我写封信给你推荐一下。 崔炜说： 好。 
English: There is an old man surnamed Ren at the foot of the mountain. His family is very rich, and he also has this disease. If you can cure him, you will surely have a good report. Please let me write a letter to recommend you. Cui Yao said: Good.

古文：任翁一闻喜跃，礼请甚谨。
现代文：姓任的老头一听说崔炜是来给他治病的，乐得直蹦高儿，对崔炜非常恭敬谨慎。
English: As soon as the old man, surnamed Ren, heard that Cui Wei had come to treat him, he jumped up and down with joy. He was very respectful and cautious towards Cui Wei.

古文：炜因出艾，一爇而愈。
现代文：崔炜就拿出艾蒿来，一点火就治好了。
English: Cui Gan took out the wormwood, and it was cured with a little fire.

古文：任翁告炜曰： 谢君子痊我所苦，无以厚酬，有钱十万奉子。幸从容，无草草而去。 
现代文：姓任的老头对崔炜说： 感谢你治好了我的病痛，没有什么优厚的酬谢，只有十万钱送给你，请从从容容地玩玩，不要急急忙忙地离去。 
English: The old man surnamed Ren said to Cui Wei: Thank you for curing my illness, there is no generous reward, only one hundred thousand money will be given to you, please take your time to play, don't leave in a hurry.

古文：炜因留彼。
现代文：崔炜于是就留在那里。
English: So Choe Son stayed there.

古文：炜善丝竹之妙，闻主人堂前弹琴声，诘家童。
现代文：崔炜善长音乐，听到主人的堂前有弹琴的声音，就问家童这是谁弹的。
English: Cui Gan was good at music, and when he heard the sound of the master playing the piano in front of the hall, he asked the children who played it.

古文：对曰： 主人之爱女也。 
现代文：家童说是主人的女儿弹的。
English: The family child said that the owner's daughter had played it.

古文：因请其琴而弹之。
现代文：于是崔炜就把她的琴借来弹奏一番。
English: So Cui Yao borrowed her piano and played it for a while.

古文：女潜听而有意焉。
现代文：那女子暗暗听了崔炜的琴声，就对他产生了爱慕之心。
English: The woman secretly listened to Cui Yao's music and developed a crush on him.

古文：时任翁家事鬼曰独脚神，每三岁必杀一人飨之。
现代文：当时任老头家里供奉着一个叫独脚神的鬼，每隔三年，必须杀一个人给这个鬼上供。
English: At that time, the old man's family worshipped a ghost called the one-legged god. Every three years, they had to kill a person to make an offering to this ghost.

古文：时已逼矣，求人不获。
现代文：时间已经迫近了，却还没找到一个可以杀的人。
English: The clock is ticking, but they haven't found anyone to kill yet.

古文：任翁俄负心，召其子计之曰： 门下客既不来，无血属，可以为飨。
现代文：姓任的老头突然负了心，叫来他的儿子核计道： 门下这位客人和我们没有血缘关系，可以杀他给鬼吃。
English: The old man surnamed Ren suddenly lost heart and called his son to check, saying: This guest under our door has no blood relationship with us, we can kill him and give him to the devil.

古文：吾闻大恩尚不报，况愈小疾耳。 
现代文：我听说大恩都可以不报，何况他只给我治好了一点小病。 
English: I've heard that a big favor can go unreported, and besides, he only cured me of a minor ailment.

古文：遂令具神馔。
现代文：于是任老头下令给鬼准备饭食。
English: So the old man Ren ordered to prepare a meal for the ghost.

古文：夜将半，拟杀炜，已潜扃炜所处之室，而炜莫觉。
现代文：快到半夜的时候，打算杀掉崔炜，任老头暗中把崔炜那屋的门锁了，而崔炜并没发觉。
English: When it was almost midnight, Ren secretly locked the door of Choi Min's house without Choi Min noticing, intending to kill Choi Min.

古文：女密知之，潜持刃于窗隙间，告炜曰： 吾家事鬼，今夜当杀汝而祭之。
现代文：任老头的女儿暗中得知此事，悄悄地拿一把刀从窗缝递给崔炜说： 我家供奉着一个鬼，今夜会杀你祭鬼的，你可以用这把刀打开窗子逃跑。
English: The old man's daughter secretly learned about this and quietly took a knife from the window and handed it to Cui Yao, saying, "My family worships a ghost. Tonight they will kill the person who sacrificed you to the ghost. You can use this knife to open the window and escape."

古文：汝可持此破窗遁去；不然者，少顷死矣。
现代文：不然，一会你就死了。这把刀你也拿走，不要连累了我。 
English: If you don't, you'll be dead in a minute. Take this knife, too, and don't bother me.

古文：此刃亦望持去，无相累也。 炜恐悸汗流，挥刃携艾，断窗棂跃出，拔键而走。
现代文：崔炜吓了一身冷汗，挥动着刀，带着艾蒿，砍断了窗棂跳了出去，拔开门闩就跑了。
English: Terrified and in a cold sweat, Cui Yao waved his knife, took Ai Weiwei with him, cut the curtains, jumped out, pulled the latch and ran away.

古文：任翁俄觉，率家童十余辈，持刃秉炬追之六七里，几及之。炜因迷道，失足坠于大枯井中。
现代文：任老头很快就发觉了，率领着十几个家僮拿着刀枪举着火把追出六七里，差不远就要追上的时候，崔炜因为迷失道路，一失脚掉进一口大枯井中。
English: The old man Ren soon found out. He led more than a dozen of his family members with swords and guns and torches to chase them for six or seven miles. When they were about to catch up, Cui Yao lost his footing and fell into a large dry well.

古文：追者失踪而返。
现代文：追赶的人因为找不到崔炜的踪迹，就回去了。
English: The pursuers went back because they couldn't find any trace of Choi Min.

古文：炜虽坠井，为槁叶所藉而无伤。
现代文：崔炜虽然掉到井里，但是掉在干树叶上，没有受伤。
English: Although Cui Yao fell into the well, he landed on dry leaves and was not injured.

古文：及晓视之，乃一巨穴，深百余丈，无计可出。
现代文：等到天亮一看，是一个深坑，一百多丈深，没法出去。
English: When I looked at it in the morning, it was a deep pit, more than a hundred feet deep, and I couldn't get out.

古文：四旁嵌空宛转，可容千人。
现代文：坑的四边空陷曲折，能装下一千人。
English: The four sides of the pit are hollow with twists and turns, and can hold a thousand people.

古文：中有一白蛇盘屈，可长数丈。
现代文：有一条几丈长的白蛇盘屈在那里。
English: A white snake, several feet long, was crouching there.

古文：前有石臼，岩上有物滴下，如饴蜜，注臼中，蛇就饮之。
现代文：前边有一个石臼，岩石上有一种象糖稀和蜂蜜的东西滴下来，流进臼中。那蛇就把这些东西喝掉。
English: There was a millstone in front of it, and on the rock something like molasses and honey dripped and ran into the mill, and the snake drank it up.

古文：炜察蛇有异，乃叩首祝之曰： 龙王，某不幸，坠于此，愿王悯之，幸不相害。
现代文：崔炜见那蛇与众不同，就叩头祷告说： 龙王，我很不幸，掉到这里边来了，希望龙王可怜可怜我，不要害我。 
English: Seeing that the snake was different from others, Cui Yan bowed down and prayed, "Dragon King, I am very unlucky to have fallen here. I hope Dragon King will have mercy on me and not harm me."

古文：因饮其余，亦不饥渴。
现代文：于是他喝掉蛇喝剩下的那些，也就不觉得饥渴了。
English: So he drank what was left over after he had eaten the snake, and he was no longer thirsty.

古文：细视蛇之唇吻，亦有疣焉。
现代文：他仔细看那蛇的嘴唇上，也长了一个肿瘤。
English: He took a closer look at the snake's lips, which also had a tumour.

古文：炜感蛇之见悯，欲为灸之，奈无从得火。
现代文：崔炜感激蛇可怜他，想要为它灸治，怎奈没地方弄火。
English: Cui Yao was grateful that the snake pitied him. He wanted to mourn and cure it, but there was no place to light a fire.

古文：既久，有遥火飘入于穴。
现代文：过了一会儿，远处有火飘到洞里来。
English: After a while, a distant fire floated into the cave.

古文：炜乃燃艾，启蛇而灸之，是赘应手坠地。
现代文：崔炜就用这火点燃了艾蒿，开始给蛇灸治。那肿瘤应手掉到地上。
English: Cui Yao used the fire to ignite the wormwood and began to cure the snake. The tumor fell to the ground.

古文：炜不受而启蛇曰： 龙王能施云雨，阴阳莫测，神变由心，行藏在己，必能有道，拯援沉沦，傥赐挈维，得还人世，则死生感激，铭在肌肤，但得一归，不愿怀宝。 
现代文：蛇的饮食，长期以来一直受到这肿瘤的妨碍，等到除去，饮食就方便多了。于是蛇就吐出一颗直径一寸的大珍珠酬谢崔炜。崔炜没有接受，他对蛇说： 龙王能呼风唤雨，天阴天晴别人没法猜测。神色的变化由内心决定，行藏动静全由自己说了算。你一定能有办法援救危难之人。如果能救我回到人世，我就永生难忘，铭刻在肌肤上。只求能回去，不想要珠宝。 
English: The snake's diet had been hindered by the tumor for a long time, and when it was removed, it was much easier to eat. So the snake spit out a large pearl with a diameter of one inch as a reward to thank Cui Rong. Cui Rong did not accept, he said to the snake: The dragon king can call the wind and rain, the weather is cloudy and clear, others can not guess. The change of color is determined by the heart, and the movement and movement are all decided by oneself. You must have a way to rescue people in danger. If you can save me back to life, I will never forget, inscribed on the skin. I just want to

古文：蛇遂咽珠，蜿蜒将有所适。
现代文：蛇就把珍珠咽下去，蠕动身子，要到什么地方去的样子。
English: The snake swallowed the pearl and wriggled around as if it wanted to go somewhere.

古文：炜遂载拜，跨蛇而去，不由穴口，只于洞中行，可数十里。
现代文：崔炜就拜了拜，跨到蛇身上随它而去。没有经过洞口，只在洞中行走，走了几十里。
English: Cui Yao bowed, stepped on the snake and followed it. He didn't go through the mouth of the cave, he only walked in the cave, walking dozens of miles.

古文：其中幽暗若漆，但蛇之光烛两壁。
现代文：洞里头漆黑一片，只有蛇身上的光亮照亮两壁。
English: It was pitch black inside the cave, with only the light from the snake illuminating the two walls.

古文：时见绘画古丈夫，咸有冠带。
现代文：当时能看清墙壁上画着一位古代男子，帽子和衣带全都有。
English: An ancient man, complete with hat and sash, could be seen painted on the wall.

古文：最后触一石门，门有金兽啮环，洞然明朗。
现代文：最后触到一个石门，门上有金兽咬着的门环，打开门之后很明亮。
English: Finally, I came across a stone door. The door had a knocker with a golden beast biting it. It was very bright when I opened the door.

古文：蛇低首不进，而卸下炜。
现代文：蛇低着头不进去，它把崔炜卸了下来。
English: The snake didn't go in with its head down. It unloaded Choi Min.

古文：炜将谓已达人世矣。
现代文：崔炜以为到达人世了，就走进门去。
English: Thinking that she had reached the end of her life, Cui Yao walked into the door.

古文：入户，但见一室，空阔可百余步，穴之四壁，皆镌为房室，当中有锦绣帏帐数间，垂金泥紫，更饰以珠翠，炫晃如明星之连缀。
现代文：他看到一间屋，很空阔，有一百多步宽。洞的四壁，都凿刻成一间一间的屋子，正中间的几间里有锦绣的帷帐，垂挂着金色的东西，紫色的墙壁，还用珠翠装饰着，闪闪烁烁的，就象许多明亮的星星穿连在一起。
English: He saw a room, very spacious, more than a hundred paces wide. The four walls of the cave were hewn into a room by room, and in the middle rooms there were richly embroidered curtains, hanging gold things, purple walls, also decorated with emeralds, twinkling, like many bright stars intertwined.

古文：帐前有金炉，炉上有蛟龙鸾凤、龟蛇鸾雀，皆张口喷出香烟，芳芬蓊欝。
现代文：帐前有一个香炉，香炉上有龙、凤、龟、蛇、鸟雀等形象，都张着口喷出香烟来，芳香浓郁。
English: In front of the curtain, there is an incense burner. On the incense burner, there are dragons, phoenixes, turtles, snakes, birds and sparrows and other images. They are all spouting cigarettes with their mouths open, and the fragrance is rich.

古文：傍有小池，砌以金壁，贮以水银凫鹥之类，皆琢以琼瑶而泛之。
现代文：傍边有一个小水池，池壁是用金子砌的，池里装的是水银和野鸭鸥鸟什么的。
English: Beside it there is a small pool, the walls of which are made of gold, and the pond is filled with mercury and mallard ducks and ostriches.

古文：四壁有床，咸饰以犀象，上有琴瑟笙篁、鼗鼓柷敔，不可胜记。
现代文：野鸭和鸥鸟都是用美玉雕成浮在水银上的。四壁下有床，都饰有犀角象牙。床上有琴瑟笙管鼗鼓柷敔等不可胜数的乐器。
English: Wild ducks and ostriches are carved from jade and float on mercury. There are beds under the four walls, all decorated with rhinoceros tusks. There are countless musical instruments on the bed, such as the zither, flute, gong and drum.

古文：炜细视，手泽尚新。
现代文：崔炜仔细一看，乐器上的手印还是新的。
English: Cui Wei took a closer look and found that the handprints on the instrument were still new.

古文：炜乃恍然，莫测是何洞府也。
现代文：崔炜这才恍然大悟，不知道这是什么仙人的洞府。
English: Cui Yan suddenly realized that he did not know what kind of fairy cave this was.

古文：良久，取琴试弹之，四壁户牖咸启，有小青衣出而笑曰： 玉京子已送崔家郎君至矣。 
现代文：过了好长一会儿，他拿过琴来试着弹奏，四壁的窗户全都打开了。有一位小婢女走出来笑着说： 玉京子已经把崔家郎君送来了！ 
English: After a long while, he took a lute and tried to play, and all the windows on the four walls opened. A little maid came out and said with a smile, "Tamakyo has sent Cui Jia Rong!"

古文：遂却走入。
现代文：于是她就跑了回去。
English: So she ran back.

古文：须臾，有四女，皆古环髻，曳霓裳之衣。谓炜曰： 何崔子擅入皇帝玄宫耶？ 
现代文：一会儿，有四位女子，全都梳着古人那样的环髻，拖着霓裳那样的衣服，来对崔炜说： 为什么崔公子擅自来到皇帝玄宫呢？ 
English: After a while, four women, all of them wearing ancient-style ringlets and dragging ancient-style dresses, came to say to Cui Qi: Why did Cui Gongzi come to the Emperor Xuan Palace without permission?

古文：炜乃舍琴再拜。
现代文：崔炜放下琴连连下拜。
English: Cui Gan put down the harp and bowed down.

古文：女亦酬拜。
现代文：四位女子也还拜。
English: The four women also bowed.

古文：炜曰： 既是皇帝玄宫，皇帝何在？ 
现代文：崔炜说： 既然是皇帝的玄宫，皇帝在哪？ 
English: Cui Yao said: Since it is the emperor's secret palace, where is the emperor?

古文：曰： 暂赴祝融宴尔。 
现代文：女子回答说： 皇帝参加祝融的婚礼去了。 
English: The girl replied, "The emperor has gone to attend Zhu Rong's wedding."

古文：遂命炜就榻鼓琴。炜乃弹胡笳。
现代文：于是她们让崔炜坐在床上弹琴，崔炜就弹了一曲《胡笳》。
English: So they asked Choi Min to sit on the bed and play the piano, and Choi Min played a piece of "Hoo Hoo."

古文：女曰： 何曲也？ 
现代文：女子问： 这是什么曲子？ 
English: The girl asked: What's the tune?

古文：曰： 胡笳也。 
现代文：崔炜说： 这是《胡笳》。 
English: Cui Yao said, "This is Hu Yao."

古文：曰： 何为胡笳？
现代文：女子说： 什么是《胡笳》？
English: The woman said, "What is "Lying"?"

古文：吾不晓也。 
现代文：我们不懂。 
English: We don't understand.

古文：炜曰： 汉蔡文姬，即中郎邕之女也，没于胡中，及归，感胡中故事，因抚琴而成斯弄，像胡中吹笳哀咽之韵。 
现代文：崔炜说： 汉朝时，中郎将蔡邕的女儿蔡文姬流落在胡地，等到回来，她感叹自己在胡地的故事，就弹琴奏出了这支曲子，象胡地吹笳那种哀怨幽咽的声音。 
English: Cui Yao said: During the Han Dynasty, the middlemen sent Cai Yao's daughter, Cai Wenji, to live in the Hudi. When she returned, she lamented her story in the Hudi and played this piece on the piano. It sounded like the Hudi trumpeting that sad, choking sound.

古文：女皆怡然曰： 大是新曲。 
现代文：四女子都高兴地说： 这确实是一支新曲子。 
English: All four girls said happily, "It really is a new piece."

古文：遂命酌醴传觞。
现代文：于是就让人摆下酒菜开始喝酒。
English: So they asked people to put down their food and drink and start drinking.

古文：炜乃叩首，求归之意颇切。
现代文：崔炜就叩头，恳切地要求回家。
English: Cui Yao bowed his head and earnestly asked to go home.

古文：女曰： 崔子既来，皆是宿分，何必匆遽，幸且淹驻。
现代文：女子说： 崔公子既然来了，这都是前定的缘分，何必这么匆忙！
English: The woman said: Since Cui Gongzi has come, this is all predetermined fate, why be in such a hurry!

古文：羊城使者少倾当来，可以随往。 
现代文：请暂且少住几天，羊城使者不久就能来，你可以跟着他回去。 
English: Please stay for a few days. The Yangcheng envoy will be here soon, and you can follow him back.

古文：谓崔子曰： 皇帝已许田夫人奉箕帚，便可相见。 
现代文：又对崔炜说： 皇帝已许田夫人作你的妻子，你这就可以见她。 
English: He also said to Cui Yao: The emperor has promised Lady Tian to be your wife, so you can see her.

古文：崔子莫测端倪，不敢应答。
现代文：崔炜不知是怎么回事，不敢答应。
English: I don't know what happened to Cui Wei, but he didn't dare to say yes.

古文：遂命侍女召田夫人。
现代文：于是就让侍女把田夫人找来。
English: So she asked the maid to fetch Mrs. Tian.

古文：夫人不肯至，曰： 未奉皇帝诏，不敢见崔家郎也。 
现代文：田夫人不肯来，说： 没有得到皇帝的诏令，不敢见崔家郎君。 
English: Mrs. Tian refused to come, saying, "I don't dare to see Cui Jia Rong without the Emperor's edict."

古文：再命不至。谓炜曰： 田夫人淑德美丽，世无俦匹。
现代文：第二次让她来她也没来，四位女子便对崔炜说： 田夫人又善良又美丽，举世无双，希望你好好待她。
English: The second time she asked her to come, she did not come, and the four women said to Cui Wei: Mrs. Tian is kind and beautiful, unparalleled in the world, I hope you treat her well.

古文：愿君子善奉之，亦宿业耳。夫人即齐王女也。 
现代文：这也是前世定的。田夫人就是齐王的女儿。 
English: This was also decided in a previous life. Lady Tian is the daughter of King Qi.

古文：崔子曰： 齐王何人也？ 
现代文：崔炜说： 齐王是什么人？ 
English: Cui Zhe said: Who is King Qi?

古文：女曰： 王讳横，昔汉初亡齐而居海岛者。 
现代文：女子说： 齐王叫田横，以前汉朝初年灭掉齐国他住到海岛上去了。 
English: The woman said, "Qi Wang called Tian Yang. He went to live on the island after the Han Dynasty wiped out Qi in the first year.

古文：逡巡，有日影入照坐中。炜因举首，上见一穴，隐隐然睹人间天汉耳。
现代文：过了一会儿，有日光照到座位中来，崔炜就抬头一看，见上边有一孔穴，隐隐约约能看见人间的天空了。
English: After a while, when the sun shone into the seat, Cui Yao looked up and saw a hole at the top, and he could vaguely see the sky.

古文：四女曰： 羊城使者至矣。 
现代文：四女子说： 羊城使者来了。 
English: The four women said, "The messenger from Sheep Town has arrived."

古文：遂有一白羊，自空冉冉而下，须臾至座。
现代文：于是有一头白羊，从空中慢慢地下来，一会儿就来到座间。
English: Then a white sheep, slowly descending from the sky, came into the auditorium.

古文：背有一丈夫，衣冠俨然，执大笔，兼封一青竹简，上有篆字，进于香几上。
现代文：这男子的衣服帽子很整齐。他拿着一支大笔，还有一封青色竹简，上面写着篆字。他把竹简放到香几上。
English: The man's clothes and hat are neatly trimmed. He is holding a large pen, as well as a blue-colored bamboo stick with a swastika written on it. He places the stick on the incense burner.

古文：四女命侍女读之曰： 广州刺史徐绅死，安南都护赵昌充替。 
现代文：四女子让一位侍女读那竹简： 广州刺史徐绅死，安南都护赵昌接替。 
English: The four women asked a maid to read the story: Xu Sheng, the famous Guangzhou poet, died, and Zhao Chang, Annan's tutor, succeeded him.

古文：女酌醴饮使者曰： 崔子欲归番禺，愿为挈往。 
现代文：女子一边给使者斟酒一边说： 崔公子要回番禺县，请你给带回去。 
English: While pouring wine for the envoy, the woman said: "Cui Gongzi wants to go back to Panyu County, please bring back the soap."

古文：使者唱喏，回谓炜曰： 他日须与使者易服缉宇，以相酹劳。 
现代文：使者大声答应下来。女子又回头对崔炜说： 改日你要替使者更换衣服屋宇，用来酬谢他。 
English: The messenger loudly agreed, and the woman turned back to Cui Yao and said, "Someday, you will change the clothes of the messenger and the house to thank him."

古文：炜但唯唯。
现代文：崔炜只是一个劲地答应。
English: Cui Jie only emphatically agreed.

古文：四女曰： 皇帝有敕，令与郎君国宝阳燧珠，将往至彼，当有胡人具十万緍而易之。 
现代文：四女子说： 皇帝有诏令，让把国宝阳燧珠给你。你拿到那里之后，能有一个胡人拿十万緍钱买它。 
English: The four women said, "The emperor has issued a decree to give you the national treasure, the Yang Di pearl. Once you get it there, you can have a wise man buy it for 100,000 baht."

古文：遂命侍女开玉函，取珠授炜。
现代文：于是让一位侍女打开一个玉匣，取出一颗珍珠交给崔炜。
English: So he asked a lady-in-waiting to open a jade box, take out a pearl and give it to Cui Gan.

古文：炜载拜捧受。
现代文：崔炜拜谢之后捧接过来。
English: Cui Zhen bowed and then took over.

古文：谓四女曰： 炜不曾朝谒皇帝，又非亲族，何遽贶遗如是？ 
现代文：他对四女子说： 我不曾拜见过皇帝，又不是皇帝的亲属，为什么要赠给我如此贵重的礼物？ 
English: He said to the four women, "I have never met the emperor, and I am not a relative of the emperor. Why did you give me such a valuable gift?"

古文：女曰： 郎君先人有诗于越台，感悟徐绅，遂见修缉。
现代文：女子说： 你的先人在越台上留有诗篇，那诗篇感悟了徐绅，徐绅就修缮了越台。
English: The woman said, "Your ancestors left a poem on Yue Tai. That poem inspired Xu Sheng, and he repaired Yue Tai.

古文：皇帝媿之，亦有诗继和。
现代文：皇帝感动，也写了相和的诗。
English: The emperor was moved and also wrote a poem of harmony.

古文：赉珠之意，已露诗中，不假仆说，郎君岂不晓耶？ 
现代文：赠给你珠子的意思，已显露在诗里。我们不告诉，你难道就不知道吗？ 
English: The meaning of giving you the beads is already revealed in the poem. If we don't tell you, won't you know?

古文：炜曰： 不识皇帝何诗。 
现代文：崔炜说： 不知道皇帝写的是什么诗？ 
English: Cui Yao said, "I don't know what poem the emperor wrote."

古文：女命侍女书题于羊城使者笔管上云： 千岁荒台隳路隅，一烦太守重椒涂。
现代文：女子让一位侍女在羊城使者的笔管上书题道： 千岁荒台隳路隅，一烦太守重椒涂。
English: The woman asked a lady's maid to write the following on the pen tube of the Yangcheng envoy: A thousand years of wasteland, a corner of the road, and a troublesome guardian.

古文：感君拂拭意何极，报尔美妇与明珠。 
现代文：感君拂拭意何极，报尔美妇与明珠。 
English: What do you think of when you see a beautiful woman and a pearl?

古文：炜曰： 皇帝原何姓字？ 
现代文：崔炜说： 皇帝本来叫什么？ 
English: Cui Yao said: What was the original name of the emperor?

古文：女曰： 已后当自知耳。 
现代文：女子说： 以后自然会知道的。 
English: The girl said, "I'll find out later."

古文：女谓炜曰： 中元日，须具美酒丰馔于广州蒲涧寺静室，吾辈当送田夫人往。 
现代文：女子对崔炜说： 七月十五日，你要在广州蒲涧寺僻静的屋子里，准备美酒和丰足的饭菜，我们将把田夫人送去。 
English: The woman said to Cui Wei: On July 15th, you have to prepare fine wine and rich meals in a secluded room of the Po Lou Temple in Guangzhou, and we will send Mrs. Tian.

古文：炜遂再拜告去，欲蹑使者之羊背。女曰： 知有鲍姑艾，可留少许。 
现代文：崔炜就连连下拜告别。他刚想要骑到羊背上，女子说： 知道你有鲍姑的艾蒿，可以留下一点。 
English: He just wanted to ride on the sheep's back, and the woman said, "Knowing that you have Bao Gu's Ai Wei, you can keep a little."

古文：炜但留艾，即不知鲍姑是何人也，遂留之。
现代文：崔炜留下一些艾蒿，却不知鲍姑是何人。瞬息之间就出了洞穴。
English: Cui Yao left some cormorants behind, but did not know who Bao Gu was. The cormorants left the cave in the blink of an eye.

古文：瞬息而出穴，履于平地。
现代文：两脚刚踩到平地上，使者和羊就不见了。
English: The messenger and the sheep disappeared as soon as their feet touched the ground.

古文：遂失使者与羊所在。
现代文：望星空河汉，这时已经是五更天了。
English: Looking at the stars in the sky, it was already five days later.

古文：望星汉，时已五更矣。俄闻蒲涧寺钟声，遂抵寺。僧人以早糜见饷，遂归广州。
现代文：立刻听到蒲涧寺的钟声，他就来到寺中，寺里的和尚把早晨的粥食给他吃了，于是他回到了广州。
English: As soon as he heard the bell of the temple, he came to the temple. The monk of the temple gave him the morning porridge to eat, so he returned to Guangzhou.

古文：崔子先有舍税居，至日往舍询之，曰： 已三年矣。 
现代文：崔炜以前租了一所房子住，到家的这天他去打听，人家告诉他，他已经离家三年了。
English: On the day he arrived home, he went to inquire and was told that he had been away from home for three years.

古文：主人谓崔炜曰： 子何所适，而三秋不返？ 
现代文：主人对崔炜说： 你到哪儿去了？为什么三年不回来？ 
English: The master said to Cui Yao: Where have you gone? Why haven't you come back for three years?

古文：炜不实告。
现代文：崔炜没有实说。
English: Choi Min did not tell the truth.

古文：开其户，尘榻俨然。
现代文：打开门一看，积满灰尘的床榻还是老样子。
English: When I opened the door, the dust-covered bed still looked the same.

古文：颇怀凄怆。
现代文：他心里很悲怆。
English: He was heartbroken.

古文：问刺史，则徐绅果死而赵昌替矣。
现代文：他打听刺史的情况，果然是徐绅死了，由赵昌接替了。
English: He inquired about the circumstances of the stabbing, and sure enough, Xu Sheng died and was succeeded by Zhao Chang.

古文：乃抵波斯邸，潜鬻是珠。
现代文：于是崔炜来到波斯客栈，偷偷地卖那颗珍珠。
English: So Cui Yao went to the Persian Inn and secretly sold the pearl.

古文：有老胡人一见，遂匍匐礼手曰： 郎君的入南越王赵佗墓中来；不然者，不合得斯宝。 
现代文：有一位老胡人一见了这颗珠子，立刻就匍匐在地上行礼说： 你显然是进入南越王赵佗的墓中又出来的，不然，你不该得到这一宝贝。 
English: When an old Hu man saw the bead, he immediately prostrated himself on the ground and said: "You obviously went into the tomb of the South Vietnamese King Zhao Tuo and came out again. Otherwise, you shouldn't get this treasure."

古文：盖赵佗以珠为殉故也。
现代文：因为赵佗是用这颗珍珠陪葬的。
English: Because Zhao Wei was buried with this pearl.

古文：崔子乃具实告，方知皇帝是赵佗，佗亦曾称南越武帝故耳。
现代文：崔炜就如实地告诉了他，这才知道皇帝是赵佗，因为赵佗也曾经被称为南越武帝。
English: Cui Gan told him the truth, and only then did he know that the emperor was Zhao Gan, because Zhao Gan was also once known as the South Vietnamese Emperor Wu.

古文：遂具十万緍易之。
现代文：于是老胡人用十万緍钱把珍珠买了去。
English: So the old man bought the pearl with 100,000 baht.

古文：崔子请胡人曰： 何以辨之？ 
现代文：崔炜问胡人道： 你根据什么认出它的？ 
English: Cui Zhe asked Hu DaLu: How did you recognize it?

古文：曰： 我大食国宝阳燧珠也。
现代文：胡人说： 这是我大食国的国宝阳燧珠。
English: Hu said, "This is the national treasure of my big-eating country.

古文：昔汉初，赵佗使异人梯山航海，盗归番禺，今仅千载矣。
现代文：以前在汉朝初年，赵佗派一个有异才的人登山航海，把这颗珠子偷到番禺县来，到现在已有一千年。
English: Previously, in the first year of the Han Dynasty, Zhao Wei sent a person with extraordinary talent to climb and sail, and stole this bead to Panyu County. It has been a thousand years now.

古文：我国有能玄象者，言来岁国宝当归。故我王召我，具大舶重资，抵番禺而搜索。
现代文：我国有一个懂得天象的人说，来年国宝应当回归，所以我国国王把我找去，给我准备大船和大量资金，让我到番禺来搜索此宝。
English: In our country, there is a person who understands the celestial body and said that the national treasure should return next year, so the king of our country sought me out, prepared a big ship and a lot of money for me, and asked me to come to Panyu to search for this treasure.

古文：今日果有所获矣。
现代文：今天果然得到了。 
English: Today I got it.

古文：遂出玉液而洗之，光鉴一室。
现代文：于是老胡人拿出玉液来把珍珠洗了洗，光照满屋。
English: So the old man took out the jade liquid to wash the pearl, and the light filled the house.

古文：胡人遽泛舶归大食去。
现代文：胡人立即开船回大食国去了。
English: The goose immediately sailed back to the land of plenty.

古文：炜得金，遂具家产；然访羊城使者，竟无影响。
现代文：崔炜得到钱，就置备了家产。然而他寻访羊城使者却没有消息。
English: When Cui Gan received the money, he prepared his family property. However, when he went to look for the Yangcheng envoy, there was no news.

古文：后有事于城隍庙，忽见神像有类使者，又睹神笔上有细字，乃侍女所题也。
现代文：后来他有事来到城隍庙，忽然发现有一个神像很像羊城使者，又见那神笔上有小字，原来是侍女题的，他这才准备了酒肉来祭奠。
English: Later, he happened to come to the Chengyu Temple, and suddenly discovered that there was a statue of a god that looked very much like the Yangcheng Messenger. He also saw that the god's pen had small letters on it, which turned out to be a handmaid's title. He then prepared the meat and wine to offer as a sacrifice.

古文：方具酒脯而奠之，兼重粉绩，及广其宇。
现代文：他又重新装修和粉饰了神像，扩建了庙宇。
English: He also redecorated and whitewashed the statues and expanded the temple.

古文：是知羊城即广州城。
现代文：这才知道羊城就是广州城，庙里有五只羊。
English: It was only then that I knew that Yangcheng was Guangzhou City, and that there were five sheep in the temple.

古文：庙有五羊焉，又徵任翁之室，则村老云： 南越尉任嚣之墓耳。 
现代文：崔炜又寻找姓任的老头住在哪里，村里的老人告诉他说，他所找的，只不过是南越尉任嚣的坟墓罢了。
English: Cui Wei also looked for where the old man surnamed Ren lived. The old man in the village told him that what he was looking for was nothing more than the grave of the South Vietnamese lieutenant Ren Huan.

古文：又登越王殿台，睹先人诗云：越井冈头松柏老，越王台上生秋草。
现代文：他又登上越王的殿台，看先人的诗。诗是这样的： 越井冈头松柏老，越王台上生秋草。
English: He also climbed onto Yue Wang's dais to read the poem of his predecessors. The poem is as follows: Yue Jing is covered with old pine and cypress trees, and autumn grass grows on Yue Wang's dais.

古文：古墓多年无子孙，野人踏践成官道。 
现代文：古墓多年无子孙，野人踏践成官道。 
English: Ancient tombs have no descendants for many years, and savages trample into officialdom.

古文：兼越王继和诗，踪迹颇异，乃询主者。
现代文：又有越王的和诗，字迹很怪。他就向主管的人打听。
English: There was also a poem by Yue Wang with strange handwriting. He asked the person in charge.

古文：主者曰： 徐大夫绅因登此台，感崔侍御诗，故重粉饰台殿，所以焕赫耳。 
现代文：主管的人说： 徐绅大夫因为登上此台，被崔侍御的诗感动，所以重新粉饰了台殿，使台殿焕然一新。
English: The person in charge said, "Dr. Xu Sheng was moved by Choi Samgyong's poem when he stepped onto the stage, so he repainted the stage hall and made it look brand new.

古文：后将及中元日，遂丰洁香馔甘醴，留蒲涧寺僧室。
现代文：后来要到七月十五了，崔炜就准备了丰厚的又干净又香甜的饭食和美酒，留住在蒲涧寺的僧室里。
English: Later, on the fifteenth day of the seventh month, Cui Yao prepared a plentiful, clean and sweet meal and wine, and stayed in the monk's room of the temple.

古文：夜将半，果四女伴田夫人至，容仪艳逸，言旨雅澹。
现代文：将到半夜的时候，果然四位女子伴着田夫人来了。田夫人容色美艳，言谈文雅。
English: Just before midnight, the four women arrived, accompanied by Mrs. Tian, who looked beautiful and spoke with elegance.

古文：四女与崔生进觞谐谑，将晓告去。
现代文：四女子和崔炜饮酒说笑，天将亮时才告别。
English: The four women drank and joked with Cui Yao, and said their goodbyes just before dawn.

古文：崔子遂再拜讫，致书达于越王，卑辞厚礼，敬荷而已。
现代文：崔炜于是再拜谢之后，给越王写了信，言辞很谦虚，礼物很丰厚，表示尊敬而已。
English: So, after thanking him again, Cui Rong wrote a letter to Yue Wang. The words were very humble, the gifts were very rich, and it was just to show respect.

古文：遂与夫人归室。
现代文：于是就和田夫人回到屋里。
English: So Mrs. Wada went back inside.

古文：炜诘夫人曰： 既是齐王女，何以配南越人？ 
现代文：崔炜问田夫人说： 你既然是齐王的女儿，为什么要嫁给南越人？ 
English: Since you are the daughter of King Qi, why do you want to marry a South Vietnamese?

古文：夫人曰： 某国破家亡，遭越王所虏为嫔御。
现代文：夫人说： 我国破家亡，被越王掳去做了嫔妃。
English: His wife said, "Our country was destroyed and our family destroyed, and I was taken captive by King Yue to be his concubine.

古文：王崩，因以为殉。
现代文：越王死了，就用我殉葬了。
English: When King Yue died, he was buried with me.

古文：乃不知今是几时也。
现代文：我竟然不知道现在是什么时代。
English: I don't even know what time it is.

古文：看烹郦生，如昨日耳。
现代文：想田广烹杀郦食其的情景，就像发生在昨天。
English: The scene of Fang Tianguang cooking, killing and devouring it, just like it happened yesterday.

古文：每忆故事，辄一潸然。 
现代文：每次想起往事，就泪流满面。 
English: Every time I think about the past, I burst into tears.

古文：炜问曰： 四女何人？ 
现代文：崔炜问道： 那四位女子都是谁？ 
English: Cui Wei asked: Who are those four women?

古文：曰： 其二瓯越王摇所献，其二闽越王无诸所进，俱为殉者。 
现代文：夫人说： 有两个是瓯越王摇献来的，另两人是闽越王无诸献来的，都是殉葬的。 
English: His wife said, "Two of them were offered by the king of Yue for sacrifice, and the other two were offered by the king of Yue for nothing. Both of them were killed and buried."

古文：又问曰： 昔四女云鲍姑何人也。 
现代文：崔炜又问道： 以前四女子说的那位鲍姑是谁？ 
English: Cui Zhe also asked: Who was the "Bao Gu" mentioned by the four women before?

古文：曰： 鲍靓女，葛洪妻也。
现代文：夫人说： 是鲍靓女，也就是葛洪的妻子。
English: His wife said, "It's Bao Ying Niu, Ge Hong's wife."

古文：多行灸于南海。 
现代文：她在南海做了许多灸治病人的事。 
English: She did a lot of moxibustion and healing in the South China Sea.

古文：炜方叹骇昔日之妪耳。
现代文：崔炜这才惊叹昔日那个老太太。
English: This made Cui Lan marvel at the old lady.

古文：又曰： 呼蛇为玉京子何也？ 
现代文：他又问： 为什么叫蛇是玉京子？ 
English: He also asked, "Why is a snake called a yakitori?"

古文：曰： 昔安期生长跨斯龙而朝玉京，故号之玉京子。 
现代文：夫人说： 以前安期生经常骑着这条龙去朝见玉京，所以叫它玉京子。 
English: His wife said: In the past, Anji often rode this dragon to see the Jade Emperor in the morning, so he called it the Jade Emperor.

古文：炜因在穴饮龙余沫，肌肤少嫩，筋力轻健。后居南海十余载，遂散金破产，栖心道门，乃挈室往罗浮，访鲍姑。
现代文：崔炜因为在洞中喝过龙的余沫，肌肤显得年轻细嫩，身体轻健有力，后来他在南海住了十几年，就散放金银破了家产，专心修道，竟带着妻室到罗浮山去寻访鲍姑。
English: Because he had drunk the dragon's leftover foam in the cave, Cui Yao's skin looked young and delicate, and his body was light and strong. Later, he lived in the South China Sea for more than ten years. He scattered gold and silver, broke the family property, and devoted himself to monasticism. He even took his wife to Mount Luofu to visit Baogu.

古文：后竟不知所适。
现代文：后来不知他究竟到哪儿去了。
English: I don't know where he went after that.

