古文：《齐民要术》：崔寔曰：正月自朔暨晦，可移松、柏、桐、梓、竹、漆诸树。
现代文：《齐民要术》：崔寔说：从正月初一到月底，可以移栽松树、柏树、桐树、梓树、竹子和漆树等各种树木。
English: From the first day of the first month to the end of the month, various trees such as pine trees, cypress trees, paulownia trees, azusa trees, bamboo trees and sumac trees can be transplanted.

古文：《博闻录》：栽松，春社前带土栽培，百株百活，舍此时，决无生理也。
现代文：《博闻录》：移栽松树，应在春社日前带土栽植，栽一百棵成活一百棵，不在这一时期移栽，绝难成活。
English: "Houwen Biographies": The transplanted pine trees should be planted with soil before the Spring Festival. Plant a hundred trees to make a hundred trees. If they are not transplanted during this period, it will be difficult to make a living.

古文：斫松木，须五更初；便削去皮，则无白蚁。 血忌日 尤好。
现代文：采伐松木，应在夜间五更开始时，便将树皮削掉，这样做可以不生白蚁。在血忌日采伐更好。
English: When harvesting pine trees, the bark should be cut off at the beginning of the night of the 5th lunar month, so that termites can not be born. It is better to harvest on the day of the blood.

古文：插杉：用惊蛰前后五日，斩新枝，剧坑、入枝、下泥、杵紧。
现代文：扦插杉木：选取惊蛰前后五日内，斩取新的枝条，掘好坑，将枝条放入坑中，用泥土壅培，用杵捣实。
English: Pruning cedar trees: within five days before and after pruning, cut new branches, dig a hole, put the branches into the hole, cultivate with soil, and tamp down with a pestle.

古文：相视天阴即插；遇雨十分生。无雨，即有分数。
现代文：应在天阴时赶快扦插。若遇上天雨，可以全部成活；天不下雨，便要打折扣。
English: It should be pricked quickly when it is cloudy. If it rains, it can all survive; if it does not rain, it should be discounted.

古文：种松、柏：八九月中，择成熟松子子，柏子同去台收顿。
现代文：种松、柏法：八九月间挑选成熟好的松子，柏子相同。将松塔剥掉，收藏起。
English: Seed pine, cypress method: Select mature pine nuts between August and September, the same for cypress. Peel off the pine cones and start collecting them.

古文：至来春春分时，甜水浸子十日。治畦、下水、上粪，漫散子于畦内，如种菜法，或单排点种。上覆土厚二指许。
现代文：到来年春天，春分时节用甜水浸种十天，整治好畦子，灌水，上粪，将种子漫撒在畦中，和种菜的方法一样；或者采用单行点种的方法，然后覆盖上大约二指厚的土。
English: By next spring, during the vernal equinox, soak the cucumbers in sweet water for ten days, trim the bracts, water and manure them, and scatter the seeds in the cocoon, the same method as growing vegetables; or use the single-row planting method, and then cover with about two fingers of soil.

古文：畦上搭矮棚蔽日。
现代文：畦子上要搭架矮棚遮蔽日晒。
English: Sheds should be erected on the rafts to shade them from the sun.

古文：旱则频浇，常须湿润。
现代文：遇到天旱要多多浇水，土壤要经常保持湿润。
English: In case of drought, it is necessary to water more and more, and the soil should always be kept moist.

古文：至秋后去棚，长高四、五寸。
现代文：入秋以后，即可将矮棚拆去，此时松苗约可长到四五寸高。
English: After the autumn, the shed can be removed. At this time, the pine seedlings can grow to about four or five inches high.

古文：十月中，夹萄秸篱，以御北风。
现代文：十月中旬，用高粱秆夹上围篱，以抵御北风。
English: In mid-October, a fence was put up with stilts to keep out the north wind.

古文：畦内乱撒麦糠覆树，令梢上厚二三寸止。
现代文：畦中随便撒上些麦糠，将树苗覆盖起，使苗的上方的厚度至二三寸为止。
English: Sprinkle some wheat bran in the straw and cover the seedlings, so that the thickness of the top of the seedlings is up to two or three inches.

古文：南方宜微盖。
现代文：南方地区可以稍微盖些便可。
English: The southern region can be covered a little more easily.

古文：至谷雨前后，手爬去麦糠，浇之。
现代文：到谷雨节前后，用手将麦糠扒去，灌水。
English: Around the time of the Mid-Autumn Festival, the wheat stalks should be removed by hand and watered.

古文：次冬，封盖亦如此。
现代文：下一年冬季，亦依照此法将树苗覆盖。
English: The following winter, the tree seedlings will also be covered in accordance with this law.

古文：二年之后，三月中，带土移栽。
现代文：两年过后，在三月中旬，即可带着土移栽。
English: After two years, in mid-March, you can start transplanting with soil.

古文：先撅区，用粪土相合内区中，水调成稀泥，植栽于内。拥土令区满，下水，塌实。
现代文：先掘好坑，用粪同土拌匀壅入坑中，下水搅拌成稀泥，把小苗栽植进去，用土将坑填满，灌水使虚土塌下变实。
English: First, dig a good pit, mix the manure with the soil and pour it into the pit, stir the sewage into a thin mud, plant the seedlings into it, fill the pit with soil, and pour water to make the loose soil collapse and solidify.

古文：无用杵筑脚踏。
现代文：不要用杵捣和脚踏。
English: Don't use a pestle and mortar.

古文：次日，有裂缝处，以脚蹑合。
现代文：第二天发现有裂缝的地方，用脚蹑过使弥合严实。
English: The next day, he found a crack and used his foot to scrape it to make sure it was properly closed.

古文：常浇令湿。
现代文：常浇水使保持湿润。
English: Water often to keep it moist.

古文：至十月，祛倒，以土覆藏，毋使露树。至春，去土。
现代文：入十月，将树苗弯倒，用土覆盖，不要让树苗露出土外。
English: In October, bend the tree seedlings over and cover them with soil. Do not let the seedlings come out of the soil.

古文：次年不须覆。
现代文：到春天，再将土去掉。第二年便不用再覆盖。
English: In the spring, remove the soil, and the next year there is no need to cover it again.

古文：栽大树者，于三月中移；广留根土，谓如一丈树，留土方二三尺；地远移者二尺五寸。
现代文：移栽大树时，在三月中旬移。应当多带根周围的陈土，例如树高一丈，便应带二三方尺土，移往远处的带土二尺五寸。
English: When transplanting a large tree, move it in mid-March. The old soil around the roots should be brought up. For example, if the tree is tall, it should be brought up with two or three feet of soil, and moved to a distant place with two feet and five inches of soil.

古文：一丈五尺树，留土三尺或三尺五寸。
现代文：一丈五尺高的树，带土三尺或者三尺五寸。
English: A five-foot-tall tree with three feet or three feet and five inches of soil.

古文：用草绳缠束根土。
现代文：用草绳将根土缠捆结实。
English: Use grass ropes to bind the roots tightly.

古文：树大者，从下剸去枝三二层。树记南北。
现代文：假如树很大，可将下面的两三层树枝剸去。
English: If the tree is large, remove the lower two or three layers of branches.

古文：运至区所，栽如前法。
现代文：要记住树原来的南北方向。运到掘好坑的地方，依照前法栽植。
English: It is necessary to remember the original north-south direction of the tree. Transport it to the place where the pit is dug, and plant it according to the previous method.

古文：桧引：种如松法。
现代文：桧：种植桧的方法，和种松法相同。
English: Loquat: The method of growing loquat is the same as that of growing pine.

古文：插枝者，二三月桧芽孽动时，先熟劚黄土地成畦，下水饮畦一遍，渗定，再下水。
现代文：采用扦插法繁殖的，二三月间桧树的芽孽萌动时，先将黄土地深剧熟柔，调治成畦；浇水透灌一遍，水渗下后，再灌一次水。
English: When the buds of eucalyptus propagated by cuttings germinate in February and March, the loess is first deep-dried and softened to form cocoons; watering is done once, and after the water seeps down, it is watered again.

古文：候成泥，将斫下细如小指桧枝，长一尺五寸许，下削成马耳状，先以杖刺泥成孔，插桧枝于孔中，深五七寸以上。
现代文：等畦子变成泥，把砍下的如同小指粗细的桧树枝条，截成约一尺五寸长，下端斜削成马耳形；先用木棒在泥上刺成小孔，然后将桧枝插入孔内，孔深约在五或七寸以上。
English: When the stubble has turned to mud, the branches of the eucalyptus tree, which are as thin as a little finger, are cut down to a length of about one foot and five inches, and the lower end is cut diagonally into a malt shape. First, a small hole is made in the mud with a wooden stick, and then the eucalyptus branch is inserted into the hole, with a hole depth of about five or seven inches.

古文：栽宜稠密，常浇令润泽。
现代文：扦插应稠密些。常浇水，保持畦中湿润。
English: The bushing should be dense. Water frequently and keep the middle of the bush moist.

古文：上搭短棚蔽日，至冬换作暖荫，次年二三月去之。
现代文：畦上架搭矮棚，遮蔽阳光。冬天，将矮棚撤去，另作暖荫，来年二三月去掉。
English: In winter, remove the low canopy and make another warm shade, and remove it in February and March next year.

古文：候树高移栽，如松柏法。
现代文：等到树长高后再行移栽，如同移植松柏树法。
English: Wait for the tree to grow tall before transplanting, just like the transplanted pine tree method.

