古文：起阏逢涒滩，尽旃蒙作噩十月，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起阏逢涒滩，尽旃蒙作噩十月，凡一年有奇。
English: Every year is special, from the first day of spring to the last day of October.

古文：庄宗光圣神闵孝皇帝中同光二年春，正月，甲辰，幽州奏契丹入寇，至瓦桥。
现代文：后唐庄宗同光二年春季，正月，甲辰，幽州上奏说契丹人入侵，到了瓦桥。
English: Later, in the spring of the second year of Tang Zhuang Zongguang, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in the first month of the year, in

古文：以天平军节度使李嗣源为北面行营都招讨使，陕州留后霍彦威副之，宣徽使李绍宏为监军，将兵救幽州。
现代文：后唐帝任命天平军节度使李嗣源为北面行营都招讨使，陕州留后霍彦威为副招讨使，宣徽使李绍宏为监军，让他们率军援救幽州。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor appointed Li Shiyuan as the envoy of the Tianping Army to the north, and Huo Yanwei as the deputy envoy after staying in Shaanxi Province. He also appointed Li Shaohong as the supervisor of the army, and let them lead the army to rescue Yuzhou.

古文：孔谦复言于郭崇韬曰： 首座相公万机事繁，居第且远，租庸簿书多留滞，宜更图之。 
现代文：孔谦又对郭崇韬说： 首座相公豆卢革日理万机，事务繁忙，而且居住的地方离朝廷很远，租庸簿册等积压很多，应当另外选择人来充当租庸使。 
English: Kong Qian also said to Guo Chongtao: The first-ranked official, Lu Ge, is a day-to-day manager, he is busy with affairs, and his place of residence is far away from the imperial court. There are a lot of backlogs of rent-a-yong books and other books. It is necessary to choose another person to act as a rent-a-yong envoy.

古文：豆卢革尝以手书假省库钱数十万，谦以手书示崇韬，崇韬微以讽革。
现代文：当时，豆卢革亲手写借条向省库借钱数十万，孔谦拿豆卢革亲手写的借条给郭崇韬看，郭崇韬稍微批评了一下豆卢革。
English: At that time, Zhu Ruge personally wrote an IOU to borrow hundreds of thousands of yuan from the provincial treasury. Kong Qian took the IOU personally written by Zhu Ruge to Guo Chongyao. Guo Chongyao slightly criticized Zhu Ruge.

古文：革惧，奏请崇韬专判租庸，崇韬固辞。
现代文：豆卢革感到害怕，上奏请求郭崇韬专管租庸事务，郭崇韬坚决辞让。
English: To Lu Ge felt scared, and requested Guo Chongyao to be in charge of the rent affairs. Guo Chongyao resolutely refused.

古文：上曰： 然则谁可者？ 
现代文：后唐帝问说： 那么谁可以呢？ 
English: Then Emperor Tang asked, "Then who can do it?"

古文：崇韬曰： 孔谦虽久典金谷，若遽委大任，恐不叶物望，请复用张宪。 
现代文：郭崇韬回答说： 孔谦虽然管理金谷事务时间较长，但如果急急忙忙委此大任，恐怕不孚众望，请再度起用张宪。 
English: Guo Chongyao replied: Although Kong Qian has been managing the Jingu affairs for a long time, if he hastily assigns such a big task, I am afraid it will not meet the expectations of the public. Please re-appoint Zhang Xian.

古文：帝即命召之。
现代文：后唐帝立即下令召见张宪。
English: Afterwards, Emperor Tang immediately ordered to summon Zhang Xian.

古文：谦弥失望。
现代文：孔谦更加失望。
English: Kong Qian was greatly disappointed.

古文：岐王闻帝入洛，内不自安，遣其子行军司马彰义节度使兼侍中继严入贡，始上表称臣。
现代文：岐王听说后唐帝进入洛阳，内心感到不安，于是派遣他的儿子行军司马彰义节度使兼侍中李继向后唐帝进贡，开始上表称臣。
English: When King Qi heard that Emperor Hou Tang had entered Luoyang, he felt uneasy, so he sent his son, Sima Zhaoyi Jiedu, who was an envoy and an aide-de-camp, to pay tribute to Emperor Hou Tang, and began to praise him.

古文：帝以其前朝耆旧，与太祖比肩，特加优礼，每赐诏但称岐王而不名。
现代文：后唐帝认为他是前朝旧老，和太祖是同辈人，于是特加厚礼，每次下诏书时只称岐王而不称其名。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor thought that he was the same age as the previous emperor and the great-grandfather, so he added a special courtesy, and each time he issued an edict, he only referred to King Qi without mentioning his name.

古文：庚戌，加继严兼中书令，遣还。
现代文：庚戌，加封李继为中书令，并把他送回去。
English: Geng Yao sealed Li Jie as a Chinese envoy and sent him back.

古文：敕： 内官不应居外，应前朝内官及诸道监军并私家先所畜者，不以贵贱，并遣诣阙。 
现代文：后唐帝下敕： 宦官不应在外面居留，前朝宦官以及各道监军和私人家里所养的人，不论贵贱，一律遣送回朝廷。 
English: After the Tang Dynasty was overthrown: Eunuchs should not stay outside, and all former imperial eunuchs, as well as the overseers of various provinces and the people raised in private homes, no matter how high or low, should be sent back to the imperial court.

古文：时在上左右者已五百人，至是殆及千人，皆给赡优厚，委之事任，以为腹心。
现代文：当时在后唐帝左右已有五百人，到这个时候几乎多达千人。后唐帝都赐给他们优厚的待遇，委派他们担任一定的职务，把他们当作心腹。
English: At that time, there were about five hundred people around the late Tang Dynasty, and by this time there were almost a thousand. The late Tang Dynasty gave them generous treatment, appointed them to certain positions, and treated them as confidants.

古文：内诸司使，自天祐以来以士人代之，至是复用宦者，浸干政事。
现代文：自天以来朝内都用一般官吏代替宦官担任宫内各司使，此时又起用宦官，宦官逐渐干预政事。
English: Since ancient times, the imperial court has replaced eunuchs with ordinary officials to serve as palace envoys. At this time, eunuchs were used again, and eunuchs gradually intervened in political affairs.

古文：既而复置诸道监军，节度使出征或留阙下，军府之政皆监军决之，陵忽主帅，怙势争权，由是籓镇皆愤怒。
现代文：不久又设置各道监军，节度使出去打仗或留在朝廷时，军府的政事都由监军来裁决，他们凌驾在主帅之上，仗势争权夺利，因此各藩镇对他们都十分愤恨。
English: Soon after, provincial supervisors were set up. When the emperor sent troops to go to war or to stay at the imperial court, the political affairs of the military government were decided by the supervisors. They were superior to the commander and fought for power and profit. Therefore, the provinces and towns were very angry with them.

古文：契丹出塞。
现代文：契丹军开出边境。
English: The Khitan army has opened the border.

古文：召李嗣源旋师，命泰宁节度使李绍钦、泽州刺史董璋戍瓦桥。
现代文：后唐帝命令李嗣源率兵回师，命令泰宁节度使李绍钦、泽州刺史董璋驻守在瓦桥。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor ordered Li Siyuan to lead the troops back to the division, and ordered Taining Jiedu to send Li Shaoqin and Zezhou Zhishi Dongqi to garrison in the tile bridge.

古文：李继严见唐甲兵之盛，归，语岐王，岐王益惧。
现代文：李继见后唐军十分强大，回来告诉岐王，岐王更加感到害怕。
English: After Li Jiji saw that the Tang army was very strong, he came back to tell Qi Wang, and Qi Wang was even more afraid.

古文：癸丑，表请正籓臣之礼，优诏不许。
现代文：癸丑，岐王上表请求以藩臣的礼来对待自己，后唐帝下诏没有答应。
English: However, the King of Qi requested that he be treated with the courtesy of a vassal, but the Emperor of Tang did not agree.

古文：孔谦恶张宪之来，言于豆卢革曰： 钱谷细事，一健吏可办耳。
现代文：孔谦不满张宪的到来，于是对豆卢革说： 钱谷这些小事，一个精干的官吏即可以办理。
English: Kong Qian was dissatisfied with the arrival of Zhang Xian, so he said to Doulu Ge: Qian Gu, these small things can be handled by a capable official.

古文：魏都根本之地，顾不重乎！
现代文：魏都是个很重要的地方，怎么能反过来不重视呢？
English: Wei is a very important place, how can we not pay attention to it?

古文：兴唐尹王正言操守有馀，智力不足，必不得已，使之居朝廷，众人辅之，犹愈于专委方面也。 
现代文：兴唐尹王正言品行有余，才能不足，不得已的话，可以让他身居朝廷，大家来辅佐他，还是胜过专门委任他担一方的军政事务。 
English: King Yin of the Tang Dynasty had more than enough words and deeds, but not enough talent. If necessary, he could be allowed to stay in the imperial court. If everyone came to assist him, it would be better than appointing him specifically to take on one side of military and political affairs.

古文：革为之言于崇韬，崇韬乃奏留张宪于东京。
现代文：豆卢革为孔谦在郭崇韬面前推荐王正言，于是郭崇韬上奏请求把张宪留在东京。
English: Kong Qian recommended Wang Zhengyan to Guo Chongyao, so Guo Chongyao requested that Zhang Xian stay in Tokyo.

古文：甲寅，以正方为租庸使。
现代文：甲寅，任命王正言为租庸使。
English: Jia Yin, appointed Wang Zhengyan as the rent yong envoy.

古文：正言昏懦，谦利其易制故也。
现代文：王正言糊涂软弱，孔谦是贪图他容易被控制，才提名他出任租庸使的。
English: Wang Zheng was weak and vacillating, and Kong Qian only nominated him to be the chief of the tributary states because he wanted him to be easily controlled.

古文：李存审奏契丹去，复得新州。
现代文：李存审奏告后唐帝契丹人已经离去，重新得到新州。
English: After Li Cunxuan's report, the Qidan people of Tang Dynasty had already left and regained Xinzhou.

古文：戊午，敕盐铁、度支、户部三司并隶租庸使。
现代文：戊午，后唐帝下敕：盐铁、度支、户部三司一并隶属于租庸使管辖。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 11th year of the 12th year of the 12th year of the 13th year of the 13th year of the 14th year of the 14th year

古文：上遣皇弟存渥、皇子继岌迎太后、太妃于晋阳，太妃曰： 陵庙在此，若相与俱行，岁时何人奉祀！ 
现代文：后唐帝派遣他的弟弟李存渥、他的儿子李继岌到晋阳迎接太后、太妃，太妃说： 祖宗陵庙在这里，如果我们都一起去，每个祭祀的时候谁来这里奉祀祖宗。 
English: Later, the Tang Emperor sent his younger brother Li Cunwu and his son Li Jizhu to Jinyang to meet the Empress Dowager and the Empress Dowager. The Empress Dowager said, "The ancestral mausoleum is here. If we all go together, who will come here to worship the ancestors every time there is a ritual?"

古文：遂留不来。
现代文：于是她留了下来。
English: So she stayed.

古文：太后至，庚申，上出迎于河阳；辛酉，从太后入洛阳。
现代文：太后即将到时，庚申，后唐帝到河阳去迎接；辛酉，后唐帝随从太后一起进入洛阳。
English: When the empress dowager was about to arrive, Emperor Gaoshen went to Hebei to meet her; Emperor Xinran followed the empress dowager to Luoyang.

古文：二月，己巳朔，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：二月，已巳朔，后唐帝到南郊去祭天，同时对全国罪犯实行大赦。
English: In February, Emperor Gaotang went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven, and at the same time, he granted amnesty to all the criminals in the country.

古文：孔谦欲聚敛以求媚，凡赦文所蠲者，谦复征之。
现代文：孔谦打算搜刮民财来讨好后唐帝，凡赦文中免除征收的人，孔谦仍然要向他们征收。
English: Kong Qian planned to collect people's money to please Emperor Hou Tang. Whoever was exempted from collection in the pardon, Kong Qian still had to collect from them.

古文：自是每有诏令，人皆不信，百姓愁怨。
现代文：从此以后，每次后唐帝下发诏令，人们都不相信，百姓们忧愁怨恨。
English: From then on, every time Emperor Tang issued a decree, people did not believe it, and the people were sad and resentful.

古文：郭崇韬初至汴、洛，颇受籓镇馈遗，所亲或谏之，崇韬曰： 吾位兼将相，禄赐巨万，岂藉外财！
现代文：郭崇韬刚到汴梁、洛阳时，接受了很多藩镇给他的馈赠，他的亲信中有人规劝他，郭崇韬说： 我的职位兼将相，俸禄无数，怎么要搜刮外财呢？
English: When Guo Chongyao first arrived in Luoyang and Luolang, he received gifts from many towns. Some of his close friends tried to persuade him. Guo Chongyao said, "My position is that of a general and my salary is countless. How can I collect foreign money?

古文：但以伪梁之季，贿赂成风，今河南籓镇，皆梁之旧臣，主上之仇雠也，若拒，其意能无惧乎！
现代文：只是因为梁朝末期，贿赂成风，现在黄河以南的藩镇官吏都是原来梁朝的旧臣，都是皇帝的仇人，如果拒绝他们，他们心里能不害怕吗？
English: It's just because bribery became popular at the end of the Liang Dynasty, and now the officials of the towns south of the Yellow River are all the former vassals of the Liang Dynasty and enemies of the emperor. If they refuse them, can they not be afraid?

古文：吾特为国家藏之私室耳。 
现代文：我是为国家先收藏在我的家里。 
English: I am the first to collect them in my home for the country.

古文：及将祀南郊，崇韬首献劳军钱十万缗。
现代文：等到后唐帝快要到南郊祭天时，郭崇韬带头贡献慰劳军队的钱十万缗。
English: When Emperor Go-Tang was about to go to the southern suburb to hold a festival, Guo Chongyi took the lead in donating 100,000 baht of money to comfort the troops.

古文：先是，宦官劝帝分天下财赋为内外府，州县上供者入外府，充经费，方镇贡献者入内府，充宴游及给赐左右。
现代文：在此之前，宦官们曾劝说后唐帝把国家的财赋分为内外二府，州县税收上交的入外府，充当国家经费用；方镇贡献的入内府，供皇帝宴席、游玩以及赏赐左右大臣用。
English: Prior to this, the eunuchs had persuaded the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to divide the country's financial endowment into two prefectures at home and abroad. The revenue from the state and county taxes sent to the foreign prefectures would be used as national economic expenses; the revenue from the Fangzhen contributed to the domestic prefectures would be used for the emperor's banquets, entertainment, and rewards to the left and right ministers.

古文：于是外府常虚竭无馀而内府山积。
现代文：这样，外府的费用经常短缺无余，而内府的财赋则堆积如山。
English: As a result, the expenses of the outer prefectures are often insufficient, while the financial endowments of the inner prefectures are piled up.

古文：及有司办郊祀，乏劳军钱，崇韬言于上曰： 臣已倾家所有以所助大礼，愿陛下亦出内府之财以赐有司。 
现代文：等到有关部门去筹办郊祀时，缺乏慰劳军队的费用，郭崇韬对后唐帝说： 我已经把所有的家产拿出来资助郊祀大礼，希望陛下也拿出内府一些钱财来帮助有关部门。 
English: When the relevant departments went to prepare for the suburb worship, the cost of the consolation army was lacking, Guo Chongyi said to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty: I have taken out all my family income to fund the suburb worship ceremony, and I hope that His Majesty will also take out some money from the inner government to help the relevant departments.

古文：上默然久之，曰： 吾晋阳自有储积，可令租庸辇取以相助。 
现代文：后唐帝沉默了好大一会儿说： 我在晋阳自有积蓄，可以让租庸使用车拉点来资助。 
English: After a long moment of silence, Emperor Tang said, "I have my own savings in Jinyang, so I can let the lessees use the car to finance it.

古文：于是取李崇韬私第金帛数十万以益之，军士皆不满望，始怨恨，有离心矣。
现代文：于是在李继韬的住地取了数十万金帛来帮助主管部门。军队士卒们对此很不满意。开始怨恨，并产生了叛离的想法。
English: So they took hundreds of thousands of gold ingots from Li Jizhe's residence to help the authorities. The soldiers were very dissatisfied with this. They began to resent and had the idea of defecting.

古文：河中节度使李继麟请榷安邑、解县盐，每季输省课。
现代文：河中节度使李继麟请求专卖安邑、解县的盐，每季给朝廷送一次盐赋。
English: The Mid-Autumn Festival made Li Jilin request to sell salt exclusively from An'yun and Jiexian, and send salt to the imperial court once a quarter.

古文：己卯，以继麟充制置两池榷盐使。
现代文：已卯，任命李继麟为制置两池榷盐使。
English: Li Jilin has been appointed as the envoy for the construction of two pools of molybdenum and salt.

古文：辛己，进岐王爵为秦王，仍不名、不拜。
现代文：辛巳，进封岐王李茂为秦王，并且允许他朝见时不称名，不下拜。
English: According to Xin, Li Mao, the king of Gui, was the king of Qin, and he was allowed to see the emperor without giving his name or bowing down.

古文：郭崇韬知李绍宏怏怏，乃置内句使，掌句三司财赋，以绍宏为之，冀弭其意，而绍宏终不悦，徒使州县增移报之烦。
现代文：郭崇韬知道李绍宏心中不快，于是设置内句使，掌管考核三司财赋，让李绍宏任内句使，希望消除他的不满，但李绍宏始终不高兴，结果，只是使州县里增加了移报手续的麻烦。
English: Guo Chongzhen knew that Li Shaohong was not happy, so he set up a secretary to be in charge of the assessment of the three departments of finance and let Li Shaohong serve as a secretary, hoping to eliminate his dissatisfaction. However, Li Shaohong was always unhappy. As a result, it only increased the troubles of the transfer procedures in the county.

古文：崇韬位兼将相，复领节旄，以天下为己任，权侔人主，旦夕车马填门。
现代文：郭崇韬位兼将相，又兼任地方节度使，他以天下为已任，其权力和皇帝相近，每天早晚门前的车马都是满满的。
English: Guo Chongzhen was concurrently the commander-in-chief and also the local festival envoy. He was in charge of the whole country, and his power was similar to that of the emperor. Every morning and evening, the chariots and horses in front of the gate were full.

古文：性刚急，遇事辄发，嬖幸侥求，多所摧仰，宦官疾之，朝夕短之于上。
现代文：他的性情刚愎而急躁，遇事易发脾气，后唐帝宠爱的人想求他办事，多数遭到失败。
English: His temperament was obstinate and impetuous, and he was prone to losing his temper in times of trouble. After the Tang Dynasty, people who were favored by the emperor wanted to ask him to do things, but most of them failed.

古文：崇韬扼腕，欲制之不能。
现代文：宦官们很憎恨他，每天在后唐帝那里说他的短处。郭崇韬感到很愤怒，想制服他们但又不能。
English: The eunuchs hated him very much and talked about his shortcomings every day with Emperor Hou Tang. Guo Chongyao felt very angry and wanted to subdue them, but he couldn't.

古文：豆卢革、韦说尝问之曰： 汾阳王本太原人徙华阴，公世家雁门，岂其枝派邪？ 
现代文：豆卢革、韦说曾经问他说： 汾阳王郭子仪本是太原人，后迁到华阴，您世世代代在雁门，难道是他的枝派吗？ 
English: Doulu Ge and Wei said that they once asked him: Guo Zi Yi, the King of Shenyang, was originally from Taiyuan and later moved to Huayin. You have been in the Wild Goose Gate for generations. Is it his branch?

古文：崇韬因曰： 遭乱，亡失谱谍，尝闻先人言，上距汾阳世四耳。 
现代文：郭崇韬因此回答说： 因遭动乱，谱谍丢失，曾经听先人说，上距汾阳王只有四世。 
English: Guo Chongyi therefore replied: Due to the turmoil, the spy was lost. I once heard the ancients say that there was only the fourth generation of the King of Shenyang.

古文：革曰： 然则固从祖也。 
现代文：豆卢革说： 既然如此，那么本是同一祖宗了。 
English: "If that's the case, then it's the same ancestor," said Douluke.

古文：崇韬由是以膏梁自处，多甄别流品，引拔浮华，鄙弃勋旧。有求官者，崇韬曰： 深知公功能，然门地寒素，不敢相用，恐为名流所嗤。 
现代文：从此，郭崇韬以出生高门而悠然自处，同时也重视辨别人的门第，推荐选拔一些华而不实的人，鄙视一些过去有功劳的故旧，有人向郭崇韬请求封官，郭崇韬说： 我很了解你的功绩和才能，但因出身寒门，不敢起用，害怕名流们讥笑。 
English: Since then, Guo Chongyao has been at ease with the fact that he was born into a high-ranking family. At the same time, he attaches importance to distinguishing other people's families, recommends the selection of some flashy people, and despises some old-fashioned people who have meritorious deeds in the past. Some people asked Guo Chongyao to seal the official. Guo Chongyao said: I know your merits and talents very well, but because I was born in a poor family, I dare not use them, afraid of celebrities' ridicule.

古文：由是嬖幸疾之于内，勋旧怨之于外。
现代文：因此，宫廷内皇帝宠幸的人忌恨他，朝廷外过去的功臣们怨恨他。
English: As a result, the emperor's favorites within the court loathed him, and past heroes outside the court resented him.

古文：崇韬屡请以枢密使让李绍宏，上不许；又请分枢密院事归内诸司以轻其权，而宦官谤之不已。
现代文：郭崇韬曾多次请求把枢密使让给李绍宏，后唐帝始终没有答应。他又请求把一部分枢密院的事情分给宦官掌握的内诸司，以此来减轻他的一些权力，但宦官们却没完没了地指责他的过失。
English: Guo Chongzhen had repeatedly requested that the Privy Council be transferred to Li Shaohong, but Emperor Hou did not agree. He also requested that a part of the Privy Council's affairs be assigned to the internal departments controlled by the eunuchs in order to relieve him of some of his powers, but the eunuchs endlessly accused him of negligence.

古文：崇韬郁郁不得志，与所亲谋赴本镇以避之，其人曰： 不可，蛟龙失水，蝼蚁足以制之。 
现代文：郭崇韬感到愁闷不得志，于是和他的亲信们商量准备到本镇去回避。有人说： 不可以。蛟龙离开了水，蝼蚁都可以制服它。 
English: Guo Chongyao felt depressed and discouraged, so he discussed with his close friends to prepare to go to this town to avoid it. Someone said: No. The dragon has left the water, and the ants can subdue it.

古文：先是，上欲以刘夫人为皇后，而有正妃韩夫人在，太后素恶刘夫人，崇韬亦屡谏，上以是不果。
现代文：在此以前，后唐帝打算把刘夫人立为皇后，因有正妃韩夫人在，皇太后平素又恨刘夫人，郭崇韬也曾多次劝说，因此后唐帝没有把刘夫人立为皇后。
English: Prior to this, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty had planned to make Lady Liu the empress. However, the Empress Dowager hated Lady Liu, and Guo Chongyao had tried to persuade her many times. Therefore, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty did not make Lady Liu the empress.

古文：于是所亲说崇韬曰： 公若请立刘夫人为皇后，上必喜。
现代文：于是，亲信们劝郭崇韬说： 您如果请求立刘夫人为皇后，皇帝一定很高兴。
English: As a result, Guo's close confidants urged him, saying, "If you request that Lady Liu be made empress, the emperor will surely be pleased.

古文：内有皇后之助，则伶宦辈不能为患矣。 
现代文：这样，内有皇后的帮助，那些伶宦们就不会成为您的忧患了。 
English: In this way, with the help of the queen, those pimples will not be your concern.

古文：崇韬从之，与宰相帅百官共奏刘夫人宜正位中宫。
现代文：郭崇韬听从了这些人的意见。于是和宰相带领百官一起上奏，请求立刘夫人为中宫皇后。
English: Guo Chongzhen listened to the opinions of these people. Therefore, he and the prime minister led hundreds of officials to play and requested that Mrs. Liu be appointed as the Empress of the Middle Court.

古文：癸未，立魏国夫人刘氏为皇后。
现代文：癸未，后唐帝立魏国夫人刘氏为皇后。
English: Soon after, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty made the Empress of Wei, Lady Liu, the Empress.

古文：皇后生于寒微，既贵，专务蓄财，其在魏州，至于薪苏果茹皆贩鬻之。
现代文：皇后出身很贫寒，等到她显贵以后，专力集蓄财物，她在魏州时，那些柴草果菜都进行贩卖。
English: The empress was born very poor. After she became prominent, she concentrated on accumulating wealth. When she was in Weizhou, she sold all those herbs and vegetables.

古文：及为后，四方贡献皆分为二，一上天子，一上中宫。
现代文：等到立为皇后以后，四方送给朝廷的贡品都分为二份，一份送给皇帝，一份送给中宫。
English: After she became empress, the tributes sent to the imperial court by all four sides were divided into two parts, one for the emperor and one for the middle court.

古文：以是宝货山积，惟用写佛经，施尼师而已。
现代文：因此财宝堆积如山，只用来抄写佛经或馈赠尼师而已。
English: As a result, there is a mountain of treasure, which is only used to copy Buddhist scriptures or to give as gifts to nuns.

古文：是时皇太后诰，皇后教，与制敕交行于籓镇，奉之如一。
现代文：这时，皇太后发的诰令，皇后发的教令，和皇帝发的制敕在藩镇中相互交行，藩镇的官吏们奉之如一。
English: At this time, the imperial edict issued by the empress dowager, the edict issued by the empress, and the imperial edict issued by the emperor intersected with each other in the towns, and the officials of the towns obeyed them as one.

古文：诏蔡州刺史硃勍浚索水，通漕运。
现代文：后唐帝下诏，命令蔡州刺史朱疏浚索水，使索水成为水上运输道路。
English: Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict, ordering Cai Zhou Zhi Zhu to dredge the cable water, so that the cable water became a water transport road.

古文：三月，己亥朔，蜀主宴近臣于怡神亭，酒酣，君臣及宫人皆脱冠露髻，喧哗自恣。
现代文：三月，已亥朔，前蜀主在怡神亭宴请亲近的大臣们，喝酒喝得正高兴时，君主、大臣以及宫人都脱掉了帽子，露出发结，喧哗吵闹，为所欲为。
English: In March, already in the autumn, the former emperor held a banquet for his close ministers at the Yixing Pavilion. While drinking and drinking happily, the monarch, ministers and courtiers all took off their hats, exposed their hair, made a lot of noise and did whatever they wanted.

古文：知制诰京兆李龟祯谏曰： 君臣沉湎，不忧国政，臣恐启北敌之谋。 
现代文：知制诰京兆人李龟祯劝前蜀主说： 君主大臣沉湎于酒，对国家的政事不忧愁，我担心这会促使北面敌人算计我们。 
English: Li Guijuan, the person in charge of the Beijing Zhao, advised the former Shu master, saying: The monarch minister indulges in wine and does not worry about the political affairs of the country. I am afraid that this will cause the enemy in the north to calculate us.

古文：不听。
现代文：前蜀主不听他的规劝。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：乙巳，镇州言契丹将犯塞，诏横海节度使李绍斌、北京左厢马军指挥使李从珂帅骑兵分道备之；天平节度使李嗣源屯邢州。
现代文：乙巳，镇州报告说契丹人将要侵犯边境。后唐帝诏令横海节度使李绍斌、北京左厢马军指挥使李从珂率领骑兵分路防备。命令天平节度使李嗣源驻守在刑州。
English: At this time, Zhenzhou reported that the Khitan were about to invade the border. Later, Emperor Tang issued an order to Li Shaobin, commander of the Beijing Left Wing Horse Army, and Li Zongke, commander of the Beijing Left Wing Horse Army, to prepare a detachment of cavalry. He also ordered the Tianping Festival to station Li Siyuan in Xizhou.

古文：绍斌本姓赵，名行实，幽州人也。
现代文：李绍斌本姓赵，名行实，幽州人。
English: Li Shaobin's real surname is Zhao, his real name is Xing, and he is from Yuzhou.

古文：丙午，加高季兴兼尚书令，时封南平王。
现代文：丙午，加封高季兴兼任尚书令，进封南平王。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Gao Jixing was additionally appointed as Shang Shuling and promoted to Nanping Wang.

古文：李存审自以身为诸将之首，不得预克汴之功，感愤，疾益甚，屡表求入觐，郭崇韬抑而不许。
现代文：李存审自认身为诸将之首，没有得到参与攻克汴梁之功，感到激愤，病情加重，曾多次上表请求朝见皇帝，郭崇韬扣压住不许他入朝。
English: Li Cunxuan considered himself to be the head of the generals and was not given the honor of participating in the conquest of Jiaoliang. He was enraged and his condition worsened. He had repeatedly requested to see the emperor, but Guo Chongzhen held him down and did not allow him to enter the imperial court.

古文：存审疾亟，表乞生睹龙颜，乃许之。
现代文：李存审的病情更加厉害，上表请求在活着的时候能见到后唐帝，因此才答应了他的请求。
English: Li Cunxuan's condition was even more serious. He asked to see Emperor Gaotang while he was still alive, so his request was granted.

古文：初，帝尝与右武卫上将军李存贤手搏，存贤不尽其技，帝曰： 汝能胜我，我当授籓镇。 
现代文：当初，后唐帝曾和右武卫上将军李存贤空手搏击，李存贤没有使出全部技能，后唐帝说： 你如能胜我，当授予你以节度使之职。 
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gaotang had a hand-to-hand combat with the right wing general Li Cunxian. Li Cunxian did not use all of his skills. Emperor Gaotang said: "If you can defeat me, you should be awarded the title of Cao Cao."

古文：存贤乃奉诏，仅仆帝而止。
现代文：于是李存贤按照他说的，但仅把他击得向前倾跌就住了手。
English: So Li Cunxian did as he said, but only knocked him forward and stopped his hand.

古文：及许存审入觐，帝以存贤为卢龙行军司马，旬日除节度使，曰： 手搏之约，吾不食言矣。 
现代文：等到允许李存审入见时，后唐帝任命李存贤为卢龙行军司马，过了十几天任命他为节度使，说： 手搏之约，我不能说话不算数。 
English: When Li Cunxu was allowed to enter the court, the late Tang Emperor appointed Li Cunxian as the Sima of the Lulong March. After a dozen days, he appointed him as the festival envoy, saying: "In hand-to-hand combat, I can't speak without counting."

古文：庚戌，幽州奏契丹寇新城。
现代文：庚戌，幽州上奏说契丹人侵犯新城。
English: Geng Zang, Yuzhou Shangsuo said that the Khitan invaded Xincheng.

古文：勋臣畏伶宦之谗，皆不自安，蕃汉内外马步副总管李嗣源求解兵柄，帝不许。
现代文：有功之臣都害怕伶宦毁谤，内心都感到不安。蕃汉内外马步副总管李嗣源请求解除兵权，后唐帝没有答应他。
English: Li Siyuan, the vice-governor of Ma Bu in and out of Han, requested to be relieved of his military powers, but Emperor Tang did not agree to this.

古文：自唐末丧乱，搢绅之家或以告赤鬻于族姻，遂乱昭穆，至有舅叔拜甥、侄者，选人伪滥者众。
现代文：自从唐末衰乱以来，士大夫家有人将作官凭证在同族亲戚中出卖，于是乱了礼教，甚至有舅舅拜见外甥的、叔叔拜见侄儿的。
English: Since the decline at the end of the Tang Dynasty, some members of the Shidafu family have sold their official credentials among their relatives of the same ethnicity, thus disturbing the etiquette. Some uncles have even visited their nephews, and uncles have visited their nephews.

古文：郭崇韬欲革其弊，请令铨司精加考核。
现代文：在候选、候补的人员中，弄虚作假的人很多。郭崇韬想革除这种弊病，请求让吏部严加考核。
English: Among the candidates and alternates, there are a lot of people who cheat and lie. Guo Chongyao wants to eliminate this kind of malady and requests the personnel department to strictly examine them.

古文：时南郊行事官千二百人，注官者才数十人，涂毁告身者十之九。
现代文：当时参加南郊祭天的行事官有一千二百多人，其中正式由吏部注官的才几十个人，涂改委任官职文凭的人占十分之九。
English: At that time, there were more than 1,200 officials who participated in the Nanjiao Festival, of which only a few dozen were officially appointed by the cadre department, and nine out of ten of them had their official diplomas altered.

古文：选人或号哭道路，或馁死逆旅。
现代文：候选、候补官员的人有的在道路上号啕大哭，有的饿死在旅馆。
English: Some of the candidates and alternate officials wailed on the road, while others starved to death in the hotel.

古文：唐室诸陵先为温韬所发，庚申，以工部郎中李途为长安按视诸陵使。
现代文：唐室先祖的陵墓早先被温韬所挖，庚申，任命工部郎中李途为长安按视诸陵使。
English: The mausoleums of the ancestors of the Tang Dynasty were excavated by Wen Xuan earlier, and Goshun appointed Li Tu, the vice-minister of the Ministry of Works, as the chief mausoleum envoy of Chang'an.

古文：皇子继岌代张全义判六军诸卫事。
现代文：皇子继岌代替张全义判六军诸卫事。
English: The prince successively replaced Zhang Quanyi and ordered the six armies to guard the city.

古文：夏，四月，己巳朔，群臣上尊号曰昭文睿武至德光孝皇帝。
现代文：夏季，四月，已巳朔，群臣给后唐帝上尊号曰昭文睿武至德光孝皇帝。
English: In the summer, in April, it was already the new year, and the courtiers gave Emperor Hou Tang the title of "Emperor Zhaowen Raiwu Zhe Deguangxiao."

古文：帝遣客省使李严使于蜀，严盛称帝威德，有混一天下之志。
现代文：后唐帝派遣客省使李严出使前蜀，李严十分夸耀后唐帝的威德，有统一天下的志向。
English: After the Tang Dynasty dispatched the guest province envoy Li Yan to the former Shu, Li Yan was very proud of the virtue of the post-Tang Dynasty and had the ambition to unify the country.

古文：且言硃氏篡窃，诸侯曾无勤王之举。
现代文：而且还说朱氏篡夺政权时，诸侯们却没有一点儿为唐王室尽力的举动。
English: Moreover, he also said that when the Zhu family usurped power, the princes did not make any effort for the Tang royal family.

古文：王宗俦以其语侵蜀，请斩之，蜀主不从。
现代文：王宗俦认为他的话是在攻击前蜀，请求把他斩杀，但前蜀主没有听从他的意见。
English: Wang Zonglu thought that his words were an attack on the former Shu, and asked that he be beheaded, but the former Shu lord did not listen to his advice.

古文：宣徽北院使宋光葆上言： 晋王有凭陵我国家之志，宜选将练兵，屯戍边鄙，积糗粮，治战舰以待之。 
现代文：宣徽北院使宋光葆对前蜀主说： 晋王有进一步逼迫我国的野心，我们应当选将练兵，在边境上驻守军队，积蓄粮，建造战船，以防他来侵略。 
English: Song Guangyao, an envoy of the Northern Court of Xuanhui, said to the former Shu master: "King Jin has the ambition to further persecute our country. We should select a general to train soldiers, station troops on the border, accumulate grain, and build warships to prevent him from invading.

古文：蜀主乃以光葆为梓州观察使，充武德节度留后。
现代文：于是前蜀主任命李光葆为梓州观察使，并充当武德节度留后。
English: As a result, the former Shu master appointed Li Guangyao as the Zizhou observation envoy, and served as the martial arts festival leader.

古文：乙亥，加楚王殷兼尚书令。
现代文：乙亥，封楚王马殷兼任尚书令。
English: Emperor Yihai and King Ma Yin of the State of Chu concurrently served as Shang Shuling.

古文：庚辰，赐前保义留后霍彦威姓名李绍真。
现代文：庚辰，后唐帝赐给原保义留后霍彦威姓名叫李绍真。
English: Geng Chen, the name given to the original Bao Yi by the late Tang Emperor, was Li Shaozhen.

古文：秦忠敬王李茂贞卒，遣奏以其子继严权知凤翔军府事。
现代文：秦忠敬王李茂贞去世，留下奏文，希望任命他的儿子李继代理凤翔军府事。
English: Li Maozhen, the king of Qin Zhongjing, died and left a message, hoping to appoint his son Li Jie to act as Fengxiang's military governor.

古文：初，安义牙将杨立有宠于李继韬，继韬诛，常邑邑思乱。
现代文：当初，巡义牙将杨立很受李继韬宠爱，李继韬被杀以后，杨立经常闷闷不乐，打算叛乱。
English: At first, Yang Li, the inspector of Yigu, was very favored by Li Jizhe. After Li Jizhe was killed, Yang Li was often depressed and planned to rebel.

古文：会发安义兵三千戍涿州，立谓其众曰： 前此潞兵未尝戍边，今朝廷驱我辈投之绝塞，盖不欲置之潞州耳。
现代文：正巧这时朝廷准备派三千安义兵去戍守涿州，杨立对他的士卒们说： 在此之前，潞州的士卒从没有戍守过边境，现在朝廷把我们这些人驱赶到很远的边塞去，大概是不想让我们在潞州了。
English: Coincidentally, it was at this time that the imperial court was preparing to send three thousand volunteers to defend Zhangzhou. Yang Li said to his soldiers: Before this, the soldiers of Zhangzhou had never defended the border. Now the imperial court has driven us people to a faraway frontier town, and probably does not want us in Zhangzhou.

古文：与其暴骨沙场，不若据城自守，事成富贵，不成为群盗耳。 
现代文：我们与其死在沙漠边塞，不如据城自守，事情如果成功了，大家就会富贵起来，事情如果不成功，我们就集合起来做盗贼。 
English: Instead of dying in the desert at the border, we'd better defend ourselves in the city. If things go well, we'll all be rich. If things don't go well, we'll band together and become thieves.

古文：因聚噪攻子城东门，焚掠市肆；节度副使李继珂、监军张弘祚弃城走，立自称留后，遣将士表求旌节。
现代文：因此聚众鼓噪，攻打子城的东门，烧掠街上的商店。节度副使李继珂、监军张宏祚弃城逃走，杨立自称为留后，并派遣他的将士们上表请求后唐帝发给留后应持有的旌节信物。
English: Therefore, the crowd gathered and made a lot of noise, attacked the east gate of the city, and burned and looted the shops on the street. Li Jike, the deputy commander of the festival, and Zhang Hong, the supervisor of the troops, abandoned the city and fled. Yang Li claimed to stay behind, and sent his soldiers to the table to request the Emperor of Tang to give him the festival tokens that he should keep behind.

古文：诏以天平节度使李嗣源为招讨使，武宁节度使李绍荣为部署，帐前都指挥使张廷蕴为马步都指挥使以讨之。
现代文：后唐帝下诏任命天平节度使李嗣源为招讨使、武宁节度使李绍荣为部署、帐前都指挥使张廷蕴为马步都指挥使前去讨伐杨立。
English: After the Tang Emperor issued the edict, he appointed Tianping Jiedu to send Li Siyuan as the summoning envoy, Wu Ning Jiedu to send Li Shaorong as the deployment envoy, Zhecuan Du commander to send Zhang Tingyun as Mabu Du commander to go to fight against Yang Li.

古文：孔谦贷民钱，使以贱估偿丝，屡檄州县督之。
现代文：孔谦将钱借贷给百姓，然后让百姓们用低价的丝来偿还贷款，而且经常下发檄文让州县的官吏们来督促。
English: Kong Qian lent money to the people, and then let the people use the low-priced silk to repay the loan, and often sent a letter to the state and county officials to urge them.

古文：翰林学士承旨、权知汴州卢质上言： 梁赵岩为租庸使，举贷诛敛，结怨于人。
现代文：翰林学士承旨、代理汴州知州卢质上书后唐帝说： 梁国的赵岩曾任租庸使，因为他利用借款来向百姓搜刮财物，和百姓们结下怨仇。
English: After Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi, the agent of Zhangzhou Chizhou Lu Qian, wrote a letter, Tang Di said: Zhao Yan of Liang Province was once a rent-a-yong envoy, because he used loans to search for property from the people, and forged a grudge with the people.

古文：陛下革故鼎新，为人除害，而有司未改其所为，是赵岩复生也。
现代文：陛下破旧立新，为民除害，但有关部门没有改掉他们的所作所为，这就像赵岩又复活一样。
English: His Majesty has broken the old and established the new, eliminating harm to the people, but the relevant departments have not changed their actions. This is just like Zhao Yan coming back to life.

古文：今春霜害桑，茧丝甚薄，但输正税，犹惧流移，况益以称贷，人何以堪！
现代文：今年春季因霜寒损害了庄稼，收获的茧丝也很少，只收正税还怕有人逃亡躺税，何况又增加了借贷，百姓怎么能忍受得了。
English: This spring, frost damaged the crops, and the harvest of cocoons was very small. Only the official tax was collected, and there was also the fear that someone would evade the tax, not to mention the increase in borrowing. How could the people bear it?

古文：臣惟事天子，不事租庸，敕旨未颁，省牒频下，愿早降明命！ 
现代文：臣下只侍奉天子，不侍奉租庸使，敕旨还没有颁发，租庸使就频繁地下达文书，希望能够及早颁发明确的命令。 
English: Subordinates only serve the Son of Heaven, and do not serve the tributary messengers. The imperial edict has not yet been issued, and the tributary messengers frequently submit documents, hoping to be able to issue clear orders as early as possible.

古文：帝不报。
现代文：但后唐帝没有答复他。
English: However, Emperor Gaotang did not answer him.

古文：汉主引兵侵闽，屯于汀、漳境上；闽人击之，汉主败走。
现代文：南汉主率兵入侵闽国，军队驻扎在汀州、漳州的边境上。闽人还击，南汉主被击败逃走。
English: The main force of the Southern Han led an invasion of Min, and the army was stationed on the border between Tingzhou and Min. The Min people fought back, and the main force of the Southern Han was defeated and fled.

古文：初，胡柳之役，伶人周匝为梁所得，帝每思之；入汴之日，匝谒见于马前，帝甚喜。
现代文：当初在胡柳战役中，优伶周匝被梁人抓获，后唐帝经常思念他。到后唐军进入汴梁的那天，周匝在马前拜见后唐帝，后唐帝十分高兴。
English: At the beginning, in the Battle of Hu Liang, the superior general Zhou Qi was captured by the Liang people, and the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty often missed him. On the day that the Later Tang Army entered the Liang, Zhou Qi met the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty in front of the horse, and the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty was very happy.

古文：匝涕泣言曰： 臣所以得生全者，皆梁教坊使陈俊、内园栽接使储德源之力也，愿就陛下乞二州以报之。 
现代文：周匝在后唐帝面前哭诉说： 臣之所以能够安全活到今天，全靠梁教坊使陈俊、内园栽接使储德源的帮助，希望陛下能把两个州封赏给他们，以此来报答他们的恩情。 
English: Zhou Yu cried in front of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty and said, "The reason why I have been able to live safely to this day is entirely due to the help of Liang Qifang's envoy Chen Jun and Naiyuan's envoy Zhu Deyuan. I hope that His Majesty can reward them with the two states as a way to repay their kindness."

古文：帝许之。
现代文：后唐帝答应了他的请求。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：郭崇韬谏曰： 陛下所与共取天下者，皆英豪忠勇之士。
现代文：郭崇韬劝后唐帝说： 陛下要封赏的应该是那些和你共同夺取天下的人，这些人都是英豪忠勇之士。
English: Guo Chongyong said: The people who conquered the world together with His Majesty are all heroic, loyal and brave.

古文：今大功始就，封赏未及一人，而先以伶人为刺史，恐失天下心。 
现代文：今天大功刚刚告成，这些人中还没有一个得到封赏，而首先任命一个优伶为刺史，恐怕要失掉天下人们的心。 
English: Today, the great deed has just been completed. None of these people have been awarded, and the first to appoint a distinguished person to be a historian is likely to lose the hearts of people around the world.

古文：以是不行。
现代文：因此周匝的建议没有实行。
English: Therefore, Zhou Ye's suggestion was not implemented.

古文：逾年，伶人屡以为言，帝谓崇韬曰： 吾已许周匝矣，使吾惭见此三人。
现代文：一年之后，优伶经常提起这件事，后唐帝对郭崇韬说： 我已经答应过周匝，我感到很不好意思见到这三个人。
English: A year later, Youyou often mentioned this matter, and Emperor Hou said to Guo Chongyao: I have already promised Zhou Ye, I feel very embarrassed to see these three people.

古文：公言虽正，然当为我屈意行之。 
现代文：你所讲的都很正确，但还应当看在我的面子上委屈执行一下。 
English: Although you are right, it should be enforced for my grievance.

古文：五月，壬寅，以俊为景州刺史，德源为宪州刺史。
现代文：五月，壬寅，后唐帝任命陈俊为景州刺史，储德源为宪州刺史。
English: In May, Emperor Renzhong of the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Chen Jun as the historian of Jingzhou and Zhu Deyuan as the historian of Gansu.

古文：时亲军有从帝百战未得刺史者，莫不愤叹。
现代文：当时亲军中有跟从后唐帝转战南北而没有封得刺史的人无不愤怒叹息。
English: At that time, there were angry sighs among the pro-military people who followed the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to fight in the north and south and did not get the seal of history.

古文：乙巳，右谏议大夫薛昭文上疏，以为： 诸道僭窃者尚多，征伐之谋，未可遽息。
现代文：乙巳，右谏议大夫薛昭文给后唐帝上疏，认为： 诸道对抗朝廷的人很多，征伐的手段不可一下子止息不用。
English: At this time, Xue Zhaowen, the right-hand man of the imperial council, gave the following advice to the Emperor of Tang: There are many people who oppose the imperial court, and the means of conquest should not be stopped all at once.

古文：又，士卒久从征伐，赏给未丰，贫乏者多，宜以四方贡献及南郊羡馀，更加颁赉。
现代文：此外，士卒们长时间出征作战，赏给不丰厚，很多人贫穷，应当把各方的贡品以及为南郊祭祀收徼的杂税赏赐给他们。
English: In addition, the soldiers who have been fighting for a long time and have not been rewarded well, and many are poor, should be given the tributes of all parties and the miscellaneous tax rewards collected for the southern suburb.

古文：又，户口流亡者，宜宽徭薄赋以安集之。又，土木不急之役，宜加裁省。又请择隙地牧马，勿使践京畿民田。 
现代文：再者，黄河以南的各路军队都是过去梁国的精锐部队，恐怕那些和朝廷对抗的藩镇官吏们会偷偷地用丰厚的利益来引诱他们，朝廷应当加以裁减。最后，请求选择一些没用的空地去放马，不要使马践踏了京畿的民田。 
English: Furthermore, all the armies south of the Yellow River were the elite troops of Liang Province in the past. I am afraid that the officials of the provinces and towns who opposed the imperial court will secretly lure them with rich profits. The imperial court should be reduced. Finally, it is requested to choose some useless open spaces to release horses, and not let the horses trample the people's fields in Gyeonggi.

古文：皆不从。
现代文：后唐帝都没有听从他的意见。
English: None of them gave their consent.

古文：戊申，蜀主遣李严还。
现代文：戊申，前蜀主派李严回归后唐。
English: Boshin, the former Shu lord sent Li Yan back to Tang.

古文：初，帝因严入蜀，令以马市宫中珍玩，而蜀法禁锦绮珍奇不得入中国，其粗恶者乃听入中国，谓之 入草物 。
现代文：当初，后唐帝派李严进入前蜀，让他用马交换前蜀宫中珍贵的玩赏器物，但前蜀法规定，蜀国上好的丝织品不能流入中原地区，做工比较粗劣的可以让流入中原地区，当地人称 入草物 。
English: At first, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty sent Li Yan to Qianshu and asked him to use horses to exchange the precious play objects in the Qianshu Palace. However, the Qianshu Law stipulated that the best silk fabrics in Shu could not flow into the Central Plains, but the inferior workmanship could flow into the Central Plains. The locals called them weeds.

古文：严还，以闻，帝怒曰： 王衍宁免为入草之人乎！ 
现代文：李严回到后唐后，把这些情况告诉了后唐帝，后唐帝很生气地说： 王衍难道可以免为入草之人吗？ 
English: After Li Yan returned to the Later Tang Dynasty, he told these circumstances to the Later Tang Emperor. The Later Tang Emperor was very angry and said: Can Wang Yan be exempted from being drafted?

古文：严因言于帝曰： 衍童騃荒纵，不亲政务，斥远故老，昵比小人。
现代文：李严于是对后唐帝说： 王衍像小孩子一样愚，昏乱放纵，不亲自处理政事，把一些过去的老人排斥得很远，亲近小人。
English: Li Yan then said to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty: Wang Yan is as stupid as a child, confused and indulgent, does not personally deal with political affairs, excludes some old people from the past, and is close to villains.

古文：其用事之臣王宗弼、宋光嗣等，谄谀专恣，黩货无厌，贤愚易位，刑赏紊乱，君臣上下专以奢淫相尚。
现代文：他用的那些掌权的大臣王宗弼、宋光嗣等，靠奉承皇帝而专横跋扈，贪得无厌，贤愚颠倒，刑赏混乱，君臣上下相互都崇尚奢侈荒淫。
English: The ministers he used, including Wang Zongyao and Song Guangzhi, who held power, relied on flattery of the emperor to be imperious, greed was insatiable, wisdom and folly were inverted, punishments and rewards were chaotic, and the monarchs and ministers advocated luxury and debauchery to each other.

古文：以臣观之，大兵一临，瓦解土崩，可翘足而待也。 
现代文：以我来看，大兵一来，他们就会土崩瓦解，我们可以在极短的时间内把蜀国得到。 
English: As far as I'm concerned, once the soldiers arrive, they will fall apart, and we can take over Shu in a very short time.

古文：帝深以为然。
现代文：后唐帝深感他讲得对。
English: Later, Emperor Tang deeply felt that he was right.

古文：帝以潞州叛故，庚戌，诏天下州镇无得修城浚隍，悉毁防城之具。
现代文：后唐帝因为潞州反叛的缘故，庚戌，下诏命令全国各州镇不得擅自修筑深沟城垒，全部拆毁原来的防城设施。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, because of the Bozhou Rebellion, Emperor Genghis Khan issued an edict ordering all towns in the country not to build deep ditch fortresses without authorization, and to completely demolish the original city defense facilities.

古文：壬子，新宣武节度使兼中书令、蕃汉马步总管李存审卒于幽州。
现代文：壬子，新上任的宣武节度使兼中书令、蕃汉马步总管李存审在幽州去世。
English: In addition, Li Cunxin, the newly appointed Xuanwu Jiedu Envoy and General Secretary of the CPC Central Committee, died in Yuzhou.

古文：存审出于寒微，常戒诸子曰： 尔父少提一剑去乡里，四十年间，位极将相，其间出万死获一生者非一，破骨出镞者凡百馀。 
现代文：李存审出身贫寒，他经常告诫孩子们说： 你们的父亲小时候拿着一把剑离开了家乡，四十多年来，爵位一直升到将相，在这期间，死里逃生不是一两次，剖开头骨取出箭头就有一百多次。 
English: Li Cunxin was born poor, and he often admonished his children: Your father took a sword and left his hometown when he was a child. For more than forty years, he was promoted to the rank of general. During this time, he escaped death not once or twice, but more than a hundred times by cutting open his skull and removing the arrow.

古文：因授以所出镞，命藏之，曰： 尔曹生于膏梁，当知尔父起家如此也。 
现代文：因而把从身上取出的箭头交给了他的孩子们，命令他们把箭头收藏起来，说： 你们生活在富裕的家庭里，应当知道你们的父亲起家是很不容易的。
English: So he gave the arrows taken from his body to his children, ordered them to collect the arrows, and said: You live in a wealthy family, you should know that your father's beginning was not easy.

古文：幽州言契丹将入寇，甲寅，以横海节度使李绍斌充东北面行营招讨使，将大军渡河而北。
现代文：幽州方面报告说契丹人又将入侵，甲寅，命令横海节度使李绍斌出任东北面行营招讨使，并让他率领大军渡过黄河向北进军。
English: The Yuzhou side reported that the Khitan would invade again, and Gao Yin ordered the Henghai Sect to appoint Li Shaobin as the envoy to the northeast, and let him lead a large army across the Yellow River to march north.

古文：契丹屯幽州东南城门之外，虏骑充斥，馈运多为所掠。
现代文：契丹的人军队驻扎在幽州东南城门外，到处都是敌人的骑兵，他们所用的粮草大多是从当地抢夺来的。
English: The Khitan army was stationed outside the southeast city gate of Yuzhou. The enemy cavalry was everywhere, and most of the grain and grass they used was looted from the local area.

古文：壬戌，以李继严为凤翔节度使。
现代文：壬戌，任命李继为凤翔节度使。
English: Ren Zheng appointed Li Jie as Feng Xiang's regent.

古文：乙丑，以权知归义留后曹义金为节度使。
现代文：乙丑，任命代理归义留后曹义金为归义节度使。
English: Second, after appointing an agent to remain in Guiyi, Cao Yijin became Guiyi's delegate.

古文：时瓜、沙与吐蕃杂居，义金遣使间道入贡，故命之。
现代文：当时，瓜州、沙州的人和吐蕃人杂居在一起，曹义金派遣使者从小道上朝入贡，所以后唐帝才任命他为节度使。
English: At that time, the people of Guazhou and Shazhou and the people of Tubo lived together. Cao Yijin sent an envoy from the trail to pay tribute, so the later Tang Dynasty appointed him as the festival envoy.

古文：李嗣源大军前锋至潞州，日已暝；泊军方定，张廷蕴帅麾下壮士百馀辈逾堑坎城而上，守者不能御，即斩关延诸军入。
现代文：李嗣源率领的部队的前锋到达潞州时已经夕阳西下。军队刚刚安顿好，张廷蕴率军中一百多名壮士越过沟坎登城，守城的人无力抵抗，他们斩关，迎接诸军进入城内。
English: The sun had already set when the vanguard of the troops led by Li Siyuan arrived in Zhangzhou. The army had just settled down, and Zhang Tingyun led more than a hundred strong men of the army across the ditch to Kandeng City. The defenders of the city were powerless to resist, and they cut off the pass to meet the troops entering the city.

古文：比明，嗣源及李绍荣至，城已下矣，嗣源等不悦。
现代文：等到天亮的时候，李嗣源和李绍荣到达潞州，潞州城已经被攻下，李嗣源等不大高兴。
English: By dawn, Li Siyuan and Li Shaorong arrived in Ganzhou. Ganzhou City had been captured, and Li Siyuan was not happy.

古文：丙寅，嗣源奏潞州平。
现代文：丙寅，李嗣源上奏皇帝说潞州已经平定。
English: Cui Yin and Li Siyuan reported to the emperor that Zhangzhou had been pacified.

古文：六月，丙子，磔杨立及其党于镇国桥。
现代文：六月，丙子，在镇国桥杀死了杨立及其同党。
English: In June, Cixi killed Yang Li and his comrades in the town of Guoxiao.

古文：潞州城池高深，帝命夷之。
现代文：潞州城高池深，后唐帝命令夷平。
English: Zhangzhou Castle was deep in water, but Emperor Tang ordered it to be razed to the ground.

古文：丙戌，以武宁节度使李绍荣为归德节度使、同平章事，留宿卫，宠遇甚厚。
现代文：丙戌，后唐帝任命武宁节度使李绍荣为归德节度使、同平章事，并留他在宫中，担任警卫，给他的待遇十分丰厚。
English: Later, Emperor Tang appointed Li Shaorong as the envoy of the festival of returning to Germany, and kept him in the palace as a guard, giving him very rich treatment.

古文：帝或时与太后，皇后同至其家。
现代文：后唐帝有时和太后、皇后一起到他家串门。
English: Later Tang emperors would sometimes visit his house together with the empress dowager and empress.

古文：帝有幸姬，色美，尝生子矣，刘后妒之。
现代文：后唐帝有个宠姬，长得很漂亮，曾生过一个儿子，刘皇后很嫉妒她。
English: Later, Emperor Tang had a favorite concubine. She was very beautiful and had given birth to a son. Empress Liu was very jealous of her.

古文：会绍荣丧妻，一日，侍禁中，帝问绍荣： 汝复娶乎？
现代文：这时李绍荣的妻子正好去世，一天，绍荣在宫中侍奉后唐帝，后唐帝就问绍荣说： 你还再娶妻子吗？
English: At this time, Li Shaorong's wife just passed away. One day, Shaorong was serving the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty in the palace. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty asked Shaorong, "Are you going to marry another wife?"

古文：为汝求婚。 
现代文：我为你去求婚。 
English: I'm going to propose to you.

古文：后因指幸姬曰： 大家怜绍荣，何不以此赐之！ 
现代文：皇后因此就指着后唐帝的宠姬对后唐帝说： 皇上很可怜绍荣，为什么不把小妾赏赐给他呢？ 
English: For this reason, the empress pointed to Emperor Dowager Tang's favorite concubine and said to Emperor Dowager Tang: The emperor is very sorry for Shao Rong, why not reward him with a concubine?

古文：帝难言不可，微许之。
现代文：皇帝难以拒绝，只是含含糊糊的答应了。
English: It was difficult for the emperor to refuse, but he vaguely agreed.

古文：后趣绍荣拜谢，比起，顾幸姬，已肩舆出宫矣。
现代文：皇后赶快让李绍荣拜谢皇帝，第二天一早，后唐帝去看他的宠姬时，已经被轿子抬出了皇宫。
English: The empress quickly let Li Shaorong bow to the emperor. The next morning, when Emperor Hou Tang went to see his favorite princess, she was already carried out of the palace by a palanquin.

古文：帝为之托疾不食者累日。
现代文：后唐帝因为这件事情托病，好几天都没吃饭。
English: Emperor Hou Tang feigned illness because of this matter and did not eat for several days.

古文：壬辰，以天平节度使李嗣源为宣武节度使，代李存审为蕃汉内外马步总管。
现代文：壬辰，后唐帝任命天平节度使李嗣源为宣武节度使，并代替李存审为藩汉内外马步总管。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Jinchen appointed Tianping Jiedu to make Li Siyuan the Xuanwu Jiedu envoy, and replaced Li Cunxuan as the general manager of horse and buggy in and out of the Han Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，壬寅，蜀以礼部书许寂为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：秋，七月，壬寅，前蜀主任命礼部尚书许寂为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Ren'in, the former Lord of Shu appointed the ceremonial secretary, Shangshu Xujia, as the attendant of the middle secretary and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：孔谦复短王正言于郭崇韬，又厚赂伶宦，求租庸使，终不获，意怏怏，癸卯，表求解职。
现代文：孔谦又在郭崇韬面前说王正言的坏话，同时用丰厚的礼物来贿赂那些伶人宦官，想求得租庸使，最终还是没有得到，心里很不高兴。
English: Kong Qian also said bad words about Wang Zhengyan in front of Guo Chongyi, and at the same time used rich gifts to bribe those eunuchs. He wanted to get a eunuch, but in the end he did not get it, and he was very unhappy.

古文：帝怒，以为避事，将置于法，景进救之，得免。
现代文：癸卯，他给后唐帝上表请求解除他的职务，后唐帝看了很生气，认为他想逃避事务，准备以法处理他，景进到后唐帝面前求情解救，才使他免于处分。
English: Unexpectedly, he sent a petition to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty asking to be relieved of his duties. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty looked very angry, thinking that he wanted to evade affairs and was prepared to deal with him by law. It was only when Jingjin came to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to ask for forgiveness and relief that he was exempted from punishment.

古文：梁所决河连年为曹、濮患，甲辰，命右监门上将军娄继英督汴、滑兵塞之。
现代文：当初后梁把黄河的堤坝打开，连续几年使曹州、濮州受害，甲辰，后唐帝命令右监门上将军娄继英督率汴州、滑州的士卒，把决口堵住。
English: At the beginning, Hou Liang opened the dam of the Yellow River, causing damage to Caozhou and Zhangzhou for several years in a row. In Jia Chen, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered the Inspector General of the Right Gate, Zou Jiying, to lead the officers of Zhangzhou and Slanting to block the breach.

古文：未几，复坏。
现代文：但没过多久，河堤又被冲坏了。
English: But it wasn't long before the levee was breached again.

古文：庚申，置威塞军于新州。
现代文：庚申，在新州设置了威武军。
English: Goshun, set up a powerful military force in Xinzhou.

古文：契丹恃其强盛，遣使就帝求幽州以处卢文进。
现代文：契丹人依仗自己的强大，派遣使者到后唐帝那里请求用幽州安置卢文进。
English: Relying on their own strength, the Khitan sent an envoy to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to request that Lu Wenjin be resettled in Yuzhou.

古文：时东北诸夷皆役属契丹，惟渤海未服；契丹主谋入寇，恐渤海掎其后，乃先举兵击渤海之辽东，遣其将秃馁及卢文进据营、平等州以扰燕地。
现代文：当时，东北地区各夷族都已经归属契丹，并受其役使，只有勃海国还没有降服。契丹主谋划入侵后唐，又怕勃海国人从后面截获他们，于是先发兵攻打勃海国的辽东地区，并派遣其将领秃馁和卢文进占据营州、平州等地来干扰后唐的燕地。
English: At that time, all the Yi people in the northeastern region had already belonged to the Khitan and were in its service, and only the Bohai Kingdom had not yet surrendered. The Khitan planned to invade the Later Tang, but they were afraid that the Bohai people would intercept them from behind, so they attacked the Liaodong region of the Later Tang first, and sent their generals, Zhengqi and Lu Wenjin, to occupy Yingzhou, Pingzhou and other places to interfere with the Yan territory of the Later Tang.

古文：八月，戊辰，蜀主以右定远军使王宗锷为招讨马步使，帅二十一军屯洋州；乙亥，以长直马军使林思谔为昭武节度使，戍利州以备唐。
现代文：八月，戊辰，前蜀主任命右定远军使王宗锷为招讨马步使，率领二十一军驻扎在洋州。乙亥，任命长直马军使林思锷为昭武节度使，率兵戍守在利州，防备后唐军。
English: In August, Wu Chen, the former Shu ruler, appointed Wang Zongqi, the envoy of the Yu Dingyuan Army, as the envoy to summon Ma Bu, and led the 21st Army to be stationed in Yangzhou. Yi Hai, appointed the envoy of the Chang Zhi Ma Army, Lin Sijie, as the envoy of the Shouwu Festival, and led the soldiers to stay in Lizhou to guard against the post-Tang Army.

古文：租庸使王正言病风，恍惚不能治事，景进屡以为言。
现代文：后唐租庸使王正言中风得病，神志恍惚，不能处理政事，景进在后唐帝面前反复说这件事情。
English: After the Tang Dynasty's Conquest, Wang Zhengyan suffered a stroke and fell into a trance, unable to deal with political affairs. Jingjin repeatedly said this in front of the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，以副使、卫尉卿孔谦为租庸使，右威卫大将军孔循为副使。
现代文：癸酉，后唐帝任命租庸副使、卫尉卿孔谦为租庸使，任命右威卫大将军孔循为租庸副使。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty appointed the deputy envoy of the Yeongyeong, the lieutenant general Kong Qian as the deputy envoy of the Yeongyeong, and appointed the right-wing general Kong Xun as the deputy envoy of the Yeongyeong.

古文：循即赵殷衡也，梁亡，复其姓名。
现代文：孔循就是赵殷衡，后梁灭亡时才恢复了真实姓名。
English: Confucius was Zhao Yinheng, and it was only after Liang's death that his real name was restored.

古文：谦自是得行其志，重敛急征以充帝欲，民不聊生。
现代文：孔谦从此才实现他的愿望，他为了满足后唐帝的欲望而对百姓们加重赋税，紧急征集，民不聊生。
English: It was only then that Kong Qian was able to realize his wish. In order to satisfy the desires of the post-Tang Dynasty, he increased taxes on the people, collected urgently, and the people did not want to live.

古文：癸未，赐谦号丰财赡国功臣。
现代文：癸未，后唐帝赏赐给孔谦号叫丰财赡国功臣。
English: Later, Emperor Tang gave Kong Qian the title of Feng Cai Yi Guo Gong Sheng.

古文：帝复遣使者李彦稠入蜀，九月，己亥，至成都。
现代文：后唐帝又派遣使者李彦稠入前蜀国，九月，已亥，李彦稠到达成都。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor also sent the envoy Li Yan Cong into the former Shu Kingdom. In September, already in the autumn, Li Yan Cong reached the capital.

古文：癸卯，帝猎于近郊。
现代文：癸卯，后唐帝在近郊打猎。
English: However, later Tang emperors hunted in the suburbs.

古文：时帝屡出游猎，从骑伤民禾稼，洛阳令何泽付于丛薄，俟帝至，遮马谏曰： 陛下赋敛既急，今稼穑将成，复蹂践之，使吏何以为理，民何以为生！
现代文：当时后唐帝经常出去游玩打猎，随从的骑兵们践踏了老百姓的庄稼。洛阳令何泽爬伏在草木丛生的地方等待着皇帝的到来，后唐帝到来后，他拦住马规劝说： 陛下征集赋税时很紧急，现在庄稼就要熟了，又来践踏它，这让官吏们以什么理由来对百姓说？
English: At that time, Emperor Go-Tang often went out hunting, and his cavalry trampled the crops of the common people. Luoyang ordered Heze to crawl and wait for the arrival of the emperor in a grassy place. After Emperor Go-Tang arrived, he stopped Ma Gui and persuaded him: Your Majesty is in a hurry to collect taxes, and now the crops are about to ripen, and they are trampling it again. What is the reason for the officials to say to the people?

古文：臣愿先赐死。 
现代文：让百姓们怎么生活？臣下希望皇上先赐我死。 
English: How should the people live? My subjects hope that the emperor will let me die first.

古文：帝慰而遣之。
现代文：后唐帝安慰他并把他送走。
English: Later, Emperor Tang consoled him and sent him away.

古文：泽，广州人也。
现代文：何泽是广州人。
English: He Ze is from Guangzhou.

古文：契丹攻渤海，无功而还。
现代文：契丹人向渤海国发起进攻，无功而还。
English: The Khitans launched an attack on the Bohai Kingdom, but it was unsuccessful.

古文：蜀前山南节度使兼中书令王宗俦以蜀主失德，与王宗弼谋废立，宗弼犹豫未决。
现代文：前蜀国前山南志节度使兼中书令王宗俦认为前蜀主已经丧失了品德，与王宗弼谋划把前蜀主废掉，王宗弼犹豫不决。
English: Wang Zongyao, the former envoy of Shannan Shi Jie Du and the second-in-command of Shu, thought that the former Shu lord had lost his virtue, and planned with Wang Zongyao to abolish the former Shu lord. Wang Zongyao hesitated.

古文：庚戌，宗俦忧愤而卒。
现代文：庚戌，王宗俦因为忧愁愤恨而死。
English: Geng Yao, Wang Zong Yao died of grief and resentment.

古文：宗弼谓枢密使宋光嗣、景润澄等曰： 宗俦教我杀尔曹，今日无患矣。 
现代文：王宗弼对枢密使宋光嗣、景润澄等说： 王宗俦曾让我杀掉你们，今日王宗俦一死就没有后患了。 
English: Wang Zongyao said to the confidential envoys Song Guangzhi and Jing Runcheng: "Wang Zongyao once asked me to kill you. Today, with Wang Zongyao's death, there will be no more suffering."

古文：光嗣辈俯伏泣谢。
现代文：宋光嗣等人边哭边跪向王宗弼表示感谢。
English: Song Guangzhi and others were crying and kneeling to thank Wang Zongyao.

古文：宗弼子承班闻之，谓人曰： 吾家难乎免矣。 
现代文：王宗弼的儿子王承班听说后，对人们说： 我家难免一场灾难了。 
English: After hearing the news, Wang Chengban, the son of Wang Zongyao, said to the people, "A disaster is inevitable for my family."

古文：乙卯，蜀主以前镇江军节度使张武为峡路应援招讨使。
现代文：乙卯，前蜀主任命前镇江军节度使张武为峡路应援招讨使。
English: Second, the former Shu Lord appointed the former Zhenjiang Army commander to make Zhang Wu the envoy to solicit assistance for the gorge road.

古文：丁巳，幽州言契丹入寇。
现代文：丁巳，幽州方面报告契丹人入侵。
English: Just then, the Yuzhou side reported the Khitan invasion.

古文：冬，十月，辛未，天平节度使李存霸、平卢节度使符习言： 属州多称直奉租庸使贴指挥公事，使司殊不知，有紊规程。 
现代文：冬季，十月，辛未，天平节度使李存霸、平卢节度使符习上奏说： 所属州官多称他们只按照租庸使的柬帖来行公事，节度使司根本不知道这一情况，这样把规程打乱了。 
English: In the winter, October, Xinwei, the Tianping Festival made Li Cunha and the Pinglu Festival made Fu Xi report: Most of the state officials said that they only carried out their duties in accordance with the instructions of the mercenaries. The festival officials did not know this situation at all, thus disrupting the rules.

古文：租庸使奏，近例皆直下。
现代文：租庸使上奏说，近来租庸使的柬帖都是直接下发到各州，不通过节度观察使。
English: He said that recently, the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents of the rents.

古文：敕： 朝廷故事，制敕不下支郡，牧守不专奏陈。
现代文：后唐帝下命令说： 按朝廷旧例，敕令不下发到各州，各州官吏也不能单独上奏。
English: Later, Emperor Tang issued an order saying: According to the old practice of the imperial court, the imperial decree cannot be sent to the states, and the officials of each state cannot play it alone.

古文：今两道所奏，乃本朝旧规；租庸所陈，是伪廷近事。
现代文：今天天平、平卢两道所讲的事情，是本朝过去的规定。租庸使所讲的是梁朝的近事。
English: What Tianping and Pinglu talked about today are the past regulations of this dynasty. What Xuan Yongzhi talked about is the recent affairs of the Liang dynasty.

古文：自今支郡自非进奉，皆须本道腾奏，租庸征催亦须牒观察使。 
现代文：从今以后，不是各支郡亲自进奉的，都必须先移交本道，然后再由本道上奏。租庸使催办征由赋税时也要书写牒文报告观察使。 
English: From now on, if taxes are not collected in person by each county, they must first be handed over to the local government, and then collected by the local government. When collecting taxes, the lessee must also write a notice to report to the observer.

古文：虽有此敕，竟不行。
现代文：虽然下达了这道命令，实际上并没有执行。
English: Although the order was given, it was never actually carried out.

古文：易定言契丹入寇。
现代文：易定方面报告说契丹人入侵。
English: The Yidam side reported that the Khitan had invaded.

古文：蜀宣徽北院使王承休请择诸军骁勇者万二千人，置驾下左、右龙武步骑四十军，兵械给赐皆优异于它军，以承休为龙武军马步都指挥使，以裨将安重霸副之，旧将无不愤耻。
现代文：前蜀国宣徽北院使王承休请准在各军中选择一万两千勇敢善战的士卒，安置在属于国主管辖的左、右龙武步骑四十军里，武器及供给都要优于其他军队，任命王承休为龙武军马步都指挥使，裨将安重霸为副指挥使，旧将们对此事无不感到愤怒耻辱。
English: Former Shu Emperor Xuanhui's Northern Court asked Wang Chengxiu for permission to select twelve thousand brave and good soldiers from each army and place them in the left and right dragons and horses of the forty armies under the jurisdiction of the state. The weapons and supplies were superior to other armies. Wang Chengxiu was appointed as the commander of the dragons and horses of the army, and the deputy commander of the army was An Chongba. The old generals were angry and humiliated by this.

古文：重霸，去州人，以狡佞贿赂事承休，故承休悦之。
现代文：安重霸是云州人，他用狡诈、巴结、贿赂的手段来侍奉王承休，所以王承休特别喜欢他。
English: An Chongba was a native of Yunnan. He used cunning, flattery, and bribery to serve Wang Chengxu, so Wang Chengxu was particularly fond of him.

古文：吴越王镠复修本朝职贡，壬午，帝因梁官爵而命之。
现代文：吴越王钱又开始向本朝贡献物品，壬午，后唐帝依据他在后梁时的官爵重新任命。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian also began to contribute goods to this dynasty, and in the morning, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty reappointed him according to his official title when he was in Houliang.

古文：镠厚贡献，并赂权要，求金印、玉册、赐诏不名、称国王。
现代文：钱贡献的物品很多，并且贿赂那些掌握大权的人们，请求后唐帝发给他金印、玉册，赐诏允许他朝见不称姓名，称为国王。
English: He contributed a lot of money and goods, and bribed those who wielded power to request that Emperor Gao of Tang give him a gold seal and a jade scroll, and issue an edict to allow him to appear before the court without giving his name, and to be called the king.

古文：有司言： 故事惟天子用玉册，王公皆用竹册；又，非四夷无封国王者。 
现代文：主管官吏说： 按旧的规定，只有天子用玉册，王公们都用竹册。而且，不是四方夷族，一律不封国王。 
English: The officials in charge said: According to the old regulations, only the heavenly sons use the jade book, and the princes all use the bamboo book. Moreover, if they are not from the barbarian tribes in the four directions, they will not be made kings.

古文：帝皆曲从镠意。
现代文：但皇帝还是委曲顺从了钱的意思。
English: But the emperor still obeyed the will of the money.

古文：吴王如白沙观楼船，更命白沙曰迎銮镇。
现代文：吴王到白沙观看叠层的大船，下命令把白沙改名叫迎銮镇。
English: King Wu went to Baisha to watch the superimposed large ships, and gave the order to change the name of Baisha to Yingluo Town.

古文：徐温自金陵来朝，先是，温以亲吏翟虔为阁门、宫城、武备等使，使察王起居，虔防制王甚急。
现代文：徐温从金陵来朝拜吴王。在此以前，徐温让他的亲信官吏翟虔担任阁门、宫城、武备等使，让他观察吴王的起居，翟虔防卫、限制吴王很严格。
English: Xu Wen came from Jinling to pay homage to King Wu. Prior to this, Xu Wen had his close confidant, the official Zou Qian, act as the envoy to the palace gate, the palace city, the military garrison, and so on, and had him observe King Wu's daily life. Zou Qian defended and restricted King Wu very strictly.

古文：至是，王对温名雨为水，温请其故。
现代文：到现在，吴王对徐温说 雨 字时总要改为 水 字，徐温请吴王解释一下这个缘故。
English: Up to now, when Wu Wang says the word "rain" to Xu Wen, he always changes it to the word "water." Xu Wen asked Wu Wang to explain the reason.

古文：王曰： 翟虔父名，吾讳之熟矣。 
现代文：吴王说： 这是翟虔父亲的名字，我避讳这个字已很熟练了。 
English: Wu Wang said, "This is the name of Yan Qian's father. I have become very skilled at avoiding this word.

古文：因谓温曰： 公之忠诚，我所知也，然翟虔无礼，宫中及宗室所须多不获。 
现代文：吴王因此对徐温说： 你对我的忠诚，我是很了解的，然而翟虔无礼，宫中以及宗室所需要的东西多数都得不到。 
English: Therefore, King Wu said to Xu Wen: I know very well about your loyalty to me. However, you are impious and disrespectful, and you cannot obtain most of the things needed by the palace and the family.

古文：温顿首谢罪，请斩之，王曰： 斩则太过，远徙可也。 
现代文：徐温听后赶快低头认罪，请求把翟虔斩了，吴王说： 杀他太过份了，把他迁徙到很远的地方就可以了。 
English: After listening to Xu Wen, he quickly bowed his head and pleaded guilty, requesting that Gong Qian be beheaded. Wu Wang said, "Killing him is too excessive. It is enough to relocate him to a faraway place."

古文：乃徙抚州。
现代文：于是把翟虔徙到了抚州。
English: So he migrated to Fuzhou.

古文：十一月，蜀主遣其翰林学士欧阳彬来聘。
现代文：十一月，前蜀主派遣其翰林学士欧阳彬来后唐互通友好。
English: In November, the former Lord of Shu dispatched his scholar of Hanlin, Ouyang Bin, to Tang for friendly exchanges.

古文：彬，衡山人也。
现代文：欧阳彬是衡山人。
English: Ouyang Bin is from Hengshan.

古文：又遣李彦稠东还。
现代文：又送李彦稠从蜀回国。
English: He also sent Li Yanchong back to China from Shu.

古文：癸卯，帝帅亲军猎于伊阙，命从官拜梁太祖墓。
现代文：癸卯，后唐帝率领他的亲军在伊阙打猎，命令跟随他的官吏们谒拜后梁太祖的坟墓。
English: However, Emperor Hou Tang led his troops to hunt in Yili and ordered his officials to visit the tomb of Emperor Hou Liang Taizu.

古文：涉历山险，连日不止，或夜合围；士卒坠崖谷死及折伤者甚众。丙午，还宫。
现代文：后唐帝一行在伊阙翻山越岭，连日不停，有时夜里合围野兽。随从后唐帝的士卒有不少人掉在深崖狭谷中摔死，有不少人被摔伤。丙午，回到皇宫中。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Gao and his entourage climbed mountains and crossed ridges in Yili. They rode non-stop for days, and sometimes surrounded wild beasts at night. Many of Emperor Gao's soldiers fell to their deaths in the deep cliffs and narrow valleys, and many were injured. In the afternoon, they returned to the imperial palace.

古文：蜀以唐修好，罢威武城戍，召关宏业等二十四军还成都。
现代文：前蜀主认为已经和后唐帝互通友好了，于是就撤了戍守在威武城的士卒，又把关宏业等二十四军调回成都。
English: The former Shu lord thought that it was already good to have mutual friends with the later Tang emperor, so he withdrew the soldiers who were stationed in Weiwu City, and transferred the 24th army such as Guan Hongye back to Chengdu.

古文：戊申，又罢武定、武兴招讨刘潜等三十七军。
现代文：戊申，又撤了武定、武兴招讨刘潜等三十七军。
English: Wushin, Wu Ding and Wu Xing invited Liu Qian and other thirty-seven troops to leave.

古文：丁巳，赐护国节度使李继麟铁券，以其子令德、令锡皆为节度使，诸子胜衣者即拜官，宠冠列籓。
现代文：丁巳，后唐帝赐给护国节度使李继麟世世代代享受特殊待遇的铁契，并任命他的儿子李令德、李令锡都为节度使，李继麟的儿子凡是能自己穿衣的都给封了官，他家受到的宠爱在所有藩镇中是居于首位的。
English: Ding Si, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty granted the iron contract to the Festival of Defending the Country so that Li Jilin could enjoy special treatment for generations to come, and appointed his sons, Li Lingde and Li Lingxi, as festival envoys. All of Li Jilin's sons who could dress themselves were given official seals. His family was the most favored in all the towns.

古文：庚申，蔚州言契丹入寇。
现代文：庚申，蔚州方面报告说契丹人入侵。
English: According to Goshun, the Ulshu side reported that the Khitan invaded.

古文：辛酉，蜀主罢天雄军招讨，命王承骞等二十九军还成都。
现代文：辛酉，前蜀主撤了天雄军的招抚讨伐任务，命令王承骞等二十九军回到成都。
English: At that time, the former Shu lord withdrew Tianxiong's army from the task of instigating a crusade and ordered Wang Chengyao and the other 29 armies to return to Chengdu.

古文：十二月，乙丑朔，蜀主以右仆射张格兼中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：十二月，乙丑朔，前蜀主任命右仆射张格兼任中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In December, the former Lord of Shu appointed his right-hand man, Zhang Ge, to serve concurrently as the Secretary of the Central Committee and the Secretary of Tongping.

古文：初，格之得罪，中书吏王鲁柔乘危窘之；及再为相用事，杖杀之。
现代文：当初，张格犯了罪的时候，中书吏王鲁柔乘机威逼过他，等他又当了宰相掌握了权力时，就用杖打死了王鲁柔。
English: At first, when Zhang Ge committed a crime, Wang Luju, the Chinese librarian, took the opportunity to force him, and when he became the prime minister and seized power, he killed Wang Luju with a cane.

古文：许寂谓人曰： 张公才高而识浅，戮一鲁柔，他人谁敢自保！
现代文：许寂对人们说： 张公才能虽高但见识短浅，杀死一个王鲁柔，其他人谁能保全自己？
English: Xu Shao said to the people: Zhang Gong is talented but short-sighted, he killed a Wang Luruo, who else can protect themselves?

古文：此取祸之端也。 
现代文：这是他自取祸难的开始。 
English: This was the beginning of his downfall.

古文：蜀主罢金州屯戍，命王承勋等七军还成都。
现代文：前蜀主撤了戍守在金州的部队，下令让王承勋等七军回到成都。
English: The former Shu ruler withdrew the troops garrisoned in Jinzhou and ordered Wang Chengxun and the other seven armies to return to Chengdu.

古文：己巳，命宣武节度使李嗣源将宿卫兵三万七千人赴汴州，遂如幽州御契丹。
现代文：己巳，后唐帝命令宣武节度使李嗣源率领三万七千名警卫部队赶到汴州，不久又去幽州抵御契丹人的侵略。
English: Later, Emperor Tang ordered the Xuanwu Festival to make Li Siyuan lead 37,000 guard troops to rush to Zhangzhou, and soon went to Yuzhou to resist the invasion of the Khitan.

古文：庚午，帝及皇后如张全义第，全义大陈贡献；酒酣，皇后奏称： 妾幼失父母，见老者辄思之，请父事全义。 
现代文：庚午，后唐帝和皇后到张全义的住处，张全义把贡献给皇帝的物品全部摆出来。酒喝得正高兴的时候，皇后奏请后唐帝说： 妾从小失去父母，一见老人就想念自己的父母，请把张全义当作父亲来侍奉他。 
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Emperor and Empress Dowager Tang went to Zhang Quanyi's residence. Zhang Quanyi displayed all of the items he had donated to the emperor. When they were happily drinking wine, the Empress asked Emperor Dowager Tang to say, "My concubine lost her parents when she was a child. When she saw the old man, she missed her parents. Please treat Zhang Quanyi as a father and serve him."

古文：帝许之。
现代文：后唐帝答应了她的请求。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：全义惶恐固辞，再三强之，竟受皇后拜，复贡献谢恩。
现代文：张全义惶恐不安，一再推辞。皇后再三坚持，最后张全义接受了皇后的拜礼，于是又拿出一些贡品送给皇后表示感谢恩德。
English: Zhang Quanyi panicked and repeatedly refused. The empress insisted again and again, and finally Zhang Quanyi accepted the queen's worship, so he also took out some tributes to the queen to express his gratitude to her.

古文：明日，后命翰林学士赵凤草书谢全义，凤密奏： 自古无天下之母拜人臣为父者。 
现代文：第二天，皇后命令翰林学士赵凤写信感谢张全义，赵凤秘密上奏后唐帝说： 自古以来没有作为天下之母的皇后拜大臣作父亲的。 
English: The next day, the empress ordered the scholar Zhao Feng to write a letter of thanks to Zhang Quanyi. After Zhao Feng secretly delivered the letter, Tang Di said, "Since ancient times, there has never been a queen as the mother of the world who had a minister as her father.

古文：帝嘉其直，然卒行之。
现代文：后唐帝表扬他耿直，但最终还是按皇后的意思办了。
English: Later, Emperor Tang praised him for his honesty, but in the end he did as the empress wished.

古文：自是后与全义日遣使往来问遗不绝。
现代文：从此以后，皇后和张全义每天都派遣使者往来问候、馈赠东西，从来没有间断过。
English: Since then, the empress and Zhang Quanyi have sent envoys to exchange greetings and gifts every day, without interruption.

古文：初，唐僖、昭之世，宦官虽盛，未尝有建节者。
现代文：当初，唐朝僖宗、昭宗的时候，宦官们虽然十分强盛，但没有出任节度使建节的人。
English: In the beginning, when the Tang Dynasty was ruled by Emperor Xizong and Emperor Zhaozong, although the eunuchs were very powerful, they did not serve as festival organizers.

古文：蜀安重霸劝王承休求秦州节度使，承休言于蜀主曰： 秦州多美妇人，请为陛下采择以献。 
现代文：前蜀国安重霸劝王承休请求出任秦州节度使，王承休对前蜀主说： 秦州美女特别多，我请求为陛下去选择一些贡献上来。 
English: The former Shu Guoan strongman persuaded Wang Chengxu to request to serve as the Qin State Festival envoy. Wang Chengxu said to the former Shu master: There are many beautiful women in Qin State, I request you to choose some contributions for your majesty.

古文：蜀主许之，庚午，以承休为天雄节度使，封鲁国公；以龙武军为承休牙兵。
现代文：前蜀王答应了他的请求。庚午，前蜀主任命王承休为天雄节度使，并封他为鲁国公。把龙武军作为王承休的卫队。
English: The former King of Shu agreed to his request. In the afternoon, the former Lord of Shu appointed Wang Chengxiu as the envoy of Tianxiong Festival, and made him the prince of Lu. The Longwu Army served as Wang Chengxiu's guard.

古文：乙亥，蜀主以前武德节度使兼中书令徐延琼为京城内外马步都指挥使。
现代文：乙亥，前蜀主任命原来的武德节度使兼中书令徐延琼为京城内外马步都指挥使。
English: Yi Hai, the former Lord of Shu, appointed the original Wu De Festival Envoy and Chinese Calligrapher Xu Yanqiong as the commanding envoy of the capital city and its surrounding areas.

古文：延琼以外戚代王宗弼居旧将之右，众皆不平。
现代文：徐延琼以外戚的身份代替王宗弼位列旧将领的上面，大家都感到不平。
English: The fact that Xu Yanqiong, as a relative other than Wang Zongxuan, has replaced him at the top of the list of former generals has made everyone feel uneasy.

古文：壬午，北京言契丹寇岚州。
现代文：壬午，太原方面报告说契丹人入侵岚州。
English: In the morning of the same day, the Taiyuan side reported that the Khitan invaded Zhangzhou.

古文：辛卯，蜀主改明年元曰咸康。
现代文：辛卯，前蜀主改明年的年号为咸康。
English: Xinwu, the former Shu Lord changed the name of next year to Xiankang.

古文：卢龙节度使李存贤卒。
现代文：卢龙节度使李存贤去世。
English: The Lulong Festival led to the death of Li Cunxian.

古文：是岁，蜀主徙普王宗仁为卫王。雅王宗辂为幽王，褒王宗纪为赵王，荣王宗智为韩王，兴王宗泽为宋王，彭王宗鼎为鲁王，忠王宗平为薛王，资王宗特为莒王；宗辂、宗智、宗平皆罢军使。
现代文：在这一年里，前蜀主调普王宗仁为卫王，雅王宗辂为豳王，褒王宗纪为赵王，荣王宗智为韩王，兴王宗泽为宋王，彭王宗鼎为鲁王，忠王宗平为薛王，资王宗特为莒王。同时撤了宗辂、宗智、宗平三人的军队职务。
English: In this year, the former Shu Emperor transferred King Pu Zongren to be the King of Wei, King Ya Zongren to be the King of Shao, King Bao Zongji to be the King of Zhao, King Rong Zongzhi to be the King of Han, King Xing Zongze to be the King of Song, King Peng Zongding to be the King of Lu, King Zhong Zongping to be the King of Xue, and King Zongte to be the King of Shao. At the same time, the military posts of the three men of Zongren, Zongzhi and Zongping were withdrawn.

古文：春，正月，甲午朔，蜀大赦。
现代文：三年春季，正月，甲午朔，前蜀国实行大赦。
English: In the spring of the third year, the first month, the first day of the second month, the former Shu State implemented an amnesty.

古文：丙申，敕有司改葬昭宗及少帝，竟以用度不足而止。
现代文：丙申，后唐帝下令有司，改葬昭宗和少帝。最后竟因费用不足而停止。
English: According to Bishin, Emperor Wu of Tang ordered the imperial court to change the burial place of Emperor Zhaozong and the young emperor. However, it was eventually stopped due to insufficient expenses.

古文：契丹寇幽州。
现代文：契丹人入侵幽州。
English: Khitan invade Yuzhou.

古文：庚子，帝发洛阳；庚戌，至兴唐。
现代文：庚子，后唐帝从洛阳出发。庚戌，皇帝到达魏州。
English: Geng Zi, the late Tang emperor, set out from Luoyang. Geng Zi, the emperor, arrived in Weizhou.

古文：诏平卢节度使苻习治酸枣遥堤以御决河。
现代文：后唐帝下诏，命令平卢节度使符习在离酸枣较远的地方修筑河堤以防御黄河决口。
English: Later, Emperor Tang issued an edict, ordering the Pinglu Jiedu to have Fu Xi build a dike in a place far away from the sour jujube to protect the Yellow River's mouth.

古文：初，李嗣源北征，过兴唐，东京库有供御细铠，嗣源牒副留守张宪取五百领，宪以军兴，不暇奏而给之；帝怒曰： 宪不奉诏，擅以吾铠给嗣源，何意也！ 
现代文：当初，李嗣源北征契丹时，路过兴唐，东京的武库中有供给皇帝用的精细的铠甲，李嗣源写了牒文给副留守张宪，取走五百具铠甲，张宪因军队在行军中，没有时间奏告后唐帝就给了李嗣源。后唐帝知道这件事后很生气地说： 张宪不遵守诏令，擅自把我的铠甲给了李嗣源，这是什么意思？ 
English: At the beginning, when Li Siyuan was on the Northern Expedition against the Khitan, he passed through Xing Tang. Tokyo's arsenal contained fine armor for the emperor. Li Siyuan wrote an ultimatum to Zhang Xian, the deputy left-behind, and took away five hundred pieces of armor. Because Zhang Xian's army was on the march, he did not have time to report it, and Tang Emperor gave it to Li Siyuan. After Tang Emperor knew about this, he was very angry and said: Zhang Xian did not comply with the edict, and gave my armor to Li Siyuan without permission. What does this mean?

古文：罚宪俸一月，令自往军中取之。
现代文：于是罚了张宪一个月的俸禄，并命令他亲自去军中把铠甲取回。
English: As a result, Zhang Xian was fined one month's salary and ordered to personally go to the army to retrieve the armor.

古文：帝以义武节度使王都将入朝，欲辟球场，宪曰： 此以行宫阙廷为球场，前年陛下即位于此。其坛不可毁，请辟球场于宫西。 数日，未成，帝命毁即位坛。
现代文：后唐帝因为义武节度使王都即将来朝拜，打算开辟一块球场，张宪说： 近来把行宫阙廷做为球场，前年陛下在那里即位，这个坛不能毁掉，请在宫西开辟球场 几天过去了，球场还没有修成，后唐帝下令毁掉即位时用的坛。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, because of the festival of Yiwu, made the capital of Wangdu worship soon and planned to open a stadium, Zhang Xian said: Recently, the palace was used as a stadium. The previous year, His Majesty ascended the throne there. This altar cannot be destroyed. Please open a stadium in the west of the palace. A few days passed, the stadium had not yet been completed, and the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered to destroy the altar used for the enthronement.

古文：宪谓郭崇韬曰： 此坛，主上所以礼上帝，始受命之地也，若之何毁之！ 
现代文：张宪对郭崇韬说： 这个坛是皇帝用来给上天祭祀的，是皇帝一开始受命于上天的地方，怎么能它毁掉呢？ 
English: Zhang Xian said to Guo Chongyi, "This altar is used by the emperor to offer sacrifices to Heaven. It is the place where the emperor was ordered by Heaven at the beginning. How can it be destroyed?

古文：崇韬从容言于帝，帝立命两虞候毁之。
现代文：郭崇韬很从容地把这件事告诉了后唐帝，后唐帝反而马上命令马军虞候和步军虞候把坛毁掉。
English: Guo Chongzhen very calmly told the matter to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty, but the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty immediately ordered Ma Junyu and Fu Junyu to destroy the altar.

古文：宪私于崇韬曰： 忘天背本，不祥莫大焉。 
现代文：张宪私下对郭崇韬说： 忘天背本，这是最大的不吉祥。 
English: Zhang Xian said to Guo Chongyao in private: "Forgetting the heavenly text is the biggest bad luck.

古文：二月，甲戌，以横海节度使李绍斌为卢龙节度使。
现代文：二月，甲戌，任命横海节度使李绍斌为卢龙节度使。
English: In February, Jiaozuo, appointed Henghai Festival Delegate Li Shaobin as Lulong Festival Delegate.

古文：丙子，李嗣源奏败契丹于涿州。
现代文：丙子，李嗣源奏告后唐帝在涿州击败了契丹人。
English: After Li Shiyuan's report, Emperor Tang defeated the Khitan in Zhangzhou.

古文：上以契丹为忧，与郭崇韬谋，以威名宿将零落殆尽，李绍斌位望素轻，欲徙李嗣源镇真定，为绍斌声援，崇韬深以为便。
现代文：后唐帝认为契丹人的存在是个忧患，和郭崇韬谋划，因有名望的老将们差不多都不在了，李绍斌的威望平时也不高，于是就想调李嗣源去镇守真定，作为李绍斌的后援，郭崇韬深感这样做是很适宜的。
English: Later, the Tang Emperor thought that the existence of the Khitan people was a worry, and planned with Guo Chongzhen, because the famous veterans were almost all gone, and the prestige of Li Shaobin was not high at ordinary times. Therefore, he wanted to transfer Li Siyuan to guard Zhending. As the backup of Li Shaobin, Guo Chongzhen deeply felt that this was very appropriate.

古文：时崇韬领真定，上欲徙崇韬镇汴州，崇韬辞曰： 臣内典枢机，外预大政，富贵极矣，何必更领籓方？
现代文：当时郭崇韬兼管真定，后唐帝想调郭崇韬去镇守汴州，郭崇韬推辞说： 臣下在朝掌管机密，在朝外又参与重大政事，富贵到了极点，何必还要再管藩镇呢？
English: At that time, Guo Chongzhen was also in charge of Zhending. Later, the Tang Emperor wanted to transfer Guo Chongzhen to the town of Bozhou. Guo Chongzhen declined, saying: "Our vassals are in charge of secrets in the government, and participate in major political affairs outside the government. They are extremely wealthy. Why do they need to be in charge of the town any more?"

古文：且群臣或从陛下岁久，身经百战，所得不过一州。
现代文：况且朝廷大臣们有的已经跟从陛下好多年了，身经百战，所得到也不过是一个州官。
English: Moreover, some of the ministers of the Imperial Court have been following His Majesty for many years. They have been through a hundred battles, and all they got was a prefect.

古文：臣无汗马之劳，徒以侍从左右，时赞圣谟，致位至此，常不自安；今因委任勋贤，使臣得解旄节，乃大愿也。
现代文：我无汗马功劳，只是陛下的左右侍从，随时辅佐圣上谋划一些事情，爵位升到这样高，我心中经常感到不安。现在乘委任有功或贤能的人，让我解脱现在职位，这才是我最大希望啊！
English: I've done nothing to deserve it, I'm just His Majesty's right and left attendant, always assisting His Holiness in planning some things, I often feel uneasy in my heart that my title has risen so high. Now, by appointing a meritorious or capable person, let me get rid of my current position, this is my greatest hope!

古文：且汴州关东冲要，地富人繁，臣既不至治所，徒令他人摄职，何异空城！
现代文：况且汴州是关东的要害地方，人多地富，我既然不到官府所在地，只能令别人代为管理，这和空一个城有什么两样呢？
English: Moreover, Zhangzhou is a key place in Kanto, where many people are rich. Since I cannot go to the seat of the government, I can only let others manage it on my behalf. What is the difference between this and an empty city?

古文：非所以固国基也。 
现代文：这不是巩固国家的办法。 
English: This is not the way to consolidate the state.

古文：上曰： 深知卿忠尽，然卿为朕画策，袭取汶阳，保固河津，既而自此路乘虚直趋大梁，成朕帝业，岂百战之功可比乎！
现代文：后唐帝说： 我深知你对我一片忠心，然而你为我出谋划策，夺取了汶阳，保住并且巩固了黄河的渡口，以后又从这条路乘虚直捣大梁，成全了我的帝业，难道百战之功可以和你相比吗？
English: Later, Emperor Tang said, "I am well aware that you are loyal to me, yet you made a plan for me, captured the city of Wenyang, preserved and consolidated the Yellow River ferry, and later, from this road, took the virtual straight beam and completed my empire. Can the merits of a hundred battles be compared to you?

古文：今朕贵为天子，岂可使卿曾无尺寸之地乎！ 
现代文：今天我显贵地成为天子，怎么可以使你没有寸土之地呢？ 
English: Today I have become the son of heaven, how can I make you landless?

古文：崇韬固辞不已，上乃许之。
现代文：郭崇韬坚决推辞，后唐帝于是答应了他的请求。
English: Guo Chongzhen resolutely refused, and Emperor Hou Tang then agreed to his request.

古文：庚辰，徙李嗣源为成德节度使。
现代文：庚辰，调李嗣源为成德节度使。
English: Geng Chen transferred Li Siyuan to Chengde Festival.

古文：汉主闻帝灭梁而惧，遣宫苑使何词入贡，且觇中国强弱。
现代文：南汉主听到后唐帝消灭了后梁感到很害怕，于是派宫苑使何词来朝进贡，并偷偷地察看了一下中原的强弱。
English: The Southern Han lord was very afraid when he heard that the Emperor of Tang had eliminated Hou Liang, so he sent the imperial court to pay tribute to the North, and secretly inspected the strength of the Central Plains.

古文：甲申，词至魏。
现代文：甲申，何词到了魏都。
English: Ka-shin, how many words have come to Wei-du.

古文：及还，言帝骄淫无政，不足畏也。
现代文：他回去后对南汉主说，后唐帝骄傲荒淫，不管政事，不必害怕。
English: After he returned, he said to the Southern Han Emperor, "After the Tang Dynasty, you should not be afraid to be proud and impudent, regardless of politics.

古文：汉主大悦，自是不复通中国。
现代文：南汉主听了非常高兴，从此以后断绝了和中原的来往。
English: The Southern Han ruler was very pleased to hear this, and from then on broke off contact with the Central Plains.

古文：帝性刚好胜，不欲权在臣下，入洛之后，信伶宦之谗，颇疏忌宿将。
现代文：后唐帝性情刚愎好胜，不愿意权归臣下，到了洛阳之后，听信了伶人宦官的谗言，对过去那些老的将领颇疏远忌恨。
English: Later Tang emperors had a strong will to win and were not willing to cede power to their subjects. After arriving in Luoyang, they listened to the advice of the eunuchs, and became estranged from the old generals.

古文：李嗣源家在太原，三月，丁酉，表卫州刺史李从珂为北京内牙马步都指挥使以便其家，帝怒曰： 嗣源握兵权，居大镇，军政在吾，安得为其子奏请！ 
现代文：李嗣源家在太原，三月，丁酉，他上表请求调卫州刺史李从珂为北京内牙马步都指挥使，这样对他照顾家里比较方便。后唐帝看了之后很生气地说： 李嗣源掌握兵权，身居大镇，军政大权在我手中，他怎么能为他的儿子提出请求呢？ 
English: Li Siyuan's home was in Taiyuan. In March, Dingwu, he went to the table to ask for the transfer of the command of the military and political power to Beijing, so that it would be more convenient for him to take care of his home. After Tang Di saw this, he said angrily: Li Siyuan holds the military power, he lives in a big town, the military and political power is in my hands, how can he make a request for his son?

古文：乃黜从珂为突骑指挥使，帅数百人戍石门镇。
现代文：于是贬李从珂为突骑指挥使，让他率领几百人戍守在石门镇。
English: As a result, Li was demoted from Ka to the commanding officer of the cavalry, and he was allowed to lead several hundred people to stay in Shimen Town.

古文：嗣源忧恐，上章申理，久之方解。
现代文：李嗣源对这件事又担忧又害怕，上书申辩，很长时间才缓解了和后唐帝的关系。
English: Li Siyuan was both worried and afraid about this matter, and it took him a long time to ease the relationship with the post-Tang Emperor.

古文：辛丑，嗣源乞至东京朝觐，不许。
现代文：辛丑，李嗣源请求到东京去朝见，后唐帝没有答应。
English: Sinfully ugly, Li Siyuan requested to go to Tokyo to see the emperor, but Emperor Hou Tang did not agree.

古文：郭崇韬以嗣源功高位重，亦忌之，私谓人曰： 总管令公非久为人下者，皇家子弟皆不及也。 
现代文：郭崇韬认为李嗣源功高位重，也很嫉妒他，私下对人说： 总管令公李嗣源并不是久为人下的人，皇家子弟都比不了他。 
English: Guo Chongyi thought that Li Siyuan's high rank and achievements were very important, and he was also jealous of him. He privately told people: General Manager Li Siyuan is not a person who has been a subordinate for a long time, and the royal children are no match for him.

古文：密劝帝召之宿卫，罢其兵权，又劝帝除之，帝皆不从。
现代文：于是偷偷劝后唐帝把李嗣源召来，让他任警卫官，罢免了他的军权，以后又劝后唐帝把李嗣源除掉，后唐帝都没有听从他的意见。
English: Therefore, he secretly persuaded the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to summon Li Siyuan, appoint him as a guard officer, and remove his military power. Later, he also advised the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty to remove Li Siyuan. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty did not listen to his advice.

古文：己酉，帝发兴唐，自德胜济河，历杨村、戚城，观昔时战处，指示群臣以为乐。
现代文：己酉，皇帝从魏州出发，从德胜渡过黄河，经历杨村、戚城，去观看了一下过去打过仗的地方，并指示群臣们要以此为乐。
English: The emperor set out from Weizhou, crossed the Yellow River from Desheng, went through Yangcun and Cicheng, went to see the places where he had fought in the past, and instructed his courtiers to enjoy it.

古文：洛阳宫殿宏邃，宦者欲上增广嫔御，诈言宫中夜见鬼物。
现代文：洛阳的宫殿修建得宏伟深邃，宦官们打算让后唐帝增加扩充侍妾和宫女，于是就假装说宫中黑夜里发现鬼物。
English: The palace in Luoyang was built to be grand and profound. The eunuchs planned to have the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty increase the number of concubines and maids of honor, so they pretended to say that a ghost was found in the dark night of the palace.

古文：上欲使符咒者攘之，宦者曰： 臣昔逮事咸通、乾符天子，当是时，六宫贵贱不减万人。
现代文：后唐帝打算让巫觋们来驱逐这些鬼物，宦官说： 我过去侍奉懿宗、僖宗，在那个时候，六宫里的侍妾宫女无论贵贱，都不下万人。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty planned to have the witches and concubines drive out these demons. The eunuch said, "I used to serve Emperor Xizong and Emperor Xizong. At that time, there were no less than ten thousand concubines and princesses in the Six Palaces, no matter how high or low they were.

古文：今掖庭太半空虚，故鬼物游之耳。 
现代文：现在妃嫔们居住的地方有一大半是空的，所以鬼物就来这里游玩了。 
English: Now the place where the concubines live is mostly empty, so the goblins come here to play.

古文：上乃命宦者王允平、伶人景进采择民间女子，远至太原、幽、镇，以充后庭，不啻三千人，不问所从来。上还自兴唐，载以牛车，累累盈路。
现代文：于是后唐帝命令宦官王允平、伶人景进去民间挑选女子，远的地方到了太原、幽州、镇州。回来后把这些女子安排在妃嫔们住的地方，不只三千人，也不问她们从什么地方来的，后唐帝从兴唐回来时，用牛车拉着很多女子，满路上接连不断，到处都是。
English: Therefore, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty ordered the eunuch Wang Yunping and the eunuch Jing to go to the people to select women, and they went as far as Taiyuan, Yuzhou and Zhenzhou. After returning, they arranged these women in the place where the concubines lived, not only three thousand, and they did not ask where they came from. When the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty returned from Xingtang, he pulled a lot of women with ox carts, and they were everywhere on the road.

古文：张宪奏： 诸营妇女亡逸者千馀人，虑扈从诸军挟匿以行。 
现代文：张宪上奏说： 魏州各营妇女逃亡的有一千多人，可能是那些扈从的军队士卒们挟持着把她们藏起来，然后把她们带走了。 
English: Zhang Xian said: There are more than a thousand women who have fled from various battalions in Weizhou. It may be that the soldiers who have been kidnapped have hidden them and then taken them away.

古文：其实皆入宫矣。
现代文：其实是都进入宫内了。
English: In fact, they have all entered the womb.

古文：庚辰，帝至洛阳；辛酉，诏复以洛阳为东都，兴唐府为鄴都。
现代文：庚辰，后唐帝到了洛阳。辛酉，下诏又把洛阳改为东都，兴唐府为邺都。
English: Geng Chen, the late Tang emperor, came to Luoyang. Xin Xi, the next emperor, changed Luoyang to the eastern capital, and Xing Tangfu became the capital.

古文：夏，四月，癸亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸亥朔，出现日食。
English: In summer, in April, at the turn of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：初，五台僧诚惠以妖妄惑人，自言能降伏天龙，命风召雨；帝尊信之，亲帅后妃及皇弟、皇子拜之，诚惠安坐不起，群臣莫敢不拜，独郭崇韬不拜。
现代文：当初，五台山的僧人诚惠用虚妄的邪术来迷惑人，他自己说能制服天上的龙，能呼风唤雨。后唐帝尊敬相信他，并亲自带领皇后、皇妃以及皇弟、皇子们去拜见诚惠，诚惠安稳地坐在那里也不起来，跟随后唐帝去的大臣们没有敢不跪拜的。
English: At first, the monk Cheng Hui of Mount Wutai used false magic to deceive people. He said that he could subdue the dragon in the sky and call the wind and rain. After the Tang Emperor respected and believed him, he personally led the queen, the empress, the prince and the prince to visit Cheng Hui. Cheng Hui sat there quietly and did not get up. The ministers who followed the Tang Emperor did not dare not to kneel.

古文：时大旱，帝自鄴都迎诚惠至洛阳，使祈雨，士民朝夕瞻仰，数旬不雨。
现代文：当时天气正值大旱，后唐帝从邺都把诚惠迎接到洛阳，请他祈雨，士民们从早到晚都来看他祈雨，结果好几十天过去了也没下雨。
English: At that time, the weather was in the midst of a severe drought. Emperor Wu of Tang welcomed Cheng Hui from Shandong to Luoyang and asked him to pray for rain. The people came to see him from morning to night to pray for rain. As a result, dozens of days passed without rain.

古文：或谓诚惠： 官以师祈雨无验，将焚之。 
现代文：有人对诚惠说： 皇上请你来祈雨，结果没有应验，他将会烧死你。 
English: Someone said to Cheng Hui, "The emperor invited you to pray for rain, but it did not come true. He will burn you to death."

古文：诚惠逃去，惭惧而卒。
现代文：诚惠听后就逃跑了，因感到惭愧害怕而死。
English: After hearing this, Cheng Hui ran away and died of shame and fear.

古文：庚寅，中书侍郎、同平章事赵光胤卒。
现代文：庚寅，中书侍郎、同平章事赵光胤去世。
English: Geng Yin, the chief secretary of the CPC Central Committee, and Zhao Guangyan, the secretary of the CPC Central Committee, passed away.

古文：太后自与太妃别，常忽忽不乐，虽娱玩盈前，未尝解颜；太妃既别太后，亦邑邑成疾。
现代文：太后自从和太妃分别之后，经常恍恍忽忽不高兴，虽然娱乐玩耍的东西在她面前到处都是，但也不能使她开颜而笑。太妃和太后分别之后，也闷闷不乐而生病。
English: The Empress Dowager, since her separation from Toffee, had often been in a state of fluctuating unhappiness, and although amusements and amusements were everywhere in front of her, they could not make her smile. After the separation of Toffee and the Empress Dowager, she was also unhappy and ill.

古文：太后遣中使医药相继于道，闻疾稍加，辄不食，又谓帝曰： 吾与太妃恩如兄弟，欲自往省之。 
现代文：太后派遣宫廷医生连续不断地去给她看病，后来听说太妃的病情加重，她愁得连饭也吃不下去。于是她对后唐帝说： 我和太妃恩如姐妹，我想亲自去看望一下她。 
English: The empress dowager continuously sent court doctors to see her. Later, she heard that the condition of the empress dowager had worsened, and she was so worried that she couldn't even eat. So she said to the Emperor: I and the empress dowager are like sisters. I want to visit her in person.

古文：帝以天暑道远，苦谏，久之乃止，但遣皇弟存渥等往迎侍。
现代文：后唐帝借口天气热，道路远，苦苦规劝她不要去，好长时间才阻止了太后，只是派遣皇弟李存渥等前去迎接侍奉。
English: On the pretext that the weather was hot and the road was long, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty tried hard to persuade her not to go. It took him a long time to stop the empress dowager, but he sent his younger brother, Li Cunwoo, to meet the attendant.

古文：五月，丁酉，北都奏太妃薨。
现代文：五月，丁酉，北都上奏说太妃去世。
English: In May, Ding Xi, the Beidou Shangxu said that Tofei died.

古文：太后悲哀不食者累日，帝宽譬不离左右。
现代文：太后听说后十分悲哀，连续几天吃不下饭，后唐帝守在太后身边安慰解释。
English: After hearing this, the empress dowager was very sad and could not eat for several days. Emperor Hou Tang stayed by her side to comfort and explain.

古文：太后自是得疾，又欲自往会太妃葬，帝力谏而止。
现代文：太后因此得病，又想亲自去给太妃送葬，后唐帝极力劝阻，她才没有去。
English: As a result, the empress dowager fell ill and wanted to go to the funeral of Tohei in person, but Emperor Tang tried his best to dissuade her, and she did not go.

古文：闽王审知寝疾，命其子节度副使延翰权知军府事。
现代文：闽王王审知得病卧床，命令他的儿子节度副使王延翰暂时代管军府事。
English: Shao Wang, sick in bed, ordered his son, the vice-envoy Wang Yanhan, to take temporary charge of military affairs.

古文：自春夏大旱，六月，壬申，始雨。
现代文：从春天到夏天一直天旱，六月，壬申，才开始下了雨。
English: From spring to summer, there was a drought, and it only started to rain in Jinshin in June.

古文：帝苦溽暑，于禁中择高凉之所，皆不称旨。
现代文：后唐帝受不了盛夏湿热的气候，在皇宫里选择地高凉爽的地方避暑，都不满意。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty could not stand the hot and humid climate of midsummer, and was not satisfied with the choice of a high, cool place in the palace to escape the summer heat.

古文：宦者因言： 臣见长安全盛时，大明、兴庆宫楼观以百数。
现代文：宦官们因此对后唐帝说： 我记得长安在全盛时期，大明、兴庆等高大的建筑就有数百座。
English: Therefore, the eunuchs said to the Emperor: I remember that in the heyday of Chang'an, there were hundreds of tall buildings such as Daming and Xingqing.

古文：今日宅家曾无避暑之所，宫殿之盛曾不及当时公卿第舍耳。 
现代文：如今圣上竟没有个避暑的地方，宫殿的华丽还不如当时公卿们的住宅。 
English: Today, there is no place for the saint to spend the summer, and the palace is not as magnificent as the residences of the nobles at that time.

古文：帝乃命宫苑使王允平别建一楼以清暑。
现代文：后唐帝于是命令营苑使王允平另外修建一座楼，用来给后唐帝避暑。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty then ordered Yingyuan to have Wang Yunping build another building to be used as a summer resort for the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty.

古文：宦者曰： 郭崇韬常不伸眉，为孔谦论用度不足，恐陛下虽欲营缮，终不可得。 
现代文：宦官们说： 郭崇韬经常愁眉不展，是因为孔谦老议论费用不足，恐怕陛下虽然想修建一座楼来避暑，但最后怕建不成。 
English: The eunuchs said: Guo Chongyao often frowns, because Kong Qian is always talking about insufficient expenses. I am afraid that although His Majesty wants to build a building to escape the summer, he is afraid that it will not be built in the end.

古文：帝曰： 吾自用内府钱，无关经费。 
现代文：后唐帝说： 我自己用内府的钱来修建，和租庸使管的经费无关。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang said: I myself used the money of the Inner Government to build it, and it has nothing to do with the funds of the rent-a-yong.

古文：然犹虑崇韬谏，遣中使语之曰： 今岁盛暑异常，朕昔在河上，与梁人相拒，行营卑湿，被甲乘马，亲当矢石，犹无此暑。
现代文：但后唐帝心里仍然忧虑郭崇韬来劝谏。于是派宫中的使者邓郭崇韬转达他的话说： 今年的盛暑异常，朕过去在黄河边与梁军对垒，行军的军营低下潮湿，穿着铠甲骑着马，亲自抵挡箭石，也没感到这么热。
English: However, Emperor Guo was still worried in his heart, so he sent an emissary from the palace, Deng Guo Chongyi, to convey his words: This year's hot weather is unusual. I used to fight against Liang's army on the edge of the Yellow River. The marching camp was low and damp. Wearing armor and riding a horse, I personally resisted the arrow stones. I did not feel so hot.

古文：今居深宫之中而暑不可度，奈何？ 
现代文：现在深居宫中而难以度过这个暑天，怎么办呢？ 
English: Now deep in the palace, it is difficult to get through this hot day. What should we do?

古文：对曰： 陛下昔在河上，勍敌未灭，深念仇耻，虽有盛暑，不介圣怀。
现代文：郭崇韬回答说： 陛下过去在黄河边时，强敌还没有消灭，深深思念的是洗除耻辱和杀敌报仇，那时虽然也有酷暑，但您也不在意。
English: Guo Chongzhen replied: When Your Majesty was on the banks of the Yellow River in the past, the strong enemy had not yet been eliminated. What you deeply yearned for was to wash away the shame and take revenge by killing the enemy. Although it was very hot at that time, you did not care.

古文：今外患已除，海内宾服，故虽珍台闲馆犹觉郁蒸也。
现代文：现在外面的忧患已经消除，国内诸侯都臣服，所以虽然有珍贵的高台和空闲的馆所，仍然觉得很闷热。
English: Now that the outside worries have been eliminated and the domestic lords have surrendered, so although there are precious platforms and idle museums, I still feel very stuffy.

古文：陛下倘不忘艰难之时，则暑气自消矣。 
现代文：陛下倘若没有忘记艰难的时候，那么暑热就会自然消除。 
English: If His Majesty does not forget the hard times, then the heat will naturally be eliminated.

古文：帝默然。
现代文：后唐帝听后没有说什么话。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：宦者曰： 崇韬之第，无异皇居，宜其不知至尊之热也。 
现代文：宦官们说： 郭崇韬的宅第，和皇宫没有什么两样，因此他不了解圣上的暑热。 
English: The eunuchs said: Guo Chongzhen's residence is no different from the imperial palace, so he does not understand the heat of the sacred.

古文：帝卒命允平营楼，日役万人，所费巨万。
现代文：后唐帝最终还是命令王允平修筑楼阁。每天参加修建楼阁的人有一万多，所耗费的钱财十分巨大。
English: The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty finally ordered Wang Yunping to build the pavilion. More than 10,000 people participated in the construction of the pavilion every day, and the money spent was enormous.

古文：崇韬谏曰： 今两河水旱，军食不充，愿且息役，以俟丰年。 
现代文：郭崇韬劝后唐帝说： 今年两河干旱，军队的供给也不充足，希望能够停止修建，等到丰年时再开始动工。 
English: After being advised by Guo Chongyao, Tang Di said: This year, the two rivers are dry, and the supply of the army is not sufficient. I hope to be able to stop the construction and wait until the harvest season to start construction.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：后唐帝没有听从他的规劝。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：帝将伐蜀，辛卯，诏天下括市战马。
现代文：后唐帝将讨伐前蜀国，辛卯，下诏天下，收买战马。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty will invade the former Shu Kingdom, Xinwu, the next emperor of the world, and buy war horses.

古文：吴镇海节度判官、楚州团练使陈彦谦有疾，徐知诰恐其遗言及继嗣事，遗之医药金帛，相属于道。
现代文：吴镇海节度判官、楚州团练使陈彦谦身体有病，徐知诰害怕他留下遗言谈及继嗣的事，于是送给他药品和金银丝帛，运送物品的车在路上接连不断。
English: Wu Zhenhai, the judge of the festival, and the Chuzhou group exercise made Chen Yanqian physically ill. Xu Zhisheng was afraid that he would leave a last word about the matter of succession, so he gave him medicines and gold and silver silk scarves. The cars transporting the goods were on the road one after another.

古文：彦谦临终，密留中遗徐温，请以所生子为嗣。
现代文：陈彦谦临终时偷偷留下了一封遗书送给了徐温，请求能让他的亲生儿子继承他的爵位。
English: On his deathbed, Chen Yanqian secretly left a suicide note to Xu Wen, requesting that his biological son inherit his title.

古文：太后疾甚。
现代文：太后病得很厉害。
English: The Empress Dowager is very ill.

古文：秋，七月，甲午，成德节度使李嗣源以边事稍弭，表求入朝省太后，帝不许。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲午，成德节度使李嗣源以边境战事逐渐停下来为理由，上表请求进朝廷看望一下太后。
English: In the autumn, in July, on the afternoon of the first day of the Chengde Festival, Li Siyuan requested to enter the imperial court to visit the empress dowager on the grounds that the border war had gradually stopped.

古文：壬寅，太后殂。
现代文：但后唐帝没有答应他的请求。壬寅，太后去世。
English: However, Emperor Hou Tang did not agree to his request. In Ren Yin, the empress dowager passed away.

古文：帝毁过甚，五日方食。
现代文：后唐帝由于过份的悲痛，五天以后才开始吃饭。
English: Due to excessive grief, Emperor Hou Tang did not start eating until five days later.

古文：八月，癸未，杖杀河南令罗贯。
现代文：八月，癸未，河南县令罗贯被杖打而死。
English: In August, shortly before the New Year, Ling Luoqan of Henan County was beaten to death with a cane.

古文：初，贯为礼部员外郎，性强直，为郭崇韬所知，用为河南令。
现代文：起初，罗贯任礼部员外郎，性情刚直，被郭崇韬赏识，任用他去当河南县令。
English: At first, Luo Guanzhong was a member of the etiquette department. He had a straightforward temperament and was appreciated by Guo Chongzhen, who appointed him to be the Henan County magistrate.

古文：为政不避权豪，伶宦请托，书积几案，一不报，皆以示崇韬，崇韬奏之，由是伶宦切齿。
现代文：他在任河南县令期间，处理政事从不回避那些有权有势之家，伶人宦官们请求托办事情的书信堆满了桌子，他一个也不给回答，把这些书信全部拿去让郭崇韬看，郭崇韬把这些事上奏给后唐帝，因此那些伶人宦官们对罗贯恨得咬牙切齿。
English: During his tenure as the Henan county magistrate, he never shied away from dealing with the powerful and influential families when dealing with political affairs. The eunuchs' letters requesting the commissioning of affairs piled up on the table, and he did not answer a single one. He took all these letters to let Guo Chongyi see. Guo Chongyi reported these matters to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty. Therefore, those eunuchs hated Luo Ran with all their teeth.

古文：河南尹张全义亦以贯高伉，恶之，遣婢诉于皇后，后与伶宦共毁之，帝含怒未发。
现代文：河南尹张全义也认为罗贯很高傲，十分讨厌罗贯，派奴婢告诉皇后，皇后和伶人宦官们一起诋毁罗贯，后唐帝听了虽然内心很生气，但还没有发作出来。
English: Yin Zhang Quan Yi of Henan also thought that Luo Ran was very proud and hated Luo Ran very much. He sent his slaves to tell the empress that the empress and the eunuchs of the Han Dynasty had slandered Luo Ran together. After listening to this, the Tang Emperor was very angry, but he did not have a fit.

古文：会帝自往寿安视坤陵役者，道路泥泞，桥多坏。
现代文：正好这时后唐帝自前往寿安察看修筑坤陵的人们，这里的道路泥泞，桥梁多数也毁坏。
English: It was just at this time that Emperor Tang went to Shou'an to inspect the people who were building Kunling. The roads here were muddy, and most of the bridges were destroyed.

古文：帝问主者为谁，宦官对属河南。
现代文：后唐帝就问主管这里的是谁，宦官们回答后唐帝说是河南县令罗贯。
English: Later, Emperor Tang asked who was in charge here, and the eunuchs answered that Emperor Tang said it was Luo Ran of Henan County.

古文：帝怒，下贯狱；狱吏榜掠，体无完肤，明日，传诏杀之。
现代文：后唐帝听了十分生气，下令把罗贯抓入监狱。监狱吏们用棍子打他，打得罗贯体无完肤。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Tang became very angry and ordered Luo Ran to be taken to prison. The prison officials beat him with a stick, beating Luo Ran's body to a pulp.

古文：崇韬谏曰： 贯坐桥道不修，法不至死。 
现代文：第二天，后唐帝下诏要把罗贯杀死，郭崇韬劝后唐帝说： 罗贯犯了桥路不修的罪，但按照法律也不应该定死罪。 
English: The next day, Emperor Gao of Tang issued an edict to kill Luo Ran. Guo Chongyi advised Emperor Gao to say: Luo Ran committed the crime of not repairing the bridge, but according to the law, he should not be sentenced to death.

古文：帝怒曰： 太后灵驾将发，天子朝夕往来，桥道不修，卿言无罪，是党也！ 
现代文：后唐帝很生气地说： 太后的灵驾很快就要出发，天子经常往来这段路间，这里的桥路不修治，你说他无罪，太袒护他了。 
English: Afterward, Emperor Tang said angrily, "Your empress's hearse will soon set off. The heavenly son often travels between this section of road. The bridge here is not maintained. You say he is not guilty, you are too protective of him."

古文：崇韬曰： 陛下以万乘之尊，怒一县令，使天下谓陛下用法不平，臣之罪也。 
现代文：郭崇韬说： 陛下是国家最尊崇的人，为一个县令生气，让天下人说陛下用法不平，这是我的罪过。 
English: Guo Chongyao said: Your Majesty is the most respected person in the country. It is my sin to be angry with a county magistrate and let the world say that Your Majesty's usage is unfair.

古文：帝曰： 既公所爱，任公裁之。 
现代文：后唐帝说： 既是你喜欢的人，那任凭你来裁决。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang said, "If it is someone you like, it is up to you to decide."

古文：拂衣起入宫，崇韬随之，论奏不已；帝自阖殿门，崇韬不得入。
现代文：于是后唐帝拂袖而起，进入宫中，郭崇韬跟随着没完没了地向后唐帝论说奏请。后唐帝亲自把殿门关了，郭崇韬没有进入宫中。
English: As a result, the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty rolled up his sleeves and entered the palace, followed by Guo Chongyi, who endlessly pleaded with the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty. The Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty personally closed the palace door, and Guo Chongyi did not enter the palace.

古文：贯竟死，暴尸府门，远近冤之。
现代文：最后罗贯还是被处死，在府门前把他的尸体示众，远近人们都认为他死得冤枉。
English: In the end, Luo Ran was still put to death and his body was displayed in front of the government building. People near and far believed that his death was unjustified.

古文：丁亥，遣吏部侍郎李德休等赐吴越国王玉册、金印，红袍御衣。
现代文：丁亥，后唐帝派遣吏部侍郎李德休等前去赏赐给吴越国王玉册、金印、红袍御衣。
English: After the death of Emperor Dinghai, Emperor Tang sent Li Dexiu, the attendant of the cadre department, to reward King Wu Yue with a jade scroll, a gold seal, and a red robe.

古文：九月，蜀主与太后、太妃游青城山，历丈人观、上清宫，遂至彭州阳平化、汉州三学山而还。
现代文：九月，前蜀主和太后、太妃到青城山游玩，经过丈人观、上清宫，又到了彭州阳平化、汉州三学山，后来才回去。
English: In September, the former Lord of Shu, the empress dowager, and the empress dowager went to Qingcheng Mountain for a tour. After visiting the father-in-law and the Shangqing Palace, they went to Yangpinghua in Pengzhou and Sanshueishan in Hanzhou, and only returned later.

古文：乙未，立皇子继岌为魏王。
现代文：乙未，后唐立皇子李继岌为魏王。
English: In the 2nd year of the Wei Dynasty, the Emperor of Tang Dynasty, Li Jizhe, became the King of Wei.

古文：丁酉，帝与宰相议伐蜀，威胜节度使李绍钦素谄事宣徽使李绍宏，绍宏荐 绍钦有盖世奇才，虽孙、吴不如，可以大任。 
现代文：丁酉，后唐帝与宰相商议讨伐前蜀，威胜节度使李绍钦平时巴结讨好宣徽使李绍宏，李绍宏推荐说： 李绍钦有盖世奇才，孙子、吴起都不如他，可以委任他干大事。 
English: Ding Jun, after the Tang Emperor and the Prime Minister discussed the campaign against the former Shu, the victory of the festival made Li Shaoqin the best in peacetime, and made Li Shaohong the best, Li Shaohong recommended that: Li Shaoqin has a world-class talent, his grandson and Wu Qi are not as good as him, he can be appointed to do great things.

古文：郭崇韬曰： 段凝亡国之将，奸谄绝伦，不可信也。 
现代文：郭崇韬说： 李绍钦是亡国之将，他奸诈献媚到了无与伦比的地步，不能相信他。 
English: Guo Chongyao said: Li Shaoqin is the general of the country's downfall. His treachery and flattery have reached an unparalleled level. We cannot trust him.

古文：众举李嗣源，崇韬曰： 契丹方炽，总管不可离河朔。
现代文：大家又推荐李嗣源，郭崇韬说： 契丹方面正打的激烈，总管李嗣源不能离开河朔。
English: Everyone also recommended Li Siyuan, and Guo Chongyi said: The Khitan side is fighting fiercely, and the general manager Li Siyuan cannot leave Hexuo.

古文：魏王地当储副，未立殊功，请依故事，以为伐蜀都统，成其威名。 
现代文：魏王应当是君位的继承人，但他没有立过什么特殊功劳，请按照过去的惯例，任命他为讨伐蜀国的统帅，成全他的威名。 
English: The king of Wei should be the heir to the throne, but he has not made any special merit. Please follow the past practice and appoint him as the commander of the campaign against Shu to fulfill his prestige.

古文：帝曰： 儿幼，岂能独往，当求其副。 
现代文：后唐帝说： 儿子还小，怎么能让他单独前去，应当给他寻找一个副统帅。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang said: My son is still young, how can I let him go alone, I should find him a vice-commander.

古文：既而曰： 无以易卿。 
现代文：后来后唐帝又说： 没有人可以代替你。 
English: Later, Emperor Tang also said, "No one can replace you."

古文：庚子，以魏王继岌充西川四面行营都统，崇韬充东北面行营都招讨制置等使，军事悉以委之。
现代文：庚子，任命魏王李继岌出任西川四面行营都统，郭崇韬担任东北面行营都招讨制置等使，军队的全部事务都委托给郭崇韬。
English: Geng Zi appointed Wei Wang Li Jizhe to serve as the commander of the Western Sichuan Campaign, and Guo Chongyi to serve as the commander of the Northeastern Campaign. All affairs of the army were entrusted to Guo Chongyi.

古文：又以荆南节度使高季兴充东南面行营都招讨使，凤翔节度使李继严充都供军转运应接等使，同州节度使李令德充行营副招讨使，陕州节度使李绍琛充蕃汉马步军都排陈斩斫使兼马步军都指挥使，西京留守张筠充西川管内安抚应接使，华州节度使毛璋充左厢马步都虞候，邠州节度使董璋充右厢马步都虞候，客省使李严充西川管内招抚使，将兵六万伐蜀，仍诏季兴自取夔、忠、万三州为巡属。
现代文：又任命荆南节度使高季兴担任东南面行营都招讨使，凤翔节度使李继担任都供军转运应接等使，同州节度使李令德担任行营副招讨使，陕州节度使李绍琛担任藩汉马步军都排阵斩斫使兼马步军都指挥使，西京留守张筠担任西川管内安抚应接使，华州节度使毛璋担任左厢马步都虞候，州节度使董璋担任右厢马步都虞候，客省使李严担任西川管内招抚使，率兵六万前往讨伐蜀国。同时下诏让高季兴率兵夺取夔、忠、万三州作为荆南巡属。
English: He also appointed Gao Jixing as the envoy for the southeastern campaign, Fengxiang as the envoy for the supply and transportation of the army, Tongzhou as the deputy envoy for the campaign, Li Lingde as the deputy envoy for the campaign, Shaanxi as the envoy for the formation of the army and the command of the army, Zhang Jun as the envoy for the pacification of the West River, Huazhou as the envoy for the pacification of the West River, Mao Jun as the envoy for the pacification of the West River, Dong Jun as the envoy for the pacification of the West River, and Li Yan as the envoy for the pac

古文：都统置中军，以供奉官李从袭充中军马步都指挥监押，高品李廷安、吕知柔充魏王府通谒。
现代文：都统设置中军，以供奉官李从袭担任中军马步都指挥监押，又让宦官李廷安、吕知柔担任魏王府的通谒。
English: The Chinese army was set up in the capital, with the official Li Conghai serving as the commander and warden of the Chinese army, and the eunuchs Li Ting'an and Lv Zhirou serving as the eunuchs of the Wei royal court.

古文：辛丑，以工部尚书任圜、翰林学士李愚并参预都统军机。
现代文：辛丑，让工部尚书任圜、翰林学士李愚一并参与都统军中的机要事情。
English: Sin ugly, let the Ministry of Industry Shangshu Renqi, Hanlin Baccalaureate Li Yu and participate in the important things in the unified army.

古文：自六月甲午雨，罕见日星，江河百川皆溢，凡七十五日乃霁。
现代文：自从六月甲午下雨以来，很少能看见太阳和星星，江河百川到处溢流，雨下了七十五天才停下来。
English: Since it rained on the afternoon of the first day of June, the sun and stars have rarely been seen, and the rivers and streams have overflowed everywhere. It took seventy-five days for the rain to stop.

古文：郭崇韬以北都留守孟知祥有荐引旧恩，将行，言于上曰： 孟知祥信厚有谋，若得西川而求帅，无逾此人者。 
现代文：郭崇韬为了报答北都留守孟知祥过去引荐他的旧恩，临出发以前，对后唐帝说： 孟知祥忠厚诚实，又有谋略，如果能夺得西川而寻求统帅，那没有人能够超过他。 
English: Guo Chongzhen, in order to repay the old favor of Meng Zhixiang, who stayed in Beijing to introduce him in the past, said to the Emperor of the Later Tang Dynasty before leaving: Meng Zhixiang is loyal and honest, and has a strategy. If you can win the West River and seek a commander, then no one can surpass him.

古文：又荐鄴都副留守张宪谨重有识，可为相，戊申，大军西行。
现代文：郭崇韬还推荐邺都副留守张宪稳重有见识，可以任他为相。戊申，大军向西出发。
English: Guo Chongzhen also recommended that Zhang Xian, the deputy of the capital, was steady and insightful, and he could be appointed as the minister. Boshin, the army set off westward.

古文：蜀安重霸劝王承休请蜀主东游秦州。
现代文：前蜀国安重霸劝王承休请求前蜀主到东面的秦州去游玩。
English: The former Shu Guoan heavyweights advised Wang Chengyu to ask the former Shu lord to visit Qinzhou in the east.

古文：承休到官，即毁府署，作行宫，大兴力役，强取民间女子教歌舞，图形遗韩昭，使言于蜀主；又献花木图，盛称秦州山川土风之美。
现代文：王承休到任后，马上就拆除了府署的房子，修建行宫，大兴土木，让人们来服劳役。他又强夺民女教她们唱歌跳舞，并画出这些歌舞的图像送给韩昭，请韩昭言于前蜀主。王承休又将秦州产的好花木画成图画献上，盛夸秦州山川土风的美丽。
English: After Wang Chengxiu took office, he immediately demolished the house of the prefectural government, built a palace, and expanded civil engineering so that people could serve as laborers. He also forced women to teach them to sing and dance, and drew the images of these songs and dances to Han Zhao, asking Han Zhao to tell the former emperor. Wang Chengxiu also painted the good flowers and trees produced in Qinzhou into pictures, praising the beauty of the mountains and rivers of Qinzhou.

古文：蜀主将如秦州，群臣谏者甚众，皆不听；王宗弼上表谏，蜀主投其表于地；太后涕泣不食，止之，亦不能得。
现代文：前蜀主将要去秦州游玩，大臣中有很多人劝说，前蜀主不听。王宗弼上表进行观劝，前蜀主把他的表章扔在地上。太后痛哭吃不下饭，劝他不要去，也没有听从。
English: The former emperor was going to travel to Qinzhou. Many ministers tried to persuade the former emperor, but he would not listen. Wang Zonglu went to the table to watch and persuade, but the former emperor threw his seal on the ground. The empress dowager cried and could not eat, and advised him not to go, but he did not listen.

古文：前秦州节度判官蒲禹卿上表几二千言，其略曰： 先帝艰难创业，欲传之万世。
现代文：原来的秦州节度判官蒲禹卿给前蜀主上表将近二千多字，大概意思是说： 先帝创业时十分艰难，打算流传万世。
English: The original judge of the Qin State Festival, Pu Yuqing, gave the former emperor a list of nearly two thousand words, which probably meant: The former emperor was very difficult when he started his business, and he intended to pass it down to the next generation.

古文：陛下少长富贵，荒色惑酒。
现代文：陛下从小生长在富贵人家，迷恋于酒色。
English: His Majesty grew up in a wealthy family and was fascinated by the color of wine.

古文：秦州人杂羌、胡，地多瘴疠，万众困于奔驰，郡县罢于供亿。
现代文：秦州是羌、胡人杂居的地方，经常流行恶性疟疾等传染病，百姓困于力役，郡县为了供应官府所需，疲惫不堪。
English: Qinzhou is a place where the Qiang and Hu people live together. Infectious diseases such as malignant malaria are often prevalent. The people are trapped in forced labor, and the counties are exhausted in order to supply the government.

古文：凤翔久为仇雠，必生衅隙；唐国方通欢好，恐怀疑贰。
现代文：凤翔长期以来与蜀有仇，一定会积嫌引成仇敌。和唐国刚刚互通友好，因无事出兵，恐怕也会引起怀疑。
English: Fengxiang has had a long-standing feud with Shu, which will inevitably lead to the accumulation of hatred and become an enemy. He and Tang just exchanged friendship, and because he sent troops without incident, I'm afraid it will also arouse suspicion.

古文：先皇未尝无故盘游，陛下率意频离宫阙。
现代文：先帝从来没有无故去游玩过，陛下经常随意就离开宫殿。
English: The former emperor never went on a trip without a reason, and his majesty often left the palace at will.

古文：秦皇东狩，銮驾不还；炀帝南巡，龙舟不返。
现代文：秦始皇向东巡狩，车马未归；隋炀帝南巡，龙舟不返。
English: Qin Shihuang went on a hunting tour to the east, but his horses and chariots did not return; the Sui and Qin emperors went on a tour to the south, but their dragon boats did not return.

古文：蜀都强盛，雄视邻邦，边亭无烽火之虞，境内有腹心之疾，百姓失业，盗贼公行。
现代文：蜀都很强大，虎视邻邦，边境虽上没有烽火的忧患，境内却有腹心之疾，百姓失业，盗贼横行。
English: Both Shus are very powerful, eyeing their neighbors, and although there is no trouble at the border, there is trouble at home, the people are unemployed, and thieves are rampant.

古文：昔李势屈于桓温，刘禅降于邓艾，山河险固，不足凭恃。 
现代文：从前李势屈从于桓温，刘禅终于投降于邓艾，山河虽然险要牢固，但仍不能够依赖。 
English: In the past, Li Xiang yielded to Huan Wen, Liu Zhen finally surrendered to Deng Ai, and although the mountains and rivers are almost solid, they still cannot be relied on.

古文：韩昭谓禹卿曰： 吾收汝表，俟主上西归，当使狱吏字字问汝！ 
现代文：韩昭对蒲禹卿说： 我先收起你上的表章，等到主上回成都时，一定让狱吏一字一句来问你！ 
English: Han Zhao said to Pu Yuqing: I will put away your watch first, and when the Lord returns to Chengdu, I will definitely let the prison officers ask you every word!

古文：王承休妻严氏美，蜀主私焉，故锐意欲行。
现代文：王承休的妻子严氏长得很美丽，前蜀主与她私通，所以他坚决想去。
English: Wang Chengxiu's wife, Yan, was very beautiful, and the former emperor had sexual intercourse with her, so he was determined to go.

古文：冬，十月，排陈斩斫使李绍琛与李严将骁骑三千、步兵万人为前锋，招讨判官陈乂至宝鸡，称疾乞留。
现代文：冬季，十月，排陈斩斫使李绍琛和李严率领勇敢善战的三千骑兵、一万步兵为前锋，招讨判官陈义到了宝鸡说身体有病，请求留在那里。
English: In the winter, in October, Li Shaoqi and Li Yan, led by the brave and warlike three thousand cavalry and ten thousand infantry, were sent to Baoji by Chen Zhaoqi. The judge Chen Yi came to Baoji and said that he was ill and asked him to stay there.

古文：李愚厉声曰： 陈乂见利则进，惧难则止。
现代文：李严生气地说： 陈义见到利益就前进，害怕困难就停止。
English: Li Yan said angrily: Chen Yi advances when he sees benefits, and stops when he fears difficulties.

古文：今大军涉险，人心易摇，宜斩以徇！ 
现代文：现在大军爬山涉险，人心很容易动摇，应当把他杀掉示众！ 
English: Now that a large army is climbing the mountain and taking risks, people's hearts are easily swayed. He should be killed and shown to the public!

古文：由是军中无敢顾望者。
现代文：因此，军中再没有敢踌躇不前进的。
English: As a result, no one in the army dared to hold back any longer.

古文：乂，蓟州人也。
现代文：陈义是蓟州人。
English: Chen Yi is from Zhangzhou.

古文：癸亥，蜀主引兵数万发成都，甲子，至汉州。
现代文：癸亥，前蜀主率领数万大军从成都出发。甲子，到达汉州。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, the former Lord of Shu led tens of thousands of troops from Chengdu to Kozi and arrived in Hanzhou.

古文：武兴节度使王承捷告唐兵西上，蜀主以为群臣同谋沮己，犹不信，大言曰： 吾方欲耀武。 
现代文：武兴节度使王承捷报告说后唐兵从西面上来，前蜀主以为是大臣们合谋阻止他，对王承捷所讲的不大相信，于是他夸口说： 我正想炫耀一下武力，显示一下我的威风。 
English: The Wu Xing Festival made Wang Cheng Jie report that the post-Tang soldiers were coming from the west, and the former Shu master thought that the ministers were conspiring to stop him. He did not believe much of what Wang Cheng Jie said, so he boasted: I just wanted to show off my power and show my dignity.

古文：遂东行。
现代文：于是向东前进。
English: So they headed east.

古文：在道与群臣赋诗，殊不为意。
现代文：在路上还和大臣们吟诗赋歌，根本不在意。
English: On the way, he also chanted poems and songs with the ministers, completely unconcerned.

古文：丁丑，李绍琛攻蜀威武城，蜀指挥使唐景思将兵出降；城使周彦禋等知不能守，亦降。
现代文：丁丑，李绍琛率军向前蜀威武城进攻，前蜀指挥使唐景思率兵投降。城使周彦等知道难以坚守，也投降了。
English: Ding Gou, Li Shaoqi led the army to attack Shuweiwu City, and the former Shu commander made Tang Jingshi and his soldiers surrender. The city envoy Zhou Yan and others knew that it was difficult to hold out, and they also surrendered.

古文：景思，秦州人也。
现代文：唐景思是秦州人。
English: Tang Jingsi is from Qinzhou.

古文：得城中粮二十万斛。
现代文：李绍琛夺得城中的粮食二十万斛。
English: Li Shaoqin seized 200,000 baht worth of grain in the city.

古文：绍琛纵其败兵万馀人逸去，因倍道趣凤州，李严飞书以谕王承捷。
现代文：李绍琛放走了前蜀军败兵一余人，然后兼程直奔凤州。李严飞速向王承捷报信。
English: Li Shaoqi released more than one defeated soldier of the former Shu army, and then went straight to Fengzhou. Li Yan quickly reported to Wang Chengjie.

古文：李继严竭凤翔蓄积以馈军，不能充，人情忧恐。
现代文：后唐凤翔节度使李继把凤翔积蓄的粮食全部馈送军士，但还不能满足，人心有点担忧和害怕。
English: After the Tang Fengxiang Festival, Li Jizhong sent all the grain accumulated by Fengxiang to the soldiers, but he was still not satisfied, and the people were a little worried and afraid.

古文：郭崇韬入散关，指其山曰： 吾辈进无成功，不复得还此矣。
现代文：郭崇韬进入散关后，指着这里的山说： 我们如果进攻不能成功，就不能再回到这里来。
English: After Guo Chongzhen entered Sankuan, he pointed to the mountain here and said: If our attack is not successful, we will not be able to come back here.

古文：当尽力一决。
现代文：应当尽力决一死战。
English: Every effort should be made to fight to the death.

古文：今馈运将竭，宜先取凤州，因其粮。 
现代文：现在运来的粮食快要吃完了，应当首先夺取凤州，用那里的粮食。 
English: The grain that has been shipped now is almost finished, so we should first take Pengzhou and use the grain there.

古文：诸将皆言蜀地险固，未可长驱，宜按兵观衅。
现代文：各位将领都说蜀地险要坚固，不可长驱直入，应当按兵不动，观察一下蜀兵的动向。
English: All the generals said that the Shu land peril should be solid and should not be driven straight in. It is necessary to keep the soldiers still and observe the movement of the Shu soldiers.

古文：崇韬以问李愚，愚曰： 蜀人苦其主荒淫，莫为之用。
现代文：郭崇韬以此询问李愚，李愚回答说： 蜀人对蜀主荒淫无度感到很苦恼，都不想为他效力。
English: Guo Chongyong asked Li Gu about this, and Li Gu replied, "The Shu people are very distressed by Lord Shu's immorality, and they don't want to serve him.

古文：宜乘其人情崩离，风驱霆击，彼皆破胆，虽有险阻，谁与守之！
现代文：应当乘蜀国人心涣散时迅速发起进攻，这样他们都会被吓破了胆，虽然有险阻，又有谁来为他坚守呢？
English: He should take advantage of the fact that the hearts of the people of Shu are scattered and quickly launch an attack, so that they will all be scared. Although there are obstacles, who will stand up for him?

古文：兵势不可缓也。 
现代文：战机不可迟缓。 
English: Don't slow down.

古文：是日李绍琛告秉，崇韬喜，谓李愚曰： 公料敌如此，吾复何忧！ 
现代文：当天李绍琛又传来捷报，郭崇韬听了之后十分高兴，对李愚说： 你料敌如此，我还有什么可忧患的。 
English: On the same day, Li Shaoqi received another piece of good news. Guo Chongyi was very happy after listening to it. He said to Li Yu, "You didn't expect it, I have nothing to worry about."

古文：乃倍道而进。
现代文：因此率军兼程前进。
English: Therefore, he led the army to advance.

古文：戊寅，王承捷以凤、兴、文、扶四州印节迎降，得兵八千，粮四十万斛。
现代文：戊寅，王承捷持凤、兴、文、扶四州的印节来投降，得到八千多降兵，粮食四十万斛。
English: Wu Yin, Wang Cheng Jie held Feng, Xing, Wen, and Fu four states to surrender on the day of the seal, and received more than eight thousand troops and four hundred thousand baht of grain.

古文：崇韬曰： 平蜀必矣！ 
现代文：郭崇韬说： 平定蜀国是必定无疑了。 
English: Guo Chongyao said: "There is no doubt that Shu will be pacified.

古文：即以都统牒命承捷摄武兴节度使。
现代文：因此以都统的命令让王承捷代理武兴节度使。
English: Therefore, by order of the Metropolitan Government, Wang Chengjie was appointed as the deputy of the Wu Xing Festival envoy.

古文：己卯，蜀主至利州，威武败卒奔还，始信唐兵之来。
现代文：己卯，前蜀主到达利州，威武城被打败的士卒逃了回来，他才相信后唐兵已经到来。
English: However, when the former Shu master arrived in Lizhou and the defeated soldiers in Weiwu escaped back, he believed that the post-Tang soldiers had already arrived.

古文：王宗弼、宋光嗣言于蜀主曰： 东川、山南兵力尚完，陛下但以大军扼利州，唐人安敢悬兵深入！ 
现代文：王宗弼、宋光嗣对前蜀主说： 东川、山南的军队还是很完整的，陛下只要用大军据守利州，唐人怎么敢孤军深入。 
English: Wang Zongyao and Song Guangzhi said to the former Lord of Shu: The armies of Dongchuan and Shannan are still very complete. Your Majesty only needs to use a large army to defend Lizhou. How dare the Tang people go deep alone.

古文：从之。
现代文：前蜀主听从了他们的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：庚辰，以随驾清道指挥使王宗勋、王宗俨、兼侍中王宗昱为三招讨，将兵三万逆战。
现代文：庚辰，任命随驾清道指挥使王宗勋、王宗俨、兼侍中王宗昱为三招讨，率兵三万迎战后唐军。
English: Geng Chen appointed Wang Zongxun, Wang Zongyao, and Wang Zongyao, who was also an aide-de-camp of the commander of the Qing Road, as the three-pronged attack, leading 30,000 soldiers to meet the post-war Tang army.

古文：从驾兵自绵、汉至深渡，千里相属，皆怨愤，曰： 龙武军粮赐倍于它军，它军安能御敌！ 
现代文：随驾的士卒从绵、汉出发到达深渡，相连千里，士卒们都很怨恨，说： 皇帝赏赐给龙武军的粮草有其他军的好几倍，其他军队怎么能来抵御敌军呢？ 
English: Accompanying officers and men set out from Mian and Han and arrived at Shundu, thousands of miles apart. The officers and men were very resentful, saying, "The emperor has given the Long March Army several times more grain and grass than other armies. How can other armies resist the enemy army?"

古文：李绍琛等过长举，兴州都指挥使程奉琏将所部兵五百来降，且请先治桥栈以俟唐军，由是军行无险阻之虞。
现代文：李绍琛等率军经过长举，兴州都指挥使程奉琏率领他的所属部队五百人前来投降，请求首先修治桥梁和栈道，等待后唐军的到来，这样后唐军行进就不用提心有什么险阴。
English: After Li Shaoqi led the army through the Long March, the commander of Xingzhou ordered Cheng Fengqi to lead his 500 subordinate troops to surrender, requesting that the bridges and causeways be repaired first and waiting for the arrival of the post-Tang army, so that the post-Tang army would not have to worry about any danger.

古文：辛巳，兴州刺史王承鉴弃城走，绍琛等克兴州，郭崇韬以唐景思摄兴州刺史。
现代文：辛巳，兴州刺史王承鉴弃城逃走，李绍琛等攻下了兴州，郭崇韬任命唐景思代理兴州刺史。
English: Xin Si, the Xingzhou assassin Wang Cheng abandoned the city and fled, Li Shaoqi and others captured Xingzhou, and Guo Chongyi appointed Tang Jingshi as the acting assassin of Xingzhou.

古文：乙酉，成州刺史王承朴弃城走。
现代文：乙酉，成州刺史王承朴弃城逃走。
English: Acetylene, Chengdu sting Wangcheng Park abandoned the city and fled.

古文：李绍琛等与蜀三招讨战于三泉，蜀兵大败，斩首五千级，馀众溃走。
现代文：李绍琛等和前蜀国三个招讨在三泉作战，前蜀军大败，五千余人被斩首，其余的士卒都溃逃。
English: Li Shaoqi and the other three generals of the former Shu State fought in Sanquan. The former Shu Army was defeated, more than five thousand people were beheaded, and the remaining soldiers fled.

古文：又得粮十五万斛于三泉，由是军食优足。
现代文：李绍琛在三泉又夺得十五万斛粮食，军队的粮食又富足起来。
English: In Sanquan, Li Shaoqin won another 150,000 mu of grain, and the army's grain became more plentiful.

古文：戊子，葬贞简太后于坤陵。
现代文：戊子，在坤陵埋葬了贞简太后。
English: On the 28th, Empress Dowager Zhengjian was buried in Kunling.

古文：蜀主闻王宗勋等败，自利州倍道西走，断桔柏津浮梁；使中书令、判六军诸卫事王宗弼将大军守利州，且令斩王宗勋等三招讨。
现代文：前蜀主听说王宗勋等战败，从利州快速向西逃跑，沿途拆除了桔柏津的浮桥。并令中书令、判六军诸卫事王宗弼率领大军坚守利州，又令将王宗勋等三个招讨斩杀。
English: Hearing of the defeat of Wang Zongxun and others, the former Shu lord quickly fled westward from Lizhou, tearing down the pontoon bridge in Jiubeijin along the way. He also ordered Wang Zongxun to lead a large army to defend Lizhou, and ordered Wang Zongxun and three others to be killed.

古文：李绍琛昼夜兼行趣利州。
现代文：李绍琛昼夜兼程直奔利州。
English: Li Shaoqi made a round-the-clock journey straight to Lizhou.

古文：蜀武德留后宋光葆遗郭崇韬书， 请唐兵不入境，当举巡属内附；苟不如约，则背城决战以报本朝。 
现代文：前蜀国武德留后宋光葆送给郭崇韬一封信，信中说： 请求唐军不要进入境内，如果办到，我就将管辖范围内的地方全部归附于唐军。如果不能按约定办，我就背城一战，以此来报答蜀主。 
English: A letter sent by Song Guangyi to Guo Chongyi after Wu De's stay in the former Shu state said: Request the Tang army not to enter the territory. If it is done, I will attach all the places within the jurisdiction to the Tang army. If it cannot be done according to the agreement, I will turn my back on the city for one battle, in order to repay the Shu lord.

古文：崇韬复书抚纳之。
现代文：郭崇韬回信表示愿如约接纳他们。
English: Guo Chongzhen replied to the letter and expressed his willingness to accept them as agreed.

古文：己丑，魏王继岌至兴州，光葆以梓、绵、剑、龙、普五州，武定节度使王承肇以洋、蓬、壁三州，山南节度使兼侍中王宗威以梁、开、通、渠、麟五州，阶州刺史王承岳以阶州，皆降。
现代文：乙丑，魏王李继岌到达兴州，宋光葆率梓、绵、剑、龙、普五州，武定节度使王承肇率洋、蓬、壁三州，山南节度使王宗威率梁、开、通、渠、麟五州，阶州刺史王承岳率阶州，全部投降了后唐军。
English: B Ugly, Wei King Li Jizhe arrived in Xingzhou, Song Guangya led Zi, Mian, Jian, Long and Pu five states, Wuding Festival led Wang Chengzhao led the Western, Peng and Wall three states, Shannan Festival led Wang Zongwei led the Liang, Kai, Tong, Qu and Lin five states, Shanzhou Sisi Wang Chengyue led the Shanzhou, all surrendered to the post-Tang army.

古文：承肇，宗侃之子也。
现代文：王承肇是王宗侃的儿子。
English: Wang Chengzhao is the son of Wang Zongkan.

古文：自馀城镇皆望风款附。
现代文：其余城镇都望风归附后唐军。
English: The rest of the towns are expected to be annexed by the Tang army.

古文：天雄节度使王承休与副使安重霸谋掩击唐军，重霸曰： 击之不胜，则大事去矣。
现代文：天雄节度使王承休和副使安重霸谋划伏击后唐军，安重霸说： 袭击如果不能取得胜利，那么大事就完了。
English: After the Tianxiong Festival, Wang Chengxiu and his deputy An Chongba plotted to ambush the Tang army. An Chongba said: "If the attack does not achieve victory, then the big event is over."

古文：蜀中精兵十万，天下险固，唐兵虽勇，安能直度剑门邪！
现代文：蜀国有十万精兵，地形险要牢固，唐军虽然勇敢，怎么能够顺利到达剑门呢？
English: There are one hundred thousand elite soldiers in Shou, the terrain should be solid, although the Tang army is brave, how can they successfully reach the Jianmen?

古文：然公受国恩，闻难不可不赴，愿与公俱西。 
现代文：国家对你的恩情很大，听到国家有危难不可不赴难，我希望和你一起向西回朝。 
English: The country is very grateful to you. When you hear that the country is in trouble, you have to go to the trouble. I hope to go back to the west with you.

古文：承休素亲信之，以为然。
现代文：王承休平素很信任安重霸，认为他讲得对。
English: Wang Chengyu, who had always trusted him, thought so.

古文：重霸请赂羌人买文、扶州路以归；承休从之，使重霸将龙武军及所募兵万二千人以从。
现代文：安重霸请求贿赂一下羌族人，买通文、扶二州的道路以便回蜀时通过，王承休也听从了他的意见，并让安重霸率领龙武军以及招募来的一万二千多士卒跟随他一起回朝。
English: An Chongba asked Wang Chengxiu to bribe the Yi people, buy the pass, and help the two-state road to pass when returning to Shu. Wang Chengxiu also listened to his opinion, and let An Chongba lead the Longwu army and recruit more than 12,000 soldiers to follow him back to the North.

古文：将行，州人饯于城外。
现代文：临行前，州人在城外为他饯行。
English: Before his departure, the people of the state marched for him outside the city.

古文：承休上道，重霸拜于马前曰： 国家竭力以得秦、陇，若从开府还朝，谁当守之！
现代文：王承休上路后，安重霸在他的马前跪拜说： 国家用全部力量夺得秦、陇二州，如果我也跟随你回朝，谁来坚守这里呢？
English: After Wang Chengyu went on his way, An Chongba knelt down in front of his horse and said: The country used all its power to conquer Qin and Shandong. If I also follow you back to China, who will stay here?

古文：开府行矣，重霸请为公留守。 
现代文：你走之后，我请求为你坚守在这里。 
English: After you're gone, I'm begging you to stick around.

古文：承休业已上道，无如之何，遂与招讨副使王宗汭自文、扶而南。
现代文：王承休已经上路，对安重霸没有办法，于是与招讨副使王宗从扶、文二州向南前进。
English: Wang Chengxiu was already on the road and had no way to deal with An Chongba, so he and Wang Zong, the vice-envoy for recruitment, headed south from Fuxi and Wenzhou.

古文：其地皆不毛，羌人抄之，且战且行，士卒冻馁，比至茂州，馀众二千而已。
现代文：这里都是不毛之地，羌族人从后面抄袭他们，王承休率军边战边走，士卒们又冻又饿，到茂州时只剩下二千人。
English: They were all barren lands. The Yao copied them from behind. Wang Chengyu led the army to the battlefield. The soldiers were cold and hungry. By the time they reached Mochou, only two thousand remained.

古文：重霸遂以秦、陇来降。
现代文：于是安重霸就率秦、陇二州投降了后唐军。
English: As a result, An Chongba led the Qin and Han armies to surrender to the Later Tang.

