古文：杨戴阳二李韩杜邢杨朝晟，字叔明，夏州朔方人。
现代文：杨朝晟字叔明，夏州朔方人。
English: Yang Zhaohui, Zhu Ming, Xia Zhou, Shuo Fang.

古文：兴行间，以先锋功授甘泉府果毅。
现代文：崛起行伍中，凭当先锋的功劳任命为甘泉府果毅。
English: During his rise through the ranks, he was awarded the title of Ganquan Fu Guoyi for his achievements as a pioneer.

古文：建中初，从李怀光讨刘文喜泾州，斩获多，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：建中初年，跟随李怀光在泾州征讨刘文喜，杀敌多，加封为骠骑大将军。
English: In the first year of middle school, he followed Li Huaiguang in Zhangzhou to recruit Liu Wenxi, killed many enemies, and was awarded the title of General of Horse Cavalry.

古文：李纳寇徐州，从唐朝臣往讨，常冠军。
现代文：李纳侵犯徐州，跟随唐朝臣去征讨，常常勇冠全军。
English: Li Na invaded Xuzhou, followed the Tang courtier to conquer, and often won the whole army.

古文：怀光赴难奉天，属朝晟兵千人下咸阳，赐实封百五十户。
现代文：李怀光奔赴奉天救驾，交给朝晟一千兵攻下咸阳，朝廷赏赐一百五十户赋税。
English: Li Huaguang rushed to the aid of heaven and gave 1,000 soldiers to the imperial court to conquer Xianyang. The imperial court rewarded 150 households with taxes.

古文：怀光反，韩游瑰退保邠、宁，贼党张昕守邠州，大索军实，多募士，欲潜归之。
现代文：李怀光反叛，韩游瑰退兵保卫州、宁州。叛贼党羽张昕守卫州，大肆勒索军饷，招募了很多士兵，想暗中投降李怀光。
English: Li Huaiguang rebelled, Han Yuqi retreated to defend the state and Ningzhou. The renegade party Zhang Ye guarded the state, extorted military pay, recruited a lot of soldiers, and wanted to secretly surrender to Li Huaiguang.

古文：朝晟父怀宾为游瑰将，夜以数十骑斩昕及同谋者。
现代文：朝晟的父亲怀宾当韩游瑰的将领，夜晚带几十名骑兵杀了张昕和同谋人。
English: Morning Glory's father, Huai Bin, was the general of the Han Yu Qui, and he took dozens of cavalrymen to kill Zhang Ye and his conspirators at night.

古文：游瑰遣怀宾告行在，德宗劳问，授兼御史中丞。
现代文：韩游瑰派怀宾到行宫报告流亡的皇帝，德宗慰劳他，并兼任御史中丞。
English: Han Yu Ji sent Huai Bin to the palace to report the exiled emperor, and Dezong consoled him, and also served as the secretary of the imperial court.

古文：朝晟泣见怀光曰： 父立功于国，子当诛，不可以主兵。 
现代文：朝晟哭着参见怀光说： 父亲为国家立功，儿子应当死，不能用我带兵。 
English: Morning wailing and weeping, see Huaiguang said: Father has made great contributions to the country, son should die, can't use me to lead soldiers.

古文：怀光絷之。
现代文：李怀光囚禁了他。
English: Li Huaiguang imprisoned him.

古文：及诸军围河中，游瑰营长春宫，而怀宾战甚力。
现代文：到各路军马围攻河中时韩游瑰在长春宫扎营，并且怀宾作战很努力。
English: When the various armies and horses besieged Hezhong, Han Yu-kui camped at Changchun Palace, and fought very hard against Baibin.

古文：怀光平，帝原朝晟，因为游瑰都虞候。父子皆开府、宾客、御史中丞，军中以为荣。
现代文：李怀光的叛乱平定后，皇帝赦免了朝晟，因而任韩游瑰为都虞候，父子都任开府、宾客、御史中丞，军中将士们认为他们很荣耀。
English: After Li Huai Guang's rebellion was quelled, the emperor pardoned the imperial concubines, so Han Yu Zhuo was appointed as the governor of the capital, and both father and son were appointed as the governor, guests, and vice-premiers. The lieutenant generals thought they were very honorable.

古文：吐蕃犯边，游瑰自将守宁州，而御士宽，军骄。
现代文：吐蕃侵犯边境，游瑰自己率军守卫宁州，但军纪松弛，士兵骄横放纵。
English: Tubo invaded the border, Yu Gui himself led the army to defend Ningzhou, but the military discipline was slack, and the soldiers were arrogant and indulgent.

古文：及张献甫来代，军遂乱，朝晟逃于郊。
现代文：到张献甫来代替他，军队发生兵变，朝晟逃到城郊。
English: When Zhang Xianfu came to replace him, the army mutinied and the pilgrims fled to the outskirts of the city.

古文：众胁监军，请以范希朝为节度使。
现代文：士兵们胁迫监军，请求派范希朝为节度使。
English: The soldiers coerced the overseers and requested that Fan Xichang be sent as the envoy.

古文：希朝时已在京师。
现代文：范希朝当时在京都。
English: Fan Xichao was in Kyoto at the time.

古文：明日，朝晟出，绐众曰： 予来贺所请之当也。 
现代文：第二天，朝晟出面，哄骗士兵们说： 我来祝贺，你们的请求是适当的。 
English: The next day, Hajime appeared and tricked the soldiers, saying, "I'm here to congratulate you. Your request is appropriate."

古文：众稍定。
现代文：士兵们渐渐安定下来。
English: The soldiers gradually settled down.

古文：朝晟结诸将谋诛首恶者。居三日，绐遣人自邠来，曰： 前请报罢，张公已舍邠矣，反者皆当死，吾不愿尽诛也，第取首恶者。 
现代文：朝晟联络将领们谋划杀死兵变的首恶分子，过了三天，假说派人从州来了，说： 前几天报请朝廷的要求没批准，张公已经放弃州，反叛的人都应处死，但我不希望大家都被杀，只杀首恶分子。 
English: The liaison generals at the hajj had planned to kill the ringleaders of the mutiny. Three days later, they sent someone from the prefecture to say, "The request we submitted to the imperial court a few days ago was not approved. Zhang Gong has abandoned the prefecture. The rebels should all be put to death. But I don't want everyone to be killed, just the ringleaders."

古文：众所讠雚指，斩二百余人，献甫遂入于军。
现代文：士兵们呼喊着检举揭发，杀了二百多个带头闹兵变的人，献甫因此进入军中。
English: The soldiers shouted to denounce and expose, and killed more than two hundred people who led the mutiny, so Xianfu entered the army.

古文：帝以希朝为节度副使，而朝晟加御史大夫。
现代文：皇帝任范希朝为节度副使，并且加封朝晟任御史大夫。
English: The emperor appointed Fan Xichang as the vice-envoy of the festival, and appointed Zong Zhaojun as the chief historian.

古文：贞元九年，城盐州，发卒护境，朝晟屯木波堡。
现代文：贞元九年，修筑盐州城，派兵守卫边境，杨朝晟驻兵木波堡。
English: In the ninth year of the Zhengyuan era, Yanzhou City was built, soldiers were sent to guard the border, and Yang Zhaohui was stationed in Mubo Castle.

古文：会献甫卒，有诏代为邠宁节度使。
现代文：逢张献甫去世，又命令朝晟代任宁节度使。
English: When Zhang Xianfu died, he also ordered the imperial court to appoint Ning Zong as the envoy to the festival.

古文：朝晟请城方渠，合道，木波以遏吐蕃路。
现代文：朝晟请求修筑方渠、木波、合道等城来堵断吐蕃进兵通路。
English: Asahikawa requested the construction of a square canal, a wooden wave, a path and other cities to block the entrance of soldiers from Toba.

古文：诏问： 须兵几何？ 
现代文：诏书问 ：须多少兵？ 
English: The imperial edict asked: How many soldiers are needed?

古文：报曰： 部兵可办。 
现代文：报告说 ：我统领的兵力就够用了。 
English: The report said: "The troops under my command are more than enough.

古文：帝问： 前日城五原，兴师七万，今何易邪？ 
现代文：皇帝问 ：前些时修筑五原城，发动七万士兵，现在为什么容易？ 
English: The emperor asked, "Some time ago, we built Wuhuan City and mobilized seventy thousand soldiers. Why is it so easy now?"

古文：对曰： 盐州之役，虏先知之。今薄戎而城，虏料王师不十万，势难轻入。
现代文：朝晟回答说 ：修筑盐州城的战役，吐蕃军预先就知道了消息，现在用少数兵力去筑城，吐蕃军预料我军不达到十万，势必难得轻易进军。
English: Zhaozhou replied, "In the battle to build Yanzhou City, the Tubo Army knew the news in advance, and now they are using a small number of troops to build the city. The Tubo Army expected that our army would not reach 100,000, so it would be difficult to easily march in.

古文：若发部兵，十日至塞下，未三旬城毕，积刍聚粮，留卒守之，寇至不可拔，莱野翦夷，虏且走，此万全计也。
现代文：如果发动我统领的兵力，十天到了塞下，不到三十天城已筑成功了，积草储粮，留兵守卫，敌军来攻攻不下，坚壁清野，敌军将会退兵，这是万全之计呀。
English: If I mobilise the forces under my command, and in ten days the siege is over, and in less than thirty days the city has been successfully built, the weeds and grain are stored, the soldiers are left to guard, the enemy cannot attack, the walls are clear, and the enemy will retreat, this is a foolproof plan.

古文：若大发兵，阅月乃至，虏亦来，来必战，战则不暇城矣。 
现代文：如果大规模发兵，经一个月才能开到目的地，敌军也来了，来了一定要交战，交战就没有时间筑城了。 
English: If a large-scale army is sent, it will take a month to drive to the destination, and the enemy army will come, and it will definitely have to fight, and there will be no time to build a city.

古文：帝纳其策。
现代文：皇帝采纳了他的策略。
English: The emperor adopted his strategy.

古文：师次方渠，水乏。有青蛇降险下走，视其迹，水从而流，朝晟使筑防环之，遂为渟渊，士饮仰足，图其事以闻。
现代文：军队驻扎在方渠，缺水饮用，有条青蛇从陡坡往下游动，跟踪察看，水从下面流出来，朝晟命令筑堤围起来，于是汇成了深潭。士兵仰仗它饮用充足，这发现水源修水潭的事报告了朝廷。
English: The army was stationed in the square canal, and there was a shortage of water for drinking. A green snake swam down from the steep slope, followed and observed, and water flowed out from below. The hajj ordered to build a dike to enclose it, so it merged into a deep pool. The soldiers relied on it to drink enough, and reported the discovery of the water source to the imperial court.

古文：有诏置祠，命泉曰应圣。
现代文：朝廷又命令修庙，命名这泉水为 应圣 泉。
English: The imperial court also ordered the temple to be repaired and named the spring water Ying Sheng Quan.

古文：已城，吐蕃悉众至，度不能害，乃引去。
现代文：城筑成功了，吐蕃军全军来犯，思量不能侵害，就领军退走。
English: After the successful construction of the city, the whole army of the Tubo army came to the crime, thinking that they could not encroach, they led the army to retreat.

古文：复城马岭而归，开地三百里。
现代文：又修筑了马岭城，开辟了三百里的领土。
English: He also built the city of Maling and opened up three hundred miles of territory.

古文：十七年，卒于屯。
现代文：贞元十七年，病死在驻地。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Jōgen era, he died of illness at his residence.

古文：戴休颜，字休颜，夏州人。家世尚武，志胆不常。
现代文：戴休颜字休颜，夏州人，世代崇尚武艺，志气胆略不一般。
English: Dai Xiuyan, a native of Xiazhou, has been advocating martial arts for generations, and his spirit is somewhat unusual.

古文：郭子仪引为大将，谕平党项羌，以安河曲。
现代文：郭子仪召用为大将，命令平定党项羌族，来安定河曲。
English: Guo Ziyi was appointed as a general and ordered to pacify the Shan people to stabilize Hequ.

古文：试太常卿，封济阴郡公，进封咸宁郡王，兼朔方节度副使。
现代文：试太常卿，封为济阴郡公，加封咸宁郡王，兼朔方节度副使。
English: He was awarded the title of county magistrate of Jiyin County, county king of Xianning County, and deputy envoy of the Shuofang Festival.

古文：城邠州功最，迁盐州刺史。
现代文：修筑州城功劳最大，调盐州刺史。
English: He made the greatest contribution to the construction of the city of Chikuzu, and made history by salting the city.

古文：硃泚反，率兵三千昼夜驰，奔问行在，德宗嘉之，赐实户二百。
现代文：朱氵此反叛，率领三千兵马，昼夜奔驰，奔赴皇帝流亡的行宫慰问，德宗表扬他，赏赐给二百户的赋税。
English: Zhu Xi rebelled and led three thousand soldiers and horses, galloping day and night to the emperor's palace in exile for condolences. De Zong praised him and rewarded him with the tax of two hundred households.

古文：与浑瑊、杜希全、韩游瑰等扞御有劳。
现代文：与浑蠨、杜希全、韩游瑰等抵抗叛军保护皇帝有功。
English: He is credited with protecting the emperor against the rebels led by Hunhyun, Du Hiquan, and Han Youkui.

古文：帝进狩梁、洋，留守奉天。
现代文：皇帝流亡到梁州、洋州，休颜留守奉天。
English: The emperor went into exile in Liangzhou and Yangzhou, and retired to Mingtian.

古文：李怀光屯咸阳，使人诱之，休颜斩其使，勒兵自守。
现代文：李怀光驻兵咸阳，派人引诱他叛变，休颜斩了他的使者，整军自守。
English: Li Huaguang stationed soldiers in Xianyang, sent people to entice him to mutiny, killed his envoy, and reorganized the army to defend themselves.

古文：怀光眙骇，自泾阳夜走。
现代文：怀光吓得瞪着眼，连夜从泾阳逃走。
English: Haiguang stared in fright and fled from Shenyang overnight.

古文：迁检校工部尚书、奉天行营节度使。
现代文：升任检校工部尚书、奉天行营节度使。
English: He was promoted to the post of inspector of the school inspection department, and the post of inspector of the Feng Tian Xingying Festival.

古文：合浑瑊兵破泚偏师，斩首三千级，追至中渭桥。
现代文：联合浑蠨军打败朱氵此的侧翼部队，斩了三千颗叛军首级，追到中渭桥。
English: The joint Hun Army defeated the flanking forces of Zhu Rongke, cut off three thousand rebel heads, and chased them to Zhongyao Bridge.

古文：京师平，又与瑊率兵趋岐阳，邀泚残党。
现代文：京都平定了，又与浑蠨率领部队向岐阳进军，拦击朱氵此的残余部队。
English: Kyoto was pacified, and he marched to Kiyan with troops led by Hunhyun to stop the remnants of Zhu Xizhe's army.

古文：加检校尚书右仆射，进户四百。
现代文：升任检校尚书右仆射，加封四百户的赋税。
English: He was promoted to the post of school inspector, and the tax of 400 households was sealed.

古文：从乘舆至京师，赐女乐、甲第，拜左龙武军统军。
现代文：护从皇帝车驾回京城，赏赐给歌女乐队，第一等的家宅，封为左龙武军统军。
English: Protection from the emperor's car drove back to Beijing, awarded to the song girl band, the first-class home, sealed as the leader of the Left Dragon Army.

古文：卒，赠扬州大都督。
现代文：病故，追封为扬州大都督。
English: After his death from illness, he was posthumously appointed Yangzhou Grand Governor.

古文：弟休璿，历开府仪同三司，封东阳郡王；休晏，历辅国大将军，封彭城郡公。俱以将略称。
现代文：弟弟戴休王睿，历任开府仪同三司，封为东阳郡王；休晏，历任辅国大将军，封为彭城郡公，都因有将才出名。
English: His younger brother, Dai Xiu Wang Rui, successively held the post of Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, and was named the King of Dongyang County; and his younger brother, Xiu Xi, successively held the post of Vice-Major General, and was named the Prince of Pengcheng County. Both of them were famous for their talents as generals.

古文：阳惠元，平州人。
现代文：阳惠元是平州人。
English: Yang Huiyuan is from Pingzhou.

古文：以趫勇奋，事平卢军。
现代文：因矫健勇猛，在平卢军服役。
English: Due to his bravery, he served in the Pinglu Army.

古文：从田神功、李忠臣浮海入青州。
现代文：跟随田神功、李忠臣等人渡海进兵青州。
English: He followed Tian Sheng Gong, Li Zhongchen and others to cross the sea and march into Qingzhou.

古文：诏以兵隶神策，为京西兵马使，镇奉天。
现代文：朝廷命令他带兵隶属神策军，任京西兵马使，镇守奉天。
English: The imperial court ordered him to lead soldiers belonging to the Shinsaku army, to serve as the Beijing-Western Terracotta Warriors and Horses, and to serve as the town guard of Mukden.

古文：德宗初立，稍绳诸节度跋扈者。
现代文：德宗皇帝刚即位，稍微约束各节度使中跋扈的人。
English: Emperor Dezong had just ascended the throne, slightly restricting the number of people allowed to enter the country.

古文：于是李正己屯曹州，田悦增河上兵，河南大扰。
现代文：这时李正己驻兵曹州，田悦增兵黄河上游，河南大乱。
English: At this time, Li Zhengji was stationed in Caozhou, Tian Yue increased the number of soldiers in the upper reaches of the Yellow River, and Henan was in turmoil.

古文：诏移兵万二千戍关东，帝御望春楼誓师，因劳遣诸将。酒至神策，将士不敢饮。
现代文：命令调兵一万二千人驻守关东，皇帝亲自到望春楼誓师，接着犒劳出征的各位将领，酒到面前，神策军将士不敢喝。
English: Twelve thousand soldiers were ordered to be stationed in Kanto, and the emperor himself went to the Wangchun Tower to swear an oath. Then, the generals who had been sent out to fight, were presented with wine. The soldiers of the Jinze Army did not dare to drink it.

古文：帝问故，惠元曰： 初发奉天，臣之帅张巨济与众约： 是役也，不立功，毋饮酒！ 
现代文：皇帝问原因，惠元说： 当初从奉天出发，我的主帅张巨济与我们约定： 这一仗不立战功，不饮酒。 
English: When the emperor asked the reason, Huiyuan said: At the beginning, starting from Fengtian, my boss Zhang Jiji made an agreement with us: This battle would not be a war achievement, and there would be no drinking.

古文：臣不敢食其言。 
现代文：我们不敢违背当时的誓言。 
English: We dare not break the vow we made then.

古文：既行，有馈于道，惟惠元军瓶罍不发。
现代文：出发后，又到路边赠送酒食，只有惠元的部队酒瓶没有打开。
English: After the departure, they went to the roadside to give away alcohol and food. Only Hui Yuan's troops did not open the bottles.

古文：帝咨叹不已，玺书慰劳。
现代文：皇帝不停地赞叹，又送诏书去慰劳他的部队。
English: The emperor kept praising him and sent an imperial edict to comfort his troops.

古文：俄以兵三千会诸将击田悦，战御河，夺三桥，惠元功多。
现代文：不久带兵会合诸位将领进攻田悦，激战御河，夺取三座桥，阳惠元功劳多。
English: Soon, the generals who led the troops gathered to attack Tian Yue, fought fiercely against Mihe, and captured three bridges. Yang Hui Yuan did a lot of work.

古文：以兵属李怀光。
现代文：朝廷把他的部队隶属李怀光。
English: The imperial court subordinated his troops to Li Huaiguang.

古文：及硃泚反，自河朔赴难，解奉天围，加检校工部尚书，摄贝州刺史。
现代文：到朱氵此反叛，从河朔奔赴国难，解了奉天的围困，加封检校工部尚书，代理贝州刺史。
English: To Zhu Xi's rebellion, he rushed to the national calamity from Hexuo, solved the siege of Fengtian, sealed the inspection of the school engineering department, and acted as the agent of Bozhou stabbing history.

古文：诏惠元与神策行营节度使李晟、鄜坊节度使李建徽及怀光联营便桥。
现代文：朝廷命令阳惠元与神策军行营节度使李晟、坊节度使李建徽及李怀光在便桥把营垒联结在一起。
English: The imperial court ordered Yang Hui Yuan and Shen Zhe to march the army to the camp to make Li Xuan, and the camp to make Li Jianhui and Li Huai Guang join the camp together at the bridge.

古文：晟知怀光且叛，移屯东渭桥。
现代文：李晟知道李怀光将要反叛，把军营移到东渭桥。
English: Li Gan knew that Li Huaiguang was going to rebel and moved the military camp to the East Fenqiao.

古文：翰林学士陆贽谏帝曰； 四将接垒，晟等兵寡位下，为怀光所易，势不两完。
现代文：翰林学士陆贽劝皇帝说 ：四个将领连结营垒，李晟等人兵少官职低，被李怀光整治，势必两方面不能保全。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Lu Yao, advised the emperor that: the four generals linked the camp, the soldiers such as Li Yao were junior officers and low-ranking, and were rectified by Li Huaguang. It is inevitable that the two aspects cannot be preserved.

古文：晟既虑变，请与惠元东徙，则建徽孤立。
现代文：李晟既然担心李怀光反叛，请求与惠元东移，那么李建徽就孤立无援。
English: Since Li Yu was worried about Li Huai Guang's rebellion and requested to move east with Hui Yuan, Li Jianhui was left alone.

古文：宜因晟行，合两军皆往，以备贼为解，趣装进道，则怀光计无所施。 
现代文：应该趁李晟行动的机会，联合阳惠元、李建徽两支军队一起移驻东渭桥，以此来防备怀光把军队肢解了，赶急整装进发，那么李怀光就使不出诡计了。 
English: He should take the opportunity of Li Hui's action to move the two armies of Yang Huiyuan and Li Jianhui to Donglu Bridge together, in order to prevent Huai Guang from dismembering the army and hastily packing it up for departure. Then Li Huai Guang would not be able to use tricks.

古文：帝不从，使神策将李升往伺。还奏： 怀光反明甚。 
现代文：皇帝不听，派神策军将领李升前去试探，回来向皇帝报告： 怀光谋反很明显。 
English: The emperor did not listen, and sent Li Sheng, the general of the Shenshang Army, to investigate. He came back and reported to the emperor: It is obvious that Huai Guang is plotting a rebellion.

古文：是夕，夺二军，惠元、建徽走奉天，怀光遣将冉宗驰骑追及于好畤。
现代文：这天晚上，李怀光夺取了阳惠元、李建徽的两支部队，惠元、建徽逃向奉天，怀光派冉宗带骑兵急速追击，在好追上了。
English: That evening, Li Huai Guang captured Yang Hui Yuan and Li Jian Hui's two troops, Hui Yuan and Jian Hui fled to Fengtian, while Huai Guang sent Ran Zong and his cavalry to quickly chase them, and caught up with them in Heping.

古文：惠元被发呼天，血流出眦，袒裼战而死。
现代文：惠元披散着头发呼喊苍天，眼眶流血，脱去外衣，赤着上身，搏斗而死。
English: Hui Yuan cried out to the heavens with her hair in disarray, her eyelids were bleeding, she took off her coat, wore a bare upper body, and died in a fight.

古文：二子晟、暠匿井中，皆及害。建徽独免。诏赠惠元尚书左仆射，晟殿中监，暠邠州刺史。
现代文：两个儿子阳晟、阳詗躲在水井中，都搜出杀害了，只建徽一个人免祸，朝廷命令追封阳惠元为尚书左仆射、阳晟为殿中监、阳詗为州刺史。
English: Yang Hui's two sons, Yang Hui and Yang Hui, who were hiding in a well, were both found and killed. Only Jian Hui was spared. The imperial court ordered that Yang Hui Yuan be given the title of Shang Shu Zuo Fu Sha, Yang Hui the title of the palace overseer, and Yang Hui the title of the provincial magistrate.

古文：少子旻，字公素。惠元之死，被八创，堕别井，或救得免。
现代文：阳惠元的小儿子阳旻，字公素，惠元死难时，阳旻身上带着八处伤。坠入另一口井，有人救起得以免死。
English: When Yang Huiyuan's youngest son, Yang Xuan, also known as Gong Su, died, he had eight wounds on his body. He fell into another well, and someone was able to save him.

古文：历邢州刺史。
现代文：历任邢州刺史。
English: Successive governors of Zhangzhou have left their mark on history.

古文：卢从史既缚，潞军溃，有骁卒五千，从史尝以子视者，奔于旻，旻闭城不内。
现代文：叛贼卢从史被活捉后，潞州军溃散，有勇士五千人，卢从史曾经把他们当作儿子看待，跑到阳处，阳紧关城门，不让他们进城。
English: After the traitor Lu Congshi was captured alive, the Zhangzhou army broke up. There were five thousand warriors, Lu Congshi once regarded them as sons, ran to the sun, and the sun tightly closed the city gate, not letting them enter the city.

古文：众皆哭曰： 奴失帅，今公有完城，又度支钱百万在府，少赐之，为表天子求旌节。 
现代文：众士兵哭着说： 我们这些奴仆失去主帅，您现在有一座好城，又有度支库的百万钱在府衙，稍微给一点给我们，定写表章给天子请求任您为节度使。 
English: The soldiers wept and said: "We, the slaves, have lost our master. You now have a fine city and a million dollars in your treasury at your disposal. Give us a little, write down a seal and ask God to let you be the messenger of the festival.

古文：旻开谕祸福遣之，众感悟，遂还军。
现代文：阳用祸福的道理开导他们，士兵们醒悟，于是回到军中。
English: Yang enlightened them with the principles of good and evil, and the soldiers came to their senses and returned to the army.

古文：宪宗嘉之，迁易州刺史。
现代文：宪宗嘉奖他，调易州刺史。
English: He was commended by Emperor Gensong and appointed as a state historian.

古文：王师讨吴元济，以唐州刺史提兵深入二百里，薄申州，拔外郛，残其垣。
现代文：朝廷的军队征讨吴元济时，阳旻任唐州刺史，领兵深入敌境二百里，逼攻申州，攻占外城，摧毁外城城墙。
English: When the imperial court's army was recruiting Wu Yuanji, Yang Xuan was assigned to Tangzhou to make history. He led the army 200 miles deep into the enemy territory, forced Shenzhou to attack, captured the outer city, and destroyed the outer city wall.

古文：以功加御史中丞。
现代文：因功加封为御史中丞。
English: He was posthumously promoted to goshi chujo.

古文：容州西原蛮反，授本州经略招讨使，击定之。
现代文：容州的西原蛮反叛，任命为容州经略招讨使，进攻并平定了他。
English: Yeongju's Nishihara rebelled violently and was appointed Yeongju's special envoy, attacked and subdued him.

古文：进御史大夫，合邕、容两管为一道。
现代文：升任御史大夫，邕州、容州两州合在一起成为一道。
English: He was promoted to Doctor of History, and the two prefectures of Zhangzhou and Rongzhou were merged into one.

古文：卒，赠左散骑常侍。
现代文：病故，追封左散骑常侍。
English: He later passed away, and the bestowal officer was the left horseback riding attendant.

古文：李元谅，安息人。本安氏，少为宦官骆奉先养息，冒姓骆，名元光。
现代文：李元谅是安息人，本来姓安，年轻时被宦官骆奉先收养，假充姓骆，名元光。
English: Li Yuanren is a Sabbatean. His original surname was An. When he was young, he was adopted by the eunuch Luo Bongxian. He assumed the surname Luo and changed his name to Yuan Guang.

古文：美须髯，鸷敢有谋。
现代文：胡须很美丽，深沉勇敢有谋略。
English: The whiskers are beautiful, deep, brave and cunning.

古文：以宿卫积劳试太子詹事。
现代文：担任官中警卫，积累了功劳，试太子詹事。
English: He served as a guard in the middle of the officials, accumulated merits, and became the crown prince.

古文：李怀让节度镇国，署奏以自副。
现代文：李怀让任镇国节度使，写奏章请求任元谅做自己的副节度使。
English: Li Huai asked to be appointed as the festival envoy of the town and country, and wrote a song to request that Ren Yuan Rong be appointed as his deputy festival envoy.

古文：居军十年，士心惮服。
现代文：在军中十年，士兵心里畏服。
English: After ten years in the army, the soldiers were awestruck.

古文：德宗出奉天，贼遣将何望之袭华州，于是刺史董晋弃城走。望之欲聚兵以绝东道，元谅自潼关引兵径薄其城，拔之。
现代文：德宗流亡到奉天，叛贼派遣将领何望之袭击华州，这时刺史董晋丢下城池逃跑了，何望之想聚集人马截断华州东面的通路，元谅从潼关领兵直逼华州城，并攻占了华州。
English: Dezong was exiled to Mukden, and the traitors sent the general He Wangzhi to attack Huazhou. At this time, the assassin Dong Jin left the city and fled. He Wangzhi wanted to gather people and horses to cut off the eastward passage of Huazhou, and Yuan Rong led the troops from Shaoguan to directly attack Huazhou City, and conquered Huazhou.

古文：时兵兴仓卒，裹罽为铠，剡蒿为矢，募兵数日至万余，军气乃振。
现代文：当时起兵仓促，裹上毛毡作为铠甲，削蒿杆作为箭，招募士兵，几天达到了一万多人，军队的声威才振奋起来。
English: At that time, the army was hastily raised, wrapped in felt as armor, sharpened the shaft as an arrow, recruited soldiers, and reached more than 10,000 people in a few days, and the army's prestige was uplifted.

古文：贼来攻，辄却。
现代文：叛军来进攻，即刻就打退了他们。
English: The rebels attacked and immediately drove them back.

古文：时尚可孤守蓝田，元谅屯昭应，王权壁中渭桥，贼兵不能逾渭南。
现代文：当时尚可孤守蓝田，元谅驻兵昭应，王权坚守中渭桥的壁垒，叛军不能越过渭南。
English: At that time, it was still possible to single-handedly defend Lantian, the Yuan emperor pardoned the stationed soldiers, the royal power held fast to the barriers of Zhonglu Bridge, and the rebels could not cross the south of Lantian.

古文：未几，迁镇国军节度使，封武康郡王。
现代文：不久，升任镇国军节度使，封为武康郡王。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of the town's military festival envoy, and was named the King of Bukang County.

古文：先是，诏发豳、陇兵东讨李希烈。师方出关，泚使刘忠孝召还；至华阴，华阴尉李夷简说驿官捕之，追及关，元谅斩以徇，所召兵不得入，由是华州独完。
现代文：这以前，朝廷命令征发幽州、陇州的兵往东去征讨李希烈，军队刚出潼关，朱氵此的使者刘忠孝命令军队回来，到华阴县，华阴县尉李夷简劝说驿官逮捕刘忠孝，追到潼关，李元谅将忠孝斩首示众，刘忠孝召回的兵不准进潼关，因此只华州得到保全。
English: Prior to this, the imperial court ordered to send soldiers from Yuzhou and Zhangzhou to the east to recruit Li Xili. The army had just left Shaoguan. Zhu Xi's envoy Liu Zhongxiao ordered the army to return to Huayin County. Li Yijian, a lieutenant from Huayin County, persuaded the eunuchs to arrest Liu Zhongxiao. They chased him to Shaoguan. Li Yuanpeng beheaded Zhongxiao in public. Liu Zhongxiao's recalled soldiers were not allowed to enter Shaoguan. Therefore, only Huazhou was preserved.

古文：俄诏元谅与李晟收京师，次浐西。
现代文：不久，朝廷命令李元谅与李晟收复京都，驻兵西。
English: Soon after, the imperial court ordered Li Yuanpeng and Li Xi to recapture Kyoto and station troops in the west.

古文：元谅先奋鏖贼，败之，进屯苑东，晟使坏苑垣入。
现代文：李元谅奋勇当先与叛军激战，打败了叛军，进驻皇苑东面。李晟派兵摧毁皇苑的围墙攻入。
English: Li Yuanpeng fought a fierce battle with the rebels, defeated the rebels, and stationed in the east of the imperial garden. Li Yu sent soldiers to destroy the wall of the imperial garden and break in.

古文：泚连战皆北，遂大溃，京师平。让功于晟，退壁近郊。
现代文：朱氵此接连几次作战都失败了，于是叛军大败溃逃，京都平定了，元谅把功劳谦让给李晟，退到近郊的营垒驻扎。
English: Zhu Xi failed in several successive battles, so the rebels were routed and fled, and Kyoto was pacified. Yuan Xie humbly conceded the credit to Li Xi and retreated to a camp in the suburbs.

古文：加检校尚书左仆射，实封户五百，赐甲第、女乐、一子六品官。
现代文：朝廷加封他为检校尚书左仆射，赏赐给五百户的赋税，赐给甲等家宅、歌伎舞女，一个儿子封六品官。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of "school inspector" and "supervisor" and rewarded him with taxes paid by 500 households, a first-class residence, a kabuki dancer, and a six-rank official title for one of his sons.

古文：李怀光反，与马燧、浑瑊讨之。
现代文：李怀光反叛，元谅与马燧、浑蠨一道征讨他。
English: Li Huaiguang rebelled, Yuan Peng and Ma Jun, together with Hun Yao, fought against him.

古文：其将徐廷光素易元谅，数嫚骂，为优胡戏，斥侮其祖。
现代文：李怀光的将领徐廷光一向藐视李元谅，多次辱骂他，并命戏子演胡人戏侮辱他的祖先。
English: Li Huaiqing's general Xu Tingguang always despised Li Yuanpeng, insulted him many times, and ordered an actor to play the role of Hu Renge to insult his ancestors.

古文：又使约降，曰： 我降汉将耳。 
现代文：元谅又派使者约徐投降，徐廷光说： 我投降汉族将领。 
English: He also sent an envoy to negotiate the surrender, and Xu Tingguang said: I surrender to the Han generals.

古文：及马燧至，降于燧。
现代文：等马燧军到，向马燧投降。
English: Wait for Ma Jun's army to arrive and surrender to Ma Jun.

古文：元谅见韩游瑰曰： 彼诟吾祖，今日斩之，子助我乎？ 
现代文：李元谅会见韩游瑰说 ：他辱骂我的祖先，今天我要杀他，你帮助我吗？ 
English: Li Yuanren met with Han Youkui and said, "He abused my ancestors, today I'm going to kill him, will you help me?"

古文：许诺。
现代文：韩游瑰答应了。
English: Han Yu Qui agreed.

古文：既而遇诸道，即数其罪，叱左右斩之，诣燧谢。
现代文：后来两人在路上相遇，元谅数说他的罪行，喝令亲随杀了徐，并参见马燧道歉。
English: Later, the two met on the road, Yuan Yuanzhong said his crime, ordered his relatives to kill Xu, and see Ma Xuan's apology.

古文：燧大怒，将杀元谅，游瑰见曰： 杀一偏裨尚尔，即杀一节度，法宜如何？ 
现代文：马燧大怒，准备杀掉元琼，韩游瑰去见马燧说： 杀一个低级军官尚且那样，那么杀一个节度使，按军法应该如何处置？ 
English: Ma Xuan was furious and prepared to kill Yuan Qiong. Han Youqi went to see Ma Xuan and said, "If you kill a low-ranking officer like that, then how should you deal with him according to military law?

古文：燧默然。
现代文：马燧说不出话来。
English: The horse couldn't speak.

古文：元谅请输钱百万劳军自赎，瑊亦为请，燧赦之。
现代文：李元谅请求送一百万钱慰劳马燧的部队来抵自己的罪过，浑蠨也为元谅求情，马燧就赦免了元谅。
English: Li Yuanpeng requested to send one million money to comfort Ma Jun's troops to atone for his sins. Dunya also pleaded for Yuanpeng, and Ma Jun pardoned Yuanpeng.

古文：帝以专杀，恐有司劾治，前诏勿论。
现代文：皇帝因李元谅专权杀人，怕有关部门弹劾治罪，前去命令，不追究这事。
English: The emperor ordered not to investigate the matter, fearing that the relevant departments would impeach and punish him for the murder committed by Li Yuanfeng.

古文：贞元三年，吐蕃请盟，诏以军从瑊会平凉，元谅军潘原、游瑰军洛口以为援。
现代文：贞元三年，吐蕃请求结盟，朝廷命令李元谅带兵跟随浑蠨到平凉城会盟，李元谅驻军潘原，韩游瑰驻军洛口作为援军。
English: In the third year of Zhengyuan, when Tubo asked for an alliance, the imperial court ordered Li Yuanpeng to lead troops to follow Tanggu to the alliance in Pingliangcheng, Li Yuanpeng to garrison Panyuan, and Han Yuqi to garrison Lokou as reinforcements.

古文：元谅曰： 潘原去平凉七十里，虏诈不情，如有急，何以赴？
现代文：李元谅说 ：潘原距平凉城七十里，敌方狡诈不讲信义，如果有危险，怎么赶得去呢？
English: Li Yuanren said: Panyuan is seventy miles away from Pingliangcheng, the enemy is cunning and not trustworthy. If there is danger, how can we rush there?

古文：请与公连屯。 
现代文：请求与你连营。 
English: Request to join you.

古文：瑊以违诏，不听。瑊壁盟所二十里，元谅密徙营次之。
现代文：浑蠨的营垒离会盟的地方二十里，元谅秘密地移营驻扎到那里。
English: The muddy camp was twenty miles away from the place of the alliance, and Yuan Yue secretly moved the camp and stationed there.

古文：既会，元谅望云物曰： 不详，虏必有变！ 
现代文：会盟后，元谅看到云气说 ：不吉祥，敌情有变化！ 
English: After the alliance, Yuan Yuanzhong saw the clouds and said, "This is not auspicious, the enemy situation has changed!"

古文：传令约部伍出阵。
现代文：令约束部队出发列成阵势。
English: Order the restraining forces to move out and take up positions.

古文：俄而虏劫盟，瑊奔还，元谅兵成列出，而泾原节度使李观亦以精兵五千伏险，与元谅相表里，虏骑乃解。
现代文：不久敌方劫盟，浑蠨奔逃回来，元谅部队成阵列出来迎战，同时泾原节度使李观也领五千精兵埋伏在险要地区，与元谅互相呼应。敌人骑兵才解围而去。
English: Soon after, the enemy plundered the alliance and fled back, and Yuanming's troops lined up to face the battle. At the same time, Shihara Jiedu made Li Guan also lead five thousand elite soldiers to lie in ambush in the critical area, echoing each other with Yuanming. The enemy cavalry only relieved the siege and left.

古文：元谅遣车重先，而与瑊振旅徐还，时以为有古良将风。
现代文：李元谅派辎重车在前面开进，然后与浑蠨整顿军队不慌不忙回来，当时的人认为他有古代良将的风度。
English: At that time, people thought that he had the demeanor of an ancient great general.

古文：是会也，微元谅、观二人，瑊且不免。
现代文：这次会盟，如果没有李元谅、李观两人，浑蠨将不能免祸。
English: This time, if there is no Li Yuanren and Li Guan, the turbidity will not be spared.

古文：帝嘉叹，赐善马金币良厚，因赐姓及名。
现代文：皇帝嘉奖他，赞叹不已，赐给他良马金币非常多，因而赐姓李，赐名元谅。
English: The emperor praised him, admired him, and gave him a lot of good horses and gold coins, so he was given the surname Li and the name Yuan Yue.

古文：更节度陇右，治良原。
现代文：又任陇右节度使，治所在良原。
English: He was also appointed as the right-hand sectional governor, and the seat of government was in Yoshihara.

古文：良原隍堞湮圮，旁皆平林荐草，虏入寇，常牧马休徒于此。
现代文：良原城墙都倒塌了，旁边都是平原树林和牧草，吐蕃军入侵，经常放牧马匹休养族人于此地。
English: The city walls of Liangyuan have all collapsed, and there are plain woods and pastures next to them. The Tubo army invaded, and the tribesmen often graze their horses and rest here.

古文：元谅培高浚渊，身执苦与士卒均，菑翳榛莽，辟美田数十里，劝士垦艺，岁入粟菽数十万斛，什具毕给。
现代文：李元谅修高城墙，疏浚、挖深护城河，与士兵同甘共苦，披荆斩棘，开辟良田几十里，勉励士兵耕作种植，每年收获粮食几十万斛，其他物品全都充足。
English: Li Yuanpeng repaired the high city wall, dredged and dug a deep moat, shared the hardships with the soldiers, cut thorns and thistles, opened up dozens of good fields, encouraged the soldiers to cultivate and plant, harvested hundreds of thousands of stalks of grain every year, and other goods were all sufficient.

古文：又筑连弩台，远烽侦，为守备，进据势胜，列新壁。
现代文：又筑连弩台，远方设烽火台，派出侦察兵，设守备，筑新壁垒进攻防卫形势优越。
English: They also built a company camp, set up a campfire in the distance, sent out scouts, set up defenses, and built new barriers. The offensive and defensive situation is superior.

古文：虏至无所掠，战又辄北，由是泾、陇以安，西戎惮之。
现代文：吐蕃军来了抢不到财物，交战又失败，因此泾州、陇州靠此保证了安宁，西部的敌人害怕他。
English: When the Tubo army came, they could not seize the property, and the battle failed. Therefore, Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou ensured peace by this, and the enemies in the west were afraid of him.

古文：卒，年六十二，赠司空，谥曰庄威。
现代文：病故，享年六十二岁，追封为司空，追赠谥号叫 庄威 。
English: He died of illness at the age of sixty-two. He was posthumously awarded the title of Siku, and posthumously given the posthumous nickname Zhuang Wei.

古文：李观，其先自赵郡徙洛阳，故为洛阳人。
现代文：李观，他的祖先从赵郡迁移到洛阳，所以是洛阳人。
English: Li Guan, his ancestors migrated from Zhao County to Luoyang, so he is a Luoyang native.

古文：少沈厚寡言。
现代文：年轻时深沉忠厚言语少。
English: When young, deep devotion and few words.

古文：以策干朔方节度使郭子仪，子仪遣佐坊州刺史吴亻由为防遏使。
现代文：凭谋略向朔方节度使郭子仪求官，郭子仪派他辅佐坊州刺史吴亻由，任防遏使。
English: Guo Ziyi sent him to assist the governor of Fang Prefecture, Wu Xiyu, in his efforts to prevent the rebellion.

古文：以亲丧解。
现代文：因为服父亲的丧辞职。
English: He resigned to attend his father's funeral.

古文：吐蕃内寇，代宗幸陕，观隐盩厔，率乡里子姓千人守黑水，虏不敢侵。
现代文：吐蕃侵入内地，代宗流亡陕州，李观隐居周至县，率领家乡子弟一千人守卫黑水，敌军不敢侵犯。
English: Tubo invaded the inland, Daizong went into exile in Shaanxi, and Li Guan lived in seclusion in Zhouzhi County. He led a thousand of his hometown children to guard Heishui, and the enemy army did not dare to invade.

古文：岭南节度使杨慎微奏为偏将，徐浩、李勉代节度，常倚以军政，数捕平剧贼。
现代文：岭南节度使杨慎微上奏朝廷任李观为偏将，徐浩、李勉代任节度使，常依靠他处理军政事务。
English: Yang Shenwei was appointed by the Lingnan Emperor to be the chief delegate to the imperial court, while Xu Hao and Li Qian served as deputy delegates, often relying on him to handle military and political affairs.

古文：迁大将，试殿中监，召为右龙武将军。
现代文：多次捕获平定巨盗。升任大将，试殿中监，征召为右龙武将军。
English: He was promoted to the rank of general, probationary middle superintendent, and was conscripted as the right dragon general.

古文：泾师叛，观适番上，即领兵千余扈德宗奉天。
现代文：泾州的部队叛乱，李观刚好轮到保卫皇帝，就统领一千多兵到奉天给德宗随从护驾。
English: The troops in Zhangzhou rebelled, and Li Qun, just in time to defend the emperor, led more than a thousand soldiers to Fengtian to escort Dezong.

古文：诏尽察诸军，整饬谁逻，增募五千人，鼙■欢竖，士气益振。
现代文：朝廷命令他督察各路部队，整顿巡逻队，增加招募五千兵员，鼙鼓咚咚，旗帜飘扬，士气更加振奋。
English: The court ordered him to inspect all the troops, rectify the patrols, increase the recruitment of five thousand soldiers, beat the drum, fly the flag, and boost morale.

古文：赐封户二百，授二子八品官。
现代文：赏赐二百户的赋税，封两个儿子为八品官。
English: He rewarded 200 households with taxes, and made two of his sons eight-rank officials.

古文：从至梁州。帝还，诏总后军。
现代文：随护皇帝车驾到梁州，皇帝回京城后，任命他总领后军。
English: He accompanied the emperor to Liangzhou. After the emperor returned to Beijing, he appointed him as the leader of the rearguard.

古文：擢四镇、北廷行军泾原节度使。
现代文：升任四镇、北庭行军泾原节度使。
English: He was promoted to Shizhen, Beidaihe Marching Corps, and Shenyuan Festival Envoy.

古文：在屯四年，训部伍，储藏饶衍。
现代文：在驻地四年，训练部队，储藏的粮草丰足。
English: After four years of being stationed there, training troops, the stored grain and grass are plentiful.

古文：平凉之盟，吐蕃不得志。
现代文：平凉城会盟，没让吐蕃阴谋得逞。
English: The Pingliangcheng Association did not let the conspiracy succeed.

古文：是年，观入朝，前一日就道，虏至期出精骑狙击，不及，去。
现代文：这年，李观回京都朝见皇帝，提前一天出发上路，敌军到日期派出精锐骑兵狙击，没有追上，就离开了。
English: This year, Li Guan returned to Kyoto to see the emperor in the morning, and set out on the road one day in advance. The enemy sent elite cavalry to snipe on the appointed day, but they did not catch up and left.

古文：由是禁人不得入观、祠。
现代文：任少府监、检校工部尚书。病故，追封为太子少傅。
English: Appointed as a junior prefectural inspector and inspector of the school's engineering department, he died of illness and was posthumously named the prince's junior tutor.

古文：杜希全，京兆醴泉人。
现代文：杜希全是京兆醴泉县人。
English: Du Xi are all from Jiuquan County, Beijing.

古文：以裨将隶郭子仪，积功劳至朔方节度使。
现代文：任郭子仪部下裨将，积累功劳官至朔方节度使。
English: He appointed Guo Ziyi's subordinates as benefactors, accumulating meritorious officials to the highest ranks.

古文：军令整严，士畏其威。
现代文：军令严整，士兵都怕他的威严。
English: The military order is strict, and soldiers are afraid of his authority.

古文：奉天之狩，希全与鄜坊节度使李建徽、盐州刺史戴休颜、夏州刺史时常春引兵赴难。次漠谷，为贼邀击，乘高纵石下之，强弩杂发。
现代文：皇帝流亡奉天，杜希全与坊节度使李建徽、盐州刺史戴休颜、夏州刺史时常春带兵奔赴国难，在漠谷宿营，被叛军半路拦击，登上高山放石头滚下，强弓劲弩夹在石头中射下。
English: The emperor's exile to heaven, Du Xi Quan and Fang Jiedu made Li Jianhui, Yan Zhou Shishi Dai Xiuyan, and Xia Zhou Shishi Changchun lead the troops to the national calamity, camped in the valley, were stopped by the rebels halfway, climbed the mountain and rolled down the stone, and shot down the strong bow and arrow caught in the stone.

古文：德宗使援之，不克，还保邠州。
现代文：德宗派兵支援，没有取胜，回军保卫州。
English: The German sect sent troops to support, but they did not win and returned to defend the state.

古文：贼平，迁检校尚书左仆射、灵盐丰夏节度使，封余姚郡王。
现代文：叛贼平定了，升任检校尚书左仆射、灵盐丰夏节度使，封余姚郡王。
English: The traitors were subdued, and Yuyao Gu Wang was promoted to the position of inspector of schools.

古文：将即屯，献《体要》八章，砭切政病。
现代文：将要去驻地时，向皇帝献上《体要》八章，指出朝政的弊端，皇帝赞赏并采纳了。
English: When he was about to go to the residence, he presented eight chapters of "Essentials" to the emperor, pointing out the drawbacks of the imperial government, which the emperor appreciated and adopted.

古文：帝嘉纳，赐《君臣箴》一篇。
现代文：赐给《君臣箴》一篇。
English: Give a copy of "The Emperor's New Groove" to him.

古文：寻兼夏绥银节度都统，建言： 盐州据要会，为塞保鄣。自平凉背盟，城陷于虏，于是灵武势县，鄜坊单逼，为边深患，请复城盐州。 
现代文：不久兼任夏绥银节度都统，建议： 盐州占据交通要冲，是边塞的保障，自从吐蕃在平凉违背盟约，盐州城陷落在敌人手里，因此使灵武形势危险，坊孤立，成为边塞的长久祸患，请重筑盐州城。 
English: Not long after, he concurrently served as the governor of the Summer Palace and the Silver Festival, and suggested: Yanzhou occupies the main transportation hub and is the guarantee of the border fortress. Since Tubo violated the treaty in Pingliang, Yanzhou City has fallen into the hands of the enemy. Therefore, the situation of Lingwu is dangerous, Fang is isolated, and has become a long-term scourge of the border fortress. Please rebuild Yanzhou City.

古文：乃诏希全及朔方、邠宁、银夏、鄜坊、振武及神策行营诸节度合选士三万五千屯盐州，又敕泾原、剑南、山南军深入吐蕃，牵挠其力，使不得犯塞。
现代文：朝廷就命令希全及朔方、宁、银夏、坊、振武及神策军行营诸节度使共选三万五千精兵驻扎盐州，又命令泾原、剑南、山南的部队深入吐蕃境内，牵制吐蕃兵力，使他不敢侵犯边塞。
English: The imperial court ordered Xichuan, Shuo Fang, Ning, Yin Xia, Fang, Zhenwu, and Shen Zhe to make a total of thirty-five thousand elite soldiers stationed in Yanzhou. It also ordered the troops from Yuyuan, Jian Nan, and Shannan to go deep into the territory of Tubo to restrain Tubo's troops, so that he would not dare to invade the border fortress.

古文：执筑凡六千人，阅二旬毕。
现代文：筑城的共六千人，经二十天竣工。
English: A total of 6,000 people worked on the construction, which was completed in 20 days.

古文：由是虏惮，不轻入。
现代文：因此敌军害怕，不敢轻易入侵。
English: Therefore, the enemy is afraid and does not dare to invade easily.

古文：希全居河西久，颇越法横肆，帝数容掩其短。
现代文：杜希全在河西留任时间长，很不遵守法纪，横行无忌，皇帝多次宽恕和掩盖他的错误。
English: Du Xiquan stayed in Hexi for a long time, did not abide by laws and regulations, and ran amok. The emperor forgave and covered up his mistakes many times.

古文：丰州刺史李景略名出希全上，疑逼己，遂排劾之。帝为斥以答其意。
现代文：丰州刺史李景略名声在希全之上，怀疑他胁迫自己，就上奏弹劾他，皇帝为批评他答复他的心意。
English: Li Jingliao, a Fengzhou poet, whose reputation was higher than that of Xi Quan, suspected that he had coerced himself, and impeached him. The emperor responded to his criticism with his thoughts.

古文：素苦风眩，稍剧，益忌忍，遂诬杀判官李起，吏下累息。
现代文：希全一向被风眩病所苦，病情只要稍稍加重，就越发疑忌性情残暴，竟然诬陷杀死了判官李起，部属都长叹惋惜。
English: Hichuan had always suffered from vertigo, and as long as his condition worsened a little, he became more suspicious and cruel. He even framed and killed the judge Li Qi, and his subordinates all lamented.

古文：卒，赠司空。
现代文：病故，追封司徒。
English: He died of illness and was succeeded by Stut.

古文：邢君牙，瀛州乐寿人。
现代文：邢君牙是瀛州乐寿县人。
English: Zhai Junya is a native of Luzhou Leju County.

古文：少从幽蓟、平卢军，以战功历果毅、折冲郎将。
现代文：年轻时到幽蓟、平卢等军镇当兵。凭战功历任果毅、折冲郎将。
English: When he was young, he went to Yuxuan, Pinglu and other military towns as a soldier. Based on his war achievements, he was successively appointed as Cui Yi and Orichong Lang.

古文：安禄山反，从侯希逸涉海入青州。
现代文：安禄山反叛，跟随侯希逸渡海进入青州。
English: Mount Anlu rebelled and followed Hou Xiyi across the sea into Qingzhou.

古文：田神功为兗郓节度使，使君牙将兵屯好畤防盛秋。
现代文：田神功任兖郓节度使，派邢君牙领兵驻扎好田寺保卫边境秋收。
English: Tian Sheng Gong appointed him as the envoy of the Qing Dynasty, and sent him as the leader of the troops to guard the border of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：吐蕃犯京师，代宗出陕，以扈从功，累封河间郡公。
现代文：吐蕃侵犯京城，代宗皇帝流亡陕州，因为护驾有功，多次提升，封为河间郡公。
English: Tubo invaded Beijing, and Emperor Daizong went into exile in Shaanxi Province. He was promoted many times and made the governor of Hema County because of his service in protecting the emperor.

古文：建中初，李晟从马燧讨田悦，以君牙为都将，在武安、襄国间凡五战，斩馘功最。
现代文：建中初年，李晟随马燧征讨田悦，用君牙任都将，在武安、襄国间共五次作战，斩杀的功劳最多。
English: In the first year of middle school, Li Qian followed Ma Xuan to conquer Tian Yue, and used Jun Ya as his general. He fought a total of five times between Wu'an and Xiangguo, and was credited with the most kills.

古文：德宗出奉天，晟率君牙倍道赴难，徙屯渭桥，军中便宜，惟君牙得豫。
现代文：德宗流亡奉天，李晟率领君牙用比平常快一倍的行军速度奔赴国难。迁移驻地到渭桥，军中应办的事务，只有君牙预先有准备。
English: When Emperor Dezong went into exile to serve Heaven, Li Xi led Junya to rush to the country with a marching speed that was twice as fast as usual. Relocating the garrison to Qianqiao, a matter that should be handled in the army, only Junya had prepared in advance.

古文：晟在凤翔，数行边，常以君牙守。
现代文：李晟在凤翔，多次巡视边防，常用君牙留守凤翔。
English: Li Gan was stationed in Fengxiang and inspected the border defense many times. Junya often stayed behind in Fengxiang.

古文：晟入朝，代为凤翔观察使。俄领节度，检校尚书右仆射。
现代文：李晟回朝任职后，君牙代理凤翔观察使，不久，兼任节度使、检校尚书右仆射。
English: After Li Lan returned to the imperial court, Junya acted as Fengxiang's observation envoy. Soon, he also served as the festival envoy and the inspector of the school, Shang Shuling.

古文：吐蕃岁犯边，君牙劭耕讲战以为备，戎不能侵。
现代文：吐蕃每年侵犯边境，邢君牙奖励耕种，训练军队备战，吐蕃军不能侵入边塞。
English: Each year, the Tubo encroached on the border. The Tong Junya rewarded cultivation and trained the army to prepare for war. The Tubo army could not invade the border fortress.

古文：又城陇州平戎川，号永信城。
现代文：又在陇州平戎川筑城，名叫永信城。
English: He also built a castle called Yongxin Castle on the Pingwu River in Zhangzhou.

古文：卒官，赠司空。
现代文：死在任上，追封为司徒。
English: He died in office and was posthumously awarded the title of Stutthof.

古文：初，布衣张汾者，无绍而干君牙，轩然坐客上。
现代文：当初，没做官的读书人张汾，没有谁介绍就去求见君牙，并高高地坐在客位上。
English: At first, Zhang Ye, a reader who was not an official, went to see Junya without any introduction and sat high up in the guest seat.

古文：会吏擿簿书，以盗没宴钱五万，君牙怒其欺，汾不谢去，曰： 吾在京师，闻邢君牙一时豪俊，今乃与设吏论钱，云何？ 
现代文：碰到部下小官因贪污酒宴钱丢弃了账簿，君牙因被欺骗而发怒，张汾不致谢就离去，说： 我在京城，听说邢君牙是当世豪杰，今天竟为部下的小官计较钱财，这怎么说呢？ 
English: Encountering a subordinate minor official who had thrown away his account book due to embezzlement of wine and banquet money, and Junya who was angry because he had been cheated, Zhang Ye left without thanking him, saying, "I am in Beijing, and I heard that Junya is a contemporary hero, but today he is actually counting money for his subordinate minor official. What can I say?

古文：君牙惭，遽释吏，引为上客，留月余，以五百缣为谢。
现代文：君牙觉得惭愧，很快释放了小官，把张汾待为上宾，挽留一个多月，用五百匹细绢作为赠送的礼品。
English: Junya felt ashamed, quickly released the minor official, treated Zhang Xuan as the chief guest, kept him for more than a month, and gave him five hundred fine horses as a gift.

古文：其屈己好士类此。
现代文：他降低身份喜欢读书人到了这种程度。
English: He's lowered himself to liking book readers to this extent.

