古文：王充者，会稽上虞人也，字仲任。
现代文：王充，会稽郡上虞县人，字仲任。
English: Wang Chong, a resident of Shangyu County, the county's auditing county, holds the post of vice-governor.

古文：其先本魏郡元城一姓。
现代文：他的祖先籍贯在魏郡元城，又姓孙。
English: His ancestors hailed from Yuancheng, Wei County, and were also surnamed Sun.

古文：孙一几世尝从军有功，封会稽阳亭。
现代文：祖上几代曾从军立有军功，被封为会稽郡的阳亭侯。
English: Several generations of ancestors had distinguished themselves in the military and were awarded the title of Yangting Hou of Heji County.

古文：一岁仓卒国绝，因家焉。以农桑为业。
现代文：才一年因变乱而失去了爵位和封地，于是就在那里落了户，以种地养蚕为业。
English: Only a year after losing his title and fief due to the turmoil, he settled there and started farming silkworms.

古文：世祖勇任气，卒咸不揆於人。
现代文：曾祖父王勇好意气用事，结果跟很多人都合不来。
English: Great-grandfather Wang Yong had a strong-willed nature, and as a result, he did not get along with many people.

古文：岁凶，横道伤杀，怨仇众多。
现代文：灾荒年头，拦路杀伤过人，因此仇人众多。
English: In the years of disaster and famine, there were many enemies who blocked the road and killed and injured people.

古文：会世扰乱，恐为怨仇所擒，祖父泛举家檐载，就安会稽，留钱唐县，以贾贩为事。
现代文：又赶上兵荒马乱，怕被仇人捉住，于是祖父王汎领着全家肩挑车载家当，准备到会稽郡城去安家，但中途在钱唐县留了下来，以经商为业。
English: Caught up in the chaos of war again, afraid of being caught by the enemy, Grandfather Wang Pan led the whole family to pick up the car and carry the family's belongings, ready to go to Heji County to settle down, but he stayed in Qiantang County halfway, doing business as a business.

古文：生子二人，长曰蒙，少曰诵，诵即充父。
现代文：祖父有两个儿子，长子叫王蒙，次子叫王诵，王诵就是王充的父亲。
English: The grandfather has two sons, the eldest son is called Wang Meng, the second son is called Wang Xiu, and Wang Xiu is the father of Wang Chong.

古文：祖世任气，至蒙、诵滋甚。故蒙、诵在钱唐，勇势凌人。
现代文：王家祖祖辈辈好讲义气，到了王蒙、王诵就更厉害了，所以王蒙、王诵在钱唐县又仗恃自己的勇力欺凌别人。
English: The ancestors of the Wang family have been good at teaching the spirit of righteousness for generations, and it is even more powerful when it comes to Wang Meng and Wang Cai, so Wang Meng and Wang Cai in Qiantang County also use their own courage to bully others.

古文：末复与豪家丁伯等结怨，举家徙处上虞。
现代文：后来，又与土豪丁伯等人结下了怨仇，只好全家又搬到上虞县居住。
English: Later, he also forged a grudge with local magnate Ding Bo and others, and the whole family had to move to Shangyu County.

古文：建武三年，充生。
现代文：建武三年，王充出生。
English: In the third year of Jianwu, Wang Chong was born.

古文：为小兒，与侪伦遨戏，不好狎侮。
现代文：王充小时候，跟同辈的伙伴一起玩，不喜欢随便打闹。
English: When Wang Chong was a child, he played with friends of the same age. He did not like to play rough.

古文：侪伦好掩雀、捕蝉、戏钱、林熙，充独不肯。诵奇之。
现代文：小伙伴们都喜欢捉鸟、捕蝉、猜钱、爬树，只有王充不愿玩这些，王诵对此感到很惊奇。
English: The little friends all like to hunt birds, catch cicadas, guess money, and climb trees. Only Wang Chun did not want to play these games. Wang Chia was very surprised by this.

古文：六岁教书，恭愿仁顺，礼敬具备，矜庄寂寥，有臣人之志。
现代文：王充六岁时，家里就教他认字写字，王充恭厚友爱孝顺，很懂礼貌，庄重寡言，有成年人的气派。
English: When Wangchong was six years old, his family taught him to read and write. Wangchong was respectful, friendly, filial, very polite, dignified, and had the air of an adult.

古文：父未尝笞，母未尝非，闾里未尝让。
现代文：父亲没有打过他，母亲没有责备过他，乡邻没有指责过他。
English: His father never beat him, his mother never scolded him, and his neighbors never criticized him.

古文：八岁出於书馆，书馆小僮百人以上，皆以过失袒谪，或以书丑得鞭。
现代文：八岁进书馆学习，书馆里的小孩子有一百多人，都因为有过失而脱去衣服受责打，或者因为字写得难看而被鞭打。
English: Eight-year-olds go to the library to study, and there are more than a hundred children in the library, all of whom are stripped of their clothes and beaten for negligence, or whipped for ugly handwriting.

古文：充书日进，又无过失。
现代文：只有王充的书法日见进步，又没有什么过失。
English: Only Wang Chong's calligraphy is improving day by day, and there is no fault.

古文：手书既成，辞师受《论语》、《尚书》，日讽千字。
现代文：学完了识字书写课程，就离开了教写字的老师，去学习《论语》和《尚书》，每天能背诵一千字。
English: After completing the literacy and writing course, he left the teacher who taught writing to study "Analects" and "Shang Shu," and can recite a thousand words a day.

古文：经明德就，谢师而专门，援笔而众奇。所读文书，亦日博多。
现代文：读通了经书，品德也修养好了，就又辞别经师而去自己专门研究，王充一写出文章，就得到许多人的好评。
English: After reading through the scriptures and cultivating his moral character, he quit his job as a scribe and went to do his own special research. As soon as Wang Chong wrote an article, it was well received by many people.

古文：才高而不尚苟作，口辩而不好谈对，非其人，终日不言。
现代文：所读的书也一天比一天多。王充才能虽高但不喜欢随便写作，口才很好可是不好与人谈论对答。不是志同道合的人，他可以整天不说话。
English: He reads more and more books every day. Although Wang Chun has a high talent, he does not like to write casually. He is very eloquent, but he is not good at talking with people. He is not a like-minded person, he can not talk all day.

古文：其论说始若诡於众，极听其终，众乃是之。
现代文：他的言论初听时似乎很古怪，与众不同，直到把他的话听完了，大家才认为说得很正确。
English: What he said seemed strange and different at first, but after listening to it, everyone thought it was right.

古文：以笔著文，亦如此焉；操行事上，亦如此焉。
现代文：王充写文章也是如此，行事为人和侍奉尊长也是如此。
English: This is also true of Wang Cheng's writing, as well as his behavior and service to his superiors.

古文：在县位至掾功曹，在都尉府位亦掾功曹，在太守为列掾五官功曹行事，入州为从事。
现代文：王充在县里的职位是掾功曹，在都尉府的职位也是掾功曹，在太守府任五官掾，兼管功曹的事务，最后到州里做过从事史。
English: Wang Chong's position in the county was Gong Cao, and his position in the governor's office was also Gong Cao. In the governor's office, he was in charge of the affairs of Gong Cao, and finally he went to the state to do history.

古文：不好徼名於世，不为利害见将。
现代文：王充不图在社会上出名，不为个人的利害去求见长官。
English: Wang Cheng did not want to be famous in the society, and did not seek to see the chief for personal interests.

古文：常言人长，希言人短。
现代文：经常说别人的长处，很少说别人的缺点。
English: Often talk about other people's strengths, rarely talk about other people's shortcomings.

古文：专荐未达，解已进者过。
现代文：专爱推荐没有作官的读书人，给已经当了官的人开脱过错。
English: He loves to recommend readers who have never held public office to exonerate those who have.

古文：及所不善，亦弗誉；有过不解，亦弗复陷。
现代文：自己认为不好的人，也不会去称赞他，人家有了过失，即使不为他开脱，也不会再去陷害他。
English: People who think they are not good will not praise him, and if someone makes a mistake, even if they do not excuse him, they will not frame him again.

古文：能释人之不大过，亦悲夫人之细非。
现代文：能够原谅别人的大错，也惋惜别人细小的过失。
English: To be able to forgive the big mistakes of others, and also regret the small mistakes of others.

古文：好自周，不肯自彰，勉以行操为基，耻以材能为名。
现代文：喜欢隐蔽自己的才能，不好自我炫耀。尽力把修养操行作为做人的根本，而羞于靠才能来沽名钓誉。
English: They like to hide their talents, and it is not good to show off. They try their best to cultivate their behavior as the foundation of being a person, but they are ashamed to rely on talent to make a name.

古文：众会乎坐，不问不言，赐见君将，不及不对。
现代文：众人聚会坐在一起，不问到自己便不说话，被长官接见时，不问到自己就不作声。
English: People gather and sit together, and do not speak unless they are asked. When they are received by an officer, they do not speak unless they are asked.

古文：在乡里，慕蘧伯玉之节；在朝廷，贪史子鱼之行。
现代文：在乡里闲居时，仰慕蘧伯玉的气节；在朝廷做官时，就崇拜史子鱼的操行。
English: When idling in the countryside, he admired the temperament of Zibo Jade; when working as an official in the imperial court, he worshiped the manners of Shi Zi Yu.

古文：见污伤，不肯自明；位不进，亦不怀恨。
现代文：受到污蔑中伤也不愿自我辩解，官位不升迁也不怀恨。
English: They are not willing to defend themselves if they are slandered or defamed, and they do not hold grudges if they are not promoted.

古文：贫无一亩庇身，志佚於王公；贱无斗石之秩，意若食万锺。
现代文：穷得连蔽身的简陋住宅都没有，但心情比王公大人还要舒畅；卑贱得连斗石的俸禄都没有，而心情却与吃万钟俸禄的人差不多。
English: They are so poor that they don't even have a humble house to live in, but their mood is more comfortable than that of a prince; they are so lowly that they don't even have a salary of a stone, but their mood is similar to that of someone who has a million-dollar salary.

古文：得官不欣，失位不恨。
现代文：做了官不格外高兴，丢了官也不特别悔恨。
English: He was not particularly happy when he became an official, and he did not particularly regret losing his position.

古文：处逸乐而欲不放，居贫苦而志不倦。
现代文：处在逸乐之中时不放纵自己的欲望；处在贫若的时候也不降低自己的气节。
English: When one is in a state of pleasure, one does not indulge his desires; when one is in a state of poverty, one does not lower one's standards.

古文：淫读古文，甘闻异言。
现代文：爱广泛地阅读古书，喜欢听不同于流俗的言论。
English: He likes to read ancient books widely and listen to different opinions from the mainstream.

古文：世书俗说，多所不安，幽处独居，考论实虚。
现代文：当时流行的书籍和世俗传说，有许多不妥当的地方，于是就深居简出，考查论证世书俗说的虚实真伪。
English: At that time, the popular books and secular legends had many inappropriate places, so they went deep and simple to examine and verify the falsity and authenticity of the world's books and sayings.

古文：充为人清重，游必择友，不好苟交。
现代文：王充为人清高稳重，结交朋友很注意选择，从不随便与人结交。
English: Wang Chong is a clear-headed and steady person. He chooses his friends carefully and never makes friends casually.

古文：所友位虽微卑，年虽幼稚，行苟离俗，必与之友。
现代文：结识的人地位虽卑微，年纪虽轻，但只要他的品行不同于世俗，就一定和他交朋友。
English: Although the acquaintance's status is humble and the age is young, as long as his behavior is different from the world, he will definitely make friends with him.

古文：好杰友雅徒，不氾结俗材。
现代文：王充好结交一些有才能有道德的人，不喜欢滥交一些庸俗之辈。
English: Wang Cheng is good at making friends with some talented and moral people, and does not like the promiscuity of some vulgar people.

古文：俗材因其微过，蜚条陷之，然终不自明，亦不非怨其人。
现代文：因此，有些庸俗之辈，就抓住王充一些微小的过失，匿名攻击陷害他，但王充始终不去辩白，也并不因此而怨恨那些人。
English: Therefore, some vulgar people caught Wang Chong some minor faults, anonymously attacked and framed him, but Wang Chong never defended himself, nor did he resent those people for that.

古文：或曰： 有良材奇文，无罪见陷，胡不自陈？
现代文：有人说： 你既然有很好的才干和出奇的文才，又是无罪而被陷害，为什么不自己申辩呢？
English: Some people said: Since you have excellent talent and extraordinary literary talent, and you have been framed without guilt, why don't you defend yourself?

古文：羊胜之徒，摩口膏舌；邹阳自明，入狱复出。
现代文：过去像羊胜那样的人，鼓动唇舌，使邹阳下了狱，邹阳自己上书申诉，结果就获得了释放。
English: In the past, people like Yang Sheng used to agitate their lips and tongues to get Zhai Yang jailed. Zhai Yang himself filed a complaint and was released as a result.

古文：苟有全完之行，不宜为人所缺；既耐勉自伸，不宜为人所屈。 
现代文：如果自己真有完美的德行，那就不该被人攻击；既然能够替自己申诉，那就更不该被人冤枉。 
English: If he is really perfect, he should not be attacked; and if he can defend himself, he should not be wronged.

古文：答曰：不清不见尘，不高不见危，不广不见削，不盈不见亏。
现代文：王充回答说：不清洁的东西就不存在被污染的问题，地位不高就不会被人危害，面积不宽就不会被削减，装得不满就不会被损耗。
English: Wang Chong replied: If something is not clean, there is no problem of being polluted; if it is not high, it will not be harmed by people; if it is not wide, it will not be reduced; if it is not satisfied, it will not be worn out.

古文：士兹多口，为人所陷，盖亦其宜。
现代文：有才能的人受到各种攻击诽谤，被人所陷害，大概也是理所当然的。
English: Talented people are subject to all kinds of attacks, slander, and being framed, probably for good reason.

古文：好进故自明，憎退故自陈。
现代文：一心想往上爬的人才去自我表白，怕丢官的人才去自我申辩。
English: Only those who are eager to climb up the ladder can express themselves, and only those who are afraid of losing their posts can defend themselves.

古文：吾无好憎，故默无言。
现代文：我既不想往上爬又不怕丢官，所以就沉默不言。
English: I didn't want to climb up the ladder and I wasn't afraid of losing my job, so I kept quiet.

古文：羊胜为谗，或使之也；邹阳得免，或拔之也。
现代文：羊胜说坏话，是有某种力量促使着他；邹阳免于祸难，是有某种力量解救了他。
English: If Yang Sheng says bad words, there is a certain force that prompts him; if Xing Yang is spared from calamity, there is a certain force that rescues him.

古文：孔子称命，孟子言天，吉凶安危，不在於人。
现代文：孔子是讲命的，孟子是讲天的，吉凶和安危，都不是人所能及的。
English: Confucius is a man of his word, Mencius is a man of heaven. Neither good fortune nor bad fortune, nor safety and danger, are beyond the reach of man.

古文：昔人见之，故归之於命，委之於时，浩然恬忽，无所怨尤。
现代文：古人明白这些道理，所以把它们归之于天命，归之于时运，就能胸怀宽广，内心宁静。
English: The ancients understood these principles, so they attributed them to the fate of heaven, attributed them to the fortune of the times, and were able to have a broad mind and inner peace.

古文：福至不谓己所得，祸到不谓己所为。
现代文：什么也不埋怨。有了福，不认为是靠自己得来的；有了祸，也不认为是自己招来的。
English: Don't complain about anything. If you have a blessing, don't think you got it on your own; if you have a misfortune, don't think you brought it on yourself.

古文：故时进意不为丰，时退志不为亏。
现代文：所以偶尔升了官也并不因此而特别得意，偶尔降了职也并不因此而格外丧气。
English: Therefore, occasionally promoted officials are not particularly pleased, and occasionally demoted officials are not particularly discouraged.

古文：不嫌亏以求盈，不违险以趋平，不鬻智以干禄，不辞爵以吊名，不贪进以自明，不恶退以怨人。
现代文：不因嫌弃贫贱而去追求富贵，不愿回避凶险而去寻求平安，不卖弄聪明以取得禄位，不用假意辞官来骗取名声，不因贪图升官而表白自己，也不因怕丢官而怨恨别人。
English: Do not pursue wealth because you do not want to be poor, do not seek peace because you do not want to avoid danger, do not pretend to be clever to get a lucrative position, do not deceive reputation by pretending to be an official, do not reveal yourself because you are greedy for promotion, and do not hate others because you are afraid of losing your position.

古文：同安危而齐死生，钧吉凶而一败成，遭十羊胜，谓之无伤。
现代文：把安与危、死和生看成是一样的，把吉与凶、成和败看成是同样的，这样就是遇到十个羊胜，也无妨害。
English: Seeing safety and danger, death and life as the same, seeing good and evil, success and failure as the same, so even if you encounter ten sheep wins, there is no obstacle.

古文：动归於天，故不自明。
现代文：我把一切都归结于天，所以不去表白自己。
English: I attribute everything to God, so I don't express myself.

古文：充性恬淡，不贪富贵。
现代文：王充的性情淡泊，不贪图富贵。
English: Wang Chong's temperament is light-hearted and does not covet wealth.

古文：为上所知，拔擢越次，不慕高官。不为上所知，贬黜抑屈，不恚下位。
现代文：当被上司了解，破格提拔的时候，不因官大而高兴；当不被上司了解，被降职罢官受压抑的时候，也不因职位低而怨恨。
English: When they are understood by their superiors and promoted in an unprecedented way, they are not happy because of their high rank; when they are not understood by their superiors and are suppressed when they are demoted or dismissed, they are not resentful because of their low position.

古文：比为县吏，无所择避。
现代文：几次被任为县里的小吏，也没有挑选而不愿干。
English: Several times he was appointed as a minor official in the county, but he did not want to do it because he was not selected.

古文：或曰： 心难而行易，好友同志，仕不择地，浊操伤行，世何效放？ 
现代文：有人说： 你心胸那么高而行为却一般，专门交结气味相投的人，做官也不计较地位，这岂不是玷污了你的节操败坏了你的品行吗？叫人家向你学习什么呢？ 
English: Some people say: Your heart is so lofty, but your behavior is ordinary. You only associate with people who smell good, and you don't care about your position when you are an official. Doesn't this tarnish your integrity and corrupt your character? What do you want others to learn from you?

古文：答曰：可效放者，莫过孔子。
现代文：王充回答说：值得人们学习的人，没有谁能比得上孔子。
English: Wang Chong replied, "There is no one who can be compared to Confucius who is worth learning from.

古文：孔子之仕，无所避矣。
现代文：孔子做官，是最不挑选的人。
English: Confucius was the most unselective person to be an official.

古文：为乘田委吏，无於邑之心；为司空相国，无说豫之色。
现代文：当他做乘田、委吏的时候，没有不高兴的心情；当他做司空、相国的时候，也没有欢乐的表现。
English: When he was a farmer or a government official, he was never unhappy; when he was a civil servant or a statesman, he was never happy.

古文：舜耕历山，若终不免；及受尧禅，若卒自得。
现代文：舜在历山耕种，就像将要那样过一辈子；等到他继承了尧的天下，又像是本来就该这样似的。
English: Toad farmed in the Leshan Mountains, as he would do for the rest of his life; when he inherited Toad's world, it was as it should have been.

古文：忧德之不丰，不患爵之不尊；耻名之不白，不恶位之不迁。
现代文：人所担忧的应该是德行上的不足，而不担心自己的爵位低；人们感到耻辱的应该是名声不清白，而不该耻于官职得不到提升。
English: It is the want of virtue that one should fear, not the smallness of one's title; it is not the smallness of one's office that one should be ashamed of, but the smallness of one's reputation.

古文：垂棘与瓦同椟，明月与砾同囊，苟有二宝之质，不害为世所同。
现代文：垂棘之玉同瓦片放在一个匣子里，明月之珠同碎石装在一条口袋里，如果有这两种宝珠的品质，是不怕被世人与瓦片和碎石混同看待的。
English: The Jade of Thorns is put in a box with the tiles, and the Pearl of the Moon is put in a bag with the rubble. If there are qualities of these two precious stones, it is not afraid of being confused by the world with the tiles and rubble.

古文：世能知善，虽贱犹显；不能别白，虽尊犹辱。
现代文：世人如果能识别什么是好人，那么好人即使处于卑贱的地位，也仍然是尊贵的；世人如果不能辨别好坏，那么即使你地位再高，也仍然是耻辱的。
English: If the world can recognize what a good person is, then a good person, even if he is in a lowly position, is still honorable; if the world cannot distinguish between good and bad, then even if your position is high, you will still be humiliated.

古文：处卑与尊齐操，位贱与贵比德，斯可矣。
现代文：如果能做到地位低和地位高的时候操行一样，身分低贱和身分尊贵的时候品德相同，这就可以了。
English: If it is possible to behave in the same way when one is low in status as when one is high, and to have the same moral character when one is low in status as when one is high in status, then that is fine.

古文：俗性贪进忽退，收成弃败。
现代文：社会上一般人的情性都是好向上爬而不愿向下降，专门巴结那些得势的而背弃那些失势的。
English: In society, the general human nature is good at climbing up rather than down, and it is dedicated to flattering those who have gained power and turning their backs on those who have lost power.

古文：充升擢在位之时，众人蚁附；废退穷居，旧故叛去。
现代文：当王充被提拔做官的时候，许多人像蚂蚁一样依附在他身边；当王充被免职，贫困家居的时候，连原来的朋友也背离而去。
English: When Wangchun was promoted to be an official, many people clung to him like ants; when Wangchun was dismissed from his post and lived in poverty, even his original friends left.

古文：志俗人之寡恩，故闲居作《讥俗》、《节义》十二篇。
现代文：王充为了记述俗人的忘恩负义，所以在家闲居的时候写成了《讥俗节义》十二篇。
English: In order to describe the ingratitude and wickedness of the laity, Wang Chun wrote the twelve chapters of "The Satire of the Festival" when he was idling at home.

古文：冀俗人观书而自觉，故直露其文，集以俗言。
现代文：希望俗人读到这本书以后能有所觉悟，因此文章的主旨很明显，并且掺杂了很通俗的语言。
English: It is hoped that the laity will be enlightened after reading this book, so the theme of the article is obvious and mixed with very popular language.

古文：或谴谓之浅。
现代文：有人指责我的文章浅薄。
English: Some people have accused my article of being shallow.

古文：答曰：以圣典而示小雅，以雅言而说丘野，不得所晓，无不逆者。
现代文：王充回答说：拿圣人的经典给小孩子看，把高雅的言论说给山野的人听，他们不会明白其中的内容，因此没有不被顶回来的。
English: Wang Chong replied, "If you show the classics of the saints to children, and speak elegant words to the people of the mountains and fields, they will not understand the content, so you will not be rejected.

古文：故苏秦精说於赵，而李兑不说；商鞅以王说秦，而孝公不用。
现代文：所以苏秦用精深的学说去赵国游说，结果李兑听了不高兴；商鞅起初用王道去游说秦孝公，而秦孝公却不愿采纳。
English: Therefore, Su Qin used sophisticated theories to lobby Zhao Guo, as a result, Li Du was not happy to hear; Shang Di initially used the royal road to lobby Qin Xiaogong, but Qin Xiaogong did not want to adopt.

古文：夫不得心意所欲，虽尽尧、舜之言，犹饮牛以酒，啖马以脯也。
现代文：凡是不符合人们内心所追求的东西，即使你说的尽是尧舜之言，那也如同用酒饮牛，用肉喂马一样无用。
English: Anything that doesn't correspond to people's innermost pursuits, even if you say it's all empty talk, is as useless as drinking wine with cows and feeding meat to horses.

古文：故鸿丽深懿之言，关於大而不通於小。
现代文：所以那种华丽深奥的言辞，适用于大人君子而不适用于小人庸夫。
English: Therefore, that kind of magnificent and profound rhetoric is suitable for an adult gentleman and not for a villain.

古文：不得已而强听，入胸者少。
现代文：人们不得已而勉强来听，能听进心中的人是很少的。
English: People come to listen reluctantly and reluctantly, and there are very few people who can listen to their hearts.

古文：孔子失马於野，野人闭不与，子贡妙称而怒，马圄谐说而懿。
现代文：孔子在野外丢失了马，被人家扣留了，子贡用美妙的言辞去劝说反而使对方更加愤怒，后来孔子的马夫用幽默诙谐的话去劝说，对方却认为讲得很好心里高兴。
English: Confucius lost his horse in the field and was detained by someone. Zigong used wonderful words to persuade but made the other party more angry. Later, Confucius's groom used humorous and witty words to persuade, but the other party thought it was a good speech and was happy.

古文：俗晓露之言，勉以深鸿之文，犹和神仙之药以治鼽咳，制貂狐之裘以取薪菜也。
现代文：一般人只懂得浅显的话语，勉强用高深鸿大的文章让他们读，就如同用仙丹妙药去治疗鼻塞咳嗽，穿着貂皮狐皮做的衣服去砍柴挖野菜一样。
English: The average person only understands simple words, and forcing them to read profound articles is like using magic potions to treat nasal congestion and coughs, and wearing clothes made of mink and fox fur to chop wood and dig vegetables.

古文：且礼有所不彳侍，事有所不须。
现代文：况且礼节也不是任何时候都要讲究的，有些事情也不是任何时候都必须这样做。
English: Moreover, etiquette is not something that must be adhered to at all times, and some things do not have to be done at all times.

古文：断决知辜，不必皋陶；调和葵韭，不俟狄牙；闾巷之乐，不用《韶》、《武》；里母之祀，不待太牢。
现代文：判决罪证明显的人，不一定要皋陶才行；烹调葵韭一类的菜蔬，也不一定要等狄牙来做才行。民间作乐，不一定用《韶》曲、《武》曲；乡村里祭祀土地神，也用不着三牲齐备的供品。
English: People who have been found guilty of a crime do not necessarily have to make pottery; cooking vegetables such as sunflower stalks does not have to wait for the dentist to do it. Folk music does not necessarily have to use "" music, "武" music; sacrificing to the land god in the countryside also does not require a three-sacrifice offering.

古文：既有不须，而又不宜。
现代文：既有不必要的问题，又有不适宜的问题。
English: There are unnecessary questions and inappropriate questions.

古文：牛刀割鸡，舒戟采葵，鈇钺裁箸，盆盎酌卮，大小失宜，善之者希。
现代文：用宰牛刀杀鸡，用长戟挖野菜，用大斧削筷子，用盆罐当酒杯，这些都是大小失当，认为这种做法适当的人很少。
English: Killing chickens with a butcher's knife, digging up vegetables with a pickaxe, sharpening chopsticks with a large axe, and using a pot as a wine glass are all inappropriate sizes, and few people think that this practice is appropriate.

古文：何以为辩？
现代文：怎样才算口才好呢？
English: How do you measure eloquence?

古文：喻深以浅。
现代文：能用通俗的语言进明深奥的道理就算好。
English: It's good to be able to use common language to clarify esoteric truths.

古文：何以为智？
现代文：怎样才算才智高呢？
English: How can one be considered highly intelligent?

古文：喻难以易。贤圣铨材之所宜，故文能为深浅之差。
现代文：能用容易懂的语言说明难懂的问题就算才智高。
English: If you can explain a difficult problem in an easy-to-understand language, you are highly intelligent.

古文：充既疾俗情，作《讥俗》之书；又闵人君之政，徒欲治人，不得其宜，不晓其务，愁精苦思，不睹所趋，故作《政务》之书。
现代文：贤圣能衡量读者对象的才能大小，所以能写出适合他们程度的、深浅不同的文章。王充憎恨俗人的性情，因而写了《讥俗节义》；又忧虑君王治理国家，只是想统治老百姓，而没有合适的治理方法，不知道该做些什么，尽管愁思苦想，但是看不出应该走的道路，为此写了《政务》这本书。
English: Wang Chong hated the disposition of the laity, so he wrote "Cynicism and Justice"; he was also worried about the king's governance of the country, he just wanted to rule the people, but he did not have a suitable governance method, he did not know what to do, and although he thought about it, he could not see the path he should take, so he wrote the book "Government Affairs."

古文：又伤伪书俗文多不实诚，故为《论衡》之书。
现代文：王充又痛恨当时社会上流行的伪书俗文，内容大多不实事求是，所以又写了《论衡》这本书。
English: Wang Chong also hated the pseudo-books and vulgarities that were popular in society at that time, most of which were not realistic, so he wrote the book "On Balance."

古文：夫贤圣殁而大义分，磋殊趋，各自开门。通人观览，不能钉铨。
现代文：自从圣贤死后，他们所讲的道理就发生了分歧，长期朝着不同的方向发展，学者自立门户各成一派，就是博古通今的人读了他们的书，也不能断定是非真假。
English: Since the death of the sages, there has been a divergence in their teachings, which have been developing in different directions for a long time, and scholars have formed their own schools. Even if people from ancient times to the present read their books, they cannot determine whether they are true or false.

古文：遥闻传授，笔写耳取，在百岁之前。
现代文：这些伪书俗文都是久远听闻代代相传的东西，有用笔记下的，有用耳听来的，都是些上百年的东西。
English: These pseudo-books and vulgarities are things that have been heard for a long time and passed down from generation to generation. Useful notes, useful ears, are things that have been around for hundreds of years.

古文：历日弥久，以为昔古之事，所言近是，信之入骨，不可自解，故作《实论》。
现代文：经过的时间越是久远，认为都是过去古代的事情，所说的大都是对的，对这些东西信得刻骨铭心，而不能自拔出来，因此我写了《论衡》这本书。
English: The more time passes, the more I think that these are things of the past and ancient times, and that most of what is said is correct, and I believe in these things with all my heart, and cannot extricate myself, so I wrote the book "On Balance."

古文：其文盛，其辩争，浮华虚伪之语，莫不澄定。
现代文：这本书的内容丰富，对问题的辩论很激烈，对于一切浮华虚伪的言论，无不加以澄清订正。
English: The book is rich in content, the debate on the issue is fierce, and all the pompous and hypocritical remarks are clarified and revised.

古文：没华虚之文，存敦庞之朴，拨流失之风，反宓戏之俗。
现代文：目的是要消除那些华而不实的文章，保存敦厚朴素的本质，矫正当时流行的不良风俗，恢复伏羲时代那种纯朴的习俗。
English: The purpose was to eliminate those flashy articles, preserve the simple and simple essence, correct the bad customs that were popular at that time, and restore the simple customs of the Fuxi era.

古文：充书形露易观。
现代文：王充的书浅显易懂。
English: Wang Chong's book is simple and easy to understand.

古文：或曰： 口辩者其言深，笔敏者其文沉。
现代文：有人说： 善辩的人讲出来的话很深刻，擅长写文章的人他写出的文章就深刻含蓄。
English: Some people say: The words spoken by a good debater are very profound, and those written by a good writer are deeply implicit.

古文：案经艺之文，贤圣之言，鸿重优雅，难卒晓睹。世读之者，训古乃下。
现代文：考察一下经典上的文章，圣贤的言论，都博大精深，优美文雅，很难一下子就看明白，现在阅读它的人，必须依靠注解才能读得下去。
English: If you look at the classical texts, the sayings of the sages, they are all profound and profound, beautiful and elegant. It is difficult to understand them all at once, and those who read them now must rely on commentary to read them.

古文：盖贤圣之材鸿，故其文语与俗不通。
现代文：这大概是由于圣贤的才智博大，所以他们说话，写文章就跟普通人不一样。
English: This is probably due to the great intelligence of the sages, so they speak and write differently from ordinary people.

古文：玉隐石间，珠匿鱼腹，非玉工珠师，莫能采得。
现代文：美玉隐藏在石头里，珍珠蕴藏在鱼腹中，不靠玉工和珠师，谁也没法采到。
English: The gem is hidden in the stone, the pearl is hidden in the fish's belly, and no one can get it without the help of a jade craftsman and a beadmaker.

古文：宝物以隐闭不见，实语亦宜深沉难测。
现代文：因为宝贵的东西都是隐蔽而不外露的，所以考辩真伪的言论也应该深奥难懂。
English: Because precious things are hidden and not exposed, so the authenticity of the speech should also be abstruse and difficult to understand.

古文：《讥俗》之书，欲悟俗人，故形露其指，为分别之文。
现代文：《讥俗节义》这本书，是想使俗人觉悟，所以它的主旨清楚，是些通俗易懂的文章。
English: This book, "The Satire of the Festival," is intended to enlighten the laity, so its theme is clear, and it is an easy-to-understand article.

古文：《论衡》之书，何为复然？
现代文：而《论衡》这本书，为什么也是这样呢？
English: And why is this also the case with the book "On Balance"?

古文：岂材有浅极，不能为覆？
现代文：莫非是你的才能浅薄到了极点，根本写不出含蓄深刻的东西来吗？
English: Could it be that your talent is so shallow that you can't write anything vaguely profound?

古文：何文之察，与彼经艺殊轨辙也？ 
现代文：不然你的文章那么浅显，和那些经典截然不同呢？
English: Otherwise, your article is so shallow, and it is completely different from those classics?

古文：答曰：玉隐石间，珠匿鱼腹，故为深覆。
现代文：王充回答说：美玉本来隐藏在石头里面，珍珠本来蕴藏在鱼腹之中，所以都隐而不露。
English: Wang Chun replied: Beauty was originally hidden in the stone, pearl was originally hidden in the fish's belly, so it was all hidden.

古文：及玉色剖於石心，珠光出於鱼腹，其隐乎？
现代文：等到美玉从石头中剖出来，珍珠从鱼腹中取出来，难道它们还隐蔽着吗？
English: When the gem is cut from the stone, and the pearl is taken from the belly of the fish, will they still be hidden?

古文：吾文未集於简札之上，藏於胸臆之中，犹玉隐珠匿也；及出露，犹玉剖珠出乎，烂若天文之照，顺若地理之晓，嫌疑隐微，尽可名处。且名白，事自定也。《论衡》者，论之平也。
现代文：它的光辉像天上的日月星辰一般灿烂，条理像地上的山脉河流一样清楚，凡是不清楚不明白的问题，全都能说得清清楚楚，况且事物的名目一旦表示清楚了，所论述的事情也就确定无疑了。《论衡》这本书，就是衡量言论是非的标准。
English: Its brilliance is as brilliant as the sun, moon and stars in the sky, its structure is as clear as the mountains and rivers on the earth, and all unclear and unclear questions can be clearly stated. Moreover, once the names of things are clearly expressed, the things discussed will be certain. The book "On Balance" is the standard for measuring the right and wrong of speech.

古文：口则务在明言，笔则务在露文。
现代文：开口说话就要力求把话说明白，动笔写文章就应该力求把文章写清楚。
English: When you speak, you should try to make your words clear. When you write, you should try to write clearly.

古文：高士之文雅，言无不可晓，指无不可睹。
现代文：才高学富的人文章写得优美，就在于他用的词语没有人读不懂，文章的主旨没人看不明白。
English: The reason why an article written by a talented, well-educated person is beautiful is that no one can read the words he uses, and no one can understand the main idea of the article.

古文：观读之者，晓然若盲之开目，聆然若聋之通耳。
现代文：读了这种文章的人，就像瞎子睁开了眼睛，聋子听到了声音。
English: Reading such articles is like the blind opening their eyes and the deaf hearing voices.

古文：三年盲子，卒见父母，不察察相识，安肯说喜？
现代文：瞎了三年的孩子，一旦看到父母，如果不看得一清二楚，怎么会欢喜呢？
English: How can a child who has been blind for three years be happy when he sees his parents, if he cannot see them clearly?

古文：道畔巨树，堑边长沟，所居昭察，人莫不知。
现代文：路边的大树，河边的长沟，由于明显存在，所以没有谁会看不见。
English: The big tree by the roadside, the long ditch by the river, because of the obvious existence, so no one can not see.

古文：使树不巨而隐，沟不长而匿，以斯示人，尧、舜犹惑。
现代文：如果树不大而且又隐蔽着，沟不长而又隐藏着，指着它们让人看，即使是尧、舜恐怕也会看不清楚。
English: If the trees are small and hidden, and the ditches are not long and hidden, pointing at them to let people see, even the crickets and grasshoppers may not be able to see clearly.

古文：人面色部七十有余，颊肌明洁，五色分别，隐微忧喜，皆可得察，占射之者，十不失一。
现代文：人脸上有颜色的部位据说有七十多个，如果脸颊肌肤明净清洁，各种颜色都很清晰，那么即使是很细微的忧喜情绪，都可以看得清楚，给他相面的人，十个不会弄错一个。
English: It is said that there are more than seventy parts of the human face that have color. If the skin of the cheeks is clear and clean, and all colors are clear, then even very subtle feelings of sadness and joy can be seen clearly. If you give him a face to face, ten people will not make a mistake.

古文：使面黝而黑丑，垢重袭而覆部，占射之者，十而失九。
现代文：如果脸面黝黑丑陋，泥垢老厚而遮盖了脸上的各个部位，给他相面的人，十个有九个要弄错。
English: If the face is dark and ugly, and the dirt is old and thick and covers all parts of the face, nine out of ten people who give him a facial expression will get it wrong.

古文：夫文由语也，或浅露分别，或深迂优雅，孰为辩者？
现代文：写文章如同说话一样，有的通俗易懂条理清楚，有的深奥曲折隐晦不明，哪一种属于善辩的人呢？
English: Writing an article is like speaking, some are easy to understand and clearly organized, some are esoteric and obscure, which one is a good debater?

古文：故口言以明志，言恐灭遗，故著之文字。
现代文：说话是为了表达人的思想，说过的话恐怕遗忘消失，所以就用文字记录下来。
English: To speak is to express one's thoughts. Words spoken are likely to be forgotten, so they should be recorded in writing.

古文：文字与言同趋，何为犹当隐闭指意？
现代文：文字与说话是同一个目的，为什么写文章要把宗旨隐蔽起来呢？
English: Writing and speaking have the same purpose, so why should the purpose of writing be concealed?

古文：狱当嫌辜，卿决疑事，浑沌难晓，与彼分明可知，孰为良吏？
现代文：狱吏审理疑难案件，廷尉处理有疑问的事情，有的含糊不清，和那办得清楚明白的相比，哪一个是好法官呢？
English: Which is the better judge, a jailer who tries difficult cases, or a courtier who deals with doubtful matters, some obscure, and some plain?

古文：夫口论以分明为公，笔辩以荴露为通，吏文以昭察为良。
现代文：说话以明白流畅为精妙，写文章以宗旨清楚为畅通，公文以明白准确为优秀。
English: Speaking with clarity and fluency is exquisite, writing with a clear purpose is smooth, and official documents with clarity and accuracy are excellent.

古文：深覆典雅，指意难睹，唯赋颂耳！
现代文：深奥隐晦，使人难以明白其宗旨的，只有像 赋 、 颂 这类文体。
English: There are only such styles as fu and ode, which are abstruse and obscure, making it difficult for people to understand their purpose.

古文：经传之文，贤圣之语，古今言殊，四方谈异也。
现代文：经传上的文章，圣贤的语言之所以不容易懂，是由于古今的语言不一样，各地的方言不相同的缘故。
English: The reason why the language of the sages is not easy to understand is that the languages of ancient and modern times are different, and the dialects of various regions are different.

古文：当言事时，非务难知，使指闭隐也。
现代文：古人说话论事的时候，并不是竭力要让人难懂，把含意隐蔽起来。
English: When the ancients talked about things, they did not try to be difficult to understand and hide the meaning.

古文：後人不晓，世相离远，此名曰语异，不名曰材鸿。
现代文：后人看不懂古人的文章，是由于时代相距太远了，这只能说是语言不同，不能称古人才智博大。
English: Posterity cannot understand the writings of the ancients because the times are too far apart, which can only be said to be a difference in language, and cannot be said to be the wisdom of the ancients.

古文：浅文读之难晓，名曰不巧，不名曰知明。
现代文：内容肤浅的文章如果叫人难于读懂，这叫做笨拙，不能称为才智高明。
English: If a shallow article is hard to read, it's clumsy, not clever.

古文：秦始皇读韩非之书，叹曰： 犹独不得此人同时。 
现代文：秦始皇读了韩非的书，赞叹说： 我怎么偏偏不能和这个人生活在同一时代呢！ 
English: Qin Shihuang read Han Fei's book and said with admiration: How can I not live in the same era as this man!

古文：其文可晓，故其事可思。
现代文：正是由于韩非的文章可以使人读懂，所以他讲的事情才能引人深思。
English: It is precisely because Han Fei's articles can be read by people that the things he talks about can be thought-provoking.

古文：如深鸿优雅，须师乃学，投之於地，何叹之有？
现代文：如果韩非的文章深奥难懂，必须有老师指导才能读懂，那么秦始皇就会把它扔在地上，还有什么赞叹可言呢？
English: If Han Fei's article is abstruse and difficult to understand, and must be read with the guidance of a teacher, then Qin Shi Huang will throw it on the ground. What more can be said?

古文：夫笔著者，欲其易晓而难为，不贵难知而易造；口论务解分而可听，不务深迂而难睹。
现代文：写文章的人，应该力求作品读起来通俗易懂而写的时候却很费力，不应该推崇那种读起来晦涩难懂而写的时候却不费力的文章；口头论述要力求解释明白，使人可以听懂，而不能为了追求深奥曲折，使人难于听懂。
English: A writer should strive for a work that is easy to read and easy to understand, but difficult to write, and should not promote the kind of article that is difficult to read and difficult to write, but not difficult to write; oral discourse should strive to explain clearly, so that people can understand, but not for the pursuit of esoteric twists and turns, making it difficult to understand.

古文：孟子相贤，以眸子明了者，察文，以义可晓。
现代文：孟子看一个人贤与不贤，是以瞳人清亮与否作为标准，同样，考察文章好坏，要以道理明白与否作为标准。
English: Mencius looked at a person's virtue and non-virtue according to whether the pupil was clear or not. Similarly, whether the examination article was good or bad should be based on whether the reason was clear or not.

古文：充书违诡於俗。
现代文：王充的著作与世俗见解相对立。
English: Wang Chong's works stand in opposition to worldly opinions.

古文：或难曰： 文贵夫顺合众心，不违人意，百人读之莫谴，千人闻之莫怪。
现代文：有人说： 写文章贵在符合大众的心意，不违背人们的心愿，应该做到百人读了不批评，千人听了不指责。
English: Some people said: "Writing articles should be in line with the public's will, not against people's wishes. It should be done so that a hundred people read without criticism, and a thousand people listen without criticism."

古文：故管子曰： 言室满室，言堂满堂。 
现代文：所以《管子》上说 在屋子里讲论，全屋的人听了都满意，在厅堂里讲话，全厅堂的人听了都赞同。 
English: That's why "The Tube" says, "Speak in the room, and the whole room is satisfied; speak in the hall, and the whole hall approves."

古文：今殆说不与世同，故文刺於俗，不合於众。 
现代文：现在大概你的学说与世人的见解不同，所以你的文章违反俗情，不合众人的心愿。 
English: Now, your doctrine is probably different from the world's opinion, so your article is contrary to popular sentiment and does not reflect the wishes of the people.

古文：答曰：论贵是而不务华，事尚然而不高合。
现代文：王充回答说：议论问题贵在内容正确而不应追求辞藻华丽，记述事情讲究符合实际而不应注重迎合别人。
English: Wang Chong replied, "When discussing issues, it is important that the content is correct, rather than pursuing rhetoric. When describing things, it is important to be realistic, rather than focusing on catering to others.

古文：论说辩然否，安得不谲常心、逆俗耳？
现代文：论文是用来分辨正确与错误的，它怎么能不违背世俗人的心理，让人们听了不顺耳呢？
English: The thesis is used to distinguish between right and wrong, how can it not go against the psychology of secular people and make people uncomfortable?

古文：众心非而不从，故丧黜其伪，而存定其真。
现代文：众人的意见是错的就不能听从，所以我才排除和贬斥那些虚伪的东西，保存和肯定那些真实的东西。
English: I cannot listen to the opinions of the crowd if they are wrong, so I eliminate and disparage those that are false, and preserve and affirm those that are true.

古文：如当从顺人心者，循旧守雅，讽习而已，何辩之有？
现代文：如果要求一切都应当顺从众人的心意，那就完全按照旧常规办就行了，还辩论什么呢？
English: If everything is supposed to be in accordance with the will of the people, then it is enough to do everything according to the old rules. What is there to debate?

古文：孔子侍坐於鲁哀公，公赐桃与黍，孔子先食黍而后啖桃，可谓得食序矣，然左右皆掩口而笑，贯俗之日久也。
现代文：孔子陪鲁哀公闲坐，鲁哀公把桃和黍赐给孔子，孔子先吃了黍然后才吃桃，可以说是完全符合进食的顺序的，但是当时左右的人都捂着嘴笑他，这是由于习惯于这种习俗时间太久的缘故。
English: Confucius sat idly with Lu Aigong. Lu Aigong gave Confucius a peach and a gourd. Confucius ate the gourd first and then ate the peach, which can be said to be completely consistent with the order of eating, but at that time, people around him were pouting and laughing at him. This was due to the fact that they had been accustomed to this custom for too long.

古文：今吾实犹孔子之序食也，俗人违之，犹左右之掩口也。
现代文：我现在实际上与孔子当时按顺序进食的情形相似，世俗的人反对我，就像当时鲁哀公左右的人捂着嘴笑孔子一样。
English: In fact, I am now in a situation similar to that of Confucius at the time of eating in order, and the secular people oppose me, just as the people around Lu Aigong smiled at Confucius at that time.

古文：善雅歌，於郑为人悲；礼舞，於赵为不好。
现代文：庙堂上用的雅歌，郑国人认为不好听；典礼上用的舞蹈，赵国人认为不好看。
English: The folk songs used in temples are considered by the Zheng people to be unpleasant to listen to; the dances used in ceremonies are considered by the Zhao people to be unpleasant to watch.

古文：尧、舜之典，伍伯不肯观；孔、墨之籍，季、孟不肯读。
现代文：《尚书》中的《尧典》和《舜典》，春秋五霸不肯看；孔子、墨子的书，季孙氏和孟孙氏不愿读。
English: The Spring and Autumn Five Immortals refused to read the Analects and the Analects of Confucius and Mozi in the Shangshu, and the Qisun and Mengsun did not want to read the books of Confucius and Mozi.

古文：宁危之计，黜於闾巷；拨世之言，訾於品俗。
现代文：可以使国家转危为安的计谋，被一般老百姓所贬低；治理国家的言论，会受到一般人的诋毁。
English: The strategies that can turn the country around are belittled by ordinary people; the speech of governing the country will be slandered by ordinary people.

古文：有美味於斯，俗人不嗜，狄牙甘食。有宝玉於是，俗人投之，卞和佩服。
现代文：有美味在这里，俗人不爱吃，但狄牙却爱吃；有宝玉在这里，俗人会抛弃它，但卞和却佩带它。
English: There is a delicacy here that the common people don't like to eat, but Di Fang loves to eat it; there is a precious jewel here that the common people would discard, but He He wears it.

古文：孰是孰非，可信者谁？
现代文：谁对谁不对呢？可以相信的是谁呢？
English: Who is right and who is wrong? Who can be trusted?

古文：礼俗相背，何世不然？
现代文：礼仪和世俗相违背，哪个时代不是如此呢？
English: When is it not the case that etiquette and worldliness contradict each other?

古文：鲁文逆祀，畔者三人。盖独是之语，高士不舍，俗夫不好；惑众之书，贤者欣颂，愚者逃顿。
现代文：鲁文公违反祭祖顺序，有三个臣子离开了；鲁定公按顺序祭祖，反而有五个臣子离开了。有独到见解的话，高明的人不会舍弃，世俗的人不会喜欢；能感动众人的书籍，贤人高兴地称颂它，而愚昧的人却躲开它。
English: Prince Luwen violated the order of ancestor-sacrificing, and three of his vassals left; Prince Luding followed the order of ancestor-sacrificing, but five of his vassals left. If there is a unique opinion, a clever person will not abandon it, and a worldly person will not like it; if there is a book that can move many people, a wise person will praise it with pleasure, but a foolish person will avoid it.

古文：充书不能纯美。
现代文：王充的著作不可能完美无缺。
English: Wang Chong's works cannot be perfect.

古文：或曰： 口无择言，笔无择文。
现代文：于是有人说： 嘴里不该讲让人挑剔的话，下笔不该有让人挑剔的文辞。
English: Therefore, some people said: "One should not say critical words in one's mouth, and one should not write critical words in one's pen."

古文：文必丽以好，言必辩以巧。
现代文：文章要华丽美好，讲话要雄辩巧妙。
English: The article should be gorgeous and beautiful, and the speech should be eloquent and skillful.

古文：言了於耳，则事味於心；文察於目，则篇留於手。
现代文：话讲得动听，所说的事情才能使人在心里再三玩味；文章值得一读，那样的著作才让人爱不释手。
English: It is the beauty of the story, the things that are said, that make people relive them in their minds; the article is worth reading, and that kind of work makes people love it.

古文：故辩言无不听，丽文无不写。
现代文：所以雄辩的议论，人们没有不爱听的；华丽的文章，人们没有不争相传抄的。
English: Therefore, there is no eloquent speech that people do not like to listen to; there is no magnificent article that people do not compete to copy.

古文：今新书既在论譬，说俗为戾，又不美好，於观不快。
现代文：现在你著的《论衡》既然是用比喻的方式来发议论，对世俗的批评就不合常情，又写得不漂亮，读起来很不舒服。
English: Now, since your book "On Balance" uses a metaphorical way to discuss, the criticism of the world is not normal, and it is not beautiful, and it is very uncomfortable to read.

古文：盖师旷调音，曲无不悲；狄牙和膳，肴无淡味。
现代文：师旷所奏的乐曲，没有不优美动听的；狄牙做的饭菜，没有味道不好的。
English: There is no music played by Shigeaki that is not beautiful; there is no bad-tasting meal cooked by Diya.

古文：然则通人造书，文无暇秽。
现代文：通今博古的人写的书，就没有什么缺点。
English: A book written by someone who is familiar with contemporary literature has no drawbacks.

古文：《吕氏》、《淮南》悬於市门，观读之者无訾一言。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》和《淮南子》这两部书，曾悬赏在城门上，观读它的人，没有说过 不 字。
English: The two books, "The Spring and Autumn of the Lü Clan" and "Huainanzi," were once put up for auction at the city gate, and the people who read them did not say a word.

古文：今无二书之美，文虽众盛，犹多谴毁。 
现代文：现在你的书没有那两本书好，文章虽然又多又长，仍然要遭到不少人的谴责和反对。 
English: Now your book is not as good as those two books. Although the articles are many and long, they still have to be condemned and opposed by many people.

古文：答曰：夫养实者不育华，调行者不饰辞。
现代文：王充回答说：养植果实就不注重养育花，修养品行就不在言辞上下功夫。
English: Wang Chong replied, "If you don't pay attention to the cultivation of fruits, you won't pay attention to the cultivation of flowers, and if you don't pay attention to the cultivation of quality, you won't pay attention to words.

古文：丰草多华英，茂林多枯枝。
现代文：茂盛的草丛中往往有许多落花，茂密的树林中必然会有许多枯枝。
English: There are often many fallen flowers in the lush grass, and there are bound to be many dead branches in the dense woods.

古文：为文欲显白其为，安能令文而无谴毁？
现代文：我写文章是想公开表明我的目的用意，怎能使自己的文章不遭受谴责和诋毁呢？
English: I write articles to openly express my aims and intentions. How can I keep my articles from being condemned and slandered?

古文：救火拯溺，义不得好；辩论是非，言不得巧。
现代文：忙着救火或救落水者的时候，顾不上讲究自己的仪表；辩论是非的时候，也顾不上言辞的美好。
English: When you are busy putting out a fire or rescuing someone who has fallen into the water, you can't pay attention to your appearance; when you are debating right and wrong, you can't pay attention to the beauty of your words.

古文：入泽随龟，不暇调足；深渊捕蛟，不暇定手。
现代文：下水追捕乌龟，顾不得调整自己的步伐；入深渊中捉蛟，顾不得考虑使用哪只手。
English: If you chase a turtle into the sewer, you can't help but adjust your pace; if you catch a tadpole in the abyss, you can't help but consider which hand to use.

古文：言奸辞简，指趋妙远；语甘文峭，务意浅小。
现代文：我的文章言辞直截了当，但思想内容却很深远；有些文章虽然言辞甜美文笔尖刻，但思想内容却很浅薄无聊。
English: My articles are straightforward in words, but the thought content is very far-reaching; some articles, although the words are sweet and the pen is sharp, but the thought content is very shallow and boring.

古文：稻谷千锺，糠皮太半；阅钱满亿，穿决出万。
现代文：千钟稻谷，糠皮就要占一大半；上亿的铜钱，坏了钱孔的会有成千上万。
English: A thousand bells of rice, the bran will account for more than half; hundreds of millions of copper coins, there will be thousands of broken money holes.

古文：大羹必有淡味，至宝必有瑕秽，大简必有大好，良工必有不巧。
现代文：祭祀用的太羹必然淡而无味，最珍贵的宝石也必然有杂质；书籍文章难免出差错，良工巧匠也会有不精巧之处。
English: The yakitori used for religious rituals is inevitably bland and tasteless, and the most precious gemstones are bound to have impurities; mistakes are inevitable in books and articles, and good craftsmen will also have imperfections.

古文：然则辩言必有所屈，通文犹有所黜。
现代文：用此，再雄辩的言论也会有说理不周密的地方，再博古通今的文章也还会有可以指责的地方。
English: With this, no matter how eloquent the speech, there will be a place where the reasoning is not thorough, and no matter how profound the article, there will still be a place where it can be criticized.

古文：言金由贵家起，文粪自贱室出，《淮南》、《吕氏》之无累害，所由出者，家富官贵也。
现代文：有的人的话像金子一般是因为它出自权贵之口，有的人的文章像粪土一样是因为它出自平民之手。《淮南子》、《吕氏春秋》没有一再受到攻击责备，那是因为它们出自有钱有势的人家。
English: Some people's words are generally like gold because they come from the mouths of the powerful, and some people's articles are like dung because they come from the hands of the common people. "Huainanzi" and "Lu Shi Chunqiu" have not been repeatedly attacked and blamed because they come from rich and powerful people.

古文：夫贵，故得悬於市，富，故有千金副。
现代文：因为有势，所以才能把书挂在城门上；因为有钱，所以才能以千金为赏格。
English: Because they are powerful, they can hang books on the city gate; because they are rich, they can be rewarded with thousands of dollars.

古文：观读之者，惶恐畏忌，虽见乖不合，焉敢谴一字？
现代文：看到这种书的人，个个惶恐畏忌，即使见有不合理之处，谁又敢提出一个字的批评呢！
English: People who see this kind of book are all terrified, and even if they see something unreasonable, who would dare to put forward a word of criticism!

古文：充书既成，或稽合於古，不类前人。
现代文：王充的书写成以后，有人拿它与古人的书核对，认为它不同于古人的著作。
English: After Wang Chong's book was written, some people compared it with the books of the ancients and thought that it was different from the works of the ancients.

古文：或曰： 谓之饰岁偶辞，或径或迂，或屈或舒。
现代文：于是有人就说： 说你是在卖弄辞藻吧，你的文章却又有的直截了当，有的迂回曲折；有的拐弯抹角，有的平铺直叙。
English: Then someone said, "You say you're playing with words, but some of your articles are straightforward, some are circuitous; some are full of twists and turns, and some are flat and straightforward.

古文：谓之论道，实事委琐，文给甘酸，谐於经不验，集於传不合，稽之子长不当，内之子云不入。
现代文：说你是在论述大道理吧，讲的又都是些琐碎的事情，文章中尽是杂七杂八的东西，对照经书既不符合，与传书对比也不相称，和司马迁的著作比不适当，和扬雄的著作归为一类也格格不入。
English: Let's say that you are discussing a great truth, but what you are talking about are trivial things. The article is full of miscellaneous things. It does not conform to the Bible, nor is it commensurate with the transmission of books. It is not appropriate to compare it with the works of Sima Qian, and it does not fit into the same category as the works of Yang Xiong.

古文：文不与前相似，安得名佳好，称工巧？ 
现代文：文章不与前人的相似，怎么说得上好，称得上巧呢？ 
English: If the article is not similar to the previous one, how can it be said to be good, and how can it be called clever?

古文：答曰：饰貌以强类者失形，调辞以务似者失情。
现代文：王充回答说：修饰容貌强求与别人类似，便失去了自己的本来面目。
English: Wang Chun replied, "If you try to look like other people, you will lose your original face.

古文：百夫之子，不同父母，殊类而生，不必相似，各以所禀，自为佳好。
现代文：修辞造句力求与前人相似，便损害了自己原来要表达的意思。众人的儿子，是不同的父母，不同的族类所生的，他们不一定长得一样，他们各自承受了父母的精气，形成了各自的长处。
English: The sons of men are born of different parents, of different tribes, and they do not necessarily look alike. They have each inherited the spirit of their parents and have developed their own strengths.

古文：文必有与合然後称善，是则代匠斫不伤手，然後称工巧也。
现代文：如果文章必须与前人雷同才能称为好文章，这就是说只有代替好木匠去砍削木柴而不会伤手的人，然后才能称为技艺高明了。
English: If an article can only be called good if it is the same as its predecessors, this means that only a person who can replace a good carpenter to chop firewood without hurting his hand can be called a skilled craftsman.

古文：文士之务，各有所从，或调辞以巧文，或辩伪以实事。
现代文：文人所做的事，各有各的路子，有人善于雕琢辞句使得文章很精妙，有人爱好辨别真伪以证论事情的真相。
English: Every writer has his own way of doing things. Some are good at crafting words to make the article very exquisite. Others like to distinguish between truth and falsehood to prove the truth of the matter.

古文：必谋虑有合，文辞相袭，是则五帝不异事，三王不殊业也。
现代文：如果认为文章的构思必须与前人相同，文章的辞句必须互相沿袭，那就等于要求五帝做同样的事情，三王建立同样的功业。
English: If you think that the idea of the article must be the same as the predecessors, and the words of the article must follow each other, it is tantamount to asking the five emperors to do the same thing, and the three kings to establish the same cause.

古文：美色不同面，皆佳於目；悲音不共声，皆快於耳。酒醴异气，饮之皆醉；百谷殊味，食之皆饱。
现代文：貌美的人面孔长得并不一样，看起来都很漂亮；动人的歌声音不相同，听起来都很悦耳；普通的酒和甜酒的气味不同，喝起来都会醉人；各种粮食的味道不同，吃了都可填饱肚子。
English: The faces of beautiful people look different, but they all look beautiful; the voices of moving songs are different, but they all sound pleasant; the smell of ordinary wine and sweet wine is different, and they are all intoxicating when drunk; the taste of various grains is different, and they can fill their stomachs when eaten.

古文：谓文当与前合，是谓舜眉当复八采，禹目当复重瞳。
现代文：如果认为写文章都必须和前人一个样，那就等于说舜的眉毛也应该是八采，禹的眼睛也该是有两个瞳人了。
English: If you think that writing an article must be the same as the predecessors, then it is tantamount to saying that the eyebrows should also be eight, and Yu's eyes should also have two pupils.

古文：充书文重。
现代文：王充的著作篇幅多份量大。
English: Wang Chong's works are large in length and weight.

古文：或曰： 文贵约而指通，言尚省而趋明。辩士之言要而达，文人之辞寡而章。
现代文：有人说： 文章以字句简练主题明确为好，说话以语言简要思想清楚为高，长于辩论的人，他的话必然扼要周到；善于写文章的人，他的文辞必然简洁鲜明。
English: Some people say: An article is better with concise words and a clear theme, a speech is better with concise language and a clear thought, a person who is good at debate must be concise and thoughtful, and a person who is good at writing articles must be concise and clear.

古文：今所作新书，出万言，繁不省，则读者不能尽；篇非一，则传者不能领。
现代文：现在你所著的新书，超出了万言，繁琐而不省略，读者没有耐心读完；篇幅太多，注释者不能一一领会。
English: The new book you have now written is beyond words, it is cumbersome but not omitted, the reader does not have the patience to finish reading; it is too long for the commentator to understand.

古文：被躁人之名，以多为不善。
现代文：你所以落了个 躁人 的名声，是因为文章写得过多就不好。
English: You've got a reputation for being a bit of a manic because it's not good to write too much.

古文：语约易言，文重难得。
现代文：说话简短容易说好，文章长了就不容易写得恰当。
English: A short speech is easy to say well, but a long article is not easy to write properly.

古文：玉少石多，多者不为珍；龙少鱼众，少者固为神。 
现代文：玉少石头多，多的就不珍贵；龙少鱼多，少的就必然神奇。 
English: Less gems, more stones, more is not precious; less dragons, more fish, less is necessarily magical.

古文：答曰：有是言也。
现代文：王充回答说：确有这样的说法。
English: Wang Chong replied, "There is indeed such a saying.

古文：盖言无多，而华文无寡。
现代文：内容充实的文章再多也不嫌多，华而不实的文章，再少也不算好。
English: No more content-rich articles is too much, and no fewer flashy articles is too few.

古文：为世用者，百篇无害；不为用者，一章无补。
现代文：只要对社会有用，即使写一百篇也没有害处；如果对社会无用，即使只写一篇也没有补益。
English: As long as it is useful to society, there is no harm in writing a hundred articles; if it is not useful to society, there is no benefit in writing only one article.

古文：如皆为用，则多者为上，少者为下。
现代文：如果全都对社会有用，那么就越多越好，少了就不好。
English: If everything is useful to society, then more is better, and less is not good.

古文：累积千金，比於一百，孰为富者？
现代文：积累了千金，和只有百金的相比，谁是富者呢？
English: Compared with those who have accumulated thousands of dollars, who is rich?

古文：盖文多胜寡，财寡愈贫。
现代文：所以文章多胜过文章少，钱财多胜过钱财少。
English: Therefore, more articles are better than fewer articles, and more money is better than less money.

古文：世无一卷，吾有百篇；人无一字，吾有万言，孰者为贤？
现代文：世人拿不出一卷，而我有百篇；别人没有写一个字，我却写了上万字，哪一个好呢？
English: The world cannot produce one volume, but I have a hundred articles; others have not written a word, but I have written tens of thousands of words. Which one is better?

古文：今不曰所言非，而云泰多，不曰世不好善，而云不能领，斯盖吾书所以不得省也。
现代文：现在有人不说我的文章有什么不对，而说我的文章太多；不说世人不喜欢好文章，却说他们不能接受我的文章，这正是我写的书不能简略的原因。
English: Now some people do not say that there is something wrong with my writing, but that I write too much; they do not say that the world does not like good writing, but they say that they cannot accept my writing, which is exactly why I cannot write a simple book.

古文：夫宅舍多，土地不得小；户口众，簿籍不得少。
现代文：房屋多，占地就不能小；人口多，户口册就不能少。
English: If there are many houses, the occupied area cannot be small; if there are many people, the number of household registration books cannot be small.

古文：今失实之事多，华虚之语众，指实定宜，辩争之言，安得约径？
现代文：现在失实的事情多，华而不实的言论多，那么指明真实情况判断是非，进行争辩的言辞，怎么能够简短呢？
English: Nowadays, there are many untrue things, and many flamboyant statements, so how can the words of pointing out the true situation, judging right and wrong, and arguing be short?

古文：韩非之书，一条无异，篇以十第，文以万数。
现代文：韩非的书，只有一个中心思想而无变化，篇数却要以十为单位来排列，文字要以万数来计。
English: Han Fei's book has only one central idea and no changes, but the number of pages should be arranged in units of ten, and the text should be counted in thousands.

古文：夫形大，衣不得褊；事众，文不得褊。
现代文：体形大，衣服就不能瘦小；事情多，文章就不能简短。
English: If you have a big body, you can't wear small clothes; if you have a lot of things to do, you can't write a short article.

古文：事众文饶，水大鱼多。帝都谷多，王市肩磨。
现代文：事情多文章就多，水大鱼就多；都城粮食多，街市人就很多。
English: The more things, the more articles, the more big fish in the water; the more food in the capital, the more people in the streets.

古文：书虽文重，所论百种。
现代文：我的书虽然篇幅多，但讨论的问题有上百个。
English: Although my book is long, there are hundreds of issues discussed.

古文：按古太公望，近董仲舒，传作书篇百有余，吾书亦才出百，而云泰多，盖谓所以出者微，观读之者不能不谴呵也。
现代文：考察一下古代的太公望，近代的董仲舒，他们写的书都在百篇以上，我写的书也才超过一百篇，有人就说太多了，这是因为作者地位低，所以读我书的人，不能不指责我啊！
English: Take a look at the ancient Tai Gongbo and the modern Dong Zhongshu. They both wrote more than a hundred books, while I only wrote more than a hundred. Some people say that's too many. This is because the author's status is low, so people who read my books can't help but criticize me!

古文：河水沛沛，比夫众川，孰者为大？
现代文：黄河之水波涛滚滚，比起其它河流，究竟谁大呢？
English: The water of the Yellow River is choppy. Compared to other rivers, which one is bigger?

古文：虫茧重厚，称其出丝，孰为多者？
现代文：重厚的蚕茧，称一下它所出的丝，与轻薄的茧相比哪个多呢？
English: How much more silk does a thick cocoon weigh compared to a thin cocoon?

古文：充仕数不耦，而徒著书自纪。
现代文：王充做官屡屡不得志，只能著书表明自己的思想。
English: Wang Chong was repeatedly discouraged from becoming an official, and could only express his thoughts by writing books.

古文：或曰： 所贵鸿材者，仕宦耦合，身容说纳，事得功立，故为高也。
现代文：有人嘲笑他说： 有大材的人之所以可贵，就贵在官运享通，本身被重用主张受采纳，能干出事业建立功名，这才算得上高贵。
English: Some people scoffed at him and said, "The reason why people with great talent are valuable is that they are able to enjoy success in the government, and they are themselves accepted by the government, and they are able to make a career and establish a reputation. This is what counts as being noble.

古文：今吾子涉世落魄，仕数黜斥，材未练於事，力未尽於职，故徒幽思属文，著记美言，何补於身？
现代文：现在你处世如此潦倒，做官屡遭贬斥。你的才干并没有在事业上表现出来，你的力量也没有在你担负的职务中充分显示，所以只能冥思苦想，写文章著书，言辞再美妙对你自身又有什么好处呢？
English: Now you are so downtrodden in your life, you have been repeatedly denigrated as an official, your talent has not been demonstrated in your career, your strength has not been fully demonstrated in the duties you have undertaken, so you can only meditate, write articles and books, and what good is it to yourself, no matter how beautiful the words are?

古文：众多欲以何移乎？ 
现代文：文章写得再多想以此达到什么目的呢？ 
English: What do you want to achieve by writing more articles?

古文：答曰：材鸿莫过孔子。
现代文：王充回答说：才智鸿富没有能超过孔子的了。
English: Wang Chong replied, "No one can surpass Confucius in wisdom and wealth."

古文：孔子才不容，斥逐，伐树，接，见围，削迹，困饿陈、蔡，门徒菜色。
现代文：孔子的才智不为当世所容，在鲁国遭贬斥，在宋国树下司礼，树被砍掉，在齐国带着刚淘好的米逃跑，在匡地被包围，在卫国被铲掉车迹，在陈蔡被困饿，学生们个个面带菜色。
English: Confucius's wisdom was not accepted by the contemporary world. In the State of Lu, he was disparaged. In the State of Song, he performed a ceremony under a tree. The tree was chopped down. In the State of Qi, he fled with freshly harvested rice. In the State of Kuang, he was besieged. In the State of Wei, his car tracks were removed. In the State of Chen Cai, he was starving. The students were hungry.

古文：今吾材不逮孔子，不偶之厄，未与之等，偏可轻乎？
现代文：现在我的才智不及孔子，不受重用的厄运，与孔子不相同，为什么偏要因此轻视我呢？
English: Now my intelligence is not as good as Confucius, I am not used as much, and I am not the same as Confucius. Why should I be despised for that?

古文：且达者未必知，穷者未必愚。
现代文：况且官运享通的人未必就聪明，卑贱穷困的人未必就愚蠢。
English: Moreover, those who enjoy success in government are not necessarily smart, and those who are lowly and poor are not necessarily stupid.

古文：遇者则得，不遇失之。
现代文：碰巧有人赏识就能富贵，没有人赏识就失意。
English: If someone happens to appreciate it, they can become rich. If no one appreciates it, they will be disappointed.

古文：故夫命厚禄善，庸人尊显；命薄禄恶，奇俊落魄。
现代文：所以禄命好的人，即使是庸人也会尊贵显达；禄命不好的人，即使是奇俊之才也会不得志。
English: Therefore, a person with a good fortune, even if he is a mediocrity, will be honored; a person with a bad fortune, even if he is a talented person, will be discouraged.

古文：比以偶合称材量德，则夫专城食土者，材贤孔、墨。
现代文：如果一定要以是否得志和受重用来衡量一个人的才能品德，那些做官吃俸禄的人，才智就都胜过孔子、墨子了。
English: If a person's talent and moral character must be measured by whether he or she has been honored and respected, then the talent of those who work as officials and receive a salary is superior to that of Confucius and Mozi.

古文：身贵而名贱，则居洁而行墨。食千锺之禄，无一长之德，乃可戏也。
现代文：身份高贵而名声很坏，说话清高而行事污浊，享受千钟俸禄，而毫无一点优良品德，这种人才是应该嘲笑的。
English: He is to be sneered at who has a good name and a bad one, who speaks well and acts badly, who has a thousand salaries and not a single virtue.

古文：若夫德高而名白，官卑而禄泊，非才能之过，未足以为累也。
现代文：至于品德高尚名声清白，官职低而俸禄少，这不能归过于他们的才能，也不能算作是他们的缺陷。
English: As for the high moral character and clean reputation, the low official position and low salary, this cannot be attributed to their talent, nor can it be counted as their defect.

古文：士愿与宪共庐，不慕与赐同衡；乐与夷俱旅，不贪与蹠比迹。
现代文：读书人都愿与原宪同往一间房子，不愿同子贡同坐一辆车子；愿跟伯夷同行，不愿跟盗跖走一条路。
English: Readers are willing to go to a house with the original constitution, not willing to take a car with the same son; willing to walk with Bo Yi, not willing to walk with the thief.

古文：高士所贵，不与俗均，故其名称不与世同。
现代文：高洁之士所看重的事情，与一般人的看法不同，所以他们的名声也就不同。
English: The things that the Gao Jie people value are different from the opinions of ordinary people, so their reputation is also different.

古文：身与草木俱朽，声与日月并彰，行与孔子比穷，文与杨雄为双，吾荣之。
现代文：他们的身体虽然和草木一样地腐烂了，但他们的名声却同日月一样光辉灿烂，行迹像孔子那样穷困不得志，文章却能与扬雄比美，我以此为荣。
English: Although their bodies are as rotten as plants, their reputations are as bright as the sun and the moon. Their deeds are as poor as Confucius, but their writings are more beautiful than Yang Xiong. I am proud of this.

古文：身通而知困，官大而德细，於彼为荣，於我为累。
现代文：有的人身虽显达但才智贫乏，官位虽高但德行渺小，对他们来说认为是光荣，对我来说这才是真正的欠缺。
English: There are men of great stature, but little talent; of high rank, but little virtue; to them it is a matter of honor, but to me it is a matter of indigence.

古文：偶合容说，身尊体佚，百载之後，与物俱殁，名不流於一嗣，文不遗於一札，官虽倾仓，文德不丰，非吾所臧。
现代文：靠献媚讨好，即使做了高官得了享受，可是百年以后，就和其他生物一样死去了，名声传不到一代，文章留不下一篇，这样的人即使俸禄很多，可是文才和德行都很浅薄，这不是我所赞赏的。
English: By flattery, even if a high-ranking official has enjoyed it, but after a hundred years, he will die like other creatures, his reputation will not be passed on to the next generation, and he will not be able to write an article. Such a person may have a lot of salary, but his literary talent and virtue are shallow. This is not what I appreciate.

古文：德汪而渊懿，知滂沛而盈溢，笔泷漉而雨集，言溶氵窟而泉出，富材羡知，贵行尊志，体列於一世，名传於千载，乃吾所谓异也。
现代文：有些人德行高尚美好，智慧深厚鸿富，下笔如急雨一样倾注，谈论像喷泉一样滔滔不绝，他们才能卓越智慧超群，行为高尚而志气不凡，尽管也只活了一辈子，可是名声却流传千古，这才是我所认为的杰出。
English: Some people are virtuous and beautiful, their wisdom is profound and vast, they write like torrential rain, they talk like a fountain, their talent is superior, their wisdom is superior, their behavior is noble and ambitious, although they have only lived a lifetime, but their reputation has been passed down for thousands of years, this is what I think is outstanding.

古文：充细族孤门。
现代文：王充出身于寒微的家族孤独的门户。
English: Wangchong was born into a poor family, a lonely gateway.

古文：或啁之曰： 宗祖无淑懿之基，文墨无篇籍之遗，虽著鸿丽之论，无所禀阶，终不为高。
现代文：有人嘲笑他说： 你的祖辈没有善良美好的根基，又没有一篇文章遗留下来，你虽然写了这种大部头著作，但却没有什么师承渊源，终究算不上高明。
English: Some people mocked him and said, "Your ancestors did not have a good and beautiful foundation, and there is not a single article left behind. Although you have written such a voluminous work, you have no teacher source, and after all, you are not very clever."

古文：夫气无渐而卒至曰变，物无类而妄生曰异，不常有而忽见曰妖，诡於众而突出曰怪。
现代文：气不是逐渐发展而是突然发生这就叫 变 ，物没有种类而胡乱产生这就叫 异 ，不常有的东西而忽然出现这就叫 妖 ，违反众人的意向而突然出现这就叫 怪 。
English: Qi is not a gradual development, but a sudden occurrence, which is called change; things without a kind and randomly produced, which is called difference; things that do not often exist and suddenly appear, which is called demon; against the intentions of many people and suddenly appear, which is called strange.

古文：吾子何祖？
现代文：你的祖上是什么样的人呢？
English: What kind of people were your ancestors?

古文：其先不载。
现代文：你那先辈的名姓不见载于史传。
English: Your ancestor's name is not recorded in history.

古文：况未尝履墨涂，出儒门，吐论数千万言，宜为妖变，安得宝斯文而多贤？ 
现代文：何况你未曾学过墨家的学说，出入于儒家之门，现在忽然写出成千上万字的著作，这该算是一种妖变，怎么能珍视这类文章而加以推崇赞美呢？ 
English: Moreover, you have never studied the teachings of the Mohists, you have entered and left the door of Confucianism, and now you suddenly write a work of thousands of words. This must be a kind of metamorphosis. How can you cherish such articles and praise them?

古文：答曰：鸟无世凤皇，兽无种麒麟，人无祖圣贤，物无常嘉珍。
现代文：王充回答说：鸟类没有世代相传的凤凰，兽类没有种系相传的麒麟，人没有世代相传的圣贤，物没有经常出现的珍宝。
English: Wang Chong replied: Birds don't have phoenixes that are passed down from generation to generation, animals don't have unicorns that are passed down from generation to generation, people don't have sages that are passed down from generation to generation, and things don't have treasures that appear frequently.

古文：才高见屈，遭时而然。
现代文：才能高超受到压抑，这是遭遇时运造成的。
English: Talent is suppressed, which is caused by bad luck.

古文：士贵，故孤兴；物贵，故独产。
现代文：人才高贵所以才单独出现，物品高贵因此才单独产生。
English: The reason why talents are noble is that they appear separately, and the reason why goods are noble is that they are produced separately.

古文：文孰常在有以放贤，是则泉有故源，而嘉禾有旧根也。
现代文：如果文章的成熟总是要对贤人有所仿效，这就等于说醴泉必然出自旧源，嘉禾必然发自老根。
English: If the maturity of an article always needs to imitate the wise, this is tantamount to saying that the spring must come from the old source, and the precious grain must come from the old root.

古文：屈奇之士见，倜傥之辞生，度不与俗协，庸角不能程。
现代文：杰出人才的出现，卓越文章的产生，风度与世俗不同，俗人因此不能对它加以衡量。
English: The emergence of outstanding talents, the production of outstanding articles, the demeanor is different from the world, so the laity can not measure it.

古文：是故罕发之迹，记於牒籍；希出之物，勒於鼎铭。
现代文：所以罕见的事迹，被记载于史书上，少见的东西，常被刻在钟鼎上。
English: Therefore, rare deeds are recorded in history books, and rare things are often engraved on bell towers.

古文：五帝不一世而起，伊、望不同家而出。
现代文：五帝不是在一个时代中兴起的，伊尹、太公望也不是出生在同一个家庭。
English: The five emperors did not rise in one era, and Yi Yin and Tai Gongwang were not born in the same family.

古文：千里殊迹，百载异发。
现代文：地区相隔千里，事迹各不相同，时代相距几百年，情况也不一样。
English: The regions are separated by thousands of miles, the deeds are different, the times are separated by hundreds of years, and the situation is also different.

古文：士贵雅材而慎兴，不因高据以显达。
现代文：士人贵在有高尚的才智而不轻易往上爬，不靠出身高贵来取得显赫的地位。
English: It is not easy for a scholar to climb to the top if he has noble talents, and it is not dependent on noble birth to obtain a prominent position.

古文：母骊犊骍，无害牺牲；祖浊裔清，不榜奇人。
现代文：母牛黄黑杂色生的小牛纯赤色，并不妨害用小牛来做祭品；祖辈不高尚而后代优秀，并不妨碍后代成为杰出的人才。
English: The pure red color of the calf of a cow with yellow-black mixed color does not interfere with the use of the calf as a sacrifice; if the ancestors are not noble and the descendants are excellent, it does not prevent the descendants from becoming outstanding talents.

古文：鲧恶禹圣，叟顽舜神。伯牛寝疾，仲弓洁全；颜路庸固，回杰超伦；孔、墨祖愚，丘、翟圣贤；扬家不通，卓有子云；桓氏稽可，谲出君山。更禀於元，故能著文。充以元和三年徙家辟诣扬州部丹阳、九江、庐江。後入为治中，材小任大，职在刺割，笔札之思，历年寝废。
现代文：扬家家族不显贵，却出了才能卓绝的扬子云；桓家上辈官运不通，却出了桓谭这样杰出的人。这是由于重新禀受了元气而生的人，所以能写出好文章。元和三年，王充被征召，全家迁往扬州部的丹阳、九江，庐江等地，后来到州里任治中从事史。才能低而责任重大，主管的是检举弹劾，著书的念头，中断多年了。
English: The Yang family was not prominent, but produced the talented Yang Ziyun; the Huan family's seniors did not succeed in the government, but produced such an outstanding person as Huan Tan. This is due to the reinvigorated people, so they can write a good article. In the first and third years, Wang Chong was conscripted, the whole family moved to Danyang, Jiujiang, Minjiang and other places in Yangzhou, and later came to the state to engage in history. Talent is low and responsibility is great, in charge of prosecution and impeachment, the idea of writing a book, interrupted for many years.

古文：章和二年，罢州家居。
现代文：章和二年，辞去州里官职回家闲居。
English: In the second year of Zhang He's reign, he resigned from his post as a provincial official and returned home to live idly.

古文：年渐七十，时可悬舆。
现代文：年纪已近七十岁，已经到了告老退休的时候。
English: He is nearly seventy years old and it is time for him to retire.

古文：仕路隔绝，志穷无如。
现代文：做官的门路已经断绝，志愿无法实现无可奈何。
English: The path to becoming an official has been cut off, and there is nothing to be done if volunteering cannot be achieved.

古文：事有否然，身有利害。
现代文：凡事总有顺利或不顺利的时候，身体也时好时坏。
English: Everything always has a smooth or not smooth time, the body is sometimes good and sometimes bad.

古文：发白齿落，日月逾迈，俦伦弥索，鲜所恃赖。
现代文：头发白了，牙齿掉了，日子一天天的逝去，同辈的朋友越来越少，可以依靠的人很少了。
English: The hair has turned white, the teeth have fallen out, the days are passing by day by day, there are fewer and fewer friends of the same generation, and there are few people who can be relied on.

古文：贫无供养，志不娱快。
现代文：生活贫困，得不到供养，心情很不愉快。
English: They live in poverty, receive no support, and are very unhappy.

古文：历数冉冉，庚辛域际，虽惧终徂，愚犹沛沛，乃作《养性》之书，凡十六篇。
现代文：光阴慢慢过去，又到了庚年、辛年交替之际，虽然害怕死去，但我心里充满活力，于是写了《养性》这本书，总共有十六篇。
English: Time passed slowly, and when it came to the turn of the year of the horse and the year of the pig, although I was afraid of dying, my heart was full of vitality, so I wrote the book "Nurturing," a total of sixteen articles.

古文：养气自守，适时则酒，闭明塞聪，爱精自保，适辅服药引导，庶冀性命可延，斯须不老。
现代文：养育精气保护身体，适量吃饭节制饮酒，闭目塞耳不问世事，爱护精力注重保养，还适当地辅以药物，作作健身操，希望寿命可以延长，短时间内不会老死。
English: Nurture the spirit to protect the body, eat in moderation, drink in moderation, close your eyes and shut your ears to the world, care for your energy, pay attention to maintenance, properly supplement with drugs, do fitness exercises, hope that your life can be extended, and you will not die of old age in a short time.

古文：既晚无还，垂书示後。
现代文：既然已经到了晚年无法返老还童，因此只能著书传给后人看。
English: Now that he has reached old age, he cannot return to his childhood, so he can only write a book and pass it on to future generations.

古文：惟人性命，长短有期，人亦虫物，生死一时。
现代文：人的寿命，长短有一定的期限，人也和虫物一样，生死有一定的时间。
English: The length of a person's life has a certain time limit, and people, like insects, have a certain time to live and die.

古文：年历但记，孰使留之？
现代文：历年写下的东西，托付给谁将它们流传下去呢？
English: What have you written down over the years, and to whom have you entrusted it for it to be passed on?

古文：犹入黄泉，消为土灰。
现代文：最终将进入坟墓，化作灰土。
English: It will eventually go to the grave and turn to dust.

古文：上自黄、唐，下臻秦、汉而来，折衷以圣道，理於通材，如衡之平，如鉴之开，幼老生死古今，罔不详该。
现代文：上自黄帝、唐尧，下至秦汉以来，我都以圣人之道为准则，以博古通今的人分析事物的方法，对它们一一进行了评论，像秤一样公平，像镜子一样明亮，一切老幼生死古今的问题，没有一样不包括在内。
English: Since the time of the Yellow Emperor, Tang Dynasty, and down to the Qin and Han dynasties, I have taken the sage's way as the standard, analyzed things with the methods of ancient and modern people, and commented on them one by one. It is as fair as a scale, as bright as a mirror, and all the problems of life and death of the old and young are not included.

古文：命以不延，吁叹悲哉！
现代文：寿命已经不长了，真令人叹息伤心哪！
English: Life expectancy is already short, what a sad sigh!

