古文：李逢吉章孝标刘轲崔群李翱女贺拔惎李宗闵庾承宣张祐卢求杜牧刘蕡薛保逊贾岛毕諴裴德融裴思谦李肱苏景胤张元夫
现代文：李逢吉章孝标刘轲崔群李翱女贺拔惎李宗闵庾承宣张祐卢求杜牧刘蕡薛保逊贾岛毕諴裴德融裴思谦李肱苏景胤张元夫
English: Li Fengji, Zhang Xiaobai, Liu Bei, Cui Qun, Li Bai's daughter, He Baqian, Li Zongren, Xuan Xuan, Zhang Youlu, Du Mu, Liu Bei, Xue Baosong, Jia Dao, Bi Zi, Pei De Rong, Pei Si Qian, Li Bai Su, Jingyin, Zhang Yuanfu

古文：李逢吉
现代文：李逢吉
English: Li Fengji

古文：元和十一年，岁在丙申，李逢吉下三十三人皆取寒素。
现代文：元和十一年，李逢吉以下三十三人都是贫寒的进士。
English: In the eleventh year of the Yuan Dynasty, the thirty-three people below Li Fengji were all poor scholars.

古文：时有语曰：元和天子丙申年，三十三人同得仙。袍似烂银文似锦，相将白日上青天。
现代文：意思说元和丙申年，三十三位贫寒学子都中了进士，官袍子像银子那么耀眼，文辞也灿烂，拉着手一起做了官。
English: It is said that in the year of the Yuan and the Hun, thirty-three poor and poor students were promoted to officers. The official robes were as dazzling as silver, the words were also brilliant, and they became officials together.

古文：李德裕颇为寒进开路。
现代文：宰相李德裕很给那些贫寒的学子们创造条件。
English: Prime Minister Li Deyu is doing his best to create favorable conditions for those poor students.

古文：及谪官南去，或有诗曰：八百孤寒齐下泪，一时回首望崖州。
现代文：他被贬官南去，有人写诗说：八百孤寒齐下泪，一时回首望崖州。
English: He was demoted to the south, and someone wrote a poem saying: "Eight hundred lonely cold tears, looking back at Yazhou."

古文：章孝标
现代文：章孝标
English: Zhang Xiaobian

古文：章孝标元和十三年下第。
现代文：元和十三年章孝标应试落第。
English: In the 13th year of the Yuan and the 13th year of the Zhang Xiaobian, it should be tried and failed.

古文：时辈多为诗以刺主司，独章为归燕诗，留献侍郎庾承宣。
现代文：当时许多落第人都写诗讽刺考官。唯独章孝标一个人作了一首《归燕》诗，留给了侍郎庾承宣。
English: At that time, many losers wrote poems to satirize the examiners. However, Zhang Xiaobiao alone wrote a poem "Return to Yan" and left it to his attendant Zou Shouxuan.

古文：承宣得时，展转吟讽，诚恨遗才，仍候秋期，必当荐引。
现代文：庾承宣收到他的诗作，反复吟诵，遗憾没有取中这样有才华的人。打算到秋试的时候，举荐他。
English: Gong Chengxuan received his poem and recited it over and over, regretting that he had not chosen such a talented person. He planned to recommend him when it came to the autumn exam.

古文：庾果重典礼曹，孝标来年擢第。
现代文：结果庾承庆被点了主考官，章孝标被取中。
English: As a result, Zou Chengqing was awarded the title of chief examiner, and Zhang Xiaobiao was selected.

古文：群议以为二十八字而致大科，则名路可遵，递相砻砺也。
现代文：人们以二十八字中试，只要努力，功业可成。于是，互相激励。
English: People take the 28-character midterm exam, and as long as they work hard, they can achieve their goals. Therefore, they encourage each other.

古文：诗曰：旧累危巢泥已落，今年故向社前归。
现代文：章考标的二十八字诗是：旧累危巢泥已落，今年故向社前归。
English: The twenty-eight-character poem of the chapter examination standard is: The old dangerous nest mud has fallen, and this year it has returned to the front of the company.

古文：连云大厦元栖处，更望谁家门户飞。
现代文：连云大厦无栖处，更望谁家门户飞。
English: Lianyungang Tower has no place to live, and it is more important to know which door to fly.

古文：刘轲
现代文：刘轲
English: Liu Xuan

古文：刘轲慕孟轲为文，故以名焉。
现代文：刘轲仰慕孟子的文章，所以起名刘轲。
English: Liu Wei admired Mencius's writings, so he took the name Liu Wei.

古文：少为僧，止于豫章高安之果园。
现代文：少年时做和尚，住在豫章高安的果园里。
English: He was a monk as a boy and lived in an orchard in Yuzhang Gao'an.

古文：后复求黄老之术，隐于庐山。
现代文：后来又学道隐居庐山。
English: Later, he studied Taoism and lived in seclusion in Shaoshan.

古文：既而进士登第。文章与韩柳齐名。
现代文：次后又考中进士，文章同韩愈、柳宗元齐名。
English: Later, he passed the junior high school entrance examination, and his essays were on a par with Han Yu and Liu Zongyuan.

古文：崔群
现代文：崔群
English: Cui Qun

古文：崔群元和自中书舍人知贡举。
现代文：元和年间，中书舍人崔群做考官。
English: During the Yuan and Zhou dynasties, Cui Qun, a scholar of Chinese classics, served as an examiner.

古文：夫人李氏因暇，尝劝树庄田，以为子孙之业。
现代文：他的夫人闲时劝崔群买置一些田产，好给子孙继承。
English: In his spare time, his wife advised Cui Qun to buy some farmland so that his children and grandchildren could inherit it.

古文：笑曰：予有三十所美庄良田，遍在天下，夫人何忧？
现代文：崔群笑着说：我有三十所美好的庄田，天下无处不有，你担心什么呢？
English: Cui Qun said with a smile: "I have thirty beautiful villages and towns, there is nowhere else in the world, what are you worried about?

古文：夫人曰：不闻君有此业。
现代文：夫人说：没听说过你有这些财产。
English: She said, "I didn't know you had all this money."

古文：群曰：吾前岁放春榜三十人，岂非良田邪？
现代文：崔群说： 我前年春天主持京试，取中了三十名进士，这不是良田吗？ 
English: Cui Qun said, "I took the Beijing exam last spring and got thirty students. Isn't this a good field?

古文：夫人曰：若然者，君非陆贽相门生乎？曰：然。
现代文：夫人说： 如果这样，你算不算宰相陆贽的学生？ 崔群说： 当然是。 
English: His wife said, "If that's the case, wouldn't you be Prime Minister Lu Wei's student?" Cui Qun said, "Of course."

古文：夫人曰：往年君掌文柄，使人约其子简礼，不令就试。
现代文：夫人说： 如果这样，你过去主持考试，为什么让人告诉陆贽的儿子不让他参加考试？
English: His wife said, "If that's the case, you used to administer the exam, why did someone tell Lu Yao's son not to let him take the exam?"

古文：如君以为良田，即陆氏一庄荒矣。
现代文：如果你算陆家的一块良田的话，那么这块土地不是荒芜了吗？ 
English: If you count a good piece of land belonging to the Lu family, then isn't this piece of land barren?

古文：群惭而退，累日不食。
现代文：崔群羞惭而退，好几天没有吃饭。
English: Cui Qun shyly retreated and did not eat for several days.

古文：李翱女
现代文：李翱女
English: Li Yingmei

古文：李翱江淮典郡。
现代文：李翱任江淮地方官。
English: Li Jun was appointed as a local official of Jianghuai Province.

古文：有进士卢储投卷，翱礼待之，置文卷几案间，因出视事。
现代文：学子卢储送卷子给他，李翱待之以礼。他把文卷放在桌子上，出去办事。
English: The scholar Lu Yuan sent him a scroll, and Li Xi waited with a bow. He put the scroll on the table and went out to do some business.

古文：迨公退，李闻之，深异其语。
现代文：他的长女已经成年，闲着没事走进他的屋子。看到桌上的文卷，研读再三，对婢女说：这个人一定会中状元。
English: His eldest daughter, who was already of age, came into his room without further ado. Seeing the document on the table and studying it over and over again, she said to her maid: "This man must be the future emperor."

古文：乃令宾佐至邮舍，具白于卢，选以为婿，卢谦让久之，终不却其意。
现代文：李翱回来，听到女儿的话，很惊讶。便让他的属官和宾客到卢储住的旅舍跟卢储说明，选他作女婿。卢储再三谦辞，最终难却好意，月余才答应。
English: When Li Lan returned, he was very surprised to hear his daughter's words. He asked his subordinates and guests to go to the hostel where Lu Ruzhu was staying and explain to Lu Ruzhu that they should choose him as their son-in-law. Lu Ruzhu repeatedly made humble apologies, but in the end, although it was difficult, he was kind, and it took Lu Ruzhu more than a month to agree.

古文：越月随计，来年果状头及第。才过关试，径赴嘉礼。
现代文：来年京试，户储果然考中状元。过关之后，马上赴婚。并作一首《催妆诗》：
English: The following year, she took the Beijing Examination, and her household savings were in the middle of the examination. After passing the examination, she immediately went to get married. She also wrote a "Cosmetic Poem":

古文：催妆诗曰：昔年将去玉京游，第一仙人许状头。
现代文：昔年将去玉京游，第一仙人许状头。
English: In the olden days, he would go to the capital city of Jade, and the first fairy godmother was Xu Zhizhong.

古文：今日幸为秦晋会，早教鸾凤下妆楼。
现代文：今日幸为秦晋会，早教鸾凤下妆楼。
English: Today, fortunately for the Qin and Jin Dynasties, the early education of the phoenix went to the dressing room.

古文：后卢止官舍，迎内子，有庭花开，乃题曰：芍药斩新栽，当庭数朵开。东风与拘束，留待细君来。
现代文：东风与拘束，留待细君来。意思说，新栽的芍药花开了几朵，风也不舍得吹落，留待给我的爱妻。
English: The east wind and restraint are reserved for my beloved. That is to say, a few newly planted flowers have opened, and the wind is not willing to blow them down, and they are reserved for my beloved wife.

古文：人生前定，固非偶然耳。
现代文：人生前缘已定，并非偶然。
English: It is no accident that the future of life has already been determined.

古文：贺拔惎
现代文：贺拔惎
English: by He Bajuan

古文：王起长庆中再主文柄，志欲以白敏中为状元，病其人与贺拔惎还往。
现代文：长庆中期，王起再次作考官。准备取白敏中为状元，但是又不满意他同贺拔惎往来。
English: In the middle of the Long Qing Dynasty, Wang Qi again served as an examiner. He was ready to take Bai Minzhong as a candidate, but he was not satisfied with his dealings with He Bajun.

古文：惎有文而落拓。
现代文：贺拔惎有文采，但狂放无羁。
English: He Bajiao has literary talent, but he is wild and unrestrained.

古文：因密令亲知申意，俾敏中与惎绝。
现代文：于是王起私下让亲信把他的意思告诉给白敏中，希望白敏中断绝同贺拔惎的交往。
English: So Wang privately asked his close confidant to tell Bai Minzhong what he wanted, hoping that Bai Min would break off all contact with He Bajun.

古文：前人复约，敏中忻然，皆如所教。
现代文：亲信把这话传给白敏中，白敏中表示接受，答应照办。
English: His close confidant relayed the message to Bai Minrong, who accepted it and agreed to do the same.

古文：既而惎造门，左右绐以敏中他适，惎迟留不言而去。
现代文：不久贺拔惎拜访白敏中，白敏中的家人骗他，说白敏中出门不在家。贺拔惎等了很长时间，无言而去。
English: Soon after, He Bajia paid a visit to Bai Minzhong. Bai Minzhong's family lied to him and said that Bai Minzhong was not at home when he went out. He Bajia waited for a long time and left without a word.

古文：俄顷敏中跃出，连呼左右召惎，于是悉以实告。
现代文：白敏中马上跑出来，让仆人把贺拔惎喊回来，如实相告。
English: Bai Minzhong immediately ran out and asked the servant to call He Bajiao back and tell him the truth.

古文：乃曰：一第何门不致？
现代文：并且说：凭着才学，哪个门不通，怎么能对不起朋友？
English: And he said: With talent to learn, which door does not pass, how can you be sorry for a friend?

古文：奈轻负至交。
现代文：于是共同饮酒，大醉，睡至日头老高尚未起床。
English: As a result, they drank alcohol together, got very drunk, and slept until the sun was high before getting up.

古文：相与尽醉，负阳而寝。
现代文：王起的人看到这情形，发怒而去。
English: When Wang Zhi's men saw this, they flew into a rage and left.

古文：前人睹之，大怒而去。告于起，且云：不可必矣。
现代文：告诉了王起，并且说：让他们断交是做不到的。
English: He told Wang Qi, and said, "It is impossible to make them break off diplomatic relations."

古文：起曰：我比祗得白敏中，今当更取贺拔惎矣。
现代文：王起说：我本来只想取中白敏中，现在更应该同时取中贺拔惎了。
English: Wang Qi said, "Originally, I only wanted to win the Bai Min Middle School, but now I should also win the He Bajia Middle School.

古文：李宗闵
现代文：李宗闵
English: Lee Jong-il

古文：李宗闵知贡举，门生多清秀俊茂，唐伸、薛庠、袁都辈，时谓之玉荀班。
现代文：李宗闵作考官，取中的进士多是很俊逸的年轻人。比如唐伸、薛庠、袁都等。当时被人们称为玉荀班。
English: When Li Zongyao was an examiner, the students he selected were mostly very handsome young men. For example, Tang Shin, Xue Yao, Yuan Du and so on. At that time, they were known as the Jade Dragonfly Class.

古文：时门生李石先于内庭恩赐矣。
现代文：意思是年轻而秀杰。庾承宣庾承宣做了六七年的考官，才升任要职。他的学生中李石在他之先就做了大官。
English: It means "young and brilliant." Xuancheng Xuancheng was an examiner for 67 years before he was promoted to a high-ranking position. One of his students, Li Shi, was a high-ranking official before him.

古文：承宣拜命之初，石以所服紫袍金鱼拜献座主。
现代文：庾承宣得到升官的任命，李石把他应穿的紫袍，应佩带的金鱼敬献给老师。
English: When Gong Chengxuan was appointed for promotion, Li Shih dedicated the purple robe he should wear and the goldfish he should carry to his teacher.

古文：张祐
现代文：张祐
English: Zhang Yu

古文：张祐元和长庆中深为令狐楚所知。
现代文：元和和长庆年间，令狐楚非常了解张祐。
English: During the Yuan and Changqing dynasties, Ling Xuchu knew Zhang Yu very well.

古文：楚镇天平日，自草荐表令以新旧格诗三百篇随表进献。
现代文：令狐楚作天平节度使，亲自写举荐书，让张祐以新诗、旧诗三百篇随同他的表章一起送到长安。
English: Let the fox make the balance of the festival, personally write a recommendation book, and let Zhang Yu send it to Chang'an with 300 new poems and old poems along with his seal.

古文：辞略曰：凡制五言，合苞六义。
现代文：表辞大意说，凡作五言诗，都应包含六义。
English: The wording is to the effect that any five-character poem should contain six meanings.

古文：近多放诞，靡有宗师。
现代文：近年不少人乱写，没有师法。
English: In recent years, many people have been scribbling without a teacher.

古文：前件人久在江湖，早攻篇什。研几甚苦，探索颇深。
现代文：而张祐很久以来读书不倦，认真研究，造诣很深。
English: Zhang Yu, on the other hand, has been reading tirelessly for a long time, studying hard, and is very accomplished.

古文：流辈所推，风格罕及。
现代文：舆论赞美，风格独特。
English: Public opinion praises its unique style.

古文：谨令录新旧格诗三百首，自光顺门进献，望请宣付中书。
现代文：我让他携带他的旧诗、新诗三百首，从光顺门进献，请交给中书省。
English: I asked him to bring 300 of his old and new poems and present them at the Guangshun Gate. Please give them to the Ministry of Literature.

古文：祐至京师，方属元稹在内庭。
现代文：张祐到了长安，正值元稹在朝堂。
English: Zhang Yu arrived in Chang'an, just as Yuan Shao was in the morning hall.

古文：上因召问祐之词藻高下。
现代文：皇帝便召见他，品评张祐的诗。
English: The emperor then summoned him to evaluate Zhang Yu's poem.

古文：稹对曰：张祐雕虫小巧，壮夫耻不为者。
现代文：元稹说，张祐的诗很不大气，有气魄的人根本不这样写诗。
English: Yuan Qi said that Zhang Yu's poem is not very atmospheric, and people with courage do not write poems like this at all.

古文：或奖激之，恐变陛下风教。
现代文：如果予以鼓励，恐怕有失陛下教化风范。
English: If it is encouraged, I am afraid it will be a failure of His Majesty to inculcate good manners.

古文：上颔之，由是失意而归。
现代文：皇上点头，张祐失意而归。
English: The emperor nodded his head, and Zhang Yu returned disappointed.

古文：祐以诗自悼曰：贺知章口徒劳说，孟浩然身不更疑。
现代文：以诗自悼说：贺知章口徒劳说，孟浩然身不更疑。
English: In a poem of self-mourning, he said: He Zhi Zhang mouthed in vain, Meng Haoran did not hesitate.

古文：卢求
现代文：卢求
English: Luqiu

古文：杨嗣复第二榜卢求者，李翱之子婿。
现代文：杨嗣复第二次做考官，考生中的卢求，是李翱的女婿。
English: Yang Shifu was an examiner for the second time, and Lu Qi, one of the candidates, was Li Yao's son-in-law.

古文：先是翱典合淝郡，有一道人诣翱言事甚异。
现代文：先前，李翱任官合肥，有一道人去见他，说的话很不一般。
English: Previously, when Li Ying was appointed as the Hefei official, there was a group of people who went to see him, and their words were very unusual.

古文：翱后任楚州，其人复至。
现代文：李翱任官楚州，那个道人又来了。
English: Lee Yeon appointed official of Chuzhou, the Taoist came again.

古文：其年嗣复知举，求落地。嗣复，翱之妹婿。
现代文：当时，卢求没有中试。杨嗣复是李翱的妹夫。
English: At that time, Lu Qi did not have a mid-term exam. Yang Shifu was the brother-in-law of Li Yao.

古文：由是颇以为嫌。
现代文：李翱很生他的起。
English: Li Yao is very proud of his beginnings.

古文：因访于道人，言曰：细事，亦可为奏章一通。
现代文：李翱请教于道人。道人说这是小事，我可以写一道表文。
English: Li Yan asked a Taoist for advice. The Taoist said that it was a small matter, I could write a letter.

古文：几砚纸笔，复置醇酎数斗于侧，其人以巨杯引满而饮，寝少顷而觉，觉而复饮酒尽，即整衣冠北望而拜，遽对案手疏二缄。
现代文：于是，准备了几砚纸笔，又准备了很多酒。道人大杯喝酒，睡了一会起来，把所有的酒喝光，整理衣帽，向北而拜。之后，很快写了两封书。
English: As a result, he prepared several piles of paper and pens, and prepared a lot of wine. He drank a large glass of wine, slept for a while, got up, drank all the wine, sorted out his clothes and hat, and bowed to the north. After that, he quickly wrote two books.

古文：迟明授翱曰：今秋有主司，且开小卷；明年见榜，开大卷。
现代文：早晨交给李翱，说今年秋天任命考官时，打开小卷看，明年京试时，打开大卷看。
English: In the morning, he handed it to Li Wei, saying that when the examiner is appointed this autumn, open the small volume to read, and when the Beijing exam is held next year, open the large volume to read.

古文：翱如所教。
现代文：李翱答应。
English: Li Yao agreed.

古文：寻报至，嗣复依前主文，即开小卷。词云：裴头黄尾，三求六李。
现代文：不久，邸报送到，由杨嗣复主考。打开小卷，上面的文字是：裴头黄尾，三求六李。
English: Soon, the residence newspaper was delivered, and Yang Shifu took the main examination. He opened the small volume, and the words on it were: "Pei Tou Huangwei, San Gui Liu Li."

古文：翱奇之，遂寄嗣复。
现代文：李翱很奇怪，把这张小卷寄给杨嗣复。
English: It was very strange for Li Yao to send this small scroll to Yang Zifu.

古文：已有所贮，彼疑漏泄。
现代文：杨嗣复秘密保存，恐怕泄露。
English: Yang Shifu kept it a secret, I'm afraid it will be leaked.

古文：及放榜，开大卷，乃一榜焕然，不差一字。
现代文：等到京试放榜，打开大卷，同榜上竟一字不差。
English: Wait until the Beijing trial release list, open a large volume, and the same list is actually one word.

古文：其年，裴求为状元，黄驾居榜未，次则卢求耳。
现代文：当年裴求中了状元，黄驾在榜末。卢求居第二名。
English: At that time, Pei was in the first place, Huang was at the bottom of the list, and Lu was in second place.

古文：余皆契合。
现代文：其余的人名也全对。
English: The rest of the names are all correct.

古文：后翱领襄阳，其人又至，翱愈敬异之。
现代文：后来，李翱做襄阳刺史，道人又来了，李翱很敬重。
English: Later, Li Qian did the history of Xiangyang, Taoists came again, Li Qian was very respectful.

古文：谓翱曰：鄙人再来，盖仰公之政也。
现代文：道人说：我之所以又来，是因为仰慕你的政绩。
English: The man said, "The reason why I have come again is because I admire your political achievements.

古文：因命出诸子，熟视，皆曰不继翱之所得。遂遣诸女出拜之。
现代文：李翱把他的儿子叫出来，道士一个个瞧了很久，说都不如你。又让女儿出来拜见道士。
English: Li Yan called his son out, looked at the Taoists one by one for a long time, and said that they were not as good as you. He also asked his daughter to come out to meet the Taoists.

古文：乃曰：尚书他日外孙三人，皆位至宰辅。
现代文：道士说：日后你有三个外孙能做到宰相。
English: The moralist said: In the future, you will have three grandchildren who can become prime ministers.

古文：后求子携、郑亚子畋、杜审权子让能，皆为将相。
现代文：后来，卢求的儿子卢携，郑严的儿子郑畋，杜审权的儿子杜让能，都是出将入相的人物。
English: Later, Lu Cui's son Lu Cui, Zheng Yan's son Zheng Qi, and Du Zheneng, the son of Du Si Quan, were all famous figures.

古文：杜牧
现代文：杜牧
English: Dumu town

古文：崔郾侍郎既拜命，于东郡试举人。
现代文：侍郎崔郾受命做主考官。在东都洛阳开试。
English: The chamberlain, Cui Yao, was appointed chief examiner, and the examination began in the eastern capital, Luoyang.

古文：三署公卿，皆祖于长乐传舍。
现代文：中书省、尚书省、黄门省的大员们齐集常乐传舍，盛况空前。
English: The leaders of the Chinese, Shangshu and Huangmen provinces gathered together at the Changle Confucian School, an unprecedented event.

古文：冠盖之盛，罕有加也。时吴武陵任太学博士，策蹇而至。
现代文：当时吴武陵做太学博士骑着瘸驴而来。
English: At that time, Wu Wuling, a doctor of science, came riding on a donkey.

古文：郾闻其来，微讶之。
现代文：崔郾听说他来了，有些惊讶，立即迎出去同他说话。
English: Upon hearing that he was coming, Cui Yao was a bit surprised and immediately went out to talk to him.

古文：及离席与言，武陵曰：侍郎以峻德伟望，为明天子选才俊，武陵敢不薄施尘露。向者偶见大学生数十辈，扬眉抵掌读一卷文书。
现代文：吴武陵说：你以德高望重为皇帝选取人才，我怎么能不帮你略尽微力呢！我在太学里偶然发现学子们好几十人在读一本书。
English: Wu Wuling said, "You are the emperor who selects talents with high moral and respect, how can I not help you with a little effort! I happened to find dozens of students reading a book in Taixue.

古文：就而观之，乃进士杜牧《阿房宫赋》。若其人，真王佐才也。
现代文：又是赞扬又是鼓掌。我一看，原来是杜牧的《阿房宫赋》，这个人真有王佐的才华。
English: There was both praise and applause. When I looked, it turned out to be Dumu's "A Fang Gong Fu." This person really has the talent of Wang Zuo.

古文：侍郎官重，恐未暇披览。
现代文：你是个大官，恐怕没功夫读过这篇文章。
English: You're a high-ranking official, I'm afraid you haven't made the effort to read this article.

古文：于是缙笏，朗宣一遍。
现代文：于是从袖中取出杜牧的文章，高声朗读。崔郾称奇。
English: So he took out Dumu's article from his sleeve and read it aloud. Cui Yao was surprised.

古文：郾大奇之。
现代文：吴武陵请求说：请你选他作状元。
English: Wu Wuling pleaded: "Please choose him as the winner.

古文：武陵请曰：侍郎与状头。
现代文：崔郾说已经有人。吴武陵说：那么，第三名。
English: Cui Wei said that there was already someone. Wu Wuling said: Well, then, the third place.

古文：郾曰：已有人。
现代文：崔郾说也已经有人。
English: Cui Wei said that there is already someone.

古文：武陵曰：不然，则第三人。
现代文：吴武陵说：实在不得已，第五名吧。
English: Wu Wuling said, "I really have no choice but to come in fifth.

古文：既即席，白诸公曰：适吴太学以第五人见惠。
现代文：崔郾未及做答，吴武陵就说：如果还不行，把这篇赋拿来还我。崔郾立即说：我答应你。崔郾就座，对在座的大官们说，刚才吴太学帮我选中一位第五名。
English: Before Cui Gan could answer, Wu Wuling said, "If you still can't do it, return this Fu to me." Cui Gan immediately said, "I promise you." Cui Gan took his seat and said to the dignitaries present, "Just now, Wu Taigong helped me choose a fifth winner."

古文：或曰：为谁。曰：杜牧。
现代文：有人问是谁，崔郾答以杜牧。
English: When someone asked who he was, Cui Lan replied that he was Dumu.

古文：众中有以牧不拘细行问之者，郾曰：已许吴君，牧虽屠狗，不能易也。
现代文：这些人中有人说杜牧这个人不拘小节。崔郾说： 我已经答应了吴武陵，杜牧即使是个卖狗肉的人，也不能更改。 
English: Some of these people said that Du Mu is not a stickler for detail. Cui Yao said: I have already agreed to Wu Wuling, even if Du Mu is a dog meat seller, I cannot change it.

古文：崔郾东都放榜，西都过堂。
现代文：崔郾在洛阳放榜，进士们在长安过堂。
English: Cui Hao put up banners in Luoyang, and the students marched through the streets in Chang'an.

古文：杜紫微诗曰：东都放榜未花开，三十三人走马回。秦地少年多酿酒，即将春色入关来。
现代文：杜牧作诗说： 东都放榜未花开，三十三人走马回；秦地少年多酿酒，即将春色入关来。 
English: Du Mu said in his poem, "In the East, the flowers were not yet in bloom, and the thirty-three people rode back home; in Qin, the young people made a lot of wine, and the spring was about to come.

古文：刘蕡
现代文：刘蕡
English: Liu Xuan

古文：大和二年，裴休等二十三人登制科。
现代文：大和二年，裴休等二十三人位进士参加皇帝亲诏的殿试。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yamato era, Pei Xiu and 23 other candidates took part in the Emperor's imperial examination.

古文：时刘蕡对策万余字，深究治乱之本。
现代文：刘蕡的《策》有一万余字。深刻探究了治乱之本，引伸春秋大义为佐证。
English: Liu Wei's "Strategy" has more than ten thousand words. It has deeply explored the book of governing chaos, and it is supported by the extension of spring and autumn.

古文：又多引春秋大义，虽公孙弘、董仲舒不能肩也。自休已下，靡不敛袵。
现代文：公孙弘、董仲舒那样的学问家也无法比拟。
English: Scholars like Gongsun Hong and Dong Zhongshu are also incomparable.

古文：然以指斥贵倖，不顾忌讳，有司知而不取。
现代文：裴休等人都甚敬重。刘蕡的文章中，抨击宦官权贵，无所顾忌。所以，考官虽然明知刘蕡的才华，也不敢取中。
English: Pei Xiu and others were held in high esteem. In Liu Yao's article, he criticized the powerful eunuchs without any scruples. Therefore, although the examiner knew Liu Yao's talent, he did not dare to take it.

古文：时登科人李邵诣阙进疏，请以己之所得，易蕡之所失。
现代文：殿试取中的进士李邵上书朝廷，请把自己的学位让给刘蕡。李邵的上书被扣下没有回音。
English: Li Shao, a probationer in the palace, submitted a letter to the court, please give your degree to Liu Ye. Li Shao's letter was withheld and there was no reply.

古文：疏奏留中。蕡期月之间，屈声播于天下，刘蕡、杨嗣复之门生也。既直言忤，中官尤所嫉怒。
现代文：刘蕡虽然没有考中，但一月之间，声名远播天下。刘蕡是杨嗣复取中的进士，由于正直敢言得罪了权贵，尤其是显贵的宦官，更加恼恨。
English: Although Liu Yao did not pass the middle school entrance examination, his fame spread far and wide between January and May. Liu Yao was a gifted scholar in Yang Zi's retaking of the throne, and because he dared to speak honestly, he offended the powerful, especially the prominent eunuchs, who were even more angry.

古文：中尉仇士良谓嗣复曰：奈何以国家科第，放此风汉耶？
现代文：中尉仇士良对杨嗣复说：为什么趁国家考试的机会，放出这样的疯汉子来？
English: Lieutenant Qiu Shiliang said to Yang Shifu: Why take the opportunity of the national examination to release such a madman?

古文：太和中，贡士不下十余人，公卿之门，卷轴填委，为阍媪脂烛之费。
现代文：杨嗣复恐惧，回答说：殿试之前，刘蕡不疯。薛保逊薛保逊经常写有影响的大部头文章，自己号称金刚杵。
English: Yang Shifu was horrified and replied, "Before the imperial examination, Liu Bei was not crazy. Xue Baosong Xue Baosong often wrote influential and voluminous articles, and he was known as the "King Kong Emperor."

古文：因之平易者曰：若薛保逊卷，即所得倍于常也。
现代文：太和中期，被举荐的读书人不下一千余人。公卿家里堆满了他们的书画，常被当作看门老妇的灯火之资。掮客们说：如果是薛保逊的文章，比平常人的文章卖价要高出一倍。
English: In the middle and late Heian period, there were more than a thousand recommended readers. The nobles' homes were filled with their books and paintings, and they were often used as lamps for old women. Brokers said: If it is an article by Xue Baosong, the selling price is twice as high as that of an ordinary person's article.

古文：贾岛
现代文：贾岛
English: Jia Dao

古文：贾岛不善呈试，每试，自叠一幅。巡铺告人曰： 原夫之辈，乞一联，乞一联。 
现代文：科举考试为防止假冒，应试的人要先投奏状，由考官检验，贾岛总是写不好这个奏状，每次参加科考，常写好几幅奏状叠在一起。巡铺说：又是你这家伙，拿一张来，拿一张来！
English: In order to prevent forgery in the scientific examination, candidates must first submit a report card, which is checked by the examiner. Jia Dao is always bad at writing this report card. Every time he takes part in the scientific examination, he often writes several report cards stacked together. The patrol said: It's you again, take one, take one!

古文：毕諴
现代文：毕諴
English: Bye-bye

古文：毕諴及第年，与一二人同行，听响卜。
现代文：毕諴及第那年，曾经跟一两人同行，夜深人稀时，听响声以卜吉凶。
English: In the previous year, I had been walking with one or two people, and in the dead of night, I heard noises and read fortunes.

古文：夜艾人稀，久无所闻。俄遇人投骨于地，群犬争趋。
现代文：听久了，没有声音。突然间遇到一个人，往地上扔骨头，一群狗在后面追抢。
English: After listening for a long time, there was no sound. Suddenly, I met a man who was throwing bones on the ground, and a group of dogs were chasing him.

古文：又一人曰：后来者必衔得。
现代文：又有一人说：后来的准能抢得到。
English: Another said: "You can grab the next one."

古文：裴德融
现代文：裴德融
English: Baide Rong

古文：裴德融讳皋，值高锴知举，入试。
现代文：裴德融忌讳皋字。高锴做考官，他去参加考试。
English: Baide Rong did not say a word. Gao Yao was an examiner, and he went to take the exam.

古文：主司曰：伊讳皋，某棋下就试，与及第，困一生事。
现代文：高锴说：你忌讳皋字，到下面的几上去考。让他中了进士，一生困顿。
English: Gao Yao said, "If you are not good at spelling, go to the next few places to take the exam. If he gets a bad mark, he will be in trouble for the rest of his life."

古文：后除屯田员外郎。
现代文：后来被任命为屯田员外郎。
English: Later, he was named Tondenkanshiro.

古文：时卢简求为右丞。
现代文：当时卢简求做右丞，裴德融同另一新任命的员外郎一起去参见。
English: At that time, Lu Jian asked to be the right-hand man, and Pei De Rong went along with another newly-appointed member, Wai Lang.

古文：从容多时，前人启云：某与新除屯田裴员外，同祗候右丞，裴员外在门外多时。
现代文：到了卢宅，卢简求叫那个人先进去。很长时间，那个人说，我和裴员外一起来侍候你，他在外面等了好长时间了。
English: Arriving at Lu's house, Lu Jian begged the man to go in first. For a long time, the man said, "I've come to wait for you with Pei Jianwei. He's been waiting outside for a long time."

古文：卢遽使驱使官传语曰：员外是何人下及第？偶有事，不得奉见。
现代文：卢简求马上让部属传话，问裴德融是哪一位主考的门生，并说因为偶然有事，我没空见你。
English: Lu Jian asked his subordinate to send a message immediately, asking which one of the examiners' protégés was Pei De Rong, and saying that because of a coincidence, I don't have time to see you.

古文：裴仓遑失错，骑前人马出门去。裴思谦
现代文：裴德融惊慌失措，骑上那位员外郎的马就跑。裴思谦
English: Panic-stricken, Pei De Rong got on the officer's horse and ran away.

古文：高锴第一榜，裴思谦以仇士良关节取状头。
现代文：高锴第一次做主考，裴思谦打通了宦官权贵仇士良的关节，索要状元。
English: Gao Yao was the examiner for the first time. Pei Si Qian opened the joint of the eunuch, Quan Gui and Qiu Shiliang, and asked for the certificate.

古文：锴庭谴之，思谦回顾厉声曰：明年打春取状头。
现代文：高锴在大厅上谴责他。裴思谦环视左右，厉声说：明年春天取状元。
English: Gao Yao denounced him in the hall. Pei Siqian looked around and said in a sharp voice: "Next spring, you will get the warrant."

古文：第二年，锴知举，诫门下不得受书题。
现代文：次年，高锴仍做主考，告诫属员，不得给裴思谦发卷。
English: The following year, Gao Wei was still the chief examiner and warned his subordinates that they should not give Pei Sichen a pass.

古文：思谦自怀士良一缄入贡院。既而易以紫衣，趋至阶下，白锴曰：军容有状，荐裴思谦秀才。
现代文：裴思谦怀揣仇士良的书信到贡院，又换上紫袍，快步走到高台下，对高锴说：军容有信给你，举荐秀才裴思谦。
English: Pei Si Qian, carrying a letter from his enemy Shiliang, went to the tribute hall. He changed into a purple robe and walked briskly to the podium. He said to Gao Yao, "The general has a letter for you. He is recommending the talented Pei Si Qian."

古文：锴不得已，遂接之。
现代文：高锴不得已，接过荐书。
English: As a last resort, Gao Jun accepted the recommendation letter.

古文：书中与思谦求巍峨。
现代文：荐书里为裴思谦索要状元。
English: In the recommendation book, Pei Sihian asked for the source of the material.

古文：锴曰：状元已有人。此外可副军容诣。
现代文：高锴说：已经有了状元，其他名次可以按照军容的意思办。
English: Gao Wei said: There is already a rank, and other ranks can be arranged according to the wishes of the military.

古文：思谦曰：卑吏面奉军容处分，裴秀才非状元，请侍郎不放。
现代文：裴思谦说，我当面请示了军容，如果状元不给裴思谦，请你不要放榜。
English: Pei Sichen said, "I asked for a military parade in person. If the commander does not give it to Pei Sichen, please do not put it on display."

古文：锴俯首良久曰：然则略要见裴学士。
现代文：高锴低着头想了半天，说：那么我总得见见裴思谦这个人。
English: Gao Yao bowed his head and thought for a long time, saying, "Then I must meet this person, Pei Siqian."

古文：思谦曰：卑吏便是。
现代文：裴思谦说：我就是。
English: Pei Sichen said: I am.

古文：思谦人物堂堂，锴见之改容。
现代文：裴思谦相貌堂堂，高锴改变了态度，答应了他的要求。
English: Pei Siqian looked handsome, Gao Yao changed his attitude and agreed to his request.

