古文：江以南至日南郡二十水，禹贡山水泽地所在，江水出三天子都，《山海经》谓之浙江也。
现代文：江以南到日南郡二十条河水，是禹贡山水泽地所在的地方。渐江水发源于三天子都，《山海经》称为浙江，《地理志》说：它发源于丹阳黔县的南蛮地区。
English: Twenty rivers flow from the south of the Yangtze River to Nichinan County, which is where the Yugong Mountains and the Yangtze River are located. The water of the Qianjiang River originates from the capital of the Three Kingdoms. The "Shanhai Jing" is called Zhejiang, and the "Geography" says: it originates from the Nanban area of Danyang County.

古文：《地理志》云：水出丹阳黟县南蛮中，北径其县，南有博山，山上有石，特起十丈，上峰若剑杪。时有灵鼓潜发，正长临县，以山鼓为候，一鸣，官长一年，若长雷发声，则官长不吉。
现代文：北流经过此县，县南有一座博山，山上有一块岩石，高耸达十丈，石的顶端像剑峰。山中常有灵鼓隐隐发声，这里的县官任期，可按山鼓预卜，山鼓一鸣，县官任期一年；若山鼓长鸣，则任期虽长而于事不吉。
English: The north stream passes through this county, and in the south of the county there is a mountain called Bo, and on the mountain there is a rock, towering ten meters high, with the top of the rock resembling the peak of a sword. In the mountains, there is often the sound of a spirit drum. The term of the county official here can be predicted by the spirit drum, and if the spirit drum sounds, the term of the county official is one year. If the spirit drum sounds, the term is long, but it is not good luck.

古文：浙江又北历黟山，县居山之阳，故县氏之。
现代文：浙江又北流经过黔山，县在山的南面，所以称为黔县。
English: The north stream of Zhejiang passes through Lushan, and the county is in the south of the mountain, so it is called Lushan County.

古文：汉成帝鸿嘉二年，以为广德国，封中山宪王孙云客王于此。
现代文：汉成帝鸿嘉二年前，封中山宪王的孙子云客于此为王，称为广德国。
English: Two years before Emperor Hongjia of Han Dynasty, Yun Ke, the grandson of Emperor Zhongshan, became the king here, known as Guang Germany.

古文：晋太康中，以为广德县，分隶宣城郡。
现代文：晋太康年代，置为广德县，隶属于宣城郡。
English: At the time of Jin Taikang, it was placed in Guangde County and was subordinate to Xuancheng County.

古文：会稽陈业，洁身清行，遁迹此山。
现代文：有一位名叫陈业的会稽入，清高廉洁，隐遁在这山中。
English: There is a person named Chen Jing, a member of the Audit Committee, who is pure and incorruptible, hiding in the mountains.

古文：浙江又北径歙县东，与一小溪合。水出县东北翁山，西径故城南，又西南入浙江。
现代文：浙江又北流经过款县，在县东与一条小溪汇合，这条小溪发源于县东北的翁山，西流经过款县旧城以南，又西南流注入浙江。
English: In Zhejiang, the north stream passes through Jian County, and in the east of the county, it merges with a creek. This creek originates from Weng Mountain in the northeast of the county. The west stream passes south of the old city of Jian County, and the southwest stream flows into Zhejiang.

古文：又东径遂安县南。
现代文：浙江又东流经过遂安县南，江面在此宽达二百步，江上建浮桥以来往。
English: The eastern stream of Zhejiang also passes through the south of Su'an County, where the river is up to two hundred paces wide, and a floating bridge has been built on the river.

古文：溪广二百步，上立杭以相通，水甚清深，潭不掩鳞，故名新定。分歙县立之。
现代文：江水又清又深，潭中游鱼，清晰可见，所以县名新定，是从款县分地而置的。
English: The water of the river is clear and deep, and the fish in the middle of the pond are clearly visible. Therefore, the county name was newly determined, and it was separated from the county.

古文：晋太康中，又改从今名。
现代文：晋太康年代，又改名为现在的遂安。
English: In the era of Jin Taikang, it was renamed Sui'an.

古文：浙江又左合绝溪，溪水出始新县西，东径县故城南，为东西长溪。溪有四十七濑，濬流惊急，奔波聒天。
现代文：浙江又左与绝溪汇合，绝溪发源于始新县西，东流经过旧县城南，称为东、西长溪，溪中有四十七处礁滩，水势湍急，波涛震天。
English: To the left of Zhejiang is the confluence with the Yangtze River. The Yangtze River originates in the west of Shixin County, and flows eastward through the south of the old county. It is called the East and West Yangtze River. There are forty-seven reefs and beaches in the river. The water is rapid and the waves are seismic.

古文：孙权使贺齐讨黟、歙山贼，贼固黟之林历山，山甚峻绝，又工禁五兵。
现代文：孙权派贺齐讨伐黔、敦一带的山贼，山贼固守款县的林历山，山很险峻，山贼又有刀枪不入的法术。
English: Sun Quan sent Hechi to fight the mountain bandits in the areas of Jiahe and Dun, and the mountain bandits firmly guarded Linlishan in Jia County. The mountain is very steep, and the mountain bandits also have the magic of invincibility.

古文：齐以铁杙椓山，升出不意，又以白棓击之，气禁不行，遂用奇功平贼。
现代文：贺齐用铁钩攀缘登山，出其不意。又用木棍攻击，山贼的法术虽能抗御金铁兵器，却挡不住木棍，贺齐就这样用奇功平定了山贼。
English: He Qi used an iron hook to climb the mountain, catching him by surprise. He also used a wooden stick to attack. Although the magic of the bandits could resist gold and iron weapons, it could not stop the wooden stick. He Qi thus leveled the bandits with miraculous feats.

古文：于是立始新之府于歙之华乡，令齐守之，后移出新亭。
现代文：于是就在款县的华乡置始新县，作为新都郡治，令贺齐为郡守。以后郡治移到新亭。
English: As a result, he set up a new county in Hua Township, which was a county seat of the new capital, and appointed He Qi as the county governor. Later, the county seat was moved to Xinting.

古文：晋太康元年，改曰新安郡。
现代文：晋太康元年，新都郡改为新安郡。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taikang, Xindu County was changed to Xian County.

古文：溪水东注浙江。
现代文：绝溪东流注入浙江。
English: The eastern stream of the Zhengyi River flows into Zhejiang.

古文：浙江又东北径建德县南。县北有乌山，山下有庙，庙在县东七里。
现代文：浙江又东北流，经过建德县以南，县北有一座乌山，山下有庙，位于县东七里。
English: Zhejiang also flows to the northeast, passing south of Jiande County, there is a black mountain in the north of the county, and there is a temple at the foot of the mountain, located seven miles east of the county.

古文：庙渚有大石，高十丈，围五尺，水濑濬激而能致云雨。
现代文：庙前小洲上有一块大石，高达十丈，周围五尺，水势奔腾和礁石相冲激，能兴云作雨。
English: On the small island in front of the temple, there is a large rock, ten meters high, with a circumference of five meters. The rushing water and the reef push against each other, which can create clouds and rain.

古文：浙江又东径寿昌县南，自建德至此，八十里中有十二濑，濑皆峻险，行旅所难。
现代文：浙江又东流经过寿昌县南，从建德到此八十里中，江上有十二处礁滩，都很险峻，造成航行的困难。
English: The east current of Zhejiang also passes through the south of Shuchang County. In the eighty miles from Jiande to here, there are twelve reefs on the river, all of which are very steep, causing navigation difficulties.

古文：县南有孝子夏先墓，先少丧二亲，负土成墓。数年不胜哀，卒。
现代文：寿昌县南有孝子夏先墓，夏先年少时双亲去世，他亲自运土作坟，由于经不起悲哀，几年后他也死了。
English: South of Shuchang County, there is the grave of Xia Xian, a filial son of Nan You. Xia Xian's parents died when he was young, and he himself carried the soil to make the grave. Because he could not bear the grief, he died a few years later.

古文：浙江又北径新城县，桐溪水注之。
现代文：浙江又北流经过新城县，桐溪水在此注入。
English: The northern stream of Zhejiang also passes through Xincheng County, and the water of Tongxi River is injected here.

古文：水出吴兴郡于潜县北天目山。
现代文：桐溪水发源于吴兴郡于潜县北的天目山。
English: Tongxi stream originates from Wuxing County and Tianmeshan in the north of Yuxian County.

古文：山极高峻，崖岭竦叠，西临峻涧。
现代文：此山十分高峻，悬崖绝岭，重重迭迭，其西峻峭，下有深涧。
English: The mountain is very high, the cliff is sheer, and there is a lot of overlap. It is steep to the west, and there is a deep ravine below.

古文：山上有霜木，皆是数百年树，谓之翔凤林。
现代文：山上有霜木，都有几百年树龄，称为翔凤林。
English: There are frost trees on the mountain, all of which are hundreds of years old, known as the Xiangfeng Forest.

古文：东面有瀑布，下注数亩深沼，名曰浣龙池。
现代文：东面有瀑布，注入广达数亩的深沼，称为洗龙池。
English: There is a waterfall in the east, which flows into a deep swamp of several mu, known as the Dragon Pool.

古文：他水南流径县西，为县之西溪。
现代文：池水南流经过于潜县西，成为县的西溪。
English: The south stream of the pond water flows through the west of Qianxian County and becomes the county's West Stream.

古文：溪水又东南与紫溪合。水出县西百丈山，即潜山也。
现代文：西溪水又东南流，与紫溪汇合，紫溪发源于县西的百丈山，即潜山。
English: The water of the West Stream also flows southeast, merging with the Purple Stream. The Purple Stream originates from Mount Baizhang in the west of the county, that is, the Hidden Mountain.

古文：山水东南流，名为紫溪，中道夹水，有紫色磐石，石长百余丈，望之如朝霞。
现代文：山水东南流，称为紫溪。溪两岸有紫色磐石，石长百余丈，望去像朝霞一般。
English: The southeastern stream of the landscape is called Zi Creek. There are purple rocks on both sides of the stream. The stones are more than a hundred meters long and look like morning mist.

古文：又名此水为赤濑，盖以倒影在水故也。
现代文：因为倒影映入水中，所以又称此水为赤懒。
English: Because the reflection is reflected into the water, this water is also called red lazy.

古文：紫溪又东南流，径白石山之阴。山甚峻极，北临紫溪。又东南连山夹水，两峰交峙，反项对石，往往相捍。
现代文：紫溪又东南流，经过白石山北，山势十分高峻，北临紫溪，又东南流，两岸山岳连绵，双峰夹水而峙，岩崖石壁，项背相对。
English: Zixi also flows southeast, passing Shiroishi Mountain to the north, the mountain is very high, north of Zixi, and southeast, the mountains on both sides are continuous, the twin peaks stand up against the water, the rock cliff and the stone wall are opposite.

古文：十余里中，积石磊砢，相挟而上，涧下白沙细石，状若霜雪。
现代文：十余里中，礁石累累，相互挟峙。溪底是白沙细石，好像霜雪。
English: In more than ten miles, the reef is crowded and faces each other. The bottom of the stream is white sand and fine stone, like frost and snow.

古文：水木相映，泉石争晖，名曰楼林。
现代文：溪水与林木相映，泉流与山石争晖，这一段溪流称为楼林。
English: The water of the stream contrasts with the trees, and the spring stream competes with the rocks. This section of the stream is called Loulin.

古文：紫溪东南流，径桐庐县东为桐溪。孙权藉溪之名以为县目，割富春之地，立桐庐县。
现代文：紫溪东南流经过桐庐县东，称为桐溪，孙权分富春县地立桐庐县，以溪水之名作为县名。
English: The southeastern stream of Zixi River flows through the east of Tonglu County and is called Tonglu River. Sun Quan divided Fuchun County and established Tonglu County, using the name of the stream as the county name.

古文：自县至于潜，凡十有六濑，第二是严陵濑。
现代文：从此县到于潜共有十六处礁滩，第二处是严陵懒。
English: From this county to Yuqian, there are a total of sixteen reefs and beaches, and the second is Yanlinglao.

古文：濑带山，山下有一石室。汉光武帝时，严子陵之所居也。
现代文：这个礁滩边上有山，山下有一处石室，是汉光武帝时严子陵所住的地方。
English: There is a mountain on the edge of this reef beach, and under the mountain there is a stone room, which is the place where Emperor Guangwu Shiyanzi lived.

古文：故山及濑，皆即人姓名之。
现代文：所以山和石都以入名相称。
English: Therefore, both the mountain and the stone are commensurate with the name.

古文：山下有磐石，周回十数丈，交枕潭际，盖陵所游也。
现代文：山下有巨石，周围十多丈，交错在潭边，是严子陵游憩之处。
English: At the bottom of the mountain there are huge boulders, more than ten meters high around, interlaced at the edge of the lake, it is a place of recreation for Yan Ziling.

古文：桐溪又东北：径新城县入浙江。
现代文：桐溪又东北流经过新城县注入浙江。
English: The northeast stream of Tongxi also flows through Xincheng County and flows into Zhejiang.

古文：县故富春地，孙权置，后省并桐庐，咸和九年，复立为县。
现代文：新城县原是富春县所属地，孙权建此县，后来又撤废并入桐庐县。晋咸和九年，重新建县。
English: Xincheng County was originally a part of Fuchun County. Sun Quan built this county, which was later abolished and merged into Tonglu County. In the ninth year of the Jin and Han dynasties, the county was rebuilt.

古文：浙江又东北入富阳县，故富春也，晋后名春，改曰富阳也。
现代文：浙江又东北流进入富阳县，就是原来的富春。因为晋朝有一个皇后名 春 ，所以改为富阳。
English: Zhejiang and the Northeast Stream entered Fuyang County, which was originally Fuchun. Because there was a queen named Chun in the Jin Dynasty, it was changed to Fuyang.

古文：东分为湖浦。
现代文：这里，浙江以东，分汉成为湖泊。
English: Here, east of Zhejiang, the Han River divides into lakes.

古文：浙江又东北径富春县南，县故王莽之诛岁也。
现代文：浙江又东北流经过富春县南，王莽曾改县名为诛岁。
English: Zhejiang and the Northeast Stream pass through the south of Fuchun County. Wang Mang once changed the name of the county to Xiannian.

古文：江南有山，孙武皇之先所葬也。汉末，墓上有光，如云气属天。
现代文：江南有山，是孙武皇祖先的葬地，汉代末期坟墓上有光，像云气一般与天相连。
English: There is a mountain in the south of the Yangtze River, which is the burial place of the ancestors of the Sun Wu Emperor. At the end of the Han Dynasty, there was light on the tomb, which was generally connected to the sky like a cloud.

古文：黄武五年，孙权以富春为东安郡，分置诸郡，以讨士宗。
现代文：黄武五年，孙权以富春县为东安郡，又建置了其他几郡，以讨伐士宗。
English: In the 5th year of Huangwu, Sun Quan designated Fuchun County as Dong'an County, and built several other counties to fight against Shizong.

古文：浙江又东北径亭山西，山上有孙权父冢。
现代文：浙江又东北流经过亭山西，山上有孙权父墓。
English: The northeast stream of Zhejiang also passes through the west of Tingshan, and the tomb of Sun Quan's father is on the mountain.

古文：北过余杭，东入于海。
现代文：北过余杭县，东入于海。
English: It crosses Yuhang County in the north and enters the sea in the east.

古文：浙江径县左，合余干大溪。
现代文：浙江流经余杭县左和余干大溪汇合。
English: The Zhejiang River flows through Yuhang County, where the Zuo and Yugang Daxi Rivers meet.

古文：溪水南出永康县。县，赤乌中分乌伤上浦立。
现代文：浙江以北，就是临安县界。江北对郭文的住宅，住依山面溪，以东有郭文墓。晋建武元年分乌伤县上浦之地而建立的。
English: To the north of Zhejiang is the border of Lin'an County. Guo Wen's residence is on the north side of the river, and he lived in Shanmen Creek. To the east is Guo Wen's tomb. It was built in Shangpu, Wushi County, in the first year of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：刘敬叔《异苑》曰：孙权时，永康县有人入山，遇一大龟，即束之以归。
现代文：刘敬叔《异苑》说：孙权时，永康县有入进入山里，遇见一只大龟，就把它捆回家。
English: Liu Jingshu, "A Different Garden," said: When Sun Quan was young, he went into the mountains in Yongkang County, met a big turtle, and bundled it home.

古文：龟便言曰：游不量时，为君所得。
现代文：乌龟说了话：我出门没挑日子，所以为你所得。
English: The turtle said something: I didn't choose the day to go out, so I got it for you.

古文：担者怪之，载出，欲上吴王。
现代文：肩挑乌龟的入极为骇怪，于是就想把它去献给吴王。
English: The entrance of the turtle on his shoulder was extremely frightening, so he wanted to dedicate it to King Wu.

古文：夜宿越里，缆船于大桑树。
现代文：晚上在越里地方歇宿，把船系在大桑树下。
English: In the evening, we stopped in the Echiri region and moored the boat under a large mulberry tree.

古文：宵中，树忽呼龟曰：元绪，奚事尔也？
现代文：半夜，大桑树忽然和乌龟说话：元绪，你遇着什么事了？
English: In the middle of the night, the big mulberry tree suddenly spoke to the turtle: cheer up, what happened to you?

古文：龟曰：行不择日，今方见烹，虽尽南山之樵，不能溃我。
现代文：乌龟说：我出门没挑日子，眼看就要被烹煮了。但是即使砍光南山的柴，却也烧不烂我。
English: The turtle said, "I didn't choose the day to go out, and I'm about to be cooked. But even if I cut all the firewood from Nanshan Mountain, it won't burn me to a crisp.

古文：树曰：诸葛元逊识性渊长，必致相困。令求如我之徒，计将安治？
现代文：桑树说：那里有个诸葛元逊，他知识渊博，一定要使你遇上灾难，假使他使用像我这样的东西，你将怎么办？
English: Mulberry said, "There's a Zhuge Yuanxun there, he's very knowledgeable, he's bound to get you into trouble. If he uses something like me, what will you do?"

古文：龟曰：子明，无多辞。
现代文：乌龟说：子明，不要再多说了。
English: The turtle said, "Ziming, don't say any more.

古文：既至建业，权将煮之，烧柴万车，龟犹如故。
现代文：到了建业，孙权就要烹煮它，但烧了万车柴火，乌龟却毫无影响。
English: When it came to Jianye, Sun Quan had to cook it, but he burned ten thousand cartloads of firewood, but it had no effect on the turtle.

古文：诸葛格曰：燃以老桑乃熟。
现代文：诸葛惜说：用老桑树烧就能烧熟。
English: Zhuge Shan said, "If you use old mulberry trees, you can cook the noodles well."

古文：献人仍说龟言，权使伐桑，取煮之即烂。
现代文：于是献龟者说出了老桑树和乌龟的对话。孙权派入砍伐了桑树来，一烧就烂。
English: So the turtle donor said the dialogue between the old mulberry tree and the turtle. Sun Quan sent someone to cut down the mulberry tree, and it rotted as soon as it was burned.

古文：故野人呼龟曰元绪。
现代文：所以入们称乌龟为元绪。
English: That's why we call the turtle the starting point.

古文：其水飞湍北注，至县南门，入谷水。
现代文：永康溪水飞流北注，到县南门注入敦水。
English: The water of Yongkang Creek flows northward, and rushes into the south gate of the county.

古文：谷水又东，定阳溪水注之。水上承信安县之苏姥布。
现代文：谷水又东流，接纳定阳溪水，其水上游接信安县的苏姥布。
English: The valley water also flows to the east, receiving the water of Dingyang Creek, and its upstream water is connected to the Su Ubabu of Xin'an County.

古文：县本新安县，晋武帝太康三年改曰信安。
现代文：信安县原名新安县，晋武帝太康三年改名信安。
English: Xin'an County, formerly known as Xin'an County, was renamed Xin'an by Emperor Jinwu Taikang three years ago.

古文：水悬百余丈，濑势飞注，状如瀑布。
现代文：这里，溪水成为悬流，高达百丈，飞注而下，形同瀑布。
English: Here, the stream becomes a riptide, soaring up to great heights and cascading down in the shape of a waterfall.

古文：濑边有石如床，床上有石牒，长三尺许，有似杂采帖也。
现代文：悬流边有一块如床的岩石，床上有三尺光景的石床板，颜色如摊着的绚丽绸缎一样。
English: On the edge of the overflow there is a rock like a bed, and on the bed there is a three-foot-high stone floor, the color of which is like a spread of gorgeous silk.

古文：《东阳记》云：信安县有悬室坂。晋中朝时，有民王质，伐木至石室中，见童子四人，弹琴而歌。质因留，倚柯听之。
现代文：《东阳记》说：信安县有悬室坂，晋朝中叶，有一个名叫王质的居民，因为伐木而到此室中，看到有四个童子边弹琴边唱歌，王质就留下来，倚靠在斧柄上听他们弹唱。
English: "Dongyang Ji" said: There is a hanging room slope in Xin'an County. In the middle of the Jin Dynasty, there was a resident named Wang Quan, who came to this room because of logging. When he saw four boys playing the piano and singing, Wang Quan stayed and leaned on the axe handle to listen to them sing.

古文：童子以一物如枣核与质，质含之，便不复饥。
现代文：童子拿一颗好像枣核般的东西给王质，王质含在口里，就不再饥饿了。
English: The boy gave the hostage something that looked like a jujube seed, and the hostage stopped being hungry as soon as he had it in his mouth.

古文：俄顷，童子曰：其归。承声而去，斧柯漼然烂尽。
现代文：过了一忽儿，童子说，归去吧，王质就应声而归，此时发现斧柄已经腐烂殆尽。
English: After a while, the boy said, "Let's go home," to which the heir to the throne replied, "At this time, the axe handle was found to be completely rotten."

古文：既归，质去家已数十年，亲情凋落，无复向时比矣。
现代文：归去后，才知道他离家已经数十年，亲入去世，与他离家时完全不同了。
English: After his return, he learned that he had been away from home for decades and had died in person, completely different from when he left home.

古文：其水分纳众流，混彼东逝，径定阳县。夹岸缘溪，悉生支竹，及芳枳木连，杂以霜菊金橙。
现代文：定阳溪水接纳许多支流，汇合东流经过定阳县，沿溪两岸，都生长着支竹、香积、薛荔，并且夹杂白色的菊花和黄色的橙桔。
English: The water of Jingyang Creek receives many tributaries. The confluence of the eastern stream passes through Jingyang County. On both sides of the stream, there are bamboo shoots, incense, Xue Li, and mixed with white chrysanthemums and yellow orange oranges.

古文：白沙细石，状如凝雪。
现代文：溪滩上则是白沙和细石，看去宛如积雪。
English: On the beach there is white sand and pebbles, which look like snow.

古文：石溜湍波，浮响无辍。
现代文：急流刷石，潺潺不息。
English: The whitewater rapids never stop.

古文：山水之趣，尤深人情。
现代文：游山玩水的乐趣，远胜于入情的交往。
English: The fun of hiking in the mountains and playing in the water is far better than a romantic relationship.

古文：县，汉献帝分信安立，溪亦取名焉。
现代文：定阳县是汉献帝分信安县的地方而建立的，溪也随县而得名。
English: Jingyang County was established by the Han Dynasty as part of Xin'an County, and the creek was also named after the county.

古文：溪永又东径长山县北，北对高山。山下水际，是赤松羽化之处也。
现代文：定阳溪水又东流，经过长山县北，北有高山屹立，山下水边，就是赤松子羽化登仙的地方。
English: Jingyang Creek also flows eastward, passing through the north of Changshan County. In the north, there are high mountains, and the waterside below the mountains is the place where red pine cones become immortal.

古文：炎帝少女追之，亦俱仙矣。
现代文：炎帝的小女儿追赶他，也一起成了仙。
English: Emperor Yan's little daughter chased after him and together they became immortals.

古文：后人立庙于山下。
现代文：后来有入在这山下建造了庙宇。
English: Later, Arinori built a temple at the foot of the mountain.

古文：溪水又东入于谷水，谷水又东径乌伤县之云黄山，山下临溪水，水际石壁杰立，高百许丈。
现代文：定阳溪水又东流注入谷水。谷水东流，经过乌伤县的云黄山，山下就是溪水，水边有石壁巍然耸立，高达百余丈。
English: The eastern stream of the Jingyang Creek flows into the valley stream. The eastern stream of the valley stream passes through the Yunhuang Mountain in Wushi County. The mountain is the stream, and there are stone walls towering along the water's edge, more than a hundred meters high.

古文：又与吴宁溪水合。
现代文：靓水又接纳吴宁溪水。
English: Surabaya also receives water from Wu Ning Creek.

古文：水出吴宁县下，径乌伤县入谷，谓之乌伤溪水。
现代文：吴宁溪水发源于吴宁县境，经过乌伤县注入谷水，称为乌伤溪水。
English: The water of Wu Ning Creek originates from the territory of Wu Ning County, and is injected into the valley water through Wusha County. It is called Wusha Creek Water.

古文：闽中有徐登者，女子化为丈夫，与东阳赵昞，并善越方，时遭兵乱，相遇于溪，各示所能。
现代文：闽中有一个叫做徐登的入，由女子变成男入，他和东阳赵晒，都善于巫术。因为当时遭到战乱，二入在乌伤溪水相遇，各入显示他们的本领。
English: In the cocoon, there is one called Xu Deng's Ying, which changes from a woman to a man, and he and Dongyang Zhao Xiang are both good at witchcraft. Because there was a war at the time, the two Yings met in the dark stream, and each Ying showed their skills.

古文：登先禁溪，水为不流。昞次禁枯柳，柳为生荑。二人相示而笑。
现代文：徐登先阻遏溪水，使它不流；接着赵晒使枯萎的柳树长出嫩芽，两入相对而笑。
English: Xu Deng first blocked the water of the stream, so that it did not flow; then Zhao Xian made the withered willow trees grow shoots, and the two laughed at each other.

古文：登年长，昞师事之。
现代文：徐登年长，赵晒就以徐登为师长。
English: Xu Deng is older, Zhao Xiang takes Xu Deng as his teacher.

古文：后登身故，昞东入章安，百姓未知；昞乃升茅屋，梧鼎而爨、主人惊怪，昞笑而不应，屋亦不损。
现代文：以后徐登去世，赵晒东行去到章安，百姓不知道，赵晒就升到茅屋上，架起鼎镬烧饭，主入惊骇，赵晒笑而不答，茅屋也不受损害。
English: After Xu Deng's death, Zhao Ran traveled east to Zhang'an, but the people did not know. Zhao Ran went up to the thatch house, set up a pot of rice, and the master was shocked. Zhao Ran laughed and did not answer, and the thatch house was not damaged.

古文：又尝临水求渡，船人不许。昞乃张盖坐中，长啸呼风，乱流而济。
现代文：他又到河边求渡，撑船的不答应，赵晒就张开伞子坐在其中，长啸呼风，在奔腾的河水中过渡。
English: He also went to the river to ask for a ferry. When the boatmen did not agree, Zhao Xiang opened his umbrella and sat in it. The wind howled for a long time, making a transition in the rushing river water.

古文：于是百姓神服，从者如归，章安令恶而杀之，民立祠于永宁，而蚊蚋不能入。
现代文：于是，百姓敬服他的神通，许多入都归附于他。章安县令厌恶他，将他杀掉。入民为他在永宁县建立了祠庙，这个祠庙蚊绳是不入的。
English: As a result, the people worshipped his supernatural power, and many towns were annexed to him. The Zhang'an County government detested him and killed him. The people established a temple for him in Yongning County. Mosquito ropes are not allowed to enter this temple.

古文：昞秉道怀术，而不能全身避害，事伺苌弘，宋元之龟，厄运之来，故难救矣。
现代文：赵晒身有道术，却不能避开灾祸，保全生命。这件事和周朝的丧弘及宋元公的神龟一样，恶运来时，拯救为难。
English: Zhao Hanzhong was skilled in Taoism, but he could not avoid the disaster and save his life. This matter is the same as Zhou Dynasty's Zohong and Song Yuan's tortoise. When bad luck comes, it is difficult to save.

古文：谷水又东入钱唐县，而左入浙江。
现代文：谷水又东流进入钱唐县，而左入浙江。
English: The valley water also flows eastward into Qiantang County, and left into Zhejiang.

古文：故《地理志》曰：谷水自太末东北至钱唐入浙江是也。
现代文：所以《地理志》说：谷水从太末东北到钱唐注入浙江。
English: Therefore, "Geography" said: the valley water from the northeast of the late Taizhou to the Qiantang was injected into Zhejiang.

古文：浙江又东径灵隐山，山在四山之中，有高崖洞穴，左右有石室三所，又有孤石壁立，大三十围，其上开散，状如莲花。
现代文：浙江又东流经过灵隐山，山在四面丛山包围之中，有高峻的岩崖和洞穴，左右有石室三所，还有孤石直立，大三十围，上面开散，形状像莲花。
English: Zhejiang also flows eastward past Lingyin Mountain. The mountain is surrounded by mountains on all sides. There are steep cliffs and caves. There are three stone chambers on the left and right. There are also isolated stones standing upright, 30 meters tall, scattered above, shaped like a lotus flower.

古文：昔有道士，长往不归，或因以稽留为山号。
现代文：从前有道士，长期住此不归，这或许就是此山所以称为灵隐的原因。
English: In the past, there were Taoists who lived here for a long time and never returned, which may be the reason why this mountain is called Lingyin.

古文：山下有钱唐故县。浙江径其南，王莽更名之曰泉亭。
现代文：山下有钱唐县旧址，浙江流过它南面，王莽改钱唐为泉亭。
English: Under the mountain is the former site of Qiantang County, Zhejiang flows through it to the south, Wang Mang changed Qiantang to Quan Ting.

古文：《地理志》曰：会稽西部都尉治。
现代文：《地理志》说：这里是会稽西部都尉治。
English: "Geography" said: Here is the auditor of the western capital.

古文：《钱唐记》曰：防海大塘在县东一里许，郡议曹华信家议立此塘，以防海水。
现代文：《钱唐记》说：防海大塘约在县东一里，郡议曹华信家，建议建立此塘以防御海水。
English: "Qiantang Records" said: the sea defense pond is about one mile east of the county, and the county councilor Cao Huaxin proposed to build this pond to defend against seawater.

古文：始开募，有能致一斜土者，即与钱一千。
现代文：于是开始征募民工，凡挑来一解土的，给钱一千。
English: So they began to recruit migrant workers. Anyone who picked up a shovel was paid a thousand.

古文：旬月之间，来者云集，塘未成而不复取。于是载土石者皆弃而去，塘以之成，故改名钱塘焉。
现代文：十天到一月之间，挑土而来的入云集，因为塘没有修筑而不给钱，入们只好抛掉土石回去，土石成堆，塘因而修成，所以改名为钱塘。
English: Between the tenth day and the first day of the month, because the pond had not been built and they did not pay, they had no choice but to throw the earth and stones back. The piles of earth and stones made the pond, so it was renamed Qiantang.

古文：县南江侧有明圣湖。父老传言，湖有金牛，古见之，神化不测，湖取名焉。
现代文：钱唐县南江边上有明圣湖，据父老相传，古时曾见湖中有金牛，神奇莫测，所以称为金牛湖。
English: There is a sacred lake on the edge of the Nanjiang River in Qiantang County. According to legend, in ancient times there was a golden cow in the lake. It was so mysterious that it was called the Golden Cow Lake.

古文：县有武林山，武林水所出也。
现代文：钱唐县有武林山，武林水从此发源。
English: Qiantang County has Wulin Mountain, the source of Wulin Water.

古文：阚駰云：山出钱水，东入海。
现代文：阐驱说：从武林山发源的钱水，东流入海。
English: The commentary said: The Qianshui flows from the source of Wulin Mountain to the east and flows into the sea.

古文：水流于两山之间，江川急浚，兼涛水昼夜再来，来应时刻，常以月晦及望尤大，至二月、八月最高，峨峨二丈有余。
现代文：《吴地记》说：现在没有钱水，钱唐县只有浙江。县东有定山、包山等山，都在浙江以西，江水流经两山之间，江水湍急，加上昼夜两度的海涛。海涛是按时刻来到的，月初和月半常常特别大，而二月和八月最高，高达两丈多。
English: "Wu Di Ji" said: There is no Qianshui now, and Qiantang County only has Zhejiang. In the east of the county, there are Dingshan, Baoshan and other mountains, all west of Zhejiang. The river flows between the two mountains, the river is fast-flowing, and the sea is high both day and night. The sea comes according to the time, and the beginning of the month and the middle of the month are often particularly large, while February and August are the highest, more than two feet high.

古文：《吴越春秋》以为子胥、文种之神也。
现代文：《吴越春秋》认为这是伍子青和文种之神。
English: "Wu Yue Chunqiu" believes that this is the god of Wu Zi Qing and literature.

古文：昔子胥亮于吴，而浮尸于江。
现代文：从前伍子青尽忠于吴国，最后却落得浮尸江中。
English: Once upon a time, Wu Zixing was loyal to the State of Wu, but ended up floating in the Dead Sea.

古文：吴人怜之，立祠于江上，名曰胥山。
现代文：吴入怜悯他，在江上为他立祠，称为青山。
English: Wu Rong took pity on him and built a small shrine for him on the river, which is called Qingshan.

古文：《吴录》云：胥山在太湖边，去江不百里，故曰江上。
现代文：《吴录》说：青山在太湖边，离江不到百里，所以称为江上。
English: "Wu Lu" said: Aoyama is on the edge of Taihu Lake, less than a hundred miles from the river, so it is called the upper reaches of the river.

古文：文种诚于越，而伏剑于山阴，越人哀之，葬于重山。
现代文：文种尽忠于越，却在山阴饮剑而亡，越入怜悯他，把他葬在重山。
English: Wen kind was loyal to Yue, but he died in the shadow of the mountain drinking a sword. Yue took pity on him and buried him in Chongshan.

古文：汉高帝十二年，一吴也，后分为二，世号三吴，吴兴、吴郡，会稽其一焉。
现代文：文种葬后一年，伍子青从海上来，带文种一起奔游在江海之中。所以在潮水前面扬波的是伍子青，在潮水后面翻浪的是文种。枚乘说：潮水的这种故事并不见于记载，不过海潮上涨时，江水为之逆流，看起来似有神明驱使，但其实并不如此。
English: A year after the burial of Wen Zong, Wu Zi Qing came from the sea and took Wen Zong with him to swim in the river. Therefore, it was Wu Zi Qing who swam in front of the tide, and Wen Zong who surfed behind the tide. Hanzheng said: This story of the tide is not recorded, but when the tide rises, the river flows against it. It seems to be driven by gods, but in fact it is not.

古文：浙江又东径御儿乡，《万善历》曰：吴黄武六年正月，获彭绮。是岁，由拳西乡有产儿，堕地便能语，云：天方明，河欲清。鼎脚折，金乃生。
现代文：所说就在这里。秦始皇三十七年正月，擒获了魏的彭绮。这一年，由拳县西乡发生了新生儿落地就能说话的事。新生儿的话说：天方明，河欲清，鼎脚折，金乃生。
English: In the first month of the thirty-seventh year of the First Emperor of the Qin Dynasty, Peng Yao of the Wei Dynasty was captured. In this year, a newborn baby was born in Xixiang, Jian County, and was able to speak. The words of the newborn were: the sky is bright, the river is clear, the tripod is broken, and the gold is born.

古文：因是诏为语儿乡。
现代文：于是此地得诏，称为语儿乡。
English: As a result, this place was given the title of "Gyuko Township."

古文：非也。
现代文：这种传说是错误的。
English: At midnight, it started to rain.

古文：御儿之名远矣，盖无智之徒，因藉地名，生情穿凿耳。
现代文：御儿这个地名，很早就有了，这是没有知识的入，用地名来牵强附会罢了。
English: The place name "Son" has been around for a long time. This is an uninformed use of a place name to create a far-fetched association.

古文：《国语》曰：句践之地，北至御儿是也。
现代文：《国语》就已经说：句践之地，北至御儿。
English: "National Language" has already said: the place of sentence practice is from the north to the east.

古文：安得引黄武证地哉？
现代文：那能用黄武年代的这种传说来证明地名的来源呢。
English: Could this legend from the Huangwu era be used to prove the origin of the place name?

古文：韦昭曰：越北鄙在嘉兴。
现代文：韦昭说：越国的北部边境在嘉兴。
English: Wei Zhao said: Vietnam's northern border is in Jiaxing.

古文：浙江又东径柴辟南，旧吴楚之战地矣。
现代文：浙江又东流，经过柴辟以南，这是从前吴、楚两国作战的地方。
English: Zhejiang also flows eastward, passing south of Chaibi. This is where the two countries of Wu and Chu once fought.

古文：备候于此，故谓之辟塞，是以《越绝》称吴故从由拳、辟塞渡会稽，凑山阴是也。
现代文：由于这里有军事设备，所以称为辟塞。因此，《越绝》说：从前吴国从由拳的辟塞到会稽抵山阴。
English: Because there is military equipment here, it is called a military outpost. Therefore, "Yue Yue" said: In the past, the State of Wu went from a military outpost to a military outpost.

古文：又径永兴县北，县在会稽东北百二十里，故余暨县也。
现代文：浙江又经过永兴县以北，此县在会稽东北一百二十里，即从前的余暨县。
English: Zhejiang also passes to the north of Yongxing County, which is 120 miles northeast of Hefei, that is, the former Yuji County.

古文：应劭曰：阖闾弟夫概之所邑。王莽之余衍也。
现代文：应劫说：这是阖间的弟弟夫概的封邑，王莽把它改为余衍。
English: The robber said, "This is the fief of my younger brother, Wang Mang, and Wang Mang changed it to Yuyan."

古文：汉末，童谣云：天子当兴东南三余之间。
现代文：汉朝末年，有童谣说：天子当兴东南三余之间。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, there was a nursery rhyme that said, "Heaven's son, Dangxing, lives in the southeastern part of China.

古文：故孙权改曰永兴。
现代文：所以孙权把它改名永兴，此县在浙江江边。
English: So Sun Quan changed its name to Yongxing. This county is on the Zhejiang River.

古文：县滨浙江，又东合浦阳江，江水导源乌伤县，东径诸暨县，与泄溪合。溪广数丈，中道有两高山夹溪，造云壁立，凡有五泄。
现代文：浙江又东流与浦阳江会合。浦阳江发源于乌伤县，东流经过诸暨与泄溪会合，泄溪宽达数丈，沿岸两旁有陡峭的高山耸入云表。共有五泄，下泄高悬三十多丈，宽十丈。
English: The Poyang River originates in Wushi County. The eastward flow passes through Zhuji and meets the Leakage Creek. The Leakage Creek is several meters wide, with steep mountains rising into the clouds on both sides of the coast. There are a total of five leaks, and the lower leak is more than 30 meters high and 10 meters wide.

古文：下泄悬三十余丈，广十丈，中三泄不可得至，登山远望，乃得见之。悬百余丈，水势高急，声震水外。
现代文：其中有三泄不能到达，攀登到山上远望，才能看见，水悬挂达百余丈，山高水急，水声震耳，响及溪外。
English: Among them, there are three leaks that cannot be reached, climb to the mountain to look far and wide to see, the water hangs more than a hundred meters high, the mountain is high and the water is rapid, the water sound is deafening, and the sound is outside the stream.

古文：上泄悬二百余丈，望若云垂，此是瀑布，土人号为泄也。
现代文：上泄悬流二百多丈，看去好像是白云下垂，这其实就是瀑布，当地入称为泄。
English: The overflowing overflow is more than two hundred meters high, and it looks like a white cloud hanging down. This is actually a waterfall, and the local inflow is called leakage.

古文：江水又东径诸暨县南，县临对江流，江南有射堂。县北带乌山，故越地也。
现代文：江水又东流经过诸暨县以南，县面对江流，江以南有射堂，县北面是乌山，从前是越国之地。
English: The eastward flow of the river also passes south of Zhuji County. The county faces the river flow. South of the river, there is a shooting gallery. The north of the county is Wu Mountain, which was once the land of Yue.

古文：先名上诸暨，亦曰何无矣。
现代文：这里过去名为上诸暨，也称句无。
English: This place used to be called Shangzhuji, also known as Zhengzhou.

古文：故《国语》曰：句践之地，南至句无。
现代文：所以《国语》说，句践之地，南至句无。
English: Therefore, the "National Language" says that there is no sentence from the south to the south.

古文：王莽之疏虏也。
现代文：王莽改名为疏虏。
English: Wang Mang changed his name to Shu Ruizong.

古文：夹水多浦，浦中有大湖，春夏多永，秋冬涸浅。
现代文：夹岸多支流，支流上有大湖，春夏季水量丰沛，秋冬季河干水浅。
English: There are many tributaries between the banks, with large lakes on the tributaries, abundant water in spring and summer, and shallow dry water in autumn and winter.

古文：江水又东南径剡县，与白石山水会。
现代文：江水又东南流，经过刻县与白石山水会合。
English: The river also flows southeast, passing through Keke County and joining the Shiroishi landscape.

古文：山上有瀑布，悬水三十丈，下注浦阳江。
现代文：山上有瀑布，水悬流而下达三十丈，注入浦阳江。
English: There is a waterfall on the mountain, and the water overflows and falls down 30 meters, pouring into the Poyang River.

古文：浦阳江水又东流南屈，又东回北转，径剡县东，王莽之尽忠也。
现代文：浦阳江又东流南转，又东流折北，辗转经过刻县以东，刻县即是王莽的尽忠县。
English: The Poyang River flows from east to south, and from east to north, passing east of Ke County, which is Wang Mang's Zhizhong County.

古文：县开东门向江，江广二百余步，自昔耆旧传，县不得开南门，开南门则有贼盗。
现代文：县城东门面对浦阳江，江宽二百余步。从前，老年入说，县城不能开南门，开南门就有盗贼。
English: The east gate of the county seat faces the Poyang River, and the river is more than two hundred paces wide. In the past, the old people said that the county seat could not open the south gate, and there would be thieves at the south gate.

古文：江水翼县转注，故有东渡、西汲焉。东南二渡，通临海，并泛单船为浮航。西渡通东阳，并二十五船为桥航。
现代文：浦阳江转流经过县城的东、西两侧，所以有东渡和西渡，东、南二渡通临海，都有渡船；西渡通东阳，用二十五条船并合成为浮桥。
English: The diverted flow of the Poyang River passes through the east and west sides of the county seat, so there are Dongdu and Xidu, and the east and south two-passage routes facing the sea have ferries; Xidu-Dongyang, with twenty-five boats merged into a pontoon bridge.

古文：江边有查浦，浦东行二百余里，与句章接界。
现代文：江边有查浦，从查浦东行二百多里和句章交界。
English: There is Cha Pu on the river, and more than two hundred miles east of Cha Pu is the junction of He Juzhang.

古文：浦里有六里，有五百家，并夹浦居，列门向水，甚有良田。
现代文：查浦浦内有六里村，有居民五百家，都在浦的两岸居住，民房门面朝水。
English: There is a six-mile village in Cha Pu Pu, with five hundred residents, all living on both banks of the Pu, with the front of the houses facing the water.

古文：有青溪、余洪溪、大发溪、小发溪，江上有溪，六溪列溉，散入江。
现代文：在水边有许多良田，沿江有青溪、余洪溪、大发溪、小发溪等六条溪流，各溪灌溉良田，然后注入江中。
English: There are many good fields along the water's edge. There are six streams along the river, including Qingxi, Yuhongxi, Dafaxi and Xiaofaxi. Each stream irrigates good fields and then flows into the river.

古文：夹溪上下，崩崖若倾，东有簟山、南有黄山，与白石三山，为县之秀峰。
现代文：溪两岸，岩崖夹立，好像要倾倒一样。东有覃山，西有黄山和白石三山，是这个县内的美丽山峰。
English: On both sides of the stream, cliffs stand as if they were about to topple over. To the east are the Lushan Mountains, to the west are the Huangshan Mountains and the Baishi Three Mountains, which are the beautiful peaks in this county.

古文：山下众流泉导，湍石激波，浮险四注。
现代文：山下有许多由泉水发源的溪流，在岩崖上激起波浪，河道甚险，向四面流注。
English: At the foot of the mountain, there are many streams that originate from springs, causing waves on the cliff. The river is very dangerous and flows in all directions.

古文：浦阳江又东径石桥，广八丈，高四丈。下有石井，口径七尺，桥上有方石，长七尺，广一丈二尺。
现代文：浦阳江又东流经过石桥，此桥宽八丈，高四丈，桥下有石井，口径七尺，桥上有方石，长七尺，宽一丈二尺。
English: The Poyang River also flows east through a stone bridge. This bridge is eight meters wide and four meters high. Under the bridge there is a stone well with a caliber of seven feet. On the bridge there is a square stone, seven feet long and one and two feet wide.

古文：桥头有磐石，可容二十人坐。
现代文：桥头有一块可以坐得下二十入的磐石。
English: At the head of the bridge there is a rock that you can sit on for 20 minutes.

古文：溪水两旁悉高山，山有石壁二十许丈，溪中相攻，赑响外发，未至桥数里，便闻其声。
现代文：溪水两旁，都是高山，山上有二十多丈的石壁，溪水冲激这些石壁，发出宏亮的声音，离桥数里，就可以听到。
English: On both sides of the stream, there are high mountains. There are more than twenty stone walls on the mountain. The stream stimulates these stone walls and emits a loud sound, which can be heard several miles away from the bridge.

古文：江水北径嵊山，山下有亭，亭带山临江，松岭森蔚，沙渚平静。
现代文：浦阳江北流经过蟀山，山下有亭，依山临江，山上有茂密的松林，河心有平静的沙洲。
English: The north flow of the Poyang River passes through Lushan. There are pavilions at the foot of the mountain, riverside pavilions along the mountains, dense pine forests on the mountains, and calm sandbanks in the center of the river.

古文：浦阳江又东北径始宁县山之成功峤。
现代文：浦阳江又向东北流，经过始宁县峰山的成功娇。
English: The Poyang River also flows to the northeast, passing through the mountains of Shining County.

古文：峤壁立临江，欹路峻狭，不得并行。行者牵木稍进，不敢俯视。
现代文：此娇在江边上壁立，沿江有羊肠小道，只容一入攀援前进，江深路狭，不敢下视。
English: This Jiao stands on the wall at the edge of the river. There is a sheep gut path along the river, which only allows one to enter and climb forward. The river is deep and narrow, and I dare not look down.

古文：峤酉有山，孤峰特上，飞禽罕至。
现代文：此娇以西，有一座极高的孤峰，连飞鸟都很少到达。
English: To the west of this Jiao, there is a very high lonely peak, which even flying birds rarely reach.

古文：尝有采药者，沿山见通溪，寻上，于山顶树下，有十二方石，地甚光洁。
现代文：曾经有采药的入，沿山循溪而行，竟到达山顶。山顶有树，树下有十二块方石，其地很平整光洁。
English: There was once a dowser who followed a stream up the mountain until he reached the top of the mountain. At the top of the mountain there were trees, and under the trees there were twelve stones. The land was very flat and clean.

古文：还复更寻，遂迷前路。
现代文：回来以后再次前去，但迷路不得到达。
English: After I came back, I went forward again, but I lost my way and couldn't get there.

古文：言诸仙之所憩宴，故以坛宴名山。
现代文：据说这是许多神仙休息宴集之处，所以称为坛宴山。
English: It is said that this is the place where many immortals gather to rest and feast, so it is called the Altar Banquet Mountain.

古文：峤北有浦，浦口有庙，庙甚灵验，行人及樵伐者皆先敬焉。
现代文：成功娇北有岭浦，浦口有庙，非常灵验。行入和樵夫到此都先敬拜。
English: Successful Jiao Bei has Lingpu, Pukou has a temple, it is very efficient. Both travelers and travelers worship here first.

古文：若相侵窃，必为蛇虎所伤。
现代文：若不尊敬，必要为毒蛇猛虎所伤。
English: If you don't respect it, you will be hurt by the venomous snakes and tigers.

古文：北则山与山接，二山虽曰异县，而峰岭相连。
现代文：成功娇的北则是嶂山，和嵘山相接，两山虽然在不同的县内，但峰岭是互相连接的。
English: The north of Chenggongjiao is Lushan, which is adjacent to Lushan. Although the two mountains are in different counties, the peaks are connected to each other.

古文：其间倾涧怀烟，泉溪引雾，吹畦风馨，触岫延赏。
现代文：这一带山间溪泉，浪花飞溅，引起一片雾露，山垅中吹来香风，峰峦相接，令入叹赏，所以王元琳称这里是神明境。
English: The mountain stream springs in this area, the splashing of the waves, causing a mist, the fragrant wind blowing in the mountains, and the peaks and ridges touching each other, are breathtaking, so Wang Yuanlin called this place the Divine Realm.

古文：是以王元琳谓之神明境，事备谢康乐《山居记》。浦阳江自山东北，径太康湖，车骑将军谢玄田居所在。
现代文：此事在谢康乐的《山居记》中有详细记载。浦阳江从嘘山向东北流经太康湖，这是车骑将军谢玄田园隐居之地。
English: This event is recorded in detail in Xie Kangle's "Mountain Residence." The Poyang River flows from Shushan to the northeast through Taikang Lake, which is the place where the cavalry general Xie Xuan lived in rural seclusion.

古文：右滨长江，左傍连山，平陵修通，澄湖远镜。
现代文：其地右濒江而左依山，有一条修长的坦道与如镜的湖泊相通。
English: It is bordered on the right by the river and on the left by the mountains, with a long, flat road connecting it to the mirror-like lake.

古文：于江曲起楼，楼侧悉是桐梓，森耸可爱，居民号为桐亭楼，楼两面临江，尽升眺之趣。
现代文：在江道的曲折之处修建楼台，楼边都是桐树和梓树，高大茂盛，非常可爱，居民称此为桐亭楼。此楼两面临江，登楼远眺，极尽情趣。
English: A terrace was built at the twists and turns of the river path. The sides of the building are lined with tall, luxuriant, and very lovely Paulownia and Azusa trees. The residents call it the Paulownia Terrace. The two sides of the building face the river, and the view from the top of the building is very interesting.

古文：芦人渔子，泛滥满焉。
现代文：满净湖都是采伐芦苇的樵夫和捕鱼的渔夫。
English: The clear lake is full of reed harvesters and fishermen.

古文：湖中筑路，东出趋山，路甚平直。
现代文：从湖中有一条平直道路向东和山相接。
English: There is a straight road from the lake to the east and the mountain.

古文：山中有三精舍，高甍凌虚、垂檐带空，俯眺平林，烟沓在下，水陆宁晏，足为避地之乡矣。
现代文：山中有三座精舍，屋宇高敞，屋檐垂空，在此俯视树林，烟雾嚎檬，伏在山下，水陆两界，都显得安宁平静，真是一个隐居避世的地方。
English: There are three fine houses in the mountain, the buildings are tall and spacious, the eaves are hanging in the air, here overlooking the woods, smoke lemon, lying under the mountain, water and land, both appear peaceful and calm, really a secluded place to escape the world.

古文：江有琵琶圻，圻有古冢堕水，甓有隐起字云：筮吉龟凶，八百年，落江中。
现代文：江边有琵琶忻，沂上有陷入水中的古墓，墓砖上隐约有字说：笠吉龟凶，八百年落江中。
English: There are pipa cymbals along the river, ancient tombs that have fallen into the water are on the cymbals, and there is a vague word on the tomb brick saying: "Kasayoshi turtle fierce, eight hundred years of falling into the river."

古文：谢灵运取甓诣京，咸传观焉。
现代文：谢灵运把砖拿到京城，让大家传观。
English: Xie Lingyun brought the bricks to the capital and let everyone watch.

古文：乃如龟繇，故知冢已八百年矣。
现代文：从这首龟谚中可知，这座古墓已有八百年了。
English: According to this turtle proverb, this ancient tomb is eight hundred years old.

古文：亦云：禹与诸侯会事讫，因相虞乐，故曰上虞。
现代文：浦阳江又东北流经过始宁县西，此境原是上虞的南乡，汉顺帝永建四年乐，所以称为上虞。
English: The Poyang River also flows in a northeasterly direction through the west of Shining County. This area used to be the southern township of Shangyu. Emperor Han Shun built it for four years, so it was called Shangyu.

古文：二说不同，未详孰是？
现代文：两种说法不同，不知谁是谁非。
English: The two statements are different, I don't know who is right and who is wrong.

古文：县南有兰风山，山少木多石，驿路带山；傍江路边皆作栏干。
现代文：上虞南有兰风山，其山岩石裸露而少树木。有释路沿山筑于江边。路旁都有栏干。
English: In the south of Shangyu, there is Lanfeng Mountain, whose mountain rocks are bare and there are few trees. There is a road built along the mountain along the river. There are railings along the road.

古文：山有三岭，枕带长江，苕苕孤危，望之若倾。
现代文：有山岭三座，孤峰高耸在漫长的江流之上。
English: There are three mountains, lonely peaks towering above the long river.

古文：缘山之路，下临大川，皆作飞阁栏干，乘之而渡，谓此三岭为三石头。丹阳葛洪遁世居之，基井存焉。
现代文：看去仿佛要倒下来似的。沿山道路之下就是大江，所以沿途都建有用栏干护围的阁道，才能通过这条道路。上面所说的山岭，入们称为三石头，丹阳的葛洪，避世在此隐居，他用过的井仍然存在。
English: It looked as if it was about to fall down. Under the mountain road was the big river, so there were guardrails along the way to pass through this road. The mountains mentioned above are called the three stones. Danyang's Ge Hong lived in seclusion here, and the well he used still exists.

古文：琅邪王方平性好山水，又爱宅兰风，垂钓于此，以永终朝。
现代文：琅邪入王方平，性情喜欢山水，在兰风建立住宅，在这里垂钓，以度一生。
English: Fangping, the king of evil, loves the landscape, builds a house in Lanfeng, and fishes here to spend his life.

古文：行者过之，不识，问曰：卖鱼师，得鱼卖否？
现代文：过路入不认识他，问他说：卖鱼佬，有没有鱼出卖？
English: A passer-by did not recognize him and asked him, "Fishmonger, do you sell fish?"

古文：方平答曰：钓亦不得，得复不卖。
现代文：方平说：我没有钓到鱼，钓到了也不卖。
English: Fang Ping said, "I didn't catch any fish, and if I did, I wouldn't sell it.

古文：亦谓是水为上虞江。县之东郭外有渔浦湖，中有大独、小独二山。又有覆舟山。
现代文：这条河流也叫上虞江，在县东郭外有一个叫做渔浦的湖，湖中有大独山和小独山二座山，还有一座复舟山。
English: This river is also called the Shangyu River. There is a lake called Yuura outside the county's Dongguo District. There are two mountains in the lake, the Dudusan and the Xiaodusan, as well as the Fuzhou Mountain.

古文：覆舟山下有渔浦王庙，庙今移入里山。
现代文：复舟山下有渔浦王庙，此庙现在已经移到山中。
English: At the foot of Fuzhou Mountain, there is the Yuhuang Temple, which has now been moved to the middle of the mountain.

古文：此三山孤立水中。猢外有青山、黄山、泽兰山，重岫叠岭，参差入云。
现代文：这三座山，孤立在湖水之中，湖以外有青山、黄山、泽兰山，山岳重迭，一座又一座地高入云天。
English: These three mountains are isolated in the middle of the lake. Outside the lake, there are Qingshan, Huangshan, and Zeeland Mountains. The mountains overlap and rise into the sky one after another.

古文：泽兰山头有深潭，山影临水，水色青绿。
现代文：泽兰山上有一个深潭，山峰倒影在深绿色的潭水之中。
English: On the Zeeland mountain there is a deep pool, the mountain peaks are reflected in the dark green water.

古文：山中有诸坞，有石健一所，右临白马潭。
现代文：山中有诸坞，并有石闸一所。右边是白马潭，潭极深无底。
English: There are docks in the mountains and a stone gate. On the right is Baima Lake, which is extremely deep and bottomless.

古文：潭之深无底，传云创湖之始，边塘屡崩，百姓以白马祭之，因以名水。
现代文：传说，此湖创立之初，湖塘多次崩塌，百姓用白马祭祀，所以得名。
English: According to legend, at the beginning of the creation of this lake, the lake collapsed many times, and the people used white horses to make sacrifices, hence the name.

古文：湖之南，即江津也。江南有上塘、阳中二里。隔在湖南，常有水患。
现代文：湖的南面，即是江的渡口，江以南，有上塘、阳中二里，分隔在湖南，常常发生水灾。
English: On the south side of the lake, that is, the crossing of the river, south of the river, there are Shangtang, Yangzhong two miles, separated in Hunan, floods often occur.

古文：太守孔灵符遏蜂山前湖以为埭。埭下开渎，直指南津。
现代文：太守孔灵符，在蜂山前湖修棣拦水，棣以下开渠，直到南津。
English: Tai Shou Kong Lingfu, in Heshan Qian Lake, built a dam to block the water, and opened a canal below the dam, up to Nanjin.

古文：又作水楗二所以舍，此江得无淹溃之害。
现代文：又建水闸二所，此江从此没有溃决淹没的灾害。
English: Two more sluices were built, and the river has never been flooded since.

古文：县东有龙头山，山崖之间有石井，冬夏常冽清泉，南带长江，东连上陂。
现代文：县的东面有一座龙头山，山崖之间有一口石井，不论冬夏，井内都有清泉，南面是漫长的江流，东面连接高处的破湖。
English: In the east of the county, there is a Longtou Mountain, and between the mountain cliffs, there is a stone well. Regardless of winter or summer, there are clear springs in the well. To the south, there is a long river, and to the east, there is a broken lake.

古文：江之道南有《曹娥碑》。
现代文：沿江的路南有《曹娥碑》。
English: South of the road along the river, there is the "Cao E Monument."

古文：娥父旴，迎涛溺死，娥时年十四，哀父尸不得，乃号踊江介，因解衣投水，祝曰：若值父尸，衣当沉。若不值，衣当浮。
现代文：曹娥的父亲曹吁，在江中迎潮而溺死，当时曹娥还只有十四岁，因为找不到父亲的尸体而哀伤欲绝，在江岸上号哭奔走，并解衣投入水中，祝祷说：假使父亲尸体在此，衣就下沉；若不在此，衣就浮在水面。
English: Cao Wu, the father of Cao E, drowned in the river at high tide. At that time, Cao E was only 14 years old. Distraught because she could not find her father's body, she ran crying on the riverbank, undressed and threw herself into the water, praying: "If my father's body is here, my clothes will sink; if it is not here, my clothes will float on the surface of the water."

古文：裁落便沉，娥遂于沉处赴水而死。
现代文：她把衣投入水中，衣服立刻下沉，曹娥就在这里投水而死。
English: She threw her clothes into the water, and they immediately sank. Cao'e died from the water.

古文：县令度尚，使外甥邯郸子礼为碑文，以彰孝烈。
现代文：县令度尚，叫他的外甥邯郸子礼撰写碑文，以表彰她的孝烈。
English: Du Shang, the county magistrate, asked his nephew Zou Zili to write an inscription to commend her filial piety.

古文：江滨有马目山，洪涛一上，波隐是山，势沦嵊亭，间历数县，行者难之。
现代文：此江边上有马目山，江潮到来之时，波涛把此山隐没在江中，其势甚至要把嗓亭也吞没，而且涉及数县，使行旅之入十分困难。
English: At the time of the arrival of the river tide, the waves have hidden this mountain in the river, and its potential is even to swallow the throat, and it involves several counties, making it very difficult to travel.

古文：县东北上，亦有孝子杨威母墓。
现代文：县的东北有一位孝子杨威母亲的坟墓。
English: In the northeast of the county, there is a grave of Yang Wei's mother, a filial son.

古文：威少失父，事母至孝，常与母入山采薪，为虎所逼，自计不能御，于是抱母，且号且行，虎见其情，遂弭耳而去。
现代文：杨威年幼丧父，事奉母亲极孝。常常和母亲到山中采柴，有一次遇着老虎追赶，杨威自己知道无力抵抗，背了母亲一，一边哭，一边逃。老虎见到送种情况，就垂着耳朵顾自走了。
English: Yang Wei lost his father at a young age, and he was very filial to his mother. He often went with his mother to the mountains to collect firewood. Once, when he was chased by a tiger, Yang Wei knew that he was powerless to resist. He carried his mother on his back, crying and running away. When the tiger saw the situation of sending seeds, he lowered his ears and walked away.

古文：自非诚贯精微，孰能理感于英兽矣。
现代文：假使不是至诚之心深入精微，哪能使兽类也受感动呢？
English: Were it not for the depth and subtlety of the heart of sincerity, how could animals be moved?

古文：又有吴渎，破山导源，注于肯江。
现代文：又有一条吴读，从山中发源注入青江。
English: There is also a Wu reading, from the source of the mountain into the Qingjiang.

古文：上虞江东径周市而注永兴。
现代文：上虞江向东经过周市而注入永兴。
English: The Shangyu River flows eastward through Zhou and flows into Yongxing.

古文：《地理志》云：县有仇亭，柯水东入海。
现代文：《地理志》说：县境有仇亭，柯水东入海。
English: "Geography" said: the county border has a vendetta, Ke water east into the sea.

古文：仇亭在县之东北十里江北，柯水疑即江也。
现代文：仇亭在县东北十里，江北的柯水或许就是上虞江。
English: Qiu Ting is ten miles to the northeast of the county, and the Ke Shui in the north of the river may be the Shangyu River.

古文：又东北径永兴县东与浙江合，谓之浦阳江。
现代文：又东北经过永兴县东和浙江会合，称为浦阳江。
English: It also runs northeast through the junction of Yongxing County East and Zhejiang, and is known as the Poyang River.

古文：《地理志》又云：县有萧山，潘水所出，东入海。
现代文：《地理志》说：县有萧山，潘水所出，东入海。
English: "Geography" said: Xiaoshan is in the county, Pan Shui originates in the east and flows into the sea.

古文：又疑是浦阳江之别名也，自外无水以应之。
现代文：潘水或许是浦阳江的别名。因为另外就没有河流可以相当了。
English: Pan Shui may be another name for the Poyang River, because there is no other river that can match it.

古文：浙江又东注于海。
现代文：浙江又东流注入海中。
English: Zhejiang also injected the east current into the sea.

古文：故《山海经》曰：浙江在闽西北入海。
现代文：所以《山海经》说：浙江在闽西北入海。
English: Therefore, the "Mountain and Sea Classic" said: Zhejiang entered the sea in the northwest of Yunnan.

古文：韦昭以松江、浙江、浦阳江为三江。
现代文：韦昭把松江、浙江、浦阳江称为三江。
English: Wei Zhao referred to the Songjiang, Zhejiang, and Poyang Rivers as the three rivers.

古文：斤江水出交阯龙编县，东北至郁林领方县，东注于郁。
现代文：斤江水发源于交趾郡龙编县，东北到郁林郡领方县，东流注入郁水。
English: The water of the Jianjiang River originates in Longquan County, Jiaozi County, and flows northeast to Lianfang County, Yulin County. The eastern stream is injected into Yulshui.

古文：《地理志》云：径临尘县至领方县，注于郁。
现代文：《地理志》说：经过临尘县，到领方县，注入郁水。
English: "Geography" said: after passing through Linfen County, to Lianfang County, and injecting stagnant water.

古文：容容、夜、湛、乘、牛渚、须无、无濡、营进、皇无、地零、侵离、侵离水出广州晋兴郡，郡以太康中分郁林置。东至临尘，入郁。
现代文：容容水，夜水，缅水，湛水，乘水，牛者水，须无水，无濡水，营进水，皇无水，地零水，侵离水，侵离水发源于广州晋兴郡，此郡是晋太康年代一从郁林郡分置的，东流到临尘县注入郁水。
English: Permissible water, night water, Burmese water, high water, riding water, cowherd's water, must water, no wet water, camp water, imperial water, ground water, encroaching water, encroaching water originated in Jinxing County, Guangzhou. This county was first separated from Yulin County in the Jin Taikang era, and the east flow injected Yulin water into Linfen County.

古文：无会、重濑、夫省、无变、由蒲、王都、融、勇外，此皆出日南郡西，东入于海。
现代文：无会水，重獭水，夫省水，无变水，由蒲水，王都水，融水，勇外水，上列各水，均发源于日南郡西，东流入海。
English: Non-meeting water, heavy water, husband-saving water, unchanging water, by water, Wangdu water, melt water, Yongwai water, the above water, all originated in the west of Nichinan County and flowed into the sea in the east.

古文：容容水在南垂，名之，以次转北也。
现代文：容容水在南部边疆，其余各水均按次排列于此水之北。
English: The containment waters are on the southern border, and the remaining waters are sequentially north of this water.

古文：右二十水，从江已南至日南郡也。
现代文：上列二十水，位于江以南到日南郡。
English: The 20 waters listed above are located from south of the river to Nichinan County.

古文：嵩高为中岳，在颖川阳城县西北。
现代文：嵩高是中岳，位于颖川郡阳城县西北；
English: The highest peak is Zhongyue, located in the northwest of Yangcheng County, Yingchuan County;

古文：《春秋说题辞》曰：阴含阳，故石凝为山。
现代文：《春秋说题辞》说，阴中含阳，所以岩石凝结成山。
English: "Spring and Autumn Saying Inscription" says that the yin contains the yang, so the rocks condense into mountains.

古文：《国语》曰：禹封九山，山，土之聚也。
现代文：《国语》说，禹封九山，土聚集起来，称为山。
English: "Kokugo" says that there are nine mountains in Yufeng, and when the soil gathers, it is called a mountain.

古文：《尔雅》曰：山大而高曰崧。
现代文：《尔雅》说：大而高的山称为篙，合起来称为篙高，分开来称为二室。
English: "Er Ya" said: The large and high mountain is called the cormorant, and together they are called the cormorant high, and separately they are called the two rooms.

古文：合而言之为崧高，分而名之为二室，西南有少室，东北有太室。
现代文：西南有少室，东北有太室。
English: There is a small chamber in the southwest and a large chamber in the northeast.

古文：《嵩高山记》曰：山下岩中有一石室，云有自然经书，自然饮食。
现代文：《篙高山记》说：山下岩石中有一所石室，据说里面有自然形成的经书，有自然形成的饮食。
English: "The Tale of Gaoshan" says: There is a stone room in the rock under the mountain. It is said that there are naturally formed scriptures and naturally formed food inside.

古文：又云：山有玉女台，言汉武帝尝见之，因以名台。
现代文：又说：山中有玉女台，汉武帝见过，所以称为玉女台。
English: He also said: There is the Jade Maiden Pagoda in the mountains, Emperor Hanwu has seen it, so it is called the Jade Maiden Pagoda.

古文：泰山为东岳，在泰山博县西北。
现代文：泰山是东岳，位于泰山郡博县西北；
English: Mount Tai is Dongyue, located in the northwest of Bo County, Taishan County;

古文：岱宗也。王者封禅于其山，示增高也。
现代文：五岳中的正宗，帝王在此山封禅，以增高其地位。
English: As the authentic sect of the Five Sacred Mountains, emperors practiced Zen on this mountain to enhance their status.

古文：有金策玉检之事焉。
现代文：这里有金的书册和玉的印章。
English: There is a gold book and a jade seal.

古文：霍山为南岳，在庐江灊县西南。
现代文：霍山是南岳，位于庐江郡瀚县西南。
English: Huoshan is the southern peak, located in the southwest of Han County, Minjiang County.

古文：天柱山也。
现代文：霍山就是天柱山。
English: Huoshan is Tianzhu Mountain.

古文：《尔雅》云：大山宫，小山为霍，《开山图》曰：其山上侵神气，下固穷泉。
现代文：《尔雅》说：大山称为宫，小山称为霍。《开山图》说：此山上通神明，下达地府。
English: "Lya" said: The big mountain is called Gong, the small mountain is called Huo. "Kaishangtu" said: This mountain is connected to the gods, and it is ruled by the local government.

古文：华山为西岳，在弘农华阴县西南。
现代文：华山是西岳，位于弘农郡华阴县西南；
English: Huashan is Xidake, located in the southwest of Huayin County, Hongnong County;

古文：《古文》之惇物山也。
现代文：华山就是《古文尚书》中的悼物山。
English: Huashan is the "mourning mountain" in the "Ancient Texts."

古文：雷首山在河东蒲坂县东南。
现代文：雷首山位于河东郡蒲坂县东南；
English: Lei Shou Mountain is located in the southeast of Busaka County, Hedong County;

古文：砥柱山在河东大阳县东河中。
现代文：砒柱山位于河东郡大阳县东的黄河中；
English: Shizhu Mountain is located in the middle of the Yellow River in the east of Dayang County, Hedong County;

古文：王屋山在河东垣县东北也。
现代文：王屋山位于河东郡垣县东北；
English: Wangyashan is located in the northeast of Gaki County, Hedong County;

古文：昔黄帝受丹诀于是山也。大行山在河内野王县西北。
现代文：从前黄帝在此山接受丹诀。太行山位于河内郡野王县西北；
English: Once upon a time, the Yellow Emperor received the Tan Recipe on this mountain. Taihang Mountain is located in the northwest of Nio County, Hanoi County;

古文：王烈得石髓处也。
现代文：这是王烈获得石髓的地方。
English: This is where Wang Lie obtained the stone pith.

古文：恒山为北岳，在中山上曲阳县西北。
现代文：恒山是北岳，位于中山郡上曲阳县西北；
English: Hengshan is Beidake, located in the northwest of Shangquyang County, Zhongshan County;

古文：碣石山在辽西临渝县南水中也。
现代文：碣石山位于辽西郡临渝县南的海水之中；
English: Shishishan is located in the middle of the sea water in the south of Linwu County, Liaoxi County;

古文：大禹凿其石，夹右而纳河，秦始皇、汉武帝皆尝登之。
现代文：大禹开凿此石，阻其右侧而接纳河水。秦始皇和汉武帝都曾经登临。
English: Dayu chiseled this stone, blocking its right side and receiving river water. Qin Shihuang and Han Emperor Wu have both visited it.

古文：海水西侵，岁月逾甚，而苞其山，故言水中矣。
现代文：海水向西侵入，长期以后而全山沦入海中，所以说山在海中。
English: The seawater intrudes to the west, and after a long time the whole mountain falls into the sea, so it is said that the mountain is in the sea.

古文：析城山在河东濩泽县西南。
现代文：析城山位于河东郡菠泽县西南；
English: Jingcheng Mountain is located in the southwest of Spinazhe County, Hedong County;

古文：大岳山在河东永安县。
现代文：太岳山位于河东郡永安县；
English: Mount Taiyue is located in Yong'an County, Hedong County;

古文：壶口山在河东北屈县东南。
现代文：壶口山位于河东郡北屈县东南；
English: Mount Hukou is located in the southeast of Beigu County, Hedong County;

古文：龙门山在河东皮氏县西。
现代文：龙门山位于河东郡皮氏县西；
English: Longmen Mountain is located in the west of Pishi County, Hedong County;

古文：梁山在冯翊夏阳县西北河上。
现代文：梁山位于冯朔郡夏阳县西北的黄河之上；
English: Liangshan is located on the Yellow River in the northwest of Xiayang County, Fengshuo County;

古文：荆山在冯翊怀德县南。
现代文：荆山位于冯翔郡怀德县南；
English: Jingshan is located in the south of Huai De County, Fengxiang County;

古文：岐山在扶风美阳县西北。
现代文：岐山位于扶风郡美阳县西北；
English: Qishan is located in the northwest of Miyang County, Fufeng County;

古文：汧山在扶风汧县之西也。
现代文：汧山位于扶风郡济县以西；
English: Lushan is located in the west of Ji County, Fufeng County;

古文：陇山、终南山、惇物山在扶风武功县西南也。
现代文：陇山、终南山、悖物山，位于扶风郡武功县西南；
English: Lushan, Zennanshan and Paramoshan are the best, located in the southwest of Wugong County, Fufeng County;

古文：西倾山在陇西临洮县西南。
现代文：西倾山位于陇西郡临挑县西南；
English: Xiling Mountain is located in the southwest of Linqi County, Shaanxi County;

古文：《禹贡》中条山也。
现代文：西倾山就是《禹贡》的中条山。
English: Xiling Mountain is the Zhongjia Mountain in "Yugong."

古文：冢山在陇西氐道县之南。
现代文：蟠家山位于陇西郡氏道县以南；
English: Qijia Mountain is located in the south of Shidao County, Shaanxi County;

古文：南条山也。
现代文：蟠家山就是南条山。
English: Shanjia Mountain is Nanjia Mountain.

古文：鸟鼠同穴山在陇西首阳县西南。
现代文：鸟鼠同穴山位于陇西郡首阳县西南；
English: Tonganshan is located in the southwest of Shouyang County, Shaanxi County;

古文：郑玄曰：鸟鼠之山有鸟焉，与鸟飞行而处之。又有止而同穴之山焉，是二山也。
现代文：郑玄说：鸟鼠之山有鸟，与鼠共同飞行。它们共同居住之处则是同穴之山，这是两座山。
English: Zheng Xuan said: "In the mountain of birds and mice, there are birds and mice flying together. The place where they live together is the mountain of the same hole, which is two mountains.

古文：鸟名为，似鸡而黄黑色，鼠如家鼠而短尾，穿地而共处，鼠内而鸟外。
现代文：鸟的名称叫鸵，和鹏相像而颜色黄黑，鼠像家鼠而尾巴短，它们穿地共居，鼠在内而鸟在外。
English: The bird's name is quail. It looks like a peng and has a yellow-black color. The rat looks like a house mouse but has a short tail. They live together through the ground. The rat is inside and the bird is outside.

古文：孔安国曰：共为雌雄。
现代文：孔安国说：雌雄共居。
English: Kong An Guo said: The male and female live together.

古文：杜彦达曰：同穴止宿，养子互相哺食，长大乃止。
现代文：杜彦达说：同穴居住，产养以后就互相哺育，长大后才中止。
English: Du Yanda said: living in the same hole, feeding each other after rearing, and only stopping when they grow up.

古文：张晏言不相为牝牡，故因以名山。
现代文：张晏说：雌雄不相混杂，所以称此山为鸟鼠同穴山。
English: Zhang Zhe said: the male and female are not mixed, so this mountain is called the mountain of birds and mice.

古文：积石在陇西河关县西南。
现代文：积石山位于陇西郡河关县西南；
English: Jishishan is located in the southwest of Heguan County, Shaanxi County;

古文：《山海经》云：山在邓林东，河所入也。
现代文：《山海经》说：此山在邓林以东，是黄河流入的地方。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" says: This mountain is east of Dunlin and is the place where the Yellow River enters.

古文：都野泽在武威县东北。
现代文：都野泽位于武威县东北。
English: Tonosawa is located in the northeast of Wuwei County.

古文：县在姑臧城北三百里，东北即休屠泽也，《古文》以为猪野也。
现代文：武威县在姑减城北三百里，其东北就是休屠泽，《古文尚书》称为猪野。
English: Wuwei County is three hundred miles north of Guzhen City, and its northeast is Xiu Tu Ze, which is called Ino in the "Ancient Texts."

古文：其水上承姑臧武始泽，泽水二源，东北流为一水，径姑臧县故城西，东北流，水侧有灵渊池。
现代文：此水上流接姑减武始泽，泽水有两个源头，向东北流合成一条河流，经过姑藏县旧城以西向东北流，水边有一个灵渊池。
English: This upstream stream connects with the Gwuzhimushi Lake. The lake water has two sources and flows to the northeast to form a river. It flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Ghuzang County, and there is a Lingyuan Pool at the water's edge.

古文：王隐《晋书》曰：汉末，博士燉煌侯瑾，善内学，语弟子曰：凉州城西，泉水当竭，有双阙起其上。
现代文：王隐《晋书》说：汉朝末年，敦煌入博士侯瑾善于佛学，他对其弟子说，凉州城以西的泉水行将枯竭，当有双网在此处兴建。
English: Wang Yin's "Jin Shu" said: At the end of the Han Dynasty, Hou Yi, a doctor of Dunhuang, was good at Buddhism. He said to his disciples that the spring water west of Liangzhou City would be exhausted, and a double net should be built here.

古文：至魏嘉平中，武威太守条茂，起学舍，筑阙于此泉。太守填水，造起门楼，与学阙相望。
现代文：到了魏嘉平年代，武威太守条茂在此兴建学校房舍，在此泉上修筑双网，太守把泉水填平，造起门楼，和学校房舍及双网相对。
English: In Wei Jiaping's time, Wuwei Taizhong Jiao Mao built a school building here, and built a double net on this spring. The Taizhong filled the spring water and built a gate tower, opposite the school building and the double net.

古文：泉源徙发，重导于斯，故有灵渊之名也。
现代文：泉水的源头迁移到此重发，所以有灵渊这个名称。
English: The source of the spring water migrated to this reissue, hence the name Lingyuan.

古文：泽水又东北流径马城东，城即休屠县之故城也。本匈奴休屠王都。
现代文：泽水又东北流经过马城以东，这就是休屠县的旧城，是原来匈奴休屠王的都城。
English: The north-east stream of the Ze River flows east of Ma Cheng. This is the old city of Xiu Tuo County, the former capital of the Xiongnu King Xiu Tuo.

古文：谓之马城河，又东北与横水合，水出姑臧城下，武威郡，凉州治。
现代文：泽水到此称为马城河。又东北流与横水会合，横水发源于姑减城下，姑减城是武威郡治和凉州州治。
English: At this point, the lake water is known as the Macheng River, and the Northeast Stream meets the lateral water. The lateral water originates from under the city of Guzheng, which is the county seat of Wuwei and the prefecture seat of Liangzhou.

古文：《地理风俗记》曰：汉武帝元朔三年，改雍曰凉州，以其金行，土地寒凉故也。
现代文：《地理风俗纪》说：汉武帝元朔三年前，把雍州改成凉州，因其五行属金，而土地寒凉的缘故。
English: "The History of Geography and Customs" says: Three years before Emperor Hanwu ascended the throne, he changed Yongzhou into Liangzhou, because its five elements are gold and the land is cold.

古文：迁于冀，晋徙治此。
现代文：州治迁到冀，晋朝又把州治迁到这里。
English: The prefectural government was moved to Ji Province, and the Jin Dynasty moved the prefectural government to Wuxi.

古文：王隐《晋书》曰：凉州有龙形，故曰卧龙城。南北七里，东西三里，本匈奴所筑也。
现代文：王隐《晋书》说，凉州形状像龙，所以叫做卧龙城，此城南北七里，东西三里，原是匈奴所修筑的。
English: Wang Yin "Jin Shu" said that Liangzhou is shaped like a dragon, so it is called Wolong City. This city is seven miles north and south, three miles east and west, and was originally built by the Xiongnu.

古文：及张氏之世居也，又增筑四城，箱各千步，东城殖园果，命曰讲武场，北城殖园果，命曰玄武圃，皆有宫殿。
现代文：等到张氏到这里世居，又增筑了各为一千步的四个城箱，东城种植果树，名为讲武场；北城种植果树，称为玄武圃，两处都有宫殿。
English: By the time the Zhang family came to live here, they had built four additional city boxes, each with a thousand steps. Fruit trees were planted in the east city, which was called the battlefield; fruit trees were planted in the north city, which was called the battlefield. There were palaces in both places.

古文：中城内作四时宫，随节游幸，并旧城为五。
现代文：中城内修建了一所四时宫，按时按节地供其游赏。
English: A four-hour palace has been built in the middle of the city, which is open to the public on a regular basis.

古文：街衢相通，二十二门。
现代文：把旧城并成五区，二十二门，大街小巷互相沟通。 
English: The old city will be consolidated into five districts, 22 gates, and the streets and alleys will communicate with each other.

古文：大缮官殿观阁，采绮妆饰，拟中夏也。
现代文：宫殿楼阁，大加修缮，妆饰得五彩缤纷，和京城皇宫比美。
English: The palace pavilion, extensively renovated and decorated with colorful decorations, is more beautiful than the imperial palace in Beijing.

古文：其水侧城北流，注马城河。
现代文：此水从城侧北流，注入马城河。
English: This water flows from the north side of the city and flows into the Macheng River.

古文：河水又东北，清涧水入焉，俗亦谓之为五涧水也。水出姑臧城东，而西北流注马城河。
现代文：马城河又东北流，与清涧河会合，世俗也称它为五涧水，发源于姑减城东，西北流注入马城河。
English: The Macheng River also flows to the northeast, meeting with the Qingyao River. The world also calls it the Wuzhishui River. It originates in the east of the city, and the northwest flows into the Macheng River.

古文：河水又与长泉水合，水出姑臧东揟次县，王莽之播德也。
现代文：马城河又与长泉水会合，长泉水发源于姑减城东的婿次县，就是王莽的播德县，西北流经过黄沙阜，再东北流注入马城河。
English: The Macheng River also joins with the Changquan River. The Changquan River originates from the eastern part of Guizhicheng, Zongzi County, which is also the eastern part of Wangmanzhi, Bende County. The northwest flow passes through Huangshafu, and then the northeast flow flows into the Macheng River.

古文：西北历黄沙阜，而东北流注马城河，又东北径宣成县故城南，又东北径平泽、晏然二亭东，又东北径武威县故城东。汉武帝太初四年，匈奴浑邪玉杀休屠王，以其众置武威县，武威郡治。王莽更名张掖。
现代文：马城河又东北流经过宣威县旧城南，又东北流经过平泽、晏然二亭以东，又东北流经过武威县旧城以东。汉武帝太初四年前，匈奴的浑邪王杀掉了休屠王，他的士民众入就建置了武威县，是武威郡的郡治，王莽改名为张掖。
English: The northeast flow of the Macheng River also passes through the south of the old city of Xuanwei County, the northeast flow passes through the east of the two pavilions of Pyeongtaek and Yongran, and the northeast flow passes through the east of the old city of Wuwei County. Four years before the beginning of the Han Dynasty, the Hun King killed King Xiu Tu, and his soldiers and people built Wuwei County, which is the county seat of Wuwei County. Wang Mang changed his name to Zhang Ye.

古文：《地理志》曰：谷水出姑臧南山，北至武威入海。
现代文：《地理志》说，谷水发源于姑减南山，北到武威注入海中。
English: "Geography" says that the valley water originates from the Nanshan in Guzhen and flows into the sea as far north as Wuwei.

古文：届此水流两分，一水北入休屠泽，俗谓之为西海；一水又东径百五十里入猪野，世谓之东海，通谓之都野矣。
现代文：到了这里，河流分成两条，一条北流注入休屠泽，通常叫做西海；一条又东流一百五十里，注入猪野，通常称为东海，一般也称为都野。
English: At this point, the river splits into two, with a northern stream flowing into Xiu Tu Ze, usually called the West Sea, and another flowing 150 miles east, into Ino, usually called the East Sea, and generally known as Tono.

古文：合离山在酒泉会水县东北。
现代文：合离山位于酒泉郡会水县东北。
English: Hailiangshan is located in the northeast of Heishui County, Jiuquan County.

古文：合黎山也。
现代文：合离山就是合黎山。
English: Hailiangshan is also known as Hailishan.

古文：流沙地在张掖居延县东北。
现代文：流沙地在张掖郡居延县东北；
English: The quicksand area is in the northeast of Juyan County, Zhangye County;

古文：居延泽在其县故城东北，《尚书》所谓流沙者也，形如月生五日也。
现代文：居延泽在居延县旧城东北，即《尚书》所称的流沙。其形状像五日的新月。
English: Juyan Ze is in the northeast of the old city of Juyan County, that is, the "Shang Shu" called the quicksand. Its shape is like the crescent of the fifth day.

古文：弱水入流沙，流沙，沙与水流行也。
现代文：弱水注入流沙。所谓流沙，就是河流与沙一起漫流。
English: Weak water injects quicksand. The so-called quicksand is the river flowing with sand.

古文：亦言出钟山，西行极崦嵫之山，在西海郡北。
现代文：也有说流沙发源于钟山的，西流远达西海郡以北的腌峨之山。
English: It is also said that the flow of the sofa originates from Zhongshan, and the westward flow reaches as far as the mountains north of Xihai County.

古文：山有石赤白色，以两石相打，则水润。
现代文：山上有红色和白色的石头，用两石互相打击，石上就生水而润滑。
English: There are red and white stones on the mountain. The two stones are used to hit each other, and the water is used to lubricate the stone.

古文：打之不已，润尽则火出，山石皆然，炎起数丈，径日不灭。
现代文：若继续不断打击，水干以后就发火，山上的石头都烧起来，火势高达数丈，整日不灭，并发生大黑风。
English: If the continuous attacks continue, after the water dries, it will ignite, the stones on the mountain will be burned, the fire will be several meters high, it will not be extinguished for the whole day, and a strong black wind will occur.

古文：有大黑风，自流沙出奄之，乃灭，其石如初。
现代文：要用流沙之水才能淹灭，石头就恢复原状。
English: It takes quicksand to drown it, and the stone returns to its original shape.

古文：言动火之事，发疾经年，放不敢轻近耳。
现代文：对于此山发火的事情，因为发生很快，而且常年不熄，所以不敢轻易接近它。
English: For the things that make this mountain angry, because they happen quickly and do not go out all year round, so do not dare to approach it easily.

古文：流沙又径浮渚，历壑市之国，又径于鸟山之东，朝云国西，历昆山西南，出于过瀛之山。
现代文：流沙又经过浮诸和壑市之国，又经过鸟山以东、朝云国以西，经过昆山西南，从过流之山流出来。
English: The drifting sands also flowed through the country of Hotan City, passed through the east of Bird Mountain, the west of Morning Cloud Country, and the southwest of Kunshan, and flowed out of the mountain of the overflow.

古文：《大荒西经》云：西南海之外，流沙出焉，径夏后开之东，开上三嫔于天，得《九辩》与《九歌》焉。
现代文：《大荒西经》说：流沙从西南海外出来，经过夏后开以东。夏后开将三个美女献给天帝，获得了《九辩》和《九歌》。
English: "The Great Wild West Classic" says: Quicksand came from the southwest overseas, passing through Xiao Houkai to the east. Xiao Houkai dedicated three beautiful women to the Heavenly Emperor, and obtained "Nine Debates" and "Nine Songs."

古文：又历员丘不死山之西，入于南海。
现代文：流沙又经过员丘不死山，注入南海。
English: The shifting sands also flowed past Mount Fuwa and into the South China Sea.

古文：三危山在燉煌县南。
现代文：三危山在敦煌县南；
English: Sanxia Mountain in the south of Dunhuang County;

古文：《山海经》曰：三危之山，三青鸟居之。
现代文：《山海经》说：三危之山，有三只青鸟住在那里。
English: "The Classic of Mountains and Seas" says: Three bluebirds live in the Three Dangers Mountain.

古文：是山也，广圆百里，在鸟鼠山西，即《尚书》所谓窜三苗于三危也。
现代文：这座山，在鸟鼠山以西，广圆达百里。《尚书》所说的把三苗放逐到三危，就是此山。
English: This mountain, in the west of the Bird and Mouse Mountain, has a wide circumference of one hundred miles. "Shang Shu" said that the three seedlings were banished to the three dangers, which is this mountain.

古文：《春秋传》曰：允姓之奸，居于瓜州。
现代文：《春秋传》说：有允姓的奸邪之入，居住在瓜州。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" says: There is a villain with the surname of Yun, who lives in Guazhou.

古文：瓜州，地名也。杜林曰：燉煌，古瓜州也。
现代文：瓜州是地名，杜林说：古时的瓜州就是敦煌。
English: Guazhou is a place name, Du Lin said: Guazhou in ancient times was Dunhuang.

古文：州之贡物，地出好瓜，民因氏之。
现代文：瓜州的土地出好瓜，是这里的贡物，所以入们称这里为瓜州。
English: The land of Guazhou produces good melons, which are a tribute here, so the natives call this place Guazhou.

古文：瓜州之戎并于月氏者也。
现代文：瓜州之戎，为月氏所并，也就是这个瓜州。
English: Guazhou's eunuch, for the moon's merger, that is, this Guazhou.

古文：汉武帝元鼎六年，分酒泉置，南七里有鸣沙山，故亦曰沙州也。
现代文：汉武帝元鼎六年前，分出酒泉县的地方置这个县。县南七里有鸣沙山，所以也叫沙州。
English: Six years before Emperor Hanwu's enthronement, Jiuquan County was set up in this county. There are seven Ming Sha mountains in the south of the county, so it is also called Shazhou.

古文：朱圉山在天水北，冀城南。
现代文：朱圉山位于天水北、冀城南；
English: Zhuye Mountain is located in the north of Tianshui and the south of Jicheng;

古文：即冀县山，有石鼓，《开山图》谓之天鼓山。
现代文：朱圉山就是冀县山，山上有石鼓，所以《开山图》称它天鼓山。
English: Zhuye Mountain is a mountain in Jixian County, and there is a stone drum on the mountain, so "Kaishan Map" calls it Tiangu Mountain.

古文：九州害起则鸣，有常应。
现代文：中国有灾祸时石鼓就鸣，常常得到应验。
English: When there is a calamity in China, the stone drum will sound, and it is often fulfilled.

古文：又云：石鼓山有石鼓，于星为河鼓，星动则石鼓鸣，石鼓鸣则秦土有殃。
现代文：又说：石鼓山有石鼓，与星宿对应，星宿动的时候石鼓就鸣，石鼓鸣的时候中国就有灾殃。
English: He also said: the stone drum mountain has a stone drum, corresponding to the star. When the star moves, the stone drum will sound. When the stone drum sounds, China will be plagued.

古文：鸣浅殃万物，鸣深则殃君王矣。
现代文：石鼓鸣声轻，灾殃及于万物；石鼓鸣声重，灾殃及于君主。
English: The light sound of the stone drum brings disaster to all things; the heavy sound of the stone drum brings disaster to the monarch.

古文：岷山在蜀郡湔氐道西。
现代文：眠山位于蜀郡渝氏道西；
English: Mingshan is located in the west of Yu County, Shu County;

古文：《汉书》以为渎山者也。
现代文：就是《汉书》所称的读山。
English: This is what the "Hanshu" calls reading mountains.

古文：熊耳山在弘农卢氏县东。
现代文：熊耳山位于弘农郡卢氏县东；
English: Mount Xiong Er is located in the east of Lu County, Hongnong County;

古文：是山也，谷水出其北林也。
现代文：殷水从此山以北的森林发源。
English: The forest to the north of the mountain is the source of the high water.

古文：荆山在南郡临沮县东北。
现代文：荆山位于南郡临沮县东北；
English: Jingshan is located in the northeast of Linde County, Nan County;

古文：东条山也。卞和得玉璞于是山，楚王不理，怀璧哭于其下，王后使玉人理之，所谓和氏之玉焉。
现代文：荆山就是东条山，卞和在此山得到一块美玉，但楚王不加以琢治，卞和抱着美玉在山下哭。楚王后来叫琢玉的入琢治此玉，称为和氏之玉。
English: Jing Mountain is Dongjia Mountain. Zouhe won a beautiful jade on this mountain, but King Chu did not polish it. Zouhe held the beautiful jade and cried at the bottom of the mountain. King Chu later called the polisher of the jade to polish the jade, which was called the jade of the warlord.

古文：内方山在江夏竟陵县东北。
现代文：内方山位于江夏郡竟陵县东北；
English: Neifangshan is located in the northeast of Jingling County, Jiangxia County;

古文：《禹贡注》：章山也。
现代文：《禹贡注》称为章山。
English: "Yugong Note" is called Zhangshan.

古文：大别山在庐江安丰县西南。
现代文：大别山在庐江郡安丰县西南；
English: Dabie Mountain is located in the southwest of Anfeng County, Lijiang County;

古文：外方山，崧高是也。
现代文：外方山就是篙高；
English: Gaifang Mountain is the highest peak;

古文：桐柏山在南阳平氏县东南。
现代文：桐柏山位于南阳郡平氏县东南；
English: Tongbai Mountain is located in the southeast of Pingxi County, Nanyang County;

古文：陪尾山在江夏安陆县东北。
现代文：陪尾山位于江夏郡安陆县东北；
English: Baio Mountain is located in the northeast of Anlu County, Jiangxia County;

古文：衡山在长沙湘南县南。
现代文：衡山位于长沙郡湘南县南；
English: Hengshan is located in the south of Shonan County, Changsha County;

古文：禹治洪水，血马祭衡山，于是得金简玉字之书。按省玉字，得通水理也。
现代文：禹治理洪水时，杀了马在衡山祭祀，因而得到《金简玉字之书》，对此书进行研究，懂得了治水的道理。
English: When Yu was controlling the flood, he killed a horse in Hengshan sacrificial rite, and thus obtained the "Book of Jin Jian Yu Zi." He studied this book and understood the principle of water control.

古文：九江地在长沙下巂县西北。
现代文：九江位于长沙郡下隽县西北。
English: Jiujiang is located in the northwest of Xiamen County, Changsha County.

古文：云梦泽在南郡华容县之东。
现代文：云梦泽位于南郡华容县东；
English: Yunmenze is located in the east of Huarong County, Nan County;

古文：东陵地在庐江金兰县西北。
现代文：东陵地位于庐江郡金兰县西北；
English: Dongling is located in the northwest of Jinlan County, Minjiang County;

古文：敷浅原地在豫章历陵县西。
现代文：敷浅原位于豫章郡历陵县西；
English: The site of Asahara is located in the west of Liling County, Yuzhang County;

古文：彭蠡泽在豫章彭泽县西北。
现代文：彭鑫泽位于豫章郡彭泽县西北；
English: Peng Xinze is located in the northwest of Pengze County, Yuzhang County;

古文：《尚书》所谓彭蠡既猪，阳鸟攸居也。
现代文：《尚书》所说：彭泽氢已经形成，鸿雁就到这里居住。
English: "Shangshu" said: Pengze Hydrogen has been formed, and wild geese have come to live here.

古文：中江在丹阳芜湖县西南，东至会稽阳羡县，入于海。震泽在吴县南五十里。
现代文：中江位于丹阳郡芜湖县西南，东到会稽郡阳羡县入海；震泽位于吴县南五十里。
English: Zhongjiang River is located in the southwest of Wuhu County, Danyang County, and flows into the sea in the east as far as Yangsen County, Hui County; Zhenze is located 50 miles south of Wu County.

古文：北江在毗陵北界，东入于海。
现代文：北江位于毗陵县北界，东入海；
English: The Beijiang River is located in the northern border of Viling County and flows into the sea in the east;

古文：峄阳山在下邳县之西。羽山在东海祝其县南也。
现代文：峄阳山位于下邪县西；羽山位于东海郡祝其县南；
English: Fenyang Mountain is located in the west of Xiaoyan County; Hasan Mountain is located in the south of Zhuqi County, Donghai County;

古文：县即王莽之犹亭也。
现代文：祝其县，就是王莽的犹亭。
English: Wish its county, that is, Wang Mang's Yu Ting.

古文：《尚书》殛鲧于羽山，谓是山也。
现代文：《尚书》说：鲸在羽山被处死刑，就是此山。
English: "Shoshu" says: The whale was sentenced to death on Mt. Hasan, which is this mountain.

古文：山西有羽渊，禹父之所化，其神为黄熊以入渊矣。
现代文：山的西面有羽渊，是禹的父亲鲸所变化的，他的神是一只黄熊，进入了禹渊。
English: On the west side of the mountain, there is a feathery abyss, which was changed by Yu's father, the whale. His god is a yellow bear, which entered the abyss.

古文：故《山海经》曰：洪水滔天，鲧窃帝之息壤以堙水，不待帝命。帝令祝融杀鲧羽郊者也。
现代文：所以《山海经》说：洪水滔天，鲸不听帝的命令，在帝的土地上筑堤障水，帝命令祝融杀鲸于羽郊。
English: Therefore, the "Song of the Mountains and the Sea" said: the flood was tremendous, the whale did not listen to the emperor's order, built a dike to block the water on the emperor's land, and the emperor ordered Zhu Rong to kill the whale in the outskirts.

古文：陶丘在济阴定陶县之西南。
现代文：陶丘位于济阴郡定陶县西南；
English: Taoqiu is located in the southwest of Dingtao County, Jilin County;

古文：陶丘，丘再成也。
现代文：陶丘是再次形成的丘阜。
English: The ceramic mound is a re-formed mound.

古文：菏泽在定陶县东。
现代文：菏泽位于定陶县东界；
English: Heze is located in the eastern part of Dingtao County;

古文：雷泽在济阴成阳县西北。
现代文：雷泽位于济阴郡成阳县西北；
English: Reze is located in the northwest of Chengyang County, Jilin County;

古文：菏水在山阳湖陆县南。
现代文：菏水位于山阳郡湖陆县南；
English: Surabaya is located in the south of Hulud County, Sanyang County;

古文：蒙山在太山蒙阴县西南。
现代文：蒙山位于太山郡蒙阴县西南；
English: Mengshan is located in the southwest of Mengyin County, Taishan County;

古文：大野泽在山阳巨野县东北。
现代文：大野泽位于山阳郡巨野县东北；
English: Onozawa is located in the northeast of Kono County, Sanyo County;

古文：大邳地在河南成皋县北。
现代文：大邳地位于河南郡成皋县北；
English: Dadun is located in the north of Chengdu County, Henan County;

古文：《尔雅》曰：山一成谓之邳，然则大邳山名，非地之名也。
现代文：《尔雅》说：山一重称为邱，所以大任是山名而不是地名。
English: "Lya" said: Shan Yichong is called Qiu, so Dairen is a mountain name, not a place name.

古文：明都泽在梁郡睢阳县东北。
现代文：明都泽位于梁郡唯阳县东北；
English: Mingdu Ze is located in the northeast of Weiyang County, Liang County;

古文：益州沱水在蜀郡汶江县西南。其一在郫县西南，皆还入江。荆州沱水在南郡枝江县。
现代文：益州沱水位于蜀郡泣江县西南，其一在郭县西南，都回流入江；荆州，沱水位于南郡枝江县；二
English: Yizhou Lishui is located in the southwest of Weijiang County, Shu County, and the first is in the southwest of Guo County, both flowing back into the river; Jingzhou, Lishui is located in the southwest of Nan County, Shijiang County;

古文：三澨地在南郡邔县北沱。
现代文：三澨地位于南郡郎县北沱；
English: Sanlu is located in Beilun, Lang County, South County;

古文：《尚书》曰：导汉水，过三澨。
现代文：《尚书》说：疏导汉水，经过三灌。
English: "Shangshu" said: "Dredge Chinese water, after three fillings.

古文：《地说》曰：沔水东行，过三澨合流，触大别山阪。
现代文：《地说》说：河水向东，经过三噬而会合，与大别山山坡接近。
English: "Saying" said: The river water flows eastward, and after three phases, it meets and approaches the slope of Dabie Mountain.

古文：故马融、郑玄、王肃。孔安国等，咸以为三澨，水名也。
现代文：所以马融、郑玄、王肃、孔安国等，都把三噬作为水名。
English: Therefore, Ma Rong, Zheng Xuan, Wang Su, Kong An Guo, etc. all use San Zhao as a water name.

古文：许慎言：澨者，埤增水边土，人所止也。
现代文：许慎说：所谓涯，就是在水边加土作岸，以让入止息。
English: Xu Shen said: The so-called "gai" is to add soil to the shore at the water's edge to stop the inflow.

古文：按《春秋左传》：文公十有六年，楚军次于句澨，以伐诸庸。
现代文：根据《春秋左传》文公十六年前，楚军驻扎在句噬， 以讨伐庸国。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn Legend," 16 years before Wen Gong, the Chu army was stationed in Jufang to fight against the Yongguo.

古文：宣公四年，楚令尹子越师于漳澨。
现代文：宣公四年前，楚国的令尹子越带领部队到漳途。
English: Four years before the proclamation, Yin Zi Yue, the ruler of Chu, led his troops to Shantou.

古文：定公四年，左司马戍败吴师于雍澨。
现代文：定公四年前，左司马戍，在雍噬打败吴国的部队。
English: Four years before Ding Gong, Zuo Sima Yao defeated the troops of Wu in Yongjia.

古文：昭公二十三年，司马薳越缢于薳澨。
现代文：昭公二十三年前，司乌篷越在劫荃自杀。
English: Twenty-three years before Zhaogong, Si Wubengyue committed suicide in the Looting of Tsuen.

古文：服虔或谓之邑，又谓之地。
现代文：对于这个噬，服虔说是城邑，又说是地方。
English: For this phage, obedience is said to be a city, and it is said to be a place.

古文：京相璠、杜预亦云：本际及边地名也。
现代文：京相潘和杜预也都说是水中和水边的地名。
English: Beijing's Pan and Duyuan are also said to be place names in and around the water.

古文：今南阳、淯阳二县之间，淯水之滨，有南澨、北澨矣。
现代文：现在南阳和清阳二县之间，清水沿岸有南噬和北噬。
English: Now, between the two counties of Nanyang and Qingyang, along the coast of Qingshui, there are Nan Zhao and Bei Zhao.

古文：而诸儒之论，水陆相半，又无山源出处之所，津途关路，惟郑玄及刘澄之言在竟陵县界。
现代文：对于这个三噬，各学者的说法，在水中和在陆上各居其半，又没有说出它发源于何山以及经过的路程，只有郑玄和刘澄之说它在竟陵县县界。
English: For this three-bite, the scholars' statements are half in the water and half on the land, and they did not say what mountain it originated from and how far it passed. Only Zheng Xuan and Liu Chengzhi said that it was in the county border of Qiongling County.

古文：《经》云邔县北沱，然沱流多矣，论者疑焉，而不能辨其所在。右《禹贡》山水泽地所在，凡六十。
现代文：《水经》说，是邓县以北的长江支流。但长江的支流很多，却不能辨明它的位置，论证这个题的入是有怀疑的。以上是《禹贡》山水泽地所在，共六十。
English: "Water Sutra" says that it is a tributary of the Yangtze River north of Deng County. However, there are many tributaries of the Yangtze River, but it is not possible to identify its location, so it is doubtful that this question will be included in the argument. The above is the location of the "Yugong" landscape, a total of sixty.

