古文：二十四日作诗与梁君别，各殷勤执手，订后期焉。
现代文：二十四日作诗与梁君辞别，各自殷勤地握着手，约定日后相见。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, he wrote a poem to say goodbye to Liang Jun, and each of them diligently shook hands and agreed to meet again in the future.

古文：西向下山，望罗丛岩在三十里外，初欲从此而南趋郁林。
现代文：向西下山，望见罗丛岩在三十里以外，起初打算从此往南赶去郁林州。
English: Going down the mountain to the west, he saw that Luo Congyan was thirty miles away. At first, he planned to drive south to Yulin Prefecture.

古文：及一里，抵山下，渡小蔂。
现代文：到走了一里，来到山下时，渡过小涧。
English: After walking for a mile, when I reached the foot of the mountain, I passed through a small stream.

古文：又西二里，过周塘，则山谷回互，罗丛已不可见。
现代文：又向西行二里，路过周塘，就见山谷回绕交错，罗丛岩已看不见。
English: Another two miles to the west, passing Zhoutang, I saw the valley winding and interlacing, and the Luo Cong Rock was no longer visible.

古文：问其道，多未谙者。
现代文：打听去罗丛岩的路，大多是不熟悉的人。
English: Most of the people enquiring about the way to Luo Congyan are not familiar with it.

古文：云须南至麻洞墟，始有路西行。
现代文：说是必须往南到麻洞墟，方才有路西行。
English: He said that he had to go south to Ma Dong Hui before he could go west.

古文：又南三里，路分为二，大道由东南上山，岐径由西南涉坞。
现代文：又往南三里，路分为两条，大道由东南上山，岔开的小径由西南越过山坞。
English: Three miles further south, the road splits into two, with the main road heading up the mountain from the southeast, and the trail leading from the southwest over the dock.

古文：余强从西南者，一里，逾一岭，渐不得道。
现代文：我强行从西南的小径走，一里，越过一岭，渐渐找不到路。
English: I forcibly walked from the southwest trail, one mile, crossed a ridge, and gradually could not find the way.

古文：二里，南行山莽间。
现代文：二里，向南行走在山间草丛之中。
English: Two miles, walking south in the mountain grass.

古文：又一里南下山，始有路自西北来，随之东南去，由坞塍出山夹中。
现代文：又走一里向南下山，这才有路自西北来，顺着它往东南去，由山坞中的土埂上走出两山的夹谷中。
English: I walked another mile south down the mountain, and only then did the road come from the northwest, following it to the southeast, from the mound in the dockyard out of the valley between the two mountains.

古文：二里，抵干冲，始值北来大道，山始开。
现代文：二里抵达干冲，才遇上北来的大道，山才开阔起来。
English: Two miles into the dry run, the road to the north comes into view, and the mountain opens up.

古文：有小溪自东而西，又有自南向入之者。
现代文：有小溪自东往西流去，又有一条自南面汇入的小溪。
English: There is a stream flowing from east to west, and another stream flowing in from the south.

古文：涉涧，随南水而上，村落依焉。
现代文：涉过山涧，顺着南面来的溪水上走，有个村落靠着溪流。
English: After wading through the mountains and following the stream coming from the south, there is a village next to the stream.

古文：于是山分东西两界，中则平畴南衍，深溪北流。
现代文：到这里山分为东西两列，中间则是平旷的原野向南扩展开去，深深的溪水往北流去。
English: At this point, the mountain is divided into two rows, east and west. In the middle, there is a flat plain extending southward and a deep stream flowing northward.

古文：西南二里，过一独木桥。
现代文：向西南行二里，过了一座独木桥。
English: Go southwest for two miles and cross a wooden bridge.

古文：又南三里，山坡突处，麻洞墟在焉。
现代文：又往南走三里，山坡突出之处，麻洞墟就在那里。
English: Another three miles to the south, where the hillside protrudes, is where the Hemp Cave Ruins are.

古文：是日墟期，时已过午，乃就垆酒店而餐。
现代文：这天是赶集日，此时已过中午，就到酒店就餐。
English: It was market day, and it was past noon by this time, so we went to the hotel for a meal.

古文：其西有岐，西向逾山为高塘路，觅高塘趁墟者问之，言： 由此至罗丛岩尚五十里，高塘未得其中火，欲西北渡郁江乃至。 
现代文：集市西边有条岔道，向西翻过山去，是去高塘的路，找到高塘来赶集的人问路，说： 由此到罗丛岩还有五十里，到高塘还未走到去那里吃中午饭的地方，要往西北渡过郁江才能到。 
English: On the west side of the market, there is a fork in the road. If you go west across the mountain, it is the road to Gaotang. People who find Gaotang and come to the market ask for directions, saying: "From here, it is another fifty miles to Luo Congyan, and you still haven't reached Gaotang to go there for lunch. You have to cross the Yujiang River to the northwest to get there."

古文：余闻之怅然，姑留为后游，遂南随散墟者循西界山而趋。
现代文：我听到这话心中闷闷不乐，姑且留着日后来游，于是向南跟随散集的人沿西面一列山赶路。
English: Hearing this, I felt gloomy in my heart. I decided to stay the day and travel back, so I headed south to follow the scattered people along a line of mountains in the west.

古文：五里，有村连聚于东界大山之下，犹麻洞之聚落也。
现代文：行五里，有个村庄连接不断分散在东面一列大山之下，仍是麻洞墟的村落。
English: Five miles away, there is a village connection constantly scattered under a row of mountains in the east, still a village of potholes.

古文：又南，山坞稍转而西，仍南共五里，为石马村。
现代文：又往南走，山坞慢慢转向西，仍向南共走五里，是石马村。
English: Walking south again, the dock slowly turned to the west, still walking south for a total of five miles, is Shima Village.

古文：村倚西麓，有石倚东麓，若马之突焉。
现代文：村子紧靠西麓，有块岩石紧靠东麓，好像骏马奔突之状。
English: The village is close to the western foot, and there is a rock close to the eastern foot, which looks like a galloping horse.

古文：西麓之后，其上石峰突兀，是为穿石寨。
现代文：西麓的后面，那上面石峰突兀，这是穿石寨。
English: Behind the western foot of the mountain, there is a rocky peak that juts out above, which is a stone wall.

古文：土人言其石中穿，可透出山后，余望而未之见也。
现代文：本地人讲那石峰中间穿通，可以钻出到山后，我远望去却未见到这样的地方。
English: Locals say that the stone peak is pierced in the middle and can be drilled out to the back of the mountain. I looked far and wide but did not see such a place.

古文：又南五里为大冲，聚落环倚西麓。
现代文：又向南走五里是大冲，村落呈环状背靠西麓。
English: Another five miles to the south is Dashong, the village is ring-shaped and backs up to the western foot.

古文：于是坞穷畴转，截山为池，回坡为田，遂复向山坳矣。
现代文：在这里山坞到了头田畴转了向，横截山坞建成水池，环绕山坡开垦成田，于是又走向山坳中了。
English: Here, the dockyard turned to the head field, built a pool across the dockyard, reclaimed Narita around the hillside, and then went to the middle of the mountain.

古文：由大冲上行，又五里，路出马头岭之南，过山脊。
现代文：由大冲上行，又走五里，路通到马头岭的南边，越过山脊。
English: From Dachong upstream, walk another five miles, the road leads to the south of Ma Touling, over the ridge.

古文：其水北流者，经干冲由车路江入浔；南流者，经都合入秀江，北转高塘、罗行而入郁。
现代文：那里的河流向北流去的，流经干冲由车路江流入得江；往南流的，流经都合流入秀江，向北转经高塘、罗行而后流入郁江。
English: The rivers there flow northward, flowing through Ganchong from Chelujiang into Dejiang; those flowing southward flow into Xiujiang through Fuxi, turn northward through Gaotang and Luogang, and then flow into Yujiang.

古文：出坳，复东南得平畴，山仍两开。
现代文：走出山坳，再向东南走上平坦的原野，山仍在两面张开。
English: Out of the foothills, and then to the southeast on a flat plain, the mountain is still open on both sides.

古文：五里，宿于中都峡。
现代文：五里路，住宿在中都峡。
English: Wuli Road, accommodation in Zhongdu Gorge.

古文：二十五日由都峡南行，二里，渡一桥，有岐从东南随水登坡，一里为回龙墟，墟犹未全集也。
现代文：二十五日由中都峡往南行，二里，过了一座桥，有岔路从东南随着河水登上山坡，一里路是回龙墟，集市还未全部聚集起来。
English: On the 25th, I drove south from Zhongdu Gorge. After two miles, I crossed a bridge. There was a winding road from the southeast that followed the river up the hillside. The one-mile road was Huilong Market. The market had not yet fully gathered.

古文：坡南水复西南去，渡板桥，更南三里，则坞穷而上岭。
现代文：坡南河水又向西南流去，越过板桥，再往南三里，山坞便到了头往上登岭。
English: The water of the Pannan River flowed to the southwest, crossed the board bridge, and then three miles to the south, and the dock came to the top of the mountain.

古文：逾岭南下，一里出山，则山坞复开。
现代文：越过山岭向南下山，一里走出山，就见山坞重又开阔起来。
English: Crossing the mountains to the south down the mountain, one mile out of the mountain, you will see the mountain dock heavy and open.

古文：南行三里，为罗播村。
现代文：往南行三里，是罗播村。
English: Three miles to the south is Luobang Village.

古文：东渡一溪，逾小岭，又涉一溪，共一里，南向登山甚峻，曰大山坪，又曰六合岭。
现代文：向东渡过一溪，越过小岭，又涉过一溪，共一里，向南登山十分陡峻，叫做大山坪，又叫六合岭。
English: To the east, I crossed a stream, crossed a ridge, and waded through a stream for a total of one mile. To the south, the climb is very steep, called Dashanping, also known as Liuhe Ridge.

古文：从其上北眺浔州西山，远在百里外，而东有大山屏列，西南亦有高峰，惟白石反为东北近山所掩不得见。
现代文：从岭上往北眺望得州的西山，远在百里之外，而东面有大山像屏风样排列着，西南也有高峰，唯有白石山反而被东北方近处的山遮住不能看见。
English: Looking north from the ridge, you can see the West Hills of Texas, hundreds of miles away. To the east, there are large mountains lined up like a screen, and there are high peaks in the southwest. Only Mount Shiraishi, on the other hand, cannot be seen because it is covered by the mountains in the northeast.

古文：平行其上二里，出南坳，岭头丛木蓊密。
现代文：平缓地行走在岭上二里，走到南面的山坳，岭头丛林薪郁茂密。
English: I walked for two miles on the ridge and walked to the south ridge. The forest at the top of the ridge was densely wooded.

古文：从其右行，又一里下山。
现代文：从岭上往右行，又走一里下山。
English: From the ridge, walk to the right and walk another mile down the mountain.

古文：又一里，山壑四交，中成奥谷，有小水自东而西。
现代文：又是一里，山中四条壑谷相交，中央形成深谷，有小溪自东流向西去。
English: Another mile, four valleys intersect in the mountains, forming a deep valley in the center, with streams flowing from east to west.

古文：越其南，从中道复登岭，一里，逾而东，入山峡。
现代文：过到溪南，从中间一道壑谷又登岭，一里，越过山岭往东行，走入山峡。
English: After passing south of the Yangtze River, from the middle of the valley and the ridge, one mile, across the mountains to the east, into the canyon.

古文：峡北麓堰水满坞，潆浸山谷。
现代文：山峡的北麓筑堤蓄水积满山坞，潇涧浸泡着山谷。
English: The dam built at the northern foot of the gorge is full of water, soaking the valley.

古文：乃循峡沿水东入南转，一里渐升，水亦渐涸。
现代文：于是顺山峡沿着水边向东进去往南转，一里路渐渐爬坡，水也渐渐干涸了。
English: As a result, Shunshan Gorge went east along the water's edge and turned south. The one-mile road gradually climbed uphill, and the water gradually dried up.

古文：复逾山坳，路循岭右升分岭界。二里，复下渡山脊，路循岭左一里，下核桃岭，则有大溪自南而来，至此西折去。路循溪向东南逾二岭，共三里，涉流渡江。
现代文：大容山东西两面有两条绣江：一条从南面广东的高州府，向北流到北流县，汇合大容山东南麓的河流，流经容县注入郁江，这是容县的绣江；一条就是此条大溪，是得州上游的绣江。路顺着溪流向东南越过两道岭，共走三里，涉水渡江。
English: There are two embroidered rivers on the east and west sides of Dayong Mountain: one flows from Gaozhou in Guangdong in the south, flows north to Beilu County, merges with the river at the southeastern foot of Dayong Mountain, flows through Yung County into the Yujiang River, which is the embroidered river in Yung County; one is this big stream, which is the embroidered river in the upper reaches of Dezhou. The road follows the stream to the southeast, crosses two ridges, and walks a total of three miles, fording the river.

古文：其水及腹，所谓横塘渡也，浔州南界止此，江南即郁林州属，为梧西北境焉。
现代文：江水达到腹部，是所谓的横塘渡了，得州府南部的辖境到此为止，江南岸就是郁林州的属地，是梧州府的西北境。
English: When the water reaches the belly of the river, it is the so-called "crossing of the pond." The jurisdiction of the southern part of Dezhou Prefecture ends here. The south bank of the river is the territory of Yulin Prefecture and is the northwest border of Wuzhou Prefecture.

古文：由江南岸复溯流逾岭，四里始有聚落，时已过午，遂就炊村庐。
现代文：由江南岸再溯江流越岭，走了四里才有村落，此时已过中午，便到村舍中就餐。
English: From the south bank of the river to the river flowing over the ridge, it took four miles to reach the village. At this time, it was past noon, and they went to the village house to have a meal.

古文：炊饭毕，山雨大作，坐待久之。
现代文：煮饭吃完后，山雨大作，坐着等了很久。
English: After cooking and eating, it rained heavily. I sat and waited for a long time.

古文：逾小岭而南，村聚益连络，所谓白堤者是，亦深山之奥区也。
现代文：越过小岭往南走，村庄房屋益加连接不断，所谓白堤的地方就是这里了，也是深山中的隐秘之地。
English: Crossing the ridge to the south, the village houses are increasingly connected. The place of the so-called white dike is here, and it is also a hidden place in the mountains.

古文：过墟舍，取中道渡小桥，溯桥右南行八里，误从路旁小岐西入，得大寨村，遂投宿主人李翁家。
现代文：过了集市中的房舍，选择中间的路走过小桥，溯溪右往南行八里，误从路旁岔开的小道往西进去，走到大寨村，便投宿在房主人李翁家里。
English: After passing the houses in the market, choose the middle path, walk across the small bridge, follow the stream to the right and go south for eight miles, enter the west by mistake from the path opened by the roadside, walk to Dazhai Village, and stay at the home of the owner Li Weng.

古文：翁具酒烹蛋，山家风味，与市邸迥别。
现代文：李翁备酒煮蛋，是山村人家的风味，与城市里的客店迥然有别。
English: Li Weng prepares boiled eggs with wine, which is the flavor of the mountain village people, and is very different from the inn in the city.

古文：大寨诸村，山回谷转，夹坞成塘，溪木连云，堤篁夹翠，鸡犬声皆碧映室庐，杳出人间，分墟隔陇，宛然避秦处也。
现代文：大寨诸村，山回谷转，山坞相夹成塘，溪畔林木连接云天，堤岸上竹丛翠色相夹，鸡犬之声相闻，全是碧绿一片映衬着农舍，杳然脱出人间，分散的村落隔着田亩，宛如躲避暴秦的世外桃源。
English: Dazhai villages, mountains turning into valleys, docks splitting into ponds, creekside trees connecting the sky and clouds, bamboo groves on the embankment splitting into emeralds, and the voices of chickens and dogs echoing. All of this is a verdant expanse against the farmhouses, a sudden escape from the human world, with scattered villages separated by acres of farmland. It's like a haven from the stormy weather.

古文：二十六日主人以鲜鲫饷客，山中珍味，从新涨中所得也。
现代文：二十六日主人拿出鲜卿鱼款待客人，是山中的珍味，从新涨的溪流中捕到的。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the host brought out fresh fish to entertain the guests. It was a delicacy in the mountains, caught from a newly rising stream.

古文：及出山，复误而西。
现代文：到出山后，再次错往西走。
English: After getting out of the mountain, I mistakenly walked west again.

古文：二里，复得倚云绕翠，修竹回塘之舍。
现代文：二里，再次走到背靠烟云，翠色环绕，修竹绕塘的农舍。
English: After two miles, I walked again to the farmhouse, which was surrounded by clouds of smoke, emerald green, and bamboo groves surrounding a pond.

古文：问道于村妇，知误，东出。
现代文：向村姑问路，知道走错了，向东出来。
English: I asked the village woman for directions, and when I realized I was on the wrong road, I headed east.

古文：作《误入山村诗》及《村妇留别》二绝句。二里，抵大板桥，始循大溪西岸南行。三里，过马禄山，越通明桥，遂西南折入山峡。两山逼束，中惟一溪，无夹水之畦，俱潆路之草。
现代文：二里路，抵达大板桥，这才沿大溪的西岸往南行。行三里，过了马禄山，越过通明桥，于是向西南折入山峡中。两侧的山紧逼过来束拢，中间仅有一条溪流，溪水两边没有田地，全是缠绕在路上的草。
English: After two miles, we arrived at the Great Plank Bridge, and then drove south along the west bank of the creek. After three miles, we passed Mount Maru, crossed the Tongming Bridge, and then turned southwest into the mountain gorge. The mountains on both sides were tightly bunched together, with only one stream in the middle. There were no fields on either side of the stream, it was all grass wrapped around the road.

古文：五里，有巨木桥横架溪上，乃通东南山路之道。
现代文：五里后，有座巨大的木桥横架在溪上，是通往东南方山路的通道。
English: Five miles later, there is a huge wooden bridge across the stream, which is a passage to the southeast mountain road.

古文：余从桥右过，不从桥渡。
现代文：我从桥右走过去，不从桥上过去。
English: I walked to the right of the bridge, not over it.

古文：其桥巨木两接，江右有大树，自崖底斜偃江中，巨木两端俱横架其杪，为梁柱焉，是名横江桥。
现代文：此桥是用巨木从两头接拢，江右岸有棵大树，自石崖底部斜卧在江中，巨木两端都横架在树梢上，当作桥柱，这桥名叫横江桥。
English: This bridge is connected by huge trees from both ends. There is a large tree on the right bank of the river. It lies diagonally in the middle of the river from the bottom of the stone cliff. The two ends of the huge tree are horizontally supported on the treetops, as a bridge pillar. This bridge is called the cross-river bridge.

古文：又西南五里，过箬帽山，山峡稍开，南见大容焉。
现代文：又向西南走五里，过了薯帽山，山峡渐渐开阔起来，南面能见到大容山了。
English: Another five miles to the southwest, past Potato Hat Mountain, the gorge gradually widens, and in the south you can see Dayong Mountain.

古文：又西南三里，涉溪而右，又涉溪而左，共二里，逾冈而上，是为平山村。
现代文：又往西南行三里，涉到溪水右岸，又涉到溪水左岸，共走二里，往上翻越山冈，这是平山村。
English: Another three miles to the southwest, wading into the right bank of the stream, and wading into the left bank of the stream, a total of two miles, up and over the mountains, this is Hirayama Village.

古文：由白堤至平山三十里，路隘草荒，隔绝人境，将出平山，则纷纷言前途多盗矣。
现代文：由白堤到平山村有三十里，路窄草荒，与有人烟的地方隔绝，将走出平山村，就听纷纷传言前边路上强盗很多。
English: From Baidai to Pingshan Village is thirty miles, the road is narrow and grassland, isolated from populated areas. When you leave Pingshan Village, you will hear rumors that there are many robbers on the road ahead.

古文：由平山南行，路已开辟。
现代文：由平山村往南行，路已开阔起来。
English: Heading south from Hirayama Village, the road has been widened.

古文：过墟舍，越岭畔行，东望大容在三十里外，犹有层峰间之。
现代文：路过集市上的房屋，在岭畔翻越而行，望见东方大容山在三十里开外，仍有层层山峰隔着它。
English: Passing the houses in the market, walking over the edge of the ridge, I could see Dongfang Dalong Mountain thirty miles away, with layers of peaks still separating it.

古文：五里，下入山峡，过黄草塘。
现代文：五里，下山走入山峡，路过黄草塘。
English: Five miles, down the mountain into the gorge, passing through the Yellow Grass Pond.

古文：西南二里，抵都长庙。
现代文：向西南二里，抵达都长庙。
English: Two miles to the south-west, arriving at the capital Changmiao.

古文：其处两山开坞西去，而路横坞而南，越岭，所上无几，南下甚遥。
现代文：此处两山夹住开阔的山坞往西延去，而路横过山坞往南越岭，上岭的路不多，向南下山的路非常远。
English: Here, two mountains sandwich an open dock to the west, and the road crosses the dock to the south of the ridge. There is not much of a road up the ridge, and the road down the mountain to the south is very far.

古文：共三里，峡转西出，是为勒菜口。
现代文：共走三里，绕着山峡向西出来，这是勒菜口。
English: A total of three miles, around the canyon to the west, this is Le Lai Kou.

古文：于是山分两界，大容峙东北，寒山峙西南，排闼而东南去，中夹成大坞，溪流南注，则罗望江之源矣。
现代文：到这里山分为两列，大容山矗立在东北方，寒山屹立在西南方，似门扇一样往东南排列而去，中间相夹形成大山坞，溪流往南流注，是罗望江的江源。
English: At this point, the mountain is divided into two rows. The Dalong Mountain stands in the northeast, the Cold Mountain stands in the southwest, and they line up to the southeast like a doorway. They are sandwiched in the middle to form a large dock, and the stream flows south. It is the source of the Luowang River.

古文：于是循寒山北麓东南行，又三里，巨树下有卖浆者，以过午将撤去，乃留之就炊而饭。
现代文：从这里沿寒山北麓往东南行，又走三里，大树下有个卖水的人，因为过了中午将要撤摊离开，就留住他就火做了饭吃。
English: From here, I walked southeast along the northern foot of the Cold Mountain for another three miles. Under a large tree, there was a man selling water. Since he was going to withdraw his stall after noon, I kept him and cooked a meal on the fire.

古文：又五里，渡溪桥，是名崩江桥。
现代文：又走五里，走过一座溪上的桥，这桥名叫崩江桥。
English: I walked another five miles and crossed a bridge over a stream. This bridge is called the Broken River Bridge.

古文：桥南有庙，卖浆炊饭者群托焉。
现代文：桥南有座庙，卖水烧饭的人成群寄身庙里。
English: There is a temple south of the bridge, and hordes of people selling water and cooking rice live in the temple.

古文：又东南二里，过冯罗庙。
现代文：又向东南走二里，路过冯罗庙。
English: I walked another two miles to the southeast, passing the Feng Luo Temple.

古文：由畦塍中南行七里，复涉冈而南，见有鼓吹东去者，执途人问之，乃捕尉勒部过此也。
现代文：庙的南边，山峡愈加开阔，原来是寒山南面到了尽头，大容山往东转去，于是平旷的田野就扩展开来了。我选择了去郁林州的路。由田间土埂上往南行七里，再跋涉过山冈往南走，见到有敲锣打鼓向东而去的人，拉住路上的人打听，是追捕强盗的军官率领部下经过此地。
English: On the south side of the temple, the mountain gorge became more and more open. Originally, the southern side of the cold mountain came to an end, and Mount Dayong turned to the east, so the flat fields expanded. I chose the road to Yulin Prefecture. From the field mound, I went south for seven miles, and then trekked through the mountain range to the south. I saw people who were beating gongs and drums to the east. I stopped people on the road to inquire. It was an officer who was chasing robbers and led his subordinates through this place.

古文：又见有二骑甲胄而驰者，则州中探报之骑也。
现代文：又见有两个身披盔甲骑马飞奔的人，则是州里刺探情报的骑兵。
English: He also saw two men in armor galloping on horseback, cavalrymen from the state scouting for intelligence.

古文：又三里，抵松城墟。
现代文：又走三里，到达松城墟。
English: Walk another three miles and you will reach Songcheng Market.

古文：墟舍旁有逆旅一家，时日色尚高，而道多虞警候望的警戒，遂停宿焉。
现代文：集市的房屋旁边有一家旅店，此时天色还早，可路上多有戒严的警报，便留住在这里。
English: There is a hotel next to the market house. It is still early, but there are many martial law alerts on the road, so they stay here.

古文：二鼓，闻骑声骤而南，逆旅主人出视之，则麻兵已夜薄贼巢，斩一级，贼已连夜遁去。
现代文：二更时分，听见骑兵的声音骤然往南而去，旅店主人出门去察看，原来是麻兵已趁夜色逼近盗贼的巢穴，斩了一个首级，盗贼已连夜逃去。
English: At two o'clock, hearing the sound of the cavalry suddenly heading south, the innkeeper went out to investigate. It turned out that the soldiers had taken advantage of the darkness to approach the burglar's lair and cut off a head. The burglar had fled during the night.

古文：夜半，复有探者扣扉，入与主人宿，言麻兵者，即土司汛守驻守盘查往来之人之兵，夙皆与贼相熟，今奉调而至，辄先以二骑往探，私语之曰： 今大兵已至，汝早为计。 
现代文：半夜，又有探子敲门，进门与店主人住在一起，说起麻兵就是土司驻防的兵，平素与盗贼相互熟悉，今天奉命调防到此，便事先派两个骑兵前去侦察，私下告知盗贼说： 现在大军已到，你们早做准备。 
English: In the middle of the night, another scout knocked on the door, entered the door and lived with the owner of the shop. He said that the soldiers were the soldiers stationed in Tusi, and they were familiar with the thieves. Today, they were ordered to move to this place. They sent two cavalrymen to scout in advance and privately told the thieves: Now the army has arrived, you should prepare early.

古文：故群贼縻遵者束缚，依从一人斩之，以首级畀麻兵为功，而贼俱夜走入山，遂以 荡平 入报。
现代文：所以群贼捆了一个归顺的人斩了，把首级交给麻兵去请功，而盗贼全部乘夜逃入山中，便用 荡平 进城报告。
English: So the band of thieves tied up and beheaded a convert, and gave the head to a soldier to ask for a reward. The thieves all fled into the mountains at night, and reported back to the city by tramp.

古文：恐转眼之后，将。
现代文：恐怕转眼之后，将
English: I'm afraid that in the blink of an eye,

古文：平山乃大容西来之脉，盖澜沧以东之山，南径交趾北境，东转过钦、廉、灵山，又东北至兴业，由平山东度，始突为大容，于是南北之流分焉。
现代文：平山是大容山西来的山脉。大致澜沧江以东的山脉，往南经过交趾北部，向东转过钦州、廉州府、灵山县，又向东北延到兴业，由平山往东延伸，这才突起成为大容山，在这里南北两面的河流分流了。
English: Hirayama is the mountain range to the west of Mt. Dalong. The mountain range roughly to the east of the Lancang River runs southward through the northern part of Jiaozuo, turns eastward through Qinzhou, Lianzhou and Lingshan counties, and extends northeastward to Xingye, extending eastward from Hirayama. Only then does it protrude into Dalong Mountain, where the rivers on the north and south sides diverge.

古文：寒山者，郁林西北之望也。
现代文：寒山，是郁林州西北面的山。
English: Cold Mountain is a mountain in the northwest of Yulin Prefecture.

古文：诸山俱环伏于大容，而此独与之抗。
现代文：群山都低伏环绕着大容山，而此山唯独与它抗衡。
English: The mountains are low-lying around Mount Dayong, and this mountain is the only one to compete with it.

古文：盖其脉分自兴业，在罗望、定川二江之间。
现代文：大概它的山脉从兴业分出来，在罗望江、定川江两江之间。
English: It is probably separated from Xingye by its mountains, and is located between the Luowang River and the Dingchuan River.

古文：其脊至勒菜口而尽，故铮铮特起。
现代文：它的山脊延到菜勒口便到头了，所以峥嵘独立。
English: Its ridge extends to the end of the dish, so it is independent.

古文：《九域志》：越王陀遣人入山采橘，十日方回，问其故，曰： 山中大寨，不得归。 
现代文：《九域志》载：越王赵陀派人进山采桔，十日才返回，追问他们缘故，回答说： 山中太寒冷，不能归来。 
English: "The History of the Nine Provinces" recorded: the king of Yue, Zhao Tuo, sent people into the mountains to pick oranges, and only returned on the tenth day. When asked why, he replied: "It's too cold in the mountains to return."

古文：因名。
现代文：因此起名。
English: Hence the name.

古文：陆马庙者，在大容南麓，乃土人以祀陆绩、马援者。
现代文：陆马庙，在大容山南麓，是当地人用来祭祀陆绩、马援的神庙。
English: Lu Ma Temple, at the southern foot of Dalong Mountain, is a sacred temple used by local people to worship Lu Yi and Ma Yuan.

古文：流贼七八十人，夙往来劫掠村落，近与官兵遇，被杀者六人。
现代文：流寇七八十人，平素往来此地抢劫村落，近来与官军遭遇，被杀死六人。
English: Robbers in their 70s and 80s, who used to come and go here to rob villages, recently encountered the government army, and six people were killed.

古文：旋南入陆川境，掠平乐墟，又杀数十人。
现代文：旋即向南窜入陆川县境内，掳掠平乐墟，又杀了数十人。
English: It immediately headed southward into the territory of Lu Chuan County, plundered Pingle Ruins, and killed dozens of people.

古文：还过北流，巢此庙中，縻诸妇女富人，刻期索赎，不至者辄杀之。
现代文：返回时路过北流县，把此庙作巢穴，拘押了许多妇女富人，限期索取赎金，不送来的就杀这些人质。
English: On his way back, he passed through Beiliu County. He used this temple as a lair, detained many rich women, demanded a ransom within a time limit, and killed the hostages if they did not deliver.

古文：二十七日早自松城墟，不待饭而行。
现代文：二十七日早晨从松城墟，不等吃饭便上路。
English: On the morning of the 27th, I left Songcheng Road without waiting for dinner.

古文：四里，过谷山村，复行田塍中。
现代文：四里，路过谷山村，又行走在田埂上。
English: Four miles, passing through the valley mountain village, and walking on the paddy fields.

古文：又五里，望见一石梁甚高整，跨罗望江上，所谓 北桥 也。
现代文：又走五里，望见一座石桥十分高大整齐，跨在罗望江上，是所谓的 北桥 了。
English: After walking another five miles, I saw a very tall and neat stone bridge spanning the Luowang River, the so-called North Bridge.

古文：三洞连穹，下叠石为堰。
现代文：三个桥洞连着拱起，下方用石块垒筑成堤坝。
English: Three bridge cavities are connected by arches, and a dike is built below with stone blocks.

古文：水漫堰而下，转西向行，由郁林城北转而西南，与定川南流合而南去，经廉州入海者也。
现代文：江水漫过堤坝下泻，转向西流去，由郁林城北转向西南，与定川江、南流江汇合后向南流去，经廉州府注入大海。
English: The river water flows through the dam and flows downhill, turning to the west, turning from the north of Yulin City to the southwest, merging with the Dechuan River and the Nanliu River and flowing south, and flowing into the sea through Lianzhou.

古文：石梁之西，又有架木为桥以渡下流者，行者就近不趋石梁而趋木桥焉。
现代文：石桥的西边，又有座木桥以便下游的人渡江，走路的人就近不走石桥而走木桥了。
English: On the west side of the stone bridge, there is also a wooden bridge so that people downstream can cross the river. People who walk will not walk near the stone bridge but walk on the wooden bridge.

古文：过桥，又南逾一岭，共一里，入郁林北门。
现代文：过了桥，又向南越一岭，共走一里，进入郁林城北门。
English: After crossing the bridge, I walked one mile to the south of Yue Yiling and entered the north gate of Yulin City.

古文：北门外人居俱倚冈汇池，如村落然，既无街衢，不似城郭，然城垣高罄严整，粤西所仅见也。
现代文：北门外居民房屋全部背靠山冈前汇水池，如村落一样，就是无街道，不似城市，然而城墙高大严整，是广西境内所仅见的。
English: The houses of the residents outside the north gate are all backed by the Yamagaoka-mae sink. Like a village, there is no street, unlike a city. However, the city wall is tall and strict, which is only seen in Guangxi.

古文：城中亦荒落。
现代文：城中也是荒凉冷落。
English: The city is also desolate and deserted.

古文：过郁林道而西，即为州治。
现代文：过了郁林兵备道往西走，就是州衙门。
English: After passing the Yulin Military Preparation Road and heading west, it is the State Gate.

古文：乃炊饭旅肆，问此中兵道，已久驻苍梧矣。
现代文：于是在旅店中煮饭，打听这里的兵备道，已驻在苍梧县很久了。
English: So I cooked rice in the hotel and inquired about military training here. I have been stationed in Gowu County for a long time.

古文：先是苍梧道顾东曙，名应旸。余锡邑人也，其乃郎以家讯寄来，过衡阳，为盗劫去，余独行至此，即令其仍驻此地，亦将不及与通，况其远在苍梧耶！
现代文：这以前苍梧道道员顾东曙，是我们无锡县人，他的儿子把家信寄来给他，过衡阳时，被强盗抢去，我独自一人走到此地，即使他仍驻在此地，也将不能与他通报家讯，何况他远在苍梧呢！
English: Before this, the Cangwu Taoist Gu Dongshu, a native of Wuxi County, had his son send him a family letter. When he passed through Hengyang, he was snatched by robbers. I came here alone. Even if he were still stationed here, I would not be able to inform him of family news, not to mention that he is far away in Cangwu!

古文：流较罗望为大。
现代文：我看这里有奇异之处，急忙走近石碑读了碑文，原来是紫泉。
English: I think there is something strange here. I hurriedly approached the stone monument and read the inscription. It turned out to be the Purple Spring.

古文：涯下泊舟鳞次，涯上有堤，内环为塘，堤上石碑骈立，堤下卧石片片，横列涯间。余视之有异，亟就碑读之，则紫泉也。
现代文：泉水的裂缝在江边堤坝半中腰的石片中，石片在南北夹成横向的裂缝，横处有三尺，宽二尺，从东回绕到西，南面缺着，泉水从底下溢出积在其中，停贮的清水有三尺深，往上边从南边的缺口处流泻出去，不时见有珍珠状的水泡浮出水面。
English: The fissure of the spring water is in the stone piece of the embankment of the river. The stone piece is sandwiched into a transverse fissure in the north and south. It is three feet across and two feet wide. It goes around from east to west. The south side is missing. The spring water overflows from the bottom and accumulates in it. The stored clear water is three feet deep. It flows upwards from the gap on the south side. From time to time, pearl-shaped bubbles float to the surface.

古文：泉隙在涯堤之半堤内塘水高丈余，涯下江流低亦丈余，水澄碧异常，其曰变 紫 者，乃宋淳熙间异兆，非泉之常也。
现代文：堤内的塘水高一丈多，江岸下江流低下去也有一丈多，水质异常清澄碧绿。它被称为变 紫 的原因，是宋代淳熙年间的异常征兆，不是泉水的正常颜色。
English: The pond water in the dike is more than a meter high, and the water quality is unusually clear and green. The reason why it is called purple is an abnormal symptom during the Song Dynasty, not the normal color of spring water.

古文：泉上旧有濯缨亭，今已成乌有。
现代文：泉上旧时有个灌缨亭，今天已化为乌有。
English: In the old days, there was a pottery pavilion on the spring, but today it has been destroyed.

古文：泉之西有石梁曰南桥，亦三蛩ó水边大石，高跨南流江上。
现代文：泉水的西边有座石桥叫南桥，也是三个桥拱二高跨在南流江上。
English: On the west side of the spring, there is a stone bridge called the South Bridge. It is also three bridges with two high arches across the Nanliu River.

古文：桥北有文昌阁，当江流环转之中，高架三层，虚敞可眺，为此中胜览。
现代文：桥北有个文昌阁，正当江流环绕之中，高高架起三层，空阔宽敞可以远眺，是这一带观赏胜景的 好去处。
English: There is a Wenchang Pavilion to the north of the bridge. It is surrounded by the current of the river and is three stories high. It is spacious and can be seen from afar. It is a good place to enjoy the scenery in this area.

古文：桥南为廉州大道；桥南由岐溯江岸东行，则水月岩道也。
现代文：桥南是去廉州的大道；桥南由岔路溯江岸往东行，是去水月岩的路。
English: The south of the bridge is the road to Lianzhou; the south of the bridge is the road to Shuiyueyan, going east from the bank of the Yunnan River.

古文：溯江半里，江自东北来，路向东南去，乃舍江从路，始由田塍行，其路犹大，乃陆川、平乐墟道也。
现代文：溯江走半里，江水自东北流来，路向东南延去，于是舍弃江流顺路走，开始时由田野中走，这路还宽大，是去陆川县、平乐墟的路。
English: After walking half a mile along the river, the river water came from the northeast, and the road extended to the southeast. Therefore, I abandoned the river flow and walked along the road. At the beginning, I walked from the middle of the field. This road is still wide, and it is the road to Luchuan County and Pinglehu.

古文：八里，陟冈，有村焉。
现代文：八里，登上山冈，有村庄在这里。
English: Eight miles, up the mountain, there is a village here.

古文：由村左岐东北行，又二里，从岐而北，路益没。
现代文：由村左的岔道往东北行，又走二里，从岔道往北行，路渐渐湮没了。
English: From the main road on the left of the village to the northeast, another two miles, from the main road to the north, the road gradually disappeared.

古文：又二里，北过一塘堤，始得西来路。
现代文：又走二里，向北经过一个水塘上的堤坝，这才遇上西来的路。
English: Another two miles north, past an embankment on a reservoir, is where the westbound camel is encountered.

古文：循之东二里，经一村，复上一岭，路仍没。
现代文：沿着路往东行二里，经过一村，又登上一岭，路就湮没了。
English: Two miles east along the road, past a village and up a ridge, the road disappears.

古文：乃逾山而东，从莽中踯躅东向，一里抵东山下，得南来之路。
现代文：只好翻过山往东走，从草丛中跌跌绊绊向东行，一里到达东山下，找到南来的路。
English: I had to go over the mountain to the east, stumble from the grass to the east, reach the east foot of the mountain for a mile, and find the way to the south.

古文：遂循之而北，二里，仍东转入山坞。
现代文：于是沿这条路往北走，二里，仍向东转入山坞。
English: So I walked north along this road for two miles, still turning east into the dock.

古文：一里，渡一小石桥，又循东山而北，过一村，复东转入山坞。
现代文：一里，越过一座小石桥，又沿东山往北行，路过一村，再向东转入山坞。
English: One mile, over a small stone bridge, and then along the East Mountain to the north, passing a village, and then turning east into the dock.

古文：其坞甚深，东入二里，路渐芜没。
现代文：这个山坞十分深，向东走进去二里，路渐渐荒芜湮没了。
English: This dock is very deep, walk two miles to the east and the road gradually becomes deserted.

古文：又望坳东登，一里至岭，始得西来大道，则亦南向平乐墟路也。
现代文：又望着山坳向东上登，一里来到岭上，这才找到西来的大道，却也是向南去平乐墟的路。
English: Looking at the mountains, he climbed eastward and came to the ridge for a mile. Only then did he find the road to the west, but it was also the road to Pinglehu to the south.

古文：越岭而东，仍舍南行大道，岐而东下山，径坞中共一里，逾山峡东下，则峡东石峰森森，自北而南，如列旗整队，别成一界矣。
现代文：越过山岭往东行，仍旧舍弃南去的大道，由岔路向东下山。经过坞中共走一里，穿过山峡往东下走，就见峡东石峰森森，自北往南延伸，如举着旗帜排列整齐的队列，另成一列山了。
English: After crossing the mountains to the east, I still abandoned the main road to the south and went down the mountain from Kushiro Road to the east. After passing the dock, I walked for a total of one mile and walked through the gorge to the east. I saw the east of the gorge full of stone peaks, extending from north to south, like a neat queue with flags, and another row of mountains.

古文：出峡，循西山东麓而北，一村倚山东向，前有大塘，余以为龙塘村矣，问之，则龙塘犹在北也。
现代文：出峡后，沿西山的东麓往北走，一个村庄背靠山峰面向东方，前边有大水塘，我以为是龙塘村了，间了路，原来龙塘村还在北边。
English: After going out of the gorge, I walked north along the eastern foot of the West Mountain. A village backed by the mountain peak faced east, with a large pond in front. I thought it was Longtang Village. After a while, it turned out that Longtang Village was still in the north.

古文：又北一里余，转而东，得龙塘村。
现代文：又向北行一里多，转向东，找到龙塘村。
English: Drive north for more than a mile and turn east to find Longtang Village.

古文：村踞冈脊之中，由其东又北一里余，直东抵石山中峰。
现代文：村子盘踞在山冈的脊梁之上，村南溪水往南流后转向东流去，村北的溪水向北流人水月洞。由村东又向北走一里多，径直向东抵达石山的中峰。
English: The village is perched on the spine of the mountain. The water of the south stream of the village flows south and then turns to the east. The water of the north stream of the village flows north to the man-made water moon cave. From the east of the village, it goes north for more than a mile and goes straight east to reach the mid-peak of the stone mountain.

古文：渡石桥而北，则上岩西向，高穹峰半矣。
现代文：过了石桥往北走，就见上岩朝向西方，高高隆起在山峰半中腰上了。
English: After crossing the stone bridge and walking north, you will see Shangyan towards the west, with a high rise halfway up the mountain.

古文：上岩者，水月洞南倚山凭虚之窍也；石山自东北来，南引而下，支分队耸，而一支中出者。
现代文：上岩，是水月洞南靠山临空的洞穴；是石山自东北延来，往南延伸而下，分出条条支脉一列列耸起，而当中一支突出的地方。
English: Shangyan is a cave in the south of Shuigetsu Cave, close to the mountain. It is a place where the stone mountain stretches from the northeast and extends down to the south, separating the branches in a row, and one of them protrudes.

古文：西瞰平芜，削崖悬窦，层级皆不甚深，而此层最下，亦最扩。
现代文：向西远瞰平旷的荒野，陡削的山崖上洞穴高悬，一层层一级级都不十分深，而此层在最下面，也最广阔。
English: Looking far to the west across the flat moorland, a cave hangs high on a sheer cliff. Each level is not very deep, but this level, at the very bottom, is also the widest.

古文：环峰石皆青润，独裂岩处色变赭赤，然其质犹极灵幻，寻丈之间，层庋缕挂，窦穿盖偃，无所不备，亦无所不奇。
现代文：环绕的石峰都是光润的青色岩石，唯独岩洞裂开之处石色变成赫红，然而石质仍极为灵妙变幻，丈尺之间，层层平架缕缕垂挂，石窦穿通伞盖倒伏，无所不备，也无所不奇。
English: The surrounding stone peaks are all shiny blue rocks, except where the cave is cracked, the stone color turns to crimson, but the stone is still extremely flexible, between the lengths, the layers of flat frames are hanging, the stone dowel penetrates the umbrella cover upside down, everything is ready, and everything is surprising.

古文：岩前架庐当门，而敞其上，庐可以栖，而上不掩胜，结构亦自不恶。
现代文：岩洞前建了房屋挡在洞口，可屋顶上敞着，房屋可以居住，但上面不会挡住优美的景色，房屋的结构也自然不差。
English: A house was built in front of the cave to block the mouth of the cave, but the roof is open. The house can be lived in, but it will not block the beautiful scenery above. The structure of the house is naturally not bad.

古文：由岩右腋穿窍而上，窍仅如管，历级宛转，复透一层，若偏阁焉。
现代文：由岩洞右旁穿过石窍往上走，石窍仅大如竹管，经由石阶弯来转去，又钻人一层，好像偏阁一样。
English: From the right side of the cave, go up through the stone nook, the stone nook is only as big as a bamboo tube, go around the stone steps, and drill another layer, like a gazebo.

古文：云由岩右腋穿窍而上，窍仅如管，历级宛转，复透一层，若偏阁焉。
现代文：入云的石窗腾在空中，星辰般的窗权透入光影，坐在这里边歇息，又别成一个 小西天 了。
English: The cloudy stone window soars in the sky, the star-like window right penetrates the light and shadow, sit here and rest, and do not become a Xiao Xi Tian.

古文：云牖腾空，星楞透影窗中可见云在空中飞腾，而星光又从窗棂边透了进来，坐憩其内，又别一 小西天 矣。由岩左腋环柱而出，柱如龙旗下垂，从其侧缘崖上跻，转出岩端，复得一层。
现代文：由岩洞左旁绕着石柱出来，石柱如龙旗下垂，从它侧边沿石崖上登，转出到洞顶上端，又找到一层洞。这层岩洞也是向西，自然分为左右两层，左边一层在下，石柱下垂石窍迸裂，仰面斜视上方，就是右边一层了，然而没有通往那里的石阶。
English: Coming out from the left side of the cave around the stone pillar, the stone pillar hangs like a dragon's wing, climbs up the cliff from its side, turns out to the top of the cave, and finds another hole. This layer of the cave is also to the west, naturally divided into left and right layers, the left layer is down, the stone pillar hangs down, and the back is inclined above, that is, the right layer, but there are no stone steps leading there.

古文：其岩亦西向，自分左右两重，其上削崖之顶，尚有一层虚悬，而跻之无级，水月洞尚在其北而稍下。
现代文：由洞外往北上登，这才进入右边一层。如楼阁点缀在绝壁上，与左边一层像双翅一样相对称，增添不少美色，都是岩洞的中层。它上边悬崖的顶上，还有一层悬在虚空，可没有石阶登上去，唯有供人抬头观看罢了。水月洞还在它北面稍稍下去之处。
English: Climbing north from the outside of the cave, it is only then that you enter the right-hand floor. For example, the pavilions dotted on the cliff, and the left-hand floor like two wings, add a lot of beauty, are the middle layer of the cave. On the top of the cliff above it, there is another layer hanging in the void, but there are no stone steps to climb up, only for people to look up. The water moon cave is still slightly below it to the north.

古文：龙塘之水，经山前石桥而北，过上岩之前，乃东向捣入洞中。
现代文：龙塘的水，流经山前的石桥往北，经过上岩的前方，便向东捣入洞中。
English: The water of Longtang flows through the stone bridge in front of the mountain to the north, passes the front of the upper rock, and then breaks into the cave to the east.

古文：洞门亦西向，路由其南，水由其北，相沿而入，透北而出。
现代文：洞口也是向西，路由洞口的南侧，溪水由洞口的北侧，相伴进入洞中，穿透北面出去。
English: The mouth of the cave is also to the west, the route is on the south side of the mouth of the cave, and the stream water enters the cave from the north side of the mouth of the cave, and goes out through the north side.

古文：前后两门，一望通明，是为明洞。
现代文：前后两个洞口，一眼望去通明透亮，这是明洞。
English: The two openings, front and back, are clear and bright at a glance. This is a bright hole.

古文：水贯其中，石蹲其旁，夹流突兀，俱作狮象形。
现代文：水流贯穿洞中，岩石蹲踞在溪旁，夹住水流突兀而立，都作出狮子大象的形状。
English: The water flows through the cave, the rock crouches next to the stream, and the water rushes up, making the shape of a lion and an elephant.

古文：其水平流洞中，无融州真仙岩之大，而两崖亦无其深峭，可褰裳而涉溪。
现代文：洞顶下垂的岩石屈曲盘绕，龙盘蛟舞，缤纷杂乱，不一而足。那溪水平缓地流过洞中，没有融县真仙岩的水流大，而且两岸的岩石也没有真仙岩的深峻陡峭，可提起裤子涉过溪流。
English: The sagging rock at the top of the cave is bent and twisted, dragons and dragons dance, colorful and chaotic, one after another. The stream flows slowly through the cave, and the water flow is not as large as that of Rongxian Shanshen Rock, and the rocks on both sides are not as deep and steep as that of Shanshen Rock. You can lift your pants and wade through the stream.

古文：崖之右，又有一小水，南自支洞出，是为阴洞。阴洞乃明洞旁穴，其中又分水陆。
现代文：从暗洞溯流走，开始时石崖左侧下嵌，孔洞十分狭窄，趴着往下钻进去，举着火把在前，洞忽然巍然向上弯隆而起，上上下下垂挂耸立着盘绕的石柱，现出千百种诡异的姿态，升降在其中，惊心骇目，深邃曲折无法穷尽。这是暗洞陆上的佳景。
English: I followed the stream from the dark cave. At the beginning, the stone cliff was embedded on the left side of the cliff. The hole was very narrow. I crawled down and went in, holding a torch in front of me. The hole suddenly curved up and up, with coiled stone pillars hanging up and down, showing thousands of strange postures. The rise and fall in it was shocking, and the deep twists and turns were inexhaustible. This is a beautiful view of the dark cave on land.

古文：余欲为水月游，时已过午，尚未饭，抵上岩，道者方扃ō，关户而出，余坐崖下荔阴间。
现代文：我想去水月洞游览，但时间已过中午，还没吃饭，走到上岩，道士刚关了门外出，我坐在山崖下的荔枝树荫间。
English: I wanted to visit Shuiyue Cave, but it was already past noon and I hadn't eaten yet. When I walked to Shangyan Rock, the Taoist priest had just closed the door and gone out. I was sitting in the shade of a lychee tree under the cliff.

古文：久之，道者罢钓归，启扉具炊，余促其束炬游水月。
现代文：很久，道士钓完鱼归来，开了门准备饭食，我催促他捆火把去游水月洞。
English: After a long time, the Taoist priest came back from fishing and opened the door to prepare the meal. I urged him to tie the torch and swim to the water moon cave.

古文：既入明洞，篝火入阴洞，道人不随支流入，由其侧伏洼穿隙，遍观阴洞陆崖之胜，其中崇宏幽奥，森罗诸诡，五易炬而后出。
现代文：进入明洞后，点燃火把走入暗洞，道士不沿支流进去，由它侧面低伏的洼地中穿过缝隙，遍观了暗洞陆上石崖的优美景色，这当中高大幽深，诸种诡奇之状森森罗列，换了五次火把后才出来。
English: After entering the bright cave, they lit torches and walked into the dark cave. The Taoist did not follow the tributary to enter, but walked through the gap from the low-lying depression on its side. They looked at the beautiful scenery of the onshore cliff of the dark cave, which was tall and deep, with all kinds of strange shapes. They changed torches five times before they came out.

古文：欲溯流穷水崖，道者以水深辞： 请别由侧道以探其后崖，不必从中出也。 
现代文：打算溯流穷究水流两岸，道士用水深来推辞： 请另外由侧面的道路去探它后面的后崖，不必从洞中出去了。 
English: Intending to follow the stream and exhaustively explore both sides of the stream, the Taoist used the depth of the water as an excuse: Please use another side road to explore the back cliff behind it. You don't have to go out of the cave.

古文：乃复出明洞，涉水穷左崖之胜，遂出后洞，仰睇垂虬舞龙之石。
现代文：只好又出了明洞，涉水穷究了左边石崖的胜景，终于出了后洞，抬头斜视虫龙悬垂飞舞的岩石。
English: I had no choice but to go out of the bright cave again. I waded through the water and explored the magnificent view of the stone cliff on the left. Finally, I came out of the back cave and squinted up at the dragon dangling from the flying rock.

古文：还饭于上岩，已日衔西山矣。
现代文：返回到上岩吃饭，已是日衔西山了。
English: After returning to Shangyan for dinner, it was time to head west.

古文：二十八日早坐上岩中。
现代文：二十八日早上坐在上岩中。
English: On the morning of the 28th, I sat in the upper rock.

古文：道者出龙塘为予买米。
现代文：道士出洞去龙塘为我买米。
English: Taoist went out of the cave to Longtang to buy rice for me.

古文：余曳杖穷其最上层，已下，憩石窍偏阁中。
现代文：我拖着拐杖探完了上岩的最上层，不久下来，歇息在右窍形成的偏阁中。
English: I dragged my cane to explore the uppermost layer of the upper rock, and soon came down and rested in the alcove formed by the ridge.

古文：盖是岩西向，下午则返照逼人，余故以上午憩，而拟以下午搜近山诸洞。
现代文：因为这个岩洞向西，下午夕阳反照逼人，所以我在上午游，休息后准备在下午去搜寻近处山上各洞。
English: Because this cave faces west, and the afternoon sunset reflected on it, I swam in the morning and prepared to search the nearby mountain caves in the afternoon.

古文：既午，道人以米至，午炊甫毕，遂循山而南，至昨来所渡石桥，由桥侧东折入环峡中。
现代文：中午之后，道士拿着米来了，午饭刚吃完，就沿着山往南行，来到昨天来时走过的石桥，由桥侧边向东折进环绕的峡谷中。
English: After noon, the Taoist priest came with rice. After lunch, he walked south along the mountain to the stone bridge he had walked over when he came yesterday. He turned east from the side of the bridge into the surrounding canyon.

古文：以为水月在其下。
现代文：这座山分出三支石峰，全部棱角锋利，高险陡削，由东北延向西南。
English: This mountain is divided into three stone peaks, all sharp-edged, high-risk steep, extending from the northeast to the southwest.

古文：询之土人，皆曰： 中不甚深，下无蹊径。 
现代文：山洞十分空阔宽敞，它分开是两个洞，合起来便是一个洞。
English: The cave is very empty and spacious, it is separated by two holes, together it is a hole.

古文：从峡转北，得中央平洼一围，牛千百为群，散处其内，名为牛陇。
现代文：顺着水流向西进去，渐渐转向北，石崖变成峡谷，流水也慢慢深暗起来，与水月洞暗洞见到的相同。
English: Following the water flow, we entered the west and gradually turned to the north. The stone cliff turned into a canyon, and the flowing water gradually darkened. It was the same as what we saw in the dark cave of Shuiyue Cave.

古文：穷其西北，遂入阴洞后门，洞甚虚敞，分之则二，合之则一。右崖，石痕丛沓繁多，俱作马蹄形，《西事珥》所谓 天马 ，意即此矣。
现代文：虽然未走到洞中，两头的源流全都见到了，可以不必麻烦再在黑暗中摸索。洞口右边的石崖，石痕丛聚繁多，全呈马蹄形，《西事饵》所说的 天马 ，料想就是此处了。
English: Although I didn't make it to the cave, I could see all the headwaters at both ends, so I didn't have to go through the trouble of groping around in the dark. The rocky cliff on the right side of the cave entrance, with its numerous clusters of stone marks, was completely horseshoe-shaped, and I assumed that this was where the "heavenly horse" referred to in "The Westing Inn" was.

古文：出洞，益遵峡而北，仰瞩东西两界，峰翔石耸，队合层分。
现代文：出洞后，再沿峡谷往北行，仰望东西两列山，山峰翱翔山石耸峙，合成队列层层分开。
English: After coming out of the cave, I walked north along the canyon, looking up at the two rows of mountains to the east and west, with the peaks soaring and the rocks jutting out, and the composite queue separated layer by layer.

古文：遥望其下，有三洞南向，其上轰霞流电，闪烁有异，亟历莽趋之。
现代文：两座支峰在北边到头之处，北面的支峰又突兀而起，与中支的北麓对峙形成峡谷。遥望山下，有三个洞向南，洞上方云霞飞卷电光流转，闪闪烁烁有奇异之处，急忙经过丛莽赶去那里。
English: The two supporting peaks are at the end of the north side, and the northern supporting peak rises abruptly, forming a canyon with the northern foot of the middle branch. Looking down the mountain, there are three holes to the south. Above the cave, the clouds are flying, the lights are circulating, and there are flashing and strange places. I hurried through the jungle to get there.

古文：其左畔二门骈列，崖下虽悬乳缤纷，而内俱不深；其右畔一门，孤悬峰半，虽洞门嵌空，而中忽渊坠，其深数十丈，宛转内透，极杳邈之势。
现代文：那左侧的两个洞口双双并列，石崖下虽悬垂着缤纷的钟乳石，而洞内都不深；那右旁的一个洞口，孤零零悬在山峰半腰上，虽然洞口嵌在高空，可洞中忽然坠成深渊，那深处有数十丈，弯来转去通向深处，极尽杳邀深远的气势。
English: The two openings on the left side are both side by side. Although there are colorful stalactites hanging under the cliff, they are not deep inside the cave. The one on the right hangs alone halfway up the mountain. Although the opening is embedded high in the sky, the cave suddenly falls into an abyss. There are dozens of heights in the depths. It bends around to lead to the depths, and it has the power to invite the depths.

古文：而两崖峭削，无级下跻。
现代文：而两侧崖壁陡峭如削，没有石阶下去。
English: But the cliff walls on both sides are as steep as a chisel, and there are no stone steps to descend.

古文：踞崖端望之，其中飞鼠千百成群，见人蓬蓬内窜，其声甚遥，闻此中有蝙蝠洞，岂即此耶？
现代文：坐在悬崖顶端望里面，洞中蝙蝠成百上千组成群，见人就璞璞璞地向内飞窜，那声音非常遥远，听说这一带有个蝙蝠洞，难道就是这里吗？
English: Sitting at the top of the cliff and looking down, there are hundreds and thousands of bats in the cave. When they see people, they swoop in. The sound is very far away. I heard that there is a bat cave here. Is this it?

古文：出洞下山，望西北山嘴颇近，以为由此奔水月后洞而入，抵上岩甚便。
现代文：出洞后下山，望见西北方的山嘴很近，以为由此穿过水月洞后洞进去，去到上岩十分方便。
English: After coming out of the cave, I went down the mountain and saw that the mountain's mouth in the northwest was very close. I thought that it would be very convenient to go through the back hole of the water moon cave and go to the upper rock.

古文：竭蹶一里趋之，其下既洼，乃攀陟山冈，则巨石飞耸，中俱蔓络，下嵌澄渊，路断径绝。
现代文：竭力跌跌撞撞走一里赶去那里，脚下不久就洼陷下去，于是攀登山冈，就见巨石飞耸，中间全都延展开交缠在一起，下边嵌入澄碧的深渊中，大路小径全断绝了。
English: He stumbled for a mile to get there, soon sinking beneath his feet, and then climbed the mountain and saw the boulders flying, the middle all spread out and intertwined, the bottom embedded in the clear blue abyss, and the highway path completely cut off.

古文：乃循北麓，仍东趋一里，南向前来之峡。
现代文：只得沿着北麓，仍往东赶了一里路，向南走入先前来时的峡谷。
English: I had to follow the northern foot of the mountain, still a mile to the east, and walk south into the canyon I had come from before.

古文：又经牛陇而南，共三里，返上岩之前。
现代文：又经牛陇往南行，共三里，返回到上岩的前边。
English: I also went south via Niulong, a total of three miles, and returned to the front of Shangyan Mountain.

古文：见日有余照，仍入水月，徜徉明洞之内。
现代文：见落日还有余辉，仍进入水月洞，闲步在明洞之内。
English: See the sunset and the afterglow, still enter the water moon cave, stroll in the bright cave.

古文：复随流出洞后，睇望所涉路断处，犹隔一峰嘴，始知此中山形横侧倏变，不可以意拟如此。
现代文：再次随着水流出了后洞，斜视所走过的路断之处，还隔着一个山嘴，这才明白这一带山势的横竖变化不定，不能凭主观意想来推断。
English: Again, as the water flowed out of the back hole, I squinted at the broken path I had walked through, and also across a mountain peak, which made me understand that the vertical and horizontal changes of this mountain range were uncertain and could not be inferred by subjective imagination.

古文：是夕仍宿上岩。
现代文：这天晚上仍住在上岩。
English: He was still living in Sheungam that night.

