古文：楚襄王为太子之时，质于齐。
现代文：楚襄王做太子的时候，在齐国做质子。
English: When King Chu Xiang was crown prince, he was a proton in Qi.

古文：怀王薨，太子辞于齐王而归。
现代文：他的父亲楚怀王死了，太子向齐王提出要回楚国奔丧。
English: His father, King Chu Huai, died, and the prince proposed to King Qi that he return to Chu to mourn.

古文：齐王隘之： 予我东地五百里，乃归子。
现代文：齐王阻止，说： 你要割让给我位于东地方圆五百里的土地，我才放你回去。
English: King Qi stopped him and said, "If you will cede to me a piece of land five hundred miles to the east, I will let you go back."

古文：子不予我，不得归。 
现代文：你如果不割让的话，你就回不去。 
English: If you don't concede, you can't go back.

古文：太子曰： 臣有傅，请追而问傅。 
现代文：太子说： 我有个老师，请允许我问问他再说。 
English: The prince said: I have a teacher, please allow me to ask him.

古文：傅慎子曰： 献之地，所以为身也。
现代文：太子的老师慎子说： 您答应割让给齐国土地吧。
English: The prince's teacher, Shinko, said, "You should agree to cede the land to Qi.

古文：爱地不送死父，不义。
现代文：土地是为了安身的，因为吝惜土地，却不为父亲送葬，是不符合道义的。
English: The land is for the sake of settling down, because it is immoral to be stingy with the land, but not to bury your father.

古文：臣故曰献之便。 
现代文：所以我说，割让土地对您有利。 
English: That's why I say it's in your interest to cede the land.

古文：太子入，致命齐王曰： 敬献地五百里。 
现代文：太子进宫，答复齐王说： 我敬献方圆五百里的土地。 
English: When the crown prince entered the palace, he replied to King Qi, "I offer my respects to the land that is five hundred miles around."

古文：齐王归楚太子。
现代文：齐王这才允许太子返回楚国。
English: It was only then that King Qi allowed the prince to return to Chu.

古文：太子归，即位为王。
现代文：太子回到楚国，继承了王位。
English: The prince returned to Chu and succeeded to the throne.

古文：齐使车五十乘，来取东地于楚。
现代文：齐国派来五十辆使车，来楚国索取位于东地的土地。
English: The State of Qi sent fifty wagons to request land from the State of Chu.

古文：楚王告慎子曰： 齐使来求东地，为之奈何? 
现代文：楚王告诉慎子说： 齐国的使臣来索取东地，这该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Chu told Shen Zi, "The envoys from the State of Qi have come to claim the eastern land. What should we do?

古文：慎子曰： 王明日朝群臣，皆令献其计。 
现代文：慎子说： 大王明天召见群臣，让大家都来想办法。 
English: Shinko said, "The great king is summoning his ministers tomorrow, so let everyone come up with a solution."

古文：上柱国子良入见。王曰： 寡人之得求反，王坟墓复群臣、归社稷也，以东地五百里许齐。
现代文：于是，上柱国子良进宫拜见楚王，楚王说： 我能够回到楚国来办理父王的丧事，又能和群臣再次见面，使国家恢复正常，是以答应割让给齐国东地方圆五百里的土地为条件的。
English: As a result, the upper pillar, Guo Ziliang, entered the palace to see King Chu. King Chu said: I can return to Chu to handle the funeral of my father, and I can meet with the ministers again to restore the country to normal, on the condition that I agree to cede 500 miles of land in the eastern part of Qi.

古文：齐令使来求地，为之奈何? 
现代文：现在齐国派使臣办理交接手续，这该怎么办？ 
English: Now that Qi has sent envoys to handle the handover procedures, what should we do?

古文：子良曰： 王不可不与也。王身出玉声，许强万乘之齐而不与，则不信。后不可以约结诸侯。
现代文：子良说： 大王不能不给，您的话一诺千金，既然亲口答应了强大的齐国，却又不肯割地，这就是不守信用，将来您就很难和其他诸侯国家谈判结盟。
English: Ziliang said: The great king cannot but give, your words are a promise of a thousand gold, since you personally promised the powerful Qi country, but refused to cut the land, this is not keeping the trust, in the future it will be difficult for you to negotiate an alliance with other vassal countries.

古文：请与而复攻之。
现代文：应该先答应给齐国割让东地，然后再出兵攻打齐国。
English: It should first promise to cede Dongchi to Qi, and then send troops to attack Qi.

古文：与之信，攻之武，臣故曰与之。 
现代文：割地，是守信用；攻打齐国，是不示弱。
English: To divide the land is to keep one's word; to attack the whole country is not to show weakness.

古文：子良出，昭常入见。
现代文：所以我认为应该割地。 子良离宫之后，昭常进宫拜见楚王。
English: Therefore, I think it is necessary to divide the land. After Kira left the palace, Sojo entered the palace to visit King Chu.

古文：王曰： 齐使来求东地五百里，为之奈何? 
现代文：楚王说： 齐国使臣来索要东地方圆五百里的土地，这该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Chu said, "The envoys from the State of Qi have come to ask for 500 miles of land in the east. What should we do?

古文：昭常曰： 不可与也。
现代文：昭常说： 不能给。
English: Shou Chang said: I can't give it to you.

古文：万乘者，以地大为万乘。
现代文：所谓万乘之国，是因为土地幅员辽阔才被称为万乘之国的。
English: The so-called country of Manchuria is called the country of Manchuria because of the vast land area.

古文：今去东地五百里，是去战国之半也，有万乘之号，而无千乘之用也，不可。
现代文：现在如果割让东地方圆五百里的土地，这样就减少了我国一半的战斗力啊！这样楚国虽有万乘之国的称号，却连千乘之国的实力也没有了，不能割让。
English: Now, if we cede 500 miles of land in the eastern region, this will reduce our combat effectiveness by half! Thus, although Chu has the title of the country of 10,000 horsemen, it does not even have the strength of the country of 1,000 horsemen, and cannot be ceded.

古文：臣故曰勿与。
现代文：所以我说不能割让。
English: That's why I said we can't concede.

古文：常请守之。 
现代文：请让我来守卫东地。 
English: Please let me guard the east.

古文：昭常出，景鲤入见。
现代文：昭常离宫之后，景鲤进宫拜见楚王。
English: After Zhaozhang left the palace, Jingyao went to the palace to visit King Chu.

古文：王曰： 齐使来求东地五百里，为之奈何? 
现代文：楚王说： 齐国使臣来索要东地方圆五百里的土地，这该怎么办呢？ 
English: King Chu said, "The envoys from the State of Qi have come to ask for 500 miles of land in the east. What should we do?

古文：景鲤曰： 不可与也。
现代文：景鲤说： 不能给。
English: Jingyao said, "I can't give it."

古文：虽然，楚不能独守。
现代文：虽然如此，不能单靠楚国一国的力量独守东地。
English: Nevertheless, it is not possible to defend the east by relying on the strength of Chu alone.

古文：王身出玉声，许万乘之强齐也而不与，负不义于天下，楚亦不能独守。
现代文：大王亲口说出来的话，一诺千金，答应了拥有万乘的强大的齐国，却又不割让土地，这就在天下落了个不义的坏名声。
English: When the great king said it himself, he promised a lot of money and promised the powerful state of Qi, which had a lot of resources, but he did not cede the land. This earned him a bad reputation for injustice in the world.

古文：臣请西索救于秦。 
现代文：也不能单靠楚国一国的力量来独守东地。请让我去往西向秦国求救。 
English: Nor can I rely on the strength of Chu alone to defend the east. Please let me go west to ask Qin for help.

古文：景鲤出，慎子入。
现代文：景鲤出朝后，太子的师傅慎子进去。
English: After Jingyao left the palace, the prince's teacher, Shanzi, came in.

古文：王以三大夫计告慎子曰： 子良见寡人曰： 不可不与也，与而复攻之。 
现代文：楚王把三个大夫出的主意都告诉了慎子，说： 子良说 不能不给，给了以后再出兵去进攻齐国 。
English: King Chu told Shen Zi the idea of the three doctors, saying: Ziliang said that he could not refuse to give it to him, and then sent troops to attack Qi.

古文：常见寡人曰： 不可与也，常请守之。 鲤见寡人曰： 不可与也，虽然，楚不能独守也，臣请索救于秦。 
现代文：昭常说 不能给，我愿去守卫东地。 景鲤说： 不能给，既然楚国不能单独守住东地，我愿意去求救于秦国。 
English: Zhao Chang said, "I can't give it to you, I'm willing to go and guard the eastern land." Jing Xi said, "I can't give it to you, since Chu can't hold the eastern land alone, I'm willing to go and seek help from Qin."

古文：寡人谁用于三子之计? 慎子对曰： 王皆用之！ 
现代文：我不知道他们三个人出的主意，到底采用谁的好？ 慎子回答说： 大王都采用。 
English: I don't know which of the three of them came up with the idea, and who should be used? Shinko replied, "All of them."

古文：王怫然作色曰： 何谓也? 
现代文：楚王怒容满面地说： 这是什么意思？ 
English: King Chu angrily said, "What does this mean?"

古文：慎子曰： 臣请效其说，而王且见其诚然也。王发上柱国子良车五十乘，而北献地五百里于齐。发子良之明日，遣昭常为大司马，令往守东地。遣昭常之明日，遣景鲤车五十乘，西索救于秦。 
现代文：慎子说： 请让我说出我的道理，大王将会知道确实如此；大王您先派遣上柱子良带上兵车辆，到齐国去进献东地里；在派遣子良的第二天，又任命昭常为大司马，要他去守卫东地；在派遣昭常的第二天，又派景鲤带领战车辆，往西去秦国求救。 楚王说： 好 。
English: Shen Zi said, "Please let me speak my truth, and the great king will know that this is indeed the case; great king, you first sent Shang Zi Liang with armored vehicles to Qi to march into the East; on the second day of sending Zi Liang, you also appointed Zhaozhang as the grand steward to guard the East; on the second day of sending Zhaozhang, you also sent Jing Yao to lead the war vehicle and go west to Qin for help. King Chu said, "Good."

古文：王曰： 善。 乃遣子良北献地于齐。遣子良之明日，立昭常为大司马，使守东地。又遣景鲤西索救于秦。
现代文：于是派子良到齐国去献地，在派子良的第二天，又立昭常为大司马，要他去守卫东地；还派遣景鲤去秦国求救。
English: So he sent Ziliang to Qi Province to offer land, and on the second day after he sent Ziliang, he also appointed Zhao Chang as the grand steward and asked him to guard the eastern land; he also sent Jingyao to Qin Province to ask for help.

古文：子良至齐，齐使人以甲受东地。
现代文：子良到了齐国，齐国派武装来接受东地。
English: Zilang arrived in Qi, and Qi sent armed forces to take over Dongchi.

古文：昭常应齐使曰： 我典主东地，且与死生。悉五尺至六十，三十余万弊甲钝兵，愿承下尘。 
现代文：昭常回答齐国使臣说： 我是主管东地的大司马，要与东地共存亡，我已动员了从小孩到岁的老人全部入伍，共多万人，虽然我们的铠甲破旧，武器鲁钝，但愿意奉陪到底。 
English: Shou Chang replied to the Qian envoy, "I am the grand steed in charge of the East, and I want to coexist with the East. I have mobilized all the old people from children to old people to enlist, a total of more than ten thousand people. Although our armor is worn out and our weapons are blunt, I am willing to accompany them to the end.

古文：齐王谓子良曰： 大夫来献地，今常守之何如? 
现代文：齐王对子良说： 您来献地，昭常却守卫东地，这是怎么回事呢？ 
English: King Qi said to Ziliang: You come to offer land, but you always guard the eastern land. What's going on?

古文：子良曰： 臣身受弊邑之王，是常矫也。王攻之。 
现代文：子良说： 我是受了敝国大王之命来进献东地的。
English: Ziliang said, "I have been ordered by the great king of Shandong to go and offer up the eastern land.

古文：齐王大兴兵，攻东地，伐昭常。
现代文：昭常守卫东地，这是他假传王命，大王可以去进攻他。 齐王于是大举进攻东地，讨伐昭常。
English: Zhao Zang was guarding the East, and this was his false transmission of the king's order, so that the great king could attack him. King Qi then launched a large-scale attack on the East and fought against Zhao Zang.

古文：未涉疆，秦以五十万临齐右壤。曰： 夫隘楚太子弗出，不仁；又欲夺之东地五百里，不义。
现代文：当大军还未到达东地边界时，秦国已经派了万大军进逼齐国的西境，说： 你们扣押了楚太子，不让回国，这是不讲仁道；又想抢夺楚国东地里，这是不讲正义。
English: When the large army had not yet reached the eastern border, the Qin State had already sent a large army to the western border of Qi, saying: You have detained the Prince of Chu and will not allow him to return to the country, which is not humane; and you want to rob the eastern part of Chu, which is not fair.

古文：其缩甲则可，不然，则愿待战。 
现代文：你们如果收兵则罢；不然，我们等着决战一场。 
English: If you withdraw, so be it; otherwise, we are waiting for a decisive battle.

古文：齐王恐焉，乃请子良南道楚，西使秦，解齐患。
现代文：齐王害怕了，就请求子良往南告诉楚国，与楚国讲和，又派人往西出使秦国，解除了齐国的祸患。
English: King Qi was afraid, so he asked Ziliang to go to the south to tell the state of Chu and make peace with the state of Chu. He also sent someone to the west to send an envoy to the state of Qin to remove the evil from the state of Qi.

古文：士卒不用，东地复全。
现代文：楚国没有派一兵一卒，却保全了东地。
English: Chu did not send a single soldier, but preserved the eastern land.

