古文：王继忠傅潜戴兴王汉忠王能张凝魏能陈兴许均张进李重贵呼延赞刘用耿全斌周仁美王继忠，开封人。父珫，为武骑指挥使，戍瓦桥关，卒。
现代文：王继忠，开封人。父亲王王充，任武骑指挥使，戍守瓦桥关，去世。
English: Wang Jizhong, a native of Kaifeng, whose father, Wang Wangchong, served as a military cavalry commander and guarded the tile bridge pass, passed away.

古文：继忠年六岁，补东西班殿侍。
现代文：继忠六岁时，补为东西班殿侍。
English: When Jizhong was six years old, he became an attendant of the Eastern and Western Divisions.

古文：真宗在藩邸，得给事左右，以谨厚被亲信。
现代文：真宗在王府时，得以事奉左右，因恭谨厚道被亲信。
English: When the Shinshu Sect was in the royal palace, it was able to serve the right and left, and because of its respectful and kind manner, it was trusted by close relatives.

古文：即位，补内殿崇班，累迁至殿前都虞候，领云州观察使，出为深州副都部署，改镇、定、高阳关三路钤辖兼河北都转运使，迁高阳关副都部署，俄徙定州。
现代文：真宗即皇帝位，继忠补为内殿崇班，累迁至殿前都虞候、掌领云州观察使，出任深州副都部署，改任镇、定、高阳关三路钤辖兼河北都转运使，升任高阳关副都部署，不久移任定州。
English: Zhenzong is the emperor, followed by Zhongfu as the Inner Court of the Inner Court of the Inner Court, successively moved to the front of the palace, led the Yunnan observation envoy, served as the deputy capital of Shenzhou, was transferred to the jurisdiction of Zhen, Ding, Gaoyangguan and Hebei Province, was promoted to the deputy capital of Gaoyangguan, and soon moved to Dingzhou.

古文：咸平六年，契丹数万骑南侵，至望都，继忠与大将王超及桑赞等领兵援之。
现代文：咸平六年，契丹几万骑兵向南侵犯，到达望都，继忠与大将王超及桑赞等人率领军队支援。
English: In the sixth year of Xianping, tens of thousands of Khitan cavalry invaded the south and reached the capital of Wangdu. Ji Zhong and generals Wang Chao and Sanzhan led the army to support.

古文：继忠至康村，与契丹战，自日昳至乙夜，敌势小却。
现代文：继忠到达康村，与契丹战斗，从日落到晚上二更，敌人气势稍稍退却。
English: Jizhong arrived at Kang Village and fought with Khitan. From sunset to two o'clock in the evening, the enemy's momentum retreated slightly.

古文：迟明复战，继忠阵东偏，为敌所乘，断饷道，超、赞皆畏缩退师，竟不赴援。
现代文：天亮再战，继忠阵势偏东，被敌人所乘，绝断粮饷道路，王超、桑赞都畏缩退军，竟然不前去援助。
English: When the battle resumed at dawn, the enemy took advantage of the eastward movement of the loyalist formation and cut off the supply route. Wang Chao and Sangzan both retreated in fear and did not go to help.

古文：继忠独与麾下跃马驰赴，服饰稍异，契丹识之，围数十重。
现代文：继忠独自与部下跃马奔驰前去，服装衣饰稍不同，契丹认出来，包围几十层。
English: Jizhong went alone with his subordinates in a horse-drawn carriage. Their clothing was slightly different, and the Khitan recognized them and surrounded them for dozens of floors.

古文：士皆重创，殊死战，且战且行，旁西山而北，至白城，遂陷于契丹。
现代文：士兵都受重伤，殊死战斗，边战边走，沿西山而向北，到达白城，于是被契丹俘获。
English: The soldiers were all seriously wounded and fought to the death, walking side by side as they went north along the West Mountain to reach Baicheng, where they were captured by the Khitan.

古文：真宗闻之震悼，初谓已死，优诏赠大同军节度，赗赙加等，官其四子。
现代文：真宗听到这一消息后感到震动，开始认为继忠已死，优诏赠大同军节度，增加等级送给财物以帮助办丧事，以他的四个儿子为官。
English: After hearing this news, Shinsong was shocked and began to think that Jizhong was dead. He presented the Datong Army Festival Award, increased the level of gifts to help with the funeral, and appointed his four sons as officials.

古文：景德初，契丹请和，令继忠奏章，乃知其尚在。
现代文：景德初年，契丹请和，命令继忠上奏奏章，才知道他还活着。
English: In the first year of Jingde's reign, Khitan made peace and ordered Ji Zhong Shang to play a piece of music, only to find out that he was still alive.

古文：朝廷从之，自是南北戢兵，继忠有力焉。
现代文：朝廷批准了他的建议，从此南北息兵，继忠有功于此。
English: The Imperial Court approved his proposal, and from then on, the North and the South halted hostilities, and Jitada is credited with this.

古文：岁遣使至契丹，必以袭衣、金带、器币、茶药赐之，继忠对使者亦必泣下。
现代文：朝廷每年派使者到契丹，必定以袭衣、金带、器币、茶叶药物赐给他，继忠对使者也必定泪下。
English: Every year, the imperial court sent an emissary to Khitan. He must have been given a suit of armor, a gold belt, money, and tea medicine. He must have shed tears for the emissary.

古文：尝附表恳请召还，上以誓书约各无所求，不欲渝之，赐诏谕意。
现代文：曾附奏表请求召回他，皇帝因盟书约定各无所求，不想背叛盟约，赐诏书晓谕旨意。
English: There was a petition to recall him, but the emperor did not want to renege on the treaty, so he issued an edict.

古文：契丹主遇继忠甚厚，更其姓名为耶律显忠，又改名宗信，封楚王，后不知其所终。
现代文：契丹主待继忠很优厚，更改他的姓名为耶律显忠，又改名宗信，封楚王，后不知继忠所终。
English: The Khitan lord waited for Jizhong very generously, changed his name to Yerut Hsentong, and also changed his name to Zongxin, King of Chu, but it is not known where Jizhong ended up.

古文：子怀节、怀敏、怀德、怀政。
现代文：儿子怀节、怀敏、怀德、怀政。
English: His sons are Huai Jie, Huai Min, Huai De and Huai Zheng.

古文：大中祥符三年，卒。呼延赞，并州太原人。
现代文：真宗东宫王府攀附的人，继忠之后有王守俊官至济州刺史，蔚昭敏官至殿前都指挥使、保静军节度使，翟明官至氵名州团练使，王遵度官至磁州团练使，杨保用官至西上门使、康州刺史，郑怀德官至御前忠佐马步军都军头、永州团练使，张承易官至礼宾使，吴延昭官至供备库使，白文肇官至引进使、昭州团练使，彭睿官至侍卫马军副都指挥使、武昌军节度使，靳忠官至侍卫马军都虞候、端州防御史，郝荣官至安国军节度观察留后，陈玉官至冀州刺史，崔美官至济州团练使，高汉美官至郑州团练使，杨谦官至御前忠佐马步军副都军头、河州刺史。呼延赞，并州太原人。
English: The adherents of the Donggong Royal Palace of the True Church, after Zhong, were Wang Shoujun official to Jeju, Wei Zhaomin official to the front of the palace, Bao Jing military commander, Gongming official to the training of the Renmin State Corps, Wang Zundu official to the training of the Magnet State Corps, Yang Bao official to the west gate, Kangzhou official, Zheng Haide official to the front of the loyal Zama army, Yongzhou regimental commander, Zhang Chengyi official to the protocol envoy, Wu Yan Zhao official to the reserve depot, Bai Wen Zhao official to the introduction envoy, Zhaozhou regimental commander, Peng

古文：父琮，周淄州马步都指挥使。
现代文：他的父亲叫呼延琮，任后周淄州马步都指挥使。
English: His father's name was Hu Yanjun, and he later became the commanding officer of Zhou Bozhou Ma Bodu.

古文：赞少为骁骑卒，太祖以其材勇，补东班长，入承旨，迁骁雄军使。
现代文：呼延赞少年时当骁骑兵，宋太祖认为他有才且勇敢，补选他任东班头领，入宫领受皇帝圣旨，升任骁雄军使。
English: When Huyan Zan was a boy, he was a horse cavalryman. Song Taizu thought that he was talented and brave. He was elected as the leader of the East squad, entered the palace to receive the emperor's edict, and was promoted to the military envoy of Shao Xiong.

古文：从王全斌讨西川，身当前锋，中数创，以功补副指挥使。
现代文：他随王全斌讨伐西川，亲自担任前锋，身体遭受数处创伤，以战功补选为副指挥使。
English: He followed Wang Quanbin to fight in the West River, personally served as a forward, suffered several injuries to his body, and was elected as a deputy commander with his war service.

古文：太平兴国初，太宗亲选军校，以赞为铁骑军指挥使。
现代文：太平兴国初，宋太宗亲自选拔军校，任命呼延赞为铁骑军指挥使。
English: At the beginning of the Taiping Xingguo, Song Taizong personally selected the military school and appointed Hu Yanzan as the commander of the Iron Cavalry.

古文：从征太原，先登乘城，及堞而坠者数四，面赐金帛奖之。
现代文：他随太宗征讨太原，最先登上城楼，战斗中从城上矮墙掉下四次，皇帝当面赏赐金帛奖励他。
English: He went with Emperor Taizong to conquer Taiyuan. He was the first to climb the city tower. During the battle, he fell down from the low wall of the city four times. The emperor rewarded him with a gold ingot in person.

古文：七年，从崔翰戍定州，翰言其勇，擢为马军副都军头，稍迁内员寮直都虞候。
现代文：太平兴国七年，他跟随崔翰戍守定州，崔翰说他勇猛，提拔他为马军副都军头，不久升任内员寮直都虞候。
English: In the seventh year of Taiping Xingguo, he followed Choi Han-so to defend Dingzhou. Choi Han said that he was brave and promoted him to vice-commander of the horse army, and soon he was promoted to the inner member of the dormitory.

古文：雍熙四年，加马步军副都军头。
现代文：雍熙四年，朝廷给他加职为马步军副都军头。
English: In the fourth year of Yongxi, the imperial court gave him an additional post as deputy commander of the Horse Guards.

古文：尝献阵图、兵要及树营砦之策，求领边任。召见，令之作武艺。
现代文：他曾向上进献军队阵图、军事要领和军队驻营扎寨的策略，请求到边疆领兵任职，宋太宗召见他，命令表演武艺。
English: Song Taizong summoned him and ordered him to perform martial arts. Song Taizong had previously presented military plans, military essentials, and military encampment strategies to Song Taizong, and asked him to serve as a military leader on the frontier.

古文：赞具装执鞬驰骑，挥铁鞭、枣槊，旋绕廷中数四，又引其四子必兴、必改、必求、必显以入，迭舞剑盘槊。
现代文：呼延赞穿上战装，执鞭驱马，挥动铁鞭、枣木长矛，在廷中旋绕四圈多，他又带他的四个儿子必兴、必改、必求、必显加入，轮流舞剑挥旋长矛。
English: Huyanzan put on his battle uniform, drove his horse with a whip, and swung an iron whip and a jujube lance, circling more than four laps in the court. He also brought his four sons, Bixing, Bijie, Biju, and Bixian, to join him, and they took turns dancing with swords and swinging spears.

古文：赐白金数百两及四子衣带。
现代文：皇帝赏赐银子数百两，赏给他四个儿子衣服绸带。
English: The emperor rewarded him with several hundred taels of silver, and gave his four sons fine clothes and silk sashes.

古文：端拱二年，领富州刺史。
现代文：端拱二年，呼延赞兼任富州刺史。
English: In the second year of the end of the arch, Huyan Zhan also served as the Fuzhou stabbing history.

古文：俄与辅超并加都军头。
现代文：不久，他与辅超一起增任都军头。
English: Soon, he and Fu Chao were both appointed as the heads of the capital's military.

古文：淳化三年，出为保州刺史、冀州副都部署。
现代文：淳化三年，他外任保州刺史、冀州副都部署。
English: In the third year of Chunhua, he was assigned to Bozhou Shishi and Jizhou Vice.

古文：至屯所，以无统御材，改辽州刺史。
现代文：他到达军队驻扎的地点，因为没有统领驾驭人的才能，改任辽州刺史。
English: He arrived at the place where the army was stationed, because he did not have the ability to command and control people, he was transferred to Liaozhou.

古文：又以不能治民，复为都军头、领扶州刺史，加康州团练使。
现代文：又因没有才能治理人民，再任职都军头，兼任扶州刺史，又增职任康州团练使。
English: And because he was not able to govern the people, he was appointed as the military commander of the capital, concurrently served as the governor of Fuzhou, and was additionally appointed as the regimental drill sergeant of Kangzhou.

古文：咸平二年，从幸大名，为行宫内外都巡检。
现代文：咸平二年，呼延赞随宋真宗巡幸大名。担任行宫内外都巡检。
English: In the second year of Emperor Xianping, Huyan Zan accompanied Emperor Song Zhenzong on a grand tour. He was in charge of patrolling both inside and outside the palace.

古文：真宗尝补军校，皆叙己功，或至喧哗，赞独进曰： 臣月奉百千，所用不及半，忝幸多矣。
现代文：宋真宗曾补选军校，人人都叙说自己的功劳，有的人甚至喧哗争执起来。独呼延赞上奏说 ：我每月的俸禄上百千，我所用的不到月俸的一半，皇上照顾我已很多了。
English: Song Zhenzong once held a by-election for a military school. Everyone talked about their merits, and some people even quarreled loudly. One person praised Yan and said: My monthly salary is over one hundred thousand, I use less than half of my monthly salary, the emperor has taken care of me a lot.

古文：自念无以报国，不敢更求迁擢，将恐福过灾生。 再拜而退，众嘉其知分。
现代文：我自己想着没有什么报效国家，不敢再求升迁，且恐怕福太多而灾祸产生。 他再次拜谢皇帝便退下，大家都称赞他知本分。
English: I myself thought that there was no reward country, and I did not dare to seek promotion again, and I was afraid that there would be too much blessing and disaster.He bowed to the emperor again and withdrew, and everyone praised his wisdom.

古文：三年，元德皇太后园陵，命掌护仪卫，及还而卒。
现代文：咸平三年，元德皇太后造墓地，任命他掌管护仪卫，回来后他就死了。
English: In the third year of Xianping, the former German Empress Dowager built a cemetery and appointed him to be in charge of the guard. He died after returning.

古文：赞有胆勇，鸷悍轻率，常言愿死于敌。
现代文：呼延赞有胆量勇气，勇猛强劲，随和率直，经常说愿意战死在敌军中。
English: Huyan was praised for his courage, bravery, strength, easy-going and straightforward, and often said that he was willing to fight and die in the enemy army.

古文：遍文其体为 赤心杀贼 字，至于妻孥仆使皆然，诸子耳后别刺字曰： 出门忘家为国，临阵忘死为主。 及作破阵刀、降魔杵，铁折上巾，两旁有刃，皆重十数斤。绛帕首，乘骓马，服饰诡异。
现代文：在自己身上到处纹 赤心杀贼 字，甚至于他的妻子、儿子、仆人都在身上纹了这几个字。他的几个儿子耳朵后面另外刺字曰 ：出门忘家为国，临阵忘死为主。 他创制兵器破阵刀、降魔杵，铁折上巾，两边有锋利的刀刃，兵器都重达十几斤，他头戴深红色的纺织品，骑着杂毛色的马，身上的穿戴奇异。
English: He has the words "Red-hearted Thief Killer" tattooed all over his body, and even his wife, son, and servants have these words tattooed on their bodies. Several of his sons have another word tattooed behind their ears, saying: "When you go out, forget home and country, but when you are in battle, forget death." He created weapons such as the battle-breaking knife, the devil-throwing dagger, and the iron-folding scarf, with sharp blades on both sides. The weapons weigh more than ten pounds. He wears crimson textiles on his head, rides a horse with mixed hair, and wears strange clothes.

古文：性复鄙诞不近理，盛冬以水沃孩幼，冀其长能寒而劲健。
现代文：他性格俗陋怪异，不近情理，隆冬时把水浇在幼孩身上，期望小孩长大后耐寒且强劲健壮。
English: His character is vulgar, strange, and unreasonable. He pours water on young children in the middle of winter, hoping that the children will grow up to be cold-resistant and strong.

古文：其子尝病，赞刲股为羹疗之。
现代文：他的儿子曾经生病，他就割下自己大腿上的肉熬汤给儿子治病。
English: Once, when his son was ill, he cut off the flesh from his own thigh and boiled it to make soup to cure his son.

古文：赞卒后，擢必显为军副都军头。
现代文：呼延赞死后，朝廷提升其子必显任军副都军头。
English: After the death of Huyanzan, the imperial court promoted his son Bixian to the post of deputy military commander.

