古文：侯益家富于财，厚赂执政及史弘肇等，由是大臣争誉之。
现代文：起强圉协洽五月，尽著雍涒滩二月，不满一年。后汉高祖乾元年三月，丙辰，史弘肇出仕复职，加官兼侍中。侯益家里财产丰厚，送厚礼贿赂执掌政权的大臣和史弘肇等人，因此众大臣交口称赞。
English: It took less than a year from May to February to complete the Yongle Bund. In March of the first year of the post-Han Gaozhu Qian, Xing Chen and Shi Hongzhao were reinstated and promoted to vice-minister and chamberlain. Hou Yi's family was rich in property and bribed the minister in charge of the regime and Shi Hongzhao and others with generous gifts, so the ministers praised each other.

古文：丙寅，以益兼中书令，行开封尹。
现代文：丙寅，任命侯益兼中书令，代理开封尹。
English: Cui Yin, appointed Hou Yi and Zhong Shuling, acting Kaifeng Yin.

古文：改广晋府为大名府，晋昌军为永兴军。
现代文：改广晋府为大名府，改晋昌军为永兴军。
English: Guangjinfu was changed to Damingfu, and Jinchang Army was changed to Yongxing Army.

古文：侯益盛毁王景崇于朝，言其恣横。
现代文：侯益在朝中大肆诋毁王景崇，说他恣意横行。
English: Hou Yi slandered Wang Jingsong in the court and said that he was acting arbitrarily.

古文：景崇闻益尹开封，知事已变，内不自安，且怨朝廷。
现代文：王景崇听说侯益为开封尹，明白事态已产生变化，内心忐忑不安，而且埋怨朝廷。
English: Wang Jingsong heard that Hou Yi was Kaifeng Yin, understood that the situation had changed, felt uneasy, and complained to the imperial court.

古文：会诏遣供奉官王益如凤翔，征赵匡赞牙兵诣阙，赵思绾等甚惧，景崇因以言激之。
现代文：正赶上诏令派供奉官王益到凤翔，取赵匡赞的牙兵带回京城，牙校赵思绾等人很害怕，王景崇乘机用话语相激。
English: It was just in time for the imperial edict to send the offering official Wang Yi to Fengxiang to take Zhao Kuanzan's dental soldiers back to Beijing. The dental school Zhao Siyu and others were very afraid, and Wang Jingsong took the opportunity to use words to provoke each other.

古文：思绾途中谓其党常彦卿曰： 小太尉已落其手，吾属至京师，并死矣，奈何？ 
现代文：赵思绾在路上对他的党羽常彦卿说： 小太尉赵匡赞已落入他们的手中，我们到达京城，都得死了，怎么办？ 
English: On the way, Zhao Siyu said to his comrade-in-arms, Tsuneyoshi Tsuneyoshi: "Lieutenant Zhao Kuanzan has fallen into their hands. When we reach the capital, we will all die. What should we do?"

古文：彦卿曰： 临机制变，子勿复言。 
现代文：常彦卿说： 见机行事，你不要再说！ 
English: Lord Tsunehiko said, "Seize the opportunity and act. Don't talk anymore!"

古文：癸酉，至长安，永兴节度副使安友规、巡检乔守温出迎王益，置酒于客亭。
现代文：癸酉，到达长安，永兴节度副使安友规、巡检乔守温出城迎接王益，并在客亭设置酒宴款待。
English: After arriving in Chang'an, Yongxing Jiedu Deputy Envoy An Youjie and Patrolman Qiao Shouwen went out of the city to meet Wang Yi, and set up a wine banquet in the guest pavilion.

古文：思绾前白曰： 壕寨使已定舍馆于城东。今将士家属皆在城中，欲各入城挈家诣城东宿。 
现代文：这时，赵思绾走上前来说： 壕寨使已经把舍馆定在城东，现在将士的家属都在城中，想各自进城把家属带到城东住宿。 
English: At this time, Zhao Sijian stepped forward and said: The entrenchment envoy has already set the lodging hall in the east of the city, and now the families of the soldiers are in the city, and they want to enter the city and bring their families to the east of the city for accommodation.

古文：友规等然之。
现代文：安友规等人同意。
English: An Yougui and others agreed.

古文：时思绾等皆无铠仗，既入西门，有州校坐门侧，思绾遽夺其剑斩之。其徒因大譟，持白梃，杀守门者十馀人，分遣其党守诸门。
现代文：当时赵思绾等人都没有武器铠甲，进了西门，见有该州军校坐在门旁，赵思绾突然夺过他的剑把他杀死；赵思绾的党羽乘势大喊大叫，拿着棍子，打死十几个守门兵士，派遣党羽分别把守各个大门。
English: At that time, Zhao Siyu and others did not have weapons and armor, entered the West Gate, saw the military school of the state sitting next to the door, Zhao Siyu suddenly took his sword and killed him; Zhao Siyu's party members shouted loudly, took a stick, killed more than a dozen gate soldiers, and sent party members to guard each gate separately.

古文：思绾入府，开库取铠仗给之，友规等皆逃去。
现代文：赵思绾进入府衙，打开府库取出武器铠甲分给大家，安友规等人都逃跑离开。
English: Zhao Siyu entered the government office, opened the government treasury and took out weapons and armor for everyone. An Yougui and others all ran away.

古文：思绾遂据城，集城中少年，得四千馀人，缮城隍，葺楼堞，旬日间，战守之具皆备。
现代文：赵思绾于是占据了长安城，集中城内少年，约有四千多人，修缮护城壕沟，整治城楼矮墙，十天之内，作战守卫的器械样样齐备。
English: Zhao Siyu then occupied Chang'an City, concentrating the city's boys, about more than four thousand people, to repair the moat, repair the low walls of the castle, and within ten days, the equipment of the combat guard was ready.

古文：王景崇讽凤翔吏民表景崇知军府事，朝廷患之。
现代文：王景崇示意凤翔的官吏士民向朝廷上表，推举自己主持军府事务，朝廷对此深为担忧。
English: Wang Jingsong suggested that the officials, judges and people of Fengxiang submit to the imperial court to nominate themselves to preside over the affairs of the military government. The imperial court was deeply concerned about this.

古文：甲戌，徙静难节度使王守恩为永兴节度使，徙保义节度使赵晖为凤翔节度使，并同平章事。
现代文：甲戌，调静难节度使王守恩为永兴节度使，调保义节度使赵晖为凤翔节度使，都为同平章事。
English: Armor-piercing war, setting Wang Shouen as Yongxing, and setting Zhao Jun as Fengxiang are all the same.

古文：以景崇为邠州留后，令便道之官。
现代文：命王景崇为州留后，让他抄近路赴任。
English: After ordering Wang Jingsong to stay in the state, he let him take a shortcut to take office.

古文：虢州伶人靖边庭杀团练使田令方，驱掠州民，奔赵思绾。
现代文：虢州的艺人靖边庭杀死团练使田令方，裹胁州中百姓，投奔赵思绾。
English: Jingbian Court, an entertainer from Ganzhou, killed the envoy Tian Lingfang, who was training the troupe, and took the middle-class people from Ganzhou and went to Zhao Siyong.

古文：至潼关，潼关守将出击之，其众皆溃。
现代文：到了潼关，潼关守将出关迎击，他的一群人全都溃散了。
English: When he arrived at Shaoguan, the guard of Shaoguan was about to go out to meet the attack, and his group of people all dispersed.

古文：初，契丹主北归，至定州，以义武节度副使邪律忠为节度使，徙故节度使孙方简为大同节度使。
现代文：当初，契丹主北行回国，来到定州，命义武节度副使邪律忠为节度使，调原节度使孙方简为大同节度使。
English: At first, the Khitan ruler returned to the north and came to Dingzhou. He ordered the vice-commander of the Yiwu Sect, Ya Ritsu Zhong, to be the Sect Commander, and the original Sect Commander, Sun Fangyan, to be the Datong Sect Commander.

古文：方简怨恚，且惧入朝为契丹所留，迁延不受命，帅其党三千人保狼山故寨，控守要害。
现代文：孙方简怨恨愤怒，又怕到了契丹朝廷被他们扣留，所以拖延时日不接受任命，率领他的党羽三千多人守卫狼山原来的山寨，控制固守各处要害。
English: Sun Fangjian was resentful and angry, and was afraid of being detained by the Khitan court, so he delayed and did not accept the appointment, leading his party of more than three thousand people to guard the original cottage of Wolf Mountain, controlling and adhering to the key points everywhere.

古文：契丹攻之，不克。
现代文：契丹兵进攻，未能攻克。
English: Khitan soldiers attacked, but failed to conquer.

古文：未几，遣使请降，帝复其旧官，以扞契丹。
现代文：不久，他派使者见后汉高祖请求归降，高祖恢复他的原官职，用他来抵御契丹。
English: Soon, he sent an envoy to see Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty to request his surrender. Gaozu restored his former official position and used it to resist Khitan.

古文：邪律忠闻鄴都既平，常惧华人为变。
现代文：邪律忠听说邺都已被平定，常常害怕汉人发动事变。
English: When the evil loyalists heard that the capital had been pacified, they often feared that the Han people would start a revolution.

古文：诏以成德留后刘在明为幽州道马步都部署，使出兵经略定州。
现代文：后汉高祖诏令成德留后刘在明为幽州道马步都部署，派他出兵整治定州。
English: Later, Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty ordered Chengde to stay, and Liu Ziming deployed troops to Yuzhou and sent them to rectify Dingzhou.

古文：未行，忠与麻荅等焚掠定州，悉驱其人弃城北去。
现代文：还没出兵，邪律忠和麻等人已劫掠焚烧了定州，驱赶定州百姓弃城北去。
English: Before the troops were dispatched, Ya Rutzhong and Ma and others had already plundered and burned Dingzhou and driven the people of Dingzhou to abandon the north of the city.

古文：孙方简自狼山帅其众数百，还据定州，又奏以弟行友为易州刺史，方遇为泰州刺史。
现代文：孙方简从狼山率领几百名军兵，回来占领定州，又上奏章请任命弟弟孙行友为易州刺史、孙方遇为泰州刺史。
English: Sun Fangyan led several hundred soldiers from Wolf Mountain and returned to occupy Dingzhou. He also requested that his brother Sun Yingyou be appointed as the governor of Yizhou and that Sun Fangyu be appointed as the governor of Taizhou.

古文：每契丹入寇，兄弟奔命，契丹颇畏之。于是晋末州县陷契丹者，皆复为汉有矣。
现代文：每当契丹人入侵，兄弟三人就奔走抵抗，契丹人很害怕他们，于是后晋末年州县陷落到契丹人手中的，都又为后汉所有了。
English: Whenever the Khitans invaded, the three brothers rushed to resist. The Khitans were very afraid of them, so in the last years of the Later Jin Dynasty, the counties that fell into the hands of the Khitans were all owned by the Later Han.

古文：丙子，以刘在明为成德节度使。
现代文：丙子，后汉任命刘在明为成德节度使。
English: Cixi, the Later Han Dynasty appointed Liu Zaiming as the Chengde Festival envoy.

古文：麻荅至其国，契丹主责以失守。麻荅服，曰： 因朝廷征汉官致乱耳。 
现代文：麻回到辽国，契丹主责备他失守，麻不服气，说： 这是因为朝廷招收任用汉官，才导致今天的祸乱！ 
English: As soon as he returned to Liao, the Khitan lord reproached him for his failure to defend the country. Asma was not convinced and said, "It is because the imperial court recruited and appointed Han officials that led to today's calamity!"

古文：契丹主鸩杀之。
现代文：契丹主将他毒死。
English: The Khitan lord poisoned him to death.

古文：苏逢吉等为相，多迁补官吏。杨邠以为虚费国用，所奏多抑之，逢吉等不悦。
现代文：苏逢吉等人作宰相，频繁提升补充官员，杨认为白白耗费国家钱财，在奏章里多次贬抑这种作法，苏逢吉等人不高兴。
English: Su Fengji and others were prime ministers and frequently promoted additional officials. Yang believed that they were wasting state money and repeatedly disparaged this practice in his report. Su Fengji and others were not happy.

古文：中书侍郎兼户部尚书、同平章事李涛上疏言： 今关西纷扰，外御为急。
现代文：中书侍郎兼户部尚书、同平章事李涛上疏说： 现在关西形势纷乱，抵御外寇入侵是当务之急。
English: Li Tao Shangsuo, the attendant of the middle secretary and also the head of the household, said: Now that the situation in Kansai is chaotic, it is urgent to resist the invasion of foreign invaders.

古文：二枢密皆佐命功臣，官虽贵而家未富，宜授以要害大镇。
现代文：二位枢密使都是先朝辅佐创业的功臣，官阶虽然显贵但家资并不富裕，应该授予他们重要的大藩镇。
English: The two privy councilors were both meritorious figures who aided and abetted entrepreneurs in the previous government. Although they were high-ranking officials, their families were not well-off. They should be awarded important daifanzhen.

古文：枢机之务在陛下目前，易以裁决，逢吉、禹珪自先帝时任事，皆可委也。 
现代文：枢密机要的事务，在陛下眼前，容易裁决，况且苏逢吉、苏禹都是从先帝时就任职，都可以委托。 
English: Matters that are important to the Privy Council are easy to adjudicate in front of His Majesty, and Su Fengji and Su Yu, who have been in office since the time of the former emperor, can be entrusted.

古文：杨邠、郭威闻之，见太后泣诉。称： 臣等从先帝起艰难中，今天子取人言，欲弃之于外。
现代文：杨、郭威听说，入宫向太后哭诉道： 我们跟随先帝在艰难中起来，现在天子听信人几句话，要把我们弃置在外。
English: Yang and Guo Wei heard that when they entered the palace, they cried to the empress dowager: We followed the former emperor in the midst of difficulties, and now the Son of Heaven listens to a few words from people and wants to abandon us.

古文：况关西方有事，臣等何忍自取安逸，不顾社稷。
现代文：况且关西正有事，我们怎忍自求安逸，不顾社稷的安危。
English: Moreover, there is something going on in Kansai, how can we tolerate seeking comfort, regardless of the safety of the community.

古文：若臣等必不任职，乞留过山陵。 
现代文：如果我们一定不称职，请求留我们过了先帝灵柩出殡。 
English: If we are absolutely incompetent, please keep us past the funeral of the former emperor.

古文：太后怒，以让帝，曰： 国家勋旧之臣，奈何听人言而逐之！ 
现代文：太后大怒，责备后汉隐帝道： 国家元勋旧臣，怎么能听人几句话就放逐他们！ 
English: The empress dowager was furious and scolded Emperor Han in the following manner: How can a national hero and former minister listen to a few words from others and then banish them!

古文：帝曰： 此宰相所言也。 
现代文：后汉隐帝说： 这是宰相说的。 
English: Later, Emperor Han Yin said: This was said by the prime minister.

古文：因诘责宰相。涛曰： 此疏臣独为之，他人无预。 
现代文：于是又去责问宰相苏逢吉等人，李涛说： 这篇疏文是臣独自写的，别人没有参预。 
English: So he went to question Prime Minister Su Fengji and others. Li Tao said: This epistle was written by the minister alone, no one else was involved.

古文：丁丑，罢涛政事，勒归私第。
现代文：丁丑，罢免李涛官职，勒令回归家中。
English: Ding Jiu, Li Tao was removed from his post and ordered to return home.

古文：是日，邠、泾、同、华四镇俱上言护国节度使兼中书令李守贞与永兴、凤翔同反。
现代文：当天，邠、泾、同、华四镇都向朝廷上报：护国节度使兼中书令李守贞和永兴、凤翔二镇同时反叛。
English: On the same day, the four towns of Handan, Handan, Tong and Hua all reported to the imperial court: Li Shuzhen, Yongxing and Fengxiang, two towns, rebelled at the same time.

古文：始，守贞闻杜重威死而惧，阴有异志，自以晋世尝为上将，有战功，素好施，得士卒心。
现代文：开始，李守贞听说杜重威被杀而心中害怕，暗中萌生反叛念头。自以为后晋时曾为上将，有战功，平常慷慨好施，所以颇得士兵之心。
English: At first, when Li Shouzhen heard that Du Chongwei had been killed, she was afraid and secretly conceived the idea of rebellion. She thought that she had been a general in the Later Jin Dynasty, had military merit, and was usually generous, so she was quite a soldier's heart.

古文：汉室新造，天子年少初立，执政皆后进，有轻朝廷之志。
现代文：现在后汉新建，皇帝年轻刚刚继位，执掌朝政都是后来进身的官员，所以有轻视朝廷看法。
English: Now that the Han Dynasty is newly established, the young emperor has just succeeded to the throne, and the officials in charge of the imperial government are all officials who came to power later, so there is a contemptuous view of the imperial court.

古文：乃招纳亡命，养死士，治城堑，缮甲兵，昼夜不息。
现代文：于是招纳亡命之徒，豢养敢死之士，治理城墙壕堑，修缮武器铠甲，日夜不停。
English: As a result, they recruited outlaws, raised those who dared to die, managed the city walls and trenches, and repaired weapons and armor, all day and night.

古文：遣人间道赍蜡丸结契丹，屡为边吏所获。
现代文：又派人从小路带着蜡丸密信去勾结契丹，多次被把守边关的官吏所查获。
English: He also sent people with wax pellets and secret letters from the back roads to collude with the Khitan, and was repeatedly caught by officials guarding the border.

古文：浚仪人赵修己，素善术数，自守贞镇滑州，署司户参军，累从移镇，为守贞言： 时命不可，勿妄动！ 
现代文：浚仪人赵修己，素来擅长星象占卜之术，自从李守贞镇守滑州，署理司户参军，屡次跟随藩镇调动，对李守贞说： 时运、天命不允许，不要轻举妄动！ 
English: Zhao Xiuqi, a dredger, has always been good at the art of astrological divination. Since Li Shuzhen was in charge of the city of Slanting, the deputy head of the household joined the army, repeatedly followed the movement of the town, and said to Li Shuzhen: Time and fate do not allow, do not act rashly!

古文：前后切谏非一，守贞不听，乃称疾归乡里。
现代文：前后恳切劝谏不止一次，李守贞不听，他于是声称有病回家乡。
English: Li Shouzhen did not listen to his earnest and repeated pleas, so he claimed to be ill and went back to his hometown.

古文：僧总伦，以术媚守贞，言其必为天子，守贞信之。
现代文：僧人总伦，用他的法术讨好李守贞，说他一定要作天子，李守贞信以为真。
English: The monk Zonglun used his magic to ingratiate himself with Li Shouzhen, saying that he must be the son of heaven, which Li Shouzhen believed to be true.

古文：又尝会将佐置酒，引弓指《舐掌虎图》曰： 吾有非常之福，当中其舌。 
现代文：又曾和将佐聚会设置酒宴，弯弓搭箭指着《舐掌虎图》说： 我如果有非常的福份，就当射中它的舌头。 
English: He once held a wine banquet with a party of generals and admirals, and pointed his bow and arrow at "Licking the Tiger's Paw" and said, "If I have a great fortune, I should shoot it in the tongue."

古文：一发中之，左右皆贺。守贞益自负。
现代文：一箭射中，周围人都向他祝贺，李守贞更加自命不凡。
English: When he shot an arrow, everyone around him congratulated him, but Li Shouzhen was even more pretentious.

古文：会赵思绾据长安，奉表献御衣于守贞，守贞自谓天人协契，乃自称秦王。遣其骁将平陆王继勋将兵据潼关，以思绾为晋昌节度使。
现代文：正赶上赵思绾占领了长安城，向李守贞奉上表章献上御衣。李守贞自认为是天意、人心共同默契，于是自称秦王，派他的骁将平陆人王继勋占据潼关，任命赵思绾为晋昌节度使。
English: Just in time, Zhao Siyuan occupied Chang'an City and presented the imperial robe to Li Shuzhen. Li Shuzhen believed that it was God's will and the hearts of the people had a common understanding, so he called himself Qin Wang and sent his eunuch Wang Jixun to occupy Shaoguan and appointed Zhao Siyuan as the Jinchang Festival envoy.

古文：同州距河中最近，匡国节度使张彦威，常诇守贞所为，奏请先为之备。诏滑州马军都指挥使罗金山将部兵戍同州。故守贞起兵，同州不为所并。
现代文：同州距离河中最近，匡国节度使张彦威常侦察李守贞的所作所为，并奏请朝廷早作防范，后汉隐帝颁诏令滑州马军都指挥使罗金山率所部守卫同州；所以李守贞起兵时，同州没有被他吞并。
English: Tongzhou is the closest to Hezhong, and the Kuangguo Festival made Zhang Yanwei often investigate the actions of Li Shouzhen, and requested the court to take precautions as soon as possible. After the Han Emperor issued a decree, he ordered the command of the Talas and the horse army to make Luo Jinshan lead the headquarters to guard Tongzhou. Therefore, when Li Shouzhen started the army, the state was not annexed by him.

古文：金山，云州人也。
现代文：罗金山是云州人。
English: Luo Jinshan is from Yunnan.

古文：定难节度使李彝殷发兵屯境上，奏称： 去三载前羌族夜毋杀绥州刺史李仁裕叛去，请讨之。 
现代文：后汉定难节度使李彝殷起兵驻守境上，向朝廷上奏章，称： 三年以前，羌族毋杀死绥州刺史李仁裕反叛逃走，请求发兵征讨。 
English: After the Han Dynasty was determined to be in a difficult situation, Li Qianyin stationed troops on the border and sent a letter to the imperial court, saying: Three years ago, the Yao people killed Li Renyu, the governor of Zhangzhou, and fled in rebellion, requesting that troops be sent to investigate.

古文：庆州上言： 请益兵为备。 
现代文：庆州上奏道： 请增加兵力作准备。 
English: Gyeongju chimed in: Please prepare more troops.

古文：诏以司天言，今岁不利先举兵，谕止之。
现代文：后汉隐帝颁诏书以司天官说，今年不利于先动兵戈，劝谕制止众将行动。
English: After the Han Emperor issued an edict, the magistrate said that this year was not conducive to starting a war, and advised to stop the generals' actions.

古文：夏，四月，辛巳，陕州都监王玉奏克复潼关。
现代文：夏季四月，辛巳，陕州都监王玉奏报收复潼关。
English: In the summer of April, the governor of Shaanxi Province, Wang Yusao, announced the recovery of Shaoguan.

古文：帝与左右谋，以太后怒李涛离间，欲更进用二枢密，以明非帝意。
现代文：后汉隐帝和身边的大臣商量，因太后恼怒李涛的挑拔离间，现在想再进用两位枢密使，以便表明前举不是皇帝的意思。
English: After the Han Emperor and the ministers around him discussed, because the empress dowager was irritated by Li Tao's provocation, she now wanted to use two more confidential envoys in order to show that the previous move was not the emperor's intention.

古文：左右亦疾二苏之专，欲夺其权，共劝之。
现代文：大臣们也憎恨二苏专政，想夺他们的权，所以都劝勉皇帝这样干。
English: The ministers also hated the dictatorship of the two Soviets and wanted to seize their power, so they all urged the emperor to do so.

古文：壬午，制以枢密使杨邠为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事，枢密使如故，以副枢密使郭威为枢密使，又加三司使王章同平章事。
现代文：壬午，制令枢密使杨为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、同平章事，枢密使官职照旧；命副枢密使郭威为枢密使；又三司使王章加官同平章事。
English: In the morning of the 13th day of the 3rd month, the king ordered the privy council to appoint Yang as the secretary of the middle secretary and the clerk of the Shangshu and Tongping chapters, and the post of the privy council as before; ordered the deputy privy council to appoint Guo Wei as the privy council; and ordered the three departments to appoint Wang Zhang to the post of Tongping chapter.

古文：凡中书除官，诸司奏事，帝皆委邠斟酌。
现代文：凡中书省任命官员、各司上奏公事，后汉隐帝全委任杨斟酌办理。
English: Whenever officials and departments were appointed by the Ministry of Literature and Calligraphy to handle public affairs, the Emperor Han Yingdi fully appointed Yang to handle it at his discretion.

古文：自是三相拱手，政事尽决于邠。
现代文：从此其它三位宰相全都拱手无事，一切政事都决定于杨。
English: Since then, the other three prime ministers have all resigned, and all political affairs have been decided by Yang.

古文：事有未更邠所可否者，莫敢施行，遂成凝滞。
现代文：凡事有未经杨认可，没有人敢施行，便形成梗塞。
English: Everything happens without Yang's approval, and no one dares to carry it out, leading to a deadlock.

古文：三相每进拟用人，苟不出邠意，虽簿、尉亦不之与。邠素不喜书生，常言： 国家府廪实，甲兵强，乃为急务。
现代文：三位宰相每次所拟的进用人选，只要不出于杨之意，即使主簿、尉这样的小官也不给，杨历来不喜欢书生，常说： 国家的府库仓廪要充实，兵力要强盛，这才是当务之急。
English: Each time the three chancellors proposed a candidate for promotion, as long as it was not out of Yang's will, even minor officials such as the chief clerk and lieutenant would not be given. Yang has always disliked students. He often said: The country's treasury should be enriched and the military should be strong. This is the most urgent task.

古文：至于文章礼乐，何足介意！ 
现代文：至于文章礼乐，有什么值得介意！ 
English: As for the post-ceremony music, what's there to mind!

古文：既恨二苏排己，又以其除官太滥，为众所非，欲矫其弊，由是艰于除拜，士大夫往往有自汉兴至亡不沾一命者。凡门廕及百司入仕者悉罢之。
现代文：他既怀恨二苏曾排斥自己，又因二苏原来任命官员太滥，被众人非议指责，想要矫正这一弊病，因此授予官职就很难了，士大夫里多有从后汉兴到后汉亡不曾受过一次升迁；还规定：凡靠祖、父余荫得官的子弟以及从各个部门入仕的，全部罢免。
English: Not only did he hold a grudge against the Second Soviet for having ostracized him, but he also wanted to rectify this evil because the Second Soviet had originally appointed officials who were too extravagant and were criticized by everyone. Therefore, it was difficult to grant official positions. Shidafu Rido did not receive a single promotion from the late Han Dynasty to the late Han Dynasty. It was also stipulated that all the children of Yuyin, who became officials through their ancestors and fathers, as well as those who entered the service from various departments, would be dismissed.

古文：虽由邠之愚蔽，时人亦咎二苏之不公所致云。
现代文：这虽说由于杨的愚昧闭塞，但当时人们也归咎于二苏封官办事不公所致。
English: Although this was due to Yang's ignorance and obtuseness, people at the time also blamed it on the injustice of the officials of the Second Soviet.

古文：以镇宁节度使郭从义充永兴行营都部署，将侍卫兵讨赵思绾。
现代文：后汉隐帝命镇宁节度使郭从义充任永兴行营都部署，率领侍卫兵讨伐赵思绾。
English: After the Han Emperor died, Emperor Zenning decreed that Guo should be deployed from Yicheng to Yongxing to lead the guards to fight against Zhao Siyu.

古文：戊子，以保义节度使白文珂为河中行营都部署，内客省使王峻为都监。
现代文：戊子，命保义节度使白文珂为河中行营都部署，内客省使王峻为都监。
English: In order to ensure the safety of life and property, Bai Wenke was deployed as the commander of the middle of the river, and Wang Jun was appointed as the inspector of the capital by the provincial governor.

古文：辛卯，削夺李守贞官爵，命文珂等会兵讨之。
现代文：辛卯，削去李守贞的官职爵位，命白文珂等将领合兵讨伐他。
English: Xinwu cut off Li Shouzhen's official title and rank, and ordered Bai Wenke and other generals to fight against him.

古文：乙未，以宁江节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使尚洪迁为西面行营都虞候。
现代文：乙未，命宁江节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使尚洪迁为西面行营都虞候。
English: At the same time, he ordered the Ningjiang festival envoy and the commander of the bodyguard and marching troops to relocate Shanghong to the west as the marching capital.

古文：王景崇迁延不之邠州，阅集凤翔丁壮，诈言讨赵思绾，仍牒邠州会兵。
现代文：王景崇拖延时日不去州上任，招集、检阅凤翔的壮丁，假称要讨伐赵思绾，并发牒文与州合兵。
English: Wang Jingsong procrastinated for days and did not go to the prefecture to take office, summoned and reviewed Fengxiang's young men, pretended to fight Zhao Siyuan, and issued an ultimatum to join forces with the prefecture.

古文：契丹主如辽阳，故晋主与太后、皇后皆谒见。
现代文：契丹主到了辽阳，前后晋主和太后、皇后都拜见他。
English: When the Khitan ruler arrived in Liaoyang, the crown prince, the empress dowager and the empress all came to see him.

古文：有禅奴利者，契丹主之妻兄也，闻晋主有女未嫁，诣晋主求之，晋主辞以幼。
现代文：有个叫禅奴利的，是契丹主妻子的哥哥，他听说后晋主有女儿尚未出嫁，就去见后晋主求婚，后晋主以女儿年龄幼小推辞。
English: There was a man named Zen Nuri, who was the elder brother of the wife of the Khitan lord. When he heard that the Later Jin lord had a daughter who had not yet married, he went to see the Later Jin lord to propose marriage, but the Later Jin lord declined on the grounds that his daughter was too young.

古文：后数日，契丹主使人驰取其女而去，以赐禅奴。
现代文：过了几天，契丹主派人骑马取走他女儿，赐给禅奴利。
English: A few days later, the Khitan lord sent someone on horseback to take away his daughter and give her to Zenulli.

古文：王景崇遗蜀凤州刺史徐彦书，求通互市。
现代文：王景崇致信给后蜀凤州刺史徐彦，要求互通贸易。
English: Wang Jingsong sent a letter to Xu Yan, the governor of the later Shu Feng Prefecture, requesting mutual trade.

古文：壬戌，蜀主使彦复书招之。
现代文：壬戌，后蜀主命徐彦回信招降他。
English: At the same time, Xu Yan, the successor of Shu Shuling, wrote back to invite him to surrender.

古文：契丹主留晋翰林学士徐台符于幽州，台符逃归。
现代文：契丹主扣留后晋翰林学士徐台符于幽州，徐台符逃回。
English: After the detention of the Khitan master, the scholar of Jin Hanlin, Xu Taifu, was in Yuzhou, and Xu Taifu fled back.

古文：五月，乙亥，滑州言河决鱼池。
现代文：五月，乙亥，滑州上报，黄河在鱼池决口。
English: In May, Yihai, Slum reported that the Yellow River was at the mouth of the fish pond.

古文：六月，戊寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，戊寅朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛巳，以奉国左厢都虞候刘词充河中行营马步都虞候。
现代文：辛巳，后汉隐帝命奉国左厢都虞候刘词充任河中行营马步都虞候。
English: Soon after, Emperor Han Ying ordered Liu Zicheng to serve as governor of the left wing of the country, and Liu Zicheng to serve as governor of the middle of the river.

古文：乙酉，王景崇遣使请降于蜀，亦受李守贞官爵。
现代文：乙酉，王景崇派使者向后蜀请求归降，同时接受李守贞给予的官爵。
English: At the same time, Wang Jingsong sent an envoy to Hou Shu to request surrender, and accepted the official title given by Li Shouzhen.

古文：高从诲既与汉绝，北方商旅不至，境内贫乏，乃遣使上表谢罪，乞修职贡。诏遣使尉抚之。
现代文：高从诲与后汉断绝往来后，北方的商人不再来，境内贫困、物资缺乏，于是派使者向后汉上表章谢罪，并请允许履行交纳贡品的职责；后汉隐帝诏令派使者前去安抚。
English: After Gao Congchu severed contacts with the Later Han, merchants from the north no longer came, and there was poverty and lack of materials in the territory. Therefore, he sent an envoy to the Later Han to thank them for their sins and ask permission to perform the duty of paying tribute; the Later Han Emperor issued a decree to send an envoy to appease them.

古文：西面行营都虞候尚洪迁攻长安，伤重而卒。
现代文：西面行营都虞候尚洪迁攻打长安，身受重伤而去世。
English: Shang Hongqian, a member of the Western Capital Campaign, attacked Chang'an, was seriously wounded and died.

古文：秋，七月，以工部侍郎李谷充西南面行营都转运使。
现代文：秋季七月，后汉隐帝命工部侍郎李充任西南面行营都转运使。
English: In the autumn of July, Li Cheng, the chamberlain of the Ministry of Industry, was appointed as the envoy to the southwestern provinces by the order of Emperor Han Yin.

古文：庚申，加枢密使郭威同平章事。
现代文：庚申，枢密使郭威加官任同平章事。
English: Gao Shen, Guo Weijia, the Privy Counsellor, was appointed to the same post.

古文：蜀司空兼中书侍郎、同平章事张业，性豪侈，强市人田宅，藏匿亡命于私第，置狱，系负债者，或历年至有瘐死者。
现代文：后蜀司空兼中书侍郎、同平章事张业，生性豪放、奢侈，强买别人的田地住宅，在自己的宅院里藏匿亡命的罪犯；私设监狱，抓欠债的人，有时关押多年以至有病死的。
English: Later, Emperor Shu's empty-headed concubine, Tongping Zhang, was famous for his extravagance and luxury. He bought other people's farmhouses by force and hid fugitive criminals in his own courtyard. He set up private prisons to arrest debtors, sometimes imprisoning them for many years until they died of disease.

古文：其子检校左仆射继昭，好击剑，尝与僧归信访善剑者，右匡圣都指挥使孙汉韶与业有隙，密告业、继昭谋反。翰林承旨李昊、奉圣控鹤马步都指挥使安思谦复从而谮之。甲子，业入朝，蜀主命壮士就都堂击杀之，下诏暴其罪恶，籍没其家。
现代文：他的儿子检校左仆射张继昭，喜好击剑，曾和归信和尚走访善于击剑的高手。右匡圣都指挥使孙汉韶和张业有仇隙，密告张业、张继昭二人谋反；翰林承旨李昊、奉圣控鹤马步都指挥使安思谦又趁机诬陷他们，甲子，张业上朝，后蜀主命令壮士在都堂里把他杀死，下诏书公布他的罪恶，抄没他的家产。
English: His son, Zhang Jizhao, the left-hand servant of the school inspector, liked fencing, and had visited a fencing expert with a converted monk. The right-hand ruler of the holy capital made Sun Han Zheng and Zhang Ye have a feud, and informed Zhang Ye and Zhang Jizhao that the two were plotting a rebellion; the ruler of the holy forest, Li Hao, and the ruler of the horse-riding capital, Feng Sheng, made An Si Qian take advantage of the opportunity to frame them, and Zhang Ye ascended to the throne, after which the lord of Shu ordered the strong man to kill him in the capital, and to publish his sins and confiscate

古文：枢密使、保宁节度使兼侍中王处回，亦专权贪纵，卖官鬻狱，四方馈献，皆先输处回，次及内府，家赀巨万。子德钧，亦骄横。
现代文：枢密使、保宁节度使兼侍中王处回，也擅权专横，贪婪恣肆，出卖官职，收受罪犯的贿赂，各地赠送的贡物，都先送到王处回处，其次给皇帝内府，他家产巨万，他的儿子王德钧，也骄横跋扈。
English: The Privy Envoy, the Boryeong Seongdu Envoy and the Attendant of the King's Household, were also arrogant, greedy and reckless. They sold their official positions, accepted bribes from criminals, and the tributes presented from all over the country were first sent to the King's Household, and then to the Emperor's Inner Palace. His family had a huge fortune, and his son Wang Deyu was also arrogant.

古文：张业既死，蜀主不忍杀处回，听归私第。处回惶恐辞位，以为武德节度使兼中书令。
现代文：张业被处死后，后蜀主不忍心杀王处回，让他回家；王处回慌忙辞去官职，后蜀主任他为武德节度使兼中书令。
English: After the death of Zhangye, Hou Shu could not bear to kill Wang Shuxuan and let him go home; Wang Shuxuan hurriedly resigned from his official post, and Hou Shu served as an envoy for the Martial Arts Festival and a middle-ranking official.

古文：蜀主欲以普丰库使高延昭、茶酒库使王昭远为枢密使，以其名位素轻，乃授通奏使，知枢密院事。
现代文：后蜀主想让普丰库使高延昭、茶酒库使王昭远为枢密使，但因他们的名声和地位向来轻微，就授予他们为通奏使，主持枢密院事务。
English: Later, the Lord of Shu wanted to appoint Gao Yanzhao from the Pufeng Library and Wang Zhaoyuan from the Tea and Liquor Library as Privy Councilors, but because their reputation and status had always been minor, he appointed them as Consuls to preside over the affairs of the Privy Council.

古文：昭远，成都人，幼以僧童从其师入府，蜀高祖爱其敏慧，令给事蜀主左右。至是，委以机务，府库金帛，恣其取与，不复会计。
现代文：王昭远是成都人，年幼时做小和尚随他的师傅进入都府，后蜀高祖喜爱他聪明敏捷，让他在后蜀主身边供事；到这时，委任他国家重要事务，府库里的金银财帛，任其随意拿取，不再计算。
English: Wang Zhaoyuan is from Chengdu. When he was a young monk, he followed his master into the capital. Later Shu Gao Zu liked his cleverness and agility and asked him to work alongside his master. At this time, he was entrusted with important national affairs and the gold, silver and treasures in the government treasury. He was allowed to take as much as he wanted.

古文：戊辰，以郭从义为永兴节度使，白文珂兼知河中行府事。
现代文：戊辰，后汉隐帝任命郭从义为永兴节度使，白文珂兼理主持河中行府事务。
English: After Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty, Guo Zongyi was appointed as Yongxing's envoy to the festival, and Baiwen Keqianli presided over the affairs of the central government.

古文：蜀主以翰林承旨、尚书左丞李昊为门下侍郎兼户部尚书，翰林学士、兵部侍郎徐光溥为中书侍郎兼礼部尚书，并同平章事。
现代文：后蜀主命翰林承旨、尚书左丞李昊为门下侍郎兼户部尚书翰林学士、兵部侍郎徐光溥为中书侍郎兼礼部尚书，都为同平章事。
English: Later, Hanlin Zongzhi was appointed by the Lord of Shu, and Li Hao, the left-hand man of Shangshu, became the under-waiter and household Shangshu Hanlin Baccalaureate, and the military waiter Xu Guangyao became the middle school waiter and ceremonial department Shangshu, all of which were the same rank.

古文：蜀安思谦谋尽去旧将，又谮卫圣都指挥使兼中书令赵廷隐谋反，欲代其位，夜，发兵围其第。
现代文：后蜀安思谦谋划把旧将全部除掉，又诬陷卫圣都指挥使兼中书令赵廷隐谋反，企图取代他的权位，夜里派兵包围了他的住宅。
English: After Shu An Shih-hien plotted to get rid of all the former generals, he also framed Zhao Ting, the commander of the Sacred Defenders and the Chinese envoy, for secretly plotting a rebellion, attempting to replace him in power, and sent soldiers to surround his house at night.

古文：会山南西道节度使李廷珪入朝，极言廷隐无罪，乃得免。
现代文：正赶上山南西道节度使李廷入朝，全力辩解赵廷隐没有罪，才免罪。
English: Just in time for the festival of Shannan Xi Dao, Li Ting entered the imperial court, and Zhao Tingyin was exonerated after Zhao Tingyin was fully exonerated.

古文：廷隐因称疾，固请解军职。甲戌，蜀主许之。
现代文：赵廷隐因此声称有病，坚持请求解除自己的军权；甲戌，后蜀主答应。
English: Zhao Tingyin therefore claimed to be ill, and insisted on requesting the removal of his military power; the emperor agreed.

古文：风翔节度使赵晖至长安。乙亥，表王景崇反状益明，请进兵击之。
现代文：凤翔节度使赵晖来到长安；乙亥，上表章说王景崇反叛的情况日益明显，请求发兵进攻。
English: Fengxiang Festival brought Zhao Wei to Chang'an; Yi Hai, the above table chapter said that the situation of Wang Jingsong's rebellion was increasingly obvious, and requested to send troops to attack.

古文：初，高祖镇河东，皇弟崇为马步都指挥使，与蕃汉都孔目官郭威争权，有隙。
现代文：当初，后汉高祖镇守河东，皇弟刘崇是马步都指挥使，与蕃汉都孔目官郭威争夺权力，二人有仇隙。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Gaozu of the Later Han Dynasty was in charge of the eastern part of the river, and Liu Chong, the younger brother of the emperor, was the commander of the capital Maabudu. They competed for power with Guo Wei, the official of the Confucian Academy of the Later Han Dynasty, and the two had a grudge.

古文：及威执政，崇忧之。
现代文：等到郭威执政，刘崇很担扰。
English: When Guo Wei came to power, Liu Chong was very worried.

古文：节度判官郑珙，劝崇为自全计，崇然之。
现代文：节度判官郑珙劝刘崇安排保全自己之计，刘崇听从了。
English: The judge of the festival, Zheng Yao, advised Liu Chong to arrange a way to save himself, and Liu Chong obeyed.

古文：珙，青州人也。
现代文：郑珙是青州人。
English: Zheng Wei is from Qingzhou.

古文：八月，庚辰，崇表募兵四指挥，自是选募勇士，招纳亡命，缮甲兵，实府库，罢上供财赋，皆以备契丹为名。朝廷诏令，多不禀承。
现代文：八月庚辰，刘崇上表招募四个指挥的士兵，从此他精选招募勇士，收纳亡命的罪犯，修缮兵器装备，充实官仓府库，停止向朝廷上缴的赋税财物，都以防御契丹入侵为名；朝廷所下的诏令，大多不接受。
English: In August, Gengchen, Liu Chong went to the table to recruit four commanding soldiers. From then on, he selected and recruited warriors, collected exiled criminals, repaired weapons and equipment, replenished the government warehouse, and stopped paying taxes and property to the court, all in the name of defending against the Khitan invasion. Most of the imperial decrees issued by the court were not accepted.

古文：自河中、永兴、凤翔三镇拒命以来，朝廷继遣诸将讨之。
现代文：自从河中、永兴、凤翔三个藩镇抗拒朝廷命令以来，朝廷连续派众将领讨伐他们。
English: Ever since the three towns of Hechu, Yongxing and Fengxiang resisted the order of the imperial court, the imperial court continuously sent generals to fight them.

古文：昭义节度使常思屯潼关，白文珂屯同州，赵晖屯咸阳。
现代文：昭义节度使常思屯兵潼关，白文珂屯兵同州，赵晖屯兵咸阳。
English: Zhao Yi's festival made Chang Si's soldiers go to Shaoguan, Bai Wen's soldiers go to Tongzhou, and Zhao Yi's soldiers go to Xianyang.

古文：惟郭从义、王峻置栅近长安，而二人相恶如水火，自春徂秋，皆相持莫肯攻战。
现代文：只有郭从义、王峻在靠近长安的地方设置栅栏，但是郭、王二人相互交恶，就像水火不能相容，所以从春到秋二人都对峙观望不肯进攻作战。
English: Only Guo Zongyi and Wang Jun set up fences in the vicinity of Chang'an, but Guo and Wang were hostile to each other, like water and fire are incompatible, so from spring to autumn they both stood on the sidelines and refused to attack.

古文：帝患之，欲遣重臣临督。壬午，以郭威为西面军前招慰安抚使，诸军皆受威节度。
现代文：后汉隐帝为此忧虑，想派一位朝廷重臣临阵督战，壬午，命郭威为西面军前招慰安抚使，各军都受郭威的调度。
English: Later, Emperor Huan was worried about this and wanted to send a high-ranking court official to supervise the battle. At noon, he ordered Guo Wei to recruit comfort and pacification envoys for the western army. All armies were dispatched by Guo Wei.

古文：威将行，问策于太师冯道。
现代文：郭威将要上路，向太师冯道请教良策。
English: Guo Wei will go on the road to ask Grand Master Feng Dao for advice.

古文：道曰： 守贞自谓旧将，为士卒所附，愿公勿爱官物，以赐士卒，则夺其所恃矣。 
现代文：冯道说： 李守贞自认为是老将，士兵之心都归附于他；望您不要吝惜官家的财物，要用以赏赐士兵，这样就夺走了他所倚仗的优势了。 
English: Feng Dao said: Li Shouzhen considers himself a veteran, and the soldiers' hearts are attached to him; I hope you will not begrudge the officials' wealth, but use it to reward the soldiers, thus taking away the advantage he relied on.

古文：威从之。
现代文：郭威听从了冯道的这条计策。
English: Liu Wei followed him.

古文：由是众心始附于威。
现代文：从此众人之心开始归附郭威。
English: From then on, people's hearts began to follow Guo Wei.

古文：诏白文珂趣河中，赵晖趣风翔。
现代文：后汉隐帝诏令，白文珂赶赴河中，赵晖赶赴凤翔。
English: After the Han Emperor Emperor's edict, Bai Wenke rushed to Hezhong, and Zhao Xi rushed to Fengxiang.

古文：甲申，蜀主以赵廷隐为太傅，赐爵宋王，国有大事，就第问之。
现代文：甲申，后蜀主任命赵廷隐为太傅，封爵为宋王，凡有国家大事，亲自到他家中询问。
English: Jiashen, after the Lord of Shu appointed Zhao Tingyin as Taifu, knighted as Song Wang, whenever there was a national event, he personally went to his home to inquire.

古文：戊子，蜀改凤翔曰岐阳军，己丑，以王景崇为岐阳节度使、同平章事。
现代文：戊子，后蜀改凤翔为岐阳军；己丑，命王景崇为岐阳节度使、同平章事。
English: Boshi, after Shu, changed Fengxiang to the Qiyang army; he was ugly, and ordered Wang Jingsong to be the Qiyang festival envoy, and the same rank.

古文：乙未，以钱弘亻叔为东南兵马都元帅、镇海、镇东节度使兼中书令、吴越国王。
现代文：乙未，后汉隐帝封吴越钱弘为东南兵马都元帅，镇海、镇东节度使兼中书令，吴越国王。
English: In the 2nd century, Emperor Han Yin made Wu Yue Qianhong the marshal of the Southeastern Terracotta Warriors and Horses, the envoy of the Zhenhai and Zhendong Festivals and the scribe of the Middle Kingdom, and the king of Wu Yue.

古文：郭威与诸将议攻讨，诸将欲先取长安、凤翔。
现代文：郭威与众将领商议讨伐进攻，众将领想先夺取长安、凤翔。
English: Guo Wei and the generals discussed the attack. The generals wanted to capture Chang'an and Fengxiang first.

古文：镇国节度使扈彦珂曰： 今三叛连衡，推守贞为主，守贞亡，则两镇自破矣。
现代文：镇国节度使扈从珂说： 现在三个叛藩联合，推举李守贞为主，如果李守贞灭亡，那两个藩镇便不攻自破了。
English: The town and country festival made Gong Cong Ke say, "Nowadays, the three rebellious clans have united to nominate Li Shuzhen as their leader. If Li Shuzhen were to perish, those two towns would be defeated.

古文：若舍近而攻远，万一王、赵拒吾前，守贞掎吾后，此危道也。 
现代文：如果舍近攻远，万一王、赵在前面抵抗，李守贞在背后夹击，这是危亡之道。 
English: If you are willing to attack far away, if Wang and Zhao resist in front, and Li Shouzhen attacks in the back, this is the way of peril.

古文：威善之。
现代文：郭威认为很有道理。
English: Guo Wei thinks this is very reasonable.

古文：于是威自陕州，白文珂及宁江节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使刘词自同州，常思自潼关，三道攻河中。
现代文：于是郭威从陕州，白文珂及宁江节度使、侍卫步军都指挥使刘词从同州，常思从潼关，从三条路进攻河中。
English: As a result, Guo Wei commanded Liu Zhi from Shaanxi Province, Bai Wenke and Ningjiang Jiedu envoy and bodyguards from Shaanxi Province, and Chang Si from Shaoguan Province to attack Hechu from three directions.

古文：威抚养士卒，与同苦乐，小有功辄厚赏之，微有伤常亲视之。士无贤不肖，有所陈启，皆温辞色而受之。违忤不怒，小过不责。
现代文：郭威抚养士兵，和他们同甘共苦，士兵们稍立军功就受到赏赐，稍有伤就经常亲自看望；谋士中无论是贤者还是不肖的，只要有事来陈述的，都和言悦色地接待他们；违背触犯他不发怒，小的过错不责罚。
English: Guo Wei raised soldiers and shared the joys and sorrows with them. The soldiers were rewarded for a little military merit, and if they were slightly injured, he often visited them in person. Among the advisers, whether they were wise or not, as long as they had something to report, they received them with kind words. He did not get angry when he was offended, and he did not punish small mistakes.

古文：由是将卒咸归心于威。
现代文：因此士兵、将领之心都归附于郭威。
English: Therefore, the hearts of soldiers and generals are attached to Guo Wei.

古文：始，李守贞以禁军皆尝在麾下，受其恩施，又士卒素骄，苦汉法之严，谓其至则叩城奉迎，可坐而待之。
现代文：开始，李守贞以为禁军都曾是自己的老部下，受过他的恩惠，而且士兵一贯骄横，苦于后汉军法的严格；认为禁军一到就会前来敲城门奉迎他为君主，可以坐着等待。
English: At first, Li Shouzhen thought that the imperial troops had all been his old subordinates and had received his favor, and that the soldiers had always been arrogant and suffered from the strictness of the post-Han military law; he thought that the imperial troops would come to knock on the city gate as soon as they arrived to welcome him as a monarch, and he could sit and wait.

古文：既而士卒新受赐于郭威，皆忘守贞旧恩。己亥，至城下，扬旗伐鼓，踊跃诟譟，守贞视之失色。
现代文：但是士兵们新近在郭威处受到赏赐，都忘了李守贞的旧恩；己亥，兵至城下，挥扬军旗，擂响战鼓，踊跃辱骂呼喊，李守贞在城上看到，大惊失色。
English: However, when the soldiers were newly rewarded by Guo Wei, they all forgot the old grace of Li Shouzhen; when the soldiers came to the city, waving the flag, beating the war drums, and shouting insults, Li Shouzhen was shocked to see them on the city.

古文：白文珂克西关城，栅于河西，常思栅于城南，威栅于城西。
现代文：白文珂攻克西关城，在黄河西岸设营栅，常思在城南设营栅，郭威在城西设营栅。
English: Bai Wenka attacked Xiguan City on the west bank of the Yellow River and set up a camp, Chang Si set up a camp in the south of the city, and Guo Wei set up a camp in the west of the city.

古文：未几，威以常思无将领才，先遣归镇。
现代文：不久，郭威认为常思没有将领之才，先把他派回原藩镇。
English: Soon, Guo Wei thought that Chang Si did not have the ability to be a general, and first sent him back to the original town.

古文：诸将欲急攻城，威曰： 守贞前朝宿将，健斗好施，屡立战功。
现代文：众将领想赶快攻城，郭威说： 李守贞是前朝有经验的老将，勇猛善斗，慷慨好施，多次建立战功。
English: Guo Wei said: Li Shouzhen is an experienced veteran of the former dynasty, brave and good at fighting, generous and generous, and has repeatedly established military exploits.

古文：况城临大河，楼堞完固，未易轻也。
现代文：况且城临黄河，城楼护墙完好坚固，不容轻视。
English: Moreover, the city is adjacent to the Yellow River, and the city wall is intact and strong, which should not be taken lightly.

古文：且彼凭城而斗，吾仰而攻之，何异帅士卒投汤火乎！
现代文：况且他凭借高城而战，我们仰面进攻，这和领着士兵去赴汤蹈火有什么不同！
English: Besides, he is fighting from the heights, we are attacking from behind, what is the difference between that and leading soldiers into the fire!

古文：夫勇有盛衰，攻有缓急，时有可否，事有后先。不若且设长围而守之，使飞走路绝。
现代文：勇气有盛有衰，进攻有慢有急，时机有可有不可，办事情有后有先；不如先设置长长的包围圈困守他，使他上天无路入地无门。
English: Courage may wax and wane, the attack may be slow or hasty, the timing may or may not be right, and things may be done later or earlier; it is better to first set up a long encirclement to trap him, so that he has no way to enter the world.

古文：吾洗兵牧马，坐食转输，温饱有馀。
现代文：而我们磨洗兵器，放牧战马，静坐享用转运来的粮食，做到温饱有余。
English: We, on the other hand, polished our weapons, grazed our war horses, and sat down to enjoy the grain that had been transported, so that we had enough to eat and drink.

古文：俟城中无食，公帑家财皆竭，然后进梯冲以逼之，飞书檄以招之。
现代文：等城中没粮了，官家、私人的钱财全都枯竭，然后推进云梯冲车来逼近他们，飞传羽檄来招降他们。
English: When there is no more grain in the city, and all the official and private money dries up, then they will push the ladder to rush to approach them, and fly feathers to attract them.

古文：彼之将士，脱身逃死，父子且不相保，况乌合之众乎！
现代文：那边的将领士兵，各自脱身逃亡，就是父子也难以互相保护，何况是些乌合之众！
English: The generals and soldiers on the other side fled separately, and it was difficult for even a father and son to protect each other, let alone a mob!

古文：思绾、景崇，但分兵縻之，不足虑也。 
现代文：赵思绾、王景崇二处，只要分兵牵制住，不值得忧虑。 
English: Zhao Sijun and Wang Jingsong, as long as they are held back by the detachment, are not worth worrying about.

古文：乃发诸州民夫二万馀人，使白文珂等帅之，刳长壕，筑连城，列队伍而围之。
现代文：于是征发各州民夫二万多人，让白文珂等人率领他们，挖长沟，筑连城，排列队伍把河中城团团围住。
English: As a result, more than twenty thousand people from each state were conscripted and sent, and they were led by Bai Wenke and others. They dug a long ditch, built a town, and lined up to surround the city in the middle of the river.

古文：威又谓诸将曰： 守贞曏畏高祖，不敢鸱张；以我辈崛起太原，事功未著，有轻我心，故敢反耳。
现代文：郭威又对众将领说： 李守贞过去害怕高祖，所以不敢嚣张；认为我们从太原崛起，事业功勋不显赫，有轻视我们之心，所以敢于反叛。
English: Guo Wei also said to the generals: In the past, Li Shouzhen was afraid of Gao Zu, so she did not dare to be arrogant; she thought that we had risen from Taiyuan, our cause was not outstanding, and she despised us, so she dared to rebel.

古文：正宜静以制之。 
现代文：我们正应该用静来制服他。 
English: We should be calming him down.

古文：乃偃旗卧鼓，但循河设火铺，连延数十里，番步卒以守之。遣水军檥舟于岸，寇有潜往来者，无不擒之。于是守贞如坐网中矣。
现代文：于是把军旗、战鼓都收起来，只沿黄河设置 火铺 传递军情，连绵几十里，派步卒轮番守护；派水军船只停泊在岸边，敌人有偷偷往来的，无不抓获，于是李守贞就像坐在罗网中了。
English: Therefore, he put away the military flags and war drums, and only set up fire shops along the Yellow River to pass on military information, stretching for dozens of miles, and sent foot soldiers to take turns to guard; sent naval vessels to anchor on the shore, and the enemy had sneaked in and out, all of which were captured, so Li Shouzhen was like sitting in a trap.

古文：蜀武德节度使兼中书令王处回请老，辛丑，以太子太傅致仕。
现代文：后蜀武德节度使兼中书令王处回请求告老退休，辛丑，他以太子太傅退休。
English: After the Shouwude Festival, the envoy and the king of the Chinese calligraphy sent back a request to retire old and ugly, and he retired as the son of the emperor.

古文：南汉主遣知制诰宣化钟允章求婚于楚，楚王希广不许。
现代文：南汉主派知制诰宣化人钟允章到楚国求婚，楚王马希广不同意。
English: The lord of the Southern Han Dynasty sent Zhong Yunzhang, a scholar and statesman, to Chu to propose marriage, but King Ma Xiguang of Chu did not agree.

古文：南汉主怒。问允章： 马公复能经略南土乎？ 
现代文：南汉主大怒，问钟允章： 马希广还能治理南方吗？ 
English: The Southern Han lord was furious and asked Zhong Yunzhang: Can Ma Xiguang still govern the south?

古文：对曰： 马氏兄弟，方争亡于不暇，安能害我！ 
现代文：答道： 马氏兄弟正在争斗不暇，怎能伤害我们！ 
English: Answer: The Ma brothers are fighting all the time, how can they hurt us!

古文：南汉主曰： 然。
现代文：南汉主说： 好！
English: The Southern Han master said: Good!

古文：希广懦而吝啬，其士卒忘战日久，此乃吾进取之秋也。 
现代文：马希广为人懦弱而且吝啬，他的士兵很久都没打过仗，这正是我们进取的大好时光啊！ 
English: Mashi is known to be cowardly and stingy, his soldiers have not fought for a long time, this is a great time for us to be aggressive!

古文：武平节度使马希萼请与楚王希广各修职贡，求朝廷别加官爵，希广用天策府内都押牙欧弘练、进奏官张仲荀谋，厚赂执政，使拒其请。
现代文：楚国武平节度使马希萼向后汉朝廷提出要与楚王马希广各自尽职进奉贡品，请求朝廷另加封官爵。马希广采用天策府内都押牙欧弘练、进奏官张仲荀的计策，用厚礼贿赂执政大臣，让朝廷拒绝马希萼的请求。
English: The Wu-Ping Festival of Chu State caused Ma Xichai to propose to the Han Dynasty that he and King Ma Xichang of Chu should each do his duty to pay tribute, and request that the Imperial Court add an official title. Ma Xichang used the strategy of Ou Hongren, the governor of the Imperial Palace, and Zhang Zhongyao, the envoy officer, to bribe the ruling minister with a heavy gift, so that the Imperial Court would refuse Ma Xichai's request.

古文：九月，壬子，赐希萼及楚王希广诏书，谕以 兄弟宜相辑睦，凡希萼所贡，当附希广以闻。 
现代文：九月，壬子，后汉隐帝赐马希萼及楚王马希广诏书，劝谕他们 兄弟应该和睦相处，凡是马希萼的贡品，应当附于马希广贡品中上报 。
English: In September, Emperor Jianzi of the Later Han Dynasty issued an edict to King Ma Xiqiao and King Ma Xiguang of the State of Chu, advising them that the brothers should live in harmony, and that any tribute from Ma Xiqiao should be attached to the tribute from King Ma Xiguang.

古文：希萼不从。
现代文：马希萼不听从。
English: Ma Hecale did not listen.

古文：蜀兵援王景崇，军于散关，赵晖遣都监李彦从袭击，破之，蜀兵遁去。
现代文：后蜀支援王景崇的军队驻扎在散关，赵晖派都监李彦从前去袭击，打败了他们，蜀军逃去。
English: After Shu supported Wang Jingsong's army stationed in Sanguan, Zhao Wei sent the governor of the capital Li Yan to attack, defeated them, and the Shu army fled.

古文：蜀主以张业、王处回执政，事多壅蔽，己未，始置匦函，后改为献纳函。
现代文：后蜀主孟昶认为张业、王处回主持政务时，自己多受蒙蔽而视听不清，己未，开始设置举报箱，名叫匦函，后改为献纳函。
English: Later, Meng Wei, the head of Shu, thought that when Zhang Ye and Wang Shucai presided over government affairs, he was often blinded and could not see or hear clearly, so he began to set up a reporting box, called the letter, and later changed it to a donation letter.

古文：王景崇尽杀侯益家属七十馀人，益子前天平行军司马仁矩先在外，得免。
现代文：王景崇把侯益的家属七十多人全部杀死，只有侯益的儿子前天平行军司马侯仁矩事前在外，才免于一死。
English: Wang Jingsong killed more than seventy members of Hou Yi's family. Only Hou Yi's son, Ma Hou Ren Rui, who had been a parallel military commander the day before, was spared from death.

古文：庚申，以仁矩为隰州刺史。
现代文：庚申，后汉朝廷命侯仁矩为隰州刺史。
English: Goshun, the post-Han Dynasty imperial edict of Hou Ren, is the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：仁矩子延广，尚在襁褓，乳母刘氏以己子易之，抱延广而逃，乞食至于大梁，归于益家。
现代文：侯仁矩的儿子侯延广，还在襁褓之中，奶妈刘氏用自己的孩子和他调换了，抱着侯延广逃走，靠要饭走到大梁城，回到侯益家里。
English: Hou Yanguang, the son of Hou Ren, was still in his cradle. Liu's wet nurse exchanged him with her own child, hugged Hou Yanguang and fled, and went to Daliang City to beg for food, and then returned to Hou Yi's home.

古文：李守贞屡出兵欲突长围，皆败而返。遣人赍蜡丸求救于唐、蜀、契丹，皆为逻者所获。
现代文：李守贞屡次出兵想突出长围，都战败而回；派人带上蜡丸密信向南唐、后蜀、契丹求救，全被巡逻士兵抓获。
English: Li Shouzhen repeatedly sent troops to highlight the encirclement, but they were defeated and returned. He sent people with wax balls and secret letters to South Tang, Hou Shu, and Qidan to ask for help, and they were all captured by patrolling soldiers.

古文：城中食且尽，殍死者日众。
现代文：城里粮食将要吃完，饿死的人一天比一天多。
English: The city is running out of food, and more and more people are dying of starvation every day.

古文：守贞忧形于色，召总伦诘之，总伦曰： 大王当为天子，人不能夺。
现代文：李守贞满脸愁云，召总伦和尚责问，总伦说： 大王应当为天子，别人不能夺走。
English: Li Shouzhen, her face clouded with sorrow, summoned General Lun to question the monk. General Lun said, "The Great King should be the Son of Heaven, and no one else can take him away."

古文：但此分野有灾，待磨灭将尽，只馀一人一骑，乃大王鹊起之时也。 
现代文：但这分野有灾，等磨难将尽，只剩一人一马，就是大王鹊起的时候了。 
English: But there is a disaster in this field, and when the ordeal is over, only one person and one horse are left, it is time for the great king to rise.

古文：守贞犹以为然。
现代文：李守贞仍然信以为真。
English: Li Shouzhen still believes this to be true.

古文：冬，十月，王景崇遣其子德让，赵思绾遣其子怀乂，见蜀主于成都。
现代文：冬季，十月，王景崇派儿子王德让，赵思绾派儿子赵怀，到成都朝见后蜀主。
English: In the winter, in October, Wang Dejan, the son of Wang Jingsong, and Zhao Huai, the son of Zhao Sijun, went to Chengdu to see the emperor.

古文：戊寅，景崇遣兵出西门，赵晖击破之，遂取西关城。
现代文：戊寅，王景崇派兵出西门，赵晖打败他，于是夺取西关城。
English: Wu Yin, Wang Jingsong sent troops out of the West Gate, Zhao Wei defeated him, and then seized the West Gate.

古文：景崇退守大城，晖堑而围之，数挑战，不出。
现代文：王景崇退守大城。赵晖挖起深沟包围住他们，多次挑战，王景崇军队也不出来了。
English: Wang Jingsong retreated to defend the big city. Zhao Wei dug a deep ditch to surround them and challenged them many times. Wang Jingsong's army did not come out.

古文：晖潜遣千馀人擐甲执兵，效蜀旗帜，循南山而下，令诸军声言： 蜀兵至矣。 
现代文：赵晖就偷偷派出一千多人身披铠甲手拿兵器，仿效后蜀军队的旗号，沿南山开下来，让各军叫道： 蜀兵到了！ 
English: Zhao Wei secretly sent more than a thousand people dressed in armor and armed with weapons, imitating the banner of the post-Shu army, driving down the Nanshan, and letting the armies shout: The Shu soldiers have arrived!

古文：景崇果遣兵数千出迎之，晖设伏掩击，尽殪之。
现代文：王景崇果然派出几千人马出城迎接，赵晖设下埋伏突然出击，出城军队全被歼灭。
English: Wang Jingsong sent several thousand horses out of the city to meet, Zhao Jun set up an ambush and suddenly attacked, and the out-of-town army was completely annihilated.

古文：自是景崇不复敢出。
现代文：从此王景崇再也不敢出城了。
English: Wang Jingsong never dared to leave the city again.

古文：蜀主遣山南西道节度使安思谦将兵救凤翔，左仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事毋昭裔上疏谏曰： 臣窃见庄宗皇帝志贪西顾，前蜀主意欲北行，凡在庭臣，皆贡谏疏，殊无听纳，有何所成！
现代文：后蜀主派山南西道节度使安思谦领兵救援凤翔，左仆射兼门下侍郎、同平章事毋昭裔上疏进谏道： 臣愚见，后唐庄宗皇帝贪于向西征伐，前蜀主意在向北进军，凡是在朝的臣子，全都劝谏上疏，一点都不听取采纳，又能有什么成就！
English: After the festival of Shannan West Road, Lord Shu sent An Si Qian to lead the troops to rescue Feng Xiang, his left-hand man, Shao, and his servant, Tong Ping Zhang, both of whom were descendants of Shang Shao, into the Shao Road: the vassal was stupid, the emperor of the later Tang Dynasty, Zhuang Zong, was eager to march westward, the former Shao Xian was marching northward, and all the vassals in the court were advising Shang Shao, and they did not listen to them at all, and they could not achieve anything!

古文：只此两朝，可为鉴诫。 
现代文：只这两朝的先例，就可作为诫鉴。 
English: Only the precedents of these two dynasties can serve as a warning.

古文：不听，又遣雄武节度使韩保贞引兵出汧阳以分汉兵之势。
现代文：后蜀主不听，又派出雄武节度使韩保贞从阳出兵来分散后汉军队的兵力。
English: Later, Lord Shu did not listen, and sent a strong military ruler to make Han Baozhen send troops from the sun to disperse the troops of the Han army.

古文：王景崇遣前义成节度使酸枣李彦舜等逆蜀兵。
现代文：王景崇派前义成节度使酸枣人李彦舜等去迎后蜀援军。
English: Wang Jingsong sent the former Yicheng governor Li Yanqi to welcome the Shu reinforcements.

古文：丙申，安思谦屯右界，汉兵屯宝鸡。
现代文：丙申，安思谦驻扎在宝鸡以西，后汉军驻扎在宝鸡。
English: Bishen, An Sichen were stationed in the west of Baoji, while the Han troops were stationed in Baoji.

古文：思谦遣眉州刺史申贵将兵二千趣模壁，设伏于竹林。丁酉旦，贵以兵数百压宝鸡而陈，汉兵逐之，遇伏而败，蜀兵逐北，破宝鸡寨。
现代文：安思谦派眉州刺史申贵率兵二千奔赴模壁，在竹林中设下伏兵；丁酉早晨，申贵用几百名士兵逼近宝鸡布阵，后汉兵驱逐他们，在竹林中了埋伏而失败，后蜀兵乘胜追击，攻破宝鸡寨。
English: An Siqian sent Meizhou Jishi Shengui and his two thousand soldiers to the Muxi Wall, and set up an ambush in the bamboo forest; in the morning of Ding'an, Shengui approached the Baoji camp with several hundred soldiers, the Han soldiers drove them out, and failed after an ambush in the bamboo forest, and the Shu soldiers took advantage of the victory to pursue and break through the Baoji camp.

古文：蜀兵去，汉兵复入宝鸡。
现代文：后蜀兵离去，后汉兵又进入宝鸡。
English: After the Shu soldiers left, the Han soldiers entered Baoji again.

古文：己亥，思谦进屯谓水，汉益兵五千戍宝鸡。思谦畏之，谓众曰： 粮少敌强，宜更为后图。 
现代文：己亥，安思谦进兵驻扎在渭水之滨，后汉增兵五千人保卫宝鸡；安思谦害怕了，对众将领说： 军粮少而敌人强大，应再为以后打算。 
English: At the same time, An Si Qian's troops were stationed at the coast of Surabaya. Later, the Han Dynasty increased the number of troops by five thousand to defend Baoji. An Si Qian was afraid and said to the generals: "The army is short of food, but the enemy is strong. We should plan for the future."

古文：辛丑，退屯凤州，寻归兴元，贵，潞州人也。
现代文：辛丑，退兵驻扎凤州，不久回到兴元。申贵是潞州人。
English: Xin ugly, retired stationed in Fengzhou, soon returned to Xingyuan. Shen Gui is from Zhangzhou.

古文：荆南节度使兼中书令、南平文献王高从诲寝疾，以其子节度副使保融判内外兵马事。
现代文：荆南节度使南平文献王高从诲卧床病重，命他的儿子节度副使高保融兼领内外兵事务。
English: Jing Nan Jie Du made Wang Gao of Nanping Literature go from bedridden to seriously ill, and ordered his son Jie Du's deputy Gao Baorong to take charge of both domestic and foreign military affairs.

古文：癸卯，从诲卒，保融知留后。
现代文：癸卯，高从诲去世，高保融主持留后事务。
English: Meanwhile, Gao Congyu passed away, and Gao Baorong presided over the post-death affairs.

古文：彰武节度使高允权与定难节度使李彝殷有隙，李守贞密求援于彝殷，发兵屯延、丹境上，闻官军围河中，乃退。
现代文：彰武节度使高允权与定难节度使李彝殷有仇隙，李守贞秘密向李彝殷求援，李彝殷发兵驻扎在延州、丹州边境上，听说官军已围住河中，就退兵了。
English: Li Shuzhen secretly asked Li Shujing for help. Li Shuzhen sent troops to be stationed on the border of Yanzhou and Danzhou. When he heard that the government troops had surrounded the middle of the river, he withdrew.

古文：甲辰，允权以其状闻，彝殷亦自诉，朝廷和解之。
现代文：甲辰，高允权将此事上报朝廷，李彝殷也自己申诉，朝廷命二人和解。
English: At that time, Gao Yunquan reported the matter to the imperial court, and Li Yuyan also made his own complaint. The imperial court ordered the two to reconcile.

古文：初，高祖入大梁，太师冯道、太子太傅李崧皆在真定，高祖以道第赐苏禹珪，崧第赐苏逢吉。
现代文：当初，后汉高祖入大梁城，太师冯道、太子太傅李崧都在真定，后汉高祖把冯道的住宅赐给苏禹，李崧的住宅赐给苏逢吉。
English: At the beginning, the later Han Gao ancestors entered Daliang City, and Grand Master Feng Dao and Prince Daifu Li Yao were both in Zhending. The later Han Gao ancestors gave the house of Feng Dao to Su Yu, and the house of Li Yao to Su Fengji.

古文：崧第中瘗藏之物及洛阳别业，逢吉尽有之。
现代文：李崧宅中埋藏的东西以及洛阳庄园，苏逢吉全都占了。
English: The things buried in Li Qian's house and Luoyang Manor, Su Fengji are all accounted for.

古文：及崧归朝，自以形迹孤危，事汉权臣，常惕惕谦谨，多称疾杜门。
现代文：等李崧归顺后汉朝廷，自认为孤立而危险，事奉后汉权臣，经常小心谨慎，大多时间称病关门在家。
English: After Li Xi returned to the Han Dynasty, he considered himself isolated and dangerous. After serving as a Han power minister, he was always careful and cautious. Most of the time, he said that he was ill and closed the door at home.

古文：而二弟屿？与逢吉子弟俱为朝士，时乘酒出怨言，云： 夺我居第、家赀！ 
现代文：而两个弟弟李屿和李，与苏逢吉子弟都是朝士，有时趁饮酒后口出怨言，说 夺我住房、家财 。
English: However, his two younger brothers, Li Yu and Li, and Su Fengji's younger brother, Mao, were morning warriors, and sometimes took the opportunity to complain after drinking, saying, "They robbed me of my house and family wealth."

古文：逢吉由是恶之。
现代文：苏逢吉因此憎恶他们。
English: This is why Su Fengji hates them.

古文：未几，崧以两京宅券献于逢吉，逢吉愈不悦。翰林学士陶谷，先为崧所引用，复从而谮之。
现代文：不久，李崧又把两京住宅的房契献给苏逢吉，苏逢吉更加不高兴；翰林学士陶，早先被李崧荐举进用，又跟着说他的坏话。
English: Soon after, Li Ying also presented the deed of the two Beijing residences to Su Fengji, which made Su Fengji even more unhappy; Hanlin Baotou, who had been recommended by Li Ying earlier, also spoke ill of him.

古文：汉法既严，而侍卫都指挥使史弘肇尤残忍，宠任孔目官解晖，凡入军狱者，使之随意锻炼，无不自诬。
现代文：后汉法律已经很严，而侍卫都指挥使史弘肇尤其残忍，史弘肇宠信、重用孔目官解晖，凡抓到军中监狱的人，任他随意罗织罪名，最后没有不屈打成招的。
English: The laws of the later Han Dynasty were already very strict, and the command of the guards made Shi Hongzhao particularly cruel. Shi Hongzhao favored letters, reused the eyes of the official to release prisoners, and anyone who was caught in the military prison was allowed to fabricate crimes at will. In the end, he did not succeed.

古文：及三叛连兵，群情震动，民间或讹言相惊骇。
现代文：等到三镇叛变连兵，朝野内群情震动，民间有人误传互相惊扰害怕。
English: Wait until the three towns mutiny against the company of soldiers, the group mood in the court and the field will be shaken, and some people will misinform, scare and frighten each other.

古文：弘肇掌部禁兵，巡逻京城，得罪人，不问情轻重，于法何如，皆专杀不请。或决口断舌，斫筋，折胫，无虚日。
现代文：史弘肇握掌部分禁兵，在京城巡逻，凡抓到罪犯，不问罪行轻重，在法律中应如何处理，全都从不请求就砍头，或者裂口断舌，砍筋，断腿骨，没有一天不是这样。
English: Shi Hong Zhaohong partially banned soldiers, patrolled in Beijing, and anyone who caught a criminal, regardless of the severity of the crime and how it should be handled in the law, all cut their heads without asking, or cut their tongues, cut their sinews, and break their leg bones. There is no day that is not like this.

古文：虽奸盗屏迹，而冤死者甚众，莫敢辨诉。
现代文：虽然奸人盗贼没了踪迹，但冤死的人很多，没人敢出来分辩申诉。
English: Although there is no trace of the traitors and thieves, there are many people who died unjustly, and no one dares to come out to defend the complaint.

古文：李屿仆夫葛延遇，为屿贩鬻，多所欺匿，屿抶之，督其负甚急，延遇与苏逢吉之仆李澄谋上变告屿谋反。
现代文：李屿的仆人葛延遇为李屿贩卖东西，常常欺骗主人、藏匿钱财；李屿鞭打他，催他交出亏欠逼得很急。葛延遇和苏逢吉的仆人李澄，商量向上诬告李屿谋反。
English: Ge Yan Rong, Li Yu's servant, sold things for Li Yu, often deceived his master and hid money; Li Yu whipped him and forced him to pay his debts very quickly. Ge Yan Rong and Su Fengji's servant, Li Cheng, discussed falsely accusing Li Yu of plotting rebellion.

古文：逢吉闻而诱致之，因召崧至第，收送侍卫狱。
现代文：苏逢吉听说后把他引诱过来，于是召李崧来到家中，抓起来送入侍卫狱。
English: Su Fengji heard of this and lured him over, whereupon he summoned Li Yan to his home, arrested him and sent him to the guards' prison.

古文：屿自诬云： 与兄崧、弟、甥王凝及家僮合二十人，谋因山陵发引，纵火焚京城作乱。又遣人以蜡书入河中城，结李守贞。又遣人召契丹兵。 
现代文：李屿在狱中屈招说： 与兄李崧、弟李、外甥王凝及家僮共二十人，谋划乘皇帝灵柩发运时，纵火焚烧京城作乱；又曾派人带蜡丸密书到河中城，勾结李守贞；又派人去招契丹兵。 
English: In prison, Li Yu Quzhao said: Together with his brother Li Zhen, his brother Li, his nephew Wang Geng and his family, a total of twenty people, he planned to set fire to the capital city to create a disturbance when the emperor's coffin was shipped; he also sent someone to take wax balls and secret documents to Hezhong City to collude with Li Shuzhen; he also sent someone to recruit Khitan soldiers.

古文：及具狱上，逢吉取笔改 二十 为 五十 字。
现代文：在结案上报时，苏逢吉又取笔把 二十 改为 五十 。
English: At the end of the report, Su Fengji took a pen and changed "twenty" to "fifty."

古文：十一月，甲寅，下诏诛崧兄弟、家属及辞所连及者，皆陈尸于市。
现代文：十一月，甲寅，下诏诛杀李崧兄弟、家属以及供词涉及的人，都暴尸街头。
English: In November, Gao Yin ordered the killing of Li Yan's brothers, their families, and the people involved in the confession, all of whom were brutally murdered on the street.

古文：仍厚赏葛延遇等，时人无不冤之。
现代文：并重赏了葛延遇等人，当时人没有不觉得李氏冤枉的。
English: At that time, people could not help but feel that the Li family had been wronged.

古文：自是士民家皆畏惮仆隶，往往为所胁制。
现代文：从此士民家里都害怕仆人，往往被仆人所胁制。
English: From then on, the families of the nobles and commoners were afraid of the servants, and were often coerced by the servants.

古文：他日，秘书郎真定李昉诣陶谷，谷曰： 君于李侍中近远？ 
现代文：有一天，秘书郎真定人李拜访陶，陶问： 你和李侍中关系远近？ 
English: One day, Secretary Lang Zhending's man Li visited Tao. Tao asked: Are you close to Li Shizhong?

古文：昉曰： 族叔父。 
现代文：李说： 他是同族叔父。 
English: Li said: He is an uncle from the same clan.

古文：谷曰： 李氏之祸，谷有力焉。 
现代文：陶说： 李家之祸，我出了力。 
English: Tao said: The Li family's misfortune, I did my best.

古文：昉闻之，汗出。
现代文：李听说，吓得出汗。
English: Li heard about it and was so scared that he broke out in a sweat.

古文：谷，邠州人也，本姓唐，避晋高祖讳改焉。
现代文：陶是州人，本姓唐，因避后晋高祖名讳而改。
English: Tao is a native of Suzhou. His original family name was Tang, but he changed it because he wanted to avoid the name of his great-great-grandfather.

古文：史弘肇尤恶文士，常曰： 此属轻人难耐，每谓吾辈为卒。 
现代文：史弘肇特别憎恶文人，常说： 这些家伙轻蔑人让人最难忍耐，常叫我们是兵卒。 
English: Shi Hongzhao especially hated the literati. He often said, "These guys despise people and are the most difficult to tolerate. They often call us soldiers."

古文：弘肇领归德节度使，委亲吏杨乙收属府公利。
现代文：史弘肇兼领归德节度使，委派他亲近的官吏杨乙征归属府的公利。
English: Shi Hongzhao also appointed Yang Yi, an official who was close to him, as the envoy to the festival.

古文：乙依势骄横，合境畏之如弘肇，副使以下，望风展敬，乙皆下视之。月率钱万缗以输弘肇，部民不胜其苦。
现代文：杨乙依仗史弘肇的势力骄横跋扈，整个藩镇怕他就象怕史弘肇，副使以下的官员，远远望见他都要展拜示敬，而杨乙都以下人看待他们，每月搜刮上万缗钱财交给史弘肇，士民百姓都受不了这种苦。
English: Yang Yi arrogantly relied on the power of Shi Hongzhao. The whole town was as afraid of him as they were of Shi Hongzhao. The officials from the vice-commander on down had to bow and show respect when they saw him from a distance, while Yang Yi looked down on them and collected tens of thousands of yuan of money every month to give to Shi Hongzhao. The people could not bear this kind of suffering.

古文：初，沈丘人舒元，嵩山道士杨讷，俱以游客干李守贞。守贞为汉所攻，遣元更姓硃，讷更姓李，名平，间道奉表求救于唐。
现代文：当初，沈丘人舒元、嵩山道士杨讷，都以游客身份谒见李守贞；当李守贞被后汉围攻，派舒元改姓朱，杨讷改姓李，名字叫平，抄小道奉表章向南唐求救。
English: At first, Shu Yuan from Shenqiu and Yang Ne, a Taoist from Songshan, both visited Li Shouzhen as tourists; when Li Shouzhen was besieged by the Western Han Dynasty, they sent Shu Yuan to change his surname to Zhu, Yang Ne to change his surname to Li, his name to Ping, and sent a petition to the Southern Tang Dynasty for help.

古文：唐谏议大夫查文徽、兵部侍郎魏岑请出兵应之。
现代文：南唐谏议大夫查广徽、兵部侍郎魏岑请求出兵救应。
English: In the Southern Tang Dynasty, the councilor Zha Guanghui and the military secretary Wei Wei requested the dispatch of troops to help.

古文：唐主命北面行营招讨使李金全将兵救河中，以清淮节度使刘彦贞副之，文徽为监军使，岑为沿淮巡检使，军于沂州之境。金全与诸将方会食，候骑白有汉兵数百在涧北，皆羸弱，请掩之。
现代文：南唐主命北面行营招讨使李金全率兵救河中，派清淮节度使刘彦贞为副手，查文徽为监军使，魏岑为沿淮巡检使，驻军在沂州境内，李金全和众将领正一起吃饭时，侦察兵报告有后汉兵几百人在涧北，都是病弱；请求袭击他们。
English: The Southern Tang ordered Li Jinquan and his generals to go to the north to recruit and recruit soldiers to save the middle of the river, and sent the Qing and Huai states to Liu Yanzhen as his deputy, Chawen Hui as the supervising envoy, and Wei Wei as the inspecting envoy along the Huai River. The garrison was in the territory of Ganzhou. Li Jinquan and the generals were eating together when the scouts reported that there were several hundred Han soldiers in the north of Ganzhou, all of them were weak; they requested to attack them.

古文：金全令曰： 敢言过涧者斩！ 
现代文：李金全命令道： 谁敢说过涧斩首！ 
English: Li Jinquan ordered: "Who dares to say behead the baboon!

古文：及暮，伏兵四起，金鼓闻十馀里，金全令曰： 曏可与之战乎？ 
现代文：到了晚上，伏兵四起，鸣金击鼓之声传出十几里，李金全说： 刚才可以和他们打吗？ 
English: In the evening, when the ambushed soldiers gathered in all directions, and the sound of drums beating gold was heard more than a dozen miles away, Li Jinquan said: Can I fight with them just now?

古文：时唐士卒厌兵，莫有斗志，又河中道远，势不相及。丙寅，唐兵退保海州。
现代文：当时南唐士兵厌战，没有斗志；又因河中城路远，地理上遥不相及，丙寅，南唐兵退守海州。
English: At that time, the Southern Tang soldiers were tired of war and had no fighting spirit. Moreover, due to the long distance between the cities in the middle of the river and the geographical distance, the Southern Tang soldiers retreated to Haizhou.

古文：唐主遗帝书谢，请复通商旅，且请赦守贞，朝廷不报。
现代文：南唐主致信后汉隐帝告罪，请求通商贸易，并请求赦免李守贞，朝廷不答复。
English: After the Lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty sent a letter to Emperor Han Yin, pleading guilty, requesting trade and commerce, and requesting an amnesty for Li Shouzhen, the imperial court did not reply.

古文：壬申，葬睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝于睿陵，庙号高祖。
现代文：壬申，后汉葬睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝刘于睿陵，庙号是高祖。
English: Jinshin, the Emperor Liu Yu Rui Mausoleum of Emperor Wu Zhao and Emperor Su Xiao of the Later Han Dynasty, the temple name is Gao Zu.

古文：十二月，丁丑，以高保融为荆南节度使、同平章事。
现代文：十二月，丁丑，任命高保融为荆南节度使、同平章事。
English: In December, Ding Yuxiu appointed Gao Baorong as Jingnan's festival envoy.

古文：辛巳，南汉主以内常侍吴怀恩为开府仪同三司、西北面招讨使，将兵击楚，攻贺州。楚王希广遣决胜指挥使徐知新等将兵五千救之。
现代文：辛巳，南汉主任命内常侍吴怀恩为开府仪同三司、西北面招讨使，率兵攻打楚国，进攻贺州；楚王马希广派决胜指挥使徐知新等人率兵五千人去援救贺州。
English: Soon after, the Lord of the Southern Han Dynasty appointed the Inner Chamberlain Wu Huai'en as Kaifu Yi Tong's Third Division and the Northwest Area Recruiting Envoy to lead the troops to attack the State of Chu and attack Hezhou; the King of Chu Mashi Guang sent the decisive commander to send Xu Zhixin and others to lead five thousand soldiers to rescue Hezhou.

古文：未至，南汉人已拔贺州，凿大阱于城外，覆以竹箔，加土，下施机轴，自堑中穿穴通阱中。
现代文：援兵还没到，南汉人已经攻占贺州，并在城外挖了大陷阱，覆盖竹席，加上土，下面设置了机关，从壕沟中挖洞通到阱里。
English: Before the reinforcements arrived, the Southern Han had already captured Hezhou, and dug a large trap outside the city, covered with bamboo mats, plus soil, and set up an organ below, digging a hole from the trench to the trap.

古文：知新等至，引兵攻城，南汉遣人自穴中发机，楚兵悉陷，南汉出兵从而击之。楚兵死者以千数，知新等遁归，希广斩之。
现代文：徐知新等到达，率兵攻城，南汉派人在洞中引发动机关，楚兵全都落入陷阱，南汉从城里出兵从而反攻，楚兵死亡数以千计；徐知新等逃回楚国，被楚王马希广斩首。
English: Xu Zhixin and others arrived, led the troops to attack the city, the Southern Han sent people into the cave to trigger the motive, the Chu soldiers all fell into the trap, the Southern Han sent troops from the city to counterattack, and thousands of Chu soldiers died; Xu Zhixin and others fled back to Chu and were beheaded by King Ma Xiguang of Chu.

古文：南汉兵复陷昭州。
现代文：南汉兵又攻陷了昭州。
English: Southern Han soldiers invaded and occupied Shoshu again.

古文：王景崇累表告急于蜀，蜀主命安思谦再出兵救之。
现代文：王景崇屡次向后蜀上表章告急求救。后蜀主命安思谦再次出兵去援救。
English: Wang Jingsong repeatedly sent urgent appeals for help to the Shangzhang Emperor of the Later Shu Dynasty. The Emperor of the Later Shu Dynasty ordered An Si Qian to send troops to rescue him again.

古文：壬午，思谦自兴元引兵屯凤州，请先运粮四十万斛，乃可出境。
现代文：壬午，安思谦从兴元领兵驻扎在凤州，请求先运军粮四十万斛，才能出境。
English: At noon, An Si Qian from Xingyuan led the troops stationed in Fengzhou and requested the first shipment of 400,000 baht of military grain before leaving the country.

古文：蜀主曰： 观思谦之意，安肯为朕进取！ 
现代文：后蜀主说： 看安思谦的意思，他怎肯为朕进兵攻取！ 
English: Later, Lord Shu said: Look at An Si Qian's intention, how would he be willing to enter the army for me!

古文：然亦发兴州、兴元米数万斛以馈之。
现代文：但依然调集兴州、兴元的米几万斛发送去。
English: However, they still mobilized tens of thousands of baht of rice from Xingzhou and Xingyuan to send.

古文：戊子，思谦进屯散关，遣马步使高彦俦、眉州刺史申贵击汉箭筈安都寨，破之。
现代文：戊子，安思谦进兵驻扎在散关，派马步使高彦俦、眉州刺史申贵袭击并攻克后汉箭安都寨。
English: Wuzi and Ansiqian marched into the army stationed in Sanguan, and sent horses to attack and conquer Gao Yanqian and Meizhou Jishi Shengui after conquering Hanqian Anduzhai.

古文：庚寅，思谦败汉兵于玉女潭，汉兵退屯宝鸡，思谦进屯模壁。
现代文：庚寅，安思谦在玉女潭又打败了后汉军队，后汉兵马退守宝鸡，安思谦进军驻扎模壁。
English: Geng Yin and An Si Qian defeated the Later Han army again in the Jade Maiden Lake, the Later Han soldiers and horses retreated to Baoji, and An Si Qian marched into the army and stationed in Mowei.

古文：韩保贞出新关，壬辰，军于陇州神前，汉兵不出，保贞亦不敢进。
现代文：后蜀将领韩保贞从新关出兵，壬辰，驻扎在陇州神前，后汉兵不出战，韩保贞也不敢进攻。
English: After Shu, Han Baozhen, the leader of the warlords, sent troops from Shinkan to Imjin and stationed them in Zhangzhou, but the Han soldiers did not fight and Han Baozhen did not dare to attack.

古文：赵晖告急于郭威，威自往赴之。
现代文：赵晖向郭威告急，郭威亲自赶赴华州。
English: Zhao Wei sent an urgent message to Guo Wei, and Guo Wei himself rushed to Huazhou.

古文：时李守贞遣副使周光逊、裨将王继勋、聂知遇守城西，威戒白文珂、刘词曰： 贼苟不能突围，终为我禽；万一得出，则吾不得复留于此。
现代文：这时李守贞派副使周光逊、副将王继勋、聂知遇守卫城西。郭威告诫白文珂、刘词说： 贼军如果不能突围，最终会被我抓获；万一冲出包围，那我们就不能再留在这里。
English: At this time, the vice-envoy Zhou Guangxun, the vice-general Wang Jixun, and Shuchi of the Li Shouzhen faction were caught guarding the west of the city. Guo Wei warned Bai Wenke and Liu Ji, saying: If the thief army cannot break through the encirclement, it will eventually be captured by me; if it breaks out of the encirclement, then we can no longer stay here.

古文：成败之机，于是乎在。
现代文：成败的关键，就在于此！
English: The key to success or failure lies in this!

古文：贼之骁锐，尽在城西，我去必来突围，尔曹谨备之！ 
现代文：贼军的精锐部队，都集中在城西，我一离去他们必然从此突围，你们要谨慎防备！ 
English: The elite troops of the thief army are concentrated in the west of the city. As soon as I leave, they will inevitably break out of the encirclement. You should be cautious and prepared!

古文：威至华州，闻蜀兵食尽引去，威乃还。
现代文：郭威来到华州，听说后蜀军队军粮吃完已退走，郭威就返回河中。
English: Guo Wei came to Huazhou. When he heard that the Shu army had left after eating the army rations, Guo Wei returned to Hechu.

古文：韩保贞闻安思谦去，亦退保弓川寨。
现代文：韩保贞听说安思谦离去，他也退守到弓川寨。
English: When Han Baozhen heard that An Siqian had left, he also retreated to Yuchuanzhai.

古文：蜀中书侍郎兼礼部尚书、同平章事徐光溥坐以艳辞挑前蜀安康长公主，丁酉，罢守本官。
现代文：后蜀中书侍朗兼礼部尚书、同平章事徐光溥因为用轻佻的话挑逗前蜀安康长公主，丁酉，被罢免同平章事，任守原来官职。
English: Later, Xu Guangya, the long-serving secretary of Shu Middle School and the head of the ceremonial department of Shangshu and Tongping, was dismissed from Tongping and retained his original official position because he used frivolous words to tease the former Shu Ankang Princess, Ding Yao.

古文：隐皇帝上
现代文：隐皇帝上
English: Emperor Inzong

古文：高祖睿文圣武昭肃孝皇帝下乾祐二年春，正月，乙巳朔，大赦。
现代文：后汉隐帝乾二年春季，正月乙巳朔，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year of Emperor Qian of the Later Han Dynasty, in the first month of the second year of Emperor Qian, the emperor pardoned everyone.

古文：郭威将至河中，白文珂出迎之。
现代文：郭威将到河中，白文珂从军营出来迎接。
English: Guo Wei will go to the river, and Bai Wenke will come out from the military camp to meet him.

古文：戊申夜，李守贞遣王继勋等引精兵千馀人，循河而南，袭汉栅，坎岸而登，遂入之，纵火大譟，军中狼狈不知所为。
现代文：戊申夜里，李守贞派王继勋等率领精锐部队一千多人沿黄河南下，袭击后汉军队的营栅。他们在堤岸上挖坑攀登而上，于是进入营栅，放火，大声呼喊，军营里狼狈不知所措。
English: In the night of Busshen, Li Shouzhen sent Wang Jixun and more than a thousand other elite troops south along the Yellow River to attack the camp gate of the post-Han army. They dug a pit on the embankment and climbed up, then entered the camp gate, set fire, shouted loudly, and the camp was at a loss.

古文：刘词神色自若，下令曰： 小盗不足惊也！ 
现代文：刘词却神色自如，下命令道： 小小盗贼不足惊慌。 
English: Liu Ji, however, looked at ease and gave the following order: "Little thieves don't need to panic.

古文：帅众击之。
现代文：率领众将士反击。
English: He led his soldiers in a counterattack.

古文：客省使阎晋卿曰： 贼甲皆黄纸，为火所照，易辨耳。奈众无斗志何！ 
现代文：客省使阎晋卿说： 贼军铠甲上都有黄纸，被火光一照，容易辨认；但众兵没有斗志怎么办！ 
English: Yan Jinqing, the guest provincial envoy, said: Thieves have yellow paper on their armor, which is easily identified by firelight; but what if the soldiers have no fighting spirit!

古文：裨将李韬曰： 安有无事食君禄，有急不死斗者邪！ 
现代文：副将李韬说： 哪有太平无事时吃君王俸禄，有危急却不冒死搏斗的！ 
English: Vice Admiral Li Wei said: Who would eat the king's salary in times of peace, but would not fight to the death in times of crisis!

古文：援槊先进，众从之。
现代文：举起长矛带头冲锋，众兵将跟上。
English: Raise the spear and lead the charge, the soldiers will follow.

古文：河中兵退走，死者七百人，继勋重伤，仅以身免。
现代文：河中兵将退却逃跑，死亡七百人，王继勋受重伤，只捡了一条命。
English: The soldiers in the river retreated and fled, seven hundred people died, Wang Jixun was seriously injured, and only one life was saved.

古文：己酉，郭威至，刘词迎马首请罪。
现代文：己酉，郭威到达，刘词出迎在马头前请罪。
English: When Guo Wei arrived, Liu Zhiying pleaded guilty in front of Ma Tou.

古文：威厚赏之，曰： 吾所忧正在于此。
现代文：郭威给他重赏，说： 我所担忧的正在这里。
English: Guo Wei gave him a reward, saying: What I am worried about is right here.

古文：微兄健斗，几为虏嗤。
现代文：没有兄弟勇猛善战，几乎被敌人所嗤笑。
English: No brother fought bravely and well, and was almost laughed at by the enemy.

古文：然虏伎殚于此矣。 
现代文：然而敌人的伎俩也就到此为止了。 
English: However, that was the end of the enemy's tricks.

古文：晋卿，忻州人也。
现代文：阎晋卿是忻州人。
English: Yan Jinqing is from Zhangzhou.

古文：守贞之欲攻河西栅也，先遣人出酤酒于村墅，或贳与，不责其直，逻骑多醉。由是河中兵得潜行入寨，几至不守。
现代文：李守贞策划偷袭河西营栅，先派人出去到村里卖酒，有的赊欠白给，不要付钱，后汉巡逻的骑兵大多喝醉，因此河中的士兵得以偷偷地进入营寨，营寨几乎失守。
English: Li Shouzhen planned a sneak attack on the Hexi camp gate. First, he sent people out to the village to sell alcohol. Some of them owed nothing and did not want to pay. Most of the cavalry patrolling in the Han Dynasty were drunk, so the soldiers in the river were able to secretly enter the camp. The camp was almost lost.

古文：郭威乃下令： 将士非犒宴，毋得私饮！ 
现代文：于是郭威下命令： 将领士兵不是犒赏宴饮，不得私下喝酒！ 
English: So Guo Wei issued an order: Generals and soldiers are not to be rewarded with banquets, and are not allowed to drink in private!

古文：爱将李审，晨饮少酒，威怒曰： 汝为吾帐下，首违军令，何以齐众！ 
现代文：郭威的爱将李审，早晨喝了点儿酒，郭威大怒道： 你在我帐下，带头违反军令，怎么来统一大家！ 
English: Guo Wei's beloved general Li Xun, having drunk a little wine in the morning, Guo Wei angrily said: You are under my charge, taking the lead in violating military orders, how can you unify everyone!

古文：立斩以徇。
现代文：立刻斩首示众。
English: Immediately behead him in public.

古文：甲寅，蜀安思谦退屯凤州，上表待罪，蜀主释不问。
现代文：甲寅，后蜀安思谦退守驻扎在凤州，送上表章等待朝廷降罪，后蜀主放下此事不再过问。
English: Jia Yin, after Shu An Shixian retreated and was stationed in Fengzhou, sent a badge to wait for the imperial court to drop the crime, after Shu Lord dropped the matter and no longer asked questions.

古文：诏以静州隶定难军，二月，辛未，李彝殷上表谢。
现代文：后汉隐帝下诏书，命将静州隶属于定难军。二月辛未，李彝殷奉上表章告罪。
English: After the Han Emperor issued an edict, he ordered that Jingzhou be subordinated to the Dingan Army. In February, shortly before the end of the year, Li Yuyin was sentenced to death.

古文：彝殷以中原多故，有轻傲之志，每籓镇有叛者，常阴助之，邀其重赂。
现代文：李彝殷因为中原多事，有轻慢傲侮的想法，每当藩镇有反叛的，常在暗处帮助、支持，以希望得到丰厚的贿赂。
English: Because the Central Plains was so eventful, Li Shuyin had a cavalier attitude. Whenever there was a rebellion in a town, he would often help and support it in the dark, hoping to get a rich bribe.

古文：朝廷知其事，亦以恩泽羁縻之。
现代文：朝廷知道这些事，也用恩惠来拢络他。
English: The imperial court was aware of these things and tried to win him over with favors.

古文：淮北群盗多请命于唐，唐主遣神卫都虞候皇甫晖等将兵万人出海、泗以招纳之。
现代文：淮北众多盗贼大都请命于南唐，南唐主派神卫都虞候皇甫晖等领兵一万人从海州、泗州出来招抚接纳他们。
English: Most of the numerous thieves from Huaibei asked for orders to come to South Tang. The Lord of South Tang sent ten thousand soldiers led by Shenwei Dugu and Wangfujing from Haizhou and Zhangzhou to invite and receive them.

古文：蒙城镇将咸师朗等降于晖。徐州将成德钦败唐兵于峒峿镇，俘斩六百级，晖等引归。
现代文：蒙城守将咸师朗等人向皇甫晖投降；徐州守将成德钦在峒镇打败南唐军队，俘获、斩首六百人，皇甫晖等率兵退回。
English: Mengcheng garrison commander Xian Shilang and others surrendered to Emperor Fuxi; Xuzhou garrison commander Cheng Deqin defeated the Southern Tang army in Shanzhen, captured and beheaded 600 people, and Emperor Fuxi and other soldiers retreated.

古文：晋李太后诣契丹主，请依汉人城寨之侧，给田以耕桑自赡。契丹主许之，并晋主迁于建州。
现代文：后晋李太后去见契丹主，请求靠着汉人城寨的旁边，给一块田地用来耕种养蚕养活自己，契丹主准许并让她和后晋出帝一起迁往建州。
English: The Empress Dowager Li of the Later Jin Dynasty went to see the Khitan lord and asked for a piece of land next to the Han fortress to cultivate and raise silkworms to feed herself. The Khitan lord granted permission and let her move to Jianzhou with the Emperor of the Later Jin Dynasty.

古文：未至，安太妃卒于路。
现代文：还没到建州。
English: We haven't reached Jianzhou yet.

古文：遗令： 必焚我骨，南向扬之，庶几魂魄归达于汉。 
现代文：安太妃死在途中，遗嘱说： 一定要火化我的遗体，向南方扬去，使我的魂魄能回到汉地。 
English: When Antaifei died on the way, her will said, "Be sure to cremate my body and take it to the south, so that my soul can return to Han."

古文：既至建州，得田五十馀顷，晋主令从者耕其中以给食。
现代文：到建州后，得到田地五十多顷，后晋出帝命令跟随的人都在田里耕种来获取食物。
English: After arriving in Jianzhou, he obtained more than fifty hectares of fields. After the Emperor Jinshi issued an order, the people who followed him all cultivated in the fields to obtain food.

古文：顷之，述律王遣骑取晋主宠姬赵氏、聂氏而去。
现代文：不久，述律王派人来取后晋出帝宠爱的姬妾赵氏、聂氏而去。
English: Soon after, the king of storytellers sent someone to take out the emperor's favorite concubines, the Zhao clan and the Zou clan.

古文：述律王者，契丹主德光之子也。
现代文：述律王是契丹主耶律德光的儿子。
English: King Surya was the son of the Khitan lord Yerudoglu.

古文：三月，己未，以归德牙内指挥使史德珫领忠州刺史。
现代文：三月己未，命归德牙内指挥使史德琉兼任忠州刺史。
English: It was not until March that he was ordered to return to Germany, where he became the commander of the Styrian army and also served as the governor of Chungju.

古文：德珫，弘肇之子也，颇读书，常不乐父之所为。
现代文：史德琉是史弘肇的儿子，很爱读书，常不喜欢父亲的所作所为。
English: Shideliu is Shi Hongzhao's son. He loves to read and often dislikes his father's actions.

古文：有举人呼譟于贡院门，苏逢吉命执送侍卫司，欲其痛棰而黥之。
现代文：有举人在贡院门前高声喧哗，苏逢吉命人抓起来送往侍卫司，准备狠抽一顿鞭子再在脸上刺上字。
English: There was a loud clamor in front of the gate of the tribute hall, and Su Fengji ordered his men to arrest them and send them to the bodyguards, ready to give them a severe whipping and then have the words tattooed on their faces.

古文：德珫言于父曰： 书生无礼，自有台府治之，非军务也。
现代文：史德琉对父亲说： 书生无礼，自然有台府处置，这不军务。
English: Steliu said to his father: "If a student is rude, the Taiwanese government will naturally deal with him. This is not a military matter."

古文：此乃公卿欲彰大人之过耳。 
现代文：这全是公卿大臣想要宣扬大人的过错罢了。 
English: This is all the fault of the Minister of Justice who wants to spread the word about adults.

古文：弘肇大然之，即破械遣之。
现代文：史弘肇深以为然，立即打开刑具把书生送走。
English: Shi Hongzhao was deeply impressed and immediately opened the torture device to send the student away.

古文：楚将徐进败蛮于风阳山，斩首五千级。
现代文：楚国将领徐进在风阳山打败南蛮，斩首五千人。
English: The Chu warlord Xu Jin defeated Nanban in Fengyang Mountain and beheaded five thousand people.

古文：夏，四月，壬午，太白昼见，民有仰视之者，为逻卒所执，史弘肇腰斩之。
现代文：夏季，四月壬午，太白星白天出现，百姓中有仰面观看的，被巡逻的士兵抓住，史弘肇命处以腰斩。
English: In the summer, at noon in April, a white star appeared in the daytime, and some people watched it from behind. They were caught by patrolling soldiers, and Shi Hong was sentenced to death by beheading.

古文：河中城中食且尽，民饿死者什五六。
现代文：河中城里粮食将要吃光，百姓饿死的有十分之五、六。
English: The grain in the city in the middle of the river will run out, and five or six out of ten people will starve to death.

古文：癸卯，李守贞出兵五千馀人，赍梯桥，分五道以攻长围之西北隅。
现代文：癸卯，李守贞出兵五千多人，带着梯子、造桥器械，分五路进攻长围的西北角。
English: At the same time, Li Shouzhen dispatched more than 5,000 soldiers, with ladders and bridge-building equipment, to attack the northwest corner of Changwu in five ways.

古文：郭威遣都监吴虔裕引兵横击之，河中兵败走，杀伤太半，夺其攻具。
现代文：郭威派都监吴虔裕率兵从旁拦击，河中兵战败逃跑，被杀伤一大半，夺走了进攻器械。
English: Guo Wei sent the city supervisor Wu Qianyu and his soldiers to block the attack from the side. The soldiers in the river were defeated and fled. They were injured and took away the offensive equipment.

古文：五月，丙午，守贞复出兵，又败之，擒其将魏延朗、郑宾。
现代文：五月丙午，李守贞又出兵，又被打败，后汉生擒了他的将领魏延朗、郑宾。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month, Li Shouzhen again sent troops and was defeated again. Later, Han Sheng defeated his generals Wei Yanlang and Zheng Bin.

古文：壬子，周光逊、王继勋、聂知遇帅其众千馀人来降。
现代文：壬子，周光逊、王继勋、聂知遇率领一千多人前来投降。
English: Ren Zi, Zhou Guangxun, Wang Jixun, and Zou Zhituo led more than a thousand people to surrender.

古文：守贞将士降者相继，威乘其离散，庚申，督诸军百道攻之。
现代文：李守贞将领、士兵投降的相继不断，郭威趁李守贞部下分崩离散，庚申，督率各军分一百路进攻河中。
English: Li Shouzhen's generals and soldiers surrendered one after another. Guo Wei took advantage of the fact that Li Shouzhen's subordinates had broken up and dispersed, and Gaoshen led the army in a hundred-way attack on Hechu.

古文：赵思绾好食人肝，尝面剖而脍之。脍尽，人犹未死。
现代文：赵思绾喜吃人肝，曾经当面剖开人腹取肝而切成细丝，切完了，人还没死。
English: Zhao Sijian likes to eat human liver. He once cut open a human abdomen to take the liver and cut it into filaments. When he was done, the person was still alive.

古文：又好以酒吞人胆，谓人曰： 吞此千枚，则胆无敌矣。 
现代文：又好用酒吞吃人胆，对人说： 吞这一千个，就胆大无敌了。 
English: And he could drink a thousand gallons of wine in a day, and he said, "If I could drink a thousand gallons of wine, I'd be a very brave man."

古文：及长安城中食尽，取妇女、幼稚为军粮，日计数而给之。每犒军，辄屠数百人，如羊豕法。
现代文：长安城中绝粮时，就靠吃妇女、小孩充当军粮，每天有一定数量的供给，每次犒劳军队，就屠杀几百个人吃，就像杀猪宰羊一样。
English: When there was a food shortage in Chang'an City, they relied on eating women and children to serve as military rations, with a certain amount of supply every day. Every time they had to feed the army, they slaughtered several hundred people to eat, just like killing pigs and slaughtering sheep.

古文：思绾计穷，不知所出。
现代文：赵思绾计谋用尽，不知出路何在。
English: Zhao Siyu's strategy is exhausted, and he doesn't know what the way out is.

古文：郭从义使人诱之。
现代文：郭从义派人引诱他。
English: Guo Congyi sent someone to entice him.

古文：初，思绾少时，求为左骁卫上将军致仕李肃仆，肃不纳，曰： 是人目乱而语诞，他日必为叛臣。 
现代文：当初，赵思绾少年时，请求当已退休的左骁卫上将军李肃的仆人，李肃不收纳他，说： 这个人眼珠乱转而且言语荒诞，来日一定是个叛臣。 
English: At first, when Zhao Sijian was a young boy, he asked the servant of the retired General of the Left Division of the National Guard, Li Su, not to receive him, saying: This man's eyes are swiveling and his words are absurd, he must be a traitor.

古文：肃妻张氏，全义之女也，曰： 君今拒之，后且为患。 
现代文：李肃的妻子张氏，是张全义的女儿，说： 你现在这样拒绝他，以后会成为你的祸患。 
English: Li Su's wife, Zhang Ru, the daughter of Zhang Quan Yi, said, "If you reject him like this now, it will be your misfortune in the future.

古文：乃厚以金帛遗之。
现代文：于是送赠许多金银钱财把他打发走了。
English: So they sent him away with a large sum of money and gold.

古文：及思绾据长安，肃闲居在城中，思绾数就见之，拜伏如故礼。
现代文：等赵思绾占据长安，李肃闲住在城中，赵思绾多次前往探望，向李肃叩拜伏地如同旧日礼节。
English: Zhao Siyu occupied Chang'an, while Li Su lived in the city. Zhao Siyu visited Li Siyu many times, and bowed down to Li Siyu as was the custom in the old days.

古文：肃曰： 是子亟来，且污我。 
现代文：李肃说： 这个人老是来我这儿，是玷污我的清白！ 
English: Li Su said, "This man is always coming to me, he is tarnishing my innocence!"

古文：欲自杀。
现代文：想要自杀。
English: After saying this, the eldest son wanted to commit suicide.

古文：妻曰： 曷若劝之归国！ 
现代文：妻子说： 何不劝他归附国家！ 
English: His wife said: Why not persuade him to join the state!

古文：会思绾问自全之计，肃乃与判官程让能说思绾曰： 公本与国家无嫌，但惧罪耳。
现代文：正赶上赵思绾前来请教能保全自己的办法，李肃就和判官程让能劝说他： 你本来和国家并无嫌隙，只不过是怕获罪而已。
English: Just in time for Zhao Sijian to come and ask for advice on how to protect himself, Li Su and the judge Cheng Zhan could persuade him: You originally had no grudge against the state, you were just afraid of being found guilty.

古文：今国家三道用兵，俱未有功，若以此时翻然改图，朝廷必喜，自可不失富贵。孰与坐而待毙乎！ 
现代文：现在国家三路用兵，都没有成功。如果趁现在翻然悔过，改弦更张，朝廷一定高兴，自然不会失掉富贵，这不比坐以待毙强多了！ 
English: At present, the country's three-way use of troops has not been successful. If it suddenly repents and changes course now, the imperial court will certainly be happy, and it will naturally not lose its wealth. This is not much better than waiting to die!

古文：思绾从之，遣使诣阙请降。
现代文：赵思绾听从了他们的劝告，派遣使者前往朝廷请求归降。
English: Zhao Siyu heeded their advice and sent an envoy to the imperial court to request the emperor's surrender.

古文：乙丑，以思绾为华州留后，都指挥使常彦卿为虢州刺史，令便道之官。
现代文：乙丑，朝廷任命赵思绾为华州留后，都指挥使常彦卿为虢州刺史，让他们走近道直接前往就任。
English: Second, after the imperial court appointed Zhao Sijian to stay in Huazhou, the commander ordered Tsuneyoshi to make Tsuneyoshi a history of Zhangzhou, and let them take a shortcut to go directly to take office.

古文：吴越内牙都指挥使钭滔，胡进思之党也，或告其谋叛，辞连丞相弘亿。吴越王弘亻叔不欲穷治，贬滔于处州。
现代文：吴越的内牙都指挥使钭滔，是胡进思的党羽，有人告发他蓄谋反叛，告发牵连到丞相钱弘亿，吴越王钱弘不想深入追查治罪，只把钭滔贬到处州。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qianhong did not want to thoroughly investigate and punish the crime, but only banished Wu Yue Wang Qianhong to the provinces.

古文：六月，癸酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，癸酉朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，赵思绾释甲出城受诏，郭从义以兵守其南门，复遣还城。
现代文：秋季，七月，甲辰，赵思绾脱下盔甲出城接受后汉隐帝的诏书，郭从义派兵把守南门，又把他接回城里。
English: In the autumn, in July, in Jia Chen, Zhao Siyu took off his armor and went out of the city to accept the edict of Emperor Han Yin. Guo Congyi sent soldiers to guard the south gate and brought him back to the city.

古文：思绾求其牙兵及铠仗，从义亦给之。思绾迁延，收敛财贿，三改行期。
现代文：赵思绾要他的卫队和兵器，郭从义也都给了他；赵思绾拖延时间，在城中收敛钱财，三次改变行期。
English: Zhao Siyi asked for his guards and weapons, and Guo Ziyi also gave them to him; Zhao Siyi delayed the time, collected money in the city, and changed the schedule three times.

古文：从义等疑之，密白郭威，请图之，威许之。
现代文：郭从义等人产生怀疑，密报郭威，请求采取果断措施。
English: Guo Zongyi and others became suspicious and secretly reported to Guo Wei, requesting that decisive measures be taken.

古文：壬子，从义与都监、南院宣徽使王峻按辔入城，处于府舍，召思绾酌别，因执之，并常彦卿及其父兄部曲三百人，皆斩于市。
现代文：郭威同意了。壬子，郭从义和都监、南院宣徽使王峻骑马入城，来到府署馆舍，召赵思绾钱行话别，就势抓住了他，连同常彦卿及父亲、兄弟、部下共三百个人，全部推到街市上斩首。
English: Guo Wei agreed. Guo Zongyi, the magistrate of Yiwu and the Southern Court, sent Wang Jun on horseback into the city, came to the government office building, called Zhao Siqian to say goodbye, and seized him, together with Lord Changyan and his father, brother, and subordinates, a total of three hundred people, all pushed to the street market and beheaded.

古文：甲寅，郭威攻河中，克其外郭。
现代文：甲寅，郭威进攻河中城，攻克外城。
English: Jia Yin, Guo Wei attacked Huanzhong City and conquered the outer city.

古文：李守贞收馀众，退保子城。
现代文：李守贞收集余部退守子城。
English: Li Shouzhen collected the remnants and retreated to Shouzi City.

古文：诸将请急攻之，威曰： 夫鸟穷则啄，况一军乎！
现代文：各将领要求赶快进攻子城，郭威说： 那鸟没处逃时还会啄人，何况是一支军队！
English: The generals demanded that the sub-city be attacked as soon as possible. Guo Wei said, "That bird will peck at people when it has nowhere to run, let alone an army!"

古文：涸水取鱼，安用急为！ 
现代文：把水慢慢舀干了再抓鱼，何必要这么性急！ 
English: After slowly draining the water, catch the fish. There's no need to be so hasty!

古文：壬戌，李守贞与妻及子崇勋等自焚，威入城，获其子崇玉等及所署宰相靖余、孙愿、枢密使刘芮、国师总伦等，送大梁，磔于市。
现代文：壬戌，李守贞和妻子及儿子李崇勋等自焚而死，郭威军队入城，抓住了李守贞的儿子李崇玉等及所委任的宰相靖、孙愿，枢密使刘芮，国师总伦等人，押解到大梁，全都杀掉并暴尸街头。
English: Guo Wei's troops entered the city, captured Li Shuzhen's son Li Chongyu, as well as the appointed prime ministers Jing and Sun Zhan, the confidential envoy Liu Hui, and the general secretary of the Chinese Communist Party, Li Chongxun, and sent them to Daliang, where they were all killed and left in the streets.

古文：征赵修己为翰林天文。
现代文：征召赵修己为翰林天文。
English: Conscripted Zhao Shuxi as a Hanlin astronomer.

古文：威阅守贞文书，得朝廷权臣及籓镇与守贞交通书，词意悖逆，欲奏之。秘书郎榆次王溥谏曰； 魑魅乘夜争出，见日自消。
现代文：郭威查阅李守贞的公文书信，得到朝廷权臣及藩镇大员和李守贞来往勾结的书信，言语大逆不道，郭威想上奏朝廷，但秘书郎榆次人王溥劝谏道： 鬼魅在夜里才争着出来，而见到太阳自然会消失。
English: Guo Wei examined the official letter of Li Shouzhen, and obtained the letters of the collusion between the imperial court officials and the lords of the domain and the lords of the town and Li Shouzhen. The words were outrageous, and Guo Wei wanted to appeal to the imperial court, but the secretary, Lang Wei's second-in-command, Wang Wei, advised him: Ghosts only come out at night, and when you see the sun, it will naturally disappear.

古文：愿一切焚之，以安反仄。 
现代文：希望把这一切统统烧掉，来安定那些反复无常的人。 
English: The hope is to burn it all down to placate the fickle.

古文：威从之。
现代文：郭威听从此言。
English: Liu Wei followed him.

古文：三叛既平，帝浸骄纵，与左右狎昵。
现代文：三叛平息后，后汉隐帝逐渐骄奢放纵，和身边的宠臣随意玩耍。
English: After the three rebellions subsided, Emperor Houhan Yingdi gradually became arrogant and indulgent, and played at will with the favorites around him.

古文：飞龙使瑕丘后匡赞、茶酒使太原郭允明以谄媚得幸，帝好与之为廋辞、丑语，太后屡戒之，帝不以为意。
现代文：飞龙使瑕丘人后匡赞、茶酒使太原人郭允明都因谄媚而得到宠幸，后汉隐帝平时爱和他们说隐语、脏话。太后多次告诫他，他也不在意。
English: Guo Yunming from Taiyuan and Guo Guanzhong from Guekou were both favored for their charms. The late Han Emperor loved to speak with them in secret and swear words. The empress warned him many times, but he didn't care.

古文：癸亥，太常卿张昭上言： 宜亲近儒臣，讲习经训。 
现代文：癸亥，太常卿张昭进言道： 应该亲近儒臣，讲习经典训诂。 
English: Zhang Zhaojin, Taizhongqing, said: It is necessary to be close to Confucianism and study classic teachings.

古文：不听。
现代文：后汉隐帝不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：昭，即昭远，避高祖讳改之。
现代文：张昭，就是张昭远，为避高祖名讳而改名。
English: Zhang Zhao, that is, Zhang Zhaoyuan, changed his name to avoid the name of Gao Zu.

古文：戊辰，加永兴节度使郭从义同平章事，徙镇国节度使扈彦珂为护国节度使，以河中行营马步都虞候刘词为镇国节度使。
现代文：戊辰，永兴节度使郭从义加任同平章事，调镇国节度使扈从珂为护国节度使，命河中行营马步都虞候刘词为镇国节度使。
English: In ancient times, the Yongxing Festival made Guo from Yiwu to be appointed as Tongping Festival, the Zhenguo Festival made Guo from Ke to be the National Defense Festival, and the Mid-Autumn Festival made Mabudu and Liu Zhi to be the National Defense Festival.

古文：唐主复进用魏岑。吏部郎中会稽钟谟、尚书员外郎李德明始以辩慧得幸，参预国政。
现代文：南唐主再度起用魏岑；吏部郎中会稽人钟谟、尚书员外郎李德明凭着能说善辩、聪明机警得到宠幸，参预国政。
English: The Lord of Southern Tang Dynasty appointed Wei Zheng again; Zhong Mu, the inspector of the Central Committee of the Ministry of Internal Affairs, and Li Deming, the younger brother of Shang Shucai, were favored by virtue of their ability to speak well, clever and alert, and participated in pre-national politics.

古文：二人皆恃恩轻躁，虽不与岑为党，而国人皆恶之。
现代文：两人都自恃恩宠而轻浮骄躁，虽然不与魏岑结党，国人也都憎恶他们。
English: Both of them were conceited and vainglorious, and although they did not join the Wei faction, the Chinese people also hated them.

古文：户部员外郎范冲敏，性狷介，乃教天威都虞候王建封上书，历诋用事者，请进用正人。
现代文：户部员外郎范冲敏，为人廉正耿直，于是让天威都虞候王建封上书，一一指责当权人的错误，要求任用正人君子。
English: Wai Lang Fan Chongmin, a member of the household department, was a man of integrity, so he asked the governor of Tianwei, Wang Jianfeng, to write a letter, blaming the mistakes of those in power one by one, and demanding the appointment of an upright gentleman.

古文：唐主谓建封武臣典兵，不当干预国政，大怒，流建封于池州，未至，杀之，冲敏弃市。
现代文：南唐主认为王建封是武将，只掌管军队，不应干预国家政治，勃然大怒，把王建封流放到池州，没有到达，在途中便被杀死；范冲敏在街头被斩首示众。
English: The lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty thought that Wang Jianfeng was a military commander, only in charge of the army, and should not interfere in national politics. He flew into a rage and exiled Wang Jianfeng to Chizhou. He did not arrive and was killed on the way; Fan Chongmin was beheaded in the street.

古文：唐主闻河中破，以硃元为驾部员外郎，待诏文理院李平为尚书员外郎。
现代文：南唐主听说河中城被攻破，就任命朱元为驾部员外郎，待诏文理院李平为尚书员外郎。
English: When the lord of the Southern Tang Dynasty heard that the city of Huanzhong had been breached, he appointed Zhu Yuan as the driver's son-in-law, and Li Ping from the College of Humanities and Sciences as the scholar's son-in-law.

古文：吴越王弘亻叔以丞相弘亿判明州。
现代文：吴越王钱弘命丞相钱弘亿出任明州地方官。
English: Wu Yue Wang Qian Hong Rong, Minister Qian Hong Rong, served as a local official in Mingshou.

古文：西京留守、同平章事王守恩，性贪鄙，专事聚敛。
现代文：西京留守、同平章事王守恩为人贪婪卑鄙，专门聚敛钱财。
English: Wang Shouen was a greedy and despicable person who stayed in West Beijing and collected money.

古文：丧车非输钱不得出城，下至抒厕、行乞之人，不免课率，或纵麾下令盗人财。
现代文：丧车不交钱不准出城，下至清扫厕所、作乞丐的，也不免交税；有时还让他手下的人去偷人家的钱财。
English: He was not allowed to leave the city without paying for the funeral car, nor was he exempt from paying taxes if he cleaned toilets or worked as a beggar; sometimes he had his men steal other people's money.

古文：有富室娶妇，守恩与俳优数人往为宾客，得银数铤而返。
现代文：有富人家娶媳妇，王守恩和几个艺人前去作宾客，捞取几锭银子才回去。
English: There was a rich man who married his daughter-in-law, and Wang Shouen and several artists went to be his guests, only to return with a few shekels of silver.

古文：八月，甲申，郭威自河中还，过洛阳。守恩自恃位兼将相，肩舆出迎。
现代文：八月，甲申，郭威从河中返回，途经洛阳；王守恩倚仗自己位兼将相，坐在轿里出来迎接。
English: In August, Guo Wei returned from the river in Jiaxing, passing through Luoyang; Wang Shouen relied on his position as commander-in-chief and came out to meet him sitting in a sedan.

古文：威怒，以为慢己，辞以浴，不见，即以头子命保义节度使、同平章事白文珂代守恩为留守，文珂不敢违。
现代文：郭威大怒，认为有意侮慢自己，用沐浴休假推辞，不见他，旋即拟堂帖任命保义节度使、同平章事白文珂取代王守恩作留守，白文珂不敢违背他的意思。
English: Guo Wei was furious, believing that he had deliberately humiliated himself. He used the excuse of taking a bath to excuse himself from seeing him, and immediately went to the court to appoint Baoyi Jiedu Envoy and Tongping Zhangji Baiwenke to replace Wang Shouen as a stay-at-home. Baiwenke did not dare to go against his will.

古文：守恩犹坐客次，吏白： 新留守已视事于府矣。 
现代文：王守恩还在客座上，官吏告诉他： 新留守现已在西京府里办公了。 
English: Wang Shouen was still in the guest seat, and the official told him: The newly left-behind has now been working in Xijing Prefecture.

古文：守恩大惊，狼狈而归，见家属数百已逐出府，在通衢矣。朝廷不之问，以文珂兼侍中，充西京留守。
现代文：王守恩大吃一惊，狼狈而归，见几百名家属已经被赶出府外，站在大街上了，朝廷不过问此事，任命白文珂兼侍中，充任西京留守。
English: Wang Shouen was taken aback and returned in dismay, seeing that several hundred family members had been driven out of the capital and were standing on the streets. The court did not inquire about the matter, but appointed Bai Wenke as an attendant and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：欧阳修论曰：自古乱亡之国，必先坏其法制而后乱从之，此势之然也，五代之际是已。
现代文：欧阳修论曰：自古动乱、灭亡的国家，一定是先破坏了它的法制，然后动乱才跟随而起，这是势所必然的，五代的时候正是这样。
English: Ouyang Xiu said: Since ancient times, when a country was in turmoil and perished, it must have first destroyed its legal system, and then turmoil would follow. This was inevitable, and it was exactly the case during the Five Dynasties.

古文：文珂、守恩皆汉大臣，而周太祖以一枢密使头子而易置之，如更戍卒。
现代文：白文珂、王守恩都是后汉的大臣，而周太祖郭威当时仅用一个枢密使的堂帖而更换，就像更换卫兵一样。
English: Bai Wenke and Wang Shouen were both ministers of the Later Han Dynasty, while Zhou Taizu Guo Wei was only replaced by a courier, just like changing the guard.

古文：是时太祖未有无君之志，而所为如此者，盖习为常事，故文珂不敢违，守恩不敢拒。
现代文：当时周太祖并没有无视君主的异志，但所以能这样干，是因为习为常事，所以白文珂不敢违背，王守恩不敢抗拒。
English: At that time, Zhou Taizu did not ignore the monarch's wishes, but he was able to do so because it was customary, so Bai Wenke did not dare to disobey, and Wang Shouen did not dare to resist.

古文：太祖既处之不疑，而汉廷君臣亦置而不问，岂非纲纪坏乱之极而至于此欤！
现代文：太祖既然不怀疑这种干法，后汉朝廷的君臣也置之不问，这难道不是因朝纳法纪败坏混乱到了极点，而导致这种局面吗！
English: Since the great-grandfather did not doubt this way of doing things, and the monarchs and ministers of the post-Han dynasty did not question it, is this not the result of the extreme chaos caused by the collapse of law and order in the Han Dynasty, which led to this situation?

古文：是以善为天下虑者，不敢忽于微而常杜其渐也，可不戒哉！
现代文：所以说，善于为国家着想的，不敢在小事上马虎，而且经常杜微防渐，能不警惕吗？
English: Therefore, if you are good at thinking for the sake of the country, do not dare to be sloppy in small things, and often avoid small steps, can you not be vigilant?

古文：守恩至大梁，恐获罪，广为贡献，重赂权贵。
现代文：王守恩来到大梁，害怕获罪，所以各处打点，用重礼贿赂权贵。
English: Wang Shouen came to Daliang, afraid of being punished, so he made deals everywhere and bribed the powerful with heavy gifts.

古文：朝廷亦以守恩首举潞州归汉，故宥之，但诛其用事者数人而已。
现代文：朝廷也因为王守恩最先率潞州归降后汉，所以宽恕了他，只惩罚了他手下当权的几个人罢了。
English: The imperial court also pardoned Wang Shouen because he was the first to lead Zhangzhou back to Han, and only punished a few of his subordinates in power.

古文：马希萼悉调郎州丁壮为乡兵，造号静江军，作战舰七百艘，将攻潭州，其妻苑氏谏曰： 兄弟相攻，胜负皆为人笑。 
现代文：马希萼征调朗州所有的壮丁组成乡兵，创立军号为静江军；制造了七百艘战船，准备攻打潭州。他的妻子苑氏劝谏道： 兄弟互相攻打，无论胜败都将被外人嗤笑。 
English: Ma Xicai conscripted all the able-bodied men of Langzhou to form a village army, and founded the army with the name of Jingjiang Army; he made seven hundred warships, ready to attack Tanzhou. His wife, Yuan, advised him: Brothers attack each other, and no matter whether they win or lose, they will be laughed at by outsiders.

古文：不听，引兵趣长沙。
现代文：马希萼不听，率兵赶赴长沙。
English: Ma Xicai did not listen and led his troops to Changsha.

古文：马希广闻之曰： 朗州，吾兄也，不可与争，当以国让之而已。 
现代文：马希广听到朗州军情后说： 朗州，那是我的哥哥，不能和他争斗，只应当把国家让给他罢了。 
English: After hearing the military situation in Lanzhou, Mashi Guang said: Lanzhou, that is my brother, I cannot fight with him, I should just give him the country.

古文：刘彦瑫、李弘皋等固争以为不可，乃以岳州刺史王赟为都部署战棹指挥使，以彦瑫监其军。
现代文：刘彦、李弘极力抗争认为不能这样做，于是派岳州刺史王为都部署战棹指挥使，派刘彦为监军。
English: Liu Yan and Li Hong strenuously protested that this could not be done, so they sent Yue Zhou Sisi Wang to deploy the commander for the capital, and sent Liu Yan to supervise the troops.

古文：己丑，大破希萼于仆射洲，获其战舰三百艘。
现代文：己丑，在仆射洲把马希萼的水军打得落花流水，俘获三百只战船。
English: He was so ugly that he beat Ma Xicai's naval force to a pulp and captured three hundred warships.

古文：赟追希萼，将及之，希广遣使召之曰： 勿伤吾兄！ 
现代文：王追击马希萼，快追上时，马希广派使臣向他关照道： 不国伤害我哥哥！ 
English: The king chased Ma Xicai, and when he caught up with him, Ma Xigang sent an envoy to warn him: No country will harm my brother!

古文：赟引兵还。
现代文：王于是率兵返回。
English: So the king returned with his army.

古文：赟，环之子也。
现代文：王是王环的儿子。
English: The king is the son of the king's ring.

古文：希萼自赤沙湖乘轻舟遁归，苑氏泣曰： 祸将至矣，余不忍见也。 
现代文：马希萼本人从赤沙湖乘小船逃回朗州。苑氏哭泣道： 大祸就要临头了，我不忍看见。 
English: Mr. Ma himself fled from Chisha Lake by boat back to Lanzhou. Mr. Yuan cried: A great disaster is imminent, I can't bear to see it.

古文：赴井而死。
现代文：投井而死。
English: He died after being thrown into a well.

古文：戊戌，郭威至大梁，入见，帝劳之，赐金帛、衣服、玉带、鞍马，辞曰： 臣受命期年，仅克一城，何功之有！
现代文：戊戌，郭威回到大梁，入朝拜见后汉隐帝，后汉隐帝慰劳他，赐给他金帛、衣服、玉带、鞍马。郭威推辞道： 臣接受命令一年，只攻克一座城，有什么功劳！
English: Guo Wei returned to Dalian and went to the court to pay homage to Emperor Houhan Yingdi. Emperor Houhan Yingdi consoled him and gave him a golden scepter, clothes, a jade sash, and a pommel horse. Guo Wei made a speech, saying, "A minister receives an order for one year, and only conquers one city, what is his merit!

古文：且臣将兵在外，凡镇安京师、供亿所须、使兵食不乏，皆诸大臣居中者之力也，臣安敢独膺此赐！
现代文：而且我率领兵马在外，保卫、治理京城，供应军需物品、使军粮不缺，都是朝中众位大臣的力量，我怎么敢独自接受这些赏赐！
English: Moreover, I led the soldiers and horses outside, defended and governed the capital city, supplied military supplies, and ensured that there was no shortage of military food, all of which were the power of numerous ministers in the DPRK and China. How dare I accept these rewards alone!

古文：请遍赏之。 
现代文：请分赏给大家吧！ 
English: Please distribute the reward to everyone!

古文：又议加领方镇，辞曰： 杨邠位在臣上，未有茅土。且帷幄之臣，不可以弘肇为比。 
现代文：又建议加授他藩镇，他推辞道： 杨位置在我之上，尚且没有兼领藩镇之地；况且帷幄近臣不可以与史弘肇相比。 
English: It was also suggested that he be given additional hanzhens, but he declined, saying, "Yang is in a higher position than me, and he does not have the position of leading a hanzhens yet; moreover, his close vassals cannot be compared to Shi Hongzhao.

古文：九月，壬寅，遍赐宰相、枢密、宣徽、三司、侍卫使九人，与威如一。
现代文：九月，壬寅，通赏宰相、枢密使、宣徽使、三司使、侍卫使九个人，与郭威一样。
English: In September, nine people, including the prime minister, the privy councilor, the imperial seal envoy, the third secretary envoy, and the bodyguard envoy, received the award, the same as Guo Wei.

古文：帝欲特赏威，辞曰； 运筹建画，出于庙堂；发兵馈粮，资于籓镇；暴露战斗，在于将士；而功独归臣，臣何以堪之！ 
现代文：后汉隐帝想特别赏赐郭威，郭威推辞道： 作战的运筹策划，出于朝廷；发兵运粮，依靠藩镇；野外战斗，在于将士，而把功劳只归我，为臣的怎能受得了！ 
English: After the Han Dynasty, Emperor Qianlong wanted to give Guo Wei a special reward. Guo Wei made a speech: The operational planning of the battle comes from the imperial court; the dispatch of troops and the transportation of grain rely on the townships; the field battle depends on the soldiers, but the credit belongs only to me. How can a vassal bear it!

古文：乙巳，加威兼侍中，史弘肇兼中书令。
现代文：乙巳，郭威加任兼侍中，史弘肇加任兼中书令。
English: At that time, Guo Weijia was also appointed as a chamberlain, and Shi Hongzhao was also appointed as a secretary.

古文：辛亥，加窦贞固司徒，苏逢吉司空，苏禹珪左仆射，杨邠右仆射。
现代文：辛亥加任窦贞固为司徒、苏逢吉为司空、苏禹为左仆射、杨为右仆射。
English: Xinhai appointed Dou Zhenggu as the leading disciple, Su Fengji as the leading disciple, Su Yu as the left subordinate, and Yang as the right subordinate.

古文：诸大臣议，以朝廷执政溥加恩，恐籓镇觖望。
现代文：众大臣议论，因为朝廷中执掌政权的大臣普遍加受恩遇，恐怕各地藩镇埋怨失望。
English: The ministers discuss, because the ministers who hold power in the imperial court are generally favored, I am afraid that the provinces and towns will complain and be disappointed.

古文：乙卯，加天雄节度使高行周守太师，山南东道节度使安审琦守太傅，泰宁节度使符彦卿守太保，河东节度使刘崇兼中书令。
现代文：乙卯，加任天雄节度使高行周为守太师、山南东道节度使安审琦为守太傅、泰宁节度使符彦卿为守太保，河东节度使刘崇兼中书令。
English: Second, the Tianxiong Festival was added to make Gao Xingzhou the Shou Daishi, the Shannan Host Festival to make An Siyuan the Shou Daifu, the Taining Festival to make Fu Yanqing the Shou Daibo, and the Hedong Festival to make Liu Chongkang the Zhong Shuling.

古文：己未，加忠武节度使刘信、天平节度使慕容彦超、平卢节度使刘铢并兼侍中。
现代文：己未，加任忠武节度使刘信、天平节度使慕容彦超、平卢节度使刘铢都兼侍中。
English: In addition, Liu Xin, Mu Rong Yanchao, Ping Lu and Liu Xuan were appointed to the posts of Zhongwu and Tianping, respectively, as well as the posts of chamberlains.

古文：辛酉，加朔方节度使冯晖、定难节度使李彝殷兼中书令。
现代文：辛酉，加任朔方节度使冯晖、定难节度使李彝殷都兼中书令。
English: Xin Xuan was appointed as the new party secretary, Feng Xuan was appointed as the new party secretary, and Li Xuan Yin was appointed as the new party secretary.

古文：冬，十月，壬申，加义武节度使孙方简、武宁节度使刘赟同平章事；壬午，加吴越王弘亻叔尚书令，楚王希广太尉；丙戌，加荆南节度使高保融兼侍中。
现代文：冬季，十月，壬申，加任义武节度使孙方简、武宁节度使刘为同平章事。壬午，加任吴越王钱弘为尚书令、楚王马希广为太尉。丙戌，加任荆南节度使高保融兼侍中。
English: In winter, in October, in Jinshin, Sun Fangjian was appointed to the Yiwu Festival, and Liu Tongping was appointed to the Wu Ning Festival. In Renhu, Wu Yue Wang Qianhong was appointed to the Shang Shuling, and Chu King Ma Xiguang was appointed to the Taifeng. In Bingyi, Gao Baorong was appointed to the Jingnan Festival, and he was also appointed as an attendant.

古文：议者以为： 郭威不专有其功，推以分人，信为美矣。而国家爵位，以一人立功而覃及天下，不亦滥乎！ 
现代文：议论的人认为： 郭威不独占功劳，而是把功劳推让分给别人，确实是高尚的行为；但是国家的爵位，因一个人立功而普及天下，不也太滥了吗！ 
English: Commentators believe that: Guo Wei does not monopolize the credit, but gives the credit to others, which is indeed a noble act; but the state's knighthood, due to a person's meritorious service and spread throughout the world, is not too extravagant!

古文：吴越王弘亻叔募民能垦荒田者，勿收其税，由是境内无弃田。
现代文：吴越王招募农民能够开垦荒地的人，不收赋税，因此吴越境内没有闲弃的田。
English: King Wu Yue recruited farmers who could reclaim wasteland and did not collect taxes, so there were no idle fields in Wu Yue.

古文：或请纠民遗丁以增赋，仍自掌其事。弘亻叔杖之国门。
现代文：有官员请求查纠百姓户籍上遗漏的男丁来增加赋役，并申请自己掌管此事；钱弘命人在都城大门用杖打他。
English: An official requested to check on a man who was omitted from the people's household registration to increase the tax, and applied for his own control of the matter; Qian Hong ordered people to beat him with a cane at the gate of the capital.

古文：国人皆悦。
现代文：国人都很高兴。
English: The Chinese people are very happy.

古文：楚静江节度使马希瞻以兄希萼、希广交争，屡遣使谏止，不从。知终覆族，疽发于背，丁亥，卒。
现代文：楚国的静江节度使马希瞻因为哥哥马希萼、马希广二人交相争斗，屡次派使者向二人劝谏阻止，二人都没有听从；他知道最终会造成家族覆亡，因背上毒疮暴发，丁亥，去世。
English: The Jingjiang Festival in the State of Chu caused Ma Xizhan to repeatedly send envoys to the two brothers, Ma Xicai and Ma Xiguang, to persuade and prevent them from fighting each other. Both did not listen; he knew that it would eventually lead to the downfall of the family. Ding Hai died due to the outbreak of poisonous sores on his back.

古文：契丹寇河北，所过杀掠，节度使、刺史各婴城自守。
现代文：契丹侵犯河北，所过之处杀人、抢掠。各节度使、刺史都只是自己绕城固守。
English: The Khitans invaded Hebei, killing and looting wherever they went. All the chieftains and satraps just surrounded the city and held on to it.

古文：游骑至贝州及鄴都之北境，帝忧之。
现代文：契丹流动骑兵来到贝州及邺都的北部边境，后汉隐帝深感忧虑。
English: The Khitan mobile cavalry came to the northern border of Bechu and Hando, and Emperor Houhanhan was deeply worried.

古文：己丑，遣枢密使郭威督诸将御之，以宣徽使王峻监其军。
现代文：已丑，派枢密使郭威督率众将领抵御来犯之敌，并派宣徽使王峻监督军队。
English: He dispatched Guo Weiguo to lead the generals to resist the invading enemy, and sent Wang Jun to supervise the army.

古文：十一月，契丹闻汉兵渡河，乃引去。
现代文：十一月，契丹兵听说后汉军队渡过黄河，就后退离去。
English: In November, when the Khitan soldiers heard that the Han troops had crossed the Yellow River, they retreated.

古文：辛亥，郭威军至鄴都，令王峻分军趣镇、定。
现代文：辛亥，郭威率军队来到邺都，命令王峻分兵开赴镇、定二州。
English: In Xinhai, Guo Wei led the army to Shidu and ordered Wang Jun's detachment to go to the town and Ding Erzhou.

古文：戊午，威至邢州。
现代文：戊午，郭威到达邢州。
English: At noon, Guo Wei arrived in Ganzhou.

古文：唐兵渡淮，攻正阳。
现代文：南唐军队渡过淮河，进攻正阳。
English: The Southern Tang army crossed the Huai River and attacked Zhengyang.

古文：十二月，颍州将白福进击败之。
现代文：十二月，颍州将领白福进出击，打败了南唐军队。
English: In December, Baifu, the general of Zhangzhou, went in and out of the attack, defeating the South Tang army.

古文：杨邠为政苛细。
现代文：杨主持政务苛刻琐碎。
English: Yang presides over a draconian and petty government.

古文：初，邢州人周璨为诸卫将军，罢秩无依，从王景崇西征，景崇叛，遂为之谋主。
现代文：当初，邢州人周璨为诸卫将军，被罢黜官阶而没有依靠，就跟随王景崇西征，王景崇叛变，于是他就成为谋主。
English: At the beginning, Zhou Qi, a native of Zhangzhou, was a general of the Guards. He was dismissed from his post and had no one to rely on, so he followed Wang Jingsong on the Western Expedition, and Wang Jingsong rebelled, so he became the mastermind.

古文：邠奏： 诸前资官，喜摇动籓臣，宜悉遣诣京师。 
现代文：杨上奏道： 各前朝所任命的官员，都喜欢煽动藩镇大臣反叛，应该全部把他们送到京城。 
English: Yang Shangso said: The officials appointed by the previous dynasties all like to incite the ministers of the domains and towns to rebel. They should all be sent to the capital.

古文：既而四方云集，日遮宰相马求官。辛卯，邠复奏： 前资官宜分居两京，以俟有阙而补之。 
现代文：不久，前朝官员从四方云集到都城，每天挡拦宰相的马请求封官；辛卯，杨又上奏道： 前朝所授的官员应分住两京，以便等有空缺而补官。 
English: Before long, officials of the former government gathered from all over the country to the capital, stopping the prime minister's horse every day to ask for an official seal; Xinwu and Yang also made a report: Officials appointed by the former government should live separately in the two capitals, so that they could wait for a vacancy to fill the post.

古文：漂泊失所者甚众。邠又奏： 行道往来者，皆给过所。 
现代文：漂泊流离失去住所的官员很多；杨又上奏道： 在路上往来的前朝所授官员，都发给能通行证。 
English: There are many officials who have wandered and lost their residences; Yang also made a report: The officials who were awarded by the previous government and came and went on the road were all issued with Neng Pass.

古文：既而官司填咽，民情大扰，乃止。
现代文：不久负责签发证件的官司衙门拥挤不堪，民情大为骚动，于是作罢。
English: Soon the courthouse, which was responsible for issuing the documents, was overcrowded and the public was in an uproar, so it was abandoned.

古文：赵晖急攻凤翔，周璨谓王景崇曰： 公曏与蒲、雍相表里，今二镇已平，蜀儿不足恃，不如降也。 
现代文：赵晖加紧进攻凤翔，周璨对王景崇说： 你过去与李守贞、赵思绾二藩镇互为表里，而现在两个藩镇已被平定，后蜀小儿也不可依仗，如投降。 
English: Zhao Wei stepped up his attack on Fengxiang. Zhou Wei said to Wang Jingtong: In the past, you and Li Shuzhen and Zhao Siyi were on the same side of the two towns, but now the two towns have been pacified. After Shu Xiaoer, you can't rely on war, such as surrender.

古文：景崇曰： 善，吾更思之。 
现代文：王景崇说： 好，容我再想想。 
English: Wang Jingsong said: Well, let me think about it.

古文：后数日，外攻转急。景崇谓其党曰： 事穷矣，吾欲为急计。 
现代文：过了九天，城外围攻得更加紧急，王景崇对他的党羽们说： 事情已经山穷水尽了，我想采取应急计策。 
English: After nine days, the siege outside the city became more urgent, and Wang Jingsong said to his followers: Things have reached a dead end, I want to take emergency measures.

古文：乃谓其将公孙辇、张思练曰： 赵晖精兵，多在城北，来日五鼓前，尔二人烧城东门诈降，勿令寇入，吾与周璨以牙兵出北门突晖军，纵无成而死，犹胜束手。 
现代文：于是对他的将领公孙辇、张思练说： 赵晖的精锐部队，大多布置在城北，明天五鼓以前，你二人烧城东门诈降，但不要让敌军进城；我和周璨率领卫队亲兵出北门冲击赵晖的军队，纵然不成而死，也胜过束手就擒。 
English: So he said to his generals, Sun Qian and Zhang Siren, "Most of Zhao Qian's elite troops are deployed in the north of the city. Tomorrow, before the fifth drum, the two of you will burn the east gate of the city and surrender, but don't let the enemy army enter the city. I and Zhou Qian led the guards out of the north gate to attack Zhao Qian's army. Even if I don't die, it's better than being tied up.

古文：皆曰： 善。 
现代文：众将领都说： 好！ 
English: So the emperor asked again: Who are Chen Tuo's generals?

古文：癸巳，未明，辇、思练烧东门请降，府牙火亦发。二将遣人诇之，景崇已与家人自焚矣。
现代文：癸巳，天还没明，公孙辇、张思练二人放火烧东城门，请求投降，府衙内也火光冲天而起；二位将领派人去侦察，原来王景崇已和家里人自焚。
English: Suddenly, before the sky was clear, Gongsun Rong and Zhang Siren both set fire to the east gate of the city and asked for surrender. Flames also shot up into the sky inside the capital. The two generals sent someone to investigate. It turned out that Wang Jingsong and his family members had already set themselves on fire.

古文：璨亦降。
现代文：周璨也投降了。
English: Zhou Yu also surrendered.

古文：丁酉，密州刺史王万敢击唐海州获水镇，残之。
现代文：丁酉，密州刺史王万敢进攻南唐海州的荻水镇，消灭守军。
English: Ding Xi, the King of Mizhou, dared to attack the town of Lishui in South Tanghai Province, annihilating the defenders.

古文：是月，南汉主如英州。
现代文：这个月，南汉主前往英州。
English: This month, the head of the Southern Han Dynasty traveled to Yingzhou.

古文：是岁，唐泉州刺史留从效兄南州副使从愿，鸩刺史董思安而代之。唐主不能制，置清源军于泉州，以从效为节度使。
现代文：这一年，南唐泉州刺史留从效的哥哥南州副使留从愿，毒死南州刺史董思安取代他；南唐主不能控制，在泉州设置清源军，任命留从效为节度使。
English: In the same year, the deputy envoy of Southern Tang Dynasty, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanzhou, Quanz

