古文：子墨子曰：古之民，未知为宫室时，就陵阜而居，穴而处。
现代文：墨子说： 上古的百姓不知道作宫室之时，靠近山陵居住，住在洞穴里，地下潮湿，伤害百姓，所以圣王开始营造宫室。
English: Mozi said: People in ancient times did not know that when they built a palace, they lived near the mountains, lived in caves, and the underground was damp, harming the people, so the holy king began to build a palace.

古文：下润湿伤民，故圣王作为宫室，为宫室之法，曰：室高足以辟润湿，边足以圉风寒，上足以待雪霜雨露，宫墙之高，足以别男女之礼。
现代文：营造宫室的法则是：地基的高度足以避湿润，四边足以御风寒，屋顶足以防备霜雪雨露，宫墙的高度足以分隔内外，使男女有别一一仅此而已。
English: The rule for building a palace room is: the foundation is high enough to avoid moisture, the four sides are high enough to keep out wind and cold, the roof is high enough to prevent frost, snow and rain, and the height of the palace wall is high enough to separate the inside and outside, so that men and women are different.

古文：谨此则止，凡费财劳力，不加利者，不为也。
现代文：凡属劳民伤财而不增加益处的事，是不会做的。
English: We will not do anything that hurts the people's livelihood and does not increase benefits.

古文：役修其城郭，则民劳而不伤，以其常正，收其租税，则民费而不病。
现代文：分派劳役，修治城郭，那么民众就虽劳苦而不至伤害；照常规征收租税，那么民众虽破费而不至困苦。
English: Assign laborers, repair the city walls, then the people will work hard but not hurt; collect taxes according to the rules, then the people will spend money but not suffer.

古文：民所苦者非此也，苦于厚作敛于百姓。
现代文：因为民众所疾苦并不是这些，而是苦于对老百姓横征暴敛。
English: Because this is not what the people are suffering from, but suffering from the violent collection of taxes from the people.

古文：是故圣王作为宫室，便于生，不以为观乐也；作为衣服带履便于身，不以为辟怪也。
现代文：所以圣王开始制造宫室，只为方便生活，并不是为了观赏之乐；开始创制衣服带履，只为便利身体，而不是为了奇怪的装束。
English: So the holy king began to make palaces, only for the convenience of life, not for the pleasure of viewing; began to create clothes and shoes, only for the convenience of the body, not for strange costumes.

古文：故节于身，诲于民，是以天下之民可得而治，财用可得而足。
现代文：所以，自身节俭，教导百姓，因而天下的民众得以治理，财用得以充足。
English: Therefore, he is frugal himself and teaches the people, so that the people of the world can be governed and the financial resources can be sufficient.

古文：当今之主，其为宫室，则与此异矣。必厚作敛于百姓，暴夺民衣食之财，以为宫室，台榭曲直之望，青黄刻镂之饰。
现代文：现在的君主，修造宫室却与此不同：他们必定要向百姓横征暴敛，强夺民众的衣食之资用来营造宫室，修造台榭曲折的景观，讲究颜色雕刻的装饰。
English: The current monarchs, however, are different when it comes to building a palace room: they will certainly have to extort money from the people, seize the people's food and clothing to build a palace room, build a twisted landscape, and pay attention to the decoration of color carvings.

古文：为宫室若此，故左右皆法象之，是以其财不足以待凶饥、振孤寡，故国贫而民难治也。
现代文：营造宫室如此，身边的人都效法这种做法，因此财用而不能应付凶年饥馑，振恤孤寡之人，所以国家穷困而百姓无法治理。
English: If you build a palace like this, the people around you will follow suit. As a result, the country will be impoverished and the people will not be able to govern.

古文：君实欲天下之治，而恶其乱也，当为宫室，不可不节。
现代文：国君若是真希望天下得到治理，而不愿其混乱，那么，营造宫室就不可不节俭。
English: If the sovereign really wants the world to be governed, and does not want it to be in chaos, then the construction of the palace must be frugal.

古文：古之民，未知为衣服时，衣皮带茭，冬则不轻而温，夏则不轻而凊，圣王以为不中人之情，故作诲妇人，治丝麻，棞布绢，以为民衣。
现代文：上古的百姓不知道做衣服的时候，穿着兽皮，系着草绳，冬天不轻便又不温暖，夏天不轻便又不凉爽。圣王认为这样不符合人情，所以开始教女子治丝麻、织布匹，用它制作成人们的衣服。
English: The ancient people did not know that when making clothes, they wore animal skins and tied with grass ropes, which was neither light nor warm in winter, nor light nor cool in summer. The holy king thought that this was not in line with human nature, so he began to teach women how to weave silk and fabric, and use it to make people's clothes.

古文：为衣服之法，冬则练帛之中，足以为轻且暖，夏则絺绤之中，足以为轻且凊，谨此则止。
现代文：制造衣服的法则是：冬天穿生丝麻制的衣服，只求其轻便而温暖，夏天穿葛制的衣服，只求其轻便而凉爽，仅此而已。
English: The rule for making clothes is: in winter, wear clothes made of raw silk and hemp, just to be light and warm, and in summer, wear clothes made of cotton, just to be light and cool, that's all.

古文：故圣人之为衣服，适身体，和肌肤，而足矣。非荣耳目而观愚民也。
现代文：所以圣人制作衣服只图身体合适、肌肤舒适就够了，并不是夸耀耳目、炫动愚民。
English: Therefore, it is enough for sages to make clothes that are suitable for the body and comfortable for the skin, rather than boasting eyes and ears and dazzling the fools.

古文：当是之时，坚车良马不知贵也，刻镂文采，不知喜也。
现代文：当这时候，坚车良马没有人知道贵重，雕刻文采没有人知道欣赏，为什么呢？
English: At this time, no one knows the value of the chariot and horse, and no one knows how to appreciate the sculpture and literature. Why?

古文：何则？
现代文：这是教导的结果。
English: Why is that?

古文：其所道之然。故民衣食之财，家足以待旱水凶饥者，何也？
现代文：所以民众的衣服之财，家家都足以防患水旱凶饥，为什么呢？
English: Therefore, people's clothing wealth is enough to prevent floods, droughts and famine. Why?

古文：得其所以自养之情，而不感于外也。是以其民俭而易治，其君用财节而易赡也。
现代文：因为他们懂得自我供养的情实，不被外界所诱惑，所以民众俭朴而容易治理，国君用财有节制而容易富足。
English: Because they understand the reality of self-sufficiency and are not tempted by the outside world, the people are frugal and easy to govern, and the sovereign is frugal and easy to enrich.

古文：府库实满，足以待不然，兵革不顿，士民不劳，足以征不服。故霸王之业，可行于天下矣。
现代文：国库充足，足以应付非常的变故：兵甲不坏，士民不劳，足以证伐不顺之臣，所以可实现霸王事业于天下。
English: The state treasury is sufficient to cope with extraordinary changes: the military is not bad, the scholars and the people are not laborious, and it is enough to prove that the vassals are not obedient, so the overlord cause can be realized in the world.

古文：当今之主，其为衣服，则与此异矣，冬则轻暖，夏则轻凊，皆已具矣，必厚作敛于百姓，暴夺民衣食之财，以为锦绣文采靡曼之衣，铸金以为钩，珠玉以为佩，女工作文采，男工作刻镂，以为身服，此非云益暖之情也。
现代文：现在的君主，他们制造衣服却与此不同：冬天轻便而暖和，夏天轻便而凉爽，这都已经具备了，他们还一定要向百姓横征暴敛，强夺民众的衣食之资，用来做锦绣文彩华丽的衣服，拿黄金作成衣带钩，拿珠玉作成配饰，女工作文采，男工作雕刻，用来穿在身上。这并非真的为了温暖。
English: The current monarchs, they make clothes, but they are different from this: winter is light and warm, summer is light and cool, all of which are already available, they must also collect money from the people, seize the people's clothing and food resources, use them to make embroidered and colorful clothes, use gold to make belt hooks, use jewels to make accessories, women's work style, men's work style, used to wear on the body. This is not really for warmth.

古文：单财劳力，毕归之于无用也，以此观之，其为衣服非为身体，皆为观好，是以其民淫僻而难治，其君奢侈而难谏也。
现代文：耗尽钱财费了民力，都是为了无用之事，由此看来，他们作衣服，不是为身体，而是为好看。因此民众邪僻而难以治理，国君奢侈而难以进谏。
English: They have spent their money and their strength for worthless things, and their clothing is not for the body, but for the eyes: therefore their people are foolish, and it is hard to govern them; and their princes are extravagant, and it is hard to rule them.

古文：夫以奢侈之君，御好淫僻之民，欲国无乱，不可得也。
现代文：以奢侈的国君统治邪僻的民众，希望国家不乱，是不可能的。
English: It is impossible to rule a perverse people with an extravagant monarch and hope that the country will not be in turmoil.

古文：君实欲天下之治而恶其乱，当为衣服不可不节。
现代文：国君若真希望天下治理好而厌恶混乱，作衣服时就不可不节俭。
English: If the sovereign really wants the world to be well-governed and abhors chaos, he must be thrifty when making clothes.

古文：古之民未知为饮食时，素食而分处，故圣人作，诲男耕稼树艺，以为民食。
现代文：上古的百姓不知道制作饮食时，只吃素食而各自分居，所以圣人起来教勇子耕稼栽种，以供人作粮食。
English: The ancient people did not know that when preparing food, they only ate vegetarian food and lived separately, so the sage stood up to teach the brave to cultivate and grow food for others.

古文：其为食也，足以增气充虚，强体养腹而巳矣。
现代文：作饮食的原则是，只求补气益虚、强身饱腹就够了。
English: The principle of dieting is that it is enough to supplement the qi and improve the deficiency, strengthen the body and fill the stomach.

古文：故其用财节，其自养俭，民富国治。
现代文：所以他们用财节省，自养俭朴，民众富足，国家安定。
English: As a result, they are thrifty with their money, self-supporting and frugal, the people are prosperous, and the country is stable.

古文：今则不然，厚作敛于百姓，以为美食刍豢，蒸炙鱼鳖，大国累百器，小国累十，前方丈，目不能遍视，手不能遍操，口不能遍味，冬则冻冰，夏则饰饐，人君为饮食如此，故左右象之，是以富贵者奢侈，孤寡者冻馁，虽欲无乱，不可得也。
现代文：现在却不是这样，向老百姓厚敛钱财，用来享受美味牛羊，蒸烤鱼鳖，大国之君集有上百样的菜，小国之君也有上十样的菜，摆在前面一丈见方，眼睛看不全，手也不能完全捡取到，嘴也不能全尝到，冬天结冻，夏天臭烂，国君这样讲究饮食，左右大臣都效仿。因此富贵的人奢侈，孤寡的人冻饿。这样一来，即使不希望国家混乱，也是不可能的。
English: Now, however, this is not the case. Money is lavished on the common people to enjoy delicious beef and lamb, steamed and grilled fish stew. The ruler of a large country has a collection of over a hundred kinds of dishes, and the ruler of a small country also has over ten kinds of dishes. If they are placed in front of a square, the eyes can't see them all, the hands can't pick them up completely, and the mouth can't taste them all. Winter is freezing, summer is stinking. The ruler is so particular about food, and the ministers on both sides are following suit. Therefore, the rich people are extravagant, and the lonely people are hungry.

古文：君实欲天下治而恶其乱，当为食饮不可不节。
现代文：国君若真希望天下治理好而厌恶其混乱，饮食就不可不节省。
English: If the sovereign really wants the world to be well governed and abhors its chaos, he must economize on his diet.

古文：古之民未知为舟车时，重任不移，远道不至，故圣王作为舟车，以便民之事。
现代文：上古的百姓不知道制造舟车时，重的东西搬不动，远的地方去不了，所以圣王开始制造舟车，用以便利民事。
English: The ancient people did not know that when making a boat, heavy things could not be moved and distant places could not be reached, so the holy king began to make a boat to facilitate civil affairs.

古文：其为舟车也，全固轻利，可以任重致远，其为用财少，而为利多，是以民乐而利之。
现代文：他们作舟车只求坚固轻便，可以运重物、行远路，费用花的少，而利益很大，所以民众乐于使用。
English: They only want a sturdy and light boat for paddling, which can carry heavy loads and travel long distances. The cost is low and the benefit is great, so people are willing to use it.

古文：法令不急而行，民不劳而上足用，故民归之。
现代文：所以法令不用催促而可行使，民众不用劳苦而财用充足，所以民众归顺他了。
English: Therefore, the decrees can be executed without urging, the people do not have to work hard and have enough money, so the people submit to him.

古文：当今之主，其为舟车，与此异矣，全固轻利皆已具，必厚作敛于百姓，以饰舟车，饰车以文采，饰舟以刻镂。
现代文：现在的君主制造舟车则与此不同。舟车已经坚固轻利了，他们还要向百姓横征暴敛，用以装饰舟车。在车上画以文彩，在舟上加以雕刻。
English: It is different with the present monarchs who make boats. The boats are already sturdy and light, but they still want to extort money from the people to decorate the boats. They paint on the cars and carve on the boats.

古文：女子废其纺织而修文采，故民寒；男子离其耕稼而修刻镂，故民饥。
现代文：女子废弃纺织而去描绘文彩，所以民众受寒；男子脱离耕稼而去从事雕刻，所以民众挨饿。
English: Women waste textiles to paint, so the people suffer from the cold; men leave farming to engage in sculpture, so the people starve.

古文：人君为舟车若此，故左右象之，是以其民饥寒并至，故为奸邪。
现代文：国君这样制造舟车，左右大臣跟着仿效，所以民众饥寒交迫，不得已而作奸邪之事。
English: The sovereign thus made a boat, and the ministers of the left and right followed suit, so the people were starving and cold, and had no choice but to commit treason.

古文：奸邪多则刑罚深，刑罚深则国乱。
现代文：奸邪之事一多，刑罚必然繁重。刑罚一繁重，国家就乱了。
English: If there are many cases of treason, the punishment must be heavy. If the punishment is heavy, the country will be in chaos.

古文：君实欲天下治而恶其乱，当为舟车不可不节。
现代文：国君如果真的希望天下治理好而厌恶混乱，制造舟车就不可不节省。
English: If the sovereign really wants the world to be well governed and abhors chaos, he must economize on the manufacture of boats.

古文：凡回于天地之间，包于四海之内，天壤之情，阴阳之和，莫不有也，虽至圣不能更也。
现代文：凡周回于天地之间，包裹于四海之内的，天地之情，阴阳之和，一切都具备了，即使至圣也不能更动。
English: Whatever revolves between heaven and earth, whatever is wrapped up in the four seas, the affections of heaven and earth, the harmony of yin and yang, everything is present, even the most sacred cannot be changed.

古文：何以知其然？
现代文：何以知道这样呢？
English: How do you know this is the case?

古文：圣人有传：天地也，则曰上下；四时也，则曰阴阳；人情也，则曰男女；禽兽也，则曰牡牝雄雌也。真天壤之情，虽有先王不能更也。
现代文：圣人传下的书说：天地称作上下，四时称作阴阳，人类分为男女，禽兽分为牝牡雌雄。这是真正的天地之情，即使有先世贤王也不能更动。
English: The book handed down by the sage said: Heaven and earth are called "up and down," the four hours are called "yin and yang," human beings are divided into men and women, and animals are divided into "male and female." This is the true feeling of heaven and earth, which cannot be changed even by the wise kings of the past.

古文：虽上世至圣，必蓄私，不以伤行，故民无怨。
现代文：即使上代至圣，一定都养有私人侍妾，但不伤害品行，所以民众无怨。
English: Even if the previous generation was the most holy, they must have had private concubines, but they did not harm their morals, so the people did not complain.

古文：宫无拘女，故天下无寡夫。
现代文：宫中没有拘禁的女子，所以天下没有鳏夫。
English: There is no imprisoned woman in the palace, so there is no widower in the world.

古文：内无拘女，外无寡夫，故天下之民众。
现代文：内无拘禁之妇，外无鳏夫，因而天下百姓众多。
English: There is not a widow among them, neither is there a sojourner among them: therefore the people are many that dwell in the land.

古文：当今之君，其蓄私也，大国拘女累千，小国累百，是以天下之男多寡无妻，女多拘无夫，男女失时，故民少。
现代文：现在的国君养侍妾，大国拘禁女子数千，小国数百，所以天下男子大多没有妻子，女子多遭拘禁而没有丈夫。男女婚姻失时，所以百姓减少。
English: Today's sovereigns keep concubines, big countries imprison thousands of women, small countries hundreds, so most men in the world don't have wives, and most women are imprisoned without husbands. Men and women are marrying later, so the population is decreasing.

古文：君实欲民之众而恶其寡，当蓄私不可不节。
现代文：国君如果真想百姓增多而厌恶减少，养侍妾就不可不节制。
English: If the sovereign really wants to increase the number of people and decrease their disgust, he must not be immoderate in raising concubines.

古文：凡此五者，圣人之所俭节也，小人之所淫佚也。
现代文：以上所说的五者，都是圣人所节俭而小人所奢侈淫佚的。
English: All of the above-mentioned five are thrifty for a saint and extravagant and lewd for a villain.

古文：俭节则昌，淫佚则亡，此五者不可不节。
现代文：节俭的就昌盛，淫佚的就灭亡，这五者不可不节制。
English: The frugal will prosper, and the profligate will come to ruin. These five must not be indulged.

古文：夫妇节而天地和，风雨节而五谷熟，衣服节而肌肤和。
现代文：夫妇之事有节制，天地就和顺；风雨调节，五谷就丰收；衣服有节制，身体肌肤就安适。
English: When a husband and wife are temperate, heaven and earth will be harmonious; when the wind and rain are regulated, the grain will be plentiful; when the clothes are temperate, the body and skin will be comfortable.

