古文：吴沉，字浚仲，兰溪人。
现代文：吴沉，字浚仲，兰溪人。
English: Wu Shen, Zi Junzhong, Lanxi people.

古文：元国子博士师道子也，以学行闻。
现代文：元朝国子博士师道的儿子，以学问品行而闻名。
English: He was the son of Dr. Kuniko Dō, a teacher of the Yuan Dynasty, and was known for his academic excellence.

古文：太祖下婺州，召沉及同郡许元、叶瓒玉、胡翰、汪仲山、李公常、金信、徐孳、童冀、戴良、吴履、孙履、张起敬会食省中，日令二人进讲经史。
现代文：太祖攻下婺州，征召吴沉及同郡的许元、叶瓒玉、胡翰、汪仲山、李公常、金信、徐孳、童冀、戴良、吴履、张起敬等人会食省中，每天命二人进讲经史。
English: Emperor Taizu conquered Luzhou and conscripted Wu Sheng and his county's Xu Yuan, Ye Bingyu, Hu Han, Wang Zhongshan, Li Gongchang, Jin Xin, Xu Wei, Tong Jie, Dai Liang, Wu Lu, Zhang Qijian and others to teach the history of the Bible in the dining hall of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：已，命沉为郡学训导。
现代文：不久，任命吴沉为郡学训导。
English: Soon after, Wu Shen was appointed as the county school's headmaster.

古文：洪武初，郡以儒士举，误上其名曰信仲，授翰林院待制。
现代文：洪武初年，郡上举荐儒士，把他的名字误报成信仲，授予翰林院待制。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the county recommended a Confucianist, misreported his name as Xunzhong, and awarded him to Hanlin Academy.

古文：沉谓修撰王厘曰： 名误不更，是欺罔也。 
现代文：吴沉对修撰王矨说： 名字写错了而不更改，这是欺骗。 
English: Wu Shen said to Wang Yao, a calligrapher, "Writing a wrong name and not changing it is cheating.

古文：将白于朝。
现代文：将于朝廷辩白。
English: He will defend himself at the Imperial Court.

古文：厘言： 恐触上怒 。
现代文：王矨说恐怕引起太祖发怒。
English: Wang Yao said that he was afraid of arousing the anger of the great-grandfather.

古文：沉不从，牒请改正。
现代文：但吴沉不听从，牒请更改。
English: But Wu Shen did not listen. Please change the ultimatum.

古文：帝喜曰： 诚悫人也。 遂眷遇之，召侍左右。
现代文：太祖高兴地说 ：他是诚实的人 ，于是十分宠爱他，召他侍候于左右。
English: The great-grandfather said happily, "He is an honest man, so I loved him very much and called him to wait around."

古文：以事降编修。
现代文：因犯事降职为编修。
English: He was demoted to the position of editor-in-chief as a result of the crime.

古文：给事中郑相同言： 故事启事东宫，惟东宫官属称臣，朝臣则否。
现代文：给事中郑相同说 ：按从前惯例，启事东宫太子，唯独东宫的官属称臣，朝臣则不这样。
English: During the presentation, Zheng Tong said, "According to the previous practice, the crown prince of the Eastern Palace is the best, but the official subordinates of the Eastern Palace are the best, while the courtiers are not.

古文：今一体称臣，于礼未安。 
现代文：现在都一体称臣，从礼节上说不太合适。 
English: Now they are all admirers of the prime minister, which is not very appropriate from the point of view of etiquette.

古文：沉驳之曰： 东宫，国之大本。
现代文：吴沉斥说 ：东宫是国家的大本。
English: Wu Shen said: Dongguan is the country's capital.

古文：尊东宫，所以尊主上也。
现代文：尊重东宫，就是尊重皇上。
English: To respect the East Palace is to respect the emperor.

古文：相同言非是。 
现代文：郑相同的说法不对。 
English: Zheng's assertion is incorrect.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：太祖听从了他的意见。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：寻以奏对失旨，降翰林院典籍。
现代文：不久，因奏对失误，降职为翰林院典籍。
English: Soon, due to mistakes in the performance, it was downgraded to a Hanlin Academy classic.

古文：已，擢东阁大学士。
现代文：不久，提升为东阁大学士。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the position of a professor at Donggak University.

古文：初，帝谓沉曰： 圣贤立教有三：曰敬天，曰忠君，曰孝亲。
现代文：最初，太祖对吴沉说： 圣贤立教有三种：一是敬天，二是忠君，三是孝亲。
English: At first, the great-grandfather said to Wu Shen, "There are three ways for sages to establish a religion: one is to respect heaven, the second is to be loyal to the emperor, and the third is to be filial to relatives."

古文：散在经卷，未易会其要领。尔等以三事编辑。 
现代文：但各种学说分散于经卷中，没有汇集于一体，你把三种学说分门别类进行编辑。 
English: But the various doctrines are scattered throughout the scrolls, not gathered into one. You have divided the three doctrines into categories for editing.

古文：至是书成，赐名《精诚录》，命沉撰序。
现代文：编成书后，赐名为《精诚录》，命吴沉作序。
English: After it was compiled into a book, it was given the title "Essence Record" and Wu Shen was ordered to write the preface.

古文：居一年，降翰林侍书，改国子博士，以老归。
现代文：居住一年，降为翰林侍书，改任国子博士，因年老归乡。
English: After living there for a year, he was demoted to the position of Hanlin's personal secretary and was reassigned to the position of Dr. Kuniko. Due to his advanced age, he returned to his hometown.

古文：沉尝著辩，言 孔子封王为非礼 。
现代文：吴沉曾著书立说，说孔子被封王是非礼。
English: Wu Shen once wrote a book saying that it was improper for Confucius to be crowned king.

古文：后布政使夏寅、祭酒丘浚皆沿其说。
现代文：后布政使夏寅、祭酒丘都沿用了这一说法。
English: This saying was later used by Bu Zhengzhi, Xia Yin, and Matsuo Jiuqiu.

古文：至嘉靖九年，更定祀典，改称 至圣先师 ，实自沉发之也。
现代文：至嘉靖九年更定祀典。改称孔子为 至圣先师 ，实际上是从吴沉开始的。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Emperor, the sutras were revised, and Confucius was renamed "Supreme Teacher," which actually began with Wu Sheng.

古文：桂彦良，名德偁，以字行，慈谿人。
现代文：桂彦良，名叫德翶，以字行，慈溪人。
English: Gui Yanliang, whose name is Deyu, is a native of Cixi.

古文：元乡贡进士，为平江路学教授，罢归。张士诚、方国珍交辟，不就。
现代文：元朝的乡贡进士，为平江路学的教授，罢官回到乡里，张士诚、方国珍交相争聘，不愿就任。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Gongjin Shi, a professor of Pingjiang Road, was dismissed from his post and returned to his hometown. Zhang Shicheng and Fang Guo Zhenjiao competed for the post, but Zhang Shicheng did not want to take up the post.

古文：洪武六年，征诣公车，授太子正字。
现代文：洪武六年明廷下令，授予太子正字。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, the Ming court ordered that the crown prince be granted the title.

古文：帝尝出御制诗文，彦良就御座前朗诵，声彻殿外，左右惊愕，帝嘉其朴直。
现代文：皇帝曾经写出诗文，桂彦良在皇帝座前朗诵，声音响彻宫殿之外，左右侍臣十分惊讶。皇帝嘉奖桂彦良朴直。
English: The emperor once wrote a poem, and Gui Yanliang recited it in front of the emperor's throne. The sound echoed outside the palace, and the attendants were very surprised. The emperor commended Gui Yanliang and Punao.

古文：时选国子生蒋学等为给事中，举人张唯等为编修，肄业文华堂。
现代文：当时明廷选送国子生蒋学等为给事中，举人张唯等为编修，在文华堂学习。
English: At that time, the Ming court selected Jiang Xue, a son of the country, as a delegate, and promoted Zhang Wei, as an editor, to study at Wenhua Hall.

古文：命彦良及宋濂、孔克表为之师。
现代文：任命桂彦良、宋濂、孔克表为他们的老师。
English: He appointed Gui Yanliang, Song Tao and Kong Ke Table as their teachers.

古文：尝从容有所咨问，彦良对必以正。
现代文：皇上曾经随意咨问，桂彦良回答必然是正确的。
English: The emperor used to ask questions at will, and Gui Yanliang's answer was inevitably correct.

古文：帝每称善，书其语揭便殿。
现代文：皇上时常称赞他，并写下他的一些对话。
English: The emperor often praised him and wrote down some of his dialogues.

古文：七年冬至，词臣撰南郊祝文用 予 、 我 字。帝以为不敬。
现代文：七年冬至，词臣撰写南郊的祝文使用了 予 、 我 ，皇上认为这是对他的不恭敬。
English: On the winter solstice of the seventh year, Sukenori wrote a congratulatory message for the southern suburbs and used the words "to me" and "to you," which the Emperor considered to be disrespectful to him.

古文：彦良曰： 成汤祭上帝曰 予小子履 ；武王祀文王之诗曰  我将我享 。古有此言。 
现代文：桂彦良劝皇上说 ：成汤祭上古之帝时就说过 予小子履 ，武王祭祀文王时诗文中说 ：我将我享 ，自古以来就有这种说法。 
English: Gui Yanliang advised the emperor, saying, "At the time of the Cheng Tang Festival, the ancient emperors said, "Give me a child," and King Wu said in a poem at the time of King Wen's sacrifice, "I will enjoy myself." This saying has been around since ancient times.

古文：帝色霁曰： 正字言是也。 
现代文：皇上听后面带微笑说： 桂彦良说得对啊。 
English: After listening, the Emperor said with a smile, "Katsurahiko-ryo was right.

古文：时御史台具狱，令词臣覆谳。
现代文：当时，御史台审定了案件，皇上让词臣复核。
English: At that time, the Imperial Historian's Office approved the case, and the emperor asked the courtier to review it.

古文：彦良所论释者数十人。
现代文：桂彦良的论述使数十人得以解脱。
English: Katsura Hikoryo's discourse has enabled dozens of people to be liberated.

古文：迁晋王府右傅。帝亲为文赐之。
现代文：桂彦良晋升为晋王府右傅，皇上亲自写任命状。
English: Katsura Hikoroshi was promoted to the right-hand man of the Imperial Household Agency, and the Emperor himself wrote the letter of appointment.

古文：彦良入谢。
现代文：桂彦良入宫谢恩。
English: Thank you for Katsura Hikora's entry into the palace.

古文：帝曰： 江南大儒，惟卿一人。 
现代文：皇上说 ：江南的大学者，唯独你一人。 
English: The emperor said, "You are the only university student from the south of the Yangtze River."

古文：对曰： 臣不如宋濂、刘基。 
现代文：桂彦良回答说 ：我不如宋濂、刘基。 
English: Gui Yanliang replied: I am not as good as Song Tao and Liu Ji.

古文：帝曰 濂，文人耳；基，峻隘，不如卿也。 
现代文：皇帝说： 宋濂是个文人，刘基心胸有点狭隘，他不如你啊。 
English: The emperor said, "Song Tao is a man of letters, Liu Jirow is a bit narrow-minded, he is not as good as you.

古文：彦良至晋，制《格心图》献王。
现代文：桂彦良到了晋地，绘制了 格心图 敬献给晋王。
English: When Katsuhiko arrived in Jin, he drew a Geishin map dedicated to the King of Jin.

古文：后更王府官制，改左长史。
现代文：后来王府官制变更，桂彦良改为左长史。
English: Later, the official system of the royal court was changed, and Katsurahikoryo was changed to Sadanagaishi.

古文：朝京师，上太平十二策。
现代文：当上京朝见时，他呈上 太平十二策 。
English: When he went to the capital to meet with the emperor, he presented the "Twelve Measures for Peace."

古文：帝曰： 彦良所陈，通达事体，有裨治道。
现代文：皇上看后说 ：桂彦良所陈述的意见，通情达理，对治理国家十分有益。
English: After reading it, the emperor said, "The opinions stated by Katsura Hikoraga are reasonable and very beneficial to the governance of the country."

古文：世谓儒者泥古不通今，若彦良可谓通儒矣。 
现代文：世人都认为学者只潜心古时的东西，而对时事不甚了解，像桂彦良这样的人可以说是精通古今的全才啊。 
English: The world thinks that scholars only concentrate on ancient things, and do not know much about current affairs. People like Katsura Hikoryo can be said to be well versed in the past and present.

古文：十八年请告归，越二年卒。
现代文：十八年桂彦良请求告老还乡，过二年，桂彦良逝世。
English: In 18 years, Katsura Hikora requested to return to his hometown, and two years later, Katsura Hikora passed away.

古文：仁宗即位，授梁府右长史，改越府。
现代文：明朝初年，特别注重对教师的选择。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, special attention was paid to the selection of teachers.

古文：和易澹泊，所至有贤声。
现代文：于是任命宋濂教育太子，而诸王对教师的选拔也十分慎重。
English: As a result, Song Xi was appointed the prince of education, and the kings were very careful in their selection of teachers.

古文：宣德中，卒官。
现代文：桂彦良和陈南宾等都是有学问、有声望的大学者。
English: Gui Yanliang and Chen Nanbin are both learned and prestigious university graduates.

古文：自是以后，王府官不为清流，遂无足纪者矣。宋讷，字仲敏，滑人。
现代文：李希颜与驸马都尉胡观的教师徐宗实，都以严厉著称。宋讷，字仲敏，滑人。
English: Li Xiyan and Xu Zongshi, the teacher of Xi Ma Duifeng Huqun, are both known for their strictness. Song Ne, Zi Zhongmin, and Niu Ren.

古文：父寿卿，元侍御史。
现代文：父亲寿卿，元朝侍御史。
English: His father, Toshihiro, was a courtier in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：讷性持重，学问该博。
现代文：宋讷性格持重，学问渊博。
English: Song Na has a strong character and is well-educated.

古文：至正中，举进士，任盐山尹，弃官归。
现代文：至正中，考中进士，担任盐山尹，弃官归乡。
English: To the middle school, the entrance examination for the middle school, served as Yan Shan Yin, resigned and returned home.

古文：洪武二年，徵儒士十八人编《礼》、《乐》诸书，讷与焉。
现代文：洪武二年，征召儒士十八人编修《礼》、《乐》诸书，宋讷也参予了编撰工作。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, 18 Confucian scholars were conscripted to compile the books "Rite" and "Music." Song Ne also participated in the compilation work.

古文：事竣，不仕归。
现代文：任务完成后，不担任官职而归乡。
English: After the completion of the task, he did not hold any official position and returned home.

古文：久之，用四辅官杜斅荐，授国子助教。以说经为学者所宗。
现代文：过了很久，因四辅官杜推荐，授予国子助教，因说经而被学者所推崇。
English: After a long time, because of the recommendation of the four assistant officials, he was awarded the assistant professor of Kuniko, and was respected by scholars for his sermon.

古文：十五年超迁翰林学士，命撰《宣圣庙碑》，称旨，赏赉甚厚。
现代文：十五年破格晋升为翰林学士，命他撰写《宣圣庙碑》，结果，颇合太祖意旨，得到的奖赏十分丰厚。
English: Fifteen years later, he was promoted to Hanlin Scholar, and he was ordered to write "Xuan Sheng Temple Monument." The result was quite in line with the intention of the great ancestor, and the reward was very rich.

古文：改文渊阁大学士。
现代文：改任文渊阁大学士。
English: He was appointed as a fellow of Bunyukaku University.

古文：尝寒附火，燎胁下衣，至肤始觉。
现代文：曾用火御寒，火烧着衣服，至皮肤才发觉。
English: He had used fire to protect himself from the cold. The fire burned his clothes, and it was only on his skin that he noticed the sores.

古文：帝制文警之。
现代文：太祖为此制文告诫。
English: The great-grandfather cautioned against this.

古文：未几，迁祭酒。
现代文：不久，晋升为祭酒。
English: Soon, it was promoted to the status of a sacred liquor.

古文：时功臣子弟皆就学，及岁贡士尝数千人。
现代文：当时，功臣的子弟都就学，岁贡士几千人。
English: At that time, the sons and daughters of the meritorious vassals were all in school, and the number of their descendants was several thousand.

古文：讷为严立学规，终日端坐讲解无虚晷，夜恒止学舍。
现代文：宋讷为他们严立学规，整天端坐讲解，不虚度光阴，常常夜深了才从学舍回归。
English: For them, Song Ne strictly established the school regulations, sat all day to explain, spent time not in vain, and often returned from the school late at night.

古文：十八年复开进士科，取士四百七十有奇，由太学者三之二。
现代文：十八年又开设进士科，录取了四百七十余人，太学占了三分之二。
English: In 18 years, the entrance examination was opened again, and more than 470 people were admitted, accounting for two-thirds of the total.

古文：再策士，亦如之。
现代文：再次考试，结果也如此。
English: I took the exam again and the result was the same.

古文：帝大悦。制词褒美。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，制词褒奖赞美。
English: The great-grandfather was very happy and praised the author.

古文：助教金文徵等疾讷，构之吏部尚书余熂，牒令致仕。
现代文：助教金文征等人嫉妒宋讷，勾结了吏部尚书余火气，牒令他辞职。
English: Teaching assistant Jin Wenzheng and others were jealous of Song Ne and colluded with the hot-tempered officials to force him to resign.

古文：讷陛辞，帝惊问，大怒，诛熂、文徵等，留讷如故。
现代文：宋讷辞职。太祖惊讶，询问详情，大怒，杀了余火气、金文征等人。留用宋讷如故。
English: Song Na resigned. Emperor Taizu was surprised, asked for details, was furious, and killed Yu Huiqi, Jin Wenzheng, and others. Song Na was retained as before.

古文：讷尝病，帝曰： 讷有寿骨，无忧也。 
现代文：宋讷曾患病，太祖说： 宋讷有寿骨，没什么忧虑的。 
English: Song Na had been ill, the patriarch said: Song Na has a bone marrow, there is nothing to worry about.

古文：寻愈。
现代文：不久就痊愈了。
English: He soon recovered.

古文：帝使画工瞷讷，图其像，危坐，有怒色。
现代文：太祖派画工窥探宋讷，并画上他的像，危坐有怒色。
English: The great-grandfather sent an artist to spy on Song Na, and painted his image, sitting dangerously and angry.

古文：明日入对，帝问： 昨何怒？ 
现代文：第二天入对，太祖问他，昨日为何而怒。
English: On the second day, the great-grandfather asked him why he was angry yesterday.

古文：讷惊对曰： 诸生有趋踣者，碎茶器。
现代文：宋讷十分惊讶，回答说： 诸生有人跌倒，打碎了茶器。
English: Song Na was very surprised and replied, "All beings have fallen and broken teapots.

古文：臣愧失教，故自讼耳。
现代文：我因对他们失教而愧疚，故自嘲罢了。
English: I feel guilty for not teaching them, so I just laugh at myself.

古文：且陛下何自知之？ 
现代文：陛下您为何知道了？ 
English: Your Majesty, how did you know?

古文：帝出图。讷顿首谢。
现代文：太祖拿出了画像，宋讷叩头称谢。
English: The great-grandfather took out the picture, Song Na bowed and thanked him.

古文：长子麟，举进士，擢御史，出为望江主簿。
现代文：长子宋麟，考上进士，担任御史，出任望江主簿。
English: The eldest son, Song Lin, was awarded the title of academician, served as imperial historian, and served as the chief accountant of Wangjiang.

古文：帝念讷老，召还侍。
现代文：太祖念及宋讷年老，召回了他。
English: The great-grandfather thought that Song Na was old and called him back.

古文：二十三年春，讷病甚，乃止学舍。
现代文：二十三年春天，宋讷病得厉害，于是回到学舍。
English: In the spring of 1923, Song Na fell seriously ill and returned to the dormitory.

古文：麟请归私第，叱曰： 时当丁祭，敢不敬耶！ 
现代文：宋麟请求回到自己家中，宋讷斥责说： 时值丁祭，胆敢不敬吗！ 
English: Song Lin begged to go back to his home, Song Ne scolded: It's the Ding Festival, how dare you disrespect it!

古文：祭毕，舁归舍而卒，年八十。
现代文：祭祀完毕，回到自家中去世了，终年八十岁。
English: After the ritual, he returned to his home and passed away at the age of 80.

古文：帝悼惜，自为文祭之。
现代文：太祖十分痛惜，亲自作文祭奠。
English: The great-grandfather was very sorry and wrote a eulogy in person.

古文：又遣官祭于家，为治葬地。
现代文：又派官到他家中悼念，为他选择安葬之地。
English: Officials were also sent to his home to mourn and choose a place for him to be buried.

古文：文臣四品给祭葬者，自讷始。
现代文：文臣四品给祭葬者，自宋讷开始。
English: Four pennies and four shillings were given to the mourners, starting with Song Na.

古文：正德中。谥文恪。
现代文：正德年间，谥号文恪。
English: During the Zhengde era, the nickname "Wen Ke" came into being.

古文：讷尝应诏陈边事，言： 海内乂安，惟沙漠尚烦圣虑。
现代文：宋讷曾应诏陈述边疆事务，说： 海内安定，唯沙漠还让皇上忧虑。
English: Song Ne once made a statement on border affairs in response to the imperial edict, saying: The sea is stable, but the desert still worries the emperor.

古文：若穷追远击，未免劳费。
现代文：如果穷追猛打，未免太劳民伤财。
English: If the pursuit is fierce, it is inevitable that the people will be overworked and their wealth will be damaged.

古文：陛下为圣子神孙计，不过谨边备而已。备边在乎实兵，实兵在乎屯田。
现代文：陛下为子孙计议，要加强边防。边防的关键在于充实军队，充实军队又在于屯田。
English: His Majesty's plan for his descendants is to strengthen border defense. The key to border defense is to strengthen the army, and to strengthen the army is to go to Tonden.

古文：汉赵充国将四万骑，分屯缘边九郡，而单于引却。
现代文：汉朝赵充国统领四万骑兵，分别于边疆九省屯田，单于却率兵退却。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Zhao Chongguo led 40,000 cavalrymen to occupy nine frontier provinces. However, he led his troops to retreat.

古文：陛下宜于诸将中选谋勇数人，以东西五百里为制，立法分屯，布列要害，远近相应。遇敌则战，寇去则耕。此长策也。 
现代文：陛下应在诸将中选拔有勇谋者数人，以东西五百里为规模，立法分别屯田，设立于要害处，远近相呼应，遇上敌人就战斗，敌人退去则耕种，这是长久的策略。 
English: His Majesty should select a few brave strategists from among the generals, legislate separately for the settlement of farmland on a scale of 500 li from east to west, set up at the critical point, echoing far and near, fight when encountering the enemy, and cultivate when the enemy retreats. This is a long-term strategy.

古文：帝颇采用其言。
现代文：太祖采纳了他的建议。
English: The great-grandfather accepted his suggestion.

古文：讷既卒，帝思之。官其次子复祖为司业，诫诸生守讷学规，违者罪至死。
现代文：宋讷去世后，太祖怀念他，任命他的次子复祖为司业，告诫诸生遵守宋讷的学规，违反的可至以死罪论处。
English: After Song Ne's death, the great-grandfather pined for him, appointed his second son Fuzao to be the director of the school, and admonished all students to abide by Song Ne's school rules. Violations could be punished with the death penalty.

古文：明开国时即重师儒官。许存仁、魏观为祭酒，老成端谨；讷稍晚进，最蒙遇。
现代文：明朝开国时就重视师儒官，许存仁、魏观为祭酒，他们老成端谨。宋讷稍晚入宫，但最受恩宠。
English: At the time of the founding of the Ming Dynasty, great importance was attached to the teachers of Confucianism, and Xu Cunren and Wei Guan were offered as sacrificial wine. They were always dignified. Song Ne entered the palace a little later, but she was the most favored.

古文：与讷定学规者，司业王嘉会、龚斅。
现代文：与宋讷制定学规的，有司业王嘉会、龚。
English: Wang Jia Hui (王嘉会) and Zou () were the officials who formulated the school regulations with Song Ne.

古文：三人年俱高，须发皓白，终日危坐，堂上肃然。
现代文：三人年龄都较大了，头发花白，整天危坐，堂上肃然。
English: All three of them are older, with grey hair, and they sit all day, looking solemn in the hall.

古文：琼学行素优，将校武臣皆知礼重。
现代文：张美和、聂铉、贝琼等人都是名儒，洪武年间，先后为博士、助教、学录，因此诸生大多有所成就。
English: Zhang Meihe, Zou, Bai Qiong and others are all famous Confucianists. During the Hongwu era, they were successively doctor, assistant professor, and student, so most of them have achieved something.

古文：十一年致仕，卒。赵俶，字本初，山阴人。
现代文：魏观的事迹另有记载。赵俶，字本初，山阴人。
English: There are other records of Wei Guan's deeds. Zhao Yao, the first to write the characters, was from Shanyin.

古文：元进士。
现代文：元朝进士。
English: He was a member of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：洪武六年，征授国子博士。
现代文：洪武六年，征召被授予国子博士。
English: Six years after Hongwu was conscripted, he was awarded the title of Kuniko Doctor.

古文：帝尝御奉天殿，召俶及钱宰、贝琼等曰： 汝等一以孔子所定经书为教，慎勿杂苏秦、张仪纵横之言。 
现代文：太祖曾亲临奉天殿，召赵亻叔和钱宰、贝琼等人说 ：你们一定要以孔子所定的经书为教导，不要掺杂苏秦、张仪的纵横学说。 
English: The great-grandfather once visited the Temple of Heaven in person and summoned Uncle Zhao, Qian Zai, Bei Qiong and others to say: "You must use the scriptures determined by Confucius for teaching, and do not mix the vertical and horizontal teachings of Su Qin and Zhang Yi.

古文：诸臣顿首受命。
现代文：诸臣叩头受命。
English: The vassals were ordered to kowtow.

古文：俶因请颁正定《十三经》于天下，屏《战国策》及阴阳谶卜诸书，勿列学宫。
现代文：赵亻叔请求颁布、修定十三经于天下，排除《战国策》及阴阳谶卜诸书，请求不要列入学宫。
English: Zhao Yongshu requested the promulgation and amendment of the 13th Five-Year Plan, the exclusion of the "Warring States Policy" and the books of Yin and Yang, and the request not to be included in the palace of learning.

古文：明年择诸生颖异者三十五人，命俶专领之，教以古文。
现代文：第二年从诸生中挑选了优秀者三十五人，命赵亻叔专门教育，教他们学习古文。
English: In the second year, thirty-five outstanding people were selected from all walks of life, and Uncle Zhao ordered special education to teach them to study ancient texts.

古文：寻擢李扩、黄义等入文华、武英二堂说书，皆见用。
现代文：不久，提拔了李扩、黄义等人进入文华、武英二堂说书，都得以重用。
English: Soon after, Li Zhan, Huang Yi and others were promoted to enter the literary world, and Wu Ying, a second-class storyteller, was able to reuse.

古文：九年，御史台言： 博士俶以《诗经》教成均四年，其弟子多为方岳重臣及持节各部者。今年逾悬车，请赐骸骨。 
现代文：九年，御史台说博士赵亻叔教导《诗经》已有四年，他的弟子大多担任了方岳重臣或持节各部，现已逾悬车，请求退隐。
English: In the ninth year, the History Channel said that Dr. Zhao Jinshu had been teaching the "Song of Songs" for four years, and most of his disciples had served as Fang Yue's chief minister or various departments of the festival, and had now been suspended and asked to retire.

古文：执往责之，镇为禁止，邑人以安。
现代文：于是以翰林院待制辞官，赏赐内币钱物治装。
English: As a result, he was appointed as a prefect of the Hanlin Academy, and was rewarded with a set of domestic coins.

古文：两人皆笃行君子也。
现代文：宋濂率领同官及诸生千余人送行。八十一岁去世。
English: He died at the age of eighty-one, accompanied by his colleagues and more than a thousand people.

古文：李叔正，字克正，初名宗颐，靖安人。
现代文：李叔正，字克正，初名宗颐，靖安人。
English: Li Shuzheng, Zi Kezheng, first name Zonglu, Jingan people.

古文：年十二能诗，长益淹博。
现代文：十二岁时能作诗，长大后知识越发渊博。
English: At the age of twelve he was able to write poetry, and as he grew older his knowledge became more and more profound.

古文：时江西有十才子，叔正其一也。
现代文：当时江西有十个才子，李叔正就是其中之一。
English: At that time, there were ten talents in Jiangxi, and Li Shuzheng was one of them.

古文：以荐授国子学正。
现代文：被举荐为国子学正。
English: He was recommended to Kuniko Gakusho.

古文：洪武初，告归。
现代文：洪武初年，请求回乡。
English: In Hongwu's first year, he asked to return to his hometown.

古文：未几，复以荐为学正，迁渭南丞。
现代文：不久，再次举荐为国子学正，晋升为渭南丞。
English: Soon, he was once again recommended to Kuniko Gakusho and promoted to Konanjo.

古文：同州蒲城人争地界，累年不决。
现代文：同州蒲城人争夺地界，长年得不到解决，行省将此事委托给了叔正。
English: The dispute over the land boundary with the people of Pucheng in the same prefecture could not be resolved for many years, and the provincial government entrusted the matter to Shuzheng.

古文：行省以委叔正，单骑至，剖数语立决。
现代文：他单枪匹马赶到现场，只用几句话就裁决清楚了。
English: He arrived at the scene single-handed and made the ruling clear in just a few words.

古文：渭南岁输粮二万，豪右与猾吏为奸，田无定额，叔正履亩丈量。立法精密，诸弊尽剔。
现代文：渭南每年上交粮食二万石，豪右和猾吏狼狈为奸，田地又无定额。叔正丈量土地，立法精密，各种弊端皆被剔除。
English: In southern Anhui Province, 20,000 koku of grain was delivered every year, the powerful and the powerful were in cahoots with the clever officials, and there was no quota for the fields. The land was measured accurately, the legislation was precise, and all kinds of drawbacks were eliminated.

古文：迁兴化知县。
现代文：李叔正晋升为兴化知县。
English: Li Shuzhong is being promoted to the top of Xinghua County.

古文：寻召为礼部员外郎。以年老乞归，不许，改国子助教。于是叔正三至太学矣。
现代文：不久，召为礼部员外郎，他以年老为由请求归乡，没有得到批准，改任国子助教，至此，叔正三次进入太学。
English: Soon, he was called to be a member of the ceremonial club, and he requested to return to his hometown on the grounds of old age, but he was not approved and was changed to an assistant professor of Kuniko. At this time, Shuzho entered Taigaku three times.

古文：帝方锐意文治，于国学人材尤加意。
现代文：太祖锐意文治，对国学人才尤为重视。
English: The great-grandfather was dedicated to the study of literature, and paid particular attention to scholars of Chinese classics.

古文：然诸生多贵胄，不率教。
现代文：然而诸生大多是贵族的后代，不遵守教规。
English: However, most of the sentient beings are descendants of aristocrats and do not follow the rules.

古文：叔正严立规条，旦夕端坐，督课无倦色。朝论贤之。
现代文：叔正严立教规，朝夕端坐在课堂，督促诸生学习而毫无怠倦，朝廷认为他贤良。
English: Shuzheng strictly established teaching rules, sat in the classroom in the morning and evening, urged all beings to study without tiring, and the court considered him to be virtuous.

古文：擢监察御史，奉命巡岭表。
现代文：提升为监察御史，奉命巡行岭表。
English: He was promoted to inspector general of history and was ordered to patrol the ridge.

古文：琼州府吏讦其守踞公座签表文，叔正鞫之，守得白，抵吏罪。
现代文：琼州府吏诬陷知府踞公座签表文。叔正讯问，真相大白，把他们抓到官府治罪。
English: Qiongzhou prefectural officials framed the prefectural governor for signing the form. My uncle is interrogating, the truth is clear, and they were arrested and punished by the prefectural government.

古文：太祖嘉之曰： 人言老御史懦，乃明断如是耶。 
现代文：太祖嘉奖他说： 有人说老御史懦弱，他断案竟是如此明察。 
English: The great-grandfather praised him, saying, "Some people say that old Emperor Shi is weak, but he was so clear-sighted in deciding the case.

古文：累官礼部侍郎。
现代文：累官为礼部侍郎。
English: He was appointed to the post of Reibu-zamiro.

古文：十四年进尚书，卒于官。
现代文：十四年晋升为尚书，死于官任上。
English: He was promoted to Shangshu in 1914 and died in office.

古文：叔正妻夏氏，陈友谅陷南昌时，投井死。
现代文：他的妻子夏氏，陈友谅攻陷南昌时，投井而死。
English: His wife, Xia clan, Chen Youjun, was killed in a well during the attack on Nanchang.

古文：叔正感其义，终身不复娶。
现代文：叔正深为她的大义所感，终生不娶。
English: Uncle Zheng was deeply moved by her magnanimity and never married.

古文：刘崧，字子高，泰和人，旧名楚。
现代文：刘崧，字子高，泰和人，原名楚。
English: Liu Wei, the character Zi Gao, Tai He Ren, formerly known as Chu.

古文：家贫力学，寒无垆火，手皲裂而钞录不辍。
现代文：他家贫却学习十分努力，寒冷时没火御寒，手皲裂，但抄录文章丝毫未停止。
English: His family was poor, but he studied very hard. When it was cold, there was no fire to keep out the cold. His palms were cracked, but he never stopped transcribing articles.

古文：元末举于乡。
现代文：元朝末年乡试中举。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, the junior high school entrance examination was held.

古文：洪武三年举经明行修，改今名。
现代文：洪武三年，举荐为经明行修，改成现在的名字。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, it was recommended that the name be changed to its current name.

古文：召见奉天殿，授兵部职方司郎中。
现代文：太祖在奉天殿召见了他，授予兵部职方司郎中。
English: The great-grandfather summoned him to the Imperial Palace and awarded him the post of middle-ranking military commander.

古文：奉命征粮镇江。
现代文：奉命到镇江征粮。
English: I was ordered to go to Zhenjiang to collect grain.

古文：镇江多勋臣田，租赋为民累，崧力请得少减。
现代文：镇江有许多勋臣的田地，租赋都由百姓承担，刘崧竭力请求减免。
English: In Zhenjiang, there are many fields owned by the noblemen, and the rent is borne by the people. Liu Hui tried his best to ask for a reduction.

古文：迁北平按察司副使，轻刑省事。招集流亡，民咸复业。
现代文：晋升为北平按察司副使，轻刑省事，招集流亡，百姓重新乐业。
English: He was promoted to the vice-envoy of the Beijing procuratorate, his punishment was reduced, he was called into exile, and the people were able to enjoy their work again.

古文：立文天祥祠于学宫之侧。
现代文：设立文天祥祠于学宫之侧。
English: The Wen Tianxiang Shrine was established on the side of the School Palace.

古文：勒石学门，示府县勿以徭役累诸生。
现代文：在学门前石头上刻字，告示府县不要以徭役拖累诸生。
English: Engraved on the stone in front of the school gate, it tells the prefectures and counties not to drag down the lives of the students.

古文：尝请减僻地驿马，以益宛平。
现代文：他曾请求减少偏僻之地的驿马，以此来充实宛平。
English: He had requested to reduce the number of horses in the outlying areas so as to enrich the roads.

古文：帝可其奏，顾谓侍臣曰： 驿传劳逸不均久矣，崧能言之。牧民不当如是耶？ 
现代文：太祖同意了他的奏请，对侍臣说： 驿传劳逸不均已经很久了，刘崧能意识到这个问题，统治百姓难道不就是要如此吗！ 
English: The great-grandfather agreed to his request and said to his attendant: "It's been a long time since we've heard about the unequal distribution of labor and wealth. Liu Bei should be aware of this problem. Isn't that what it means to rule the people?"

古文：为胡惟庸所恶，坐事谪输作。
现代文：因遭到胡惟庸的排挤，被贬为输作，不久，被遣回乡。
English: Because he was ousted by Hu Wei Rong, he was relegated to being a loser, and soon he was sent back to his hometown.

古文：寻放归。十三年，惟庸诛，征拜礼部侍郎。
现代文：十三年胡惟庸被诛，刘崧应召为礼部侍郎。
English: In the 13th year of Hu Wei Yong's exile, Liu Ye was summoned to serve as a waiter in the ceremonial club.

古文：未几，擢吏部尚书。
现代文：不久，提升为吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of secretary of the personnel department.

古文：雷震谨身殿，帝廷谕群臣陈得失。
现代文：雷震谨身殿，太祖下令群臣陈说得失。
English: The thunder shook the palace, and the great-grandfather ordered the courtiers to discuss the gains and losses.

古文：崧顿首，以修德行仁对。
现代文：刘崧叩头，以修德行仁对答。
English: Liu Bei kowtowed and answered with the principle of cultivating virtue and benevolence.

古文：寻致仕。
现代文：不久辞官。
English: He resigned soon after.

古文：明年三月，与前刑部尚书李敬并征。
现代文：第二年三月和前刑部尚书李敬一并召入。
English: In March of the following year, the former head of the Criminal Investigation Department, Shangshu Li Jing, was also called in.

古文：拜敬国子祭酒，而崧为司业。
现代文：任命李敬为国子祭酒，刘崧为司业。
English: Li Jing was appointed as the son of the country's sacrificial wine, and Liu Ye was appointed as the secretary of the industry.

古文：赐鞍马，令朝夕见，见辄燕语移时。
现代文：赐给鞍马，令朝夕相见，见辄燕语移时。
English: Give him a pommel horse so that he can see you in the morning and in the evening.

古文：未旬日卒。
现代文：未旬日去世。
English: He died a short time later.

古文：疾作，犹强坐训诸生。
现代文：得病后，仍强坐训导诸生。
English: After contracting the disease, he still insisted on teaching and guiding sentient beings.

古文：及革，敬问所欲言。
现代文：病重时，李敬问他有什么可说的。
English: When he was seriously ill, Li Jing asked him what he had to say.

古文：曰： 天子遣崧教国子，将责以成功，而遽死乎！ 
现代文：刘崧说 ：天子派我教导国子，责成我完成任务，可惜这么快就要死了！ 
English: Liu Yao said, "Heaven sent me to teach the son of the country, and ordered me to complete the task. Unfortunately, I am going to die so soon!"

古文：无一语及家事。
现代文：他没有一句话谈及家事。
English: He didn't say a word about the housework.

古文：帝命有司治殡殓，亲为文祭之。
现代文：太祖命令有关部门为他安排殡殓，并亲自作文祭奠。
English: The great-grandfather ordered the relevant departments to arrange a funeral for him, and personally wrote a eulogy.

古文：崧幼博学，天性廉慎。
现代文：刘崧年幼时就博学广闻，天性谦慎。
English: When Liu Ye was young, he was well-educated and widely known, and he was naturally modest.

古文：兄弟三人共居一茆屋，有田五十亩。
现代文：兄弟三人共居一间茅屋，有田地五十亩。
English: The three brothers live together in a thatched cottage and have fifty acres of farmland.

古文：及贵，无所增益。
现代文：到他当官后，家产也没有增加。
English: After he took office, the family fortune did not increase.

古文：十年一布被，鼠伤，始易之，仍葺以衣其子。
现代文：十年用一床布被，被老鼠咬破，才换新的，仍做成衣服给他儿子穿。
English: After ten years of using a bedclothes comforter, which was chewed up by mice, he replaced it with a new one, and still made clothes for his son to wear.

古文：居官未尝以家累自随。之任北平，携一童往，至则遣还。
现代文：当官时也不带家属。到北平赴任，携带一侍童前往，到达后就把侍童遣回。
English: When he was an official, he didn't take his family with him. When he went to Beiping to take office, he went with an attendant, and sent the attendant back after he arrived.

古文：晡时史退，孤灯读书，往往达旦。
现代文：黄昏时官吏退下后，他孤灯读书，常常通宵达旦。
English: At dusk, after the officials had retired, he would read by himself, often staying up all night.

古文：善为诗，豫章人宗之为《西江派》云。
现代文：他善长写诗，豫章人推崇他为 西江派 之宗。
English: He was good at writing poetry, and the people of Yuzhang praised him as the best of the Xijiang School.

古文：罗复仁，吉水人。
现代文：罗复仁，吉水人。
English: Luo Fuzhen, from Jishui.

古文：少嗜学，陈友谅辟为编修。
现代文：少年时就爱好学习，陈友谅征召他为编修。
English: When he was a boy, he loved to study, and Chen Youzhen recruited him as an editor.

古文：已，知其无成，遁去。
现代文：不久，知友谅无成，逃去。
English: Soon after, the friend ran away.

古文：谒太祖于九江，留置左右。
现代文：在九江谒见了太祖，被留在左右。
English: In Jiujiang, he saw his great-grandfather and was left in awe.

古文：从战鄱阳，赍蜡书谕降江西未下诸郡，授中书谘议。
现代文：从战鄱阳，带着蜡书谕降江西还没攻下的诸郡。授予中书咨议。
English: From the Battle of Poyang, he brought the wax book to the counties that had not yet been conquered in Jiangxi Province. He was awarded the Chinese Book Consultation.

古文：从围武昌，太祖欲招陈理降，以复仁故友谅臣也，遣入城谕，且曰： 理若来，不失富贵。 
现代文：从大军围攻武昌。太祖想招降陈理，因复仁是陈友谅的旧臣，派他入城劝降，并说 ：陈理如果来降，将令他不失富贵。 
English: Wuchang was besieged by a large army. The great-grandfather wanted to invite Chen Li to surrender, and since Fuzhen was an old vassal of Chen Youzheng, he sent him to the city to persuade him to surrender, saying, "If Chen Li comes to surrender, it will make him rich and valuable."

古文：复仁顿首曰： 如陈氏遣孤得保首领，俾臣不食言于异日，臣死不憾。 
现代文：复仁顿首说 ：如陈氏遗孤得以保全性命，让为臣不在将来某日食言，为臣就是死了也无遗憾。 
English: Fuzhindong said, "If Chen's bereaved family can preserve their lives, then I won't regret my words one day in the future, even if I die."

古文：太祖曰： 汝行，吾不汝误也。 
现代文：太祖说： 你去吧，我不会误你。 
English: The great-grandfather said: Go ahead, I won't miss you.

古文：复仁至城下，号恸者竟日，理缒之入。
现代文：复仁到城下，号恸者终日。陈理把复仁吊入城中。
English: Fuzhen to the city, the buglers all day. Chen Li hung Fuzhen into the city.

古文：见理大哭，陈太祖意，且曰： 大兵所向皆摧，不降且屠，城中民何罪？ 
现代文：见到陈理后大哭，陈说了太祖的意思，并说： 明军所到之处无不攻克，不投降将会被屠城，城中的居民又有什么罪？ 
English: After seeing Chen Li burst into tears, Chen said the meaning of the great-grandfather, and said: The Ming army will conquer everywhere it goes. If it does not surrender, it will be slaughtered. What is the sin of the residents of the city?

古文：理听其言，遂率官属出降。
现代文：陈理听从复仁的功告，率部下出降。
English: Chen Li listened to Fuzhen's report and led his subordinates to surrender.

古文：迁国子助教，以老特赐乘小车出入。
现代文：晋升为国子助教，因年老特恩赐乘小车出入。
English: He was promoted to Kuniko assistant professor, and because of his age, he was allowed to use a small car to go in and out.

古文：每宴见，赐坐饮食。
现代文：每次宴会，恩赐坐位和饮食。
English: For every banquet, the best seats and food.

古文：已，复使扩廓。
现代文：不久，再次出使扩廓。
English: Soon after, they were sent out again to expand their territory.

古文：前使多拘留，复仁议论慷慨，独得还。
现代文：以前的使者大多被拘留。复仁议论慷慨，独自得以返回。
English: Most of the previous envoys were detained, but Fuzhen was able to return on his own after making a generous offer.

古文：洪武元年，擢编修，复偕主事张福往谕安南还占城侵地。
现代文：洪武元年，提升为编修，再次偕同主事张福前往安南晓谕归还占城的侵地。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, he was promoted to editor-in-chief, and again accompanied Zhang Fu to Annan to order the return of the occupied city.

古文：安南奉诏，遗复仁金、贝、土产甚厚，悉却不受。
现代文：安南奉诏，赐给复仁金、贝、土产十分丰厚，复仁推却不受。
English: According to Annan's edict, he gave Furen gold, shellfish, and very rich local produce, but Furen did not accept it.

古文：帝闻而贤之。
现代文：太祖听说后认为他贤良。
English: After hearing this, the great-grandfather thought he was a good man.

古文：三年置弘文馆，以复仁为学士，与刘基同位。
现代文：三年设置弘文馆，任命复仁为学士，与刘基同位。
English: He set up the Hongwen Museum three years later and appointed Fuzhen as a bachelor, the same rank as Liu Ji.

古文：在帝前率意陈得失。尝操南音。
现代文：复仁在太祖面前直率地陈述得失，曾操南方口音。
English: In front of his great-grandfather, Fushin bluntly stated the gains and losses, and once spoke with a southern accent.

古文：帝顾喜其质直，呼为 老实罗 而不名。间幸其舍，负郭穷巷，复仁方垩壁，急呼其妻抱杌以坐帝。
现代文：太祖欣赏他朴直，称他为 老实罗 。曾经亲临他的房舍，位于城外的偏僻小巷，复仁正在粉刷墙壁，连忙叫妻子拿来小凳给太祖坐。
English: The great-grandfather admired his simplicity and called him Honest Luo. Once he visited his house, located in a remote alley outside the city. Fuzhen was painting the walls and quickly asked his wife to bring a small bench for the great-grandfather to sit on.

古文：帝曰： 贤士岂宜居此。 
现代文：太祖说 ：贤士怎么适宜居住在这里？ 
English: The great-grandfather said, "How is it appropriate for a sage to live here?"

古文：遂赐第城中。
现代文：于是恩赐房屋于城中。
English: As a result, a grace-and-favour house was built in the city.

古文：天寿节制《水龙吟》一阕以献。
现代文：天寿节制《水龙吟》一阕献上。
English: "Water Dragon" by Tian Shou Sheng is presented on a tray.

古文：帝悦，厚赐之。
现代文：太祖十分高兴，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Tang was very pleased and rewarded him with a rich gift.

古文：寻乞致仕。
现代文：不久请求辞职。
English: He soon asked to resign.

古文：陛辞，赐大布衣，题诗衣襟上褒美之。
现代文：阶下辞行，赐给大布衣，在衣襟上题诗褒奖赞美。
English: The lower echelon resigns, is given an overcoat, and a poem of praise is inscribed on the lapel.

古文：已，又召至京师。奏减江西秋粮。
现代文：不久，又召他至京师，上奏减免江西的秋粮。
English: Soon, he was called to Beijing to make a report on the reduction and exemption of autumn grain in Jiangxi.

古文：报可。
现代文：得到许可。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：留三月，赐玉带、铁拄杖、坐墩、裘马、食具遣还，以寿终。
现代文：居留三个月，赐给玉带、铁拄杖、坐墩、裘马、食具返回，寿终正寝。
English: After staying for three months, he was given a jade belt, an iron scepter, a seat, a horse, and utensils to return with. He died peacefully.

