古文：颜回见仲尼，请行。
现代文：颜回拜见老师孔子，请求同意他出远门。
English: Yan Hui went to see his teacher, Confucius, and asked for permission to go out.

古文：曰： 奚之？ 
现代文：孔子问： 你要去哪里？ 
English: Confucius asked, "Where are you going?"

古文：曰： 将之卫。 
现代文：颜回说： 打算去卫国。 
English: Yan replied, "I plan to go to defend the country."

古文：曰： 奚为焉？ 
现代文：孔子问： 去卫国做什么？ 
English: Yuanfeng also asked: What are we going to do?

古文：曰： 回闻卫君，其年壮，其行独。轻用其国而不见其过。
现代文：颜回说： 我听说卫国现任国君，年轻气壮，横行霸道，处理国事极不慎重，又听不进任何批评。
English: Yan Hui said: I have heard that the current Emperor of Japan is young, strong, domineering, extremely careless in handling state affairs, and does not listen to any criticism.

古文：轻用民死，死者以国量，乎泽若蕉，民其无如矣！
现代文：他轻率地动用民力导致百姓死亡，全国死去的人可以填满大泽，多得像大泽中的草芥。
English: He recklessly used the people's power to cause the death of the people. The people who died across the country could fill Osawa, as many as the mustard in Osawa.

古文：回尝闻之夫子曰： 治国去之，乱国就之。
现代文：卫国百姓已经走投无路了。我曾经听您讲过： 治理得好的国家可以离开它。
English: I once heard you say: A well-governed country can leave it.

古文：医门多疾。 愿以所闻思其则，庶几其国有瘳乎！ 
现代文：治理得不好的国家却要去到那里，就好像医生门前病人多一样 。我希望根据先生的这些教诲思考治理卫国的办法，卫国也许还可以逐步恢复元气吧！ 孔子说： 唉！
English: Countries that are not well governed go there, just as there are many sick people in front of the doctor's door. I hope to think about the way to govern the defense of the country according to these teachings of the gentleman. Perhaps the defense of the country can gradually recover! Confucius said: Alas!

古文：仲尼曰： 嘻，若殆往而刑耳！
现代文：你恐怕去到卫国就会遭到杀害啊！
English: I'm afraid you'll be killed if you go to the Fatherland!

古文：夫道不欲杂，杂则多，多则扰，扰则忧，忧而不救。
现代文：推行大道是不宜掺杂的，一旦庞杂，就会产生许多的纷扰，纷扰多了就会产生忧患，忧患多了就难以救治。
English: It is not advisable to mix up the implementation of the road. Once it is too complex, it will cause a lot of disturbance. If there is too much disturbance, it will cause distress. If there is too much distress, it will be difficult to treat.

古文：古之至人，先存诸己而后存诸人。
现代文：古时候道德修养高尚的至人，总是先使自己日臻成熟方才去扶助他人。
English: In ancient times, people with high moral cultivation always made themselves more and more mature before helping others.

古文：所存于己者未定，何暇至于暴人之所行！
现代文：如今在自己的道德修养方面还没有什么建树，哪有时间去揭露别人的过错。
English: Today, they have not built anything in terms of their own moral cultivation, and they have no time to expose the faults of others.

古文：且若亦知夫德之所荡而知之所为出乎哉？
现代文：而且你也知道道德沦丧、智慧外露的原因吧？
English: And do you know the reason for the decline of morality and the exposure of wisdom?

古文：德荡乎名，知出乎争。
现代文：道德沦丧是因为沽名钓誉，智慧外露是因为争强好胜。
English: Morality is lost because of the pursuit of fame, and wisdom is revealed because of competition.

古文：名也者，相轧也；知也者争之器也。二者凶器，非所以尽行也。
现代文：名誉是人相互倾轧的原因，智慧是人们争斗的工具，两者都是凶器，不能把它们推行于世。
English: Reputation is the reason why people fall out with each other, and wisdom is the tool for people to fight. Both are deadly weapons, and they cannot be promoted in the world.

古文：且德厚信矼，未达人气；名闻不争，未达人心。
现代文：先立己嘛，后立人嘛。你现在自己掌握的道理尚未统一，哪有功夫去纠正暴君的行为。再说你啊，也该懂得，一个人的德行为什么会传播开去？
English: Put yourself first, then put others first. The principles you have grasped now are not yet unified, and there is no effort to correct the behavior of the tyrant. Besides, you should also understand what a person's moral behavior will spread.

古文：而强以仁义绳墨之言術暴人之前者，是以人恶有其美也，命之曰灾人。
现代文：一个人的智力为什么会显扬出来？德行传播开去，是因为他贪爱美名。智力显扬出来，是因为他喜爱竞争。
English: Why does a man's intelligence stand out? Virtue spreads because he loves fame. Intelligence stands out because he loves competition.

古文：灾人者，人必反灾之。
现代文：都变成凶器了，绝不可能用来实现救国的抱负啊。 
English: They have all become deadly weapons, and it is absolutely impossible to use them to realize the ambition of saving the country.

古文：若殆为人灾夫。且苟为人悦贤而恶不肖，恶用而求有以异？
现代文：一个人虽然德行纯厚诚实笃守，可未必能和对方声气相通，一个人虽然不争名声，可未必能得到广泛的理解。
English: Although a person is virtuous, pure and honest, he may not be able to communicate with the other party. Although a person does not compete for fame, he may not be widely understood.

古文：若唯无诏，王公必将乘人而斗其捷。而目将荧之，而色将平之，口将营之，容将形之，心且成之。是以火救火，以水救水，名之曰益多。
现代文：你除非不向他进谏，否则他肯定会趁你失误之机，展示他的辩才，你的双眼会被迷惑而眩晕，你的神色会慢慢平静下来，你嗫嗫嚅嚅地为自己辩解，你的脸上会流露出顺从的表情，你的内心也会认同他的主张。这样做就像是用火救火，用水救水，可以称之为错上加错。
English: If you don't approach him, he will surely take advantage of your mistakes to show his eloquence, your eyes will be confused and dizzy, your face will slowly calm down, you will defend yourself, your face will show a submissive expression, and your heart will agree with his proposition. This is like using fire to save fire and water to save water. It can be called a mistake on top of a mistake.

古文：顺始无穷，若殆以不信厚言，必死于暴人之前矣！
现代文：有了依顺他的开始，以后顺从他的旨意便会没完没了，假如你未能取信便深深进言，那么一定会死在这位暴君面前。
English: With the beginning of obedience to him, obedience to his will will be endless, and if you fail to get a letter and dig deep, then you will surely die in front of this tyrant.

古文：且昔者桀杀关龙逄，纣杀王子比干，是皆修其身以下伛拊人之民，以下拂其上者也，故其君因其修以挤之。
现代文：而且，以前桀王杀害敢于直谏的关龙逢，纣王杀害力谏的叔叔比干，都是因为他们修身立德，以臣下的地位爱抚百姓，以臣下的地位违逆凶残的君王，所以他们的国君就因为他们道德修养高尚而排斥他们、杀害了他们。
English: Moreover, in the past, Guan Longfeng, who dared to stand up to the emperor, was killed by the emperor, and Uncle Bi Gan, who dared to stand up to the emperor, was killed by the emperor, all because they cultivated themselves and stood up for virtue, caressed the people with the status of a subject, and rebelled against the cruel king with the status of a subject. Therefore, their sovereigns excluded them and killed them because of their high moral cultivation.

古文：是好名者也。
现代文：这就是喜好名声的结果。
English: That's the result of liking fame.

古文：昔者尧攻丛枝、胥、敖，禹攻有扈。国为虚厉，身为刑戮。其用兵不止，其求实无已，是皆求名实者也，而独不闻之乎？
现代文：当年帝尧征伐丛枝和胥敖，夏禹攻打有扈，三国变为废墟，百姓都死完了，而国君自身也遭受杀戮，原因就是三国不停地使用武力，贪求别的国家的土地和人口。
English: In that year, the emperor conquered Xujiahui and Yunnan, Xia Yu attacked Yunnan, the three countries became ruins, the people all died, and the sovereign himself was also killed. The reason is that the three countries constantly use force and covet the land and population of other countries.

古文：名实者，圣人之所不能胜也，而况若乎！
现代文：这些都是求名求利的结果，你偏偏就没有听说过吗？名声和实利，就是圣人也不可能超越，何况是你呢？
English: All of this is the result of seeking fame and profit. Haven't you heard? Even a saint cannot surpass fame and profit, let alone you?

古文：虽然，若必有以也，尝以语我来。 
现代文：虽然是这样，你必定是有所依凭，所以你就试着把它告诉我吧！ 
English: Still, you must have something to rely on, so try to tell it to me!

古文：颜回曰： 端而虚，勉而一，则可乎？ 
现代文：颜回说： 我外表端庄内心谦虚，勉力行事而意志专一，这样可以吗？ 
English: Yan Hui said, "I am outwardly dignified and inwardly modest, I try my best but my will is single-minded, is this okay?

古文：曰： 恶！恶可！
现代文：孔子说： 唉，这怎么可以呢！
English: Confucius said: Alas, how can this be?

古文：夫以阳为充孔扬，采色不定，常人之所不违，因案人之所感，以求容与其心，名之曰日渐之德不成，而况大德乎！
现代文：卫君骄气横溢，喜怒无常，人们都不敢违逆他，他也借此压抑人们的真实感受和不同观点，以此来放纵他的欲望。他这种人，每天用小德慢慢感化都不会有成效，更何况用大德来劝导呢？
English: Wei Jun is arrogant and temperamental. People are afraid to disobey him, and he takes advantage of this to suppress people's true feelings and different points of view to indulge his desires. A person like him who is slowly influenced by small virtues every day will not be effective, let alone use great virtues to persuade?

古文：将执而不化，外合而内不訾，其庸讵可乎！ 
现代文：他必将固执己见而不会改变，即使表面赞同内心里也不会对自己的言行做出反省，你采取的方法如何能行呢？ 
English: He will certainly be stubborn and will not change, even if the surface agrees with the heart, he will not reflect on his words and deeds, how can the method you adopt work?

古文： 然则我内直而外曲，成而上比。
现代文：颜回说： 如此，那我就内心诚直而外表恭敬，内心自有主见并处处跟古代贤人作比较。
English: Yan replied, "In that case, I will be sincere at heart and respectful on the outside, and I will have my own opinions and compare myself with ancient sages everywhere."

古文：内直者，与天为徒。
现代文：内心诚直，就是与自然同类。
English: To be honest at heart is to be one with nature.

古文：与天为徒者，知天子之与己，皆天之所子，而独以己言蕲乎而人善之，蕲乎而人不善之邪？
现代文：与自然同类的，就可知道国君与自己在本性上都属于天生的，又何必把自己的言论宣之于外而希望得到人们的赞同，或者希望人们不予赞同呢？
English: If we are of the same species as nature, then we can know that both the sovereign and ourselves are innate in nature. Why do we have to proclaim our words outside and hope to get people's approval, or hope that people do not agree?

古文：若然者，人谓之童子，是之谓与天为徒。
现代文：像这样做，人们就会称之为童心未泯，这就叫跟自然为同类。
English: To do so would be to be childlike, to be at one with nature.

古文：外曲者，与人之为徒也。
现代文：所谓 外表恭敬 ，是和世人一样。
English: The so-called appearance of respect is the same as the rest of the world.

古文：擎跽曲拳，人臣之礼也。人皆为之，吾敢不为邪？
现代文：手拿朝笏躬身下拜，这是人臣应尽的礼节，人家都这么去做，我敢不这么做吗？
English: Holding the morning glory in my hand and bowing down, this is the proper etiquette for a courtier. Everyone does it. Dare I not do it?

古文：为人之所为者，人亦无疵焉，是之谓与人为徒。
现代文：做大家所做的事，别人就不会责难我，这就叫与世人为伍。
English: If I do what everyone else does, no one will blame me. That's what it means to be at one with the world.

古文：成而上比者，与古为徒。其言虽教，谪之实也，古之有也，非吾有也。
现代文：心有成见上比古代贤人，是跟古人为同类，他们的言论虽然很有教益，指责世事才是真情实意。
English: Compared to the ancient sages, they are the same as the ancients in their prejudices. Although their remarks are very instructive, blaming the world is the true meaning.

古文：若然者，虽直而不病，是之谓与古为徒。若是则可乎？ 
现代文：自古就有这样的做法，并不是我自己的编造，这样做，虽然正直不阿却也不会受到伤害，这就叫做与古人为伍，这样做可以吗？ 孔子说： 唉！
English: There has been such a practice since ancient times, it is not my own invention, doing so, although it is not honest, it will not be harmed, this is called being in the company of the ancients, is it okay to do so? Confucius said: Alas!

古文：仲尼曰： 恶！恶可！
现代文：怎么可以呢？
English: How can that be?

古文：大多政法而不谍。虽固，亦无罪。
现代文：太多的事情需要纠正，就是有所效法也会出现不当，虽然固陋而不通达也没有什么罪责。
English: There are too many things that need to be corrected, even if there is imitation, it will be improper, although there is no culpability for being crude and unintelligent.

古文：虽然，止是耳矣，夫胡可以及化！
现代文：即使这样也不过如此而已，又怎么能感化他呢！
English: Even if it's nothing more than that, how can you influence him?

古文：犹师心者也。 
现代文：你太执着于自己内心成见了。
English: You're too caught up in your own inner turmoil.

古文：颜回曰： 吾无以进矣，敢问其方。 
现代文：颜回说： 我没有更好的办法了，冒昧地向老师求教方策。 
English: Yan Hui said: I don't have a better way, I dared to ask the teacher for advice.

古文：仲尼曰： 斋，吾将语若。
现代文：孔子说： 斋戒清心，我将告诉你！
English: Confucius said, "I will tell you what fasting and a pure heart are.

古文：有心而为之，其易邪？
现代文：如果怀着积极用世之心去做，难道是容易的吗？
English: If you do it with a positive attitude, will it be easy?

古文：易之者，皞天不宜。 
现代文：如果这样做也很容易的话，苍天也会认为是不适宜的。 
English: If it were easy, it would be considered inappropriate.

古文：颜回曰： 回之家贫，唯不饮酒不茹荤者数月矣。如此则可以为斋乎？ 
现代文：颜回说： 我颜回家境贫穷，不饮酒浆、不吃荤食已经好几个月了，像这样，可以说是斋戒了吧？ 
English: Yan Hui said, "I'm poor back home, and I haven't drunk any alcohol or eaten any food for several months. Like this, can it be said that I'm fasting?

古文：曰： 是祭祀之斋，非心斋也。 回曰： 敢问心斋。 
现代文：孔子说： 这是祭祀前的所谓斋戒，并不是 心斋。 颜回说： 我请教什么是 心斋 。 
English: Confucius said, "This is the so-called fasting before the sacrifice, not the fasting of the heart." Yan Hui said, "I would like to know what the fasting of the heart is."

古文：仲尼曰： 若一志，无听之以耳而听之以心；无听之以心而听之以气。
现代文：孔子说： 你必须摒除杂念，专一心思，不用耳去听而用心去领悟，不用心去领悟而用凝寂虚无的意境去感应！
English: Confucius said: You must get rid of distracting thoughts, concentrate on one's thoughts, do not listen with your ears but understand with your heart, do not understand with your heart but feel with the artistic mood of nothingness!

古文：听止于耳，心止于符。
现代文：耳的功用仅只在于聆听，心的功用仅只在于跟外界事物交合。
English: The function of the ear is only to listen, and the function of the mind is only to interact with external things.

古文：气也者，虚而待物者也。唯道集虚。虚者，心斋也 
现代文：凝寂虚无的心境才是虚弱柔顺而能应待宇宙万物的，只有大道才能汇集于凝寂虚无的心境。虚无空明的心境就叫做 心斋 。 
English: It is the state of mind of concentration and emptiness that is weak and pliable and can respond to all things in the universe. Only the avenue can gather in the state of mind of concentration and emptiness. The state of mind of nothingness and emptiness is called the state of mind.

古文：颜回曰： 回之未始得使，实自回也；得使之也，未始有回也，可谓虚乎？ 
现代文：颜回说：  我不曾禀受过 心斋 的教诲，所以确实存在一个真实的颜回；我禀受了 心斋 的教诲，我便顿时感到不曾有过真实的颜回。这可以叫做虚无空明的境界吗？ 
English: Yan Hui said: I have never received the teachings of the Heart Sutra, so there is indeed a true Yan Hui; I have received the teachings of the Heart Sutra, and I suddenly feel that I have never had a true Yan Hui. Can this be called the realm of nothingness and emptiness?

古文：夫子曰： 尽矣！
现代文：孔子说： 你对 心斋 的理解实在十分透彻。
English: Confucius said, "Your understanding of the mind is very thorough.

古文：吾语若：若能入游其樊而无感其名，入则鸣，不入则止。无门无毒，一宅而寓于不得已则几矣。
现代文：我再告诉你，假如能够进入到追名逐利的环境中遨游而又不为名利地位所动，卫君能采纳你阐明你的观点，不能采纳你就停止不说，不去寻找仕途的门径，也不向世人提示索求的标的，心思凝聚全无杂念，把自己寄托于无可奈何的境域，那么就差不多合于 心斋 的要求了。
English: I'll tell you again, if you can enter the environment of chasing fame and profit without being moved by fame and fortune, if the guardian can adopt you and clarify your point of view, if you can't adopt, you can stop talking, don't look for a career path, and don't show the world what you're looking for. If your mind is concentrated without any distractions, and you put yourself in a helpless situation, then it's almost in line with the requirements of the heart.

古文：绝迹易，无行地难。
现代文：一个人不走路容易，走了路不在地上留下痕迹就很难。
English: It is easy for a person not to walk, but it is difficult to walk without leaving traces on the ground.

古文：为人使易以伪，为天使难以伪。
现代文：受世人的驱遣容易伪装，受自然的驱遣便很难作假。
English: Driven by the world, it is easy to disguise. Driven by nature, it is difficult to fake.

古文：闻以有翼飞者矣，未闻以无翼飞者也；闻以有知知者矣，未闻以无知知者也。
现代文：听说过凭借翅膀才能飞翔，不曾听说过没有翅膀也能飞翔；听说过有智慧才能了解事物，不曾听说过没有智慧也可以了解事物。
English: I have heard that wings are needed to fly, but I have never heard that you can fly without wings; I have heard that wisdom is needed to understand things, but I have never heard that you can understand things without wisdom.

古文：瞻彼阕者，虚室生白，吉祥止止。
现代文：看一看那空旷的环宇，空明的心境顿时独存精白，而什么也都不复存在，一切吉祥之事都消逝于凝静的境界。
English: Take a look at the vastness of the universe. An empty state of mind suddenly exists, and nothing ceases to exist. All auspicious things disappear in the realm of stillness.

古文：夫且不止，是之谓坐驰。
现代文：至此还不能凝止，这就叫形坐神驰。
English: At this point, you can't stop, it's like a roller coaster.

古文：夫徇耳目内通而外于心知，鬼神将来舍，而况人乎！
现代文：倘若让耳目的感观向内通达而又排除心智于外，那么鬼神将会前来归附，何况是人呢！
English: If the senses of the eyes and ears are allowed to penetrate inside and the mind is excluded from the outside, then ghosts and gods will come to attach themselves, not to mention people!

古文：是万物之化也，禹、舜之所纽也，伏戏、几蘧之所行终，而况散焉者乎！ 
现代文：这就是万物的变化，是禹和舜所把握的要领，也是伏羲、几蘧所遵循始终的道理，何况普通的人呢！ 
English: This is the change of all things. It is the essentials grasped by Yu and Zou, and it is also the principle consistently followed by Fuxi and several others, not to mention ordinary people!

古文：叶公子高将使于齐，问于仲尼曰： 王使诸梁也甚重。
现代文：叶公子高即将出使齐国，他向孔子请教： 楚王派我诸梁出使齐国，责任重大。
English: When Ye Gongzi Gao was about to be sent on a mission to Qi, he asked Confucius for advice: King Chu sent me, Zhu Liang, on a mission to Qi, which is a great responsibility.

古文：齐之待使者，盖将甚敬而不急。
现代文：齐国接待外来使节，都是表面恭敬内心怠慢。
English: Qi's reception of foreign envoys was respectful on the surface but neglectful at heart.

古文：匹夫犹未可动也，而况诸侯乎！
现代文：平常老百姓尚且不容易说服，更何况是诸侯呢！
English: It is not easy to convince ordinary people, let alone princes!

古文：吾甚栗之。
现代文：我心里十分害怕。
English: I was scared out of my mind.

古文：子常语诸梁也曰： 凡事若小若大，寡不道以欢成。
现代文：您常对我说： 事情无论大小，很少有不通过言语的交往可以获得圆满结果的。
English: You have often said to me: In matters large and small, there are few things that can be accomplished successfully without verbal communication.

古文：事若不成，则必有人道之患；事若成，则必有阴阳之患。
现代文：事情如果办不成功，那么必定会受到国君的处罚；事情如果办成功了，那又一定会忧喜交集酿出病害。
English: If the matter is not handled successfully, then it will definitely be punished by the sovereign; if the matter is handled successfully, then it will definitely bring about a mixture of sorrow and joy.

古文：若成若不成而后无患者，唯有德者能之。 
现代文：事情成功与否都不会留下祸患，只有道德高尚的人才能做到。 
English: Success or failure does not leave scars, only a person with high moral standards can do that.

古文：吾食也执粗而不臧，爨无欲清之人。
现代文：我每天吃的都是粗糙的食物，烹饪食物的人也就无须解凉散热。
English: I eat coarse food every day, and people who cook food do not need to cool down and dissipate heat.

古文：今吾朝受命而夕饮冰，我其内热与！
现代文：我今天早上接受国君诏命到了晚上就得饮用冰水，恐怕是因为我内心焦躁无比担忧吧！
English: This morning I accepted the Emperor's edict that I must drink ice water in the evening. I'm afraid it's because I'm so anxious inside!

古文：吾未至乎事之情而既有阴阳之患矣！事若不成，必有人道之患，是两也。
现代文：我还不曾接触到事的真情，就已经有了忧喜交加所导致的病患；事情如果真的办不成，那一定还会受到国君处罚。
English: I have not yet come into contact with the truth of the matter, I have already had the illness caused by the sorrow and joy; if the matter is really not done, it will certainly be punished by the sovereign.

古文：为人臣者不足以任之，子其有以语我来！ 
现代文：成与不成这两种结果，做臣子的我都不足以承担，先生你大概有什么可以教导我吧！ 
English: As a courtier, I am not strong enough to bear the consequences of either success or failure. Sir, do you have anything to teach me?

古文：仲尼曰： 天下有大戒二：其一命也，其一义也。
现代文：孔子说： 天下有两个足以为戒的大法：一是天命，一是道义。
English: Confucius said, "There are two great laws in the world that are sufficient as precepts: one is the Mandate of Heaven, and the other is morality.

古文：子之爱亲，命也，不可解于心；臣之事君，义也，无适而非君也，无所逃于天地之间。
现代文：做儿女的敬爱双亲，这是自然的天性，是无法从内心解释的；臣子侍奉国君，这是人为的道义，天地之间无论到什么地方都不会没有国君的统治，这是无法逃避的现实。
English: For children to love their parents is a natural instinct that cannot be explained from the heart. For courtiers to serve the sovereign is an artificial morality. No matter where you go between heaven and earth, you will not be without the sovereign's rule. This is an inescapable reality.

古文：是之谓大戒。
现代文：这就叫做足以为戒的大法。
English: This is called the Great Law of Sufficient Precaution.

古文：是以夫事其亲者，不择地而安之，孝之至也；夫事其君者，不择事而安之，忠之盛也；自事其心者，哀乐不易施乎前，知其不可奈何而安之若命，德之至也。
现代文：所以侍奉双亲的人，无论什么样的境遇都要使父母安适，这是孝心的最高表现；侍奉国君的人，无论办什么样的事都要让国君放心，这是尽忠的极点。注重自我修养的人，悲哀和欢乐都不容易使他受到影响，知道世事艰难，无可奈何却又能安于处境、顺应自然，这就是道德修养的最高境界。
English: Therefore, those who serve their parents, no matter what kind of situation, should make their parents comfortable, which is the highest expression of filial piety; those who serve the sovereign, no matter what kind of things they do, should reassure the sovereign, which is the pinnacle of loyalty. Those who pay attention to self-cultivation, are not easily affected by sadness and joy. They know that the world is difficult, but they can be at peace with the situation and conform to nature. This is the highest realm of moral cultivation.

古文：为人臣子者，固有所不得已。行事之情而忘其身，何暇至于悦生而恶死！
现代文：做臣子的原本就会有不得已的事情，遇事要能把握真情并忘掉自身，哪里还顾得上眷恋人生、厌恶死亡呢！
English: To be a courtier, you must be able to grasp the truth and forget yourself. How can you be attached to life and hate death?

古文：夫子其行可矣！
现代文：你这样去做就可以了！ 
English: You can do it this way!

古文：丘请复以所闻：凡交近则必相靡以信，远则必忠之以言。
现代文： 不过我还是把我所听到的道理再告诉你：不凡与邻近国家交往一定要用诚信使相互之间和顺亲近，而与远方国家交往则必定要用语言来表示相互间的忠诚。
English: But I will tell you again what I have heard: When dealing with neighboring countries, we must use honesty to make each other closer and closer, and when dealing with distant countries, we must use language to express mutual loyalty.

古文：言必或传之。
现代文：国家间交往的语言总得有人相互传递。
English: Someone has to pass on the language of interaction between countries.

古文：夫传两喜两怒之言，天下之难者也。
现代文：传递两国国君喜怒的言辞，乃是天下最困难的事。
English: It is the most difficult thing in the world to convey the words of joy and anger of the two sovereigns.

古文：夫两喜必多溢美之言，两怒必多溢恶之言。
现代文：两国国君喜悦的言辞必定添加了许多过分的夸赞，两国国君愤怒的言辞必定添加了许多过分的憎恶。
English: The words of joy of the two sovereigns must have added a lot of excessive praise, and the words of anger of the two sovereigns must have added a lot of excessive hatred.

古文：凡溢之类妄，妄则其信之也莫，莫则传言者殃。
现代文：大凡过度的话语都类似于虚构，虚构的言辞其真实程度也就值得怀疑，国君产生怀疑传达信息的使者就要遭殃。
English: Great and excessive words are similar to fiction, and the degree of truth of fictional words is also questionable. If the sovereign has doubts, the messenger who conveys the message will suffer.

古文：故法言曰： 传其常情，无传其溢言，则几乎全。 
现代文：所以古代格言说： 传达平实的言辞，不要传达过分的话语，那么也就差不多可以保全自己了 。
English: So the ancient maxim says: Convey plain speech, do not convey excessive speech, then you can almost save yourself.

古文：且以巧斗力者，始乎阳，常卒乎阴，泰至则多奇巧；以礼饮酒者，始乎治，常卒乎乱，泰至则多奇乐。
现代文：况且以智巧相互较量的人，开始时平和开朗，后来就常常暗使计谋，达到极点时则大耍阴谋、倍生诡计。按照礼节饮酒的人，开始时规规矩矩合乎人情，到后来常常就一片混乱大失礼仪，达到极点时则荒诞淫乐、放纵无度。
English: Moreover, people who compete with each other with cleverness are peaceful and cheerful at the beginning, and then they often secretly plot, and when they reach the extreme, they play conspiracies and double life tricks. People who drink according to etiquette, at the beginning, the rules and regulations are in line with human feelings, and then they often lose etiquette in a mess, and when they reach the extreme, they are absurd, lewd, and indulgent.

古文：凡事亦然，始乎谅，常卒乎鄙；其作始也简，其将毕也必巨。
现代文：无论什么事情恐怕都是这样：开始时相互信任，到头来互相欺诈；开始时单纯细微，临近结束时便变得纷繁巨大。
English: Whatever it is, I'm afraid it's like this: mutual trust at the beginning, mutual deception at the end; simple and subtle at the beginning, becoming complex and huge near the end.

古文：言者，风波也；行者，实丧也。
现代文： 言语犹如风吹的水波，传达言语定会有得有失。
English: Words are like waves of water blown by the wind. There must be gains and losses in conveying words.

古文：夫风波易以动，实丧易以危。
现代文：风吹波浪容易动荡，有了得失容易出现危难。
English: The wind and waves are prone to turbulence, and with gains and losses, danger is likely to occur.

古文：故忿设无由，巧言偏辞。
现代文：所以愤怒发作没有别的什么缘由，就是因为言辞虚浮而又片面失当。
English: So there is no other reason for the outburst of anger, it is because the rhetoric is false and one-sided.

古文：兽死不择音，气息勃然于是并生心厉。
现代文：猛兽临死时什么声音都叫得出来，气息急促喘息不定，于是迸发伤人害命的恶念。
English: When a ferocious beast is about to die, it can call out any sound, and its breath is rapid and breathless, so the evil thoughts of hurting people and killing people burst out.

古文：剋核太至，则必有不肖之心应之而不知其然也。
现代文：大凡过分苛责，必会产生不好的念头来应付，而他自己也不知道这是怎么回事。
English: If he is too strict, he will have bad thoughts to deal with, and he doesn't know what's going on.

古文：苟为不知其然也，孰知其所终！
现代文：假如做了些什么而他自己却又不知道那是怎么回事，谁还能知道他会有怎样的结果！
English: If he does something and he doesn't know what it is, who knows what will happen to him!

古文：故法言曰： 无迁令，无劝成。过度益也。 
现代文：所以古代格言说： 不要随意改变已经下达的命令，不要勉强他人去做力不从心的事，说话过头一定是多余、添加的 。
English: Therefore, the ancient maxim says: Do not arbitrarily change the orders that have already been issued, do not force others to do things that are beyond their capabilities, talking too much must be superfluous and added.

古文：迁令劝成殆事。美成在久，恶成不及改，可不慎与！
现代文：改变成命或者强人所难都是危险，成就一桩好事要经历很长的时间，坏事一旦做出悔改是来不及的。行为处世能不审慎吗！
English: It is dangerous to change one's destiny or one's strong point. It takes a long time to achieve a good thing, and it is too late to repent once one has done a bad thing. How can one not be prudent in dealing with the world?

古文：且夫乘物以游心，托不得已以养中，至矣。
现代文：至于顺应自然而使心志自在遨游，一切都寄托于无可奈何以养蓄神智，这就是最好的办法。
English: As for following nature and letting the mind wander freely, everything is entrusted to the helpless how to cultivate the mind, this is the best way.

古文：何作为报也！
现代文：有什么必要作意回报！
English: What need is there to reciprocate!

古文：莫若为致命，此其难者？ 
现代文：不如原原本本地传达国君所给的使命，这样做有什么困难呢！ 
English: It is better to convey the mission given by the sovereign locally, what is the difficulty in doing so!

古文：颜阖将傅卫灵公大子，而问于蘧伯玉曰； 有人于此，其德天杀。
现代文：颜阖将被请去做卫国太子的师傅，他向卫国贤大夫蘧伯玉求教： 如今有这样一个人，他的德行生就凶残嗜杀。
English: Yan Xuan will be invited to be the tutor of the Prince of the Great Patriotic War, and he asked the wise doctor of the Great Patriotic War, Zou Boyu, for advice: Today, there is such a person, and his virtue is a ferocious thirst for killing.

古文：与之为无方则危吾国，与之为有方则危吾身。
现代文：跟他朝夕与共如果不符合法度与规范，势必危害自己的国家；如果合乎法度和规范，那又会危害自身。
English: If you do not comply with the laws and norms, you are bound to harm your own country; if you comply with the laws and norms, you will harm yourself.

古文：其知适足以知人之过，而不知其所以过。
现代文：他的智慧足以了解别人的过失，却不了解别人为什么会出现过错。
English: He is wise enough to understand the faults of others, but does not understand why others make mistakes.

古文：若然者，吾奈之何？ 蘧伯玉曰： 善哉问乎！
现代文：像这样的情况，我将怎么办呢？ 蘧伯玉说： 问得好啊！
English: What would I do in a situation like this? Zou Bo-yu said, "That's a good question!

古文：戒之，慎之，正女身哉！
现代文：要警惕，要谨慎，首先要端正你自己！
English: Be alert, be cautious, first of all straighten yourself out!

古文：形莫若就，心莫若和。
现代文：表面上不如顺从依就以示亲近，内心里不如顺其秉性暗暗疏导。
English: On the surface, it is not as good as obeying to show closeness, but in the heart it is not as good as following one's nature.

古文：虽然，之二者有患。
现代文：即使这样，这两种态度仍有隐患。
English: Even so, there are pitfalls to both attitudes.

古文：就不欲入，和不欲出。
现代文：亲附他不要关系过密，疏导他不要心意太露。
English: Don't be too close to him, and don't be too open with him.

古文：形就而入，且为颠为灭，为崩为蹶；心和而出，且为声为名，为妖为孽。
现代文：外表亲附到关系过密，会招致颠仆毁灭，招致崩溃失败。内心顺性疏导显得太露，将被认为是为了名声，也会招致祸害。
English: To be too closely attached to one's cousin on the outside will bring about the ruin of one's vassal, the collapse of one's success, and on the inside, if one's cuckoldry is too obvious, it will be considered to be for the sake of fame, and it will also bring about disaster.

古文：彼且为婴儿，亦与之为婴儿；彼且为无町畦，亦与之为无町畦；彼且为无崖，亦与之为无崖；达之，入于无疵。
现代文：他如果像个天真的孩子一样，你也姑且跟他一样像个无知无识的孩子；他如果同你不分界线，那你也就跟他不分界线。他如果跟你无拘无束，那么你也姑且跟他一样无拘无束。
English: If he is like a naïve child, then you should be like an ignorant child like him; if he does not draw a line with you, then you should not draw a line with him. If he is unrestrained with you, then you should be unrestrained like him.

古文：汝不知夫螳螂乎？
现代文：慢慢地将他思想疏通引入正轨，便可进一步达到没有过错的地步。
English: By slowly introducing his thoughts into the right track, he can further reach the point of no fault.

古文：怒其臂以当车辙，不知其不胜任也，是其才之美者也。
现代文： 你没有听说过那螳螂吗？它奋起手臂去阻挡车轮，不知道自己根本不能做到这一点，反而认为这是自己最得意的力量。
English: Haven't you heard of the cockroach that raises its arm to block the wheel, not knowing it can't do it, but thinking it's the best thing it can do?

古文：戒之，慎之，积伐而美者以犯之，几矣！
现代文：要警惕啊！
English: Be on your guard!

古文：汝不知夫养虎者乎？
现代文：小心啊！多次地夸耀自己最得意的东西会触犯王子，这就和螳螂差不多了。
English: Be careful! Repeatedly boasting about what you do best will offend the prince. It's almost like being a cockroach.

古文：不敢以生物与之，为其杀之之怒也；不敢以全物与之，为其决之之怒也。时其饥饱，达其怒心。
现代文：你不知道那养虎之人吗？他从不敢用活物去喂养老虎，因为他担心扑杀活物会激起老虎凶残的怒气；他也从不敢用整个的动物去喂养老虎，因为他担心撕裂动物也会诱发老虎凶残的怒气。
English: Don't you know the man who keeps tigers? He never dares to feed a live animal to a retired tiger, because he fears that killing a live animal will arouse the tiger's ferocious anger; he also never dares to feed a retired tiger with a whole animal, because he fears that tearing the animal will also arouse the tiger's ferocious anger.

古文：虎之与人异类，而媚养己者，顺也；故其杀者，逆也。
现代文：注意顺应它饥饱的状态，疏导它凶残的本性。老虎虽不同于人类，却顺从喂养它的人，这是因为顺应了它的天性。
English: Pay attention to its hunger state and channel its ferocious nature. Although the tiger is different from humans, it obeys the person who feeds it, because it obeys its nature.

古文：夫爱马者，以筐盛矢，以蜃盛溺。
现代文：而被老虎咬死的人，是因为违背了天性。爱马的人，以精细的竹筐装马粪，用珍贵的蛤壳接马尿。
English: People who were killed by tigers died because they violated their nature. People who loved horses filled horse manure with fine bamboo baskets and collected horse urine with precious clam shells.

古文：适有蚊虻仆缘，而拊之不时，则缺衔毁首碎胸。意有所至而爱有所亡。可不慎邪？ 
现代文：刚巧一只牛虻叮在马身上，爱马之人出于爱惜随手拍击，没想到马儿受惊便咬断勒口、挣断辔头、弄坏胸络。意在爱马却失其所爱，能够不谨慎吗！ 
English: It just so happened that a calf tingled on a horse. Out of love for the horse, a horse lover slapped it with his hand. Without thinking that the horse would be frightened, he bit off the muzzle, broke the hoe, and broke the chest. Can you be careless if you want to love a horse but lose its love?

古文：匠石之齐，至于曲辕，见栎社树。
现代文：有个姓石的匠人去到了齐国一个叫曲辕的地方，看见一颗被人们称为神树的栎树。
English: An artisan surnamed Shi went to a place called Quqian in Qi Province and saw an elm tree that people called a sacred tree.

古文：其大蔽牛，絜之百围，其高临山十仞而后有枝，其可以舟者旁十数。
现代文：那棵树非常高大，树荫可以遮蔽数千头牛，测量它的树干，足有百尺之围，树高达至山顶，离地面几丈高后才长有树枝，可以用它造十余艘船只。
English: The tree was very tall, its shade could cover thousands of cattle, its trunk measured a hundred feet in circumference, the tree reached as high as the top of the mountain, and its branches only grew after it was several feet above the ground. It could be used to build more than ten ships.

古文：观者如市，匠伯不顾，遂行不辍。
现代文：参观它的人如同赶集一般来来往往。
English: People who visit it come and go like a stampede.

古文：弟子厌观之，走及匠石，曰： 自吾执斧斤以随夫子，未尝见材如此其美也。
现代文：这位匠人却看也不看，不停地向前走，他的徒弟在树旁看够了跑着赶上木匠，说： 自从我拿着斧子跟随您做木工，还没见过这么高大的树。
English: The carpenter, however, did not see him, but kept on walking. His apprentice had seen enough by the tree and ran to catch up with the carpenter, saying: "Since I took the axe and followed you to do carpentry, I have not seen such a tall tree."

古文：先生不肯视，行不辍，何邪？ 
现代文：先生为何不肯看一眼，只向前走个不停呢？ 
English: Why didn't the teacher take a look and just keep walking?

古文：曰： 已矣，勿言之矣！
现代文：木匠回答说： 算了，不要再说了它了！
English: The carpenter replied, "Forget it, don't mention it!

古文：散木也。以为舟则沉，以为棺椁则速腐，以为器则速毁，以为门户则液瞒，以为柱则蠹，是不材之木也。
现代文：那木头是无用之物，做成船它会沉没，做成棺材它会很快就会腐朽，做器具它很快会毁坏，做门户它会像树一样流出污浆，做成柱子，它会被虫子蛀蚀。
English: That wood is a useless thing; made into a boat, it will sink; made into a coffin, it will soon rot; made into a tool, it will soon be destroyed; made into a doorway, it will ooze like a tree; made into a pillar, it will be eaten away by worms.

古文：无所可用，故能若是之寿。 
现代文：这是一棵不能成材的树木，没有一点用处，所以它才有这么长的寿命。 
English: It's a dead tree, it's useless, that's why it lives so long.

古文：匠石归，栎社见梦曰： 女将恶乎比予哉？
现代文：木匠回到家里后，梦见栎树对他说： 你有什么东西能跟我相提并论呢？
English: When the carpenter returned home, he dreamed that the elm tree said to him, "What can you compare me to?

古文：若将比予于文木邪？
现代文：你打算拿可用之木来跟我相比吗？
English: Are you going to compare me to a piece of wood?

古文：夫楂梨橘柚果蓏之属，实熟则剥，剥则辱。大枝折，小枝泄。
现代文：那些楂梨橘柚之类的树木，果实成熟后就会被打落，打落下来就会受辱，大的树枝被折断，小的树枝被拉扯。
English: After the fruit ripens, those trees, such as the pear and the tangerine, will be knocked down, and if they are knocked down, they will be insulted, the big branches will be broken, and the small branches will be pulled.

古文：此以其能苦其生者也。故不终其天年而中道夭，自掊击于世俗者也。
现代文：它之所以受苦就是因为它生来有用，所以不能享其天年而中途夭折，任何事物都是如此。
English: It suffers because it was born to be useful, so it can't enjoy its golden years and die prematurely, just like everything else.

古文：物莫不若是。且予求无所可用久矣！几死，乃今得之，为予大用。
现代文：我寻求没有用的办法已经很久了，差点死了，如今才获得这个办法。这无用之能正是大用，还有比这更大的用途吗？
English: For a long time I have been searching for a useless method, I almost died, and now I have obtained this method. This useless ability is a great use, is there a greater use than this?

古文：使予也而有用，且得有此大也邪？且也若与予也皆物也，奈何哉其相物也？
现代文：况且你和我都是自然界中的事物罢了，怎么能够用这种方式看待事物呢？
English: Besides, you and I are just things in nature, how can we look at things in this way?

古文：而几死之散人，又恶知散木！ 
现代文：你是快接死亡的普通凡人，又如何知道树木无用的道理呢！ 
English: You are an ordinary mortal on the verge of death, how do you know the reason why trees are useless!

古文：匠石觉而诊其梦。弟子曰： 趣取无用，则为社何邪？ 
现代文：木匠醒来后说出了他的梦，徒弟说： 自己希望的是无用，又怎么能为社神之树呢？ 木匠说： 闭嘴！
English: When the carpenter woke up and told his dream, the apprentice said, "What you hope for is useless, how can you be the tree of the gods?" The carpenter said, "Shut up!

古文：曰： 密！
现代文：你不要再说了。
English: You don't have to say anything.

古文：若无言！彼亦直寄焉！以为不知己者诟厉也。
现代文：它只不过是寄寓于此，使那些不理解他的人去诟骂他。
English: It just dwells there, causing those who don't understand it to abuse it.

古文：不为社者，且几有翦乎！
现代文：如果不做社神，他一定会被砍伐！
English: If he doesn't become a social god, he'll surely be cut down!

古文：且也彼其所保与众异，而以义喻之，不亦远乎！ 
现代文：他保全自身的方法与众不同，如果用常理来理解它，不是相差太远了吗？ 
English: His method of self-preservation is different, and if you understand it with common sense, isn't it too far apart?

古文：南伯子綦游乎商之丘，见大木焉，有异：结驷千乘，隐将芘其所藾。子綦曰： 此何木也哉！
现代文：南伯子綦在商丘一带游乐，看见长着一棵出奇的大树，上千辆驾着四马的大车，荫蔽在大树树荫下歇息。子綦说： 这是什么树呢？
English: Nanbo Zizhao was enjoying himself in the area of Shangqiu. He saw a surprisingly large tree with thousands of four-horse chariots resting in the shade of the tree. Zizhao said, "What kind of tree is this?"

古文：此必有异材夫！ 
现代文：这树一定有特异的材质啊！ 
English: This tree must have a special material!

古文：仰而视其细枝，则拳曲而不可以为栋梁；俯而视其大根，则轴解而不可以为棺椁；舐其叶，则口烂而为伤；嗅之则使人狂酲三日而不已。
现代文：仰头观看大树的树枝，弯弯扭扭的树枝并不可以用来做栋梁；低头观看大树的主干，树心直到表皮旋着裂口并不可以用来做棺椁；用舌舔一舔树叶，口舌溃烂受伤；用鼻闻一闻气味，使人像喝多了酒，三天三夜还醒不过来。
English: Looking up at the branches of a big tree, the twisted twisted branches can not be used as a pillar; looking down at the trunk of a big tree, the heart of the tree can not be used as a coffin until the epidermis is twisted and cracked; licking the leaves with the tongue, the mouth and tongue are festering and injured; sniffing the smell with the nose, makes people feel like drinking too much wine, and they can not wake up for three days and three nights.

古文：子綦曰 此果不材之木也，以至于此其大也。
现代文：子綦说： 这果真是什么用处也没有的树木，以至长到这么高大。
English: Zixuan said, "It is indeed a useless tree to grow so tall."

古文：嗟乎神人，以此不材。 
现代文：唉，精神世界完全超脱物外的 神人 ，就像这不成材的树木呢！ 
English: Alas, the spiritual world is completely detached from the material world, just like these useless trees!

古文：宋有荆氏者，宜楸柏桑。
现代文：宋国有个叫荆氏的地方，很适合楸树、柏树、桑树的生长。
English: There is a place in Song called Jing, which is very suitable for the growth of eucalyptus, cypress and mulberry trees.

古文：其拱把而上者，求狙猴之杙斩之；三围四围，求高名之丽者斩之；七围八围，贵人富商之家求禅傍者斩之。
现代文：树干长到一两把粗，做系猴子的木桩的人便把树木砍去；树干长到三、四围粗，地位高贵名声显赫的人家寻求建屋的大梁便把树木砍去；树干长到七、八围粗，达官贵人富家商贾寻找整幅的棺木又把树木砍去。
English: When the tree trunk grows to one or two fathoms, people who make monkey-shaped wooden stakes cut the trees down; when the tree trunk grows to three or four fathoms, people of high rank and fame who are looking for a beam to build a house cut the trees down; when the tree trunk grows to seven or eight fathoms, high-ranking dignitaries and rich merchants look for a full-length coffin and cut the trees down.

古文：故未终其天年而中道之夭于斧斤，此材之患也。
现代文：所以它们始终不能终享天年，而是半道上被刀斧砍伐而短命。
English: As a result, they are not able to live to a ripe old age, but are cut down with a knife and axe halfway through their short lives.

古文：故解之以牛之白颡者，与豚之亢鼻者，与人有痔病者，不可以适河。
现代文：这就是材质有用带来的祸患。因此古人祈祷神灵消除灾害，总不把白色额头的牛、高鼻折额的猪以及患有痔漏疾病的人沉入河中去用作祭奠。
English: For this reason, the ancients prayed to the gods to avert disasters, and would never immerse a cow with a white forehead, a pig with a high snout, or a person suffering from hemorrhoids in the river as a memorial.

古文：此皆巫祝以知之矣，所以为不祥也。
现代文：这些情况巫师全都了解，认为他们都是很不吉祥的。
English: Wizards know all about these situations and consider them to be very unlucky.

古文：此乃神人之所以为大祥也。
现代文：不过这正是 神人 所认为的世上最大的吉祥。
English: However, this is exactly what Shinto people believe to be the greatest good luck in the world.

古文：支离疏者，颐隐于齐，肩高于顶，会撮指天，五管在上，两髀为胁。
现代文：有个名叫支离疏的人，下巴隐藏在肚脐下，双肩高于头顶，后脑下的发髻指向天空，五官的出口也都向上，两条大腿和两边的胸肋并生在一起。
English: There was a man named Straggling. His chin was hidden under his navel, his shoulders were higher than the top of his head, the hair at the back of his head pointed to the sky, the exit of his five senses were also upward, and his two thighs and both sides of his chest were born together.

古文：挫针治繲，足以餬口；鼓荚播精，足以食十人。
现代文：他给人缝衣浆洗，足够度日；又替人筛糠簸米，足可养活十口人。
English: He sews and washes clothes for people, enough to get by; he also sifts glutinous rice for people, enough to feed ten people.

古文：上征武士，则支离攘臂于其间；上有大役，则支离以有常疾不受功；上与病者粟，则受三锺与十束薪。
现代文：国君征兵时，支离疏捋袖扬臂在征兵人面前走来走去；国君有大的差役，支离疏因身有残疾而免除劳役；国君向残疾人赈济米粟，支离疏还领得三钟粮食十捆柴草。
English: When the king was conscripted, he walked up and down in front of the conscripts with his arms raised; the king had a large salary, and the king was exempted from labor service due to his disability; the king gave rice to the disabled, and the king also received three ounces of grain and ten bundles of firewood.

古文：夫支离者其形者，犹足以养其身，终其天年，又况支离其德者乎！
现代文：像支离疏那样形体残缺不全的人，还足以养活自己，终享天年，又何况德行残缺不全呢！
English: A person with a fragmented and incomplete body is still enough to support himself and live to a ripe old age, let alone a person with a fragmented and incomplete virtue!

古文：孔子适楚，楚狂接舆游其门曰： 凤兮凤兮，何如德之衰也。
现代文：孔子去到楚国，楚国隐士接舆有意来到孔子门前，说 凤鸟啊，凤鸟啊！
English: Confucius went to the State of Chu. The hermit from the State of Chu came to the door of Confucius and said, "Phoenix bird, phoenix bird!"

古文：来世不可待，往世不可追也。
现代文：你怎么怀有大德却来到这衰败的国家！未来的世界不可期待，过去的时日无法追回。
English: How can you come to this decadent country with great virtue? The world of the future cannot be expected, and the past cannot be recovered.

古文：天下有道，圣人成焉；天下无道，圣人生焉。
现代文：天下得到了治理，圣人便成就了事业；国君昏暗天下混乱，圣人也只得顺应潮流苟全生存。
English: When the country was governed, the sage accomplished his mission; when the country was in chaos, the sage had to follow the trend to survive.

古文：方今之时，仅免刑焉！
现代文：当今这个时代，怕就只能免遭刑辱。
English: In this day and age, the only way to avoid fear is to avoid punishment.

古文：福轻乎羽，莫之知载；祸重乎地，莫之知避。
现代文：幸福比羽毛还轻，而不知道怎么取得；祸患比大地还重，而不知道怎么回避。
English: Happiness is lighter than a feather, but I don't know how to get it; disaster is heavier than the earth, but I don't know how to avoid it.

古文：已乎，已乎！
现代文：算了吧，算了吧！
English: Forget it, forget it!

古文：临人以德。
现代文：不要在人前宣扬你的德行！
English: Don't proclaim your virtue in front of others!

古文：殆乎，殆乎！
现代文：危险啊，危险啊！
English: Danger, danger!

古文：画地而趋。
现代文：人为地划出一条道路让人们去遵循！
English: Artificially carving out a path for people to follow!

古文：迷阳迷阳，无伤吾行。
现代文：遍地的荆棘啊，不要妨碍我的行走！
English: Thorns of the field, do not hinder my steps.

古文：吾行郤曲，无伤吾足。 
现代文：曲曲弯弯的道路啊，不要伤害我的双脚！ 
English: Crooked road, don't hurt my feet!

古文：山木，自寇也；膏火，自煎也。桂可食，故伐之；漆可用，故割之。
现代文：山上的树木自己招致砍伐，油脂自己招致燃烧，桂树因为可以食用，所以遭人砍伐，漆树因为有用，所以被刀割。
English: The trees on the mountain cause themselves to be cut down, the grease causes itself to be burned, the katsura tree is cut down because it is edible, and the sumac tree is cut down because it is useful.

古文：人皆知有用之用，而莫知无用之用也。
现代文：人们都知道 有用 的作用，却不知道 无用 的更大作用啊。
English: People know the useful role, but they don't know the greater role of the useless.

