古文：豫章王综，字世谦，高祖第二子也。
现代文：豫章王萧综字世谦，是高祖的第二个儿子。
English: Yuanzhang Wang Xiao Zi Zi Shi Qian is the second son of Gao Zu.

古文：天监三年，封豫章郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：天监三年，他被封为豫章郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the third year of Tianjun, he was named the king of Yuzhang County, feeding two thousand households.

古文：五年，出为使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、仁威将军、南徐州刺史，寻进号北中郎将。
现代文：天监五年，他出京城为使持节、都督南徐州诸军事、仁威将军、南徐州刺史，不久晋升官号为北中郎将。
English: In the fifth year of Tianjun, he went to Beijing for the Envoys' Festival, the military governor of South Xuzhou, General Ren Wei, and the history of South Xuzhou, and soon he was promoted to the position of North Vice Admiral.

古文：十年，迁都督郢、司、霍三州诸军事、云麾将军、郢州刺史。
现代文：天监十年，迁任都督郢司霍三州诸军事、云麾将军、郢州刺史。
English: Ten years after the establishment of the Heaven's Supervisor, he was transferred to the position of the Military Governor of the Three Provinces, the General of Yunnan Province, and the Governor of Zhangzhou Province.

古文：十三年，迁安右将军、领石头戍军事。
现代文：天监十三年，迁任安右将军、领石头戍军事。
English: In the thirteenth year of Tianjun, he was transferred to the post of General An Yu, the leader of the military.

古文：十五年，迁西中郎将，兼护军将军，又迁安前将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：天监十五年，迁任西中郎将，兼护军将军，又迁任安前将军、丹阳尹。
English: In the fifteenth year of Tianjun, he was transferred to the position of Xi Zhongro Shogun, concurrently the General of the Protection Army, and was also transferred to the position of Anzen Shogun, Danyang Yin.

古文：十六年，复为北中郎将、南徐州刺史。
现代文：天监十六年，又任北中郎将、南徐州刺史。
English: In the 16th year of Tianjun, he was also appointed as the commander of the Northern Middle Kingdom and the governor of Southern Xuzhou.

古文：普通二年，入为侍中、镇右将军，置佐史。
现代文：普通二年，入朝为侍中、镇右将军，手下开始设置佐史。
English: Two years later, he entered the imperial court as a chamberlain and Zhen Yu general, and his subordinates began to set up Sashi.

古文：初，其母吴淑媛自齐东昏宫得幸于高祖，七月而生综，宫中多疑之者。及淑媛宠衰怨望，遂陈疑似之说，故综怀之。
现代文：起初，他的母亲吴淑媛本是齐束昏侯的宫妃，高祖宠幸，七个月后生下萧综，所以宫中许多人怀疑他不是高祖的亲生子，待到吴淑媛宠爱衰退心怀不满时，宫中人便向萧综叙述了怀疑的议论，所以萧综心中牢记着逭事。
English: At first, his mother, Wu Shuyuan, was originally a dowager princess, Gao Zu's favorite, and seven months later gave birth to Xiao Sim, so many people in the palace suspected that he was not Gao Zu's biological son. When Wu Shuyuan was dissatisfied with the decline of favor, people in the palace recounted their doubts to Xiao Sim, so Xiao Sim kept the anecdote in mind.

古文：既长，有才学，善属文。
现代文：长大后，有才华学问，擅长写文章。
English: When he grew up, he was talented, learned, and good at writing articles.

古文：高祖御诸子以礼，朝见不甚数，综恒怨不见知。
现代文：高祖用礼仪管教子女，他的儿子朝见他的次数不多，萧综因此常常埋怨高祖不了解他。
English: Gao Zu uses etiquette to discipline his children. His son sees him only a few times in the morning. As a result, Xiao Siming often complains that Gao Zu does not understand him.

古文：每出籓，淑媛恒随之镇。
现代文：萧综每次到藩镇去，吴淑媛总要随他前往。
English: Every time Xiao Zomei went to the town, Wu Shuyuan always went with him.

古文：至年十五六，尚裸袒嬉戏于前，昼夜无别，内外咸有秽议。
现代文：萧镕十五六岁时，还赤身露体在吴淑媛面前玩乐，白天黑夜没有区别，宫内外都对这种丑事有议论。
English: At the age of fifteen or sixteen, Xiao Yao was still naked and playing in front of Wu Shuyuan. There was no difference between day and night, and both inside and outside the palace were discussing this scandal.

古文：综在徐州，政刑酷暴。
现代文：萧综在徐州，政令刑罚非常残暴。
English: For Xiao Zomei in Xuzhou, the punishment decreed by the government is very cruel.

古文：又有勇力，手制奔马。
现代文：萧综有气力，空手能制服奔跑的马。
English: Xiao Zomei has strength. He can subdue a running horse with karate.

古文：常微行夜出，无有期度。
现代文：他经常在夜裹穿着便服隐瞒身份外出，没有节制。
English: He often went out at night in plain clothes to conceal his identity, and did not exercise restraint.

古文：每高祖有敕疏至，辄忿恚形于颜色，群臣莫敢言者。
现代文：每当有高祖的韶命来到时，总是表现出忿恨的表情，群臣没有谁敢对他劝谏。
English: Whenever Gao Zu's death came, he always showed a resentful expression, and none of the courtiers dared to advise him.

古文：恒于别室祠齐氏七庙，又微服至曲阿拜齐明帝陵。
现代文：萧综在专门的房子襄建立了齐氏的七庙，常去祭祀；他还身穿便装到曲阿齐明帝陵去跪拜。
English: Xiao Zomei built the seven temples of the Qi clan in a special house and often went to the sacrifices; he also dressed in plain clothes to kneel in front of the Emperor Qiu's Mausoleum.

古文：然犹无以自信，闻俗说以生者血沥死者骨，渗，即为父子。
现代文：然而他还无法使自己确信是齐东昏侯的儿子，听到俗话说用活人的血滴在死人的遗骨上，血渗进去了，就说明是父子关系。
English: However, he was still unable to convince himself that he was the son of the deceased lord of Qidong. He heard a saying that the blood of the living was dripped on the bones of the dead, and the blood seeped in, indicating a father-son relationship.

古文：综乃私发齐东昏墓，出骨，沥臂血试之。并杀一男，取其骨试之，皆有验，自此常怀异志。
现代文：萧综就暗地掘开齐束昏侯的坟墓，把骨头取出来，将自己手臂的血滴在骨头上试验；同时又杀了他自己的一个儿子，取他的骨头也作滴血试验，结果都可验证。从此，萧综就经常怀着叛变之心。
English: Xiao Zomei secretly dug up the grave of Qi Shuangwen, took out the bones, and tested the blood of his own arm on the bones; at the same time, he killed one of his own sons, and took his bones for a blood test, and the results could be verified. From then on, Xiao Zomei always had a rebellious heart.

古文：四年，出为使持节、都督南兗、兗、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、平北将军、南兗州刺史，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：普通四年，萧综出京城任使持节、都督南兖、兖、徐、青、冀五州诸军事、平北将军、南兖州刺史，高祖赐给他鼓吹一部。
English: In the ordinary four years, Xiao Zuo was sent to Beijing to hold the festival, and became the military governor of the five states of Nan'an, Qu'an, Xu, Qing, and Hebei, the general of Pingbei, and the historian of Nan'an. Gao Zu gave him a part of the propaganda.

古文：闻齐建安王萧宝寅在魏，遂使人入北与之相知，谓为叔父，许举镇归之。
现代文：萧综听说齐建安王萧实寅在魏，便派人到魏去舆萧宝寅结识，称萧实寅为叔父，答应将率领自己的辖地归顺魏。
English: Xiao Zui heard that Xiao Shiyin, the king of Qi Jian'an, was in Wei, so he sent someone to Wei to get to know Xiao Baotong, called Xiao Shiyin his uncle, and promised to lead his jurisdiction to Shun Wei.

古文：会大举北伐。六年，魏将元法僧以彭城降，高祖乃令综都督众军，镇于彭城，与魏将安豊王元延明相持。
现代文：正值高祖大举北伐，普通六年，魏将元法僧以彭城向高祖投降，高祖就命令萧综总领众军，在彭城镇守，与魏将安丰王元延明相对抗。
English: It was the time when Gaozhu launched the Northern Expedition. Six years later, Wei general and former monk Gaozhu surrendered to Gaozhu in Pengcheng. Gaozhu ordered Xiao Zui, the general of the army, to defend Pengcheng and oppose Wei general and king of Anfeng, Yuan Yanming.

古文：高祖以连兵既久，虑有衅生，敕综退军。
现代文：后来高祖认为连续战争时间已久，担心发生祸乱，便命令萧综撤军。
English: Later, Gaozu thought that the continuous war had been going on for a long time and, fearing disaster, ordered Xiao Simi to withdraw.

古文：综惧南归则无因复与宝寅相见，乃与数骑夜奔于延明，魏以为侍中、太尉、高平公、丹阳王，邑七千户，钱三百万，布绢三千匹，杂彩千匹，马五十匹，羊五百口，奴婢一百人。
现代文：萧综害怕南归后再也没有机会舆萧实寅相见，就与敷骑在夜裹逃奔到元延明那裹，向魏投降，魏命他为侍中、太尉、高平公、丹阳王，食邑七千户，赐钱三百万，布绢三千匹，杂彩千匹，马五十匹，羊五百只，奴婢一百人。
English: Xiao Zomei was afraid that after returning to the south, he would no longer have the opportunity to meet Miao Xiao Shizhong, so he and Shiki ran away in the night to Yuan Yanming, and surrendered to Wei. Wei ordered him to be a waiter, lieutenant, Gaoping, and Danyang king, to feed seven thousand households, to give three million money, three thousand cloth horses, one thousand variegated horses, fifty horses, five hundred sheep, and one hundred slaves.

古文：综乃改名纘，字德文，追为齐东昏服斩衰。
现代文：萧综就改名为萧缵，字德文，追悼齐废帝束昏侯，还为他按对待父亲的礼仪穿斩衰服守丧。
English: Xiao Zomei changed his name to Xiao Yiming, a German word, to mourn the death of the Qianlong Emperor, and also to wear mourning clothes for him according to the etiquette of treating his father.

古文：于是有司奏削爵土，绝属籍，改其姓为悖氏。
现代文：于是有司便奏请高祖革除他的官爵和削除封地，开除他的名籍，将他的姓改为悖氏。
English: Therefore, he asked Gao Zuge to strip him of his title and fief, expel him from the family register, and change his surname to Ruan.

古文：俄有诏复之，封其子直为永新侯，邑千户。
现代文：不久，又有韶命恢复他的名籍，并封他的儿子萧直为永新侯，食邑千户。
English: Not long after, he made a desperate effort to restore his family name, and named his son Xiao Zhi as Yongxin Hou (永新侯).

古文：大通二年，萧宝寅在魏据长安反，综自洛阳北遁，将赴之，为津吏所执，魏人杀之，时年四十九。
现代文：大通二年，萧宝寅在魏据长安反魏，萧综从洛阳向北逃走，将逃赴长安，被津吏捉住，魏人把他杀了，死时四十九岁。
English: In the second year of the Great Northern War, Xiao Baoying fought against Wei in the Wei stronghold of Chang'an. Xiao Zhan fled north from Luoyang and was about to flee to Chang'an when he was caught by the Jin officials. The Wei killed him and he died at the age of forty-nine.

古文：初，综既不得志，尝作《听钟鸣》、《悲落叶》辞，以申其志。
现代文：当初，萧综不得志时，曾作《听钟鸣》、《悲落叶辞》，用来表达他的思想感情。
English: At first, when Xiao Zuo was discouraged, he wrote "Listening to the Chimes" and "Lamentation of the Fallen Leaves" to express his thoughts and feelings.

古文：大略曰：听钟鸣，当知在帝城。
现代文：概要说：听钟声响，就知道身在皇城。
English: In a nutshell: When you hear the bells ringing, you know you are in the Imperial City.

古文：参差定难数，历乱百愁生。
现代文：世事变化很难有定敷，经历遇战乱，种种忧愁都因此而生。
English: It is difficult to have a firm foundation for the changes in the world, experience war, and all kinds of sorrows are born as a result.

古文：去声悬窈窕，来响急徘徊。
现代文：钟声传去深邃遥远，钟声传来急促回旋。
English: The bells go deep and far away, the bells come rushing around.

古文：谁怜传漏子，辛苦建章台。
现代文：谁人可怜那传奏时刻的人，他一年到头辛苦在建章台。
English: Who can pity the man who passes the baton of time, who toils all year long to build the podium?

古文：听钟鸣，听听非一所。
现代文：听钟声响，听钟声不是一处。
English: Hear the bells ringing, hear the bells ringing everywhere.

古文：怀瑾握瑜空掷去，攀松折桂谁相许？
现代文：空有美德和雄才，却被抛弃不用，谁能让我展示才能。
English: Empty of virtue and genius, but abandoned and useless, who will let me show my talent.

古文：昔朋旧爱各东西，譬如落叶不更齐。
现代文：从前的朋友和喜爱的人如今各自东西，像落叶一样不能再聚在一起。
English: Former friends and loved ones are now separated, like fallen leaves, and can no longer come together.

古文：漂漂孤雁何所栖，依依别鹤夜半啼。
现代文：我像漂泊的孤雁，何处容我栖身，我像依依分雕的白鹤，在半夜裹哀啼。
English: I am like a wandering lone goose, where can I find shelter? I am like a white crane, clinging to a carving, wailing in the middle of the night.

古文：听钟鸣，听此何穷极？
现代文：听钟声响，听这钟声多么无穷无尽。
English: Listen to the bells ringing, listen to the endlessness of the bells.

古文：二十有余年，淹留在京域。
现代文：二十余年，我滞留在京城。
English: For more than 20 years, I have stayed in Kyoto.

古文：窥明镜，罢容色，云悲海思徒掩抑。其《悲落叶》云：
现代文：照镜子，衹见我满面疲困愁容，悲痛的心绪像云海那样低沉。他的《悲落叶》说：
English: Looking in the mirror, I saw my face full of fatigue and sorrow, and my sad mood was as low as the sea of clouds. His "Leaves of Sorrow" said:

古文：悲落叶，连翩下重叠。
现代文：悲叹落叶，树叶连续不断落下，层层相叠。
English: Lamenting the fallen leaves, the leaves continue to fall, layer upon layer.

古文：落且飞，纵横去不归。
现代文：树叶落下且飞扬，有纵有横飞去不复回。
English: The leaves fall and fly, sometimes vertically, sometimes horizontally, never to return.

古文：悲落叶，落叶悲。人生譬如此，零落不可持。
现代文：悲叹落叶，落叶何悲，人生就像落叶，零落凋谢不可持久。
English: Lamenting the fallen leaves, fallen leaves what a pity, life is like a fallen leaf, fragmentary withering is not sustainable.

古文：悲落叶，落叶何时还？
现代文：悲叹落叶，落叶何时能返回?
English: Lamenting the fallen leaves, when can the fallen leaves return?

古文：夙昔共根本，无复一相关。
现代文：往日都生在同一根本上，如今却不再一起相互关联。
English: In the past, they were all born on the same root, but now they are no longer connected to each other.

古文：当时见者莫不悲之。
现代文：当时读了他的诗的人没有一个不感到悲切。
English: No one who read his poems at that time did not feel sad.

古文：武陵王纪，字世询，高祖第八子也。
现代文：武陵王蓝纪字世询，是高祖的第八个儿子。
English: Wuling Wang Lanji, also known as Shizhen, was the eighth son of Gaozu.

古文：少勤学，有文才，属辞不好轻华，甚有骨气。
现代文：他从小勤奋好学，很有文才，写文章不喜欢轻浮华靡，注重深刻感人。
English: Since childhood, he has been diligent and eager to learn. He is very talented in literature. He does not like to write frivolous and flashy articles, but focuses on deeply touching people.

古文：天监十三年，封为武陵郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：天监十三年，他被封为武陆锂王，食邑二千户。
English: In the 13th year of Tianjun, he was awarded the title of Wulu Lithium King, catering to two thousand households.

古文：历位宁远将军、琅邪、彭城二郡太守、轻车将军、丹阳尹。
现代文：历任宁远将军、琅邪彭垣二郡太守、轻车将军、丹阳尹。
English: He was successively appointed as Ningyuan General, Shiyan Pengyuan Second County Governor, Light Truck General, and Danyang Yin.

古文：出为会稽太守，寻以其郡为东扬州，仍为刺史，加使持节、东中郎将。
现代文：后出京任会稽太守，不久因会稽郡改为东扬州，他接任东扬州刺史，加使持节、东中郎将。
English: After that, he went to Beijing to be appointed as the grand steward of the association, and soon he was transferred to Dongyang Prefecture due to the change of the county of the association. He took over as the secretary of Dongyang Province, as well as the secretary of Jisai and the commander of Dongzhongro.

古文：征为侍中，领石头戍军事。
现代文：后朝廷征召他为侍中，领互亟廛军事。
English: Later, the imperial court conscripted him as a chamberlain to lead the military.

古文：出为宣惠将军、江州刺史。
现代文：后出京任宣惠将军、江州刺史。
English: After that, he went to Beijing as General Xuan Hui, and became the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：征为使持节、宣惠将军、都督扬、南徐二州诸军事、扬州刺史。
现代文：朝廷又召他为使持节、宣惠将军、都督扬南徐二州诸军事、扬州刺史。
English: The imperial court also called him to be the envoy of the festival, the promotion of the general, the governor of Yangnan, the military of the two states, and the history of Yangzhou.

古文：寻改授持节、都督益、梁等十三州诸军事、安西将军、益州刺史，加鼓吹一部。
现代文：不久又改授他为持节、都督益梁等十三州诸军事、安西将军、益塑刺史，加赐他鼓吹一部。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Jishie, the military commander of the Thirteen Provinces, the general of Anxi, and the history of Yishuo, and he was also awarded a part of the propaganda.

古文：大同十一年，授散骑常侍、征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：大同十一年，朝廷授他为散骑常侍、征西大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the eleventh year of the Datong era, the imperial court awarded him the titles of straggler, grand marshal of the Western Expedition, grand marshal of the Northern Expedition, and grand marshal of the Northern Expedition.

古文：初，天监中，震太阳门，成字曰 绍宗梁位唯武王 ，解者以为武王者，武陵王也，于是朝野属意焉。
现代文：以前，天监年间，雷击太阳门，雷击痕迹形成字 绍宗梁位唯武王 ，解释的人认为武王就是指武陵王，于是朝廷内外人心都归向他。
English: In the past, during the Celestial Prison, lightning struck the Gate of the Sun, and the lightning marks formed the word "Shao Zong Liang Yi Wei Wu Wang." The person who explained it thought that "Wu Wang" meant "Wuling Wang," so the hearts of people inside and outside the court all went to him.

古文：及太清中，侯景乱，纪不赴援。
现代文：到太遣年间，候景叛乱，竟然不出兵增援京师。
English: During the Taiyuan era, when Jing rebelled, he actually did not send troops to reinforce the Beijing Division.

古文：高祖崩后，纪乃僭号于蜀，改年曰天正。
现代文：高祖驾崩后，在蜀僭越称帝。他改年号为天正。
English: After Gao Zu passed away, he was crowned emperor in Shushan Yue. He changed his era name to Tian Zheng.

古文：立子圆照为皇太子，圆正为西阳王，圆满竟陵王，圆普南谯王，圆肃宜都王。
现代文：立子的儿子圆照为皇太子，圆正为西阳王，圆满为竟陵王，圆普为南谯王，圆肃为宜都王。
English: The son of the eldest son, Yuan Zhao, became the crown prince, Yuan Zheng became the king of Xiyang, Yuan Zheng became the king of Jingling, Yuan Pu became the king of Nanxi, and Yuan Su became the king of Yidu.

古文：以巴西、梓潼二郡太守永豊侯捴为征西大将军、益州刺史，封秦郡王。
现代文：任命巴西、梓潼二郡太守永丰侯萧揭为征西大将军、益州刺史，封为秦郡王。
English: He appointed Yongfeng Hou Xiao, the governor of Brazil and the second county of Zizhou, as the general of the Western Conquest and the governor of Yizhou as the king of Qin County.

古文：司马王僧略、直兵参军徐怦并固谏，纪以为贰于己，皆杀之。
现代文：司马王僧略、直兵参军徐怦一同再三直言规劝，萧纪认为他们对自己怀有二心，将他们杀了。
English: Sima Wang, a monk, and Xu Xi, a soldier who joined the army, repeatedly made direct exhortations together. Xiao Ji thought that they harbored double-mindedness and killed them.

古文：永豊侯捴叹曰： 王不免矣！
现代文：永丰侯萧摄叹息说： 武陵王不能避免败亡了!
English: Yongfeng Hou Xiao He sighed and said: King Wuling cannot avoid defeat!

古文：夫善人国之基也，今反诛之，不亡何待！ 
现代文：善人是国家的根基，现在武陵王反而杀害他们，不亡还等待什么! 
English: The good people are the foundation of the country, and now King Wuling is killing them instead. What are we waiting for?

古文：又谓所亲曰： 昔桓玄年号大亨，识者谓之 二月了 ，而玄之败实在仲春。
现代文：他又对亲近的人说： 以前，桓玄年号大亨，有见识的人说它是 二月了，桓玄的败亡确实在二月。
English: He also said to those close to him: In the past, Kuan Xuan was a tycoon, and people with insight said that it was February, and Kuan Xuan's defeat was indeed in February.

古文：今年曰天正，在文为 一止 ，其能久乎？ 
现代文：今年武陵王称年号为天正，正字就是 一止，他能长久吗? 
English: This year, Wuling Wang said that the year is Tianzheng, and the correct word is one stop. Can he last long?

古文：太清五年夏四月，纪帅军东下至巴郡，以讨侯景为名，将图荆陕。
现代文：太清五年夏四月，萧纪统率军队顺江束下到巴郡，以讨伐侯景为名，将谋取荆陕。
English: In April of the summer of the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, Xiao Ji led the army down the Shunjiang River to Bashun, and in the name of fighting Houjing, he would seek to capture Jinshan.

古文：闻西魏侵蜀，遣其将南梁州刺史谯淹回军赴援。
现代文：萧纪听说西魏进犯蜀，便派他的将领南梁州刺史谯淹率军回蜀增援。
English: When Xiao Ji heard that the Western Wei Dynasty had invaded Shu, he sent his general Nan Liang Zhou Zhi Shi and his army back to Shu for reinforcement.

古文：五月日，西魏将尉迟迥帅众逼涪水，潼州刺史杨乾运以城降之，迥分军据守，即趋成都。
现代文：五月甲戌日，西魏将军尉迟迥率军逼近涪水，潼州刺史杨干运率城向尉迟迥投降，尉迟迥分兵据守潼州，自己即刻率军奔赴成都。
English: On May 6th, the Western Wei general Lieutenant Lixuan led the army to approach Surabaya, the city of Zhangzhou Zhishi Yang Ganjun led the army to surrender to Lieutenant Lixuan, and the detachment of Lieutenant Lixuan was stationed in Zhangzhou. He immediately led the army to rush to Chengdu.

古文：丁丑，纪次于西陵，舳舻翳川，旌甲曜日，军容甚盛。
现代文：丁丑日，萧纪军队驻扎在西陵，船只掩盖了整个江面，旌旗盔甲辉映闪耀，军队士气十分旺盛。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, Xiao Ji's army was stationed in Xiling, the ships covered the entire river, the flag and armor shined brightly, and the army's morale was very strong.

古文：世祖命护军将军陆法和于硖口夹岸筑二垒，镇江以断之。
现代文：世祖命令护军将军陆法和在硖口两岸建筑两座防御堡垒，封锁大江，用来阻遏萧纪军队。
English: Shizu ordered the guard generals Lu Fa and He to build two defensive fortresses on both sides of the estuary to block the big river and to use them to stop Shou Ji's army.

古文：时陆纳未平，蜀军复逼，物情恇扰，世祖忧焉。
现代文：遣时，陆纳叛乱尚未平定，蜀军又来进逼，人心恐惧慌张，世祖对此很忧虑。
English: At that time, the Lu Na rebellion had not yet been quelled, the Shu army was advancing again, and the people were frightened and panicked. Shizhu was very worried about this.

古文：法和告急，旬日相继。
现代文：陆法和在十天之内连续几次告急。
English: There were several consecutive emergencies within ten days.

古文：世祖乃拔任约于狱，以为晋安王司马，撤禁兵以配之；并遣宣猛将军刘棻共约西赴。
现代文：世祖便提拔在狱中的任约任晋安王司马，撤下亲兵配给他率领，并派宣猛将军刘棻和任约一同向西去增援陆法和。
English: The founder of the dynasty then promoted Wang Sima of Jin'an, who was in prison at the time, to the highest rank, removed his own soldiers assigned to him to lead, and sent the fierce general Liu Bei and Ren You together to the west to reinforce Lufa.

古文：六月，纪筑连城，攻绝铁鏁。
现代文：六月，萧纪构筑连城，攻破横贯大江的铁链。
English: In June, Xiao Ji built Liancheng and broke the iron chain across the Yangtze River.

古文：世祖复于狱拔谢答仁为步兵校尉，配众一旅，上赴法和。
现代文：世祖又提拔在狱中的谢答仁为步兵校尉，配给他一旅军队，派他溯江而上去增援陆法和。
English: The patriarch also promoted Xie Dairen, who was in prison, to the rank of infantry captain, assigned him a brigade of troops, and sent him up the river to reinforce Lufa.

古文：世祖与纪书曰： 皇帝敬问假黄钺太尉武陵王：自九黎侵轶，三苗寇扰，天长丧乱，獯丑冯陵，虔刘象魏，黍离王室。
现代文：世祖给萧纪韶书说： 皇帝敬间假黄钹太尉武陵王：自从九黎侵犯袭击，三苗劫掠骚扰，天下长年遭受死丧祸乱，獯鬻侵凌，祸及宫阙，宗庙尽为禾黍，周王室由此覆亡。
English: The founder of the world said to Xiao Jizhe, "Emperor, I would like to pay my respects to the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang Di, the false Huang

古文：朕枕戈东望，泣血西浮，殒爱子于二方，无诸侯之八百，身被属甲，手贯流矢。
现代文：我心存军国，不能安寝，枕戈而卧，东望京城，悲痛泣血，西进讨贼，我的长子战死在湖州，我的小儿子为人质死于西魏，我没有周武王那样有八百诸侯的军事力量，但我能身披盔甲冲锋陷阵，像晋解张那样乱箭射穿了他的手仍能英勇战斗。
English: I keep the military nation in mind, I can't sleep peacefully, I lie on my back, I look at the capital in the east, I weep with sorrow and blood, I go to the west to catch thieves, my eldest son died in battle in Huzhou, my youngest son died as a hostage in the West Wei Dynasty, I don't have the military power of 800 princes like King Zhou Wu, but I can charge into battle wearing armor, and I can still fight bravely after an arrow shot through his hand like Jin Li Zhang.

古文：俄而风树之酷，万恨始缠，霜露之悲，百忧继集，扣心饮胆，志不图全。
现代文：不久，即遭到父母双亡不能奉养的惨痛，万种仇恨萦怀，思念双亲的哀思，百种忧愁聚集，我捶胸饮胆，悲愤至极，发誓要歼灭叛贼，决不顾自己生命的安全。
English: Soon after, I suffered the pain of losing my parents and not being able to take care of them, all kinds of hatreds, sorrows of missing my parents, and a hundred kinds of sorrows gathered, I beat my chest and drank my guts, sad and angry to the extreme, vowed to destroy the traitors, and never cared about the safety of my life.

古文：直以宗社缀旒，鲸鲵未剪，尝胆待旦，龚行天罚，独运四聪，坐挥八柄。
现代文：但是因为宗庙和社稷被逆贼挟持，凶恶的敌人没有消灭，我祇有刻苦自励，枕戈待旦，恭敬地奉行天子之命诛罚叛贼，我衹是运用四方聪明之士，安然指挥统御他们。
English: However, because the ancestral temple and the shrine were held hostage by the traitors, and the vicious enemy was not eliminated, I had to work hard, wait patiently, and respectfully carry out the order of the Son of Heaven to punish the traitors. We are using the four wise men to command and control them safely.

古文：虽复结坛待将，褰帷纳士，拒赤壁之兵，无谋于鲁肃；烧乌巢之米，不访于荀攸；才智将殚，金贝殆竭，傍无寸助，险阻备尝。遂得斩长狄于驹门，挫蚩尤于枫木。
现代文：虽然如此，又复建坛拜将，揭起帷幕招纳士人，抗拒赤壁的曹军，没有求鲁肃谋划，烧毁乌星的粮草，不曾向苟攸请教，我的才智将要竭尽，钱财几乎用完，别无丝毫援助，我经历了无数的艰险困阻，才能在驹门将长狄斩首，在枫林打败蚩尤。
English: In spite of this, I rebuilt the altar of worship, raised the curtain to recruit scholars, resisted Cao's army in Chibi, did not ask Lu Sui for a plan, burned the grain and grass of Wuxing, and did not ask Guo You for advice. My talent is about to be exhausted, money is almost used up, and there is no other help. I have experienced countless hardships and difficulties in order to behead Chang Di at the gate and defeat You You in the maple forest.

古文：怨耻既雪，天下无尘，经营四方，专资一力，方与岳牧，同兹清静。
现代文：怨仇已报，耻辱已除，天下太平，四方的营造规划，大家同心协力，我正与四岳十二州牧，同享这种清静无为的太平生活。
English: The grudge has been settled, the shame has been removed, the world is peaceful, the construction plan of the four sides, everyone is working together, I am sharing this quiet and peaceful life with the twelve states of the four mountains.

古文：隆暑炎赫，弟比何如？
现代文：盛暑时节，烈日如火，弟近来如何?
English: It's the height of summer, the sun is blazing, how's your younger brother doing these days?

古文：文武具僚，当有劳弊。
现代文：文武僚属，当劳苦疲敝。
English: They belong to the class of civil and military officers, and are exhausted from hard work.

古文：今遣散骑常侍、光州刺史郑安忠，指宣往怀。 
现代文：现派散骑常侍、光州刺史郑安忠，前去宣谕我的心意。 
English: Now I am sending my knight errant, Zheng Anzhong, the prince of Gwangju, to proclaim my will.

古文：仍令喻意于纪，许其还蜀，专制岷方。
现代文：并命郑安忠向萧纪晓谕自己的心意，答应让他回到蜀地去，专一控制岷方。
English: He also ordered Zheng Anzhong to tell Xiao Ji what he wanted and promised to let him return to Shu to control the Min side.

古文：纪不从命，报书如家人礼。
现代文：萧纪不服从世担的诏命，祇是按家人礼仪给世祖覆信。
English: Xiao Ji disobeyed the edict of the patriarch, and only answered the letter to the patriarch according to family etiquette.

古文：庚申，纪将侯睿率众缘山将规进取，任约、谢答仁与战，破之。
现代文：庚申日，芦起的将领翅率军沿山将规划进攻，鱼面、谢答仁与他交战，把谜打败。
English: On Goshun's Day, the generals led by Lu Zhizhi planned an attack along the mountain, and the fish noodles and Xie Dairen fought with him to defeat the riddle.

古文：既而陆纳平，诸军并西赴，世祖又与纪书曰： 甚苦大智！
现代文：接着，陆曲被平定，朝廷各路军队一齐向西进军，世担又给萧起信说： 主丰，你太辛苦了!
English: Then, Luqu was subdued, and all the armies of the imperial court marched westward together. The world council also sent a letter to Xiao Qifeng, saying: Lord Feng, you have worked too hard!

古文：季月烦暑，流金烁石，聚蚊成雷，封狐千里，以兹玉体，辛苦行阵。乃眷西顾，我劳如何？
现代文：夏季六月，天气酷热，金石销熔，蚊虫聚集，声如雷鸣，封狐出没往来千里害人，以你逭样高贵的身体辛苦行军列阵，我对你十分顾念关怀，你将如何受得了这样的辛劳。
English: In the summer of June, the weather is extremely hot, the rocks are melting, the mosquitoes are gathering, the sound is like thunder, the foxes have come and gone thousands of miles to harm people, with your noble body marching hard, I am very concerned about you, how will you bear such hard work.

古文：自獯丑凭陵，羯胡叛换，吾年为一日之长，属有平乱之功，膺此乐推，事归当璧。傥遣使乎，良所迟也。
现代文：自从獯鬻进犯侵凌，羯胡蛮横跋扈，我的年龄比你大些，适值有平定叛贼的功劳，因此受到众人拥戴而即位，天下平定之后，当将帝位让给天命所归之人。
English: I am older than you, and I have the merit of having subdued the traitors. Therefore, I was supported by everyone and ascended to the throne. After the world is subdued, the throne should be given to the person who is destined by fate.

古文：如曰不然，于此投笔。
现代文：倘若派遣使者前来，确实迟缓了。如果说这样不好，我便就此放下笔。
English: If it is true that there has been a delay in the arrival of the envoys, and if it is true that this is not good, then I will put down my pen.

古文：友于兄弟，分形共气。
现代文：兄弟之间的友爱，是形体分别，气息相连的。
English: The brotherly love between brothers is separate in form, but united in spirit.

古文：兄肥弟瘦，无复相代之期；让枣推梨，长罢欢愉之日。
现代文：兄弟身份不同，不再说有互相代替的时日；兄弟友爱推让的欢乐已很久没有享受。
English: Brothers with different status no longer say that there is a time to replace each other; the joy of brotherly love and concession has not been enjoyed for a long time.

古文：上林静拱，闻四鸟之哀鸣；宣室披图，嗟万始之长逝。
现代文：上林四周寂静，祇听见四鸟分飞的哀鸣；在宣室披阗地图，嗟叹兄弟的情谊远逝。
English: Shanglin is silent all around, only the wailing of four birds flying separately can be heard; in the prayer room, a map is carried, lamenting that the brotherhood is long gone.

古文：心乎爱矣，书不尽言。 
现代文：我心裹充满了对你的友爱，书信写不尽我的情意。 
English: My heart is so full of love for you that I cannot write you a letter.

古文：大智，纪之别字也。
现代文：大智是萧纪的别字。
English: Daichi is another word for Xiao Ji.

古文：纪遣所署度支尚书乐奉业至于江陵，论和缉之计，依前旨还蜀。
现代文：蓝起派了他所任命的度支尚书乐奉业到江陆，讨论和睦协力的计划，要求依照上次书信的旨意回到蜀地去。
English: Lan Qi sent Du Zhishang Shule, whom he had appointed, to Jianglu to discuss the plan of harmony and cooperation, and asked him to return to Shu in accordance with the intention of the previous letter.

古文：世祖知纪必破，遂拒而不许。
现代文：世担知道蕉起必定会被打败，便拒绝不答应他。
English: Shetan knew that Shaoqi would definitely be defeated, so he refused to refuse him.

古文：丙戌，巴兴民苻升、徐子初等斩纪硖口城主公孙晃，降于众军。
现代文：丙戌，巴束百姓苻升、徐子初等杀了萧纪的硖口城主公孙晃，向朝廷军投降。
English: He, Ba Sok people, and Xu Zi Junior all killed Xiao Ji's lord of Hukou, Sun Ao, and surrendered to the imperial army.

古文：王琳、宋簉、任约、谢答仁等因进攻侯睿，陷其三垒，于是两岸十余城遂俱降。
现代文：王琳、宋篷、任约、谢答仁等乘机进攻侯数，攻陷了他的三座堡垒，于是两岸十余城就都投降了。
English: Wang Lin, Song Canopy, Ren Yao, Xie Dairen and others took the opportunity to attack Hou Ji, and captured his three fortresses. As a result, more than ten cities on both sides of the Strait surrendered.

古文：将军樊猛获纪及其第三子圆满，俱杀之于硖口，时年四十六。
现代文：将军樊猛俘获了萧纪和他的第三子圆满，把他们都在硖口杀死，萧纪死时四十六岁。
English: The general fiercely captured Xiao Ji and his third son, Fulfillment, and killed them both in Hekou. Xiao Ji was forty-six years old when he died.

古文：有司奏请绝其属籍，世祖许之，赐姓饕餮氏。
现代文：有司奏请革除他的属籍，世祖同意这样做，赐给他姓饕餮。
English: Siso asked for his family name to be removed, and the patriarch agreed to do so, giving him the surname Zou.

古文：初，纪将僭号，妖怪非一。其最异者，内寝柏殿柱绕节生花，其茎四十有六，靃靡可爱，状似荷花。
现代文：当初，萧纪将要僭越称帝时，发生妖异苛陆的事情不止一起，其中最奇怪的是，寝宫柏殿环绕殿柱的斗拱长出花，它的茎有四十六根，细弱可爱，形状好像荷花。
English: At the beginning, when Xiao Ji was about to become emperor, there were more than one strange things happening. One of the strangest was that the archway of the bed chamber surrounding the pillars of the palace grew flowers. It had 46 stems, delicate and lovely, shaped like lotus flowers.

古文：识者曰： 王敦杖花，非佳事也。 
现代文：有见识的人说： 造就像王敦的仪仗上长出花来，不是好事。 
English: People with insight say: It is not a good thing for flowers to grow out of a ceremonial battle like Wang Dun.

古文：纪年号天正，与萧栋暗合，佥曰 天 字 二人 也， 正 字 一止 也。
现代文：萧纪年号天正，与萧栋的年号相同，人们都说天正的天字 二人 也，正字 一止 也。
English: Xiao Ji's era name is Tian Zheng, which is the same as Xiao Dong's era name. People say that Tian Zheng's word is 二人 也,正字一止 也.

古文：栋、纪僭号，各一年而灭。
现代文：萧栋、萧纪僭越称帝，各衹有一年便被消灭。
English: Xiaodong and Xiao Jizhong became emperors, and were eliminated one year later.

古文：临贺王正德，字公和，临川靖惠王第三子也。
现代文：临贺王萧正德字公和，是临川靖惠王的第三子。
English: Lin He Wang Xiao Zhengde Zi Gong He was the third son of Linchuan King Jing Hui.

古文：少粗险，不拘礼节。
现代文：少年时，粗暴邪恶，不讲究礼节。
English: When he was a boy, he was rude, evil, and did not care about etiquette.

古文：初，高祖未有男，养之为子。及高祖践极，便希储贰，后立昭明太子，封正德为西豊侯，邑五百户。
现代文：当初，高祖没有儿子时，便收养他作为儿子，等到高祖登上帝位，萧正德便希望立自己为太子，后来高祖立了昭明太子，封萧正德为西丰侯，食邑五百户。
English: At first, when Gao Zu did not have a son, he adopted him as his son. When Gao Zu ascended the throne, Xiao Zhengde hoped to establish himself as the crown prince. Later, Gao Zu established Prince Zhaoming, and Xiao Zhengde was given the title of Xifeng Hou, with 500 households.

古文：自此怨望，恒怀不轨，睥睨宫扆，觊幸灾变。
现代文：萧正德从此便心怀不满，经常怀着圃谋不轨的念头，觊觎皇帝的宝座，希望侥幸发生灾祸事变。
English: From then on, Xiao Zhengde harbored dissatisfaction in his heart, often harboring the idea of scheming, coveting the emperor's throne, hoping that a disaster would happen by chance.

古文：普通六年，以黄门侍郎为轻车将军，置佐史。
现代文：普通六年，他由黄门侍郎任轻车将军，设置佐史。
English: Six years later, he was promoted from Huangmen waiter to general of light vehicles, setting up Sashi.

古文：顷之，遂逃奔于魏，有司奏削封爵。
现代文：不久，他逃奔到魏，有司奏请高祖削除所封的官。
English: Not long after, he fled to Wei, and Siso asked Gaozu to remove the officials who had been sealed.

古文：七年，又自魏逃归，高祖不之过也。复其封爵，仍除征虏将军。
现代文：普通七年，萧正德又从魏逃了回来，高祖没有责备他，恢复给他的封爵，接着任命他为征虏将军。
English: Seven years later, Xiao Zhengde escaped from Wei and returned. Gaozu did not reproach him, restored his knighthood, and then appointed him as a conscript general.

古文：中大通四年，为信武将军、吴郡太守。
现代文：中大通四年，萧正德为信武将军、吴郡太守。
English: In the fourth year of middle and high school, Xiao Zhengde became the general of Xinwu and the governor of Wu County.

古文：征为侍中、抚军将军，置佐史，封临贺郡王，邑二千户，又加左卫将军。
现代文：后朝廷征召他为侍中、抚军将军，设佐史，并封他为临贺郡王，食邑二千户，又加左卫将军。
English: Later, the imperial court enlisted him as a chamberlain, a general of the army, and appointed him as Sashi, and made him the king of Linhe County, feeding two thousand households, as well as the general of the Left Division.

古文：而凶暴日甚，招聚亡命。
现代文：可是他日益凶暴，招集亡命之徒。
English: But he's becoming increasingly violent, recruiting desperadoes.

古文：侯景知其有奸心，乃密令诱说，厚相要结。
现代文：侯景知道他有奸谋，便秘密派人去诱惑游说他，和他密切交往相互勾结。
English: Hou Jing knew that he was plotting, so he secretly sent someone to tempt and entice him, and closely interacted and colluded with him.

古文：遗正德书曰： 今天子年尊，奸臣乱国，宪章错谬，政令颠倒，以景观之，计日必败。
现代文：侯景送信给萧正德说： 现在天子年纪大了，奸臣乱国，典章制度错乱，政令是非颠倒，依我看来，高祖定要败亡。
English: Hou Jing sent a message to Xiao Zhengde, saying: Now that the heavenly son is old, the treacherous vassals are ruining the country, the award system is out of order, the government order is upside down, in my opinion, Gao Zu is doomed to defeat.

古文：况大王属当储贰，中被废辱，天下义士，窃所痛心，在景愚忠，能无忿慨？
现代文：况且您本来应当立为太子的，中途遭到废弃，天下义士，私下都非常痛心，我侯景虽然愚忠，但对此也不能不忿恨感慨。
English: Moreover, you should have been crowned as the prince, but you were abandoned in the middle of the journey. The world is full of righteous people, and they are very sad in private. Although I am stupidly loyal, I cannot help but resent this.

古文：今四海业业，归心大王，大王岂得顾此私情，弃兹亿兆！
现代文：现在天下动乱不安，人心都归向您，您怎么能衹顾念父子的一己私情，丢弃这亿万人民。
English: Now the whole world is in turmoil, and people's hearts are turning to you. How can you disregard the personal feelings of your father and son and abandon these hundreds of millions of people?

古文：景虽不武，实思自奋。
现代文：我虽然没有能力，但我确实想奋发而起。
English: I don't have the ability, but I really want to push myself.

古文：愿王允副苍生，鉴斯诚款。 正德览书大喜曰： 侯景意暗与我同，此天赞也。 
现代文：希望您顺从天下人民的愿望，明察我的一片诚心萧正德看了侯景的信，非常高兴，说： 侯景的意思与我不谋而合，这是上天赞助我。 
English: Xiao Zhengde read Hou Jing's letter and was very happy, saying, "Hou Jing's meaning coincides with mine. This is Heaven's support for me."

古文：遂许之。
现代文：便答应了侯景的要求。
English: He agreed to Hou Jing's request.

古文：及景至江，正德潜运空舫，诈称迎荻，以济景焉。
现代文：等到侯景到达江边，萧正德秘密运来空船，假说去装载荻苇，实际用来运载侯景渡江。
English: When Hou Jing arrived at the river, Xiao Zhengde secretly transported an empty boat, which was supposed to be loaded with rafts, but was actually used to carry Hou Jing across the river.

古文：朝廷未知其谋，犹遣正德守硃雀航。
现代文：朝廷不知道萧正德的阴谋，还派他去守朱雀航。
English: The imperial court did not know about Xiao Zhengde's plot and sent him to guard Zhu Zakhang.

古文：景至，正德乃引军与景俱进，景推正德为天子，改年为正平元年，景为丞相。
现代文：侯景到达朱雀航，萧正德就率领军队与侯景一同进攻京城。侯景拥立萧正德为天子，改年号为正平元年，侯景为宰相。
English: When Hou Jing arrived at Suzakhang, Xiao Zhengde led the army to attack the capital together with Hou Jing. Hou Jing held Xiao Zhengde as the son of heaven, the year was changed to Zhengping in the first year, and Hou Jing was the prime minister.

古文：台城没，复太清之号，降正德为大司马。
现代文：攻陷台城后，侯景恢复太清的年号，把萧正德降为大司马。
English: After the capture of Taicheng, Houjing restored the era name of Taiching and demoted Xiao Zhengde to the rank of major general.

古文：正德有怨言，景闻之，虑其为变，矫诏杀之。
现代文：萧正德有怨言，侯景知道后，担心他叛乱，便假传圣旨把他杀了。
English: Xiao Zhengde had a complaint. After Hou Jing found out about it, he was worried that he would rebel, so he killed him by passing on a fake edict.

古文：河东王誉，字重孙，昭明太子第二子也。
现代文：河东王萧誉字重孙，是昭明太子的第二个儿子。
English: King Xiaoyu of Hedong was the second son of Prince Zhao Ming.

古文：普通二年，封枝江县公。
现代文：普通二年，他被封为枝江县公。
English: Two years later, he was awarded the title of Edo prefectural governor.

古文：中大通三年，改封河东郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：中大通三年，高祖改封他为河东郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Gao Zu changed his title to the county king of Hedong, with 2,000 households in the food village.

古文：除宁远将军、石头戍军事。
现代文：并任命他为宁远将军、石头戍军事。
English: He also appointed him as the general of Ningyuan and the military commander of Shijiazhuang.

古文：出为琅邪、彭城二郡太守。
现代文：后来调他出京城为琅邪、彭城二郡太守。
English: Later, he was transferred out of Beijing to suppress evil and became the supreme governor of the two counties of Pengcheng.

古文：还除侍中、轻车将军，置佐史。
现代文：后又调回京城任侍中、轻车将军，设置佐史。
English: Later, he was transferred back to Kyoto to serve as a chamberlain and commander of a light carriage, and was assigned as assistant historian.

古文：出为南中郎将、湘州刺史。
现代文：后又调出为南中郎将、湘州刺史。
English: Later, he was transferred to Minami Churoshige and Shoshu Sashi.

古文：未几，侯景寇京邑，誉率军入援，至青草湖，台城没，有诏班师，誉还湘镇。
现代文：不久，侯景侵犯京城，萧誉率领军队前来增援，军队抵达青草湖时，台城已陷没，有诏命收兵回转，萝誉率军回到湘州镇守。
English: Not long after, Hou Jing invaded Beijing, and Xiao Rong led the army to come to reinforce. When the army arrived at Qingcao Lake, Taicheng had already fallen, and there was an imperial command to gather the troops and turn around. Luo Rong led the army back to Hunan.

古文：时世祖军于武城，新除雍州刺史张纘密报世祖曰： 河东起兵，岳阳聚米，共为不逞，将袭江陵。 
现代文：当时世祖率军驻扎在，新任命的雍州刺史张纘密报世祖说： 蔻誉在河东招兵起事，在岳阳聚集粮草，这都是想干不法的事情，他们打算袭击江陵。 
English: At that time, Shizuo was stationed there with his army, and the newly-appointed Yangzhou chief historian Zhang Yimi reported to Shizuo, saying, "Shizuo is recruiting soldiers in Hedong and gathering grain and grass in Yueyang. They are all trying to do something illegal. They are planning to attack Jiangling.

古文：世祖甚惧，因步道间还，遣谘议周弘直至誉所，督其粮众。
现代文：世担听了十分恐惧，就从小路步行回江陵，派谘议周弘直到萧誉那襄，监督萧誉粮草和军队。
English: After listening to the fears of the world, he walked back to Gangneung from the path, sent Zhou Hong to Xiaoyang for consultation, and supervised Xiaoyang's grain, grass and army.

古文：誉曰： 各自军府，何忽隶人？ 
现代文：萧誉说： 我们都是太守身份，为什么忽然要隶属别人? 
English: Xiao Ying said, "We are all Tai Shou identity, why do we suddenly want to belong to others?

古文：前后使三反，誉并不从。
现代文：世祖前后三次派人前去，萧誉都拒不服从世祖。
English: The patriarch sent people forward three times, and all of them refused to obey the patriarch.

古文：世祖大怒，乃遣世子方等征之，反为誉所败死。
现代文：世担大怒，就派世子芦查壁去征讨他，友等反而被芦誉打败战死。
English: The world was enraged, so it sent its heir, Lu Chabiao, to fight him, but his friends were defeated and killed by Lu Yu.

古文：又令信州刺史鲍泉讨誉，并与书陈示祸福，许其迁善。
现代文：世祖又命令信州刺史鲍泉去讨伐萧誉，并给陈示书信，陈述指明祸福，许他改过从善。
English: The patriarch also ordered the Shinshu statesman Bao Quan to fight against the evil reputation, and to show him a letter, stating the evil and good, and allowing him to do good.

古文：誉不答，修浚城池，为拒守之计。谓鲍泉曰： 败军之将，势岂语勇？
现代文：萧誉不回覆，加固城墙，加深护城河，作拒守的打算；萧誉对鲍泉说： 败军的将领，还有什么资格谈勇。
English: Xiao Rong did not reply, but strengthened the city wall, deepened the moat, and planned to refuse to defend the city. Xiao Rong said to Bao Quan: General of the defeated army, what qualifications do you have to talk about courage?

古文：欲前即前，无所多说。 
现代文：你想打就向前打，无须多说。 
English: If you want to play, play forward, there's no need to say more.

古文：泉军于石椁寺，誉帅众逆击之，不利而还。
现代文：鲍泉军队驻在石椁寺，萧誉率领众军迎击他，萧誉没有攻下鲍泉军营而退回。
English: Bao Quan's army was stationed at Shijiazhuang Temple, and Xiao Rong led the army to meet him. Xiao Rong did not capture the Bao Quan military camp and retreated.

古文：泉进军于橘洲，誉又尽锐攻之，不克。
现代文：鲍泉又进军驻扎在橘洲，萧誉又出动了全部精锐部队攻打他，没有打胜。
English: Bao Quan also marched into the army and stationed in Tangerine Island, Xiaoyu also sent out all the elite troops to attack him, but did not win.

古文：会已暮，士卒疲弊，泉因出击，大败之，斩首三千级，溺死者万余人。
现代文：遣时，正值日落天黑，士兵都疲劳无力，鲍泉乘机出击，把萧誉打得大败，斩首三千级，淹死在水裹的有万余人。
English: At the time of sending, it was sunset and dark, the soldiers were tired and weak, Bao Quan took the opportunity to attack, defeated Xiao Yuan, beheaded three thousand, and drowned more than ten thousand people in the water.

古文：誉于是焚长沙郭邑，驱居民于城内，鲍泉度军围之。
现代文：萧誉因此就焚毁长沙外城，把居民驱赶到城内，鲍泉调集军队包围了长沙城。
English: As a result, Xiao Ren set fire to the outer city of Changsha and drove the residents into the city. Bao Quan mobilized troops and surrounded Changsha City.

古文：誉幼而骁勇，兼有胆气，能抚循士卒，甚得众心。
现代文：萧誉幼年时就勇猛威武，并很有胆量，能够安抚士兵，很受士兵的拥护。
English: When Xiao Rong was young, he was brave and powerful, and he had a lot of courage. He was able to pacify the soldiers and was well supported by the soldiers.

古文：及被围既久，虽外内断绝，而备守犹固。
现代文：及至被围困时间很久，虽然内外断绝，但守备尚很坚固。
English: It was besieged for a long time, and although it was cut off from the outside and the inside, its defenses were still strong.

古文：后世祖又遣领军将军王僧辩代鲍泉攻誉，僧辩筑土山以临城内，日夕苦攻，矢石如雨，城中将士死伤者太半。
现代文：后来世祖又派领军将军王坦峦代替鲍塞攻打芦登，王仅避构筑土山而靠近城内，日夜苦攻，箭和石头像雨一样，城中的将士死伤过半。
English: Later, the ancestor sent the leading army general Wang Tianzhong to attack Ludong in place of Bose. Wang only avoided building a mound of earth and came close to the city. He attacked day and night. The arrows and stones were like rain. More than half of the soldiers in the city were killed or injured.

古文：誉窘急，乃潜装海船，将溃围而出。
现代文：萧誉非常窘迫着急，就暗地装备大船，准备突围而出。
English: Xiao Rong was very embarrassed and anxious, so he secretly equipped a large ship and prepared to break out of the encirclement.

古文：会其麾下将慕容华引僧辩入城，誉顾左右皆散，遂被执，谓守者曰： 勿杀我！
现代文：正值萧誉的部下将领慕容华引导王世道入城，芦登环顾见左右亲近的人都溃散了，便被捉住。
English: At that time, his subordinate general, Mu Ronghua, was leading Wang Shidao into the city. Lu Deng looked around and saw that everyone close to him was scattered, and he was caught.

古文：得一见七官，申此谗贼，死亦无恨。 
现代文：萧誉对看守他的人说： 不要杀我，我要和世祖见上一面，我要斥责这个谗害别人的贼子，死也无恨。 
English: Xiao You said to his guards, "Don't kill me. I want to meet my ancestor. I want to rebuke this thief who preys on others. There is no hatred in death."

古文：主者曰： 奉命不许。 
现代文：主管看守他的人说： 奉命不准许。 
English: The person in charge of guarding him said, "I've been ordered not to let you leave."

古文：遂斩之，传首荆镇，世祖反其首以葬焉。
现代文：于是就斩了他，将他的头传送到荆镇，世祖将他的头送回去埋葬了他。
English: So he beheaded him and sent his head to the town of Jing. The ancestor sent his head back and buried him.

古文：初，誉之将败也，私引镜照面，不见其头；又见长人盖屋，两手据地瞰其斋；又见白狗大如驴，从城而出，不知所在。
现代文：起初，萧誉将失败时，暗地裹拿镜子照面孔，不见他的头；又看见一个高大的人趴在屋上，两只手撑在地上俯看他的肚脐；又看见白狗大如驴，从城裹出去，不知到哪裹去了。
English: At first, when Xiao Rongcheng failed, he secretly wrapped a mirror around his face to look at his face and could not see his head; he also saw a tall man lying on the roof with both hands on the ground looking down at his navel; he also saw a white dog as big as a donkey, wrapped up and out of the city, and he did not know where he was wrapped up.

古文：誉甚恶之，俄而城陷。
现代文：萧誉很厌恶这种现象，不久，城就被攻陷。
English: Xiaoyu was disgusted by this phenomenon, and soon the city was captured.

古文：史臣曰：萧综、萧正德并悖逆猖狂，自致夷灭，宜矣。
现代文：史臣曰：萧综、萧正德都叛逆想随心所欲，自己招致灭亡，也是应当的。
English: Shichen said: Xiao Siming and Xiao Zhengde both rebelled and wanted to do whatever they wanted, and they caused their own demise, which was also appropriate.

古文：太清之寇，萧纪据庸、蜀之资，遂不勤王赴难，申臣子之节；及贼景诛剪，方始起兵，师出无名，成其衅祸。
现代文：太清年间，侯景叛乱，侵犯京师，萧纪据有庸、蜀丰富的资财，却不率军去救援朝廷的危难，表明臣子的气节；等到逆贼侯景被诛灭，他开始起兵，师出无名，构成灾祸。
English: During the Qing Dynasty, when Houjing rebelled and attacked the Beijing division, Xiao Ji, who was said to have wealth and wealth, but did not lead the army to rescue the danger of the imperial court, showed the temperament of a courtier; until the traitor Houjing was annihilated, he began to raise an army, and the division was unknown, which constituted a disaster.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼!
English: Alas!

古文：身当管、蔡之罚，盖自贻哉。
现代文：他像西周乱国之臣管叔与蔡叔那样遭受诛减，祸害是他自己带来的。
English: Like the Western Zhou dynasty's vassals, Guan Xiu and Cai Xiu, he was reduced to penury, a calamity he brought on himself.

