古文：李自成，米脂人，世居怀远堡李继迁寨。
现代文：李自成，米脂人。世代居住在怀远堡李继迁寨。
English: Li Zicheng, a man of rice and fat. He has lived in Huaiyuan Castle for generations.

古文：父守忠，无子，祷于华山，梦神告曰： 以破军星为若子。 
现代文：父亲李守忠，婚后多年无子，便到华山祈祷，梦见神告诉他说 ：我把破军星给你做儿子。 
English: His father, Li Shouzhong, had been childless for many years after his marriage, so he went to Mount Hua to pray. He dreamed that God told him, "I will give you a star for a son."

古文：已，生自成。
现代文：后来生下了自成。
English: She later gave birth to Zicheng.

古文：幼牧羊于邑大姓艾氏，及长，充银川驿卒。
现代文：自成小时给本乡大姓艾氏牧羊，长大后，充当银川驿站的站卒。
English: In his spare time, he herded sheep for his great-grandfather Ai, and when he grew up, he worked as a porter at the Yinchuan Railway Station.

古文：善骑射，斗很无赖，数犯法。
现代文：他善于骑射，凶狠无赖，多次犯法。
English: He is good at riding and shooting, a fierce scoundrel, and has repeatedly violated the law.

古文：知县晏子宾捕之，将置诸死，脱去为屠。
现代文：知县晏子宾逮捕了他，将要置他于死地，被他逃出，当了屠夫。
English: He was arrested by the county magistrate of Zhixian, who was going to put him to death, but he escaped and became a butcher.

古文：天启末，魏忠贤党乔应甲为陕西巡抚，朱童蒙为延绥巡抚，贪黩不诘盗，盗由是始。
现代文：天启末年，魏忠贤的党羽乔应甲做陕西巡抚，朱童蒙做延绥巡抚，他们贪污渎职，不查办盗贼，盗贼从此开始作乱。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, Wei Zhongxian's followers Qiao Yingran became the governor of Shaanxi Province, and Zhu Tongmen became the governor of Yan'an Province. They committed corruption and dereliction of duty, and did not investigate the thieves, and the thieves began to make trouble.

古文：崇祯元年，陕西大饥，延绥缺饷，固原兵劫州库。
现代文：崇祯元年，陕西发生严重饥荒，延绥缺少粮饷，固原守军抢劫了本州仓库。
English: In the first year of Chongzhen, a severe famine occurred in Shaanxi, Yan'an was short of grain, and the defenders of Guyuan looted the Honshu warehouse.

古文：白水贼王二，府谷贼王嘉胤，宜川贼王左挂、飞山虎、大红狼等，一时并起。
现代文：白水王二，府谷王嘉胤，宜川王左挂、飞山虎、大红狼等人，一时间都起来作乱。
English: Baishui Wang II, Fugu Wang Jia Lin, Yigawa Wang Zuo Hang, Flying Mountain Tiger, Big Red Wolf and others all rose up to create a disturbance.

古文：有安塞马贼高迎祥者，自成舅也，与饥民王大梁聚众应之。
现代文：安塞马贼高迎祥，是李自成的舅舅，也与饥民王大梁聚众响应。
English: Ansei horse thief Gao Yingxiang is the uncle of Li Zicheng, and has also rallied the public in response to Wang Daliang, the king of the hungry.

古文：迎祥自称闯王，大梁自称大梁王。
现代文：高迎祥自称闯王，王大梁自称大梁王。
English: Gao Yingxiang claimed to be the champion, and Wang Daliang claimed to be the king.

古文：二年春，诏以杨鹤为三边总督，捕之。
现代文：二年春，诏令以杨鹤为三边总督，捉拿盗贼。
English: In the spring of the second year, Yang He was appointed as the governor of the three sides to catch the thieves.

古文：参政刘应遇击斩王二、王大梁，参政洪承畴击破王左挂，贼稍稍惧。
现代文：参政刘应遇击杀王二、王大梁，参政洪承畴击破王左挂，贼人稍稍害怕了。
English: Liu Ying, a member of the Political Bureau, killed Wang Er and Wang Daliang, and Hong Chengzong, a member of the Political Bureau, defeated Wang Zuogang. The thieves were a little scared.

古文：会京师戒严，山西巡抚耿如杞勤王兵哗而西，延绥总兵吴自勉、甘肃巡抚梅之焕勤王兵亦溃，与群盗合。
现代文：正值京师戒严，山西巡抚耿如杞的勤王兵哗变西走，延绥总兵吴自勉、甘肃巡抚梅之焕的勤王兵也溃散，这些人多与群贼会合。
English: At the time of martial law in Beijing, the royalist soldiers of the Shanxi governor Geng Ruchen mutinied and went west, and the royalist soldiers of the Yancheng general Wu Zimin and the Gansu governor Meizhihuan also broke up. Most of these people joined the bandits.

古文：延绥巡抚张梦鲸恚死，承畴代之，召故总兵杜文焕督延绥、固原兵，便宜剿贼。
现代文：延绥巡抚张梦鲸含恨而死，洪承畴取代了他，并召来原总兵官杜文焕，让他督领延绥、固原的军队，得以相机剿贼。
English: The governor of Yancheng, Zhang Mengwhal, died with bitterness, and Hong Chengzhang replaced him, and summoned the former commander-in-chief, Du Wenhuan, to let him lead the army of Yancheng and Guhuan, and get the camera.

古文：三年，王左挂、王子顺、苗美等战屡败，乞降。
现代文：三年，王左挂、王子顺、苗美等人屡战屡败，乞请投降。
English: For three years, Wang Zuoguang, Oji Shun, Miao Mei and others repeatedly lost battles and begged for surrender.

古文：而王嘉胤掠延安、庆阳间，杨鹤抚之，不听，从神木渡河犯山西。
现代文：而王嘉胤在延安、庆阳一带抢掠，杨鹤去招抚，他不听，从神木渡过黄河进犯山西。
English: Wang Jiayin, on the other hand, plundered in Yan'an and Qingyang. Yang He tried to cajole him, but he did not listen, and crossed the Yellow River from Shenmu to invade Shanxi.

古文：是时，秦地所征曰新饷，曰均输，曰间架，其目日增，吏因缘为奸，民大困。
现代文：那时候，陕西征取的名目有新饷、均输、间架等，并且还不断增加，官吏因缘为奸，人民非常困苦。
English: At that time, the items requisitioned in Shaanxi included new rafts, uniform transport, and intermediate racks, and they continued to increase. Government officials were complicit in the situation, and the people were very poor.

古文：以给事中刘懋议，裁驿站，山、陕游民仰驿糈者，无所得食，俱从贼，贼转盛。
现代文：因给事中刘懋的建议，朝廷裁撤驿站，使晋陕一带靠驿站粮饷生活的游民失去粮食来源，纷纷依从了盗贼，贼势因而转盛。
English: As a result of Liu Wei's suggestion in the matter, the imperial court abolished the mule station, so that the homeless people in the area of Jin and Shaanxi who lived on mule station grain lost their food source, and they followed the thieves one after another. As a result, the thieves prospered.

古文：兵部郎中李继贞奏曰： 延民饥，将尽为盗，请以帑金十万振之。 
现代文：兵部郎中李继贞上奏说： 延绥百姓饥馑，将全部为盗，请用库金十万去赈济。 
English: Li Jizhen, a member of the Ministry of Military Affairs, said in his report: "If the people of Yancheng are starving, they will all be robbed. Please use 100,000 yuan from the treasury to help them.

古文：帝不听。
现代文：皇上不听。
English: Emperor Xuan did not listen.

古文：而嘉胤已袭破黄甫川、清水、木瓜三堡，陷府谷、河曲。
现代文：而王嘉胤已经袭破了黄甫川、清水、木瓜三堡，攻陷府谷、河曲。
English: Meanwhile, Wang Jia-yin has broken through the three fortresses of Huangfu River, Clear Water and Papaya, and captured Fugu and Hequ.

古文：又有神一元、不沾泥、可天飞、郝临庵、红军友、点灯子、李老柴、混天猴、独行狼诸贼，所在蜂起，或掠秦，或东入晋，屠陷城堡。
现代文：又有神一元、不沾泥、可天飞、郝临庵、红军友、点灯子、李老柴、混天猴、独行狼等贼，到处起事，或抢掠陕西，或东入山西，屠陷城堡。
English: In addition, there are thieves such as the god of one yuan, not sticking to mud, flying in the sky, visiting the hermitage, the Red Army comrades, lighting lamps, Li Laochai, mixed sky monkeys, and lone wolves, who start trouble everywhere, or loot Shaanxi, or go east into Shanxi, and destroy the castle.

古文：官兵东西奔击，贼或降或死，旋灭旋炽。
现代文：官兵东西奔击，贼人或降或死，但也旋灭旋炽。
English: Officers and soldiers rushed from one place to another, either surrendering or dying, but they also fought fiercely.

古文：延安贼张献忠亦聚众据十八寨，称八大王。
现代文：延安贼张献忠也聚众占据了十八寨，称八大王。
English: Zhang Xianzhong, the Yan'an thief, also gathered a crowd to occupy the 18 villages, calling them the eight kings.

古文：四年，孤山副将曹文诏破贼河曲，王嘉胤遁去。
现代文：四年，孤山副将曹文诏在河曲破贼，王嘉胤遁走。
English: In four years, Cao Wenzhao, vice-commander of the Lone Mountain, broke up the thieves in Hequ, and Wang Jiayin led them away.

古文：已，复自岳阳突犯泽、潞，为左右所杀，其党共推王自用号紫金梁者为魁。
现代文：后来，他又从岳阳突然进犯泽州、潞安府，被左右所杀，他的党羽共推外号叫紫金梁的王自用做首领。
English: Later, he suddenly attacked Zhezhou and Luanfu from Yueyang, and was killed by both sides. His followers called him "Zi Jinliang" (紫金梁) and made him their leader.

古文：自用结群贼老回回、曹操、八金刚、扫地王、射塌天、阎正虎、满天星、破甲锥、刑红狼、上天老、蝎子块、过天星、混世王等及迎祥、献忠共三十六营，众二十余万，聚山西。
现代文：王自用联合老回回、曹操、八金刚、扫地王、射塌天、阎正虎、满天星、破甲锥、邢红狼、上天龙、蝎子块、过天星、混世王等人以及高迎祥、张献忠共三十六营，二十余万人，聚集在山西。
English: Wang Ziyi combined with Lao Hu Hu, Cao Cao, Eight Kings, Sweeping King, Shooting Sky, Yan Zhenghu, Sky Full of Stars, Broken Armor Cone, Crimson Wolf, Heavenly Dragon, Scorpion Block, Transcendental Star, Mixed-up King and others, as well as Gao Yingxiang and Zhang Xianzhong, a total of 36 battalions, more than 200,000 people, gathered in Shanxi.

古文：自成乃与兄子过往从迎祥，与献忠等合，号闯将，未有名。
现代文：李自成于是与哥哥的儿子李过前往追随高迎祥，与张献忠等会合，号称闯将，还没有出名。
English: Li Zicheng then went with his brother's son Li Guo to follow Gao Yingxiang and meet with Zhang Xianzhong and others. He was known as a breakout star, but was not yet famous.

古文：杨鹤抚贼不效被逮，洪承畴代鹤，张福臻代承畴，督诸将曹文诏、杨嘉谟剿贼，所向克捷，陕地略定。
现代文：杨鹤因招抚无效被朝廷逮捕，由洪承畴取而代之，张福臻则取代洪承畴，督领曹文诏、杨嘉谟等将领剿贼，所向无敌，陕西地区基本安定了。
English: Yang He was arrested by the imperial court due to his ineffectual persuasion, and was replaced by Hong Chengzhuang, while Zhang Fuzhen replaced Hong Chengzhuang. Generals such as Cao Wenzhao and Yang Jia Mu, who were in charge, were invincible, and the Shaanxi region was basically stable.

古文：而山西贼大盛，剽掠宁乡、石楼、稷山、闻喜、河津间。
现代文：而山西贼势大盛，在宁乡、石楼、稷山、闻喜、河津一带抢掠。
English: Meanwhile, the Shanxi bandits were in full swing, robbing and pillaging in Ningxiang, Shilou, Lushan, Wensi, and the area around Kawazu.

古文：五年，贼分道四出，连陷大宁、隰州、泽州、寿阳诸州县，全晋震动。
现代文：五年，贼人分道四出，连破大宁、隰州、泽州、寿阳等州县，全晋震动。
English: In the fifth year, the bandits went their separate ways and even broke into the counties of Daning, Zhangzhou, Zezhou and Shouyang, shaking the whole of Jin.

古文：乃罢巡抚宋统殷，以许鼎臣代之，与宣大总督张宗衡分督诸将。
现代文：朝廷于是罢免巡抚宋统殷，用许鼎臣来代替，与宣府大同的总督张宗衡分别督领诸将。
English: As a result, the imperial court dismissed the governor Song Tongyin and replaced him with Xu Dingcheng, and appointed Zhang Zongheng, the governor of Xuanfu Datong, to lead the generals.

古文：宗衡督虎在威、驾人龙、左良玉等兵八千人，驻平阳，责以平阳、泽、潞四十一州县。
现代文：张宗衡督领虎大威、贺人龙、左良玉等八千将士，驻扎平阳，负责平阳、泽州、潞安等四十一个州县。
English: Commander Zhang Zongheng led eight thousand soldiers including Hu Dawei, He Renlong and Zuo Liangyu, stationed in Pingyang and responsible for the forty-one prefectures and counties including Pingyang, Zhezhou and Jian'an.

古文：鼎臣督张应昌、颇希牧、艾万年兵七千人，驻汾州，责以汾、太、沁辽三十八州县。
现代文：许鼎臣督领张应昌、颇希牧、艾万年等七千将士，驻扎汾州，负责汾州、太原、沁州、辽州等三十八个州县。
English: Xu Dingvich led 7,000 soldiers including Zhang Yingchang, Po Ximu, and Ai Wanyin, stationed in Ganzhou, and was responsible for 38 counties including Ganzhou, Taiyuan, Ganzhou, and Liaozhou.

古文：贼亦转入磨盘山，分众为三： 阎正虎据交城、文水，窥太原；邢红狼、上天龙据吴城，窥汾州；自用、献忠突沁州、武乡，陷辽州。
现代文：贼也转入磨盘山，将部众分为三支：阎正虎据交城、文水，窥视太原；邢红狼、上天龙据吴城，窥视汾州；王自用、张献忠突袭沁州、武乡，攻陷辽州。
English: The thieves also turned to the Millpan Mountain and divided the followers into three branches: Yan Zhenghu, according to Jiaocheng and Wenshui, spied on Taiyuan; Zou Honglu, the Heavenly Dragon, according to Wucheng, spied on Ganzhou; Wang Ziyi, Zhang Xianzhong, raided Ganzhou and Wuxiang, and invaded Liaozhou.

古文：六年春，官兵共进力击。
现代文：六年春，官兵共进奋力击贼。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, officers and soldiers marched together to fight against the thieves.

古文：自用惧，乞降于故锦衣佥事张道浚。
现代文：王自用害怕了，向原锦衣卫佥事张道浚乞请投降。
English: Wang Ziyi was afraid, and he begged the former Jin, Yi and Wei generals to surrender.

古文：约未定，阳和兵袭之。
现代文：双方还没有约定好，阳和兵袭击他。
English: The two sides have not yet reached an agreement, and Yang He's soldiers attack him.

古文：贼怒，败约去。
现代文：贼人愤怒，便撤约而去。
English: Enraged, the thief withdrew from the contract and left.

古文：会总兵官曹文诏率陕西兵至，偕诸将猛如虎、虎大威、颇希牧、艾万年、张应昌等合剿，屡战皆大克，前后杀混世王、满天星、姬关锁、翻山动，掌世王、显道神等，破自用、献忠、老回回、蝎子块、扫地王诸贼。
现代文：正好总兵官曹文诏率陕西兵来到，与猛如虎、虎大威、颇希牧、艾万年、张应昌等将领联合剿杀，屡战皆大捷，前后杀死混世王、满天星、姬关锁、翻山动、掌世王、显道神等人，击破王自用、张献忠、老回回、蝎子块、扫地王等贼。
English: Just at that time, the general Cao Wenzhao led the Shaanxi soldiers to come, and fought with the generals such as Meng Rugao, Tiger Dawei, Po Xi Mu, Ai Wan Nian, Zhang Yingchang and so on. They were victorious in many battles. They killed the kings of the mixed world, Man Tian Xing, Kiguan Zhao, Qian Shan Zong, Shao Shiyang, and Xian Tao Shen, and defeated the thieves such as Wang Ziyi, Zhang Xian Zhong, Lao Hui Hui, Scorpion Block, and Sweeping King.

古文：其后，自用又为川将邓玘射杀之。
现代文：后来，王自用又被川将邓王己射杀。
English: Later, Wang Ziyi was shot and killed by the river general Deng Wangji.

古文：山西三大盗俱败。
现代文：山西三大盗皆败。
English: Shanxi's three biggest thieves have all been defeated.

古文：初，贼之破泽州也，分其众，南逾太行，掠济源、清化、修武，围怀庆。
现代文：当初，贼人攻破泽州后，分开部众，南逾太行山，抢掠济源、清化、修武，包围怀庆。
English: At first, after the bandits broke through Zezhou, they separated their followers and marched south over the Taihang Mountains, plundering Jiyuan, Qinghua, and Wuchang, and encircled Huaiqing.

古文：官军击之，贼遁走。
现代文：官军攻击，贼人遁走。
English: The government troops attacked, and the thieves fled.

古文：别贼复阑入西山，大掠顺德、真定间。
现代文：别的贼人又闯入西山，在顺德、真定一带大肆抢掠。
English: Other thieves also broke into the West Mountain and looted extensively in the Shunde and Zhending areas.

古文：大名道卢象升力战劫贼。
现代文：大名道卢象升奋力抗战，击退了贼人。
English: Lu Xiangsheng, a daimyo, fought back and defeated the bandits.

古文：贼自邢台摩天岭西下，抵武安，败总兵左良玉，河北三府焚劫殆遍。
现代文：贼人从邢台摩天岭西下，抵达武安，击败总兵官左良玉，河北三府几乎全被焚掠。
English: Thieves went west from Xingtai Mountain Range and arrived in Wu'an, defeating the general officer Zuo Liangyu. Almost all of Hebei's three prefectures were burned and plundered.

古文：潞王上疏告急，兼请卫凤、泗陵寝。
现代文：潞王上疏告急，并请求保卫凤阳、泗州的陵寝。
English: Shao Wang sent an urgent message and requested the protection of Fengyang and Luzhou's mausoleum.

古文：诏特遣总兵倪宠、王朴率京营兵六千人，与诸将并进。
现代文：诏令特遣总兵官倪宠、王朴率领京营兵六千人，与诸将并进讨贼。
English: Ni Jie and Wang Pak, the general staff officers of the special task force, led 6,000 soldiers from the Beijing battalion, and marched alongside the generals to hunt down the thieves.

古文：贼闻之，欲从河内走太行。文诏邀击之，不敢进。
现代文：贼人听说后，想从河内退走太行山，曹文诏迎头拦进，贼人不敢进。
English: After the thief heard that, he wanted to retreat from Hanoi to Taihang Mountain. Cao Wenzhao stopped him, and the thief did not dare to enter.

古文：贼之败于山西者，亦奔河北合营，迎祥、自成、献忠、曹操、老回回等俱至。
现代文：在山西被击败的贼人，也奔往黄河以北会合，高迎祥、李自成、张献忠、曹操、老回回等也到了。
English: Thieves who were defeated in Shanxi also rushed to the north of the Yellow River to meet. Gao Yingxiang, Li Zicheng, Zhang Xianzhong, Cao Cao, Lao Hui Hui and others also arrived.

古文：京兵蹙其后，左良玉，汤九州等扼其前，连战于青店、石冈、石坡、牛尾、柳泉、猛虎村，屡败之。
现代文：京兵在贼人后面追击，左良玉、汤九州等人在前面拦截，接连在青店、石冈、石坡、牛尾、柳泉、猛虎村作战，多次击败贼人。
English: The Beijing soldiers chased after the thieves, while Zuo Liangyu, Tang Kyushu and others intercepted them in front, and fought successively in Qingdian, Shigang, Shihpo, Niuwei, Liuquan and the Tiger Village, defeating the thieves many times.

古文：贼欲逸，阻于河，大困。
现代文：贼人想逃走，但被黄河所阻，处境非常窘困。
English: The thief tried to escape, but was stopped by the Yellow River. He was in a very difficult situation.

古文：贼素畏文诏、道浚，道浚先坐事遣戍，文诏转战秦、晋、河北，遇贼辄大克，御史复劾其骄倨，调大同总兵去。
现代文：贼人素来惧怕曹文诏、张道浚，道浚先因犯法被遣去戍边，文诏转战于陕、晋和黄河北岸，每战都大败贼人，御史却弹劾他骄傲，被调任大同总兵。
English: Thieves have always been afraid of Cao Wenzhao and Zhang Dojun. Dojun was first sent to Lijiang for violating the law. Wenzhao fought in Shaanxi, Jin and the north bank of the Yellow River, and defeated thieves in every battle. However, the history impeached him for his pride, and he was transferred to the Datong General Army.

古文：贼遂诡辞乞降，监军太监杨进朝信之，为入奏。
现代文：贼人于是诈称要求投降，监军太监杨进朝信以为真，上奏朝廷。
English: The thief then falsely claimed to demand surrender, but the eunuch Yang Jin, who was in charge of supervising the army, believed it to be true and reported it to the imperial court.

古文：会天寒河冰合，贼突从毛家寨策马径渡。
现代文：正好天寒黄河结冰，贼人突然从毛家寨策马渡河。
English: Just as the Yellow River froze over, the thief suddenly crossed the river from Mao Jia Zhai to Cema.

古文：河南诸军无扼河者，贼遂连陷渑池、伊阳、卢氏三县。
现代文：河南各军竟没有扼守黄河的，贼人便连陷渑池、伊阳、卢氏三县。
English: The armies of Henan did not defend the Yellow River, and the thieves even seized the three counties of Dianchi, Iyang, and Lu.

古文：河南巡抚玄默率诸将盛兵待之，贼窜入卢氏山中，由间道直走内乡，掠郧阳，又分掠南阳、汝宁，入枣阳、当阳，逼湖广。
现代文：河南巡抚玄默率领各将领严阵以待，贼窜入卢氏山中，由间道直走内乡，劫掠郧阳，又分兵抢掠南阳、汝宁，进入枣阳、当阳境内，逼近湖广。
English: Henan procurator Xuan Mo led the generals in a tight line to wait. The thieves broke into the Lu Mountains, went straight to the inland from the middle road, and looted Fenyang. Separate soldiers also looted Nanyang and Runing, entered Zaoyang and Dangyang, and approached Guanghu.

古文：巡抚唐晖敛兵守境。
现代文：巡抚唐日军聚兵守境。
English: The Tang governor gathered Japanese troops to defend the border.

古文：犯归、巴、夷陵等处，破夔州，攻广元，逼四川，所在告急。
现代文：贼人进犯归州、巴州、夷陵等处，攻破夔州，进攻广元，逼近四川，所到之处纷纷告急。
English: Thieves attacked Guizhou, Bazhou, Yiling and other places, broke through Zhangzhou, attacked Guangyuan, and approached Sichuan. Everywhere they went, they were in a hurry.

古文：七年春，特设山、陕、河南、湖广、四川总督，专办贼，以延绥巡抚陈奇瑜为之，以卢象升抚治郧阳，为奇瑜破贼延水关有威名，而象升历战阵知兵也。
现代文：七年春，特设山西、陕西、河南、湖广、四川总督，专办剿贼，以延绥巡抚陈奇瑜担任，以卢象升抚治郧阳，这是因为陈奇瑜在延水关破贼有威名，而卢象升屡历战阵，颇知兵法。
English: In the spring of the seventh year, the governors of Shanxi, Shaanxi, Henan, Hunan, Guangxi and Sichuan were specially appointed to deal with banditry, with Yancheng's governor Chen Qiyu serving as governor, and Lu Xiangsheng as governor of Shenyang. This was because Chen Qiyu had a reputation for breaking bandits in Yanshu Pass, while Lu Xiangsheng had experienced many battles and knew a lot about warfare.

古文：于是奇瑜自均州入，与象升并进，师次乌林关，斩贼数千级。
现代文：于是陈奇瑜从均州进入，与卢象升并进，部队到达乌林关，斩杀贼人数千。
English: As a result, Chen Qiyu entered from Junzhou and marched alongside Lu Xiangsheng. The troops reached Ulin Pass and killed thousands of thieves.

古文：贼走汉南，奇瑜以湖广不足忧，引兵西击。
现代文：贼人走汉南，陈奇瑜因湖广不足忧，便率兵西击。
English: The bandits went to Hannan, but Chen Qiyu was not worried about the lake, so he led his soldiers to attack the west.

古文：始，贼自渑池渡河，高迎祥最强，自成属焉。
现代文：最初，贼人从渑池渡过黄河时，高迎祥最强，李自成从属于他。
English: At first, when the thieves crossed the Yellow River from Dianchi, Gao Yingxiang was the strongest, and Li Zicheng was subordinate to him.

古文：及入河南，自成与兄子过结李牟、俞彬、白广恩、李双喜、顾君恩、高杰等自为一军。
现代文：到进入河南后，李自成与哥哥的儿子李过交结李牟、俞彬、白广恩、李双喜、顾君恩、高杰等人，组成一军。
English: After entering Henan, Li Zicheng and his brother's son Li Guo made friends with Li Mou, Zhibin, Bai Guang'en, Li Shuangxi, Gu Jun'en, Gao Jie and others to form an army.

古文：过、杰善战，君恩善谋。
现代文：李过、高杰善战，顾君恩善于谋划。
English: Li Kuan, Gao Jie are good at fighting, Gu Jun En is good at planning.

古文：及奇瑜兵至，献忠等奔商、雒，自成等陷于兴安之车箱峡。
现代文：到陈奇瑜部队到来后，张献忠等人奔往商县、洛南，李自成等人陷入兴安车箱峡。
English: After the arrival of Chen Qiyu's troops, Zhang Xianzhong and others rushed to Shangxian and Luonan, and Li Zicheng and others fell into the Xing'an Box Canyon.

古文：会大雨两月，马乏刍多死，弓矢皆脱，自成用君恩计，贿奇瑜左右，诈降。
现代文：正赶上连下两个月大雨，马因缺草料大多都死了，弓箭也都脱弦了，李自成采用顾君恩的计谋，贿赂陈奇瑜左右的人，诈称投降。
English: Just in time for the two months of heavy rain, most of the horses died for lack of fodder, and the bows and arrows were out of string. Li Zicheng used Gu Junen's stratagem to bribe people around Chen Qiyu and falsely claimed to surrender.

古文：奇瑜意轻贼，许之，檄诸将按兵毋杀，所过州县为具糗传送。
现代文：陈奇瑜心中轻敌，便答应了，传檄诸将按兵不动，贼人所经过的州县都要为他们备好粮食传送。
English: Chen Qiyu despised the enemy in her heart, so she agreed. The couriers would not move, and the states and counties through which the thieves passed should prepare grain delivery for them.

古文：贼甫渡栈，即大噪，尽屠所过七州县。
现代文：贼人刚渡过栈道，即大声喧哗，杀掠所经过的七个州县。
English: The thieves had just crossed the causeway, that is, the seven states and counties that the loud noise, killing and looting had passed through.

古文：而略阳贼数万亦来会，贼势愈张。
现代文：而略阳数万贼也来会合，贼势又扩展起来。
English: On the other hand, tens of thousands of bandits also came to the meeting, and the bandit situation expanded again.

古文：奇瑜坐削籍，而自成名始著矣。
现代文：陈奇瑜为此被撤职除名，而李自成从此开始著名了。
English: Chen Qiyu was removed from office for this, and Li Zicheng became famous from then on.

古文：已，洪承畴代奇瑜，李乔巡抚陕西，吴甡巡抚山西。
现代文：过后，洪承畴取代陈奇瑜，李乔任陕西巡抚，吴生生任山西巡抚。
English: After that, Hong Chengzhuang replaced Chen Qiyu, Li Qiao was appointed governor of Shaanxi Province, and Wu Shengsheng was appointed governor of Shanxi Province.

古文：大学士温体仁谓甡曰： 流贼癣疥疾，勿忧也。 
现代文：大学士温体仁对吴生生说： 流贼不过是癣疥一般的疾病，不用担忧。 
English: Wen Tizhen, a university scholar, said to Wu Shengsheng: "Drifting is just a common disease, don't worry about it.

古文：未几，西宁兵变，承畴甫受命而东，闻变遽返。
现代文：不久，西宁发生兵变，洪承畴刚受命东行，得到消息后马上返回。
English: Soon after, there was a mutiny in Xining. Hong Chengzhuang had just received orders to go east, but he returned immediately after receiving the news.

古文：迎祥、自成遂入巩昌、平凉、临洮、凤翔诸府数十州县。败贺人龙、张天礼军，杀固原道陆梦龙。
现代文：高迎祥、李自成便进入巩昌、平凉、临洮、凤翔等府数十个州县，击败贺人龙、张天礼军，杀死固原道陆梦龙。
English: Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng entered dozens of prefectures and counties in Gongchang, Pingliang, Linyi, Fengxiang and other prefectures, defeated He Renlong and Zhang Tianli Jun, and killed Lu Menglong of Gouyuan.

古文：围陇州四十余日，承畴檄总兵左光先与人龙合击，大破之。
现代文：他们还包围陇州四十多天，洪承畴发檄召总兵官左光先和贺人龙合击，大破贼兵。
English: They also besieged Zhangzhou for more than forty days, and Hong Chengdu sent out a call to summon the general officer Zuo Guangxian and He Ronglong to fight together and smash the thief soldiers.

古文：会朝廷亦命豫、楚、晋、蜀兵四道入陕，迎祥、自成遂窜入终南山。
现代文：正好朝廷也命豫、楚、晋、蜀部队分四道入陕、高迎祥、李自成便窜入终南山。
English: Just as the imperial court also ordered the troops of Yu, Chu, Jin and Shu to enter Shaanxi in four directions, Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng marched into the final Nanshan.

古文：已而东出，陷陈州、灵宝、汜水、荥阳。
现代文：后来又东出，攻陷陈州、灵宝、汜水、荥阳。
English: Later, they went east again, and invaded and occupied Chenzhou, Lingbao, Surabaya, and Shenyang.

古文：闻左良玉将至，移壁梅山、溱水间。
现代文：听说左良玉将到，便移到梅山、溱水之间扎营。
English: Hearing that Saoryotama would be arriving, they moved to camp between Meishan and Surabaya.

古文：部贼拔上蔡，烧汝宁郛。
现代文：贼人部下还占领上蔡，焚烧汝宁外城。
English: The bandits' subordinates also occupied Shang Cai and burned the outer city of Runing.

古文：乃命承畴出关追贼，与山东巡抚朱大典并力击，贼侦知之。
现代文：皇上于是命洪承畴出关追击贼人，与山东巡抚朱大典联合奋击，贼人侦察到了这个消息。
English: The emperor then ordered Hong Chengzhuang to go out to chase the thief, and he and Zhu Dadian, the inspector general of Shandong Province, fought together. The thief discovered this news.

古文：八年正月，大会于荥阳。
现代文：八年正月贼人在荥阳召开大会。
English: In the first month of the eighth year, the bandits held a general assembly in Fenyang.

古文：老回回、曹操、革里眼、左金王、改世王、射塌天、横天王、混十万、过天星、九条龙、顺天王及迎祥、献忠共十三家七十二营，议拒敌，未决。
现代文：老回回、曹操、革里眼、左金王、改世王、射塌天、横天王、混十万、过天星、九条龙、顺天王以及高迎祥、张献忠共十三家七十二营，商议对敌策略，还没有形成决议。
English: Lao Huahua, Cao Cao, Gu Lijian, Zuo Jin Wang, Gu Xian Wang, Jian Zhao Tian, Heng Tian Wang, Jian Wan Wan, Gu Xian Xing, Jiujia Long, Shun Tian Wang, Gao Ying Xiang, Zhang Xian Zhong, a total of thirteen families and seventy-two battalions, have discussed the strategy against the enemy, and have not yet formed a resolution.

古文：自成进曰： 一夫犹奋，况十万众乎！
现代文：李自成上前说： 一夫尚且奋起，何况十万呢！
English: Li Zicheng stepped forward and said, "If one man has risen up, how much more the hundred thousand!"

古文：官兵无能为也。
现代文：官兵对此是无能为力的。
English: The officers and soldiers are powerless to do anything about it.

古文：宜分兵定所向，利钝听之天。 
现代文：应该分兵，各定攻打方向，成败利钝，就听天命了。 
English: Should the division of troops, each determined the direction of attack, success or failure, it is up to fate.

古文：皆曰： 善。 
现代文：众人说 ：好。 
English: So the emperor asked again: Who are Chen Tuo's generals?

古文：乃议革里眼、左金王当川、湖兵，横天王、混十万当陕兵，曹操、过天星扼河上，迎祥、献忠及自成等略东方，老回回、九条龙往来策应。
现代文：于是建议由革里眼、左金王抵挡川、湖兵，横天王、混十万抵挡陕西兵，曹操、过天星扼守黄河，高迎祥、张献忠以及李自成等攻击东方，老回回、九条龙往来策应。
English: Therefore, it was suggested that Gu Ligean, Zuo Jinwang resist the river and lake soldiers, Heng Tianwang, mixed hundred thousand resist the Shaanxi soldiers, Cao Cao and Gu Xingxing hold the Yellow River, Gao Yingxiang, Zhang Xingzhong and Li Zicheng attack the East, Lao Hui and Nine Dragons exchange strategies.

古文：陕兵锐，益以谢塌天、改世王。
现代文：陕西兵精锐，再派射塌天、改世王去抵挡。
English: Shaanxi's elite soldiers were then sent to resist by shooting down the sky and changing the world.

古文：所破城邑，子女玉帛惟均。
现代文：所攻取的城邑，子女玉帛大家平分。
English: The captured towns will be divided equally among the children.

古文：众如自成言。
现代文：众人都同意了李自成的意见。
English: Everyone agreed with Li Zicheng's opinion.

古文：先是，南京兵部尚书吕维祺惧贼南犯，请加防凤阳陵寝，不报。
现代文：当初，南京兵部尚书吕维祺怕贼南犯，请加强防卫凤阳陵寝，不见回报。
English: At first, the Nanjing Military Department's Shangshu Lu Wei was afraid of thieves and criminals from the south, and asked to strengthen the defense of the Fengyang Mausoleum, but there was no return.

古文：及迎祥、献忠东下，江北兵单。固始、霍丘俱失守。
现代文：到高迎祥、张献忠东进，江北兵力孤单，固始、霍丘都已失守。
English: When Gao Yingxiang and Zhang Xianzhong marched eastward, there was only one army in the north of the Yangtze River, and Gushi and Huoqiu had already been lost.

古文：贼燔寿州，陷颍州，知州尹梦鳌、州判赵士宽战死，杀故尚书张鹤鸣。
现代文：贼人焚烧寿州，攻陷颍州，知州尹梦鳌、州判赵士宽战死，原尚书张鹤鸣被杀死。
English: Thieves burned Shoushou, invaded Zhangzhou, Yin Mengyao of Zhizhou and Zhao Shikuan of Zhizhou were sentenced to death in battle, and the original Shangshu Zhang Homing was killed.

古文：乘胜陷凤阳，焚皇陵，留守署正朱国相等皆战死。
现代文：贼乘胜攻陷凤阳，焚烧皇陵，留守署正朱国相等皆战死。
English: The thieves took advantage of the victory to invade Fengyang, burn the imperial mausoleum, and the left-behind department, Zheng Zhu Guo, all died in battle.

古文：事闻，帝素服哭，遣官告庙。
现代文：消息传到京师，皇上穿上素服哀哭，派官员到宗庙告祭。
English: The news spread to the capital, the emperor put on plain clothes and wept, and sent officials to the family temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：逮漕运都御史杨一鹏弃市，以朱大典代之，大征兵讨贼。
现代文：逮捕漕运都御史杨一鹏，将他诛死，暴尸街头，以朱大典代他，大规模地征兵讨贼。
English: They arrested the governor of the capital city, Shi Yang Yipeng, strangled him to death, dragged his corpse through the streets, replaced him with Zhu Dadian, and carried out large-scale conscription to catch thieves.

古文：贼乃大书帜曰古元真龙皇帝，合乐大饮。自成从献忠求皇陵监小阉善鼓吹者，献忠不与。
现代文：贼人于是在旗帜上大书 古元真龙皇帝 ，聚集在一起痛饮狂欢，李自成向张献忠索求监守皇陵中善于鼓吹的小阉官，张献忠不给。
English: The thieves then wrote "Ancient Dragon Emperor" on the banner and gathered together for a drinking binge. Li Zicheng demanded that Zhang Xianlian, a minor eunuch who was good at preaching, guard the imperial mausoleum, but Zhang Xianlian refused.

古文：自成怒，偕迎祥西趋归德，与曹操、过天星合，复入陕西。
现代文：李自成大怒，与高迎祥西走归德，与曹操、过天星会合，重新进入陕西。
English: Li Zicheng flew into a rage, went back to virtue with Gao Yingxiang Xi, and met Cao Cao and Gu Tianxing to re-enter Shaanxi.

古文：献忠独东下庐州。
现代文：张献忠独自东下庐州。
English: Zhang Xianzhong went to Zhangzhou on his own.

古文：承畴方驰至汝州，命诸将左良玉、汤九州、尤世威、徐来朝、陈永福、邓玘、张应昌分扼湖广、河南、郧阳诸关隘，召曹文诏为中军。
现代文：洪承畴刚赶到汝州，便命左良玉、汤九州、尤世威、徐来朝、陈永福、邓王己、张应昌等将领分别扼守湖广、河南、郧阳各地关隘，召曹文诏任中军将军。
English: As soon as Hong Chengzheng arrived in Ruzhou, he ordered generals including Zuo Liangyu, Tang Kyushu, You Shihwei, Xu Lai Cha, Chen Yongfu, Deng Wangqi, and Zhang Yingchang to guard the passes in Hukang, Henan, and Shenyang, respectively, and summoned Cao Wenzhao to serve as the general of the Chinese army.

古文：文诏未至，玘以兵乱死。
现代文：曹文诏还没到，邓王己因兵乱而死。
English: Cao Wen Zhao had not yet arrived, and Deng Wang had already died as a result of the mutiny.

古文：迎祥、自成从终南山出，大掠富平、宁州。
现代文：高迎祥、李自成从终南山走出，大肆抢掠富平、宁州。
English: Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng came out of the final Nanshan and plundered Buping and Ningzhou.

古文：老回回、献忠、曹操、蝎子块、过天星诸贼，闻承畴出关，先后皆走陕西，焚掠西安、平凉、凤翔诸郡。
现代文：老回回、张献忠、曹操、蝎子块、过天星等贼，听说洪承畴出关了，便先后都跑到陕西，焚烧抢掠西安、平凉、凤翔等府州。
English: Thieves such as Lao Hui Hui, Zhang Xianzhong, Cao Cao, Scorpion Block, and Passing Star, when they heard that Hong Cheng Zhen had left the customs, ran to Shaanxi successively, burning and looting Xi'an, Pingliang, Fengxiang and other prefectures.

古文：承畴亟还救，分遣诸将击老回回等，令副总兵刘成功、艾万年击迎祥、自成于宁州。
现代文：洪承畴急忙回师救护，分遣将领攻击老回回等，令副总兵刘成功、艾万年在宁州攻击高迎祥、李自成。
English: Hong Chengzheng hurried back to the division to rescue, dispatched generals to attack the old back, and so on, so that the vice-commander Liu succeeded, Ai Wan in Ningzhou attacked Gao Yingxiang, Li Zicheng.

古文：万年中伏战死，文诏怒，复击之，亦中伏战死。
现代文：艾万年中埋伏战死，曹文诏大怒又去攻击，结果也中埋伏战死。
English: Ai Wan was ambushed and killed in the middle of the year. Cao Wenzhao was so angry that he attacked again. As a result, he was also ambushed and killed.

古文：群贼乘胜掠地，火照西安城中。
现代文：群贼乘胜攻占城邑，火光照亮了西安城。
English: The bandits took advantage of the victory to occupy the city, and the firelight lit up Xi'an City.

古文：承畴力御之泾阳、三原间，决死战，贼不得过。
现代文：洪承畴在泾阳、三原一带全力抵抗，誓决一死战，贼人没能通过。
English: Hong Chengzheng resisted with all his strength in the areas of Shenyang and Mihara, vowing to fight to the death. The bandits did not get through.

古文：献忠、老回回等由他道转突朱阳关，守关将徐来臣军溃死，尤世威中箭遁。
现代文：张献忠、老回回等从别的道路转而突袭朱阳关，守关将领徐来臣因部队溃败而死，尤世威中箭后逃走。
English: Zhang Xianzhong, Lao Hui Hui, and others turned from other roads to raid Zhuyang Pass. The general guarding the pass, Xu Laichen, died as a result of the rout of the troops, and You Shiwei fled after being hit by an arrow.

古文：于是群贼皆出关，分十三营东犯，而迎祥、自成独留陕西。
现代文：于是群贼全部出关，分十三营向东进犯，而高迎祥、李自成独留在陕西。
English: As a result, all of the bandits left the customs, divided into thirteen battalions to attack the east, while Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng stayed in Shaanxi.

古文：时卢象升已改湖广巡抚，总理直隶、河南、山东、四川、湖广诸军务。
现代文：当时卢象升已改任湖广巡抚，总理直隶、河南、山东、四川、湖广各省军务。
English: At that time, Lu Xiangsheng had been transferred to the post of Huguang Inspector, the Prime Minister's direct subordinate, and the military affairs of Henan, Shandong, Sichuan and Huguang provinces.

古文：诏承畴督关中，象升督关外。
现代文：诏令洪承畴督领关中，卢象升督领关外。
English: In the edict, Hong Chengzheng was put in charge of customs, but Lu Xiangsheng was not.

古文：贼亦分兵，迎祥略武功、扶风以西，自成略富平、固州以东。
现代文：贼人也分兵，高迎祥夺取武功、扶风以西，李自成夺取富平、固州以东。
English: The thieves also divided their forces, with Gao Yingxiang seizing Wu Gong and Fu Feng in the west, and Li Zicheng seizing Fuping and Guzhou in the east.

古文：承畴遣将追自成，小捷，至醴泉。
现代文：洪承畴派遣将领追击李自成，打了个小胜仗后到达醴泉。
English: Hong Chengzheng sent his generals to chase down Li Zicheng, and after a small victory, they arrived at Longquan.

古文：贼将高杰通于自成妻邢氏，惧诛，挟之来降。
现代文：贼将高杰与李自成的妻子邢氏私通，害怕被诛杀，便带着邢氏来投降。
English: The thief took Gao Jie fornicating with Li Zicheng's wife, Zou Shi, and was afraid of being beaten to death, so he brought Zou Shi to surrender.

古文：承畴身追自成，大战渭南、临潼，自成大败东走。
现代文：洪承畴亲自追击李自成，大战于渭南、临潼，李自成大败，向东而走。
English: Hong Chengzheng personally pursued Li Zicheng, and the big battle took place in the south of Hunan and Linyi. Li Zicheng was defeated and headed east.

古文：迎祥亦屡败，东逾华阴南原，绝岭，偕自成出朱阳关，与献忠合。
现代文：高迎祥也多次战败，向东越过华阴南部原野，翻过山岭，与李自成一起出朱阳关，与张献忠会合。
English: Gao Yingxiang was also defeated many times. He went east across the southern plain of Huayin, crossed the mountains, and went out of Zhuyang Pass with Li Zicheng to meet Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：冬十一月，群贼薄阌乡，左良玉、祖宽御之不克，遂陷陕州，进攻雒阳。
现代文：冬十一月，群贼迫近阌乡，左良玉、祖宽抵挡不住，贼人遂攻陷陕州，进而攻打洛阳。
English: In the winter of November, a group of bandits approached Shanshan Township. Zu Liangyu and Zu Guang could not resist. The bandits then invaded Shaanxi Province, and then attacked Luoyang.

古文：河南巡抚陈必谦督良玉、宽援雒阳，献忠走嵩、汝。
现代文：河南巡抚陈必谦督领左良玉、祖宽援助洛阳，张献忠退走嵩县、汝州。
English: Chen Biqian, the governor of Henan Province, led Zuo Liangyu and Zu Guang to help Luoyang, while Zhang Xianzhong retreated to Song County and Ruzhou.

古文：迎祥、自成走偃师、巩县，略鲁山、叶县，陷光州，象升击败之确山。
现代文：高迎祥、李自成退走偃师、巩县，夺取鲁山、叶县，攻陷光州，在确山被卢象升击败。
English: Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng retreated from Shanshih and Gong County, captured Luzhan and Ye County, invaded Gwangju, and were defeated by Lu Xiangsheng in Jingshan.

古文：九年春，迎祥、自成攻庐州，不拔。陷含山、和州，杀知州黎弘业及在籍御史马如蛟等。
现代文：九年春，高迎祥、李自成攻打庐州，没有攻下，转而攻陷含山、和州，杀死知州黎弘业以及在家乡的御史马如蛟等人。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng attacked Bozhou, but failed to capture it. Instead, they invaded Hanzhan and Hezhou, killing Chizhou Li Hongye as well as Goshima Rugao and others in their hometown.

古文：又攻滁州，知州刘大巩、太仆卿李觉斯坚守不下。
现代文：贼人又攻打滁州，知州刘大巩、太仆寺卿李觉斯坚守，才没被攻下。
English: The bandits attacked Bozhou again, and Liu Dagong and Li Jue Si, the eunuch priest of Zhizhou, held out until they were captured.

古文：象升亲督祖宽、罗岱、杨世恩等来援，战于朱龙桥，贼大败，尸咽水不流。
现代文：卢象升亲自督领祖宽、罗岱、杨贡恩等来救援，战于朱龙桥，大败贼兵，尸体阻塞河道，河水为之断流。
English: Lu Xiangsheng personally led Zu Guang, Luo Yao, Yang Gongen and others to come to the rescue, fought in Zhulong Bridge, defeated the thieves, the bodies blocked the river, and the river was cut off.

古文：北攻寿州，故御史方震孺坚守。
现代文：贼人北攻寿州，原御史方震孺坚守。
English: The bandits attacked Shoushu from the north, but the former imperialists held out.

古文：折而西，入归德，边将祖大乐破之。
现代文：贼折而向西，进入归德，被边防将领祖大乐打败。
English: The bandits turned westward and entered Germany, where they were defeated by the border guard general Zu Dalet.

古文：走密、登封，故总兵汤九州战死。
现代文：贼转到密县、登封，原总兵官汤九州战死。
English: Thieves were transferred to Myeon and Dengfeng, and the former commander-in-chief, Tong Kyushu, died in battle.

古文：分道犯南阳、裕州，必谦援南阳，象升援裕，令大乐等击贼，杀迎祥、自成精锐几尽。
现代文：贼分道进犯南阳、裕州，陈必谦救援南阳，卢象升救援裕州，令祖大乐等人向贼人进攻，高迎祥、李自成的精锐几乎被杀尽。
English: The thieves attacked Nanyang and Yuzhou separately. Chen Biqian rescued Nanyang, Lu Xiangsheng rescued Yuzhou, and Zu Dalek and others attacked the thieves. Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng's elite were almost killed.

古文：贼复分兵再入陕，迎祥由郧、襄趋兴安、汉中，自成由南山逾商、雒，走延绥，犯巩昌北境。诸将左光先、曹变蛟破之，自成走环县。
现代文：贼人又分兵再次入陕，高迎祥由郧阳、襄阳奔向兴安、汉中，李自成由南山越过商县、洛南，走延绥，侵犯巩昌北境，被左光先、曹变蛟等将领打败，李自成便退走环县。
English: The bandits sent another detachment into Shaanxi. Gao Yingxiang ran from Fenyang and Xiangyang to Xing'an and Hanzhong. Li Zicheng crossed from Nanshan to Shangxian and Luonan, went to Yancheng, invaded the northern border of Gongchang, and was defeated by generals such as Zuo Guangxian and Cao Zhenyao. Li Zicheng then retreated to Huanxian.

古文：未几，官军败于罗家山，尽亡士马器仗，总兵官俞冲霄被执。
现代文：不久，官军在罗家山被打败，士卒战马以及武器全部丧失，总兵官俞冲霄被俘。
English: Soon, the government army was defeated in Lojia Mountain, the soldiers, horses and weapons were all lost, and the commander-in-chief was captured.

古文：自成执复振，进围绥德，欲东渡河，山西兵遏之。
现代文：李自成的势力重新获得发展，他进而围攻绥德，想渡过黄河，但被山西兵所阻。
English: Li Zicheng's forces regained strength, and he went on to besiege Shunde and wanted to cross the Yellow River, but was blocked by Shanxi soldiers.

古文：复西掠米脂，呼知县边大绶，曰： 此吾故乡也，勿虐我父老。 
现代文：他又向西抢掠米脂，向知县边大绶喊道： 这是我的故乡，不要虐待我的父老！ 
English: He also robbed rice and fat to the west, and shouted to the governor of Xiangchi County: "This is my hometown, don't mistreat my parents!"

古文：遗之金，令修文庙。
现代文：还给他留下黄金，叫他修建文庙。
English: He also left him gold and told him to build a temple.

古文：将袭榆林，河水骤长，贼淹死甚众，乃改道，从韩城而西。
现代文：李自成将要袭击榆林，黄河突然暴涨，贼人有很多被淹死，于是改道，从韩城西去。
English: Li Zicheng was about to attack Yulin, the Yellow River suddenly surged, and many thieves were drowned, so he changed his route and went west of Hancheng.

古文：时象升及大乐、宽等皆入援京师。
现代文：当时卢象升和祖大乐、祖宽都去援助京师。
English: At that time, Lu Xiangsheng, Zu Dalet and Zu Kuan all went to help the Beijing Division.

古文：孙传庭新除陕西巡抚，锐意灭贼。
现代文：孙传庭新任陕西巡抚，锐意灭贼。
English: Sun Chuanting, the new governor of Shaanxi Province, is determined to eliminate thieves.

古文：秋七月，擒迎祥于盩啡，献俘阙下，磔死。
现代文：秋七月，他在銩稨擒获高迎祥，上朝廷献俘，将他肢解。
English: In autumn and July, he captured Gao Yingxiang in Fuxi, went to the imperial court as a prisoner of war, and dismembered him.

古文：于是贼党乃共推自成为闯王矣。
现代文：于是贼党便共推李自成为闯王。
English: As a result, the kleptocrats pushed Li Zi to become the king.

古文：是月，犯阶、徽。
现代文：这个月，自成侵犯阶州、徽州。
English: This month, it invaded Chaozhou and Huizhou on its own.

古文：未几，出、陇，犯凤翔，渡渭河。
现代文：不久，从氵开县、陇州出来，侵犯凤翔，渡过渭河。
English: Soon, it came out of the counties of Qiaokai and Luzhou, encroached on Fengxiang, and crossed the Li River.

古文：十年，犯泾阳、三原。
现代文：十年，自成侵犯泾阳、三原。
English: Ten years later, it successfully invaded Shenyang and Mihara.

古文：蝎于块、过天星俱来会。
现代文：蝎子块、过天星都来相会。
English: Scorpion chunks and passing stars all come together.

古文：传庭督变蛟连战七日，皆克，蝎子块降。
现代文：孙传庭督领曹变蛟连战七天，都战胜了贼人，蝎子块投降。
English: Sun Chuan, head of the court, led Cao Zhenya in a seven-day battle, defeating the thieves and surrendering the scorpion block.

古文：自成与过天星奔秦州。
现代文：李自成与过天星奔到秦州。
English: Li Zicheng ran to Qinzhou with the stars.

古文：入蜀，陷宁羌，破七盘关，陷广元，总兵官侯良柱战死，遂连陷昭化、剑州、梓潼、江油、黎雅、青川等州县。
现代文：他们又进入四川，攻陷宁羌，击破七盘关，攻陷广元，总兵官侯良柱战死，贼人遂接连攻下昭化、剑州、梓潼、江油、黎雅、青川等州县。
English: They also entered Sichuan, invaded Ningbo, broke through the seven gates, invaded Guangyuan, and the commander-in-chief Hou Liangzhu was killed in battle. The thieves then successively invaded Zhaohua, Jianzhou, Zizhou, Jiangyou, Liya, Qingchuan and other counties.

古文：剑州知州徐尚卿、吏目李英俊、昭化知县王时化、郫县主簿张应奇、金堂典史潘梦科皆死。
现代文：剑州知州徐尚卿、吏目李英俊、昭化知县王时化、郫县主簿张应奇、金堂县典史潘梦科都死了。
English: Jianzhou Chizhou Xu Shangqing, Li Yingjun, Wang Shihhua, Zhang Yingqi, and Jintang County Denshi Pan Mengke are all dead.

古文：进攻成都，七日不克，巡抚王维章坐避贼征。
现代文：自成进攻成都，七天没有攻下来。巡抚王维章因躲避贼人被问罪。
English: He attacked Chengdu on his own, but did not take it for seven days. The governor, Wang Weizhang, was charged with evading a thief.

古文：十一年春，官军败贼梓潼，自成奔白水，食尽。
现代文：十一年春，官军在梓潼击败贼人，自成奔往白水，粮食用尽了。
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, the government army defeated the thieves in Zizhi and rushed to Baishui on their own. The grain was exhausted.

古文：承畴、传庭合击于潼关原，大破之。
现代文：洪承畴、孙传庭在潼关联合进攻，大破贼兵。
English: Hong Chengzheng and Sun Chuanting jointly attacked Shaoguan and defeated the bandits.

古文：自成尽亡其卒，独与刘宗敏、田见秀等十八骑溃围，窜伏商、洛山中。
现代文：李自成丧失全部士卒，只与刘宗敏、田见秀等十八骑突出重围，逃窜到商县、洛南山中潜伏。
English: Li Zicheng lost all his soldiers, and was only surrounded by 18 cavalrymen including Liu Zongmin and Tian Mi Xiu. He fled to Shangxian and hid in the mountains of Luonan.

古文：其年，献忠降，自成势益衰。
现代文：这一年，张献忠投降，自成气势更衰。
English: This year, Zhang Xianzhong capitulated, and Zicheng's momentum became even weaker.

古文：承畴改蓟辽总督，传庭改保定总督。传庭以疾辞，逮下狱。
现代文：洪承畴改任蓟辽总督，孙传庭改任保定总督，孙传庭借病推辞，被逮捕入狱。
English: Hong Chengzong was appointed governor of Min Liao, and Sun Chuanting was appointed governor of Baoding. Sun Chuanting resigned due to illness and was arrested and imprisoned.

古文：二人去，自成稍得安。
现代文：这两人离去后，李自成稍得安定下来。
English: After the two men left, Li Zicheng had to settle down a bit.

古文：总理熊文灿方主抚，谍者或报自成死，益宽之。
现代文：总理熊文灿正主张招抚，有些间谍汇报说李自成死了，他更加放松了。
English: Premier Xiong Wencan is advocating appeasement, some spies report that Li Zicheng is dead, and he is more relaxed.

古文：十二年夏，献忠反穀城。
现代文：十二年夏，张献忠在谷城造反。
English: In the summer of the twelfth year, Zhang Xianzhong rebelled in Gu Cheng.

古文：自成大喜，出收众，众复大集。
现代文：李自成非常高兴，出来收集部众，队伍又壮大起来。
English: Li Zicheng was very happy. He came out to gather the team, and the team grew again.

古文：陕西总督郑崇俭发兵围之，令曰 围师必缺。 
现代文：陕西总督郑崇俭发兵去包围，下令说 包围圈一定要留有缺口 。
English: Zheng Chongjian, the governor of Shaanxi, sent troops to encircle and ordered that the encirclement must have a gap.

古文：自成乃由缺走，突武关，往依献忠。
现代文：李自成于是从缺口逃出，突破武关，前往依附张献忠。
English: Li Zicheng then escaped from the gap, broke through the military checkpoint, and went to attach Zhang Xianzhong.

古文：献忠欲图之，觉，遁去。
现代文：张献忠想吞并他，被李自成发觉后逃走。
English: Zhang Xianzhong tried to annex it, but was discovered by Li Zicheng and fled.

古文：杨嗣昌督师夷陵，檄令降，自成出谩语。
现代文：杨嗣昌率师到夷陵，发檄令他投降，李自成出言谩骂。
English: Yang Shichang led his division to Yiling, issued an edict ordering him to surrender, and Li Zicheng made abusive remarks.

古文：官军围自成于巴西、鱼复诸山中，自成大困，欲自经，养子双喜劝而止。
现代文：官军将李自成包围在巴西、鱼复山中，李自成很窘迫，想自尽，养子李双喜劝解才罢了。
English: The government army encircled Li Zicheng in Brazil and the Yufu Mountains. Li Zicheng was very distressed and wanted to commit suicide. His adopted son Li Shuangxi only had to persuade him.

古文：贼将多出降。
现代文：贼将有许多出来投降。
English: The thieves will come out in numbers to surrender.

古文：刘宗敏者，蓝田锻工也，最骁勇，亦欲降。
现代文：刘宗敏是蓝田县锻工，最为骁勇，也想投降。
English: Liu Zongmin, a forger from Lantian County, was the most courageous and also wanted to surrender.

古文：自成与步入丛祠，顾而叹曰： 人言我当为天子，盍卜之，不吉，断我头以降。 
现代文：自成与他走入荒野中的一座神祠。相顾而叹道 ：人们都说我当做天子，现在何不去问一卜，如果不吉利，你就将我的头砍去投降。 
English: I walked with him into a shrine in the wilderness. I looked at him and sighed: People say that I should be the son of heaven, why not ask now, if it is not auspicious, you will cut off my head and surrender.

古文：宗敏诺，三卜三吉。
现代文：宗敏答应了，问了三卜，都大吉。
English: Zongmin agreed and asked for three things, all of which were satisfactory.

古文：宗敏还，杀其两妻，谓自成曰： 吾死从君矣。 
现代文：刘宗敏回来后，将他的两个妻子杀掉，对李自成说 ：我死心追随你了。 
English: After Liu Zongmin came back, he killed his two wives and said to Li Zicheng: "I have followed you with all my heart."

古文：军中壮士闻之，亦多杀妻子愿从者。
现代文：军中的壮士听说后，也多有杀妻儿表示愿意追随的。
English: After hearing about it, many of the brave men in the army expressed their willingness to follow in the footsteps of those who had killed their wives and children.

古文：自成乃尽焚辎重，轻骑由郧、均走河南。
现代文：李自成于是将辎重全部烧掉，轻骑从郧阳、均州突出，进入河南。
English: Li Zicheng then burned all the baggage and rode from Shenyang and Junzhou to Henan.

古文：河南大旱，斛谷万钱，饥民从自成者数万。
现代文：河南大旱，一斛谷子值一万钱，饥民依从李自成的达数万人。
English: Henan is suffering from a severe drought. A bushel of grain is worth 10,000 yuan. Tens of thousands of people are starving according to Li Zicheng.

古文：遂自南阳出，攻宜阳，杀知县唐启泰。
现代文：自成于是从南阳出来，进攻宜阳，杀知县唐启泰。
English: Therefore, they came out of Nanyang, attacked Yiyang, and killed Tang Qitai of Zhixian.

古文：攻永宁，杀知县武大烈，戕万安王采钅轻。
现代文：又进攻永宁，杀知县武大烈，残杀万安王朱采耎。
English: He also attacked Yongning, killed Wu Dairie of Zhixian County, and brutally killed Zhu Cui, the King of Wan'an.

古文：攻偃师，知县徐日泰骂贼死。
现代文：又进攻偃师，知县徐日泰骂贼而死。
English: He also attacked the Shanshih Division. Xu Rittai of Zhixian County died while cursing the thieves.

古文：时十三年十二月也。
现代文：这时是十三年十二月。
English: It was now the 13th of December.

古文：自成为人高颧深〈幽页〉，鸱目曷鼻，声如豺。
现代文：李自成颧骨突出，眼窝深凹，眼睛像鹰，鼻子如蝎，声音如豺。
English: Li Zicheng has prominent cheekbones, deep eye sockets, eyes like an eagle, a nose like a scorpion, and a voice like a cricket.

古文：性猜忍，日杀人斮足剖心为戏。
现代文：性猜疑残忍，每天以杀人断足剖心为戏。
English: Suspicion of sex is cruel. Every day, murder, amputation and dismemberment are the order of the day.

古文：所过，民皆保坞堡不下。
现代文：他所经过的地方，百姓都坚守坞堡，不肯降服。
English: Wherever he passed, the people held fast to their strongholds and refused to surrender.

古文：杞县举人李信者，逆案中尚书李精白子也，尝出粟振饥民，民德之曰： 李公子活我。 
现代文：杞县举人李信，是逆案中尚书李精白的儿子，曾经出粮赈济饥民，百姓很感激他。说： 李公子救活了我们。 
English: Li Xin, the leader of Handan County, is the son of Shangshu Li Jingbai in the reverse case. He once gave grain to feed the hungry, and the people were very grateful to him. He said: Li Gongzi saved our lives.

古文：会绳伎红娘子反，掳信，强委身焉。信逃归，官以为贼，囚狱中。
现代文：正好玩绳技的红娘子造反，俘获了李信，强行委身于他，李信逃回，当官的把他当作贼人，囚禁在狱中。
English: The Red Maidens, who were playing rope tricks at the time, rebelled, captured Li Xin, and forcibly committed themselves to him. Li Xin fled back, and the officials treated him as a thief and imprisoned him in prison.

古文：红娘子来救，饥民应之，共出信。
现代文：红娘子来营救，并得到饥民的响应，一起救出了李信。
English: The Red Maid came to the rescue and received a response from the starving people, and together they rescued Li Xin.

古文：卢氏举人牛金星磨勘被斥，私入自成军为主谋，潜归，事泄坐斩，已，得末减。
现代文：卢氏县举人牛金星在考绩时被斥退，便私自投入李自成军中任主谋，后来偷偷跑回来，被发觉后论罪当斩，后来得以减刑。
English: Lu County's candidate, Jin Xing, was rejected at the performance appraisal, so he secretly joined Li Zicheng's army as a mastermind. Later, he secretly ran back and was found guilty and sentenced to beheading. Later, he was able to reduce his sentence.

古文：二人皆往投自成，自成大喜，改信名曰岩。
现代文：两人都前往投靠李自成，自成大喜，将李信改名为李岩。
English: Both of them went to stay with Li Zicheng, and Li Zicheng was so happy that he changed his name from Li Xin to Li Yan.

古文：金星又荐卜者宋献策，长三尺余，上谶记云： 十八子，主神器。 
现代文：牛金星又推荐善占卜的宋献策，此人身长三尺余，他给李自成上谶语说： 十八子，主神器。 
English: Niu Jinxing also recommended Song Xianzhao, who was good at divination. This person was more than three feet long, and he said to Li Zicheng the following slang: "Eighteen sons, master artifact."

古文：自成大悦。
现代文：自成非常高兴。
English: I'm very happy.

古文：岩因说曰： 取天下以人心为本，请勿杀人，收天下心。 
现代文：李岩便向自成劝说道： 夺取天下以人心为本，请不要杀人，以收天下人心。 
English: Li Yan then advised Zicheng: To win the hearts and minds of the world, please don't kill people to win the hearts and minds of the world.

古文：自成从之，屠戮为减。
现代文：自成听从了，从此减少了杀戮。
English: He complied voluntarily, and the killings have since been reduced.

古文：又散所掠财物振饥民，民受饷者，不辨岩、自成也，杂呼曰： 李公子活我。 
现代文：自成还将掠来的财物赈济饥民，百姓得到粮食后，分不清是李岩的还是李自成的，便笼统地欢呼道 ：李公子救活了我们。 
English: Zicheng also used the stolen wealth to feed the hungry. After the people received the grain, they could not tell whether it was from Li Yan or from Li Zicheng, and they cheered in a general way: Li Gongzi saved us.

古文：岩复造谣词曰： 迎闯王，不纳粮。 
现代文：李岩又造民谣说 ：迎闯王，不纳粮。 
English: Li Yan also created a folk song, saying: Welcome the king, but do not take the grain.

古文：使儿童歌以相煽，从自成者日众。
现代文：并让儿童歌唱，以收煽动之效，结果追随李自成的越来越多。
English: And let the children sing, to collect the effect of incitement, as a result, more and more people followed Li Zicheng.

古文：十四年正月攻河南，有营卒勾贼，城遂陷，福王常洵遇害。
现代文：十四年正月自成进攻河南，有士卒勾结贼人，结果城被攻陷，福王朱常洵遇害。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, he attacked Henan on his own. Some officers colluded with thieves. As a result, the city was captured, and Fu Wang Zhu Changyu was killed.

古文：自成兵汋王血，杂鹿醢尝之，名 福禄酒。 
现代文：自成的士兵煮福王的血，拿鹿肉酱杂着吃，名叫 福禄酒 。
English: The self-made soldiers boiled the blood of King Fu and ate it mixed with venison sauce. It was called Fu Luo wine.

古文：王世子由崧裸而逃。
现代文：福王的世子朱由崧裸身而逃。
English: Zhu Yuxuan, the son of King Fu, fled naked.

古文：自成发王邸金振饥民，遂移攻开封。
现代文：自成将福王府的金钱赈济饥民，便移师攻打开封。
English: When he succeeded in getting the money from the King's Bounty Palace to help the hungry, he moved his division to break the seal.

古文：时张献忠亦陷襄阳，戕襄王翊铭。
现代文：当时张献忠也攻陷襄阳，杀害襄王朱翊铭。
English: At that time, Zhang Xianzhong also invaded Xiangyang and killed the king of Xiangyang, Zhu Rongming.

古文：王开封者周王恭枵，闻贼至，急发库金募死士，与巡抚都御史高名衡等固守。
现代文：被封在开封为王的周王朱恭枵，得知贼人来到，急忙用库存黄金招募死士，与巡抚都御史高名衡等人固守。
English: Zhou King Zhu Gongyao, who was sealed as the king of Kaifeng, learned that the thieves were coming and hurriedly used the stockpile gold to recruit dead soldiers. He and the governor of the capital, Gao Mingheng, and others held fast.

古文：自成攻七昼夜，解去，屠密县。
现代文：自成攻打七昼夜不下，便领兵离去，屠戮密县。
English: He attacked on his own for seven days and nights, then led his troops away and slaughtered My County.

古文：贼魁罗汝才、土寇袁时中皆归自成。
现代文：贼人首领罗汝才，土寇袁时中都归附自成。
English: Luo Rucai, the leader of the thieves, and the Turkic Yuan Shizhong were both annexed by Zicheng.

古文：时中众二十万，号小袁营。
现代文：袁时中有众二十万，号称小袁营。
English: Yuan Shiji has a population of 200,000 and is known as Xiao Yuan Ying.

古文：汝才即曹操，与献忠同降复叛去者也。
现代文：罗汝才即曹操，与张献忠一同投降，后来又反叛而去。
English: Luo Rucai, that is, Cao Cao, surrendered together with Zhang Xiantong, and later rebelled.

古文：自成初为迎祥裨将，至是势大盛。
现代文：自成当初做高迎祥的裨将，至此势力大盛。
English: Since Zicheng initially made Gao Yingxiang a benefactor, his influence has flourished.

古文：帝以故尚书傅宗龙为陕西总督，使专办自成，别敕保定总督杨文岳会师。
现代文：皇上以原尚书傅宗龙为陕西总督，让他专门对付李自成，另外命令保定总督杨文岳前往会师。
English: The emperor appointed Zonglong, the former Shang Shufu, as the governor of Shaanxi, and asked him to deal specifically with Li Zicheng. In addition, he ordered Yang Wengyue, the governor of Baoding, to join the division.

古文：宗龙驰入关，与巡抚汪乔年调兵，兵已发尽，乃檄河南大将李国奇、贺人龙兵隶部下，亟出关。
现代文：傅宗龙飞驰入关，与巡抚汪乔年调兵，但兵已全部发完了，于是发文将河南大将李国奇、贺人龙部队隶属于部下，急速出关。
English: Fu Zonglong entered the pass at high speed and transferred troops with the governor Wang Qiaoren, but the soldiers had all been sent out, so he issued a document to subordinate the Henan general Li Guoqi and the He Renlong troops to his subordinates, and quickly left the pass.

古文：文岳率虎大威军俱至新蔡，与自成遇。人龙卒先奔，国奇、大威继之，宗龙、文岳以亲军筑垒自固。
现代文：杨文岳率领虎大威的部队一起到了新蔡，与自成遭遇，贺人龙的士卒先逃了，李国奇、虎大威继之也逃了，傅宗龙、杨文岳率亲军筑垒固守。
English: Yang Wengyue led the troops of Hu Dawei to Xin Cai together, and encountered Zicheng. The soldiers of He Renlong fled first, Li Guoqi and Hu Dawei also fled, and Fu Zonglong and Yang Wengyue led their own troops to build fortifications and hold fast.

古文：夜，文岳兵溃奔陈州，宗龙与贼持数日，食尽，突围走，被执死。
现代文：到了晚上，杨文岳的部队溃奔陈州，傅宗龙与贼兵相持数日，粮食用尽了，想突围而走，被抓住杀死了。
English: In the evening, Yang Wenyu's troops rushed to Chenzhou. Fu Zonglong held out with the bandits for several days. He ran out of food and tried to break out of the encirclement, but was caught and killed.

古文：自成陷叶县，杀副将刘国能，遂围左良玉于郾城。
现代文：自成攻陷叶县，杀副将刘国能，遂将左良玉包围在郾城。
English: He attacked Ye County on his own, killed Vice Admiral Liu Guoneng, and then surrounded Zuo Liangyu in Handan.

古文：乔年代宗龙总督，出关，次襄城，自成尽锐攻之，乔年与副将李万庆皆死。
现代文：汪乔年取代傅宗龙为总督，出关，到襄城驻扎。自成尽发精锐来进攻，汪乔年与副将李万庆都被杀死。
English: Wang Qiaoren replaced Fu Zonglong as governor, went out of the customs, and stationed in Xiangcheng. The elite attacked on their own, and both Wang Qiaoren and Vice Admiral Li Wanqing were killed.

古文：自成劓刖诸生百九十人。遂乘胜陷南阳、邓州十四城，再围开封。
现代文：自成将一百九十名书生割鼻断足，遂乘胜攻陷南阳、邓州等十四城，再围开封。
English: He cut off the noses and feet of one hundred and ninety scholars, and then took advantage of the victory to invade fourteen cities, including Nanyang and Dangzhou, and then encircle Kaifeng.

古文：巡抚名衡、总兵陈永福力拒之，射中自成目，炮殪上天龙等，自成益怒。
现代文：巡抚高名衡、总兵陈永福奋力抵抗，射中自成眼睛，上天龙等人中炮死，自成更加愤怒。
English: The governor Gao Nianheng and the general soldier Chen Yongfu fought hard to resist, and shot themselves in the eye. Shangtianlong and others were killed in the gunfire, and Zicheng was even more angry.

古文：自成每攻城，不用古梯冲法，专取瓴甋，得一砖即归营卧，后者必斩。
现代文：自成每次攻城，不用古代云梯和冲车撞城法，专撬砖头，得一块砖头即归营休息，落后的人一定斩首。
English: Every time they attack the city, they don't use the ancient method of using ladders and cars to crash into the city, they use bricks, and when they get a brick, they go back to camp to rest, and those who are behind must be beheaded.

古文：取砖已，即穿穴穴城。初仅容一人，渐至百十，次第傅土以出。过三五步，留一土柱，系以巨縆。
现代文：取完砖头后，就挖洞穿城，开始洞只能容一人，后来渐增到十个、百个，挨个将土传运出来，隔三五步就留一土柱，系上粗绳。
English: After removing the bricks, they dug a hole through the city. At first, the hole could only hold one person, but later it gradually increased to ten or a hundred. The soil was transported out one by one, leaving a column of soil every thirty-five steps and tying it with a thick rope.

古文：穿毕，万人曳縆一呼，而柱折城崩矣。
现代文：打完洞后，万人拉着绳子一声喊，土柱被拉断，而城墙便倒了。
English: After the hole was made, a thousand people pulled the rope and shouted. The pillar was pulled apart, and the wall fell down.

古文：名衡于城上凿横道，听其下有声，用毒秽灌之，多死。
现代文：高名衡在城上凿横道，一听到下面有声音，便用有毒和污秽的东西往下灌，结果贼人多有死者。
English: Gao Nianheng was digging a cross-over on the city. As soon as he heard a sound below, he used poisonous and filthy things to pour water down. As a result, many thieves died.

古文：贼乃即城坏处用火攻法，实药瓮中，火燃药发，当者辄糜碎，名曰放迸。
现代文：贼人于是在城墙已毁坏的地方采用火攻法，并将装满火药的坛子投入火中，火燃药发，当场的都被炸得稀烂，贼人将它称为 放迸 。
English: The thief then used the fire attack method in the place where the city wall had been destroyed, and threw a jar full of gunpowder into the fire. The fire ignited the gunpowder, and they were all blown up on the spot. The thief called it Putao.

古文：十五年正月，城半圮，贼用放迸法攻之，铁骑数千驰噪，伺城颓即拥入城。
现代文：十五年正月，城墙已毁坏了一半，贼人用放迸法攻打，数千铁骑来回呼噪，单等城墙一倒便蜂拥而入。
English: In the first month of the fifteenth year, half of the city wall had been destroyed. Thieves attacked with crowbars. Thousands of iron horsemen rode back and forth, and they swarmed into the city wall.

古文：城故宋汴都，金人所重筑也。厚数丈，土坚，火外击，贼骑多歼，自成骇而去。
现代文：开封城原是宋朝都城，金朝又加以重建，城墙厚达数丈，土块坚实，结果火药倒往外击，贼人骑兵反倒死了不少，自成惧怕，领兵撤走了。
English: Kaifeng was originally the capital city of the Song Dynasty, but it was rebuilt by the Jin Dynasty. The city wall was several meters thick and the soil was solid. As a result, gunpowder fell outwards. On the other hand, many thieves and cavalrymen died. They were afraid and withdrew their troops.

古文：南陷西华，寻屠陈州，副使关永杰、知州侯君擢皆骂贼死。
现代文：他南下攻陷西华，不久屠戮陈州，副使关永杰、知州侯君擢都骂贼而死。
English: He went south to invade West China, and soon slaughtered Chenzhou. His vice-envoys, Guan Yongjie and Chizhou Hou Junzhang, both died cursing the thieves.

古文：归德、睢州、宁陵、太康数十郡县，悉残毁。
现代文：归德、睢州、宁陵、太康数十个州县，都被残毁。
English: Dozens of prefectures and counties in Guizhou, Dezhou, Ningling and Taikang have been completely destroyed.

古文：商丘知县梁以樟创死复苏，全家歼焉。
现代文：商丘知县梁以樟受伤昏死过去，后来醒来，结果全家都被杀死。
English: Liang Yijun of Shangqiu County in Sichuan Province was injured and passed out. He later woke up, and as a result, his entire family was killed.

古文：已，复攻开封，筑长围为持久计。
现代文：后来，自成又攻打开封，筑起长围做持久之计。
English: Later, Zicheng attacked and opened the seal, and built a long perimeter as a long-term strategy.

古文：诏起孙传庭为总督，释故尚书侯恂命督师，召左良玉援开封。
现代文：诏令起用孙传庭为总督，释放原尚书侯恂，命他领兵，召左良玉援助开封。
English: The imperial edict appointed Sun Chuanting as the governor, released the former Shang Shuhou, ordered him to lead the army, and summoned Zuo Liangyu to help open the seal.

古文：良玉至朱仙镇，大败，奔襄阳。
现代文：左良玉到朱仙镇，大败，逃到襄阳。
English: Zuo Liangyu went to Zhuxian Town, was defeated, and fled to Xiangyang.

古文：诸军皆屯河北，不敢进。
现代文：各部队都屯驻黄河以北，不敢前进。
English: All the troops are stationed north of the Yellow River and dare not advance.

古文：开封食尽。
现代文：开封粮尽。
English: Kaifeng ran out of grain.

古文：山东总兵刘泽清亦奉诏至。
现代文：山东总兵刘泽清也奉诏令来到。
English: Liu Zeqing, the general of the Shandong army, also came by imperial order.

古文：传庭知开封急，大会诸将西安，亟出关来救。
现代文：孙传庭知道开封危急，在西安大会诸将，赶快出关来救。
English: Sun Chuanting knew that Kaifeng was in a critical situation, so the generals at the Xi'an meeting hurried out of the gate to come to the rescue.

古文：未至，名衡等议决朱家寨口河灌贼，贼亦决马家口河欲灌城。秋九月癸未，天大雨，二口并决，声如雷，溃北门入，穿东南门出，注涡水。
现代文：他们还没有到达，高名衡等人商议在朱家寨口挖开黄河灌贼兵，贼人也在马家口挖开黄河想灌城，秋九月，天下起大雨，两口并决，响声如雷，洪水冲开北门而入，从东南门穿出，注入涡水。
English: Before they arrived, Gao Nianheng and others discussed digging up the Yellow River at the mouth of Zhujiazhai to flood the soldiers of thieves. The thieves also dug up the Yellow River at the mouth of Majiazhai to flood the city. In autumn and September, the world was hit by heavy rain. The two rivers collided and thundered loudly. The flood rushed in through the north gate and out through the southeast gate, injecting swirling water.

古文：城中百万户皆没，得脱者惟周王、妃、世子及抚按以下不及二万人。
现代文：城中一百万户都被淹没，只有周王和王妃、世子以及巡抚以下不到两万人逃脱。
English: One million households in the city were inundated, but less than twenty thousand people, including King Zhou, his wife, heir and governor, escaped.

古文：贼亦漂没万余，乃拔营西南去。
现代文：贼人也被漂没一万多，于是拔营向西南离去。
English: More than ten thousand thieves were also drowned, so they left the camp to the southwest.

古文：先是，有马守应称老回回、贺一龙称革里眼、贺锦称左金王、刘希尧称争世王、蔺养成称乱世王者，皆附自成，时号 革左五营。 
现代文：当初，马守应称老回回、贺一龙称革里眼、贺锦称左金王、刘希尧称争世王、蔺养成称乱世王，他们都归附自成，当时号为 革左五营 。
English: At first, Ma Shou was called Lao Hui Hui, He Yilong was called Ke Ligean, He Jin was called Zuo Jin Wang, Liu Xizhao was called Zheng Shi Wang, and Zou Yacheng was called Rui Shi Wang. They all belonged to Zicheng and were called Ke Zuo Wujing at that time.

古文：自成乃西迎传庭兵，遇于南阳，传庭军溃走，豫人所谓柿园之败也。
现代文：自成于是西进迎击孙传庭部队，双方相遇于南阳，孙传庭军溃败而走，这就是河南人所说的柿园之败。
English: Zicheng then marched west to meet Sun Chuanting's army, and the two sides met in Nanyang. Sun Chuanting's army was routed and fled. This is what Henan people call the defeat of Persimmon Garden.

古文：是时大清兵南侵，京师方告急，朝廷不暇复讨贼。
现代文：这时大清兵南侵，京师正在告急，朝廷无暇再去讨贼。
English: At this time, the Qing soldiers invaded the south, the Beijing division was in a hurry, and the imperial court had no time to go after the thieves.

古文：自成乃收群贼，连营五百余里，再屠南阳，进攻汝宁。
现代文：自成于是收服群贼，连营五百余里，再次屠戮南阳，进而攻打汝宁。
English: Zicheng then subdued the bandits, camped for more than five hundred miles, slaughtered Nanyang again, and then attacked Yuning.

古文：总兵虎大威中炮死，杨文岳被杀。
现代文：总兵虎大威中炮而死，杨文岳被杀。
English: The commander-in-chief of the army, Hu Dawei, died in the gunfire, and Yang Wenyu was killed.

古文：自成乃胁崇王由樻使从军，遂由确山、信阳、泌阳向襄阳。
现代文：自成于是胁迫崇王朱由木贵。左良玉望风南逃，自成进入襄阳。
English: Zicheng then coerced Chong Wang Zhu Yu Mu Gui. Zu Liang Yu Wang Feng fled south, and Zicheng entered Xiangyang.

古文：左良玉望风南走，自成入襄阳。分徇属城及德安诸州县，皆下，再破夷陵、荆门州。
现代文：自成分人巡行襄阳所属城池以及德安各州县，各地都投降了。再破夷陵、荆门州。
English: The self-organized people marched through the cities and villages belonging to Yangyang and the prefectures and counties of De'an, and all regions surrendered.

古文：自成自攻荆州，湘阴王俨钅尹遇害，烧献陵木城，穿毁宫殿。
现代文：自成自己去攻打荆州，湘阴王朱俨钅尹被害，贼人烧献陵木城，捣毁宫殿。
English: He went to attack Jingzhou on his own. The king of Hunan, Zhu Xiyin, was killed. Thieves burned the city of Lingmu and destroyed the palace.

古文：十六年春陷承天。
现代文：十六年春攻陷承天。
English: The 16th year of the Spring Offensive and the fall of Chengdu.

古文：将发献陵，有声震山谷，惧而止。
现代文：贼人将要挖掘献陵，突然有响声震动山谷，贼人害怕而止。
English: The robbers were about to dig up the mausoleum, when suddenly there was a noise that shook the valley. The robbers stopped in fear.

古文：帝掠潜山、京山、云梦、黄陂、孝感等州县，皆下。
现代文：贼人旁掠潜山、京山、云梦、黄陂、孝感等州县，全部攻了下来。
English: The bandits captured all the counties and prefectures including Guanshan, Jingshan, Yunmeng, Huangpi, and Xiaogan.

古文：先驱逼汉阳，良玉走九江。
现代文：贼人前锋逼近汉阳，左良玉逃到九江。
English: The thief striker approached Hanyang, while the left-handed player fled to Jiujiang.

古文：攻郧阳，抚治都御史徐起元及王光恩力守不下。
现代文：贼人进攻郧阳，抚治都御史徐起元和王光恩奋力坚守，没被攻下。
English: Thieves attacked Shenyang, Fuzhi governor Xu Qiyuan and Wang Guangen fought hard to hold out and were not captured.

古文：光恩，贼反正者也。
现代文：王光恩原是贼人反正过来的。
English: Wang Guang'en was originally a thief who came here anyway.

古文：自成自号奉天倡义大元帅，号罗汝才代天抚民威德大将军。
现代文：自成自号奉天倡义大元帅，封罗汝才为代天抚民威德大将军。
English: He made himself a grand marshal with the title of advocating righteousness in the name of Heaven, and he appointed Luo Rucai to be the general of Fumin Weide on behalf of Heaven.

古文：分其众，曰标营，领兵百队；曰先、后、左、右营，各领兵三十余队。标营白帜黑纛，自成独白鬃大纛银浮屠；左营帜白，右绯，前黑，后黄，纛随其色。
现代文：分别部众，一个叫标营，领兵一百队，还有前、后、左、右营，各领兵三十余队，标营白旗黑纛，自成的旗帜为白鬃大纛银浮屠；左营白旗，右营红旗，前营黑旗，后营黄旗，纛的颜色与旗相同。
English: Separate groups, one is called the standard battalion, with a hundred leading troops, and there are front, rear, left, and right battalions, with more than thirty leading troops each. The standard battalion has a white flag with a black crest, and the self-made flag is a white crest with a silver crest; the left battalion has a white flag, the right battalion has a red flag, the front battalion has a black flag, and the rear battalion has a yellow flag. The colors of the crest are the same as the flag.

古文：五营以序直昼夜，次第休息，巡徼严密。
现代文：五营按顺序昼夜值班，依次休息，巡察严密。
English: The five battalions will be on duty day and night in sequence, take a break in turn, and carry out strict inspections.

古文：逃者谓之落草，磔之。
现代文：逃跑的人称为落草，抓到要被肢解。
English: Those who escape are called otaku, and if caught, they are to be dismembered.

古文：收男子十五以上、四十以下者为兵。
现代文：招收男子十五岁以上，四十岁以下为兵。
English: Men over the age of fifteen and under the age of forty were recruited as soldiers.

古文：精兵一人，主刍、掌械、执爨者十人。
现代文：凡精兵一人，配给管草料、掌兵械以及饮炊的共十人。
English: For every elite soldier, a total of ten people were assigned to handle herbs, handle weapons, and cook and drink.

古文：军令不得藏白金，过城邑不得室处，妻子外不得携他妇人。
现代文：军令不得私藏白金，所过城邑不得占住民房，除妻子之外不得携带其他妇女。
English: According to the military order, soldiers are not allowed to hoard platinum, occupy residential buildings in the towns they pass through, or bring women other than their wives.

古文：寝兴悉用单布幕。
现代文：被单都用单布幕。
English: The bedspreads are all single-ply.

古文：绵甲厚百层，矢炮不能入。
现代文：棉甲厚一百层，弓箭炮石都打不透。
English: The cotton armor is a hundred layers thick, and the bows and arrows are impenetrable.

古文：一兵倅马三四匹，冬则以茵褥籍其蹄。
现代文：一个士兵配给三四匹马，冬天则用垫褥垫蹄子。
English: A soldier is allocated three or four horses, and in winter they are shod with a mat.

古文：剖人腹为马槽以饲马，马见人，辄锯牙思噬若虎豹。
现代文：剖人腹做马槽来喂马，使马一见到人，便像虎豹一样张开牙齿想吃人。
English: A man's stomach was cut open to make a manger to feed the horse, so that as soon as the horse saw a person, it opened its teeth like a tiger and leopard to eat the person.

古文：军止，即出较骑射，曰站队。
现代文：军队驻扎下来后，即出去比赛骑射，名为站队。
English: After the troops were stationed, they went out to compete in horse shooting, which was called the standing team.

古文：夜四鼓，蓐食以听令。
现代文：半夜四鼓，就坐在寝褥上吃饭，准备听令。
English: In the middle of the night, he would sit on his bunk to eat, ready to take orders.

古文：所过崇冈峻坂，腾马直上。
现代文：所过崇山峻岭，策马直上。
English: After passing through the high mountains and steep ridges, he rode straight up.

古文：水惟惮黄河，若淮、泗、泾、渭，则万众翘足马背，或抱鬛缘尾，呼风而渡，马蹄所壅阏，水为不流。
现代文：江河只怕黄河，像淮水、泗水、泾水、渭水这些河流，则万人竞渡，有的翘足于马背，有的抱着马鬣，有的扯着尾巴，风一般地渡了过去。马蹄壅塞，河水为之不流。
English: Rivers are only afraid of the Yellow River. For rivers such as Huai Shui, Xinshui, Xinshui and Xinshui, tens of thousands of people compete to cross. Some stand on horseback, some hold horseshoes, some pull their tails, and the wind generally passes. The horseshoe is blocked, so the river does not flow.

古文：临阵，列马三万，名三堵墙。
现代文：临阵时，列马三万，名叫三堵墙。
English: When on the verge of battle, 30,000 horses were lined up, known as the three walls.

古文：前者返顾，后者杀之。
现代文：前者如果回头看，后排便杀了他。
English: If the former looked back, the back row would kill him.

古文：战久不胜，马兵佯则诱官兵，步卒长枪三万，击刺如飞，马兵回击，无不大胜。
现代文：如久战不胜，骑兵便佯败以引诱官兵，如官兵上当，则步兵长枪三万，击刺如飞，骑兵回头击杀，无不大胜。
English: If there is no victory for a long time, the cavalry will be defeated to lure the officers and soldiers. If the officers and soldiers are deceived, the infantry will have 30,000 rifles, the stabbing will fly, and the cavalry will turn around and kill. There is no big victory.

古文：攻城，迎降者不杀，守一日杀十之三，二日杀十之七，三日屠之。
现代文：攻城时，出来迎降的不杀，守城一天的杀十分之三，两天十分之七，三天则屠城。
English: When attacking a city, it is better not to kill anyone who comes out to meet the attack, but when defending a city, it is better to kill three-tenths of the enemy in one day, seven-tenths in two days, and slaughter the city in three days.

古文：凡杀人，束尸为燎，谓之打亮。
现代文：凡杀人，捆起尸体烧烤，叫作打亮。
English: Whenever someone is killed, the bodies are bundled up and grilled, a process known as beating.

古文：城将陷，步兵万人环堞下，马兵巡徼，无一人得免。
现代文：城池将要攻陷时，步兵一万人围集在城堞下，骑兵往来巡察，无一人得以走免。
English: When the castle was about to fall, ten thousand infantrymen gathered under the castle, and cavalry patrolled back and forth. No one was able to escape.

古文：献忠虽至残忍，不逮也。
现代文：张献忠虽很残忍，也赶不上他。
English: Although Zhang Xiantu is very cruel, he can't keep up with him.

古文：诸营较所获，马骡者上赏，弓夭铅铳者次之，币帛又次之，珠玉为下。
现代文：各营比较所缴获的物品，得马骡的获上赏，弓矢铅铳的次之，币帛的又次之，珠玉得下赏。
English: Each battalion compared the seized items, and the horse tack was awarded the highest reward, followed by the bow and arrow lead ingot, followed by the coin tack, and the jewel was awarded the lowest reward.

古文：自成不好酒色，脱粟粗粝，与其下共甘苦。
现代文：自成不好酒色，吃的是粗米，与部下同甘共苦。
English: Self-made is not good wine color, eating is coarse rice, with his subordinates together through thick and thin.

古文：汝才妻妾数十，被服纨绮，帐下女乐数部，厚自奉养，自成尝嗤鄙之。
现代文：罗汝才妻妾数十，被服纨绮，帐下还有几部女乐，对她们厚加供养，自成常耻笑他。
English: Luo Rucai has dozens of wives and concubines, and he has been court-martialled. He also has several women's music under his account. He has provided for them generously, and they often make fun of him.

古文：汝才众数十万，用山西举人吉珪为谋主。
现代文：罗汝才部众数十万，用山西举人吉王圭为谋主。
English: Luo Ru gathered hundreds of thousands of talented people, and used Shanxi to raise a man, Ji Wanggui, as the mastermind.

古文：自成善攻，汝才善战，两人相须若左右手。
现代文：自成善攻，罗汝才善战，两人相互依赖，就像人的左右手一样。
English: Self-made good attack, Luo Ru only good fight, two people rely on each other, just like people's right and left hands.

古文：自成下宛、叶，克梁、宋，兵强士附，有专制心，顾独忌汝才。
现代文：自成攻下宛城、叶县，攻克梁州、宋州，兵力强大，士人归附，便产生了专制的念头，但心里唯独顾忌罗汝才。
English: After successfully conquering Wancheng and Ye County, as well as conquering Liangzhou and Songzhou, with a strong military force and the accession of scholars, he had the idea of autocracy, but in his heart, he was only concerned with defeating the enemy.

古文：乃召汝才所善贺一龙宴，缚之，晨以二十骑斩汝才于帐中，悉兼其众。
现代文：他于是设宴召来与罗汝才交好的贺一龙，将他捆了起来，到早晨时派二十名骑兵将罗汝才斩杀于帐中，全部兼并了他的部众。
English: He then invited He Yilong, who befriended Luo Rucai, to a banquet, tied him up, and in the morning sent twenty cavalrymen to kill Luo Rucai and annex all of his subordinates.

古文：自成在中州，所略城辄焚毁之。
现代文：自成在中州地区，所攻取的城池常加以焚毁。
English: Since it was established in the Chuzhou region, the captured castles were often burned.

古文：及渡汉江，谋以荆、襄为根本，改襄阳曰襄京，修襄王宫殿居之。
现代文：渡过汉江后，计划以荆州、襄阳为根本，便改襄阳为襄京，并修建襄王的宫殿用为居室。
English: After crossing the Han River, the plan was to take Jingzhou and Xiangyang as the foundation, then change Xiangyang to Xiangjing, and build a palace for King Xiang to use as a bedroom.

古文：改禹州曰均平府，承天府曰扬武州，他府县多所更易。
现代文：改禹州为均平府，承天府为扬武州，其他府县也多加更改。
English: Yuzhou was changed to Junping Prefecture, Chengdu Prefecture to Yangwu Prefecture, and other prefectures and counties were also changed.

古文：牛金星教以创官爵名号，大行署置。
现代文：牛金星教李自成创设官爵名号，大行设官。
English: Niu Jinxing taught Li Zicheng to create official titles, and Da Xing to appoint officials.

古文：自成无子，兄子过及妻弟高一功，迭居左右，亲信用事。
现代文：自成无子，哥哥的儿子李过以及内弟高一功，都留在左右，用为亲信。
English: He had no children of his own, but his brother's son, Li Kuan, and his brother-in-law, Gao Yikong, stayed around and were used as confidants.

古文：田见秀、刘宗敏为权将军，李岩、贺锦、刘希尧等为制将军，张鼐、党守素等为威武将军，谷可成、任维荣等为果毅将军，凡五营二十二将。
现代文：田见秀、刘宗敏被任为权将军，李岩、贺锦、刘希尧等人为制将军，张鼐、党守素等人为威武将军，谷可成、任维荣等人为果毅将军，共五营二十二将。
English: Tian Mingshu and Liu Zongmin were appointed as General Quan, Li Yan, He Jin, Liu Xizhao and others as artificial generals, Zhang Qian and Dang Shou Su as Generals Wei Wu, Gu Kecheng and Ren Weirong as Generals Gu Yi, a total of five battalions and twenty-two generals.

古文：又置上相、左辅、右弼、六政府侍郎、郎中、从事等官。
现代文：又设置上相、左辅、右弼、六政府侍郎、郎中、从事等官员。
English: In addition, officials such as the chief minister, left assistant minister, right deputy minister, and six government attendants, attendants, and attendants were set up.

古文：要地设防御使，府曰尹，州曰牧，县曰令。
现代文：险要之地设置防御使，府的长官叫尹，州叫牧，县叫令。
English: The prefectural governor is called Yin, the prefectural governor is called Maki, and the prefectural governor is called Ryo.

古文：封崇王由樻襄阳伯、邵陵王在城枣阳伯、保宁王绍圮宣城伯、肃宁王术〈木受〉顺义伯。
现代文：封崇王朱由木贵为襄阳伯，邵陵王朱在城为枣阳伯、保宁王朱绍土己为宣城伯、肃宁王朱术木受为顺义伯。
English: Feng Chong Wang Zhu Yu Mu Gui was Xiangyang Bo, Shao Ling Wang Zhu Zuo Cheng was Zaoyang Bo, Boryeong King Zhu Shao Tu Ji was Xuancheng Bo, Suning King Zhu Zhuk Muju was Shunyi Bo.

古文：以张国绅为上相，牛金星为左辅，来仪为右弼。
现代文：以张国绅为上相，牛金星为左辅，来仪为右弼。
English: Zhang Guosheng is the upper portrait, Cattle Venus is the left auxiliary, and Laiyi is the right image.

古文：国绅，安定人，尝官参政。既降，献文翔凤妻邓氏以媚自成。
现代文：张国绅是定远人，曾官任参政，投降后，献上文翔凤的妻子邓氏以取媚于自成。
English: Zhang Guoshen was from Dingyuan. He had served as an official and participated in politics. After the surrender, he presented Xiangfeng's wife, Deng, to Zicheng in order to win her favor.

古文：自成恶其伤同类，杀之，而归邓氏于其家。
现代文：自成恨其伤害同类，将他杀死，而将邓氏送回家。
English: Zicheng hated him for hurting his kind, killed him, and sent Mr. Deng home.

古文：六政府侍郎则石首喻上猷、江陵萧应坤、招远杨永裕、米脂李振声、江陵邓岩忠、西安姚锡胤，寻以宣城丘之陶代振声为兵政府侍郎。
现代文：六政府侍郎分别是石首喻上猷、江陵萧应坤、招远杨永裕、米脂李振声、江陵邓岩忠、西安姚锡胤，不久以宣城丘之陶取代李振声任兵政府侍郎。
English: The six government attendants were Shishou Yu Shangyu, Jiangling Xiao Yingkun, Zhaoyuan Yang Yongyu, Mizhi Li Zhengsheng, Jiangling Deng Yanzhong, Xi'an Yao Xitian, and soon replaced Li Zhengsheng as the government attendant.

古文：其余受伪职者甚众，不具载。
现代文：其他被授以伪职的很多，不详细记载了。
English: There are many others who were given fake positions, but they are not recorded in detail.

古文：使高一功、冯雄守襄阳，任继光守荆州，蔺养成、牛万才守夷陵，王文曜守澧州，白旺守安陆，萧云林守荆门，谢应龙守汉川，周凤梧守万禹州。
现代文：自成派高一功、冯雄守襄阳，任继光守荆州，蔺养成、牛万才守夷陵，王文曜守澧州，白旺守安陆，萧云林守荆门，谢应龙守汉川，周凤梧守禹州。
English: Zicheng dispatched Gao Yikong, Feng Xiong to guard Xiangyang, Ren Jiguang to guard Jingzhou, Zou Yicheng, Niu Wancai to guard Yiling, Wang Wenyou to guard Ganzhou, Baiwang to guard Anlu, Xiao Yunlin to guard Jingmen, Xie Yinglong to guard Hanchuan, and Zhou Fengwu to guard Yuzhou.

古文：于是河南、湖广、江北诸贼莫不听命。
现代文：于是河南、湖广、江北各贼无不听命于他。
English: As a result, all the bandits in Henan, Hukang and the northern part of the Yangtze River obeyed his orders.

古文：自成既杀汝才、一龙，又袭杀养成，夺守应兵，击杀袁时中于杞县。
现代文：自成杀了罗汝才、贺一龙后，又袭杀蔺养成，夺取马守应的部队，在杞县击杀袁时中。
English: After he successfully killed Luo Rucai and He Yilong, he attacked and killed Zou Qingcheng, captured Ma Shouye's troops, and killed Yuan Shizhong in Handan County.

古文：献忠方据武昌，自成遣使贺，且胁之曰： 老回回已降，曹操辈诛死，行及汝矣。 
现代文：张献忠正占据武昌，自成遣使者去祝贺，并且威胁他说： 老回回已经投降了，曹操之辈也被诛死了，下一个要轮到你了。 
English: Zhang Xianzhong was in control of Wuchang and sent an envoy of his own to congratulate him. He threatened him, saying: "The old emperor has surrendered, Cao Cao's descendants have also been strangled to death, and it will be your turn next."

古文：献忠大惧，南入长沙。
现代文：张献忠大为恐惧，南入长沙。
English: Zhang Xianzhong was terrified and fled south to Changsha.

古文：当是时，十三家七十二营诸大贼，降死殆尽，惟自成、献忠存，而自成独劲，遂自称曰新顺王。
现代文：当时，十三家七十二营各个大贼，基本上不降即死，只剩下自成和张献忠，而自成最强，遂自称为新顺王。
English: At that time, the thirteen families and seventy-two battalions of each great thief basically died without surrendering, leaving only Zicheng and Zhang Xianlian, and Zicheng was the strongest, so he called himself the king of Xin Shun.

古文：集牛金星等议兵所向。
现代文：他召集牛金星等人商议进军方向。
English: He gathered Niu Jinxing and others to discuss the direction of the march.

古文：金星请先取河北，直走京师。
现代文：牛金星请先取河北，直奔京师。
English: Cattle Venus, please take Hebei first and go straight to Beijing.

古文：杨永裕请下金陵，断燕都粮道。
现代文：杨永裕请东下金陵，断绝燕京粮道。
English: Yang Yongyu asked Jinling to go east and cut off Yanjing's grain route.

古文：从事顾君恩曰： 金陵居下流，事虽济，失之缓。
现代文：从事顾君恩说 ：金陵位在下游，虽说可以成功，但失之过缓。
English: Gu Jun'en, who is engaged in the project, said: Jinling is located downstream, and although it can be successful, it will fail too slowly.

古文：直走京师，不胜，退安所归，失之急。
现代文：直奔京师，如不胜，将要退到哪里？这失之过急。
English: Go straight to the capital division, if you don't win, where will you retreat to? This is too hasty.

古文：关中，大王桑梓邦也，百二山河，得天下三分之二，宜先取之，建立基业。
现代文：关中，是大王您家乡所在，百二山河，占了天下三分之二，应该先夺取它，建立基业。
English: Guanzhong is the location of the great king's hometown, with one hundred and two mountains and rivers, accounting for two-thirds of the world. It should be seized first to establish the foundation.

古文：然后旁略三边，资其兵力，攻取山西，后向京师，庶几进战退守，万全无失。 
现代文：然后略取三边，用这些兵力攻取山西，然后指向京师。这样则进可战退可守，万无一失。 
English: Then take the three sides, use these forces to capture Shanxi, and then point to the Beijing Division. In this way, you can advance, retreat, and defend, and there is no room for error.

古文：自成从之。
现代文：自成听从了他的意见。
English: We listened to their opinions.

古文：传庭之败于柿园而归陕也，大治兵，制火车二万辆，募壮士，使白广恩、高杰将，欲俟贼饥而击之。
现代文：孙传庭在柿园战败后回到陕西，大力治兵，制造火车二万辆，招募壮士，用白广恩、高杰为将，想等贼兵饥饿时攻击他们。
English: After the defeat of Persimmon Garden, Sun Chuanting returned to Shaanxi, vigorously governed the army, manufactured 20,000 trains, recruited strong men, and used Bai Guang'en and Gao Jie as generals, hoping to attack the robber soldiers when they were hungry.

古文：朝议日督战，不得已出关。
现代文：朝廷每天都建议他督战，孙传庭不得已出关。
English: The imperial court advised him to supervise the war every day, and Sun Chuanbing was forced to leave the imperial palace.

古文：以牛成虎、卢光祖为前锋，由灵宝入洛。
现代文：以牛成虎、卢光祖为前锋，由灵宝进入洛阳。
English: With Niu Chenghu and Lu Guangzu as the forwards, they entered Luoyang from Lingbao.

古文：高杰为是中军，檄广恩从新安来会。
现代文：高杰为中军，发檄文叫白广恩从新安来会师。
English: Gao Jie was a member of the Chinese army, and sent a letter to Bai Guang'en from Xin'an to invite him to join the army.

古文：河南将陈永福守新滩，四川将秦翼明出商、洛，为掎角。
现代文：河南将领陈永福守新滩，四川将领秦翼明出商县、洛南，互为犄角。
English: Chen Yongfu, general of Henan, guarded Xintan, and Qin Yiming, general of Sichuan, went to Shangxian and Luonan.

古文：前锋败贼渑池，至宝丰，再拔其城。
现代文：前锋在渑池击败贼兵，到宝丰，再拔其城。
English: The forward defeated the bandits in Dianchi, went to Baofeng, and then took the city.

古文：次郏。自成率万骑还战，复大败，几被擒。
现代文：进到郏县驻扎，自成率领一万骑兵回头交战，又被打得大败，自成也差点被擒。
English: He entered and stationed himself in Jixian County, led ten thousand cavalrymen led by Zicheng to fight back, and was defeated again. Zicheng was also almost captured.

古文：会天大雨，道泞，粮车不进。
现代文：正赶上大雨，道路泥泞，粮车无法前进。
English: They are just catching up with the heavy rain, the roads are muddy, and the grain trucks can't move forward.

古文：自成遣轻骑出汝州，要截粮道。
现代文：自成派轻骑出汝州，要截断粮道。
English: The Jicheng faction is riding lightly out of Ruzhou and wants to cut off the grain route.

古文：传庭乃分军三，令广恩从大道，令高杰亲随从间道，迎粮，令永福守营。
现代文：孙传庭于是分兵为三，令白广恩走大道，令高杰随从他走间道去迎粮车，令陈永福守营。
English: Therefore, Sun Chuanting divided his troops into three, ordering Bai Guang'en to walk on the main road, ordering Gao Jie to follow him on the side road to meet the grain truck, and ordering Chen Yongfu to guard the camp.

古文：传庭既行，永福兵亦争发，不可禁，遂为贼所蹑。
现代文：孙传庭走后，陈永福的部队也争着要走，不可禁止，遂被贼人追踪。
English: After Sun Chuanting left, Chen Yongfu's troops also wanted to leave and could not be stopped, so they were pursued by the thieves.

古文：至南阳，传庭还战，贼阵五重，官军克其三。已而稍却，火车奔，骑兵亦大奔。贼纵铁骑践之，传庭大败。
现代文：到了南阳，孙传庭回师交战。贼人设了五重阵营，官军攻克了三重，不久官军稍稍退却，火车先奔逃，骑兵也纷纷奔逃，贼人纵铁骑践踏，孙传庭大败。
English: Arriving in Nanyang, Sun Chuan Ting returned to his division to engage in battle. The thieves set up a five-layered camp, and the government army defeated the three-layered camp. Soon, the government army retreated slightly. The train ran away first, and the cavalry also ran away one after another. The thieves trampled on the vertical iron horse, and Sun Chuan Ting was defeated.

古文：自成空壁追，一日夜逾四百里，官军死者四万余人，失兵器辎重数十万。
现代文：自成尽发部众来追赶，一昼夜追了四百余里，官军死亡四万多人，丧失兵器辎重数十万。
English: They chased the enemy for more than four hundred miles in one day and night. More than forty thousand government troops were killed and hundreds of thousands of weapons were lost.

古文：传庭奔河北，转趋潼关，气败沮不复振。
现代文：孙传庭逃到黄河北岸，转奔潼关，气势败沮，从此不能重振起来。
English: Sun Chuanting fled to the north bank of the Yellow River and went to Shaoguan. He lost his momentum and was unable to recover.

古文：冬十月，自成陷潼关，传庭死，遂连破华阴、渭南、华、商、临潼。
现代文：冬十月，自成攻陷潼关，孙传庭死，遂连破华阴、渭南、华州和临潼，进而攻打西安。
English: In the winter of October, he attacked Shaoguan on his own, and after Sun Chuan died in court, he went on to attack Huayin, Hunan, Huazhou and Linyi, and then attacked Xi'an.

古文：进攻西安，守将王根子开东门纳贼。
现代文：西安守将王根子开东门接贼人进城。
English: Wang Genzi, the governor of Xi'an, opened the east gate to welcome the thieves into the city.

古文：自成执秦王存枢以为权将军，永寿王谊曈为制将军。
现代文：自成抓住秦王朱存枢，任命为权将军，永寿王朱谊氵兄为副将军。
English: Zicheng seized the Qin King Zhu Cunxu and appointed him as the general of power, and the Yongshou King Zhu Yixuan's brother became the deputy general.

古文：巡抚冯师孔以下死者十余人，布政使陆之祺等俱降。自成大掠三日，下令禁止。
现代文：巡抚冯师孔以下等十余人死亡，布政使陆之祺等人全部投降，自成大掠三天，才下令禁止。
English: More than ten people, including the governor Feng Shikong and his subordinates, were killed, and the political envoy Lu Zhiyao and others all surrendered. It took three days for the large-scale robbery to be banned.

古文：改西安曰长安，称西京。
现代文：改西安为长安，称西京。
English: He changed Xi'an to Chang'an and called it West Beijing.

古文：赐顾君恩女乐一部，赏入关策也。
现代文：赐给顾君恩女乐一部，作为他提出的入关策略的报赏。
English: As a reward for his entry strategy, Gu Junen was given a part of the women's music.

古文：大发民，修长安城，开驰道。
现代文：大发民工，修筑长安城，开通驰道。
English: The construction of Chang'an City, the opening of the highway.

古文：自成每三日亲赴教场校射，百姓望见黄龙纛，咸伏地呼万岁。
现代文：自成每隔三天便亲自到教场检阅比武，百姓望见黄龙纛，都拜倒在地欢呼万岁。
English: Since then, he has personally visited the school every three days to review the competition. When the people saw Huanglongyao, they bowed to the ground and cheered.

古文：诸将白广恩、高汝利、左光先、梁甫先行后皆降。陈永福以先射中自成目，保山巅不敢下，自成折箭为誓，招之，亦降。惟高杰以窃自成妻走延安，为李过所追，折而东，渡宜川，绝蒲津以守。
现代文：白广恩、高汝利、左光先、梁甫等将领先后投降，陈永福因先前射中自成的眼睛，便在山顶上自保而不敢下，自成折断箭杆为誓，招抚他，他也投降了，只有高杰因窃走自成的妻子而逃到延安，被李过追赶，便折而向东，从宜川渡过黄河，绝断蒲津以固守。
English: Bai Guang'en, Gao Ruli, Zuo Guangxian, Liang Fu and others would surrender after taking the lead. Chen Yongfu, because he had previously shot himself in the eye, did not dare to defend himself on the top of the mountain. He swore to break the arrow shaft and caress him, and he also surrendered. Only Gao Jie fled to Yan'an because he stole his self-made wife. He was chased by Li Peng, so he turned to the east, crossed the Yellow River from Yichuan, and decided not to hold on to Puzin.

古文：自成兵所至风靡，乃诣米脂祭墓。
现代文：自成的军队所向披靡，他于是回米脂祭坟。
English: Overwhelmed by his self-made army, he then returned to the rice fat sacrificial grave.

古文：向为军所发，焚弃遗骴，筑土封之。求其宗人，赠金封爵以去。
现代文：祖坟以前被官军挖开，遗骨被焚烧抛弃，这时自成重新筑土埋葬，又访求同宗的人，赐封金银爵号而去。
English: The ancestral grave had previously been dug up by government troops, and the remains were burned and thrown away. At this time, he built a new burial ground on his own. He also visited people of the same family and gave them the title of gold and silver.

古文：改延安府曰天保府，米脂曰天保县，清涧曰天波府。
现代文：改延安府叫天保府，米脂叫天保县，清涧叫天波府。
English: Yanan Prefecture was renamed Tianbo Prefecture, Mizhi Prefecture was renamed Tianbo County, and Qinghai Province was renamed Tianbo Prefecture.

古文：凤翔不下，屠之。
现代文：凤翔不投降，便屠城。
English: If Fengxiang does not surrender, it will be slaughtered.

古文：始，自成入陕西，自谓故乡，毋有侵暴，未一月抄掠如故。
现代文：当初，自成进入陕西时，说是自己的故乡，没有侵暴百姓，但不到一个月又抢掠如故了。
English: At first, when Zicheng entered Shaanxi, he said it was his hometown and did not violate the people, but less than a month later, the looting was back to normal.

古文：又以士大夫必不附己，悉索诸荐绅，搒掠征其金，死者瘗一穴。
现代文：他又以为士大夫肯定不归附自己，便搜索各个缙绅，将他们拷打，索要金银，死了的便埋在一个坑中。
English: He also thought that the magistrate would definitely not be loyal to him, so he searched for all the gentry, tortured them, demanded gold and silver, and buried the dead in a pit.

古文：榆林故死守，李过等不能克，自成大发兵攻陷之。
现代文：榆林仍旧死守，李过等人攻不下，自成便大量发兵将其攻陷。
English: Yulin was still on the defensive, and Li Guo and others could not attack it, so they sent a large number of troops to attack it.

古文：副使都任，总兵王世国、尤世威等，俱不屈死。
现代文：副使都任，总兵王世国、尤世威等人，都不屈而死。
English: The vice-ambassadors were all appointed, and the commander-in-chief, Wang Shiguo, You Shwei, and others all died.

古文：乘胜取宁夏，屠庆阳，执韩王亶塉。
现代文：贼人乘胜攻取宁夏，屠戮庆阳，捉拿韩王朱土脊。
English: The thieves took advantage of the victory to capture Ningxia, slaughter Qingyang, and capture Han Wang Zhudoji.

古文：移攻兰州，甘肃巡抚林日端等亦死。
现代文：移师攻打兰州，甘肃巡抚林日瑞等人也死了。
English: The transferred division attacked Lanzhou, and the Gansu patrol leader Lin Rixui and others also died.

古文：进陷西宁，于是肃州、山丹、永昌、镇番、庄浪皆降，陕西地悉归自成。
现代文：贼人进而攻陷西宁，于是肃州、山丹、永昌、镇番、庄浪等皆投降，陕西之地全归自成占有。
English: The bandits then invaded Xining, and as a result, Suzhou, Shandan, Yongchang, Zhenban, Zhuanglang, etc. all surrendered, and the land of Shaanxi was completely occupied.

古文：又遣贼渡河，陷平阳，杀宗室三百余人。
现代文：又遣贼兵渡过黄河，攻陷平阳，杀死宗室三百余人。
English: He also sent soldiers to cross the Yellow River and invade Pingyang, killing more than three hundred members of his family.

古文：高杰奔泽州。
现代文：高杰逃到泽州。
English: Gao Jie fled to Zezhou.

古文：诏以余应桂总督三边，收边兵剿贼，然全陕已没，应桂不能进。
现代文：诏令余应桂总督三边，收集边防兵来剿贼，但整个陕西已经陷没，余应桂不能前进。
English: The emperor ordered Yu Ying Gui, the governor of the three sides, to collect border guards to fight the thieves, but the whole of Shaanxi has been trapped, and Yu Ying Gui cannot advance.

古文：十七年正月庚寅朔，自成称王于西安，僣国号曰大顺，改元永昌，改名自晟。追尊其曾祖以下，加谥号，以李继迁为太祖。
现代文：十七年正月初一，自成在西安称王，僭称国号叫大顺，改元永昌，追尊他的曾祖父以下，加给谥号，以李继迁为太祖。
English: On the first day of the first month of the seventeenth year, Zicheng proclaimed himself king in Xi'an, changed the country's name to Dashun, changed the era to Yongchang, followed his great-grandfather, and added the surname to Li Jijian as the great-grandfather.

古文：设天佑殿大学士，以牛金星为之。
现代文：设天佑殿大学士，以牛金星来担任。
English: Set up the Heaven's Blessing Hall Scholarship, with Niu Jinxing as the winner.

古文：增置六政府尚书，设弘文馆、文谕院、谏议、直指使、从政、统会、尚契司、验马寺、知政使、书写房等官。
现代文：增设六政府尚书，设弘文馆、文谕院、谏议、直指使、从政、统会、尚契司、验马寺、知政使、书写房等官。
English: Six government offices were added, including the Hongwu Library, the Literature Research Institute, the Deliberation Office, the Direct Delegate Office, the Political Affairs Office, the National Unification Council, the Official Documents Division, the Horse Inspection Temple, the Political Advisor Office, and the Writing Room.

古文：以乾州宋企郊为吏政尚书、平湖陆之祺为户政尚书、真宁巩焴为礼政尚书、归安张嶙然为兵政尚书。
现代文：以乾州宋企郊为吏政尚书、平湖陆之祺为户政尚书、真宁巩火育为礼政尚书、归安张嶙然为兵政尚书。
English: Songqi Suburbs in Qianzhou is a good example of leadership, Pinghu Lujiazui is a good example of household management, Janning Gonghuyu is a good example of etiquette, and Gui'an Zhangyuan is a good example of military management.

古文：复五等爵，大封功臣，侯刘宗敏以下九人，伯刘体纯以下七十二人，子三十人，男五十五人。
现代文：恢复五等爵制，大封功臣，给刘宗敏等九人封侯，刘体纯等七十二人封伯，有三十人封子，五十五人封男。
English: The five-class peerage system was restored, and nine people, including Liu Zongmin, were given the title of vassal, 72 people, including Liu Tizhun, were given the title of vassal, 30 people were given the title of vassal, and 55 people were given the title of vassal.

古文：定军制。有一马儳行列者斩之，马腾入田苗者斩之。
现代文：制定军事制度，凡有一马站队列不齐的就斩之，马跃入庄稼地的也斩之。
English: Formulate a military system, where there is a horse station with an uneven queue, it will be cut off, and the horse jumping into the farmland will also be cut off.

古文：籍步兵四十万、马兵六十万。
现代文：登记有步兵四十万，骑兵六十万。
English: Four hundred thousand infantry and six hundred thousand cavalry were registered.

古文：兵政侍郎杨王休为都肄，出横门，至渭桥，金鼓动地。
现代文：兵政侍郎杨王休建都肆，从横门直到渭桥，金鼓动地。
English: Yang Wang Xiu, the attendant of the military government, built the capital, and from the side gate to the bridge, the gold flowed.

古文：令弘文馆学士李化鳞等草檄驰谕远近，指斥乘舆。
现代文：自成令弘文馆学士李化鳞等人起草檄文驰告远近各地，指责皇上。
English: Li Huayu, a scholar at the Hongwen Academy, and others drafted a letter to be sent to all parts of the country, criticizing the emperor.

古文：是日，大风霾，黄雾四塞。
现代文：这一天，大风夹着尘土，黄雾四塞。
English: On this day, there was a strong wind with dust, and the yellow fog was everywhere.

古文：事闻，帝大惊，召廷臣议。
现代文：事情传到京城，皇上大惊，召集廷臣来商议。
English: When the news reached the capital, the emperor was shocked and summoned courtiers to discuss the matter.

古文：大学士李建泰请督师，帝许之。
现代文：大学士李建泰请求督师，皇上答应了。
English: Li Jiantai, a college student, asked for a supervisor, and the emperor agreed.

古文：时山西自平阳陷，河津、稷山、荥河皆陷，他府县多望风送款。
现代文：当时山西自从平阳陷落后，河津、稷山、荥河也都失陷，其他府县多望风送款投降。
English: At that time, after the fall of Pingyang, Shanxi, Kawazu, Lushan, and Luohe also fell, and other prefectures and counties surrendered.

古文：二月，自成渡河，破汾州，徇河曲、静乐，攻太原，执晋王求桂，巡抚蔡懋德死之。
现代文：二月，自成渡过黄河，击破汾州，巡视河曲、静乐，攻打太原，抓住晋王朱求桂，巡抚蔡懋德死。
English: In February, Zicheng crossed the Yellow River, defeated Zhangzhou, inspected Hequ and Jingle, attacked Taiyuan, captured the Jin king Zhu Qugui, and the governor Cai Bingde died.

古文：北徇忻、代，宁武总兵周遇吉战死。
现代文：又北上巡行忻州、代州，宁武总兵周遇吉战死。
English: They also marched northward to Bozhou and Daizhou. The Ningwu general Zhou Yuxi was killed in the battle.

古文：自成先遣游兵入故关，掠大名、真定而北。身率众贼并边东犯，陷大同，巡抚卫景瑗、总兵朱三乐死。
现代文：自成先派游兵进入故关，攻取大名、真定以北，自率贼众沿着边防线东犯，攻陷大同，巡抚卫景瑗、总兵朱三乐死。
English: Zicheng first sent rangers to enter the old pass, captured the north of Daimyo and Zhending, led the thieves along the border line, attacked and captured Datong, and the governor Wei Jingyao and the general soldier Zhu Sanle died.

古文：自成杀代王传齐，代藩宗室殆尽。
现代文：自成杀代王朱传忄齐，代王的宗室几乎死光。
English: King Zhu Chuanqi committed suicide. The king's family was almost wiped out.

古文：犯宣府，总兵姜环迎降，巡抚朱之冯死。
现代文：进犯宣府，总兵姜王襄迎降，巡抚朱之冯死。
English: Xuanwu was attacked, the general soldier Jiang Wangxiang surrendered, and the inspector Zhu Zifeng died.

古文：遂犯阳和，由柳沟逼居庸，总兵官唐通、太监杜之秩迎降。
现代文：贼兵遂犯阳和，由柳沟逼近居庸关，总兵官唐通、太监杜之秩迎降。
English: The robber soldiers then made peace with Yang and approached Juyongguan from Liugou. The general officer Tang Tong and the eunuch Du were demoted in rank.

古文：三月十三日，焚昌平，总兵官李守鑅死。
现代文：三月十三日焚烧昌平，总兵官李守钅荣死。
English: On March 13, Changping was burned, and the commander-in-chief, Li Shouyi, died with honor.

古文：始，贼欲侦京师虚实，往往阴遣人辇重货，贾贩都市，又令充部院诸掾吏，探刺机密。
现代文：当初，贼人想刺探京师虚实，往往偷偷派人载着重货，到都市做贩，并派人充任各部院的属吏，刺探机密情报。
English: At first, thieves wanted to spy on the truth and falsity of the Beijing division, and often secretly sent people to carry heavy goods and do business in the city, and sent people to serve as officials of various ministries and institutions to spy on confidential information.

古文：朝廷有谋议，数千里立驰报。
现代文：朝廷有什么谋议，哪怕是数千里之外，他们也立即飞骑报告。
English: Even if they are thousands of miles away, they immediately report what the court has planned.

古文：及抵昌平，兵部发骑探贼，贼辄勾之降，无一还者。
现代文：到贼人抵达昌平时，兵部派骑兵去侦察，贼人总是将他们留下投降，无一复还。
English: When the bandits arrived in Changping, the army sent cavalry to investigate, but the bandits always left them behind and surrendered, never to return.

古文：贼游骑至平则门，京师犹不知也。
现代文：贼兵游骑到平则门，京师还不知道呢。
English: Kleptocrats roam to Pingzimen, and the Beijing division does not know about it.

古文：十七日，帝召问群臣，莫对，有泣者。
现代文：十七日，皇上召群臣来询问，没有人回答，有的还哭了。
English: On the seventeenth day, the emperor summoned his ministers to inquire, but no one answered, and some even cried.

古文：俄顷贼环攻九门，门外先设三大营，悉降贼。
现代文：不久贼兵围攻九座城门，门外原先设立的三大营，都投降了贼人。
English: Not long after, the bandits besieged the nine gates of the city. The three major battalions that were originally set up outside the gates all surrendered to the bandits.

古文：京师久乏饷，乘陴者少，益以内侍。
现代文：京师长期缺粮饷，能登上女墙作战的很少，便用宦官补充。
English: The Beijing Division was chronically short of food, and few were able to fight on the Female Wall, so they were supplemented with eunuchs.

古文：内侍专守城事，百司不敢问。
现代文：宦官专管守城事务，百司不敢过问。
English: The eunuchs were in charge of the city's defense, and Baishi dared not question them.

古文：十八日，贼攻益急，自成驻彰义门外，遣降贼太监杜勋缒入见帝，求禅位。
现代文：十八日，贼兵攻城更急，自成驻扎在彰义门外，将已投降的太监杜勋吊进城中，派他去见皇上，求皇上禅位。
English: On the 18th, the robber soldiers attacked the city more urgently, and stationed themselves outside the Changyi Gate. They hoisted the eunuch Du Xun, who had already surrendered, into the city, and sent him to see the emperor to ask the emperor for Zen.

古文：帝怒，叱之下，诏亲征。
现代文：皇上大怒，将他斥下，诏令亲征。
English: The emperor flew into a rage, dismissed him and ordered him to be conscripted.

古文：日暝，太监曹化淳启彰义门，贼尽入。
现代文：天黑后，太监曹化淳打开彰义门，贼兵全部入城。
English: After dark, the eunuch Cao Huachun opened the Changyi Gate, and all the thieves entered the city.

古文：帝出宫，登煤山，望烽火彻天，叹息曰： 苦我民耳。 
现代文：皇上出宫，登上煤山，望着满天的烽火，叹息道： 苦了我的百姓了。 
English: The emperor went out of the palace, climbed the coal mountain, looked at the sky full of bonfires, and sighed: My people are suffering.

古文：徘徊久之，归乾清宫，令送太子及永王、定王于戚臣周奎、田弘遇第，剑击长公主，趣皇后自尽。
现代文：徘徊良久，回到乾清宫，令人将太子和永王、定王送到外戚周奎、田弘遇家中，拔剑刺长公主，催促皇后自尽。
English: After wandering for a long time, they returned to the Qianqing Palace, and had the prince, Yong Wang, and Ding Wang sent to the home of their relatives, Zhou Kui and Tian Hong, where they drew their swords and stabbed the eldest princess, urging the empress to commit suicide.

古文：十九日丁未，天未明，皇城不守，呜钟集百官，无至者。
现代文：十九日，天还没亮，皇城失守，鸣钟召集百官，竟没有一人到来。
English: On the 19th, before dawn, the imperial city was lost, the bells were rung to summon hundreds of officials, but no one came.

古文：乃复登煤山，书衣襟为遗诏，以帛自缢于山亭，帝遂崩。
现代文：皇上于是又登上煤山，在衣襟上写下遗诏，在山亭中用帛上吊，皇上于是驾崩。
English: The emperor then ascended the coal mountain, wrote his last will and testament on the lapel of his robe, and hanged himself with a halter in the mountain pavilion. The emperor then passed away.

古文：太监王承恩缢于侧。
现代文：太监王承恩也在旁边上吊。
English: The eunuch Wang Cheng'en also hanged himself nearby.

古文：自成毰笠缥衣，乘乌驳马，入承天门。
现代文：自成头戴毡帽，身穿淡青色衣服，骑着乌驳马，进入承天门。
English: He put on a skullcap, wore light blue clothes, and rode a horse to enter the Gate of Heaven.

古文：伪丞相牛金星，尚书宋企郊、喻上猷，侍郎黎志升、张嶙然等骑而从。
现代文：伪丞相牛金星，尚书宋企郊、喻上猷，侍郎黎志升、张嶙然等人骑马相随。
English: Pseudo-minister Niu Jinxing, Shangshu Song Qijuan, Yu Shangtao, and his attendants Li Zhisheng and Zhang Yulan followed on horseback.

古文：登皇极殿，据御座，下令大索帝后，期百官三日朝见。
现代文：自成登上皇极殿，占据御座，下令搜索皇后，与百官约定三日后朝见。
English: He ascended the Imperial Throne Hall of his own accord, occupied the throne, ordered a search for the empress, and made an appointment with a hundred officials to see the emperor three days later.

古文：文臣自范景文、勋戚自刘文炳以下，殉节者四十余人。
现代文：文臣从范景文以下，勋戚从刘文炳以下，有四十余人殉节。
English: There were more than forty people who died on this day, including scholars and courtiers from Fan Jingwen and below, and honored relatives from Liu Wenyi and below.

古文：宫女魏氏投河，从者二百余人。
现代文：宫女魏氏投河自杀，有二百多人跟从。
English: The consort of the Wei Dynasty committed suicide by throwing herself into a river, and more than 200 people followed her.

古文：象房象皆哀吼流泪。
现代文：象房的大象都哀吼流泪。
English: The elephants in the elephant house are wailing and weeping.

古文：太子投周奎家，不得入，二王亦不能匿，先后拥至，皆不屈，自成羁之宫中。
现代文：太子投奔周奎家，却不能进去，永王、定王也无处藏身，先后被抓来见自成，他们都不屈服，自成将他们关在宫中。
English: The prince rushed to Zhou Kui's house, but he couldn't get in. Yong Wang and Ding Wang also had nowhere to hide. They were arrested one after another to see Zicheng. They didn't give in and Zicheng locked them up in the palace.

古文：长公主绝而复苏，舁至，令贼刘宗敏疗治。
现代文：长公主昏死复醒，被抬来，自成令贼人刘宗敏为她治疗。
English: After the eldest princess regained consciousness, she was carried to the hospital, where the thief Liu Zongmin took it upon himself to treat her.

古文：已，乃知帝后崩，自成命以宫扉载出，盛柳棺，置东华门外，百姓过者皆掩泣。
现代文：不久，知道皇后已去世，自成便命人用宫中门板运出，装入柳棺，放置在东华门外，路过的百姓都掩面而泣。
English: Soon, knowing that the empress had passed away, Zicheng ordered someone to use the palace door panel to transport her out, load her into a willow coffin, and place it outside the Donghua Gate. The people passing by all hid their faces and wept.

古文：越三日己酉，味爽，成国公朱纯臣、大学士魏藻德率文武百官入贺，皆素服坐殿前。
现代文：过了三天，天刚亮，成国公朱纯臣、大学士魏藻德率领文武百官入宫朝贺，他们都穿着素服坐在殿前。
English: Three days later, just after dawn, Cheng Guo Gong, Zhu Chuncheng, and Wei Zhao De, a university scholar, led hundreds of military and civilian officials into the palace for morning greetings. They were all wearing plain clothes and sitting in front of the palace.

古文：自成不出，群贼争戏侮，为椎背、脱帽，或举足加颈，相笑乐，百官慑伏不敢动。
现代文：自成不出来，群贼争相对百官戏耍侮辱，或槌打他们的背部，脱下他们的帽子，或将他们的脚弯起来勾在脖子上，以此相笑闹，百官都害怕得趴在地上不敢动。
English: Unable to get out on their own, the band of thieves playfully insulted the officers, or hammered their backs, took off their hats, or hooked their feet up around their necks to make fun of them, and the officers were so scared that they couldn't move.

古文：太监王德化叱诸臣曰： 国亡君丧，若曹不思殡先帝，乃在此耶！ 
现代文：太监王德化叱骂群臣道 ：国家灭亡，君主丧生，你们不思殓殡先帝，在这里干什么？ 
English: The eunuch Wang Dehua scolded the group of courtiers: "The country is ruined, the monarch is dead, you don't think about burying the former emperor, what are you doing here?

古文：因哭，内侍数十人皆哭，藻德等亦哭。
现代文：他于是哭起来，宦官数十人都哭了，魏藻德等人也哭。
English: He then began to cry. Dozens of eunuchs were crying, and Wei Zengde and others were also crying.

古文：顾君恩以告自成，改殓帝后，用兖冕祎翟，加苇厂云。
现代文：顾君恩将情况告诉自成，便改殓皇后，给她戴上哀冕，穿上画有野鸡图案的衣，并加盖一间草棚。
English: Gu Jun'en told the situation to Zicheng, and then changed her into a queen, put a mourning crown on her, put on a dress with a pheasant pattern, and built a grass shed.

古文：大学士陈演劝进，不许。
现代文：大学士陈演劝自成登帝位，自成不许。
English: Chen Yuan, a university scholar, advised Zicheng to ascend to the throne. Zicheng was not allowed to do so.

古文：封太子为宋王。
现代文：封太子为宋王。
English: The crown prince was King Song.

古文：放刑部、锦衣卫系囚。
现代文：放出刑部、锦衣卫关押的囚犯。
English: Release prisoners held by the Department of Corrections and the Department of Correctional Services.

古文：自成自居西安，建置官吏，至是益尽改官制。
现代文：自成自从居住于西安，便建置官吏，至此更尽改官制。
English: Since Zicheng lived in Xi'an, he established officials, and thus completely changed the official system.

古文：六部曰六政府，司官曰从事，六科曰谏议，十三道曰直指使，翰林院曰弘文馆，太仆寺曰验马寺，巡抚曰节度使，兵备曰防御使，知府州县曰尹、曰牧、曰令。
现代文：六部叫六政府，各部属官叫从事，六科叫谏议，十三道叫直指使，翰林院叫弘文馆，太仆寺叫验马寺，巡抚叫节度使，兵备使叫防御使，府州县长官分别叫尹、牧、令。
English: The six departments are called the six governments, the subordinate officials of each department are called the engaged, the six disciplines are called the deliberation, the thirteen roads are called the direct envoys, the Hanlin Academy is called the Hongwen Hall, the Dapu Temple is called the Horse Inspection Temple, the inspector is called the festival envoy, the military envoy is called the defense envoy, and the prefectural and county governors are respectively called Yin, Maki, and Ling.

古文：召见朝官，自成南响坐，金星、宗敏、企郊等左右杂坐，以次呼名，分三等授职。
现代文：自成召见朝官，他南面而坐，牛金星、刘宗敏、宋企郊等人在左右杂坐，依次喊各人的名字，分三等授以官职。
English: Zicheng was summoned to see the imperial official, he sat facing south, and Niu Jinxing, Liu Zongmin, Song Qijuan and others sat on the left and right, shouting the names of each person in turn, and awarding official positions in three classes.

古文：自四品以下少詹事梁绍阳、杨观光等无不污伪命，三品以上独用故侍郎侯恂。
现代文：自少詹事梁绍阳、杨观光等四品官以下，无不不顾廉耻地接受伪命，三品以上官员唯独任用原侍郎侯恂。
English: From Shao Zhan Zhi Liang, Shao Yang, Yang Guoguang and other four-rank officials on down, all of them shamelessly accepted false orders, while officials with three or more ranks were only appointed by the former chamberlain Hou Yi.

古文：其余勋戚、文武诸臣奎、纯臣、演、藻德等共八百余人，送宗敏等营中，拷掠责赇赂，至灼肉折胫，备诸惨毒。
现代文：其他勋戚、文武大臣周奎、朱纯臣、陈演、魏藻德等共八百余人，都被送到刘宗敏营中，被拷打索要贿赂，甚至烧灼肌肉，折断胫骨，备尽惨毒。
English: A total of more than eight hundred people, including other honored relatives, Minister of Education and Culture Zhou Kui, Zhu Chuncheng, Chen Rong and Wei Zangde, were all sent to Liu Zongmin Camp, where they were tortured and asked for bribes, and even had their muscles burned, their cheekbones broken, and were prepared for the worst.

古文：藻德遇马世奇家人，泣曰： 吾不能为若主，今求死不得。 
现代文：魏藻德遇到马世奇家人，哭着说： 我不能为你做主，如今是求死不得呀。 
English: Weizao De met Masechi's family and said in tears: "I can't be the one to make decisions for you. Now I'm begging for death."

古文：贼又编排甲，令五家养一贼，大纵淫掠，民不胜毒，缢死相望。
现代文：贼人又编制排甲，令五家共养一贼，并纵贼淫掠，百姓无法忍受他们的毒害，上吊而死的人到处可见。
English: Thieves were also organized into platoons, so that five families shared one thief, and thieves were allowed to plunder. The people could not bear their poison, and people who hanged themselves could be seen everywhere.

古文：征诸勋戚大臣金，金足辄杀之。
现代文：向勋戚大臣索要黄金，但黄金交足后还常常被杀。
English: They demanded gold from the Minister of the Order, but were often killed after handing over the gold.

古文：焚太庙神主，迁太祖主于帝王庙。
现代文：贼人焚烧太庙的神主牌位，将太祖的牌位迁到帝王庙。
English: Thieves burned the god card of the imperial temple and moved the card of the great ancestor to the imperial temple.

古文：时贼党已陷保定，李建泰降，畿内府县悉附。
现代文：当时贼党已经攻陷保定，李建泰投降，畿内各个府县都归附了贼人。
English: At that time, the Kleptocrats had already captured Baoding, Li Jiantai surrendered, and all prefectures and counties in the Kinai region were annexed to the Kleptocrats.

古文：山东、河南遍设官吏，所至无违者。
现代文：在山东、河南遍设官吏，所到之处无人敢违抗。
English: In Shandong and Henan, government officials were set up everywhere, and no one dared to resist.

古文：及淮，巡抚路振飞发兵拒之，乃去。
现代文：他们到达淮水，巡抚路振飞发兵抗拒，他们才离去。
English: When they arrived at Huai Shui, Governor Lu Zhenfei sent troops to resist, and they left.

古文：自成谓真得天命，金星率贼众三表劝进，乃从之，令撰登极仪，诹吉日。
现代文：自成以为真的得到天命，牛金星率领贼众三次上表劝他登大位，这才听从了，并令准备登基礼仪，择吉日。
English: He thought that he had truly received the destiny of heaven, and went to the emperor three times to persuade him to ascend to the throne, but he only obeyed, and ordered the preparation of the enthronement ceremony and the selection of the auspicious day.

古文：及自成升御座，忽见白衣人长数丈，手剑怒视，座下龙爪鬛俱动，自成恐，亟下。
现代文：到自成升坐御座时，突见一个身长数丈的白衣人，手提着宝剑向他怒目而视，而且座下的龙也爪鬣俱动，自成很害怕，赶忙下来了。
English: When Zicheng ascended to the throne, he suddenly saw a tall man in white, holding a sword and glaring at him, and the dragon under the throne was also moving its claws. Zicheng was very scared and hurried down.

古文：铸金玺及永昌钱，皆不就。
现代文：铸造金玺和永昌钱，都没有成功。
English: Neither the gold ingot nor the Yongchang money were successfully minted.

古文：闻山海关总兵吴三桂兵起，乃谋归陕西。
现代文：听说山海关总兵吴三桂起兵，自成便计划返回陕西。
English: I heard that Wu Sangui, the chief soldier of Shanhaiguan Customs, raised an army and planned to return to Shaanxi.

古文：初，三桂奉诏入援，至山海关，京师陷，犹豫不进。
现代文：当初，吴三桂奉诏令入援，到山海关时，京师已失陷，便犹豫不进。
English: At first, Wu Sangui was ordered by the emperor to come to the rescue, but when he arrived at Shanhaiguan, the capital division had already fallen, so he hesitated to advance.

古文：自成劫其父襄，作书招之，三桂欲降。至滦州，闻爱姬陈沅被刘宗敏掠去，愤甚，疾归山海，袭破贼将。
现代文：自成劫走他的父亲吴襄，写书招抚他，吴三桂便想投降，到滦州时，闻知自己的爱姬陈沅被刘宗敏抢去，非常愤恨，马上返回山海关，袭击打败贼将。
English: Wu Sangui wanted to surrender after he successfully kidnapped his father, Wu Xiang, and wrote a book to appease him. When he arrived in Zhangzhou, he heard that his beloved Chen Qi had been snatched by Liu Zongmin. He was very angry and immediately returned to Shanhaiguan to attack and defeat the thief.

古文：自成怒，亲部贼十余万，执吴襄于军，东攻山海关，以别将从一片石越关外。
现代文：自成大怒，亲自率领贼兵十余万，将吴襄押在军中，东向攻打山海关，派别将从一片石越出关外。
English: Furious with himself, he personally led more than one hundred thousand soldiers to arrest Wu Xiang in the army and attacked Shanhaiguan to the east. The faction would leave Shanhaiguan in one piece.

古文：三桂惧，乞降于我大清。
现代文：吴三桂害怕了，便向我大清乞降。
English: Wu Sangui was scared and begged me to surrender.

古文：四月二十二日，自成兵二十万，阵于关内，自北山亘海。
现代文：四月二十二日，自成的二十万部队布阵于关内，从北山绵延到海边。
English: On April 22nd, 200,000 self-made troops set up camp in Guanzhong, stretching from the North Mountain to the seaside.

古文：我兵对贼置阵，三桂居右翼末，悉锐卒搏战，杀贼数千人，贼亦力斗，围开复合。
现代文：我军对贼设阵，吴三桂在右翼末尾，全都是精锐之士去搏战，杀贼数千人，贼也奋力拼杀，包围圈被打开又复合上。
English: Our army set up a line against the bandits, with Wu Sangui at the end of the right wing. All of them were elite soldiers who went to fight, killing thousands of bandits. The bandits also fought hard, and the encirclement was opened and compounded.

古文：战良久，我兵从三桂阵右突出，冲贼中坚，万马奔跃，飞矢雨堕，天大风，沙石飞走，击贼如雹。自成方挟太子登高冈观战，知为我兵，急策马下冈走。
现代文：交战良久，我军从吴三桂阵地的右边突然出击，冲击贼兵中坚，万马奔跃，飞矢如雨般坠落，天又刮起大风，刮起的沙石如冰雹一般打在贼人身上，自成正挟皇太子登上高岗观战，知道是我军，急忙策马下岗奔走。
English: After fighting for a long time, our army suddenly attacked from the right side of Wu Sangui's position, striking the core of the thief soldiers. Thousands of horses galloped, flying arrows fell like rain. The sky blew up again, and the blowing sand and stones hit the thieves like hailstones. The crown prince climbed onto the high post to watch the battle. Knowing that it was our army, he hurriedly dismounted and ran away.

古文：我兵追奔四十里，贼众大溃，自相践踏死者无算，僵尸遍野，沟水尽赤。
现代文：我军追出四十里，贼众大溃，自相践踏，死亡无数，僵尸遍野，沟中的水都红了。
English: Our army chased out forty miles, the thieves were routed, trampled on each other, countless deaths, zombies everywhere, and the water in the ditch turned red.

古文：自成奔永平，我兵逐之。
现代文：自成逃到永平，我军又追击。
English: He escaped to Yongping on his own, and our army chased him.

古文：三桂先驱至永平，自成杀吴襄，奔还京师。
现代文：吴三桂的前锋到达永平，自成杀死吴襄，奔回京师。
English: Wu Sangui's vanguard reached Yongping, killed Wu Xiang of their own accord, and rushed back to the capital.

古文：时牛金星居守，诸降人往谒，执门生礼甚恭。
现代文：当时牛金星留守京师，各投降的人前往谒见，对他执门生礼，非常恭敬。
English: At that time, Niu Jinxing stayed behind in the capital, and all those who had surrendered went to see him, bowing to him with great respect.

古文：金星曰： 讹言方起，诸君宜简出。 
现代文：牛金星说： 谣言正起，诸君应少出门。 
English: Cow Venus said: Rumors are on the rise, you should go out less.

古文：由是降者始惧，多窜伏矣。
现代文：投降的人这才害怕了，都隐蔽了起来。
English: The surrenders were afraid of this and went into hiding.

古文：自成至，悉镕所拷索金及宫中帑藏、器皿，铸为饼，每饼千金，约数万饼，骡车载归西安。
现代文：自成回来后，将强行索得的黄金以及宫中库藏、器皿，全都熔化，铸为饼，每饼千金，约有数万饼，用骡车运回西安。
English: After he returned, he melted down all the gold he had forcibly obtained, as well as the treasures and utensils in the palace, and cast them into loaves, each loaf costing thousands of gold, about tens of thousands of loaves, and transported them back to Xi'an by mule cart.

古文：二十九日丙戌僣帝号于武英殿，追尊七代皆为帝后，立妻高氏为皇后。
现代文：二十九日，自成在武英殿僭称帝号，追尊七代以内祖先为帝后，立妻子高氏为皇后。
English: On the 29th, Zicheng assumed the title of emperor in the Wuying Palace, honored his ancestors within seven generations as empresses, and appointed his wife Gao as empress.

古文：自成被冠冕，列仗受朝。
现代文：自成戴上冠冕，排列仪仗，接受百官朝拜。
English: They put on crowns of their own accord, arrange ceremonial battles, and receive the worship of hundreds of officials.

古文：金星代行郊天礼。
现代文：牛金星代行郊祀天礼。
English: Cows and gold stars act as proxy for the suburb's divine service.

古文：是夕焚宫殿及九门城楼。
现代文：这天晚上焚烧宫殿以及九门城楼。
English: On this night, the palace and the nine gate towers were set on fire.

古文：诘旦，挟太子、二王西走，而使伪将军左光先、谷可成殿。
现代文：第二天早晨，挟持太子、永王和定王向西逃走，派伪将军左光先、谷可成殿后。
English: The next morning, he took the crown prince, Yongwang and Dingwang hostage and fled to the west, sending the fake general Zuo Guang ahead and Gu Kecheng behind.

古文：五月二日，我大清兵入京师，下令安辑百姓，为帝后发丧，议谥号，遣将偕三桂追自成。
现代文：五月二日，我大清兵进入京师，下令安辑百姓，为皇后发丧，议谥号，派遣将领与吴三桂一起追击自成。
English: On May 2, our Great Qing soldiers marched into the Beijing Division, ordered to organize the people, mourned for the empress, discussed the funeral, and sent generals together with Wu Sangui to pursue Zicheng.

古文：时福王已监国南京，大学士史可法督师讨贼。
现代文：当时福王已在南京监国，大学士史可法督师讨贼。
English: At that time, Fu Wang was already in Nanjing supervising the country, and the university scholar Shi Ke, the legal inspector, was trying to catch the thief.

古文：自成至定州，我兵追之，与战，斩谷可成，左光先伤足，贼负而逃。
现代文：自成到达定州，被我兵追上，双方交战，斩杀谷可成，左光先足部受伤，贼人背着他而逃。
English: He reached Dingzhou on his own, was caught by our soldiers, the two sides fought, the valley could be killed, the left light was injured in the foot, and the thief fled behind him.

古文：自成西走真定，益发众来攻，我兵复击之。
现代文：自成向西走真定，增兵来攻，我军又攻击他们。
English: They decided to go west on their own. More soldiers came to attack, and our army attacked them again.

古文：自成中流矢创甚，西逾故关，入山西。
现代文：自成被流箭射中，受伤很重，向西越过故关，进入山西。
English: Zicheng was shot by a stray arrow and was seriously injured. He crossed the pass to the west and entered Shanxi.

古文：会我兵东返，自成乃鸠合溃散，走平阳。
现代文：正好我军东返，自成于是纠合溃散的部下，退走平阳。
English: Just as our army was returning to the east, Zicheng gathered his scattered subordinates and retreated to Pingyang.

古文：李岩者，故劝自成以不杀收人心者也。及陷京师，保护懿安皇后令自尽。
现代文：李岩就是原来劝自成不杀人以收取人心的那位，在京师陷落时，他保护懿安皇后，令她自尽。
English: Li Yan was the one who originally persuaded Zicheng not to kill people in order to win their hearts. When Beijing fell, he protected the Queen of An and ordered her to commit suicide.

古文：又独于士大夫无所拷掠，金星等大忌之。
现代文：他又唯独不拷打士大夫，牛金星等人很忌恨他。
English: He's also the only one who doesn't torture doctors, and people like Niu Jinxing loathe him.

古文：定州之败，河南州县多反正，自成召诸将议，岩请率兵往。
现代文：定州之败后，河南州县大多反正了，自成召集诸将来商议，李岩请率兵前往河南。
English: After the defeat of Dingzhou, most of Henan's prefectures did the right thing anyway. Li Yan called for future discussions and asked Li Yan to lead the troops to Henan.

古文：金星阴告自成曰： 岩雄武有大略，非能久下人者。河南，岩故乡，假以大兵，必不可制。
现代文：牛金星背地里告诉自成说： 李岩雄武有大略，并非是久居人下的人，河南又是李岩的故乡，如果交给他大兵，必然不可控制。
English: Niu Jinxing secretly told Zicheng that: Li Yanxiong has a broad strategy and is not a person who has lived under the people for a long time. Henan is Li Yan's hometown. If he is given soldiers, he will inevitably be uncontrollable.

古文：十八子之谶，得非岩乎？ 
现代文：十八子那句谶语，难道就不是指的李岩吗？ 
English: Isn't the phrase "18-year-old son" slang for Li Yan?

古文：因谮其欲反。
现代文：又趁机诬陷李岩想造反。
English: He also took the opportunity to frame Li Yan for wanting to rebel.

古文：自成令金星与岩饮，杀之，贼众俱解体。
现代文：自成便令牛金星与李岩饮酒，在席间杀死了李岩，贼众都解体了。
English: Zicheng then made Niu Jinxing and Li Yan drink alcohol, and killed Li Yan during the banquet, and the thieves all disintegrated.

古文：自成归西安，复遣贼陷汉中，降总兵赵光远，进略保宁。
现代文：自成回到西安，又遣贼攻陷汉中，降服总兵赵光远，进而攻取保宁。
English: He returned to Xi'an of his own accord, and sent the bandits to invade Hanzhong, subdue the general Zhao Guangyuan, and then capture Boryeong.

古文：时献忠以兵拒之，乃还。
现代文：当时张献忠派兵抗拒，他们才回来了。
English: At that time, Zhang Xianzhong sent troops to resist, and they only came back.

古文：八月建祖祢庙成，将往祀，忽寒栗不能就礼。
现代文：八月，祖祢庙建成，自成要前往祭祀，突然冷得发抖，不能行礼。
English: In August, Zune Temple was completed, and he wanted to go to the ritual. Suddenly, he was shivering from the cold and couldn't perform the ritual.

古文：自成始以岩言，谬为仁义，及岩死，又屡败，复强很自用，伪尚书张第元、耿始然皆以小忤死。
现代文：自成初因李岩的劝说，假装仁义，到李岩死后，又屡次战败，便恢复先前凶狠和刚愎自用的禀性，伪尚书张第元、耿始然都因稍微冒犯了他而被处死。
English: At the beginning of his reign, he pretended to be benevolent and righteous because of Li Yan's persuasion, but after Li Yan's death, he was defeated again and again, and he resumed his previous ferocious and self-serving stubbornness. The pseudo-scholar Zhang Di Yuan and Geng Shi Ran were both executed for slightly offending him.

古文：制铜镆，官吏坐赇，即镆斩。
现代文：他又制造铜翷，官吏犯了贿赂之罪，即用翷斩杀。
English: He also made bronze gongs, and officials who committed the crime of bribery were beheaded with the gongs.

古文：我兵两道追蹑，连蹙之邓州、承天、德安、武昌，穷追至贼老营，大破之者八。当是时，左良玉东下，武昌虚无人。自成屯五十余日，贼众尚五十余万，改江夏曰瑞符县。
现代文：百姓偷一只鸡便要处死，西部人民非常害怕。顺治二年二月，清军攻打潼关，伪伯爵马世濯以六十万人来迎战，战败而死。潼关破后，自成便放弃西安，从龙驹寨走武冈，进入襄阳，又走武昌。我军两路追踪，接连在邓州、承天、德安、武昌追上贼兵，穷追到贼人老营，八次大破贼兵。当时，左良玉东下，武昌空虚无人，自成在那屯扎五十多天，贼众尚有五十多万。改江夏叫瑞符县。
English: If a commoner steals a chicken, he will be put to death, and the people in the west are very afraid. In February of the second year of Shunzhi, the Qing army attacked Shaoguan, and the fake Count Ma Shishou came to fight with 600,000 people and died in defeat. After Shaoguan was broken, Zicheng abandoned Xi'an, walked from Longjingzhai to Wugang, entered Yangyang, and walked to Wuchang. Our army tracked both ways, and successively caught up with the thief soldiers in Dengzhou, Chengtian, De'an, and Wuchang, and chased them all the way to the thief soldiers' old

古文：寻为我兵所迫，部众多降，或逃散。
现代文：不久被我军所迫，部众许多投降了，有的则逃散了。
English: Soon they were forced back by our army, and many of them surrendered, while others fled.

古文：自成走咸宁、蒲圻，至通城，窜于九宫山。
现代文：自成奔往咸宁、蒲圻，到达通城，窜进九宫山。
English: He ran to Xianning and Putuo on his own, reached Tongcheng, and entered Jiugongshan.

古文：秋九月，自成留李过守寨，自率二十骑略食山中，为村民所困、不能脱，遂缢死。
现代文：秋九月，自成留李过守寨，自己率领二十骑兵到山中抢粮食，被村民围困，无法走脱，结果被勒死了。
English: In autumn and September, he led 20 cavalrymen to the mountains to grab grain. He was besieged by villagers, unable to escape, and was strangled as a result.

古文：或曰村民方筑堡，见贼少，争前击之，人马俱陷泥淖中，自成脑中鉏死。
现代文：又有人说村民正在筑堡，见贼人少，争相前去击打，自成人马都陷在泥沼中，头部被锄头击中而死。
English: Another said that the villagers were building a castle, and when they saw that there were few thieves, they rushed forward to beat them. The adult horses were stuck in the mud, and they were hit on the head with a hoe and died.

古文：剥其衣，得龙衣金印，眇一目，村民乃大惊，谓为自成也。
现代文：村民剥下他的衣服，获得龙衣和金印，又发现死者瞎了一只眼睛，这才大惊，说这是李自成啊！
English: The villagers stripped off his clothes, got the dragon robe and gold seal, and found that the dead man was blind in one eye. They were shocked and said that this was Li Zicheng!

古文：时我兵遣识自成者验其尸，朽莫辨。
现代文：当时我军派认识李自成的人去验尸，但已腐朽不可辨认。
English: At that time, our military sent someone who knew Li Zicheng to conduct an autopsy, but he had already rotted beyond recognition.

古文：获自成两从父伪赵侯、伪襄南侯及自成妻妾二人，金印一。
现代文：抓获自成两位义父伪赵侯、伪襄南侯，以及自成的妻妾两人，金印一枚。
English: Caught two self-made stepfathers, pseudo Zhao Hou and pseudo Xiang Nan Hou, and two self-made wives and concubines, one gold seal.

古文：又获伪汝侯刘宗敏、伪总兵左光先、伪军师宋献策。
现代文：又抓获伪汝侯刘宗敏、伪总兵左光先、伪军师宋献策。
English: In addition, Liu Zongmin, a fake prince, Zuo Guangxian, a fake general, and Song Xianzhe, a fake military strategist, were captured.

古文：于是斩自成从父及宗敏于军。牛金星、宋企郊等皆遁亡。
现代文：于是将自成的义父和刘宗敏斩杀于军中，牛金星、宋企郊等人都逃亡了。
English: As a result, his self-made father-in-law and Liu Zongmin were killed in the army, and Niu Jinxing, Song Qijun and others fled.

古文：自成兄子过改名锦，偕诸贼帅奉高氏降于总督何腾蛟。
现代文：自成哥哥的儿子李过改名李锦，与各贼帅奉高氏向总督何腾蛟投降。
English: Li Kuan, the son of Zicheng's elder brother, changed his name to Li Jin, and surrendered to Governor He Tengyu together with the commander-in-chief, Feng Gao.

古文：时唐王立于闽，赐锦名赤心，封高氏忠义夫人，号其军曰忠贞营，隶腾蛟麾下。
现代文：当时唐王在福建立朝廷，赐李锦名叫李赤心，封高氏为忠义夫人，将他的部队号为忠贞营，隶属于何腾蛟麾下。
English: At that time, King Tang established the imperial court in Fuxi, gave Li Jin the name of Li Chixin, named Gao the wife of Loyalty, and named his army the Loyalty Battalion, which was subordinate to He Teng.

古文：永明王时，赤心封兴国侯，寻死。
现代文：永明王时，李赤心被封为兴国侯，不久死。
English: During the reign of King Yongming, Li Chixin was given the title of Prince of Xing and died soon after.

古文：张献忠者，延安卫柳树涧人也，与李自成同岁生。
现代文：张献忠，是延安卫柳树涧人。
English: Zhang Xianzhong is a Yan'an Wei willow egret.

古文：长隶延绥镇为军，犯法当斩，主将陈洪范奇其状貌，为请于总兵官王威释之，乃逃去。
现代文：与李自成同年出生，长大后隶属于延绥镇为兵，犯法当被斩首，主将陈洪范看他相貌奇特，为他向总兵官王威请求释放，过后便逃跑了。
English: He was born in the same year as Li Zicheng, and grew up as a soldier under Yancheng Town. When he was beheaded for breaking the law, his commander Chen Hongfan saw his strange appearance and asked General Wang Wei for his release, after which he ran away.

古文：崇祯三年，陕西贼大起，王嘉胤据府谷，陷河曲。
现代文：崇祯三年，陕西贼人纷纷起事，王嘉谟占据府谷，攻陷河曲。
English: In the three years of Chongzhen, the bandits in Shaanxi rose up one after another. Wang Jia Mu occupied Fugu and attacked Hequ.

古文：献忠以米脂十八寨应之，自称八大王。
现代文：张献忠以米脂十八寨响应，自称八大王。
English: Zhang Xianzhong responded to the 18 rice-fat villages by calling himself the king of the eight.

古文：明年，嘉胤死，其党王自用复聚众三十六营，献忠及高迎祥、罗汝才、马守应等皆为之渠。
现代文：第二年，王嘉谟死，他的党徒王自用又聚众三十六营，张献忠和高迎祥、罗汝才、马守应等人都是首领。
English: The following year, when Wang Jia Mu died, his followers gathered 36 battalions, led by Zhang Xianzhong, Gao Yingxiang, Luo Rucai and Ma Shouying.

古文：其冬，洪承畴为总督，献忠及汝才皆就抚。
现代文：这年冬，洪承畴任总督，张献忠和罗汝才都接受招抚。
English: In the winter of that year, with Hong Chengzheng as governor, Zhang Xianzhong and Luo Rucai both accepted the invitation.

古文：已而叛入山西，偕群贼焚掠。
现代文：后来又反叛，进入山西，与群贼一起焚掠。
English: Later, he rebelled again, entered Shanxi, and plundered and burned together with a group of thieves.

古文：寻扰河北，又偕渡河。
现代文：不久骚扰黄河以北，又一同渡过黄河。
English: Soon they harassed the north of the Yellow River and crossed the Yellow River together.

古文：自是，陕西、河南、湖广、四川，江北数千里地，皆被蹂躏。
现代文：此后，陕西、河南、湖广、四川、江北数千里地，都被蹂躏。
English: Since then, thousands of miles of land in Shaanxi, Henan, Hukang, Sichuan and northern Jiangsu have been ravaged.

古文：当此之时，贼渠率众无专主，遇官军，人自为斗，胜则争进，败则窜山谷不相顾。
现代文：那时候，贼人首领率众没有强制指挥，遇到官军时，各自为战，胜了就争相前进，败则窜入山谷，不相互照应。
English: At that time, the leaders of the thieves did not have a compulsory command. When they encountered the government army, they fought for each other. If they won, they would compete to advance, and if they lost, they would break into the valley and not take care of each other.

古文：官军遇贼追杀，亦不知所逐何贼也。
现代文：官军遇到贼兵，要追杀时，也不知所追的是哪路贼兵。
English: When the government army encounters a bandit and wants to chase and kill him, it does not know which bandit it is chasing.

古文：贼或分或合，东西奔突，势日强盛。
现代文：贼人或分或合，东奔西突，势力逐渐强大起来。
English: Thieves or divided or combined, rushing east and west, the forces gradually become stronger.

古文：八年，十三家会荥阳，议敌官军。
现代文：八年，十三家在荥阳大会，商议对抗官军。
English: In the eighth year, thirteen families gathered at the Shenyang Conference to discuss the confrontation with the government army.

古文：守应欲北渡，献忠嗤之，守应怒，李自成为解，乃定议。
现代文：马守应想北渡，被献忠讥笑，马守应大怒，李自成从中调解，这才定下决议。
English: Ma Shou Ying wanted to go to the north, but he was ridiculed by devotees. Ma Shou Ying was furious, and Li Zicheng mediated between them. This is when the decision was made.

古文：献忠始与高迎祥并起作贼，自成乃迎祥偏裨，不敢与献忠并。
现代文：献忠最初与高迎祥一起造反做贼，李自成却只是高迎祥的裨将，不敢与献忠并坐，至此便与他不相上下了。
English: At first, Xianzhong rebelled with Gao Yingxiang and became a thief, but Li Zicheng was only Gao Yingxiang's helper and did not dare to sit with Xianzhong, so he was no match for him.

古文：及是遂相颉颃，与俱东掠，连破河南、江北诸县，焚皇陵。
现代文：两人一起东向攻掠，连破黄河以南、长江以北各县，焚烧皇陵。
English: Together, the two men attacked and plundered eastward, and burned the imperial tombs in every county south of the Yellow River and north of the Yangtze River.

古文：已而迎祥、自成西去。献忠独东，围庐州、舒城，俱不下。
现代文：不久高迎祥、李自成西去，献忠独向东，包围庐州、舒城，但都没有攻下。
English: Not long after, Gao Yingxiang and Li Zicheng went west and devoted themselves to the east, encircling Zhangzhou and Shucheng, but they did not capture them.

古文：攻桐城，陷庐江，屠巢、无为、潜山、太湖、宿松诸城，应天巡抚张国维御之。
现代文：又攻打桐城，攻陷庐江，屠戮巢县、无为、潜山、太湖、宿松等城，应天巡抚张国维前往抵挡。
English: They also attacked Tongcheng, captured the Lijiang River, and slaughtered the cities of Chaozhou County, Wuwei, Guanshan, Taihu, and Suqiao, and the governor Zhang Guowei went to resist them.

古文：献忠从英、霍遁，道麻城，合守应等入关，会迎祥于凤翔。
现代文：献忠从英山、霍山遁走，经过麻城，与马守应等会合，进入关中，到凤翔与高迎祥会合。
English: Xianzhong walked from Yingshan and Huoshan, passed through Macheng, met with Ma Shouye, entered Guanzhong, and met with Gao Yingxiang in Fengxiang.

古文：已，复出商、洛，屯灵宝，以待迎祥。
现代文：不久，又出商县、洛南，屯驻在灵宝，等待高迎祥。
English: Soon, he went to Shangxian and Luonan, and stationed in Lingbao, waiting for Gao Yingxiang.

古文：迎祥至，则合兵复东。
现代文：高迎祥到来后，便合兵东向。
English: After Gao Yingxiang arrived, he and his soldiers marched eastward.

古文：总兵官左良玉、祖宽击之，献忠与迎祥分道走。
现代文：总兵官左良玉、祖宽攻击他们，献忠与高迎祥分道而走。
English: Commander-in-chief officers Zu Liangyu and Zu Guang attacked them, and Xian Zhong and Gao Yingxiang parted ways.

古文：宽追献忠，战于嵩县及九皋山，三战皆克，俘斩甚众。
现代文：祖宽追击献忠，在嵩县和九皋山交战，三战皆捷，斩获不少贼人。
English: Zu Kuan pursued Xian Zhong, fought in Song County and Jiu Lushan, won all three battles, and captured many thieves.

古文：献忠恚，再合迎祥众还战，复大败。
现代文：献忠火了，再与高迎祥联合，回头再战，又被打得大败。
English: After paying homage, he allied with Gao Yingxiang, fought back, and was defeated again.

古文：迎祥寻与自成入陕西，而守应、汝才诸贼，各盘踞郧阳、商、洛山中，不能救，献忠亦遁山中。
现代文：高迎祥不久与李自成进入陕西，而马守应、罗汝才等贼，各自盘踞在郧阳、商县、洛南的山中，不能相救，献忠便也逃到山中。
English: Gao Yingxiang soon entered Shaanxi with Li Zicheng, while Ma Shouying, Luo Rucai and other thieves were each entrenched in the mountains of Fenyang, Shangxian and Luonan. Unable to save each other, Xian Zhong also fled to the mountains.

古文：明年秋，总督卢象升去，苗胙土巡抚湖广，不习兵。
现代文：明年秋，总督卢象升离职，苗胙土任湖广巡抚，他不懂军事。
English: In the autumn of next year, Governor Lu Xiangsheng will leave his post, and Miao Xuntu will be appointed as the inspector general of Hubei Province. He does not understand military affairs.

古文：于是献忠自均州，守应自新野，蝎子块自唐县，并犯襄阳，众二余万。
现代文：于是献忠从均州、马守应从新野、蝎子块从唐县出来，一起侵犯襄阳，部众有二十余万。
English: As a result, Xian Zhong came from Junzhou, Ma Shou Ying from Nino, and Scorpion Block from Tang County to invade Xiangyang together, with more than 200,000 followers.

古文：总兵秦翼明兵寡不能御，湖广震动。
现代文：总兵秦翼明兵少不能抵御，湖广震动。
English: General Qin Yiming's soldiers were too few to resist, and the lake was shaken.

古文：献忠纠汝才、守应及闯塌天诸贼，顺流东下，与江北贼贺一龙、贺锦等合，烽火达淮、扬。
现代文：献忠纠集罗汝才、马守应和闯塌天等贼，顺流东下，与江北贼贺一龙、贺锦等会合，烽火达到淮水、扬州。
English: Luo Rucai, Ma Shou Ying and Zou Zetian, along with other thieves, went down the river to the east to meet He Yilong and He Jin, the thieves from the north of the river, and the bonfire reached Huai Shui and Yangzhou.

古文：南京兵部尚书范景文、操江都御史黄道直、总兵官杨御蕃分汛固守，安池道副使史可法亲率兵当贼冲。
现代文：南京兵部尚书范景文、操江都御史黄道直、总兵官杨御蕃分汛地固守，安池道副使史可法亲自率兵阻挡贼人要冲。
English: The military department of Nanjing was headed by Shang Shufan and Jingwen, the governor of the Yangtze River, Shi Huangdao, and the commander-in-chief of the military, Yang Miyao, respectively. The deputy governor of Anchi Province, Shi Kefa, personally led the troops to block the thieves.

古文：贼从间道犯安庆，连营百里，巡抚国维告警。
现代文：贼人从间道侵犯安庆，连营一百里，巡抚国维告急。
English: Thieves invaded Anqing from a side road, the company camp was a hundred miles away, and the inspector of the State Highway Administration was in a hurry.

古文：诏左良玉、马爌、刘良佐合兵援之，遂大破贼。
现代文：诏令左良玉、马火广、刘良佐联合救援，于是大破贼兵。
English: Zhao ordered Zuo Liangyu, Ma Huiguang, and Liu Liangza to jointly rescue the soldiers, and the bandits were defeated.

古文：贼走潜山之天王古寨，国维檄良玉搜山，良玉不应，寻北去。
现代文：贼人逃到潜山的天王古寨，国维发檄文叫左良玉搜山，左良玉不答应，不久向北而去。
English: The thief fled to the Tianwang Ancient Village of the Hidden Mountain. Guowei sent a letter to Zuo Liangyu to search the mountain. Zuo Liangyu did not agree and soon left for the north.

古文：贼乃复出太湖，连蕲、黄，败官军于酆家店，杀参将程龙、陈于王等四十余人。
现代文：贼人于是从太湖复出，连结蕲州、黄州，在酆家店击败官军，杀死参将程龙、陈于王等四十余人。
English: The bandits then returned from Taihu Lake, linked up with Bozhou and Huangzhou, defeated the government army in Shijiazhuang, and killed more than forty people, including the general Cheng Long and Chen Yu Wang.

古文：会总兵官牟文绶偕良佐来援，复破贼。
现代文：正好总兵官牟文绶和刘良佐来援助，才又打败贼人。
English: It was just then that the commander-in-chief Mufeng Yao and Liu Liang Zuo came to help, only to defeat the thieves again.

古文：贼皆遁，献忠入湖广。
现代文：贼人全部逃遁，献忠进入湖广。
English: The thieves all fled, and the devotees fled into the lake.

古文：是时，河南、湖广贼十五家，惟献忠最狡黠骁勍，次则汝才。
现代文：那时，河南、湖广十五家贼人，要数献忠最狡猾、最强大，其次则是罗汝才。
English: At that time, the fifteen thieves in Henan and Hukang were the most cunning and powerful, followed by Luo Rucai.

古文：献忠尝伪为官兵，欲给宛城，良玉适至，献忠仓皇走，前锋罗岱射之中额，良玉马追及，刃拂献忠面，马驰以免。
现代文：献忠曾伪装成官兵，想骗开宛城，左良玉刚好赶到，献忠仓皇而逃，前锋罗岱射中他的额头，左良玉马赶上献忠，刀刃拂过献忠面门，因马飞跑被他走免。
English: Xianzhong had disguised himself as an officer and wanted to trick Wangcheng, Zuo Liangyu just arrived, Xianzhong ran away, the striker Luo Yao shot him in the forehead, Zuo Liangyu caught up with Xianzhong, the blade brushed the door of Xianzhong's face, and he was spared because the horse ran away.

古文：会熊文灿为总理，刊檄抚贼。
现代文：正值熊文灿为总理，刊出檄文招抚贼众。
English: At the time when Xiong Wencang was premier, he published a proclamation to appease the thieves.

古文：闯塌天者，本名刘国能，与献忠有郤，诣文灿降。献忠创甚，不能战，大恐。
现代文：闯塌天，本名刘国能，与献忠有矛盾，便到熊文灿处投降，献忠伤得很重，不能作战，非常害怕。
English: Liu Guoreng, whose real name is Liu Guoneng, had a conflict with Xianzhong, so he went to Xiong Wencang to surrender. Xianzhong was seriously injured, unable to fight, and very scared.

古文：十一年春，侦知陈洪范隶文灿麾下为总兵，大喜，因遣间赍重币献洪范曰： 献忠蒙公大恩，得不死，公岂忘之邪？
现代文：十一年春，献忠侦察到陈洪范隶属于熊文灿麾下任总兵，非常高兴，便派间谍带着重金献给陈洪范，对他说： 献忠承蒙您的大恩，得以不死，您难道忘了吗？
English: In the spring of the eleventh year, Xian Zhong detected that Chen Hongfan was subordinate to Xiong Wencang, the next general. He was very happy, so he sent a spy with a large amount of money to Chen Hongfan and said to him: "Xian Zhong, thanks to your great grace, I was able not to die. Have you forgotten?

古文：愿率所部降以自效。 
现代文：愿率领所部投降，为您效力。 
English: I am willing to lead the surrender of the headquarters and serve you.

古文：洪范亦喜，为告文灿，受其降。
现代文：陈洪范也很高兴，为他转告熊文灿，接受了他的投降。
English: Chen Hongfan was also very happy. He told Xiong Wencang for him and accepted his surrender.

古文：巡按御史林铭球、分巡道王瑞栴与良玉谋，俟献忠至执之，文灿不可。
现代文：巡抚御史林铭球、分巡道王瑞縋与左良玉计议，等张献忠来后便将他抓起来，但熊文灿不允许。
English: The governor, Shilin Mingqiu, and the sub-inspector, Wang Ruiqi, discussed the matter with Zuo Liangyu, and after Zhang Xianzhong arrived, they arrested him, but Xiong Wencang would not allow it.

古文：献忠遂据谷城，请十万人饷，文灿不敢决。
现代文：献忠遂占据谷城，请求拨给十万人的粮饷，熊文灿不敢决定。
English: Xiong Wencang did not dare to make a decision after the loyalists occupied Gucheng and asked for grain to be allocated to 100,000 people.

古文：时群贼皆聚南阳，屠掠旁州县。
现代文：当时群贼都聚集在南阳，杀掠附近州县。
English: At that time, the bandits were all gathered in Nanyang, killing and plundering horses in nearby prefectures.

古文：文灿赴裕州，益大发檄抚贼。
现代文：熊文灿赴裕州，进一步大发檄文招抚贼人。
English: Xiong Wencang went to Yuzhou to further encourage the thieves.

古文：汝才以战败乞降于太和山监军太监李继改。
现代文：罗汝才因战败向在太和山的监军太监李继改乞降。
English: Due to the defeat, Luo Rucai went to the eunuch Li Jichang, the overseer of the troops in Taihe Mountain, to beg for surrender.

古文：明年，射塌天、混十万、过天星、关索、王光恩等十三家渠帅，先后俱降。
现代文：第二年，射塌天、混十万、过天星、关索、王光恩等十三家头领，先后投降。
English: In the second year, the heads of thirteen families, such as Jian Zolotong, Jian 10000, Xian Xing, Guan Suo, and Wang Guangen, surrendered successively.

古文：陕西总督洪承畴、巡抚孙传庭复大破李自成，自成窜崤、函山中，朝廷皆谓贼扑剪殆尽。
现代文：陕西总督洪承畴、巡抚孙传庭又大破李自成，李自成逃窜到崤山、函谷关一带山中。朝廷都以为贼人被扑灭殆尽了。
English: The governor of Shaanxi, Hong Chengzhuang, and the inspector general, Sun Chuanting, also defeated Li Zicheng, and Li Zicheng fled to the mountains around Lushan and Hantuguan. The imperial court thought that the thieves had been extinguished.

古文：献忠在谷城，训卒治甲仗，言者颇疑其欲反。
现代文：献忠在谷城，训练士卒，修造甲衣兵器，议论的人颇怀疑他想反叛。
English: Loyalty in the valley city, training soldiers, repairing armor weapons, people who talk about it are quite suspicious that he wants to rebel.

古文：帝方信兵部尚书杨嗣昌言，谓文灿能办贼，不复忧也。
现代文：皇上正相信兵部尚书杨嗣昌的话，以为熊文灿能够治好贼乱，不再担忧了。
English: The emperor believed the words of Yang Shichang, the military commander, and thought that Xiong Wencang would be able to cure the banditry, and he was no longer worried.

古文：夏五月，献忠叛，杀知县阮之钿，隳谷城，陷房县，合汝才兵，杀知县郝景春。
现代文：夏五月，献忠反叛，杀知县阮之钿，毁坏谷城，攻陷房县，联合罗汝才的兵力，杀知县郝景春。
English: In the summer of May, he devoted his loyalty to the rebellion, killed Ruan Zhixuan of Zhixian County, destroyed Gucheng, captured Fang County, and, together with Luo Rucai's troops, killed Luo Jingchun of Zhixian County.

古文：十三家降贼一时并叛，惟王光恩不从。
现代文：十三家降贼一时间全部反叛，只有王光恩没有跟从。
English: Thirteen rebel families all rebelled at once, only Wang Guang'en did not follow.

古文：献忠去房县，左良玉追击之，罗岱为前锋，至罗犭英山，岱中伏死，良玉大败。
现代文：献忠离开房县，左良玉前去追击，罗岱为前锋，到罗犭英山时，罗岱中埋伏而死，左良玉大败。
English: When Xian Zhong left Fang County, Zuo Liangyu went in pursuit, with Luo Wei as the forward. When he arrived at Luo Wei Ying Mountain, Luo Wei was ambushed and killed, and Zuo Liangyu was defeated.

古文：嗣昌已拜大学士，乃自请督师，帝大悦。
现代文：杨嗣昌已拜为大学士，于是自请督领部队，皇上非常高兴。
English: Yang Shichang had already become a scholar, so he volunteered to lead the troops. The emperor was very pleased.

古文：十月朔，嗣昌至襄阳，集诸将议进兵。
现代文：十月初一，杨嗣昌到达襄阳，召集诸将商议进兵事宜。
English: On the first day of October, Yang Shichang arrived in Xiangyang and convened the generals to discuss the matter of entering the army.

古文：时群贼大掠，贺一龙、贺锦犯随、应、麻、黄，与官军相持。
现代文：当时群贼大肆杀掠，贺一龙、贺锦侵犯随州、应城、麻城、黄州，与官军相对抗。
English: At that time, the bandits killed and plundered wildly, and He Yilong and He Jin invaded Suizhou, Yingcheng, Macheng, and Huangzhou to resist the government army.

古文：汝才及过天星窜伏漳、房、兴、远，献忠踞湖广、四川界，将西犯。
现代文：罗汝才和过天星窜伏在漳河、房县、兴山、远安一带，献忠盘踞在湖广、四川交界地区，并将要西犯。
English: Luo Rucai and Guo Tianxing will stay in the areas of Luohe, Fangxian, Xingshan, and Yuan'an, and devote themselves to the border areas of Huguang and Sichuan, and will go to the West.

古文：嗣昌视东略稍缓，乃宿辎重襄阳，浚濠筑城甚固，令良玉专力剿献忠。
现代文：杨嗣昌看到东边的局势稍缓，便将辎重留在襄阳，疏通壕沟，筑起坚固的城墙，令左良玉专门致力于剿灭献忠。
English: Yang Shichang saw that the situation in the east was a little slow, so he left the anchor in Xiangyang, cleared the trench, built a solid city wall, and made Zuo Liangyu dedicated to the destruction of dedication.

古文：十三年闰正月，良玉击贼枸坪关，献忠遁，追至玛瑙山。
现代文：十三年闰正月，左良玉在枸坪关攻击贼人，献忠遁走，官军追到玛瑙山。
English: In the first month of the 13th year of the leap year, Zuo Liangyu attacked the thieves in Fenping Pass, and led the loyal soldiers away. The government army chased him to Manaowan Mountain.

古文：贼据山拒敌，良玉先登，贺人龙、李国奇夹击，大败之，斩首千三百余级，擒献忠妻妾。
现代文：贼人据山抵抗，左良玉先登了上去，贺人龙、李国厅夹击，大败贼兵，斩首一千三百多级，擒获献忠的妻妾。
English: The bandits resisted on the mountain, and Zuo Liangyu was the first to climb up. He Renlong and Li Guotang clamped down on the bandits, defeated the bandits, beheaded more than 1,300 soldiers, and captured the loyal wives and concubines.

古文：湖广将张应元、汪之凤追败之水右坝。
现代文：湖广将领张应元、汪之凤继续追击，在水右坝打败贼兵。
English: Hukang generals Zhang Yingyuan and Wang Zhifeng continued to pursue and defeat the bandits at Shuiyouba.

古文：川将张令、方国安又邀击于岔溪。
现代文：川将张令、方国安又在岔溪拦击。
English: Zhang Ling and Fang Guo'an, the river generals, intercepted them at Lixi.

古文：献忠奔柯家坪，张令逐北深入，被围，应元、之凤援之，复破贼。
现代文：献忠逃到柯家坪，张令追击败兵，过于深入，被包围，张应元、汪之凤去救援，又击败贼兵。
English: Xian Zhong fled to Kejiaping, Zhang Ling chased and defeated the soldiers, too deep, was surrounded, Zhang Yingyuan and Wang Zhifeng went to the rescue, and defeated the thief soldiers.

古文：献忠率千余骑窜兴、归山中，势大蹙。
现代文：献忠率领一千余骑窜到兴山、归州山中，气势极为窘迫。
English: Dedication led more than a thousand horsemen to Xingshan and Guizhou Mountains, and the situation was extremely difficult.

古文：初，良玉之进兵也，与嗣昌议不合。
现代文：当初，左良玉的进兵路线与杨嗣昌的建议不合。
English: At first, Zuo Liangyu's enlistment route did not fit with Yang Shichang's suggestion.

古文：献忠遣间说良玉，良玉乃围而弗攻。
现代文：献忠派间谍游说左良玉，左良玉于是围而不攻。
English: Loyalist spies lobbied for Zuo Liangyu, and Zuo Liangyu was besieged and not attacked.

古文：献忠因得与山民市盐刍米酷，收溃散，掩旗息鼓，益西走白羊山。
现代文：献忠因此得以和山民交换盐粮米酪，收集散兵，偃旗息鼓，逐步向西逃往白羊山。
English: Therefore, Xian Zhong was able to exchange salt, grain, rice and cheese with the mountain people, collect the scattered soldiers, and gradually fled westward to Baiyang Mountain.

古文：时汝才及过天星从宁昌窥大昌、巫山，欲渡江，为官兵所扼。
现代文：当时罗汝才和过天星从宁昌窥视大昌、巫山，想渡过长江，但被官兵所阻。
English: At that time, Luo Rucai and Guo Tianxing peeped into Dachang and Wushan from Ningchang and wanted to cross the Yangtze River, but they were blocked by officers and soldiers.

古文：献忠至，遂与之合。
现代文：献忠到来后，便与他们会合。
English: When the devotees arrived, they joined them.

古文：献忠虽累败，气益盛，立马江岸，有不前赴者，辄戮之。
现代文：献忠虽然屡败，这时气势更盛，他立马于江岸上，有不前进的，便加以杀戮。
English: Although Xianrong had been defeated many times, he was more powerful at this time. He immediately went to the riverbank and killed anyone who did not advance.

古文：贼争死斗，官军退走。
现代文：贼人争相死战，官军退走。
English: The thieves fought to the death, and the government troops retreated.

古文：贼毕渡，屯万顷山，归、巫大震。已而汝才、过天星犯开县不利，汝才东走，过天星复轶开县而西。
现代文：贼人全部渡过了长江，屯驻在万顷山，归州、巫山大为震动，随后罗汝才、过天星侵犯开县不利，罗汝才向东退走，过天星又越过开县向西走。
English: The thieves all crossed the Yangtze River and settled in Wanhaoshan. Guizhou and Wushan were shaken, and then Luo Rucai invaded Kaishan through Tianxing. Luo Rucai retreated to the east, and crossed Kaishan through Tianxing to the west.

古文：诸将往复追逐，献忠乃悉众攻楚兵于土地岭，副将汪之凤战死。
现代文：诸将往来追逐，献忠于是集中全部兵力在土地岭攻打楚兵，副将汪之凤战死。
English: All the generals chased each other and were loyal to each other, so they concentrated all their forces to attack the Chu soldiers on the land ridge. Vice Admiral Wang Zhifeng was killed in the battle.

古文：遂陷大昌，进屯开县，张令战死，石砫女土司秦良玉亦败。
现代文：献忠遂攻陷大昌，进而屯驻开县，张令战死，石纉女土司秦良玉也被打败。
English: Dedicated to loyalty, he succeeded in capturing Dachang, and then stationed in Kai County. Zhang Ling was killed in the battle, and Qin Liangyu, the land stewardess of Shiqi, was also defeated.

古文：汝才复自东至，与献忠转趋达州。
现代文：罗汝才又从东边回来，与献忠转而奔向达州。
English: Luo Rucai came back from the east and rushed to Dazhou with devotion.

古文：川抚邵捷春退扼涪江。
现代文：四川巡抚邵捷春退守涪江。
English: The Sichuan governor, Shao Jiechun, retreated to the Li River.

古文：贼北陷剑州，将入汉中。
现代文：贼人北陷剑州，将要进入汉中。
English: Thieves have invaded Jianzhou in the north and are about to enter Hanzhong.

古文：总兵官赵光远、贺人龙守阳平、百丈险。贼不得过，乃复走巴西。
现代文：总兵官赵光远、贺人龙守卫阳平、百丈险要之地，贼人不能通过，便转走巴州以西。
English: General Zhao Guangyuan and He Ren Long guarded Yangping and Baizhang, which were critical areas. The thieves could not pass through, so they went to the west of Bazhou.

古文：涪江师溃，捷春论死。
现代文：涪江守军溃散，邵捷春被判死罪。
English: The defenders of the Minjiang River were routed, and Shao Jechun was sentenced to death.

古文：献忠屠绵州，越成都，陷沪州，北渡隐永川，走汉川、德阳，入巴州。又自巴走达州，复至开县。
现代文：献忠屠戮绵州，越过成都，攻陷泸州，又北渡沱江，攻陷永川，经过汉川、德阳，进入巴州，又从巴州奔向达州，回到开县。
English: Xian Zhong slaughtered Mianzhou, crossed Chengdu, invaded and occupied Luzhou, crossed the Li River to the north, invaded and occupied Yongchuan, passed through Hanchuan and Deyang, entered Bazhou, and ran from Bazhou to Dazhou and back to Kaishan.

古文：先是，嗣昌闻贼入川，进驻重庆。
现代文：原先，杨嗣昌听说贼人进入四川，便进驻重庆。
English: Originally, Yang Shichang heard that the bandits had entered Sichuan, so he was stationed in Chongqing.

古文：监军万元吉曰： 贼或东突，不可无备，宜分中军间道出梓潼，扼归路。 
现代文：监军万元吉说 ：贼人或许要东向突击，不可不备，宜分中军从间道出潼关，扼住贼人归路。 
English: The supervisor of the army, Yuan Ji, said: the thieves may want to make a surprise attack to the east, it is necessary to be prepared, it is appropriate to divide the Chinese army from the middle way out of the pass, and strangle the thieves' way back.

古文：嗣昌不听，拟令诸将尽赴沪州追贼。
现代文：杨嗣昌不听，拟令诸将全部开赴泸州追击贼人。
English: Yang Shichang did not listen and planned to order all generals to go to Bozhou to pursue the thieves.

古文：十四年正月，总兵猛如虎、参将刘士杰追之开县之黄陵城，贼还战，官军大败，士杰及游击郭开等皆死。
现代文：十四年正月，总兵猛如虎、参将刘士杰追到开县的黄陵城，贼人回头交战，官军大败，刘士杰和游击郭开等人都死了。
English: In the first month of the 14th year, the general soldiers were fierce as tigers and chased Liu Shijie to Huangling City in Kai County. The thieves turned back to fight, and the government army was defeated. Liu Shijie and the guerrilla Guo Kai and others all died.

古文：献忠果东出，令汝才拒郧抚袁继咸兵，自率轻骑，一日夜驰三百里，杀督师使者于道，取军符，绐陷襄阳城。
现代文：献忠果然东向突击，命令罗汝才抵挡郧阳巡抚袁继咸的部队，自己则率领轻骑，一昼夜飞驰三百里，在途中杀死督师的使者，获取军符，骗开襄阳城。
English: He ordered Luo Rucai to resist the troops of Yuan Jixian, the governor of Fenyang, and he himself led the light cavalry, galloping three hundred miles in a day and night, killing the envoy of the superintendent on the way, obtaining military insignia, and deceiving the city of Xiangyang.

古文：献忠缚襄王翊铭置堂下，属之酒曰： 我欲借王头，使杨嗣昌以陷藩诛，王其努力尽此酒。 
现代文：献忠将襄王朱翊铭绑到堂下，给他劝酒说 ：我想借王爷的头，使杨嗣昌因失陷藩王而被诛，王爷您就努力喝了这杯酒吧。 
English: He loyally tied Zhu Shuming, the Prince of Xiang, to the hall, and persuaded him to drink, saying, "I want to borrow the prince's head so that Yang Shichang will be executed for the fall of the king of the domain. You should drink this glass of wine diligently."

古文：遂杀之，并杀郧襄道张克俭、推官邝曰广，复得其所失妻妾。
现代文：遂杀襄王，并杀郧襄道张克俭、推官邝曰广，重新得到原来丢失的妻妾。
English: He then killed King Xiang, as well as Zhang Kejian of Xiang Province, and the governor of Xiang Province, Zhai Zhiguang, to regain his lost wife and concubine.

古文：又去，陷樊城、当阳、郏。
现代文：献忠又离开襄阳，攻陷樊城、当阳、郏县。
English: Xianzhong left Xiangyang again, and succeeded in seizing Shicheng, Dangyang, and Shixian.

古文：合汝才入光州，残商城、罗山、息县、信阳、固始。
现代文：与罗汝才合兵，进入光州，残害商城、罗山、息县、信阳、固始。
English: He joined forces with Luo Rucai and entered Gwangju, destroying the city of Shangcheng, Luoshan, Xixian, Xinyang, and Gushi.

古文：分军犯茶山、应城，陷随州。
现代文：分军侵犯茶山、应城，攻陷随州。
English: Separate armies invaded Chashan and Yingcheng and captured Suizhou.

古文：伪张良玉帜，入泌阳。
现代文：他伪举左良玉旗帜，进入泌阳。
English: He falsely raised the banner of the left-hand side and entered Seiryang.

古文：再攻应山，不克，去。
现代文：再攻应山，不克，便撤走。
English: If we attack Yingshan again, it will not be successful, and we will withdraw.

古文：攻郧阳，守将王光恩力战，始解。
现代文：攻打郧阳，守将王光恩奋力抗战，才撤兵而去。
English: After attacking Poyang, the guard general Wang Guangen fought hard against the war and withdrew his troops.

古文：又拔郧西，群盗附者万计，遂东略地。
现代文：献忠又攻拔郧西，群贼依附于他的以万计，遂东向攻取城邑。
English: He devoted his loyalty and attacked the west of Shaanxi, and the bandits adhered to his ten-thousand-year plan, and then attacked the cities in the east.

古文：献忠自玛瑙山之败，心畏良玉，及屡胜，有骄色。
现代文：献忠自从玛瑙山之败后，心里很害怕左良玉，这时屡战屡胜，便产生了骄傲情绪。
English: Since the defeat of Onyushan, Xiantu has been very afraid of Zuo Liangyu. At this time, repeated battles and victories have produced a sense of pride.

古文：秋八月，良玉追击之信阳，大破之，降贼众数万。
现代文：秋八月，左良玉在信阳追击献忠，将他打得大败，贼人有数万投降。
English: In the autumn and August, Zuo Liangyu pursued Xianzhong in Xinyang and defeated him. Tens of thousands of bandits surrendered.

古文：献忠伤股，乘夜东奔，良玉急追之。
现代文：献忠大腿受伤，乘夜东奔，左良玉紧追不舍。
English: Xianzhong injured his thigh and ran away in the night, closely followed by Zuo Liangyu.

古文：会大雨，江溢道绝，官军不能进，献忠走免。
现代文：正赶上下大雨，江水泛滥，道路隔绝，官军无法前进，献忠这才走免。
English: It was just in time for the heavy rain, river flooding, roads cut off, and the government army could not advance. It was only through loyalty that they were able to escape.

古文：已，复出商城，将向英山，又为副将王允成所破，众道散且尽，从骑止数十。
现代文：后来，他又从商城复出，将要指向英山，又被副将王允成击败，部众途中溃散将尽，只有数十骑随从。
English: Later, he returned from Shangcheng and was about to head for Yingshan. He was again defeated by Vice Admiral Wang Yuncheng, and the troops were about to disperse en route, with only a few dozen horsemen following him.

古文：时汝才已先与自成合，献忠遂投自成。自成以部曲遇之，不从。
现代文：当时罗汝才已先与李自成会合，献忠遂投奔李自成，李自成把他当部曲对待，他不从。
English: At that time, Luo Rucai had first met with Li Zicheng, and he was loyal to Li Zicheng. Li Zicheng treated him like a puppet, but he did not obey.

古文：自成欲杀之，汝才谏曰： 留之使扰汉南，分官军兵力。 
现代文：李自成想杀他，罗汝才劝谏道 ：留着他去扰乱汉水以南，可以分官军兵力。 
English: Li Zicheng wanted to kill him, but Luo Rucai advised him to keep him to disrupt the south of the Han River, so that he could divide the military forces.

古文：乃阴与献忠五百骑，使遁去。道纠土贼一斗谷、瓦罐子等，众复盛，然犹佯推自成。
现代文：于是偷偷给献忠五百骑兵，让他逃走，他在路上纠集土贼一斗谷、瓦罐子等人，部众又壮大起来，但还假装拥戴李自成。
English: Therefore, he secretly gave 500 loyal cavalrymen to let him escape. On the way, he collected a bucket of earth, earthenware jars and other people. The followers grew up again, but they also pretended to support Li Zicheng.

古文：先是，贼营革、左二贺陷含、巢、潜诸县，欲西合献忠，以湖广官兵沮不得达。
现代文：原先，贼营中革里眼、左金王二贺攻陷含山、巢湖、潜山等县，想西向与献忠会合，因被湖广兵阻拦而不能到达。
English: Originally, the bandits in the middle of the battalion captured Lianshan, Chaohu, Qianshan and other counties, and wanted to go west to meet with Xianzhong, but they could not reach it because they were blocked by the soldiers of Hukang.

古文：及汴围急，督师丁启睿及左良玉皆往援汴，献忠乘间陷亳州，入英、霍山中，与革、左、二贺相见，皆大喜。
现代文：到开封被围困，督师丁启睿和左良玉都前往救援。献忠便乘虚攻陷亳州，进入英山、霍山一带山中，与革、左二贺相见，大家都非常高兴。
English: When Kaifeng was besieged, superintendents Ding Qirui and Zuo Liang Yutu both went to the rescue. Xian Zhong took advantage of the situation to invade Zhangzhou, entered the mountains around Yingshan and Huoshan, and met with Ge and Zuo Er He. Everyone was very happy.

古文：明年合攻，陷舒城、六安，掠民益军。
现代文：第二年联合进攻，攻陷舒城、六安，抢掠百姓来扩充武装。
English: In the second year, they launched a joint attack, capturing Shucheng and Lu'an, and robbing the people to expand their armed forces.

古文：陷庐州，知府郑履祥死。
现代文：攻陷庐州，知府郑履祥死。
English: After the fall of Bozhou, the governor Zheng Lixiang died.

古文：陷无为、庐江，习水师于巢湖。
现代文：攻陷无为、庐江，在巢湖训练水师。
English: There was nothing to be done about the sinking of the Lijiang River, so sailors were trained at Chaohu Lake.

古文：太监卢九德以总兵官黄得功、刘良佐之兵战于夹山，败绩，江南大震。
现代文：太监卢九德用总兵官黄得功、刘良佐的部队与贼人在夹山交战，吃了败仗，江南大为震动。
English: The eunuch Lu Jiude used the general officer Huang Dergong, Liu Liangzuo's troops and the thieves to fight in the mountains, but they were defeated, and the south of the Yangtze River was greatly shaken.

古文：凤阳总督高斗光、安庆巡抚郑二阳逮治，诏起马士英代斗光。
现代文：凤阳总督高斗光、安庆巡抚郑二阳被逮捕治罪，诏令起用马士英代替高斗光。
English: Fengyang Governor Gao Douguang and Anqing Inspector Zheng Eryang were arrested and punished, and Ma Shixing was appointed to replace Gao Douguang.

古文：是秋，得功、良佐大破贼于潜山，献忠腹心妇竖尽走蕲水，革、左二贺北投自成。
现代文：这年秋天，黄得功、刘良佐在潜山大破贼兵，献忠的心腹妇童全部逃到蕲水，革、左二贺北上投靠李自成。
English: In the autumn of that year, Huang Dergong and Liu Liang Zuo defeated the bandits on the Hidden Mountain, and all the loyal women and children fled to Surabaya, while Ke and Zu Erhe went north to support Li Zicheng.

古文：已，献忠复袭陷太湖。
现代文：不久，献忠又袭击攻下太湖。
English: Soon after, Xianzhong attacked and captured Taihu Lake.

古文：会良玉避自成东下，尽撤湖广兵自从。
现代文：正好左良玉为躲避李自成而东下，将湖广兵全部撤出带走。
English: Just at that time, Zuo Liangyu went east to avoid Li Zicheng, and withdrew all the soldiers from Hukang.

古文：献忠闻之，又袭陷黄梅。
现代文：献忠得知后，又袭击攻下黄梅。
English: After learning of the allegiance, he attacked and captured Huangmei.

古文：十六年春，连陷广济、蕲州、蕲水。
现代文：十六年春，献忠接连攻陷广济、蕲州、蕲水，进入黄州。
English: In the spring of the 16th year, Xianzhong successively invaded and occupied Guangji, Luzhou, Surabaya, and entered Huangzhou.

古文：入黄州，黄民尽逃，乃驱妇女铲城，寻杀之以填堑。
现代文：黄州百姓全部逃出，献忠于是驱赶妇女铲除城墙，随后又将她们杀死，填进壕沟。
English: The people of Huangzhou all fled, so Xianlu drove the women out to demolish the city wall, then killed them and filled the ditch.

古文：麻城人汤志者，大姓奴也，杀诸生六十人，以城降贼。
现代文：麻城人汤志，是大姓的家奴，他杀死六十名书生，将城池献给贼人。
English: Tang Zhi, a resident of Ma City, was a slave of the eldest son. He killed sixty scholars and dedicated the city to the thieves.

古文：献中改麻城为州。
现代文：献忠改麻城为州。
English: He dedicated himself to changing Macheng into a prefecture.

古文：又西陷汉阳，全军从鸭蛋洲渡，陷武昌，执楚王华奎，笼而沈诸江，尽杀楚宗室。
现代文：他又西进攻陷汉阳，全军从鸭蛋洲渡江，攻陷武昌，抓住楚王朱华奎，将他放进竹笼，沉入江中，尽杀楚王宗室。
English: He also attacked Hanyang in the west, the whole army crossed the river from Duck Egg Island, invaded Wuchang, captured Chu King Zhu Huakui, put him in a bamboo cage, sank into the river, and killed the royal family of King Chu.

古文：录男子二十以下、十五以上为兵，余皆杀之。
现代文：将男子二十岁以下、十五岁以上录用为兵，其余的全部杀掉。
English: The men under the age of twenty and over the age of fifteen were enlisted as soldiers, and all the rest were killed.

古文：由鹦鹉洲至道士洑，浮胔蔽江，逾月人脂厚累寸，鱼鳖不可食。
现代文：从鹦鹉洲到道士氵伏，浮尸布满江面，一个月后人油厚达一寸，鱼鳖都不能吃。
English: From Cockatoo Island to Taoist Temples, floating corpses covered the surface of the river. A month later, the dead bodies were up to an inch thick. The fish could not eat the bait.

古文：献忠遂僣号，改武昌曰天授府，江夏曰上江县。
现代文：献忠遂僭号称王，改武昌为天授府，江夏为上江县。
English: He called himself the king of dedication and loyalty, changed Wuchang to Tianzhu Prefecture, and Jiangxia to Shangjiang County.

古文：据楚王第，铸西王之宝，伪设尚书、都督、巡抚等官，开科取士。
现代文：占住楚王府第，铸造西王宝印，伪设尚书、总督、巡抚等官，开科取士。
English: They occupied the Chu King's residence, forged the Western King's seal, forged official documents, governors, governors, and other officials, and began to recruit scholars.

古文：以兴国州柯、陈两姓土官悍勇，招降之。
现代文：因兴国州柯、陈两姓土官悍勇，便招降他们。
English: Due to the bravery of the two local officials surnamed Xing, Guozhou Ke and Chen, they were invited to surrender.

古文：题诗黄鹤楼。
现代文：在黄鹤楼题诗。
English: There is a poem inscribed on the Yellow Crane Tower.

古文：下令发楚邸金振饥民。
现代文：下令将楚王府的金银发放，赈济饥民。
English: He ordered the distribution of gold and silver from King Chu's palace to help the starving people.

古文：蕲、黄等二十一州县悉附。
现代文：蕲州、黄州等二十一个州县全都归附。
English: Twenty-one prefectures and counties, including Zhangzhou and Huangzhou, were all annexed.

古文：时李自成在襄阳，闻之忌且怒，贻书谯责。
现代文：当时李自成在襄阳，听说后既忌恨又愤怒，传书去责备他。
English: At that time, Li Zicheng was in Yangyang. When he heard about this, he was both disgusted and angry, and sent a letter to reprimand him.

古文：左良玉兵复西上，伪官吏多被擒杀。
现代文：左良玉部队又西上，伪官吏多被擒杀。
English: Zuo Liangyu's troops went west again, and most of the pseudo-officials were killed.

古文：献忠惧，乃悉众趋岳州、长沙。
现代文：献忠害怕了，便带领部下全部奔往岳州、长沙。
English: When Xian Zhong was afraid, he led all his subordinates to rush to Yuezhou and Changsha.

古文：于是监军道王瓆、沔阳知州章旷、武昌生员程天一、白云寨长易道三皆起兵讨贼，蕲、黄、汉阳三府皆反正。
现代文：于是监军道王王质、沔阳知州章旷、武昌生员程天一、白云寨长易道三都起兵讨贼。蕲州、黄州、汉阳三府全都反正。
English: As a result, the supervisors of Military Road Wang Wangxuan, Poyang Zhizhou Zhang Kuang, Wuchang Resident Cheng Tianyi, and Baiyunzhai Changyi Road all raised an army to fight the thieves. Zhangzhou, Huangzhou, and Hanyang are all three provinces anyway.

古文：献忠遂陷咸宁、蒲圻，逼岳州。
现代文：献忠遂攻陷咸宁、蒲圻，逼近岳州。
English: He successfully invaded Xianning and Putuo, and approached Yuezhou.

古文：沅抚李乾德、总兵孔希贵等据城陵矶拒战，三战三克，歼其前部。
现代文：沅州巡抚李乾德、总兵孙希贵等人据守城陵矶抗战，三战三捷，消灭了贼人前部。
English: The governor of Zhangzhou, Li Qiande, the general soldier, Sun Xigui, and others defended the city and fought the war of resistance, won three battles and three victories, and eliminated the front of the thieves.

古文：献忠怒，百道并进，乾德等不支，皆走，岳州陷。
现代文：献忠大怒，分百路并进，李乾德等人坚持不住，都退走了，岳州失陷。
English: Xianzhong was furious, and they advanced in hundreds of directions at the same time. Li Qiande and others could not hold out, they all retreated, and Yuezhou fell.

古文：献忠欲渡洞庭湖，卜于神，不吉，投珓而訽。
现代文：献忠想渡过洞庭湖，先卜问神灵，不吉，便将占卜用的王交丢到地上，破口大骂。
English: When Xian Zhong wanted to cross Dongting Lake, he first asked the gods for a fortune, but it was not good, so he threw the divining cup onto the ground and cursed loudly.

古文：将渡，风大作，献忠怒，连巨舟千艘，载妇女焚之，水光夜如昼。
现代文：将渡时，狂风大作，献忠大怒，将一千艘巨船连起来，载上妇女，点火焚烧，水面上照得如同白昼。
English: At the time of the Passing of the Great Wind, with great fury and great fury, a thousand huge ships were tied together, loaded with women, set on fire, and shone like daylight on the water.

古文：骑而逼长沙，巡按刘熙祚奉吉王、惠王走衡州，总兵尹先民降，长沙陷。
现代文：献忠转而用骑兵逼近长沙，巡按刘熙祚奉吉王、惠王逃到衡州，总兵尹先民投降，长沙失陷。
English: He turned from loyalty to loyalty and used cavalry to approach Changsha. The patrol leader Liu Xishu followed King Fongji and King Hui fled to Hengzhou. The commander-in-chief Yin Xianmin surrendered and Changsha fell.

古文：寻破衡州，吉王、惠王、桂王俱走永州。
现代文：不久贼人攻破衡州，吉王、惠王、桂王都逃到永州。
English: Soon the thieves broke through Hengzhou, and King Ji, King Hui, and King Gui all fled to Yongzhou.

古文：乃拆桂府材，载至长沙，造伪殿，而自追三王于永。
现代文：于是拆掉桂王府的木材，运到长沙，建伪宫殿，而献忠自己则往永州追击三王。
English: So he tore down the wood of the Gui Wangfu and transported it to Changsha to build a fake palace, while he went to Yongzhou to pursue the three kings.

古文：熙祚命中军护三王入广西，身入永死守，城陷见杀。
现代文：刘熙祚命中军护送三王到广西，自己亲自入永州城死守，后来城陷被杀。
English: Liu Xichen was killed by the army escorting the three kings to Guangxi, and he personally entered Yongzhou City to defend it, and was later killed in the castle.

古文：又陷宝庆、常德，发故督师杨嗣昌祖墓，斩其尸见血。
现代文：献忠又攻陷宝庆、常德，掘开原督师杨嗣昌的祖坟，击斩尸体，竟还见到血迹。
English: Xianzhong also invaded Baoqing and Changde, dug up the ancestral grave of the former superintendent Yang Shichang, beheaded the body, and even saw bloodstains.

古文：攻道州，守备沈至绪战殁，其女再战，夺父尸还，城获全。
现代文：又攻打道州，守备沈至绪战死，他的女儿再战，夺回父亲遗体，城池获得保全。
English: He attacked Doushu again, and died in the battle to defend Shen Zhixiang. His daughter fought again, recaptured her father's body, and the city was preserved.

古文：遂东犯江西，陷吉安、袁州、建昌、抚州、永新、安福、万载、南丰诸府县。
现代文：献忠遂东犯江西，攻陷吉安、袁州、建昌、抚州、永新、安福、万载、南丰等府县。
English: Suidong and Suidong attacked Jiangxi Province, capturing Ji'an, Yuanzhou, Jianchang, Fuzhou, Yongxin, Anfu, Wanzai, Nanfeng and other prefectures.

古文：广东大震，南、韶属城官民尽逃。
现代文：广东大为震动，南雄、韶关所属城池的居民全部外逃。
English: Guangdong was greatly shaken, and the residents of Nanxiong and Shaoguan were forced to flee.

古文：贼有献计取吴、越者，献忠惮良玉在，不听，决策入川中。
现代文：贼中有人献计攻取吴、越，献忠惧怕左良玉在，不听，决定进入四川。
English: Some of the thieves made plans to conquer Wu and Yue, but fearing the loyalty of Zuo Liangyu, they decided to enter Sichuan.

古文：十七年春陷夔州，至万县，水涨，留屯三月。
现代文：十七年春攻陷夔州，到达万县，江水暴涨，便留屯三个月。
English: In the spring of 17th year, he invaded and occupied Bozhou, reached Wanshan, the river water surged, and then stayed in Tun for three months.

古文：已，破涪州，败守道刘麟长、总兵曾英兵。
现代文：随后，攻破涪州，击败守道刘麟长、总兵曾英的部队。
English: Subsequently, they broke through Zhangzhou and defeated the troops of Liu Linlong, the guard of the road, and Zeng Ying, the general.

古文：进陷佛图关。破重庆，瑞王常浩遇害。
现代文：进而攻陷佛图关，攻破重庆，瑞王朱常浩遇害。
English: In addition, the Buddhas Pass was captured, Chongqing was defeated, and Zui Wang Zhu Changhao was killed.

古文：是日，天无云而雷，贼有震者。献忠怒，发巨炮与天角。
现代文：这一天，晴空无云，却有雷声，贼人有的受到震惊，献忠大怒，引发大炮与天较量。
English: On this day, the sky is cloudless, but there is thunder, some thieves are shocked, and devotees are furious, triggering cannons to compete with the sky.

古文：遂进陷成都，蜀王至澍率妃、夫人以下投于井，巡抚龙文光被杀。
现代文：遂进军攻陷成都，蜀王朱至澍率领王妃、夫人以下投井自杀，巡抚龙文光被杀。
English: So they marched into and conquered Chengdu. Shu King Zhu Ziqi led his queen and his wife to commit suicide by throwing themselves into a well. The governor, Long Wenguang, was killed.

古文：是时我大清兵已定京师，李自成遁归西安。
现代文：这时我大清兵已经平定京师，李自成逃回西安。
English: At this time, the Great Qing soldiers had already subdued the Beijing division, and Li Zicheng fled back to Xi'an.

古文：南京诸臣尊立福王，命故大学士王应熊督川、湖军事，兵力弱，不能讨贼。
现代文：南京诸臣尊立福王，命令原大学士王应熊总督四川、湖广军事，但因兵力弱，不能讨贼。
English: The courtiers in Nanjing held King Fu in high esteem, and ordered the former university judge Wang Yingxiong, the governor of Sichuan and Hougang, to take military action. However, due to the weakness of the army, he was unable to repel the bandits.

古文：献忠遂僣号大西国王，改元大顺，冬十一月庚寅，即伪位，以蜀王府为宫，名成都曰西京。
现代文：献忠遂僭号大西国王，改元大顺。冬十一月，献忠登上伪位，以蜀王府为王宫，改成都为西京。
English: In the winter of November, he ascended to the pseudo-throne, with Shu Wangfu as the royal palace and Chengdu as West Beijing.

古文：用汪兆麟为左丞相，严锡命为右丞相。
现代文：用汪兆麟为左丞相，严锡命为右丞相。
English: Wang Zhaolin was appointed as the Left Minister and Yan Xi as the Right Minister.

古文：设六部五军都督府等官，王国麟、江鼎镇、龚完敬等为尚书。
现代文：设六部五军都督府等官，用王国麟、江鼎镇、龚完敬等人为尚书。
English: Six departments of the five armed forces, the governor's office and other officials were set up, and Wang Guolin, Jiang Ding Zhen, and Zou Kan Rong were used as honorary titles.

古文：养子孙可望、艾能奇、刘文秀、李定国等皆为将军，赐姓张氏，分徇诸府州县，悉陷之。
现代文：养子孙可望、艾能奇、刘文秀、李定国等都为将军，赐姓张氏，派他们分巡各府州县，所到之处全部攻了下来。
English: His adopted sons and grandsons, Kibo, Ai Nengqi, Liu Wenxiu, and Li Dingguo, were all generals. He gave them the surname Zhang and sent them to patrol all prefectures and counties, and they conquered everything they came to.

古文：保宁、顺庆先已降自成，置官吏，献忠悉逐去。
现代文：保宁、顺庆先已经投降了李自成，并设置了官吏，献忠全部将他们赶走。
English: Boryeong and Shunqing surrendered to Li Zicheng first, and set up officials to drive them all away.

古文：自成发兵攻，不克，遂据有全蜀。
现代文：李自成发兵来攻，攻不下，献忠遂占有了整个四川。
English: Li Zicheng sent troops to attack, failed to attack, and eventually occupied the whole of Sichuan.

古文：惟遵义一郡及黎州土司马金坚不下。
现代文：只有遵义一府和黎州土司马金坚坚守不下。
English: Only Zunyi Prefecture and Lizhou Tusi and Makin were able to hold out.

古文：献忠黄面长身虎颔，人号黄虎。
现代文：献忠身长面黄，下巴像虎，人称黄虎。
English: Xian Zhong is a long-faced yellow man with a chin like a tiger. He is known as the Yellow Tiger.

古文：性狡谲，嗜杀，一日不杀人，辄悒悒不乐。诡开科取士，集于青羊宫，尽杀之，笔墨成丘冢。
现代文：性狡谲，喜好杀人，一天不杀人便郁郁不乐，他诡称要开科取士，将士人集中到青羊宫，全部杀害，笔墨堆成丘冢。
English: He was cunning and liked to kill people. If he didn't kill anyone for a day, he would be depressed. He made up a ruse that he was going to gather scholars and send them to the Qingyang Palace. He killed them all and piled up the ink into mounds.

古文：坑成都民于中园。
现代文：将成都百姓坑杀在中园。
English: killing the people of Chengdu in Zhongyuan.

古文：杀各卫籍军九十八万。
现代文：他还杀掉各卫在籍士兵共九十八万。
English: He also killed a total of nine hundred and eighty thousand soldiers enrolled in the Guards.

古文：又遣四将军分屠各府县，名草杀。
现代文：他又遣四位将军分别屠戮各个府县，名为草杀。
English: He also sent four generals to slaughter each prefecture separately, known as the grasshopper massacre.

古文：伪官朝会拜伏，呼獒数十下殿，獒所嗅者，引出斩之，名天杀。
现代文：伪官们朝会时拜伏在地，他唤出数十条凶猛的狗入殿，狗嗅了哪一个，便将他拉出斩首，名叫天杀。
English: The pseudo-officials prostrated themselves on the ground during the imperial meeting. He called out dozens of ferocious dogs to enter the temple. When the dogs sniffed which one, they pulled him out and decapitated him, which was called "death by heaven."

古文：又创生剥皮法，皮未去而先绝者，刑者抵死。
现代文：他又创生剥人皮法，如皮没有剥下而人已气绝的，动刑的人要抵死。
English: He also created the method of skinning people. If the skin is not peeled off and the person is exhausted, the person who started the punishment must die.

古文：将卒以杀人多少叙功次，共杀男女六万万有奇。
现代文：将士以杀人多少定功劳大小，前后杀死的男女达六万万以上。
English: The number of men and women killed before and after reached more than sixty thousand thousand.

古文：贼将有不忍至缢死者。伪都督张君用、王明等数十人，皆坐杀人少，剥皮死，并屠其家。
现代文：有的贼将因不忍而上吊，伪都督张君用、王明等数十人，都因杀人少被剥皮而死，家属也被杀戮。
English: Some of the thieves hanged themselves because they could not bear it. The pseudo-governor Zhang Junyong, Wang Ming and dozens of others were all flayed to death for murder, and their families were also killed.

古文：胁川中士大夫使受伪职，叙州布政使尹伸、广元给事中吴宇英不屈死。
现代文：他威胁川中士大夫接受伪职，叙州布政使尹伸、广元给事中吴宇英不屈而死。
English: He threatened Dr. Kawakawa, a sergeant-major, to accept a false position, and the political envoys of Suzhou, Yin Shin and Guangyuan, gave the matter to Wu Yuying, who died unyielding.

古文：诸受职者，后寻亦皆见杀。
现代文：那些接受伪职的人，随后不久也都被杀了。
English: Those who accepted the fake jobs were also killed soon after.

古文：其惨虐无人理，不可胜纪。
现代文：其惨酷无人道的行为不可胜纪。
English: His cruel and inhumane actions are unspeakable.

古文：又用法移锦江，涸而阙之，深数丈，埋金宝亿万计，然后决堤放流，名水藏，曰： 无为后人有也。 
现代文：他又筑坝先将锦江改道，放干河道，挖一个深数丈的大坑，将亿万计的金银财宝埋在其中，然后决堤放水，名为水藏，说： 不能让后人拥有。 
English: He also built a dam to divert the Jinjiang River, drained the riverbed, dug a huge pit several meters deep, buried hundreds of millions of gold and silver treasures in it, and then broke through the dike to release water, called the reservoir, saying: "We cannot let future generations have it."

古文：当是时，曾英、李占春、于大海、王祥、杨展、曹勋等议兵并起，故献忠诛杀益毒。川中民尽，乃谋窥西安。
现代文：当时，曾英、李占春、于大海、王祥、杨展、曹勋等义兵并起，所以献忠杀戮更加惨毒，川中百姓已尽，献忠便图谋窥视西安。
English: At that time, Zeng Ying, Li Zhanchun, Yu Haihuang, Wang Xiang, Yang Zhan, Cao Xun and other volunteer soldiers were at the same time, so the loyalty killing was more vicious. The people in Sichuan were exhausted, and the loyalty was trying to peep into Xi'an.

古文：顺治三年，献忠尽焚成都宫殿庐舍，夷其城，率众出川北，又欲尽杀川兵。
现代文：顺治三年，献忠将成都的宫殿房舍全部烧毁，铲平成都城，然后率众出川北。
English: In the third year of Shunzhi, Xianzhong burned down all the palace buildings in Chengdu, shoveled the capital city, and then led the crowd to the north of Sichuan.

古文：伪将刘进忠故统川兵，闻之，率一军逃。
现代文：又想将四川兵全部杀掉，伪将刘进忠原统领川兵，听说后，率领一军逃了。
English: He also wanted to kill all the Sichuan soldiers, and the pseudo general Liu Jin Zhongyuan led the Sichuan soldiers. After hearing this, he led an army and fled.

古文：会我大清兵至汉中，进忠来奔，乞为乡导。至盐亭界，大雾。献忠晓行，猝遇我兵于凤凰坡，中矢坠马，蒲伏积薪下。
现代文：正好我大清兵到了汉中，刘进忠来投奔，请求做向导，到了盐亭县境内，起了大雾，献忠白天行军，突然与我军在凤凰坡遭遇，被箭射中，跌落马下，他爬到柴堆下面躲起来。
English: Just as my Great Qing soldiers arrived in Hanzhong, Liu Jinzhong came running and asked to be a guide. When he arrived in Yanting County, there was heavy fog. He marched during the day, and suddenly encountered our army in Fenghuangpo. He was shot by an arrow, fell under a horse, and crawled under a pile of firewood to hide.

古文：于是我兵擒献忠出，斩之。
现代文：于是清军将献忠抓出，斩首。
English: As a result, the Qing army caught and beheaded Xianzhong.

古文：川中自遭献忠乱，列城内杂树成拱，狗食人肉若猛兽虎豹，啮人死辄弃去，不尽食也。
现代文：川中自从遭受献忠的祸乱，各城之内杂树成拱，狗吃人肉就像虎豹等猛兽，将人咬死后往往就弃之而去，并不吃光。
English: Since the river suffered the calamity of devotion, the miscellaneous trees in each city have become arched, dogs eat human flesh like tigers and leopards and other ferocious beasts, and often abandon people after biting them, and do not eat them.

古文：民逃深山中，草衣不食久，遍体皆生毛。
现代文：人民逃到深山之中，以草为衣，以树木为食，时间长了，遍体长满了毛发。
English: The people fled deep into the mountains, with grass for clothing and trees for food. It took a long time, and their bodies were covered with hair.

古文：献忠既诛，贼党可望、能奇、文秀、定国等溃入川南，杀曾英、李乾德等，后皆降于永明王。
现代文：献忠被诛杀后，贼党孙可望、艾能奇、刘文秀、李定国等溃逃入川南，杀死曾英、李乾德等人，后来都向永明王投降。
English: After Xian Zhong was killed, the bandits Sun Kibang, Ai Nengqi, Liu Wenxiu, Li Dingguo and others fled to the south of Sichuan, killed Zeng Ying, Li Qiande and others, and later surrendered to King Yongming.

