古文：陈友谅，沔阳渔家子也。
现代文：陈友谅，沔阳渔家之子。
English: Chen Youzong, the son of a fisherman from Shenyang.

古文：本谢氏，祖赘于陈，因从其姓。
现代文：祖先原本姓谢，因入赘陈家，才跟随其姓。
English: The ancestor's family name was originally Xie, but because he joined the Chen family, he followed his family name.

古文：少读书，略通文义。
现代文：他少时读书，略通文义。
English: He read books when he was young and has a basic understanding of literature.

古文：有术者相其先世墓地，曰 法当贵 ，友谅心窃喜。
现代文：有一卜者在察看过其祖先的墓地之后说 ：日后定会富贵。 陈友谅心中暗喜。
English: After inspecting the graves of his ancestors, one man said, "I'm sure I'll be rich in the future." Chen Youyou was secretly happy.

古文：尝为县小吏，非其好也。
现代文：他曾任县里的小吏，但这并非他的目标。
English: He had been a minor official in the county, but this was not his goal.

古文：徐寿辉兵起，友谅往从之，依其将倪文俊为簿掾。
现代文：徐寿辉起兵后，陈友谅前去投靠，在徐的部将倪文俊手下管理文书档案。
English: After Xu Shouhui raised an army, Chen Youpeng went to join him, and managed the document archives under Xu's subordinate Ni Wenjun.

古文：寿辉，罗田人，又名真一，业贩布。
现代文：徐寿辉，罗田人，又名徐真一，以贩布为生。
English: Xu Shouhui, a man from Luotian, also known as Xu Zhenyi, makes a living by selling cloth.

古文：元末盗起，袁州僧彭莹玉以妖术与麻城邹普胜聚众为乱，用红巾为号，奇寿辉状貌，遂推为主。
现代文：元朝末年，盗贼四起，袁州和尚彭莹玉以其妖术与麻城邹普胜一起聚众为乱，以红巾为标志，他们觉得徐寿辉相貌不凡，便推举他为首领。
English: At the end of the Yuan Dynasty, there were four robberies. Yuan Zhou and Shang Peng Yingyu, with their magic, gathered the crowd together with Ma Chengyi and Pu Sheng to create chaos, using the red scarf as a symbol. They thought that Xu Shouhui's appearance was extraordinary, so they elected him as the leader.

古文：至正十一年九月陷蕲水及黄州路，败元威顺王宽彻不花。
现代文：至正十一年九月，攻陷蕲水及黄州路，打败元威顺王宽彻不花。
English: In September of the eleventh year of the Taisho era, he captured Surabaya and Huangzhou Road, and defeated the Yuan Wei Shun Wang Kuan Che.

古文：遂即蕲水为都，称皇帝，国号天完，建元治平，以普胜为太师。
现代文：徐寿辉随即以蕲水为都，自称皇帝，国号天完，年号治平，以邹普胜为太师。
English: Xu Shouhui immediately took Surabaya as the capital, claiming to be the emperor, the country's name was Tiankan, the year's name was Zhiping, and Pu Sheng as the grand master.

古文：未几，陷饶、信。
现代文：不久，攻陷饶、信。
English: Soon after, Rao and Xin were captured.

古文：明年分兵四出，连陷湖广、江西诸郡县。
现代文：第二年又分兵四路出击，连陷湖广、江西各郡县。
English: In the following year, four detachments of soldiers launched a four-pronged attack, capturing Huguang and all counties in Jiangxi Province.

古文：遂破昱岭关，陷杭州。
现代文：然后攻克昱岭关、杭州。
English: And then conquer Fuling Pass and Hangzhou.

古文：别将赵普胜等陷太平诸路。势大振。
现代文：另外率领赵普胜等攻陷太平等地，声威大振。
English: In addition, he led Zhao Pusheng and others to attack and fall too equally, and his prestige was greatly shaken.

古文：然无远志，所得不能守。
现代文：然而他们没有远大志向，所取之地都不能坚守。
English: However, they do not have lofty aspirations and cannot hold on to what they have gained.

古文：明年为元师所破，寿辉走免。
现代文：第二年，蕲水被元军攻破，徐寿辉幸免逃脱。
English: The following year, Surabaya was overrun by Yuan forces, but Xu Shouhui managed to escape.

古文：已而复炽，迁都汉阳，为其丞相倪文俊所制。
现代文：不久声势又起，迁都汉阳，但被丞相倪文俊控制。
English: Soon after, there was a resurgence and the capital was moved to Hanyang, but it was controlled by the prime minister Ni Wenjun.

古文：十七年九月，文俊谋弑寿辉，不克，奔黄州。
现代文：十七年九月，倪文俊企图谋杀徐寿辉，没有成功，逃至黄州。
English: In September 17th, Ni Wenjun attempted to murder Xu Shouhui, but failed and fled to Huangzhou.

古文：时友谅隶文俊麾下，数有功，为领兵元帅。
现代文：当时陈友谅正隶属倪文俊，因屡立战功，升为领兵元帅。
English: At that time, Chen Youyuan was under the command of Ni Wenzhun. Due to his repeated war exploits, he was promoted to field marshal.

古文：遂乘衅杀文俊，并其兵，自称宣慰使，寻称平章政事。
现代文：于是陈友谅乘此机会杀掉倪文俊，吞并了他的军队，自称宣慰使，随即又称平章政事。
English: Therefore, Chen Youyuan took this opportunity to kill Ni Wenjun, absorbed his army, and claimed to be a consoler, which was also called the Pingzhang government.

古文：明年，陷安庆，又破龙兴、瑞州，分兵取邵武、吉安，而自以兵入抚州。
现代文：第二年，陈友谅率军攻陷安庆，又破龙兴、瑞州。然后分兵攻取邵武、吉安，而自己则领兵进入抚州。
English: In the second year, Chen Youzhen led the army to capture Anqing, and defeated Longxing and Ruizhou. Then, the detachment captured Shaowu and Ji'an, and he led the army into Fuzhou.

古文：已，又破建昌、赣、汀、信、衢。
现代文：不久，又破建昌、赣、汀、信、衢。
English: Soon, he also broke Jianchang, Zou, Ting, Xin and Zou.

古文：当是时，江以南惟友谅兵最强。
现代文：当时，长江以南只有陈友谅部最强。
English: At that time, south of the Yangtze River, only Chen Youyuan was the strongest.

古文：太祖之取太平也，与为邻。
现代文：朱元璋攻取太平后，与他为邻。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang became his neighbor after conquering Taiping.

古文：友谅陷元池州，太祖遣常遇春击取之，由是数相攻击。
现代文：陈友谅攻陷元池州，朱元璋派常遇春率军前去攻打陈友谅，夺取池州。
English: Chen Youzong attacked and captured Yuan Chizhou, and Zhu Yuanzhang often sent his army to attack Chen Youzong and capture Chizhou.

古文：赵普胜者，故骁将，号 双刀赵 。
现代文：赵普胜是有名的骁将，号称 双刀赵 。
English: Zhao Pusheng is a famous swordsman, known as Double-Sword Zhao.

古文：初与俞通海等屯巢湖，同归太祖，叛去归寿辉。
现代文：开始与俞通海等驻扎巢湖，一起归附朱元璋，后来叛归徐寿辉。
English: At first, he was stationed in Chaohu with Zou Tonghai and others, and was attached to Zhu Yuanzhang at the same time. Later, he defected to Xu Shouhui.

古文：至是为友谅守安庆，数引兵争池州、太平，往来掠境上。
现代文：这时他正为陈友谅驻守安庆，多次引兵争夺池州、太平，到处抢掠。
English: At this time, he was stationed in Anqing for Chen Youxuan, repeatedly led troops to compete for Chizhou and Taiping, and plundered everywhere.

古文：太祖患之，啖普胜客，使潜入友谅军间普胜。
现代文：朱元璋为此担忧不已，于是引诱赵普胜的食客，让他潜入陈友谅军中去离间赵普胜。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang was worried about this, so he lured Zhao Pusheng's diners and asked him to infiltrate Chen Youyuan's army to separate Zhao Pusheng.

古文：普胜不之觉，见友谅使者辄诉功，悻悻有德色。
现代文：赵普胜没有发觉，见到陈友谅的使者总是诉说自己的功劳，觉得自己有恩于陈，脸上露出悻悻的表情。
English: Zhao Pusheng did not notice that the messenger who saw Chen Youjun always talked about his own merits, felt that he was grateful to Chen, and his face showed a haggard expression.

古文：友谅衔之，疑其贰于己，以会师为名，自江州猝至。普胜以烧羊逆于雁汉。甫登舟，友谅即杀普胜，并其军。
现代文：陈友谅由此怀恨心中，怀疑他要背叛自己，便以会师为名，从江州突然来到安庆，赵普胜在雁汊以烧羊迎接，当他刚一登船，陈友谅便马上杀了他，吞并其军。
English: Chen Youzhen harbored a grudge against him and suspected him of betraying him, so he suddenly came to Anqing from Jiangzhou in the name of a mentor. Zhao Pusheng greeted him with a lamb roast in the wild goose. As soon as he boarded the ship, Chen Youzhen immediately killed him and annexed his army.

古文：乃以轻兵袭池州，为徐达等击败，师尽覆。
现代文：然后以轻兵袭击池州，被徐达等击败，参战军队全军覆没。
English: Then, they attacked Chizhou with light soldiers, but were defeated by Xu Da and others, and the entire army of the participating army was wiped out.

古文：始友谅破龙兴，寿辉欲徙都之，友谅不可。
现代文：当初陈友谅攻占龙江时，徐寿辉想迁都龙兴，陈友谅不同意。
English: At first, when Chen Youyou captured Longjiang, Xu Shouhui wanted to move the capital to Longxing, but Chen Youyou disagreed.

古文：未几，寿辉遽发汉阳，次江州。
现代文：不久，徐寿辉仓促从汉阳出发，临时驻扎江州。
English: Soon, Xu Shouhui hastily departed from Hanyang and temporarily stationed in Jiangzhou.

古文：江州，友谅治所也，伏兵郭外，迎寿辉入，即闭城门，悉杀其所部。
现代文：江州是陈友谅管辖之地，他命士兵埋伏在城外，然后将徐寿辉迎入城中，马上紧闭城门，将徐寿辉所部全部消灭。
English: Jiangzhou is under the jurisdiction of Chen Youxuan. He ordered his soldiers to lie in wait outside the city, then welcomed Xu Shouhui into the city, immediately closed the city gate, and eliminated all of Xu Shouhui's troops.

古文：即江州为都，奉寿辉以居，而自称汉王，置王府官属。
现代文：随即以江州为都，挟奉徐寿辉居于此地，而陈友谅则自称汉王，设置王府官属。
English: Jiangzhou was then made the capital, and Xu Shouhui lived there as a vassal, while Chen Youjun claimed to be the Han king and set up the royal court.

古文：遂挟寿辉东下，攻太平。
现代文：然后挟持徐寿辉东下，进攻太平。
English: Then he took Xu Shouhui eastward and attacked Taiping.

古文：太平城坚不可拔，乃引巨舟薄城西南。士卒缘舟尾攀堞而登，遂克之。
现代文：但太平城坚不可拔，于是陈友谅军便利用大型船只靠近西南城墙，士兵们顺着船尾爬过矮墙进入城内，攻克太平城。
English: However, Taiping City was impregnable, so Chen Youzhen's army used large ships to approach the southwest city wall. The soldiers climbed over the low wall along the stern of the ship to enter the city and conquer Taiping City.

古文：志益骄。
现代文：此后，陈友谅便愈加骄狂。
English: After that, Chen Youyuan became more and more arrogant.

古文：进驻采石矶，遣部将阳白事寿辉前，戒壮士挟铁挝击碎其首。
现代文：陈友谅部进驻采石矶后，他派遣部将假装到徐寿辉面前陈述事情，趁机安排壮士用铁器击碎徐寿辉的脑袋。
English: After Chen Youjun's detachment was stationed at the quarry, he would pretend to be in front of Xu Shouhui to report the matter, and take the opportunity to arrange for a strong man to smash Xu Shouhui's head with an iron tool.

古文：寿辉既死，以采石五通庙为行殿，即皇帝位，国号汉，改元大义，太师邹普胜以下皆仍故官。
现代文：徐寿辉一死，陈友谅便以采石五通庙为行殿，即皇帝位，国号汉，改元大义，太师邹普胜以下都是以前的旧官。
English: As soon as Xu Shouhui died, Chen Youpeng took the quarry of the Wutong Temple as the lineage hall, that is, the emperor's throne, the country name Han, the change of the Yuan Dynasty, and the following were the former old officials.

古文：会大风雨，群臣班沙岸称贺，不能成礼。
现代文：陈友谅即位之日正巧遇上大风大雨，群臣们排列在沙岸上向他道贺，没能按礼仪行事。
English: On the day of Chen Youken's enthronement, it happened to be windy and rainy. The courtiers lined up on the sandbank to congratulate him, but failed to act according to etiquette.

古文：友谅性雄猜，好以权术驭下。
现代文：陈友谅性情强硬而多疑，喜欢以权术控制部下。
English: Chen Youyuan is tough and suspicious, and likes to use power tactics to control his subordinates.

古文：既僣号，尽有江西、湖广之地，恃其兵强，欲东取应天。
现代文：他已自称皇帝，而且尽占江西、湖广之地，便自恃兵力强大，想向东攻取应天。
English: He had already proclaimed himself emperor and occupied all of Jiangxi Province and Hunan Province. He boasted that he had a strong army and wanted to conquer Yingtian in the east.

古文：太祖患友谅与张士诚合，乃设计令其故人康茂才为书诱之，令速来。
现代文：朱元璋担心陈友谅与张士诚联合，于是设计命陈友谅的老朋友康茂才写信引诱他，让他迅速赶来。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang was worried that Chen Youzheng would unite with Zhang Shicheng, so he sent a letter to Chen Youzheng's old friend Kang Mao to entice him to come quickly.

古文：友谅果引舟师东下，至江东桥，呼茂才不应，始知为所绐。
现代文：陈友谅果然率水师东下，到达江东桥，呼叫康茂才，无人答应，才知道自己被骗了。
English: Chen Youzhen led the sailors eastward, reached the East River Bridge, and called for Kang Maocai. No one agreed, and only then did he know that he had been deceived.

古文：战于龙湾，大败。潮落舟胶，死者无算，亡战舰数百，乘轻舸走。
现代文：双方战于龙湾，陈友谅大败，因为潮落，船被搁浅，死者无数，丧失战舰数百艘，陈友谅只得坐小船逃走。
English: The two sides fought in Longwan, Chen Youzong suffered a crushing defeat. Because of the low tide, the ship was stranded, countless people died, hundreds of warships were lost, and Chen Youzong had to escape in a small boat.

古文：张德胜追败之慈湖，焚其舟。
现代文：张德胜乘胜追击，在慈湖将其打败，焚烧其船。
English: Zhang Desheng chased after him, defeated him at Cihu, and burned his ship.

古文：冯国胜以五翼军蹙之，友谅出皂旗军迎战，又大败。
现代文：冯国胜率五路大军乘胜追击，陈友谅派出皂旗军迎战，又被大败。
English: Feng Guo's victorious five-way army took advantage of the victory to pursue, Chen Youzhen sent the soap banner army to meet the battle, and was defeated.

古文：遂弃太平，走江州。
现代文：于是陈友谅放弃太平，逃至江州。
English: So Chen Youyong abandoned Taiping and fled to Jiangzhou.

古文：太祖兵乘胜取安庆，其将于光、欧普祥皆降。
现代文：朱元璋军乘胜攻取安庆，陈友谅的部将于光、欧普祥都缴械投降。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang's army took advantage of the victory to capture Anqing, and Chen Youjun's troops surrendered at Guangming and Ou Puxiang.

古文：明年，友谅遣兵复陷安庆。
现代文：第二年，陈友谅派兵再次攻陷安庆。
English: The following year, Chen Youyou sent troops to invade Anqing again.

古文：太祖自将伐之，复安庆，长驱至江州。
现代文：朱元璋亲自率军讨伐，恢复安庆，长驱直入抵达江州。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang personally led the crusade, restored Anqing, and drove straight into Jiangzhou.

古文：友谅战败，夜挈妻子奔武昌。
现代文：陈友谅战败，连夜携妻带子逃往武昌。
English: Chen Youjun was defeated and fled to Wuchang with his wife overnight.

古文：其将吴宏以饶降，王溥以建昌降，胡廷瑞以龙兴降。
现代文：他的部将吴宏以饶州投降，王溥以建昌投降，胡廷瑞以龙兴投降。
English: His subordinates Wu Hong surrendered in Raozhou, Wang Qi surrendered in Jianchang, and Hu Tingrui surrendered in Longxing.

古文：友谅忿疆土日蹙，乃大治楼船数百艘，皆高数丈，饰以丹漆，每船三重，置走马棚，上下人语声不相闻，舻箱皆裹以铁。载家属百官，尽锐攻南昌，飞梯冲车，百道并进。
现代文：陈友谅眼见其疆土日益减少，十分愤怒，于是制造了数百艘楼船。这些船均高数丈，用丹漆粉饰，每艘船都有三层，设有走马棚，船上船下人语之声互不相闻，橹箱都用铁裹住，然后船载家属百官，尽发精锐进攻南昌，飞梯冲车，百路并进。
English: Chen Youyuan saw his territory dwindling day by day and was very angry, so he made hundreds of buildingships. These ships were several meters high, painted with red lacquer, each ship had three floors, equipped with stables, the voices of the people on board and under the ship were not mutually intelligible, the carts were all wrapped with iron, and then the ship carried hundreds of family members and officials, attacking Nanchang with all their strength, flying ladders, and hundreds of roads.

古文：太祖从子文正及邓愈坚守，三月不能下，太祖自将救之。友谅闻太祖至，撤围，东出鄱阳湖，遇于康郎山。
现代文：朱元璋的堂侄朱文正及郑愈坚守南昌三个月，朱元璋亲自率军前去援救，陈友谅听说朱元璋将到，便撤除对南昌的包围，向东出鄱阳湖，与朱元璋在康郎山相遇。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang's cousins, Zhu Wenzheng and Zheng Yu, held out in Nanchang for three months. Zhu Yuanzhang personally led an army to come to the rescue. Chen Youjun heard that Zhu Yuanzhang would arrive, so he lifted the siege on Nanchang, went east out of Poyang Lake, and met Zhu Yuanzhang in Kanglang Mountain.

古文：友谅集巨舰，连锁为阵，太祖兵不能仰攻，连战三日，几殆。
现代文：陈友谅集合巨舰，以连锁为阵。朱元璋军不能仰攻，连战三日，损兵折将，渐感不支。
English: Chen Youzhen assembled huge ships and formed a chain formation. Zhu Yuanzhang's army could not attack from the rear, and fought for three days in a row, losing more and more soldiers.

古文：已，东北风起，乃纵火焚友谅舟，其弟友仁等皆烧死。
现代文：但是不久，刮起了东北风，朱元璋便下令放火焚烧陈友谅的船只，其弟陈友仁等都被烧死。
English: However, not long after, a northeasterly wind began to blow, and Zhu Yuanzhang gave the order to set fire to Chen Youjun's ship. His brother Chen Youren and others were all burned to death.

古文：友仁号五王，眇一目，有勇略，既死，友谅气沮。
现代文：陈友仁号称五王，瞎一眼，却智勇双全，他死后，陈友谅为之丧气。
English: Chen Youren was known as the Five Kings. He was blind in one eye, but possessed both wisdom and courage. After his death, Chen Youren was devastated.

古文：是战也，太祖舟虽小，然轻驶，友谅军俱艨艟巨舰，不利进退，以是败。
现代文：在这场战斗中，朱元璋船虽小，却轻便易行；陈友谅虽是巨舰，却不能进退自如，故而战败。
English: In this battle, Zhu Yuanzhang's ship, although small, was light and easy to sail; Chen You Yue, although a huge ship, could not advance and retreat freely, and was defeated.

古文：太祖所乘舟樯白，友谅约军士明日并力攻白樯舟。
现代文：朱元璋的坐船是白桅杆，陈友谅便与其将士约定第二天集中兵力猛攻白桅船。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang's ship was the White Mast, so Chen Youzhen agreed with his generals to attack the White Mast ship with concentrated forces the next day.

古文：太祖知之，令舟樯尽白。
现代文：朱元璋知道后，下令将所有船的桅杆都漆成白色。
English: When Zhu Yuanzhang found out, he ordered the masts of all ships to be painted white.

古文：翌日复战，自辰至午，友谅军大败。
现代文：第二天再战，从早晨到中午，陈友谅军大败。
English: The next day, from morning to noon, Chen Youxuan's army suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：友谅欲退保鞵山，太祖已先扼湖口，邀其归路。
现代文：陈友谅想退保革奚山，但朱元璋已预先扼住湖口，拦截其退路。
English: Chen Youzhen wanted to retreat to the protection of Lushan Mountain, but Zhu Yuanzhang had already preemptively blocked the mouth of the lake and intercepted his escape route.

古文：持数日，友谅谋于众。
现代文：在坚持数日之后，陈友谅与众将商量摆脱困境的对策。
English: After a few days of persistence, Chen Youyong and the crowd will discuss the countermeasures to get out of the predicament.

古文：右金吾将军曰： 出湖难，宜焚舟登陆，直趋湖南图再举。 
现代文：右金吾将军说 ：既然出湖困难，我们就应当焚船登陆，直奔湖的南岸以图再举。 
English: General Yu Kingu said, "Since it is difficult to get out of the lake, we should burn the boat and go straight to the southern shore of the lake to try again."

古文：左金吾将军曰： 此示弱也，彼以步骑蹑我，进退失所据，大事去矣。 
现代文：左金吾将军说 ：这是向敌人示弱，他们利用步骑追赶我军。进退之间我们将失去自己的地盘，大势也将去也。 
English: General Zuo Jingu said, "This is a sign of weakness to the enemy. They are pursuing our army on foot and horseback. Between advancing and retreating, we will lose our own territory, and the general momentum will also be lost."

古文：友谅不能决，既而曰： 右金吾言是也。 
现代文：陈友谅不能作出决定，既而说道 ：右金吾将军所言有理。 
English: Unable to make a decision, Chen Youzhen said, "General U Kingo is right.

古文：左金吾以言不用，举所部来降。右金吾知之，亦降。
现代文：左金吾将军因其意见未被采纳，便率所部投降了朱元璋；右金吾将军知悉后，也率部投降。
English: General Zuo Kingu, because his opinion was not accepted, led his troops to surrender to Zhu Yuanzhang; General Zuo Kingu also led his troops to surrender after learning of this.

古文：友谅益困。
现代文：陈友谅处境更加困难。
English: Chen Youyuan's situation is even more difficult.

古文：太祖凡再移友谅书，其略曰： 吾欲与公约从，各安一方，以俟天命。
现代文：朱元璋给陈友谅写了两封信，信的内容大致如下： 我想与你约定，你我各安一方，以待天命。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang wrote two letters to Chen Youzhu, the contents of which are roughly as follows: I want to make an agreement with you, and you and I will be on the same side, waiting for the fate of heaven.

古文：公失计，肆毒于我。
现代文：你却盘算失误，企图加害于我。
English: But you've miscalculated and tried to do me harm.

古文：我轻师间出，奄有公龙兴十一郡，犹不自悔祸，复构兵端。
现代文：我军只以少量兵力，便攻取了你龙兴十一郡，你还不悔过，重新挑起战端。
English: With only a small number of troops, our army captured eleven counties in Longxing from you, and you have not regretted it, and have restarted the war.

古文：一困于洪都，再败于康郎，骨肉将士重罹涂炭。
现代文：首先被困在洪都，再败于康郎，骨肉将士被葬身于火海。
English: First, they were trapped in Hongdu, and then they were defeated by Kang Rong. The flesh and blood soldiers were buried in a sea of fire.

古文：公即幸生还，亦宜却帝号，坐待真主，不则丧家灭姓，悔晚矣。 
现代文：你即便侥幸生还，但也应当取消帝号，坐待真正的主子，不然将会丧家灭姓，到那时就悔之晚矣。 
English: Even if you are lucky enough to survive, you should cancel the imperial title and wait for the real master, otherwise you will lose your family and your name, and by then it will be too late to regret.

古文：友谅得书忿恚，不报。
现代文：陈友谅收到信后怒不可遏，不予回信。
English: After receiving the letter, Chen Youyong was furious and refused to reply.

古文：久之乏食，突围出湖口。
现代文：时间一久，陈友谅军中粮食渐绝，只得突围冲出湖口。
English: After a long time, Chen Youyuan's army ran out of food and had to break out of the encirclement.

古文：诸将自上流邀击之，大战泾江口。汉军且斗且走，日暮犹不解。
现代文：朱元璋的将领们从上游加以拦截，双方大战于泾江口，汉军且战且走，但日落之时仍未能摆脱。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang's generals intercepted them from upstream, and the two sides fought at the mouth of the Minjiang River. The Chinese army continued to fight, but could not escape at sunset.

古文：友谅从舟中引首出，有所指捴，骤中流矢，贯晴及颅死。
现代文：陈友谅当时从船中伸出头来，指挥作战，却被飞箭射中，贯穿头颅，陈友谅当即死去。
English: At that time, Chen Youyong stuck his head out of the boat and commanded the battle, but was shot by an arrow, penetrating his head. Chen Youyong died immediately.

古文：军大溃，太子善儿被执。太尉张定边夜挟友谅次子理，载其尸遁还武昌。
现代文：顿时，陈友谅军土崩瓦解，太子陈善儿被擒，太尉张定边趁夜挟持陈友谅的次子陈理，载上陈友谅的尸体逃回武昌。
English: Suddenly, Chen You Yue's army collapsed, Prince Chen Zhen'er was arrested, and Lieutenant Zhang Ding took advantage of the night to hold Chen You Yue's second son Chen Li hostage, loaded Chen You Yue's body and fled back to Wuchang.

古文：友谅豪侈，尝造镂金床甚工，宫中器物类是。
现代文：陈友谅生前生活奢侈，曾经制造了一张镂金床，做工非常精巧，宫中其他器物也是一样。
English: During his lifetime, Chen Youyuan lived a life of luxury. He once made a sheet metal bed, the workmanship of which was very exquisite, as were the other utensils in the palace.

古文：既亡，江西行省以床进。太祖叹曰： 此与孟昶七宝溺器何异！ 
现代文：他死后，江西行省将镂金床献给朱元璋，朱元璋感叹道： 这张床与孟日永的七宝便壶有什么不同呢？ 
English: After his death, Jiangxi Province dedicated a sheet metal bed to Zhu Yuanzhang. Zhu Yuanzhang lamented: What is the difference between this bed and Meng Rongyong's Qibao toilet bowl?

古文：命有司毁之。
现代文：然后下令有关官员将它熔掉。
English: He then ordered officials to melt it down.

古文：友谅僣号凡四年。
现代文：陈友谅僭称皇帝共四年。
English: Chen Youzong served as emperor for a total of four years.

古文：子理既还武昌，嗣伪位，改元德寿。
现代文：陈友谅之子陈理回到武昌，继承伪位，改元德寿。
English: Chen Li, the son of Chen Youjun, returned to Wuchang, inherited the pseudo-position, and changed his name to De Shou.

古文：是冬，太祖亲征武昌。
现代文：这年冬天，朱元璋亲征武昌。
English: This winter, Zhu Yuanzhang personally entered Wuchang.

古文：明年二月再亲征。
现代文：第二年二月再次亲征。
English: In February of the following year, he enlisted in the army again.

古文：其丞相张必先自岳州来援，次洪山。
现代文：陈理的丞相张必先从岳州前来援救，暂驻洪山。
English: Chen Li's chancellor Zhang must first come from Yuezhou to rescue, temporarily stationed in Hongshan.

古文：常遇春击擒之，徇于城下。
现代文：常遇春击败并擒获了他，将他绑在城下示众。
English: Changdu Chun defeated and captured him, tied him up and paraded him outside the city.

古文：必先，骁将也，军中号 泼张 ，倚为重。
现代文：张必先是一名骁将，在军中号称 泼张 ，深得重任。
English: Zhang Bixian was a great general. He was known in the army as "Dashing Zhang" and was deeply committed to his duties.

古文：及被擒，城中大惧，由是欲降者众。
现代文：他被擒之后，城中将士惊慌失措，许多人因此想投降朱元璋。
English: After he was captured, the generals in the city panicked, and many people wanted to surrender to Zhu Yuanzhang.

古文：太祖乃遣其故臣罗复仁入城招理。
现代文：朱元璋便派遣陈友谅的旧臣罗复仁入城前去招降陈理。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang then sent Luo Furen, a former minister of Chen Youjun, into the city to recruit Chen Li.

古文：理遂降，入军门，俯伏不敢视。
现代文：陈理于是投降，进入军门，俯伏于地不敢抬头。
English: Chen Li then surrendered, entered the military gate, bowed to the ground and did not dare to look up.

古文：太祖见理幼弱，掖之起，握其手曰： 吾不汝罪也。 
现代文：朱元璋见陈理年幼弱小，便将他扶起，握着他的手说： 我不会将你治罪的。 
English: Zhu Yuanzhang saw that Chen Li was young and weak, so he helped him up, held his hand and said: I will not punish you.

古文：府库财物恣理取，旋应天，授爵归德侯。
现代文：府库财物任凭陈理选取，随即返回应天，授陈理为归德侯。
English: The prefectural treasury property was selected by Chen Li, and then returned to Yingtian. Chen Li was awarded the title of Gui Dehu.

古文：友谅之从徐寿辉也，其父普才止之。不听。
现代文：陈友谅跟随徐寿辉时，其父陈普才曾阻止过他，他不听。
English: When Chen Youzhen followed Xu Shouhui, his father Chen Pucai once stopped him, but he did not listen.

古文：及贵，往迎之。
现代文：待他显贵后，前去迎接其父。
English: After waiting for him to be dignified, he went to meet his father.

古文：普才曰： 汝违吾命，吾不知死所矣。 
现代文：陈普才说道： 你违背我的话，我如果跟随你去，还不知道自己会死在哪里啊！ 
English: Chen Pucai said, "You are going against my word. If I follow you, I don't know where I will die!"

古文：普才五子：长友富，次友直，又次友谅，又次友仁、友贵。
现代文：陈普才有五子：长子友富，次子友直，三子友谅，四子友仁，五子友贵。
English: Chen Pu only had five sons: the eldest son, Youfu, the second son, Younao, the third son, Youjun, the fourth son, Youren, and the fifth son, Yougui.

古文：友仁、友贵前死鄱阳。
现代文：陈友仁、陈友贵已战死于鄱阳湖。
English: Chen Youren and Chen Yougui died in the battle at Poyang Lake.

古文：太祖平武昌，封普才承恩侯，友富归仁伯，友直怀恩伯，赠友仁康山王，命所司立庙祀之，以友贵祔。
现代文：朱元璋平定武昌后，封陈普才为承恩侯，陈友富为归仁伯，陈友直为怀恩伯，追赠陈友仁为康山王，命有关官员立庙祭祀，并将陈友贵附祭。
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang conquered Wuchang, he named Chen Pucai as the Prince of Honour, Chen Youfu as the Prince of Benevolence, Chen Youzhi as the Prince of Compassion, Chen Youzhi as the Prince of Compassion, posthumously awarded Chen Youren as the King of Kangshan, ordered the relevant officials to build a temple for sacrifice, and attached Chen Yougui to the sacrifice.

古文：理居京师，邑邑出怨望语。
现代文：陈理住在京城，一直闷闷不乐，有时还口出怨言。
English: Chen Li, who lives in Beijing, has always been unhappy, and sometimes complains.

古文：帝曰： 此童孺小过耳，恐细人蛊惑，不克全朕恩，宜处之远方。 
现代文：太祖说： 这只是小孩所犯的过错，恐怕他会受到小人的欺骗诱惑，不能牢记朕对他的恩典，还是应当让他远离京城为好。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "This is just a mistake made by a child. I am afraid that he will be deceived and tempted by a villain. He should not remember my grace to him, and it would be better to keep him away from the capital.

古文：洪武五年，理及归义侯明升并徙高丽，遣元降臣枢密使延安答理护行。赐高丽王罗绮，俾善视之。
现代文：洪武五年，陈理及归义侯明升一起迁居高丽，太祖命元朝降臣枢密使延安答理护送他们，并赏赐高丽王罗绮，让其善待他们。
English: In the 5th year of Hongwu, Chen Li and Gui Yi Hou Ming Sheng moved to Goryeo together. The great-grandfather ordered Yan An, the Imperial envoy of Yan An, who had surrendered to the Yuan Dynasty, to escort them, and rewarded King Luo of Goryeo for his kind treatment of them.

古文：天瑞诛，复故姓云。张士诚，小字九四，泰州白驹场亭人。
现代文：太祖将陈普才等也迁居滁阳。张士诚，小名张九四，泰州白驹场亭人。
English: The great-great-grandfather Chen Pucai and others also moved to Fenyang. Zhang Shicheng, known as Zhang Jiu Si, was from Baizhou Baiyuan Pavilion.

古文：有弟三人，并以操舟运盐为业，缘私作奸利。
现代文：有三个弟弟，都以撑船运盐为业，他们利用这一职业营私获利。
English: He has three younger brothers, all of whom make a living transporting salt in paddle boats, a profession they use for personal gain.

古文：颇轻财好施，得群辈心。
现代文：张士诚平时经常施舍钱财，因此很得人心。
English: Zhang Shicheng often gives away money, so he is very popular.

古文：常鬻盐诸富家，富家多陵侮之，或负其直不酬。
现代文：他经常卖盐给一些有钱人家，那些有钱人家却总是欺侮他，有的还欠钱不还。
English: He often sold salt to some rich families, but those rich families always bullied him, and some still owed money and would not pay it back.

古文：而弓手丘义尤窘辱士诚甚。
现代文：其中有一个叫丘义的弓箭手欺侮张士诚尤其厉害。
English: One of them, an archer named Qiu Yi, bullied Zhang Shicheng particularly badly.

古文：士诚忿，即帅诸弟及壮士李伯升等十八人杀义，并灭诸富家，纵火焚其居。
现代文：张士诚对此十分愤怒，于是带领他的弟弟及壮士李伯升等十八人杀死丘义，消灭那些欺侮过他的有钱人家，并放火烧掉了他们的房屋。
English: Zhang Shicheng was very angry about this, so he led his younger brother and strongman Li Bo Sheng and eighteen others to kill Qiu Yi, eliminate those rich people who had bullied him, and set fire to their houses.

古文：入旁郡场，招少年起兵。
现代文：然后进入邻郡，招集青年起兵。
English: Then he went to a neighboring county to call up young people to join the army.

古文：盐丁方苦重役，遂共推为主，陷泰州。
现代文：当时盐丁们正为重役所苦，便共推张士诚为首领，攻陷泰州。
English: At that time, the salt workers were suffering from the executives, so they jointly promoted Zhang Shicheng as the leader and invaded Taizhou.

古文：高邮守李齐谕降之，复叛。杀行省参政赵琏，并陷兴化，结砦德胜湖，有众万余。
现代文：高邮守将李齐招降了他，后又反叛，杀掉行省参政赵琏，并攻陷兴化，在德胜湖设立防卫栅栏，此时张士诚部已有万余人。
English: Gao Postmaster Li Qi recruited and demoted him, and then rebelled, killed the provincial politician Zhao Wei, and attacked Xinghua, setting up a defense fence in Desheng Lake. At this time, Zhang Shicheng had more than 10,000 people.

古文：元以万户告身招之。不受。
现代文：元朝以万户官职招降，张士诚拒不接受。
English: The Yuan Dynasty recruited and demoted tens of thousands of officials, but Zhang Shicheng refused to accept.

古文：绐杀李齐，袭据高邮，自称诚王，僣号大周，建元天祐。
现代文：他诱杀了李齐，袭据高邮，自称诚王，僭号大周，年号天。
English: He lured Li Qi to his death and, according to Gaoyou, claimed to be King Cheng, with the posthumous name of Dazhou and the year of birth of Tian.

古文：是岁至正十三年也。
现代文：当年是至正十三年。
English: That year was the 13th year of the Shojo era.

古文：明年，元右丞相脱脱总大军出讨，数败士诚，围高邮，隳其外城。
现代文：第二年，元右丞相脱脱统领大军出讨，数败张士诚，包围高邮，毁其外城。
English: In the second year, the former Minister of the Right, Dechu Dechu, led a large army to defeat Zhang Shicheng, encircle Gaoyou, and destroy its outer city.

古文：城且下，顺帝信谗，解脱脱兵柄，削官爵，以他将代之。
现代文：可就在高邮城即将被攻下时，元顺帝听信谗言，解除了脱脱的兵权，并削其官爵，用其他将领代替了他。
English: However, just as Gaoyou City was about to be conquered, Emperor Yuan Shun listened to the advice and relieved the escaped general of his military powers, stripped him of his title and replaced him with other generals.

古文：士诚乘间奋击，元兵溃去，由是复振。
现代文：张士诚乘此间隙奋起还击，元军溃败而去，于是张士诚军又兴盛起来。
English: Zhang Shicheng took advantage of this gap to fight back, the Yuan army was defeated and left, so Zhang Shicheng's army flourished again.

古文：逾年，淮东饥，士诚乃遣弟士德由通州渡江入常熟。
现代文：一年后，淮东发生饥荒，张士诚便派其弟张士德从通州渡江进入常熟。
English: A year later, when a famine occurred in Huadong, Zhang Shicheng sent his brother Zhang Shide from Tongzhou to cross the river into Changshu.

古文：十六年二月陷平江，并陷湖州、松江及常州诸路。
现代文：十六年二月，攻陷平江，同时攻陷湖州、松江及常州诸路。
English: In February of the 16th year, the Pingjiang River was invaded, and at the same time, the Huzhou, Songjiang and Changzhou roads were invaded.

古文：改平江为隆平府，士诚自高邮来都之。即承天寺为府第，踞坐大殿中，射三矢于栋以识。
现代文：改平江为隆平府，张士诚从高邮迁都至此，将承天寺作为府第，他踞坐在大殿中，将三支箭射在正梁上作为标志。
English: He changed Pingjiang River to Longping Prefecture, Zhang Shicheng moved the capital from Gaoyou to this place, and made Chengtian Temple the capital. He sat in the main hall and shot three arrows on the main beam as a sign.

古文：是岁，太祖亦下集庆，遣杨宪通好于士诚。其书曰： 昔隗嚣称雄于天水，今足下亦擅号于姑苏，事势相等，吾深为足下喜。
现代文：当年，朱元璋也攻下集庆，派杨宪送信通好张士诚，他在信中说道 ：昔日隗嚣称雄于天水，今日足下也据姑苏称王，事势相等，我深为足下高兴。
English: In the same year, Zhu Yuanzhang also captured Jieqing and sent Yang Xian to send a message to Zhang Shicheng. In his letter, he said: "In the past, the arrogance prevailed in Tianshui, and today, according to Gu Su, it is king. The situation is the same. I am deeply happy.

古文：睦邻守境，古人所贵，窃甚慕焉。
现代文：睦邻守境，这是古人所重视的，我非常羡慕。
English: Good-neighborly border protection, which was valued by the ancients, I very much admire.

古文：自今信使往来，毋惑谗言，以生边衅。 
现代文：但愿从今天起我们能信使往来，不为谗言所惑，以生边衅。 
English: I hope that from today onwards, we will be able to communicate with each other as messengers, not be confused by insults, and challenge each other in a constructive manner.

古文：士诚得书，留宪不报。
现代文：张士诚收到信后，扣留杨宪，不给回信。
English: After Zhang Shicheng received the letter, he detained Yang Xian and did not reply to the letter.

古文：已，遣舟师攻镇江。徐达败之于龙潭。
现代文：不久，派水师进攻镇江，徐达在龙潭将其击败。
English: Soon, he sent sailors to attack Zhenjiang, and Xu Da defeated them at Longtan.

古文：太祖遣达及汤和攻常州。
现代文：然后朱元璋派徐达及汤和进攻常州，张士诚军赶来支援，大败，失去张、汤二将。
English: Then Zhu Yuanzhang sent Xu Da and Tang He to attack Changzhou, and Zhang Shicheng's army came to support them. They were soundly defeated, losing Zhang and Tang two generals.

古文：士诚兵来援，大败，失张、汤二将，乃以书求和，请岁输粟二十万石，黄金五百两，白金三百斤。
现代文：张士诚这才写信求和，请求每年纳粟二十万石，黄金五百两，白金三百斤。
English: It was only then that Zhang Shicheng wrote to ask for a sum of money, requesting an annual sum of 200,000 koku of millet, 500 koku of gold, and 300 koku of platinum.

古文：太祖答书，责其归杨宪，岁输五十万石。士诚复不报。
现代文：朱元璋复信，责成他放回杨宪，每年缴纳粟五十万石，张士诚又不予回信。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang replied to the letter, instructing him to return Yang Xian and pay 500,000 koku of millet every year. Zhang Shicheng did not reply to the letter.

古文：初，士诚既得平江，即以兵攻嘉兴。
现代文：当初，张士诚攻取平江后，即以兵进攻嘉兴。
English: At first, after Zhang Shicheng captured Pingjiang, he attacked Jiaxing with soldiers.

古文：元守将苗帅杨完者数败其兵。
现代文：元守将苗帅杨完者数败其兵。
English: General Miao Shuai Yang defeated his soldiers.

古文：乃遣士德间道破杭州。完者还救，复败归。
现代文：张士诚于是派张士德从小路攻破杭州，杨完者率兵回援，张士德再败返回。
English: Zhang Shicheng then sent Zhang Shide to break through Hangzhou from a small road, Yang Gan led the troops to return the support, Zhang Shide was defeated again and returned.

古文：明年，耿炳文取长兴，徐达取常州，吴良等取江阴，士诚兵不得四出，势渐蹙。
现代文：第二年，耿炳文攻取长兴，徐达攻取常州，吴良等攻取江阴，张士诚部四面受阻，势力日渐缩小。
English: In the second year, Geng Bingwen conquered Changxing, Xu Da conquered Changzhou, Wu Liang and others conquered Jiangyin, Zhang Shicheng was blocked on all sides, and his power gradually shrank.

古文：亡何，徐达兵徇宜兴，攻常熟。士德迎战败，为前锋赵德胜所擒。
现代文：不久，徐达率兵巡行宜兴，进攻常熟，张士德迎战失败，被前锋赵德胜所擒。
English: Soon, Xu Da and his soldiers marched through Yixing, attacked Changshu, and Zhang Shide was defeated and beaten by the striker Zhao Desheng.

古文：士德，小字九六，善战有谋，能得士心，浙西地皆其所略定。既被擒，士诚大沮。
现代文：张士德，小名张九六，善战有谋，在军中很得人心，浙西之地都是他略定的，被擒后，张士诚大为沮丧。
English: Zhang Shide, whose nickname was Zhang Jiu Li, was a good strategist and was very popular in the army. He had the western part of Zhejiang all mapped out. After he was arrested, Zhang Shicheng was very depressed.

古文：太祖欲留士德以招士诚。士德间道贻士诚书，俾降元。
现代文：朱元璋想扣留张士德以招降张士诚，张士德却偷偷给张士诚写了一封信，让他投降元朝。
English: Zhu Yuanxuan wanted to detain Zhang Shide in order to recruit Zhang Shicheng, but Zhang Shide secretly wrote a letter to Zhang Shicheng, asking him to surrender to the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：士诚遂决计请降。江浙右丞相达识帖睦迩为言于朝，授士诚太尉，官其将吏有差。
现代文：张士诚于是决定降元，江浙右丞相达识帖睦迩替他在朝中说话，授张士诚为太尉，对其部将官吏都授以官职。
English: Zhang Shicheng then decided to be demoted to Yuan, and the Minister of the Right of the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Dynasties, Datong Zhituo Muxun, spoke for him in the court, and Zhang Shicheng was awarded the rank of lieutenant, and the officials of his department were awarded official positions.

古文：士德在金陵竟不食死。
现代文：张士德后来在金陵绝食而死。
English: Zhang Shide later died of starvation in Jinling.

古文：士诚虽去伪号，擅甲兵土地如故。
现代文：张士诚虽然取消了伪号，但却像以前一样仍拥有军队、土地。
English: Although Zhang Shicheng canceled the pseudonym, he still owns the army and land as before.

古文：达识帖睦迩在杭与杨完者有隙，阴召士诚兵。士诚遣史文炳袭杀完者，遂有杭州。
现代文：达识帖睦迩在杭州与杨完者发生隔阂，暗地里招来张士诚的军队，张士诚派史文炳袭杀了杨完者，然后占据了杭州。
English: In Hangzhou, Da Zhi Jie and Yang Wan were estranged, and Zhang Shicheng's army was secretly brought in. Zhang Shicheng sent Shi Wenqi to attack and kill Yang Wan, and then occupied Hangzhou.

古文：顺帝遣使征粮，赐之龙衣御酒。士诚自海道输粮十一万石于大都，岁以为常。
现代文：元顺帝派使臣前来征粮，赐给张士诚龙衣御酒，张士诚从海路输送十一万石粮食至大都，以后每年如此。
English: Emperor Yuan Shun sent envoys to collect grain and gave Zhang Shicheng a dragon robe and wine. Zhang Shicheng transported 110,000 kilos of grain from the sea to the capital, and this happened every year thereafter.

古文：既而益骄，令其下颂功德，邀王爵。不许。
现代文：不久张士诚渐渐骄傲起来，命其部下为他歌功颂德，希望封王授爵，未被允许。
English: Soon, Zhang Shicheng gradually became proud and ordered his subordinates to sing his praises, hoping to be knighted by the king, which was not allowed.

古文：二十三年九月，士诚复自立为吴王，尊其母曹氏为王太妃，置官属，别治府第于城中，以士信为浙江行省左丞相，幽达识帖睦迩于嘉兴。
现代文：二十三年九月，张士诚重新自立为吴王，尊其母曹氏为王太妃，设置官属，在城中另修府第，以张士信为浙江行省左丞相，将达识帖睦迩幽禁于嘉兴。
English: In September 23rd, Zhang Shicheng re-established himself as the King of Wu, revered his mother Cao as the Empress Dowager, set up officials and subordinates, built a separate government office in the city, with Zhang Shixin as the Minister of the Left for Zhejiang Province, and imprisoned Daxingjie Mucun in Jiaxing.

古文：元征粮不复与。
现代文：元朝来征粮时，张士诚不再缴纳。
English: When the Yuan Dynasty came to collect grain, Zhang Shicheng no longer paid.

古文：参军俞思齐者，字中孚，泰州人，谏士诚曰： 向为贼，可无贡；今为臣，不贡可乎？ 
现代文：参军俞思齐，字中孚，泰州人，劝谏张士诚道： 以前为盗贼，可以不进贡；而今为人臣，不进贡可以吗？ 
English: Zhang Shicheng, a citizen of Taizhou, who joined the army, advised Zhang Shicheng: Previously, as a thief, you can not pay tribute; but now as a vassal, can you not pay tribute?

古文：士诚怒，抵案仆地，思齐即引疾去。
现代文：张士诚听后大怒，将桌子推倒在地，俞思齐马上借口生病离去。
English: After hearing this, Zhang Shicheng flew into a rage, pushed the table to the ground, and Yao Siqi immediately left on the pretext of illness.

古文：当是时，士诚所据，南抵绍兴，北逾徐州，达于济宁之金沟，西距汝、颍、濠、泗，东薄海，二千余里，带甲数十万。
现代文：这个时候，张士诚所据之地，南抵绍兴，北逾徐州，到达济宁的金沟，西到汝、颍、濠、泗，东临海边，二千多里，拥兵数十万。
English: At this time, Zhang Shicheng's territory reached as far as Shaoxing in the south, Xuzhou in the north, Jining's Jingou in the west, and the coast in the east, more than two thousand miles and hundreds of thousands of soldiers.

古文：以士信及女夫潘元绍为腹心，左丞徐义、李伯升、吕珍为爪牙，参军黄敬夫、蔡彦文、叶德新主谋议，元学士陈基、右丞饶介典文章。
现代文：张士诚以张士信及女婿潘元绍为心腹，左丞徐义、李伯升、吕珍为爪牙，参军黄敬夫、蔡彦文、叶德新负责谋议之事，元朝学士陈基、右丞饶介主管文献书籍。
English: Zhang Shicheng took Zhang Shixin and his son-in-law Pan Yuan Shao as his confidants, the left-hand man Xu Yi, Li Bo Sheng, and Lü Zhen as his minions, Huang Jingfu, Cai Yanwen, and Ye Dexin were responsible for deliberation, and the Yuan Dynasty scholar Chen Ji and the right-hand man Rao Jie were in charge of literature and books.

古文：又好招延宾客，所赠遗舆马、居室、什器甚具。
现代文：张士诚喜欢招待宾客，还赠送很多车马、居室及其他器物，所以寓居他乡，流落在外的人纷纷归附张士诚。
English: Zhang Shicheng liked to invite guests, and also gave away a lot of cars, horses, rooms and other utensils, so he lived in another town, and those who were exiled were attached to Zhang Shicheng.

古文：诸侨寓贫无籍者争趋之。士诚为人，外迟重寡言，似有器量，而实无远图。既据有吴中，吴承平久，户口殷盛，士诚渐奢纵，怠于政事。
现代文：张士诚的为人，外表迟重寡言，似有气量，但实际上却无远大图谋。他占据吴中后，吴境太平已久，人丁兴旺，张士诚日渐奢侈放纵，政事松懈。
English: Zhang Shicheng was a taciturn and reticent person on the outside, and seemed to have a lot of energy, but in reality he had no far-reaching plans. After he occupied Wuzhong, Wuzhen had been peaceful for a long time, and people were prosperous. Zhang Shicheng became increasingly extravagant and indulgent, and lax in political affairs.

古文：士信、元绍尤好聚敛，金玉珍宝及古法书名画，无不充牣。日夜歌舞自娱。
现代文：张士信、潘元绍尤其喜欢聚敛财宝，金玉珍宝、古代法书帖及名画，无不收罗家中，而且日夜以歌舞自娱。
English: Zhang Shixin and Pan Yuanshao especially liked to collect treasures, precious stones, ancient law books and famous paintings, all of which were kept at home, and entertained themselves with songs and dances day and night.

古文：将帅亦偃蹇不用命，每有攻战，辄称疾，邀官爵田宅然后起。
现代文：将帅也懒散松懈，不听命令，每有攻战，总是自称有病，被授予官爵田宅之后才肯领命出征。
English: The commander-in-chief was also lazy and slack, did not listen to orders, always claimed to be ill whenever there was an offensive battle, and was only willing to be ordered to go to war after he was awarded a peerage.

古文：甫至军，所载婢妾乐器踵相接不绝，或大会游谈之士，樗蒲蹴踘，皆不以军务为意。
现代文：到军中去时，装载妻妾奴婢、乐器的车辆络绎不绝，一路之上，或者大会游谈之士，或者赌博踢球，都不将军务放在心中。
English: When going to the army, there is an endless stream of vehicles loaded with wives, concubines, slaves, and musical instruments. Along the way, whether they are talking about the general assembly, or gambling or playing football, they do not put the military affairs in their hearts.

古文：及丧师失地还，士诚概置不问。已，复用为将。
现代文：等到丧师失地返回后，张士诚一概置之不问，不久，又重新将其任命为将领。
English: After returning from the battlefield, Zhang Shicheng did not question him at all, and soon reappointed him as a general.

古文：上下嬉娱，以至于亡。
现代文：全军上下嬉娱，直到灭亡。
English: The whole army went up and down to have fun until they died.

古文：太祖与士诚接境。
现代文：朱元璋与张士诚边境相接。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang is adjacent to Zhang Shicheng's border.

古文：士诚数以兵攻常州、江阴、建德、长兴、诸全，辄不利去。
现代文：张士诚屡次以兵进攻常州、江阴、建德、长兴、诸全等地，都不利而归。
English: Zhang Shicheng repeatedly attacked Changzhou, Jiangyin, Jiande, Changxing, Zhuquan and other places with soldiers, but they all returned unfavorably.

古文：而太祖遣邵荣攻湖州，胡大海攻绍兴，常遇春攻杭州，亦皆不能下。
现代文：而朱元璋派邵荣攻湖州，胡大海攻绍兴，常遇春攻杭州，也都不能攻下。
English: However, Zhu Yuanzhang sent Shao Rong to attack Huzhou, Hu Hai to attack Shaoxing, and often attacked Hangzhou in the spring, but they could not attack either.

古文：廖永安被执，谢再兴叛降士诚，会太祖与陈友谅相持，未暇及也。
现代文：廖永安被捉，谢再兴叛降张士诚，当时朱元璋正与陈友谅相持不下，无暇顾及。
English: Liao Yong'an was captured, Xie Zaixing rebelled, and Zhang Shicheng surrendered. At that time, Zhu Yuanzhang was unable to keep up with Chen Youyuan, and had no time to take care of him.

古文：友谅亦遣使约士诚夹攻太祖，而士诚欲守境观变，许使者，卒不行。
现代文：陈友谅也派使者约张士诚夹攻朱元璋，而张士诚则仅想守境观变，所以虽然答应了使者，其军队却不采取行动。
English: Chen Youzong also sent an envoy to Zhang Shicheng to attack Zhu Yuanzhang, while Zhang Shicheng only wanted to defend the border and watch for changes, so although he agreed with the envoy, his army did not take action.

古文：太祖既平武昌，师还，即命徐达等规取准东，克泰州、通州，围高邮。
现代文：朱元璋平定武昌，率师返回，便立即命令徐达等进取淮东，攻克泰州、通州，围攻高邮。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang leveled Wuchang and returned with his division, then immediately ordered Xu Da and others to advance to Huaidong, conquer Taizhou and Tongzhou, and besiege Gaoyou.

古文：士诚以舟师溯江来援，太祖自将击走之。
现代文：张士诚率水师溯江而上，前来支援，朱元璋亲自率军将他击回。
English: Zhang Shicheng led the sailors up the river and came to support, and Zhu Yuanzhang personally led the army to beat him back.

古文：达等遂拔高邮，取淮安，悉定淮北地。
现代文：徐达等攻占高邮，夺取淮安，将淮北之地全部平定。
English: Xu Da and others occupied Gaoyou, captured Huai'an, and completely pacified the north of Huai'an.

古文：于是移檄平江，数士诚八罪。
现代文：然后将檄文传至平江，历数张士诚八条罪状。
English: Then, the letter was sent to Pingjiang, and Zhang Shicheng was charged with eight crimes.

古文：徐达、常遇春帅兵自太湖趋湖州，吴人迎战于毗山，又战于七里桥，皆败，遂围湖州。
现代文：徐达、常遇春率军自太湖直趋湖州，吴军迎战于毗山，又战于七里桥，都被打败，于是徐达、常遇春包围了湖州。
English: Xu Da and Changyu Chun led the army from Taihu Lake straight to Huzhou, the Wu Army fought in Bishan, and also fought in Qili Bridge, all of which were defeated, so Xu Da and Changyu Chun surrounded Huzhou.

古文：士诚遣朱暹、五太子等以六万众来援，屯于旧馆，筑五砦自固。
现代文：张士诚派朱暹、五太子等率兵六万前来援救，驻扎在旧馆，筑起五寨以自卫。
English: Zhang Shicheng sent Zhu Siam, the Five Princes and others to come to the rescue with 60,000 soldiers, stationed in the old pavilion, and built Wuzhai to defend themselves.

古文：达、遇春筑十垒以遮之，断其粮道。
现代文：徐达、常遇春则筑成十处堡垒，断其粮道。
English: Xu Da and Changyu Chun built ten fortresses and cut off their grain routes.

古文：士诚知事急，亲督兵来战，败于皂林。
现代文：张士诚获知事情紧急，亲自督兵来战，败于皂林。
English: Zhang Shicheng learned that the situation was urgent, and personally supervised the soldiers to fight, but was defeated by Saurin.

古文：其将徐志坚败于东迁，潘元绍败于乌镇，升山水陆寨皆破，旧馆援绝，五太子、朱暹、吕珍皆降。
现代文：其将徐志坚败于东迁，潘元绍败于乌镇，升山水寨、陆寨全被攻破，旧馆外援断绝，五太子、朱暹、吕珍都缴械投降。
English: It defeated Xu Zhijian in Dongcheng, Pan Yuan Shao in Wuzhen, and broke through all of Shengshan Water Village and Luzhai. Foreign aid to the old capital was cut off, and the Five Princes, Zhu Siam, and Luzhen all surrendered.

古文：五太子者，士诚养子，短小精悍，能平地跃丈余，又善没水，珍、暹皆宿将善战，至是降。
现代文：五太子是张士诚的养子，身材短小精悍，却能平地跃起一丈多，又善于潜水，吕珍、朱暹都是有经验、善于作战的老将，现在都投降了。
English: The fifth prince is the adopted son of Zhang Shicheng. He is short and agile, but he can jump a lot higher on the flat, and he is good at diving. Lü Zhen and Zhu Siam are experienced veterans who are good at fighting, and now they have surrendered.

古文：达等以徇于湖州。守将李伯升等以城降，嘉兴、松江相继降。
现代文：徐达得以巡行湖州，守将李伯升以城投降，嘉兴、松江等相继投降。
English: Xu Da was able to parade through Huzhou, and the garrison commander Li Bo Sheng surrendered Yicheng, while Jiaxing and Songjiang surrendered one after another.

古文：潘原明亦以杭州降于李文忠。
现代文：潘原明也以杭州城降于李文忠。
English: Pan Yuanming also lost to Li Wenzhong with Hangzhou City.

古文：二十六年十一月，大军进攻平江，筑长围困之。
现代文：二十六年一月，朱元璋大军进攻平江，筑起长墙围困平江。
English: In January of the 26th year, Zhu Yuanzhang's army attacked Pingjiang and built a long wall to besiege Pingjiang.

古文：士诚距守数月。太祖贻书招之曰： 古之豪杰，以畏天顺民为贤，以全身保族为智，汉窦融、宋钱俶是也。
现代文：张士诚拒守数月之后，朱元璋派人送信招降他，信中写道 ：古之豪杰，都以敬畏上天、顺从民意为贤能，以保全自身及家族为明智，汉代窦融、宋代钱亻叔就是如此。
English: After Zhang Shicheng refused to defend himself for several months, Zhu Yuanzhang sent a letter inviting him to surrender, writing in the letter: The heroes of ancient times were all virtuous in that they feared the heavens and obeyed the will of the people, and they were wise in that they protected themselves and their families. This was the case with Dou Rong in the Han Dynasty and Uncle Qian Rong in the Song Dynasty.

古文：尔宜三思，勿自取夷灭，为天下笑。 
现代文：你应当三思，不要自取灭亡，为天下人耻笑。 
English: You should think twice, don't self-destruct and become a laughing stock.

古文：士诚不报，数突围决战，不利。
现代文：张士诚不予回信，屡次突围决战，都被打败。
English: Zhang Shicheng did not reply to the letter, and repeatedly broke through the encirclement and was defeated.

古文：李伯升知士诚困甚，遣所善客逾城说士诚曰： 初公所恃者，湖州、嘉兴、杭州耳，今皆失矣。
现代文：李伯升知道张士诚已很困乏，便派与自己交好的食客越过城墙，前去劝说张士诚： 当初你所依赖的湖州、嘉兴、杭州，现在都已失去了。
English: Li Bo-sheng knew that Zhang Shicheng was very tired, so he sent diners who were friends with him over the city wall to persuade Zhang Shicheng: Huzhou, Jiaxing and Hangzhou, which you relied on at the beginning, have all been lost now.

古文：独守此城，恐变从中起，公虽欲死，不可得也。
现代文：你独守此城，恐怕事变将会在城中发生，到那时你虽想死，却不能死。
English: If you remain in the city, it may happen that some disaster will come upon the city, and you will wish to die, but you will not die.

古文：莫若顺天命，遣使金陵，称公所以归义救民之意，开城门，幅巾待命，当不失万户侯。
现代文：还不如顺从天命，派使者去金陵，说你之所以归顺是为了挽救城中百姓，然后打开城门，幅巾待命，应当不会失去万户侯之职。
English: It would be better to obey the fate of heaven and send an envoy to Jinling, saying that the reason why you have surrendered is to save the people in the city, and then open the city gate and stand by. You should not lose the position of the prince of all households.

古文：且公之地，譬如博者，得人之物而复失之，于公何损？ 
现代文：况且你的地盘，就好像你在玩一种赌输赢的游戏，得人之物而又失去它，对你又有什么损害呢？ 
English: Moreover, your site, as if you were playing a game of chance, winning and losing, gaining what belongs to others and losing it, what is the harm to you?

古文：士诚仰观良久曰： 吾将思之。 
现代文：张士诚仰视良久之后说道 ：我会考虑这件事的。 
English: Zhang Shicheng looked up for a long time and then said, "I'll think about it."

古文：乃谢客，竟不降。
现代文：于是谢客，却仍不投降。
English: So they thanked the guests, but still did not surrender.

古文：士诚故有勇胜军号 十条龙 者，皆骁猛善斗，每被银铠锦衣出入阵中，至是亦悉败，溺万里桥下死。
现代文：张士诚以前有一支勇胜军号称 十条龙 ，个个骁猛善战，每次披上银铠锦衣投入战斗，现在也都战败，在万里桥下溺死。
English: Zhang Shicheng once had a victorious army known as the Ten Dragons, each of them fierce and good at fighting, each time they put on silver brocade and went into battle, but now they are also defeated and drowned under the bridge.

古文：最后丞相士信中礮死，城中汹汹无固志。
现代文：最后丞相张士信也中炮而死，城中喧闹纷乱，已无斗志。
English: In the end, the prime minister, Zhang Shixin, was also killed by a cannon. The city was in uproar and chaos, and there was no fighting spirit.

古文：二十七年九月，城破，士诚收余众战于万寿寺东街，众散走。
现代文：二十七年九月，平江城被攻破，张士诚聚集余部战于万寿寺东街，士兵却都四散逃走。
English: In September of the 27th year, Pingjiang City was breached, and Zhang Shicheng gathered the remaining troops to fight in the East Street of Wanzhou Temple, but the soldiers scattered and fled.

古文：仓皇归府第，拒户自缢。故部将赵世雄解之。
现代文：张士诚只得仓惶逃回府第，关门自缢，被旧部将赵世雄解救。
English: Zhang Shicheng had to flee back to the capital in a panic, closed the door and hanged himself. He was rescued by the old general Zhao Shixiong.

古文：大将军达数遣李伯升、潘元绍等谕意，士诚瞑目不答。舁出葑门，入舟，不复食。
现代文：大将军徐达多次派李伯升、潘元绍等去传达其旨意，张士诚总是闭目不答，后来被抬出葑门，进入船中，不再进食。
English: General Xu Da repeatedly sent Li Boxing, Pan Yuan Shao and others to convey his will. Zhang Shicheng always closed his eyes and did not answer. Later, he was carried out of the gate, into the ship, and no longer ate.

古文：至金陵，竟自缢死，年四十七。
现代文：到金陵后，竟自缢而死，时年四十七岁。
English: After arriving in Jinling, he actually hanged himself and died at the age of forty-seven.

古文：命具棺葬之。
现代文：朱元璋下令备置棺材，将他埋葬。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang ordered to prepare a coffin to bury him.

古文：方士诚之被围也，语其妻刘曰： 吾败且死矣，若曹何为？ 
现代文：张士诚被围困时，对其妻刘氏说： 我如果兵败将死，你们怎么办呢？ 
English: When Zhang Shicheng was besieged, he said to his wife Liu: If I am defeated and about to die, what will you do?

古文：刘答曰： 君无忧，妾必不负君。 
现代文：刘氏答道： 你不用担心，妾一定不会背弃你。 
English: Mr. Liu replied, "Don't worry, your concubine will never betray you."

古文：尝将兵讨平湖广慈利蛮，又为征南右副将军，同吴良讨靖州蛮。后坐胡党死。
现代文：然后令人在齐云楼下堆积干柴。城被攻破时，刘氏将群妾驱赶上楼，命养子张辰保放火烧楼，自己也自缢而死。
English: When the city was breached, Liu drove the group of concubines upstairs, ordered his adopted son Zhang Chenbao to set fire to the building, and hanged himself.

古文：潘元明以平章守杭州降，仍为行省平章，与伯升俱岁食禄七百五十石，不治事。云南平，以元明署布政司事，卒官。
现代文：刘氏有两个幼子藏匿于民间，后来不知所终。在此之前，黄敬夫等三人掌权管事，吴人知道张士诚必败，所以民间流传有 黄菜叶 的十七字歌谣，后来他的死应验了这一传说。
English: Prior to this, Huang Jingfu and three others held the reins of power. The people of Wu knew that Zhang Shicheng was doomed to defeat, so there was a folk legend about the seventeen-character song of Huang Cai Ye. Later, his death fulfilled this legend.

古文：士诚自起至亡，凡十四年。
现代文：张士诚自起兵到灭亡，共十四年。
English: It took Zhang Shicheng a total of fourteen years from the time he raised an army to his death.

古文：方国珍，黄岩人。
现代文：方国珍，黄岩人。
English: Fang Guozhen, from Huangyan.

古文：长身黑面，体白如瓠，力逐奔马。
现代文：身材高大，面色黝黑，体白如瓠，力赛奔马。
English: Tall, dark-skinned, white as snow, he is a strong runner.

古文：世以贩盐浮海为业。
现代文：世代以行船海上贩盐为业。
English: For generations, salt has been traded by boat.

古文：元至正八年，有蔡乱头者，行剽海上，有司发兵捕之。
现代文：元至正八年，有一个名叫蔡乱头的人，在海上打劫财物，官府派兵追捕他。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, there was a man named Cai Rantou who robbed property at sea, and the government sent soldiers to hunt him down.

古文：国珍怨家告其通寇。国珍杀怨家，遂与兄国璋、弟国瑛、国珉亡入海，聚众数千人，劫运艘，梗海道。
现代文：方国珍的仇家便告发他通寇，方国珍杀死仇家，与其兄方国璋、其弟方国瑛、方国珉逃亡海上，聚集数千人，抢劫过往船只，阻塞海路。
English: Fang Guozhen's enemies denounced him as a pirate, Fang Guozhen killed his enemies, and fled to the sea with his brother Fang Guozhen, his brother Fang Guoying, and Fang Guozhen, gathering thousands of people, robbing passing ships, and blocking the sea route.

古文：行省参政朵儿只班讨之，兵败，为所执，胁使请于朝，授定海尉。寻叛，寇温州。
现代文：行省参政朵儿只班率军征讨，兵败，被方国珍所捉。方国珍迫使其请命于朝廷，授他为定海尉，不久反叛，侵犯温州。
English: Du Er, a provincial councilor, led the army to fight, but was defeated and captured by Fang Guozhen. Fang Guozhen forced him to ask the imperial court to appoint him as a naval lieutenant, and he soon rebelled and invaded Wenzhou.

古文：元以孛罗帖木儿为行省左丞，督兵往讨，复败，被执。
现代文：元朝以孛罗帖木儿为行省左丞，督军前往征讨，也兵败被捉。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, Erraochmu'er was appointed as the acting provincial secretary of the left, and the commander of the army went to solicit, but he was also defeated and captured.

古文：乃遣大司农达识帖睦迩招之降。
现代文：元朝只得派大司农达识帖睦迩再次招降他。
English: The Yuan Dynasty had no choice but to send the grand secretary, Nongda Zhijie Muxuan, to recruit him again.

古文：已而汝、颍兵起，元募舟师守江。
现代文：不久，汝、颍之地兵起，元朝招募水师防守长江。
English: Soon after, the Yuan Dynasty recruited sailors to defend the Yangtze River.

古文：国珍疑惧，复叛。诱杀台州路达鲁花赤泰不华，亡入海。
现代文：方国珍心中疑惧，重新反叛，诱杀台州路达鲁花赤泰不华，逃亡入海。
English: Fang Guozhen had doubts in his heart, rebelled again, booby-trapped Taizhou Ludaruhana, and fled into the sea.

古文：使人潜至京师，赂诸权贵，仍许降，授徽州路治中。
现代文：后来派人潜至京城，贿赂朝中权贵，允许他投降，授为徽州路治中。
English: Later, he sent someone to sneak into the capital, bribe the powerful people of the dynasty, allow him to surrender, and award him the title of Huizhou Luji Middle School.

古文：国珍不听命，陷台州，焚苏之太仓。
现代文：方国珍拒不听命，率军攻陷台州，焚烧苏之太仓。
English: Fang Guozhen refused to obey orders, led the army to invade Taizhou, and burned Suzhi Taicang.

古文：元复以海道漕运万户招之，乃受官。
现代文：元朝又以海道漕运万户之职招降他，方国珍这才投降，并接受这一官职。
English: In the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed to the post of sea-route transport for all households, but Fang Guozhen surrendered and accepted this post.

古文：寻进行省参政，俾以兵攻张士诚。士诚遣将御之昆山。
现代文：不久进升行省参政，派兵进攻张士诚，张士诚派遣将领在昆山抵御。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to participate in provincial politics and sent soldiers to attack Zhang Shicheng. Zhang Shicheng sent generals to resist in Kunshan.

古文：国珍七战七捷。会士诚亦降，乃罢兵。
现代文：方国珍七战七捷，直到张士诚也投降，才停战退兵。
English: Fang Guozhen won seven battles and achieved seven victories. It was not until Zhang Shicheng also surrendered that he ended the war and retired.

古文：先是，天下承平，国珍兄弟始倡乱海上，有司惮于用兵，一意招抚。
现代文：在此之前，天下太平，方国珍兄弟带头骚乱海上，官府惮于用兵，一意进行招抚。
English: Prior to this, the world was at peace, the Fang Guozhen brothers led the riots at sea, the government was reluctant to use troops, and was determined to appease.

古文：惟都事刘基以国珍首逆，数降数叛，不可赦。朝议不听。
现代文：只有都事刘基认为方国珍是首逆，而且屡降屡叛，不可饶恕，但朝议时没有听从他的意见。
English: Only Liu Ji thought that Fang Guozhen was the chief rebel, and that it was unforgivable to repeatedly surrender and rebel, but the court did not listen to his opinion.

古文：国珍既授官，据有庆元、温、台之地，益强不可制。
现代文：方国珍授官之后，据有庆元、温、台之地，更加强大，不可控制。
English: After Fang Guozhen was awarded the post, according to Qingyuan, Wen and Tai, Cangzhou was more powerful and uncontrollable.

古文：国珍之初作乱也，元出空名宣敕数十道募人击贼。海滨壮士多应募立功。所司邀重贿，不辄与，有一家数人死事卒不得官者。
现代文：方国珍开始作乱时，元朝发出空名宣诏数十道，招募人们去进攻贼寇，许多海滨壮士响应招募，并为此立功，可是负责此事的官员接受重贿，总是不给这些人应有的赏赐，有一家为此死去几个人，却得不到官职。
English: When Fang Guozhen began to make trouble, the Yuan Dynasty issued dozens of empty proclamations to recruit people to attack the thieves and robbers. Many coastal heroes responded to the recruitment and made contributions for this, but the officials responsible for this matter accepted heavy bribes and always did not give these people the rewards they deserved. One family lost several people because of this, but did not get an official post.

古文：而国珍之徒，一再招谕，皆至大官。
现代文：但对方国珍之徒，却一再招抚，都升为大官。
English: However, the other side's treasured followers were repeatedly pandered to, and all were promoted to high-ranking officials.

古文：由是民慕为盗，从国珍者益众。
现代文：因为这样，百姓都羡慕当强盗，跟随方国珍的人日益增多。
English: Because of this, the people are envious of being robbers, and the number of people following Fang Guozhen is increasing.

古文：元既失江、淮，资国珍舟以通海运，重以官爵羁縻之，而无以难也。
现代文：元朝失去江、淮后，只得凭借方国珍的船只使海运畅通，便又以官爵笼络他，这样海运无事。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty lost the Yangtze River and the Huai River, it had to rely on Fang Guozhen's ships to make the shipping smooth, and then enticed him with government officials, so there was no problem with shipping.

古文：有张子善者，好纵横术，说国珍以师溯江窥江东，北略青、徐、辽海。
现代文：有一个名叫张子善的人，喜爱纵横之术，劝说方国珍率军溯江而上，窥视江东，北夺青、徐、辽海。
English: There was a man named Zhang Zizan, who was fond of longitudinal and lateral skills, and persuaded Fang Guozhen to lead the army upstream, peering into the east of the Yangtze River, and the north of the Qing, Xu and Liaohai.

古文：国珍曰： 吾始志不及此。 
现代文：方国珍回答说 ：我还没有这么大的志向。 
English: Fang Guozhen replied: I don't have such a big ambition.

古文：谢之去。
现代文：然后谢之离去。
English: Then Xie Zhi left.

古文：太祖已取婺州，使主簿蔡元刚使庆元。
现代文：朱元璋攻取婺州后，派主簿蔡元刚出使庆元。
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang conquered Zhangzhou, he sent his general secretary Cai Yuanzhang to dispatch Qingyuan.

古文：国珍谋于其下曰： 江左号令严明，恐不能与抗。
现代文：方国珍与其下属商量道 ：江左号令严明，恐怕不能与他对抗。
English: Fang Guozhen consults with his subordinates: Jiang Zhao's orders are strict, I'm afraid I can't go against him.

古文：况为我敌者，西有吴，南有闽。
现代文：况且与我为敌的，西有吴，南有闽。
English: Moreover, my enemies to the west are the Wu and to the south the Yao.

古文：莫若姑示顺从，藉为声援以观变。 
现代文：不如暂且表示顺从，借此作为声援以观其变。 
English: It would be better to show compliance for the time being, using this as solidarity, and see what happens.

古文：众以为然。
现代文：下属觉得他说的在理。
English: Everyone thought he had a point.

古文：于是遣使奉书进黄金五十斤，白金百斤，文绮百匹。
现代文：于是，方国珍派使者给朱元璋送信，并奉献黄金五十斤，白金五十斤，有花纹的丝织品一百匹。
English: As a result, Fang Guozhen sent an envoy to Zhu Yuanzhang, and offered fifty catties of gold, fifty catties of platinum, and one hundred silk products with patterns.

古文：太祖复遣镇抚孙养浩报之。
现代文：朱元璋又派镇抚孙养浩回访他。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang also sent his grandson Yanghao to pay him a return visit.

古文：国珍请以温、台、庆元三郡献，且遣次子关为质。
现代文：方国珍请求进献温、台、庆元三郡，并派次子方关作为人质。
English: Fang Guozhen requested that the three counties of Wen, Tai and Qingyuan be donated, and sent his second son Fang Guan as a hostage.

古文：太祖却其质，厚赐而遣之；复使博士夏煜往，拜国珍福建行省平章事，弟国瑛参知政事，国珉枢密分院佥事。
现代文：朱元璋没接受人质，而且给予厚赐，将他送回；又派博士夏煜前去，拜方国珍为福建省平章事，其弟方国瑛为参知政事，方国珉为枢密分院佥事。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang did not accept the hostage, and gave a generous gift to send him back; he also sent Dr. Xia Yao to visit Fang Guozhen, the governor of Fujian Province, his brother Fang Guoying, the governor of Fujian Province, and Fang Guozhen, the secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：国珍名献三郡，实阴持两端。煜既至，乃诈称疾，自言老不任职，惟受平章印诰而已。
现代文：方国珍名义上奉献三郡，实则心存二心，待夏煜到后，他诈称有病，自言年老不能称职，只接受平章印章及诰命。
English: Fang Guozhen nominally dedicated three counties, but in reality he had two hearts. After Xia Yao arrived, he falsely claimed to be ill and said that he was too old to serve. He only accepted the hanzhang seal and his life.

古文：太祖察其情，以书谕曰： 吾始以汝豪杰识时务，故命汝专制一方。
现代文：朱元璋觉察到这种情况，便写信告诫方国珍说： 我开始认为你是识时务的豪杰，这才命你专制一方。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang, aware of this situation, wrote a letter to Fang Guozhen, saying: I am beginning to think that you are a hero who is aware of current affairs. This is why I ordered you to take an authoritarian side.

古文：汝顾中怀叵测，欲觇我虚实则遣侍子，欲却我官爵则称老病。
现代文：你却居心叵测，想探听我的虚实便派你儿子来，想推却所封官爵则自称年老有病。
English: You, on the other hand, have been deceitful in your intentions. You sent your son to find out if I was real or not, and you claimed to be old and ill when you wanted to reject my knighthood.

古文：夫智者转败为功，贤者因祸成福，汝审图之。 
现代文：历来聪明者可转败为功，贤能者可因祸得福，你好好想想吧。 
English: Historically, the wise can turn failure into success, and the virtuous can be blessed by misfortune. Think about it.

古文：是时国珍岁岁治海舟，为元氵曹张士诚粟十余万石于京师，元累进国珍官至江浙行省左丞相衢国公，分省庆元。国珍受之如故，特以甘言谢太祖，绝无内附意。及得所谕书，竟不省。
现代文：当时方国珍年年修造海船，为元朝漕运张士诚的十多万石粟到京城，元朝因此多次提升方国珍，直到命他为江浙行省左丞相衢国公，分管庆元，方国珍也受之如故；而对朱元璋却以甜言蜜语加以谢绝，表示绝无依附之意，收到朱元璋的信，竟然不打开看。
English: At that time, Fang Guozhen built a sea ship every year, and transported more than 100,000 koku of rice to Beijing for the Yuan Dynasty. As a result, the Yuan Dynasty promoted Fang Guozhen many times, until he was appointed as the Jiangsu and Zhejiang Provincial Minister of the Left, in charge of Qingyuan. Fang Guozhen also accepted it as it was; but he declined Zhu Yuanzhang with sweet words, expressing no attachment. When he received Zhu Yuanzhang's letter, he did not even open it.

古文：太祖复以书谕曰： 福基于至诚，祸生于反覆，隗嚣、公孙述故辙可鉴。
现代文：朱元璋又写信劝说道 ：福基于至诚之心，祸生于反复无常，隗嚣、公孙述两人就可作为前车之鉴。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang also wrote a letter of persuasion, saying: "Fortune is based on a sincere heart, misfortune is born from capriciousness, and the example of the two people who were impetuous and quarrelsome can be used as a precedent.

古文：大军一出，不可虚辞解也。 
现代文：大军一出，就不再是用空话可以解救的了。 
English: Once a large army is dispatched, it can no longer be saved by empty words.

古文：国珍诈穷，复阳为惶惧谢罪，以金宝饰鞍马献。
现代文：方国珍技穷了，又装出一副惊慌害怕的样子来谢罪，并进献一匹鞍上饰有黄金宝物的马，朱元璋又没有接受。
English: Fang Guozhenqi was poor, and he pretended to be panicked and afraid to apologize, and offered a horse with a gold treasure on the saddle, which Zhu Yuanzhang did not accept.

古文：太祖复却之。已而苗帅蒋英等叛，杀胡大海，持首奔国珍，国珍不受，自台州奔福建。国璋守台，邀击之，为所败，被杀，太祖遣使吊祭。
现代文：不久，苗将蒋英等反叛，杀死胡大海，带着胡大海的首级投奔方国珍，方国珍拒不接纳，蒋英等便从台州逃往福建，驻守台州的方国璋率军中途拦截，方国璋兵败被杀，朱元璋派使者前去悼祭。
English: Soon, Miao rebelled against Jiang Ying and others, killed Hu Hai, and took the head of Hu Hai to Fang Guozhen. Fang Guozhen refused to accept him. Jiang Ying and others fled from Taizhou to Fujian. Fang Guozhen, who was stationed in Taizhou, led an army to intercept them halfway. Fang Guozhen was defeated and killed, and Zhu Yuanzhang sent an envoy to mourn.

古文：逾年，温人周宗道以平阳来降。国珍从子明善守温以兵争。参军胡深击败之，遂下瑞安，进兵温州。
现代文：一年后，温州人周宗道以平阳来降，方国珍的堂侄方明善当时驻守温州，便派兵争夺平阳，参军胡深将其击败，然后攻下瑞安，进兵温州。
English: A year later, Zhou Zongdao, a native of Wenzhou, invaded Pingyang. Fang Guozhen's cousin Fang Mingshan was stationed in Wenzhou at the time. He sent troops to fight for Pingyang, joined Hu Sheng's army to defeat it, and then captured Rui'an and marched into Wenzhou.

古文：国珍恐，请岁输白金三万两给军，俟杭州下，即纳土来归。太祖诏深班师。
现代文：方国珍这时害怕了，请求每年供给朱军白金三万两，待攻下杭州时，马上纳土前来归附，朱元璋这才下诏令胡深班师返回。
English: Fang Guozhen was afraid at this time, and requested that 30,000 taels of platinum be supplied to Zhu's army every year. When Hangzhou was about to be conquered, Natu immediately came to annex it. It was only then that Zhu Yuanzhang issued an edict ordering Hu Sheng's division to return.

古文：吴元年克杭州。国珍据境自如，遣间谍假贡献名觇胜负，又数通好于扩廓帖木儿及陈友定，图为掎角。
现代文：吴元年攻克杭州后，方国珍据境自如，派间谍借向朱元璋进献之名，侦察对方力量，又屡次通好于扩廓帖木儿及陈友谅，企图互为掎角。
English: After conquering Hangzhou in the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Fang Guozhen took advantage of the situation and sent spies in the name of Zhu Yuanzhang to reconnoitre the other side's strength, and repeatedly favored the expansion of Timur and Chen Youyuan, trying to make trouble for each other.

古文：太祖闻之怒，贻书数其十二罪，复责军粮二十万石。
现代文：朱元璋获悉之后大怒，派人送去书信，历数他的十二条罪状，又索取军粮二十万石。
English: After learning of this, Zhu Yuanzhang was furious and sent someone to deliver a letter listing his twelve charges and demanding 200,000 koku of grain.

古文：国珍集众议，郎中张本仁、左丞刘庸等皆言不可从。
现代文：方国珍为此召集部属商议，郎中张本仁、左丞刘庸等都认为不能顺从。
English: Fang Guozhen called together his subordinates to discuss the matter, and his vassal Zhang Ben-Ren and his left-hand man Liu Yong both felt that they could not comply.

古文：有丘楠者，独争曰： 彼所言均非公福也。
现代文：唯有一个名叫丘楠的独自争辩道 ：你们所言都不是方公之福啊。
English: Only one, named Qunan, argued independently: What you are saying is not a blessing for Fang Gong.

古文：惟智可以决事，惟信可以守国，惟直可以用兵。
现代文：只有明智可以解决事情，只有讲信用可以守住疆土，只有有理有利才可以用兵。
English: Only wisdom can solve things, only trustworthiness can protect the territory, and only with reason and advantage can soldiers be used.

古文：公经营浙东十余年矣，迁延犹豫，计不早定，不可谓智。
现代文：公经营浙东十多年了，可总是迁延不决，犹豫再四，计不早定，这不可以说是明智。
English: After more than ten years of public management of East Zhejiang, it can always be postponed, hesitated four times, and not decided in advance, which can not be said to be wise.

古文：既许之降，抑又倍焉，不可谓信。
现代文：既然答应朱元璋投降，却又违背他，这不可以说是有信用。
English: Since he promised to surrender to Zhu Yuanzhang, but reneged on it, this cannot be said to be trustworthy.

古文：彼之征师，则有词矣，我实负彼，不可谓直。
现代文：朱元璋派军征战，有他的理由，因为我们确实有负于他，这不可以说是有理。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang had his reasons for sending troops to fight, because we did indeed owe him, which cannot be said to be reasonable.

古文：幸而扶服请命，庶几可视钱俶乎？ 
现代文：你扶服请命，幸运的话他还会将你看作是钱亻叔啊。 
English: If you are lucky, he will see you as Uncle Qian.

古文：国珍不听，惟日夜运珍宝，治舟楫，为航海计。
现代文：方国珍不听劝告，只是日夜运送珍宝，修造船只，为避走海上做准备。
English: Fang Guozhen did not listen to the advice, but transported treasures day and night, built ships, and prepared to escape by sea.

古文：九月，太祖已破平江，命参政朱亮祖攻台州，国瑛迎战败走。
现代文：九月，朱元璋已攻克平江，命参政朱亮祖进攻台州，方国瑛迎战，战败逃走。
English: In September, Zhu Yuanzhang had conquered the Pingjiang River, and Zhu Liangzu attacked Taizhou and confronted Fang Guoying, but was defeated and fled.

古文：进克温州。
现代文：朱亮祖又攻克温州。
English: Zhu Liangzu attacked Wenzhou again.

古文：征南将军汤和以大军长驱抵庆元。国珍帅所部遁入海。追败之盘屿，其部将相次降。
现代文：征南将军汤和率大军长驱直入抵达庆元，方国珍率部逃亡入海，又被追兵在盘屿打败，其部将相继投降。
English: Tang He, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Force, led by the commander of the large army, drove straight in and arrived in Qingyuan. Fang Guozhen led his troops to flee into the sea, and was defeated by the pursuing troops in Panyu. His troops would surrender one after another.

古文：和数令人示以顺逆，国珍乃遣子关奉表乞降曰： 臣闻天无所不覆，地无所不载。王者体天法地，于人无所不容。
现代文：汤和多次派人向方国珍说明顺从与抗拒的不同后果，方国珍这才派儿子奉表乞降，说道： 臣听说天无所不盖，地无所不载，王者体天法地，对人无所不容。
English: Tang He repeatedly sent people to Fang Guozhen to explain the different consequences of obedience and resistance. It was only then that Fang Guozhen sent his son to beg for submission, saying: The minister heard that the sky covers everything, the earth covers everything, the king is heavenly and legal, and everything is unacceptable to people.

古文：臣荷主上覆载之德旧矣，不敢自绝于天地，故一陈愚衷。
现代文：臣长期以来蒙受主上的宽待之恩，不敢做出自绝于天地的事，因此一陈愚衷。
English: For a long time, the vassal received the grace of the Lord's lenient treatment. He did not dare to do something that would cut himself off from heaven and earth, so he was a fool.

古文：臣本庸才，遭时多故，起身海岛，非有父兄相藉之力，又非有帝制自为之心。
现代文：臣本是庸才一个，遇上这多事之秋，起兵于海岛，没有父兄之力相助，又没有帝制自为的野心。
English: The vassal was a mediocrity who, in the autumn of this eventful year, raised an army on the island, without the help of his father and brother, and without the ambition to rule the empire for himself.

古文：方主上霆击电掣，至于婺州，臣愚即遣子入侍，固已知主上有今日矣，将以依日月之末光，望雨露之余润。
现代文：当主上率军浩浩荡荡到达婺州时，愚臣马上派儿子前去侍奉，就已经知道主上会有今天，我将如依日月之余光，望雨露之余润。
English: When the Lord led a vast army to arrive in Zhangzhou, the foolish minister immediately sent his son to serve, already knowing that the Lord would have today, I will be like the afterglow of the sun and moon, watching the rain and dew.

古文：而主上推诚布公，俾守乡郡，如故吴越事。
现代文：而主上推诚布公，派我驻守乡郡，就像以前吴越一样。
English: But the Lord pushed me to stay in my hometown and county, just like Wu Yue before.

古文：臣遵奉条约，不敢妄生节目。
现代文：臣遵奉条约，不敢妄生枝节。
English: The vassal abides by the treaty and does not dare to make a rash move.

古文：子姓不戒，潜构衅端，猥劳问罪之师，私心战兢，用是俾守者出迎。
现代文：只因堂侄性情暴躁，偷偷挑起衅端，烦劳问罪之师，我心里战战兢兢，因此派守军出迎。
English: Only because of the cousin's irascible temperament, secretly provoking the provocative end, and the troublesome teacher, I was trembling in my heart, so I sent the defending army to meet.

古文：然而未免浮海，何也？
现代文：然而最后还是飘浮入海，为什么呢？
English: However, it eventually floated out to sea. Why?

古文：孝子之于亲，小杖则受，大杖则走，臣之情事适与此类。
现代文：孝子对于父亲的责罚，如果是轻微的杖责便接受，如果是重杖的话便会逃避，臣的事情就与这种情况相类似。
English: A dutiful son accepts his father's punishment if it is a light cane, but evades it if it is a heavy cane. The matter of the vassal is similar to this situation.

古文：即欲面缚待罪阙廷，复恐婴斧钺之诛，使天下后世不知臣得罪之深，将谓主上不能容臣，岂不累天地大德哉。 
现代文：我想马上自缚去朝廷请罪，又惟恐遭斧钺之诛，假使天下后世不知道臣得罪你有多深，将会说主上之心不能容臣，这岂不会连累天地之大德吗？ 
English: I want to immediately bind myself to go to the imperial court to plead guilty, and I am afraid of being beaten by the axe. If the world and future generations do not know how deeply the vassal has sinned against you, they will say that the Lord's heart cannot tolerate the vassal. Will this not encumber the great virtue of heaven and earth?

古文：盖幕下士詹鼎词也。
现代文：以上这些话大概都是出自方国珍的部下詹鼎之口。
English: These words above are probably from the mouth of Fang Guozhen's subordinate Zhan Ding.

古文：太祖览而怜之，赐书曰： 汝违吾谕，不即敛手归命，次且海外，负恩实多。
现代文：朱元璋看后，觉得方国珍可怜，便赐信说道 ：你违背我的告诫，不马上收手归命，反而流入海上，负恩实在太多。
English: After Zhu Yuanzhang saw it, he felt sorry for Fang Guozhen, so he gave her a letter saying, "You disobeyed my admonition, and instead of immediately surrendering, you flowed into the sea. You owe Fang Guozhen too much."

古文：今者穷蹙无聊，情词哀恳，吾当以汝此诚为诚，不以前过为过，汝勿自疑。 
现代文：今天你已走投无路，又情词恳切，我理当以你此诚为诚，不以前过为过，你不要自起疑心。 
English: Today, you have been cornered, and your words are sincere. I should take this sincerity of yours as sincere. You have never done anything like this before. Don't doubt yourself.

古文：遂促国珍入朝，面让之曰： 若来得毋晚乎！ 
现代文：于是催促方国珍入朝拜见，当面责备他道 ：你来得不是太晚了吗？ 
English: So he urged Fang Guozhen to visit him in the morning and scolded him in person, saying, "Aren't you late?

古文：国珍顿首谢。授广西行省左丞，食禄不之官。数岁，卒于京师。
现代文：方国珍顿首拜谢，授为广西行省左丞，只享食禄而不上任，数年之后，死于京城。
English: Fang Guo Zhengtong bowed his head in thanks and was awarded the title of Guangxi Provincial Zuo Zheng. He only enjoyed a stipend and did not take office, and died in Beijing several years later.

古文：子礼，官广洋卫指挥佥事；关，虎贲卫千户所镇抚。
现代文：其子方礼，任广洋卫指挥佥事；方关，任虎贲卫千户所镇抚。
English: His son, Fang Lai, was appointed as the commander of Guangyangwei Anecdote; Fang Guan, was appointed as the governor of Qiwei Qianhu Township.

古文：玉珍曰： 与友谅俱臣徐氏，顾悖逆如此。 
现代文：方关之弟方行，字明敏，善于写诗，宋濂曾经称赞过他。明玉珍，随州人。身长八尺，目为双瞳仁。与家乡父老共起兵千余人，驻青山。
English: Fang Guan's younger brother, Fang Xing, was a clever writer, good at writing poetry, and was once praised by Song Dynasty. Ming Yuzhen was from Suizhou. He was eight feet tall and had two pupils. He and his parents raised more than a thousand soldiers and were stationed in Aoyama.

古文：命以兵塞瞿塘，绝不与通。
现代文：徐寿辉称帝，派人招引玉珍，明玉珍便率众降。
English: Xu Shouhui proclaimed himself emperor and sent someone to invite Yuzhen, but Yuzhen declined.

古文：立寿辉庙于城南隅，岁时致祀。
现代文：至正十七年袭取重庆，受寿辉职为陇蜀行省右丞。
English: In the seventeenth year of the Taisho era, he took over Chongqing, and was appointed by Shuhei to be the provincial right-hand man of Shushou.

古文：自立为陇蜀王，以刘桢为参谋。
现代文：二十年，陈友谅杀徐寿辉自立，明玉珍便自立为陇蜀王，以刘桢为参谋。
English: Twenty years later, Chen Youzhen killed Xu Shouhui and became independent. Ming Yuzhen then became independent as the King of Shu, with Liu Ye as his staff officer.

古文：桢，字维周，泸州人。
现代文：刘桢，字维周，泸州人。
English: Liu Wei, the character Wei Zhou, is from Zhangzhou.

古文：元进士。
现代文：元朝进士。
English: He was a member of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：尝为大名路经历，弃官家居。
现代文：曾为大名路经历，后弃官在家。
English: He once served as a daimyo and later resigned from his post to live at home.

古文：玉珍之攻重庆也，道泸，部将刘泽民荐之。
现代文：明玉珍进攻重庆，经过泸州时，部将刘泽明向他推荐刘桢。
English: Ming Yuzhen attacked Chongqing, and when passing through Zhangzhou, the general Liu Zeming recommended Liu Shao to him.

古文：玉珍往见，与语大悦，即日延至舟中，尊礼备至。
现代文：明玉珍前去会见，与刘桢交谈之后，十分高兴，当日就将刘桢迎至船中，尊敬备至。
English: Ming Yuzhen went to meet, and after talking with Liu Ye, she was very happy. On the same day, she welcomed Liu Ye to the ship, which was very respectful.

古文：次年，桢屏人说曰： 西蜀形胜地，大王抚而有之，休养伤残，用贤治兵，可以立不世业。
现代文：次年，刘桢避开众人劝说明玉珍 ：西蜀地势优越，大王如果占据了它，休养伤残将士，起用贤人统率军队，便可以建立不世功业。
English: The following year, Liu Bei avoided the crowd to persuade and explain to Yuzhen: Xishu has superior terrain, if the great king occupies it, recuperates injured soldiers, and appoints wise men to lead the army, he can build a great career.

古文：不于此时称大号以系人心，一旦将士思乡土，瓦解星散，大王孰与建国乎。 
现代文：而如果不在此时称帝来维系人心，一旦将士思念乡土，军队就会像瓦一样破碎，像星星一样离散，到那时大王靠什么去建立国家呢？ 
English: On the other hand, if the emperor is not called at this time to maintain the hearts of the people, once the soldiers miss their hometown, the army will be broken like tiles and scattered like stars. At that time, what will the great king rely on to build the country?

古文：玉珍善之，乃谋于众，以二十二年春僣即皇帝位于重庆，国号夏，建元天统。
现代文：明玉珍觉得他说的有理，便与部众商议，于二十二年春在重庆即皇帝位，国号夏，建元天统。
English: Ming Yuzhen felt that what he said was reasonable, so he discussed it with his ministers, and in the spring of 1922 in Chongqing, that is, the emperor's throne, the country's summer, and the establishment of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：立妻彭氏为皇后，子升为太子。
现代文：立其妻彭氏为皇后，儿子明升为太子。
English: He made his wife Peng the empress and his son Ming Sheng the crown prince.

古文：效周制，设六卿，以刘桢为宗伯。
现代文：仿效周制，设立六卿，以刘桢为宗伯。
English: Following the example of the Zhou Dynasty, six nobles were established, with Liu Bei as the patriarch.

古文：分蜀地为八道，更置府州县官名。
现代文：将蜀地分为八路，更改府州县的官名。
English: Shu will be divided into eight districts, and the official name of Fuzhou County will be changed.

古文：蜀兵视诸国为弱，胜兵不满万人。
现代文：蜀军与他国军队相比较弱，能够作战的兵力不足万人。
English: The Shu army was relatively weak compared to the armies of other countries, with less than ten thousand soldiers able to fight.

古文：玉珍素无远略，然性节俭，颇好学，折节下士。
现代文：明玉珍素无远谋，然而性情节俭，十分好学，礼贤下士。
English: Bright jade, rare and far-sighted, yet frugal in temperament, very eager to learn, a virtuous corporal.

古文：既即位，设国子监，教公卿子弟，设提举司教授，建社稷宗庙，求雅乐，开进士科，定赋税，以十分取一。
现代文：即位之后，设立国子监，教育公卿子弟，设提举司教授，建造社稷宗庙，寻求雅乐，开设进士科举，确定赋税额为十中取一。
English: After ascending the throne, he set up the State Children's Supervisor, educated the children of court nobles, set up a professor of the Promotion Division, built the Shunzong Temple, sought elegant music, opened the Scholarship Examination, and determined the amount of tax to be one tenth.

古文：蜀人悉便安之。
现代文：蜀人全都因此安居乐业。
English: As a result, the people of Shu all live and work in peace.

古文：皆刘桢为之谋也。
现代文：以上这些措施都是刘桢为他谋划的。
English: All of these measures were planned for him by Liu Wei.

古文：明年，遣万胜由界首，邹兴由建昌，又指挥李某者由八番，分道攻云南。两路皆不至，惟胜兵深入，元梁王走营金马山。
现代文：第二年，明玉珍派万胜从界首出发，邹兴从建昌出发，指挥李某从八番出发，分道进攻云南，其中两路都未到达，只有万胜独自率军深入，元朝梁王逃驻金马山。
English: In the second year, Ming Yuzhen sent Wansheng to attack Yunnan from the head of the region, Zou Xing from Jianchang, and Li Mou, the commander, to attack Yunnan from the eighth district. Both routes were not reached, only Wansheng led the army in depth, and the Yuan Dynasty Liang Wang fled to Jinmashan.

古文：逾年，王挟大理兵击胜，胜以孤军无继引还。
现代文：一年后，梁王挟制大理军队进攻万胜，万胜因为孤军无援而率军返回。
English: A year later, Liang Wang coerced Dali's army to attack Wansheng. Wansheng returned with his army because he was alone and had no support.

古文：复遣兴取巴州。
现代文：明玉珍又派遣邹兴攻取巴州。
English: Ming Yuzhen also dispatched Su Xing to capture Bazhou.

古文：久之，复更六卿为中书省枢密院，改冢宰戴寿、司马万胜为左、右丞相，司寇向大亨、司空张文炳知枢密院事，司徒邹兴镇成都，吴友仁镇保宁，司寇莫仁寿镇夔关，皆平章事。
现代文：时间一久，又将六卿改为中书省枢密院，改任冢宰戴寿、司马万胜为左、右丞相，司寇向大亨、司空张文炳为知枢密院事，命司徒邹兴镇守成都，吴友仁镇守保宁，司寇莫仁寿镇守夔关，三人均为平章事。
English: After a long period of time, the Six Lords were changed to the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, and the following people were appointed as the Vice-Chairman Dai Shou, the Vice-Chairman Sima Wansheng as the Left and Right Vice-Chairmen, the Vice-Chairman Xiang Tycoon, the Vice-Chairman Zhang Wenyi as the Vice-Chairman of the Privy Council of the People's Republic of China, the Vice-Chairman Tuo Xing as the Vice-Chairman of Chengdu, Wu Youren as the Vice-Chairman of Boryeong, and the Vice-Chairman Mo Renshou as the Vice

古文：是岁，遣胜取兴元，使参政江俨通好于太祖。
现代文：这一年，明玉珍派万胜攻到兴元，然后派参政江俨与太祖通好。
English: In this year, Ming Yuzhen sent Wan Sheng to attack Xingyuan, and then sent Jiang Zang, a member of the Political Bureau, to communicate with Taizu.

古文：太祖遣都事孙养浩报聘，遗玉珍书曰： 足下处西蜀，予处江左，盖与汉季孙、刘相类。
现代文：太祖派都事孙养浩回访，太祖在给明玉珍的信中写道 ：足下处于西蜀，我则住在江左，这与汉末的孙、刘两人相似。
English: The great-grandfather sent his grandson Sun Yanghao to pay a return visit. In a letter to Ming Yuzhen, the great-grandfather wrote: I live in the west of Shu, and I live in the west of Jiangzu, which is similar to the grandson and Liu at the end of Han Dynasty.

古文：近者王保保以铁骑劲兵，虎踞中原，其志殆不在曹操下，使有谋臣如攸、彧，猛将如辽、合阝，予两人能高枕无忧乎。
现代文：近来王保保率领铁骑劲兵，虎踞中原，其志向恐怕不在曹操之下，如果他有像许攸、荀一样的谋臣，有如张辽、张一样的猛将，我们两人怎能高枕无忧呢？
English: Recently, Wang Baobao has led the Iron Cavalry and the Central Plains Tigers, and his ambition is probably not under Cao Cao. If he has a strategist like Xu Youyou and Yao, and a fierce general like Zhang Liao and Zhang, how can we both sleep well?

古文：予与足下实唇齿邦，愿以孙刘相吞噬为鉴。 
现代文：我与足下实为唇齿相依的邻居，但愿能以孙、刘两人互相兼并争斗作为教训。 
English: I and my neighbors, who are really close to each other, would like to learn a lesson from the mutual annexation struggle between Sun and Liu.

古文：自后信使往返不绝。
现代文：从此以后，双方信使往来不绝。
English: Since then, the two sides have been in constant communication.

古文：二十六年春，玉珍病革，召寿等谕曰： 西蜀险固，若协力同心，左右嗣子，则可以自守。
现代文：二十六年春，明玉珍重病在身，将戴寿等召来说道： 两蜀地势险固，你们若能同心协力，辅佐我儿，则可以自守。
English: In the spring of the twenty-sixth year, when Ming Yu Zhen was seriously ill, he summoned Dai Shou and others to say: The situation of the two Shus is precarious. If you can work together to assist my son, then you can protect yourself.

古文：不然，后事非所知也。 
现代文：不然的话，将来不知会发生什么事情。 
English: Otherwise, I don't know what will happen in the future.

古文：遂卒。
现代文：明玉珍去世。
English: It's over as soon as you say it.

古文：凡立五年，年三十六。
现代文：称帝共五年，死时三十六岁。
English: He was emperor for a total of five years and died at the age of thirty-six.

古文：子升嗣，改元开熙，葬玉珍于江水之北，号永昌陵，庙号太祖。
现代文：明玉珍之子明升即位，改元开熙，将明玉珍葬于江水之北，称为永昌陵，庙号太祖。
English: Ming Sheng, the son of Ming Yuzhen, ascended to the throne, changed the era to the Qing Dynasty, and buried Ming Yuzhen in the north of the river, known as Yongchang Mausoleum, with the temple name Taizu.

古文：尊母彭氏为皇太后，同听政。
现代文：明升尊奉母亲彭氏为皇太后，共同听政。
English: Ming Sheng respected his mother Peng as the empress dowager and listened to politics together.

古文：升甫十岁，诸大臣皆粗暴，不肯相下。
现代文：明升刚刚十岁，各大臣都很粗暴，不肯居于他人之下。
English: Ming Sheng was just ten years old, and all the ministers were rude and did not want to live under others.

古文：而万胜与张文炳有隙，胜密遣人杀之。
现代文：而万胜与张文炳之间存有隔阂，万胜暗中派人杀死张文炳。
English: However, there was a rift between Mansheng and Zhang Wenyi, and Mansheng secretly sent someone to kill Zhang Wenyi.

古文：文炳所善玉珍养子明昭，复矫彭氏旨缢杀胜。
现代文：张文炳曾善待明玉珍的养子明昭，所以明昭又假托彭氏旨意，吊死万胜。
English: Zhang Wenyu had been kind to Ming Yao, the adopted son of Ming Yu Zhen, so Ming Yao, at the request of Mr. Topeng, hanged himself.

古文：胜于明氏功最多，其死，蜀人多怜之。
现代文：万胜为明氏立功最多，他被吊死，蜀人大多同情他。
English: Wan Sheng did the most for the Ming Dynasty. He was hanged, and most of the Shu people sympathized with him.

古文：吴友仁自保宁移檄，以清君侧为名。升命戴寿讨之。
现代文：吴友仁以清君侧为名，从保宁传来檄文声讨明昭。明升命戴寿前去讨伐。
English: Wu Youren, in the name of the side of the Qing Dynasty, received a letter from Boryeong to discuss Ming Zhao. Ming Zheng gave his life to fight for Ming Zhao.

古文：友仁遗寿书谓： 不诛昭，则国必不安，众必不服。
现代文：吴友仁给戴寿写信说道 ：不杀明昭，众心不服。
English: Wu Youren wrote a letter to Dai Shou saying, "If you don't kill Ming Zhao, everyone will be dissatisfied."

古文：昭朝诛，吾当夕至。 
现代文：如果明昭早晨被处死，我傍晚将会赶到。 
English: If Mingzhao is executed in the morning, I will arrive in the evening.

古文：寿乃奏诛昭，友仁入朝谢罪。
现代文：戴寿于是奏请处死明昭，吴友仁则入朝谢罪。
English: Dai Shou then requested the execution of Ming Zhao, while Wu Youren was sentenced to death.

古文：于是诸大臣用事，而友仁尤专恣，国柄旁落，遂益不振。
现代文：于是诸大臣各司其职，而吴友仁更加专横放纵，致使国权旁落，国势日益不振。
English: As a result, the ministers each carried out their duties, while Wu Youren became more despotic and indulgent, resulting in the sidelining of state power and the country's growing weakness.

古文：万胜既死，刘桢为右丞相，后三年卒。
现代文：万胜死后，刘桢为右丞相，三年之后也去世。
English: After Mansheng's death, Liu Ye became the minister of the right, and died three years later.

古文：是岁，升遣使告哀于太祖，已，又遣使入聘。
现代文：这一年，明升派使者告哀于朱元璋，不久，又派使者前去问候。
English: This year, Ming Sheng sent an envoy to mourn Zhu Yuanzhang, and soon sent another envoy to greet him.

古文：太祖亦遣侍御史蔡哲报之。
现代文：朱元璋也派侍御史蔡哲回访。
English: Zhu Yuanzhang also sent his attendant Cai Zhe to pay a return visit.

古文：洪武元年，太祖克元都，升奉书称贺。
现代文：洪武元年，太祖攻克元朝都城，明升送信祝贺。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, Taizu conquered the capital city of the Yuan Dynasty and sent congratulations to Ming Sheng.

古文：明年，太祖遣使求大木。
现代文：第二年，太祖派使臣前来征求木材。
English: The following year, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to the city to solicit timber.

古文：升遂并献方物。
现代文：明升便将蜀地特产一并献上。
English: Ming Sheng then presented the special products of Shu together.

古文：帝答以玺书。
现代文：太祖以玺书作答。
English: The great-great-grandfather replied with a scribble.

古文：其冬，遣平章杨璟谕升归命。升不从。
现代文：这年冬天，太祖派杨王景谕示明升回京复命，明升拒不听从。
English: In the winter of that year, Emperor Taizu sent Yang Wangjing to tell Ming Sheng to return to Beijing to answer for his life, but Ming Sheng refused to obey.

古文：璟复遗升书曰：
现代文：杨王景又写信给明升道：
English: Yang Wangjing also wrote to Ming Sheng Dao:

古文：古之为国者，同力度德，同德度义，故能身家两全，流誉无穷，反是者辄败。
现代文： 古之从政治国者，同力度德，同德度义，故而能身家两全，流芳百世，反之则败。
English: In ancient times, those who came from a political country had the same strength in virtue and the same virtue in righteousness, so they were able to have the best of both worlds and be loved for a hundred generations, while those who did not were defeated.

古文：足下幼冲，席先人业，据有巴、蜀，不咨至计，而听群下之议，以瞿塘、剑阁之险，一夫负戈，万人无如之何。
现代文：足下如此年幼，便继承先人功业，占据巴、蜀，却不考虑长远之计，而听从群属之言，认为有了瞿塘、剑阁之险，便可一夫当关，万夫莫开。
English: At such a young age, he inherited the work of his predecessors and occupied Ba and Shu, but he did not consider the long-term strategy, but listened to the words of the group, and thought that with the danger of Qutang and Jiange, he could be the key and must not be opened.

古文：此皆不达时变以误足下之言也。
现代文：这些都是他们不懂时势变化，将使足下蒙受伤害的言论啊。
English: These are all statements that they do not understand the changes in the current situation and that will bring harm to the country.

古文：昔据蜀最盛者，莫如汉昭烈。
现代文：昔日占据蜀地最强大者，莫过于汉昭烈。
English: In the past, the most powerful person to occupy Shu was none other than Han Zhaorong.

古文：且以诸葛武侯佐之，综核官守，训练士卒，财用不足，皆取之南诏。
现代文：而且有诸葛武侯辅佐，考核守官，训练士卒，物资不足，均取于南诏。
English: Moreover, Zhuge Wuhou's assistant, assessment officer, training officer, and material shortages were all taken from Nanzhao.

古文：然犹朝不谋夕，仅能自保。
现代文：但是仍然朝不谋夕，仅能自保而已。
English: But they are still searching day and night, and are only able to protect themselves.

古文：今足下疆场，南不过播州，北不过汉中，以此准彼，相去万万，而欲藉一隅之地，延命顷刻，可谓智乎？
现代文：而今足下的疆域，南不过播州，北不过汉中，以此求彼，相隔万里，而想凭借一隅之地，延长顷刻寿命，可以说这是明智吗？
English: And now, the territory under our feet, the south is not Banzhou, the north is not Hanzhong, so we ask him, separated by thousands of miles, but want to extend our life by virtue of a corner of land, can we say that this is wise?

古文：我主上仁圣威武，神明响应，顺附者无不加恩，负固者然后致讨。
现代文： 我主上仁圣威武，神明感动，对于顺从归附者无不施以恩惠，而对于顽固背弃者才出兵征讨。
English: Our Lord, the All-Merciful, the All-Powerful, the All-Merciful, the All-Merciful, the All-Merciful, the All-Merciful, the All-Merciful, the All-Merciful.

古文：以足下先人通好之故，不忍加师，数使使谕意。
现代文：因为足下的先人曾通好我主上的缘故，而不忍用兵，屡次派人向你谕示此意。
English: For they have often sent unto thee, saying, For the Lord's sake, and for the good of my master, we will not fight against thee.

古文：又以足下年幼，未历事变，恐惑于狂瞽，失远大计，故复遣璟面谕祸福。
现代文：又因足下年纪尚幼，从未经历事变，惟恐你受狂言迷惑，丧失长远之计，又派杨王景前去面谕祸福。
English: Also, because he is still young and has never experienced any changes, he sent Yang Wangjing to tell you about the good and bad fortune, lest you be confused by the rant and lose the long-term strategy.

古文：深仁厚德，所以待明氏者不浅，足下可不深念乎？
现代文：我主上仁德深厚，待明氏实在不薄，足下难道能不深念于心？
English: The benevolence of my master is profound, and the patience of Mr. Ming is really not thin. Can I not think about it deeply under my feet?

古文：且向者如陈、张之属，窃据吴、楚，造舟塞江河，积粮过山岳，强将劲兵，自谓无敌。
现代文： 而且以往陈、张之辈，窃据吴、楚，造船堵塞江河，粮食堆积如山，又有强将劲兵，因此自谓无敌。
English: Moreover, in the past, Chen and Zhang's generation stole from Wu and Chu, blocked rivers and rivers with shipbuilding, piled up mountains of grain, and had strong generals and soldiers, so they called themselves invincible.

古文：然鄱阳一战，友谅授首，旋师东讨，张氏面缚。
现代文：但是鄱阳湖一战，陈友谅被杀，我军随即东征，张氏投降。
English: However, in the First Battle of Poyang Lake, Chen Youxuan was killed, and our army immediately went to the East, and the Zhang clan surrendered.

古文：此非人力，实天命也。
现代文：此非人力所为，实乃天命所归啊。
English: This is not the work of man, but the work of Providence.

古文：足下视此何如？
现代文：足下是怎样看待此事的呢？
English: How does your company see this?

古文：友谅子窜归江夏，王师致伐，势穷衔璧。
现代文： 陈友谅之子窜归江夏，王师前往征伐，陈友谅之子走投无路，被迫投降。
English: Chen Youyou's son Zou returned to Jiangxia, Wang Shi went on a campaign, Chen Youyou's son was cornered and forced to surrender.

古文：主上宥其罪愆，剖符锡爵，恩荣之盛，天下所知。
现代文：我主上宽恕其罪，并剖符赐爵，恩荣之盛，天下所知。
English: My Lord forgave his sin and gave him a knighthood, the full extent of which is known to all.

古文：足下无彼之过，而能翻然觉悟，自求多福，则必享茅土之封，保先人之祀，世世不绝，岂不贤智矣哉？
现代文：足下未犯像他那样的过错，如能幡然醒悟，自求多福，则必定可以享受土地之封，保住先人之祀，世代不绝，这么做岂不是明智之举吗？
English: If you can suddenly wake up and ask for more blessings, then you will definitely be able to enjoy the seal of the land, keep the worship of the ancestors, generation after generation, isn't it a wise move to do so?

古文：若必欲崛强一隅，假息顷刻，鱼游沸鼎，燕巢危幕，祸害将至，恬不自知。
现代文：如果你一定要逞强一隅，苟延顷刻，就好像鱼儿浮游于沸腾的鼎水，燕子在危险的帷幕上筑巢一样，大难将至，而恬不自知。
English: If you persist in procrastinating, you will be like a fish swimming in boiling water, or like a swallow building its nest on the edge of a dangerous precipice.

古文：璟恐天兵一临，凡今为足下谋者，他日或各自为身计，以取富贵。
现代文：杨瞡惟恐大兵一到，凡是现在为足下出谋划策之人，他日也许会为自身打算，各自求取富贵。
English: Yang Xuan was afraid that as soon as the soldiers arrived, all those who were now making plans for their feet might one day make plans for themselves and seek wealth for themselves.

古文：当此之时，老母弱子，将安所归？
现代文：到了那时，你们老母弱子，何处才能安身呢？
English: In those days, you feeble ones, where will you be able to live?

古文：祸福利害，瞭然可睹，在足下审之而已。
现代文：其中的祸福利害，一目了然，足下好好想想吧。 
English: Among them, the harms and benefits are obvious at a glance. Think about it carefully.

古文：升终不听。
现代文：明升最终还是未听从劝告。
English: In the end, Ming Sheng did not listen to the advice.

古文：又明年，兴元守将以城降。
现代文：又过了一年，兴元守将献城投降。
English: A year later, the governor of Xingyuan surrendered the city.

古文：吴友仁数往攻之，不克。
现代文：吴友仁几次前往进攻，都未能攻克。
English: Wu Youren went to attack several times, but failed to defeat the dragon.

古文：是岁，太祖遣使假道征云南，升不奉诏。
现代文：这一年，太祖为征伐云南，派遣使者前往借路，明升拒不遵从诏令。
English: In that year, Emperor Taizu sent an envoy to Yunnan to conquer the country, but Ming Sheng refused to obey the imperial edict.

古文：四年正月命征西将军汤和帅副将军廖永忠等以舟师由瞿塘趋重庆，前将军傅友德帅副将军顾时等以步骑由秦、陇趋成都，伐蜀。
现代文：四年正月，太祖命征西将军汤和偕副将军廖永忠等率水师由瞿塘直趋重庆，前将军傅友德偕副将军顾时等率步兵、骑兵由秦、陇直趋成都，征伐蜀。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, Emperor Taizu ordered General Tang of the Western Expedition and Vice-General Liao Yongzhong of the Western Expedition to march from Putang to Chongqing, and former General Fu Youde of the Western Expedition and Vice-General Gu Shi of the Western Expedition to march from Qin to Chengdu and conquer Shu.

古文：初，寿言于升曰： 以王保保、李思齐之强，犹莫能与明抗，况吾蜀乎！
现代文：当初，戴寿对明升说道： 以王保保、李思齐的强大，仍不能与明军对抗，何况我们蜀地呢？
English: At first, Dai Shou said to Ming Sheng: With the strong Wang Baobao and Li Siqi, we still can't stand up to the Ming army. What's more, what about Shu Di?

古文：一旦有警，计安出？ 
现代文：一旦出现紧急情况，我们怎么去应付呢？ 
English: In the event of an emergency, how would we cope?

古文：友仁曰： 不然，吾蜀襟山带江，非中原比，莫若外交好而内修备。 
现代文：吴友仁则说： 你说得不对，我们蜀地依山傍水，非中原能比，不如对外结交友邦，对内则修整军备。 
English: Wu Youren said, "You are not right. We rely on mountains and rivers. If we can't compete with China, it's better to make friends abroad and improve our armaments at home.

古文：升以为然，遣莫仁寿以铁索横断瞿塘峡口。
现代文：明升认为他说的在理，于是便派莫仁寿用铁索横断瞿塘峡口。
English: Ming Sheng thought that what he said was reasonable, so he sent Mo Renshou to cross the Qutang Gorge with an iron cable.

古文：至是又遣寿、友仁、邹兴等益兵为助。
现代文：现在又命戴寿、吴友仁、邹兴等增兵援助。
English: Now, Dai Shou, Wu Youren, Hao Xing and others have also been ordered to increase troop assistance.

古文：北倚羊角山，南倚南城砦，凿两岸石壁，引铁索为飞桥，用木板置礮以拒敌。
现代文：北倚羊角山，南倚南城砦，凿穿两岸石壁，牵引铁索成为铁桥，使用木板安置炮弹来抵御敌军。
English: It leans against Sheep's Head Mountain to the north and Nancheng Fort to the south, cutting through the stone walls on both sides, pulling iron cables to become an iron bridge, and using wooden planks to place cannonballs to fend off enemy troops.

古文：和军至，不能进。
现代文：汤和率军到达，不能前进。
English: Tang He arrived with his army, but was unable to advance.

古文：傅友德觇阶、文无备，进破之，又破绵州。
现代文：傅友德侦察到阶、文没有防备，便进军将其攻破，又攻克绵州。
English: Fu Youde detected that Ju and Wen were unprepared, so he marched to break through them and conquer Mianzhou.

古文：寿乃留兴等守瞿塘，而自与友仁还，会向大亨之师以援汉州。
现代文：戴寿于是留下邹兴等防守瞿塘，而自己则与吴友仁返回，会合向大亨军援救汉州。
English: Dai Shou then left Pu Xing and others to defend Shantang, while he and Wu Youren returned to join the tycoon's army to rescue Hanzhou.

古文：数战皆大败，寿、大亨走成都，友仁走保宁。
现代文：几次交战均遭大败，戴寿、向大亨逃往成都，吴友仁逃往保宁。
English: In several battles, they were defeated. Dai Shou and Xiang Tycoon fled to Chengdu, and Wu Youren fled to Boryeong.

古文：时永忠亦破瞿塘关。
现代文：当时廖永忠也已攻破瞿塘关。
English: At that time, Liao Yongzhong had also broken through the Shantang Pass.

古文：飞桥铁索皆烧断，兴中矢死，夏兵皆溃。
现代文：飞桥铁索均被烧断，邹兴中箭而死，夏军皆溃。
English: The iron cables of the flying bridge were all burned out, and Zou Xing was killed by an arrow, and Xia's army was defeated.

古文：遂下夔州，师次铜罗峡。
现代文：明军然后攻下夔州，驻扎铜罗峡。
English: The Ming army then captured Zhangzhou and stationed in Tongluo Gorge.

古文：升大惧，右丞刘仁劝奔成都。
现代文：明升大为恐惧，右丞刘仁劝他逃奔成都。
English: Ming Sheng was terrified, and Liu Ren, the right-hand man, advised him to flee to Chengdu.

古文：升母彭泣曰： 成都可到，亦仅延旦夕命。
现代文：明升之母彭氏哭道： 我们可以去成都，但这也只能延长旦夕寿命。
English: We can go to Chengdu, but it will only prolong our life.

古文：大军所过，势如破竹，不如早降以活民命。 
现代文：因为大军所过，势如破竹，我们不如早一点投降，以挽救百姓的性命。 
English: Because of the overwhelming force of the army, we might as well surrender a little earlier to save the lives of the people.

古文：于是遣使赍表乞降。
现代文：于是派遣使者携带奏章前去乞降。
English: So they sent an envoy to beg for surrender.

古文：升面缚衔璧舆榇，与母彭及官属降于军门。
现代文：明升反绑双手、车载棺材，与母亲彭氏及官属前往军门投降。
English: Ming Sheng tied his hands behind his back and loaded a coffin onto a truck. He went to the military gate to surrender with his mother, Peng Shi, and officials.

古文：和受璧，永忠解缚，承旨抚慰，下令诸将不得有所侵扰。
现代文：汤和接受璧玉，廖永忠则为他解开绑绳，秉承太祖旨意，对其加以抚慰，并下令诸将对他们不得有所侵扰。
English: Tanghe accepted Bi Yu, while Liao Yongzhong untied the ropes for him, consoled him in accordance with the will of the great ancestor, and ordered the generals not to disturb them.

古文：而寿、大亨亦以成都降于友德。
现代文：而戴寿、向大亨也以成都降于傅友德。
English: On the other hand, Dai Shou and Xiang Tycoon also ranked Chengdu lower than Fu Youde.

古文：升等悉送京师，礼臣奏言： 皇帝御奉天殿，明升等俯伏待罪午门外，有司宣制赦，如孟昶降宋故事。 
现代文：明升等全被押送京城，礼臣奏道 ：皇帝御临奉天殿，明升等俯伏待罪于午门外，有关官员宣读赦免诏令，就像从前孟永日降宋一样。 
English: Ming Sheng and the others were all escorted to the capital, and the courtiers sang: The emperor has come to dedicate the Temple of Heaven, and Ming Sheng and the others prostrated themselves in front of the noon gate, and the relevant officials read out the pardon decree, just like Meng Yong Il's surrender to the Song Dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 升幼弱，事由臣下，与孟昶异，宜免其伏地上表待罪之仪。 
现代文：太祖说道： 明升年幼弱小，凡事听由臣下，与孟永日不同，所以应当免去他伏地上奏待罪之仪。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "Ming Sheng was young and weak, and everything was left to his vassals, unlike Meng Yongri. Therefore, he should be exempted from performing the ritual of prostration.

古文：是日授升爵归义侯，赐第京师。
现代文：当日，太祖授明升为归义侯，并赐居京城。
English: On the same day, the great-great-grandfather conferred the title of Guiyi Hou and granted him the right to live in the capital.

古文：冬十月，和等悉定川、蜀诸郡县，执友仁于保宁，遂班师。
现代文：十月，汤和等全部平定川、蜀诸郡县，在保宁逮捕吴友仁，然后班师回朝。
English: In October, Tang He and the others all went to Pingding River and Shu Zhu County, arrested Wu Youren in Boryeong, and then the team returned to the North.

古文：寿、大亨、仁寿皆凿舟自沉死。
现代文：戴寿、向大亨、莫仁寿都凿船自沉而死。
English: Dai Shou, Xiang Tycoon, and Mo Ren Shou all scuttled their boats and died.

古文：丁世贞者，文州守将也，友德攻文州，据险力战，汪兴祖死焉。
现代文：丁世贞是文州守将，傅友德进攻文州，丁世贞据险力战，汪兴祖战死。
English: Ding Shizhen was the military commander of Wenzhou, Fu Youde attacked Wenzhou, Ding Shizhen fought bravely, and Wang Xingzu died in battle.

古文：文州破，遁去。
现代文：文州失陷，丁世贞逃走。
English: Wenzhou fell, and Ding Shizhen fled.

古文：已复以兵破文州，杀朱显忠，友德击走之。
现代文：不久又率军攻破文州，杀死朱显忠，傅友德将其击走。
English: Not long after, he led an army to break through Wenzhou, killing Zhu Xianzhong, and Fu Youde drove him away.

古文：夏亡，复集余众围秦州五十日。
现代文：夏亡之后，丁世贞聚集余部围攻秦州五十日。
English: After Xia's death, Ding Shizhen gathered the rest to besiege Qinzhou for 50 days.

古文：兵败，夜宿梓潼庙，为其下所杀。
现代文：战败，夜宿梓潼庙，被其部下所杀。
English: Defeated, he spent the night in Zizhi Temple and was killed by his subordinates.

古文：友仁至京师，帝以其寇汉中，首造兵端，令明氏失国，僇于市。
现代文：吴友仁被押至京城，太祖认为他骚扰汉中，首先挑起战端，使明氏失国，将他在街市斩首。
English: Wu Youren was sent to Beijing. Emperor Taizu thought that he was harassing Han Zhong, and first provoked a war, causing the Ming Dynasty to lose the country, and beheaded him in the market.

古文：戍他将校于徐州。
现代文：并命其他将领戍守徐州。
English: He also ordered other generals to guard Xuzhou.

古文：明年徙升于高丽。
现代文：第二年将明升迁徙到高丽。
English: The next year, Ming Sheng moved to Goryeo.

