古文：京师盛时，诸司老吏，类多识事体，习典故。翰苑有孔目吏，每学士制草出，必据案细读，疑误辄告。
现代文：原来京都全盛之时，中央机关各署的老官吏，大多能够识得事体，熟习共制丸掌效，当时有个孔目的官吏，每当学士们代拟的制书的草稿写出来，一定伏案仔细研究，有疑误之处就告诉当事者。
English: Originally, when Kyoto was in its heyday, most of the senior officials of the central government agencies were able to see things for what they were and were familiar with co-authoring. At that time, there was a hole in the officials, whenever the drafts of the books prepared by the bachelors were written, they would carefully study the drafts and tell the parties if there were any mistakes.

古文：刘嗣明尝作《皇子剃胎发文》，用 克长克君 之语，吏持以请，嗣明曰： 此言堪为长堪为君，真善颂也。 
现代文：刘嗣明曾作过一篇《皇子剃胎发文》，用了克长克君的话，孔目吏拿着稿子来请教此话怎讲，嗣明曰： 这句话是说能做长能做君的意思，完全是好的颂辞。 
English: Liu Siming once wrote an article, "The Prince Shaved His Tits and Sent a Letter," in which he used the words of Kechang Kechun. When the Confucian scholar took the manuscript to ask how to say this, Siming said, "This sentence means that you can do what you want to do, and it is completely a good eulogy."

古文：吏拱手曰： 内中读文书不如是，最以语忌为嫌，既克长又克君，殆不可用也。
现代文：孔目吏拱手致谢，说： 大内里面读文书不象这样，最憎恨触犯语言，忌讳，克冠同音，很可能被理解成既翘长又姐君，这句话不能用。 
English: The Confucius scholar extended his hand in thanks, saying: It is not like this to read documents inside the university. The most hated thing is to offend the language, taboos, and homophones. It is likely to be understood as both a long neck and a sister. This sentence cannot be used.

古文：嗣明悚然亟易之。
现代文：嗣明惊然恐惧，赶快换成了其他的话。
English: Tsugumi was clearly shocked and frightened, and quickly changed to other words.

古文：靖康岁都城受围，御敌器甲枻弊。
现代文：靖康那一年都城被敌人包围，御敌器甲都破敝了。
English: In the year of Jingkang, the capital was besieged by the enemy, and the enemy's armor was broken.

古文：或言太常寺有旧祭服数十，闲无所用，可以藉甲。
现代文：有人说太常寺存有旧的祭服数十套，听说没有什么用处了，可以用来衬垫铠甲。
English: Some people say that there are dozens of sets of old ceremonial robes in Taijo-ji Temple. I heard that they are no longer useful and can be used to pad armor.

古文：少卿刘珏即具稿欲献于朝，以付书史。
现代文：太常少卿刘珏就起草奏章想着把它们献给朝廷，把奏章的直稿交给掌管文书的吏员抄写。
English: Too often, Shaoqing Liu Ye would draft musical compositions with the idea of dedicating them to the imperial court, and he would give the direct draft of the musical composition to the clerk in charge of documents to copy.

古文：史作字楷而敏，平常无错误，珏将上马，立俟之，既至，而结衔脱两字。趣使更写，至于三，其误如初。
现代文：那位吏员写字工笔楷书，速度又快，平常未曾出错，刘珏就要上马，站着等奏查，送来之后一看，却在签署明官衔方掉了两个字，催促他赶快重写，一直写了三回，其错如故。
English: The clerk was a fast typist and usually never made a mistake. Liu Yao was about to get on the horse and stood waiting for the report to be checked. However, when he looked at it after it was sent, two words were missing from the official's signature. He was urged to quickly rewrite it. He kept rewriting it three times, but the mistake was still there.

古文：珏怒责之，逡巡谢曰： 非敢误也，某小人窃妄有管见，在《礼》， 祭服敝则焚之 。
现代文：刘珏发了脾气斥责他，书吏迟疑不决地谢罪道： 本来不敢写错，但因小人我内心里有点拘虚之见，根据《礼记》记载， 祭服坏了就把它烧掉 。
English: Liu Ye lost his temper and rebuked him. The librarian hesitantly apologized, saying, "I didn't dare to make a mistake, but because I'm a villain, I'm a bit narrow-minded. According to the Records of Rites, if the sacrificial vestments are damaged, they should be burned."

古文：今国家迫急，诚不宜以常日论，然容台之职，唯当秉礼。
现代文：现在国家处于危急之中，实在不应该以平常时候的老规距办事，可是礼部宫员的职分所关，应当按礼制行事。
English: Now that the country is in a critical situation, it is really not appropriate to act according to the old rules of normal times. However, the duties of a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies should be in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：少卿固体国，不若俟朝廷来索则纳之，贤于先自背礼而有献也。 
现代文：少卿这样做固然是体谅国家的困难，不如等朝廷来索要再交上去，那样要比自己首先违背礼制去进献的好。 
English: Of course, the young lord did this out of consideration for the country's difficulties, but it would have been better to wait for the imperial court to come and ask for it to be handed over again, rather than breaking the rules of etiquette to make the offering in the first place.

古文：珏愧叹而止，后每为人言，嘉赏其意。
现代文：刘珏感到惜愧、慨叹再三，中止了这件事。
English: Liu Yao felt sorry and lamented again and again, and stopped the matter.

古文：今之胥徒，虽公府右职，省寺掌故，但能鼓扇狷浮，顾球谢为业，簿书期会之间，乃漫不之晓，求如彼二人，岂可得哉！
现代文：后来经常同人谈起，嘉许赞赏那位书吏的一片苦心，现在的办事人员，即便是在公卿府中担任高级职位的吏员，了解中央各部机关的掌故，也只能是用来扇动虚浮不实的风气，追求呷人的钱财谢礼，以之为业；至于处理文书、办理公务，竟然全然不懂，再找象二述那两个人，哪能找得到呢！
English: Later, he often talked with others, praising and appreciating the painstaking efforts of that clerk. The current clerks, even the clerks who hold senior positions in the Court of Chancery and understand the workings of the central ministries, can only be used to incite a false and unrealistic culture, and pursue extravagant money and gifts as a career; as for handling documents and handling official duties, they do not understand at all, and how can you find two people like the two mentioned above?

