古文：◎兵四
现代文：兵四
English: Soldier Four

古文：○清理军伍训练赏功火器车船马政
现代文：清理军伍训练赏功火器车船马政
English: Military clean-up drill rewards meritorious service with firearm, vehicle, ship and horse parade

古文：明初，垛集令行，民出一丁为军，卫所无缺伍，且有羡丁。
现代文：明朝初年，以垛兵法征兵的命令推行，百姓每户抽出一人当兵，卫所不缺少士兵，而且有多余的士兵。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the order of conscription was carried out according to the law of war, and the people selected one person from each household to be a soldier. There was no shortage of soldiers in the garrison, and there were extra soldiers.

古文：未几，大都督府言，起吴元年十月，至洪武三年十一月，军士逃亡者四万七千九百余。
现代文：不久，大都督府公布说，从昊元年十月，到洪武三年十一月，军士逃亡四万七千九百余人。
English: Soon after, the Governor-General's Office announced that from October of Hao Year 1 to November of Hongwu Year 3, more than 47,900 military personnel had fled.

古文：于是下追捕之令，立法惩戒。
现代文：于是下达追捕的命令，制定法令惩戒。
English: As a result, a pursuit order was issued and disciplinary measures were enacted.

古文：小旗逃所隶三人，降为军。上至总旗、百户、千户，皆视逃军多寡，夺俸降革。
现代文：小旗逃亡所管辖的三人，降为士兵，上至总旗、百户、千户，都按逃亡士兵多少，罚削夺俸禄降级免职。
English: The three people under the jurisdiction of Xiaoqi's escape were reduced to soldiers, up to the general flag, one hundred households, and one thousand households, all according to the number of escaped soldiers, and were fined for salary, demoted, and dismissed.

古文：其从征在外者，罚尤严。
现代文：那些从征在外的，处罚尤其严厉。
English: For those who are not conscripts, the punishment is particularly severe.

古文：十六年，命五军府檄外卫所，速逮缺伍士卒，给事中潘庸等分行清理之。
现代文：十六年传令五军府以檄文告知外地卫所，急速逮捕军伍空缺的士兵，给事中潘庸等分行伍清查这件事。
English: Sixteen years ago, the five military departments were ordered to inform the out-of-town infirmary in writing, quickly arrest the soldiers who had vacancies in the military, and investigate the matter with the branches such as Pan Yong.

古文：明年，从兵部尚书俞纶言，京卫军户绝者，毋冒取同姓及同姓之亲，令有司核实发补，府卫毋特遣人。
现代文：第二年听从兵部尚书俞纶的进言，京卫军户没有后代的，不能滥取同姓及同姓的亲戚，下令有关部门核实调发补充，府街不能特地派遣人。
English: The following year, heeding the advice of Shang Shuxuan of the Ministry of Military Affairs, he ordered the relevant departments to verify the transfer and supplement the same surname and relatives of the same surname, and the capital city could not send people specially.

古文：二十一年，诏卫所核实军伍，有匿己子以养子代者，不许。
现代文：二十一年诏令卫所核实军队，有隐瞒自己儿子以养子代替的，不允许。
English: In the 21st year of the Emperor's reign, the Institute of Sacred Medicine verified that the army did not allow those who concealed their sons to be replaced by adopted sons.

古文：其秋，令卫所著军士姓名、乡贯为籍，具载丁口以便取补。
现代文：那年秋天，下令卫所登记士兵姓名、籍贯作为军籍，详细记载人口以便选取补充。
English: In the fall of that year, he ordered the National Guard to register soldiers' names and hometowns as military records, and to keep detailed records of the population in order to select replacements.

古文：又置军籍勘合，分给内外，军士遇点阅以为验。
现代文：又设置军籍验对符契，分给内外卫，士兵遇上查点时作为验证。
English: In addition, a military registration verification certificate will be set up, which will be assigned to the inner and outer guards, and will be used as verification when soldiers encounter checkpoints.

古文：成祖即位，遣给事等官分阅天下军，重定垛集军更代法。
现代文：成祖即位，派遣给事等官分别检阅全国军队，重新制定以垛兵法征兵的替换办法。
English: Emperor Chengzu ascended the throne, dispatched officials to review the national army separately, and re-enacted the replacement method of conscription by martial law.

古文：初，三丁已上，垛正军一，别有贴户，正军死，贴户丁补。
现代文：当初，一家三个男子以上，每垛正军一人，另有候补军户，正军死亡，候补军户抽丁补充。
English: At the beginning, there were more than three men in a family, one person from the regular army in each family, and there were alternate military households, the regular army died, and the alternate military households were supplemented by the lottery.

古文：至是，令正军、贴户更代，贴户单丁者免；当军家蠲其一丁徭。
现代文：到现在，下令正军、候补军户更相替代，候补军户没有兄弟的成年男子免征；应当征兵的人家免去他家一人的徭役。
English: Up to now, it has been ordered that the main army and the alternate army households should be replaced, and the adult men of the alternate army households without brothers are exempted from conscription; the family of the person who should be conscripted is exempted from the service of one person in his family.

古文：洪熙元年，兴州左屯卫军范济极言勾军之扰。
现代文：洪熙元年，兴州左屯卫军人范济极力进言征兵扰民。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, Fan Ji, a soldier of the Xingzhou Zuotun Guards, tried his best to recruit soldiers to disturb the people.

古文：富峪卫百户钱兴奏言： 祖本涿鹿卫军，死，父继，以功授百户。
现代文：富峪卫百户钱兴上奏说： 祖父本是涿鹿卫士兵，去世后，由父亲接替，因功绩被授官百户。
English: Fu Rongwei said, "My grandfather was a soldier of the Elk Guards. After his death, he was succeeded by his father. He was awarded the title of "Hundred Households" for his achievements.

古文：臣已袭父职，而本卫犹以臣祖为逃军，屡行勾取。 
现代文：臣已经承袭父亲的职务，而原来的卫所还认为我的祖父是逃兵，多次捉取。 
English: The vassal has inherited the duties of his father, and the original guardhouse still believes that my grandfather is a deserter, and has arrested him many times.

古文：帝谓尚书张本曰： 军伍不清，弊多类此。 
现代文：皇帝对兵部尚书张本说： 军队不清理，弊端多与此类似。 
English: The emperor said to Zhang Ben of the Ministry of Military Affairs: If the army is not cleaned up, the drawbacks are mostly similar.

古文：已而宣宗立，军弊益滋，黠者往往匿其籍，或诬攘良民充伍。
现代文：随后宣宗即位，军队弊病更加严重，狡猾的人往往隐瞒自己的军籍，或诬陷捉取一般的平民充任军士。
English: Subsequently, Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, the army's ills became more serious, and cunning people often concealed their military records, or falsely accused and captured ordinary civilians to serve as sergeants.

古文：帝谕兵部曰： 朝廷于军民，如舟车任载，不可偏重。
现代文：皇帝告谕兵部说： 朝廷对于军民，如同承担运输的车船，不可以偏重。
English: The emperor told the military department: The imperial court must not give preferential treatment to the military and civilians, just as it does to vehicles and ships that undertake transportation.

古文：有司宜审实毋混。 
现代文：有关部门应该核实，不要混淆。 
English: The relevant departments should verify and avoid confusion.

古文：乃分遣吏部侍郎黄宗载等清理天下军卫。
现代文：于是分别派遣吏部侍郎黄宗载等清理全国的军卫。
English: As a result, Huang Zongzai, the Secretary of the General Staff, and others were separately dispatched to clean up the military guards throughout the country.

古文：三年敕给事、御史清军，定十一条例，榜示天下。
现代文：宣德三年，命令给事、御史清理军队，制定了十一条规则，张榜告示全国。
English: In the three years since the proclamation of the Constitution of the People's Republic of China, he has ordered the army to be cleaned up, formulated eleven rules, and announced them to the whole country.

古文：明年复增为二十二条。
现代文：第二年又增为二十二条。
English: The following year, it was increased to 22 articles.

古文：五年，从尚书张本请，令天下官吏、军旗公勘自洪、永来勾军之无踪者，豁免之。
现代文：宣德五年，听从尚书张本的请求，下令全国官吏、军旗公开核查从洪武、永乐以来征兵而没有踪影的人，免除他们的兵役。
English: In the fifth year of Xuan De, heeding the request of Shang Shu Zhang Ben, he ordered the national officials and military flags to openly check those who have not been recruited since Hongwu and Yongle, and exempt them from military service.

古文：六年，令勾军有亲老疾独子者，编之近地，余丁赴工逋亡者例发口外，改为罚工一年，示优恤焉。
现代文：六年，下令被勾取的士兵中有双亲年老疾病独子的，编制在附近的地方，军中编外人员赶赴工场逃亡的人按例要发配长城以北的地方，改为罚服工役一隼，以示体恤。
English: In the sixth year, the soldiers who were ordered to be picked up included two elderly parents and an only son with a disease, and were stationed in a nearby place. The non-commissioned officers in the army who rushed to the factory to escape were, as a rule, to be sent to a place north of the Great Wall, and were instead punished with one shilling of labor service to show their sympathy.

古文：八年，免苏州卫抑配军百五十九人，已食粮止令终其身者，千二百三十九人。
现代文：宣德八年，赦免苏州卫被冤枉流刑发配戍边的军士一百五十九人，已经食用公粮祇令终其自身的，一千二百三十九人。
English: In the eighth year of Xuande, Suzhou Wei pardoned one hundred and fifty-nine military officers who were unjustly exiled and sentenced to death, and one thousand two hundred and thirty-nine people who had eaten public grain and ordered their own death.

古文：先是，苏、常军户绝者，株累族党，动以千计，知府况钟言于朝，又常州民诉受抑为军者七百有奇，故特敕巡抚侍郎周忱清理。
现代文：在此之前，苏、常的军户没有后代的，株连牵累同族亲戚，往往成千上万，知府况锺进言于朝廷，再加上常州平民诉讼被冤枉充任军户的七百多人，因此特地下令巡抚侍郎周忱清理。
English: Prior to this, the military households of the Soviet Union and Changzhou did not have descendants, but the joint-stock companies involved relatives of the same ethnicity, often tens of thousands, and the prefectural government made suggestions to the imperial court. In addition, there were more than seven hundred military households that were wrongfully appointed to serve as military households in Changzhou's civil litigation. Therefore, the governor ordered the steward to thoroughly clean up.

古文：正统初，令勾军家丁尽者，除籍；逃军死亡及事故者，或家本军籍，而偶同姓名，里胥挟雠妄报冒解，或已解而赴部声冤者，皆与豁免。
现代文：正统初年，下令被勾征为军的家庭而没有丁口的，免除军籍；逃避军役死亡以及因事死亡的，或家人本已编入军籍，而偶有同姓名，里长心怀私仇乱报假冒解送，或已经解送而奔赴部裹伸冤的，都予以免除。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, families that were ordered to be conscripted into the army, but did not have a son, were exempted from military registration; those who died while evading military service and those who died as a result of an accident, or whose family members had already been enrolled into the military, and occasionally had the same name, and whose elders had a personal vendetta and falsely reported their deportation, or those who had already been deported and rushed to the ministry to seek redress, were exempted.

古文：定例，补伍皆发极边，而南北人互易。
现代文：制定规则，补充的军士都发配偏速的边境，而南方和北方的人互相对调。
English: To set the rules, the additional sergeants are all assigned to the fast-track border, while the southerners and northerners are matched against each other.

古文：大学士杨士奇谓风土异宜，濒于夭折，请从所宜发戍。
现代文：大学士杨士奇说风俗习惯不相宜，士兵濒临于夭折，请依据适宜的环境调发戍边。
English: Yang Shiqi, a university scholar, said that customs and habits are not appropriate, soldiers are on the verge of premature death, please send the ruffles according to the appropriate environment.

古文：署兵部侍郎邝埜以为紊祖制，寝之。
现代文：代理兵部侍郎废茎认为紊乱祖宗的制度，废弃不采用。
English: The acting secretary of the Ministry of Military Affairs, Jiro Wastegi, believes that the system of disordered ancestors should be abandoned and not adopted.

古文：成化二年，山西巡抚李侃复请补近卫，始议行。
现代文：成化二年，山西巡抚李侃又奏请补充士兵到邻近的卫所，纔拟议施行。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, the Shanxi governor Li Kan also requested additional soldiers to the nearby sanatorium, and the proposal was implemented.

古文：十一年，命御史十一人分道清军，以十分为率，及三分者最，不及者殿。
现代文：十一年命令御史十一人分道清理军队，以十分为标准，达到三分的为上等，逵不到的为末等。
English: In the eleventh year, he ordered the Eleven Historians to separate and clean up the army, with a standard of ten points, three points as the highest level, and the lowest level as the lowest level.

古文：时以罪谪者逃故，亦勾其家丁。
现代文：当时因犯罪流放的人逃亡的原因，也勾取他们的家人。
English: The families of those exiled for crimes committed at the time were also consulted on the reasons for their escape.

古文：御史江昂谓非 罚弗及嗣 之义，乃禁之。
现代文：御史江昂认为不符合 责罚不连及子嗣 的法度，于是予以禁止。
English: Goshi Jiangang thought that it was not in accordance with the law of punishment and disinheritance, so it was banned.

古文：嘉靖初，捕亡令愈苛，有株累数十家，勾摄经数十年者，丁口已尽，犹移覆纷纭不已。
现代文：嘉靖初年，捕捉逃亡之令更加严厉，有株连牵累数十家，捉拿历经数十年的，人口已绝，还移文回复纷纭不止。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the order to catch fugitives was more severe. Dozens of companies were involved, and after decades of arrests, the population had died out. There were also more and more requests for remittances.

古文：兵部尚书胡世宁请 屡经清报者免勾。
现代文：兵部尚书胡世宁奏请 多次经过清理上报的免于勾取。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs has requested that those who have been cleared and reported multiple times be exempted from collection.

古文：又避役之人必缓急难倚，急改编原籍。
现代文：又逃避兵役的人有紧急情况，必然难以依靠，应迅速更改原来的军籍。
English: In addition, evaders of military service who are in an emergency situation must be difficult to rely on and should quickly change their original military registration.

古文：卫所有缺伍，则另选舍余及犯罪者充补。
现代文：卫所有缺少的军士，就另选军营舍人、余丁以及犯罪的人充任补足。
English: In order to fill the vacancies of the military officers, the camp porters, the surplus soldiers and the criminals will be selected.

古文：犯重发边卫者，责卖家产，阖房迁发，使绝顾念。
现代文：犯有再次发配边疆卫所的，责令变卖家产，全家流放发配，使他们断绝颅念。
English: Those who are found guilty of allocating resources to the frontier defense station again will be ordered to sell their family property, and the whole family will be exiled to distribute resources, so that they will be cut off from the memory of the war.

古文：庶卫卒皆土著，而逃亡益鲜 。
现代文：希望卫所士兵都是当地人，逃亡的人就更少 。
English: It is hoped that the soldiers of the National Guard will be local people, and fewer people will escape.

古文：帝是其言。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对。
English: The emperor thought this was a very good idea.

古文：其后，用主事王学益议，制勾单，立法详善。
现代文：这以后，采用主事王学益的建议，制定勾军名单，建立的法规详细完善。
English: After that, the recommendation of the director Wang Xueyi was adopted to formulate the list of hook troops, and the established regulations were improved in detail.

古文：久之，停差清军御史，宽管解逃军及军赴卫违限之科。
现代文：很久以后，停止差遣清军御史，放宽管制押解逃兵以及赶赴卫所的士兵超过期限的刑律。
English: After a long time, the dispatch of the Qing army's military history was stopped, and the supervision of the escorting of deserters and the soldiers who rushed to the infirmary exceeded the time limit were relaxed.

古文：清军官日玩愒，文卷磨灭，议者复请申饬。
现代文：清理军队的官员贪图安逸旷废时日，公文案卷丢失，建言的官员又奏请进行整顿。
English: The officials in charge of cleaning up the military wasted their time in the pursuit of comfort. Official documents and files were lost, and the officials who made suggestions were asked to carry out rectification.

古文：万历三年，给事中徐贞明言： 勾军东南，资装出于户丁，解送出于里递，每军不下百金。
现代文：万历三年，给事中徐贞明进言： 在东南地区勾取征集军人，由户丁来备办旅费行装，由乡里执役的人来押送，每一个士兵的花费不少于一百两银子。
English: After three years of hard work, Xu Zhenming gave the following advice in the middle of the matter: In the southeastern region, recruit soldiers, prepare travel expenses by households, and escort them by people in the countryside. Each soldier costs no less than one hundred and two silver coins.

古文：大困东南之民，究无补于军政。
现代文：极大地困扰了东南地区的百姓，最终无补于军政。
English: This greatly troubled the people in the southeastern region and ultimately did not help the military government.

古文：宜视班匠例，免其解补，而重征班银，以资召募，使东南永无勾补之扰，而西北之行伍亦充。 
现代文：应该依照轮流服役工匠的规则，免除解送补助，而加重征收轮班银，来资助招募，使东南地区永无勾取征集补充军役的烦扰，而西北地区的军队乜得到了充实。 
English: It is necessary to exempt the transportation subsidy according to the rule of rotating service craftsmen, and increase the collection of shift money to fund the recruitment, so that the southeast region will never have the trouble of recruiting and collecting supplementary military service, and the army reserve in the northwest region has been enriched.

古文：郧阳巡抚王世贞因言有四便：应勾之户，乐于就近，不图避匿，便一；各安水土，不至困绝，便二；近则不逃，逃亦易追，便三；解户不至破家，便四。
现代文：鄙阳巡抚王世贞接着进言这样做有四种好处：受勾取征集的人，乐于就近，不图谋逃避隐匿，这是好处之一；各自安于水土，不至艰难困顿，这是好处之二；就近便不逃亡，逃亡了也容易追捕，这是好处之三；押解的人不至于耗尽家产，这是好处之四。
English: Wang Shizhen, the governor of Danyang, went on to say that there were four advantages to doing so: one of the advantages was that the people who had been recruited were happy to be approached and did not try to escape from hiding; the second advantage was that they were at ease with each other and would not be in difficulty; the third advantage was that they would not flee when they were close and would be easy to pursue if they fled; and the fourth advantage was that the people who escorted them would not exhaust their family property.

古文：而兵部卒格贞明议，不行。
现代文：而兵部最终拒绝徐贞明的提议，没有施行。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs ultimately rejected Xu Zhenming's proposal and did not implement it.

古文：后十三年，南京兵部尚书郭应聘复请各就近地，南北改编。
现代文：后十三年，南京兵部尚书郭应聘又请求让百姓各自到近地服军役，南北改编。
English: Thirteen years later, the Nanjing Military Department Shang Shuxu Guo applied for employment and requested that the people should each go to the vicinity to serve in the military, and the north and south were reorganized.

古文：又言 应勾之军，南直隶至六万六千余，株连至二三十万人，请自天顺以前竟与释免 。
现代文：又说 应该勾征的士兵，直直盏达到六万六千多人，株连到二三十万人，奏请从天顺以前的完全予以释放免役 。
English: He also said that the soldiers who should be conscripted, ranging from more than 66,000 to 2.3 million, should be completely released from service before Tianshun.

古文：报可，远近皆悦。
现代文：批覆依准，逮近之人都满意。
English: The approval is in accordance with the approval, and the people close to the arrest are satisfied.

古文：然改编令下，求改者相继。
现代文：然而改编的命令下达后，请求更改的相继不断。
English: However, after the order for the adaptation was issued, the requests for changes continued.

古文：明年，兵部言 什伍渐耗，边镇军人且希图脱伍 。
现代文：第二年，兵部进言 军队渐渐不足，边境要塞的军人甚至企圃脱离军队 。
English: The next year, the Ministry of Military Affairs suggested that the army was gradually insufficient, and the soldiers of the border fortress even left the army.

古文：有旨复旧，而应聘之议复不行。
现代文：有圣旨恢复旧有制度，而堑尘盟的建议又不被施行。
English: There is a holy will to restore the old system, but the proposal of the League of Dirt and Dust is not implemented.

古文：凡军卫掌于职方，而勾清则武库主之。
现代文：全部卫所由职方掌管，而勾征清理军人又由武库主管。
English: All the sanitariums are under the control of the staff, and the recruitment of clean-up soldiers is in charge of the arsenal.

古文：有所勾摄，自卫所开报，先核乡贯居止，内府给批，下有司提本军，谓之跟捕；提家丁，谓之勾捕。
现代文：有所捉取，由卫所开列呈报，先核实籍贯住址，内府给予批覆，下发有关部门提取本军，称为跟捕；提取家中丁口，称为拘捕。
English: If there is a capture, the health center will present a report, first verify the address of the origin, the inner government will give approval, and the relevant departments will be issued to extract the army, which is called follow-up arrest; extracting the mouth of the family, which is called arrest.

古文：间有恩恤开伍者。
现代文：间或有体恤而赦免士兵的。
English: Sometimes soldiers are pardoned out of compassion.

古文：洪武二十三年，令应补军役生员，遣归卒业。
现代文：洪武二十三年，传令应该补充军役的秀才，遣送回家完成学业。
English: In the 23rd year of Hongwu's reign, it was decreed that military service talents should be supplemented and sent home to complete their studies.

古文：宣德四年，上虞人李志道充楚雄卫军，死，有孙宗皋宜继。
现代文：宣德四年，上虞人李志道充任楚雄卫军，死去，有孙子李宗皋本应接替。
English: In the fourth year of Xuande, Li Zhidao, a Shangyu man, served as a guard for Chu Xiong and died. His grandson, Li Zongyao, was supposed to succeed him.

古文：时已中乡试，尚书张本言于帝，得免。
现代文：当时已乡试中举，兵部尚书张本向皇帝进言，得到赦免。
English: At that time, he was already in the middle of the village test, and the military department still wrote Zhang Ben to the emperor, and was pardoned.

古文：如此者绝少。
现代文：像这样的极少。
English: It's very rare to see something like this.

古文：户有军籍，必仕至兵部尚书始得除。
现代文：家有军籍，必须官至兵部尚书纔能免除。
English: If a family member has a military record, he or she must be exempted from military service.

古文：军士应起解者，皆佥妻；有津给军装、解军行粮、军丁口粮之费。
现代文：士兵应该押送上路的，都要妻妾随同前往；有补贴给予的军装、解送行军加发的粮饷、兵士口粮的费用。
English: If soldiers are to be escorted on the road, their wives and concubines must accompany them; there are expenses for subsidized military uniforms, additional rations for marching, and soldiers' rations.

古文：其册单编造皆有恒式。
现代文：它的册单的编排制造都有固定的格式。
English: It has a fixed format for the arrangement and production of brochures.

古文：初定户口、收军、勾清三册。
现代文：最韧制定户口、收军、勾清三个册子。
English: The most tenacious set up a household registration, collected troops, and checked off three brochures.

古文：嘉靖三十一年，又编四册，曰军贯，曰兜底，曰类卫、类姓。
现代文：嘉靖三十一年又编排成四册，叫军贯、兜底、类卫、类姓。
English: In the 31st year of Jiajing, it was also compiled into four volumes, called the army, the bottom, the guards, and the surnames.

古文：其勾军另给军单。
现代文：那些勾取征集的军士另外编排军单。
English: The recruiting sergeants draw up a separate list.

古文：盖终明世，于军籍最严。
现代文：大概整个明朝，对于军籍最为严格。
English: The entire Ming Dynasty was probably the most strict about military ranks.

古文：然弊政渐丛，而扰民日甚。
现代文：然而弊政渐渐增多，而烦扰百姓日渐厉害。
English: However, the maladministration is gradually increasing, and the annoyance of the people is getting worse.

古文：明太祖起布衣，策群力，取天下。
现代文：明太祖在平民百姓中崛起，依靠众人出谋划策，夺取天下。
English: Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty rose among the common people and relied on everyone to come up with plans and strategies to conquer the world.

古文：即位后，屡命元勋宿将分道练兵，而其制未定。
现代文：即位后，多次命令元勋老将分道练兵，而这种制度没有确定。
English: After he ascended the throne, he repeatedly ordered the war veterans to train separately, but this system has not been established.

古文：洪武六年，命中书省、大都督府、御史台、六部议教练军士律： 骑卒必善驰射枪刀，步兵必善弓弩枪。
现代文：洪武六年，命令中书省、大都督府、御史台、六部商讨教练军队的律令： 骑兵必须善于骑马射箭使用枪刀，步兵必须善于使用弓箭长枪。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, he ordered the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, the General Post Office, and the Six Departments of the People's Liberation Army to discuss the regulations for training the army: cavalry must be good at riding horses, archery, and using swords, and infantry must be good at using bows and arrows.

古文：射以十二矢之半，远可到，近可中为程。
现代文：射箭在十二箭之中有一半，远处能够射到，近处能够射中为标准。
English: Archery accounts for half of the twelve arrows. The standard is to be able to hit at a distance and at close range.

古文：远可到，将弁百六十步、军士百二十步；近可中，五十步。
现代文：远处能射到，将官要求一百六十步、士兵要求一百二十步；近处能够射中，要求五十步。
English: To be able to hit at a distance, a general officer requires one hundred and sixty paces, a soldier one hundred and twenty paces; to be able to hit at close range, fifty paces are required.

古文：彀弩以十二矢之五，远可到，蹶张八十步，划车一百五十步；近可中，蹶张四十步，划车六十步。
现代文：发射弩箭十二箭之申有五支，逮处能够射到，用脚踏强弩要求八十步，划车要求一百五十步；近处能够射中，用脚踏强弩要求四十步，划车要求六十步。
English: There are five arrows among the twelve arrows for firing crossbow arrows. The archer can hit the target at the highest point, and can hit the target at 80 paces by stepping on the crossbow and 150 paces by rowing. The archer can hit the target at the closest point, and can hit the target at 40 paces by stepping on the crossbow and 60 paces by rowing.

古文：枪必进退熟习。
现代文：使用长枪必须进退熟习。
English: The use of long guns must be practiced.

古文：在京卫所，以五千人为率，取五之一，指挥以下官领赴御前验试，馀以次番试。
现代文：在京城的卫所，以五千人为标准，抽取其中的五分之一，由指挥以下的官员带领到皇帝面前检验测试，其余的依次轮番测试。
English: At the Imperial Palace Guard Station, one-fifth of the 5,000 men were selected and brought to the emperor by officials below the rank of commander for inspection and testing, while the rest were tested in turn.

古文：在外都司卫所，每卫五千人，取五之一，千户以下官领赴京验试。余以次番试。
现代文：在外地的都司卫所，每卫五千人，抽取其中五分之一，由千户以下的官员带领赶赴京城检骏测试，其余的依次轮流测试。
English: In each of the five thousand guards in the field, one-fifth of them will be selected, and officials from less than one thousand households will lead them to rush to the capital for inspection and testing, and the rest will be tested in turn.

古文：军士步骑皆善，将领各以其能受赏，否则罚。
现代文：步兵骑兵都好，将领各自以他们的才能受到赏赐，否则给以处罚。
English: The infantry and cavalry are all good, and the generals are each rewarded for their talents, or else punished.

古文：军士给钱六百为道里费。
现代文：士兵发给钱六百作为路费。
English: The soldiers gave him six hundred rupees for travelling expenses.

古文：将领自指挥使以下，所统军士三分至六分不中者，次第夺俸；七分以上，次第降官至为军止。
现代文：将领从指挥使以下，所统率的士兵十分之三到十分之六不合格的，依次罚扣俸禄；十分之七以上不合格的，依次降官到士兵为止。
English: If three-tenths to six-tenths of the soldiers under the command of generals and commanders are not qualified, their salaries will be deducted in order; if more than seven-tenths are not qualified, they will be demoted to soldiers in order.

古文：都指挥军士四分以上不中，夺俸一年；六分以上罢职。 
现代文：都指挥军士十分之四以上不合格，罚扣俸禄一年；十分之六以上不合格的罢职。 
English: If more than 4 out of 10 command sergeants are unqualified, they will be fined one year's salary; if more than 6 out of 10 are unqualified, they will be dismissed.

古文：后十六年，令天下卫所善射者十选一，于农隙分番赴京较阅，以优劣为千百户赏罚，边军本卫较射。
现代文：以后十六年，传令全国卫所善于射箭的，选择十分之一，在农闲时分批轮流赶赴京城比赛，按优劣给以千户、百户来赏罚，边境士兵在本卫内比赛射箭。
English: Sixteen years later, the National Guard was ordered to select one-tenth of those who were good at archery, and in their spare time, they would take turns to go to Beijing to compete. According to their strengths and weaknesses, one thousand households and one hundred households would be rewarded and punished, and the border soldiers would compete in archery within the Guard.

古文：二十年，命卫士习射于午门丹墀。
现代文：洪武二十年，传令军卫的兵士在午门的赤色地面上练习射箭。
English: In the 20th year of Hongwu, the soldiers of the military guard were ordered to practice archery on the red ground of the noon gate.

古文：明年复令： 天下卫所马步军士，各分十班，将弁以荫叙久次升者统之，冬月至京阅试。
现代文：第二年又下令说： 全国卫所的骑兵步兵，各自分成十班，将官由受先世荫庇叙录为官居官时间长而升迁的人统率，冬天到京城检查考核。
English: The next year, he also ordered: The cavalry and infantry of the National Guard, each in ten classes, will be promoted from the ranks of those who have been protected by the previous generations to the ranks of those who have been promoted for a long time, and will go to Beijing in winter for inspection and assessment.

古文：指挥、千百户，年深惯战及屯田者免。
现代文：指挥、千户、百户，年资深、善于征战以及屯田的免除考核。
English: Command, thousand households, hundred households, senior, good at war, and exempted from the assessment of tonden.

古文：仍先下操练法，俾遵行。
现代文：仍然先发布操练的法令，要求遵照执行。
English: Still, the exercise decree was issued first, requiring compliance.

古文：不如法及不娴习者，罚。 
现代文：不按法规以及不熟习的，予以处罚。 
English: Those who do not follow the regulations and those who are not familiar with them will be punished.

古文：明年，诏五军府： 比试军士分三等赏钞，又各给钞三锭为路费，不中者亦给之。
现代文：第二年诏令五军府： 比赛测试的军士分三等赏给钱钞，又分别给予钱钞三锭作为路费，不合格的也发给他们。
English: In the second year, the five military authorities issued a decree: the sergeants who passed the competition test were awarded money in three classes, and they were also given money three times as travel expenses, and those who did not qualify were also issued to them.

古文：明年再试不如式，军移戍云南，官谪从征，总小旗降为军。
现代文：第二年再比试不合要求的，军士迁移去戍守云南，将官贬降从征，总小旗降职为军士。
English: In the second year, when the competitive examination did not meet the requirements, the sergeant was transferred to Yunnan, the general officer was demoted to conscript, and the general petty officer was demoted to sergeant.

古文：武臣子弟袭职，试骑步射不中程，令还卫署事，与半俸，二年后仍试如故者，亦降为军。 
现代文：武臣子弟承袭职位，测试骑马射箭和徒步射箭不合要求，命令回归卫署事，发给一半的俸禄，二年以后测诚仍和原来一样的，也降为军士。 
English: The son of a samurai retainer inherited the post, tested horse-riding archery and archery on foot, which were not up to the requirements, ordered to return to the Guards Department, and was given half of the salary. Two years later, he was still the same as before, and was also reduced to a sergeant.

古文：文皇即位，五驾北征，六师尝自较阅。
现代文：文皇即位，五次御驾北征，天子的军队曾自己考核检阅。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, led the Northern Expedition five times, and personally inspected the army of the Son of Heaven.

古文：又尝敕秦、晋、周、肃诸王，各选护卫军五千，命官督赴真定操练，陕西、甘肃、宁夏、大同、辽东诸守将，及中都留守、河南等都司，徐、宿等卫，遣将统马步军分驻真定、德州操练，侯赴京阅视。
现代文：又曾敕令秦、晋、周、肃诸位亲王，各挑选护卫军五千人，命令由官员监督赶赴真定操练，陕西、甘肃、宁夏、大同、辽东各位守将，以及中都留守、河南等都司，徐、宿等卫，派遣将领统率骑兵、步兵分别驻扎真定、德州操练，等候赶赴京城检阅考核。
English: He also ordered the princes of Qin, Jin, Zhou, and Su to each select an escort force of five thousand, and ordered the officials to supervise and rush to Shingding for the drill. The generals of Shaanxi, Gansu, Ningxia, Datong, and Liaodong, as well as the generals of Zhongdu, Henan, and other capitals, and the generals of Xu and Yucu, sent their generals and cavalry and infantry to be stationed in Shingding and Dezhou respectively for the drill, waiting to rush to Beijing for review and examination.

古文：景泰初，立十团营。
现代文：景泰初年，建立十团营。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, ten regimental camps were established.

古文：给事中邓林进《轩辕图》，即古八阵法也，因用以教军。
现代文：给事中邓林进献《轩辕图》，就是古代的八阵法，于是用以教习军士。
English: During the presentation, Deng Lin presented "Xuan Yu Tu," which is the ancient eight-line method, and it was used to teach the sergeants.

古文：成化间，增团营为十二，命月二次会操，起仲春十五日，止仲夏十五日，秋、冬亦如之。
现代文：成化年间，增设团营为十二个，下令每月二次会合操练，从仲春十五日起，到仲夏十五日止，秋天、冬天也这样。
English: During the Chenghua era, twelve additional regimental camps were established, and a second meeting every month was ordered for training, from the fifteenth day of spring to the fifteenth day of summer, as well as in autumn and winter.

古文：弘治九年，兵部尚书马文升申明洪、永操法，五日内，二日走阵下营，三日演武。
现代文：弘治九年，兵部尚书马文升申明了洪武、永乐年间操练的办法，五天之内，两天演练阵法扎营下寨，三天演习武艺。
English: In the ninth year of the Hongzhi era, the head of the military department, Shangshu Ma Wensheng, affirmed the method of drill during the Hongwu and Yongle eras: within five days, two days of drill camp camp, and three days of drill martial arts.

古文：武宗好武勇，每令提督坐营官操练，又自执金鼓演四镇卒。
现代文：武宗喜好武功，常常命令提督坐营官操练，并且亲自掌管金鼓演练四镇士卒。
English: Emperor Wuzong was fond of martial arts. He often ordered the admiral to exercise as a camp officer, and personally supervised the golden drum exercise of the four townsmen.

古文：然大要以恣驰骋、供嬉戏，非有实也。
现代文：但操练主要是任意驰骋、供给嬉戏，没有实际作用。
English: However, the drill is mainly arbitrary gallop, supply play, and has no practical effect.

古文：嘉靖六年定，下营布阵，止用三叠阵及四门方营。
现代文：嘉靖六年规定，扎营下寨布列阵法，只用三迭阵以及四门方营。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, only the three-tiered camp and the four-door square camp were used.

古文：又令每营选枪刀箭牌铳手各一二人为教师，转相教习。
现代文：又下令每营选取枪刀箭牌镜手各一二人为教师，辗转互相教练学习。
English: He also ordered each battalion to select one or two gun, knife and arrow brand mirrors as teachers, and to learn from each other's coaches.

古文：及更营制，分兵三十枝，设将三十员，各统三千人训练，择精锐者名选锋，厚其校艺之赏。
现代文：等到更改营制，把军队分为三十支，设立将三十员，各自统率三千人训练，选择精锐的称作选锋，加大比试武艺的赏赐。
English: Wait until they change the battalion system, divide the army into thirty branches, set up thirty members, each of whom will lead three thousand people in training, select the elite called the front line, and increase the reward of martial arts.

古文：总督大臣一月会操者四，余日营将分练。
现代文：总督大臣每月会合操练四天，其余时间营将分别操练。
English: The governors-general will meet monthly for four days of drills, while the rest of the time the battalions will practice separately.

古文：协理大臣及巡视给事、御史随意入一营，校阅赏罚，因以择选锋。
现代文：协理大臣以及巡视给事、御史随意进入一营，考核检阅予以赏罚，以此挑选选锋。
English: The Vice-Minister of Justice, as well as the Inspector-General and the Minister of History, enter a battalion at will, and are rewarded or punished for their examination and inspection, in order to select the vanguard.

古文：帝又置内营于内教场，练诸内使。
现代文：皇帝又在内教场建立内营，操练各宦官。
English: The emperor also set up an inner camp in the inner training ground to train the eunuchs.

古文：隆庆初，命各营将领以教练军士分数多寡为黜陟。
现代文：隆庆初年，下令各营将领按教练军士分数的多少来升官降职。
English: In the first year of Longqing, he ordered the generals of each battalion to promote and demote according to the number of coach sergeant points.

古文：全营教练者加都督佥事，以次减；全不教练者降祖职一级，革任回卫。
现代文：全营教习训练的加官都督愈事，按次序递减；完全不教习训练的贬降承袭的官职一级，革职返回卫所。
English: The addition of the governor of the whole battalion to the teaching and training department will be reduced in order; the reduction of the inherited official position to the first level without teaching and training at all, and the resignation will be returned to the nursing station.

古文：三年内教练有成，操协大臣奖谕恩录；无功绩者议罚。
现代文：三年之内教练有功绩，操练协理大臣表彰加恩登录；没有功绩的议定给予处罚。
English: Within three years, if the coach has meritorious achievements, the assistant minister of drill will commend him; if there is no meritorious achievement, it is agreed to impose a penalty.

古文：规制虽立，然将卒率媮惰，操演徒为具文。
现代文：绦规制度虽然设立，但将领军士都偷安怠惰，操练演习祇成为徒具形式而无实际作用。
English: Although the discipline system has been established, the generals and sergeants are lazy and lazy, and the drills and exercises have only become an empty form and have no practical effect.

古文：先是，浙江参将戚继光以善教士闻，尝调士兵，制鸳鸯阵破倭。
现代文：在此之前，浙江参将戚继光以善于教习军士闻名，曾经调发地方兵，创制鸳鸯阵攻破倭寇。
English: Prior to this, the Zheijiang general Qi Jiguang was famous for being good at training sergeants. He had dispatched local soldiers to create a battle line to defeat the Japanese invaders.

古文：至是已官总兵。
现代文：到这时，已经官居总兵。
English: By this time, he had already been promoted to General of the Army.

古文：穆宗从给事中吴时来请，命继光练兵蓟门。
现代文：穆宗听从给事中昊时来的奏请，命令戚继光在蓟门练兵。
English: Mu Zong obeyed the request of Qi Jiguang, who came to him in the middle of the matter, and ordered Qi Jiguang to train soldiers in Qimen.

古文：蓟兵精整者数十年。
现代文：蓟门军队数十年都精良整饬。
English: The Chinese army has been well-organized for decades.

古文：继光尝著《练兵实纪》以训士。
现代文：戚继光曾经着《练兵实纪》来教导士兵。
English: Qi Jiguang used to teach soldiers with "Practical Military Training."

古文：一曰练伍，首骑，次步，次车，次辎重；先选伍，次较艺，总之以合营。
现代文：一是训练军伍，首先训练骑兵，其次是训练步兵，再次是训练车战，最后是训练辎重；先选挥军兵，再较量技艺，最后是掌握合营之法。
English: One is to train the army, first to train the cavalry, then to train the infantry, then to train the chariot battle, and finally to train the heavy; first to select the soldiers, then to measure the skills, and finally to master the method of joint camp.

古文：二曰练胆气，使明作止进退及上下统属、相友相助之义。
现代文：二是训练胆量勇气，使军士明白起止进返以及上下统属、相互友好相互帮助的大义。
English: The second is to train courage and courage, so that the sergeants understand the great justice of starting and stopping, as well as subordinate, mutual friendly and mutual help.

古文：三曰练耳目，使明号令。
现代文：三是训练耳目，使军士明了号令。
English: The third is to train the ears and eyes, so that the sergeant can understand the command.

古文：四曰练手足，使熟技艺。
现代文：四是训练手脚，使军士熟悉技艺。
English: The fourth is to train the hands and feet, so that the sergeant is familiar with the skills.

古文：五曰练营阵，详布阵起行、结营及交锋之正变。
现代文：五是训练军营布阵，详悉布阵行军、驻扎军营以及交战的常规和变易。
English: The fifth is the training of military camp deployment, with detailed knowledge of deployment march, military camp stationing, as well as the rules of engagement and changes.

古文：终之以练将。
现代文：最后是训练将领。
English: Finally, there is the training of generals.

古文：后多遵用之。
现代文：此后很多人都遵照实行逭一方法。
English: Since then, many people have been following the "one-child" policy.

古文：赏功之制，太祖时，大赏平定中原、征南诸将及云南、越州之功。
现代文：赏赐军功的制度，太塑时，重赏平定中原、征伐南方的各将领以及平定云直、越州的功绩。
English: The system of awarding military merit, when it is too plastic, rewards the generals who pacified the Central Plains and conquered the South, as well as the achievements of pacifying Yunchang and Yuezhou.

古文：赏格虽具，然不豫为令。
现代文：悬赏所定的等级虽然具备，然而不预先设令。
English: Although the level set by the reward is available, it is not pre-set.

古文：惟二十九年命沿海卫所指挥千百户获倭一船及贼者，升一级，赏银五十两，钞五十锭，军士水陆擒杀贼，赏银有差。
现代文：只有二十九年下令沿海卫所指挥、千户、百卢俘获倭寇一只船以及寇贼的，提升一级，赏白银五十两，钱五十锭；军士水陆擒杀寇贼，赏赐白银多少不同。
English: Only in 1929, he ordered the command of the Coast Guard Station, Chihou and Bailu to capture a wokou and a ship, and the bandits to be promoted to the first level, and awarded fifty-two silver and fifty money; the sergeants and sailors killed the bandits, and the reward of silver was somewhat different.

古文：永乐初，以将士久劳，命礼部依太祖升赏例，参酌行之。
现代文：永乐初年，因将士艮期劳苦，传令礼部依照太祖升赏的规定，参考实行。
English: In the first year of Yongle, due to the hardships of the warrior's retirement period, the ceremonial department was ordered to raise the reward in accordance with the provisions of the great-grandfather, and it was implemented with reference.

古文：乃分奇功、首功、次功三等，其赏之轻重次第，率临时取旨，亦不豫为令。
现代文：于是分奇功、首功、次功三等。这种赏赐的轻重次序，大都临时承接圣旨，也不预先设令。
English: As a result, there is a division into three grades of merit: miraculous merit, first merit, and second merit. The order of importance of this reward is mostly a temporary result of the Holy Will, and is not set in advance.

古文：十二年定： 凡交锋之际，突出敌背杀败贼众者，勇敢入阵斩将搴旗者，本队已胜、别队胜负未决、而能救援克敌者，受命能任事、出奇破贼成功者，皆为奇功。
现代文：十二年规定： 凡是交战之时，从敌人背后突然杀出杀败众贼的，勇敢闯入敌阵斩杀将领夺取敌旗的，本队已胜、别队胜负未决、而能救援击败敌人的，接受命令能称职、出奇兵攻破敌人成功的，都称为奇功。
English: The provisions of the 12th year: In the event of a battle, anyone who suddenly kills and defeats the thieves from behind the enemy's back, bravely breaks into the enemy's formation, kills the general and captures the enemy's flag, his team has won, the other team's victory or defeat is pending, but he can rescue and defeat the enemy, can accept orders competently, and the extraordinary soldiers succeed in defeating the enemy, are all called miraculous feats.

古文：齐力前进、首先败贼者，前队交锋未决、后队向前败贼者，皆为首功。
现代文：齐心合力前进、首先击败寇贼的，前队交战胜负未决、后队向前击败寇贼的，都称为首功。
English: Those who advance together and defeat the bandits first, the first team to defeat and defeat the undecided, and the second team to defeat the bandits are all called the first achievement.

古文：军行及营中擒获奸细者，亦准首功。
现代文：行军及在营中擒获奸细的，也与首功相当。
English: Marching and capturing spies in the camp are also equivalent to the first merit.

古文：余皆次功。 
现代文：其余都为次功。 
English: The rest are second-rate.

古文：又立功赏勘合，定四十字，曰： 神威精勇猛，强壮毅英雄。
现代文：又制定立功赏赐的验对符契，规定了四十个字，是： 神威精勇猛，强壮毅英雄。
English: In addition, the verification contract for the reward of meritorious service was formulated, and forty characters were specified, which were: the spirit of authority, the spirit of valor, and the strong hero.

古文：克胜兼超捷，奇功奋锐锋。
现代文：克胜兼超捷，奇功奋锐锋。
English: Victory and super-acceleration, miraculous feats and sharp-edged.

古文：智谋宣妙略，刚烈效忠诚。
现代文：智谋宣妙略，刚烈效忠诚。
English: Wisdom and wit, firmness and loyalty.

古文：果敢能安定，扬名显大勋。 
现代文：果敢能安定，扬名显大勋。 
English: If courage can be stable, it will be famous.

古文：编号用宝，贮内府印绶监。
现代文：编号盖上宝印，贮存在内府的印绶监。
English: The number is stamped with a treasure seal and stored at the post office's stamp office.

古文：当是时，稽功之法甚严。
现代文：当时，考察功绩的法令非常严格。
English: At that time, the law on the examination of merits was very strict.

古文：正统十四年，造赏功牌，有奇功、头功、齐力之分，以大臣主之。
现代文：正统十四年制造了赏功牌，有奇功、头功、齐力的分别，由大臣主管。
English: In the 14 years since the establishment of the orthodox system, medals have been made to reward meritorious service, with distinctions for extraordinary meritorious service, meritorious service to the head, and meritorious service to the whole, with the minister in charge.

古文：凡挺身突阵斩将夺旗者，与奇功牌。
现代文：凡是挺身突入敌阵靳杀将领夺取敌旗的，赐与奇功牌。
English: Anyone who rushes into the enemy's battle to kill the general and capture the enemy's flag will be given a miraculous achievement card.

古文：生擒瓦剌或斩首一级，与头功牌。
现代文：生擒瓦刺或斩杀敌人一名，赐与头功牌。
English: If a player impales or chops down an enemy, he or she will receive the first achievement card.

古文：虽无功而被伤者，与齐力牌。
现代文：虽然没有功绩而被杀伤的，赐与齐力牌。
English: Those who were killed or injured without meritorious service will be awarded the Qi Lijian.

古文：盖专为瓦剌入犯设也。
现代文：这是专为瓦剌入犯制定的。
English: It's designed specifically for break-and-enters.

古文：是后，将士功赏视立功之地，准例奏行。
现代文：这以后，将士功绩赏赐按照立功的处所，按此规定上奏执行。
English: After this, the awarding of merit to soldiers will be carried out in accordance with the place where the merit was made, and in accordance with this regulation.

古文：北边为上，东北边次之，西番及苗蛮又次之，内地反贼又次之。
现代文：北方边境为上等，东北方边境为次等，西番及苗蛮又次一等，内地反叛寇贼又次一等。
English: The northern border is the top grade, the northeastern border is the second grade, the West Bank and Miao Man are the second grade, and the inland rebel bandits are the second grade.

古文：世宗时，苦倭甚，故海上功比北边尤为最。
现代文：世宗时，深受倭寇之苦，所以海上的功绩比北方边境等次更高。
English: During his reign, he suffered greatly from the Wokou, so his achievements at sea were higher than those at the northern border.

古文：北边，自甘肃迤东，抵山海关。
现代文：北方边境，从甘肃往东，直到山海关。
English: The northern border, from Gansu eastward to Shanhaiguan.

古文：成化十四年例： 一人斩一级者，进一秩，至三秩止。
现代文：成化十四年规定： 一个人斩杀一名敌人，进升一级，到三级为止。
English: According to the regulations of the 14th year of Chenghua, a person who kills an enemy will be promoted to the third level.

古文：二人共斩者，为首进秩同。
现代文：二个人共同斩杀的，为首的人进升相同。
English: If two people kill together, the one who kills first gets the same promotion.

古文：壮男与实授，幼弱妇女与署职。
现代文：强壮男子赐与正式任命的额定官职，年幼体弱和妇女赐与代理官职。
English: Strong men were given official appointments, while the young, infirm and women were given acting posts.

古文：为从及四级以上，俱给赏。
现代文：附从以及斩杀四人以上，都给与赏赐。
English: A reward is given for following orders and killing four or more people.

古文：领军官部下五百人者，获五级，进一秩。
现代文：率领军队的官员部下五百人的，斩获敌人五名，进升一级。
English: The officer who leads the army and has 500 subordinates gains five enemies and is promoted to the next level.

古文：领千人者，倍之。 
现代文：率领一千人的，加倍进升。 
English: If you lead a thousand men, double your promotion.

古文：正德十年重定例： 独斩一级者升一秩。
现代文：正德十年重新制定规则： 独自斩杀一名敌人的进升一级。
English: Zhengde 10 years to re-establish the rules: single-handedly kill an enemy to advance to the next level.

古文：三人共者，首升署一秩，从给赏。
现代文：三人共同斩杀的，为首的提升署一秩，附从适量给予赏赐。
English: If three people are killed together, the leader will be promoted to the first rank of the promotion department, and the appropriate reward will be given.

古文：四五六人共者，首给赏，从量赏。
现代文：四五六人共同斩杀的，为首的给予赏赐，附徒的酌情奖赏。
English: If four or five hundred and six people are killed together, the leader will be given a reward, and the followers will be rewarded at their discretion.

古文：二人共斩一幼敌者，首视三人例，从量赏。
现代文：二个人共同斩杀一名幼敌的，为首的按照三人共同斩杀敌人的规定给予奖赏，附从的酌情奖赏。
English: If two persons jointly slaughter a child enemy, the leader shall be rewarded in accordance with the provisions for three persons jointly slaughtering an enemy, and the followers shall be rewarded at their discretion.

古文：不愿升者，每实授一秩，赏银五十两，署职二十两。 
现代文：不愿意进升的，每正式授职一级赏赐白银五十两，署职每一级赏赐白银二十两。 
English: Those who do not want to be promoted will be awarded 50 taels of silver for each level of official appointment, and 20 taels of silver for each level of deputy.

古文：嘉靖十五年定，领军官千、把总，加至三秩止，都指挥以上，止升署职二级，余加赏。
现代文：嘉靖十五年规定，领军军官千总、把总，加官三级而止，都指挥以上，祇提升署职两级，其余功绩予以赏赐。
English: According to the regulations of the 15th year of Jiajing, the leading officers of the general staff, the commander-in-chief, and the additional officers of the third level are all above the command level, and only the promotion of the post two levels, and the remaining merits will be rewarded.

古文：东北边，初定三级当北边之一。
现代文：东北方边境，最初规定斩杀三人与北方边境斩杀一人奖赏相当。
English: On the northeastern border, it was initially stipulated that the reward for killing three people was equivalent to the reward for killing one person on the northern border.

古文：万历中，改与北边同。
现代文：万历年间，改为与北方边境相同。
English: During the Wanli era, it was changed to be the same as the northern border.

古文：番寇苗蛮，亦三级进一秩，实授署职，视北边。
现代文：对番寇苗蛮作战，也是斩杀三人进升一级，正式任命额定的官职和署职，与北方边境相同。
English: In the fierce battle against the Miao bandits, three people were promoted to the first level and officially appointed to additional official positions and agencies, which is the same as the northern border.

古文：十级以上并不及数者给赏。
现代文：斩杀十人以上和没有达到数量的给予赏赐。
English: Rewards are given for killing more than ten people and for not reaching that number.

古文：万历三年，令陕西番寇功，视成化中例，军官千总领五百人者，部下斩三十级，领千人者六十级，把总领五百人者十级，领千人者三十级，俱进一秩，至三秩止。
现代文：万历三年，传令陕西平定番寇的功绩，比照成化年间的规定办，军官千总率领五百人的，部下斩杀敌人三十名，率领一千人的，部下斩杀敌人六十名，把总率领五百人的，部下斩杀敌人十名，率领一千人的，部下斩杀敌人三十名，都进升一级，到三级为止。
English: In the third year of Wanli, Shaanxi was ordered to determine the merits of vanquishing the pangolins, according to the provisions of the Chenghua years, the officers led 500 people, the subordinates killed 30 enemies, led 1,000 people, the subordinates killed 60 enemies, the general led 500 people, the subordinates killed 10 enemies, led 1,000 people, the subordinates killed 30 enemies, all advanced to the first level, up to the third level.

古文：南方蛮贼，宣德九年例，三级以上及斩获首贼，俱升一秩，余加赏。
现代文：南方的蛮贼，宣德九年规定，斩杀敌人三名以上以及斩杀捕获蛮贼首领，都进升一级，其余功绩加倍赏赐。
English: Southern bandits, Xuande nine-year regulations, killing more than three enemies and killing and capturing bandit leaders, are promoted to the first level, and the remaining merits are rewarded twice.

古文：正德十六年，定军官部下斩百级者升署一秩，三百级者实授一秩，四百级者升一秩，余功加赏。
现代文：正德十六年规定军官部下斩杀敌人一百名的升署职一级，斩杀三百名的提升实授官职一级，斩杀四百名的进升一级，其余的功绩加倍赏赐。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, it was stipulated that officers and subordinates should kill one hundred enemies to be promoted to the first grade, kill three hundred to be promoted to the first grade, kill four hundred to be promoted to the first grade, and double the reward for the remaining merits.

古文：倭贼，嘉靖三十五年定： 斩倭首贼一级，升实授三秩，不愿者赏银百五十两。
现代文：对倭贼作战，嘉靖三十五年规定： 斩杀倭贼头目一名，提升实授官职进升三级，不愿意升职的赏赐自银一百五十两。
English: In the 35th year of the Jiajing Emperor's reign, the following regulations were issued for the war against the Japanese invaders: kill at least one Japanese invader, be promoted to the third level of official posts, and be rewarded with 1502 silver coins if you did not want to be promoted.

古文：从贼一级，授一秩。
现代文：斩杀随从的寇贼一名，授予一级。
English: Kill a follower of the bandits, awarded the first level.

古文：汉人胁从一级，署一秩。
现代文：斩杀胁从的汉人一名，授予署职一级。
English: A Chinese man who killed a subordinate was awarded the first level of deputy.

古文：阵亡者，本军及子实授一秩。
现代文：阵亡的，军人本身以及儿子提升实授官职一级。
English: For those who died in battle, the soldiers themselves and their sons will be promoted to the first level of official posts.

古文：海洋遇贼有功，均以奇功论。 
现代文：在海上遭遇寇贼建立功绩，都以奇功行赏。 
English: Those who have encountered pirates at sea and have made achievements are rewarded with miraculous feats.

古文：万历十二年更定，视旧例少变，以贼众及船之多寡，为功赏之差。
现代文：万历十二年更改规定，比照旧例稍有改变，按贼寇及船只的多少，确立功绩赏赐的区别。
English: According to the regulations to be amended in the 12th year of Wanli, there will be a slight change compared to the old regulations, establishing the distinction of merit awards according to the number of thieves and ships.

古文：复定海洋征战，无论倭寇、海贼，勘是奇功，与世袭。
现代文：又规定海洋征战，不论倭寇、海贼，勘定焉奇功，赐予世代承袭。
English: It also stipulates that the ocean campaign, regardless of wako and sea pirates, will be given to the next generation on account of their extraordinary feats.

古文：云南夷贼，擒斩功次视倭功。
现代文：对云南夷贼作战，擒获斩杀功绩的大小、官阶的升迁比照对倭寇作战的功绩行赏。
English: For the war against the Yunnan barbarians, the merits of the war against the wokou were rewarded according to the size of the merit of killing and the promotion of the official rank.

古文：内地反贼，成化十四年例，六级升一秩，至三秩止，幼男妇女及十九级以上与不及数者给赏。
现代文：对内地反贼作战，成化十四年规定，斩杀叛贼六名进升一级，到三级为止，杀死年幼男子、妇女及斩杀十九名叛贼以上与数量没有达到数目要求的给予赏赐。
English: For anti-traitor operations on the mainland, according to the provisions of the 14th CPC National Congress, the killing of six traitors was promoted to the first level and up to the third level, and the killing of young men and women and the killing of more than 19 traitors and the number did not meet the number requirements were rewarded.

古文：正德七年，定流贼例： 名贼一级，授一秩，世袭，为从者给赏。
现代文：正德七年，制定抗击流贼昀规定： 斩杀有名的流贼一名，授官一级，世代承袭，附从的给予赏赐。
English: In the seventh year of Zhengde, the regulations for resisting the bandits were formulated: killing a famous bandit, awarding a first-class officer, inheriting generations, and giving rewards to subordinates.

古文：次贼一级，署一秩。
现代文：斩杀低一级的流贼，授署职一级。
English: Kill the low-level rogue, award the first-level post.

古文：从贼三级及阵亡者，俱授一秩，世袭。
现代文：斩杀协从流贼三名及阵亡的，都授官一级，世代承袭。
English: Those who killed the three thieves and those who died in battle were all awarded first-class posts, which were passed down from generation to generation.

古文：重伤回营死者，署一秩。 
现代文：受了重伤回到军营死去的，授署职一级。 
English: Those who were seriously injured and died after returning to the barracks were awarded the rank of first grade.

古文：又以割耳多寡论功，最多者至升二秩，世袭。
现代文：又按割取敌人耳朵的多少评定功绩，最多的高达进升二级，世代承袭。
English: In addition, according to how many ears of the enemy were cut off, the merit was evaluated, and the most was up to the second level of promotion, which was inherited by generations.

古文：先是，五年宁夏功，后嘉靖元年江西功，俱视流贼例。
现代文：在此之前，成化五年，评定宁夏功绩，后来嘉靖元年评定江西功绩，都比照对流贼作战的规定行赏。
English: Prior to this, in the fifth year of Chenghua, the evaluation of Ningxia's merits, and later the evaluation of Jiangxi's merits in the first year of Jiajing, were all rewarded in accordance with the provisions of the anti-pirate war.

古文：崇祯中，购闯、献以万金，爵封侯，余贼有差，以贼势重，变常格也。
现代文：崇祯年间，悬赏征求阎王、张献忠赏金一万两，授爵封侯，其余的流贼悬赏各有差等，因为流贼势力强大，改变平常的赏格。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, rewards were offered for soliciting the king of hell, Zhang Xianzhong received a reward of ten thousand taels, and was given a peerage and made a marquess, while the rest of the bandits were offered different rewards, because the bandits were powerful and changed the usual rewards.

古文：其俘获人畜、器械，成化例，俱给所获者。
现代文：那些俘获的人畜、器械，成化年间规定，全部赏给所俘获的人。
English: The captured people, animals, and equipment will all be rewarded to the captors according to the stipulation of the year they were captured.

古文：其论功升秩，成化十四年例，军士升一秩为小旗，舍人升一秩给冠带，以上类推。
现代文：评定功绩进升官阶，成化十四年规定，军士进升一级为小旗，舍人进升一级赐予官职，以此类推。
English: It is stipulated that promotion to higher ranks shall be based on merit evaluation, and promotion to higher ranks shall be made after 14 years of service; promotion to higher ranks for non-commissioned officers shall be a small banner, promotion to higher ranks for officers shall be a small banner, and promotion to higher ranks for officers shall be a small banner, and so on.

古文：嘉靖四十三年定，都督等官无阶可升者，所应袭男荫冠带。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年规定，都督等官没有官阶可进升的，应该袭任的儿子蒙荫授官职。
English: In the 43rd year of Jiajing, it was stipulated that if there was no official rank for the governor and other officials to be promoted, the son of the incumbent should succeed to the official post.

古文：万历十三年定，都指挥使升秩者，不授都督，赏银五十两，升俸者半之。
现代文：万历十三年规定，都指挥使进升官阶的，不授予都督之职，赏赐白银五十雨，增加俸禄的赏赐白银一半即二十五两。
English: According to the regulations of the 13th year of the Wanli era, those who commanded and promoted officials were not awarded the post of governor, but were awarded 50 rain of silver, and those who increased their salary were awarded half of the silver, that is, 252.

古文：其有司民兵，隆庆六年定，视军人例。
现代文：那些有关部门乡兵，隆庆六年规定，比照军人的规定。
English: The relevant departments of the village soldiers, the Longqing six-year regulations, in accordance with the provisions of the military.

古文：自洪、宣以后，赏格皆以斩级多少豫定。
现代文：自从洪武、宣德以后，奖赏的标准都由斩杀首级的多少来决定。
English: Since Hongwu and Xuande, the standard of reward has been determined by the number of first-degree murders.

古文：条例渐多，幸弊日启。
现代文：条例逐渐增多，幸臣的弊端逐渐开启。
English: The number of regulations gradually increased, and the drawbacks of Yuko-Mori gradually emerged.

古文：正德间，副使胡世宁言： 两军格斗，手眼瞬息，不得差池，何暇割级？
现代文：正德年间，副使胡世宁进言： 两军格斗，眼疾手快瞬息之间，不可以有差错，哪有时间割取敌人首级。
English: During the Zhengde era, deputy envoy Hu Shining said: The two armies are fighting, and there must be no mistakes between the eyes and hands, and there is no time to cut off the enemy's head.

古文：其获级者或杀已降，或杀良民，或偶得单行之贼、被掠逃出之人，非真功也。
现代文：那些获取的首级右的是杀掉已经降服的人，有的是杀掉平民百姓，有的是偶然遇到单独行动的贼寇、被抓获逃出的人，不是真正的功绩。
English: Those who got the first rank right were those who killed those who had already surrendered, some killed civilians, some accidentally encountered bandits who acted alone, and those who were captured and escaped. It was not a real achievement.

古文：宜选强明刚正之员，为纪功官，痛惩此弊。 
现代文：应该选取强干精明刚正的官员，任记述功勋的官员，严厉惩治这一弊端。 
English: Strong, shrewd and upright officials should be selected, and officials who have made outstanding contributions should be appointed to severely punish this defect.

古文：时弗能行。
现代文：当时没能实行。
English: It was not implemented at the time.

古文：故事，镇守官奏带，例止五名。
现代文：旧例，镇守官上奏兼带叙功，按规定只有五名。
English: In the past, only five town guards were appointed to the post of shosho and given the title of shogun according to regulations.

古文：后领兵官所奏有至三四百名者，不在斩馘之列，别立名目，曰运送神枪，曰赍执旗牌，曰冲锋破敌，曰三次当先，曰军前效劳。
现代文：后来领兵官上奏，有的达到三四百人，不在斩取首级的规定范围，就另立名目，叫做运送神枪、携带旗牌、冲锋破敌、多次冲在最前面、战场效劳。
English: Later, the commanding officer announced, some reaching three or four hundred people, not in the prescribed range of decapitation, they set up a separate name, called transporting a sacred weapon, carrying a flag, storming the enemy, repeatedly rushing to the forefront, battlefield service.

古文：冒滥之弊，至斯极已。
现代文：遇滥冒充的弊端，到这时达到了极点。
English: At that time, the abuse of counterfeiting reached its peak.

古文：古所谓炮，皆以机发石。
现代文：古代所说的炮，都用机械发射石块。
English: In ancient times, the so-called cannons were used to fire stones mechanically.

古文：元初得西域炮，攻金蔡州城，始用火。
现代文：元朝初年得到了西域制造的炮，进攻金国的蔡州城，开始用火器。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, they obtained cannons made in the Western Regions, attacked Caizhou City in Jin Province, and began to use firearms.

古文：然造法不传，后亦罕用。
现代文：但是制造的方法没有留传下来，后世也很少使用。
English: However, the manufacturing method was not passed down, and it was rarely used in later generations.

古文：至明成祖平交阯，得神机枪炮法，特置神机营肄习。
现代文：到明成祖平定交陛时，得到了神机枪炮法，特地设置神机营练习。
English: At the time of Ming Chengzu's subjugation of Emperor Jiaozuo, he obtained the method of machine gun, and specially set up a machine gun camp to practice.

古文：制用生、熟赤铜相间，其用铁者，建铁柔为最，西铁次之。
现代文：用生、熟赤铜相混制做，那些使用铁的，建地铁最为柔韧，西铁差一点。
English: Made of a mixture of raw and cooked red copper, those that use iron are the most flexible, and the West Railway is almost as good.

古文：大小不等，大者发用车，次及小者用架、用桩、用托。
现代文：炮大小不等，大的用车发射，次一点及小的用架、用椿、用托来发射。
English: The cannons vary in size, with the larger ones being fired from a vehicle, while the smaller ones are fired from a frame, a camel and a pedestal.

古文：大利于守，小利于战。随宜而用，为行军要器。
现代文：大的利于防守，小的利于征战，根据适宜而选用，是军队的重要武器。
English: Large is conducive to defense, small is conducive to war, according to the appropriate selection, is an important weapon of the army.

古文：永乐十年，诏自开平至怀来、宣府、万全、兴和诸山顶，皆置五炮架。
现代文：永乐十年，下诏从开平到怀来、宣府、万全、兴和各山顶，都设置五个炮架。
English: In the 10th year of Yongle, five gun mounts were set up at the top of each mountain from Kaiping to Huailai, Xuanfu, Wanzhen, Xinghe.

古文：二十年，从张辅请，增置于山西大同、天城、阳和、朔州等卫以御敌。
现代文：二十年，听从张辅的奏请，增加在山西大同、天城、阳和、朔州等卫设置炮来抵御敌兵。
English: For twenty years, he listened to Zhang Fu's request and increased the number of artillery in Shanxi Datong, Tiancheng, Yanghe, and Shuozhou to defend against enemy soldiers.

古文：然利器不可示人，朝廷亦慎惜之。
现代文：然而利器不可以让外人看到，朝廷也慎重爱惜它。
English: However, the sharp weapon was not allowed to be seen by outsiders, and the imperial court carefully preserved it.

古文：宣德五年，敕宣府总兵官谭广： 神铳，国家所重，在边墩堡，量给以壮军威，勿轻给。 
现代文：宣德五年，敕令宣府总兵官谭广说： 神镜，是国家所看重的武器，处在边境上的报警台和堡垒，酌量给予来壮大军威，切莫轻易给予。 
English: In the fifth year of Xuande, Tan Guang, the chief military officer of Xuanwu, said: The mirror is a weapon valued by the country. It is an alarm station and a fortress on the border. It should be given in moderation to strengthen military prestige. It should not be given easily.

古文：正统六年，边将黄真、杨洪立神铳局于宣府独石。
现代文：正统六年，边境将领黄真、杨洪在宣府独石设立神镜局。
English: Six years after the establishment of orthodoxy, border generals Huang Zhen and Yang Hong set up the Divine Mirror Bureau in Xuanfu.

古文：帝以火器外造，恐传习漏泄，敕止之。
现代文：皇帝认为火器在外地制造，恐怕传授学习方法泄漏，敕令停止。
English: The emperor thought that the firearm was made in a foreign country, and feared that the teaching and learning method would be leaked, so he issued an order to stop.

古文：正统末，边备日亟，御史杨善请铸两头铜铳。
现代文：正统末年，边境武备日渐紧急，御史杨善奏请铸造两头铜锐。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, border military preparedness was becoming increasingly urgent, and Emperor Shi Yang Shanso requested the casting of two bronze spearheads.

古文：景泰元年，巡关侍郎江潮言： 真定藏都督平安火伞，上用铁枪头，环以响铃，置火药筒三，发之可溃敌马。
现代文：景泰元年，巡关侍郎江潮进言： 真定藏都督平安火伞，上面装有铁枪头，用响铃环绕，放置火药三筒发射，可以击溃敌人骑兵。
English: In the first year of King Taejo's reign, the patrol sergeant, Jiangchao, said: "Mingding hid the duke's safe fire umbrella, which was equipped with an iron gun head, surrounded with a bell, and fired with three barrels of gunpowder, which could defeat the enemy cavalry."

古文：应州民师翱制铳，有机，顷刻三发，及三百步外。 
现代文：应州百姓师翱制造镜，配有发射的装置，顷刻之间连续三次发射，能射到三百步之外。 
English: It is equipped with a launching device, which can launch three times in succession in an instant, and can shoot up to three hundred paces away.

古文：俱试验之。
现代文：都进行了试骏。
English: All of them have been tested.

古文：天顺八年，延绥参将房能言麓川破贼，用九龙筒，一线然则九箭齐发，请颁式各边。
现代文：天顺八年，延绥参将房能进言麓川击溃寇贼，使用了九龙筒，一线点燃九箭齐发，奏请颁布样式于各边镇。
English: In the 8th year of Tianshun, Yan Xuan sent Fang Neng into the Yanlu River to defeat the bandits. He used a nine-dragon tube, ignited nine arrows at once, and requested that the style be promulgated in all border towns.

古文：至嘉靖八年，始从右都御史汪鋐言，造佛郎机炮，谓之大将军，发诸边镇。
现代文：到了嘉靖八年，开始听从右都御史汪铉的进言，制造佛郎机炮，叫做大将军，分发给各边境地区的要塞重镇。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he began to listen to the advice of Wang Xi, the governor of the right capital, to manufacture a machine gun, called the general, and distribute it to the fortress towns in the border areas.

古文：佛郎机者，国名也。
现代文：佛郎机，是国名。
English: "Furanchi" is the name of the country.

古文：正德末，其国舶至广东。
现代文：正德末年，那个国家的船舶来到广东。
English: In the last years of Zhengde, ships from that country came to Guangdong.

古文：白沙巡检何儒得其制，以铜为之。长五六尺，大者重千余斤，小者百五十斤，巨腹长颈，腹有修孔。
现代文：白沙巡检何儒得到了它的制造方法，用铜来制造，长五六尺，大的重一千多斤，小的重一百五十斤，腹部巨大颈部很长，腹部有长孔。
English: Baisha patrol inspector He Ru got its manufacturing method. It is made of copper. It is five or six feet long, weighs more than a thousand pounds for the big one, and 150 pounds for the small one. The huge neck of the abdomen is long, and there are long holes in the abdomen.

古文：以子铳五枚，贮药置腹中，发及百余丈，最利水战。驾以蜈蚣船，所击辄糜碎。
现代文：用五枚子镜，装上火药放在炮腹部内，发射路程达到一百多丈，最适宜水战，用蜈蚣船载着，击中的敌船就立即粉碎了。
English: With five sub-mirrors, loaded with gunpowder and placed in the belly of the cannon, the firing range reaches more than a hundred meters, most suitable for water combat, carried by a barge, the enemy ship hit immediately shattered.

古文：二十五年，总督军务翁万达奏所造火器。
现代文：嘉靖二十五年，总督军务翁万达献上所造的火器。
English: In the 25th year of Jiajing, the military governor Weng Wanda presented the firearm he had made.

古文：兵部试之，言： 三出连珠、百出先锋、铁捧雷飞，俱便用。
现代文：兵部对它们做了测试，说： 三出连珠、百出先锋、铁捧雷飞，都便于使用。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs tested them and said: "Three out of a row of beads, a hundred out of a spearhead, and a thunderbolt are all easy to use."

古文：母子火兽、布地雷炮，止可夜劫营。 
现代文：母子火兽、布地雷炮，只可夜间劫营使用。 
English: Mother and child fire beast, cloth mine cannon, can only be used for nighttime camp robbery.

古文：御史张铎亦进十眼铜炮，大弹发及七百步，小弹百步；四眼铁枪，弹四百步。
现代文：御史张铎也献上十眼铜炮，大弹发射射程达到七百步，小弹发射射程达到一百步；四眼铁枪，枪弹射程达四百步。
English: Grand Historian Zhang Ye also presented a ten-eyed bronze cannon, with a large projectile firing range of seven hundred paces and a small projectile firing range of one hundred paces; a four-eyed iron gun, with a projectile firing range of four hundred paces.

古文：诏工部造。
现代文：诏令工部进行制造。
English: He ordered the engineering department to manufacture it.

古文：万历中，通判华光大奏其父所制神异火器，命下兵部。
现代文：万历年间，通判华光大献上他父亲制造的神异火器，传令交付兵部。
English: Over the years, Tongzhan Hua Guangda presented the magical firearm made by his father, and was ordered to deliver it to the military department.

古文：其后，大西洋船至，复得巨炮，曰红夷。
现代文：这之后，大西洋的船来到，又得到巨炮，叫红夷大炮。
English: After that, ships from the Atlantic came and got huge cannons, called Hongyi cannons.

古文：长二丈余，重者至三千斤，能洞裂石城，震数十里。
现代文：长二丈多，重的达到三千斤，能够穿透击裂石城，震动敷十里。
English: It is more than twice as long and weighs up to three thousand pounds. It can penetrate through the cracked stone city and vibrate ten miles.

古文：天启中，锡以大将军号，遣官祀之。
现代文：天启年间，赐以大将军号，派遣官员祭祀它。
English: In the year of the apocalypse, it was given the title of great general, and officials were dispatched to worship it.

古文：崇祯时，大学士徐光启请令西洋人制造，发各镇。
现代文：崇祯时，大学士徐光启请求让西洋人制造，分发各边镇。
English: At the time of Chongzhen, Xu Guangqi, a university scholar, requested that the Westerners manufacture and distribute it to all the border towns.

古文：然将帅多不得人，城守不固，有委而去之者。
现代文：然而将帅多不得贤能的人，守城不坚固，有委弃大炮而逃跑的。
English: However, many of the generals were not capable, the defense of the city was not strong, and there were those who abandoned the cannon and fled.

古文：及流寇犯阙，三大营兵不战而溃，枪炮皆为贼有，反用以攻城。
现代文：到流寇进攻京城时，三大营兵没有交战就溃败了，枪炮都被流贼获得，反用来攻城。
English: When the pirates attacked the capital, the three battalions were defeated without a fight. The guns were all obtained by the pirates and used to attack the city.

古文：城上亦发炮击贼。
现代文：城上也发炮击贼。
English: Artillery was also fired on the city to repel the thieves.

古文：时中官已多异志，皆空器贮药，取声震而已。
现代文：当时宦官已经多有叛离之心，都用空的弹装药，求取炮声震响罢了。
English: At that time, many eunuchs already had the heart of a traitor, and they all loaded empty cartridges to get the sound of the cannon.

古文：明置兵仗、军器二局，分造火器。
现代文：名朝设置了兵仗、军器二局，分别制造火器。
English: The Ming and Qing dynasties set up two bureaus, one for military affairs and the other for military equipment, to manufacture firearms separately.

古文：号将军者自大至五。
现代文：封号为将军的从大将军到五将军。
English: Those with the title of general have gone from the rank of grand general to five generals.

古文：又有夺门将军大小二样、神机炮、襄阳炮、盏口炮、碗口炮、旋风炮、流星炮、虎尾炮、石榴炮、龙虎炮、毒火飞炮、连珠佛郎机炮、信炮、神炮、炮里炮、十眼铜炮、三出连珠炮、百出先锋炮、铁捧雷飞炮、火兽布地雷炮、碗口铜铁铳、手把铜铁铳、神铳、斩马铳、一窝锋神机箭铳、大中小佛郎机铜铳、佛郎机铁铳、木厢铜铳、筋缴桦皮铁铳、无敌手铳、鸟嘴铳、七眼铜铳、千里铳、四眼铁枪、各号双头铁枪、夹把铁手枪、快枪以及火车、火伞、九龙筒之属，凡数十种。
现代文：又有夺门将军大小二样、神机炮、襄阳炮、盏口炮、碗口炮、旋风炮、流星炮、虎尾炮、石榴抱、龙虎炮、毒火飞炮、连珠佛郎机炮、信炮、神炮、炮里炮、十眼铜炮、三出连珠炮、百出先锋炮、铁捧雷飞炮、火兽布地雷炮、碗口钢铁镜、手把铜铁镜、神镜、斩马镜、一窝锋神机箭镜、大中小佛郎机铜镜、佛郎机铁镜、木厢铜镜、筋缴桦皮铁镜、无敌手镜、鸟嘴镜、七眼铜镜、千里镜、四眼铁枪、各号双头铁枪、夹把铁手枪、快枪，以及有火攻装备的战车、有火攻装备的飞伞、九龙筒之类，总共有数十种。
English: In addition, there are two types of large and small "capturing general," "sacred machine cannon," "Xiangyang cannon," "candlestick cannon," "bowl mouth cannon," "cyclone cannon," "meteor cannon," "tiger tail cannon," "pomegranate cradle," "dragon and tiger cannon," "poison fire flying cannon," "jade flute machine cannon," "letter cannon," "sacred cannon," "cannon inside the cannon," "ten-eye copper cannon," "three-out-of-a-row-of-pearl cannon," "one

古文：正德、嘉靖间造最多。
现代文：正德、嘉靖年间制造最多。
English: Zhengde and Jiajing produced the most.

古文：又各边自造，自正统十四年四川始。
现代文：又各边镇自己制造，正统十四年从四川开始。
English: In addition, each border town made their own, starting from Sichuan in the 14th year of orthodoxy.

古文：其他刀牌、弓箭、枪弩、狼筅、蒺藜、甲胄、战袄，在内有兵仗、军器、针工、鞍辔诸局，属内库，掌于中官，在外有盔甲厂，属兵部，掌以郎官。
现代文：其它刀牌、弓箭、枪弩、狼筅、蒺藜、甲冑、战袄，在宫内有兵仗、军器、针工、鞍辔等局，隶属内库，由宦官控制；在外朝有盔甲厂、隶属兵部，由郎官掌管。
English: Other swords, bows and arrows, crossbows, wolf whistles, halberds, armor and battle helmets, in the palace there are military, military equipment, needlework, saddlery and other bureaus, belonging to the inner treasury, controlled by eunuchs; in the outer court there is an armor factory, belonging to the military department, controlled by the steward.

古文：京省诸司卫所，又俱有杂造局。
现代文：京省各司卫所，又都有杂造局。
English: All departments of the Beijing Provincial Health Bureau also have handicraft bureaus.

古文：军资器械名目繁夥，不具载，惟火器前代所少，故特详焉。
现代文：军资器械名目繁多，不详细记载，只有火器前代少有，所以特别详细记载。
English: There are many names of military equipment, but they are not recorded in detail. Only firearms of the previous generation are rare, so they are recorded in detail.

古文：中原用车战，而东南利舟楫，二者于兵事为最要。
现代文：中原运用车战，而东南利于船战，这两种作战方式对战争来说最为重要。
English: The Central Plains used chariot warfare, while the Southeast favored ship warfare. These two modes of warfare were the most important for the war.

古文：自骑兵起，车制渐废。
现代文：自从骑兵兴起后，制造战车的技术逐渐废弃了。
English: Since the rise of the cavalry, the technology of making chariots has been gradually abandoned.

古文：洪武五年，造独辕车，北平、山东千辆，山西、河南八百辆。
现代文：洪武五年，制造独辕车，北平、山东有一千辆，山西、河南有八百辆。
English: In the five years of Hongwu, there were one thousand cars made in Beiping and Shandong, and eight hundred in Shanxi and Henan.

古文：永乐八年北征，用武刚车三万辆，皆惟以供馈运。
现代文：永乐八年北征，使用了三万辆武刚车，都只用来运输粮食。
English: During the Northern Expedition in Yongle in the eighth year, 30,000 armed vehicles were used, all of which were only used to transport grain.

古文：至正统十二年，始从总兵官朱冕议，用火车备战。
现代文：到正统十二年开始听从总兵官朱冕的建议，用有火攻装备的战车备战。
English: By the 12th year of orthodoxy, he began to listen to the advice of the general officer Zhu Guanyin and prepare for battle with chariots equipped with fire attack equipment.

古文：自是言车战者相继。
现代文：从此以后建言车战的接连不断。
English: Since then, there has been a succession of car battles.

古文：十四年，给事中李侃请以驘车千辆，铁索联络，骑卒处中，每车翼以刀牌手五人，贼犯阵，刀牌手击之，贼退则开索纵骑。
现代文：十四年，给事中李侃把一千辆骡车，用铁索连接，骑兵处在车中，每辆车配备五名刀牌手，贼寇侵犯军阵，刀牌手攻击他们，贼寇撤退就解开铁索放出骑兵。
English: In the fourteenth year, in the middle of the matter, Li Kan took a thousand carts and connected them with iron ropes. The cavalry was in the car, each car was equipped with five swordsmen. The bandits invaded the army, the swordsmen attacked them, and when the bandits retreated, they untied the iron ropes and released the cavalry.

古文：帝命造成祭而后用。
现代文：皇帝传令造成祭祀后使用。
English: It was used after the riot caused by the emperor's edict.

古文：下车式于边境，用七马驾。
现代文：把兵车的样式下达到边境，用七匹马来拉。
English: He drove it to the border in the shape of a chariot, pulled by seven horses.

古文：宁夏多沟壑，总兵官张泰请用独马小车，时以为便。
现代文：宁夏多沟壑，总兵官张泰奏请使用单匹马拉的小车，当时以为很便捷。
English: In the many ravines of Ningxia, the general officer Zhang Taisiao asked to use a one-horse carriage. At that time, he thought it was very convenient.

古文：箭工周四章言，神机枪一发难继，请以车载枪二十，箭六百，车首置五枪架，一人推，二人扶，一人执爨。
现代文：箭工周四章进言，神机枪一次发射之后难以连续发射，请求用战车装载二十支神机枪，六百支箭，车头安置五座枪架，一个人推，二个人扶，一个人点火。
English: On Thursday, the archer said that it was difficult to continuously fire the machine gun after a single launch, and requested that the chariot be loaded with 20 machine guns, 600 arrows, five gun racks placed at the front of the vehicle, one person to push, two people to support, and one person to ignite.

古文：试可，乃造。
现代文：试验可用，然后制造。
English: The test is available and then manufactured.

古文：景泰元年，定襄伯郭登请仿古制为偏箱车。
现代文：景泰元年，定襄伯郭登奏请仿照古代的形制制造偏箱车。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Taejo, Dingxiang Bo Guodengso ordered the manufacture of a side-box car modeled on the ancient system.

古文：辕长丈三尺，阔九尺，高七尺五寸，箱用薄板，置铳。
现代文：车辕长一丈三尺，车宽九尺，高七尺五寸，车箱使用薄板，设置镜。
English: The car frame is 3 feet long, 9 feet wide, and 7 feet 5 inches high. The car box uses a thin plate and a mirror.

古文：出则左右相连，前后相接，钩环牵互。
现代文：拉出时左右相连，前后相接，回环牵引。
English: When pulling out, the left and right are connected, the front and back are connected, and the loop is pulled.

古文：车载衣粮、器械并鹿角二。
现代文：用车装载衣粮、器械和二个鹿角。
English: The truck was loaded with food and clothing, equipment and two antlers.

古文：屯处，十五步外设为藩。
现代文：驻扎的地方，十五步外设成帷帐。
English: The place where they were stationed was surrounded by curtains for fifteen paces.

古文：每车枪炮、弓弩、刀牌甲士共十人，无事轮番推挽。
现代文：每辆车有枪炮、弓弩、刀牌甲士共十人，没有战事时轮流运输。
English: Each vehicle has guns, bows and arrows, and a total of ten swordsmen, and they are transported in rotation when there is no war.

古文：外以长车二十，载大小将军铳，每方五辆，转输樵采，皆在围中。
现代文：外面用长的战车二十辆，装载大小将军镜，每一方五辆车，转运物资采集柴薪都在围中。
English: Outside, twenty long-wheeled chariots, loaded with mirrors of all sizes, five on each side, transporting materials and collecting firewood are all in the encirclement.

古文：又以四轮车一，列五色旗，视敌指挥。
现代文：又用四轮车一辆，排列着五色旗，针对敌情指挥。
English: He also used a four-wheeled vehicle, lined with five-color flags, to command the enemy situation.

古文：廷议此可以守，难于攻战，命登酌行。
现代文：朝廷议论它可以防守，难以进攻，传令郭登择善而行。
English: The imperial court argued that it was possible to defend, but difficult to attack, and ordered Guo Deng to choose wisely.

古文：兰州守备李进请造独轮小车，上施皮屋，前用木板，画兽面，凿口，置碗口铳四，枪四，神机箭十四，树旗一。
现代文：兰州守备李进奏请制造独轮小车，上面蒙罩皮制帐幕，前面使用木板，画上兽面，凿孔，安装碗口镜四个，枪四支，神机箭十四支，插上旗一面。
English: Lanzhou garrison Li Jinso, please make a unicycle car, cover the top with a tent made of leather, use a wooden board in front, draw a beast face, drill a hole, install four bowl mirrors, four guns, fourteen magic arrows, and insert a flag.

古文：行为阵，止为营。
现代文：行军时为军阵，停下来时为营寨。
English: When marching, it is a military line, and when stopping, it is a camp.

古文：二年，吏部郎中李贤请造战车，长丈五尺，高六尺四寸，四围箱板，穴孔置铳，上辟小窗，每车前后占地五步。
现代文：景泰二年，吏部郎中李贤奏请制造战车，长一丈五尺，高六尺四寸，四周用箱板围着，在穴孔里安装镜，上面开有小窗，每辆车前后占地五步。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Taejo, Li Xianso, a junior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, requested that a chariot be made. It was five feet long and six feet four inches high. It was surrounded by a box board. Mirrors were installed in the holes. There were small windows on the top. Each chariot took up five paces in front and behind.

古文：以千辆计，四方可十六里，刍粮、器械辎重咸取给焉。
现代文：以一千辆计算，方形排列可达到十六里，粮草、器械物资都随时取用以供需求。
English: Calculated with a thousand vehicles, the square arrangement can reach 16 miles, and grain, grass, equipment and materials can be used at any time to meet demand.

古文：帝令亟行。
现代文：皇帝下令立即施行。
English: The emperor ordered that it be put into effect immediately.

古文：成化二年，从郭登言，制军队小车。
现代文：成化二年听从郭登的进言，制造军队小车。
English: Chenghua has been following Guo Deng's advice for two years to manufacture army cars.

古文：每队六辆，辆九人，二人挽，七人番代，车前置牌画猊首，远望若城垒然。
现代文：每队六辆，每辆九人，二人拉，七人轮流替换，车前面配置牌昼上狮头，远处望去像城堡营垒的样子。
English: Six cars in each team, nine people in each car, two pulling, seven people taking turns to replace, the front of the car is equipped with a plate with a lion's head, looking like a castle camp in the distance.

古文：八年，宁都诸生何京上御敌车式，上施铁网，网穴发枪弩，行则敛之。
现代文：成化八年，宁都生员何京进献抵御敌人的战车的式样，上面覆盖铁网，在网内发射枪弩，行军时就把它们收起来。
English: In the eighth year of Chenghua, He Jing, a native of Ningdu, presented a model of a chariot to resist the enemy. The top was covered with iron mesh, and gun barrels were fired in the mesh, and they were put away when marching.

古文：五十车为一队，用士三百七十五人。
现代文：五十辆战车焉一队，配备士卒三百七十五人。
English: Fifty chariots were in one column, with three hundred and seventy-five soldiers.

古文：十二年，左都御史李宾请造偏箱车，与鹿角参用。
现代文：成化十二年，左都御史李宾奏请制造偏箱车，与鹿角共同使用。
English: In the twelfth year of Chenghua, the Left Capital Governor Li Binxiao requested the manufacture of a side box car, which was used together with the deer horn.

古文：兵部尚书项忠请验阅，以登高涉险不便，已之。
现代文：兵部尚书项忠奏请察看试验，因为登高涉险不便利，停止不用。
English: Please observe the test, because it is not convenient to climb high and take risks, and stop using it.

古文：十三年，从甘肃总兵官王玺奏，造雷火车，中立枢轴，旋转发炮。
现代文：成化十三年，听从甘肃总兵官王玺的奏请，制造雷火车，中间立有枢轴，旋转发炮。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, he listened to the request of the Gansu general officer Wang Xuan and made a thunder train, with a pivot in the middle and a rotating cannon.

古文：二十年，宣大总督余子俊以车五百辆为一军，每辆卒十人，车隙补以鹿角。
现代文：成化二十年，宣、大总督余子俊把战车五百辆作为一军，每辆士兵十人，车与车的缝隙用鹿角填补。
English: Twenty years later, Emperor Xuanzong and Governor Yu Zijun made 500 chariots into an army, with ten soldiers per chariot, and filled the gaps between the chariots with antlers.

古文：既成，而迟重不可用，时人谓之鹧鸪军。
现代文：做成以后，笨重迟缓不可以使用，当时的人称它为鹧鸪军。
English: After it was made, it was too heavy and slow to use, and people at the time called it the "squadron."

古文：弘治十五年，陕西总制秦纮请用只轮车，名曰全胜，长丈四尺，上下共六人，可冲敌阵。
现代文：弘治十五年，陕西总制秦舷奏请使用只轮车，称为全胜，长一丈四尺，上下共六人，可以冲击敌阵。
English: In the 15th year of Hongzhi, the Shaanxi general system of Qin pannier music, please use only a wheeled cart, known as a total victory, four feet long, a total of six people up and down, can impact the enemy.

古文：十六年，闲住知府范吉献先锋霹雳车。
现代文：弘治十六年，被免去官职在家居住的知府范吉进献先锋霹雳车。
English: In the 16th year of the Hongzhi era, the prefectural governor Fan Ji, who was removed from his official position and lived at home, presented a pioneer car.

古文：嘉靖十一年，南京给事中王希文请仿郭固、韩琦之制，造车，前锐后方，上置七枪，为橹三层，各置九牛神弩，傍翼以卒。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，南京给事中王希文奏请仿效郭固、韩琦的制造方法，制造战车，前面尖后面方，上面配置七支枪，建造三层望楼，各配置九牛神弩，两侧用士兵保护。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the king of Nanjing, Xi Wenxiao, asked the people to follow the manufacturing methods of Guogu and Han Xuan, to make a chariot, with seven guns on the front and seven guns on the back, and to build a three-story watchtower, each with a sacred cow, protected by soldiers on both sides.

古文：行载甲兵，止为营阵。
现代文：行军时运载武器，驻军时作为营阵。
English: When marching, they carry weapons, and when stationed, they serve as a battalion.

古文：下边镇酌行。
现代文：下发边镇，择善而行。
English: Go down to the edge of town, choose the good and go.

古文：十五年，总制刘天和复言全胜车之便，而稍为损益，用四人推挽，所载火器、弓弩、刀牌以百五十斤为准。
现代文：嘉靖十五年，总制刘天和又进言说全胜车的便利，而稍作改进，用四人来推车，所装载的火器、弓弩、刀牌以一百五十斤为标准。
English: In the 15th year of Jiajing, Liu Tianhe, the head of the system, also suggested that it was convenient to win the car, and made a slight improvement, using four people to push the car, and the loaded firearms, bows and arrows, and knives were 150 pounds as standard.

古文：箱前画狻猊，旁列虎盾以护骑士。
现代文：车箱前面画狮子，旁边排放虎盾来护卫骑兵。
English: A lion is painted on the front of the box, with a tiger shield on the side to protect the cavalry.

古文：命从其制。
现代文：传令采取这种制造方式。
English: This is the manufacturing method that was ordered.

古文：四十三年，有司奏准，京营教演兵车，共四千辆，每辆步卒五人，神枪、夹靶枪各二。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年，有司上奏获准，京城营军训练兵车，共四千辆，每辆步兵五人，神枪、夹靶枪各二支。
English: In the 43rd year of Jiajing, with permission from the commander-in-chief, a total of 4,000 training vehicles for the Beijing battalion were assembled, with five infantrymen in each vehicle, and two guns each for sharpshooting and target practice.

古文：自正统以来，言车战者如此，然未尝一当敌。
现代文：从正统以来，进言车战的情况就是这样，然而从来没有用来抵御过敌人。
English: This has been the case in chariot warfare since the dawn of orthodoxy, yet it has never been used to fend off an enemy.

古文：至隆庆中，戚继光守蓟门，奏练兵车七营：以东西路副总兵及抚督标共四营，分驻建昌、遵化、石匣、密云；蓟、辽总兵二营，驻三屯；昌平总兵一营，驻昌平。
现代文：到隆庆年间，戚继光驻守蓟门，奏请练兵车七营：以东西路副总兵以及抚督标共四营，分别驻守建昌、遵化、石匣、密云；蓟、辽总兵二营，驻守三屯；昌平总兵一营，驻守昌平。
English: By the time of Longqing, Qi Jiguang was stationed at Shimen, and seven battalions of troop cars were requested for training: a total of four battalions, including the East-West Vice-Commander-in-Chief and the Commander-in-Chief, stationed at Jianchang, Zunhua, Shijiazhuang, and Miyun respectively; two battalions of general soldiers from Handan and Liao stationed at Sandun; and one battalion of general soldiers from Changping stationed at Changping.

古文：每营重车百五十有六，轻车加百，步兵四千，骑兵三千。
现代文：每营有辎重兵车一百五十六辆，轻便战车增加一百辆，步兵四千，骑兵三千。
English: Each battalion will have 156 armored personnel carriers, an additional 100 light combat vehicles, 4,000 infantry and 3,000 cavalry.

古文：十二路二千里间，车骑相兼，可御敌数万。
现代文：十二路二千里内，车兵骑兵相互呼应，能够抵御敌人数万。
English: Within two thousand miles of twelve roads, the cavalry and cavalry echo each other, and can resist tens of thousands of enemies.

古文：穆宗韪之，命给造费。
现代文：穆宗赞赏这种作战方式，传令给予制造费用。
English: Mu Zong appreciated this way of fighting and ordered to pay the manufacturing cost.

古文：然特以遏冲突，施火器，亦未尝以战也。
现代文：然而专门用来制止冲袭，发射火器，也从来没有用以交战。
English: However, it was specifically designed to stop assaults, fire weapons, and was never used in combat.

古文：是后，辽东巡抚魏学曾请设战车营，仿偏箱之制，上设佛郎机二，下置雷飞炮、快枪六，每车步卒二十五人。
现代文：这之后，辽东巡抚魏学曾奏请设立战车营，仿效偏箱的制造方式，上面设有佛郎机炮二眼，下面设置雷飞炮、快枪六眼，每辆车步兵二十五人。
English: After this, Wei Xuecheng, the governor of Liaodong, requested the establishment of a chariot battalion, imitating the manufacturing method of the side box, with two Flang machine guns on the top, and six lightning cannons and rapid guns on the bottom, with twenty-five infantrymen per vehicle.

古文：万历末，经略熊廷弼请造双轮战车，每车火炮二，翼以十卒，皆持火枪。
现代文：万历末年，经略熊廷弼奏请制造双轮战车，每车火炮二眼，配备十名兵士来保护，都持有火枪。
English: In the last year of the Wanli era, a request was made to build a two-wheeled chariot. Each chariot had two cannons and was equipped with ten soldiers for protection, all of whom held muskets.

古文：天启中，直隶巡按御史易应昌进户部主事曹履吉所制钢轮车、小冲车等式，以御敌，皆罕得其用。
现代文：天启年间，直隶巡按御史易应昌进献户部主事曹履吉所制造的钢轮车、小冲车等制造方式，用来抵御敌兵，都很少发挥它们的用处。
English: During the year of the Apocalypse, the steel wheeled cart and the small wheeled cart, which were used to resist the enemy soldiers, were manufactured by Cao Lujie, the head of the household department, and were rarely used for their usefulness.

古文：大约边地险阻，不利车战。
现代文：大致边境地势险要，不利于车战。
English: The general situation along the border is precarious and not conducive to vehicular combat.

古文：而舟楫之用，则东南所宜。
现代文：而战船的使用，则东南适宜。
English: The use of warships, however, is more appropriate in the southeast.

古文：舟之制，江海各异。
现代文：船的制造样式，江和海各不相同。
English: The manufacturing style of the ship, the river and the sea are different.

古文：太祖于新江口设船四百。
现代文：太祖在新江日设船四百艘。
English: The great-grandfather set up four hundred boats in Xinjiang.

古文：永乐初，命福建都司造海船百三十七，又命江、楚、两浙及镇江诸府卫造海风船。
现代文：永乐初年，传令福建都司制造海船一百三十七艘，又传令江、楚、两浙及镇江各府卫所制造海风船。
English: In the first year of Yongle, Fujian Prefecture was ordered to manufacture 137 seagoing ships, and the prefectural health stations of Jiangsu, Chu, Zhejiang and Zhenjiang were ordered to manufacture sea-breeze ships.

古文：成化初，济川卫杨渠献《桨舟图》，皆江舟也。
现代文：成化初年，济川卫杨渠进献《桨舟图》，都是江上航行的船。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, Jichuan Weiyang Canal presented "Paddle Boat Map," all of which were boats sailing on the river.

古文：海舟以舟山之乌槽为首。
现代文：海船以舟山的乌槽为首。
English: The ship headed for the Black Grotto in Zhoushan.

古文：福船耐风涛，且御火。
现代文：福船抗风浪，并且防火。
English: The boat is wind and wave resistant and fireproof.

古文：浙之十装标号软风、苍山，亦利追逐。
现代文：浙江的十装标号软风、苍山，也适宜追逐。
English: Zhejiang's ten-pack label soft wind, Cangshan, is also suitable for chasing.

古文：广东船，铁栗木为之，视福船尤巨而坚。
现代文：广东船，用铁栗木制成，比福船更大而且坚固。
English: The Guangdong ship, made of iron chestnut wood, is larger and stronger than the Fufu ship.

古文：其利用者二，可发佛郎机，可掷火球。
现代文：它适宜使用的有雨方面，可以发射佛郎机炮，可以投掷火球。
English: It is suitable for use in the rain, can fire flang machine guns, can throw fireballs.

古文：大福船亦然，能容百人。
现代文：大福船也这样，能容纳一百人。
English: The Daifuku boat is the same. It can hold a hundred people.

古文：底尖上阔，首昂尾高，柁楼三重，帆桅二，傍护以板，上设木女墙及炮床。
现代文：底下尖上面宽，船头高昂船尾高起，船的后舱室有三层，挂帆的桅杆二根，旁边用木板护卫，上面设有木制女墙以及炮架。
English: The bottom is wide at the top, the bow is high and the stern is high, the ship's aft cabin has three floors, two masts for sails, a wooden board guard next to it, and a wooden female wall and gun rack above.

古文：中为四层：最下实土石；次寝息所；次左右六门，中置水柜，扬帆炊爨皆在是，最上如露台，穴梯而登，傍设翼板，可凭以战。
现代文：船中部是四层：最低层装有土石；第二层是睡觉休息的地方；第三层左右有六个门，中间放有水柜，开船做饭都在这儿；最上面像高的台，挖穴为梯而登，旁边设有保护木板，可以凭靠着它来作战。
English: In the middle of the ship there are four levels: the lowest level is equipped with earth and stone; the second level is a place to sleep and rest; the third level has six doors around it, in the middle there is a water cabinet, and cooking is done here; the top is like a high table, with a hole dug for a ladder, and a protective wooden board next to it, which can be used to fight.

古文：矢石火器皆俯发，可顺风行。
现代文：箭石火器都卧伏发出，可以顺风而行。
English: Arrowstone firearms are issued lying down, and can travel with the wind.

古文：海苍视福船稍小。
现代文：海苍比福船稍小。
English: Haicheng is slightly smaller than Fufu.

古文：开浪船能容三五十人，头锐，四桨一橹，其行如飞，不拘风潮顺逆。
现代文：开浪船能容纳三五十人，头尖，四个船桨一个橹，运行如飞，不受风向海潮的限制。
English: The wave-riding boat can accommodate thirty to fifty people. It has a pointed head, four oars and one oar, and it runs like the wind, not limited by the wind direction and tide.

古文：艟〈舟乔〉船视海苍又小。
现代文：艟骄船比海苍又小。
English: The proud ship is smaller than the sea.

古文：苍山船首尾皆阔，帆橹并用。
现代文：苍山船首尾都宽，帆橹共同使用。
English: The Cangshan boat is wide at both ends, and the sails are used together.

古文：橹设船傍近后，每傍五枝，每枝五跳，跳二人，以板闸跳上，露首于外，其制上下三层，下实土石，上为战场，中寝处。
现代文：船橹设在船两侧靠近后部，每边五枝，每枝五跳，每跳二人，以木板闸于跳上，头露在外面。它的样式是上下三层，下层装载土石，上层是战场，中层是休息的地方。
English: The stern is located on both sides of the ship near the back, with five branches on each side, five jumps on each branch, and two people on each jump, with a wooden gate on the jump and the head exposed outside. Its style is three layers up and down, the lower layer is loaded with earth and stone, the upper layer is a battlefield, and the middle layer is a resting place.

古文：其张帆下椗，皆在上层。
现代文：扬帆下碇，都在上层。
English: When the sails are hoisted, everyone is on the upper deck.

古文：戚继光云： 倭舟甚小，一入里海，大福、海苍不能入，必用苍船逐之，冲敌便捷，温人谓之苍山铁也。 
现代文：戚继光说： 倭寇船很小，一旦进入里海，大福、海苍不能驶入，必须用苍船追赶它，攻击敌人便捷，温人称它为苍山铁。 
English: Qi Jiguang said: The wokou ship is very small. Once it enters the Caspian Sea, the Dafu and Hai Cang cannot sail in. It must be chased by the Cang Ship. It is convenient to attack the enemy. The Wen people call it the Cangshan Iron.

古文：沙、鹰二船，相胥成用。
现代文：沙、鹰二船，互相补充使用。
English: The two boats, the sand boat and the eagle boat, complement each other.

古文：沙船可接战，然无翼蔽。
现代文：沙船可以迎战，然而没有遮护。
English: Sandboats can engage, but they have no cover.

古文：鹰船两端锐，进退如飞。
现代文：鹰船两头尖，进退如飞。
English: The two ends of the eagle ship are pointed, advancing and retreating as if flying.

古文：傍钉大茅竹，竹间窗可发铳箭，窗内舷外隐人以荡桨。
现代文：船旁钉上大茅竹，竹间的窗可以发射镜箭，窗内船舷外面藏有人来划桨。
English: A large thatched bamboo was nailed to the side of the boat. The window between the bamboo can launch mirrors and arrows. Someone is hiding inside the window and outside the boat to paddle.

古文：先驾此入贼队，沙船随进，短兵接战，无不胜。
现代文：先驾驶这种船进入贼寇船队，沙船随后驶进，短兵交战，没有不胜利的。
English: The first to steer such a ship into the bandit fleet, the sand ship then sailed in, the skirmishers fought, and there was no failure.

古文：渔船至小，每舟三人，一执布帆，一执桨，一执鸟嘴铳。
现代文：渔船最小，每船三人，一人执布帆，一人执船桨，一人执鸟嘴镜。
English: The fishing boats are the smallest, with three people per boat, one with a cloth sail, one with a paddle, and one with a bird's beak.

古文：随波上下，可掩贼不备。
现代文：随波浪上下起伏，可乘贼寇不防备而袭击。
English: With the ups and downs of the waves, it can be attacked by bandits without preparation.

古文：网梭船，定海、临海、象山俱有之，形如梭。
现代文：网梭船，定海、临海、象山都有，形状像梭子。
English: Net shuttle boats, Dinghai, Linhai, Xiangshan, all have a shape like a shuttle.

古文：竹桅布帆，仅容二三人，遇风涛辄舁入山麓，可哨探。
现代文：竹制桅杆布制船帆，仅能容纳二三人，碰上风浪就抬入山麓，可以侦察。
English: Bamboo mast cloth sail, can only accommodate two or three people, when the wind and waves are carried into the foothills, can be scouted.

古文：蜈蚣船，象形也，能驾佛朗机铳，底尖面阔，两傍楫数十，行如飞。
现代文：蜈蚣船，像蜈蚣的形状，能载佛郎机镜，船底尖船面宽，两旁有船楫数十枝，运行如飞。
English: The paddle boat, shaped like a paddle, can carry the Frohn machine mirror, the bottom of the boat is wide, and there are dozens of paddles on both sides. It runs like a rocket.

古文：两头船，旋转在舵，因风四驰，诸船无逾其速。
现代文：两头船，由船舵旋转，顺风向四出急速行驶，各种船没有哪一种超过它的速度。
English: The two-headed ship, spun by the rudder, sped along with the wind, and none of the ships exceeded its speed.

古文：盖自嘉靖以来，东南日备倭，故海舟之制，特详备云。
现代文：大概从嘉靖以来，东南常常防备倭寇，所以海船的制造方式，特别详细记载。
English: Since around the time of Jiajing, Southeast Asia has often been on guard against wokou, so the manufacturing methods of seagoing vessels have been recorded in great detail.

古文：明制，马之属内厩者曰御马监，中官掌之，牧于大坝，盖仿《周礼》十有二闲意。
现代文：明代制度，马属于御马房，叫御马监，由宦官掌管，在辽阔的平地上放牧，大概是仿效《周礼》十二马厩的意思。
English: In the Ming Dynasty system, horses belonged to the imperial stables, called imperial horse inspectors. They were controlled by eunuchs and grazed on the vast plains, which was probably meant to imitate the twelve stables in "Zhou Li."

古文：牧于官者，为太仆寺、行太仆寺、苑马寺及各军卫，即唐四十八监意。
现代文：饲养在官府里的，属太仆寺、行太仆寺、苑马寺以及各军卫，就是唐代四十八牧马监的意思。
English: Raised in government offices, they belonged to Dapu Temple, Xing Dapu Temple, Yuanma Temple and various military guards, which meant the 48 herdsmen and horse inspectors in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：牧于民者，南则直隶应天等府，北则直隶及山东、河南等府，即宋保马意。
现代文：饲养在民间的，南方则有直隶应天等府，北方则有直隶及山东、河南等府，就是宋代保马的意思。
English: In the south, there were horses directly subordinate to the prefectures such as Yingtian, and in the north, there were horses directly subordinate to the prefectures such as Shandong and Henan. This is the meaning of Baoma in the Song Dynasty.

古文：其曰备养马者，始于正统末，选马给边，边马足，而寄牧于畿甸者也。
现代文：叫做备养马的，开始于正统末年，挑选马匹供给边防，边防马匹充足，而委托在京城附近饲养。
English: Called the horse reserve, it began in the last years of orthodoxy, with the selection of horses to supply the border guards. There were enough horses for the border guards, and they were entrusted to be raised near the capital.

古文：官牧给边镇，民牧给京军，皆有孳生驹。
现代文：官府饲养供给边防要塞重镇，民间饲养供给京城军队，都有繁殖的马驹。
English: The government's breeding supplies the border fortress of Chongzhen, and the private breeding supplies the capital's army, both of which have breeding stallions.

古文：官牧之地曰草场，或为军民佃种曰熟地，岁征租佐牧人市马。
现代文：官府放牧的地方叫草场，有的是军民耕种的土地叫熟地，每年征收租赋帮助牧人买马。
English: The government's grazing area is called the pasture, and some of the land cultivated by the military and the people is called the land. Every year, the government collects the rent to help the herdsmen buy horses.

古文：牧之人曰恩军，曰队军，曰改编军，曰充发军，曰抽发军。
现代文：饲养马的人称恩军，称队军，称改编军，称充发军，称抽发军。
English: People who keep horses are called "En Army," "Team Army," "Adapted Army," "Enriched Army" and "Extracted Army."

古文：苑马分三等，上苑万，中七千，下四千。
现代文：苑囿马分三等，上等苑囿饲养一万匹马，中等苑囿饲养七千匹马，下等苑囿饲养四千匹马。
English: There are three grades of horses in the imperial estates. The highest-ranking imperial estates keep 10,000 horses, the middle-ranking imperial estates keep 7,000 horses, and the lower-ranking imperial estates keep 4,000 horses.

古文：一夫牧马十匹，五十夫设圉长一人。
现代文：一名牧马夫饲养马十匹，五十名牧马夫设圉长一名。
English: One wrangler keeps ten horses, and fifty wranglers have one pack leader.

古文：凡马肥瘠登耗，籍其毛齿而时省之。
现代文：凡是马肥瘦增减，登记它的毛色牲龄而按时检查。
English: Whenever there is an increase or decrease in a horse's weight, its age should be registered and checked on time.

古文：三岁，寺卿偕御史印烙，鬻其羸劣以转市。
现代文：饲养三年，寺卿偕同御史印烙，卖掉那些瘦弱的来重新购买。
English: After raising them for three years, Terakyo stamped them with his seal of approval and sold the weak ones to buy new ones.

古文：边卫、营堡、府州县军民壮骑操马，则掌于行寺卿。
现代文：边防卫所、堡垒、府州县军民中强壮的、经过骑兵训练之马，则由行寺卿掌管。
English: The border guard stations, fortresses, and the strongest horses among the soldiers and citizens of Fuzhou County that have been trained by cavalry are under the control of Gyoji Kei.

古文：边用不足，又以茶易于番，以货市于边。
现代文：边防马匹使用不足，又用茶叶同番人交换，用钱在边境购买。
English: The border guards' horses are underutilized, and they exchange tea leaves with the guards and use money to buy horses at the border.

古文：其民牧皆视丁田授马，始曰户马，既曰种马，按岁征驹。
现代文：民间饲养都按人口田地给予马匹，开始时称户马，后来又称种马，按时间征收马驹。
English: In folk breeding, horses are given according to the population of the field. At the beginning, they were called household horses, and later they were also called stallions. Horseshoes are levied according to time.

古文：种马死，孳生不及数，辄赔补。
现代文：种马死去，繁殖不够数，就赔偿补足。
English: If a stallion dies and there is not enough breeding stock, compensation will be made.

古文：此其大凡也。
现代文：这就是大概情况。
English: Here's what it looks like.

古文：初，太祖都金陵，令应天、太平、镇江、庐州、凤阳、扬州六府，滁、和二州民牧马。
现代文：当初，太祖建都金陵，下令应天、太平、镇江、庐州、凤阳、扬州六府，滁、和二州百姓饲养马。
English: At first, the great-grandfather built the capital Jinling, and ordered the people of six prefectures including Tianjin, Taiping, Zhenjiang, Zhangzhou, Fengyang, Yangzhou, Handan, and Erzhou to breed horses.

古文：洪武六年，设太仆寺于滁州，统于兵部。
现代文：洪武六年，在滁州设立太仆寺，由兵部统辖。
English: In the sixth year of Hongwu's reign, Taipu Temple was established in Zhangzhou, under the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：后增滁阳五牧监，领四十八群。
现代文：后来增设滁阳五个牧监，统领四十八处马群。
English: Later, five additional pastoral supervisors were set up in Shenyang to supervise 48 horse herds.

古文：已，为四十监，旋罢，惟存天长、大兴、舒城三监。
现代文：之后，设立四十个牧监，很快撤销，只留存天长、大兴、舒城三个牧监。
English: After that, forty overseers were established, but they were soon revoked, and only three overseers remained: Tianchang, Daxing, and Shucheng.

古文：置草场于汤泉、滁州等地。
现代文：在汤泉、滁州等地设置牧场。
English: Set up pastures in places such as Tangquan and Zhangzhou.

古文：复令飞熊、广武、英武三卫，五军养一马，马岁生驹，一岁解京。
现代文：又传令飞熊、广武、英武三处卫所，每五个士兵饲养一匹马，马一年产下马驹，长到一岁解送京城。
English: In addition, it was ordered that the three sanitariums of Feixiong, Guangwu and Yingwu should raise one horse for every five soldiers. The horse would give birth to a foal every year, and when it was one year old, it would be sent to the capital.

古文：既而以监牧归有司，专令民牧。
现代文：随后由监牧交给主管部门，专门命令百姓饲养。
English: Subsequently, the supervising herdsman handed it over to the competent authority, and specifically ordered the people to raise it.

古文：江南十一户，江北五户养马一，复其身。
现代文：江南十一户，江北五户养一匹马，抵偿他们的赋役。
English: Eleven households in the south of the Yangtze River and five households in the north of the Yangtze River raised a horse to compensate for their forced labor.

古文：太仆官督理，岁正月至六月报定驹，七月至十月报显驹，十一、二月报重驹。
现代文：太仆官监督管理，每年正月到六月上报配种走驹，七月到十月上报孕育的马驹，十、二月上报增加的马驹。
English: Under the supervision and management of the overseer, every year, from the first month to June, the number of horses bred is reported, from July to October, the number of horses bred is reported, and from October to February, the number of horses bred is reported.

古文：岁终考马政，以法治府州县官吏。
现代文：岁末考察养马的政绩，用法律治理府州县的官吏。
English: At the end of the year, the political achievements of horse breeders will be examined, and the officials of prefectures and counties will be governed by law.

古文：凡牡曰儿，牝曰骒。
现代文：公马叫儿马，母马叫骤马。
English: A stallion is called a foal, a mare is called a foal.

古文：儿一、骒四为群，群头一人。
现代文：公马一匹、母马四匹为一群，设群头一人。
English: One stallion and four mares form a group, with one at the head of the group.

古文：五群，群长一人。
现代文：五群，设群长一人。
English: There are five groups, with one group leader.

古文：三十年，设北平、辽东、山西、陕西、甘肃行太仆寺，定牧马草场。
现代文：洪武三十年，设置北平、辽东、山西、陕西、甘肃行太仆寺，固定牧马草场。
English: In the 30th year of Hongwu's reign, Taiping Temple was set up in Beiping, Liaodong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, and Gansu, and the horse pasture was fixed.

古文：永乐初，设太仆寺于北京，掌顺天、山东、河南。
现代文：永乐初年，在北京设置太仆寺，掌管顺天、山东、河南。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he set up Taipu Temple in Beijing, in charge of Shuntian, Shandong and Henan.

古文：旧设者为南太仆寺，掌应天等六府二州。
现代文：过去设置的成为南太仆寺，掌管应天等六府二州。
English: In the past, it was set up as Nan Taipo Temple, which controlled six prefectures and two prefectures including Yingtian.

古文：四年，设苑马寺于陕西、甘肃，统六监，监统四苑。
现代文：四年，在陕西、甘肃设置苑马寺，统管六个牧监，每个牧监统管四个苑囿。
English: In four years, he set up Yuanma Temple in Shaanxi and Gansu, with six pastors in charge, and each pastor in charge of four courtyards.

古文：又设北京、辽东二苑马寺，所统视陕西、甘肃。
现代文：又设置北京、辽东二个苑马寺，所统管的比照陕西、甘肃施行。
English: In addition, two Yuanma temples were set up in Beijing and Liaodong, and the overall management of the temples was carried out in Shaanxi and Gansu.

古文：十二年，令北畿民计丁养马，选居闲官教之畜牧。
现代文：十二年，传令北畿百姓按丁口养马，选用免去官职闲住的人教他们畜牧。
English: In the 12th year, the people of North Gyeongsang Province were ordered to raise horses according to Dingkou, and to select people who were exempt from official duties to teach them animal husbandry.

古文：民十五丁以下一匹，十六丁以上二匹，为事编发者七户一匹，得除罪。
现代文：民户十五丁以下养马一匹，十六丁以上养马二匹，因罪编户发配的七户养马一匹，得以免罪。
English: Households with 15 or fewer horses, two with 16 or more horses, and seven households with one horse were exonerated.

古文：寻以寺卿杨砥言，北方人户五丁养一，免其田租之半，蓟州以东至南海等卫，戍守军外，每军饲种马一。
现代文：不久按照寺卿杨砥的进言，北方人户五丁养一匹马，免去他们一半的田租，蓟州以束到南海等卫所，戍守军士除外，每一个军士饲养种马一匹。
English: Soon, in accordance with the advice of the temple's chief priest Yang Tuo, households in the north of Wuding raised one horse and were exempted from paying half of their farm rent, and from Bozhou to Nankai and other sanctuaries, with the exception of the guard sergeants, each sergeant raised a stallion.

古文：又定南方养马例：凤、庐、扬、滁、和五丁一，应天、太、镇十丁一。
现代文：又规定南方养马的条例：凤、庐、扬、滁、和五丁养一匹马，应天、太、镇十丁养一匹马。
English: It also stipulates the regulations for raising horses in the south: Feng, Zou, Yang, Zou, and Wuding raise one horse, and Yingtian, Tai, and Zhenzhenting raise one horse.

古文：淮、徐初养马，亦以丁为率。
现代文：淮、徐开始养马，也以人丁为标准。
English: Huai and Xu began to raise horses, and also used human beings as the standard.

古文：十八年，罢北京苑马寺，悉牧之民。
现代文：十八年，撤销北京苑马寺，全部由百姓饲养。
English: In 18 years, Beijing Yuanma Temple was abolished, and all horses were bred by the people.

古文：洪熙元年，令民牧二岁征一驹，免草粮之半。
现代文：洪熙元年，传令百姓养马二年征收一匹马驹，免去一半的草粮。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the people raising horses were ordered to collect one horse mule every two years, and half of the grass grain was exempted.

古文：自是，马日蕃，渐散于邻省。
现代文：从此以后，马匹日渐增多，逐渐扩散到邻省。
English: Since then, the number of horses has been increasing day by day, gradually spreading to neighboring provinces.

古文：济南、兖州、东昌民养马，自宣德四年始也。
现代文：济南、兖州、束昌百姓养马，从宣德四年开始。
English: People in Jinan, Zhangzhou, and Sokchang have been raising horses since Xuande was founded four years ago.

古文：彰德、卫辉、开封民养马，自正统十一年始也。
现代文：彰德、卫辉、开封百姓养马，从正统十一年开始。
English: Changde, Weihui and Kaifeng people raised horses, starting from the 11th year of orthodoxy.

古文：已而也先入犯，取马二万，寄养近京，充团营骑操，而尽以故时种马给永平等府。
现代文：后来也先进犯，朝廷选取马匹二万，寄养在京城附近，充作团营骑兵操练，而把过去的种马全部交付永平等府。
English: Later, he was also the first offender. The imperial court selected 20,000 horses and fostered them near the capital to be used for cavalry regiment training, and all the stallions of the past were handed over to Yongpyong Prefecture.

古文：景泰三年，令儿马十八岁、骒马二十岁以上，免算驹。
现代文：景泰三年，命令公马十八岁、母马二十岁以上，免去征收马驹。
English: In the third year of Jing Tai, he ordered that male horses over the age of 18 and female horses over the age of 20 be exempted from the collection of horse manure.

古文：成化二年，以南土不产马，改征银。
现代文：成化二年，因南方不产马，改为征收银两。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, because the south did not produce horses, it was changed to levy silver two.

古文：四年，始建太仆寺常盈库，贮备用马价。
现代文：成化四年，开始建立太仆寺常盈库，储存购买备用马匹的钱财。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, he began to establish the Taipo Temple Changying Bank to store money and wealth for the purchase of spare horses.

古文：是时，民渐苦养马。
现代文：当时，百姓逐渐苦于养马。
English: At that time, people were struggling to keep horses.

古文：六年，吏部侍郎叶盛言： 向时岁课一驹，而民不扰者，以刍牧地广，民得为生也。
现代文：成化六年，吏部侍郎叶盛进言： 过去每年征收一匹马驹，而百姓不被困扰，是因为放牧的土地广阔，百姓得以为生计。
English: Six years later, Ye Sheng, the steward of the cadre department, said: In the past, one horse was collected every year, but the people were not troubled, because the grazing land was vast, and the people had to make a living.

古文：自豪右庄田渐多，养马渐不足。
现代文：自从富豪之家庄田逐渐增多以来，养马的土地逐渐不足。
English: Since the number of rich people's homes in Shoda has gradually increased, there has been a gradual shortage of land for horse breeding.

古文：洪熙初，改两年一驹，成化初，改三年一驹。
现代文：洪熙初年，改为两年征收一匹骂驹，成化初年，改为三年征收一匹马驹。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, it was changed to two years to levy one horse, and in the first year of Chenghua, it was changed to three years to levy one horse.

古文：马愈削，民愈贫。
现代文：征收的马匹越削减，百姓越贫困。
English: The more the tax on horses is cut, the more impoverished the people become.

古文：然马卒不可少，乃复两年一驹之制，民愈不堪。
现代文：然而马终究不可少，于是恢复两年征收一匹马驹的制度，百姓更加困苦。
English: In the end, however, horses were indispensable, so the two-year system of collecting one horse mule was restored, and the people became even more impoverished.

古文：请敕边镇随俗所宜，凡可以买马足边、军民交益者，便宜处置。 
现代文：奏请敕令边境要塞重镇因地制宜，凡是可以买马供足边境、军民互得利益的，斟酌情势自行处置。 
English: It is requested to report to the imperial command that border fortresses should be built according to local conditions. If it is possible to buy horses to supply the border, and the military and civilians can benefit from each other, they should be disposed of at their own discretion.

古文：时马文升抚陕西，又极论边军偿马之累，请令屯田卒田多丁少而不领马者，岁输银一钱，以助赔偿。
现代文：当时马文升巡抚陕西，又极力论述边境军士赔偿马匹的沉重负担，请求命令屯田军士田多人少而不饲养马的，每年交纳白银一钱，来辅助赔偿。
English: At that time, Ma Wensheng, the inspector general of Shaanxi Province, also vigorously discussed the heavy burden of compensation for horses by the border sergeants, and requested that the soldiers in Tonden be ordered to pay one silver coin per year to supplement the compensation.

古文：虽皆允行，而民困不能舒也。
现代文：虽然都许可执行，但百姓的困苦不能缓解。
English: Although they are all allowed to be implemented, the hardships of the people cannot be alleviated.

古文：继文升抚陕者萧祯，请省行太仆寺。
现代文：接替马文升治理陕西的萧祯，奏请裁减行太仆寺。
English: Xiao Wei, who succeeds Ma Wensheng as governor of Shaanxi, calls for a reduction in the number of monks at Taipu Temple.

古文：兵部覆云： 洪、永时，设行太仆及苑马寺，凡茶马、番人贡马，悉收寺、苑放牧，常数万匹，足充边用。
现代文：兵部回复说： 洪熙、永乐时，设置行太仆寺及苑马寺，凡用茶叶交换的马匹、番人进贡的马匹，都收归寺、苑放牧，通常有数万匹，足够供给边境使用。
English: The Ministry of Military Affairs replied, "At the time of Hongxi and Yongle, they set up Daju Temple and Yuanma Temple. All the horses that were exchanged for tea leaves and the horses that the guards paid tribute to were returned to the temple and the garden for grazing. There are usually tens of thousands of horses, which is enough to supply the border.

古文：正统以后，北敌屡入抄掠，马遂日耗。
现代文：正统以后，北方敌人屡次闯入掠夺，马匹逐日减少。
English: After the unification, the northern enemy repeatedly invaded and plundered the horses, and the number of horses decreased day by day.

古文：言者每请裁革，是惜小费而忘大计。 
现代文：进言之人每每请求裁减革除，这是吝惜小的花费而忘记了国家大计。 
English: Every time the proponents ask for cuts and elimination, it is a case of sparing the pennies and forgetting the national budget.

古文：于是敕谕祯，但令加意督察。
现代文：于是敕令训谕萧祯，只管特别注意督察。
English: As a result, Xiao Yao was ordered to pay special attention to the inspector.

古文：而北畿自永乐以来，马日滋，辄责民牧，民年十五者即养马。
现代文：而北畿从永乐以来，马匹逐日增多，于是责令百姓饲养，年纪达到十五岁的就养马。
English: Since Yongle, horses have been increasing day by day in North Gyeongsang Province, so the people were ordered to raise horses until they reached the age of fifteen.

古文：太仆少卿彭礼以户丁有限，而课驹无穷，请定种马额。
现代文：太仆少卿彭礼认为人口有限，而征收马驹没有穷尽，奏请规定种马的数额。
English: Peng Li, the servant of Shaoqing, thought that the population was limited, but the collection of horse manure was not exhausted. He asked for the amount of stallions to be specified.

古文：会文升为兵部尚书，奏行其请，乃定两京太仆种马，儿马二万五千，骒马四之，二年纳驹，著为令。
现代文：恰逢马文升任兵部尚书，上奏实行他的请求，于是规定两京太仆种马，公马二万五千匹，母马是公马的四倍，二年上交马驹，写定著录焉法令。
English: At the same time that Ma Wen was promoted to the post of military commander, his request was put into practice. Therefore, it was stipulated that there should be 25,000 stallions for the two capital eunuchs, and four times as many mares as stallions, and the stallions should be handed over within two years, and a record-keeping decree was written.

古文：时弘治六年也。
现代文：当时是弘治六年。
English: At that time, Koji was six years old.

古文：十五年冬，尚书刘大夏荐南京太常卿杨一清为副都御史，督理陕西马政。
现代文：弘治十五年冬天，尚书刘大夏推荐南京太常卿杨一清为副都御史，监督管理陕西养马政务。
English: In the winter of the 15th year of the Hongzhi era, Shangshu Liu Daxia recommended Yang Yiching, the First Secretary of the Nanking Municipal Government, to be the vice-governor of the capital to supervise and manage the government affairs of horse breeding in Shaanxi.

古文：一清奏言： 我朝以陕右宜牧，设监苑，跨二千余里。
现代文：杨一清上奏说： 我朝认为陕右适宜放牧，设置牧监苑囿，跨越二千余里。
English: Yang Yixing said: I believe that Shaanxi and Zhejiang are suitable for grazing, and set up a pastoral supervision yard, spanning more than two thousand miles.

古文：后皆废，惟存长乐、灵武二监。
现代文：后来都撤销了，只留下长乐、灵武二处牧监。
English: Later, they were all revoked, leaving only Changle and Lingwu as the two pastoral supervisors.

古文：今牧地止数百里，然以供西边尚无不足，但苦监牧非人，牧养无法耳。
现代文：如今牧场只有数百里，然而用来供应西部边境还没有显出不充足，只是苦于监督放牧的人不称职，放牧饲养没有方法罢了。
English: Today, there are only a few hundred miles of pastureland, but the supply of cattle to the western border has not yet been insufficient. It is just that the people who are struggling to supervise the grazing are incompetent, and there is no way to graze and raise cattle.

古文：两监六苑，开城、安定水泉便利，宜为上苑，牧万马；广宁、万安为中苑；黑水草场逼窄，清平地狭土瘠，为下苑。
现代文：两监六苑，开城、安定水泉便利，应当为上苑，放牧一万匹马；广宁、万安为中苑；黑水草场狭窄，清平草地狭小土地贫瘠，为下苑。
English: The six courtyards of the two superintendents, Kaesong and Jianzhen are convenient, and should be the upper courtyards, with 10,000 horses grazing; Guangning and Wan'an should be the middle courtyards; Heishui grassland is narrow, and Cheongpyeong grassland is narrow and barren, and should be the lower courtyards.

古文：万安可五千，广宁四千，清平二千，黑水千五百。
现代文：万安可放牧五千匹，广宁四千匹，清平二干匹，黑水一千五百匹。
English: Five thousand cattle can be grazed in Wan'an, four thousand in Guangning, two in Qingping, and fifteen hundred in Heishui.

古文：六苑岁给军外，可常牧马三万二千五百，足供三边用。
现代文：六苑除每年供给军队外，可固定放牧马匹三万二千五百匹，足以供应三边使用。
English: In addition to supplying the army with horses every year, the Sixth Courtyard can permanently graze 32,500 horses, which is enough to supply the three sides.

古文：然欲广孳息，必多蓄种马，宜增满万匹，两年一驹，五年可足前数。
现代文：然而想要大量繁衍，一定要多畜养种马，应该增足一万匹，每两年产一匹马胸，五年可以补足以前的数目。
English: However, if you want to reproduce a lot, you must breed more stallions. You should increase the number of stallions by 10,000, and produce one horse chest every two years. In five years, you can make up for the previous number.

古文：请支太仆马价银四万二千两，于平、庆、临、巩买种马七千。
现代文：请支付太仆寺买马的费用白银四万二千雨，到平、庆、临、巩购买种马七千匹。
English: Please pay the cost of buying a horse from Taipu Temple, 42,000 ryo in silver, and purchase up to 7,000 stallions from Ping, Qing, Lin, and Gong.

古文：又养马恩队军不足，请编流亡民及问遣回籍者，且视恩军例，凡发边卫充军者，改令各苑牧马，增为三千人。
现代文：另外养马的恩队军不够，请求登记流亡百姓以及判处遣送回籍的人，姑且比照充军戍边的罪人的规定，凡是发配边境卫所充军的，改为到各苑牧马，增加为三千人。
English: In addition, there are not enough horse-breeding envoys, and they request that the exiled people be registered and those who have been sentenced to be sent back to their hometowns should be punished according to the provisions of the criminals who have been punished by the military, and those who have been punished by the border guard should be punished by being sent to pasture horses in various gardens, increasing to three thousand.

古文：又请相地势，筑城通商，种植榆柳，春夏放牧，秋冬还厩，马既得安，敌来亦可收保。 
现代文：又请求测量地势，修城通商，种植榆树柳树，春夏放牧，秋冬回马厩，马匹既得到安定，敌人来犯也可以收聚保护。 
English: They also requested that the terrain be surveyed, the city be rebuilt, commerce be conducted, eucalyptus and willow trees be planted, spring and summer be used for grazing, and the horses returned to the stables in autumn and winter. The horses would not only be stabilized, but also protected from enemy intruders.

古文：孝宗方重边防，大夏掌兵部，一清所奏辄行。迁总制仍督马政。
现代文：孝宗正重视边防，刘大夏执掌兵部，杨一清所奏立即得以实行，升任总制仍监督养马政务。
English: Xiaozong is attaching importance to border defense, Liu Daxia is in charge of the military department, Yang Yixing's report can be implemented immediately, and the promotion to the general system is still supervising the government affairs of raising horses.

古文：诸监草场，原额十三万三千七百余顷，存者已不及半。
现代文：各牧监草场，原来额定十三万三千七百余顷，存下来的已不到一半。
English: Each herdsman's pasture, originally rated at more than 133,700 hectares, has less than half of it left.

古文：一清核之，得荒地十二万八千余顷，又开武安苑地二千九百余顷。
现代文：杨一清查核牧场，得到荒地十二万八千余顷，又开辟武安苑草地二千九百余顷。
English: Yang Yiching inspected the nuclear pasture, obtained more than 128,000 hectares of wasteland, and opened up more than 2,900 hectares of grassland in Wu'an Garden.

古文：正德二年闻于朝。
现代文：正德二年上报朝廷。
English: Zhengde reported to the imperial court two years later.

古文：及一清去官，未几复废。
现代文：等到杨一清离任，不长时间草场又荒废了。
English: By the time Yang Iqing left office, the pasture had not long been abandoned.

古文：时御史王济言： 民苦养马。
现代文：当时御史王济进言： 百姓苦于养马。
English: At that time, Wang Jizhun said, "The people are struggling to raise horses.

古文：有一孳生马，辄害之。
现代文：有一出生的马，就杀掉它。
English: If a horse is born, kill it.

古文：间有定驹，赂医讳之，有显驹坠落之。
现代文：间或有配种定驹，就贿赂兽医隐瞒下来，有孕育马驹就坠胎。
English: Occasionally, if there is a cross-breeding agreement, they will bribe the veterinarian to conceal it, and if there is a pregnant foal, it will miscarry.

古文：马亏欠不过纳银二两，既孳生者已闻官，而复倒毙，不过纳银三两，孳生不死则饥饿。
现代文：马亏欠不过交纳白银二两，已经生育的已经上报官府，而又死掉的，不过交纳白银三两，产出不死就要挨饿。
English: If a horse is in debt, it can only pay two silver coins. If it has given birth, it has been reported to the government. If it has died, it can only pay three silver coins. If it does not produce, it will starve to death.

古文：马日瘦削，无济实用。
现代文：马日渐消瘦，无助于实用。
English: The horse is getting thinner and thinner, which is not helpful for practical use.

古文：今种马、地亩、人丁，岁取有定额，请以其额数令民买马，而种马孳生，县官无与。 
现代文：如今种马、田地、人口，每年征收有固定的数额，请用这数额命令百姓买马，而种马繁殖，朝廷不要干预。 
English: Nowadays, a fixed amount is levied on stallions, fields, and people every year. Please use this amount to order the people to buy horses, and let the stallions breed. The court should not interfere.

古文：兵部是其言。
现代文：兵部认为他说得对。
English: The military thinks he's right.

古文：自后，每有奏报，辄引济言县官无与种马事，但责驹于民，遗母求子矣。
现代文：自此以后，每有上奏，就引用王济的话朝廷不干预种马事务，只向百姓征收马驹，留下母马求子马。
English: From then on, whenever there was a performance, Wang Ji was quoted as saying that the imperial court did not interfere in stallion affairs, but only collected foals from the people, leaving the mare to beg for a foal.

古文：初，边臣请马，太仆寺以见马给之。
现代文：当初，边境官员请求给予马匹，太仆寺把现成的马给予他们。
English: At first, the border officials asked for horses, and Taipo Temple gave them a ready-made horse.

古文：自改征银，马日少，而请者相继，给价十万，买马万匹。
现代文：自从改为征收钱财后，马匹逐日减少，而请求给予马匹的接连不断，给予钱十万，购买马一万匹。
English: Since the changeover to the collection of money and property, the number of horses has been decreasing day by day, and the requests to give horses have continued, to give one hundred thousand dollars and buy ten thousand horses.

古文：边臣不能市良马，马多死，太仆卿储巏以为言，请仍给马。
现代文：边境官员不能买到好马，马多死去，太仆卿储嵫因此进言，请求仍旧供给马匹。
English: The border officials were unable to buy good horses, and Mado died. As a result, the great retainer, Prince Shukun, intervened, requesting that horses continue to be supplied.

古文：又指陈各边种马盗卖私借之弊。
现代文：又陈述各边防盗窃出卖、私自借出种马的弊端。
English: It also states the drawbacks of stealing and selling and privately lending stallions from each border.

古文：语虽切，不能从。
现代文：言语虽然切直，朝廷不能听从。
English: Although his words were forthright, the imperial court could not listen.

古文：而边镇给发日益繁。延绥三十六营堡，自弘治十一年始，十年间，发太仆银二十八万有奇，买补四万九千余匹，宁夏、大同、居庸关等处不与焉。
现代文：而边境要塞重镇供给调发银两日益增多，延绥三十六营垒，从弘治十一年开始，十年期间，调发太仆寺白银二十八万多两，购买补充马四万九干多匹，宁夏、大同、居庸关等地不计算在内。
English: Meanwhile, the supply of silver to the border fortresses has been increasing day by day. Since the beginning of the 11th year of the Hongzhi era, more than 280,000 taipo silver has been sent to the 36 fortresses in Yancheng, and more than 49,000 additional horses have been purchased, not including Ningxia, Datong, Juyongguan and other places.

古文：至正德七年，遂开纳马例，凡十二条。
现代文：到正德七年，便开启交纳马的条例，一共十二条。
English: In the seventh year of Zhengde, a total of twelve regulations on the payment of horses were issued.

古文：九年，复发太仆银市马万五千于山东、辽东、河南及凤阳、保定诸府。
现代文：九年又调发太仆寺白银从山束、辽东河南及凤阳、保定诸府买马一万五千匹。
English: In the ninth year, Taipu Temple's silver was transferred to buy 15,000 horses from the prefectures of Shanshu, Liaodong, Henan, Fengyang, and Baoding.

古文：嘉靖元年，陕西苑马少卿卢璧条上马政，请督逋负、明印烙、训医药、均地差，以救目前，而辟场广蓄为经久计。
现代文：嘉靖元年，陕西苑骂少卿卢璧备文陈述养马政务，请求督促拖欠、严明印烙、规范医药、协调各地差异来缓解目前的情况，而开辟草场扩大畜养作为长久之计。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, Shaanxi Yuan scolded Shaoqing Lu Bi to prepare a document to state the government affairs of horse breeding, requesting supervision of arrears, strict branding, standardization of medicine, coordination of local differences to alleviate the current situation, and opening up pastures to expand animal husbandry as a long-term plan.

古文：帝嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝赞许并采纳他的意见。
English: The emperor appreciated and adopted his opinion.

古文：自后言马事者颇众，大都因事立说，补救一时而已。
现代文：自此以后进言养马事务的颇多，大都因事立说，补救一时急需而已。
English: Since then, there have been a lot of rumours about the horse-breeding business, most of which are based on speculation and are in urgent need of remedy.

古文：二十九年，俺答入寇，太仆马缺，复行正德纳马例。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年，俺答入犯，太仆寺缺乏马匹，恢复实行正德时上交马匹的规定。
English: In the 29th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, I answered that I had committed a crime, that there were not enough horses in the Taipo Temple, and that the regulation of handing in horses at the time of Zhengde was restored.

古文：已，稍增损之。
现代文：之后，稍有增加减少。
English: After that, a slight increase followed by a decrease.

古文：至四十一年，遂开例至捐马授职。
现代文：到嘉靖四十一年，便开启规定捐献马匹授予官职。
English: By the 41st year of Jiajing, the regulations for donating horses to be awarded official positions were opened.

古文：隆庆二年，提督四夷馆太常少卿武金言： 种马之设，专为孳生备用。
现代文：隆庆二年，提督四夷馆太常少卿武金进言： 种马制度的设立，专门为繁殖备用。
English: In the second year of the Longqing, Admiral Shi Yiguan Taizhong Shaoqing Wu Jin said: The establishment of the stallion system is specifically for breeding.

古文：备用马既别买，则种马可遂省。
现代文：备用马既然另外购买，那么种马可以因此去除。
English: Since the spare horse was purchased separately, the stallion can therefore be removed.

古文：今备用马已足三万，宜令每马折银三十两，解太仆。
现代文：如今备用马已经足有三万匹，应该命令每匹马折合白银三十两，解送到太仆寺。
English: Now that there are already thirty thousand spare horses, each horse should be ordered to pay thirty silver taels and be sent to Taipu Temple.

古文：种马尽卖，输兵部，一马十两，则直隶、山东、河南十二万匹，可得银百二十万，且收草豆银二十四万。 
现代文：种马全部卖出，交付兵部。一匹马白银十两，那么直隶、山东、河南十二万匹，可获得白银一百二十万两，并且收取草豆的白银二十四万两。 
English: All the stallions were sold and handed over to the military department. One horse was worth twelve silver, so if there were 120,000 horses in Zhili, Shandong and Henan, they could earn 1.2 million silver, and 240,000 silver was collected from the soybeans.

古文：御史谢廷杰谓： 祖制所定，关军机，不可废。 
现代文：御史谢廷杰说： 祖宗的制度所规定的，事关军机大事，不可废除。 
English: Mgr. Shi Xie Tingjie said: The system of the ancestors, which is related to military affairs, cannot be abolished.

古文：兵部是廷杰言。
现代文：兵部认为谢廷杰的话对。
English: The military thinks Xie Tingjie is right.

古文：而是时，内帑乏，方分使括天下逋赋。
现代文：而当时，国库匮乏，正分别派遣人搜刮全国拖欠的赋税。
English: But at that time, the treasury was short of money, and people were being sent out to collect tax arrears across the country.

古文：穆宗可金奏，下部议。
现代文：穆宗同意武金的上奏，交付兵部议定。
English: Mu Zong agreed to the payment of the military pay, and it was agreed that it would be delivered to the military department.

古文：部请养、卖各半，从之。
现代文：兵部请求留养、卖出各一半，皇帝听从了这个请求。
English: The military department requested to retain and sell half of each, and the emperor complied with this request.

古文：太仆之有银也，自成化时始，然止三万余两。
现代文：太仆寺存有白银，从成化时期开始，然而只有三万多两。
English: There has been silver in Taigu Temple since the Ming Dynasty, but only more than 30,000 taels.

古文：及种马卖，银日增。
现代文：等到种马卖掉，白银日益增多。
English: By the time the stallions are sold, the silver is piling up.

古文：是时，通贡互市所贮亦无几。
现代文：当时，与外番通贡贸易所贮存的白银也没有多少。
English: At that time, there was not much silver stored at the Foreign Exchange and Tribute Trading House.

古文：及张居正作辅，力主尽卖之议。
现代文：到张居正任辅政大臣时，极力支持种马全部卖出的建议。
English: When Zhang Jiusheng was an assistant minister, he strongly supported the proposal to sell all the stallions.

古文：自万历九年始，上马八两，下至五两，又折征草豆地租，银益多，以供团营买马及各边之请。
现代文：从万历九年开始，上等马银八两，最低到五两，又折合征收草豆地租，白银更多，用来供应团营买马以及各边防的请求。
English: Starting from the ninth year of the Wanli era, the highest-ranking horse was valued at 8 taels of silver, and the lowest was 5 taels, which was equivalent to the collection of soybean land rent, and more silver was used to supply the group camp to buy horses and the requests of the border guards.

古文：然一骟马辄发三十金，而州县以驽马进，其直止数金。
现代文：然而一匹骗马就发给三十两白银，而州县以劣马进献，它的价值只有数两白银。
English: However, a cheating horse was awarded thirty-two pieces of silver, while the prefectures offered inferior horses, whose value was only a few pieces of silver.

古文：且仍寄养于马户，害民不减曩时。
现代文：而且仍旧寄养在马户那儿，危害百姓不亚于以前。
English: And they are still being fostered there in Mato, endangering the people no less than before.

古文：又国家有兴作、赏赉，往往借支太仆银，太仆帑益耗。
现代文：还有，国家有兴建、赏赐，往往借支太仆寺的银两，太仆寺的财物日益减少。
English: In addition, the state has built and rewarded, and often borrowed two silver coins from the Taipo Temple, and the property of the Taipo Temple has been decreasing.

古文：十五年，寺卿罗应鹤请禁支借。
现代文：万历十五年，太仆寺卿罗应鹤请求禁止支借。
English: Fifteen years later, at the request of Luo Yinghe, the chief priest of the temple, the loan was prohibited.

古文：二十四年诏太仆给陕西赏功银。
现代文：万历二十四年，诏令太仆寺发给陕西赏功的白银。
English: In the 24th year of Wanli, Taipu Temple was awarded the silver medal of Shaanxi Province.

古文：寺臣言： 先年库积四百余万，自东西二役兴，仅余四之一。
现代文：太仆寺寺臣进言： 往年库存四百余万，自从东西二役兴起，仅剩四分之一。
English: Taichu-ji Temple, Teraomi-jinko: In previous years, the inventory was more than four million, but since the rise of the East-West dual role, only a quarter remains.

古文：朝鲜用兵，百万之积俱空。
现代文：朝鲜用兵，一百万的积蓄全部用尽。
English: North Korea has used up all of its one million man reserve army.

古文：今所存者，止十余万。
现代文：如今所存的，只有十余万两。
English: Today, only a little more than 100,000 tsu remain.

古文：况本寺寄养马岁额二万匹，今岁取折色，则马之派征甚少，而东征调兑尤多。
现代文：况且本寺寄养马每年额定二万匹，今年折合征收银钱，那么马匹的摊派征收便很少，而柬征调用尤其多。
English: Moreover, the number of horses fostered by this temple is up to 20,000 a year, which is equivalent to the amount of money collected this year, so the distribution of horses is very small, and the call for Cambodian conscription is particularly large.

古文：卒然有警，马与银俱竭，何以应之。 
现代文：仓猝之间有紧急情况，马匹与自银都用尽，怎样来应付。 
English: There is an emergency between the rush, the horses and the money are exhausted, how to deal with it.

古文：章下部，未能有所厘革也。
现代文：奏章交付兵部，不能有所改变。
English: The medal was handed over to the military department and cannot be changed.

古文：崇祯初，核户兵工三部，借支太仆马价至一千三百余万。
现代文：崇祯祯初年，核查户、兵、工三部，借支太仆寺马钱达到一千三百多万两白银。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, the three departments of households, soldiers and workers were audited, and the amount of money borrowed by the servants of the temple reached more than 13 million taels.

古文：盖自万历以来，冏政大坏，而边牧废弛，愈不可问。
现代文：大概从万历以来，太仆寺政务大大败坏，而边境牧马制度废弛，更加不可追究。
English: Probably since Wanli, the government affairs of Taipu Temple have been greatly corrupted, and the border wrangling system has been weakened, and it is even more impossible to investigate.

古文：既而辽东督师袁崇焕以缺马，请于两京州县寄养马内，折三千匹价买之西边。
现代文：后来辽东督师袁崇焕因为缺马，请求在两京州县寄养马内，折合三千匹的价钱从西部边防购买。
English: Later, because of the shortage of horses, Yuan Chonghuan, the inspector of Liaodong Province, requested the purchase of three thousand horses from the western border guard in two foster horses in Jingzhou County.

古文：太仆卿涂国鼎言： 祖宗令民养马，专供京营骑操，防护都城，非为边也。
现代文：太仆卿涂国鼎进言： 祖宗命令百姓养马，专供京城团营骑兵操练，保护都城，不是为边防。
English: The great retainer Tu Guoding said: The ancestors ordered the people to raise horses, exclusively for the Beijing regimental cavalry to practice, to protect the capital, not for border defense.

古文：后来改折，无事则易马输银，有警则出银市马，仍是为京师备御之意。
现代文：后来改为征收银两，没有战事就卖马交纳白银，有紧急情况就拿出白银买马，仍是为京城防御的意思。
English: Later, it was changed to levy silver two, sell horses without war to pay silver, and take out silver to buy horses in an emergency, still meaning to defend the capital.

古文：今折银已多给各镇，如并此马尽折，万一变生，奈何？ 
现代文：如今折合的白银已经多供给各边镇，如果连同马一起折算，万一有变乱产生，怎么办？ 
English: Nowadays, the converted silver has been more supplied to the border towns. If it is converted together with the horses, what if there is a disturbance?

古文：帝是其言，却崇焕请。
现代文：皇帝认为他说得对，制止了袁崇焕的请求。
English: The emperor thought he was right and stopped Yuan Chonghuan's request.

古文：按明世马政，法久弊丛。
现代文：按明代马政，法制长久弊端丛生。
English: According to Ma Zheng of the Ming Dynasty, the legal system had long-term drawbacks.

古文：其始盛终衰之故，大率由草场兴废。
现代文：它的起初昌盛最后衰败的原因，大抵由于草场的兴废。
English: The reason for its initial prosperity and ultimate decline is usually due to the rise and fall of pastures.

古文：太祖既设草场于大江南北，复定北边牧地：自东胜以西至宁夏、河西、察罕脑儿，以东至大同、宣府、开平，又东南至大宁、辽东，抵鸭绿江又北千里，而南至各卫分守地，又自雁门关西抵黄河外，东历紫荆、居庸、古北抵山海卫。荒闲平埜，非军民屯种者，听诸王驸马以至近边军民樵采牧放，在边藩府不得自占。
现代文：太祖既在大江南北设置草场，又规定北方边境的牧地：从束胜以西到宁夏、江西、察罕脑儿，向东到大同、宣府、开平，又东南到大窒、辽东，直抵鸭绿江又向北一千里，而南到各卫分别驻守的地点，又从雁门关西到黄河以外，向东经过紫剂、居庸、古北到山海卫，荒废闲置的平坦广阔的原野，不是军民屯种的，便听任诸王驸马以至靠近边境的军民砍柴放牧，在边境的藩王府不得私自占有。
English: The great-grandfather not only set up pastures in the north and south of the Yangtze River, but also stipulated the pastures of the northern border: from west of Soksheng to Ningxia, Jiangxi, and Cahangneer, east to Datong, Xuanfu, and Kaiping, and southeast to Datong and Liaodong, straight to the Yalu River and a thousand miles to the north, and south to the places where the guards were stationed separately, and from the West Gate of the Wild Goose Gate to beyond the Yellow River, eastward through Zi Jia, Juyong, and Gubei to Shanhaiwei.

古文：永乐中，又置草场于畿甸。
现代文：永乐年间，又在京城附近设置草场。
English: During the Yongle era, grass fields were set up near the capital.

古文：寻以顺圣川至桑乾河百三十余里，水草美，令以太仆千骑，令怀来卫卒百人分牧，后增至万二千匹。
现代文：不久因为顺圣川到桑干河一百三十余里，水草肥美，命令供应太仆寺一千马匹，命令怀来卫军士一百人分别放牧，后来增加到一万二千匹。
English: Soon, because the Shunsheng River to the Sanggan River is more than one hundred and thirty miles long, and the water and grass are fertile, he ordered the supply of one thousand horses to the Taipu Temple, and ordered one hundred guardsmen to graze separately, and later increased to twelve thousand horses.

古文：宣德初，复置九马坊于保安州。
现代文：宣德初年，又在保安州设置九马坊。
English: In the first year of Xuande, Jiuma Fang was set up in Baozhou.

古文：于是兵部奏，马大蕃息，以色别而名之，其毛色二十五等，其种三百六十。
现代文：于是兵部上奏，马大量繁殖，用颜色来分别给予命名，马的毛色有二十五等，它的种类有三百六十个。
English: Therefore, the army was raised, horses were bred in large numbers, and they were named separately by color. The color of the horse's hair is 25th, and there are 360 types of horses.

古文：其后庄田日增，草场日削，军民皆困于孳养。
现代文：这之后庄园田地日渐增多，草场日渐减少，军民都被繁殖饲养马匹所困扰。
English: After that, the fields of the manor increased day by day, the pastures decreased day by day, and the soldiers and civilians were troubled by the breeding and rearing of horses.

古文：弘治初，兵部主事汤冕、太仆卿王霁、给事中韩祐、周旋、御史张淳，皆请清核。
现代文：弘治初年，兵部主事汤冕、太仆卿王霁、给事中韩佑周旋、御史张淳，都奏请清查。
English: In the first year of Hongzhi, the head of the military department Tang Guan, the servant Wang Yao, the assistant Han Yu Zhou, and the historian Zhang Jun all reported for investigation.

古文：而旋言： 香河诸县地占于势家，霸州等处俱有仁寿宫皇庄，乞罢之，以益牧地。 
现代文：而周旋说： 香河各县土地被蒙强世家所占有，霸州等地都有仁昼宜的皇庄，请求废除它们，来扩充牧场。 
English: But Zhou Xuan said: The land in all counties of the Xianghe River was occupied by the Mengqiang family, and there were benevolent imperial farms in Baju and other places. He requested that they be abolished to expand the pastures.

古文：虽允行，而占佃已久，卒不能清。
现代文：虽然获准实行，而占有耕种已久，最终不能清除。
English: Although approved for implementation, the occupation has been cultivated for a long time and ultimately cannot be cleared.

古文：南京诸卫牧场亦久废，兵部尚书张蓥请复之。
现代文：南京各卫牧场也长期荒废，兵部尚书张莹请求恢复牧场。
English: Nanjing's pastures have also been abandoned for a long time. The Ministry of Military Affairs has written to Zhang Ying to request the restoration of the pastures.

古文：御史胡海言恐遗地利，遂止。
现代文：御史胡海进言，恐怕丧失对农业生产有利的土地，于是制止了这一请求。
English: Gu Shi Hu Hai said that he was afraid of losing land that was beneficial to agricultural production, so he stopped this request.

古文：京师团营官马万匹，与旗手等卫上直官马，皆分置草场。
现代文：京城团营官马有一万匹，与旗手等卫当值官马，都分别放置于草场。
English: There are ten thousand horses of the Keijo regimental officers, and the horses of the guards on duty, such as the flag bearer, are placed separately in the pasture.

古文：岁春末，马非听用者，坐营官领下场放牧，草豆住支，秋末回。
现代文：每年春末，不听候使用的马，坐营官领出交付牧场放牧，草豆停止支付，秋末送回。
English: At the end of spring every year, if the horses are not ready for use, the camp officials will take them out to pasture for grazing, and the payment of grass and beans will be stopped, and they will be sent back at the end of autumn.

古文：给事御史阅视马毙军逃者以闻。
现代文：给事御史检查马死兵逃的情况上报。
English: Report the situation of the dead soldier's escape to the inspector of history.

古文：后上直马不出牧，而骑操马仍岁出如例。
现代文：后来当值的马不带出放牧，而骑兵操练的马仍每年按常例带出放牧。
English: Later, the horses on duty were not taken out to graze, but the horses trained by the cavalry were still taken out to graze as usual every year.

古文：嘉靖六年，武定侯郭勋以边警为辞，奏免之，征各场租以充公费，余贮太仆买马。
现代文：嘉靖六年，武定侯郭勋以边境紧急为托辞，上奏免去这一制度，征收各草场租赋来补充国家费用，其余贮存在太仆寺买马。
English: In the sixth year of Jiajing, Wuding Hou Guo Xun, using the excuse of border emergency, exempted himself from this system, levied the rent of each pasture to supplement the state expenses, and stored the rest in Taipu Temple to buy horses.

古文：于是营马专仰秣司农，岁费至十八万，户部为诎，而草场益废。
现代文：于是军营马匹专门依靠户部喂养，每年花费达十八万，户部匮乏，而草场更加荒废。
English: As a result, the military camp horses rely exclusively on the household to feed, spending up to one hundred and eighty thousand a year, the household is scarce, and the pasture is even more desolate.

古文：议者争以租佃取赢，侵淫至神宗时，弊坏极矣。
现代文：提建议的人诤谏凭租种获取嬴利，延续到神宗时，败坏到了极点。
English: When the person who made the suggestion got rich by leasing seeds and continued to the Shinto religion, the corruption reached the extreme.

古文：茶马司，洪武中，立于川、陕，听西番纳马易茶，赐金牌信符，以防诈伪。
现代文：茶马司，洪武年间，在川、陕设立，管理西番交纳马匹换取茶叶，赐与金牌信符，以防止欺诈假冒。
English: During the Hongwu era, the Tea and Horse Division was established in Sichuan and Shaanxi to manage the West Pan to exchange horses for tea leaves and give gold medals to prevent fraud and counterfeiting.

古文：每三岁，遣廷臣召诸番合符交易，上马茶百二十斤，中马七十斤，下马五十斤。
现代文：每隔三年，派遣朝臣召各番合验符信进行交易，上等马交换茶叶一百二十斤，中等马交换茶叶七十斤，下等马交换茶叶五十斤。
English: Every three years, courtiers were dispatched to call up the highest-ranking match letters for trading. The highest-ranking horse exchanged 120 catties of tea, the middle-ranking horse exchanged 70 catties of tea, and the lowest-ranking horse exchanged 50 catties of tea.

古文：以私茶出者罪死，虽勋戚无贷。
现代文：用私人茶叶出境的判死罪，即使有功勋的大臣皇亲国戚也不宽恕。
English: Even a meritorious minister or a relative of the emperor would not be pardoned if he was sentenced to death for using private tea leaves to leave the country.

古文：末年，易马至万三千五百余匹。
现代文：洪武末年，交换的马达到一万三千五百多匹。
English: In the last years of Hongwu, the number of horses exchanged reached more than 13,500.

古文：永乐中，禁稍弛，易马少。
现代文：永乐年间，禁令稍微松弛，交换的马减少。
English: During the Yongle period, the ban was slightly relaxed, and the number of horses exchanged decreased.

古文：乃命严边关茶禁，遣御史巡督。
现代文：于是命令严格边关交换茶叶的禁令，派遣御史巡视督察。
English: He then ordered a strict ban on the exchange of tea leaves at the border and dispatched an inspector to inspect the situation.

古文：正统末，罢金牌，岁遣行人巡察，边氓冒禁私贩者多。
现代文：正统末年，废除金牌，每年派遣使者巡察，边境居民违反禁令私自贩卖的很多。
English: At the end of the orthodox era, the gold medal was abolished, and envoys were sent every year to inspect. Many border residents violated the ban and sold illegally.

古文：成化间，定差御史一员，领敕专理。
现代文：成化年间，定时差遣御史一员，领取敕令专门治理。
English: During the Chenghua era, a member of the Imperial Household Agency was sent on a regular basis to receive special treatment by imperial order.

古文：弘治间，大学士李东阳言： 金牌制废，私茶盛，有司又屡以敝茶绐番族，番人抱憾，往往以羸马应。
现代文：弘治年间，大学士李束阳进言： 金牌制度废弃，私自交换茶叶盛行，主管官吏又屡次以劣质茶叶欺骗番族，番人心怀怨恨，往往用劣马回应。
English: During the Hongzhi era, Li Sokyang, a university scholar, made the following comments: the gold medal system was abandoned, the private exchange of tea prevailed, the officials in charge repeatedly deceived the tribals with inferior tea, the guards harbored resentment, and often responded with inferior horses.

古文：宜严敕陕西官司揭榜招谕，复金牌之制，严收良茶，颇增马直，则得马必蕃。 
现代文：应该严正敕令陕西官员张贴皇帝的谕旨，恢复金牌的制度，严格征收良茶，略微增加马的价钱，那么得到的马必多。 
English: Officials in Shaanxi should be ordered to post the emperor's edict, restore the gold medal system, strictly collect good tea, and slightly increase the price of horses, so there will be more horses.

古文：及杨一清督理苑马，遂命并理盐、茶。
现代文：等到杨一清督察管理苑马，于是命令一同治理盐、茶。
English: When Inspector Yang Yiching arrived to manage the horses, he ordered that salt and tea be treated together.

古文：一清申旧制，禁私贩，种官茶。
现代文：杨一清申明旧有制度，禁止私自贩卖，种植官家茶叶。
English: Yang Yiching affirmed that the old system, the prohibition of private sale, the planting of official tea.

古文：四年间易马九千余匹，而茶尚积四十余万斤。
现代文：四年之间交换马九千多匹，而茶叶还积存四十余万斤。
English: More than 9,000 horses were exchanged between the four years, and more than 400,000 kg of tea were accumulated.

古文：灵州盐池增课五万九千，贮庆阳、固原库，以买马给边。
现代文：灵州盐池增收五万九千斤，贮存在庆阳、固原府库中，用来买马供应边防。
English: Lingzhou Yanchi collected an additional 59,000 kg, which was stored in the Qingyang and Guyuan prefectural warehouses and used to buy horses to supply the border defense.

古文：又惧后无专官，制终废也，于正德初，请令巡茶御史兼理马政，行太仆、苑马寺官听其提调，报可。
现代文：又担心以后没有专职官贝，制度最终要废弃，在正德初年，请求让巡茶御史兼管养马政务，行太仆、苑马寺官听从他的调度，朝廷批覆同意。
English: He was also worried that there would be no full-time officials in the future, and the system would eventually be abandoned. In the first year of Zhengde, he requested that the tea inspector should also be in charge of the government affairs of raising horses, and that the palace servants and the temple officials should follow his schedule. The imperial court approved the request.

古文：御史翟唐岁收茶七十八万余斤，易马九千有奇。
现代文：御史翟唐每年征收茶叶七十八万多斤，换取马匹九千有余。
English: Emperor Shun of Tang collected more than seven hundred and eighty thousand catties of tea every year in exchange for more than nine thousand horses.

古文：后法复弛。
现代文：后来法令又松弛。
English: Later, the law was relaxed.

古文：嘉靖初，户部请揭榜禁私茶，凡引俱南户部印发，府州县不得擅印。
现代文：嘉靖初年，户部奏请张贴文告禁止私自贩卖茶叶，凡是允许交易的凭证都由南户部印发，府州县不得擅自印制。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the Hukou Department requested that a notice be posted prohibiting the private sale of tea. All documents allowing transactions were issued by the Southern Hukou Department, and prefectures and counties were not allowed to print them without authorization.

古文：三十年，诏给番族勘合，然初制讫不能复矣。
现代文：三十年诏令发给番族验对的符契，然而当初的制度最终没能恢复。
English: Thirty years after the edict was issued to the Fan nationality, the original system could not be restored.

古文：马市者，始永乐间。
现代文：马市，开设于永乐年间。
English: Ma Shi, opened in the Yongle years.

古文：辽东设市三，二在开原，一在广宁，各去城四十里。
现代文：辽东设置马市三个，二个在开原，一个在广宁，各自离城四十里。
English: Liaodong has set up three horse cities, two in Kaiyuan and one in Guangning, each of which is forty miles away from the city.

古文：成化中，巡抚陈钺复奏行之。
现代文：成化年间，巡抚陈钹再次上奏推行马市。
English: During the Chenghua era, the governor Chen Xi once again promoted the horse market.

古文：后至万历初不废。
现代文：后来到万历初年还没有废除。
English: Later, it was not abolished until the first year of Wanli.

古文：嘉靖中，开马市于大同，陕边宣镇相继行。
现代文：嘉靖年间，在大同开设马市，陕西边防宣府边镇相继开设。
English: During the Jiajing period, Datong opened Ma City, and the Shaanxi border defense Xuanfu border town was successively opened.

古文：隆庆五年，俺答上表称贡。
现代文：隆庆五年，俺答上表进贡。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing, I answered the table to pay tribute.

古文：总督王崇古市马七千余匹，为价九万六千有奇。
现代文：总督王崇古买马七千多匹，折价九万六千有余。
English: Governor Wang Chonggu bought more than seven thousand horses, with a discount of more than ninety-six thousand.

古文：其价，辽东以米布绢，宣、大、山西以银。
现代文：马的价钱，辽东用米布绢支付，宣府、大同、山西用白银支付。
English: The price of horses in Liaodong is paid in rice cloth, and in Xuanfu, Datong and Shanxi in silver.

古文：市易外有贡马者，以钞币加赐之。
现代文：购买交换之外有进贡马匹的，用钱钞彩帛增加赏赐。
English: If there are tribute horses in addition to the purchase and exchange, the reward will be increased with money and banknotes.

古文：初，太祖起江左，所急惟马，屡遣使市于四方。
现代文：当初，太祖崛起于江左，重视的就是战马，多次派遣使者到四方购买。
English: At first, Emperor Taizu rose to power on the left bank of the Yangtze River, attaching great importance to war horses and repeatedly sending emissaries to the four directions to purchase horses.

古文：正元寿节，内外藩封将帅皆以马为币。
现代文：正月元旦日，皇上寿诞，内外藩封将帅都用马作为礼物。
English: On New Year's Day of the first month of the year, the emperor's birthday, the feudal generals at home and abroad all used horses as gifts.

古文：外国、土司、番部以时入贡，朝廷每厚加赐予，所以招携怀柔者备至。
现代文：外国、土司、番部按时进贡，朝廷每每厚加赐予，所以招安怀柔的都到来。
English: Foreign countries, local magistrates, and guards paid tribute on time, and the imperial court gave more and more, so everyone came to invite Anhuai Rong.

古文：文帝勤远略，遣使绝域；外国来朝者甚众，然所急者不在马。
现代文：文帝勤于治理远方，派遣使者到极远的地方，外国来朝的很多，然而所重视的不在马的方面。
English: Emperor Wen was diligent in governing far away places, sending emissaries to extremely far away places. Many foreigners came to Korea, but they did not attach much importance to horses.

古文：自后狃于承平，驾驭之权失，马无外增，惟恃孳生岁课。
现代文：自此以后满足于太平，驾驭的权力失掉，马匹没有外部增加供应，只有依靠繁殖征收。
English: Since then, they have been content with peace, the power of driving has been lost, and there has been no external increase in the supply of horses, which can only be collected by breeding.

古文：重以官吏侵渔，牧政荒废，军民交困矣。
现代文：加上官吏从中侵吞渔利，牧养政务荒废，军民一齐陷入困境。
English: Coupled with the fact that government officials embezzled fishing profits, and pastoral and political affairs were abandoned, the military and the people were all in trouble.

古文：盖明自宣德以后，祖制渐废，军旅特甚，而马政其一云。
现代文：大概明代从宣德以后，祖宗的制度逐渐废弛，军队方面特别严重，而马政是其中之一。
English: Probably in the Ming Dynasty, after Xuan De, the ancestral system gradually fell into disuse, and the military was particularly serious, and Ma Zheng was one of them.

