古文：◎叛臣下○李全下宝庆三年二月，杨氏使人行成于夏全曰： 将军非山东归附耶？狐死兔泣，李氏灭，夏氏宁独存？
现代文：宝庆三年二月，杨氏派人同夏全求和说： 将军不是山东归附的吗？狐狸死，兔子哭，李氏灭亡，夏氏难道能独立存在？
English: In February of the third year of Baoqing, the Yang clan sent a person to sue for peace with the Xia clan, saying: Didn't the general annex Shandong? The fox died, the rabbit cried, the Li clan perished, can the Xia clan exist independently?

古文：愿将军垂盼。 全诺。
现代文：希望将军对我们给以照顾。 夏全答应。
English: I hope the general will take care of us. Xia Quan agreed.

古文：杨氏盛饰出迎，与按行营垒，曰： 人传三哥死，吾一妇人安能自立？
现代文：杨氏穿戴整齐出来迎接夏全，和他巡视营垒，说 ：人们传说三哥已经死了，我一个妇人哪能自立？
English: Mr. Yang came out fully dressed to meet Xia Quan, and inspected the camp with him, saying: People say that the third brother has died, how can I, a woman, stand on my own?

古文：便当事太尉为夫，子女玉帛、干戈仓廪，皆太尉有，望即领此，诚无多言也。 夏全心动，乃置酒欢甚，饮酣，就寝如归，转仇为好，更与福谋逐琸矣。
现代文：就应该把太尉作为丈夫那样侍奉，我所有的部众、玉帛、兵器财物，都归太尉所有，希望你马上接受这些，千万别多费口舌啦。 夏全动心，杨氏就设酒宴招待夏全，他很高兴，喝得很起兴，睡觉时如同在家中一样，他们把仇恨转变成和好，夏全反过来与李福商量逐走刘王卓。
English: Xia Quan's heart was stirred, Mr. Yang held a wine banquet for Xia Quan, he was very happy, he drank a lot, and when he slept, it was like at home. They turned their hatred into reconciliation, and Xia Quan, in turn, discussed with Li Fu to expel Liu Wang Zhuo.

古文：辛卯，夏全令贼党围州治。焚官民舍，杀守藏吏，取货物。
现代文：十一日，夏全命令叛贼的同党包围了州治，焚烧官府和百姓的房屋，杀死守护库藏的官吏，取走了库中的货物。
English: On the 11th day, Xia Quan ordered the traitor's fellow party members to surround the prefectural government, burn the government and people's houses, kill the officials guarding the warehouse, and take away the goods in the warehouse.

古文：时琸精兵尚万余，窘束不能发一令，太息而已，夜半缒城，仅以身免。
现代文：当时刘王卓还有一万多名精兵，窘迫得不能发出一个命令，只有叹息而已，半夜时刘王卓用绳索顺城墙而下，才得以活命。
English: At that time, Liu Wangzhuo still had more than ten thousand elite soldiers. He was so embarrassed that he could not issue a single order, only a sigh. In the middle of the night, Liu Wangzhuo used a rope to go down the city wall to survive.

古文：镇江军与贼战死者太半，将校多死，器甲钱粟悉为贼有。
现代文：镇江军与叛贼交战而死的有一大半，将校多数死亡，武器、铠甲、钱、粮都被叛贼据有。
English: The majority of the Zhenjiang Army died in the war with the traitors, and most of the officers died. Weapons, armor, money, and grain were all possessed by the traitors.

古文：琸步至扬州，借州兵自卫，犹札扬州造旗帜。
现代文：刘王卓步行到扬州，借扬州兵自卫，还下答刂子命令扬州制造旗帜。
English: Liu Wangzhuo walked to Yangzhou, borrowed the Yangzhou National Guard to defend himself, and ordered Yangzhou to make a flag.

古文：林拱缴奏于朝，闻者大笑。
现代文：林拱把这些上奏给朝廷，听说这件事的人大笑。
English: Lin Gong reported this to the imperial court, and those who heard about it laughed loudly.

古文：夏全既逐琸，幕归，杨氏拒之，意杨氏反目图己，明日大掠，趋盱眙欲为乱，张惠、范成进闭门，不得入，翱翔淮上。
现代文：夏全赶走刘王卓后，晚上回来，杨氏拒绝了他，夏全知道杨氏已经反悔，要图谋自己，第二天大肆抢掠，赶奔盱眙想要作乱，张惠、范成进关闭城门，夏全不能进去，就在淮河上游荡。
English: After Xia Quan drove out Liu Wang Zhuo, he came back in the evening, and Mr. Yang refused him. Xia Quan knew that Mr. Yang had repented and wanted to plot against himself. The next day, he looted and pillaged, and rushed to make trouble. Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin closed the city gate, and Xia Quan could not enter, so he wandered on the Huai River.

古文：惠、成进出兵欲剿之，夏全狼狈归金，金人纳之。
现代文：张惠、范成进出兵想剿灭他，夏全狼狈地归附了金国，金人接纳了他。
English: Zhang Hui and Fan Cheng marched in and marched out to annihilate him, and Xia Quanzhong reluctantly attached himself to the Jin state, and the Jin people accepted him.

古文：是举也，张正忠不从乱，经妻女于庭，并己自焚。
现代文：这次行动，张正忠没有跟从叛乱，让自己的妻子、女儿在庭中上吊，他自焚而死。
English: This time, Zhang Zhengzhong did not follow the rebellion and let his wife and daughter hang themselves in the yard. He then set himself on fire and died.

古文：报至，中外大恐，刘琸自劾，未几，死。
现代文：消息传来，中外恐惧，刘王卓自己弹劾自己。不久，刘王卓死。
English: News came that, to the horror of China and the world, Liu Wangzhuo himself impeached himself. Soon after, Liu Wangzhuo died.

古文：初，姚翀从贾涉辟楚州推官，全喜其附己，为引重当路，得改秩，全请以通判青州。
现代文：起初，姚罛跟从贾涉被召用为楚州推官，李全对他归附自己很高兴，替他向当权的人说好话，他才得以升官，李全请求任姚罛为青州通判。
English: At first, Yao Wei and his subordinate Jia Wan were appointed as the judges of Chuzhou. Li Quan was very happy to have him as his subordinate. He was only able to be promoted when he spoke well of him to the people in power. Li Quan requested that Yao Wei be appointed as the judge of Qingzhou.

古文：国之死，全借翀抚定以诳众，以功入朝。
现代文：许国死后，李全借助姚罛稳定局势，欺骗众人，姚罛因功入朝为官。
English: After the death of Xu Guo, Li Quan stabilized the situation with the help of Yao Tong and deceived everyone. Yao Tong became an official in the DPRK because of his merits.

古文：三月，以翀为军器少监、知楚州兼制置。
现代文：三月，朝廷任命姚为军器少监、楚州知州兼制置。
English: In March, the imperial court appointed Yao as a junior inspector of military equipment, and Chuzhou Zhizhou was also established.

古文：翀辟郑子恭、杜耒等为幕客，留母及其子于京，买二妾以行。
现代文：姚罛召用郑子恭、杜耒等人为僚属，留自己的母亲和儿子在京城，买来两个妾随他同行。
English: Yao Yao summoned Zheng Ziqong, Du Yao and others as his subordinates, left his mother and son in Beijing, and bought two concubines to accompany him.

古文：至城东，舣舟以治事。
现代文：姚罛到楚州城东，把船靠在岸边处理政事。
English: Yao Zhen went to the east of Chuzhou city and docked the ship to deal with political affairs.

古文：间入城见杨氏，用晞稷故事而礼过之。
现代文：派人入城去拜见杨氏，用徐稷的旧例，并且超过了他的礼节。
English: He sent someone to the city to meet with Mr. Yang, using the old example of Xu Xi and exceeding his etiquette.

古文：杨许翀入城，乃入，寄治僧寺，极意娱之。
现代文：杨氏允许姚罛入城，姚罛才入城，把府衙暂时安排在僧寺中，杨氏对姚罛极力讨好，使他高兴。
English: Mr. Yang allowed Yao Hao to enter the city, and only after Yao Hao entered the city, he temporarily arranged the prefectural capital in the monk temple. Mr. Yang tried his best to please Yao Hao, which made him happy.

古文：时全在围一年，食牛马及人且尽，将自食其军。
现代文：此时李全已经被围困一年，牛、马和人都要吃光了，将要吃自己的军卒。
English: At this time, Li Quan has been besieged for a year. Cows, horses and people are all about to be eaten up. Li Quan is about to eat his own soldiers.

古文：初军民数十万，至是余数千矣。
现代文：当初有数十万军民，现在只剩数千人了。
English: Initially, there were hundreds of thousands of soldiers and civilians, but now only a few thousand remain.

古文：四月辛亥，全欲归于大元，惧众异议，乃焚香南向再拜，欲自经，而使郑衍德、田四救之，曰： 譬如为衣，有身，愁无袖耶？
现代文：四月辛亥日，李全想投降大元，害怕众人有异议，就焚香向南方祭拜，想上吊自杀，被郑衍德、田四救下，说： 比如做衣裳，有身子，还愁没有袖子吗？
English: In April, Xinhai Day, Li Quan wanted to surrender to Dayuan, fearing that many people would have objections, so he burned incense to worship the south, wanted to hang himself, and was saved by Zheng Yande and Tian Si, saying: For example, do you make clothes, have a body, and still worry about not having sleeves?

古文：今北归蒙古，未必非福。 全从之，乃约降大元。
现代文：现在投降蒙古，未必不是福。 李全听了这个意见，就约定投降大元。
English: It may not be a blessing to surrender to Mongolia now. Li Quan listened to this opinion and agreed to surrender.

古文：大元兵入青州，承制授全山东行省。
现代文：大元兵进入青州，按皇帝的旨意授予李全为山东行省。
English: Dayuan soldiers entered Qingzhou, and according to the emperor's will, Li Quan was awarded the province of Shandong.

古文：庆福在山阳，自知己为厉阶，怀不自安，欲图福以自赎。
现代文：刘庆福在山阳，自知自己是祸端，心怀不安，想图谋李福来赎罪。
English: In Shanyang, Liu Qingfu, knowing that he was the cause of the calamity, was uneasy and wanted to plot with Li Fu to atone.

古文：福知之，亦谋去庆福。
现代文：李福知道后，也计谋除去刘庆福。
English: After Li Fu knew, he also plotted to remove Liu Qing Fu.

古文：二人互相猜贰，不相见。
现代文：他们二人互相猜疑，不见面。
English: The two are suspicious of each other and do not see each other.

古文：福伪病旬余，诸将问疾，庆福不往。
现代文：李福装病十多天，众将领都去看望他，刘庆福没去。
English: Li Fu pretended to be ill for more than ten days. Generals came to visit him, but Liu Qingfu did not go.

古文：张甫者，素厚庆福，惧福疑己，乃劝庆福往。
现代文：张甫，一向与刘庆福友好，害怕李福怀疑自己，就劝刘庆福去看望李福。
English: Zhang Fu, who had always been friendly with Liu Qingfu, was afraid that Li Fu would doubt him, so he persuaded Liu Qingfu to visit Li Fu.

古文：后庆福约甫同往，乃寝，遥见福卧不解衣，心恐，不得已至床前，见床头鞘刀，庆福口问疾而手按鞘，惧福先发。
现代文：后来刘庆福与张甫相约一同前去，到寝室时，刘庆福远远地看见李福躺在那里没脱外衣，心中恐惧，不得已来到床前，看见床头有鞘刀，刘庆福口问病情而手按刀鞘，害怕李福先下手。
English: Later, Liu Qingfu and Zhang Fu made an appointment to go together. When they arrived at the bedroom, Liu Qingfu saw Li Fu lying there in the distance without taking off his coat. He was afraid. He had no choice but to come to the bedside and saw a sheath knife at the head of the bed. Liu Qingfu asked about his illness and put his hand on the sheath of the knife, afraid that Li Fu would strike first.

古文：福疑庆福就刀见害，乃跃起拔刀伤庆福，庆福徒手不支，甫救之。
现代文：李福怀疑刘庆福手按刀鞘是准备杀他，就一跃而起拔刀砍伤刘庆福，刘庆福空手不能支撑，被张甫解救。
English: Li Fu suspected that Liu Qingfu was preparing to kill him when he put his hand on the sheath of the knife. He jumped up and slashed Liu Qingfu with his knife. Liu Qingfu couldn't support his empty hand and was rescued by Zhang Fu.

古文：左右群起杀庆福及甫。
现代文：李福的部下一起杀死了刘庆福和张甫。
English: Li Fu's men killed Liu Qing Fu and Zhang Fu together.

古文：甫本金元帅，封高阳公，最善驭众。
现代文：张甫本来是金国的元帅，被封为高阳公，他最善于驾驭部众。
English: Zhang Fu was originally a marshal of the Kingdom of Jin and was given the title of Gaoyang. He was the best at controlling his subordinates.

古文：金亡河北，甫据雄、霸、清、莫、河间、信安不下。
现代文：金国丢掉河北，张甫保卫雄、霸、清、莫、河间、信安没被大元攻陷。
English: When Jin lost Hebei, Zhang Fu protected Xiong, Ba, Qing, Mo, Hema, and Xin'an from being conquered by Taiyuan.

古文：信安出白沟，距燕二百里而阻巨泺，大元兵不能涉，甫每潜师窥伺。
现代文：信安在白沟的外面，距离燕京二百里并被大塘泺阻遏，大元兵不能越过，张甫常派军去伺机骚扰元兵。
English: Xinyan was outside Baigou, two hundred miles away from Yanjing, and was blocked by Datangyu. The Great Yuan soldiers could not cross it. Zhang Fu often sent troops to wait for an opportunity to harass the Great Yuan soldiers.

古文：大元将俚砦奴屡欲灭甫以取雄、霸。
现代文：大元的将领俚寨奴屡次想消灭张甫，夺取雄、霸二州。
English: The generals of Taiyuan repeatedly wanted to eliminate Zhang Fu, seize Xiong and dominate the two states.

古文：骁将窝罗虎者，归甫，甫纳之。
现代文：俚寨奴的猛将窝罗虎，投降了张甫，张甫接纳了他。
English: His fierce general, Wo Luo Hu, surrendered to Zhang Fu, and Zhang Fu accepted him.

古文：其后窝罗虎遁去，且窃甫千里马以献俚砦奴。
现代文：后来窝罗虎逃走，并且偷了张甫的千里马献给俚寨奴。
English: Later, the tiger escaped and stole Zhang Fu's horse to give to the villager.

古文：俚砦奴喜，待遇益厚。
现代文：俚寨奴高兴，对窝罗虎更信任。
English: The farmer was happy and had more trust in the tiger.

古文：尝会饮燕京之大悲阁，窝罗虎醉俚砦奴而推使投阁，几毙焉。
现代文：他们曾在燕京的大悲阁一起饮酒，窝罗虎灌醉俚寨奴并把他推到阁下，俚寨奴差一点死掉。
English: They used to drink together at the Great Compassion Pavilion in Yanjing. They got him drunk and pushed him to the front. He almost died.

古文：窝罗虎乃佯醉下楼，复乘所献马以归甫，追者莫及，人始服甫之用间焉。
现代文：窝罗虎就假装醉酒下楼，又骑着自己献出的马回到张甫这里，追赶他的人没追上，人们才佩服张甫善用间牒。
English: Wo Luo Hu pretended to be drunk and went downstairs, and then rode his horse back to Zhang Fu. His pursuers did not catch up, and people admired Zhang Fu's good use of the ultimatum.

古文：其后归全。
现代文：后来张甫归附了李全。
English: Later, Li Quan was annexed by Zhang Fu.

古文：福以庆福头纳翀，翀大喜，耒曰： 庆福首祸，一世奸雄，今头落措大手耶！ 飞报于朝，遣子恭继奏捷。
现代文：李福把刘庆福的头交给姚罛，姚罛非常高兴，杜耒说： 刘庆福是叛乱的祸首，一世的奸雄，如今头落在读书人的手中啦！ 就飞快地向朝廷汇报，派郑子恭随后去上奏捷报。
English: Li Fu handed Liu Qingfu's head to Yao Zhen. Yao Zhen was very happy. Du Yu said: Liu Qingfu is the villain of the rebellion, the villain of the first generation, and now the head is in the hands of the readers! He quickly reported to the court and sent Zheng Ziqong to publish the successful report.

古文：琸之败，储积扫地，纲运不续，贼党籍籍，谓福所致。
现代文：刘王卓失败，储积的货物都被掠空，纲运不能接续，叛军骚动不安，认为这是李福所导致的。
English: Liu Wangzhuo failed, the accumulated goods were all swept away, the general transport could not continue, and the rebels were restless, believing that this was caused by Li Fu.

古文：福数见翀及佥幕促之，皆谢以朝廷拨降未下，福曰： 朝廷若不养忠义，则不必建阃开幕，今建阃开幕如故，独不支忠义钱粮，是欲立制阃以困忠义也。 六月，福乘众怒，与杨氏谋，召翀饮。
现代文：李福多次见姚罛和制府的官员催促粮草，他们都以朝廷的调拨还没下达为理由推辞，李福说 ：朝廷如果不养活忠义军，就不必设置帅府了；如今和从前一样设置帅府，只是不支给忠义军钱粮，是想建置制府来困住忠义军。 六月，李福乘部众愤怒的时机，与杨氏商议，召姚罛饮酒。
English: Li Fu repeatedly met with Yao Wei and officials of the imperial government to urge grain and grass, and they all declined on the grounds that the allocation of the imperial court had not yet been issued. Li Fu said: If the imperial court does not feed the loyalist army, there is no need to set up a headquarters; today, as in the past, they set up a headquarters, but they do not pay money and grain to the loyalist army. They want to build a headquarters to trap the loyalist army. In June, Li Fu took the opportunity of the anger of the members to discuss with Mr. Yang and call Yao Wei to drink.

古文：翀至而杨氏不出，就坐宾次，左右散去。
现代文：姚罛来后而杨氏不出来，姚罛坐在宾客的位置上，左右人散去。
English: After Yao Yao came and Mr. Yang did not come out, Yao Yao sat in the guest's seat, and people left and right dispersed.

古文：福与翀命召诸幕客，以杨氏命召翀二妾。
现代文：李福与姚罛命令召来其他幕僚，以杨氏的名义召姚罛的两个妾。
English: Li Fu and Yao Yao ordered other staff members to be summoned, and Yao Yao's two concubines were summoned in the name of Mr. Yang.

古文：诸幕客知有变，不得已往。
现代文：众幕僚知道有变乱，迫不得已前来。
English: The staff knew there was trouble and had to come.

古文：耒朝服至八字桥，福兵腰戮之，耒南望再拜就毙。
现代文：杜耒穿着朝服来到八字桥，李福的兵杀他，杜耒向着南方拜了两拜后被杀死。
English: Du Juan came to the Eight-Syllable Bridge wearing a royal robe. Li Fu's soldiers killed him. Du Juan bowed to the south for two bouts and was killed.

古文：二妾之入，翀及见之。
现代文：姚罛的二个妾进来，姚罛与她们见了面。
English: Yao Yao's two concubines came in, and Yao Yao met with them.

古文：福兵欲害翀，郑衍德救之得免，去须鬓，缒城西夜走，徒步归明州，未几。死。
现代文：李福的兵想杀姚罛，被郑衍德救下才得以活命。他剃去胡须和鬓毛，晚上在城西沿绳索下城墙逃走，步行回到明州，不久，姚罛死去。
English: Li Fu's soldiers wanted to kill Yao Yao, but he was saved by Zheng Yan De. He shaved off his beard and mane, and in the evening he escaped from the city wall along the rope in the west of the city, and returned to Mingzhou on foot. Soon, Yao Yao died.

古文：朝廷以淮乱相仍，遣帅必毙，莫肯往来。
现代文：朝廷因为淮地的叛乱不停，派去的将帅一定丧命，谁也不肯来。
English: Because of Huaiyi's rebellion, the imperial court was constantly on the move. The generals sent there were sure to be killed, and no one wanted to come.

古文：始欲轻淮而重江，楚州不复建阃，就以帅杨绍云兼制置，改楚州名淮安军，命通判张国明权守，视之若羁縻州然。
现代文：开始考虑在防守上轻淮河、重长江。楚州不再建帅府，就以统帅杨绍云兼任置制使，把楚州改名为淮安军，命令通判张国明为权淮安军，把它如羁縻州一样看待。
English: They began to consider the importance of the Huaihe River and the Yangtze River in defense. When Chuzhou no longer had a commander-in-chief, they appointed Yang Shaoyun as commander-in-chief, changed the name of Chuzhou to the Huai'an Army, and ordered Zhang Guoming to be the authority of the Huai'an Army, treating it like Guizhou.

古文：贼徒党塞南门，开北门，支邑民田皆以少价抑买之，自收赋以赡军，钱粮不继如故。
现代文：叛军堵塞淮安军南门，开北门，淮安军属县的民田都用少的价钱强买来，自收赋税来养兵，钱粮同过去一样不能接续。
English: The rebels blocked the south gate of the Huai'an Army and opened the north gate. The people's fields in the counties belonging to the Huai'an Army were all bought by force at a low price, and the soldiers were raised by collecting taxes. The money and grain could not be continued as in the past.

古文：贼将国安用、阎通叹曰： 我曹米外日受铜钱二百，楚州物贱可以乐生，而刘庆福为不善。
现代文：叛军将领国安用、阎通叹气说： 我们除了米以外每天得到二百铜钱，楚州物价可以平安度日，而刘庆福做坏事，互相寻找怨仇，使我们无衣无食。 
English: The rebel generals, Guo Anying and Yan Tonglu, sighed and said, "We get two hundred coppers a day except for rice. The prices in Chuzhou allow us to live in peace, but Liu Qingfu did bad things and looked for grudges against each other, leaving us without food and clothing.

古文：怨仇相寻，使我曹无所衣食。 张林、邢德亦谓： 尝受宋恩，中遭全间隙，今归于此，岂可不与朝廷立事？ 王义深亦尝遭全屈辱，且谓： 我本贾帅帐前人，与彭安抚举义不成而归。 五人相谓曰： 朝廷不降钱粮，为有反者未除耳！ 乃共议杀福及杨氏以献，于是众帅兵趋杨氏家。
现代文：张林、邢德也说： 我们曾蒙受宋朝的恩德，中间受到李全的挑拨，如今落到这个地步，怎么能不为朝廷做事？ 王义深也曾经遭受过李全的欺辱，也说： 我本来是贾帅手下的人，和彭安抚举义没成功而来。 他们五个人互相说 ：朝廷不拨钱粮给我们，是因为有反叛的人没除去啊！ 他们就共同决定杀李福和杨氏献给朝廷，于是众人率兵奔杨氏家。
English: Zhang Lin and Xing De also said: We once received the kindness of the Song Dynasty, and were provoked by Li Quan in the middle, and now we have fallen to this level, how can we not work for the court? Wang Yishen also suffered from the humiliation of Li Quan, and also said: I was originally a person under Jia Shuai, and Peng Anju did not succeed in raising righteousness. The five of them said to each other: The court does not allocate money and grain to us because there are rebels who have not been removed! They jointly decided to kill Li Fu and the Yang family to donate to the court, so they all led the troops to the Yang family.

古文：福出，德手刃之，相屠者数百人。
现代文：李福出来，邢德亲手杀了他，有数百人被屠杀。
English: When Li Fu came out, Zande killed him with his own hands, and hundreds of people were slaughtered.

古文：有郭统制者，杀全次子。
现代文：有位郭统制，杀死了李全的二儿子。
English: One of Guo's subordinates killed Li Quan's second son.

古文：通杀一妇人，以为杨氏，函其首并福首驰献于绍云。
现代文：阎通杀死一个妇人，以为是杨氏，把她和李福的头一齐装在匣子里献给杨绍云。
English: Yan Tong killed a woman, thinking it was Mr. Yang, and put her and Li Fu's heads together in a box to give to Yang Shaoyun.

古文：绍云驿送京师，倾朝甚喜。
现代文：杨绍云又送到京城，满朝的人十分高兴。
English: Yang Shaoyun was sent to Beijing again, and the people of Manchukuo were very happy.

古文：檄彭忄乇、张惠、范成进、时青并兵往楚州，便宜尽戮余党。
现代文：朝廷传檄命令彭忄乇、张惠、范成进、时青合兵前往楚州，根据情况不必报告朝廷，杀尽叛军的余党。
English: The imperial court ordered Peng Yao, Zhang Hui, Fan Chengjin, and Shi Qing to go to Chuzhou together, according to the situation, they do not need to report to the imperial court, and kill all the remaining rebels.

古文：未几，传杨氏故无恙，妇人头乃全次妻刘氏也。
现代文：不久，传说杨氏安然无恙，那个妇人的头是李全的第二房夫人刘氏。
English: Soon, it was rumored that Mr. Yang was safe and sound, and that the woman's head was that of Mr. Liu, the second wife of Li Quan.

古文：忄乇轻儇，每供四总管弄戏，得檄不敢自决，力逊。
现代文：彭忄乇是个轻薄浮华的人。常被四总管戏弄，得到檄命后不敢自作主张，极力退避。
English: Peng Yao was a frivolous and flashy person. He was often teased by the four commanders-in-chief. After he was killed, he did not dare to make his own claims and tried his best to retreat.

古文：惠、成进二人即提兵入楚城，与林等五人欢宴，议分北军为五，使五人分掌之，每军无过千人，一屯南渡门，一屯平河桥，一屯北神镇，城中城西各一；在山东人老幼并绝钱粮，出淮阴战舰，陈淮岸以断全归路，请制府及朝廷处之。
现代文：张惠、范成进二人就率兵进入楚州城，同张林等五人欢宴，商量分北方军为五部分，让国安用等五人分别统领，每军不超过一千人，一军驻扎在南渡门，一军驻扎在平河桥，一军驻扎在北神镇，城中城西各驻扎一军；在山东的人老幼都被断绝了钱粮，调淮阴战舰，陈列在淮河岸边来切断李全的退路，请制府和朝廷决定。
English: Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin both led their troops into Chuzhou City. They had a banquet with Zhang Lin and five others, and discussed dividing the Northern Army into five parts, and letting Guo Anyong and five others command them separately. Each army was no more than a thousand people. One army was stationed at Nan Du Men, one army was stationed at Pinghe Qiao, one army was stationed at Bei Shen Zhen, and one army was stationed west of the city in the middle of the city. In Shandong, people of all ages were cut off from money and grain, and Huaiyin warships were moved and displayed on the banks of the Huai River to cut off Li Quan

古文：庙议谓青望重，惟听青区画。
现代文：朝廷认为时青的威望重，就听凭时青来处理。
English: The imperial court considered the prestige of Shichizhong to be very important, so they let Shichizhong deal with it.

古文：省檄之下，不及惠、成进。
现代文：檄命传下，没谈到如何安排张惠、范成进。
English: According to the order, there was no mention of how to arrange Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin.

古文：青亦恐祸及，密遣人报全于青州，迁延不决。
现代文：时青也害怕祸患殃及自己，就秘密派人到青州报告李全，拖延时间不做决定。
English: Shi Qing was also afraid that the disaster would affect himself, so he secretly sent someone to Qingzhou to report to Li Quan, delaying the time and not making a decision.

古文：惠等归盱眙，贼党复振。
现代文：张惠等回到盱眙，叛军势力又抬头。
English: Zhang Hui and others returned to Handan, and the rebel forces were on the rise again.

古文：绍云赴枢密禀议，淮东总领岳珂摄制府事。
现代文：杨绍云到枢密院去汇报，商议，淮东总领岳珂负责制府的事。
English: Yang Shaoyun went to the Privy Council to report and discuss, Huaidong General Yue Ke was responsible for the establishment of the government.

古文：惠、成进既归，钱粮缺乏，密约降金，卢鼓槌许之。
现代文：张惠、范成进回到盱眙，缺乏钱粮，秘密约定投降金国，卢鼓槌答应。
English: Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin returned to Handan, lacking money and grain, and secretly agreed to surrender to Jin. Lu Drumstick agreed.

古文：时镇江军及滁州虎儿军在盱眙者尚众，二人绐忄乇曰： 南北军易致激变，宜令军人出入无得带刃。 又劝早发虎儿军折洗，忄乇从之。
现代文：这时镇江军和滁州虎儿军在盱眙的还很多，张惠、范成进欺骗彭忄乇说： 南方军和北方军在一起容易激起变乱，应该命令军人出入不得带兵器。 又劝彭忄乇早调虎儿军摧毁敌人，彭忄乇答应。
English: At this time, the Zhenjiang Army and the Zhangzhou Tiger Army were still at large. Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin deceived Peng Rong and said: The Southern Army and the Northern Army are easy to stir up turmoil together, and soldiers should be ordered not to carry weapons. They also advised Peng Rong to transfer the Tiger Army to destroy the enemy as early as possible, and Peng Rong agreed.

古文：二人每宴忄乇，必遍迨皂隶，忄乇皆不悟，方感其拒夏全之功，转两军官资。
现代文：张惠、范成进二人每次宴请彭忄乇，一定会遍及衙门的差役，彭忄乇都不醒悟；为感激他们抗拒夏全的功劳，提升他们二军将领的官职。
English: Every time Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin invited Peng Quan to a banquet, the attendants would be all over the gate, and Peng Quan would not wake up; to thank them for resisting Xia Quan's merits, they promoted them to the official position of the two army generals.

古文：二人同戏下合辞曰： 不愿得官，欲得钱粮。 八月辛酉，惠、成进燕忄乇，忄乇左右知有谋，多不往，忄乇往如平时。
现代文：他们二人和部下都推辞说 ：不希望得到官职，想得到钱粮。 八月十五日，张惠、范成进宴请彭忄乇，彭忄乇的亲信知道有阴谋，多数没去，彭忄乇和平时一样赴宴。
English: Both of them and their subordinates declined, saying, "I don't want to get an official post, I want to get money and grain." On August 15, Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin invited Peng Yao to a banquet. Peng Yao's close friends knew there was a conspiracy, and most of them didn't go. Peng Yao went to the banquet as usual.

古文：酒半，缚忄乇，忄乇从者无寸铁，且醉，皆就缚。
现代文：酒宴进行到一半，就把彭忄乇捆绑起来，彭忄乇的随从人员手无寸铁，并且都醉了，就都被捆绑起来。
English: Halfway through the wine banquet, they tied up Peng Yao. Peng Yao's entourage was unarmed and drunk, so they were all tied up.

古文：即日渡淮输款，以盱眙附卢鼓槌于泗州。
现代文：当天张惠、范成进就渡过淮河投降了金国，把盱眙附属于卢鼓槌的泗州。
English: On the same day, Zhang Hui and Fan Chengjin crossed the Huai River and surrendered to Jin, and attached the scepter to Luzhou.

古文：金兵至，开门接之，诸军不战皆降。
现代文：金兵到盱眙，张惠、范成进开门迎接，盱眙各军都不战而降。
English: When the gold soldiers arrived in Handan, Zhang Hui and Fan Cheng entered and opened the door to welcome them. All of Handan's armies surrendered without a fight.

古文：于是塞南门，开北门，导淮水以通泗之东西域焉。
现代文：于是就堵住南门，开北门，疏导淮水沟通泗州的东西两边。
English: As a result, the south gate was blocked and the north gate was opened to channel the Huai River to connect the east and west sides of Luzhou.

古文：卢鼓槌与惠释憾连姻，金官惠有加，俾专制河南，以拒大元。
现代文：卢鼓槌与张惠解除仇怨结成姻亲，金国给张惠授予高官，让他专门控制河南，抵御大元。
English: Lu Drumstick and Zhang Hui resolved their grudge and became in-laws. The state of Jin awarded Zhang Hui a high-ranking official, allowing him to specifically control Henan and resist the Great Yuan.

古文：自是金人窥淮东益急，朝廷调京湖制置司兵万人屯青平山以备全。
现代文：从此金人更加紧对淮东的进攻。朝廷调京湖制置司的一万名士兵驻扎在青平山来防备李全。
English: From then on, the Jin people intensified their attack on Huadong. The imperial court transferred 10,000 soldiers from the Beijing Lake Construction Division to be stationed in Qingping Mountain to guard against Li Quan.

古文：全得青报恸哭，力告大元大将，求南归，不许；断一指示归南必畔，许之。
现代文：李全得到时青的报告后痛哭，极力向大元大将请求回到南方，元将没答应；李全折断一个手指表示回到南方一定背叛宋朝，元将答应。
English: After Li Quan received the report from Shi Qing, he cried bitterly and tried his best to plead with Dai Yuandao to return to the south, but Yuandao did not agree; Li Quan broke a finger to indicate that returning to the south would definitely betray the Song Dynasty, and Yuandao agreed.

古文：承制授山东、淮南行省，得专制山东，而岁献金币。
现代文：根据大元皇帝的旨意李全被授予山东、淮南行省的官职，得以专制山东，但每年要向大元献金币。
English: According to the will of Emperor Taiyuan, Li Quan was awarded the official post of Shandong and Huainan Province, and was able to rule Shandong, but he had to donate gold coins to Taiyuan every year.

古文：十月丙辰，全与大元张宣差并通事数人至楚州，服大元衣冠，文移纪甲子而无号。
现代文：十月十日，李全和大元的张宣差以及几个通事来到楚州，穿戴着大元的衣服、帽子，文书纪年采用天干地支，但没有年号。
English: On October 10, Li Quan and Zhang Xuan from Dayuan, as well as several couriers, came to Chuzhou. They wore Dayuan's clothes and hats, and used the Tiangan branch of the Chinese zodiac, but no year number.

古文：义深走金，安用杀林、德自赎。
现代文：王义深逃到金国，国安用杀死张林和邢德向李全赎罪。
English: Wang Yishen fled to Jin Province, and Guoan used the killing of Zhang Lin and Xing De to atone for Li Quan.

古文：丁巳，全邀青及张国明于淮阴，国明辞疾，青父子同至。
现代文：十一日，李全在淮阴邀请时青和张国明，张国明因病推辞，时青父子一同前去。
English: On the 11th day, Li Quan invited Shi Qing and Zhang Guoming to Huaiyin. Zhang Guoming declined due to illness, and Shi Qing and his son went together.

古文：全推杀其子者郭统制斩之，又收田成瑶、田之昂、李英等八人下狱，云： 非朝廷杀我妻子，吾惟问汝。 李英，全腹心，狡而密，与李平皆山东胥吏。
现代文：李全追究杀他儿子的人郭统制并杀了他，又把田成瑶、田之昂、李英等八人投入监狱，说 ：不是朝廷杀了我的妻子、儿子，我只向你们问罪。 李英，是李全的心腹，狡诈而细密，和李平都是山东的胥吏。
English: Li Quan investigated the person who killed his son, Guo Dizhe, and killed him. He also put eight people, including Tian Chengyu, Tian Zhiang, and Li Ying, in prison, saying, "It was not the court that killed my wife and son, I only ask you for punishment. Li Ying is Li Quan's confidant, cunning and meticulous, and Li Ping is Shandong's eavesdropper.

古文：全之乍逆乍顺，二人所教也。
现代文：李全忽而反叛忽而归顺，就是他们二人教的。
English: The two of them taught Li Quan to be rebellious and obedient at the same time.

古文：平又数致全书至庙堂，以觇朝廷。
现代文：李平又多次把李全的书信送到朝廷，以此来侦知朝廷的意图。
English: Li Ping also repeatedly sent Li Quan's letters to the imperial court in order to discover the intentions of the imperial court.

古文：青缴所授檄于全曰： 我素推尊相公，岂肯为此！ 全亦恶青反覆。
现代文：时青把他接受的朝廷的檄命交给李全说 ：我是向来推重和尊敬相公的，哪肯做这些事！ 李全也恨时青反复无常。
English: Shih Ch'ing gave the imperial command he had accepted to Li Quan and said: I have always respected and respected my husband, who would do these things! Li Quan also hated Shih Ch'ing's capriciousness.

古文：辛酉，与登城南楼饮，杀青，驰骑往绐青妻，言青病，见与祷禳。
现代文：十五日，李全和时青登上城南的门楼饮酒，杀死时青，派骑兵去欺骗时青的妻子，说时青病了，决定为他做祈祷消灾免祸的仪式。
English: On the fifteenth day, Li Quan and Shi Qing boarded the gate tower in the south of the city to drink, killed Shi Qing, sent cavalry to deceive Shi Qing's wife, said that Shi Qing was ill, and decided to pray for him.

古文：青妻至，尽杀之。
现代文：时青的妻子到来之后，与时青一起被杀死。
English: After Shi Qing's wife arrived, she was killed together with Shi Qing.

古文：遂并青军，擢小校胡义为将，徙其半于涟、海。
现代文：李全就吞并了时青的军队，提拔小校胡义为将领，把时青军队的一半调往涟水、海州。
English: Li Quan absorbed the army of the youth of the time, promoted the schoolboy Hu Yi as a general, and transferred half of the youth army to Surabaya and Haizhou.

古文：绍定元年春，全厚募人为兵，不限南北，宋军多亡应之。
现代文：绍定元年春，李全用优厚的条件招募士兵，被招募的人没有南北方的限制，宋军士兵多数逃走到李全这里应募。
English: In the spring of the first year of Shaoding, Li Quan used generous conditions to recruit soldiers. The recruited people were not restricted by the north and south. Most of the Song Army soldiers fled to Li Quan to apply for recruitment.

古文：天长民保聚为十六砦，比岁失业，官振之，不能继，壮者皆就募。
现代文：天长的保甲百姓聚在一起为十六个寨子，他们连年失业，不耕种土地，官府赈济他们，但不能接续上，强壮的人都应募去李全那里。
English: The long-suffering people of Baogao have gathered together to form 16 villages. They have been unemployed for years and do not cultivate the land. The government has been supporting them, but it cannot continue. Strong people should be recruited to go to Li Quan.

古文：射阳湖浮居数万家，家有兵仗，侵掠不可制，其豪周安民、谷汝砺、王十五长之，亦蜂结水砦，以观成败。
现代文：射阳湖有数万家在那里客居，他们家中有兵器，他们的侵掠不能被制止，周安民、谷汝砺、王十五是他们的首领，也结成水寨，观看成败。
English: Tens of thousands of families from Shayang Lake live there. They have weapons in their homes, and their invasion and plunder cannot be stopped. Zhou Anmin, Gu Ruchen, and Wang XV are their leaders, and they also form a water village to watch the success or failure.

古文：翟朝宗知扬州，权制置。
现代文：翟朝宗为扬州知州，权制置。
English: Jianchoshu was the chizhou of Yangzhou, and the power system was established.

古文：全厚赏捕赵邦永，邦永乃变名必胜。
现代文：李全悬重赏逮捕赵邦永，赵邦永就改名为赵必胜。
English: Li Quan put a heavy bounty on the arrest of Zhao Bangyong, and Zhao Bangyong changed his name to Zhao Bisheng.

古文：全知东南利舟师，谋习水战，米商至，悉并舟籴之。留其柁工，一以教十。
现代文：李全知道东南依靠水兵，就计划练习水战，米商来到后，连船带米一起买来，把舵工留下，以一教十。
English: Li Quan knew that the Southeast depended on sailors, so he planned to practice naval warfare. After the rice merchants came, they bought the boat and rice together, leaving the helmsman to teach ten.

古文：又遣人泛江湖市桐油煔筏，厚募南匠，大治舭〈舟达〉船，自淮及海相望。
现代文：又派人到各地买桐油粘筏，用优厚的条件招募南方的工匠，大造舭舟达船，从淮河到海都能相望。
English: He also sent people to various places to buy tung oil sticky reeds, recruited craftsmen from the south with favorable conditions, and built a large reed boat, so that they could look at each other from the Huai River to the sea.

古文：于是善湘禁桐油煔筏下江，严甚。
现代文：于是赵善湘禁止桐油粘筏下江，特别严格。
English: As a result, Zhao Shanxiang banned the use of tung oil in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River, which was particularly strict.

古文：朝宗市煔木往扬州，善湘亦闻于朝，请以松木易留之。
现代文：翟朝宗到扬州去买粘木，赵善湘也向朝廷奏报，请求用松木替换粘木并留下粘木。
English: Zhao Zhenxiang also sent a report to the imperial court, requesting that the pine wood be used to replace the sticky wood and leave the sticky wood.

古文：全不得已，代以榆板，舟成多重滞。
现代文：李全不得已，以榆木代替粘木，造成的船多数重并容易搁浅。
English: As a last resort, Li Quan replaced the sticky wood with birch, which made the boat heavier and prone to stranding.

古文：六月，试舟射阳湖，善湘恐其乘便捣通、泰，亟牒池州求通、泰入湖之路。
现代文：六月，在射阳湖试验造好的船，赵善湘恐怕李全乘机攻打通、泰二州，马上给池州下牒文寻找通、泰二州入湖的通道。
English: In June, Zhao Shanxiang tested the boat built in Shayang Lake, and I am afraid that Li Quan took the opportunity to attack Tong and Tai Erzhou, and immediately gave Chizhou an ultimatum to find a channel for Tong and Tai Erzhou to enter the lake.

古文：七月壬辰，全使衍德提兵三万如海州。
现代文：七月廿一日，李全派郑衍德率领三万士兵到海州。
English: On July 21, Li Quan sent Zheng Yande to lead 30,000 soldiers to Haizhou.

古文：乙未，全及杨氏大阅战舰于海洋。
现代文：廿四日，李全和杨氏在海中检阅战舰。
English: On the 24th, Li Quan and Mr. Yang inspected the warship at sea.

古文：八月，全趋青州，为严实及石小哥邀击，败走。
现代文：八月，李全到青州，被严实及石小哥攻击，李全失败逃走。
English: In August, Li Quan went to Qingzhou. He was attacked by Yan Si and Shi Xiao Bro. Li Quan failed to escape.

古文：小哥，珪子也，遂夺青厓崮，据之，九月，全归海州，治舟益急，驱诸崮人习水。
现代文：石小哥，是石王圭的儿子，他夺取了青山固，并占据了它。九月，李全回到海州，更加紧制造战舰，驱使各山寨的人练习游泳。
English: Shi Xiao'er, the son of Shi Wanggui, captured Qingshan and occupied it. In September, Li Quan returned to Haizhou to make more warships and drive the villagers to practice swimming.

古文：十一月，全至楚州。
现代文：十一月，李全到楚州。
English: In November, Li Quan went to Chuzhou.

古文：全山东经理未定，而岁贡于大元者不缺，故外恭顺于宋以就钱粮，往往贸贷输大元。
现代文：李全治理山东仍不稳定，但每年向大元贡奉的东西不缺少，所以表面上恭顺宋朝以便得到宋朝的钱粮，往往是把贸易的货物送给大元。
English: Li Quan's governance of Shandong was still unstable, but there was no shortage of things to pay tribute to Dayuan every year. Therefore, in order to ostensibly obey the Song Dynasty and get the Song Dynasty's money and grain, he often sent trade goods to Dayuan.

古文：宋得少宽北顾之忧，遣饷不辍。
现代文：宋朝得以减少了对北方的忧虑，不停地给李全发军饷。
English: The Song Dynasty was able to reduce its worries about the north, and continued to pay tribute to Li Quan.

古文：全纵游说于朝，不若复建山阳制置司。
现代文：李全派人到朝廷游说，不如重新设置山阳制置司。
English: Li Quan sent people to the imperial court to lobby. It would be better to re-establish the Sanyang System.

古文：全又与金合纵，约以盱眙与之，金亦遣靳经历者聘全，皆不遂。
现代文：李全又与金国联合，相约把盱眙给金国，金国也派靳经历来聘问李全，但都没成功。
English: Li Quan also joined hands with Kim Guo and made an appointment to give the shovel to Kim Guo. Kim Guo also sent shovel experience to hire Li Quan, but it was not successful.

古文：二年四月，全以粮少为词，遣海舟自苏州洋入平江、嘉兴告籴，实欲习海道，觇畿甸也。
现代文：绍定二年四月，李全以粮少为借口，派海船从苏州洋进入平江、嘉兴请求买粮，实际是想熟习海路，窥伺京城地区。
English: In April of the second year of Shaoding, Li Quan sent seagoing ships from Suzhou Yang into Pingjiang and Jiaxing to request to buy grain under the pretext of grain shortage. In fact, he wanted to familiarize himself with the sea route and spy on the Beijing area.

古文：六月，全资淮安牛马〈马会〉赵五啸合亡命，杂北军分往盱眙略牛马。
现代文：六月，李全资助淮安的牛马贩子赵五召集逃亡的人，把北方军夹杂在里面分别去盱眙抢掠牛马。
English: In June, Li Quan sponsored Zhao Wu, a cattle and horse trader in Huai'an, to gather the fugitives, and mixed the Northern Army into them to separately go and loot cattle and horses.

古文：九月，全往涟、海视战舰，阳言归东平葬方士许先生。
现代文：九月，李全去涟水、海州巡视战舰，表面上说是回东平安葬方士许先生。
English: In September, Li Quan went to Surabaya and Haizhou to inspect the warships. On the surface, it was said that he was returning to the East to peacefully bury Mr. Xu.

古文：未几，还。
现代文：不久，李全回来。
English: Soon, Li Quan came back.

古文：尝燕张国明等，忽曰： 我乃不忠不孝之人。 众曰： 节使何为有是言也？ 全曰： 縻费朝廷钱粮至多，乃杀许制置，不忠；我兄被人杀，不能报复，不孝。
现代文：李全曾宴请张国明等人，席间他忽然说： 我是个不忠不孝的人。 
English: Li Quan once held a banquet for Zhang Guoming and others. During the meal, he suddenly said, "I am a disloyal and unfilial person."

古文：二月二十五日事，吾之罪也。
现代文：众人问 ：节使为什么会说出这种话呢？ 
English: The crowd asked: Why did the festival organizer say such a thing?

古文：十一月十三日事，谁之罪耶？ 盖指琸与夏全也。
现代文：李全说 ：浪费了朝廷的很多钱粮，杀死许制置，这是不忠；我的哥哥被人杀死，我不能报仇，这是不孝。二月二十五日的事，是我的罪过，十一月十三日的事，是谁的罪呢？ 
English: Li Quan said, "I wasted a lot of money and grain from the imperial court, and killed Xu Xiechi, which is disloyalty; my brother was killed, and I can't take revenge, which is unfilial. The February 25th incident was my fault, and the November 13th incident was whose fault?

古文：全密遣军掠高邮、宝应、天长之间，知高邮军叶秀发遣宗雄武领民兵捍御，为贼所败。
现代文：这是指刘王卓和夏全。李全秘密派军队在高邮、宝应、天长之间掳掠，高邮军知军叶秀发派宗雄武率领民兵抵御，被叛军打败。
English: This refers to Liu Wangzhuo and Xia Quan. Li Quan secretly sent troops to loot and plunder between Gaoyou, Baoying and Tianlang. Gaoyou's military commander Ye Xiufa sent Zong Xiongwu to lead the militia to resist and was defeated by the rebels.

古文：三年二月壬寅，御前军器库火。
现代文：绍定三年二月九日，御前军器库失火。
English: On February 9 of the third year of the Shao Ding Dynasty, the Imperial Armory caught fire.

古文：得纵火者，楚州军穆椿也。
现代文：放火的人被抓获，是楚州的军人穆椿。
English: The person who set the fire was caught, it was a soldier from Chuzhou, Mu Tsubaki.

古文：全欲销宋兵备，故使椿行，且伏奸于外，谋入为乱，以不得入而止。
现代文：李全想摧毁宋朝的兵备，所以派穆椿去放火，并且在外面埋伏人，计划进去捣乱，因为没进去而停止。
English: Li Quan wanted to destroy the military equipment of the Song Dynasty, so he sent Muqin to set fire, and ambushed people outside, planned to go in and make trouble, but stopped because he did not go in.

古文：于是先朝兵甲尽丧。
现代文：于是先朝的兵器铠甲都丧失。
English: As a result, the weapons and armor of the previous government were all lost.

古文：椿临刑笑曰： 事济矣。 全欲先据扬州以渡江，分兵徇通、泰以趋海。
现代文：穆椿在受刑前笑着说 ：事情成功了。 李全想占据扬州然后从这里渡过长江，分兵占领通、泰二州以便到达海上。
English: Before he was sentenced, Muqin smiled and said: "It's a success. Li Quan wanted to occupy Yangzhou and then cross the Yangtze River from here, and the detachment occupied Tong and Taizhou in order to reach the sea.

古文：诸将皆曰： 通、泰，盐场在焉，莫若先取为家计，且使朝廷失盐利。 全欲朝廷不为备，且虽反而难遽绝钱粮，乃挟大元李、宋二宣差恫疑虚喝，而使国明达诸朝。而大元实未尝资全兵。
现代文：众将领都说 ：通、泰二州，盐场在那里，不如先攻取作为家计，并且使朝廷失去盐场的利益。 李全认为朝廷不做防备，况且他即使反叛，朝廷也难以马上断绝给他的钱粮，就挟持大元的李、宋二位宣差对宋朝廷虚张声势，恐吓威胁，并派张国明通报给宋朝廷，而大元实际上不曾资助李全兵力。
English: The generals all said, "In the two provinces of Tong and Tai, where there is a salt mine, it is better to capture it first as a family business and deprive the imperial court of the profits of the salt mine. Li Quan thought that the imperial court did not take precautions, and moreover, even if he rebelled, the imperial court would not immediately cut off the money and grain given to him. Therefore, the two envoys of Li and Song, who held the large amount of money, bluffed and threatened the Song imperial court, and sent Zhang Guoming to inform the Song imperial court, but the large amount of money did not actually support Li Quan's troops.

古文：有识李宣差者，曰： 此青州卖药人也。 七月，召国明禀议，全以宝玉资其行，宾从所过，扬言： 李相公英略绝伦，其射五百步，朝廷莫若裂地王之，与增钱粮，使当边境。 遍馈要津，求主其说。
现代文：有认识李宣差的人，说： 这是青州一个卖药的。 七月，朝廷召张国明去禀奏，李全用宝玉给他做费用，李全的宾客和仆从在所过之处扬言 ：李相公的雄才大略无与伦比，他射箭能达到五百步那么远，朝廷不如分裂国土，让他为王，给他增加钱粮，让他守卫边境。 
English: Some people who knew Li Xuancha said, "This is a drug peddler from Qingzhou." In July, the imperial court summoned Zhang Guoming to play the harp, Li Quan paid him with precious stones, and Li Quan's guests and servants threatened everywhere they passed: Li Xianggong's talent is unparalleled, he can shoot arrows as far as five hundred paces, the imperial court should divide the country, let him be king, give him more money and grain, and let him guard the border.

古文：既见庙堂，以百口保全不叛。
现代文：对所有身居要职的人都进行贿赂，请求这些人赞同这种说法，替他说好话。
English: He bribed everyone in a position of authority to endorse the story and say nice things about him.

古文：八月，全将阅舟师，风不顺，焚香祷曰： 使全有天命，当反风。 语毕风反。
现代文：张国明见到皇上后，以一百口人的性命担保李全不背叛宋朝。八月，李全将检阅水军，风势不顺，他就焚香祷告说： 如果让我李全有天命，应该是相反的风向。 
English: After Zhang Guoming met the emperor, he pledged the lives of a hundred people to guarantee that Li Quan would not betray the Song Dynasty. In August, Li Quan would review the naval forces. When the wind was not favorable, he lit incense and prayed: "If I, Li Quan, have a heavenly destiny, it should be the opposite wind direction."

古文：大阅数日。
现代文：李全说完这话风向就反过来了。
English: After Li Quan said this, the wind changed direction.

古文：会全籴麦舟过盐城县，朝宗嗾尉兵夺之。
现代文：李全阅兵好几天。正巧李全买麦子的船路过盐城县，翟朝宗唆使尉兵抢夺。
English: Li Quan held a military parade for several days. It just so happened that the ship on which Li Quan was buying wheat was passing through Yancheng County, and Yu Chaozong instigated his soldiers to loot it.

古文：全怒，以捕盗为名，庚午，水陆数万径捣盐城，戍将陈益、楼强皆遁，全入城据之。
现代文：李全大怒，以搜捕盗贼为名，十一日，李全的水、陆军数万人直捣盐城，盐城守将陈益、楼强都逃走，李全进城并占据了它。
English: Li Quan flew into a rage, and on the 11th day of the month, in the name of hunting down thieves, tens of thousands of Li Quan's soldiers and sailors stormed Yancheng. Yancheng's guards, Chen Yi and Lou Qiang, fled. Li Quan entered the city and occupied it.

古文：知县陈遇逾城走，公私盐货皆没于全。
现代文：盐城县知县陈遇越过城墙逃走，城中公家和私人的盐货都落入李全的手中。
English: Chen Yu, from Zhixian County, Yancheng County, fled across the city wall. Public and private salt supplies in the city all fell into the hands of Li Quan.

古文：朝宗仓皇遣干官王节入盐城，恳全退师；又遣吏曾玠、李易入山阳，求杨氏里言之助，皆不答。
现代文：翟朝宗仓皇派干官王节进入盐城，恳求李全退兵；又派官吏曾、李易进入山阳，求杨氏在内部帮着说好话，都不答应。
English: Emperor Jianzhong sent officials Wang Jie into Yancheng and implored Li Quan to withdraw from the army; he also sent officials Zeng and Li Yi into Shanyang to ask Yang to help and say good words inside, but they did not agree.

古文：朝宗乃遣卞整领兵扼境。
现代文：翟朝宗就派卞整领兵扼守境土。
English: The Han Dynasty sent Han Jing to lead the troops to defend the territory.

古文：全留郑祥、董友守盐城，提兵往楚。
现代文：李全留郑祥、董友守卫盐城，自己领兵去楚州。
English: Li Quan left Zheng Xiang and Dong You to guard Yancheng, while he led his troops to Chuzhou.

古文：整与遇麾军道左，击柝声诺。
现代文：卞整和陈遇在道的东面指挥军队，打更时互相出声答应。
English: Xun Zhei and Chen Rong commanded the army on the east side of the road, and when it was time to fight, they said yes to each other.

古文：全言于朝，称遣兵捕盗过盐城，令自弃城遁去，虑军民惊扰，未免入城安众。
现代文：李全对朝廷上报，声称自己派兵捕杀盗贼路过盐城，盐城知县自己弃城逃走，他担心城中军民受到惊扰，未免进城去安抚众人。
English: Li Quan reported to the imperial court, claiming that he had sent soldiers to catch and kill thieves passing through Yancheng. Yancheng Zhixian himself abandoned the city and fled. He was worried that the soldiers and civilians in the city would be disturbed, so he went into the city to appease everyone.

古文：乃加全两镇节，令释兵，命制置司干官耶律均往谕之。
现代文：朝廷于是给李全加上两镇指挥使的官职，命令他退兵，命令制置司干官耶律均去告诉他。
English: The imperial court then gave Li Quan the official post of the commander of the two towns, ordered him to withdraw from the army, and ordered the establishment of the secretary Yerujun to tell him.

古文：全曰： 朝廷待我如小儿，啼则与果。 不受。
现代文：李全说 ：朝廷对我就像小孩一样，哭的时候就给果子吃。 
English: Li Quan said: The imperial court treated me like a child, giving me fruit to eat when I cried.

古文：朝廷为罢朝宗，谋再用绍云，绍云辞以官卑不能制；命郑损，损辞。
现代文：不接受朝廷的命令。朝廷因此罢去翟朝宗，计划再用杨绍云，杨绍云以官职卑微不能控制下属为理由推辞；朝廷又任命郑损，郑损推辞。
English: He did not accept the order of the imperial court. Therefore, the imperial court dismissed Gong Chaozong and planned to use Yang Shaoyun again. Yang Shaoyun declined the appointment on the grounds that he was too lowly to control his subordinates. The imperial court also appointed Zheng Ji, but Zheng Ji declined the appointment.

古文：通判扬州赵璥夫暂摄事。
现代文：扬州通判赵王敬夫暂时负责制置司的事。
English: The Yangzhou Intermediate People's Court has ruled that Zhao Wang Jingfu is temporarily responsible for the establishment of the department.

古文：全造舟益急，至发冢取煔板，炼铁钱为钉鞠，熬人脂捣油灰，列炬继晷，招沿海亡命为水手。
现代文：李全加紧造船，甚至掘坟墓取得粘木板，把铁钱溶化炼成钉鞠，熬人的脂肪做成油灰，打着火把日夜不停地干，招集沿海地区逃命的人为水手。
English: Li Quan stepped up shipbuilding, even digging a grave to obtain a sticky board, melting iron money into a javelin, boiling human fat into putty, holding a torch day and night, and summoning sailors fleeing for their lives from coastal areas.

古文：又绐璥夫以大元为词，邀增五千人钱粮，求誓书铁券。
现代文：又以抵御大元为借口欺骗赵王敬夫，要求增加五千人的钱粮，请求誓书铁券。
English: He also deceived Zhao Wang Jingfu under the pretext of resisting the Great Yuan Dynasty, demanding an increase of money and grain for five thousand people, and asking for a pledge of iron coupons.

古文：朝廷犹遣饷不绝。
现代文：朝廷仍给李全不停地运送军饷。
English: The imperial court continued to send military pay to Li Quan.

古文：全得米，即自转输淮海入盐城以赡其众。
现代文：李全得到米，就自己转到淮海送到盐城供养他的部众。
English: When Li Quan got rice, he himself went to Huaihai and sent it to Yancheng to feed his subordinates.

古文：他军士见者曰： 朝廷惟恐贼不饱，我曹何力杀贼！ 射阳湖人至有 养北贼戕淮民 之语，闻者太息。
现代文：别的军士见到这些后说： 朝廷惟恐贼吃不饱，我们怎么尽力杀贼？ 射阳湖的人甚至有 养北方的贼，残害淮地的百姓 的话，听到的人叹息。
English: After seeing this, another sergeant said: "The imperial court can't get enough of the thieves, so how can we do our best to kill the thieves? The people of Shayang Lake even raised thieves from the north to destroy the people of Huai, and the people who heard this sighed.

古文：王十五附全，全又遣人以金牌诱胁周安民等，造浮梁于谕口，以便盐城来往；又开马攞港、寿河，引淮船入湖，为攻挠水砦计。
现代文：王十五归附李全，李全又派人用金牌引诱和威胁周安民等人，在谕口建造浮桥，以方便盐城的来往；又开辟马罗港、寿河，使淮河上的船能进到湖中，作为攻打水寨的准备。
English: On the fifteenth day of the King's reign, it was annexed by Li Quan. Li Quan also sent people to tempt and threaten Zhou Anmin and others with gold medals, built a pontoon bridge at the mouth of the river to facilitate the traffic of Yancheng; and opened Maro Port and Shouhe to enable ships on the Huaihe River to enter the lake, as a preparation for attacking the water village.

古文：复言于制置司云： 全复归三年，淮甸宁息，虽荷大丞相力主安靖之说，深有覆护之恩，奈何赵制置、岳总管、二赵兄弟人自为政，使全难处！
现代文：又对置制司说 ：我李全归附了三年，淮甸安宁，虽然蒙受大丞相力主安靖的思想，深受被保护的恩情，无奈赵制置、岳总管、赵葵、赵范兄弟二人各自为政，使李全难于安身。
English: He also said to the chief secretary: I, Li Quan, have been attached for three years, Huai Tian Anning, although I have received the thought of the grand secretary and the main force of Anning, and I am deeply grateful for being protected, but the two brothers, Zhao Shieqi, Yue Shuan, Zhao Kwai, and Zhao Fan, are independent of each other, making it difficult for Li Quan to settle down.

古文：全欲决定去就，亲往盐城存札。
现代文：我李全想决定是离开还是留下，亲自去盐城检阅视察。
English: I, Li Quan, want to decide whether to leave or stay, and personally go to Yancheng to inspect and inspect.

古文：若有疾全者、疑全者，如赵知府之辈，便可提兵决战。
现代文：如果有忌恨李全、怀疑李全的，如赵知府之流，便可以领兵前去决战。
English: If there are those who are jealous of Li Quan or suspicious of Li Quan, such as the Zhao Chifu clan, they can lead soldiers to go to the decisive battle.

古文：如能灭全，高官重禄任彼取之，倘不能灭，方表全心。 善湘见之甚愤，范亦请调兵。
现代文：如果能消灭李全的，高官厚禄任凭你取；如果不能消灭李全，正表明了我李全的心意。 赵善湘看到后十分气愤，赵范也请求调兵。
English: If you can eliminate Li Quan, you can take the high-ranking official's rich reward; if you can't eliminate Li Quan, it just shows my intention of Li Quan. Zhao Shanxiang was very angry when he saw it, and Zhao Fan also requested the transfer of troops.

古文：时弥远多在告，执政无可否，举朝率谓： 大丞相老于经纶，岂不善处？ 独参知政事郑清之深忧之，密与枢密袁韶、尚书范楷议，二人所见合。
现代文：这时史弥远常常休假，执政不能做出决定，满朝的人差不多都认为： 大丞相善于策划治理国家大事，能不妥善处理？ 只有参知政事郑清之特别忧虑，秘密与枢密使袁韶、尚书范楷商议，他们二人与郑清之的意见相同。
English: At this time, Shi Yiyuan often took a vacation, the government could not make a decision, and the people of the Manchu Dynasty almost all thought: the great chancellor is good at planning and managing national affairs, can it not be handled properly? Only Zheng Qing, the governor and statesman, was particularly worried, and secretly discussed with the envoys Yuan Xuan and Shang Shufan Kai, both of whom had the same opinion as Zheng Qing.

古文：清之乃约韶见帝，韶历言全状，帝有忧色。
现代文：郑清之就约袁韶一起拜见皇上，袁韶极力讲李全的情况，皇上也面带忧虑。
English: Zheng Qingzhi went to see the emperor together with Yuan Qi. Yuan Qi tried his best to explain the situation of Li Quan, and the emperor was also worried.

古文：清之即力赞讨全，帝意决。
现代文：郑清之就极力赞成讨伐李全，皇上也下了决心。
English: Zheng Qingzhi strongly supported the crusade against Li Quan, and the emperor also made up his mind.

古文：清之退，以帝意告弥远，弥远意亦决。
现代文：郑清之退去后，把皇上的意思报告给史弥远，史弥远也下了决心。
English: After Zheng Qingzhi retreated, he reported the emperor's intention to Shi Yidang, who also made up his mind.

古文：乙巳，金字牌进善湘焕章阁学士、江淮制置大使，范直徽猷阁、知扬州、淮东安抚副使，葵直宝章阁、淮东提点刑狱兼知滁州，俱节制军马，全子才军器监簿、制置司参议官。
现代文：乙巳日，朝廷下金字牌进升赵善湘为焕章阁学士、江淮制置大使，赵范为直徽猷阁、扬州知州、淮东安抚副使，赵葵为直宝章阁、淮东提点刑狱兼滁州知州，都指挥军队，全子才为军器监簿、制置司参议官。
English: On the second day of the month, the imperial court promoted Zhao Shanxiang to the title of Huan Zhangge Bachelor and Jianghuai Construction Ambassador, Zhao Fan to the title of Zhihuangge, Yangzhou Zhizhou, and Huaidong Pacification Vice-Envoy, Zhao Kwai to the title of Zhihuangge, Huaidong Tianting Prison and Zhangzhou Zhizhou, all of whom commanded the army, and all of whom were the military equipment supervision and installation department counselor.

古文：下诏曰：
现代文：皇上下诏说：
English: He also said the following:

古文：君臣，天地之常经；刑赏，军国之大枋。
现代文：君臣，是天地的常理；刑赏，是国家的权柄。
English: Kings and ministers are the common sense of heaven and earth; punishment and reward are the power of the state.

古文：顺斯柔抚，逆则诛夷。
现代文：顺应它们就能得到安抚，违背它们就要受到诛杀。
English: They are appeased when they are obeyed, and fought when they are disobeyed.

古文：惟我朝廷兼爱南北，念山东之归附，即淮甸以绥来。
现代文：只因为我朝廷兼爱南方和北方，惦记山东归附来的人，就在淮甸安抚来的人。
English: Only because my court loves both the south and the north, remembering those who were annexed in Shandong and those who were pacified in Huai Dian.

古文：视尔遗黎，本吾赤子，故给资粮而脱之饿殍，赐爵秩而示以宠荣，坐而食者逾十年，惠而养之如一日，此更生之恩也，何负汝而反耶？
现代文：你们这些遗民，本来是我的子民百姓，所以给你们物资、粮食使你们从死亡中挣脱出来，赏赐官爵是表示对你们的恩宠，你们坐在那里不劳而食已经超过了十年，朝廷对你们的恩惠和供养十几年如一日，这是再生的恩德，怎么得罪了你们而使你们反叛呢？
English: You, the survivors, used to be my people. That is why I gave you supplies and food to save you from death. The reward of nobility is a sign of grace to you. You have been sitting there without working for more than ten years. The court's favor and support for you for more than ten years is like a day. This is the grace of rebirth. How did I offend you and make you rebel?

古文：蠢兹李全，侪于异类，蜂屯蚁聚，初无横草之功；人面兽心，曷胜擢发之罪！缪为恭顺，公肆陆梁。
现代文：这个愚蠢的李全，和异类一样，像蜂和蚁那样屯聚，最初一点功劳也没有；他长着人的面目，野兽的心，罪大恶极！假装恭顺，公然肆虐。
English: This stupid Li Quan, like the outliers, gathered like bees and ants, initially without any merit; he had the face of a man, the heart of a beast, the worst of sins! Pretending to be obedient, openly raging.

古文：因馈饷之富，以啸集俦徒；挟品位之崇，以胁制官吏。凌蔑帅阃，杀逐边臣，虔刘我民，输掠其众。
现代文：借着国家给的钱粮，招集部众；凭着官职荣宠，威胁和控制官吏；欺凌和蔑视统帅，杀死逐走守边疆的官员，劫掠我的百姓，把劫掠来的东西运送给自己的部众。
English: With the money and grain given by the state, he rallied his subordinates; with the glory of office, he threatened and controlled officials; he bullied and defied commanders, killed officials who guarded the border, plundered my people, and transported the plundered goods to his subordinates.

古文：狐假威以为畏己，犬吠主旁若无人。
现代文：狐假虎威以为人们害怕自己，狗咬主人就像旁边没人一样，目空一切。
English: The fox and the tiger think that people are afraid of them, and the dog bites the owner as if there were no one around.

古文：姑务包含，愈滋猖獗，遽夺攘于盐邑，继掩袭于海陵，用怨酬恩，稔恶恣暴。
现代文：朝廷暂时包涵这些，李全却愈益猖獗，在盐邑掠夺后，又接着袭击海陵，用怨仇来酬谢恩德，积邪恶而恣意横暴。
English: The imperial court tolerated this for the time being, but Li Quan became more and more rampant. After plundering Yan'e, he attacked Hailing again, rewarding Xie Ende with hatred, and accumulating evil and arbitrary violence.

古文：为封豕以洊食，贪婪无厌；怒螳螂而当车，灭亡可待。
现代文：李全是头填不饱肚子的大猪，贪婪无厌；恨他螳臂挡车不自量力，只能等待灭亡。
English: Li Quan is a big pig with an insatiable appetite, insatiable greed; hating him, he can't stop the car by himself, and can only wait for his death.

古文：故神人之共愤，岂覆载之所容！
现代文：所以神和人都很愤怒，难道天地能庇护包容？
English: Therefore, both God and man are very angry. Can heaven and earth shelter tolerance?

古文：舍是弗图，孰不可忍！
现代文：舍去讨伐李全这件事，孰不可忍！
English: Giving up the fight against Li Quan is intolerable!

古文：李全可削夺官爵，停给钱粮。
现代文：对李全可以削夺官爵，停止给他钱粮。
English: Li Quan can be stripped of his title and his allowance stopped.

古文：敕江、淮制臣，整诸军而讨伐；因朝野佥议，坚一意以剿除。
现代文：命令江、淮制臣，整顿各军准备去讨伐；借着朝内外的一致意见，下定决心剿除李全。
English: He ordered Jiang and Huai to rectify the troops and prepare for the crusade. With the unanimous opinion of both inside and outside the DPRK, he made up his mind to eliminate Li Quan.

古文：蔽自朕心，诞行天罚。
现代文：李全蒙蔽朕心，理所当然地遭到天的惩罚。
English: Li Quan deceived my heart and was punished by heaven.

古文：顾予众士，久衔激愤之怀；暨尔边氓，期洗沈冤之痛。
现代文：我朝的官员、士大夫，心怀激愤已经很久；至于边境的百姓，他们希望洗去沉冤造成的痛苦。
English: The officials and scholars of my government have been angry for a long time; as for the people on the border, they hope to wash away the pain caused by the injustice.

古文：益勉思于奋厉，以共赴于功名。
现代文：应该鼓足勇气，奋勇杀敌，取得功名。
English: It is necessary to muster up courage, kill the enemy bravely, and win fame.

古文：凡曰胁从，举官效顺，当察情而宥过，庸加惠以褒忠。
现代文：凡是被李全胁迫而跟从的人，应该报效和归顺国家，国家应该查明实情进行宽恕，增加恩惠来表彰忠义的人。
English: All those who were coerced by Li Quan to follow him should repay their services and submit to the state, and the state should investigate the facts to forgive and increase the favors to commend the loyal people.

古文：爰饬邦条，式孚群听：应擒斩到全者，赏节度使，钱二十万，银绢二万匹；同谋人次第擢赏。
现代文：把国家的规定，公布给众人：抓到或者杀死李全的人，赏给节度使的官职，赏钱二十万，银绢二万匹；帮助抓到或杀死李全的人，按功劳的大小给不同的提升和赏赐。
English: The state's regulations were announced to the public: those who caught or killed Li Quan would be rewarded with the official post of the Minister of Public Security, with a reward of 200,000 yuan and 20,000 silver donkeys; those who helped to catch or kill Li Quan would be given different promotions and rewards according to the size of their merit.

古文：能取夺见占城壁者，州，除防御使；县，除团练使；将佐官民以次推赏。
现代文：能夺取现在被李全的叛军占领的城池的人，夺取州城的，授予防御使的官职；夺取县城的，授予团练使的官职；从中出力的将官、士兵和百姓都按功劳加以赏赐。
English: Those who can capture the cities now occupied by Li Quan's rebel army will be awarded the official post of defense envoy; those who can capture the state cities will be awarded the official post of defense envoy; those who can capture the county cities will be awarded the official post of regimental training envoy; and the generals, soldiers and people who have made efforts will be rewarded according to their merits.

古文：逆全头目兵卒皆我遗黎，岂甘从叛？
现代文：逆贼李全的部将和士兵都是我遗失的百姓，怎能甘心跟从他做叛贼？
English: The general and soldiers of the traitor Li Quan are my lost people, how can I be willing to follow him as a traitor?

古文：谅由劫制，必非本心。
现代文：相信你们是因为受到逼迫，一定不是出自本心。
English: If you believe that it is because you are persecuted, it must not be from your heart.

古文：所宜去逆来降，并与原罪；若能立功效者，更加异赏。
现代文：你们应该离开逆贼来归降，朝廷一律免罪；如果你们能立功，朝廷将给予特殊的赏赐。
English: You should leave the traitors and surrender, and the imperial court will absolve you; if you can perform meritorious deeds, the imperial court will give you a special reward.

古文：郑衍德、国安用虽与逆全管兵，然屡效忠款，乃心本朝，冯垍、于世珍虽为逆全信用，然俱通古今，宜晓逆顺，如率众来降，当加擢用。
现代文：郑衍德、国安用虽然给逆贼李全管理军队，但他们多次效忠国家，是心向本朝；冯土自、于世珍虽然被逆贼李全相信和重用，但他们都贯通古今的道理，应该知道逆顺，如果他们率领众人来归降，应该加以提拔重用。
English: Although Zheng Yande and Guo An used the traitor Li Quan to manage the army, they were loyal to the country for many times, and their hearts were for this dynasty; although the traitors Li Quan trusted and used Feng Tu Zi and Yu Shizhen, they all understood the principles of ancient and modern times. They should know the ups and downs, and if they led the people to surrender, they should be promoted and reused.

古文：四方士人流落淮甸，一时陷贼，实非本心，如能相率来归，当与赦罪。
现代文：各地的士大夫流落到淮甸，一时陷入贼营，实际不是出自本心，如果能相继来归降，应该给以免罪。
English: The officials from all over the country were exiled to HuaiDian and temporarily fell into the camp of thieves. In fact, they did not come from their own hearts. If they can come back one after another, they should be forgiven.

古文：海州、涟水军、东海县等处有为逆全守城壁者，举城来降，当各推恩。
现代文：海州、涟水军、东海县等处有为逆贼李全守城的人，如果能献城投降，应该给予恩惠。
English: In Haizhou, Lishui Army, Donghai County and other places, there are people who defend the city for the traitor Li Quan. If they can surrender the city, they should be given favors.

古文：时青以忠守境，屡立骏功；彭义斌以忠拓境，大展皇略，亦为逆全谋害，俱加赠典，追封立庙。
现代文：时青以忠守卫边境，屡立大功；彭义斌以忠开拓土地，大展宏图，也被逆贼李全谋害，对他们都给以赠典、追封和立庙。
English: Shi Qing used his loyalty to guard the border and repeatedly made great contributions; Peng Yibin used his loyalty to open up the land and expand his ambitious plan. He was also killed by the traitor Li Quan. They were all given awards, chased and built temples.

古文：噫，以威报虐，既有辞于苗民，惟断乃成，斯克平于淮、蔡。
现代文：唉，用威力回报残暴，对天下百姓也有个交待；只要决断了就能成功，就是要平定淮、蔡地区。
English: Alas, using power to repay brutality is also a message to the people of the world; as long as you are determined, you can succeed, that is, to pacify the Huai and Cai regions.

古文：布告中外，咸使闻知。
现代文：以上这些布告中外，使大家都知道。
English: The above-mentioned proclamations are known to all, both at home and abroad.

古文：诏词，清之所代也。
现代文：皇帝诏书的话，是郑清之代写的。
English: The words of the Emperor's rescript were written by Zheng Qingnong on his behalf.

古文：促荆襄、淮西诸军赴援。
现代文：朝廷催促荆襄、淮西各军去援助征讨李全的军队。
English: The imperial court urged the armies of Jingxiang and Huaxi to go to the aid of Li Quan's army.

古文：壬子，全兵突至湾头，璥夫恐，欲走，副都统丁胜劫阍者止之。
现代文：壬子日，李全的军队突然来到湾头，赵王敬夫恐惧，想逃走，副都统丁胜劫持守门的人制止他。
English: On Ren Zi Day, Li Quan's army suddenly arrived at the head of the bay. Zhao Wang Jingfu was afraid and wanted to run away. Deputy Governor Ding Sheng stopped him by kidnapping the person guarding the gate.

古文：全攻城南门，都统赵胜自堡砦提劲弩赴大城注射，全稍退。
现代文：李全攻打城的南门，都统赵胜从堡寨率领强弩手赶到大城射李全的军队，李全稍稍后退。
English: Li Quan attacked the south gate of the city, and the general Zhao Sheng led a strong force from the fortress and rushed to the big city to shoot Li Quan's army. Li Quan retreated a little.

古文：全遣刘全奄至堡砦西城下，欲夺之以瞰大城。
现代文：李全派刘全马上到堡寨的西城下，想夺西城以便俯视大城。
English: Li Quan immediately sent Liu Quan to the west side of the fortress, hoping to capture the west side in order to overlook the big city.

古文：先是，赵胜屯西城，见濠浅，每曰： 设有寇至，未围大城，行袭堡砦，何可不备？ 盛暑中督军浚濠，人皆苦之，翟朝宗亦以为笑。
现代文：先前，赵胜驻扎在西城，见城壕浅，多次说： 假如有寇盗来，没围大城，先袭击堡寨，怎么能不防备？ 他就在酷暑中监督士兵疏导城壕，人们都认为这很苦，翟朝宗也认为这可笑。
English: Previously, Zhao Sheng was stationed in the West City, and when he saw that the trenches were shallow, he said many times: "If a bandit comes and does not encircle the big city, but attacks the fortress first, how can you not be prepared?" He supervised the soldiers to clear the trenches in the scorching heat. People all thought it was very hard, and Emperor Gao also thought it was ridiculous.

古文：既浚，胜决新塘水注焉。
现代文：城壕疏通后，赵胜决开新塘水注入城壕。
English: After the dredging of the trench, Zhao Sheng decided to open a new pond to inject water into the trench.

古文：及是，刘全不能进，胜又浚市河，人尤谓不急。
现代文：这时，刘全不能前进。赵胜又疏导市场中的河，人们都认为这不着急。
English: At this time, Liu Quan could not move forward. Zhao Sheng also diverted the river in the market, and people thought that there was no hurry.

古文：全至，胜开水门纳贾舟千余艘，活者数千人，粮货不与焉。
现代文：李全来后，赵胜打开水门接纳商船一千多艘，救活了数千人，粮食和货物没落入李全手中。
English: After Li Quan arrived, Zhao Sheng opened the floodgates to receive more than a thousand merchant ships, saving thousands of people. The grain and goods did not fall into Li Quan's hands.

古文：时朝廷虽下诏讨全，而犹有内图战守、外用调停之说。
现代文：当时朝廷虽然下诏书讨伐李全，但还有在内只求迎战和防守，在外采用调和的办法，而不去主动进攻的说法。
English: At that time, although the imperial court issued an edict to crack down on Li Quan, there was still a saying that only war and defense should be sought inside, and a conciliatory approach should be adopted outside, rather than taking the initiative to attack.

古文：是日，璥夫得弥远书，许增万五千人粮，劝全归楚州。
现代文：这天，赵王敬夫得到史弥远的书信，答应增加一万五千人的粮食，劝李全回到楚州。
English: On this day, Zhao Wang Jingfu received a letter from Shi Yiyuan, promising to increase the grain of fifteen thousand people and persuading Li Quan to return to Chuzhou.

古文：璥夫亟遣刘易即全垒授全。
现代文：赵王敬夫马上派刘易到李全的军营中把史弥远的书信交给李全。
English: Zhao Wang Jingfu immediately sent Liu Yi to Li Quan's military camp to deliver Shi Yiyuan's letter to Li Quan.

古文：全笑曰： 丞相劝我归，丁都统与我战，非相绐耶？ 掷书不受，惟留省札。
现代文：李全笑着说 ：丞相劝我回去，丁都统与我交战，这不是欺骗吗？ 李全把史弥远的书信扔在地上不接受，只留下了官府的文书。
English: Li Quan said with a smile, "The prime minister advised me to go back, and Ding Du Tong fought with me. Isn't this cheating?" Li Quan threw Shi Yiyuan's letter on the ground and refused to accept it, leaving only the official document.

古文：璥夫始知全绐己，亟发牌印迓范。
现代文：赵王敬夫才知道李全欺骗了自己，就立即发牌印迎接赵范。
English: It was only when Zhao Wang Jingfu realized that Li Quan had deceived him that he immediately issued a seal of approval to greet Zhao Fan.

古文：癸丑，全塞泰州城濠。
现代文：癸丑日，李全堵塞泰州的城壕。
English: On April Fool's Day, Li Quan blocked the trenches in Taizhou.

古文：于邦杰、宗雄武通全，戒守者无得发矢，俟薄城而蹙之，全得距堙。
现代文：于邦杰、宗雄武私通李全，告诫守城的人不要射箭，等李全他们靠近城时再射，使他们窘迫，因此李全得以筑成土垒，窥伺城内的情况。
English: Yu Bangjie and Zongxiong Wu communicated with Li Quan and warned the defenders of the city not to shoot arrows, and wait for Li Quan to shoot them when they approached the city, embarrassing them, so Li Quan was able to build a mound and spy on the situation in the city.

古文：宋济恐，令县尉某如全垒，全以增粮省檄示之，尉复出，献钱二百万以降。
现代文：宋济恐惧，命令县尉某人到李全的营中，李全把政府答应给他增粮的文书给县尉看，县尉又出城，献出钱二百万投降了他。
English: Frightened, Song Jie ordered a certain person from the county captain to go to Li Quan's camp. Li Quan showed the county captain the document in which the government promised him an increase in grain. The county captain then went out of the city and surrendered to him with 2 million yuan.

古文：乙卯，邦杰、雄武开门导全，济帅僚吏出迎。
现代文：乙卯日，于邦杰、宗雄武开城门领着李全进城，宋济率官吏们出来迎接。
English: On the second day of the month, Yu Bangjie and Zongxiong Wu opened the city gate and led Li Quan into the city. Song Jie led the officials to come out to greet them.

古文：全入坐郡治，济发帑出所献钱，全曰： 献者，献汝私藏耶？
现代文：李全进来坐在郡治所，宋济拿出库存的钱献给李全，李全说： 你献的钱，是你的私产吗？
English: Li Quan came in and sat in the county government office. Song Ji took out the money from the inventory and gave it to Li Quan. Li Quan said: Is the money you donated your private property?

古文：若泰州府库，则我固有，何假汝献为！ 乃舍济佥判厅，入郡堂，尽收子女货币。
现代文：如果是泰州府库的，那本来就是我的，怎么用你来献！ 就住在宋济的佥判厅，进入郡堂，把泰州的一切都据为己有。
English: If it is from the Taizhou prefectural treasury, then it is originally mine, how can I use you to donate it! I lived in Song Zi's court of justice, entered the county hall, and claimed everything in Taizhou as my own.

古文：庚申，全闻范、葵既入，鞭衍德曰： 我计先取扬州渡江，尔曹劝我先取通、泰，今二赵入扬州矣，江其可渡耶？ 莫敢对。
现代文：初一日，李全听说赵范、赵葵进入扬州，就鞭打郑衍德说： 我计划先攻取扬州渡过长江，你们劝我先攻取通、泰二州，现在二赵进扬州城了，还能渡长江了吗？ 
English: On the first day, when Li Quan heard that Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai had entered Yangzhou, he whipped Zheng Yande and said, "I planned to capture Yangzhou and cross the Yangtze River first. You advised me to capture Tong and Taizhou first. Now that Second Zhao has entered Yangzhou City, can I still cross the Yangtze River?"

古文：既而曰： 今惟有径捣扬州耳。 甲子，全配兵守泰州，悉出众宜陵。
现代文：郑衍德不敢回答。
English: Zheng Yande did not dare to answer.

古文：丙寅，至湾头立砦，据运河之冲。
现代文：李全接着说 ：现在只有直捣扬州了。 
English: Li Quan went on to say, "Now it's just a matter of going straight to Yangzhou."

古文：使胡义将先锋骑驻平山堂，伺三城机便。
现代文：五日，李全配备兵力守卫泰州，把宜陵的部众全部调出。
English: On the fifth day, Li Quan equipped troops to guard Taizhou and transferred all his subordinates from Yiling.

古文：丁卯，全攻城东门不利，贼将张友呼城东请见葵，全隔濠立马相劳苦，葵切责之，全弯弓抽矢向葵而去。
现代文：七日，来到湾头建立堡寨，占据运河的咽喉要道。李全派胡义率领先锋骑兵在平山堂驻扎，窥伺三城的情况。八日，李全攻打扬州城东门没成功。贼将张友在城东呼叫请求见赵葵，李全隔着城壕骑在马上与他互相慰劳，赵葵严词谴责李全，李全弯弓射箭向赵葵而去。
English: On the seventh day, he came to the head of the bay to build a fortress and occupy the throat of the canal. Li Quan sent Hu Yi and his leading cavalry to stay in Pingshan Hall to spy on the situation of the three cities. On the eighth day, Li Quan attacked the east gate of Yangzhou without success. The thief called Zhang You in the east of the city to see Zhao Kwai, Li Quan rode on the horse across the trench to console him, Zhao Kwai severely condemned Li Quan, Li Quan bowed and shot arrows at Zhao Kwai.

古文：戊辰，张琎、戴友龙、王铨、张青以天长制勇三军至，阻全不得前，遣人请援。
现代文：九日，张、戴友龙、王铨、张青率领天长的制勇三军到来，因李全的阻截不能前进，派人到城中求援。
English: On the 9th, Zhang, Dai Youlong, Wang Qian, and Zhang Qing led the three brave armies of Tianlang to arrive. Because Li Quan's interception could not advance, they sent someone to the city to ask for help.

古文：范、葵亲出堡塞西门，列陈待之，全不敢动，琎等乃入城。
现代文：赵范、赵葵亲自出堡寨的西门，列阵等待他们，李全不敢动兵，张等进入城中。
English: Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai personally went out of the west gate of the fortress to wait for them. Li Quan did not dare to mobilize, and Zhang and others entered the city.

古文：庚午，全晨率步骑五千余攻堡塞西门，赵胜出兵，战不利，范、葵以兵益之。
现代文：十一日，李全清早就率步、骑兵五千多人攻打堡寨的西门，赵胜领兵迎战，没取胜，赵范、赵葵给他派去援兵。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Li Quan led more than five thousand cavalrymen to attack the west gate of the fortress in the early morning. Zhao Sheng led the troops to fight, but did not win. Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai sent him reinforcements.

古文：全兵亦增，葵击却之。
现代文：李全也增加士兵，被赵葵击退。
English: Li Quan also increased the number of soldiers and was repulsed by Zhao Kwai.

古文：辛未，贼引兵三万沿州城东向西门，李虎、赵必胜、张琎、崔福力战，自巳至申，全乃沿东门以归，丁胜、王鉴、于俊击走之。
现代文：十二日，贼率领三万兵沿扬州城的东面奔向西门，李虎、赵必胜、张、崔福奋力战斗，从中午十二点一直打到晚上六点，李全才沿着东门回去，被丁胜、王鉴、于俊击走。
English: On the twelfth day, the thief led thirty thousand soldiers along the east side of Yangzhou City and ran to the west gate. Li Hu, Zhao Bisheng, Zhang and Cui Fu fought hard and fought from noon until six o'clock in the evening. Li Quan only went back along the east gate and was beaten away by Ding Sheng, Wang Jian and Yu Jun.

古文：襄兵万人至真州上坝，统制张达、监军张大连不设备，鱼贯而行。
现代文：襄阳的一万名士兵到达真州的上坝，统制张达、监军张大连不做防备，军队像鱼群那样连续不断地前行。
English: Ten thousand soldiers from Xiangyang arrived at the upper dam of Zhenzhou. The commanding Zhangda and supervising Zhang Dalian did not take precautions, and the army continuously advanced like a shoal of fish.

古文：全哨马帅田四击之为数截，歼者五千，达、大连死之；淮西援兵至，亦遇全统领桑青力战，城中俱不知也。
现代文：李全的侦察骑兵统帅田四把这支队伍击断成几部分，死去了五千人，张达、张大连都死在那里。淮西的援兵到来，也遇到李全的统领桑青，双方展开了激战，扬州城中对这些都不知道。
English: Li Quan's reconnaissance cavalry commander Tian Si broke this team into several parts, five thousand people died, Zhang Da and Zhang Dalian both died there. When Huaxi's reinforcements arrived, they also encountered Li Quan's commander Sang Qing, and the two sides launched a fierce battle. Yangzhou city did not know about this.

古文：襄兵败，全凶焰益振，每曰： 我不要淮上州县，渡江浮海，径至苏、杭，孰能当我！ 甲戌，复引轻骑犯州城南门，且欲破堰泄濠水，统制陈达率劲弩射之，范、葵出军迎击，乃去。
现代文：襄阳宋兵的失败，使李全的气焰更加嚣张，他常说： 我不要淮河流域的州县，我要渡江过海，直到苏、杭，谁能挡住我？ 十五日，李全又率领轻骑兵进犯扬州城的南门，并且想掘开堰塘放掉城壕中的水，统制陈达率领强弩手射他们，赵范、赵葵出兵迎击，李全才退去。
English: The defeat of the Yangyang Song soldiers made Li Quan's arrogance even more arrogant. He often said: I don't want the states and counties in the Huai River basin, I want to cross the river to Su and Hang, who can stop me? On the 15th, Li Quan led the light cavalry to invade the south gate of Yangzhou City, and wanted to dig out the weir and release the water in the trench. Chen Da, the commanding officer, led the strong hand to shoot them. Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai sent troops to meet the attack, and Li Quan retreated.

古文：是日，金玠等距淮安十里，焚全砦栅，全将刘全出战，玠军不利，退屯宝应。
现代文：当天，金等距离淮安十里，烧毁李全的寨栅，李全的部将刘全出来迎战，金的军队失败，就退兵驻扎在宝应。
English: On the same day, Kim, who was ten miles away from Huai'an, burned down Li Quan's stockade, Li Quan's general Liu Quan came out to fight, and when Kim's army failed, he withdrew and stationed in Baoying.

古文：全志吞三城，而兵每不得傅城下，宗雄武献全计曰： 城中素无薪，且储蓄为总所支借殆尽，若筑长围，三城自困。 乙亥，全悉众及驱乡农合数十万列砦围三城，制司总所粮援俱绝。
现代文：李全的志向是吞并扬州三城，但他的士兵每次都不能靠近城池，宗雄武向李全献计策说： 扬州城中历来没有柴草，况且储备的物资被总所支借得差不多没有了，如果形成长期包围，三城自然困乏。 十六日，李全集中所有的部众并驱使农民总共有数十万人列寨包围三城，制司和总所的粮援都被断绝。
English: Li Quan's ambition was to annex the three cities of Yangzhou, but his soldiers could not get close to the city every time. Zong Xiongwu proposed a plan to Li Quan, saying: There has never been firewood in Yangzhou city, moreover, the reserve materials have been borrowed by the General Headquarters. If a long-term siege is formed, the three cities will naturally be in need. On the 16th, Li Quan concentrated all his subordinates and drove a total of hundreds of thousands of farmers to encircle the three cities. The production department and the General Headquarters's grain aid were cut off.

古文：范、葵命三城诸门各出兵劫砦，举火为期，夜半纵兵冲击，歼贼甚众。
现代文：赵范、赵葵命令三城的各个城门分别出兵去劫李全的营寨，以举火为信号，半夜时纵兵冲击贼寨，消灭了很多李全的部下。
English: Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai ordered the various city gates of the three cities to send troops to loot Li Quan's camp separately, using the fire as a signal, and the soldiers stormed the thieves' camp at midnight, eliminating many of Li Quan's subordinates.

古文：自是贼一意长围，以持久困官军，不复薄城。
现代文：从此叛军一心对扬州实行长期包围，以持久的包围使官军困乏，不再接近三城。
English: Since then, the rebels have been single-mindedly implementing a long-term encirclement of Yangzhou. With a lasting encirclement, the government army is exhausted and no longer approaches the three cities.

古文：戊寅，全张盖奏乐平山堂，布置筑围，指挥闲暇。
现代文：十九日，李全在平山堂打出自己的伞盖，奏起音乐，布置对扬州的包围，他发令调遣部队，就像安静无事的样子。
English: On the 19th, Li Quan opened his umbrella cover in the Pingshan Hall, played music, laid out the encirclement of Yangzhou, and ordered the dispatch of troops. It was as if nothing had happened.

古文：范、葵令诸门以轻兵牵制，亲帅将士出堡砦西，全分路鏖战，自辰至未，杀伤相当。
现代文：赵范、赵葵命令各门用轻兵牵制敌人，自己亲自率领将士来到堡寨的西面，李全分路与宋军鏖战，从上午十点到下午四点，双方被杀伤的人数差不多相同。
English: Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai ordered each gate to use light soldiers to hold back the enemy, and personally led the generals to the west side of the fortress. Li Quan and the Song army fought a pitched battle, from ten o'clock in the morning to four o'clock in the afternoon, and the number of casualties on both sides was almost the same.

古文：庚辰，范出师大战，玠等破全将张友于都仓，获粮船数十艘。
现代文：廿一日，赵范出兵与李全大战，金等人在都仓攻破李全的部将张友的营寨，缴获数十艘粮船。
English: On the 21st, Zhao Fan dispatched troops to fight against Li Quan. Jin and others broke through the camp of Li Quan's general Zhang You in Ducheng and captured dozens of grain ships.

古文：甲申，葵出战，贼大败。
现代文：廿五日，赵葵出城交战，叛军大败。
English: On the 25th, Zhao Kwai left the city to fight, and the rebels were soundly defeated.

古文：四年正月辛卯，全兵浚围城堑，范、葵遣诸将出城东门掩击，全走土城，官军蹑之，蹂溺甚众。
现代文：绍定四年正月初四，李全的军队疏通围城的堑濠，赵范、赵葵派众将领出城东门趁敌人不备展开进攻，李全逃到土城，宋军在后面追击，被踩死和淹死的人很多。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the fourth year of Shaoding, Li Quan's army broke through the siege of the city. Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai led the generals out of the east gate of the city and took advantage of the enemy's unpreparedness to launch an attack. Li Quan fled to Tucheng, and the Song Army pursued behind. Many people were trampled to death and drowned.

古文：是日，玠破全将郑祥，获粮百艘。
现代文：当天，金攻破李全的部将郑祥的营寨，缴获一百艘粮船。
English: On the same day, Jin broke through the camp of Li Quan's general Zheng Xiang and captured a hundred grain ships.

古文：甲午，全兵千余犯州城东门，城中出兵应之，全即引去。
现代文：七日，李全率一千多人攻打州城的东门，城中出兵和他交战，李全就退去。
English: On the seventh day, Li Quan led more than a thousand people to attack the east gate of the state capital. The city sent troops to fight him, and Li Quan retreated.

古文：乙未，李虎出南门，杨义出东门，王鉴出西门，崔福出北门，各径扼贼围，开土城数处，范、葵提兵策应，全步骑数千出战，诸军奋击，俘馘甚众。
现代文：八日，李虎率兵出城南门，杨义率兵出城东门，王鉴率兵出城西门，崔福率兵出城北门，他们分别直接攻击叛军的包围圈，土城被攻破了好几处；赵范、赵葵率兵策应，李全的步兵和骑兵有数千人出来迎战，宋各路军奋起攻击，俘获了很多叛军。
English: On the eighth day, Li Hu led the troops out of the south gate of the city, Yang Yi led the troops out of the east gate of the city, Wang Jian led the troops out of the west gate of the city, and Cui Fu led the troops out of the north gate of the city. They directly attacked the encirclement of the rebels separately, and several places in Tucheng were broken; Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai led the troops to counterattack, thousands of Li Quan's infantry and cavalry came out to fight, and all the Song armies attacked and captured many rebels.

古文：夜，贼复合所开城。
现代文：夜里，叛军又修复了被攻破的土城。
English: During the night, the rebels repaired the destroyed earthworks.

古文：丁酉，赵胜遣统制陆昌、孙举立桥堡砦于北门，贼步骑分道来战，胜击退之。
现代文：十日，赵胜派统制陆昌、孙举在城北门设立桥堡寨，叛军的步兵和骑兵分路来战，赵胜击退了他们。
English: On the 10th day, Zhao Sheng sent Lu Chang and Sun Qiu to set up a bridge fortress at the north gate of the city. The rebel infantry and cavalry came to fight separately, and Zhao Sheng repulsed them.

古文：范陈于西门，贼闭垒不出。
现代文：赵范在城西门陈兵，叛军关起营门不出战。
English: Zhao Fan stationed soldiers at the west gate of the city. The rebels closed the gate and did not fight.

古文：葵曰： 贼俟我收兵而出尔。 乃伏骑破垣门，收步卒诱之。
现代文：赵葵说 ：叛军是在等我们收兵才出战。 赵葵就埋伏骑兵攻破叛军的营门，召集步兵去诱惑他们。
English: Zhao Kwai said, "The rebels are waiting for us to gather our troops before they go to war." Zhao Kwai then ambushed the cavalry to break through the rebels' camp gate, and gathered the infantry to tempt them.

古文：贼兵数千果趋濠侧，虎力战，城上矢石雨注，贼退。
现代文：叛军数千人果然奔到城壕的侧面，李虎奋力战斗，城上的箭和石器像下雨一样落下来，叛军退去。
English: Thousands of rebels rushed to the side of the trench, Li Hu fought hard, the arrows and stone tools on the city fell like rain, and the rebels retreated.

古文：有顷，贼别队自东北驰至，范、葵挥步骑夹浮桥、吊桥并出，为三迭陈以待之，自巳至未，贼与大战；别遣虎、显广、必胜、义以马步五百出贼背，而葵帅轻兵横冲之，三道夹击，用范所制长枪，果大利，贼败走。
现代文：一会儿，另一队叛军从东北方向很快来到城下，赵范、赵葵指挥步兵、骑兵从浮桥、吊桥的两边一起出战，摆成三迭阵等待敌人，从上午十点到下午四点，和叛军展开大战；又派李虎、显广、赵必胜、杨义等率马兵和步兵五百人来到叛军的背后，赵葵率精兵冲入敌人的队伍，三路夹击，用赵范所制造的长枪，果然取得大胜，叛军败走。
English: After a while, another group of rebels quickly came to the city from the northeast. Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai led the infantry and cavalry to fight together from both sides of the pontoon bridge and the suspension bridge, waiting for the enemy in a three-tiered formation. From ten in the morning to four in the afternoon, they fought with the rebels. They also sent five hundred horse soldiers and infantry led by Li Hu, Xian Guang, Zhao Bisheng, Yang Yi and others to the back of the rebels. Zhao Kwai led the elite soldiers to rush into the enemy team, hit three ways, and used the long gun made by Zhao Fan to win a great victory. The

古文：翼日，全遣步卒三百余向城西门，乍进乍退，以诱扬州兵，复驱壮丁增濠面，培鹿角。
现代文：第二天，李全派步兵三百多人奔向城西门，忽进忽退，来诱惑扬州兵，又驱使强壮的男子增宽营门前的濠沟，埋好鹿角。
English: The next day, Li Quan sent more than three hundred infantrymen to rush to the west gate of the city, rushing in and out to tempt the Yangzhou soldiers, and drove the strong men to widen the furrow in front of the camp gate and bury the antlers.

古文：范、葵遣骑将出，夹城东西牵制之，亲出州城西门，分三道以进，贼望风溃，乃募勇力赍薪炮，焚其楼橹十余。
现代文：赵范、赵葵派骑兵准备出战，在城的东西两面牵制敌人，他们自己亲自从扬州城的西门出兵，分三路进攻敌人，叛军望风而溃，赵范、赵葵就招募勇敢而有力气的人搬运火炮，烧毁李全十多艘战舰。
English: Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai dispatched cavalry to prepare for battle and hold back the enemy from both the east and west sides of the city. They themselves sent troops from the west gate of Yangzhou City to attack the enemy in three directions. The rebels fled in the wind. Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai recruited brave and powerful people to carry artillery and burn more than ten warships of Li Quan.

古文：贼自平山堂麾骑下救，道遇于俊军而归。
现代文：叛军从平山堂率领骑兵下来援救自己的队伍，在路上遇到于俊的军队，被阻击回来。
English: The rebels led cavalry from Hirayama-do to rescue their own troops. On the way, they encountered Yu Jun's army and were repulsed.

古文：始，全反计虽成，然多顾忌，且惧其党不皆从逆。
现代文：起初，李全虽然已经决定反叛，但还有很多顾虑，并且害怕他的党羽不能都跟他一起反叛。
English: At first, although Li Quan had already decided to rebel, he still had many concerns and was afraid that his followers could not all rebel with him.

古文：边陲好进喜事者，欲挟贼为重，或阴赞之，谓激作愈甚，朝廷愈畏，则钱粮愈增，又许身任调停之责。
现代文：边疆有想升官发财的人，想借李全的势力来抬高自己，有的在暗中支持他，对李全说他反叛得越厉害，朝廷越害怕，那么朝廷给的钱粮就越来越多，又答应李全说自己担当李全和朝廷之间的调停人。
English: There were people in the border regions who wanted to get promoted and get rich, who wanted to use Li Quan's power to elevate themselves, and some secretly supported him, telling Li Quan that the more he rebelled and the more the imperial court feared him, the more money and grain the imperial court would give him, and promising Li Quan that he would act as a mediator between Li Quan and the imperial court.

古文：故全兵将举而张国明先召，全之托词陈遇弃城，及归过三赵图己，盖成谋也。
现代文：所以李全将要发兵时而张国明先被召用，李全就以陈遇弃城作为托词，又把过错归到赵善湘、赵范和赵葵三赵身上，他说三赵要图谋害他，所以就反叛了。
English: Therefore, when Li Quan was about to dispatch troops and Zhang Guoming was called up first, Li Quan used Chen Yu's abandonment of the city as a pretext, and also attributed the fault to Zhao Shanxiang, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai Sanzhao. He said that Sanzhao was going to plot to kill him, so he rebelled.

古文：及三赵用，宋师集，诸阃易，国明沮，削全官爵，罢支钱粮，攻城不得，欲战不利，全始自悔，忽忽不乐。
现代文：等到朝廷任用三赵，集结军队，更换统帅，张国明被阻止，李全被削去官爵，朝廷不给他的军队发放钱粮，李全攻城不能成功，想战斗还不能取得胜利时，李全才自己后悔，常常不高兴。
English: When the imperial court appointed San Zhao, assembled the army, and changed the commander-in-chief, when Zhang Guoming was stopped, when Li Quan was stripped of his title, when the imperial court did not give money and grain to his army, when Li Quan could not succeed in attacking the city, and when he could not win the battle, Li Quan regretted himself and was often unhappy.

古文：或令左右抱其臂曰： 是我手否？ 人皆怪之。
现代文：有时候他让身边的人抱着自己的胳膊问 ：这是我的手吗？ 人们都对他感到奇怪。
English: Sometimes he lets people around him hold his arm and asks: Is this my hand? People are curious about him.

古文：时正月望，城中放灯张乐，姑示整暇。
现代文：这时正是正月十五，扬州城中点起彩灯，奏起音乐，向李全表示城中很平静。
English: At this time, it was the fifteenth day of the first month of the year. The city of Yangzhou lit up with colored lights and played music to show Li Quan that the city was calm.

古文：全见之。亦往海陵载妓女，张灯平山堂，矫情自肆。
现代文：李全看到这些后，也到海陵运来妓女，在平山堂点上彩灯，掩饰自己的感情，为所欲为。
English: After Li Quan saw this, he also transported prostitutes to Hailing and lit up the lanterns in Hirayama Hall to disguise his feelings and do whatever he wanted.

古文：是晚，燕大元宣差，宣差激全曰： 相公服饰器用多南方物，乃心终在南耳！ 全乃取诰敕，朝服南向，历述平生梗概，再拜褫服，焚之，叹曰： 国明误我。 泪下如雨，抆泪就坐强欢。
现代文：当天晚上，请大元宣差，大元宣差激李全说 ：相公穿的戴的用的多数是南方的东西，你的心始终是在南方啦！ 李全就取出朝廷给他的诰敕，穿上朝会时穿的礼服，面向南，一一讲述自己的一生走过的主要历程，又拜了脱下去的礼服，烧掉了它们。李全叹着气说： 张国明害了我。 他泪如雨下，李全擦去眼泪回到座位上勉强自己欢乐。
English: On the evening of the same day, Da Yuan Xuan sent for Li Quan, and Da Yuan Xuan sent for Li Quan to say, "Most of the things you wear are from the south, your heart is always in the south!" Li Quan took out the sash given to him by the court, put on the dress he wore at the court meeting, facing south, and told the main course of his life one by one, and bowed to the dress he took off and burned them. Li Quan sighed and said, "Zhang Guoming has harmed me." He was in tears, and Li Quan wiped his tears and returned to his seat to force himself to be happy.

古文：有朐山于道士者，老矣，全迎致之，初见全即叹曰： 我业债合在此亻赏耶？ 占事多验，尊为军师。
现代文：有位朐山的于道士，已经老了，李全把他接来，于道士第一次见到李全就叹着气说 ：我的孽债就应该在这偿还吗？ 于道士占卜的事情常常得到应验，被李全尊奉为军师。
English: There was an old Yu Daoist from Shaoshan, and Li Quanzhong took him in. When Yu Daoist saw Li Quanzhong for the first time, he sighed and said, "Is this where I should repay my debts?" The fortune-telling of Yu Daoist was often fulfilled, and he was honored by Li Quanzhong as a military strategist.

古文：及见全焚诰命，谓人曰： 相公死明日，我死今日矣！ 人问之，曰： 朝廷以安抚、提刑讨逆，然为逆者，节度使也。岂有安抚、提刑能擒节度使哉？
现代文：于道士看到李全焚烧皇帝诰命后，就对人说： 相公死在明天，我死在今天啦！ 人们问他，他说： 朝廷用安抚、提刑来讨伐叛逆，然而叛逆的人，是节度使，怎么能有安抚、提刑能擒获节度使的呢？
English: After the Taoist saw Li Quan burning the emperor and taking his life, he said to people: "My father-in-law died tomorrow, I died today!" People asked him, he said: The court uses appeasement and punishment to fight rebellion, but the rebellious person is the instigator of discipline, how can there be appeasement and punishment to win discipline?

古文：诰敕既焚，则一贼尔。盗固安抚、提刑所得捕，不死何为！ 入见全曰： 相公明日出帐门必死。 全怒以为厌己，斩之。
现代文：皇帝的诏敕已经被他烧毁了，那他就是一个盗贼而已，盗贼本来就能被安抚、提刑捕获，捕到的盗贼不处死怎么办？ 于道士进去拜见李全说 ：相公明日出营帐的门一定会死。 李全发怒，以为于道士讨厌自己，就杀了他。
English: The emperor's imperial seal had been burned by him, so he was just a thief. A thief could have been appeased, punished and captured, but what about a thief who was caught and not executed? When the Taoist priest went in to see Li Quan, he said, "The door through which my father-in-law leaves the tent tomorrow will surely die." Li Quan was furious, thinking that the Taoist priest hated himself, so he killed him.

古文：范、葵夜议诰朝所向，葵曰： 东向利，不如出东门。 范曰： 西出尝不利，贼必见易，因其所易而图之，必胜。
现代文：赵范、赵葵夜晚商量明天早晨进攻的方向，赵葵说： 东面的方向有利，不如出兵城东门。 赵范说 ：我军从城西门出曾经失利，叛军一定认为这个方向容易取胜，我军就借着他们认为容易取胜的方向去攻击他们，一定能成功。
English: In the evening, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai discussed the direction of the attack tomorrow morning. Zhao Kwai said: The east direction is advantageous, it is better to send troops to the east gate of the city. Zhao Fan said: Our army has been defeated from the west gate of the city, the rebels must think that this direction is easy to win. Our army will attack them through the direction they think is easy to win, and will definitely succeed.

古文：不如出堡塞西门。 壬寅，全置酒高会平山堂，有堡塞候卒识其枪垂双拂为号，以报。
现代文：不如从堡寨西门出兵。 十五日，李全在平山堂举行大宴会，有堡寨的侦察兵知道李全以枪垂双拂为出战的信号，就报告了这件事，赵范高兴地对赵葵说： 这个叛贼勇猛但轻率，如果他果然出战，一定能被擒获了。 
English: On the fifteenth day, Li Quan held a grand banquet in the Pingshan Hall, and some scouts in the fortress knew that Li Quan had signaled to go to war with a gun and a pair of whisks, and reported the matter. Zhao Fan said happily to Zhao Kwai: This traitor is brave but imprudent. If he does go to war, he will definitely be captured.

古文：范喜谓葵曰： 此贼勇而轻，若果出，必成擒矣。 乃悉精锐数千而西，取官军素为贼所易者，张其旗帜以易之。全望见，喜谓宣差曰： 看我扫南军。 官军见贼突斗而前，亦不知其为全也。
现代文：就率领数千名精兵向城西，调一向被叛军轻视的官军，打出他们的旗帜更换了自己的旗帜。李全望见后，高兴地对大元宣差说 ：看我扫灭南军。 宋军见一个盗贼冲出营门前来，也不知道他是李全。
English: He led thousands of elite soldiers to the west of the city, transferred the official army, which had always been despised by the rebels, and replaced their flag with his own. After Li Quan saw him, he said happily to Oyuan Xuancheng: "Look at me wipe out the Southern Army." The Song Army saw a thief rush out of the camp gate and did not know that he was Li Quan.

古文：范麾军并进，葵亲搏战，诸军争奋。
现代文：赵范率军齐头并进，赵葵亲自上阵搏斗，宋军争相奋战。
English: Zhao Fan led the army to advance together, Zhao Kwai personally fought, and the Song Army fought against each other.

古文：贼始疑非前日军，欲走入土城，李虎军已塞其瓮门。
现代文：叛军才怀疑这不是从前的宋军，想逃回土城，李虎的军队已经堵住了李全瓮城的城门。
English: The rebels suspected that this was not the former Song Army, and wanted to escape back to Tucheng. Li Hu's army had already blocked the gate of Li Quanzhang's city.

古文：全窘，从数十骑北走，葵率诸将以制勇、宁淮军蹙之，贼趋新塘。
现代文：李全十分危急，跟从他的数十名骑兵向北逃去，赵葵率众将带领制勇军、宁淮军追击，盗贼奔向新塘。
English: Li Quan was in a very critical situation. He fled north with dozens of cavalry following him. Zhao Kwai led the people to pursue the Ziyong Army and Ninghuai Army, and the thieves ran to Xintang.

古文：新塘自决水后，淖深数尺，会久晴，浮战尘如燥壤，全骑陷淖不能拔。
现代文：新塘自从决水以后，水深数尺，又赶上天气一直晴朗，上面被战争扬起的沙石盖上就像干燥坚硬的土地一样，李全的马陷进泥塘里不能出来。
English: Xintang has been a few feet deep since the water broke, and the weather has been fine. The sand and stone raised by the war on top of it are like dry hard ground. Li Quan's horse cannot get out of the muddy pond.

古文：制勇军奋长枪三十余乱刺之，全曰： 无杀我，我乃头目。 先是，令诸阵上，众获头目无得争以为献，故群卒碎其尸，而分其鞍马器甲，并杀三十余人，类非卒伍，俱不暇问。
现代文：制勇军的三十多枝长枪一齐乱刺他，李全说 ：不要杀我，我是头目。 在这之前，宋军命令各个战场，大家得到叛军的头目后，不能争抢着献上来，所以这些制勇军把李全刺得支离破碎，分了他的马鞍、马、武器和盔甲，并杀死三十多人，都不像普通士兵，制勇军也没有时间问明白。
English: Li Quan said, "Don't kill me, I'm the leader." Before this, the Song Army had ordered all the battlefields not to compete for the leader of the rebels, so these soldiers stabbed Li Quan to pieces, divided his saddle, horse, weapons and armor, and killed more than 30 people. They were not like ordinary soldiers, and the soldiers didn't have time to ask questions.

古文：甲辰，贼军全椒人周海请降，报全已杀，余党议溃去。
现代文：十七日，李全的部下全椒人周海请求归降，报告说李全已经被杀，他的余党决定散去。
English: On the 17th, Zhou Hai, a subordinate of Li Quan and a member of the Quan Zhe, requested to surrender, reported that Li Quan had been killed, and the rest of his party decided to disperse.

古文：未几，闻安用叹恨饮泣，初议推一人为首，以竟其逆，莫肯相下，欲还淮安奉杨氏主之。
现代文：不久，听说安用哀恨痛哭，起初商议推举一个人为首领，接着李全继续反叛，叛军相持不下，想回到淮安尊奉杨氏为首领。
English: Soon, I heard that An used to weep bitterly with sorrow. At first, they discussed nominating a person as the leader, and then Li Quan continued to rebel. The rebels could not stand each other and wanted to return to Huai'an to serve the Yang clan as the leader.

古文：范夜上捷书制置司，议翼日追贼。
现代文：赵范晚上向制置司报捷，决定明天追击叛军。
English: In the evening, Zhao Fan reported his success to the stationing officer and decided to pursue the rebels tomorrow.

古文：乙巳早，安用引五百骑径南门趋湾头，范伏弩射之，贼呼曰： 尔襄阳援兵已败走，汝知之乎？ 城中应曰： 汝李全已为戮，汝何不降？ 贼不应，诸将欲追贼，范惧有伏兵，先分兵烧围城楼橹，夜半火光烛天，命东南诸门皆出兵，范、葵继提精兵进。
现代文：城中回答说 ：你们的李全已经被杀死，你们为什么不投降？ 叛军不回答，众将想追击他们，赵范怕他们有伏兵，就先分兵烧叛军的围城、战船。半夜时火光冲天，命令扬州城东南各门都出兵，赵范、赵葵随后率精兵向叛军进攻。四更天时，叛军大败。
English: The townspeople replied, "Your Li Quan has already been killed, why don't you surrender?" The rebels didn't answer, and the general wanted to pursue them. Fearing that they would be ambushed, Zhao Fan first sent troops to burn the rebel's besieged town and warship. At midnight, the sky was ablaze with fire, and he ordered all the gates in the southeast of Yangzhou City to send troops. Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai then led the elite soldiers to attack the rebels. Four days later, the rebels were soundly defeated.

古文：四鼓，贼大溃。丙午黎明，葵追及贼于湾头，一战又破之，俘斩及夺回粮畜蔽野。
现代文：十九日黎明，赵葵在湾头追上叛军，又一战就打败了他们，被俘的和被杀死的以及夺回的粮食、牲畜在田野荒地中到处可见。
English: At dawn on the 19th, Zhao Kwai caught up with the rebels at the head of the bay, and defeated them in another battle. The captured and killed, as well as the recovered grain and livestock, can be seen everywhere in the fields and wastelands.

古文：别将追至大仪，不及。
现代文：别的将领追到大仪，没追上叛军。
English: Other generals chased to the Great Ceremony, but did not catch up with the rebels.

古文：葵使人瘗新塘骸骨，得左掌无一指，盖全支解也。
现代文：赵葵派人掩埋新塘的尸骨，得到一只一个手指也没有的左手掌，这是李全被肢解的部分。
English: Zhao Kwai sent someone to bury Xintang's bones and obtained a left palm without a single finger, which is the part of Li Quan that was dismembered.

古文：先是，全乞灵茅司徒庙无应，全怒，断神像左臂。
现代文：在这之前，李全在茅司徒庙祭祀，请神人辅助他，但没有反应，李全大怒，折断了神像的左臂。
English: Prior to this, Li Quan was performing a ritual at the Mausoleum of the Martyrs and asked the godman to assist him, but there was no response. Li Quan flew into a rage and broke the left arm of the god statue.

古文：或梦神告曰： 全伤我，全死亦当如我。 至是果然。
现代文：有一次梦见神告诉他说 ：李全伤害我，李全死也应该像我这样没有左臂。 
English: Once he dreamed that God told him, "Li Quan hurt me, Li Quan should die without a left arm like me."

古文：扬州平，善湘以露布上，帝惊喜，太后举手加额。
现代文：现在果然是这样。扬州平静下来，赵善湘用不缄封的文书报告给朝廷，皇上又惊又喜，太后也非常高兴。
English: Yangzhou calmed down, and Zhao Shanxiang reported to the imperial court in an unsealed document. The emperor was both surprised and pleased, and the empress dowager was also very happy.

古文：国明辈惧祸及己，唱论云全未死，至有资游士吴大理等助煽之。
现代文：张国明等人怕祸患殃及自己，造谣说李全没死，甚至有官资的游士吴大理等人也帮助他们煽动。
English: Zhang Guoming and others, fearing that the calamity would affect themselves, spread rumors that Li Quan was not dead, and even the official-funded wanderer Wu Dali and others also helped them instigate.

古文：及泰州凯奏继上，浮言始定。
现代文：等到泰州接着向朝廷报捷后，这些谣言才平息。
English: These rumours only died down when Taizhou reported its success to the imperial court.

古文：朝中皆拟随表入贺，弥远以小寇就平，谢止之。
现代文：朝中官员都打算进献贺表，史弥远认为这就是平定了一股小寇盗，制止了。
English: Officials from both North Korea and China planned to present a congratulatory letter, and Shi Miyan believed that this was the way to quell a small band of robbers and stop them.

古文：甲寅，善湘来犒师。
现代文：廿七日，赵善湘来到扬州犒赏军队。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Shanxiang came to Yangzhou to reward the troops.

古文：二月，命胡颖部所获贼酋二十人献俘于朝，且定奇功二十有九人及其余，促行赏；又遣赵楷往禀庙算。
现代文：二月，他命令胡颖的军队把所俘获的二十名盗贼首领献给朝廷，并且确定二十九人立有奇功，其他人也按战绩功劳大小，赶快进行奖赏；他又派赵楷去向皇上汇报。
English: In February, he ordered Hu Ying's army to present the captured twenty leaders of the thieves to the imperial court, and determined that twenty-nine of them had performed miraculous feats, and the others were also rewarded according to their achievements and merits. He also sent Zhao Kai to report to the emperor.

古文：三月庚寅，祃祭，有枭鸣于牙，占之吉，别遣全子才率王旻等将万五千人，与于玠掎角取盐城。
现代文：三月四日，宋军在驻地祭神时，有枭在帅旗上鸣叫，很吉利。赵善湘另派全子才率王等带领一万五千人，与于形成犄角之势，互相策应去攻取盐城。
English: On March 4th, when the Song army was in the residence to offer sacrifices to the gods, there were crickets chirping on the handsome flag, which was very auspicious. Zhao Shanxiang also sent his son Cai to lead the king and others to lead fifteen thousand people, and to form a corner situation, and to work together to capture Yancheng.

古文：癸巳，步骑十万发扬州，留胜权守。
现代文：七日，步兵和骑兵十万人从扬州出发，留下赵胜暂时负责扬州的事。
English: On the seventh day, 100,000 infantrymen and cavalrymen set out from Yangzhou, leaving Zhao Sheng temporarily in charge of Yangzhou.

古文：庚子，盐城贼董友、王海以兵围卞整砦，玠击却之。
现代文：十四日，盐城的叛军董友、王海率兵包围卞整的营寨，于击退了他们。
English: On the 14th, the rebels of Yancheng, led by Dong You and Wang Hai, surrounded the fortified camp and repulsed them.

古文：癸卯，遣总辖韩亮、戚永升率多桨船及民船四百入射阳湖，击贼于谕口。
现代文：十七日，赵善湘派总辖韩亮、戚永升率领多桨船和民船四百只进入射阳湖，在谕口击杀叛军。
English: On the 17th, Han Liang and Qi Yongsheng of the General Headquarters of the Zhao Shenshong faction led a multi-oar boat and 400 civilian boats into Shayang Lake and killed the rebels at the mouth of the river.

古文：丁未，亮破贼于崔沟。
现代文：廿一日，韩亮在崔沟打败叛军。
English: On the 21st, Han Liang defeated the rebels in Cui Gou.

古文：己酉，范、葵分兵进至平河桥，剿贼甚多。
现代文：廿三日，赵范、赵葵分路进到平河桥，杀死很多盗贼。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai went to Pinghe Bridge and killed many thieves.

古文：壬子，玠、整败贼将王国兴于冈门，斩首千级。
现代文：廿六日，于、卞整在冈门打败叛军将领王国兴，杀死一千人。
English: On the 26th, Yu and Rui defeated the rebel general Wang Guoxing at Gammon, killing a thousand people.

古文：四月丁巳，败贼于十里亭，贼兵争门，坠濠如蚁。
现代文：四月初一，在十里亭打败叛军，叛兵争着往门外跑，掉到濠沟中的像蚂蚁一样多。
English: On the first day of April, the rebels were defeated in Shiliting. The rebels ran out of the gate, falling into the ditch like ants.

古文：庚申，别将范胜、赵兴破贼砦于寿河，拔农民胁从者万家。
现代文：四日，配合主力军作战的将领范胜、赵兴在寿河攻破叛军的营寨，救出了一万家被逼迫而跟从反叛的农民。
English: On the fourth day, the generals Fan Sheng and Zhao Xing, who cooperated with the main force to fight, broke through the rebel camp in Shouhe and rescued ten thousand farmers who were persecuted and followed the rebellion.

古文：壬戌，范、葵遣诸军薄淮安城下，贼大败，死者万余，焚二千家，城中哭声振天。
现代文：六日，赵范、赵葵派各军逼近淮安城下，叛军大败，死了一万多人，烧了二千家，城中哭声震天。
English: On the 6th, Zhao Fan and Zhao Kwai sent their armies to approach the town of Huai'an. The rebels were soundly defeated, more than ten thousand people died, two thousand houses were burned, and the cries in the town were deafening.

古文：甲子，子才自他道进攻，贼将董友拒之，大战于港口，败之。
现代文：八日，全子才从别的路进攻，叛兵将领董友抵抗，双方在港口大战，董友被打败。
English: On the eighth day, Quanzhong attacked from another direction, rebel general Dong You resisted, the two sides fought in the port, and Dong You was defeated.

古文：庚辰，舟师过涟水，战胜，达淮安。
现代文：廿四日，宋水兵过涟水，战胜叛军，抵达淮安。
English: On the 24th, the Song sailors crossed the Surabaya River, defeated the rebels, and arrived in Huai'an.

古文：五月丙戌朔，天大雾，官兵攻上城，贼守者尚卧，仓皇起斗。
现代文：五月初一，天降大雾，宋军攻上城墙，守卫淮安的叛军还没起床，他们慌忙起来战斗。
English: On the first day of May, a heavy fog descended from the sky, the Song army attacked the city wall, and the rebels guarding Huai'an had not yet got up. They hurried to fight.

古文：官军互踏肩为梯，前者或坠，后者继至，自丑至未，五城俱破，斩首数千级，生擒数百人。
现代文：宋军互相踩着肩膀搭成人梯，前面的人掉下来了，后面的人接着上，从早晨四点到晚上四点，淮安五城都被攻破，杀死了数千人，活捉了数百人。
English: The Song army stepped on each other's shoulders to build a ladder, the people in front fell down, the people behind followed. From four o'clock in the morning to four o'clock in the evening, the five cities of Huai'an were broken, thousands of people were killed, and hundreds of people were captured alive.

古文：兵士有故隶楚州左右军者，家属数为贼虐，至是泄愤，无老幼皆杀之，烧砦栅万余家，腥焰蔽天。
现代文：宋军中有原先隶属楚州左右军的士兵，他们的家属多次遭受叛军的肆虐，这时他们发泄愤怒，不管老少都杀，烧了一万多家的寨栅，带血腥味的火焰遮住了天空。
English: Among the soldiers of the Song Army were soldiers who were originally affiliated with the left and right armies of Chuzhou. Their families were repeatedly subjected to the ravages of the rebels. When they vented their anger, they killed both old and young, burned more than ten thousand houses, and covered the sky with bloody flames.

古文：余寇争桥入大城，重濠皆满。
现代文：剩下的盗贼争着从桥上进入大城，城濠里都是人。
English: The remaining thieves fight their way across the bridge into the big city, which is full of people.

古文：淮北贼归赴援，舟师又剿击，焚其水栅，夷五城余址，贼始惧。
现代文：淮北的叛军回来救援，宋水军又去剿杀他们，烧了他们的水寨，五城的遗址都被削平，叛军才开始害怕。
English: The rebels from Huaibei came to the rescue, the Song water army went to fight and kill them, burned their water castle, and the ruins of the five cities were razed to the ground, and the rebels began to be afraid.

古文：己亥，子才率赵必胜、王旻军移砦西门，道遇贼大战，至夜不解。子才为锐阵左右救，乃胜。
现代文：十四日，全子才率领赵必胜、王的军队移到营寨的西门，在路上遇到叛军展开了大战，到夜晚还没脱身；全子才布置精锐士卒左右救援，才获胜。
English: On the 14th, Quanzhong Tsao led the army of Zhao Bisheng and Wang Tong to the west gate of the camp. On the way, he encountered the rebels and launched a big battle, and he did not escape until the night. Quanzhong Tsao arranged the elite soldiers to rescue the left and right, and won.

古文：杨氏谕郑衍德等曰： 二十年梨花枪，天下无敌手，今事势已去，撑拄不行。
现代文：杨氏劝郑衍德等人说 ：我使用二十年梨花枪，天下没有可与我匹敌的，现在大势已去，支撑不住。
English: Mr. Yang advised Zheng Yande and others to say: I have been using the pear flower gun for twenty years, there is nothing in the world that can match me, now the momentum has gone, I can't support it.

古文：汝等未降者，以我在故尔。
现代文：你们没有投降，是因为我还在。
English: You didn't surrender because I'm still here.

古文：杀我而降，汝必不忍。
现代文：杀我后你们投降，你们一定不忍心。
English: If you surrender after killing me, you won't be able to bear it.

古文：若不图我，人谁纳降？
现代文：如果不杀我，谁能接受你们投降？
English: If you don't kill me, who will accept your surrender?

古文：今我欲归老涟水，汝等宜告朝廷，本欲图我来降，为我所觉，已驱之过淮矣。
现代文：现在我想回到涟水养老，你们就告诉朝廷说，本来想杀了我来投降，但被我发觉，已经骑马渡过淮河了。
English: Now that I want to go back to Surabaya to retire, you should tell the court that you wanted to kill me to surrender, but I discovered that you had already crossed the Huai River on horseback.

古文：以此请降可乎？ 众曰： 诺。 翼日，杨氏绝淮而去。贼党即遣伪计议冯垍、潘于款于军门，范等密闻于朝，朝论不可，范曰： 若明谕朝旨，是坚贼志，不如阳许以误之，我自为必讨之计。 乃遣范用吉入城谕贼曰： 朝廷已许纳降，但令安抚交过北军。 衍德等遣潘于随用吉报谢，许献玉带、犒军黄金四千两。
现代文：叛军们就派他们的计议官冯土自、潘于在宋军营门前请求投降，赵范等秘密地向朝廷汇报，朝臣们议论后，认为不能招降他们，赵范说： 如果向叛军明确宣布朝廷的旨意，这是在坚定他们反叛的意志，不如表面答应他们，使他们受到延误，我们仍然做一定要讨伐他们的打算。 于是就派范用吉进淮安城去告诉叛军说 ：朝廷已经答应你们投降，但命令安抚交出北军。 郑衍德等人派潘于跟着范用吉来答谢，并且答应献出玉带，拿出四千两黄金犒赏军队。
English: The rebels sent their councilors Feng Tujie and Pan Yu to request surrender in front of the Song camp. Zhao Fan and others secretly reported to the imperial court. After the courtiers had a discussion, they decided that they could not surrender them. Zhao Fan said: If you clearly announce the intention of the imperial court to the rebels, this is to strengthen their will to rebel. It is not as good as promising them on the surface and causing them to be delayed. We still plan to fight them. So they sent Fan Yingji into Huai'an City to tell the rebels: The imperial court has promised you to surrender, but the order is to pacify and surrender the Northern Army. Zheng

古文：范曰： 我欲款贼，贼更来款我。 于归，郑衍德等自知降亦不免，始送款于金。
现代文：赵范说 ：我想招降叛军，叛军反过来招降我。 潘于回来，郑衍德等人自己知道投降也免不了一死，于是就投降了金国。
English: Zhao Fan said, "I wanted to invite the rebels to surrender, and the rebels in turn invited me to surrender." When Pan Yu returned, Zheng Yande and the others knew that they would die if they surrendered, so they surrendered to Jin Guo.

古文：至是，金遣其副统军许奕、万户兀林答以其京东元帅牒来言曰： 此贼不降，能为两国患，请与大国夹攻之，各勿受降。 范怪其来无故，而难于阴绝，遣王贵报之，不从其请。
现代文：这时，金国派他们的副统军许奕、万户兀林答带着他们的京东元帅的文牒来到宋营说 ：这些叛军不降服，能成为我们两国的祸患，请大国与我们一起夹击他们，不要接受他们投降。 赵范怪他们无缘无故地来，又难以拒绝，就派王贵去回报他们，没有答应他们的请求。
English: At this time, Jin Guo sent their vice-unification forces Xu Yi and Wanyu Yulin to Songying with a written ultimatum from their Jingdong Marshal, saying, "These rebels will not surrender and can become a scourge to our two countries. Please ask the great powers to fight them together with us and do not accept their surrender. Zhao Fan suspected that they came for no reason and it was difficult to refuse, so he sent Wang Gui to repay them and did not agree to their request.

古文：六月己未，大战于河西三砦，贼大败，杨氏归涟水。
现代文：六月四日，宋军和叛军在河西三寨大战，叛军大败，杨氏回到涟水。
English: On June 4th, the Song army and the rebel army fought a big battle in Sanzhai, Hexi. The rebel army was defeated, and the Yang clan returned to Surabaya.

古文：壬戌，贼先遣妻孥过淮，军争欲往，斩之不能禁，反有起杀头目者。
现代文：七日，叛军先让自己的妻子儿女渡过淮河，士兵们也争着前去，杀他们也不能禁止，反而有起来杀首领的。
English: On the seventh day, the rebels let their wives and children cross the Huaihe River first, and the soldiers also fought to go forward. Killing them could not be prohibited, but some rose up to kill the leader.

古文：甲子，复大战，淮安遂平。
现代文：九日，双方又大战，淮安平定。
English: On the 9th, the two sides fought again, and Huai'an was pacified.

古文：议乘胜复淮阴，兵未行，淮阴降金。
现代文：又商量乘胜收复淮阴，军队还没出发，淮阴就投降了金国。
English: They also discussed how to take advantage of the victory to recover Huaiyin. Before the army set out, Huaiyin surrendered to Jin.

古文：继得探报云：宋师迟一宿攻城，淮安亦为金有矣。
现代文：接着又得到侦察兵的报告说：宋军如果晚一天攻打淮安城，那么淮安也归金国了。
English: Then he received another report from the scouts: "If the Song Army attacks Huai'an City one day later, then Huai'an will also return to China."

古文：于是全所据州悉平。
现代文：这时李全所占据的州都平定。
English: At this time, all the states occupied by Li were pacified.

古文：杨氏窜归山东，又数年而后毙。
现代文：杨氏逃回山东，又过了数年之后她去世。
English: Ms. Yang fled back to Shandong and died a few years later.

古文：全之寇泰州，官属十有九人皆迎降，独教授高梦月不污，诏赠三官。
现代文：李全进犯泰州时，泰州的十九名官员都出城迎接李全，向他投降，只有教授高梦月清白，皇上下诏赠他三官。
English: When Li Quan invaded Taizhou, the nineteen officials of Taizhou went out of the city to meet Li Quan and surrender to him. Only Professor Gao Mengyue was innocent, and the emperor gave him three officials.

古文：全子坛。
现代文：李全的儿子叫李坛。
English: Li Quan's son is called Li Dan.

