古文：太甲既立，不明，伊尹放诸桐。
现代文：太甲继承帝位以后，不明事理，伊尹把他放逐到桐宫。
English: After Taiga succeeded to the throne, for reasons unknown, Yi Yin banished him to Tonggong.

古文：三年复归于亳，思庸，伊尹作《太甲》三篇。
现代文：三年后太甲回到亳地，思考需要的道理，伊尹作《太甲》三篇。
English: Three years later, Tai Jia returned to Handan, thinking about the principle of need, and Yi Yin wrote "Tai Jia" three articles.

古文：惟嗣王不惠于阿衡，伊尹作书曰： 先王顾諟天之明命，以承上下神祇。社稷宗庙，罔不祗肃。
现代文：嗣王太甲不听从伊的劝告，伊尹上书给王说： 先王成汤顾念上天的命令是正确的，因此供奉上下神祇、宗庙社稷无不恭敬严肃。
English: King Taiga did not listen to Yi's advice, and Yi Yin sent a letter to the king saying, "Former King Cheng-tang's consideration for God's order is correct, therefore, the worship of gods and deities and the worship of ancestral temples and shrines must be respectful and serious.

古文：天监厥德，用集大命，抚绥万方。
现代文：上天看到汤的善政，因此降下重大使命，让他治理安定四方。
English: Heaven sees Tang's good governance, so it has given him an important mission, allowing him to govern a stable country.

古文：惟尹躬克左右厥辟，宅师，肆嗣王丕承基绪。
现代文：我能亲辅助君主建功立业，让百姓安居乐业，所以王您才能继承先王的基业。
English: I can personally assist the monarch in building a successful career and let the people live in peace and contentment, so you, the king, can inherit the previous king's legacy.

古文：惟尹躬先见于西邑夏，自周有终。相亦惟终；其后嗣王罔克有终，相亦罔终，嗣王戒哉！
现代文：我亲眼见到西方夏邑的君主，用忠信取得成就，大臣们也就能够保持忠信因而善终；他们后继的王不能取得成就，辅相大臣也没有成就。王您一定要警戒呀！
English: I have seen with my own eyes the monarchs of the Western Xia, using loyalty to achieve success, and the ministers can also remain loyal and thus end well; their successor kings cannot achieve success, and the assistant ministers have no achievements. King, you must be vigilant!

古文：祗尔厥辟，辟不辟，忝厥祖。 
现代文：应当敬重你做君主的法则，做君主而不尽君道，将会羞辱自己的祖先。 
English: You should respect the law of your being a monarch. If you are a monarch and don't follow the rules, you will dishonor your ancestors.

古文：王惟庸罔念闻。
现代文：王仍然像往常一样，没有将这些话放在心上。
English: The king, as usual, did not take these words to heart.

古文：伊尹乃言曰： 先王昧爽丕显，坐以待旦。
现代文：于是伊尹就说： 先王在天将明未明的时候，就思考国事，坐着等待天明。
English: Then Yi Yin said, "The late king used to think about the affairs of state and sit and wait for the dawn of the day when it was still dark.

古文：旁求俊彦，启迪后人，无越厥命以自覆。
现代文：遍寻有才能的贤士来做官员，教导后人，不要忘记先祖的教导以自取灭亡。
English: Search everywhere for talented sages to serve as officials and teach future generations. Do not forget the teachings of your ancestors and destroy yourselves.

古文：慎乃俭德，惟怀永图。
现代文：您要慎行俭约的美德，怀着长久的计谋。
English: You should carefully practice the virtue of thrift, with a long-term strategy.

古文：若虞机张，往省括于度则释。钦厥止，率乃祖攸行，惟朕以怿，万世有辞。 
现代文：好象虞人张开了弓，还要去察看箭尾符合法度以后，才发射一样；您要重视自己所要达到的目的，遵行你的祖先的措施！这样我就高兴了，千秋万世您将会得到美好的声誉。 
English: As if a statesman opened his bow and had to inspect the arrow's tail to see if it complies with the law before firing it, you should pay attention to the goal you want to achieve and follow the measures of your ancestors! This makes me happy, and you will have a good reputation for thousands of years.

古文：王未克变。
现代文：太甲不依然不改变自己的行为。
English: Taiga still does not change his behavior.

古文：伊尹曰： 兹乃不义，习与性成。
现代文：伊尹对群臣说： 王这是不义的行为。
English: Yi Yin said to his courtiers: "O King, this is an act of injustice.

古文：予弗狎于弗顺，营于桐宫，密迩先王其训，无俾世迷。
现代文：习惯将同生性相结合，我不能轻视不顺教导的人。要在桐营建造宫殿，让他聆听先王的教诲，莫让他终身迷误。 
English: I cannot despise a person who does not follow the teachings. I must build a palace in Tongying so that he can listen to the teachings of the former king, and prevent him from making mistakes throughout his life.

古文：王徂桐宫居忧，克终允德。 
现代文：嗣王去桐宫，处在忧伤的环境，能够成就诚信的美德。
English: The heir to the throne went to Tonggong, was in a sad environment, and was able to achieve the virtue of integrity.

