古文：肩吾字慎之，八岁能赋诗，爲兄于陵所友爱。
现代文：庾肩吾字慎之，八岁就能赋诗，兄长庾於陵对他十分友爱。
English: At the age of eight, he was able to compose poetry. His elder brother, Shun Yu Ling, was very fond of him.

古文：初爲晋安王国常侍，王每徙镇，肩吾常随府。
现代文：起初他担任晋安王的国常侍，晋安王常常迁移守地，庾肩吾一直跟随迁移。
English: At first, he served as Jinan Wang's imperial equerry. Jinan Wang often moved to guard the land, and he always followed the migration.

古文：在雍州被命与刘孝威、江伯摇、孔敬通、申子悦、徐防、徐摛、王囿、孔铄、鲍至等十人抄撰衆籍，丰其果馔，号高斋学士。
现代文：在雍州，他被任命与刘孝威、江伯摇、孔敬通、申子悦、徐防、徐詀、王囿、孔铄、鲍至等十人抄录众多典籍，供给很多果品，号为高斋学士。
English: In Yongzhou, he was appointed with Liu Xiaowei, Jiang Bo Rong, Kong Jing Tong, Shen Ziyue, Xu Fang, Xu Wei, Wang Wei, Kong Wei, Bao Zi and other ten people to transcribe many classics, supply many fruits, and was named a high school bachelor.

古文：王爲皇太子，兼东宫通事舍人。
现代文：晋安王做了皇太子，庾肩吾兼东宫通事舍人。
English: King Jinan became the crown prince, but he did not want to serve as an advisor to the Eastern Court.

古文：后爲安西湘东王录事、谘议参军，太子率更令，中庶子。
现代文：后来担任湘东王录事、咨议参军、太子率更令、中庶子。
English: Later, he served as the record of the king of Hunan, the consultation to join the army, the prince rate, and the middle child.

古文：简文开文德省置学士，肩吾子信、徐摛子陵、吴郡张长公、北地傅弘、东海鲍至等充其选。
现代文：简文帝创建了文德省，设置了学士，庾肩吾的儿子庾信、徐詀的儿子徐陵、吴郡的张长公、北地的傅弘、东海的鲍至等人成为其中的人选。
English: Emperor Jianwen founded the Wende Province and set up a bachelor's degree, and his son, Xuan Xin, his son, Xu Ling, his son, Zhang Changgong of Wu County, Fu Hong of the North, and Bao Zhi of the East China Sea became candidates.

古文：齐永明中，王融、谢朓、沈约文章始用四声，以爲新变，至是转拘声韵，弥爲丽靡，复踰往时。
现代文：齐朝永明年间，王融、谢緿、沈约在文章中开始使用四声，作为创新，到了这时，转而拘守声韵，更加靡丽，超过了以往。
English: During the reign of Qi Dynasty, Wang Rong, Xie Qian, and Shen Youlu began to use four voices in their articles. As an innovation, at this time, they turned to adhere to the sound rhyme, which was more beautiful than before.

古文：简文与湘东王书论之曰：
现代文：简文帝在给湘东王的信中论述道：
English: Emperor Jianwen wrote in a letter to the King of Eastern Hunan:

古文：比见京师文体，懦钝殊常，竞学浮疏，争事阐缓，既殊比兴，正背风骚。
现代文： 近来见京城的文体，钝弱超过往常，比着学习浮华，争相讲求舒缓，既不同于比兴，也背离了《风》《骚》。
English: Recently, I have seen that the style of literature in Beijing is more blunt and weak than usual, comparing it to the study of pomposity and competing to be soothing. It is not only different from Bixing, but also deviates from "Wind" and "So."

古文：若夫六典三礼，所施则有地，吉凶嘉宾，用之则有所，未闻吟咏情性，反拟内则之篇，操笔写志，更模酒诰之作。
现代文：六典三礼，使用则有地方，吉凶嘉宾，运用也有处所，不曾听说吟咏性情，反而模拟《内则》之篇，执笔写史，又去依照《酒诰》之作。
English: Six ceremonies and three ceremonies, there are places to use them, auspicious and inauspicious guests, and there are places to use them. I have never heard of the nature of the chanting, but instead imitate the article of "Nai Zheng," write a history, and go according to the work of "Sake Lees."

古文：迟迟春日，翻学归藏，湛湛江水，遂同大传。
现代文：迟迟春日，反而去学《归藏》，湛湛江水，却是如同《大传》。
English: On a late spring day, I went to study "Gathering" instead, and the water of the Zhanjiang River was like that of "Great Biography."

古文：吾既拙于爲文，不敢轻有掎摭，但以当世之作，历方古之才人，远则杨、马、曹、王，近则潘、陆、顔、谢，观其遣辞用心，了不相似。
现代文： 我既然在写文章方面很笨拙，不敢轻易地有所指责，只是以当代的作品，依次与古代的才士相比，远有杨、马、曹、王，近有潘、陆、颜、谢，看他们的遣词用心，全不相似。
English: Since I am very clumsy in writing articles, I dare not easily make any criticism, but compared with the ancient talents, the contemporary works are far from Yang, Ma, Cao, and Wang, and close to Pan, Lu, Yan, and Xie. Looking at their words, they are not similar at all.

古文：若以今文爲是，则昔贤爲非，若以昔贤可称，则今体宜弃。
现代文：如果以今天的文章为是，那么就是过去的贤人为非，如果认为过去的贤士可以称扬，那么今天的文体就该抛弃。
English: If today's article is correct, then the sages of the past are wrong, and if the sages of the past can be praised, then today's style should be abandoned.

古文：俱爲盍各，则未之敢许。
现代文：如果说他们都是各怀己见，则不敢赞同。
English: If they all have their own opinions, they do not dare to agree.

古文：又时有效谢康乐、裴鸿胪文者，亦颇有惑焉。
现代文：又当时有效法谢康乐、裴鸿胪文章的，也对他们很有疑惑。
English: From time to time, there are also poems that imitate Xie Ducheng's music and ruffles, which are also very confusing.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：谢客吐言天拔，出于自然，时有不拘，是其糟粕。
现代文：谢氏吐言高拔，出于自然，时而有不够严谨的，是他的糟粕。
English: Xie's words are lofty, out of nature, and sometimes not rigorous enough, which is his waste.

古文：裴氏乃是良史之才，了无篇什之美。
现代文：裴氏则是良史之才，完全没有篇章的美感。
English: Mr. Pei, on the other hand, has a talent for good history, but has no sense of beauty at all.

古文：是爲学谢则不届其精华，但得其冗长；师裴则蔑绝其所长，唯得其所短。
现代文：这就是学谢而没有得到他的精华，只是得了他的冗长；学裴则弃绝了他的所长，只得了他的所短。
English: That is, Xue Xie did not get his essence, but only got his verbosity; Xue Pei, on the other hand, abandoned his strengths and only got his weaknesses.

古文：谢故巧不可阶，裴亦质不宜慕。
现代文：谢固然是精巧而不可效法，裴也是质朴而不应羡慕。
English: The magic of Xiewen cannot be achieved, and the simplicity of Peiwen should not be admired.

古文：故胸驰臆断之侣，好名忘实之类，决羽谢生，岂三千之可及，伏膺裴氏，惧两唐之不传。
现代文：所以心猜臆断之属，好名忘实之类，追随谢氏，哪是三千弟子所能赶上，遵从裴氏，害怕两唐不能流传。
English: Therefore, those who are inclined to guess and speculate, and those who forget the truth, follow Xie, which is what the three thousand disciples can catch up with, follow Pei, and are afraid that the two Tang Dynasties cannot be spread.

古文：故玉徽金铣，反爲拙目所嗤，巴人下俚，更合郢中之听。
现代文：所以玉徽金铣，反而被不识货的人所鄙视，《巴人》《下俚》，更能为郢城中的人所爱听。
English: Therefore, "Jade Emblem" is despised by people who do not know the goods, while "Bajin" and "Jiaojing" are loved by people in the city.

古文：阳春高而不和，妙声绝而不寻。
现代文：《阳春》曲高而不能唱和，妙声断绝而无法寻找。
English: "Yangchun" is a high-pitched song and cannot be sung, and the beautiful voice is cut off and cannot be found.

古文：竟不精讨锱铢，覆量文质，有异巧心，终愧妍手。
现代文：竟然不精细探讨，衡量文雅质朴，虽然有异巧之心，但终究愧于高手。
English: Even if it is not elaborately discussed, it is measured by elegance and simplicity, and although it has a wonderful heart, it is ultimately worthy of a master.

古文：是以握瑜怀玉之士，瞻郑邦而知退，章甫翠履之人，望闽乡而叹息。
现代文：所以手握珍宝怀藏美玉之士，望着郑国而知道退返；头戴章甫脚穿翠履之人，远见闽乡而深长叹息。
English: Therefore, those who hold precious treasures in their hands and cherish the beauty of gems, look at Zheng Guo and know to return; those who wear Zheng Fu on their heads and wear emerald shoes on their feet, have a long-sighted view of the countryside and sigh deeply.

古文：诗既若此，笔又如之。
现代文：诗歌已是这样，散文却又相同。
English: The poem is already like this, and the text is like the poem.

古文：徒以烟墨不言，受其驱染，纸劄无情，任其摇襞。
现代文：只是墨汁不会言语，要受他们渲染，纸张没有情感，任凭他们叠画。
English: Only the ink doesn't have words, it has to be rendered by them, the paper doesn't have emotions, it's left to them to overlay.

古文：甚矣哉，文章横流，一至于此。
现代文：太厉害了，文章的邪道横流，竟到了这种地步！
English: It's too bad that the article has been misrepresented to such an extent!

古文：至如近世谢朓、沈约之诗，任昉、陆倕之笔，斯文章之冠冕，述作之楷模。
现代文： 就像近代谢緿、沈约的诗歌、任窻、陆亻垂的散文，这些都是文章的冠冕，作品的楷模。
English: Just like the modern poetry of Xie Qi and Shen Yao, and the prose of Ren Qi and Lu Xitai, these are the crown of the article, the model of the work.

古文：张士简之赋，周升逸之辩，亦成佳手，难可复遇。
现代文：张士简的辞赋，周升邈的论辩，也都属于高手，很难再次遇到。
English: Zhang Shijian's "Fu" and Zhou Shengyi's "Dispute" have also made these two people good at writing articles. It is difficult to meet such talented people again.

古文：文章未坠，必有英绝，领袖之者，非弟而谁。
现代文：文章没有衰落，必定会有英才，其中的领袖人物，非贤弟还能有谁！
English: If there is no decline, there will certainly be great talents, including leaders, who else could there be but a wise man!

古文：每欲论之，无可与语，思吾子建，一共商榷。
现代文：常常想作讨论，无人可以交谈，想念我的子建，与你共同商榷。
English: I often want to discuss, no one can talk, I miss my son, and discuss with you.

古文：辨兹清浊，使如泾、渭，论兹月旦，类彼汝南。
现代文：辩明文学的清澈与混浊，让它能如同泾水和渭水，这样论人物，颇似汝南王。
English: Argue the clarity and confusion of literature, so that it can be like splashing water and splashing water, such a character, quite similar to the king of Runan.

古文：朱白既定，雌黄有别，使夫怀鼠知惭，滥竽自耻。
现代文：红白已经判定，评论有所不同，使那些身怀鼠技的人知道惭愧，滥竽充数的人自感耻辱。
English: Red and white have decided that the comments are different, so that those with rat skills know shame, and those who are indiscriminate feel shame.

古文：相思不见，我劳如何！
现代文：相思不见，多么忧伤！ 
English: No love, how sad!

古文：及简文即位，以肩吾爲度支尚书。
现代文：后来简文帝即位，以庾肩吾为度支尚书。
English: Later, Emperor Jianwen ascended to the throne, and he was supported by the emperor.

古文：时上流蕃镇，并据州拒侯景，景矫诏遣肩吾使江州喻当阳公大心。
现代文：当时上游的藩镇，都凭据州城抗拒侯景，侯景假传诏令让庾肩吾出使江州去劝说当阳公萧大心。
English: At that time, the upstream towns all resisted Houjing on the basis of Zhucheng, and Houjing issued a false edict to let Xing Shoulder and I go to Jiangzhou to persuade Dangyang Gong Xiao Dashin.

古文：大心乃降贼，肩吾因逃入东。
现代文：萧大心投降了贼军，庾肩吾于是逃到了东部。
English: Xiao Daxin surrendered to the bandits and fled to the east.

古文：后贼宋子仙破会稽，购得肩吾欲杀之，先谓曰： 吾闻汝能作诗，今可即作,若能，将贷汝命。 
现代文：后来贼将宋子仙攻下了会稽，悬赏抓到了庾肩吾，打算把他杀掉，首先对他说： 我听说你能作诗，现在可以当即作一首，如果能够，就可以保全你的性命。 
English: Later, the thief captured Song Zixian from the auditorium, offered a bounty to catch him, and planned to kill him. First, he said to him: I heard that you can write poetry, now you can immediately write a poem, and if you can, you can save your life.

古文：肩吾操笔便成，辞采甚美，子仙乃释以爲建昌令。
现代文：庾肩吾挥笔便写成了，辞采极美，宋子仙便放了他，让他做建昌令。
English: With a wave of his pen, he wrote it down. The words were beautiful, and Song Zixian let him go and let him do the construction work.

古文：仍间道奔江陵，历江州刺史，领义阳太守，封武康县侯。
现代文：他于是从小路奔往江陵，曾担任江州刺史，兼义阳太守，封为武康县侯。
English: He then ran from a small road to Gangneung, and served as the governor of Gangwon Province, the governor of Yiyang Province, and the governor of Bukang County.

古文：其日卒，年五十八。
现代文：死后，赠他为散骑常侍、中书令。
English: After his death, he bestowed upon him the title of "Sanzhei-no-Tsunezamurai" and "Chushirei."

古文：虬子之遴。
现代文：他的儿子名叫庾信。
English: His son's name is Yu Xin.

古文：之遴字思贞，八岁能属文。
现代文：刘之遴字思贞，八岁能写文章。
English: Liu Zhiqian can write an article at the age of eight.

古文：虬曰： 此儿必以文兴吾宗。 
现代文：他的父亲刘虬说： 这孩子必然会以文学使我们的家族兴盛。 
English: His father, Liu Wei, said: "This child will surely make our family prosperous with literature."

古文：常谓诸子曰： 若比之顔氏，之遴得吾之文。 
现代文：他常常对他的儿子们说： 如果和颜氏相比，之遴是得了我的文风。 
English: He often said to his sons, "Compared to Yan, Zhisheng has my style of writing."

古文：由是州里称之。
现代文：由此州里很称赞他。
English: That's why the state praises him.

古文：时有沙门僧惠有异识，每诣虬必呼之遴小字曰： 僧伽福德儿。 
现代文：当时有个和尚僧惠有卓异的见识，每次到刘虬那里去，必定喊着刘之遴的小名说： 僧伽是个有福有德的孩子。 
English: At that time, there was a monk and monk Hui who had extraordinary insight. Every time he went to Liu Ye, he must have called out Liu Zichuan's nickname and said: Sangha is a child with good fortune and virtue.

古文：握手而进之。
现代文：于是握着他的手走了进去。
English: So he took him by the hand and went in.

古文：年十五，举茂才，明经对策，沈约、任昉见而异之。
现代文：十五岁的时候，举为茂才，进行明经对策的时候，沈约、任窻见到他后感到非常诧异。
English: At the age of fifteen, when he was promoted to Maozai and carried out the Ming Dynasty countermeasures, Shen Yotong and Ren Wei were very surprised to see him.

古文：吏部尚书王瞻尝候任昉，遇之遴在坐，昉谓瞻曰： 此南阳刘之遴，学优未仕，水镜所宜甄擢。 
现代文：吏部尚书王瞻曾经等候任窻，遇到刘之遴在座，任窻对王瞻说： 这是南阳刘之遴，学优而未仕，您这明鉴之士应该加以任用。 
English: Wang Zhan, the secretary of the personnel department, was waiting for Ren Zheng when he met Liu Zhan in the audience. Ren Zheng said to Wang Zhan: This is Nanyang Liu Zhan, he is an excellent student, but he has not yet served. You, a person with clear knowledge, should be appointed.

古文：即辟爲太学博士。
现代文：于是把他聘为太学博士。
English: So he hired him as a doctor of science.

古文：昉曰： 爲之美谈，不如面试。 
现代文：任窻说： 对他进行称赞，不如当面测试。 
English: Ren Wei said: It is better to praise him than to test him in person.

古文：时张稷新除尚书仆射，托昉爲让表，昉令之遴代作，操笔立成。
现代文：当时张稷新任尚书仆射，托任窻给他写一份推辞的奏表，任窻让刘之遴代作，执笔立即写成。
English: At that time, Zhang Ye was newly appointed as Shang Shu's valet, entrusting Ren Ren to write a letter of resignation for him. Ren Ren asked Liu Zhan to write it on his behalf, and the writing was immediately completed.

古文：昉曰： 荆南秀气，果有异才，后仕必当过仆。 
现代文：任窻说： 荆南的秀气，果然有异才，以后为官必定超过我。 
English: Ren Fang said, "Jingnan is a beautiful place, and it is true that there are exceptional talents. In the future, officials will surpass me.

古文：御史中丞乐蔼即之遴之舅，宪台奏弹，皆令之遴草焉。
现代文：御史中丞乐蔼就是刘之遴的舅舅，御史弹劾官员的奏章，都是让刘之遴起草。
English: Liu Zhizhu's uncle was the imperial historian Le Er, and Liu Zhizhu drafted the imperial impeachment official's report.

古文：后爲荆州中从事，梁简文临荆州，仍迁宣惠记室。
现代文：后来他做了荆州中从事，梁简文帝到了荆州，便升迁他为宣惠记室。
English: Later, he was engaged in Jingzhou Middle School, and when Emperor Liang Jianwen arrived in Jingzhou, he was promoted to be the head of the publicity and record office.

古文：之遴笃学明审，博览群籍，时刘显、韦棱并称强记，之遴每与讨论，咸不过也。
现代文：刘之遴好学明鉴，博览群书，当时刘显、韦棱都号称记忆力强，刘之遴常常与他们一起讨论，都超不过他。
English: At that time, Liu Xian and Wei Ren were both reputed to have a strong memory, and Liu Zichuan often discussed with them. They were all better than him.

古文：累迁中书侍郎，后除南郡太守。
现代文：逐步升迁为中书侍郎，后来任命为南郡太守。
English: He was gradually promoted to the position of chusho-sajiro (chamberlain), and later he was appointed the governor of Minami-gun.

古文：武帝谓曰： 卿母年德并高，故令卿衣锦还乡，尽荣养之理。 
现代文：武帝对他说： 卿的母亲年纪和德行都已经很高，所以让卿衣锦还乡，去尽奉养的天职。 
English: Emperor Wu said to him, "Your mother's age and virtue are already very high, so let your father return to his hometown and fulfill his heavenly duty of raising you.

古文：转西中郎湘东王绎长史，太守如故。
现代文：转任西中郎湘东王萧绎的长史，太守职务依旧。
English: The long history of the transfer of the West Middle Lord to the East Hunan King Xiaoyan is over, and the position of the grand steward is still the same.

古文：初，之遴在荆府，常寄居南郡，忽梦前太守袁彖谓曰： 卿后当爲折臂太守，即居此中。 
现代文：起初，刘之遴在荆州府时，常常寄居在南郡，忽然梦见前太守袁彖对他说： 您以后当会成为折臂太守，就住在这里。 
English: At first, when Liu Zhichuan was in Jingzhou Prefecture, he often stayed in Nanshun. Suddenly, he dreamed that Yuan Qi, the former grand marshal, said to him, "You should live here when you become the grand marshal."

古文：之遴后牛奔堕车折臂，右手偏直，不复得屈伸，书则以手就笔，叹曰： 岂黥而王乎？ 
现代文：后来刘之遴驾车的牛受惊奔跑，他从车上掉下来，摔折了胳膊，右手偏直，不再能屈伸，写字只能以手去就笔，他哀叹说： 难道要遭受墨刑而做诸侯么？ 
English: Later, Liu Zhizhong's ox, which was driving the car, was startled and ran. He fell from the car and broke his arm. His right hand was straightened and could no longer be flexed. He could only write with his hand. He lamented, "Do I have to be inked to be a vassal?

古文：周舍尝戏之曰： 虽复并坐可横，政恐陋巷无枕。 
现代文：周舍曾经跟他开玩笑说： 虽然并排坐位可以横卧，却恐怕简陋的巷子里没有枕头。 
English: Zhou She once joked with him, "Although you can lie down while sitting side by side, I'm afraid there are no pillows in the humble alley.

古文：后连相两王，再爲此郡，历秘书监。
现代文：后来他连续两次辅佐藩王，两次做本郡的长官，曾任秘书监。
English: Later, he assisted the king of the domain twice in a row, twice served as the chief of the county, and once served as the secretary supervisor.

古文：出爲郢州行事，之遴意不愿出，固辞曰： 去岁命绝离巽，不敢东下；今年所忌又在西方。 
现代文：后来他出京担任郢州行事，刘之遴心里不愿意出去，坚持推辞说： 去年我命运毁于离巽，不敢东下；今年所忌讳的又在西方。 
English: Later, he went to Beijing to act as the representative of Zhangzhou. Liu Zhixuan did not want to go out, insisting on the excuse that: Last year, my fate was ruined by being away from home, and I did not dare to go to the east; this year, the taboo is in the west.

古文：武帝手敕曰： 朕闻妻子具，孝衰于亲，爵禄具，忠衰于君。
现代文：武帝手敕说： 朕听说有了妻子儿女，对双亲的孝心就薄弱了，有了爵位俸禄，对君王的忠心就薄弱了。
English: Emperor Wu said, "I have heard that if you have a wife and children, your filial piety toward your parents will be weak. If you have a title and salary, your loyalty to the emperor will be weak.

古文：卿既内足，理忘奉公之节。 
现代文：卿既然家内满足了，理当会忘记奉公的志节。 
English: When he is satisfied in his heart, he should forget the discipline of public service.

古文：遂爲有司奏免。
现代文：于是被有关部门上奏免官。
English: As a result, he was dismissed by the relevant department.

古文：后爲都官尚书、太常卿。
现代文：后来担任都官尚书、太常卿。
English: Later, he served as the governor of the capital, Shoshu, and the Grand Councilor.

古文：之遴好古爱奇，在荆州聚古器数十百种，有一器似瓯可容一斛，上有金错字，时人无能知者。
现代文：刘之遴好古爱奇，在荆州收集了古器数十上百种，其中有一个古器形状好像盆盂，可以容纳一斛，上面有涂金的字，当时的人没有能认识的。
English: Liu Zhi picked up dozens and hundreds of ancient artifacts in Jingzhou. Among them, there was an ancient artifact shaped like a pot, which could hold a bowl, with gold-coated words on it, which people at that time could not recognize.

古文：又献古器四种于东宫。
现代文：又在东宫献了古器四种。
English: In addition, four kinds of antique vases were presented to the prince.

古文：其第一种，镂铜鸱夷榼二枚，两耳有银镂，铭云： 建平二年造。 
现代文：其中第一种，是用铜雕刻的酒器二枚，两耳有银刻的装饰，铭文说： 建平二年造。 
English: The first one is a pair of drinking vessels carved from copper, with silver decoration on the two handles. The inscription reads: Built in the second year of Jianping.

古文：其第二种，金银错镂古鐏二枚，有篆铭云： 秦容成侯适楚之岁造。 
现代文：其中第二种，是金银涂刻的古樽二枚，有篆字铭文写道： 秦容成侯适楚国之岁造。 
English: The second type is a pair of old gold-and-silver-painted barrels inscribed with the Chinese character for "Qin Rongcheng, ruler of Chu."

古文：其第三种，外国澡灌一口，有铭云： 元封二年，龟兹国献。 
现代文：其中第三种，是外国澡罐一口，有铭文说： 元封二年，龟兹国献。 
English: The third one is a foreign bath can, with an inscription saying: "Presented to the State of Hubei in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty."

古文：其第四种，古制澡盘一枚，铭云： 初平二年造。 
现代文：其中第四种，是古代制造的澡盘一枚，铭文写着： 初平二年造。 
English: The fourth type is a bath tray made in ancient times, with the inscription: "Made in the second year of Hatsuhira."

古文：时鄱阳嗣王范得班固所撰汉书真本献东宫，皇太子令之遴与张缵、到溉、陆襄等参校异同，之遴录其异状数十事，其大略云： 案古本汉书称永平十六年五月二十一日己酉，郎班固上，而今本无上书年月日子。
现代文：当时鄱阳嗣王萧范得到了班固所写的《汉书》真本献给了东宫，皇太子让刘之遴与张缵、到溉、陆襄等参校异同，刘之遴录下了其中相异的地方几十处，其大略是说： 按古本《汉书》说是永平十六年五月二十一日己酉，郎班固上，而今本没有上书的年月日。
English: At that time, Wang Xiao Fan, the successor of Shanyang, obtained the original "Chinese Book" written by Ban Gu and dedicated it to the East Palace. The crown prince asked Liu Zhixuan to compare the differences and similarities between Zhang Ye, Zu Rong, Lu Xiang and other participants in the school. Liu Zhixuan recorded dozens of different places, which roughly said: According to the ancient book "Chinese Book," it is said that Yongping was born on May 21st, 16th, and his brother Ban Gu was born, but now there is no date of publication.

古文：又案古本叙传号爲中篇，今本称爲叙传，又今本叙传载班彪事行，而古本云 彪自有传 。
现代文：又按古本的《叙传》号为中篇，而今本称为《叙传》。又今本《叙传》记载班彪的事迹，而古本上说 班彪自己有传 。
English: Also, according to the ancient book, "The Biography" is the middle chapter, while the present book is called "The Biography." Also, the present "The Biography" records the deeds of Ban Biao, while the ancient book says that Ban Biao himself has a biography.

古文：又今本纪及表志列传不相合爲次，而古本相合爲次，总成三十八卷。
现代文：又今本的《纪》以及《表》《志》《列传》不符合次序，而古本符合次序，总共编成三十八卷。
English: Moreover, the present-day "Chronicle" as well as "Table," "History" and "Biography" do not conform to the order, while the ancient book conforms to the order, making up a total of thirty-eight volumes.

古文：又今本外戚在西域后，古本外戚次帝纪下。
现代文：又今本的《外戚》在《西域》后面，古本的《外戚》紧接在《帝纪》下面。
English: Also, the present version of "Mother-in-law" is behind "Western Regions," and the ancient version of "Mother-in-law" is immediately below "Imperial History."

古文：又今本高五子、文三王、景十三王、孝武六子、宣元六王杂在诸传帙中，古本诸王悉次外戚下，在陈项传上。
现代文：又今本中的《高五子》、《文三王》、《景十三王》、《孝武六子》、《宣元六王》混杂在各篇传记的案卷中，古本的《诸王》都排列在《外戚》的下面，在《陈项传上》。
English: In addition, the "High Five Sons," "Three Kings of Literature," "Thirteen Kings of Scenery," "Six Sons of Filial Piety" and "Six Kings of the Yuan Dynasty" in the present book are mixed in the case files of various biographies, and the "Kings" of the ancient book are all arranged below "Mother-in-law" in the "History of Chen."

古文：又今本韩彭英卢吴述云： 信惟饿隶，布实黥徒，越亦狗盗，芮尹江湖。
现代文：又今本的《韩彭英卢吴述》中说： 韩信只是个挨饿的奴隶，英布实际上是个受过墨刑的囚徒，彭越也是一个盗贼，吴芮做江湖小官。
English: It is also said in the present "Han Peng, Ying Lu, Wu Shu" that: Han Xin is just a starving slave, Ying Bu is actually a prisoner who has been inked, Peng Yue is also a thief, and Wu Xi is a minor official.

古文：云起龙骧，化爲侯王。 
现代文：风云兴起而蛟龙腾跃，结果变成了侯王。 
English: The storm arose and the dragon leaped, and as a result he became the prince.

古文：古本述云： 淮阴毅毅，仗剑周章，邦之杰子，实惟彭、英。
现代文：古本叙述道： 淮阴坚毅，持剑闯荡，国家英才，实在要称彭越、英布。
English: Gu Ben said: Huai Yin perseverance, sword-wielding, national talent, really should be called Peng Yue and Ying Bu.

古文：化爲侯王，云起龙骧。 
现代文：结果变成了侯王，风云兴起而蛟龙腾跃。 
English: As a result, he became the lord of the manor, the storm arose and the dragon leaped.

古文：又古本第三十七卷解音释义，以助雅诂；而今本无此卷也。 
现代文：又古本第三十七卷注音释义，以帮助理解，而今本没有这一卷。 
English: In addition, the 37th volume of the Annotation and Interpretation of the Old Testament was created to help with understanding, but this volume is not in the New Testament.

古文：之遴好属文，多学古体，与河东裴子野、沛国刘显恒共讨论古籍，因爲交好。
现代文：刘之遴好写文章，多学古体，与河东裴子野、沛国刘显总是一起讨论古籍，因此成为好友。
English: Liu Zichuan was good at writing articles and learned a lot about ancient texts. He always discussed ancient books with Liu Xian of Peiguo and Peizhino of Hedong, and thus they became good friends.

古文：时周易、尚书、礼记、毛诗并有武帝义疏，唯左氏传尚阙，之遴乃着春秋大意十科，左氏十科，三传同异十科。
现代文：当时《周易》、《尚书》、《礼记》、《毛诗》都有武帝的解说，只有《左氏传》还缺着，刘之遴便著了《春秋大意》十类，《左氏》十类，《三传同异》十类。
English: At that time, "Zhou Yi," "Shang Shu," "Li Ji" and "Mao Shi" all had Wu Di's commentary, only "Zao Shi Chuan" was still missing, and Liu Zichuan wrote "Spring and Autumn Summary" ten categories, "Zao Shi" ten categories, and "Three Passages with the Same Difference" ten categories.

古文：合三十事上之。
现代文：共合三十类上奏。
English: A total of thirty types of music are played.

古文：帝大悦，诏答曰： 省所撰春秋义，比事论书，辞微旨远，编年之教，言阐义繁。
现代文：武帝非常高兴，下诏书回答说： 看过了所写的《春秋》义解，考校事实讨论书本，词语虽少而意蕴深远，编年的内容，阐述的意义广博。
English: Emperor Wu was very pleased, and replied in the next imperial edict: "I have read the interpretation of "Spring and Autumn" and the examination fact discussion book. Although the words are few, the meaning is far-reaching. The contents of the chronicle and the meaning of the exposition are extensive.

古文：丘明传洙、泗之风，公羊宗西河之学，铎椒之解不追，瑕丘之说无取。
现代文：左丘明继承了儒家的风范，公羊氏崇尚西河的学说不追随铎椒的阐释，不采取瑕丘的解说。
English: Zuo Quming inherited the style of Confucianism, and the Ram clan advocated the theory of the West River and did not follow the interpretation of the pepper, and did not adopt the interpretation of Guekiu.

古文：继踵胡母，仲舒云盛，因循谷梁，千秋最笃。
现代文：继承胡母氏，董仲舒为盛，因循《谷梁传》，要数车千秋。
English: Inheriting the Humo clan, Dong Zhongshu was prosperous. According to "The Tale of Gu Liang," he needed several chariots.

古文：张苍之传左氏，贾谊之袭荀卿，源本分镳，指归殊致，详略纷然，其来旧矣。
现代文：张苍传给左氏，贾谊承袭荀卿，源本分为流派，意旨很不相同，详略各异，由来已久。
English: Zhang Cang was passed down to the Zuo clan, and Jia Yi was inherited by Yu Qing. The source is divided into schools, the meaning is very different, the details are different, and it has a long history.

古文：昔在弱年，久经研味，一从遗置，迄将五纪。
现代文：过去我年纪较轻，研讨的时间很长，自从把它丢开后，至今将近六十年。
English: I used to be younger, I studied for a long time, and it's been almost sixty years since I threw it away.

古文：兼晚秋晷促，机事罕暇，夜分求衣，未遑披括。
现代文：加上晚秋天短，事忙很少闲暇，半夜里就要起床，来不及翻阅研讨。
English: In addition, the late autumn is short, busy with little leisure, I have to get up in the middle of the night, and I can't turn over the seminar.

古文：须待夏景，试欲推寻，若温故可求，别酬所问也。 
现代文：必须等待夏季，打算再作研究，如果温习旧业还能随心，另外再来回答你的提问。 
English: I have to wait for the summer, I plan to do more research, and if I can revisit my old career, I will answer your questions again.

古文：始武帝于齐代爲荆府谘议，时之遴父虬隐在百里洲，早相知闻。
现代文：开始武帝在齐朝担任荆州府咨议，当时刘之遴的父亲刘虬隐居在百里洲，很早就与他互相听说。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Wu served as the Jingzhou prefectural councilor in the Qi Dynasty. At that time, Liu Zhixuan's father, Liu Xuan, lived in seclusion in Baizhou. They had heard about each other very early on.

古文：帝偶匮乏，遣就虬换谷百斛。
现代文：武帝偶然困难，派人去向刘虬换谷子一百斛。
English: Emperor Wu was in a difficult situation and sent someone to Liu Bei to exchange one hundred yakitori.

古文：之遴时在父侧，曰： 萧谘议踬士，云何能得舂，愿与其米。 
现代文：刘之遴当时在父亲身边，说： 萧咨议遇到挫折，怎么能够把谷子舂好，希望拿米给他。 
English: Liu Zhizhu, who was at his father's side at the time, said, "When Xiao Zhengyi encountered a setback, how could he pick up the grain and hope to give him the rice?

古文：虬从之。
现代文：刘虬依从了他。
English: Liu Ye obeyed him.

古文：及帝即位常怀之。
现代文：武帝即位后常常怀念他们。
English: Emperor Wu often missed them after he ascended the throne.

古文：侯景初以萧正德爲帝，之遴时落景所，将使授玺绂。
现代文：侯景起初立萧正德为皇帝，刘之遴当时落在了侯景那里，将要让他交授玉玺。
English: At the beginning, Hou Jing made Xiao Zhengde the emperor. Liu Zhiqi was at that time with Hou Jing, and he was going to give him the imperial scepter.

古文：之遴预知，仍剃发披法服乃免。
现代文：刘之遴预先知道了，便剃去头发披上了法衣才免掉。
English: Liu Zhizhu knew in advance, so he shaved off his hair and put on the cassock to get rid of it.

古文：先是，平昌伏挺出家，之遴爲诗嘲之曰： 传闻伏不斗，化爲支道林。 
现代文：在此以前，平昌人伏挺出家，刘之遴写诗嘲笑他说： 《传》闻伏不斗，化为支道林。 
English: Prior to this, the people of PyeongChang had become Buddhists, and Liu Zhi's selection of poems mocked him by saying: "The Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend of the Legend."

古文：及之遴遇乱，遂披染服，时人笑之。
现代文：等刘之遴遇到了变乱，便披上了僧人的黑衣，当时人便拿他取笑。
English: When Liu Zhichuan encountered turmoil, he put on the black robe of a monk, and people made fun of him at the time.

古文：寻避难还乡，湘东王绎尝嫉其才学，闻其西上至夏口，乃密送药杀之。
现代文：不久避难回乡，湘东王萧绎曾经嫉妒他的才学，听说他西上到了夏口，便秘密地送药把他杀死。
English: He soon took refuge and returned to his hometown. King Xiaoyan of eastern Hunan was once jealous of his talent for learning. When he heard that he had gone west to Xiakou, he secretly sent medicine to kill him.

古文：不欲使人知，乃自制志铭，厚其赙赠。
现代文：他不想让别人知道，便自己为刘之遴做了墓志铭，给了丰厚的馈赠。
English: He did not want others to know, so he made an epitaph for Liu Zhixuan and gave him a generous gift.

古文：前后文集五十卷。
现代文：刘之遴前后的文集共五十卷。
English: Liu's anthologies before and after the selection totaled fifty volumes.

古文：子三达字三善，数岁能清言及属文。
现代文：他的儿子刘三达字三善，几岁就能清谈、写文章。
English: His son, Liu Sanda Zi Sanzhen, can talk clearly and write articles at the age of a few.

古文：州将湘东王绎闻之，盛集宾客，召而试之。
现代文：州将湘东王萧绎听说了，便聚集了很多的宾客，召他来测试。
English: When the governor of Hunan, Wang Xiaoyuan, heard about it, he gathered a lot of guests and invited him to test it.

古文：说义属诗，皆有理致。
现代文：他说理作诗，都很有条理。
English: He said that his poems are well-organized.

古文：年十二，听江陵令贺革讲礼还，仍覆述，不遗一句。
现代文：十二岁时，有一次听了江陵令贺革讲《礼》回来，便进行复述，不漏一句。
English: When he was twelve years old, he once came back from listening to Gangneung Ling He Ge's recitation of "Rite," and then retold it without missing a single sentence.

古文：年十八卒。
现代文：十八岁死去。
English: He died at the age of 18.

古文：之遴深怀悼恨，乃题墓曰 梁妙士 以旌之。
现代文：刘之遴深怀哀悼和遗憾，给他的墓题字称作 梁妙士 ，以作表彰。
English: Liu Zhizhu was deeply mourned and regretted, and his tombstone was inscribed with the name "Liang Miao Shi" in recognition.

