古文：吾观《礼经》，圣人之教：箕帚匕箸，咳唾唯诺，执烛沃盥，皆有节文，亦为至矣。
现代文：我看《礼经》，上面有圣人的教诲：为长辈清扫秽物时该怎样使用畚箕、扫帚，进餐时该怎样使用匙子、筷子，在长辈面前该保持怎样的一种行为姿态，酒席宴会上该有些什么规矩，服侍长辈洗手又该如何进行，都有一定的规范，说得也十分周详。
English: I look at the "Book of Rites" and there are teachings of saints on it: how to use a rake and broom when cleaning filth for elders, how to use a spoon and chopsticks when eating, what kind of behavior should be maintained in front of elders, what kind of rules should be observed at a banquet, and how to wash hands when serving elders, all of which have certain norms and are very detailed.

古文：但既残缺，非复全书；其有所不载，及世事变改者，学达君子，自为节度，相承行之，故世号士大夫风操。
现代文：但此书已经残缺，不是全本；有些礼仪规范，书上也没有记载，有些则需根据世事的变化作相应的调整，博学通达的君子，自己去权衡度量，然后推而行之，所以人们就把这些礼仪规范称为士大夫风操。
English: However, this book is incomplete, not a complete book; some etiquette norms are not recorded in the book, and some need to be adjusted accordingly according to changes in the world. Erudite gentlemen should weigh and measure themselves and then carry it out. Therefore, people call these etiquette norms as scholar-teacher style.

古文：而家门颇有不同，所见互称长短；然其阡陌，亦自可知。
现代文：然而各个家庭所规定的风度节操又有所不同，各有长短，但它们的大致脉络还是清楚的。
English: However, the manners and ethics prescribed by each family are different, each has its own length, but their general context is still clear.

古文：昔在江南，目能视而见之，耳能听而闻之；蓬生麻中，不劳翰墨。
现代文：你们生长在战乱年代，对这些礼仪规范当然是看不见也听不到的，所以我姑且把它们记录下来，以此传示子孙后代。《礼记》上说： 父母去世后，见到容貌相似的会心惊，听到与父母名字相同的也会心惊。 
English: You grew up in a time of war, and of course you can't see or hear these etiquette rules, so I'll just record them and pass them on to future generations. "The Book of Etiquette" says: "After the death of your parents, you will be shocked to see someone with a similar appearance, and you will be shocked to hear someone with the same name as your parents.

古文：汝曹生于戎马之间，视听之所不晓，故聊记录，以传示子孙。
现代文：这是因为有所感触，心目凄怆，如果是在平日气氛和缓的地方，在机缘巧合下发生这类事，自然可以把这种感情发泄出来。
English: This is because there is a feeling, the mind is sad, if it is in a place where the atmosphere is calm on weekdays, if such things happen by chance, it is natural to vent this feeling.

古文：《礼》曰： 见似目瞿，闻名心瞿。 
现代文：但如果是在一些无法回避的情况下，就应当适当地忍一忍。
English: However, in some unavoidable circumstances, it should be properly tolerated.

古文：有所感触，侧怆心眼，若在从容平常之地，幸须申其情耳。必不可避，亦当忍之，犹如伯叔、兄弟，酷类先人，可得终身肠断与之绝耶？
现代文：比如伯叔、兄弟的容貌跟去世的父母相似，难道要因为一直伤心就跟他们断绝往来吗？《礼记》上又说： 作文章不用避讳，在庙里祭视不用避讳，在君王面前不用避自己父祖的名讳。 
English: For example, the appearance of uncles and brothers is similar to that of deceased parents, should we cut off contact with them because we have been sad? "Li Ji" also says: You don't have to avoid writing articles, you don't have to avoid performing rituals in temples, and you don't have to avoid the name of your ancestors in front of the king.

古文：又 临文不讳，庙中不讳，君所无私讳 。
现代文：它的意思就是让我们听到祖先、父母的名讳应该有所斟酌，不必一定要匆忙走避。
English: Its meaning is to let us hear the names of ancestors and parents should be considered, do not have to be in a hurry to avoid.

古文：盖知闻名须有消息，不必期於颠沛而走也。梁世谢举 ，甚有声誉，闻讳必哭，为世所讥。
现代文：梁朝时有个叫谢举的，名望很高，但只要听到自己父祖的名讳就哭，因此被世人所讥笑。
English: During the Liang Dynasty, there was a man named Xie Jiu. He was very famous, but whenever he heard his father's name, he would cry, so he was ridiculed by the world.

古文：又有臧逢世，臧严之子也，笃学修行，不坠门风，孝元经牧江州，遣往建昌督事，郡县民庶，竞修笺书，朝夕辐辏，几案盈积，书有称 严寒 者，必对之流涕，不省取记，多废公事，物情怨骇 ，竟以不办而还。
现代文：还有个臧逢世，是臧严的儿子，学问踏实，品行端正，能维持门风。梁元帝出任江州，派他去建昌督办公事，都县的百姓，都抢著给他写信，信多得早晚汇集，堆满了案桌，信上有写了严寒 的，他看到了一定对信流泪，再不察看作复函；公事常因此不得处理，引起人们的责怪怨恨，终於因避讳影响办事而被召回。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan, who was in charge of Jiangzhou, sent him to work for the governor of Jianchang. People from all over the county rushed to write to him. The letters came in thick and fast, piling up on his desk. One of the letters said that it was very cold. He must have shed tears when he read the letter, and then ignored it as a reply. As a result, he was often unable to deal with business matters, which caused people to blame and resent him. Eventually, he was recalled because his shyness was affecting his work.

古文：此并过事也。
现代文：这都是把避讳事情做过头了。
English: It's all a case of overdoing the shunning thing.

古文：近在扬都，有一士人讳审，而与沉氏交给周厚，沉与其书，名而不姓，此非人情也。
现代文：近来在扬州，有个士人避讳 审 字，同时又跟一位姓沈的人关系亲厚，姓沈的友人给他写信，只署名而不写上 沈 姓，这就真的很不近人情了。
English: Recently, in Yangzhou, there was a scholar who avoided the examination of characters, and at the same time had a close relationship with a person surnamed Shen. A friend of Shen wrote a letter to him, but only signed it without writing Shen's surname, which was really unkind.

古文：昔候霸之子孙，称其祖父曰家公；陈思王称其父为家父，母为家母；潘尼称其祖曰家祖：古人之所行，令人之所笑也。
现代文：从前侯霸的子孙，称他们的祖父叫家公；陈思王曹植称他的父亲叫家父，母亲叫家母；潘尼称他的祖叫家祖：这都是古人所做的，而为今人所笑的。
English: Once upon a time, the descendants of Houba called their grandfather Jia Gong; Chen Si Wang Cao Zhi called his father Jia Bao, his mother Jia Miao; Penny called his grandfather Jia Zu: all of these were done by the ancients, but they are laughed at by modern people.

古文：今南北风俗，言其祖及二亲，无云人言，言已世父 ，以次第称之，不云 家 者，以尊于父，不敢 家 也。
现代文：如今南北风俗，讲到他的祖辈和父母双亲，没有说 家 的，只有农村里卑贱的人，才会这样叫。和别人谈话，只要讲到自己的伯父，就用排行来称呼，不说 家 ，是因为伯父比父亲还尊，不敢称 家 。
English: Nowadays, it is the custom in the north and the south that when talking about one's grandparents and parents, only the lowly people in the countryside would call someone who did not say "home," and when talking to others, as long as they talked about their uncles, they would call them by rank, and not say "home," because an uncle is more respected than a father, and they would not dare to call him "home."

古文：凡言姑、姊妹、女子子，已嫁则以夫氏称之，在室则以次第称之，言礼成他族，不得云 家 也。
现代文：凡是说到姑、姊妹、女儿，已经出嫁的就用丈夫的姓来称呼，没有出嫁的就用排行来称呼，意思是出嫁后就成为别的家族的人，不好称 家 。
English: When referring to a mother-in-law, sister, or daughter, those who are already married are referred to by their husband's surname, and those who are not married are referred to by their rank, which means that after marriage, they become someone from another family, and it is not easy to call them family.

古文：子孙不得称 家 者，轻略之也。
现代文：子孙不好称 家 ，是对他们的轻视忽略。
English: Descendants do not have a good reputation, and they are despised and ignored.

古文：蔡邕书集呼其姑、姊为家姑、家姊，班固书集亦云家孙，今并不行也。
现代文：蔡邕文集里称呼他的姑、姊为家姑、家姊，班固文集里也说家孙，如今都不通行。
English: In Cai Qi's collection of writings, his aunt and sister were called Jia Gu (家姑) and Jia Xiao (家姉), and in Banggu's collection of writings, they were also called Jia Sun (家孙).

古文：凡与人言，称彼祖父母、世父母；父母及长姑，皆加 尊 字，自叔父母已下，则加 贤 子，尊卑之差也。
现代文：和别人谈话，提到对方的祖父母、伯父母、父母和长姑，都加个 尊 字，从叔父母以下，就加个 贤 宇，这是表示尊卑有别。
English: When talking to others and mentioning the other person's grandparents, uncles, parents, and aunts, add the honorific, and from the uncles and aunts on down, add the honorific, which is an indication of superiority or inferiority.

古文：王羲之书，称彼之母与自称己母同，不云 尊 字，今所非也。
现代文：王羲之写信，称人家的母和称自己的亲相同，称呼前都不加 尊 ，这在今天是不可取的。
English: Wang Xizhi wrote a letter, saying that other people's mothers were the same as his own relatives, and that he did not respect them before addressing them, which is not advisable today.

古文：昔者，王侯自称孤、寡、不谷。自兹以降，虽孔子圣师，及闸人言皆称名也。
现代文：从前王侯自己称自己孤、寡、不谷，从此以后，尽管孔子这样的圣师，和弟子谈话都自己称名。
English: In the past, princes used to call themselves "lonely, widowed, and destitute." From then on, even though they had holy teachers such as Confucius, they would call themselves by their names when talking to their disciples.

古文：后虽有臣、仆之称，行者盖亦寡焉。江南轻重，各有谓号，具诸《书仪》。
现代文：后来虽有自称臣、仆的，但也很少有人这么做，江南地方礼仪轻重各有称谓，都记载在专讲礼节的《书仪》上。
English: Later, although there were self-proclaimed vassals and servants, very few people did so. The local etiquette of Jiangnan Province has different titles, all of which are recorded in the "Book of Etiquette," which is dedicated to etiquette.

古文：北人多称名者，乃古之遗风。吾善其称名焉。
现代文：北方人多自己称名，这是古代的遗风，我个人认为自己作名的好。
English: Many northerners call themselves by their names. This is an ancient tradition. Personally, I think it's good to make your own name.

古文：古人皆呼伯父、叔父，而今世多单呼伯、叔。
现代文：古人都喊伯父、叔父，而现在的人大多单喊伯、叔。
English: The ancients called everyone uncle, but nowadays most people just call everyone uncle.

古文：从父兄弟姊妹已孤，而对其前呼其母为伯叔母，此未可避者也。
现代文：叔伯兄弟、姊妹，父亲去世后，当着他们的面喊他母亲为伯母、叔母，这是无从回避的。
English: Uncles, brothers, sisters, after the death of the father, in front of them, called his mother as aunt, aunt, this is unavoidable.

古文：兄弟之子已孤，与他人言，对孤者前呼为兄子。弟子，颇为不忍，北土人多呼为佳。
现代文：兄弟的儿子死了父亲，和他谈话的时候，对著已孤者叫他兄之子、弟之子，就颇为不忍，北方人多叫他侄。
English: A brother's son has died. When talking to him, the father is quite impatient with the orphan calling him his brother's son, his brother's son. Many northerners call him his nephew.

古文：案《尔雅》、《丧服经》、《左传》，侄虽名通男女，并是对姑之称，晋世以来，始呼叔侄。
现代文：按：在《尔雅》、《丧服经》、《左传》诸书中， 侄 这个称呼虽然男女都可用，但都是对姑而言。晋代以来，才开始称叔侄。
English: According to: in the books of "Lya," "The Book of Mourning," and "Zo Zhuang," nephew, although this title can be used by both men and women, is only used for the mother-in-law. Since the Jin Dynasty, it has only begun to be called uncle and nephew.

古文：今呼为侄，于理为胜也。
现代文：现在统称为侄，从道理上说是恰当的。
English: Now they are collectively referred to as nephews, which is logically appropriate.

古文：别易会难，古人所重；江南饯送，下泣言离。
现代文：古时候，名用来表明本身，字用来表示德行，名在死后就要避讳，字就可以作为孙辈的氏。
English: In ancient times, the name was used to indicate oneself, the character was used to indicate virtue, the name was to be avoided after death, and the character could be used as the clan of grandchildren.

古文：有王子侯，梁武帝弟，出为东郡，与武帝别，帝曰： 我年已老，与汝分张，甚以恻怆。 
现代文：孔子的弟子记事时，都称孔子为仲尼；吕后在微贱时，曾称呼汉高祖的字叫他季；至汉人爱种，称他叔父的字叫丝；王丹和侯霸的儿子谈话，称呼侯霸的字叫君房。
English: When the disciples of Confucius recorded the events, they all called Confucius Zhongni; when Empress Dowager Lyu was a lowly woman, she used to call Han Gao Zu by the name of Ta Ji; when the Han people loved seeds, they called his uncle by the name of Si; when Wang Dan talked to Houba's son, he called Houba by the name of Junfang.

古文：数行泪下。
现代文：江南地方至今对称字不避讳。
English: So far, the southern Jiangsu region has not shied away from using the word "symmetrical."

古文：侯遂密云，赧然而出。
现代文：这时候在河北地区人士对名和字完全不加区别，名也叫做字，字自然叫做字。
English: At this time, people in Hebei make no distinction between names and words. Names are also called words, and words are naturally called words.

古文：坐此被责，飘飘舟渚，一百许日，卒不得去。
现代文：尚书王元景兄弟，都号称名人，父名云，字罗汉，一概避讳，其馀的人就不足怪了。
English: Shangshu Wang and his brother, Yuanjing, are both famous, their father's name is Yun, and they are called Luohan, but they all keep a low profile. The rest of the people are not surprising.

古文：北间风俗，不屑此事，歧路言离，欢笑分首。然人性自有少涕泪者，肠虽欲绝，目犹烂然；如此之人，不可强责。
现代文：有些旁门左道的书中讲，人在去世以后某一天会返家，这一天子孙逃避在外，没有人肯留在家里；要画瓦书符，作种种巫术法术；又说出丧那天，门前要生火，屋子外边要铺灰，除灾去邪，请求老天阻止死者祸及家人。所有这类迷信恶俗做法，都是不近人情的，是儒学雅道的罪人，对这种陋习应该加以弹劾检举。
English: There are some books that say that a person will return home one day after his death. On this day, his children and grandchildren will run away, and no one will stay at home. They will draw vases and do all kinds of witchcraft and magic. They also say that on the day of death, a fire will be lit in front of the door, ashes will be spread on the outside of the house, evil will be eliminated, and God will be asked to stop the evil of the deceased and his family. All such superstitious and vulgar practices are inhumane, and are the sinners of Confucianism and elegance. This kind of bad habit should be impeached and prosecuted.

古文：凡亲属名称，皆须粉墨，不可滥也。
现代文：《礼经》上说； 父亲留下的书籍，母亲用过的杯圈，觉得上面有汗水和唾水，就不忍再阅读使用。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says; Books left by the father, used cup rings by the mother, feel that there is sweat and spit on them, and can't bear to read and use them.

古文：无风教者，其父已孤，呼外祖父母与祖父母同，使人为其不喜闻也。
现代文：这正因为是父亲所常讲习，经校勘抄写，以及母亲个人使用，有遗迹可供思念。
English: This is precisely because it was his father's habitual study, after proofreading and copying, and his mother's personal use, there are relics to think about.

古文：虽质于面，皆当加外以别之；父母之世叔父 ，皆当加其次第以别之；父母之世叔母，皆当加其姓以别之；父母之群从世叔父母及从祖父母，皆当加其爵位若姓以别之。
现代文：如果是一般的书籍，公用的器物，怎能统统废弃不用呢？
English: If they are common books, common utensils, how can they all be discarded?

古文：河北士人，皆呼外祖父母为家公家母，江南田里间亦言之。
现代文：既已不读不用，那也不该分散丢失，而应封存保留传给后代。
English: If it is no longer read or used, it should not be dispersed and lost, but should be preserved and passed on to future generations.

古文：以家代外，非吾所识。凡宗亲世数，有从父，有从祖，有族祖。江南风俗，自兹已往，高秩者，通呼为尊；同昭穆者，虽百世犹称兄弟；若对他人称之，皆云族人。
现代文：江南的风俗，在孩子周岁的时候，要为孩子缝制新衣，洗浴打扮，男孩就用弓箭纸笔，女孩就用刀尺针线，再加上一些饮食物品，还有珍宝和衣服玩具，放在孩子面前，看他想抓什么东西，用来测试他是贪婪还是清廉，是愚蠢还是聪明，这个做法被叫做试儿，这一天，亲戚们都聚集在一起，主人设宴招待。
English: According to the customs of Jiangnan, when a child is one year old, it is necessary to sew new clothes for the child, bathe and dress up, the boy uses a bow and arrow pen, the girl uses a needle and thread, plus some food and drink, as well as treasures and clothes toys, put in front of the child to see what he wants to catch, used to test whether he is greedy or incorruptible, stupid or smart, this practice is called a trial child. On this day, relatives all gathered together, and the host held a banquet.

古文：河北士人，虽三二十世，犹呼为从伯从叔。
现代文：尽兴痛饮，纵情声乐，不知道要怀念父母而感伤。
English: Drinking to their heart's content, indulging in vocal music, not knowing how to miss their parents and being sentimental.

古文：梁武帝尝问一中土人曰： 卿北人，何故不知有族？ 
现代文：梁朝孝元帝年轻的时候，每到八月六日生日这天，总是要吃素讲经。
English: When Emperor Liang Zhaoxiao Yuan was young, he always wanted to be a vegetarian on his birthday, August 6th.

古文：答云： 骨肉易疏，不忍言族耳。 
现代文：自他母亲阮修容去世之后，这种事就停止了。
English: That stopped after his mother, Nguyn Th Rng, died.

古文：当时虽为敏对，于礼未通。
现代文：自古以来，人有忧患疾病，就会呼喊天地、父母。
English: Since ancient times, when people are worried about illness, they will call heaven and earth, parents.

古文：吾尝问周弘让曰： 父母中外姊妹 ，何以称之？ 周曰： 亦呼为丈人。 
现代文：现在的人讲究避讳，甚至比古人更为严格。江东的士族庶族，在悲痛时就叫 祢 。 祢 是已故父亲的庙号，父亲在世时不可以叫庙号，父亲死后怎能随便呼叫他的庙号呢？《苍颉篇》中有 倄 字，《训诂》解释说： 这是痛苦时发出的声音，发音是 羽罪反 。 
English: Nowadays, people are even stricter than the ancients when it comes to avoiding taboos. For example, the common people of the warrior class in the east of the Yangtze River call You when they are in grief. You are the temple bell of the deceased father. When the father was alive, it was not allowed to call the temple bell. After the death of the father, how can you call his temple bell casually? "Heron" has the character, and "Teaching" explains: This is the sound made when suffering, and the pronunciation is 羽罪反.

古文：自古未见丈人之称施于妇人也。
现代文：现在北方人悲痛时就是这样叫的。《声类》注这个字的音是 于耒反 ，现在南方人悲痛时也有人这样喊。
English: Now this is how people in the north call it when they are sad. The sound of the word "sound" is yu反, and now people in the south also call it this way when they are sad.

古文：吾亲表所行，若父属者，为某姓姑；母属者，为某姓姨。中外丈人之妇，猥俗呼为丈母，士大夫谓之王母、谢母云。而《陆机集》有《与长沙顾母书》，乃其从叔母也，今所不行。
现代文：这两个音随人们的乡俗而定，都可以用。梁朝被拘禁弹劾的官员，他的子孙、侄子们，都要光着脚、披头散发，连续三天到朝廷上请罪；如果子孙中有人做官，也要主动请求解除官职。儿子们则穿上草鞋和粗布衣服，蓬头垢面，惊恐不安地守候在道路上，拦住办案的主管官员，叩头流血，申诉冤屈。
English: Both of these tones can be used depending on people's local customs. The sons and nephews of Liang Dynasty officials who were detained and impeached had to go barefoot and bareheaded to appeal to the imperial court for three days in a row. If any of the sons and nephews were officials, they also had to take the initiative to request to be relieved of their official duties. The sons put on straw sandals and coarse cloth clothes, their hair unkempt and dirty, and waited on the road in fear and anxiety, stopping the officials in charge of handling the case, bowing their heads and bleeding, and complaining about grievances.

古文：古者，名以正体，字以表德，名终则讳之，字乃可以为孙氏。
现代文：如果父亲被发配去服苦役，儿子们就一起在官署门口搭上草棚，不敢在家中安居，而且一住就是十来天，一直到官府驱逐，才搬回去住。
English: If the father is sent to serve hard labor, the sons will build a grass shed together at the entrance of the government office, not daring to live at home, and they will live for ten days at a time, until the government office expels them, before moving back.

古文：孔子弟子记事者，皆称仲尼；吕后微时，尝字高祖为季；至汉麦种，字其叔父曰丝；王丹与侯霸子语，字霸为君房。
现代文：江南主管监察的御史，有纠察、弹劾官员的职责。有时候案情虽不是很严重，被弹劾的人只是因违背教义，就遭到御史的污辱，或者因受到牵连而死在狱中，这些人家就会与御史结下怨仇，子孙三代都不相往来。
English: Sometimes, although the case is not very serious, the person who was impeached was only for violating the doctrine, but was insulted by the chief historian, or died in prison because he was implicated. These families will have a grudge against the chief historian, and their children and grandchildren will not have contact with each other for three generations.

古文：江南至今不讳字也。河北人士全不辨之，名亦呼为字，字固呼为字。
现代文：到洽当御史中丞的时候，开始想弹劾刘孝绰，到洽的哥哥到溉与刘孝绰关系友善，他苦苦规劝到洽不要弹劾刘孝绰，最终也未能如愿，就前往刘孝绰处，流着泪与他分手。
English: When he came to Tonga, he wanted to impeach Liu Xiaoqiao. His elder brother Tonga had a friendly relationship with Liu Xiaoqiao. He tried hard to persuade Tonga not to impeach Liu Xiaoqiao. In the end, he could not, so he went to Liu Xiaoqiao's place and broke up with him in tears.

古文：尚书王元景兄弟，皆号名人，其父名云，字罗汉，一皆讳之，其馀不足怪也。
现代文：来自五湖四海的人想要结义拜为兄弟，这并不容易。一定要志同道合，对朋友始终如一的，可以考虑。
English: It is not easy for people from all over the world to become brothers. They must be like-minded and consistent with their friends, which can be considered.

古文：偏傍之书，死有归杀，子孙逃窜，莫肯在家；画瓦书符，作诸厌胜；丧出之日，门前然火，户外列灰，祓送家鬼，章断注连。
现代文：一旦与他人结拜兄弟，就要叫自己的孩子出来拜见，称呼对方为丈人，表达晚辈对父辈的敬意，自己对对方的双亲，也应该施扎。
English: Once you have made a brother with others, you should ask your children to come out to meet, call the other person a father-in-law, express the respect of the younger generation to their parents, and you should also be polite to each other's parents.

古文：凡如此比，不近有情，乃儒雅之罪人，弹议所当加也。
现代文：近来见到北方人对这一点很轻率，路上相遇，就可结成兄弟，只需问问对方年龄看看相貌，也不想这是否妥当，甚至有与自己的父辈结拜兄弟，与自己子侄辈的人结拜为弟弟的事情。
English: Recently, I have seen that northerners are very careless about this. If you meet someone on the road, you can form a brotherhood. All you have to do is ask the other person's age and look at their appearance. You don't even have to think about whether this is appropriate. There are even cases of people who are brothers with their fathers and brothers with their sons and nephews.

古文：《礼经》： 父之遗书，母之杯圈，感其手口之泽，不忍读用。 
现代文：以前周公宁愿随时中断沐浴、停止用餐，以接待来访的贫寒有道之士，曾经在一天之内接见了七十多人。而晋文公却以在洗头为借口拒绝接见宫中的小臣头须，以致招来 图反 的嘲笑。不使宾客在家门口停留，这是古人所看重的礼节。
English: In the past, Zhou Gong preferred to interrupt bathing and meals at any time in order to receive visiting poor Taoists, and once received more than seventy people in one day. However, Jinwen Gong refused to receive the courtiers of the palace on the pretext of washing his hair, which attracted the ridicule of the rebels. It is a courtesy valued by the ancients not to make guests stay at the door of the house.

古文：政为常所讲习，讎校缮写，及偏如服用，有迹可思者耳。若寻常坟典，为生什物，安可悉废之乎？
现代文：那些没有良好教养的家庭，看门人也没有礼貌，有的在客人来访时，以主人正在睡觉、吃饭或发脾气为借口，拒绝为客人通报。
English: For those families who are not well-bred, the gatekeepers are not polite, and some refuse to inform the guests when they visit, under the pretext that the host is sleeping, eating or losing his temper.

古文：既不读用，无容散逸，惟当缄保，以留后世耳。
现代文：江南人家深以此事为耻。黄门侍郎裴之礼，被称作士大夫的楷模，如果他家中有这样的人，他会当着客人的面用棍子抽打。
English: People in southern Jiangsu are deeply ashamed of this. Huangmen waiter Pei Zhuli, known as the model of a scholar, if he had such a person in his family, he would beat him with a stick in front of the guests.

古文：祢是父之庙号，父在无容称庙，父殁何容辄呼？
现代文：他的侍者、僮仆在接待客人的时候，进退礼仪，表情言辞，无不严肃恭敬，与主人没有两样。
English: His waiters and footmen, when receiving guests, have the same etiquette, expressions and words, all serious and respectful, as the host.

