古文：夫为国之体有四焉：一曰仁义，二曰礼制，三曰法令，四曰刑罚。
现代文：治理国家的本体有四条：一是仁义，二是礼制，三是法令，四是刑罚。
English: There are four principles for governing the country: one is benevolence and righteousness, the second is etiquette, the third is laws and regulations, and the fourth is punishment.

古文：仁义、礼制，教之本也；法令、刑罚，教之末也。
现代文：仁义、礼制是教化的根本；法令、刑罚是教化的末端。
English: Righteousness, righteousness, and etiquette are the foundation of indoctrination; laws and punishments are the end of indoctrination.

古文：无本不立，无末不成。
现代文：无本不立，无末不成。
English: There is no beginning and no end.

古文：然教化远而刑罚近，可以助化而不可以专行，可以立威而不可以繁用。
现代文：然而教化功能是长远的事，刑罚功能近在眼前，刑罚可以用来帮助教化而不能单独实行，可以用来树立威信而不可过多地使用。
English: However, the function of edification is a long-term matter, and the function of punishment is close at hand. Punishment can be used to help education, but it cannot be used alone. It can be used to establish prestige, but it should not be used excessively.

古文：老子曰： 其政察察，其人缺缺。 
现代文：老子说 ：政令分析明辨，百姓就浇薄。 
English: Laozi said: The analysis of the government order is clear and distinct, and the people are thin.

古文：又曰： 法令滋章，盗贼多有。 
现代文：又说： 法令越是彰明，盗贼越是多见。 
English: He also said: "The more the law is made clear, the more thieves there will be."

古文：然则，令之烦苛，吏之严酷，不可致化，百世可知。
现代文：然而，政令繁杂苛刻，官吏严厉残酷，不可能实行教化，百代都应该知道。
English: However, the government decrees are complicated and harsh, the officials are harsh and cruel, and it is impossible to carry out enlightenment, which should be known by all generations.

古文：考览前载，有时而用之矣。
现代文：考察浏览前书记载，也有不断利用的。
English: It is recorded in the register before the inspection and browsing, and it is also used continuously.

古文：昔秦任狱吏，赭衣满道。
现代文：以前秦朝任用狱吏，穿着红褐色衣服的狱吏充斥道路。
English: In the past, the Qin Dynasty appointed wardens, and wardens wearing reddish-brown clothes flooded the roads.

古文：汉革其风，矫枉过正，禁纲疏阔，遂漏吞舟。故大奸巨猾，犯义悖礼。
现代文：汉代革除这种作风，矫枉过正，法网宽疏，可以漏掉能吞噬船只的大鱼，所以大奸巨猾，侵犯道德违背礼义。
English: The Han-dynasty revolution eliminated this style of work, over-correction, broad legal net, can miss the big fish that can devour ships, so the traitor is very cunning, violating morality and violating propriety.

古文：郅都、宁成之伦，猛气奋发，摧拉凶邪，一切以救时弊。虽乖教义，或有所取焉。
现代文：郅都、宁成这些人，威武之气勃发，惩治凶恶奸邪之徒，所行之事都是为了救济时弊，虽然违背教化，有时也有可取之处。
English: Shedu and Ningcheng were men of great military might who punished evil-doers. Everything they did was to relieve the hardships of the times. Although it was against the teachings of the time, it sometimes had merits.

古文：于洛侯之徒，前书编之《酷吏》。
现代文：于洛侯之流，前代史书编入《酷吏》。
English: In the line of Lohu, the previous history book was compiled into "Cruel Officials."

古文：或因余绪，或以微功，遭遇时来，忝窃高位。
现代文：或凭借先人留下的功业，或者因为轻微的功劳，遭逢时机，耻居重要职位。
English: Either by virtue of the work left behind by their predecessors, or because of minor merit, they have the opportunity to occupy important positions.

古文：肆其褊性，多行无礼，君子小人，咸罹其毒。
现代文：逞其狭隘气度，做出许多无礼举动，君子百姓，都深受其害。
English: They are proud of their narrow-mindedness and make many impolite actions, and the gentry and the people are deeply affected by it.

古文：凡所莅职，莫不懔然。
现代文：凡是他到官任事，没有不恐惧的。
English: There is nothing he is not afraid of when he takes office.

古文：居其下者，视之如蛇虺；过其境者，逃之如寇仇。
现代文：在他之下的，视他如蛇虺；路过他辖区的，避他如贼寇仇敌。
English: Those who are under him are like grasshoppers; those who pass by his courts flee from him like plunder from an enemy.

古文：与人之恩，心非好善；加人之罪，事非疾恶。
现代文：给人恩惠，心地并非善良；给人施加罪过，并非出于疾恶。
English: To show partiality is not good, and to heap iniquity is not evil.

古文：其所笞辱，多在无辜。
现代文：他所鞭挞羞辱的，大多是无辜之人。
English: Most of those he whipped and humiliated were innocent people.

古文：察其所为，豺狼之不若也。
现代文：看看他的所作所为，豺狼不如。
English: Look at what he's done. He's a jackal.

古文：其禁奸除猾，殆与郅、宁之伦异乎。
现代文：他们禁止奸邪清除狡猾，大概与郅都、宁成那些人不一样。
English: They forbid treachery and purify cunning, which is probably different from those people in Shidu and Ningcheng.

古文：君子贱之，故编于《酷吏》。
现代文：君子鄙视他们，所以编进《酷吏》。
English: Nobles despised them, so they were included in "Cruel Officials."

古文：魏有于洛侯、胡泥、李洪之、高遵、张赦提、羊祉、崔暹、郦道元、谷楷。
现代文：魏朝有于洛侯、胡泥、李洪之、高遵、张赦提、羊祉、崔暹、郦道元、谷楷。
English: In the Wei Dynasty, there were Luo Hou, Hu Di, Li Hongzhi, Gao Zun, Zhang Mengti, Sheep Shearing, Cui Siam, Xing Dogen, and Gu Kai.

古文：齐有邸珍、宋游道、卢斐、毕义云。
现代文：齐朝有邸珍、宋游道、卢斐、毕义云。
English: In the Qi Dynasty, there were Yuanzhen, Song Youdao, Lu Fei and Bi Yiyun.

古文：《周书》不立此篇。
现代文：《周书》不设酷吏传。
English: "Zhou Shu" does not contain any stories about cruel officials.

古文：《隋书》有库狄士文、田式、燕荣、赵仲卿、崔弘度、元弘嗣、王文同。
现代文：《隋书》有厍狄士文、田式、燕荣、赵仲卿、崔弘度、元弘嗣、王文同。
English: "Suishu" includes the works of Jie Di Shiwen, Tian Shi, Yan Rong, Zhao Zhongqing, Cui Hongdu, Yuan Hongzhi, and Wang Wentong.

古文：今检高遵、羊祉、郦道元、谷楷、宋游道、卢斐、毕义云、库狄士文、赵仲卿、崔弘度各从其家传，其余并列于此云。
现代文：现选出高遵、羊祉、郦道元、谷楷、宋游道、卢斐、毕义云、厍狄士文、赵仲卿、崔弘度，都记录在他们的家传中。其余都一起排列在这里。
English: Gaozun, Sheep Shearing, Xing Dao Yuan, Gu Kai, Song You Dao, Lu Fei, Bi Yiyun, Xing Di Shwen, Zhao Zhongqing, Cui Hongdu, are all recorded in their family legends. The rest are arranged together here.

古文：于洛侯，代人也。
现代文：于洛侯，代地人。
English: Yuhou, a local resident.

古文：为秦州刺史，贪酷安忍。
现代文：任秦州刺史，暴虐残忍。
English: Ren Qinzhou stabbed history, tyrannical and cruel.

古文：部人富炽夺人吕胜胫缠一具，洛侯辄鞭富炽一百，截其右腕。
现代文：兵士富炽强夺吕胜一具缠脚布，于洛侯就鞭打富炽一百下，砍掉他的右腕。
English: The soldier Fu Blazing forcibly snatched a footcloth from Lv Sheng. Yu Luo then whipped Fu Blazing a hundred times and chopped off his right arm.

古文：百姓王陇客刺杀人王羌奴、王愈二人，依律罪死。
现代文：老百姓王陇客杀死王羌奴、王愈二人，依照法律应处以死刑。
English: According to the law, the commoner Wang Yingke should be sentenced to death for killing two people, Wang Yingnu and Wang Yu.

古文：而洛侯生拔陇客舌，刺其本，并刺胸腹二十余疮。陇客不堪苦痛，随刀战动。
现代文：而于洛侯活生生地拔下王陇客的舌头，用针扎他的脚跟，并且连刺胸及腹部二十多处，陇客不堪痛苦，随刀颤动。
English: But in Lohou, he plucked out the tongue of the client, stabbed him in the heel with a needle, and stabbed him in more than 20 places in the chest and abdomen. The client was in great pain and trembled with the knife.

古文：以北平阳尼硕学，遂表荐之。转为定州刺史。
现代文：洛侯便树立四根柱子，分解他的手脚，王陇客将死时，才砍掉他的头，割裂肢体，分挂在道路上，看到的人无不悲伤痛苦感叹惊愕。
English: Luo Hou then set up four pillars and dismembered his hands and feet. When Wang Yingke was about to die, he cut off his head, severed his limbs, and hung them on the road. Those who saw this were saddened, pained, and astonished.

古文：以暴虐，刑罚酷滥，受纳货贿，徽还戮之。将就法，孝文临太华殿引见，遣侍臣宣诏责之，遂就家赐尽。李洪之，本名文通，恆农人也。
现代文：百姓王元寿等因此造反。官府揭发弹劾于洛侯，孝文帝派人到秦州府拷打犯人的地方，召集士兵宣布于洛侯的暴行，然后将于洛侯斩首以答谢百姓。李洪之原名文通，恒农人。
English: The people, including Wang Yuan Shou, rebelled as a result. The government exposed the impeachment of Luo Hou, and Emperor Xiaowen sent people to Qinzhou where they tortured prisoners, gathered soldiers to announce the atrocities in Luo Hou, and then beheaded Luo Hou to thank the people. Li Hong's original name was Wen Tong, a farmer.

古文：少为沙门，晚乃还俗。
现代文：年轻时为和尚，晚年才还俗。
English: He was a monk when he was young, and only became a layman in his later years.

古文：真君中，为狄道护军，赐爵安阳男。
现代文：真君年间，做狄道护军，赐爵安阳男。
English: During Zhenjun's time, he served as Dido's bodyguard, and was given the title of Anyangan.

古文：会永昌王仁随太武南征，得元后姊妹二人，洪之潜相饷遗，结为兄弟，遂便如亲。
现代文：适逢永昌王仁随太武南征，得到元后姐妹二人，洪之偷偷送去食物，结拜为兄弟，于是就跟亲人一样。
English: At the right time, Yongchang Wangren followed the Southern Expedition of Taiwu and got two sisters after the Yuan Dynasty. Hongzhi secretly sent food and made them brothers, so they were like relatives.

古文：颇得元后在南兄弟名字，乃改名洪之。及仁坐事诛，元后入宫，得幸于文成，生献文。
现代文：与元后在南朝兄弟的名字很相近。就改名为李洪之，到永昌王仁因事被杀，元后进入宫中，受到文成帝宠幸，生下献文帝。
English: The name of the brothers in the Southern Dynasty is very similar to the name of Empress Yuan. She changed her name to Li Hongzhi, and after the Yongchang King Jin was killed, Empress Yuan entered the palace, was favored by Emperor Wencheng, and gave birth to Emperor Wencheng.

古文：元后临崩，太后问其亲，因言洪之为兄。
现代文：元后临死时，昭太后问她的亲人，于是说李洪之是她的哥哥，与他诀别长达一年。
English: When Empress Yuan was about to die, Empress Dowager Zhao asked her relatives, and then said that Li Hongzhi was her brother, and said goodbye to him for a year.

古文：与相诀经日，具条列南方诸兄珍之等，手以付洪之。遂号为献文亲舅。
现代文：全部罗列南朝各兄长如珍之等名字，亲手交给李洪之，于是称为献文帝的亲舅。
English: He listed all the names of the brothers of the Southern Dynasty, such as Ru Zhen, and personally handed them to Li Hongzhi, who was then called the uncle of Emperor Xianwen.

古文：太安中，珍之等兄弟至都，与洪之相见，叙元后平生故事，计长幼为昆季。
现代文：太安年间，珍之等弟兄们来到都城，与李洪之相见，叙说元后一生经历，按长幼分出大小。
English: During the Taian era, brothers such as Zhen Zhi and others came to the capital, met with Li Hongzhi, recounted their life experiences after the Yuan Dynasty, and divided them according to their ages.

古文：以外戚为河内太守，进爵任城侯，威仪一同刺史。
现代文：以外戚身份做了河内太守，增升爵位为任城侯，持仗随从和刺史一样。
English: He was made the governor of Hanoi in his capacity as a relative, and was raised to the rank of lord as the acting mayor. He was a follower of the war, just like his father-in-law.

古文：河内北连上党，南接武牢，地险人悍，数为劫害，长吏不能禁。
现代文：河内北接上党，南接武牢，地势险要，人性悍。屡次抢劫为害。官吏不能禁止。
English: Hanoi is connected to the party in the north and to the military prison in the south. The terrain is precarious and the people are tough. Repeated robberies have been the scourge. Officials cannot prohibit it.

古文：洪之至郡，严设科防，募斩贼者，便加重赏，勤劝务本，盗贼止息。
现代文：李洪之到河内郡后，严格法令防备，征募到能杀贼的人，就给予重赏，经常勉励百姓从事农耕，盗贼得以平息。
English: After Li Hongzhi arrived in Hanoi County, he strictly enforced the laws and regulations on prevention and preparedness, recruited people who could kill thieves and gave them a heavy reward, and often encouraged the people to engage in farming, so that the thieves could be pacified.

古文：诛锄奸党，过为酷虐。
现代文：诛杀奸党，过于残酷暴虐。
English: It is too cruel and tyrannical to fight and kill traitors.

古文：后为怀州刺史，封汉郡公，征拜内都大官。
现代文：后来做怀州刺史。封为汲郡公，征调为内都大官。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Waizhou. He was appointed as the county magistrate of Ku County and transferred to the capital.

古文：河西羌胡领部落反叛，献文亲征，命洪之与侍中、东郡王陆定总统诸军。
现代文：黄河西边羌胡人率领部落反叛。献文帝亲自带兵征伐，命令李洪之与侍中、东郡王陆定总领各军。
English: The Yanhu people on the west side of the Yellow River led the tribe to rebel. Emperor Xianwen personally led the troops to conquer, and ordered Li Hongzhi and the general of the Eastern County, King Lu Ding, to lead the armies.

古文：舆驾至并州，诏洪之为河西都将，讨山胡。
现代文：皇帝车驾到并州，诏令李洪之为河西都将，征讨山胡。
English: When the emperor's carriage arrived at Bianzhou, he ordered Li Hong to go to the west of the river to collect the mountain goats.

古文：皆保险距战，洪之筑垒于石楼南白鸡原以对之。
现代文：山胡人占据险要之处拒敌迎战。李洪之在石楼南的白鸡原构筑工事以对敌。
English: The Sanhu people occupied critical places to resist the enemy. Li Hongzhi built a construction project in Baijiyuan, south of Shilou, to confront the enemy.

古文：时诸将悉欲进攻，洪之乃开以大信，听其复业。胡人遂降。
现代文：当时众将领都想发动进攻，李洪之就用大的信义开导他们，听凭他们恢复旧业，胡人就投降了。
English: At that time, all the generals wanted to launch an attack, and Li Hongzhi enlightened them with great faith and sincerity, and the Hu people surrendered after they resumed their old business.

古文：献文嘉之。迁拜尚书、外都大官。
现代文：献文帝嘉赏他，升任为尚书，外都大官。
English: Emperor Xianwen commended him and promoted him to Shangshu, a high-ranking official outside the capital.

古文：后为使持节、安南将军、秦、益二州刺史。
现代文：后来做使持节、安南将军、秦益二州刺史。
English: Later, he served as the envoy of Jizhi Festival, General Annan, and Qin Yi in the history of the two states.

古文：至任，设禁奸之制。有带刃行者，罪与劫同。轻重品格，各有条章。
现代文：到任上后，设立禁止奸邪的法令，有带兵器行路的，罪行与抢劫相同，判刑轻重的规格，各有条律章规。
English: After he took office, he established a law prohibiting adultery, making the crime the same as robbery for anyone traveling with a weapon, specifying the severity of the sentence, and establishing various rules and regulations.

古文：于是大飨州中豪杰长老，示之法制。
现代文：于是宴请州中豪杰和德高望众的人，把法令给他们看。
English: So he invited the state's heroes and people of high moral standing to a banquet and showed them the law.

古文：乃夜密遣骑分部覆诸要路，有犯禁者，辄捉送州，宣告斩决。
现代文：在夜间秘密派遣骑兵分别埋伏在各要道路口，有触犯禁令的，就捉往州衙，宣判斩首。
English: At night, cavalrymen were secretly dispatched to lie in ambush at each major road junction. Those who violated the ban were taken to the state capital and sentenced to beheading.

古文：其中枉见杀害者，至有百数。
现代文：其中被冤枉杀死的，达到百人。
English: One hundred of them were killed unjustly.

古文：赤葩渴郎羌深居山谷，虽相羁縻，王人罕到。
现代文：赤葩渴郎羌居于深山，虽然加以约束，朝廷官员很少到此。
English: The Red Kite Thirsty Cormorant lives deep in the mountains, and although it is restricted, court officials rarely come here.

古文：洪之芟山为道，广十馀步，示以军行之势。
现代文：李洪之开山为路，宽十多步，做出军队要进山的样子。
English: Li Hongzhi opened the mountain as a road, more than ten steps wide, making it look like the army wanted to enter the mountain.

古文：乃兴军临其境，山人惊骇。
现代文：于是发兵到羌人居住的地方。山中人惊恐害怕。
English: So they sent an army to the place where the Yao people lived. The people in the mountains were terrified.

古文：洪之将数十骑至其里闾，抚其妻子，问所疾苦，因资遗之。
现代文：李洪之率领数十个骑兵到他们的村庄，安抚他们的妻子儿女，了解他们的疾苦，把物品送给他们。
English: Li Hongzhi led dozens of cavalry to their villages, appeased their wives and children, understood their suffering, and gave them goods.

古文：众羌喜悦，求编课调，所入十倍于常。
现代文：众羌人很高兴，请求开列赋税，所得是平常的十倍多。
English: The crowd was delighted and asked for the tax to be listed. The income was more than ten times the usual.

古文：洪之善御戎夷，颇有威惠，而刻害之声，闻于朝野。
现代文：李洪之善于统治少数民族，很有威仪恩惠，然而刻薄残酷的名声，也传遍朝廷内外。
English: Li Hongzhi was good at ruling ethnic minorities, very dignified and benevolent, but the reputation of being mean and cruel also spread throughout the imperial court and beyond.

古文：初，洪之微时妻张氏，亦聪强妇人，自贫贱至富贵，多所补益，有男女几十人。
现代文：当初，李洪之贫贱时娶张氏为妻，是一个聪明能干的女人，从贫贱到富贵，受到张氏的很多帮助，有儿女几十人。
English: At first, Li Hongzhi married Zhang when he was poor. She was a smart and capable woman, from poor to rich, with a lot of help from Zhang, and had dozens of children.

古文：洪之后得刘芳从姊，重之，疏张氏。
现代文：李洪之后来娶到刘芳的堂姐，宠爱她，疏远了张氏。
English: Li Hong later married Liu Fang's cousin, doted on her, and alienated Zhang.

古文：亦多所产育。
现代文：也生有好多儿女。
English: They also had many children.

古文：为两宅别居，偏厚刘室，由是二妻妒竞，两宅母子，往来如仇。
现代文：建了两处宅院分开居住，偏爱刘氏一室。由此两个妻室互相嫉妒，两院子的母子往来如同仇人。
English: They built two homesteads and lived separately, preferring Liu's one. As a result, the two wives were jealous of each other, and the mother and son of the two homesteads were like enemies.

古文：及莅西州，以刘自随。
现代文：到西州去时，让刘氏一人跟随。
English: When going to Xizhou, let Mr. Liu follow alone.

古文：洪之素非廉清，每有受纳。
现代文：李洪之平常并非廉洁清正，不时接受贿赂。
English: Li Hongzhi was not always clean and honest, and he accepted bribes from time to time.

古文：时孝文始建禄制，法禁严峻，遂锁洪之赴京，亲临太华，庭集群臣数之。
现代文：当时孝文帝刚刚设立俸禄制，法律禁令严厉，于是锁拿李洪之进京，孝文帝亲自到太华殿，在朝廷上集合群臣责备李洪之。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowen had just established a salary system, and the legal ban was strict. Therefore, he locked up Li Hongzhi and took him to Beijing. Emperor Xiaowen himself went to the Taihua Palace and gathered a group of courtiers at the court to reprimand Li Hongzhi.

古文：以其大臣，听在家自裁。
现代文：由于他是大臣，让他在家中自尽。
English: Since he is a minister, let him kill himself at home.

古文：洪之志性慷慨，多所堪忍。
现代文：李洪之性情激昂，很多处罚都能忍受。
English: Li Hong's temperament is passionate, and he can endure a lot of punishment.

古文：疹病炙疗，艾炷围将二寸，首足十馀处，一时俱下，言笑自若，接宾不辍。
现代文：患疹子针灸治疗，点燃的艾炷将近二寸粗，头脚放有十多处，同时刺下，谈笑自若，接待宾客不止。
English: Acupuncture and moxibustion treatment for patients with urticaria. The lighted mugwort is nearly two inches thick, with more than ten spots on the head and feet. They prick themselves at the same time, talk and laugh freely, and receive more and more guests.

古文：及临尽，沐浴衣幍，防卒扶持，出入遍巡家庭，如是再三，泣叹良久，乃卧而引药。
现代文：等到临死时，沐浴穿戴，押解的士卒扶持着，进进出出遍巡家中各室，像这样反复多次，哭泣哀叹很久，才卧床吞药。
English: He waited until he was on the verge of death, bathed and dressed, supported by the policemen who escorted him, and went in and out of every room in the house, repeating this many times, weeping and lamenting for a long time, before he lay in bed and swallowed the medicine.

古文：始洪之托为元后兄，公私自同外戚。
现代文：当初李洪之伪托是元后的哥哥，公门私室跟外戚相同。
English: At the beginning, Li Hongzhi's pseudo-trustee was Yuan's brother, and his official and private households were the same as those of his maternal relatives.

古文：至此罪后，孝文乃稍对百官辩其诬假。
现代文：到这次获罪后，孝文帝才逐渐对百官辩说他的虚假。
English: It was only after this conviction that Emperor Xiaowen gradually began to argue his falsehood to the hundred officials.

古文：而诸李犹善相视，恩纪如亲。
现代文：而对李家诸人还友好相待，恩礼如亲人。
English: On the other hand, they treated the Li family and others in a friendly manner, and treated them as if they were relatives.

古文：洪之始见元后，计年为兄。
现代文：李洪之初见元后，按年龄做了兄长。
English: After Li Hongzhi first met Yuan, he became an older brother according to his age.

古文：及珍之等至，洪之以元后素定长幼，其呼拜坐，皆如家人。
现代文：等珍之等人到京城后，李洪之因元后平时所定长幼、称呼、拜见之礼，都像一家人。
English: After Zhenzhi and others arrived in Beijing, Li Hongzhi's family size, name, and greetings were all like a family.

古文：暮年，数延携之宴饮。醉酣之后，时或言及本末，洪之则起而加敬，笑语自若。
现代文：晚年，屡次邀请他饮宴，醉酒之后，有时说到事情的来龙去脉，李洪之就站起来越加恭敬，笑语自如。
English: In his later years, Li Hongzhi repeatedly invited him to banquets. After getting drunk, Li Hongzhi would sometimes talk about the ins and outs of things. Li Hongzhi stood up more and more respectfully, laughing freely.

古文：富贵赫奕，舅戚之家。遂弃宗，专附珍之等。
现代文：富贵显赫，相当于帝舅之家，于是抛弃自家祖宗，一心依附珍之等。
English: Rich and prominent, equivalent to the imperial uncle's family, so they abandoned their own ancestors and clung to the rare ones.

古文：后颇存振本属，而犹不显然。
现代文：后来很有振兴本族之意，但并没有明显效果。
English: Later, there was a strong desire to revitalize the tribe, but it did not have a significant effect.

古文：刘氏四子。
现代文：刘氏生有四个儿子。
English: Mr Liu has four sons.

古文：长子神，少有胆略，以气尚为名。
现代文：长子李神，年轻时很有胆略，以勇气超出一般人而闻名。
English: The eldest son, Li Shen, was very daring when he was young and was known for his courage beyond the average person.

古文：以军功封长乐县男，累迁平东将军、太中大夫。
现代文：因军功封为长乐县男，后迁升为平东将军，太中大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of "Changle County Man" for his military service, and was later promoted to the rank of "Pingdong General" and "Grand Vice-Minister of Health."

古文：孝昌中，行相州事，寻正加抚军。
现代文：孝昌年间，管理相州事务，不久加封为抚军。
English: During the reign of Xiaochang, he managed the affairs of Xiangzhou, and was soon given the title of Fu Jun.

古文：葛荣尽锐攻之，久不能克。
现代文：葛荣发动全部精锐部队攻打他，很长时间未能攻克。
English: Ge Rong launched all the elite troops to attack him, but they could not defeat him for a long time.

古文：会葛荣见禽，以功进爵为公。
现代文：适逢葛荣被擒获，因功晋封为公爵。
English: When Ge Rong was captured, he was promoted to Duke for his service.

古文：元颢入洛，庄帝北巡，以神为侍中。
现代文：元颢入洛阳争帝位，孝庄帝北巡，都让李神为侍中。
English: Yuan Shun entered Luoyang to fight for the imperial throne, and Emperor Xiaozhuang made Li Shen his attendant.

古文：又除殿中尚书，仍行相州事。
现代文：又封职为殿中尚书，仍兼管相州事务。
English: He was also appointed to the post of chancellor of the imperial court, and was still in charge of inter-provincial affairs.

古文：车驾还宫，改封安康郡公。
现代文：车驾回宫后，又改封为安康郡公。
English: After returning to the palace by car, he changed his title to Ankang County Governor.

古文：普泰元年，进骠骑大将军、仪同三司、相州大中正。
现代文：普泰元年，增官骠骑大将军、仪同三司、相州大中正。
English: In the first year of Putai, Zeng Guan was promoted to the general of cavalry, the three departments of ceremony and etiquette, and the middle school of Xiangzhou University.

古文：后赠定州刺史、司空公。
现代文：死时，追赠司徒公，冀州刺史。儿子士素勺承袭爵位。
English: When he died, he was posthumously given the title of Shitu Gong, Jizhou Shishi, and his son Shisuo inherited the title.

古文：田式，字显标，冯翊下邽人也。
现代文：北齐接受禅让建国后，依例降职。田式字显标，冯翊下圭阝人。
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, Beiqi accepted the zen-zhang and was demoted in accordance with the rules.

古文：祖安兴、父长乐，仕魏，俱为本郡太守。
现代文：祖父安兴、父亲长乐，在魏做官，都是本郡的太守。
English: His grandfather, Anxing, and his father, Changle, both served as officials in the Wei Dynasty and were the governors of the county.

古文：式性刚果，多武艺，拳勇绝人。
现代文：田式性情刚毅果断，会多种武艺，勇猛过人。
English: Tian's temperament is resolute and decisive, he can do many kinds of martial arts, and he is extremely brave.

古文：仕周，位渭南太守，政尚严猛，吏人重足而立，无敢违法。
现代文：在周做官，职位是渭南太守，为政崇尚严明刚猛，官吏谨小慎微，不敢违法。
English: During the Zhou Dynasty, officials held the position of the governor of southern Anhui Province. They were strict and strong-willed, and officials were cautious and did not dare to break the law.

古文：迁本郡太守，亲故屏迹，请托不行。
现代文：升任本郡太守。亲戚故友退隐踪迹，一切请求托付都不办理。
English: He has been promoted to the position of the county's governor. Relatives and friends have disappeared without a trace, and all requests for entrustment are not handled.

古文：周武帝闻而善之，进位仪同三司，赐爵信都县公，擢拜延州刺史。
现代文：周武帝听到后很赞赏他，升职仪同三司，赐爵位信都县公，提拔为延州刺史。
English: After hearing this, Emperor Zhou Wudi appreciated him very much. The promotion ceremony was the same as that of the three departments, and he was given the title of Xindu County official and promoted to the post of Yanzhou chief historian.

古文：从平齐，以功授上开府，徙为建州刺史，改封梁泉县公。后从韦孝宽讨尉迟迥，以功拜大将军，进爵武山郡公。
现代文：跟随皇上平定齐朝，以军功授上开府。调任建州刺史，改封爵位为梁泉县公，后来随韦孝宽讨伐尉迟迥，以军功被任命为大将军，升爵位为武山郡公。
English: He followed the emperor to subdue the Qi Dynasty, and was awarded the title of "Senior General" for his military exploits. He was transferred to the post of Jianzhou Shishi, and his title was changed to "Governor of Liangquan County." Later, he followed Wei Xiaokuan to fight against the "Field-Marshal Zhixuan," and was appointed as "Major General" for his military exploits, and was promoted to the title of "Governor of Wushan County."

古文：及隋文帝受禅，拜襄州总管。
现代文：到隋文帝接受禅让即位后，升他为襄州总管。
English: After Emperor Wen of the Sui Dynasty accepted the abdication and ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the governor-general of Xiangzhou.

古文：专以立威为务，每视事于外，必盛气以待之。
现代文：专门把树立威望当作根本，每次到外地巡视，一定盛气凌人地对待他人。
English: They specially regard the establishment of prestige as the foundation, and every time they go on a field inspection, they will treat others arrogantly.

古文：其下官属，股栗无敢仰视。
现代文：他的下级僚属，双腿发颤不敢仰视。
English: His junior colleagues dare not look up, their legs trembling.

古文：有犯禁者，虽至亲昵，无所容贷。
现代文：有触犯禁令者，即使是非常亲近的人也不宽容。
English: Those who violate the ban are not tolerated, even by those who are very close to them.

古文：其女婿京兆杜宁自长安省之，式诫宁无出外。
现代文：他的女婿京兆杜宁从长安来探望他，田式告诫杜宁不要外出。
English: His son-in-law, Jingzhao Duning, came from Chang'an to visit him. Tian Xi warned Duning not to go out.

古文：宁久之不得还，窃上北楼，以暢羁思。
现代文：杜宁很长时间不能回去，私自上了北楼，以倾吐羁留他乡思乡之情。
English: Duning couldn't go back for a long time, so I went up to the north tower to vent my homesickness.

古文：式知之，杖宁五十。
现代文：田式知道后，打了杜宁五十杖。
English: After knowing this, Tian Shiqi beat Duning with 50 sticks.

古文：其所爱奴，尝诣式白事，有虫上其衣衿，挥袖拂去之，式以为慢己，立棒杀之。
现代文：他所喜欢的奴仆曾经到田式那里禀告事情，有虫子爬上田式的衣襟，奴仆挥袖打掉虫子，田式认为他对自己不敬，当即用木棒打死了奴仆。
English: The servant he liked once went to Tian Shih to report the matter. There were worms crawling on Tian Shih's collar, and the servant waved his sleeve to beat off the worms. Tian Shih thought he was disrespectful to himself, and immediately killed the servant with a wooden stick.

古文：或僚吏奸赃，部内劫盗者，无问轻重，悉禁地阱中，寝处粪秽，令受苦毒。自非身死，终不得出。
现代文：有僚属吏卒贪赃枉法，在官署内部劫掠偷盗者，不问情节轻重，都关闭在地窖中，在粪便脏物中躺卧，让他们遭受痛苦，不是自己死了，始终不得放出。
English: If there is a fellow subordinate official who is corrupt, robs and steals inside the government office, no matter how serious the circumstances are, they are all closed in the cellar, lying in the feces and filth, making them suffer. If they do not die themselves, they must not be released.

古文：每赦书到州，式未暇省读，先召狱卒杀重囚，然后宣示百姓。其刻暴如此。
现代文：每当朝廷的赦免文书到达州里，田式来不及读看，就先召集狱卒杀死重罪犯，然后把赦免文书宣读给百姓听，他的苛刻暴虐就是这个样子。
English: Whenever a pardon from the imperial court arrived in the prefecture and Tian Shifu didn't have time to read it, he would first call the jailers to kill the felons, and then read the pardon to the people. This was his harsh tyranny.

古文：由是为上所谴，除名。
现代文：由于这个原因，他受到皇上责备，免去官职。
English: For this reason, he was reprimanded by the emperor and removed from office.

古文：式惭恚不食，妻子至其所辄怒，唯侍僮二人，给使左右。
现代文：田式又惭愧又恼怒，不进饭食，妻子儿女到他的房内，就发脾气，只有两名侍僮，在他身边听候使唤。
English: Embarrassed and angry, Tian did not eat. When his wife and children came to his room, he lost his temper. There were only two attendants at his side, waiting to be summoned.

古文：从家中索椒，欲自杀，家人不与。
现代文：从家里要来花椒，打算自杀，家人不给他。
English: He asked for pepper from home and planned to commit suicide, but his family wouldn't give it to him.

古文：阴遣侍僮诣市买毒药，妻子又夺弃之。
现代文：偷偷地让侍僮到集市上买来毒药，又被妻子儿女夺回扔掉。
English: He secretly asked his servants to go to the market to buy poison, which was then taken back by his wife and children and thrown away.

古文：式恚卧，其子信时为仪同，至式前流涕曰： 大人既是朝廷重臣，又无大过，比见公卿放辱者多矣，旋复外用，大人何能久乎？
现代文：田式生气躺下，他的儿子田信当时为仪同，到田式跟前流着泪说： 大人您既是朝廷的重臣，又没有大过错，那些公卿大夫被放逐遭侮辱的接连不断，有很多，随即又被任用京外，大人您怎么能长久被弃置不用呢？
English: Tenshiki became angry and lay down. His son, Tenshin, who was also present at the time, came to Tenshiki with tears streaming down his face and said, "My lord, you are a high-ranking official of the Imperial Court, yet you have not made any major mistakes. There are many court nobles and doctors who have been banished and insulted one after another. They were then appointed outside of Kyoto. My lord, how can you be abandoned and not used for a long time?

古文：乃至于此！ 
现代文：竟到了自杀的这种地步！ 
English: It got to the point of suicide!

古文：式欻起抽刀斫信，信避之，刃中于门。
现代文：田式突然起身拔刀砍田信，田信躲避，刀砍在门上。
English: Tian suddenly got up, drew a knife and slashed at Tianxin. Tianxin ducked, and the knife slashed at the door.

古文：上知之，以式为罪己之深，复其官爵，寻拜广州总管，卒官。
现代文：皇上知道了这件事，认为自己惩处田式很重，便恢复了他的官爵，不久任命为广州总管，死在任上。
English: When the emperor learned of this, he thought that he had punished Tian Shi very severely, so he restored his rank and title. Soon after, he was appointed the governor of Guangzhou, and died in office.

