古文：起阏逢敦牂，尽柔兆涒滩，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。汉献帝建安十九年
English: and lasted for a total of three years. In the 19th year of the Han Dynasty,

古文：孝献皇帝壬建安十九年春，马超从张鲁求兵，北取凉州，鲁遣超还围祁山。
现代文：春季，马超请求张鲁分派给他一支军队，向北攻取凉州，张鲁派遣马超回军围攻祁山，祁山守将姜叙向夏侯渊告急。
English: In the spring, Ma Chao asked Zhang Lu to send him an army to conquer Liangzhou in the north, Zhang Lu sent Ma Chao's army back to besiege Lushan, and Lushan's governor sent Jiang Xiu to Xia Houyuan in a hurry.

古文：姜叙等告急于夏侯渊，诸将议欲须魏公操节度。
现代文：夏侯渊部下将领议论，认为必须上报魏公曹操，由他发令调度。
English: Xia Houyuan's subordinates discussed the matter and decided that it must be reported to Wei Gong Cao Cao, who would issue the dispatch.

古文：渊曰： 公在鄴，反覆四千里，比报，叙等必败，非救急也。 
现代文：夏侯渊说： 魏公远在邺城，向他报告，往返行程四千里，等他的命令传到这里，姜叙等人必定早已被打败，这不能解救危机。 
English: Xia Houyuan said: Wei Gongyuan is in Lucheng, report to him. The round trip is four thousand miles. By the time his order reaches here, Jiang Xiu and others must have already been defeated. This cannot relieve the crisis.

古文：遂行，使张郃督步骑五千为前军。
现代文：于是命令部队行动，由张率步、骑兵五千人为先头部队。
English: He then ordered the troops to move, starting with the standard march, with five thousand cavalry as the leading troops.

古文：超败走。
现代文：马超败退而走。
English: Ma Chao retreated in defeat.

古文：韩遂在显亲，渊欲袭取之，遂走。
现代文：韩遂驻军显亲。夏侯渊欲图袭击韩遂，夺取显亲，韩遂退走。
English: At this time, Han Sui's troops were showing off, and Xia Houyuan wanted to take advantage of the situation to attack him. When Han Sui learned the news, he fled first.

古文：渊追至略阳城，去遂三十馀里，诸将欲攻之，或言当攻兴国氐。
现代文：夏侯渊追到略阳城，距离韩遂驻地三十余里。将领们准备向韩遂发动攻击，有人建议应当进攻兴国的氐人。
English: Xia Houyuan chased to Liaoyang City, more than thirty miles away from Han Sui's residence. The generals were preparing to launch an attack on Han Sui, and it was suggested that they should attack Xingguo's Xiang people.

古文：渊以为： 遂兵精，兴国城固，攻不可卒拔，不如袭长离诸羌。
现代文：夏侯渊认为： 韩遂的军队精锐，兴国有坚固的城防，进攻很难迅速取胜，不如攻打长离的羌人部落。
English: Xia Houyuan believed that: Han Sui's army was elite, Xing had a solid city defense, and it was difficult to win a quick victory in the attack. It was better to attack the distant Hun tribes.

古文：长离诸羌多在遂军，必归救其家。
现代文：很多长离的羌人都在韩遂军中，他们必然会回去援救自己的家乡。
English: Many defectors are in the Han Sui forces, and if they are attacked, they will certainly rush back to help.

古文：若舍羌独守则孤，救长离则官兵得与野战，必可虏也。 
现代文：韩遂若舍弃长离羌人拥兵自守，便会失去羌人的支持而势孤力单；如果援救长离，我们就可以与他的部队进行野战，一定能够生擒韩遂。 
English: If Han Sui abandons long-distance support and self-defence, he will lose the support of the Han people and be left alone; if the rescue is long-distance, we can carry out field battles with his troops, and we will definitely be able to rescue Han Sui.

古文：渊乃留督将守辎重，自将轻兵到长离，攻烧羌屯，遂果救长离。
现代文：于是，夏侯渊留下督将守卫辎重，亲自率军轻装至长离，攻打烧羌部落，韩遂果然来救长离。
English: As a result, Xia Houyuan left the governor to keep a heavy guard, personally led the army lightly armed to Changli, attacked the Burnt Grass Tribe, and Han Sui really came to save Changli.

古文：诸将见遂兵众，欲结营作堑乃与战。
现代文：夏侯渊的部下将领见韩遂兵多，要扎下营盘、挖好堑壕再作战。
English: General Xia Houyuan's subordinates saw many soldiers of Han Sui, so they had to set up camp, dig trenches and then fight.

古文：渊曰： 我转斗千里，今复作营堑，则士众罢敝，不可复用。
现代文：夏侯渊说： 我军千里转战，如果再扎营盘，掘堑壕，士兵便会疲惫不堪，无法再用他们去作战了。
English: Xia Houyuan said: Our army has traveled thousands of miles to fight. If we set up camp and dig trenches again, the soldiers will be too tired to fight with them.

古文：贼虽众，易与耳。 
现代文：韩遂兵虽多，却容易对付。 
English: Although there are many enemy raiders, they are easy to defeat.

古文：乃鼓之，大破遂军。进围兴国。
现代文：夏侯渊下令击鼓进攻，一举击溃了韩遂的军队，并乘胜包围了兴国。
English: Xia Houyuan ordered a drumming attack, defeated Han Sui's army in one fell swoop, and took advantage of the victory to surround Xingguo.

古文：氐王千万奔马超，馀众悉降。
现代文：氐王千万逃到马那里，其余的官兵都投降了夏侯渊。
English: Shao Wang fled to Ma, and the rest of the officers and soldiers surrendered to Xia Houyuan.

古文：转击高平、屠各，皆破之。
现代文：夏侯渊又转而进攻高平、屠各两个部落，也都把他们击溃。
English: Xia Houyuan turned to attack the two tribes of Gaoping and Tu, and also defeated them.

古文：三月，诏魏公操位在诸侯王上，改授金玺、赤绂、远游冠。
现代文：三月，献帝颁发诏书，确认魏公曹操地位在诸侯王之上，改授金制印玺、帝王和诸侯专用的红色绶带，以及诸侯王专用的远游冠。
English: In March, Emperor Xian issued an edict, confirming Wei Gong Cao Cao's status as superior to the princes, and re-awarded the gold seal, the red ribbon for the emperor and princes, and the traveling crown for the princes.

古文：夏，四月，旱。
现代文：入夏，四月，干旱。
English: Early summer, April, drought.

古文：五月，雨水。
现代文：五月，雨水很多。
English: In May, there was a lot of rain.

古文：初，魏公操遣庐江太守硃光屯皖，大开稻田。
现代文：当初，魏公曹操派庐江太守朱光在皖屯兵，大量开垦土地，种植稻谷。
English: At first, Emperor Cao Cao of Wei sent Zhu Guang, the governor of the Li River, to reclaim a large amount of land and plant rice.

古文：吕蒙言于孙权曰： 皖田肥美，若一收孰，彼众必增，宜早除之。 
现代文：吕蒙向孙权建议： 皖地田土肥沃，如果一旦稻熟收获，曹军必然扩充，应当早日除去朱光。 
English: Lv Meng suggested to Sun Quan: The ploughed land is fertile, if once the rice is harvested, Cao Jun will inevitably expand, Zhu Guang should be removed as soon as possible.

古文：闰月，权亲攻皖城。
现代文：闰五月，孙权亲自率军攻打皖城。
English: In leap May, Sun Quan personally led the army to attack Shicheng.

古文：诸将欲作土山，添攻具，吕蒙曰： 治攻具及土山，必历日乃成；城备既修，外救必至，不可图也。
现代文：将领们计划堆土山和增加攻城的设备，吕蒙说： 制造攻城设备和堆土成山，须多日才能完工。到那时，敌人城防已经巩固，援兵必定到来，我们将不能夺得皖城。
English: The generals planned to pile up mounds of earth and increase siege equipment, Liumeng said: "It will take many days to complete the construction of siege equipment and pile up mounds of earth. By then, the enemy's city defense has been consolidated, reinforcements will surely arrive, and we will not be able to capture Handan.

古文：且吾乘雨水以入，若留经日，水必向尽，还道艰难，蒙窃危之。
现代文：况且我军乘雨多水大而来，如果旷日久留，大水必定渐渐退走，我们回兵的道路会遇到困难，我以为那是很危险的。
English: Moreover, our army came here with a lot of rain and water. If we stay for a long time, the water will gradually recede, and we will encounter difficulties on the way back. I thought that was very dangerous.

古文：今观此城，不能甚固，以三军锐气，四面并攻，不移时可拔；及水以归，全胜之道也。 
现代文：现在看来，此城不会十分坚固，我三军士气高昂，四面齐攻，很快就可攻克，然后趁大水未退而回军，这才是大获全胜的策略。
English: Now it seems that this city will not be very strong. The morale of our three armies is high. We can attack from all directions and quickly defeat it. Then, we can take advantage of the flood and return to the army. This is the strategy for a complete victory.

古文：权从之。
现代文：孙权采纳了这一建议。
English: Sun Quan followed his advice.

古文：蒙荐甘宁为升城督，宁手持练，身缘城，为士卒先；蒙以精锐继之，手执枹鼓，士卒皆腾踊。
现代文：吕蒙推荐甘宁为升城督，甘宁手持白色熟绢，身先士卒攀上城墙；吕蒙命令精锐战士紧随其后，他亲自擂鼓指挥，战士们踊跃登城。
English: Lv Meng recommended Ganning to be the governor of the city, and Ganning climbed the city wall holding a white jujube in his hand. Lv Meng ordered the elite soldiers to follow him. He personally played the drum and conducted the soldiers to climb the city.

古文：侵晨进攻，食时破之，获硃光及男女数万口。
现代文：拂晓发起攻击，早上辰时已经攻克皖城，俘获朱光以及城中男女数万人。
English: They launched an attack at dawn, and by the early hours of the morning, they had conquered Handan City, captured Zhu Guang and tens of thousands of men and women in the city.

古文：既而张辽至夹石，闻城已拔，乃退。
现代文：不久，张辽率兵赶到夹石，听说皖城失守，便领兵撤退了。
English: When Zhang Liao and his army arrived at Jiaoshi, they learned that the city of Handan had been occupied by the Wu army, and they had no choice but to retreat.

古文：权拜吕蒙为庐江太守，还屯寻阳。
现代文：孙权任命吕蒙为庐江太守。回兵驻守寻阳。
English: Sun Quan appointed Lv Meng as the governor of the Li River. Hui soldiers were stationed in Xuanyang.

古文：诸葛亮留关羽守荆州，与张飞、赵云将兵溯流克巴东。
现代文：诸葛亮留关羽留守荆州，与张飞、越云率兵溯长江而上，攻克巴东。
English: Zhuge Liang left Guan Yu to stay in Jingzhou, and together with Zhang Fei and Yue Yun led the troops up the Yangtze River to conquer Badong.

古文：至江州，破巴郡太守严颜，生获之。
现代文：至江州，打败并生擒了巴郡太守严颜。
English: He went to Jiangzhou, defeated and captured the governor of Ba County, Yan Yan.

古文：飞呵颜曰： 大军既至，何以不降，而敢拒战！ 
现代文：张飞呵斥严颜： 我大军已到，你为什么不投降，而敢率军顽抗！ 
English: Zhang Fei yelled at Yan Yan: My army has arrived, why don't you surrender and dare to lead the army to resist!

古文：颜曰： 卿等无状，侵夺我州，我州但有断头将军，无降将军也！ 
现代文：严颜说： 你们无理夺取我江州，江州只有断头将军，没有投降将军！ 
English: Yan Yan said: You have seized my Jiangzhou for no reason. In Jiangzhou, there is only a decapitation general, not a surrender general!

古文：飞怒，令左右牵去斫头。
现代文：张飞大怒，命令左右部属把严颜拉出去斩首。
English: Zhang Fei was furious and ordered his right and left subordinates to drag Yan Yan out and behead him.

古文：颜容止不变，曰： 斫头便斫头，何为怒邪！ 
现代文：严颜形容举止不变，说： 砍头便砍头，发什么火！ 
English: Yan Yan described his demeanour as unchanged, saying: "If you chop off a head, you chop off a head, what fire!

古文：飞壮而释之，引为宾客。
现代文：张飞佩服严颜的胆魄，将他释放，并让他做自己的宾客。
English: Zhang Fei thought Yan Yan was very brave, so he ordered his release and treated him as a guest.

古文：分遣赵云从外水定江阳、犍为，飞定巴西、德阳。
现代文：诸葛亮派遣赵云经外水出兵平定江阳、犍为，派张飞平定巴西、德阳。
English: Zhuge Liang dispatched Zhao Yun to dispatch troops via foreign waters to pacify Jiangyang and Shouwen, and sent Zhang Fei to pacify Brazil and Deyang.

古文：刘备围雒城且一年，庞统为流矢所中，卒。
现代文：刘备围攻雒城近一年，庞统被流矢射中而死。
English: Liu Bei besieged Lucheng for nearly a year, and Pang Tong was shot and killed.

古文：法正笺与刘璋，为陈形势强弱，且曰： 左将军从举兵以来，旧心依依，实无薄意。
现代文：法正写信给刘璋，分析了形势强弱，并说： 左将军刘备起兵后，对您仍有旧情，实际上没有恶意。
English: Fa Zheng wrote a letter to Liu Bei, analyzing the strength and weakness of the situation, and said: After the Left General Liu Bei raised an army, he still has old feelings for you, in fact, there is no malice.

古文：愚以为可图变化，以保尊门。 
现代文：我认为您应改变态度，以保住家门的尊贵。 
English: I think I can protect my family according to the changes in the situation.

古文：璋不答。
现代文：刘璋未予答复。
English: Liu Ye did not reply.

古文：雒城溃，备进围成都。
现代文：刘备攻破雒城，进而包围了成都。
English: Liu Bei broke through Shicheng, and then surrounded Chengdu.

古文：诸葛亮、张飞、赵云引兵来会。
现代文：诸葛亮、张飞、赵去也率兵前来会合。
English: Zhuge Liang, Zhang Fei and Zhao De also led the troops to come to the meeting.

古文：马超知张鲁不足与计事，又鲁将杨昂等数害其能，超内怀于邑。
现代文：马超知道张鲁是个不值得与其计议大事的人，张鲁的部将杨昂等人又多次诋毁他的才能，因此心中忧郁。
English: Ma Chao knew that Zhang Lu was a person who was not worth discussing important matters with, and Zhang Lu's subordinate Yang Ang and others repeatedly slandered his talent, so he was depressed.

古文：备使建宁督邮李恢往说之，超遂从武都逃入氐中，密书请降于备。
现代文：刘备派建宁督邮李恢前去游说马超，马超便从武都逃到氐人部落，秘密写信给刘备请求归降。
English: Liu Bei sent Jianning Du Fu and Li Wei to lobby Ma Chao. Ma Chao then fled from Wudu to the Hun tribe and secretly wrote to Liu Bei to request his surrender.

古文：使人止超，而潜以兵资之。
现代文：刘备派人制止了马超，但暗中派兵给以帮助。
English: Liu Bei sent someone to stop Ma Chao, but secretly sent soldiers to help.

古文：超到，令引军屯城北，城中震怖。
现代文：马超来到成都，刘备命他率军驻扎城北，成都城内的人非常震惊，心中恐惧。
English: Ma Chao came to Chengdu, and Liu Bei led his army to the north of the city. People in Chengdu were very shocked and fearful.

古文：备围城数十日，使从事中郎涿郡简雍入说刘璋。
现代文：刘备包围成都数十天，派从事中郎涿郡人简雍进城劝降刘璋。
English: Liu Bei besieged Chengdu for dozens of days and sent Jian Yong, a man from Zhonglangye County, into the city to persuade Liu Bei to surrender.

古文：时城中尚有精兵三万人，谷帛支一年，吏民咸欲死战。
现代文：此时城中还有精兵三万人，粮食和丝帛可以支持一年，官吏和百姓都愿死战到底。
English: At this time, there were still 30,000 elite soldiers in the city, grain and silk can support a year, officials and people are willing to fight to the death.

古文：璋言： 父子在州二十馀年，无恩德以加百姓。
现代文：刘璋说： 我们父子统领益州二十余年，对百姓没有什么恩德。
English: Liu Wei said: Our father and son have been leading Yizhou for more than 20 years, and there is no grace for the people.

古文：百姓攻战三年，肌膏草野者，以璋故也，何心能安！ 
现代文：百姓苦战三年，暴尸荒野，实在是因为我刘璋的缘故，我怎能安心！ 
English: The people have been fighting hard for three years, and the wilderness of dead bodies is really because of me, Liu Ye. How can I be at ease?

古文：遂开城，与简雍同舆出降，群下莫不流涕。
现代文：因此命令打开城门，和简雍同乘一辆车出来投降，部属无不伤心落泪。
English: Therefore, he ordered to open the city gate, and he and Jian Yong came out in a car to surrender. All the subordinates were sad and shed tears.

古文：备迁璋于公安，尽归其财物，佩振威将军印绶。
现代文：刘备把刘璋安置在公安这个地方，归还他的全部财物，让他佩带振威将军印绶。
English: Liu Bei placed Liu Wei in the public security department, returned all of his belongings, and made him wear the seal of General Zhenwei.

古文：备入成都，置酒，大飨士卒。取蜀城中金银，分赐将士，还其谷帛。
现代文：刘备进入成都，大摆酒宴，犒劳士卒，取出城中存放的金银，分赐给将士，而粮食和丝帛则物归原主。
English: Liu Bei entered Chengdu, held a grand wine banquet, wined and dined the soldiers, took out the gold and silver stored in the city, and distributed it to the soldiers, while the grain and silk reeds were returned to their original owners.

古文：备领益州牧，以军师中郎将诸葛亮为军师将军，益州太守南郡董和为掌军中郎将，并置左将军府事，偏将军马超为平西将军，军议校尉法正为蜀郡太守、扬武将军，裨将军南阳黄忠为讨虏将军，从事中郎麋竺为安汉将军，简雍为昭德将军，北海孙乾为秉忠将军，广汉长黄权为偏将军，汝南许靖为左将军长史，庞羲为司马，李严为犍为太守，费观为巴郡太守，山阳伊籍为从事中郎，零陵刘巴为西曹掾，广汉彭羕为益州治中从事。
现代文：刘备兼任益州牧，任命军师中郎将诸葛亮为军师将军，益州太守、南郡人董和为掌军中郎将，并且代理左将军府事，偏将军马超为平西将军，军议校尉法正为蜀郡太守、扬武将军，裨将军、南阳人黄忠为讨虏将军，从事中郎麋竺为安汉将军，简雍为昭德将军，北海人孙乾为秉忠将军，广汉长黄权为偏将军，汝南人许靖为左将军长史，庞羲为司马，李严为犍为太守，费观为巴郡太守，山阳人伊籍为从事中郎，零陵人刘巴为西曹掾，广汉人彭为益州治中从事。
English: Liu Bei concurrently served as the governor of Yizhou, appointed the military leader Zhuge Liang as the military leader, the governor of Yizhou, the person of Nan County, Dong He, as the commander of the military leader, and acted as the left general for the government affairs, the partial general Ma Chao as the general of Pingxi, the military council lieutenant Fazheng as the governor of Shu County, the general of Yangwu, the general of Tu, the person of Nanyang, Huang Zhong, as the general of Toru, the person of Zhonglang, Zou, as the general of Anhan, Jian Yong as the general of Zhao De, the person of the

古文：初，董和在郡，清俭公直，为民夷所爱信，蜀中推为循吏，故备举而用之。
现代文：当初，董和在益州郡的时候，清明，俭朴、公平、正直，受到汉夷百姓的爱戴和信任，大家公认他是循礼守法的官吏，所以得到刘备的提拨和任用。
English: At the beginning, when Dong He was in Yizhou County, he was very clear, frugal, fair and honest. He was loved and trusted by the people of Hanyi. Everyone recognized that he was a courteous and law-abiding official, so he was nominated and appointed by Liu Bei.

古文：备之自新野奔江南也，荆楚群士从之如云，而刘巴独北诣魏公操。
现代文：刘备从新野逃到江南，荆州一带的士人投奔他的非常多，唯独刘巴跑到魏公曹操那里。
English: Liu Bei fled from Xinyo to the south of the Yangtze River. Many scholars from the Jingzhou region joined him, but Liu Ba only went to Wei Gong Cao Cao.

古文：操辟为掾，遣招纳长沙、零陵，桂阳。
现代文：曹操任命刘巴为掾，派遣他去招降和接收长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡。
English: Cao Cao appointed Liu Ba as the commander and sent him to recruit and receive the three counties of Changsha, Luling and Guiyang.

古文：会备略有三郡，巴事不成，欲由交州道还京师。
现代文：正赶上刘备夺取了三郡，刘巴无法完成任务，准备由交州转道返回京城。
English: Just in time for Liu Bei to capture the three counties, Liu Ba was unable to complete the task and prepared to return to Beijing via the Jiaozhou detour.

古文：时诸葛亮在临蒸，以书招之，巴不从，备深以为恨。
现代文：这时诸葛亮在临蒸，写信劝他投奔刘备，他不同意，刘备深感是件恨事。
English: At this time, Zhuge Liang was in Lintong, writing a letter to persuade him to join Liu Bei. He did not agree, and Liu Bei deeply felt that it was a hateful thing.

古文：巴遂自交趾入蜀依刘璋。
现代文：刘巴从交趾进入蜀地依附刘璋。
English: Liu Ba entered Shu from Jiaozuo to attach himself to Liu Ye.

古文：及璋迎备，巴谏曰： 备，雄人也，入必为害。 
现代文：当刘璋准备迎接刘备入蜀的时候，刘巴劝谏说： 刘备是一代奸雄，进入蜀地必定害人。 
English: When Liu Ye was preparing to welcome Liu Bei into Shu, Liu Ba advised him, "Liu Bei is a generation of traitors. Entering Shu is bound to harm others."

古文：既入，巴复谏曰： 若使备讨张鲁，是放虎于山林也。 
现代文：刘备入蜀以后，刘巴再次劝谏说： 要是让刘备去征讨张鲁，如同放虎归山。 
English: After Liu Bei's entry into Shu, Liu Ba once again persuaded Zou, saying, "If Liu Bei were to go to fight Zhang Lu, it would be like releasing a tiger to return to the mountain.

古文：璋不听，巴闭门称疾。
现代文：刘璋不听，他便闭门称病。
English: Liu Wei did not listen, he closed the door and called in sick.

古文：备攻成都，令军中曰： 有害巴者，诛及三族。 
现代文：刘备围攻成都，向军队下令： 谁若伤害刘巴，诛灭三族。 
English: Liu Bei besieged Chengdu and ordered the army: If anyone harms Liu Ba, the three ethnic groups will be annihilated.

古文：及得巴，甚喜。
现代文：及至得到刘巴，刘备非常高兴。
English: Liu Bei was very happy to get Liu Ba.

古文：是时益州郡县皆望风景附，独黄权闭城坚守，须璋稽服，乃降。
现代文：当时益州各郡县闻风都如影随形般地投靠刘备，只有黄权紧闭城门坚守，等到刘璋跪拜投降，他才归附。
English: At that time, all the counties and counties in Yizhou followed Liu Bei. Only Huang Quan closed the city gate and waited for Liu Bei to kneel and surrender before he joined.

古文：于是董和、黄权、李严等，本璋之所授用也；吴懿、费观等，璋之婚亲也；彭羕，璋之所摈弃也；刘巴，宿昔之所忌恨也；备皆处之显任，尽其器能，有志之士，无不竞劝，益州之民，是以大和。
现代文：这样，本为刘璋所任用的董和、黄权、李严等，刘璋的姻亲吴懿、费观等，刘璋所排斥的彭，刘备往日所忌恨的刘巴，刘备都予以重用，以尽其才能。有志之士，都争相努力尽职，益州百姓，因此非常合睦。
English: In this way, Dong He, Huang Quan, Li Yan and others who were originally appointed by Liu Bei, Liu Bei's in-laws Wu Xi, Fei Guan and others, Peng who was rejected by Liu Bei, Liu Ba who was hated by Liu Bei in the past, and Liu Bei were all reused to the best of their abilities. People with aspirations were all competing to do their best, and the people of Yizhou, therefore, were very harmonious.

古文：初，刘璋以许靖为蜀郡太守。
现代文：以前，刘璋任命许靖为蜀郡太守。
English: Previously, Liu Bei appointed Xu Jing as the governor of Shu County.

古文：成都将溃，靖谋逾城降备，备以此薄靖，不用也。
现代文：成都将被攻破时，许靖曾计划出城投降刘备，刘备因此而看不起许靖，对他不加任用。
English: When Chengdu was about to be overrun, Xu Jing had planned to leave the city and surrender to Liu Bei. As a result, Liu Bei looked down on Xu Jing and did not appoint him.

古文：法正曰： 天下有获虚誉而无其实者，许靖是也。
现代文：法正对刘备说： 世上有一种有虚名而其实不副的人，许靖就是这种人。
English: Fa Zheng said to Liu Bei: There is a kind of person in the world who has a false name but is actually not worthy, Xu Jing is such a person.

古文：然今主公始创大业，天下之人，不可户说，宜加敬重，以慰远近之望。 
现代文：然而主公您现在刚开始创建大业，不能让天下人议论您。对许靖还是敬重为好，以此抚慰远近之人，不使失望。 
English: However, Lord, you have just begun to create a great cause, and you cannot let the world talk about you. It is better to respect Xu Jing, so as to comfort people near and far, and not disappoint them.

古文：备乃礼而用之。
现代文：刘备这才对许靖以礼相待，加以任用。
English: Liu Bei then treated Xu Jing with courtesy and appointed him.

古文：成都之围也，备与士众约： 若事定，府库百物，孤无预焉。 
现代文：围攻成都时，刘备曾与部下约定： 若攻破成都，官府仓库的一切财物，你们可以任意地拿，我决不干预。 
English: When besieging Chengdu, Liu Bei had made an agreement with his subordinates: If you attack Chengdu, you can take all the property of the government warehouse at will, I will never interfere.

古文：及拔成都，士众皆舍干戈赴诸藏，竞取宝物。
现代文：破城之后，士兵们都扔掉兵器，奔向仓库争抢财物，造成军费不足，刘备深感忧虑。
English: After defeating the city, the soldiers threw away their weapons and rushed to the warehouse to scramble for belongings, resulting in a shortage of military spending. Liu Bei was deeply worried.

古文：军用不足，备甚忧之，刘巴曰： 此易耳。但当铸直百钱，平诸物价，令吏为官市。 
现代文：刘巴说： 这很容易解决，只要铸造一种值百钱的的钱币，平抑物价，命官吏设立官市。 
English: Liu Ba said: This is easy to solve, just mint a coin worth a hundred dollars, keep prices flat, and order officials to set up an official market.

古文：备从之。数月之间，府库充实。
现代文：刘备采纳了这一建议，几个月后，府库的财物就充足了。
English: Liu Bei accepted this suggestion, and after a few months, the prefectural treasury's assets were sufficient.

古文：时议者欲以成都名田宅分赐诸将。
现代文：当时，有人建议把成都有名的肥田沃土和住宅分给将领们。
English: At that time, it was suggested that the fertile land and houses in Chengdu's famous Fertile Fields should be allocated to the generals.

古文：赵云曰： 霍去病以匈奴未灭，无用家为。
现代文：赵云说： 霍去病曾认为匈奴尚未消灭，不应考虑自己的家业。
English: Zhao Yun said: He once thought that the Xiongnu had not yet been eliminated, and that he should not consider his family business.

古文：今国贼非但匈奴，未可求安也。
现代文：现在的国贼远非匈奴可比，我们不能贪图安乐。
English: The current national traitors are far from comparable to the Huns, and we cannot be greedy for happiness.

古文：须天下都定，各反桑梓，归耕本土，乃其宜耳。
现代文：等到天下都安定以后，将士们重归故里，在自己的田地上耕作，才会各得其所。
English: After the world is stable, the soldiers will return to their hometowns and cultivate their own fields, and then everyone will find their place.

古文：益州人民，初罹兵革，田宅皆可归还，令安居复业，然后可役调，得其欢心，不宜夺之以私所爱也。 
现代文：益州的百姓，刚刚遭受兵灾战祸，土地、田宅都应归还原来的主人，使百姓平安定居，恢复生产，然后才可以向他们征发兵役，收取租税，获得他们的好感；不应该夺取他们财物，以私宠自己所爱的将领。 
English: The people of Yizhou, who have just suffered the disaster of war, should return the land and farmhouses to their original owners, so that the people can live peacefully and resume production. Only then can they be conscripted for military service, collect taxes, and gain their goodwill. They should not be deprived of their property to favor their beloved generals.

古文：备从之。
现代文：刘备接受了赵云的意见。
English: Liu Bei accepted Zhao Yun's opinion.

古文：备之袭刘璋也，留中郎将南郡霍峻守葭萌城。
现代文：刘备袭击刘璋时，留中郎将南郡人霍峻守卫葭萌城。
English: When Liu Bei attacked Liu Bei, Ruzhongluo sent a man from Nan County, Huo Jun, to guard Qimeng City.

古文：张鲁遣杨昂诱峻求共守城。
现代文：张鲁派杨昂引诱霍峻，要求共同守城。
English: Zhang Lu sent Yang Ang to seduce Huo Jun and asked him to jointly defend the city.

古文：峻曰： 小人头可得，城不可得！ 
现代文：霍峻说： 我的头可得，而城不可得！ 
English: Ho Jun said: My head can be taken, but not the city!

古文：昂乃退。
现代文：杨昂只好作罢。
English: Yang Ang had no choice but to give up.

古文：后璋将扶禁、向存等帅万馀人由阆水上，攻围峻，且一年。
现代文：后来刘璋的部将扶禁、向存等人，率领一万余人溯阆水向上游进发，围攻霍峻近一年。
English: Later, Liu Bei's troops led more than ten thousand people upstream, and besieged Ho Jun for nearly a year.

古文：峻城中兵才数百人，伺其怠隙，选精锐出击，大破之，斩存。
现代文：霍峻在城中只有数百名战士，窥伺敌人疲惫的机会，挑选精锐出击，大破敌军，斩杀了向存。
English: Ho Jun had only a few hundred soldiers in the city. He spied an opportunity when the enemy was exhausted, selected the elite to attack, defeated the enemy army, and killed the enemy.

古文：备既定蜀，乃分广汉为梓潼郡，以峻为梓潼太守。
现代文：刘备占据蜀地后，从广汉郡分出梓潼郡，任命霍峻为梓潼太守。
English: After Liu Bei occupied Shu, he separated Zizhi County from Guanghan County and appointed Huo Jun as the governor of Zizhi County.

古文：法正外统都畿，内为谋主，一飧之德、睚眦之怨，无不报复，擅杀毁伤己者数人。或谓诸葛亮曰： 法正太纵横，将军宜启主公，抑其威福。 
现代文：法正在外统辖蜀郡，在内是为刘备出谋划策的主要人物。他恩怨分明，对他有过一餐饭的恩惠，他都予以报答；对他有一瞪眼的怨恨，他也无不报复，擅自杀害了一些伤害过自己的人，有人对诸葛亮说： 法正肆意横行，将军您应该禀报主公，限制他作威作福。 
English: Fa Zheng governed Shu County from the outside, and was the main person who made plans for Liu Bei from the inside. He had a clear grudge against him. He had been very generous to him, and he had repaid him. He had a blinding grudge against him, and he also took revenge. He killed some people who had harmed him. Someone said to Zhuge Liang: Fa Zheng is running amok. General, you should report to your master and restrict him from using his power to benefit others.

古文：亮曰： 主公之在公安也，北畏曹操之强，东惮孙权之逼，近则惧孙夫人生变于肘腋。法孝直为之辅翼，令翻然翱翔，不可复制。
现代文：诸葛亮说： 主公在公安的时候，北边畏惧曹操的强大，东边害怕孙权的威胁，近处则担心孙夫人在家中搞出内乱，法正象羽翼一样辅佐主公，使主公能够自由翱翔，不再受制于他人。
English: Zhuge Liang said: When the lord was in public security, the north feared the power of Cao Cao, the east was afraid of the threat of Sun Quan, and the neighborhood was worried that Mrs. Sun would cause civil unrest at home. Fa-Zheng assisted the lord like a wing, so that the lord could fly freely and no longer be constrained by others.

古文：如何禁止孝直，使不得少行其意邪！ 
现代文：怎么能禁止法正，而不许他稍稍随心所欲呢！ 
English: How can he forbid the Fa-rectification and not allow him to do as he pleases?

古文：诸葛亮佐备治蜀，颇尚严峻，人多怨叹者。
现代文：诸葛亮辅佐刘备治理蜀地，很强调严刑峻法，很多人怨恨叹息。
English: Zhuge Liang assisted Liu Bei in the governance of Shu, and he emphasized the severity of punishment. Many people resented and sighed.

古文：法正谓亮曰： 昔高祖入关，约法三章，秦民知德。
现代文：法正对诸葛亮说： 以前汉高祖入函谷关，约法三章，秦地的百姓感恩戴德。
English: Fa Zheng said to Zhuge Liang: In the past, the ancestors of the Han Dynasty entered the valley of Hanzhong, the three chapters of the Fa were written, and the people of Qin were grateful.

古文：今君假借威力，跨据一州，初有其国，未垂惠抚；且客主之义，宜相降下，愿缓刑弛禁以慰其望。 
现代文：如今，您借助权势的力量，占据一州的地方，刚刚建立国家，还没有施加恩惠，进行安抚，况且从外来的客与本地的主这间的关系讲，客人的姿态应当降低，希望您能放宽刑律和禁令，以适应当地人的意愿。 
English: Now that you have used your power to occupy a place in a state, and have just established a country, and have not yet imposed favors and appeasement, and moreover, in terms of the relationship between the foreign guest and the local host, the attitude of the guest should be reduced. I hope you can relax the criminal law and ban to adapt to the wishes of the local people.

古文：亮曰： 君知其一，未知其二。
现代文：诸葛亮回答说： 您只知其一，不知其二。
English: Zhuge Liang replied, "You only know one, not the other.

古文：秦以无道，政苛民怨，匹夫大呼，天下土崩；高祖因之，可以弘济。
现代文：秦因为暴虐无道，政令苛刻，造成人民对它的怨恨，所以一介草民大呼一声，天下就土崩瓦解。汉高祖在这种情况下，可以采用宽大的政策而获得很大成功。
English: Qin's ruthless tyranny and harsh government decrees caused the people's resentment against it, so the world would collapse as soon as the people shouted loudly. In this situation, Han Gaozu could adopt a lenient policy and achieve great success.

古文：刘璋暗弱，自焉已来，有累世之累，文法羁縻，互相承奉，德政不举，威刑不肃。
现代文：刘璋糊涂软弱，从其父刘焉那时起，刘家对蜀地的人两世的恩惠，全靠典章和礼仪维系上下的关系，互相奉承，德政不能施行，刑罚失掉威业。
English: Liu Xuan was weak and confused. From the time of his father, Liu Yan, the Liu family's two generations of favors to the people of Shu were entirely dependent on the rules and etiquette to maintain the relationship between the upper and lower classes, mutual flattery, the impossibility of carrying out German politics, and the loss of prestige caused by punishment.

古文：蜀土人土，专权自恣，君臣之道，渐以陵替。
现代文：蜀地的人专权而为所欲为，君臣之道，渐渐破坏。
English: The people of Shu have the monopoly of power and can do whatever they want. The way of the monarch and the vassal is gradually being destroyed.

古文：宠之以位，位极则贱；顺之以恩，恩竭则慢。
现代文：给予高官表示宠爱，官位无法再高时，反而被臣下轻视；顺从臣下的要求，施加恩惠，不能的时候，臣下便会轻狂怠慢。
English: If you show favor to a high-ranking official, you will be despised by your subordinates when the official position cannot be higher; if you comply with the demands of your subordinates and give them favors, you will be neglected by your subordinates when you can't.

古文：所以致敝，实由于此。
现代文：蜀地所以到了破败的地步，实在是由于这样的原因引起的。
English: It is for this reason that Shunde has fallen into a state of ruin.

古文：吾今威之以法，法行则知恩；限之以爵，爵加则知荣。
现代文：我现在要树立法令的威严，法令被执行，人们便会知道我们的恩德；以爵位限定官员的地位，加爵的人便会觉得很荣耀。
English: I now want to build the majesty of the legislative decree. If the decree is implemented, people will know our benevolence; if the status of officials is limited to a knighthood, those who give knighthoods will feel very honored.

古文：荣恩并济，上下有节，为治之要，于斯而著矣。 
现代文：荣耀和恩德相辅相成，上下之间有一定的规矩，治国的主要原则，由此清楚地显示出来了。 
English: Glory and benevolence complement each other, and there is a certain rule between the upper and lower levels, the main principle of governing the country, which clearly shows.

古文：刘备以零陵蒋琬为广都长。
现代文：刘备任命零陵人蒋琬为广都长。
English: Liu Bei appointed Chiang Kai-shek as the governor of the capital.

古文：备尝因游观，奄至广都，见琬众事不治，时又沉醉。
现代文：刘备外也游览，突然到达广都，见蒋琬不处理各项政务，当时又喝得烂醉。
English: Liu Bei also made a tour of foreign countries, and suddenly arrived in Quang Du. He saw that Chiang Kai-shek was not dealing with various government affairs. At that time, he was very drunk.

古文：备大怒，将加罪戮。
现代文：刘备大怒，要将蒋琬治以死罪。
English: Liu Bei was furious and wanted to sentence Jiang Chen to death.

古文：诸葛亮请曰： 蒋琬社稷之器，非百里之才也。
现代文：诸葛亮为蒋琬求情说： 蒋琬是治国的栋梁之材，不是治理百里小县的官史。
English: Zhuge Liang pleaded for Chiang Kai-shek, saying: "Chiang Kai-shek is the pillar of governance, not the official history of the governance of a hundred small counties.

古文：其为政以安民为本，不以修饰为先，愿主公重加察之。 
现代文：他施政以安定百姓为本，不以做表面文章为先，希望主公重新考察。 
English: His policy is based on the stability of the people, not on making superficial articles. I hope that the Lord will reconsider.

古文：备雅敬亮，乃不加罪，仓卒但免官而已。
现代文：刘备一向尊重诸葛亮，才没有给蒋琬定罪，只是在仓促中免去了他的官职。
English: Liu Bei had always respected Zhuge Liang, so he did not convict Chiang Kai-shek, but dismissed him from his post in haste.

古文：秋，七月，魏公操击孙权，留少子临菑侯植守鄴。
现代文：秋季，七月，魏公曹操进攻孙权，留下小儿子临侯曹植守卫邺城。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wei Gong Cao Cao attacked Sun Quan, leaving his youngest son, Lin Hou Cao Zhi, to guard the city.

古文：操为诸子高选官属，以刑颙为植家丞。
现代文：曹操为自己的几个儿子选任官属的标准很高，任命邢为曹植的家丞。
English: Cao Cao set a high standard for the appointment of officials for his sons, appointing Zou as Cao Zi's family chancellor.

古文：颙防闲以礼，无所屈挠，由是不合。
现代文：邢对曹植按礼仪严格约束，从不退让，因此与曹植不合。
English: In accordance with the etiquette of prevention and prohibition of inappropriate words and deeds, he never gave in, so the relationship with Cao Zhi was not good.

古文：庶子刘桢美文辞，植亲爱之。
现代文：庶子刘桢擅长写文章，辞藻华丽，曹植对他很亲近、喜爱。
English: Liu Yao, the illegitimate son, is good at writing articles, his words are gorgeous, Cao Zhi is very close to him and loves him.

古文：桢以书谏植曰： 君侯采庶子之春华，忘家丞之秋实，为上招谤，其罪不小，愚实惧焉。 
现代文：刘桢写信劝谏曹植： 君侯您只采撷庶子我华丽的春花，而忽视了家丞的秋实，将为君上招来毁谤，罪过不小，我实在感到恐惧。 
English: Liu Yao wrote a letter to persuade Yao Cao Zhi: Your majesty, you have only picked the gorgeous spring flowers of my illegitimate son, while ignoring the autumn fruits of my family, and will invite slander for your majesty. The sin is not small. I really feel fear.

古文：魏尚书令荀攸卒。
现代文：魏尚书令荀攸去世。
English: Wei Shang Shuling passed away.

古文：攸深密有智防，自从魏公操攻讨，常谋谟帷幄，时人及子弟莫知其所言。
现代文：荀攸深沉明智，善于保护自己。自从跟随魏公曹操四方征战，经常参与机密，献计献策，当时的人和他的子弟，都不知道他曾献过哪些计策。
English: Since he followed Wei Gong Cao Cao to fight in all directions, he often participated in secrets and gave advice. At that time, neither he nor his son knew what kind of advice he had given.

古文：操尝称： 荀文若之进善，不进不休；荀公达之去恶，不去不止。 
现代文：曹操曾称赞说： 荀进献好的建议，不被采纳不罢休；荀攸排除错误的行为，不达到目的不停止。 
English: Cao Cao once praised: "If you put forward good suggestions, if they are not accepted, do not give up; if you eliminate wrong actions, if you do not achieve the goal, do not stop."

古文：又称： 二荀令之论人，久而益信，吾没世不忘。 
现代文：又说： 荀和荀攸两位尚书令，对人物的评论，时间愈久，愈显示他们的观点中肯，我终身都不会忘却。 
English: He also said:  and You are two great writers. The longer I read their comments on the characters, the more pertinent their opinions are. I will never forget them.

古文：初，枹罕宋建因凉州乱，自号河首平汉王，改元，置百官，三十馀年。
现代文：当初，罕人宋建乘凉州动乱，自己号称河首平汉王，更改年号，设置官署，任命各级官吏，长达三十余年。
English: At the beginning, Song Jian, a rare person, took advantage of the Liangzhou turmoil, calling himself the King of Pinghan, changing the year, setting up government offices, and appointing officials at all levels for more than 30 years.

古文：冬，十月，魏公操使夏侯渊自兴国讨建，围枹罕，拔之，斩建。
现代文：冬季，十月，魏公曹操派夏侯渊从兴国出发征讨宋建，包围并攻克了罕，将宋建斩首。
English: In the winter, in October, Cao Cao sent Xia Houyuan from Xingguo to invade Song Jian, encircled and conquered Han, and beheaded Song Jian.

古文：渊别遣张郃等渡河，入小湟中，河西诸羌皆降，陇右平。
现代文：夏侯渊派张等人渡过黄河，进入小湟中，河西羌人各部落全部归降，陇右地区被平定了。
English: Xia Houyuan sent Zhang and others to cross the Yellow River and enter Xiaoju, all the tribes of the Xiongnu people in Hexi Province surrendered, and the Xiongnu right region was leveled.

古文：帝自都许以来，守位而已，左右侍卫莫非曹氏之人者。
现代文：汉献帝自从建都许昌以来，仅仅能够保住自己的皇帝地位而已，左右随从侍卫无一不是曹操的人。
English: Since the founding of the capital Xuchang, Emperor Han Xian has only been able to maintain his status as emperor, and none of Cao Cao's attendants are not Cao Cao's attendants.

古文：议郎赵彦尝为帝陈言时策，魏公操恶而杀之。
现代文：议郎赵彦经常为汉献帝分析时势，进献对策，因此遭到魏公曹操的憎恶而被杀害。
English: Zhao Yan, the mediator, often analyzed the current situation and proposed countermeasures for Han Xiandi. Therefore, he was hated by Wei Gong Cao Cao and was killed.

古文：操后以事入见殿中，帝不任其惧，因曰： 君若能相辅，则厚；不尔，幸垂恩相舍。 
现代文：后来，曹操有事进殿见献帝，汉献帝无法控制恐惧，对曹操说： 您若能辅佐我，就宽厚些；否则，您就开恩把我抛开。 
English: Later, Cao Cao came to see Emperor Xian for some reason. Emperor Xian could not control his fear and said to Cao Cao: "If you can help me, then be more lenient; otherwise, you should graciously let me go."

古文：操失色，俛仰求出。
现代文：曹操大惊失色，急忙应付着请求告辞。
English: Cao Cao was taken aback and lost his composure, hastily responding to the request to leave.

古文：旧仪：三公领兵，朝见，令虎贲执刃挟之。
现代文：汉朝旧制规定：领兵的三公在朝见皇帝时，都要由虎贲武士持刀挟持。
English: According to the old system of the Han Dynasty, when the three generals who led the troops met with the emperor, they had to be escorted by a tiger-bearded samurai holding a sword.

古文：操出，顾左右，汗流浃背；自后不复朝请。
现代文：曹操出殿后，回顾左右，汗流浃背，从此不再朝见献帝。
English: After Cao Cao left the palace, he looked back and forth, sweating profusely. From then on, he would no longer appear before the emperor.

古文：董承女为贵人，操诛承，求贵人杀之。
现代文：垂承的女儿是献帝的贵人，曹操杀掉董承以后，要求把他的女儿董贵人也杀死。
English: After Cao Cao killed Dong Cheng, he demanded that his daughter, Dong Guizhen, also be killed.

古文：帝以贵人有妊，累为请，不能得。
现代文：汉献帝以贵人有身孕为由，多次向曹操求情，曹操都不同意。
English: Xian Di thought that the noblewoman was pregnant, and asked Lian Lian to be excused, but in the end she could not.

古文：伏皇后由是怀惧，乃与父完书，言曹操残逼之状，令密图之，完不敢发。
现代文：伏皇后因此而心怀恐惧，写信给父亲伏完，谈了曹操逼迫皇帝的凶恶行为。
English: As a result, Empress Fu was filled with fear and wrote to her father, Fu Gan, about Cao Cao's heinous act of persecuting the emperor.

古文：至是，事乃泄，操大怒，十一月，使御史大夫郗虑持节策收皇后玺绶，以尚书令华歆为副，勒兵入宫，收后。
现代文：到这时，事情泄露出来，曹操知道后非常愤怒。十一月，派御史大夫郗虑带着符节和策书，收缴了皇后的印玺绶带，派尚书令华歆为副，率兵入宫逮捕伏皇后。
English: By this time, the affair had leaked out, and Cao Cao was furious when he found out. In November, he sent the Grand Historian Zou Sheng to take the rune festival and strategy book, seized the queen's seal ribbon, sent Shang Shu to appoint Hua Wei as deputy, and led soldiers into the palace to arrest the Empress Fu.

古文：后闭户，藏壁中。
现代文：皇后关上门，藏在夹墙里。
English: The queen shut the door and hid behind a wall.

古文：歆坏户发壁，就牵后出。
现代文：华歆砸门破壁，把皇后拖了出来。
English: Hua Wei smashed the door and dragged the queen out.

古文：时帝在外殿，引虑于坐，后被发，徒跣，行泣，过诀曰： 不能复相活邪？ 
现代文：汉献帝当时在外殿，招呼郗虑坐下，皇后批头散发，光着双脚，边走边哭，经过献帝面前诀别道： 不能再救我一命吗？ 
English: At that time, Emperor Han Xian was in the outer hall, greeting and sitting down, distributing the queen's approval, barefoot, crying as he walked, and saying goodbye in front of Emperor Xian: Can't you save my life again?

古文：帝曰： 我亦不知命在何时！ 
现代文：献帝说： 我也不知道自己能活到几时！ 
English: He said, "I don't know how long I can live!"

古文：顾谓虑曰： 郗公，天下宁有是邪！ 
现代文：他看着郗虑说： 郗公，天下难道竟有这样的事吗！ 
English: He looked at him anxiously and said, "Master Zou, is there really such a thing in the world?"

古文：遂将后下暴室，以幽死；所生二皇子，皆鸩杀之，兄弟及宗族死者百馀人。
现代文：就这样把皇后关在宫中的监狱里，幽禁而死。她生的两个皇子，也被用毒酒杀死了，她的兄弟以及宗族亲属被害者有一百余人。
English: The two princes she bore were also killed with poisoned wine, and more than a hundred of her brothers and clan relatives were victims.

古文：十二月，魏公操至孟津。
现代文：十二月，魏公曹操到达孟津。
English: In December, Wei Gong Cao Cao arrived in Mengjin.

古文：操以尚书郎高柔为理曹掾。
现代文：曹操任命尚书郎高柔为理曹掾。
English: Cao Cao appointed Shang Shulang Gao Ju as the head of Cao Pi.

古文：旧法：军征士亡，考竟其妻子。
现代文：旧有的法令规定：军队征来的兵士逃跑了，要追究他们的妻子、儿女。
English: The old law stipulated that if conscripted soldiers ran away, their wives and children were to be prosecuted.

古文：而亡者犹不息。
现代文：但士兵逃亡仍然不断。
English: But soldiers continue to flee.

古文：操欲更重其刑，并及父母、兄弟，柔启曰： 士卒亡军，诚在可疾，然窃闻基中时有悔者。
现代文：曹操要加重对逃兵的刑罚，连带追究他们的父母、兄弟。高柔说： 士兵开小差，确实很可恶，但听说他们之中也常有人后悔。
English: Cao Cao wanted to increase the punishment for deserters, and to prosecute their parents and brothers as well. Gao Ju said: It is indeed abominable for soldiers to desert, but I have heard that some of them often regret it.

古文：愚谓乃宜贷其妻子，一可使诱其还心。
现代文：我以为，应当宽恕他们的妻子、儿女，或许可以诱使他们心回意转。
English: I thought perhaps forgiving their wives and children might induce them to change their minds.

古文：正如前科，固已绝其意望；而猥复重之，柔恐自今在军之士，见一人亡逃，诛将及己，亦且相随而走，不可复得杀也。
现代文：只按照以前的法令，本已断绝了他们返回的希望，要是再加重刑罚，我恐怕从今以后，军队中的士兵，见到一人逃跑，害怕自己受牵连而死，也会跟着逃跑，将不再有人可杀了。
English: Only, according to the previous decree, the hope of their return has already been cut off, and if the punishment is further aggravated, I am afraid that from now on, soldiers in the army who see a person running away, fearing that they will be implicated and die, will also run away, and there will be no one to kill.

古文：此重刑非所以止亡，乃所以益走耳！ 操曰： 善！ 
现代文：这样，加重刑罚不但不能制止士兵逃跑，反而会使逃兵更多。 曹操说： 很好！ 
English: In this way, increasing the punishment will not only fail to stop soldiers from escaping, but will actually increase the number of deserters. Cao Cao said, "That's great!

古文：即止不杀。
现代文：便停止了处死逃兵的刑罚。
English: The death penalty for desertion was suspended.

古文：孝献皇帝壬建安二十年
现代文：建安二十年
English: 20 years of building security

古文：春，正月，甲子，立贵人曹氏为皇后；魏公操之女也。
现代文：春季，正月，甲子，魏公曹操的女儿曹贵人被册立为皇后。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, Cao Zi, the daughter of Cao Wei, was crowned as empress.

古文：三月，魏公操自将击张鲁，将自武都入氐，氐人塞道，遣张郃、硃灵等攻破之。
现代文：三月，魏公曹操亲自率兵攻打张鲁，准备自武都进入氐人所居之地。氐人在途中拦截，曹操派张、朱灵打败了氐人。
English: In March, Wei Gong Cao Cao personally led an army to attack Zhang Lu, preparing to enter the place where the Xiang people lived. The Xiang people were intercepted on the way, and Cao Cao sent Zhang and Zhu Ling to defeat the Xiang people.

古文：夏，四月，操自陈仓出散关至河池，氐王窦茂众万馀人恃险不服，五月，攻屠之。
现代文：夏季，四月，曹操从陈仓出散关，到达河池。氐王窦茂有部众一万余人，仗恃地势险要，不肯降服。
English: In the summer, in April, Cao Cao set out from Chencang to Sankuan and arrived in Hechi. There were more than ten thousand people under the command of Cao Wang Doumao, who refused to surrender due to the critical situation.

古文：四平、金城诸将麹演、蒋石等共斩送韩遂首。
现代文：五月，曹军打败氐人，并进行屠杀。西平、金城的演、蒋石等将领共同杀死韩遂，把他的头颅献给曹操。
English: In May, Cao's army defeated and massacred the Xiongnu. Xi Ping, Jincheng En, Jiang Shi and other generals jointly killed Han Sui and offered his head to Cao Cao.

古文：初，刘备在荆州，周瑜、甘宁等数劝孙权取蜀。
现代文：当初，刘备在荆州时，周瑜、甘宁等人多次劝孙权夺取蜀地。
English: At first, when Liu Bei was in Jingzhou, Zhou Yu, Ganning and others repeatedly advised Sun Quan to seize Shu.

古文：权遣使谓备曰： 刘璋不武，不能自守，若使曹操得蜀，则荆州危矣。
现代文：孙权派遣使者对刘备说： 刘璋软弱，不能保护自己，假如曹操得到蜀地，荆州就危险了。
English: Sun Quan sent an envoy to Liu Bei saying: Liu Bei is weak and cannot protect himself. If Cao Cao gains Shu, Jingzhou will be in danger.

古文：今欲先攻取璋，次取张鲁，一统南方，虽有十操，无所忧也。 
现代文：我现在计划先攻破刘璋，再击败张鲁，统一南方，即使有十个瑛操，我也没有什么可担忧的了。 
English: I now plan to first defeat Liu Bei, then defeat Zhang Lu, and unify the south. Even if there are ten Eings, I have nothing to worry about.

古文：备报曰： 益州民富地险，刘璋虽弱，足以自守。
现代文：刘备回答说： 益州人民富裕，地势险要，刘璋虽然软弱，保护自己还有足够的力量。
English: Liu Bei replied, "The people of Yizhou are rich and the terrain is precarious. Although Liu Bei is weak, he still has enough strength to protect himself.

古文：今暴师于蜀、汉，转运于万里，欲使战克攻取，举不失利，此孙、吴所难也。
现代文：现在若使军队行进在蜀、汉之地，餐风宿露，在万里道路上转运给养，要想战必克，攻必取，举措不失利，就是孙武和吴起也难以做到。
English: Nowadays, if the army marches in the land of Shu and Han, the dining style is dew, and the supply is transported on the road of thousands of miles. If you want to fight hard, attack hard, and take measures without losing, it is difficult for Sun Wu and Wu Qi to do so.

古文：议者见曹操失利于赤壁，谓其力屈，无复远念。
现代文：议论的人见曹操在赤壁失败，就说他已经没有什么力量，不再有长远打算。
English: Commentators saw Cao Cao's defeat at the Red Cliffs and said that he had little power and no longer had any long-term plans.

古文：今操三分天下已有其二，将欲饮马于沧海，观兵于吴会，何肯守此坐须老乎！
现代文：然而现今三分天下曹操已拥有其二，准备到沧海去饮马，到吴郡会稽来阅兵，怎么会守着这个局面坐等年老呢？
English: However, now that Cao Cao has two-thirds of the world, he is ready to go to Canghai to drink horse, and to Wu County to hold a military parade. How can he keep this situation and wait for old age?

古文：而同盟无故自相攻伐，借枢于操，使敌承其隙，非长计也。
现代文：而抗曹的同盟之间却无故自相攻伐，把机会借给曹操，让敌人钻空子，这水是长久之计。
English: But the anti-Cao alliance attacked each other without reason, lending Cao Cao the opportunity to let the enemy exploit the loophole. This was a long-term strategy.

古文：且备与璋托为宗室，冀凭英灵以匡汉朝。
现代文：况且我和刘璋都是刘姓皇族，希望凭借祖上尊严的神灵匡扶汉朝。
English: Moreover, both Liu Wei and I are members of the imperial family with the surname Liu, and we hope to support the Han Dynasty with the help of the dignified deities of our ancestors.

古文：今璋得罪于左右，备独悚惧，非所敢闻，愿加宽贷。 
现代文：如今刘璋得罪了您，我独自感到惶恐，不敢听从您的计划，请求宽恕。 
English: Now that Liu Ye has offended you, I alone feel frightened and dare not follow your plan and ask for forgiveness.

古文：权不听，遣孙瑜率水军往夏口。
现代文：孙权不听刘备的劝告，派孙瑜率水军驻在夏口。
English: Sun Quan did not listen to Liu Bei's advice and sent Sun Yu to lead the navy stationed in Xiakou.

古文：备不听军过，谓瑜曰： 汝欲取蜀，吾当被发入山，不失信于天下也。 
现代文：刘备不允许孙权的军队过境，对孙瑜说： 你们若要攻取蜀地，我将披头散发，隐遁山林之中，不能在天下人面前失信。 
English: Liu Bei did not allow Sun Quan's army to cross the border, and said to Sun Yu: "If you want to conquer Shu, I will send out my warriors and hide them in the mountains and forests. I cannot betray my trust in front of the world."

古文：使关羽屯江陵，张飞屯秭归，诸葛亮据南郡，备自住孱陵，权不得已召瑜还。
现代文：便派关羽驻守江陵，张飞屯兵在秭归，诸葛亮据守南郡，他自己坐镇孱陵。孙权不得已，把孙瑜召回。
English: He then sent Guan Yu to garrison Jiangling, Zhang Fei to lead the troops returning home, Zhuge Liang to garrison Nan County, and himself to garrison Lingling. As a last resort, Sun Quan recalled Sun Yu.

古文：及备西攻刘璋，权曰： 猾虏，乃敢挟诈如此！ 
现代文：及至刘备向西进攻刘璋时，孙权说： 这个滑头，竟敢如此搞阴谋诡计！ 
English: When Liu Bei attacked Liu Bei to the west, Sun Quan said: "How dare this slippery fellow plot and scheme like this!

古文：备留关羽守江陵，鲁肃与羽邻界；羽数生疑贰，肃常以欢好抚之。
现代文：刘备留下关羽防守江陵，鲁肃的防区与关羽为邻；关羽多次产生疑虑，鲁肃则经常以友好的态度使他安心。
English: Liu Bei left Guan Yu to defend Jiangling, and the defense zone of Rusu was adjacent to Guan Yu; Guan Yu repeatedly had doubts, and Rusu often reassured him with a friendly attitude.

古文：及备已得益州，权令中司马诸葛瑾以备求荆州诸郡。
现代文：刘备得到益州后，孙权派中司马诸葛瑾向刘备索求荆州的各郡。
English: After Liu Bei obtained Yizhou, the Sun Quan faction's General Secretary Mazhu Gejun asked Liu Bei for the counties of Jingzhou.

古文：备不许，曰： 吾方图凉州，凉州定，乃尽以荆州相与耳。 
现代文：刘备不同意，说： 我正准备夺取凉州，取得凉州以后，才能把荆州全部给你们。 
English: Liu Bei disagreed, saying, "I am preparing to seize Liangzhou, and only after I have obtained Liangzhou can I give you all of Jingzhou."

古文：权曰： 此假而不反，乃欲以虚辞引岁也。 
现代文：孙权说： 这是有借无还，不过是找借口以拖延时日罢了。 
English: Sun Quan said, "There is no way back from this, it's just an excuse to delay things.

古文：遂置长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡长吏。
现代文：因此任命了长沙、零陵、桂阳三郡的地方长官。
English: Therefore, the local governors of Changsha, Luling and Guiyang counties were appointed.

古文：关羽尽逐之。
现代文：关羽则全部加以驱逐。
English: The Guan Yu were all expelled.

古文：权大怒，遣吕蒙督兵二万以取三郡。
现代文：孙权大怒，派吕蒙率兵二万人夺取三郡。
English: Enraged, Sun Quan sent Lv Meng to lead 20,000 soldiers to seize the three counties.

古文：蒙移书长沙、桂阳，皆望风归服，惟零陵太守郝普城守不降。
现代文：吕蒙向长沙、桂阳发送文书，二郡都望风归服，只有零陵太守郝普据城坚守不降。
English: Lv Meng sent documents to Changsha and Guiyang, and the two counties all submitted to the wind. Only Ziling Taishou and Puyang City held out.

古文：刘备闻之，自蜀亲至公安，遣关羽争三郡。
现代文：刘备得到消息以后，亲自从蜀抵达公安，派关羽争夺三郡。
English: After Liu Bei received the news, he personally arrived from Shu to the public security and sent Guan Yu to compete for the three counties.

古文：孙权进住陆口，为诸军节度；使鲁肃将万人屯曾阳以拒羽；飞书召吕蒙，使舍零陵急还助肃。
现代文：孙权则亲至陆口坐镇，指挥调度各军；派鲁肃领兵一万人驻屯益阳，对抗关羽；用紧急军书传召吕蒙，让他放弃零陵去帮助鲁肃。
English: Sun Quan, on the other hand, personally went to Lukou to sit in the town and commanded and dispatched all the armies; he sent Lu Su to lead ten thousand soldiers stationed in Yiyang to fight against Guan Yu; he summoned Lv Meng with an emergency military letter and asked him to give up Ziling to help Lu Su.

古文：蒙得书，秘之，夜，召诸将授以方略；晨，当攻零陵，顾谓郝普故人南阳邓玄之曰： 郝子太闻世间有忠义事，亦欲为之，而不知时也。
现代文：吕蒙接到孙权的书面命令后，秘密藏了起来。夜间，召集部下将领，宣布了自己的作战方案；清晨，在向零陵发起攻击时，吕蒙看着郝普的旧友南阳人邓玄之说： 郝普听说世间有忠义之事，也想那样做，但他不了解时势。
English: After receiving a written order from Sun Quan, Lv Meng secretly hid. At night, he summoned his subordinate generals and announced his battle plan; in the morning, when launching an attack on the tomb, Lv Meng looked at Deng Xanzhi, an old friend of Yan Pu from Nanyang, and said: Yan Pu heard that there is loyalty in the world and wanted to do the same, but he did not understand the situation.

古文：今左将军在汉中为夏侯渊所围；关羽在南郡，至尊身自临之。彼方首尾倒县，救死不给，岂有馀力复营此哉！
现代文：现在左将军刘备在汉中被夏侯渊包围，关羽则在南郡，我们主公亲自来征讨，他们好像首尾倒悬，救命都来不及，哪里有余力量再救援零陵！
English: Now the left general Liu Bei is surrounded by Xia Houyuan in Han, Guan Yu is in Nanshun, our lord himself came to collect, they seem to be hanging upside down, they are too late to save their lives, where is the spare power to rescue Ziling!

古文：今吾计力度虑而以攻此，曾不移日而城必破，城破之后，身死，何益于事，而令百岁老母戴白受诛，岂不痛哉！
现代文：如今我已考虑周全，准备充分，将向零陵城发起攻击，不久必定可攻进城去，城破之后，郝普自己身死了，有什么益处，而且牵连百岁白发老母遭受诛杀，难道不让人痛心吗！
English: Now that I have thoroughly considered and fully prepared, I will launch an attack on the city of Liling, and I will surely be able to enter the city soon. After the city is broken, what is the benefit of Yanpu himself dying, and involving a hundred-year-old white-haired old mother to be killed, isn't it heartbreaking!

古文：度此家不得外问，谓援可恃，故至于此耳。
现代文：我想郝普是得不到外边的消息，以为可以依靠援兵，所以坚守到现在。
English: I think that Yan Pu was unable to get information from the outside, and thought that he could rely on reinforcements, so he held out until now.

古文：君可见之，为陈祸福。 
现代文：你应该去见他，为他分析祸福。 
English: You should go to see him and analyze the pros and cons for him.

古文：玄之见普，具宣蒙意，普惧而出降。
现代文：邓玄之见到郝普，把吕蒙的意思全都告诉他。
English: When Deng Xianzhi saw Yan Pu, he told him all of Lv Meng's intentions.

古文：蒙迎，执其手与俱下船，语毕，出书示之，因拊手大笑。
现代文：郝普被吓住了，出城投降。吕蒙亲自迎接，拉着他的手一起下船，谈话后，吕蒙把孙权的军书命令拿来给他看，拍手大笑。
English: Yan Pu was scared and went out of the city to surrender. Lv Meng personally greeted him and took him by the hand to disembark. After the conversation, Lv Meng showed him Sun Quan's military order, clapping his hands and laughing.

古文：普见书，知备在公安而羽在益阳，惭恨入地。
现代文：郝普看到军书命令，才知道刘备已到公安，而关羽在益阳，惭愧悔恨得要钻到地底下。
English: When Yan Pu saw the military order, he knew that Liu Bei had gone to the Public Security Bureau, while Guan Yu was in Yiyang. He felt so ashamed and remorseful that he had to go underground.

古文：蒙留孙河，委以后事，即日引军赴益阳。
现代文：吕蒙留下孙河，命令他处理零陵的事务，当天率军奔赴益阳。
English: Lv Meng left Sun He behind and ordered him to deal with the affairs of the tomb. On the same day, he led the army to Yiyang.

古文：鲁肃欲与关羽会语，诸将疑恐有变，议不可往。
现代文：鲁肃准备与关羽会谈，将领们恐怕发生变故，劝鲁肃不要去。
English: Rusu is preparing to hold talks with Guan Yu. The generals are afraid that something will happen and advise Rusu not to go.

古文：肃曰： 今日之事，宜相开譬。
现代文：鲁肃说： 事到如今，最好的办法是开导、劝说。
English: Lu Su said: Up to now, the best way is to enlighten and persuade.

古文：刘备负国，是非未决，羽亦何敢重欲干命！ 
现代文：刘备忘恩负义，是非还没有最后的结论，关羽又如何敢再打算谋害我的性命！ 
English: Liu Guotai's gratitude is insincere, Guan Yu's right and wrong have not yet reached a final conclusion, how dare Guan Yu plan to murder my life again!

古文：乃邀羽相见，各驻兵马百步上，但诸将军单刀俱会。
现代文：于是，邀请关羽会面，各自在百步以外止住自己的部队，只有又方的将领带佩刀相见。
English: As a result, they invited Guan Yu to meet, and each halted his troops a hundred paces away, only to meet the other side's general with a necktie and a sword.

古文：肃因责数羽以不返三郡，羽曰： 乌林之役，左将军身在行间，戮力破敌，岂得徒劳，无一塊土，而足下来欲收地邪！ 
现代文：鲁肃责备关羽不返还三郡，关羽说： 乌林那次战役，刘左将军直接参战，竭尽全力打败了敌人，难道能白白辛苦，不拥有一块土地？而您要来收取土地了吗！ 
English: Lu Su reproached Guan Yu for not returning the three counties. Guan Yu said, "In that battle in Wulin, General Liu Zuo directly participated in the battle and did his best to defeat the enemy. Is it possible to work hard for nothing and not own a piece of land? And you want to collect land?

古文：肃曰： 不然。
现代文：鲁肃说： 不对！
English: Liang Su said, "No."

古文：始与豫州觐于长阪，豫州之众不当一校，计穷虑极，志势摧弱，图欲远窜，望不及此。
现代文：开始在长阪与刘备会面时，他的部众抵挡不了一校的人马，智竭计穷，士气低落，势力衰颓，打算远逃，那时想不到会有今天。
English: When he first met with Liu Bei in Nagasaka, his subordinates could not resist the manpower of a school. They were exhausted, demoralized, weakened, and planned to flee far away. At that time, it was unthinkable that there would be today.

古文：主上矜愍豫州之身无有处所，不爱土地士民之力，使有所庇廕以济其患；而豫州私独饰情，愆德堕好。
现代文：我们主公可怜刘备无处守身，不吝惜土地和百姓的劳役，使刘备有了落脚之地，帮助他解决了困难。而刘备却自私自利，虚情假意，辜铡恩德，损坏我们的友好关系。
English: Our lord pitied Liu Bei, who had nowhere to protect himself, and did not spare the land and the labor of the people, so that Liu Bei had a foothold and helped him solve difficulties. However, Liu Bei was selfish and self-serving, had false feelings and pretended to be kind, and damaged our friendly relations.

古文：今已藉手于西州矣，又欲翦并荆州之土，斯盖凡夫所不忍行，而况整领人物之主乎！ 羽无以答。
现代文：现在他已得到益州，有了力量，又要兼并荆州土地，这样的事连普通人都不忍心做，何况领导一邦的领袖人物！ 关羽无话可答。
English: Now that he has gained Yizhou and gained strength, he wants to annex the land of Jingzhou, which is something that even an ordinary person cannot bear to do, let alone the leader of a country! Guan Yu has nothing to say.

古文：会闻魏公操将攻汉中，刘备惧失益州，使使求和于权。
现代文：正这时，有人说魏公曹操将要攻打汉中，刘备恐怕失去益州，派使者向孙权求和。
English: At this time, some people said that Wei Gong Cao Cao was going to attack Hanzhong, and Liu Bei was afraid of losing Yizhou and sent an envoy to Sun Quan to sue for peace.

古文：权令诸葛瑾报命，更寻盟好。
现代文：孙权命令诸葛瑾答复刘备，愿再度和好。
English: Sun Quan ordered Zhuge Liang to reply to Liu Bei that he was willing to make peace again.

古文：遂分荆州，以湘水为界；长沙、江夏、桂阳以东属权，南郡、零陵、武陵以西属备。
现代文：于是双方以湘水为界，分割了荆州：长沙、江夏、桂阳以东归属孙权，南郡、零陵、武陵以西归属刘备。
English: As a result, the two sides divided Jing Province along the border of Xiangshui: the area east of Changsha, Jiangxia and Guiyang belonged to Sun Quan, while the area west of Nangun, Juling and Wuling belonged to Liu Bei.

古文：诸葛瑾每奉使至蜀，与其弟亮但公会相见，退无私面。
现代文：诸葛瑾每次作为使者到蜀，和他的弟弟诸葛亮只在公务会议上相见，退下后并不私相会面。
English: Each time Zhuge Liang came to Shu as an envoy, he and his brother Zhuge Liang only met at official meetings, and did not meet privately after they retired.

古文：秋，七月，魏公操至阳平。
现代文：秋季，七月，魏公曹操抵达阳平。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wei Gong Cao Cao arrived in Yangping.

古文：张鲁欲举汉中降，其弟卫不肯，率众数万人拒关坚守，横山筑城十馀里。
现代文：张鲁准备以汉中为代价投降曹操，他的弟弟张卫不同意，率兵众数万人凭借关隘坚守，在山上横向筑城墙十余里。
English: Zhang Lu was ready to surrender to Cao Cao at the expense of Hanzhong, but his brother Zhang Wei did not agree. He led tens of thousands of soldiers to stick to the narrow pass and built more than ten miles of city walls horizontally on the mountain.

古文：初，操承凉州从事及武都降人之辞，说 张鲁易攻，阳平城下南北山相远，不可守也 ，信以为然。
现代文：当初，曹操听了凉州从事及从武都投降过来的人所说的话： 张鲁容易被击败，阳平城外的南、北山相距很远，无法防守。 便相信了。
English: At first, Cao Cao listened to the words of the people who were engaged in Liangzhou and surrendered from Wudu: Zhang Lu was easy to defeat, and the South and North Mountains outside Yangping City were far apart and could not be defended.

古文：及往临履，不如所闻，乃叹曰： 他人商度，少如人意。 
现代文：等他亲自实地观察后，发现不像所听说的那样，因而感叹地说： 别人的揣度，很少能令人满意。 
English: When he personally observed the situation on the ground, he found that it was not like what he had heard, so he said with regret: Other people's speculation is rarely satisfactory.

古文：攻阳平山上诸屯，山峻难登，既不时拔，士卒伤夷者多，军食且尽，操意沮，便欲拔军截山而还，遣大将军夏侯惇、将军许褚呼山上兵还。
现代文：攻打阳平山守军时，山势险峻难登，不能及时攻取，士兵死伤很多，军粮也快用尽。曹操心情沮丧，便想让军队开拨，切断山道以后撤走，派大将军夏侯、将军许褚喊回山上的战士。
English: When attacking the Yangpingshan defenders, the mountain was so steep that it was difficult to climb and could not be captured in time. Many soldiers were killed and wounded, and army rations were almost exhausted. Cao Cao was in a depressed mood, so he wanted the army to retreat after cutting off the mountain road, and sent the great generals Xia Hou and General Xu Yao to shout back to the soldiers on the mountain.

古文：会前军夜迷惑，误入张卫别营，营中大惊退散。
现代文：恰巧，前部军队在夜间迷路，误入张卫下属军营，张卫的士兵大惊溃散。
English: Coincidentally, the frontline troops lost their way at night and wandered into Zhang Wei's camp. Zhang Wei's soldiers panicked and scattered.

古文：侍中辛毘、主簿刘晔等在兵后，语惇、褚，言 官兵已据得贼要屯，贼已散走 ，犹不信之。
现代文：侍中辛毗、主簿刘晔等人跟在迷路士兵之后，便报告夏侯、许褚说： 我军已经占据了敌人的重要据点，敌人已经溃散。 夏侯等人还不信。
English: After the soldiers lost their way, the attendant Sin Pi, the chief clerk Liu Wei and others reported to Xia Hou and Xu Wei: Our army has occupied the enemy's important strongholds, and the enemy has dispersed. Xia Hou and others still do not believe.

古文：惇前自见，乃还白操，进兵攻卫，卫等夜遁。
现代文：夏侯亲眼目睹后，才回去报告了曹操，继续进兵攻打张卫，张卫等人乘夜逃走。
English: After Xia Hou witnessed it with his own eyes, he went back to report Cao Cao and continued to attack Zhang Wei. Zhang Wei and others fled by night.

古文：张鲁闻阳平已陷，欲降，阎圃曰： 今以迫往，功必轻；不如依杜濩赴朴胡，与相拒，然后委质，功必多。 
现代文：张鲁听说阳平已被曹军攻陷，要投降。阎圃说： 现在因为受到曹军压力而被迫投降，一定没有什么功；不如通过杜投奔朴胡，一同抗拒曹军，然后再归顺，功一定大。 
English: Zhang Lu heard that Yangping had been captured by Cao's army and was about to surrender. Yan Piao said: Now that I have been forced to surrender because of pressure from Cao's army, there must be no merit; it would be better to resist Cao's army through Du Du and run to Pak Hu, and then surrender, the merit must be great.

古文：乃奔南山入巴中。
现代文：于是逃奔南山进入巴中。
English: So he ran away to Nanshan and entered the middle school.

古文：左右欲悉烧宝货仓库，鲁曰： 本欲归命国家，而意未得达。
现代文：张鲁部下要烧毁全部宝物和仓库，张鲁说： 本来我们准备归顺国家，而这样的意愿还没有转达上去。
English: Zhang Lu's subordinates want to burn all the treasures and warehouses, Zhang Lu said: Originally, we were prepared to submit to the state, but this intention has not been conveyed.

古文：今之走避锐锋，非有恶意。
现代文：如今离开这里，只是为了躲避大军的锋锐，并没有恶意。
English: There is no malice in leaving here now, just to avoid the sharpness of the army.

古文：宝货仓库，国家之有。 
现代文：宝物仓库，本是国家所有。 
English: All the treasures in the warehouse should be owned by the state.

古文：遂封藏而去。
现代文：于是，把府库封存好以后，张鲁等人才离去。
English: They only left when they had properly placed all the treasures.

古文：操入南郑，甚嘉之。
现代文：曹操进入南郑，对张鲁的作法非常赞赏。
English: Cao Cao entered Nan Zheng and was very complimentary of Zhang Lu.

古文：又以鲁本有善意，遣人慰喻之。
现代文：又因为张鲁原本有善意，派人前往安慰晓谕。
English: Also, because Zhang Lu originally had good intentions, he sent someone to comfort her.

古文：丞相主簿司马懿言于操曰： 刘备以诈力虏刘璋，蜀人未附，而远争江陵，此机不可失也。
现代文：丞相主簿司马懿向曹操建议： 刘备靠奸诈动持了刘璋，蜀人还没有归附他，他却去远行争夺江陵，这是个不能失去的好机会。
English: Sima Yi, the chief secretary of the prime minister, suggested to Cao Cao that Liu Bei had been moved by Liu Bei's treachery. Shu people had not yet joined him, but he went far away to fight for Jiangling. This was a good opportunity that could not be lost.

古文：今克汉中，益州震动，进兵临之，势必瓦解。
现代文：现在，我们攻克了汉中，益州受到震动，此时进兵攻击，势必土崩瓦解。
English: Now, we have conquered Hanzhong, and Yizhou has been shaken. At this time, the invasion attack is bound to collapse.

古文：圣人不能违时，亦不可失时也。 
现代文：圣人不能违背天时，也不能错过良机。 
English: A saint can't go against the tide, can't miss an opportunity.

古文：操曰： 人苦无足，既得陇，复望蜀邪！ 
现代文：曹操说： 人都是苦于不知足，既得到陇地，又眼望着蜀地吗！ 
English: Cao Cao said: People are all suffering from not being satisfied, both getting the land of Re, and looking at the land of Shu!

古文：刘晔曰： 刘备，人杰也，有度而迟；得蜀日浅，蜀人未恃也。
现代文：刘晔说： 刘备，是人中豪杰，做事有章法，但是缓慢；取得蜀地时间不长，还不能依靠蜀人。
English: Liu Wei said: Liu Bei is a hero among the people. He has rules and regulations for doing things, but he is slow; it does not take long to obtain Shu Di, and he cannot rely on Shu people.

古文：今破汉中，蜀人震恐，其势自倾。
现代文：我们刚刚攻取汉中，蜀地之人受到很大震动，非常恐慌，势将自行崩溃。
English: We have just conquered Hanzhong, and the people of Shu have been greatly shaken, very frightened, and are about to collapse on their own.

古文：以公之神明，因其倾而压之，无不克也。
现代文：以主公的英明，趁其崩溃时率兵压境，一定能取胜。
English: With the wisdom of the Lord, taking advantage of the collapse of the military pressure, we will surely win.

古文：若小缓之，诸葛亮明于治国而为相，关羽、张飞勇冠三军而为将，蜀民既定，据险守要，则不可犯矣。
现代文：如果稍有迟缓，诸葛亮擅长治国而为相，关羽、张飞勇冠三军而为将，蜀地人民安定以后，据守险要之处，我们就很难进攻了。
English: If there is a slight delay, Zhuge Liang is good at governing the country and is the leader, Guan Yu and Zhang Fei are the champions of the three armies, and after the people of Shu are stable, it will be difficult for us to attack according to the key points.

古文：今不取，必为后忧。 
现代文：现在不去攻取，必将成为我们的后患。 
English: If we don't attack now, it will be our misfortune.

古文：操不从。
现代文：曹操没有听从这些建议。
English: Cao Cao did not listen to these suggestions.

古文：居七日，蜀降者说 蜀中一日数十惊，守将虽斩之而不能安也。 
现代文：七天后，蜀地来降的人说： 蜀中一天发生数十次惊忧，守将虽然以斩杀来弹压，仍然安定不下来。 
English: Seven days later, the person who came from Shu said: Dozens of surprises occurred in Shu one day. Although the commander-in-chief used killing to bounce back, he still could not settle down.

古文：操问晔曰： 今尚可击不？ 
现代文：曹操问刘晔： 现在还能进攻吗？ 
English: Cao Cao asked Liu Bei: Can you still attack now?

古文：晔曰： 今已小定，未可击也。 
现代文：刘晔回答： 现在蜀地已初步安定，不能再进攻。 
English: Liu Bei replied: Now that Shu has been initially stabilized, it is no longer possible to attack.

古文：乃还。
现代文：于是撤军。
English: So I came back.

古文：以夏侯渊为都护将军，督张郃、徐晃等守汉中；以丞相长史杜袭为驸马都尉，留督汉中事。
现代文：任命夏侯渊为都护将军，率领张、徐晃等人守卫汉中；任命丞相长史杜袭为附马都尉，留下掌管汉中的事务。
English: He appointed Xia Houyuan as the general in charge of protecting the capital, leading Zhang, Xu and others to guard Hanzhong; he appointed the minister of justice Shi Duyi as the lieutenant in charge of horses, leaving him in charge of the affairs of Hanzhong.

古文：袭绥怀开导，百姓自乐出徙洛、鄴者八万馀口。
现代文：杜袭采取怀柔政策进行开导，汉中的百姓自愿出来迁徙到洛、邺两地的有八万余人。
English: Du Wei adopted the policy of Huairou to enlighten, and the people of Hanzhong voluntarily migrated to Luo and Handan, with more than 80,000 people.

古文：八月，孙权率众十万围合肥。
现代文：八月，孙权率军队十万人围攻合肥。
English: In August, Sun Quan led an army of 100,000 to besiege Hefei.

古文：时张辽、李典、乐进将七千馀人屯合肥。
现代文：此时，张辽、李典、乐进率七千人在合肥驻守。
English: At this time, Zhang Liao, Li Dian and Le Jin Quan were among the 7,000 people stationed in Hefei.

古文：魏公操之征张鲁也，为教与合肥护军薛悌，署函边曰： 贼至，乃发。 
现代文：魏公曹操去征讨张鲁，留一份指令给合肥护军薛悌，在指令的封套边上写道： 敌人来了，再找开看。 
English: Wei Gong Cao Cao went to enlist Zhang Lu and left an order for Hefei escort Xue Qi, writing on the edge of the envelope: "The enemy is coming, look again."

古文：及权至，发教，教曰： 若孙权至者，张、李将军出战，乐将军守，护军勿得与战。 
现代文：及至孙权到来，薛悌等人打开指令，指令中写道： 假若孙权到来，张、李将军出战迎敌，乐将军守城，护军不要参战。
English: When Sun Quan arrived, Xue Yao and others opened the instructions. The instructions read: If Sun Quan arrives, Generals Zhang and Li will go out to meet the enemy, General Le will defend the city, and the escort troops should not participate in the war.

古文：诸将以众寡不敌，疑之。
现代文：将军们认为寡不敌众，对曹操的指示有怀疑。
English: The generals thought they were outnumbered and doubted Cao Cao's instructions.

古文：张辽曰： 公远征在外，比救至，彼破我必矣。
现代文：张辽说： 魏公远征张鲁，等他派救兵到达，敌人必定已将我们攻破了。
English: Zhang Liao said, "Weigong sent Zhang Lu on an expedition. By the time he sent rescuers, the enemy must have broken through us.

古文：是以教指及其未合逆击之，折其盛势，以安众心，然后可守也。 
现代文：所以他指示趁敌人未集结时予以迎头抗击，以摧折敌军锋芒，安定我军军心，然后才可能拒守。 
English: Therefore, instruct us to take advantage of the fact that the enemy troops have not yet encircled and attacked us, to frustrate their momentum, to stabilize the soldiers, so that we can defend the city.

古文：进等莫对。
现代文：乐进等人都不发言。
English: Lejin and the others did not speak.

古文：辽怒曰： 成败之机，在此一战。
现代文：张辽气愤地说： 胜负的关键，在此一战。
English: Zhang Liao said indignantly: The key to victory or defeat lies in this one battle.

古文：诸君若疑，辽将独决之。 
现代文：诸位若还有疑问，我张辽将独自出战，以决胜负。 
English: If you still have any doubts, I, Zhang Liao, will fight alone to decide the outcome.

古文：李典素与辽不睦，慨然曰： 此国家大事，顾君计何如耳，吾可以私憾而忘公义乎！
现代文：李典原本与张辽不和，却感慨地说： 这是国家大事，只是看您的计谋将会怎样罢了，我怎么能因为私人的恩怨而损害公义呢！
English: Li Dian originally did not get along with Zhang Liao, but said with emotion: This is a national event, it just depends on what your strategy will be. How can I harm justice because of a personal grudge!

古文：请从君而出。 
现代文：我请求和您一起出战。 
English: I'm asking to go to war with you.

古文：于是辽夜募敢从之士，得八百人，椎牛犒飨。
现代文：于是，张辽当夜募集敢于自己出战的兵士八百人，杀牛设宴隆重犒赏他们。
English: As a result, that night Zhang Liao recruited 800 soldiers who dared to go to war, slaughtered a cow, and held a grand banquet to reward them.

古文：明旦，辽被甲持戟，先登陷阵，杀数十人，斩二大将，大呼自名，冲垒入至权麾下。
现代文：第二天清晨，张辽身穿铠甲，手持战戟，身先士卒，冲锋陷阵，杀死数十人，斩敌两员大将，高喊 我是张辽 ，冲破敌兵营垒，直到孙权的大旗下。
English: In the early morning of the next day, Zhang Liao, wearing armor and holding a war club, led the troops in a charge, killed dozens of people, killed two enemy generals, shouted "I am Zhang Liao," and broke through the enemy camp until he reached Sun Quan's great banner.

古文：权大惊，不知所为，走登高冢，以长戟自守。
现代文：孙权大惊，不知所措，退上一座高丘，用长戟抵御。
English: Startled and at a loss, Sun Quan retreated to a high hill and defended himself with a long pole.

古文：辽叱权下战，权不敢动，望见辽所将众少，乃聚围辽数重。
现代文：张大声叫喊着，要孙权下来交战，孙权不敢动，看到张辽所带的人马并不多，乃下令将张辽重重包围。
English: Zhang Liao called on Sun Quan to come down and fight. Sun Quan did not dare to act, and when he saw that Zhang Liao's army was small, he gathered soldiers and surrounded Zhang Liao for several floors.

古文：辽急击围开，将麾下数十人得出。
现代文：张辽急忙打开重围，带领部下数十人冲出来。
English: Zhang Liao hastily reopened the siege, leading dozens of his men to rush out.

古文：馀众号呼曰： 将军弃我乎？ 
现代文：其余的人高喊： 将军要抛弃我们吗？ 
English: The rest shouted: "Is the general going to abandon us?"

古文：辽复还突围，拔出馀众，权人马皆披靡，无敢当者。
现代文：张辽又返身杀回，再度突围，救出其余的战士。孙权的人马都望风披靡，不敢抵挡。
English: Zhang Liao returned to kill again, broke through the encirclement again, and rescued the rest of the soldiers. Sun Quan's men were all invincible and did not dare to resist.

古文：自旦战至日中，吴人夺气。
现代文：从清晨一直战到中午，东吴的士兵丧失了斗志。
English: Fighting from early morning until noon, Dongwu's soldiers lost their fighting spirit.

古文：乃还修守备，众心遂安。
现代文：张辽这才命令回城，部署守城，整修城防，人心军心于是安定。
English: Zhang Liao then ordered to return to the city, deploy to defend the city, and renovate the city's defenses. As a result, the people's hearts and minds were stable.

古文：权守合肥十馀日，城不可拔，彻军还。
现代文：孙权包围合肥十多天，无法攻陷，便撤军返回。
English: Sun Quan besieged Hefei for more than ten days. Unable to capture it, he withdrew and returned.

古文：兵皆就路，权与诸将在逍遥津北，张辽觇望知之，即将步骑奄至。
现代文：十兵们已经上路，孙权和部下将领们在逍遥津北岸，张辽从远处看到后，便率领步、骑兵突然杀到。
English: The ten soldiers were already on their way. Sun Quan and his subordinate generals were on the north bank of the Xuan Yao River. When Zhang Liao saw them from a distance, he took the lead and the cavalry suddenly arrived.

古文：甘宁与吕蒙等力战扞敌，凌统率亲近扶权出围，复还与辽战，左右尽死，身亦被创，度权已免，乃还。
现代文：甘宁与吕蒙等人奋力抵御，凌统率领亲兵扶孙权冲出包围，又杀进去与张辽奋战，身边的战士全部战死了，他自己也受了伤，佑计孙权已无危险，他才退回去。
English: Gan Ning and Lv Meng and others fought hard to resist. Ling Tong led his relatives, Fu Sun Quan, to break out of the encirclement, and then went into battle with Zhang Liao. All the soldiers around him died in the battle, and he himself was injured. Yu Jie Sun Quan was no longer in danger, so he retreated.

古文：权乘骏马上津桥，桥面已彻，丈馀无版；亲近监谷利在马后，使权持鞍缓控，利于后著鞭以助马势，遂得超度。
现代文：孙权乘骏马来到逍遥津桥上，桥南部的桥板已撤去，有一丈多宽没有桥板。亲近监谷利在孙权马后，要孙权抓住马鞍，放松缰绳，他在后面猛烈用鞭抽马，加强马的冲势，于是飞跃过去。
English: Sun Quan came to the Xuan Yao Jin Bridge on a horse-drawn carriage. The bridge plate in the south of the bridge had been removed, and there was no bridge plate. Close to the valley, after Sun Quan's horse, he asked Sun Quan to grab the saddle and loosen the reins. He violently whipped the horse in the back to strengthen the horse's momentum, and then leapt over.

古文：贺齐率三千人在津南迎权，权由是得免。
现代文：贺齐率三千人在逍遥津南岸迎接，孙权因此得免于难。
English: He Qi led 3,000 people to greet Sun Quan on the south bank of Shouyaotsu, and Sun Quan was thus spared.

古文：权入大船宴饮，贺齐下席涕泣曰： 至尊人主，常当持重，今日之事，几致祸败。
现代文：孙权登上大船，在船舱设宴饮酒，贺齐从席间走出，哭着说： 主公无比尊贵，应处处小心谨慎，今天的事情，几乎造成巨大灾难。
English: Sun Quan boarded the big ship, held a banquet and drank alcohol in the cabin. He Qi came out from between the tables, crying and said: "The Lord is extremely honorable and should be careful at all times. Today's events almost caused a huge disaster.

古文：群下震怖，若无天地，愿以此为终身之诫！ 
现代文：我们这些部属都非常惊恐，如同天塌地陷，希望您终身记住这一教训！ 
English: All of us subordinates were very frightened, as if the sky had fallen. I hope you will remember this lesson forever!

古文：权自前收其泪曰： 大惭谨已刻心，非但书绅也。 
现代文：孙权亲自上前为贺齐擦去眼泪说： 很惭愧，我把这次教训铭刻在心中，不仅仅写在束身的大带上。 
English: Sun Quan himself came forward to wipe away tears for He Qi and said: I am very ashamed, I have engraved this lesson in my heart, not just written it on the large belt of bondage.

古文：九月，巴、賨夷帅朴胡、杜濩、任约，各举其众来附。
现代文：九月，巴、夷两个少数部族首领朴胡、杜、任约，各率全体部众归附朝廷。
English: In September, the leaders of the two minority tribes of Ba and Yi, namely, Pak Hu, Du, and Ren You, each led the entire staff to join the imperial court.

古文：于是分巴郡，以胡为巴东太守，濩为巴西太守，约为巴郡太守，皆封列侯。
现代文：于是朝廷划分巴郡，以朴胡为巴东太守，杜为巴西太守，任约为巴郡太守，三人都被封为列侯。
English: As a result, the imperial court divided Ba County, with Pak Hu as the governor of Ba Dong, Du as the governor of Brazil, appointed as the governor of Ba County, and all three were made princes.

古文：冬，十月，始置名号侯以赏军功。
现代文：冬季，十月，开始设置只有名号的侯爵，奖赏那些有军功的人。
English: In the winter, in October, marquisates were created in name only, to reward those who had distinguished themselves in the military.

古文：十一月，张鲁将家属出降。
现代文：十一月，张鲁率领家属出来投降。
English: In November, Zhang Lu led his family members to surrender.

古文：魏公操逆拜鲁镇南将军，待以客礼，封阆中侯，邑万户。
现代文：魏公曹操亲迎，授予张鲁镇南将军的官职，按照宾客的礼节接待他，封他为阆中侯，食邑万户。
English: Wei Gong welcomed Cao Cao personally, conferred the official position of Zhang Lu Zhennan General, received him according to the etiquette of the guests, appointed him as the middle-ranking official, and provided food for thousands of households.

古文：封鲁五子及阎圃等皆为列侯。
现代文：同时，封张鲁的五个儿子，以及阎圃等人为列侯。
English: His five sons and Yan Pu and others were all made vassals.

古文：习凿齿论曰：阎圃谏鲁勿王，而曹公追封之，将来之人，孰不思顺！
现代文：习凿齿论曰： 阎圃劝谏张鲁不要称王，而曹操却追封他，以后的人，哪有不愿归顺曹操的！
English: According to the theory of chiseling teeth:  Yan Piao advised  Zhang Lu not to proclaim himself king, but Cao Cao chased after him. Who would not want to submit to Cao Cao!

古文：塞其本源而末流自止，其此之谓与！
现代文：堵塞水的源头，其下游的水自然不再流动，说的不正是这个道理吗！
English: If you block the source of water, the downstream water will naturally no longer flow. Isn't that exactly the reason?

古文：若乃不明于此，而重焦烂之功，丰爵厚赏止于死战之士，则民利于有乱，俗竞于杀伐，阻兵杖力，干戈不戢矣。
现代文：假如不明白这一点，仅重视武力征伐的作用，丰厚的爵位和赏赐只给那些拼死作战的武士，民众百姓便会认为动乱有利可图，习惯于争相攻杀，倚仗武力，战乱就不会停止了。
English: If people do not understand this, if they only attach importance to the role of conquest by force, and only give rich titles and rewards to those warriors who fight to the death, the common people will think that turmoil is profitable, and they will get used to fighting and killing each other, relying on force, and the war will not stop.

古文：曹公之此封，可谓知赏罚之本矣。
现代文：曹操这样封赏，可以说是了解赏罚的根本原则。
English: Cao Cao can be said to have understood the fundamental principle of reward and punishment.

古文：程银、侯选、庞惪皆随鲁降，魏公操复银、选官爵，拜惪立义将军。
现代文：程银、侯选、庞德都随张鲁归降曹操。魏公曹操恢复了程银、侯选的官爵，授予庞德立义将军的职位。
English: Cheng Yin, Hou Xuan, and Pang De all returned to Cao Cao with Zhang Lu. Wei Gong Cao Cao restored Cheng Yin and Hou Xuan's peerage and awarded Pang De the position of General Liyi.

古文：张鲁之走巴中也，黄权言于刘备曰： 若失汉中，则三巴不振，此为割蜀之股臂也。 
现代文：张鲁逃奔巴中时，黄权对刘备说： 如果失去汉中，则三巴将很难挽救，这等于割去了蜀的四肢。 
English: When Zhang Lu was running away from Ba Zhong, Huang Quan said to Liu Bei: "If we lose Hanzhong, then Sanba will be difficult to save, which is equivalent to cutting off Shu's limbs.

古文：备乃以权为护军，率诸将迎鲁；鲁已降，权遂击朴胡、杜濩、任约，破之。
现代文：刘备因此任命黄权为护军，率领兵将去迎接张鲁；因张鲁已归降了曹操，黄权便去攻打朴胡、杜、任约，获胜。
English: Therefore, Liu Bei appointed Huang Quan as the escort, and he led the troops to meet Zhang Lu. Since Zhang Lu had surrendered to Cao Cao, Huang Quan went to attack Park Hu, Du, and Ren Yao, and won.

古文：魏公操使张郃督诸军徇三巴，欲徙其民于汉中，进军宕渠。
现代文：魏公曹操派张统领军队占领三巴，企图把那里的民众迁徙到汉中，张率军向岩渠进发。
English: Wei Gong Cao Cao sent Zhang to command the army to occupy Sanba, in an attempt to migrate the people there to Hanzhong, Zhang led the army to the rock channel.

古文：刘备使巴西太守张飞与郃相拒，五十馀日，飞袭击郃，大破之。
现代文：刘备派遣巴西太守张飞抗拒张。五十多天后，张飞向张发动袭击，张大败，退回南郑。
English: Liu Bei dispatched the Brazilian governor Zhang Fei to resist Zhang. More than fifty days later, Zhang Fei launched an attack on Zhang, Zhang was defeated and returned to Nan Zheng.

古文：郃走还南郑，备亦还成都。
现代文：刘备也回到成都。
English: Liu Bei also returned to Chengdu.

古文：操徙出故韩遂、马超等兵五千馀人，使平难将军殷署等督领，以扶风太守赵俨为关中护军。
现代文：曹操分出原属于韩遂、马超的士卒五千余人，派平难将军殷署等人统领，又任命扶风太守赵俨为关中护军。
English: Cao Cao separated more than five thousand soldiers who originally belonged to Han Sui and Ma Chao, sent General Pingnan to lead the Yin Division and others, and appointed the Fufeng governor Zhao Wei as the guard of Guanzhong.

古文：操使俨发千二百兵助汉中守御，殷署督送之，行者不乐。
现代文：曹操命令赵俨派兵一千二百加强汉中防务，由殷署监督送往汉中，将要被派往汉中的十兵很不情愿。
English: Cao Cao ordered Zhao Jun to send twelve hundred soldiers to strengthen the defense of Hanzhong, and sent them to Hanzhong under the supervision of Yin. The ten soldiers to be sent to Hanzhong were reluctant.

古文：俨护送至斜谷口，还，未至营，署军叛乱。
现代文：赵俨送这些人到斜谷口后返回，尚到军营，殷署的部队发生叛乱。
English: After Zhao Wei sent these people to the mouth of the valley and returned, he still went to the military camp, and the troops of the Yin Department rebelled.

古文：俨自随步骑百五十人，皆叛者亲党也，闻之，各惊，被甲持兵，不复自安。
现代文：跟随赵俨的步、骑兵一百五十人，都是叛军的亲戚同党，他们听说叛乱以后，都很惊慌，穿戴好铠甲，手执兵器，惶惶不安。
English: Following Zhao Jun's footsteps, there were 150 cavalrymen, all of whom were relatives of the rebels and members of the same party. After they heard about the rebellion, they were very panicked, wearing armor, holding weapons, and panicking.

古文：俨徐谕以成败，慰励恳切，皆慷慨曰： 死生当随护军，不敢有二！ 
现代文：赵俨从容地对他们分析了成败得失，恳切地加以抚慰勉励，士兵们都慷慨地说： 不论生死，我们都会跟随护军，不敢有二心！ 
English: Zhao Yao calmly analyzed their successes and failures, conscientiously comforted and encouraged them, and the soldiers all said generously: Regardless of life and death, we will follow the escort, do not dare to have two hearts!

古文：前到诸营，各召料简诸奸结叛者八百馀人，散在原野。
现代文：他们前往各营，分别召唤、鉴别那些结党叛乱者，共八百余人，分散在田野中。
English: They went to each battalion, separately summoning and identifying those rebels, a total of more than eight hundred people, scattered in the fields.

古文：俨下令惟取其造谋魁率治之，馀一不问，郡县所收送皆放遣，乃即相率还降。
现代文：赵俨下令：只取那些谋划叛乱的首领进行惩治，其余的一概不追究。郡县将所逮捕的人全部释放，于是叛兵相继回来投降。
English: Zhao Wei ordered that only the leaders who plotted the rebellion should be punished, and the rest should not be investigated. The counties released all the arrested people, so the rebels came back one after another to surrender.

古文：俨密白： 宜遣将诣大营，请旧兵镇守关中。 
现代文：赵俨秘密上报： 应当将这批人送到大营，请用旧部队来镇守关中。 
English: Zhao Wei secretly reported: This group of people should be sent to the big camp, please use the old troops to guard the town.

古文：魏公操遣将军刘柱将二千人往，当须到乃发遣。
现代文：魏公曹操派将军刘柱率两千人前往，约定等抵达后再发遣关中兵。
English: Wei Gong Cao Cao sent General Liu Zhu and two thousand men to go, and agreed to send the Guanzhong soldiers after their arrival.

古文：俄而事露，诸营大骇，不可安谕。
现代文：不久事情泄露。各营非常惊恐，用劝导已不能使众人安定下来。
English: Soon the affair leaked out. The battalions were very alarmed, and persuasion was no longer able to calm everyone down.

古文：俨遂宣言： 当差留新兵之温厚者千人，镇守关中，其馀悉遣东。 
现代文：赵俨于是宣布： 我将在你们当中挑选温和老实的一千人留下，镇守关中，其余的全都派往东方。 
English: Zhao Zhe then announced: I will select a thousand gentle and honest people among you to stay and guard the town, and the rest will all be sent to the East.

古文：便见主者内诸营兵名籍，立差别人。
现代文：于是召见主管官员，命令呈上各营士兵名册，立刻进行择别。
English: The officer-in-charge was then summoned and ordered to submit a list of soldiers from each battalion for immediate selection.

古文：留者意定，与俨同心，其当去者亦不敢动。
现代文：留下来的人情绪稳定，与赵俨同心，那些该走的人也不敢有所举动。
English: The people who stayed behind are emotionally stable and share the same heart as Zhao Wei, and those who should leave are afraid to make a move.

古文：俨一日尽遣上道，因使所留千人分布罗落之。
现代文：赵俨在一天内将该走的人全部发遣上路，并将所留下的一千人分布到各处守置。
English: Within one day, Zhao Wei sent all the people who should go on the road, and distributed the remaining one thousand people to various places.

古文：东兵寻至，乃复胁谕，并徙千人，令相及共东。
现代文：不久，刘柱所率部队从东方赶到，赵俨于是再次威胁劝导，将留下的一千人也一并发遣，让他们跟在先前被发遣的部队后面，一同前往东方。
English: Soon, the troops led by Liu Zhu arrived from the east, and Zhao Jun again threatened and persuaded him to send the remaining one thousand people as well, so that they could follow the troops that had been sent earlier and go to the east together.

古文：凡所全致二万馀口。
现代文：总共安全送到东方二万余人。
English: In total, more than 20,000 people were safely transported to the East.

古文：孝献皇帝壬建安二十一年
现代文：建安二十一年
English: The 21st year of Jian'an

古文：春，二月，魏公操还鄴。
现代文：春季，二月，魏公曹操回到邺城。
English: In the spring, in February, Wei Gong Cao Cao returned to Lucheng.

古文：夏，五月，进魏公操爵为王。
现代文：夏季，五月，进封魏公曹操为王。
English: In the summer, in May, Wei Gong Cao Cao became king.

古文：初，中尉崔琰荐巨鹿杨训于操，操礼辟之。
现代文：当初，中尉崔琰把巨鹿人杨训推荐给曹操，曹操以礼征召并任用杨训。
English: At first, Lieutenant Cui Wei recommended the giant deer man Yang Xun to Cao Cao, and Cao Cao summoned and appointed Yang Xun as a courtesy.

古文：及操进爵，训发表称颂功德。
现代文：及至曹操进爵为王，杨训作表为他歌功颂德。
English: When Cao Cao was knighted and became king, Yang Xun wrote a poem to praise his achievements.

古文：或笑训希世浮伪，谓琰为失所举。
现代文：有人嘲笑杨训阿谀世俗，轻浮虚伪，说崔琰推荐人不当。
English: Some people ridiculed Yang Xunma for being worldly, frivolous and hypocritical, saying that Cui Yao's recommendation was improper.

古文：琰从训取表草视之，与训书曰： 省表，事佳耳。
现代文：崔琰从杨训那里把上表的底稿取来查看，给杨训写信说： 看了你的上表，事情做得很好。
English: Cui Wei took the draft of the above table from Yang Xun and inspected it. He wrote to Yang Xun, saying, "I have read your above table, and things are going well.

古文：时乎，时乎！
现代文：什么时代啊！
English: What an era!

古文：会当有变时。 
现代文：总有一天会改变的。 
English: It will change one day.

古文：琰本意讥论者好谴呵而不寻情理也，时有与琰宿不平者，白琰 傲世怨谤，意指不逊 ，操怒，收琰付狱，髡为徒隶。
现代文：崔琰的本意，是讥讽那些乱议论的人太苛求，而不通情理。当时有与崔琰历来不和的人，上告崔琰 傲慢而目空一切，怨愤诽谤，信中有悖逆不逊之意 。
English: Choi Min's intention was to ridicule those who were too demanding and unreasonable. At that time, some people who had always been at odds with Choi Min sued Choi Min for being arrogant and arrogant, resentful and slanderous, and the letter was rebellious.

古文：前白琰者复白之云： 琰为徒，对宾客虬须直视，若有所瞋。 
现代文：曹操很气愤，下令把崔琰逮捕入狱，处以剃光头发服苦役的刑罚。那个告发崔琰的人又说： 崔琰当了刑徒，对宾客捻着胡须直视，似乎心有所恨。 
English: Cao Cao was very angry and ordered that Cui Yao be arrested and sent to prison to serve a sentence of hard labor with his hair shaved off. The person who reported Cui Yao also said: Cui Yao became a criminal and looked directly at the guests with his beard twisted, as if he had hatred in his heart.

古文：遂赐琰死。
现代文：曹操于是命令崔琰自杀。
English: As a result, Choe Son Gwon was killed.

古文：尚书仆射毛玠伤琰无辜，心不悦。
现代文：尚书仆射毛对崔琰无辜而死很伤感，心中闷闷不乐。
English: Shang Shufu Emao is very sad about Cui Yao's innocent death, and is depressed in his heart.

古文：人复白玠怨谤，操收玠付狱，侍中桓阶、和洽皆为之陈理，操不听。
现代文：又有人告发毛怨愤诽谤，曹操下令将毛逮捕入狱。侍中桓阶、和洽都为毛辩解，曹操不听。
English: Someone else accused Mao of malice and slander, and Cao Cao ordered that Mao be arrested and jailed. Cao Cao did not listen to the attendants Huanzhang and He Ci, who both defended Mao.

古文：阶求案实其事。王曰： 言事者白，玠不但谤吾也，乃复为崔琰觖望。
现代文：桓阶请求查清事实，魏王曹操说： 告发他的人说，毛不但诽谤我，而且为崔琰感到怨愤。
English: The Wei King Cao Cao said: The person who reported him said that Mao not only slandered me, but also felt resentment for Cui Yao.

古文：此捐君臣恩义，妄为死友怨叹，殆不可忍也。 
现代文：这是抛弃君臣的恩义，狂妄地为处死的故友怨愤，对这些行为，恐怕不可容忍。 
English: This is abandoning the gratitude of princes and ministers, and arrogantly harboring grudges against old friends who were put to death. I am afraid that these actions are intolerable.

古文：洽曰： 如言事者言，玠罪过深重，非天地所覆载。
现代文：和洽说： 假如事实确实如告发的人所说，毛罪过深重，天地难容。
English: "If the facts are indeed as the whistleblower said, Mao's crime is too serious to be tolerated," he said.

古文：臣非敢曲理玠以枉大伦也，以玠历年荷宠，刚直忠公，为众所惮，不宜有此。
现代文：我不敢强辞夺理地为毛辩护，破坏臣下对君王绝对服从这一最高准则。以毛多年受到您的宠爱和信任，为人刚直、忠诚、公正，被很多人忌惮，他不应有这样的事。
English: I don't dare to make pretentious arguments to defend Mao and undermine the highest principle of absolute obedience of a subject to the sovereign. Mao has been loved and trusted by you for many years. He is upright, loyal and fair, and is feared by many people. He should not have such a thing.

古文：然人情难保，要宜考玠，两验其实。
现代文：然而人的思想难保会发生变化，应当进行审查，对告发者和毛两方面进行核实。
English: However, it is difficult to guarantee that people's thoughts will change. A review should be carried out to verify both the whistleblower and Mao.

古文：今圣恩不忍致之于理，更使曲直之分不明。 
现代文：当今大王圣恩，不忍将此案交到司法部门，更使得是非曲直的界限不明。 
English: Today's great king, Saint Grace, could not bear to submit the case to the judicial department, which made the boundaries of right and wrong unclear.

古文：操曰： 所以不考，欲两全玠及言事者耳。 
现代文：曹操说： 所以不追究，只是要使毛和告发的人都得以保全罢了。 
English: Cao Cao said, "That's why we don't investigate, we just want Mao and the people who reported him to be safe."

古文：洽对曰： 玠信有谤主之言，当肆之市朝；若玠无此言，言事者加诬大臣以误主听，不加检覈，臣窃不安。 
现代文：和洽回答说： 毛如确实有诽谤主上的言论，应该斩首示众；如果没有，告发的人就是诬陷大臣，混淆主上的视听。不加审查，我感到不安。 
English: "If it's true that Mao said something that slandered the Lord, he should be beheaded; if it's not true, the person who made the accusation is slandering the minister and distorting the Lord's words and deeds. Without a review, I feel uneasy.

古文：操卒不穷治，玠遂免黜，终于家。
现代文：曹操到底没有追究，毛被放了出来，罢黜官职，后来在家中去世。
English: Cao Cao was not investigated in the end, Mao was released, removed from office, and later died at home.

古文：是时西曹掾沛国丁仪用事，玠之获罪，仪有力焉；群下畏之侧目。
现代文：当时，西曹掾、沛国人丁仪得势，毛获罪，丁仪起了很大作用，群臣都很怕他，不敢正眼相视。
English: At that time, Western Cao Pi and Pei Guo's Ding Yi gained power and Mao was punished. Ding Yi played a great role, and the ministers were afraid of him and dared not look him in the eye.

古文：尚书仆射何夔及东曹属东莞徐弈独不事仪，仪谮弈，出为魏郡太守，赖桓阶左右之得免。
现代文：唯有尚书仆射何夔以及东曹属东莞人徐奕不依附丁仪。徐奕遭丁仪谗毁，被调离京城任魏郡太守，靠了桓阶的帮助，才得以免受伤害。
English: It was only Shang Shuxu's servant, He Xuan, and Dong Cao's Dongguan man, Xu Yi, who did not cling to Ding Yi. Xu Yi was destroyed by Ding Yi and transferred from Beijing to serve as the governor of Wei County. It was only with the help of Huan Qua that he was able to avoid harm.

古文：尚书傅选谓何夔曰： 仪已害毛玠，子宜少下之。 
现代文：尚书傅选对何夔说： 丁仪已经害了毛，您应对他稍稍低头。 
English: Shang Shufu Xuan said to He Xuan: Ding Yi has lost his hair, you should bow your head to him a little.

古文：夔曰： 为不义，适足害其身，焉能害人！
现代文：何夔回答说： 做事不义，恰恰害了自己，怎么能够害人！
English: He Yao replied: "Doing something unjustly, you have just harmed yourself, how can you harm others!

古文：且怀奸佞之心，立于明朝，其得久乎！ 
现代文：况且怀有奸险之心的人，在圣明的朝廷中，能够长得了吗！ 
English: Moreover, can a person with a treacherous heart grow up in the court of the sacred light?

古文：崔琰从弟林，尝与陈群共论冀州人士，称琰为首，群以智不存身贬之。
现代文：崔琰的堂弟崔林，曾经和陈群一同评论冀州的人物，称崔琰为第一，陈郡则认为崔琰的才智还不足以保护自身，因而贬低崔琰。
English: Cui Wei's cousin Cui Lin, who once commented on the figures of Jizhou together with Chen Qun, said that Cui Wei was the first, while Chen County believed that Cui Wei's talent was not enough to protect himself, thus belittling Cui Wei.

古文：林曰： 大丈夫为有邂逅耳，即如卿诸人，良足贵乎 五月，己亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：崔林说： 大丈夫只看有没有机会遇到明主罢了，如果像各位一样，就算高贵了吗？ 五月，已亥朔，出现日食。
English: Cui Lin said: It's only a matter of whether there is a chance to meet the Lord. If you are like everyone else, will you be noble? In May, already in the spring, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：代郡乌桓三大人皆称单于，恃力骄恣，太守不能治。
现代文：代郡乌桓的三个首领都称单于，依仗实力，态度骄横，恣意妄行，以往的太守对他们无可奈何。
English: The three leaders of the Wuhuan deputy county all claimed to be alone, relying on their strength, arrogant attitude, and arbitrary behavior. The previous daimyo had no choice but to deal with them.

古文：魏王操以丞相仓曹属裴潜为太守，欲授以精兵。
现代文：魏王曹操任命丞相仓曹属裴潜为太守，准备给他一支精干的部队。
English: The Wei king Cao Cao appointed the chancellor Cang Cao Zhen Pei Qian as the imperial governor and prepared to give him a capable army.

古文：潜曰： 单于自知放横日久，今多将兵往，必惧而拒境，少将则不见惮，宜以计谋图之。 
现代文：裴潜说： 单于自己也知道放纵横行的时间很长了，现在多带兵去，他们必会感到恐惧而拒绝我们入境；少带，他们则不怕，因此应当用计谋去解决问题！ 
English: Pei Qian said, "I alone know that it has been a long time since indulgence has been rampant. Now, if we bring more soldiers, they will surely feel fear and refuse us entry; if we bring fewer, they are not afraid, so we should use strategies to solve the problem!"

古文：遂单车之郡，单于惊喜。
现代文：于是，裴潜只驾单车到郡，单于们又惊又喜。
English: As a result, Pei Qian only rode a bicycle to the county, which surprised and delighted everyone.

古文：潜抚以恩威，单于詟服。
现代文：裴潜恩威并加，进行安抚，单于们慑服。
English: Pei Qian envied and added, to appease, alone in their deterrent clothing.

古文：初，南匈奴久居塞内，与编户大同而不输贡赋。
现代文：当初，南匈奴长期居住在塞内，和编入户籍的平民大致相同，但是不交纳贡赋。
English: At first, the Southern Huns lived in Senne for a long time, and they were roughly the same as the civilians who were registered, but they did not pay tribute.

古文：议者恐其户口滋蔓，浸难禁制，宜豫为之防。
现代文：议论的人担心他们户口迅速增加，渐渐难以控制，应该加以预防。
English: Commentators are concerned that the rapid increase of their hukou is getting out of control and should be prevented.

古文：秋，七月，南单于呼厨泉入朝于魏，魏王操因留之于鄴，使右贤王去卑监其国。
现代文：秋季，七月，南单于呼厨泉到魏朝见，魏王曹操借机把他留在邺城，派右贤王去卑监理其国事务。
English: In the autumn, in July, Nan Shan went to see the Wei Dynasty at Hukouquan. Cao Cao, the king of Wei, took the opportunity to leave Nan Shan in Shicheng and sent Yu Xianwang to He to supervise the affairs of his country.

古文：单于岁给绵、绢、钱、谷如列侯，子孙传袭其号。
现代文：单于每年所享受的绵、绢、钱、粮待遇，与列侯相同，子孙可以世代传袭封号。
English: Only the annual allowance of cotton, silk, money and grain is the same as that of a vassal, and the title can be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：分其众为五部，各立其贵人为帅，选汉人为司马以监督之。
现代文：同时，把单于的部属分为五部，各设立一个贵族为统帅，并选派汉人作司马监督他们。
English: At the same time, Han Yu's subordinates were divided into five departments, each with an aristocrat as commander-in-chief, and Han Chinese were selected to supervise them.

古文：八月，魏以大理钟繇为相国。
现代文：八月，魏任命大理钟繇作相国。
English: In August, Wei appointed Dali Zhongxuan as his consort.

古文：冬，十月，魏王操治兵击孙权；十一月，至谯。
现代文：冬季，十月，魏王曹操练兵准备向孙权进攻；十一月，到达谯郡。
English: In winter, in October, the Wei King Cao Cao trained soldiers to prepare for an attack on Sun Quan; in November, he arrived in Shixian.

