古文：武帝上高祖武皇帝讳邕，字祢罗突，太祖第四子也。
现代文：高祖武皇帝名邕，字弥罗突，是太祖的第四个儿子。
English: Gao Zuwu, the fourth son of Emperor Mingzong, is also known as Mirodu.

古文：母曰叱奴太后。
现代文：母亲是叱奴太后。
English: His mother was the scold of the empress dowager.

古文：大统九年，生于同州，有神光照室。
现代文：西魏大统九年，出生于同州，出生时有神光照亮房间。
English: In the ninth year of the Western Wei Dynasty, he was born in the same state. When he was born, there was a divine light illuminating the room.

古文：幼而孝敬，聪敏有器质。
现代文：年幼时孝敬长辈，聪颖明敏有器度资质。
English: When they are young, they show filial piety to their elders, and they are intelligent, bright, and sensitive.

古文：太祖异之，曰： 成吾志者，必此儿也。 年十二，封辅城郡公。
现代文：太祖认为他很不一般，说： 能够完成我的志向的，一定是这个孩子 十二岁时，被封为辅城郡公。
English: The great-grandfather thought he was very unusual and said, "The one who can fulfill my ambition must be this child. When he was twelve years old, he was made the county magistrate of Fucheng."

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜大将军，出镇同州。
现代文：孝闵帝即位后，他被拜为大将军，出镇同州。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaojun, he was worshiped as a great general and went to Tongzhou.

古文：世宗即位，迁柱国，授蒲州诸军事、蒲州刺史。
现代文：世宗即位，升为柱国，授蒲州诸军事、蒲州刺史。
English: Sejong ascended the throne, was promoted to pillar state, and was awarded the title of Military Governor of Gushu and the title of Military Governor of Gushu.

古文：武成元年，入为大司空、治御正，进封鲁国公，领宗师。
现代文：武成元年，入朝担任大司空、治御正。晋封为鲁国公，领宗师。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wucheng, he entered the imperial court as Daishi Ku and Jigosho. He was promoted to the position of the Prince of Lu and became the head of the school.

古文：甚为世宗所亲爱，朝廷大事，多共参议。
现代文：他很受世宗的宠爱，朝廷大事，多与他一起商议。
English: He was very much loved by Shizong, and they often discussed important matters of the imperial court together.

古文：性沉深有远识，非因顾问，终不辄言。
现代文：武帝性情沉静稳重有眼光见识，除非有人征求他的意见，他从不开口多言。
English: Emperor Wu is calm, steady and insightful. Unless someone asks for his opinion, he never speaks too much.

古文：世宗每叹曰： 夫人不言，言必有中。 武成二年夏四月，世宗崩，遗诏传帝位于高祖。
现代文：世宗经常赞叹说： 这个人平常不多说话，一说话就说到点子上。 武成二年夏季四月，世宗去世，死前下诏将帝位传给高祖。
English: Shizong often said admiringly, "This man doesn't usually talk much, but when he does, he gets straight to the point."Shizong died in the summer of April in the second year of Wucheng, and before he died, he issued an imperial edict to pass the throne to Gaozhu.

古文：高祖固让，百官劝进，乃从之。
现代文：高祖坚决辞让，百官劝进，这才听从。
English: Gao Zu resolutely refused to give in, and was persuaded by hundreds of officials to move forward. Only then did he comply.

古文：壬寅，即皇帝位，大赦天下。
现代文：壬寅日，即皇帝位，大赦天下。
English: Renin Day, that is, the emperor's day, is a national holiday.

古文：冬十二月，改作露门、应门。
现代文：冬季十二月，改建露门、应门。
English: In December of the winter, the dew gate and the answering gate were rebuilt.

古文：是岁，齐常山王高演废其主殷而自立，是为孝昭帝。
现代文：这年，北齐的常山王高演废黜皇帝高殷而自立为皇帝，这就是孝昭帝。
English: In this year, the Northern Qi's Changshan King Gao En dethroned Emperor Gao Yin and became emperor himself. This was the beginning of Xiao Zhaodi.

古文：保定元年春正月戊申，诏曰： 寒暑亟周，奄及徂岁，改元命始，国之典章。
现代文：保定元年春季正月戊申，武帝下诏说： 寒暑急速循环，岁月很快就过去了，更改年号确定始元，这是国家的法令制度。
English: In the first month of the spring of Baoding in the first year of the year, Emperor Wu issued a decree saying: Cold and heat cycle rapidly, the years passed quickly, change the year to determine the origin, this is the country's legal system.

古文：朕祗承宝图，宜遵故实。
现代文：朕恭敬地继承皇位，应当遵循旧制。
English: Since I respectfully succeed to the throne, I should follow the old system.

古文：可改武成三年为保定元年。
现代文：可将武成三年改为保定元年。
English: It is possible to change the Takenobu 3rd year to the Baoding 1st year.

古文：嘉号既新，惠泽宜布，文武百官，各增四级。 以大冢宰、晋国公护为都督中外诸军事，令五府总于天官。
现代文：嘉号既已更新，就应当布施恩泽，文武百官，每人都提升四级。 任命大冢宰、晋国公字文护为都督中外诸军事，命五府都受天官总管。
English: Since the title of "Celebrity" has been renewed, it is necessary to bestow favors, and the 100 military and civilian officials will each be promoted to the fourth level.The appointment of Dajie Zhai, Jin Guo Gong, and Wen Guo as military governors in and out of the country, and the appointment of the five prefectures are subject to the general management of the heavenly officials.

古文：庚戌，祠圆丘。
现代文：庚戊日，祭祀圆丘。
English: On Geng Wu Day, the round mound is worshipped.

古文：壬子，祠方丘。
现代文：壬子日，祭祀方丘。
English: On the day of Imago, there will be a ritual at Fangoka.

古文：甲寅，祠感生帝于南郊。乙卯，祠太社。
现代文：甲寅曰，在长安南郊祭祀感生帝。乙卯日，祭祀太社。
English: In the southern suburb of Chang'an, the Emperor Kansho is worshipped. On the second day of the second month, the Taisha is worshipped.

古文：辛酉，突厥遣使献其方物。
现代文：辛酉日，突厥派使者进献土产。
English: On the day of Xinren, the Turks sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：戊辰，诏曰： 履端开物，实资元后；代终成务，谅惟宰栋。
现代文：戊辰曰，武帝下韶说： 开创事业，要依赖君王，而最终完成事务，一定要依靠宰臣。
English: According to Wu Chen, Emperor Wu said in his edict: To start a business, you must rely on the monarch, but to finally complete the business, you must rely on the vassal.

古文：故周文公以上圣之智，翼彼姬周，爰作六典，用光七百。
现代文：所以周文公以卓越的才智，辅助姬周，制定六典，施行了七百年。
English: Therefore, Zhou Wenguang, with his outstanding talent and wisdom, assisted Ji Zhou to formulate six laws and implemented them for seven hundred years.

古文：自兹厥后，代失其绪，俾巍巍之化，历千祀而莫传；郁郁之风，终百王而永坠。
现代文：从此以后，历代都抛弃了周公的业绩，使得巍巍的教化，历经千年以后而失传；浓郁的世风，经过百王以后而永远坠落。
English: Since then, all the dynasties have abandoned Zhou Gong's achievements, causing the enlightenment of Zhou to be lost after a thousand years, and the rich world style to fall forever after a hundred kings.

古文：我太祖文皇帝禀纯和之气，挺天纵之英，德配干元，功侔造化，故能舍末世之弊风，蹈隆周之叡典，诞述百官，厥用允集。
现代文：我太祖文皇帝禀受纯和之气，显示出上天赋予的杰出才能，道德可以与皇天相匹配，功绩可以同化育万物的自然相等齐，所以能够摒弃末世败坏的世风，因袭盛周时的圣典，大叙百官，使百官的作用得以会集。
English: I, Emperor Taizouwen, am endowed with the spirit of purity and harmony, showing the outstanding talent bestowed by heaven, the morality can match the imperial heaven, the merit can assimilate and nurture the natural equality of all things, so I can abandon the corrupt world style of the last days, and because of the holy scriptures at the peak of the week, the role of the hundred officials can be gathered.

古文：所谓乾坤改而重构，岂帝王洪范而已哉。
现代文：逭就是所谓的天地改变而重新构造，难道仅仅是帝王的大法而已吗?
English: It is the so-called heaven and earth change and re-structure, is it just the emperor's great law?

古文：朕入嗣大宝，思扬休烈。
现代文：朕承继皇位，念及弘扬美好的功业。
English: I am the heir to the throne, and I will do my best to carry forward the good work.

古文：今可班斯礼于太祖庙庭。 己巳，祠太庙，班太祖所述六官焉。
现代文：如今应将此礼颁布于太祖庙庭。 己巳曰，祭祀太庙，颁布了太祖所创制的六官之职。
English: Now, this ceremony should be held in the courtyard of the Grand Ancestor's Temple. It is said that the six official positions created by the Grand Ancestor have been promulgated.

古文：癸酉，吐谷浑、高昌并遣使献方物。
现代文：癸酉日，吐谷浑、高昌一同派使者贡献当地土特产。
English: On the same day, both Tuyuhun and Gaochang sent envoys to contribute local special products.

古文：甲戌，诏先经兵戎官年六十已上，及民七十已上，节级板授官。
现代文：甲戌曰，武帝下韶凡是在从前经历过战事的六十岁以上的官员，以及七十岁以上的百姓，都按次第临时授予官职。
English: Gao said that under Emperor Wu, all officials over the age of 60 and people over the age of 70 who had experienced war in the past were temporarily granted official positions according to the schedule.

古文：乙亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：乙亥日，武帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: On the day of the second year of the Heian period, Emperor Wu personally cultivated his ancestral fields.

古文：丙子，大射于正武殿，赐百官各有差。二月己卯，遣大使巡察天下。
现代文：丙子曰，在正武殿举行大规模的射礼，按不同等次赏赐百官，二月己卯曰，派使节巡视天下。
English: Cixi said that a large-scale shooting ceremony was held at the Zhengwu Palace, awarding hundreds of officials according to different ranks, and in February, he sent envoys to inspect the world.

古文：于洮阳置洮州。
现代文：在洮阳设置洮州。
English: Set up Bozhou in Fenyang.

古文：甲午，朝日于东郊。
现代文：甲午，在束郊朝拜太阳。
English: At 1:00 a.m., worship the sun in the suburbs.

古文：乙未，突厥、宕昌并遣使献方物。
现代文：乙末日，突厥、宕昌一同派使者贡献当地土特产。
English: On the last day of the 2nd month, Turk and Gaochang sent an envoy to contribute local special products.

古文：丙午，省轝辇，去百戏。
现代文：丙午曰，减省车辇，去掉百戏。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, reduce the number of carriages and remove the hundred plays.

古文：弘农上言九尾狐见。
现代文：弘农上书称有九尾狐出现。
English: Hongnong's petition claimed that nine-tailed foxes had appeared.

古文：三月丙寅，改八丁兵为十二丁兵，率岁一月役。
现代文：三月丙寅日，将八丁兵改为十二丁兵，全都是每年服一月的兵役。
English: On the third day of the third month, the eight soldiers were changed to twelve soldiers, and all of them served one month of military service every year.

古文：夏四月丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏季四月丙子初一，太阳有亏蚀。
English: In summer, on the first day of April, the sun is eclipsed.

古文：庚寅，以少傅、吴公尉迟纲为大司空。
现代文：庚寅日。任命少傅、吴公尉迟纲为大司空。
English: Geng Yin Rong. Appointed Shao Fu and Wu Gong Lien Chi Gang as Daishi Kuo.

古文：丁酉，白兰遣使献犀甲、铁铠。
现代文：丁酉日，白兰派使者贡献犀甲、铁销。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's death, Bai Lan sent an emissary to Zhuo to donate armor and iron pins.

古文：五月丙午，封孝闵皇帝子康为纪国公，皇子赟为鲁国公。
现代文：五月丙午日，封孝闵皇帝的儿子宇文康为纪厘公，皇子空运盏为叠压阴。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the fifth month, Emperor Fengxiao's son, Emperor Wuwenkang, was crowned as the Prince of Jilin, and the prince's carriage was carried by air.

古文：晋公护获玉斗以献。
现代文：置公室这盏得到一柄玉斗将它进献给武帝。
English: The official was given a jade sword and presented it to Emperor Wu.

古文：戊辰，突厥、龟兹并遣使献方物。
现代文：戊辰日，突厥、龟兹一同派使者贡献当地土特产。
English: On the day of Pentecost, Turks and Turks together sent an envoy to contribute local special products.

古文：六月乙酉，遣治御正殷不害等使于陈。
现代文：六月乙酉日，派治御正殷不害等人出使陈国。
English: On the second day of the sixth month of the year, Emperor Zhengxing sent envoys to Chen.

古文：秋七月戊申，诏曰： 亢旱历时，嘉苗殄悴。
现代文：秋季七月戊申曰，武帝下诏说： 大旱长久，禾苗枯萎。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Shen said that Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: The drought is long and the seedlings are withered.

古文：岂狱犴失理，刑罚乖衷欤？
现代文：难道是牢狱失去常理，刑罚违背了中正吗?
English: Is it that prison has lost its common sense and punishment has violated the principles of the Chinese Constitution?

古文：其所在见囚：死以下，一岁刑以上，各降本罪一等；百鞭以下，悉原免之。 更铸钱，文曰 布泉 ，以一当五，与五铢并行。
现代文：凡是现在被囚禁的犯人：死刑以下，一年刑罚以上的，各降原罪一级；罚一百鞭以下的，全部将其原罪赦免。 重新铸造铜钱，钱文叫 布泉 ，以一枚当值五钱，与五铢钱一起流通。
English: All prisoners who are currently incarcerated: less than the death penalty, more than one year's punishment, each reduction of the original crime by one level; those punished with less than one hundred lashes, all their original crimes will be pardoned.Re-minted copper money, the money is called Buquan, with a piece of five-dollar coin, circulated together with the five-baht coin.

古文：己酉，追封皇伯父颢为邵国公，以晋公子江陵公会为后；次伯父连为杞国公，以章武孝公子永昌公亮为后；第三伯父洛生为莒国公，以晋公子崇业公至为后；又追封武邑公震为宋国公，以世宗子实为后：并袭封。
现代文：己酉，追封皇伯父宇文颢为邵国公，以晋公的儿子江陵公宇文会作为他的后嗣；次伯父宇文连为杞国公，以章武孝公的儿子永昌公宇文亮作为他的后嗣；第三伯父宇文洛生为莒国公，以晋公的儿子崇业公宇文至作为他的后嗣；又追封武邑公宇文震为宋国公，以世宗的儿子宇文实为他的后嗣：都承袭他们的封号。
English: His second uncle, Uwen Lian, was the Duke of Shao, and his son, Jiangling Gong Uwen Hui, the son of Jin Gong, became his heir; his second uncle, Uwen Lian, was the Duke of Shao, and his son, Yongchang Gong Uwen Liang, the son of Zhangwu Xiao; his third uncle, Uwen Lousheng, was the Duke of Shao, and his son, Chongye Gong Uwen Zi, the son of Jin Gong, became his heir; and Uwen Zhen, the Duke of Wuyi, became the Duke of Song, and his son, Uwen Shih, the son of Shizong,

古文：己巳，荧惑入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：己巳，火星侵入舆鬼宿，侵犯积尸星。
English: Already, Mars has invaded the House of the Spirits and encroached on the House of the Dead.

古文：九月甲辰，南宁州遣使献滇马及蜀铠。
现代文：九月甲辰，南宁州派使者进献滇马和蜀钟。
English: In September, Nanning sent an envoy to present horses and clocks.

古文：乙巳，客星见于翼。
现代文：乙巳曰，有忽隐忽现的星出现在翼宿。
English: It is said that a fleeting star appears in Tsubasa.

古文：冬十月甲戌，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬季十月甲戌曰，太阳有亏蚀。
English: In the winter, in October, the sun is eclipsed.

古文：戊寅，荧惑犯太微上将，合焉。
现代文：戊寅，火星侵犯太微星垣上将星，在那裹重合。
English: Wuchin, Mars encroaches on Taibei, the general star of the star wall, where they coincide.

古文：十一月乙巳，以大将军、卫国公直为雍州牧。
现代文：十一月乙巳日，任命大将军、卫国公宇文直为雍州州牧。
English: On November 21st, the great general and defender of the country, Uwen Zhi, was appointed as the Yongzhou prefectural governor.

古文：陈遣使来聘。
现代文：陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: Chen Guo sent an emissary to ask for a truce.

古文：进封柱国、广武公窦炽为邓国公。
现代文：进封柱国、广武公窦炽为邓国公。
English: Guanzhizhu Guo, Guangwu Guo, and Deng Guo Guo.

古文：丁巳，狩于岐阳。
现代文：丁巳，武帝在岐阳冬猎。
English: Soon after, Emperor Wu went winter hunting in Qiyang.

古文：是月，齐孝昭帝薨，弟长广王湛代立，是为武成帝。
现代文：这个月，齐孝昭帝逝世，他的弟弟长广王高湛代立为皇帝，造就是齐武成帝。
English: This month, Emperor Qi Xiaozhao died, and his younger brother, Long Guang Wang Gaotan, became emperor in his place. This was the beginning of the reign of Emperor Qiwu.

古文：十二月壬午，至自岐阳。
现代文：十二月壬午曰，武帝从岐阳回到都城。
English: On the afternoon of December 13, Emperor Wu returned to the capital from Qiyang.

古文：是岁，追封皇族祖仲为虞国公。
现代文：在这一年，武帝追封皇族祖父宇文仲为虞国公。
English: In this year, Emperor Wu posthumously appointed the grandfather of the imperial family, Uwenzhong, as the Prince of the State.

古文：二年春正月壬寅，初于蒲州开河渠，同州开龙首渠，以广灌溉。
现代文：保定二年春季正月壬寅日，开始在蒲州开凿黄河渠道，在同州开凿龙首渠，用来扩充灌溉。
English: In the spring of the second year of Baoding, on the first day of the first month of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first month of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the first year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of the second year of

古文：丁未，以陈主弟顼为柱国，送还江南。
现代文：丁未，任命陈主的弟弟陈顼为柱国，将他送还长江南面。
English: Ding Wei appointed Chen's younger brother Chen Qi as a pillar country and sent him back to the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：闰月己丑，诏柱国以下，帅都督以上，母妻授太夫人、夫人、郡君、县君各有差。
现代文：闰正月己丑，武帝下诏命柱国以下，帅都督以上的官员，其母亲、妻子分别按等级授予太夫人、夫人、郡君、县君等称号。
English: In the first month of the leap year, the Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering officials below the level of provincial governors and above the level of provincial governors, and their mothers and wives were awarded the titles of "Grand Lady," "Wife," "County Head" and "County Head" according to their ranks.

古文：癸巳，太白入昴。
现代文：癸巳，太白星侵入昴宿。
English: Suddenly, Taibaixing invaded Shibuya.

古文：己亥，柱国、大司马、凉国公贺兰祥薨。
现代文：己亥曰，柱国、大司马、凉国公贺兰祥逝世。
English: Ji Hai said that Zhu Guo, Da Sima and Liang Guo Gong congratulated Lan Xiang on his death.

古文：洛州民周共妖言惑众，假署将相，事发伏诛。
现代文：洛州平民周共以妖言蛊惑百姓，伪任将相，事情揭发后，被处死刑。
English: After the affair was exposed, Zhou Zhou, a civilian from Loszhou, was sentenced to death for deceiving the people with magic words and pretending to be a general.

古文：二月壬寅，荧惑犯太微上相。
现代文：二月壬寅，火星侵犯太微星垣的上相星。
English: In February, the Moon and Mars invade the upper phase of the too-fine star barrier.

古文：癸丑，以久不雨，降宥罪人，京城三十里内禁酒。
现代文：癸丑曰，因为长时间不下雨，减免罪人的罪行，在京城三十里以内禁止饮酒。
English: Because it does not rain for a long time, the offender's crime is exempted, and drinking alcohol is prohibited within 30 miles of Beijing.

古文：梁主萧察薨。
现代文：梁主萧察逝世。
English: Master Liang Xiaochao passed away.

古文：以大将军、蔡国公广为秦州总管。
现代文：任命大将军、蔡国公宇文广为秦州总管。
English: General Cai Guogong and Wenguang were appointed as the chief administrators of Qin.

古文：三月壬午，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：三月壬午日，火星侵犯左执法星。
English: On the day of March at noon, Mars encroaches on the left law enforcement star.

古文：夏四月甲辰，禁屠宰，旱故也。
现代文：夏季四月甲辰曰，禁止屠宰，这是因为天旱的缘故。
English: In the first hour of April in the summer, slaughtering is prohibited because of the drought.

古文：丁巳，南阳献三足乌。
现代文：丁巳曰，南阳进献三足乌。
English: Ding Si said that Nanyang presented three feet of wax.

古文：湖州上言见二白鹿从三角兽而行。
现代文：湖州上书说看见二只白鹿跟着三角兽行走。
English: Huzhou Shangshu said that he saw two white deer walking with the Triceratops.

古文：己未，于伏流城置和州。
现代文：己未日，在伏流城设置和州。
English: It's been a long time since I've set foot in Fushuryu Castle.

古文：癸亥，诏曰： 比以寇难犹梗，九州未一，文武之官立功效者，虽锡以茅土，而未租赋。
现代文：癸亥日，武帝下诏说： 近来因为寇难而东西仍有阻塞，全国没有统一，文武官员建立了功绩的，虽然赐封了他们王侯，但没有给他们供应租赋。
English: On the Day of the Boar, Emperor Wu issued the following edict: Recently, because of the invasion and difficulties, things are still blocked, the whole country is not unified, and the civil and military officials who have established merits, although they have been given the title of prince, but they have not been provided with rent.

古文：诸柱国等勋德隆重，宜有优崇，各准别制，邑户听寄食他县。 
现代文：各位柱国等人功德厚重，应当有所优待尊崇，各自按照特别的例制，准许他们的邑户依附他县生活。 
English: All of you pillar countries and others who have made great contributions should be given preferential treatment and respect, and each of you should allow their households to live in other counties according to a special rule.

古文：五月庚午，以山南众瑞并集，大赦天下，百官及军人，普泛二级。
现代文：五月庚午曰，因为山南各种祥瑞一同汇集，大赦天下，百官以及军人，普遍提升二级。
English: In the afternoon of May, because Shannan's various Xiang Rui gathered together, the general amnesty of the world, hundreds of officials and soldiers, generally promoted to the second level.

古文：南阳宛县三足乌所集，免今年役及租赋之半。
现代文：南阳宛县是三足乌会集的地方，免除当地本年的劳役和半数的租赋。
English: Nanyang's Wan County is the place where the three-legged storks gather, exempting the local storks from labor service and half of the rent this year.

古文：壬辰，以柱国随国公杨忠为大司空，吴国公尉迟纲为陕州总管。
现代文：壬辰日，任命柱国随国公杨忠为大司空，吴国公尉迟纲为陕州总管。
English: On the day of Imjin, Zhu Guozhong Yang Zhong was appointed as the chief secretary of Kuang, and Wu Guozhong Yi Gang was appointed as the general manager of Shaanxi.

古文：六月己亥，以柱国蜀国公尉迟迥为大司马，邵国公会为蒲州总管。
现代文：六月己亥曰，任命柱国蜀国公尉迟迥为大司马，邵国公宇文会为蒲州总管。
English: In June, Ji Hai said that he had appointed Zhu Guo, Shu Guo's lieutenant Chi Xi as the chief secretary, and Shao Guo's public education association as the general manager of Puzhou.

古文：分山南荆州、安州、襄州、江陵为四州总管。
现代文：将山南分为荆州、安州、襄州、江陵四州总管。
English: Shannan will be divided into Jingzhou, Anzhou, Xiangzhou, and Gangneung into four states.

古文：秋七月己巳，封开府贺拔纬为霍国公。
现代文：秋季七月己巳曰，封开府贺拔纬为霍国公。
English: In the autumn of July, it was announced that He Biwei of Fukaifu had become the Duke of Hokkoku.

古文：乙亥，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：乙亥日，太白星侵犯舆鬼星宿。
English: On the second day of the Chinese lunar month of Hai, the Taibai Star encroached on the public ghost star.

古文：九月戊辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月戊辰初一，太阳有亏蚀。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：陈遣使来聘。
现代文：陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: Chen Guo sent an emissary to ask for a truce.

古文：冬十月戊戌，诏曰： 树之元首，君临海内，本乎宣明教化，亭毒黔黎；岂唯尊贵其身，侈富其位。
现代文：冬季十月戊戌日，武帝下诏说： 树立君主，统治天下，本是为了宣明教化，养育百姓；岂衹是为了尊贵他的身体，侈富他的地位。
English: In the winter of October, Emperor Wu issued the following edict: To establish a monarch and rule the world, it was originally for the purpose of educating and educating the people; otherwise, it was for the purpose of honoring his body and enriching his status.

古文：是以唐尧疏葛之衣，麤粝之食，尚临汾阳而永叹，登姑射而兴想。
现代文：所以即便是唐尧身穿粗布的衣服，吃的是粗糙的粮食，尚且来到汾阳而长叹，登上姑射山而联想。
English: Therefore, even if Tang Xuan wore coarse cloth clothes and ate coarse grain, he still came to Shenyang and sighed, and ascended the mountain and associated.

古文：况无圣人之德而嗜欲过之，何以克厌众心，处于尊位，朕甚恧焉。
现代文：何况那些没有圣人的德行而在嗜欲方面又超过了圣人的人，用什么来使众人心服呢，朕处在君主之位，心中为此非常惭愧。
English: How much more those who have not the virtues of a saint, but whose appetites exceed those of a saint, with what shall they win the hearts of the people? I am in the position of a monarch, and my heart is very ashamed of this.

古文：今巨寇未平，军戎费广，百姓空虚，与谁为足。
现代文：现在巨寇没有平定，军事费用很多，百姓空虚，有谁能够富足。
English: Now that the giant pirates have not been subdued, military expenses are many, and the people are empty, who can be rich?

古文：凡是供朕衣服饮食，四时所须，爰及宫内调度，朕今手自减削。
现代文：凡是供应朕的衣服饮食，四季所需的用品，以及宫中的费用安排，朕现在亲手削减。
English: Everything that supplies me with clothes and food, the supplies needed for the four seasons, and the cost arrangements in the palace, I am now cutting down with my own hands.

古文：纵不得顿行古人之道，岂曰全无庶几。
现代文：纵然不能即时施行古人的做法，难道说完全没有希望。
English: Even if the ancient practice cannot be implemented immediately, is it completely hopeless?

古文：凡尔百司，安得不思省约，勖朕不逮者哉。 辛亥，帝御大武殿大射，公卿列将皆会。
现代文：你们所有的官员，怎么能不考虑节约，勉励朕所没做到的事呢? 辛亥曰，武帝亲临大武殿举行射礼，公卿列将都会集在那裹。
English: How can all of your officials not consider economy and encourage me to do what I have not done? Xinhai said that Emperor Wu himself came to the Great Martial Hall to hold a shooting ceremony, and the nobles and generals would gather there.

古文：戊午，讲武于少陵原。
现代文：戊午日，在少陵原讲习军事。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, military training began in Shaolingyuan.

古文：分南宁州置恭州。
现代文：从南宁州中分设恭州。
English: Gyeongju was divided from Nanning.

古文：十一月丁卯，以大将军卫国公直、大将军赵国公招并为柱国。
现代文：十一月丁卯，任命大将军街凰公宇文直、大将军赵凰公室塞塑同为柱国。
English: In November of Dingwu, he appointed the great general Jie Huan Gong, U Wen Zhi, and the great general Zhao Huan Gong to be pillar countries.

古文：又以招为益州总管。
现代文：又任命皇塞翅为益丛总管。
English: He also appointed Emperor Saehyeong as the general manager of Iksung.

古文：壬午，荧惑犯岁星于危南。
现代文：壬午日，火星在危宿南部侵犯岁星。
English: On the day of the meridian, Mars will invade the year star in the south of the dangerous place.

古文：十二月，益州献赤乌。
现代文：十二月，益州进献赤色乌。
English: In December, Yizhou presented red wax.

古文：三年春正月辛未，改光迁国为迁州。
现代文：保定三年春季正月辛末日，将光迁国改为迁州。
English: In the spring of the third year of Baoding, at the end of the first month of the year, the country of relocation was changed to the state of relocation.

古文：乙酉，太保、梁国公侯莫陈崇赐死。
现代文：乙酉日，太保、梁国公侯莫陈崇被赐死。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, Mo Chen Chong, Tai Po and Prince of Liang Province, was sentenced to death.

古文：壬辰，于乞银城置银州。
现代文：壬辰曰，在乞银城设置银州。
English: According to Imjin, a silver state was set up in the begging silver city.

古文：二月庚子，初颁新律。
现代文：二月庚子日，开始颁布新律法。
English: On February 7th, the new law began to be promulgated.

古文：辛丑，诏魏大统九年以前，都督以上身亡而子孙未齿叙者，节级授官。
现代文：辛丑日，下诏凡魏大统九年以前，身亡了的都督以上官员的没有叙用的子孙，按次第授予官职。
English: On Xinwu Day, nine years before the advent of the Great Reunification of China and Wei Dynasty, the descendants of the deceased officials who were above the rank of governor and had not been appointed to any posts were successively awarded official posts.

古文：渭州献三足乌。
现代文：渭州进献三足乌。
English: Bozhou presents three-legged wax worms.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 二仪创辟，玄象着明；三才已备，历数昭列。
现代文：辛酉曰，下诏说： 天地开辟，天象显明；天地人三才已经齐备，历数明显排列。
English: Xin Xin said, the next edict said: The heavens and the earth have been opened, and the heavenly appearance has been revealed; the three heavens and the earth have been prepared, and the calendar numbers have been clearly arranged.

古文：故书称钦若敬授，易序治历明时。
现代文：所以《尚书》称敬顺上天制定历法，《周易》叙述制定历法确定时令节气。
English: Therefore, "Shangshu" said that it is better to obey God and establish a calendar, and "Zhou Yi" described the establishment of a calendar to determine the seasonal solar terms.

古文：此先代一定之典，百王不易之务。
现代文：这是先朝各代固定的典制，是历代帝王不变的事务。
English: This is a fixed ceremony system for each generation of the previous dynasty, and it is an unchangeable matter for successive emperors.

古文：伏惟太祖文皇帝，敬顺昊天，忧劳庶政，历序六家，以阴阳为首。
现代文：想到太祖文皇帝，恭敬地遵循上天的旨意，忧虑辛劳各种政务，逐一排列阴阳、儒、墨、名、法、道德六家学派，以阴阳作为首位。
English: Thinking of Emperor Taizowen, he respectfully followed the will of heaven, worried about and worked hard on various government affairs, and arranged the six schools of Yin and Yang, Confucianism, Ink, Name, Law, and Morality one by one, with Yin and Yang as the first.

古文：洎予小子，弗克遵行，惟斯不安，夕惕若厉。
现代文：到了我继位后，不能遵照实行，心中为此不安，就像身处险境而终日戒慎恐惧。
English: When I succeeded to the throne, I couldn't follow the practice, and I was worried about it. It was like being in a dangerous situation and being cautious and fearful all the time.

古文：自顷朝廷权舆，事多仓卒，乖和爽序，违失先志。
现代文：自从我即位开始，多有祸难之事发生，背离和顺错失时序，违背了先人的意志。
English: Since I came to the throne, many calamitous things have happened, deviations and successes have been out of sequence, and the will of the ancestors has been violated.

古文：致风雨愆时，疾厉屡起，嘉生不遂，万物不长，朕甚伤之。
现代文：致使风雨失调，祸害屡屡兴起，谷物的生长不顺人意，万物不能昌盛，朕非常伤心。
English: As a result, the wind and rain are out of balance, the scourge repeatedly rises, the growth of grain is unsatisfactory, and everything cannot flourish, I am very sad.

古文：自今举大事、行大政，非军机急速，皆宜依月令，以顺天心。 
现代文：从今以后决定重大的事情、施行重大的政务，如果不是急迫的军政要事，都应依照时令行事，以顺从上天的意志。 
English: From now on, major decisions and the implementation of major government affairs, if they are not urgent military and political affairs, should act in accordance with the times and in obedience to the will of heaven.

古文：三月乙丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月乙丑初一，太阳出现亏蚀。
English: On the first day of the second month of March, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：丙子，宕昌遣使献生猛兽二，诏放之南山。
现代文：丙子曰，宕昌派使者进献两头活着的猛兽，武帝下诏命令将猛兽放归南山。
English: Cun Zi said that Tang Chang sent an envoy to present two live beasts of prey, and Emperor Wu issued an order to release the beasts back to Nanshan.

古文：乙酉，益州献三足乌。
现代文：乙酉曰，益州进献三足乌。
English: Yixuan said that Yizhou presented three feet of wax.

古文：夏四月乙未，以柱国、郑国公达奚武为太保，大将军韩果为柱国。
现代文：夏季四月乙未，任命柱国、郑国公达奚武为太保，大将军韩果为柱国。
English: In the summer of April, the pillar country, Zheng Guogong Dada Qianwu, was appointed as Taibo, and the general Han Guo was appointed as the pillar country.

古文：己亥，帝御正武殿录囚徒。
现代文：己亥，武帝亲临正武殿审察囚犯。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wu himself came to the Zhengwu Palace to inspect the prisoners.

古文：癸卯，大雩。
现代文：癸卯，举行盛大的祈雨祭礼。
English: In the evening, a grand rain festival was held.

古文：癸丑，有牛足生于背。
现代文：癸丑，有一头牛的脚生在背上。
English: Ugly, with a cow's foot sticking out of its back.

古文：戊午，幸太学，以太傅、燕国公于谨为三老而问道焉。
现代文：戊午曰。武帝亲临太学，任命太傅、燕国公于谨为三老并向他请教治国之道。
English: Emperor Wu personally visited Taigaku, appointed Taifu and Yan Guogong as the three elders, and asked him for advice on how to govern the country.

古文：初禁天下报雠，犯者以杀人论。
现代文：开始禁止天下的人报仇，违犯者以杀人罪论处。
English: The world began to prohibit people from taking revenge, and violators were punished with homicide.

古文：壬戌，诏百官及民庶上封事，极言得失。
现代文：壬戌曰，韶令百官及平民百姓上书密奏政事，尽情陈述政事的得失。
English: Ren Wei said that the Emperor had ordered hundreds of officials and common people to write a secret report on the government affairs, and to fully explain the gains and losses of the government affairs.

古文：五月甲子朔，避正寝不受朝，旱故也。
现代文：五月甲子初一，武帝避开正殿不接受朝拜，这是天旱的缘故。
English: On the first day of the fifth month, Emperor Wu avoided the main hall and did not accept worship. This was due to the drought.

古文：甲戌，雨。
现代文：甲戌，降雨。
English: On the 26th, it rained.

古文：秋七月戊辰，行幸原州。
现代文：秋季七月戊辰曰，武帝前往原州。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Wu went to Wonju.

古文：庚午，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：庚午曰，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Chen Guo sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：丁丑，幸津门，问百年，赐以钱帛，又赐高年板职各有差，降死罪一等。
现代文：丁丑日，茎童前往违门，询访百岁老人，赏赐给他们钱帛，又赐给老人临时官职大小不等，降死罪一级。
English: On the day of Ding Jiu, the stalking boy went to the illegal door, inquired about the centenarian, rewarded them with money, and gave the old man a temporary official position of varying size, reducing the death penalty to the first level.

古文：八月丁未，改作露寝。
现代文：八月丁末日，改建露寝。
English: At the end of August, it was converted into a dormitory.

古文：九月甲子，自原州登陇山。
现代文：九月甲子，武帝从原州登上陇山。
English: In September, Emperor Wu climbed Mount Lushan from Wonju.

古文：荧惑犯太微上将。
现代文：火星侵犯太微星垣上将星。
English: Mars invades the faint star General Kage.

古文：丙戌，幸同州。
现代文：丙戌，前往回业。
English: 丙, go back to work.

古文：戊子，诏柱国杨忠率骑一万与突厥伐齐。
现代文：戊子日，诏令柱国圭眯率领一万骑兵同窒逐讨伐韭齐。
English: On the day of Boshi, the emperor ordered Zhu Guo Gui to lead ten thousand cavalrymen to join the crusade.

古文：己丑，蒲州献嘉禾，异亩同颖。
现代文：己丑日，蒲州进献生长茁壮的禾稻，在不同的田亩却长出同样好的谷穗。
English: On that fateful day, the city of Puzhou donated flourishing rice, but the same good ears of grain sprouted in different fields.

古文：初令世袭州郡县者改为五等爵，州封伯，郡封子，县封男。
现代文：开始下令将世袭的州郡县改为五等爵位，州封伯爵，郡封子爵，县封男爵。
English: At the beginning, he ordered to change the hereditary title of prefect, county and county to a fifth-class title, prefectural title of count, county title of viscount, and county title of baron.

古文：冬十月壬辰，荧惑犯左执法。
现代文：冬季十月壬辰曰，火星侵犯左执法星。
English: In the winter of October, Mars encroaches on the left law enforcement star.

古文：乙巳，以开府、杞国公亮为梁州总管。
现代文：乙巳日，任命开府、杞国公宇文亮为梁州总管。
English: On the second day of the month, he appointed the head of the provincial government, Gongwu Wenliang, to be the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：庚戌，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：庚戌日，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month, Chen Guo sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：十有二月辛卯，至自同州。
现代文：十二月辛卯日，武帝从同州返回都城长安。
English: On the day of Xinwu in December, Emperor Wu returned to the capital city Chang'an from the same state.

古文：遣太保、郑国公达奚武率骑三万出平阳以应杨忠。
现代文：派太保、郑国公达奚武率领三万骑兵出平陨以策应杨忠。
English: He sent Taibao and Zheng Guogong Da Xunwu to lead 30,000 cavalry out of the plain to deal with Yang Zhong.

古文：是月，有人生子男，而阴在背后如尾，两足指如兽爪。
现代文：在这个月，有人生了个男孩，但小孩的阴茎像尾巴一样长在背后，两脚脚趾像兽爪。
English: This month, someone gave birth to a boy, but the child's penis grew behind his back like a tail, and his two toes looked like animal claws.

古文：有犬生子，腰以后分为二身，两尾六足。
现代文：有一条狗生小狗，小狗腰部以后分为两个身子，两条尾巴六只脚。
English: A dog gave birth to a puppy. After the puppy's waist, it was divided into two bodies, two tails and six legs.

古文：四年春正月庚申，杨忠破齐长城，至晋阳而还。
现代文：保定四年春季正月庚申日，杨忠攻破北齐长城，到晋阳后返回。
English: On the first day of the first month of the fourth spring of Baoding, Yang Zhong broke through the North Qi Great Wall and returned to Jinyang.

古文：二月庚寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：二月庚寅初一，太阳出现亏蚀。
English: On the first day of the second lunar month, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：甲午，荧惑犯房右骖。
现代文：甲午，火星侵犯房宿右骖星。
English: In the afternoon of the 1st, Mars encroaches on the house of the right planet.

古文：三月己未，荧惑又犯房右骖。
现代文：三月己末日。火星又侵犯房宿右黪星。
English: March has come to an end. Mars has encroached on the right-hand side of the house.

古文：庚辰，初令百官执笏。
现代文：庚辰，开始命令百官朝见时手执笏板。
English: Geng Chen began to order all officials to hold the gong board in their hands when meeting in the morning.

古文：夏四月癸卯，以柱国、邓公窦炽为大宗伯。
现代文：夏季四月癸卯曰，任命柱国、邓公宝炽为大宗伯。
English: In the summer of April, Zhu Guo and Deng Gongbao were appointed as grand patriarchs.

古文：五月壬戌，封世宗长子贤为毕国公。
现代文：五月壬戌曰，封世宗的长子宇文贤为毕国公。
English: In May, Fuxizong's eldest son, Uwenxian, became the Duke of Bi Province.

古文：丁卯，突厥遣使献方物。
现代文：丁卯曰，突厥派使者前来贡献当地土特产。
English: Dingwu said that the Turks sent emissaries to contribute local special products.

古文：癸酉，以大将军、安武公李穆为柱国。
现代文：癸酉，任命大将军、安武公李穆为柱国。
English: , appointed the great general, Anwukong Li Mu as the pillar country.

古文：丁亥，改礼部为司宗，大司礼为礼部，大司乐为乐部。
现代文：丁亥日，改礼部为司宗，大司礼为礼部，大司乐为乐部。
English: On Dinghai Day, the Ministry of Ceremonies was changed to the Ministry of Religion, the Ministry of Ceremonies to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Ministry of Music to the Ministry of Music.

古文：六月庚寅，改御伯为纳言。
现代文：六月庚寅，改御伯中大夫为纳言。
English: In June, Geng Yin was promoted to the post of Imperial Junior High School Doctor.

古文：秋七月戊午，特遣使献方物。
现代文：秋季七月戊午曰，粟特派使者进献土产。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the seventh month in autumn, the Maotai sent an envoy to present local products.

古文：戊寅，焉耆遣使献名马。
现代文：戊寅，焉耆派使者进献名马。
English: Wu Yin, Yan Yan sent an envoy to present the famous horse.

古文：八月丁亥朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：八月丁亥初一，太阳有亏蚀。
English: In August, on the first day of the Chinese New Year, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：诏柱国杨忠率师与突厥东伐，至北河而还。
现代文：武帝下韶命令柱国杨忠率领军队与突厥一起向东讨伐，河后返回。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering Yang Zhong, the pillar state, to lead the army to the east together with the Turks and return after the river.

古文：戊子，以柱国齐公宪为雍州牧，许国公宇文贵为大司徒。
现代文：戊子日，任命柱国齐公宇文宪为雍州牧，许国公宇文贵为大司徒。
English: On the day of Bo Zi, Zhu Guo Qigong Yu Wen Xian was appointed as Yongzhou pastor, and Xu Guo Guo Guo Yu Wen Gui was appointed as the chief disciple.

古文：九月丁巳，以柱国、卫国公直为大司空，封开府李昞为唐国公，若干凤为徐国公。
现代文：九月丁巳，任命柱国、卫国公宇文直为大司空。封开府李晒为唐国公，若干凤为徐国公。
English: In September, Zhu Guo and Wei Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo Guo.

古文：陈遣使来聘。
现代文：陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: Chen Guo sent an emissary to ask for a truce.

古文：是月，以皇世母阎氏自齐至，大赦天下。
现代文：在这个月，因为皇世母阎氏从北齐来到长安，大赦天下。
English: In this month, because the empress dowager Yan clan came to Chang'an from North Qi, the world was amnestied.

古文：闰月己亥，以大将军韦孝宽、大将军长孙俭并为柱国。
现代文：闰九月己亥曰，任命大将军韦孝宽、大将军长孙俭同为柱国。
English: In September, General Wei Xiaokuan and General Sun Jian were appointed as pillar countries.

古文：冬十月癸亥，以大将军陆通、大将军宇文盛、蔡国公广并为柱国。
现代文：冬季十月癸亥，任命大将军陆通、大将军宇文盛、蔡国公宇文广同为柱国。
English: In the winter of October, General Lu Tong, General Wu Wensheng, Cai Guogong and U Wenguang were appointed as pillar countries.

古文：甲子，诏大将军、大冢宰、晋国公护率军伐齐，帝于太庙庭授以斧钺。
现代文：甲子曰，诏令大将军、大冢宰、晋国公宇文护率军讨伐北齐，武帝在太庙大庭授其斧钹。
English: Gao Zi said that the emperor had ordered the general, the grand vizier, and the prince of Jin, Wen Rong, to lead the army to fight against the Northern Qi, and Emperor Wu awarded him the axe in the Great Court of the Great Temple.

古文：于是护总大军出潼关，大将军权景宣率山南诸军出豫州，少师杨摽出关。
现代文：于是宇文护统领大军出潼关，大将军权景宣率山南各军出豫州，少师杨尉出轵关。
English: As a result, Uwen Guo led the army out of Shaoguan, General Quan Jingxuan led the Shannan armies out of Yuanzhou, and Young Master Yang Li led the army out of Shaoguan.

古文：丁卯，幸沙苑劳师。
现代文：丁卯曰，武帝前往沙苑慰劳军队。
English: Dingwu said that Emperor Wu went to Shayuan to comfort the troops.

古文：癸酉，还宫。
现代文：癸酉曰，返回宫中。
English: On the 13th, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：十一月甲午，柱国、蜀国公尉迟迥率师围洛阳，柱国、齐国公宪营于邙山，晋公护次于陕州。
现代文：十一月甲午曰，柱国、蜀国公尉迟迥率军包围洛阳，柱国、齐国公宇文宪驻守却山，晋公宇文护驻在陕州。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, Zhiguo and Shu Guo's lieutenant Chi Xi led an army to encircle Luoyang. Zhuguo and Qi Guo's Gongwu Wenxian was stationed in Heshan, and Jin Guo's Gongwu Wengu was stationed in Shaanxi.

古文：十二月，权景宣攻齐豫州，刺史王士良以州降。
现代文：十二月，权景宣进攻北齐豫州，豫州刺史王士良率全州投降。
English: In December, Quan Jingxuan launched an attack on North Qi and Yuzhou, and Yuzhou's best general, Wang Shishi, led the entire state to surrender.

古文：壬戌，齐师渡河，晨至洛阳，诸军惊散。
现代文：壬戌，北齐军队渡过黄河，在清晨抵达洛阳，北周各军惊恐溃散。
English: After crossing the Yellow River, the Northern Qi army arrived in Luoyang in the early morning. The Northern Zhou armies were terrified and dispersed.

古文：尉迟迥率麾下数十骑扞敌，得却，至夜引还。
现代文：尉迟迥率领部下几十个骑兵抵御敌军，得以退却，到夜晚返回。
English: He led dozens of cavalrymen to resist the enemy army, was able to retreat, and returned at night.

古文：柱国、庸国公王雄力战，死之。
现代文：柱国、庸国公王雄竭力迎战，战死。
English: Prince Takao of pillar country and Yongguk made every effort to go to war, but died in battle.

古文：遂班师。
现代文：于是周军班师。
English: Then the class teacher came out.

古文：杨摽于轵关战没。
现代文：杨尉在软关覆没。
English: Lieutenant Yang lost in the soft pass.

古文：权景宣亦弃豫州而还。
现代文：权景宣也放弃豫州退回。
English: Quan Jingxuan also gave up and returned to Yuzhou.

古文：五年春正月甲申朔，废朝，以庸国公王雄死王事故也。
现代文：保定五年春季正月甲申初一，停止朝会，这是因为庸国公王雄因公而死的缘故。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year of Jiaxing in the spring of Baoding in the fifth year, the imperial court meeting was stopped, this was due to the death of the prince of Yongguo.

古文：辛卯，白虹贯日。
现代文：辛卯曰，太阳周围出现光环。
English: Xinwu said that a halo appeared around the sun.

古文：庚子，令荆州、安州、江陵等总管并隶襄州总管府，以柱国、大司空、卫国公直为襄州总管。
现代文：庚子日，下令荆州、安州、江陵等州总管共同隶属于襄州总管府，任命柱国、大司空、卫国公宇文直为襄州总管。
English: On the day of Geng Zi, he ordered the governors-general of Jingzhou, Anzhou, Gangneung and other provinces to be jointly subordinated to the General Administration Office of Xiangzhou, and appointed Zhu Guo, Dai Si Kuo, and Wei Guo Gong Yu Wenzhong as the general administrators of Xiangzhou.

古文：甲辰，太白、荧惑、岁星合于娄。
现代文：甲辰，太白星、火星、岁星相会于娄宿。
English: The Jia Chen, the Taibai Star, the Mars, and the Year Star will meet in Pengshu.

古文：乙巳，吐谷浑遣使献方物。
现代文：乙巳曰，吐谷浑派使者前来贡献土产。
English: It is said that Tukoku Hun sent an envoy to contribute to the local production.

古文：以庸国公王雄世子开府谦为柱国。
现代文：任命庸国公王雄的嫡长子开府王谦为柱国。
English: He appointed the eldest legitimate son of Prince Yang Guo Wangxiong, Kaifu Wang Qian, as a pillar state.

古文：二月辛酉，诏陈国公纯、柱国许国公宇文贵、神武公窦毅、南安公杨等，如突厥逆女。
现代文：二月辛酉曰，诏令陈国公宇文纯、柱国许国公字文贵、神武公窦毅、南安公杨荐等人，前往突厥迎接突厥公主。
English: In February, Xin Xin said that he had ordered Chen Guogong Yu Wenzhun, Zhu Guo Xu Guogong Zi Wengui, Shenwu Guo Dou Yi, Nan'an Guo Yang Wei and others to go to Turkey to meet the Turkish princess.

古文：甲子，郢州获绿毛龟。
现代文：甲子曰，郢州捕获一只绿毛龟。
English: According to Kosi, a green turtle was caught in Luzhou.

古文：丙寅，以柱国安武公李穆为大司空，绥德公陆通为大司寇。
现代文：丙寅，任命柱国安武公李穆为大司空，绥德公陆通为大司寇。
English: Cui Yin appointed the pillar country Anwu Gong Li Mu as the grand secretary of the sky, and Shide Gong Lu Tong as the grand secretary of the sky.

古文：壬申，行幸岐州。
现代文：壬申日，武帝前往岐州。
English: On Jinshin Day, Emperor Wu went to Qizhou.

古文：三月戊子，柱国、楚国公豆卢宁薨。
现代文：三月戊子曰，柱国、楚国公豆卢宁去世。
English: March Bosi said that Zhu Guo and Chu Guo Gongzu Luning passed away.

古文：夏四月，齐武成禅位于其太子纬，自称太上皇帝。
现代文：夏季四月，齐武成帝高湛禅位给太子高纬，自称太上皇帝。
English: In the summer of April, Qiwu Chengdi Gaozhan gave the throne to the prince Gaowei, claiming to be the supreme emperor.

古文：五月丙戌，以皇族父兴为大将军，袭虞国公封。
现代文：五月内戌曰，任命皇族父宇文兴为大将军，承袭虞国公的封号。
English: In May, the father of the imperial family, Uwen Xing, was appointed grand general, inheriting the title of Yu Guogong.

古文：己亥，诏左右武伯各置中大夫一人。
现代文：己亥日，诏令左右武伯各自设置中大夫一人。
English: On the day of Ji Hai, Wu Bo ordered the left and right to each set up a junior doctor.

古文：六月庚申，彗星出三台，入文昌，犯上将，后经紫宫西垣入危，渐长一丈余，指室、壁。
现代文：六月庚申，有彗星在三台星出现，流入文昌星，侵犯上将星，后来经过紫宫西垣进入危宿，逐渐增长至一丈多长，指向室宿、壁宿。
English: In June, Koshin, a comet appeared in the three stars, flowing into the Moon Chang star, invading the Admiral star, and then passing through the Purple Palace West Wall to enter the dangerous place, gradually growing to a height and a length, pointing to the room and the wall.

古文：后百余日，稍短，长二尺五寸，在虚、危灭。
现代文：后来一百多天，逐渐减短，长二尺五寸，在虚宿、危宿消失。
English: After more than a hundred days, it gradually became shorter and shorter, reaching two feet and five inches in length, and disappearing in empty and dangerous lodgings.

古文：辛未，诏曰： 江陵人年六十五以上为官奴婢者，已令放免。
现代文：辛未日，武帝下韶说： 江陵人年龄在六十五岁以上为官家奴婢的，已经下令释放。
English: On the eve of Xin's death, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: "People in Gangneung who are over 65 years old and are servants of officials have been ordered to be released.

古文：其公私奴婢有年至七十以外者，所在官司，宜赎为庶人。 
现代文：公私奴婢有年龄到了七十岁以上的，其所在的官府，应当将他们赎身为平民。 
English: If there are public or private servants who have reached the age of seventy or more, the government office where they are located should redeem them as civilians.

古文：秋七月辛巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：秋季七月辛巳初一，太阳有亏蚀。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：庚寅，行幸秦州。
现代文：庚寅曰，武帝前往秦州。
English: Geng Yin said that Emperor Wu went to Qinzhou.

古文：降死罪以下。
现代文：死罪以下的犯人降罪。
English: Prisoners sentenced to less than the death penalty will have their sentences commuted.

古文：辛丑，遣大使巡察天下。
现代文：辛丑日，派大使巡察全国。
English: On the day of Xinwu, he sent an ambassador to inspect the whole country.

古文：八月丙子，至自秦州。
现代文：八月丙子曰，武帝从秦州回到长安。
English: August Cixi said that Emperor Wu returned to Chang'an from Qinzhou.

古文：九月乙巳，益州献三足乌。
现代文：九月乙巳日，益州进献三足乌。
English: In September, on the Day of the Snake, Ikshu offered three feet of wax.

古文：冬十月辛亥，改函谷关城为通洛防。
现代文：冬季十月辛亥，将函谷关城改为通洛防。
English: In the winter, in October of Xinhai, they changed the name of the pass from "Hanggu Guancheng" to "Tongluofen."

古文：十一月庚辰，岐州上言一角兽见。
现代文：十一月庚辰曰，岐州上书称有一只角的野兽出现。
English: In November, Geng Chen said that a report from Qizhou claimed that a horned beast had appeared.

古文：甲午，吐谷浑遣使献方物。
现代文：甲午曰，吐谷浑派使者来贡献土产。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Tugu Hun sent an envoy to contribute to local production.

古文：丁未，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：丁末日，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: On the last day of the month of Ding, Chen Guo sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：天和元年春正月己卯，日有蚀之。
现代文：玉曲元年春季正月己卯日，太阳有亏蚀。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Yuqu, the sun was eclipsed.

古文：辛巳，露寝成，幸之。
现代文：辛巳曰，露寝建成，武帝前往那裹。
English: Xin Mi said that the dew bed was completed, and Emperor Wu went there.

古文：令群臣赋古诗，京邑耆老并预会焉，颁赐各有差。
现代文：下令群臣作古诗，京城老人都参加聚会，武帝给他们颁发的赏赐多少不等。
English: He ordered his courtiers to compose ancient poems, the old men of the capital took part in gatherings, and Emperor Wu awarded them varying amounts of rewards.

古文：癸未，大赦改元，百官普加四级。
现代文：癸末日，大赦天下更改年号，百官普遍晋升四级。
English: At the end of the day, the general amnesty changed the year, and hundreds of officials were generally promoted to the fourth level.

古文：己亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：己亥曰，武帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wu personally cultivated his ancestral fields.

古文：丁未，于宕昌置宕州。
现代文：丁末日，在宕昌设置宕州。
English: At the end of the Ding Dynasty, the state of Tangshu was set up in Tangchang.

古文：以柱国、昌宁公长孙俭为陕州总管。
现代文：任命柱国、昌宁公长逐俭为座州总管。
English: He appointed Zhuang Guo and Changning Gongchang as the chief administrators of Zhazhou.

古文：遣小载师杜杲使于陈。
现代文：派小载师杜呆出使陈国。
English: He sent Xiao Jia Shi Du Dao to dispatch Chen Guo.

古文：二月戊申，以开府、中山公训为蒲州总管。
现代文：二月戊申，任命开府、中山公宇文训为蒲州总管。
English: In February, he appointed the founder of the prefecture, Zhongshan Gongyu Wenxun, as the general manager of Puzhou.

古文：戊辰，诏三公已下各举所知。
现代文：戊辰日，诏令三公以下的官员各自推举自己了解的人。
English: On the day of Pentecost, the emperor decreed that officials below the three princes should each nominate someone they knew.

古文：庚午，日斗，光遂微，日里乌见。
现代文：庚午曰，太阳被撞击，光芒逐渐微弱，太阳裹出现黑色。
English: On the afternoon of the 7th, the sun was hit, the light gradually weakened, and the sun appeared black.

古文：三月丙午，祠南郊。
现代文：三月丙午日，武帝到南郊祭天。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month, Emperor Wu went to the southern suburbs to hold a festival.

古文：夏四月己酉，益州献三足乌。
现代文：夏季四月己酉曰，益州进献三足乌。
English: In the summer of April, the three-legged worm was presented in Yizhou.

古文：辛亥，雩。
现代文：辛亥曰，举行祈雨祭典。
English: Xinhai said that it was time to hold a rain festival.

古文：甲子，日有交晕，白虹贯之。
现代文：甲子曰，太阳出现交错的光晕，在太阳周围出现光环。
English: According to Kosi, a staggered halo of light appeared on the sun, and a halo appeared around the sun.

古文：是月，陈文帝薨，子伯宗嗣立。
现代文：在这个月，陈文帝逝世，他的儿子陈伯宗继位。
English: In this month, Emperor Chen died, and his son Chen Bozong succeeded him.

古文：五月庚辰，帝御正武殿，集群臣亲讲礼记。
现代文：五月庚辰日，武帝前往正武殿，招集大臣们亲自宣讲《礼记》。
English: On the day of Gengchen in May, Emperor Wu went to the Zhengwu Palace and summoned the ministers to personally preach the "Rituals."

古文：吐谷浑龙涸王莫昌率户内附，以其地为扶州。
现代文：吐谷浑龙涸王慕容莫昌率领他的部落归附北周，武帝把他的地区改为扶州。
English: King Murong Mochang of the Tuy Valley led his tribe to be annexed to Northern Zhou, and Emperor Wu changed his region to Fuzhou.

古文：甲午，诏曰： 道德交丧，礼义嗣兴。
现代文：甲午曰，武帝下诏说： 道德交替沦丧，礼义连续兴起。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the year, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying, "Morality has alternately fallen into ruin, and propriety and righteousness have continuously risen."

古文：褒四始于一言，美三千于为敬。
现代文：对《诗经》四始的褒扬概括为一句话，对三千诗篇的赞美集中为恭敬处事。
English: The praise of the four beginnings of the "Song of Songs" is summarized in one sentence, and the praise of the three thousand poems is treated with respect.

古文：是以在上不骄，处满不溢，富贵所以长守，邦国于焉乂安。
现代文：所以身居高位而不骄逸，在充盈时而不外流，富贵就会长久，国家就能安定。
English: Therefore, it is not arrogant to be in a high position, and it is not an outflow when it is full. The wealth will last for a long time, and the country will be stable.

古文：故能承天静地，和民敬鬼，明并日月，道错四时。
现代文：因而就能承奉天道安宁大地，和顺百姓敬事鬼神，与曰月一样光明，道德与四季相随。
English: As a result, they will be able to follow the heavenly way of peace and tranquility, respect ghosts and gods, and be as bright as the moon. Morality follows the four seasons.

古文：朕虽庸昧，有志前古。
现代文：朕虽然平庸昏昧，但也有效法先古的志向。
English: Although I am mediocre and dim-witted, I also have an ancient aspiration.

古文：甲子乙卯，礼云不乐。
现代文：在甲子、乙卯两天。按礼的讲法是不能奏乐的。
English: Two days in Koshi and Otsu. According to the etiquette, it is not possible to play music.

古文：苌弘表昆吾之稔，杜蒉有扬觯之文。
现代文：苌弘表彰昆吾的丰稔，晋平公接受杜黄谏静而停乐。
English: Gong Hong commended Kunwu's bountiful harvests, while Jin Ping Gong accepted Du Huang's harvests and quietly stopped playing.

古文：自世道丧乱，礼仪紊毁，此典茫然，已坠于地。
现代文：自从世道丧乱，礼仪紊毁，这种典制模糊不清，已经在世上衰落。
English: Since the world has been in turmoil and etiquette has been destroyed, this ceremony system is vague and has declined in the world.

古文：昔周王受命，请闻颛顼。
现代文：从前周王接受天命，请教颛顼时的礼仪。
English: Once upon a time, King Zhou accepted the Mandate of Heaven and asked for advice on the etiquette of mourning.

古文：庙有戒盈之器，室为复礼之铭。
现代文：在庙裹有警戒盈溢的器皿，在室中刻有恢复礼制的铭文。
English: In the temple, there is an abundance of sacred vessels, and in the room, there is an inscription on the restoration of the ritual system.

古文：矧伊末学，而能忘此。
现代文：何况我学识浅薄，怎么能够忘记造呢。
English: Besides, my knowledge is so shallow, how could I forget to make it?

古文：宜依是日，省事停乐。
现代文：应当在这两天，精简事务停止奏乐。
English: On these two days, we should streamline our affairs and stop playing music.

古文：庶知为君之难，为臣不易。
现代文：使大家知道做君主的艰难，为臣子的不易。
English: To let everyone know how hard it is to be a monarch, and how difficult it is to be a courtier.

古文：贻之后昆，殷鉴斯在。 
现代文：将它传给后人，记住殷商灭亡的教训。 
English: Pass it on to future generations, and remember the lesson of the demise of the Yin merchants.

古文：六月丙午，以大将军、枹罕公辛威为柱国。
现代文：六月丙午，任命大将军、袍罕公辛威为柱国。
English: In the afternoon of June 3rd, Xinwei, a general and robe-wearing nobleman, was appointed as a pillar state.

古文：秋七月戊寅，筑武功、郿、斜谷、武都、留谷、津坑诸城，以置军人。
现代文：秋季七月戊寅日，修筑武功、郧、斜谷、武都、留谷、津坑等城，用来安置军人。
English: In the autumn, on the seventh month, Wu Yin Day, the cities of Wukong, Zhou, Xizhou, Wudu, Lvgu, and Tsukeng were built to house soldiers.

古文：壬午，诏： 诸冑子入学，但束修于师，不劳释奠。
现代文：壬午曰，下诏： 各位王子入学，衹是送给教师十条干肉作为酬礼，不必举行置爵祭奠先师的礼仪。
English: On the morning of the ninth day of the ninth month, the following edict was issued: "All princes, upon entering the school, are to present ten pieces of dried meat to the teacher as a reward, and there is no need to hold a knighting ceremony to commemorate the teacher.

古文：释奠者，学成之祭，自今即为恒式。 
现代文：置爵祭奠先师，是学业完成后的祭礼，从今以后就作为固定的制度。 
English: The conferring of a knighthood on a pioneer is a ceremony that takes place after the completion of one's studies, and will henceforth be a fixed institution.

古文：八月己未，诏： 诸有三年之丧，或负土成坟，或寝苫骨立，一志一行，可称扬者，仰本部官司，随事言上。
现代文：八月己末日，下诏说： 那些有为父母守丧三年，有的背土堆成坟丘，有的睡卧在草席上形体消瘦，一志一行，值得赞扬的，希望本部官员，将其事迹奏报上来。
English: It was the last day of August, and the next edict said: "Those who have mourned for their parents for three years, some with their backs turned into mounds, some sleeping on straw mats, emaciated and deserving of praise, hope that the headquarters officials will report their deeds."

古文：当加吊勉，以厉薄俗。 
现代文：应当加以慰问勉励，以此振奋轻薄的风俗。 
English: They should be comforted and encouraged, so that frivolous customs will be uplifted.

古文：九月乙亥，信州蛮冉令贤、向五子王反，诏开府陆腾讨平之。
现代文：九月乙亥日，信州蛮冉令贤、向五子王造反，武帝下诏命开府陆腾讨伐平定了他们。
English: On September 21st, Shinshu rebelled against Wuzi Wang, and Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering the Luiteng Campaign to be launched against them.

古文：冬十月乙卯，太白昼见，经天。
现代文：冬季十月乙卯日，太白星在白天出现，横越天空。
English: On October 1st, a winter's day, a very white star appeared in the daytime and streaked across the sky.

古文：甲子，初造山云舞，以备六代之乐。
现代文：甲子日，开始编造《山云儸》，以完备夏商周秦汉魏六代的舞乐。
English: On the first day of the year, he began to compose "Mountain Cloud Dance" to complete the dance music of the six generations of Xia Shang, Zhou, Qin, Han and Wei.

古文：十一月丙戌，行幸武功等新城。
现代文：十一月丙戌曰，武帝前往武功等新城。
English: In November, Emperor Wu went to Wugong and other new cities.

古文：十二月庚申，还宫。
现代文：十二月庚申曰。返回宫中。
English: In December, Gosen returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：二年春正月癸酉朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：天和二年春季正月癸酉初一，出现日食。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：己亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：己亥，武帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wu personally cultivated his ancestral fields.

古文：三月癸酉，改武游园为道会苑。
现代文：三月癸酉曰，将武游园改名为道会苑。
English: On the third day of March, Wuyuan Garden was renamed as Taoist Association Garden.

古文：丁亥，初立郊丘坛壝制度。
现代文：丁亥日，开始建立郊丘坛谴制度。
English: On Dinghai Day, the establishment of the suburb hilltop ban system began.

古文：夏四月乙巳，省东南诸州：以颖州、归州、涢州、均州入唐州，油州入纯州，鸿州入淮州，洞州入湖州，睢州入襄州，宪州入昌州。
现代文：夏季四月乙巳曰，武帝视察东南各州：将颖州、归州、湏州、均州并入唐州，油州并入纯州，鸿州并入淮州，洞州并入湖州，睢州并入襄州，宪州并入昌州。
English: In the summer of April, Emperor Wu inspected the southeastern states: he merged Yingzhou, Guizhou, Zhangzhou and Junzhou into Tangzhou, Yuzhou into Chunzhou, Honzhou into Huaizhou, Dongzhou into Huzhou, Zhangzhou into Xiangzhou, and Genshou into Changzhou.

古文：以大将军、陈国公纯为柱国。
现代文：任命大将军、陈国公宇文纯为柱国。
English: He appointed General Chen Guogong and U Manchun as pillar states.

古文：五月壬申，突厥、吐谷浑、安息并遣使献方物。
现代文：五月壬申日，突厥、吐谷浑、安息都派使者前来进献当地土产。
English: On Jinshin Day in May, Turk, Tukugun, and Sabo all sent envoys to present their local products.

古文：丁丑，进封柱国、安武公李穆为申国公。
现代文：丁丑日，进封柱国、安武公李穆为申国公。
English: On the day of Dingwushi, Anwu's son, Li Mu, became the ruler of Sheng.

古文：己丑，岁星与荧惑合于井。
现代文：己丑曰，岁星和火星在井宿相聚。
English: It is said that the year star and Mars meet at the well.

古文：六月辛亥，尊所生叱奴氏为皇太后。
现代文：六月辛亥曰，武帝尊奉生母叱奴氏为皇太后。
English: In June of Xinhai, Emperor Wu was crowned empress dowager in honor of his real mother.

古文：甲子，月入毕。
现代文：甲子曰，月亮侵入毕宿。
English: According to Kosi, the moon enters the house at the end of the night.

古文：闰月庚午，地震。
现代文：闰六月庚午日，发生地震。
English: On the afternoon of leap June, an earthquake occurred.

古文：戊寅，陈湘州刺史华皎率众来附，遣襄州总管卫国公直率柱国绥公陆通、大将军田弘、权景宣、元定等，将兵援之，因而南伐。
现代文：戊寅日，陈国湘州刺史华皎率众前来归附，武帝派襄州总管卫国公宇文直率柱国绥德公陆通、大将军田弘、权景宣、元定等人，带兵支援他，趁机南伐。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, Chen Guo, Xiang Zhou, Zhi Shi, Huayu led the crowd to come and join, and Emperor Wu sent Yang Zhou's general manager Wei Guo, Uwen Zhi, Guo Zhe De, Gong Lu Tong, General Tian Hong, Quan Jing Xuan, Yuan Ding and others to support him and take advantage of the opportunity to march south.

古文：壬辰，以大将军、谯国公俭为柱国。
现代文：壬辰曰，任命大将军、谯国公宇文俭为柱国。
English: Imjin said, appointing the great general, Min Guo Gongwu Wenjian as the pillar country.

古文：丁酉，岁星、太白合于柳。
现代文：丁酉曰，岁星、太白星在柳宿相聚。
English: Ding Hao said that the stars of the year and the stars of Taibai were gathered in the willow lodge.

古文：戊戌，襄州上言庆云见。
现代文：戊戌日，襄州上奏称有祥云出现。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th lunar month, there was an auspicious cloud in the sky over Yangzhou.

古文：秋七月辛丑，梁州上言凤凰集于枫树，群鸟列侍以万数。
现代文：秋季七月辛丑日，梁州上奏称有凤凰聚集在枫树上，数以万计的鸟在周围侍立。
English: On an ugly day in autumn in July, Liangzhou reported that there were phoenixes gathered on maple trees, with tens of thousands of birds standing around.

古文：甲辰，立露门学，置生七十二人。
现代文：甲辰日，设立露门学，安置学生七十二人。
English: On the first day of the year, Lumen School was established, and 72 students were placed there.

古文：庚戌，太白犯轩辕。
现代文：庚戌日，太白星侵犯轩辕星。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi Festival, the Taibai Star invaded the Xuan Zi Star.

古文：壬子，以太傅、燕国公于谨为雍州牧。
现代文：壬子曰，任命太傅、燕国公于谨为雍州牧。
English: Ren Zi said that the appointment of Taifu and Yan Guogong Yu Ji as Yongzhou herdsmen.

古文：九月，卫国公直等与陈将淳于量、吴明彻战于沌口，王师失利。
现代文：九月，卫国公宇文直等人和陈国将领淳于量、吴明彻在沌作战，王师失利。
English: In September, the defender of the country, Uwen Zhi, and other people, and Chen's generals, Chun Yu Quan and Wu Ming Che, fought in chaos, and Wang Shi was defeated.

古文：元定以步骑数千先度，遂没江南。
现代文：元定率几千步兵骑兵率先渡过长江，于是失陷在江南。
English: The original quota of several thousand infantry and cavalry took the lead in crossing the Yangtze River, only to be lost in the south of the river.

古文：冬十月辛卯，日出入时，有黑气一，大如杯，在日中。
现代文：冬季十月辛卯日，在太阳升起和落山时，有一团黑气，大如杯，处在太阳正中。
English: In winter, in October, on the hottest day, when the sun rises and sets, there is a black cloud, as big as a cup, in the middle of the sun.

古文：甲午，又加一焉。
现代文：甲午曰，又增加了一团黑气。
English: On the afternoon of the first day, a dark atmosphere was added.

古文：经六日乃灭。
现代文：经过六天才消失。
English: It took six days for it to disappear.

古文：十一月戊戌朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月戊戌初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the lunar new year in November, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：癸丑，太保、许国公宇文贵薨。
现代文：癸丑，太保、许国公宇文贵去世。
English: Gongushi, Taiho, Xu Guogong and Umengui passed away.

古文：三年春正月辛丑，祠南郊。
现代文：天和三年春季正月辛丑日，祭祀南郊。
English: On the first day of the first month of spring in the third year of the Heian period, the Southern Suburbs held a festival.

古文：二月丁卯，幸武功。
现代文：二月丁卯曰，武帝前往武功。
English: In February, Dingwu said, Emperor Wu went to Wugong.

古文：丁亥，还宫。
现代文：丁亥，返回宫中。
English: Dinghai, return to the palace.

古文：三月癸卯，皇后阿史那氏至自突厥。
现代文：三月癸卯曰，皇后阿史那氏从突厥抵达京师。
English: On the last day of March, the Empress Ashena arrived in Beijing from Turkey.

古文：甲辰，大赦天下，亡官失爵，并听复旧。
现代文：甲辰曰，大赦天下，丢失官爵的人，都恢复原职。
English: Jiachen said that the amnesty of the world, the people who lost their titles, have resumed their original duties.

古文：丁未，大会百寮及四方宾客于路寝，赐衣马钱帛各有差。
现代文：丁末日，在路寝大规模地会见百官和四方的宾客，赏赐衣服马匹钱财布帛各有不等。
English: In the last days of Ding, he met with hundreds of officials and guests from all over the world on a large scale, and rewarded clothes, horses, money, cloth and so on.

古文：甲寅，以柱国陈国公纯为秦州总管，蔡国公广为陕州总管。
现代文：甲寅日，任命柱国陈国公宇文纯为秦州总管，蔡国公字文广为陕州总管。
English: On July 1, Zhuangguo Chen Guogong Yu Wenzhong was appointed as the general manager of Qin Province, and Cai Guogong Zi Wenguang was appointed as the general manager of Shaanxi Province.

古文：戊午，太傅、柱国、燕国公于谨薨。
现代文：戊午，太傅、柱国、燕国公于谨去世。
English: At noon, Taifu, Zhu Guo, and Yan Guo Gong passed away.

古文：己未，太白犯井北轩第一星。
现代文：己末日，太白星侵犯井宿北轩的第一颗星。
English: At the end of the day, Taibai Star encroached on the first star of Jingjuku Beixuan.

古文：夏四月辛巳，以太保、郑国公达奚武为太傅，大司马、蜀国公尉迟迥为太保，柱国、齐国公宪为大司马。
现代文：夏季四月辛巳曰，任命太保、郑国公达奚武为太傅，大司马、蜀国公尉迟迥为太保，柱国、齐国公宇文宪为大司马。
English: In the summer of April, Xin Mi said that he would appoint Tai Bao, Zheng Guo Gong Darwen Wu as Tai Fu, Da Sima, Shu Guo Guo Guo Guo Bei as Tai Bao, and Zhu Guo and Qi Guo Gong Uwen Xian as Da Sima.

古文：太白入舆鬼，犯积尸。
现代文：太白星进入舆鬼宿，侵犯积尸星。
English: Taibai Xing enters the haunted house and invades the Zhezhu Star.

古文：五月庚戌，祠太庙。
现代文：五月庚戌，祭祀太庙。
English: In May, Geng Zi, a ritual is held at the Grand Temple.

古文：庚申，行幸醴泉宫。
现代文：庚申曰，武帝前往醴泉宫。
English: Emperor Wu is on his way to Quanquan Palace.

古文：六月甲戌，有星孛于东井，北行一月，至舆鬼，乃灭。
现代文：六月甲戌曰，有彗星在东井宿出现，向北运行了一个月，到达舆鬼宿，才消失。
English: In June, a comet appeared in Higashii-juku, traveled northward for a month, and arrived at Utsugi-juku before disappearing.

古文：秋七月壬寅，柱国、随国公杨忠薨。
现代文：秋季七月壬寅，柱国、随国公杨忠去世。
English: In the autumn, in July of Ren Yin, Yang Zhong, the pillar country and the follower country, passed away.

古文：戊午，至自醴泉宫。
现代文：戊午，武帝从醴泉宫返回。
English: At noon, Emperor Wu returned from the Spring Palace.

古文：己未，客星见房，渐东行入天市，犯营室，至奎，四十余日乃灭。
现代文：己末日，客星出现在房宿，慢慢向东运行到天市，侵犯营室，抵达奎宿，四十多天才消失。
English: At the end of the day, the guest star appeared in the rooming house, slowly ran east to Tianshi, invaded the camp room, arrived at Kui accommodation, and disappeared for more than forty days.

古文：八月乙丑，韩国公元罗薨。
现代文：八月乙丑，韩国公元罗去世。
English: August Second Ugly, Korea AD Luo died.

古文：齐请和亲，遣使来聘，诏军司马陆逞、兵部尹公正报聘焉。
现代文：北齐请求和亲，派使者前来聘问修好，武帝下韶派军司马陆逞、兵部尹公正答聘。
English: Beiqi requested a reconciliation and sent an envoy to ask for an amicable settlement. Emperor Wu sent the military commander Ma Lu Gang and the commander of the military department Yin Zhengyi to ask for amicable settlement.

古文：癸酉，帝御大德殿，集百僚及沙门、道士等亲讲礼记。
现代文：癸酉曰，武帝前往大德殿，招集百官和僧人、道士等亲自宣讲《礼记》
English: On the same day, Emperor Wu went to the Great Hall of the People and summoned hundreds of officials, monks and Taoists to personally preach the "Rituals"

古文：九月庚戌，太白与镇星合于角。
现代文：九月庚戌，太白星和镇星在角宿会合。
English: In September, Geng Yao, Taibai Xing and Zhen Xing met in Jiuyuan.

古文：冬十月癸亥，祠太庙。
现代文：冬季十月癸亥，祭祀太庙。
English: In winter, in October, at the time of the Year of the Boar, there is a ritual at the Imperial Temple.

古文：丙戌，太白入氐。
现代文：丙戌，太白星侵入氐宿。
English: Propylene glycol, too white stars invade our homes.

古文：丁亥，上亲率六军讲武于城南，京邑观者，舆马弥漫数十里，诸蕃使咸在焉。
现代文：丁亥曰，皇上亲自率领六军在城南举行军事演习，京城观看的人，车马连绵几十里，各藩国的使者也都在那裹。
English: Ding Hai said that the emperor personally led the six armies to hold military exercises in the south of the city, and the people watching in the capital were tens of miles apart, and the emissaries of the feudal states were also there.

古文：十一月壬辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一月壬辰初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of November, a partial solar eclipse occurred.

古文：甲辰，行幸岐阳。壬子，遣开府崔彦穆、小宾部元晖使于齐。
现代文：甲辰日，武帝前往岐阳，壬子曰，派开府崔彦穆、小宾部元晖出使北齐。
English: On the 1st day of the 1st month, Emperor Wu went to Qiyang. Ren Zi said that he would send the governor of Kaifu, Cui Yanmu, and the small guest, Yuan Xuan, to dispatch the Northern Qi.

古文：甲寅，陈安成王顼废其主伯宗而自立，是为宣帝。
现代文：甲寅，陈国安成王陈顼废黜君主伯宗而自立为帝，这就是陈宣帝。
English: Emperor Jia Yin, Emperor Chen Guoan, Emperor Chen Xi, Emperor Chen Zong, Emperor Chen Xuan, Emperor Chen Xuan.

古文：十二月丁丑，至自岐阳。
现代文：十二月丁丑日，运适从!
English: December Ding Ugly Day, good luck!

古文：是月，齐武成帝薨。
现代文：!蝎回宫。当月，变逮旦适去世。
English: ! The scorpion returned to the palace. That month, Zeng Fang Danshi passed away.

古文：四年春正月辛卯朔，废朝，以齐武成薨故也。
现代文：玉和四年春季正月辛卯初一，停止上朝，这是因为齐武成帝去世的缘故。
English: On the first day of the first month of Xinwu in the spring of the fourth year of the reign of Yuhe, the Shang Dynasty ceased to exist, which was due to the death of Qi Wucheng.

古文：遣司会、河阳公李纶等会葬于齐，仍吊赙焉。
现代文：派司会、河阳公李纶等人到北齐参加葬礼，接着又吊唁并赠送财物助丧。
English: He sent the presiding committee, Heyang Gong Li Jun and others to Beiqi to attend the funeral, followed by condolences and gifts of money and goods to help the funeral.

古文：二月癸亥，以柱国、昌宁公长孙俭为夏州总管。
现代文：二月癸亥，任命柱国、昌宁公长孙俭为夏州总管。
English: In February of the Year of the Rooster, Sun Jian, the prince of Zhuguo and Changning, was appointed as the general manager of Xiazhou.

古文：戊辰，帝御大德殿，集百僚、道士、沙门等讨论释老义。
现代文：戊辰，武帝前往大德殿，招集百官、道士、僧人等讨论佛教、道家教义。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu went to the Daede Hall and summoned hundreds of officials, Taoists, and monks to discuss Buddhism and Taoist teachings.

古文：岁星逆行，掩太微上将。
现代文：岁星逆着运行，遮掩住太微星垣的上将星。
English: The year star runs in the opposite direction, covering the general star of the too small star wall.

古文：庚午，有流星大如斗，出左摄提，流至天津，灭后，有声如雷。
现代文：庚午日，有像斗一样大的流星，在左摄提出现，流到天津，消失后，发出雷鸣般的声音。
English: On the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, a meteor as large as a bucket appeared in the left photo, flowed to Tianjin, and after disappearing, emitted a thunderous sound.

古文：夏四月巳，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：夏季四月己巳，北齐派使者前来聘问。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Qi sent an envoy to come and ask questions.

古文：五月己丑，帝制象经成，集百僚讲说。
现代文：五月己丑曰，武帝制定的《象经》完成，招集百官宣讲讨论。
English: In May, Jiushi said that the "Elephant Sutra" formulated by Emperor Wu had been completed, and summoned hundreds of officials to preach and discuss.

古文：封魏广平公子元谦为韩国公，以绍魏后。
现代文：封魏广平公的儿子元谦为韩国公，以继承魏的后嗣。
English: The son of Wei Guangping Gong, Yuan Qian, was named the Korean Gong to succeed Wei's heir.

古文：庚戌，行幸醴泉宫。
现代文：庚戌曰，武帝前往醴泉宫。
English: Emperor Wu is on his way to Quanquan Palace.

古文：丁巳，柱国、吴国公尉迟纲薨。
现代文：丁巳，柱国、吴国公尉迟纲去世。
English: Ding Si, Zhu Guo, Wu Guo Guo's lieutenant, passed away.

古文：六月，筑原州及泾州东城。
现代文：六月，修筑原州和泾州束城。
English: In June, the construction of Wonju and Yeoju Sokseong began.

古文：秋七月辛亥，至自醴泉宫。
现代文：秋季七月辛亥曰，武帝从醴泉宫返回。
English: In the autumn, in July of Xinhai, Emperor Wu returned from the Spring Palace.

古文：丁巳，突厥遣使献马。
现代文：丁巳曰，突厥派使者进献马匹。
English: Ding said that the Turks sent an envoy to present horses.

古文：八月庚辰，盗杀孔城防主，以其地入齐。
现代文：八月庚辰，盗贼杀死了孔城防主，将其地献给北齐。
English: In August, Gengchen, thieves killed Kongcheng's defender and dedicated his land to Beiqi.

古文：九月辛卯，遣柱国、齐国公宪率众于宜阳筑崇德等城。
现代文：九月辛卯日，派柱国、齐国公宇文宪率众在宜阳修筑崇德等城。
English: In September, he sent Zhu Guo and Qi Guo to build Chongde and other cities in Yiyang.

古文：冬十一月辛亥，柱国、昌宁公长孙俭薨。
现代文：冬季十一月辛亥日，柱国、昌宁公长孙俭去世。
English: In the winter of November, Xinhai Day, the pillar of the country, Sun Jian, Prince of Changning, passed away.

古文：十二月壬午，罢陇州。
现代文：十二月壬午，废除陇州。
English: At noon of December, Ganzhou was abolished.

古文：五年春二月己巳，邵惠公颢孙冑自齐来归。
现代文：玉巫五年春季二月己巳日，邵惠公宇文颢的孙子宇文胄从王生查归来。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Jade Witch, in February of the same year, Shao Huigong's grandson, Uwen Yao, returned from Wang Shengcha.

古文：改邵国公会为谭国公，封冑为邵国公。
现代文：改封迎凰公室塞盒为望国公，封宇文胄为邵国公。
English: The seal of Yinghuang Office was changed to Mokgukong, and the seal of Yuwenwen was changed to Shao Guogong.

古文：三月辛卯，进封柱国韦孝宽为郧国公。
现代文：三月辛卯日，进封柱国韦孝宽为郧国公。
English: On the day of Xinwu in March, Wei Xiaokang of Jinhu Province became the prince of Shandong Province.

古文：甲辰，初令宿卫官住关外者，将家累入京，不乐者，解宿卫。
现代文：甲辰，开始下令住在关外的宿卫官，带领家人入京，不乐意的，解除宿卫官职。
English: Jiachen began to order the guards who lived outside of Guan to bring their families to Beijing, and he was not happy about this, so he dismissed the guards.

古文：夏四月甲寅，以柱国宇文盛为大宗伯。
现代文：夏季四月甲寅曰，任命柱国宇文盛为大宗伯。
English: In the summer of April, Jia Yin said that Zhuang Guo Yu Wensheng was appointed as the grand patriarch.

古文：行幸醴泉宫。
现代文：基童前往醴泉宫。
English: The foundation children went to the Spring Palace.

古文：省帅都督官。
现代文：裁减了帅都督官。
English: The number of superintendents has been reduced.

古文：丙寅，遣大使巡天下。
现代文：丙寅曰，派大使巡视天下。
English: Cui Yin said that he would send an ambassador to inspect the world.

古文：以陈国公纯为陕州总管。
现代文：任命陈国公宇文纯为陕州总管。
English: Chen Guogong and U Wenzhong were appointed as the chief administrators of Shaanxi Province.

古文：六月壬辰，封开府梁睿为蒋国公。
现代文：六月壬辰，封开府梁睿为蒋国公。
English: In June of the same year, Liang Rui, the head of the newly-established prefecture, was enthroned as the Prince of Chiang Kai-shek.

古文：庚子，降宥罪人，并免逋租悬调等，以皇女生故也。
现代文：庚子曰，下韶宽赦罪人，并免除拖欠的租调，这是因为皇女降生的缘故。
English: Geng Zi said that the lower jaw forgives sinners and waives the arrears of rent, which is due to the birth of the princess.

古文：七月，盐州献白兔。
现代文：七月，盐丛进献白兔。
English: In July, white rabbits are offered to the salt piles.

古文：乙卯，至自醴泉宫。
现代文：乙卯，武帝从醴泉宣返回。
English: Meanwhile, Emperor Wu returned from Xuanquan Xuan.

古文：辛巳，以柱国、谯国公俭为益州总管。
现代文：辛巳，任命柱国、谯国公宇文俭为益业总管。
English: At the same time, Zhu Guo and Xing Guo appointed Gongwu Wenjian as the general manager of Yijie.

古文：九月己卯，太白、岁星合于亢。
现代文：九月己卯，太白星、岁星会聚在亢宿。
English: In September, the Taibai Star and the New Year Star will gather in Shibuya.

古文：冬十月辛巳朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：冬季十月辛巳初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of winter in October, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丙戌，太白、镇星合于氐。
现代文：丙戌曰，太白星、镇星会聚在氐宿。
English: He said that the Taibai Star and the Town Star would gather in Shibuya.

古文：丁酉，太傅、郑国公达奚武薨。
现代文：丁酉曰，太傅、郑国公达奚武去世。
English: Ding Rong said, "Grandmaster and Zheng Guogong Dadenwu passed away.

古文：十一月乙丑，追封章武孝公导为豳国公，以蔡国并于豳。
现代文：十一月乙丑曰，追封章武孝公宇文导为豳国公，将蔡国并入豳。
English: In November of the year of the Ox, Chihihai Zhang, Wu Xiaogong, and Wu Wenduo were appointed as the governors of the State of Qi, and Cai Guo was incorporated into the State of Qi.

古文：丁卯，柱国、豳国公广薨。
现代文：丁卯，柱国、豳国公宇文广去世。
English: Ding Wu, Zhu Guo, and Zang Guo died.

古文：十二月癸巳，大将军郑恪率师平越巂，置西宁州。
现代文：十二月癸巳日，大将军郑恪率军平定了越仑，设置西宁州。
English: On December 30th, the great general Zheng Ke led the army to pacify Yuelun and set up Xining Province.

古文：是冬，齐将斛律明月寇边，于汾北筑城，自华谷至于龙门。
现代文：这一年冬天，北齐将领斛律明月侵犯边境，在汾水北岸筑城，从华谷一直到龙门。
English: In the winter of that year, the Northern Qi general Bao Lu Ming Yue invaded the border and built a city on the north bank of Surabaya, stretching from Huaguo to Longmen.

古文：六年春正月己酉朔，废朝，以露门未成故也。
现代文：天和六年春季正月己酉初一，停止上朝，这是因为露门没有建成的缘故。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the sixth year, it stopped in the morning, because the dew gate was not built.

古文：诏柱国、齐国公宪率师御斛律明月。
现代文：武帝下诏命柱国、齐国公宇文宪率军抗击斛律明月。
English: Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering Zhu Guo and Qi Guo, led by Guo Yuwen Xian, to fight against Bao Lu Ming Yue.

古文：丁卯，以大将军张掖公王杰、谭国公会、鴈门公田弘、魏国公李晖等并为柱国。
现代文：丁卯日，任命大将军张掖公王杰、谭国公宇文会、雁门公田弘、魏国公李晖等人一同为柱国。
English: On the day of Dingwu, he appointed the great generals Zhang Ye, Wang Jie, Tan Guo, Uwen Hui, Ganmen, Tianhong, Wei Guo, and others as pillar countries.

古文：二月己丑夜，有苍云广三尺许经天，自戌加辰。
现代文：二月己丑夜，有三尺多宽的苍云横越天空，自戌时直至辰时。
English: In February, there is an ugly night, with thick clouds more than three feet wide stretching across the sky, from dusk until the small hours.

古文：三月己酉，齐国公宪自龙门度河，斛律明月退保华谷，宪攻拔其新筑五城。
现代文：三月己酉，齐国公宇文宪从龙门渡过黄河，斛律明月退守华谷，宇文宪攻下了斛律明月新修的五个城。
English: In March, Uwen Xian, the Prince of Qi, crossed the Yellow River from Longmen, and in May, the Prince of Luli retreated to Huaguan. Uwen Xian captured the five newly built cities of Luli.

古文：夏四月戊寅朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：夏季四月戊寅初一，出现日食。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：己卯，荧惑犯舆鬼。
现代文：己卯，火星侵犯舆鬼。
English: Mars encroaches on the public spirit.

古文：辛卯，信州蛮渠冉祖喜、冉龙骧举兵反，遣大将军赵誾率师讨平之。
现代文：辛卯，信州蛮首领冉祖喜、冉龙骧起兵造反，武帝派大将军趟间率兵讨伐平定了他们。
English: Xinwu, Shinshu barbarian leaders Ran Zuxi and Ran Longjun started a mutiny, and Emperor Wu sent a general to lead the troops to fight and defeat them.

古文：甲午，以柱国、燕国公于寔为凉州总管，大将军、杞国公亮为秦州总管。
现代文：甲午曰，任命柱国、燕国公于蹇为凉州总管，大将军、杞国公宇文亮为秦州总管。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the month, Zhu Guo and Yan Guo Guo were appointed as the general managers of Liangzhou, and the general manager of Qin State was appointed as the general manager of Qin State.

古文：庚子，以大将军、荥阳公司马消难为柱国。
现代文：庚子，任命大将军、荣阳公司马消难为柱国。
English: Geng Zi, appointed the great general, Rongyang company Ma Qian as the pillar country.

古文：陈国公纯、鴈门公田弘率师取齐宜阳等九城。
现代文：陈国公宇文纯、雁门公田弘率军攻下了北齐宜阳等九个城。
English: Chen Guogong, Wu Wenzhong, and Ganmeng Konda Hong led the army to capture nine cities including Yiyang in northern Qi.

古文：以大将军武安公侯莫陈琼、太安公阎庆、神武公窦毅、南阳公叱罗协、平高公侯伏侯龙恩并为柱国。
现代文：任命大将军武安公侯莫陈琼、太安公阎庆、神武公窦毅、南阳公叱罗协、平高公侯伏侯龙恩一同为柱国。
English: He appointed the generals, Prince Mo Chenqiong of Wu'an, Prince Yanqing of Tai'an, Prince Dou Yi of Shenwu, Prince Yanluo of Nanyang, and Prince Long En of Pinggao as pillar states.

古文：封开府斛斯征为岐国公，右宫伯长孙览为薛国公。
现代文：封开府斛斯征为岐国公，右宫伯长孙览为薛国公。
English: Fong Kaifu Guszheng became the Prince of Qi Province, and the Right Palace Chief Grandson Zhan became the Prince of Xue Province.

古文：五月癸卯，遣纳言郑诩使于陈。
现代文：五月癸卯，派纳言姜蝈出使速玺。
English: At the end of May, Pina said that Jiang Chen would send an envoy to speed up the process.

古文：丙寅，以大将军唐国公李昞、中山公训、杞国公亮、上庸公陆腾、安义公宇文丘、北平公寇绍、许国公宇文善、犍为公高琳、郑国公达奚震、陇东公杨纂、常山公于翼并为柱国。六月乙未，以大将军、太原公王柬为柱国。
现代文：丙寅，任命大将军唐凰公奎硒、土山公室塞划、担厘公邈、继陆誊、邀巡、公洼纽、许国公宇文善、犍为公直壁、郑国公达要雳、胧墓公扰籑、鲎山么工翼同为柱国。六月乙末日，任命大将军、太原公王柬为柱国。
English: Hsin-yin appointed the generals Tang Hoo-gong Kui-sen, Tsuchiyama Gong-chung Sa-kai, Tan-li Gong-kwan, Sui Lu-kwan, Ji-hwan, Gong-wa-nu, Xu Guo-gong Yu-wensen, Zhou Guo-gong Da-chung, Hsieh Tomb-gong Zha-kwan, and Shaoshan Gao-wings as pillar countries. At the end of June, he appointed the general, Taiyuan Gong-wang Ho-kwan as pillar country.

古文：是月，齐将段孝先攻陷汾州。
现代文：当月，北齐将领段孝先攻陷了汾州。
English: In the same month, Northern Qi general Duan Xiao was the first to attack and conquer Zhangzhou.

古文：秋七月乙丑，以大将军、越国公盛为柱国。
现代文：秋季七月乙丑曰，任命大将军、越国公宇文盛为柱国。
English: In the autumn, in July of the 2nd year of the 4th month, the great general, Yue Guo Gongwu Fumimori, was appointed as the pillar state.

古文：八月癸未，镇星、岁星、太白合于氐。
现代文：八月癸末日，镇星、岁星、太白星相聚在氐宿。
English: On the last day of August, the town star, the year star, and the white star gathered in Shibuya.

古文：九月庚申，月在娄，蚀之既，光不复。
现代文：九月庚申，月亮在娄宿，全食之后，月光没有恢复。
English: In September, at the time of the Koshin, the moon was in Oshuku. After the total eclipse, the moonlight did not return.

古文：癸酉，省掖庭四夷乐、后宫罗绮工人五百余人。
现代文：癸酉日，裁减掖庭四夷乐、后宫罗绮工人五百余人。
English: On the same day, more than 500 workers at the Imperial Court and the Imperial Palace were laid off.

古文：冬十月壬午，国公通薨。
现代文：冬季十月壬午曰，冀国公宇文通去世。
English: In the winter of October, on the afternoon of the 13th, Jigoku Gongyubentong passed away.

古文：乙未，遣右武伯谷会琨、御正蔡斌使于齐。
现代文：乙末日，派右武伯谷会琨、御正蔡斌出使北齐。
English: On the last day of the 2nd month, he sent the Right Wu Hokkien Council and the Emperor Cai Bin to dispatch the Northern Qi.

古文：壬寅，上亲率六军讲武于城南。
现代文：壬寅曰，皇上亲自率领六军在城南进行军事演习。
English: Ren Yin said that the emperor personally led the six armies to conduct military exercises in the south of the city.

古文：十一月壬子，以大将军梁国公侯莫陈芮、大将军李意并为柱国。
现代文：十一月壬子曰，任命大将军梁国公侯莫陈芮、大将军李意同为柱国。
English: In November, Ren Zi said that the general Liang Guoguang Mo Chenqi and the general Li Yitong were appointed as pillar countries.

古文：丙辰，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：丙辰，北齐派使者前来通问修好。
English: North Qi sent an envoy to Xingcheng to ask for a truce.

古文：丁巳，行幸散关。
现代文：丁巳曰，武帝前往散关。
English: Ding Si said that Emperor Wu was heading to Sankuan.

古文：十二月己丑，还宫。
现代文：十二月己丑曰，回宫。
English: In December, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：是冬，牛大疫，死者十六七。
现代文：在这年冬天，发生了人规模的牛瘟，十分之六七的牛死去。
English: In the winter of that year, human-scale rinderpest occurred, and six or seven out of ten cattle died.

古文：建德元年春正月戊午，帝幸玄都观，亲御法座讲说，公卿道俗论难，事毕还宫。
现代文：建德元年春季正月戊午日，武帝前往玄都塑，亲自坐在法座上宣讲，公卿道俗辩论喆难，事情完后回宫。
English: On the afternoon of the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of Jiande, Emperor Wu went to the Xuandu Sculpture and personally sat on the throne to preach. The nobles debated the customs and returned to the palace after the matter was over.

古文：降死罪及流罪一等，其五岁刑已下，并宥之。
现代文：将死罪和流放罪降罪一等，五年徒刑以下的，全都赦免。
English: The death penalty and the crime of exile will be reduced to first-degree crimes, and all those who have been sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment will be pardoned.

古文：二月癸酉，遣大将军、昌城公深使于突厥，司李际、小宾部贺遂礼使于齐。
现代文：二月癸酉，派大将军、昌城公宇文深出使突厥，司宗李际、小宾部贺遂礼出使北齐。
English: At the end of February, he sent the general, Changcheng Gongyu Wenshen, as envoy to Turkey, and Sizong Lijie and Xiaobinbu He Suirei as envoys to the Northern Qi.

古文：乙酉，柱国、安义公宇文丘薨。
现代文：乙酉曰，柱国、安义公字文丘去世。
English: Yitong said that Zhuangguo, An Yikong and Wenqiu passed away.

古文：三月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：三月癸卯初一，发生食。
English: The first day of March is the New Year's Day, with a solar eclipse.

古文：齐遣使来聘。
现代文：韭蛮派使者前来通问修好。
English: The barbarians sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：丙辰，诛大冢宰晋国公护、护子柱国谭国公会、会弟大将军莒国公至、崇业公静，并柱国侯伏侯龙恩、龙恩弟大将军万寿、大将军刘勇等。
现代文：丙辰日，诛杀大冢宰晋国公宇文护、室塞盏的儿子谭凰公室塞会、室塞盒的弟弟大将军莒国公字主至、塞数字一文静，以及柱国堡丛堡蓝墨、侯伏侯龙恩的弟弟大将军侯伏侯万寿、大将军刘勇等。
English: On the tenth day of the ninth month, he killed the grand vizier of the State of Jin, Gongwu Wenzhou, the son of the ruler of the State of Tanhu, the ruler of the State of Tanhu, the brother of the ruler of the State of Jin, Zhaozhu Zhizhi, the brother of the ruler of the State of Jin, and the brother of the ruler of the State of Jin, Zhuozhu Lanmo, the brother of the ruler of the State of Jin, the brother of the ruler of the State of Jin, the son of the ruler of the State of Jin, Tanhuang, the brother of the ruler of the State of Jin, the brother of

古文：大赦，改元。
现代文：大赦，更改年号。
English: An amnesty will be implemented and the year will be changed.

古文：罢中外府。
现代文：废除中外府。
English: Chugai-fu abolished.

古文：癸亥，以太傅、蜀国公尉迟迥为太师，柱国邓国公窦炽为太傅，大司空、申国公李穆为太保，齐国公宪为大冢宰，卫国公直为大司徒，赵国公招为大司空，柱国枹罕公辛威为大司寇，绥德公陆通为大司马。
现代文：癸亥日，任命太傅、蜀国公尉迟迥为太师，柱国邓国公宣烬为太傅，大司空、空国公李穆为太保，齐国公宇文宪为大冢宰，街凰公室塞直为大司徒，赵国公宇文招为大司空，柱国袍罕公辛威为大司寇，绥德公陆通为大司马。
English: On the first day of the Year of the Dog, Taifu and Shu Guo Guo Guo Guo were appointed as Taifu, Zhu Guo Deng Guo Guo Xuan Em was appointed as Taifu, Daishi Kuo and Kuo Guo Guo Li Mu were appointed as Taibo, Qi Guo Guo Guo Guo Uwen Xian was appointed as Daizai, Jiao Guo Guo Guo Guo Uwen Zhao was appointed as Daishi Kuo, Zhuo Guo Guo Guo Han Guo Xin Wei was appointed as Daishi Kou, and Baide Guo Guo Lu Tong was appointed as Daishi Ma.

古文：诏曰： 民亦劳止，则星动于天；作事不时，则石言于国。
现代文：下韶说： 百姓太辛劳，则星星在天上流动；做事不合时令，则石头也会在国中说话。
English: The lower jaw said: If the people are too hard-working, the stars will flow in the sky; if the work is not timely, the stones will also speak in the country.

古文：故知为政欲静，静在宁民；为治欲安，安在息役。
现代文：所以知道处理政务要清静，清静在于安宁百姓；治理国家要平安，平安在于停止劳役。
English: Therefore, we know that the handling of government affairs should be calm, and the calmness lies in the tranquility of the people; the governance of the country should be safe, and the safety lies in stopping the labor service.

古文：顷兴造无度，征发不已，加以频岁师旅，农亩废业。
现代文：近来兴建修造没有节制，征调不止，加上连年战争，使得农田荒废。
English: Recently, there has been no restraint in building and construction, more and more requisitions and transfers, coupled with years of war, making farmland wasteful.

古文：去秋灾蝗，年谷不登，民有散亡，家空杼轴。
现代文：去年秋天的蝗灾，使谷物歉收，百姓流离失所，家中停止纺织。
English: Last autumn's locust plague led to a poor grain harvest, the displacement of people, and the cessation of weaving at home.

古文：朕每旦恭己，夕惕兢怀。
现代文：朕经常白天恭谨以律己，晚上犹担心恐惧。
English: I am often respectful and self-disciplined during the day, but I still worry and fear at night.

古文：自今正调以外，无妄征发。
现代文：从现在起除正调以外，不能随意微调。
English: From now on, except for the positive tone, you can not fine-tune at will.

古文：庶时殷俗阜，称朕意焉。 
现代文：希望时世殷厚风俗朴实，符合我的心意。 
English: I hope that the customs of the times are simple and conform to my heart's desire.

古文：夏四月甲戌，以代国公达、滕国公逌并为柱国。
现代文：夏季四月甲戌曰，任命代国公宇文达、滕国公宇文迪同为柱国。
English: In the summer of April, the acting governor Wenda and the governor of Tengguo, Wendi, were both appointed as pillar states.

古文：诏荆州、安州、江陵等总管停隶襄州。
现代文：下韶命荆州、安州、江陵等总管不再隶属于襄州。
English: The headquarters of Jingzhou, Anzhou and Jiangling are no longer under the jurisdiction of Xiangzhou.

古文：己卯，以柱国张掖公王杰为泾州总管，魏国公李晖为梁州总管。
现代文：己卯曰，任命柱国、张掖公王杰为泾州总管，魏国公李晖为梁州总管。
English: Jiwu said that he had appointed Zhuang Guo and Zhang Ye Gong Wang Jie as the general manager of Zhangzhou, and Wei Guo Gong Li Jie as the general manager of Liangzhou.

古文：诏公卿以下各举所知。
现代文：下诏公卿以下的官员各自荐举自己了解的人。
English: The following officials below the rank of Kugyo (high court noble) each recommended someone they knew.

古文：遣工部代公达、小礼部辛彦之使于齐。
现代文：派工部代国公宇文达、小礼部辛彦之出使北齐。
English: On behalf of the Ministry of Works, Kunigimi Uwenda was sent, and on behalf of the Ministry of Small Ceremonies, Shinkihiko Kitazaki was sent.

古文：丙戌，诏百官军民上封事，极言得失。
现代文：丙戌曰，下诏命百官军民上书言事，尽情指出政治上的得失。
English: He said that he had ordered hundreds of officials, soldiers and citizens to write letters and speeches, pointing out political gains and losses as much as possible.

古文：丁亥，诏断四方非常贡献。
现代文：丁亥曰，下诏断绝各地不是常规的贡献。
English: Dinghai said that it is not a routine contribution to cut off the contribution of various regions.

古文：庚寅，追尊略阳公为孝闵皇帝。
现代文：庚寅曰，追尊略阳公为孝闵皇帝。
English: Geng Yin said that the emperor of filial piety is the emperor of pursuing the honor of the Yang di-Pertuan.

古文：癸巳，立鲁国公赟为皇太子。
现代文：癸巳日，立鲁国公宇文资为皇太子。
English: On the same day, Gongwu Wenshu was proclaimed crown prince of the State of Lu.

古文：大赦天下，百官各加封级。
现代文：大赦天下，百官各自都加封晋级。
English: There was a general amnesty across the country, and each of the hundred officials received a promotion.

古文：五月，封卫国公直长子宾为莒国公，绍莒庄公洛生后。
现代文：五月，封卫国公宇文直的长子宇文宾为莒国公，继承莒庄公宇文洛生的后嗣。
English: In May, Uwenbin, the eldest son of the feudal lord Uwen Zhi, became the lord of Zhaozhuang and the heir of the lord of Zhaozhuang, Uwen Luosheng.

古文：壬戌，帝以大旱，集百官于庭，诏之曰： 盛农之节，亢阳不雨，气序愆度，盖不徒然。
现代文：壬戌日，武帝因为大旱，在朝廷招集百官，对他们下诏说： 农忙时节，大旱无雨，时序失调，大概不是没有原因的。
English: On the 13th day of the ninth month, Emperor Wu summoned hundreds of officials to the imperial court because of the drought, and issued an edict to them, saying: The agricultural season is busy, the drought is without rain, and the time sequence is out of kilter, which is probably not without reason.

古文：岂朕德薄，刑赏乖中欤？
现代文：难道是我的德行浅薄，刑罚奖赏不当?
English: Is it possible that my virtue is shallow and the punishment is not a proper reward?

古文：将公卿大臣或非其人欤？
现代文：任用的公卿大臣或许有不对的?
English: Is there perhaps something wrong with the appointment of the Lord High Commissioner?

古文：宜尽直言，无得有隐。 公卿各引咎自责。
现代文：你们应当尽情直言，不得有所隐瞒。 公卿们都各自承认过失责备自己。
English: You should speak as frankly as you can, and not hold anything back. Each of the nobles admitted their faults and blamed themselves.

古文：其夜澍雨。
现代文：当天夜裹天降时雨。
English: That night, it rained.

古文：六月庚子，改置宿卫官员。
现代文：六月庚子曰，改设宿卫官员。
English: In June, Genko said that the post of guard officer would be changed.

古文：秋七月辛丑，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：秋季七月辛丑曰，陈国派使者前来通问修
English: In the autumn of the seventh month of Xinwu, Chen Guo sent an envoy to inquire and repair

古文：丙午，辰星、太白合于东井。
现代文：好。丙午曰，辰星、太白星相聚在东井宿。
English: Good. On the afternoon of the third day, Chensing and Taibaixing gathered at Dongjing.

古文：己酉，月犯心中星。
现代文：己酉日，月亮侵犯心宿的中星。
English: On the day of self-flagellation, the moon encroaches on the middle star of the heart.

古文：九月庚子朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：九月庚子初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：庚申，扶风掘地得玉杯以献。
现代文：庚申曰，扶风将出土的玉杯献上。
English: Goshin said that Fufeng will present the unearthed jade cup.

古文：冬十月庚午，诏江陵所获俘虏充官口者，悉免为民。
现代文：冬季十月庚午曰，诏命江陵将没入官府为奴隶的俘虏，全部释放为平民。
English: On the afternoon of October in winter, the imperial edict ordered that Jiangling would be absorbed into the government as slave captives, and all of them would be released as civilians.

古文：辛未，遣小匠师杨勰、齐驭、唐则使于陈。
现代文：辛末日，派小匠师杨勰、齐驭唐则出使陈国。
English: At the end of the Heian period, he sent the small craftsmen Yang Jie and Qi Jie Tang to dispatch Chen Guo.

古文：柱国、大司马、绥德公陆通薨。
现代文：柱国、大司马、绥德公陆通去世。
English: Zhu Jianguo, Da Sima, and Xing De Gong Lutsong passed away.

古文：十一月丙午，上亲率六军讲武城南。
现代文：十一月丙午曰，皇上亲自率领六军在城南进行军事演习。
English: On the afternoon of November 3rd, the emperor personally led the six armies to conduct military exercises in the south of the city.

古文：庚戌，行幸羌桥，集京城以东诸军都督以上，颁赐有差。
现代文：庚戌曰，武帝前往羌桥，招集京城以东各军都督以上的官员，赏赐各有不等。
English: Geng Yao said that Emperor Wu went to Qianqiao and summoned officials above the rank of the military governor of each army east of Beijing, and the rewards were different.

古文：乙卯，还宫。
现代文：乙卯日，回宫。
English: On the second day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：壬戌，以大司空、赵国公招为大司马。
现代文：壬戌日，任命大司空、赵国公宇文招为大司马。
English: On the same day, he appointed Major General Kuang and Zhao Guogong Uwenchao as major generals.

古文：乙未，月犯心中星。
现代文：乙末日，月亮侵犯心宿的中星。
English: At the end of the second day, the moon encroaches on the middle star of the heart.

古文：十二月壬申，行幸斜谷，集京城以西诸军都督已上，颁赐有差。
现代文：十二月壬申日，武帝前往斜谷，招集京城以西各军都督以上的官员，赏赐各有不等。
English: On Jinshin Day in December, Emperor Wu went to Xizhou and summoned the officials of the military forces west of the capital who were above the rank of governor-general. The rewards were different for each of them.

古文：丙戌，还宫。
现代文：丙戌日，回宫。
English: On the following day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：己丑，帝御正武殿，亲录囚徒，至夜而罢。
现代文：己丑日，武帝前往正武殿，亲自审察囚犯，到夜晚才停止。
English: On the day of his disgrace, Emperor Wu went to the Zhengwu Palace and personally inspected the prisoners, only stopping at night.

古文：庚寅，幸道会苑，以上善殿壮丽，遂焚之。
现代文：庚寅曰，武帝前往道会蕴，认为上善殿太壮丽，就放火烧掉了它。
English: Geng Yin said that Emperor Wu went to the Taoist Temple and thought that the Shang Son Hall was too magnificent, so he set fire to it.

古文：二年春正月辛丑，祠南郊。
现代文：塑二年春季正月辛丑日，祭祀南郊。
English: In the spring of the second year, on the first day of the new year, the Southern Suburbs Festival was held.

古文：乙巳，以柱国、鴈门公田弘为大司空，大将军、徐国公若干凤为柱国。
现代文：乙巳日，任命柱国、雁门公田弘为大司空，大将军、徐凰公若干凤为柱国。
English: On the second day of the month, the pillar country, the wild goose gate, was appointed to be the great general Tian Hong, and the great general, Xu Hong, and several phoenixes were appointed to be the pillar country.

古文：庚戌，复置帅都督官。
现代文：庚戌日，重新设置帅都督官。
English: On the day of the Geng Zi, the position of Shuai Du Inspector was re-established.

古文：乙卯，祠太庙。
现代文：乙卯日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the second day of the month, a ritual is held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：闰月己巳，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：闰正月己巳日，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: On the first day of the leap month, Chen Guo sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：二月辛亥，白虹贯日。
现代文：二月辛亥日，太阳周围出现光环。
English: In February, on the day of the Chinese New Year, a halo appeared around the sun.

古文：甲寅，诏皇太子赟抚巡西土。
现代文：甲寅日，主童下诏命皇太子圭塞置巡视西土。
English: On the first day of the year, the head boy issued an edict ordering Crown Prince Guisei to go on a tour of the West.

古文：壬戌，遣司会侯莫陈凯、太子宫尹郑译使于齐。
现代文：壬戌日，派司会侯莫陈凯、太子宫尹塑盏出使韭查。
English: On the day of the inspection, Hou Mo, Chen Kai and Yin Shujuan of the Imperial Household Agency were dispatched to investigate.

古文：荧惑犯舆鬼，入积尸。
现代文：火星侵犯舆鬼，侵入积尸。
English: Mars invades the ghosts, invades the corpses.

古文：省雍州内八郡，并入京兆、冯翊、扶风、咸阳等郡。
现代文：裁减雍州内的八个郡，将其并入京兆、冯翊、扶风、咸阳等郡。
English: The eight counties in Yongzhou will be reduced and merged into counties such as Jingzhao, Fengye, Fufeng and Xianyang.

古文：三月己卯，皇太子于岐州获二白鹿以献。
现代文：三月己卯日，皇太子将他在岐州得到的二只白鹿献上。
English: On the last day of March, the Crown Prince presented the two white deer he obtained in Qizhou.

古文：诏答曰： 在德不在瑞。 癸巳，省六府诸司中大夫以下官，府置四司，以下大夫为之官长，上士贰之。
现代文：武帝下诏答覆说： 在于德行而不在于祥瑞。 癸巳日，减省六府诸司中大夫以下的官员，在府中设置四司，任命下大夫为司中长官，上士作为副手。
English: Emperor Wu replied with the following edict: It is better to be virtuous than to be virtuous. On the same day, the officials below the rank of middle doctor in the six prefectures were reduced, and four divisions were set up in the prefectures, with the lower doctor appointed as the chief of the division and the staff sergeant as the deputy.

古文：夏四月己亥，祠太庙。
现代文：夏季四月己亥日，祭祀太庙。
English: In the summer, on April Fool's Day, a ritual is held at Taimyo.

古文：丙辰，增改东宫官员。
现代文：丙辰日，增加和改设东宫的官员。
English: On the third day of the month, the number of officials in the East Palace was increased and changed.

古文：五月丁卯，荧惑犯右执法。
现代文：五月丁卯日，火星侵犯右执法。
English: On the fifth day of the month, Mars encroached on the right to enforce the law.

古文：丁丑，以柱国周昌公侯莫陈琼为大宗伯，荥阳公司马消难为大司寇，上庸公陆腾为大司空。
现代文：丁丑日，任命柱国周昌公侯莫陈琼为大宗伯，荥阳公司马逍难为大司寇，上庸公陆腾为大司空。
English: On the day of Ding Yuxi, Mo Chen Qiong, the prince of Zhouchang in Zhuguo Province, was appointed as the grand patriarch, Ma Xunhan of the Shenyang Company was appointed as the grand secretary, and Shangyong Gonglu Teng was appointed as the grand secretary.

古文：六月庚子，省六府员外诸官，皆为丞。
现代文：六月庚子日，裁减六府员外诸官，都改为丞。
English: In June, Geng Zi Day, the reduction of six prefectural officials and other officials were changed to Jo.

古文：甲辰，月犯心中星。
现代文：甲辰日，月亮侵犯心宿的中星。
English: On the day of the first hour, the moon encroaches on the middle star of the heart.

古文：壬子，皇孙衍生，文武官普加一阶。
现代文：壬子日，皇孙室塞堑出生，文武官员全部晋升一级。
English: On the same day, the grandson of the imperial family, Saeki, was born, and all civil and military officials were promoted to the first level.

古文：大选诸军将帅。
现代文：大规模地挑选各军将帅。
English: Large-scale selection of generals for each army.

古文：丙辰，帝御露寝，集诸军将，勖以戎事。
现代文：丙辰曰，武帝前往露寝，召集各军将领，勉励他们努力从事征战。
English: According to Hsin Chen, Emperor Wu went to Luye to convene the generals of each army and encourage them to work hard in the war.

古文：庚申，诏诸军旌旗皆画以猛兽、鸷鸟之象。
现代文：庚申曰，武童下诏命各军的旌旗上都画上猛兽、骛鸟的形象。
English: Goshin said that Wudong issued an edict ordering the banners of all armies to be painted with the image of a ferocious beast and an ostrich.

古文：秋七月己巳，祠太庙。
现代文：秋季七月己巳曰，祭祀太庙。
English: In the autumn, in July, it is said that the rituals of Taimyo are over.

古文：自春末不雨，至于是月。
现代文：从春末以来没有下雨，直到这一个月。
English: There had been no rain since late spring until this month.

古文：壬申，集百寮于大德殿，帝责躬罪己，问以治政得失。
现代文：壬申日，武帝在大德殿召集百官，自责认罪，并询问政治上的得失。
English: On the day of Jinshin, Emperor Wu summoned hundreds of officials to the Great Hall of the People, confessed his guilt, and inquired about political gains and losses.

古文：戊子，雨。
现代文：戊子日，下雨。
English: It rained on Boshi Day.

古文：八月丙午，改三夫人为三妃。
现代文：八月丙午日，改三夫人为三妃。
English: On the afternoon of August 3rd, the third wife was changed to the third wife.

古文：关内大蝗。
现代文：关内发生大蝗灾。
English: A large locust infestation has occurred in Guennai.

古文：九月乙丑，陈遣使来聘。
现代文：九月乙丑日，陈国派使者前来通问修好。
English: On September 1st, Chen Guo sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：癸酉，太白犯右执法。
现代文：癸酉，太白星侵犯右执法。
English: , Taibai Xing violated the right to enforce the law.

古文：戊寅，以柱国、郑国公达奚震为金州总管。
现代文：戊寅，任命柱国、堑玺公达垦屋为金姐总管。
English: Wu Yin, appointed Zhu Guo, Zi Gongda and Zou Ya as the general manager of Jin Jie.

古文：诏曰： 政在节财，礼唯宁俭。
现代文：下韶说： 为政关键在于节约钱财，礼仪衹讲求宁静节俭。
English: He said: The key to politics is to save money, and the etiquette is to be quiet and frugal.

古文：而顷者婚嫁竞为奢靡，牢羞之费，罄竭资财，甚乖典训之理。
现代文：而近来婚嫁竞相奢侈浪费，牛羊祭品的费用，用尽所有的财物，严重违背了典训的道理。
English: But recently, the bride and groom competed in extravagant waste, the cost of cattle and sheep sacrifices, exhausted all the property, seriously violated the principle of the ceremony.

古文：有司宜加宣勒，使咸遵礼制。 壬午，纳皇太子妃杨氏。
现代文：有关官员应当宣传制止，使人们都遵循礼制。 壬午日，为皇太子娶妃杨氏。
English: The relevant officials should publicize and stop it, so that people will follow the etiquette.On the morning of the third day, the crown prince married the Yang clan.

古文：冬十月癸卯，齐遣使来聘。
现代文：冬季十月癸卯日，北齐派使者前来通问修好。
English: On the last day of October in winter, the Northern Qi sent an envoy to ask for a truce.

古文：甲辰，六代乐成，帝御崇信殿，集百官以观之。
现代文：甲辰曰，六代乐舞编成，武帝前往崇信殿，召集百官观赏。
English: According to Jiachen, the six generations of music and dance were choreographed, and Emperor Wu went to the Chongxin Hall to gather hundreds of officials to watch.

古文：十一月辛巳，帝亲率军讲武于城东。
现代文：十一月辛巳日，武帝亲率六军在城束举行军事演习。
English: In November Xin Si Day, Emperor Wu's relatives led the six armies to hold military exercises in Chengzhuang.

古文：癸未，集诸军都督以上五十人于道会苑大射，帝亲临射宫，大备军容。
现代文：癸未，召集各军都督以上官员五十人在道会苑举行大射礼，亘游亲临射宫，大备军容。
English: Not long ago, fifty officials above the rank of military governor were summoned to hold a grand shooting ceremony in the Taoist Association Garden. They visited the shooting palace in person and prepared their military appearance.

古文：十二月癸巳，集群臣及沙门、道士等，帝升高座，辨释三教先后，以儒教为先，道教为次，佛教为后。
现代文：十二月癸巳，召集群臣及僧人、道士等，亘游登上高座，辨别三教的先后次序，以儒教为先，道教为其次，佛教为最后。
English: In December of the same year, he summoned a group of ministers, monks, Taoists, and others to ascend to the throne to discern the order of succession of the three religions, with Confucianism first, Taoism second, and Buddhism last.

古文：以大将军、乐川公赫连达为柱国。
现代文：任命大将军、乐丛公昼连达为柱国。
English: Appointed the general, Le Cong Gong Ringtai as the pillar country.

古文：诏曰： 尊年尚齿，列代弘规，序旧酬劳，哲王明范。
现代文：亘适下诏说： 尊敬老人，是历代的大制，排定旧齿次序酬谢功劳，是明哲君王留下的典范。
English: "Respecting the elderly is a great system of the past generations, and arranging old people in order to reward and thank them for their merits is a model left by Emperor Mingzhe.

古文：朕嗣承弘业，君临万邦，驱此兆庶，寘诸仁寿。
现代文：我继承大业，统治万国，驱使万民，使他们仁寿。
English: I inherit a great cause, rule over all nations, drive all peoples, and make them live a long life.

古文：军民之间，年多耆耋，眷言衰暮，宜有优崇。
现代文：在军民中，多有年老的人，顾念他们衰老，应当对他们特别优待尊崇。
English: Among the military and civilians, there are many elderly people. In consideration of their aging, they should be given special preferential treatment and respect.

古文：可颁授老职，使荣沾邑里。 戊午，听讼于正武殿，自旦及夜，继之以烛。
现代文：可以颁授老职，使得恩荣润泽邑里。 戊午日，武帝在正武殿决断诉讼，从早上到夜晚，直至深夜。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Emperor Wu adjudicated the lawsuit in the Zhengwu Palace, from morning to night, until late at night.

古文：三年春正月壬戌，朝群臣于露门。
现代文：豆面三年春季正月壬戌日，武帝在露门接见群臣。
English: On the first day of the third year of bean noodles in the spring, Emperor Wu received a group of ministers at the Lu door.

古文：册柱国齐国公宪、卫国公直、赵国公招、谯国公俭、陈国公纯、越国公盛、代国公达、滕国公逌并进爵为王。
现代文：册封柱国查周公室壬毖、彊国尘室壬皇、赵国公宇文招、尽鱼公室王捡、速迩公室壬拉、越国公宇文盛、优厘公室这钟、堡厘公室这望一同晋爵为王。
English: Zhaozhou Guozhong Mansion, Jian Guozhong Mansion, Jian Guozhong Mansion, Zhao Guozhong Mansion, Jianyu Guozhong Mansion, Wang Zhaozhong Mansion, Yue Guozhong Mansion, Wensheng Guozhong Mansion, Yuli Guozhong Mansion, and Baoli Guozhong Mansion were all promoted to the peerage.

古文：己巳，祠太庙。
现代文：己巳，祭祀太庙。
English: It's time to make a sacrifice to the Imperial Temple.

古文：庚午，突厥遣使献马。
现代文：庚午，突厥派使者进献马匹。
English: In the afternoon, the Turks sent an envoy to present horses.

古文：癸酉，诏： 自今已后，男年十五，女年十三已上，爰及鳏寡，所在军民，以时嫁娶，务从节俭，勿为财币稽留。 乙亥，亲耕籍田。
现代文：癸酉，武帝下诏说： 从今以后，男子十五岁，女子十三岁以上，以及鳏夫寡妇，当地军民，按时嫁娶，一定要节俭办事，不要因为钱财而延误。 乙亥日，武帝亲自耕种籍田。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu issued the following edict: From now on, men over the age of fifteen, women over the age of thirteen, as well as widows and widowers, local soldiers and civilians, must marry on time, must be frugal, and must not be delayed because of money.

古文：丙子，初服短衣，享二十四军督将以下，试以军旅之法，纵酒尽欢。
现代文：丙子日，开始穿短衣，赐宴二十四军督将以下的官员，使用军中法令，尽情饮酒。
English: On the third day, he began to wear a short coat, gave a banquet to the following officials of the 24th military governor, used military regulations, and drank to his heart's content.

古文：诏以往岁年谷不登，民多乏绝，令公私道俗，凡有贮积粟麦者，皆准口听留，以外尽粜。
现代文：下韶因为去年谷物歉收，百姓大多缺乏粮食，命公家私人僧道俗人，凡是有贮积粟麦的，都允许按人口存留，其余的粟麦全部卖出。
English: Because of last year's poor grain harvest, most of the people in the Lower Yangtze are short of grain, and the government has ordered the public, private and lay people to store all the poppy seeds they have, allowing them to be stored according to the population, and the rest of the poppy seeds to be sold.

古文：二月壬辰朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月壬辰初一，发生日食。
English: On the first day of Imjin, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：丁酉，纪国公康、毕国公贤、酆国公贞、宋国公实、汉国公赞、秦国公贽、曹国公允并进爵为王。
现代文：丁酉日，纪国公宇文康、毕国公字文贤、酆国公宇文贞、宋国公宇文实、汉国公宇文赞、秦国公宇文蛰、曹国公宇文允一同晋爵为王。
English: On the day of Ding Xi's enthronement, Ji Guo Gongwu Wenkang, Bi Guo Gongwu Zi Wenkian, Zang Guo Gongwu Wenzhen, Song Guo Gongwu Wenshi, Han Guo Gongwu Wenzan, Qin Guo Gongwu Wenzhong and Cao Guo Gongwu Wenzhong were all crowned as kings.

古文：丙午，令六府各举贤良清正之人。
现代文：丙午日，命六府各自荐举贤良清正的人。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the third month, the six prefectures each recommended a virtuous and upright person.

古文：癸丑，柱国、许国公宇文善有罪免。
现代文：癸丑日，柱国、许国公宇文善有罪被免爵。
English: On April Fool's Day, Zhu Guo and Xu Guo Gongyuan were stripped of their titles.

古文：乙卯，行幸云阳宫。
现代文：乙卯日，武帝前往云阳宫。
English: On the second day, Emperor Wu went to Yunyang Palace.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 民生而静，纯懿之性本均；感物而迁，嗜欲之情斯起。
现代文：丙辰日，武帝下诏说： 人刚出生时都是洁静的，纯朴美好的性情本来相等；受到环境的感染而发生变化，嗜好欲望之情就产生了。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: People are all pure and quiet when they are just born, and their simple and beautiful dispositions are originally the same; when they are infected by the environment, they change, and the feelings of addiction and desire arise.

古文：虽复云鸟殊世，文质异时，莫不限以堤防，示之禁令。
现代文：即使朝代不同，世风的文华与质朴不同，也无不设法防范，用禁令加以限制的。
English: Even if the dynasties are different, and the styles of literature and art are different from the rustic ones, there are ways to prevent them and restrict them with prohibitions.

古文：朕君临万宇，覆养黎元，思振颓纲，纳之轨式。
现代文：我统治万方，养育百姓，想振兴颓废了的纲纪，将其纳入正常的轨道。
English: I govern Wanfang, nurture the people, and want to revitalize the decadent system of discipline and put it on a normal track.

古文：比因人有犯，与众弃之，所在群官有愆过者，咸听首露，莫不轻重毕陈，纤毫无隐。
现代文：近来因为有人犯法，与众人一起抛弃了他，当地官吏有罪过的，都允许自首，无论轻重都要陈述，丝毫不要隐瞒。
English: Recently, because someone broke the law, they abandoned him together with everyone else. Local officials who have committed crimes are allowed to surrender. Regardless of the seriousness, they must make a statement, and do not hide anything.

古文：斯则风行草偃，从化无违，导德齐礼，庶几可致。
现代文：这样以德教化育人民，遵从教化而不违背，用道德引导人民使他们遵循礼义，也许就可以达到。
English: In this way, it may be possible to educate the people with morality, follow the education without violating it, and guide the people with morality to make them follow the etiquette.

古文：但上失其道，有自来矣，凌夷之弊，反本无由，宜加荡涤，与民更始。
现代文：但在上的人违背此道，自来已久。由盛至衰的弊端，无法恢复到本源，应当加以荡除，和百姓一起重新从开始做起。
English: However, the people at the top have been violating this way for a long time. From prosperity to decline, the drawbacks cannot be restored to their original source. They should be eliminated and start again from the beginning with the people.

古文：可大赦天下。 庚申，皇太后不豫。
现代文：可以大赦天下。 庚申日，皇太后生病。
English: The empress dowager fell ill on Goshun day.

古文：三月辛酉，至自云阳宫。
现代文：三月辛酉曰，武帝从云阳宫返回。
English: In March, Emperor Wu returned from the Yunyang Palace.

古文：癸酉，皇太后叱奴氏崩。
现代文：癸酉日，皇太后叱奴氏去世。
English: On the same day, the Empress Dowager Shinui passed away.

古文：帝居倚庐，朝夕共一溢米。
现代文：武帝居住在中间用木搭建的草庐中，从早到晚一共才吃一溢米。
English: Emperor Wu lived in a grass-thatched hut built of wood in the middle, and only ate an excess of rice from morning to night.

古文：群臣表请，累旬乃止。
现代文：群臣仁表请求，几十天后才停止。
English: At the request of a group of ministers, it was only stopped after dozens of days.

古文：诏皇太子赟总厘庶政。
现代文：武帝下诏命皇太子宇文宾总理政务。
English: Emperor Wu decreed that Crown Prince U Wenbin, the prime minister, take over the government.

古文：夏四月乙卯，齐遣使吊赠会葬。
现代文：夏季四月乙卯曰，北齐派使者前来吊丧会葬。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Qi sent an envoy to come to the funeral.

古文：丁巳，有星孛于东北紫宫垣，长七尺。
现代文：丁巳日，在东北紫宫垣有彗星出现，长七尺。
English: On the tenth day of the month, a comet appeared in the northeastern purple palace, seven feet long.

古文：五月庚申，葬文宣皇后于永固陵，帝袒跣至陵所。
现代文：五月庚申日，将文宣皇后下葬在永固陵，武帝袒衣赤足到文宣皇后陵地。
English: On the day of the May Koshin, Empress Wenzhong was buried in the Yonggu Mausoleum, and Emperor Wu walked barefoot to the tomb of Empress Wenzhong.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 齐斩之情，经籍彝训，近代沿革，遂亡斯礼。
现代文：辛酉日，武帝下诏说： 齐衰斩衰之情，是经籍上记载的典训，近代沿革，就丧失了这种礼仪。
English: On the second day of the new year, Emperor Wu issued an edict, saying, "The feeling of being defeated and defeated is a classic training recorded in the scriptures. In modern times, this etiquette has been lost.

古文：伏奉遗令，既葬便除，攀慕几筵，情实未忍。
现代文：敬奉遣命，下葬后就除了丧服，攀慕筵席，实在是不忍心。
English: It's really unbearable to have to wear mourning clothes and attend the funeral after honoring the deceased.

古文：三年之丧，达于天子，古今无易之道，王者之所常行。
现代文：三年的守丧期，上至于天子也要遵守，这是古今不变的法则，是帝王经常实行的。
English: The three-year mourning period, as far as heaven and earth are concerned, must also be observed. This is an unchanging rule from ancient times to the present, and is often practiced by emperors.

古文：但时有未谐，不得全制。
现代文：但有时没有这样做，使这种制度没有完全执行。
English: However, sometimes this is not done, and the system is not fully implemented.

古文：军国务重，庶自听朝。
现代文：军国要务，必须听政。
English: When it comes to military affairs, we must listen to the government.

古文：缞麻之节，苫庐之礼，率遵前典，以申罔极。
现代文：身穿缭麻，居住草庐的礼节，要遵循从前的典制，以表达对父母的无限哀思。
English: Dressed in dazzling clothes, the etiquette of living in grass huts should follow the previous ceremony to express infinite sorrow for their parents.

古文：百寮以下，宜依遗令。 公卿上表，固请俯就权制，过葬即吉。
现代文：百官以下，都应依照先人的遣命。 公卿上表，坚决请求武帝实行临时权宜的法制，下葬之后即行吉礼。
English: All officials below the 100th rank should follow the instructions of their predecessors, and the court noble should go to the table and firmly request Emperor Wu to implement the temporary and expedient legal system, and perform the auspicious ceremony immediately after the burial.

古文：帝不许，引古礼答之，群臣乃止。
现代文：武帝不答应，引用古时的礼制来答覆他们，群臣这才停止。
English: Emperor Wu did not agree and replied to them by quoting the ancient etiquette. The courtiers then stopped.

古文：于是遂申三年之制，五服之内，亦令依礼。初置太子谏议员四人，文学十人；皇弟、皇子友员各二人，学士六人。
现代文：于是就重申守丧三年的制度，在五服之内，也下令遵照这种礼仪；开始设置太子谏议员四人，文学十人；皇弟、皇子友员各二人，学士六人。
English: Therefore, he reaffirmed the three-year mourning system, and ordered that this etiquette be followed within the five sets of clothing. He began to set up four members of the Prince's Council and ten members of the Literature Council; two members each of the Prince's brother and Prince's friend, and six members of the Academy.

古文：丁卯，荆州献白乌。
现代文：丁卯日，荆州进献白乌。
English: On the day of Dingwu, Jingzhou presented white poppies.

古文：戊辰，诏故晋国公护及诸子，并追复先封，改葬加谥。
现代文：戊辰日，武帝下诏命原晋国公宇文护以及他的各位儿子，都追封恢复从前的封爵，改葬加谧号。
English: On the day of Pentecost, Emperor Wu issued an edict ordering the former ruler of the Jin Dynasty, King Wen Rong, and his sons to restore their former titles and change their surnames.

古文：丙子，初断佛、道二教，经像悉毁，罢沙门、道士，并令还民。
现代文：丙子日，开始禁止佛、道二教，二教的经书塑像全部毁掉，废除僧人、道士，都命令他们还俗为民。
English: On the tenth day of the ninth month, he began to ban Buddhism and the two sects of Taoism, destroy all the statues of the scriptures of the two sects, abolish the monks and Taoists, and ordered them to return to the people.

古文：并禁诸淫祀，礼典所不载者，尽除之。
现代文：并禁止各种不合礼制的祭祀，礼仪典籍中没有记载的，全部废除。
English: In addition, all kinds of sacrificial rites that do not conform to the etiquette system are prohibited, and those that are not recorded in the etiquette classics are all abolished.

古文：六月丁未，集诸军将，教以战阵之法。
现代文：六月丁末日，召集各军将领，教给他们布置军阵的方法。
English: On the last day of June, gather the generals of each army and teach them how to set up the army.

古文：壬子，更铸五行大布钱，以一当十，与布泉钱并行。
现代文：壬子日，重新铸造五行大布钱，一枚五行大布钱值十枚布泉钱，和布泉钱一起流通。
English: On Imzi Day, the five-row large cloth money was re-minted. One five-row large cloth money was worth ten cloth spring money, and circulated together with cloth spring money.

古文：戊午，诏曰： 至道弘深，混成无际，体包空有，理极幽玄。但岐路既分，派源逾远，淳离朴散，形气斯乖。
现代文：戊午曰，武帝下诏说： 大道高深，混成万物没有边际，它的形式包容了一切，它的义理穷极了幽深玄奥的道理但是既已出现了错误的方向，支流和本源就越来越疏远，它厚重朴实的义理离析分散，它的形体和神气也发生了背离。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: The Great Way is profound and profound, blending into all things without limit, its form embraces everything, its principles are profound and profound, but as soon as there is a wrong direction, the tributary and the source become more and more estranged, its thick and simple principles are separated and dispersed, and its form and spirit have also deviated.

古文：遂使三墨八儒，朱紫交竞；九流七略，异说相腾。
现代文：于是使得三墨八儒，是非优劣交相争逐；九流七略，各种学说纷纷涌现。
English: As a result, Sanmo and Baju, good and bad, compete with each other; nine schools and seven schools, and various doctrines have emerged.

古文：道隐小成，其来旧矣。
现代文：大道不明，由来已久了。
English: The avenue is unknown, it has a long history.

古文：不有会归，争驱靡息。
现代文：如果没有共同遵奉的准则，各派之争就不会止息。
English: If there is no common standard to follow, the struggle between the factions will not stop.

古文：今可立信道观，圣哲微言，先贤典训，金科玉篆，秘迹玄文，所以济养黎元，扶成教义者，并宜弘阐，一以贯之。
现代文：现在可以设立通道观，凡是圣人的微言。先贤的典训，完美重要的法令，罕见的典籍，衹要是可以救助养育百姓，帮助完成教义的，都应当弘扬光大，用一种大道将它们贯穿起来。
English: It is now possible to establish the view of the passage: all the little sayings of the sages, the teachings of the sages, the perfect and important decrees, and the rare classics, if they can help to nurture the people and help to complete the doctrine, should carry forward the glory and use a road to penetrate them.

古文：俾夫翫培塿者，识嵩岱之崇崛；守碛砾者，悟渤澥之泓澄，不亦可乎。 
现代文：使那些喜好卑小土丘的人，认识到嵩山、岱山的崇高；使那些固守河滩上捆石的人，领悟到渤海的泓深清澈，不也是可以的吗。 
English: Isn't it also possible to make those who like lowly mounds realize the loftiness of lofty mountains and barren hills; to make those who cling to the boulders on the riverbanks realize the depth and clarity of the Bohai Sea?

古文：秋七月庚申，行幸云阳宫。
现代文：秋季七月庚申闩，武帝前往云阳宫。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Gaoshen died, and Emperor Wu went to the Yunyang Palace.

古文：乙酉，卫王直在京师举兵反，欲突入肃章门。
现代文：乙酉日，旺字文直在京师起兵造反，想冲入肃章塱。
English: On the 1st day of the 2nd month of the 4th month, Wang Zhiwen directly rebelled against the Beijing division and wanted to rush into Zhuozhangyuan.

古文：司武尉迟运等拒守。
现代文：司武尉迟运等人抵御防守。
English: Sifu Taiyun and the others are on the defensive.

古文：直败，率百余骑遁走。
现代文：圭塞直战败，率领一百多名骑兵逃走。
English: Guise was soundly defeated and fled with more than a hundred cavalry.

古文：京师连雨三旬，是日霁。
现代文：京师连着下了三十天的雨，这一天停止了。
English: It rained in Beijing for 30 days in a row, but it stopped on this day.

古文：戊子，至自云阳宫。
现代文：戊子，亘嘘从云阳宫返回。
English: Wu Zi, Wu Lie returned from Yunyang Palace.

古文：八月辛卯，擒直于荆州，免为庶人。
现代文：八月辛卯，在荆州擒获了宇文直，将他免为庶人。
English: In August of Xinwu, Wu Wenzhong was captured in Jingzhou, and he was freed from being a commoner.

古文：乙未，诏自建德元年八月以前犯罪，未被推纠，于后事发失官爵者，并听复旧。
现代文：乙未日，武帝下诏在建德元年八月以前犯罪，没有被审问查究，后来事情暴露而失去官职爵位的，都准允恢复原来官爵。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month of the 2nd month of the 2nd year of the 3rd year of the 3rd year of the 4th year of the 5th year of the 6th year of the 6th year of the 7th year of the 8th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 9th year of the 10th year of the 11th year of the 11

古文：丙申，行幸云阳宫。
现代文：丙申，亘造前往云阳宫。
English: Bishen, Wuzhong went to Yunyang Palace.

古文：九月庚申，幸同州。
现代文：九月庚申曰，武帝前往同州。
English: In September, Goshun said, Emperor Wu went to Tongzhou.

古文：戊辰，以柱国、大宗伯、周昌公侯莫陈琼为秦州总管。
现代文：戊辰，任命柱国、大宗伯、周昌公侯莫陈琼为秦州总管。
English: Wucheng, Mo Chenqiong, the prince of Zhuguo, Dazongbo and Zhouchang, was appointed the governor of Qin.

古文：冬十月丙申，御正杨尚希、礼部卢恺使于陈。
现代文：冬季十月丙申日，御正杨尚希、礼部卢恺出使陈国。
English: In the winter of October, the Emperor Yang Shangxi and the Minister of Ceremonies Lu Wei sent an envoy to Chen Guo.

古文：戊戌，雍州献苍乌。
现代文：戊戌曰，雍州进献苍乌。
English: "Yongzhou's contribution to Cangwu is the best.

古文：庚子，诏蒲州民遭饥乏绝者，令向郿城以西，及荆州管内就食。
现代文：庚子，武帝下诏渣业受饥饿困乏的百姓，命他们到眉啦以西，以及荆州管辖区内去谋生。
English: Geng Zi, Emperor Wu's emissary to the starving and impoverished people, ordered them to go to the west of Meila and the jurisdiction of Jingzhou to earn a living.

古文：甲寅，行幸蒲州。
现代文：甲寅日，武帝前往蒲州。
English: On the first day of the year, Emperor Wu went to Puzhou.

古文：乙卯，曲赦蒲州见囚大辟以下。
现代文：乙卯曰，特赦蒲州被囚禁的死刑以下的罪犯。
English: B said that Puzhou would grant amnesty to prisoners who had been sentenced to death or less.

古文：丙辰，行幸同州。
现代文：丙辰曰，武帝前往同州。
English: Xing Chen said that Emperor Wu went to Tongzhou.

古文：始州民王鞅拥众反，大将军郑恪讨平之。
现代文：始州平民王鞅聚众造反，大将军郑恪讨伐平定了他们。
English: Wang Qi, a commoner from Shizhou, rallied the people to rebel, and the great general Zheng Ke crushed them.

古文：十一月戊午，以柱国、大司空、上庸公陆腾为泾州总管。
现代文：十一月戊午日，任命柱国、大司空、上庸公陆腾为泾州总管。
English: On the afternoon of November 1st, Zhu Guo, Daishi Kuo and Shang Yong Gonglu Teng were appointed as the general manager of Zhangzhou.

古文：于阗遣使献名马。
现代文：于阗派使者前来进献名马。
English: Yu Yao sent an envoy to present the famous horse.

古文：己巳，大阅于城东。
现代文：己巳，在城柬大规模检阅军队。
English: At the same time, a large-scale inspection of the army was carried out in the city of Cambodia.

古文：甲戌，至自同州。
现代文：甲戌日，武帝从同州返回。
English: On Armistice Day, Emperor Wu returned from the same state.

古文：十二月戊子，大会卫官及军人以上，赐钱帛各有差。
现代文：十二月戊子，武帝大规模会见卫官及军人以上的官员，赏赐的钱帛多少不等。
English: In December, Emperor Wu held a large-scale meeting with guards and military officials, and the amount of money awarded varied.

古文：辛卯，月掩太白。
现代文：辛卯日，月亮遮住了太白星。
English: On a cloudy day, the moon hides the white star.

古文：诏荆、襄、安、延、夏五州总管内，有能率其从军者，授官各有差。
现代文：武帝下韶在荆、襄、安、延、夏五州总管内，有能够率其从军的，授予官职大小不等。
English: Under Emperor Wu, in the five prefectures of Jing, Xiang, An, Yan and Xia, those who were able to lead the army were awarded positions of varying sizes.

古文：其贫下户，给复三年。
现代文：贫困下户人家，免除赋税三年。
English: Families living in poverty will be exempt from paying taxes for three years.

古文：丙申，改诸军军士并为侍官。
现代文：丙申，将各军军士全部改为侍官。
English: Bishin, change all the army sergeants to attendants.

古文：丁酉，利州上言驺虞见。
现代文：丁酉日，利州上书称有骝虞出现。
English: On the day of Dingyao, Lizhou submitted a letter saying that there was a risk of flooding.

古文：癸卯，集诸军讲武于临皋泽。
现代文：癸卯日，在临皋泽召集各军进行军事演习。
English: On the same day, the army was convened in Linfenze to conduct military exercises.

古文：凉州比年地震，坏城郭，地裂，涌泉出。
现代文：凉州连年地震，城郭毁坏，大地崩裂，泉水涌出地面。
English: Earthquakes in Liangzhou year after year, the city walls destroyed, the earth cracked, and springs gushed out of the ground.

