古文：穆崇
现代文：穆崇，是代郡人。
English: Mu Chong is a representative of the county.

古文：穆崇，代人也。其先世效节于神元、桓、穆之时。
现代文：他的先代曾在神元帝、桓帝、穆帝的时代效力。
English: His predecessor had served during the reigns of Emperor Jingu, Emperor Kantei, and Emperor Muti.

古文：崇机捷便辟，少以盗窃为事。
现代文：穆崇机智敏捷善于逢迎，年轻时以盗窃为职事。
English: Mu Chong is quick-witted and good at meeting people. When he was young, he used theft as his profession.

古文：太祖之居独孤部，崇常往来奉给，时人无及者。
现代文：太祖居住在独孤部，穆崇时常来往供奉，当时人没有谁比得上。
English: The great-grandfather lived in Solitary Confinement, and Musung often came and went to worship him. At that time, there was no one like him.

古文：后刘显之谋逆也，平文皇帝外孙梁眷知之，密遣崇告太祖。
现代文：后来刘显谋划作乱，平文皇帝的外孙梁眷知道内情，秘密派遣穆崇报告太祖。
English: Later, Liu Xian plotted to create turmoil, and Emperor Pingwen's grandson Liang Zhen knew the inside story and secretly sent Mu Chong to report to his grandfather.

古文：眷谓崇曰： 显若知之问汝者，丈夫当死节，虽刀剑别割，勿泄也。 
现代文：梁眷对穆崇说： 刘显如果知道后拷问你，大丈夫应当为节操而死，虽然刀剑切割，也不要泄露。 
English: Liang's relative said to Mu Chong: "If Liu Xian tortures you after knowing about it, it's okay to die for the sake of discipline. Although the sword cuts, don't reveal it.

古文：因以宠妻及所乘良马付崇曰： 事觉，吾当以此自明。 
现代文：于是把宠爱的妻子和所骑的好马交给穆崇说： 事情如果泄露了，我将以这来自我证明。 
English: So he gave his beloved wife and the good horse he was riding to Mu Chong and said to him, "The matter has been discovered, and I will use this to express myself."

古文：崇来告难，太祖驰如贺兰部。
现代文：穆崇前来报告祸难，太祖奔往贺兰部。
English: Mu Chong came to report the calamity, and the great-grandfather rushed to Helan.

古文：显果疑眷泄其谋，将囚之。
现代文：刘显果然怀疑梁眷泄露了他的计谋，将要囚禁他。
English: Liu Xian really suspected that Liang Zhen had revealed his plot and was going to imprison him.

古文：崇乃唱言曰： 梁眷不顾恩义，奖显为逆，今我掠得其妻马，足以雪忿。 
现代文：穆崇就宣扬说： 梁眷不顾念恩情道义，协助刘显作乱，现在我掠取了他的妻子马匹，足以雪恨。 
English: Mu Chong then proclaimed: "The Liang family helped Liu Xian to create chaos, regardless of consideration, kindness and morality. Now I have plundered his wife and horses, which is enough to make him hate me.

古文：显闻而信之。
现代文：刘显听说后相信了。
English: Liu Xian believed it when he heard about it.

古文：窟咄之难，崇外甥于桓等谋执太祖以应之，告崇曰： 今窟咄已立，众咸归附，富贵不可失，愿舅图之。 
现代文：窟咄作乱，穆崇的外甥于桓等谋划捉住太祖来响应他，告诉穆崇说： 现在窟咄已登位，众人都归附，富贵之机不可失，希望舅舅考虑这件事。 
English: When the grotto was in turmoil, Mu Chong's nephew Yu Huan and others plotted to capture the great ancestor to respond to him, telling Mu Chong: "Now that the grotto has been enthroned, everyone has joined, the opportunity to become rich cannot be lost. I hope my uncle will consider this matter."

古文：崇乃夜告太祖。太祖诛桓等，北逾阴山，复幸贺兰部。
现代文：穆崇就在夜晚报告太祖，太祖诛杀于桓等人，向北越过阴山，又前往贺兰部。
English: In the night, Mu Chong reported to Taizu that Taizu had killed Yu Huan and others, crossed the gloomy mountains to the north, and went to Horanbe.

古文：崇甚见宠待。
现代文：穆崇很受宠信厚待。
English: Mu Chong is well-liked and well-treated.

古文：太祖为魏王，拜崇征虏将军。
现代文：太祖为魏王，任命穆崇为征虏将军。
English: The great-grandfather was the king of Wei, who appointed Mu Chong as the general of the conquest.

古文：从平中原，赐爵历阳公，散骑常侍。
现代文：随从平定中原，赐爵位为历阳公，任散骑常侍。
English: He followed the pacification of the Central Plains, was given the title of Duke of Liyang, and was appointed as a samurai.

古文：后迁太尉，加侍中，徙为安邑公。
现代文：后来升太尉，加授侍中，改封为安邑公。
English: Later, he was promoted to the rank of captain and given the additional rank of chamberlain, and his title was changed to Lord of Anyi.

古文：又从征高车，大胜而还。
现代文：又随从征伐高车，大胜返回。
English: He also followed the high-wheeled vehicles to the conquest and returned with a great victory.

古文：姚兴围洛阳，司马德宗将辛恭靖请救，太祖遣崇六千骑赴之。
现代文：姚兴包围洛阳，司马德宗的将领辛恭靖请求救援，太祖派遣穆崇率领六千骑兵赶去。
English: Yao Xing besieged Luoyang, Sima Dezong's general Xin Jiajing requested rescue, and Taizu dispatched Mu Chong to lead six thousand cavalry.

古文：未至，恭靖败，诏崇即镇野王，除豫州刺史，仍本将军。
现代文：没有到达，恭靖失败，太祖韶令穆崇就地镇守墅王，授任豫州刺史，仍为本号将军。
English: He did not arrive, and the appeasement failed. The great-great-grandfather Yu ordered Mu Chong to be the king of the town and the villa, and he was appointed the governor of Yuzhou, and he was still the general.

古文：徵为太尉，又徙宜都公。
现代文：征召为太尉，又改封宜都公。
English: He was conscripted as a captain and changed his title to Giduko.

古文：天赐三年薨。
现代文：天赐三年逝世。
English: He died three years later.

古文：先是，卫王仪谋逆，崇豫焉，太祖惜其功而秘之。
现代文：在这以前，卫王元仪谋划作乱，穆崇参与了，太祖怜惜他的功劳而不声张。
English: Prior to this, Wei Wangyuan Yi plotted to create chaos, Mu Chong participated, and the great-grandfather took pity on his merits and did not make a fuss.

古文：及有司奏谥，太祖亲览谥法，至述义不克曰 丁 。太祖曰： 此当矣。 
现代文：等到有关官员上奏谧号，太祖亲自阅览谧法，看到道义不能善终为 丁 时，太祖说： 这个合适。 
English: When the relevant officials sounded the gong, and the great-grandfather personally read the gong method, and saw that morality can not be good, the great-grandfather said: This is appropriate.

古文：乃谥曰丁公。
现代文：于是定谧号为丁公。
English: As a result, his posthumous name was Ding Gong.

古文：初，太祖避窟咄之难，遣崇还察人心。
现代文：当初，太祖躲避窟咄的祸难，派遣穆崇返回观察人心。
English: At first, the great ancestor avoided the calamity of the cave and sent Mu Chong back to observe the people.

古文：崇夜至民中，留马与从者，乃微服入其营。
现代文：穆崇夜晚到民间，留下马匹给随从的人，就改换平民服装进入营地。
English: When Mu Chong went to the people in the evening, he left his horses to his followers and changed into civilian clothes to enter the camp.

古文：会有火光，为舂妾所识，贼皆惊起。
现代文：遇上有火光，被舂米的侍妾所认出，贼寇都惊慌起身。
English: Encountered with a flash of fire, and recognized by the concubines of the glutinous rice, the thieves got up in a panic.

古文：崇求从者不得，因匿于坑中，徐乃窃马奔走。
现代文：穆崇寻找随从的人找不到，就藏匿在土坑中，很久才偷马逃走。
English: When Mu Chong couldn't find anyone to accompany him, he hid in a dirt pit for a long time before stealing a horse and escaping.

古文：宿于大泽，有白狼向崇而号，崇乃觉悟，驰马随狼而走。
现代文：睡在大草泽中，有头白狼向穆崇嚎叫，穆崇于是醒悟过来，骑马随狼而奔跑。
English: As he slept in the tall grass, a white wolf howled at Mu Chong. Mu Chong woke up and ran after the wolf on horseback.

古文：适去，贼党追者已至，遂得免难。
现代文：刚离去，贼寇党与追赶的人已赶到，于是得以免除祸难。
English: He had just left when the bandits and their pursuers arrived, so he was able to avoid the disaster.

古文：太祖异之，命崇立祀，子孙世奉焉。
现代文：太祖感到很奇异，命穆崇立庙祭祀，子孙世代敬奉白狼。
English: The great-grandfather felt very strange, he was ordered to build a temple for sacrifice, and his descendants worshipped the white wolf.

古文：太和中，追录功臣，以崇配飨。
现代文：太和年间，追评功臣，以穆崇配祭。
English: During the Taiwa era, he was awarded the title of meritorious vassal, and the festival was held in his honor.

古文：崇长子遂留，历显官。
现代文：穆崇的长子遂留，历任显要官职。
English: The eldest son of Mu Chong then stayed, and successively held important official positions.

古文：讨蠕蠕有功，赐爵零陵侯，后以罪废。
现代文：讨伐蠕蠕有功劳，赐爵位为零陵侯。后因有罪被罢黜。
English: He was given a knighthood for meritorious service in the suppression of the Cm Cm. Later, he was ousted for his guilt.

古文：子乙九，内行长者。
现代文：儿子乙九，任内行长者。
English: His son, Jiu Jiu, is the current president.

古文：以功赐爵富城公，加建忠将军，迁散骑常侍、内乘黄令、侍中。
现代文：因有功劳获赐爵位富城公，加授建忠将军，调任散骑常侍、内乘黄令、侍中。
English: For his meritorious service, he was given the title of Lord of Fucheng, awarded the additional title of General Jianzhong, and transferred to the positions of Sanzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizh.

古文：卒，谥曰静。
现代文：去世，谧号为静。
English: She died, and her nickname was Shizuka.

古文：子真，起家中散，转侍东宫，尚长城公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：儿子穆真，出仕为中散大夫，转至东宫侍奉，娶长城公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: His son, Mu Zhen, was promoted to the position of Zhongshan Doctor, transferred to the East Palace to serve, married the Great Wall Princess, and was appointed as the Captain of the Horse.

古文：后敕离婚，纳文明太后姊。
现代文：后来皇帝下令离婚，娶文明太后的姐姐。
English: Later, the emperor ordered a divorce and married the sister of the Empress Dowager Wenming.

古文：寻除南部尚书、侍中。
现代文：不久被授任为南部尚书、侍中。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to Nanbu Shosho and a chamberlain.

古文：卒，谥曰宣。
现代文：去世，谧号为宣。
English: He died, and his nickname was Xuan.

古文：高祖追思崇勋，令著作郎韩显宗与真撰定碑文，建于白登山。
现代文：高祖追念穆崇的功勋，命令著作郎韩显宗和穆真撰碑文，立在白登山。
English: Gao Zu commemorated the merits of Mu Chong and ordered the author's brother Han Xianzong and Mu Zhen to write an inscription and erect it on Mount Bai.

古文：真子泰，本名石洛，高祖赐名焉。
现代文：穆真的儿子穆泰，本名叫石洛，是高祖赐予的名字。
English: Mu Zhen's son, Mu Tai, whose real name was Shi Luo, was given his name by Gao Zu.

古文：以功臣子孙，尚章武长公主，拜驸马都尉，典羽猎四曹事，赐爵冯翊侯。
现代文：因是功臣子孙，娶章武长公主，被任命为驸马都尉，掌管帝王狩猎四曹事务，赐爵位为通翅堡。
English: Because he was the descendant of a meritorious vassal, he married Princess Zhangwuchang and was appointed lieutenant of horses, in charge of the emperor's hunting affairs, and was given the title of Tongling Fort.

古文：迁殿中尚书，加散骑常侍、安西将军。
现代文：升殿中尚书，加授散骑常侍、安西将军。
English: He was promoted to the court as a courtier, and was additionally awarded the title of straggler, and general of Anxi.

古文：进爵为公。
现代文：升爵位为公。
English: Emperor Taibu promoted him to Duke.

古文：出为镇南将军、洛州刺史。
现代文：外出任镇南将军、洛州刺史。
English: He also served as the general of Zhenan and the governor of Lozhou.

古文：例降为侯。
现代文：依条例降爵为侯。
English: In accordance with the ordinance, he was demoted to marquess.

古文：寻徵为右光禄大夫、尚书右仆射。
现代文：不久被征召为右光禄大夫、尚书右仆射。
English: He was soon called up to serve as Uko Roku no daibu and Shoshu Uko sho.

古文：又出为使持节、镇北将军、定州刺史。
现代文：又外出任使持节、镇北将军、定州刺史。
English: He also went abroad as the envoy of Jisai, the general of Zhenbei, and the historian of Dingzhou.

古文：改封冯翊县开国侯，食邑五百户。
现代文：改封为冯翊县开国侯，食邑五百户。
English: He was renamed as the founding lord of Fengye County, with 500 households in the food village.

古文：进征北将军。
现代文：升为征北将军。
English: He was promoted to General of the Expedition to the North.

古文：初，文明太后幽高祖于别室，将谋黜废，泰切谏乃止。
现代文：当初，文明太后把产担囚禁于别室，将谋划废黜他，穆泰恳切规劝才作罢。
English: At first, the Empress Dowager Wenming imprisoned the midwife in another room and planned to depose him, but Mutai earnestly persuaded her to stop.

古文：高祖德之，锡以山河，宠待隆至。
现代文：高祖感激他，赐给他封地，十分宠信。
English: Gaozou was grateful to him and gave him a fiefdom. He was very fond of Gaozou.

古文：泰自陈病久，乞为恆州，遂转陆叡为定州，以泰代焉。
现代文：穆泰自己陈述患病已久，乞求做恆州刺史，于是改派陆叡为定州刺史，用穆泰代替他。
English: Mutai himself stated that he had been ill for a long time and begged to be appointed as the chief historian of Hengzhou, so Lu Ei was reassigned as the chief historian of Dingzhou and replaced with Mutai.

古文：泰不愿迁都，叡未及发而泰已至，遂潜相扇诱，图为叛。
现代文：穆泰不愿意迁都，陆散没来得及出发而穆泰已经到任，就暗中加以煽动引诱，图谋作乱。
English: Mutai did not want to move the capital, Lu San did not have time to leave and Mutai was already in office, so he secretly incited and enticed him, trying to create turmoil.

古文：乃与叡及安乐侯元隆，抚冥镇将、鲁郡侯元业，骁骑将军元超，阳平侯贺头，射声校尉元乐平，前彭城镇将元拔，代郡太守元珍，镇北将军、乐陵王思誉等谋推朔州刺史阳平王颐为主。
现代文：于是和陆钡以及安乐侯元隆，抚冥镇将、鲁郡侯元业，骁骑将军元超，阳平侯贺头，射声校尉元乐平，前彭城镇将元拔，代郡太守元珍，镇北将军、乐陵王思誉等人谋划推举朔州刺史阳平王元颐为君主。
English: As a result, he and Lu Yu, as well as An Le Hou Yuan Long, Fuxi Zhen Zheng, Lu County Hou Yuan Ye, Xingqi Zheng Yuan Chao, Yangping Hou He Tou, Yingxiang Captain Yuan Le Ping, Qian Peng Town Zheng Yuan Bao, Deputy County Governor Yuan Zhen, Zhenbei General, Le Ling Wang Siyou, and others, planned to promote Yangping Wang Yuan Zheng, the prince of Shuozhou, as the monarch.

古文：颐不从，伪许以安之，密表其事。
现代文：元颐不听从，假装答应来稳住他们，秘密上报这件事。
English: Yuan Xuan disobeyed, pretended to promise to stabilize them, and secretly reported the matter.

古文：高祖乃遣任城王澄率并肆兵以讨之。
现代文：高祖于是派遣任城王元澄率领并州肆州的军队去讨伐他们。
English: Gaozu then dispatched the troops led by the king of Rencheng, Yuancheng, and the troops from Zhouzhou to fight them.

古文：澄先遣治书侍御史李焕单车入代，出其不意，泰等惊骇，计无所出。
现代文：元澄先派遣治书侍御史李焕单人乘车进入代京，出其不意，穆泰等人惊讶诧异，不知如何是好。
English: First, Motosumi dispatched his aide-de-camp, Li Huan, to enter Daikyo by car alone. He was taken by surprise, and Mutai and the others were surprised and puzzled. They did not know what to do.

古文：焕晓谕逆徒，示以祸福，于是凶党离心，莫为之用。
现代文：李焕晓谕作乱的人，向他们分析祸福，于是凶恶的党羽离心离德，没有人为穆泰所使用。
English: Li Huan spoke to the rioters and analyzed their fortunes and misfortunes. As a result, the evil party members were alienated, and no one was of any use to Mu Tai.

古文：泰自度必败，乃率麾下数百人攻焕郭门，冀以一捷。不克，单马走出城西，为人擒送。
现代文：穆泰自己估计必定失败，就率领手下的几百人攻打李焕的城门，希望能取胜攻打不下，单人匹马跑出城西，被别人擒获押送。
English: Mu Tai himself estimated that he would certainly fail, so he led several hundred of his men to attack the city gate of Li Huan, hoping to win the battle, but he couldn't. He ran out of the west of the city alone, and was captured and escorted by others.

古文：澄亦寻到，穷治党与。
现代文：元澄不久也到达。极力审讯他的同党。
English: Motosumi soon arrived as well, eager to interrogate his comrade.

古文：高祖幸代，亲见罪人，问其反状，泰等伏诛。
现代文：高祖前往代京，亲自会见犯罪的人，询问他们谋反的情形，穆泰等人受死刑。
English: Gaozu went to Daikyo, met with the criminals in person, and asked them about the circumstances of their rebellion. Mutai and others were sentenced to death.

古文：子伯智，八岁侍学东宫，十岁拜太子洗马、散骑侍郎。
现代文：儿子伯智，八岁时在束宫侍奉太子读书，十岁时被任命为太子洗马、散骑侍郎。
English: At the age of eight, his son, Bo Zhi, served the prince at Sok Palace, and at the age of ten, he was appointed as the prince's horse-washing and horseback riding attendant.

古文：尚饶阳公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶饶阳公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: He married Princess Raoyang and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：早卒。
现代文：去世早。
English: He died at an early age.

古文：子喈。
现代文：儿子穆喈。
English: His son, Mu Xi, is a singer.

古文：伯智弟士儒，字叔贤。
现代文：伯智的弟弟士儒，字叔贤。
English: Bo Zhi's younger brother Shiru, nicknamed Shuxian.

古文：徙凉州，后乃得还。
现代文：流放到凉州，后来才得以返回。
English: He was exiled to Liangzhou and only later was able to return.

古文：为太尉参军事。
现代文：担任太尉参军事。
English: He served as a second lieutenant in the military.

古文：子容，武定中，汲郡太守。
现代文：儿子穆容，武定年间，担任汲郡太守。
English: His son, Mu Rong, served as the governor of Ku County during the Wuding era.

古文：乙九弟忸头，侍中、北部尚书。
现代文：乙九的弟弟忸头，担任侍中、北部尚书。
English: Bixiu's younger brother, Shantou, served as an aide-de-camp to the Northern Shangshu.

古文：卒，赠司空公，谥曰敬。
现代文：去世，追赠司空公，谧号为敬。
English: He died and was posthumously given the posthumous title of Siku Gong (司空公).

古文：子蒲坂，虞曹尚书、征虏将军、泾州刺史。
现代文：儿子蒲坂，担任虞曹尚书、征虏将军、泾州刺史。
English: His son, Busaka, served as Yu Cao Shangshu, Conscript General, and Zhangzhou Sashi.

古文：赠征西将军、雍州刺史，谥曰昭。
现代文：追赠征西将军、雍州刺史，谧号为昭。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Western Expeditionary Force and the title of Yongzhou Assassin, and his posthumous name was Zhao.

古文：子韶，字伏兴，员外散骑侍郎、代郡太守、征东将军、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：儿子穆超，字丛璺，担任员外散骑侍郎、伐邮太守、征柬将军、金紫光禄大夫。
English: His son Mu Chao, surnamed Congyi, served as non-commissioned officer, horseback riding attendant, postmaster-general, conscript general of Cambodia, and doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu.

古文：卒，赠使持节、都督冀相殷三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、冀州刺史，谥曰文。
现代文：去世，追赠使持节、都督茎捣凿三州诸军事、骠骑大将军、冀州刺史，谧号为主。
English: After his death, he was posthumously awarded the titles of envoy, military commander of the Three Provinces, cavalry general, and historian of Jizhou Province.

古文：子遵伯，幽州司马。
现代文：儿子遵值，担任些业司马。
English: His son, Zunian, served as a business manager.

古文：遂留弟观，字闼拔，袭崇爵。
现代文：遥留的弟弟穆塑，字迩篮，继承搂基的爵位。
English: His distant younger brother, Musuo, nicknamed "Basket," succeeded to his title.

古文：少以文艺知名，选充内侍，太祖器之。
现代文：年轻时以文章技艺闻名，选入内廷侍奉，太担器重他。
English: When he was young, he was famous for his writing skills. He was elected to serve in the Inner Court, and he was given a heavy burden.

古文：太宗即位，为左卫将军，绾门下中书，出纳诏命。
现代文：太家即位，墨垦塑担任左卫将军，掌管门下中书，传达韶令。
English: Emperor Taika ascended to the throne, and Mo Yingxu served as the General of the Left Division, in charge of the school's junior high school, and conveyed the imperial edict to Zhou.

古文：及访旧事，未尝有所遗漏，太宗奇之。
现代文：等到问及往事，不曾有所遗漏，太宗感到他很奇特。
English: When asked about the past, Taizong did not omit anything, which made him feel very special.

古文：尚宜阳公主，拜附马都尉，稍迁太尉。
现代文：娶宜阳公主，被任命为驸马都尉，逐渐升到太尉。
English: He married Princess Yiyang and was appointed lieutenant of the Horse Guards, gradually rising to the rank of captain.

古文：世祖之监国，观为右弼，出则统摄朝政，入则应对左右，事无巨细，皆关决焉。
现代文：世祖代掌国事，穆观担任右弼，外出就统管朝中政事，入宫就在左右回答问题，事情不分大小，都经由他决断。
English: The founder of the dynasty was in charge of state affairs, and Mu Guan served as the right-hand man. When he went out, he was in charge of the political affairs of the dynasty, and when he entered the palace, he answered questions left and right. He decided everything, no matter how big or small.

古文：终日怡怡，无愠喜之色。
现代文：整日和顺，没有喜怒的神色。
English: The whole day went smoothly, there was no look of joy or anger.

古文：劳谦善诱，不以富贵骄人。
现代文：勤谨谦虚善于诱导，不因富贵而对人傲慢。
English: Diligence, modesty, good at inducement, not arrogant to others because of wealth.

古文：泰常八年，暴疾薨于苑内，时年三十五。
现代文：泰常八年，因暴病在苑内逝世，遣年三十五岁。
English: In the eighth year of the reign of Emperor Taizang, he died of a violent illness in the courtyard, at the age of thirty-five.

古文：太宗亲临其丧，悲恸左右。
现代文：太宗亲临他的丧葬，悲伤感动左右的人。
English: Emperor Taizong attended his funeral in person, and people on both sides were moved by grief.

古文：赐以通身隐起金饰棺，丧礼一依安城王叔孙俊故事。
现代文：赐给全身隐起的金饰棺材，丧礼全部依安城王叔孙俊的旧例。
English: He was given a gold-plated coffin with his whole body concealed, and the funeral ceremony was all based on the old example of the king of Ancheng, Sunjun.

古文：赠宜都王，谥曰文成。
现代文：追赠宜都王，谧号为文成。
English: He was posthumously given the title King of Yidu, and his posthumous name was Wencheng.

古文：世祖即位，每与群臣谈宴，未尝不叹惜殷勤，以为自泰常以来，佐命勋臣文武兼济无及之者，见称如此。
现代文：世祖即位，每当和群臣谈论饮宴，未尝不赞叹穆观的恳切，以为从泰常以来，辅佐功臣文武才干兼备的没有人比得上他，他就是如此地受到称道。
English: When Emperor Taizong ascended the throne, whenever he talked about the banquet with his ministers, he could not help but admire Mu Guo's sincerity. He thought that since Emperor Taizong, there was no one who was as talented in both literature and martial arts as he was, and he was praised in this way.

古文：子寿，袭爵，少以父任选侍东宫。
现代文：儿子穆寿，继承爵位，年轻时以父亲的功劳被选入东宫侍奉。
English: His son, Mu Shou, inherited the title of nobility, and in his youth was chosen to serve in the East Palace in recognition of his father's achievements.

古文：尚乐陵公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶乐陵公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: He married Princess Le Ling and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：明敏有父风，世祖爱重之，擢为下大夫。
现代文：他聪明敏捷有父亲的风范，世祖喜爱器重他，擢升为下大夫。
English: He was clever and quick and had his father's demeanor. The patriarch loved and respected him, and he was promoted to junior doctor.

古文：敷奏机辩，有声内外。
现代文：他上奏机智善辩，内外有声名。
English: He was an intelligent and adaptable player, and was well-known both inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：迁侍中、中书监，领南部尚书，进爵宜都王，加征东大将军。
现代文：升为侍中、中书监，兼南部尚书，升爵位为宜都王，加授征束大将军。
English: He was promoted to Samurai Middle Officer, Middle Clerk of the Privy Purse, and Southern Clerk of the Privy Purse. He was also raised to the peerage as King of Yidu and awarded the title of General of the Conscription.

古文：寿辞曰： 臣祖崇，先皇之世，属值艰危，幸天赞梁眷，诚心密告，故得效功前朝，流福于后。
现代文：穆寿推辞说： 臣下的祖父穆崇，先皇的时代，遇上艰难危险，有幸上天赞助梁眷，诚心秘密相告，所以能在前朝报效立功，遗留福禄传给后代。
English: Mu Shou said, "The grandfather of my subjects, Mu Chong, in the era of the former emperor, encountered difficulties and dangers. He was fortunate to have the support of heaven for his relatives, and he sincerely told them in secret. Therefore, he was able to report to the former emperor, and his legacy was passed on to future generations.

古文：昔陈平受赏，归功无知，今眷元勋未录，而臣独奕世受荣，岂惟仰愧古贤，抑亦有亏国典。 
现代文：从前陈平受赏赐，归功于无知，现在梁眷的首功没有评定，而臣下独自世代享受荣华，岂止是上愧古代贤人，也有损于国家典章。 
English: In the past, Chen Ping received the award due to ignorance, but now the first merit of Liang Zhen is not evaluated, and the vassals enjoy the glory for generations alone, which is not only a disgrace to the ancient sages, but also a detriment to the national award.

古文：世祖嘉之。
现代文：世祖嘉许他。
English: The patriarch praised him.

古文：乃求眷后，得其孙，赐爵郡公。
现代文：于是寻找梁眷的后代，找到梁眷的孙子，赐给郡公的爵位。
English: So he looked for descendants of Liang's relatives, found Liang's grandchildren, and gave them the title of county magistrate.

古文：舆驾征凉州，命寿辅恭宗，总录要机，内外听焉。
现代文：世祖征伐凉州，命令穆寿辅助恭宗，总领要事机密，内外听从他。
English: The ancestor conquered Liangzhou, ordered Mu Shou to assist Gong Zong, the commander-in-chief of important secrets, and obeyed him at home and abroad.

古文：行次云中，将济河，宴诸将于宫。
现代文：世祖行进停驻云中，将要渡过黄河，在行宫宴请各将领。
English: The ancestor of the world will travel and stop in the clouds, cross the Yellow River, and invite the generals to a banquet at the imperial palace.

古文：世祖别御静室，召寿及司徒崔浩、尚书李顺。世祖谓寿曰： 蠕蠕吴提与牧犍连和，今闻朕征凉州，必来犯塞，若伏兵漠南，殄之为易。
现代文：世祖另外到清静的房舍，召见穆寿和司徒崔浩、尚书李顺，世祖对穆寿说： 蠕蠕吴提和牧犍联合，现在听说我征伐凉州，必定前来侵犯边境，如果埋伏兵马在沙漠南面，消灭他们是容易的。
English: In addition, the ancestor went to a quiet house and summoned Mu Shou and the scholars Cui Hao and Shangshu Li Shun. The ancestor said to Mu Shou: "Wu Wudi and Mu Xi are united. Now that I have heard that I will conquer Liangzhou, I must come to violate the border. If the ambush soldiers and horses are in the south of the desert, it is easy to eliminate them.

古文：朕故留壮兵肥马，使卿辅佐太子。
现代文：所以我留下强壮的兵士肥大的马匹，派你辅佐太子。
English: That's why I left strong soldiers and big horses behind and sent you to assist the crown prince.

古文：收田既讫，便可分伏要害，以待虏至，引使深入，然后击之，擒之必矣。
现代文：狩猎结束后，就可分兵埋伏在要害地区，等待敌寇到来，引诱他们深入内地，然后攻打他们，擒获他们是必然的。
English: After the hunt is over, detachments of soldiers can lie in wait in key areas, wait for the arrival of enemy raiders, lure them deep into the interior, and then attack them. Capturing them is inevitable.

古文：凉州远，朕不得救。
现代文：凉州路途遥远，我不能救援。
English: Liangzhou is a long way away, I can not rescue.

古文：卿若违朕指授，为虏侵害，朕还斩卿。
现代文：你如果违背我的指令，遭敌寇侵犯伤害，我返回后就杀你。
English: If you disobey my orders and are harmed by the invaders, I will kill you when I return.

古文：崔浩、李顺为证，非虚言也。 
现代文：崔浩、李顺做证人，这不是假话。 
English: Cui Hao and Li Shun testify that I am not a liar.

古文：寿顿首受诏。
现代文：穆寿叩头接受诏令。
English: Mu Shou's followers accept the edict.

古文：寿信卜筮之言，谓贼不来，竟不设备。
现代文：穆寿相信占卜之人的话，认为贼寇不会来，竟不设立戒备。
English: Mu Shou believed the words of the soothsayer and thought that the bandits would not come, but he did not set up a guard.

古文：而吴提果至，侵及善无，京师大骇。
现代文：而吴提果然到来，侵犯到善无，京城大为惊扰。
English: But Wu Ti did indeed arrive, encroaching on everything, and the capital was greatly alarmed.

古文：寿不知所为，欲筑西郭门，请恭宗避保南山。
现代文：穆寿不知怎样应对，想修筑西城门，请恭宗躲到南山据守。
English: Mu Shou didn't know what to do. He wanted to build the west gate, so he asked King Gongzong to hide in Nanshan.

古文：惠太后不听，乃止。
现代文：惠太后不听从，才作罢。
English: If Empress Dowager Hui did not listen, he had to stop.

古文：遣司空长孙道生等击走之。
现代文：派遣司空长孙道生等人打退了吴提。
English: He dispatched Sun Daosheng, the head of the Civil Aeronautics Administration, and others to repel Wu Ti.

古文：世祖还，以无大损伤，故不追咎。
现代文：世祖返回，因没有大的损伤，所以不追究罪过。
English: The ancestor returned, and since there was no major damage, he was not prosecuted.

古文：恭宗监国，寿与崔浩等辅政，人皆敬浩，寿独凌之。
现代文：恭宗代掌国政，穆寿和崔浩等人辅佐政事，人们都敬重崔浩，惟独穆寿凌辱他。
English: Gongzong was in charge of state affairs, and Mu Shou and Cui Hao and others assisted in government affairs. People respected Cui Hao, but only Mu Shou insulted him.

古文：又自恃位任，以为人莫己及。
现代文：又自恃地位宠信，以为别人谁也赶不上自己。
English: They also believe that they are favored by their status, and think that no one else can catch up with them.

古文：谓其子师曰： 但令吾兒及我，亦足胜人，不须苦教之。 
现代文：对自己的儿子穆师说： 衹要使我的儿子赶得上我，也足以胜过别人，不需要苦苦教导他们。 
English: To his son, Mu Shi, he said: "If I want my son to catch up with me, it is enough to be better than others, I don't need to teach them hard.

古文：遇诸父兄弟有如仆隶，夫妻并坐共食，而令诸父馂余。
现代文：对待叔父伯父和兄弟如同仆人奴隶，夫妻坐在一起共同进餐，而使叔父伯父吃剩余的。
English: Treating their uncles and brothers like servants and slaves, the couple would sit down to a meal together and let their uncles eat the leftovers.

古文：其自矜无礼如此，为时人所鄙笑。
现代文：他就是如此地傲慢无礼，被当时人所鄙视嘲笑。
English: He was so arrogant and rude that he was despised and ridiculed by the people of his time.

古文：真君八年薨。
现代文：真君八年逝世。
English: Mankun passed away eight years ago.

古文：赠太尉，谥曰文宣。
现代文：追赠太尉，谧号为文宣。
English: He was posthumously promoted to the rank of captain, and his nickname was Wen Xuan.

古文：子平国，袭爵。
现代文：儿子平国，继承爵位。
English: His son, Taira no Kuni, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：尚城阳长公主，拜驸马都尉、侍中、中书监，为太子四辅。
现代文：娶城阳长公主。被任命为驸马都尉、侍中、中书监，任太子四辅。
English: He married the eldest princess, Shiyang. He was appointed as the captain of the imperial cavalry, the chamberlain, the middle school librarian, and the fourth assistant to the crown prince.

古文：正平元年卒。
现代文：正平元年去世。
English: Zhengping died in the first year of the year.

古文：子伏干，袭爵。
现代文：儿子伏干，继承爵位。
English: His son, Fukan, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：尚济北公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶济北公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: He married the princess of Jibei and was appointed lieutenant of the imperial horse.

古文：和平二年卒，谥曰康。
现代文：和平二年去世，谧号为康。
English: He died in the second year of the Heian period, and his nickname was Kang.

古文：无子。
现代文：没有儿子。
English: Wang Jun has no son.

古文：伏干弟罴，袭爵。
现代文：伏干的弟弟穆照，继承爵位。
English: Fukan's younger brother, Mu Zhao, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：尚新平长公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：娶新平长公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: He married the eldest princess of Xinping and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse.

古文：又附虎牢镇将，频以不法致罪。
现代文：又授任虎牢镇将，接连因不守法度而获罪。
English: In addition, he was appointed as the general of Huludao Town, and was convicted one after another for not abiding by the law.

古文：高祖以其勋德之胄，让而赦之。
现代文：高祖因他是功臣的后代，责问后赦免了他。
English: Gaozu pardoned him after questioning him because he was a descendant of a hero.

古文：转征东将军、吐京镇将。
现代文：改任征东将军、吐京镇将。
English: He was reassigned to the post of Eastern General and the post of Toki Town General.

古文：罴赏善罚恶，深自克励。
现代文：穆熊赏赐好人惩罚坏人，努力克制激励自己。
English: Mo Xiong rewards good people, punishes bad people, and strives to restrain and motivate himself.

古文：时西河胡叛，罴欲讨之，而离石都将郭洛头拒违不从。
现代文：当时西河胡人反叛，穆罢想讨伐他们，而盘五都将郭盗亟违抗不服从。
English: At that time, the Xihe Hu people rebelled, Mu Bebe wanted to fight them, and Pan Wugu urged Guo Guo to resist and disobey.

古文：罴遂上表自劾，以威不摄下，请就刑戮。
现代文：穆罢于是上奏举劾自己，因威信不足以统领下属，请求受刑罚。
English: Mu De then appealed to impeach himself, because authority is not enough to command subordinates, and asked to be punished.

古文：高祖乃免洛头官。
现代文：高祖于是免除洛头的官职。
English: As a result, Gaozu removed Luo Tou from his official position.

古文：山胡刘什婆寇掠郡县，罴讨灭之。
现代文：山胡刘什婆侵犯掳掠郡县，蝈讨伐消灭了他们。
English: Shanhu Liu Shibah invaded and plundered counties and counties, and fought and eliminated them.

古文：自是部内肃然，莫不敬惮。
现代文：从此境内安宁，无不恭敬畏惧。
English: Since then, there has been peace in the country, with no disrespect or fear.

古文：后改京洋镇为汾州，仍以罴为刺史。
现代文：后来改吐基箠为进业，仍以!蝎为刺史。
English: Later, he changed his name to "Tukiji" for further studies, but he still uses "!蝎" as his nickname.

古文：前吐京太守刘升，在郡甚有威惠，限满还都，胡民八百余人诣罴请之。
现代文：前任吐直太守刘丑，在郡中很有威信恩惠，期限满后回都城，翅民八百多人前往穆罢那裹请求留下刘升。
English: The previous governor of Tu Zhi Dao, Liu U, was very respected and favored in the county. After the expiration of his term, he returned to the capital. More than 800 people went to Mubenabai to ask Liu Sheng to stay.

古文：前定阳令吴平仁亦有恩信，户增数倍。
现代文：前任定阳令县王仁也有恩惠信义，户口增加几倍。
English: His predecessor, Wang Ren of Dingyangling County, also received favors and loyalty, and his household registration increased several times.

古文：罴以吏民怀之，并为表请。
现代文：穆熊因官吏民众怀念二人，都为上奏请求。
English: Mu Xiong was asked to play two songs in memory of officials and the public.

古文：高祖毕从焉。
现代文：高祖都听从了。
English: The ancestors all obeyed.

古文：罴既频荐升等，所部守令，咸自砥砺，威化大行，百姓安之。
现代文：穆熊接连推荐刘升等人后，所属的郡守县令，都自己严格要求，教化大行，百姓安居乐业。
English: After Mu Xiong successively recommended Liu Sheng and others, the county governors and county magistrates he belonged to all had strict requirements of their own, carried out extensive education, and allowed the people to live and work in peace.

古文：州民李轨、郭及祖等七百余人，诣阙颂罴恩德。
现代文：州民李轨、郭及祖等七百多人，前往朝廷歌颂穆罢的恩德。
English: More than seven hundred people, including the state's citizens Li Luo, Guo and Zu, went to the imperial court to sing the praises of Mu.

古文：高祖以罴政和民悦，增秩延限。
现代文：高祖因穆熊政事和顺民众喜悦，增加他的俸禄延长他的任职期限。
English: Gaozu increased his salary and extended his term of office, which was welcomed by the people of Shun and Mu Xiong.

古文：后徵为光禄勋，随例降王为魏郡开国公，邑五百户。
现代文：后来征任光禄勋。依例降王爵为魏郡开国公，食邑五百户。
English: Later, he was appointed as a member of the Order of the Radiant Star. As usual, he was made a Knight of the Garter and became the founding father of Wei County, with 500 households in the county.

古文：又除镇北将军、燕州刺史，镇广宁。
现代文：又授任镇北将军、燕州刺史，镇守广宁。
English: He was also awarded the title of Zhenbei General, Yanzhou Shishi, and Zhengu Guangning.

古文：寻迁都督夏州、高平镇诸军事，本将军，夏州刺史，镇统万。
现代文：不久调任都督夏州、高平镇诸军事，本号将军，夏州刺史，镇守统万。
English: He was soon transferred to the military as the governor of Xiazhou and Gaoping Town. He was given the title of general, the history of Xiazhou was engraved on his tombstone, and the number of town guards was increased to 10,000.

古文：又除侍中、中书监。
现代文：又授任侍中、中书监。
English: He was also awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School and Junior High School Supervisor.

古文：穆泰之反，罴与潜通，赦后事发，削封为民。
现代文：穆泰谋反，穆罢和他暗中来往，赦免后事情泄露，被削去封爵为平民。
English: Mutai plotted rebellion, Mu Bo had secret dealings with him, the affair leaked out after he was pardoned, and he was stripped of his knighthood and became a commoner.

古文：卒于家。
现代文：在家中去世。
English: He died at home.

古文：世宗时，追赠镇北将军、恆州刺史。
现代文：世宗时，追赠他为镇北将军、恒州刺史。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Zhenbei General and Hengzhou Historian.

古文：子建，字晚兴，性通率，颇好文史。
现代文：儿子穆建，字晚兴，性格通脱直率，很喜好文史。
English: His son, Mu Jian, nicknamed "Late Xing," is a free-spirited and straightforward person who likes literature and history.

古文：起家秘书郎，稍迁直阁将军，兼武卫。
现代文：出仕为秘书郎，逐渐升迁到直合将军，兼任武卫将军。
English: He started out as a secretary and was gradually promoted to the post of General Zhaohe, and also served as General Wuwei.

古文：建妻尔朱荣之妹，建常依附荣。
现代文：穆建的妻子是尔朱荣的妹妹，穆建时常依附尔朱荣。
English: Mu Jian's wife is the sister of Er Zhu Rong, and Mu Jian often clings to Er Zhu Rong.

古文：荣入洛之后，除镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫、征北将军，封济北郡开国公。
现代文：尔朱荣进入洛阳以后，授任穆建为镇东将军、金紫光禄大夫、征北将军，封为济北郡开国公。
English: After Le Zhu Rong entered Luoyang, he appointed Mu Jian as the Zhendong General, the Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, the Northern Expedition General, and the founding father of Jibei County.

古文：后迁散骑常侍、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、兼尚书、北道行台、并州事。
现代文：后来调任散骑常侍、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫、兼尚书、北道行台、并州事。
English: Later, he was transferred to the positions of horseback riding attendant, chariot riding general, doctor of the left side of the compass, imperial secretary, governor of Hokkedo, and governor of the state.

古文：元晔之立，建兼尚书右仆射，俄转侍中、骠骑大将军。
现代文：元晔登位，穆建兼尚书右仆射，不久改任侍中、骠骑大将军。
English: Yuan Shao ascended to the throne, and Mu Jian and Shang Shuxu became his right-hand men. Soon, he was promoted to the position of chamberlain and cavalry general.

古文：出帝末，本将军、仪同三司、洛州刺史。
现代文：出帝末年，任本号将军、仪同三司、洛州刺史。
English: At the end of the imperial era, he was appointed to the post of General, the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the Secretary of State of the State of Luozhou.

古文：天平中，坐事自杀于五原城北。
现代文：天平年间，因事获罪在五原城北自杀。
English: During the Tenpyo era, he committed suicide in the northern part of Gohara Castle after being convicted of a crime.

古文：子千牙，武定中，开府祭酒。
现代文：儿子千牙，武定年间，任开府祭酒。
English: His son Chigusa, during the Wuding era, was in charge of brewing the Kaifu Festival Sake.

古文：建弟衍，字进兴。
现代文：穆建的弟弟穆衍，字进兴。
English: Mu Jian's younger brother Mu Yan, also known as Jin Xing.

古文：解褐员外郎，封新兴县开国子，稍迁通直常侍，行云州事。
现代文：出仕为员外郎，被封为新兴县开国子，逐渐升迁到通直常侍、行云州事。
English: He served as a member of the outer court, was appointed as the founder of a new county, and was gradually promoted to the position of a regular attendant to the emperor and to the highest post in Yunnan.

古文：罴弟亮，字幼辅，初字老生，早有风度。
现代文：穆罢的弟弟穆亮，字幼辅，起初字为老生，早年有风度。
English: Mubai's younger brother, Mu Liang, whose first name means "young assistant," was at first called "old student" and had a demeanor in his early years.

古文：显祖时，起家为侍御中散。
现代文：显祖时，出仕为侍御中散。
English: At the time of Emperor Xianzu, he served as an attendant to the Emperor.

古文：尚中山长公主，拜驸马都尉，封赵郡王，加侍中、征南大将军。
现代文：娶中山长公主，被任命为驸马都尉，封赵郡王，加授侍中、征南大将军。
English: He married the First Princess of Zhongshan and was appointed Lieutenant of the Horse Guards, given the title of King of Zhao County, and promoted to Vice Admiral and General of the Southern Expedition.

古文：徙封长乐王。
现代文：改封为长乐王。
English: He was renamed Changle Wang.

古文：高祖初，除使持节、秦州刺史。
现代文：高祖初年，授任为使持节、秦州刺史。
English: In Gao Zu's first year, he was awarded the title of "Envoy of the Year" and "Qin State Historian."

古文：在州未期，大著声称。
现代文：到任不到一年，名声大振。
English: Less than a year into the job, he's made a name for himself.

古文：徵为殿中尚书。又迁使持节、征西大将军、西戎校尉、敦煌镇都大将。
现代文：征入任殿中尚书又调任使持节、征西大将军、西戎校尉、敦煌镇都大将。
English: He was conscripted into the appointment hall, and was transferred to the post of envoy, general of the Western Expedition, lieutenant of the Western Expedition, and general of Dunhuang Town.

古文：政尚宽简，赈恤穷乏。
现代文：政事崇尚宽厚简约，赈济抚恤困苦贫乏的人。
English: The government advocates a generous and simple policy, and provides subsidies to the poor and needy.

古文：被徵还朝，百姓追思之。
现代文：被征召回朝廷，百姓自念。
English: He was called back to the imperial court, and the people were heartbroken.

古文：除都督秦梁益三州诸军事、征南大将军、领护西戎校尉、仇池镇将。
现代文：授任他为都督秦梁益三州诸军事、征南大将军、兼护西戎校尉、仇池镇将。
English: He was appointed as the military governor of Qin Liangyizhanzhou, the general of the Southern Expedition, the lieutenant of the West Garrison, and the general of Quchi Town.

古文：时宕昌王梁弥机死，子弥博立，为吐谷浑所逼，来奔仇池。
现代文：当时宕昌王梁弥机死去，儿子弥博继位，被吐谷浑逼迫，前来投奔仇池。
English: At that time, the king of the Tang Dynasty, Liang Yicai, died, and his son, Yibo, succeeded to the throne. He was forced by Tu Gu Han to come and take the throne.

古文：亮以弥机蕃款素著，矜其亡灭；弥博凶悖，氐羌所弃；弥机兄子弥承，戎民归乐，表请纳之。
现代文：穆亮因弥机作为藩臣的诚心一向昭着，同情他的死亡；弥博凶恶狂悖，被氐人羌人所厌弃；弥机哥哥的儿子弥承。为戎族民众所归附乐意，穆亮上奏疏请求立他。
English: Mu Liang has always been known for his sincerity as a vassal of the domain, and he sympathizes with his death; Yibo is vicious and rebellious, and is hated by everyone; the son of Yachi's brother succeeds him. For the willingness of the people of the Ezo people, Mu Liang sent a letter to Soso to request his appointment.

古文：高祖从焉。
现代文：高祖听从造一建议。
English: Gao Zu heeded Zou's suggestion.

古文：于是率骑三万，次于龙鹄，击走吐谷浑，立弥承而还。
现代文：穆亮于是率领骑兵三万人，停驻在龙鹄，打败吐谷浑，扶立弥承后返回。
English: Mu Liang then led a cavalry of thirty thousand men, stationed in Longjing, defeated Tu Guhun, and returned after Fu Li Yixing.

古文：是时，阶陵比谷羌董耕奴、斯卑等率众数千人，寇仇池，屯于阳遐岭，亮副将杨灵珍率骑击走之。
现代文：这时，阶陵比谷羌董耕奴、斯卑等人率领部众几千人，侵犯仇池，驻扎在阳遐岭，穆亮的副将杨灵珍率领骑兵打退了他们。
English: At this time, Zhuling Bi Gu, Dong Gongnu, Spi and others led thousands of troops to invade Qiuchi and stationed in Yangshuiling. Yang Lingzhen, Mu Liang's deputy, led the cavalry to repel them.

古文：氐豪杨卜，自延兴以来，从军征伐，二十一战，前来镇将，抑而不闻。
现代文：氐人豪强杨卜，从延兴年间以来，随从军队征伐，作战二十一次，从前的镇将，压制他不报告。
English: Yang Bu, the hero of Xingren, has accompanied the army to conquer and fight twenty-one times since the Yanxing years. He is a former town commander, suppressing him and not reporting him.

古文：亮表卜为广业太守，豪右咸悦，境内大安。
现代文：穆亮上奏请求杨卜任广业太守，豪强都高兴，境内很安宁。
English: Mu Liang recommended Yang Buren as the governor of Guangye on the table. Those powerful people were very happy, and the territory was very stable.

古文：徵为侍中、尚书右仆射。
现代文：征召穆亮任侍中、尚书右仆射。
English: Mu Liang was conscripted to serve as a chamberlain, and Shang Shuxu, his right-hand man, was sent to the front.

古文：于时，复置司州。
现代文：这时，又设置司州。
English: At this time, Shizhou was also set up.

古文：高祖曰： 司州始立，未有僚吏，须立中正，以定选举。
现代文：高祖说： 司州刚设置，没有僚属，必须设立中正，来决定选用贤能。
English: Gao Zu said, "Sizhou has just been set up, and there are no subordinates. We must set up Zhongzheng to decide on the selection of talents.

古文：然中正之任，必须德望兼资者。
现代文：然而中正的职位，必须德行声望兼备的人。
English: However, for the position of Zhongzheng, one must have both virtue and prestige.

古文：世祖时，崔浩为冀州中正，长孙嵩为司州中正，可谓得人。
现代文：世祖的时候，崔浩担任冀州中正，长孙嵩担任司州中正，可以说是得到合适人选。
English: At the time of the founder, Cui Hao served as the Jizhou Vice-governor, and the eldest son Song served as the Sizhou Vice-governor, which can be said to be a suitable candidate.

古文：公卿等宜自相推举，必令称允。 
现代文：公卿大臣应互相推举，一定要使人选称职允当。 
English: Kugyo and ministers should be nominated by each other, and it is imperative to select people who are qualified for the position.

古文：尚书陆睿举亮为司州大中正。
现代文：尚书陆欢推举穆亮为司州大中正。
English: Shangshu Lu Rui also recommended Mu Liang for the post of Sizhou Zhongzheng.

古文：时萧赜遣将陈显达攻陷醴阳，加亮使持节，征南大将军，都督怀、洛、南、北豫、徐、兗六州诸军事以讨之。
现代文：当时萧赜派遣将领陈显达攻下醴阳，加授穆亮为使持节，征南大将军，都督怀、洛、南北豫、徐、兖六州诸军事去讨伐他们。
English: At that time, Xiao Yu sent the general Chen Xianda to conquer Fenyang, and awarded Mu Liang the title of Envoy to Persevere, and sent the Southern General and the military from the six states of Huai, Luo, Nanfangyuan, Xu and Qin to fight them.

古文：显达遁走，乃还。
现代文：显达逃走，穆亮才返回。
English: Hende ran away, and Mu Liang returned.

古文：寻迁司空，参议律令。
现代文：不久升任司空，参与制定法律条令。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of director of the Civil Aeronautics Administration and participated in the formulation of laws and regulations.

古文：例降爵为公。
现代文：依条例降爵位为公。
English: As is customary, he was reduced to the rank of duke.

古文：时文明太后崩，已过期月，高祖毁瘠犹甚。
现代文：当时文明太后逝世，已过一周年，高祖悲伤消瘦仍很突出。
English: At that time, the first anniversary of the death of the Empress Dowager of Civilization had passed, and Gao Zu's sadness and emaciation were still very prominent.

古文：亮表曰： 王者居极，至尊至重，父天母地，怀柔百灵。
现代文：穆亮上奏疏说：君王处于统治地位，最尊贵最重大，以天为父以地为母，取悦百神。
English: Mu Liang wrote: The king is in the dominant position, the most honorable and the most important, with heaven as the father and earth as the mother, pleasing hundreds of gods.

古文：是以古先哲王，制礼成务。
现代文：所以古代英明的君王，制定礼仪完成事务。
English: That is why the wise kings of ancient times established etiquette to complete affairs.

古文：施政立治，必顺天而后动；宣宪垂范，必依典而后行。
现代文：施行政事确立治道，必定顺应天道而后举办；宣扬法典留下规范，必定依照典章而后行动。
English: To carry out administrative affairs and establish a legal way, it must be organized in accordance with the heavenly way; to propagate the code and leave norms, it must act in accordance with the regulations.

古文：用能四时不忒，阴阳和暢。
现代文：因而能四季不出差错，阴阳和顺。
English: Therefore, the four seasons can not go wrong, yin and yang are harmonious.

古文：若有过举，咎徵必集。
现代文：如果有过分的举动，灾祸的征兆必然会集。
English: If you act excessively, the omens of disaster are sure to gather.

古文：故大舜至慕，事在纳麓之前；孔子至圣，丧无过瘠之纪。
现代文：所以大舜深深的思念，事情在总揽大政以前；孔于是最高的圣人，丧事没有过度悲痛而致消瘦的准则。
English: Therefore, Daju thought deeply about the matter before the general election; Kong was the highest saint, and there was no excessive grief at the funeral, leading to the principle of wasting.

古文：尧书稽古之美，不录在服之痛；《礼》备诸侯之丧，而无天子之式。
现代文：《尧书》稽考古代的美事，不记录服丧时的悲痛；《仪礼》详载诸侯的丧葬，而没有天子的标准。
English: "The Book of Decrees" reviews the ancient beauties, but does not record the grief at the time of mourning; "Rites" details the funerals of princes, but does not have the standard of the Son of Heaven.

古文：虽有上达之言，未见居丧之典。
现代文：虽然有向上升进之言，没有见到服丧的典章。
English: Although there was talk of promotion, there was no formal mourning ceremony.

古文：然则位重者为世以屈己，居圣者达命以忘情。
现代文：那么地位贵重的为世人而委屈自己，居于圣贤的通达天命而忘却情怀。
English: Such a high-ranking person wrongs himself for the sake of the world and forgets his feelings for the sake of attaining the destiny of a sage.

古文：伏惟陛下至德参二仪，惠泽覃河海，宣礼明刑，动遵古式。
现代文：陛下的大德与日月相并，恩泽延及黄河大海，宣扬礼制严明政刑，一切行为遵从古代准则。
English: His Majesty's great virtue is on a par with the sun and the moon, and his benevolence extends to the Yellow River and the sea. He preaches the etiquette of strict government punishment, and all actions follow the ancient standards.

古文：以至孝之痛，服期年之丧，练事既阕，号慕如始。
现代文：以纯孝的悲痛，服周年的丧事，服期已满，号哭思念如当初。
English: With the grief of pure filial piety, the funeral of the anniversary of service, the service period has expired, crying and missing as in the beginning.

古文：统重极之尊，同众庶之制，废越绋之大敬，阙宗祀之旧轨。
现代文：统领最高权力的尊贵，同于众人的制度，废除天地社稷的重大恭敬，阙略宗庙祭祀的旧曰法度。
English: The nobility of the supreme power is the same as the system of all people, the great respect of heaven and earth and society is abolished, and the old law of temple worship is abolished.

古文：诚由文明太皇太后圣略超古，惠训深至，欲报之德，昊天罔极。比之前代，戚为过甚。
现代文：实在是由于文明太皇太后圣明谋略超越古代，贤惠教导深入周到，想要报答她的恩德，如上天没有穷尽，同前代相比，悲伤过于深沉。
English: In fact, it is because the civilization of the great empress dowager's sage strategy surpasses the ancient times, and the virtuous teachings are profound and thoughtful, and she wants to repay her kindness, as if heaven has no end, compared with the previous generation, the sadness is too deep.

古文：岂所谓顺帝之则，约躬随众者也？
现代文：这哪裹是顺从上天的规则，克制自己随从众人的做法呢?
English: What does it mean to obey the rules of heaven and restrain oneself from following the crowd?

古文：陛下既为天地所子，又为万民父母。
现代文：陛下既是天地的儿子，又是广大民众的父母。
English: His Majesty is both the son of heaven and earth and the parent of the broad masses of the people.

古文：子过哀，父则为之惨悴；父过戚，子则为之忧伤。
现代文：儿子过度哀痛，父亲就为他凄楚憔悴；父亲过度悲伤，儿子就为他忧愁伤心。
English: When a son is excessively sad, his father is distraught; when a father is excessively sad, his son is sad.

古文：近蒙接见，咫尺旒冕，圣容哀毁，骇感无止，况神祗至灵，而不久亏和气，微致风旱者哉？
现代文：我近来受到接见，舆陛下近在咫尺，见圣明的容貌哀伤消瘦，惊骇感慨不止，何况神明最威灵，而不长久亏损和顺之气，略微导致风暴干旱呢?
English: I have recently been received, my majesty is close at hand, I see the holy man's face sad and emaciated, I am shocked and appalled, not to mention the god's most powerful, but not long-term loss and complacency, slightly leading to storm drought?

古文：《书》称： 一人有庆，兆民赖之 。今一人过哀，黎元焉系？
现代文：《尚书》说 一人有福，广大民众仰赖他 ，现在一人过度哀伤，百姓归向谁呢?
English: "Shangshu" said that one person is blessed, the broad masses of the people rely on him, now one person is excessively sad, who will the people turn to?

古文：群官所以颠殒震惧，率土所以危惶悚忄栗；百姓何仰而不忧，嘉禾何由而播殖？
现代文：群官为之忧思震惊，境内为之惶恐畏惧，百姓仰赖谁而不忧愁，茁壮的禾稻凭什么播种?
English: The officials were shocked and worried by it, the people were scared and frightened by it, the people did not worry about who to rely on, and what was the best way to sow flourishing rice?

古文：愿陛下上承金册遗训，下称亿兆之心，时袭轻服，数御常膳，修崇郊祠，垂惠咸秩；舆驾时动，以释忧烦；博采广谘，以导性气；息无益之恋，行利见之德；则休徵可致，嘉应必臻，礼教并宣，孝慈兼备，普天蒙赖，含生幸甚。 
现代文：希望陛下在上承奉金册遣训，在下满足广大民众心意，及时脱下丧服饮食如常，施行郊庙祭祀，垂下恩惠给百神，车驾不时出动，来解除众人的忧愁烦恼，广博地采访咨询，来疏导性情心气，乎息没有益处的思念，施行显见的恩德。这样美好的征兆可以招致，吉祥的应验必定到来。礼乐教化一并宣扬，孝顺慈爱兼具完备，普天之下有所依赖，一切生灵荣幸之至。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will undertake the training of the golden book on the upper level, satisfy the hearts of the general public on the lower level, take off the mourning clothes in time and eat as usual, perform the suburban temple sacrifice, bestow favors on the hundreds of gods, drive from time to time, relieve the sorrows and troubles of the people, interview and consult widely, guide the temperament and temperament, dispel the thoughts that are of no benefit, and implement the obvious grace. Such a good omen can be invited, and the auspicious fulfillment will surely come. The liturgy and music are preached together, filial piety and mercy are both complete, there is dependence in the whole world,

古文：诏曰： 苟孝悌之至，无所不通。
现代文：诏书说： 如果孝悌到极黠，没有什么不通畅。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "If filial piety is supreme, everything will be understood."

古文：今飘风亢旱，时雨不降，实由诚慕未浓，幽显无感也。
现代文：现在狂风大旱，不下透雨，实在是因诚挚的思念不够，天地神灵没有被感动。
English: It's windy and dry right now. When the rain doesn't fall, it's really because the sincerity hasn't arrived, and the dim light hasn't been felt!

古文：所言过哀之咎，谅为未衷，省启以增悲愧。 
现代文：所说遇度悲伤的过失，实为不中肯的话，读过后更增加悲痛惭愧。 
English: What is said about the fault of experiencing sadness is really not pertinent, and after reading it, the sorrow and shame increase even more.

古文：寻领太子太傅。
现代文：不久兼任太子太傅。
English: Soon, Mu Liang also became the crown prince.

古文：时将建太极殿，引见群臣于太华殿，高祖曰： 朕仰遵先意，将营殿宇，役夫既至，兴功有日。
现代文：这时将要修建太极殿，在太华殿接见群臣，高祖说： 我上遵先人意愿，将要营造殿堂，民工到达后，不日就动工。
English: At this time, the Taiji Hall was to be built, and Gao Zu met with his ministers in the Taihua Hall. Gao Zu said, "I will follow the wishes of my predecessors and build the hall. After the arrival of the migrant workers, the construction will begin soon."

古文：今欲徙居永乐，以避嚣埃。
现代文：现在要迁居永乐宫，以避开喧闹尘埃。
English: Now they have to move to Yongle Palace to get away from the noise and dust.

古文：土木虽复无心，毁之能不凄怆。
现代文：土木虽没有心，毁掉它们岂能不凄伤?
English: Although civil engineering has no heart, would it not be sad to destroy it?

古文：今故临对卿等，与之取别。
现代文：所以现在面对各位，同它们告别。
English: Today, I'm singing a special farewell to it in front of everyone.

古文：此殿乃高宗所制，爰历显祖，逮朕冲年，受位于此。
现代文：这座殿是高宗建造，经历显祖，到我幼年，在这里接受大位。
English: This palace was built by Emperor Gaozong. When Emperor Xianzu passed away, he was succeeded to the throne here when I was a child.

古文：但事来夺情，将有改制，仰惟畴昔，惟深悲感。 
现代文：衹因事情变化强抑感情，将要改建，回顾往昔，深为悲痛感慨。 
English: Due to the change of things, I have strong emotions, will be rebuilt, look back on the past, and feel deeply sad.

古文：亮稽首对曰： 臣闻稽之卜筮，载自典经，占以决疑，古今攸尚。
现代文：穆亮叩头回答说： 臣下听说用卜筮稽考，记载在经典中，用占卜来决断疑惑的事，是古今所崇尚的。
English: Mu Liang replied, "My subjects have heard that the use of divination, recorded in the classics, to resolve doubts through divination, has been revered from ancient times to the present.

古文：兴建之功，事在不易，愿陛下讯之蓍龟，以定可否。
现代文：兴建工程，事情不容易，希望陛下用蓍草龟甲讯问，来决定可行与否。
English: The construction project is not easy. I hope that His Majesty will use the tortoise and hare inquiry to decide whether it is feasible or not.

古文：又去岁役作，为功甚多，太庙明堂，一年便就。
现代文：另外去年劳役，用工很多，太庙明堂，一年才完成。
English: In addition, there was a lot of labor last year, and the Taimiao Ming Hall was only completed in one year.

古文：若仍岁频兴，恐民力凋弊。
现代文：如果连年修建，恐怕民力凋敝。
English: If it is built year after year, I am afraid that people's willpower will wither away.

古文：且材干新伐，为功不固，愿得逾年，小康百姓。 
现代文：而且材料刚砍伐，质量不牢固，希望年后动工，使百姓略为安定。 
English: Moreover, the material has just been cut down, the quality is not solid, and it is hoped that construction will start later, so that the people will be slightly stable.

古文：高祖曰： 若终不为，可如卿言。
现代文：高祖说： 如果最终不修建，可如你所说的。
English: Gao Zu said: If it is not built in the end, it can be done as you said.

古文：后必为之，逾年何益？
现代文：如今后必定修建，跨年后有什么益处?
English: It's bound to be built now, what's the benefit of waiting years?

古文：朕远览前王，无不兴造。
现代文：我远观前代帝王，无不修建殿堂。
English: I looked at the previous emperors from afar, and they all built palaces.

古文：故有周创业，经建灵台；洪汉受终，未央是作。
现代文：所以周朝开创业绩，建造灵台；汉朝受命，建造未央宫。
English: Therefore, the Zhou Dynasty began to make great achievements and built a spiritual platform; the Han Dynasty was ordered to build the Weiyang Palace.

古文：草创之初，犹尚若此，况朕承累圣之运，属太平之基。
现代文：初创的阶段，尚且如此，何况我继承各代圣人的国运，遇上太平的根基。
English: This was still the case in the initial stage, not to mention that I inherited the national fortune of the saints of all generations and encountered the foundation of peace.

古文：且今八表清晏，年谷又登，爰及此时，以就大功。
现代文：而且如今天下太平，五谷丰收，应在此时，来完成大工程。
English: Moreover, if today is a peaceful day and the grain harvest is plentiful, the big project should be completed at this time.

古文：人生定分，修短命也，蓍蔡虽智，其如之何？
现代文：人生有固定的名分，长短是命运，卜筮虽然灵验，又能怎么样?
English: Life has a fixed name, the length is fate, although the divination is effective, what can be done?

古文：当委之大分，岂假卜筮？ 
现代文：应当决定于天命，何必凭藉卜筮? 
English: It should be decided by fate, why should we rely on conjecture?

古文：遂移御永乐宫。
现代文：于是迁居到永乐宫。
English: As a result, they moved to Yongle Palace.

古文：后高祖临朝堂，谓亮曰： 三代之礼，日出视朝。自汉魏以降，礼仪渐杀。
现代文：后来高祖临朝，对穆亮说： 三代的礼仪，太阳一出就上朝理事，从漠魏以后，礼仪逐渐凋落。
English: Later, Gao Zu went to the imperial court and said to Mu Liang: The etiquette of the three generations, the sun will rise to the imperial court, and after the Wei Dynasty, the etiquette will gradually decline.

古文：《晋令》有朔望集公卿于朝堂而论政事，亦无天子亲临之文。
现代文：《晋令》中有初一和十五召集公卿在朝堂而讨论政事，也没有天子亲自前往的条文。
English: There is a provision in the "Imperial edict" that the nobles should gather in the court to discuss political affairs on the day of the new moon, but there is no record of the emperor's presence.

古文：今因卿等日中之集，中前则卿等自论政事，中后与卿等共议可否。 
现代文：现在因你们中午聚集，中午以前你们就自己讨论政事，中午以后我和你们共同议定可行与否。 
English: Now, since you have gathered at noon, before noon you will discuss political affairs on your own, and after noon I will discuss with you whether it is feasible or not.

古文：遂命读奏案，高祖亲自决之。
现代文：于是命令阅读上奏文案，高祖亲自决断。
English: So he ordered to read the text of the appeal, and Gaozu himself decided.

古文：又谓亮曰： 徐州表给归化人禀。
现代文：又对穆亮说： 徐州上奏赐给归顺者口粮。
English: He also said to Mu Liang: Xuzhou Shangso has given rations to those who have surrendered.

古文：王者民之父母，诚宜许之。
现代文：君王是民众的父母，实在应准许这件事。
English: The king is the parent of the people and should really allow this to happen.

古文：但今荆扬不宾，书轨未一，方欲亲御六师，问罪江介。
现代文：不过现在荆州扬州不归附，天下没统一，我将要亲自统领六军，到量江边问罪。
English: However, now that Jingzhou and Yangzhou are not annexed and the world is not unified, I will personally lead the Six Armies and go to the Yangtze River to ask for punishment.

古文：计万户投化，岁食百万，若听其给也，则蕃储虚竭。
现代文：估算一万户投诚，一年粮一百万石，如果准许赐给，边地储蓄就空虚了。
English: It is estimated that ten thousand households have invested, and the annual grain is one million koku. If permission is granted, the marginal savings will be empty.

古文：虽得户千万，犹未成一同。
现代文：即使得到一千万户，还是没有达到统一。
English: Even if we get ten million households, we still haven't achieved unification.

古文：且欲随贫赈恤，卿意何如？ 
现代文：我想要根据贫困来赈济抚恤，你以为如何? 
English: I want to base my pension on poverty, what do you think?

古文：亮对曰： 所存远大，实如圣旨。 
现代文：穆亮回答说： 陛下所考虑的很远大，的确如圣旨所说。 
English: Mu Liang replied, "What Your Majesty has in mind is very far-reaching, just as His Holiness said.

古文：及车驾南迁，迁武卫大将军，以本官董摄中军事。
现代文：等到高祖向南迁徙，穆亮升武卫大将军，以本官代理中军事务。
English: When Gao Zu migrated to the south, Mu Liang was promoted to General Wu Wei, acting as his own official in charge of Chinese military affairs.

古文：高祖南伐，以亮录尚书事，留镇洛阳。
现代文：高祖向南讨伐，任命穆亮为录尚书事，留下来镇守洛阳。
English: Gaozu marched southward, appointed Mu Liang as the recorder, and stayed to defend Luoyang.

古文：后高祖将自小平泛舟幸石济，亮谏曰： 臣闻垂堂之诲，振古成规，于安思危，著于《周易》。
现代文：后来高祖将要从小平乘船到石济，穆亮规劝说： 臣下听说有关危险之地的教诲，是自古的既定规范，居安思危，明白地写在《周易》中。
English: Later, Gao Zu was about to take a boat from Xiaoping to Shijie, and Mu Liang persuaded him: The teachings of the dangerous land that the vassals had heard about were the established norms from ancient times, living in peace and thinking about danger, and were clearly written in "Zhou Yi."

古文：是以凭险弗防，没而不吊。
现代文：所以凭藉险要地势不防备，死后不吊祭。
English: Therefore, by taking advantage of the dangerous situation, there is no precaution, and there is no hanging sacrifice after death.

古文：匹夫之贱，犹不自轻，况万乘之尊，含生所仰，而可忽乎！
现代文：低贱的平民百姓，还不轻视自己，何况尊贵的天子，为生灵所仰赖，而能轻忽吗!
English: The lowly common people do not despise themselves, let alone the exalted Son of Heaven, who is relied upon by all living beings, but can they despise Him?

古文：是故处则深宫广厦，行则万骑千乘。
现代文：所以居住是纵深的宫室众多的大厦，出行是成万骑兵上千车辆。
English: Therefore, the residence is a building with many palace rooms in depth, and the travel is thousands of cavalry and thousands of vehicles.

古文：昔汉帝欲乘舟渡渭，广德将以首血污车轮，帝乃感而就桥。
现代文：从前漠帝想乘船渡过渭水，广德将要用头颅的鲜血染红车轮，皇帝于是感悟而上桥。
English: Once upon a time, a desert emperor wanted to cross Surabaya by boat. Guangde was going to use the blood of his head to stain the wheels red. The emperor was impressed and went onto the bridge.

古文：夫一渡小水，犹尚若斯，况洪河浩汗，有不测之虑。
现代文：渡过一条小河，尚且如此，何况黄河宽阔浩大，有不可预测的忧虑。
English: After crossing a small river, this is still the case, not to mention that the Yellow River is wide and vast, and there are unpredictable worries.

古文：且车乘由人，犹有奔逸致败之害，况水之缓急，非人所制，脱难出虑表，其如宗庙何！ 
现代文：而且车辆由人驾驭，还有奔跑导致颠覆的危害，何况水流的快慢，不是人所能控制的，万一有出乎意料的祸难，宗庙该怎么办? 
English: Moreover, vehicles are driven by people, and there are dangers of subversion caused by running. What's more, the speed of water flow is beyond human control. In case of unexpected disaster, what should the ancestral temple do?

古文：高祖曰： 司空言是也。 
现代文：高祖说： 司空的话是对的。 
English: Gaozu said, "Siku's words are right.

古文：及亮兄罴预穆泰反事，亮以府事付司马慕容契，上表自劾。
现代文：等到穆亮的哥哥穆熊参与穆泰谋反的事件，穆亮把府中事务交付给司马慕容契，上奏疏弹劾自己。
English: When Mu Liang's elder brother Mu Xiong took part in Mu Tai's rebellion, Mu Liang handed over the affairs of the government to Sima Murongqi and impeached himself.

古文：高祖优诏不许，还令摄事。
现代文：高祖宽容地作诏书不准许，仍命令他管理事情。
English: Gaozhu forbearingly did not allow him to make an imperial edict, but still ordered him to manage the matter.

古文：亮频烦固请，久乃许之。
现代文：穆亮接连执意请求，很久才准许他。
English: Mu Liang made persistent requests one after another, and it was a long time before he was allowed.

古文：寻除使持节、征北大将军、开府、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
现代文：不久授任穆亮为使持节、征北大将军、开府、仪同三司、冀州刺史。
English: Soon after, Mu Liang was appointed as the envoy of the Jizhi Festival, the general of the Northern Expedition, the governor of Kaifu, the three departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the historian of Jizhou.

古文：徙封顿丘郡开国公，食邑五百户，以绍崇爵。
现代文：改封顿丘郡开国公，食邑五百户，来继承穆崇的爵位。
English: He was made the founding lord of Dongqiu County, which had 500 households, to succeed to Mu Chong's title.

古文：世宗即位，迁定州刺史，寻除骠骑大将军、尚书令，俄转司空公。
现代文：世宗即位，调任定州刺史，不久授任骠骑大将军、尚书令，继而改任司空公。
English: When Sejong ascended the throne, he was assigned to be the governor of Dingzhou Province, and soon he was given the positions of General of the Horse and General of the Cavalry, as well as the post of the Secretary of State, and then he was assigned to the post of the Secretary of State.

古文：景明三年薨，时年五十二。
现代文：景明三年逝世，时年五十二岁。
English: Jingming died three years later at the age of fifty-two.

古文：给东园温明秘器、朝服一具、衣一袭，钱四十万、布七百匹、蜡二百斤。
现代文：赐给棺材、朝廷礼服一套、衣服一套，钱四十万文、布七百匹、蜡二百斤。
English: He was given a coffin, a set of court dress, a set of clothes, four hundred thousand yuan in money, seven hundred horses of cloth, and two hundred pounds of wax.

古文：世宗亲临小敛。
现代文：世宗亲自参加小殓。
English: Sejong himself took part in a small chorus.

古文：赠太尉公，领司州牧，谥曰匡。
现代文：追赠穆亮为太尉公，兼司州牧，谧号为匡。
English: As a posthumous award, Mu Liang was promoted to the rank of Tai Liang Gong, concurrently appointed to the post of Sishu Maki, and his posthumous name was Kuang.

古文：子绍，字永业。
现代文：儿子穆绍，字永业。
English: His son, Musho, became known as Yongye.

古文：高祖以其贵臣世胄，顾念之。
现代文：高祖因他是尊贵臣属的后代，照顾他。
English: Gaozhu took care of him because he was the descendant of a distinguished vassal.

古文：九岁除员外郎，侍学东宫，转太子舍人。
现代文：九岁时穆绍被授任为员外郎，在束宫侍奉读书，改任太子舍人。
English: At the age of nine, Musho was appointed as a member of the Imperial Household Agency, served as a student at the Sokku Palace, and was reappointed as Crown Prince Shorenin.

古文：十一尚琅邪长公主，拜驸马都尉、散骑侍郎、领京兆王愉文学。
现代文：十一岁时娶琅邪长公主，被任命为驸马都尉、散骑侍郎，兼京兆王元愉文学。
English: At the age of eleven, he married the eldest princess of the evil, and was appointed the captain of the horse, the horseman, and the prince of the literature.

古文：世宗初，通直散骑常侍、高阳王雍友。
现代文：世宗初年，担任通直散骑常侍、高阳王元雍友。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he served as a regular attendant on horseback and a friend of King Goyang.

古文：遭父忧，诏起袭爵，散骑常侍，领主衣都统。
现代文：遇父亲逝世，诏令他复出继承爵位，担仟散骑常侍，兼主衣都统。
English: Upon his father's death, the emperor ordered him to return to inherit his title, and he assumed the role of a knight's equerry, as well as the master of the imperial court.

古文：迁秘书监、侍中、金紫光禄大夫、光禄卿，又迁卫将军、太常卿。
现代文：升任秘书监、侍中、金紫光禄大夫、光禄卿，又调任卫将军、太常卿。
English: He was promoted to secretary superintendent, chamberlain, Jin Zi Guanglu doctor, Guanglu lord, and transferred to general of the guard and grand secretary.

古文：寻除使持节、都督冀瀛二州诸军事、本将军、冀州刺史，以母老固辞，忤旨免官。
现代文：不久授任使持节、都督冀瀛二州诸军事、本号将军、冀州刺史，以母亲年老坚决推辞，违犯旨意被免除官职。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the envoy to Jizhixi, the military governor of Jizhou, the general of this title, and the governor of Jizhou, but he resolutely refused because of his mother's old age, and was removed from office for violating the will.

古文：除中书令，转七兵尚书，徙殿中尚书。
现代文：授任中书令，改任七兵尚书，调为殿中尚书。
English: He was given the title of Chushiro, changed his title to Shichibyo Shosho, and transferred to Denshuchusho.

古文：遭所生忧免，居丧以孝闻。
现代文：遇母亲逝世免职，服丧时以孝道闻名。
English: He was relieved of his duties when his mother died, and was known for his filial piety when attending funerals.

古文：又除卫大将军、左光禄大夫、中书监，复为侍中，领本邑中正。
现代文：又授任卫大将军、左光禄大夫、中书监，又任侍中，兼本州中正。
English: He was also awarded the titles of General of the Guards, Doctor of the Left Hand, and Central Librarian. He was also appointed to the position of Junior Chamberlain, as well as Honshu Vice-Governor.

古文：绍无他才能，而资性方重，罕接宾客，希造人门。
现代文：穆绍没有其他的才能，而性格端方持重，很少会见宾客，很少拜访人家。
English: Moussaoui has no other talent, and his personality is reserved, rarely meeting guests, rarely visiting homes.

古文：领军元叉当权熏灼，曾往候绍，绍迎送下阶而已，时人叹尚之。
现代文：领军元叉当权炙手可热，曾经前往探望穆绍，穆绍仅迎送下台阶而已，当时人叹赏尊崇他。
English: The leader of the army, Yuan Xuan, was very popular when he was in power. He once went to visit Musao, but Musao only welcomed him down the steps. At that time, people admired and respected him.

古文：及灵太后欲黜叉，犹豫未决，绍赞成之。
现代文：等到灵太后想罢黜元叉，犹豫不决，穆绍赞同促成这件事。
English: When the spiritual empress dowager was preparing to dethrone Yu Yuanfang, but still hesitated, Musho strongly approved.

古文：以功加特进，又拜其次子岩为给事中。
现代文：因功劳加授特进，又任命他的次子穆岩为给事中。
English: He also appointed his second son, Mu Yan, as a member of the committee.

古文：寻加仪同三司，领左右。
现代文：不久加授仪同三司，兼侍中。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Third Secretary and also to Junior Chamberlain.

古文：时侍中元顺与绍同直，顺尝因醉入其寝所。
现代文：当时侍中元顺和穆绍一同值勤，元顺曾因喝醉酒进入穆绍的就寝处。
English: At that time, the chamberlain, Motoshin, was on duty together with Musao. Motoshin had entered Musao's sleeping place because he was drunk.

古文：绍拥被而起，正色让顺曰： 身二十年侍中，与卿先君亟连职事，纵卿后进，何宜相排突也！ 
现代文：穆绍裹被起身，严肃地责备元顺说： 我二十年任侍中，和你的先父一同任职，纵然你是后起之秀，哪应推门闯进呢? 
English: Wrapped in his robes, Musho stood up and sternly scolded Yuan Shun, saying, "I've been a waiter for twenty years, serving alongside your father. Even though you're a rising star, where should I push the door to break in?

古文：遂谢事还家。
现代文：于是辞职回家。
English: So he resigned and went home.

古文：诏喻久乃起。
现代文：诏书晓谕很久才复出。
English: It took a long time for the imperial edict to come back.

古文：除车骑大将军、开府、定州刺史，固辞不拜。
现代文：授任车骑大将军、开府、定州刺史，坚决推辞小受任。
English: He was awarded the titles of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, Kaifu, and Jingshou, but he resolutely refused to accept the post.

古文：又除侍中，托疾未起。
现代文：又授任侍中，声称有病不受任。
English: He was also awarded the position of chamberlain, but he claimed that he was ill and could not take up the post.

古文：河阴之役，故得免害。
现代文：在河阴的变乱中，因此得以避免受害。
English: As a result, they were able to avoid being harmed during the turmoil in Heyin.

古文：庄帝立，尔朱荣遣人徵之。
现代文：庄帝即位，尔朱荣派人征召他。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne, and Zhu Rong sent someone to recruit him.

古文：绍以为必死，哭辞家庙。
现代文：穆绍以为必定死去，哭着告别家庙。
English: Thinking that his death was inevitable, Musho said goodbye to his family and ancestral temple, weeping.

古文：及往见荣于邙山，捧手不拜。
现代文：等到前往邙山见到尔朱莹，拱手不叩拜。
English: Wait until you go to Lushan to see Er Zhu Ying, do not bow down.

古文：荣亦矫意礼之，顾谓人曰： 穆绍不虚大家兒。 
现代文：尔朱荣也假意礼敬他，回头对人说： 穆绍真是大家风范。 
English: Le Zhu Rong also pretended to salute him, and turned to say to the people: Mushao is really a model for everyone.

古文：车驾入宫，寻授尚书令、司空公，进爵为王，给班剑四十人，仍加侍中。
现代文：庄帝进宫，不久授任穆绍为尚书令、司空公，升爵位为王，给予带班剑的仪仗四十人，随之加授侍中。
English: Zhuangdi entered the palace, and soon appointed Mushao as Shang Shuling and Sikuo Gong, promoted to the rank of king, given the honor of forty people with swords, and then awarded the attendants.

古文：时河南尹李奖往诣绍。
现代文：当时河南尹李奖前往穆绍那裹。
English: At that time, Henan Yin Li Award went to see Musao.

古文：奖以绍郡民，谓必加敬；绍又恃封邑，是奖国主，待之不为动膝。
现代文：李奖因穆绍是他所辖郡中的人，认为穆绍一定对他加以礼敬，穆绍又依恃封邑，是奎壁所在封国的封君，接待李奖不对他行礼。
English: Li Prize thought that since Musho was a person from the county under his jurisdiction, Musho must have paid him a courtesy. Musho was also a vassal of a fief, and was a vassal of the country where Quibi was located. Li Prize did not bow to him when he received him.

古文：奖惮其位望，臻拜而还。
现代文：奎望畏惧垄钮的地位声望，前往叩拜而返回。
English: Covetousness dreads the status and prestige of the ridge knob, goes to prostrate and returns.

古文：议者两讥焉。
现代文：议论的人对两人都有讥讽。
English: Those who like to argue ridiculed both of them.

古文：尔朱荣之讨葛荣也，诏上党王天穆为前锋，次于怀县；司徒公杨椿为右军；绍为后继。
现代文：尔朱荣讨伐董茔，诏令上皇延型娄充当前锋，停驻在堡逊；司徒公查隧为右军；垂幽为后续部队。
English: Er Zhu Rong fought against Dong Xuan, and the emperor ordered Yan Jia as the vanguard, stationed in the fortress of Song; Szu Gong as the right army; Zhu Yu as the follow-up force.

古文：未发，会擒葛荣乃止。
现代文：没有出发，正好擒获葛荣就停止进军了。
English: He did not set out, but just as he captured Ge Rong, he stopped marching.

古文：未几，降王复本爵。
现代文：不久，降穆纽的王爵恢复本来爵位。
English: Soon after, Munyuh's title was restored to its original rank.

古文：元颢入洛，以绍为兗州刺史。
现代文：元颢进入盗阳，任命壁绉为查业刺史。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Poyang and appointed Qie Xuan to investigate the history.

古文：行达东郡，颢败而反。
现代文：行进到束郡，因元颢失败而返回。
English: They marched to Sok County, but returned after failing to capture Yuancheng.

古文：普泰元年，除都督青齐兗光四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府、青州刺史。
现代文：普泰元年，授任穆绍为都督青齐兖光四州诸军事、骠骑大将军、开府、青州刺史。
English: In the first year of Putai, Musao was appointed as the military governor of Qingzhou, the military commander of the four states, the cavalry general, the governor of Kaifu, and the historian of Qingzhou.

古文：未行，其年九月薨，时年五十二。
现代文：没有到任，当年九月逝世，五十二岁。
English: He did not take up the post, and died in September of that year, aged fifty-two.

古文：赠侍中、都督冀相殷三州诸军事、大将军、尚书令、太保、冀州刺史，谥曰文献。
现代文：追赠他为侍中、都督冀相殷三州诸军事、大将军、尚书令、太保、冀州刺史，谧号为文献。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Chamberlain, Governor of Hebei Province, Military Commander of the Three Provinces of Hebei Province, Grand General, Shang Shuling, Taibo, and Hebei Provincial Historian, and his posthumous title was Literature.

古文：子长嵩，字子岳。
现代文：儿子长嵩，字子岳。
English: His son, Nagasaka, became the character Zidake.

古文：起家通直郎，再迁散骑常侍。
现代文：初为通直郎，再升为散骑常侍。
English: At first, he was called Tsuchinairo, and then he was promoted to Sanzhishi no Tsunenari.

古文：袭爵，转镇东将军、光禄少卿。
现代文：继承爵位，改任镇束将军、光禄少卿。
English: He succeeded to the peerage and was appointed to the posts of General Zenzaku and Junior Lord Koroku.

古文：兴和中卒，赠都督冀沧二州诸军事、征东将军、冀州刺史。
现代文：兴和年间去世，追赠都督冀沧二州诸军事、征束将军、冀州刺史。
English: He died in the Xinghe era, and was posthumously awarded the military, conscript generals and Jizhou engraved history by the governor of Jizhou Cangzhou.

古文：子岩，武定中，司徒谘议参军。
现代文：儿子穆岩，武定年间，担任司徒谘议参军。
English: His son Muyan, during the Wuding era, served as an advisor to the military.

古文：平国弟相国，官至安东将军、济州刺史、上洛公。
现代文：平国的弟弟相国，官至安束将军、济州刺史、上洛公。
English: The younger brother of the Taira clan, Shokoku, rose through the ranks to become the general of Anzoku, the governor of Jeju, and the lord of Shangluo.

古文：相国弟正国，尚长乐公主，拜驸马都尉。
现代文：相国的弟弟正国，娶长乐公主，被任命为驸马都尉。
English: The brother of the partner country, Zheng Guo, married the Changle princess and was appointed the captain of the horse.

古文：子平城，早卒。
现代文：儿子平城，去世早。
English: His son, Heizei, died early.

古文：高祖时，始平公主薨于宫，追赠平城驸马都尉，与公主合葬。
现代文：高祖时，始平公主在宫中逝世，追赠平城为驸马都尉，和公主合葬。
English: At the time of Emperor Gaozu, Princess Shihei passed away in the palace. She was posthumously given the title of Lieutenant of the Horse of Heijo, and was buried together with the princess.

古文：平城弟长城，司徒左长史。
现代文：马。平城的弟弟长城，担任司徒左长史。
English: Ma. Pingcheng's younger brother, Great Wall, served as the head of the Left Division.

古文：子世恭，武定中，朱衣直阁。
现代文：儿子世恭，武定年间，担任朱衣直阁。
English: His son, Shigong, served as Zhu Yizhong during the Wuding era.

古文：长城弟彧，符玺郎中。
现代文：长城的弟弟长彧，担任符玺郎中。
English: Great Wall's younger brother, Nagatoro, served as the middle of the runners-up.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子永延，尚书骑兵郎、青州征东司马。
现代文：儿子永延，担任尚书骑兵郎、青州征东司马。
English: His son, Yong Yan, served as Shang Shuxu's cavalryman and Qingzhou's East Conquest Sima.

古文：正国弟应国，征西将军、张掖公。
现代文：正国的弟弟应国，担任征西将军、张掖公。
English: Zheng Guo's younger brother, Ying Guo, served as the Western Conquest General and Zhang Ye Gong.

古文：子度孤，袭爵。
现代文：儿子度孤，继承爵位。
English: His son, Du Guo, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：平南将军、梁城镇将。
现代文：担任平南将军、梁城镇将。
English: He served as the general of Pingnan and the general of Liang Town.

古文：子清休，颇有将略。
现代文：儿子清休，很有军事谋略。
English: My son is retired, and he is very good at military strategy.

古文：司农少卿、武卫将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：担任司农少卿、武卫将军、左光禄大夫。
English: He served as Sino-Minor Secretary of Agriculture, General of the Imperial Guard, and Doctor of the Left Hand.

古文：出为骠骑大将军、夏州刺史。
现代文：外出任骠骑大将军、夏州刺史。
English: Outside, he served as the cavalry general, and the history of Xiazhou was written.

古文：子铁槌，秘书郎。
现代文：儿子铁槌，担任秘书郎。
English: His son, Tetsuzuchi, worked as a secretary.

古文：应国弟安国，历金部长、殿中尚书，加右卫将军，赐爵新平子。
现代文：应国的弟弟安国，历任金部长、殿中尚书，加授右卫将军，赐爵位为新平子。
English: Ying Guo's younger brother, An Guo, the successive Minister of Finance, was awarded the title of General of the Right Division, and was given a knighthood as the new Ping Zi.

古文：为乙浑所杀，追赠征虏将军。
现代文：被乙浑杀死，追赠他为征虏将军。
English: He was killed by Yigong and posthumously awarded the title of Conscript General.

古文：子吐万，袭爵。
现代文：儿子吐万，继承爵位。
English: His son, Tuban, succeeded to the title.

古文：襄城镇将。
现代文：担任襄城镇将。
English: He served as the general of Xiang Town.

古文：子金宝，秘书郎。
现代文：儿子金宝，担任秘书郎。
English: His son, Jinbao, works as a secretary.

古文：寿弟伏真，高宗世，稍迁尚书，赐爵任城侯。
现代文：寿的弟弟伏真，高宗时，逐渐升到尚书，赐爵位为任城侯。
English: Shou's younger brother, Fuzhen, gradually rose to the rank of Shangshu when he was Gaozong, and was given a peerage as the mayor of the city.

古文：出为兗州刺史、假宁东将军、濮阳公。
现代文：外出任兗州刺史、代理宁东将军、濮阳公。
English: He also served as the governor of Zhangzhou, the acting general of Ningdong, and the governor of Shenyang.

古文：子常贵，南阳太守。
现代文：儿子常贵，担任南阳太守。
English: His son, Tsunegi, served as Nanyang Dazhu.

古文：伏真弟多侯，历位殿中给事、左将军，赐爵长宁子。
现代文：伏真的弟弟多侯，历任殿中给事、左将军，赐爵位为长宁子。
English: Fuchizane's younger brother, Toh, successively held the posts of chancellor and left-wing general, and was given the title of Naganishi.

古文：迁司卫监。
现代文：调任司卫监。
English: He was transferred to the post of health inspector.

古文：高宗崩，乙浑专权。
现代文：高宗逝世，乙浑专擅朝政。
English: After Gaozong's death, Eghun Zeng took over the imperial government.

古文：时司徒陆丽在代郡温汤疗病，浑忌之，遣多侯追丽。
现代文：当时司徒陆丽在代郡温汤治病，乙浑怨恨他，派遣多侯追回陆丽。
English: At that time, Sitou Lu Li was being treated for an illness in the county seat of Wen Tang. Yihun resented him and sent many courtiers to bring Lu Li back.

古文：多侯谓丽曰： 浑有无君之心，大王众所望也，去必危，宜徐归而图之。 
现代文：多侯对陆丽说： 乙浑有谋反的心思，大王是众人所仰望的，离去必然危险，应慢慢返回而作打算。 
English: Dohou said to Lu Li: Yigong has a rebellious mind, the great king is looked up to by many people, it is inevitably dangerous to leave, you should slowly return and make plans.

古文：丽不从，遂为浑所杀。多侯亦见杀。
现代文：陆丽不听从，于是被乙浑杀害，多侯也被杀。
English: Lu Li did not obey, so she was killed by Yihun, and Dohou was also killed.

古文：谥曰烈。
现代文：谧号为烈。
English: 号烈.

古文：子胡兒袭爵。
现代文：儿子胡儿继承爵位。
English: His son, Hu'er, will inherit the title.

古文：观弟翰，平原镇将、西海王。
现代文：穆观的弟弟穆翰，担任平原镇将、西海王。
English: Mu Guo's younger brother, Mu Han, served as the general of Pingyuan Town and the king of the West Sea.

古文：薨。
现代文：逝世。
English: He died.

古文：子龙仁，袭爵，降为公。
现代文：儿子龙仁，继承爵位，降为公爵。
English: His son, Yongin, inherited the title and was demoted to Duke.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子丰国，袭爵。
现代文：儿子丰国，继承爵位。
English: His son, Toyokuni, succeeded to the peerage.

古文：丰国弟子弼，有风格，善自位置。
现代文：丰国的弟弟子弼，有风度品格，善于处世。
English: Fengguo's younger brother and disciple, Zou, has grace and character, and is good at dealing with the world.

古文：涉猎经史，与长孙稚、陆希道等齐名于世。矜己陵物，颇以损焉。
现代文：广泛阅读经史，和长孙稚、陆希道等人在世间名声相等，高傲自负盛气凌人，以此很损声誉。
English: He read widely in the history of scripture, and had the same reputation in the world as his eldest grandson, Lu Xi Dao, and others. He was arrogant, arrogant, and domineering, which damaged his reputation.

古文：高祖初定氏族，欲以弼为国子助教。
现代文：高祖起初确定氏族，想要委任子弼为国子助教。
English: At first, Gao Zu decided on the clan and wanted to appoint Zi Yao as the assistant professor of Kuniko.

古文：弼辞曰： 先臣以来，蒙恩累世，比校徒流，实用惭屈。 
现代文：子弼推辞说： 先臣穆观以来，数代蒙受恩惠，近来检校众人，实在为之惭愧委屈。 
English: Zixuan said, "Since the time of Mu Guan, several generations have received favors, and everyone who has recently inspected the school is really ashamed and aggrieved.

古文：高祖曰： 朕欲敦厉胄子，故屈卿先之。
现代文：高祖说： 我想激励国子学生，所以委屈你去光大他们。
English: Gaozu said, "I want to encourage Kuniko students, so I'm upset that you're going to promote them.

古文：白玉投泥，岂能相污？ 
现代文：白玉投入泥土中，哪能污染你? 
English: If a marble is thrown into the dirt, how can it contaminate you?

古文：弼曰： 既遇明时，耻沉泥滓。 
现代文：子弼说： 遇上了英明的时代，耻于沉入泥中。 
English: Zixuan said, "I have encountered an era of wisdom, and I am ashamed to sink into the mud."

古文：会司州牧、咸阳王禧入，高祖谓禧曰： 朕与卿作州都，举一主簿。 
现代文：恰巧司州牧、咸阳王元禧入宫，高祖对元禧说： 我为你作州中正，推举一个主簿。 
English: Coincidentally, the pastors of the prefecture and the king of Xianyang, Yuan Xiyi, entered the palace. Gao Zu said to Yuan Xiyi: I will be the prefect of the prefecture for you, and I will select a master book.

古文：即命弼谒之。
现代文：就命令子弼拜见元禧。
English: He ordered his son to pay homage to the first anniversary.

古文：因为高祖所知。
现代文：子弼于是为高祖所赏识。
English: Therefore, Zixuan was appreciated by Gao Zu.

古文：舆驾南征，特敕随从。
现代文：高祖向南征伐，特地命令子弼随从。
English: Gao Zu marched south, and specifically ordered Zi Yao to follow him.

古文：世宗初，除尚书郎，以选为广平王怀国郎中令。
现代文：世宗初年，授尚书郎，经挑选为广平王元怀的封国郎中令。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Sejong, he was awarded the title of Shuro and was selected as the second-in-command of the provincial governors of King Guangping.

古文：数有匡谏之益。
现代文：多次有匡正规劝的补益。
English: There have been many times the benefits of Kuangjun's formal persuasion.

古文：世宗善之。
现代文：世宗赏识他。
English: The world appreciates him.

古文：除中书舍人，转司州治中、别驾，历任有称。
现代文：授任中书舍人，改任司州治中、别驾，在所历职位上有声誉。
English: He was awarded the title of Senior Assistant to the President of the People's Republic of China, and was transferred to the post of Secretary of the State Council. He had a good reputation in his previous positions.

古文：肃宗时，河州羌却铁忽反，敕兼黄门，慰喻忽。
现代文：肃宗时，河州羌却望迪反叛，命令乏因为兼黄门，去晓谕却铁忽。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, however, the Hezhou Emperor hoped that Di would rebel. However, he did not give the order because it was a bad omen.

古文：以功加前将军，赐以钱帛。
现代文：因功劳加授前将军，赐给钱帛。
English: The former general was awarded the prize for his meritorious service, and Qian Jun was given the prize.

古文：寻以本将军行扬州事，追拜平西将军、华州刺史。
现代文：不久以本号将军代行扬州事务，追授平西将军、华州刺史。
English: Soon, he was acting as Yangzhou affairs with this title of general, and was posthumously awarded the title of General of Pingxi and the history of Huazhou.

古文：卒于州，时年五十一。
现代文：在州中去世，这年五十一岁。
English: He died in the state at the age of fifty-one.

古文：赠使持节、征北将军、定州刺史，谥曰懿。
现代文：追赠使持节、征北将军、定州刺史，谧号为懿。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Jizhixi, General of the Northern Expedition, and Historian of Dingzhou, and his posthumous name was Yu.

古文：子季齐，释褐司徒参军事、开府骑兵参军。
现代文：儿子季齐，初任司徒参军事、开府骑兵参军。
English: His son, Ji Qi, was the first to join the military, joining the cavalry in Kaifu.

古文：翰弟顗，忠谨有材力。
现代文：穆翰的弟弟穆顗，忠诚谨慎有才干。
English: Mu Han's younger brother, Mu Yao, is loyal, prudent and talented.

古文：太宗时为中散，转侍御郎。
现代文：太宗时担任中散大夫，改任侍御郎。
English: At the time of Emperor Taizong, he held the position of Zhongshan Daifu, and was changed to Samurai Goro.

古文：从世祖征赫连昌，勇冠一时，世祖嘉之。
现代文：随从世祖征伐赫连昌，勇气为当时第一，世祖赞许他。
English: He followed his ancestor in the conquest of Herengchang. His courage was the best at the time, and he was praised by his ancestor.

古文：迁侍辇郎、殿中将军，赐爵泥阳子。
现代文：调任侍辇郎、殿中将军，赐爵为泥阳子。
English: He was transferred to the position of chamberlain, general of the palace, and was given the title of muddy yakitori.

古文：从征和龙，功超诸将，拜司卫监，加龙骧将军，进爵长乐侯。
现代文：随从征伐和龙，功劳超过各将领，被任命为司卫监，加授龙骧将军，升爵位为长乐侯。
English: He followed the conquest of the War of the Dragon, and his achievements exceeded those of all the generals. He was appointed as the superintendent of the National Guard, was awarded the title of Longjing General, and was raised to the peerage as the Prince of Changle.

古文：曾从世祖田于崞山，有虎突出，顗搏而获之。
现代文：穆颌曾经随从世祖在崞山狩猎，有只老虎冲出来，穆颉搏斗后擒获了它。
English: Mu Xun once went hunting with his ancestor in Lushan. A tiger rushed out, and Mu Xun captured it after a fight.

古文：世祖叹曰： 《诗》所谓 有力如虎 ，顗乃过之？ 
现代文：世祖赞叹说： 《诗经》说 有力如虎 ，穆颢还超过了。 
English: The ancestor said with admiration: "The Book of Songs says that he is as strong as a tiger, and even more powerful than a dragonfly.

古文：后从驾西征白龙，北讨蠕蠕，以功加散骑常侍、镇北将军，进爵建安公。
现代文：后来跟随世祖向西征伐白龙，向北讨伐蠕蠕，因功劳加授散骑常侍、镇北将军，升爵位为建安公。
English: Later, he followed his ancestor to the west to conquer the White Dragon and to the north to conquer the Cree Cree. For his service, he was awarded the Distinguished Cavalryman, the General of Zhenbei, and was promoted to the peerage as Jianan Gong.

古文：出为北镇都将，徵拜殿中尚书。
现代文：外出任北镇都将，征入任殿中尚书。
English: Those who were assigned to the north town were all conscripted into the appointment hall.

古文：出镇凉州，所在著称。
现代文：外出镇守凉州，在各地声誉颇佳。
English: The out-and-about town guard of Liangzhou has a good reputation in various regions.

古文：还加散骑常侍，领太仓尚书。
现代文：回朝后加授散骑常侍，兼太仓尚书。
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was given the title of sanshaku (free rider) and also became Taicang Shangshu.

古文：高宗时，为征西大将军、督诸军事，西征吐谷浑，出南道。
现代文：高宗时，担任征西大将军、督诸军事，向西征讨吐谷浑，从南路出动。
English: At the time of Gao Zong, he served as the general of the Western Expedition and the military governor. He went to the west to conquer Tugu Hun and set out from the south road.

古文：坐击贼不进，免官爵徙边。
现代文：因攻打贼寇不推进而获罪，免除官爵迁徙边境。
English: He was found guilty of attacking thieves and robbers and not advancing, and he was exempted from moving the border.

古文：高祖又以顗著勋前朝，徵为内都大官。
现代文：高祖又因穆颅功勋显着于前朝，征入任内都大官。
English: Gaozu was also enlisted as a high-ranking official in the capital due to his distinguished service in the previous dynasty.

古文：天安元年卒。
现代文：天安元年去世。
English: He died in the first year of Tiananmen.

古文：赠征西大将军、建安王，谥曰康。
现代文：追赠征西大将军、建安王，谧号为康。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Western Expedition and King of Jian'an. His posthumous name was Kang.

古文：子寄生，袭。
现代文：儿子寄生，继承爵位。
English: The son of a parasite inherits a peerage.

古文：寄生弟栗，凉州镇将、安南公。
现代文：寄生的弟弟穆栗，担任凉州镇将、安南公。
English: The parasitic younger brother, Mu Li, served as the commander of Liangzhou Town and the crown prince of Annan.

古文：子祁，字愿德。
现代文：儿子穆祁，字愿德。
English: His son, Mu Xi, was named Zhan De.

古文：通直常侍、上谷河内二郡太守、司州治中、太子右卫率。
现代文：担任通直常侍、上谷河内二郡太守、司州治中、太子右卫率。
English: He served as Tsunetsuna's regular attendant, the governor of two counties in Kamiya-Hanoi, the governor of Shishu, and the prince's right guard.

古文：卒，赠齐州刺史。
现代文：去世，追赠齐州刺史。
English: Emperor Xiaowen praised him for his good answer.

古文：子景相，字霸都。
现代文：儿子景相，字霸都。
English: His son, Kagezo, became a word champion.

古文：中书舍人、上党太守。
现代文：担任中书舍人、上党太守。
English: He served as the middle school teacher and the upper party leader.

古文：栗弟泥乾，为羽林中郎，赐爵临安男。
现代文：穆栗的弟弟泥干，担任羽林中郎，赐爵位为临安男。
English: Mu Gui's younger brother, Mudan, served as the middle son of Ulin, and was given a peerage as the son of Linan.

古文：后稍历显职，除冀州刺史，假安南将军、钜鹿公。
现代文：后来逐渐担任显要职位，授任冀州刺史，代理安南将军、钜鹿公。
English: Later, he gradually assumed important positions, and was awarded the title of Jizhou Provincial Historian, Acting General Annan, and Elk King.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子浑，袭爵。
现代文：儿子穆浑，继承爵位。
English: His son, Mukhun, succeeded to the title.

古文：秘中书散。
现代文：担任秘书中散。
English: He became a secretary in the middle of the war.

古文：子令宣，通直常侍。
现代文：儿子令宣，担任通直常侍。
English: His son, Ryozen, served as Tsunenagao's regular attendant.

古文：崇宗人丑善，太祖初，率部归附，与崇同心戮力，御侮左右。
现代文：穆崇同族的人丑善，太祖初年，率领部落归附，和穆崇同心协力，在太祖左右抵御欺侮。
English: The people of the same tribe as Mu Chong were ugly and evil. In the first year of the grandfather's reign, he led the tribe to annexation, and worked together with Mu Chong to resist bullying around the grandfather.

古文：从征窟咄、刘显，破平之。
现代文：跟随征伐窟咄、刘显，打败平定他们。
English: Follow Liu Xian in conquering the caves, and defeat and pacify them.

古文：又从击贺兰部，平库莫奚。
现代文：又跟随攻打贺兰部，平定库莫奚。
English: He also followed the attack on Horanbe to pacify Kumo Province.

古文：拜天部大人，居于东蕃。
现代文：被任命为天部大人，住在束部边境。
English: He was appointed as the adult of Tenbu and lived in the border of Sokube.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子莫提，从平中原，为中山太守。
现代文：儿子莫提，跟随平定中原，担任中山太守。
English: His son, Moti, followed in the footsteps of Hepingding Zhongyuan and served as the governor of Zhongshan.

古文：除宁南将军、相州刺史，假阳陵侯。
现代文：授任宁南将军、相州刺史，赐予阳陵侯。
English: He was appointed as the general of Ningnan, the chief historian of Xiangzhou, and was given the title of Yangling.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子吐，太宗世，散骑常侍。
现代文：儿子穆吐，太宗时，担任散骑常侍。
English: His son Mu Tu, when he was the emperor, served as a horseback-riding attendant.

古文：卒于侍中、镇东将军。
现代文：任侍中、镇束将军时去世。
English: He died while serving as a chamberlain and general of the town of Zenzaku.

古文：子敦，辅国将军、西部都将。
现代文：儿子穆敦，担任辅国将军、西部都将。
English: His son, Mutun, will serve as vice-governor-general of the western region.

古文：赐爵富平子。
现代文：赐爵位为富平子。
English: The title of nobility was bestowed on Tomihirako.

古文：卒。
现代文：去世。
English: To die.

古文：子纯，袭爵。
现代文：儿子穆纯，继承爵位。
English: His son, Mu Chun, succeeded to the title.

古文：历散骑常侍、光禄勋。
现代文：历任散骑常侍、光禄勋。
English: Successive samurai who rode horseback, honorable mention.

古文：高祖时，右卫将军，寻除右将军、河州刺史。
现代文：高祖时，担任右卫将军，不久授任右将军、河州刺史。
English: At the time of Gaozu, he served as the right guard general, and was soon appointed the right general and the governor of Hezhou.

古文：卒，赠镇北将军、并州刺史。
现代文：去世，追赠镇北将军、并州刺史。
English: He died and was posthumously awarded the title of Zhenbei General and the title of Shuzhou Sashihong.

古文：子盛，袭爵。
现代文：夫。儿子穆盛，继承爵位。
English: Her husband and son, Mu Sheng, inherited the title of nobility.

古文：直阁将军。
现代文：担任直合将军。
English: He assumed the post of General Tadayoshi.

古文：盛弟裕，辅国将军、中散大夫。
现代文：穆盛的弟弟穆裕，担任辅国将军、中散大夫。
English: Mu Sheng's younger brother, Mu Yu, served as a vice-governor general and Zhongshan doctor.

古文：裕子礼，东牟太守。
现代文：穆裕的儿子穆礼，担任东牟太守。
English: Muyu's son, Murei, served as the governor of Higashi-Muta.

古文：礼弟略，武定末，魏尹丞。
现代文：穆礼的弟弟穆略，武定末年，担任魏尹丞。
English: Mu Li's younger brother, Mu Luo, who was in his late twenties at the time of Wu Ding's death, served as Wei Yin Zheng.

古文：纯弟鑖，历东宫庶子、汲郡太守。
现代文：穆纯的弟弟穆镶，历任束宫庶子、汲郡太守。
English: Mu Chun's younger brother, Mu Meng, was the illegitimate son of Sokong and the governor of Ku County.

古文：世宗时，为怀朔镇将，东、北中郎将，豳、幽、凉三州刺史。
现代文：世宗时，担任怀朔镇将，东、北中郎将，豳、幽、凉二州刺史。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, he served as the governor of Waishuo Town, the governor of Dong and Beizhong counties, and the governor of Min, You and Liang counties.

古文：肃宗世，除平北将军、并州刺史、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：肃宗时，授任平北将军、并州刺史、金紫光禄大夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suzong, he was appointed as the general of North Pyongan Province, as well as the governor of Zhoushi Province and the doctor of Jinziguanglu.

古文：在公以威猛见称。
现代文：在官府以威猛受到称赞。
English: He was praised in the government for his bravery.

古文：卒时年七十四，赠散骑常侍、征东将军、相州刺史，谥曰安。
现代文：去世时七十四岁，追赠散骑常侍、征束将军、相州刺史，谧号为安。
English: He was seventy-four years old at the time of his death. He was posthumously awarded the titles of Sanzhi, General of Conscription, and Sangzhou, and his posthumous name was An.

古文：子显寿，长水校尉。
现代文：儿子显寿，担任长水校尉。
English: His son, Hsien Shou, became a school captain in Changshui.

古文：显寿弟显业，卒于散骑侍郎。
现代文：显寿的弟弟显业，在任散骑侍郎时去世。
English: Hsien Shou's younger brother, Hsien Ye, died while serving as a samurai.

古文：子子琳，举秀才，为安戎令，颇有吏干。
现代文：儿子子琳，被推举为秀才，担任安戎令，很有行政才干。
English: His son, Zilin, was elected as a talented person, served as a military commander, and had great administrative ability.

古文：随长孙稚征蜀有功，除尚书屯田郎中。
现代文：跟随长孙稚征伐蜀人有功，授任尚书屯田郎中。
English: He was awarded the title of Shoshu Tonden no Roju (Junior Secretary of Shoshu Tonden) for his contribution to the conquest of Shushu with his eldest grandson.

古文：出帝即位，以摄仪曹事，封高唐县开国男，邑二百户。
现代文：出帝即位，因代行仪曹事务，封为高唐县开国男，食邑二百户。
English: He was enthroned as emperor, and because he performed ceremonial duties on behalf of the emperor, he was given the title of the founding father of Gaotang County, with 200 households in his hometown.

古文：孝静初，镇东将军、司州别驾。
现代文：孝静帝初年，担任镇束将军、司州别驾。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Xiaojing, he served as the general of the garrison and the governor of Shizhou.

古文：以占夺民田，免官爵。
现代文：因侵占强夺民众土地，免除官职爵位。
English: He was stripped of his official title and knighthood for usurping people's land.

古文：久之，阿至罗国主副罗越居为蠕蠕所破，其子去宾来奔。
现代文：很久后，阿至罗国主副罗越居被蠕蟋打败，他的儿子去宾前来投奔。
English: After a long time, Luo Yueju, the vice-governor of Ajiro, was defeated by Cormorant, and his son defected to Bin.

古文：齐献武王奏去宾为安北将军、肆州刺史，封高车王，招慰夷虏；表子琳为去宾长史，复其前封。
现代文：齐献武王奏请去宣担任安北将军、建业刺史，封为直娄王，招抚慰劳夷人；任命子琳为去宾的长史，恢复他从前的封爵。
English: King Wu was invited to go to Xuan to serve as the general of Anbei, Jianye to make history, and was named the king of Jiaozuo to appease and comfort the laborers; Zilin was appointed as the long history of the guest, and his former knighthood was restored.

古文：寻迁仪同开府长史、齐献武王丞相司马。
现代文：不久子琳调任仪同开府长史、齐献武玉丞相司马。
English: Soon after, Zilin was appointed to the post of prefectural governor together with the governor of the prefecture and the prime minister, Sima.

古文：卒时年五十三，赠骠骑大将军、都官尚书、瀛州刺史。
现代文：去世时五十三岁，追赠骠骑大将军、都官尚书、瀛州刺史。
English: He was fifty-three years old at the time of his death, and was posthumously awarded the titles of General of the Horse, Senior Official of the Capital, and Governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：子伯昱。
现代文：儿子伯昱。
English: His son, Haku, is a singer.

古文：弟朏，武定中，开府中兵参军。
现代文：弟弟穆助，武定年间，担任开府中兵参军。
English: His younger brother, Musuke, served as a soldier in Kaifu and joined the army during the Wuding era.

古文：子琳弟良，字先德。
现代文：穆琳的弟弟穆良，字先德。
English: Murin's younger brother, Murakami Murakami, was nicknamed "Sentoku."

古文：司空行参军、将作丞、司徒祭酒、安东将军、南钜鹿太守。
现代文：担任司空行参军、将作丞、司徒祭酒、安束将军、南钜鹿太守。
English: He served as the secretary of the flight to join the army, the commander of the army, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest, the priest of the priest.

古文：颇有民誉。
现代文：在民众中很有声誉。
English: It has a good reputation among the public.

古文：入为司徒司马、大将军从事中郎、中书舍人。
现代文：召入任司徒司马、大将军从事中郎、中书舍人。
English: He was called to serve as a scholar of Sima, the general engaged in the middle, and the middle scholar.

古文：武定六年卒。
现代文：武定六年去世。
English: Wu Ding died six years later.

古文：赠征东将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：追赠征东将军、徐州刺史。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Eastern Expedition and the History of Xuzhou.

古文：史臣曰：穆崇夙奉龙颜，早著诚节，遂膺宠眷，位极台鼎；至乃身豫逆谋，卒蒙全护，明主之于劳臣，不亦厚矣！
现代文：史臣曰：穆崇往日侍奉皇上，很早表明诚心节操，受到宠信眷顾，位至宰辅；以致参预作乱谋划，最后得以保全性命，英明君主对于有功劳的臣子，不也是很宽厚吗!
English: Shichen said: Mu Chong used to serve the emperor in the past, very early showed his sincerity and discipline, was favored and patronized, and was promoted to deputy; so that he participated in pre-planning and planning, and finally was able to save his life. Isn't the wise monarch also very generous to meritorious courtiers?

古文：从享庙庭，抑亦尚功之义。
现代文：配祭庙庭，大概也是崇尚功劳的意思。
English: Matching the festival with the temple garden is probably also the meaning of advocating merit.

古文：观少当公辅之任，业器其优乎？
现代文：穆观年轻处于公辅的职位，业绩才能很优秀吧?
English: Mu Guan is young and is in the position of public assistant, so his performance can be excellent, right?

古文：顗壮烈显达，亮宽厚致位，绍立虚简之操，弼有风格之名，世载不陨，青紫兼列，盛矣。
现代文：穆颌因壮烈而显要通达，穆亮因宽厚而获致高位，穆绍树立谦虚简约的操守，子弼拥有风度品格的名声，世代不衰落，青绶紫绶兼具排列，兴盛啊。
English: Mu Rong is famous for being strong and accomplished, Mu Liang is famous for being generous and achieved a high position, Musao established a modest and simple ethics, Zi Rong has a reputation for style and character, generations do not decline, Qinglong Zi Rong has both arrangement and prosperity.

古文：至于寿以贵终，罴止削废，人之无礼，为幸盖多。
现代文：至于穆寿以尊贵终身，穆罢仅削爵免官，人的无礼，幸运大概也多。
English: As for Mu Shou, he was honored for life, Mu Bo was only stripped of his title and removed from office, and he was probably more lucky than rude.

古文：丑之子孙，不乏名位，亦有人哉！
现代文：丑善的子孙，不缺乏名声地位，也有人才啊!
English: The offspring of ugly people do not lack fame and status, they also have talent!

