古文：二李马路李嗣业，字嗣业，京兆高陵人。长七尺，膂力绝众。
现代文：李嗣业的字叫嗣业，京兆府高陵县人，身高七尺，力大超群。
English: Li Shigye, also known as Shigye, is from Gaoling County, Beijing, is seven feet tall and extremely strong.

古文：开元中，从安西都护来曜讨十姓苏禄，先登捕虏，累功署昭武校尉。
现代文：开元年间，跟随安西都护来曜征伐十姓苏禄，他首先登上城堡又抓获了俘虏，积累功劳被封为昭武校尉。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, he followed the Anxi tutelage to conquer the ten surnames of Sulu. He first boarded the castle and captured the prisoners, and was awarded the title of Shouwu lieutenant.

古文：后应募安西，军中初用陌刀，而嗣业尤善，每战必为先锋，所向摧北。
现代文：后来被召募到安西，军队中开始使用长刀、李嗣业特别善于使用，每次战斗必定担任先锋，所向无敌。
English: Later, he was called up to Anxi, and he began to use a long sword in the army. Li Heye was particularly good at using it, and he must serve as the vanguard in every battle, and he was invincible.

古文：马灵察为节度，出战必与俱。
现代文：马灵鮞任节度，每次出兵都带他一起去。
English: Ma Lingyu is in charge of the festival, and every time the troops are sent out, they take him with them.

古文：高仙芝讨勃律，署嗣业及中郎将田珍为左右陌刀将。
现代文：高仙芝征伐勃律国，任命李嗣业和中郎将田珍为左右陌刀将。
English: Gao Xianzhi conquered Bodu Province, and appointed Li Shigeye and Zhong Lang to be the left and right sword commanders.

古文：时吐蕃兵十万屯娑勒城，据山濒水，联木作郛，以扼王师。
现代文：当时吐蕃十万军队驻扎在娑勒城，靠山临河，用木材修成城寨，来抵御唐军。
English: At that time, a hundred thousand troops from Tubo were stationed in the city of Mulei, which was built on a hill and next to a river. They used wood to build a walled city to resist the Tang army.

古文：仙芝潜军夜济信图河，令曰： 及午破贼，不者皆死。 
现代文：高仙芝夜里偷渡信图河，下命令说： 到中午打败敌人，不然都处死。 
English: Gao Xianzhi sneaked across the Xintu River at night and gave the order: Defeat the enemy by noon, or they will all be executed.

古文：嗣业提步士升山，颓石四面以击贼，又树大旗先走险，诸将从之。
现代文：李嗣业率步兵登上高山，往下推石头砸死敌军，又扛着大旗带头冲向险路，众将都跟着他。
English: Li Heye led the infantry up the high mountain, pushed down the stones and killed the enemy army, and led the way to the dangerous road carrying a large flag. All the generals followed him.

古文：虏不虞军至，因大溃，投崖谷死者十八。
现代文：敌军没料到唐军突然来了，因此大败，跳到山崖下摔死的有十分之八。
English: The enemy did not expect the Tang army to come suddenly, so they were defeated. Eight out of ten of them jumped to their deaths under the cliff.

古文：鼓而驱至勃律，禽其主，平之。
现代文：他们乘胜进军到了勃律国，抓住了他们的国王，讨平了他们的国家。
English: They marched victoriously into the land of Brobdingnag, captured their king, and leveled their country.

古文：授右威卫将军。
现代文：李嗣业被封为右威卫将军。
English: Li Siye was named General Yu Weiwei.

古文：从平石国及突骑施，以跳荡先锋加特进。
现代文：后又跟着高仙芝讨平了石国和突骑施，任跳荡先锋加封特进官。
English: After that, he followed Gao Xianzhi to level Shikoku and surprise Shi, and promoted the vaulting pioneer Gaofeng to a special post.

古文：虏号为 神通大将 。
现代文：敌军称他叫 神通大将 。
English: The enemy called him General Shintoku.

古文：初，仙芝特以计袭取石，其子出奔，因构诸胡共怨之，以告大食，连兵攻四镇。
现代文：先前，王仙芝靠用计偷袭攻占了石国，石国国王的儿子逃跑了，就挑拨各族都恨高仙芝，并告诉了大食国，他们联合军队来进攻四镇。
English: Previously, Wang Xianzhi had conquered Shikoku by means of a sneak attack. When the son of the king of Shikoku fled, he incited all the tribes to hate Gao Xianzhi and told the big food country that they would attack the four towns with a joint army.

古文：仙芝率兵二万深入，为大食所败，残卒数千。
现代文：高仙芝率两万军队深入进攻，被大食军打败，残兵只几千人。
English: Gao Xianzhi led 20,000 troops in a deep attack and was defeated by the Great Food Army, leaving only a few thousand soldiers.

古文：事急，嗣业谋曰： 将军深履贼境，后援既绝，而大食乘胜，诸胡锐于斗，我与将军俱前死，尚谁报朝廷者？
现代文：情况紧急，李嗣业对高仙芝谋划说： 您率兵深入敌境，后无援兵，大食军乘胜进攻，他们其他各族军队也将勇猛敢斗，我和您都前去战死了，谁来报效国家呢？
English: The situation was urgent, Li Siye said to Gao Xianzhi's plan: You led the troops deep into the enemy territory, and there were no reinforcements behind you. The Great Food Army took advantage of the victory to attack. Their other armies of all ethnic groups will also fight bravely. I and you both went to war and died. Who will serve the country?

古文：不如守白石岭以为后计。 
现代文：不如退守白石岭考虑退兵。 
English: It would be better to retreat to Shiroishi Ridge and consider withdrawing.

古文：仙芝曰： 吾方收合馀尽，明日复战。 
现代文：高仙芝说： 我正召集被打散的军队，明天再和他们交战。 
English: Gao Xianzhi said: I am gathering the scattered troops and will fight them again tomorrow.

古文：嗣业曰： 事去矣，不可坐须菹醢。 
现代文：李嗣业说： 大势已去，不能坐等杀头。 
English: Li Siye said: The tide has turned, we can't sit back and wait.

古文：即驰守白石，路既隘，步骑鱼贯而前。会拔汗那还兵，辎饷塞道不可骋，嗣业惧追及，手梃鏖击，人马毙仆者数十百，虏骇走，仙芝乃得还。
现代文：于是立即赶去扼守白石岭，路狭窄，步、骑兵一个跟着一个前进，遇上拔汗那先退兵，辎重车堵住了道路不能过，李嗣业怕被追上，手拿大棒打他们，士兵和马匹被打倒的有几十上百，拔汗那的异族军吓跑了，高仙芝才得以生还。
English: So he immediately rushed to defend Shiroishi-Ridge. The road was narrow, and the infantry and cavalry advanced one by one. When they encountered Pahang, the first to retreat was Pahang. The wagon blocked the road and they could not pass. Fearing that they would be overtaken, Li Siye hit them with a big stick. Dozens and hundreds of soldiers and horses were knocked down. Pahang's foreign army was scared away, and Gao Xianzhi was able to survive.

古文：表嗣业功，进右金吾大将军，留为疏勒镇使。
现代文：高仙芝奏报了李嗣业的功劳，提升他为右金吾大将军，留任疏勒镇使。
English: Gao Xianzhi reported the merits of Li Shiji, promoted him to the Right Kingu General, and kept him as the Sule Town Envoy.

古文：城一隅阤，屡筑辄坏，嗣业祝之，有白龙见，因其处蕝祠以祭，城遂不坏，汉耿恭故井久涸，祷已，泉复出。
现代文：城墙有个角落崩塌了，多次修好后又塌了，李嗣业在那里祷告，有条白龙出现了，因此在那里建祠祭祀，城墙就不塌了。汉代耿恭的旧井长期干涸，他祈祷以后，泉水又有了。
English: There was a corner of the city wall that collapsed, and it collapsed again after being repaired many times. Li Xiurong prayed there, and a white dragon appeared, so they built an ancestral shrine there, and the city wall did not collapse. The old well of Geng Gong in the Han Dynasty dried up for a long time, and after he prayed, the spring water appeared again.

古文：初讨勃律也，通道葱领，有大石塞隘，以足蹶之，抵穹壑，识者以为至诚所感云。
现代文：开始讨伐勃律国时，在葱岭上开路，有块大石头堵住了道路，他用脚一蹬，石头就滚到深谷里去了，记载这事的人认为是他的诚心使上天感动了。
English: When he began his crusade against the country of Bodu, he was clearing a path on the green hills, when a large rock blocked the path. He stamped his foot, and the rock rolled into a deep valley. The person who recorded this event believed that it was his sincerity that moved heaven.

古文：天宝十二载，加骠骑大将军。
现代文：天宝二十年，加封骠骑大将军。
English: Tianbao for 20 years, and was awarded the title of General of the Horse.

古文：入朝，赐酒玄宗前，醉起舞，帝宠之，赐彩百、金皿五十物、钱十万，曰： 为解酲具。 
现代文：进京朝拜时，唐玄宗当面赐酒给他喝，他因酒醉起身拜舞，皇帝为表示对他的宠信，赏给他一百匹绸缎、五十件金器、钱十万贯，说道 ：这是给你解酒的。 
English: When he went to Beijing to pay homage, Tang Xuan Zong gave him wine to drink in person. He was so drunk that he got up and danced. In order to show his favor, the emperor gave him a hundred pairs of silk stockings, fifty pieces of gold, and one hundred thousand yuan, saying, "This will help you sober up."

古文：安禄山反，肃宗追之，诏至，即引道，与诸将割臂盟曰： 所过郡县，秋毫不可犯。 
现代文：安禄山反叛了，唐肃宗调他回来，诏书一到他就率军上路，并和众将割破手臂起誓说： 路过的地方，一草一木都不能动。 
English: Anlu Mountain rebelled, Tang Su Zong transferred him back, and as soon as the edict arrived, he led the army on the road, and swore with the generals to cut his arm: "Where I pass, not a blade of grass or a tree can be moved."

古文：至凤翔，上谒，帝喜曰： 今日卿至，贤于数万众。事之济否，固在卿辈。 
现代文：到达凤翔后，拜见了皇帝，皇帝高兴地说 ：现在你来了，胜过几万军队，讨贼能否成功，全靠你们。 
English: After arriving at Fengxiang, he met the emperor. The emperor said happily, "Now that you have come, you are more powerful than tens of thousands of troops. Whether or not you succeed in catching the thief depends entirely on you."

古文：乃诏与郭子仪、仆固怀恩掎角。
现代文：于是下诏命他和郭子仪、仆固怀恩配合。
English: Therefore, the emperor ordered him to cooperate with Guo Ziyi and his servant Gu Wai En.

古文：常为先锋，以巨咅笞斗，贼值，类崩溃。
现代文：他常常担任先锋，用大棒挥击，叛军碰到了，都被打败了。
English: He was often in the vanguard, wielding a big stick, and when the rebels met, they were defeated.

古文：进四镇、伊西、北庭行军兵马使。
现代文：又升任四镇、伊西、北庭行军兵马使。
English: In addition, he was promoted to be the envoy of the troops marching to Shizhen, Isi and Beiting.

古文：广平王收长安，嗣业统前军，阵于香积祠北。
现代文：广平王收复长安的时候，李嗣业率前军，在香积祠北边列阵。
English: When Guangping Wang recovered Chang'an, Li Sigeye led the front army and lined up on the north side of the incense altar.

古文：贼酋李归仁拥精骑薄战，王师注矢逐之，走未及营，贼大出，掩追骑，还蹂王师，于是乱不能阵。
现代文：叛军将领李归仁率精锐骑兵来挑战，唐军用箭射退他们后就派骑兵追赶他们，他们还没跑到敌军营地，敌军大举出击，掩杀追击的唐军骑兵，逃回的骑兵冲乱了唐军，因此军阵乱了。
English: The rebel general Li Guiren led the elite cavalry to challenge. The Tang army shot them with arrows and then sent cavalry to chase them. Before they reached the enemy camp, the enemy army launched a large-scale attack to cover the chasing Tang cavalry. The fleeing cavalry disrupted the Tang army, so the army was disorganized.

古文：嗣业谓子仪曰： 今日不蹈万死取一生，则军无类矣。 
现代文：李嗣业对郭子仪说 ：现在不拼死求生，全军就完了。 
English: Li Shigeye said to Guo Ziyi, "If you don't fight to survive now, the whole army will be finished."

古文：即袒持长刀，大呼出阵前，杀数十人，阵复整。
现代文：立刻脱掉衣服手持长刀，大喊着冲到阵前，杀死了几十名叛军，唐军军阵才又整顿好了。
English: He immediately took off his clothes and, holding a long knife, rushed to the front, shouting, and killed dozens of rebels. Only then did the Tang army regroup.

古文：步卒二千以陌刀、长柯斧堵进，所向无前。归仁匿兵营左，觇军势，王分回纥锐兵击其伏，嗣业出贼背合攻之，自日中至昃，斩首六万级，填涧壑死几半，贼东走，遂平长安。
现代文：他率两千步兵持长刀、长柄斧并排前进，所向无敌，李归仁将军队埋伏在军营左边，窥测形势，广平王命回纥精兵进攻叛军的伏兵，李嗣业也从敌军背后夹攻，从中午战到太阳偏西，杀头六万颗，死在山涧山谷中的将近一半，叛军东逃，于是收复了长安。
English: He led two thousand infantrymen holding long swords and long-handled axes to advance side by side, which was invincible. Li Guiren ambushed the army on the left side of the military camp to spy on the situation. Guangping Wang ordered his elite soldiers to attack the rebels' ambush. Li Shihe also attacked from behind the enemy army. He fought from noon to the west of the sun, killed sixty thousand, and died in nearly half of the mountains and valleys. The rebels fled east, and thus regained Chang'an.

古文：进收东都，嗣业战多。
现代文：后又进兵收复洛阳，李嗣业作战最多。
English: Later, soldiers were sent in to recapture Luoyang, and Li Siye fought the most.

古文：乃与张镐、鲁炅、来瑱、嗣吴王祗、李奂略定诸州。
现代文：接着又和张镐、鲁炅、来調、嗣吴王李祗、李奂平定了各州。
English: Then, together with Zhang Ye, Lu Ye, Lai Cho, and the descendants of Wu Wang, Li Ye and Li Ye, they conquered all the states.

古文：兼卫尉卿，封虢国公，实封户二百。
现代文：他被任命兼任卫尉卿，封为虢国公、食实封两百户。
English: He was appointed concurrently to the post of Captain of the Imperial Guards, given the title of Duke of Shandong Province, and given a stipend of two hundred households.

古文：兼怀州刺史、北庭行营节度使。
现代文：以后又兼任怀州刺史、北庭行营节度使。
English: Later, he also served as the Waizhou Sashishi and Beiting Xingyong Festival Envoy.

古文：与子仪等围相州，师耄，诸将无功，独嗣业被坚数奋，为诸军冠。
现代文：后来和郭子仪等围攻相州，军队疲倦了，众将都没能建功，只有李嗣业穿铠甲多次奋勇杀敌，在众军中数第一。
English: Later, together with Guo Ziyi and others, they besieged Xiangzhou. The army was tired, and the generals were unable to make any contributions. Only Li Siye wore armor and fought bravely to kill the enemy many times, ranking first among the troops.

古文：中流矢，卧帐中，方愈，忽闻金鼓声，知与贼战，大呼，创溃，血流数升卒。
现代文：后被流箭射中，躺在营帐里，伤快好了，突然听见了发令的钟鼓，他知道是在和叛军作战，就大喊杀敌，伤口又破开了，流了几升血后去世了。
English: After being shot by a stray arrow, he was lying in his tent, recovering from the wound, when he suddenly heard the bell and drum issuing orders. He knew that he was fighting against the rebels, he shouted to kill the enemy, the wound opened again, he bled several liters of blood and died.

古文：谥曰忠勇，赠武威郡王，给灵舆护还在所。
现代文：皇帝赐给他谥号叫忠勇，赠官武威郡王，派灵车护送回任所。
English: The emperor gave him a nickname called Zhongyong, granted him the title of Wuwei County King, and sent a hearse to escort him back to his post.

古文：葬日，使中人临吊，中朝臣祖泣，茔给扫除十户。
现代文：下葬的那天，又派宦官去吊唁，朝中大臣哭着为他致哀，他的墓地安排十户人家常年清扫。
English: On the day of his burial, eunuchs were sent to pay their condolences, the chancellor of the court wept and mourned for him, and his grave was cleaned by ten families throughout the year.

古文：嗣业忠毅忧国，不计居产，有宛马十疋，前后赏赐，皆上于官以助军云。
现代文：据说李嗣业忠心为国，不置家财，只有大宛马十匹，先后赏给他的东西，他都交给官府来补充军费。
English: It is said that Li Shigeye was loyal to the country, did not keep any family wealth, and had only ten large horses. He gave everything that was awarded to him to the government to supplement military expenses.

古文：子佐国，袭爵，历丹王府长史。
现代文：他的儿子李佐国，继承了他的爵位，任官到丹王府长史。
English: His son, Li Zuoguo, inherited his title and was appointed to the post of prefect of the Dan Kingdom.

古文：卒，推嗣业功，赠宋州刺史。
现代文：他儿子去世后，为嘉奖李嗣业的功绩，赠官为宋州刺史。
English: After the death of his son, in order to commend the merits of Li Shiji's work, Song Zhou was awarded the post of Song Zhou's historian.

