古文：邓元佐姚氏宋氏史氏女渔人
现代文：邓元佐魏国清河人宋士宗的母亲，黄初年间的一个夏天在浴室里洗澡，让家里的儿女们关上门。
English: Deng Yuanzao, the mother of Song Shizong from Qinghe in Wei, took a bath in the bathroom one summer in the first year of the Yellow Emperor, and asked the children in the family to close the door.

古文：人化水族黄氏母宋士宗母宣骞母江州人独角薛伟
现代文：家里人从墙壁的孔洞中，暗中窥见浴盆的水里有一只鼋。于是他们就打开门，大人小孩全进到浴室里，大鼋却一点也不搭理他们。
English: The family peered through a hole in the wall to see a toad in the water of the bathtub, so they opened the door and all the adults and children went into the bathroom, but the toad did not pay any attention to them.

古文：水族为人邓元佐
现代文：老太太先前戴着的银钗，仍在其头上。
English: The old lady was still wearing the silver bracelet on her head.

古文：邓元佐者，颍川人也，游学于吴。
现代文：一家人没办法只好守着大鼋哭泣。
English: The family had no choice but to hold on to the coffin and weep.

古文：好寻山水，凡有胜境，无不历览。因谒长城宰，延挹托旧，畅饮而别。
现代文：有顷，那大鼋爬出门外，跑得很快，谁也追赶不上，眼睁睁看着它跳进河水里，过了好几天，它忽然又回来了，在住宅四周巡行，象平时一样，它一句话没说就走了。
English: One day, the big toad crawled out of the door, ran so fast that no one could catch up, and watched it jump into the river. After several days, it suddenly came back, cruising around the house, as usual, it did not say a word and left.

古文：元佐叹咤良久，不损其螺。元佐自此栖心于道门，永绝游历耳。
现代文：当时的人对宋士宗说应当为母亲举办丧事，宋士宗认为母亲虽然变了外形，可是还活在世上，就没有举行丧礼。
English: People at the time said to Song Shizong that a funeral should be held for his mother. Song Shizong believed that although his mother had changed her appearance, she was still alive in the world, so there was no funeral.

古文：姚氏
现代文：姚氏
English: Mr. Yao

古文：东州静海军姚氏率其徒捕海鱼，以充岁贡。
现代文：东州静海军的姚氏率领他的手下捕捉海鱼，用来充当每年向朝廷交的贡鱼。
English: Mr. Yao of the Dongzhou Jing Navy led his men to catch sea fish, which was used as a tribute fish presented to the imperial court every year.

古文：时已将晚，而得鱼殊少，方忧之，忽网中获一人，黑色，举身长毛，拱手而立。
现代文：这一天，时间已经晚了，可是捕的鱼却很少。正在为此发愁的时候，忽然网里捉到一个人，黑色，全身长毛，拱着手站着，问他也不答应。
English: On this day, it was late, but there were few fish caught. While I was worrying about this, I suddenly caught a man in the net, black, with long hair all over his body, standing with his arms outstretched, and he wouldn't even answer my question.

古文：问之不应，海师曰： 此所谓海人，见必有灾，请杀之，以塞其咎。 
现代文：海师说： 这就是人们说的海人，看见他一定有灾难，请杀了他，来避免灾难。 
English: The marine engineer said, "This is what people call a seaman. If you see him, there must be a disaster. Please kill him to avoid a disaster."

古文：姚曰： 此神物也，杀之不祥。 
现代文：姚氏说： 这是神物，杀了他不吉祥。 
English: Mr. Yao said, "This is a sacred object, and killing it is not auspicious."

古文：乃释而祝之曰： 尔能为我致群鱼，以免阙职之罪，信为神矣。 
现代文：于是放了他并向他祈祷说： 你能替我赶来鱼群，以此免去我失职的罪过，我相信你就是神。 
English: Then she let him go, and prayed, saying, If thou canst draw out fish for me, and cleanse me from this sin, I will believe that thou art the Lord.

古文：毛人却行水上，数十步而没。明日，鱼乃大获。
现代文：毛人倒退着在水面上行走，走了几十步就沉没了，第二天，就捕获了很多鱼，是往年的一倍。
English: The hairy man walked backwards on the surface of the water, walked a few dozen steps and sank. The next day, he caught a lot of fish, twice as many as in previous years.

古文：倍于常岁矣。宋氏
现代文：宋氏
English: Song Dynasty

古文：江西军吏宋氏尝市木至星子，见水滨人物喧集，乃渔人得一大鼋。
现代文：江西军中官吏宋氏曾经到星子江去买木料，看见水边上很多人聚集在一起吵嚷，原来是一个渔夫捉到一只大鼋。
English: Song, a mid-ranking official of the Western Jiangxi Army, once went to the Xingzi River to buy lumber and saw a lot of people gathered on the water's edge, making a lot of noise. It turned out to be a fisherman catching a big clam.

古文：鼋见宋屡顾，宋即以钱一千赎之，放于江中。
现代文：鼋看见宋氏便多次回头望他，宋氏就用一千钱买下它，放到了江里。
English: When he saw Mr. Song, he looked back at him many times. Mr. Song bought it for 1,000 yuan and put it in the river.

古文：后数年，泊船龙沙，忽有一仆夫至，云元长史奉召。宋恍然。  不知何长史也。
现代文：又过了几年，宋氏坐的船停在龙沙，忽然有一个仆人来到，说是元长史请宋氏去，宋氏恍恍惚惚的，不知道是什么长史。
English: A few years later, the ship on which Mr. Song was traveling stopped in Longsha. Suddenly, a servant came and said that Yuan Changshi had invited Mr. Song to go. Mr. Song was in a daze and did not know what Longshi was.

古文：既往，欻至一府，官出迎。与坐曰： 君尚相识耶！ 
现代文：他随仆人去了以后，很快就到了一个府第，有个官吏出来迎接，和他一起坐下说： 你还认识我吗？ 
English: After he had gone with his servants, he soon arrived at a palace. An official came out to meet him, sat down with him and said: Do you still know me?

古文：宋思之，实未尝识。
现代文：宋氏想了想，实在不曾相识。
English: Mr. Song thought about it and realized that they had never met.

古文：又曰： 君亦记星子江中放鼋耶？ 
现代文：那官吏又说： 你还记得星子江中放生的鼋吗？ 
English: The official also said: Do you remember the dragonflies released in the Xingzi River?

古文：曰： 然，身即鼋也。
现代文：宋氏回答说： 记得。 
English: Mr. Song replied, "I remember.

古文：顷尝有罪，帝命谪为水族，见囚于渔人，微君之惠，已骨朽矣。
现代文：官吏说： 我就是鼋，那时曾经有罪，玉帝把我贬成水中生物，被渔夫捉住。不是你的恩惠，我的尸骨也已经腐烂了。
English: The official said: I am the dragonfly, I was guilty at that time, the Jade Emperor reduced me to a creature in the water, I was caught by the fisherman. It was not your favor, my bones have rotted.

古文：今已得为九江长，相召者，有以奉报。君儿某者命当溺死，名籍在是。
现代文：我现在已经当上了九江的总管，叫你来，是有件事情奉告你：你的儿子命中应当淹死，他的名字记在我这里的名册上。
English: I have now become the head steward of Jiujiang. I called you here because I have something to tell you: Your son is destined to drown. His name is on my list here.

古文：后数日，鸣山神将朝庐山使者，行必以疾风雨，君儿当以此时死。
现代文：几天以后，鸣山神准备去朝拜庐山使者，行走时一定带着疾风暴雨，你的儿子应当在这个时候淹死。
English: A few days later, Mingshan Shen prepared to go to worship Lushan Envoy. When he walked, he must have been accompanied by a storm. Your son should have drowned at this time.

古文：今有一人名姓正同，亦当溺死，但先期岁月间耳。
现代文：现在有一个人名姓与你儿子正好一样，也应当淹死，只不过比你的儿子早死一些日子罢了，我想拿他来代替。
English: Now there is a man with the same name as your son, who should also have drowned, only he died a few days before your son, and I want to take his place.

古文：吾取以代之，君儿宜速登岸避匿，不然不免。 
现代文：你的儿子应当快些上岸躲藏好，不然就免不了淹死。 
English: Your son had better get ashore quickly and hide, or he will surely drown.

古文：宋陈谢而出，不觉已在舟次矣。
现代文：宋氏说了感谢的话就出去了，不知不觉地已回到船上。
English: After thanking him, Mr. Song went out and unknowingly returned to the ship.

古文：数日，果有风涛之害，死甚众，宋氏之子竟免。
现代文：过了几天，果然发生了风涛之灾，死了很多人，宋氏之子竟然没有淹死。
English: A few days later, the storm really happened, many people died, but Mr. Song's son did not drown.

古文：史氏女
现代文：史氏女
English: Shi's daughter

古文：溧水五坛村人史氏女，因莳田倦，偃息树下。
现代文：溧水县五坛村史氏的女儿，因为莳弄庄稼累了，在树下休息。
English: The daughter of Mr. Shi of Wotan Village, Surabaya County, was tired of ploughing crops and rested under a tree.

古文：见一物，鳞角爪距可畏，来据其上。
现代文：她看见一个动物，其鳞角爪距很可怕，那动物扑过来压在她的身上。
English: She saw an animal, its claws horribly spaced, swoop down on her.

古文：已而有娠，生一鲤鱼，养于盆中，数日益长，乃置投金濑中。
现代文：不久，这女子有了身孕，后生下一条鲤鱼，养在盆里，几天时间长大了不少，就把它送到金濑河里去。
English: Soon, the woman became pregnant and gave birth to an eel, which was raised in a bowl. After a few days, it grew a lot and was sent to the Jinyu River.

古文：顷之，村人刈草，误断其尾，鱼即奋跃而去，风雨随之，入太湖而止。
现代文：不久，有个村民割草，不小心砍断了它的尾巴，鲤鱼就奋力地跃出金濑河，而且有风和雨伴随着它。直到它跳入太湖，那风雨才停止。
English: Soon after, a villager was mowing the grass and accidentally cut off its tail. The eel struggled to jump out of the Jinyu River, accompanied by wind and rain. The wind and rain did not stop until it jumped into the Taihu Lake.

古文：家亦渐富，其后女卒，每寒食，其鱼辄从群鱼一至墓前。
现代文：女子的家里渐渐地富起来，后来她死了，每到寒食节，那条鲤鱼就带领着一群鱼到女子的墓前来一次。
English: Gradually, the woman's family became rich, and then she died. Every cold food festival, the eel would lead a group of fish to the woman's grave.

古文：至今，每闰年一至尔。
现代文：现在，它每到闰年时来一次。
English: Now, it comes once every leap year.

古文：又渔人李黑獭恒张网于江，忽获一婴儿，可长三尺，网为乱涎所萦，浃旬不解。
现代文：又听人讲有个渔夫李黑獭经常在江上安设捕网，一天，忽然网住了一个婴儿，大约有三尺长。网被婴儿吐出的涎水粘连着，十多天也解不开。
English: I also heard about a fisherman, Li Heijun, who often set up a fishing net on the river. One day, the net suddenly caught a baby, about three feet long. The net was stuck with the salty water that the baby vomited, and it could not be untied for more than ten days.

古文：有道士见之曰： 可取铁汁灌之。 
现代文：有个道士看见了说： 可以用铁水来浇。 
English: A Taoist saw it and said, "It can be poured with molten iron."

古文：如其言，遂解。
现代文：照道士的话做，果然解开了。
English: According to the words of the Taoist priest, it was solved.

古文：视婴儿，口鼻眉发如画，而无目，口犹有酒气，众惧，复投于江。
现代文：看那婴儿，口、鼻子、眉毛、头发都象画上画的一样，可就是没有眼睛，它口里还有酒气。大家很害怕，把它又扔到江里去了。
English: Look at the baby, his mouth, nose, eyebrows and hair are just like in the picture, but he has no eyes, and there is alcohol in his mouth. Everyone was so scared that they threw him back into the river.

古文：渔人
现代文：渔人
English: Fisherman from

古文：近有渔人泊舟马当山下，月明风恬，见一大鼋出水，直上山顶，引首四望。
现代文：最近有个渔夫在马当山下停船，月明风静，他看见一只大鼋出水来，一直爬上山顶，还抬起头来向四面张望。
English: Recently, a fisherman stopped his boat at the foot of Mt. Madang. The moon was bright and the wind was calm. He saw a giant clam come out of the water, climb all the way to the top of the mountain, and look up in all directions.

古文：顷之，江水中涌出一彩舟，有十余人会饮酒，妓乐陈设甚盛。
现代文：不久，江水中涌出一只彩船，船里有十多个人聚会喝酒，有舞女歌伎助兴，陈设布置华丽而盛大。
English: Soon, a colorful boat emerged from the river. There were more than ten people in the boat, drinking and partying, with a female kabuki dancer to add to the fun, and the decorations were gorgeous and grand.

古文：献酬久之，上流有巨舰来下，橹声振于坐中，彩舟乃没。
现代文：他们互相劝酒喝了很长时间，上游有只大型战船下来了，摇橹的声音惊动了彩船，彩船才沉没了。
English: They persuaded each other to drink for a long time. Upstream, a large warship came down. The shaking sound alerted the boat, and the boat sank.

古文：前之鼋亦下，未及水，忽死于岸侧。
现代文：先前出水的鼋也爬下山来，还没有等进水里，忽然地死在岸边上。
English: The tadpoles that had come out of the water earlier also crawled down the mountain, and before they could enter the water, they suddenly died on the shore.

古文：意者水神使此鼋为候望，而不知巨舰之来，故殛之。
现代文：渔夫推想：可能是水神派这只鼋到山顶守候了望，却竟然没有看见大战船的到来，所以才杀了它。
English: The fisherman speculated that the god of water may have sent this cormorant to the top of the mountain to keep watch, but it did not see the arrival of the big warship, so he killed it.

古文：黄氏母
现代文：人化水族黄氏母
English: The mother of the anthropomorphic aquarian Huang

古文：后汉灵帝时，江夏黄氏之母浴而化为鼋，入于深渊，其后时时出见。
现代文：东汉灵帝的时候，江夏人黄氏的母亲洗澡时变成一只鼋，走到深渊中去了。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty, the mother of Mr. Huang, a native of Jiangxia, turned into a toad while taking a bath and went into the abyss.

古文：与江夏黄母相似。宣骞母
现代文：那以后还常常浮出水来，刚洗澡时戴的一只银钗，等她的化身在水面出现时，还戴在头上。
English: Since then, she has often surfaced, and a silver bracelet that she wore in the shower is still on her head when her avatar appears on the surface of the water.

古文：吴孙皓宝鼎元年，丹阳宣骞之母，年八十，因浴化为鼋。
现代文：宋士宗母宣骞母吴国末帝孙皓宝鼎元年，丹阳人宣骞的母亲，年龄八十岁，因洗澡变成鼋。
English: In the 1st year of Baoding, the mother of Emperor Xuan Zang of the Song Dynasty, the mother of Emperor Xuan Zang of the late Emperor of the State of Wu, and the mother of Emperor Xuan Zang of the Danyang Dynasty, at the age of eighty, was turned into a skeleton due to bathing.

古文：骞兄弟闭户卫之，掘堂内作大坎，实水，其鼋即入坎游戏。
现代文：宣骞兄弟们关上门保护鼋，在堂屋里挖了个大坑，灌满水，那只鼋就进到坑里游戏。
English: The brothers closed the door to protect the toad, dug a big hole in the hall, filled it with water, and the toad went into the hole to play.

古文：经累日，忽延颈外望，伺户小开，便辄自跃，赴于远潭，遂不复见。
现代文：过了好几天，那鼋忽然伸长脖子向外面看，见门欠开一道缝，就自己跳出坑，向远处的水潭爬去，并再也没出现。
English: Several days later, the toad suddenly craned its neck to look outside, saw a crack in the door, jumped out of the pit on its own, crawled to a distant pool, and never reappeared.

古文：江州人
现代文：江州人
English: People from Jiangzhou

古文：晋末，江州人年百余岁，顶上生角，后因入舍前江中，变为鲤鱼，角尚存首。
现代文：晋代末年，江州有个人一百多岁了，头顶上长了角。后来因为他掉进住宅前面的江中，变成了鲤鱼，角还长头上。
English: At the end of the Jin Dynasty, there was a 100-plus-year-old man in Jiangzhou who grew horns on the top of his head. Later, because he fell into the river in front of his house, he turned into a carp, with horns still on his head.

古文：自后时时暂还，容状如平生，与子孙饮，数日辄去。
现代文：此后他还经常回来暂住，样子与从前一样，和子孙们把酒畅饮，几天以后就走。
English: After that, he often came back to stay for a while, looking the same as before, drinking wine with his children and grandchildren, and leaving after a few days.

古文：晋末以来，绝不复见。
现代文：晋代末年以来，他再也没有出现过。
English: He has not been seen since the end of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：独角
现代文：独角
English: Single horn

