古文：宰相上事苏瑰两省独孤及参酌院阳城吕温韦绚李程杂说
现代文：宰相上事苏瑰两省独孤及参酌院阳城吕温韦绚李程杂说
English: Prime Minister Su Gui's speech on the independence of the two provinces and Yangcheng Lyu Wenwei Hua Li Cheng's speech

古文：御史同州御史崔遠严武押班台门历五院韩皋杂说使职
现代文：御史同州御史崔遠严武押班台门历五院韩皋杂说使职
English: History, Tongzhou, History, Cui, Yuan, Yan, Wu, Oppong, Bantai, Menli, Wujin, Han, Zhaozhou, Zhaozhou

古文：尚书省崔日知度支柳辟省桥秘书省鱼袋莎厅
现代文：尚书省崔日知度支柳辟省桥秘书省鱼袋莎厅
English: Secretary of the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology Secretary of the Ministry of Science, Technology and Industry Secretary of the Ministry of Railways Secretary of the Ministry of Railways

古文：宰相
现代文：宰相
English: Prime Minister

古文：凡拜相礼，绝班行。
现代文：举行拜相礼那天百官停止上朝。
English: On the day of the priest's ceremony, the hundreds of officials stopped coming to the temple.

古文：府县载沙填路，自私第至于子城东街，名曰沙堤。
现代文：京兆府县百姓都要填平道路，道铺黄沙、洒水。从宰相的私宅铺到子城东街，名叫沙堤。
English: The people of Jingzhao County all have to fill the roads with sand and sprinkles. From the prime minister's private residence to Zicheng East Street, it is called the sand embankment.

古文：有服假，或问疾，百僚就第。
现代文：有丧事服假的，或者父母有病去问候疾病的除外，其余文武百官都要去参加。
English: Except for those who are on bereavement leave, or whose parents are too ill to greet the sick, all other civil and military officials are required to attend.

古文：有司设幕次，排班。
现代文：由主管拜相礼的官员给安排次序，安排帐蓬的位置。
English: It is up to the officials in charge of the mass to arrange the order and position of the tents.

古文：元日冬至立仗，大官皆备珂伞，列烛有五六百炬，谓之火城。
现代文：京城大官都要准备伞盖，众官点着大腊烛五、六百根。照得通亮称为火城。
English: All the officials in the capital had to prepare umbrella covers, and all the officials lit five or six hundred large wax candles. The city was so brightly lit that it was called the City of Fire.

古文：宰相火城将至，则皆扑灭以避。
现代文：宰相的仪仗到来，众官都要掩避腊烛以示尊重。
English: When the Prime Minister's ceremonial arrival, all officials should hide the wax candle to show respect.

古文：宰相判四方之事有都堂，处分有司有堂帖，下次押名曰花押，黄敕既下，小异同曰黄帖，宰相呼为堂老。
现代文：宰相办公地点叫都堂，处理有关主管各署事务用堂帖。皇帝用黄绢写的有关命令、训谕臣下的诏书叫黄敕，宰相下达的文书叫黄贴。都堂内的官员称宰相为堂老。
English: The prime minister's office is called Tudo, and the posts in charge of the relevant departments are called Dojo. The emperor's orders and decrees to his subjects, written in yellow ink, are called Huang Di, and the documents issued by the prime minister are called Huang Tie. The officials in Tudo call the prime minister Dojo.

古文：初百官早朝，必立马建福望仙门外。宰相则于光宅车坊，以避风雨。
现代文：原先百官早朝，必须牵马在建福望仙门外等候，宰相则于光宅车坊内等候，以避风雨。
English: Originally, in the early morning, hundreds of officials had to wait outside the Jianfu Wangxian Gate with their horses, while the prime minister waited inside the Guangzhai Coach House to avoid the wind and rain.

古文：元和初，始置待漏院。
现代文：到唐宪宗李纯元和初年才设置待漏院。
English: It was not until the first year of the reign of Li Chunyuan of the Tang Dynasty that a hospice was set up.

古文：上事
现代文：上事
English: Superiors

古文：凡中书门下，并于西省上，以便礼仪。
现代文：凡是属于中书省和门下省的官向朝廷上书陈述意见的，都要经过尚书省奏给皇上，以便礼仪。
English: All officials belonging to the Central Literature Department and subordinate departments who submit a letter to the Imperial Court to state their opinions must go through the Central Literature Department and report to the Emperor in order to facilitate the etiquette.

古文：五品以上，宰相送上，乃并卿参。
现代文：五品以上的官如有奏章，由宰相送上和群臣一起参奏。
English: If an official of the Fifth Rank or higher has a performance medal, the Prime Minister will present it to him, and he and his ministers will participate in the performance.

古文：苏瑰
现代文：苏瑰
English: Suzhou

古文：景龙三年，苏瑰除尚书右仆射。
现代文：唐中宗李显景尤三年，苏瑰授尚书右仆射。
English: Li Xianjing, a member of the Tang Dynasty Middle School, was only three years old, while Su Jiu, a disciple of Shang Shuxu, was only two years old.

古文：时公卿大臣初拜官者，例计献食，名曰烧尾。
现代文：当时公卿大臣，初次授官者，依照惯例应该献食，名叫烧尾。
English: At that time, Kugyo-daijin (Minister of the Kugyo) and those who were appointed for the first time were required to make an offering of food in accordance with the usual practice. This offering was called "Anio."

古文：瑰因侍内宴，将作大匠宗晋卿谓曰：拜仆射，竟不烧尾，岂不善邪？
现代文：苏瑰因为授尚书右仆射时皇帝已为他设宴。将作大匠宗晋卿对苏瑰说：授仆射这样重大的事，竟不 烧尾 岂不是不对吗？
English: The emperor had already prepared a banquet for Su Gui when he was awarded the right to shoot his servant. The master craftsman Zong Jinqing said to Su Gui: "Isn't it wrong not to burn the tail after being awarded such an important thing as shooting a servant?"

古文：帝默然。
现代文：唐中宗没吱声。
English: The emperor was silent.

古文：瑰奏曰：臣闻宰相者，主阴阳，助天理物。
现代文：苏瑰上奏说：臣知道当宰相的，执掌国家大事，帮助天子处理国家事务。
English: Su Juxiong said: "Vassals know who is prime minister, who is in charge of national affairs, and who helps Tianzi to deal with national affairs.

古文：今粒食踊贵，百姓不足，臣见宿卫兵，至有三日不得食者。臣愚不称职，所以不敢烧尾。
现代文：现在粮食昂贵，米价暴涨，百姓吃不饱。臣见禁军中，竟有三天没吃到饭的，臣考虑自己不称职，因为这个缘故不敢 烧尾 。
English: Now grain is expensive, the price of rice has skyrocketed, and the people can't get enough to eat. When a vassal saw a member of the Imperial Army who hadn't eaten for three days, the vassal considered himself incompetent and didn't dare to fire him for this reason.

古文：两省
现代文：两省
English: Two provinces

古文：谏议无事不入：每遇入省，有厨食四孔炙。
现代文：谏议大夫无事不入门下省，如入省，有厨食四孔烧烤肉吃。
English: If you go to a province, you can eat grilled meat cooked in a four-hole grill.

古文：中书舍人时谓宰相判官；宰相亲嫌，不拜知制诰为屧脚。
现代文：中书舍人，时谓宰相判官。宰相对待下属官员有远有近，不授与中书舍人为知制诰官的为屧脚，又叫不由三字。
English: The chancellor is the judge of the subordinate officials, whether far or near. If the chancellor does not award the chancellorship to the eunuchs, it is considered to be lame, and it is called "three words."

古文：又云：不由三字，直拜中书舍人者，谓之挞额裹头。
现代文：直接授中书舍人官的叫挞额裹头。
English: Directly awarding the secondary school students, the officials of the school called it "wrapping the forehead with the head."

古文：其制诰之本，出自王言，皆人主所为。
现代文：关于制诰一类的诏书，本来出自皇帝之口，都是皇帝本人应该做的。
English: Regarding imperial decrees such as the establishment of imperial residences, which originally came from the mouth of the emperor, they should be made by the emperor himself.

古文：故汉光武时，第五伦为督铸钱掾，见诏书而叹曰：此圣明主也，一见决矣。
现代文：过去汉光武帝时，第五伦任督铸钱掾，看见诏书而感叹说，这是英明的圣主啊！皇上一见就决定了。
English: In the past, during the reign of Emperor Han Guangwu, the fifth-ranked Long Ren was in charge of minting money, and when he saw the edict, he sighed and said, "This is a wise sage! The emperor made the decision at first sight."

古文：近者凡有诏敕，皆责成群下。
现代文：现在凡是有诏敕，都责成下边写成诏书。
English: Now, anyone with an imperial edict is required to write an imperial edict at the bottom.

古文：褒贬之言，哲王所慎。
现代文：诏书上的话，是英明圣主应该慎重选择的。
English: The words in the edict should be carefully chosen by the wise Lord.

古文：凡百具寮，王公卿士，始褒则谓其珪璋特达，善无可加；旋有贬黜，则比以斗筲下才，罪不容责。
现代文：现在群臣、王公卿士，想褒奖一个人时就说他品德高尚，人才出众，好得没法再好；若是遭到贬斥被罢免时就说他才识短浅、器量狭小，是个罪不容责的坏人。
English: Now, when ministers and princes want to praise a person, they say that he is of high moral character and outstanding talent, so good that he can't be better; if he is disparaged and dismissed, they say that he is short-sighted and narrow-minded, and is a bad person who can't be held accountable.

古文：同为一士之行，固出君上之言，愚智生于倏忽，是非变于俄倾。
现代文：同样一个人做的事，出自君王之口，糊涂、聪明生于瞬间，正确、错误变于顷刻。
English: The same thing done by one man comes from the mouth of a king. Foolishness and wisdom are born in an instant, and right and wrong change in a moment.

古文：盖天子无戏言，言之苟失，则取尤天下。
现代文：君王应该无戏言，说话若有失误，则取罪于天下，失信于天下老百姓。
English: The monarch should have nothing to say. If there is a mistake in his speech, he will be blamed by the world and discredited by the people of the world.

古文：独孤及
现代文：独孤及
English: Alone and isolated

古文：独孤及求知制诰，试见元载。
现代文：独孤及想任知制诰官，去见元载想探听消息。
English: He was lonely and wanted to be appointed as a eunuch of the intellectual system. He went to see Yuan Zang to inquire about the news.

古文：时杨炎在阁下，忌及之来，故元阻之，乃二人力也。
现代文：独孤及没当上知制诰，是元杨二人阻止的结果。参酌院
English: It was the result of the two of them preventing Yuan Yang from becoming the sole ruler.

古文：参酌院长庆初，穆宗以刑法为重。每大狱，有司断罪，又令给事中中书舍人参酌出入之，百司呼为参酌院。
现代文：唐穆宗李恒长庆初年，穆宗以刑法为重，每次遇到大的案件，先由主管者判罪，又命令门下省的给事中和中书省的中书舍人参加商量定罪。当时官员叫这为参酌院。
English: In the first year of Tang Mu Zong Li Heng Changqing, Mu Zong focused on criminal law. Every time he encountered a major case, he first convicted the person in charge, and ordered the people in charge of the case in the province under his supervision and the people in charge of the case in the province of Chinese calligraphy to participate in the discussion and conviction. At that time, the officials called it the Sankei-in.

古文：阳城
现代文：阳城
English: Yangcheng

古文：阳城居夏县，拜谏议大夫；郑锢居阌乡，拜拾遗；李周南居曲江，拜校书郎。
现代文：阳城居夏县，授谏议大夫；郑锢居阌乡，授拾遗；李周南居曲江，授校书郎。
English: Yangcheng lived in Xia County, and was awarded the title of doctor of consultation; Zheng Rong lived in Handan Township, and was awarded the title of scholar; Li Zhounan lived in Qujiang, and was awarded the title of scholar.

古文：时人以转远转高，转近转卑。
现代文：当时人们认为越从远地方调来的官职越高，越从近的地方调来的官职反而低下。
English: At that time, people believed that the higher the official position transferred from a distant place, the higher the official position transferred from a nearby place.

古文：吕温
现代文：吕温
English: Lyu Wen

古文：通事舍人宣诏，旧命拾遗团句把麻者，盖谒者不知书，多失句度，故用拾遗低摘声句以助之。
现代文：门下省通事舍人宣读诏书时，按照旧例门下省长官命令拾遗官帮助指点句读，因宣读者不懂诏书上句子长短，多数把句子读错，所以让拾遗官从旁低声帮助提示。
English: During the reading of the imperial edict, the provincial magistrate ordered the coroner to help point out the sentences in accordance with the old practice. Since the coroner did not understand the length of the sentences in the imperial edict, most of the sentences were read incorrectly, so the coroner was asked to whisper to the side to help point out.

古文：及吕温为拾遗，被唤把麻，不肯去。
现代文：到吕温任拾遗官时，被唤去把麻吕温不肯去。
English: When he arrived in Lüwen to be the official responsible for collecting the remains, he was summoned to remove Ma, but Lüwen refused to go.

古文：遂成故事。
现代文：从这以后，就成为惯例。
English: Since then, it has become common practice.

古文：拾遗不把麻者，自吕始也。
现代文：拾遗不给宣读者提示句读是从品温开始的。
English: The reader is reminded that the reading of a sentence begins with the temperature of the product.

古文：时柳宗元戏吕云：幸识一文半字，何不与他把也？
现代文：当时柳宗元对吕温开玩笑说：幸亏你认识一字半字，否则为啥不给他把麻？
English: At that time, Liu Zongyuan jokingly said to Lü Wen: Fortunately, you know a word and a half, otherwise why not give him the lead?

古文：韦绚
现代文：韦绚
English: Wei Hua

古文：开成末，韦绚自左补阙为起居舍人。
现代文：唐文宗李昂开成末年，韦绚从左补阙任起居舍人。
English: In the last years of Tang Wenzong Liangkaicheng, Wei Hua took up the position of the left assistant abbot.

古文：时文宗稽古尚文，多行贞观开元之事。
现代文：当时文宗好古尊崇文人学士，多数按照太宗贞观、玄宗开元年间的办法办事。
English: At that time, the Wenzong respected the literati and scholars, and most of them followed the methods of Taizong Zhenguan and Xuanzong in the first year of the reign.

古文：妙选左右史，以魏谟为右史，俄兼大谏，入阁秉笔。
现代文：仔细挑选左史、右史，以魏谟为右史，不久又让魏谟兼谏议大夫，入朝执掌记事。
English: He carefully selected the left history and the right history, with Weimar as the right history, and soon he made Weimar concurrently the doctor of deliberation, and he was put in charge of the records.

古文：直声远闻，帝倚以为相者，期在旦暮。
现代文：魏谟正直的名声，远近传扬。文宗让他当宰相是早晚的事。
English: Weimar's reputation for honesty spread far and wide. It was only a matter of time before Wenzong made him chancellor.

古文：对剔进谏，细大必行。
现代文：魏谟不论大事小事，都能针对时弊正言直谏。
English: Irrespective of the big and small things, Weimar is able to stand up and speak out against the current ills.

古文：公望美事，朝廷拭目，以观文贞公之风彩。会文宗晏驾，时事变移，遂中辍焉。
现代文：朝廷众官都等待选择魏谟任宰相那一天。正在这个时候文宗死了。事情有了变化，让魏谟当宰相这件事就停下了。
English: All the officials of the imperial court were waiting for the day when Weimar would be chosen as chancellor. It was at this time that Wenzong died. Things changed, and the matter of having Weimar as chancellor came to a halt.

古文：时绚已除起居舍人，杨嗣复于殿下先奏曰：左补阙韦绚新除起居舍人，未中谢，奏取进止。帝领之。
现代文：当时韦绚已经授职起居舍人。杨嗣又在殿下向武宗李炎上奏说，左补阙韦绚新授起居舍人，没向皇帝谢恩，就中止了吧，皇帝点点头。
English: At that time, Wei Huan had already been given the post of chief retainer. Yang Zhi also made a report to the Emperor Wu Zong Li in the presence of His Imperial Highness, saying that the newly appointed chief retainer, Wei Huan, did not thank the Emperor, so let's cancel it, and the Emperor nodded.

古文：李珪招而引之，绚即置笔札于玉阶栏槛之石，遽然趋而致词拜舞焉。
现代文：退班后，李珪招呼韦绚请他到殿外。韦绚急忙把笔和书写用的木简放在玉阶栏杆石头上，跑过来致词拜舞，韦绚这样做，是为了给皇帝谢恩。
English: After leaving work, Li Ying called Wei Huan to invite him to the outside of the palace. Wei Huan hurriedly put his pen and writing block on the stone railing of the Jade Step and ran over to make a speech and dance. Wei Huan did this to thank the emperor.

古文：左史得中谢，自开成中至武宗即位，随仗而退，无复簪笔之任矣。
现代文：从开成中期到武宗即位，仪仗退下群臣也就退下，没有在朝记事的事了。
English: From the middle of the reign of Emperor Kaisei to the enthronement of Emperor Wuzong, there was no record of events in the imperial court.

古文：遇簪笔之际，因得密迩天颜，故时人谓两省为侍从之班，则登选者不为不达矣。
现代文：遇有记事的时候，能接近皇上，看清皇上的面貌。门下省和中书省的官员只是随从而已。因为这个缘故，所以当时人们称，两省为侍从班。当上大官可以算是近臣了。
English: When there were matters to be recorded, they could get close to the emperor and see his face clearly. The officials of the subordinate provinces and the Chinese provinces only followed. Because of this, people at that time said that the two provinces were the attendant class. When a high-ranking official could be considered a vassal.

古文：李程
现代文：李程
English: Li Cheng

古文：李程为翰林学士，以阶前砖日影为入候。
现代文：李程任翰林学士以阶前砖的日影为入院时刻。
English: Master Li Cheng Ren Hanlin took the shadow of the brick in front of the steps as the time of admission.

古文：程性懒，每入必逾八砖，故号为八砖学土。
现代文：李程愿意睡早觉。每次入院日影必须超过八块砖，才能入朝。因此号为八砖学士。
English: Li Cheng likes to go to bed early. Each time he is admitted to the hospital, the shadow must exceed eight bricks to enter the morning. Therefore, he is called the eight-brick bachelor.

古文：杂说
现代文：杂说
English: Miscellaneous

古文：两省相呼为阁老，尚书丞郎相呼为曹长，员外郎御史拾遗相呼为院长。
现代文：门下省、中书省的官员相互称为阁老。尚书省的尚书郎、左丞、右丞相互称为曹长。员外郎、御史、拾遗相互称为院长。
English: The officials of the subordinate province and Zhongshu province are mutually referred to as the cabinet elder; the officials of Shangshu province, such as Shang Shuro, Zuo Zhe and Yu Zhe, are mutually referred to as Cao Chang; and the officials of the subordinate province, such as Jian Wairo, Mi Shi and Zuo Zhe, are mutually referred to as Dean.

古文：上可兼下，下不可兼上。
现代文：官职大的可以代替下属官员办事，下属官员不可以代替官职大的官员办事。
English: An official of a higher education institution may act in place of a subordinate official, but a subordinate official may not act in place of an official of a higher education institution.

古文：侍御史相呼为端公。
现代文：侍御史之间相互称为端公。
English: Between the attendants, they call each other "Tango."

古文：御史
现代文：御史
English: History

古文：御史故事，大朝会则监察押班，常参则殿中分班，入阁则侍御史监奏。
现代文：唐代御史的惯例，大朝会在含元殿举行，由监察御史领班。常参则由殿中侍御史在宣政殿分班排列。入阁则由侍御史监奏。
English: According to the custom of imperial history in the Tang Dynasty, the Grand Imperial Court Assembly was held in the Gan Yuan Hall, and the inspector of imperial history was the leader. The regular attendees were arranged by the attendants of imperial history in the hall in the Xuan Zheng Hall. The cabinet was supervised by the attendants of imperial history.

古文：盖含元殿最远，用八品宣政其次，用七品紫宸最近，用六品殿中得立花砖，绿衣用紫案褥之类，号为七贵。监察院长与同院礼隔，语曰：事长如事端。凡上堂绝言笑，有不可忍，杂端大笑，则合座皆笑，谓之烘堂。
现代文：有忍不住笑的话或事，御史大笑，则满屋大笑。
English: If there is a word or event that cannot help but make you laugh, you will laugh out loud, and the whole house will laugh out loud.

古文：烘堂不罚。
现代文：满座皆笑叫哄堂，哄堂大笑下属不受罚。
English: The whole auditorium roared with laughter, and the subordinates who roared with laughter went unpunished.

古文：大夫中暴入三院，罚直尽放。其轻重尺寸，由于吏人，而大者存之黄卷。
现代文：御史大夫和御史中丞到三院办公，履行职责：弹劾、察举、纠察、辩诬等，其处理轻重程度，先由具体办案的低级吏员提出初步意见。大的案件要有黄卷存档。
English: Goshi daibu and goshi chujo go to the offices of the three courts to perform their duties: impeachment, investigation, picketing, defense, etc. The severity of their handling is determined by the preliminary opinions of the lower-level officials who handle the specific case. Large cases should be archived in yellow volumes.

古文：三院上堂，有除改者不得终食。
现代文：三院理事，凡新授任官的，调转的当即停发原职的俸禄，改发新任职俸。
English: For the members of the Third House of the State Council who are newly appointed officials, the salary of the original position will be suspended immediately after the transfer, and the new salary will be issued instead.

古文：唯刑部郎中得终之。
现代文：唯有刑部郎中以上官员，继续发俸至年终，之后按新任职务发俸。
English: Only officials at the junior to senior levels of the Criminal Investigation Department will continue to be paid until the end of the year, after which they will be paid according to their new positions.

古文：同州御史
现代文：同州御史
English: Governor of the same state

古文：王某云：往岁任官同州，见御史出案，回止州驿，经宿不发。
现代文：王某人说，他过去在同州任官时。亲眼看见监察御史从京城出来巡察州县，回来到同州驿馆住下。
English: A certain Mr. Wang said that when he was an official in Tongzhou in the past, he saw with his own eyes that the inspector came from Beijing to inspect the county and returned to live in Tongzhou.

古文：忽索杂案，又取印历，锁驿门甚急，一州大扰。
现代文：住了一宿也不走，突然向州衙署索要各式各样的案卷，又要印鉴和记事簿，并且很急促地把驿门锁上，象有什么要紧的事似的，扰闹得一州一宿不得安宁。
English: After staying there for one night, he suddenly demanded all kinds of case files from the prefectural police department, as well as a seal and a record book, and hurriedly locked the gate, as if there was something important, disturbing the peace of the prefecture for one night.

古文：有老吏窃哂，乃因庖人以通宪胥，许以百缣为赠。明日未明，御史已启驿门，尽还案牍，乘马而去。
现代文：有一个老吏偷偷地发笑。他借掌膳食人的关系官已和监察御史下边的胥吏通融好了，答应给送壹百匹缣。第二天天没亮，御史已开驿门，把案卷印历还给州的官署，骑马而去。
English: An old official was secretly laughing. The liaison officer, whom he had hired to serve the meal, had made amends with the magistrate supervising the case and promised to give him a hundred horses. The next day, before dawn, the magistrate had opened the gate, returned the case file to the state government office, and rode away.

古文：崔遠
现代文：崔遠
English: Cui Yuan

古文：崔遠为监察，巡囚至神策军，为吏所陷。
现代文：吏人说坏话给长官窦文遠，窦文遠大怒，立刻上奏皇帝。
English: When the official spoke ill of the governor Dou Wenyuan, Dou Wenyuan was furious and immediately reported the matter to the emperor.

古文：张盖而入，又讽军中索酒食，意欲结欢。窦文遠怒，立奏敕就台鞭于直厅而流之。自是巡囚不至禁军。
现代文：皇帝下了附有命令的诏书，命令在值班的大厅里打崔遠一顿鞭子，然后再流放到边远的地方。从这以后，巡查犯人，不到禁军了。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict with an order to give Cui Yuan a whipping in the duty hall, and then banish him to a remote place. From then on, the inspection of prisoners did not reach the forbidden army.

古文：严武
现代文：严武
English: Yanwu

古文：宝应二年，大夫严武奏在外新除御史，食宿私舍非宜。
现代文：唐代宗李豫宝应二年，大夫严武上奏皇上说新授御史在家食宿不方便有困难。
English: In the second year of the reign of Li Yu Bao of the Tang Dynasty, the doctor Yan Wu reported to the emperor that it was inconvenient and difficult to teach the new imperial history at home.

古文：自此乃给公乘。
现代文：皇上恩准，自此便给公家马骑。
English: The emperor agreed, and from then on, horses were given to the nobility.

古文：元和中，元稹为监察，与中使争驿厅，为其所辱，始有敕：节度观察使台官与中使，先到驿者，得处上厅。
现代文：唐宪宗李纯元和年间监察御史元禛与宫中使臣宦官争占驿厅，元稹被宦官所污辱。皇上才下有命令性质的诏书，规定节度使、观察使、台官和中使，先到驿馆的，得住上厅，定下这种规矩。
English: During the reign of Emperor Li Chun Yuan of the Tang Dynasty, the inspector-general of history, Yuan Xuan, fought with the eunuchs of the palace to occupy the eunuchs' hall. Yuan Xuan was insulted by the eunuchs. It was only after the emperor issued an edict of an order nature, stipulating that the festival envoys, observation envoys, Taiwan officials and middle envoys, who came to the eunuchs' hall first, could live in the upper hall, that this rule was established.

古文：为定制。押班
现代文：押班
English: Escort duty

古文：凡大朝会，监察押班不足，则使下侍御史，因朝奏者摄之。
现代文：凡是大朝会，由监察御史领班，如果监察御史不够用，则派侍御史顶替。因为是朝奏者奏请皇帝批准的。
English: In general, at the Grand Imperial Court Ceremonies, the inspector-historian leads the orchestra, and if the inspector-historian is not enough, the attendant-historian is sent to replace him, because it is the morning musician who requests the emperor's approval.

古文：台门
现代文：台门
English: Taimen

古文：御史台门北开，盖取肃杀就阴之义，故京台门北开矣。
现代文：御史台门北开，因为是取酷烈、萧索、严肃的意思。
English: Goshidai-mon Gate opens to the north, because it means to take the fierce, gloomy and serious.

古文：按邺郡故事云：御史台在宫城西南，其门北开。
现代文：按《邺郡故事》上说，御史台在宫城西南，为了上朝便利，其门北开。
English: According to "The Tale of Tsukuda County," Goshidai was located in the southwest of Miyagi, and its gate was opened to the north for the convenience of the last emperor.

古文：史故城御史台亦北开。
现代文：隋时京城御史台门也北开。
English: At the time of the Sui Dynasty, the Gushidai Gate of Beijing also opened to the north.

古文：龙朔中，置桂坊，为东朝宪府，门亦北开。
现代文：唐高宗李治龙朔三年。设置桂坊改为御史台门也北开。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty, Guifang was changed to Gushidai Gate and the gate was opened to the north.

古文：然都御史台门南开。
现代文：可是都御史台门南开，是当时建筑者没精心筹划，故违反旧例。
English: However, the southern gate of the Metropolitan History Museum was not carefully planned by the builders at that time, so it violated the old rules.

古文：当时创造者不经，反于故事，同诸司，盖以权宜邪？
现代文：同其他衙署一样，大概是人权者随事势而采取的适宜办法吧。
English: As with other departments, it is probably an appropriate measure for human rights activists to take in response to the situation.

古文：又北开者，或云，是隋初移都之时，兵部尚书李圆通兼御史大夫，欲向省便近，故开北门。
现代文：又北开门的说法，有的人这样说，是隋朝初迁都时，兵部尚书李圆通兼御史大夫，想去尚书省就近，故开北门。
English: According to the theory of opening the north gate again, some people say that when the capital of the Sui Dynasty was moved at the beginning of the Sui Dynasty, Li Yuntong, who was also the chief historian of the Ministry of Military Affairs, wanted to be close to Shangshu Province, so he opened the north gate.

古文：历五院
现代文：历五院
English: The fifth house of the lunar calendar

古文：台仪，自大夫已下至监察，通谓之五院御史。
现代文：御史台的礼仪，唐朝官职设置，御史大夫、御史中丞、侍御史、殿中侍御史、监察御史，通谓之五院御史，唐朝只有三个人都经历过五院的。
English: The etiquette of the Imperial Historian's Office, the official positions set up in the Tang Dynasty, the Imperial Historian's Assistant, the Imperial Historian's Junior Secretary, the Imperial Historian's Attendant, the Imperial Historian's Attendant in the Court, and the Imperial Historian's Inspector, are commonly referred to as the Five Imperial Historians, and only three people in the Tang Dynasty experienced the Five Imperial Historians.

古文：国朝历跋五院者共三人焉：李尚隐、张延赏、温造也。
现代文：这三个人是李尚隐、张延赏、温造。
English: The three men are Li Shangyin, Zhang Yanbo and Unzo.

古文：韩皋
现代文：韩皋
English: Han Zheng

古文：韩皋为御史中丞，常有所陈，必于紫宸殿，对百僚而请，未尝诣便殿。
现代文：韩皋为御史中丞时，常向皇帝奏事，每朝见皇帝都在紫宸殿，面对百官，未曾到便殿去上奏。
English: When Han Xuan was the imperial historian, he often reported to the emperor. Every time he saw the emperor, he was in the Hall of the Purple Ribbon, facing hundreds of officials, but he never went to the Hall of Ban.

古文：上谓之曰：我与卿言，于此不尽，可来延英，当与卿从容，或无遗事。
现代文：皇上有时对韩说： 我和你说，在这说不完，可以到延英殿去说。我和你可以慢慢讲，或许不能遗漏。
English: The emperor sometimes said to Han: I told you, I can't finish talking here, I can go to Yan Ying Palace to talk. You and I can talk slowly, perhaps we can't miss it.

古文：亲友或谓皋曰：自乾元已来，群臣启事，皆诣延英，方得详尽。
现代文：韩皋的亲友有的对韩皋说，自乾元以来，群臣启事都到延英殿去奏，才能详尽。
English: Some of Han Xuan's relatives and friends said to Han Xuan that since the Qianyuan Dynasty, they had to go to the Yan Ying Palace to play the announcements of the ministers, so that they could be detailed.

古文：公何独于处庭，对众官以陈之，无失于慎密乎？
现代文：你为什么独于外庭面对百官向皇帝陈述呢，不怕泄秘吗？
English: Why did you present your case to the emperor in front of hundreds of officials, alone in the outer court, not fearing that your secret would be revealed?

古文：韩曰：御史天下之持平也。
现代文：韩皋说：御史这个官职应该本着公平正直的态度去处理事情。
English: Han Zheng said: the official position of historian should deal with things in a fair and honest manner.

古文：所言之事，贵人知之，奈何求请便殿，避人窃语，以私国家之法。
现代文：不畏强暴，大家公认合乎情理，所说的事情最好让大家都知道。为什么去便殿，躲避百官私语，以国家法律为自己谋私利？
English: Without fear of violence, everyone is recognized as reasonable, and it is best to let everyone know what has been said. Why go to the toilet, avoid the whispers of a hundred officials, and use national laws for their own benefit?

古文：且延英之置也，肃宗皇帝以苗晋卿年老艰步，故设之。
现代文：况且设置延英殿本意是肃宗皇帝因为苗晋卿年老步艰，所以才建这座殿。
English: Moreover, the setting of Yan Ying Hall was originally intended by Emperor Su Zong to build this hall because Miao Jinqing was old and difficult.

古文：后来臣僚得诣便殿，多以私自售，希求恩宠，欲尽其身。奈何以此为望哉！
现代文：后来臣僚到便殿，多数是假公济私，希望得到皇上的恩宠，从中自己得到好处，为什么以此为荣耀呢？
English: Later, the ministers went to the toilet, most of them pretending to be public servants, hoping to get the emperor's favor and benefit from it. Why did they take this as an honor?

古文：谏院以章疏之故，忧患略同。
现代文：谏院因为屡上奏章的缘故，他们担心大体相同。
English: They are worried about the same thing because of the repeated playing of the chapter in the imperial court.

古文：台中则务纠举。
现代文：御史同僚之间常闹意见。
English: Misaki's colleagues are often at odds with each other.

古文：省中多事，旨趋不一，故言遗补相惜，御史相憎，郎官相轻。
现代文：门下省工作任务繁重，大家的意见经常不一致。所以说拾遗、补阙互相友爱；御史之间互相憎恨；郎官之间互相轻视。
English: The work tasks of the subordinate provinces are heavy, and everyone's opinions are often inconsistent. Therefore, the collection of relics and the filling of gaps are mutual friendship; the historians hate each other; the vassals despise each other.

古文：使职
现代文：使职
English: Assignment of duties

古文：开元已前，于外则命使臣，否则止。
现代文：唐玄宗开元以前，皇帝亲自任命的官员为使臣，不是这样的不能称使。
English: Before the founding of the Republic of China by Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, officials personally appointed by the emperor were envoys. If they were not, they could not be called envoys.

古文：自置八节度十采访，始有坐而为使。
现代文：自从国内设置八个节度使、十路采访使，从此节度使和采访使都有了固定辖区和治地。
English: Since the establishment of eight festival commissioners and ten interview commissioners in China, the festival commissioners and interview commissioners have all had fixed jurisdictions.

古文：其后名号益广。
现代文：此后各种使臣名目繁多。
English: Since then, there have been a wide variety of envoys.

古文：于是有为使则重，为官则轻。
现代文：于是兼任使臣的官员被人们看重，不兼任使臣的一般官员被人们轻视。
English: As a result, officials who also served as envoys were valued, while ordinary officials who did not serve as envoys were despised.

古文：故天宝末有佩印至三十者，大历中请俸有至千贯者。
现代文：所以到天宝年间，有的官员佩戴官印竟有三十枚之多，到代宗大历年间有人兼职俸禄到千贯以上的。
English: Therefore, in the Tenpo era, some officials wore as many as 30 official seals, and in the Daizong era, some people received part-time salaries of more than 1,000 yuan.

古文：今在朝太清宫、太微宫、度支、盐铁、转运、知苑、闲厩、左右巡、分察、监察、馆驿、监仓、监库、左右街。
现代文：今在朝的有太清宫、太微宫、度支、盐铁、转运、知苑、闲厩、左右巡、分察、监察、馆驿、监仓、监库、左右街，这些都是采访使。
English: This morning, there are the Taiqing Palace, the Taiwei Palace, the Duzhi, the Salt Iron, the Transshipment, the Zhiyuan, the Idle Stables, the Left and Right Patrol, the Inspection, the Supervision, the Museum, the Warehouse, the Warehouse, and the Left and Right Streets, all of which are interview envoys.

古文：外任则节度、观察、诸军、押蕃、防御、团练、经略、镇遏、招讨、榷盐、水陆运、营田、给纳、监牧、长春宫。
现代文：外任则为节度使，如观察、诸军、押蕃、防御、团练、经略、镇遏、招讨、榷盐、水陆运、营田、给纳、监牧、长春宫等。
English: The outposts were used for ceremonial duties, such as observation, gathering of troops, escorting, defense, group training, strategy, containment, solicitation, salting, land and water transportation, yakitori, payment, supervision, and Changchun Palace.

古文：有时而置者。则大礼、礼仪、会盟、删定、三司、黜陟、巡抚、宣慰、推复、选补、礼会、册立、吊祭、供军、粮料、和籴。
现代文：有临时设置的，则有大礼、礼仪、会盟、删定、三司、黜陟、巡抚、宣慰、推覆、选补、礼会、册立、吊祭、供军、粮料、和籴等。
English: If there is a temporary setup, there will be a grand ceremony, etiquette, alliance, deletion, three divisions, gong, governor, consolation, overturn, election, ceremony, registration, hanging ceremony, army supply, grain, and gong.

古文：此其大略。经置而废者不录。
现代文：这些都是大体上设置的衙门，还有一些设置的衙门后来废除的，尚不包括在内。
English: These are generally set thresholds, and some set thresholds that were later abolished are not included.

古文：宦官内外悉谓之使。
现代文：宦官无论在宫中任职或在外任职也一律称使。
English: Eunuchs, whether they work in the palace or outside it, are also considered to be servants.

古文：旧为权臣所绾，州县所理，今属中人者有之。尚书省
现代文：过去由重臣所司的职务，州县官所处理的事务，由宦官来管理的也有。尚书省
English: In the past, there were positions that were managed by senior vassals, and affairs handled by prefectural and county officials were also managed by eunuchs.

古文：郎官故事：吏部郎中二厅，先小铨，次格式；员外郎二厅，先南曹，次废置。刑部分四复；户部分两赋。
现代文：郎中官和员外官旧例：吏部郎中有两个办公地点，遇有掌选时先初次考绩、考论文、核查资历、以后再考试有关官署制度、官员职权等法规，员外郎也有两个办公衙署，先到掌选的吏部员外郎铨选，以后决定去留；刑部分刑部、都官、比部、门司四司，户部按职务性质可分两赋：田赋、贡赋。
English: Second-rank officials and non-officials old example: there are two office locations in the second-rank officials, in the case of election, the initial performance appraisal, examination of papers, verification of qualifications, and then examination of the relevant government office system, official powers and other laws and regulations, the second-rank officials also have two offices, first to the election of the second-rank officials, and then decided to stay; the criminal part of the criminal department, the capital official, the police department, and the monsi four departments, the household department can be divided into two groups according to the nature of the duties: the field and the tribute.

古文：其制尚矣。
现代文：过去的说法认为吏部是尚书省的省眼。
English: In the past, it was said that the personnel department was the provincial eye of the province.

古文：旧说，吏部为省眼，礼部为南省舍人，考功度支为振行，比部得廊下食。以饭从者，号比盘。
现代文：吏部下设考功司、度支司称之为振行。刑部的比部司的官员可以在廊下就食，司以下其他官员陪同吃饭的叫作比盘。
English: Officials of the Criminal Investigation Department can eat in the hallway, and officials from the Criminal Investigation Department who are accompanied by other officials are called meal trays.

古文：二十四曹呼左右司为都公。
现代文：尚书省下有六部每部分四司，一共有二十四衙署。衙署的官员之间，相互称呼为都公。
English: Under the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, there are six ministries, each with four departments, and a total of 24 departments. The officials of these departments call each other "dukong."

古文：省中语曰：后行祠屯，不博中行都门；中行礼部，不博前行驾库。
现代文：尚书省内有这种说法：后行工部、不换中行礼部，中行礼部不换兵部、吏部。
English: There is such a saying in Shangshu Province: the rear-line engineering department does not replace the middle-line ceremonial department, and the middle-line ceremonial department does not replace the military department and the cadre department.

古文：崔日知
现代文：崔日知
English: Cui Ritchi

古文：崔日知历职中外，恨不居八座。及为太常卿，于都寺厅事后起一楼，正与尚书省相望。
现代文：崔日知在京城任官，也在地方任过官，可就是没有任过左仆射和右仆射及六部尚书，感到很遗憾。
English: Cui Rizhi has served as an official in Beijing and has also served as an official in other places, but it is a pity that he has not served as a left-handed shooter and a right-handed shooter and six Shangshu.

古文：时人谓之崔公望省楼。度支
现代文：惯例，度支衙门，郎中主管收入，员外郎主管支出，由总管的侍郎签字画押。
English: In accordance with the usual practice, the income of the subordinate manager, the income of the subordinate manager and the expenditure of the subordinate manager shall be signed and sealed by the servant of the general manager.

古文：故事，度支案，郎中判入，员外判出，侍郎总疏押案而已。
现代文：唐德宗贞元之后，专门设使，称为度支使，由郎官值班处理具体事务。其职事中最重要的是颁布皇帝的有关命令。
English: After Emperor Dezong of Tang, special envoys, known as Du Shi Envoys, were assigned to handle specific affairs by the vassals on duty. The most important of their duties was to promulgate the relevant orders of the emperor.

古文：水部员外郎刘约值宿，会河北系囚配流岭南，夜发敕，直宿令史不更事，唯下岭南，不下河北。
现代文：水部员外郎刘约值班。恰赶上河北向岭南发配囚徒。夜间皇帝颁布发配命令，值宿的下级令使是个糊涂人，只给岭南传达了命令，而没有给河北传达命令。
English: Wai Lang Liu, a member of the Ministry of Water Resources, was on duty. He was just in time for Hebei to dispatch prisoners to Lingnan. At night, the emperor issued a dispatch order. The subordinate commander on duty was a confused person, and only conveyed orders to Lingnan, but did not convey orders to Hebei.

古文：旬月后，本州闻奏，约遂出官。
现代文：经过一段时间，河北官员向皇帝报告了这件事，刘约被免去职务。
English: After a period of time, Hebei officials reported the incident to the emperor, and Liu You was removed from his post.

古文：柳辟
现代文：柳辟
English: Yanagibashi

古文：吏部甲库有朱泚伪黄案数百道，省中常取戏玩，已而藏之。
现代文：吏部储藏甲胄的仓库里面有朱泚叛唐案卷数百件。尚书省中的官员常常拿来取乐，玩完了就收藏起来。
English: There are hundreds of Zhu Xi's Tang rebellion case files in the warehouse where the cadre department stores armor. Officials in Shangshu province often use them for fun, and collect them when they are finished.

古文：柳辟知甲库，始白执政，于都堂集八座丞郎焚之。
现代文：柳辟知道这件事，对主管尚书省的官说。命令在尚书令的大厅内把尚书省左右仆射、左右丞及六部侍郎都召集来，当着这些人的面，把朱泚伪黄案卷焚烧了。
English: Liu Bei knew about this and said to the official in charge of Shang Shuxuan, "I order you to summon Shang Shuxuan's left and right attendants, right and left attendants, and six attendants in the hall of Shang Shuling, and in front of these people, burn Zhu Xi's false yellow case file."

古文：省桥
现代文：省桥
English: Provincial Bridge

古文：尚书省东南隅通衢有小桥，相目为拗项桥，言侍御史及殿中久次者至此，必拗项南望南宫也。
现代文：尚书省东南角四通八达的大路上有座小桥，大家都叫它拗项桥，是因为侍御史和殿中侍御史经常走到这里必定回过头来望尚书省。
English: In the southeastern corner of Shangshu, there is a small bridge on the wide road. Everyone calls it the bridge of reluctance, because the attendant of history and the attendant of history in the hall often go here and must turn back to look at Shangshu.

古文：都堂南门道东有古槐，垂阴至广。
现代文：尚书省尚书令大厅的南门道东有棵古槐树。
English: There is an old eucalyptus tree on the east side of the South Gate Road of the Shangshu Provincial Shangshu Ling Hall.

古文：相传夜深闻丝竹之音，省郎有入相者，欲谓之音声。
现代文：这棵树遮荫覆盖面积很大，相传夜深人静时听到有奏乐的声音。门下省的侍中有入朝当宰相的，通常说它是音声。
English: The shade of this tree covers a large area, and it is said that in the dead of night, the sound of music can be heard. Among the attendants of the province, there is one who became the prime minister, and it is usually said that it is sound.

古文：祠部呼为水厅，言其清且冷也。
现代文：祠部叫作水厅，是说祠部冷冷清清的意思。
English: The ancestral hall is called the water hall, which means that the ancestral hall is cold and clear.

古文：秘书省
现代文：秘书省
English: Ministry of Secretaries

古文：唐初，秘书省唯主写书贮掌勘校而已。
现代文：唐初年，秘书省工作只管主写书、贮藏图书、校对勘误而已。
English: In the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the work of the secretarial department was only responsible for writing books, storing books, and proofreading.

古文：自是门可张罗，迥无统摄官署。
现代文：因此挺清闲，门庭冷落，一向没有统领它的官署。
English: As a result, it is rather idle, unpopular, and has never had its own government office.

古文：望虽清雅，而实非要剧。
现代文：虽然名声清廉，可是不是重要的部门。
English: Although it has a clean reputation, it is not an important department.

古文：权贵子弟及好利夸侈者率不好此职。
现代文：有权有钱的人家子弟及好名利，好夸富的人，大多数不愿意干这个差使。
English: Most of the sons and daughters of powerful and rich people, and those who like fame and fortune and boasting about their wealth, are not willing to do this job.

古文：流俗以监为宰相病坊，少监为给事中中书舍人病坊，丞及著作郎为尚书郎病坊，秘书郎及著作左郎为监察御史病坊。
现代文：当时流行的俗语说，监为宰相的病房，少监为给事中、中书舍人的病房，中丞著作郎的官署是尚书郎的病房，秘书郎及著作郎的官署也是监察御史的病房。
English: A popular saying at the time said that the supervisor was the ward of the prime minister, the junior supervisor was the ward of the vice-premier, the junior secretary was the ward of the junior secretary, the official office of the junior secretary was the ward of the junior secretary, and the official office of the secretary and the official office of the junior secretary was the ward of the inspector.

古文：言从职不任繁剧者，当改入此省。
现代文：凡是任职不胜任工作的，都到这个秘书省。
English: All those who are incompetent go to this secretarial department.

古文：然其职在图史，非复喧卑，故好学君子厌于趋竞者，亦求为此职焉。
现代文：秘书省的主要职务是掌管图书史料，衙署清静无喧闹声。因此好学的正人君子、不追求功名利禄的人，也有愿意任这个职务的。
English: The main function of the Ministry of Secretaries is to manage books and historical materials, and the office is quiet and quiet. Therefore, honest gentlemen who are eager to learn, and those who do not pursue fame and fortune, are also willing to hold this position.

古文：鱼袋
现代文：鱼袋
English: Fish bags

古文：朝仪鱼袋之饰，唯金银二等。
现代文：唐时朝廷规定的礼仪，要朝臣腰中悬挂鱼袋饰物，标志着官的品味的高低。鱼袋只有金银两个等级。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, the etiquette prescribed by the imperial court required courtiers to wear fish bag ornaments around their waists, signifying the level of taste of officials. Fish bags were only available in two grades: gold and silver.

古文：至武后，乃改五品以铜。
现代文：到武则天称帝时，改五品官为铜鱼袋。
English: When Emperor Wu Zetian ascended to the throne, he changed the title of the Fifth Grade Official to the Bronze Fish Bag.

古文：中宗反正，从旧。
现代文：唐中宗即位，乃恢复旧例。
English: The enthronement of the Tang and Middle Dynasties restored the old order.

古文：莎厅
现代文：莎厅
English: Salsa Hall

古文：京兆府判司，特云西法士。
现代文：京兆即首都，其时府尹下属佐官叫判司，特称为西法士。
English: Kyocho was the capital, and the adjutant under Yin at that time was called Hanji, especially known as Xi Fashi.

古文：此两厅事多。
现代文：判司有两个衙署：东士曹厅和西士曹厅。
English: There are two magistrates' courts: the East Magistrates' Court and the West Magistrates' Court.

古文：东士曹厅，时号为念珠厅，盖判案一百八道；西士曹厅为莎厅，厅前有莎，周回可十五步。
现代文：东士曹厅，当时叫作念珠厅，因判案一百零八道。西士曹厅为莎厅，因为厅前有棵莎树，周围有十五步，所以叫莎厅。
English: At that time, the East Judge's Hall was called the Rosary Hall, because of the 108 judgments. The West Judge's Hall was called the Salsa Hall, because there was a salsa tree in front of the hall and there were fifteen steps around it.

古文：京兆府，时云不立两县令，不坐两少尹。
现代文：京兆府立下这样规矩：不能同时来两县令，不能同时接待两府尹。
English: Jingzhao prefecture has set up this rule: you can't come to two counties at the same time, and you can't receive Yin from two prefectures at the same time.

古文：两县引马到府门，传门而报。
现代文：两县令骑马到京兆府门前，须要一个先报，接待完了，再接待另一个。
English: The two counties ordered to ride a horse to the front of Beijing Zhaofu, requiring a pre-announcement. After the reception was completed, another one was received.

古文：两尹入厅，大尹亦到厅，不得候两尹坐后出，不得候两尹立后出。
现代文：两外府府尹入厅，不得两尹同时坐、同时出，须一人坐，一人立。
English: If two foreign prefectural governors enter the hall, they must not sit at the same time or leave at the same time. One must sit and one must stand.

古文：其京兆府县之重，亦表大尹之尊。
现代文：从这个规矩中可以看出京兆府县的重要和京兆府尹的尊严。
English: From this rule, we can see the importance of Jingzhao County and the dignity of Jingzhao Yin.

古文：京兆府掾曹，时人云倚团省郎。
现代文：京兆府掾曹，当时人们都叫依团省郎。
English: At that time, people called him Yituan Shorang.

古文：河中府司录厅亦有绿莎。昔好事者相承常溉灌。
现代文：河中府司录厅也有棵绿莎，过去有人经常浇灌它。
English: There is also a green sapling in the Central Records Office. In the past, people often watered it.

古文：天佑已后，为不好事者除之。
现代文：唐哀帝李柷天佑以后，被不爱莎树的人除掉了。
English: After the Tang Dynasty Emperor Lishan was blessed by heaven, he was eliminated by those who did not love the Jacaranda tree.

