古文：春，正月，丙寅朔，上帅群臣诣兴庆宫上上皇尊号。
现代文：起重光大荒落，尽旃蒙作噩，一共五年。唐宪宗元和元年春季，正月，丙寅朔，宪宗率领群臣来到兴庆宫，向太上皇进献尊号。
English: For a total of five years, the Tang Emperor Xianzong Yuan and the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first

古文：丁卯，赦天下，改元。
现代文：丁卯，宪宗大赦天下罪囚，改年号。
English: Dingwu, the world's most pardoned prisoner of the Constitutional Church, changed his name.

古文：辛未，以鄂岳观察使韩皋为奉义节度使。癸酉，以奉义留后伊宥为安州刺史兼安州留后。
现代文：辛未，宪宗任命鄂岳观察使韩皋为奉义节度使；癸酉，任命奉义留后伊宥为安州刺史兼安州留后。
English: Xinwei, Xianzong appointed the observation of Mount E to make Han Zheng the festival delegate of Fengyi; Zheng, after appointing Fengyi to stay, Iyu to be the Anzhou chief historian and Anzhou to stay.

古文：宥，慎之子也。
现代文：伊宥是伊慎的儿子。
English: Iyu is the son of Ishin.

古文：壬午，加成德节度使王士真同平章事。
现代文：壬午，加封成德节度使王士真为同平章事。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, the addition of the Chengde Festival made Wang Shizhen a peerage.

古文：甲申，上皇崩于兴庆宫。
现代文：甲申，太上皇在兴庆宫驾崩。
English: Emperor Gaoshin died at the Xingqing Palace.

古文：刘辟既得旌节，志益骄，求兼领三川，上不许。
现代文：刘辟得到节度使的任命以后，愈发心志骄矜，又要求兼管整个三川，宪宗不肯答应。
English: After Liu Pi was appointed as the festival's envoy, he became more and more arrogant and demanded to be in charge of the entire Sanchuan region, which Xianzong refused to grant.

古文：辟遂发兵围东川节度使李康于梓州，欲以同幕卢文若为东川节度使。
现代文：于是，刘辟派兵在梓州围困东川节度使李康，打算让本幕府的卢文若担任东川节度使。
English: As a result, Liu Bei sent soldiers to besiege the Dongchuan Festival envoy Li Kang in Zizhou, intending to let Lu Wenruo of this shogunate serve as the Dongchuan Festival envoy.

古文：推官莆田林蕴力谏辟举兵，辟怒，械系于狱，引出，将斩之，阴戒行刑者使不杀，但数砺刃于其颈，欲使屈服而赦之。
现代文：推官莆田人林蕴极力规劝刘辟不要起兵、刘辟大怒，给林蕴加上枷锁，投入监牢，后来又将他拖出来，做出将要杀他的样子，却又暗中告诫执行刑罚的人不要杀死他，只在他的脖子上用刀刃磨上几下，打算使他屈服，而赦免他。
English: Lin Yun, the magistrate of Putian, tried his best to dissuade Liu Pi from raising an army, but Liu Pi flew into a rage. He put Lin Yun in chains and threw him into prison. Later, he dragged him out and made it look like he was going to kill him. However, he secretly warned the executioner not to kill him, and only sharpened the blade on his neck a few times, intending to make him give in and pardon him.

古文：蕴叱之曰： 竖子，当斩即斩，我颈岂汝砥石邪！ 
现代文：林蕴喝斥执行刑罚的人说： 小子！要杀就杀，我的脖子难道是你的磨刀石吗！ 
English: Lin Yun shouted at the executioner and said, "Kid, you can kill me if you want, isn't my neck your grindstone?"

古文：辟顾左右曰： 真忠烈之士也！ 
现代文：刘辟环顾着周围的人们说： 林蕴真是一位忠烈之士啊！ 
English: Liu Bi looked around at the people around him and said: Lin Yun is really a loyal person!

古文：乃黜为唐昌尉。
现代文：于是，刘辟将林蕴罢免为唐昌县尉。
English: As a result, Liu Bei removed Lin Yun from his post as Tangchang County Lieutenant.

古文：上欲讨辟而重于用兵，公卿议者亦以为蜀险固难取，杜黄裳独曰： 辟狂戆书生，取之如拾芥耳！
现代文：宪宗打算讨伐刘辟，但是又不愿意轻易开启战端，公卿中议论此事的人们也认为蜀地险要坚固，难以攻取。唯独杜黄裳说： 刘辟是一个心气狂傲但又戆直无谋的书生，征服他就如同拾取芥子一般容易。
English: Xianzong planned to fight Liu Bei, but he did not want to start a war easily. The people who discussed this matter among the nobles also believed that Shu Dihan should be solid and difficult to capture. However, Du Huangxiao said: Liu Bei is a proud but unscrupulous scholar, and conquering him is as easy as picking up mustard seeds.

古文：臣知神策军使高崇文勇略可用，愿陛下专以军事委之，勿置监军，辟必可擒。 
现代文：据我了解，神策军使高崇文有勇有谋，堪当此任，希望陛下将军中事务交托给他，不要设置监军，刘辟肯定能够就擒。 
English: As far as I know, Gao Chong, the commander of the Divine Providence Army, is well qualified for this position. I hope that His Majesty will entrust him with the affairs of the general staff, and not set up a supervisor. Liu Bei will certainly be able to do his duty.

古文：上从之。
现代文：宪宗听从了他的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：翰林学士李吉甫亦劝上讨蜀，上由是器之。
现代文：翰林学士李吉甫也规劝宪宗讨伐蜀中，宪宗由此便器重他了。
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Li Jifu, also advised Kenzong to attack Shuzhong, which made Kenzong respect him.

古文：戊子，命左神策行营节度使高崇文将步骑五千为前军，神策京西行营兵马使李元奕将步骑二千为次军，与山南西道节度使严砺同讨辟。
现代文：戊子，宪宗命令左神策行营节度使高崇文率领步、骑兵五千人担当前军，神策京西行营兵马使李元奕率领步、骑兵两千人担当后军，与山南西道节度使严砺共同讨伐刘辟。
English: Wu Zi, Xianzong ordered Zuo Sheng to organize a military expedition to the west of Beijing, with Gao Chongwen leading the way and five thousand cavalrymen as the vanguard, and Sheng Sheng to organize a military expedition to the west of Beijing, with Li Yuanyi leading the way and two thousand cavalrymen as the vanguard, and to jointly fight against Liu Bei with Yan Zang, the commander of the western road of Shannan Province.

古文：时宿将名位素重者甚众，皆自谓当征蜀之选，及诏用崇文，皆大惊。
现代文：当时，名声与地位平素便为人们推重的老将很多，都自认为自己应当是征讨蜀中的人选，及至宪宗颁诏起用了高崇文，都感到非常惊讶。
English: At that time, there were many veterans whose reputation and status were highly valued by the people, and they all thought that they should be the candidates for soliciting Shu, and they were very surprised when Gao Chongwen was appointed by the emperor.

古文：上与杜黄裳论及籓镇，黄裳曰： 德宗自经忧患，务为姑息，不生除节帅。有物故者，先遣中使察军情所与则授之。
现代文：宪宗与杜黄裳谈论到藩镇问题时，杜黄裳说： 德宗自从经过朱作乱的忧患后，总是无原则地宽容藩镇，不肯在节度使生前免除他们的职务，有节度使去世，他就先派遣中使探察军中人心归向的人物，而将节度使授给其人。
English: When Gensong and Du Huanxiang were discussing the issue of the townships, Du Huanxiang said: Ever since the tribulations of the Zhouzhuang Disturbance, Dezong has always been unprincipled in tolerating the townships. He did not want to relieve them of their duties during his lifetime, and when he died, he would first send a person from the army to investigate the hearts of the people, and then award the post to that person.

古文：中使或私受大将赂，归而誉之，即降旄钺，未尝有出朝廷之意者。
现代文：有时中使私自收受大将的贿赂，回朝称誉其人，德宗便立即将该人除授为节度使，对节度使的任命就不曾有过出自朝廷本意的例子。
English: In some cases, when a vassal received a bribe from a general and returned to the imperial court to praise him, Emperor Dezong immediately appointed the vassal as a ceremonial envoy. There has never been an example of a ceremonial envoy being appointed intentionally by the imperial court.

古文：陛下必欲振举纲纪，宜稍以法度裁制蕃镇，则天下可得而理也。 
现代文：如果陛下准备振兴法纪，应当逐渐按照法令制度削弱和约束藩镇，这样天下便能够得到治理了。 
English: If His Majesty is preparing to revitalize the legal system, he should gradually weaken and restrict the domain towns in accordance with the legal system, so that the world can be governed.

古文：上深以为然，于是始用兵讨蜀，以至威行两河，皆黄裳启之也。
现代文：宪宗认为很对，于是开始调兵遣将，征讨蜀中，终于使朝廷的威严遍及河南、河北一带，这都是由杜黄裳的建议发端的。
English: Xianzong thought it was very right, so he began to send troops to conquer Shu, and finally made the majesty of the imperial court spread throughout Henan and Hebei. This was all initiated by Du Huangxiang's suggestion.

古文：高崇文屯长武城，练卒五千，常如寇至，卯时受诏，辰时即行，器械糗粮，一无所阙。
现代文：高崇文在长武城驻扎时，训练了五千士兵，经常保持着战备状态。他在卯时接受诏命，到辰时便已启程，军中的器械装备与制成的干粮，没有一样是缺少的。
English: When Gao Chongwen was stationed in Changwu City, he trained five thousand soldiers and always maintained a state of combat readiness. He accepted the imperial command at dusk and left at dawn. The army's equipment and equipment and the dry grain produced were all missing.

古文：甲午，崇文出斜谷，李元奕出骆谷，同趣梓州。
现代文：甲午，高崇文由斜谷出兵，李元奕由骆谷出兵，共同奔赴梓州。
English: In the afternoon of the first day, Gao Chongwen sent troops from Xizhou Valley, Li Yuanyi sent troops from Luohu Valley, and they went to Zizhou together.

古文：崇文军至兴元，军士有食于逆旅，折人匕箸者，崇文斩之以徇。
现代文：高崇文军来到兴元的时候，将士们途中在客舍进餐，有人把主人的筷子折断了，高崇文便将此人斩首示众。
English: When Gao Chongwen's army came to Xingyuan, the generals were having a meal in the guest house on the way. Someone broke the owner's chopsticks, and Gao Chongwen beheaded the person.

古文：刘辟陷梓州，执李康。
现代文：刘辟攻陷梓州，捉住了李康。
English: Liu Bei invaded Zizhou and captured Li Kang.

古文：二月，严砺拔剑州，斩其刺史文德昭。
现代文：二月，严砺攻克剑州，将剑州刺史文德昭斩杀。
English: In February, Yan Xuan conquered Jianzhou and killed Jianzhou assassin Shi Wende Zhao.

古文：奚王诲落可入朝。
现代文：奚王诲落可入京朝见。
English: Shao Wangyulang can see the emperor in Beijing.

古文：丁酉，以诲落可为饶乐郡王，遣归。
现代文：丁酉，宪宗将诲落可封为饶乐郡王，遣送他返回。
English: Ding Yao and Xianzong made Yao Luo the king of Raole County and sent him back.

古文：癸丑，加魏博节度使田季安同平章事。
现代文：癸丑，宪宗加封魏博节度使田季安为同平章事。
English: At the same time, the addition of the Wei Bo Festival to the Xian Zong made Tian Ji'an an equal event.

古文：戊午，上与宰相论： 自古帝王，或勤劳庶政，或端拱无为，互有得失，何为而可？ 
现代文：戊午，宪宗与宰相谈论道： 自古以来，有些帝王为各项政务勤勉地操劳，有些帝王却端身拱手，清静无为，他们各自都有成功或失败的地方，怎么做才是最适当的呢？ 
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Gensong discussed with the prime minister: Since ancient times, some emperors have worked diligently for various government affairs, while others have been idle and inactive. Each of them has their own success or failure. What is the most appropriate way to do it?

古文：杜黄裳对曰： 王者上承天地宗庙，下抚百姓四夷，夙夜忧勤，固不可自暇自逸。
现代文：杜黄裳回答说： 帝王对上面承受着天地与国家赋予的使命，对下面负有安抚百姓与周边民族和邦国的重任，朝夕忧心劳苦，固然不能够自图清闲安逸。
English: Du Huangxiang replied: The emperor bears the mission given by heaven and earth and the country to the top, and has the important task of appeasing the people and the surrounding nations and countries to the bottom. He is worried and hardworking in the morning and evening, but he cannot relax and enjoy himself.

古文：然上下有分，纪纲有叙，苟慎选天下贤才而委任之，有功则赏，有罪则刑，选用以公，赏刑以信，则谁不尽力，何求不获哉！
现代文：然而，君主与臣下是各有职分的，国家的法度是有一定的程序的。如果能够慎重地选拔天下的贤才，并且将重任托付给他们，立功便予以奖赏，犯罪便处以刑罚，选拔与任用出以公心，奖赏与惩罚不失信用，那还会有什么人不肯竭尽全力为朝廷办事呢，朝廷还会有什么寻求的目标不能实现呢！
English: However, the monarch and his subjects have their own positions, and the laws of the country have a certain procedure. If we can carefully select the world's talents and entrust them with important tasks, reward them for their merits, punish them for their crimes, select and appoint them with a fair mind, and reward and punish them without losing credibility, then who would not be willing to do their best to serve the court, and what goals would the court seek to achieve?

古文：明主劳于求人，而逸于任人，此虞舜所以能无为而治者也。
现代文：贤明的君主在寻求人才时是辛劳的，而在任用人才后却是安逸的，这便是虞舜能够清静无为而使政治修明的原因啊。
English: Wise monarchs are laborious in their search for talent, but they are at ease after appointing talent. This is the reason why Yuxuan can calmly do nothing and make politics clear.

古文：至于簿书狱市烦细之事，各有司存，非人主所宜亲也。
现代文：至于诉讼与交易等烦琐细小的事情，有各有关部门存在，不是君主所应该躬亲过问的。
English: As for trivial matters such as lawsuits and transactions, there are various relevant departments, and it is not something that the monarch should have to go through.

古文：昔秦始皇以衡石程书，魏明帝自按行尚书事，隋文帝卫士传餐，皆无补于当时，取讥于后来，其耳目形神非不勤且劳也，所务非其道也。
现代文：过去，秦始皇用衡器称取所阅疏表奏章，魏明帝亲自到尚书台按验发行文书，隋文帝议事时侍卫人员只好互传食物充饥，对当世全无补益，却反被后人讥笑。他们的双耳与双眼、身体与心志并非不勤劳而辛苦，但是他们致力的事情，并不合乎事理啊！
English: In the past, Emperor Qin Shihuang used a weighing instrument to weigh the sheet music he read, Emperor Wei Ming personally went to Shang Shudai to issue documents according to the inspection, and the guards had to pass food to each other to satisfy their hunger during the deliberation of Emperor Sui, which did not benefit the present world at all, but was ridiculed by later generations. Their ears and eyes, body and mind are not laborious and hard, but the things they are committed to are not reasonable!

古文：夫人主患不推诚，人臣患不竭忠。
现代文：一般说来，君主最忌不能推心置腹，臣下最忌不能竭尽忠心。
English: Generally speaking, the monarch is most afraid of not being able to put his heart and soul into his work, and his subjects are most afraid of not being able to be loyal to the best of their ability.

古文：苟上疑其下，下欺其上，将以求理，不亦难乎！ 
现代文：如果君主怀疑他的臣下，臣下诓骗他们的君主，将要以这种局面来寻求政治修明，不是很困难吗？ 
English: If a prince suspects that his subjects, his subjects, are deceiving their prince, would he not find it difficult to seek political clarification in such a situation?

古文：上深然其言。
现代文：宪宗认为他的话极为正确。
English: Tang Xuan Zong thought his words were very right.

古文：三月，丙寅，以神策京西行营节度使范希朝为右金吾大将军。
现代文：三月，丙寅，宪宗任命神策行营京西节度使范希朝为右金吾大将军。
English: In March, Emperor Xizong appointed Fan Xichang as the Right Kingu Grand General.

古文：高崇文引兵自阆州趣梓州，刘辟将邢泚引兵遁去，崇文入屯梓州。
现代文：高崇文领兵由阆州奔赴梓州，刘辟的将领邢领兵逃走，高崇文进入梓州，屯扎下来。
English: Gao Chongwen led the soldiers from Bozhou to Zizhou, Liu Bei's generals led the soldiers to escape, and Gao Chongwen entered Zizhou and settled down.

古文：辟归李康于崇文以求自雪，崇文以康败军失守，斩之。
现代文：刘辟为了洗刷自己的罪责，将李康交还给高崇文，高崇文因李康打了败仗，失去梓州，便将他斩杀了。
English: In order to wash away his guilt, Liu Pi handed Li Kang back to Gao Chongwen. Gao Chongwen killed Li Kang because he lost the battle and lost Zizhou.

古文：丙子，严砺奏克梓州。
现代文：丙子，严砺奏称攻克梓州。
English: Yan Xun played the role of conquering Zizhou.

古文：丁丑，制削夺刘辟官爵。
现代文：丁丑，宪宗颁布制书革除刘辟的官职爵位。
English: Ding Qiu, the Constitutionalist promulgated the book reform to remove Liu Bi's official title.

古文：初，韩全义入朝，以其甥杨惠琳知夏绥留后。
现代文：当初，韩全义人京朝见，德宗皇帝任命他的外甥杨惠琳代理夏绥留后事务。
English: At first, Han Chuan Yi went to Beijing to meet Emperor Dezong, and Emperor Dezong appointed his nephew Yang Huilin to be the representative of Xia Yao's post-residence affairs.

古文：杜黄裳以全义出征无功，骄蹇不逊，直令致仕，以右骁卫将军李演为夏绥节度使。
现代文：杜黄裳认为韩全义出兵征讨吴少诚全无建树，态度傲慢，有失恭顺，便索性让他退休，任命右骁卫将军李演为夏绥节度使。
English: Du Huangxiang thought that Han Quanyi's dispatch of troops to recruit Wu Shaocheng was completely unproductive, arrogant and disrespectful, so he simply retired him and appointed the right guard general Li Yuan as the Xiali Festival envoy.

古文：惠琳勒兵拒之，表称 将士逼臣为节度使 。
现代文：杨惠琳率领兵马阻止李演上任，上表奏称： 将士们逼迫我出任节度使。 
English: Yang Huilin led the soldiers and horses to prevent Li Yuen from taking office, and the above table said: The generals forced me to serve as the festival envoy.

古文：河东节度使严绶表请讨之。诏河东、天德军合击惠琳，绶遣牙将阿跌光进及弟光颜将兵赴之，光进本出河曲步落稽，兄弟在河东军皆以勇敢闻。
现代文：河东节度使严绶上表奏请讨伐杨惠琳，宪宗颁诏命令河东、天德军合兵进击杨惠琳，严绶派遣牙将阿跌光进与他的弟弟阿跌光颜带领兵马前去进击杨惠琳。阿跌光进本来是河曲步落稽人，他们兄弟二人在河东军中，都以勇敢著称。
English: At the festival of Hedong, Yan Xuan asked Yan Xuan to march to Yang Huilin, and the Emperor issued an edict ordering the armies of Hedong and Tiande to march together to attack Yang Huilin. Yan Xuan sent his brother, Ah Dou Guangjin, and his brother, Ah Dou Guangyan, to lead the troops to attack Yang Huilin. Ah Dou Guangjin was originally a foot soldier of Hequ. Both of their brothers were famous for their bravery in the army of Hedong.

古文：辛巳，夏州兵马使张承金斩惠琳，传首京师。
现代文：辛巳，夏州兵马使张承金斩杀杨惠琳，将他的头颅传送京城。
English: Soon after, Zhang Chengjin was ordered by the Xiazhou soldiers and horses to kill Yang Huilin, and his head was sent to Beijing.

古文：东川节度使韦丹至汉中，表言 高崇文客军远斗，无所资。若与梓州，缀其士心，必能有功。 
现代文：东川节度使韦丹来到汉中后，上表声称： 高崇文率领外来的军队长途征战，没有任何凭依，如果将梓州归属于他，借以维系部下的心愿，肯定能够使他获得成功。 
English: After the Dongchuan Festival brought Wei Dan to Han Middle School, the above table claimed: Gao Chongwen led a foreign army on a long-distance campaign, without any evidence. If Zizhou is attributed to him, in order to maintain the wishes of his subordinates, it will certainly enable him to succeed.

古文：夏，四月，丁酉，以崇文为东川节度副使、知节度事。
现代文：夏季，四月，丁酉，宪宗任命高崇文为东川节度副使，知节度使事。
English: In the summer, in April, Ding Xi, Kenzong appointed Gao Chongwen as the deputy envoy of Dongchuan Festival, and he was the first to know about the festival.

古文：潘孟阳所至，专事游宴，从仆三百人，多纳贿赂。
现代文：潘孟阳每到一个地方，专门以游观娱乐为务，随从仆人有三百人，还接受了大量的贿赂。
English: Every time Pan Mengyang went to a place, he went specifically for sightseeing and entertainment. He was accompanied by 300 servants and accepted a large amount of bribes.

古文：上闻之，甲辰，以孟阳为大理卿，罢其度支、盐铁转运副使。
现代文：宪宗闻知此事后，甲辰，任命潘孟阳为大理卿，免除了他度支副使和盐铁转运副使的职务。
English: After Kenzong learned of the matter, Jia Chen appointed Pan Mengyang as the Lord of Dali, and relieved him of his duties as deputy envoy of Doushi and deputy envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：丙午，策试制举之士，于是校书郎元稹、监察御史独孤郁、校书郎下邽白居易、前进士萧俛、沈传师出焉。
现代文：丙午，宪宗亲自在大殿对应诏赴试的士子举行制举考试。于是，校书郎元稹、监察御史独孤郁、校书郎下人白居易、前进士萧、沈传师都崭露头角，独孤郁是独孤及的儿子。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Emperor Xianzong himself held a formal examination in the Great Hall for the scholars who were going to the examination. As a result, the school scribe Geng Yao, the inspector of history Du Guoyu, the school scribe Bai Juyi, the advanced scholar Xiao, and the teacher Shen Chuanshi all came to the fore, and Du Guoyu was the son of Du Guoyu.

古文：郁，及之子；俛，华之孙；传师，既济之子也。
现代文：萧是萧华的孙子。
English: Xiao is the grandson of Xiao Hua.

古文：杜佑请解财赋之职，仍举兵部侍郎、度支使、盐铁转运副使李巽自代。
现代文：沈传师是沈既济的儿子。杜佑请求解除自己管理资财赋税方面的职务，还推举兵部侍郎、度支使、盐铁转运副使李巽来替代自己。
English: Shen Chuanshi was the son of Shen Yeji. Du You requested to be relieved of his duties in the management of assets and taxes, and also nominated Li Jie, the secretary of the military department, the chief of staff, and the deputy envoy of salt and iron transportation, to replace himself.

古文：丁未，加佑司徒，罢其盐铁转运使，以巽为度支、盐铁转运使。
现代文：丁未，宪宗加封杜佑为司徒，免除了他盐铁转运使的职务，任命李巽为度支使和盐铁转运使。
English: During the reign of Emperor Ding Wei, Emperor Xianzong appointed Du You as a scholar, relieved him of his duties as the envoy of salt and iron transportation, and appointed Li Xi as the envoy of Du and the envoy of salt and iron transportation.

古文：自刘晏之后，居财赋之职者，莫能继之。
现代文：自刘晏以后，担任财物赋税管理职务的人们都赶不上他。
English: Since Liu Wei, the people who have held the position of property tax administration can't catch up with him.

古文：巽掌使一年，征课所入，类晏之多，明年过之，又一年加一百八十万缗。
现代文：李巽掌管使职一年，征收赋税的收入，便像刘晏时那样多了，第二年又超过了刘晏，再过一年，又较刘晏时增加了一百八十万缗。
English: In the first year of Li Wei's tenure, the revenue from tax collection increased as much as that of Liu Wei. In the second year, it exceeded that of Liu Wei. After another year, it increased by 1.8 million baht compared to that of Liu Wei.

古文：戊申，加陇右经略使、秦州刺史刘澭保义军节度使。
现代文：戊申，宪宗加封陇右经略使、秦州刺史刘为保义军节度使。
English: Wushin, Jianzong and Guan Yu were appointed as the special envoys, and Qinzhou and Liu were appointed as the special envoys of the Guoying Army.

古文：辛酉，以元稹为右拾遗，独孤郁为左拾遗，白居易为盩厔尉、集贤校理，萧俛为右拾遗，沈传师为校书郎。
现代文：辛酉，任命元稹为左拾遗，白居易为县尉、集贤校理、萧为右拾遗，沈传师为校书郎。
English: Xin Yu, appointed Yuan Yu as the left scavenger, Bai Juyi as the county lieutenant, Ji Xian as the schoolmaster, Xiao as the right scavenger, and Shen Chuanshi as the school scribe.

古文：稹上疏论谏职，以为： 昔太宗以王珪、魏征为谏官，宴游寝食未尝不在左右，又命三品以上入议大政，必遣谏官一人随之，以参得失，故天下大理。
现代文：元稹上书谈论谏官的职任，他认为： 过去，太宗任命王与魏徵为谏官，无论宴饮游观，还是寝息就餐，没有一时不让他们跟随在身边，还命令在三品以上官员入朝计议重大政务时，一定要派遣一位谏官跟随，以便检验各种议论的优劣，所以当时天下政治修明。
English: Yuan Xuan wrote a letter to discuss the duties of eunuchs, he thought: In the past, Emperor Taizong appointed Wang and Wei Zheng as eunuchs. Whether it was a banquet, a sightseeing tour, or a sleepy meal, he never let them follow him for a moment. He also ordered that when more than three eunuchs were included in the government to discuss important government affairs, they must send a eunuch to follow in order to test the merits of various discussions. Therefore, the world was politically clear at that time.

古文：今之谏官，大不得豫召见，次不得参时政，排行就列，朝谒而已。
现代文：现在的谏官，首先不能得到圣上的召见，其次不能参究当前的政治措施，只是侪身于朝班的行列之中，按时上朝拜见圣上罢了。
English: Today's eunuchs, first of all, cannot be summoned by the emperor, and secondly, they cannot study the current political measures. They just have to be in the ranks of the imperial guard and worship the emperor on time.

古文：近年以来，正牙不奏事，庶官罢巡对，谏官能举职者，独诰命有不便则上封事耳。
现代文：近些年来，免除正殿奏事，停止百官轮流奏事，谏官能够奉行的职责，只有在诏诰命令不尽合宜时，献上一本皂封缄的奏章而已。
English: In recent years, the eunuchs have been exempted from performing the ceremony in the main hall, the rotation of the eunuchs has been stopped, and the eunuchs can only perform their duties by presenting a soap-sealed scroll when the imperial edict is not appropriate.

古文：君臣之际，讽谕于未形，筹画于至密，尚不能回至尊之盛意，况于既行之诰令，已命之除授，而欲以咫尺之书收丝纶之诏，诚亦难矣。
现代文：君臣际会，即使在事情发生以前便委婉规劝，进行极为周密的谋划，尚且难以回转圣上的盛意，何况诏诰命令已经颁行，对官员的任命已经发布，要想凭着谏官进呈一纸章奏收回圣上的诏书，实在也是够困难的了。
English: It is difficult to reverse the sacred imperial edict, even if the council of lords and ministers had been gently exhorting and making very careful plans before the incident occurred. Moreover, the imperial edict has already been issued, and the appointment of officials has already been issued. It is really quite difficult to withdraw the sacred imperial edict with the submission of a piece of paper by the eunuch.

古文：愿陛下时于延英召对，使尽所怀，岂可置于其位而屏弃疏贱之哉！ 
现代文：希望陛下经常在延英殿召见谏官奏对，让他们把意见都讲出来，怎么能够将他们安置在谏官的职位上，但又对他们弃置不顾，并且疏远贱视呢！ 
English: It is to be hoped that His Majesty will often summon eunuchs to the palace of Yan Ying-den, and let them express their opinions. How can they be placed in the position of eunuchs, but they are abandoned and despised?

古文：顷之，复上疏，以为： 理乱之始，必有萌象。
现代文：不久，元稹再次上疏，他认为： 在政治修明与祸乱危亡的初期，肯定是有萌芽和迹象的。
English: Not long after, Yuan Shao returned to Shangzhu, and he thought: In the early days of political reform and disaster, there must have been buds and signs.

古文：开直言，广视听，理之萌也；甘谄谀，蔽近习，乱之象也。
现代文：开通直言进谏的道路，拓广接受意见的范围，这是政治修明的萌芽。
English: Opening up a path of straight-talking and broadening the scope of acceptance of opinions is the bud of political moderation.

古文：自古人主即位之初，必有敢言之士，人主苟受而赏之，则君子乐行其道，竞为忠谠；小人亦贪其利，不为回邪矣。
现代文：喜欢阿谀逢迎，被自己亲幸的人们蒙蔽，这是祸乱危亡的迹象。自古以来，在君主即位的初期，肯定会有敢于直言切谏的人士，如果人君接受这些人士的意见，从而奖赏他们，君子便愿意奉行他们的理想，小人也贪图其中的利益，不做奸邪的事情了。
English: To love flattery, and to be deceived by one's own fortune-tellers, are the signs of calamity. From time immemorial, in the early days of a monarch's reign, there are sure to be outspoken people. If the prince accepts the opinions of these people and thus rewards them, the gentleman will be willing to pursue their ideals, and the villain will covet the benefits and not do evil things.

古文：如是，则上下之志通，幽远之情达，欲无理得乎！
现代文：如果能够做到这些，那么上下之志相通，幽深辽远之情畅达，即使不打算政治修明，能够办得到吗！
English: If we can achieve these things, then the aspirations of the upper and lower classes are the same, and the feelings of the deep and distant are unimpeded. Even if we do not intend to amend politics, can we do it?

古文：苟拒而罪之，则君子卷怀括囊以保其身，小人阿意迎合以窃其位矣。
现代文：如果君主抵制直言切谏的人士，从而惩罚他们，君子便会藏身隐退，缄口不言，但求明哲保身了，小人便会曲意迎合，从而窃居君子的地位了。
English: If the prince opposes and punishes those who are outspoken, the gentleman will hide and withdraw, keeping his mouth shut, but if he seeks wisdom to protect himself, the villain will pander to his whim, thus stealing the position of the gentleman.

古文：如是，则十步之事，皆可欺也，欲无乱得乎！
现代文：像这个样子，要办的事情就是近在十步以内，也完全有可能做出欺上罔下的勾当来，想没有祸乱办得到吗！
English: In this way, the things to be done are within ten steps of each other, and it is entirely possible to cheat your subordinates. Do you think you can do it without disaster?

古文：昔太宗初即政，孙伏伽以小事谏，太宗喜，厚赏之。
现代文：过去，太宗刚执政时，孙伏伽就一件小事进谏，大宗大喜，重重地奖赏了他。
English: In the past, when Emperor Taizong first came to power, Sun Fuga was greatly pleased with a small matter and rewarded him heavily.

古文：故当是时，言事者惟患不深切，未尝以触忌讳为忧也。
现代文：所以在当时，谈论政事的人们惟恐讲得不够深挚切实，从来不曾有人担心触犯忌讳。
English: Therefore, at that time, people who talked about politics were afraid of not being sincere enough, and no one was ever worried about breaking taboos.

古文：太宗岂好逆意而恶从欲哉？
现代文：难道是太宗喜欢让人违背自己的意志而厌恶人们顺从自己的愿望吗？
English: Is it that Taizong likes to make people go against their will and dislikes people to follow their wishes?

古文：诚以顺适之快小，而危亡之祸大故也。
现代文：这诚然因为顺心适意的快乐太渺小，而国家危亡的祸殃太重大的原故。
English: This is, of course, because the pleasures of convenience are too small, while the calamities of national peril are too great.

古文：陛下践祚，今已周岁，夫闻有受伏伽之赏者。
现代文：自从陛下登基以来，至今已满一年，没听说过有人受到孙伏伽那样的奖赏。
English: It has been a year since His Majesty ascended to the throne, and I have never heard of anyone receiving such a reward as Sun Fuga.

古文：臣等备位谏列，旷日弥年，不得召见，每就列位，屏气鞠躬，不敢仰视，又安暇议得失，献可否哉！
现代文：我等在谏官行列中聊以充数，空费时日，不能够得到陛下的召见，每当站进朝班的行列位次之中，屏住呼吸，曲身行礼，连抬头看上一眼都没有胆量，又怎么会顾得上议论得失，诤言进谏呢！
English: We wait in the line of eunuchs to make up the numbers, wasting time, unable to receive His Majesty's summons, every time we stand in the procession of the morning shift, holding our breath, bowing, not daring to even look up, and how can we care about the gains and losses of the discussion, and the insinuation of slander!

古文：供奉官尚尔，况疏远之臣乎！
现代文：在皇帝周围供职的官员尚且如此，何况其他职位疏远的臣下呢！
English: The same is true of the officials who serve around the emperor, not to mention the distant vassals in other positions!

古文：此盖群下因循之罪也。 
现代文：这恐怕是群臣因袭故习的原故吧。 
English: I am afraid that this is the reason why the ministers are following the old custom.

古文：因条奏请次对百官、复正牙奏事、禁非时贡献等十事。
现代文：于是，他逐条上奏，请求实行依次召对百官、恢复正殿奏事、禁止临时进献贡物等十件事情。
English: As a result, he appealed one by one, requesting the implementation of ten things, including the sequential summoning of one hundred officials, the restoration of the main hall, and the prohibition of the temporary offering of tributes.

古文：稹又以贞元中王伾、王叔文伎术得幸东宫，永贞之际几乱天下，上书劝上早择修正之士使辅导诸子，以为： 太宗自为蕃王，与文学清修之士十八人居。
现代文：元稹又以贞元年间王、王叔文靠着擅长方伎小术得到太子的宠爱，到永贞年间几乎使天下大乱之事，上书劝宪宗及早选拔善良正派的人士，辅佐教导各位皇子，他认为： 自从太宗当了藩王后，便与十八位博学能文、操行洁美的人士相处。
English: In addition, Yuan Zheng wrote a letter to Emperor Taizong, urging him to select good and decent people as early as possible, and to assist in teaching the princes. He believed that since Emperor Taizong became the queen of the domain, he would get along with eighteen people who were knowledgeable in literature and beautiful in their behavior.

古文：后代太子、诸王，虽有僚属，日益疏贱，至于师傅之官，非眊聩废疾不任事者，则休戎罢帅不知书者为之。
现代文：虽然后世的太子与诸王仍有所属的官吏，但是他们的地位越来越遭受疏远与轻贱，至于太师、少师、太傅、少傅一类官员，不是由眼昏耳聋、身体残废、不能办事的人物担承，就是让战事完结以后免去节帅职务而又不懂书的人物出任。
English: Although later generations of princes and kings still had officials who belonged to them, their status was increasingly alienated and despised. As for officials such as grand masters, junior masters, grand masters and junior masters, they were either borne by people who were blind, deaf, physically disabled and unable to work, or they were replaced after the war by people who were exempted from the post of commander-in-chief but did not know books.

古文：其友谕赞议之徒，尤为冗散之甚，搢绅皆耻由之。
现代文：尤其王府那些友、司议郎、谕德、赞善大夫等官员，更是闲散之职，士大夫都以担当过这类官员为耻辱。
English: In particular, those officials of the royal court, such as friends, councilors, magistrates, and doctors, are even more idle positions, and the magistrates are ashamed to have been in charge of such officials.

古文：就使时得僻老儒生，越月逾时，仅获一见，又何暇傅之德义，纳之法度哉！
现代文：即使有时能够得到一些孤陋寡闻，年纪老迈的儒生，也是历时数月，仅仅获得一次与太子、诸王见面的机会，又哪里有闲暇为他们辅导仁德道义，使他们深明法令制度呢！
English: Even if it is sometimes possible to get some elderly Confucian scholars who have been isolated and poorly known, it took several months to get only one opportunity to meet the prince and kings, and where is the leisure to tutor them in benevolence and morality, so that they are familiar with the legal system!

古文：夫以匹士爱其子，犹知求明哲之师而教之，况万乘之嗣，系四海之命乎！ 
现代文：一般说来，就连地位低贱的人们，为了痛爱自己的子女，还知道去寻找明达事理的老师来教诲自己的子女，何况太子、诸王都是帝王的后嗣，关系着国家的命运呢！ 
English: Generally speaking, even people of low status, in order to love their children, still know how to find knowledgeable teachers to teach their children, not to mention that princes and kings are the heirs of emperors and are related to the fate of the country!

古文：上颇嘉纳其言，时召见之。
现代文：宪宗对他的话很是赞许，颇多采纳，还时常召见他。
English: Kenzong was very appreciative of his words, adopted many of them, and often summoned him.

古文：壬戌，邵王约薨。
现代文：壬戌，邵王李约去世。
English: On the 29th, Shao Wang Li passed away.

古文：五月，丙子，以横海留后程执恭为节度使。
现代文：五月，丙子，宪宗任命横海留后程执恭为该军节度使。
English: In May, Emperor Xianzong appointed Henghai's second-in-command, Houcheng Xingyan, as the military's envoy to the festival.

古文：庚辰，尚书左丞、同平章事郑馀庆罢为太子宾客。
现代文：庚辰，尚书左丞、同平章事郑馀庆被罢免为太子宾客。
English: Geng Chen, Shang Shuzhong, and Tongping Zhangji Zheng Yuqing were dismissed as the prince's guests.

古文：辛卯，尊太上皇后为皇太后。
现代文：辛卯，尊奉太上皇的皇后为皇太后。
English: Xinwu, revered as the empress dowager of the emperor, became the empress dowager.

古文：刘辟城鹿头关，连八栅，屯兵万馀人以拒高崇文。
现代文：刘辟修筑鹿头关，连结八座栅垒，屯聚兵马一万多人，以便抵御高崇文。
English: Liu Bei built Deer Head Pass, connected eight fences, and gathered more than ten thousand soldiers and horses in order to resist Gao Chongwen.

古文：六月，丁酉，崇文击败之。
现代文：六月，丁酉，高崇文打败了刘辟。
English: In June, Ding Xi and Gao Chongwen defeated Liu Bei.

古文：辟置栅于关东万胜堆。
现代文：刘辟又在鹿头关东面的万胜堆设置栅垒。
English: Liu Bi also set up a fence at Wansheng Heap on the east side of Deer Head Pass.

古文：戊戌，崇文遣骁将范阳高霞寓攻夺之，下瞰关城，凡八战皆捷。
现代文：戊戌，高崇文派遣骁将范阳人高霞寓前去攻取了万胜堆，由此可以俯视鹿头关全城。
English: Wuzhen, Gao Chongwen dispatched his general Fan Yangren to Gao Xia's residence to capture Wanshengdui, from which you can overlook the whole city of Shantou Pass.

古文：加卢龙节度使刘济兼侍中。
现代文：共计经过八次交战，高霞寓全都获胜。
English: After a total of eight battles, Gao Xiayu won all of them.

古文：己亥，加平卢节度使李师古兼侍中。
现代文：宪宗加封卢龙节度使刘济兼任侍中；己亥，加封平卢节度使李师古兼任侍中。
English: Kenzong's addition of Lulong Jiedu made Liu Jie concurrently serve as a chamberlain; Ji Hai's addition of Pinglu Jiedu made Li Shigu concurrently serve as a chamberlain.

古文：庚子，高崇文破刘辟于德阳。
现代文：庚子，高崇文在德阳打败刘辟。
English: Geng Zi, Gao Chongwen beat Liu Bei in Deyang.

古文：癸卯，又破之于汉州。
现代文：癸卯，高崇文在汉州再败刘辟。
English: Meanwhile, Gao Chongwen defeated Liu Bei again in Hanzhou.

古文：严砺遣其将严秦破辟众万馀人于绵州石碑谷。
现代文：严砺派遣他的将领严秦在绵州的石碑谷打败刘辟的部众一万多人。
English: Yan Xuan sent his general Yan Qin to defeat Liu Bei's army of more than ten thousand men at Shibei Valley in Mianzhou.

古文：初，李师古有异母弟曰师道，常疏斥在外，不免贫窭。
现代文：当初，李师古有一个异母兄弟，名叫李师道，经常遭受冷落，被斥逐在外地，不免贫困。
English: At the beginning, Li Shigu had a half-brother, named Li Shidao, who was often left out in the cold, was banished to a foreign land, and was inevitably impoverished.

古文：师古私谓所亲曰： 吾非不友于师道也，吾年十五拥节旄，自恨不知稼穑之艰难。
现代文：李师古私下里告诉亲近的人们说： 并不是我不肯与李师道友好，我十五岁时担任节度使，恨自己不懂得耕种与收获的艰难。
English: Li Shigu privately told people close to him: "It's not that I don't want to be friendly with Li Shigu. When I was 15 years old, I served as an emissary for the festival, and I hated myself for not understanding the hardships of farming and harvesting.

古文：况师道复减吾数岁，吾欲使之知衣食之所自来，且以州县之务付之，计诸公必不察也。 
现代文：况且李师道又比我小几岁，我想让他了解吃穿供给是从哪里来的，才暂且把治理州县的事务交付给他，想来诸位肯定还没有看出来吧。 
English: Moreover, Li Shidao is a few years younger than me. I want him to understand where the food and clothing supply comes from, before temporarily handing over the affairs of state and county governance to him. I'm sure you haven't figured it out yet.

古文：及师古疾笃，师道时知密州事，好画及觱篥。
现代文：及至李师古病情危笃时，李师道当时正在代理密州事务，喜欢绘画和吹奏胡人的葭管。
English: At the time of Li Shigu's critical illness, Li Shidao was acting as an agent for the state of Michoacán. He enjoyed painting and playing the flute.

古文：师古谓判官高沐、李公度曰： 迨吾之未乱也，欲有问于子。
现代文：李师古对判官高沐和李公度说： 趁着我神智还没有迷乱时，我想征求你们的意见。
English: Li Shigu said to the judges Gao Mu and Li Gongdu: I would like to solicit your opinions while my sanity is still intact.

古文：我死，子欲奉谁为帅乎！ 
现代文：我死后，你们打算拥戴何人担当主帅呢？ 
English: When I die, who are you going to have as manager?

古文：二人相顾未对。
现代文：两人相互看了一眼，没有回答。
English: The two men looked at each other and did not answer.

古文：师古曰： 岂非师道乎？
现代文：李师古说： 难道不是李师道吗？
English: Li Shigu said, "Isn't the Li Shidao the beginning?

古文：人情谁肯薄骨肉而厚他人，顾置帅不善，则非徒败军政也，且覆吾族。
现代文：由人们的常情说来，谁愿意对骨肉兄弟刻薄寡恩，而对其他的人却优渥丰厚呢，但是设置主帅不得其人，便不只是败坏军中政务，而且将会倾覆我的家族。
English: It is human nature to be ungenerous to one's brothers and generous to others, but to make the commanding officer ungenerous would not only corrupt the army, but it would ruin my family.

古文：师道为公侯子孙，不务训兵理人，专习小人贱事以为己能，果堪为帅乎？
现代文：李师道是公侯家族的后人，却不致力训练军队，治理百姓，专门学习小人的下贱行当，认为是自己的才能，他担当主帅果真胜任吗？
English: Li Shidao is a descendant of the princely family, but he does not devote himself to training the army and governing the people, he specializes in learning the villain's despicable behavior, he thinks it is his talent, is he really competent as a coach?

古文：幸诸公审图之！ 
现代文：希望诸位审慎地计议一下吧。 
English: I hope you will consider this carefully.

古文：闰月，壬戌朔，师古薨。
现代文：闰六月，壬戌朔，李师古去世。
English: In late June, Li Shigu passed away.

古文：沐、公度秘不发丧，潜逆师道于密州，奉以为节度副使。
现代文：高沐与李公度隐秘其事，暂不公布李师古的死讯，暗中从密州迎接李师道，拥戴他担当节度副使。
English: Gao Mu and Li Gongdu kept the matter secret, did not announce the death of Li Shigu for the time being, secretly welcomed Li Shidao from Mizhou, and supported him as deputy envoy of the festival.

古文：秋，七月，癸丑，高崇文破刘辟之众万人于玄武。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸丑，高崇文在玄武打败刘辟的部众一万人。
English: In the autumn, in July, Gao Chongwen defeated Liu Bei's army of ten thousand in Xuanwu.

古文：甲午，诏： 凡西川继援之兵，悉取崇文处分。 
现代文：甲午，宪宗颁诏： 凡是在西川相继增援的军队，一概听从高崇文的指挥。 
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the second month, Emperor Xianzong issued an edict: All the troops that were successively reinforced in the West River should obey Gao Chongwen's command.

古文：壬寅，葬至德大圣大安孝皇帝于丰陵，庙号顺宗。
现代文：壬寅，宪宗将至德大圣大安孝皇帝安葬在丰陵，庙号顺宗。
English: In Renin, Emperor Jianzong will be buried in Fengling, the temple name Shunzong.

古文：八月，壬戌，以妃郭氏为贵妃。
现代文：八月，壬戌，宪宗册立皇妃郭氏为贵妃。
English: In August, Emperor Jianzong inscribed the Guo clan's empress as a noble consort.

古文：丁卯，立皇子宁为邓王，宽为澧王，宥为遂王，察为深王，寰为洋王，寮为绛王，审为建王。
现代文：丁卯，宪宗册立皇子李宁为邓王，李宽为澧王，李宥为遂王，李察为深王，李寰为洋王，李寮为绛王，李审为建王。
English: Dingwu, Emperor Xianzong established the princes Li Ning as the King of Deng, Li Guang as the King of Shun, Li Yu as the King of Sui, Li Zha as the King of Shen, Li Xi as the King of Yang, Li Liao as the King of Shun, and Li Jian as the King of Jian.

古文：李师道总军务，久之，朝命未至。
现代文：李师道总揽军中事务后，过了许久，朝廷的任命还没有到来。
English: It has been a long time since Li Shidao was in charge of the affairs of the army, and the appointment of the imperial court has not yet arrived.

古文：师道谋于将佐，或请出兵掠四境。高沐固止之，请输两税，申官吏，行盐法，遣使相继奉表诣京师。
现代文：李师道与将佐们商讨对策，有人请求往四邻的边境上派兵虏掠，高沐坚决制止了这一企图，请李师道向朝廷缴纳两税，申报所任用的官吏，实行食盐法，派遣使者接连不断地前往京城进献表章。
English: Li Shidao and his generals discussed countermeasures. Someone asked him to send troops to the border of the four neighbors to plunder. Gao Mu resolutely stopped this attempt. He asked Li Shidao to pay two taxes to the imperial court, declare the appointed officials, implement the salt law, and send envoys to the capital one after another to present watches.

古文：杜黄裳请乘其未定而分之。
现代文：杜黄裳请求趁着李师道没有安定来的时机，将平卢分而治之。
English: Du Huangxiao asked Li Shidao to take advantage of the unstable situation and divide and rule Pinglu.

古文：上以刘辟未平，己巳，以师道为平卢留后、知郓州事。
现代文：宪宗因刘辟尚未平定，己巳，任命李师道为平卢留后、知郓州事。
English: Because Liu Bei had not yet been subdued, Emperor Gensong decided to appoint Li Shidao as the governor of Zhisheng after he stayed in Pinglu.

古文：堂后主书滑涣久在中书，与知枢密刘光琦相结，宰相议事有与光琦异者，令涣达意，常得所欲，杜佑、郑絪等皆低意善视之。
现代文：堂后主书滑涣长期在中书省任职，与知枢密刘光琦相互交结，凡是宰相计议的事情与刘光琦发生分歧时，刘光琦便让滑涣传达自己的意图，经常能够满足自己的愿望。杜佑、郑等人都低声下气，用友好的态度对待他。
English: When there was a disagreement between Liu Guangyao and the prime minister on any matter of discussion, Liu Guangyao would have Slippery Toad convey his intentions, and he was often able to satisfy his wishes. Du You, Zheng and others were all subdued and treated him in a friendly manner.

古文：郑馀庆与诸相议事，涣从旁指陈是非，馀庆怒叱之。未几，罢相。
现代文：郑馀庆与各位宰相计议事情时，滑涣在旁边指点评说诸相意见的曲直短长，郑馀庆怒气冲冲地喝斥了他，没过多久，郑馀庆便被罢免了宰相的职务。
English: When Zheng Yuqing was discussing the matter with the various prime ministers, Slippery Toad was nearby pointing out and commenting on the brevity of the opinions of the various parties. Zheng Yuqing angrily rebuked him. It did not take long for Zheng Yuqing to be dismissed from the post of prime minister.

古文：四方赂遗无虚日，中书舍人李吉甫言其专恣，请去之。
现代文：各地向滑涣贿赂财物，没有停闲的时日。中书舍人李吉甫进言说滑涣肆意专权，请求除去他。
English: People from all over the country bribed him with money and goods, and there was no time for idleness. Li Jifu, a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, suggested that he had arbitrary power and requested that he be removed.

古文：上命宰相阖中书四门搜掩，尽得其奸状，九月。
现代文：宪宗命令宰相将中书省四面的门户关闭起来，进行突然搜查，取得了滑涣肆行邪恶的全部罪状。
English: Kenzong ordered the prime minister to close the four gates of Zhongshu Province, conduct a sudden search, and obtained all the crimes of the slippery scoundrel.

古文：辛丑，贬涣雷州司户，寻赐死。籍没，家财凡数千万。
现代文：九月，辛丑，宪宗将滑涣贬为雷州司户，不久便赐他自裁，没收他家的财产计有数千万之多。
English: In September, Xinwu, Xianzong relegated Nideshun to the position of Leizhou governor, and soon gave him self-censorship, confiscating tens of millions of his family's property.

古文：壬寅，高崇文又败刘辟之众于鹿头关，严秦败刘辟之众于神泉。
现代文：壬寅，高崇文再次在鹿头关打败刘辟的部众，严秦在神泉也打败了刘辟的部众。
English: Ren Yin and Gao Chongwen once again defeated Liu Bei's subordinates in Shitou Pass, and Yan Qin also defeated Liu Bei's subordinates in Shenquan.

古文：河东将阿跌光颜将兵会高崇文于行营，愆期一日，惧诛，欲深入自赎，军于鹿头之西，断其粮道，城中忧惧。
现代文：河东将领阿跌光颜带领兵马与高崇文在行营会合，耽误了一天时间，因害怕高崇文杀他，打算深入前敌，赎回自己的过失，在鹿头关西面驻扎下来，继绝了刘辟的运粮通道，使鹿头关内将士忧愁恐惧。
English: The general of Hedong, Ah Dou Guangyan, led the soldiers and horses to meet Gao Chongwen at the encampment. He delayed the meeting for one day, because he was afraid that Gao Chongwen would kill him. He planned to go deep into the former enemy, redeem his fault, and stationed himself in the west of Shuguangguan. He cut off Liu Bi's grain transportation channel and made the soldiers in Shuguangguan feel sad and afraid.

古文：于是辟、绵江栅将李文悦、鹿头守将仇良辅皆以城降于崇文。获辟婿苏强，士卒降者万计。
现代文：于是，刘辟的绵江栅守将李文悦、鹿头关守将仇良辅都率城向高崇文投降，还捉获了刘辟的女婿苏强，投降的士兵数以万计。
English: As a result, Liu Bei's Mianjiang Gatekeeper Li Wen Yue and Deer Gatekeeper Qiao Liang Fu led the city to surrender to Gao Chongwen. Liu Bei's son-in-law Su Qiang was also captured, and tens of thousands of soldiers surrendered.

古文：崇文遂长驱直指成都，所向崩溃，军不留行。
现代文：于是，高崇文迅速地直逼成都，所到之处，无不崩溃，军队在行进中从未受阻。
English: As a result, Gao Chongwen quickly pushed straight to Chengdu. Everywhere he went, everything collapsed, and the army was never blocked in its march.

古文：辛亥，克成都。
现代文：辛亥，高崇文攻克成都。
English: In Xinhai, Gao Chongwen conquered Chengdu.

古文：刘辟、卢文若帅数十骑西奔吐蕃，崇文使高霞寓等追之，及于羊灌田。
现代文：刘辟、卢文若带领数十人骑马向西逃奔吐蕃，高崇文让高霞寓等人追赶，并在羊灌田追上了他们。
English: Liu Bi and Lu Wenruo led dozens of people on horseback to flee to the west of Tubo, Gao Chongwen let Gao Xiaye and others chase them, and caught up with them in Yangwu Tian.

古文：辟赴江不死，擒之。
现代文：刘辟跳入长江、没有淹死，终被擒获。
English: Liu Bi jumped into the Yangtze River, but did not drown, and was eventually caught.

古文：文若先杀妻子，乃系石自沉。
现代文：卢文若事先将妻子儿女杀死，然后便在身上系了石头沉江自杀。
English: If Lu Wen killed his wife and children in advance, then he tied a stone to his body and committed suicide.

古文：崇文入成都，屯于通衢，休息士卒，市肆不惊，珍宝山积，秋毫不犯，槛刘辟送京师。
现代文：高崇文进入成都后，在四通八达的大道上驻扎下来，让士兵就地休息，市中的店铺没有受到惊动，市场上珍贵的货财堆积如山，也没有遭受丝毫的侵犯。
English: After Gao Chongwen entered Chengdu, he stationed himself on a wide avenue and let the soldiers rest on the spot. The shops in the city were not alarmed, the precious goods piled up in the market, and they did not suffer the slightest infringement.

古文：斩辟大将邢泚、馆驿巡官沈衍，馀无所问。
现代文：高崇文将刘辟装入槛车，送往京城，斩杀了刘辟的大将邢和馆驿巡官沈衍，对其余的人一概不加追究。
English: Gao Chongwen loaded Liu Bei into a threshold car and sent him to Beijing. He killed Liu Bei's general Zou and the inspector Shen Yan, and did not pursue the rest of the people.

古文：军府事无巨细，命一遵韦南康故事，从容指扌为，一境皆平。
现代文：对军府的事务，无论大小，高崇文命令一律遵从南康郡王韦皋先前奉行的惯例，他从容不迫地指挥着，西川全境便完全平定了。
English: For the affairs of the military government, no matter how big or small, Gao Chongwen's orders all followed the practice previously followed by Wang Weiqi of Nankang County. He commanded unhurriedly, and the entire territory of West River was completely leveled.

古文：初，韦皋以西山运粮使崔从知邛州事，刘辟反，从以书谏辟；辟发兵攻之，从婴城固守；辟败，乃得免。
现代文：当初，韦皋委任西山运粮使崔从掌管邛州事务，刘辟反叛朝廷后，崔从写书信劝阻刘辟，刘辟派兵攻打邛州，崔从据城坚守。刘辟失败，崔从终于得以幸免。
English: At first, Wei Yan appointed Xishan Grain Transport to let Cui Zeng take charge of Zhangzhou affairs, Liu Bi rebelled against the imperial court, Cui Zeng wrote letters to dissuade Liu Bi, Liu Bi sent troops to attack Zhangzhou, Cui Zeng held out. Liu Bi failed, Cui Zeng was finally spared.

古文：从，融之曾孙也。
现代文：崔从是崔融的曾孙。
English: Cui Cong is the great-grandson of Cui Rong.

古文：韦皋参佐房式、韦乾度、独孤密、符载、郗士美、段文昌等素服麻屦，衔土请罪。崇文皆释而礼之，草表荐式等，厚赆而遣之。
现代文：韦皋的参佐房式、韦乾度、独孤密、符载、郗士美、段文昌等人身著白色丧服，脚穿麻鞋，按死罪制度口衔土块，请求治罪，高崇文全都释放了他们，以礼相待，还草拟表章举荐房式等人，赠给他们丰厚的财物，送他们前去就任。
English: Wei Wei's Sanzafang style, Wei Qiandu, Duxuomi, Fuzang, Wu Shimei, Duan Wenchang and other people wore white mourning clothes, wore hemp shoes, according to the death penalty system, the mouth of the soil, asked for punishment, Gao Chongwen all released them, treated them with courtesy, and also drafted a seal to recommend the house style and other people, gave them rich property, and sent them forward to take office.

古文：目段文昌曰： 君必为将相，未敢奉荐。 
现代文：高崇文看着段文昌说： 你肯定会成为将相，我不敢推荐你。 
English: Gao Chongwen looked at Duan Wenchang and said, "You will definitely become a future leader. I dare not recommend you."

古文：载，庐山人；式，琯之从子；文昌，志玄之玄孙也。
现代文：段文昌是段志玄的玄孙。
English: Duan Wenchang is the great-great-grandson of Duan Shixuan.

古文：辟有二妾，皆殊色，监军请献之，崇曰： 天子命我讨平凶竖，当以抚百姓为先，遽献妇人以求媚，岂天子之意邪！
现代文：刘辟有两个偏房，容貌都特别美丽，监军请求将她们献给朝廷，高崇文说： 天子命令我征伐平定刘辟这一凶顽竖子，我应当首先安抚百姓。忙着进献妇女，讨好天子，这哪里会是天子的本意呢！
English: Liu Bei had two side chambers, both of which were particularly beautiful. The overseer of the army requested that they be offered to the imperial court. Gao Chongwen said: The heavenly son ordered me to conquer and pacify Liu Bei, this fierce warrior, and I should first appease the people. Busy offering women and pleasing the heavenly son, what would be the original intention of the heavenly son?

古文：崇文义不为此。 
现代文：我奉行正义，不干这种事情。 
English: I do justice, I don't do this kind of thing.

古文：乃以配将吏之无妻者。
现代文：于是，他将刘辟的两个偏房许配给没有妻室的将吏了。
English: As a result, he assigned Liu Bei's two partial houses to officers without wives.

古文：杜黄裳建议征蜀及指受高崇文方略，皆悬合事宜。
现代文：杜黄裳建议征讨蜀中并授意高崇文应采取的谋略。
English: Du Huangxiao suggested that Shu Zhong should be recruited and Gao Chongwen should be instructed on the strategy to be adopted.

古文：崇文素惮刘澭，黄裳使谓之曰： 若无功，当以刘澭相代。 
现代文：这些谋略对后来发生的事情完全适宜。由于高崇文平时畏惧刘，杜黄裳便让人告诉他说： 如果你不能取得成功，便会让刘替代你。 
English: Since Gao Chongwen always feared Liu, Du Huangxiang had someone tell him: If you don't succeed, Liu will replace you.

古文：故能得其死力。
现代文：所以杜黄裳能够使高崇文尽到最大的力量。
English: Therefore, Du Huangxiang can make Gao Chongwen do his best.

古文：及蜀平，宰相入贺，上目黄裳曰： 卿之功也！ 
现代文：及至平定蜀中后，宰相入朝祝贺，宪宗望着杜黄裳说： 这都是你的功劳啊！ 
English: After the conquest of Shu, the prime minister congratulated Du on his accession to the throne. Looking at Du Huangxiao, Emperor Xianzong said, "This is all thanks to you!"

古文：辛巳，诏征少室山人李渤为左拾遗。
现代文：辛巳，宪宗颁诏征召少室山的隐士李渤担任左拾遗，李渤称病，不肯前来。
English: Soon after, Emperor Gensong issued an edict summoning the hermit of Mt. Shōmuro, Li Jie, to serve as the guardian of the relics. Li Jie claimed to be ill and refused to come.

古文：渤辞疾不至，然朝政有得失，渤辄附奏陈论。
现代文：然而，一旦朝廷大政发生问题，他总是寄上奏章，陈述论说自己的见解。
English: However, whenever there was a problem with the imperial government, he always sent a report stating his opinion.

古文：冬，十月，甲子，易定节度使张茂昭入朝。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲子，易定节度使张茂昭入京朝见。
English: In the winter, October, Jiaozi, and Yi Ding Festival, Zhang Maozhao came to Beijing to see the emperor.

古文：制割资、简、陵、荣、昌、泸六州隶东川。
现代文：宪宗颁制命令分出资州、简州、陵州、荣州、昌州、泸州六地，归属东川。
English: The order issued by the Confucius Institute was divided into six regions: Taizhou, Jianzhou, Lingzhou, Rongzhou, Changzhou, and Zhangzhou, which belonged to Dongchuan.

古文：房式等未至京师，皆除省寺官。
现代文：房式等人还没有来到京城，宪宗已经全部任命他们各省、各寺的官员。
English: Fang Shih and others have not yet arrived in Beijing, but the Emperor has already appointed them all as officials of various provinces and temples.

古文：丙寅，以高崇文为西川节度使。戊辰，以严砺为东川节度使。
现代文：丙寅，任命高崇文为西川节度使；戊辰，任命严砺为东川节度使。
English: Cui Yin, appointed Gao Chongwen as the West River Festival Envoy; Bo Chen, appointed Yan Qi as the East River Festival Envoy.

古文：庚午，以将作监柳晟为山南西道节度使。
现代文：庚午，宪宗任命将作监柳晟为山南西道节度使。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, Xianzong was appointed as the inspector of the West Shannan Road Festival.

古文：晟至汉中，府兵讨刘辟还，未至城，诏复遣戍梓州，军士怨怒，胁监军，谋作乱。
现代文：柳晟来到汉中时，汉中府的兵马征讨刘辟回来，还没有进城，便有诏书派遣他们再去戍守梓州。将士们既怨恨，又恼怒，胁迫监军，策划发起变乱。
English: When Liu Bei came to Hanzhong, the soldiers and horses of Hanzhong Prefecture came to recruit Liu Bei, and before they entered the city, there was a decree to send them to defend Zizhou again. The soldiers were both resentful and angry, coercing the supervisors and plotting to initiate a mutiny.

古文：晟闻之，疾驱入城，慰劳之，既而问曰： 汝曹何以得成功？ 
现代文：柳晟得知消息后，连忙策马进城，慰劳他们。过了一会儿，柳晟问道： 你们是怎么获得成功的呀？ 
English: After learning the news, Liu Ye hurriedly rode into the city to console them. After a while, Liu Ye asked: How did you succeed?

古文：对曰： 诛反者刘辟耳。 
现代文：将士们回答说： 是由于前去讨伐反叛者刘辟呗。 
English: The officers replied, "It was because I went to fight against the rebel Liu Biyun."

古文：晟曰： 辟以不受诏命，故汝曹得以立功，岂可复使它人诛汝以为功邪？ 
现代文：柳晟说： 由于刘辟不肯接受诏书的命令，所以使你们获得了立功的机会，怎么能够让别人再来讨伐你们，从而建立功劳呢！ 
English: Liu Bei said, "Since Liu Bei refused to accept the order of the imperial rescript, you have gained the opportunity to make meritorious contributions. How can you allow others to fight against you again and thus build up merit?

古文：众皆拜谢，请诣戍所如诏书。
现代文：大家都向柳晟行礼，表示感谢，请求按照诏书前往戍守之地。
English: Everyone bowed to Liu Bei, expressed their gratitude, and requested to go to the place of detention in accordance with the edict.

古文：军府由是获安。
现代文：从此，军府获得安宁。
English: Since then, the military government has been at peace.

古文：壬午，以平卢留后李师道为节度使。
现代文：壬申，宪宗任命平卢留后李师道为节度使。
English: In Jinshin, Jianzong appointed Li Shidao as the festival envoy after Pinglu stayed.

古文：戊子，刘辟至长安，并族党诛之。
现代文：戊子，刘辟被押送到长安，朝廷命令将他连同他的同族亲属一并诛杀。
English: Wu Zi and Liu Bi were escorted to Chang'an, and the imperial court ordered him to be killed together with his relatives of the same race.

古文：武宁节度使张愔有疾，上表请代。
现代文：武宁节度使张身患重病，上表请求派人替代自己。
English: The Wu-Ning Festival has caused Zhang Si to fall seriously ill, and he has requested that someone be sent to replace him.

古文：十一月，戊申，征愔为工部尚书，以东都留守王绍代之，复以濠、泗二州隶武宁军。
现代文：十一月，戊申，宪宗征召张回朝担任工部尚书，任命东都留守王绍代替张的原职务，又将濠州、泗州两地归属武宁军。
English: In November, in Buxin, Jianzong conscripted Zhang to return to the dynasty to serve as Shangshu of the Ministry of Industry, appointed Wang Shao, who remained in Dongdu, to replace Zhang's original position, and assigned Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou to the Wu Ning Army.

古文：徐人喜得二州，故不为乱。
现代文：徐州地区的将士们高兴得到两州的土地，所以不作乱。
English: The soldiers in the Xuzhou region are happy to get the land of the two states, so they do not make trouble.

古文：丙辰，以内常侍吐突承璀为左神策中尉。
现代文：丙辰，宪宗任命内常侍吐突承璀为左神策中尉。
English: Hsin-Chen and Kenzong appointed Tu-Tu Chung-Hee, a regular attendant, as a lieutenant of Zuo Sheng-Seo.

古文：承璀事上于东宫，以干敏得幸。
现代文：吐突承璀在宪宗当太子时曾侍奉左右，因干练机敏而得到宠爱。
English: Tu Tu Chengyu had served around Emperor Gensong when he was crown prince. He was favored for his ability and astuteness.

古文：是岁，回鹘入贡，始以摩尼偕来，于中国置寺处之。
现代文：这一年，回鹘入京进贡，开始带着摩尼教僧人一同前来，朝廷在国内设置寺院，安置摩尼僧人居住。
English: In the same year, the imperial court began to bring Manichaean monks to Beijing as tribute. The imperial court set up temples in China and settled Manichaean monks there.

古文：其法日晏乃食，食荤而不食湩酪。
现代文：根据摩尼僧人的规矩，日暮时分才开始进食，可以吃荤腥食品，但不能够食用奶酪。
English: According to the rules of the Mani monks, they only start eating at dusk. They can eat spicy food, but they can't eat cheese.

古文：回鹘信奉之，可汗或与议国事。
现代文：回鹘信奉摩尼教，回鹘可汗有时要与摩尼僧人计议国家大事。
English: The Uighurs believe in Manichaeism, and the Uighur khan sometimes has to discuss national affairs with the Manichaean monks.

古文：元和二年丁亥，公元八零七年
现代文：二年春季，正月，辛卯，宪宗祭祀圜丘，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year, the first month of the year, Xinwu, the Confucian sect held a religious ceremony in Shaoshan, and the country was amnestied.

古文：春，正月，辛卯，上祀圆丘，赦天下。上以杜佑高年重德，礼重之，常呼司徒而不名。
现代文：宪宗因杜佑年迈，品德高尚，以隆重的礼数对待他，经常称呼他为司徒，而不直呼其名。
English: Due to Du You's advanced age and high moral character, Gensong treated him with great respect, often calling him "Stu" instead of his real name.

古文：佑以老疾，请致仕。诏令佑每月入朝不过再三，因至中书议大政。
现代文：杜佑因年老多病，请求退休，宪宗颁诏令杜佑每月来朝廷朝见不超过两三次，并趁此机会前往中书省计议重大的政务。
English: Due to his old age and illness, Du You requested to retire, and the Emperor issued an edict ordering Du You to visit the Imperial Court no more than two or three times a month, and to take this opportunity to go to Zhongshuo Province to discuss important government affairs.

古文：它日听归樊川。
现代文：其他日子准许他回到樊川府第。
English: On other days, he was allowed to return to his home in Shukawa Prefecture.

古文：门下侍郎、同平章事杜黄裳，有经济大略而不修小节，故不得久在相位。
现代文：门下侍郎、同平章事杜黄裳，具有经国济民的远大谋略，但对生活小事不加检点，所以没有能够长期保持宰相的职位。
English: His subordinate, Tongping Zhangji Duhuangzhuang, had a far-reaching strategy to benefit the country and the people, but did not pay attention to the small things in life, so he was not able to maintain the position of prime minister for a long time.

古文：乙巳以黄裳同平章事，充河中、晋、绛、慈、隰节度使。
现代文：乙巳，宪宗让杜黄裳挂衔同平章事，充任河中、晋、绛、慈、隰节度使。
English: At this time, Emperor Xianzong gave Du Huangxiang the rank of Tongping Zhengji, and he served as the Kechu, Jin, Zou, Ci, and Zou sectional envoy.

古文：己酉，以户部侍郎武元衡为门下侍郎，翰林学士李吉甫为中书侍郎，并同平章事。
现代文：己酉，宪宗任命户部侍郎武元衡为门下侍郎，翰林学士李吉甫为中书侍郎，两人一并同平章事。
English: After the death of Ji Xuan, Emperor Xianzong appointed Household Attendant Wu Yuanhe as a subordinate attendant, Hanlin Scholar Li Ji Fu as a middle school attendant, and the two of them together with Hei Zhangji.

古文：吉甫闻之感泣，谓中书舍人裴垍曰： 吉甫流落江、淮，逾十五年，一旦蒙恩至此。
现代文：李吉甫得知消息以后，感动得哭了，他告诉中书舍人裴说： 我飘泊江、淮，穷困失意，超过了十五年，现在忽然蒙受朝廷的恩典达到如此地步。
English: After Li Jifu learned the news, he was moved to tears. He told Pei, the person in charge of the Chinese school, "I have been drifting along the Huai River, poverty-stricken and frustrated, for more than fifteen years, and now I have suddenly received the grace of the imperial court to such an extent.

古文：思所以报德，惟在进贤，而朝廷后进，罕所接识，君有精鉴，愿悉为我言之。 
现代文：我想到的报答朝廷恩德的途径，只有引进贤明之士，但是我很少接触并结识朝廷中后来入仕的人们。您是善于识别人才的，希望您向我讲出您的所有意见。 
English: The only way I can think of to repay the kindness of the imperial court is to bring in wise men, but I rarely come into contact with and get to know the people who later serve in the imperial court. You are good at identifying talent, I hope you can tell me all your opinions.

古文：垍取笔疏三十馀人，数月之间，选用略尽。当时翕然称吉甫为得人。
现代文：于是，裴拿起笔来，开列了三十多人的名单。在几个月内，李吉甫将这些人几乎都选拔起用了，当时人们纷纷称道李吉甫用人得当。
English: Therefore, Pei picked up a pen and made a list of more than 30 people. Within a few months, Li Jifu selected almost all of these people and used them. At that time, people praised Li Jifu for using people properly.

古文：二月，癸酉，邕州奏破黄贼，获其酋长黄承庆。
现代文：二月，癸酉，邕州奏报击败黄氏乱民，俘获了他们的酋长黄承庆。
English: In February, the Luzhou Song Pao defeated the Huang clan rioters and captured their chief Huang Chengqing.

古文：夏，四月，甲子，以右金吾大将军范希朝为朔方、灵、盐节度使，以右神策、盐州、定远兵隶焉，以革旧弊，任边将也。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲子，宪宗任命右金吾大将军范希朝为朔方、灵、盐节度使，将右神策军、盐州、定远的兵马归属给他，为的是以此革除以往的弊病，由朝廷直接任命驻守边塞的将领。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Kenzong appointed Fan Xichang, the Right Great General of Kingu, as the envoy of the Spring Festival, and assigned to him the troops and horses of the Right Great General of Kingu, Yanshou and Dingyuan. In order to eliminate the past ills, the general stationed at the frontier fortress was directly appointed by the court.

古文：秋、八月，刘济、王士真、张茂昭争私隙，迭相表请加罪。
现代文：秋季，八月，刘济、王士真、张茂昭因私怨而发生争执，交替上表请求朝廷惩治对方。
English: In the autumn, in August, Liu Ji, Wang Shizhen, and Zhang Maozhao had a dispute due to personal grudge, and alternately requested the court to punish each other.

古文：戊寅，以给事中房式为幽州、成德、义武宣慰使，和解之。
现代文：戊寅，宪宗任命给事中房式为幽州、成德、义武宣慰使，使他们和解。
English: In response, Emperor Gensong appointed Fong Shih to be the messenger of consolation to Yuzhou, Chengde, and Yiwu in order to reconcile them.

古文：九月，乙酉，密王绸薨。
现代文：九月，乙酉，密王李绸去世。
English: In September, Acetylene, Mi Wang Li Silk passed away.

古文：夏、蜀既平，籓镇惕息，多求入朝。
现代文：夏州杨惠琳、蜀中刘辟被平定后，藩镇极为恐惧，多数请求入京朝见。
English: After Xiazhou Yang Huilin and Shu Zhong Liu Bi were subdued, the towns were extremely afraid, and most of them requested to see the emperor in Beijing.

古文：镇海节度使李锜亦不自安，求入朝，上许之。遣中使至京口慰抚，且劳其将士。
现代文：镇海节度使李也感到不安，请求入京朝见，宪宗答应了他的请求，派遣中使前往京口抚慰他，而且慰劳他部下的将士们。
English: The Zhenhai Festival also made Li feel uneasy, and he requested to go to Beijing to see the imperial court. Kenzong agreed to his request and sent an envoy to Beijing to comfort him and his subordinates.

古文：锜虽署判官王澹为留后，实无行意，屡迁行期，澹与敕使数劝谕之。
现代文：李虽然委任判官王澹暂且担任留后，但实际并没有离开的打算，好几次拖延了启程的日期。
English: Although Li appointed Magistrate Wang Qi to stay on temporarily, he did not actually plan to leave and delayed his departure several times.

古文：锜不悦，上表称疾，请至岁暮入朝。
现代文：王澹与宪宗派来的敕使屡次劝告他，李心中不快，上表声称身染疾病，请求延缓到年底再入京朝见。
English: Wang Hui and the envoys sent by the Constitutionalist sect repeatedly advised him that Li was not happy, the above table claimed to be infected with a disease, and requested a delay until the end of the year before entering Beijing to see the imperial court.

古文：上以问宰相，武元衡曰： 陛下初即政，锜求朝得朝，求止得止，可否在锜，将何以令四海！ 
现代文：宪宗就此事征询宰相的意见，武元衡说： 陛下刚刚执掌朝政大权，李要求朝见就得以朝见，要求中止朝见就得以中止朝见，由李决定去就，将来怎么就够对全国发号施令呢！ 
English: Gensong asked the opinion of the prime minister on this matter, and Wu Yuanheng said: His Majesty has just taken over the supreme political power of the dynasty, Li asked to see the court and was allowed to see the court, asked to stop seeing the court and was allowed to stop seeing the court, Li decided to go, how will it be enough to give orders to the whole country in the future!

古文：上以为然，下诏征之。
现代文：宪宗认为有理，便颁发诏书征召他前来。
English: Kenzong thought it was reasonable and issued an imperial edict summoning him to come.

古文：锜诈穷，遂谋反。
现代文：李计谋已穷，于是便策划造反。
English: Lee's strategy was exhausted, so he plotted a rebellion.

古文：王澹既掌留务，于军府颇有制置，锜益不平，密谕亲兵使杀之。
现代文：王澹执掌留后事务后，对军府的建制颇有些改革，李愈发愤郁不满，便暗中谕示亲兵杀掉王澹。
English: After Wang Hui took charge of the post-retention affairs, there were some reforms to the military establishment. Li became more and more angry and dissatisfied, and he secretly ordered his soldiers to kill Wang Hui.

古文：会颁冬服，锜严兵坐幄中，澹与敕使入谒，有军士数百噪于庭曰： 王澹何人，擅主军务！ 
现代文：适逢发放冬季的服装，李全副武装地坐在帐幕中间，正当王澹与宪宗敕使进帐谒见时，有数百名将士在庭院中喧噪着说： 王澹是什么人，竟敢擅自掌管军中事务！ 
English: At the time of distributing winter clothing, Li was sitting in the middle of the tent, fully armed. Just as Wang Hui met with the envoy of Emperor Xianzong, hundreds of soldiers were noisily chanting in the courtyard: "Who is Wang Hui, how dare he arbitrarily control the affairs of the army!"

古文：曳下，脔食之；大将赵琦出慰止，又脔食之；注刃于敕使之颈，诟詈，将杀之。锜阳惊，起救之。
现代文：于是，将士们将他拖了出来，割碎了他的身体吃掉。大将赵琦出来劝慰阻止将士们，大家又将他割碎了吃掉。将士们用兵器直指宪宗敕使的脖颈痛骂，准备将他杀掉，李佯装大惊，将他救了下来。
English: As a result, the soldiers dragged him out, cut up his body and ate it. General Zhao Wei came out to dissuade the soldiers, and they cut him up and ate him. The soldiers used weapons to point at the neck of the Kenzong envoy and scolded him, preparing to kill him, but Li Wei feigned shock and saved him.

古文：冬，十月，己未，诏征锜为左仆射，以御史大夫李元素为镇海节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，己未，宪宗颁诏征调李出任左仆射，任命御史大夫李元素为镇海节度使。
English: In the winter, in October, Jiwei, the Emperor issued an edict to transfer Li to the position of Zuofei, and appointed the Imperial Historian Li Ying as the Zhenhai Festival envoy.

古文：庚申，锜表言军变，杀留后、大将。
现代文：庚申，李上表宣称军队发生变故，杀害了留后与大将。
English: Goshun and Li Shangbai claimed that there was a mutiny in the army and killed Remao and the general.

古文：先是，锜选腹心五人为所部五州镇将，姚志安处苏州，李深处常州，赵惟忠处湖州，丘自昌处杭州，高肃处睦州，各有兵数千，伺察刺史动静。
现代文：在此之前，李选拔出五个亲信，担任他所管辖的五个州的镇守将领，姚志安在苏州，李深在常州，赵惟忠在湖州，丘自昌在杭州，高肃在睦州，各自拥有兵马数千人，伺察刺史的举动。
English: Prior to this, Li had selected five close confidants to serve as town guard generals in the five states under his jurisdiction: Yao Zhian in Suzhou, Li Sheng in Changzhou, Zhao Weizhong in Huzhou, Qiu Zichang in Hangzhou, and Gaoshu in Mutsu. Each of them had thousands of soldiers and horses to investigate the move of stabbing history.

古文：至是，锜各使杀其刺史，遣牙将庚伯良将兵三千治石头城。
现代文：至此，李让他们分别杀掉本州刺史，又派遣牙将庾伯良率领兵马三千人修整石头城。
English: At this point, Li had them kill Honshu Shishi separately, and dispatched Fang general Zibo Liang to lead three thousand soldiers and horses to repair the stone city.

古文：常州刺史颜防用客李云计，矫制称招讨副使，斩李深，传檄苏、杭、湖、睦。请同进讨。
现代文：常州刺史颜防采用宾客李云的计策，假托制书已有任命，自称招讨副使，斩杀李深，向苏州、杭州、湖州、睦州传送檄文，请各州共同进军讨伐李。
English: Changzhou stabbing history Yanfen used the strategy of the guest Li Yun, the fake petition has been appointed, claiming to recruit the deputy envoy, killed Li Shen, transmitted the letter to Suzhou, Hangzhou, Huzhou, and Mutsu, and invited the states to march together to fight against Li.

古文：湖州刺史辛秘潜募乡闾子弟数百，夜袭赵惟忠营，斩之。
现代文：湖州刺史辛秘暗中募集乡里子弟数百人，在夜间袭击赵惟忠的营地，并将赵惟忠斩杀。
English: Huzhou assassin Xin secretly recruited hundreds of children from the countryside to attack Zhao Weizhong's camp at night and behead him.

古文：苏州刺史李素为姚志安所败，生致于锜，具桎梏钉于船舷，未及京口，会锜败，得免。
现代文：苏州刺史李素被姚志安击败，姚志安将李素交送李，给李素带上脚镣手铐，再将脚镣手铐钉死在般舷上，但是在没有到达京口以前，赶上李失败，李素得以幸免。
English: The Suzhou assassin Li Su was defeated by Yao Zhi'an. Yao Zhi'an handed Li Su over to Li, gave Li Su a shackle bracelet, and then nailed the shackle bracelet to the gunwale, but before reaching Beijing, he failed to catch up with Li, and Li Su was spared.

古文：乙丑，制削李锜官爵及属籍。以淮南节度使王锷统诸道兵为招讨处置使，征宣武、义宁、武昌兵并淮南、宣歙兵俱出宣州，江西兵出信州，浙东兵出杭州，以讨之。
现代文：乙丑，宪宗颁布制书，命令革除李的官职爵位，并在宗室名册中除名，命令淮南节度使王锷统领各道兵马，出任招讨处置使；征调宣武、义宁、武昌兵马，连同淮南、宣歙兵马一起由宣州进军，江西兵马由信州进军，浙东兵马由杭州进军，以便讨伐李。
English: In Yixiu, Emperor Xianzong promulgated a document ordering the removal of Li's official rank and title and the removal of his name from the family register, and ordered the Huainan Festival to make Wang Qian lead the soldiers and horses of each province and serve as the envoy to invite and dispose of; enlist the soldiers and horses of Xuanwu, Yining, and Wuchang, together with the soldiers and horses of Huainan and Xuanwu, to march from Xuanzhou, the soldiers and horses of Jiangxi to march from Xinshou, and the soldiers and horses of East Zhejiang to march from Hangzhou, in order to fight against Li.

古文：高崇文在蜀期年，一旦谓监军曰： 崇文，河朔一卒，幸有功。
现代文：高崇文任职蜀中满了一年，有一天他对监军说： 我高崇文，河朔地带的一名小卒，幸而立下战功，才达到现在这个职位。
English: Gao Chongwen served in Shu Middle School for a year, and one day he said to the supervisors: I Gao Chongwen, a small soldier in the Hexuo area, was fortunate enough to win the war and achieve this position.

古文：致位至此。西川乃宰相回翔之地，崇文叨居日久，岂敢自安！ 
现代文：西川是宰相盘旋飞翔的地方，我含愧居于此地的时间已经很长了，怎敢心安理得地呆下去呢！ 
English: Nishikawa is a place where prime ministers hover and fly. I have lived in this place for a long time, how dare I stay here with peace of mind!

古文：屡上表称 蜀中安逸，无所陈力，愿效死边陲。 
现代文：他屡次上表声称： 蜀中安适闲逸，没有我施展自己能力的地方，希望让我前往边疆，尽死效力。 
English: He has repeatedly stated on the table: Shu Zhong is comfortable and leisurely, there is no place for me to exert my abilities, I hope to let me go to the frontier and do my best.

古文：上择可以代崇文者而难其人。
现代文：宪宗选择能够替代高崇文的人，但难以找到合适的人选。
English: Kenzong chose someone who could replace Gao Chongwen, but it was difficult to find a suitable candidate.

古文：丁卯，以门下侍郎、同平章事武元衡同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：丁卯，宪宗命令门下侍郎、同平章事武元衡同平章事，充任西川节度使。
English: At the same time, Kenso ordered his servant, Tonghei Shoji Takemoto and Tonghei Shoji, to serve as Saikawa Setsudoshi.

古文：李锜以宣州富饶，欲先取之，遣兵马使张子良、李奉仙、田少卿将兵三千袭之。
现代文：李锜认为宣州富庶丰饶，准备首先夺取此地，便派遣兵马使张子良、李奉仙和田少卿带领兵马三千人袭击宣州。
English: Li Gan thought that Xuanzhou was rich and plentiful, and he planned to seize this place first, so he sent Zhang Ziliang, Li Fengxian, and Wada Shaoqing, who led 3,000 soldiers and horses to attack Xuanzhou.

古文：三人知锜必败，与牙将裴行立同谋讨之。
现代文：三人知道李肯定要失败，便与牙将裴行共同策划讨伐李。
English: The three of them knew that Li would definitely fail, so they and the commander Pei Xing jointly planned to fight against Li.

古文：行立，锜之甥也，故悉知锜之密谋。
现代文：裴行立是李的外甥，所以他完全了解李的机密策谋。
English: Pei Xingli is Li's nephew, so he is fully aware of Li's secret plot.

古文：三将营于城外，将发，召士卒谕之曰： 仆射反逆，官军四集，常、湖二将继死，其势已蹙。
现代文：三位将领在镇海军城外扎营，在准备出发时，把将士们召集起来，开导他们说； 李仆射谋反叛逆，官军已经从各地汇集起来，常州和湖州的李深与赵惟忠二位将领接连败死，李的形势已经窘迫。
English: The three generals camped outside the naval town of the town, and when they were preparing to leave, they called the soldiers together and enlightened them, saying that Li Min had plotted a rebellion, the official army had been gathered from all over the country, and the two generals of Changzhou and Huzhou, Li Sheng and Zhao Weizhong, had been defeated and killed one after another. Li's situation was already in dire straits.

古文：今乃欲使吾辈远取宣城，吾辈何为随之族灭！
现代文：现在，李准备让我们这些人经长途攻取宣州，我们这些人为什么要跟着他而使自己整个家族遭受诛灭呢！
English: Now, Li is going to let us conquer Xuanzhou over a long distance, why should we follow him and let our whole family be annihilated!

古文：岂若去逆效顺，转祸为福乎！ 
现代文：何不脱离李，效力朝廷，将祸殃转变为福缘呢！ 
English: Why not break away from Li, serve the imperial court, and turn the disaster into a blessing!

古文：众悦，许诺，即夜，还趋城。
现代文：大家都很高兴，便应承下来了。
English: Everyone was happy, so we had to take it on.

古文：行立举火鼓噪，应之于内，引兵趋牙门。
现代文：就在当天夜晚，三位将领回军直奔镇海军城。裴行立点着火，擂鼓呐喊，在镇海军城内响应，领兵真奔军府牙门。
English: In the evening of the same day, the three generals led the returnees straight to the naval city of the town. Pei Xing lit a fire, beat a drum and shouted, responded in the naval city of the town, and led the soldiers to the gate of the military government.

古文：锜闻子良等举兵，怒，闻行立应之，抚膺曰： 吾何望矣！ 
现代文：李得知张子良等人起兵，大怒，得知裴行立接应他们后，捶着自己胸口说： 我还有什么希望呢！ 
English: When Li learned that Zhang Ziliang and others had raised an army, he was furious. When he learned that Pei Xingli had responded to them, he clutched his chest and said, "What hope do I have?

古文：跣走，匿楼下。
现代文：他光着脚逃走，躲藏在一座楼下。
English: He fled barefoot and hid under a building.

古文：亲将李钧引挽强三百趋山亭，欲战，行立伏兵邀斩之。
现代文：李的亲信将领李钧率领能挽强弓的亲兵三百人直奔山亭，准备交战，裴行立埋伏的兵马截击并斩杀了他。
English: Li's close confidant, the general Li Qian, led 300 soldiers who could hold a strong bow straight to the mountain pavilion, ready to fight. Pei Xingli's ambushed soldiers and horses intercepted and killed him.

古文：锜举家皆哭，左右执锜，裹之以幕，缒于城下，械送京师。
现代文：李全家人都哭泣，李的随从们捉住李，用帐幕裹着他，用绳索将他缒到城下，给他带上枷锁，送往京城。
English: Li's whole family was crying. Li's attendants caught Li, wrapped him in a tent curtain, roped him to the foot of the castle, put him in chains, and sent him to the capital.

古文：挽强、蕃落争自杀，尸相枕藉。
现代文：李的能挽强弓的亲兵和由胡人、奚人等组成的蕃兵纷纷自杀，尸体纵横交陈。
English: Li's own soldiers, who were able to bend their bows, and the soldiers of the Xiongnu army, made up of the Hu people and the Yao people, committed suicide one after another, and their bodies were scattered all over the countryside.

古文：癸酉，本军以闻。
现代文：癸酉，镇海军将本军发生的事情上奏朝廷闻知。
English: Suddenly, the town navy reported what had happened to the army to the imperial court.

古文：乙亥，群臣贺于紫宸殿。上愀然曰： 朕之不德，致宇内数有干纪者，朕之愧也，何贺之为！ 
现代文：乙亥，群臣在紫宸殿向宪宗祝贺，宪宗愁容满面地说： 由于朕不施恩德，致使国内屡次出现违犯法纪的人，朕渐愧得很啊，有什么值得祝贺的呢！ 
English: In the second year of the Heian period, a group of courtiers congratulated Kenso in Shishinden, and Kenso said with a sorrowful face: Since I do not show kindness, I have repeatedly caused people who violate the law to appear in the country, I am gradually ashamed, what is worth congratulating?

古文：宰相议诛锜大功以上亲，兵部郎中蒋乂曰：锜大功亲，皆淮安靖王之后也。
现代文：宰相商议诛杀李叔伯兄弟姊妹以上的亲属，兵部郎中蒋义说： 李叔伯兄弟姊妹以上的亲属都是淮安靖王李神通的后裔。
English: The prime minister discussed the killing of relatives older than Li Shuntong's brothers and sisters, and Jiang Yi, the son of the Minister of Military Affairs, said: The relatives older than Li Shuntong's brothers and sisters are all descendants of Huai'an Jing Wang Li Shentong.

古文：淮安有佐命之功，陪陵、享庙，岂可以末孙为恶而累之乎！ 
现代文：淮安靖王有辅佐太祖、太宗、创建国家的功勋，陪葬于献陵，配享于高祖祠庙，难道能够因为末代子孙作恶，便受到连累吗！ 
English: Huai'an Jing Wang assisted the Great Ancestor, the Great Patriarch, and the founder of the country, and was buried with him in the mausoleum, and enjoyed the ancestral temple of the Great Ancestor. Can he be tied up because of the evil deeds of the last generation of his descendants?

古文：又欲诛其兄弟，乂曰： 锜兄弟，故都统国贞之子也，国贞死王事，岂可使之不祀乎！ 
现代文：宰相们又打算诛杀李的兄弟，蒋义说： 李的兄弟，是已故都统李国贞的儿子，李国贞为朝廷献身，难道能够让他失去后人的祭祀吗！ 
English: The chancellors also planned to kill Li's brother. Jiang Yi said, "Li's brother is the son of the late duke Li Guozhen. Li Guozhen dedicated his life to the imperial court. Can he be deprived of the sacrifices of his descendants?"

古文：宰相以为然。
现代文：宰相们认为所言有理。
English: The prime ministers agreed that this was reasonable.

古文：辛巳，锜从父弟宋州刺史銛等皆贬官流放。
现代文：辛巳，李的叔伯弟弟宋州刺史李等人都被贬官流放。
English: Soon after, Li's uncle and younger brother, Songzhou Jishi Li, and others were demoted and exiled.

古文：十一月，甲申朔，锜至长安，上御兴安门，面诘之。
现代文：十一月，甲申朔，李被押送到长安，宪宗亲临兴安门，当面责问他。
English: In November, when Li was escorted to Chang'an by Jia Shengshuo, Xianzong personally came to Xing'an Gate and scolded him in person.

古文：对曰： 臣初不反，张子良等教臣耳。 
现代文：李回答说： 我起先并没有造反，是张子良等人教我这样做的。 
English: Li replied: I did not rebel at first, but Zhang Ziliang and others taught me to do so.

古文：上曰： 卿为元帅，子良等谋反，何不斩之，然后入朝！ 
现代文：宪宗说： 你身为主帅，既然张子良等人策划造反，你为什么不将他们杀了，然后再入京朝见？ 
English: Gensong said: You are the head coach, since Zhang Ziliang and others are planning to rebel, why don't you kill them and then go to Beijing to see the emperor?

古文：锜无以对。乃并其子师回腰斩之。
现代文：李无法回答了，于是将他连同他的儿子李师回一并腰斩处死。
English: Li could not answer, so he and his son, Li Shiguang, were both beheaded.

古文：有司请毁锜祖考冢庙，中丞卢坦上言： 李锜父子受诛，罪已塞矣。
现代文：有关部门请求拆除李祖先的坟墓和家庙，御史中丞卢坦进言说： 李父子遭受诛戮，已经足以抵罪。
English: The relevant departments requested the demolition of the tomb and family temple of Li's ancestors, and Grand Historian Lu Tan said: The fact that Li and his son were beaten is already enough to incriminate them.

古文：昔汉诛霍禹，不罪霍光；先朝诛房遗爱不及房玄龄。
现代文：过去汉宣帝诛杀霍禹，并不处罚霍光；本朝前代诛杀房遗爱，并不牵连房玄龄。
English: In the past, Emperor Han Xuan killed Huo Yu, but did not punish Huo Guang; the previous generation of this dynasty killed Fang Xuanling, but did not implicate Fang Xuanling.

古文：《康诰》曰： 父子兄弟，罪不相及。 
现代文：《康诰》说： 在父子兄弟之间，无论谁触犯刑罚，都不能互相牵连。 
English: "Confucius" said: Between father and son, no matter who has violated the punishment, they cannot be involved with each other.

古文：以锜为不善而罪及五代祖乎？ 
现代文：何况因李作恶，而要牵连五代祖先一起治罪呢！ 
English: What's more, because of Li's evil deeds, five generations of ancestors will be implicated and punished together!

古文：乃不毁。
现代文：于是作罢。
English: So I gave up.

古文：有司籍锜家财输京师。翰林学士裴垍、李绛上言，以为： 李锜僭侈，割剥六州之人以富其家，或枉杀其身而取其财。
现代文：有关部门没收李家财，准备运到京城，翰林学士裴与李绛进言认为： 李过度奢侈，残酷掠夺润、睦、常、苏、湖、杭六州百姓，使自己家富有，甚至滥杀无辜，从中夺取资财。
English: The relevant departments confiscated the Li family's wealth and prepared to transport it to Beijing. Hanlin Baibai and Li Xunjin said that: Li was excessively extravagant and cruelly plundered the people of Run, Mutsu, Chang, Su, Hubei and Hangzhou to make his family rich, and even killed innocents indiscriminately to seize capital and wealth.

古文：陛下闵百姓无告，故讨而诛之，今辇金帛以输上京，恐远近失望。
现代文：陛下怜悯百姓无处说理，所以征讨并诛杀了他，现在要将没收的金银丝帛装载成车，转运京城，恐怕会使各地的人们感到失望。
English: His Majesty's compassion for the people cannot be reasoned with, so he had him hunted down and killed. Now he wants to load the confiscated gold and silver ingots into cars and transport them to the capital. I'm afraid this will disappoint people everywhere.

古文：愿以逆人资财赐浙西百姓，代今年租赋。 
现代文：希望将李的物资钱财颁赐给浙西的百姓，用以代替他们今年应交纳的赋税。 
English: It is hoped that Li's material wealth will be given to the people of western Zhejiang in lieu of the taxes they have to pay this year.

古文：上嘉叹久之，即从其言。
现代文：宪宗嘉许赞叹良久，随即听从了他的建议。
English: Kenzong praised and admired him for a long time, and then heeded his advice.

古文：昭义节度使卢从史，内与王士真、刘济潜通，而外献策请图山东，擅引兵东出。
现代文：昭义节度使卢从史，在内与王士真、刘济暗中交往，在外却向朝廷进献计策，请求谋取太行山以东的魏博、恒冀等藩镇，擅自率领兵马东进。
English: The Shouyi Festival caused Lu Congshi to secretly interact with Wang Shizhen and Liu Jizhen on the inside, but on the outside, he presented a strategy to the imperial court, requesting to seek out Weibo, Hengji and other towns east of Taihang Mountain, and led the soldiers eastward without authorization.

古文：上召令还上党，从史托言就食邢、洺，不时奉诏。久之，乃还。
现代文：宪宗传召并命令他返还昭义，他却托称移兵前往邢州与州，就地获取给养，不肯按时奉行诏书的指令，过了好久，才返回昭义。
English: Kenzong summoned him and ordered him to return to Shoyi, but he pretended to move troops to Bozhou and Bozhou to obtain supplies on the spot, and refused to follow the instructions of the edict on time. It took a long time before he returned to Shoyi.

古文：他日，上召李绛对于浴堂，语之曰： 事有极异者，朕比不欲言之。
现代文：后来，宪宗在浴堂殿传召李绛前来应对谘询，对李绛谈道： 有件极为异常的事情，朕完全不愿意讲到它。
English: Later, in the bathhouse hall, Gensong summoned Li Xi to come and respond to the consultation, and said to Li Xi: There is something extremely unusual, I absolutely do not want to talk about it.

古文：朕与郑絪议敕从史归上党，续征入朝。
现代文：朕与郑商议敕令卢从史返回上党，接着便征召他入京朝见。
English: I discussed with Zheng about ordering Lu to return from history to the upper party, and then summoned him to Beijing to meet with the imperial court.

古文：絪乃泄之于从史，使称上党乏粮，就食山东。
现代文：郑却将此事泄露给卢从史，让他声称上党缺乏粮食，需要移兵崤山以东，就地取得粮食给养。
English: Zheng, however, leaked the matter to Lu Congshi, letting him claim that the upper party was short of grain and needed to move troops east of Lushan to obtain grain supplies locally.

古文：为人臣负朕乃尔，将何以处之？ 
现代文：作为人臣，辜负朕达到如此程度，将应当怎么处治他呢？ 
English: As a vassal, if he has betrayed me to such an extent, how should he be dealt with?

古文：对曰： 审如此，灭族有馀矣！
现代文：李绛回答说： 假如确实是这样，诛戮整个家族的罪罚还有余。
English: Li Wei replied: If this is indeed the case, the punishment for killing an entire family is more than enough.

古文：然絪、从史必不自言，陛下谁从得之？ 
现代文：然而，郑与卢从史肯定不会自己说出去，陛下是从谁那里得到消息的呢？ 
English: However, Zheng and Lu Congshi will certainly not speak out on their own. Who did His Majesty get the news from?

古文：上曰： 吉甫密奏。 
现代文：宪宗说： 是李吉甫秘密奏报的。 
English: Kenzong said: It was Li Jifu who made the secret report.

古文：绛曰： 臣窃闻搢绅之论，称絪为佳士，恐必不然。
现代文：李绛说： 我私下里听到士大夫的评论，称许郑是一位德才兼优的人，恐怕他不会这样做的。
English: Li Wei said: I have heard the doctor's comments in private, saying that Xu Zheng is a virtuous and excellent person, I am afraid he will not do so.

古文：或者同列欲专朝政，疾宠忌前，愿陛下更熟察之，勿使人谓陛下信谗也！ 
现代文：或许是他的同事中有人打算独揽朝廷大政，嫉妨郑得到宠信，居己之先吧，希望陛下再深入验察此事，不要让人说陛下是在听信谗言啊！ 
English: It may be that some of his colleagues are planning to monopolize the power of the imperial court. If Zheng wants to be favored, let him be ahead of them. I hope that His Majesty will further examine this matter. Don't let anyone say that His Majesty is listening to gossip!

古文：上良久曰： 诚然，絪必不至此。
现代文：宪宗停了许久才说： 的确如此，郑肯定不至于干出这种事情。
English: Xianzong paused for a long time before saying, "It's true, Zheng definitely wouldn't do such a thing."

古文：非卿言，朕几误处分。 
现代文：如果不是你这一席话，朕几乎要做出错误的决定来了。 
English: If it wasn't for you, I almost made the wrong decision.

古文：上又尝从容问绛曰： 谏官多谤讪朝政，皆无事实，朕欲谪其尤者一二人以儆其馀，何如？ 
现代文：宪宗还曾从容询问李绛说： 谏官往往毁谤朝廷政务，全然没有事实依据，朕打算将他们中间一两个突出人物处以贬谪，以便使其余的人有所警惕，你认为怎么样呢？ 
English: Gensong also calmly asked Li Qiye, "Eunuchs often slander the government affairs of the imperial court, without any factual basis. I intend to punish one or two prominent figures among them, in order to alert the rest of them. What do you think?"

古文：对曰： 此殆非陛下之意，必有邪臣欲壅蔽陛下之聪明者。
现代文：李绛回答说： 这大概不是陛下的本意，肯定有邪恶臣下蒙蔽陛下视听的事情发生。
English: Li Yan replied: This is probably not His Majesty's intention. There must be an evil vassal who has blinded His Majesty's sight and hearing.

古文：人臣死生，系人主喜怒，敢发口谏者有几！
现代文：臣下的死与生，都是与主上的喜与怒相联系着的，有勇气开口进谏的能有几人呢！
English: The death and life of his subjects are all connected with the Lord's joy and anger. How many people have the courage to speak out?

古文：就有谏者皆昼度夜思，朝删暮减，比得上达，什无二三。
现代文：即使有人进谏，也都是经过日日夜夜的思量，朝朝暮暮的删减，及至谏言得以送交到上面来时，所剩已经没有十分之二三了。
English: Even if someone does get in, it is only after day and night thinking, morning and evening deleting, and by the time the criticism can be sent to the top, there are only two or three tenths left.

古文：故人主孜孜求谏，犹惧不至，况罪之乎！
现代文：所以，主上勤勉不怠地寻求规谏，还怕无人进谏，何况要对谏官处以罪罚呢！
English: Therefore, the Lord diligently sought for a regulation, fearing that no one would enter the priesthood, let alone punish the eunuchs!

古文：如此，杜天下之口，非社稷之福也。 
现代文：倘若如此，就会让天下之人闭口不言，这可不是国家之福啊。 
English: If that were the case, everyone in the world would be silenced, and that would not be a blessing for the country.

古文：上善其言而止。
现代文：宪宗赞赏他的进言，于是不再贬谪谏官。
English: Emperor Cheng thought that what she said made a lot of sense, so he gave up.

古文：群臣请上尊号曰睿圣文武皇帝，丙申，许之。
现代文：群臣请求向宪宗进献尊号，称作睿圣文武皇帝。丙申，宪宗应允了这一请求。
English: The group of courtiers requested to present the title of honor to Emperor Kenzong, known as Emperor Rui Shengwenwu. According to him, Emperor Kenzong agreed to this request.

古文：盩厔尉、集贤校理白居易作乐府及诗百馀篇，规讽时事，流闻禁中。
现代文：县尉、集贤校理白居易写作乐府与诗歌一百多篇，婉言规谏时事，流传到宫廷之中。
English: Li Bai Juyi, a county magistrate and scholar, wrote more than a hundred pieces of music and poetry, and his wise sayings on current affairs were passed down to the imperial court.

古文：上风而悦之，召入翰林为学士。
现代文：宪宗看了白居易的乐府与诗歌后，很是喜爱，便传召白居易进入翰林院，担任翰林学士。
English: After watching Bai Juyi's music and poetry performances, Gensong loved him very much and summoned him to enter Hanlin Academy to serve as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：十二月，丙辰，上谓宰相曰： 太宗以神圣之资，群臣进谏者犹往复数四，况朕寡昧，自今事有违，卿当十论，无但一二而已。
现代文：十二月，丙辰，宪宗告诉宰相说： 凭着太宗那样的圣明资质，群臣进献的谏言尚且需要往返三四次哩，何况朕是愚昧寡闻的呢！从今以后，如果有什么不对的事情，你们应当论说十次，而不是仅仅论说一两次就算了事。 
English: In December of the same year, Emperor Xianzong told the prime minister: "With the saintly qualifications of Emperor Taizong, it takes three or four times to go back and forth to listen to the sermons offered by the ministers. What's more, I'm too stupid to listen! From now on, if there's something wrong, you should discuss it ten times, not just once or twice.

古文：丙寅，以高崇文同平章事，充邠宁节度、京西诸军都统。
现代文：丙寅，宪宗任命高崇文同平章事，充任宁节度使、京西诸军都统。
English: Hsin-Yin and Kenzong appointed Gao Chongwen as Tongping Zhengji, and appointed him as the Ning Festival envoy to unify the armies of Beijing and the West.

古文：山南东道节度使于頔惮上英威，为子季友求尚主。上以皇女普宁公主妻之。
现代文：山南东道节度使于岂惮宪宗的英明威严，为儿子于季友请求娶公主为妻，宪宗便将皇女普宁公主嫁给了他。
English: Shannan hosted the festival, and thanks to the wisdom and majesty of Emperor Xuanzong, Emperor Xuanzong asked his son Yu Jiyu to marry the princess, and Emperor Xuanzong married the princess Puning to him.

古文：翰林学士李谏曰： 頔，虏族，季友，庶孽，不足以辱帝女，宜更择高门美才。 
现代文：翰林学士李绛进谏说： 于出身于虏族，于季友是于的偏房所生，配不上帝室的女儿，应当为公主另选出于名门、才具秀美的人才。 
English: The scholar of Hanlin, Li Yujing, said: "Since Yu was born in the Krupo tribe, and Yu Ji You was born in the partial house of Yu, and was not a worthy daughter of a god's wife, the princess should choose another talented person from a prestigious family with talent and beauty.

古文：上曰： 此非卿所知。 
现代文：宪宗说： 你不知道这里面的原因。 
English: Kenzong said, "You don't know the reason behind this.

古文：己卯，公主适季友，恩礼甚盛。頔出望外，大喜。
现代文：已卯，普宁公主下嫁给于季友，宪宗对于家的礼遇很是隆盛，于出于预料之外，感到非常高兴。
English: Now that Princess Puning has married Yu Jiyu, Emperor Gensong has been very generous in his courtesies to the family, and unexpectedly, he is very happy.

古文：顷之，上使人讽之入朝谢恩，頔遂奉诏。
现代文：不久，宪宗让人婉言规劝于前往朝廷感谢皇帝的恩典，于便接受了诏命。
English: Soon after, Kenzong had someone gently persuade him to go to the imperial court to thank the emperor for his grace, and he accepted the imperial edict.

古文：是岁，李吉甫撰《元和国计簿》上之，总计天下方镇四十八，州府二百九十五，县千四百五十三。
现代文：这一年，李吉甫撰写成《元和国计簿》，进献给朝廷。据该书记载，总计全国有方镇四十八个，有州府二百九十五个，有县一千四百五十三个。
English: In the same year, Li Jifu compiled the "Yuan and National Accounts Book" and presented it to the imperial court. According to the book, there were a total of 48 Fangzhen, 295 prefectures and 1,453 counties in the country.

古文：其凤翔、鄜坊、邠宁、振武、泾原、银夏、灵盐、河东、易定、魏博、镇冀、范阳、沧景、淮西、淄青等十五道七十一州不申户口外，每岁赋税倚办止于浙江东、西、宣歙、淮南、江西、鄂岳、福建、湖南八道四十九州，一百四十四万户，比天宝税户四分减三。
现代文：其中凤翔、坊、宁、振武、泾原、银夏、灵盐、河东、易定、魏博、镇冀、范阳、沧景、淮西、淄青等十五个道七十一个州不向朝廷申报户口外，每年的赋税征收只靠着浙江东西、宣歙、淮南、江西、鄂岳、福建、湖南等八个道四十九个州，在编人口共一百四十四万户，比天宝年间纳税人户减少了四分之三。
English: Among them, Fengxiang, Fang, Ning, Zhenwu, Yuyuan, Yinxia, Lingyan, Hedong, Yiding, Weibo, Zhenhe, Fanyang, Cangjing, Huaxi, and Jiaqing and other 15 provinces and 71 prefectures did not declare their household registration to the imperial court, and the annual tax collection relied only on eight provinces and 49 prefectures such as East and West Zhejiang, Xuancheng, Huainan, Jiangxi, Yue, Fujian, and Hunan, with a total registered population of 1.44 million households, which was three-quarters less than the taxpayer households in the Tianbao period.

古文：天下兵仰给县官者八十三万馀人，比天宝三分增一，大率二户资一兵。
现代文：全国依赖国库供给的军队有八十三万多人，比天宝年间增加了三分之一，大约每两户人家供养一个士兵。
English: Nationwide, there are more than 830,000 people in the military who depend on the state treasury for supplies, an increase of one-third over the Tianbao years, and approximately one soldier is supported by every two households.

古文：元和三年戊子，公元八零八年
现代文：若有旱涝灾害损坏收成，或者有临时的征发调用，还不能包括在这个数目以内。三年
English: If there is drought or flood damage to the harvest, or there is a temporary call-up, it cannot be included in this number.

古文：春，正月，癸巳，群臣上尊号曰睿圣文武皇帝；赦天下。 自今长吏诣阙，无得进奉。 
现代文：春季，正月，癸巳，群臣向宪宗进献尊号，称作睿圣文武皇帝。宪宗大赦天下罪囚，规定： 从今以后，各地长官前往朝廷，不得进献贡物。 
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year, on the day of the new moon, a group of courtiers presented the title of honor to Emperor Xianzong, known as Emperor Rui Shengwenwu. Emperor Xianzong pardoned the prisoners of the world, stipulating: From now on, the governors of various regions should not go to the imperial court to offer tribute.

古文：知枢密刘光琦奏分遣中使赍赦诣诸道，意欲分其馈遗，翰林学士裴垍、李绛奏 敕使所至烦扰，不若但附急递。 
现代文：知枢密刘光琦奏请分别派遣各使者携带赦书前往各道，想要分别占有各地赠送的财物。翰林学士裴、李绛奏称： 朝廷派出的使者每到一处，就要烦劳搅扰一处，不如只将赦书交付驿站火速传递。 
English: Liu Guangyao, a well-known privy councilor, suggested that each envoy should be sent separately to each province to carry the letter of pardon, and that they should separately take possession of the property donated by each province. Hanlin Bae, a scholar, and Li Yingyao said: Every time an envoy sent by the imperial court comes to a place, it is troublesome to disturb a place. It is better to just deliver the letter of pardon to the post office and quickly pass it on.

古文：上从之。
现代文：宪宗听从了二人的建议。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：光琦称旧例，上曰： 例是则从之，苟为非是，奈何不改！ 
现代文：刘光琦援引惯例反对，宪宗却说： 如果惯例是正确的，自然要依从惯例，如果惯例是不正确的，为什么不纠正呢！ 
English: Liu Guangyao objected, citing the practice, but Xianzong said: If the practice is correct, it is natural to follow the practice, if the practice is incorrect, why not correct it!

古文：临泾镇将郝泚以临泾地险要，水草美，吐蕃将入寇，必屯其地，言于泾原节度使段祐，奏而城之，自是泾原获安。
现代文：临泾镇将郝认为临泾地势险要，水草肥美，如果吐蕃准备前来侵犯，肯定要在此地驻扎，便向泾原节度使段进言，经奏请后修筑了临泾城。从此，泾原获得了安宁。
English: The mayor of Linyi Town thought that Linyi's terrain was precarious and the water and grass were fertile. If the Tuyi prepared to invade, they would definitely have to station themselves here. So, he made a suggestion to the governor of Yingyuan, and after being asked, built Linyi City. From then on, Yingyuan gained tranquility.

古文：二月，戊寅，咸安大长公主薨于回鹘。
现代文：二月，戊寅，咸安大长公主在回鹘去世。
English: In February, Wu Yin, the eldest princess of Haman, passed away in Huizhou.

古文：三月，回鹘腾里可汗卒。
现代文：三月，回鹘腾里可汗去世。
English: In March, Hui Tengli Zong Khan passed away.

古文：癸巳，郇王总薨。
现代文：癸巳，郇王李总去世。
English: Soon after, King Li Zong passed away.

古文：辛亥，御史中丞卢坦奏弹前山南西道节度使柳晟，前浙东观察使阎济美违赦进奉。
现代文：辛亥，御史中丞卢坦上奏揭发前任山南西道节度使柳晟和前任浙东观察使阎济美违背赦书，进献贡物。
English: Xinhai, the senior historian, Lu Tan, reported that the former Shannan West Road Festival made Liu Wei and the former Zhejiang East Observation made Yan Jimei violate the pardon and pay tribute.

古文：上召坦褒慰之，曰： 朕已释其罪，不可失信。 
现代文：宪宗召见卢坦，对他称赞慰问了一番以后说： 朕已经将他们的罪责免除了，这是不能失信的啊。 
English: After praising and consoling him for the first time, he said, "I have absolved them of their guilt. This cannot be discredited."

古文：坦曰： 赦令宣布海内，陛下之大信也。
现代文：卢坦说： 赦令是向全国公布的，是陛下的大信用。
English: Lutan said: "The pardon was announced to the whole country and is a great credit to His Majesty.

古文：晟等不畏陛下法，奈何存小信弃大信乎！ 
现代文：柳晟等人不畏惧陛下之法，陛下怎么能够只顾小信用，反而丢弃大信用呢！ 
English: Liu Ye and others are not afraid of His Majesty's law, how can His Majesty only care about small credit, but discard big credit!

古文：上乃命归所进于有司。
现代文：于是，宪宗命令将他们进献的物品交给有关部门。
English: As a result, Kenzong ordered the items they donated to be handed over to the relevant departments.

古文：夏，四月，上策试贤良方正直言极谏举人，伊阙尉牛僧孺、陆浑尉皇甫湜、前进士李宗闵皆指陈时政之失，无所避；户部侍郎杨於陵、吏部员外郎韦贯之为考策官，贯之署为上第。上亦嘉之。乙丑，诏中书优与处分。
现代文：夏季，四月，宪宗对有关部门推举的贤良方正、直言极谏科的考生举行考试，伊阙县尉牛僧孺、陆浑县尉皇甫、前科进士李宗闵等人，指明并陈述当时政务的过失，都能够毫无避讳。吏部侍郎杨於陵、吏部员外郎韦贯之担任主考策对的官员，韦贯之将牛僧孺等人纳入成绩优秀的上第中，宪宗对他们也很嘉许，颁诏命令中书省对他们从优安排。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xianzong held an examination for the candidates of the virtuous Fangzheng and outspoken Gao Jike, who were nominated by the relevant departments. Ili County Lieutenant Niu Son Hui, Lukhun County Lieutenant Huang Fu, and former Kejin Scholar Li Zongyao, all of whom were able to point out and state the mistakes of the government affairs at that time, did not hesitate to do so. Yang Yuling, the clerk of the clerk's office, and Wei Quanzhi, the clerk's brother-in-law, were the officials in charge of the examination. Wei Quanzhi included Niu Son

古文：李吉甫恶其言直，泣诉于上，且言 翰林学士裴垍、王涯覆策。
现代文：李吉甫讨厌他们言语直切，哭泣着向宪宗陈诉，而且说： 策对考试是由翰林学士裴和王涯来覆核审定的。
English: Li Jifu disliked their blunt speech, and wept as he complained to Xianzong. He also said, "The strategic examination was reviewed and approved by Hanlin Scholar Pei and Wang Lai.

古文：湜，涯之甥也，涯不先言；垍无所异同。 
现代文：皇甫是王涯的外甥，王涯没有事先说明，裴也没有提出异议。 
English: The crown prince is Wang Ya's nephew. Wang Ya did not explain in advance, and Pei did not raise any objection.

古文：上不得已，罢垍、涯学士，垍为户部侍郎，涯为都官员外郎，贯之为果州刺史。
现代文：宪宗没有办法，免除了裴与王涯翰林学士的职务，让裴出任户部侍郎，王涯出任都官员外郎，韦贯之出任果州刺史。
English: Unable to do anything, Emperor Xianzong relieved Bae and Wang Ya Hanlin of their posts as scholars, and made Bae the head of the household, Wang Ya the head of the capital, and Wei Gangzhi the head of the Guozhou imperial court.

古文：后数日，费之再贬巴州刺史，涯贬虢州司马。
现代文：几天以后，韦贯之又被贬为巴州刺史，王涯被贬为虢州司马。
English: A few days later, Wei Gangzhi was again relegated to the status of Baju Shishi, and Wang Ya was relegated to the status of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：乙亥，以杨於陵为岭南节度使，亦坐考策无异同也。
现代文：乙亥，宪宗任命杨於陵为岭南节度使，他也是由于主考策对时没有提出异议而受到处罚。
English: In Eihei, Emperor Gensong appointed Yang Yuling as the Lingnan Festival envoy, and he was also punished because he did not raise objections when he was the chief examiner.

古文：僧孺等久之不调，各从辟于籓府。
现代文：牛僧孺等人长期不得调任，分别被藩镇征用为幕府的僚属。
English: Niu Sang Hui and others were not allowed to be transferred for a long time, and were separately requisitioned by the towns as vassals of the shogunate.

古文：僧孺，弘之七世孙；宗闵，元懿之玄孙；贯之，福嗣之六世孙；湜，睦州新安人也。
现代文：牛僧孺是牛弘的七世孙。李宗闵是李元懿的玄孙。韦贯之是韦福嗣的六世孙。皇甫是睦州新安人。
English: Niu Xiangyao is the seventh-generation grandson of Niu Hong. Li Zongyao is the great-great-grandson of Li Yuanyao. Wei Xuanzhi is the sixth-generation grandson of Wei Fuxi. Wang Fu is from Xin'an, Muzhou.

古文：丁丑，罢五月朔宣政殿朝贺。
现代文：丁丑，宪宗撤销了五月朔日在宣政殿举行的朝贺。
English: Ding Xi, the Constitutionalist cancelled the morning greeting held on May New Year's Day at the Xuancheng Palace.

古文：以荆南节度使裴均为右仆射。
现代文：宪宗任命荆南节度使裴均为右仆射。
English: Emperor Xianzong appointed Jingnan as the head of the festival and made Pei the right-hand man.

古文：均素附宦官得贵显，为仆射，自矜大。
现代文：裴均平时依附宦官，得以富贵显达，出任右仆射后，更为骄矜自大。
English: Pei Jun usually depended on eunuchs to become rich and powerful, but after he became a right-hand man, he became even more arrogant.

古文：尝入朝，逾位而立；中丞卢坦揖而退之，均不从。
现代文：有一次，裴均上朝，在超越自己职位的地方站了下来，御史中丞卢坦向他拱手行礼，请他退回到自己的位置上去，裴均不肯听从。
English: Once upon a time, when Baekkyun ascended to the throne, he stood down in a place where he had overstepped his position. Grand Historian Chujo Lutang bowed to him and asked him to return to his position. Baekkyun refused to obey.

古文：坦曰： 昔姚南仲为仆射，位在此。 
现代文：卢坦说： 过去，姚南仲担任仆射时，他的位置就是在这里的。 
English: Lu Tan said: In the past, when Yao Nanzhong was the assistant coach, his position was here.

古文：均曰： 南仲何人？ 
现代文：裴均说： 姚南仲是什么人？ 
English: Pei Jun said: Who is Yao Nanzhong?

古文：坦曰： 是守正不交权幸者。 
现代文：卢坦说： 是信守正道，不肯交结权贵宠臣的人。 
English: Rutan said: "He is a person who adheres to the right path and does not want to make friends with the power elite's favorite."

古文：坦寻改右庶子。
现代文：不久，卢坦被改任为右庶子。
English: Soon after, Lutan was promoted to starter.

古文：五月，翰林学士、左拾遗白居易上疏，以为： 牛僧孺等直言时事，恩奖登科，而更遭斥逐，并出为关外官。
现代文：五月，翰林学士、左拾遗白居易上疏认为： 牛僧孺等人直率地谈论当时的事务，蒙恩登科，复试合格，但是又遭受驱逐，一并被贬黜为幕府的僚属。
English: In May, Hanlin Baccalaureate and Zuo Zhi Bai Ju Yi Shang Su believed that: Niu Zengqi and others spoke frankly about the affairs of the time, Meng Endenke, passed the retest, but was expelled, and was demeaned as a subordinate of the shogunate.

古文：杨于陵等以考策敢收直言，裴垍等以覆策不退直言，皆坐谴谪。
现代文：杨於陵等人因主考策问时敢于收录直率而言的人们，裴等人因复试策问时不肯斥逐直率而言的人们，都获罪贬官。
English: Yang Yuling and others who dared to include outspoken people during the main examination, and Bae and others who refused to expel outspoken people during the second examination, were all convicted and demoted.

古文：卢坦以数举职事黜庶子。
现代文：卢坦则因屡次纠劾任职官员，被贬为右庶子。
English: Lutang, on the other hand, was relegated to being an illegitimate son due to his repeated reprimanding of officials.

古文：此数人皆今之人望，天下视其进退以卜时之否藏者也。
现代文：这几个人都是当今众望所归的人物，天下的人们就是根据他们的升降情况来估量时势的好坏的。
English: All of these people are figures who are held in high esteem today, and people around the world judge the current situation as good or bad based on their rise and fall.

古文：一旦无罪悉疏弃之，上下杜口，众心氵匈々，陛下亦知之乎？
现代文：朝廷忽然在他们无罪的情况下，对他们全都予以贬逐，使大小官员缄口不言，大家心中动荡不安，陛下也知道这种情形吗？
English: Does Your Majesty know that the Imperial Court has suddenly disparaged all of them, even though they are not guilty, silenced officials of all ranks, and caused turmoil in everyone's hearts?

古文：且陛下既下诏征之直言，索之极谏，僧孺等所对如此，纵未能推而行之，又何忍罪而斥之乎！
现代文：而且，既然陛下颁布诏书征求人们直率而言，要求人们极言规谏，牛僧孺等人才会作出这样的策对，即使陛下不能够将他们的策对推广实施，又怎么忍心处以罪罚，将他们驱逐出去呢！
English: Moreover, since His Majesty has issued an edict to solicit people to be forthright, to require people to be extremely disciplined, only people such as Niu Sangyu will make such a strategy, even if His Majesty is unable to promote and implement their strategy, how can he bear to punish and expel them!

古文：昔德宗初即位，亦征直言极谏之士，策问天旱，穆质对云： 两汉故事，三公当免，卜式著议，弘羊可烹。 
现代文：过去，在德宗刚刚即位时，也曾征召直率而言、尽力规谏的人士，当时的策对考试问到干旱问题，穆质策对说： 如果发生干旱，依照西汉和东汉的惯例，应当将三公免职；根据卜式的著名议论，应当将桑弘羊一类人物煮死。 
English: In the past, when Emperor Dezong had just ascended to the throne, people who were straightforward and tried their best to be disciplined were also recruited. When asked about the drought in the policy examination at that time, Mu Qizhe said: In the event of a drought, according to the practice of Western Han and Eastern Han, the three princes should be dismissed; according to the famous argument of Pu style, people such as Mulberry Sheep should be boiled to death.

古文：德宗深嘉之，自畿尉擢为左补阙。
现代文：德宗对穆质的话深为嘉许，便将穆质由京郊的县尉提升为左补阙。
English: Desong deeply appreciated Muxian's words, and promoted Muxian from a prefectural officer in the suburbs of Beijing to the rank of Zuozhu.

古文：今僧孺等所言未过于穆质，而遽斥之，臣恐非嗣祖宗之道也！ 
现代文：现在，牛僧孺等人说的话不及穆质言辞激烈，但陛下连忙驱逐了他们，我看这恐怕并不是继承祖宗事业的办法啊。 
English: Now, the words uttered by Niu Sang Hui and others are not as fierce as those of Mu Zi, but His Majesty quickly expelled them. I'm afraid this is not the way to carry on the work of our ancestors.

古文：质，宁之子也。
现代文：穆质是穆宁的儿子。
English: Muxie is Munin's son.

古文：丙午，册回鹘新可汗为爱登里啰汨密施合毘伽保义可汗。
现代文：丙午，宪宗将回鹘的新任可汗册封为爱登里汩密施合毗伽保义可汗。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, the new khan of Huizong was named the Khan of Aidunli, and the new khan of Huizong was named the Khan of Aidunli.

古文：西原蛮酋长黄少卿请降。
现代文：西原蛮人酋长黄少卿请求投降。
English: Huang Shaoqing, the barbarian chief of the Western Plains, asked for surrender.

古文：六月，癸亥，以为归顺州刺史。
现代文：六月，癸亥，宪宗任命黄少卿为归顺州刺史。
English: In June, at the end of the Heian period, Emperor Gensong appointed Huang Shaoqing as the successor of Shunzhou.

古文：沙陀劲勇冠诸胡，吐蕃置之甘州，每战，以为前锋。
现代文：沙陀在各胡人中最为精壮骁勇，吐蕃将沙陀安置在甘州，每当交战时，便让沙陀充当前锋。
English: Satao was the strongest and bravest of all the Hu people. Tu Wei placed Satao in Ganzhou, and whenever there was a battle, he let Satao act as the vanguard.

古文：回鹘攻吐蕃，取凉州。吐蕃疑沙陀贰于回鹘，欲迁之河外。
现代文：回鹘攻打吐蕃，占领了凉州，吐蕃怀疑沙陀同时听从回鹘的指使，便准备将沙陀迁徙到黄河以外。
English: Uighurs attacked Tibetans and occupied Liangzhou. Tibetans suspected Shado and obeyed the orders of Uighurs, and prepared to move Shado outside the Yellow River.

古文：沙陀惧，酋长硃邪尽忠与其子执宜谋复自归于唐，遂帅部落三万，循乌德犍山而东。
现代文：沙陀人害怕，酋长朱邪尽忠与他的儿子朱邪执宜商量再次主动归附唐朝，便率领部落三万，沿着乌德山向东而来。
English: The people of Sado were afraid. The chief Zhu Yazhongzhong and his son Zhu Yazhongyi discussed the issue of voluntarily returning to the Tang Dynasty, and then led the tribe of thirty thousand along the Ude Mountain to the east.

古文：行三日，吐蕃追兵大至，自洮水转战至石门，凡数百合。尽忠死，士众死者大半。
现代文：沙陀部落行走了三天时，吐蕃追赶的兵马纷纷来到，沙陀与吐蕃由洮水辗转打到石门，共计交战数百次，朱邪尽忠死去，战士与人众死去了一多半。
English: When the Shado tribe walked for three days, the soldiers and horses chased by Tubo came one after another. Shado and Tubo fought from Surabaya to Shimen, fighting hundreds of times in total. Zhu Yadong died, and more than half of the soldiers and people died.

古文：执宜帅其馀众犹近万人，骑三千，诣灵州降。
现代文：朱邪执宜率领剩下来的部众，还有将近一万人，骑兵三千人，前往灵州归降。
English: Zhu Yixing led the remaining troops, nearly ten thousand people and three thousand cavalry, to Lingzhou to surrender.

古文：灵盐节度使范希朝闻之，自帅众迎于塞上，置之盐州，为市牛羊，广其畜牧，善抚之。
现代文：灵盐节度使范希朝得知消息后，亲自率领部众在边塞上迎接沙陀人，将他们安顿在盐州，替他们购买牛羊，扩大他们的畜牧范围，好好地安抚他们。
English: After the Spirit Salt Festival made the Fan Xi Dynasty learn the news, he personally led the troops to meet the Sado people at the border fortress, settled them in Yanzhou, purchased cattle and sheep for them, expanded their livestock range, and pacified them well.

古文：诏置阴山府，以执宜为兵马使。
现代文：于是，朝廷颁诏命令设置阴山府，任命朱邪执宜为兵马使。
English: As a result, the imperial court issued a decree ordering the establishment of Yinshan Prefecture and the appointment of Zhu Yixing as a military envoy.

古文：未几，尽忠弟葛勒阿波又帅众七百诣希朝降，诏以为阴山府都督。
现代文：不久，朱邪尽忠的弟弟朱邪葛勒阿波又率领部众七百人前往范希朝处归降，朝廷颁诏任命他为阴山府都督。
English: Not long after, Zhu Yanzhong's loyal younger brother Zhu Yanzhong Guleabo led another seven hundred people to the Fanxi Imperial Palace to surrender, and the imperial court issued a decree appointing him as the governor of Yinshan Prefecture.

古文：自是，灵盐每有征讨，用之所向皆捷，灵盐军益强。
现代文：从此，每当灵盐遇有战事，便让沙陀兵马参战，无论打到哪里，无不取得胜利，灵盐的军队愈发强盛起来了。
English: From then on, whenever Lingyan encountered a battle, he would let the Sadu soldiers and horses take part in the battle. No matter where they fought, they all achieved victory. Lingyan's army became more and more powerful.

古文：秋，七月，辛已朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋季，七月，辛巳朔，出现日食。
English: In autumn, in July, at the turn of the year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：以右庶子卢坦为宣歙观察使。
现代文：宪宗任命右庶子卢坦为宣歙观察使。
English: Kenzong appointed his son-in-law Lutang as the Xuanwu observation envoy.

古文：苏强之诛也，兄弘在晋州幕府，自免归，人莫敢辟。
现代文：苏强被诛杀时，他的哥哥苏弘正在晋州幕府任职，他自请免职回来，人们都不敢征召任用他。
English: When Su Qiang was beaten to death, his brother Su Hong was serving in the Jinzhou Shogunate. He came back voluntarily after being relieved of his duties, and people did not dare to recruit him.

古文：坦奏： 弘有才行，不可以其弟故废之，请辟为判官。 
现代文：卢坦上奏说： 苏弘有才能，品行好，不能够因他弟弟的原故而遭受罢免，请征召他出任判官。 
English: Lutang said: Su Hong is talented and good-behaved, and cannot be dismissed because of his brother. Please recruit him as a judge.

古文：上曰： 向使苏强不死，果有才行，犹可用也，况其兄乎！ 
现代文：宪宗说： 假如苏强不死，果真德才兼备，尚且是可以起用的，何况对于他的哥哥呢！ 
English: Xianzong said, "If Su Qiang does not die, if he is both talented and virtuous, he can still be used, not to mention his brother!

古文：坦到官，值旱饥，谷价日增，或请抑其价。坦曰： 宣、歙土狭谷少，所仰四方之来者。
现代文：卢坦就任时，正赶上当地发生旱灾，闹了饥荒，谷物的价格日益增高，有人请求压低谷物价格，卢坦说： 宣歙地区耕地面积狭小，谷物出产较少，仰仗着各地前来经商的人们运来粮食。
English: When Lutan took office, it was just in time for droughts and famines to occur in the region. The price of grain was increasing day by day, and there were requests to lower the price of grain. Lutan said: The cultivated area in Xuanwu region is small, the production of grain is small, and it relies on people from all over the country who come to do business to transport grain.

古文：若价贱，则商船不复来，益困矣。 
现代文：如若粮食价格降低了，商人的船只便不再前来，宣歙地区就越发困难了。 
English: If grain prices fall, merchant ships will no longer come, and the Xuanwu area will become even more difficult.

古文：既而米斗二百，商旅辐凑，民赖以生。
现代文：不久，当地一斗米价值二百钱，行商都聚集到这里来了。
English: Before long, a local barrel of rice was worth 200 yuan, and the hawkers all gathered here.

古文：九月，庚寅，以于由页为司空，同平章事如故；加右仆射裴均同平章事，为山南东道节度使。
现代文：九月，庚寅，宪宗任命于为司空，仍然如前同平章事，加封右仆射裴均同平章事，出任山南东道节度使。
English: In September, Geng Yin and Xianzong were appointed as the secretary of the sky, still the same as before, and the right-hand man and the second-in-command were both the same as before, and served as the host festival envoy of Shannan.

古文：淮南节度使王锷入朝。
现代文：淮南节度使王锷入京朝见。
English: The Huainan Festival made Wang Hui visit the imperial court in Beijing.

古文：锷家巨富，厚进奉及赂宦官，求平章事。
现代文：王锷家中极为富有，他以大量资财进献贡物和贿赂宦官，谋求出任平章事。
English: Wang Yao's family was extremely wealthy, and he used a large amount of wealth to pay tribute and bribe eunuchs in his quest to become a peer.

古文：翰林学士白居易上言以为： 宰相人臣极位，非清望大功不应授。
现代文：翰林学士白居易认为： 宰相是人臣中的最高职位，如果不是声望清正或者功劳巨大的人是不应当授给的。
English: Hanlin scholar Bai Juyi believes: The prime minister is the highest position among the ministers, and if it is not a person with a clear reputation or great merit, it should not be awarded.

古文：昨除裴均，外议已纷然，今又除锷，则如锷之辈皆生冀望。
现代文：过去任命裴均为宰相，外界的议论已经很多了。如今又要任命王锷为宰相，那么像王锷这一类人都会生出要当宰相的希望。
English: In the past, Bae was appointed as prime minister, and there has been a lot of discussion in the outside world. Now, Wang Hui is to be appointed as prime minister, so people like Wang Hui will have the hope of becoming prime minister.

古文：若尽与之，则典章大怀，又不感恩；不与，则厚薄有殊，或生怨望。
现代文：如果完全满足他们的愿望，就会使制度遭到极大的破坏，而他们也并不会感激陛下的恩典。如果不满足他们的原望，便是陛下有厚薄之分，有人就会生产怨恨。
English: If their wishes are fully satisfied, the system will be greatly damaged, and they will not be grateful for His Majesty's grace. If they are not satisfied with their original wishes, it is His Majesty's fault, and some people will produce resentment.

古文：幸门一启，无可如何。
现代文：侥幸之门一经打开，便无法收拾了。
English: Once the door of chance is opened, it cannot be closed.

古文：且锷在镇五年，百计诛求，货财既足，自入进奉。
现代文：而且，王锷出任淮南的五年间，想尽办法搜刮聚敛，在物资钱财充足后，便亲自入朝进献贡物。
English: Moreover, during the five years that Wang Hui was in charge of Huainan, he tried his best to scrounge and accumulate, and when he had enough material and money, he personally went to the court to offer tribute.

古文：若除宰相，四方籓镇皆谓锷以进奉得之，竞为割剥，则百姓何以堪之！ 
现代文：倘若任命他为宰相，各地藩镇都会说王锷是由于进献贡物而得到宰相职务的，便争着剥削百姓，那么百姓怎么能够经受得住呢！ 
English: If he were to be appointed prime minister, all the provinces and towns would say that Wang Xi got the post of prime minister because of the tribute, and he would try to exploit the people. How could the people stand it?

古文：事遂寝。
现代文：于是事情被搁置下来。
English: So it was stopped.

古文：壬辰，加宣武节度使韩弘同平章事。
现代文：壬辰，宪宗加封宣武节度使韩弘同平章事。
English: In Imjin, the enthronement of Emperor Gensong and the proclamation of martial law brought Han Hong to the same level.

古文：丙申，以户部侍郎裴垍为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丙申，宪宗任命户部侍郎裴为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: According to Hsin, Kenzong appointed Hube's attendant Bae to the post of Chusho's attendant and Tongpei to the post of Shogi.

古文：上虽以李吉甫故罢垍学士，然宠信弥厚，故未几复擢为相。
现代文：虽然宪宗因李吉甫的原故免去了裴的翰林学士职务，然而对他的宠爱信任却更为深厚，所以不久便又提拔他出任宰相。
English: Although Emperor Gensong relieved Bae of his position as Hanlin Scholar because of Li Jifu, he loved and trusted him even more, and soon promoted him to the post of prime minister.

古文：初，德宗不任宰相，天下细务皆自决之，由是裴延龄辈得用事。
现代文：当初，德宗不肯信任宰相，天下的细小事务完全由自己处理，因此裴延龄一类人得以当权。
English: At first, Dezong refused to trust the prime minister, and handled all the minor affairs of the world on his own. As a result, people like Pei Yanling came to power.

古文：上在籓邸，心固非之，及即位，选擢宰相，推心委之，尝谓垍等曰： 以太宗、玄宗之明，犹藉辅佐以成其理，况如朕不及先圣万倍者乎！ 
现代文：宪宗还在藩王府邸中时，内心本来就认为这种做法是不对的，及至即位后，对选择提拔的宰相，总是推心置腹地信任他们。宪宗曾经对裴等人说 凭着太宗、玄宗的英明，还要借助大臣来完成对国家的治理，何况象朕这样连先朝圣君的万分之一都不上的人呢！ 
English: When Kenzong was still in the residence of the king of the domain, his heart originally thought that this approach was wrong, and after ascending to the throne, he always trusted the prime ministers he chose to promote. Kenzong once said to Bae and others, "With the wisdom of Taizong and Xuanzong, we must also use the ministers to complete the governance of the country, and what's more, people like me who are not even one ten-thousandth of the previous pilgrims!

古文：垍亦竭诚辅佐。
现代文：裴也竭尽诚心佐助皇帝。
English: Bae also did his best to help the emperor.

古文：上尝问垍： 为理之要何先？ 
现代文：宪宗曾经询问裴说； 治理国家的要务，什么居于首位？ 
English: Kenzong once asked Bae, "What is the most important task in governing the country?"

古文：对曰： 先正其心。 
现代文：裴回答说： 首先应当端正人心。 
English: Bae replied: First of all, it is necessary to set the people's hearts right.

古文：旧制，民输税有三：一曰上供，二曰送使，三曰留州。
现代文：依照常例，人民交纳的赋税有三项：第一项是进献朝廷的赋税，第二项是送交镇使的赋税，第三项是留在本州的赋税。
English: According to the usual practice, there are three taxes paid by the people: the first is the tax paid to the imperial court, the second is the tax sent to the town officials, and the third is the tax left in the state.

古文：建中初定两税，货重钱轻。
现代文：建中初年制定了两税法，致使商品价格提高而钱币价格跌落。
English: In the first year of the middle school, the two tax laws were formulated, resulting in the increase of commodity prices and the fall of coin prices.

古文：是后货轻钱重，民所出已倍其初。
现代文：在此之后，商品价格跌落而钱币价格提高，百姓交纳的赋税已经多出当初的一倍了。
English: Since then, as commodity prices have fallen and coin prices have risen, the taxes paid by the people have more than doubled.

古文：其留州、送使者，所在又降省估，就实估以重敛于民。
现代文：其中留在本州的与送交镇使的赋税，各地又降低都省规定的物价而按照实际的物价征收，以加重对百姓的征敛。
English: Among them, the taxes left in Honshu and sent to town officials, and the prices stipulated by the capital province were reduced and levied according to the actual prices in various regions, so as to increase the collection of the people.

古文：及垍为相，奏： 天下留州、送使物，请一切用省估。
现代文：及至裴出任宰相，他上奏说： 对于全国留在本州和交送镇使的物品，请一律采用都省制定的物价。
English: When Bae assumed the post of prime minister, he made a report saying: For items left in this prefecture and sent to town officials across the country, please use the price set by the prefecture.

古文：其观察使，先税所理之州以自给，不足，然后许税于所属之州。 
现代文：观察使应当首先在自己治理的州中征税，以便自给，如果达不到应该征收的税额，然后才允许他们在所隶属的州中征税。 
English: Observing that the governors should first levy taxes in the states they govern in order to be self-sufficient, and if they fail to collect the due amount of taxes, then they should be allowed to levy taxes in the states they belong to.

古文：由是江、淮之民稍苏息。
现代文：由此，江淮地区的百姓逐渐得到休养生息。
English: As a result, people in the Jianghuai region have gradually been able to rest and recuperate.

古文：先是，执政多恶谏官言时政得失，垍独赏之。
现代文：在此之前，主持政务的官员往往厌恶谏官谈论时政的成功与失败，唯独裴奖励谏官进谏。
English: Prior to this, the officials who presided over government affairs often disliked eunuchs talking about the success and failure of current politics, but only rewarded eunuchs for promotion.

古文：垍器局峻整，人不敢干以私。
现代文：裴的才具气度严正而庄重，人们不敢因私事干求他。
English: Pei's talent is dignified and solemn, and people do not dare to ask him for personal affairs.

古文：尝有故人自远诣之，垍资给优厚，从容款狎。其人乘间求京兆判司，垍曰： 公才不称此官，不敢以故人之私伤朝廷至公。
现代文：曾经有一位朋友从远方来到他那里，裴送给这位朋友许多财物，纵情而无拘束地接待他，此人借机请求京兆府参军的职务，裴说： 你不适合担当这个官职，我不敢因朋友的私情去损害朝廷至上的公道。
English: Once upon a time, a friend came to him from far away. Bae gave this friend many possessions and received him indulgently and without restraint. This person took the opportunity to request the post of the Beijing Municipal Government to join the army. Bae said: You are not suitable to hold this official post. I dare not damage the supreme justice of the imperial court because of my friend's personal feelings.

古文：它日有盲宰相怜公者，不妨得之，垍则必不可。 
现代文：以后若有瞎眼的宰相怜悯你，你不妨得到这个官职，我却是肯定不会同意的。 
English: In the future, if a blind prime minister takes pity on you, you might get this post, but I certainly won't agree.

古文：戊戌，以中书侍郎、同平章事李吉甫同平章事，充淮南节度使。
现代文：戊戌，宪宗使中书侍郎、同平章事李吉甫同平章事，充任淮南节度使。
English: Wu Xuan, the secretary of the envoy of Emperor Xianzong, and Li Jifu, the secretary of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of the envoy of Huainan.

古文：河中、晋绛节度使邠宣公社黄裳薨。
现代文：河中、晋绛节度使宣公杜黄裳去世。
English: In the middle of the river, at the time of the Jurchen festival, Du Huangxiao, a proclamation official, died.

古文：冬，十二月，庚戌，置行原州于临泾，以镇将郝下泚为刺史。
现代文：冬季，十二月，庚戌，朝廷在临泾设置行原州，任命镇将郝为刺史。
English: In winter, December, Geng Zi, the imperial court in Linyi set up the line of the original state, and appointed the town to be the history.

古文：元和四年己丑，公元八零九年春，正月，戊子，简王遘薨。
现代文：南诏王异牟寻去世，他的儿子寻劝即位。四年春季，正月，戊子，简王李遘去世。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, in the first month of the year, in Wuzi, King Jian died.

古文：渤海康王嵩璘卒，子元瑜立，改元永德。
现代文：渤海康王大嵩去世，他的儿子大元瑜即位，更改年号为永德。
English: Erhai Kang Wang Dasong died, his son Dai Yuan Yu ascended to the throne, and the year name was changed to Yongde.

古文：南方旱饥。
现代文：南方天气干旱，发生饥荒。
English: In the south, the weather is dry and famine occurs.

古文：庚寅，命左司郎中郑敬等为江、淮、二浙、荆、湖、襄、鄂等道宣慰使，赈恤之，将行，上戒之曰： 朕宫中用帛一匹，皆籍其数，惟贝周救百姓，则不计费，卿辈宜识此意，勿效潘孟阳饮酒游山而已。 
现代文：庚寅，宪宗任命左司郎中郑敬等人为江淮、两浙、荆、湖、襄、鄂等道宣慰使，前去赈济抚恤饥民。在将要启程时，宪宗警告他们说： 朕在宫中就是使用一匹丝帛，都要登记使用数额，只有在救济百姓时，才不计算费用。你们这些人应当记住我的用心，不要学着潘孟阳的样子去喝酒游山就算了事。 
English: In Goyang, Emperor Xianzong appointed Zuo Si Lang Zhong Zheng Jing and others to be the comforting envoys for the Jianghuai, two Zhejiang, Jing, Hubei, Xiang, and Hubei provinces to go to help and support the starving people. When they were about to leave, Emperor Xianzong warned them: "I use a silk donkey in the palace, and I have to register the amount of use. Only when I help the people, I don't calculate the cost. You people should remember my intentions, and don't learn the appearance of Pan Mengyang to drink and travel in the mountains.

古文：给事中李籓在门下，制敕有不可者，即于黄纸后批之。
现代文：给事中李藩在门下省供职，凡是制书敕令有不适当的地方，他便在黄麻纸的末后批写意见。
English: During the incident, Li Fan was working in the province under his supervision. Whenever there was anything inappropriate in the book-making order, he would write comments on the back and end of the jute paper.

古文：吏请更连素纸，籓曰： 如此，乃状也，何名批敕！ 
现代文：吏人请他再用一张白纸连在后面，李藩却说： 要是这样的话，就是在写文状了，还叫什么批写敕书呢！ 
English: The official asked him to use another piece of white paper to attach to the back, but Li Fan said: If that's the case, it's just writing a letter, what's the point of writing a letter of approval!

古文：裴垍荐籓有宰相器。
现代文：裴推荐李藩有担当宰相的器度。
English: Bae recommended that Li Han have the stature to be the prime minister in charge.

古文：上以门下侍郎、同平章事郑絪循默取容，二月，丁卯，罢絪为太子宾客，擢籓为门下侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：宪宗认为门下侍郎、同平章事郑缄默不言，取悦于人，二月，丁卯，将郑罢免为太子宾客，提升李藩为门下侍郎、同平章事。
English: In February, Dingwu removed Zheng as a guest of the crown prince and promoted Li Fan as a servant and peer of the prince.

古文：籓知无不言，上甚重之。
现代文：李藩知无不言，宪宗很器重他。
English: The Li clan knew all about him, and Kenzong held him in high esteem.

古文：河东节度使严绶，在镇九年，军政补署一出监军李辅光，绶拱手而已。
现代文：河东节度使严绶在藩镇任职九年，军中政务和吏员委任一概由监军李辅光处理，严绶抱合双手表示恭敬罢了。
English: The Hedong Festival has made Yan Xuan serve in the town for nine years, and the political affairs and the appointment of officials in the army are all handled by the supervisor Li Fu Guang. Yan Xuan hugged his hands to show his respect.

古文：裴垍具奏其状，请以李鄘代之。
现代文：裴将他的状况全部上奏，请求让李替代他。
English: Bae played up his condition and asked Li to replace him.

古文：三月，乙酉，以绶为左仆射，以凤翔节度使李鄘为河东节度使。
现代文：三月，乙酉，宪宗任命严绶为左仆射，任命凤翔节度使李为河东节度使。
English: In March, Yixian, the founder of the Confucianism, appointed Yan Jie as the left-hand messenger, and appointed Feng Xiang as the festival envoy, and Li as the festival envoy of Hedong.

古文：成德节度使王士真薨，其子副大使承宗自为留后。
现代文：成德节度使王士真去世，他的儿子副大使王承宗自命为留后。
English: The Chengde Festival caused the death of Wang Shizhen, and his son, Vice-Ambassador Wang Chengzong, decided to stay behind.

古文：河北三镇，相承各置副大使，以嫡长为之，父没则代领军务。
现代文：河北三镇相继分别设置了副大使，以嫡长子担任，一旦父亲去世，便代替父亲统领军中事务。
English: The three towns of Hebei successively set up deputy ambassadors, with the eldest son serving as the vice-ambassador. If the father died, the son would take over his father's command of the military affairs.

古文：上以久旱，欲降德音。翰林学士李绛、白居易上言，以为 欲令实惠及人，无如减其租税。 
现代文：由于发生了长时间的干旱，宪宗准备颁布德音，翰林学士李绛与白居易进言，认为： 要想让人们得到实际恩惠，最好是减轻他们的租税。 
English: Due to the long-term drought, Jianzong was about to promulgate the Deyin, and the scholars of Hanlin, Li Jun and Bai Juyi, suggested that: In order to give people real benefits, it is best to reduce their taxes.

古文：又言 宫人驱使之馀，其数犹广，事宜省费，物贵徇情。 
现代文：又说： 宫中人员在供内廷驱遣以外，剩下来的人为数仍然很多。办事应当节省开支，对人贵在顺乎常情。 
English: He also said: The number of people left in the palace is still large, except for those who have been driven out by the Inner Court. The work should be done in a cost-saving manner, and people should be treated with dignity.

古文：又请 禁诸道横敛，以充进奉。 
现代文：他们还请求 禁止各道横征暴敛以充当进献的贡物。 
English: They also requested that all provinces be prohibited from levying exorbitant taxes to serve as tribute.

古文：又言 岭南、黔中、福建风俗，多掠良人卖为奴婢，乞严禁止。 
现代文：又说： 岭南、黔中、福建的习尚，往往掳掠良民，将他们卖作奴婢，请严加禁止。 
English: He also said: please strictly prohibit the ruffians in Lingnan, Luzhong and Fujian, who often kidnap and plunder the good people and sell them as slaves.

古文：闰月，己酉，制降天下系囚，蠲租税，出宫人，绝进奉，禁掠卖，皆如二臣之请。
现代文：闰三月，己酉，宪宗颁布制书，减轻对全国在押囚犯的处罚，免除本年租赋，外放宫中妇女，杜绝进奉，禁止掠卖人口，完全像他们两人请求的那样。
English: In the intercalary month of March, Ji Xuan and Jianzong promulgated a document to reduce the punishment of prisoners in custody throughout the country, exempt this year's rent, release women in the palace, put an end to forced labor, and prohibit the plunder of the population, exactly as they both requested.

古文：己未，雨。
现代文：己未，下雨。
English: On the 13th, it rained.

古文：绛表贺曰： 乃知忧先于事，故能无忧；事至而忧，无救于事。 
现代文：李绛上表祝贺说： 由此可知，忧虑在事情发生之前，才能够消除忧虑；忧虑在事情发生后，便无可挽回了。 
English: Li Wei congratulated the table and said: From this, it can be seen that worries can only be eliminated before things happen; worries are irretrievable after things happen.

古文：初，王叔文之党既贬，有诏，虽遇赦无得量移。
现代文：当初，王叔文一党被贬后，诏书规定他们即使遇到大赦，也不能够酌情迁官。
English: At first, after Wang Shouwen and his party were demoted, the edict stipulated that they could not be transferred at their discretion, even if they were granted amnesty.

古文：吏部尚书、盐铁转运使李巽奏： 郴州司马程异，吏才明辨，请以为杨子留后。 
现代文：吏部尚书、盐铁转运使李巽上奏说： 郴州司马程异，有担当官吏的才分，明察善辨，请陛下任命他为扬子留后。 
English: Shangshu of the Personnel Department and Li Jian of the Salt and Iron Transportation Department said: Zhangzhou Sima Chengyi, who has the ability to be in charge of officials and is good at discernment, asked His Majesty to appoint him as Yangzi's successor.

古文：上许之。
现代文：宪宗答应了他的请求。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：巽精于督察，吏人居千里之外，战栗如在巽前。
现代文：李巽监督考察属下是精明的，即使吏人身在千里以外，仍然像在李巽面前那样战战兢兢地办事。
English: Li Yao's supervisors and subordinates are shrewd. Even if the officials are thousands of miles away, they still work with the same trepidation as they did in front of Li Yao.

古文：异句检簿籍，又精于巽，卒获其用。
现代文：程异检核帐簿文书，比李巽还要精明，最后还是得到进用了。
English: Cheng is more astute than Li Yao when it comes to inspecting and verifying accounting documents, and he was finally able to use it.

古文：魏征玄孙稠贫甚，以故第质钱于人，平卢节度使李师道请以私财赎出之。
现代文：魏徵的玄孙魏稠极为贫困，将祖居的住宅典押给人，换取钱币，平卢节度使李师道请求用自己的资财将住宅赎买出来。
English: Wei Zheng's great-great-grandson Wei Cong was extremely poor. He pawned his ancestral residence to someone in exchange for money. Pinglu Jiedu asked Li Shidao to redeem the house with his own money.

古文：上命白居易草诏，居易奏言： 事关激劝，宜出朝廷。
现代文：宪宗命令白居易草拟同意李师道请求的诏书，白居易上奏说： 这件事情关系到对臣下的激励劝勉，应当由朝廷办理此事。
English: Kenzong ordered Bai Juyi to draft an edict agreeing to Li Shidao's request, and Bai Juyi reported: This matter is related to the encouragement and exhortation of his subjects, and should be handled by the imperial court.

古文：师道何人，敢掠斯美！
现代文：李师道是什么人，胆敢抢去这个美名！
English: What kind of person is Li Shidou, daring to steal this good name!

古文：望敕有司以官钱赎还后嗣。 
现代文：希望陛下敕令有关部门用官府的钱赎买住宅，归还给魏氏的后人。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will order the relevant departments to redeem the house with government money and return it to the descendants of the Wei family.

古文：上从之，出内库钱二千缗赎赐魏稠，仍禁质卖。
现代文：宪宗听从了这一建议，由内廷专库中支出钱两千缗，赎出住宅，赐给魏稠，并禁止典押出卖。
English: Xianzong listened to this suggestion, spent two thousand baht from the special treasury of the Inner Court, redeemed the house, gave it to Wei Zong, and forbade the pawnbroking.

古文：王承宗叔父士则以承宗擅自立，恐祸及宗，与幕客刘栖楚俱自归京师。
现代文：王承宗的叔父王士则因王承宗擅自继任节度使，惟恐祸殃牵连本宗，便与幕府宾客刘栖楚一起主动返回京城。
English: Wang Chengzong's uncle Wang Shi, fearing that the succession of Wang Chengzong to the position of the festival's envoy would bring misfortune to Wang Chengzong, took the initiative to return to the capital together with the guest of the shogunate Liu Qichu.

古文：诏以士则为神策大将军。
现代文：宪宗颁诏任命王士则为神策大将军。
English: Emperor Kenzong issued an edict appointing Wang Shih as the Grand General of the Divine Policy.

古文：翰林学士李绛等奏曰： 陛下嗣膺大宝，四年于兹，而储闱未立，典册不行，是开窥觎之端，乖重慎之义，非所以承宗庙、重社稷也。
现代文：翰林学士李绛等人上奏说： 陛下继承皇位，到现在已经有四年了。然而，太子尚未确立，册命没有颁行，这将开启暗中希求的端倪，违背慎重的原则，不是继承宗庙、尊重国家的办法啊。
English: "It has been four years since His Majesty succeeded to the throne. However, the crown prince has not yet been established, and the imperial edict has not been issued. This will open up a hint of what is secretly desired. It violates the principle of prudence, and is not the way to inherit the ancestral temple and respect the country.

古文：伏望抑扌为谦之小节，行至公之大典。 
现代文：希望陛下贬损个人细小的谦逊行为，奉行国家重大的最为公正无私的仪典。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will discard the small and humble acts of individuals and pursue the most just and selfless ceremony of national importance.

古文：丁卯，制立长子邓王宁为皇太子。
现代文：丁卯，宪宗颁制将长子邓王李宁立为太子。
English: Dingwu, the eldest son of Deng Wang, Li Ning, was appointed as the prince by Emperor Xianzong.

古文：宁，纪美人之子也。
现代文：李宁是纪美人的儿子。
English: Li Ning is the son of Ji Mei Ren.

古文：辛未，灵盐节度使范希朝奏以太原防秋兵六百人衣粮给沙陀，许之。
现代文：辛未，灵盐节度使范希朝奏请拨出太原六百士兵的衣服与口粮供给沙陀，宪宗答应了他的请求。
English: In Xinwei, the spiritual salt festival made Fan Xi call for the allocation of clothes and rations from Taiyuan's six hundred soldiers to supply Satoru, and Xianzong agreed to his request.

古文：夏，四月，山南东道节度使裴均恃有中人之助，于德音后首进银器千五百馀两。
现代文：夏季，四月，山南东道节度使裴均仗着得到宦官的帮助，在德音颁布后，进献银器多达一千五百余两。
English: In the summer, in April, the Shannan Host Festival made Pei Jun rely on the help of eunuchs, and after the promulgation of Deyin, he donated more than fifteen hundred silverware.

古文：翰林学士李绛、白居易等上言： 均欲以此尝陛下，愿却之。 
现代文：翰林学士李绛与白居易等人进言说： 裴均打算用此事试探陛下，希望陛下将银器退还。 
English: Hanlin scholars Li Qian and Bai Juyi and others said: Pei Jun intends to use this matter to test His Majesty, hoping that His Majesty will return the silverware.

古文：上遽命出银器付度支。
现代文：宪宗赶忙命令将银器取出，交付度支。
English: Kenzong hurriedly ordered the silverware to be taken out and the money to be handed over.

古文：既而有旨谕进奏院： 自今诸道进奉，无得申御史台；有访问者，辄以名闻。 
现代文：不久，宪宗颁旨谕示诸道进奏院说： 从现在起，凡是各道前来进献贡物，不允许申报御史台。倘若有人询问此类事情，你处就应当将询问者的名字向朕报告。 
English: Soon after, the Kenzong issued an edict to all Dojos, saying: "From now on, whenever a Dojos comes to offer a tribute, it is not allowed to declare a gosaidai. If anyone inquires about such a thing, you should report the name of the inquirer to me."

古文：白居易复以为言，上不听。
现代文：白居易又就此事进言，宪宗不肯听从。
English: Bai Juyi also made a suggestion on this matter, but Kenzong refused to listen.

古文：上欲革河北诸镇世袭之弊，乘王士真死，欲自朝廷除人，不从则兴师讨之。
现代文：宪宗准备革除河北各藩镇世代承袭节度使的弊病，趁着王士真去世的机会，打算由朝廷任命节度使，如果王承宗不肯服从，就起兵讨伐他。
English: Gensong was prepared to eradicate the ills of the imperial envoys that had been inherited from generation to generation in the provinces and towns of Hebei. Taking the opportunity of Wang Shizhen's death, he planned to have the imperial court appoint imperial envoys, and if Wang Chengzong refused to obey, he would raise an army to fight him.

古文：裴垍曰： 李纳跋扈不恭，王武俊有功于国，陛下前许师道，今夺承宗，沮劝违理，彼必不服。 
现代文：裴说： 李纳对朝廷骄横不敬，而王武俊却为国家立下功劳。陛下前些时候允许李师道承袭节度使职务，现在却要削夺王承宗的承袭，既有碍对藩镇的勉励，又违反事情的情理，王承宗肯定不会服气。 
English: Bae said: Li Na is arrogant and disrespectful to the imperial court, while Wang Wujun has made great contributions to the country. His Majesty allowed Li Shidao to succeed to the post of regent some time ago, but now he wants to take away Wang Chengzong's succession, which is not only a hindrance to the encouragement of the towns and villages, but also a violation of the reason for the matter. Wang Chengzong will certainly not be convinced.

古文：由是议久不决。
现代文：因此，对王承宗的事情计议了很长时间，都没有能够决定下来。
English: Therefore, the matter of Wang Chengzong has been deliberated for a long time, and no decision has been made.

古文：上以问诸学士，李绛等对曰： 河北不遵声教，谁不愤叹，然今日取之，或恐未能。
现代文：宪宗就此询问各位翰林学士，李绛等人回答说： 河北藩镇不遵奉朝廷的声威与教化，谁不愤恨叹惜！然而，要想现在就攻取他们，也许朝廷还没有这个能力。
English: Xianzong asked the scholars of Hanlin about this, and Li Wei and others replied: If Hebei's towns do not follow the imperial court's authority and enlightenment, who would not resent it! However, if you want to capture them now, perhaps the imperial court does not have this ability.

古文：成德军自武俊以来，父子相承四十馀年，人情贯习，不以为非。况承宗已总军务，一旦易之，恐未即奉诏。
现代文：成德一镇，自从王武俊以来，父子相继承袭节度使的职位，已经有四十多年，人情已经习惯，不认为有什么不对，何况王承宗已经总揽军中事务，忽然派人取代他，恐怕他不一定会接受诏命。
English: Chengde Town, since Wang Wujun, father and son have been inheriting the post of the regent for more than forty years. People have become accustomed to it and do not think there is anything wrong. Moreover, Wang Chengzong has been in charge of the affairs of the military, and suddenly sent someone to replace him. I am afraid he will not necessarily accept the imperial command.

古文：又范阳、魏博、易定、淄青以地相传，与成德同体，彼闻成德除人，必内不自安，阴相党助，虽茂昭有请，亦恐非诚。
现代文：加之，范阳、魏博、易定、淄青各藩镇也是将所统辖的地盘世代相传，与成德属于同一体制。他们得知成德由朝廷任命节度使，肯定内心感到不安，暗中相互援助。虽然张茂昭曾经请求替代王承宗，恐怕也没有诚意。
English: In addition, Fanyang, Weibo, Yiding, and Jiaqing also passed down the territory under their control from generation to generation, and belonged to the same system as Chengde. When they learned that Chengde was appointed by the imperial court, they must have felt uneasy and secretly helped each other. Although Zhang Maozhao once asked to replace Wang Chengzong, I am afraid there is no sincerity.

古文：所以然者，今国家除人代承宗，彼邻道劝成，进退有利。
现代文：现在朝廷委派官员替代王承宗，便是他的邻道劝说成功了，这对张茂昭以后采取或进或退的行动是有利的。
English: Now that the imperial court has appointed an official to replace Wang Chengzong, his neighborly persuasion has been successful, which is beneficial to the actions taken by Zhang Maozhao.

古文：若所除之人得入，彼则自以为功；若诏令有所不行，彼因潜相交结，在于国体，岂可遽休！
现代文：如果朝廷委派的官员得以进入成德，张茂昭便认为这是自己的功劳；如果陛下的诏令不能得以施行，张茂昭便可能与王承宗暗中相互勾结。这关系到国家的体统，怎么能够就此善罢甘休了呢！
English: If officials appointed by the imperial court were able to enter Chengde, Zhang Maozhao would consider it to be his own merit; if His Majesty's edict could not be implemented, Zhang Maozhao might secretly collude with Wang Chengzong. This is related to the country's integrity, how can we just leave it at that!

古文：须兴师四面攻讨，彼将帅则加官爵，士卒则给衣粮，按兵玩寇，坐观胜负，而劳费之病尽归国家矣。
现代文：而这就必须征集军队，从四方攻打声讨他们，对委任的将领与主帅就得加封官职与爵位，对应征的士兵就得供给衣服与口粮，还会发生顿兵不前，姑息敌寇，旁观战事的胜利与失败的事情，但是，劳苦百姓、耗费物资的弊病却全部由国家承担起来了。
English: As a result, the army had to be called up and attacked from four directions. The appointed generals and commanders had to be given official positions and titles, and the enlisted soldiers had to be provided with clothes and rations. There were also cases of soldiers not marching forward, appeasing the enemy, and watching the victory and defeat of the war. However, the ills of the working people and the consumption of materials were all borne by the state.

古文：今江、淮水，公私困竭，军旅之事，殆未可轻议也。 
现代文：如今江淮地区发生了水灾，官府与平民极为困顿，对于用兵打仗的事情，恐怕是不应该轻易计议的吧。 
English: Now, floods have occurred in the Jianghuai region, and the government and civilians are extremely distressed. As for the use of soldiers to fight, I am afraid it should not be easily considered.

古文：左军中尉吐突承璀欲希上意，夺裴垍权，自请将兵讨之。
现代文：左神策军中尉吐突承璀，打逄逢迎宪宗的意愿，削去裴的权力，便主动请求率领兵马讨伐王承宗。
English: Zuo Sheng Cho's lieutenant, Tutu Chengzong, took the initiative to request that he lead the soldiers and horses to fight Wang Chengzong. This was in accordance with Ying Xianzong's wishes and stripped Bae of his power.

古文：上疑未决，宗正少卿李拭奏称： 承宗不可不讨。
现代文：宗正少卿李拭上奏声称： 对王承宗不能够不讨伐。
English: Zongzheng Shaoqing Li Wubi said in his report: It is impossible not to fight Wang Chengzong.

古文：承璀亲近信臣，宜委以禁兵，使统诸军，谁敢不服！ 
现代文：吐突承璀是陛下亲近并信任的内臣，应该将禁卫亲军委托给他，让他统率各军，有谁胆敢不服从命令！ 
English: Tutu Chengjun is a close and trusted vassal of His Majesty. He should be entrusted with the protection of the troops and let him lead the troops. Who would dare to disobey orders!

古文：上以拭状示诸学士曰： 此奸臣也，知腾欲将承璀，故上此奏。
现代文：宪宗将李拭的进状拿给各位翰林学士看，还说： 这是一个奸臣啊，他知道朕打算任命吐突承璀为大将，所以他便进献这一奏状。
English: Gensong showed Li Wu's letter to the scholars and said, "This is a treacherous minister. He knows that I plan to appoint Tutu Chengjun as a general, so he submitted this letter."

古文：卿曹记之，自今勿令得进用。 
现代文：你们这些人记住他的名字，从今以后，不要让他得到提拔任用。 
English: You people remember his name, from now on, don't let him get a promotion.

古文：昭义节度使卢从史遭父丧，朝廷久未起复，从史惧，因承璀说上，请发本军讨承宗。
现代文：昭义节度使卢从史遇到父亲去世而退官守丧，朝廷很长时间没有再起用他。卢从史害怕了，便通过吐突承璀劝说宪宗，请求让自己调发昭义本军前去攻讨王承宗。
English: The imperial court did not use Lu Congshi again for a long time. Lu Congshi was afraid, so he persuaded Kenzong through Tutu Chengyu and asked to send his own army to attack Wang Chengzong.

古文：壬辰，起复从史左金吾大将军，馀如故。
现代文：壬辰，宪宗起用卢从史为左金吾大将军，其余职务一如既往。
English: In Imjin, Emperor Gensong appointed Lu Zongshi as the Left Kingu Great General, and the rest of the positions were the same as before.

古文：初，平凉之盟，副无帅判官路泌、会盟判官郑叔矩皆没于吐蕃。
现代文：当初，朝廷与吐蕃在平凉川举行会盟时，副元帅判官路泌、会盟判官郑叔矩都沦落到吐蕃。
English: At first, when the imperial court and Tubo held a league in Pingliang River, Vice-Marshal Judge Lu Xuan and League Judge Zheng Shucheng both went to Tubo.

古文：其后吐蕃请和，泌子随三诣阙号泣上表，乞从其请。德宗以吐蕃多诈，不许。
现代文：此后，吐蕃请求和好，路泌的儿子路随三次前往朝廷哭着进献表章，乞求依从吐蕃的请求，德宗认为吐蕃狡诈多变，不肯听从。
English: After that, Tu Zong asked for a reconciliation. Lu Xun's son, Lu, went to the imperial court three times, crying and presenting a badge, begging to comply with Tu Zong's request. Dezong thought that Tu Zong was cunning and changeable, and refused to obey.

古文：至是，吐蕃复请和，随又五上表，诣执政泣请，裴垍、李籓亦言于上，请许其和。上从之。
现代文：至此，吐蕃再次请求和好，路随又接连五次上表，到主持政务的官员那里哭泣着请求，裴、李藩也向宪宗诉说，请求允许吐蕃请和，宪宗听从了他们的意见。
English: At this point, Tubo once again asked for peace, and Lu Sui made five consecutive visits to the officials in charge of government affairs, crying and pleading. Pei and the Li clan also appealed to Xianzong, asking for permission to invite Tubo to make peace, and Xianzong listened to their opinions.

古文：五月，命祠部郎中徐复使吐蕃。
现代文：五月，命令祠部郎中徐复出使吐蕃。
English: In May, he ordered the retainer of the ancestral hall to return to Tibet.

古文：六月，以灵盐节度使范希朝为河东节度使。
现代文：六月，宪宗任命灵盐节度使范希朝为河东节度使。
English: In June, Jianzong appointed Fan Xichang as the Hedong Festival envoy.

古文：朝议以沙陀在灵武，迫近吐蕃，虑其反复，又部落众多，恐长谷价，乃命悉从希朝诣河东。
现代文：朝廷计议国政的人们认为沙陀住在灵武，靠近吐蕃，顾虑他们反复无常，加上沙陀部落众多，担心会因此使谷物价格上涨，便命令沙陀悉数跟从范希朝前往河东。
English: The people in charge of national affairs at the imperial court thought that Satao lived in Lingwu, near Tubo. Concerned about their capriciousness, coupled with the large number of Satao tribes, and fearing that grain prices would rise as a result, they ordered Satao to follow Fan Xichang to the east of the river.

古文：希朝选其骁骑千二百，号沙陀军，置使以领之，而处其馀众于定襄川。
现代文：范希朝在沙陀人中选出骁勇的骑兵一千二百人，号称沙陀军，设置兵马使统领他们，而将其余的沙陀人众在定襄川安顿下来。
English: The Fanxi Dynasty selected twelve hundred brave cavalrymen from the Shado people, known as the Shado Army, and set up an envoy to lead them, while the rest of the Shado people settled in Dingyangchuan.

古文：于是硃邪执宜始保神武川之黄花堆。
现代文：从此，朱邪执宜开始防守神武川的黄花堆。
English: From then on, Zhu Yaxuiyi began to defend the yellow flowers of the Jinwu River.

古文：左军中尉吐突承璀领功德使，盛修安国寺，奏立圣德碑，高大一准《华岳碑》，先构碑楼，请敕学士撰文，且言 臣已具钱万缗，欲酬之。 
现代文：左神策军中尉吐突承璀兼任功德使的职务，大力修治安国寺，奏请树立圣德碑，长宽一概以《华岳碑》为标准，先建造藏碑的楼宇，请求宪宗敕令翰林学士撰写碑文，而且说： 我已准备好一万缗钱，打算酬谢撰文的学士。 
English: Zuo Sheng Chojun's lieutenant, Tu Tu Chengyu, who also served as a meritorious envoy, vigorously repaired the Peace and Security National Temple, and requested the erection of a sacred monument, the length and width of which were all based on the "Hua Yue Monument," and first built a building to store the monument. He requested the Emperor to order the scholar Han Lin to write the inscription, and said: I have prepared ten thousand baht of money, and I intend to reward the scholar who wrote the inscription.

古文：上命李绛为之，绛上言： 尧、舜、禹、汤，未尝立碑自言圣德，惟秦始皇于巡游所过，刻石高自称述，未审陛下欲何所法！
现代文：宪宗命令李绛撰写碑文，李绛进言说： 唐尧、虞舜、夏禹、商汤不曾立碑称道自己超凡的德行，只有秦始皇在巡视游历经过的地方，镌刻石碑，为自己大力宣扬，不知道陛下打算效法谁人？
English: Xianzong ordered Li Xi to write an inscription, and Li Xi said: Tang Xi, Yu Xi, Xia Yu, and Shang Tang never erected a monument to praise their extraordinary virtues. Only Qin Shihuang was touring the places he passed through, engraving stone monuments, and vigorously promoting himself. I don't know who His Majesty intends to emulate?

古文：且叙修寺之美，不过壮丽观游，岂所以光益圣德！ 
现代文：而且，叙述修治寺庙的美盛之处，只不过是建筑壮丽，足供游览一类，难道这是光大陛下恩德的办法吗！ 
English: Moreover, the description of the beauty of the temple is just a magnificent building, enough for a tour, is this the way of His Majesty's grace!

古文：上览奏，承璀适在旁，上命曳倒碑楼。
现代文：宪宗览阅奏章时，适逢吐突承璀在一旁，宪宗便让他将碑楼拖倒。
English: When Kenzong was reading the music chapter, it happened that Tutu Chengyu was by his side, and Kenzong asked him to pull down the monument.

古文：承璀言： 碑楼甚大，不可曳，请徐毁撤。 
现代文：吐突承璀说： 碑楼很大，无法拖拉，请让我慢慢将它毁除吧。 
English: "The monument is very large and cannot be delayed, so please let me destroy it slowly," said Tutu Chengyu.

古文：冀得延引，乘间再论。上厉声曰： 多用牛曳之！ 
现代文：希望得以招揽适当的人物，借机再说此事，宪宗语调严厉地说： 用许多牛来拖拉碑楼！ 
English: Hoping to recruit the right people, he took the opportunity to speak about the matter again, and in a stern tone, he said: Use many cows to drag the monument!

古文：承璀乃不敢言。
现代文：吐突承璀这才不敢答言。
English: That's why he didn't dare to answer.

古文：凡用百牛曳之，乃倒。
现代文：共计用一百条牛拖拉碑楼，碑楼才倒塌下来。
English: A total of one hundred oxen were used to drag the monument, and the monument collapsed.

