古文：黄帝问曰：天有五行御五位，以生寒暑燥湿风；人有五脏化五气，以生喜怒忧思恐。
现代文：黄帝问道：天上有木、火、土、金、水五行，从而产生寒、暑、燥、湿、风五种气候变化。人有五脏化生五气，从而产生喜、怒、思、忧、恐五种情志变化。
English: The Yellow Emperor asked: There are five elements of wood, fire, earth, gold, and water in the sky, which produce five types of climate change: cold, hot, dry, wet, and wind. People have five internal organs that produce five types of qi, which produce five types of emotional changes: joy, anger, thought, worry, and fear.

古文：论言五运相袭，而皆治之，终期之日，周而复始，予已知之矣。
现代文：经论说，五运递相因袭，各有一定的主治季节，到了一年终结之时，又重新开始新的轮回，我已经知道这个变化规律了。
English: According to the sutra, each of the five phases of the cycle has its own season, and at the end of the year, a new cycle begins. I already know this law of change.

古文：愿闻其与三阴三阳之候，奈何合之？
现代文：还想再听听五运和三阴三阳的结合是怎样的呢？
English: Would you like to hear more about the combination of the five elements and the three yin and three yang?

古文：鬼臾区稽首再拜对曰：昭乎哉问也！
现代文：鬼臾区行稽首再拜大礼后回答说：你提这个问题很高明啊！
English: After another grand ceremony, the inspector of the Onitsuka district replied: You are very clever to ask this question!

古文：夫五运阴阳者，天地之道也，万物之纲纪，变化之父母，生杀之本始，神明之府也，可不通乎!
现代文：五运和阴阳是天地自然界变化的一般规律，是自然万物的一个总纲，是事物发展变化的基础和生长毁灭的根本，是宇宙间无穷尽的变化所在，这些道理哪能不通晓呢？
English: The five movements of the zodiac and yin and yang are the general laws of the changes in the natural world of heaven and earth. They are a general outline of all things in nature. They are the basis for the development and change of things and the root of growth and destruction. They are the source of endless changes in the universe. How can we not understand these principles?

古文：故物生谓之化，物极谓之变，阴阳不测谓之神，神用无方谓之圣。
现代文：因而事物的开始发生叫做 化 ，发展到极点叫做 变 ，难以探测的阴阳变化叫做 神 ，能够掌握和运用这种变化无边的原则的人叫做 圣 。
English: Therefore, the beginning of things is called transformation, the development to the extreme is called change, the difficult-to-detect yin-yang change is called God, and the person who can grasp and apply this boundless principle of change is called a saint.

古文：夫变化之为用也，在天为玄，在人为道，在地为化。化生五味，道生智，玄生神。
现代文：阴阳变化的作用，在天表现为玄妙深远无穷，在人表现为认识事物的自然规律，在地表现为万物的生化，物质的生化而产生五味，认识了自然规律而产生智慧，深远的宇宙空间而产生神明。
English: The effect of yin and yang changes manifests in heaven as the mysterious and profound, in man as the natural law of knowing things, and on earth as the biochemistry of all things. The biochemistry of matter produces the five tastes, the knowledge of the laws of nature produces wisdom, and the far-reaching cosmic space produces gods.

古文：神在天为风，在地为木；在天为热，在地为火；在天为湿，在地为土；在天为燥，在地为金；在天为寒，在地为水。
现代文：神明的作用，在天为风，在地为木；在天为热，在地为火；在天为湿，在地为土；在天为燥，在地为金；在天为寒，在地为水。
English: The work of the gods is wind in the sky and wood on the earth; heat in the sky and fire on the earth; wet in the sky and earth on the earth; dry in the sky and gold on the earth; cold in the sky and water on the earth.

古文：故在天为气，在地成形，形气相感,而化生万物矣。
现代文：所以在天为无形之气，在地为有形之质，形和气相互感召，就能变化和产生万物。
English: Therefore, the formless air in the sky and the tangible substance on the earth are the same, and the form and the air mutually inspire each other, and can change and produce all things.

古文：然天地者，万物之上下也；左右者，阴阳之道路也；水火者，阴阳之征兆也；金木者，生成之终始也。
现代文：天复于上，地载于下，所以天地是万物的上下；阳升于左，阴降于右，所以左右是阴阳的道路；水属阴，火属阳，所以水火是阴阳的象征；万物生发于春属木、成实于秋属金，所以金木是生成的终始。
English: Heaven is above and earth is below, so heaven and earth are the top and bottom of all things; the sun rises to the left, the yin descends to the right, so the left and right are the paths of yin and yang; water is yin, fire is yang, so water and fire are the symbols of yin and yang; all things are born in the spring of wood, and become solid in the autumn of gold, so the golden wood is the beginning of generation.

古文：气有多少，形有盛衰，上下相召而损益彰矣。帝曰：愿闻五运之主时也何如？
现代文：阴阳之气并不是一成不变的，它有多少的不同，有形物质在发展过程中也有旺盛和衰老的区别，在上之气和在下之质互相感召，事物太过和不及的形象就都显露出来了。黄帝说：我想听听关于五运分主四时是怎样的呢？
English: Yin and yang qi is not immutable, how much it is different, tangible matter also has the difference between vigorous and aging in the development process, the qi above and the quality below inspire each other, and the image of things that are too much and not enough are revealed. Huangdi said: I want to hear about the four o'clock of the five elements.

古文：鬼臾区曰：五气运行，各终期日，非独主时也。
现代文：鬼臾区说：五运各能主一年，不是单独只主四时。
English: Onitsuka Ward said: "Each member of the May 5th Movement can be the leader for one year, not just the leader for four hours.

古文：帝曰：请闻其所谓也。
现代文：黄帝说：请你把其中的道理讲给我听听。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Please tell me the reason."

古文：鬼臾区曰：臣积考《太始天元册》文曰： 太虚寥廓，肇基化元，万物资始，五运终天，布气真灵，总统坤元，九星悬朗，七曜周旋，曰阴曰阳，曰柔曰刚，幽显既位，寒暑弛张，生生化化，品物咸章。 
现代文：鬼臾区说：臣仔细研读《太始天元册》，文中说： 广阔无边的天空，是物质生化之本元的基础，万物资生的开始，五运行于天道终而复始，布施天地真元之气，概括大地生化的本元，九星悬照天空，七曜按周天之度旋转，于是万物有阴阳的不断变化，有柔刚的不同性质，幽暗和显明按一定的位次出现，寒冷和暑热按一定的季节往来，这些生生不息之机，变化无穷之道，宇宙万物的不同形象，都表现出来了。 
English: Onitsuka said, "I carefully read "The Book of the Beginning of Heaven," which said, "The vast and boundless sky is the foundation of the biochemical basis of matter. The beginning of all things is the beginning of life. The five movements end and begin in the heavenly way. The breath of the true origin of heaven and earth is given, summarizing the biochemical basis of the earth. The nine stars illuminate the sky, and the seven planets rotate according to the degree of the day of the week. Therefore, everything has a constant change of yin and yang, has different properties of softness and rigidity, dark and bright appear in a certain order, and cold and heat come and go

古文：臣斯十世，此之谓也。帝曰：善。
现代文：我家研究这些道理已有十世，就是这个意思。黄帝说：好。
English: My family has been studying these principles for ten generations, that's what I mean. Huang Di said: Good.

古文：何谓气有多少，形有盛衰？
现代文：什么叫气有多少，形有盛衰呢？
English: How much of what is called qi, is there a rise and fall in form?

古文：鬼臾区曰：阴阳之气，各有多少，故曰三阴三阳也。
现代文：只要明白了迎之而至的是属于什么气，随之而至的是属于什么气，对一年中运气的盛衰情况，就可以预先知道。
English: As long as you understand what kind of qi you belong to, and what kind of qi you belong to, you can know in advance the rise and fall of luck in a year.

古文：形有盛衰，谓五行之治，各有太过不及也。故其始也，有余而往，不足随之；不足而往，有余从之，知迎知随，气可与期。应天为天符，承岁为岁直，三合为治。
现代文：凡一年的中运之气与司天之气相符的，属于 天符 之年，一年的中运之气与岁支的五行相同的，属于 岁直 之年，一年的中运之起与司天之气、年支的五行均相合的，属于 三合 之年。
English: If a year's Mid-Autumn Festival is in accordance with the five elements of the zodiac, it belongs to the Year of the Conjunction. If a year's Mid-Autumn Festival is in accordance with the five elements of the zodiac, it belongs to the Year of the Conjunction. If a year's Mid-Autumn Festival is in accordance with the five elements of the zodiac, it belongs to the Year of the Conjunction.

古文：帝曰：上下相召，奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：天气和地气互相感召是怎样的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "How is it that the weather and the earth's atmosphere inspire each other?"

古文：鬼臾区曰：寒暑燥湿风火，天之阴阳也，三阴三阳上奉之。
现代文：鬼臾区说：寒、暑、燥、湿、风、火，是天的阴阳，三阴三阳上承之。
English: Onitsuka district said: cold, hot, dry, wet, wind, fire, are the yin and yang of the day, and the three yin and three yang are the same.

古文：木火土金水火，地之阴阳也，生长化收藏下应之。
现代文：木、火、土、金、水、火，是地的阴阳，生、长、化、收、藏下应之。
English: Wood, fire, earth, metal, water, and fire are the yin and yang of the earth, corresponding to birth, growth, transformation, harvest, and storage.

古文：天以阳生阴长，地以阳杀阴藏。
现代文：上半年天气主之，春夏为天之阴阳，主生主长；下半年地气主之，秋冬为地之阴阳，主杀主藏。
English: In the first half of the year, the weather is the main, spring and summer are the yin and yang of the sky, and the main is the main; in the second half of the year, the earth is the main, autumn and winter are the yin and yang of the earth, and the main is the main.

古文：天有阴阳，地亦有阴阳。
现代文：天气有阴阳，地气也有阴阳。
English: Weather has yin and yang, and the earth's atmosphere also has yin and yang.

古文：木火土金水火，地之阴阳也，生长化收藏，故阳中有阴，阴中有阳。
现代文：因此说：阳中有阴，阴中有阳。
English: Therefore, it is said that there is yin in yang and yang in yin.

古文：所以欲知天地之阴阳者，应天之气动而不息，故五岁而右迁；应地之气静而守位，故六期而环会。
现代文：所以想要知道天地的变化情况，就要了解，五行应于天干而为五运，常动而不息，故五年之间，自东向西，每运转换一次；六气应于地支，为三阴三阳，其运行较迟，各守其位，故六年而环周一次。
English: Therefore, if you want to know the changes in the heavens and the earth, you must understand that the five elements should be in the stem of the heavens and become the five movements, constantly moving and never stopping, so they should be converted once every five years, from east to west; the six airs should be in the branch of the earth, for the three yin and three yang, their operation is late, each keeping its place, so they should be circled once every six years.

古文：动静相召，上下相临，阴阳相错，而变由生也。
现代文：由于动和静互相感召，天气和地气互相加临，阴气和阳气互相交错，而运气的变化就发生了。
English: As the dynamic and the static influence each other, the weather and the atmosphere influence each other, the yin and yang intertwine with each other, and the change of luck occurs.

古文：帝曰：上下周纪，其有数乎？
现代文：黄帝说：天气和地气，循环周旋，有没有定数呢？
English: Huangdi said: weather and the earth's atmosphere, the cycle of circulation, is there a constant?

古文：鬼臾区曰：天以六为节，地以五为制。
现代文：鬼臾区说：司天之气，以六为节，司地之气，以五为制。
English: Onitsuka district said: the spirit of the leader of heaven and earth is based on six, and the spirit of the leader of earth and earth is based on five.

古文：周天气者，六期为一备。终地纪者，五岁为一周。
现代文：司天之气，六年循环一周，谓之一备；司地之气，五年循环一周，谓之一周。
English: Shi Tian no qi, six-year cycle one week, so-called one preparation; Shi Di no qi, five-year cycle one week, so-called one week.

古文：君火以明，相火以位。
现代文：主运之气的火运，君火是有名而不主令，相火代君宣化火令。
English: The fire luck of the wind of the main wind, the king fire is famous but not the main order, the relative fire represents the king's proclamation of the fire order.

古文：五六相合，而七百二十气为一纪，凡三十岁；千四百四十气，凡六十岁而为一周。不及太过，斯皆见矣。
现代文：六气和五运互相结合，七百二十气，谓之一纪，共三十年；一千四百四十气，共六十年而成为一周，在这六十年中，气和运的太过和不及，都可以出现了。
English: Six qi and five movements combine with each other. Seven hundred and twenty qi, which is called one era, is a total of thirty years; one thousand four hundred and forty qi, a total of sixty years, becomes a week. During these sixty years, excess and deficiency of qi and movement can occur.

古文：帝曰：夫子之言，上终天气，下毕地纪，可谓悉矣。
现代文：黄帝说：先生所谈论的，上则终尽天气，下则穷究地理，可以说是很详尽了。
English: Huang Di said: What you are talking about, the weather at the top, and the geography at the bottom, can be said to be very detailed.

古文：余愿闻而藏之，上以治民，下以治身，使百姓昭著，上下和亲，德泽下流，子孙无忧，传之后世，无有终时，可得闻乎？
现代文：我想在听后把它保存下来，上以调治百姓的疾苦，下以保养自己的身体，并使百姓也都明白这些道理，上下和睦亲爱，德泽广泛流行，并能传之于子孙后世，使他们不必发生忧虑，并且没有终了的时候，可以再听你谈谈吗？
English: After listening to it, I want to preserve it, firstly to treat the people's illnesses, secondly to maintain my own body, and to make the people also understand these principles, harmony between the upper and lower levels, dear, virtue is widespread, and can be passed on to future generations, so that they do not have to worry, and there is no end time, can I listen to you talk again?

古文：鬼臾区曰：至数之机，迫迮以微，其来可见，其往可追，敬之者昌，慢之者亡，无道行私，必得天殃，谨奉天道，请言真要。
现代文：鬼臾区说：气运结合的机理，很是切近而深切，它来的时候，可以看得见，它去的时候，是可以追溯的。遵从这些规律，就能繁荣昌盛，违背这些规律，就要损折夭亡；不遵守这些规律，而只按个人的意志去行事，必然要遇到天然的灾殃。
English: The ghost said: The mechanism of the combination of air and wind is very close and profound. When it comes, it can be seen, and when it goes, it can be traced back. If you follow these rules, you can prosper. If you violate these rules, you will die young. If you do not follow these rules, but only act according to your personal will, you will inevitably encounter natural disasters.

古文：帝曰：善言始者必会于终，善言近者必知其远。
现代文：现在请让我根据自然规律讲讲其中的至理要道。黄帝说：凡是善于谈论事理的起始，也必能领会其终结；善于谈论近的，也必然就知道远的。
English: Now, please let me tell you the essentials of it according to the laws of nature. Huang Di said: Anyone who is good at talking about the beginning of things will also be able to understand its end; if you are good at talking about the near, you will inevitably know the far.

古文：是则至数极而道不惑，所谓明矣。
现代文：这样，气运的至数虽很深远，而其中的道理并不至被迷惑，这就是所谓明了的意思。
English: In this way, although the number of good luck is very far-reaching, the reason is not confused, which is the so-called clear meaning.

古文：愿夫子推而次之，令有条理，简而不匮，久而不绝，易用难忘，为之纲纪。至数之要，愿尽闻之。
现代文：请先生把这些道理，进一步加以推演，使它更有条理，简明而又不贫乏，永远相传而不至于绝亡，容易掌握而不会忘记，使其能提纲挈领，至理扼要，我想听你详细地讲讲。
English: Sir, I would like to hear you expound on these principles, to make them more systematic, concise but not poor, eternal but not extinct, easy to grasp but not forgotten, comprehensive and concise. I would like to hear you explain them in detail.

古文：鬼臾区曰：昭乎哉问！
现代文：鬼臾区说：你说的道理很明白，提的问题也很高明啊！
English: Onitsuka Ward said, "The reason you said is very clear, and the question you asked is also very clever!"

古文：明乎哉道！如鼓之应桴，响之应声也。
现代文：好像鼓槌击在鼓上的应声，又像发出声音立即得到回响一样。
English: It's like the sound of a drumstick hitting a drum, and the sound of the sound immediately reverberating.

古文：臣闻之，甲己之岁，土运统之；乙庚之岁，金运统之；丙辛之岁，水运统之；丁壬之岁，木运统之；戊癸之岁，火运统之。
现代文：臣听说过，凡是甲、已年都是土运治理，乙、庚年都是金运治理，丙、辛年都是水运治理，丁、壬年都是木运治理，戊、癸年都是火运治理。
English: The minister has heard that in years A and Y, the earth movement is controlled, in years B and G, the money movement is controlled, in years C and Z, the water movement is controlled, in years D and Z, the wood movement is controlled, and in years E and G, the fire movement is controlled.

古文：帝曰：其于三阴三阳合之奈何？
现代文：黄帝说：三阴三阳与六气是怎样相合的呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor said: How do the three yin and three yang and the six qi fit together?

古文：鬼臾区曰：子午之岁，上见少阴；丑未之岁，上见太阴；寅申之岁，上见少阳；卯酉之岁，上见阳明；辰戌之岁，上见太阳；巳亥之岁，上见厥阴。
现代文：鬼臾区说：子、午年是少阴司天，丑、末年是太阴司天，寅、申年是少阳司天，卯、酉年是阳明司天，辰、戌是太阳司天，巳、亥年是厥阴司天。
English: It is said that in the Year of the Rat, the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat, the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat, the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat, the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat, the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat, the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat, and the Year of the Rat is the Year of the Rat.

古文：少阴所谓标也，厥阴所谓终也。
现代文：少阴是起首，厥阴是终结。
English: The minor yin is the beginning, and the major yin is the end.

古文：厥阴之上，风气主之；少阴之上，热气主之；太阴之上，湿气主之；少阳之上，相火主之；阳明之上，燥气主之；太阳之上，寒气主之。
现代文：厥阴司天，风气主令；少阴司天，热气主令；太阴司天，湿气主令；少阳司天，相火主令；阳明司天，燥气主令；太阳司天，寒气主令。
English: Jueyansi Tian, the main wind; ShaoYansi Tian, the main heat; TaiYansi Tian, the main humidity; ShaoYangSi Tian, the main fire; YangMingSi Tian, the main dry air; SunSi Tian, the main cold.

古文：所谓本也，是谓六元。
现代文：这就是三阴三阳的本元，所以叫做六元。
English: This is the origin of the three yin and three yang, so it is called six yuan.

古文：帝曰：光乎哉道！
现代文：黄帝说：你的论述很伟大，也很高明啊！
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "Your discourse is very great and very clever!

古文：明乎哉论！请著之玉版，藏之金匮，署曰《天元纪》。
现代文：我将把它刻在玉版上，藏在金匮里，题上名字，叫做《天元纪》。
English: I will engrave it on a jade plate, hide it in a gold mine, and inscribe it with a name: "The Era of the Elements."

