古文：起阏逢摄提格，尽屠维协洽，凡六年。
现代文：起，止，一共六年。
English: From start to finish, a total of six years.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之下地节三年
现代文：汉宣帝地节三年
English: Three years have passed since the Han Xuan Di Festival

古文：春，三月，诏曰： 盖闻有功不赏，有罪不诛，虽唐、虞不能以化天下。
现代文：春季，三月，汉宣帝颁布诏书说： 人们常听说，如果有功不赏，有罪不罚，既使是唐尧、虞舜也无法将天下治理好。
English: In the spring, in March, Emperor Xuan of Han issued an edict, saying: "It is often said that if there is no reward for merit and no punishment for crime, even if it is Tang Xuan and Gu Yao, it is impossible to govern the world well.

古文：今胶东相王成，劳来不怠，流民自占八万馀口，治有异等之效。
现代文：如今胶东国丞相王成，工作勤奋，当地申报户籍定居的流民达八万余人，治理成效为特等。
English: Today, Wang Cheng, Minister of Jiaodong Province, has been working diligently. There are more than 80,000 displaced people who have declared their household registration and settled in the local area, and the governance effect is excellent.

古文：其赐成爵关内侯，秩中二千石。 
现代文：赐王成关内侯爵位，并将其官阶提高到中二千石。 
English: The title of Lord Wangcheng was given to Guanai, with a stipend of 2,000 koku.

古文：未及征用，会病卒官。
现代文：还没等到朝廷自行征召任用，王成就因病死于任上。
English: However, before the time of requisition, Wang Chengzong fell ill and passed away.

古文：后诏使丞相、御史问郡、国上计长史、守丞以政令得失。或对言： 前胶东相成伪自增加以蒙显赏。 是后俗吏多为虚名云。
现代文：后来，汉宣帝命丞相、御史向各郡、国来朝廷呈送财政、户籍薄册的长史、守丞等官员询问朝廷政令的得失，有人提出： 前胶东国丞相王成自己虚报流民申报户籍的人数，以获得朝廷的表彰和重赏，从那以后，很多庸碌无能的官吏都靠虚假的成绩来骗取名誉。 
English: Later, officials such as Han Xuan Emperor's Minister of the Imperial Household and Minister of the Imperial Household who came to the imperial court to inquire about the merits and demerits of the imperial decree were asked about the long history of submitting financial and household registration books to the imperial court. It was suggested that: Former Jiaodong Minister of the Imperial Household Wang Cheng himself falsified the number of displaced people who declared their household registration in order to receive commendations and rewards from the imperial court. Since then, many mediocre and incompetent officials have relied on false achievements to gain fame.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，立子奭为皇太子，以丙吉为太傅，太中大夫疏广为少傅。
现代文：夏季，四月戊申，汉宣帝立儿子刘为皇太子，任命丙吉为太傅，太中大夫疏广为少傅。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Wu of the Han Dynasty appointed Liu, the son of Emperor Xuan, as the crown prince, and appointed Bingji as the grand tutor, and the grand tutor, Shou Guang, as the junior tutor.

古文：封太子外祖父许广汉为平恩侯。又封霍光兄孙中郎将云为冠阳侯。
现代文：又封太子刘的外祖父许广汉为平恩侯，霍光的侄孙中郎将霍云为冠阳侯。
English: In addition, Prince Liu's maternal grandfather Xu Guanghan was named the Prince of Ping'en, and Huo Guang's nephew Sun Zhonglang named Huo Yun the Prince of Guanyang.

古文：霍显闻立太子，怒恚不食，欧血，曰： 此乃民间时子，安得立！
现代文：霍光的妻子霍显听说刘被立为太子，气得饭也吃不下，并吐了血，说： 刘是皇上为平民时生的儿子，怎能被立为皇太子！
English: When Huo Guang's wife, Huo Xian, heard that Liu had been made crown prince, she was so angry that she could not eat, and she vomited blood, saying, "Liu is the son of the emperor when he was a commoner, how can he be made crown prince!

古文：即后有子，反为王邪！ 
现代文：如果将来皇后生了儿子，反倒只能作诸侯王吗？ 
English: If the queen gave birth to a son, could he become king instead?

古文：复教皇后令毒太子。
现代文：于是霍显又教皇后霍成君毒死皇太子。
English: She also ordered Queen Huo to poison the crown prince.

古文：皇后数召太子赐食，保、阿辄先尝之，后挟毒不得行。
现代文：皇后几次召太子前来，赐给食物，但太子的保姆和奶妈总是先尝过之后再让太子吃，皇后拿着毒药，却无从下手。
English: Several times the queen called the prince to come and give him food, but the prince's nanny and wet nurse always tasted it first and then let the prince eat it. The queen held the poison, but she couldn't use it.

古文：五月，甲申，丞相贤以老病乞骸骨；赐黄金百斤、安车、驷马，罢就第。
现代文：五月甲申，丞相韦贤因年老多病，请求退休。汉宣帝赐给他黄金一百斤和一辆由四匹马拉的、可以坐乘的安车，允许他辞官回家。
English: In May, Emperor Xuan of Han gave him 100 catties of gold and a four-horse carriage, allowing him to return home.

古文：丞相致仕自贤始。
现代文：丞相退休，自韦贤开始。
English: The resignation of chancellors began with Wei Xian.

古文：六月，壬辰，以魏相为丞相。
现代文：六月壬辰，汉宣帝任命魏相为丞相。
English: In June, Emperor Han Xuan appointed Wei Xiang as chancellor.

古文：辛丑，丙吉为御史大夫，疏广为太子太傅，广兄子受为少傅。
现代文：辛丑，任命丙吉为御史大夫，疏广为太子太傅，疏广兄长的儿子疏受为少傅。
English: Xin Ug, appointed Bingji as the imperial secretary, Sohang as the crown prince, and Sohang's elder brother's son, Sohye, as the younger brother.

古文：太子外祖父平恩侯许伯，以为太子少，白使其弟中郎将舜监护太子家。
现代文：太子刘的外祖父平恩侯许广汉，因为太子年纪幼小，便向汉宣帝建议，让自己的弟弟中郎将许舜监护太子家。
English: Prince Liu's maternal grandfather, Ping En Hou Xu Guanghan, because the prince was young, suggested to Han Xuan Di that his brother Zhong Lang would take care of the prince's family.

古文：上以问广，广对曰： 太子，国储副君，师友必于天下英俊，不宜独亲外家许氏。
现代文：汉宣帝询问疏广对此事的看法，疏广说： 太子是国家的储君，其师、友必须由天下的优秀人才来充任，不应只与其外祖父许氏一家亲密。
English: Han Xuan Di asked Suo Guang for his opinion on the matter. Suo Guang said: The prince is the state's crown prince, and his teachers and friends must be the world's outstanding talents. He should not only be close to his grandfather Xu and his family.

古文：且太子自有太傅、少傅，官属已备，今复使舜护太子家，示陋，非所以广太子德于天下也。 
现代文：况且太子自有太傅、少傅，官属已经齐备，而今再让许舜监护太子家，将使人感到浅陋狭隘，不是向天下传扬太子品德的好办法。 
English: Moreover, the prince has his own taifu and shoofu, and his officials and subordinates are already well-prepared. Now, to let Xu Rong supervise the prince's family will make people feel shallow and narrow, and is not a good way to spread the prince's character to the world.

古文：上善其言，以语魏相，相免冠谢曰： 此非臣等所能及。 
现代文：汉宣帝认为疏广的话很有道理，便将此语转告丞相魏相，魏相摘下帽子，谢罪说： 这种高超的见识是我等所不及的。 
English: Emperor Xuan of Han believed that Soguan's words were very reasonable, so he relayed the words to the prime minister, Wei Xiang. Wei Xiang took off his hat and said, "I can't wait for such a superb insight."

古文：广由是见器重。
现代文：疏广因此受到汉宣帝的器重。
English: As a result, Sohang was treated with great respect by Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：京师大雨雹，大行丞东海萧望之上疏，言大臣任政，一姓专权之所致。
现代文：京师长安下了一场大冰雹，大行丞东海人萧望之向汉宣帝上了一道奏章，认为这场雹灾是由于朝政大事都由大臣把持，一姓人专权而招致上天警告。
English: There was a great hailstorm in Beijing's Shichang'an District. The people of the East China Sea, who were desperate for help, sent a message to Emperor Xuan of Han, saying that this hailstorm was caused by the fact that the government affairs were controlled by the ministers, and that one person had absolute power, which drew a warning from heaven.

古文：上素闻望之名，拜为谒者。
现代文：汉宣帝早就听说过萧望之的大名，于是任命他担任谒者。
English: Emperor Han Xuan had long heard of Xiao Wangzhi's great name, so he appointed him as the eunuch.

古文：时上博延贤俊，民多上书言便宜，辄下望之问状；高者请丞相、御史，次者中二千石试事，满岁以状闻；下者报闻，罢。
现代文：当时，汉宣帝正广泛延揽贤能才俊之人，很多百姓上书朝廷提建议。汉宣帝总是将百姓的上书交给萧望之审查，才能高的，请丞相、御史试用，稍次的交给中二千石官员试用，满一年后，将试用情况奏闻朝廷；才能低的，则奏报皇帝，遣送回乡。
English: At that time, Emperor Han Xuan was extensively recruiting talented and talented people, and many people submitted letters to the imperial court to make suggestions. Emperor Han Xuan always submitted the people's submissions to the examination of the Great Expectation. For high talents, he asked the prime minister and the minister of history to try out, and for a short time, he gave it to the middle and high school officials to try out. After one year, the trial situation was reported to the imperial court; for low talents, it was reported to the emperor and sent back to the hometown.

古文：所白处奏皆可。冬，十月，诏曰： 乃者九月壬申地震，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：萧望之提出的处理意见，都正合汉宣帝的心意，所以一律批准。冬季，十月，汉宣帝颁布诏书说： 先前在九月壬申发生的地震，使朕非常恐惧。
English: In the winter, in October, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict saying, "The earthquake that occurred in Jinshin in September made me very afraid.

古文：有能箴朕过失，及贤良方正直言极谏之士，以匡朕之不逮，毋讳有司。
现代文：如有能指出朕的过失，以及各郡、国举荐的 贤良方正 和 直言极谏 之士，要匡正朕的失误，对有关高级官员的错误也不必回避！
English: If there is anyone who can point out my mistakes, as well as the virtuous, upright and outspoken people recommended by the counties and the country, we must rectify my mistakes, and we do not have to avoid the mistakes of the relevant senior officials!

古文：朕既不德，不能附远，是以边境屯戍未息。
现代文：由于朕的品德不足，不能使远方的蛮族归附，因而边境的屯戍事务一直不能结束。
English: Due to our lack of virtue, we cannot annex the remote areas, so that the border remains unsettled.

古文：今复饬兵重屯，久劳百姓，非所以绥天下也。
现代文：如今又调兵增加边塞屯戍力量，使百姓长期劳苦不止，不利于天下的安定。
English: Then he ordered the troops to stay put, increasing the burden on the people and the toil of the soldiers. This was not a long-term strategy for world peace.

古文：其罢车骑将军、右将军屯兵。 
现代文：解散车骑将军张安世、右将军霍禹所属的两支屯戍部队！ 
English: It is now decided to remove the cavalry general and the right general from the garrison.

古文：又诏： 池籞未御幸者，假与贫民。
现代文：又下诏命令： 将未使用过的皇家池塘和禁苑借给贫苦百姓，让他们在其中从事生产活动。
English: He also decreed that the unused royal ponds and forbidden gardens should be lent to the poor to engage in productive activities.

古文：郡国宫馆勿复修治。
现代文：各郡、国的宫室、别馆，不要再进行修缮。
English: No more renovations should be carried out in counties, state palaces, and other buildings.

古文：流民还归者，假公田，贷种食，且勿算事。 
现代文：返回原籍的流民，由官府借给公田，贷给种子、粮食，免除他们的财产税和徭役。 
English: The government lends public land, seeds and grain to the returned exiles, exempting them from property tax and corvée.

古文：霍氏骄侈纵横。
现代文：霍氏一家在朝中势力强大，骄横奢侈。
English: The Huo family wields great power in North Korea, and they are arrogant and extravagant.

古文：太夫人显，广治第室，作乘舆辇，加画，绣絪冯，黄金涂；韦絮荐轮，侍婢以五采丝輓显游戏第中；与监奴冯子都乱。
现代文：太夫人霍显大规模地新建府第，又制造同御用规格相同的人拉辇车，绘以精美的图画，车上的褥垫用锦绣制成，车身涂以黄金，车轮外裹上熟皮和绵絮，减轻车身的颠簸，由侍女用五彩丝绸拉着霍显在府中游玩娱乐。另外，霍显还与管家冯子都淫乱。
English: Lady-in-waiting Hou Hsien built new residences on a large scale, and also manufactured a carriage with the same specifications as the royal carriage, painted with exquisite pictures, the cushion on the carriage was made of brocade, the body was painted with gold, the wheels were wrapped with leather and lint to reduce the bumps on the body, and Hou Hsien was pulled around the palace by a maid in multicolored silk. In addition, Hou Hsien also had an affair with the housekeeper, Feng Zi.

古文：而禹、山亦并缮治第宅，走马驰逐平乐馆。
现代文：霍禹、霍山也同时扩建宅第，常常在平乐馆中骑马奔驰追逐。
English: At the same time, Huo Yu and Huo Shan also repaired their houses, and often chased horses at the Pingle Pavilion.

古文：云当朝请，数称病私出，多从宾客，张围猎黄山苑中，使仓头奴上朝谒，莫敢谴者。
现代文：霍云几次在朝会时称病而私自出游，带着许多宾客，到黄山苑中行围打猎，派奴仆去朝廷报到，却无人敢于指责。
English: On several occasions, Huo Yun claimed to be ill at the time of the imperial court meeting and went on a private trip. He took many guests with him and went hunting in the middle of Huangshan Garden. He sent servants to report to the imperial court, but no one dared to criticize him.

古文：显及诸女昼夜出入长信宫殿中，亡期度。
现代文：霍显和她的几个女儿，昼夜随意出入上官太后居住的长信宫，没有限度。
English: There is no limit to the number of times that Huo Xian and her daughters can enter and leave Changxin Palace, the residence of Shangguan's empress dowager, day and night.

古文：帝自在民间，闻知霍氏尊盛日久，内不能善。
现代文：汉宣帝早在民间时，就听说霍氏一家因长期地位尊贵，不能自我约束。
English: Han Xuandi heard that the Huo family could not restrain themselves due to their long-term noble status when he was a commoner.

古文：既躬亲朝政，御史大夫魏相给事中。
现代文：亲掌朝政以后，命御史大夫魏相任给事中。
English: After he took the reins of the imperial government, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian by Emperor Wei.

古文：显谓禹、云、山： 女曹不务奉大将军馀业，今大夫给事中，他人壹间女，能复自救邪！ 
现代文：霍显对霍禹、霍云、霍山说： 你们不设法继承大将军的事业，如今御史大夫当了给事中，一旦有人在他面前说你们的坏话，你们还能救自己吗？ 
English: Huo Xian said to Huo Yu, Huo Yun and Huoshan: You do not try to inherit the cause of the general, now the chief historian is in charge, once someone speaks ill of you in front of him, can you save yourself?

古文：后两家奴争道，霍氏奴入御史府，欲躢大夫门；御史为叩头谢，乃去。
现代文：后霍、魏两家的奴仆因争夺道路引起冲突，霍家奴仆闯入御史府，要踢魏家大门，御史为此叩头道歉，方才离去。
English: Afterward, the servants of the two families, Huo and Wei, caused a conflict due to the competition for the road. The servants of the Huo family broke into the imperial palace to kick the gate of the Wei family. The imperial historian apologized for this and bowed before leaving.

古文：人以谓霍氏，显等始知忧。
现代文：有人将此事告诉霍家，霍显等才开始感到忧虑。
English: Someone told the Huo family about this, and only then did they begin to know that there would be trouble.

古文：会魏大夫为丞相，数燕见言事；平恩侯与侍中金安上等径出入省中。
现代文：当魏相成为丞相，多次在汉宣帝闲暇时受到召见，报告国事，平恩侯许广汉和侍中金安上也可以径自出入宫廷。
English: When Wei Xiang became chancellor, he was summoned many times in Han Xuan Di's spare time to report on state affairs. Ping'en marquis Xu Guanghan and chamberlain Jin An Shang could also walk in and out of the palace.

古文：时霍山领尚书，上令吏民得奏封事，不关尚书，群臣进见独往来，于是霍氏甚恶之。
现代文：当时，霍山主管尚书事务，汉宣帝崐却下令，允许官吏百姓直接向皇帝呈递秘密奏章，不必经过尚书，群臣也可直接晋见皇帝。这些都使霍氏一家人极为恼恨。
English: At that time, Huoshan was in charge of the imperial rescript affairs, but Emperor Han Xuan decreed that officials and commoners were allowed to submit secret rescripts directly to the emperor. They did not have to go through the imperial rescript, and ministers could also directly see the emperor. All of this made the Huo family extremely angry.

古文：上颇闻霍氏毒杀许后而未察，乃徙光女婿度辽将军、未央卫尉、平陵侯范明友为光禄勋，出次婿诸吏、中郎将、羽林监任胜为安定太守。
现代文：汉宣帝听说不少关于霍显毒死许皇后的传闻，只是尚未调查，于是将霍光的女婿度辽将军、未央卫尉、平陵侯范明友调任光禄勋，将霍光的二女婿诸吏、中郎将、羽林监任胜调出京师，任安定太守。
English: Emperor Han Xuan heard a lot of rumors about Huo Xian poisoning the death of the Empress Xu, but he had not yet investigated, so he transferred Huo Guang's son-in-law General Du Liao, Wei Yang Wei, and Pingling Hou Fan Mingyou to the honor of Guanglu, and transferred Huo Guang's second son-in-law Zhu Li, Zhong Lang Zhe, and Ulin Guan Sheng to the Beijing Division, and appointed them as the governor of stability.

古文：数月，复出光姊婿给事中、光禄大夫张朔为蜀郡太守，群孙婿中郎将王汉为武威太守。
现代文：几个月之后，又将霍光的姐夫给事中、光禄大夫张塑调出京师，任蜀郡太守，将霍光的孙女婿之一、中郎将王汉调任武威太守。
English: A few months later, he transferred Huo Guang's brother-in-law, Ren, and Guanglu's doctor, Zhang Shuo, out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Shu County, and transferred Wang Han, one of Huo Guang's grandsons-in-law and the middle brother, to serve as the governor of Wuwei.

古文：顷之，复徙光长女婿长乐卫尉邓广汉为少府。
现代文：稍后，又将霍光的大女婿长乐卫尉邓广汉调任少府。
English: Not long after the meeting, Deng Guangmo, the eldest son-in-law of Huo Guang, was transferred to the position of Junior Governor of Changle Palace.

古文：戊戌，更以张安世为卫将军，两宫卫尉、城门、北军兵属焉。
现代文：八月戊戌，改由张安世为卫将军，未央、长乐两宫卫尉，长安十二门的警卫部队和北军都归张安世统领。
English: In August, it was changed from Zhang Anshi to Wei general, with Weiyang and Changle two palace guards, and the guards of the twelve gates of Chang'an and the Northern Army were all under the command of Zhang Anshi.

古文：以霍禹为大司马，冠小冠，亡印绶；罢其屯兵官属，特使禹官名与光俱大司马者。
现代文：任命霍禹为大司马，却不让他戴照例应戴的大官帽，而是戴小官帽，且不颁给印信、绶带，撤销他以前统领的屯戍部队和官属，只使他的官名和霍光同样为大司马。
English: He appointed Huo Yu as the grand steward, but did not allow him to wear the grand steward's cap that should normally be worn, but wore a minor official's cap, and did not issue the seal letter, the ribbon, and revoked his former command of the garrison troops and officials, only to make his official name and Huo Guang the same as the grand steward.

古文：又收范明友度辽将军印绶，但为光禄勋；及光中女婿赵平为散骑、骑都尉、光禄大夫，将屯兵，又收平骑都尉印绶。
现代文：又将范明友的度辽将军印信和绶带收回，只让他担任光禄勋一职。霍光的另一个女婿赵平本为散骑、骑都尉、光禄大夫，统领屯戍部队，如今也将赵平的骑都尉印信和绶带收回。
English: He also took back the seal and sash of General Du Liao from Fan Mingyou, and only allowed him to hold the position of Guanglu Xun. Huo Guang's other son-in-law, Zhao Ping, who was a cavalry officer, cavalry captain, and Guanglu doctor, and commanded the garrison troops, has now also taken back Zhao Ping's seal and sash of cavalry captain.

古文：诸领胡、越骑、羽林及两宫卫将屯兵，悉易以所亲信许、史子弟代之。
现代文：所有统领胡人和越人骑兵、羽林军以及未央、长乐两宫卫所属警卫部队的将领，都改由汉宣帝所亲信的许、史两家子弟担任。
English: All the generals of the Hu people and the Viet cavalry, the Ulin army, and the guards of the palace guards belonging to Weiyang and Changle were replaced by the two sons of Xu and Shi, who were trusted by Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：初，孝武之世，征发烦数，百姓贫耗，究民犯法，奸轨不胜。
现代文：当初，汉武帝时，征调频繁，百姓困乏，穷苦之人触犯法律，纷纷作乱，无法平息。
English: At first, during the reign of Emperor Han Wudi, there were frequent requisitions and transfers, the people were poor, and the poor people broke the law and made disturbances one after another, which could not be quelled.

古文：究当为穷，于是使张汤、赵禹之属，条定法令，作见知故纵、监临部主之法，缓深、故之罪，急纵、出之诛。
现代文：于是，汉武帝命张汤、赵禹之类酷吏制定法令，定出有关 明知有人犯法而不举报 和 长官有罪，其僚属连坐 等惩罚条例。
English: As a result, Emperor Hanwu ordered Zhang Tang, Zhao Yu and other cruel officials to formulate laws and regulations, and set forth punishment regulations such as knowing that someone has violated the law and not reporting it, and senior officials are guilty, and their colleagues are held jointly.

古文：其后奸猾巧法转相比况，禁罔浸密，律令烦苛，文书盈于几阁，典者不能遍睹。
现代文：对犯有给人定罪过严或者栽赃陷害之罪的官吏，往往从宽处理；而对那些宽释犯人的官吏则加重惩处。以后，很多奸猾的官吏玩弄法律，转相引用比照苛刻的判例，使法网日益严密，律令更加繁苛，法律文件堆得满桌满屋，主管官员根本看不过来。
English: After that, many treacherous officials played with the law, in turn quoting harsh precedents, so that the legal net became increasingly tight, the rules and regulations more onerous, the legal documents piled up on tables, and the competent officials could not see them at all.

古文：是以郡国承用者驳，或罪同而论异，奸吏因缘为市，所欲活则傅生议，所欲陷则予死比，议者咸冤伤之。
现代文：因此各郡、国在引用法令时出现混乱，有的罪行相同而处罚各异，奸猾官吏借机进行交易，索取贿赂。想使罪犯活命，就附会能让他活命的法令；想致其于死地，就引用使其非死不可的条文。
English: As a result, there is confusion among counties and countries in the application of laws and regulations. Some crimes are the same, but punishments vary. Devious officials take advantage of the opportunity to make deals and solicit bribes. If you want to keep a criminal alive, add a law that will keep him alive; if you want to kill him, use a law that will make him die.

古文：廷尉史巨鹿路温舒上书曰： 臣闻齐有无知之祸而桓公以兴，晋有骊姬之难而文公用伯。近世赵王不终，诸吕作乱，而孝文为太宗。
现代文：人们议论法律，都认为冤屈太多而感到悲伤。廷尉史钜鹿人路温舒上书汉宣帝说： 我听说，春秋时齐国出现姜无知杀死齐襄公之祸，却使齐桓公因此兴起；晋国发生因骊姬的谗言而造成的灾难，却使晋文公后来称霸于诸侯；近世我朝赵王不得善终，吕氏一家作乱，却使孝文皇帝被尊为太宗。
English: People talk about the law, they all think that there are too many grievances and feel sad. The courtier Shi Menglu, who was sent by Emperor Han Xuan, said: I heard that in the Spring and Autumn Period, the calamity of Jiang Ignorance killing Qixianggong occurred in Qi Province, but Qixianggong arose as a result; the calamity caused by the slander of Qianji occurred in Jin Province, but Jinwengong later dominated the princes; in modern times, the reign of King Zhao did not end well, and the Lv family made a riot, but Emperor Xiaowen was respected as Taizong.

古文：繇是观之，祸乱之作，将以开圣人也。
现代文：从这些往事看来，祸乱的发生，往往能造就出贤圣之人。
English: Seen from this perspective, the occurrence of the calamity opens the way for the emergence of the holy king.

古文：夫继变乱之后，必有异旧之恩，此贤圣所以昭天命也。
现代文：大乱之后，必然会出现与以往大不相同的变革措施，贤圣之人以此昭示上天的旨意。
English: After the great turmoil, there will inevitably be transformative measures that are very different from those in the past, and wise people will use them to reveal God's will.

古文：往者昭帝即世无嗣，昌邑淫乱，乃皇天所以开至圣也。
现代文：以前孝昭皇帝去世时，没有后嗣，昌邑王淫邪悖乱，这正是上天为造就至圣明君开辟道路。
English: In the past, when Emperor Xiaozhao died, there was no heir, and King Changyi rebelled against him. This is exactly how Heaven opened the way for the creation of the Most Holy Ming Jun.

古文：臣闻《春秋》正即位、大一统而慎始也。
现代文：我听说，《春秋》将继承正统称作即位，因尊重正统，对开端必须慎重。
English: I heard that "Spring and Autumn" will inherit the orthodoxy called enthronement, because of respect for orthodoxy, we must be cautious about the beginning.

古文：陛下初登至尊，与天合符，宜改前世之失，正始受命之统，涤烦文，除民疾，以应天意。
现代文：陛下刚刚登上至尊之位不久，与天意正相符合，应当改正前代的失误，以显示是继承正统，删去繁杂琐碎的法令条文，解除百姓的疾苦，以顺应天意。
English: His Majesty has just ascended to the supreme throne, and it is in line with the will of heaven. He should correct the mistakes of the previous generation to show that he is inheriting the orthodoxy, delete the complicated and trivial laws and regulations, relieve the suffering of the people, and comply with the will of heaven.

古文：臣闻秦有十失，其一尚存，治狱之吏是也。
现代文：我听说秦朝有十项重大失误，如今有一项尚存在，即司法官吏的严苛。
English: I have heard that the Qin Dynasty had ten major faults, one of which still exists today, that is, the officials who tried prisoners.

古文：夫狱者，天下之大命也，死者不可复生，绝者不可复属。《书》曰： 与其杀不辜，宁失不经。 
现代文：崐刑狱是天下重要的大事。被处死的人不可能复生，截断肢体的人也无法再接上复原，所以《尚书》中说： 与其杀死无辜的人，宁可偶尔失之宽纵。 
English: Imprisonment is one of the most important things in the world. It is impossible to revive a person who has been executed, and it is impossible to restore a person whose limbs have been amputated. Therefore, it is said in the Shangshu, "Instead of killing innocent people, it is better to occasionally forgive."

古文：今治狱吏则不然，上下相驱，以刻为明，深者获公名，平者多后患，故治狱之吏皆欲人死，非憎人也，自安之道在人之死。
现代文：如今司法官吏却并非如此，他们上下相争，都以苛刻为贤明，判刑严厉的，获得 公正 的美誉，而执法平和的人，却往往多有后患。所以，负责司法事务的官吏都想将案犯定为死罪，并非憎恨犯人，而是保全自己的方法在于致人于死。
English: Today, this is not the case with judicial officials. They are competing with each other, and they all have the reputation of being wise, severe in sentencing, and fair. However, those who enforce the law peacefully often have a lot of trouble. Therefore, the officials responsible for judicial affairs all want to make the crime a capital crime. They do not hate the criminal, but the way to protect themselves is to cause death.

古文：是以死人之血流离于市，被刑之徒，比肩而立，大辟之计，岁以万数。
现代文：因此，死人的鲜血在街市上流淌，受刑的囚犯一个挨着一个，处以死刑的人每年数以万计。
English: As a result, the blood of the dead flows in the streets, prisoners are tortured side by side, and tens of thousands of people are sentenced to death every year.

古文：此仁圣之所以伤也，太平之未洽，凡以此也。
现代文：仁慈圣明的人对此感到悲哀，太平盛世不能到来，都是由于这个原因。
English: The benevolent and holy people are saddened by this, and it is for this reason that peace and prosperity cannot come.

古文：夫人情，安则乐生，痛则思死，棰楚之下，何求而不得！
现代文：按照人之常情，平安的时候就愿意活着，痛苦的时候就希望死，严刑拷打什么样的口供都能得到！
English: According to human nature, when it is safe, they are willing to live, when it is painful, they hope to die, and any kind of confession can be obtained through severe torture!

古文：故囚人不胜痛，则饰辞以示之；吏治者利其然，则指导以明之；上奏畏却，则锻练而周内之。
现代文：所以当囚犯无法忍受痛苦时，审案官就修饰词语进行暗示；审案官为使囚犯的供词对自己有利，就干脆清楚明白地告诉他应如何招供；为了怕向朝廷奏报时遭到批驳，就想方设法使定案的理由充分完备周密。
English: Therefore, when the prisoner could not bear the pain, the adjudicator hinted at the embellished words; the adjudicator, in order to make the prisoner's confession beneficial to himself, simply told him clearly and clearly how to confess; in order to fear being refuted when reporting to the court, he tried his best to make the reasons for the final case fully complete and thorough.

古文：盖奏当之成，虽皋陶听之，犹以为死有馀辜。
现代文：上奏之后，既使是古代以善于审案定罪著称的皋陶听了，也会认为该犯是死有余辜。
English: After the recital, even if Zou Tao, who was famous in ancient times for being good at adjudicating and convicting, listened, he would think that the criminal was innocent.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：成练者众，文致之罪明也。
现代文：因为屈打成招，罗织捏造的罪行既多且明。
English: Because bending the truth into a trick, Luo Wei's fabricated crimes are many and clear.

古文：故俗语曰： 画地为狱，议不入；刻木为吏，期不对。 
现代文：因此，俗话说： 既使是在地上画一个圆圈作为监狱，也不能进去；将木头人做成审讯官，也不要去面对。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: If the ground is painted as a prison, no one will dare to go to the court to discuss politics; if the wood is carved as officials, no one will dare to take countermeasures.

古文：此皆疾吏之风，悲痛之辞也。唯陛下省法制，宽刑罚，则太平之风可兴于世。 
现代文：这些都是人们对严刑酷法痛心疾首的悲愤之词。希望陛下减省法令，放宽刑罚，太平之风才能呈现于当今。 
English: These are the words of sorrow and indignation of people who are heartbroken by the draconian laws. I hope that His Majesty will reduce the decrees and relax the penalties, so that the spirit of peace can be present today.

古文：上善其言。
现代文：汉宣帝认为他说得很有道理。
English: The emperor thought that what Tanaga said was reasonable.

古文：十二月，诏曰： 间者吏用法巧文浸深，是朕之不德也。
现代文：十二月，汉宣帝下诏书说： 近来，官吏们舞文弄法的现象越来越严重，这都是朕的错误。
English: In December, Emperor Xuan of Han issued an edict saying, "Recently, the phenomenon of bureaucrats playing tricks has become more and more serious. This is all my fault.

古文：夫决狱不当，使有罪兴邪，不辜蒙戮，父子悲恨，朕甚伤之！
现代文：案狱处理不当，使有罪者愈发作恶，无辜者遭受严刑处罚，父子兄弟悲伤愤恨，朕对此非常难过！
English: The improper handling of the case and prison has made the guilty more and more evil, the innocent have suffered severe punishment, and the father and son brothers are sad and angry. I am very sad about this!

古文：今遣廷史与郡鞠狱，任轻禄薄，其为置廷尉平，秩六百石，员四人。
现代文：如今派廷尉史参与各郡的司法事务，但职权小俸禄少，应再设置廷尉平四名，俸禄为六百石。
English: Nowadays, the court officials are sent to participate in the judicial affairs of each county, but the duties are small and the salary is small, and four court officials should be set up, with a salary of 600 koku.

古文：其务平之，以称朕意！ 
现代文：务必使审判公平，以符合朕的心意！ 
English: Let the trial be fair and in accordance with my wishes!

古文：于是每季秋后请谳时，上常幸宣室，斋居而决事，狱刑号为平矣。
现代文：于是每年秋天，当对一年中的案狱做最后决定时，汉宣帝经常到宣室殿，住那里实行斋戒，亲自裁决。从此，对各类刑罚案狱的判决号称公平。
English: As a result, every autumn, when the final decision on the year's prison sentence was made, Emperor Han Xuan often went to the Xuanwu Palace, where he lived, practiced fasting, and personally adjudicated. From then on, the judgment on various types of criminal prison sentences was known to be fair.

古文：涿郡太守郑昌上疏言： 今明主躬垂明听，虽不置廷平，狱将自正；若开后嗣，不若删定律令。
现代文：涿郡太守郑昌上奏章说： 如今圣明的主上亲自对刑罚诉讼作最后的判决，即使不设廷尉平一职，司法也自会公正；但若想为后世确立规范，则不如从删改、修定法律条文着手。
English: "Nowadays, the Lord of the Sacred Light personally makes the final judgment on criminal proceedings. Even if there is no courtier, justice will be fair; but if you want to establish a standard for future generations, it is better to start with deleting and modifying legal provisions.

古文：律令一定，愚民知所避，奸吏无所弄矣。
现代文：各项律令一经确定，百姓们知道怎样才能不触犯国家法律，奸猾官吏也就无计可施了。
English: Once the law is determined, the people will know what to avoid, and evil officials will not be able to play with the law.

古文：今不正其本，而置廷平以理其末，政衰听怠，则廷平将召权而为乱首矣。 
现代文：如今不从根本上加以纠正，只是靠设置廷尉平在末梢上补救，一旦朝政疏懈，陛下对判决案狱有所倦怠，则廷尉平将揽权弄法，成为祸乱天下的罪首。 
English: Today, it is not fundamentally corrected, but only remedied by setting up the courtier Ping on the periphery. Once the imperial government is slack and His Majesty is tired of sentencing and imprisonment, the courtier Ping will seize power and become the culprit of the world.

古文：昭帝时，匈奴使四千骑田车师。
现代文：汉昭帝时，匈奴曾派四千骑兵以行围打猎为名前往车师国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Han Zhao, the Xiongnu once sent four thousand cavalrymen to encircle and hunt in the name of the country.

古文：及五将军击匈奴，车师田者惊去，车师复通于汉；匈奴怒，召其太子军宿，欲以为质。
现代文：后汉朝派五将军出击匈奴，在车师打猎的匈奴骑兵惊恐不安，撤兵而去，车师国再次恢复了与汉朝的联系。匈奴得知后大为恼火，召车师国太子军宿前往匈奴，打算扣为人质。
English: Later, the Han Dynasty sent five generals to attack the Xiongnu. The Hun cavalrymen who were hunting in the Chariot Division were frightened and uneasy, and withdrew. The Chariot Division country once again restored contact with the Han Dynasty. The Hun was very angry when he learned of this, and summoned the Prince of the Chariot Division country to the Hun, intending to take him hostage.

古文：军宿，焉耆外孙，不欲质匈奴，亡走焉耆，车师王更立子乌贵为太子。
现代文：军宿是焉耆王的外孙，不愿去匈奴充当人质，便逃往焉耆，于是车师王改立另一个儿子乌贵为太子。
English: The innkeeper was the grandson of the king of Yanshan. He did not want to go to the Huns as a hostage, so he fled to Yanshan. Therefore, the king appointed another son, Ugui, as the prince.

古文：及乌贵立为王，与匈奴结婚姻，教匈奴遮汉道通乌孙者。
现代文：乌贵当上车师国王之后，与匈奴结成婚姻，并建议匈奴截断汉朝与乌孙的联系通道。
English: Later, Ugui became the king of chariots, married the Xiongnu, and provided information for the Xiongnu to intercept the envoys of the Han Dynasty to Wusun.

古文：是岁，侍郎会稽郑吉与校尉司马喜，将免刑罪人田渠犁，积谷，发城郭诸国兵万馀人与所将田士千五百人共击车师，破之；车师王请降。
现代文：这一年，侍郎会稽人郑吉和校尉司马，率领被免除刑罚的罪犯在渠犁屯田，积存谷物，并征调西域各城邦国家的军队一万余人，会合二人率领的崐屯田兵卒一千五百人共同攻击车师国，结果车师国大败，车师王乌贵请求归降。
English: In that year, Zheng Ji, the inspector of the chamberlains' guild, and Sima, the lieutenant of the school, led the criminals who had been exempted from punishment in the canal and accumulated grain, and conscripted more than 10,000 troops from the city-states in the western region. The 1,500 soldiers from the canal and the city-states led by the two men jointly attacked the chariot country. As a result, the chariot country was defeated, and the chariot master Wang Ugui requested to surrender.

古文：匈奴发兵攻车师；吉、喜引兵北逢之，匈奴不敢前。
现代文：匈奴听到消息后，派兵进攻车师，郑吉、司马率兵北进迎击，匈奴军不敢向前逼近。
English: After the Huns heard the news, they sent soldiers to attack the car division. Zheng Ji and Sima led the soldiers north to meet the attack. The Huns did not dare to approach forward.

古文：吉、喜即留一候与卒二十人留守王，吉等引兵归渠犁。
现代文：郑吉、司马便留下一名候率领二十名兵卒负责监视车师王，自己率兵返回渠犁。
English: Zheng Ji and Sima then left a soldier-in-waiting with twenty soldiers to monitor the coachman Wang, and returned to the ditch with their own soldiers.

古文：车师王恐匈奴兵复至而见杀也，乃轻骑奔乌孙。吉即迎其妻子，传送长安。
现代文：车师王害怕匈奴再派军队前来将他杀死，便轻骑逃往乌孙，郑吉便即将车师王的妻子、儿女接来，用驿马送往长安。
English: Coachman Wang was afraid that the Xiongnu would send an army to kill him, so he fled to Wusun on a light horse. Zheng Ji then picked up Coachman Wang's wife and children and sent them to Chang'an on a light horse.

古文：匈奴更以车师王昆弟兜莫为车师王，收其馀民东徙，不敢居故地；而郑吉始使吏卒三百人往田车师地以实之。
现代文：匈奴改立车师王乌贵的弟弟兜莫为车师王，召集车师国余下的百姓向东迁徙。
English: The Xiongnu changed the chariot master Wang Ugui's younger brother to the chariot master Wang, and gathered the remaining people of the chariot master country to migrate eastward.

古文：上自初即位，数遣使者求外家；久远，多似类而非是。
现代文：不敢再留居原来的地方。郑吉便开始派官吏士卒三百人到车师屯田，以充实该地。汉宣帝自即皇位以来，多次派使者查访其外祖父家的消息。
English: He did not dare to stay in the same place any longer. Zheng Ji then began to send 300 officials and clerks to Cheji Tunden to enrich the area. Emperor Han Xuan sent emissaries to visit his maternal grandfather's home many times since he became emperor.

古文：是岁，求得外祖母王媪及媪男无故、武。
现代文：然而，因时间已相隔太久，查访到的人家，大多虽像而实际不是。这一年，找到了其外祖母王媪和王媪的儿子王无故和王武。
English: However, due to the long time gap, most of the people's homes visited by the investigation were not real, although they looked like it. This year, they found their grandmother Wang Yao and Wang Yao's sons, Wang Wujie and Wang Wu.

古文：上赐无故、武爵关内侯。
现代文：汉宣帝赐王无故、王武关内侯爵。
English: Emperor Han Xuan gave Wang Wuhai the title of Marquis of Wangwuguanai.

古文：旬月间，赏赐以巨万计。
现代文：短短十天时间，对王家的赏赐就以万万计。
English: In just ten days, the reward for the royal family has increased by tens of thousands.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之下地节四年春，二月，赐外祖母号为博平君；封舅无故为平昌侯，武为乐昌侯。
现代文：地节四年春季，二月，汉宣帝赐其外祖母 博平君 称号，封其舅父王无故为平昌侯、王武为乐昌侯。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the festival, in February, Emperor Han Xuan gave his grandmother Bo Pingjun the title, and made his uncle Wang Wuzhong the prince of Pyeongchang and Wang Wu the prince of Lechang.

古文：夏，五月，山阳、济阴雹如鸡子，深二尺五寸，杀二十馀人，飞鸟皆死。
现代文：夏季，五月，山阳、济阴两地下了一场冰雹，如鸡蛋般大小，深二尺五寸，有二十多人被冰雹砸死，当地的飞鸟也全部丧生。
English: In the summer, in May, Shanyang and Jiyin were hit by a hailstorm, the size of an egg, two feet and five inches deep. More than twenty people were killed by the hailstorm, and all the local birds were killed.

古文：诏： 自今子有匿父母、妻匿夫、孙匿大父母，皆勿治。 
现代文：汉宣帝下诏书说： 从今以后，凡属儿子窝藏父母、妻子窝藏丈夫、孙子窝藏祖父母的，一律不治罪。 
English: The edict issued by Emperor Han Xuan said, "From now on, any son who harbors his parents, any wife who harbors her husband, any grandchild who harbors his grandparents, shall not be punished.

古文：立广川惠王孙文为广川王。
现代文：汉宣帝立广川惠王的孙子刘文为广川王。
English: Guangchuan Hui Wang Sunwen was named King of Guangchuan.

古文：霍显及禹、山、云自见日侵削，数相对啼泣自怨。
现代文：霍显和霍禹、霍山、霍云眼看霍家的权势日益被削弱，多次聚在一起痛哭流涕，自怨自艾。
English: When Huo Xian, Huo Yu, Huo Shan and Huo Yun saw that the power of the Huo family was weakening day by day, they gathered together many times to weep bitterly and feel sorry for themselves.

古文：山曰： 今丞相用事，县官信之，尽变易大将军时法令，发扬大将军过失。
现代文：霍山说： 如今丞相当权，受到天子的信任，将大将军在世时的法令全部更改，还专门宣扬大将军的过失。
English: Huoshan said, "Nowadays, Zheng is so powerful and trusted by the Son of Heaven that he has changed all the decrees of the great general when he was alive, and has also specially publicized the faults of the great general.

古文：又，诸儒生多窭人子，远客饥寒，喜妄说狂言，不避忌讳，大将军常雠之。
现代文：再者，那些儒生大都为贫贱出身，从偏远的地方来到京中，衣食无着，却爱说狂言，不避忌讳，大将军一向痛恨他们，但如今皇上却专爱和这些腐儒谈话。
English: Furthermore, most of those Confucian scholars were born poor, came to Kyoto from remote places, had nothing to eat or wear, but loved to tell wild stories and did not avoid taboos. The general had always hated them, but now the emperor loved to talk to these corrupt Confucians.

古文：今陛下好与诸儒生语，人人自书对事，多言我家者。尝有上书言我家昆弟骄恣，其言绝痛；山屏不奏。
现代文：他们每人都上书奏事，纷纷指责我们霍家。曾经有人上书说我们兄弟骄横霸道，言词十分激烈，被我压下没有呈奏。
English: Each of them wrote a report, accusing us of being a "ho family." Someone once wrote a report saying that our brothers were arrogant and domineering, that their words were very fierce, and that they were under pressure from me and didn't perform.

古文：后上书者益黠，尽奏封事，辄使中书令出取之，不关尚书，益不信人。
现代文：后来上书者越来越狡猾，都改成秘密奏章，皇上总是让中书令出来取走，并不通过尚书，日益不信任我。
English: Later, the sender of the letter became more and more cunning and changed it to a secret score. The Emperor always asked for the Chinese transcript to come out and take it away, and did not pass the transcript, and increasingly did not trust me.

古文：又闻民间讙言 霍氏毒杀许皇后 ，宁有是邪？ 
现代文：又听说民间纷纷传言 霍氏毒死许皇后 ，难道有这回事吗？ 
English: I also heard that there were rumors among the people that Huo had poisoned and killed the Empress Xu. Is there such a thing?

古文：显恐急，即具以实告禹、山、云。
现代文：霍显吓坏了，便将实情告诉霍禹、霍山、霍云。
English: Hor Hsien was terrified, so he told the truth to Hor Yu, Hor Shan and Hor Yun.

古文：禹、山、云惊曰： 如是，何不早告禹等！
现代文：霍禹、霍山、霍云大惊，说道： 果真如此，为什么不早告诉我们！
English: Huo Yu, Huo Shan, and Huo Yun were shocked and said: If this is true, why didn't you tell us earlier!

古文：县官离散、斥逐诸婿，用是故也。此大事，诛罚不小，奈何？ 
现代文：皇上将霍家女婿都贬斥放逐，就是为了这个缘故。这是大事，一旦事发，必遭严惩，怎么办？ 
English: It was for this reason that the son-in-law of the Emperor had all the sons-in-law of the Huo family banished. This was a big deal. If it happened, they would be severely punished. What should they do?

古文：于是始有邪谋矣。
现代文：于是开始有反叛朝廷的阴谋。
English: From then on, they began to plot.

古文：云舅李竟民善张赦，见云家卒卒，谓竟曰： 今丞相与平恩侯用事，可令太夫人言太后，先诛此两人。
现代文：霍云的舅父李竟有一位要好的朋友，名叫张赦，看到霍云一家人惊慌不安，便对李竟说： 如今是丞相魏相和平恩侯许广汉当权，可以让霍太夫人向上官太后进言，先将这两人杀死。
English: Huo Yun's uncle Li actually had a good friend named Zhang Mengran. When he saw that Huo Yun's family was panicked and uneasy, he said to Li: Now that the prime minister Wei Xiang and the Prince of Peace Xu Guanghan are in power, he can have Mrs. Huo Tai advise the queen mother to kill the two people first.

古文：移徙陛下，在太后耳。 
现代文：废掉当今皇上，改立新君，全由皇太后决定。 
English: It is up to the Empress Dowager to depose His Majesty.

古文：长安男子张章告之，事下廷尉、执金吾，捕张赦等。
现代文：后被长安男子张章告发，汉宣帝将此事交给廷尉和执金吾处理，逮捕了崐张赦等人。
English: After being denounced by Zhang Zhang, a man from Chang'an, Emperor Han Xuan handed the matter over to the imperial lieutenant and the eunuch to deal with, and arrested Zou Zhang Meng and others.

古文：后有诏，止勿捕。
现代文：后来，汉宣帝下诏，命令不要抓人。
English: Later, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict ordering that no one should be arrested.

古文：山等愈恐，相谓曰： 此县官重太后，故不竟也。
现代文：霍山等更加慌恐，商议说： 这是皇上尊重太后，所以不深究，但已可看出苗头不妙，时间长了还会爆发。
English: Huoshan and others were even more alarmed, and said, "This is the face of the emperor valuing the empress dowager, so there is no in-depth investigation."

古文：然恶端已见，久之犹发，发即族矣，不如先也。 
现代文：一旦爆发，就是灭门之祸，不如先下手为强。 
English: Once it breaks out, it will be the scourge of extermination. It is better to strike first.

古文：遂令诸女各归报其夫，皆曰： 安所相避！ 
现代文：于是命霍家女儿各自回家告知自己的丈夫，霍家各位女婿都说 大祸一来，我们谁也跑不了！ 
English: So they ordered all the daughters of the Huo family to go home and tell their husbands, and all the sons-in-law of the Huo family said that if a great calamity comes, none of us can escape!

古文：会李竟坐与诸侯王交通，辞语及霍氏，有诏： 云、山不宜宿卫，免就第。 
现代文：正巧李竟因受指控结交诸侯王而被朝廷治罪，审问中供词涉及霍氏家族，汉宣帝因而下诏命令： 霍云、霍山不适合再在宫中供职，免职回家。 
English: It just so happened that Li was actually prosecuted by the imperial court for being accused of befriending the princes. During the interrogation, he made a confession involving the Huo family. Emperor Han Xuan therefore issued a decree: Huo Yun and Huoshan were no longer fit to serve in the palace, and were dismissed to go home.

古文：山阳太守张敞上封事曰： 臣闻公子季友有功于鲁，赵衰有功于晋，田完有功于齐，皆畴其庸，延及子孙。
现代文：山阳太守张敞向汉宣帝上了一道秘密奏章，说道： 我听说，春秋时期，公子季友有功于鲁国，赵衰有功于晋国，田完有功于齐国，都受到本国的酬劳，并延及子孙。
English: Zhang Zhang, the Grand Master of Sanyang, wrote a secret musical score for Emperor Xuan of Han, saying: I have heard that during the Spring and Autumn Period, Gongzi Qiyu was honored in the State of Lu, Zhao Zhen was honored in the State of Jin, and Tian Guan was honored in the State of Qi. All of them were rewarded by their home countries, and this extended to their children and grandchildren.

古文：终后田氏篡齐，赵氏分晋，季氏颛鲁。
现代文：但是后来，田氏篡夺了齐国政权，赵氏瓜分了晋国，季氏则专权于鲁国。
English: Later, however, the Tian clan usurped the power of Qi, the Zhao clan divided Jin, and the Ji clan gained exclusive power in Lu.

古文：故仲尼作《春秋》，迹盛衰，讥世卿最甚。
现代文：因此，孔子作《春秋》，追踪考察各国的兴衰存亡，严厉批判卿大夫世袭制度。
English: Therefore, Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn," recorded the rise and fall of the past, ridiculed the world's most powerful.

古文：乃者大将军决大计，安宗庙，定天下，功亦不细矣。
现代文：当年，大将军霍光作出重大决策，使宗庙平安、国家稳定，功劳也不算小。
English: Former general Huo Guang made great achievements in making decisions on the national grand plan, stabilizing the ancestral temple, and pacifying the world.

古文：夫周公七年耳，而大将军二十岁，海内之命断于掌握。
现代文：周公辅政才七年，就归政于周成王，而大将军掌握国家的命运长达二十年之久。
English: Zhou Gongfu had only been in power for seven years when he was replaced by Zhou Chengwang, and the general held the fate of the country in his hands for twenty years.

古文：方其隆盛时，感动天地，侵迫阴阳。
现代文：在他执掌大权的鼎盛时期，威严震撼天地，势力侵凌日月。
English: At the height of his power, his majesty shook the heavens and the earth, and his power encroached on the sun and the moon.

古文：朝臣宜有明言曰： 陛下褒宠故大将军以报功德足矣。
现代文：应由朝臣明确提出： 陛下褒奖、宠信已故大将军，以报答他对国家的功德，已经足够了。
English: It should be made clear by the courtier: It is enough for His Majesty to praise and favor the late great general in return for his service to the country.

古文：间者辅臣颛政，贵戚太盛，君臣之分不明，请罢霍氏三侯皆就第；及卫将军张安世，宜赐几杖归休，归存问召见，以列侯为天子师。 
现代文：而近来辅政大臣专擅朝政，外戚势力过大，君臣之间没有明显的分别，请求解除霍氏三侯的官职，以侯的身份回家；对卫将军张安世，也应赐给几案与手杖，让他退休回家，以列候的身分充当天子的老师，由陛下时常召见慰问。 
English: Recently, however, the Vice-Minister of State, who is an expert in the politics of the imperial court and whose relative has too much power, and there is no clear distinction between the monarch and the ministers, requested that the official position of the three princes of the Huo clan be removed and that he should return home as a marquis. He also requested that the General of the Imperial Guard, Zhang Anshi, be given several cases and a cane, so that he could retire and return home as a teacher of the son of the emperor, and be frequently summoned by His Majesty for condolences.

古文：明诏以恩不听，群臣以义固争而后许之，天下必以陛下为不忘功德而朝臣为知礼，霍氏世世无所患苦。
现代文：陛下则公开下诏表示对他们施恩，听从大臣所请。
English: His Majesty, on the other hand, issued a public edict to show his benevolence to them and to comply with the minister's request.

古文：今朝廷不闻直声，而令明诏自亲其文，非策之得者也。
现代文：群臣再据理力争，然后陛下予以批准。这样一来，天下人肯定会认为陛下不忘旧勋的功德而群臣又知礼，霍氏一家也可以世世代代无忧无患。
English: It is not a good idea that the voice of the emperor is not heard in the imperial court, and the imperial edict is issued independently.

古文：今两侯已出，人情不相远，以臣心度之，大司马及其枝属必有畏惧之心。
现代文：如今，朝中听不到直言，而使陛下自己下诏，这不是好策略。现在霍氏两侯已被赶出宫廷，人情大致相同，因此以我的心来猜度，大司马霍禹和他的亲戚僚属等必然会心怀畏惧。
English: It is not a good strategy to make His Majesty issue an edict without listening to his direct words. Now that the two princes of the Ho clan have been driven out of the court, the human conditions are roughly the same, so I can guess with my heart that the chief magistrate Ma Huoyu and his relatives and subordinates will certainly be afraid.

古文：夫近臣自危，非完计也。
现代文：使天子的近臣恐慌自危，总不是万全的办法。
English: It is not a foolproof method to make the son of heaven's vassals panic and put themselves in danger.

古文：臣敞愿于广朝白发其端，直守远郡，其路无由。唯陛下省察。 
现代文：我愿在朝中公开提出我的意见作为开端，只是身在遥远的山阳郡，无法实现，希望陛下仔细考虑。 
English: I would like to publicly put forward my opinion in the DPRK and China as a start, but being in the distant Shanyang County, it cannot be realized, and I hope His Majesty will carefully consider it.

古文：上甚善其计，然不召也。
现代文：汉宣帝对张敞的建议甚为欣赏，然而却没有召他来京。
English: Emperor Han Xuan appreciated Zhang Zhang's suggestion, but did not invite him to Beijing.

古文：禹、山等家数有妖怪，举家忧愁。
现代文：霍禹、霍山等家中多次出现妖怪之事，全家人都非常忧虑。
English: Hoyu, Huoshan, and other family members have repeatedly seen monsters in their homes, and the whole family is very worried.

古文：山曰： 丞相擅减宗庙羔、菟、蛙，可以此罪也。 
现代文：霍山说： 丞相擅自减少宗庙祭祀用的羊羔、兔子和青蛙，可以以此为借口向他问罪。 
English: Huoshan said, "The fact that the chancellor reduced the number of lambs, rabbits, and frogs offered to the ancestral temple without permission can be used to convict him.

古文：谋令太后为博平君置酒，召丞相、平恩侯以下，使范明友、邓广汉承太后制引斩之，因废天子而立禹。
现代文：于是，密谋让上官太后设酒宴款待博平君王媪，召丞相魏相、平恩侯许广汉及其属下作陪，然后让范明友、邓广汉奉太后之命将他们斩杀，乘机废掉汉宣帝，立霍禹为皇帝。
English: They plotted to have the empress dowager set up a banquet for Bo Pingjun, summon officials below the prime minister and Ping Enhou, and have Fan Mingyou and Deng Guanghan take orders from the empress dowager to drag these people out and behead them, taking the opportunity to remove the heavenly son and establish Huo Yu as emperor.

古文：约定，未发，云拜为玄菟太守，太中大夫任宣为代郡太守。
现代文：密谋已定，尚未发动，汉宣帝任命霍云为玄菟太守，太中大夫任宣为代郡太守。
English: The conspiracy had already been decided, but had not yet been launched. Emperor Han Xuan appointed Huo Yun as the governor of Xuanzang, and the Grand Middle Doctor appointed Xuan Zi as the acting governor of the county.

古文：会事发觉，秋，七月，云、山、明友自杀，显、禹、广汉等捕得；禹要斩，显及诸女昆弟皆弃市；与霍氏相连坐诛灭者数十家。
现代文：就在此时，霍氏的政变阴谋被发觉。
English: It was at this time that Ho's coup plot was discovered.

古文：太仆杜延年以霍氏旧人，亦坐免官。
现代文：秋季，七月，霍云、霍山、范明友自杀。
English: In autumn and July, Huo Yun, Huoshan and Fan Mingyou all committed suicide.

古文：八月，己酉，皇后霍氏废，处昭台宫，乙丑，诏封告霍氏反谋者男子张章、期门董忠、左曹杨恽、侍中金安上、史高皆为列侯。
现代文：霍显、霍禹、邓广汉等被逮捕，霍禹被腰斩，霍显及霍氏兄弟姐妹全部被当众处死，因与霍氏有牵连而被诛杀的有数十家。太仆杜延年因为是霍家旧友，也被罢免官职。八月己酉，霍皇后被废，囚禁崐于昭台宫。乙丑，汉宣帝下诏，将告发霍氏政变密谋的男子张章、期门董忠、左曹杨恽、侍中金安上、史高封为列候。
English: Huo Xian, Huo Yu, Deng Guanghan and others were arrested, Huo Yu was beheaded, Huo Xian and all the brothers and sisters of Huo were publicly executed, and dozens of families were killed because of their involvement with the Huo family. The eunuch Du Yannian was also dismissed from his official post because he was an old friend of the Huo family. In August, Queen Huo was dethroned and imprisoned in the Zhaotai Palace. In the second year, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict, and the men who would denounce Huo's coup plot were Zhang Zhang, Zhimen Dongzhong, Zuo Cao Yangjun

古文：恽，丞相敞子；安上，车骑将军日磾弟子；高，史良娣兄子也。
现代文：其中杨恽是前丞相杨敞的儿子，金安上是前车骑将军金日弟弟的儿子，史高是史良娣哥哥的儿子。
English: Among them, Yang Jie is the son of former prime minister Yang Jiao, Jin Anjie is the son of the younger brother of former cavalry general Kim Il, and Shi Gao is the son of Shi Liangyu's older brother.

古文：初，霍氏奢侈，茂陵徐生曰： 霍氏必亡。
现代文：当初，霍氏一家骄横奢侈，茂陵人徐福就曾指出： 霍氏必亡。
English: At the beginning, Huo's life was extravagant, and Xu Sheng of Murying said: Huo will surely perish.

古文：夫奢则不逊，不逊必侮上。
现代文：凡奢侈无度，必然傲慢不逊；傲慢不逊，必然冒犯主上；冒犯主上就是大逆不道。
English: Because once you are arrogant, you will not be obedient, and if you are not obedient, you must despise the emperor.

古文：侮上者，逆道也，在人之右，众必害之。霍氏秉权日久，害之者多矣。天下害之，而又行以逆道，不亡何待！ 
现代文：身居高位的人，必然会受到众人厌恶。霍氏一家长期把持朝政，遭到很多人的厌恶，天下人厌恶，又作出大逆不道的事情，怎么可能不灭亡呢！ 
English: A person in a high position is bound to be disliked by everyone. The Huo family has long been in charge of the government and has been disliked by many people. The whole world is disgusted, and they have done things that are against the law. How could they not perish?

古文：乃上疏言： 霍氏泰盛，陛下即爱厚之，宜以时抑制，无使至亡。 
现代文：于是，上书朝廷说： 霍氏一家权势太大，陛下既然厚爱他们，就应随时加以约束限制，不要让他们发展到灭亡的地步！ 
English: Therefore, the letter to the Imperial Court said: The power of the Huo family is too great. Since His Majesty loves them, they should be restrained and limited at any time, and they should not be allowed to develop to the point of extinction!

古文：书三上，辄报闻。
现代文：上书三次，天子听到了，未加采纳。
English: The book was submitted three times, but the emperor heard about it and did not approve it.

古文：其后霍氏诛灭，而告霍氏者皆封，人为徐生上书曰： 臣闻客有过主人者，见其灶直突，傍有积薪，客谓主人： 更为曲突，远徙其薪，不者且有火患。 
现代文：后霍氏一家被诛杀，曾告发过霍氏的人都被封赏，有人上书汉宣帝，为徐福鸣不平说： 我听说，有一位客人到主人家拜访，见主人家炉灶的烟囱是直的，旁边又堆有柴薪，这位客人便对主人说： 您的烟囱应改为弯曲的，并将柴薪搬到远处去，不然的话，将会发生火灾！ 
English: Later, Huo's family was killed, and all those who had denounced Huo were rewarded. Some people wrote to Emperor Xuan of Han to complain about Xu Fuming, saying: I heard that a guest visited the owner's house and saw that the chimney of the owner's stove was straight and there was a pile of firewood next to it. The guest said to the owner: Your chimney should be changed to a curved one and the firewood should be moved far away, otherwise there will be a fire!

古文：主人嘿然不应。
现代文：主人默然，不予理会。
English: The host should not have remained silent.

古文：俄而家果失火，邻里共救之，幸而得息。
现代文：不久，主人家果然失火，邻居们共同抢救，幸而将火扑灭。
English: Not long after, the owner's house did indeed catch fire. Neighbors from all over the neighborhood came to put out the fire. Fortunately, the fire was extinguished.

古文：于是杀牛置酒，谢其邻人，灼烂者在于上行，馀各以功次坐，而不录言曲突者。
现代文：于是，主人家杀牛摆酒，对邻居表示感谢，在救火中烧伤的被请到上座，其余则各按出力大小依次就坐，却没有请那位建议他改弯烟囱的人。
English: So, the owners killed a cow and offered wine to thank their neighbor. Those who were burned in the fire were invited to the first seat, while the rest were seated in order of power, but they did not invite the man who suggested that they bend the chimney.

古文：人谓主人曰： 乡使听客之言，不费牛酒，终亡火患。
现代文：有人对这家主人说： 当初要是听了那位客人的劝告，就不用杀牛摆酒，终究不会有火灾。
English: Someone said to the owner of the house: If you had listened to the advice of that guest, you wouldn't have had to kill the cow and serve wine. After all, there wouldn't have been a fire.

古文：今论功而请宾，曲突徙薪无恩泽，焦头烂额为上客邪？ 
现代文：如今论功请客酬谢，建议改弯烟囱、移走柴薪的人没有功劳，而在救火时被烧得焦头烂额的人才是上客吗？ 
English: Nowadays, when it comes to merit, the guest is thanked. The person who suggested bending the chimney and removing the firewood has no merit, but the person who was burned to a crisp while fighting the fire is the guest?

古文：主人乃寤而请之。
现代文：主人这才醒悟，将那位客人请来。
English: Only then did the host come to his senses and invite the guest.

古文：今茂陵徐福，数上书言霍氏且有变，宜防绝之。
现代文：茂陵人徐福多次上书说霍氏将会有叛逆行为，应预先加以防范制止。
English: Xu Fu, a resident of Maolin, repeatedly wrote that Mr. Huo would have a rebellious behavior and should be prevented and stopped in advance.

古文：乡使福说得行，则国无裂土出爵之费，臣无逆乱诛灭之败。
现代文：假如陛下接受徐福的劝告，则国家就没有划出土地分封列候的费用，臣下也不会谋逆叛乱，遭受诛杀的大祸。
English: If His Majesty had accepted Xu Fu's advice, the country would not have had to pay the costs of land division and waiting list, and his vassals would not have plotted to rebel and suffered the great calamity of being killed.

古文：往事既已，而福独不蒙其功，唯陛下察之，贵徙薪曲突之策，使居焦发灼烂之右。 
现代文：现在事情已然过去，而只有徐福的功劳没有受到奖赏，希望陛下明察，嘉许其 弯曲烟囱、移走柴薪 的远见，使他居于 焦头烂额 者之上！ 
English: The past is the past, but those who have done good deeds have not been rewarded. I hope that His Majesty can pay attention to the good policy of removing the bent chimneys of firewood, and make it work on the people whose body hair has been burned.

古文：上乃赐福帛十匹，后以为郎。
现代文：汉宣帝这才赐给徐福绸缎十匹，后又任命他为郎官。
English: The emperor then gave Xu Fuxin ten horses, and later appointed him as a vassal.

古文：帝初立，谒见高庙，大将军光骖乘，上内严惮之，若有芒刺在背。
现代文：汉宣帝初即皇位时，前往汉高祖庙祭拜，由大将军霍光同车陪乘，汉宣帝心中十分畏惧，有如芒刺在背，很不舒服。
English: At the beginning of his reign, Emperor Han Xuan went to worship at the ancestral temple of Henkel. He was accompanied by General Huo Guang in the car. Emperor Han Xuan was very afraid in his heart. It was like a thorn in his back and he was very uncomfortable.

古文：后车骑将军张安世代光骖乘，天子从容肆体，甚安近焉。
现代文：后改由车骑将军张安世同车陪乘，汉宣帝这才觉得轻松从容，十分安全亲近。
English: Later, Zhang An, the general of the cavalry, accompanied Huo Guang for generations. Tianzi was more comfortable and at ease, his body stretched freely, and he felt very safe and close.

古文：及光身死而宗族竟诛，故俗传霍氏之祸萌于骖乘。
现代文：等到霍光死后，其宗族最终遭到诛杀，所以民间传说，霍家的灾祸早在霍光陪同汉宣帝乘车时就已萌芽了。
English: After the death of Huo Guang, his clan was finally killed, so according to folklore, the calamity of the Huo family had already sprouted when Huo Guang accompanied Emperor Xuan of Han by car.

古文：后十二岁，霍后复徙云林馆，乃自杀。
现代文：十二年后，霍皇后又被迁到云林馆囚居，自杀身亡。
English: Twelve years later, Empress Huo was transferred to the Yunlin Mansion, where she committed suicide.

古文：班固赞曰：霍光受襁褓之托，任汉室之寄，匡国家，安社稷，拥昭，立宣，虽周公、阿衡何以加此！
现代文：班固赞曰：霍光身受辅佐幼主的重托，掌握着汉朝的安危存亡，匡扶国家，安定社稷，维护汉昭帝，拥立汉宣帝，即使是周公、伊尹，又怎能超过！
English: Ban Guzan said: Huo Guang was entrusted with the important task of assisting the young master, controlling the safety and survival of the Han Dynasty, supporting the country, stabilizing the society, safeguarding Han Zhao, and supporting Han Xuan. Even Zhou Gong and Yi Yin, how can they exceed!

古文：然光不学亡术，闇于大理；阴妻邪谋，立女为后，湛溺盈溢之欲，以增颠覆之祸，死财三年，宗族诛夷，哀哉！
现代文：然而，霍光不学无术，不明大理，隐瞒妻子的邪恶逆谋，立自己的女儿为皇后，沉溺于过多的欲望，使覆亡的灾祸加剧，身死才三年，宗族就遭诛灭，实在令人悲哀！
English: However, Huo Guang did not learn anything, did not know the truth, concealed his wife's evil plot, set up his daughter as queen, indulged in too much desire, and intensified the disaster of destruction. It was only three years after his death that his family was annihilated. It was really sad!

古文：臣光曰：霍光之辅汉室，可谓忠矣；然卒不能庇其宗，何也？
现代文：臣司马光曰： 霍光辅佐汉朝，可以说是忠心耿耿，然而却终究未能庇护他的宗族，是什么原因呢？
English: Minister Sima Guang said: Huo Guangfu, the assistant of the Han Dynasty, can be said to be loyal, but in the end he could not protect his clan, what is the reason?

古文：夫威福者，人君之器也。人臣执之，久而不归，鲜不及矣。
现代文：威严权柄，只有君王才能享有，如果由臣下享有，长期不归还君王，则很少能逃脱灭亡的命运。
English: Majestic power can only be enjoyed by a monarch, and if it is enjoyed by a subject, if it is not returned to the monarch for a long time, it will rarely escape the fate of extinction.

古文：以孝昭之明，十四而知上官桀之诈，固可以亲政矣，况孝宣十九即位，聪明刚毅，知民疾苦，而光久专大柄，不知避去，多置亲党，充塞朝廷，使人主蓄愤于上，吏民积怨于下，切齿侧目，待时而发，其得免于身幸矣，况子孙以骄侈趣之哉！
现代文：以汉昭帝的贤明，十四岁就能洞察上官桀的奸诈行为，原来可以亲理朝政了，更何况汉宣帝十九岁即皇位，聪明刚毅，了解民间疾苦，而霍光却依然长期专擅大权，不知引退，反在朝中广植私党，致使君王积蓄怨愤于上，官、民积蓄不满于下，咬牙切齿，侧目而视，都在等待时机发动。霍光自己能够免祸，已然是侥幸了，何况子孙更加骄横奢侈呢！
English: With the wisdom of Emperor Han Zhao, at the age of fourteen, he could see through the treacherous behavior of the upper officials and officials, and he was able to personally govern the government. Not to mention that Emperor Han Xuan was nineteen years old when he ascended to the throne, and he was clever and courageous, and he understood the hardships of the people. However, Ho Guang still had exclusive power for a long time, and he did not know how to retire. Instead, he planted a wide range of private parties in the middle of the court, causing the king's savings to be resentful of the upper, and the official and people's savings to be dissatisfied with the lower,

古文：虽然，向使孝宣专以禄秩赏赐富其子孙，使之食大县，奉朝请，亦足以报盛德矣；乃复任之以政，授之以兵，及事丛衅积，更加裁夺，遂至怨惧以生邪谋，岂徒霍氏之自祸哉？
现代文：尽管如此，假如当初汉宣帝专用官阶和俸禄赏赐霍光的子孙，使他们富有，让他们享用大县的收入，定期前来朝见皇帝，也就足以报答霍光的盛德了；而汉宣帝仍然让他们主持朝政，授以兵权，等到事态严重，这才对他们加以裁夺，以至他们恐惧怨恨，生出反叛朝廷的阴谋。这难道只是霍氏一家自己招致的灾祸吗？
English: Nevertheless, if at that time the Han Emperor Xuan gave special ranks and salaries to the sons of Huo Guang, making them rich, allowing them to enjoy the income of large counties, and regularly coming to see the emperor, it would be enough to repay Huo Guang's generosity; but the Han Emperor still let them preside over the court and grant military power, and when the situation was serious, they were deprived of them, so that they feared and resented, and a rebellion against the court was born. Is this just a disaster caused by the Huo family?

古文：亦孝宣酝酿以成之也。
现代文：这也是汉宣帝酝酿而成的。
English: This was also brewed up by Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：昔椒作乱于楚，庄王灭其族而赦箴尹克黄，以为子文无后，何以劝善。
现代文：春秋时，斗椒在楚国作乱，楚庄王灭其宗族，却赦免了担任箴尹的斗克黄，认为如果不让当初于国有功的斗於菟留下后代，就不利于勉励人们行善立功。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, Doo Jiao made a disturbance in the State of Chu. The King of Chu Zhuang annihilated his clan, but pardoned Doo Ke Huang, who served as Zhen Yin. He thought that if he did not allow the descendants of Doo Jiao, who was originally a national hero, to remain, it would not be conducive to encouraging people to do good deeds.

古文：夫以显、禹、云、山之罪，虽应夷灭，而光之忠勋不可不祀；遂使家无噍类，孝宣亦少恩哉！
现代文：以霍显、霍禹、霍云、霍山犯下的罪行，当然应诛灭全族，但立下大功的忠臣霍光却不可无人祭祀，汉宣帝竟将其全族老小全部处死，一个不留，也未免刻薄寡恩了！
English: The crimes committed by Huo Xian, Huo Yu, Huo Yun and Huo Shan should, of course, annihilate the whole nation, but the loyal subject Huo Guang, who has made great contributions, should not be sacrificed by anyone. Emperor Han Xuan actually executed his entire family, old and young, leaving no one behind, and he was also very ungrateful!

古文：九月，诏减天下盐贾。
现代文：九月，汉宣帝下诏降低天下盐价。
English: In September, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to lower the world's salt prices.

古文：又令郡国岁上系囚以掠笞若瘐死者，所坐县、名、爵、里，丞相、御史课殿最以闻。
现代文：又下令各郡、国，每年将本地因受刑或病饿而死的囚犯的县份、姓名、官爵和所居邑里呈报朝廷，由丞相、御史对地方官员考评，排出等级后奏报汉宣帝。
English: He also ordered each county and province to annually report to the imperial court the county, name, official title, and town of residence of local prisoners who died as a result of imprisonment or starvation. The local officials would be evaluated by the minister of justice and the minister of history, and their grades would be reported to Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：十二月，清河王年坐内乱废，迁房陵。
现代文：十二月，清河王刘年因被指控伦，被废去王爵，贬居房陵。
English: In December, Liu Nian, the king of Qinghe, was accused of defection, stripped of his title and banished to his mausoleum.

古文：是岁，北海太守庐江硃邑以治行第一入为大司农，勃海太守龚遂入为水衡都尉。
现代文：这一年，北海太守庐江人朱邑，以治理地方政绩和个人品行排名第一，被调入朝中担任大司农，勃海太守龚遂也调入朝中担任水衡都尉。
English: In the same year, Zhu Yi, the governor-general of the North Sea and the governor-general of the Bohai River, ranked first in terms of the performance of local governance and personal conduct, and was transferred to the Middle Court as the director of agriculture, and the governor-general of the Bohai Sea was also transferred to the Middle Court as the captain of water balance.

古文：先是，勃海左右郡岁饥，盗贼并起，二千石不能禽制。
现代文：当初，勃海周围各郡遇到荒年，百姓饥馑，盗贼并起，二千石官员不能擒获制止。
English: At the beginning, the counties around Bohai were experiencing a bad year, the people were hungry, thieves were on the rise, and officials with 2,000 koku could not be caught and stopped.

古文：上选能治者，丞相、御史举故昌邑郎中令龚遂，上拜为勃海太守。
现代文：汉宣帝下令征选有能力治理的官员，丞相、御史举荐前昌邑国郎中令龚遂，于是汉宣帝任命龚遂为勃海太守。
English: Emperor Han Xuan ordered the selection of officials with the ability to govern, including the prime minister and the prefectural governor of Chang'e, Guolang Zhongling, who was recommended by the emperor, and then Emperor Han Xuan appointed Guo Sui as the governor of Bohai.

古文：召见，问： 何以治勃海，息其盗贼？ 
现代文：召见时，汉宣帝问龚遂： 你用什么办法来治理勃海郡，平息那里的盗贼呢？ 
English: When summoned, Han Xuan Di asked Gong Sui: What methods did you use to govern Bohai County and quell the thieves there?

古文：对曰： 海濒遐远，不沾圣化，其民困于饥寒而吏不恤，故使陛下赤子盗弄陛下之兵于潢池中耳。
现代文：龚遂说： 勃海郡地处海滨，远离京师，得不到圣明君主的教化，当地百姓为饥寒所困苦，而地方官吏却不加体恤，所以才使陛下的子民盗取陛下的兵器，在小池溏中耍弄罢了。
English: Zou Sui said: Bohai County is located on the seashore, far away from Beijing Division, and cannot be enlightened by the Holy Emperor Ming. The local people are suffering from hunger and cold, but local officials are not sympathetic. Therefore, they just let His Majesty's people steal His Majesty's weapons and play with them in small ponds.

古文：今欲使臣胜之邪，将安之也？ 
现代文：如今陛下是打算派我镇压他们呢？还是安抚他们呢？
English: Now I don't know whether I should suppress them or appease them.

古文：上曰： 选用贤良，固欲安之也。 
现代文：汉宣帝说： 我征选贤良人才，当然是要安抚他们。 
English: Han Xuan Di said: I have selected the best talents, of course, to appease them.

古文：遂曰： 臣闻治乱民犹治乱绳，不可急也；唯缓之，然后可治。
现代文：龚遂说： 我听说，治理作乱的百姓，就如同整理一团乱绳一般，不能操之过急，只有先将紧张的局势缓和下来，然后才能治理。
English: Zou Sui said, "I've heard that governing a chaotic population is like straightening a chaotic rope. It can't be done in a hurry. You don't have to rush, and then you can govern.

古文：臣愿丞相、御史且无拘臣以文法，得一切便宜从事。 
现代文：我希望丞相、崐御史不要用严格的法令约束我的行动，准许我相机行事。 
English: I request the Prime Minister and the Minister of History not to use the provisions of the general law to restrict me for the time being, and to let me dispose of the matter myself according to the actual situation.

古文：上许焉，加赐黄金赠遣。
现代文：汉宣帝批准了龚遂的请求，并加赏黄金，派他前往。
English: Emperor Han Xuan approved his request, rewarded him with gold, and sent him on his way.

古文：乘传至勃海界，郡闻新太守至，发兵以迎。
现代文：龚遂乘坐国家的驿车，来到勃海郡界，郡中官员听说新太守来到，派军队前往迎接。
English: He then took a state carriage and came to Bohai County. When county officials heard that the new crown prince was coming, they sent troops to meet him.

古文：遂皆遣还。移书敕属县： 悉罢逐捕盗贼吏，诸持锗、钩、田器者皆为良民，吏毋得问；持兵者乃为贼。 
现代文：龚遂将军队全部遣还，并下达文书给所属各县，命令： 将所有负责缉捕盗贼的官吏一律撤销，凡是手持锄头、镰刀和其他农具的，一律视为良民百姓，地方官吏不得刁难，只有手持兵器的才算是盗贼。 
English: He then sent all the troops back, and issued a document to all the counties he belonged to, ordering: All officials responsible for arresting thieves should be revoked. Anyone with a hoe, sickle and other agricultural tools should be regarded as a good citizen. Local officials should not be harassed, and only those with weapons should be regarded as thieves.

古文：遂单车独行至府。
现代文：然后，龚遂单人独车前往郡衙门就职。
English: She then took a taxi alone to the county seat.

古文：盗贼闻遂教令，即时解散，弃其兵弩而持钩、钅且，于是悉平，民安土乐业。
现代文：盗贼们听说新太守的命令后，立即解散，抛弃兵器弓弩，拿起镰刀、锄头，于是盗贼全部平息，百姓安居乐业。
English: After the thieves heard the order of the new governor, they immediately disbanded, abandoned their weapons, bows and arrows, and took up scythes and hoes. As a result, the thieves all calmed down, and the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：遂乃开仓廪假贫民，选用良吏尉安牧养焉。
现代文：于是，龚遂下令打开官仓，赈济贫苦百姓，选派品行优良的官吏对百姓们进行安抚、管理。
English: As a result, Zou Sui ordered to open the official storehouses to help the poor people, and selected officials with good moral conduct to pacify and manage the people.

古文：遂见齐俗奢侈，好末技，不田作，乃躬率以俭约，劝民务农桑，各以口率种树畜养。
现代文：龚遂发现齐地风俗奢侈，人们喜欢经营工商业，不愿在田间劳作，便以身作则，提倡勤俭节约，劝导百姓从事农业生产，按各家人口的多少，规定必须种树若干，养家畜若干。
English: He then discovered that the customs of Qi Di were extravagant. People liked to engage in industry and commerce and did not want to work in the fields. He set an example, advocated diligence and thrift, and persuaded the people to engage in agricultural production. According to the size of each family's population, it was stipulated that they must plant a certain number of trees and raise a certain number of livestock.

古文：民有带持刀剑者，使卖剑买牛，卖刀买犊，曰： 何为带牛佩犊！ 
现代文：凡百姓有带刀持剑的，让他们卖剑买耕牛，卖刀买牛犊，说道： 你为什么把壮牛和牛犊佩带在身上！ 
English: If any of the people are found to have swords, let them sell their swords for oxen, and their knives for plowshares, and say, "Why have you put on oxen and mules?

古文：劳来循行，郡中皆有畜积，狱讼止息。
现代文：经过龚遂的辛勤劝勉，往来巡查，终于使勃海郡内各家各户都有了积蓄，刑狱讼案也大为减少。
English: After diligent persuasion and inspection, all households in Bohai County have finally saved money, and the number of criminal cases has been greatly reduced.

古文：乌孙公主女为龟兹王降宾夫人。
现代文：嫁给乌孙国王的汉朝公主刘解忧的女儿是龟兹国王绛宾的夫人。
English: The daughter of the Han dynasty princess Liu Xiezhen, who married King Wusun, was the wife of the Kuez king Zhibin.

古文：绛宾上书言： 得尚汉外孙，愿与公主女俱入朝。 
现代文：绛宾上书汉宣帝说： 我有幸娶汉朝外孙女为妻，愿与公主的女儿同到长安朝见。 
English: In his letter to the guests, Emperor Han Xuan said, "I have the honor of marrying a granddaughter of the Han Dynasty, and I would like to go to Chang'an with the princess's daughter.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之下元康元年春，正月，龟兹王及其夫人来朝；皆赐印绶，夫人号称公主，赏赐甚厚。
现代文：元康元年春季，正月，龟兹王及其夫人前来朝见汉宣帝。汉宣帝赐给他们印信、绶带，封其夫人公主称号，并给予十分丰厚的赏赐。
English: In the spring of the first month of the first year of the Kangxi era, King Kuez and his wife came to see Emperor Han Xuan. Emperor Han Xuan gave them a seal letter, an umbilical cord, the title of princess to his wife, and a very rich reward.

古文：初作杜陵。徙丞相、将军、列侯、吏二千石、訾百万者杜陵。
现代文：汉宣帝开始为自己修建陵墓杜陵，并将丞相、将军、列候、二千石官员以及拥有百万以上家财的人迁往杜陵。
English: Emperor Han Xuan began to build a mausoleum for himself, called Du Ling, and moved the prime minister, generals, courtiers, officials of 2,000 koku, and people with more than one million family wealth to Du Ling.

古文：三月，诏以凤皇集泰山、陈留，甘露降未央宫，赦天下。
现代文：三月，汉宣帝下诏，因有凤凰聚集于泰山、陈留一带，又有甘露降于未央宫，所以大赦天下。
English: In March, Emperor Xuan of Han issued an edict that because phoenixes had gathered in the vicinity of Mount Tai and Chenliu, and nectar had fallen on the Weiyang Palace, there would be a general amnesty.

古文：有司复言悼园宜称尊号曰皇考；夏，五月，立皇考庙。
现代文：有关官员再次进言：汉宣帝的父亲刘进应尊称为 皇考 。夏季，五月，建立皇考庙。
English: Relevant officials once again suggested that Liu Jin, the father of Emperor Han Xuan, should be respectfully called the imperial examination. In the summer, in May, the imperial examination temple was established.

古文：冬，置建章卫尉。
现代文：冬季，设置建章卫尉。
English: In winter, there is a guard of honour.

古文：赵广汉好用世吏子孙新进年少者，专厉强壮蜂气，见事风生，无所回避，率多果敢之计，莫为持难，终以此败。
现代文：京兆尹赵广汉喜欢任用那些世代为吏者的子孙中刚开始在官府任职的年轻人，专门锻炼他们的强猛和锐气。他们办事雷厉风行，无所回避，大多有胆识，不知犹豫为难，但最终却因此而败亡。
English: Jing Zhaoyun Zhao Guanghan liked to appoint young people who had just started working in the government among the descendants of those who had been officials for generations, especially to exercise their strength and sharpness. They worked vigorously, did not shy away from anything, most of them had courage and did not hesitate, but eventually they were defeated because of this.

古文：广汉以私怨论杀男子荣畜，人上书言之，事下丞相、御史按验。
现代文：赵广汉出于私人的怨恨，将一名叫作荣畜的男子判处死刑。有人上书朝廷告发此事，汉宣帝命丞相、御史负责审查。
English: Out of personal resentment, Zhao Guanghan sentenced a man called Rongzhu to death. Someone sent a letter to the imperial court to report the matter, and Han Xuan, the minister of imperial life and imperial history, was responsible for the review.

古文：广汉疑丞相夫人杀侍婢，欲以此胁丞相，丞相按之愈急。
现代文：赵广汉怀疑丞相魏相的夫人曾杀死婢女，便打算用此事来威胁丞相，但丞相却加紧了审查。
English: Zhao Guanghan suspected that the wife of the chancellor Wei Xiang had killed her maid, and he intended to use this to threaten the chancellor, but the chancellor stepped up the examination.

古文：广汉乃将吏卒入丞相府，召其夫人跪庭下受辞，收奴婢十馀人去。
现代文：于是，赵广汉亲自率领官吏、兵卒进入丞相府，召丞相夫人前来，跪在院中接受盘问，并抓走了相府奴婢十余人。
English: As a result, Zhao Guanghan personally led officials and soldiers to enter the prime minister's residence, summoned the prime minister's wife to come, knelt in the courtyard to be interrogated, and seized more than ten slaves of the prime minister's residence.

古文：丞相上书自陈，事下廷尉治，实丞相自以过谴笞傅婢，出至外第乃死，不如广汉言。
现代文：丞相魏相上书汉宣帝为自己辩白，汉宣帝命廷尉负责处理。经调查证明，是丞相自己因一名婢女犯有过失，加以责打，送到外宅后才死去，并非像赵广汉说的那样。
English: Emperor Han Xuan Di wrote a letter to Emperor Wei to defend himself, and Emperor Han Xuan Di ordered a courtier to handle the matter. The investigation proved that it was the emperor himself who was at fault for a female servant, who was beaten and sent to a villa before dying, and not as Zhao Guanghan said.

古文：帝恶之，下广汉廷尉狱。
现代文：汉宣帝厌恶赵广汉的行为，下令将赵广汉逮捕，关押在廷尉狱中。
English: Emperor Han Xuan detested Zhao Guanghan's actions and ordered that he be arrested and detained in the Tingyi Prison.

古文：吏民守阙号泣者数万人，或言： 臣生无益县官，愿代赵京兆死，使牧养小民！ 
现代文：官吏和百姓听说赵广汉被捕，纷纷守在皇宫门前号哭，达数万人之多。有人说： 我活着对皇上并无益处，情愿代崐替赵京兆去死，让他留下来照管小民！ 
English: When officials and common people heard that Zhao Guanghan had been arrested, tens of thousands of them gathered in front of the palace gate to cry. Some said, "It is of no benefit to the emperor that I am still alive. I would rather die on behalf of Zhao Jingzhao and let him stay to take care of the common people!"

古文：广汉竟坐要斩。
现代文：然而赵广汉终于被腰斩。
English: Guanghan was finally beheaded.

古文：广汉为京兆尹，廉明，威制豪强，小民得职，百姓追思歌之。
现代文：赵广汉身为京兆尹，廉洁明察，以威严抑制豪强，使小民各得其所，受到百姓的思念和歌颂。
English: Zhao Guanghan, as Jing Zhaoyun, was honest and clear-sighted, restrained the powerful with dignity, so that the common people could have their own place, and was missed and praised by the people.

古文：是岁，少府宋畴坐议 凤皇下彭城，未至京师，不足美 ，贬为泗水太傅。
现代文：这一年，少府宋畴因声称 凤凰飞集彭城，未到长安，不足以赞美 ，受到指控，被贬为泗水国太傅。
English: In this year, the young prefect Song Zhen was accused of claiming that the phoenix flew to Pengcheng, but did not go to Chang'an, which was not enough to praise, and was demoted to the Taifu of Surabaya.

古文：上迁博士、谏大夫通政事者补郡国守相，以萧望之为平原太守。
现代文：汉宣帝征选通晓政务的博士、谏大夫充任郡太守和封国丞相，任命萧望之为平原太守。
English: Emperor Han Xuan selected Dr. Zou, a doctor who was well-versed in government affairs, to serve as the county governor and minister of state, and appointed Xiao Wangyi as the governor of Pingyuan.

古文：望之上疏曰： 陛下哀愍百姓，恐德之不究，悉出谏官以补郡吏。
现代文：萧望之上书汉宣帝说： 陛下哀怜百姓，唯恐恩德不能遍及天下，将朝中谏官全部派到各郡、国掌管地方事务。
English: In despair, Emperor Xuan of Han said: "Your Majesty, have pity on the people, lest your benevolence should not spread throughout the world, and send all the eunuchs of the dynasty to the counties and provinces to take charge of local affairs.

古文：朝无争臣，则不知过，所谓忧其末而忘其本者也。 
现代文：但朝中缺少直谏之臣，就不能使陛下了解朝政的缺失，这正是所谓只忧虑末梢而忘记了根本。 
English: However, the lack of Naosuke's vassal in the court cannot make His Majesty understand the lack of court politics. This is precisely the so-called worrying only about the periphery and forgetting the fundamentals.

古文：上乃征望之入守少府。
现代文：于是汉宣帝征调萧望之担任少府。
English: As a result, Emperor Han Xuan transferred Xiaowang to serve as a minor prefect.

古文：东海太守河东尹翁归，以治郡高第入为右扶风。
现代文：东海太守河东人尹翁归，因治理郡务成绩优等，被调入京担任右扶风一职。
English: Yin Wengui, the governor of the East China Sea and a native of the eastern part of the river, was transferred to Beijing to assume the post of the Right Assistant to the Wind due to his excellent performance in the administration of county affairs.

古文：翁归为人，公廉明察，郡中吏民贤、不肖及奸邪罪名尽知之。
现代文：尹翁归为人公正、廉洁、明察，对郡中官吏和普通百姓的好坏及奸邪之徒的罪状无不尽知。
English: Yin Weng was a fair, honest and clear-sighted person. He knew all about the good and bad of the officials and ordinary people in the county, as well as the crimes of the traitors.

古文：县县各有记籍，自听其政；有急名则少缓之。
现代文：他对治下每个县的情况都有专门记载，亲自处理各县的政务。
English: He has a special record of the situation in each county under his rule, and personally handles the government affairs of each county.

古文：吏民小解，辄披籍。取人必于秋冬课吏大会中及出行县，不以无事时。
现代文：凡遇下属处理事务过于苛急，他便命其稍加平缓；如属下官吏办事稍有懈怠，他则亲自查阅有关记载督促。尹翁归逮捕罪犯，都在秋冬考核官吏大会中，或出巡各县之际，而不在平日无事时进行。
English: If a subordinate is too hasty in handling a matter, he will order him to be a little more lenient; if a subordinate official is a little slack, he will personally check the relevant records and supervise. Yin Wengui's arrests of criminals are made during the autumn and winter examination of officials, or when he is on a tour of the counties, and not on weekdays when there is nothing to do.

古文：其有所取也，以一警百。
现代文：他逮捕罪犯，目的在于以一警百。
English: He arrests criminals in order to make a hundred policemen.

古文：吏民皆服，恐惧，改行自新。
现代文：官吏和百姓全都敬服，心怀恐惧，改过自新。
English: The officials and the people all bowed in reverence, with fear in their hearts, and reformed.

古文：其为扶风，选用廉平疾奸吏以为右职，接待以礼，好恶与同之；其负翁归，罚亦必行。
现代文：尹翁归出任右扶风，选用清廉公正、疾恶如仇的官员担任高级职务；待人接物注重礼节，无论自己喜欢还是厌恶，都同样对待；但对违抗命令者，也必加处罚。
English: Yin Wengui was appointed to the right-hand column, and officials who are honest, fair and vengeful are selected to hold high-ranking positions; they pay attention to etiquette when dealing with people, and treat them equally whether they like or dislike them; but they will also be punished for disobeying orders.

古文：然温良谦退，不以行能骄人，故尤得名誉于朝廷。
现代文：然而尹翁归为人温和谦虚，从不依恃自己的才能看不起别人，因此在朝中尤其受人赞誉。
English: However, Yin Weng is a gentle and modest person, never relying on his own talent to look down on others, so he is especially praised in the DPRK and China.

古文：初，乌孙公主少子万年有宠于莎车王。
现代文：当初，嫁与乌孙王的汉朝公主的小儿子万年受到莎车王的宠爱。
English: At first, the youngest son of the Han Dynasty princess married to King Wusun was always favored by King Zhaozhe.

古文：莎车王死而无子，时万年在汉，莎车国人计，欲自托于汉，又欲得乌孙心，上书请万年为莎车王。
现代文：莎车王死后，没有儿子，当时万年正在汉朝，莎车国人商议，既想托庇于汉朝，又想取得乌孙国的欢心，于是上书汉朝廷，请求立万年为莎车王。
English: After the death of King Zhaozhe, who had no son, the people of Zhaozhe, who were in the Han Dynasty at that time, wanted to take refuge in the Han Dynasty and win the favor of the Wusun Kingdom. Therefore, they sent a letter to the Han Dynasty, requesting the establishment of the Zhaozhe King for 10,000 years.

古文：汉许之，遣使者奚充国送万年。
现代文：汉朝同意所请，派使者奚充国护送万年前往莎车。
English: Emperor Xuan agreed, and sent an emissary to the state of Zengcheng to send the 10,000-year-old cart.

古文：万年初立，暴恶，国人不说。
现代文：万年刚当上莎车国王，就非常残暴凶恶，莎车人深为不满。
English: He has just been king for ten thousand years, he is very tyrannical, and the people of Sacha don't like him very much.

古文：上令群臣举可使西域者，前将军韩增举上党冯奉世以卫候使持节送大苑诸国客至伊循城。
现代文：汉宣帝命群臣举荐能够出使西域的人选。经前将军韩增举荐，上党人冯奉世以卫候身份充当使者，携带皇帝符节，护送大宛等国客人到达伊循城。
English: Emperor Han Xuan ordered his courtiers to recommend candidates who could be sent to the Western Regions. After the recommendation of the former general Han Zeng, the Shang party member Feng Bongshi acted as an emissary in the capacity of an emissary, carrying the emperor's symbols and escorting the guests from Dawan and other countries to arrive in Ixian City.

古文：会故莎车王弟呼屠征与旁国共杀其王万年及汉使者奚充国，自立为王。
现代文：正巧前莎车王的弟弟呼屠徵联合邻国势力一同杀死其王万年和汉朝使者奚充国，自立为莎车王。
English: Coincidentally, the younger brother of the former king of Yarkand, Hu Tu Zheng, joined forces with neighboring countries to kill his king, Wan Rong, and the Han Dynasty's envoy, Xucheng Guo, and established himself as the king of Yarkand.

古文：时匈奴又发兵攻车师城，不能下而去。
现代文：当时，匈奴再次出兵攻打车师城，未能攻下，撤兵而还。
English: At that time, the Xiongnu once again sent troops to attack the Chariot Division City, failed to capture it, withdrew and returned.

古文：莎车遣使扬言 北道诸国已属匈奴矣 ，于是攻劫南道，与歃盟畔汉，从鄯善以西皆绝不通。
现代文：莎车国派使者扬言： 西域北路各国已归属匈奴了。 于是派兵攻打南路各国，与各国结盟，背叛汉朝，使西域自鄯善国以西全部与汉朝绝交。
English: The State of Yarkand sent an envoy to threaten that all the countries along the northern route in the western region had already belonged to the Huns, so it sent troops to attack the countries along the southern route, allied with them, betrayed the Han Dynasty, and caused all the countries west of the self-proclaimed "Good Country" in the western region to sever diplomatic relations with the Han Dynasty.

古文：都护郑吉、校尉司马喜甏皆在北道诸国间，奉世与其副严昌计，以为不亟击之，则莎车日强，其势难制，必危西域，遂以节谕告诸国王，因发其兵，南北道合万五千人，进击莎车，攻拔其城。
现代文：此时都护郑吉崐、校尉司马都在北路各国间，冯奉世与其副使严昌商议，认为如不立即攻击莎车，那么莎车将日益强盛，难以控制，必定危及整个西域。于是以皇帝符节告谕各国国王，征调各国军队，南北两路共一万五千人，进攻莎车。
English: At this time, the tutelary Zheng Jisheng and the lieutenant Sima were in the northern countries. Feng Fengshi and his deputy Yan Chang discussed that if they did not immediately attack the cart, then the cart would become increasingly powerful, difficult to control, and would certainly endanger the entire western region. Therefore, the emperor sent a message to the kings of various countries, conscripted the armies of various countries, a total of 15,000 people from the north and south to attack the cart.

古文：莎车王自杀，传其首诣长安，更立它昆弟子为莎车王。诸国悉平，威振西域，奉世乃罢兵以闻。
现代文：结果莎车城被攻克，莎车王自杀，首级被送至长安，改立前莎车王其他兄弟的儿子为莎车王，冯奉世率兵将各国全部平定，威震西域，然后罢兵，奏闻朝廷。
English: As a result, Yarkhe City was conquered, Yarkhe King committed suicide, his head was sent to Chang'an, the sons of the other brothers of the former Yarkhe King were re-established as Yarkhe King, Feng Bongshi led the troops to pacify all countries, devastating the western region, and then the troops were disbanded and reported to the imperial court.

古文：帝召见韩增曰： 贺将军所举得其人。 
现代文：汉宣帝召见韩增说： 祝贺将军，你举荐的人非常出色。 
English: Han Xuan Di summoned Han Zeng and said: "Congratulations general, the person you recommended is very outstanding.

古文：奉世遂西至大宛。大宛闻其斩莎车王，敬之异于它使，得其名马象龙而还。
现代文：冯奉世于是西至大宛，大宛王听说他杀死了莎车王，所以对他特别恭敬，与对别的使臣不同，大宛国向汉朝皇帝进献了一匹叫作象龙的名马，冯奉世将其带回长安。
English: Feng Fengshi then went west to Dawan. The king of Dawan heard that he had killed the king of Zhaqi, so he was particularly respectful to him. Unlike other envoys, Dawan presented a famous horse called Zhao Long to the Han Dynasty emperor. Feng Fengshi brought it back to Chang'an.

古文：上甚说，议封奉世。
现代文：汉宣帝大为高兴，与朝臣商议，打算封冯奉世为侯。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was very pleased and discussed with the courtiers, intending to bestow Feng with the title of marquis.

古文：丞相、将军皆以为可，独少府萧望之以为： 奉世奉使有指，而擅矫制违命，发诸国兵，虽有功效，不可以为后法。
现代文：丞相、将军等都认为可以，只有少府萧望之表示反对，他认为： 冯奉世作为朝廷的使臣，有指定的任务，而他却违背使命，擅自用皇上的名义征调各国军队，虽然建立功勋，却不能让后人效法。
English: The prime minister, generals, and others all thought it was acceptable, but only Shofu Shouwang objected. He thought: Feng Bongshi, as an envoy of the imperial court, had a designated task, but he violated his mission and used the emperor's name to recruit troops from various countries without authorization. Although he established merits, he could not let future generations follow suit.

古文：即封奉世，开后奉使者利以奉世为比，争逐发兵，要功万里之外，为国家生事于夷狄，渐不可长。
现代文：如封冯奉世为侯，以后奉命出使的人将以他为榜样，争着征调各国军队，以图建功于万里之外，使国家在外族地区多生事端，此风不可渐长。
English: If Feng Feng serves as a role model for the world, people who are ordered to send envoys in the future will follow his example and compete to conscript the armies of various countries, in order to build achievements thousands of miles away, and make the country more troublesome in foreign areas. This trend cannot be allowed to grow.

古文：奉世不宜受封。 
现代文：因此，冯奉世不宜受封。 
English: Therefore, it is not appropriate for Feng Fengshi to receive this title.

古文：上善望之议，以奉世为光禄大夫。
现代文：汉宣帝认为萧望之的话很有道理，于是任命冯奉世为光禄大夫，没有封侯。
English: Emperor Han Xuan thought that Xiao Wangzhi's words were very reasonable, so he appointed Feng Fengshi as a doctor of Guanglu, without a title.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之下元康二年春，正月，赦天下。
现代文：元康二年春季，正月，大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Yuan Kang, in the first month, there was a general amnesty.

古文：上欲立皇后，时馆陶主母华婕妤及淮阳宪王母张婕妤、楚孝王母卫婕妤爱幸。
现代文：汉宣帝打算立皇后。当时，馆陶公主的母亲华及淮阳宪王的母亲张、楚孝王的母亲卫都受到汉宣帝的宠爱。
English: Emperor Han Xuan intended to set up a queen. At that time, the mother of Princess Guantao, Hua, and the mother of King Huaiyang Xian, Zhang, and the mother of King Chu Xiao, Wei, were all favored by Emperor Han Xuan.

古文：上欲立张婕妤为后；久之，惩艾霍氏欲害皇太子，乃更选后宫无子而谨慎者。
现代文：汉宣帝想立张为皇后，但迟迟不决，鉴于前皇后霍成君企图害死皇太子刘的教训，便挑选后宫中没有儿子且行为谨慎的人立为皇后。
English: Emperor Han Xuan wanted to make Zhang the empress, but he was indecisive. In view of the lesson of the former empress Huo Chengjun's attempt to kill Crown Prince Liu, he chose a prudent person without a son in the harem to be the empress.

古文：二月，乙丑，立长陵王婕妤为皇后，令母养太子；封其父奉光为邛成侯。
现代文：二月乙丑，汉宣帝立长陵人王为皇后，命她作为皇太子的母亲，负起养育太子的责任；封其父王奉光为邛成侯。
English: In February of the second month, Emperor Han Xuan made Changling Ren Ren Wang the empress and ordered her, as the mother of the crown prince, to take on the responsibility of raising the prince; and made his father, Wang Fengguang, the prince.

古文：后无宠，希得进见。
现代文：新皇后不受宠爱，很少能见到皇上。
English: The new empress was unloved and rarely saw the emperor.

古文：五月，诏曰： 狱者，万民之命。
现代文：五月，汉宣帝颁布诏书说： 刑狱，关系着万民的生命。
English: In May, Emperor Xuan of Han issued an edict saying: "Imprisonment affects the lives of all people.

古文：能使生者不怨，死者不恨，则可谓文吏矣。
现代文：只有能使生者不抱怨，死者不怀恨，才可以称得上是称职的官吏。
English: If you can make the living not resent and the dead not hate, then you can serve as a clerk.

古文：今则不然。
现代文：如今却不是这样。
English: That is no longer the case.

古文：用法或持巧心，析律贰端，深浅不平，奏不如实，上亦亡由知，四方黎民将何仰哉！
现代文：有的官吏用诈使巧，玩弄法令，断章取义，对律文作出不同解释，判决案狱轻重不公，又不如实上奏，连朕也无法了解真相，四方万民还有什么仰仗、指望呢！
English: Some officials use deception and trickery, play with laws and regulations, take the meaning out of context, make different interpretations of the texts of the law, and judge the case of imprisonment to be unfair, but it is not as good as the reality. Even I can not understand the truth. What do the people in all directions have to rely on and hope for?

古文：二千石各察官属，勿用此人。
现代文：二千石官员要分别督察自己的属下，不得任用这样的人。
English: Two thousand koku each inspect their subordinates, and they must not use such a self-serving person to be in charge of prison.

古文：吏或擅兴徭役，饰厨传，称过使客，越职逾法以取名誉，譬如践薄冰以待白日，岂不殆哉！
现代文：还有的官吏擅自征发徭役，装饰宾馆驿站，使过往使者和官员称心如意，超越职权，违反规定，以博取赞誉。这种情况，就如同踩在薄冰上等待太阳出来，岂不危险吗！
English: There are also officials who solicit postings without authorization, decorate hotels and stations, make past envoys and officials happy, exceed their authority, violate regulations, and win praise. This situation is like treading on thin ice waiting for the sun to come out, isn't it dangerous!

古文：今天下颇被疾疫之灾，朕甚愍之，其令郡国被灾甚者，毋出今年租赋。 
现代文：现在天下不少地方有疾病瘟疫流行，朕十分怜悯，凡受灾重的郡、国，免除百姓今年的田租赋税。 
English: At present, there are diseases and plagues in many parts of the world. I am very sorry. All counties and countries that have been seriously affected by the disaster are exempt from paying land rent tax this year.

古文：又曰： 闻古天子之名，难知而易讳也；其更讳询。 
现代文：汉宣帝在诏书上还说： 听说，古代天子的名字，民间都不常用，容易避讳，所以我改名为刘询。 
English: Emperor Han Xuan also said in the edict: I heard that the name of the ancient son of heaven is not commonly used by the people, and it is easy to avoid, so I changed my name to Liu Zhen.

古文：匈奴大臣皆以为 车师地肥美，近匈奴，使汉得之，多田积谷，必害人国，不可不争 ，由是数遣兵击车师田者。
现代文：匈奴国的大臣们都认为： 车师国土地肥沃，又靠近匈奴，如被汉朝得到，在那里大量垦田，积聚谷物，必为我国之害，所以不能不将车师从汉朝手中夺过来。 
English: The ministers of the Xiongnu state all believed that: the fertile land of the Chariot State, which is also close to the Xiongnu, if obtained by the Han Dynasty, where a large number of ploughed fields and accumulated grain, must be a harm to our country, so we must win the Chariot from the hands of the Han Dynasty.

古文：郑吉将渠犁田卒七千馀人救之，为匈奴所围。
现代文：于是多次派兵袭击在车师屯田的汉人。郑吉率领在渠犁屯田的汉朝兵卒七千余人前来援救，为匈奴兵围困。
English: As a result, soldiers were repeatedly sent to attack the Han Chinese in the Chinese garrison. Zheng Ji led more than seven thousand Han Dynasty soldiers in the Chinese garrison to come to the rescue and besieged the Huns.

古文：吉上言： 东怀去渠犁千馀里，汉兵在渠犁者少，势不能相救，愿益田卒。 
现代文：郑吉派人向汉宣帝报告说： 车师距渠犁一千余里，在渠犁的汉军兵力单薄，难以援救车师，希望能增派屯田军队。 
English: Zheng Ji sent a person to report to Han Xuan Di: the driver is more than a thousand miles away from the canal, and the Chinese army in the canal is thin, it is difficult to rescue the driver, and it is hoped that the Tonden army will be increased.

古文：上与后将军赵充国等议，欲因匈奴衰弱，出兵击其右地，使不得复扰西域。
现代文：为了一点细小的仇恨，忍不住愤怒而起兵，称之为 忿兵 ，忿兵往往失败。贪图别国的土地、财富而起兵，称之为 贪兵 ，贪兵将为别人所破。
English: For the sake of a little petty hatred, unable to restrain anger, they raise an army and call it "wrathful soldiers," and the wrathful soldiers often fail. For coveting the land and wealth of other countries, they raise an army and call it "greedy soldiers," and the greedy soldiers will be defeated by others.

古文：魏相上书谏曰： 臣闻之：救乱诛暴，谓之义兵，兵义者王；敌加于己，不得已而起者，谓之应兵，兵应者胜；争恨小故，不忍愤怒者，谓之忿兵，兵忿者败；利人土地、货宝者，谓之贪兵，兵贪者破；恃国家之大，矜民人之众，欲见威于敌者，谓之骄兵，兵骄者灭。此五者，非但人事，乃天道也。
现代文：自恃国家强大，人口众多，企图在敌方面前显示自己的威力，称之为 骄兵 ，骄兵将会灭亡。
English: Those who think their country is strong and have a large population and try to show their strength in front of the enemy are called arrogant soldiers, and arrogant soldiers will perish.

古文：间者匈奴尝有善意，所得汉民，辄奉归之，未有犯于边境；虽争屯田车师，不足致意中。
现代文：这五种情况，不仅是人事，实为上天的意志。近来，匈奴曾向我国表明善意，得到汉朝的百姓，马上就将他们送回，未曾侵略我国边境。虽与我国争着在车师屯田，我认为不足介意。
English: These five situations are not only personnel, but also the will of heaven. Recently, the Xiongnu had shown goodwill to our country, and when they received the Han Dynasty people, they immediately sent them back, without invading our border. Although they are competing with our country in Cheji Tunden, I think they are not enough.

古文：今闻诸将军欲兴兵入其地，臣愚不知此兵何名者也！
现代文：现在听说各位将军打算兴兵攻入匈奴境内，恕我愚昧，不知此兵名义何在！
English: Now I have heard that your generals are planning to raise an army to invade the territory of the Huns. With all due respect to my ignorance, I do not know what the name of this army is!

古文：今边郡困乏，父子共犬羊之裘，食草莱之实，常恐不能自存，难以动兵。 军旅之后，必有凶年， 言民以其愁苦之气伤阴阳之和也。
现代文：如今边境各郡都很困乏，百姓们父子共穿一件狗皮或羊皮衣服，靠野草野果充饥，他们对自己的生存常常感到忧心，难以征调他们去当兵打仗！《老子》说 军事行动之后，必然会出现灾年 。就是说百姓们以他们的愁苦怨恨之气伤害了天地间的阴阳谐调。
English: Nowadays, all the counties along the border are very poor. The common people, both men and women, wear a dog or sheepskin coat and rely on wild herbs and fruits to satisfy their hunger. They are often worried about their own survival, and it is difficult to conscript them to fight as soldiers! "Lao Zi" said that after military operations, there will inevitably be a disaster year. That is to say, the common people have hurt the yin and yang harmony between heaven and earth with their sorrow and resentment.

古文：出兵虽胜，犹有后忧，恐灾害之变因此以生。
现代文：所以一旦兴兵，即使取得了胜利，也会带来后患，恐怕灾变从此产生。
English: Therefore, once the army is raised, even if victory is achieved, it will bring subsequent problems, and I am afraid that a catastrophe will occur.

古文：今郡国守相多不实选，风俗尤薄，水旱不时。
现代文：如今各郡太守、各封国丞相多不称职，风俗尤为不正，水旱灾害不时发生。
English: Nowadays, many county governors and provincial chancellors are incompetent, customs are particularly unfair, and floods and droughts occur from time to time.

古文：按今年计子弟杀父兄、妻杀夫者凡二百二十二人，臣愚以为此非小变也。
现代文：就在今年，儿子杀父亲、弟弟杀哥哥、妻子杀丈夫的共二百二十二人，我认为这种情况绝不是小事。
English: Just this year, sons killed their fathers, brothers killed their brothers, and wives killed their husbands, a total of 222 people. I think this situation is by no means a small matter.

古文：今左右不忧此，乃欲发兵报纤介之忿于远夷，殆孔子所谓 吾恐季孙之忧不在颛臾而在萧墙之内也 。 
现代文：现在陛下左右的人不为此事担忧，却想发兵到遥远的蛮夷之地去报复细小的怨忿，恐怕正如孔子所说 我担心季孙氏的忧患，不在颛臾国，而在萧墙之内。  
English: Now people around His Majesty are not worried about this matter, but want to send troops to distant barbarian lands to avenge petty grudges. I am afraid that, as Confucius said, I am worried about the sorrow of the Ji Sun clan, not in Shandong, but in Xiaowan.

古文：上从相言，止。遣长罗侯常惠将张掖、酒泉骑往车师，迎郑吉及其吏士还渠犁。
现代文：汉宣帝接受了魏相的劝告，只派长罗侯常惠率领张掖、酒泉的骑兵前往车师，接郑吉及其所率将士还回渠。
English: Emperor Han Xuan accepted Wei Xiang's advice and only sent the cavalry led by Luo Hou Chang Hui, Zhang Qian and Jiuquan to the coachmen to pick up Zheng Ji and his soldiers and return to the canal.

古文：召故车师太子军宿在焉耆者，立以为王；尽徙车师国民令居渠犁，遂以车师故地与匈奴。
现代文：又召前车师太子、正在焉耆的军宿，立为车师王；将车师国百姓全部迁徙，让他们到渠居住，将原车师国地区让给匈奴。
English: He also summoned the former chariot driver prince, who was in the military camp of Yanzhong, and established him as the chariot driver king; he moved all the people of the chariot driver country to live in the canal, and gave the original chariot driver country area to the Huns.

古文：以郑吉为卫司马，使护善阝善以西南道。
现代文：汉宣帝任命郑吉为卫司马，负责鄯善以西的南路地区的安全。
English: Emperor Han Xuan appointed Zheng Ji as Wei Sima, who was responsible for the safety of the Nanlu area west of Jinshan.

古文：魏相好观汉故事及便宜章奏，数条汉兴已来国家便宜行事及贤臣贾谊、晁错、董仲舒等所言，奏请施行之。
现代文：魏相喜欢阅读有关汉朝旧事的记载和前人提出改良建议的奏章，多次列举汉朝建国以来推行的于国有益的措施以及贤臣贾谊、晁错、董仲舒等人的建议，奏请汉宣帝批准实行。
English: Wei Xiang liked to read the records of the old affairs of the Han Dynasty and the records of the predecessors' suggestions for improvement. He repeatedly listed the measures that were beneficial to the country since the founding of the Han Dynasty, as well as the suggestions of the wise men Jia Yi, Zou Zhe, Dong Zhongshu and others, and asked Emperor Han Xuan for approval.

古文：相敕掾史按事郡国，及休告，从家还至府，辄白四方异闻。
现代文：丞相府的官员因公事到郡国及休假从家回到相府，魏相都命他们将各地发生的奇闻异事报告给他。
English: The officials of the Prime Minister's Office went to the county for business and returned to the Prime Minister's Office from their homes on leave. The Prime Minister ordered them to report to him the strange and unusual things that happened in various places.

古文：或有逆贼、风雨灾变，郡不上，相辄奏言之。
现代文：如果有的地区出现逆贼，或自然灾害，郡府不向朝廷报告，总是由魏相奏闻朝廷。
English: If there is a traitor or a natural disaster in a certain area, the county government will not report it to the imperial court, but Wei Xiang will always report it to the imperial court.

古文：与御史大夫丙吉同心辅政，上皆重之。
现代文：魏相与御史大夫丙吉同心协力辅佐朝政，汉宣帝对二人都很倚重。
English: Emperor Han Xuan attached great importance to both Wei Xiang and the imperial historian He Jie, who worked together to support the imperial government.

古文：丙吉为人深厚，不伐善。
现代文：丙吉为人深沉忠厚，不夸耀自己的功劳。
English: He Jie is a man of deep loyalty and does not boast of his achievements.

古文：自曾孙遭遇，吉绝口不道前恩，故朝廷莫能明其功也。
现代文：自汉宣帝即位以来，丙吉绝口不提以前对汉宣帝的恩惠，所以朝中无人知道他的功劳。
English: Since Liu Zhen became the emperor, Bijie never mentioned that he had helped Liu Zhen before and was grateful to him, so no one in the court knew about his merits.

古文：会掖庭宫婢则令民夫上书，自陈尝有阿保之功，章下掖庭令考问，则辞引使者丙吉知状。
现代文：正巧一个名叫则的掖庭所属宫婢让自己的老百姓丈夫上书朝廷，陈述自己对皇帝曾有抚育之功，汉宣帝命掖庭令负责查问此事，宫婢则在供词中提到丙吉了解当时的情况。
English: It just so happened that a palace maid named Zet, who belonged to the imperial court, asked her commoner husband to write a letter to the imperial court, stating that she had been responsible for the emperor's upbringing. Emperor Han Xuan ordered the palace maid to investigate the matter. In her confession, the palace maid mentioned that Bongji understood the situation at the time.

古文：掖庭令将则诣御史府以视吉，吉识，谓则曰： 汝尝坐养皇曾孙不谨，督笞汝，汝安得有功！
现代文：掖庭令将宫婢则带到御史府来见丙吉，丙吉认识她，对她说： 你当年抚育皇曾孙时，因照顾不周，我还曾责打过你，你有什么功劳！
English: By order of the imperial court, the palace maids were brought to the Imperial Palace to meet Bong Ji. Bong Ji recognized her and said to her, "When you were raising the emperor's great-grandson, I used to scold you for not taking good care of him. What do you have to show for it?

古文：独渭城胡组、淮阳郭征卿有恩耳。 
现代文：只有渭城人胡组、淮阳人郭徵卿对皇曾孙有恩。 
English: Only Hu Jie from Shicheng and Guo Zhengqing from Huaiyang were kind to the great-grandson of the emperor.

古文：分别奏组等共养劳苦状。
现代文：于是分别将胡组等当年共同辛勤抚养的情况上奏汉宣帝。
English: Bingji then separately sent a letter to the emperor, describing how hard the Hu group and others had worked to support the emperor.

古文：诏吉求组、征卿；已死，有子孙，皆受厚赏。
现代文：汉宣帝下诏，命寻访胡组、郭徵卿，但二人已然去世，只有子孙尚在，都受到丰厚的赏赐。
English: Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to search for the lives of Hu Jiu and Guo Zhengqing, but the two had already passed away, only their descendants were still alive, and they were all richly rewarded.

古文：诏免则为庶人，赐钱十万。上亲见问，然后知吉有旧恩而终不言，上大贤之。
现代文：汉宣帝又下诏赦免则的官奴婢身分，使她成为平民，赐给她十万钱，并亲自召见，询问当年情况，这才知道丙吉对自己有旧恩，却一直不肯透露，对丙吉的贤德大为感动。
English: Emperor Han Xuan also issued a decree to pardon Xie's status as an official slave, making her a commoner, giving her 100,000 yuan, and personally summoning her to inquire about the situation at that time. It was only then that he knew that Xie Jie had an old favor for himself, but he refused to disclose it. He was greatly moved by Xie Jie's virtue.

古文：帝以萧望之经明持重，议论有馀，材任宰相，欲详试其政事，复以为左冯翊。
现代文：汉宣帝认为萧望之善于筹划，为人持重，很会分析议论，才能堪为丞相，打算仔细考察他处理政务的能力，便又任命他为左冯翊。
English: Emperor Han Xuan thought that Xiao Wangzhu was good at planning, respected people, and was good at analyzing and discussing, so he could be a prime minister. He planned to carefully examine his ability to handle government affairs, and then appointed him as Zuo Fengyu.

古文：望之从少府出为左迁，恐有不合意，即移病。
现代文：萧望之本为少府，如今从宫廷被降到地方，担心皇上对自己有不满意之处，便上书汉宣帝，以有病为理由，打算辞去官职。
English: Xiao Wangzhi was transferred from Shaofu to a lower position. Fearing that he had offended the emperor, he wrote a letter saying that he was ill and asked for leave.

古文：上闻之，使侍中成都侯金安上谕意曰： 所用皆更治民以考功。
现代文：汉宣帝知道后，派侍中成都侯金安上向萧望之解释自己的意思说： 这样做都是为了考察你治理百姓的能力。
English: After Emperor Han Xuan learned of this, he sent the Chengdu magistrate Jin'an to explain his intentions to Xiao Wangzhi, saying, "I did this to examine your ability to govern the people.

古文：君前为平原太守日浅，故复试之于三辅，非有所闻也。 
现代文：你以前当平原太守的时间太短，所以再调你到三辅地区试用，并非听到什么不利于你的议论。 
English: When you were the governor of the plains, your time was very short, so I sent you to Sanshu to investigate. I didn't hear anything bad.

古文：望之即起视事。
现代文：于是萧望之立即起身处理政事。
English: As a result, 萧望之 immediately rose to deal with political affairs.

古文：初，掖庭令张贺数为弟车骑将军安世称皇曾孙之材美及征怪，安世辄绝止，以为少主在上，不宜称述曾孙。
现代文：当初，掖庭令张贺多次在其弟车骑将军张安世面前称赞皇曾孙的才干，并谈到与皇曾孙有关的一些奇异征兆。张安世总是禁止他说这些，认为上有年轻的皇上，不应称道皇曾孙。
English: At first, Zhang He, the courtier, praised the talent of the emperor's great-grandson many times in front of his younger brother, the cavalry general Zhang Anshi, and talked about some strange signs related to the emperor's great-grandson. Zhang Anshi always forbade him to say these things, believing that there was a young emperor, and the great-grandson of the emperor should not be praised.

古文：及帝即位而贺已死，上谓安世曰： 掖庭令平生称我，将军止之，是也。 
现代文：到汉宣帝即位时，张贺已然去世，汉宣帝对张安世说： 掖庭令当初无端地称赞我，将军制止他是对的。 
English: By the time Emperor Han Xuan ascended the throne, Zhang He had already passed away. Emperor Han Xuan said to Zhang Anshi, "At the beginning, Emperor Xuan praised me without any reason. The general was right to stop him."

古文：上追思贺恩，欲封其冢为恩德侯，置守冢二百家。
现代文：汉宣帝追念张贺对自己的恩惠，打算追封他为恩德侯，为他设置二百人家守墓。
English: Emperor Han Xuan remembered Zhang He's kindness to him and planned to make him a prince of Ende and set up a tomb guarded by 200 people.

古文：贺有子蚤死，子安世小男彭祖。
现代文：张贺的儿子去世很早，收张安世的小儿子张彭祖为养子。
English: Zhang He's son died very early, and Zhang Anshi's youngest son, Zhang Peng Zu, was adopted.

古文：彭祖又小与上同席研书指，欲封之，先赐爵关内侯。
现代文：张彭祖幼年时又曾与汉宣帝一起读书，所以汉宣帝打算封张彭祖为侯，先赐他为关内侯。
English: Zhang Pengzu had also studied with Emperor Han Xuan when he was a child, so Emperor Han Xuan intended to make Zhang Pengzu a marquis, and first made him the Marquis of Guanai.

古文：安世深辞贺封；又求损守冢户数，稍减至三十户。
现代文：张安世对张贺封侯之事坚决辞谢，又请求减少为张贺守墓的户数，逐渐减至三十户。
English: Zhang Anshi resolutely declined to thank Zhang He for the fencing, and also requested that the number of households guarding Zhang He's tomb be reduced gradually to thirty.

古文：上曰： 吾自为掖庭令，非为将军也。 
现代文：汉宣帝说： 我本是为掖庭令，并不是为将军你！ 
English: Emperor Han Xuan said: I originally marched for the imperial edict, not for you, the general!

古文：安世乃止，不敢复言。
现代文：张安世这才罢休，不敢再说。
English: Yasushi stopped, not daring to say anything.

古文：上心忌故昌邑王贺，赐山阳太守张敞玺书，令谨备盗贼，察往来过客；毋下所赐书。
现代文：汉宣帝心中对原昌邑王刘贺很是忌惮，赐给山阳太守张敞诏书，命他严防盗贼，注意察看来往的人，并命张敞不得将所赐诏书公布出去。
English: Emperor Han Xuan was very wary of Liu He, the former King of Changyi, and gave Zhang Zang, the Grand Prince of Shanyang, an imperial edict, ordering him to strictly prevent thieves, pay attention to those who came to visit, and order Zhang Zang not to publish the imperial edict.

古文：敞于是条奏贺居处，著其废亡之效曰： 故昌邑王为人，青黑色，小目，鼻末锐卑，少须眉，身体长大，疾痿，行步不便。
现代文：于是，张敞一一奏报刘贺的起居行止，写明他被废黜后的反应，说： 原昌邑王肤色青黑，眼睛很小，鼻尖塌陷，胡须眉毛稀少，身材高大，有肢体痿弱的病，行走不便。
English: As a result, Zhang Zhan reported Liu He's movements one by one, describing his reaction after he was deposed, saying: The original King Changyi had a dark complexion, small eyes, a collapsed nose tip, sparse whiskers and eyebrows, a tall stature, a limb-weakening disease, and difficulty walking.

古文：臣敞尝与之言，欲动观其意，即以恶鸟感之曰： 昌邑多枭。 
现代文：我曾经与他交谈，想在说话时观察他的内心活动，便借用恶鸟引诱他崐说： 昌邑地区猫头鹰很多。 
English: I once had a conversation with him, and I wanted to observe his inner activity while talking, so I borrowed a bad bird to lure him to say: There are many owls in the Changyi area.

古文：故王应曰： 然。前贺西至长安，殊无枭；复来，东至济阳，乃复闻枭声。 
现代文：原昌邑王说： 是啊，以前我西至长安，一只猫头鹰也见不到；回来时，东行到济阳，才又听到猫头鹰的叫声。 
English: The original King of Chang'e said: "Yes, before I went west to Chang'an, I couldn't see an owl; when I came back, I went east to Jiyang, and then I heard the owl's cry.

古文：察故王衣服、言语、跪起，清狂不惠。
现代文：我观察他的衣着、言语、跪下、起立的举止，就像一个糊涂的白痴。
English: I watched him dress, talk, kneel and stand like a bumbling idiot.

古文：臣敞前言： 哀王歌舞者张脩等十人无子，留守哀王园，请罢归。 
现代文：我曾经对他说： 令尊昌邑哀王的歌舞宫女张等十人都没有儿女，留守在哀王的墓地，请你放她们回家吧。 
English: I once said to him, "There are ten maids of the Song and Dance Palace in King Mourn's hometown, Chang'e, who have no children and stay at King Mourn's graveyard. Please let them go home."

古文：故王闻之曰： 中人守园，疾者当勿治，相杀伤者当勿法，欲令亟死。
现代文：他听后说道： 宫女守墓，有病的不应医治，相互打架杀伤的也不应处置，我想让她们早早死去。
English: When he heard this, he said, "Since the imperial concubines guard the tomb, those who are ill should not be cured, and those who fight and kill each other should not be dealt with. I want them to die early."

古文：太守奈何而欲罢之？ 
现代文：太守为什么要放她们走呢？ 
English: Why did the governor let them go?

古文：其天资喜由乱亡，终不见仁义如此。 
现代文：可见其天性喜好走乱亡的路，到底不懂得什么叫作仁义。 
English: It can be seen that their natural inclination is to follow the path of chaos and death, and they do not understand what is called benevolence and righteousness.

古文：上乃知贺不足忌也。
现代文：于是汉宣帝知道刘贺不足忌惮。
English: As a result, Emperor Han Xuan knew that Liu He was too timid.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之下元康三年春，三月，诏封故昌邑王贺为海昏侯。
现代文：元康三年戊午，公元前年春季，三月，汉宣帝下诏封原昌邑王刘贺为海昏侯。
English: At noon of the third year of the Yuan Kang, in the spring of BC, in March, the Han Xuan Emperor decreed that Liu He, the original King of Changyi, would become the Prince of Haiwen.

古文：乙未，诏曰： 朕微眇时，御史大夫丙吉，中郎将史曾、史玄，长乐卫尉许舜，侍中、光禄大夫许延寿，皆与朕有旧恩，及故掖庭令张贺，辅导朕躬，修文学经术，恩惠卓异，厥功茂焉。
现代文：乙未，汉宣帝下诏说： 朕在平民时，御史大夫丙吉，中郎将史曾、史玄，长乐卫尉许舜，侍中、光禄大夫许延寿都对朕有旧恩。还有已故掖庭令张贺对朕辅导教育，使朕研习儒术，恩惠卓著，功劳最大。
English: On the 2nd day of the 2nd month, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict saying, "When I was a commoner, I had the old favor of the Imperial Historian Bijie, the middle-ranking generals Shi Zeng and Shi Xuan, the Changle Guardsman Xu Xi, the chamberlains, and the Guanglu doctor Xu Yan Shou. There was also the late Imperial Court Judge Zhang He to tutor me in education, so that I could study Confucianism. His favor was outstanding, and he deserves the greatest credit.

古文：《诗》不云乎： 无德不报 ，封贺所子弟子侍中、中郎将彭祖为阳都侯，追赐贺谥曰阳都哀侯，吉为博阳侯，曾为将陵侯，玄为平台侯，舜为博望侯，延寿为乐成侯。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 没有不应报答的恩情。 今特封张贺的养子侍中、中郎将张彭祖为阳都侯，追赐张贺谥号为阳都哀侯，丙吉为博阳侯，史曾为将陵侯，史玄为平台侯，许舜为博望侯，许延寿为乐成侯。 
English: "The Book of Poems" said: "There is no unrequited favor. Now, Zhang He's adopted son's attendant and middle son will be specially named Zhang Pengzu as Yangdu Hou, Zhang He's posthumous name will be Yangdu Miao Hou, Bijie will be Bojang Hou, Shi Zeng will be Jialing Hou, Shigen will be Platform Hou, Xu Xi will be Bohang Hou, Xu Yanju will be Le Cheng Hou.

古文：贺有孤孙霸，年七岁，拜为散骑、中郎将，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：张贺有一孤孙名叫张霸，年仅七岁，被任命为散骑、中郎将，赐爵为关内侯。
English: Zhang He had an only grandchild named Zhang Ba, who was only seven years old. He was appointed as a free rider, middle steward, and given the title of Guanai marquis.

古文：故人下至郡邸狱复作尝有阿保之功者，皆受官禄、田宅、财物，各以恩深浅报之。
现代文：凡是汉宣帝从前的老相识，下至当初在郡邸狱中按刑律服劳役的妇女中，曾对他有抚育之恩的人，都被赐给官禄、土地、房屋、财物，分别按照恩德的深浅予以报答。
English: All of Han Xuan Di's old acquaintances from the past, down to the women who were serving forced labor according to the penal code in the county residence prison, who had been kind to him, were given official ranks, land, houses, and property, and were rewarded according to the depth of their kindness.

古文：吉临当封，病；上忧其不起，将使人就加印绋而封之，及其生存也。
现代文：丙吉在受封时身患疾病，汉宣帝担心他一病不起，准备派人将博阳侯印信送到他的身边，让他能在生前受封。
English: At the time of his enthronement, Bingji was suffering from an illness. Emperor Han Xuan was worried that he would not be able to cope with his illness and was preparing to send someone to deliver the letter to him so that he could be enthroned while he was still alive.

古文：太子太傅夏侯胜曰： 此未死也！
现代文：太子太傅夏侯胜说： 丙吉这次不会死！
English: Prince Taifu Xia Hou Sheng said, "Biji will not die this time!"

古文：臣闻有阴德者必飨其乐，以及子孙。
现代文：我听说，凡是积有阴德的人，必然能在生前受到回报，并延及子孙。
English: I have heard that anyone who has accumulated the virtue of chastity will certainly be rewarded during his lifetime, and this will extend to his children and grandchildren.

古文：今吉未获报而疾甚，非其死疾也。 
现代文：如今丙吉尚未得到陛下的报答而病重，这个病不会死。 
English: Now that C's chastity hasn't been repaid, she's so sick that it's not a life-threatening illness.

古文：后病果愈。
现代文：后丙吉的病果然痊愈。
English: Later, Bingji's illness was cured.

古文：张安世自以父子封侯，在位太盛。
现代文：张安世自认为父子都被封侯，权位太盛，便向汉宣帝请求辞去俸禄。
English: Zhang Anshi thought that both his father and son had been knighted and that their positions of power were too powerful, so he asked Emperor Xuan of Han to give up his stipend.

古文：乃辞禄，诏都内别藏张氏无名钱以百万数。
现代文：汉宣帝命大司农所属都内衙门单独为张安世收藏这笔无名钱，达到数百万。
English: Han Xuan Di, the Grand Secretary of the Peasants, collected this anonymous money, amounting to millions, for Zhang Anshi alone from the Inner Capital Gate.

古文：安世谨慎周密，每定大政，已决，辄移病出。
现代文：张安世谨慎周密，每次与皇帝商议大事，决定后，他总是称病退出。
English: Zhang Anshi was careful and meticulous. Every time he discussed an important matter with the emperor, he always called in sick after the decision was made.

古文：闻有诏令，乃惊，使吏之丞相府问焉。
现代文：等听到皇帝颁布诏令后，再假装大吃一惊，派人到丞相府去询问。
English: When he heard that the emperor had issued the edict, he pretended to be taken aback and sent someone to the prime minister's office to inquire.

古文：自朝廷大臣，莫知其与议也。
现代文：所以既使是朝廷大臣，无人知道他曾参与此事的决策。
English: Therefore, even though he was a minister of the Imperial Court, no one knew that he was involved in the decision-making of this matter.

古文：尝有所荐，其人来谢，安世大恨，以为 举贤达能，岂有私谢邪！ 
现代文：张安世曾向朝廷举荐过一个人，此人前来道谢，张安世非常生气，认为： 为国家举荐贤能，难道可以私相酬谢吗！ 
English: Zhang Anshi once recommended a person to the imperial court, and this person came to thank him. Zhang Anshi was very angry and thought: Can I reward myself for recommending a person of virtue to the country?

古文：绝弗复为通。
现代文：从此与此人绝交。
English: Since then, we have severed ties with this person.

古文：有郎功高不调，自言安世，安世应曰： 君之功高，明主所知，人臣执事，何长短而自言乎！ 
现代文：有一位郎官功劳很大，却没有调升，自己去求张安世为他说话。张安世对他说道： 你的功劳很大，皇上是知道的，作人臣子的，怎么能自说长短处！ 坚决不答应他。
English: Zhang Anshi said to him, "Your merit is great. The emperor knows it. How can you, as a courtier, talk about your merits and demerits? I absolutely refuse to agree with him."

古文：绝不许。已而郎果迁。
现代文：不久，这位郎官果然升官了。
English: Not long after, the steward was indeed promoted.

古文：安世自见父子尊显，怀不自安，为子延寿求出补吏，上以为北地太守；岁馀，上闵安世年老，复征延寿为左曹、太仆。
现代文：张安世见自己父子地位尊显，内心深感不安，便为儿子张延寿请求出任地方官。汉宣帝任命张延寿为北地太守。一年多后，汉宣帝怜恤张安世年老，又将张延寿调回朝廷，担任左曹、太仆。
English: Zhang Anshi saw that his father-son status was respected and felt deeply uneasy, so he asked his son, Zhang Yanshou, to serve as a local official. Emperor Han Xuan appointed Zhang Yanshou as the governor of the North. More than a year later, Emperor Han Xuan took pity on Zhang Anshi's old age and transferred Zhang Yanshou back to the imperial court to serve as his left-hand man and servant.

古文：夏，四月，丙子，立皇子钦为淮阳王。
现代文：夏季，四月丙子，汉宣帝立皇子刘钦为淮阳王。
English: In the summer, in April, Emperor Xuan of the Han Dynasty made Prince Liu Qin the king of Huaiyang.

古文：皇太子年十二，通《论语》、《孝经》。
现代文：皇太子刘年十二岁，已通晓《论语》、《孝经》。
English: At the age of twelve, Crown Prince Liu was already familiar with the Analects and the Book of Filial Piety.

古文：太傅疏广谓少傅受曰： 吾闻 知足不辱，知止不殆。 
现代文：太傅疏广对少傅疏受说： 我听说 知道满足的人不会受辱，知道适可而止的人不会遇到危险。 
English: I have heard that those who know contentment will not be insulted, and those who know when to stop will not be in danger.

古文：今仕宦至二千石，官成名立，如此不去，惧有后悔。 
现代文：而今我们作官已到二千石高位，功成名就，这样再不离去，恐怕将来会后悔。 
English: But now that our officials have reached a high position of 2,000 koku, success and fame are enough. If we don't leave like this, I'm afraid we'll regret it in the future.

古文：即日，父子俱移病，上疏乞骸骨。
现代文：于是，当天，叔侄二人就一起以身体患病为理由，上书汉宣帝请求退休。
English: As a result, on the same day, the two uncles and nephews jointly submitted a letter to Han Xuan Di requesting retirement on the grounds of physical illness.

古文：上皆许之，加赐黄金二十斤，皇太子赠以五十斤。
现代文：汉宣帝批准所请，加赐黄金二十斤，皇太子也赠送黄金五十斤。
English: Emperor Han Xuan approved the request and gave him twenty catties of gold. The crown prince also gave him fifty catties of gold.

古文：公卿故人设祖道供张东都门外，送者车数百两。
现代文：公卿大臣和故人在东都门外设摆酒宴，陈设帷帐，为他们送行，前来相送的人乘坐的车辆达数百辆之多。
English: The minister of justice and the deceased held a wine banquet and set up curtains outside the Dongdu Gate to see them off. Hundreds of vehicles were used to transport the guests.

古文：道路观者皆曰： 贤哉二大夫！ 
现代文：沿途观看的人都赞道： 两位大夫真是贤明！ 
English: People who watched along the way praised: The two doctors are really wise!

古文：或叹息为之下泣。
现代文：有人甚至为之感叹落泪。
English: Some people sighed and shed tears.

古文：广、受归乡里，日令其家卖金共具，请族人、故旧、宾客，与相娱乐。
现代文：疏广和疏受回到家乡，每天都命家人变卖黄金，设摆宴席，请族人、旧友、宾客等一起取乐。
English: After returning to his hometown, every day he ordered his family to sell gold, set up a banquet, and invited tribesmen, old friends, guests, etc. to have fun together.

古文：或劝广以其金为子孙颇立产业者，广曰： 吾岂老悖不念子孙哉！
现代文：有人劝疏广用黄金为子孙购置一些产业，疏广说： 我难道年迈昏庸，不顾子孙吗！
English: Some people advised him to use the gold to buy some properties for his children and grandchildren. He said, "Am I too old and feeble to care about my children and grandchildren?"

古文：顾自有旧田庐，令子孙勤力其中，足以共衣食，与凡人齐。
现代文：我想到，我家原本就有土地房屋，让子孙们在上面勤劳耕作，就足够供他们饮食穿戴，过与普通人同样的生活。
English: I am thinking of some of the old farmhouses in their own homes, assuming that their children and grandchildren will work hard and diligently to run them, enough to provide them with food and clothing, so that they can live like ordinary people.

古文：今复增益之以为赢馀，但教子孙怠堕耳。
现代文：如今再要增加产业，使有盈余，只会使子孙们懒惰懈怠。
English: To increase production and make a surplus now will only make our children and grandchildren lazy and slack.

古文：贤而多财，则损其志；愚而多财，则益其过。
现代文：贤能的人，如果财产太多，就会磨损他们的志气；愚蠢的人，如果财产太多，就会增加他们的过错。
English: Virtue and riches diminish the will; folly and riches increase the errors.

古文：且夫富者众之怨也，吾既无以教化子孙，不欲益其过而生怨。
现代文：况且富有的人是众人怨恨的目标，我既然无法教化子孙，就不愿增加他们的过错而产生怨恨。
English: Moreover, since the rich are the object of everyone's resentment, and since I cannot educate my children, I do not want to increase their faults and cause resentment.

古文：又此金者，圣主所以惠养老臣也，故乐与乡党、宗族共飨其赐，以尽吾馀日，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：再说这些金钱，乃是皇上用来恩养老臣的，所以我愿与同乡、同族的人共享皇上的恩赐，以度过我的余生，不也很好吗！ 
English: Besides, this money is used by the emperor to grant favors to retired ministers, so I would like to share the emperor's gift with my fellow countrymen and people of the same race to spend the rest of my life. Wouldn't that be great!

古文：于是族人悦服。
现代文：于是族人都心悦诚服。
English: As a result, the tribesmen were heartily convinced.

古文：颍川太守黄霸使邮亭、乡官皆畜鸡、豚，以赡鳏、寡、贫、穷者；然后为条教，置父老、师帅、伍长，班行之于民间，劝以为善防奸之意，及务耕桑、节用、殖财、种树、畜养，去浮淫之费。
现代文：颍川太守黄霸命郡内驿站和乡官一律畜养鸡、猪，用以救济独身男子、寡妇和贫穷之人；后来又定立规章制度，设置父老、师帅、伍长，在民间推行，教育百姓行善防恶，务农养蚕，节俭用度，增加财富，种植树木，饲养家蓄，不要将钱财浪费在表面或无益之处。
English: Huang Ba, the governor of Luochuan, ordered the county post office and township officials to raise chickens and pigs to help single men, widows and poor people. Later, he also established rules and regulations, set up fathers, teachers and corporals to promote among the people, educate the people to do good and prevent evil, farm and raise silkworms, use money sparingly, increase wealth, plant trees, raise household savings, and do not waste money on the surface or useless places.

古文：其治，米盐靡密，初若烦碎，然霸精力能推行之。
现代文：黄霸治理地方，既杂且细，开始时似乎繁琐细碎，黄霸却能集中力量贯彻推行。
English: Huangba's local governance is both complex and detailed. At the beginning, it seems to be tedious and detailed, but Huangba can concentrate on implementation.

古文：吏民见者，语次录绎，问它阴伏以相参考，聪明识事，吏悄不知所出，咸称神明，豪厘不敢有所欺。
现代文：接见属下官吏、百姓时，从交谈中寻找红索，询问其分潜伏的问题以相参考。黄霸聪明而能够认识事情的真相，属吏及百姓们不知其所以然，都称赞他如神明一般，不敢有丝毫欺瞒。
English: When receiving subordinate officials and common people, he would look for the red thread in the conversation and inquire about their hidden problems for reference. Huang Ba was clever and able to recognize the truth of the matter. The officials and common people did not know why, but they all praised him as a god, and did not dare to deceive.

古文：奸人去入它郡，盗贼日少。
现代文：奸邪坏人纷纷逃到别的郡，颍川地区盗贼日益减少。
English: Thieves can just move to other counties, so the number of thieves in this county is gradually decreasing.

古文：霸力行教化而后诛罚，务在成就全安长吏。
现代文：黄霸对下属官吏首先进行教育和感化，如有人不遵教化，再对其施以刑罚，力求成就、保全他们。
English: Huangba tried his best to carry out the indoctrination, and only then used the punishment. He paid attention to the integrity and protection of subordinate officials.

古文：许丞老，病聋，督邮白欲逐之。
现代文：许县县丞年老耳聋，郡督邮禀告黄霸，打算将其斥逐不用。
English: Xu County's county magistrate is old and deaf, and the county postmaster told Huangba that he planned to expel him.

古文：霸曰： 许丞廉吏，虽老，尚能拜起送迎，正颇重听何伤！
现代文：黄霸说： 许县县丞是个清廉官吏，虽然年老，但尚能下拜起立，送往迎来，只不过有些耳聋，又有什么妨碍！
English: Huang Ba said: Xu Xian Xian Rong is an incorruptible official. Although he is old, he can still bow down, stand up, and send us off. However, he is a little deaf, so what is the obstacle?

古文：且善助之，毋失贤者意！ 
现代文：应好好帮助他，不要使贤能的人失望。 
English: You should help him well, and don't let a capable person down.

古文：或问其故，霸曰： 数易长吏，送故迎新之费，及奸吏因缘，绝簿书，盗财物，公私费耗甚多，皆当出于民。
现代文：有人问他这样做的原因，他说： 频繁地变更重要官吏，会增加送旧迎新的费用，奸猾官吏也会借机藏匿档案记载，盗取财物。公私费用耗费过多，全要由百姓们承担。
English: When asked why he did this, he said: Frequent changes of important officials will increase the cost of sending the old and welcoming the new, and treacherous officials will also take the opportunity to hide archives and records and steal property. Excessive public and private expenses will be borne by the people.

古文：所易新吏又未必贤，或不如其故，徒相益为乱。
现代文：新换的官吏也未必贤能，或许是还不如原来的，就会徒然增加混乱。
English: The new officials may not be competent, and may not be as good as the old ones, which will only add to the confusion.

古文：凡治道，去其泰甚者耳。 
现代文：治理的方法，不过是去掉太不称职的官吏而已。 
English: The main principle of great governance is not to overdo it.

古文：霸以外宽内明，得吏民心，户口岁增，治为天下第一，征守京兆尹。
现代文：黄霸外崐表宽厚，内心明察，很得官吏百姓之心，郡内户口年年增加，政绩天下第一，汉宣帝征召他担任京兆尹。
English: Huangba was generous on the outside and shrewd on the inside. He won the hearts of the officials and the people. The number of households in the county increased year by year. His political achievements were the best in the world. Emperor Xuan of Han summoned him to serve as Jing Zhaoyun.

古文：顷之，坐法，连贬秩；有诏复归颍川为太守，以八百石居。
现代文：不久，因被指控违法，连续受到降级处分。后汉宣帝下诏让他重新回到颍川，以八百石的官秩充任颍川太守。
English: Soon after, he was accused of breaking the law, and was punished with successive demotions. Later, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict to let him return to Beichuan, and he was appointed governor of Beichuan with an official rank of 800 koku.

古文：中宗孝宣皇帝上之下元康四年
现代文：元康四年
English: Four years of Genkang

古文：春，正月，诏： 年八十以上，非诬告、杀伤人，它皆勿坐。 
现代文：春季，正月，汉宣帝颁布诏书说： 年纪在八十以上的人，除犯有诬告、杀人、伤人之罪以外，其他罪一概免予论处。 
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, Emperor Han Xuan issued an edict saying: People over the age of eighty are exempt from punishment for all other crimes except for the crimes of false accusation, homicide, and wounding.

古文：右扶风尹翁归卒，家无馀财。
现代文：右扶风尹翁归去世，家无余财。
English: Right-hand man Yin Weng passed away, leaving the family penniless.

古文：秋，八月，诏曰： 翁归廉平乡正，治民异等。其赐翁归子黄金百斤，以奉祭祀。 
现代文：秋季，八月，汉宣帝下诏说： 尹翁归廉洁公正，治理百姓成绩优异，赐给尹翁归之子黄金百斤，作为祭祀之用。 
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Xuan of Han issued an edict: Yin Wengui was incorruptible and fair, and his achievements in governing the people were outstanding. He gave his son 100 jin of gold as a sacrifice.

古文：上令有司求高祖功臣子孙失侯者，得槐里公乘周广汉等百三十六人，皆赐黄金二十斤，复其家，令奉祭祀，世世勿绝。
现代文：汉宣帝命有关部门查访汉高祖功臣的子孙中失去侯爵的人，共查出槐里公乘周广汉等一百三十六人，一律赐予黄金二十斤，免除其家徭役赋税，命其负责祖先的祭祀事务，世世不绝。
English: Emperor Han Xuan ordered the relevant departments to investigate the people who lost their marquis among the descendants of the ancestors and heroes of the Han Dynasty, and found a total of 136 people, including Gongzheng Zhou Guanghan and others, all of whom were given 20 jin of gold, exempted from their family service tax, and ordered to be responsible for the ancestor's sacrificial affairs.

古文：丙寅，富平敬侯张安世薨。
现代文：丙寅，富平侯张安世去世。
English: Cui Yin, Fuping Hou Zhang Anshi passed away.

古文：初，扶阳节侯韦贤薨，长子弘有罪系狱，家人矫贤令，以次子大河都尉玄成为后。
现代文：当初，扶阳节侯韦贤去世后，韦贤的长子韦弘因罪被逮捕下狱，韦家假托韦贤生前有令，以二儿子大河都尉韦玄成作为韦贤的继承人。
English: At first, after the death of Hou Wei Xian on the Fuyang Festival, Wei Xian's eldest son Wei Hong was arrested and imprisoned for a crime. The Wei family had an order before Wei Xian's death, with Wei Xuan Cheng, the second son of the great river captain, as Wei Xian's heir.

古文：玄成深知其非贤雅意，即阳为病狂，卧便利，妄笑语，昏乱。
现代文：韦玄成深知这并不是父亲的本意，便假装疯癫，躺在粪尿之中，胡言乱语，又笑又闹。
English: Wei Xuancheng knew that this was not his father's intention, so he pretended to be crazy, lying in the feces and urine, talking nonsense, laughing and making noise.

古文：既葬，当袭爵，以狂不应召。
现代文：安葬了韦贤之后，韦玄成应当继承扶阳侯爵位，但他却继续假装疯癫，不肯应召袭爵。
English: After Wei Xian was buried, Wei Xuancheng should have inherited the title of Marquis of Fuyang, but he continued to pretend to be insane and refused to be summoned to inherit the title.

古文：大鸿胪奏状，章下丞相、御史案验。
现代文：大鸿胪向汉宣帝奏报此事，汉宣帝命丞相、御史核验是否属实。
English: Dahongye wrote to the imperial court, and the imperial court sent a document to the prime minister and the imperial historian, requesting them to investigate the matter.

古文：案事丞相史乃与玄成书曰： 古之辞让，必有文义可观，故能垂荣于后。
现代文：查办此事的丞相史便写信给韦玄成说： 古人辞让爵位的，都著有文章，说明自己的仁义行为，因此才能留芳后世。
English: The minister in charge of the investigation then wrote to Hyun Seong, saying: The ancient people must have a decent name, so that the name can be passed down to future generations.

古文：今子独坏容貌，蒙耻辱为狂痴，光曜晻而不宣，微哉子之所托名也！
现代文：如今你却只是毁坏容貌，忍受耻辱而伪装疯癫，有如微细的光亮，照不了多远，你所能得到的名声是很小的。
English: Now thou dost but mar thy countenance, and suffer shame, and feign madness, like a faint light, that shines not far, and thy renown is small.

古文：仆素愚陋，过为宰相执事，愿少闻风声；不然，恐子伤高而仆为小人也。 
现代文：我一向愚昧浅陋，勉强为丞相办事，希望能稍微听到外界对你的议论。不然的话，恐怕你会因清高而受到伤害，我成了检举你的小人。 
English: I have always been stupid and shallow, reluctantly working for the prime minister, hoping to hear a little bit about you from the outside world. Otherwise, I'm afraid you will be hurt by being high-minded, and I will become a villain who reports you.

古文：玄成友人侍郎章亦上疏言： 圣王贵以礼让为国，宜优养玄成，勿枉其志，使得自安衡门之下。 
现代文：韦玄成的朋友、一个叫做章的侍郎也上书说： 圣明的君主为国尊崇礼让行为，应当优待韦玄成，不必违背他的意志，使他得以自安于清贫的生活。 
English: Wei Xuancheng's friend, Zhi Lang Zhang, also wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: The sacred monarch governs the country, advocating the behavior of courtesy and benevolence. The imperial court should treat Xuancheng with courtesy, do not wrong his good aspirations, let him be poor and have peace of mind.

古文：而丞相、御史遂以玄成实不病，劾奏之，有诏勿劾，引拜；玄成不得已，受爵。
现代文：而丞相、御史则以韦玄成本没有疯癫之病为理由弹劾他。汉宣帝下诏命不必弹劾，命领他来承袭爵位。韦玄成迫不得已，只得奉命袭爵。
English: However, the chancellor and the minister of history impeached Wei Xuancheng on the grounds that he did not have a mental illness. Emperor Han Xuan issued an imperial edict ordering him to succeed to the peerage without impeachment. Wei Xuancheng had no choice but to accept the order to succeed to the peerage.

古文：帝高其节，以玄成为河南太守。
现代文：汉宣帝欣赏他的志节，任命他为河南太守。
English: Emperor Han Xuan appreciated his dedication and appointed him as the governor of Henan Province.

古文：车师王乌贵之走乌孙也，乌孙留不遣。
现代文：车师王乌贵逃到乌孙后，乌孙将其收留。
English: After the driver Wang Wugui fled to Wusun, Wusun took him in.

古文：汉遣使责乌孙，乌孙送乌贵诣阙。
现代文：汉朝派使臣责问乌孙，乌孙将乌贵送往长安。
English: The Han Dynasty sent envoys to question U Sun, and U Sun sent Ugui to Chang'an.

古文：初，武帝开河西四郡，隔绝羌与匈奴相通之路，斥逐诸羌。不使居湟中地。
现代文：当初，汉武帝开辟河西四郡，隔断了羌人与匈奴联系的通道，并驱逐羌人各部，不让他们居住在湟中地区。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Hanwu opened up four counties in the west of the river, cut off the channel of contact between the Huns and the Huns, and expelled the Huns from all parts of the country, preventing them from living in the central Hunan region.

古文：及帝即位，光禄大夫义渠安国使行诸羌；先零豪言： 愿时度湟水北，逐民所不田处畜牧。 
现代文：及至汉宣帝即位，派光禄大夫义渠安国巡查羌人各部。羌人先零部落首领对义渠安国说： 我们希望能时常北渡湟水，到没有耕地的地方放牧。 
English: When Emperor Han Xuan ascended to the throne, he sent Dr. Guanglu Yiqiu and An Guo to inspect the various departments of the Xiongnu. The Xiongnu first zero tribal leader said to Yiqiu and An Guo: We hope to be able to cross the Yishui River to the north from time to time and graze in places where there is no arable land.

古文：安国以闻。
现代文：义渠安国表示同意，并奏闻朝廷。
English: An Guo reported the dispatch to the emperor.

古文：后将军赵充国劾安国奉使不敬。
现代文：后将军赵充国弹劾义渠安国 奉使不敬 ，擅作主张。
English: Later, General Zhao Chongguo impeached Yi Quan An Guo for insubordination and advocating arbitrarily.

古文：是后羌人旁缘前言，抵冒度湟水，郡县不能禁。
现代文：此后，羌人以汉使曾经许诺为借口崐，强行渡过湟水，当地郡县无力禁止。
English: After that, the people of Handan used the promise of the Han envoy as an excuse to forcibly cross the Water of Handan, which the local county was powerless to prohibit.

古文：既而先零与诸羌种豪二百馀人解仇、交质、盟诅。
现代文：久，先零部落与其他各羌族部首领二百余人解除相互间怨仇，彼此交换人质，共同盟誓。
English: After a long time, the first zero tribe and more than 200 other leaders of the various Yi tribes resolved their mutual grudges, exchanged hostages with each other, and swore together.

古文：上闻之，以问赵充国，对曰： 羌人所以易制者，以其种自有豪，数相攻击，势不壹也。
现代文：汉宣帝听说后，就此询问赵充国的看法。赵充国说： 羌人之所以容易控制，是因为其部落各自有首领，彼此间多次互相攻击，势力不统一。
English: When Emperor Han Xuan heard about this, he asked Zhao Chongguo for his opinion. Zhao Chongguo said: The reason why the Qiang people are easy to control is because their tribes have their own leaders, they have attacked each other many times, and their forces are not unified.

古文：往三十馀岁西羌反时，亦先解仇合约攻令居，与汉相距，五六年乃定。
现代文：三十多年前，西羌背叛朝廷时，也是先解除自身内部的仇怨，然后合力进攻令居，与汉朝对抗，历时五六年才平定。
English: More than 30 years ago, when Xicheng betrayed the imperial court, it was Xicheng that first resolved its internal grudges, and then joined forces to attack Lingju and confront the Han Dynasty, which took 56 years to subdue.

古文：匈奴数诱羌人，欲与之共击张掖、酒泉地，使羌居之。
现代文：匈奴多次引诱羌人，企图与羌人联合进攻张掖、酒泉地区，让羌人在那里居住。
English: The Xiongnu repeatedly lured the Yao people, attempting to jointly attack Zhangye and Jiuquan regions with the Yao people, and let the Yao people live there.

古文：间者匈奴困于西方，疑其更遣使至羌中与相结。
现代文：近年来，匈奴西部地区受到困扰，我怀疑他们又派使者到羌中与羌人部落联合。
English: In recent years, the western regions of the Xiongnu have been troubled, and I suspect that they have sent emissaries to Yunnan to unite with the Yunnan tribes.

古文：臣恐羌变未止此，且复结联他种，宜及未然为之备。 
现代文：我恐怕西羌事变并不局限于此，他们还会和其他部族再次联合，我们应提前做好准备。 
English: I'm afraid there's a lot more to come, and they'll be teaming up with other tribes, so you'd better be ready before it happens.

古文：后月馀，羌侯狼何果遣使至匈奴藉兵，欲击善阝善、敦煌以绝汉道。
现代文：一个多月以后，羌人首领、羌侯狼何果然派使者到匈奴去借兵，企图进攻鄯善、敦煌，隔断汉朝通往西域的道路。
English: More than a month later, the leader of the Xiongnu and the wolf of the Xiongnu sent an envoy to the Xiongnu to borrow soldiers in an attempt to attack Xianshan and Dunhuang and cut off the Han Dynasty's road to the western region.

古文：充国以为 狼何势不能独造此计，疑匈奴使已至羌中，先零、罕、幵乃解仇作约。
现代文：赵充国认为： 狼何不可能独自订出此计，我怀疑匈奴使者已经到达羌中，先零？等羌人部落才解除仇恨，订立盟约。
English: Zhao Chongguo thought: How is it impossible for the wolf to come up with such a plan alone? I suspect that the Hun envoy has already arrived in Yunnan, and it will take time for the Yunnan tribes to get rid of their hatred and conclude a covenant.

古文：到秋马肥，变必起矣。
现代文：一到秋季马匹肥壮之时，必有事变发生。
English: Wait until autumn Ma Hui, turmoil will inevitably occur.

古文：宜遣使者行边兵，豫为备敕，视诸羌毋令解仇，以发觉其谋。 
现代文：应派出使臣，巡视边塞防御情况，预先备好敕令，设法阻止羌人各部落解除仇恨，瓦解他们的联盟，以揭露他们的阴谋。 
English: Envoys should be dispatched to inspect the defense of the frontier fortress, prepare the imperial edict in advance, and try to prevent the Xiongnu tribes from dissolving their hatred, breaking up their alliance, and exposing their conspiracy.

古文：于是两府复白遣义渠安国行视诸羌，分别善恶。
现代文：于是丞相、御史再次禀明汉宣帝，派义渠安国巡视羌人各部，区分各部的善恶。
English: As a result, the two prefectures requested that an envoy from Yichuan and An Guo be dispatched to inspect each of the sentient tribes to distinguish the good from the bad.

古文：是时，比年丰稔，谷石五钱。
现代文：这时候，因农业连年丰收，一石谷物的价格是五钱。
English: At this time, due to successive years of bumper agricultural harvests, the price of a stone of grain was five yuan.

