古文：元年春，王正月。三月，公及邾仪父盟于蔑。
现代文：隐公代行国政而想要和邾国友好，所以在蔑地举行了盟会。
English: Ying Gong wanted to be friendly with Yan, who was running the country on his behalf, so he held the alliance meeting in defiance.

古文：夏五月，郑伯克段于鄢。
现代文：夏季五月，郑庄公在鄢地打败了共叔段。
English: In the summer of May, Zheng Zhuanggong defeated the Communist Party of China.

古文：秋七月，天王使宰咺来归惠公、仲子之赗。
现代文：秋季，七月，周平王派遣宰咺来赠送鲁惠公和仲子的吊丧礼品。
English: In the autumn, in July, King Zhou Ping sent his vizier to present the funeral gifts of Lu Hui and Zhongzi.

古文：九月，及宋人盟于宿。
现代文：九月，和宋人在宿地结盟，两国开始友好起来。
English: In September, he allied with the Song people in Suzdal, and the two countries began to be friendly.

古文：冬十有二月，祭伯来。公子益师卒。
现代文：冬季腊月，祭伯前来吊唁，公子益师死了。
English: In the winter waxing moon, Saibaku came to offer condolences, and Prince Masashi died.

古文：元年春，王周正月。
现代文：鲁隐公元年春，周历正月。
English: Luyin in the spring of the year, the first month of the lunar calendar.

古文：不书即位，摄也。
现代文：《春秋》上不写 鲁隐公即位 ，摄政。
English: "Spring and Autumn" does not mention the enthronement of Lu Yingguo, the regent.

古文：三月，公及邾仪父盟于蔑，邾子克也。
现代文：三月，隐公和邾仪父在蔑会见，邾仪父就是邾子克。
English: In March, Ying Gong and Puyi's father met in Zhaozhuang. Puyi's father was Zang Zik.

古文：未王命，故不书爵。曰仪父，贵之也。
现代文：由于邾仪父还没有受周朝正式册封，所以《春秋》没有记载他的爵位；称他为 仪父 ，是尊重他。
English: Since Puyi's father had not yet been officially ennobled by the Zhou Dynasty, "Spring and Autumn" did not record his title; calling him "Father of the Rites" was out of respect for him.

古文：公摄位而欲求好于邾，故为蔑之盟。
现代文：隐公代行国政而想要和邾国友好，所以在蔑地举行了盟会。
English: Ying Gong wanted to be friendly with Yan, who was running the country on his behalf, so he held the alliance meeting in defiance.

古文：夏四月，费伯帅师城郎。
现代文：夏四月，费伯率领军队在郎这个地方建城。
English: In the summer of April, Faber led an army to build a city in this place.

古文：不书，非公命也。
现代文：《春秋》没有记载，是因为费伯做这件事不是奉鲁隐公之命。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is not recorded, because it was not made on the orders of the prince.

古文：初，郑武公娶于申，曰武姜。生庄公及共叔段。
现代文：当初，郑武公娶了申国的女子为妻，名叫武姜，生了庄公和共叔段两个儿子。
English: At first, Zheng Wukong married a woman from Sheng, named Wujiang, and had two sons, Zhuangong and Gongshuandu.

古文：庄公寤生，惊姜氏，故名曰寤生，遂恶之。
现代文：庄公难产而生，使姜氏受了惊吓，所以起名叫做 寤生 ，也因此而讨厌他。
English: Zhuang Gong was born with difficulty, which frightened Jiang, so he was named Zheng Sheng, and he hated him for that.

古文：爱共叔段，欲立之。亟请于武公，公弗许。
现代文：姜氏喜爱共叔段，想立他为太子，多次向武公请求，武公都没有答应。
English: Mr. Jiang loved his uncle and wanted to make him the crown prince. He repeatedly petitioned Emperor Wu, but Emperor Wu did not agree.

古文：及庄公即位，为之请制。公曰： 制，巖邑也，虢叔死焉，佗邑唯命。 
现代文：等到庄公继位成为郑国国君，姜氏请求将制地作为共叔段的封邑，庄公说： 制地是个险要的地方，虢叔就死在那里。其他地方都可以任他挑选。 
English: When Zhuang Gong succeeded to the throne as Zheng Guo Guojun, Jiang requested that the land be made into a fief for his uncle. Zhuang Gong said, "The land is a very important place. My uncle died there. Other places can be chosen by him."

古文：请京，使居之，谓之京城大叔。
现代文：姜氏又改请求京地，让共叔段住在那里，就称他为 京城太叔 。
English: Mr. Jiang then changed his request to the capital, asking for the uncle to live there, and called him the uncle of the capital.

古文：祭仲曰： 都城过百雉，国之害也。
现代文：祭仲对庄公说： 凡属国都，城墙周围的长度超过三百丈，就会成为国家的危害。
English: Saizhong said to Zhuanggong: Any national capital with a city wall longer than three hundred meters will become a national hazard.

古文：先王之制，大都不过参国之一，中五之一，小九之一。
现代文：先王制定的制度：大的地方的城墙，不能超过国都的三分之一；中等的，不能超过五分之一；小的，不能超过九分之一。
English: The system established by the previous king: the city wall of a large place cannot exceed one-third of the national capital; a medium-sized one cannot exceed one-fifth; and a small one cannot exceed one-ninth.

古文：今京不度，非制也。君将不堪。 
现代文：现在京地的城墙不合制度，这不是祖制所允许的，您会忍受不了。 
English: Now the walls of the capital are not in accordance with the system, this is not allowed by the ancestral system, you will not be able to bear it.

古文：公曰： 姜氏欲之，焉辟害？ 
现代文：庄公说： 姜氏要这样，哪里能避免祸害呢？ 
English: Zhuang Gong said, "If Jiang wants to do this, where can he avoid disaster?

古文：对曰： 姜氏何厌之有？
现代文：祭仲回答说： 姜氏怎么会得到满足？
English: Saizhong replied, "How can Mr. Jiang be satisfied?

古文：不如早为之所，无使滋蔓，蔓，难图也。
现代文：不如及早作安排，免得其贪欲蔓延滋长，一旦蔓延就难得对付了。
English: It is better to make arrangements as early as possible to prevent its greed from spreading and growing. Once it spreads, it will be difficult to deal with.

古文：蔓草犹不可除，况君之宠弟乎？ 
现代文：蔓延的野草尚且不能铲除掉，何况是您宠爱的弟弟呢？ 
English: The spreading weeds can't be eradicated yet, and what about your beloved brother?

古文：公曰： 多行不义必自毙，子姑待之。 
现代文：庄公说： 多作不义之事，必定要失败。
English: Zhuang Gong said, "If you do many unjust things, you are sure to fail."

古文：既而大叔命西鄙、北鄙贰于己。
现代文：您暂且等着瞧吧！ 不久，太叔命令西部和北部边境既听庄公的命令，又听自己的命令。
English: Just wait and see! Soon, Uncle ordered the western and northern borders to listen to Zhuangguo's orders as well as their own.

古文：公子吕曰： 国不堪贰，君将若之何？
现代文：公子吕说： 国家不能忍受这种两面听命的情况，您打算怎么办？
English: Prince Lyu said, "The country can't tolerate this double-dealing. What are you going to do?

古文：若与大叔，臣请事之；若弗与，则请除之。无生民心。 公曰： 无庸，将自及。 
现代文：您要把君位让给太叔，下臣就去事奉他；如果不给，那就除掉他，不要让老百姓产生其他想法。 庄公说： 用不着，他会自食其果的。 
English: If you want to give the throne to your great-uncle, then your vassals will go and serve him; if not, then get rid of him, and don't let the people have any other ideas.Zhuang Gong said: No need, he will reap the consequences.

古文：大叔又收贰以为己邑，至于廪延。
现代文：太叔又收取原来两属的地方作为自己的封邑，并扩大到廪延地方。
English: The great-uncle also received the places of the original two clans as his own fiefdoms, and expanded to the Jinyan area.

古文：子封曰： 可矣，厚将得众。 
现代文：子封说： 可以动手了。势力一大，将会争得民心。 
English: Zifeng said, "Let's get started. With a large force, we will win the hearts of the people."

古文：公曰： 不义不暱，厚将崩。 
现代文：庄公说： 对国家不义，不懂得亲近人民，团结人民的人，即使扩大了土地，也会垮台。 
English: Zhuang Gong said: Those who are unfair to the country and do not know how to be close to the people and unite the people will fall, even if they expand the land.

古文：大叔完聚，缮甲兵，具卒乘，将袭郑。夫人将启之。公闻其期，曰： 可矣！ 
现代文：太叔修理城郭，储备粮草，补充武器装备，充实步兵车兵，准备袭击郑国都城，姜氏则打算作为内应将城门打开。庄公听到太叔起兵的日期，说： 可以了。 
English: Uncle Taizong repaired the city walls, stockpiled grain and grass, replenished weapons and equipment, increased the number of infantry and chariots, and prepared to attack the capital city of Zheng, while Jiang intended to open the city gates as an internal matter. Zhuang Gong heard the date of Uncle Taizong's army and said, "It's okay."

古文：命子封帅车二百乘以伐京。
现代文：就命令子封率领二百辆战车进攻京城。
English: He ordered Zifeng to lead two hundred chariots to attack the capital.

古文：京叛大叔段，段入于鄢，公伐诸鄢。
现代文：京城的人反对太叔。太叔只能逃到鄢地。庄公又赶到鄢地进攻他。
English: The people of the capital city opposed the great uncle. The great uncle could only flee to Shantou. Zhuangong also rushed to Shantou to attack him.

古文：五月辛丑，大叔出奔共。
现代文：五月二十三日，太叔又逃到共国。
English: On May 23rd, my great uncle fled to the communist country again.

古文：书曰： 郑伯克段于鄢。 
现代文：《春秋》说： 郑伯克段于鄢。 
English: "Spring and Autumn" said: Zheng Bock is in the lead.

古文：段不弟，故不言弟；如二君，故曰克；称郑伯，讥失教也；谓之郑志，不言出奔，难之也。
现代文：太叔所作所为不像兄弟，所以不说 弟 字；兄弟相争，好像两个国君打仗一样，所以用个 克 字；把庄公称为 郑伯 是讥刺他没有尽教诲之责；赶走共叔段是出于郑庄公的本意，便不写共叔段自动出奔，这么处理含有责难郑庄公的意思。
English: The great uncle did not behave like a brother, so the word "brother" was not used; the brothers fought, as if two kings were at war, so the word "brother" was used; calling Zhuang Gong "Zheng Bo" was a mockery of his failure to fulfill his duty of teaching; driving away the common uncle was out of the intention of Zheng Zhuangong, so he did not write that the common uncle ran away automatically, and this treatment contained the meaning of blaming Zheng Zhuangong.

古文：遂寘姜氏于城颍，而誓之曰： 不及黄泉，无相见也。 
现代文：郑庄公就把姜氏安置在城颍地方，发誓说： 不到黄泉不再相见。 
English: Zheng Zhuang placed Jiang at the city gate and swore that they would not see each other again until the underworld.

古文：既而悔之。
现代文：不久之后又后悔了。
English: It wasn't long before he regretted it.

古文：颍考叔为颍穀封人，闻之，有献于公。
现代文：有个叫颍考叔的，是颍谷管理疆界的官吏，听到这件事，就把贡品献给郑庄公。
English: An official of the Shibuya border administration, called Uncle Shoko, heard about this and offered the tribute to Zheng Zhuang.

古文：公赐之食，食舍肉。
现代文：庄公赐给他饭食。颍考叔在吃饭的时候，把肉留着。
English: Zhuang Gong gave him some food. While eating, Gongkao uncle kept the meat.

古文：公问之，对曰： 小人有母，皆尝小人之食矣，未尝君之羹，请以遗之。 
现代文：庄公问他为什么这样。颍考叔答道： 我有母亲，我吃的东西她都尝过，只是从未尝过君王的肉羹，请让我带回去送给她吃。 
English: Zhuang Gong asked him why this was so. Uncle Gong replied: I have a mother, she has tasted everything I have eaten, but she has never tasted the king's meat jelly, please let me take it back and give it to her to eat.

古文：公曰： 尔有母遗，繄我独无！ 
现代文：庄公说： 你还有母亲可送，唉，唯独我就没有！ 
English: Zhuang Gong said, "You still have your mother to send, alas, but I don't!

古文：颍考叔曰， 敢问何谓也？ 
现代文：颍考叔说： 请问您这是什么意思？ 
English: Uncle Gong Gao said: What do you mean by this?

古文：公语之故，且告之悔。
现代文：庄公就将原因告诉了他，还告诉他自己很后悔。
English: Zhuang Gong told him the reason, and also told him that he regretted it.

古文：对曰： 君何患焉！
现代文：颍考叔答道： 您有什么担心的！
English: Uncle Gongkao replied: What are you worried about!

古文：若阙地及泉，隧而相见，其谁曰不然？ 
现代文：只要挖一条地道，挖出了泉水，从地道中相见，谁又会说您呢？ 
English: As long as you dig a tunnel, dig out a spring, and see each other from the tunnel, who will say you?

古文：公从之。
现代文：庄公接受了他的建议。
English: Cao Gong obeyed him.

古文：公入而赋： 大隧之中，其乐也融融！ 
现代文：庄公走进地道去见武姜，赋道： 大隧之中相见啊，多么和乐相得啊！ 
English: Zhuang Gong walked into the tunnel to see Wu Jiang, and said, "Seeing each other in the middle of the tunnel, how happy we are to be together!"

古文：姜出而赋： 大隧之外，其乐也洩洩！ 
现代文：武姜走出地道，赋诗道： 大隧之外相见啊，多么舒畅快乐啊！ 
English: Wujiang stepped out of the tunnel and uttered a poem: "Seeing each other outside the tunnel, how comfortable and happy!"

古文：遂为母子如初。
现代文：于是他们恢复了从前的母子关系。
English: As a result, they restored the former mother-child relationship.

古文：君子曰： 颍考叔，纯孝也，爱其母，施及庄公。
现代文：君子说： 颍考叔算是真正的孝子，爱他的母亲，扩大影响到庄公。
English: The gentleman said, "Uncle Zengkao is a true filial son, he loves his mother, and the expansion will affect Zhuangguo.

古文：《诗》曰： 孝子不匮，永锡尔类。 
现代文：《诗》说： 孝子的孝心没有穷尽，永远可以影响给你的同类。 
English: "Poetry" says: The filial piety of a filial son is inexhaustible, and it can always influence your peers.

古文：其是之谓乎？ 
现代文：说的就是这样的事情吧！ 
English: That's what I'm talking about!

古文：秋七月，天王使宰咺来归惠公、仲子之赗。
现代文：秋季，七月，周平王派遣宰咺来赠送鲁惠公和仲子的吊丧礼品。
English: In the autumn, in July, King Zhou Ping sent his vizier to present the funeral gifts of Lu Hui and Zhongzi.

古文：缓，且子氏未薨，故名。
现代文：惠公已经下葬，这是迟了，而仲子还没有死，所以《春秋》直接写了宰咺的名字。
English: Huigong has already been buried, which is too late, and Zhongzi has not yet died, so "Spring and Autumn" directly wrote the name of Zai Yong.

古文：天子七月而葬，同轨毕至：诸侯五月，同盟至，大夫三月，同位至；士踰月，外姻至。
现代文：天子死了七个月后才下葬，诸侯都来参加葬礼；诸侯五个月后下葬，同盟的诸侯参加葬礼；大夫三个月后下葬，官位相同的来参加葬礼；士一个月以后下葬，亲戚参加葬礼。
English: The emperor died and was buried seven months later, and the princes all came to the funeral; the princes were buried five months later, and the allied princes attended the funeral; the doctors were buried three months later, and they came to the funeral with the same official rank; the judges were buried a month later, and their relatives attended the funeral.

古文：赠死不及尸，吊生不及哀。豫凶事，非礼也。八月，纪人伐夷。
现代文：向死者赠送东西没有赶上下葬，向生者吊丧没有赶上举哀的时间，预先赠送有关丧事的东西，这都不合于礼。八月，纪国人讨伐夷国。
English: It is not proper to give gifts to the dead before they are buried, or to the living before it is time to mourn, or to give gifts related to the funeral in advance.

古文：夷不告，故不书。
现代文：夷国没有前来报告鲁国，所以《春秋》不加记载。
English: Yi Province did not come to report Lu Province, so "Spring and Autumn" was not recorded.

古文：有蜚。
现代文：发现蜚盘虫。
English: A roundworm was found.

古文：不为灾，亦不书。
现代文：没有造成灾害，《春秋》也不加记载。
English: No disasters were caused, and "Spring and Autumn" was not recorded.

古文：惠公之季年，败宋师于黄。
现代文：鲁惠公的晚年，在黄地打败了宋国。
English: In his later years, Lu Huigong defeated the Song Dynasty in Huangdi.

古文：公立而求成焉。
现代文：鲁隐公即位，要求和宋人讲和。
English: Emperor Luyin ascended to the throne and demanded to make peace with the Song Dynasty.

古文：九月，及宋人盟于宿，始通也。
现代文：九月，和宋人在宿地结盟，两国开始友好起来。
English: In September, he allied with the Song people in Suzdal, and the two countries began to be friendly.

古文：冬十月庚申，改葬惠公。
现代文：冬季，十月十四日，改葬鲁惠公。
English: In winter, on October 14th, Lu Hui Gong's funeral took place.

古文：公弗临，故不书。
现代文：隐公不敢以丧主的身份到场哭泣，所以《春秋》不加记载。
English: Ying Gong did not dare to cry on the scene as the bereaved, so "Spring and Autumn" was not recorded.

古文：惠公之薨也有宋师，大子少，葬故有阙，是以改葬。
现代文：惠公死的时候，正好遇上和宋国打仗，太子又年幼，葬礼不完备，所以改葬。
English: When Huigong died, he happened to be at war with Song, and the prince was young. The funeral was incomplete, so the funeral was changed.

古文：卫侯来会葬。不见公，亦不书。
现代文：卫桓公来鲁国参加葬礼，没有见到隐公，《春秋》也不加记载。
English: Emperor Wei Huan came to Lu to attend the funeral, but did not see Emperor Ingyin, and there is no record of him in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：郑共叔之乱，公孙滑出奔卫。
现代文：郑国共叔段叛乱，段的儿子公孙滑逃到卫国。
English: Zheng Guo's uncle Duan rebelled, and Duan's son Gongsun Slip fled to the defense of the country.

古文：卫人为之伐郑，取廪延。
现代文：卫国人替他进攻郑国，占领了廪延。
English: The defenders of the country attacked Zheng for him and occupied Shu Yan.

古文：郑人以王师、虢师伐卫南鄙。请师于邾。
现代文：郑国人率领周天子的军队、虢国的军队进攻卫国南部边境，同时又请求邾国出兵。
English: The people of Zheng led the army of Zhou Tianzi and the army of Yan to attack the southern border of the motherland, and at the same time asked Yan to send troops.

古文：邾子使私于公子豫。豫请往，公弗许，遂行，及邾人、郑人盟于翼。
现代文：邾子派人私下和公子豫商量，公子豫请求出兵援救，隐公不允许，公子豫就自己走了，和邾国、郑国在翼地会盟。
English: Xun Zi sent a person to privately discuss with Xun Zi Yu. Xun Zi Yu requested to send troops to rescue, but Xun Zi Yu did not allow it. Xun Zi Yu left on his own and formed an alliance with Xun Guo and Zheng Guo.

古文：不书，非公命也。
现代文：《春秋》不加记载，因为不是出于隐公的命令。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is not recorded, because it was not made on the orders of the prince.

古文：新作南门。不书，亦非公命也。
现代文：新建南门，《春秋》不加记载，也是因为不是出于隐公的命令。
English: The newly built south gate, "Spring and Autumn" is not recorded, also because it is not due to the order of the prince.

古文：十二月，祭伯来，非王命也。
现代文：十二月，祭伯来，并不是奉了周王的命令。
English: It was not by order of King Zhou that the sacrifice of Bo came in December.

古文：众父卒。公不与小敛，故不书日。
现代文：众父去世，隐公没有参加以衣衾加于死者之身的小敛，所以《春秋》不记载死亡的日子。
English: All the fathers died, and the lord did not take part in the minor chastisement inflicted on the bodies of the dead, so "Spring and Autumn" does not record the day of death.

