古文：郁新，字敦本，临淮人。
现代文：郁新，字敦本，临淮人。
English: Yu Xin, Zi Dunben, Lin Huai Ren.

古文：洪武中，以人才征，授户部度支主事。迁郎中。
现代文：洪武年间，以人才被征，授予户部度支主事，后升为郎中。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was enlisted as a talented person and given the post of head of the household, and later he was promoted to junior vassal.

古文：逾年，擢本部右侍郎。
现代文：过了一年，升为本部右侍郎。
English: A year later, he was promoted to the position of Motobu's right hand man.

古文：尝问天下户口田赋，地理险易，应答无遗，帝称其才。
现代文：皇上曾问他天下户口田赋的数据，以及地理险易情况，郁新都应答无遗，皇上称赞他的才华。
English: The emperor once asked him about the data of the world's Hukou Tianfu, as well as the geographical perilous situation. Iku Shin answered all the questions, and the emperor praised his talent.

古文：寻进尚书。
现代文：不久他进升为尚书。
English: Soon he was promoted to Shang Shu.

古文：时亲王岁禄米五万石，新定议减五之四，并定郡王以下禄有差。
现代文：当时亲王每年的禄米是五万石。郁新建议减去五分之四，并规定了郡王以下宗室的禄米数额。
English: At that time, the prince's annual rupee was 50,000 koku. Iku Shin proposed to reduce it by four-fifths, and stipulated the amount of rupee for the families below the crown prince.

古文：又以边饷不继，定召商开中法，令商输粟塞下，按引支盐，边储以足。
现代文：又因边务粮饷不继，郁新制定招商开中法，令商人输运粮食到塞下，然后发给引，根据凭据支给食盐，边防粮储因此而充足。
English: In addition, due to the lack of continuity in border grain supply, Yu Xin formulated the method of attracting merchants and opening up the middle, so that merchants transported grain to the bottom of the block, and then issued the lead, and provided salt according to the credentials. As a result, the border grain storage was sufficient.

古文：夏原吉为户部主事，新重之，诸曹事悉委任焉。
现代文：夏原吉任户部主事时，郁新很敬重他，各部门的事务都委任给他处理。
English: When Natsuhara Yoshihito was in charge of the Household Department, Ikuharu respected him very much, and he was assigned to deal with the affairs of all departments.

古文：建文二年引疾归。
现代文：建文二年，他称病回家。
English: In the second year of Jianwen, he said he was sick and went home.

古文：成祖即位，召掌户部事，以古朴为侍郎佐之。
现代文：成祖即位后，召他掌管户部事务，以古朴为侍郎辅佐他。
English: After the enthronement of the founder, he called him to be in charge of the household affairs, with Kofuku as his attendant assistant.

古文：永乐元年，河南蝗，有司不以闻，新劾治之。
现代文：永乐元年，河南发生蝗灾，有关官员不上报朝廷，郁新弹劾处治了他们。
English: In the first year of Yongle, a locust plague occurred in Henan. The relevant officials did not report to the imperial court, and Ikuxin impeached and punished them.

古文：初，转漕北京，新言： 自淮抵河，多浅滩跌坡，运舟艰阻。
现代文：当初，粮食由运河转运到北京，郁新说： 从淮河到黄河，多是浅滩跌坡，运船非常艰难。
English: At first, grain was transported from the canal to Beijing. Yu Xin said, "From the Huai River to the Yellow River, it is mostly a shoal slope, and it is very difficult to transport the ship.

古文：请别用浅船载三百石者，自淮河、沙河运至陈州颍溪口跌坡下，复用浅船载二百石者运至跌坡上，别用大船运入黄河。
现代文：请另用可装载三百石的浅船，从淮河、沙河运到陈州颍溪口跌坡下，再用可载二百石的浅船运到跌坡上，然后用大船运入黄河。
English: In addition, please use a shallow boat that can carry 300 stones to transport them from the Huaihe River and the Shahe River to the downstream of the mouth of the Chenzhoulu Creek, and then use a shallow boat that can carry 200 stones to transport them to the downstream, and then use a large boat to transport them into the Yellow River.

古文：至八柳树诸处，令河南车夫陆运入卫河，转输北京。 
现代文：到八柳树等处后，令河南的车夫由陆路运入卫河，转输到北京。 
English: After reaching Yaliushu and other places, the coachman from Henan was transported by road into Weihe and transferred to Beijing.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：又言： 湖广屯田所产不一，请皆得输官。
现代文：他又说： 湖广屯田所产的东西不一，请允许他们都可以输运给国家。
English: He also said: The products of Hougang Tunden are different, please allow them to be transported to the country.

古文：粟谷、穈黍、大麦、荞二石，准米一石。
现代文：粟谷、糜黍、荞郘两石，准许当大米一石。
English: Two kilos of millet, bean sprouts, and scallions are allowed, and one kilo of rice.

古文：稻谷、敔秫二石五斗，穇稗三石，各准米一石。
现代文：稻谷、高粱二石五斗，禾参稗三石，各准许当大米一石。
English: Rice and sorghum are allowed to be used for 2 koku and 5 do, and wheat for 3 koku, and each is allowed to be used for 1 koku of rice.

古文：豆、麦、芝麻与米等。 
现代文：黄豆、小麦、芝麻与米相等。 
English: Soybeans, wheat and sesame seeds are equal to rice.

古文：著为令。
现代文：这一条被定为法令。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：二年，议公、侯、伯、驸马、仪宾禄，二百石以上者，请如文武官例，米钞兼给。
现代文：二年，郁新建议公、侯、伯、驸马、仪宾这些俸禄达到二百石以上的人，请照文武官员之例，米和钱钞兼给。
English: In the second year, Iku Shin suggested that people with a salary of more than 200 koku, such as princes, lords, noblemen, courtiers, and guests of honor, should follow the example of civil and military officials and give both rice and money.

古文：三年，以士卒劳困，议减屯田岁收不如额者十之四五，又议改纳米北京赎罪者于南京仓。
现代文：三年，因士卒劳困，他建议将每年收成达不到原定产量的屯田的课税减去十分之四五，又建议改纳米到北京赎罪为纳米入南京仓。
English: In the third year, due to the hardships of the staff, he suggested that the annual harvest of the tunden that did not reach the original output should be deducted by four-fifths of a percent, and it was also suggested to change the nanometer to Beijing to atone for the nanometer into the Nanjing warehouse.

古文：皆允行。
现代文：皇上都批准执行。
English: All are allowed to go into effect.

古文：是年八月卒于官。
现代文：这一年八月他在任上去世。
English: He died in office in August of that year.

古文：帝叹曰： 新理邦赋十三年，量计出入，今谁可代者？ 
现代文：皇上叹道 ：郁新处理国家财赋十三年，计算出入，现在谁能替代他呢？ 
English: The emperor lamented: Iku Shin has been handling the country's financial resources for thirteen years, and the calculations have been inconsistent. Who can replace him now?

古文：辍朝一日，赐葬祭，而召夏原吉还理部事。
现代文：辍朝一日，赐给葬祭，而召夏原吉回来处理户部事务。
English: One day later, it was given to the funeral service, and Natsuharayoshi was called back to deal with the household affairs.

古文：新长于综理，密而不繁。
现代文：郁新长于综理，细密而不繁。
English: Iku Shin is good at overviews, detailed but not complicated.

古文：正统元年卒，年七十三。金忠，鄞人。
现代文：他所定下的制度，后人都无法更改。金忠，鄞县人。
English: The system he established cannot be changed by later generations. Jin Zhong, a native of Jixian County.

古文：少读书，善《易》卜。
现代文：从小读书，擅长《易》和占卜。
English: He has been reading since he was a child, and is good at "Yi" and divination.

古文：兄戍通州亡，忠补戍。贫不能行，相者袁珙资之。
现代文：哥哥戍守通州时死去，金忠补戍，因家贫不能出行，看相的袁珙资助了他。
English: When his brother Zou Shou Tongzhou died, Jin Zhong Fu Zou, unable to travel due to family poverty, was supported by Yuan Shao, a courtier.

古文：既至，编卒伍。
现代文：到通州后，金忠被编入卒伍。
English: After arriving in Tongzhou, Jin Zhong was drafted into the graduate army.

古文：卖卜北平市，多中。市人传以为神。
现代文：他在北平市中卖卜，多能说中，市民把他传为神人。
English: He sold divination in Beiping City, and the citizens proclaimed him a godman.

古文：僧道衍称于成祖。
现代文：道衍和尚向成祖称赞他。
English: Tao Yan Monk praised him to Cheng Zu.

古文：成祖将起兵，托疾召忠卜，得铸印乘轩之卦。曰： 此象贵不可言。 
现代文：成祖将要起兵，托病召金忠来问卜。金忠占得铸印乘轩之卦，他说： 这卦贵不可言。 
English: Chengzu was about to raise an army, and he called Jinzhong to consult the oracle under the pretext of illness. Jinzhong was able to obtain the cast seal of Jixuan, and he said, "This oracle is too precious to be told."

古文：自是出入燕府中，常以所占劝举大事。
现代文：此后他出入燕王府中，常以所占得的结果劝成祖举大事。
English: After that, he went in and out of the Yan Wangfu Middle School, and often used the results he obtained to persuade Cheng Zu to hold a big event.

古文：成祖深信之。
现代文：成祖对他深信不疑。
English: Cheng Zu had no doubt about him.

古文：燕兵起，自署官属，授忠王府纪善，守通州。
现代文：燕兵起时，成祖自己任命官属，授予金忠为王府纪善，守卫通州。
English: When the Yan soldiers started, Cheng Zu himself appointed officials and subordinates, and awarded Jin Zhong as the King's Discipline and Discipline, and guarded Tongzhou.

古文：南兵数攻城不克。
现代文：南方部队多次攻城，都没能攻克。
English: Nanfang troops repeatedly attacked the city, but failed to conquer it.

古文：已，召置左右，有疑辄问，术益验，且时进谋画。
现代文：后来，成祖将他召到左右，有什么疑问常问他，而金忠的法术也更加灵验，并且还时常进献计谋。
English: Later, Cheng Zu called him around and often asked him if he had any questions, and Jin Zhong's magic was also more effective, and he often made suggestions.

古文：遂拜右长史，赞戎务，为谋臣矣。
现代文：成祖遂拜他为右长史，赞佐军务，于是金忠成了谋臣了。
English: He was worshipped as the right-hand man of the founder, and was in charge of military affairs, so Kim Jong-nam became his adviser.

古文：成祖称帝，论佐命功，擢工部右侍郎，赞世子守北京。
现代文：成祖称帝后，论佐命之功，升金忠为工部右侍郎，辅佐世子守北京。
English: Cheng Zu was proclaimed empress dowager, and on the merits of Sasa's life, promoted Jinzhong to the position of the right hand man of the Ministry of Industry, and assisted Sasa's son-in-law to govern Beijing.

古文：寻召还，进兵部尚书。
现代文：不久将金忠召回，升为兵部尚书。
English: He soon recalled Jinzhong and promoted him to the post of military secretary.

古文：帝起兵时，次子高煦从战有功，许以为太子。
现代文：皇上起兵时，次子高煦从战有功，皇上答允立他为太子。
English: When the emperor raised an army, his second son, Gao Jiong, had distinguished himself in battle, and the emperor agreed to make him crown prince.

古文：至是，淇国公邱福等党高煦，劝帝立之。
现代文：至此淇国公丘福等人偏向高煦，劝皇上立他为太子。
English: At this point, Guo Guogong Qufu and others were inclined to Gao Yao and persuaded the emperor to appoint him as the prince.

古文：独忠以为不可，在帝前历数古嫡孽事。
现代文：只有金忠认为不可，并在皇上面前历数古代嫡庶相争的事例。
English: Only Kim Chung thought it was unacceptable, and he recounted in front of the emperor several examples of ancient disputes between legitimate heirs.

古文：帝不能夺，密以告解缙、黄淮、尹昌隆。
现代文：皇上无法决定，便秘密告知解缙、黄淮、尹昌隆。
English: The emperor could not decide, so he secretly informed Jie Tong, Huang Huai, and Yin Changlong.

古文：缙等皆以忠言为是。
现代文：解缙等人都认为金忠的意见为是。
English: Xie Jun and others all agreed that Jin Zhong's opinion was correct.

古文：于是立世子为皇太子，而忠为东宫辅导官，以兵部尚书兼詹事府詹事。
现代文：于是立世子为皇太子，而金忠作为东宫辅导官，以兵部尚书兼任詹事府詹事。
English: As a result, the heir apparent was appointed crown prince, and Kim Jung, as a tutor of the East Palace, concurrently served as Zhanji of Zhanji-fu with the rank of Hyobusho.

古文：六年命兼辅皇太孙。
现代文：永乐六年命他兼辅导皇太孙。
English: Six years after Yongle's death, he also became the tutor of the crown prince's grandson.

古文：帝北征，留忠与蹇义、黄淮、杨士奇辅太子监国。
现代文：皇上北征，留金忠和蹇义、黄淮、杨士奇辅佐太子监国。
English: The emperor went on the Northern Expedition, leaving Jinzhong and Shunyi, Huanghuai, and Yang Shiji to assist the crown prince in supervising the country.

古文：是时高煦夺嫡谋愈急，蜚语谮太子。
现代文：这时朱高煦夺嫡的计划更急了，他散布蜚语诬陷太子。
English: At this time, Zhu Gaozhen's plan to seize the heir was more urgent. He spread slang to frame the prince.

古文：十二年北征还，悉征东宫官属下狱。
现代文：十二年皇上北征回来，将东宫官属全部逮入狱中。
English: In the twelfth year, the emperor returned from the Northern Expedition and arrested all the officials and subordinates of the Eastern Court and put them in prison.

古文：以忠勋旧不问，而密令审察太子事。忠言无有。
现代文：金忠因为是功勋旧臣，得以不问，皇上命他审察太子有过失的事，他说没有。
English: Because he was a meritorious old retainer, Kim Jong Chung was able not to ask. The emperor ordered him to investigate the matter of the crown prince's negligence, but he said no.

古文：帝怒。忠免冠顿首流涕，愿连坐以保之。
现代文：皇上火了，金忠免冠叩头流涕，愿连坐为太子担保。
English: The emperor was angry, and Kim Zhong bowed his head without a crown. He was willing to sit for the prince as a guarantee.

古文：以故太子得无废，而宫僚黄淮、杨溥等亦以是获全。
现代文：太子因此得以不被废掉，而东宫臣僚黄淮、杨溥也因此获得保全。
English: As a result, the prince could not be deposed, and the Eastern Court ministers Huang Huai and Yang Hui were also preserved.

古文：忠起卒伍至大位，甚见亲倚，每承顾问，知无不言，然慎密不泄。
现代文：金忠从一名卒伍升到大位，很受亲信和倚重，每次承蒙皇上顾问，总是知无不言，但他也很慎密，从不泄露出去。
English: Kim Jong Chung rose from a foot soldier to a high-ranking official. He was very trusted and relied on. Every time he received the emperor's advice, he always knew everything, but he was also very cautious and never revealed anything.

古文：处僚友不持两端，退恒推让之。
现代文：他在同僚朋友之中从不持两端，退下后常常谦让他们。
English: He never held grudges among his colleagues and friends, and often humbled them when he stepped back.

古文：里中称为 白云先生 。李庆，字德孚，顺义人。洪武中，以国子生署右佥都御史，后授刑部员外郎，迁绍兴知府。
现代文：第二年四月他去世了。皇上给驿车载他归葬，命有关官员建祠堂和坟墓，免除他家的赋税徭役。洪熙元年，追赠他为荣禄大夫、少师，谥号忠襄。授予他的儿子金达为翰林检讨。李庆，字德孚，顺义人。洪武年间，他以国子监学生代理右佥都御史，后来被授予刑部员外郎，又升为绍兴知府。
English: He died in April of the following year. The emperor gave him a carriage to carry him to his burial, ordered relevant officials to build an ancestral hall and a tomb, and exempted his family from paying taxes. In the first year of Hongxi, he was posthumously awarded as a doctor of honor, a young teacher, and the title of Zhongxiang. He was awarded to his son Jinda for the review of Hanlin. Li Qing, Zi Defu, Shun Yiren. During the Hongwu years, he acted as the state's student overseer. Later, he was awarded the foreign minister of the criminal department, and was promoted to Shaoxing Prefecture.

古文：永乐元年召为刑部侍郎。
现代文：永乐元年，他被召为刑部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he was called to serve as a sergeant of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：性刚果，有干局，驭下甚严。
现代文：他个性刚毅果断，有才干气度，对下属约束得很严。
English: His personality is resolute and decisive, he is talented, and he is very strict with his subordinates.

古文：帝以为才，数命治他事，不得时至部。
现代文：皇上认为他很有才，多次命他治理别的事，使他不能时常到部中。
English: The Emperor thought he was very talented, and many times ordered him to take care of other matters, so that he could not always go to the Ministry.

古文：然属吏与罪人交通私馈饷，庆辄知之，绳以重法。
现代文：但属下官员与罪人交通，私下馈赠之事，李庆总是知道，给他们治以重罪。
English: However, Li Qing always knew that his subordinate officials were communicating with criminals and making private gifts, and he punished them with serious crimes.

古文：五年，改左副都御史。
现代文：五年，李庆改任左副都御史。
English: Five years later, Li Qing was reappointed as the Left Vice-Governor of the Capital.

古文：两遭亲丧，并起复。
现代文：他两遭亲丧，不待守孝期满即被召回任职。
English: He suffered two bereavements and was recalled to office without waiting for his term of office to expire.

古文：时勋贵武臣多令子弟家人行商中盐，为官民害。
现代文：当时勋贵武臣多令子弟和家人经商贩盐，成为百姓的祸害。
English: At that time, many distinguished samurai lords had their sons and sons-in-law and their families engage in salt trading, which became a scourge for the common people.

古文：庆言： 旧制，四品以上官员家不得与民争利。
现代文：李庆说： 按旧制，四品以上官员的家属不能与百姓争利。
English: Li Qing said: According to the old system, the family members of officials with more than four ranks cannot compete with the people.

古文：今都督蔡福等既行罚，公侯有犯，亦乞按问。 
现代文：现在都督蔡福既已被罚，公侯如有违犯，也请求进行查问处治。 
English: Now that Governor Cai Fu has been punished, if there is a violation by the prince, he will also request an investigation and punishment.

古文：帝命严禁如制。
现代文：皇上命依制度严申禁令。
English: The emperor ordered a strict ban in accordance with the system.

古文：忻成伯赵彝擅杀运夫，盗卖军饷。都督谭青、朱崇贪纵。
现代文：忻成伯赵彝擅自杀死运夫，盗卖军饷；都督谭青、朱崇贪婪放纵。
English: Rui Chengbo Zhao Jian committed suicide without permission, stole and sold military pay; the governors Tan Qing and Zhu Chong were greedy and indulgent.

古文：庆劾之，皆下吏。
现代文：李庆弹劾他们，他们都被交给司法官员审问。
English: Li Qing impeached them and they were all handed over to judicial officials for interrogation.

古文：已，劾都督费瓛欺罔、梁铭贪暴、镇守德州都督曹得黩货。皆被责。
现代文：过后，他又弹劾都督费王献欺罔、梁铭贪婪残暴、镇守德州都督曹得贪财，结果他们都被谴责。
English: Later, he also impeached the governor Fei Wang for being a bully, Liang Ming for being greedy and cruel, and the governor of Texas, Cao De, for being greedy. As a result, they were all condemned.

古文：中外凛其风采。
现代文：中外官员都畏惧他的风采。
English: Chinese and foreign officials are afraid of his style.

古文：十八年进工部尚书，寻兼领兵部事。
现代文：十八年李庆进升工部尚书，不久兼领兵部事务。
English: In 18 years, Li Qingjin was promoted to the Ministry of Industry and soon also led the Ministry of Military Affairs.

古文：仁宗立，改兵部，加太子少保。
现代文：仁宗即位后，李庆改任兵部尚书，加封为太子少保。
English: After Emperor Nanzong's accession to the throne, Li Qing was appointed as the secretary of the military department and given the additional title of the prince's junior bodyguard.

古文：弋谦以言事忤旨，吕震等交口诋之，惟庆与夏原吉无所言。
现代文：弋谦，因提意见忤逆了皇上旨意，吕震等人纷纷诋毁他，只有李庆和夏原吉没说什么。
English: Zou Qian, because of his opinion, defied the emperor's will. Lu Zhen and others slandered him one after another. Only Li Qing and Xia Yuanji did not say anything.

古文：帝寻悟，降敕自责，并责震等，震等甚愧此两人。
现代文：皇上不久醒悟了，颁敕自责，并责备吕震等人。吕震因此很愧对这两个人。
English: The emperor soon came to his senses, issued a edict of self-condemnation, and reproached Lv Zhen and the others. Lv Zhen was therefore very ashamed of the two men.

古文：山陵事多，趣办中官有求，执不与，人多严惮之，号为 生李 。
现代文：山陵事多，去办事的宦官有所要求，李庆坚决不给，人们多敬畏他，称他为 生李 。
English: There are a lot of things to do in the mountains and villages. The eunuchs who go to do things have their demands, but Li Qing resolutely refuses to give them. People are more in awe of him, calling him Shou Li.

古文：奉命侍皇太子谒孝陵，在途约束将士，秋毫无所扰。
现代文：他奉命侍从皇太子拜谒孝陵时，途中严格约束将士，一路秋毫无所扰。
English: When he was ordered to attend the crown prince's visit to the Mausoleum of Sun Yat-sen, he strictly restrained the soldiers on the way and did not disturb them at all.

古文：太子欲猎，庆谏止。
现代文：太子想去打猎，李庆劝止了他。
English: The prince wanted to go hunting, but Li Qing dissuaded him.

古文：及太子还北京，遂留庆南京兵部。
现代文：到太子回北京时，遂留李庆任南京兵部尚书。
English: When the crown prince returned to Beijing, Li Qingren remained in Nanjing as a military attaché.

古文：宣德二年，安远侯柳升讨黎利，命庆参赞军务，许择部曹贤能者自随。
现代文：宣德二年，安远侯柳升讨伐黎利，命李庆参佐军务，准许他将贤能的下属选出随从出征。
English: In the second year of Xuande, Anyuan Hou Liu Sheng led a crusade against Lili, ordered Li Qing to be a military adviser, and allowed him to select his capable subordinates to accompany him on the campaign.

古文：师至镇夷关，升意轻贼，不为备。
现代文：部队到镇夷关时，柳升心中轻贼，不作防备。
English: When the troops arrived at Zhenyiguan, Liu Sheng thought of them as petty thieves and did not take precautions.

古文：郎中史安、主事陈镛言于庆。
现代文：郎中史安、主事陈镛报告李庆。
English: The steward, Shi An, and the chief steward, Chen Yao, report to Li Qing.

古文：时庆已病甚，强起告升。
现代文：当时李庆已病得很重，他勉强起来告诉柳升。
English: At that time, Li Qing was already very ill. He reluctantly got up to tell Liu Sheng.

古文：升不听，直前，中伏败死。
现代文：柳升不听，率军直前，结果中埋伏而死。
English: Liu Sheng did not listen and led the army straight ahead. As a result, he was ambushed and died.

古文：庆病遂笃，明日亦死，一军尽没。
现代文：李庆遂病危，第二天也死了，全军皆没。
English: Li Qing fell critically ill and died the next day. The entire army was wiped out.

古文：师逵，字九达，东阿人。
现代文：师逵，字九达，东阿人。
English: Shifeng, Zi Juda, Donga Ren.

古文：少孤，事母至孝。
现代文：少年失怙，侍奉母亲非常孝顺。
English: The boy lost his temper and was very dutiful to his mother.

古文：年十三，母疾，思藤花菜。
现代文：他十三岁时，母亲得病，想吃藤花菜。
English: When he was thirteen, his mother fell ill and wanted to eat wisteria.

古文：逵出城南二十余里求得之。及归，夜二鼓，遇虎。
现代文：师逵到城南二十余里的地方找到了它，回来时已是夜二鼓时分了。
English: Shi Hao went to a place more than 20 miles south of the city and found it. When he returned, it was already 2 o'clock in the evening.

古文：逵惊呼天，虎舍之去。
现代文：途中遇到老虎，师逵惊呼喊天，老虎舍他而去。
English: Encountering a tiger on the way, Shisheng exclaimed, "Heaven!" and the tiger left him.

古文：母疾寻愈。
现代文：母亲的病不久好了。
English: My mother's illness will soon be over.

古文：洪武中，以国子生从御史出按事，为御史所劾，逮至。
现代文：洪武年间，师逵以国子监生的身份随御史出京按察事情，被御史弹劾，逮到皇上跟前。
English: During the Hongwu era, Shisheng, as the son of a provincial official, went to Beijing with the emperor to investigate the matter. He was impeached by the emperor and brought before the emperor.

古文：帝伟其貌，释之，谪御史台书案牍。
现代文：皇上见他相貌奇伟，释放了他，贬到御史台去书写案宗。
English: The emperor saw his magnificent appearance, released him, and sent him to the imperial court to write a case.

古文：久之，擢御史，迁陕西按察使。
现代文：后来，他被升为御史，又升为陕西按察使。
English: Later, he was promoted to imperial historian, and then to Shaanxi deputy inspector general.

古文：狱囚淹系千人，浃旬尽决遣，悉当其罪。
现代文：当时陕西监狱关有上千人，师逵仅用十天就全部处理完毕，判罪都非常正确。
English: At that time, there were more than a thousand people in prison in Shaanxi, and it only took ten days for the teachers and cadres to deal with all of them. The convictions were all correct.

古文：母忧去官，庐墓侧，不饮酒食肉者三年。
现代文：母亲去世时他挂官而去，在墓侧结庐居住，三年不饮酒不吃肉。
English: When his mother died, he resigned from his post and went to live in a shack next to the grave. He did not drink alcohol or eat meat for three years.

古文：成祖即位，召为兵部侍郎，改吏部。
现代文：成祖即位后，把他召为兵部侍郎，后改到吏部。
English: After the enthronement of Cheng Zu, he was called to be the attendant of the military department, and later he was transferred to the administrative department.

古文：永乐四年建北京宫殿，分遣大臣出采木。
现代文：永乐四年，修建北京宫殿，分遣大臣出去采办木材。
English: Yongle four years, the construction of the Beijing Palace, dispatched the minister to go out to purchase wood.

古文：逵往湖、湘，以十万众入山辟道路，召商贾，军役得贸易，事以办。
现代文：师逵前往湖、湘，他以十万之众入山开辟道路，召来商贾，军役得以贸易，使事情办成了。
English: Shisheng went to Hubei and Hunan, he opened a road with a hundred thousand people into the mountains, summoned merchants, and the military service was able to trade, so that the matter was completed.

古文：然颇严刻，民不堪，多从李法良为乱。左中允周干劾之。
现代文：但他过于严酷，百姓无法忍受，多追随李法良作乱，左中允周干弹劾他。
English: However, he was too harsh, and the people could not bear it. They mostly followed Li Fariang to create turmoil, and Zhou Yan of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China impeached him.

古文：时仁宗监国，以帝所特遣，置不问。
现代文：当时仁宗监国，因师逵是皇上所特遣，便置之不问。
English: At that time, Emperor Jinzong was the overseer of the country, and since Shisheng was specially dispatched by the emperor, he was not questioned.

古文：八年，帝北征，命总督馈饷，逵请量程置顿堡，更递转输。
现代文：八年，皇上北征，命师逵总督粮饷供给，师逵请计路程设置顿堡，步步转输。
English: In the eighth year, the emperor went on the Northern Expedition, and ordered the governor to supply grain and grain, and the governor requested the route to set up the Don Fort, and gradually transferred.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上同意了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：逵佐蹇义在吏部二十年，人不敢干以私。
现代文：师逵在吏部辅佐蹇义二十年，人们都不敢谋私。
English: For the past twenty years that Shifu has been an assistant to the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, no one dares to seek personal gain.

古文：仁宗嗣位，与赵羾、古朴皆改官南京，而逵进户部尚书，兼掌吏部。
现代文：仁宗继位后，他与赵羽工、古朴都改到南京任职，而师逵升为户部尚书，兼掌吏部事务。
English: After Emperor Nanzong's succession, he, Zhao Yagong and Guo Pu all moved to Nanjing to serve, and Shi Gao was promoted to the household department of Shangshu, and was also in charge of the affairs of the officials department.

古文：宣德二年正月卒官，年六十二。
现代文：宣德二年正月他在任上去世，终年六十二岁。
English: He died in office in the first month of the second year of Xuan De, at the age of sixty-two.

古文：逵廉，不殖生产，禄赐皆分宗党。
现代文：师逵很廉洁，不谋求生财，所得俸禄和赏赐都分给宗族。
English: Shisheng was very honest and did not seek to make a living. All of his salary and rewards were divided among his family members.

古文：有子八人，至无以自赡。
现代文：他有八个儿子，甚至都无法自给。
English: He has eight sons and can't even feed himself.

古文：成祖在北京尝语左右曰： 六部扈从臣，不贪者惟逵而已。 
现代文：成祖在北京时曾对左右的人说 ：六部扈从的大臣中，不贪的唯有师逵一人而已。 
English: When Cheng Zu was in Beijing, he once said to the people around him: Among the six subordinate ministers, the only one who is not greedy is Shi Lu.

古文：古朴，字文质，陈州人。
现代文：古朴，字文质，陈州人。
English: Antique and simple, the characters are of good quality, and they are from Chenzhou.

古文：洪武中以太学生清理郡县田赋图籍，还隶五军断事理刑。
现代文：洪武年间以太学生身份清理郡县田赋和图籍，回来后隶属于五军都督府，管断事理刑。
English: During Hongwu's time as a student, he cleaned up the county's land and property records, and after returning, he was affiliated with the Five Military Governor's Office, in charge of judging and administering punishments.

古文：自陈家贫，愿得禄养母。
现代文：他自陈家贫，愿得俸禄奉养母亲。
English: He came from a poor family and wanted to earn a salary to support his mother.

古文：帝嘉之，除工部主事。
现代文：皇上称赞他，授予他工部主事。
English: The emperor praised him and gave him the post of head of the engineering department.

古文：母殁，官给舟归葬。
现代文：母亲去世时，官家拨给船让他归葬。
English: When his mother died, the government allocated a boat for him to be buried.

古文：服阕，改兵部，累迁郎中。
现代文：守孝期满后，他改到兵部，累升为郎中。
English: After his term of filial piety expired, he was transferred to the military department and was promoted to junior vassal.

古文：建文三年擢兵部侍郎。
现代文：建文三年升为兵部侍郎。
English: In the third year, Kenmon was promoted to the position of Hyobushirō.

古文：成祖即位，改户部。
现代文：成祖即位后，古朴改任吏部侍郎。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Chengzu, Guo Pu was appointed as an attendant of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：永乐二年，朴奏： 先奉诏令江西、湖广及苏、松诸府输粮北京，今闻并患水潦，转运艰难，而北京诸郡岁幸丰。
现代文：永乐二年，古朴上奏说： 先前诏令江西、湖广和苏州、松江等府输粮到北京，现听说这些地区都患水灾，转运艰难，而北京地区各郡幸好今年丰收。
English: In the second year of Yongle, Guopu Shangsoo said: Previously, Jiangxi, Hukang and Suzhou, Songjiang and other prefectures were ordered to export grain to Beijing. Now it is said that these areas are suffering from floods, and transportation is difficult. Fortunately, the counties in Beijing region have a bumper harvest this year.

古文：宜发钞命有司增价收籴，减南方运。 
现代文：应发出钱钞命有关官员增价收购粮食，减轻南方的转运。 
English: Money and notes should be issued to order relevant officials to purchase grain at a higher price to reduce transshipment in the south.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：营建北京，命采木江西，以恤民见褒。
现代文：营建北京时，他受命到江西采办木材，因体恤百姓受到褒奖。
English: When Beijing was being built, he was ordered to go to Jiangxi to procure timber, and he was commended for his consideration for the people.

古文：七年，帝北巡，皇太子监国。召还，佐夏原吉理户部。
现代文：七年，皇上北巡，皇太子监国，将古朴召回，辅佐夏原吉处理户部事务。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor's northern inspection, the crown prince's supervision of the country, recalled Guo Pu, and assisted Xia Yuanji in dealing with household affairs.

古文：仁宗即位，改南京通政使。
现代文：仁宗即位后，古朴改任南京通政使。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, Guopu was appointed as the political envoy to Nanjing.

古文：明年就拜户部尚书，出督畿内田赋。
现代文：第二年他就任户部尚书，出京督察畿内的田赋。
English: The following year, he assumed the post of household secretary and went to Kyoto to inspect rice fields in the Kinai region.

古文：师逵病，命朴代之。
现代文：师逵病后，皇上命古朴取代他。
English: After Shi Xuan's illness, the emperor ordered Guo Pu to replace him.

古文：宣德三年二月卒于官。
现代文：宣德三年二月，古朴在任上去世。
English: In February of the third year of Xuande's reign, Gu Pu died in office.

古文：初，户部主事刘良不检，乞中贵人求上考。
现代文：当初，户部主事刘良品行不检，乞求宦官贵人，以便在考绩时得上等。
English: At first, Liu Liangpin, the head of the household department, was unruly and begged eunuchs to give him a higher grade in the performance appraisal.

古文：朴不可。
现代文：古朴不批。
English: Antique and rustic are not approved.

古文：良遂诬奏朴罪，朴就逮。
现代文：刘良便上奏诬陷古朴有罪，结果古朴被逮。
English: Liu Liang falsely accused Guo Pu of being guilty and Guo Pu was arrested as a result.

古文：宝有文学，宽厚爱民，而持身廉直，屡遭困厄不稍易，平居言不及利。
现代文：成祖察出刘良的诬陷，古朴才得释放。后来，吏部上奏给刘良诰命。仁宗说 ：此人素来没有品行，而且曾诬陷大臣，不能给他。 
English: Cheng Zu detected Liu Liang's frame-up, and Gu Pu was released. Later, the cadre department reported to Liu Liang's order. Renzong said: This person has no moral character, and he framed the minister, so he can't be given to him.

古文：历仕四十余年，卒之日，家具萧然。
现代文：刘良后来果然因贪赃致败。古朴在朝廷三十余年，从郎官升到尚书，都确然有操守，不请托索求，与右都御史向宝，都以清介著称。
English: Later, Liu Liang was indeed defeated by corruption. Gu Pu spent more than 30 years in the imperial court, rising from vassal to courtier, and both of them were indeed virtuous and did not ask for favors, and both of them were famous for their chastity.

古文：陈寿，随人。
现代文：陈寿，随县人。
English: Chen Shou is from Suixian County.

古文：洪武中，由国子生授户部主事。
现代文：洪武年间，他由国子监生被授予户部主事。
English: During the Hongwu era, he was awarded the post of head of the household department by the son of the provincial governor.

古文：永乐元年迁员外郎。
现代文：永乐元年，升为员外郎。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Dynasty, he was promoted to the position of a member of the outer circle.

古文：出为山东参政，所至以爱民为务。
现代文：后出任山东参政，所到之处他都以爱民为务。
English: After that, he served as a politician in Shandong Province. Everywhere he went, he was committed to loving the people.

古文：用夏原吉荐，召为工部左侍郎。
现代文：因夏原吉的推荐，他被召为工部左侍郎。
English: On the recommendation of Natsuhara Yoshitaka, he was called to be the left-hand man of the engineering department.

古文：皇太子监国南京，寿日陈兵民困，又乘间言左右干恩泽者多，恐累明德。
现代文：皇太子在南京监国时，陈寿每天都陈述兵民困敝的情况，还找机会对太子说现在左右干求恩泽的很多，恐怕有损殿下明德。
English: When the crown prince was supervising the country in Nanjing, Chen Shou reported to him on a daily basis about the plight of the soldiers and people, and also looked for opportunities to say to the prince that there were many people around him who were seeking favors. I am afraid that this would damage the virtue of His Royal Highness.

古文：太子深纳之。
现代文：太子深深采纳了他的意见。
English: The crown prince deeply adopted his opinion.

古文：尝目送之出，顾侍臣曰： 侍郎中第一人也。 
现代文：太子曾目送他出宫，转头对侍臣说： 这是侍郎中第一人。 
English: The crown prince once saw him off from the palace, turned to his equerry and said: "This is the first of the equerries.

古文：九年以汉王高煦谮，下狱，贫不能给朝夕。
现代文：九年因汉王朱高煦的诬陷，陈寿被投进监狱，因为贫穷，早晚饮食都不能保证。
English: In nine years, Chen Shou was thrown into prison because of the false accusation of the Han king Zhu Gaolu. Because of poverty, he could not guarantee food sooner or later.

古文：十四年起行部左侍郎，复留南京者三年。
现代文：官属中有人送给他食物，他拒而不受，结果竟死于狱中。过了一年，启殡时他容貌仍如生前一样。
English: Some of the officials gave him food, but he refused, and as a result he died in prison. A year later, at the funeral, he still looked the same as he did before his death.

古文：帝念其老，赐敕及钞币，今致仕。
现代文：仁宗即位后，赠给他工部尚书，谥号敏肃，授予他的儿子陈王常为中书舍人，他后来也做到工部侍郎。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended to the throne, he gave him the title of Shangshu of the Ministry of Works and the nickname of Minshu, and awarded his son Chen Wangcheng as the curator of Chinese books. Later, he also became the chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：卒于途，年七十八。杨砥，字大用，泽州人。
现代文：杨砥，字大用，泽州人。
English: Yang Tuo, who uses a lot of Chinese characters, is from Zezhou.

古文：洪武末，由进士授行人司右司副。
现代文：洪武末年，由进士被授予行人司右司副。
English: At the end of Hongwu's life, he was awarded the title of Deputy of the Right Division of the Pedestrian Division by Jin Shi.

古文：上疏言： 扬雄为莽大夫，贻讥万世。
现代文：他上疏说 ：扬雄做王莽的大夫，被万世所讥。
English: He went on to say, "Yang Xiong was ridiculed by the world for being Wang Mang's doctor.

古文：董仲舒《天人三策》及正谊明道之言，足以扶翼世教。
现代文：董仲舒的《天人三策》和他的正谊明道之言，足以辅助世风教化。
English: Dong Zhongshu's "Three Strategies of Heaven and Man" and his words of righteousness and enlightenment are enough to assist the enlightenment of the world.

古文：今孔庙从祀有雄无仲舒，非是。 
现代文：现在孔庙从祀的人中有扬雄而没有董仲舒，这很不合适。 
English: Now the Confucius Temple has Yang Xiong among the worshippers but no Dong Zhongshu, which is very inappropriate.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：历官湖广布政司参议。
现代文：历任湖广布政司参议。
English: Successive political secretaries of Hukangb attended the meeting.

古文：建文中，言： 帝尧之德始于亲九族。
现代文：建文年间，他说： 帝尧之德始于亲爱九族。
English: During the Jianwen period, he said: "The virtue of imperial discipline began with the Nine Tribes.

古文：今宜惇睦诸藩，无自剪枝叶。 
现代文：现在应该敦睦各位藩王，不要自剪枝叶。 
English: Now is the time for the lords of the domain to come together and not cut their own throats.

古文：不报。
现代文：不见回报。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：父丧归。
现代文：因父亲去世，他回家。
English: He returned to his hometown after his father's death.

古文：成祖即位，起鸿胪寺卿，乞终制。
现代文：成祖即位后，他被起用为鸿胪寺卿，但他请求守孝期满后再去。
English: After Cheng Zu ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the chief priest of Hongyu Temple, but he asked to go back after his term of filial piety was over.

古文：服阕，擢礼部侍郎，坐视河渠失职，降工部主事，改礼部。
现代文：期满后，他被升为礼部侍郎，因犯视察河渠失职罪，被降为工部主事，又改到礼部。
English: After the expiration of the term, he was promoted to the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies. For the crime of failing to inspect the canal, he was demoted to the head of the Ministry of Works, and then to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：永乐十年迁北京行太仆寺卿。
现代文：永乐十年，他升任北京行太仆寺卿。
English: In the tenth year of Yongle, he was promoted to the Beijing line of the Taipo Temple.

古文：时吴桥至天津大水决堤伤稼。
现代文：当时从吴桥到天津，大水决堤，庄稼被淹。
English: At that time, from Wuqiao to Tianjin, heavy water broke through the dike, and crops were flooded.

古文：砥请开德州东南黄河故道及土河，以杀水势。
现代文：杨砥请开德州东南的黄河故道和土河，以减轻水势。
English: Yang Tuo asked for the ancient roads and earth rivers of the Yellow River in the southeast of Dezhou to reduce the water potential.

古文：帝命工部侍郎蔺芳经理之。
现代文：皇上命工部侍郎蔺芳总理此事。
English: The Emperor's personal attendant in the Ministry of Works, Prime Minister Kuwahara, was in charge of the matter.

古文：定牧马法，请令民五丁养种马一匹，十马立群头一人，五十马立群长一人，养马家岁蠲租粮之半。
现代文：制定牧马法，杨砥请令百姓五丁养种马一匹，每十匹马立群头一人，五十匹马立群长一人，养马之家每年减免一半的税粮。
English: In formulating the law on herding horses, Yang Tuo asked the people of Wuding to raise one stallion, one head of the herd for every ten horses, and one head of the herd for every fifty horses. The horse-breeding homes would be exempted from half of the tax grain every year.

古文：而蓟州以东至山海诸卫，土地宽广，水草丰美，其屯军人养种马一匹，租亦免半。
现代文：而蓟州以东到山海的各个卫，土地宽广，水草丰美，这里屯驻的军人，每养种马一匹，也可以免交一半租税。
English: On the other hand, soldiers stationed here, who raise one stallion each, can also be exempted from paying half of the tax.

古文：帝命军租尽蠲之，余悉从其议。
现代文：皇上命将军租全部免除，其余的都照他的建议执行。
English: The emperor ordered that the general rent be completely waived, and the rest was carried out according to his suggestion.

古文：于是马大蕃息。
现代文：从此马匹大量繁衍。
English: Since then, horses have proliferated.

古文：砥刚介有守，尤笃孝行。
现代文：杨砥刚直而有操守，孝行尤笃。
English: Yang Tong is upright and honest, and his filial piety is outstanding.

古文：十六年，母丧哀毁，未至家，卒。
现代文：十六年，母亲去世，他极度悲痛，还没回到家便死去了。
English: Sixteen years later, his mother died, and he was so grief-stricken that he died before he could return home.

古文：虞谦，字伯益，金坛人。
现代文：虞谦，字伯益，金坛人。
English: Yu Qian, also known as Bo Yi, was a gold miner.

古文：洪武中，由国子生擢刑部郎中，出知杭州府。
现代文：洪武年间，由国子监生升为刑部郎中，出任杭州知府。
English: During the Hongwu era, he rose from the son of a provincial prison guard to the vice-chairman of the criminal investigation department, and served as the governor of Hangzhou.

古文：建文中请限僧道田，人无过十亩，余以均给贫民。
现代文：建文年间，虞谦请限制僧道占田数量，规定每人不能超过十亩，多余部分便平均分给贫民。
English: During the Jianwen period, Yu Xian asked the emperor to limit the number of fields occupied by the monks and nuns, stipulating that each person could not exceed ten mu, and the excess part would be divided equally among the poor.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：永乐初召为大理寺少卿。
现代文：永乐初年，他被召为大理寺少卿。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he was called to be the junior high priest of Dali Temple.

古文：时有诏。建文中，上言改旧制者悉面陈。
现代文：当时有诏书说，建文年间曾上奏改革旧制的人，现在都要当面向皇上陈述清楚。
English: At that time, there was an imperial edict saying that those who had played a leading role in reforming the old system during the Jianwen era must now make a clear statement to the emperor.

古文：谦乃言前事请罪。
现代文：虞谦于是陈述上述这件事，并请罪。
English: Yu Qian then stated the above-mentioned matter and pleaded guilty.

古文：帝见谦怖，笑曰： 此秀才辟老、佛耳。 
现代文：皇上见虞谦害怕，便笑着说： 这不过是秀才批判道、佛而已。 
English: When the emperor saw that Yu Qian was afraid, he smiled and said, "This is nothing more than a scholar criticizing Tao and Buddha.

古文：释弗问。而僧道限田制竟罢。
现代文：将他放过不问，但僧道限田的规定还是被废除了。
English: He was let off scot-free, but the regulation limiting the fields of monks was still abolished.

古文：都察院论诓骗罪，准洪武榜例枭首以徇。
现代文：都察院讨论欺骗之罪，请准予照洪武年间公布的条例枭首示众。
English: If the Metropolitan Prosecutors' Office wants to discuss the crime of deception, please allow me to show my dagger to the public in accordance with the regulations promulgated during the Hongwu era.

古文：谦奏： 比奉诏准律断罪，诓骗当杖流，枭首非诏书意。 
现代文：虞谦上奏说 ：近来奉诏书要依律断罪，欺骗之罪应判杖打流放，枭首不是诏书之意。 
English: Yu Qian said: Recently, the imperial edict has been issued to punish crimes according to the law, and the crime of deception should be punished with the cane and banishment, and the dagger is not the meaning of the imperial edict.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：皇上听从了。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：天津卫仓灾，焚粮数十万石。
现代文：天津卫仓库失火，烧掉粮食数十万石。
English: A fire broke out in a warehouse in Tianjin, burning hundreds of thousands of kilos of grain.

古文：御史言主者盗用多，纵火自盖。
现代文：御史说是主管的人盗用多了，所以烧仓以掩盖罪迹。
English: The chief historian said that the person in charge embezzled more, so the warehouse was burned to cover up the crime.

古文：逮几八百人，应死者百。
现代文：逮捕了近八百人，有一百人应判死罪。
English: Nearly 800 people have been arrested, with 100 facing the death penalty.

古文：谦白其滥，得论减。
现代文：虞谦说处罚得过滥，结果他们得以减罪。
English: Yu Qian said that the punishment was excessive, and as a result they were able to reduce the sentence.

古文：七年，帝北巡，皇太子奏谦为右副都御史。
现代文：七年，皇上北巡，皇太子上奏虞谦为右副都御史。
English: In the seventh year, when the emperor was on a tour of the north, the crown prince promoted Yu Qian to the position of vice-governor of the capital.

古文：明年，偕给事中杜钦巡视淮、凤抵陈州灾伤，免田租，赎民所鬻子女。
现代文：第二年他与给事中杜钦巡视淮安和凤阳，到达陈州灾区，免除该地田租，赎回百姓所卖的子女。
English: In the second year, he and Du Qin, who was in charge of the matter, inspected Huai'an and Fengyang, and arrived at the Chenzhou disaster area to exempt the land rent and redeem the children sold by the people.

古文：明年，谦请振，太子谕之曰： 军民困极，而卿等从容请启，彼汲黯何如人也。 
现代文：第二年，虞谦请求赈灾，太子对他说 ：军民极度困敝，而卿等还从容陈请，那汲黯算什么人？ 
English: The following year, when Yu Qian asked for relief from the disaster, the prince said to him, "The military and the people are in dire straits, but the nobles are still calmly asking for help. What kind of people are they?

古文：寻命督两浙、苏、松诸府粮，输南、北京及徐州、淮安。
现代文：不久，命虞谦督管两浙、苏州、松江等府粮米，输运到南、北两京和徐州、淮安。
English: Soon, Governor Muyuyu Qian was in charge of grain and rice from the two provinces of Zhejiang, Suzhou and Songjiang, which were transported to Beijing in the north and south, Xuzhou and Huai'an.

古文：富民赂有司，率得近地，而贫民多远运。
现代文：富民贿赂有关官员，他们都得运到近地，而贫民多要输运到远地。
English: The rich bribed the officials concerned, and they all had to be transported to the near land, while the poor mostly had to be transported to the far land.

古文：谦建议分四等：丁多粮最少者运北京，次少者运徐州，丁粮等者运南京、淮安，丁少粮多者存留本土。
现代文：虞谦建议分为四等：丁多粮最少的运到北京，次少的运到徐州，人丁和租粮相当的运到南京和淮安，丁少粮多的就存留本土。
English: Yu Qian's proposal is divided into four categories: the least amount of grain should be transported to Beijing, the second least to Xuzhou, the same amount of people and grain should be transported to Nanjing and Huai'an, and the least amount of grain should be stored on the mainland.

古文：民利赖之。
现代文：百姓赖此得到便利。
English: This makes it easier for the people to get around.

古文：又言：徐州、吕梁二洪，行舟多阻。请每洪增挽夫二百，月给廪；官牛一百，暇时听民耕，大舟至，用以挽。
现代文：他又说： 徐州、吕梁二洪，行船多被阻，请在每洪增加二百名挽夫，每月供给粮食；另拨给一百头官牛，闲暇时听任百姓使用耕作，大船来时，便用来挽船。 
English: He also said, "In Xuzhou and Luliang Erhong, where most ships are blocked from sailing, please increase the number of bollards by 200 per hong, and supply grain every month. In addition, allocate one hundred official cattle, and let the people use them for farming in their leisure time, and use them to tie up ships when big ships come.

古文：人以为便。
现代文：人民都觉得方便。
English: People find it convenient.

古文：尝督运木，役者大疫。谦令散处之，疫遂息。
现代文：他曾监督运木材，当时服役的人严重染上瘟疫，虞谦下令遣散处理，才控制住了瘟疫。
English: He once supervised the transportation of timber. At that time, the servicemen were seriously infected with the plague. It was only when Yu Qian ordered their discharge that the plague was brought under control.

古文：未几，偕给事中许能巡抚浙江。
现代文：不久，他偕同给事中许能巡抚浙江。
English: Soon after, he and Xu Neng were appointed as the procurators of Zhejiang Province.

古文：仁宗即位，召还，改大理寺卿。
现代文：仁宗即位后将虞谦召回，改任大理寺卿。
English: After the enthronement of Ninsong, Yu Qian was recalled and reappointed as the Lord of Dali Temple.

古文：时吕升为少卿，仰瞻为丞，而谦又荐严本为寺正。
现代文：当时吕升任少卿，仰瞻任寺丞，而虞谦又推荐严本任寺正。
English: At that time, Lü Sheng was appointed as Shaoqing, Yang Zhan was appointed as Jizhe, and Yu Qian recommended Yan Ben to be appointed as Jizhe.

古文：帝方矜慎刑狱，谦等亦悉心奏当。
现代文：皇上正慎重于用刑，虞谦等人也都悉心奏请，依罪定刑。
English: The emperor was being cautious in the use of punishment, and Yu Qian and others were also diligently asking for punishment according to the crime.

古文：凡法司及四方所上狱，谦等再四参复，必求其平。
现代文：凡是法司和各地上报的案件，虞谦等人都再四审查，力求其平正。
English: All cases reported to the Department of Justice and various regions are re-examined by Yu Qian and others to ensure that they are fair.

古文：尝语人曰： 彼无憾，斯我无憾矣。 
现代文：他曾对人说： 他们无憾，我也就无憾了。 
English: He once said to someone, "If they have no regrets, then I have no regrets."

古文：尝应诏上言七事，皆切中时务。
现代文：他曾响应诏令，上书议论七个事项，都切中时务。
English: In response to the imperial edict, he wrote a letter discussing seven issues, all of which were relevant to the current situation.

古文：有言其奏事不密，市恩于外者。
现代文：有人说他上奏言事不密，向外人示恩买好。
English: Some people said that he was not close to the matter on the speech, and that he showed his gratitude to outsiders.

古文：帝怒，降少卿。
现代文：皇上怒，把他降为少卿。
English: The emperor was so angry that he demoted him to Shōkyō.

古文：一日，杨士奇奏事毕，不退。
现代文：有一天，杨士奇奏事完毕后，还不想退下。
English: One day, after Yang Shiqui finished playing, he still didn't want to give up.

古文：帝问： 欲何言，得非为虞谦乎？ 
现代文：皇上问： 你还想说什么？不是为了虞谦吧？ 
English: The emperor asked: What else do you want to say? Isn't it for Yu Qian?

古文：士奇因具白其诬，且言谦历事三朝，得大臣体。
现代文：杨士奇便从头到尾论说虞谦冤枉，并说虞谦历事三朝，很得大臣之体。
English: Yang Shichi argued from beginning to end that Yu Qian had been wronged, and said that Yu Qian had been through three dynasties and was well suited to be a minister.

古文：帝曰： 吾亦悔之。 
现代文：皇上说 ：我也后悔那么做。 
English: The emperor said: I also regret it.

古文：遂命复职。
现代文：于是命令他复职。
English: He was ordered to be reinstated.

古文：宣宗立，谦言： 旧制，犯死罪者，罚役终身。
现代文：宣宗即位后，虞谦说： 按照旧制，犯了死罪的人，要罚终身服役。
English: After the enthronement of Xuan Zong, Yu Qian said: According to the old system, those who committed capital crimes should be punished with life-long service.

古文：今所犯不等，宜依轻重分年限。 
现代文：现在犯人所犯罪行不等，应依罪行轻重划分服役年限。 
English: Now that the crimes committed by the offenders vary, the length of service should be divided according to the severity of the crime.

古文：报可。
现代文：回报说可行。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：宣德二年三月卒于官。
现代文：宣德二年三月，他在任上去世。
English: In March of the second year of Xuan De, he died in office.

古文：其使徽也，知府馈酒肴亦不受。
现代文：虞谦仪表俊美，风采凝重。工于诗画，对自己的才华很自负。
English: Yu Qian has a handsome appearance and a dignified demeanor. He works in poetry and painting and is very proud of his talent.

古文：年七十八卒。汤宗，字正传，浙江平阳人。
现代文：工部侍郎苏瓒，为人精鄙猥亵，却位居虞谦之上，虞谦因此常怏怏不乐，人们因此觉得他气量过于狭小。汤宗，字正传，浙江平阳人。
English: Su Zong, the steward of the works department, was a despicable and obscene person, but he ranked higher than Yu Qian. As a result, Yu Qian was often unhappy, and people therefore felt that he was too narrow. Tang Zong, the word is passed down, was from Pingyang, Zhejiang.

古文：洪武末，由太学生擢河南按察佥事，改北平。
现代文：洪武末年，由太学生升为河南按察佥事，后改到北京任按察佥事。
English: In the last years of Hongwu's life, he was promoted from a student to a deputy inspector in Henan Province, and later to a deputy inspector in Beijing.

古文：建文时上变，言按察使陈瑛受燕邸金钱，有异谋。
现代文：建文时期，他上奏说有变故，他说按察使陈瑛接受燕王邸的金钱，有异谋。
English: During the Jianwen period, he reported that there had been a change of circumstances. He said that there was a conspiracy to have Chen Ying accept the money from Yan Wang's residence.

古文：诏逮瑛，安置广西，而迁宗山东按察使。
现代文：诏令逮捕陈瑛，发往广西安置，而升汤宗为山东按察使。
English: Chen Ying was arrested by imperial edict and sent to Guangxi for resettlement, while Sheng Tangzong became the inspector general of Shandong.

古文：坐事，左迁刑部郎中，出知苏州府。
现代文：因犯有过失，他被降为刑部郎中，又出京任苏州知府。
English: For his fault, he was demoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Justice, and was sent to Beijing to serve as the governor of Suzhou.

古文：苏连岁水，民流，逋租百余万石。
现代文：苏州连年水灾，人民流离，拖欠的租税达一百余万石。
English: Suzhou has been flooded for years, people have been displaced, and tax arrears amount to more than one million koku.

古文：宗谕富民出米代输。
现代文：汤宗通告富民出米代为交纳。
English: Tang Zong announced that Fumin would pay for the rice.

古文：富民知其爱民，不三月悉完纳。
现代文：富民知道他爱民，不出三个月便交纳完毕。
English: The rich man knew that he loved the people, and in less than three months he had paid everything.

古文：永乐元年，有言其坐视水患者，逮下狱，谪判禄州。
现代文：永乐元年，有人说他坐视水患不管，将他逮捕下狱，贬到禄州任通判。
English: In the first year of Yongle, someone said that he was indifferent to the flood, arrested him and put him in prison, and sent him to Luzhou for trial.

古文：以黄淮荐，召为大理寺丞。
现代文：因黄淮的推荐，他被召为大理寺丞。
English: On the recommendation of Huang Huai, he was called to be a priest of Dali Temple.

古文：或言宗曾发潜邸事。
现代文：有人说汤宗曾揭发成祖在潜邸时的事。
English: Some people say that Tang Zong once revealed the story of Cheng Zu's time in the lair.

古文：帝曰： 帝王惟才是使，何论旧嫌。 
现代文：皇上说 ：帝王唯才是用，何必论旧嫌？ 
English: The emperor said, "The emperor only needs to be the best, so why do we need to discuss old grudges?"

古文：时外国贡使病死，从人谓医杀之。
现代文：当时外国朝贡使者病死，使者的随从人员说是医生杀死了他。
English: At that time, the foreign tributary envoy died of illness, and the envoy's entourage said that the doctor killed him.

古文：狱具，宗阅牍叹曰： 医与使者何仇，而故杀之乎？ 
现代文：结案后，汤宗看过案情记录叹道： 医生与使者有什么仇，有什么理由要杀他？ 
English: After the case was closed, Tang Zong read the case record and sighed: What is the enmity between the doctor and the messenger, what reason is there to kill him?

古文：卒辨出之。
现代文：他于是为医生辩白，使他被放了出来。
English: He then pleaded for the doctor to be released.

古文：寻命振饥河南，还署户部事。
现代文：不久他受命赈济河南饥荒，回来后代理户部事务。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to help with the famine in Henan Province. After his return, he became the acting head of the Household Department.

古文：解缙下狱，词连宗，坐系十余年。
现代文：解缙入狱时，牵连到汤宗，被判关了十几年。
English: When he was jailed, he implicated Tang Zong and was sentenced to more than ten years in prison.

古文：仁宗立，复官，再迁南京大理卿。
现代文：仁宗即位后，汤宗得复官，再升为南京大理寺卿。
English: After the enthronement of Ninsong, Tang Zong was reinstated and promoted to the position of Nanjing Dali Temple Lord.

古文：宣宗初，清军山东。会天久不雨，极陈民间饥困状。
现代文：宣宗初年，他到山东清理军事，正值久不下雨，汤宗极力陈述民间饥馑困敝的情况。
English: In the first year of Xuan Zong, he went to Shandong to clean up the military. It had not rained for a long time, and Tang Zong tried his best to explain the situation of the people's hunger and hardship.

古文：帝为蠲租免役，罢不急之务。
现代文：皇上为此免除山东的租税徭役，停罢不急的事项。
English: To this end, the emperor exempted Shandong from tax collection, ending a matter that was not urgent.

古文：宣德二年卒。
现代文：宣德二年汤宗去世。
English: In the second year of Xuande, Tang Zong passed away.

