古文：赵琰，字叔起，天水人。
现代文：赵琰，字叔起，天水人。
English: Zhao Wei, nicknamed "Uncle Qi," was born in Tianshui.

古文：父温为杨难当司马。
现代文：父温为杨难当司马。
English: His father, Wen, is Yang Nan Dang Sima.

古文：初，苻氏乱，琰为乳母携奔寿春，年十四乃归。
现代文：当初，苻氏叛乱，赵琰被奶妈带着奔逃到寿春，长到十四岁才回到老家。
English: At first, when the Min clan rebelled, Zhao Yao was taken by his wet nurse and fled to Shouchun. He did not return to his hometown until he was 14 years old.

古文：孝心色养，饪熟之节，必亲调之。
现代文：精心奉养父母，茶水饭食，必亲自调弄。
English: Carefully nurture parents, tea and water meals, must be personally coaxed.

古文：皇兴中，京师俭，婢简粟粜之，琰遇见切责，敕留轻粃。
现代文：皇兴年间，京城缺粮，奴婢碾粟筛出瘪谷，赵琰看见狠狠把她教训了一顿，责令她留下轻谷。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xing, there was a shortage of grain in the capital, and slaves and maidservants were grinding poppies to sift out the stubble. When Zhao Wei saw this, he gave her a stern lecture and ordered her to leave the stubble.

古文：尝送子应冀州娉室，从者于路偶得一羊，行三十里而琰知之，令送于本处。
现代文：曾送儿子赵应到冀州订亲，随从的人在路上偶然得到一只羊，走了三十里后，赵琰知道了，责令仆人送还原处。
English: Zhao Ying once sent his son to Jizhou to make a betrothal, and the attendant accidentally got a sheep on the road. After walking for thirty miles, Zhao Ying found out and ordered the servant to return it to the original place.

古文：又过路傍，主人设羊羹，琰访知盗杀，卒辞不食。
现代文：又在经过的路边，主人准备了羊肉汤，赵琰查知这是偷杀的羊，始终不愿就餐。
English: On the side of the road again, the owner prepared mutton soup. Zhao Yao found out that this was sheep that had been stolen, and he was always reluctant to eat.

古文：遣人买耜刃，得剩六耜，即令送还刃主。
现代文：派人购买耒吕刀，发现多了六把，立即让人送还主人。
English: He sent someone to buy six more Yulü swords, and they were immediately returned to their owner.

古文：刃主高之，义而不受，琰命委之而去。
现代文：刀主为他所感动，坚决不收，赵琰命人把刀放下就走。
English: The owner of the sword was moved by him and resolutely refused to accept it. Zhao Yu ordered the man to put down the sword and leave.

古文：初为兗州司马，转团城镇副将。
现代文：开始赵琰任兖州司马，转任团城镇的副将。
English: At the beginning, Zhao Jun served as the Sima of Ganzhou, and was transferred to the vice-general of the town of the regiment.

古文：琰积三十余年，不得葬二亲。
现代文：归还京城，任淮南王元他幕府长史。当时禁制很严，不让大臣越关葬于故乡。
English: After the return of the capital, Huainan Wangyuan was appointed as the chief historian of the shogunate. At that time, the ban was very strict, and the minister was not allowed to be buried in his hometown.

古文：及蒸尝拜献，未曾不婴慕卒事。
现代文：赵琰不能归葬双亲达三十年之久。到祭祀拜献的时候，总是不能不想归葬双亲的事。
English: Zhao Wei has not been able to bury his parents for more than 30 years. When it comes to offering sacrifices, he cannot help but want to bury his parents.

古文：每于时节，不受子孙庆贺。
现代文：每每逢年过节，总不接受子孙的庆贺。
English: Whenever there is a New Year's holiday, he always refuses to accept congratulations from his children and grandchildren.

古文：年余耳顺，而孝思弥笃。
现代文：随着年纪渐高，孝顺之情越来越深厚。
English: As they grow older, their sense of filial piety becomes more and more profound.

古文：慨岁月推移，迁窆无期，乃绝盐粟，断诸滋味，食麦而已。
现代文：他感叹岁月推移，而迁坟无期，于是不吃盐粟，断除众味，只吃麦食。
English: He laments the passage of time, but the relocation of graves has no expiration date, so he does not eat salt corn, cuts off all tastes, and only eats wheat food.

古文：年八十卒。
现代文：八十多岁时去世。
English: He died in his eighties.

古文：迁都洛阳，子应等乃还乡葬焉。
现代文：后魏迁都洛阳，儿子赵应等还乡葬祖与赵琰。
English: After the Wei Dynasty moved the capital to Luoyang, his son Zhao Ying returned to the hometown to bury his ancestors and Zhao Yao.

古文：丧母，水浆不入口五日，吐血数升，居忧毁瘠，见称州里。
现代文：赵琰弟赵煦，字宾育。爱好音律，以擅长歌唱著称于世。
English: Zhao Yao's younger brother Zhao Yao, nicknamed "Bin Yu," is a lover of music and is famous for his singing.

古文：有司奏闻，出帝诏标门闾。王崇，字乾邕，阳夏雍丘人也。兄弟并以孝称。
现代文：官至秦州刺史。王崇，字乾邕，阳夏雍丘人。兄弟两人都以孝顺著称于世。
English: Wang Chong, surnamed Qian Ye, from Yangxia and Yongqiu. Both brothers are famous for their filial piety.

古文：身勤稼穑，以养二亲。
现代文：勤于耕种，以奉养双亲。
English: He was diligent in farming and supported his parents.

古文：仕梁州镇南府主簿。
现代文：任梁州镇南府主簿。
English: Appointed as the chief accountant of Liangzhou Town South Prefecture.

古文：母亡，杖而后起，鬓发坠落。
现代文：母亲去世，他哀伤过度，倚杖才能起身，毛发也脱落了。
English: When his mother died, he was so grief-stricken that he had to lean on a cane to get out of bed, and his hair fell out.

古文：未及葬，权殡宅西。
现代文：未及下葬，权且停柩房舍西面。
English: Before he was buried, the authorities cordoned off the west side of the house.

古文：崇庐于殡所，昼夜哭泣，鸠鸽群至。
现代文：王崇在停柩的地方结庐而住，昼夜啼哭，引得鸠与鸽成群飞来。
English: Wang Chong lived in a cramped, stagnant place, crying day and night, attracting flocks of crickets and pigeons.

古文：有一小鸟，素质墨眸，形大如雀，栖于崇庐，朝夕不去，母丧始阕，复丁父忧，哀毁过礼。
现代文：有一只小鸟，白色羽毛，乌黑的眼睛，形如麻雀大小，栖息在王崇房上，早晚不飞走，与他为伴。母亲丧期刚满，又遭父丧，哀伤悲痛过于礼仪规定。
English: There is a small bird with white feathers and black eyes, the size of a sparrow, perched on Wang Chongbo's house. It does not fly away, and accompanies him. His mother has just passed away, and his father has also passed away. The sadness and grief are beyond the rules of etiquette.

古文：是年，阳夏风雹，所过之处，禽兽暴死，草木摧折。
现代文：这一年，阳夏遭风雹袭击，风雹所经过的地方，禽兽都横遭死亡，草木摧坏折断。
English: In this year, Yangxia was hit by a typhoon. Where the typhoon passed, animals were killed, and plants and trees were destroyed and broken.

古文：至崇田畔，风雹便止，禾麦十顷，竟无损落，及过崇地，风雹如初。
现代文：但风雹到了王崇田边，便停止了，十顷禾麦，竟完好无损，过了崇地，风雹又如原来一样。
English: But when the wind reached Wang Chong Tian's side, it stopped. Ten hectares of wheat, however, remained intact. After passing through Chong Di, the wind remained as it was before.

古文：咸称至行所感。
现代文：人们都说这是他的孝行感动了天地。
English: People say that it was his filial piety that moved heaven and earth.

古文：崇虽除服，仍居墓侧。
现代文：王崇虽然脱去丧服，但仍住在父母墓旁。
English: Although Wang Chong has taken off his mourning clothes, he still lives next to his parents' grave.

古文：于其室前生草一根，茎叶甚茂，人莫能识。
现代文：在他房前长出一根草来，草干草叶都很茂盛，人们叫不出它的名字来。
English: In front of his house, a blade of grass sprouted. The grass and hay were so lush that people couldn't name it.

古文：至冬中，复有鸟巢于崇屋，乳养三子，毛羽成长，驯而不惊。
现代文：到了冬天，又有鸟在王崇房内做窝，喂养三只小鸟，小鸟羽毛渐丰，性情温驯，从不惊飞。
English: In winter, another bird made a nest in Wang Chong's room, feeding three small birds. The feathers of the birds gradually became plentiful, their temperament was tame, and they never flew away in fright.

古文：守令闻之，亲自临视。
现代文：守令等地方官听说，亲自前往观看。
English: Shurei and other local officials heard about it and went to see it in person.

古文：州以闻奏，标其门闾。
现代文：于是州里上奏朝廷，以孝标其门庭。
English: As a result, Shuri appealed to the imperial court, using filial piety as a yardstick.

