古文：安禄山反，破东都，遣段子光传李憕、卢奕、蒋清首，以徇河北。
现代文：原文唐玄宗时安禄山谋反，攻陷洛阳，命段子光带着李憕、卢奕、蒋清三人的人头招降河北一带的勤王之师。
English: In the time of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty, An Lushan plotted a rebellion and attacked Luoyang. His son, Guan Ziguang, took the heads of three men, Li Yu, Lu Yi, and Jiang Qing, to recruit the king's loyal teachers from around Hebei.

古文：真卿绐诸将曰： 吾素识憕等，其首皆非是。 
现代文：颜真卿对诸将军说： 我认识李憕等三人，这不是他们的头颅。 
English: Yan Zhenqing said to the generals: I know three people such as Li Xuan, this is not their head.

古文：乃斩光而藏三首。
现代文：于是颜真卿斩了段子光，而把李憕、卢奕、蒋清三个人头藏起来。
English: As a result, Yan Zhenqing chopped off the heads of Duan Ziguang and hid the heads of Li Yu, Lu Yi, and Jiang Qing.

古文：李尚书揆素为卢杞所恶，用为入蕃会盟使。
现代文：唐德宗宰相卢杞一向讨厌尚书李揆，想刁难他，于是向德宗推荐李揆为朝廷特使，到番邦签订盟约。
English: Emperor Dezong's prime minister Lu Wei always disliked Shangshu Li Wei and wanted to make trouble for him, so he recommended Li Wei to Emperor Dezong as a special envoy of the imperial court to sign a treaty with Pangang.

古文：揆辞老，恐死道路，不能达命。
现代文：李揆以 年老多病，怕路途遥远，恐难达成使命 为由请辞，德宗也很同情。
English: De Zong was also sympathetic to Li Lan's resignation on the grounds that he was too old and sickly, that he was afraid of the long journey ahead, and that it would be difficult to achieve his mission.

古文：帝恻然，杞曰： 和戎当择练朝事者，非揆不可，揆行，则年少于揆者，后无所避矣。 揆不敢辞。揆至蕃，酋长曰： 闻唐有第一人李揆，公是否？ 
现代文：卢杞说： 出使番邦一定要挑选熟悉政务、善于应对的大臣，此事非李尚书不可，如果以李尚书如此年纪还肯为明廷出使番邦，那么朝中这些比李尚书年轻的，谁敢不为朝廷效命呢？ 于是李揆无法再推辞。李揆来到番邦后，番王问： 听说贵国有位人称大唐第一的李揆，可是阁下么？ 
English: Lu Wei said: It is necessary to select a minister who is familiar with government affairs and good at dealing with matters. Li Shangshu is the only one who can do this. If Li Shangshu is so old that he is willing to send a minister to the Ming court, then who in the court is younger than Li Shangshu, who would not dare to serve the court? So Li Wei could no longer refuse. After Li Wei came to Pangang, the king of Pang asked: I heard that people in your country called Li Wei the first of the Great Tang Dynasty, but are you?

古文：揆畏留，因绐之曰： 彼李揆安肯来耶？ 
现代文：李揆怕番王会借故强行挽留，就骗番王说： 那个李揆怎么肯来呢？ 
English: Li Qian was afraid that the king of the guards would use the excuse to forcefully retain him, so he deceived the king of the guards and said: How could that Li Qian come?

