古文：韦陟芸辉堂裴冕于頔王涯李德裕杨收同昌公主李璋李使君
现代文：韦陟芸辉堂裴冕于頔王涯李德裕杨收同昌公主李璋李使君
English: Wei Wei, Wei Wei, Wei Wei, Wei Wei, Wei Wei, Wei Wei

古文：韦陟
现代文：韦陟
English: Wei Xuan

古文：韦斌虽生于贵门，而性颇质厚。
现代文：韦斌虽然生在显贵的人家，然而他的禀性却很耿直厚道。
English: Although Wei Bin was born into a prominent family, he is very straightforward and kind.

古文：然其地望素高，冠冕特盛，虽门风稍奢。
现代文：他的地位与名望一向是很高的，而且是世代为宦的旺族，只是门风稍奢华些。
English: His status and reputation have always been very high, and he has been a member of the Wang ethnic group for generations, but his manners are a little more luxurious.

古文：而斌立朝偘偘，容止尊严，有大臣之体。
现代文：韦斌在朝为官一向刚直，举止言行注重端庄持重，很有大臣的风范作派。
English: Wei Bin has always been a forthright official in the government. He is dignified and dignified in his words and deeds. He has the demeanor of a minister.

古文：每会朝，未尝与同列笑语。
现代文：每次上朝议事，从来不跟站在一起的僚属们谈笑。
English: Every time he attends a meeting, he never talks or laughs with his colleagues who are standing next to him.

古文：旧制，群臣立于殿庭，既而遇雨雪。亦不移步于廊下。忽一日密雪骤降，自三事以下，莫不振其簪裙，或更其立位。
现代文：按旧制的要求，文武百官站在殿前庭院中，既使遇上下雨、下雪，也不允许走到殿廊下躲避，忽然有一天，密集的大雪突然降下来，自三公以下，没有不摘帽掸雪或抖掉衣裙上的雪的，有人还移动他站立的位置。
English: According to the requirements of the old system, hundreds of civil and military officials stood in the courtyard in front of the palace. Even if it rained or snowed, they were not allowed to go under the palace corridor to escape. Suddenly, one day, dense heavy snow suddenly fell. Since the three princes and below, there was no one who did not take off his hat to shovel snow or shake off the snow on his dress. Someone also moved his standing position.

古文：独斌意色益恭，俄雪甚至膝。
现代文：唯独韦斌神色益加谦恭严肃，站在那儿一动不动，一直到大雪都埋住了他的膝部。
English: However, Wei Bin's expression became more humble and serious, and he stood there motionless until the heavy snow buried his knees.

古文：朝既罢，斌于雪中拔身而去。
现代文：直到朝会结束后，才从雪中拔脚走回去。
English: It wasn't until after the morning session was over that I was able to drag my feet out of the snow and walk back.

古文：见之者咸叹重焉。
现代文：看到他这幅严肃认真的样子的人，都非常赞佩敬重他。
English: People who see his serious and earnest appearance admire and respect him very much.

古文：斌兄陟，早以文学识度，著名于时。
现代文：韦斌的哥哥韦陟，很早就以他在文学上的造诣与知识见识，而闻名于当世。
English: Wei Bin's brother, Wei Wei, was famous for his literary accomplishments and knowledge very early in his life.

古文：善属文，攻草隶书。
现代文：韦陟擅长写文章，专心致志地研习草书、隶书。
English: Wei Wei is good at writing articles, and has devoted himself to studying cursive and calligraphy.

古文：出入清显，践历崇贵。
现代文：跟他交往的人都是清要显达的达官名士，他经常走动的人家也都是高贵有名望的。
English: The people he interacts with are high-ranking officials and celebrities who want to be conspicuous, and the people he often walks around with are also noble and famous.

古文：自以门地才华，坐取卿相。
现代文：本来韦陟就凭藉他的门第与才华，不用活动就应当当上宰相这样的高官。
English: Originally, Weizun should have become a high-ranking official such as prime minister without any activity by virtue of his lineage and talent.

古文：而接物简傲，未尝与人款曲。
现代文：但是，由于他接人待物态度太高傲、简慢，从不与任何人说好话周旋。
English: However, because he is too proud and slow to receive people, he never says a kind word to anyone.

古文：衣服车马，尤尚奢侈。
现代文：他穿用的衣服、乘坐的车马，都特别奢侈豪华。
English: The clothes he wore and the horses he rode in were particularly luxurious.

古文：侍儿阉竖，左右常数十人。
现代文：在他身边，经常有几十个僮仆太监服侍他。
English: Around him, there are often dozens of eunuchs serving him.

古文：或隐几搘颐度日，懒为一言。
现代文：有时候，他在家里坐在书案旁边，用手拄着脸腮一句话不说，一坐就是一天。
English: Sometimes, at home, he would sit next to his bookcase, rubbing his face with his hands and not saying a word. One sitting was a day.

古文：其于馔羞，尤为精洁，仍以鸟羽择米。
现代文：至于他吃的饭菜，尤其讲究，必须弄得特别精细、洁净，用鸟羽挑选米。
English: As for the food he eats, he is very particular about it, he has to make it very fine and clean, and he uses bird feathers to pick out the rice.

古文：每食毕，视厨中所委弃，不啻万钱之直。
现代文：每吃完一顿饭，你去看看他家厨房里所扔掉的菜肴食物，何止价值万钱呢。
English: Every time you finish a meal, take a look at the dishes and food that are thrown away in his kitchen. They are worth thousands of dollars.

古文：若宴于公卿，虽水陆具陈，曾不下筋。
现代文：如果在公卿同僚家聚宴，虽然山珍海味俱全，韦陟也不动筷。
English: If there is a banquet at the home of a noble colleague, although the delicacies of the mountains and seas are complete, Wei Wei will not move his chopsticks.

古文：每令侍婢主尺题，往来复章。未尝自札，受意而已。
现代文：韦陟让他的侍婢负责他的信函。往来的信函、奏章，他从不亲自书写，而是授意给他的侍婢代拟代书。
English: Wei Zheng put his servants in charge of his correspondence. He never wrote the letters and musical scores he received in person, but instructed his servants to write them on his behalf.

古文：词旨重轻，正合陟意。
现代文：他的侍婢代拟的这些信函、奏章，措词的分寸正好符合他的心意。
English: The letters and music composed by his maidservants and maidservants are worded just as he intended.

古文：而书体遒利，皆有楷法，陟唯署名。
现代文：而且书写的字体遒劲流利，都非常符合楷书的规范。韦陟只签署个名氏而已。
English: Moreover, the written fonts are vigorous and fluent, all of which are in line with the standard of block letters. Wei Wei only signed one name.

古文：常自谓所书陟字，如五朵云。
现代文：他常常自己夸赞他签署的陟字，宛若五朵云彩。
English: He often boasted that the signature he signed was like the five clouds.

古文：当时人多仿效，谓之郇公五云体。
现代文：当时，有许多人都效仿他的这种签署方式，被人称为郇公五云体。
English: At that time, many people imitated his signature style, which was known as the "five clouds."

古文：常以五彩纸为缄题。
现代文：韦陟常年使用五彩纸为信笺。
English: Wei Wei always uses five-colored paper as letterhead.

古文：其侈纵自奉，皆此类也。
现代文：他的日常生活用度的奢华程度，都象这样啊！
English: The sumptuousness of his daily life is like this!

古文：然家法整肃。
现代文：但是，韦陟的治家法规非常严整。
English: However, Wei Xuan's house rules are very strict.

古文：其子允，课习经史。
现代文：他的儿子韦允学习经史，每天他都加以教诲训励。
English: His son Wei Yun is studying history, and he teaches and encourages him every day.

古文：日加诲励，夜分犹使人视之。
现代文：就是在夜间，也常派人去察看。
English: Even at night, they would send someone to check on him.

古文：若允习读不辍，旦夕问安，颜色必悦。
现代文：如果韦允学习很用功，不停顿，则在早、晚向父母问安时，都和颜悦色；如果他稍有懈怠，就立即派人去制止。
English: If Wei Yun studies very hard and does not stop, he will greet his parents in the morning and evening in a friendly manner; if he slacks a little, he will immediately send someone to stop him.

古文：若稍怠惰，即遽使人止之，令立于堂下，或弥旬不与语。陟虽家僮数十人，应门宾客，必遣允为之。
现代文：命令韦允站立在厅堂下，或者十天之内不跟儿子说一句话。韦陟虽然有家僮几十人，但是凡是到他家来的宾客，必定让他的儿子韦允接待，迎送。
English: He ordered Wei Yun to stand under the hall, or not to speak a word to his son for ten days. Although Wei Yun has dozens of family members, any guest who comes to his house must be received and greeted by his son Wei Yun.

古文：寒暑未尝辍也，颇为当时称之。
现代文：不论寒暑都没有停止这样做过。这种礼仪，很是受到当时人的称赞。
English: Regardless of cold or heat, they never stopped doing this. This kind of etiquette was highly praised by the people of the time.

古文：然陟竟以简倨特才，常为持权者所忌。
现代文：然而，韦陟竟然因为他高傲恃才，常常为那些有权有势的人所忌恨。
English: However, because of his arrogance and talent, Wei Wei was often hated by those with power.

古文：芸辉堂
现代文：芸辉堂
English: Performed by Geihido

古文：元载造芸辉堂于私第。
现代文：元载在自己的宅院里建造了一座芸辉堂。芸辉，是一种香草的名字，产在于阗国。
English: Yuan Zang built a Geihui Hall in his courtyard. Geihui is the name of a kind of vanilla, which is produced in Laos.

古文：芸辉香草名也，出于阗国，其香洁白如玉。入土不朽烂，舂之为屑，以涂其壁，故号芸辉。
现代文：它质地象玉一样洁白，掺入土里不腐烂。将它舂成碎屑，用来涂饰墙壁。因此，叫芸辉堂。
English: Its texture is as white as jade, and it does not rot when mixed with soil. It is pounded into crumbs and used to decorate walls. Therefore, it is called Geihido.

古文：而更以沉香为梁栋，金银为户牖。
现代文：这座殿堂还用沉香木做屋梁，用金银做窗户。
English: This hall of fame also uses agate wood for the roof beams and gold and silver for the windows.

古文：内设悬黎屏风紫绡帐，其屏风本杨国忠之宝也。其上刻前代美女妓乐之形，外以玳瑁水晶为押，络饰以真珠瑟瑟。
现代文：殿堂内装有美玉制的屏风，紫色的绡帐。这付屏风本是当年宰相杨国忠心爱的至宝，上面雕刻着前朝美女妓乐图，另外用水晶作压帘的饰具，还用碧色宝石串成串作装饰。
English: In the hall of fame, there is a screen made of precious stones, with a purple bezel. This screen was originally a beloved treasure of the Prime Minister Yang Guotong. It is engraved with a picture of a beautiful prostitute from the previous dynasty. In addition, it is decorated with crystal as a pressed curtain, and is also decorated with strings of blue gemstones.

古文：精巧之妙，殆非人工所及。
现代文：它制作的精致巧妙，完全是人工所不能达到的。
English: The delicacy and ingenuity of its production is completely unattainable by man.

古文：紫绡帐得于南海溪洞之帅首，即绞绡类也。
现代文：紫绡帐是从南海溪洞的酋长那儿得到的，是用绞绡一类织物制作的。
English: The purple silk curtain was obtained from the chief of Nanhai Cave, and was made of fabric such as twine.

古文：轻疏而薄，如无所碍。
现代文：既轻疏又非常的薄，挂在那边就象什么也没挂一样。
English: It's light and very thin, and it hangs there like nothing.

古文：虽当时凝寒，风不能入；盛夏则清凉自至。
现代文：虽然在天寒地冻的时节，风也吹不进帐子里面；就是在盛夏酷暑，帐子里自然清凉。
English: Although in the freezing season, the wind can not blow into the tent; even in the middle of the summer heat, the tent is naturally cool.

古文：其色隐隐，或不知其帐也，谓载卧内有紫气。
现代文：它的颜色隐隐约约的，让你都看不出来挂有帐子，都说元载的卧室里有紫气呢。
English: Its color is vaguely approximate, so you can't see that there is a curtain, and it is said that there is a purple atmosphere in the master bedroom.

古文：其余服玩奢僭，率皆拟于帝王家。
现代文：其余的，如服饰、古玩、用具，也都特别的奢华，都效仿帝王之家的排场。
English: The rest, such as clothing, antiques, utensils, are also particularly luxurious, all emulating the pomp of the imperial family.

古文：芸辉堂前有池，以文石砌其岸。
现代文：元载还在芸辉堂前修造了一座水池，用玛瑙和带纹理的石头垒砌池塘的堤岸。
English: He also built a pond in front of Geihui Hall, using agate and textured stone to build the embankment of the pond.

古文：中有苹阳花，亦类于白苹，其花红而且大，如有牡丹。
现代文：池中植有苹阳花，象白苹一类，它开的花红而大，象牡丹。
English: The pond is planted with lilies of the valley, such as white lilies, and its flowers are red and large, like peonies.

古文：更有碧芙蓉，香洁萏菡，伟于常者。
现代文：还植有碧芙蓉，香洁萏萏，都比一般的芙蓉、荷花长得高大壮伟。
English: There are also green hibiscus and fragrant chrysanthemum, which are taller and more magnificent than ordinary hibiscus and lotus.

古文：载因暇日，凭栏以观。
现代文：一天闲暇时，元载依着栏杆观赏池中的花草。
English: During a day of leisure, Yuan Zang rode along the railing to admire the flowers and plants in the pool.

古文：忽闻歌声清亮，若十四五女子唱焉，其曲则《玉树后庭花》也。
现代文：忽然听到清亮的歌声，象十四五岁的少女唱的，唱的歌曲是《玉树后庭花》。
English: Suddenly I heard a clear singing voice, like that of a fourteen- or fifteen-year-old girl, singing the song "Jade Garden Flowers."

古文：载惊异，莫知所在。
现代文：元载非常惊异，不知道这歌声来自哪里。
English: He was very surprised and didn't know where the singing was coming from.

古文：及审听之，乃芙蓉中也。
现代文：待仔细审听辨识，乃是从池中芙蓉里发出来的。
English: To be identified by careful listening, it emanates from the hibiscus in the pond.

古文：俯而视之，闻喘息之音。
现代文：他俯身察看，听到有喘气的声音。
English: He leaned over to take a closer look and heard gasps.

古文：载大恶，遂剖其花，一无所见。
现代文：元载非常疑忌这件事，立即将芙蓉花剖开看，什么也没有见到。
English: Yuan Zai was very suspicious of this matter, and immediately opened the hibiscus flower to see, and saw nothing.

古文：因秘不令人说。
现代文：他不让家里人对外讲这件事。
English: He didn't want his family to talk about it.

古文：及载受戮，而逸奴为平庐军卒，人故得其实。
现代文：等到元载获罪被处死后，将他的家中童仆遣送到平庐为兵卒，人们才知道这件事。
English: People didn't know about it until after Yuan Zhao was convicted and executed, and his family's child servants were sent to Pingyao as soldiers.

古文：载龙髯拂，紫色如烂椹。
现代文：元载有一把龙髯拂尘，颜色绛紫，象熟透了的桑椹。
English: The original contained a dragonfly broom, the color of which was deep purple, like a ripe mulberry.

古文：可长三尺，削水晶以为柄，刻红玉以为环钮。
现代文：这把拂尘长约三尺，用水晶石制作尘柄，雕刻红玉作环钮。
English: This whisk is about three feet long, with a crystal stone handle and a carved ruby as a knob.

古文：或风雨晦暝，临流沾湿，则光彩动摇，奋然如怒。
现代文：到刮风下雨天气晦暗时，或者到水边将它沾湿了，则光彩摇动着，拂尘上的龙髯奋然立起来象发怒了的样子。
English: When the wind blows and the rain falls and the weather is gloomy, or when you go to the water's edge and get it wet, the luster shakes, and the dragonfly on the whisk stands up excitedly as if it were angry.

古文：置之于堂中，夜则蚊蚋不能近；拂之为声，则鸡犬牛马无不惊逸；若垂之于池潭；则鳞甲之属，悉俯伏而至；引水于空中，即成瀑布长三五尺，而未尝辄断；烧燕肉薰之，则焪焪焉若生云雾。厥后上知其异，载不得已而进内。
现代文：将它放在厅堂中，到了夜晚蚊子小咬等不敢到近前。将它拂出声音来，那么鸡犬牛马听到后没有不惊恐逃离的。如果将它垂放在池潭旁边，那么鱼鳖虾蟹，都俯首来到近前，将水喷洒向空中，立即形成长三五尺的瀑布，而且一点也不断流。如果烧燕子肉来薰它，就会生出烟来如云似雾。后来，皇上得知这把拂尘的奇异后，元载不得不将它进献到宫中。
English: If it is placed in the hall, at night, mosquitoes, small bites, etc. will not dare to come close. If it is whisked to make a sound, then the chickens, dogs, cattle, and horses will not flee in fear after hearing it. If it is hung next to the pond, then the fish, shrimp, and crabs will come close and spray the water into the air, immediately forming a waterfall three to five feet long, and it will not flow at all. If the swallow meat is burned to soak it, it will produce smoke like a cloud. Later, after the emperor learned of the strangeness of this whisk, Yuan Zai had to present it

古文：载自云，得之于洞庭道士张知和。
现代文：元载自己说过这把拂尘是从洞庭湖一位叫张知和的道士那里得到的。
English: Yuan Zai himself said that he got this whisk from a Taoist named Zhang Zhihong in Dongting Lake.

古文：又载之妻王氏字韫秀，缙之女也。初王缙镇北京，以韫秀嫁元载，岁久而见轻怠。
现代文：时间长了，见元载既不是什么名门望族，又没有什么地位，因此王家待他很是一般，有些轻视怠慢。王韫秀看到这种情形后，对元载说：夫君，你为什么不刻苦学习读书？
English: After a long time, he saw that Yuan Zai was neither a famous family nor had any status, so the royal family treated him in a very ordinary way, with some contempt and neglect. After seeing this situation, Wang Yuxiu said to Yuan Zai: Husband, why don't you study hard?

古文：韫秀谓夫曰：何不增学，妾有奁幌资装，尽为纸墨之费。
现代文：为妻我带来些陪嫁的钱物、服饰，都可以给你作读书的费用。
English: I brought some money and clothes for my wife to accompany me, which can be used to pay for your studies.

古文：王氏父母未知或知，亲属以载夫妻皆乞儿，厌薄之甚。
现代文：对于这件事，王韫秀的父母也许知道也许不知道。但是当时亲属们都将他们夫妇当成乞儿看待，非常瞧不起，冷淡他们。
English: Wang Yuxiu's parents may or may not have known about this, but at the time, their relatives regarded them as beggars, looked down on them and treated them coldly.

古文：元遂游秦，为诗别韫秀曰：年来谁不厌龙钟，虽在侯门似不容。
现代文：元载在妻子的鼓励下，离家去秦地游学。离家前写诗一首留别韫秀。诗是这样的：年来谁不厌龙钟，虽在侯门似不容。
English: With the encouragement of his wife, Yuan Zhao left home to travel to Qin to study. Before leaving home, he wrote a poem to bid farewell to Xiu Xiu. The poem is as follows: Over the years, who has not been tired of Longjing, although it seems to be unacceptable in Houmen.

古文：看取海山寒翠树，苦遭霜霰到春风。
现代文：看取海山寒翠树，苦遭霜霰到春风。
English: Look at the cold green trees of the sea mountain, suffering from frost and spring breeze.

古文：妻请偕行曰：路扫饥寒迹，天哀志气人。
现代文：王韫秀也写诗一首，请求陪伴元载去秦游学。诗是这样的：路扫饥寒迹，天哀志气人。
English: Wang Yuxiu also wrote a poem, requesting to accompany Yuan Zang to Qin to study. The poem is as follows: The road sweeps away hunger and cold, and the sky is sad.

古文：休淋离别泪，携手入西秦。
现代文：休淋离别泪，携手入西秦。
English: Shedding tears of parting, they entered the West Qin Dynasty together.

古文：载既到京，屡陈时务，深符上旨。
现代文：元载到了京城长安后，多次向朝廷上表陈述治理国家的方针、谋略，很是符合皇上的旨意。
English: After arriving in the capital Chang'an, Yuan Zang repeatedly presented to the imperial court the policy and strategy for governing the country, which was very much in line with the emperor's will.

古文：肃宗擢拜中书。
现代文：于是，唐肃宗提升元载为中书令，位居宰相。
English: As a result, Tang Su Zong was promoted to the position of chusho rei and became the prime minister.

古文：王氏喜元郎入相，寄诸姊妹诗曰：相国已随麟阁贵，家风第一右丞诗。
现代文：王韫秀非常高兴，写诗一首寄给她的几个姐妹。诗是这样的：相国已随麟阁贵，家风第一右丞诗。
English: Wang Yuxiu was very happy and wrote a poem to send to several of her sisters. The poem is as follows: My country has followed Lin Kegui, and my family's style is the best.

古文：笄年解笑鸣机妇，耽见苏秦富贵时。
现代文：笄年解笑鸣机妇，耽见苏秦富贵时。
English: In the year of the rooster, the laughing woman, the delay in seeing Su Qin as a rich man.

古文：载肃宗代宗两朝宰相，贵盛无比。
现代文：元载官居唐肃宗、代宗两朝宰相，富贵权重没有人能相比。
English: The original official residence of the Tang Su Zong, the deputy prime minister of the two dynasties, no one can compare with the richness and importance.

古文：广葺亭台，交游贵族，客候其门，或多间阻。
现代文：他在宅院中大势兴修楼台亭榭。跟他来往的都是豪门贵族。许多客人在他府门前等候接见，多数人都不受接待。
English: He vigorously built a grand pavilion in his courtyard. The people who visited him were all high-ranking aristocrats. Many guests waited in front of his gate to be received, but most of them were not received.

古文：王氏复为一篇以喻之曰：楚竹燕歌动画梁，春兰重换舞衣裳。
现代文：这时，王韫秀又写诗一首劝喻丈夫。诗是这样的：楚竹燕歌动画梁，春兰重换舞衣裳。
English: At this time, Wang Yuxiu also wrote a poem to persuade her husband. The poem is as follows: Chu Zhu Yange animation beam, Chunlan change dance clothes.

古文：公孙开馆招嘉客，知道浮荣不久长。
现代文：公孙开馆招嘉客，知道浮荣不久长。
English: Gongsun opened the museum to invite guests, knowing that it wouldn't be long before it became a success.

古文：载于是稍减。太原内外亲属悉来谒贺，韫秀安置于闲院。
现代文：元载读了妻子的这首劝喻诗后，稍稍改变了以往对来访客人的冷淡态度。元载位居宰相后，太原王氏的内外亲属都来拜见祝贺。王韫秀将他们安排在一个闲空的院中住下。
English: After reading this persuasive poem by his wife, Yuan Zai slightly changed his previous cold attitude towards visiting guests. After Yuan Zai became prime minister, the relatives of the Taiyuan Wang clan both at home and abroad came to visit and congratulate. Wang Yuxiu arranged for them to live in an empty courtyard.

古文：忽因天晴之景，以青紫丝条四十条，各长三十丈，皆施罗绔绮绣之饰。
现代文：忽然有一天天气非常晴朗，元家的仆夫们在西院中抢系四十条青紫色的丝条，每条长三十丈，上面晾晒着软罗、素绸、绮绣等服饰。
English: Suddenly, one day, the weather was very fine, and the servants of the Yuan family were busy in the West Courtyard, tying together forty strips of blue-violet silk, each of which was thirty meters long, and drying clothes such as soft silk, plain silk, and embroidery on them.

古文：每条条下，排金银炉二十枚，皆焚异香。
现代文：每条丝绿下面，并排置放二十枚金银香炉，里面焚燃的都是异香，用来薰衣物。
English: At the bottom of each strip of green silk, twenty gold and silver incense burners are placed side by side. The incense burned inside is of a different fragrance, used to make lavender.

古文：香至其服，乃命诸亲戚西院闲步。
现代文：王韫秀让亲属们去西院散步，当着他们面问仆人：这上面晾的是什么？
English: Wang Yuxiu let his relatives go for a walk in the West Courtyard, and asked the servants in front of them: "What's that hanging there?"

古文：韫秀问是何物，侍婢对曰：今日相公与夫人晒曝夜服。
现代文：服侍她的使女回答说：晾晒的是宰相与夫人的晚服。
English: The maid who was serving her replied that it was the prime minister's and his wife's evening clothes that had been hung out to dry.

古文：王氏谓诸亲曰：岂料乞索儿妇，还有两事盖形粗衣也。
现代文：王韫秀对亲属们说：谁想到当年的乞讨儿的媳妇，还有两件遮体的粗布衣裳啊！
English: Wang Yuxiu said to his relatives: Who would have thought that his daughter-in-law, who used to beg, still had two coarse cloth robes to cover her body!

古文：于是诸亲羞赧，稍稍辞去。
现代文：这些亲属听了后，都羞惭满面，悄悄走开。
English: After listening to these relatives, they were all ashamed and quietly walked away.

古文：韫秀常分馈服饰于他人，而不及太厚之骨肉。
现代文：王韫秀经常将衣服、饰物馈送他人，却从来不送给太原她的亲属。
English: Wang Yuxiu often gave clothes and ornaments to others, but never to her relatives in Taiyuan.

古文：每曰：非几不礼于姑姊，其奈当时见辱何！
现代文：每次提起这件事时，她都说：不是作女儿的不礼待姑姑、姐姐，怎奈当初她们那样轻慢我了的。
English: Every time she brought it up, she said, "It's not like I'm being disrespectful to my aunt and sister. Why did they treat me like that in the first place?"

古文：载后贪恣为心，竟招罪累。
现代文：元载后来骄横贪婪，终于招来罪过。
English: He was arrogant and greedy for a long time, which eventually led to his sin.

古文：上恶诛之，而亡其家。
现代文：皇上大怒下诏处死他，并且祸及全家。
English: The emperor was furious and had him executed, which brought misfortune to the whole family.

古文：韫秀少有识量，节槩亦高。
现代文：王韫秀非常有见识，志节气概也高。
English: Wang Yuxiu is very insightful and has high aspirations.

古文：载被戮，上令入宫。
现代文：元载被处死后，皇上诏令王韫秀进入宫中，发给她一只杆身漆朱的笔，让她将亲身的经历写出来，用以劝戒规谏他人。
English: After the execution of Wang Zhaoxiu, the emperor ordered Wang Zhaoxiu to enter the palace and gave her a red-lacquered pen so that she could write down her personal experience and use it to admonish and discipline others.

古文：备彤管箴规之任，叹曰：王家十二娘子，二十年太原节度使女，十六年宰相妻，谁能书得长信昭阳之事，死亦幸矣，坚不从命！
现代文：王韫秀接到诏令后，感叹地说：唉！王家第十二姑娘，二十年节度使的女儿，十六年当朝宰相的夫人。我怎么能去写那些象长信、昭阳宫中发生过的荣极而衰、宠极生悲的故事呢？
English: After receiving the imperial edict, Wang Qixiu said with regret: Alas! I am the twelfth daughter of the royal family, the daughter of a minister of ceremonies for twenty years, and the wife of a prime minister for sixteen years. How can I write those stories that are like a long letter, about the rise and fall of the Zhoyang Palace, and the life and death of a favorite?

古文：或云，上宥其罪。
现代文：我现在就是死了也算可以啦！
English: I might as well be dead now!

古文：或云，京兆笞而毙之。
现代文：坚决不进宫去。有人说皇上听到她的这些话后，赦佑了她的罪过。
English: She resolutely refused to go into the palace. Some say that after hearing these words from her, the emperor forgave her sins.

古文：载宠姬薛瑶英能诗书，善歌舞，仙姿玉质。
现代文：有人说她被京兆尹处笞刑而死。元载有个最宠爱的小妾叫薛瑶英，能歌善舞，玉质仙姿。而且肌肤香艳，体态轻盈。
English: Some people say that she was beaten to death by Emperor Jing Zhaoyun. Once upon a time, there was a favorite concubine named Xue Qianying, who could sing and dance, and had the appearance of a jade nymph. Moreover, her skin was fragrant and her body was light.

古文：肌香体轻，虽旋波、移光，飞燕、绿珠，不能过也。
现代文：就是春秋时期越国的美女旋波、移光，汉代的赵飞燕，晋代的绿珠，都不及她的美丽娇娜。
English: In the Spring and Autumn Period, the beauties of Yue Gu, Zhao Feiyan of the Han Dynasty, and Green Pearl of the Jin Dynasty, were not as beautiful as her.

古文：瑶英之母赵娟，亦岐王之爱妾也。后出为薛氏之妻，生瑶英。
现代文：薛瑶英的母亲赵娟，原本是岐王的爱妾，后来再嫁薛家，生了薛瑶英。
English: Xue Qianying's mother, Zhao Qian, was originally a beloved concubine of King Qi. Later, she remarried into the Xue family and gave birth to Xue Qianying.

古文：而幼以香啗之，故肌香。
现代文：她从小就给薛瑶英吃香料，因此薛瑶英肌体芳香。
English: She had given Xue Qianying spices since she was a child, so Xue Qianying's body was fragrant.

古文：及载纳为姬，处金丝之帐，却尘之褥。
现代文：待到薛瑶英被元载收纳为妾后，寝卧的是金丝帐，铺的是不招灰尘的褥子。
English: After Xue Qianying was taken in as a concubine by Yuan Zai, she slept in a gold-plated bedspread and was covered with filthy bedclothes.

古文：出自勾丽国。云却尘兽毛为之，其色红殷，光软无比。
现代文：却尘褥产自勾丽国，据说是用却尘兽毛制作的，殷红色，异常光亮柔软。
English: It is said that it is made of animal hair, and is bright red, with an unusually bright and soft crest.

古文：衣龙绡之衣，一袭无二三两，搏之不盈一握。
现代文：穿的是龙绡织成的衣服。一件衣服没有二三两重，将它挂起来握在掌中不满一把。
English: They are wearing clothes woven from tarragon. A piece of clothing does not have two or three layers, and it is not enough to hang it up and hold it in the palm of your hand.

古文：载以瑶英体轻，不胜重衣，故于异国求之。
现代文：元载认为薛瑶英身体特别轻盈娇丽，不堪穿太重的衣服，因此才从勾丽国寻索到这种龙绡衣。
English: Yuan Zang believed that Xue Qianying's body was particularly light and beautiful, and she could not bear to wear clothes that were too heavy. Therefore, she searched for this dragon embroidered dress from Goryeo.

古文：唯贾至、杨炎与载友善，故往往得见歌舞时。
现代文：元载在世时，他只有贾至、杨炎二位好友。他们二人常常能够亲眼看到薛瑶英唱歌跳舞。
English: When Yuan Zhao was alive, he only had two friends, Jia Zi and Yang Yan. The two of them were often able to see Xue Yingying singing and dancing with their own eyes.

古文：至因赠诗曰：舞怯铢衣重，笑疑桃脸开。
现代文：贾至曾赠诗赞美薛瑶英。诗是：舞怯铢衣重，笑疑桃脸开。
English: Jia Zhi once gave a poem to praise Xue Yingying. The poem is: Dance timidly, wear heavy clothes, smile suspiciously, and have a peach face.

古文：方知汉武帝，虚筑避风台。
现代文：方知汉武帝，虚筑避风台。
English: Fang Zhi Hanwu Emperor, built a shelter from the wind.

古文：炎亦作长歌褒美，其略曰，雪面淡娥天上女，凤箫鸾翅欲飞去。
现代文：杨炎也作一首长诗赞美薛瑶英。这首诗是这样的：雪面淡娥天上女，凤箫鸾翅欲飞去。
English: Yang Yan also wrote a long poem to praise Xue Yingying. This poem is as follows: The snow is pale, the sky is pale, the phoenix's wings want to fly away.

古文：玉钗翘碧步无尘，纤腰如柳不胜春。
现代文：玉钗翘碧步无尘，纤腰如柳不胜春。
English: Tamakazura has a dust-free gait and a slender waist like a willow tree.

古文：瑶英善为巧媚，载惑之，怠于相务。
现代文：薛瑶英非常会巧笑献媚，元载沉湎在她的妖娆美色之中，宰相的政务也懒得去处理。
English: Xue Qianying is very good at smiling and flattering. She has been immersed in her enchanting beauty for a long time, and the prime minister's government affairs are too lazy to deal with.

古文：而瑶英之父曰宗本，兄曰从义，与赵娟递相出入。以构贿赂，号为关节。
现代文：而且，薛瑶英的父亲薛宗本，哥哥薛从义，与她的母亲赵娟，交替着出入于相府，来收索贿赂，说是给走门路。
English: Moreover, Xue Qianying's father, Xue Zongben, brother, Xue Congyi, and her mother, Zhao Yao, alternately entered and left the sister-in-law's house to solicit bribes, saying that they would give them a way out.

古文：更与中书主吏卓倩等为心腹。
现代文：更严重的是，他们跟中书王吏卓倩等人互相勾结、狼狈为奸。
English: What is even more serious is that they colluded and conspired with Zhuo Jun, the chief official of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and others.

古文：而宗本辈以事告者，载未尝不从之。
现代文：而这些人跟元载不论提出什么要求，元载从未有过不应允的事情。
English: And no matter what requests these people made to Yuan Zang, Yuan Zang never did anything that was not acceptable.

古文：天下赍货求官职者，无不恃载雄势，指薛卓为梯媒。
现代文：当时，所有带着钱物贿赂他们谋求官职的人，都依仗元载的威赫势力，将薛家的人与卓倩之流当作媒介和阶梯。
English: At that time, all those who bribed them with money and goods to seek official positions relied on the Weihai forces of the Yuan Dynasty to use the Xue family and Zhuo Xi as a medium and a ladder.

古文：及载死，瑶英为里人妻。
现代文：待到元载被朝廷处死后，薛瑶英又嫁给闾里的一般人家作妻室了。
English: After the death of Yuan Zai, who was executed by the imperial court, Xue Qianying married a commoner from Qili.

古文：论者以元载丧令德，自一妇人致也。
现代文：评论这件事情的人认为：元载丧失美德，是从宠溺一个女人而导至来的！
English: People commenting on this matter believe that: the loss of virtue is derived from pampering a woman!

古文：裴冕
现代文：裴冕
English: Fei Guorong

古文：裴冕代裴鸿渐秉政，小吏以俸钱文簿白之。
现代文：裴冕代替裴鸿渐处理政务，属下的小官吏将自己的薪水、办公用的纸张、簿册白送给他。
English: In place of Pei Hongxuan, Pei Guan handled government affairs, and minor officials under him gave him their salaries, office paper, and books.

古文：冕固子弟，喜见于色，其嗜财若此。
现代文：裴冕将这些东西拿给自家的年轻人看，而且喜形于色。裴冕爱财竟然到了这种地步。
English: Fei Rong showed these things to the young people in his family, and they were overjoyed. Fei Rong's love of money had reached such a level.

古文：冕性本侈靡，好尚车服。
现代文：裴冕生性好奢华铺张，崇尚豪华车舆服装。
English: Fei Guanzhong is good at luxury and ostentation, advocating luxury cars and clothing.

古文：名马数百金铸者十匹。
现代文：他家养着十匹名贵的马，每匹都耗费几百金为它制备鞍辔。
English: His family kept ten valuable horses, each of which cost hundreds of gold to make saddles for.

古文：每会客，滋味品数，多有不知名者。
现代文：每次宴请宾客，都上好多菜肴，有很多的菜都是稀有的，不知它叫什么名字。
English: Every time you invite guests to a banquet, you serve a lot of dishes, many of which are rare, and I don't know what it's called.

古文：于頔
现代文：于頔
English: Yu Zhen

古文：于頔为襄州，点山灯，一上油二千石。
现代文：于頔在襄州为官，喜欢点山灯，一次往灯碗里加油就用了二千石油。
English: Yu Jun, a government official in Xiangzhou, likes to light mountain lanterns. It takes two thousand barrels of oil to refuel a bowl of lanterns.

古文：李昌夔为荆南，打猎，大修粉饰。
现代文：李昌夔在荆南为官，他喜欢打猎，而且每次出猎都大势铺排。
English: Li Changyu is an official in Jingnan. He likes hunting, and every time he goes hunting, he has a big plan.

古文：其妻独孤氏，亦出女队二千人，皆著乾红紫绣袄子锦鞍鞯。
现代文：李昌夔的妻子独孤氏，也带着二千名妇女组成的打猎队一同去打猎。每个人都穿着深红色绣着紫花的袄，铺着彩锦鞍鞯。
English: Mr. Lee's wife, Ms. Duk Guo, also went hunting with a hunting party of 2,000 women, each wearing a crimson sash embroidered with purple flowers and covered with colorful brocade saddles.

古文：此郡因而空耗。
现代文：因为他们夫妻这样铺排奢华，荆南郡很快被耗费一空。
English: Because of the couple's lavish lifestyle, Jingnan County was quickly exhausted.

古文：王涯
现代文：王涯
English: Wang Ya

古文：文宗朝，宰相王涯奢豪。
现代文：唐文宗李昂在位期间，宰相王涯极其奢侈豪华。
English: During the reign of Tang Wenzong Liang, Prime Minister Wang Yao was extremely extravagant and luxurious.

古文：庭穿一井，金玉为栏，严其锁钥。
现代文：王涯在他的宰相府庭院中凿一口井，围井的栏杆都是用黄金、玉石制作的。而且用后就用锁头锁上，严加看管。
English: Wang Ya chiseled a well in the courtyard of his Prime Minister's Office. The railings surrounding the well are made of gold and jade. And after use, they are locked with a lock and strictly guarded.

古文：天下宝玉真珠，悉投入中。
现代文：他将普天下的珠宝玉石收刮来后，都投进这口井里。
English: He scraped all the world's jewels and gems and threw them into this well.

古文：汲其水，供涯所饮。
现代文：让仆人汲取这口井里的水供他自己饮用。
English: Let the servant draw water from this well for his own use.

古文：未几犯法，为大兵枭戮，赤其族。
现代文：不长时间，王涯触犯了刑律，被斩首示众，杀灭他全族人。
English: Not long after, Wang Ya violated the criminal law and was beheaded in public, killing his entire family.

古文：涯骨肉色并如金。
现代文：王涯的骨肉都呈黄金的颜色。
English: Wang Ya's bones and flesh are golden in color.

古文：李德裕
现代文：李德裕
English: Li Deyu

古文：武宗朝，宰相李德裕奢侈。
现代文：唐武宗李炎在位期间，宰相李德裕非常奢侈。
English: During the reign of Tang Wuzong Li Yan, Prime Minister Li Deyu was very extravagant.

古文：每食一杯羹，其费约三万。为杂以珠玉宝贝，雄黄朱砂，煎汁为之。
现代文：他食用的一杯菜羹价值三万钱，是掺杂珠玉等各种宝物，再加上雄黄、朱砂等用火煎成汁液做的。
English: A cup of bean soup that he consumed was worth 30,000 yuan. It was made by mixing pearls and other precious materials, as well as yakitori and cinnamon, and frying them in fire to make a juice.

古文：过三煎则弃其柤。
现代文：煎过三次后，就将掺杂的珠玉等扔掉不要。
English: After frying three times, do not throw away the doped gems.

古文：杨收
现代文：杨收
English: Yang Jie

古文：咸通中，崔安潜以清德峻望。
现代文：唐懿宗咸通年间，崔安因为高尚的品德在社会上享有很高的声望。
English: During Tang Xizong's reign, Cui An enjoyed a high reputation in society for his noble character.

古文：为镇时风，宰相杨收师重焉。
现代文：为了安定时风抬高自己的威望，宰相杨收想从师礼敬重崔安。
English: In order to stabilize the situation and enhance his prestige, Prime Minister Yang Jiechi wanted to learn from and respect Cui An.

古文：欲设食相召，无由可入。
现代文：要宴请他，却苦于没有理由与借口。
English: There is no reason or excuse to invite him to a banquet.

古文：先请崔公之门人，方便为言，至于再三，终未许，杨意转坚。
现代文：最初，杨收请崔安的弟子门客给从中勾通斡旋，再三邀请，崔安都没有答应，但杨收非要请崔安赴宴不可。
English: At first, Yang Jie invited the disciple and protégé of Cui An to mediate between them. He repeatedly invited Cui An, but Cui An did not agree. However, Yang Jie had to invite Cui An to the banquet.

古文：稍稍亦有流言，或劝崔曰：时相不可坚拒。
现代文：这层意思传出来，有人劝说崔安说：杨收现在是一朝宰相，不可以一门绝拒他的邀请啊！
English: When word of this came out, someone persuaded Cui An to say: Yang Hui is now the prime minister, you can't just refuse his invitation!

古文：不得已而许之。
现代文：于是，崔安才勉强应允了。
English: As a result, Cui An reluctantly agreed.

古文：杨甚喜，遽令排比，然后请日祗候。
现代文：杨收得知这一消息后，非常高兴。马上命令家人安排准备，然后定好宴请的日期在府上恭候。
English: After learning this news, Yang Hui was very happy. He immediately ordered his family members to arrange preparations, and then set a date for the banquet to be held in the house.

古文：先是崔公亲情间人，亦与杨通旧。欲求事，请公言之，终难启口。
现代文：起先，崔安有位熟人跟杨收也是旧交，有事欲求杨收，曾请崔安给说说，始终难于启口。
English: At first, Cui An had an acquaintance who was also an old friend of Yang Hui. When Yang Hui wanted something, he asked Cui An to tell him, but it was always difficult to open up.

古文：将止杨之召，谓亲情曰：修行今召我食。
现代文：现在崔安已答应到杨家赴宴，于是对他的这位熟人说：现在杨收邀请我去他家赴宴。
English: Now Cui An has agreed to go to Yang's house for a banquet, so he said to his acquaintance: Now Yang Hui invited me to go to his house for a banquet.

古文：明日，尔但与侧近祗候，此际必言之。
现代文：待到明天我去他家时，你也陪同一块儿去，在我的旁边恭候。
English: Wait until tomorrow, when I go to his house, you go with me and wait by my side.

古文：倘或要见，尔便须即来。
现代文：这次我一定跟杨收提及你的这件事，倘若他提出要见你，你就马上过来。
English: This time I'll be sure to mention your case to Yang Hui, and if he asks to see you, you should come right away.

古文：及崔到杨舍，见厅馆铺陈华焕，左右执事皆双鬟珠翠，崔公不乐。
现代文：崔安到了杨府后，但见厅堂楼馆布置得豪华璀璨，左右的招待人员，一律是头梳双鬟，戴珠叠翠的年轻使女，他很不高兴。
English: After Cui An arrived at Yangfu, however, he was very unhappy to see that the hall of the hall was luxuriously decorated, and the reception staff on both sides were all young maids with combed hair and beads.

古文：饮馔及水陆之珍。
现代文：开宴后，上的菜肴都是山珍海味，极为名贵。
English: After the banquet, the dishes on the table were all mountain and sea delicacies, which are extremely precious.

古文：台盘前置一香炉，烟出成楼阁之状。
现代文：桌案前边放着一只香炉，里面有屡屡香烟燃出，烟形呈楼阁的样子。
English: In front of the desk, there is an incense burner. There are many cigarettes burning inside, and the shape of the smoke looks like a mansion.

古文：崔别闻一香气，似非烟炉及珠翠所有者。
现代文：崔安还闻到另外一种香味，似乎不是这只香炉和珠翠等饰物发出的香气，心里暗暗诧异。
English: Cui An also smelled another kind of fragrance, which did not seem to be the fragrance emitted by the incense burner and beads and other ornaments, and she was secretly surprised.

古文：心异之，时时四顾，终不谕香气。
现代文：不时地四处搜寻，始终没有找到这股异香是从哪里来的。
English: They searched everywhere from time to time, but never found where the strange smell was coming from.

古文：移时，杨曰：相公意似别有所瞩？
现代文：过了一会儿，杨收问：崔老是不是在查找什么？
English: After a while, Yang asked: Is Cui Lao looking for something?

古文：崔公曰：某觉一香气异常酷烈。
现代文：崔安说：我闻到一股香气特别浓烈，不知这香气是从哪来的？
English: Choi An said, "I smelled a strong aroma of cinnamon. I don't know where this aroma came from.

古文：杨顾左右，令于厅东间阁子内缕金案上，取一白角碟子，盛一漆球子。呈崔公曰：此是罽宾国香。
现代文：杨收招呼使女仆妇，让她们从厅堂东间屋里的缕金桌案上，拿过来一只白角碟子，碟子上装着一只漆球子，端过来给崔安看，说：这是罽宾国进献来的香料。
English: Yang Hui called for the maidservants and asked them to take a white-cornered plate from the gold-plated table in the hall's east room. The plate contained a lacquer ball. They brought it to Cui An and said, "This is the spice that was offered by the State of Zibo."

古文：崔大奇之。宴罢返归，竟不说得亲情求事。
现代文：崔安非常惊奇，宴会结束后就回家中来了，竟然忘了跟杨收谈他的这位熟人求他的那件事情。
English: Cui An was very surprised when he came home after the banquet and forgot to talk to Yang about what his acquaintance had asked him to do.

古文：据《太宗实录云》，罽宾国进拘物头花，香闻数里，疑此近是。
现代文：据《太宗实录》上说：罽宾国进献拘物头花，它散发出来的香气在几里地之内都可以闻到。
English: According to the "Taizong Record," it was said that: "The state of Yibin presented the head flower to the emperor, and the fragrance it emitted could be smelled from several miles away."

古文：又见杨门人说，相公每下朝，常弄一玉婆罗门子。
现代文：怀疑宴席上杨收让家人端给崔安看的漆球子，大概就是这种香料。又听杨收的弟子们说：宰相每天下朝后，时常玩赏一只玉制的婆罗门子，有几寸高，身体晶莹剔透精巧可爱。
English: He suspected that the lacquer ball that Yang Jie had his family members show to Cui An at the banquet was probably this spice. He also heard Yang Jie's disciples say that the prime minister often played with a golden Brahmin, a few inches tall, with a crystal clear, delicate and lovely body, every morning.

古文：高数寸，莹彻精巧可爱，云是于阗王内库中物。同昌公主
现代文：说是于阗国王宫内库收藏的宝物。同昌公主唐懿宗咸通九年，同昌公主出嫁。
English: It is said to be a treasure from the collection of the treasury of the palace of King Yoo. Princess Tongchang married in the ninth year of the reign of King Hamdang of Tang Dynasty.

古文：咸通九年，同昌公主出降。宅于广化里，锡钱五百万贯。
现代文：公主的宅第在京城长安的广化里，皇上赐给她五百万贯钱。
English: The empress gave her five million yuan for the princess's residence in the Chang'an district of Beijing.

古文：更罄内库珍宝，以实其宅。
现代文：而且将宫中内库珍藏的各种珍宝几乎都给了同昌公主，让她用这些珍宝来装修她的新宅。
English: Moreover, he gave almost all the treasures from the palace treasury to Princess Tongchang, and let her use these treasures to decorate her new home.

古文：而房栊户牖，无不以众宝饰之。
现代文：公主的新宅，房屋的门窗没有不用这些珍宝装饰的。
English: The doors and windows of the princess's new home could not have been decorated without these treasures.

古文：更以金银为井栏药臼，食柜水槽。铛釜盆瓮之属，缕金为笊篱箕筐。
现代文：更为奢华的是，宅内的水井，捣药的药臼，贮放食物的柜厨，存放饮用水的水槽，以及铛、釜、盆、瓮等炊具，都是用黄金、白银铸制的。
English: What is even more luxurious is that the well in the house, the mortar for mixing the medicine, the cupboard for storing food, the sink for storing drinking water, and the cooking utensils such as the ladle, kettle, pot, and ladle are all cast in gold and silver.

古文：制水晶火齐琉璃玳瑁等为床，搘以金龟银鹿。
现代文：用金丝编制笊篱、簸箕、箩筐，用水晶、火齐珠、琉璃、玳瑁等镶嵌床铺，床脚下支着黄金、白银制作的龟、鹿。
English: Hedges, rattan and wicker baskets are made of gold wire, beds are inlaid with crystal, fire beads, glaze and enamel, and turtles and deer made of gold and silver are propped up at the foot of the bed.

古文：更琢五色玉为器皿什物，合百宝为圆案。
现代文：还用五彩玉石雕琢成器皿等用具，将各种珍宝镶嵌在一块制成圆桌。
English: In addition, a round table was made by inlaying all kinds of treasures in one piece with tools such as vessels and dishes carved from multicolored jade.

古文：赐金麦银粟共数斛，此皆太宗朝条支国所献也。
现代文：皇上还赏赐给同昌公主黄金制成的麦子，白银制成的粟米，一共好几斗。这些金麦、银粟，都是唐太宗在位期间条支国进献来的。
English: The emperor also gave several buckets of golden wheat and silver corn to Princess Tongchang. These golden wheat and silver corn were brought from Jochi Province during the reign of Emperor Taizong of Tang.

古文：堂中设连珠之帐，却寒之帘，犀簟牙席，龙凤绣。
现代文：堂屋中架设连珠帐子，悬挂却寒门廉，铺犀牛皮褥子，睡用象牙做装饰的竹席，以及乡有龙凤图案的床上用品。
English: In the hall, there are beaded curtains, hanging chandeliers, rhinoceros-leather bedding, bamboo seats decorated with ivory, and bedding with dragon and phoenix patterns.

古文：连珠帐，续真珠以成也。
现代文：连珠帐，是将珍珠串起来编制成的。
English: A pearl necklace is made by stringing pearls together.

古文：却寒帘，类玳瑁斑，有紫色，云却寒鸟骨之所为也。但未知出于何国。
现代文：却寒廉，类似玳瑁花斑，紫色的，据说是用却寒鸟骨作成的，但是不知道产在哪个国家。
English: It is said to be made from the bones of the chaga bird, but it is not known in which country it was made.

古文：更有鹧鸪枕、翡翠匣、神丝绣被。
现代文：还有鹧鸪枕，翡翠匣，神丝绣被等华贵物品。
English: There are also enamel pillows, jade boxes, silk embroidered quilts and other luxury items.

古文：其枕以七宝合为鹧鸪之斑，其匣饰以翠羽。
现代文：鹧鸪枕，用七种珍宝镶嵌成鹧鸪图案。翡翠匣上面装饰有翠羽。
English: The chrysanthemum pillow is inlaid with seven kinds of precious stones to form a chrysanthemum pattern. The jade box is decorated with emerald feathers.

古文：神丝绣被，三千鸳鸯，仍间以奇花异叶，精巧华丽，可得而知矣。
现代文：神丝绣被上面，绣有三千对鸳鸯，期间绣上奇花异叶，精巧华丽可想而知啊！
English: The divine silk embroidered quilt above, embroidered with three thousand pairs of braids, embroidered with exotic flowers and leaves during the period, exquisite and gorgeous can be imagined!

古文：其上缀以灵粟之珠如粟粒，五色辉焕。
现代文：而且绣被上还缝缀上灵粟珠。这种珠子只有米粒那么大，五色斑斓，耀人眼目。
English: Moreover, the embroidered quilt is also embroidered with mica beads. These beads are only the size of a grain of rice, five-colored and dazzling.

古文：更有蠲忿犀如意玉。
现代文：还有用犀骨制作的妆饰品，带上它后可以使你消除忿怒。
English: There is also a rhinoceros bone ornament that you can wear to dispel your anger.

古文：其犀圆如弹丸，入土不朽烂；带之，令人蠲忿怒。如意玉类枕头，上有七孔，云通明之象。
现代文：它的样子，犀骨雕琢成如弹丸样的圆珠，埋入土中不会朽烂。还有用如意玉做的枕头之类的东西，上面有七个孔，是通明的形状。
English: Its appearance, the rhinoceros bone carved into a round ball like a projectile, buried in the soil will not rot. There are also things like pillows made of rhodiola, with seven holes on top, a transparent shape.

古文：更有瑟瑟幙，纹布巾、火蚕绵、九玉钗。
现代文：还有碧色宝石帐幕，绞布巾，火蚕绵，九玉钗等物。
English: There is also a turquoise gemstone tent curtain, a handkerchief, a silk scarf, a nine-jeweled brooch and other items.

古文：其幕色如瑟瑟，阔三尺，长一百尺，轻明虚薄，无以为比。
现代文：这件帐幕颜色象碧色宝石，宽三尺，长一百尺，非常轻、薄，而且透明，是无以伦比的。
English: And the tabernacle was three cubits wide, and a hundred cubits long; and the color of the tabernacle was like the color of a beryl stone: and the lightness, and the thickness, and the clearness, of it, were without parallel.

古文：向空张之，则疏朗之纹，如碧丝之贯其珠。
现代文：将它在空中张挂起来后，纹络疏朗，象有碧丝穿着珍珠一样，虽然遇到下大雨、暴雨，也一点不能淋湿它。
English: After hanging it up in the air, the texture is sparse, as if there is a Beatrice wearing pearls, although it encounters heavy rain, heavy rain, it can not be wet at all.

古文：虽大雨暴降，不能沾湿，云以蛟人瑞香膏所傅故也。纹布中即手巾也，洁白如雪，光软绝伦，拭水不濡，用之弥年，亦未尝垢。
现代文：听说是用睡香膏涂搽的缘故。绞布巾，就是手巾，象雪一样的洁白，光亮柔软没有东西能和它相比。而且用它擦拭手脸，沾水不湿，用一年也沾不上灰尘污垢。
English: It is said that it is due to the use of sleeping balm. The handkerchief is a hand towel, as white as snow, shiny and soft, nothing can compare with it. And it is used to wipe the face of the hand, it does not get wet with water, and it does not get dirty with dust for a year.

古文：二物称得鬼谷国。
现代文：这两件东西，据说是在鬼谷国得到的。
English: These two items are said to have been obtained in the Demon Valley.

古文：火蚕绵出火洲，絮衣一袭，止用一两，稍过度，则熇蒸之气不可奈。
现代文：火蚕绵产自火洲，用它絮一件棉衣，止用一两就够了，稍稍用得多了些，穿在身上烘烤得你就受不了。
English: The silkworms come from the volcanic island of Tierra del Fuego. You can use one or two of them to make a cotton garment, but if you use a few more, you won't be able to stand being baked while wearing it.

古文：九玉钗上刻九鸾，皆九色，其上有字曰玉儿，精巧奇妙，殆非人制。
现代文：九玉钗上雕刻有九只鸾凤，呈九种颜色，它上面镌刻着玉儿两个字。制作得精致、巧妙、奇特，是人工完全制作不出来的。
English: The nine-jeweled gong is engraved with nine dragonflies and phoenixes in nine colors, and the word "玉兒" is engraved on the top of it. It is made delicately, skillfully, and strangely, and cannot be made completely by hand.

古文：有得于金陵者，因以献。公主酧之甚厚。
现代文：有人在金陵得到这只九玉钗，将它进献给同昌公主，公主赏赐给他特别丰厚的酬谢。
English: Someone in Jinling obtained this nine-jeweled gong and presented it to Princess Tongchang, who rewarded him with a particularly rich reward.

古文：一日昼寝，梦绛衣奴传语云：南齐潘淑妃取九鸾钗。
现代文：一天，白日里同昌公主躺在床上小憩，梦见一位身穿紫绛色衣服的使女传话给她，说南齐的潘淑妃来取这只九玉钗。
English: One day, Princess Tongchang was taking a nap on her bed during the day. She dreamed that a maid dressed in purple and indigo sent her a message saying that Lady Pan of Nanqi had come to collect the nine-jeweled dragonfly.

古文：及觉，具以梦中之言告于左右。
现代文：梦醒后，公主将梦中的情形告诉给她身边的人。
English: After waking up, the princess told the people around her what had happened in the dream.

古文：公主薨，其钗亦不知其处。
现代文：同昌公主死后，这只九鸾钗也不知道上哪里去了。
English: After the death of Princess Tongchang, this nine-year-old peregrine falcon did not know where to go.

古文：韦氏异其事，遂以实语诸门人。
现代文：同昌公主的母亲韦氏对这件事感到奇异，就将情况如实告诉了诸位门客。
English: Ms. Wei, the mother of Tongchang Princess, felt strange about this matter and told the guests the truth.

古文：或曰：玉儿即潘妃小字。
现代文：有的门客说：玉儿即潘妃的小名。
English: Some devotees said: "Yule is the nickname of Panfei."

古文：逮诸珍异，不可具载。
现代文：得到奇珍异宝，不可以将它们都佩戴在身上。
English: If you get rare treasures, you can't wear them all on your body.

古文：自汉唐公主出降之盛，未之有也。
现代文：自汉、唐以来，皇家公主出嫁，从未有过象同昌公主这样盛大奢华的。
English: Since the Han Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty, royal princesses have never married in such a grand and luxurious way as Princess Tongchang.

古文：公主乘七宝步辇，四角缀五色锦香囊。囊中贮辟邪香瑞麟香金凤香，此皆异国献者。
现代文：同昌公主乘坐七宝步辇。辇的四角缀有五色锦香囊，囊里装的是辟邪香、瑞麟香、金凤香，都是外域国家进献的贡品。
English: Princess Tongchang rode on a cloisonné carriage. The four corners of the carriage were decorated with five-coloured brocade incense holders. The holders contained incense sticks, incense sticks, and incense sticks, all of which were tributes from foreign countries.

古文：仍杂以龙脑金屑，镂水晶玛瑙辟尘犀为龙凤花木状。
现代文：其间掺糅着龙脑香料金屑粉等。辇上用水晶、玛瑙、避尘犀等宝物镂成龙凤花木的各种形状，上面都络洁着珍珠、玳瑁等。
English: Dragon's brain incense powder is mixed in the middle. Treasures such as crystal, agate, and mugwort are sprinkled on top to create various shapes of dragon and phoenix flowers and trees, all of which are topped with pearls, enamel, and more.

古文：其上悉络真珠玳瑁，更以全丝为流苏，雕轻玉为浮动。
现代文：辇上的流苏是用金丝制作的，并且用轻玉雕刻成各种饰物。
English: The tassels on the crotch are made of gold wire, and are carved into various ornaments with corundum.

古文：每一出游，则芬香街巷，晶光耀日，观者眩其目。
现代文：同昌公主乘坐这具步辇，每次出游都满街溢香，莹光耀日。耀得围观的人眼睛都睁不开。
English: Princess Tongchang rode on this palanquin, and every time she went out, the streets were filled with fragrance and the sun shone brightly. The onlookers were dazzled and couldn't keep their eyes open.

古文：时有中贵人，买酒于广化旗亭，忽相谓曰：坐来香气？
现代文：当时有宫中的太监到广化里酒楼来买酒，忽然互相询问：咱们坐在这里，哪来的香气？
English: At that time, some eunuchs from the palace came to the Guanghua Restaurant to buy wine, and suddenly asked each other: We are sitting here, where does the aroma come from?

古文：何太异也？
现代文：怎么这样特殊的香啊？
English: Why such a special fragrance?

古文：同席曰：岂非龙脑乎？
现代文：同桌的一个太监说：这不是龙脑香吗？
English: One of the eunuchs at the table said, "Isn't this the dragon's brain incense?"

古文：曰：非也。
现代文：另一个回答说：不是龙脑香。
English: Another replied: "It's not camphor.

古文：予幼给事于嫔妃宫，故此常闻此。
现代文：我小时候为嫔妃宫中办事，经常闻到这种异香。
English: I used to work for the Imperial Household Agency when I was a child, and I often smelled this strange scent.

古文：未知今日何由而致。
现代文：但不知道今天是什么缘由在这里闻到了。
English: But I don't know why I smelled it here today.

古文：因顾问当垆者，云：公主步辇夫，以锦衣质酒于此。中贵人共请视之，益叹异焉。
现代文：太监们更加惊异，连连感叹不息。同昌公主身体患病后，懿宗皇上每天都派人赐送宫中的御膳和汤药。
English: The eunuchs were even more surprised and continued to sigh. After Princess Tongchang fell ill, Emperor Taizong sent someone every day to bring her imperial meals and soup medicine.

古文：上日赐御馔汤药，而道路之使相属。
现代文：从皇宫到同昌公主住的广化里，沿途送食品菜肴和汤药的使臣接连不断。
English: From the Imperial Palace to Guanghua Village, where the Tongchang Princess lived, envoys continuously sent food and soup along the way.

古文：其馔有消灵炙、红虬脯。
现代文：皇上赐送的御菜有消灵炙、红虬脯。
English: The side dishes presented by the Emperor include Shireen broiled fish and red snapper.

古文：其酒则有凝露浆、桂花醅。
现代文：赐送的御酒有凝露浆、桂花醅。
English: The gift of sake included condensed milk and osmanthus syrup.

古文：其茶则有绿花、紫英之号。
现代文：赐送的御茶有绿花、紫英等。
English: The gift of tea includes green flowers, purple yellows and more.

古文：灵消炙，一羊之肉，取四两，虽经暑毒，终不臭败。
现代文：消灵炙，是一只羊的肉，只取四两，经过暑天毒热，也不腐烂变臭。
English: Xie Ling Bao, is a lamb meat, only take four pairs, after the hot weather, it does not rot and stink.

古文：红虬脯，非虬也。
现代文：红虬脯，不是真虬。
English: Red snapper, not real snapper.

古文：但贮于盘中，缕徤如红丝，高一尺，以筋抑之，无三四分，撤即复故。
现代文：但是将它盛在盘子里，健缕象红丝，高一尺，用筷子将它压按，没有三四分厚；不压了，有恢复原状。
English: But put it on a plate, the healthy strands are like red silk, one foot high, press it with chopsticks, not three or four minutes thick; do not press, there is a return to the original state.

古文：其诸品味，他人莫能识。
现代文：其它的食品馔肴，别人都不认识，叫不上名称。
English: Other foods and dishes are unknown to others and cannot be named.

古文：而公主家人餐饫，如里中糠粃。
现代文：而同昌公主的仆人每顿饭都吃的是这些宫中御膳，就象市井百姓人家吃糖咽菜一样平常。
English: But Princess Tongchang's servants ate these imperial meals for every meal, just as it was common for commoners to eat sugar-coated noodles.

古文：一日大会韦氏之族于广化里，玉馔具陈。
现代文：一天，所有韦氏家族的人都聚合在广化里同昌公主府上。
English: One day, all the people of the Wei family gathered at the Tongchang Princess House in Guanghua.

古文：暑气将甚，公主命取澄水帛以蘸之，挂于南轩，满座皆思挟纩。
现代文：桌上摆满了各种名贵的菜肴，酷热的暑气让人难以忍受。同昌公主命人拿出来澄水帛蘸上水后，挂在南窗上面，满座的人顿觉凉气透骨，都想披上棉衣遮寒。
English: The table was filled with all kinds of precious dishes, and the scorching heat was unbearable. After Princess Tongchang ordered someone to take out clear water and sprinkle it on the water, it was hung above the south window. A full seat of people suddenly felt cool through the bones, and they all wanted to put on cotton clothes to cover the cold.

古文：澄水帛长八九尺，似布而细，明薄可鉴。
现代文：澄水棉，有八九尺长，象布比布细，薄得透明可以照见人。
English: Clear water cotton, eighty-nine feet long, thinner than elephant cloth, so thin and transparent that it can be seen by the human eye.

古文：云其中有龙涎，故能消暑也。
现代文：据说其中有龙涎，因此夏天里能消暑解热啊。
English: It is said that there are dragon flies among them, so they can relieve heat and heat in the summer.

古文：韦氏诸宗好为叶子戏，夜则公主以红琉璃盘，盛夜光珠，令僧祁捧于堂中，则光明如昼焉。
现代文：韦氏家族里的人喜爱玩纸牌。到了晚上，同昌公主用红琉璃盘子，盛装上夜光珠，让僧祁用手端着站立在堂屋中间，夜光珠照耀屋中象白天一样。
English: People in the Wei family like to play cards. In the evening, Princess Tongchang used a red-glazed glass plate to decorate a glow-in-the-dark bead, and asked the monk to stand in the middle of the hall with his hand. The glow-in-the-dark bead shone in the hall like daylight.

古文：公主始有疾，召术士米宾为禳法，乃以香蜡烛遗之。
现代文：同昌公主刚刚患病时，召来术士米宾为公主祭神怯病，送给他香蜡烛作酬谢。
English: When Princess Tongchang had just fallen ill, she summoned the sorcerer Mi Bin to offer a sacrifice to the god of fear for the princess and gave him a scented candle as a reward.

古文：米氏之邻人，觉香气异常，或诣门诘其故，宾具以事对。
现代文：米宾拿回家中点燃后，米宾的邻人闻到一股异常的香气。有的邻人来到他家问是怎么回事？
English: After Mibin took it home and lit it, Mibin's neighbors smelled an unusual aroma. Some neighbors came to his house to ask what was going on.

古文：出其烛，方二寸，长尺余，其上施五彩。
现代文：未宾将实际情况告诉他，并拿出香蜡烛给邻人看。这种香蜡烛二寸见方，一尺多长，上面饰有五彩纹饰。
English: The uninvited guest told him the actual situation and took out a scented candle to show the neighbors. This scented candle is two inches square, more than a foot long, and is decorated with multicolored patterns.

古文：爇之，竟夕不尽。郁烈之气，可闻于百步余。
现代文：点燃它，一个夜晚也燃不尽，散发出来的浓郁强烈的香气，百步开外都能闻到。
English: If you light it, it will not burn out in one night. The rich, strong aroma emitted by it can be smelled from a hundred paces away.

古文：烟出于上，即成楼阁台殿之状。
现代文：燃出的蜡烟，在蜡上空形成楼阁殿台的形状。
English: The smoke from the burning wax forms the shape of a mansion above the wax.

古文：或云，烛中有蜃脂也。
现代文：有人说蜡烛里面含有蜃脂的缘故啊！
English: Some people say it's because the candle contains rouge!

古文：公主疾既甚，医者欲难其药，奏云：得红蜜白猿膏，食之可愈。
现代文：同昌公主的病越来越重了，御医很难再给她开药。御医上奏懿宗皇上，说：需要用红蜜白猿膏，吃了即可病愈。
English: Princess Tongchang's illness became more and more serious, and it was difficult for the doctor to give her any more medicine. The doctor appealed to Emperor Zongzong and said, "You need to use red honey and white monkey balm. If you eat it, you will be cured."

古文：上令检内库，得红蜜数石，本兠离国所贡。
现代文：懿宗皇帝命令宫人盘检宫中内库，找到红蜜几石，是兠离国进献来的贡品。
English: Emperor Yongzong ordered palace officials to inspect the palace's internal storeroom and found several stones of red honey, which was a tribute brought from abroad.

古文：白猿膏数瓮，本南海所献。
现代文：白猿膏几瓮，是南海进献来的贡品。
English: A few jars of white monkey paste, a tribute from Nanhai.

古文：虽日加药饵，终无其验，公主薨。
现代文：虽然每天都用红蜜、白猿膏为药饵，始终没有收到效验。同昌公主病死，懿宗皇帝极其哀痛。
English: Although red honey and white monkey ointment were used as medicine every day, they never received an efficacy test. Princess Tongchang died of illness, and Emperor Xizong was extremely saddened.

古文：上哀痛，遂自制挽歌词，令朝臣继和。
现代文：皇上亲自为公主写挽歌的歌词，并让满朝大臣都跟他一块儿写。
English: The emperor himself wrote the lyrics of the elegy for the princess, and had all the imperial ministers write them with him.

古文：反庭祭曰，百司内官，皆用金玉饰车舆服玩，以焚于韦氏庭，韦家争取灰以择金宝。
现代文：待到公主的遗体运回韦氏家中，祭日那天，朝廷中的文武百官，都用黄金、玉石等为饰物作车舆服玩等祭品，在韦氏庭院中焚烧。韦家人争抢着搂取焚烧后的灰烬，在里面寻拣黄金、珠宝。
English: After the body of the princess was transported back to the Wei family, on the day of the festival, all the civil and military officials in the imperial court used gold, jade, etc. as ornaments to make cars, clothes, toys, and other offerings, and burned them in the Wei courtyard. The Wei family scrambled to grab the ashes after burning, and searched for gold and jewelry inside.

古文：及葬于东郊，上与淑妃御延兴门。
现代文：待到同昌公主下葬东郊那天，懿宗皇帝与同昌公主母亲韦淑妃，都亲临延兴门。
English: On the day of Princess Tongchang's burial in the eastern suburb, Emperor Yongzong and Princess Tongchang's mother, Princess Wei Shu, both visited Yanxingmen.

古文：出内库金骆驼凤凰麒麟各高数尺，以为仪从。
现代文：从宫中内库拿出金骆驼、金凤凰、金麒麟，每只都高几尺，作为仪从。
English: The golden camel, the golden phoenix and the golden unicorn, each several feet high, were taken from the treasury inside the palace and used as props.

古文：其衣服玩具，与人无异，每一物皆至一百二十舆。
现代文：至于陪葬的衣服、玩具，跟活人使用的一样。每一种陪葬物品都有一百二十车。
English: As for the burial clothes and toys, they are the same as those used by living people. There are one hundred and twenty carts for each type of burial goods.

古文：刻木为数殿，龙凤花木人畜之众者不可胜计。
现代文：还用木雕刻宫殿好几座。雕刻的龙、凤、花、木、人、畜，无计其数。
English: He also carved several palaces out of wood, with countless dragons, phoenixes, flowers, trees, people and animals.

古文：以绛罗绮绣，络以金珠瑟瑟，为帐幙者千队。
现代文：用绛罗绮绣作帐幕，上面穿络黄金、珍珠、碧色宝石，这样的车舆有一千多队。
English: There were more than a thousand chariots with curtains embroidered with scarlet, overlaid with gold, with pearls, and with emeralds.

古文：其幢节伞盖，弥街翳日。
现代文：丧葬队伍所持的旗帐仪仗，布满街市，遮蔽天日。
English: The flags held by the funeral procession covered the streets and blocked out the sun.

古文：旌旗珂珮卤簿，率多加等。
现代文：皇帝、皇后的饰有白色玉石佩饰的旌旗仪仗，都比往日增加了许多。
English: The number of emperors and empresses wearing white jade-decorated imperial banners has greatly increased.

古文：敕紫尼及女道士为侍从引翼。
现代文：懿宗皇帝御敕身着紫服的尼姑和女道姑，在送葬队伍前面为引导。
English: Emperor Taizong's consort, a nun and a Taoist nun dressed in purple, lead the funeral procession.

古文：焚升霄百灵之香，而击归天紫金之磬。
现代文：焚烧的是升宵、百灵等香料，敲打的是归天、紫金宝磬。
English: The incinerated spices are Shangxiao, Bai Ling, etc. and the beaten spices are Guotian and Zijin Baojun.

古文：繁华辉焕，殆将二十余里。
现代文：豪华盛大的送葬队伍长达二十多里。
English: The funeral procession of the great and powerful was more than twenty miles long.

古文：上又赐酒一百斛，饼啗三十骆驼，各径阔二尺，饲役夫也。
现代文：懿宗皇帝又赐予御酒一百斛，糕饼三十骆驼。每只糕饼直径二尺那么大。
English: Emperor Yongzong also gave him 100 gourds of wine and 30 camel cakes, each cake being two feet in diameter.

古文：京城士庶罢业观者流汗相属，唯恐居后。
现代文：用来赏赐给出殡送葬的杂役仆夫。整个长安京城，在同昌公主下葬这天市民商贩都停止营业，挤在路两边围观。
English: The whole of Chang'an Capital, on the day of Princess Tongchang's burial, the citizens' merchants stopped their business and crowded on both sides of the road to watch.

古文：及灵辆过延兴门，上与淑妃恸哭，中外闻者，无不伤痛。
现代文：每个人都挤得汗流满面，唯恐落在后面观看不见。待到同昌公主的灵车经过延兴门，懿宗皇帝和韦淑妃失声恸哭。里外听到哭声的人，没有一个不为之悲伤哀痛的。
English: Everyone was sweating profusely, for fear of being left behind and not being able to see. When Princess Tongchang's hearse passed through Yanxing Gate, Emperor Yongzong and Empress Wei wept uncontrollably. No one who heard the cries inside or outside was not saddened and grieved.

古文：同日葬乳母，上更作《祭乳母文》。词质而意切，人多传诵。
现代文：在这同一天，懿宗皇帝下葬他的奶娘。皇上亲自写了一篇《祭乳母》文，言词质朴而情真意切。人们争相传诵。
English: On the same day, Emperor Yeongjong buried his granddaughter. The emperor himself wrote a poem, "Sacrificial Nurse," which was simple and heartfelt, and it was widely recited.

古文：自后上日夕注心挂意。
现代文：从这以后，懿宗皇帝不论是白天还是夜晚，总思念这件事情。
English: From then on, Emperor Yeongjong always thought about it, day and night.

古文：李可及进《叹百年曲》，声词哀怨，听之莫不泪下。
现代文：有个叫李可及的人写了一首《叹百年曲》，进献给懿宗皇帝。曲子与歌词都哀怨感人，听的人没有不落泪的。
English: A man named Li Keji wrote a "Sighing Centenary Song" and dedicated it to Emperor Xizong. Both the song and the lyrics are sad and touching, and there is no one who does not shed tears.

古文：更教数十人作《叹百年队》。
现代文：懿宗皇帝诏令几十个人组成演唱《叹百年曲》的歌舞队。
English: Emperor Xizong issued an edict ordering dozens of people to form a song and dance troupe to perform the "Centennial Song."

古文：取内库珍宝雕成首饰，取绢八百匹画作鱼龙波浪文，以为地衣。
现代文：从宫中内库里取出珍宝雕成首饰，取出丝绢八百匹，上面画上鱼、龙、波浪纹，用来作地围子。
English: Treasures were taken from the palace storeroom to be carved into jewelry, and 800 silk reeds were taken, with fish, dragons, and wave patterns painted on them, to be used to make aprons.

古文：每舞竟，珠翠满地。
现代文：每次演唱舞完后，都落得满地的珠翠。
English: After each song and dance, the whole floor was covered in emeralds.

古文：可及官历大将军，赏赐盈万。
现代文：李可及因为进献《叹百年曲》有功，连续升任到大将军，懿宗皇帝赏赐给他的物品价值过万。
English: Li Kegui was promoted to the rank of general because of his contribution to "The Lamentation of the Centenary," and Emperor Yongzong rewarded him with goods worth more than ten thousand yuan.

古文：甚无状，左军容使西门季玄素颇梗直，乃谓可及曰：尔恣巧媚以惑天子，族无日矣。
现代文：但是李可及行为举止一点也不检点。左军容使西门季玄为人非常耿直，对李可及说：你用取巧谄媚迷惑皇上，用不多久就会遭至杀头之罪的啊！
English: However, Li Ke and his behavior were not at all proper. The left-wing troops made Xi Men Ji Xuan very honest, and said to Li Ke and: You use deception and flattery to confuse the emperor, and you will soon be guilty of killing the head!

古文：可及恃宠，无有少改。
现代文：李可及仗恃懿宗皇上对他的恩宠，一点也没有收敛改正。
English: Li Ke reached out to Emperor Qianlong for his favor, and did not hesitate to make amends.

古文：可及善啭喉舌，于天子前，弄眼作头脑，连声著词，唱曲。
现代文：李可及擅长唱歌。他在懿宗皇帝面前，又飞眼又摇头晃脑，接连不断地编词唱曲。
English: Li Kegui was also good at singing. In front of Emperor Xizong, he kept composing lyrics and singing in succession, with his eyes darting and his head shaking.

古文：须臾间，变态百数不休。
现代文：转瞬间，就能变化一百多种神态，而且不断在变化神态。
English: In an instant, more than a hundred facial expressions can be changed, and they are constantly changing.

古文：是时京城不调少年相效，谓之拍弹。
现代文：当时京城中的不才少年争相效仿，称这种演唱方法叫拍弹。
English: At that time, untalented boys in the capital tried to follow suit, saying that this method of singing was called clapping.

古文：一日可及乞假为子娶妇，上曰：即令送酒面及来，以助汝嘉礼。
现代文：一天，李可及请假为他的儿子娶媳妇。懿宗皇帝说：我马上命人给你送去酒、面和米，用来作为祝贺你儿子结婚的贺礼。
English: One day, Li Kegui took a leave of absence to marry his son's daughter-in-law. Emperor Yongzong said, "I will immediately order someone to send you wine, noodles and rice as a gift to congratulate your son on his marriage."

古文：可及归至舍，俄一中贵人监二银榼各高二尺余，宣赐可及。
现代文：李可及回到家中，不一会儿，一个太监担着两只银盒来到府上，每只盒约有二尺多高，向李可及宣布这是皇上赏赐的贺礼。
English: Li Keji returned home, and a short while later, a eunuch came to the house carrying two silver boxes, each about two feet high, and announced to Li Keji that this was a gift from the emperor.

古文：始以为酒，及启，皆实以金宝。
现代文：起初，李可及真以为盒里盛的是酒、米之类。
English: At first, Li Keji really thought that the box contained wine, rice and the like.

古文：上赐可及银麒麟高数尺。
现代文：待到打开盒盖一看，里面盛的尽是黄金、珠宝。
English: When I opened the lid of the box, I saw that it was full of gold and jewels.

古文：可及取官库车，载往私第。
现代文：懿宗皇帝还赏赐给李可及一只银麒麟，身高好几尺。李可及用官库的车将银麒麟运回家里。
English: Emperor Taizong also awarded Li Ke and a silver unicorn, several feet tall. Li Ke and used a car from the treasury to transport the silver unicorn home.

古文：西门季玄曰：今日受赐用官车，他日破家，亦须辇还内府。
现代文：西门季玄看到说：今天受到皇上的赏赐用官车运回家里，他日被抄家，也得用官车再将银麒麟运回宫中内库。
English: Seeing this, Ximen Ji Xuan said, "Today, I received a reward from the emperor and was transported home in an official car. The other day, my home was raided, and I had to use an official car to transport the silver unicorn back to the palace treasury.

古文：不道受赏，徒劳牛足。
现代文：这不是受赏，是白白地劳累牛脚啊！
English: It's not a reward, it's a lot of hard work for nothing!

古文：后可及果流于岭表，旧赐珍玩，悉皆进入。
现代文：后来，李可及果然获罪被流放到岭外。过去懿宗皇帝赏赐给他的珍宝古玩，又都抄没运回宫中内库。
English: Later, Li Kegui was found guilty and exiled outside of Ling. In the past, the precious antiques given to him by Emperor Taizong were all copied and not transported back to the palace treasury.

古文：君子谓季玄有先见之明。
现代文：有见识的人说：西门季玄有先见之明啊！
English: People with insight say: Xiamen Ji Xuan has foresight!

古文：李璋
现代文：李璋
English: Lee Min Ho

古文：李绛子璋为宣州观察使。
现代文：李绛的儿子李璋任宣州观察史。
English: Li Yu's son, Li Yu Ren, was appointed to observe the history of Xuanzhou.

古文：杨收造白檀香亭子初成，会亲宾观之。
现代文：宰相杨收建造白檀香亭子，刚建成，邀请亲朋宾客观赏。
English: Prime Minister Yang Jie built a white sandalwood pavilion, which has just been completed, and invited relatives and friends to objectively appreciate it.

古文：先是璋潜遣人度其广袤，织成地毯，其日献之。
现代文：李璋在这之前，暗中派人进入杨收宅第测量这座亭子的样子，将它织成地毯，到杨收宴请宾客这天进献给他。
English: Prior to this, Li Yao secretly sent someone into Yang Zhe's house to measure the appearance of the pavilion, weave it into a carpet, and invite guests to Yang Zhe's banquet to dedicate the day to him.

古文：及收败，璋亦从坐。
现代文：待到杨收败落，李璋也因这事受到株连。
English: By the time Yang's defeat was over, Li Yao had also been punished for this.

古文：李使君
现代文：李使君
English: Mr. Li Zhijun

古文：乾符中，有李使君出牧罢归，居在东洛。
现代文：唐僖宗乾符年间，有个姓李的官员从州、府任上辞官回来，它居在东都洛阳。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianfu of the Tang Dynasty, there was an official surnamed Li who resigned from the post of prefecture and prefecture and returned. He lived in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：深感一贵家旧恩，欲召诸子从容。
现代文：李某人非常感激一家权贵的旧恩，想将他家的几位儿子设宴请来玩一天。
English: Li Xinyu was very grateful for the old favor of a powerful family, and wanted to invite several sons of his family to a banquet for a day.

古文：有敬爱寺僧圣刚者，常所往来。
现代文：洛阳敬爱寺中有个僧人叫圣刚，经常出入李某人家。
English: There is a monk in Luoyang Jing'ai Temple named Sheng Gang, who often visits Li Xizhong's home.

古文：李因以具宴为说，僧曰：某与为门徒久矣，每观其食，穷极水陆滋味。
现代文：李某人将自己想宴请这家几个儿子的打算对这位僧人说了。僧人圣刚说：我在这家作宗门信徒很长时间了。每次观察他家的饭菜，山珍海味没有吃不到的。
English: Someone named Li told the monk about his plan to host the sons of this family. The monk, Saint Gang, said: "I have been a believer in this family for a long time. Every time I observe his family's meals, there is no mountain delicacy that cannot be eaten.

古文：常馔必以炭炊，往往不惬其意。
现代文：而且，平常饭菜都必吃炭火锅，这样还往往不满意。
English: Moreover, they always have to eat charcoal hot pot for ordinary meals, which is often unsatisfactory.

古文：此乃骄逸成性，使君召之可乎？
现代文：这是骄奢淫逸成性了，你可以邀请这样的人吗？
English: It's the epitome of extravagance. Can you invite someone like that?

古文：李曰：若朱象髓白猩唇，恐未能致。
现代文：李某人回答说：如果要吃朱象髓白猩唇，我恐怕弄不到。
English: Li Someone replied, "If I want to eat the pearl oyster, I'm afraid I can't get it.

古文：止于精办小筵，亦未为难。
现代文：至于将筵席置办得精致一些，也不是什么太难的事情。
English: As for the table setting, it is not too difficult to make it more exquisite.

古文：于是广求珍异，俾妻孥亲为调鼎。
现代文：于是，李某人四处收求珍稀食物，让妻子儿女亲自下厨房调味。
English: As a result, someone called Li collected rare foods from all over and asked his wife and children to personally go to the kitchen to season them.

古文：备陈绮席雕盘，选日邀致。
现代文：终于准备好一桌奢华的筵席，选定好日期，将这家权贵的几个儿子都邀请来了。
English: Finally, a sumptuous banquet table was prepared, a date was chosen, and several sons of this powerful family were invited.

古文：弟兄列坐，矜持俨若冰玉。
现代文：这家权贵的几兄弟来到后，依次入座，态度骄慢矜持，面若冰霜。
English: After the arrival of several brothers of this powerful family, they took their seats in turn, their attitude was proud and reserved, their faces were like ice.

古文：淆羞每至，曾不入口。
现代文：每道菜上来后，都不动一筷。
English: After each dish was served, not a single chopstick was moved.

古文：主人揖之再三，唯沾果实而已。
现代文：李某人请让再三，只是吃一点干鲜水果而已。
English: Li someone please let me repeat, just eat a little dried fresh fruit.

古文：及至冰餐，俱置一匙于口，各相眄良久，咸若吃蘖吞针。
现代文：待到吃冰餐，都只用匙舀一下放入口中，互相对视了许久，都象咬着木棍吃进口里的是针一样难受。
English: When it came time to eat the ice cream, they all just spooned it into their mouths and stared at each other for a long time. It was as uncomfortable as biting on a wooden stick to eat something with a needle in it.

古文：李莫究其由，但以失饪为谢。
现代文：李某人并不追究缘由，只是客气地说饭菜没做好，请求几位兄弟谅解。
English: Mr. Li did not inquire into the cause, but politely said that the meal was not ready and asked several brothers for their understanding.

古文：明日复见圣刚，备述诸子情貌。
现代文：第二天，李某人见到圣刚僧人，将昨天宴席上的情形详细地告诉了他。
English: The next day, someone named Li saw the monk and told him in detail what had happened at the banquet the day before.

古文：僧曰：前者所说岂谬哉。
现代文：圣刚僧人问：我从前说的话一点也没说错吧。
English: The monk asked, "What I said before was not wrong at all.

古文：既而造其门问之曰：李使君特备一筵，淆馔可谓丰洁，何不略领其意？
现代文：之后，来到这位权贵家中问几位兄弟：李使君特意为几位兄弟准备了一桌筵席，菜肴可谓丰盛洁净，你们为什么不稍稍吃一点呢？
English: Afterward, he came to the dignitary's home and asked several brothers: Li Qijun specially prepared a table for several brothers. The dishes were plentiful and clean. Why didn't you eat a little bit?

古文：诸子曰：燔炙煎和未得法。
现代文：几位兄弟回答说：烧烤煎和不得方法。
English: Several brothers replied: grilling and frying is not the way.

古文：僧曰：他物从不可食，炭炊之餐，又嫌何事？
现代文：圣刚僧人说：其它的菜都不好吃，炭火锅，又嫌什么呢？
English: St. Ganga the monk said, "Other dishes are not delicious. What's not to like about the charcoal-fired hot pot?

古文：乃曰：上人未知，凡以炭炊馔，先烧令熟，谓之炼炭，方可入爨，不然犹有烟气。
现代文：几位兄弟说：僧人你不知道，凡是吃火锅，必须先将炭火烧熟了，这叫煤炭，才可以下菜肴进食。不这样，会有炭烟的。
English: Several brothers said, "Monk, don't you know that whenever you eat hot pot, you must first cook the charcoal, which is called coal, before you can eat the dish. Otherwise, there will be soot.

古文：李使君宅炭不经炼，是以难食。
现代文：李使君火锅里的炭没有经过炼烧，往外冒炭烟，因此难以下食。
English: The charcoal in Li Zhijun's hot pot has not been refined and emits soot, making it difficult to eat.

古文：僧拊掌大笑曰：此则非贫道所知也。
现代文：圣刚僧人拍掌大笑道：这些都是贫僧不知道的啊！
English: The monk Saint Gang clapped his hands and laughed loudly, "These are things a poor monk doesn't know!

古文：及巢寇陷洛，财产剽掠俱尽。
现代文：后来，黄巢率领军队攻占了洛阳。这家权贵的家财被抢掠一空。
English: Later, Huang Chao led an army to capture Luoyang. The wealth of this powerful family was plundered.

古文：昆仲数人，乃与圣刚同窜。潜伏山谷，不食者至于三日。
现代文：这几位兄弟和圣刚僧人一同逃出洛阳，潜藏在深山中，有三天没吃到一点东西。
English: These few brothers fled Luoyang together with the monks of the holy Ganges and hid deep in the mountains. For three days they did not have anything to eat.

古文：贼锋稍远，徒步将往河桥。
现代文：等到黄巢的部队稍稍远去，这几位兄弟和圣刚僧人一同徒步去河桥。
English: After waiting for the troops from Huang Chao to move a little further away, the brothers walked to the river bridge together with the holy monks.

古文：道中小店始开，以脱粟为餐而卖。
现代文：途中遇到一家刚刚开板的小饭店，用只脱去皮壳的糙米做成饭卖给顾客。
English: On the way, I came across a small restaurant that had just opened, selling rice to customers using only brown rice with the husk removed.

古文：僧囊中有钱数百，买于土杯同食。
现代文：圣刚僧人兜里还有几百文钱，买了些糙米饭盛在一只土杯中，跟这几位兄弟一块儿吃。
English: The monk still had a few hundred yuan in his pocket, so he bought some brown rice, put it in a bowl, and ate it with the brothers.

古文：腹枵既甚，膏梁之美不如。僧笑而谓之曰：此非炼炭所炊，不知堪与郎君吃否。
现代文：肚子里饿得特别厉害，吃着这样的糙米饭，觉得过去吃过的玉食珍馐都没有它好吃啊。圣刚僧人笑着问几位兄弟：这糙米饭不是经过炼炭的火锅，不知道可以给几位郎君吃否？
English: He was particularly hungry in the stomach, eating such brown rice, and felt that none of the yakitori delicacies he had eaten in the past tasted good. The monk asked several brothers with a smile: This brown rice is not a charcoal-grilled hot pot, I don't know if I can give it to several lords.

古文：皆低头惭见，无复词对。
现代文：这几位兄弟听了后，都羞愧地低下了头，一句话也答不上来。
English: When the brothers heard this, they all bowed their heads in shame and could not answer a word.

