古文：东越闽中，有庸岭，高数十里，其西北隙中，有大蛇，长七八丈大十余围，土俗常惧。
现代文：东越国闽中郡有一座庸岭，高几十里。在它西北部的山缝中有一条大蛇，长七八丈，粗十多围，当地人都很害怕它。
English: There is a yong ridge in Bozhong County, East Vietnam, which is dozens of miles high. In the mountain crevice in the northwest of it, there is a big snake, seven or eight meters long, more than ten meters thick, and the locals are very afraid of it.

古文：东治都尉及属城长吏，多有死者。
现代文：东冶都尉和东冶所管辖下的县城里的长官，也有许多是被蛇咬死的。
English: Many Dongye captains and prefectural officials under the jurisdiction of Dongye were also killed by snakebites.

古文：祭以牛羊，故不得福，或与人梦，或下谕巫祝，欲得啖童女年十二三者。
现代文：人们一直用牛羊去祭它，所以才没有大的灾祸。后来，大蛇或者托梦给人，或者吩咐巫祝，说它要吃十二三岁的女孩。
English: People have been sacrificing cattle and sheep to it, so there was no big disaster. Later, the snake either gave people a dream, or ordered a witch to say that it wanted to eat a girl of twelve or three years old.

古文：都尉令长并共患之，然气厉不息，共请求人家生婢子，兼有罪家女养之，至八月朝，祭送蛇穴口，蛇出吞啮之。
现代文：但是大蛇的妖气所造成的灾害却没个完。他们只得一起征求大户人家奴婢生的女儿和犯罪人家的女儿，把她们收养起来。到八月初一祭祀的时候，把女孩子送到大蛇的洞口。大蛇出来，便把女孩吞食了。
English: However, there was no end to the disasters caused by the evil spirit of the snake. They had to work together to solicit the daughters of the slaves and maids of the big families and the daughters of the criminals, and adopt them. At the beginning of August, during a ritual, they sent the girl to the mouth of the snake. The snake came out and swallowed the girl.

古文：累年如此，已用九女。
现代文：连年这样，已经用了九个女孩。
English: After years of this, nine girls have been used.

古文：尔时预复募索，未得其女。
现代文：这时，他们又预先招摹寻求，还没有找到这样的女孩。
English: At this time, they also pre-solicited and sought, have not found such a girl.

古文：将乐县李诞家有六女。无男，其小女名寄，应募欲行。父母不听。
现代文：将乐县李诞的家中，有六个女儿，没有男孩，最小的女儿叫李寄，想应募而去，父母不同意。
English: There are six daughters in the Li Xizhong family in Zhule County, but no boys. The youngest daughter is called Li Ying, and she wants to apply for the program, but her parents do not agree.

古文：寄曰： 父母无相，惟生六女，无有一男。虽有如无。女无缇萦济父母之功，既不能供养，徒费衣食，生无所益，不如早死；卖寄之身，可得少钱，以供父母，岂不善耶！ 
现代文：李寄说： 父母没有福相，只生了六个女儿，没有一个儿子，即使有了子女也好象没有一样，女儿我没有缇萦救父母那样的功德，既然不能供养父母，白白耗费衣服食物，活着也没有什么益处，还不如早点去死。卖掉我的身体，可以得些钱，用来供养父母，难道不好吗？ 
English: Li Ying said: My parents were not blessed. They only gave birth to six daughters and no son. Even if they had children, it would be as if they were not the same. As a daughter, I do not have the merit to save my parents. Since I cannot support my parents, I waste clothes and food in vain. There is no benefit to living. I might as well die early. Isn't it better to sell my body so that I can get some money to support my parents?

古文：父母慈怜，终不听去。
现代文：父母疼爱她，始终不同意她去。
English: Her parents loved her dearly and never allowed her to go.

古文：寄自潜行，不可禁止。
现代文：李寄就自己悄悄地走了，父母终究没法阻止她。
English: Li Ying quietly left on her own, and her parents were ultimately unable to stop her.

古文：寄乃告请好剑及咋蛇犬，至八月朝，便诣庙中坐，怀剑，将犬，先将数石米餈，用蜜灌之，以置穴口，蛇便出。头大如囷，目如二尺镜，闻瓷香气，先啖食之。
现代文：到八月初一，她就到庙中坐好，揣着剑，带着狗。她先把几石米饼用蜜拌的米麦糊灌在里面，然后把它放在蛇的洞口。蛇便出来了，头大得象圆形的谷仓，眼睛象直径两尺大的镜子。它闻到米饼的香味，先去吞食米饼。
English: On the first day of August, she went to the temple and sat down, carrying a sword and a dog. First, she filled several stones of rice cake with honey-mixed rice flour, and then placed it in the snake's hole. The snake came out, with a head as big as a round barn and eyes as big as a two-foot-diameter mirror. It smelled the scent of rice cake and went to swallow the rice cake first.

古文：寄便放犬，犬就啮咋，寄从后研得数创，疮痛急，蛇因踊出，至庭而死。
现代文：李寄便放出狗，狗就上去撕咬，李寄从后面砍了蛇好几下。蛇的创口痛得厉害，便翻滚着窜出来，爬到庙中的院子里便死了。
English: Li Huan then let the dog out, and the dog went up and bit it. Li Huan then cut the snake several times from behind. The snake's wound was very painful, so it rolled over and crawled out. It crawled into the courtyard of the temple and died.

古文：寄入视穴，得其九女髑髅，悉举出，咤言曰： 汝曹怯弱，为蛇所食，甚可哀愍。 
现代文：李寄进入蛇洞察看，发现了那九个女孩的头骨，便都拿了出来，悲痛地说： 你们这些人胆小软弱，被蛇吃了，太可怜了。 
English: Li Ying looked into the snake and found the skulls of the nine girls. He took them out and said sadly, "You people are too weak and cowardly to be eaten by a snake. How pitiful."

古文：于是寄女缓步而归。
现代文：于是李寄便慢慢地走回家去。
English: So Li Ying slowly walked back.

古文：越王闻之，聘寄女为后，指其父为将乐令，母及姊皆有赏赐。
现代文：越王听说了这件事，把李寄姑娘聘为王后，任命她的父亲为将乐县县令，母亲和姐姐们都得到了赏赐。
English: When King Yue heard of this, he hired the girl Li Ying as his queen and appointed her father as the governor of Le County. Both her mother and sisters were rewarded.

古文：自是东治无复妖邪之物。
现代文：从此东冶县不再有怪异邪恶的东西了。
English: Since then, there have been no more strange and evil things in Dongye County.

古文：其歌谣至今存焉。
现代文：那赞颂李寄的歌谣到现在还在那里流传着。
English: Songs in praise of Li Ying are still sung there.

古文：晋武帝咸宁中，魏舒为司徒，府中有二大蛇，长十许丈，居厅事平橑上，止之数年，而人不知，但怪府中数失小儿，及鸡犬之属。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁年间，魏舒任司徒。官府中有两条大蛇，长十多丈，盘居在公堂屋檐前的椽木上，栖息在那儿已经几年了，人们却还不知道，只是奇怪官府中屡次丢失了小孩以及鸡狗之类。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, Wei Shu served as a magistrate. In the government office, there were two large snakes, more than ten meters long, coiled on the elm tree in front of the courthouse roof. They had been roosting there for several years, but people did not know it yet. It was just strange that the government office had repeatedly lost children, chickens, dogs, and the like.

古文：后有一蛇夜出，经柱侧伤于刃，病不能登于是觉之。
现代文：后来有一条蛇晚上出来，经过柱子边上，被刀口碰伤了，病得不能再爬上去，于是人们才发现了它。
English: Later, a snake came out at night, passed by the edge of the pillar, was wounded by the blade, and was too sick to climb up again, so people discovered it.

古文：发徒数百，攻击移时，然然杀之。
现代文：府中发动几百个差役，击打好一会儿，然后才把它打死了。
English: The prefectural government dispatched hundreds of police officers to beat it for a while, and then killed it.

古文：视所居，骨骼盈宇之间。
现代文：察看它盘居的地方，只见骨骼挤满了屋檐之间。
English: Look where it's roosted, and you'll see skeletons crammed between the eaves.

古文：于是毁府舍更立之。
现代文：于是便捣毁了这座公堂，另外再建造了一座。
English: So they tore down the courthouse and built another one.

古文：汉武帝时张宽为扬州刺史。
现代文：汉武帝的时候，张宽任扬州刺史。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, Zhang Guang served as Yangzhou's chief historian.

古文：先是，有二老翁争山地，诣州，讼疆界，连年不决，宽视事，复来。
现代文：在他任职之前，这儿有两个老头争夺山地，到扬州府为疆界纠纷打官司，一连几年都没有能解决，张宽任职后，他们又来打官司了。
English: Before he took office, there were two old men competing for mountain land here. They went to Yangzhou Prefecture to litigate the border dispute. They could not resolve it for several years. After Zhang Guang took office, they came to litigate again.

古文：宽窥二翁，形状非人，令卒持杖戟将入问 汝等何精？ 
现代文：张宽看这两个老头的形状不象人，就命令士兵拿着兵器把他们押进来，喝问道： 你们是什么妖精？ 
English: Seeing that the two old men did not look like humans, Zhang Kuan ordered the soldiers to push them in with weapons, shouting: "What kind of fairies are you?

古文：翁走。宽呵格之，化为二蛇。
现代文：两个老头马上逃跑，张宽使唤士兵拦住他们痛打，他们便变化为两条蛇。
English: The two old men immediately ran away. Zhang Guang called soldiers to stop them and beat them severely. They turned into two snakes.

古文：荥阳人张福船行，还野水边，夜有一女子，容色甚美，自乘小船来投福，云： 日暮，畏虎，不敢夜行。 
现代文：荥阳县人张福，撑着船回家时停泊在野外的河边。夜里有一个女子，容貌很美丽，独自划着小船来投靠张福，说： 天黑了，我怕老虎，所以不敢在夜里赶路。 
English: Zhang Fu, a native of Fenyang County, was anchored on the edge of a river in the open when he was sailing home. At night, there was a woman, very beautiful, rowing a small boat alone to help Zhang Fu, saying: It's dark, I'm afraid of tigers, so I don't dare to hurry at night.

古文：福曰： 汝何姓？
现代文：张福说： 你姓什么？
English: Zhang Fu said: What is your surname?

古文：作此轻行。
现代文：怎么作这样轻率的旅行？
English: How can you make such a reckless trip?

古文：无笠，雨驶，可入船就避雨。 
现代文：你没有笘笠，却还在雨中行驶，可以进我的船里躲雨。 
English: You don't have a raincoat, but you're still driving in the rain, you can get into my boat and shelter from the rain.

古文：因共相调，遂入就福船寝。
现代文：因而两人互相调戏了一番，于是女子便来到张福的船里睡觉，并把她乘坐的小船缚在张福的船边。
English: As a result, the two flirted with each other, so the woman came to sleep in Zhang Fu's boat and tied the boat she was riding in to the side of Zhang Fu's boat.

古文：以所乘小舟，系福船边，三更许，雨晴，月照，福视妇人，乃是一大鼍枕臂而卧福惊起，欲执之，遽走入水。
现代文：张福惊恐地爬起来，想捉住它，它急忙逃进水里，刚才那只小船，只是一截干枯的木筏断头，长一丈多。
English: Zhang Fu got up in fright and tried to catch it. It hurriedly fled into the water. The small boat just now was just a dry wooden raft with a broken head. It was more than a meter long.

古文：向小舟是一枯槎段，长丈余。
现代文：丹阳郡道士谢非，去石头城买冶炼仙丹的锅。
English: Danyang County Taoist priest Xie Fei went to Stone Town to buy a pot for smelting immortelle.

古文：丹阳道士谢非往石城买台釜，还，日暮，不及至家；山中庙舍于溪水上，入中，宿，大声语曰 吾是天帝使者，停此宿，犹畏人劫夺其釜，意苦搔搔不安。 
现代文：回来时，天色已晚，来不及赶到家，看见山中有座庙宇座落在溪水边，便到里面留宿。他大声说道： 我是天帝的使者，留在这里住宿。 他还怕别人抢夺他的锅，心里一直惶惶不安。
English: When he came back, it was late in the day and he couldn't get home in time. He saw a temple in the mountains, which was located on the edge of a stream, and he went to stay there. He said loudly, "I am an emissary of the Heavenly Emperor, and I am staying here." He was also afraid that others would snatch his pot, and his heart was always in turmoil.

古文：二更中，有来至庙门者，呼曰： 何铜： 铜应喏。
现代文：二更时分，有人来到庙门叫道： 何铜。 何铜在里面答应了一声。
English: At two o'clock, someone came to the temple gate and called out, "What a copper!

古文：曰： 庙中有人气，是谁？ 
现代文：外面的人说： 庙里有人的气味，是谁？ 
English: People outside said, "There's the smell of someone in the temple. Who is it?"

古文：铜云 有人。言是天帝使者。 
现代文：何铜说： 的确有一个人，他说自己是天帝的使者。 
English: He Tong said: Indeed, there is a man who says that he is the messenger of the Heavenly Emperor.

古文：少顷便还。
现代文：一会儿那人便回去了。
English: After a while, the man went back.

古文：须臾又有来者，呼铜问之，如前。铜答如故。复叹息而去。
现代文：过了片刻，又有人来叫何铜，就象刚才一样问何铜，何铜也象刚才那样作了回答，那人也叹息着走了。
English: After a while, someone came to call Copper Ho again, and asked Copper Ho the same question as before, and Copper Ho replied the same way as before, and the man went away with a sigh.

古文：非惊扰不得眠。遂起，呼铜问之： 先来者谁？ 
现代文：谢非受到惊扰后睡不着，就起了床，也叫了声何铜，然后问他： 刚才来的是谁？ 
English: Unable to sleep after being disturbed, Xie Fei got up from the bed and called out, "Who's that?" and then asked, "Who just came in?"

古文：答言： 是水边穴中白鼍。 
现代文：何铜回答说： 是溪水边洞穴中的白鳄鱼。 
English: He replied, "It's a white crocodile in a cave by the stream."

古文： 汝是何等物？ 
现代文：谢非又问： 你是什么东西？ 
English: Xie Fei also asked: What are you?

古文：答言： 是庙北岩嵌中龟也。 
现代文：何铜回答说： 是庙北岩缝中的乌龟。 
English: He Tong replied: It is the turtle in the crevice of the rock north of the temple.

古文：非皆阴识之。
现代文：谢非都暗暗记在心里。
English: Xie Fei secretly recorded everything.

古文：天明，便告居人言： 此庙中无神，但是龟鼍之辈，徒费酒食祀之。
现代文：天亮后，他便告诉居住在附近的人们，说： 这庙里没有神灵，只是乌龟、鳄鱼之类，你们还白白花费酒食祭祀它们。
English: After dawn, he told the people living nearby: "There are no gods in this temple, only turtles, crocodiles and the like, and you spend money on food and wine to worship them.

古文：急具锸来，共往伐之。 
现代文：赶快拿铁锹来，我们一起去除掉它们。 
English: Hurry up and get your shovel and spade. Let's fight the witch together.

古文：诸人亦颇疑之，于是并会伐掘，皆杀之。
现代文：大家也有点怀疑这庙里的神灵了，于是就一起去挖掘，把乌龟、鳄鱼都杀死了。
English: Everyone was also a little suspicious of the gods in this temple, so they went digging together and killed the turtle and the crocodile.

古文：遂坏庙，绝祀。自后安静。
现代文：然后捣毁了庙宇，断绝了祭祀，从此以后就安宁平静了。
English: Then they destroyed the temples, stopped the sacrifices, and from then on there was peace and tranquility.

古文：孔子厄于陈，弦歌于馆，中夜，有一人长九尺余，着皁衣，高冠，大咤，声动左右。
现代文：孔子在陈国遭到困厄的时候，在旅馆中弹琴唱歌。夜里忽然有一个人，身长九尺多，穿着黑衣服，戴着高帽子，大声怒叱，声音惊动了孔子身边的人。
English: When Chen Guo was in trouble, Confucius was playing the piano and singing in the hotel. At night, there was suddenly a man, more than nine feet tall, dressed in black, wearing a tall hat, loudly scolding, the voice alarmed the people around Confucius.

古文：子贡进问 何人耶？ 
现代文：子贡走上前去，问： 你是什么人呀？ 
English: Zigong stepped forward and asked: Who are you?

古文：便提子贡而挟之。
现代文：这人便提起子贡把他挟在腋下。
English: The man picked up Zigong and held him under his arm.

古文：子路引出与战于庭，有顷，未胜，孔子察之，见其甲车间时时开如掌，孔子曰： 何不探其甲车，引而奋登？ 
现代文：子路就把他拉了出来，和他在院子中打起来了。过了一会儿，子路还没有取胜。孔子仔细察看，只见他的铠甲和牙床之间不时地裂开来，那口子就象手掌那么大。孔子对子路说： 你为什么不把手伸到那铠甲与牙床之间，拉着它用力爬上去？ 
English: Zilu pulled him out and began to fight him in the courtyard. After a while, Zilu still hadn't won. Confucius took a closer look and saw that from time to time there was a gap between his armor and gums. The gap was as big as the palm of a hand. Confucius said to Zilu, "Why don't you reach your hand between the armor and the gums and pull it up with all your might?

古文：子路引之，没手仆于地。乃是大鳀鱼也。长九尺余。
现代文：子路便伸手去拉它，手全都伸了进去，那人便倒在地上，竟是一条大鳀鱼，长九尺多。
English: Zilu stretched out his hand to pull it. All his hands went in, and the man fell to the ground. It turned out to be a large eel, more than nine feet long.

古文：孔子曰： 此物也，何为来哉？
现代文：孔子说： 这种东西，为什么来的呢？
English: Confucius said, "How did such a thing come about?

古文：吾闻物老。则群精依之。因衰而至此。
现代文：我听说过：东西老了，那么各种精怪就来依附它，因为它衰微了才来的。
English: I've heard it said that when something gets old, all sorts of weird creatures attach themselves to it because it's decrepit.

古文：其来也，岂以吾遇厄，绝粮，从者病乎！
现代文：这鳀鱼精的来临，难道是因为我遭遇到了困厄、断绝了粮食、跟随我的人都生了病的缘故吗？
English: Is this ephah come because I have seen affliction, because my bread is dried up, because all my companions are sick?

古文：夫六畜之物，及龟蛇鱼鳖草木之属，久者神皆凭依，能为妖怪，故谓之 五酉。 
现代文：那牛、马、羊、鸡、狗、猪六种家畜，以及龟、蛇、鱼、鳖、野草、树木之类，生长时间长的，神灵都依附它们，因而能成为妖怪，所以人们把它们叫做 五酉 。
English: The cattle, horses, sheep, chickens, dogs, pigs, six kinds of livestock, as well as turtles, snakes, fish, earthworms, weeds, trees and the like, grow long, and the gods are attached to them, so they can become monsters, so people call them the five spirits.

古文： 五酉 者，五行之方，皆有其物，酉者，老也，物老则为怪，杀之则已，夫何患焉。
现代文：五酉，是指五行的各个方面都有那相应的东西。酉，就是老，东西老了就会变成妖怪，把它杀掉了，那么妖怪也就没有了，对这种东西又有什么担心的呢？
English: The five elements refer to all aspects of the five elements that have the corresponding things. The elements are old, and when something is old, it will turn into a monster. If you kill it, the monster will be gone. What is there to worry about with this kind of thing?

古文：或者天之未丧斯文，以是系予之命乎！
现代文：或者是老天为了不丧失那些古代的文化典制，因而用这东西来维持我的生命么？
English: Or is God using this thing to keep me alive in order not to lose those ancient cultural institutions?

古文：不然，何为至于斯也。 
现代文：否则，为什么它会到这里来呢？ 
English: Otherwise, why would it come here?

古文：弦歌不辍。
现代文：孔子继续弹唱个不停。
English: Confucius continued to play and sing.

古文：子路烹之，其味滋。病者兴，明日，遂行。
现代文：子路煮了这条鳀鱼，它的味道很好，病人吃了都起了床。
English: Zi Lu cooked this eel. It tasted so good that the patient got out of bed after eating it.

古文：豫章有一家，婢在灶下，忽有人长数寸，来灶间壁，婢误以履践之，杀一人；须臾，遂有数百人，着衰麻服，持棺迎丧，凶仪皆备，出东门，入园中覆船下。
现代文：第二天，大家便又行路了。豫章郡有一家人家，婢女站在灶边的时候，忽然有一些身长几寸的人，来到灶边的隔墙旁，婢女不小心用鞋子踩了他们，踩死了一个。一会儿，就有几百个人。穿着丧服，扛着棺材来抬尸体，丧葬的礼仪都很完备。他们出了东门，进入莱园中一条翻过来的船下。
English: The next day, everyone went on their way again. There was a family in Yuzhang County. While the maid was standing by the stove, suddenly some people, a few inches tall, came to the wall next to the stove. The maid accidentally stepped on them with her shoes, trampling one to death. In a moment, there were several hundred people. Wearing mourning clothes, carrying coffins to carry the bodies, the funeral etiquette was complete. They went out of the east gate and entered an overturned boat in the middle of the park.

古文：就视之，皆是鼠妇。婢作汤灌杀，遂绝。
现代文：走近仔细一看，都是些潮虫，婢女便烧了热水去浇灌，把它们都烫死了，于是这怪物就绝迹了。
English: When she came closer and took a closer look, she saw that they were all tidal worms, so she boiled hot water to irrigate them, scalded them to death, and the monster disappeared.

古文：狄希，中山人也，能造千日酒饮之，千日醉；时有州人，姓刘，名玄石，好饮酒，往求之。
现代文：狄希，是中山国人。他会酿造一种 千日酒 ，喝了这种酒会醉上千日。当时州里有个人姓刘，名玄石，喜欢喝酒，便去狄希那儿要酒喝。
English: Dixie was from Zhongshan Province. He could brew a kind of thousand-day liquor, and if you drank it, you would be drunk for a thousand days. At that time, there was a man in the state whose surname was Liu and his name was Gemstone. He liked to drink, so he went to Dixie to get some liquor.

古文：希曰： 我酒发来未定，不敢饮君。 
现代文：狄希说： 我的酒发酵了，但药性还没有稳定，不敢给您喝。 
English: "My wine is fermented, but its medicinal properties are not yet stable, so I don't dare to give it to you," he said.

古文：石曰： 纵未熟，且与一杯，得否？ 
现代文：刘玄石说： 就是还没有熟，姑且先给我一杯，可以吗？ 
English: Liu Xuanshi said, "Even if it's not ripe, let me have a glass first, okay?"

古文：希闻此语，不免饮之。
现代文：狄希听了这话，不免给他喝了。
English: When Dixie heard this, she had to give him a drink.

古文：复索，曰： 美哉！
现代文：他喝完后又要求说： 妙啊！
English: When he had finished, he asked for more and said: "Wonderful!

古文：可更与之。 
现代文：请再给我一杯。 
English: Another glass, please.

古文：希曰： 且归。别日当来。只此一杯，可眠千日也。 
现代文：狄希说： 你暂且回去吧，请改日再来，就这一杯，已经可以让你睡上一千天了。 
English: Dixie said, "You should go back for a while, please come back another day, just this cup has been able to make you sleep for a thousand days."

古文：石别，似有怍色。
现代文：刘玄石只得告别，似乎因为遭到拒绝还有点惭愧的脸色。
English: Liu Xuanshi had to say goodbye, and seemed to be a little ashamed because of the rejection.

古文：至家，醉死。
现代文：他回到家中，便醉得死了过去。
English: When he got home, he was dead drunk.

古文：家人不之疑，哭而葬之。
现代文：家里人没有怀疑他的死，所以哭着将他埋葬了。
English: The family did not suspect his death, so they buried him in tears.

古文：经三年，希曰： 玄石必应酒醒，宜往问之。 
现代文：过了三年，狄希寻思道： 刘玄石的酒一定醒了，应该去问候他。 
English: After three years, Deasy pondered: Liu Xuanshi's wine must have woken up, we should go and greet him.

古文：既往石家，语曰： 石在家否？ 
现代文：不久他就去刘家，说道： 玄石在家吗？ 
English: Soon he went to Liu's house and said, "Is Black Stone at home?"

古文：家人皆怪之曰： 玄石亡来，服以阕矣。 
现代文：刘家的人都对这问话感到奇怪，便说： 玄石死了以后，丧服都因三年满期而卸除了。 
English: Everyone in Liu's family was surprised by this question and said, "After the death of Xuanshi, the mourning clothes were removed because of the expiration of three years.

古文：希惊曰： 酒之美矣，而致醉眠千日，今合醒矣。 
现代文：狄希惊讶地说： 那酒美极了，以致予使他醉睡一千日，今天理当醒了。 
English: Dixie said in surprise, "That wine was so beautiful that it made him sleep for a thousand days. He should have woken up today."

古文：乃命其家人凿冢，破棺，看之。
现代文：于是他就叫刘家的人去挖坟开棺看看。
English: So he asked the Liu family to dig up the grave and open the coffin.

古文：冢上汗气彻天。
现代文：只见坟上汗气冲天，就叫人挖开坟。
English: When he saw the sweat rising to the sky on the grave, he ordered the grave to be dug up.

古文：遂命发冢，方见开目，张口，引声而言曰： 快者醉我也！ 
现代文：正好看见刘玄石睁开眼睛，张开嘴巴，拖长了声音在说： 醉得我好痛快啊！ 
English: He just happened to see Liu Xuanshi open his eyes, open his mouth, and draw out his voice to say: I'm so drunk!

古文：因问希曰： 尔作何物也？令我一杯大醉，今日方醒，日高几许？ 
现代文：他便问狄希说： 你搞了什么东西，使我喝了一杯就酩酊大醉，到今天才醒？太阳多高了？ 
English: He then asked Deasy: "What did you do to get me so drunk that I didn't wake up until today? How high is the sun?"

古文：墓上人皆笑之。被石酒气冲入鼻中，亦各醉卧三月。
现代文：坟边的人都笑他，却不小心被他的酒气冲入鼻中，结果也都醉睡了三个月。
English: The people at the graveside all laughed at him, but they accidentally got his alcohol into their noses, and as a result, they all fell into a drunken sleep for three months.

古文：陈仲举微时，常宿黄申家，申妇方产，有扣申门者，家人咸不知，久久方闻屋里有人言： 宾堂下有人，不可进。 
现代文：陈蕃还没有显达的时候，常常寄宿在黄申家中。黄申的妻子刚生小孩，忽然有人来敲黄申的门，家里的人都没听见。过了好长时间，敲门人才听见屋里有人说： 客堂下有人，不能进来。 
English: When Chen Yao was still a toddler, he often stayed at the home of Huang Shen. Huang Shen's wife had just given birth to a child, and suddenly someone knocked on Huang Shen's door, but no one in the family heard him. It took a long time before the person knocking on the door heard someone in the house say, "There's someone in the auditorium, you can't come in."

古文：扣门者相告曰： 今当从后门往。 
现代文：敲门的互相商量说： 现在得从后门走。 
English: The door-knockers confer with each other and say: Now we have to go through the back door.

古文：其人便往。
现代文：其中一人就去了。
English: One of them went to the toilet.

古文：有顷，还，留者问之： 是何等？
现代文：过了一会儿，那人便回来了。留在大门边上的人就问他： 生下来的是个什么样的人？
English: After a while, the man returned, and those who remained at the gate asked him, "What kind of man was he who was born?"

古文：名为何？
现代文：名叫什么？
English: What's his name?

古文：当与几岁？ 
现代文：该给他几岁？ 
English: How old should he be?

古文：往者曰： 男也。名为奴。当与十五岁。 
现代文：去的人说： 生的是男孩，名叫 奴 ，应该给他十五岁。 
English: Those who went there said: He was born a boy, his name is Nhu, he should be given fifteen years of age.

古文： 后应以何死？ 
现代文：留在那儿的人又问他： 后来这孩子该怎样死？ 
English: And they that stood by, asked him again, How can this child die?

古文：答曰： 应以兵死。 
现代文：去的人回答说： 该因为兵器而死。 
English: The man who went there replied: "He should die because of the weapon."

古文：仲举告其家曰： 吾能相此儿当以兵死。 
现代文：陈蕃对黄家的人说： 我会相面。你们这孩子该因兵器而死。 
English: Chen Yao said to the Huang family, "I will meet you face to face. You children should die because of weapons."

古文：父母惊之，寸刃不使得执也。
现代文：那父母亲为此惊恐万分，连小刀都不让儿子拿。
English: The parents were so horrified by this that they wouldn't even let their son take the knife.

古文：至年十五，有置凿于梁上者，其末出，奴以为木也，自下钩之，凿从梁落，陷脑而死，后仲举为豫章太守，故遣吏往饷之申家，幷问奴所在；其家以此具告。
现代文：这孩子长到十五岁，有个人把凿子放在梁上，凿子的末端露了出来，黄奴以为是根小木料，就在下面钩它，凿子从梁上落下来，陷进了他的脑袋，他就死了。后来陈蕃任豫章郡太守，所以派了差役去到黄申家馈赠礼物，同时询问一下黄奴在什么地方。
English: When the boy reached the age of fifteen, someone put a chisel on the beam. The end of the chisel was exposed. Huang Nong thought it was a small piece of wood and hooked it underneath. The chisel fell off the beam and got stuck in his head, and he died. Later, Chen Rong was appointed as the governor of Yu Zhang County, so he sent an official to Huang Shen's house to present a gift and inquire where Huang Nong was.

古文：仲举闻之，叹曰： 此谓命也。 
现代文：陈蕃听了，叹息地说： 这是命啊！ 
English: Chen Yao listened and said with a sigh: This is life!

