古文：甘茂亡秦，且之齐，出关遇苏子，曰： 君闻夫江上之处女乎？ 
现代文：甘茂自秦国逃出后，打算到齐国去。出了函谷关，遇见苏代，就对他说： 您听说江上女子的故事吗？ 
English: After Kammao escaped from Qin, he planned to go to Qi. When he came out of Hanyu Pass and met Sudai, he said to him: Have you heard the story of the woman on the river?

古文：苏子曰： 不闻。 
现代文：苏代说： 没听说过。 
English: Sudai said: I haven't heard of it.

古文：曰： 夫江上之处女，有家贫而无烛者，处女相与语，欲去之。
现代文：甘茂说： 在江上的众多女子中，有一个家贫无烛的女子。女子们在一起商量，要把家贫无烛的赶走。
English: Kammao said, "Among the many women on the river, there was a woman whose family was poor and did not have a candle. The women discussed together how to drive away the poor woman who did not have a candle.

古文：家贫无烛者将去矣，谓处女曰： 妾以无烛，故常先至，扫室布席，何爱余明之照四壁者？
现代文：家贫无烛的女子准备离去了，她对女子们说： 我因为没有烛，所以常常先到，一到便打扫屋子，铺好席子。你们何必爱惜照在四壁上的那一点余光呢？
English: The woman, whose family was poor and had no candles, was getting ready to leave. She said to the girls: "Because I don't have candles, I always arrive first. As soon as I arrive, I clean the house and lay the mats. Why do you want to spare the little light that shines on the four walls?

古文：幸以赐妾，何妨于处女？
现代文：如果赐一点余光给我，对你们又有什么妨碍呢？
English: If you give me a little more time, what is the harm to you?

古文：妾自以有益于处女，何为去我？ 
现代文：我自认为对你们还是有用的，为什么一定要赶走我呢？ 
English: I think I'm still useful to you, so why do you have to get rid of me?

古文：处女相语以为然而留之。
现代文：女子们商量以后，认为她说的对，就把她留下来了。
English: After some discussion, the girls decided she was right and kept her.

古文：今臣不肖，弃逐于秦而出关，愿为足下扫室布席，幸无我逐也。 
现代文：如今我因为没有才德，被秦国驱赶，不得不出了函谷关，愿意为您打扫屋子，铺席子，希望不要把我赶走。 
English: Now, because of my lack of talent, I was driven away by the Qin State, and I had to leave Hanyu Pass. I am willing to clean the house for you and lay the mats. I hope you will not drive me away.

古文：苏子曰： 善。请重公于齐。 
现代文：苏代说： 好，我将设法让齐国重用您。 
English: Sudai said, "Okay, I will try to get Qi Guo to use you again."

古文：乃西说秦王曰： 甘茂，贤人，非恒士也。其居秦，累世重矣，自殽塞、谿谷，地形险易尽知之。
现代文：于是，苏代先西入关中游说秦王说： 甘茂是个有才能的人，并不是一般人；他在秦国受到惠王、武王、昭王等几朝重用。由崤山、函谷关直至谿谷，秦国的险阻要冲，他都了如指掌。
English: As a result, Su Daixian lobbied the Qin King in the middle of the West Gate, saying, "Ganmao is a talented person, not an ordinary person; he has been used by several dynasties in Qin, including King Hui, King Wu, and King Zhao. From Lushan, Hanyu Pass to Shibuya, he knows all the dangers of Qin.

古文：彼若以齐约韩、魏，反以谋秦，是非秦之利也。 
现代文：万一他通过齐国，联合韩、魏，反过来图谋秦国，这就对秦国十分不利。 
English: In the unlikely event that he were to unite Korea and Wei through Qi, and in turn plot against Qin, this would be very unfavorable to Qin.

古文：秦王曰： 然则奈何？ 
现代文：秦王说： 那可怎么办呢？ 
English: Qin Wang said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：苏代曰： 不如重其贽，厚其禄以迎之。
现代文：苏代说： 您不如多备厚礼，以高位重金聘其回国。
English: Sudai said, "You'd better prepare a lot of gifts and invite him back to the country with a large sum of money."

古文：彼来则置之槐谷，终身勿出，天下何从图秦。 秦王曰： 善。 
现代文：他要是回来了，把他软禁在槐谷，终身不得离开，天下各国又凭借什么来图谋秦国呢？ 秦王说： 好。 
English: If he came back, he would be put under house arrest in Shibuya, and would not be allowed to leave for the rest of his life. What would the nations of the world use to plot against the State of Qin? The King of Qin said, "Good."

古文：与之上卿，以相迎之齐。
现代文：于是，给甘茂以上卿的高位，拿了相印到齐国去迎接他。
English: As a result, he gave Kammao a high position above the lord, and took a seal to Qi Province to meet him.

古文：甘茂辞不往，苏秦伪谓王曰： 甘茂，贤人也。
现代文：甘茂推辞不去。苏代此时又到齐国，对齐王说： 甘茂是个贤能的人，眼下秦王给他上卿的高位，拿了相印去迎接他。
English: At this time, the Su Dynasty also came to Qi Province and said to the King of Qi: "Ganmao is a man of virtue. At this time, the King of Qin gave him the high rank of Shangqing and took the seal to meet him.

古文：今秦与之上卿，以相迎之，茂德王之赐，故不往，愿为王臣。今王何以礼之？王若不留，必不德王。
现代文：但甘茂却因为感激您齐王的恩德而不去秦国，其实他愿意做大王的臣子，如果大王不挽留他，他定不会再感激大王。
English: However, Ganmao did not go to Qin because he was grateful for King Qi's kindness. In fact, he was willing to be the king's vassal. If the king did not keep him, he would not be grateful to the king.

古文：彼以甘茂之贤，得擅用强秦之众，则难图也！ 齐王曰： 善。 
现代文：以甘茂之才，如果让他统帅强秦的军队，秦国对齐国来说可就难以对付了。 齐王说： 好。 
English: With Ganmao's talent, if he were to command the army of strong Qin, Qin would be difficult to deal with for Qi.

古文：赐之上卿，命而处之。
现代文：于是，赐甘茂为上卿，下令让他留在齐国。
English: Therefore, he gave Kam Mao the title of Shangqing and ordered him to stay in Qi.

