古文：◎孝宗
现代文：孝宗
English: Takamune

古文：孝宗达天明道纯诚中正圣文神武至仁大德敬皇帝，讳祐堂，宪宗第三子也。
现代文：孝宗建天明道诚纯中正圣文神武至仁大德敬皇帝，名叫朱祐樘，宪宗第三子。
English: Xiaozong Jian Tianming Dao Cheng Chun Zhongzheng Shenwen Shenwu Zu Ren Da De Kei Emperor, named Zhu Yuxuan, is the third son of Xianzong.

古文：母淑妃纪氏，成化六年七月生帝于西宫。
现代文：其母淑妃纪氏，成化六年七月生朱祐樘于西宫。
English: His mother, Sukhee Ji, was born in July of the same year as Zhu Youya in Seogu.

古文：时万贵妃专宠，宫中莫敢言。
现代文：当时，万贵妃得宠于宪宗，宫中敢怒不敢说。
English: At that time, Princess Mangui was favored by Emperor Xianzong, and the palace dared not say anything in anger.

古文：悼恭太子薨后，宪宗始知之，育周太后宫中。
现代文：悼恭太子死后，宪宗才知道祐樘一事，在周太后宫中抚养朱祐樘。
English: It was only after the death of Prince Eikyong that Emperor Gensong learned about Zhu Youyao, and he raised Zhu Youyao in Empress Dowager Zhou's harem.

古文：十一年，敕礼部命名，大学士商辂等因以建储请。
现代文：成化十一年，命令礼部取名，大学士商辂等因此请求设立太子。
English: In the eleventh year of Chenghua, the ceremonial department was ordered to take a name, and university scholars, merchants, and so on therefore requested the establishment of a prince.

古文：是年六月，淑妃暴薨，帝年六岁，哀慕如成人。
现代文：当年六月，淑妃暴死，祐樘年刚六岁，但哀丧同成年人一样。
English: In June of that year, Shu Fei died suddenly, just six years old, but mourned like an adult.

古文：十一月，立为皇太子。
现代文：十一月，立朱祐樘为皇太子。
English: In November, Zhu Yuxuan was appointed crown prince.

古文：二十三年八月，宪宗崩。
现代文：成化二十三年八月，宪宗死。
English: In August of the 23rd year of Chenghua, Xianzong died.

古文：九月壬寅，即皇帝位。
现代文：九月六日，朱祐樘即皇帝位。
English: On September 6, Zhu Rongji became emperor.

古文：大赦天下，以明年为弘治元年。
现代文：大赦天下。以明年为弘治元年。
English: A general amnesty for the whole country. Next year will be the first year of Koji.

古文：丁未，斥诸佞幸侍郎李孜省、太监梁芳、外戚万喜及其党，谪戍有差。
现代文：十一日，斥退各因巧言侥幸受宠的侍郎李孜省、太监梁芳、外戚万喜及其同伙，贬官戍边各有不等。
English: On the 11th day, Li Ze Province, the eunuch Liang Fang, the maternal relative Wanxi and their associates, who were favored due to their clever words and luck, were expelled, and the demotion of officials varied.

古文：冬十月丁卯，汰传奉官，罢右通政任杰、侍郎蒯钢等千余人，论罪戍斥。
现代文：十月一日，淘汰传令官，罢免右通政任杰、侍郎蒯钢等一千多人，判罪戍边或者斥退。
English: On October 1st, the herald was eliminated, and more than a thousand people, including Yu Tsong, Ren Jie, and Jian Gang, were dismissed, convicted, or expelled.

古文：革法王、佛子、国师、真人封号。
现代文：除掉法王、佛子、国师、真人封号。
English: Remove His Holiness, the Buddha, the national teacher, and the real person's seal.

古文：乙亥，尊皇太后周氏为太皇太后，皇后王氏为皇太后。
现代文：九日，尊奉皇太后周氏为太皇太后，皇后王氏为皇太后。
English: On the 9th, the revered Empress Dowager Zhou became the Grand Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager Wang became the Empress Dowager.

古文：丙子，立妃张氏为皇后。
现代文：十日，立妃张氏为皇后。
English: On the 10th, Princess Zhang became the empress.

古文：丁亥，万安罢。
现代文：二十一日，万安死。
English: On the 21st, he died peacefully.

古文：壬辰，追谥母淑妃为孝穆皇太后。
现代文：二十六日，追谥其母亲淑妃为穆皇太后。
English: On the 26th, she succeeded her mother, Su Shi, as Empress Dowager Mu.

古文：癸巳，吏部左侍郎兼翰林学士徐溥入阁预机务。
现代文：二十七日，吏部左侍郎兼翰林学士徐溥入文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On the 27th, the left-hand man of the personnel department and the scholar of Hanlin, Xu Hao, entered the Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：十一月癸丑，尹直罢。
现代文：十一月十八日，尹直停职。
English: On November 18, Yin Zhi was suspended from his post.

古文：乙卯，詹事刘健为礼部侍郎兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。戊午，下梁芳、李孜省于狱。
现代文：二十日，詹事刘健为礼部侍郎兼翰林学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务，二十三日，下梁芳、李孜省于狱中。
English: On the 20th, Zhan Zhi Liu Jian was appointed as an attendant of the ceremonial department and a scholar of Hanlin, and was assigned to the Wen Yuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs. On the 23rd, the Lower Liang Fang and Li Ze Province were in prison.

古文：十二月壬午，葬纯皇帝于茂陵。
现代文：十二月十七日，葬纯皇帝于茂陵。
English: On December 17th, Emperor Jun's funeral was held at the Mausoleum.

古文：是月，免江西、湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：本月，免江西、湖广受灾税粮。
English: This month, Jiangxi Province and Hunan Province were exempted from grain tax.

古文：是年，安南、暹罗、哈密、土鲁番、乌斯藏、琉球入贡。
现代文：这年，安南、暹罗、哈密、土鲁番、乌斯藏、琉球入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Annan, Siam, Hami, Turpan, Ussuri, and Ryukyu paid tribute to the North.

古文：封占城王子古来为王，谕安南黎灏还占城侵地。
现代文：封占城王子古来为王，告晓安南黎灏归还所侵占的占城田地。
English: The prince of the besieged city has been the king since ancient times, and the return of the occupied fields of the besieged city has been announced by Annan Lihong.

古文：弘治元年春正月己亥，享太庙。
现代文：弘治元年正月四日，祭奉太庙。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the first year of the Heian period, the temple was dedicated.

古文：丙午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：己未，始考察镇守武臣。
现代文：二十四日，开始考察镇守武官。
English: On the 24th, the inspection of the town guards and military officers began.

古文：二月戊戌，祭社稷。
现代文：二月四日，祭祀社稷。
English: On February 4th, the ritual ended.

古文：丁未，耕耕田。
现代文：十三日，耕种謖田。
English: On the 13th, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：封哈密卫左都督罕慎为忠顺王。
现代文：封哈密卫左都督罕慎为忠顺王。
English: Han Shen, the governor of Hamiwei Zuo, was named the King of Zhongshun.

古文：丙辰，禁廷臣请托公事。
现代文：二十二日，禁止廷臣将公事私相嘱托。
English: On the 22nd, courtiers were prohibited from entrusting public and private affairs to others.

古文：三月乙丑，疏文武大臣及中外四品以上官姓名，揭文华殿壁。
现代文：三月一日，陈述文武大臣及朝中内外四品以上官吏姓名，标帜于文华殿墙壁上。
English: On March 1st, the names of the Minister of Education and Culture and four or more government officials at home and abroad were announced and posted on the walls of the Palace.

古文：癸酉，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：九日，祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the 9th, a memorial service was held for Confucius.

古文：乙亥，小王子寇兰州，都指挥廖斌击败之。
现代文：十一日，小王子侵犯兰州，被都指挥廖斌击败。
English: On the 11th day, the Little Prince invaded Lanzhou and was defeated by the Dux Liu Bin.

古文：丙子，御经筵。
现代文：十二日，去经筵听讲经论史。
English: On the 12th, I went to the scripture hall to listen to a lecture on the history of scripture.

古文：丁丑，命儒臣日讲。
现代文：十三日，命儒臣每天讲授。
English: On the 13th, Zhu Chen was ordered to teach every day.

古文：夏四月甲寅，以天暑录囚。
现代文：四月二十一日，因天气热审查囚犯。
English: On April 21, due to the hot weather, the prisoners were not examined.

古文：嗣后岁以为常。
现代文：此后每年如此。
English: This has happened every year since.

古文：六月癸巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月一日，有日食。
English: On June 1st, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月戊辰，减浙江银课，汰管理银场官。
现代文：七月七日，减浙江银课，淘汰管理银场官员。
English: On July 7, the Zhejiang silver course was reduced, and the officials in charge of managing the silver course were eliminated.

古文：八月乙巳，小王子犯山丹、永昌。
现代文：八月十四日，小王子侵掠山丹、永昌。
English: On August 14th, the Little Prince invaded Shantan and Yongchang.

古文：辛亥，犯独石、马营。
现代文：二十日，侵犯独石、马营。
English: On the 20th, they invaded Dokseok and Maying.

古文：冬十月乙卯，振湖广、四川饥。
现代文：十月二十五日，赈救湖广、四川饥荒。
English: On October 25th, Nie helped Hukang and Sichuan with famine relief.

古文：十一月甲申，妖僧继晓伏诛。
现代文：十一月二十五日，妖僧继晓被诛杀。
English: On November 25th, the demon priest Ji Xiao was beaten to death.

古文：乙酉，免河南被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十六日，免河南受灾秋粮。
English: On the 26th, the autumn grain in Henan was exempted from the disaster.

古文：是年，土鲁番杀忠顺王罕慎，复据哈密。
现代文：当年，土鲁番杀忠顺王罕慎，再次占据哈密。
English: In that year, Turuban killed the loyal Shun Wang Hanxin and occupied Hami again.

古文：琉球、占城、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：琉球、占城、撒马儿罕、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Zhancheng, Samarkand, and Ussuri paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二年春正月丁卯，收已故内臣赐田，给百姓。
现代文：弘治二年正月八日，收回已死内臣赐田给百姓。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Konji, the deceased vassal's land was given back to the people.

古文：辛未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月癸巳，振四川饥。
现代文：二月五日，赈救四川饥荒。
English: On February 5th, the Sichuan Famine Relief Campaign was launched.

古文：三月己未，免陕西被灾秋粮三分之二。
现代文：三月一日，免陕西遭灾秋粮三分之二。
English: On March 1, two-thirds of the autumn grain in Shaanxi was spared from the disaster.

古文：戊寅，闭会川卫银矿。
现代文：二十日，关闭会川卫银矿。
English: On the 20th, the closure of the Sichuan Wei silver mine began.

古文：夏五月庚申，河决开封，入沁河，役五万人治之。
现代文：五月三日，开封黄河决堤，河水涌入沁河，役使五万人治理。
English: On May 3, the Yellow River in Kaifeng broke through the dike, and the river water poured into the Fen River, causing fifty thousand people to help control it.

古文：秋七月癸亥，以京师霪雨、南京大风雷修省，求直言。
现代文：七月七日，因京师久雨、南京大风雷而修身反省，征求直言。
English: On July 7th, because of the long rain in Beijing and the heavy wind and lightning in Nanjing, he reflected on himself and asked for a straight answer.

古文：戊寅，振畿内水灾。免税粮，给贫民麦种。
现代文：二十二日，赈济畿内水灾，免除税粮，给贫民麦种。
English: On the 22nd, to help the flood victims in Gyeonggi Province, tax-free grain and wheat seeds were provided to the poor.

古文：八月丁酉，复四川流民复业者杂役三年。
现代文：八月十二日，免除四川归业流民杂役三年。
English: On August 12, Sichuan migrant workers who have returned to work were exempted from miscellaneous service for three years.

古文：己酉，宪宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：二十四日，宪宗神牌位附祭于太庙。
English: On the 24th day of the month, the Kenzong God Plaque Ceremony was held at the Imperial Temple.

古文：十一月戊午，顺天饥，发粟平粜。
现代文：十一月四日，顺天饥荒，发放粮食平价卖出。
English: On November 4th, in the wake of the famine, grain was distributed and sold at parity prices.

古文：十二月甲申朔，日有食之。辛卯，赐于谦谥，立祠曰 旌功 。
现代文：十二月初一日，有日食。八日，赐给于谦谥号，立祭祠叫 旌功祠 。
English: On the first day of the first month of December, there was a solar eclipse. On the eighth day, it was given to Qianlong, and the temple was called Qigong Temple.

古文：是年，土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Turuban was the first to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：撒马儿罕贡狮子、鹦鹉，却之。
现代文：撒马儿罕贡狮子、鹦鹉，被拒绝，退还。
English: The lion and parrot of the Samal Hangun were rejected and returned.

古文：三年春正月甲子，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治三年正月十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the third year of the Konji era, a grand festival will take place in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月壬辰，免河南被灾秋粮。
现代文：二月十日，免河南受灾秋粮。
English: On February 10, Henan was exempted from the affected autumn grain.

古文：甲午，户部请免南畿、湖广税粮。
现代文：十二日，户部请求减免南畿、湖广税粮。
English: On the 12th, the Household Department requested the reduction and exemption of tax grain in Nanki and Hukang.

古文：上曰： 凶岁义当损上益下。
现代文：孝宗说 ：凶年应当损上益下。
English: Takamune said: A bad year should be a year of losses and gains.

古文：必欲取盈，如病民何。 
现代文：假若一定要收取盈余，如同百姓生病一样。 
English: If there is a surplus, it must be collected, just as if the people were ill.

古文：悉从之。
现代文：全部同意减免。
English: All agreed to the reductions.

古文：三月丙辰，命天下预备仓积粟，以里数多寡为差，不及额者罪之。
现代文：三月四日，命天下预备仓库积蓄粮食，以居民组织多少规定数额，不满额的判罪。
English: On March 4, he ordered the whole country to prepare warehouses to stockpile grain, and the residents' organization was found guilty of not meeting the required amount.

古文：庚午，赐钱福等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐钱福等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On the 18th, money and blessings were given to the winners, whose ranks and backgrounds varied.

古文：甲戌，侍郎张海、通政使元守直阅边。
现代文：二十二日，侍郎张海、通政使元守直巡察边境。
English: On the 22nd, the chamberlain Zhang Hai and the diplomatic envoy Yuan Shou Zhi inspected the border.

古文：秋九月庚戌，禁内府加派供御物料。
现代文：九月一日，禁止内府加派皇上御用物料。
English: On September 1, the Imperial Household Agency was prohibited from dispatching any more Imperial materials.

古文：闰月癸巳，禁宗室、勋戚奏请田土及受人投献。
现代文：闰九月十四日，禁止宗室、勋戚上奏请求田土及受人之托冒认他人田土。
English: On the 14th day of the 9th month of the leap year, the family and relatives of the deceased were prohibited from petitioning for land and being asked to impersonate other people's land.

古文：冬十一月甲辰，停工役，罢内官烧造瓷器。
现代文：十一月二十六日，停工役，停止内官烧造瓷器。
English: On November 26th, the work stoppage came to an end, and the officials stopped firing porcelain.

古文：十二月辛亥，以彗星见，敕群臣修省，陈军民利病。
现代文：十二月四日，因出现彗星，命群臣修身反省，陈述军民利弊得失。
English: On December 4th, due to the appearance of the comet, the generals and ministers began to reflect on themselves, stating the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people.

古文：己未，京师地震。
现代文：十二日，京师地震。
English: On the 12th, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：壬戌，减供御品物，罢明年上元灯火。
现代文：十五日，减少供御物品，免明年上元节灯火。
English: On the 15th, the supply of goods will be reduced, and the lights on the Lantern Festival next year will be exempted.

古文：是年，琉球、安南、哈密、撒马儿罕、天方、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、安南、哈密、撒马儿罕、天方、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Annan, Hami, Samarkand, Amakata, and Turuban entered the court to pay tribute.

古文：四年春正月癸未，以修省罢上元节假。
现代文：弘治四年正月初六日，因修身反省免上元节假日。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the 4th year of Hongzhi, he was exempted from the Lantern Festival due to self-reflection.

古文：己丑，大祀天地于南郊，停庆成宴。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于南郊，停庆成宴。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival was held in the southern suburbs, ending with a banquet.

古文：二月己巳，敕法司曰： 曩因天道示异，敕天下诸司审录重囚，发遣数十百人。
现代文：二月二十三日，命令法官说： 过去因天气显示奇特，命天下各部门审查重大囚犯，发配派遣数十百人。
English: On February 23rd, the judge ordered: "In the past, due to unusual weather, all departments were ordered to examine important prisoners and dispatch tens of hundreds of people.

古文：朕以为与其宽之于终，孰若谨之于始。
现代文：朕以为与其到最后宽免，不如一开始就谨慎。
English: I think it is better to be cautious at the beginning than to be lenient at the end.

古文：嗣后两京三法司及天下问刑官，务存心仁恕，持法公平，详审其情罪所当，庶不背于古圣人钦恤之训。 
现代文：此后两京三法律部门及天下问刑官，务必诚心仁慈宽恕，执法公平，详细适当审查其罪行，使百姓不违背古圣人宽恤之训。 
English: Since then, the legal departments of the two capitals and the three countries and the world have asked the penal officers to be sincere, merciful and forgiving, enforce the law fairly, and properly examine their crimes in detail, so that the people do not violate the ancient sage's teachings of mercy.

古文：六月辛亥，京师地震。
现代文：六月六日，京师地震。
English: On June 6, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：秋八月庚戌，苏、松、浙江水，停本年织造。
现代文：八月六日，苏、松、浙江涨水，停止本年织造。
English: On August 6, water levels rose in Su, Song and Zhejiang, halting weaving this year.

古文：乙卯，南京地震。
现代文：十一日，南京地震。
English: On the second day of the month, Nanjing was hit by an earthquake.

古文：己未，封皇弟祐榰为寿王，祐梈汝王，祐橓泾王，祐枢荣王，祐楷申王。
现代文：十五日，封皇帝之弟朱为寿王，椁汝王，木舜泾王，枢荣王，楷申王。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhu, the emperor's younger brother, was appointed as the King of Shou, the King of Jiu, the King of Muxun, the King of Zhurong, and the King of Kaishen.

古文：冬十月丙辰，以皇长子生，诏天下。
现代文：十月十三日，因皇长子降生而诏告天下。
English: On October 13th, the birth of the emperor's eldest son was announced to the world.

古文：戊午，河溢，振河南被灾者。
现代文：十五日，黄河涨水，赈救河南遭灾者。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Yellow River rose to help the victims in Henan.

古文：乙丑，礼部尚书丘濬兼文渊阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十二日，礼部尚书丘兼文渊阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 22nd, Shang Shuxiu, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of Wen Yuange University, participated in important affairs.

古文：十一月庚辰，振南畿灾。
现代文：十一月八日，赈济南畿灾害。
English: On November 8th, the Nanki disaster occurred.

古文：十二月甲子，土鲁番以哈密地及金印来归。
现代文：十二月二十二日，土鲁番以哈密地及金印前来归附。
English: On December 22nd, Turuban came to return it with a gift of land and a gold seal.

古文：是年，暹罗入贡。
现代文：这年，暹罗来朝进贡。
English: This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：五年春正月壬午，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治五年正月十一日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 11th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Konji era, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：二月丙寅，命陕巴袭封忠顺王。
现代文：二月二十五日，命陕巴袭封忠顺王。
English: On February 25th, he ordered Shaanxi Ba to attack and capture King Zhongshun.

古文：庚午，减陕西织造绒毼之半。
现代文：二十九日，减免陕西织造绒曷毛的一半。
English: On the 29th, the reduction and exemption of half of Shaanxi's woven cashmere mane.

古文：三月戊寅，立皇子厚照为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：三月八日，立皇子朱厚照为皇太子，大加赦免。
English: On March 8th, Prince Zhu Houzhao was appointed crown prince and pardoned.

古文：录太祖庙配享功臣绝封者后。
现代文：审查太祖庙附祭功臣绝封者后代。
English: The descendants of the great ancestor temple's enshrined heroes and vassals who were excommunicated were examined.

古文：辛卯，广西副总兵马俊、参议马铉、千户王珊等讨古田叛僮，遇伏死。
现代文：二十一日，广西副总兵马俊、参议马铉、千户王珊等征讨古田叛乱壮人，遇伏兵战死。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, Ma Jun, the deputy commander-in-chief of the soldiers of Guangxi, Ma Yao, the councillor, and Chihou Wang Shan, and others went to enlist the strong men of the Gutian rebellion, and were killed in an ambush.

古文：夏六月丁未，免南畿去年被灾税粮。
现代文：六月八日，免南畿去年受灾税粮。
English: On June 8th, tax-free grain from Nanki, which was affected by the disaster last year, arrived.

古文：秋七月甲午，振南京、浙江、山东饥。
现代文：七月二十六日，赈救南京、浙江、山东饥荒。
English: On July 26th, the famine in Nanjing, Zhejiang and Shandong was averted.

古文：八月癸卯，刘吉致仕。
现代文：八月五日，刘吉辞官退职。
English: On August 5, Liu Ji resigned and retired.

古文：乙丑，停苏、松、浙江额外织造，召督造官还。
现代文：二十七日，停止苏、松、浙江额外织造，召督造官回京。
English: On the 27th, the extra weaving of Su, Song and Zhejiang was stopped, and the supervising weaver was called back to Beijing.

古文：冬十月壬戌，湖广总兵官镇远侯顾溥、贵州巡抚都御史邓廷瓒、太监江惪会师讨贵州黑苗。
现代文：十月二十五日，湖广总兵官镇远侯顾溥、贵州巡抚都御史邓廷瓒、太监江鰆会师征讨贵州黑苗。
English: On October 25th, the commander-in-chief of Hubei and Guangxi, Zhenyuan Hou Gu Jun, the governor of Guizhou, Deng Tingjun, and the eunuch, Jiang Jun, gathered to solicit Guizhou black seedlings.

古文：十一月丙申，闭温、处银坑。
现代文：十一月二十九日，关闭温、处二州银坑。
English: On November 29th, the temperature and circulation departments of two state silver pits were closed.

古文：十二月丁巳，荆王见潚有罪，废为庶人。
现代文：十二月二十一日，荆王朱见氵肃犯罪，废为庶人。
English: On December 21st, Jing Wang Zhu was dethroned as a commoner.

古文：是年，琉球、乌斯藏、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、乌斯藏、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Ussuri, and Turuban went to the court to pay tribute.

古文：火剌札国贡方物，不受，给廪食遣还。
现代文：火剌札国进贡地方特产，不接受，给来使粮食遣返回国。
English: He did not accept the tribute of local special products from Hebei Province, and sent the grain back to his country.

古文：六年春正月己卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治六年正月十三日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 6th year of the Heian period, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：二月甲寅，录常遇春、李文忠、邓愈、汤和后裔，世袭指挥使。
现代文：二月十九日，录用常遇春、李文忠、邓愈、汤和后代，世袭指挥使。
English: On February 19, Changyu Chun, Li Wenzhong, Deng Yu, Tang He and his descendants were appointed as hereditary commanders.

古文：丁巳，擢布政使刘大夏右副都御史，治张秋决河。
现代文：二十二日，提升布政使刘大夏为右副都御史，治理张秋黄河决口。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Daxia, the political envoy of Bu, was promoted to the right vice-governor of the capital to govern Zhangqiu, the mouth of the Yellow River.

古文：三月癸未，赐毛澄等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐毛澄等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 18th, Mao Cheng and other new recruits were given different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月己亥，土鲁番速檀阿黑麻袭执陕巴，据哈密。
现代文：四月五日，土鲁番速檀阿黑麻袭击并擒获陕巴，占据哈密。
English: On April 5, Turuban attacked and captured Shaanba, occupying Hami.

古文：己酉，侍郎张海、都督同知缑谦经略哈密。
现代文：十五日，侍郎张海、都督同知缑谦经略哈密。
English: On the fifteenth day, Zhang Hai, the steward of the palace, and the governor of the capital, Zou Qian, went to visit Hami.

古文：辛酉，久旱，敕修省，求直言。
现代文：二十七日，久旱，命修身反省，征求直言。
English: On the 27th, after a long drought, he reflected on his life and asked for advice.

古文：五月丙寅，小王子犯宁夏，杀指挥赵玺。
现代文：五月三日，小王子侵犯宁夏，杀指挥赵玺。
English: On May 3rd, the Little Prince invaded Ningxia and killed the commander Zhao Wei.

古文：闰月乙未，免南京被灾秋粮。
现代文：闰五月二日，免南京受灾秋粮。
English: On the second day of leap May, the affected autumn grain in Nanjing was exempted.

古文：六月庚午，捕蝗。
现代文：六月八日，捕捉蝗虫。
English: June 8th, catching locusts.

古文：壬申，都御史闵珪击破古田叛僮。
现代文：十日，都御史闵王圭击败古田叛乱壮人。
English: On the 10th, the Metropolitan Shih Wang Kei defeated the Gutian rebel strongman.

古文：秋八月甲戌，免顺天被灾夏税。
现代文：八月十二日，免顺天受灾夏税。
English: On August 12th, the disaster-affected summer tax will be exempted.

古文：九月丁酉，免陕西被灾夏税。
现代文：九月六日，免陕西受灾夏税。
English: On September 6, Shaanxi was exempted from the disaster-affected summer tax.

古文：冬十月丙寅，以灾伤罢明年上元灯火。
现代文：十月五日，因灾伤免明年上元节灯火。
English: On October 5th, due to the disaster and injury, the lights of next year's Lantern Festival were cancelled.

古文：庚辰，停甘肃织造绒毼。
现代文：十九日，停止甘肃织造绒曷毛。
English: On the 19th, the production of cashmere mane in Gansu Province was suspended.

古文：十一月庚申，振京师流民。
现代文：十一月二十九日，赈济京师流民。
English: On November 29th, the displaced people left Beijing.

古文：十二月己卯，敕天下镇巡官修省。
现代文：十二月十九日，命天下镇巡官修身反省。
English: On December 19th, the town inspector was ordered to reflect on his actions.

古文：是年，安南、乌斯藏、土鲁番、暹罗入贡。
现代文：当年，安南、乌斯藏、土鲁番、暹罗入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Wuzang, Turpan and Siam paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：七年春正月丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治七年正月初七日，在南郊大祭天地。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the seventh year of the Hongzhi era, the Southern Suburbs Grand Festival took place.

古文：二月甲子，以去年冬孝陵风雷之变，遣使祭告，修省，求直言，命内外慎刑狱，决轻系。
现代文：二月五日，因去年冬天孝陵风雷变化，派使者祭告祖先，修身反省，征求直言，命令内外官谨慎用刑，判决不得轻率。
English: On February 5th, due to last winter's changes in filial piety, an envoy was sent to preach to the ancestors, to cultivate self-reflection, to solicit frank speech, and to order the officials at home and abroad to use punishment cautiously, and the judgment should not be rash.

古文：三月癸巳，贵州黑苗平。
现代文：三月四日，平定贵州黑苗。
English: On March 4th, Guizhou Black Seedling was pacified.

古文：戊申，两畿捕蝗。
现代文：十九日，两畿捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 19th, locusts were caught in the two provinces.

古文：夏五月甲辰，太监李兴、平江伯陈锐同刘大夏治张秋决河。
现代文：五月十七日，太监李兴、平江伯陈锐同刘大夏治理张秋黄河决口。
English: On May 17th, the eunuch Li Xing, the Pingjiang eunuch Chen Rui, and the eunuch Liu Daxia made a breakthrough in the governance of Zhangqiu and the Yellow River.

古文：秋七月乙巳，京师地震。
现代文：七月十九日，京师地震。
English: On July 19th, the Beijing earthquake occurred.

古文：丙午，工部侍郎徐贯、巡抚副都御史何鉴经理南畿水利。
现代文：二十日，工部侍郎徐贯、巡抚副都御史何鉴经理南畿水利。
English: On the 20th, Xu Gang, the secretary of the engineering department, and the deputy governor of the capital, Mishi He Jian, the manager of Nanki Water Conservancy, left.

古文：九月丁亥，以水灾停苏、松诸府所办物料，留关钞、户盐备振。
现代文：九月二日，因水灾停苏、松各府所采办物料，留关钞、户盐以备赈救之用。
English: On September 2, due to the floods, the materials procured by the prefectures of Su and Song were stopped, and customs notes and household salt were left to prepare for rescue.

古文：冬十一月壬子，京师地震。
现代文：十一月二十七日，京师地震。
English: On November 27th, the Beijing earthquake occurred.

古文：十二月甲戌，张秋河工成。
现代文：十二月十九日，张秋黄河堤竣工。
English: On December 19th, the Zhangqiu dike of the Yellow River was completed.

古文：乙卯，振甘、凉被兵军民，给牛种。
现代文：二十四日，赈救甘、凉遭兵祸军民，给耕牛粮种。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the reed helped the soldiers and civilians who suffered from cold and frost, and provided grain seeds for the oxen.

古文：是年，免北京、河南、湖广、陕西、山西被灾税粮。
现代文：这年，免北京、河南、湖广、陕西、山西受灾税粮。
English: This year, Beijing, Henan, Guangxi, Shaanxi and Shanxi were exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：琉球入贡。
现代文：琉球入朝进贡。
English: The Ryukyus paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：以土鲁番据哈密，却其贡使。
现代文：因土鲁番占据哈密，辞退其进贡使者。
English: Due to Turfan's occupation of Hami, his envoy to pay tribute was turned away.

古文：八年春正月乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治八年正月十一日，在京师南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the eighth year of the Heian period, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Kyoto.

古文：以太皇太后不豫，免庆成宴。
现代文：因太皇太后身体不适，免庆成宴。
English: The Empress Dowager is unwell and will not attend the banquet.

古文：壬子，甘肃总兵官刘宁败小王子于凉州。
现代文：二十八日，甘肃总兵官刘宁在凉州打败小王子。
English: On the 28th, Liu Ning, the chief military officer of Gansu Province, defeated the Little Prince in Liangzhou.

古文：二月乙卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一日，有日食。四日，丘死。
English: On the first day of February, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊午，丘濬卒。乙丑，礼部侍郎李东阳、少詹事谢迁入阁预机务。己卯，黄陵冈河口工成。
现代文：十一日，礼部侍郎李东阳、少詹事谢迁入阁参与机要事务。二十五日，黄陵冈黄河决口治理竣工。
English: On the 11th day, Li Dongyang, the attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and Shao Zhanzhi Xie moved into the cabinet to participate in important affairs. On the 25th day, the management of the Huanglinggang Yellow River mouth was completed.

古文：三月壬辰，免湖广被灾税粮。
现代文：三月九日，免湖广受灾税粮。
English: On March 9th, tax-free grain was distributed to those affected by the disaster.

古文：己亥，宁夏地震。
现代文：十六日，宁夏地震。
English: On the 16th, the Ningxia earthquake occurred.

古文：夏四月甲寅，苏、松各府治水工成。
现代文：四月一日，苏、松各府治水工程竣工。
English: On April 1, the flood control projects in the prefectures of Su and Song were completed.

古文：壬戌，谕吏部、都察院，人材进退，考察务得实迹，不可偏听枉人。
现代文：九日，告诉吏部、都察院，凡进举或退辞人才，考察必须有实际事实，不得偏听旁人之言。
English: On the 9th, he told the Ministry of Civil Affairs and the Criminal Investigation Agency that the examination of all talents who were promoted or resigned must have actual facts and must not be biased by others.

古文：五月己丑，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：五月七日，免南畿受灾税粮。
English: On May 7, Nanki was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：秋七月丁亥，封宋儒杨时将乐伯，从祀孔子庙庭。
现代文：七月七日，封宋儒杨时将乐伯，从祭于孔子庙庭。
English: On July 7th, Song, Confucius, and Yang will be enshrined in the Confucius Temple.

古文：戊子，广西副总兵欧磐击破平乐叛瑶。
现代文：八日，广西副总兵欧磐击败平乐叛瑶。
English: On the 8th, Guangxi Vice-Commander-in-Chief Ou Pang defeated the Pingle rebels.

古文：八月癸亥，以四方灾异数见，敕群臣修省。
现代文：八月十三日，因四方灾害，多次出现异常情况，命群臣修身反省。
English: On August 13th, due to the disaster in the four directions, abnormal situations occurred many times, and the ministers were forced to reflect on their lives.

古文：冬十一月己酉，免直隶被灾秋粮。
现代文：十一月三十日，免直隶受灾秋粮。
English: On November 30th, Mianzhili suffered from the autumn grain.

古文：十二月辛酉，巡抚甘肃佥都御史许进、总兵官刘宁入哈密，土鲁番遁，遂班师。
现代文：十二月十二日，巡抚甘肃副都御史许进、总兵官刘宁进入哈密，土鲁番逃跑，遂下令回师。
English: On December 12, the inspector of Gansu, the vice-governor of Gansu, Mishi Xu Jin, and the general officer Liu Ning entered Hami, Turuban fled, and then ordered to return to the division.

古文：是年，爪哇、占城、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，爪哇、占城、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In this year, Java, Zhancheng and Wuxu paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：乜克力诸部款肃州塞求入贡，却之。
现代文：乜克力诸部到肃州边塞请求入朝进贡，被辞退拒绝。
English: Zeng Keli and other officials went to the border fortress of Suizhou to request the payment of tribute to the dynasty, but were turned down.

古文：九年春正月壬辰，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治九年正月十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the ninth year of the Heian period, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：二月庚午，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：二月二十二日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On February 22nd, Henan was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：辛未，右通政张璞、大理少卿马中锡阅边。
现代文：二十三日，右通政张璞、大理少卿马中锡检阅边境军马。
English: On the 23rd, U-turn Zhang Ye and Dali Shaoqing Ma Zhongxi inspected the horses of the border troops.

古文：三月丙申，赐朱希周等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐朱希周等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 18th, Zhu Xi Zhou and others were awarded the title of "Candidate" with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月戊子，以岷王膺鉟奏，逮武冈知州刘逊。
现代文：四月十一日，因岷王膺钅丕奏，逮捕武冈知州刘逊。
English: On April 11th, Liu Xun from Wukan Chizhou was arrested for playing the fiddle.

古文：给事中、御史庞泮、刘绅等谏，下锦衣卫狱，寻释之。
现代文：给事中、御史庞泮、刘绅等进谏，下锦衣卫狱，不久释放。
English: During the incident, Mishi Pangyao, Liu Sheng, etc. were imprisoned, and they were released shortly after.

古文：六月庚子，免江西被灾税粮。
现代文：六月二十五日，免江西受灾税粮。
English: On June 25th, Jiangxi was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：秋八月壬寅，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：八月二十八日，免湖广受灾秋粮。
English: On August 28th, the affected autumn crops in Hubei Province were exempted from the disaster.

古文：九月己酉，禁势家侵夺民利。
现代文：九月六日，禁止势家豪族侵犯民利。
English: On September 6, it was forbidden for powerful families to encroach on the interests of the people.

古文：是年，日本、琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，日本、琉球、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Japan, Ryukyu, and Ussuri provinces paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十年春正月庚戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治十年正月八日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the 10th year of the Heian period, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：三月辛亥，以旱霾修省，求直言。
现代文：三月九日，因天旱起风沙而修身反省，求直言。
English: On March 9th, due to the wind and sand caused by the drought, he reflected on his self-cultivation and asked for straight talk.

古文：甲子，召大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁于文华殿议庶政，后以为常。
现代文：二十二日，召见大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁于文华殿商讨平民政事，以后经常如此。
English: On the 22nd, university scholars Liu Jian, Li Dongyang, and Xie Qian were summoned to discuss civilian politics at the Wenhua Hall, and this has often been the case since then.

古文：夏五月戊辰，小王子犯潮河川。
现代文：五月二十七日，小王子侵犯潮河川。
English: On May 27th, the Little Prince invaded the tidal rivers.

古文：己巳，犯大同。
现代文：二十八日，侵犯大同。
English: On the 28th, it invaded Datong.

古文：六月己卯，侍郎刘大夏、李介理宣府、大同军饷。
现代文：六月九日，侍郎刘大夏、李介整理宣府、大同军饷。
English: On June 9, attendants Liu Daxia and Li Jie sorted out the Xuanfu and Datong troops.

古文：秋七月癸丑，都督杨玉帅京营军，备永平。
现代文：七月十四日，都督杨玉率京营兵，防备永平。
English: On July 14th, Yang Yu, the governor of the capital, led the Beijing camp soldiers to guard Yongping.

古文：冬十一月庚子，土鲁番归陕巴，乞通贡。
现代文：十一月三日，土鲁番放回陕巴，乞求与朝廷通好进贡。
English: On November 3, Turuban was released back to Shaanxi and Ba, and begged for a good settlement of tribute with the imperial court.

古文：是年，免南畿、山西、陕西被灾税粮，振山东、四川水灾。
现代文：当年，免南畿、山西、陕西受灾税粮，赈济山东、四川水灾。
English: In that year, Nanki, Shanxi and Shaanxi were exempted from the disaster tax grain, and the floods in Shandong and Sichuan were alleviated.

古文：安南、暹罗、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：安南、暹罗、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: Annan, Siam and Wuxia paid tribute to the North.

古文：十一年春正月丁未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治十一年正月十一日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the eleventh day of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the Heian period, a grand festival was held in the southern suburbs of Kyoto.

古文：二月己巳，小王子遣使求贡。
现代文：二月三日，小王子派使者请求进贡。
English: On February 3rd, the little prince sent an envoy to demand tribute.

古文：夏五月戊申，甘肃参将杨翥败小王子于黑山。
现代文：五月十三日，甘肃参将杨翥在黑山打败小王子。
English: On May 13th, the Gansu gambler Yang Wei defeated the little prince in Montenegro.

古文：秋七月己酉，总制三边都御史王越袭小王子于贺兰山后，败之。
现代文：七月十五日，总制三边都御史王越袭击小王子于贺兰山后，大败小王子。
English: On July 15th, Wang Yue, the general commander of the three-sided capital, attacked Xiao Wuxi in Helan Mountain, and defeated Xiao Wuxi.

古文：癸亥。徐溥致仕。
现代文：二十九日，徐溥辞官退职。
English: On the 29th, Xu Rong resigned from his post.

古文：八月癸未，振祥符民被河患者。
现代文：八月二十日，赈救祥符遭黄河水患灾民。
English: On August 20th, the 救祥符 went to the victims of the Yellow River flood.

古文：冬十月丙寅，命工作不得役团营军士。
现代文：十月四日，命令不得役使团营军士工作。
English: On October 4, he was ordered not to work as an envoy battalion sergeant.

古文：甲戌，清宁宫灾。
现代文：十二日，清宁宫火灾。
English: On the 12th, the fire broke out in the Qingning Palace.

古文：丁亥，敕群臣修省，求直言，罢明年上元灯火。
现代文：二十五日，命群臣修身反省，求直言，免明年上元节灯火。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the lives of the ministers began to self-reflect and ask for straight talk, so as to avoid the lights of the Lantern Festival next year.

古文：十一月壬子，免陕西织造羊绒。
现代文：十一月二十日，免陕西织造羊绒。
English: On November 20th, Shaanxi Min weaving cashmere.

古文：闰月壬戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：闰十一月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of leap November, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：乙酉，罢福建织造彩布。
现代文：二十四日，停止福建织造彩布。
English: On the 24th, the weaving of colored cloth in Fujian Province was suspended.

古文：十二月庚子。禁中外奢靡逾制。
现代文：十二月九日，禁止朝中内外奢侈超过规定。
English: On December 9, it was forbidden for the DPRK, China and other countries to indulge in extravagance beyond regulations.

古文：壬子，以清宁宫灾诏赦天下。
现代文：二十一日，因清宁宫灾害，下诏大赦天下。
English: On the twenty-first day, due to the disaster at the Qingning Palace, the emperor issued a general amnesty.

古文：是年，免山西、陕西、两畿、广西、广东被灾税粮。
现代文：这年，免山西、陕西、两畿、广西、广东受灾税粮。
English: This year, Shanxi, Shaanxi, the two Kis, Guangxi and Guangdong were exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：土鲁番、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：土鲁番、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: Turuban and Usshimo paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十二年春正月辛未，大祀天地于南郊，免庆成宴。
现代文：弘治十二年正月十一日，大祭天地于南郊，免庆成宴。
English: On the 11th day of the first month of the 12th year of Hongzhi, the grand festival heaven and earth will be held in the southern suburbs, and the celebration banquet will be held.

古文：二月壬辰，免山东被灾夏税。
现代文：二月二日，免山东受灾夏税。
English: On February 2, Shandong was exempted from the disaster-affected summer tax.

古文：戊申，严左道惑众之禁。
现代文：十八日，严格邪道惑众之禁令。
English: On the 18th, there was a strict ban on misleading the public.

古文：三月丁丑，赐伦文叙等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐伦文叙等进士及第，出身各有差别。
English: On March 18th, Qi Lun, Wen Xiu and others were promoted to the first and second ranks, with different origins.

古文：夏四月癸巳，敕宣、大、延绥备边。
现代文：四月四日，命令宣府、大同、延绥防备边境。
English: On April 4, Xuanfu, Datong and Yancheng were ordered to prepare for the border.

古文：是月，免湖广、江西被灾税粮。
现代文：当月，免湖广、江西受灾税粮。
English: In the same month, the disaster-affected tax grain in Guangxi and Jiangxi was exempted.

古文：五月戊寅，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：五月十九日，免南畿遭灾秋粮。
English: On May 19th, Nanki was spared from the autumn grain disaster.

古文：六月甲辰，阙里先师庙灾，遣使慰祭。
现代文：六月十六日，阙里先师庙发生火灾，派使者慰问祭祀。
English: On June 16th, a fire broke out in the temple of the Bodhisattva of Compassion in Bali, and an envoy was sent to offer condolences.

古文：秋八月，免河南、南畿被灾夏税。
现代文：八月，免河南、南畿遭灾夏税。
English: In August, Henan and Nanki were exempted from the disaster summer tax.

古文：九月壬午，普安贼妇米鲁作乱。
现代文：九月二十五日，普安女贼米鲁制造叛乱。
English: On September 25, the Pu'an female thief Miru led a rebellion.

古文：甲申，重建清宁宫成。
现代文：二十七日，重新建成清宁宫。
English: On the 27th, the Qingning Palace was rebuilt.

古文：是年，占城、乌斯藏、土鲁番、爪哇、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：本年，占城、乌斯藏、土鲁番、爪哇、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: This year, Zhancheng, Wuzang, Turpan, Java and Samarkand paid tribute to the North.

古文：十三年春正月乙丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：弘治十三年正月初十日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the 13th year of the Hongzhi era, a grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月戊子，免山西被灾税粮，庚寅，定问刑条例。
现代文：二月四日，免山西受灾税粮。六日，制定问刑条例。
English: On February 4, Shanxi was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain. On the 6th, the interrogation regulations were formulated.

古文：乙未，严旌举连坐之法。
现代文：十一日，严格荐举连坐之法。
English: On the 11th day, it is strictly recommended to sit up straight.

古文：夏四月，火筛寇大同，游击将军王杲败绩于威远卫。
现代文：四月，火筛侵犯大同，游击将军王杲溃败于威远卫。
English: In April, the fire sieve invaded Datong, and the guerrilla general Wang Qi was defeated by Wei Yuanwei.

古文：乙巳，平江伯陈锐为靖虏将军，充总兵官，太监金辅监军，户部左侍郎许进提督军务，御之。
现代文：二十二日，平江伯陈锐为靖虏将军，兼任总兵官，太监金辅监督军队，户部左侍郎许进提督军务，抗击火筛。
English: On the 22nd, Chen Rui, the eunuch of Pingjiang Province, became the general of Jingrui, concurrently serving as the chief military officer, the eunuch Jin Fu supervised the army, and the left attendant of the household, Xu Jin, was the admiral of military affairs, resisting the fire.

古文：五月甲寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丙辰，召大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁于平台，议京营将领。
现代文：三日，召大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁于平台，讨论京营将领一事。
English: On the third day, university scholars Liu Jian, Li Dongyang and Xie Qian were called to the platform to discuss the matter of the generals of the Beijing Camp.

古文：癸亥，火筛大举入寇大同左卫，游击将军张俊御却之。
现代文：十日，火筛大举入侵大同左卫，游击将军张俊击退火筛。
English: On the 10th, the fire brigade invaded Datong Zuwei in a big way, and the guerrilla general Zhang Jun repelled the fire brigade.

古文：六月甲申，免江西被灾秋粮，停山、陕采办物料。
现代文：六月二日，免江西受灾秋粮。停止山、陕采办物料。
English: On June 2, the autumn grain in Jiangxi Province was exempted from the disaster. The procurement of materials in Shan and Shaanxi was stopped.

古文：庚子，召陈锐、金辅还，保国公朱晖、太监扶安往代，益兵御寇。
现代文：十八日，召陈锐、金辅回京，保国公朱晖、太监扶安前往代替陈锐、金辅，增兵抗击火筛。
English: On the 18th, Chen Rui and Jin Fu were called back to Beijing, and Zhu Xi, the Protector of the State, and Fu An, the eunuch, went to replace Chen Rui and Jin Fu, to increase the number of soldiers to fight the fire.

古文：秋七月己巳，京师地震。
现代文：七月十七日，京师地震。
English: On July 17th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：八月辛卯，振江西水灾。
现代文：八月九日，赈救江西水灾。
English: On August 9th, the flood disaster in Jiangxi Province occurred.

古文：冬十月戊申，两京地震。
现代文：十月二十七日，两京地震。
English: On October 27th, an earthquake hit the two capitals.

古文：是月，小王子诸部寇大同。
现代文：当月，小王子诸部侵犯大同。
English: That month, the Little Prince invaded Datong.

古文：十二月辛丑，火筛寇大同，南掠百余里。
现代文：十二月二十一日，火筛侵掠大同，向南侵掠一百多里。
English: On December 21, the fire spread to Datong, more than a hundred miles to the south.

古文：是年，小王子部入居河套，犯延绥神木堡。
现代文：当年，小王子占据河套，侵犯延绥神木堡。
English: In that year, the Little Prince occupied Hetao and encroached upon Yancheng's sacred wooden castle.

古文：琉球、土鲁番、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：琉球、土鲁番、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Turuban, and Usuko paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十四年春正月庚戌朔，陕西地大震。
现代文：弘治十四年正月初一日，陕西发生大地震。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 14th year of Hongzhi, a major earthquake occurred in Shaanxi.

古文：乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 9th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：二月己亥，罢陕西织造中官。
现代文：二月二十日，罢免陕西织造中官。
English: On February 20, the middle-ranking official of Shaanxi Weaving was dismissed.

古文：夏四月庚辰，工部侍郎李鐩总督延绥边饷。
现代文：四月三日，工部侍郎李钅遂总督延绥边境粮饷。
English: On April 3, Li Shuxu, the Minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and the Governor of Yancheng Border Grain Refinery.

古文：戊子，保国公朱晖、提督军务都御史史琳、监军太监苗逵分道进师延绥。
现代文：十一日，保国公朱晖、提督军务都御史史琳、监军太监苗逵分道进兵延绥。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Zhu Xi, the governor of Baoguo Province, Shi Xilin, the admiral of the capital of military affairs, and Miao Wei, the eunuch in charge of supervising the army, marched into Yancheng.

古文：戊戌，免陕西、山西物料。
现代文：二十一日，免陕西、山西物料。
English: On the 21st, materials from Shaanxi and Shanxi will be exempted.

古文：是月，火筛诸部寇固原。
现代文：本月，火筛诸部侵掠固原。
English: This month, the fire spread to all parts of Gyogen.

古文：五月庚戌，振大同被兵军民，免税粮。
现代文：五月三日，赈济大同遭兵祸军民，免除税粮。
English: On May 3rd, in order to help the soldiers and civilians in Datong who suffered from the war, tax-free grain was issued.

古文：辛酉，免陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：十四日，免陕西受灾税粮。
English: On the 14th, the disaster-affected tax grain in Shaanxi Province was exempted.

古文：戊辰，修阙里先师庙。
现代文：二十一日，修复阙里先师庙。
English: On the twenty-first day, the restoration of the teacher temple in Bali was completed.

古文：命各布政使司上地里图。
现代文：命各布政使司写呈上地里图。
English: He ordered all the political appointees to write and submit the above map.

古文：秋七月丁未，泰宁卫贼犯辽东，掠长胜诸屯堡。
现代文：七月一日，泰宁卫贼侵犯辽东，抢劫长胜诸屯堡。
English: On July 1, the Taining defenders invaded Liaodong and robbed Changsheng Zhutun Fort.

古文：癸亥。南京户部尚书王轼兼左副都御史提督军务，讨贵州贼妇米鲁。
现代文：十七日，南京户部尚书王轼兼左副都御史提督军务，征讨贵州女贼米鲁。
English: On the 17th, Shangshu Wangyao, the left vice-governor of Nanjing and the left vice-governor of Guizhou, arrived in Nanjing to solicit the Guizhou female thief Miru.

古文：丁卯，朱晖、史琳袭小王子于河套。
现代文：二十一日，朱晖、史琳在河套袭击小王子。
English: On the twenty-first day, Zhu Xi and Shilin attacked the little prince in Hetao.

古文：庚午，分遣给事中、御史清理屯田。
现代文：二十四日，分遣给事中、御史清理屯田。
English: On the 24th, he was dispatched to the middle of the matter and the history to clean up the occupied land.

古文：闰月乙酉，都指挥王泰御小王子于盐池，战死。
现代文：闰七月九日，都指挥王泰在盐池抗击小王子，战死。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month, the commander Wang Tai fought against the Little Prince in Yanchi and was killed.

古文：戊戌，振两畿、江西、山东、河南水灾。
现代文：二十二日，赈两畿、江西、山东、河南水灾。
English: On the 22nd, floods occurred in Shandong, Jiangxi, Shandong and Henan.

古文：八月己酉，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：八月四日，免河南遭灾税粮。
English: On August 4, Henan was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：是月，火筛诸部犯固原，大掠韦州、环县、萌城、灵州。
现代文：本月，火筛诸部侵犯固原，大肆抢劫韦州、环县、萌城、灵州。
English: This month, various fire departments invaded Guyuan and looted Weizhou, Huan County, Mengcheng and Lingzhou.

古文：己巳，减光禄寺供应，如元年制。
现代文：二十四日，减少光禄寺供应，按弘治元年规定。
English: On the 24th, the supply to Koroku-ji Temple was reduced in accordance with the regulations of the first year of the Heian period.

古文：火筛诸部犯宁夏东路。
现代文：火筛诸部侵犯宁夏东路。
English: The fire spread to various parts of Ningxia East Road.

古文：九月丙子朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of September, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丁亥，遣使募兵于延绥、宁夏、甘、凉。
现代文：十二日，派使者到宁夏、延绥、甘、凉等地募兵。
English: On the 12th, envoys were sent to Ningxia, Yancheng, Gan, Liang and other places to recruit soldiers.

古文：甲辰，召史琳还，起秦纮为户部尚书兼副都御史，代之。
现代文：二十九日，召史琳回京，起用秦为户部尚书兼副都御史，代替史琳。
English: On the 29th, Shilin was called back to Beijing, and Qin was appointed as the head of the household and vice-governor of the capital, replacing Shilin.

古文：冬十一月癸巳，分遣侍郎何鉴、大理寺丞吴一贯振恤两畿、山东、河南饥民。
现代文：十一月十九日，分遣侍郎何鉴、大理寺丞吴一贯赈恤两畿、山东、河南饥民。
English: On November 19th, the dispatched chamberlain He Jian and the priest of the Dali Temple, Wu Jianzhong, went to the famine-stricken areas in Shandong and Henan.

古文：十二月戊辰，辽东大饥，振之。
现代文：十二月二十四日，辽东大饥荒，赈济。
English: On December 24th, the great famine in Liaodong began.

古文：是月，寇出河套。
现代文：这月，火筛逃出河套。
English: This month, a fire escapes from the riverbed.

古文：是年，免湖广、江西、山西、山东、陕西、河南、畿内被灾税粮。
现代文：当年，免湖广、江西、山西、山东、陕西、河南、畿内受灾税粮。
English: In that year, the foodstuffs affected by the disaster in Huguang, Jiangxi, Shanxi, Shandong, Shaanxi, Henan and Kinai were exempted from the tax.

古文：安南、琉球入贡。
现代文：安南、琉球入朝进贡。
English: Annan and Ryukyu pay tribute to the Emperor.

古文：十五年春正月丙子，朱晖帅师还。
现代文：弘治十五年正月初三日，朱晖率师回京。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 15th year of the Hongzhi era, Zhu Xi led his division back to Beijing.

古文：丙戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：二月癸丑，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：二月十日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On February 10, the disaster-affected grain in Henan was exempted from the tax.

古文：三月癸未，罢饶州督造瓷器中官。
现代文：三月十一日，罢免饶州督造瓷器中官。
English: On March 11th, the vice-governor of the Raozhou Superintendency of Porcelain was dismissed.

古文：庚寅，赐康海等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐康海等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the 18th, there were differences in the number and origin of new recruits such as Kanghai.

古文：夏四月壬寅，振京师贫民。
现代文：四月初一日，赈济京师贫民。
English: On the first day of April, the Beijing Relief Society began to help the poor.

古文：五月庚子，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：五月二十九日，免湖广受灾秋粮。
English: On May 29th, the affected autumn grain crops in Hunan Province were exempted from the disaster.

古文：秋七月己卯，录刘基后裔世袭指挥使。
现代文：七月九日，录用刘基后代世袭指挥使。
English: On July 9th, Liu Ji's descendants were appointed as hereditary commanders.

古文：己丑，王轼破斩米鲁，贵州贼平。
现代文：十九日，王轼破斩米鲁，贵州贼被平定。
English: On the 19th, Wang Qi defeated Miru, and the Guizhou bandits were subdued.

古文：辛卯，命各边卫设养济院、漏泽园。
现代文：二十一日，命各边卫设养济院、漏泽园。
English: On the twenty-first day, he ordered each border guard to set up a nursing home and a garden.

古文：八月庚戌，以南京、凤阳霪雨大风，江溢为灾。遣使祭告，敕两京群臣修省。
现代文：八月十一日，因南京、凤阳久雨大风，长江水满成灾，遣使臣祭告先祖，命两京群臣修身反省。
English: On August 11th, due to the heavy rain and strong winds in Nanjing and Fengyang, the Yangtze River was flooded, and the envoys were sent to pay tribute to the ancestors and ordered the Beijing group of ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：九月庚午朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of September, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊子，放减内府所畜鸟兽。
现代文：十九日，放走并减少内府所喂养的鸟兽。
English: On the 19th, the birds and beasts that were fed by the government were released and reduced.

古文：冬十月癸卯，罢明年上元灯火。
现代文：十月四日，停明年上元节灯火。
English: On October 4th, the lights will be turned off for next year's Lantern Festival.

古文：十一月壬申，琼州黎贼作乱。
现代文：十一月三日，琼州黎贼作乱。
English: On November 3, Qiongzhou and Lijiang bandits staged a riot.

古文：甲午，罢广东采珠。
现代文：二十五日，停止广东采集珠宝。
English: On the 25th, Guangdong stopped collecting jewelry.

古文：十二月己酉，《大明会典》成。
现代文：十二月十一日，《大明会典》修成。
English: On December 11th, the "Daming Canon" was completed.

古文：辛亥，以疾不视朝。
现代文：十三日，因病不上朝办公。
English: On the 13th, due to illness, he did not go to work in the morning.

古文：是月，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：这月，免南畿受灾秋粮。
English: This month, Nanki was spared from the autumn grain disaster.

古文：是年，琉球、安南入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、安南入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu and Annan paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十六年春正月癸酉，遣官代享太庙。
现代文：弘治十六年正月十五日，遣官代祭太庙。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the 16th year of the Heian period, he was sent to serve as the representative of the temple.

古文：二月辛丑，视朝。
现代文：二月四日，上朝办公。
English: On February 4th, I went to work in the morning.

古文：戊申，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于南郊。
English: On the 11th day, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：三月癸巳，免山西被灾税粮。
现代文：三月二十六日，免山西受灾税粮。
English: On March 26th, Shanxi disaster-affected tax grain was exempted.

古文：夏四月辛亥，敕宣、大严边备。
现代文：四月十五日，命令宣府、大同严防边备。
English: On April 15, Xuanfu and Datong were ordered to be on high alert.

古文：五月戊子，以云南灾变敕群臣修省。
现代文：五月二十三日，因云南灾情变化命群臣修身反省。
English: On May 23rd, due to the changes in the disaster situation in Yunnan, the ministers were forced to reflect on their lives.

古文：刑部侍郎樊莹巡视云、贵，察官吏，问民疾苦。
现代文：刑部侍郎樊莹巡视云南、贵州，检察官吏，问民疾苦。
English: Gao Ying, an attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, inspected Yunnan and Guizhou, and the procurators asked the people about their hardships.

古文：秋七月，广东官军讨黎贼，败之。
现代文：七月，广东官军征讨黎贼，大败黎氏。
English: In July, the Guangdong government army went to fight the Lai bandits and defeated the Lai clan.

古文：九月丁丑，振两畿、浙江、山东、河南、湖广被灾军民。
现代文：九月十四日，赈救两畿、浙江、山东、河南、湖广受灾军民。
English: On September 14th, Yunnan rescued the affected soldiers and civilians in the two Kis, Zhejiang, Shandong, Henan and Hunan provinces.

古文：冬十一月甲戌，罢营造器物及明年上元烟火。
现代文：十一月十一日，停免营造器物及明年上元节烟火。
English: On November 11th, the ban on building objects and the next year's Lantern Festival fireworks will be lifted.

古文：是月，免南畿被灾秋粮。
现代文：这月，免南畿遭灾秋粮。
English: This month, Nanki was spared from the autumn grain disaster.

古文：十二月丙午，免淮、扬、浙江物料。
现代文：十二月十三日，免淮、扬、浙江物料。
English: December 13th, exempt Huai, Yang and Zhejiang materials.

古文：是年，安南、暹罗、哈密、土鲁番、撒马儿罕入贡。
现代文：当年，安南、暹罗、哈密、土鲁番、撒马儿罕入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Annan, Siam, Hami, Turpan and Samarkand paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：十七年春正月辛未，南京工部侍郎高铨振应天饥。
现代文：弘治十七年正月初九日，南京工部侍郎高铨赈救应天饥荒。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the 17th year of the Hongzhi era, Gao Qi, a chamberlain of the Nanjing Engineering Department, came to help with the famine.

古文：甲戌，大祀天地于南郊。壬午，严诬告之禁。
现代文：十二日，在京城南郊大祭天地。二十日，严定诬告禁令。
English: On the 12th, a grand festival will be held in the southern suburbs of Beijing. On the 20th, a strict ban on false accusations.

古文：二月甲寅，减供用物料。
现代文：二月二十二日，减少供用物料。
English: On February 22nd, the supply of materials was reduced.

古文：己未，严谶纬妖书之禁。
现代文：二十七日，严格谶纬妖书禁令。
English: On the 27th, the ban on witchcraft books was strictly enforced.

古文：庚申，免浙江被灾税粮。
现代文：二十八日，免浙江遭灾税粮。
English: On the 28th, Zhejiang was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：三月壬戌，太皇太后崩。
现代文：三月一日，太皇太后死。
English: On March 1, the great empress dowager passed away.

古文：癸未，定太庙各室一帝一后之制。
现代文：二十二日，定太庙各室一帝一后制度。
English: On the 22nd, the system of one emperor and one empress dowager for each room of the Jingtai Temple was established.

古文：夏四月己酉，葬孝肃皇太后。
现代文：四月十八日，安葬孝肃皇太后。
English: On April 18th, the funeral of Empress Dowager Xiaoshu took place.

古文：闰月辛酉，阙里先师庙成，遣大学士李东阳祭告。
现代文：闰四月一日，阙里先师庙修成，派大学士李东阳祭告。
English: On the first day of leap April, the construction of the teacher's temple in Bali was completed, and the university scholar Li Dongyang was sent to announce it.

古文：庚午，免山东被灾税粮。
现代文：十日，免山东遭灾税粮。
English: On the 10th, Shandong was exempted from the disaster tax grain.

古文：乙亥，以四方灾荒敕群臣修省。
现代文：十五日，因四方灾荒命群臣修身反省。
English: On the fifteenth day, due to the disaster in the four directions, the ministers were forced to reflect on themselves.

古文：庚辰，命诸司详议害民弊政。
现代文：二十日，命各部门详细讨论害民弊政。
English: On the 20th, all departments were ordered to discuss in detail the harm to the people and the maladministration.

古文：五月壬辰，罢南京、苏、杭织造中宫。
现代文：五月三日，罢免南京、苏、杭织造中官。
English: On May 3, the vice-governors of Nanjing, Suzhou and Hangzhou were dismissed.

古文：六月乙亥，始命两京五品以下官六年一考察。
现代文：六月十六日，从此开始命令两京五品以下官吏六年考察一次。
English: On June 16th, he ordered officials below the rank of Beijing No. 5 to inspect the site once every six years.

古文：辛巳，召刘健、李东阳于暖阁，议边务。
现代文：二十二日，在暖阁召见大学士刘健、李东阳，讨论边防事务。
English: On the 22nd, Liu Jian and Li Dongyang, university scholars, were summoned to Nengge to discuss border defense affairs.

古文：癸未，火筛入大同，指挥郑瑀力战死。
现代文：二十四日，火筛侵入大同，指挥郑王禹奋力战死。
English: On the 24th, the fire brigade invaded Datong, and the commander, Zheng Wang Yu, died in battle.

古文：秋七月癸巳，工部侍郎李鐩、大理少卿吴一贯、通政司参议便丛兰分道经略边塞。
现代文：七月五日，工部侍郎李钅遂、大理少卿吴一贯、通政司参议丛兰分道经略边关要塞。
English: On July 5th, Li Yansui, the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, Wu Yongsong, the Junior Secretary of the Dalian Municipal Party Committee, and Conglan, the Councillor of the Department of Political Affairs, went to the border fortress.

古文：甲午，左副都御史阎仲宇、通政司参议熊伟分理边饷。
现代文：六日，左副都御史阎仲宇、通政司参议熊伟分别经理边防粮饷。
English: On the 6th, Yan Zhongyu, the left vice-governor of the capital, and Xiong Wei, the councillor of the State Administration of Foreign Affairs, were appointed as the manager of the border grain control.

古文：八月戊辰，命天下抚、按、三司官奏军民利病，土民建言可采者，所司以闻。
现代文：八月十一日，命天下抚、按、三司官陈奏军民利弊，士民建议可以采纳的，所在部门要上报。
English: On August 11th, it was ordered that the three officials of the State Council, the General Office of the People's Liberation Army, and the General Office of the People's Liberation Army should discuss the advantages and disadvantages of the military and the people. If the suggestions of the scholars and the people can be accepted, the department should report it.

古文：甲申，免南畿被灾夏税。
现代文：二十七日，免南畿受灾夏税。
English: On the 27th, Nanki was exempted from the summer tax.

古文：丁亥，召马文升、戴珊于暖阁，谕以明年考察，务访实迹，以求至当。
现代文：三十日，在暖阁召见马文升、戴珊，告谕他们明年考察一定要查访实绩，以求准确妥当。
English: On the 30th, Ma Wensheng and Daishan were summoned to the warm pavilion and told that they must visit the actual performance next year in order to be accurate and appropriate.

古文：九月庚寅，谕法司不得任情偏执，致淹狱囚。
现代文：九月三日，告诉法官不得偏情任性执法，推迟狱囚时间。
English: On September 3, he told the judge that he must not be partial to arbitrary law enforcement and delay the time of prisoners.

古文：甲寅，太常少卿孙交经略宣、大边务。
现代文：二十七日，太常少卿孙交经略宣府、大同边务。
English: On the 27th, Sun Jiajing, Taizhong Shaoqing, left for Xuanfu and Datong Border Affairs.

古文：丁巳，御暖阁，谕刘健、李东阳、谢迁： 诸边首功，巡按御史察勘，动淹岁年，非所以示劝。
现代文：三十日，到暖阁，告诉刘健、李东阳、谢迁 ：各边境主要功劳，巡抚御史察实，往往推迟一年，这不是奖励军功的办法。
English: On the 30th, he went to the warm pavilion and told Liu Jian, Li Dongyang and Xie Qian: the major merits of each border, the inspector general of history and fact-finding, are often delayed for one year, this is not a way to reward military merit.

古文：自今奏报，以远近立限。
现代文：从今天起一切奏报，以远近为限期。
English: From today, the deadline for all reports is near or far.

古文：违者诘治。 
现代文：违者查办惩治。 
English: Violators will be investigated and punished.

古文：谕讲官进讲直言毋讳。
现代文：告谕讲官进讲可以直言不讳。
English: Announcement lecturers can be outspoken in their lectures.

古文：冬十一月戊子，罢云南银场。
现代文：十一月二日，停开云南银场。
English: On November 2, the Yunnan Silver Exchange was closed.

古文：十二月庚午，申闭籴之禁。
现代文：十二月十四日，重申禁止平价卖粮之禁令。
English: On December 14, the ban on selling grain at parity prices was reaffirmed.

古文：甲申，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：二十八日，免湖广受灾秋粮。
English: On the 28th, the autumn grain affected by the disaster was exempted from the lake.

古文：是年，琉球、撒马儿罕、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、撒马儿罕、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Samarkand, Hami and Uss were taken as tribute.

古文：十八年春正月己丑，小王子诸部围灵州，入花马池，遂掠韦州、环县。
现代文：弘治十八年正月初三日，小王子诸部围攻灵州，进入花马池，抢劫韦州、环县。
English: On the third day of the first month of the 18th year of Hongzhi, the Little Prince's various departments besieged Lingshou, entered Hanama Pond, and robbed Weizhou and Huan County.

古文：户部侍郎顾佐理陕西军饷。
现代文：户部侍郎顾佐治理陕西军饷。
English: Gusa, the steward of the household, governed the military districts of Shaanxi Province.

古文：乙未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：九日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 9th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：甲辰，小王子陷宁夏清水营。
现代文：十八日，小王子攻陷宁夏清水营。
English: On the 18th, the Little Prince captured the Ningxia Clear Water Camp.

古文：二月戊辰，御奉天门，谕户、兵、工三部曰： 方今生齿渐繁，而户口、军伍日就耗损，此皆官司抚恤无方、因仍苟且所致。
现代文：二月十二日，到奉天门，告诉户、兵、工三部说： 如今人口逐渐增多，而户口、军士日趋损耗，这都是官吏抚恤无方、苟且不负责所造成。
English: On February 12, he went to Fengtianmen and told the three departments of households, soldiers, and workers: Nowadays, the population is gradually increasing, while the household registration and the non-commissioned officers are becoming increasingly depleted. This is all caused by the bureaucrats' careless and irresponsible treatment.

古文：其悉议弊政以闻。 
现代文：你们应全部讨论弊政上报。 
English: You should all discuss the maladministration and report it.

古文：三月癸卯，赐顾鼎臣等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐顾鼎臣等进士及第、出身各有不同。
English: On March 18th, Ji Gu Dingchen and other new recruits had different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月戊寅，刑部侍郎何鉴抚辑荆、襄流民。
现代文：四月二十三日，刑部侍郎何鉴抚慰安置荆、襄流民。
English: On April 23rd, He Jianzhu, the attendant of the Criminal Investigation Department, comforted and resettled the displaced people.

古文：甲申，帝不豫。
现代文：二十九日，孝宗身体不舒服。
English: On the 29th, Takamune began to feel unwell.

古文：五月庚寅，大渐，召大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁受顾命。
现代文：五月六日，病危，召见大学士刘健、李东阳、谢迁接受照管皇室的命令。
English: On May 6, Liu Jian, Li Dongyang and Xie Qian, who were critically ill, were summoned to accept the order to take care of the royal family.

古文：辛卯，崩于乾清宫，年三十有六。
现代文：七日，死于乾清宫，享年三十六岁。
English: On the seventh day, he died in Qianqing Palace at the age of 36.

古文：六月庚申，上尊谥，庙号孝宗，葬泰陵。
现代文：六月七日，上尊谥，庙号孝宗，葬于泰陵。
English: On June 7th, Shangzong Zang, temple name Xiaozong, was buried in Tai Ling.

古文：赞曰：明有天下，传世十六，太祖、成祖而外，可称者仁宗、宣宗、孝宗而已。
现代文：评论：明朝得天下，传十六世，除太祖、成祖以外，可称颂的是仁宗、宣宗、孝宗。
English: Comment: The Ming Dynasty ruled the world, and it is said that the sixteenth generation, in addition to Taizu and Chengzu, can be praised as Renzong, Xuanzong and Xiaozong.

古文：仁、宣之际，国势初张，纲纪修立，淳朴未漓。
现代文：仁、宣之际，国势初步强盛，纲纪修立，淳朴不变。
English: At the time of Jin and Xuan, the country was initially strong, discipline was established, and simplicity remained unchanged.

古文：至成化以来，号为太平无事，而晏安则易耽怠玩，富盛则渐启骄奢。
现代文：至成化以来，号称太平无事，然而安乐则容易沉溺于怠慢贪玩，富强则会逐渐滋生骄奢。
English: Since it reached maturity, it has been said to be peaceful and tranquil, but it is easy to indulge in carelessness and playfulness, and the rich and powerful will gradually breed arrogance.

古文：孝宗独能恭俭有制，勤政爱民，兢兢于保泰持盈之道，用使朝序清宁，民物康阜。
现代文：孝宗独能谦逊，节俭有度，勤政爱民，兢兢业业于保国泰持民盈之道，使朝政太平、安定有序，民物康富。
English: Xiaozong was uniquely able to be humble, frugal and prudent, to be diligent in politics and to love the people, to work diligently to safeguard the country and keep the people prosperous, to make the imperial government peaceful, stable and orderly, and to make the people and goods prosperous.

古文：《易》曰： 无平不陂，无往不复，艰贞无咎。 
现代文：《易》经说 ：没有平地就没有山坡，没有往来就没有复回，只有艰贞是不会错的。 
English: "Yi" sutra says: Without flat land, there will be no mountain slope, without communication, there will be no return, and only hardship will not be wrong.

古文：知此道者，其惟孝宗乎！
现代文：知此道理者，只有孝宗了。
English: The only one who knows this is Takamune.

