古文：康保裔，河南洛阳人。
现代文：康保裔，河南洛阳人。
English: He is from Luoyang, Henan Province.

古文：祖志忠，后唐长兴中，讨王都战没。
现代文：祖父志忠，后唐长兴年中，征讨王都时因战斗死亡。
English: Grandfather Zhizhong, in the middle of the post-Tang Changxing period, died in battle during the conquest of Wangdu.

古文：父再遇，为龙捷指挥使，从太祖征李筠，又死于兵。
现代文：父亲再遇，为龙捷指挥使，随从宋太祖征伐李筠，又死于兵事。
English: My father met him again. He was the commander of Long Jie and followed Song Taizu in the conquest of Li Ying. He also died in the war.

古文：保裔在周屡立战功，为东班押班，及再遇阵没，诏以保裔代父职，从石守信破泽州。
现代文：保裔在后周时屡立战功，为东班押班，等到康再遇阵亡，皇帝诏令以保裔代替父亲的职务，跟从石守信攻破泽州。
English: In the following weeks, the Hozoku repeatedly distinguished themselves in battle, serving as the East squad leader. When Kang was killed in battle again, the emperor issued a decree to replace his father's position with the Hozoku, and followed Ishinomori to invade Zezhou.

古文：明年，攻河东之广阳，获千余人。
现代文：第二年，攻打河东的广阳，俘获一千多人。
English: In the second year, they attacked Guangyang in the east of the river and captured more than a thousand people.

古文：开宝中，又从诸将破契丹于石岭关，累迁日骑都虞候，转龙卫指挥使，领登州刺史。
现代文：开宝年中，又跟从诸将在石岭关攻破契丹，累迁日骑都虞候，转官龙卫指挥使，领登州刺史。
English: In the middle of the Kibo era, he followed Zhuge Liang in conquering Khitan at Shilingguan, and successively moved to the capital city, transferred to the post of Longwei commander, and led the history of Dengzhou.

古文：端拱初，授淄州团练使，徙定州、天雄军驻泊部署。
现代文：端拱年初，授官淄州团练使，移定州、天雄军驻泊部署。
English: At the beginning of the year of the end of the arch, he was awarded the post of Bozhou regimental training envoy, transferred to Dingzhou, and the Tianxiong Army was stationed.

古文：寻知代州，移深州，又徙高阳关副都部署，就加侍卫马军都虞候，领凉州观察使。
现代文：不久为代州知州，移知深州，又移高阳关副都部署，随即加官侍卫马军都虞候，管领凉州观察使。
English: Soon, he was deployed to Chizhou in Daizhou, to Shenzhou in Zhizhou, and to Gaoyang in Guanzhou. Thereafter, he was assigned to be an officer to guard the horse army, and to be in charge of the observation envoy to Liangzhou.

古文：真宗即位，召还，以其母老勤养，赐以上尊酒茶米。
现代文：真宗即皇帝位，把他召回京城，因为他的母亲年老殷切盼望侍养，赐给上尊酒茶米。
English: He was called back to the capital because his mother, who was old and eager to be taken care of, had given him rice and wine.

古文：俄领彰国军节度，出为并代都部署，徙知天雄军，并代列状请留，诏褒之，复为高阳关都部署。
现代文：不久管领彰国军节度，出任并代都部署，移知天雄军，并代开列状文请求挽留他，皇帝下诏褒奖他，再次任高阳关都部署。
English: Soon he was in charge of the festival of the Changchun National Army, took office and deployed on behalf of the capital, transferred knowledge to the Tianxiong Army, and requested to retain him on behalf of the petition, the emperor praised him, and was deployed again in Gaoyang Pass.

古文：契丹兵大入，诸将与战于河间，保裔选精锐赴之，会暮，约诘朝合战。
现代文：契丹军队大举进入宋境，诸将与契丹战于河间，保裔选调精锐部队赴战，适逢天晚，相约早晨联合战斗。
English: The Khitan army entered the Song territory on a large scale, the Zhu would fight with the Khitan in the middle of the river, and the Bao selected elite troops to go to war. It was late in the day, and they would fight together in the morning.

古文：迟明，契丹围之数重，左右劝易甲驰突以出，保裔曰： 临难无苟免。 遂决战。
现代文：将近天明，契丹把他们重重包围，左右之人劝他换掉衣服突围出去，保裔说： 面临危难不能苟且求免。 于是与契丹决战。
English: Near dawn, the Khitans encircled them, and the people around him advised him to change his clothes and break out of the encirclement. The loyalist said, "In the face of danger, one must not hesitate to ask for help." So he fought a decisive battle with the Khitans.

古文：二日，杀伤甚众，蹴践尘深二尺，兵尽矢绝，援不至，遂没焉。
现代文：两天之中，杀伤甚众，踩踏尘土有二尺深，兵尽矢绝，援兵不到，于是阵亡。
English: During the two days, there was a lot of killing and wounding, the dust was two feet deep, the soldiers were exhausted, there were no reinforcements, and they died in battle.

古文：时车驾驻大名，闻之震悼，废朝二日，赠侍中。以其子继英为六宅使、顺州刺史，继彬为洛苑使，继明为内园副使，幼子继宗为西头供奉官，孙惟一为将作监主簿。
现代文：当时皇帝驻扎在大名，听到这一消息感到震惊哀悼，停止上朝两天，赠给他侍中的官职，以他的儿子继英任六宅使、顺州刺史，继彬任洛苑使，继明任内园副使，幼子继宗任西头供奉官，孙子惟一任将作监主簿。
English: At that time, the emperor was stationed in Daming. He was shocked and saddened to hear this news. He suspended his visit to the imperial court for two days and gave him the official post of a chamberlain. He appointed his son Sui Ying as Rokkaku envoy, Shunshu as scribe, Sui Bin as Luoyuan envoy, Sui Ming as vice-envoy to the Inner Garden, his young son Sui Zong as Xitou offering official, and his only grandson as supervisor.

古文：继英等奉告命，谢曰： 臣父不能决胜而死，陛下不以罪其孥幸矣，臣等顾蒙非常之恩！ 因悲涕伏地不能起。
现代文：因而悲伤痛哭仆在地上不能起来。皇帝哀痛怜悯地说 ：你父亲为王事而死，赠封加赏的典礼，应当隆厚。 
English: The servant on the ground could not get up because of grief and weeping. The emperor said with sorrow and pity: Your father died for the royal cause, and the ceremony of awarding the title and reward should be grand.

古文：上恻然曰： 尔父死王事，赠赏之典，所宜加厚。 顾谓左右曰： 保裔父、祖死疆场，身复战没，世有忠节，深可嘉也。 保裔有母年八十四，遣使劳问，赐白金五十两，封为陈国太夫人，其妻已亡，亦追封河东郡夫人。
现代文：皇帝回头对左右大臣说： 保裔的祖父、父亲都死在战场上，他又战亡，世代有忠节之气，很值得嘉许。 保裔有母亲年纪八十四岁，皇帝派遣使者慰问，赐给银子五十两，册封为陈国太夫人，保裔的妻子已经去世，也追封为河东郡夫人。
English: The emperor turned to the ministers on his right and left and said, "The grandfather and father of a person of Bao descent both died on the battlefield, and he also died in battle. The generation has a spirit of loyalty, which is very praiseworthy. A person of Bao descent has a mother who is eighty-four years old. The emperor sent an envoy to offer condolences, gave her fifty taels of silver, and registered her as Chen Guotai's wife. The wife of a person of Bao descent has passed away, and has also been posthumously registered as the wife of Hedong County.

古文：保裔谨厚好礼，喜宾客，善骑谢，弋飞走无不中。
现代文：保裔谨慎厚道喜好礼节，喜欢宾客，善于骑马射箭，射飞禽走兽没有不中的。
English: They are cautious, kind, polite, like guests, good at horseback riding, archery, and shooting birds and beasts.

古文：江仲明，台州人。宣和寇乱，载老母逃山涧中，猝遇寇于东城之冈，逼使就降，仲明义不辱，奋起骂贼，卒死之，丞相吕赜浩诔以文。
现代文：曾经手握三十枝箭，拉满弓射出去，箭头与箭羽一支支相连接而坠落，人们都佩服他的高超技艺。屡经战阵，身上遭受七十处创伤。
English: He once held thirty arrows in his hand, pulled out a full bow and shot, and the arrowhead connected with a feather branch and fell. People all admired his superb skills. After repeated battles, he suffered seventy wounds on his body.

古文：有蒋煜者，州之仙居人，有文学。寇欲妻以女，煜拒之，胁以拜，亦不从，寇曰： 吾戮汝矣！ 煜伸颈就刃，詈声不绝而死。
现代文：借贷公钱数十万犒劳军队，死后，他所亲近的吏属卖掉用具和供玩耍的东西来偿还，皇帝知道这事，于是再给以优厚的赏赐。
English: He borrowed hundreds of thousands of public money to pay for the army, and after his death, officials close to him sold tools and playthings to repay him. The emperor knew about this and gave him a generous reward.

古文：李若水，字清卿，洺州曲周人，元名若冰。
现代文：李若水字清卿，洺州曲周人，原名若冰。
English: Li Ruoshui, known as Qingqing, was born in Quzhou, Ganzhou Province. His original name was Ruo Bing.

古文：上舍登第，调元城尉、平阳府司录。
现代文：他以上舍生登第，调任元城县尉、平阳府司录。
English: He was promoted to the third rank after his graduation, and was transferred to the position of Yuancheng County Lieutenant and Pingyang Prefecture Secretary.

古文：试学官第一，济南教授，除太学博士。
现代文：参加学官考试获第一名，任济南教授，被命为太学博士。
English: He won the first place in the entrance examination, was appointed as a professor in Jinan, and was appointed as a doctor of science.

古文：蔡京晚复相，子绦用事，李邦彦不平，欲谢病去。
现代文：蔡京晚年恢复相位，儿子蔡绦用事专权，李邦彦愤愤不平，打算以病辞谢离开朝廷。
English: In his later years, Cai Jing regained his composure, his son Cai Ye assumed exclusive power, and Li Bangyan became indignant and planned to leave the imperial court with a sick note.

古文：若水为言： 大臣以道事君，不可则止，胡不取决上前，使去就之义，暴于天下。
现代文：若水则说 ：大臣以道德事奉君主，不可以就此停止，为什么不取决皇帝面前，使去留的大义，显露于天下呢？
English: Wakamizu said, "A minister serves the sovereign with morality, and cannot stop there. Why not make a decision in front of the emperor, so that the great justice of leaving will be revealed to the world?"

古文：顾可默默托疾而退，使天下有伴食之讥邪？ 又言： 积蠹已久，致理惟难。
现代文：难道可默默托病而退去，使天下有尸位素餐的讥讽吗？ 又说 ：积弊已经很久，要求得治理是很难。
English: Is it possible to retreat silently on the pretext of illness, so that the world has the irony of a vegetarian meal? He also said: the accumulation of defects has been going on for a long time, and it is difficult to demand that they be rectified.

古文：建裁损而邦用未丰，省科徭而民力犹困，权贵抑而益横，仕流滥而莫澄。
现代文：建议裁损费用而国家用度不丰裕，减省科赋徭役而百姓财力还是困乏，权贵谦退而越是骄横，仕流泛滥而不能澄清。
English: It is recommended to cut costs while the state is not abundant, reduce the provincial science endowment while the people's financial resources are still poor, the powerful are humble and the more arrogant, and the flow is overflowing and cannot be clarified.

古文：正宜置驿求贤，解榻待士，采其寸长远见，以兴治功。 凡十数端，皆深中时病，邦彦不悦。
现代文：正应当置驿求贤，解榻待士，采纳他们的小小长处和远见卓识，以振兴治理之功。 共十多条，都很切中时病，李邦彦不高兴。
English: Li Bangyan was not happy with the more than ten articles, all of which were critical and timely.

古文：靖康元年，为太学博士。
现代文：靖康元年，李若水任太学博士。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, Li Ruoshui was appointed Doctor of Theology.

古文：开府仪同三司高俅死，故事，天子当挂服举哀，若水言： 俅以幸臣躐跻显位，败坏军政，金人长驱，其罪当与童贯等。
现代文：开府仪同三司高俅死去，按照以前旧例，皇帝应当挂服举哀，李若水说 ：高俅以幸臣的身份逾越等级跻身显位，败坏军政，致使金人长驱直入，他的罪恶应当与童贯等同。
English: Kaifu Yi and the three Gaozhou died, according to the old precedent, the emperor should hang up his clothes and mourn. Li Ruoshui said: Gaozhou, with the status of a fortunate minister, exceeded the rank and became prominent, corrupted the military and politics, causing the Jin people to drive straight in, and his crime should be the same as Tongran.

古文：得全首领以没，尚当追削官秩，示与众弃；而有司循常习故，欲加缛礼，非所以靖公议也。 章再上，乃止。
现代文：他得以保全脑袋而死，尚且应当追削官秩，表示被大家忘记；但官吏们循常习故，打算加以繁琐的礼仪，这不是可以用来平息公议的办法。 奏章一再呈上，才使朝廷停止了这种做法。
English: He was allowed to die with his head intact, and yet he had to be stripped of his official rank to signify that he had been forgotten by everyone; but the officials, in accordance with their usual practice, intended to impose onerous formalities, which was not a method that could be used to quell public discussion, and it took repeated petitions for the court to stop this practice.

古文：钦宗将遣使至金国，议以赋入赎三镇，诏举可使者，若水在选中。
现代文：钦宗将要派遣使臣到金国去，讨论用赋税收入赎回三镇，诏令推举可堪出使重任的人，李若水名列选人之中。
English: Emperor Qinzong was going to send envoys to Jin to discuss the use of tax revenue to redeem the three towns. Li Ruoshui was one of the people selected by the imperial edict.

古文：召对，赐今名，迁著作佐郎。
现代文：皇帝召见了他，赐给他今名，迁任著作佐郎。
English: The emperor summoned him, gave him his present name, and transferred him to the post of Shososaro.

古文：为使，见粘罕于云中。
现代文：作为使臣，李若水在云中会见了粘罕。
English: As an envoy, Li Ruoshui met with Mui Han in the clouds.

古文：才归，兵已南下，复假徽猷阁学士，副冯澥以往。
现代文：刚返归朝廷，金兵已经南下，又以徽猷阁学士的身份，辅佐冯氵解前往金国。
English: Just after returning to the imperial court, Jinbei had already gone south, and he also went to Jin as a scholar of Huiyang Academy to assist Feng Lijie.

古文：甫次中牟，守河兵相惊以金兵至，左右谋取间道去，澥问 何如 ？
现代文：方停留在中牟，守御黄河的军队互相惊慌以为金兵来了，左右侍臣商议从小路离开，冯氵解问若水： 怎么办？ 
English: Fang stayed in Zhongmou, the troops guarding the Yellow River panicked each other, thinking that the gold soldiers had come. The attendants on both sides discussed leaving the path, and Feng Jun asked the young water: What should we do?

古文：若水曰： 戍卒畏敌而溃，奈何效之，今正有死耳。 令敢言退者斩，众乃定。
现代文：若水回答说 ：戍兵害怕敌人而溃散，怎么能仿效他们，今天恰好以死报国。 下令敢讲退却者斩首，这样大家才安定下来。
English: Wakamizu replied, "The soldiers were afraid of the enemy and scattered, so how can we follow their example and surrender our country with death today, and order those who dare to retreat to be beheaded, so that everyone can settle down?"

古文：既行，叠具奏，言和议必不可谐，宜申饬守备。
现代文：已经出行，累次上奏章，说和议必定不可以成功，应当告诫严加守备。
English: He has already traveled and repeatedly played the song, saying that peace talks must not succeed, and should be warned to be on the alert.

古文：至怀州，遇馆伴萧庆，挟与俱还。
现代文：到怀州，遇上金国馆伴使萧庆，把他挟持一起回朝。
English: When he arrived in Waizhou, he met Xiao Qing, an envoy of the State Council of the People's Republic of China, and took him back to the North together.

古文：及都门，拘之于冲虚观，独令庆、澥入。
现代文：到京城门口，把萧庆拘留在冲虚观，只令萧庆、冯氵解进去。
English: At the gate of the capital, Xiao Qing was detained in Chonghuangyuan, and only Xiao Qing and Feng Rongde were allowed to enter.

古文：既所议多不从，粘罕急攻城，若水入见帝，道其语，帝命何行。
现代文：既而双方所议多不合，粘罕加紧攻打京城，李若水入朝见皇帝，告诉这一情况，皇帝命令何前行。
English: Even though the two sides disagreed on many issues, and the mujahideen intensified their attack on the capital, Li Ruoshui went to the imperial court to tell the emperor about this situation, and the emperor ordered him to move forward.

古文：桌还，言二人欲与上皇相见，帝曰： 朕当往。 明日幸金营，过信而归。
现代文：何还朝，说他们二人想与太上皇徽宗相见，皇帝说： 我应当前往。 第二天皇帝临幸金兵军营，过了二夜才归。
English: What morning, said they two wanted to meet with the Empress Dowager Huizong, the emperor said: I should go. The next day, the emperor Linxing Jinbei military camp, after two nights to return.

古文：擢若水礼部尚书，固辞。
现代文：提拔若水任礼部尚书，李若水坚决辞谢。
English: The promotion of Li Ruoshui to the Ministry of Ceremonies is still on the books, and Li Ruoshui has resolutely resigned.

古文：帝曰： 学士与尚书同班，何必辞。 请不已，改吏部侍郎。
现代文：皇帝说 ：学士与尚书同班，何必辞谢。 李若水不停地请求，改任吏部侍郎。
English: The emperor said, "A scholar is in the same class as a scholar, why should he resign? Li Ruoshui kept requesting to be reassigned as a servant of the cadre."

古文：二年，金人再邀帝出郊，帝殊有难色，若水以为无他虑，扈从以行。
现代文：靖康二年，金人再次邀请皇帝出郊，皇帝很有难色，李若水认为不要有其他顾虑，随从前行。
English: In the second year of Jingkang, the goldsmith once again invited the emperor out of the countryside. The emperor was very difficult, and Li Ruoshui thought that there should be no other concerns and followed him.

古文：金人计中变，逼帝易服，若水抱持而哭，诋金人为狗辈。
现代文：金人中途改变主意，逼迫钦宗换下皇袍，李若水抱住痛哭，骂金人是狗辈。
English: Jin changed his mind halfway through and forced Qin Zong to change his royal robe. Li Ruoshui hugged him and cried bitterly, calling Jin a dog.

古文：金人曳出，击之败面，气结仆地，众皆散，留铁骑数十守视。
现代文：金人把他拖出去，击坏他的脸，因气结倒在地上，众人都散去，留下铁骑数十人看守。
English: The goldsmith dragged him out, smashed his face, and fell to the ground in a fit of rage. Everyone dispersed, leaving dozens of guards on iron horses.

古文：粘罕令曰： 必使李侍郎无恙。 若水绝不食，或勉之曰： 事无可为者，公昨虽言，国相无怒心，今日顺从，明日富贵矣。 若水叹曰： 天无二日，若水宁有二主哉！ 其仆亦来慰解曰： 公父母春秋高，若少屈，冀得一归觐。 若水叱之曰： 吾不复顾家矣！
现代文：粘罕下令说： 一定使李侍郎无恙。 李若水绝食，有人劝勉他说： 事情已经没有办法，你昨天虽然骂人，国相没有生气，今天归顺服从，明天就荣华富贵了。 若水感叹说： 天无二个太阳，我李若水难道有二个君主吗！ 他的仆从也来劝慰说 ：您父母年岁已高，如果稍稍屈服，希望能得到一个回去觐见的机会。 李若水大声呵斥说： 我不再顾及家里了！
English: Li Ruoshui was on a hunger strike, and someone urged him, saying, "There is no way out of this. Although you cursed yesterday, the minister of state was not angry. Today, you submit and obey, and tomorrow, you will be rich and famous." Ruoshui lamented, "There are no two suns in the sky. Do I, Li Ruoshui, have two sovereigns?" His servants also came to comfort him, saying, "Your parents are very old. If you give in a little, I hope you will get a chance to go back and see them." Li Ruoshui shouted, "I no longer care about my home!"

古文：忠臣事君，有死无二。
现代文：忠臣事奉君主，有死无二。
English: When a loyal subject serves the sovereign, death is certain.

古文：然吾亲老，汝归勿遽言，令兄弟徐言之可也。 
现代文：但我亲孝老人，你回去后不要马上告诉他们，让兄弟慢慢告诉他们就行了。 
English: But I'm a filial old man, so don't tell them right away when you get back, just let your brother tell them slowly.

古文：后旬日，粘罕召计事，且问不肯立异姓状。
现代文：十天以后，粘罕召他商议事情，而且询问不肯拥立异姓为帝的情况。
English: Ten days later, Mu Han summoned him to discuss the matter, and inquired about the situation of not wanting to establish a different name for the emperor.

古文：若水曰： 上皇为生灵计，罪己内禅，主上仁孝慈俭，未有过行，岂宜轻议废立？ 粘罕指宋朝失信，若水曰： 若以失信为过，公其尤也。 历数其五事曰： 汝为封豕长蛇，真一剧贼，灭亡无日矣。 粘罕令拥之去，反顾骂益甚。
现代文：李若水说 ：上皇为百姓着想，罪责自己内禅皇位，主上仁义孝道慈仁节俭，没有什么过错，怎么适宜轻议废立？ 粘罕指责宋朝失信，李若水说： 如果以失信为过错，你是最失信的人。 历数粘罕失信的五件事说 ：你是大猪和长蛇式的贪暴者，真是一个剧贼大盗，灭亡没有多少日子了。 粘罕命令把他推出去，李若水反而骂得越发厉害。
English: Li Ruoshui said: The last emperor thought of the people, and blamed himself for the imperial throne, and the Lord was benevolent, filial, merciful, and frugal, and there was no fault, so how was it appropriate to lightly discuss abolishing the throne? Mui Han accused the Song Dynasty of dishonesty, Li Ruoshui said: If dishonesty is a fault, you are the most dishonest person. Counting the five things of Mui Han's dishonesty said: You are a big pig and a long snake-like corrupter, really a great thief, and your death is not many days away. Mui Han ordered him to be expelled, but Li Ruoshui

古文：至郊坛下，谓其仆谢宁曰： 我为国死，职耳，奈并累若属何！ 又骂不绝口，监军者挝破其唇，噀血骂愈切，至以刃裂颈断舌而死，年三十五。
现代文：到达郊坛下面，李若水对仆从谢宁说 ：我为国家而死，这是职责，只是一起连累你们了！ 又骂不绝口，监军的人打破他的嘴唇，他喷血痛骂更加不停，最后用刀裂颈断舌而死，享年三十五岁。
English: Arriving at the foot of the altar, Li Ruoshui said to Xianing's servant: "I died for the country, this is my duty, I just burdened you all together!" He also cursed incessantly, the overseer of the army broke his lips, he sprayed blood and cursed even more incessantly, and finally died with a knife cracking his neck and breaking his tongue, at the age of thirty-five.

古文：宁得归，具言其状。
现代文：谢宁得到机会回朝，详细说李若水就义情形。
English: Xie Ning was given the opportunity to return to the North, detailing the circumstances of Li Ruoshui's acquittal.

古文：平居恂恂然，无喜愠色，遇事若无所可否，非其意，崒然不可犯。
现代文：宋高宗即皇帝位，下诏说： 若水忠义气节，无与伦比，我听说后，为之流涕哭泣。 特赠若水观文殿学士，谥号叫 忠愍 。
English: Song Gaozong, i.e. the emperor, issued the following edict: If water is loyal and virtuous, it is incomparable, I heard about it and shed tears for it.

古文：恬于势利，在京师，故人鼎贵，罕至其门，间一见，寒温谈笑而已。
现代文：李若水死后有从北方逃归的人说 ：金人相互说 ，辽国灭亡，死于忠义的十多人，南朝只有李侍郎一人。 
English: After Li Ruoshui's death, some people who had fled from the north said: "The gold people said to each other, 'Liao Province has perished, more than ten people have died of loyalty, and only Li Jilang is left from the Southern Dynasty.

古文：及仓卒徇义，荦荦如此，闻者哀而壮之，时年三十七。乾道中，赐谥曰忠肃。
现代文：他临死前毫无恐怖之色，做歌诗而死，歌诗云 ：昂首责问苍天啊，苍天终于没有话说，忠臣以死效忠国家啊，死又有什么罪咎呢？ 
English: Before his death, he had no fear at all. He died a poet, a poet's death. He asked the heavens with his head held high, and the heavens finally had nothing to say. A loyal subject is loyal to his country even unto death. What is there to be guilty of in death?

古文：杨震，字子发，代州崞人。
现代文：在场的人为之悲痛。 杨震字子发，代州崞县人。
English: Those present grieved for him.Yang Zhen Zi Fa, a resident of Dayu County, Shandong Province.

古文：以弓马绝伦为安边巡检。
现代文：因射箭骑马超群被任为安边巡检。
English: He was appointed as a border patrol inspector due to his outstanding performance in archery and horseback riding.

古文：河东军征臧底河，敌据山为城，下瞰官军，诸将合兵城下，震率壮士拔剑先登，斩数百级，众乘胜平之，上功第一。
现代文：河东军队出征臧底河，敌人据山为城寨，下瞰官军，各将合兵在城下，杨震率领壮士拔剑先登，斩敌首数百级，大军乘胜平定敌人，上奏杨震战功第一。
English: The army from the east of the river went to fight in the Loudi River. The enemy used the mountain as a fortress. Looking down at the government army, the generals and soldiers joined forces under the city. Yang Zhen led the strong men to take the sword first and cut off hundreds of enemy heads. The great army took advantage of the victory to quell the enemy. Yang Zhen was awarded the first place in the battle.

古文：从折可存讨方腊，自浙东转击至三界镇，斩首八千级。
现代文：杨震跟随折可存讨伐方腊，从浙东转战到三界镇，斩首八千级。
English: Yang Zhen followed the folding can be saved to fight the warring parties, from East Zhejiang to the three towns, beheading eight thousand.

古文：追袭至黄岩，贼帅吕师囊扼断头之险拒守，下石肆击，累日不得进。
现代文：追袭到黄崖，贼军主帅吕师囊扼断头山之险拒守，放下石头大肆阻击，官军多日不能前进。
English: Pursued to the Yellow Cliff, the commander of the thief army, Lv Shibuc, strangled the danger of the head mountain and refused to defend, put down the stone and blocked it, and the government army could not advance for many days.

古文：可存问计，震请以轻兵缘山背上，凭高鼓噪发矢石，贼惊走，已复纵火自卫。
现代文：折可存询问计策，杨震请求以轻兵沿着山背而上，凭借高处鼓噪发射箭矢石头，贼军惊慌逃走，不久又纵火自卫。
English: Yang Zhen asked for light soldiers to march up the mountainside, firing arrows and stones with the help of high-altitude drums. The bandits panicked and fled, and soon set fire to defend themselves.

古文：震身被重铠，与麾下履火突入，生得师囊，及杀首领三十人，进秩五等。
现代文：杨震身披笨重的铠甲，与部下踏着大火突然进入，活捉吕师囊，并杀掉首领三十人，进官秩五等。
English: Yang Zhen, clad in heavy armor, suddenly entered the fire with his subordinates, captured Lu Shibao alive, killed thirty leaders, and was promoted to the fifth rank.

古文：还知麟州建宁砦。
现代文：战后任知麟州建宁砦。
English: After the war, he served as the commander of Jianning Fort in Jilin Province.

古文：初，契丹之亡，其将小鞠〈革录〉西奔，招合杂羌十余万，破丰州，攻麟府诸城郭。
现代文：起初，契丹灭亡，将领小鞠革录向西奔逃，招得杂羌共十余万人，攻破丰州，攻打麟府诸城廓。
English: At first, Khitan was defeated, and the general Kojurek fled to the west, inviting a total of more than one hundred thousand people to invade Fengzhou and attack Linfu's fortresses.

古文：震父宗闵领本道兵马屡摧败之，俘其父母妻子。
现代文：杨震父亲杨宗闵带领本道兵马多次击败鞠革录，俘获他的父母妻室儿女。
English: Yang Zongyao, Yang Zhen's father, led the local soldiers and horses to repeatedly defeat the Jiu Ge Li, and captured his parents, wife, and children.

古文：靖康元年十月，太原陷，鞠〈革录〉驱幽蓟叛卒与夏人奚人围建宁，扣壁语震曰： 汝父夺我居，破我兵，掩我骨肉，我忍死到今，急举城降，当全汝躯命。 时城中守兵不满百，震与战士约，斩一级赏若干，官帑竭，继以家人服珥，吏士感激自奋。
现代文：靖康元年十月，太原陷落，鞠革录驱使幽蓟叛兵与西夏人、奚人围困建宁，直抵城墙对杨震说： 你父亲夺去了我的房子，击破了我的军队，乘人不备逮捕了我的骨肉，我偷生忍死到今天。
English: In October of the first year of Jingkang, when Taiyuan fell, Jurek led the Yuxi rebels, the Xixia people, and the Yao people to besiege Jianning. He reached the city wall and said to Yang Zhen: Your father took my house, defeated my army, and arrested my flesh and blood by accident. I have lived and died to this day.

古文：越旬，矢尽力乏，城不守，与子居中、执中力战没，閤门俱丧，唯长子存中从征河北独免。
现代文：如果你赶快举城投降，当会保全你的性命。 当时砦城中守兵不到百人，杨震与战士约定，斩敌首一级赏钱若干，官库用完了，既而用家人的衣服珠玉耳饰，官吏士兵为之感激自奋。过了十天，弓箭用尽人力疲乏，城不能守住，杨震与儿子居中、执中力战阵殁，全家都死，只有长子存中从征河北独独免死。
English: At that time, there were less than a hundred guards in the fortified city, Yang Zhen agreed with the soldiers to reward a certain amount of money for beheading the enemy. The government treasury was exhausted, and the officials and soldiers were grateful for the use of their family's clothes and jeweled earrings. After ten days, the bows and arrows were exhausted and the city could not be defended. Yang Zhen and his son were in the middle, holding the middle of the battle, and the whole family died. Only the eldest son survived and was spared from the death of Hebei.

古文：明年，宗闵亦死事于长安。
现代文：第二年，杨宗闵也在长安死于王事。
English: The following year, Yang Zongxuan also died in Chang'an.

古文：震时年四十四。
现代文：杨震当时年四十四岁。
English: Yang Zhen was 44 years old at the time.

古文：建炎二年，诏赠武经郎。
现代文：建炎二年，朝廷诏令赠武经郎。
English: In the second year of Jianyan, the Imperial Court issued a decree to bestow Mushiro.

古文：存中贵，请于朝，谥曰恭毅。
现代文：杨存中显贵，向朝廷请求，谥号叫 恭毅 。
English: Yang Cunzhong was a prominent person who petitioned the imperial court. His nickname was Gongyi.

