古文：◎礼四
现代文：礼四
English: Fourth Sunday of Lent

古文：历代帝王陵庙三皇圣师国先师孔子旗纛五祀国马神南京神庙功臣庙京师九庙诸神祠厉坛
现代文：历代帝王陵庙三皇圣师国先师孔子旗纛五祀国马神南京神庙功臣庙京师九庙诸神祠厉坛
English: Tombs and mausoleums of emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors, emperors

古文：历代帝王陵庙
现代文：历代帝王陵庙
English: Imperial mausoleums through the ages

古文：洪武三年，遣使访先代陵寝，仍命各行省具图以进，凡七十有九。
现代文：洪武三年，皇帝派遣使者访求前代帝王陵墓，接着命令各行省制成地图献上，共有七十九座陵。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the emperor sent an envoy to visit the mausoleums of the former emperors, and then ordered all provinces to make a map and present it. There are a total of 79 mausoleums.

古文：礼官考其功德昭著者，曰伏羲，神农，黄帝，少昊，颛顼，唐尧，虞舜，夏禹，商汤、中宗、高宗，周文王、武王、成王、康王，汉高祖、文帝、景帝、武帝、宣帝、光武、明帝、章帝，后魏文帝，隋高祖，唐高祖、太宗、宪宗、宣宗，周世宗，宋太祖、太宗、真宗、仁宗、孝宗、理宗，凡三十有六。
现代文：礼官考察其中功德显著的，有伏羲，神农，黄帝，少昊，颛顼，唐尧，虞舜，夏禹，商汤、中宗、高宗，周文王、武王、成王、康王，汉高祖、文帝、景帝、武帝、宣帝、光武、明帝、章帝，后魏文帝，隋高祖，唐高祖、太宗、宪宗、宣宗，周世宗，宋太祖、太宗、真宗、仁宗、孝宗、理宗，共三十六人。
English: The etiquette officials examined the merits of Fuxi, Shennong, Huangdi, Shao Hao, Yao, Tang Di, Yu Di, Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhongzong, Gao Zong, King Zhouwen, King Wu, King Cheng, King Kang, Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Wen, Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu, Emperor Xuan, Emperor Guangwu, Emperor Ming, Emperor Zhang, Emperor Wu of the Later Wei Dynasty, Emperor Gaozu of the Sui Dynasty, Emperor Gaozu of the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Taizong, Emperor Gensong, Emperor Xuan, Emperor Zhou, Emperor Song, Emperor Taizong, Emperor

古文：各制衮冕，函香币。
现代文：各自制作礼服与礼冠，用函装上香和彩帛。
English: They made their own dresses and ceremonial crowns, and filled a box with incense and colored wreaths.

古文：遣秘书监丞陶谊等往修祀礼，亲制祝文遣之。
现代文：皇帝派遣秘书监丞陶谊等人前往举行祭祀礼，亲自制作祭祀文辞派遣他们。
English: The emperor dispatched his secretary, Jianzhe Tao, and others to hold the sacrificial ceremony, personally making the sacrificial words and dispatching them.

古文：每陵以白金二十五两具祭物。陵寝发者掩之，坏者完之。
现代文：每一陵给以白银二十五两备办祭祀物品坟墓被挖掘的就掩覆起来，毁坏的就修整好。
English: Each mausoleum was provided with twenty-five taels of silver for the preparation of sacrificial objects. If a tomb was excavated, it was covered, and if it was destroyed, it was repaired.

古文：庙敝者葺之。
现代文：庙宇破旧的就修葺好。
English: The dilapidated temple will be repaired.

古文：无庙者设坛以祭。
现代文：没有祭庙的就设坛祭祀。
English: If there is no temple, an altar will be set up.

古文：仍令有司禁樵采。
现代文：接着命令有关部门禁止打柴采摘。
English: He then ordered the relevant departments to ban firewood collection.

古文：岁时祭祀，牲用太牢。
现代文：每年的一定时节进行祭祀，祭祀牺牲用太牢。
English: Every year, a certain time of the year is set aside for sacrifice.

古文：四年，礼部定议，合祀帝王三十五。
现代文：洪武四年，礼部议定，合于祭祀的帝王有三十五人。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, the ritual department agreed that there were thirty-five emperors who were suitable for sacrifice.

古文：在河南者十：陈祀伏羲、商高宗，孟津祀汉光武，洛阳祀汉明帝、章帝，郑祀周世宗，巩祀宋太祖、太宗、真宗、仁宗。
现代文：在河南的有十人：陈祭祀伏羲、商高宗，孟津祭祀汉光武，洛阳祭祀汉明帝、章帝，郑祭祀周世宗，巩祭祀宋太祖、太宗、真宗、仁宗。
English: In Henan, there are ten: Chen worshiped Fuxi and Shanggao, Mengjin worshiped Han Guangwu, Luoyang worshiped Han Ming and Zhang, Zheng worshiped Zhou, Gong worshiped Song Taizu, Taizong, Zhenzong and Renzong.

古文：在山西者一：荥河祀商汤。
现代文：在山西祭祀的一人：荣河祭祀商汤。
English: One person who worships in Shanxi: Ronghe worships Shang Tang.

古文：在山东者二：东平祀唐尧，曲阜祀少昊。
现代文：在山东祭祀的二人：东平祭祀唐尧，曲阜祭祀少昊。
English: There are two people who worship in Shandong: Dongping worship Tang Xuan, Qufu worship Shao Hao.

古文：在北平者三：内黄祀商中宗，滑祀颛顼、高辛。
现代文：在北平祭祀的三人：内黄祭祀商中宗，滑祭祀颛项、高辛。
English: There are three people who offer sacrifices in Beiping: Uchihwang offers sacrifices to Shang Zhongzong, Niu offers sacrifices to Xiang Xiang, and Gao Xin offers sacrifices.

古文：在湖广者二：酃祀神农，宁远祀虞舜。
现代文：在湖广祭祀的二人：酃祭祀神农，宁逮祭祀虞舜。
English: There are two people who worship at Hukang: Shennong is worshipped at Shennong, and Guan Yu is worshipped at Ning Fang.

古文：在浙江者二：会稽祀夏禹、宋孝宗。
现代文：在浙江祭祀的二人：会稽祭祀夏禹、宋孝宗。
English: The two people who performed the ritual in Zhejiang: Xia Yu and Song Xiaozong.

古文：在陕西者十五：中部祀黄帝，咸阳祀周文王、武王、成王、康王、宣王，汉高帝、景帝，咸宁祀汉文帝，兴平祀汉武帝，长安祀汉宣帝，三原祀唐高祖，醴泉祀唐太宗，蒲城祀唐宪宗，泾阳祀唐宣宗。
现代文：在陕西祭祀的十五人：中部祭祀黄帝，咸阳祭祀周文王、武王、成王、康王、童王，汉高帝、景帝，咸宁祭祀汉文帝，兴平祭祀汉武帝，长安祭祀汉宣帝，三原祭祀唐高祖，醴泉祭祀唐太宗，蒲城祭祀唐宪宗，泾阳祭祀唐宣宗。
English: The fifteen people who made sacrifices in Shaanxi: Chubu made sacrifices to the Yellow Emperor, Hamyang made sacrifices to King Zhouwen, King Wu, King Cheng, King Kang, and King Tong, Hango and King Jing made sacrifices to Emperor Hanwen, Xingping made sacrifices to Emperor Hanwu, Chang'an made sacrifices to Emperor Han Xuan, Mihara made sacrifices to Emperor Gaozu of the Tang Dynasty, Jiuquan made sacrifices to Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty, Pucheng made sacrifices to Emperor Jianzong of the Tang Dynasty, and Shenyang made sacrifices to Emperor Xuan of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：岁祭用仲春、仲秋朔。
现代文：每年祭祀在二月、八月的初一。
English: The annual festival is held on the first day of the new year in February and August.

古文：于是遣使诣各陵致祭。
现代文：于是派遣使者到各陵祭祀。
English: Therefore, envoys were sent to the mausoleums to offer sacrifices.

古文：陵置一碑，刊祭期及牲帛之数，俾所在有司守之。
现代文：每处陵墓设置一块碑，刻有祭祀日期以及所用牲帛数目，使所在地有关部门守护。
English: Each mausoleum has a monument inscribed with the date of the sacrifice and the number of animals used, which is guarded by the local authorities.

古文：已而命有司岁时修葺，设陵户二人守视。
现代文：不久命有关部门在每年一定时节修葺，设置陵户二人看守。
English: Soon after, the relevant departments repaired the mausoleum at a certain time every year and set up two guards for the mausoleum.

古文：又每三年，出祝文、香帛，传制遣太常寺乐舞生赍往所在，命有司致祭。
现代文：又每三年，拿出祭祀文辞、香与彩帛，传达制命派遣太常寺乐舞生带着这些物品到所在地，命令有关部门进行祭祀。
English: Also, every three years, the ritual words, incense, and colored candlesticks are brought out, and the order is conveyed to send the musicians and dancers of Taijo-ji Temple to the location with these items, and the relevant departments are ordered to perform the ritual.

古文：其所祀者，视前去周宣王，汉明帝、章帝，而增祀娲皇于赵城，后魏文帝于富平，元世祖于顺天，及宋理宗于会稽，凡三十六帝。
现代文：所祭祀的人，比以前少了周宣至、汉明帝、章帝，而增加祭祀娲皇于赵城，后魏文帝于富平，元世祖于顺天，以及宋理宗于会稽，一共三十六个帝王。
English: The number of people who were sacrificed was less than before for Zhou Xuan Zi, Han Ming Di and Zhang Di, but the number of sacrifices was increased for Emperor Zhao in Zhaocheng, Emperor Wei in Fuping, Emperor Yuan in Shuntian, and Emperor Song Li Zong in Heji, a total of thirty-six emperors.

古文：后又增祀隋高祖于扶风，而理宗仍罢祀。
现代文：后又增加祭祀隋高祖于扶风，而接着俘止祭祀宋理宗。
English: Later, the worship of Sui Gao Zu in Fufeng was added, and then the worship of Song Li Zong was stopped.

古文：又命帝王陵庙所在官司，以春秋仲月上旬，择日致祭。
现代文：又命令帝王陵庙所在的官府主管部门在春秋雨季的第二个月上旬，选择日期祭祀。
English: He also ordered the government department in charge of the imperial mausoleum and temple to select the date of the sacrifice in the early part of the second month of the spring and autumn rainy season.

古文：六年，帝以五帝、三王及汉、唐、宋创业之君，俱宜于京师立庙致祭，遂建历代帝王庙于钦天山之阳。
现代文：六年，皇帝以五帝、三王以及汉、唐、宋创立帝业的君主，都应在京城设庙祭祀，于是在钦天山的南面建历代帝王庙。
English: In the sixth year, the emperor with the five emperors, three kings and the monarchs who founded the empire such as Han, Tang and Song, should set up a temple to worship in the capital, so he built a temple for the emperors of all ages in the south of Qin Tianshan.

古文：仿太庙同堂异室之制，为正殿五室：中一室三皇，东一室五帝，西一室夏禹、商汤、周文王，又东一室周武王、汉光武、唐太宗，又西一室汉高祖、唐太祖、宋太祖、元世祖。
现代文：仿照太庙同堂异室的制度，设正殿五室：中间一室是三皇，束面一室是五帝，西面一室是夏禹、商汤、周文王，又束面一室是周武王、汉光武、唐太宗，又西面一室是汉高祖、唐高祖、宋太祖、元世祖。
English: The five rooms of the main hall are modeled after the system of different rooms in the same hall of the Imperial Temple: the middle room is the Third Emperor, the front room is the Five Emperors, the west room is Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhou Wen Wang, and the front room is King Zhou Wu, Han Guangwu, Tang Taizong, and the west room is Han Gaozu, Tang Gaozu, Song Taizu, and Yuan Shizuo.

古文：每岁春秋仲月上旬甲日致祭。
现代文：每年春秋雨季的第二月上旬甲日祭祀。
English: Every year, in the early part of the second month of the spring and autumn rainy season, there is a festival on the first day of the month.

古文：已而以周文王终守臣服，唐高祖由太宗得天下，遂寝其祀，增祀隋高祖。
现代文：不久因周文王最终处于诸侯的身份，唐高祖因太宗得到天下，于是停止他们的祭祀，增加祭祀隋高祖。
English: Soon after, as King Zhouwen was finally elevated to the status of a vassal, and Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty gained control of the country, they stopped their sacrifices and increased the sacrifices to Emperor Gaozu of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：七年，令帝王庙皆塑衮冕坐像，惟伏羲、神农未有衣裳之制，不必加冕服。
现代文：七年，命令帝王庙都塑帝王穿戴衣冠的坐像，只有伏羲、神农没有衣裳的制式，不必加冕服。
English: In the seventh year, the imperial temples were ordered to make seated statues of emperors wearing crowns. Only Fuxi and Shennong did not have a dress code, so there was no need for coronation robes.

古文：八月，帝躬祀于新庙。
现代文：八月，皇帝亲自到新庙祭祀。
English: In August, the emperor himself went to the new temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：已而罢隋高祖之祀。
现代文：不久停止祭祀隋高祖。
English: The worship of Sui Gao Zu was soon stopped.

古文：二十一年，令每岁郊祀，附祭历代帝王于大祀殿。
现代文：洪武二十一年，命令每年郊祀，在大祀殿附带祭祀历代帝王。
English: In the twenty-first year of Hongwu, it was ordered that there should be a suburb ritual every year, and that there should be a ritual for the emperors of all ages in the Great Hall of Worship.

古文：仍以岁八月中旬，择日遣官祭于本庙，其春祭停之。
现代文：仍在每年八月中旬，选择日期派遣官员在本庙祭祀，春祭则停止。
English: Even in the middle of August each year, officials are dispatched to offer sacrifices at this temple on the selected date, and the spring festival is stopped.

古文：又定每三年遣祭各陵之岁，则停庙祭。
现代文：又规定每三年中派人祭祀各陵的那一年，就停止庙祭。
English: It was also stipulated that the temple festival would be stopped every three years in the middle of the year in which people were sent to worship the mausoleums.

古文：是年，诏以历代名臣从祀，礼官李原名奏拟三十六人以进。
现代文：这年下诏以历代名臣陪从祭祀，礼官李原名上奏拟定三十六人献上。
English: In this year, the emperor decreed that the eminent courtiers of past generations should accompany the sacrificial rites, and the etiquette official Li Yuan proposed thirty-six names to be presented.

古文：帝以宋赵普负太祖不忠，不可从祀。
现代文：皇帝认为宋趟普背负太祖，不忠心，不可以陪从祭祀。
English: The emperor thought that Song Zhi Pu was not loyal and could not accompany the sacrificial rites.

古文：元臣四杰，木华黎为首，不可祀孙而去其祖，可祀木华黎而罢安童。
现代文：元代四位杰出大臣，木华黎占首位，不可以祭祀孙子而舍弃他祖父，可以祭祀木华黎而罢除安童。
English: The four outstanding ministers in the Yuan Dynasty, with Mu Huali in the first place, could not sacrifice their grandson and abandon their grandfather, but they could sacrifice Mu Huali and dismiss Ando.

古文：既祀伯颜，则阿术不必祀。
现代文：既然祭祀伯颜，那么阿木不必祭祀。
English: Since the sacrifice is for Bo Yan, then the Ami does not have to be sacrificed.

古文：汉陈平、冯异，宋潘美，皆善始终，可祀。
现代文：汉代陈平、冯异，宋代潘美，都善始善终，可以祭祀。
English: Han Dynasty Chen Ping, Feng Yi, Song Dynasty Pan Mei, are all good at the beginning and good at the end, and can be sacrificed.

古文：于是定风后、力牧、皋陶、夔、龙、伯夷、伯益、伊尹、傅说、周公旦、召公奭、太公望、召虎、方叔、张良、萧何、曹参、陈平、周勃、邓禹、冯异、诸葛亮、房玄龄、杜如晦、李靖、郭子仪、李晟、曹彬、潘美、韩世忠、岳飞、张浚、木华黎、博尔忽、博尔术、赤老温、伯颜，凡三十七人，从祀于东西庑，为坛四。
现代文：于是定风后、力牧、皋陶、夔、龙、伯夷、伯益、伊尹、傅说、周公旦、召公奭、太公望、召虎、方叔、张良、萧何、曹参、陈平、周勃、邓禹、冯异、诸葛亮、房玄龄、杜如晦、李靖、郭子仪、李晟、曹彬、潘美、韩世忠、岳飞、张浚、木华黎、博尔忽、博尔木、赤老温、伯颜，共三十七人，于东西廊庶陪从祭祀，设了四个坛。
English: As a result, a total of thirty-seven people, including Dingfeng Hou, Li Mu, Zhaotao, Zhao, Long, Baiyi, Bo Yi, Yi Yin, Fu Xie, Zhou Gongdan, Zhao Gongjun, Tai Gongwang, Zhao Hu, Fang Shou, Zhang Liang, Xiao He, Cao San, Chen Ping, Zhou Bo, Deng Yu, Feng Yiyi, Zhu Ge Liang, Fang Xuanling, Du Rugao, Li Jing, Guo Ziyi, Li Jun, Cao Bin, Pan Mei, Han Shizhong, Yue Fei, Zhang Jun, Mu Hua Li, Bor Hu,

古文：初，太公望有武成王庙。尝遣官致祭如释奠仪。
现代文：当初，太公望有武成王庙，曾派遣官员如同祭奠先师先圣的仪式举行祭祀。
English: At first, Emperor Taigong had high hopes for the temple of King Wucheng, and sent officials to hold a ritual as if it were a ceremony to commemorate the founder of the dynasty.

古文：至是，罢庙祭，去王号。
现代文：到这时，罢除庙祭，除去王号。
English: At this time, cancel the temple festival and remove the king's name.

古文：永乐迁都，帝王庙遣南京太常寺官行礼。
现代文：永乐迁都，帘王庙，派遣南京太常寺官举行祭礼。
English: Yongle moved the capital, the Curtain King Temple, and sent officials from Nanjing Taizhong Temple to hold a festival.

古文：嘉靖九年，罢历代帝王南郊从祀。
现代文：嘉靖九年，停止历代帝王在南郊从祀。
English: In the ninth year of Jiajing, the emperors of all ages stopped worshipping in the southern suburbs.

古文：令建历代帝王庙于都城西，岁以仲春秋致祭。
现代文：命令于都城西建历代帝王庙，每年在仲春、仲秋祭祀。
English: It was ordered to build a temple for the emperors of all ages in the west of the capital, and to hold annual rites in mid-spring and mid-autumn.

古文：后并罢南京庙祭。
现代文：后来一并停止南京庙祭。
English: Later, the Nanjing Temple Festival was also suspended.

古文：十年春二月，庙未成，躬祭历代帝王于文华殿，凡五坛，丹陛东西名臣四坛。
现代文：永乐十年春二月，庙没建成，皇帝亲自于文华殿祭祀历代帝王，共设五个祭坛，宫殿台阶东西设名臣四个祭坛。
English: In the spring and February of the 10th year of Yongle, when the temple was not completed, the emperor himself offered sacrifices to the emperors of all ages in the Wenhua Hall, setting up a total of five altars, and four altars for eminent courtiers on the palace steps.

古文：礼部尚书李时言： 旧仪有赐福胙之文。
现代文：礼部尚书李时说： 旧有仪式有赏赐福禄的文章。
English: Shangshu Lisi, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, said, "There is an article about the awarding of merit in the old ceremony.

古文：赐者自上而下之义，惟郊庙社稷宜用。
现代文：赏赐，是自上而下的意思，祇在郊庙社稷时适宜用。
English: Rewarded, meaning from the top down, is only appropriate in the case of suburban temples and shrines.

古文：历代帝王，止宜云答。 
现代文：历代帝王，只适合称答。 
English: The emperors of all times are only fit for praise.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏准许。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：十一年夏，庙成，名曰景德崇圣之殿。
现代文：十一年夏，庙建成，题名为景德崇圣之殿。
English: In the summer of the eleventh year, the temple was completed and named Jingde Chong Sheng Temple.

古文：殿五室，东西两庑，殿后祭器库，前为景德门。
现代文：殿有五室，东西两庶，殿后是放祭器的仓库，前为景德门。
English: The hall has five rooms, east and west two compartments, the back of the hall is a warehouse for the altar, and the front is the Jingde Gate.

古文：门外神库、神厨、宰牲亭、钟楼。
现代文：门外是神库、神厕、宰牲亭、钟楼。
English: Outside the gate are the Shinto shrine, Shinto toilet, sacrificial pavilion, and bell tower.

古文：街东西二坊，曰景德街。
现代文：街东西二坊，叫景德街。
English: The street runs east-west for two blocks and is called Jingde Avenue.

古文：用八月壬辰亲祭。
现代文：八月壬辰亲自祭祀。
English: In August, Imjin performed the ritual himself.

古文：帝由中门入，迎神、受福胙、送神各两拜。
现代文：皇帝由中门入，迎神、接受福祚、送神各拜两拜。
English: The emperor entered through the middle door, bowed twice to welcome the gods, receive blessings, and send the gods.

古文：嗣后岁遣大臣一员行礼，四员分献。
现代文：过后每年派大臣一员举行祭礼，四员大臣分别献祭。
English: After that, one minister was sent every year to hold a festival, and four ministers offered sacrifices separately.

古文：凡子、午、卯、酉祭于陵寝之岁，则停秋祭。
现代文：凡是子、午、卯、酉于帝王陵墓祭祀的年份，就停止秋祭。
English: The autumn festival will be suspended in years when the Zi, M, U, and Zi are sacrificed at the imperial mausoleum.

古文：二十四年，以礼科陈棐言，罢元世祖陵庙之祀，及从祀木华黎等，复迁唐太宗与宋太祖同室。
现代文：二十四年，因礼科陈菜建议，停止元世祖的陵庙祭祀以及陪从祭祀木华黎等人，又将唐太宗迁到宋太祖同一室内。
English: In 1924, due to the suggestion of Chen Cai of the etiquette department, the mausoleum and temple sacrifices of the original ancestor and the accompanying sacrifices of Mu Huali and others were stopped, and the Tang Taizong was moved to the same room as the Song Taizong.

古文：凡十五帝，从祀名臣三十二人。
现代文：共十五位皇帝，陪从祭祀的名臣有三十二人。
English: A total of fifteen emperors and thirty-two eminent ministers accompanied the ceremony.

古文：三皇
现代文：三皇
English: The Third Emperor

古文：明初仍元制，以三月三日、九月九日通祀三皇。
现代文：明朝初年沿袭元朝制度，在三月三日、九月九日共同祭祀三皇。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the system of the Yuan Dynasty was followed, and the three emperors were jointly worshipped on March 3rd and September 9th.

古文：洪武元年，令以太牢祀。
现代文：洪武元年，命令用太牢祭祀。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, an order was issued to use a dungeon for the ritual.

古文：二年，命以句芒、祝融、风后、力牧左右配，俞跗、桐君、僦贷季、少师、雷公、鬼臾区、伯高、岐伯、少俞、高阳十大名医从祀。仪同释奠。
现代文：洪武二年，命令用句芒、祝融、风后、力牧左右配祀，俞跗、桐君、僦贷季、少师、雷公、鬼臾区、伯高、岐伯、少俞、高阳十大名医陪从祭祀，仪式如同奠祭先师先圣。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, it was ordered to use the words "Mang," "Zhu Rong," "Feng Hou" and "Li Mu" to designate the places of worship, and the ten famous doctors, including Zhou, Tong Jun, Zou Lian Ji, Shao Shi, Lei Gong, Guan Yu, Baigao, Qibao, Shao Zang and Gaoyang, to accompany the sacrificial rites. The ceremony was similar to the offering ceremony for the first teacher and the first saint.

古文：四年，帝以天下郡邑通祀三皇为渎。
现代文：四年，皇帝认为天下郡邑共同祭祀三皇太遇度。
English: In the fourth year, the emperor thought that it would be a good opportunity for the counties and towns of the world to jointly worship the third emperor.

古文：礼臣议： 唐玄宗尝立三皇五帝庙于京师。
现代文：礼臣议论说： 唐玄宗曾经在京城设立三皇五帝庙。
English: The courtiers argued: Tang Xuan Zong once established the Temple of the Three Emperors and Five Emperors in Beijing.

古文：至元成宗时，乃立三皇庙于府州县。
现代文：到元成宗时，纔在府州县设立三皇庙。
English: When he arrived at Yuancheng Sect, he set up the Third Emperor's Temple in Fuzhou County.

古文：春秋通祀，而以医药主之，甚非礼也。 
现代文：春秋共同祭祀，而以医药为主，很不合礼法。 
English: Spring and autumn festivals are held together, but medicine is the main focus, which is not in accordance with etiquette.

古文：帝曰： 三皇继天立极，开万世教化之原，汨于药师可乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 三皇继承天意登帝位，开创了万代教育感化的本源，和药师混在一起，行吗？ 
English: The emperor said, "The three emperors ascended the throne by inheriting the will of heaven, created the source of education and inspiration for all generations, and mingled with pharmacists. Is that okay?

古文：命天下郡县毋得亵祀。
现代文：命令天下郡县不准亵渎祭祀。
English: He ordered all counties in the country not to allow sacrificial rituals to be desecrated.

古文：正德十一年，立伏羲氏庙于秦州。
现代文：正德十一年，于秦州设立伏羲氏庙。
English: In the eleventh year of Zhengde, the Fuxi Temple was established in Qinzhou.

古文：秦州，古成纪地，从巡按御史冯时雄奏也。
现代文：秦州，是古代成纪的地方，这样做是依从了巡按御史冯时雄的奏议。
English: Qinzhou is a place of ancient history, and this was done in accordance with the suggestion of the inspector Feng Shixiong.

古文：嘉靖间，建三皇庙于太医院北，名景惠殿。
现代文：嘉靖年间，于太医院北建立三皇庙，题名景惠殿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the Third Emperor's Temple, named Jinghui Hall, was built in the north of Tai Hospital.

古文：中奉三皇及四配。
现代文：中间奉祀三皇以及四配。
English: In the middle, the third emperor and four attendants are enshrined.

古文：其从祀，东庑则僦贷季、岐伯、伯高、鬼臾区、俞跗、少俞、少师、桐君、雷公、马师皇、伊尹、扁鹊、淳于意、张机十四人，西庑则华陀、王叔和、皇甫谧、葛洪、巢元方、孙思邈、韦慈藏、王冰、钱乙、朱肱、李杲、利完素、张元素、朱彦修十四人。
现代文：它的陪从祭祀，束屋是僦贷季、岐伯、伯高、鬼臾区、俞跗、少俞、少师、桐君、雷公、马师皇、伊尹、扁韹、婆于惠、张机十四人，西屋是华陀、王叔和、皇甫谧、葛洪、巢元方、孙思邈、韦慈藏、王冰、钱乙、朱肱、李杲、刘完素、张元素、朱彦修十四人。
English: There are 14 attendants of its accompanying rituals, of which there are 14 in the Tsukuya, namely, Min, Gui, Bo, Gui, Gui, Shao, Shao, Shao, Tong, Lei, Ma, Yi, Bian, Ba, Yu, and Zhang, and 14 in the West House, namely, Hua Tuo, Wang Shuhe, Wang Fu, Ge Hong, Xue Yuanfang, Sun Si, Wei Cizang, Wang Bing, Qian Yi, Zhu Xi, Li Qian, Liu Can Su, Zhang Ye, and Zhu Yanxiu.

古文：岁仲春、秋上甲日，礼部堂上官行礼，太医院堂上官二员分献，用少牢。
现代文：每年二月、八月上旬的甲日，礼部堂上官举行祭礼，太医院堂上官两员分别祭献，用少牢。
English: Every year, on the first day of February and the first half of August, the superintendent of the ceremonial hall holds a festival, and two members of the superintendent of the hall of the Tai Hospital separately offer sacrifices, using a small prison.

古文：复建圣济殿于内，祀先医，以太医官主之。
现代文：又在里面修建圣济殿，祭祀先代名医，以太医官主持祭祀。
English: In addition, they built the Hall of St. John the Baptist inside, where the previous generation of famous doctors were worshipped, and the etheric medical officer presided over the worship.

古文：二十一年，帝以规制湫隘，命拓其庙。
现代文：二十一年，皇帝认为规模形制低下矮小，命令扩大祭庙。
English: In the twenty-first year, the emperor thought that the scale of the temple was too small and ordered the expansion of the temple.

古文：圣师
现代文：圣师
English: The Holy Teacher

古文：圣师之祭，始于世宗。
现代文：圣师的祭祀，开始于世宗。
English: The cult of the sage began in Sejong.

古文：奉皇师伏羲氏、神农氏、轩辕氏、帝师陶唐氏，有虞氏，王师夏禹王、商汤王、周文王武王，九圣南向。
现代文：供奉皇师伏羲氏、神农氏、轩辕氏，帝师陶唐氏、有虞氏，王师夏禹王、商汤王、周文王、武王，九圣面向南。
English: It is dedicated to the imperial masters Fu Xi, Shennong, and Xuan Xi, the imperial masters Tao Tang, and You You, the royal masters Xia Yu, Shang Tang, Zhou Wen, and Wu Wang, and faces south.

古文：左先圣周公，右先师孔子，东西向。
现代文：左面是先圣周公，右面是先师孔子，东西向。
English: On the left is the first saint Zhou Gong, and on the right is the first teacher Confucius, facing east and west.

古文：每岁春秋开讲前一日，皇帝服皮弁，拜跪，行释奠礼。
现代文：每年春秋为皇帝讲经的前一日，皇帝穿着皮弁，跪拜，举行奠祭先圣先师的礼仪。
English: Every year in spring and autumn, on the day before the emperor's sermon, the emperor wears a flapper, kneels, and holds a ceremony to offer a libation to the holy forefather.

古文：用羹酒果脯帛祭于文华殿东室。
现代文：在文华殿束屋用羹酒果脯帛祭祀。
English: At the Bunka-den Sokuya, a ritual is performed with jellied fruit and wine.

古文：初，东室有释像，帝以其不经，撤之，乃祀先圣先师。
现代文：当初，束屋有释迦牟尼像，皇帝认为他不合常法，撤掉了，于是祭祀先圣周公和先师孔子。
English: At first, there was a statue of Sakyamuni in the storeroom, but the emperor thought it was against the law and had it removed, so the first saint, Zhou Gong, and the first teacher, Confucius, were sacrificed.

古文：自为祭文，行奉安神位礼。
现代文：自己写祭文，举行奉安神位礼。
English: They wrote their own dedicatory texts and held the Bongan Shinto ritual.

古文：辅臣礼卿及讲官俟行礼讫，入拜。
现代文：辅政大臣、礼卿以及讲官等待行完礼，进入跪拜。
English: The Vice-Minister of State, the Lord of Ceremonies and the Lecturer wait for the completion of the salute and then kneel down.

古文：先是洪武初，司业宋濂建议欲如建安熊氏之说，以伏羲为道统之宗，神农、黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，以次列焉。
现代文：在此以前，洪武初年，司业宋濂建议要依建安熊氏的说法，以伏羲为儒家道统的宗师，神农、黄帝、尧、舜、禹、汤、文、武，依次列坐。
English: Prior to this, in the first year of Hongwu, the secretary of industry, Song Liang, suggested that it should be based on the saying of Jian An Xiong, with Fuxi as the master of Confucianism, Shennong, Huang Di, Yao, Yao, Yu, Tang, Wen, and Wu, in order.

古文：秩祀天子之学，则道统益尊。
现代文：按等级祭祀天子的学说，那么儒家道统更为尊贵。
English: According to the doctrine of sacrificing the Son of Heaven according to rank, then the Confucian doctrine is more noble.

古文：太祖不从。
现代文：太祖不听从。
English: The great-grandfather did not listen.

古文：至是，世宗仿其意行之。
现代文：到这时，世宗仿照宋濂的意思实行。
English: At this time, Shizong imitated the will of Song Dynasty and implemented it.

古文：十六年，移祀于永明殿后，行礼如初。
现代文：嘉靖十六年，改到在永明殿后祭祀，和当初一样举行祭礼。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of Emperor Jiajing, the ritual was moved to the back of the Yongming Hall, where it is still held today.

古文：其后常遣官代祭。
现代文：这以后常派遣官员代皇帝祭祀。
English: After that, officials were often dispatched to perform sacrifices on behalf of the emperor.

古文：隆庆初，仍于文华殿东室行礼。
现代文：隆庆初年，仍在文华殿东屋举行祭礼。
English: In the first year of the Longqing, the festival was still held in the east wing of the Wenhua Hall.

古文：至圣先师子孔庙祀
现代文：至圣先师子孔庙祀
English: Confucius Temple enshrines its most revered disciple

古文：汉晋及隋或称先师，或称先圣、宣尼、宣父。
现代文：汉、晋以及隋，有的称先师，有的称先圣、宣尼、宣父。
English: In Han, Jin and Sui Dynasties, some were called Shanshi, some were called Shensheng, Xuanni and Xuanfu.

古文：唐谥文宣王，宋加至圣号，元复加号大成。
现代文：唐朝谧号文宣王，宋加上圣号，元又加上大成号。
English: The Tang Dynasty added the title of King Wenxuan, the Song Dynasty added the title of Saint, and the Yuan Dynasty added the title of Taicheng.

古文：明太祖入江淮府，首谒孔子庙。
现代文：明太祖入江淮府，首先拜孔子庙。
English: When Emperor Taizu of the Ming Dynasty entered Jianghuai Prefecture, he first visited the Confucius Temple.

古文：洪武元年二月，诏以太牢祀孔子于国学，仍遣使诣曲阜致祭。
现代文：洪武元年二月，下诏在国学用太牢祭祀孔子，仍派遣使者到曲阜举行祭祀。
English: In February of the first year of Hongwu's reign, the emperor decreed that Confucius should be worshiped in the Confucian Academy's dungeon, but still sent an envoy to Qufu to hold the sacrifice.

古文：临行谕曰： 仲尼之道，广大悠久，与天地并。
现代文：临出发时告论说： 仲尼的道义，广大悠久，与天地并存。
English: At the time of departure, he said: Zhongni's morality is vast and long-standing, coexisting with heaven and earth.

古文：有天下者莫不虔修祀事。
现代文：据有天下的帝王，无不恭敬地举行祭祀事务。
English: According to emperors around the world, sacrificial services were held in a respectful manner.

古文：朕为天下主，期大明教化，以行先圣之道。
现代文：我身为天下君主，希望大大昌明教化，来实行先圣的道术。
English: I, as the monarch of the world, hope to greatly promote enlightenment and to practice the sacred Taoism.

古文：今既释奠成均，仍遣尔修祀事于阙里，尔其敬之。 
现代文：如今既然在大学举行祭祀先圣先师的礼仪，仍派你们到阙里举行祭祀事务，你们要恭敬行事。 
English: Now that the rite of offering sacrifices to the first saint and teacher is being held at the university, you are still sent to Bali to hold sacrificial services, and you should act respectfully.

古文：又定制，每岁仲春、秋上丁，皇帝降香，遣官祀于国学。
现代文：又规定制度，在每年仲春、仲秋的上丁日，皇帝降香，派官员在国子学祭祀。
English: It also stipulated a system in which the emperor would offer incense on the first day of the lunar new year and the first day of the lunar new year every year, and send officials to attend religious services at the Imperial Academy.

古文：以丞相初献，翰林学士亚献，国子祭酒终献。
现代文：以丞相行初献礼，翰林学士行二献礼，国子祭酒行三献礼。
English: The chancellor will perform the first offering, the scholar of Hanlin will perform the second offering, and the son of the country will perform the third offering.

古文：先期，皇帝斋戒。
现代文：祭期之前，皇帝沐浴更衣，戒绝嗜欲。
English: Before the festival, the emperor bathed, changed clothes, and abstained from sexual indulgence.

古文：献官、陪祀、执事官皆散斋二日，致斋一日。
现代文：献官、陪祀、执辜官都行不御不乐不吊的散斋两天，清身洁心的致斋一天。
English: Offerings, accompaniment of worship, and the performance of religious duties are all carried out during the two days of fasting, and the day of fasting is the day to purify the body and mind.

古文：前祀一日，皇帝服皮弁服，御奉天殿降香。
现代文：祭祀的前一天，皇帝穿皮弁服，驾临奉天殿降香。
English: On the day before the sacrifice, the emperor put on his leather trousers and came to offer incense to the heavenly sanctuary.

古文：至日，献官行礼。
现代文：到了祭祀日，献官举行祭礼。
English: On the day of the ritual, the offering ceremony is held.

古文：三年，诏革诸神封号，惟孔子封爵仍旧。
现代文：三年，下诏革除众神封号，只有孔子的封爵依旧。
English: Three years later, with the abolition of the imperial edict, only Confucius's title remained.

古文：且命曲阜庙庭，岁官给牲币，俾衍圣公供祀事。
现代文：而且命令曲阜神庙，每年官府给予祭牲彩帛，使衍圣公供奉祭祀事务。
English: Moreover, he ordered the Qufu Temple to receive the government's annual offering of sacrificial animals, so that Yan Sheng Gong could offer sacrificial services.

古文：四年，礼部奏定仪物。
现代文：四年，礼部上奏议定仪节用品。
English: In the fourth year, the ceremonial goods were reported to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：改初制笾豆之八为十，笾用竹。
现代文：改以前规定的篷豆用八为十，篷要用竹制成。
English: The previously specified number of tarpaulins was changed from eight to ten, and the tarpaulins were to be made of bamboo.

古文：其簠簋登鉶及豆初用木者，悉易以瓷。
现代文：所用盛黍稷稻粱的篮簋登钏以及豆，最初用木制的，全部换为瓷制。
English: The baskets used to hold the rice and beans, originally made of wood, were all changed to porcelain.

古文：牲易以熟。
现代文：祭牲改用煮熟的。
English: The sacrificial animal was cooked instead.

古文：乐生六十人，舞生四十八人，引舞二人，凡一百一十人。
现代文：奏乐的六十人，舞蹈的四十八人，领舞的二人，共一百一十人。
English: There were sixty musicians, forty-eight dancers, and two leaders, for a total of one hundred and ten people.

古文：礼部请选京民之秀者充乐舞生，太祖曰： 乐舞乃学者事，况释奠所以崇师，宜择国子生及公卿子弟在学者，豫教肄之。 
现代文：礼部请求挑选京城百姓中秀丽的充任乐生、舞生。太祖说； 乐舞是学者的事情，何况祭祀先圣先师是用来尊崇孔子的。应选择国子生以及公卿子弟在太学学习的人，预先教授他们。 
English: The Ministry of Ceremonies requested the selection of a beautiful full-time musician and dancer from among the people of the capital. Taizu said; Music and dance is a matter for scholars, not to mention that the sacrificial priest is used to honor Confucius. It is necessary to select the sons of the country and the sons of the nobles who study at Taigaku, and teach them in advance.

古文：五年，罢孟子配享。
现代文：五年，罢除孟子拊祭。
English: Five years later, the Mencius Bon Festival was abolished.

古文：逾年，帝曰： 孟子辨异端，辟邪说，发明孔子之道，配享如故。 
现代文：过了一年，皇帝说： 孟子辨明异端，排除邪说，发扬昌明孑子道术，像以前一样拊祭。 
English: A year later, the emperor said: "Mencius has identified the heresy, eliminated the heresy, promoted the Changming Dajie Daoism, and burned the sacrifice as before.

古文：七年二月，上丁日食，改用仲丁。
现代文：七年二月上丁日，日食，改用第二个丁日。
English: In February of the 7th year, the solar eclipse on the 1st day of the 2nd month was changed to the 2nd day of the 3rd month.

古文：十五年，新建太学成。
现代文：洪武十五年，新建太学竣工。
English: In the 15th year of Hongwu's reign, the newly-built Taigaku was completed.

古文：庙在学东，中大成殿，左右两庑，前大成门，门左右列戟二十四。
现代文：庙建在太学东面，中间是大成殿，左右两庶，前面是大成门，门的左右列了二十四戟。
English: The temple was built on the east side of Taigaku. In the middle was the Dacheng Hall, with two wings on the left and right. In front was the Dacheng Gate, with twenty-four gates on the left and right.

古文：门外东为牺牲厨，西为祭器库，又前为灵星门。
现代文：门外东面是牺牲厕，西面是祭器库，再前面为灵星门。
English: Outside the door, to the east is the sacrificial toilet, to the west is the sacrificial tool store, and in front is the spirit star door.

古文：自经始以来，驾数临视。
现代文：自开始营建以来，皇帝数次驾临视察。
English: Since the start of construction, the emperor has visited several times.

古文：至是落成，遣官致祭。
现代文：到这时落成，派官员举行祭祀。
English: By this time, it was completed, and officials were sent to hold a religious service.

古文：帝既亲诣释奠，又诏天下通祀孔子，并颁释奠仪注。
现代文：皇帝既已亲自去奠祭先圣先师，又下诏天下共同祭祀孔子，并颁布奠祭先圣先师的制度。
English: The emperor himself went to the sacrificial offering for the holy forerunner, and issued an edict for the whole world to jointly worship Confucius, and promulgated the sacrificial offering for the holy forerunner system.

古文：凡府州县学，笾豆以八，器物牲牢，皆杀于国学。
现代文：凡是府州县学，篷豆用八，器物牲牢，都比园子学减少。
English: In all prefectural and county schools, the use of eight cans of beans and eight cans of utensils is less than in kindergartens.

古文：三献礼同，十哲两庑一献。
现代文：献酒的三次礼仪相同，孔子的十个弟子在两庶行一献礼。
English: The three times of offering wine have the same etiquette. The ten disciples of Confucius offer their gifts in two separate lines.

古文：其祭，各以正官行之，有布政司则以布政司官，分献则以本学儒职及老成儒士充之。
现代文：祭祀时，各自用正职官员奉行，有布政司就由布政司官主祭，分别祭献就用本太学学宫以及老成儒士充任。
English: At the time of the sacrificial rites, they were each conducted by a full-time official, and if there was a political secretary, the political secretary would be the chief priest, and if there was a sacrificial offering, the great scholar and the old Confucian scholar would serve as priests.

古文：每岁春、秋仲月上丁日行事。
现代文：每年春、秋第二月上旬的丁日祭祀。
English: Every year in spring and autumn, the Ding Festival is held in the early part of the second month.

古文：初，国学主祭遣祭酒，后遣翰林院官，然祭酒初到官，必遣一祭。
现代文：当初，国子学主持祭祀的派遣祭酒官，后来派遣翰林院官，然而祭酒初上任，必定派遣祭祀一次。
English: At first, Kuniko-gaku dispatched the sacrificial wine officer to preside over the ritual, and later dispatched the Hanlin academician. However, when the sacrificial wine officer first took office, he must dispatch the ritual once.

古文：十七年，敕每月朔望，祭酒以下行释菜礼，郡县长以下诣学行香。
现代文：十七年，下令每月朔日和望日，祭酒以下举行入学祭奠先师礼，郡县长官以下到学宫上香。
English: In the seventeenth year, he ordered that every month on the New Year's Day and the Day of Hope, the school entrance ceremony should be held after the offering of wine, and the county magistrate and below should go to the school palace to offer incense.

古文：二十六年，颁大成乐于天下。
现代文：洪武二十六年，向天下颁布大成乐。
English: In the 26th year of Hongwu's reign, he proclaimed the great success to the world.

古文：二十八年，以行人司副杨砥言，罢汉扬雄从祀，益以董仲舒。
现代文：二十八年，因行人司副官杨砥进言，罢除汉扬雄陪祀，增加董仲舒。
English: In the 28th year, due to the suggestion of Yang Tuo, the deputy officer of the Pedestrian Division, Han Yangxiong was removed and Dong Zhongshu was added.

古文：三十年，以国学孔子庙隘，命工部改作，其制皆帝所规画。
现代文：三十年，因为国子学孑子庙狭窄，命令工部改建，构制规模都是皇帝规划的。
English: Thirty years ago, the Emperor ordered the Ministry of Works to rebuild the narrow Kuniko-gakusei Shushi-ji Temple, and the scale of the structure was planned by the Emperor.

古文：大成殿门各六楹，灵星门三，东西庑七十六楹，神厨库皆八楹，宰牲所六楹。
现代文：大成殿门各有六楹，灵星门三楹，东西庶七十六楹，神厕、神库都是八楹，宰杀祭牲的地方是六楹。
English: Each of the gates of the Dacheng Hall has six gates, the Gate of the Stars has three gates, the east and west gates each have seventy-six gates, the sacred toilet and the sacred storehouse each have eight gates, and the place where sacrificial animals are slaughtered has six gates.

古文：永乐初，建庙于太学之东。
现代文：永乐初年，在太学束面建庙。
English: In the first year of Yongle, a temple was built in Taigaku Sokumen.

古文：宣德三年，以万县训导李译言，命礼部考正从祀先贤名位，颁示天下。
现代文：宣德三年，因万县训导李译进言，命礼部考正陪祀先贤的名位，颁布告示天下。
English: In the third year of Xuande, due to the speech of the Wanxian training guide Li Yizhong, the Ministry of Ceremonies ordered the examination to be accompanied by the veneration of the name of the sages, promulgated and announced to the world.

古文：十年，慈利教谕蒋明请祀元儒吴澄。
现代文：十年，慈利教谕蒋明请求祭祀元代儒士昊澄。
English: Ten years later, Tzu Li ordered Jiang Ming to request the sacrifice of the Yuan Dynasty Confucianist Hao Cheng.

古文：大学士杨士奇等言当从祀，从之。
现代文：大学士杨士奇等人说应当陪祀，皇帝听从了。
English: Yang Shichi, a university scholar, and others said that they should accompany the worship, and the emperor obeyed.

古文：正统二年，以宋儒胡安国、蔡沈、真德秀从祀。
现代文：正统二年，以宋儒胡安国、蔡沈、真德秀陪祀。
English: In the second year of orthodoxy, he was accompanied by Song Confucius Huang Guo, Cai Shen, and Zhen De Xiu.

古文：三年，禁天下祀孔子于释、老宫。
现代文：三年，禁止天下在释、老宫祭祀孔子。
English: Three years later, the world banned the worship of Confucius at the Imperial Palace.

古文：孔、颜、孟三氏子孙教授裴侃言： 天下文庙惟论传道，以列位次。
现代文：孔、颜、孟三氏的子孙教授裴侃说： 天下文庙只根据传道来排列位次。
English: Professor Pei Kan, a descendant of Kong, Yan, and Meng San, said: Tian Guan Temple is only ranked according to preaching.

古文：阙里家庙，宜正父子，以叙彝伦。
现代文：阙里的孔子家庙，应该端正父子关系，来作为排列先后的常道。
English: The Confucius Family Temple in Handan should rectify the relationship between father and son and take it as a common practice to arrange them one after another.

古文：颜子、曾子、子思，子也，配享殿廷。
现代文：颜子、曾子、子思是儿子，在殿庭配享。
English: Yan Zi, Zeng Zi and Zisi are sons, and they share the throne.

古文：无繇、子昽、伯鱼，父也，从祀廊庑。
现代文：无繇、子皙、伯鱼是父亲，在走廊侧房陪祀。
English: Muxuan, Zixuan and Bo Yu are the fathers, and they accompany the worship in the corridor side room.

古文：非惟名分不正，抑恐神不自安。
现代文：并非只是名分不正，恐怕神自己也不会安心。
English: It's not just the name that's not right, I'm afraid God himself won't be reassured.

古文：况叔梁纥元已追封启圣王，创殿于大成殿西崇祀，而颜、孟之父俱封公，惟伯鱼、子昽仍侯，乞追封公爵，偕颜、孟父俱配启圣王殿。 
现代文：何况叔梁纥在元代已经追封为启圣王，在大成殿西建殿崇拜奉祀，而且颜、孟的父亲都封公，祇有伯鱼、子皙仍封侯，请求追封公爵，与颜、孟的父亲都配享于启圣王殿。 
English: Moreover, in the Yuan Dynasty, Shu Liangyao had been posthumously crowned as the Prince of Qi, worshipped and enshrined in the West Hall of the Great Hall of the Great Hall of the People, and the fathers of Yan and Meng were both crowned as princes, but only Bo Yu and Zi Yao were still crowned as princes, and they requested to be crowned as dukes, and both Yan and Meng's fathers were entitled to enjoy the Prince of Qi.

古文：帝命礼部行之，仍议加伯鱼、子昽封号。
现代文：皇帝命礼部施行，接着议论给伯鱼、子皙加封号。
English: The Emperor's order was carried out by the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, followed by a discussion on adding a seal number to the fish and the cormorant.

古文：成化二年，追封董仲舒广川伯，胡安国建宁伯，蔡沈崇安伯，真德秀浦城伯。
现代文：成化二年，追封董仲舒为广川伯，胡安国为建宁伯，蔡沈为崇安伯，真德秀为浦城伯。
English: In the second year of Chenghua, Dong Zhongshu was posthumously awarded the title of Guangchuan Biao, Juan Guo was awarded the title of Jianning Biao, Cai Shen was awarded the title of Chongan Biao, and Zhende Xiu was awarded the title of Pucheng Biao.

古文：十二年，从祭酒周洪谟言，增乐舞为八佾，笾豆各十二。
现代文：十二年，皇帝听从祭酒周洪谟的建议，增加乐舞为八佾，篷豆各焉十二件。
English: In the twelfth year, the emperor listened to the suggestion of the sacrificial wine Zhou Hongmu and increased the music and dance to eight gongs, and the taro beans to twelve pieces each.

古文：弘治八年，追封杨时将乐伯。从祀，位司马光之次。
现代文：弘治八年，追封杨时为将乐伯，陪从祭祀，位置次于司马光。
English: In the eighth year of the Hongzhi era, when Yang was posthumously awarded the title of General Le Bo, he accompanied the sacrificial rites, a position second only to Sima Guang.

古文：九年，增乐舞为七十二人，如天子之制。
现代文：九年，增加乐舞至七十二人，如同天子的礼制。
English: Nine years later, the number of musicians and dancers was increased to seventy-two, in accordance with the ritual of the heavenly sons.

古文：十二年，阙里孔庙毁，敕有司重建。
现代文：十二年，阙里孔庙焚毁，敕令有关部门重建。
English: In the 12th year, the Confucius Temple in Dali was burned down, and the relevant departments were ordered to rebuild it.

古文：十七年，庙成，遣大学士李东阳祭告，并立御制碑文。
现代文：十七年，庙建成，派遣大学士李束阳祭告，并刻石树立御制碑文。
English: In the seventeenth year, the temple was completed, and Li Sokyang, a university scholar, was dispatched to make an announcement, and the imperial inscription was carved on the stone.

古文：正德十六年，诏有司改建孔氏家庙之在衢州者，官给钱，董其役。
现代文：正德十六年，下诏有关部门改建在衢州的孔氏家庙，官府供给钱，督办工程。
English: In the 16th year of Zhengde, the relevant departments were ordered to rebuild the Kong family temple in Zhangzhou. The government provided money and supervised the project.

古文：令博士孔承义奉祀。
现代文：命令博士孔承义奉杞。
English: Dr. Kong Chengyi was ordered to be hanged.

古文：嘉靖九年，大学士张璁言： 先师祀典，有当更正者。
现代文：嘉靖九年，大学士张璁说： 孔子祭祀典礼，有应当更正的地方。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing era, Zhang Ye, a university scholar, said: The Confucius ritual ceremony is outdated, and there are areas that should be corrected.

古文：叔梁纥乃孔子之父，颜路、曾昽、孔鲤乃颜、曾、子思之父，三子配享庙庭，纥及诸父从祀两庑，原圣贤之心岂安？
现代文：叔梁纥是孔子的父亲，颜路、曾皙、孑鲤是颜渊、曾参、子思的父亲，三个儿子在庙庭配享，叔梁纥及各位父亲却在两庶陪祀，推究圣贤的心又怎能安适？
English: Shu Liangzhu is the father of Confucius, Yanlu, Zengzhu, and Zou are the fathers of Yan Yuan, Zengzhan, and Zisi. The three sons share the temple courtyard, but Shu Liangzhu and the fathers accompany the worship in two households. How can it be comfortable to investigate the hearts of sages?

古文：请于大成殿后，别立室祀叔梁纥，而以颜路、曾昽、孔鲤配之。 
现代文：请在大成殿后，另外建房祭祀叔梁纥，而以颜路、曾皙、孔鲤配享。 
English: After the Dacheng Hall, please build another hall to worship Uncle Liang, and share Yanlu, Zenglu, and Konglu.

古文：帝以为然。因言： 圣人尊天与尊亲同。
现代文：皇帝认为正确，于是说： 圣人尊天与尊亲相同。
English: The emperor thought he was right, so he said, "A saint's reverence for heaven is the same as reverence for relatives."

古文：今笾豆十二，牲用犊，全用祀天仪，亦非正礼。
现代文：现今用篷豆十二件，祭牲用犊，全部是用来祭祀天的礼仪，也不是正礼。
English: Nowadays, the twelve pieces of taro, and the sacrificial animal with the yoke, are all used to worship the heavens, and are not formal.

古文：其谥号、章服悉宜改正。 
现代文：他的谧号、锈有日月星辰图案的礼服都应改正。 
English: His nickname and rust-colored gown with a sun, moon and stars motif should be corrected.

古文：璁缘帝意，言： 孔子宜称先圣先师，不称王。
现代文：张璁顺着皇帝意思说： 孔子宜称先圣先师，不称王。
English: Zhang Ye said in accordance with the emperor's will: Confucius should be called the first sage, not the king.

古文：祀宇宜称庙，不称殿。
现代文：祭祀的房屋宜称庙，不称殿。
English: A house of worship should be called a temple, not a hall.

古文：祀宜用木主，其塑像宜毁。
现代文：祭祀适宜用木制牌位，他的塑像应该毁掉。
English: Wooden plaques should be used for sacrifices, and his statue should be destroyed.

古文：笾豆用十，乐用六佾。
现代文：篷豆用十件，乐用六佾。
English: Ten pieces of taro are used, and six stalks are used.

古文：配位公侯伯之号宜削，止称先贤先儒。
现代文：配享者爵位为公侯伯的封号应该削除，只称先贤先儒。
English: The title of the holder of the title of prince should be removed, and he should only be referred to as the great sage Confucius.

古文：其从祀申党、公伯寮、秦冉等十二人宜罢，林放、蘧瑗等六人宜各祀于其乡，后苍、王通、欧阳修、胡瑗、蔡元定宜从祀。 
现代文：所陪祀的申党、公伯寮、秦冉等十二人应该罢除，林放、蘧瑗等六人应该各自在其乡里祭祀，后苍、玉乃、欧阳修、胡瑗、蔡元定应该陪祀。 
English: Twelve people such as Shen Dang, Gong Bo Liao, and Qin Ran, who were accompanied by the worshippers, should be removed, six people such as Lin Fang and Zou should be sacrificed in their hometowns, and Gohang, Tamano, Ouyang Xiu, Hu Yao, and Cai Yuanding should be accompanied by the worshippers.

古文：帝命礼部会翰林诸臣议。
现代文：皇帝命令礼部会同翰林众臣议论。
English: The emperor ordered the etiquette committee to have a discussion with all the courtiers.

古文：编修徐阶疏陈易号毁像之不可。
现代文：编修徐阶上疏陈述改易称号毁掉塑像不可行。
English: It is not feasible to change the title and destroy the statue.

古文：帝怒，谪阶官，乃御制《正孔子祀典说》，大略谓孔子以鲁僣王为非，宁肯自僣天子之礼？
现代文：皇帝发怒，贬谪徐阶的官职，于是御制《正孔子祀典说》，大略说，孔子以为鲁僭越王礼是不对的，难道肯自己僭越天子的礼仪吗？
English: Enraged, the emperor demeaned Xu Jia's official position, and then issued the "Confucius's Rites and Rituals." Roughly speaking, Confucius thought that it was wrong for Lu Xun to exceed the king's etiquette. Would he dare to exceed the etiquette of the son of heaven?

古文：复为《正孔子祀典申记》，俱付史馆。
现代文：又作《正孔子祀典申记》，都交付给史馆。
English: He also wrote the "Declaration of the Genuine Confucius Worship Book," all of which were handed over to the history museum.

古文：璁因作《正孔子庙祀典或问》奏之。
现代文：张璁于是作《正孔子庙祀典或问》上奏。
English: Zhang Ye then composed the first movement of "The Ritual of the Genuine Confucius Temple."

古文：帝以为议论详正，并令礼部集议。
现代文：皇帝以为议论详细正确，并令礼部集体议论。
English: The emperor thought that the detailed discussion was correct, and ordered the ritual department to discuss it collectively.

古文：于是御史黎贯等言： 圣祖初正祀典，天下岳渎诸神皆去其号，惟先师孔子如故，良有深意。
现代文：于是御史黎贯等人说： 圣祖当初订正祭祀典礼，天下五岳四演众神都削去封号，只有先师孔子如故，确实有深意。
English: Therefore, Goshirikan and others said, "The Holy Father originally revised the sacrificial rites, and the names of the five mountains and four deities in the world were removed. Only the forerunner, Confucius, still has a deep meaning.

古文：陛下疑孔子之祀上拟祀天之礼。
现代文：陛下怀疑孔子的祭祀，上与祭祀上天的礼仪相比拟。
English: His Majesty suspected that the sacrificial rites of Confucius were on a par with the rites of heaven.

古文：夫子以不可及也，犹天之不可阶而升，虽拟诸天，亦不为过。
现代文：孔子的不可及，像上天不可登阶而升，即使比拟于天，也不为过。
English: Confucius is unattainable, just as heaven cannot be ascended, even if it is compared to heaven, it is not too much.

古文：自唐尊孔子为文宣王，已用天子礼乐。
现代文：自从唐尊孔子为文宣王，已经使用天子礼乐。
English: Since the Tang Dynasty revered Confucius as the king of proclamation, they have been using the Divine Liturgy.

古文：宋真宗尝欲封孔子为帝，或谓周止称王，不当加帝号。
现代文：宋真宗曾经想封孔子为皇帝，有人说周只称王，不应当加帝号。
English: Song Zhenzong once wanted to crown Confucius as emperor. Some people said that Zhou was only a king and should not be given the title of emperor.

古文：而罗从彦之论，则谓加帝号亦可。
现代文：而罗从彦所论，增加帝号也可以。
English: According to Luo Congyan, the imperial title can also be added.

古文：至周敦颐则以为万世无穷王祀孔子，邵雍则以为仲尼以万世为王。
现代文：到了周敦颐便认为万世无穷，以王礼祭祀孔子，邵雍则认为仲尼以万世为王。
English: As far as Zhou Dunlian is concerned, he believes that the world is infinite and worships Confucius with royal rites, while Shaoyong believes that Zhongni is the king of the world.

古文：其辨孔子不当称王者，止吴澄一人而已。
现代文：论辩孔子不应当稻王的人，只有昊澄一人罢了。
English: Haocheng was the only one who argued that Confucius should not be the king of rice.

古文：伏望博考群言，务求至当。 
现代文：诚恳希望皇上广泛地考察众人的言论，务求最恰当。 
English: I sincerely hope that the Emperor will extensively examine the comments made by many people to ensure that they are most appropriate.

古文：时贯疏中言： 莫尊于天地，亦莫尊于父师。
现代文：当时黎贯疏中说： 没有什么比天地更尊贵的，也没有什么比父亲和老师更尊贵的。
English: At that time, Li Gangsuo said: There is nothing more precious than heaven and earth, and there is nothing more precious than father and teacher.

古文：陛下敬天尊亲，不应独疑孔子王号为僣。 
现代文：陛下敬天尊亲，不应单独怀疑孔子的王号是僭越。 
English: Your Majesty, with respect to God and your relatives, you should not doubt that Confucius' royal title is "Confucius."

古文：帝因大怒，疑贯借此以斥其追尊皇考之非，诋为奸恶，下法司会讯，褫其职。
现代文：皇帝因此大怒，怀疑黎贯藉此来斥责他追尊亡父的错误，谴责他为奸恶，下交司法部门会同审讯，削夺了他的官职。
English: The emperor was furious, suspecting that this was a way for Li Gang to reprimand him for the mistake of honoring his deceased father, accuse him of treachery, submit him to the judicial department for joint trial, and deprive him of his official position.

古文：给事中王汝梅等亦极言不宜去王号，帝皆斥为谬论。
现代文：给事中王汝梅等人也极力说不该削去王号，皇帝都斥责为谬论。
English: In this matter, Wang Rumei and others also insisted that the king's title should not be removed, and the emperor rebuked them for their fallacy.

古文：于是礼部会诸臣议： 人以圣人为至，圣人以孔子为至。
现代文：于是礼部会同众臣议论： 人以圣人为最崇高，圣人以孔子为最崇高。
English: As a result, the ritual department discussed with all the courtiers: People regard saints as the most sublime, and saints regard Confucius as the most sublime.

古文：宋真宗称孔子为至，宋真宗称孔子为至圣，其意已备。今宜于孔子神位题至圣先师孔子，去其王号及大成、文宣之称。
现代文：宋真宗称孔子为至圣，他的意思已经齐备。现在应在孔子神位上题写至圣先师孔子，去掉他的王号以及大成、文宣的称号。
English: Song Zhenzong said that Confucius was the most holy, and his meaning was already complete. Now it should be inscribed on the throne of Confucius the most holy prophet Confucius, removing his royal title and the titles of Dacheng and Wenxuan.

古文：改大成殿为先师庙，大成门为庙门。
现代文：改大成殿为先师庙，大成门为庙门。
English: The Dacheng Hall was converted into a temple, and the Dacheng Gate into a temple gate.

古文：其四配称复圣颜子、宗圣曾子、述圣子思子、亚圣孟子。
现代文：他的四位配享弟子称复圣颜子、宗圣曾子、述圣子思子、亚圣孟子。
English: His four honored disciples were called Fu Shengyanzi, Zong Sheng Zengzi, Su Shengzi Sizi, and Asheng Mengzi.

古文：十哲以下凡及门弟子，皆称先贤某子。
现代文：十位贤哲弟子以下凡是入门了的弟子，都称先贤某子。
English: All the disciples who have started following the ten sages are called the sons of the sages.

古文：左丘明以下，皆称先儒某子，不复称公侯伯。
现代文：左丘明以下，都称公侯伯先儒某子。不再称公侯伯。
English: From Zuo Qiuming downwards, they were all referred to as Prince Bao Xian Ru Mengzi. They were no longer referred to as Prince Bao.

古文：遵圣祖首定南京国子监规制，制木为神主。
现代文：遵循圣祖首先定下的南京国子监规格形制，制造木头神位。
English: The wooden throne was made according to the specifications of the Nanjing Guozhiguan, which was first established by the Holy Father.

古文：仍拟大小尺寸，著为定式。
现代文：接着拟定大小尺寸，著录为定式。
English: Next, draw up the size and dimensions, and write down the formula.

古文：其塑像即令屏撤。
现代文：他的塑像，立即下令撤除。
English: His statue was immediately ordered to be removed.

古文：春秋祭祀，遵国初旧制，十笾十豆。
现代文：春秋祭祀，遵循建国初的旧有制度，十篷十豆。
English: The spring and autumn festivals follow the old system from the beginning of the founding of the country, with ten tents and ten beans.

古文：天下各学，八笾八豆。
现代文：天下各学官，八篷八豆。
English: Every scholar in the world is worth his weight in gold and silver.

古文：乐舞止六佾。
现代文：乐舞只用六佾。
English: Music and dance only use six cymbals.

古文：凡学别立一祠，中叔梁纥，题启圣化孔氏神位，以颜无繇、曾点、孔鲤、孟孙氏配，俱称先贤某氏，至从祀之贤，不可不考其得失。
现代文：凡是学校另立一祠，中间的叔梁纥题写为启圣公孔氏神位，以颜无繇、曾点、孔鲤、孟孙氏配享，都称先贤某氏。至于陪祀的贤人，不可不考察得失。
English: Whenever a school sets up a separate shrine, the middle of the shrine is inscribed with the name of the founding god, Kong, and is shared by the Yan Muxuan, Zeng Ding, Kong Xuan, and Meng Sun dynasties, all of which are called the sages. As for the sages who accompany the worship, it is necessary to examine the gains and losses.

古文：申党即申枨，厘去其一。公伯寮、秦冉、颜何、荀况、戴圣、刘向、贾逵、马融、何休、王肃、王弼、杜预、吴澄罢祀。
现代文：申党就是申根，改动去掉一个公伯寮、秦冉、颜何、苟况、戴圣、刘向、贾逵、马融、何休、王肃、王弼、杜预、昊澄罢除祭祀。
English: Shen's party is Shengen, and the alteration removed a Gongbo Liao, Qin Ran, Yan He, Gou Jiao, Dai Sheng, Liu Xiang, Jia Wei, Ma Rong, He Xiu, Wang Su, Wang Wei, Du Yuan, and Hao Cheng from the sacrificial rites.

古文：林放、蘧瑗、卢植、郑众、郑玄、服虔、范宁各祀于其乡。
现代文：林放、蘧瑗、卢植、郑众、郑玄、服虔、范奎在各自的家乡祭祀。
English: Lin Fang, Zou, Lu Zhi, Zheng Zong, Zheng Xuan, Fu Qian, Fan Kui performed the ritual in their respective hometowns.

古文：后苍、王通、欧阳修、胡瑗宜增入。 
现代文：后苍、王通、欧阳修、胡瑗应该增入。 
English: Houchen, Wang Tong, Ouyang Xiu and Hu Yao should be added.

古文：命悉如议行。
现代文：皇帝命令全部按议论实行。
English: All of the emperor's orders are to be carried out as discussed.

古文：又以行人薛侃议，进陆九渊从祀。
现代文：又因行人薛侃的建议，增加陆九渊陪祀。
English: In addition, due to the suggestion of pedestrian Xue Kan, the number of Lu Jiuyuan's attendants was increased.

古文：初，洪武时，司业宋濂请去像设主，礼仪乐章多所更定，太祖不允。
现代文：最初，洪武年间，司业宋濂请求去掉塑像设置神位，礼仪乐章多有更改，太祖不答应。
English: At first, during the Hongwu era, the official Song Xi requested the removal of the statue and the setting up of a god, and there were many changes to the ritual music, but the great-grandfather did not agree.

古文：成、弘间，少詹程敏政尝谓马融等八人当斥。
现代文：成、弘年间，少詹程敏政曾说马融等八个人应当除去。
English: During the Cheng and Hong dynasties, Shozhan Cheng Minzheng once said that eight people such as Ma Rong should be removed.

古文：给事中张九功推言之，并请罢荀况、公伯寮、蘧瑗等，而进后苍、王通、胡瑗。
现代文：给事中张九功推演论说此事，并请求罢除荀况、公伯寮、蘧瑗等人，而增加后苍、王通、胡瑗。
English: In the case, Zhang Jiu Gong deduced and discussed the matter, and requested the removal of 况,公伯寮, and others, and the addition of 後苍, Wang通, and Hu.

古文：为礼官周洪谟所却而止。
现代文：被礼官周洪谟拒绝而停止。
English: He was stopped by the refusal of the etiquette official Zhou Hongmu.

古文：至是以璁力主，众不敢违。
现代文：到这时，因张璁极力主张，众人不敢违背。
English: At this time, because Zhang Xuan strongly advocated, people did not dare to disobey.

古文：毁像盖用濂说，先贤去留，略如九功言。
现代文：毁掉塑像大约是用了宋濂的说法，先贤的去留，大略如同张九功所说。
English: To destroy the statue is roughly to use the saying of Song Dynasty. The departure and stay of the sages is roughly the same as what Zhang Jiugong said.

古文：其进欧阳修，则以濮议故也。
现代文：增入欧阳修，那是因为宋代争议濮王的地位即濮议的缘故。
English: The addition of Ouyang Xiu was due to the Song Dynasty controversy over the status of the king of the Xiongnu, i.e. the Xiongnu.

古文：明年，国子监建启圣公祠成。
现代文：第二年，国子监建成启圣公祠。
English: In the second year, the National Children's Supervisor completed the construction of the Kaisho Public Shrine.

古文：从尚书李时言，春秋祭祀，与文庙同日。
现代文：依从尚书李时的建议，春秋祭祀，与文庙在同一天。
English: According to the suggestion of Shangshu Lisi, the Spring and Autumn Festival will be held on the same day as the Wen Temple.

古文：笾豆牲帛视四配，东西配位视十哲，从祀先儒程晌、朱松、蔡元定视两庑。
现代文：篷豆牲帛比照祭祀孔子的四位配享子弟，东西的配享位置比照孔子的十位贤哲弟子，陪祀的先儒程晌、朱松、蔡元定比照两厅的从祀者。
English: The arrangement of the animals is compared with that of the four sons of Confucius, and the arrangement of the things is compared with that of the ten disciples of Confucius, and the attendants of the two halls are compared with that of the ancestors of Confucianism, Cheng Xuan, Zhu Song and Cai Yuanding.

古文：辅臣代祭文庙，则祭酒祭启圣祠。
现代文：辅政大臣代帝王在文庙祭祀，则祭酒在启圣祠祭祀。
English: The Imperial Vice-Minister of State performs the ritual at the Temple of Literature, while the sacrificial wine is offered at the Holy Shrine of the Initiation.

古文：南京祭酒于文庙，司业于启圣祠。
现代文：南京，祭酒在文庙祭祀，司业在启圣祠祭祀。
English: In Nanjing, the wine festival was held at the Wenmiao Temple, and the priest's ceremony was held at the Qixi Shrine.

古文：遂定制，殿中先师南向，四配东西向。
现代文：于是定下制度，殿中先师孔子面向南，四位弟子配享东西向。
English: As a result, a system was established in which the master Confucius faced south in the hall and the four disciples faced east and west.

古文：稍后十哲：闵子损、冉子雍、端木子赐、仲子由、卜子商、冉子耕、宰子予、冉子求、言子偃、颛孙子师皆东西向。
现代文：稍后是十位贤哲弟子：闵子损、冉子雍、端木子赐、仲子由、卜子商、冉子耕、宰子予、冉子求、直王偃、颛孙子师都东西向。
English: Later, there were ten disciples of sages: Zang Zi Zhuo, Ran Zi Yong, Duan Mu Zi Ji, Zhong Zi Yu, Bo Zi Shang, Ran Zi Gao, Za Zi Yu, Ran Zi Cuo, Nao Wang Yao, and Zang Sun Zi Shi, all of whom were from the east to the west.

古文：两庑从祀：先贤澹台灭明、宓不齐、原宪、公冶长、南宫适、高柴、漆雕开、樊须、司马耕、公西赤、有若、琴张、申枨、陈亢、巫马施、梁鳣、公昽哀、商瞿、冉孺、颜辛、伯虔、曹恤、冉季、公孙龙、漆雕哆、秦商、漆雕徒父、颜高、商泽、壤驷赤、任不齐、石作蜀、公良孺、公夏首、公肩定、后处、鄡单、奚容蒧、罕父黑、颜祖、荣旂、秦祖、左人郢、句井疆、郑国、公祖句兹、原亢、县成、廉洁、燕伋、叔仲会、颜之仆、邽巽、乐欬、公西舆如、狄黑、孔忠、公西蒧、步叔乘、施之常、秦非、颜哙，先儒左丘明、公羊高、谷梁赤、伏胜、高堂生、孔安国、毛苌、董仲舒、后苍、杜子春、王通、韩愈、胡瑗、周敦颐、程颢、欧阳修、邵雍、张载、司马光、程颐、杨时、胡安国、朱熹、张栻、陆九渊、吕祖谦、蔡沈、真德秀、许衡凡九十一人。
现代文：两庶从祀：先贤澹台灭明、宓不齐、原宪、公冶长、南宫适、高柴、漆雕开、樊须、司马耕、公西赤、有若、琴张、申根、陈亢、巫马施、梁鲢、公皙哀、商瞿、冉孺、颜辛、伯虔、曹恤、冉季、公孙龙、漆雕哆、秦商、漆雕徒父、颜高、商泽、壤驷赤、任不齐、石作蜀、公良孺、公夏首、公肩定、后处、郑单、奚容葳、罕父黑、颜祖、荣旃、秦祖、左人郢、句井疆、郑国、公祖句兹、原亢、县成、廉洁、燕伋、叔仲会、颜之仆、邦巽、乐欺、公西舆如、狄黑、孔忠、公西藏、步叔乘、施之常、秦非、颜啥，先儒左丘明、公羊高、谷梁赤、伏胜、高堂生、孔安国、毛苌、董仲舒、后苍、杜子春、王通、韩愈、胡瑗、周敦颐、程颢、欧阳修、邵雍、张载、司马光、程颐、杨时、胡安国、朱熹、张拭、陆九渊、吕祖谦、蔡沈、真德秀、许衡共九十一人。
English: The two subordinate followers worshipped: the sages Xingtai Zhiming, Xizhi Qi, Yuan Xian, Gongye Chang, Nan Gong Shi, Gao Zhai, Urushi Gao, Shishu, Sima Gao, Gongxi Rao, You Ruo, Qin Zhang, Shengen, Chen Qi, Wuma Shi, Liang Qi, Gongye Ai, Shang Qi, Ran Qi, Yan Xin, Bao Qian, Cao Qi, Ran Ji, Gongsun Long, Urushi Yao, Qin Shang, Urushi Apprentice, Yan Gao, Shang Zhe, Yang Qi Rao, Ren Qi, Stone Shu, Gong Liang,

古文：隆庆五年，以薛瑄从祀。
现代文：隆庆五年，以薛坛从祀。
English: In the fifth year of the Longqing, the Xue Altar was dedicated.

古文：万历中，以罗从彦、李侗从祀。
现代文：万历年间，以罗从彦、李侗从祀。
English: During the Wanli era, Iroh Zohiko and Li Xi were enshrined.

古文：十二年，又以陈献章、胡居仁、王守仁从祀。
现代文：十二年，又以陈献章、胡居仁、王守仁从祀。
English: In the twelfth year, Chen Xianzhang, Hu Jiren and Wang Shuren were also enshrined.

古文：二十三年，以宋周敦颐父辅成从祀启圣祠。
现代文：二十三年，以宋周敦颐父周辅成从祀启圣祠。
English: Twenty-three years later, Song Zhou Dun's father Zhou Yucheng was deified as the founder of the shrine.

古文：又定每岁仲春、秋上丁日御殿传制，遣大臣祭先师及配位。
现代文：又定于每年二月、八月上旬丁日到殿上传达制命，派遣大臣祭祀先师及配享位众人。
English: In addition, it is decided to convey the imperial command to the Imperial Palace every February and early August, dispatching the minister of sacrificial rites and the allocation of seats.

古文：其十哲以翰林官、两庑以国子监官各二员分献。
现代文：孔子的十位贤哲弟子派翰林官，两庶派国子监官员各二人分别祭献。
English: The ten wise disciples of Confucius sent Hanlin officials and two subordinate officials of the State Children's Supervision Bureau to offer sacrifices separately.

古文：每月朔，及每科进士行释菜礼。
现代文：每月朔日，与每科进士举行奠祭先圣先师礼。
English: On the first day of every month, a dedication ceremony is held for the first priest with every student.

古文：司府州县卫学各提调官行礼。
现代文：司府州县卫学各提调官举行祭礼。
English: The prefectural and county health inspectors held a ceremony.

古文：牲用少牢，乐如太学。京府及附府县学，止行释菜礼。
现代文：祭牲用少牢，奏乐如太学、京府以及附属府县学，只举行祭奠先圣先师礼。
English: Sacrificial animals are used in Shoryo, and music is played in schools such as Taigaku, Kyoto Prefectural School, and affiliated prefectural and county schools. Only the ceremony to commemorate the death of Shosonji is held.

古文：崇祯十五年，以左丘明亲授经于圣人，改称先贤。
现代文：崇祯十五年，因左丘明由圣人亲自传授经义，改称先贤。
English: In the 15th year of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, because Zuo Quming was personally taught the sutras by the saint, he was renamed Shen Xian.

古文：并改宋儒周、二程、张、朱、邵六子亦称先贤，位七十子下，汉唐诸儒之上。
现代文：同时改宋儒周敦颐、程颢、程颐、张拭、朱熹、邵雍六子也称为先贤，位次在七十子之下，汉、唐众儒生之上。
English: At the same time, the six sons of Song Confucius, Zhou Dunxi, Cheng Qi, Cheng Qi, Zhang Wu, Zhu Qi, and Shao Yong, were also called sages, ranking below the seventy sons, and above the Han and Tang Confucians.

古文：然仅国学更置之，阙里庙廷及天下学宫未遑颁行也。
现代文：然而仅有国学更换了，阙里庙庭以及天下学宫没有来得及颁布施行。
English: However, only the study of Chinese classics was changed, and the Boli Temple Garden and the National Palace of Learning did not have time to promulgate and implement the changes.

古文：旗纛
现代文：旗纛
English: 旗

古文：旗纛之祭有四。
现代文：旗纛的祭祀有四。
English: There are four rites for the flag-raising ceremony.

古文：其一，洪武元年，礼官奏： 军行旗纛所当祭者，旗谓牙旗。
现代文：第一，洪武元年，礼官上奏： 军队出行应当及时的旗纛，旗称牙旗。
English: First, in the first year of Hongwu, the etiquette officer played: the army should travel in a timely manner. The flag is called the tooth flag.

古文：黄帝出军诀曰： 牙旗者，将军之精，一军之形侯。
现代文：黄帝出车歌诀说： 饰以象牙的主帅旗帜，是将军的精神，是全军面貌的体现。
English: The Yellow Emperor's departure hymn says: The general's flag adorned with ivory is the spirit of the general and the embodiment of the appearance of the whole army.

古文：凡始竖牙，必祭以刚日。 
现代文：凡是开始树立牙旗，必定在单日祭祀。 
English: Whenever a tooth banner is erected, it must be a one-day ritual.

古文：纛，谓旗头也。
现代文：纛，说的是旗头。
English: Oh, you mean the standard-bearer.

古文：《太白阴经》曰： 大将中营建纛。
现代文：《太白阴经》说： 大将中营建纛旗。
English: "The Taibai Yinjing" says: It is the general's duty to build a banner.

古文：天子六军，故用六纛。
现代文：天子六军，所以用六个旗纛。
English: There are six armies of the heavenly sons, so six banners are used.

古文：牦牛尾为之，在左騑马首。 
现代文：耗牛尾制成，树在车辕左边那匹马的前面。 
English: Made from ox tails, the tree is in front of the horse on the left of the rim.

古文：唐、宋及元皆有旗纛之祭。
现代文：唐、宋以及元朝都有旗纛的祭祀。
English: The Tang, Song, and Yuan Dynasties all had the worship of the banner.

古文：今宜立庙京师，春用惊蛰，秋用霜降日，遣官致祭。 
现代文：现在应该在京城设立庙宇，春天在惊垫日，秋天在霜降日，派遣官员举行祭祀。 
English: A temple should be set up in the capital now, and officials should be dispatched to hold a religious service on the day of surprise in spring and the day of frost in autumn.

古文：乃命建庙于都督府治之后，以都督为献官，题主曰军牙之神、六纛之神。
现代文：于是命令在都督府所在地的后面建庙，以都督为祭献官员，在神位牌上题为军牙之神、六纛之神。
English: As a result, he ordered a temple to be built behind the location of the governor's office, with the governor as the sacrificial official, and titled "God of the Teeth" and "God of the Six Teeth" on the shrine tablet.

古文：七年二月，诏皇太子率诸王诣阅武场祭旗纛，为坛七，行三献礼。
现代文：七年二月，下诏令皇太子率领诸王到阖武场去祭祀饰有乌羽的旗帜，设七个祭坛，行三献礼。
English: In February of the seventh year, the emperor ordered the crown prince to lead all the kings to the battlefield to sacrifice a banner decorated with a feather, set up seven altars, and perform three offerings.

古文：后停春祭，止霜降日祭于教场。
现代文：后来停止春祭，只是霜降日在教场祭祀。
English: Later, the spring festival was stopped, but the school festival continued to be held on the frosty day.

古文：其二，岁暮享太庙日，祭旗纛于承天门外。
现代文：第二，年终祭享皇帝祖庙的日子，在承天门外祭祀旗纛。
English: Second, on the day of celebrating the emperor's ancestral temple at the end of the year, the flagpole is sacrificed outside the Chengdu Gate.

古文：其三，旗纛庙在山川坛左。
现代文：第三，旗纛庙在山川坛左边。
English: Thirdly, Qibao Temple is on the left of the altar.

古文：初，旗纛与太岁诸神合祭于城南。
现代文：最初，旗纛与太岁众神在城南一起祭祀。
English: In the beginning, Qianqian was worshipped together with the other gods in the south of the city.

古文：九年，别建庙。
现代文：九年，另外建庙。
English: Nine years later, another temple was built.

古文：每岁仲秋，天子躬祀山川之日，遣旗手卫官行礼。
现代文：每年八月，天子亲自祭祀山川的那一天，派旗手卫官行礼。
English: Every year in August, on the day when the Son of Heaven personally offered sacrifices to the mountains and rivers, he sent the standard-bearers to salute.

古文：其正祭，旗头大将、六纛大将、五方旗神、主宰战船正神、金鼓角铳炮之神、弓弩飞枪飞石之神、阵前阵后神祇五昌等众，凡七位，共一坛，南向。
现代文：正神祭祀有，旗头大将、六纛大将、五方旗神、主宰战船正神、金鼓角镜炮神、弓弩飞枪飞石神、阵前阵后神只五昌等众神，共七位，共祭一坛，面向南。
English: There are seven deities, including the Flag Captain, the Six-Sided General, the Five-Sided Banner God, the Lord of the Battleship, the Golden Drum Mirror, the Gun God, the Bow and Arrow Flying God, the Flying Stone God, and the Front and Back of the Front and Back of the Front and Back of the Front and Back of the Front and Back of the Front and Back of the Front and Back of the Front.

古文：皇帝服皮弁，御奉天殿降香。
现代文：皇帝穿皮弁，驾临奉天殿降香。
English: The emperor wore a leather valance and came to offer incense to the Heavenly Palace.

古文：献官奉以从事。
现代文：献官供奉进行祭祀。
English: Offerings are made to the deities and sacrifices are performed.

古文：祭物视先农，帛七，黑二白五。
现代文：祭祀物品比照祭先农，帛七束，黑色二束、白色五束。
English: The sacrificial items were seven bundles of straw, two black bundles, and five white bundles.

古文：瘗毛血、望燎，与风云雷雨诸神同。
现代文：痉毛血、望祭与燎祭，与祭祀风云雷雨众神相同。
English: The blood of the bristlecone, the hope-sacrifice, and the burnt-offering are the same as the sacrifices to the gods of wind and thunder.

古文：祭毕，设酒器六于地。
现代文：祭祀完毕，在地上放六个酒器杀六只雄鸡，滴血祭祀。
English: When the ritual is over, six wine jars are placed on the ground, six roosters are killed, and the blood-dripping ritual begins.

古文：刺雄鸡六，沥血以衅之。其四，永乐后，有神旗之祭，专祭火雷之神。
现代文：笫四，永乐以后，有神旗的祭祀，专门祭祀火雷神。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month, after the Yongle Festival, there will be a sacred flag sacrifice, dedicated to the god of fire and thunder.

古文：每月朔望，神机营提督官祭于教场。
现代文：每个月的朔日、望日，神机营提督官在教场祭祀。
English: On the first day of every month and on the day of the lunar new year, the commander of the Shenji Battalion performs a ritual at the school.

古文：牲用少牢。
现代文：祭牲用少牢。
English: Sacrifices are punishable by a short prison sentence.

古文：凡旗纛皆藏内府，祭则设之。
现代文：凡是旗纛都藏在内府，祭祀便设上。
English: All the flagpoles are kept in the inner ward, and the rituals are held there.

古文：王国祭旗纛，则遣武官戎服行礼。
现代文：诸侯王国祭祀旗纛，就派遣武官穿军装行礼。
English: When a princely kingdom held a flag-raising ceremony, it would send military officers to wear military uniforms and perform a military salute.

古文：天下卫所于公署后立庙，以指挥使为初献官。僚属为亚献、终献。
现代文：天下的卫所在办公官署后设立庙宇，以指挥使为初献官，僚属官为亚献官、终献官。
English: Temples were established after the offices of the imperial guards were established, with the commander-in-chief as the first-officer, and his subordinate officers as the second-officer and last-officer.

古文：仪物杀京都。
现代文：祭祀物品比京城有所减少。
English: The number of sacrificial objects has decreased compared to Kyoto.

古文：五祀
现代文：五祀
English: Five deities

古文：洪武二年定制，岁终腊享，通祭于庙门外。
现代文：洪武二年定下制度，年终腊祭，在庙门外共同祭祀。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the system was established, and the year-end wax festival was held, with a common sacrifice outside the temple gate.

古文：八年，礼部奏： 五祀之礼，周、汉、唐、宋不一。
现代文：八年，礼部奏报： 五祀的礼仪，周、汉、唐、宋不一样。
English: In the eighth year, the etiquette department reported: The etiquette of the five religions, Zhou, Han, Tang and Song, is different.

古文：今拟孟春祀户，设坛皇宫门左，司门主之。
现代文：现在拟定在正月祭祀户神，在皇宫门左设坛，主管宫门的官员主持祭祀。
English: It is now planned to hold a ritual for the household god in the first month of the year, with an altar set up to the left of the imperial palace gate, and the official in charge of the palace gate presiding over the ritual.

古文：孟夏祀灶，设坛御厨，光禄寺官主之。
现代文：四月祭祀灶神，在皇宫的厨房设坛，光禄寺官主持祭祀。
English: In April, a altar was set up in the kitchen of the Imperial Palace to worship the god of the hearth, and officials from Koroku-ji Temple presided over the ceremony.

古文：季夏祀中霤，设坛乾清宫丹墀，内官主之。
现代文：六月祭祀中溜之神，在干清官的赤色空地上设坛，内官主持祭祀。
English: In June, a altar was set up in the red open space of the dry cleaners to worship the god Nakadamaru, and the steward presided over the ceremony.

古文：孟秋祀门，设坛午门左，司门主之。
现代文：七月祭祀门神，在午门的左面设坛，主管城门的官主持祭祀。
English: In July, a sacrificial altar is set up on the left side of the noon gate, and the official in charge of the city gate presides over the sacrifice.

古文：孟冬祀井，设坛宫内大庖井前，光禄寺官主之。
现代文：十月祭祀井神，在宫内大庖井前面设坛，光禄寺官员主持祭祀。
English: In October, a ritual is held for the god of the well. An altar is set up in front of the large well in the palace, and officials from Koroku-ji Temple preside over the ritual.

古文：四孟于有事太庙之日，季夏于土旺之日，牲用少牢。 
现代文：四季中每季的首月在祭祀太庙那天，夏六月在土旺日，祭牲用少牢。 
English: In the first month of each of the four seasons, on the day of the temple festival, and in the summer in June, on the busiest day of the week, the number of sacrificial animals is small.

古文：制可。
现代文：皇帝制命同意。
English: The post-Bukou system can work.

古文：从定中霤于奉天殿外文楼前。
现代文：跟着确定祭祀中溜神在奉天殿外文楼前。
English: It was then determined that the yakitori deity was in front of the Bongten Hall Gaibun Building during the ritual.

古文：又岁暮合祭五祀于太庙西庑下，太常寺官行礼。
现代文：又定年终在太庙西周屋下将五种祭祀合在一起祭祀，太常寺官举行祭祀礼。
English: It was also decided that at the end of the year, five kinds of rituals would be held together under the West Zhouya of the Taiji Temple, and the officials of the Taiji Temple would hold a ritual.

古文：马神
现代文：马神
English: Horse God

古文：洪武二年命祭马祖、先牧、马社、马步之神，筑坛后湖。
现代文：洪武二年，皇帝命令祭祀马祖、先牧、马社、马步的神灵，在后湖筑坛。
English: In the second year of Hongwu, the emperor ordered that the deities of Matsu, Senmoku, Ma She and Ma Bu should be worshipped, and a shrine was built at Houhu.

古文：礼官言： 《周官》春祭马祖，天驷星也；夏祭先牧，始养马者；秋祭马社，始乘马者；冬祭马步，乃神之灾害马者。
现代文：礼官说： 《周官》春天祭马祖，是天驷星；夏天祭先牧，是开始养马；秋天祭马社，是开始乘马；冬天祭马步，这是神降给马灾害。
English: The etiquette official said: "Zhou Guan," the spring festival of Mazu is the heavenly shooting star; the summer festival of the first herdsmen is the beginning of horse breeding; the autumn festival of the horse society is the beginning of horse riding; the winter festival of horse walking, this is God's disaster to the horse.

古文：隋用周制，祭以四仲之月。
现代文：隋朝承用周朝的制度，在四季中每季的第二个月祭祀。
English: The Sui Dynasty inherited the system of the Zhou Dynasty and held the ritual in the second month of each of the four seasons.

古文：唐、宋因之。
现代文：唐、宋沿用。
English: It was used in Tang and Song dynasties.

古文：今定春、秋二仲月，甲、戊、庚日，遣官致祀。
现代文：现在定于春、秋雨季的第二个月，甲、戊、庚日，派官举行祭祀。
English: It is now scheduled to be held in the second month of the spring and autumn rainy seasons, on the 1st, 3rd, and 4th day of the month.

古文：为坛四，乐用时乐，行三献礼。 
现代文：建立四个坛，乐用时下音乐，行三次献酒礼。 
English: Four altars will be set up to play contemporary music, and there will be three wine-offering ceremonies.

古文：四年，蜀明升献良马十，其一白者，长丈余，不可加鞯勒。
现代文：洪武四年，蜀明升献上好马十匹，其中有一匹白色的，长一丈多，不能加鞍鞯与笼头。
English: In the fourth year of Hongwu, Shuming Sheng offered ten good horses, one of which was white, more than a yard long, and could not be saddled with a bridle or bridle.

古文：太祖曰： 天生英物，必有神司之。 
现代文：太祖说： 天生的杰出物，必然有神主管它。 
English: The great-grandfather said, "If something is outstanding by nature, there must be a god in charge of it."

古文：命太常以少牢祀马祖，囊沙四百斤压之，令人骑而游苑中，久之渐驯。
现代文：命令太常用少牢祭祀马祖，用袋装四百斤沙压上，命令人骑上在苑中游玩，时间长了慢慢温驯。
English: The order is too often used to worship Matsu in the juvenile detention center. Four hundred pounds of sand is packed in a bag and pressed down. The order is to ride and play in the middle of the garden. After a long time, it is slowly tamed.

古文：帝乘之以夕月于清凉山。
现代文：皇帝骑着它在清凉山祭月。
English: The emperor rode it to the Qingliang Mountain for the Moon Festival.

古文：比还，大悦，赐名飞越峰。
现代文：等到归回，十分高兴，赐名飞越峰。
English: When I got back, I was very happy and gave my name to fly over the peak.

古文：复命太常祀马祖。
现代文：又命令太常祭祀马祖。
English: He also ordered that Mazu be worshipped regularly.

古文：五年，并诸神为一坛，岁止春祭。
现代文：洪武五年，将众神合祭一坛，一午只是在春天祭祀。
English: In the fifth year of Hongwu, all the gods were enshrined together in one altar, and only one afternoon was dedicated in the spring.

古文：永乐十二年，立北京马神祠于莲花池。
现代文：永乐十三年，在莲花池设立北京马神祠。
English: In the 13th year of Yongle, the Beijing Horse Shrine was established in the Lotus Pond.

古文：其南京马神，则南太仆主之。
现代文：在南京的马神，则由南太仆主持祭祀。
English: In Nanjing's Horse God, Nan Taifu presided over the ritual.

古文：南京神庙
现代文：南京神庙
English: Nanjing God Temple

古文：初称十庙。
现代文：最初称十庙。
English: It was originally called the Ten Temples.

古文：北极真武以三月三日、九月九日，道林真觉普济禅师宝志以三月十八日，都城隍以八月祭帝王后一日，祠山广惠张王渤以二月十八日，五显灵顺以四月八日、九月二十八日，皆南京太常寺官祭。
现代文：北极真武在三月三日、九月九日，道林真觉普济禅师宝志在三月十八日，都城隍在八月祭祀帝王后的一天，祠山广惠王张渤在二月十八日，五显灵顺在四月八日、九月二十八日，都由南京太常寺官员祭祀。
English: Arctic Zhenwu on March 3rd and September 9th, Tao Lin Zhengyue Pu Zi Zen Master Bao Zhi on March 18th, Du Chengyu on a day in August to worship the empress dowager, Ancestral Mountain Guanghui Wang Zhangye on February 18th, Wu Xian Ling Shun on April 8th and September 28th, were all sacrificed by officials of Nanjing Taiji Temple.

古文：汉秣陵尉蒋忠烈公子文、晋成阳卞忠贞公壸、宋济阳曹武惠王彬、南唐刘忠肃王仁瞻、元卫国忠肃公福寿俱以四孟朔，岁除，应天府官祭。
现代文：汉秣陵尉忠烈公蒋子文、晋成阳忠贞公卞壶、宋济阳武惠王曹彬、南唐忠肃王刘仁瞻、元卫国忠肃公福寿都在每季首月的初一，岁终，由应天府官员祭祀。
English: On the first day of the first month of each season, and at the end of the year, the officials of Yingtianfu offer sacrifices to the Han Dynasty's Mausoleum Lieutenant, Loyalist General Chiang Ziwen, the Jin Dynasty's Chengyang Loyalist General Jiao Jiao, the Song Dynasty's Jiyang Wu Hui King Cao Bin, the Southern Tang Dynasty's Chung Sui King Liu Ren Zhan, and the Yuan Dynasty's Chung Sui General Fuxiu.

古文：惟蒋庙又有四月二十六日之祭。
现代文：只有蒋庙又有四月二十六日的祭祀。
English: Only the Jiang Temple has a ritual on April 26th.

古文：并功臣庙为十一。
现代文：连同功臣庙是十一庙。
English: Together with the Temple of Heroes, there are eleven temples.

古文：后复增四：关公庙，洪武二十七年建于鸡笼山之阳，称汉前将军寿亭侯。
现代文：后来又增加四庙：关公庙，洪武二十七年在鸡笼山南面建成，称为汉前将军寿亭侯。
English: Later, four temples were added: Guan Gong Temple, which was built by Hongwu in the 27th year on the south side of Chicken Cage Mountain, and is known as the former Han general Shuting.

古文：嘉靖十年订其误，改称汉前将军汉寿亭侯。
现代文：嘉靖十年订正错误，改称汉前将军汉寿亭侯。
English: In the tenth year of Jiajing, the mistake was corrected and the former Han general Han Shuting was renamed.

古文：以四孟岁暮，应天府官祭，五月十三日，南京太常寺官祭。
现代文：在每季首月以及年终，由应天府官员祭祀，五月十三日，直立太常寺官员祭祀。
English: In the first month of each quarter and at the end of the year, officials from Yingtenfu offer sacrifices, and on May 13th, officials from Taejoji Temple offer sacrifices.

古文：天妃，永乐七年封为护国庇民妙灵昭应弘仁普济天妃，以正月十五日、三月二十三日，南京太常寺官祭。
现代文：天妃，永乐七年封为护国庇民妙灵昭应弘仁普济天妃，在正月十五日、三月二十三日，由南京太常寺官员祭祀。
English: Tianfei, Yongle for seven years as a protector of the country and patron of the people, Miao Ling, Zhao Ying, Hong Ren, and Pu Zi Tianfei, on the 15th day of the first month and the 23rd day of March, were worshiped by the officials of Nanjing Taiji Temple.

古文：太仓神庙，以仲春、秋望日，南京户部官祭。
现代文：太仓神庙在二月、八月的十五日，由南京户部官员祭祀。
English: On the fifteenth day of February and August, officials from the Nanjing Household Department performed the ritual at the Taicang Temple.

古文：司马、马祖、先牧神庙，以春、秋仲月中旬，择日南京太仆寺官祭。
现代文：司马、马祖、先牧神庙，在在二月、八月的中旬，挑选一天由南京太仆寺官员祭祀。
English: In the middle of February and August, officials of the Nanjing Taipu Temple will select a day to offer sacrifices at the Sima, Matsu, and Senmu temples.

古文：诸庙皆少牢，真武与真觉禅师素羞。
现代文：众庙都用少牢，真武与真觉禅师用素食祭祀。
English: All temples use Shodoyaku, while Zen masters Shinnobu and Shinkaku use vegetarian offerings.

古文：功臣庙
现代文：功臣庙
English: Goseon-ji Temple

古文：太祖既以功臣配享太庙，又命别立庙于鸡笼山。
现代文：太祖既将功臣配享于太庙，又命令另外在鸡笼山立庙。
English: The great ancestor not only assigned the meritorious vassals to the Great Temple, but also ordered another temple to be built on Chicken Cage Mountain.

古文：论次功臣二十有一人，死者塑像，生者虚其位。
现代文：评述功臣二十一人，死去的人塑像，活着的空出位置。
English: Twenty-one heroes and heroines are reviewed, statues of those who died, and vacant positions for those who are still alive.

古文：正殿：中山武宁王徐达、开平忠武王常遇春、岐阳武靖王李文忠、宁河武顺王邓愈、东瓯襄武王汤和、黔宁昭靖王沐英。
现代文：正殿：中山武宁王徐达、开平忠武王常遇春、岐阳武靖王李文忠、宁河武顺王邓愈、束瓯襄武王汤和、黔宁昭靖王沐英。
English: The main hall: Zhongshan King Xuda of Wu Ning, King Changchun of Kaiping Zhongwu, King Li Wenzhong of Qiyang Wujing, King Dengyu of Ninghe Wushun, King Tanghe of Sokun Xiangwu, and King Muying of Huning Zhaojing.

古文：羊二，豕二。
现代文：用两只羊、两只猪。
English: Use two sheep, hunt two cranes.

古文：西序：越国武庄公胡大海、梁国公赵德胜、巢国武壮公华高、虢国忠烈公俞通海、江国襄烈公吴良、安国忠烈公曹良臣、黔国威毅公吴复、燕山忠愍侯孙兴祖。
现代文：西厢房：越国武庄公胡大海、梁国公赵德胜、巢国武壮公华高、虢国忠烈公俞通海、江国襄烈公昊良、安国忠烈公曹良臣、黔国威毅公呈复、燕山忠愍侯孙兴祖。
English: West wing room: Yue Guo Wuzhuang Gong Hu Hai, Liang Guo Guo Gong Zhao Desheng, Chaoguo Guo Wuzhong Gong Hua Gao, Zhe Guo Zhong Liang Gong Hu Tong Hai, Jiang Guo Zhong Liang Gong Hao Liang, An Guo Zhong Liang Gong Cao Liang Min, Zhe Guo Wei Yi Gong Xuan Fu, Yanshan Zhong Liang Hou Sun Xing Zu.

古文：东序：郢国公冯国用、西海武壮公耿再成、济国公丁德兴、蔡国忠毅公张德胜、海国襄毅公吴桢、蕲国武义公康茂才、东海郡公茅成。
现代文：东厢房：郢国公冯国用、西海武庄公耿再成、济国公丁德兴、蔡国忠毅公张德胜、海国襄毅公昊桢、薪国武义公康茂才、东海郡公茅成。
English: East wing rooms: Feng Guoyong, the governor of Shandong Province, Gen Zensheng, the governor of Wuzhuang, the governor of West China Sea, Ding Dexing, the governor of Zhejiang Province, Zhang Desheng, the governor of Cai Province, Zhong Yi, the governor of Hai Guo Province, Xiang Yi, the governor of Wuyi, Kang Maocai, the governor of Qi Province, and the governor of Donghai County, Mao Cheng.

古文：羊二，豕二。
现代文：用羊两只，猎两只。
English: Use two sheep, hunt two cranes.

古文：两庑各设牌一，总书 故指挥千百户卫所镇抚之灵 。
现代文：在两个廉廊各设一个牌位，总写着 故指挥千百户卫所镇抚之灵 。
English: A plaque will be set up in each of the two corridors, inscribed with the words, "He commanded hundreds of sanitariums to pacify the spirit."

古文：羊十，豕十。
现代文：用十只羊，十只猎。
English: With ten sheep, ten hunt.

古文：以四孟岁暮，遣驸马都尉祭。
现代文：在每季首月以及年终，派遣驸马都尉条祀。
English: In the first month of each season and at the end of the year, a horse-drawn carriage is sent to the shrine.

古文：初，胡大海等殁，命肖像于卞壸、蒋子文之庙。
现代文：当初，胡大海等人死后，命令在卞壶、蒋子文的庙宇画肖像。
English: At first, after the death of Hu Haiya and others, he ordered portraits to be painted in the temples of Zou Jug and Jiang Ziwen.

古文：及功臣庙成，移祀焉。
现代文：等到功臣庙建成，移到那儿祭祀。
English: Wait until the temple is built, and then move there to offer sacrifices.

古文：永乐三年，以中山王勋德第一，又命正旦、清明、中元、孟冬、冬至遣太常寺官祭于大功坊之家庙，牲用少牢。
现代文：永乐三年，因中山王的功勋德行第一，又命令在正月旦日、清明、中元、孟冬、冬至日派遣太常寺官员在大功坊的家庙祭祀，祭牲用少牢。
English: In the third year of Yongle, because the merits and virtues of King Zhongshan ranked first, he also ordered the officials of Taizhong Temple to be sent to the home temple of the Grand Gongpo for the sacrifices on the first day of the first month, Qingming, Zhongyuan, Mengdong, and winter solstice, and the sacrificial animals were kept in a small prison.

古文：京师九庙
现代文：京师九庙
English: Nine Buddhist Temples in Beijing

古文：京师所祭者九庙。
现代文：京城所祭祀的是九庙。
English: Nine temples are enshrined in Kyoto.

古文：真武庙，永乐十三年建，以祀北极佑圣真君。
现代文：真武庙，永乐十三年建成，以祭祀北极佑圣真君。
English: Zhenwu Temple, built in the 13th year of the Yongle Emperor, is famous for its sacrifice to the North Pole to help Saint Zhenjun.

古文：正德二年改为灵明显佑宫，在海子桥之东，祭日同南京。
现代文：正德二年，改为灵明显佑宫，在海子桥的束面，祭日与南京一样。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, it was changed to Ling Xiang Yu Gong, and in the bund face of Haizi Bridge, the festival day was the same as Nanjing.

古文：东岳泰山庙，在朝阳门外，祭以三月二十八日。
现代文：东岳泰山庙，在朝阳门外，于三月二十八日祭祀。
English: Dongyue Taishan Temple, outside Chaoyang Gate, on March 28th.

古文：都城隍庙，祭以五月十一日。
现代文：都城隍庙，在五月十一日祭祀。
English: It is held at the Miyakonojo Shinden Temple on May 11th.

古文：汉寿亭侯关公庙，永乐间建。
现代文：汉寿亭侯关公庙，永乐年间建成。
English: Han Shou Ting Hou Guan Gong Temple, built during the Yongle Dynasty.

古文：成化十三年，又奉敕建庙宛平县之东，祭以五月十三日。
现代文：成化十三年，又奉敕令在宛平县束面修建庙宇，于五月十三日祭祀。
English: In the thirteenth year of Chenghua, he also ordered the construction of a temple in Sokumen, Wanping County, which was dedicated on May 13th.

古文：皆太常寺官祭。
现代文：都是太常寺官员祭祀。
English: They were all held by officials of the Taijo-ji Temple.

古文：京都太仓神庙，建于太仓，户部官祭。
现代文：京都太仓神庙在太仓修建，由户部官员祭祀。
English: The Kyoto Taikura Shrine was built in Taikura and was dedicated by officials of the Household Ministry.

古文：司马、马祖、先牧神庙，太仆寺官祭。
现代文：司马、马祖、先牧神庙，由太仆寺官员祭祀。
English: Sima, Matsu, and Senmoku shrines, all of which are enshrined by officials of Taiju-ji Temple.

古文：宋文丞相祠，永乐六年从太常博士刘履节请，建于顺天府学之西。
现代文：宋文丞相祠，永乐六年，听从太常博士刘履节的请求，在顺天府学西面兴建。
English: Song Wenzheng's ancestral shrine, Yongle six years, listen to the request of Dr. Tai Chang Liu Cui Jie, built in the west of Shun Tianfu.

古文：元世祖庙，嘉靖中罢。
现代文：元世塑逮，嘉靖年间罢除祭祀。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, it was banned, and during the Jiajing Dynasty, it was abolished.

古文：皆以二月，八月中旬顺天府官祭。
现代文：都在二月、八月中旬由顺天府官员祭祀。
English: Both were enshrined by Shuntenfu officials in February and mid-August.

古文：洪恩灵济宫，祀徐知证、知谔。
现代文：洪恩灵济宫，祭祀徐知证、徐知夸。
English: Hong'en Lingji Palace, the worship of Xu Zhixian and Xu Zhiguo.

古文：永乐十五年，立庙皇城之西，正旦、冬至圣节，内阁礼部及内官各一员祭。
现代文：永乐十五年，在皇城西面立庙，正月旦日、冬至圣节，内阁、礼部以及内官各一员祭祀。
English: In the 15th year of Yongle, a temple was built on the west side of the imperial city, and on the first day of the first month and the winter solstice, a member of the cabinet, the ritual department, and the inner official each held a ritual.

古文：生辰，礼部官祭。
现代文：生日，礼部官员祭祀。
English: On his birthday, officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies held a religious service.

古文：弘治中，大学士刘健等请毋遣阁臣。
现代文：弘治年间，大学士刘健等人请求不要派遣内阁大臣祭祀。
English: During the Hongzhi era, Liu Jian, a university scholar, and others requested that no cabinet ministers be sent to offer sacrifices.

古文：嘉靖中，改遣太常寺官。
现代文：嘉靖年间，改为派遣太常寺官员祭祀。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jiajing, officials from Taizho-ji Temple were dispatched to perform the ritual.

古文：其荣国公姚广孝，洪熙元年从祀太庙。
现代文：荣国公姚广孝，洪熙元年在太庙陪祀。
English: Yao Guangxiao, the Prince of Rongguo, was accompanied by Hong Xi in the first year of the year in the Great Temple.

古文：嘉靖九年撤庙祀，移祀大兴隆寺，在皇城西北隅。
现代文：嘉靖九年撤除庙祀，移到大兴隆寺祭祀，在皇城西北角。
English: In the ninth year of the Jiajing Emperor, the temple rituals were removed and moved to the Daxinglong Temple, in the northwest corner of the imperial city.

古文：后寺毁，复移崇国寺。
现代文：后来寺庙焚毁又移到崇国寺祭祀。
English: Later, when the temple was burned, it was moved to Chonguo Temple for worship.

古文：东岳、都城隍用太牢，五庙用少牢，真武、灵济宫素羞。
现代文：东岳、都城隍用太牢，五庙用少牢，真武、灵济宫用素食祭祀。
English: Dongyue and Ducheng use Taiji, Five Temples use Shaoji, and Zhenwu and Lingji Palace use vegetarian sacrifices.

古文：诸神祠
现代文：诸神祠
English: Ancestral Hall of the Gods

古文：洪武元年，命中书省下郡县，访求应祀神祇。
现代文：洪武元年，命令中书省到郡县，访求应该祭祀的神只。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Central Literature Department was ordered to go to counties and counties to visit the gods that should be worshiped.

古文：名山大川、圣帝明王、忠臣烈士，凡有功于国家及惠爱在民者，著于祀典，令有司岁时致祭。
现代文：名山大川、圣明帝王、忠臣烈士，凡是有功于国家以及惠爱百姓的，都写进祭祀典册，命令有关部门每年一定时饰祭祀。
English: Famous mountains and rivers, Emperor Shengming, loyal vassals and martyrs, and all those who have contributed to the country and benefited the people are written into the ritual book, and the relevant departments are ordered to hold the ritual at a certain time every year.

古文：二年，又诏天下神祇，常有功德于民，事迹昭著者，虽不致祭，禁人毁撤祠宇。
现代文：二年，又下诏天下神祇，对百姓常有功德，事迹显著的，即使不祭祀，也要禁止人毁坏撤掉祠堂。
English: In the second year, it was also decreed that the gods of the world, who often had merits and remarkable deeds for the people, should be prohibited from destroying and removing the ancestral hall, even if they were not sacrificed.

古文：三年，定诸神封号，凡后世溢美之称皆革去。
现代文：三年，制定众神封号，凡是后世溢美的称号都革除。
English: In the third year, the gods' seal names were formulated, and all titles that would be praised in the future were eliminated.

古文：天下神祠不应祀典者，即淫祠也，有司毋得致祭。
现代文：天下神祠不应进行祭祀典礼的，就是淫祠，有关部门不得祭祀。
English: If there is any shrine in the world that should not hold a sacrificial ceremony, it is the adultery shrine. The relevant departments must not hold a sacrificial ceremony.

古文：弘治元年，礼科张九功言： 祀典正则人心正。
现代文：弘治元年，礼科张九功说： 祭祀典礼正，那么人心就正。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, the etiquette expert Zhang Jiu Gong said: If the ritual is correct, then the people's hearts will be correct.

古文：今朝廷常祭之外，又有释迦牟尼文佛、三清三境九天应元雷声普化天尊、金玉阙真君元君、神父神母，诸宫观中又有水官星君、诸天诸帝之祭，非所以法天下。 
现代文：当今朝廷按常例祭祀外，又有释迦牟尼文佛、三清三境九天应元雷声普化天尊、金玉阙真君元君、神父神母，各宫观中又有水官星君、诸天诸帝的祭祀，这不足以为天下效法。 
English: Today, in addition to the regular sacrificial rites of the imperial court, there are also the sacrificial rites of Shakyamuni, Buddha, Sanqing, Sanjia and Jiuquan, Ying Yuan, Lei Xuan, Pu Hua Tian Zun, Jin Yu Yu Zhen Jun Yuan Jun, and Father Divine Mother, as well as the sacrificial rites of Merchant Admiral Xing Jun and Gods of the Heavens and Gods of the Heavens and Gods of the Gods of the Heavens and Gods of the Gods of the Heavens and Gods of the Gods of the Heavens and Gods of the Gods of the Heavens and Gods of the Gods of the He

古文：帝下其章礼部，尚书周洪谟等言：
现代文：皇帝将奏章下交给礼部，尚书周洪谟等人说：
English: When the emperor handed over the scroll to the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Zhou Hongmu and others said:

古文：释迦牟尼文佛生西方中天竺国。
现代文：释迦牟尼文佛生于西方中天竺国。
English: Shakyamuni Buddha was born in the West, in the Middle Kingdom.

古文：宗其教者，以本性为法身，德业为报身，并真身为三，其实一人耳。
现代文：其教义的根本，以本性为法身，德行与功业为报身，连同真身为三，其实是一个人。
English: The essence of his teaching is that nature is the legal body, virtue and merits are the rewarded body, and together with the true body, there are three, which is actually one person.

古文：道家以老子为师。
现代文：道家以老子为老师。
English: Taoism takes Lao Tzu as its teacher.

古文：朱熹有曰： 玉清元始天尊既非老子法身，上清太上道君又非老子报身，设有二像，又非与老子为一。
现代文：朱熹说遇： 玉清元始天尊既不是老子的法身，上清太上道君又不是老子的报身，设了二像，又不是和老子为一人。
English: Zhu Xi said: The Jade Emperor of the First Yuan Dynasty was neither the legal body of Laozi, nor was the Upper Qing Empress Dowager Daojun the heraldic body of Laozi. There were two images, but they were not the same person as Laozi.

古文：而老子又自为上清太上老君，盖仿释氏而又失之者也。 
现代文：而老子又自己称上清太上老君，大约是仿照释氏而又失真。 
English: However, Laozi also called himself the Upper Qing Empress Dowager Laojun, which is similar to and a distortion of Shih.

古文：自今凡遇万寿等节，不令修建吉祥斋醮，或遇丧礼，不令修建荐扬斋醮。
现代文：自现在起，凡是遇上皇上的生日，不命令修建吉祥斋坛祈祷，或者遇上丧礼，不命令修建推荐赞扬的斋坛祈祷。
English: From now on, whenever there is a birthday of the emperor, do not order the construction of the auspicious altar of prayer, or when there is a funeral, do not order the construction of the altar of prayer recommended for praise.

古文：其大兴隆寺、朝天宫俱停遣官祭告。
现代文：大兴隆寺、朝天宫都停止派官员祭告。
English: Daxinglong Temple and the Imperial Palace have both stopped sending officials to offer prayers.

古文：北极中天星主紫微大帝者，北极五星在紫微垣中，正统初，建紫微殿，设像祭告。
现代文：北极中天星主紫薇大帝，北极五星在紫微垣中。正统初年，建紫微殿，设立神像祭告。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the Zi Wei Hall was built, and statues of deities were set up.

古文：夫幽禜祭星，古礼也。
现代文：设坛祈祭星辰，是古礼。
English: It is an ancient rite to set up an altar to pray for the stars.

古文：今乃像之如人，称之为帝，稽之祀典，诚无所据。
现代文：现在却像似人，称它为帝，考察祭祀典籍，确实没有依据。
English: Now, however, they act as if they were human, calling it the emperor. An examination of the sacrificial literature shows that there is really no basis for this.

古文：雷声普化天尊者，道家以为总司五雷，又以六月二十四日为天尊示现之日，故岁以是日遣官诣显灵宫致祭。
现代文：雷声普化天尊，道家认为主管五雷，又在六月二十四日为天尊显现的日子，所以每年在这一天派官到显灵宫祭祀。
English: The sound of thunder is believed by Taoists to be the sound of five thunderclaps, and June 24th is the day when the deity appears, so every year on this day, officials are sent to the Xianling Palace to offer sacrifices.

古文：夫风云雷雨，南郊合祀，而山川坛复有秋报，则此祭亦当罢免。
现代文：风云雷雨，在南郊合在一起祭祀，而山川坛又有秋日祭祀，那么这个祭祀也应当免除。
English: In the case of wind, clouds, and thunderstorms, in the southern suburbs, there is a combined ritual, while the mountain and river altar has an autumn ritual, then this ritual should also be exempted.

古文：祖师三天扶教辅玄大法师真君者，传记云： 汉张道陵，善以符治病。
现代文：祖师三天扶教辅玄大法师真君，传记上说： 汉张道陵，善于用符治病。
English: Ancestor three-day teaching assistant to Grand Mage Zhen Jun, the biography said: Han Zhang Daoling, good at using charms to cure diseases.

古文：唐天宝，宋熙宁、大观间，累号正一靖应真君，子孙亦有封号。
现代文：唐天寅，宋熙宁、大观年间，多次加封号后为正一靖应真君，子孙也有封号。
English: During the Tang Tianyin, Song Xining, and Taekwondo eras, he was given the title of Zheng Yijing Zhenjun after being given the title several times, and his descendants also have the title.

古文：国朝仍袭正一嗣教真人之封。 
现代文：朝廷仍沿用正一嗣教真人的封号。 
English: The imperial court continued to use the title of Shōichisugi Shōjin.

古文：然宋邵伯温云： 张鲁祖陵、父衡，以符法相授受，自号师君。 
现代文：可是宋邵伯温说： 张鲁的祖父张陵、父亲张衡，用符法之术传授他，自己号称师君。 
English: But Song Shao Bowen said: Zhang Lu's grandfather, Zhang Ling, and father, Zhang Heng, taught him the art of magic, calling themselves teachers.

古文：今岁以正月十五日为陵生日，遣官诣显灵宫祭告，亦非祀典。
现代文：今年以正月十五日是张陵生日，派官到显灵宫祭告，也不合祭祀典礼。
English: This year, the fifteenth day of the first month is Zhang Ling's birthday, and officials have been sent to the Xianling Palace to make an announcement, which is not in accordance with the ritual ceremony.

古文：大小青龙神者，记云： 有僧名卢，寓西山。
现代文：大小青龙神，记载说： 有位僧人名叫卢，寓居西山。
English: According to the records of the Great and Small Blue Dragon God, there was a monk named Lu who lived in the West Mountain.

古文：有二童子来侍。
现代文：有两位童子来侍奉。
English: Two boys came to serve.

古文：时久旱，童子入潭化二青龙，遂得雨。
现代文：当时长久大旱，童子入潭化为两条青龙，于是下雨。
English: At that time, there was a long drought, and the boy who went into the pond turned into two blue dragons, so it rained.

古文：后赐卢号曰感应禅师，建寺设像，别设龙祠于潭上。
现代文：后来赐给卢名号叫感应禅师，建寺设像，在潭上另设龙祠。
English: Later, Lu was given the title of "Intonation Zen Master," a temple was built, a statue was set up, and a dragon shrine was built on the lake.

古文：宣德中，建大圆通寺，加二龙封号，春秋祭之。 
现代文：宣德年间，建大圆通寺，加上二龙封号，春秋祭祀。 
English: During the Xuande era, the Great Yangtze Temple was built, with the addition of two dragons, and the Spring and Autumn Festival was held.

古文：迩者连旱，祈祷无应，不足崇奉明矣。
现代文：近来连年旱灾，祈祷没有应验，不足以崇拜奉祀已经很明显。
English: In the recent years of drought, it has become clear that prayers have not been answered, and worship has not been enough.

古文：梓潼帝君者，记云： 神姓张，名亚子，居蜀七曲山。
现代文：梓潼帝君，记载说： 神姓张名亚子，居住在蜀七曲山。
English: Zizhi Emperor, records say: the god's surname is Zhang Mian Yazi, and he lives in Shu Qigu Mountain.

古文：仕晋战没，人为立庙。
现代文：在晋做官战死，人们给他立庙。
English: When Jin died in battle as an official, people built a temple for him.

古文：唐、宋屡封至英显王。
现代文：唐、宋多次加封至英显王。
English: In Tang and Song Dynasties, he was awarded the title of Yingxian Wang several times.

古文：道家谓帝命梓潼掌文昌府事及人间禄籍，故元加号为帝君，而天下学校亦有祠祀者。
现代文：道家称天帝命令梓潼掌管文昌府事务以及人间的福禄寿的簿册，所以元代加封号为帝君，而天的学校也有建祠堂祭祀的。
English: Taoists say that the Heavenly Emperor ordered Zixuan to be in charge of the affairs of Wenchang Prefecture and the book of human fortune, so the Yuan Dynasty added the title of Emperor, and the Heavenly School also built a shrine for sacrifice.

古文：景泰中，因京师旧庙辟而新之，岁以二月三日生辰，遣祭。 
现代文：景泰年间，因为京城的旧庙开拓而新建，每年在二月三日的生辰，派官祭祀。 
English: During the reign of King Gyeongtae, as the old temples in the capital were developed and new ones were built, officials held a religious service every year on February 3rd, the Emperor's birthday.

古文：夫梓潼显灵于蜀，庙食其地为宜。
现代文：梓潼在蜀显灵，故在蜀建庙祭祀较好。
English: Zizang is in Shu Xianling, so it is better to make sacrifices in Shu Jian Temple.

古文：文昌六星与之无涉，宜敕罢免。
现代文：文昌六星与它无关，应该下令罢除祭祀。
English: Wenchang Six-Star has nothing to do with it, and it should be ordered to cancel the sacrifice.

古文：其祠在天下学校者，俱令拆毁。
现代文：在天下学校的祠堂，都下令拆毁。
English: In schools across the country, ancestral halls have been ordered to be torn down.

古文：北极佑圣真君者，乃玄武七宿，后人以为真君，作龟蛇于其下。
现代文：北极佑圣真君，是玄武七星宿，后人以它是真君，在下面作龟蛇。
English: The North Pole is sacred to the True King, and is the origin of the Seven Stars. Later generations believed it to be the True King, who was a turtle-snake below.

古文：宋真宗避讳，改为真武。
现代文：宋真宗避讳，改为真武。
English: Song Zhenzong shunned it and changed it to Zhenwu.

古文：靖康初，加号佑圣助顺灵应真君。
现代文：靖康初年，加封号为佑圣助顺灵应真君。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingkang, he was given the additional title of "Yu Shengzu Shunling Ying Zhen Jun."

古文：图志云： 真武为净乐王太子，修炼武当山，功成飞升。
现代文：图志上说： 真武是净乐王太子，在武当山修炼，功成飞升。
English: The chart said: "Zhenwu is the prince of the Prince of Pure Music. He cultivates in Wudang Mountain, and his achievements are soaring."

古文：奉上帝命镇北方。
现代文：奉上天的命令镇抚北方。
English: By order of heaven, pacify the north.

古文：被发跣足，建皂纛玄旗。 
现代文：披发赤足，建立皂色军中大黑旗。 
English: Wearing hair and barefoot, they set up a large black flag in the middle of the army.

古文：此道家附会之说。
现代文：这是道家附会的说法。
English: This is the view of the Taoist Affiliation.

古文：国朝御制碑谓，太祖平定天下，阴佑为多，当建庙南京崇祀。
现代文：我朝御制的碑上称，太祖平定天下，受到很乡神灵暗中保佑，曾在南京建庙尊崇祭祀。
English: On the monument of the imperial system of our dynasty, it is said that the great-grandfather conquered the world, was secretly blessed by the gods of his hometown, and built a temple in Nanjing to worship and worship.

古文：及太宗靖难，以神有显相功，又于京城艮隅并武当山重建庙宇。
现代文：到太宗靖难，认为神有显灵帮助的功劳，又在京城东北角以及武当山重建庙宇。
English: To Taizong Yasunan, he believed that God had the merit of helping the spirits, and rebuilt temples in the northeast corner of Beijing and Wudang Mountain.

古文：两京岁时朔望各遣官致祭，而武当山又专官督祀事。
现代文：两处京城在每年一定时节和朔日、望日各自派遣官员祭祀，而武当山又有专门官员督办祭祀事务。
English: The two capital cities each send officials to offer religious services at certain times of the year, and on the New Year's Eve and New Year's Day, while Wudang Mountain has special officials to supervise religious services.

古文：宪宗尝范金为像。
现代文：宪宗曾经浇铸铜像。
English: A bronze statue of Kenzong was once cast.

古文：今请止遵洪武间例，每年三月三日、九月九日用素羞，遣太常官致祭，余皆停免。
现代文：现在请求只是遵循洪武年间的旧例，每年三月三日、九月九日用素食，派太常官举行祭祀，其余的都减免停祭。
English: The request now is just to follow the old practice during the Hongwu era, to use vegetarian food on March 3rd and September 9th every year, to send officials to hold sacrifices, and to reduce or suspend the rest.

古文：崇恩真君、隆恩真君者，道家以崇恩姓萨名坚，西蜀人，宋徽宗时尝从王侍宸、林灵素辈学法有验。
现代文：崇恩真君、隆恩真君，道家认为崇恩姓萨名坚，西蜀人，宋徽宗时曾跟从王侍宸、林灵素等人学习法术有灵验。
English: Long En Zhenjun and Chong En Zhenjun, Taoists believe that Chong En, surnamed Sana Jian, was from Western Shushan, and when he was a disciple of Song Huizong, he learned magic from Wang Zhiyao and Lin Lingsu.

古文：隆恩，则玉枢火府天将王灵官也，又尝从萨传符法。
现代文：隆恩，是玉枢火府天将王灵官，又曾经跟从萨坚传习符法。
English: Long En was the spiritual advisor to the king of the Jade Emperor of the Fire Palace, and he once taught calligraphy to Sajian.

古文：永乐中，以道士周思得能传灵官法，乃于禁城之西建天将庙及祖师殿。
现代文：永乐年间，因道士周思得能传灵官法，于是在禁城西面建天将庙以及祖师殿。
English: During the Yongle period, because the Taoist Zhou thought he could teach the spiritual official law, he built the Heavenly General Temple and the Ancestor Hall on the west side of the Forbidden City.

古文：宣德中，改大德观，封二真君。
现代文：宣德年间，改大德观，封二真君。
English: During the Xuande era, the Great Virtue Doctrine was reformed, and Er Zhenjun was imprisoned.

古文：成化初改显灵宫。
现代文：成化初年改为显灵宫。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, it was changed to Xianling Palace.

古文：每年换袍服，所费不訾。
现代文：每年换袍服，花费很多。
English: It costs a lot to change robes every year.

古文：近今祈祷无应，亦当罢免。
现代文：近来祈祷没有应验，也应当罢除免祭。
English: In recent times, prayers have not been answered, and the festival should be cancelled.

古文：金阙上帝、玉阙上帝者，志云： 闽县灵济宫祀五代时徐温子知证、知谔。
现代文：金阙上帝、玉阙上帝，有记录说： 闽县灵济官祭祀五代时徐温的儿子徐知证、徐知谤。
English: Jinqiao God, Jadeqiao God, there is a record that: the Lingji official of Jixian County worshiped the sons of Xu Wen, Xu Zhixian and Xu Zhigao, in the fifth generation.

古文：国朝御制碑谓太宗尝弗豫，祷神辄应，因大新闽地庙宇，春秋致祭。
现代文：我朝御制的碑文称太宗曾经生病，祈祷神灵就应验，于是大肆整新闽地庙宇，春秋祭祀。
English: The inscription of the imperial edict of our dynasty says that Emperor Taizong was once ill, and his prayers to the gods were answered. Therefore, the temples in Fuxi were extensively renovated, and the spring and autumn sacrifices were held.

古文：又立庙京师，加封金阙真君、玉阙真君。
现代文：又在京城立庙，加封金阙真君、玉阙真君。
English: In addition, at the Beijing City Temple, the names of Jin Ying Zhenjun and Yu Ying Zhenjun were added.

古文：正统、成化中，累加号为上帝。
现代文：正统、成化年间，多次加封号为上帝。
English: During the years of orthodoxy and maturation, he was repeatedly given the title of God.

古文：朔望令节俱遣官祀，及时荐新，四时换袍服。 
现代文：朔日、望日、时令节日都派官祭祀，及时以时鲜的食品进献，四时换袍服。 
English: On New Year's Eve, Day of the Dead, and seasonal festivals, officials are dispatched to offer sacrifices, timely fresh food is presented, and robes are changed at four o'clock.

古文：夫神世系事迹，本非甚异，其僣号宜革正，妄费亦宜节省。
现代文：神的世系事迹，本来差别不大，他的僭越名号应更正，妄自浪费也应节省。
English: There is not much difference between God's lineage and His deeds. His arrogance should be corrected, and his extravagance should be reduced.

古文：神父圣帝、神母元君及金玉阙元君者，即二徐父母及其配也。
现代文：神父圣帝、神母元君以及金玉阙元君，就是二徐父母，及其配享。
English: The Holy Father, the Mother of God, and the Immaculate Heart of Mary, are the parents of Er Xu, and they share everything with him.

古文：宋封其父齐王为忠武真人，母田氏为仁寿仙妃，配皆为仙妃。
现代文：宋封他的父亲齐王为忠武真人，母亲田氏为仁寿仙妃，配享的都是仙妃。
English: Song Feng's father, King Qi, was a loyal warrior, and his mother, Lady Tian, was a benevolent fairy godmother.

古文：永乐至成化间，屡加封今号，亦宜削号罢祀。
现代文：永乐到成化年间，多次加封至现今的称号，也应削去封号宠除祭祀。
English: In the years from Yongle to Chenghua, the title that has been sealed many times until now should also be removed from the seal number.

古文：东岳泰山之神者，泰山五岳首，庙在泰安州山下。
现代文：东岳泰山神，泰山是五岳之首，庙在泰安州的山下。
English: Dongyue Taishan god, Mount Tai is the head of the five mountains, the temple is at the foot of the mountain in Tai'an.

古文：又每岁南郊及山川坛俱有合祭之礼。
现代文：又于每年在甫郊以及山川坛都有合于一处祭祀的礼仪。
English: In addition, there is a ritual ritual that takes place every year on the outskirts of the temple and at the mountain altar.

古文：今朝阳门外有元东岳旧庙，国朝因而不废。
现代文：现今朝阳门外有元代的束岳旧庙，我朝因袭而不废。
English: Nowadays, there is the old temple of Sokudake in the Yuan Dynasty outside the Chaoyang Gate. I am not going to waste my time.

古文：夫既专祭封内，且合祭郊坛，则此庙之祭，实为烦渎。
现代文：既已在境内专门祭祀，而且在郊外坛上合于一处祭祀，那么这座庙的祭祀，实在是繁复遇滥。
English: Since there is already a special sacrificial rite within the precincts, and the sacrificial rites are combined in one place on the altar in the suburbs, then the sacrificial rites of this temple are really complex and extravagant.

古文：京师都城隍之神者，旧在顺天府西南，以五月十一日为神诞辰，故是日及节令皆遣官祀。
现代文：京城都城隍神，原来在顺天府西南，以五月十一日作为神的诞辰，所以这一日以及节气时令都派官祭祀。
English: The capital of Kyoto, Shinshin, was originally located in the southwest of Shuntianfu, with May 11th as the birthday of the god, so this day and the season of the solar year are assigned to official sacrifices.

古文：夫城隍之神，非人鬼也，安有诞辰？
现代文：城隍神，不是人鬼，怎么会有诞辰？
English: How could the god of the city, who is not a ghost, have a birthday?

古文：况南郊秋祀俱已合祭，则诞辰及节令之祀非宜，凡此俱当罢免。
现代文：何况南郊秋天祭祀都已合于一处祭祀，那么诞辰以及节气时令的祭祀都不合适，凡是这些都应当罢除免祭。
English: In addition, the southern suburb's autumn rites have all been combined into one rite, so the rites of the birthday and the solar terms are not appropriate, and all of these should be removed from the festival.

古文：议上，乃命修建斋醮，遣官祭告，并东岳、真武、城隍庙、灵济宫祭祀，俱仍旧。
现代文：奏议上呈，于是命令修建斋坛，派官祭告，连同束岳、真武、城隍庙、灵济宫的祭祀，都依旧。
English: He then ordered the construction of a sacrificial altar, and sent officials to announce that the sacrificial rites, as well as those of Sokudake, Jimmu, Chengyu Temple, and Lingji Palace, would remain the same.

古文：二徐真君及其父母妻革去帝号，仍旧封，冠袍等物换回焚毁，余如所议行之。
现代文：二徐真君以及他的父母妻子革除帝号，仍用旧封号，冠袍等物换回烧毁，其余的按议定的施行。
English: Second, Xu Zhenjun and his parents and wife were stripped of the imperial title, but they still used the old seal name, crown robe and other things to replace and burn, and the rest was carried out as agreed.

古文：按祀典，太祖时，应天祀陈乔、杨邦乂、姚兴、王鉷，成都祀李冰、文翁、张咏，均州祀黄霸，密县祀卓茂，松江祀陆逊、陆抗、陆凯，龙州祀李龙迁，建宁祀谢夷甫，彭泽祀狄仁杰，九江祀李黼，安庆祀余阙、韩建之、李宗可。
现代文：按照祭祀典籍，太祖时期，应天祭祀陈乔、杨邦火、姚兴、王铁，成都祭祀李冰、文翁、张咏，均州祭祀黄霸，密县祭祀卓茂，松江祭祀陆逊、陆抗、陆凯，龙州祭祀李龙迁，建宁祭祀谢夷甫，彭泽祭祀狄仁杰，九江祭祀李黼，安庆祭祀余阙、韩建之、李宗可。
English: According to the ritual books, during the Taizu period, Chen Qiao, Yang Banghu, Yao Xing, and Wang Tie were worshipped in response to the heavens; Li Bing, Wen Weng, and Zhang Ye were worshipped in Chengdu; Huang Ba was worshipped in Junzhou; Zhuo Mao was worshipped in Miyakian; Lu Xun, Lu Yan, and Lu Kai were worshipped in Songjiang; Li Longqian was worshipped in Longzhou; Xie Yifu was worshipped in Jianning; Di Renjie was worshipped in Pengze; Li Jie was worshipped in Jiujiang; Yu Yu, Han Jianzhi, and

古文：宣宗时，高邮祀耿遇德。
现代文：宣宗年间，高邮祭祀耿遇德。
English: During the years of the Xuan Zong, the high-ranking postmaster's sacrificial rites were carried out.

古文：英宗时，豫章祀韦丹、许逊，无锡祀张巡。
现代文：英宗年间，豫章祭祀韦丹、许逊，无锡祭祀张巡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yingzong, the Yuzhang Festival was held in honor of Emperor Weidan and Emperor Xu, and the Wuxi Festival was held in honor of Emperor Zhang.

古文：宪宗时，崖山祀张世杰、陆秀夫。
现代文：宪宗时，崖山祭祀张世杰、陆秀夫。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xianzong, Zhang Shijie and Lu Xiuwu were enshrined on the cliff.

古文：孝宗时，新会祀宋慈元杨后，延平祀罗从彦、李侗，建宁祀刘子翚，乌撒祀潭渊，庐陵祀文天祥，婺源祀朱熹，都昌祀陈澔，饶州祀江万里，福州祀陈文龙，兴化祀陈瓒，湖广祀李芾，广西祀马慨。
现代文：孝宗时，新会祭祀宋慈元杨后，延平祭祀罗从彦、李侗，建宁祭祀刘子翠，乌撒祭祀潭渊，庐陵祭祀文天祥，婺源祭祀朱熹，都昌祭祀陈潞，饶州祭祀江万里，福州祭祀陈文龙，兴化祭祀陈瓒，湖广祭祀李芾，广西祭祀马慨。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaozong, the Xinhui worshipped Song Ci Yuan Yang Guo, Yanping worshipped Luo Cong Yan and Li Xi, Jianning worshipped Liu Zicui, Wusa worshipped Tan Yuan, Fuling worshipped Wen Tian Xiang, Yuyuan worshipped Zhu Xi, Duchang worshipped Chen Xi, Raozhou worshipped Jiang Wanli, Fuzhou worshipped Chen Wenlong, Xinghua worshipped Chen Xi, Hukang worshipped Li Xi, Guangxi worshipped Ma Xia.

古文：武宗时，真定祀颜杲卿、真卿，韶州附祀张九龄子拯，沂州祀诸葛亮，萧山祀游酢、罗从彦。
现代文：武宗时期，真定祭祀颜杲卿、颜真卿，韶州附带祭祀张九龄的儿子张拯，沂州祭祀谙葛亮，萧山祭祀游酢、罗从彦。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wuzong, Zhending worshipped Yan Xuanqing and Yan Zhenqing, Bozhou worshipped Zhang Julin's son Zhang Zheng, Bozhou worshipped Zou Ge Liang, Xiaoshan worshipped You Zui and Luo Congyan.

古文：其大者，鄱阳湖忠臣祠祀丁普郎等三十五人，南昌忠臣祠祀赵德胜等十四人，太平忠臣庙祀花云、王鼎、许瑗，金华忠臣祠祀胡大海，皆太祖自定其典。其后，通州祀常遇春，山海关祀徐达，苏州祀夏原吉、周忱，淮安祀陈瑄，海州卫祀卫青、徐安生，甘州祀毛忠，榆林祀余子俊，杭州祀于谦，萧山祀魏骥，汀州祀王得仁，广州祀杨信民、毛吉，云南祀沐英、沐晟，贵州祀顾成，庐陵祀刘球、李时勉，广信祀邓颙，宝庆祀贺兴隆，上杭祀伍骥、丁泉，庆远祀叶祯，云南祀王祎、吴云，青田祀刘基，平阳祀薛瑄，杭州祀邹济、徐善述，金华祀章懋，皆众著耳目，炳然可考。其他郡县山川龙神忠烈之士，及祈祷有应而祀者，《会典》所载，尤详悉云。
现代文：他们都是历代的著名大臣，事迹显著。地方守土大臣题名奏请，礼官议论答复，事情都如实地记载，年月可以考查。至于明代大臣与前代历史上的名臣相媲美的，或者因为功勋，或者因为学识品行，或者因为守正不阿的操守，或者因为死于国事，在志书上记载，刻在碑碣雕版上，不能一一述说。大的有鄱阳湖忠臣祠祭祀丁普郎等三十五人，南昌忠臣祠祭祀趟德胜等十四人，太平忠臣庙祭祀花云、王鼎、许瑗，金华忠臣祠祭祀胡大海，都是太祖自己制定典礼。这以后，通州祭祀常遇春，山海关祭祀徐达，苏州祭祀夏原吉、周忱，淮安祭祀陈坛，海州卫祭祀卫青、徐安生，甘州祭祀毛忠，榆林祭祀余子俊，杭州祭祀于谦，萧山祭祀魏骥，汀州祭祀王得仁，广州祭祀杨信民、毛吉，云南祭祀沐英、沐晟，贵州祭祀顾成，庐陵祭祀刘球、李时勉，广信祭祀邓颐，宝庆祭祀贺兴隆，上杭祭祀伍骥、丁泉，庆远祭祀叶祯，云南祭祀王樟、昊云，青田祭祀刘基，平阳祭祀薛管，杭州祭祀邹济、徐善述，金华祭祀章懋，都是众所周知的，清晰可考。其它郡县山川龙神忠烈的人，以及祈祷有灵验而祭祀的，《会典》上的记载，尤其详备。
English: They are all famous ministers of all generations, and their deeds are remarkable. The title of the local minister of defence is recorded, and the etiquette officials discuss and reply. The events are recorded truthfully, and the dates can be checked. As for the ministers of the Ming Dynasty, they are comparable to the famous ministers in the history of the previous generation, either because of their merits, or because of their academic performance, or because of their upright conduct, or because they died in national affairs. They are recorded in the history book and engraved on the monument and engraved plate, and cannot be described one by one. The largest are the thirty-five people of the Poyang Lake Loyalist Shrine who

古文：厉坛
现代文：厉坛
English: The stage is set

