古文：二月晦入潼关，三十五里，乃税驾停宿，税通 脱 西岳庙。
现代文：二月底进入潼关，走了三十五里，就在西岳庙停宿。黄河从北方沙漠地带往南奔流，到潼关后转向东流。
English: At the end of February, we entered Shouguan, walked for thirty-five miles, and stopped at Xiyuemiao. The Yellow River flows from the northern desert to the south, and after Shoguan, it turns to the east.

古文：黄河从朔漠北方沙漠之地南下，至潼关，折而东。关正当河、山隘口，北瞰河流，南连华岳，惟此一线为东西大道，以百雉长而高大之城墙锁之。
现代文：潼关正好位于狭窄、险要的黄河、华山口，北边俯瞰黄河水，南边和华山相连接，只有撞关这狭窄的通道是横贯东西的大路，由长而高大的城墙封锁着。
English: Shaoguan is located right at the narrow, dangerous intersection of the Yellow River and Huashan Pass. The north side overlooks the Yellow River, and the south side is connected to Huashan. Only the narrow passage of Shaoguan is the main road that crosses the east and west, blocked by the long and tall city wall.

古文：舍此而北，必渡黄河，南必趋武关，而华岳以南，峭壁层崖，无可度者。
现代文：如果不走潼关往北去，就必须横渡黄河，往南则必须从武关走，而华山以南，崖壁层叠陡峭，没有路穿越。
English: If you don't go to Shouguan to the north, you have to cross the Yellow River, and if you go to the south, you have to go from Wuguan, but south of Huashan, the cliff walls are steep and there is no way to cross.

古文：未入关，百里外即见太华屼出云表；及入关，反为冈陇所蔽。
现代文：还没进入潼关时，在百里之外就看见华山突兀高出云上；等入了潼关，华山反而被低冈小山遮蔽了。
English: Before entering Shaoguan, I saw Huashan towering above the clouds from a hundred miles away; after entering Shaoguan, Huashan was overshadowed by a low hill.

古文：行二十里，忽仰见芙蓉片片，已直造其下，不特三峰秀绝，而东西拥攒诸峰，俱片削层悬。
现代文：走了二十里，一抬头，忽然看到一座座美如荷花的华山山峰，原来已经直达华山下。华山不仅落雁、朝阳、莲花三峰秀美无比，而且聚集、簇拥在东西两边的众峰，也都是刀削层悬的石片。
English: After walking for twenty miles, I suddenly looked up and saw a mountain peak of Huashan that was as beautiful as a lotus flower, and it had already reached the bottom of Huashan. Huashan is not only the three peaks of the falling geese, the morning sun, and the lotus flower, but also the peaks gathered and clustered on both sides of the east and west, are also stone chips hanging from the knife layer.

古文：惟北面时有土冈，至此尽脱山骨，竞发为极胜处。
现代文：只有北面不时出现的土冈，到此时才完全露出岩石，争相显示最美的景色。
English: Only the earth mounds that appear from time to time in the north fully expose the rock by this time, competing to show the most beautiful scenery.

古文：三月初一日入谒西岳神，登万寿阁。
现代文：三月初一日进庙拜西岳华山之神，登上万寿阁。
English: On the first day of March, he went to the temple to worship the god of Xidue Huashan and ascended the Manshou Pavilion.

古文：向岳南趋十五里，入云台观。
现代文：朝华山南面走十五里，进云台观。
English: Walk fifteen miles to the south of Mount Chaohua and enter Yuntai.

古文：觅导于十方庵。
现代文：在十方庵找到向导。
English: Find a guide at Jufo-an.

古文：由峪ǘ山谷口入，两崖壁立，一溪中出，玉泉院当其左。
现代文：从山谷口往里走，两边山崖壁立，一股溪水在山谷中流淌，玉泉院位于溪水左岸。
English: Walking from the mouth of the valley, there are cliffs on both sides, a stream flows in the valley, and the Jade Spring Temple is located on the left bank of the stream.

古文：循溪随峪行十里，为莎萝宫，路始峻。
现代文：跟着溪流沿山谷行走十里，到莎萝宫，道路开始陡峻。
English: After following the stream for ten miles along the valley, the road begins to steepen as we reach the palace.

古文：又十里。为青柯坪，路少坦。
现代文：又走十里，到青柯坪，道路稍显平坦。
English: After another ten miles, the road to Qingkeping is slightly flat.

古文：五里，过寥阳桥，路遂绝。
现代文：走五里，过寥阳桥后，路就断了。
English: After walking five miles and crossing the Liaoyang Bridge, the road was cut off.

古文：攀锁铁链上千尺幢，再上百尺峡。
现代文：攀援铁链登上千尺幢，再上到百尺峡。
English: Climbing up the iron chain to the thousand-foot building, and then up to the hundred-foot gorge.

古文：从崖左转，上老君犁沟，过猢狲岭。去青柯五里，有峰北悬深崖中，三面绝壁，则白云峰也。
现代文：顺崖往左转，登上老君犁沟，越过瑚孙岭，距离青柯坪五里处，有座山峰悬立在北面的深谷中，山峰三面全是绝壁，这就是白云峰。
English: Turn left along the cliff, climb Laojun ravine, cross Hu Sunling, five miles from Qingkeping, there is a peak hanging in the deep valley to the north, the three sides of the peak are all cliffs, this is Baiyun Peak.

古文：舍之南，上苍龙岭，过日月岩。
现代文：我放弃白云峰而往南走，登上苍龙岭，经过日月岩。
English: I abandoned the Baiyun Peak and walked south, climbed the Canglong Ridge, and passed the Sun and Moon Rocks.

古文：去犁沟又五里，始上三峰足。
现代文：距离老君犁沟又五里，开始登三峰足。
English: It was another five miles to Laojun ravine, and I began to climb the three peaks.

古文：望东峰侧而上，谒玉女祠，入迎阳洞。
现代文：看着东峰侧边往上走，到玉女祠渴拜，进入迎阳洞。
English: Looking at the east side of the peak, walk up, go to the Jade Maiden's Shrine to worship, and enter the Yangyang Cave.

古文：道士李姓者，留余宿。
现代文：一个姓李的道士，留我住下来。
English: A Taoist named Li let me stay.

古文：乃以余晷ǐ日影，此即剩余时间上东峰，昏返洞。
现代文：于是用剩下的时间攀登东峰，天黑才回到迎阳洞。
English: So he used the remaining time to climb the East Peak, and only returned to Yangyang Cave after dark.

古文：初二日从南峰北麓上峰顶，悬南崖而下，观避静处。
现代文：初二这天从南峰北麓登上峰顶，又从南面悬崖下来，游览一些比较偏僻幽静的地方。
English: On the second day of junior high school, I climbed to the summit from the northern foot of the south peak, and descended from the southern cliff to visit some relatively remote and quiet places.

古文：复上，直跻峰绝顶。
现代文：又上山，直接登上南峰的绝顶。
English: I went up the mountain again and climbed directly to the very top of the South Peak.

古文：上有小孔，道士指为仰天池。
现代文：顶上有个小洞，道士指名为仰天池。
English: There is a small hole at the top, which Taoists refer to as Yang Tianchi.

古文：旁有黑龙潭。
现代文：旁边有黑龙潭。
English: Next to it is the Black Dragon Pool.

古文：从西下，复上西峰。
现代文：从西面下山，又登上西峰。
English: Descended from the west side of the mountain and ascended the west peak.

古文：峰上石耸起，有石片覆其上如荷叶。
现代文：西峰顶上岩石耸立，有的岩石被荷叶般的石片覆盖。
English: On the top of the west peak, rocks tower, and some rocks are covered with stone flakes like lotus leaves.

古文：旁有玉井甚深，以阁掩其上，不知何故。
现代文：旁边有很深的玉井，井上盖有阁楼，我不是道为什么这样。
English: There is a very deep well next to it, and there is a loft above the well. I'm not sure why this is.

古文：还饭于迎阳。
现代文：后来返回迎阳洞吃饭。
English: Later, return to Yangyang-dong for dinner.

古文：上东峰，悬南崖而下，一小台峙绝壑中，是为棋盘台。
现代文：登上东峰，从南面山崖悬空坠落而下，有一座小平台峙立在极陡的壑谷中，这就是棋盘台。
English: After climbing the east peak and falling down from the cliff in the south, there is a small platform standing in a very steep valley. This is the chessboard platform.

古文：既上，别道士，从旧径下，观白云峰，圣母殿在焉。
现代文：登上峰顶后，我便和道士告别，从原路下山，观览白云峰，圣母殿就建在那里。
English: After climbing to the peak, I said goodbye to the Taoist priest and went down the mountain on the original path to view Baiyun Peak, where the Notre Dame Cathedral was built.

古文：下到莎萝坪，暮色逼人，急出谷，黑行三里，宿十方庵。
现代文：再向下到莎萝坪，暮色逼人，于是急忙走出山谷，摸黑行了三里，在十方庵住宿。
English: Then we went down to Shalo Ping, and the twilight was overwhelming, so we hurried out of the valley, walked three miles in the dark, and stayed at Jifang'an.

古文：出青柯坪左上，有柸ē渡庵、毛女洞；出莎萝坪右上，有上方峰；皆华之支峰也。
现代文：出青柯坪往左上去，有枉渡庵、毛女洞；出莎萝坪往右上去，有上方峰；全是华山的支峰。
English: Going up from Qingke Ping to the left, there are Wudao Duan and Mao Mei Dong; going up from Sha Lo Ping to the right, there are Shangfang Peak; they are all offshoots of Huashan.

古文：路俱峭削，以日暮不及登。
现代文：路都很陡峻，因天黑来不及攀登。
English: The roads are very steep, and it's too late to climb because of the darkness.

古文：初三日行十五里，入岳庙。
现代文：初三日行十五里，到岳庙。
English: On the third day of the first lunar month, they traveled fifteen miles to Yue Temple.

古文：西五里，出华阴西门，从小径西南二十里、出泓峪，即华山之西第三峪也。
现代文：往西走五里，从华阴县城西门出去，顺小路往西南走二十里，进入乱峪，这是华山西边的第三座山谷。
English: Walk five miles to the west, go out of the West Gate of Huayin County, walk 20 miles to the southwest along the path, and enter the turbulent valley. This is the third valley on the west side of Mount Huashan.

古文：两崖参天而起，夹立甚隘，水奔流其间。
现代文：山谷两边的崖壁参天而起，夹谷而立，十分狭窄，溪水在谷中奔流。
English: The cliff walls on both sides of the valley rise up to the sky and stand between the valleys. They are very narrow, and the streams rush through the valley.

古文：循涧南行、倏而东折，倏而西转。
现代文：沿山涧往南行，一会转向东，一会转向西。
English: Head south along the ridge, turning east and then west.

古文：盖山壁片削，俱犬牙错入，行从牙罅中，宛转如江行调舱然。
现代文：因岩壁像石片，互相犬牙交错，道路在石片缝中穿行，转来转去，人如在弯曲的江上行船，要不断调整航向一样。
English: Because the rock wall is like a piece of stone, the canine teeth are interlaced with each other, and the road passes through the cracks of the stone piece and turns around and around. As if a person is sailing on a curved river, it is necessary to constantly adjust the course.

古文：二十里，宿于木柸。
现代文：走二十里，在木枉住宿。
English: Travel twenty miles and stay in Mewas.

古文：自岳庙来，四十五里矣。
现代文：从岳庙出来，已经走了四十五里。
English: I have walked forty-five miles since I left Yuemiao.

古文：初四日行十里，山峪既穷，遂上泓岭。
现代文：初四这天行十里，走完山谷后，就登乱岭。
English: On the fourth day of the first day of the year, I walked ten miles, and after walking through the valley, I climbed the turbulent ridge.

古文：十里，蹑其巅。
现代文：十里，上到乱岭顶。
English: Ten miles, up to the top of the ridge.

古文：北望太华，兀立天表。
现代文：往北望太华山，高高的耸入天际。
English: Looking north, Mount Taihua, soaring high into the sky.

古文：东瞻一峰，嵯峨特异，土人云赛华山。
现代文：往东看到一座山峰扩山势高峻得特别出众，当地人说是赛华山。
English: To the east, you can see a particularly high mountain peak, which the locals say is Mount Saihua.

古文：始悟西南三十里有少华，即此山矣。
现代文：我才醒悟到西南三十里有少华山，指的就是这座山了。
English: Only then did I wake up to the fact that there is a mountain called Mount Shaohua in the south-west, and it is this mountain that I am referring to.

古文：南下十里，有溪从东南注西北，是为华阳川。
现代文：往南下十里，有条溪水从东南向西北流淌，这是华阳川。
English: Ten miles to the south, there is a stream flowing from southeast to northwest, which is the Huayang River.

古文：溯川东行十里，南登秦岭，为华阴、洛南界。
现代文：溯川流往东走十里，往南攀登秦岭，进入华阴县、洛南县境。
English: Tracking the river flow eastward for ten miles, climbing Qinling to the south, entering Huayin County and Luonan County.

古文：上下共五里。
现代文：一上一下共五里。
English: A total of five miles up and down.

古文：又十里为黄螺铺。
现代文：又走十里到黄螺铺。
English: I walked another ten miles to the yellow snail shop.

古文：循溪东南下，三十里，抵杨氏城。
现代文：顺着溪水往东南下，走三十里，到达杨氏城。
English: Follow the stream to the southeast, walk 30 miles, and arrive at Yang's Town.

古文：初五日行二十里，出石门，山始开。
现代文：初五这天行二十里，出了石门，山才开阔。
English: On the day of the fifth day of the first lunar month, I walked 20 miles. I came out of the stone gate, and the mountain opened up.

古文：又七里，折而东南，入隔凡峪。
现代文：又走七里，转向东南，进入隔凡峪。
English: Walk another seven miles, turn to the southeast, and enter Sevanluo.

古文：西南二十里，即洛南县峪。
现代文：从此往西南二十里，就是洛南县城所在的山谷。
English: Twenty miles to the southwest from here is the valley where the county seat of Lonan is located.

古文：东南三里，越岭，行峪中。
现代文：往东南三里，越过山岭，在山谷中行走。
English: Three miles to the southeast, over the mountains, walking in the valley.

古文：十里、出山，则洛水自西而东，即河南所渡之上流也。
现代文：十里，出了山，而洛水从西向东流，就是在河南所渡河水的上游。
English: Ten li, out of the mountain, and Luoshui flows from west to east, which is in the upper reaches of the river in Henan.

古文：渡洛复上岭，曰田家原。
现代文：渡过洛水后又上岭，名田家原。
English: After crossing the Luoshui River, it goes up the ridge and ends at the famous Tianjiahara.

古文：五里，下峪中，有水自南来入洛。
现代文：走五里，下到山谷中，有水从南边流来注入洛水。
English: After walking five miles and descending into the valley, water flowed in from the south and filled Luo Shui.

古文：溯之入，十五里，为景村。
现代文：溯水流往里走，十五里，到景村。
English: Follow the water flow inward, fifteen miles, to Jingcun.

古文：山复开，始见稻畦。
现代文：山又开阔起来，开始看得见稻田。
English: The mountains opened up again and the rice paddies became visible.

古文：过此仍溯流入南峪，南行五里，至草树沟。
现代文：过景村后仍然溯流而行，进入南峪，往南行五里，到草树沟。
English: After passing through the scenic village, we still followed the stream, entered Nanluo, and traveled five miles south to Caoshu Ditch.

古文：山空日暮，借宿山家。
现代文：山上空荡荡的，太阳又落山了，在山里人家借宿。
English: The mountains are empty, the sun has set, and people are sleeping in the mountains.

古文：自岳庙至木柸，俱西南行，过华阳川则东南矣。
现代文：从岳庙到木枉，一直往西南走，过了华阳川则往东南走。
English: From Yuemiao to Mudu, go southwest all the way, and after Huayang River, go southeast.

古文：华阳而南，溪渐大，山渐开，然对面之峰峥峥高峻挺拔也。下秦岭，至杨氏城。
现代文：从华阳川往南，水渐渐大了，山渐渐开阔，然而对面的山峰则十分高峻。卞秦岭，到杨氏城。
English: From the Huayang River to the south, the water gradually increased, the mountains gradually widened, but the peaks on the opposite side were very high.

古文：两崖忽开忽合，一时互见，又不比木柸峪中，两崖壁立，有回曲无开合也。
现代文：两旁的山崖忽然分开，忽然又合拢，分合在短时间内交错出现，又和木枉的山谷不一样，那里两边的山崖壁立，有迂回曲折而没有分开合拢的景观。
English: The cliffs on both sides suddenly separated, suddenly closed again, and the splitting and closing appeared in a short time in a staggered manner. It is also different from the Muxai Valley, where the cliffs on both sides stand, and there are detours and twists without a separated and closed landscape.

古文：初六日越岭两重，凡二十五里，饭坞底岔。
现代文：初六这天翻越两重岭，一共走了二十五里，到坞底岔吃饭。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the year, I climbed over two mountains, walked a total of twenty-five miles, and went to the dock to eat.

古文：其西行道，即向洛南者。
现代文：坞底岔往西去的路，通向洛南县。
English: Dock at the bottom of the westbound road, leading to Lonan County.

古文：又东南十里，入商州界，去洛南七十余里矣。
现代文：我又往东南走十里，进入商州境，距离洛南县有七十多里。
English: I walked another ten miles to the southeast and entered the border of Shangzhou, more than seventy miles away from Lonan County.

古文：又二十五里，上仓龙岭。
现代文：又走二十五里，登上仓龙岭。
English: He walked another twenty-five miles and reached the top of Canglongling.

古文：蜿蜒行岭上，两溪屈曲夹之。
现代文：在曲折蜿蜒的岭上行走，两边是弯弯曲曲的溪流。
English: Walking on a winding ridge, with a meandering stream on either side.

古文：五里，下岭，两溪适合。
现代文：走五里，下岭，两条溪水恰巧汇合。
English: Go five miles, down the ridge, two streams coincidentally converge.

古文：随溪行老君峪中，十里，暮雨忽至，投宿于峪口。
现代文：跟着溪流在老君峪中行走，十里，夭已傍晚，雨忽然降落，在老君峪口投宿。
English: Following the stream, they walked for ten miles in Laojun Pass. It was late in the evening when the rain suddenly fell. They camped at Laojun Pass.

古文：初七日行五里，出峪。
现代文：初七这天行五里，走出山谷。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month, I walked five miles and walked out of the valley.

古文：大溪自西注于东，循之行十里，龙驹寨。
现代文：一条大溪从西向东流，沿溪走十里，到龙驹寨。
English: A large stream flows from west to east. Walk ten miles along the stream to Longyu Village.

古文：寨东去武关九十里，西向商州，即陕省间道偏僻之捷路，马骡商货，不让潼关道中意即不比潼关道中少。溪下板船，可胜五石舟。
现代文：寨东边距离武关九十里，西边通商州，是去陕西的小路，路上来往的骡马、商人、货物，不比潼关大路上的逊色。溪流中的板船，可以承受五石重量。
English: The east side of the village is ninety miles from Wuguan, and the west side is Tongshan County, which is a small road to Shaanxi. The horses, merchants, and goods on the road are not inferior to those on the Shuguang Road. The board boat in the stream can withstand five stone weight.

古文：水自商州西至此，经武关之南，历胡村。至小江口入汉者也。
现代文：溪水从商州西边流到这里，经过武关后往南流，过胡村，到小江口汇入汉水。
English: The stream water flows from the west side of Shangzhou to here, after passing Wuguan, it flows south, passes Hu village, and flows into the Han River at Xiaojiakou.

古文：遂趋觅舟。甫定，雨大注，终日不休，舟不行。
现代文：于是寻找船；刚刚定好船只，天下起大雨，一整天没停，船不能航行。
English: So they looked for a boat; they had just set up the boat, but it rained heavily all day long, and the boat couldn't sail.

古文：初八日舟子以贩盐故，久乃行，雨后，怒溪如奔马，两山夹之，曲折萦回，轰雷入地之险，与建溪无异。
现代文：初八这天船夫因为贩卖盐，很久后才启航。大雨之后，溪流水势盛大，如万马奔腾，夹在两边的山崖之中，曲折盘旋，响如雷鸣地流入险要地段，和建溪没有什么不同。
English: On the day of the eighth day of the first month, the boatman did not set sail until a long time later because of the sale of salt. After the heavy rain, the stream water was magnificent, like a galloping horse, sandwiched between the cliffs on both sides, twisted and circled, and thundered into the critical area, no different from Jianxi.

古文：已而雨复至。
现代文：不一会，天又下起了雨。
English: After a while, it started to rain again.

古文：午抵影石滩，雨大作，遂泊于小影石滩。
现代文：下午到达影石滩，雨大下起来，于是停泊在小影石滩。
English: In the afternoon, we arrived at Xiaoying Stone Beach. It was raining heavily, so we anchored at Xiaoying Stone Beach.

古文：初九日行四十里，过龙关。
现代文：初九这天航行四十里，经过龙关。
English: On the morning of the 9th day of the 9th month, we sailed for forty miles and passed through Longguan.

古文：五十里，北一溪来注，则武关之流也。
现代文：五十里，一条溪水从北边流入，是武关的河流。
English: Fifty li, a stream flowing in from the north, is the Wu Guan river.

古文：其地北去武关四十里，盖商州南境矣。
现代文：这里往北距离武关四十里，是商州南部边境。
English: Forty miles north of Wuguan, this is the southern border of Shangzhou.

古文：时浮云已尽，丽日乘空，山岚重叠竞秀。
现代文：此睦浮吞蒸尽，丽日当空，雾气笼罩的山峰层峦叠障，争相秀美。
English: The sun is shining, the sky is clear, and the mist-shrouded mountain peaks are stacked on top of each other, competing to be the most beautiful.

古文：怒流送舟，两岸浓桃艳李，泛光欲舞，出坐船头，不觉欲仙也。
现代文：奔腾的永流推动航船，两岸盛开的桃花、李花浓淡相间，沐浴在阳光中，像在翩翩起舞，走出船舱到船头坐下，不觉飘飘欲仙。
English: The ever-flowing river pushes the ship forward. The peach blossoms and plum blossoms bloom on both sides of the river, bathed in the sun, seem to dance, walk out of the cabin to the bow and sit down, unconsciously drifting away.

古文：又八十里，日才下午，榜人摇船的人以所带盐化迁柴竹，屡止不进。
现代文：又航行八十里，时间才到下午，摇船的人用所带的盐交换柴、竹，多次停船不行。
English: After sailing another eighty miles, it was not until the afternoon that the time was up. The shakers exchanged the salt they had brought with them for firewood and bamboo. It was not possible to stop the boat several times.

古文：夜宿于山涯之下。
现代文：当夜住宿在山下水边。
English: That night we stayed at the foot of the mountain by the water.

古文：初十日五十里，下莲滩。
现代文：初十这天航行五十里，到莲滩。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, I sailed fifty miles to Lotus Beach.

古文：大浪扑入舟中，倾囊倒箧，无不沾濡。
现代文：大浪打进船舱，口袋、箱柜倒斜，全都被水打湿了。
English: A large wave crashed into the cabin, and pockets and chests tipped over, all wet with water.

古文：二十里，过百姓滩，有峰突立溪右，崖为水所摧，岌岌欲堕。
现代文：航行二十里，过百姓滩，河右岸突立着山峰，峰崖被水流冲击，岌岌欲堕。
English: After sailing for twenty miles, we passed the People's Beach. On the right bank of the river, there was a prominent mountain peak. The peak and cliff were impacted by the current and precariously fell.

古文：出蜀西楼，山峡少开，已入南阳淅川境，为秦、豫界。
现代文：船出了蜀西楼，山谷稍稍开阔，不久便驶入南阳府的渐川县境，为陕西、河南两省的分界处。
English: The boat left Shu Xi Lou, the valley was slightly open, and soon it entered the territory of Yanchuan County in Nanyang Prefecture, which is the border between Shaanxi and Henan provinces.

古文：三十里，过胡村。
现代文：船行三十里，过胡村。
English: The boat traveled thirty miles and passed Hu village.

古文：四十里，抵石庙湾，登涯投店。
现代文：四十里，到达石庙湾，上岸找旅店投宿。
English: Forty miles, arrived at Stone Temple Bay, went ashore to find a hotel to stay.

古文：东南去均州，上太和，盖一百三十里云。
现代文：这里东南距离均州，上太和山，约一百三十里。
English: It is about one hundred and thirty miles southeast of Junzhou and Shangtaihe Mountain.

