古文：◎食货三
现代文：食货三
English: Groceries three

古文：○漕运仓库
现代文：漕运仓库
English: Rowing warehouse

古文：历代以来，漕粟所都，给官府廪食，各视道里远近以为准。
现代文：历代以来，漕粮聚集，供给官府麇食，各自根据道路远近作为标准。
English: Since time immemorial, grain has been gathered and supplied to the government, each according to the distance of the road as the standard.

古文：太祖都金陵，四方贡赋，由江以达京师，道近而易。
现代文：太祖建都金陵，四方贡献赋税，从长江抵达京城，道路近易于运送。
English: The great-grandfather built the capital Jinling, the four sides contributed taxes, from the Yangtze River to the capital, the road is close and easy to transport.

古文：自成祖迁燕，道里辽远，法凡三变。
现代文：自从成祖迁都于燕，道路遥远，制度一共改变三次。
English: Since Chengzu moved the capital to Yan, the road is far away, and the system has changed a total of three times.

古文：初支运，次兑运、支运相参，至支运悉变为长运而制定。
现代文：最初施行支运，后来施行兑运、支运互相参用，到最后支运全部变成长运丽制度被确定下来。
English: At first, the delivery system was implemented, later the delivery system and the delivery system were used interchangeably, and finally the delivery system was all changed into the Changyunli system.

古文：洪武元年北伐，命浙江、江西及苏州等九府，运粮三百万石於汴梁。
现代文：洪武元年，北伐，命令浙江、江西以及苏州等九府，运粮三百万石到汴梁。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, the Northern Expedition ordered nine prefectures, including Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Suzhou, to transport three million kilos of grain to Qilian.

古文：已而大将军徐达令忻、崞、代、坚、台五州运粮大同。
现代文：随后大将军徐达命令忻、崞、代、坚、台五州运粮至大同。
English: Subsequently, the general Xu Da ordered,, 代, 坚, and 臺五州 to transport grain to Datong.

古文：中书省符下山东行省，募水工发莱州洋海仓饷永平卫。
现代文：中书省公文下发山东行省，招募水工调发莱州洋海仓的粮食供应永平卫军饷。
English: In the official document of the People's Republic of China, the province of Shandong was sent to the east of the province to recruit water engineers to supply grain to the Yanghaicang of Laizhou.

古文：其后海运饷北平、辽东为定制。
现代文：此后海运供应北平、辽东军饷作为固定的制度。
English: Since then, the supply of military supplies to Beiping and Liaodong by sea has been a fixed system.

古文：其西北边则浚开封漕河饷陕西，自陕西转饷宁夏、河州。
现代文：西北边防则疏浚开封漕河供应陕西军饷，从陕西转运给宁夏、河州。
English: The Northwest Frontier Defense dredged the Kaifeng Caohe River to supply military supplies to Shaanxi, which were then transported from Shaanxi to Ningxia and Hezhou.

古文：其西南令川、贵纳米中盐，以省远运。
现代文：西南则命令川、贵纳米中盐，以省去长途运输。
English: In the south-west, the river is ordered, and the nano-sized salt is used to save long-distance transportation.

古文：於时各路皆就近输，得利便矣。
现代文：于是各路都就近输送，得到其便利。
English: As a result, all routes are transported nearby, which is convenient.

古文：永乐元年纳户部尚书郁新言，始用淮船受三百石以上者，道淮及沙河抵陈州颍岐口跌坡，别以巨舟入黄河抵八柳树，车运赴卫河输北平，与海运相参。
现代文：永乐元年，接受户部尚书郁新的建议，开始用承载二百石以上的淮船，途经淮及沙河抵达陈州颖岐口跌坡，另用巨船入黄河抵达八柳树，用车运往卫河输纳北平，与海运互相参用。
English: In the first year of Yongle, he accepted the new suggestion of Shang Shuxiu, head of the household department, and began to use the Huai ship, carrying more than 200 stone, to pass through the Huai River and the Sand River to reach the Chenzhou Yingqigou Slope. In addition, he used the giant ship to enter the Yellow River to reach the Bailiwick, and transported it by car to Weihe to Beiping, and used it in conjunction with maritime transport.

古文：时驾数临幸，百费仰给，不止饷边也。
现代文：当时皇帝多次临幸，各种费用供给，不只是供应边防军饷。
English: At that time, the emperor made many visits and provided all kinds of expenses, not just the supply of border troops.

古文：淮、海运道凡二，而临清仓储河南、山东粟，亦以输北平，合而计之为三运。
现代文：淮、海运输线共二条，而临清仓库存储河南、山东的粮食，也用以输送北平，合计共有三条线。
English: There are a total of two lines for Huai and Hai transportation, while the Linqing warehouse stores grain from Henan and Shandong, and is also used to transport it to Beiping. There are a total of three lines.

古文：惟海运用官军，其馀则皆民运云。
现代文：只有海运用官军，其余都是民运。
English: Only the official army used the sea, the rest were the people's movement.

古文：自浚会通河，帝命都督贾义、尚书宋礼以舟师运。
现代文：自从疏浚会通河，皇帝命令都督贾义、尚书宋礼用水军运送。
English: Since the dredging would open the river, the emperor ordered the governor Jia Yi and Shang Shu Song Li to be transported by the navy.

古文：礼以海船大者千石，工窳辄败，乃造浅船五百艘，运淮、扬、徐、兖粮百万，以当海运之数。
现代文：宋礼因海船大的可载千石，制造粗滥便壤，便制造浅船五百艘，运输淮、扬、徐、充粮食一百万石，以与海运之数相当。
English: Song Li, because large sea vessels can carry thousands of stones and produce coarse soil, made five hundred shallow vessels to transport one million stones of grain, which is equivalent to the number of shipments by sea.

古文：平江伯陈瑄继之，颇增至三千馀艘。
现代文：平江伯陈管继任，多增至三千多艘。
English: He was succeeded by Pingjiang Bo Chen Guan, and the number of ships increased to more than three thousand.

古文：时淮、徐、临清、德州各有仓。
现代文：当时淮、徐、临清、德州各有仓库。
English: At that time, Huai, Xu, Linqing and Dezhou all had warehouses.

古文：江西、湖广、浙江民运粮至淮安仓，分遣官军就近輓运。
现代文：江西、湖广、浙江人民运粮到淮安仓库，分别派官军在近处运送。
English: The people of Jiangxi, Huguang and Zhejiang transported grain to the Huai'an warehouse, and sent government troops to transport it in the vicinity.

古文：自淮至徐以浙、直军，自徐至德以京卫军，自德至通以山东、河南军。以次递运，岁凡四次，可三百万馀石，名曰支运。
现代文：从淮到徐用浙、直的军队，从徐到德用京卫军，从德到通用山东、河南的军队，依次递运，每年共四次，大约可运三百多万石，名叫支运。
English: From Huai to Xu, the army of Zhejiang and Zhengzhou, from Xu to Germany, the Beijing Guard Army, and from Germany to the army of Shandong and Henan, are successively transported, a total of four times a year, about more than three million stones can be transported, which is called the transport.

古文：支运之法，支者，不必出当年之民纳；纳者，不必供当年之军支。
现代文：支运的方法，支是不必出当年人民交纳的粮食；纳是不必供应当年军队的开支。
English: The method of supporting transportation is that the expenditure does not have to come from the grain paid by the people in that year; the payment does not have to supply the expenditure of the army in that year.

古文：通数年以为裒益，期不失常额而止。
现代文：总计数年以为增减，期约不失去经常的额数而止。
English: The total number of years is subject to increase or decrease without losing the regular amount.

古文：由是海陆二运皆罢，惟存遮洋船，每岁于河南、山东、小滩等水次，兑粮三十万石，十二输天津，十八由直沽入海输蓟州而已。
现代文：于是海、陆二条运输都罢除，只保存遮洋船，每年于河南、山东、小滩等水边，兑粮三十万石，十分之二输送天津，十分之八从直沽入海输送到蓟州而止。
English: As a result, transportation by both sea and land was abolished, and only ocean-going vessels were preserved. Every year, 300,000 koku of grain was delivered to waterfronts such as Henan, Shandong, and Xiaotan. Two-tenths of the grain was transported to Tianjin, and eight-tenths of the grain was transported from Zhoushan into the sea to Zhangzhou.

古文：不数年，官军多所调遣，遂复民运，道远数愆期。
现代文：没有几年，官军多所调遣，便又用民运，道路遥远多次超过期限。
English: In just a few years, the government army has been dispatched to many places, and then the people's movement has been used. The road is far away and the deadline has been exceeded many times.

古文：宣德四年，瑄及尚书黄福建议复支运法，乃令江西、湖广、浙江民运百五十万石於淮安仓，苏、松、宁、池、庐、安、广德民运粮二百七十四万石於徐州仓，应天、常、镇、淮、扬、凤、太、滁、和、徐民运粮二百二十万石於临清仓，令官军接运入京、通二仓。
现代文：宣德四年，陈管和尚书黄福建议恢复支运法，便命令汪西、湖广、浙江人民运粮一百五十万石到淮安粮仓，苏、松、宁、池、庐、安、广德人民运粮二百七十四万石到徐州粮仓，应天、常、镇、淮、扬、凤、太、滁、和、徐人民运粮二百二十万石到临清粮仓，命令官军接着运送入京、通二粮仓。
English: In the fourth year of Xuan De, Chen Guan and the monk Huang Fu suggested that the method of transporting grain should be restored, and ordered the people of Wangxi, Huguang, and Zhejiang to transport 1.5 million kilos of grain to Huai'an grain silo, the people of Su, Song, Ning, Chi, Shun, An, and Guangde to transport 2.74 million kilos of grain to Xuzhou grain silo, and the people of Yingtian, Chang, Zhen, Huai, Yang, Feng, Tai, Shun, and Xu to transport 2.2 million kilos of grain to Linqing grain silo, and ordered the government army to then transport it to Beijing

古文：民粮既就近入仓，力大减省，乃量地近远，粮多寡，抽民船十一或十三、五之一以给官军。
现代文：人民的粮食就近纳入官仓以后，人力大大减省，便测量地方远近，粮食的多少，抽调民船十分之一或十分之三、五分之一以供给官军。
English: After the grain of the people was brought into the government warehouse nearby, the manpower was greatly reduced, and the distance and the amount of grain were measured, and the people's ships were dispatched to supply the government army with one-tenth or three-fifths of one-tenth.

古文：惟山东、河南、北直隶则径赴京仓，不用支运。
现代文：只有山东、河南、北直隶便径直送往京仓，不用支运。
English: Only Shandong, Henan and North Zhili can be sent directly to Kyocang, without transportation.

古文：寻令南阳、怀庆、汝宁粮运临清仓，开封、彰德、卫辉粮运德州仓，其后山东、河南皆运德州仓。
现代文：不久命令南阳、怀庆、汝宁的粮食运往临清仓库，开封、彰德、卫辉的粮食运往德州仓库，此后山东、河南都运送德州仓库。
English: Soon, he ordered the grain from Nanyang, Huaiqing and Runing to be transported to the Linqing warehouse, the grain from Kaifeng, Changde and Weihui to be transported to the Dezhou warehouse, and then the grain from Shandong and Henan to be transported to the Dezhou warehouse.

古文：六年，瑄言： 江南民运粮诸仓，往返几一年，误农业。
现代文：六年，陈逭奏言： 江南人民运粮到各官仓，往返将近一年，耽误农业。
English: In the sixth year, Chen Zhe made a report: the people of Jiangnan transported grain to various government warehouses, and it took nearly a year to travel back and forth, delaying agriculture.

古文：令民运至淮安、瓜洲，兑与卫所。
现代文：命令人民运到淮安、瓜洲，兑给卫所。
English: The people were ordered to be transported to Huai'an and Guazhou and sent to the Health Bureau.

古文：官军运载至北，给与路费耗米，则军民两便。 
现代文：官军运载到北方，给予路费和消耗的粮食，则军队和人民两面都便利。 
English: If the official army is transported to the north and given travel expenses and grain consumption, it will be convenient for both the army and the people.

古文：是为兑运。
现代文：造就是兑运。
English: Making is receiving.

古文：命群臣会议。
现代文：命令群臣集体讨论。
English: The ministers were ordered to discuss the matter collectively.

古文：吏部蹇义等上官军兑运民粮加耗则例，以地远近为差。
现代文：吏部蹇义等上呈官军兑逗人民交纳的粮食补加损耗的条例，以地方远近作为差等。
English: The Ministry of Civil Affairs, the Ministry of Public Security, and so on submitted to the government and the army the regulations on the supplementation of grain losses and losses paid by the people, taking the local far and near as the difference.

古文：每石，湖广八斗，江西、浙江七斗，南直隶六斗，北直隶五斗。
现代文：每石粮，湖广八斗，江西、浙江七斗，南直隶六斗，北直隶五斗。
English: Per koku of grain, Huguang is eight do, Jiangxi and Zhejiang are seven do, South Zhizhi is six do, and North Zhizhi is five do.

古文：民有运至淮安兑与军运者，止加四斗，如有兑运不尽，仍令民自运赴诸仓，不愿兑者，亦听其自运。
现代文：人民有运送到淮安兑给军运的，最多加四斗，如果有兑运不完的，仍令人民自行运到各官仓，不愿意兑运的，也听凭其自己运送。
English: If there are people who have been transported to Huai'an to pay for the military transport, the maximum is four bucks. If there are people who have not finished paying, the people will still be transported to the official warehouses by themselves. If they do not want to pay, they will be transported by themselves.

古文：军既加耗，又给轻赍银为洪闸盘拨之费，且得附载他物，皆乐从事，而民亦多以远运为艰。於是兑运者多，而支运者少矣。
现代文：军队既加粮耗，又供给部分折收易于搬运的银两作为洪闸搬运费，而且能够附载别的货物，都乐于这样做，而人民也多因远途运输而感到艰难，于是兑运的多，而支运的少了。
English: The army not only increased grain consumption, but also supplied part of the easy-to-handle silver and silver as floodgate handling fees, and could carry other goods. They were all happy to do so, and the people also felt difficult because of long-distance transportation. As a result, there were more deliveries and fewer shipments.

古文：军与民兑米，往往恃强勒索。
现代文：军队与人民兑米，往往依恃力强进行勒索。
English: The army and the people against the U.S. often resort to strong-arm blackmail.

古文：帝知其弊，敕户部委正官监临，不许私兑。
现代文：皇帝知道其弊端，命令户部委派正官亲临监督，不允许私下兑粮。
English: The emperor was aware of its drawbacks, and ordered the Household Ministry to appoint an official to supervise the exchange in person, and not to allow the exchange of grain in private.

古文：已而颇减加耗米，远者不过六斗，近者至二斗五升。
现代文：后来多增加或减少耗米，路途远的不超过六斗，近的低到二斗五升。
English: Later, the consumption of rice was more or less increased, the far distance was not more than six buckets, and the near distance was as low as two buckets and five liters.

古文：以三分为率，二分与米，一分以他物准。
现代文：以三为标准，二分给米，一分以别的财物折合。
English: With three as the standard, two points are given to rice, and one point is equivalent to other property.

古文：正粮斛面锐，耗粮俱平概。
现代文：正粮量斛平面尖锐，耗粮都量斛齐平。
English: The grain quantity and grain consumption are at the same level.

古文：运粮四百万石，京仓贮十四，通仓贮十六。
现代文：运粮四百万石，京城仓库存贮十分之四，通州粮仓存贮十分之六。
English: Four million koku of grain was transported, four tenths of which was stored in the warehouse in Beijing, and six tenths in the warehouse in Tongzhou.

古文：临、徐、淮三仓各遣御史监收。
现代文：临、徐、淮三个粮仓各自派御史监收。
English: The three granaries of Lin, Xu and Huai each sent their own inspectors to supervise the collection.

古文：正统初，运粮之数四百五十万石，而兑运者二百八十万馀石，淮、徐、临、德四仓支运者十之三四耳。
现代文：正统初年，运粮的数目是四百五十万石，而兑运二百八十万余石，淮、徐、临、德四个粮仓支运占十分之二四而已。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the amount of grain transported was 4.5 million koku, while the delivery was more than 2.8 million koku. The four grain silos of Huai, Xu, Lin, and De only accounted for 24 out of ten.

古文：土木之变，复尽留山东、直隶军操备。
现代文：土木事变发生，又全部留下山东、直隶军队操练备边。
English: A civil engineering incident occurred, leaving the Shandong and Zhili armies to practice and prepare.

古文：苏、松诸府运粮仍属民。
现代文：苏、松等府运粮仍然交给人民。
English: The grain transported by Su, Song and other prefectures was still handed over to the people.

古文：景泰六年，瓦剌入贡，乃复军运。
现代文：景泰六年，瓦剌入朝进贡，纔恢复军队运粮。
English: In the sixth year of King Taejo's reign, Wafu paid tribute to the dynasty and resumed the transportation of grain for the army.

古文：天顺末，兑运法行久，仓入觊耗馀，入庾率兑斛面，且求多索，军困甚。
现代文：天顺末年，兑运法施行已久，管仓之人企图获取外加的弥补耗损，入仓庾时大都兑有额外的聚敛，并且要求多索取，军队十分困窘。
English: At the end of the Tianshun year, the delivery method had been implemented for a long time, and the people in the warehouse attempted to obtain additional compensation for wear and tear. When entering the warehouse, most of them had additional accumulation, and asked for more, and the army was very embarrassed.

古文：宪宗即位，漕运参将袁佑上言便宜。
现代文：宪宗即位，漕运参将袁佑上疏陈说便宜行事。
English: When Emperor Gensong ascended to the throne, Yuan You, a member of the rowing team, said to Shang Soo Chen that it would be better to act cheaply.

古文：帝曰： 律令明言，收粮令纳户平准，石加耗不过五升。
现代文：皇帝说： 法律条令明确说，收粮令交纳户平衡，每石加损耗不超过五升。
English: The emperor said: The law clearly states that the grain collection order shall be balanced by the payer, and the loss per stone shall not exceed five liters.

古文：今运军愿明加，则仓吏侵害过多可知。
现代文：现在运粮军队愿意明加耗粮，那么管仓官吏侵夺过多可以知道了。
English: Now that the grain transport army is willing to increase grain consumption, it is clear that the warehouse officials have taken too much.

古文：今后令军自概，每石加耗五升，毋溢，勒索者治罪。 
现代文：今后命令军队自己平衡，每石增加耗粮五升，不能再增加，勒索的治罪。 
English: In the future, the army will be ordered to balance itself, increase grain consumption by five liters per stone, and can no longer increase, and criminalize extortion.

古文：后从督仓中官言，加耗至八升。
现代文：后来听从监督官仓的宦官之言，增加耗粮到八升。
English: Later, he listened to the eunuch who supervised the official storehouse and increased the grain consumption to eight liters.

古文：久之，复溢收如故，屡禁不能止也。
现代文：后来，又增收如故，多次令禁却不能禁止。
English: Later, revenue continued to increase, and the ban was repeatedly imposed, but it could not be banned.

古文：初，运粮京师，未有定额。
现代文：当初，运粮到京城，没有固定额敷。
English: At first, there was no fixed quota for transporting grain to the capital.

古文：成化八年始定四百万石，自后以为常。
现代文：成化八年，开始固定为四百万石，从此之后以为常则。
English: It took eight years to complete and was initially fixed at four million stones, and has been the norm ever since.

古文：北粮七十五万五千六百石，南粮三百二十四万四千四百石，其内兑运者三百三十万石，由支运改兑者七十万石。
现代文：北方粮七十五万五千六百石，南方粮三百二十四万四千四百石，其内兑运的三百三十万石，由支运改兑运的七十万石。
English: The grain from the north was 755,600 koku, and the grain from the south was 3,244,400 koku, of which 3,300,000 koku was transported internally, and 700,000 koku was transported from the tributary.

古文：兑运之中，湖广、山东、河南折色十七万七千七百石。
现代文：兑运之中，湖广、山东、河南折色粮十七万七千七百石。
English: In the course of the delivery, 177,700 koku of rice from Hukang, Shandong, and Henan were delivered.

古文：通计兑运、改兑加以耗米入京、通两仓者，凡五百十八万九千七百石。
现代文：总计兑运、改兑加上耗米纳入京、通两仓的，一共五百一十八万九千七百石。
English: A total of 5,189,700 koku of rice was delivered, converted, and consumed in the two warehouses of Beijing and Tong.

古文：而南直隶正粮独百八十万，蓟州一府七十万，加耗在外。
现代文：而南直隶正粮独交一百八十万石，苏州一府交纳七十万石，加收的损耗粮在外。
English: However, Nan Zhi Li Zheng Grain alone brought in 1.8 million koku, and Suzhou I Prefecture brought in 700,000 koku, not including the additional grain lost and consumed.

古文：浙赋视苏减数万。
现代文：浙江的赋税比苏州减少数万石。
English: Zhejiang's tax burden is tens of thousands of koku less than that of Suzhou.

古文：江西、湖广又杀焉。
现代文：江西、湖广又在此基础上减少。
English: On this basis, Jiangxi Province and Hunan Province also saw a decrease.

古文：天津、苏州、密云、昌平，共给米六十四万馀石，悉支兑运米。
现代文：天津、蓟州、密云、旦壬，共供给米六十四万余石，全部支付兑运米。
English: Tianjin, Zhangzhou, Miyun, and Tanren supplied a total of more than 640,000 kilos of rice, all of which were paid for by rice transportation.

古文：而临、德二仓，贮预备米十九万馀石，取山东、河南改兑米充之。
现代文：而临、德二官仓，存贮预备米十九万余石，取山东、河南改兑米充此数。
English: In contrast, the two official warehouses in Jin and De stored and prepared more than 190,000 koku of rice, and Shandong and Henan were used to convert the rice into this number.

古文：遇灾伤，则拨二仓米以补运，务足四百万之额，不令缺也。
现代文：遇到灾害，便调拨二官仓的米以补运，务必充足四百万的额数，不让缺少。
English: In the event of a disaster, the rice in the two official warehouses will be allocated for replenishment, and the amount of four million must be sufficient to prevent shortages.

古文：至成化七年，乃有改兑之议。
现代文：到成化七年，纔有改兑的提议。
English: Seven years into the project, there have been no proposals for conversion.

古文：时应天巡抚滕昭令运军赴江南水次交兑，加耗外，复石增米一斗为渡江费。
现代文：当时应天巡抚滕昭命令运粮军到江南水边交兑，增加损耗米之外，又一石粮增加米一斗为渡江费。
English: At that time, in response to the order of Teng Zhao, the heavenly governor, the grain transport army was ordered to meet at the water's edge of the south of the Yangtze River, and in addition to increasing the loss of rice, another stone grain and one bucket of rice were added to the river crossing fee.

古文：后数年，帝乃命淮、徐、临、德四仓支运七十万石之米，悉改水次交兑。
现代文：以后数年，皇帝纔命令淮、徐、临、德四个官仓支运七十万石米，全部改为水边交兑。
English: In the next few years, Emperor Gao ordered the four official warehouses of Huai, Xu, Lin and De to transport 700,000 stone meters, and all of them were changed to waterside.

古文：由是悉变为改兑，而官军长运遂为定制。
现代文：从此全部变成改兑，而官军长途运粮便成为固定的制度。
English: Since then, all of them have been converted, and the long-distance transportation of grain by the government army has become a fixed system.

古文：然是时，司仓者多苛取，甚至有额外罚，运军展转称贷不支。
现代文：然而这时，管理官仓的人多苛刻敛取，甚至有额外的处罚，运粮军辗转称贷不支。
English: However, at this time, the people who managed the official warehouses were more harsh and exacting, and there were even additional penalties.

古文：弘治元年，都御史马文升疏论运军之苦，言： 各直省运船，皆工部给价，令有司监造。
现代文：弘治元年，都御史马文升上疏议论运粮军的苦楚，说： 各直省运粮船。都是工部给价，命令主管官吏监造。
English: In the first year of the Hongzhi era, the governor of the capital, Shima Wen, rose to discuss the hardships of the grain transport army, saying: The grain transport ships of each province are priced by the Ministry of Industry and ordered the officials in charge to supervise the construction.

古文：近者，漕运总兵以价不时给，请领价自造。
现代文：近来，漕逗总兵因价不能按时供给，请求领价自己造船。
English: Recently, because of the high price, the total number of soldiers could not be supplied on time, and they asked for the price to build their own ship.

古文：而部臣虑军士不加爱护，议令本部出料四分，军卫任三分，旧船抵三分。
现代文：而部臣顾虑军士不加爱护，商议命令本部提供造船料四分，军卫承担三分，旧船抵三分。
English: However, ministers and ministers were concerned that the sergeant would not be treated with care, so they discussed and ordered the headquarters to provide four points of shipbuilding fees, three points for the military guards, and three points for the old ship.

古文：军卫无从措办，皆军士卖资产、鬻男女以供之，以造船之苦也。
现代文：军卫无办法操办，都是军士卖掉资产，卖掉儿女来供给，这是造船的苦楚。
English: There is no way for the military to operate, and all the sergeants sell their assets and children to provide for themselves. This is the pain of shipbuilding.

古文：正军逃亡数多，而额数不减，俱以馀丁充之，一户有三、四人应役者。
现代文：正军户兵逃亡数量多，而额数不减，全部由军中编外之人充数，一卢有三、四人服役的。
English: A large number of regular soldiers have fled, but the number has not decreased, and all of them are filled by people who are not members of the military, with up to three or four people serving at a time.

古文：春兑秋归，艰辛万状。
现代文：春天兑粮秋天返归，艰难万分。
English: It is very difficult to return from spring to autumn.

古文：船至张家湾，又雇车盘拨，多称贷以济用，此往来之苦也。
现代文：船到张家湾，又雇用车辆搬运，多借贷以补足用度，这是往来的苦楚。
English: From the ship to Zhangjiagang, and hire vehicles to carry, and borrow more to make up for the cost, this is the pain of the traffic.

古文：其所称贷，运官因以侵渔，责偿倍息。而军士或自载土产以易薪米，又格於禁例，多被掠夺。
现代文：他们所借贷的债务，运粮官又趁机侵夺剥削，责令偿还加倍的利息，而军士有的自己带上土产来换取柴米，又受禁例的限制，多被掠夺。
English: The grain transport officers took advantage of the opportunity to seize and exploit the debt they had borrowed, ordering them to pay double the interest, while the soldiers, some of whom had brought their own produce in exchange for firewood, were subject to restrictions and were mostly plundered.

古文：今宜加造船费每艘银二十两，而禁约运官及有司科害搜检之弊，庶军困少苏。 
现代文：现在应该增加造船费每艘银二十两，而禁止运粮官和主管官吏科征焉害搜查翻检的弊端，希望军士的困苦稍微缓解。 
English: Now it is time to increase the shipbuilding fee to twenty-two silver coins per ship, and prohibit the grain transport officer and the responsible official from collecting and inspecting the drawbacks of re-inspection, and hope that the hardship of the sergeant will be alleviated slightly.

古文：诏从其议。
现代文：下诏听从他的提议。
English: After all, Emperor Taizong issued an edict approving this motion.

古文：五年，户部尚书叶淇言： 苏、松诸府，连岁荒歉，民买漕米，每石银二两。
现代文：五年，户部尚书叶淇说： 苏、松等府，连连灾荒，庄稼歉收，人民购买漕米，每石银二两。
English: In the fifth year, the head of the household department, Shang Shubei, said: Su, Song and other prefectures, continuous disasters, poor crops, people buy rice, two silver coins per stone.

古文：而北直隶、山东、河南岁供宣、大二边粮料，每石亦银一两。
现代文：而北直隶、山东、河南每年供应宣、大二边防的粮料，每石也值银一两。
English: However, North Zhili, Shandong, and Henan supply grain to the border defense of Xuan and Dalian every year, and each stone is worth one or two silver.

古文：去岁，苏州兑运已折五十万石，每石银一两。
现代文：去年，苏州兑运已折五十万石，每石银一两。
English: Last year, Suzhou Cash in Transit had a turnover of 500,000 koku, with one or two pieces of silver per koku.

古文：今请推行於诸府，而稍差其直。
现代文：现在请推行到各府，而其价值稍有差异。
English: Now please implement it to all prefectures, and its value will be slightly different.

古文：灾重者，石七钱，稍轻者，石仍一两。
现代文：灾重的，一石粮折七钱；灾稍轻的，一石粮仍折一两。
English: If the disaster is severe, one stone of grain is worth seven coins; if the disaster is slight, one stone of grain is still worth one or two coins.

古文：俱解部转发各边，抵北直隶三处岁供之数，而收三处本色以输京仓，则费省而事易集。 
现代文：都解运到户部再转发各地边防，抵北直隶三处每年供应的数额，而收三处本色赋税输送京城官仓，那么费用节省而事情容易成功。 
English: All of them are transported to the household department and then forwarded to the border guards around the country, arriving at the three annual supplies of the North Zhili, while the three real taxes are collected and transported to the official warehouse in Beijing, so the cost is saved and the matter is easy to succeed.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从其议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：自后岁灾，辄权宜折银，以水次仓支运之粮充其数，而折价以六七钱为率，无复至一两者。
现代文：此后遇到灾荒，便权且折银，用水边仓库支运的粮食填充其数，而折价以六七钱为标准，不再达到一两。
English: After that, when there was a natural disaster, the convenience and discount increased, and the grain transported by the waterside warehouse was used to fill the number, and the discount was based on six or seven yuan, and no longer reached one or two.

古文：先是，成化间行长运之法。
现代文：在此之前，成化年间实行长运的办法。
English: Prior to this, the method of long-distance transportation was implemented during the gestation period.

古文：江南州县运粮至南京，令官军就水次兑支，计省加耗输輓之费，得馀米十万石有奇，贮预备仓以资缓急之用。
现代文：江南州县运粮到南京，命令官军在水边兑支，总计省去增加损耗运送的费用，得到余米十万石有余，贮存在预备仓中以资助紧急时的用度。
English: Jiangnan County transported grain to Nanjing, and ordered the government army to make payment at the water's edge. In total, it saved the cost of increasing the loss of transportation, and obtained a surplus of 100,000 koku of rice, which was stored in a reserve warehouse to finance emergency use.

古文：至是，巡抚都御史以兑支有弊，请令如旧上仓而后放支。
现代文：到这时，巡抚都御史因兑支有弊病，请求命令如同旧时上入粮仓然后放支。
English: At this time, the governor of the capital, Mishi, who had a problem with cashing out, requested an order to go into the granary and then disburse the money as in the old days.

古文：户部言： 兑支法善，不可易。 
现代文：户部说： 兑支的办法好，不可改变。 
English: The head of the household said: The method of cashing is good and cannot be changed.

古文：诏从部议，以所馀就贮各卫仓，作正支销。
现代文：下诏依从户部的议论，把多余的粮食贮存到各地卫仓，作正支开销。
English: The following edict, in accordance with the discussion of the Household Department, stored the surplus grain in warehouses around the country and used it as the main expenditure.

古文：又从户部言，山东改兑粮九万石，仍听民自运临、德二仓，令官军支运。
现代文：又依从户部的建议，山东改兑粮九万石，仍然听凭人民自己运送到临、德二仓，命令官军支运。
English: Also, in accordance with the recommendation of the Household Department, Shandong converted grain to 90,000 koku, but still allowed the people themselves to transport it to Lin and De two warehouses, and ordered the government army to support the transportation.

古文：正德二年，漕运官请疏通水次仓储，言： 往时民运至淮、徐、临、德四仓，以待卫军支运，后改附近州县水次交兑。
现代文：正德二年，漕运官吏请求疏通水边的仓储，说： 过去人民运粮到淮、徐、临、德四座官仓，以等待卫军支运，后来改在附近州县水边交兑。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, the rowing transport officials requested to clear the storage at the water's edge, saying: In the past, the people transported grain to four government warehouses in Huai, Xu, Lin and De to wait for the escort of the Guards, and later changed to the water's edge in the nearby counties.

古文：已而并支运七十万石亦令改兑。
现代文：随后连同支运七十万石也命令改兑。
English: Subsequently, together with the 700,000-koku allowance, it was also ordered to be converted.

古文：但七十万石之外，犹有交兑不尽者，民仍运赴四仓，久无支销，以致陈腐。
现代文：但是七十万石以外，还有交兑不尽的，人民仍然运到四仓，很久不支销，以致于粮食陈腐。
English: However, in addition to the 700,000 koku, there is still an inexhaustible supply, and the people are still transported to Shikura, and they are not paid for a long time, so that the grain is stale.

古文：请将浙江、江西、湖广正兑粮米三十五万石，折银解京，而令三省卫军赴临、德等仓，支运如所折之数。
现代文：请求将浙江、江西、湖广正兑的粮米三十五万石，折合银两解送到京城，而命令三省卫军运粮到临、德等官仓，支运如同所折合的数额。
English: He requested that the 350,000 koku of grain and rice from Zhejiang, Jiangxi, and Hubei be sent to Beijing, and ordered the guards of the three provinces to transport the grain to the official warehouses in Lin, De and other provinces, and transport it as the equivalent amount.

古文：则诸仓米不腐，三省漕卒便於支运。
现代文：这样，各仓的米不腐烂，三省的漕卒也便于支运。
English: In this way, the rice in each silo does not rot, and the oarsmen in the three provinces are also easy to transport.

古文：岁漕额外，又得三十五万折银，一举而数善具矣。 
现代文：每年漕运额数之外，又得到三十五万折银，一举几样好处都具备了。 
English: In addition to the annual amount of transportation, they also get 350,000 silver coins, which has several benefits.

古文：帝命部臣议，如其请。
现代文：皇帝命令部臣商议，按其请求办理。
English: The emperor ordered his ministers to consult and act according to his request.

古文：六年，户部侍郎邵宝以漕运迟滞，请复支运法。
现代文：六年，户部侍郎邵寅因漕运滞留迟后，请求恢复支运法。
English: In the sixth year, Shao Yin, the steward of the household department, requested the restoration of the transportation method after the delay of the rowing transport.

古文：户部议，支运法废久，不可卒复，事遂寝。
现代文：户部讨论，支运法废除已久，不能突然又恢复，事情便终止了。
English: After discussion with the head office, it was decided that the branch transportation law had been abolished a long time ago and could not be suddenly reinstated, and the matter was terminated.

古文：临、德二仓之贮米也，凡十九万，计十年得百九十万。
现代文：临、德二官仓的贮藏之米，共十九万石，合计十年能贮藏一百九十万石。
English: The rice stored in the two official warehouses of Lin and De has a total of 190,000 koku, and a total of ten years can store 1.9 million koku.

古文：自世宗初，灾伤拨补日多，而山东、河南以岁歉，数请轻减，且二仓囤积多朽腐。
现代文：从世宗初年，因灾害调拨补充一天天多了，而山东、河南因粮食歉收，多次请求减轻赋税，并且二仓囤积的粮食多腐朽。
English: Since the first year of the reign of King Sejong, due to disasters, allocations and supplements have increased day by day, while Shandong and Henan have repeatedly requested tax reductions due to poor grain harvests, and the grain hoarded in the second warehouse is mostly rotten.

古文：於是改折之议屡兴，而仓储渐耗矣。
现代文：于是改收折色的提议多次兴起，而仓库存储渐渐损耗了。
English: As a result, there have been many proposals to change the collection and distribution system, and warehouse storage has gradually been depleted.

古文：嘉靖元年，漕运总兵杨宏，请以轻赍银听运官道支，为顾僦舟车之费，不必装鞘印封，计算羡馀，以苦漕卒。
现代文：嘉靖元年，漕运总兵杨宏，请求把折收的部分银两听凭运粮官在路上支出，作为雇工和租用船车的费用，不必装入饷鞘加印封愈，计算多余，以使漕运士卒受苦。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Yang Hong, the chief of the rowing transport soldiers, requested that part of the money collected be spent on the road by the grain transport officers as the cost of hiring workers and renting wagons. It was not necessary to load it into the sheath, seal it, and calculate the excess, so that the rowing transport officers would suffer.

古文：给事、御史交驳之。
现代文：给事、御史纷纷驳斥。
English: The report was refuted one after another by historians.

古文：户部言： 科道官之论，主于防奸，是也。
现代文：户部说： 科道官的议论，主要在于防奸，是对的。
English: The household department said: The discussion of the science and technology officer, mainly about preventing adultery, is correct.

古文：但轻赍本资转般费，今虑官军侵耗，尽取其赢馀以归太仓，则以脚价为正粮，非立法初意也。 
现代文：但是折收的银两本来是用以资助转运费用，现在顾虑官军侵占损耗，全部取其多余部分归于太仓，便把运费作为正粮，不是立法时的用意。 
English: However, the collected silver was originally used to finance transshipment costs, but now, because of the encroachment of losses by the government army, all the excess parts were taken to Taicang, and the freight was regarded as grain, which was not the intention at the time of legislation.

古文：乃议运船至通州，巡仓御史核验，酌量支用实数，著为定规。
现代文：便提议运粮船到通州，巡仓御史核实验收，酌量支用实际额数，定着成固定的规矩。
English: It was proposed that the grain ship should go to Tongzhou, the warehouse should be inspected, the nuclear test should be collected, and the discretionary expenditure should be the actual amount, which was fixed as a fixed rule.

古文：有羡馀，不输太仓，即用以修船，官旗渔蠹者重罪。
现代文：有多余的，不输送入太仓，而就用来修船，官吏侵吞的处以重罪。
English: If there is any surplus, it will not be sent to Taicang, but will be used to repair the ship, and officials who embezzle it will be punished with a felony.

古文：轻赍银者，宪宗以诸仓改兑，给路费，始各有耗米；兑运米，俱一平一锐，故有锐米；自随船给运四斗外，馀折银，谓之轻赍。
现代文：折收的轻赍银，是宪宗因各官仓改兑，供给路费，纔各有损耗之粮；兑运米，都是一平衡一冒尖，所以有锐米；除了随船给运四斗之外，其余的折合银两，叫做轻赍。
English: The light-weighted silver collected by Genso is the grain that Genso has to pay for transportation costs due to the conversion of government warehouses, and each grain has losses; the rice that is transported is balanced and sharp, so there is sharp rice; in addition to the four buckets that are transported by ship, the remaining two pieces of silver are called light-weighted.

古文：凡四十四万五千馀两。
现代文：共四十四万五千多两。
English: A total of four hundred and forty-five thousand and two.

古文：后颇入太仓矣。
现代文：后来多输入了，太仓。
English: Later, more input, too much storage.

古文：隆庆中，运道艰阻，议者欲开胶莱河，复海运。
现代文：隆庆年间，运粮通道艰难险阻，议论的人想开通胶莱河，恢复海运。
English: During the Longqing period, the grain transportation channel was difficult and dangerous, and people wanted to open the Jiaolai River and resume shipping.

古文：由淮安清江浦口，历新坝、马家壕至海仓口，径抵直沽，止循海套，不泛大洋。
现代文：从淮安清江浦口，经过新坝、马家壕到海仓口，直接抵达直沽，只沿着海套行船不航行于大洋上。
English: From Huai'an to Qingjiang Pukou, through Xinba and Majiaokou to Haicangkou, directly to Danzhong, only sailing along the strait and not sailing on the ocean.

古文：疏上，遣官勘报，以水多沙碛而止。
现代文：奏疏上呈，派官员勘察回报，因海套水上多沙碛不便行船而停止。
English: The report was submitted, officials were sent to investigate and report back, and the operation was stopped due to the inconvenience of sailing in the sand on the sea.

古文：神宗时，漕运总督舒应龙言： 国家两都并建，淮、徐、临、德，实南北咽喉。
现代文：神宗时期，漕运总督釭尘龙说： 国家两个京都一并建立，淮、徐、临、德，实为南北咽喉。
English: During the period of the Shinshu sect, the governor of Cao Yun, Zou Danlong, said: The two Kyotos of the country were built together, Huai, Xu, Lin and De, which is actually the throat of the north and the south.

古文：自兑运久行，临、德尚有岁积，而淮、徐二仓无粒米。
现代文：自从兑运长久施行，临、德还有每年积聚之粮，而淮、徐二官仓已没有粒米。
English: Since the delivery has been implemented for a long time, Lin and De still have grain accumulated every year, while Huai and Xu two official warehouses have no grain rice.

古文：请自今山东、河南全熟时，尽徵本色上仓。
现代文：请求从今以后山东、河南庄稼成熟时，全部征收本色税粮上交官仓。
English: It is requested that from now on, when the crops in Shandong and Henan are mature, all genuine tax grain will be collected and submitted to the official warehouse.

古文：计临、德已足五十馀万，则令纳於二仓，亦积五十万石而止。 
现代文：总计临、德已满五十余万，便命令交纳到二仓，也积聚五十万石而止。 
English: When the total amount of taxes and duties had reached more than half a million, he ordered the tax to be paid into two warehouses, and also stopped accumulating half a million koku.

古文：从之。
现代文：朝廷听从其请。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：当是时，折银渐多。
现代文：这个时候，折色银渐渐增多。
English: At this time, the amount of broken silver gradually increased.

古文：万历三十年，漕运抵京，仅百三十八万馀石。
现代文：万历三十年，漕运抵达京城，只有一百三十八万石。
English: After thirty years, the rowing transport arrived in the capital, with only 1.38 million koku.

古文：而抚臣议载留漕米以济河工，仓场侍郎赵世卿争之，言： 太仓入不当出，计二年后，六军万姓将待新漕举炊，倘输纳愆期，不复有京师矣。 
现代文：而抚臣提议截留漕米以胭济河工，仓场侍郎趟世卿争辩说： 太仓之粮纳入不能与调出相当，计划二年之后，六军万姓将等待新的漕粮做饭，倘若交纳过期，不再有京城了。 
English: However, Fushin proposed to retain the rice paddies to support the river workers, and Watanabe argued that: the inclusion of grain from Taicang cannot be equivalent to the transfer. After two years of the plan, the six armies and all families will wait for new rice paddies to cook. If the payment is overdue, there will no longer be a capital city.

古文：盖灾伤折银，本折漕粮以抵京军月俸。
现代文：原来灾害折银，本折漕粮以抵京城卫军的月俸。
English: Originally, disaster relief money, this relief money is the monthly salary of the guards arriving in the capital.

古文：其时混支以给边饷，遂致银米两空，故世卿争之。
现代文：当时混支以供给边防军饷，于是使得银米两样都空虚，所以趟世卿争辩。
English: At that time, it was mixed to supply the border troops with money, thus making both silver and rice empty, so the nobles argued.

古文：自后仓储渐匮，漕政亦益驰。
现代文：此后官仓储备渐渐匮乏，漕政也更加松弛。
English: Since then, the reserves of government warehouses have been gradually depleted, and coordination has become more lax.

古文：迨於启、祯，天下萧然烦费，岁供愈不足支矣。
现代文：到了天启、崇祯时期，天下扰乱骚动，费用繁多，每年的供给越来越不足开支了。
English: By the time of the Apocalypse and the Age of Reverence, the world was in turmoil, expenses were numerous, and the annual supply was becoming more and more insufficient.

古文：运船之数，永乐至景泰，大小无定，为数至多。
现代文：运粮船的数目，永乐至景泰，大小没有定则，数量很多。
English: The number of grain ships, from Yongle to Jingtai, has no fixed size, and there are many of them.

古文：天顺以后，定船万一千七百七十，官军十二万人。
现代文：天顺以后，定船一万一千七百七十条，官军十二万人。
English: After Tianshun, the number of ships was 11,770 and the number of troops was 120,000.

古文：许令附载土宜，免徵税钞。
现代文：允许附载各地土产，免征税钞。
English: It is allowed to attach local products from all over the country, tax-free banknotes.

古文：孝宗时限十石，神宗时至六十石。
现代文：孝宗时限制十石，神宗时增至六十石。
English: At the time of the filial piety, the limit was ten koku, and at the time of the divine piety, it was increased to sixty koku.

古文：宪宗立运船至京期限，北直隶、河南、山东五月初一日，南直隶七月初一日，其过江支兑者，展一月，浙江、江西、湖广九月初一日。
现代文：宪宗定立运船到京城的期限，北童丰、河南、山东五月初一日，南直隶七月初一日，遇江支兑的，延期一月，浙江、江西、湖广九月初一日。
English: The time limit for transporting ships to Beijing will be the first day of May for Beidongfeng, Henan and Shandong, the first day of July for Nanzhili, the first day of September for Zhejiang, Jiangxi and Hubei, and the first day of January for Jiangsu.

古文：通计三年考成，违限者，运官降罚。
现代文：总计三年考核，违背期限的，运粮官降级处罚。
English: A total of three years of assessment, if the deadline is violated, the grain transport officer will be downgraded.

古文：武宗列水程图格，按日次填行止站地，违限之米，顿德州诸仓，曰寄囤。
现代文：武宗列出水路图表，按日期依次填写行止的地方，违犯期限的粮食，留在德州各官仓，叫做寄囤。
English: Wu Zong listed the waterway chart, filled in the place of action according to the date in order, and the grain that violated the deadline was left in the official warehouses in Texas, which is called the host.

古文：世宗定过淮程限，江北十二月者，江南正月，湖广、浙江、江西三月，神宗时改为二月。
现代文：世宗制定经过淮的日程期限，江北在十二月，江南在正月，湖广、浙江、江西在三月，神宗时改在二月。
English: Shizong set the schedule period after Huai, the north of the river in December, the south of the river in the first month, Huguang, Zhejiang and Jiangxi in March, and Shensong in February.

古文：又改至京限五月者，缩一月，七八九月者，递缩两月。
现代文：又改动到京城限期五月的，缩短一月，七八九月的，依次缩短两月。
English: It was also changed to the Beijing deadline of May, shortened by one month, July and September, shortened by two months in turn.

古文：后又通缩一月。
现代文：后来又通通缩短一月。
English: It was later shortened to January.

古文：神宗初，定十月开仓，十一月兑竣，大县限船到十日，小县五日。
现代文：神宗初年，规定十月开仓，十一月兑付完，大县限定船到十天，小县五天。
English: In the first year of Shenzong, it was stipulated that the warehouse would be opened in October, and the payment would be completed in November. Large counties were limited to ten days, and small counties to five days.

古文：十二月开帮，二月过淮，三月过洪入闸。
现代文：十二月开帮启运，二月遇淮，三月过河流分道口进入水闸门。
English: It was launched in December, encountered the Huai River in February, and entered the sluice gate through the river fork in March.

古文：皆先期以样米呈户部，运粮到日，比验相同乃收。
现代文：都事先把作样品的米呈送户部，运粮到达之日，比合验证相同纔收粮。
English: In advance, all rice samples were sent to the household department, and on the day of arrival of the grain shipment, the comparison verification was the same as the grain collection.

古文：凡灾伤奏请改折者，毋过七月。
现代文：凡是灾害奏请改折的，不超过七月。
English: In the event of a disaster, the deadline will be extended to no later than July.

古文：题议后期及临时改题者，立案免覆。
现代文：题议超过日期和临时改题的，立案免于复核。
English: If the topic exceeds the date and the topic is changed temporarily, the filing of the case is exempt from review.

古文：漂流者，抵换食米。
现代文：漂流出。抵换食米。
English: Drifting out and flowing in. Refusing to exchange rice.

古文：大江漂流为大患，河道为小患；二百石外为大患，二百石内为小患。
现代文：长江漂流便是大患，河道漂流是小患；二百石以外是大患，二百石以内是小患。
English: Drifting in the Yangtze River is a major disease, while river drifting is a minor disease. Beyond 200 kilos, it is a major disease, and within 200 kilos, it is a minor disease.

古文：小患把总勘报，大患具奏，其后不计多寡，概行奏勘矣。
现代文：小患由把总勘验上报，大患详捆奏报，以后不论多少，一概上奏勘验。
English: Minor patients should submit a general survey report, major patients should submit a detailed report, and in the future, no matter how many, all will submit a survey report.

古文：初，船用楠杉，下者乃用松。
现代文：开初，造船用楠木杉木，下等的就用松木。
English: At the beginning of the construction, the ships were made of camphor cedar wood, while the lower-class ships were made of pine wood.

古文：三年小修，六年大修，十年更造。
现代文：三年进行小修，六年大修，十年重新建造。
English: Three years of minor repairs, six years of major repairs, and ten years of new construction.

古文：每船受正耗米四百七十二石。
现代文：每艘船得到正耗米四百七十二石。
English: Each ship received positive consumption of four hundred and seventy-two stone.

古文：其后船数缺少，一船受米七八百石。
现代文：此后船的数量缺少，一艘船得到耗米七八百石。
English: After that, the number of ships was insufficient, and one ship consumed seven or eight hundred koku of rice.

古文：附载夹带日多，所在稽留违限。
现代文：附载夹带一天天增多，处处停留超过规定期限。
English: The number of attached loads is increasing day by day, and they always stay longer than the prescribed time limit.

古文：一遇河决，即有漂流，官军因之为奸。
现代文：一旦遇到黄河决堤，便有漂流发生，官军因此而作奸诈之事。
English: Once the Yellow River breaks through the dike, there will be drifting, and the government army will therefore commit treachery.

古文：水次折乾，沿途侵盗，妄称水火，至有凿船自沉者。
现代文：水边折合干粮，沿途侵吞盗用，虚报遇到水灾、火灾，以至有凿穿船底自沉的。
English: They scavenged dry grain from the water's edge, misappropriated it along the way, falsely reported that they had encountered floods and fires, and even scuttled themselves by drilling through the bottom of the ship.

古文：明初，命武臣督海运，尝建漕运使，寻罢。
现代文：明代初年，命令武官监督海上运输，曾经设立漕运使，不久罢除。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, the military attaché was ordered to supervise maritime transport. A ro-shipping envoy was set up, but was soon dismissed.

古文：成祖以后用御史，又用侍郎、都御史催督，郎中、员外分理，主事督兑，其制不一。
现代文：成祖以后使用御史，又用侍郎、都御史催促督运，郎中、员外分别管理，主事监督兑现，其制度并不统一。
English: After becoming a patriarch, the system was not uniform, with the imperial historian being used, the attendant and the imperial historian being used to urge and supervise the transportation, the attendant and the non-attendant being separately managed, and the supervisor supervising and cashing.

古文：景泰二年始设漕运总督于淮安，与总兵、参将同理漕事。
现代文：景泰二年，开始在淮安设立漕运总督，与总兵、参将共同管理漕运事务。
English: In the second year of King Tae's reign, he began to set up the governor of rowing transport in Huai'an, and jointly managed the rowing transport affairs with the general and general staff.

古文：漕司领十二总，十二万军，与京操十二营军相准。
现代文：漕司管辖十二总，十二万军队，与京城操练十二营军队相当。
English: The 12th General Headquarters, with 120,000 troops, is under the jurisdiction of the General Quarters, which is equivalent to the 12 battalions of troops in Beijing.

古文：初，宣宗令运粮总兵官、巡抚、侍郎岁八月赴京，会议明年漕运事宜，及设漕运总督，则并令总督赴京。
现代文：当初，宣宗命令运粮总兵官、巡抚、侍郎每年八月到京城，集中讨论第二年漕运的事务，到设立了漕运总督，便一并命令总督到京城。
English: At first, Emperor Xuanzong ordered the commander-in-chief of grain transportation, the governor and the attendants to go to Beijing every August to discuss the affairs of the next year's transportation. When the governor of transportation was established, he also ordered the governor to go to Beijing.

古文：至万历十八年后始免。
现代文：到万历十八年，以后纔免去。
English: To the 18th year of the Wanli era, after which it will be exempted.

古文：凡岁正月，总漕巡扬州，经理瓜、淮过闸。
现代文：每一年的正月，漕运总督巡视扬州，管理瓜、淮的遇闸。
English: Every year in the first month of the year, the governor of rowing patrols Yangzhou to manage the meeting of Gua and Huai.

古文：总兵驻徐、邳，督过洪入闸，同理漕参政管押赴京。
现代文：总兵驻扎徐、邳，监督经过分水口进入水闸门，同理漕参政一起管理押送到京城。
English: The general stationed in Xu and Handan, supervised the entrance to the sluice gate through the water outlet, and managed and escorted to the capital together with Li Ruo and Sheng Zheng.

古文：攒运则有御史、郎中，押运则有参政，监兑、理刑、管洪、管厂、管闸、管泉、监仓则有主事，清江、卫河有提举。
现代文：掼运有御史、郎中负责，押运有参政负责，监兑、理刑、管洪、管厂、管闸、管泉、监仓有主事负责，清江、卫河有提举负责。
English: He was responsible for the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation, the supervision of transportation.

古文：兑毕过淮过洪，巡抚、漕司、河道各以职掌奏报。
现代文：兑粮完毕经过淮经过河道分水口，巡抚、漕司、河道各自以其职掌上报。
English: After the grain exchange is completed, it passes through the water outlet of the river, and the governor, the rower, and the river each report it according to their duties.

古文：有司米不备，军卫船不备，过淮误期者，责在巡抚。
现代文：主管部门米没有具备，军卫的运粮船不具备，过淮误期的，责任在巡抚。
English: The competent department does not have rice, the grain transport ship of the military guard does not have, and the responsibility lies with the inspector.

古文：米具船备，不即验放，非河梗而压帮停泊，过洪误期因而漂冻者，责在漕司。
现代文：米和船都具备了，不及时验收放运，不是河道阻塞而压下开帮停泊不发，过分水口误期园而漂流冻结的，责任在漕司。
English: If the rice and the boat are ready, but the acceptance and shipping are not done in time, if the river is not blocked and the boat is not pushed down and the boat is not anchored, if the water outlet is too late and the drift is frozen, the responsibility lies with the boatman.

古文：船粮依限，河渠淤浅，疏浚无法，闸坐启闭失时，不得过洪抵湾者，责在河道。
现代文：船粮依限期启运，而河渠淤塞水浅，疏浚无法，闸坐开启关闭失时，不能过洪抵达水湾的，责任在河道。
English: If the grain is shipped in accordance with the deadline, but the canal is blocked and shallow, dredging is impossible, and the sluice is not opened and closed, and it is not possible to cross the flood and reach the bay, the responsibility lies with the river.

古文：明初，於漕政每加优恤，仁、宣禁役漕舟，宥迟运者。
现代文：明代初年，对漕政常常加以优待照顾，仁、宣禁止役使漕船，宽宥迟运的人。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, preferential treatment and care were often given to rowers, benevolence and proclamation forbade rowers to use rowing boats, and forgave those who were late.

古文：英宗时始扣口粮均摊，而运军不守法度为民害。
现代文：英宗时期开始扣押口粮均摊，而运粮军不遵守法度成为人民的祸害。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yingzong, the withholding of rations began to be evenly distributed, and the grain transport army's failure to comply with the law became a scourge to the people.

古文：自后漕政日驰，军以耗米易私物，道售稽程。
现代文：此后漕政一天天松弛，军队用耗米交换私物，道路上出售稽留程限。
English: Since then, the government has relaxed day by day, the army has exchanged personal belongings with rice, and the limit for selling rice on the road has been raised.

古文：比至，反买仓米补纳，多不足数。
现代文：等到抵达，反而买粮仓之米补交，多不够数目。
English: When they arrived, they bought rice from the granary to make up for the shortfall.

古文：而粮长率搀沙水於米中，河南、山东尤甚，往往蒸湿浥烂不可食。
现代文：而粮长大都在米中搀和沙或水，河南、山东尤其严重，往往粮食潮湿蒸发霉烂不能食用。
English: However, the grain is always mixed with sand or water in the rice. Henan and Shandong are particularly serious, and the grain is often wet, evaporated and moldy and cannot be eaten.

古文：权要贷运军银以罔取利，至请拨关税给船料以取偿。
现代文：权贵显要贷运军银以牟取厚利，以至请求调拨关税供给船料来获取补偿。
English: The rich and powerful apparently wanted to borrow money to transport the troops in order to make huge profits, and even requested the allocation of tariffs to provide shipping costs to obtain compensation.

古文：漕运把总率由贿得。
现代文：漕运把总之职大都由于贿赂获得。
English: Most of the positions at the head of the rowing team were obtained through bribery.

古文：仓场额外科取，岁至十四万。
现代文：仓场额敷之外征收，每年达到十四万。
English: levied in addition to the warehouse allowance, up to 140,000 yen per year.

古文：世宗初政，诸弊多厘革，然漂流、违限二弊，日以滋甚。
现代文：世宗初期行政，诸多弊端多被革除，然而漂流、违限二弊端，一天天滋长得很严重。
English: In the early years of the Sejong administration, many of the drawbacks were eliminated, but the two drawbacks of drifting and violation of restrictions have grown very serious day by day.

古文：中叶以后，益不可究诘矣。
现代文：中期以后，更加不可追问了。
English: After the mid-term, it is even more impossible to ask questions.

古文：漕粮之外，苏、松、常、嘉、湖五府，输运内府白熟粳糯米十七万四十馀石，内折色八千馀石，各府部糙粳米四万四千馀石，内折色八千八百馀石，令民运。谓之白粮船。
现代文：漕粮之外，苏、松、常、嘉、湖五府，运送内府白熟粳糯米十七万零四十多石，内折色八千多石，各府部糙粳米四万四千多石，内折色八千八百多石，命令人民运送，叫做白粮船。
English: In addition to rowing grain, the five prefectures of Su, Song, Chang, Jiayu and Hubei have ordered the people to transport more than 170,040 kilos of white-ripened glutinous rice and more than 8,000 kilos of brown glutinous rice, and ordered the people to transport more than 44,000 kilos of brown glutinous rice and more than 8,800 kilos of brown glutinous rice. It is called the white grain ship.

古文：自长运法行，粮皆军运，而白粮民运如故。
现代文：自从长运法施行，粮食都是军队运输，而白粮由人民运送如故。
English: Since the implementation of the Long Transport Law, grain has been transported by the army, while white grain has been transported by the people.

古文：穆宗时，陆树德言： 军运以充军储，民运以充官禄。
现代文：穆宗时期，陆树德说： 军队运输以充军队储粮，人民运输以充官员俸禄。
English: At the time of Mu Zong, Lu Shude said: The transportation of the army is to fill the grain reserves of the army, and the transportation of the people is to fill the salary of the officials.

古文：人知军运之苦，不知民运尤苦也。
现代文：人们知道军队运粮之苦，不知人民运粮尤其艰苦。
English: People know the hardships of transporting grain for the army, but they don't know that transporting grain for the people is especially difficult.

古文：船户之求索，运军之欺陵，洪闸之守候，入京入仓，厥弊百出。
现代文：船户求索，运军欺压，洪闸守候，入京入仓，其弊端百出。
English: The ship owners are looking for a solution, the transport troops are being bullied, the gates are being guarded, and the ships are being stored in Beijing, all of which have their drawbacks.

古文：嘉靖初，民运尚有保全之家，十年后无不破矣。
现代文：嘉靖初年，人民运粮还有能够保全的家庭，十年之后没有不破家的。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the people transported grain and still had families that could be preserved. Ten years later, there were no families that could not be destroyed.

古文：以白粮令军带运甚便。 
现代文：把白粮命令军队带运很便利。 
English: It is very convenient to order the army to transport white grain.

古文：疏入，下部议。
现代文：奏疏呈入，下发卢部讨论。
English: The report was submitted, and it was discussed at the lower level.

古文：不从。
现代文：不依从。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：凡诸仓应输者有定数，其或改拨他镇者，水次应兑漕粮，即令坐派镇军领兑者给价，州县官督车户运至远仓，或给军价就令关支者，通谓之挖运。
现代文：凡是各官仓应该输入的有一定的数额，其中有的改换调拨别镇的，水边应兑的漕粮，即令摊派镇军领兑者供给款项，州县官监督车户运送到远地官仓，或者供给军队价款就令领取的，通通叫做客运。
English: If there is a certain amount that should be imported into the official warehouses, some of which should be transferred to other towns, and the grain that should be paid at the water's edge should be paid, that is, the town's army receivers should be ordered to supply the money, the state and county officials should supervise the car owners to transport to the distant official warehouses, or the army should be ordered to pay the price, all of which are called passenger transportation.

古文：九边之地，输粮大率以车，宣德时，饷开平亦然，而兰、甘、松潘，往往使民背负。
现代文：九边地区，运输粮食大多用车，宣德时期，供给开平军饷也是用车，而兰、甘、松潘，往往使人民背运。
English: In the Kubei region, most of the grain was transported by car. During the Xuande period, the supply of Kaiping military supplies was also by car, while Lan, Gan and Songpan often made the people unlucky.

古文：永乐中，又尝令广东海运二十万石给交址云。
现代文：永乐年间，又曾命令广东海运二十万石供给交阢。
English: During the Yongle era, he also ordered Guangdong Shipping Company to supply 200,000 koku of coho.

古文：明初，京卫有军储仓。
现代文：明代初年，京卫有军队储仓。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, there was a military warehouse in Beijing.

古文：洪武三年增置至二十所，且建临濠、临清二仓以供转运。
现代文：洪武三年，增添设置到二十所，并且建立临濠、临清二粮仓以供转运。
English: In the third year of Hongwu, the number of grain silos was increased to 20, and two grain silos were built in Linyi and Linqing for transshipment.

古文：各行省有仓，官吏俸取给焉。
现代文：各行省有粮仓，官吏的薪俸取以供给。
English: Each line of the province has a granary, and the salaries of officials are taken to supply it.

古文：边境有仓，收屯田所入以给军。
现代文：边境有粮仓，收纳屯田所交粗食以供给军队。
English: There are grain silos on the border, which receive the coarse food brought in from the war-torn areas to supply the army.

古文：州县则设预备仓，东南西北四所，以振凶荒。
现代文：州县便设立预备仓，东南西北四所，以赈济灾荒。
English: Preliminary warehouses were set up in prefectures and counties, including four in the southeast and northwest, to help with the disaster.

古文：自钞法行，颇有省革。
现代文：自从钞法施行，多有减省革除。
English: Since the implementation of the Banknote Law, there have been many reductions and eliminations.

古文：二十四年储粮十六万石於临清，以给训练骑兵。
现代文：二十四年，在临清储备粮食十六万石，以供给训练骑兵。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, 160,000 koku of grain was stored in Linqing to supply the training of cavalry.

古文：二十八年置皇城四门仓，储粮给守御军。
现代文：二十八年，设置皇城四门仓库，储备粮食供给守御的军队。
English: In the 28th year, a four-gate warehouse was set up in the imperial city to store grain and supply it to the defending army.

古文：增京师诸卫仓凡四十一。
现代文：增设京城诸卫仓库共四十一座。
English: A total of forty-one warehouses were added to the warehouses in the capital city of Zhuwei.

古文：又设北平、密云诸县仓，储粮以资北征。
现代文：又设置北平、密云诸县仓库，储备粮食以供应北征。
English: They also set up warehouses in Beiping and Miyun counties to store grain to supply the Northern Expedition.

古文：永乐中，置天津及通州左卫仓，且设北京三十七卫仓。
现代文：永乐年间，设置天津和通州左卫仓库，并且设置北京三十七卫仓库。
English: During the Yongle era, Tianjin and Tongzhou Zuowei warehouses were set up, and Beijing 37 Wei warehouse was set up.

古文：益令天下府县多设仓储，预备仓之在四乡者移置城内。
现代文：更命令天下府县多设置仓储，在四乡的预备仓移置于城内。
English: He also ordered that more warehouses should be set up in all prefectures and counties, and the reserve warehouses in Shixiang should be moved to the city.

古文：迨会通河成，始设仓於徐州、淮安、德州，而临清因洪武之旧，并天津仓凡五，谓之水次仓，以资转运。
现代文：等到会通河修成，开始在徐州、淮安、德州设置仓库，而临清因袭洪武的旧制，合天津仓一共五座，叫做水次仓，以供转运。
English: After the construction of Huitong River was completed, warehouses were set up in Xuzhou, Huai'an, and Dezhou, while the old system in Linqing, due to the invasion of Hongwu, included a total of five warehouses in Tianjin, called water sub-warehouses, for transshipment.

古文：既，又移德州仓於临清之永清坝，设武清卫仓於河西务，设通州卫仓於张家湾。
现代文：随后，又转移德州仓到临清的永清坝，设置武清卫仓于河西务，设置通州卫仓于张家湾。
English: Subsequently, the Dezhou Depot was transferred to Yongqing Dam in Linqing, the Wuching Depot was set up in Hexi, and the Tongzhou Depot was set up in Zhangjiagang.

古文：宣德中，增造临清仓，容三百万石。
现代文：宣德年间，增加建造临清仓，容纳三百万石。
English: During the Xuande era, the construction of warehouses was increased to accommodate three million stones.

古文：增置北京及通州仓。
现代文：增设北京和通州仓。
English: Beijing and Tongzhou warehouses were added.

古文：京仓以御史、户部官、锦衣千百户季更巡察。
现代文：京城粮仓派御史、户部官、锦衣千百户按季更换巡察。
English: The Keijo Granary dispatches inspectors, household officials, and inspectors to inspect hundreds of households on a quarterly basis.

古文：外仓则布政、按察、都司关防之。
现代文：外地仓便派布政、按察、都司防守。
English: The field storehouse then sent Bu Zheng, Atsucha, and Toshi to defend.

古文：各仓门，以致仕武官二，率老幼军丁十人守之，半年一更。
现代文：各个仓门，以退休的武官二人，率领老幼兵丁十人防守，半年更换一次。
English: Each warehouse gate is guarded by two retired military attachés, who lead ten old and young soldiers. They are replaced every six months.

古文：英宗初，命廷臣集议，天下司府州县，有仓者以卫所仓属之，无仓者以卫所改隶。
现代文：英宗初年，命令廷臣集体商议，天下司府州县，有粮仓的把卫所的粮仓隶属于它，没有粮仓的把卫所的粮仓改为隶属于它。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Yingzong, he ordered the courtiers to collectively discuss and decide the prefectures and counties of the country. If there was a granary, the granary of the guardhouse would be subordinate to it. If there was no granary, the granary of the guardhouse would be subordinate to it.

古文：惟辽东、甘肃、宁夏、万全及沿海卫所，无府州县者仍其旧。
现代文：只有辽东、甘肃、宁夏、万全和沿海的卫所，没有府州县的仍照原来管理。
English: Only the health stations in Liaodong, Gansu, Ningxia, Wanchuan and coastal areas, but not those in Fuzhou and counties, are still managed as before.

古文：正统中，增置京卫仓凡七。
现代文：正统年间，增添设置京卫仓库共七座。
English: During the orthodox years, a total of seven warehouses were added to the Beijing Defense Depot.

古文：自兑运法行，诸仓支运者少，而京、通仓不能容，乃毁临清、德州、河西务仓三分之一，改为京、通仓。
现代文：自兑运法施行，各仓支运的少，而京、通粮仓不能容纳，便毁临清、德州、河西整粮仓三分之一，改为京、通仓。
English: Since the implementation of the cash-on-delivery method, there are fewer shipments from each warehouse, and the Beijing and Tong grain silos cannot accommodate them, so one-third of the Linqing, Dezhou and Hexi grain silos were destroyed and changed to Beijing and Tong warehouses.

古文：景泰初，移武清卫诸仓於通州。
现代文：景泰初年，把武清卫等粮仓转移到通州。
English: In the first year of Jing Tai, Wu Qing Wei and other granaries were transferred to Tongzhou.

古文：成化初，废临、德预备仓在城外者，而以城内空廒储预备米。
现代文：成化初年，废弃临、德在城外的预备仓，而用城内的空仓储藏预备粮。
English: In the first year of formation, Lin and De abandoned the reserve warehouse outside the city, and used the empty warehouse inside the city to store reserve grain.

古文：名临清者曰常盈，德州者曰常丰。
现代文：名临清的叫做常盈，名德州的叫做常丰。
English: The one named Linqing is called Changying, and the one named Dezhou is called Changfeng.

古文：凡京仓五十有六，通仓十有六。
现代文：京城粮仓共有五十六座，通仓十六座。
English: There are a total of fifty-six grain silos in the capital and sixteen through silos.

古文：直省府州县、藩府、边隘、堡站、卫所屯戍皆有仓，少者一二，多者二三十云。
现代文：直省府州县、藩府、边隘、堡站、卫所屯戍之地都有粮仓，少的一二座，多的达二三十座。
English: Directly in the provinces, prefectures, counties, prefectures, frontiers, forts, stations, and garrisons, there are grain silos, ranging from one or two to as many as twenty or thirty.

古文：预备仓之设也，太祖选耆民运钞籴米，以备振济，即令掌之。
现代文：预备仓的设置，太祖选年高有德之民运钞罗米，以预备赈灾救济，也命令他们掌管。
English: They were also ordered to take charge of the setting up of a reserve warehouse to prepare for disaster relief.

古文：天下州县多所储蓄，后渐废驰。
现代文：天下的州县多有储蓄，后来渐渐废弃。
English: Most of the states and counties in the world had savings, but they were gradually abandoned.

古文：于谦抚河南、山西，修其政。
现代文：于谦巡抚河南、山西，修明其政。
English: Yu Qian, the governor of Henan Province and Shanxi Province, clarified his policy.

古文：周忱抚南畿，别立济农仓。他人不能也。
现代文：周忱巡抚南几，另外设立济农仓，别的人不能这样做。
English: Zhou Zhenggong, the governor of Nanji, also set up a Jian Cang, which others could not do.

古文：正统时，重侵盗之罪，至佥妻充军。
现代文：正统时，加重侵夺盗窃之罪，甚至偕同妻子一起充军。
English: When he was orthodox, he aggravated the crime of robbery and theft, and even joined the army with his wife.

古文：且定纳谷千五百石者，敕奖为义民，免本户杂役。
现代文：并且规定交纳粮谷一千五百石的，下敕书嘉奖为义民，免去该户的杂役。
English: Moreover, it is stipulated that if the grain and grain of 1,500 koku is paid, it will be commended as a righteous person and the household will be exempted from miscellaneous service.

古文：凡振饥米一石，俟有年，纳稻谷二石五斗还官。
现代文：凡是赈济饥荒时得米一石，等到丰年，交纳稻谷二石五斗归还官府。
English: When there is a famine, one stone of rice is given to the government, but in a good year, two stones and five catties of rice are returned to the government.

古文：弘治三年限州县十里以下积万五千石，二十里积二万石；卫千户所万五千石，百户所三百石。
现代文：弘治三年限定州县十里以下积粮一万五千石，二十里积粮二万石；卫千户所积粮一万五千石，百户所积粮三百石。
English: In the three years of the Hongzhi era, the grain reserves of counties and prefectures within 10 miles of the capital were limited to 15,000 koku, and those within 20 miles to 20,000 koku; the grain reserves of 1,000 households were limited to 15,000 koku, and those of 100 households to 300 koku.

古文：考满之日，稽其多寡以为殿最。
现代文：考绩期满之日，考察其积粮多少作为政绩最上、最下的标准。
English: On the day of the expiration of the performance appraisal period, examine how much grain it has accumulated as the highest and lowest standard of political performance.

古文：不及三分者夺俸，六分以上降调。
现代文：不到三分的夺俸，六分以上的降调。
English: Less than three points will be deducted, and more than six points will be deducted.

古文：十八年令赎罪赃罚，皆籴谷入仓。
现代文：十八年，命令赎罪追脏罚款，都棹谷纳入官仓。
English: In 18 years, the order to atone for the crime and pursue the fine, Tudor Valley was included in the official warehouse.

古文：正德中，令囚纳纸者，以其八折米入仓。
现代文：正德年间，命令囚犯纳纸的，以其八折米纳入官仓。
English: During the Zhengde era, prisoners who were ordered to collect paper were sent to the official storehouse with their eighty-fold rice.

古文：军官有犯者，纳谷准立功。
现代文：军官有犯法的，交纳谷物准其立功赎罪。
English: If an officer has violated the law, he is allowed to make a contribution of grain to atone for his crime.

古文：初，预备仓皆设仓官，至是革，令州县官及管粮仓官领其事。
现代文：当初，预备仓都设置仓官，到这时革除，命令州县官和管粮仓之官掌管其事。
English: At first, warehouse officials were set up in the reserve warehouses, but they were dismissed at this time, and state and county officials and officials in charge of grain warehouses were ordered to take charge of the matter.

古文：嘉靖初，谕德顾鼎臣言： 成、弘时，每年以存留馀米入预备仓，缓急有备。
现代文：嘉靖初年，谕德顾鼎臣说： 成、弘时期，每年把存留的余米纳入预备仓，遇到紧急情况便有所防备。
English: In the first year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Degu Dingchen said: In the Cheng and Hong Dynasties, the remaining rice was put into the reserve warehouse every year. In case of an emergency, it was necessary to be prepared.

古文：今秋粮仅足兑运，预备无粒米。
现代文：今年秋粮只够兑运，预备仓没有一粒米。
English: This year's autumn grain is only enough for delivery, and there is not a single grain of rice in the reserve warehouse.

古文：一遇灾伤，辄奏留他粮及劝富民借谷，以应故事。
现代文：一遇到灾荒，便上奏请求留用别的粮食以及鼓励富豪之民借贷谷物，以应付事变。
English: In the event of a disaster, they would appeal for the use of other grain and encourage the rich people to borrow grain to cope with the situation.

古文：乞急复预备仓粮以裕民。 
现代文：请求紧急恢复预备仓粮以使人民富裕。 
English: Call for the urgent restoration of the grain reserve to enrich the people.

古文：帝乃令有司设法多积米谷，仍仿古常平法，春振贫民，秋成还官，不取其息。
现代文：皇帝便命令主管官吏设法多蓄积粮食，仍仿照古代的常平法，春天赈济贫苦之民，秋天收成后返还官府，不收其利息。
English: The emperor then ordered the officials in charge to try to accumulate more grain, still following the ancient law of Changping, to help the poor in the spring, and to return it to the government after the autumn harvest, without charging interest.

古文：府积万石，州四五千石，县二三千石为率。
现代文：府积粮一万石，州四五千石，县二三千石为标准。
English: The standard grain reserves are 10,000 koku for the prefecture, 45,000 koku for the prefecture, and 23,000 koku for the county.

古文：既，又定十里以下万五千石，累而上之，八百里以下至十九万石。
现代文：随后，又决定十里以下积粮一万五千石，累计上加，八百里以下加到十九万石。
English: Subsequently, it was also decided that grain reserves below ten li would be increased to 15,000 koku, and the cumulative total would be increased to 190,000 koku below 800 li.

古文：其后积粟尽平粜，以济贫民，储积渐减。
现代文：此后积蓄的粮食全部平价耀出，以赈济贫苦人民，储积之粮渐渐减少。
English: Since then, all the stored grain has been sold at the same price to help the poor people, and the stored grain has gradually decreased.

古文：隆庆时，剧郡无过六千石，小邑止千石。
现代文：隆庆时期，大郡不超过六千石，小县只有一千石。
English: During the Longqing period, large counties had no more than 6,000 koku, and small counties had only 1,000 koku.

古文：久之数益减，科罚亦益轻。
现代文：以后数量更加减少，处罚也更轻。
English: In the future, the number will be further reduced, and the punishment will be lighter.

古文：万历中，上州郡至三千石止，而小邑或仅百石。
现代文：万历年间，上等州郡多至三千石而止，而小县有的只有一百石。
English: During the Wanli period, the highest-ranking prefectures and counties had as much as 3,000 koku, while some small counties had only 100 koku.

古文：有司沿为具文，屡下诏申饬，率以虚数欺罔而已。
现代文：主管官吏沿制为之详细记载，多次下诏申明整饬，大都以虚数欺骗谎报而已。
English: It was recorded in detail by the officials in charge according to the system, and they repeatedly issued edicts to rectify the situation, but most of them cheated and lied by using false numbers.

古文：弘治中，江西巡抚林俊尝请建常平及社仓。
现代文：弘治年间，江西巡抚林俊曾经请求建立常平及社仓。
English: During the Hongzhi era, Lin Jun, the governor of Jiangxi Province, once requested the establishment of Changping and Shachang.

古文：嘉靖八年乃令各抚、按设社仓。
现代文：嘉靖八年，便命令各抚、按设置社仓。
English: In the eighth year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he ordered the establishment of company warehouses.

古文：令民二三十家为一社，择家殷实而有行义者一人为社首，处事公平者一人为社正，能书算者一人为社副，每朔望会集，别户上中下，出米四斗至一斗有差，斗加耗五合，上户主其事。
现代文：命令人民二三十家结焉一社，选择家庭富裕而又有德行道义的一人任社首，处事公平的一人为社正，能书写计算的一人为社副，每逢初一和十五会集一次，分别人户马上中下。出米四斗到一斗不等，每斗加耗米五合，上等人户主持其事。
English: Order the people of twenty or thirty households to unite into one company, and choose a person who is rich in family and has virtue and morality to be the head of the company, a person who is fair in dealing with things to be the president of the company, and a person who can write and calculate to be the vice president of the company. Every first day and fifteenth meeting will be held once, and the different households will be divided into middle and lower. The rice output will vary from four to one bucket, and each bucket will consume five cups of rice, and the superior households will preside over the matter.

古文：年饥，上户不足者量贷，稔岁还仓。中下户酌量振给，不还仓。
现代文：遇到荒年，上等人户食物不足的酌量借贷，丰年归还社仓，中等下等人户酌量赈济供给，不归还社仓。
English: In the event of a lean year, the upper-class households with insufficient food will borrow the discretionary amount and return the warehouse in a good year, while the middle and lower-class households will borrow the discretionary amount and do not return the warehouse.

古文：有司造册送抚、按，岁一察核。
现代文：主管部门造册送抚、按，每年查核一次。
English: The competent department shall make a record of the transfer and deposit, and check it once a year.

古文：仓虚，罚社首出一岁之米。
现代文：社仓空虚，罚社首交一年的粮。
English: The company warehouse was empty, and the company was fined one year's worth of grain.

古文：其法颇善，然其后无力行者。
现代文：其方法很好，然而后来无力施行。
English: It was well-intentioned, but has since failed to be implemented.

古文：两京库藏，先后建设，其制大略相同。
现代文：两京的库藏，先后建成，其形制大致相同。
English: The treasuries of the two capitals were built successively, and their shape is roughly the same.

古文：内府凡十库：内承运库，贮缎匹、金银、宝玉、齿角、羽毛，而金花银最大，岁进百万两有奇。
现代文：内府共有十库。内承运库，贮藏缎匹、金银、实玉、齿角、羽毛，而金花银最大，每年纳进一百万两有余。
English: There are a total of ten warehouses in Naifu. The inner carrier warehouse stores horseshoe crabs, gold and silver, solid jade, tooth angles, feathers, and the largest is gold and silver, with more than one million two hundred thousand a year.

古文：广积库，贮硫黄、硝石。
现代文：广积库，贮藏硫黄、硝石。
English: Extensive storage, including sulphur and saltpeter.

古文：甲字库，贮布匹、颜料。
现代文：甲字库，贮藏布匹、颜料。
English: A-character library, storage of fabrics, paints.

古文：乙字库，贮胖袄、战鞋、军士裘帽。
现代文：乙字库，贮藏胖袄、战鞋、军士裘帽。
English: B-character library, storage of fat socks, combat boots, sergeant's cap.

古文：丙字库，贮棉花、丝纩。
现代文：丙字库，贮藏棉花、丝缤。
English: C library, storing cotton and silk cocoons.

古文：丁字库，贮铜铁、兽皮、苏木。
现代文：丁字库，贮藏铜铁、兽皮、苏木。
English: T-shaped library, storage of copper and iron, animal skins, cedar.

古文：戊字库，贮甲仗。
现代文：戊字库，贮藏甲仗。
English: E-character library, storage armor ring.

古文：赃罚库，贮没官物。
现代文：追脏罚款库，贮藏没收入官的财物。
English: Chasing dirty fines, storing the lost property of the revenue officer.

古文：广惠库，贮钱钞。
现代文：广惠库，贮藏钱钞。
English: Guanghui Bank, where banknotes are stored.

古文：广盈库，贮纻丝、纱罗、绫锦、绢。
现代文：广盈库，贮藏纡丝、纱罗、绫锦、绸绢。
English: Guangying warehouse, storage of silk, satin, brocade and satin.

古文：六库皆属户部，惟乙字库属兵部，戊字、广积、广盈库属工部。
现代文：六库都属于户部掌管。祇有乙字库属于兵部掌管。戊字、广积、广盈库属于工部掌管。
English: All six libraries are under the control of the Household Department. Only the B-character library is under the control of the Military Department. The E-character, Wide Volume, and Wide Yield libraries are under the control of the Engineering Department.

古文：又有天财库，亦名司钥库，贮各衙门管钥，亦贮钱钞。
现代文：又有天财库，又名司钥库，贮藏各衙门管钥，也贮藏钱钞。
English: There is also the Treasury of Heaven, also known as the Keeper's Treasury, which stores the keys to all the gates, as well as banknotes.

古文：供用库，贮粳稻、熟米及上供物。
现代文：供用库，贮藏粳稻、熟米以及上供之物。
English: a supply depot, storing paddy rice, cooked rice, and other supplies.

古文：以上通谓之内库。
现代文：以上通称为内库。
English: The above is commonly referred to as the internal repository.

古文：其在宫内者，又有内东裕库、宝藏库，谓之里库。
现代文：其在官内的，又有内东裕库、宝藏库，叫做里库。
English: Within the government, there is also the Inner East Treasure Repository, called the Repository.

古文：凡里库不关於有司。
现代文：凡是里库与主管部门无关。
English: The library has nothing to do with the authorities.

古文：其会归门、宝善门迤东及南城磁器诸库，则谓之外库。
现代文：其会归门、宝善门向东以及南城磁器等库，便叫做外库。
English: Its Hui Gate, Bao Zhen Gate to the east and Nancheng Porcelain and other libraries are called external libraries.

古文：若内府诸监司局，神乐堂，牺牲所，太常、光禄寺，国子监，皆各以所掌，收贮应用诸物。
现代文：如内府众监司局，神乐堂，牺牲所，太常、光禄寺，国子监，都各以所执掌职责，收贮应用的各种对象。
English: For example, the Inner Prefectural People's Supervision Bureau, the Shinraku-do Hall, the Sacrifice Hall, the Taijo, the Koroku-ji Temple, and the Kokushi Supervision Bureau, all of which are responsible for their duties, have various objects for storage and application.

古文：太仆则马价银归之。
现代文：太仆便是马价银归于它。
English: The maid is the source of the horse-priced silver.

古文：明初，尝置行用库於京城及诸府州县，以收易昏烂之钞。
现代文：明代初年，曾经在京城以及各府州县设置行用库，以收藏易于模糊破烂的钱钞。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, banks were set up in the capital and in all prefectures and counties to collect easily fuzzy and tattered banknotes.

古文：仁宗时罢。
现代文：仁宗时罢除。
English: Ren Zongji was dismissed.

古文：英宗时，始设太仓库。
现代文：英宗时期，开始设立太仓库。
English: During the reign of Emperor Yingzong, a warehouse was built.

古文：初，岁赋不徵金银，惟坑冶税有金银，入内承运库。
现代文：当初，岁赋不征收金银，只有坑冶税有金银，纳入内承运库。
English: At first, there was no levy on gold and silver for the New Year's gift, and only the mining and metallurgy tax had gold and silver, which was included in the internal carrier warehouse.

古文：其岁赋偶折金银者，俱送南京供武臣禄。
现代文：岁赋偶尔折合金银的，都运送到南京供给武官的俸禄。
English: Yearly tributes, occasionally made of alloyed silver, were all transported to Nanjing to supply the salary of military attachés.

古文：而各边有缓急，亦取足其中。
现代文：而各边防有紧急情况，也取于其中来满足供应。
English: However, if there is an emergency at any border, supplies will be taken from there.

古文：正统元年改折漕粮，岁以百万为额，尽解内承运库，不复送南京。
现代文：正统元年，改折漕粮，每年以一百万为限额，全部运送到内承运库，不再运送到南京。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the grain reserve was revised, with an annual limit of one million, and all of it was transported to the internal carrier warehouse, and no longer transported to Nanjing.

古文：自给武臣禄十馀万两外，皆为御用。所谓金花银也。
现代文：除了供给武官俸禄十余万两之外，都为皇帝使用，造就是所说的金花银。
English: In addition to providing military officers with a stipend of more than ten thousand taels, they were all used for the emperor, making up the so-called gold and silver.

古文：七年乃设户部太仓库。
现代文：七年，纔设立户部太仓库。
English: Seven years later, it set up the household goods warehouse.

古文：各直省派剩麦米，十库中绵丝、绢布及马草、盐课、关税，凡折银者，皆入太仓库。籍没家财，变卖田产，追收店钱，援例上纳者，亦皆入焉。
现代文：各直省分派剩余的麦米、十库中绵丝、绢布及马草、盐税、关税，凡折成银两的，都入太会库没收家财，变卖田产，追收店钱，根据条例向上交纳的，也都纳入其中。
English: All provinces directly under the Central Government shall allocate the surplus of wheat and rice, cotton and silk, silk and horsetail, salt tax and tariff in the ten storehouses, and all of which are converted into silver, shall be put into the Tai Hui storehouse for confiscation of family assets, sale of farm produce, and collection of store money, and all of which are paid up in accordance with the regulations shall also be included.

古文：专以贮银，故又谓之银库。
现代文：因为专门用来贮藏银两，故又称银库。
English: Because it is specially used to store silver, it is also known as a silver vault.

古文：弘治时，内府供应繁多，每收太仓银入内库。
现代文：弘治时期，内府供应繁多，常常收太仓的银两纳入内库。
English: During the Koji period, there was a wide range of supplies from the inner prefecture, and the silver from Taicang was often included in the inner warehouse.

古文：又置南京银库。
现代文：又设置南京银库。
English: The Nanjing Bank was also established.

古文：正德时，内承运库中官数言内府财用不充，请支太仓银。
现代文：正德时期，内承运库宦官，多次说内府的财物用度不充足，请求支取太仓银。
English: During the Zhengde period, the eunuch of the Inner Carrying Depot repeatedly said that the use of the inner government's property was insufficient and requested the withdrawal of the Taicang silver.

古文：户部执奏不能沮。
现代文：户部执奏不能阻拦。
English: You can't stop the head of the household from performing.

古文：嘉靖初，内府供应视弘治时，其后乃倍之。
现代文：嘉靖初年，内府供应比照弘治时期，其后供应加倍。
English: In the first year of Jiajing, the supply of Naifu was higher than that in the Hongzhi period, and the supply doubled afterwards.

古文：初，太仓中库积银八百馀万两，续收者贮之两庑，以便支发。
现代文：当初，太仓中库积银八百多万两，继续收纳的贮藏在两廉，以便于支出发放。
English: At the beginning, there were more than eight million taels of silver in the Taicang warehouse, and the amount that continued to be stored was kept at two yuan, so that it could be disbursed more easily.

古文：而中库不动，遂以中库为老库，两庑为外库。
现代文：而中库贮银不动，于是以中库为老库，两糜为外库。
English: However, the storage of silver in the middle vault did not move, so the middle vault was used as the old vault, and the two vaults were used as the outer vault.

古文：及是时，老库所存者仅百二十万两。
现代文：到这时，老库所存银只有一百二十万两。
English: By this time, the old treasury had only 1.2 million taels of silver.

古文：二十二年特令金花、子粒银应解内库者，并送太仓备边用，然其后复入内库。
现代文：二十二年，特命金花、子粒银应该解运内库的，一并送往太仓以备边防使用，然而后来又纳入内库。
English: In 1922, the specially ordered gold flowers and silver seeds were supposed to be removed from the inner vault and sent to Taicang to prepare for border defense, but later they were included in the inner vault.

古文：三十七年令岁进内库银百万两外，加预备钦取银，后又取没官银四十万两入内库。
现代文：三十七年，命令每年纳进内库的银一百万两之外，追加预备钦取银，以后又取没收入官的银四十万两纳入内库。
English: In 1937, it was ordered that in addition to the one million taels of silver to be brought into the treasury each year, additional silver should be prepared for confiscation, after which 400,000 taels of silver confiscated from the revenue officer should be brought into the treasury.

古文：隆庆中，数取太仓银入内库，承运库中官至以空紥下户部取之。
现代文：隆庆年间，多次提取太仓银纳入内库，承运库的宦官甚至用空札子下发户部提取库银。
English: During the Longqing period, the Taicang silver was repeatedly withdrawn into the inner vault, and the eunuch of the carrier vault even used the empty note to withdraw the vault silver.

古文：廷臣疏谏，皆不听。
现代文：廷臣上疏劝谏，都不听从。
English: The courtiers tried to persuade him, but he would not listen.

古文：又数取光禄太仆银，工部尚书朱衡极谏，不听。
现代文：又多次提取光禄太仆银两，工部尚书朱衡竭力劝谏，不听。
English: In addition, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce tried to persuade Zhu Heng not to listen to him.

古文：初，世宗时，太仓所入二百万两有奇。
现代文：当初，世宗时期，太仓纳入银二百万两有余。
English: At first, during the reign of King Sejong, Taicang had more than two million taels of silver.

古文：至神宗万历六年，太仓岁入凡四百五十馀万两，而内库岁供金花银外，又增买办银二十万两以为常，后又加内操马刍料银七万馀两。
现代文：到神宗万历六年，太仓每年纳入银四百五十多万两，而内库每年供给金花银之外，又增加买办银二十万两以为常规，后来又加内操马刍料银七万多两。
English: By the sixth year of Shensong Wanli, Taicang included more than 4.5 million taels of silver every year, and in addition to the annual supply of gold and silver to the inner vault, the buyer's office added 200,000 taels of silver as a rule, and later added more than 70,000 taels of silver.

古文：久之，太仓、光禄、太仆银，括取几尽。
现代文：后来，太仓、光禄、太仆银，几乎被全部刮取。
English: Later, almost all of the Taicang, Guanglu, and Taizhong were taken away.

古文：边赏首功，向发内库者，亦取之太仆矣。
现代文：边防赏赐首功，一向是调发内库之银，现在也取之于太仆了。
English: The first award given for frontier defense has always been the transfer of silver from the treasury, but now it is also taken from the servants.

古文：凡甲字诸库，主事偕科道巡视。
现代文：凡是甲字各库，主事偕同科道巡视。
English: In all the libraries of A, the main thing is to carry out the inspection of the same science road.

古文：太仓库，员外郎、主事领之，而以给事中巡视。
现代文：太仓库，由员外郎、主事掌管，而以给事中巡视。
English: The warehouse is too big, and it is under the control of the person in charge and the person in charge, and it is inspected by the person in charge.

古文：嘉靖中，始两月一报出纳之数。
现代文：嘉靖年间，开始两个月报告一次收入支出的数目。
English: During the Jiajing period, the first two months reported the number of one-time income and expenditure.

古文：时修工部旧库，名曰节慎库，以贮矿银。
现代文：当时修工部旧库，取名节慎库，以贮藏矿银。
English: At that time, the old warehouse of the Ministry of Industry and Trade was repaired, and it was renamed the "Shenzhen Warehouse" to store ore silver.

古文：尚书文明以给工价，帝诘责之，令以他银补偿，自是专以给内用焉。
现代文：尚书文明用以供给工价，皇帝责问他，命令用别的银两补偿，从此专门用来供给内用了。
English: The emperor rebuked him and ordered him to use other silver to compensate, and from then on it was exclusively used to supply domestic use.

古文：其在外诸布政司、都司、直省府州县卫所皆有库，以贮金银、钱钞、丝帛、赃罚诸物。
现代文：其在地方的各布政司、都司、直省府州县卫所，都有库，用来贮藏金银、钱钞、丝帛、追赃处罚等财物。
English: In the provinces, prefectures, counties, and health stations, there are storehouses for storing gold and silver, banknotes, silk cocoons, stolen goods, and other property.

古文：巡按御史三岁一盘查。
现代文：巡按御史三年盘查一次。
English: A three-year inspection of the patrol press history.

古文：各运司皆有库贮银，岁终，巡盐御史委官察之。
现代文：各运司都有库贮银，年终，巡盐御史派官员察核。
English: Each transport division had a warehouse for storing silver, and at the end of the year, the salt patrol sent officials to inspect it.

古文：凡府州县税课司局、河泊所，岁课、商税、鱼课、引由、契本诸课程，太祖令所司解州县府司，以至於部，部札之库，其元封识，不擅发也。
现代文：凡是府州县税课司局、河泊所，岁课、商税、鱼课、引由、契本等按税率交纳的赋税，太祖命令主管部门解送州县府司，以至于户部，户部下文于库，其原来的封签，不擅自开启。
English: For all taxes paid at the tax rate by prefectural and county tax bureaus, river parking stations, yearbooks, commercial taxes, fish classes, citations, deeds, etc., the great-grandfather ordered the competent departments to send the prefectural and county tax bureaus, so that the household department, the household department's documents in the library, its original seal, do not open without authorization.

古文：至永乐时，始委验勘，中，方起解；至部复验，同，乃进纳。
现代文：到永乐时期，开始委派官吏验证勘察，符合，纔向上解运；到达户部重新骏证，相同，纔交纳。
English: In the Yongle period, officials were appointed to verify and investigate, and if it was in conformity, it was sent to the next level; if it arrived at the household department, it was re-certified, and if it was the same, it was paid.

古文：嘉靖时，建验试厅，验中，给进状寄库。
现代文：嘉靖时期，建立验试厅，验证合格，给予进状寄库。
English: During the Jiajing period, the examination hall was established, the examination was passed, and the certificate was sent to the library.

古文：月逢九，会巡视库藏科道官，进库验收，不堪者驳易。
现代文：每月逢九之日，会同巡视库藏科道官，进库验收，验收不上的抵换。
English: On the 9th day of every month, together with the inspectors of the Tibetology and Taoism Library, they will inspect the acceptance of the goods into the library, and the exchange of the goods that cannot be accepted.

古文：正统十年设通济库於通州。
现代文：正统十年，在通州设立通济库。
English: After ten years of orthodoxy, a Tongji library was established in Tongzhou.

古文：世宗时罢。
现代文：世宗时期罢除。
English: It was abolished during the reign of King Sejong.

古文：隆庆初，密云、蓟州、昌平诸镇皆设库，收贮主客年例、军门公费及抚赏、修边银云。
现代文：隆庆初年，密云、蓟州、昌平等镇都设立库，收存主客年例、军门公费和抚赏、还有修边银。
English: In the first year of Longqing, the towns of Miyun, Luzhou and Changping all set up warehouses to store the host and guest annuals, military public fees and rewards, as well as repairing silver.

古文：凡为仓库害者，莫如中官。
现代文：凡是成为仓库危害的，没有什么比得上中官。
English: There's nothing like being a lieutenant colonel to be a warehouse hazard.

古文：内府诸库监收者，横索无厌。正德时，台州卫指挥陈良纳军器，稽留八载，至乞食於市。
现代文：内府各库监收的人，横加勒索贪得无厌正德时期，台州卫指挥陈良交纳军器，滞留八年，以至于在集市讨饭。
English: During the Zhengde period, Chen Liang, the commander of the Taizhou garrison, was so greedy that he stayed for eight years to collect military equipment, even begging for food at the market.

古文：内府收粮，增耗尝以数倍为率，其患如此。
现代文：内府收粮，增收耗粮曾经以数倍为标准，其祸患如此严重。
English: Inner prefectures collect grain, and the increase in collection and consumption of grain used to be several times the standard, and the scourge is so serious.

古文：诸仓初不设中官，宣德末，京、通二仓始置总督中官一人，后淮、徐、临、德诸仓亦置监督，漕輓军民被其害。
现代文：各仓开初不设置中官，宣德末年，京、通二仓开始设置总督中官一人，以后淮、徐、临、德等仓也设置监督，运粮的军民道受其害。
English: At the beginning of the opening of each warehouse, no middle officer was set up, in the last years of the Xuande era, the second warehouse of Beijing and Tongzhou began to set up a governor middle officer, and later the warehouses of Huai, Xu, Lin, and De also set up supervision, and the military and civilian roads of grain transportation suffered from it.

古文：世宗用孙交、张孚敬议，撤革诸中官，惟督诸仓者如故。
现代文：世宗采用孙交、张孚敬的提议，撤除众中官，只有监督各仓的人如同过去。
English: The Shizong adopted the proposal of Sun Jiao and Zhang Fu Jing to remove all the middle-ranking officials, and only the people who supervised each warehouse were removed as in the past.

古文：久之，从给事中管怀理言，乃罢之。
现代文：后来，依从给事中管怀理的进言，纔罢除。
English: Later, in accordance with the advice of reasonableness in the matter, he was dismissed.

古文：初，天下府库各有存积，边饷不借支於内，京师不收括於外。
现代文：当初，天下的府库各有存储的积蓄，边防军饷不向各地借支，京城不向地方收取。
English: At first, the prefectural treasuries around the world each had stored savings, the border troops did not borrow from other regions, and the capital did not collect from the regions.

古文：成化时，巡盐御史杨澄始请发各盐运提举司赃罚银入京库。
现代文：成化时期，巡盐御史杨澄开始请求调发各盐运提举司的追脏罚银入京城府库。
English: During the formation period, Yang Cheng, the patrolling salt inspector, began to request the transfer of the dirty fine money of each salt transportation and hoisting department into the Beijing prefectural treasury.

古文：弘治时，给事中曾昂请以诸布政司公帑积贮征徭羡银，尽输太仓。
现代文：弘治时期，给事中曾昂请求以各布政司的公有财物积贮征徭羡银，全部运送入太仓。
English: During the Hongzhi period, Zengang requested that the public assets of all the political secretaries be used to store and collect money and silver, all of which were transported to Taicang.

古文：尚书周经力争之，以为有不足者，以识造、赏赉、斋醮、土木之故，必欲尽括天下财，非藏富於民意也。
现代文：尚书周经竭力争辩，认为用度不足，是因为织造、赏赐、斋醮、兴修土木的缘故，一定想全部搜刮天下的财物，不是藏富于人民之意。
English: Shangshu Zhou tried his best to argue that the reason for the insufficient expenditure was due to weaving, reward, feasting, and construction of civil engineering. He must have wanted to collect all the wealth of the world, not to hide it from the people.

古文：至刘瑾用事，遂令各省库藏尽输京师。
现代文：到刘瑾专权，便命令各省库藏全部送往京城。
English: When Liu Bei gained absolute power, he ordered all provincial treasuries to be sent to the capital.

古文：世宗时，闽、广进羡馀，户部请责他省巡按，岁一奏献如例。
现代文：世宗时期，闽、广输入多余贮银，卢部请求责令别省巡按，每年按例进献一次。
English: During the reign of King Sejong, Gyeongbokgung and Gwangju-do imported surplus stored silver. At the request of the provincial government, the provincial government ordered that the surplus silver be inspected and donated once a year.

古文：又以太仓库匮，运南户部库银八十万两实之。
现代文：又因太仓库匮乏，便运送南户部库银八十万两来充实。
English: In addition, due to the shortage of warehouses, 800,000 taels of silver were transported to the South Household Treasury to replenish it.

古文：而户部条上理财事宜，临、德二仓积银二十万两，录以归太仓。
现代文：而户部分条奏上理财事宜，临、德二库积存银二十万两，被登记归入太仓。
English: However, some of the households reported on financial management matters, and 200 thousand taels of silver were accumulated in the Second Treasury of the Central Bank and the Second Treasury of the State Council, and were registered as Taicang.

古文：隆庆初，遣四御史分行天下，搜括库银。
现代文：隆庆初年，派遣四御史分别巡行天下，搜刮库银。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, four emperors were dispatched to go around the world separately to search for silver.

古文：神宗时，御史萧重望请核府县岁额银进部，未报上。
现代文：神宗时期，御史萧重望请求核实府县的岁额银运进户部，没有报上。
English: During the period of the Shinshu Sect, the Grand Historian Xiao Chongwang requested to verify the amount of money sent to households by prefecture, but it was not reported.

古文：千户何其贤乞敕内官与己督之，帝竟从其请，由是外储日就耗。
现代文：千户何其贤请求敕令内官与自己督办，皇帝竟然听从其请，从此各地储备一天天消耗。
English: Qianhu He Qixian requested the emperor to order the imperial secretary and himself to supervise, and the emperor actually obeyed his request. Since then, the reserves of various regions have been depleted day by day.

古文：至天启中，用操江巡抚范济世策，下敕督岁进，收括靡有遗矣。
现代文：到天启年间，采用操江巡抚范济世的计策，下敕令督促交纳每年的进献银，搜刮得没有遗留了。
English: By the year of the Apocalypse, using the strategy of Fan Jisei, the governor of the Yangtze River, he issued an order to urge the payment of the annual donation of silver, and there was no leftover scraping.

古文：南京内库颇藏金银珍宝，魏忠贤矫旨取进，盗窃一空。
现代文：南京内库多藏有金银珍宝，魏忠贤假传圣旨进入内库掠取，盗窃一空。
English: Most of the treasuries in Nanjing contained gold, silver and precious treasures. Wei Zhongxian entered the treasury and plundered it, stealing everything.

古文：内外匮竭，遂至於亡。
现代文：朝廷内外财物匮乏竭尽，终于走向灭亡。
English: Both inside and outside the imperial court, the shortage of goods and materials was exhausted, finally leading to its demise.

