古文：裴矩，字弘大，绛州闻喜人。
现代文：裴矩字弘大，绛州闻喜县人。
English: Pei Mom, surnamed Hongda, was from Wenshi County, Ganzhou.

古文：父讷之，为齐太子舍人。
现代文：父亲名讷之，北齐时官至太子舍人。
English: His father was a high-ranking official in the Northern Qi Dynasty and later became the crown prince.

古文：矩在乳而孤，及长好学，有文藻智数。
现代文：裴矩尚在襁褓之中，父亲就去世了，长大之后爱好学习，富于文采心计。
English: When Pei Rong was still in his infancy, his father passed away. When he grew up, he loved to study and was full of literary ideas.

古文：再补高平王文学。
现代文：两度在北齐高平王府任文学。
English: He was twice appointed to the post of literature in the Northern Qi Gaoping Royal Palace.

古文：齐亡，不得调。
现代文：北齐灭亡了，无处任职。
English: Bei Qi perished, but his official position did not change.

古文：隋高祖为定州总管，召补记室，以母忧去职。
现代文：当时隋文帝杨坚任定州总管，聘任他为总管府记室，因母亲去世离职回家守孝。
English: At that time, Emperor Yang Jian of the Sui Dynasty was appointed as the governor of Dingzhou, and he was appointed as the governor of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office.

古文：高祖已受禅，迁给事郎，奏舍人事。
现代文：文帝登位，提升他为给事郎，主管内史舍人的事务。
English: Emperor Wen ascended to the throne and promoted him to the position of the secretary, in charge of the internal affairs of the emperor.

古文：帝伐陈，为元帅记室。
现代文：文帝征讨南陈时，裴矩任元帅记室。
English: When Emperor Wen enlisted Nan Chen, Pei Rui was appointed as the marshal of the record office.

古文：江左平，诏矩巡抚岭南，未行，而高智慧等乱，道不通，帝难其遣，矩请速进，许之。
现代文：南陈灭亡后，诏令裴矩去安抚岭南各州，还没动身，高智慧等人叛乱，道路不通，文帝不便下令发兵，裴矩要求迅速出发，文帝同意。
English: After the death of Nan Chen, the emperor ordered Pei Mom to go to pacify the southern states of Lingnan, but he had not yet set off, Gao Zhizhi and others rebelled, the road was impassable, Emperor Wen inconveniently ordered the dispatch of troops, Pei Mom demanded a speedy departure, Emperor Wen agreed.

古文：次南康，得兵数千人。
现代文：人马暂驻南康县，集聚了几千兵卒。
English: Troops and horses were temporarily stationed in Nankang County, gathering several thousand soldiers.

古文：是时，俚帅王仲宣逼广州，遣别将围东衡州，矩与将军鹿愿赴之。
现代文：这时，俚族统帅王仲宣进逼广州，派遣他的另一支队伍围攻东衡州，裴矩和将军鹿愿赶去救援。
English: At this time, the leader of the Yi people, Wang Zhongxuan, marched into Guangzhou and sent another team to besiege Donghengzhou. Pei Jian and General Deer were willing to rush to the rescue.

古文：贼立九壁，屯大庾岭，矩进击，破之。
现代文：叛军构筑了许多营垒，驻扎在大庾岭，裴矩进攻，打败了叛军。
English: The rebels built many camps and stationed themselves in Dalatling. They attacked at the right time and defeated the rebels.

古文：贼惧，释东衡州之围，据愿长岭，又击破之，斩其帅。
现代文：叛军害怕，撤去了东衡州的包围，据守愿长岭，裴矩又打败了他们，斩杀了叛军主将。
English: The rebels were afraid and withdrew from the encirclement of Donghengzhou. According to the wishes of Changling, Pei Rui defeated them and killed the rebel commander.

古文：自南海趣广州，仲宣惧，溃去。
现代文：裴矩从南海县直奔广州，王仲宣胆怯，四散逃走。
English: Pei-Ming went straight from Nanhai County to Guangzhou. Wang Zhongxuan was afraid and fled in all directions.

古文：绥集二十余州，承制署渠帅为刺史、县令。
现代文：于是安抚了二十多个州，秉承文帝旨意任命当地主帅为刺史、县令。
English: As a result, more than 20 prefectures were pacified, and in accordance with Emperor Wen's will, local superintendents were appointed as magistrates and county magistrates.

古文：还报，帝大悦，诏升殿劳苦之。
现代文：回京报告战绩，文帝非常高兴，诏令进殿慰劳他。
English: When he returned to Beijing to report his achievements, Emperor Wen was very pleased and ordered him to come to the palace to console him.

古文：拜开府，爵闻喜县公，赐赉异等。
现代文：授予开府头衔，封闻喜县公爵号，各按等级赏赐财物。
English: They were awarded the title of Kaifu and the title of Dukes of Xixian, and were rewarded with property according to their rank.

古文：迁累内史侍郎。
现代文：后升任内史侍郎。
English: He was later promoted to Naishi no Samurai.

古文：时突厥强盛，都蓝与突利构难，屡犯塞，诏太平公史万岁为行军总管，出定襄道，以矩为长史。
现代文：当时突厥强盛，都蓝和突利结为怨仇造成祸乱，多次侵犯边境，文帝诏令太平公史万岁任行军总管，从定襄道出兵，任命裴矩为长史。
English: At that time, the Turkic peoples were strong, the Turanians and the Turks had a grudge against each other, causing chaos and repeatedly violating the border. Emperor Wen decreed that Taiping Gongshi should be appointed as the commander-in-chief of the march, sent troops from Dingxiang Road, and appointed Pei Jian as the commander-in-chief of the march.

古文：破达头可汗而万岁诛，矩功不见录。
现代文：打败了突厥达头可汗，而史万岁却被处死，裴矩的功劳没有被认可。
English: He defeated the Turkic leader Khan, but Shivanshir was put to death, and Baikang's achievement was not recognized.

古文：还为尚书左丞，迁吏部侍郎，名称职。
现代文：回京后任尚书左丞，改任吏部侍郎，以称职闻名。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he was appointed to the post of Shoshu-zojo, and later he was appointed to the post of the clerk's attendant, and he was famous for his competence.

古文：炀帝时，西域诸国悉至张掖交市，帝令矩护视。
现代文：大业初年，西域各国都到张掖县城开展商贸活动，炀帝杨广命令裴矩去监管。
English: In the first year of the great undertaking, all countries in the western region came to Zhangye County to carry out business activities. Emperor Yang Guang ordered Pei Mom to supervise.

古文：矩知帝勤远略，乃访诸商胡国俗、山川险易，撰《西域图记》三篇，合四十四国，凡裂三道：北道起伊吾，径蒲类、铁勒、突厥可汗廷，乱北流河至拂菻；中道起高昌、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒，逾葱岭，汗、苏对沙那、康、曹、何、大小安、穆诸国，至波斯；南道起鄯善、于阗、硃俱波、喝般陀，亦度葱岭，涉护密、吐火罗、挹怛、忛延、漕国，至北婆罗门。
现代文：裴矩知道炀帝正在谋划吞并西域，就向各族商人考察各国的风俗习惯、地理环境，撰写《西域图记》三卷，包括四十四个国家，共分三条路线：北路从伊吾开始，途经蒲类、铁勒、突厥可汗的王宫，横渡向北的河流到拂林艹；中路从高昌、焉耆、龟兹、疏勒开始，跨越葱岭，途经钅发汗、苏对沙那、康、曹、何、大小安、穆各国，到波斯；南路从善阝善、于阗、朱俱波、喝陀开始，也跨过葱岭，途经护密、吐火罗、挹怛、忄凡延、漕国，到北婆罗门。
English: Knowing that Emperor Qianlong was planning to annex the Western Regions, Pei Rong examined the customs, habits and geographical environment of various countries from merchants of all ethnic groups and wrote the "Map of the Western Regions" in three volumes, including forty-four countries, divided into three routes: the northern route started from Igu, passing through the royal palaces of Putuo, Tiler and the Turkic khan, and crossing the rivers to the north to Huilin; the middle route started from Gaochang, Yancheng, Kuez and Shule, and crossed the green mountains, passing through Bufanghan, Suvanshana, Kang, Cao, He, Xiao An, Mu

古文：皆竟西海。
现代文：都到西海为止。
English: All the way to the West Sea.

古文：诸国亦自有空道交通。
现代文：各国之间也有大路通达。
English: There are also highways between countries.

古文：既还，奏之。
现代文：回京后，献给了炀帝。
English: After returning to Kyoto, it was dedicated to Emperor Shō.

古文：帝引内矩，问西方事，矩盛言： 胡多瑰怪名宝，俗土著，易并吞。 
现代文：炀帝把裴矩带进内宫，询问西域的情况，裴矩极力鼓吹： 西域有丰富的奇珍异宝，百姓世代定居，容易吞并。 
English: Emperor Qian took Pei Mom into the Inner Palace to inquire about the situation in the western region, and Pei Mom strongly advocated: The western region is rich in treasures, and the people have settled there for generations, making it easy to annex.

古文：帝由是甘心四夷，委矩经略。
现代文：炀帝从此醉心于征服西域，委托裴矩策划。
English: From then on, Emperor Qian was obsessed with conquering the Western Regions and commissioned Pei Mom to plan the campaign.

古文：再迁黄门侍郎，参豫朝政。
现代文：后任命他为黄门侍郎，参与处理朝廷政务。
English: Later, he was appointed as the Yellow Gate chamberlain and participated in handling the affairs of the imperial court.

古文：大业三年，帝有事恒山，西方来助祭者十余国。
现代文：大业三年，炀帝到恒山祭天，前来参加祭祀的西域国家有十多个。
English: In the third year of the Great Work, Emperor Qian went to Mount Hengshan to hold a festival. More than ten countries in the western region came to participate in the festival.

古文：矩遣人说高昌、伊吾等，啗以厚利，使入朝。
现代文：裴矩派人游说高昌王鞠伯雅、伊吾吐屯设等，用厚利引诱，使得他们归附了隋朝。
English: Pei Ruo sent people to lobby Gaochang Wang Jubei, Igu Tutun, etc. and lured them with huge profits, causing them to join the Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝西巡燕支山，高昌等二十七国谒道左，皆使佩金玉，服锦罽，奏乐歌舞，令士女盛饰纵观，亘数十里，示中国强富。
现代文：炀帝到西部边境巡视燕支山时，高昌等二十七个国家首领在路边拜见，要他们都佩戴金银珠宝，穿着丝绸毛料礼服，演奏音乐唱歌跳舞，命令青年男女穿上华丽衣裳纵情游乐，四周延绵几十里，显示中国富强。
English: When Emperor Qian went to the western border to inspect the Yanzhishan Mountains, Gao Chang and other leaders of 27 countries met on the roadside. They were all required to wear gold and silver jewelry, wear silk wool dresses, play music, sing and dance, and ordered young men and women to wear gorgeous clothes and indulge in pleasure. It stretched for dozens of miles around, showing China's wealth and strength.

古文：后遂破吐谷浑，拓地数千里，遣兵出戍，岁委输巨亿万计。
现代文：后来打败了吐谷浑，扩展了几千里土地，派军队去防守，每年运输物资的费用以万万计算。
English: Later, they defeated the Tuyugun, expanded thousands of miles of land, sent troops to defend, and the annual cost of transporting materials was calculated at tens of thousands of dollars.

古文：帝谓矩有绥怀略，擢银青光禄大夫。
现代文：炀帝由于裴矩具有招抚外族国家的谋略，赐给银青光禄大夫爵位。
English: Emperor Qian gave Yin Qingguanglu the title of grand duchess because of Pei An's strategy of appeasing foreign countries.

古文：帝在东都，矩以蛮夷朝贡踵至，讽帝悉召天下奇倡怪伎，大陈端门前，曳锦縠、珥金琲者十余万，百官都人列缯楼幔阁夹道，被服光丽。
现代文：炀帝巡视洛阳时，裴矩认为朝拜进贡的外国使节很多，婉言要求炀帝招集天下技艺高超的人，声势壮观地摆在皇宫正南的端门前边表演，穿着鲜艳丝绸、戴着金玉首饰的红男绿女十多万人，诏令文武百官和洛阳居民用绸缎装饰街道两边的房舍屋宇，穿上光彩华丽的服装。
English: When Emperor Gong inspected Luoyang, Pei Rong thought that there were many foreign envoys who paid tribute to the emperor. He politely asked Emperor Gong to summon the world's most skilled people to perform spectacularly in front of the southern end gate of the imperial palace. There were more than 100,000 red men and green women wearing bright silk and gold and jade jewelry. He ordered the civil and military officials and Luoyang residents to decorate the houses on both sides of the street with silk and satin and put on splendid costumes.

古文：廛邸皆供帐，池酒林皪。
现代文：货栈商店都设置帷帐，摆上丰盛的美酒佳肴。
English: The warehouse stores are all set up with curtains, displaying rich wine and delicacies.

古文：译长纵蛮夷与民贸易，所在令邀饮食，相娱乐。蛮夷嗟咨，谓中国为 仙晨帝所 。
现代文：翻译官员鼓励外国商人跟中国百姓做生意，所到之处都让店家请去吃喝，一起娱乐。外国来宾赞叹，说中国是 仙晨帝所 。
English: The translation officer encouraged foreign businessmen to do business with Chinese people. Wherever he went, he invited merchants to eat, drink, and entertain together. Foreign guests were amazed and said that China was a place of immortality.

古文：天子以为诚，谓宇文述、牛弘曰： 矩所建白，皆朕之志，要未发，矩辄先闻，非悉心奉国，畴能是邪？ 
现代文：炀帝称赞裴矩忠诚，对宇文述、牛弘说 ：裴矩的建议，都是我的心愿，我还没有说出来，他就向我建议了，如果不是全心全意报效国家，谁能做到这样？ 
English: Emperor Xuan praised Pei for his loyalty, and said to Yu Wenshu and Niu Hongwu, "Pei's suggestions are all my wishes. I haven't said it yet, but he suggested it to me. If you don't serve the country wholeheartedly, who can do it?

古文：又助城伊吾，胁处罗入朝。
现代文：他又帮助在伊吾筑起了城池，逼迫处罗归顺了隋朝。
English: He also helped build a castle in Igu, forcing Luo to submit to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：帝益喜，赐貂裘、西胡珍器。
现代文：炀帝更加高兴，把貂皮袄和西域的珍贵器物赏赐给他。
English: Emperor Yao was even more pleased, and gave him a mink coat and a valuable Western artifact.

古文：从帝巡塞北，幸启民帐。
现代文：裴矩随从炀帝到北部边境巡视，视察了启民可汗的营帐。
English: Pei Jian accompanied Emperor Gong to patrol the northern border and inspected the camp of the Qimin Khan.

古文：时高丽遣使先在突厥，启民引见帝。
现代文：当时高丽派遣的使者已先到了突厥，启民可汗带领他拜见炀帝。
English: At that time, the envoy sent by Goryeo had already arrived in Turkey first, and Qimin Khan led him to meet the Emperor.

古文：矩因奏言： 高丽本孤竹国，周以封箕子，汉分三郡，今乃不臣，先帝疾之，欲讨久矣。
现代文：裴矩乘机禀奏说 ：高丽本来就是孤竹国，周天子把它封给箕子，汉朝把它分成了三个郡，如今却不做隋朝的属国，先帝憎恨它，老早就想讨伐了。
English: "Goryeo was originally a lone bamboo country. Zhou Tianzi gave it to Zizi. The Han Dynasty divided it into three counties. Today, however, it is not a vassal state of the Sui Dynasty. The former emperor hated it and wanted to fight against it for a long time.

古文：方陛下时，安得不事？
现代文：在陛下这代，怎能无所作为？
English: In His Majesty's generation, how can there be inaction?

古文：今其使朝突厥，及见启民，举国臣服，胁令入朝，可致也。
现代文：如今它的使者朝拜突厥，亲眼看到启民可汗全国都做隋朝的臣民，威胁它归附隋朝，是办得到的。
English: Now its emissary worships the Turks, sees with his own eyes that the Qimin Khan has made the whole country a subject of the Sui Dynasty, and threatens to annex it to the Sui Dynasty. It can be done.

古文：请面诏其使，令归语王，有如旅拒，方率突厥诛之。 
现代文：请陛下当面命令它的使者，叫他回去告诉国王，如果聚众抗拒，就率领突厥军队一起讨伐。 
English: Let his majesty command his emissary in person to go back and tell the king that if the people refuse, he will lead the Turkish army against them.

古文：帝纳焉。
现代文：炀帝采纳了他的意见。
English: Emperor Shun accepted his opinion.

古文：高丽不听命，征辽自此始。
现代文：高丽不接受命令，征讨辽东从此开始。
English: Goryeo did not accept the order, and the conquest of Liaodong began.

古文：王师再临辽，皆从，以劳加右光禄大夫。
现代文：隋军两次征讨辽东，裴矩都参加了，由于立功，晋升为右光禄大夫。
English: The Sui army conquered Liaodong twice, and Pei Rong took part in both. Due to his meritorious service, he was promoted to Uguanglu Doctor.

古文：时纲纪汩振，宇文述、虞世基用事，官以贿迁，唯矩挺节无秽声，世颇称之。
现代文：当时法纪混乱，宇文述、虞世基当权，人们用贿赂手段升官，惟独裴矩坚守节操没有不洁的名声，人们很是称赞他。
English: At that time, the legal discipline was chaotic, Wu Wenshu and Yu Shiji were in power, and people were promoted by means of bribery. However, Pei Jian adhered to the discipline and did not have an unclean reputation. People highly praised him.

古文：矩以始毕可汗众渐盛，建请以宗女嫁叱吉设，建为南面可汗，分其势。
现代文：裴矩根据始毕可汗兵众日益强盛的形势，建议定一名皇族姑娘嫁给叱吉设，扶持他称南突厥的可汗，分化突厥的力量。
English: According to the increasingly prosperous situation of the khan's soldiers at the beginning of the war, Pei proposed that an imperial girl should be married to Shu Jishie, support him as the khan of South Turkistan, and differentiate the power of Turkistan.

古文：叱吉不敢受。
现代文：叱吉设不敢这样干。
English: I wouldn't dare to do that.

古文：始毕闻之，稍怨望。
现代文：始毕可汗知道了这事，非常怨恨。
English: Shi Bi Khan found out about this and was very angry.

古文：矩又言： 突厥淳陋，易离间，但内多群胡教导之。
现代文：裴矩又出主意： 突厥人头脑简单，容易挑起内部矛盾，不过王宫里有各族人才指导他们。
English: Pei Jian had another idea: The Turks were simple-minded and easily provoked internal conflicts, but there were people from all ethnic groups in the royal palace to guide them.

古文：臣闻史蜀胡悉尤有谋，幸于始毕，请杀之。 
现代文：我听说史蜀胡悉最有谋略，深受始毕可汗信任，请让我杀掉他。 
English: I've heard that Shi Shuhu knows the best strategy and is deeply trusted by Shibi Khan. Please let me kill him.

古文：帝曰： 善。 
现代文：炀帝说 ：好。 
English: Mutei said, "That's well said."

古文：矩因诡计召胡悉受赐，斩马邑下，报始毕曰： 史蜀胡悉背可汗，我所共恶，今既诛之。 
现代文：裴矩于是诈称召见史蜀胡悉接受赏赐，在马邑县杀了他，通报始毕可汗说： 史蜀胡悉背叛您，是我们共同憎恨的人，现在已经杀掉。 
English: Pei Jian then pretended to summon Shu Husi to accept the reward, and killed him in Mayi County, informing the First Bi Khan that: Shu Husi betrayed you, he is a person we all hate, and has now been killed.

古文：始毕知状，由是不朝。
现代文：始毕可汗知道真实情况，从此不再朝拜隋朝。
English: Shi Bi Khan knew the true situation and no longer worshiped the Sui Dynasty.

古文：后帝北巡，始毕率骑十万围帝雁门，诏矩与虞世基宿朝堂待顾问。
现代文：后来炀帝巡视北部边境，始毕可汗率领十万骑兵将炀帝围困在雁门关，炀帝命令裴矩和虞世基住在行宫随时等待咨询。
English: Later, Emperor Gong inspected the northern border. Shi Bi Khan led a hundred thousand cavalry to besiege Emperor Gong at Yanmen Pass. Emperor Gong ordered Pei Jian and Yu Shiji to live in the palace and wait for consultation at any time.

古文：围解，从幸江都宫。
现代文：雁门解围后，裴矩跟随炀帝到了江都行宫。
English: After the siege of the Wild Goose Gate was lifted, Pei Mom followed Emperor Zou to Jiangdu Xinggu.

古文：时盗贼蜂结，郡县上奏不可计，矩言于帝。
现代文：当时叛乱队伍蜂群般集结，郡县向朝廷举报的无法统计，裴矩报告了炀帝。
English: At that time, the rebel team gathered like a swarm of bees. The number of counties that reported to the imperial court could not be counted. Pei Jian reported to the emperor.

古文：帝怒，遣诣京师，以疾解。
现代文：炀帝发火了，派他回京，因为生病才收回了诏令。
English: Emperor Shun was furious and sent him back to Beijing, only withdrawing the edict because he was ill.

古文：俄而高祖入关，帝令虞世基问方略，矩曰： 唯愿陛下亟西，天下定矣。 
现代文：不久，高祖李渊进入长安，炀帝命令虞世基向裴矩询问对策，裴矩说： 只希望陛下早点回京，天下就安定了。 
English: Soon after, Gaozu Li Yuan entered Chang'an, and Emperor Xuan ordered Yu Shiji to inquire about countermeasures from Pei Mom. Pei Mom said, "I only hope that Your Majesty will return to Beijing as soon as possible, and the world will be stable."

古文：矩性勤谨，未尝忤物，见天下方乱，其待遇士尤厚，虽厮役皆得其欢。
现代文：裴矩性情勤勉谨慎，还不曾得罪过人，眼看天下开始动乱，对待别人特别厚道，即使是奴仆都得到他的好意。
English: Pei Jiao is diligent and prudent, has never offended anyone, sees the world begin to be in turmoil, treats others with special kindness, and even slaves are favored by him.

古文：是时，卫兵数逃去，帝忧之，以问矩。
现代文：这时，炀帝的警卫将士多次逃跑，他很发愁，询问裴矩怎么办。
English: At this time, Emperor Xizong's guards ran away several times, and he was worried and asked what to do with Pei.

古文：矩曰： 今乘舆淹狩已二年，诸骁果皆无家，人无匹合，则不久安，臣请皆听纳室。 
现代文：裴矩说 ：至今车马滞留江都已经两年，将士们都没有家室，人没有配偶，就不能长久安定，我请陛下听任将士们娶妻纳妾。 
English: Pei Nang said: So far, the chariots and horses have been stranded in the Yangtze River for two years. The soldiers have no family, and a person without a spouse cannot be stable for a long time. I ask Your Majesty to allow the soldiers to marry and have concubines.

古文：帝笑曰： 公定多智。 
现代文：炀帝笑着说 ：您的主意真多。 
English: Hao Di smiled and said, "You really have a lot of ideas."

古文：因诏矩尽召江都女子、孀家，恣将士所欲，即配之，人情翕然相悦，曰： 裴公惠也！ 
现代文：于是命令裴矩把江都的姑娘、寡妇都招集拢来，只要将士喜爱，就嫁给他，人们的情绪一下子稳定下来，都高兴地说 ：这是裴大人的恩惠！ 
English: He then ordered Pei Niang to gather together all the girls and widows in Jiangdu, and marry anyone who liked him. The mood of the people suddenly stabilized, and they all happily said, "This is the grace of Lady Pei!"

古文：宇文化及乱，众劫矩。
现代文：宇文化及杀死了炀帝，叛军劫持了裴矩。
English: Emperor Gong was killed by Emperor Yu and Emperor Pei was kidnapped by the rebels.

古文：贼皆曰： 裴黄门无豫也。 
现代文：他们都说： 裴黄门别犹豫了。 
English: They all said, "Pei Huangmen, don't hesitate."

古文：既而众以秦王子浩为帝，诏矩为侍内，随而北。
现代文：后来叛军立秦王的儿子杨浩继嗣隋朝帝位，诏令裴矩任侍内，随军北上。
English: Later, the rebels established Yang Hao, the son of King Qin, as the successor to the throne of the Sui Dynasty, and ordered Baikang to serve as an attendant and follow the army northward.

古文：化及僭位，署矩尚书右仆射，为河北道安抚大使。
现代文：宇文化及篡夺了帝位，任命裴矩为代理尚书右仆射，任河北道安抚大使。
English: and usurped the imperial throne, appointed Pei Rong as the deputy of Shang Shu Rong, and served as the pacification ambassador of Hebei Province.

古文：又为窦建德所获，建德以矩隋旧臣，遇之厚。
现代文：窦建德打败宇文化及后，裴矩又被窦建德捉住，窦建德认为裴矩是隋朝旧臣，对他很宽厚。
English: After Dou Jiande defeated Yu Wenchuan, Pei Mom was captured by Dou Jiande. Dou Jiande thought that Pei Mom was an old minister of the Sui Dynasty and was very generous to him.

古文：建德起群盗，非有君臣制度，矩为略制朝仪，不阅月，宪章拟王者，建德尊礼之。
现代文：窦建德从民间造反起家，没有君臣礼仪制度，裴矩替他全面制定朝廷礼仪，不到一个月，按照帝王的规格建立了法律规章，窦建德很敬重他。
English: Dou Jiande was a rebel from the people. He did not have a monarch-servant etiquette system. Pei Jiande comprehensively formulated the imperial court etiquette for him. In less than a month, he established laws and regulations according to the specifications of the emperor. Dou Jiande respected him very much.

古文：建德败，来朝，擢殿中侍御史，爵安邑县公。
现代文：窦建德失败后，裴矩归降唐朝，被提拔为殿中侍御史，封为安邑县公。
English: After Dou Jiande's defeat, Pei Mom returned to the Tang Dynasty, was promoted to the palace attendant, and was given the title of Anyi County official.

古文：累迁太子詹事、检校侍中。
现代文：先后改任太子詹事、检校侍中。
English: He was successively reassigned to Prince Zhan Zhi and served as a middle school inspector.

古文：时突厥数盗边，高祖遣使约西突厥连和，突厥因请婚。
现代文：当时突厥多次到边境抢掠，高祖派遣使者邀请西突厥订立和约，突厥乘机要求联姻。
English: At that time, the Turks repeatedly went to the border to plunder. Gaozu sent an envoy to invite the Western Turks to conclude a peace treaty, and the Turks took the opportunity to demand a marriage alliance.

古文：帝曰： 彼势与我绝，缓急不为用，奈何？ 
现代文：高祖说 ：突厥的发展趋势会跟我们绝交，事情一紧急就不会听我的，怎么办？ 
English: Gaozu said, "The development trend of the Turks will be to break off diplomatic relations with us. They will not listen to me in an emergency. What should we do?"

古文：矩曰： 然北虏方炽，岁苦边，若权顺许，以示外援，须我完实更议之。 
现代文：裴矩说 ：不过北方各族气焰正高，年年为边境不安定而伤脑筋，如果暂且顺应，表示把它当作友好力量，等我们军事设施完备、军需物资充实之后再改变战略。 
English: Pei Nang said, "However, the northern ethnic groups are currently in high spirits, and the border is unstable and nerve-wracking every year. If we temporarily comply, we will regard it as a friendly force and wait until our military facilities are complete and military supplies are sufficient before changing our strategy."

古文：帝然其计。
现代文：高祖同意他的计策。
English: Gaozu agreed to his plan.

古文：隐太子败，余党保宫城不解。
现代文：隐太子李建成玄武门被杀以后，他的同伙还要保卫东宫不愿散去。
English: After the murder of the Hidden Prince, Li Jiancheng and Xuanwu Men, his associates still wanted to defend the East Palace and did not want to disperse.

古文：秦王遣矩谕之，乃听命。
现代文：秦王李世民派裴矩去明确开导他们，他们才服从命令。
English: Li Shimin, the king of Qin, sent Pei Jian to enlighten them, and they obeyed the order.

古文：迁民部尚书。
现代文：接着升任民部尚书。
English: He was then promoted to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：太宗即位，疾贪吏，欲痛惩乂之，乃间遣人遗诸曹，一史受馈缣，帝怒，诏杀之。
现代文：太宗李世民登上帝位，憎恨贪官污吏，打算严厉惩处他们，就暗中派人向各部门官员赠送财物，有一个司门令史接受了一匹细绢，太宗发怒，命令杀掉他。
English: Emperor Taizong Li Shimin ascended to the throne. He hated corrupt officials and planned to severely punish them. He secretly sent people to give gifts to officials in various departments. One of the officials received a fine horse. Emperor Taizong was angry and ordered to kill him.

古文：矩曰： 吏受赇，死固宜。
现代文：裴矩说 ：官吏接受贿赂，处死本来应当。
English: "Officials who accept bribes should be put to death," Pei said.

古文：然陛下以计绐之，因即行法，所谓罔人以罪，非道之以德之谊。 
现代文：不过陛下是用计谋诱骗他，凭这就要处以死刑，就成了所说的用罪名陷害别人，不符合用道德来教育他的情理。 
English: But your majesty's deceiving him by trickery, which is punishable by death, is what is called framing someone, and it is not reasonable to educate him with morality.

古文：帝悦，为群臣言之，曰： 矩遂能廷争，不面从，物物若此，天下有不治哉？ 
现代文：太宗听了很高兴，向朝臣们讲了这件事，说 ：裴矩能做到在朝廷当众对我强谏，不肯当面阿谀逢迎，人人都像这样，天下还会不太平吗？ 
English: Emperor Taizong was very pleased to hear this and told the courtiers about it, saying: "If Pei Mom can force me in public at the imperial court and refuse to meet me face-to-face, if everyone is like this, won't the world be peaceful?"

古文：年八十，精明不忘，多识故事，见重于时。
现代文：裴矩八十岁了，精细明察记忆力强，通晓历史旧事，很受人们推崇尊重。
English: At the age of 80, Pei Zhen is highly respected for his keen observation and memory, as well as his knowledge of ancient history.

古文：贞观元年卒，赠绛州刺史，谥曰敬。
现代文：他于贞观元年去世，被追认为绛州刺史，谥号为 敬 。
English: He died in the first year of Zhenguan, and was regarded as the history of Zhangzhou, and his nickname was Jing.

古文：宇文士及，字仁人，京兆长安人。
现代文：宇文士及字仁人，京兆长安县人。
English: Uwenshi and Zhiren people, Jingzhao Chang'an County people.

古文：父述，为隋右卫大将军。
现代文：父亲名述，在隋朝官至右卫大将军。
English: According to his father's name, he rose through the ranks of the Sui dynasty to the rank of grand marshal of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：开皇末，以述勋封新城县公。
现代文：隋文帝开皇末年，凭借父亲的功勋被封为新城县公。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Sui Wen, he was made the governor of Xincheng County on the basis of his father's merits.

古文：文帝引入卧内，与语，奇之。
现代文：文帝杨坚曾把他带进卧室，同他交谈，认为他是优异人才。
English: Emperor Yang Jian once took him into his bedroom, talked with him, and considered him to be an outstanding talent.

古文：诏尚炀帝女南阳公主，为尚辇奉御，从幸江都，以父丧免，起为鸿胪少卿。
现代文：他按诏令娶炀帝杨广的女儿南阳公主为妻，任尚辇奉御，随从炀帝巡视江都。因父亲去世守孝离职，期满复职任鸿胪少卿。
English: According to the imperial edict, he married Nanyang Princess, the daughter of Emperor Yangguang, and was appointed as the vassal of Emperor Yangguang. He accompanied Emperor Yangguang to inspect Jiangdu. Due to the death of his father, he left the position of filial piety and was reinstated as the junior secretary of Emperor Hongwu at the end of his term.

古文：其兄化及谋弑逆，以主婿忌之，弗告。已弑帝，乃封蜀王。
现代文：他哥哥宇文化及秘密策划叛乱时，由于他是炀帝的女婿，对他严守秘密，弑杀炀帝后，才封他为蜀王。
English: When his brother Yu Wenming secretly plotted a rebellion, because he was the son-in-law of Emperor Shun, he kept it a secret from him and only made him the King of Shu after he had killed Emperor Shun.

古文：初，士及为奉御，而高祖任殿中少监，雅自款结。
现代文：从前，宇文士及任奉御，高祖李渊任隋朝的殿内少监，和他有密切交往。
English: Once upon a time, Wu Wenshi was appointed as a vassal of the emperor, and his great-great-grandfather Li Yuan was appointed as a junior inspector in the palace of the Sui Dynasty, and they had close contacts with him.

古文：及从化及至黎阳，帝手书召之。
现代文：在跟随宇文化及到黎阳时，高祖亲写诏书邀请他去。
English: When he followed Yu Qun and went to Liyang, Gao Zu personally wrote an imperial edict to invite him to go.

古文：士及亦遣家童间道走长安，通谆勤，且献金镮。
现代文：宇文士及也暗地派遣仆人秘密赶到长安，表白心迹，并进献了一只金环。
English: He secretly sent his servants to Chang'an to express his feelings and presented a gold ring.

古文：帝悦曰： 我尝与士及共事，今以此献，是将来矣。 
现代文：高祖高兴地说： 我曾和士及共事，今天进献金环，这表明他要来了。 
English: Gaozu said happily, "I used to work with him, and today I gave him a gold ring, which indicates that he is coming."

古文：化及兵日蹙，士及劝归命，不从，乃与封伦诡求督饷。
现代文：宇文化及的军事形势一天天紧迫，宇文士及劝他归附唐朝，宇文化及不听，他就和封伦借口要求去督运军粮。
English: The military situation of the U Culture and the U Culture was becoming more and more urgent. The U scribes tried to persuade him to join the Tang Dynasty, but the U Culture did not listen, so he and Fenglun demanded to supervise the transportation of military grain.

古文：俄而化及败，于是济北豪杰谋起齐兵击窦建德以收河北，观形势，士及不纳，与伦等自归。
现代文：宇文化及很快失败了，这时济北的豪强大族鼓励宇文士及发动齐地的人众进攻窦建德，收复河北的土地，等待形势的发展，宇文士及没有采纳，就和封伦等人主动投奔长安。
English: At that time, the powerful and powerful clans of North Jibei encouraged the Uwenshi and the people of Qi to attack Dou Jiande and recover the land of Hebei, and waited for the development of the situation. If the Uwenshi did not accept it, he and Feng Lun and others took the initiative to go to Chang'an.

古文：帝让之曰： 汝兄弟率思归之人为入关计，尔得时，我父子，尚肯相假乎？
现代文：高祖责备他说 ：你兄弟二人率领要求打回京城的人马确定了进攻关中的方略，那时如果打败了我李家父子，还会放过我们吗？
English: Gao Zu reproached him, saying, "Your two brothers led the people who demanded the return of the capital and determined the strategy of the attack. If you had defeated my father and son of the Li family, would you have let us go?

古文：今欲何地自处？ 
现代文：你现在能到哪儿去安身？ 
English: Where can you go and live now?

古文：士及谢曰： 臣罪当死，但臣往在涿郡，尝与陛下夜论世事，顷又奉所献，冀以此赎罪。 
现代文：宇文士及道歉说： 按我的罪过是该处死，但是我从前在涿州，曾经和陛下在半夜里议论时局，后来又进献金环，希望用这个办法赎罪。 
English: The scribe apologized and said, "According to my crime, I should be put to death, but I was once in Zhangzhou, and I once discussed the current situation with His Majesty in the middle of the night, and later I entered the donation ring, hoping to atone for my sins in this way.

古文：帝笑谓裴寂曰： 彼与我论天下事，逮今六七年，公等皆在其后。 
现代文：高祖笑着对裴寂说 ：他和我谈论治国平天下的大业，至今六七年了，您诸位都在他的后头。 
English: Gao Zu smiled and said to Pei Zh: He and I have been talking about the great cause of governing the country and the world for sixty-seven years, and you are all behind him.

古文：时士及女弟为昭仪，有宠，由是见亲礼，授上仪同。
现代文：当时宇文士及的妹妹为高祖的昭仪，得到宠爱，因此受到亲近尊重，进授仪同三司头衔。
English: At that time, Yu Wenshi and his younger sister were Gao Zu's Zhaoyi, they were favored, so they were closely respected, and the title of Zhaoyi was the same as that of the three departments.

古文：从秦王平宋金刚，录功，复隋旧封，以宗室女妻之，迁王府骠骑将军。
现代文：跟随秦王李世民消灭了宋金刚，论功行赏，恢复了他在隋朝的新城县公封号，娶皇族寿光县主为妻，提升为秦王府骠骑将军。
English: Following the Qin King, Li Shimin annihilated the Song King Kong, and on the basis of merit, he restored his official title of Xincheng County in the Sui Dynasty, married the head of the royal family of Shuguang County, and was promoted to the general of Qin Wangfu.

古文：从讨王世充等，进爵郢国公。
现代文：随同消灭了王世充等叛军，晋封郢国公爵号。
English: Wang Shichong and other rebels were also eliminated, and he received the title of Duke of Shandong.

古文：武德八年，权检校侍中，兼太子詹事。
现代文：武德八年，代理检校侍中，兼任太子詹事。
English: In the eighth year of Wude, he was an acting school inspector, and also served as the crown prince Zhanji.

古文：王即位，拜中书令，真食益州七百户，以本官检校凉州都督。
现代文：秦王登帝位时，他被任命为中书令，得到在益州收纳七百户租税的实封，以原有官职兼任凉州都督。
English: When Emperor Qin ascended to the throne, he was appointed to the position of Zhongshirong, received a sealed envelope for the collection of taxes from 700 households in Yizhou, and concurrently served as the governor of Liangzhou with his original official position.

古文：时突厥数入寇，士及欲立威以镇耀边鄙，每出入，盛陈兵卫，又痛折节下士。
现代文：当时突厥多次侵犯边境，宇文士及要树立威望镇守边关，每当出入，都要摆列气势浩大的警卫队伍，又一个劲地降低身份，尊重下级军民。
English: At that time, the Turks repeatedly violated the border, and the Uwenshi had to establish the prestige of the town to guard the border. Whenever they went in and out, they had to line up a huge guard team, and they had to lower their status and respect the lower-level soldiers and civilians.

古文：或告其反，讯无状，召为殿中监，以疾改蒲州刺史。
现代文：有人告发他谋反，审查起来没有根据，调回朝廷任殿中监，因犯错误离京任蒲州刺史。
English: Some people accused him of plotting a rebellion, the investigation was unfounded, he was transferred back to the imperial court to serve as a palace middle warden, and because of a mistake, he left Beijing to serve as a magistrate in Puzhou.

古文：政尚宽简，人皆宜之。
现代文：主持政务崇尚宽松简略，人人心情舒畅。
English: The presiding government affairs advocate loose and simple, and everyone is in a comfortable mood.

古文：擢右卫大将军。
现代文：后来回京升任右卫大将军。
English: Later, he returned to Beijing and was promoted to the rank of Ueidai shogun.

古文：太宗延入閤语，或至夜分出，遇休沐，往往驰召。
现代文：太宗把他带进内宫交谈，有时半夜才出来，碰上他在家休假，往往派人催马召见他。
English: Emperor Taizong took him into the inner palace to talk with him, and sometimes he came out in the middle of the night. When he was on vacation at home, he often sent someone to summon him.

古文：士及益自谨，其妻尝问遽召何所事，士及卒不对。
现代文：宇文士及更加谨慎，他妻子曾问朝廷催他去干什么，他始终不应声。
English: His wife once asked him what the court was urging him to do, but he remained silent.

古文：帝尝玩禁中树曰： 此嘉木也！ 
现代文：太宗有一次观赏宫中一棵普通的树说： 这是一棵珍贵的树！ 
English: Taizong once looked at an ordinary tree in the palace and said, "This is a precious tree!"

古文：士及从旁美叹。
现代文：宇文士及就在旁边大加赞美起来。
English: Uwenshi and the rest of the group heaped on the praise.

古文：帝正色曰： 魏征常劝我远佞人，不识佞人为谁，乃今信然。 
现代文：太宗板起脸来说 ：魏征经常提醒我疏远花言巧语阿谀奉承的人，我还不知道指的是谁，现在我可相信他的话了。 
English: Tai Zongpan said with a straight face: Wei Zheng has often reminded me to stay away from flatterers. I still don't know who he was referring to, but now I can believe his words.

古文：谢曰： 南衙群臣面折廷争，陛下不得举手。
现代文：宇文士及道歉说： 中书、门下、尚书三省的宰相们冒犯威严直言劝谏，弄得陛下手足无措。
English: The scribe apologized and said, "The chancellors of the three provinces of Zhongshu, Mengshu, and Shangshu have offended the majesty and made His Majesty feel helpless.

古文：今臣幸在左右，不少有将顺，虽贵为天子，亦何聊？ 帝意解。
现代文：现在我有幸在您身边，不稍微将就一点儿，您虽然处在尊贵的天子地位，又有什么意思？ 
English: Now that I have the privilege of being around you, I am not the least bit intimidated. Although you are in the position of a noble son of heaven, what is the point?

古文：又尝割肉，以饼拭手，帝屡目，阳若不省，徐啗之。
现代文：太宗的不满消失了。太宗又有一次用刀切肉，用饼揩手，递给宇文士及，时不时地瞅瞅他，宇文士及佯装没有看见，慢慢地吃着。
English: Taizong's dissatisfaction disappeared. Once again, Taizong cut the meat with a knife, rubbed his hands with a piece of bread, handed it to Uwenshi and poked him from time to time. Uwenshi and I didn't see it, and slowly ate it.

古文：其机悟率类此。
现代文：他的机智颖悟都像这样。
English: His witticisms are all like this.

古文：后以雅旧，别封一子新城县公。
现代文：因为他是老臣，另外封他的一个儿子为新城县公。
English: Because he was an old minister, he also appointed one of his sons as the new county magistrate.

古文：久之，复为殿中监。
现代文：任右卫大将军七年，又任殿中监。
English: He was appointed to the post of Udaidai shogun for seven years, and was also appointed to the post of palace middle inspector.

古文：卒，赠左卫大将军、凉州都督，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：去世后，追认为左卫大将军、凉州都督，安葬在太宗预先为自己营建的昭陵墓地。
English: After his death, he was posthumously recognized as the General of the Left Division and the Governor of Liangzhou, and was buried in the Zhaoling Cemetery that Taizong had built for himself in advance.

古文：士及抚幼弟、孤兄子，以友睦称。
现代文：宇文士及抚育小弟弟以及哥哥的遗孤，表现的兄弟友爱受到人们称赞。
English: He was praised for his brotherly love in raising his orphaned younger brother and elder brother.

古文：好周恤亲戚故人，然过自奉养，服玩食饮必极丰侈。
现代文：他乐于周济贫穷的亲戚朋友，而自己过分贪图享乐，吃的、穿的、用的、玩的，一定要挥霍浪费到极点。
English: He is happy to give money to poor relatives and friends, but he is excessively greedy for pleasure. What he eats, wears, uses, and plays with, he must squander and waste to the extreme.

古文：迟明，兵斩楚璧等，传首东都，籍其家。
现代文：太常寺初拟谥号为 恭 ，黄门侍郎刘洎辩驳说： 宇文士及家庭生活奢侈放纵，不能叫 恭 。 就改谥号为 纵 。
English: For the first time, the nickname of Taizhong Temple was proposed to be "Kong," but the steward of the Yellow Gate, Liu Ye, argued: "Uwenshi and the family life of luxury and indulgence cannot be called "Kong," so the nickname was changed to "Zheng."

古文：阎让，字立德，以字行，京兆万年人。
现代文：阎让字立德，字更有影响，京兆万年县人。
English: Yan let the character Lide, the character has more influence, Jingzhuan County people.

古文：父毘，为隋殿内少监，本以工艺进，故立德与弟立本皆机巧有思。
现代文：父亲名毗，在隋朝任殿内少监，本来是凭手工技艺提拔当官的，所以阎立德和弟弟阎立本都机智灵巧富于想象。
English: Yan Lide and his younger brother Yan Lide were both witty and imaginative, as their father, named Mian Pi, was a junior inspector of the palace in the Sui Dynasty. Originally, officials were promoted based on manual skills.

古文：武德初，为秦王府士曹参军，从平东都。
现代文：高祖武德初年，任秦王府士曹参军，随军平定洛阳。
English: In Gao Zuwude's first year, he joined the army as a staff sergeant of Qin Wangfu and went with the army to pacify Luoyang.

古文：迁尚衣奉御，制衮冕六服、腰舆、伞扇，咸有典法。
现代文：升任尚衣奉御，制作皇帝、后妃、朝臣的衣服、帽子、手拉车轿、华盖、掌扇都合规章制度。
English: He was promoted to Shangyi Bongyou, making clothes, hats, hand-pulled carriages, flower covers, and hand fans for emperors, empresses, and courtiers.

古文：贞观初，历将作少匠、大安县男。
现代文：太宗贞观初年，历任将作少匠、大安县男。
English: In the first year of Taizong Zhenguan, all successors will be junior craftsmen and Da'an County men.

古文：护治献陵，拜大匠。
现代文：为监造高祖的献陵，任命为将作大匠。
English: In order to supervise the construction of Gao Zu's mausoleum, he was appointed to be a great craftsman.

古文：文德皇后崩，摄司空，营昭陵，坐弛职免。
现代文：太宗文德皇后长孙氏逝世，他任代理司空，建造昭陵，因延误期限获罪免职。
English: After the death of Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager

古文：起为博州刺史。
现代文：后起用为博州刺史。
English: Later, it was used as the Boshu stabbing history.

古文：太宗幸洛阳，诏立德按爽垲建离宫清暑，乃度地汝州西山，控汝水，睨广成泽，号襄城宫，役凡百余万。
现代文：太宗巡视洛阳，命令阎立德按照明亮干燥的要求建造行宫以便避暑，于是在汝州西边的山上测量地基，临近汝水，斜对广成泽，名叫襄城宫，征用劳役共一百多万人。
English: Taizong inspected Luoyang, ordered Yan Lide to build a palace according to the requirements of bright and dry to avoid the summer, so he measured the foundation on the mountain west of Ruzhou, near the water, diagonally opposite Guangcheng Lake, called Xiangcheng Palace, and requisitioned a total of more than one million laborers.

古文：宫成，烦燠不可居，帝废之，以赐百姓，坐免官。
现代文：行宫建成后，烦躁闷热不能居住，太宗放弃了它，赏赐给了朝廷官员，阎立德因此获罪免职。
English: After the completion of the Imperial Palace, it was too hot and stuffy to live in. Emperor Taizong gave it up and it was given to an official of the imperial court. Yan Lide was therefore convicted and removed from office.

古文：未几，复为大匠，即洪州造浮海大航五百艘，遂从征辽，摄殿中监，规筑土山，破安市城。
现代文：没过多久，又任将作大匠，到洪州制造航海大船五百艘，于是随军征讨高丽，代理殿中监职务，筹划筑起土山，攻克了安市城。
English: Not long after, he was appointed as a master craftsman and went to Hongzhou to manufacture 500 large seagoing ships, so he followed the army to recruit Goryeo, acting as the palace middle supervisor, planned to build a hill, and conquered the city of An.

古文：师还，至辽泽，亘二百里，淖不可通，立德筑道为桥梁，无留行。
现代文：班师回朝时，走到辽泽，连绵两百里，全是泥沼，不能通行，阎立德筑路架桥，没有耽误行军。
English: When the team returned to the North, they walked to Liaoze, a continuous two hundred miles, all muddy, impassable, Yan Lide built roads and bridges, and did not delay the march.

古文：帝悦，赐予良厚。
现代文：太宗高兴，赏赐十分丰厚。
English: Taizong was delighted and the reward was very rich.

古文：又营翠微、玉华二宫，擢工部尚书。
现代文：还主持建造了翠微宫、玉华宫，升任工部尚书。
English: He also presided over the construction of the Jade Palace and the Jade Palace, and was promoted to the Ministry of Engineering.

古文：帝崩，复摄司空，典陵事，以劳进爵大安县公。
现代文：太宗逝世，又任代理司空，主持昭陵的营建事务，凭功劳进封大安县公爵号。
English: After the death of Emperor Taizong, he also served as Acting Secretary of the Air Force, presided over the construction of the Zhaoling Mausoleum, and was awarded the title of Duke of Da'an County.

古文：永征五年，高宗幸万年宫，留守京师，领徒四万治京城。
现代文：永徽五年，高宗游幸万年宫，让他留守长安，带领四万名工匠修理京城。
English: In the fifth year of Yonghui, Gao Zong toured the Lucky Palace, let him stay in Chang'an, and led forty thousand craftsmen to repair the capital city.

古文：卒，赠吏部尚书、并州都督，陪葬昭陵，谥曰康。
现代文：去世后，追认为吏部尚书、并州都督，安葬在太宗的昭陵墓地，谥号为 康 。
English: After his death, he was posthumously regarded as the head of the government and the provincial governor, and was buried in Taizong's Zhaoling Cemetery. His posthumous name was Kang.

古文：立本，显庆中以将作大匠代立德为工部尚书。
现代文：阎立德的弟弟阎立本，高宗显庆年间，以将作大匠的身份接替阎立德任工部尚书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Gaozong, Yan Liben, Yan Lide's younger brother, succeeded Yan Lide as the Grand Craftsman of the Ministry of Works.

古文：总章元年，以司平太常伯拜右相、博陵县男。
现代文：高宗总章元年，从司平太常伯升任右相、晋封博陵县男。
English: In the first year of the General Chapter of Gaozong, he was promoted from Siping Taizhongbo to the Minister of the Right and promoted to the man of Boling County.

古文：初，太宗与侍臣泛舟春苑池，见异鸟容与波上，悦之，诏坐者赋诗，而召立本侔状。
现代文：当初，太宗和侍从朝臣在春苑池上划船游览，看到珍禽异鸟在池面上随波起伏，喜爱这番情景，命令同坐船上的人吟咏诗歌，而喊阎立本来写生作画。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Taizong and his attendants and courtiers went boating on the Spring Garden Pool. They saw rare and exotic birds undulating on the surface of the pool. They loved the scene and ordered the people on the boat to sing and recite poetry, while they called Yan Li to paint.

古文：閤外传呼画师阎立本，是时已为主爵郎中，俯伏池左，研吮丹粉，望坐者羞怅流汗。
现代文：门外传呼画师阎立本，实际上他已任主爵郎中，却趴在池边，研磨吸吮绘画颜料，他望着那些坐着吟诗的人羞恼得冷汗直流。
English: Outside the door hangs a poster for painter Yan Liben, who is actually the lord's son-in-law, but he is lying on the edge of the pool, grinding and sucking paint. He looks at those who are sitting and chanting and sweats profusely.

古文：归戒其子曰： 吾少读书，文辞不减侪辈，今独以画见名，与厮役等，若曹慎毋习！ 
现代文：回家告诫他的儿子说： 我年轻时读书，吟诗作文不比那些人差，如今人们只知道我会绘画，把我当奴仆看待，你们千万不要学画！ 
English: He went home and admonished his son: "When I was young, I could read and write poetry just as well as those people. Now, people only know that I can paint, and they treat me like a slave. You must never learn to paint!"

古文：然性所好，虽被訾屈，亦不能罢也。
现代文：但是他爱画成癖，虽然遭受讽刺屈辱，还是不愿丢弃。
English: But he loves the habit of painting, and although he is subjected to ironic humiliation, he is still unwilling to discard it.

古文：既辅政，但以应务俗材，无宰相器。
现代文：在参与朝政以后，只被当作应付杂务的普通人员，而没有宰相才能。
English: After participating in the imperial government, he was only treated as an ordinary person who had to deal with chores, but he had no ability to be prime minister.

古文：时姜恪以战功擢左相，故时人有 左相宣威沙漠，右相驰誉丹青 之嘲。
现代文：当时姜恪凭战功提拔为左相，所以人们中流传着 左相姜恪在战场上显威风，右相阎立本在绘画上享荣誉 的挖苦话。
English: At that time, Jiang Ke was promoted to Zuo based on his war exploits, so people circulated a sarcastic saying that Zuo Jiang Ke showed his authority on the battlefield, while Zuo Yan Liben enjoyed honor in painting.

古文：咸亨元年，官复旧名，改中书令。
现代文：高宗咸亨元年，恢复将作大匠的官职，又改任中书令。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gaozong's reign, Gaozong resumed his official position as Grand Craftsman, and was also appointed to the post of Chushiro.

古文：卒，谥曰文贞。
现代文：去世后，谥号为 文贞 。
English: After his death, his nickname was Wenzhen.

古文：立德孙知微，曾孙用之。
现代文：阎立德的孙子名知微，曾孙名用之。
English: Yan Lide's grandson was named Zhiwei, and his great-grandson was named Qu.

古文：知微，圣历初为豹韬卫将军。
现代文：阎知微，武则天圣历年间，任豹韬卫将军。
English: During the reign of Yan Zhiwei and Wuzetian Shengli, he served as the general of the Leopard Guards.

古文：武后时，突厥默啜请和亲，后遣知微摄春官尚书，持金帛护送武延秀聘其女。
现代文：当时，突厥默啜可汗要求联姻，武后派阎知微任代理春官尚书，带上财物护送武延秀去娶他的女儿。
English: At that time, the Turkic mute khan asked for a marriage, and Wu Hou sent Yan Zhiwei to act as the agent of the harbinger of spring, Shang Shu, to escort Wu Yanxiu to marry his daughter.

古文：默啜怒非天子子，囚延秀，挟知微入寇赵、定，尊之如可汗，以示华人，自河以北萧然。
现代文：默啜可汗认为武延秀不是皇子就发火了，关押了武延秀，挟持阎知微侵犯赵州、定州，像对待可汗一样地尊敬他，做给中原人看。黄河以北一片凄凉。
English: The silent khan thought that Wu Yanxiu was not a prince and got angry. He imprisoned Wu Yanxiu, took him hostage, invaded Zhao and Dingzhou, and treated him with the same respect as the khan. This was for the Central Plains people to see. North of the Yellow River was desolate.

古文：朝廷以知微卖国，夷其族。
现代文：朝廷认为阎知微背叛了国家，就杀光了他的全族。
English: The imperial court believed that Yan Zhiwei had betrayed the country and killed his entire family.

古文：知微不知，逃还。
现代文：阎知微不知道这个情况，逃回来了。
English: Unaware of the situation, Yan fled back.

古文：武后业已然，乃曰： 恶臣疾子，赐百官甘心焉。 
现代文：武后已经弄成这个样子，只好说： 这是奸邪的臣子忌恨你造成的，我把他们交给你听凭处置。 
English: Empress Wu had already made herself look like this, so she had to say: This was caused by treacherous courtiers who hated you. I will leave them to you to deal with as you see fit.

古文：于是骨断脔分，非要职者不能得。
现代文：于是棒敲棍打零刀碎剐，不是身居要职的不能使他满意。
English: As a result, he cannot be satisfied with beating with a stick, beating with a club, and chopping with a knife.

古文：子则先，以武三思婿免死。
现代文：阎知微的儿子阎则先，由于是武三思的女婿那时免了死罪。
English: Yan Zetian, the son of Yan Zhiyi, was spared the death penalty because he was the son-in-law of Wu Sansi.

古文：玄宗在籓时，以善割蒙宠。
现代文：玄宗李隆基当临淄郡王时，他因善于切肉受到宠信。
English: When Xuanzong Li Longji was the king of Linyi County, he was favored because he was good at cutting meat.

古文：开元中，有司奏拟供奉，姚元崇以为则先刑戮家，又逆人姻属，不可留京师。
现代文：玄宗开元中叶，主管官吏奏请授予他供奉官职，姚崇认为他的家族遭到朝廷屠杀，他又抢夺了别人的妻妾，不能留在京城。
English: In the middle of the first half of the Xuan Zong Dynasty, the officials in charge asked Yao Chong to grant him an official post. Yao Chong believed that his family had been slaughtered by the imperial court, and that he had robbed someone else's wife and concubine, and could not stay in Beijing.

古文：诏曰： 朕在外日，尝驱使，宜令供奉。 
现代文：玄宗发出诏令 ：我在封地时，曾用过他，可以任命为供奉。 
English: Emperor Xuanzong issued a decree: I used him when I was in the fief, so he can be appointed as a votive offering.

古文：用之，初为彭州参军，尝摄录事，一日纠愆谬不法数十事，太守以为材。
现代文：阎用之，开始时任彭州参军，曾任代理录事，一天之内纠正错误违法的事件几十起，太守认为他是个人才。
English: Yan Yingzhi, who joined the army from Pengzhou at the beginning, once served as a deputy recorder, and corrected dozens of wrong and illegal incidents within one day. The emperor thought he was a talent.

古文：后举通事舍人，累迁右卫郎将，知引驾仗。
现代文：后被举荐任通事舍人，连续提升为右卫郎将，主持带领皇帝仪仗的事务。
English: After that, he was recommended to be promoted to the post of commander-in-chief, and was successively promoted to the post of right guard, presiding over and leading the emperor's ceremonial duties.

古文：金吾将军李质升殿不解刀，呵却之，请按以法，左右震悚。
现代文：金吾将军李质上殿没有解去佩刀，阎用之将他喝了出去，要求依法处置，周围的人都震惊恐惧。
English: Kingu's general, Li Qiao, did not remove his sword from the palace, but Yan used it to drink him out and demanded that he be dealt with according to the law. The people around him were shocked and afraid.

古文：始，有司以三卫执扇登殿，用之奏三卫皆趫悍，不宜升陛迩御坐，请以宦者代，遂为故事。
现代文：以往，主管官吏派警卫人员为皇帝握持掌扇，阎用之禀奏警卫人员都敏捷勇猛，不适合登上宫殿站在皇帝身边，要求用太监接替，从此成为惯例。
English: In the past, the officials in charge sent guards to hold the palm fan for the emperor, and the guards used by Yan were agile and brave. They were not suitable for climbing the palace to stand beside the emperor and asked to be replaced by eunuchs. Since then, it has become a common practice.

古文：天宝中，女为义王玼妃。
现代文：玄宗天宝中叶，他女儿为义王李王此的妃。
English: In the middle of the reign of Emperor Xuanzong, his daughter became the consort of the righteous King Li.

古文：终左金吾将军。
现代文：在左金吾将军任上去世。
English: He died while serving as General Sadakingo.

