古文：尉瑾，字安仁。
现代文：尉瑾，字安仁。
English: 尉,字安仁.

古文：父庆宾，为魏肆州刺史。
现代文：父亲尉庆宾，是魏肆州刺史。
English: His father, First Lieutenant Qingbin, was a Wei Zhaozhou official.

古文：瑾少而敏悟，好学慕善。
现代文：尉瑾年少时很聪明，好学向善。
English: When he was young, he was very smart and eager to learn.

古文：稍迁直后。
现代文：升官至直后。
English: Promoted to immediately after.

古文：司马子如执政，瑾取其外生皮氏女，由此擢拜中书舍人。
现代文：司马子如执政的时候，尉瑾娶了他的外甥皮家的女儿，因此被擢拔为中书舍人。
English: When Sima Zi Rong was in power, he married the daughter of his nephew Pi Jia, so he was promoted to the position of the second secretary.

古文：既是子如姻戚，数往参诣，因与先达名辈微相款狎。
现代文：成了子如的姻亲后，多次去拜见他，由此逐渐和一批名流显贵来往。
English: After becoming Ziru's in-laws, she went to visit him many times, and gradually came into contact with a number of celebrities and dignitaries.

古文：世宗入朝，因命瑾在邺北宫共高德正典机密。
现代文：世宗入朝后，就命尉瑾在邺都北宫和高德正一起掌管机密大事。
English: After Sejong entered the imperial court, he ordered Yeongjo to take charge of confidential matters together with Gao Dezheng at the Beipu Palace.

古文：肃宗辅政，累迁吏部尚书。
现代文：肃宗辅佐朝政时，多次升迁任吏部尚书。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suizong, he was promoted several times to the position of secretary.

古文：世祖践祚，赵彦深本子如宾僚，元文遥、和士开并帝乡故旧，共相荐达，任遇弥重。
现代文：世祖登基，赵彦深本来是子如的幕僚，元文遥、和士开都是皇上在家乡时的朋友，大家互相引荐，都做了大官，尉瑾更加受到重用。
English: When the emperor ascended to the throne, Zhao Yanshen was originally Zi Ruru's staff, and Yuan Wenyao and He Shikai were friends of the emperor when they were in their hometown. They were introduced to each other, and both became senior officials, and were even more heavily used.

古文：又吏部铨衡所归，事多秘密，由是朝之几事，颇亦预闻。
现代文：吏部本来是选拔考核官员的机构，涉及许多机密，从此朝中一些隐秘大事，很多都能参与。
English: The Personnel Department was originally an agency for selecting and assessing officials, involving many secrets. Since then, many have been able to participate in some secret events in the morning.

古文：寻兼右仆射，摄选，未几即真。病卒。
现代文：不久兼任右仆射，帮助选拔官员，很快就得以正式任命，后来因病去世。
English: Soon he also served as a right-hand man, helping to select officials, and was soon officially appointed. He later died of illness.

古文：世祖方在三台饮酒，文遥奏闻，遂命彻乐罢饮。
现代文：当时世祖正在三台喝酒，元文遥报告了尉瑾去世的消息，世祖随即命人停止歌舞撤去了酒宴。
English: At that time, Shizu was drinking in Sandai, and Yuan Wenyao reported the news of Ye's death. Shizu immediately ordered the people to stop singing and dancing and withdrew the wine banquet.

古文：瑾外虽通显，内阙风训，闺门秽杂，为世所鄙。
现代文：虽然尉瑾在官场上地位显达，但家中却缺少教养，内室污秽淫乱，受到世人的鄙视。
English: Although he held a prominent position in the government, he lacked upbringing at home, and his inner room was filthy and lewd. He was despised by the world.

古文：然亦能折节下士，意在引接名流，但不别之。
现代文：但他却能礼贤下士，意图交结名流，却又不加区别。
English: But he can salute a corporal, intend to mingle with celebrities, and yet make no distinction.

古文：及官高任重，便大躁急，省内郎中将论事者逆即瞋詈，不可谘承。
现代文：等他做了大官，手握重权。脾气也变得极其暴躁，尚书省内讨论事情的官员，如果违背了他的意愿就瞪眼大骂，不能继续商讨下去。
English: When he became a high-ranking official, he held a lot of power. His temper also became extremely hot, and officials who discussed things in Shangshu Province, if they went against his wishes, would stare and swear, and could not continue to discuss.

古文：既居大选，弥自骄狠。
现代文：掌握了铨选官吏的大权后，更加骄横狠毒。
English: After seizing the power to select officials, he became even more arrogant and vicious.

古文：子德载嗣。
现代文：儿子尉德载继嗣。
English: His son 尉德载 became his successor.

古文：冯子琮，信都人，北燕主冯跋之后也。
现代文：冯子琮，值都人，是寸艳国君遇毖的后代。
English: Feng Zixuan, a native of Chengdu, is a descendant of the empress Dowager Cunyan.

古文：父灵绍，度支郎中。
现代文：他的父亲运动，曾为度支郎中。
English: His father, a sportsman, had been a middle school teacher.

古文：子琮性聪敏，涉猎书传，为。肃宗除领军府法曹，典机密，摄库部。
现代文：王签本性聪敏，博览群书，被卢塞任命为领军府法曹，主管机密，同时协助管理库部。
English: Wang Qian was naturally intelligent and well-read. He was appointed by Luce as the leading legal officer of the Military Government, in charge of secrets, and also assisted in managing the treasury department.

古文：肃宗曾阅簿领，试令口陈，子琮闇对，无有遗失。
现代文：有一次肃宗检查记事的文书，试着让子琮口头陈述，他都能背着回答上来，没有任何遗漏。
English: On one occasion, Su Zong checked the written record and tried to have Zi Yao make an oral statement. He was able to answer behind his back without any omissions.

古文：子琮妻，胡皇后妹也。
现代文：子琮的妻子是胡皇后的妹妹。
English: Zi Yao's wife is the younger sister of Queen Hu.

古文：迁殿中郎，加东宫管记。又奉别诏，令共胡长粲辅导太子，转庶子。
现代文：后来升任殿中郎，加授东宫管记又奉另外的诏书，命他和胡长粲共同辅导太子，改任庶于。
English: Later, he was promoted to the position of the palace's middle steward, and according to another imperial edict, he and Hu Changtao were ordered to jointly tutor the crown prince.

古文：天统元年，世祖禅位后主。
现代文：天统元年，世祖惮位给后主。
English: In the first year of the Heavenly Reign, the position of the founder of the world was passed on to his successor.

古文：世祖御正殿，谓子琮曰： 少君左右宜得正人，以卿心存正直，今以后事相委。 除给事黄门侍郎，领主衣都统。
现代文：世祖来到正殿上，对于琮说： 年少的国君周围应该有正直的大臣辅佐，因为你心地正直，所以今天我把国事托付给你。 任他为给事黄门侍郎，领主衣都统。
English: When the ancestor came to the main hall, he said to Zou: The young sovereign should be surrounded by honest ministers and assistants, because you are honest at heart, so today I entrust the affairs of state to you.

古文：世祖在晋阳，既居旧殿，少帝未有别所，诏子琮监造大明宫。
现代文：世祖在晋阳，仍然住在以前的宫殿，后主没有另外的住所，就命子琮监造大明宫。
English: The ancestor was still living in the former palace in Jinyang, and since his successor had no other place to live, he ordered his son to supervise the construction of the Daming Palace.

古文：宫成，世祖亲自巡幸，怪其不甚宏丽。
现代文：建成后，世祖亲自来巡视，责怪修造得不够宏伟壮丽。
English: After it was completed, the founder himself came to inspect it, blaming it for not being grand enough.

古文：子琮对曰： 至尊幼年，纂承大业，欲令敦行节俭，以示万邦。
现代文：他回答说： 皇上年纪幼小，承袭了君位，希望能督促他行为节俭来昭示给别的国家。
English: He replied: The emperor is young and has inherited the throne, and I hope to urge him to behave frugally to show other countries.

古文：兼此北连天阙，不宜过复崇峻。 世祖称善。
现代文：况且这座宫殿北面和您的住所相连，也不应该过分高大雄伟。 世祖对他的回答很赞赏。
English: Moreover, this palace is connected to your residence on the north side, and it should not be too tall and majestic.

古文：及世祖崩，仆射和士开先恒侍疾，秘丧三日不发。
现代文：仆射扭闻原先一直侍候病情，世祖去世后，连续三天秘不发丧。
English: After the death of his ancestor, he secretly mourned for three consecutive days.

古文：子琮问士开不发丧之意。
现代文：子琮问和士开这样做的原因。
English: Zou Zi asked He Shikai the reason for doing so.

古文：士开引神武、文襄初崩并秘丧不举，至尊年少，恐王公有贰心，意欲普追集□风堂，然后与公详议。
现代文：和士开引证神武帝、文襄帝去世时秘不发丧的旧例，认为皇帝年纪幼小，恐怕王公贵族会有篡夺帝位之心，想把贵族大臣都召集到凉风堂，再和他们详细商议。
English: Citing the old example of keeping the death of Emperor Shenwu and Emperor Wenxiang a secret, he thought that the emperor was too young, and feared that the princes and nobles would have the heart to usurp the imperial throne. He wanted to gather the nobles and ministers to the cool breeze hall, and then discuss with them in detail.

古文：时太尉录尚书事赵郡王叡先恒居内，预帷幄之谋，子琮素知士开忌叡及领军临淮王娄定远，恐其矫遗诏出叡外任，夺定远禁□之权，因答云： 大行，神武之子，今上又是先皇传位，□臣富贵者皆是至尊父子之恩，但令在内贵臣一无改易，王公已下必无异望。
现代文：当时太尉录尚书事趟叠廷直纽原先也一直住在宫内，参预谋划宫内事务，王壁平时知道和翅很顾忌直塑和领军堕进王娄定远，恐怕和士开会假托皇帝的遣诏，让产壑就任外职，夺取娄定远的职权。便回答说： 刚去世的世祖皇帝，是神武帝的儿子，现在的皇帝又是先皇传位的，群臣的富贵都是出自皇上父子的恩德，衹要你不改变大臣的权力地位，王公以下的人一定不会有什么别的奢求。
English: At that time, the captain of the imperial guard had been living in the palace, and the councillors had been planning the affairs of the palace. Wang Bei knew that the emperor and the empress were very careful not to lead the army into Wang Jingyuan. I am afraid that the emperor and the empress would hold a meeting to pretend to be sent by the emperor, and let the emperor take up a foreign post and seize the authority of Wang Jingyuan. He replied: The just-deceased ancestor emperor is the son of Emperor Jinwu, and the current emperor is the first emperor to succeed to the throne. The wealth of the ministers comes from the grace of the emperor's father

古文：世异事殊，不得与霸朝相比。
现代文：时代不同事情也发生了变化，过去的朝代不能和现在相比。
English: Times are different, things are different, and today cannot be compared to the past.

古文：且公出宫门已经数日，升遐之事，行路皆传，久而不举，恐有他变。 于是乃发丧。
现代文：况且你已经不出宫门几天了，皇上去世的事，到处都在传扬，长时间不发丧，恐怕会有别的变故。 于是发布皇上去世的消息。
English: Moreover, you have not been out of the palace for several days, and the news of the Emperor's death is being spread everywhere. If you don't mourn for a long time, I'm afraid something else will happen. So the news of the Emperor's death is released.

古文：元文遥以子琮太后妹夫，恐其□成太后干政，说赵郡王及士开出之，拜郑州刺史，即令之任。
现代文：互主遥因为工签是太后的妹夫，担心他会协助太后干预朝政，就劝说高散与和士开使子琮离开京城，任命他为郑州刺史，并且命他立即赴任。
English: Because the mutual master, Yao, was the sister-in-law of the empress dowager, and feared that he would assist the empress dowager in interfering in the politics of the dynasty, he persuaded Gao San and He Shikai to send Zibo to leave Beijing, appointed him as the governor of Zhengzhou, and ordered him to take office immediately.

古文：子琮除州，非后主本意，中旨殷勤，特给后部鼓吹，加兵五十人，并听将物度关至州。
现代文：王珪出任刺史，并非是后主的本意，诏旨下达后皇上很眷顾他，特地赐给后部鼓吹，增派五十名士兵，并且听任他带着东西通过关卡上任。
English: It was not the intention of the empress dowager to appoint Wang Qian as the crown prince. Since the imperial edict was issued, the empress dowager was very fond of him. She specially gave him the rear propaganda, sent fifty additional soldiers, and allowed him to take things with him through the checkpoints to take office.

古文：未几，太后为齐安王纳子琮长女为妃，子琮因请假赴邺，遂授吏部尚书。
现代文：不久，太后为齐安王纳子琮的大女儿为妃子，子琮因而请假来到邺都，于是被任命为吏部尚书。
English: Not long after, the empress dowager named the eldest daughter of the Qian king, Na Zixuan, as her concubine. As a result, Zixuan took a leave of absence and came to Chengdu, whereupon he was appointed as the secretary of the General Staff.

古文：其妻恃亲放纵，请谒公行，贿货填积，守宰除授，先定钱帛多少，然后奏闻，其所通致，事无不允，子琮亦不禁制。
现代文：子琮的妻子倚仗是太后的妹妹而放纵，公然请托，接受贿赂，太守和县令的任命，先要确定财帛的多少，然后才上奏给皇上。所奏之事，都能允准。子琮对妻子行为也不加禁止。
English: Zixuan's wife relied on being the empress dowager's sister and indulged, openly soliciting and accepting bribes. When appointing an eunuch and a county magistrate, it was first necessary to determine how much money was needed before reporting it to the emperor. Anything that was reported could be approved. Zixuan's behavior towards his wife was also not prohibited.

古文：俄迁尚书右仆射，仍摄选。
现代文：不久升任尚书右仆射，代为选拔官吏。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the post of Shangshu's right-hand man, acting as a selection official.

古文：和士开居要日久，子琮旧所附托，卑辞曲躬，事事谘□。
现代文：和士开任要职很长时间，子琮一直依附他，卑躬曲膝，凡事都要禀报。
English: He held the important post for a long time, and Zixu always clung to him, groveled, and had to report everything.

古文：士开弟休与卢氏婚，子琮检校趋走，与士开府僚不异。
现代文：士开的弟弟士休和卢氏结婚时，子琮到处检查奔走，与士开的幕僚没什么两样。
English: When Shikai's younger brother Shih Xiu married Lu, Zijun ran around checking up on him, just like Shikai's staff.

古文：是时内官除授多由士开奏拟，子琮既恃内戚，兼带选曹，自擅权宠，颇生间隙。
现代文：当时内官的任命都是由士开启奏皇上，而子琮依仗自己是皇亲并且兼选官吏，就自己独揽大权，和和士开产生矛盾。
English: At that time, the appointment of the inner officer was initiated by the nobles and reported to the emperor, while Zi Xi relied on himself as a royal relative and elected officials, monopolizing power and creating a contradiction with the nobles.

古文：琅邪王俨杀士开，子琮与其事。
现代文：琅邪王高俨杀士开时，子琮也参预其事。
English: When the evil king Gao Zhen killed a man, Zi Zhen also participated in the matter.

古文：就内省绞杀之。
现代文：在内省把他绞死。
English: Hang him on reflection.

古文：子琮微有识鉴，及位望转隆，宿心顿改。
现代文：子琮稍微有点识别人才的能力，等他地位日渐尊贵，完全改变了过去的心志，提拔一些不正之人，把他们当作深交。
English: Zixuan had a little ability to recognize talent, and as his position became more and more distinguished, he completely changed his mind in the past, promoted some dishonest people, and regarded them as close friends.

古文：擢引非类，以为深交；纵其子弟，官位不依伦次；又专营婚媾，历选上门，例以官爵许之，旬日便验。
现代文：放纵子弟，授予宫职也不依照正常秩序，而且专门和上层人物缔结婚姻关系，照例许给他们官位，十来天就可以实现。
English: Indulging one's children, awarding palace posts without following the normal order, and specially concluding marriage relations with upper-class people, and giving them official positions as usual, can be achieved in about ten days.

古文：子慈正。
现代文：他的儿子冯慈正。
English: His son, Feng Cizheng, is gone.

古文：赫连子悦，字士欣，勃勃之后也。
现代文：赫连子悦，字士欣，是勃勃的后代。
English: Kherian Ziyue, also known as Shi Xin, is a vigorous offspring.

古文：魏永安初，以军功为济州别驾。
现代文：魏永安初年，因军功被任命为济州别驾。
English: In the first year of Wei Yong'an, he was appointed as a Jeju special guest due to his military service.

古文：及高祖起义，侯景为刺史，景本尒朱心腹，子悦劝景起义，景从之。
现代文：世宗笑着说： 你衹知道要方便百姓，不知道自己的地盘减少。 
English: Sejong smiled and said, "You don't know how to make things convenient for the people, and you don't know that your territory is shrinking.

古文：除林虑守。世宗往晋阳，路由是郡，因问所不便。
现代文：他回答说： 我所陈述的都是从百姓的疾苦出发，不敢因为贪图私利而违背自己的良心。 世宗说： 你能做到逭一点，很好，很好。 
English: He replied, "What I have stated is based on the sufferings of the people, and I dare not violate my conscience for the sake of personal gain."The world said, "If you can do a little bit, that's great, that's great."

古文：悦答云： 临水、武安二县去郡遥远，山岭重迭，车步艰难，若东属魏郡，则地平路近。 世宗笑曰： 卿徒知便民，不觉损干。 子悦答云： 所言因民疾苦，不敢以私润负心。 世宗云︰ 卿能如此，甚善，甚善。 仍□依事施行。
现代文：于是下令按子悦的意见执行。
English: He then ordered that it be carried out in accordance with Ziyue's opinion.

古文：在郡满，更征为临漳令。
现代文：在郡任期满后又被征召为临漳县令，以后又任命为郑州刺史。
English: After the expiration of his term of office in the county, he was again conscripted as the Linyi County magistrate, and later he was appointed as the Zhengzhou magistrate.

古文：后除郑州刺史，于时新经河清大水，民多逃散，子悦亲加恤隐，户口益增，治为天下之最。
现代文：当时塑丛刚刚经历了迥遣年间的大水，很多人都逃散了，子悦亲自去慰问抚恤他们，使得户口比原来有了增加，郑州被治理的成为当时最好的地方。
English: At that time, Puxu had just experienced the flood of the Sanyuan period. Many people had fled, and Ziyue personally went to comfort and support them, making the hukou increase compared to the original, and Zhengzhou was governed as the best place at that time.

古文：入为都官尚书，郑州民八百余请立碑颂德，有诏许焉。
现代文：被召入朝廷任都官尚书时，郑州百姓八百多人请求为他树碑颂德，朝廷下韶同意请求。
English: When Shang Shu, an official of the imperial court, was summoned to the imperial court, more than 800 people in Zhengzhou requested that a monument be erected to him, and the imperial court agreed to the request.

古文：后以本官兼吏部。
现代文：后来又以都官尚书兼管吏部。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Tokyo Metropolitan Government official in charge of official documents.

古文：子悦在官，唯以清勤自守，既无学术，又阙风仪，人伦清鉴，去之弥远，一旦居铨衡之首，大招物议。由是除太常卿，卒。
现代文：子悦做官清廉勤谨自我约束，但没有治国之术，也没有什么风度，如何鉴别人才，他也不内行，一旦做了铨选人才的首席官，招来许多人的非议，所以又改任为太常卿，一直到去世。
English: As an official, Ziyue was clean, honest, diligent and self-disciplined, but he did not have the ability to govern the country, nor did he have any manners. He did not know how to judge other people's talents. Once he became the chief officer of selecting talents, he attracted many people's criticism, so he was reappointed as Tai Changqing until his death.

古文：唐邕，字道和，太原晋阳人，其先自晋昌徙焉。
现代文：唐邕，字道和，太原晋阳人，他的祖先从晋昌迁到这裹。
English: Tang Xuan, also known as Tao He, was a native of Taiyuan and Jinyang, and his ancestors migrated here from Jinchang.

古文：父灵芝，魏寿阳令。
现代文：父亲唐灵芝，是魏寿阳县令。
English: His father, Tang Lingzhi, was the governor of Wei Shouyang County.

古文：邕少明敏，有治世才具。
现代文：唐邕小时候就聪明，有治理天下的才干。
English: When he was a child, Tang Xuan was clever and had the ability to govern the world.

古文：太昌初，或荐于高祖，命其直外兵曹，典执文帐。
现代文：太昌初年，有人把他推荐给高祖，命他在外兵曹任职，负责公文案卷。
English: In the first year of Taichang, someone recommended him to Gaozu and ordered him to serve as a foreign petty officer in charge of official documents.

古文：邕善书计，强记默识，以干济见知，擢为世宗大将军府参军。
现代文：唐邕擅长文字和计算，记忆力很强，因为才能出众受到赏识，被擢拔为世宗大将军府参军。
English: Tang Yao was good at writing and calculation, and had a strong memory. Because of his outstanding talent, he was highly appreciated and was promoted to the rank of Sejong Grand General and joined the army.

古文：及世宗崩，事出仓卒，显祖部分将士，镇压四方，夜中召邕支配，造次便了，显祖甚重之。
现代文：世宗去世时，事出仓猝，显祖指挥分派将士，镇定四方，夜裹把唐邕召去调配各方面事宜，片刻之间就已安排停当，显祖很倚重他。
English: When Shizong passed away, the matter came out of the blue. Xianzu took the lead in commanding and assigning soldiers to keep the four sides calm. At night, he summoned Tang Jun to arrange all aspects of the matter. Within a few moments, he had arranged to stop. Xianzu was very dependent on him.

古文：显祖频年出塞，邕必陪从，专掌兵机。
现代文：显祖连年出塞，必定要唐邕陪同，专门掌管军中机密。
English: Emperor Xianzu had to be accompanied by Tang Jun, who was in charge of military secrets.

古文：识悟闲明，承受敏速，自督将以还，军吏以上，劳□由绪，无不谙练，每有顾问，占对如响。
现代文：见识清楚，领会迅速，从督将以下，军卒以上，他们的功绩缘由，无不熟悉，显祖每一次询问，都能立即回答。
English: He saw clearly and comprehended quickly. He was familiar with the reasons for their exploits from the rank of lieutenant general and above. He could answer every inquiry immediately.

古文：或于御前简阅，虽三五千人，邕多不执文簿，暗唱官位姓名，未常谬误。
现代文：在显祖面前考察官员情况，即使有三五千人，唐邕也不用拿名册，凭记忆唱名，从来也没出过差错。
English: When inspecting the officials in front of Xianzu, even if there were three or five thousand people, Tang Jun did not need to take the roster, he recited the names from memory, and never made a mistake.

古文：七年，于羊汾堤讲武，令邕总为诸军节度。
现代文：太昌七年，显祖在羊汾堤讲习武事，命唐邕为诸军指挥。
English: In the seventh year of the Tenpo era, Emperor Wenzhong gave a martial arts lecture at Yangpu Dike and ordered Tang Jun to mobilize the troops.

古文：事毕，仍监宴射之礼。
现代文：完毕后，又命他做了饮宴习射的监礼官。
English: After the seminar, he was still ordered to supervise the banquet and the etiquette of archery.

古文：是日，显祖亲执邕手，引至太后前，坐于丞相斛律金之上，启太后云： 唐邕强干，一人当千。 仍别赐锦彩钱帛。
现代文：这一天，显祖亲自拉着唐邕的手，带他来到太后跟前，坐在丞相斛律金的上位，对太后说： 唐邕精明强干，一人可以抵得上一千人。 于是另外赐给他彩缎钱帛。
English: On this day, Emperor Xianzu personally took Tang Xuan by the hand and brought him to the empress dowager. He sat on the top of the throne and said to the empress dowager, "Tang Xuan is shrewd and strong, and one person can be worth a thousand people." Therefore, he also gave him a lot of money.

古文：邕非唯强济明辨，然亦善揣上意，进取多途，是以恩宠日隆，委任弥重。
现代文：唐邕不仅办事干练明辨，而且善于揣摩皇上的心思，多方博取皇上的欢心，因此皇上对他的恩宠增一日，委任职权越来越大。
English: Tang Xuan was not only capable and discerning in his work, but also good at guessing the emperor's thoughts and winning the emperor's favor in many ways. Therefore, the emperor's favor to him increased by one day, and his power of appointment became greater and greater.

古文：显祖又尝对邕白太后云： 唐邕分明强记，每有军机大事，手作文书，口且处分，耳又听受，实是异人。 一日之中，六度赐物。
现代文：显祖曾经当着他的面对太后说： 唐邕头脑清楚记忆力强，每逢有什么军机大事，手上一面写文书，嘴裹处理事务，耳朵还听着别人的报告，实在是奇才。 一天之中，赏赐给他六次束西。
English: Xianzu once said to the empress dowager in front of him: "Tang Yao has a clear mind and a strong memory. Whenever there is any military event, he writes documents on his hand, handles affairs with his mouth wrapped, and listens to other people's reports. He is truly a genius. In one day, he is rewarded with six bundles of money.

古文：又尝解所服青鼠皮裘赐邕，云： 朕意在车马衣裘与卿共弊。 十年，从幸晋阳，除兼给事黄门侍郎，领中书舍人。
现代文：又曾解下自己穿的青鼠裘皮大衣赐给唐邕，说： 我的意思是车马衣裘这些东西，可以和大臣一起来享用。 太昌十年，随从显祖到晋阳，兼任给事黄门侍郎，同时领中书舍人。
English: He also took off his green mouse fur coat and gave it to Tang Xuan, saying, "I mean, these things can be enjoyed together with the minister." Taichang spent ten years following Xianzu to Jinyang, concurrently serving as the attendant of the Yellow Gate, and at the same time leading the middle school students.

古文：显祖尝登童子佛寺，望□州城曰： 此是何等城？ 或曰： 此是金城汤池，天府之国。 帝云： 我谓唐邕是金城，此非金城也。 其见重如此。
现代文：显祖曾经登上童子佛寺，望着并州城说： 这是什么样的城池? 左右有人说： 这是一座固若金汤、物产丰富的城池。 皇上说： 我却认为唐邕才是座金城，而造座城却不是。 
English: Emperor Xianzu once ascended the Doji Buddhist Temple, gazed at the castle and said: What kind of castle is this? Some people said: This is a solid gold soup, a castle rich in products. The emperor said: But I think that Tanggu is a golden city, but it is not a castle city.

古文：其后语邕曰： 卿劬劳既久，欲除卿作州。
现代文：唐邕就是这样被皇上看重。后来皇上又对他说： 你为国家操劳很多年了，本来想让你到外地去做官。
English: This is how Tang Xuan was valued by the emperor. Later, the emperor said to him, "You have worked hard for the country for many years, and I originally wanted you to go abroad to work as an official.

古文：频□杨遵彦更求一人堪代卿者，遵彦云比遍访文武，如卿之徒实不可得，所以遂停此意。
现代文：也曾经多次命杨遵彦另外找一人代替你，但他说，近来在文武官员中普遍查询了一次，像你这样的实在找不出第二人，所以就打消了这念头，你就努力地干吧。 
English: He also repeatedly ordered Yang Zunhan to find another person to replace you, but he said that recently he had made a general inquiry among the civil and military officials, and he couldn't find a second person like you, so he dismissed the idea. You should work hard.

古文：卿宜勉之。 显祖或时切责侍臣不称旨者： 观卿等举措，不中与唐邕作奴。 其见赏遇多此类。
现代文：显祖有时斥责那些不称职的侍臣，说： 看你们的所作所为，连给唐邕做奴才都不合格。 唐邕经常像这样受到皇上的嘉奖。
English: Emperor Xianzu sometimes rebuked those incompetent courtiers, saying: "Looking at what you have done, you are not even qualified to be the servants of Tang Jun. Tang Jun was often praised by the emperor in this way.

古文：肃宗作相，除黄门侍郎。
现代文：肃宗作丞相时，唐邕任黄门侍郎。
English: When Suson became chancellor, Tang Xuan served as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain.

古文：于华林园射，特赐金带宝器服玩杂物五百种。
现代文：在华林园习射时，特别赏给他金带、实器及各种穿用玩赏的杂物五百种。
English: When he practiced shooting in the Hualin Garden, he was specially rewarded with 500 kinds of gold belts, solid objects and various miscellaneous objects to wear and play with.

古文：天统初，除侍中、□州大中正，又拜护军，余如故。
现代文：天统初年，任侍中、并州大中正，又封为护军，其他职位不变。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Tenmu, he was appointed as a Samurai Junior High School, a Junior High School Vice President of the State University, and a military escort. Other positions remain unchanged.

古文：邕以军民教习田猎，依令十二月，月别三围，以为人马疲敝，奏请每月两围。
现代文：按照过去的惯例军民要演习田猎，每年十二个月，每月围猎三次，唐邕认为这样搞得人马疲困，就奏明皇上，请求改为每月两次。
English: According to the past practice, the military and civilians should practice field hunting for twelve months a year, hunting three times a month. Tang Jun thought that this would make people and horses tired, so he wrote to the emperor, requesting to change it to twice a month.

古文：世祖从之。
现代文：世祖听从了他的建议。
English: The patriarch accepted the suggestion.

古文：后出为赵州刺史，余官如故。
现代文：后来唐邕出任赵州刺史，其他官职不变。
English: Later, Tang Jun served as Zhaozhou chief historian, and his other official positions remained unchanged.

古文：世祖谓邕曰： 朝臣未有带侍中、护军、中正作州者，以卿故有此举，放卿百余日休息，至秋间当即追卿。 迁右仆射，又迁尚书令，封晋昌王，录尚书事。
现代文：世祖对他说： 朝中大臣没有以侍中、护军、中正做州刺史的，仅因为你的缘故才有这事。
English: The ancestor said to him, "The reason why the Minister of the Middle Court of the North did not appoint a chamberlain, a military escort, or a middle-ranking official as the prefectural governor was because of you.

古文：属周师来寇，丞相高阿那肱率兵赴援，邕配割不甚从允，因此有隙。
现代文：给你一百多天的时间去休息，到了秋天再征召你回来。 升任为右仆射，改为尚书令，封晋昌王，总领尚书事。
English: I'll give you more than a hundred days to rest, and then I'll call you back in the autumn.I'll promote you to the position of right-hand man, and change you to the position of Shang Shurei, and give you the title of Jin Chang Wang, and make you the head of Shang Shurei.

古文：肱谮之，遣侍中斛律孝卿宣旨责让，留身禁止，寻释之。
现代文：北周军入侵，丞相高阿那肱率领军队增援，唐邕调派人马没有完全听从，于是产生矛盾，高阿那肱陷害唐邕，派侍中斛律孝卿宣读皇上的诏书指责他，把他拘留起来，不久又把他释放。
English: The Northern Zhou army invaded, the chancellor Gao Ananzhong led the reinforcement of the army, Tang Jun did not fully obey, so there was a contradiction. Gao Ananzhong framed Tang Jun, sent the chamberlain Gao Lixiao to read the emperor's edict to accuse him, detained him, and soon released him.

古文：车驾将幸晋阳，□孝卿总知骑兵度支，事多自决，不相询□。邕自恃从霸朝以来常典枢要，历事六帝，恩遇甚重，一旦为孝卿所轻，负气郁怏，形于辞色。
现代文：皇上要到置阳去，命斛律孝卿总管骑兵的规划筹备，而孝卿自己独断专行，从来不询问唐邕，而唐邕也依仗自己从入朝以来一直掌管机要，事奉六位皇帝，很受皇上恩宠，如今却被孝卿轻视，心中气愤郁闷，常常在神情言谈中表现出来。
English: The emperor wanted to go to Jieyang, and ordered the general manager of cavalry planning and preparation, Ritsu Xiaoqing, while Xiaoqing himself acted arbitrarily and never asked Tang Xi, and Tang Xi also relied on himself to serve six emperors since he entered the court. He was very favored by the emperor, but now he was despised by Xiaoqing. He was angry and depressed in his heart, and often showed it in his facial expressions.

古文：帝平阳败后，狼狈还邺都。
现代文：皇上在干阳战败后，狼狈地返回邺都。
English: After the Emperor's defeat at Goyang, he returned to Shendu in dismay.

古文：邕惧那肱谮之，恨斛律孝卿轻己，遂留晋阳，与莫多娄敬显等崇树安德王为帝。
现代文：唐邕害怕高阿那肱陷害自己，又恨斛律孝卿轻视自己，就留在了晋阳，和莫多娄敬显等人推举安德王为帝。
English: Tang Xuan was afraid that Gao Anaxuan would frame him, and he also hated Gao Ruling Filial Piety for despising him, so he stayed in Jinyang, and he and others, such as Modo Xing Jianxian, elected King Ando as emperor.

古文：信宿城陷，邕遂降周，依例授仪同大将军。卒于凤州刺史。
现代文：第二天，晋阳城陷落，他就投降了北周。按例被任为仪同大将军，死时官任凤州刺史。
English: The next day, after the fall of Jinyang City, he surrendered to the Northern Zhou. As usual, he was appointed as the grand general of the ceremony, and at the time of his death, he was appointed as the governor of Fengzhou.

古文：邕性识明敏，通解时事，齐氏一代，典执兵机。
现代文：唐邕本性聪明，熟悉时事，在北齐掌管军事机要。
English: Tang Yao was intelligent by nature, familiar with current affairs, and in charge of military affairs in North Qi.

古文：凡是九州岛军士、四方勇募，强弱多少，番代往还，及器械精粗、粮储虚实，精心勤事，莫不谙知。
现代文：凡是涉及全国的兵力部署，战斗力强弱、军队数量多少、将领的轮换、武器的精粗和储粮的虚实，都非常用心地承办，都了如指掌。
English: All matters related to the deployment of troops across the country, the strength and weakness of combat power, the number of troops, the rotation of generals, the sophistication of weapons and the falsity of grain reserves are all handled with great care and are well known.

古文：自大宁以来，奢侈糜费，比及武平之末，府藏渐虚。
现代文：自从大宁以来，奢侈浪费，到了武平末年，国家的府库渐渐空虚。
English: From the time of Tanin, there was extravagance and waste, and by the end of the period of martial law, the state treasury was gradually empty.

古文：邕度支取舍，大有裨益。
现代文：唐邕筹划取舍，对国家财政大有裨益。
English: It is of great benefit to the national finance for Tang Jun to plan and make compromises.

古文：然既被任遇，意气渐高，其未经府寺陈诉，越览词牒，条数甚多，俱为宪台及左丞弹纠，并御注放免。
现代文：但是他一天天受到皇上的恩宠，心气也一天天大。常常没有经过正常部门的陈诉，就越级管览公文，而且次数很多，受到御史和左丞的弹劾，但皇上都赦免了他的罪遇。
English: However, he was favored by the emperor day by day, and his spirit grew stronger day by day. Often, he did not go through the normal department's complaint, he went beyond the level of supervision of official documents, and there were many times, he was impeached by the imperial historian and the left senator, but the emperor pardoned his crimes.

古文：司空从事中郎封长业、太尉记室□军平涛并为征官钱违限，邕各杖背二十。
现代文：司空从事中郎封长业、太尉记室参军芒迁因为征收官钱违反了规定，被唐邕各打了脊杖二十下。
English: Siku, who was engaged in the duties of a middle-ranking official, was given twenty strokes of the cane by Tang Xuan for violating the regulations on the collection of official money.

古文：齐时宰相未有挝挞朝士者，至是甚骇物听。
现代文：北齐宰相从没有杖击朝中大臣的，造件事在众人看来实属骇人听闻。
English: If the Prime Minister of Northern Qi never had a stick to hit the Middle Minister of the DPRK, the fabrication would be truly appalling in the eyes of the public.

古文：邕三子。长子君明，开府仪同三司。
现代文：唐邕有三子，长子明君，官至开府仪同三司。
English: Tang Xuan had three sons, the eldest of whom was Ming Jun, who rose to the position of Kaifu Yi and Sanji.

古文：开皇初，卒于应州刺史。
现代文：开皇初年，死于应州刺史任上。
English: In the first year of the emperor's reign, he died on the post of Yingzhou Jishi.

古文：次子君彻，中书舍人。
现代文：次子君彻，官至中书舍人。
English: His second son, Junche, was a bureaucrat who disdained Chinese calligraphy.

古文：隋顺、戎二州刺史，大业中，卒于武贲郎将。
现代文：隋朝任顺州、戎州刺史，大业年间，官至武贲郎将去世。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, he was assigned to record the history of Shunzhou and Eunshu. During the Taiei era, he passed away.

古文：少子君德，以邕降周伏法。
现代文：小儿子君德，因为唐邕降北周被杀。
English: The youngest son, Junde, was killed because of Tang Xuan's fall to the Northern Zhou.

古文：齐朝因高祖作相，丞相府外兵曹、骑兵曹分掌兵马。及天保受禅，诸司监咸归尚书，唯此二曹不废，令唐邕白建主治，谓之外兵省、骑兵省。
现代文：高祖作丞相时，丞相府外兵曹、骑兵曹分别负责军队和战马因为这个原因，到天保年间，产担接受惮位，其他部门都划归尚书省，衹有这两个机构并不废除，命唐邕、白建管理，称作外兵省、骑兵省。
English: When Gao Zu was the chancellor, the chancellor, the prefectural foreign soldiers, and the cavalry soldiers were respectively responsible for the army and the war horses. For this reason, by the time of Tian Bao, the production department received the title of honor, and other departments were assigned to the Ministry of Education and Culture. However, these two institutions were not abolished, and they were ordered to be managed by Tang Xi and Bai Jian, and were called the Ministry of Foreign Troops and the Ministry of Cavalry.

古文：其后邕、建位望转隆，各为省主，令中书舍人分判二省事，故世称唐、白云。
现代文：此后唐邕、白建地位、名望越来越高，就各自作了省主，命中书舍人分别负责二省事务，所以当世并称唐、白。
English: After that, Tang Xuan and Bai Jian's status and reputation became higher and higher, and they became the provincial governors respectively. The person who hit the bookshelf was responsible for the affairs of the two provinces respectively, so they were also called Tang and Bai.

古文：白建，字彦举，太原阳邑人也。
现代文：白建，字彦举，太原阳邑人。
English: Bai Jian, Aza Hikokke, from Taiyuan Yangmura.

古文：初入大丞相府骑兵曹，典执文帐，明解书计，为同局所推。
现代文：起初为大丞相府骑兵曹，管理公文案卷，精通文字和筹算，受到同事的推崇。
English: At first, he was a cavalry sergeant of the Prime Minister's Office, managing official documents, proficient in writing and calculation, and highly respected by his colleagues.

古文：天保十年，兼中书舍人。
现代文：天保十年，兼中书舍人。
English: Ten years of Tenpo, also a middle school student.

古文：肃宗辅政，除大丞相骑兵参军。
现代文：肃宗辅政时，任大丞相骑兵参军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Suizong, he was appointed Grand Secretary of Cavalry and joined the army.

古文：河清三年，突厥入境，代、忻二牧悉是细马，合数万匹，在五台山北□谷中避贼。
现代文：河清三年，突厥入侵，伐业、匠州牧养的都是小马，总数有几万匹，为避免被突厥抢走，放在五台山北部的柏谷中躲藏了二十几天。
English: In the third year of the Qing Dynasty, the Turks invaded, and the logging and herding horses in Zhouzhou were all small horses, with a total of tens of thousands of horses. In order to avoid being snatched away by the Turks, they were hidden in the Kashi Valley in the northern part of Mount Wutai for twenty days.

古文：贼退后，□建就彼检校，续使人诣建间领马，送定州付民养饲。
现代文：突厥退走后，朝廷派白建去检查，接着又派人到他那襄领取马匹，准备送到窒州由百姓喂养。
English: After the Turks retreated, the imperial court sent Bai Jian to inspect, and then sent someone to him to pick up the horses, ready to be sent to Nanzhou to be fed by the people.

古文：建以马久不得食，瘦弱，远送恐多死损，遂违□以便宜从事，随近散付军人。
现代文：旦建看到马匹长时间草料不足，非常瘦弱，恐怕长途运送会造成损失，就违反命令自己见机行事，就近分散给十兵喂养。
English: When Jian Jian saw that the horses had been starved of fodder for a long time and were very thin and weak, fearing that long-distance transportation would cause losses, he violated the order and acted at his own discretion, feeding the ten soldiers nearby.

古文：启知，□许焉。
现代文：奏明皇上后得到了允许。
English: After Emperor Sonoaki ascended to the throne, it was permitted.

古文：戎乘无损，建有力焉。
现代文：这批军马没有受到损失，直建有很大的功劳。
English: This batch of war horses did not suffer any losses, and Zhi Jian is to be given great credit.

古文：武平末，历特进、侍中、中书令。
现代文：迎末年，历任特进、侍中、中书令等职街。
English: At the end of the year, the successors of the special promotion, the chamberlain, the Chinese calligrapher and other positions were retired.

古文：建虽无他才，勤于在公，属王业始基，戎寄为重，建与唐邕俱以典执兵马致位卿相。
现代文：白建虽然没有什么别的才能，但处理公事很勤奋，国家刚刚建立，一切以军旅之事为重，他和唐邕都是由于掌握军权而身登高位的。
English: Although Bai Jian had no other talent, he was very diligent in handling public affairs. The country had just been established, and everything was focused on military affairs. He and Tang Jun both rose to high positions due to their mastery of military power.

古文：晋阳，国之下都，每年临幸，征诏差科，责成州郡。
现代文：晋阳，是北齐的陪都，皇上每年都要去，征召官吏、科派劳役，都由他负责督促检查。
English: Jinyang is the capital of North Qi, and the emperor goes there every year to recruit officials and dispatch laborers. He is responsible for supervising and inspecting them.

古文：本藩僚佐爰及守宰，谘承陈请，趋走无暇。
现代文：他手下的僚佐以及太守县令，纷纷前来请示，没有一点空闲时间。
English: Colleagues and assistants of his subordinates, as well as the governor of the county, came one after another to ask for instructions. There was no free time at all.

古文：诸子幼稚，俱为州郡主簿，新君选补，必先召辟。
现代文：他的几个儿子年纪很小就做了州郡的主簿，新皇帝挑选补充官员，必定先从他的儿子中选用。
English: Several of his sons were very young when they became the chief administrators of prefectures and counties. The new emperor must first choose from his sons to select additional officials.

古文：男婚女嫁，皆得胜流。当世以为荣宠之极。
现代文：儿女嫁娶的，都是当世名流当时的人们以为荣耀到极点。
English: People at the time thought it was the height of glory when their sons and daughters married famous people of the day.

古文：武平七年卒。
现代文：武乎七年去世。
English: Wuhu died seven years later.

