古文：吴祐字季英，陈留长垣人也。
现代文：◆吴祐传，吴祐字季英，陈留郡长垣县人。
English: ◆ Wu Yuzhuan, Wu Yuzi Ji Ying, from Chenlu County, Nagaki County.

古文：父恢，为南海太守。
现代文：父亲吴恢，为南海太守。
English: His father, Wu Huan, was the first governor of the South China Sea.

古文：祐年十二，随从到官。
现代文：吴祐十二岁时，随父亲到官舍。
English: When Wu Yu was twelve years old, he followed his father to the official residence.

古文：恢欲杀青简以写经书，祐谏曰： 今大人逾越五领，远在海滨，其俗诚陋，然旧多珍怪，上为国家所疑，下为权戚所望。
现代文：吴恢想用竹简写经书，吴祐劝阻说 ：现在大人过五岭，远处海滨，这里风俗简陋，然而，素多珍怪稀有之物，在上为朝廷所疑惑；在下则为权势贵戚所欲占有。
English: Wu Hui wanted to use bamboo to write scriptures, but Wu Yu dissuaded him, saying, "Now that the adults have passed the Wuling Mountains, the seashore is far away, and the customs here are simple and poor. However, many rare and rare things are suspected by the imperial court on the upper level; on the lower level, they are possessed by powerful nobles.

古文：此书若成，则载之兼两。
现代文：您这部书如果写成了，就要用不少车辆运载。
English: If your book is finished, it will need to be transported by many vehicles.

古文：昔马援以薏苡兴谤，王阳以衣囊徼名。
现代文：从前马援因把薏苡运归，遭人诬告，说他运归的都是明珠文犀；王阳好车马，衣服讲究，迁徙转移，所载不过囊橐，别人说他能作黄金。
English: Once upon a time, Ma Yuan was falsely accused of transporting precious stones back to China. He was told that all the stones he transported back were pearls and rhinoceroses. Wang Yang was fond of horses and chariots, his clothes were exquisite, and he had to move from place to place. He could not carry more than a sack of straw. Others said that he could make gold.

古文：嫌疑之间，诚先贤所慎也。 恢及止，抚其首曰： 吴氏世不乏季子矣。 及年二十，丧父，居无檐石，而不受赡遗。
现代文：所以嫌疑之地，是古代贤人所最慎重的。 吴恢听了他的话，便把写经书的事作罢了，抚摩着吴祐的背说 ：我姓吴的世世代代有季子啊！ 年二十，吴祐父亲死了，家里没有一石粮食的储蓄，但是他不接受别人的送礼。
English: Therefore, the place of suspicion is the most prudent place for ancient sages. Wu Huan listened to his words and stopped writing scriptures. He stroked Wu You's back and said, "My family name, Wu, has been passed down from generation to generation. In the 1920s, Wu You's father died. The family didn't have a single grain to save, but he didn't accept gifts from others.

古文：常牧豕于长坦泽中，行吟经书。
现代文：经常在长垣泽中牧猪，口里哼着经书。
English: He often herds pigs in Nagagakizawa Junior High School, humming scriptures.

古文：遇父故人，谓曰： 卿二千石子而自业贱事，纵子无耻，奈先君何？ 祐辞谢而已，守志如初。
现代文：碰着他父亲的朋友，被问道： 您是二千石的儿子却干着这种下贱的工作，即使您自己不以为可耻，怎么对得起你地下的父亲呢？ 吴祐口称谢谢，牧猪如故。
English: When he bumped into his father's friend, he was asked: You are the son of a two-thousand-koku farmer, yet you do this lowly work. Even if you don't think it's shameful, how can you live up to your underground father? Wu Yucou said thank you, and continued to herd pigs.

古文：后举孝廉，将行，郡中为祖道，祐越坛共小史雍丘黄真欢语移时，与结友而别。
现代文：后来举为孝廉，将行，郡里设酒祭道为他送行，吴祐逾坛与小史雍丘黄真谈笑多时，结为朋友而别。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of filial piety, and the county set up a wine festival to see him off. Wu Yu and Xiao Shi Yongqiu Huang Zhen talked and laughed for a long time, and parted as friends.

古文：功曹以祐倨，请黜之。
现代文：郡功曹认为吴祐倨傲无礼，请太守罢斥他。
English: The county gong cao thought that Wu Yuxuan was arrogant and rude, and asked the emperor to expel him.

古文：太守曰： 吴季英有知人之明，卿且勿言。 真后亦举孝廉，除新蔡长，世称其清节。
现代文：太守说： 吴季英能认识人，你暂且不要说。 黄真后来也举为孝廉，任命为新蔡长。当世称赞他清廉有气节。
English: The daimyō said, "Don't say for the time being that Wu Ji Ying can get to know people. Huang Zhen was later praised for his filial piety and appointed as the new Cai Chang. He was praised for his honesty and integrity.

古文：时，公沙穆来游太学，无资粮，乃变服客佣，为祐赁舂。
现代文：这时公沙穆来京师游太学，没有饭吃，于是换了衣服打工，为吴祐舂米。
English: At this time, Gongsamu came to Beijing to study and travel, and had no food to eat, so he changed his clothes and worked as a rice miller for Wu Yu.

古文：祐与语大惊，遂共定交于杵臼之间。
现代文：吴祐与他谈话，大为惊异，就与他定交于舂米的地方。
English: Wu Yu was very surprised when he talked to him, so he made a deal with him at the glutinous rice field.

古文：祐以光禄四行迁胶东侯相。
现代文：吴祐举光禄四行，敦厚、质朴、逊让、节俭，迁胶东侯相。
English: There are four lines of Wu Yu's Guanglu, dignified, simple, submissive, and frugal, and he is the prince who moved to the East.

古文：时济北戴宏父为县丞，宏年十六，从在丞舍。
现代文：这时济北戴宏的父亲为县丞，戴宏年十六，跟着住在丞舍。
English: At this time, Daihong's father in northern Ji Province was the county magistrate. Daihong was 16 years old and lived with him in the magistrate's house.

古文：祐每行园，常闻讽诵之音，奇而厚之，亦与为友，卒成儒宗，知名东夏，官至酒泉太守。
现代文：吴祐每行园中，经常听到讽诵的声音，奇怪而厚相看待，也与他交为朋友，戴宏终究为儒生所宗，著名东方，官至酒泉太守。
English: In Wu Yu's every trip to the garden, he often heard the sound of sarcastic chanting, regarded it as strange and thick, and also made friends with him. Dai Hong is, after all, a Confucian, a famous Oriental, and an official of Jiuquan.

古文：祐政唯仁简，以身率物。
现代文：吴祐为政仁爱简易，以身作则。
English: Wu Yu is a politician who loves simplicity and leads by example.

古文：民有争诉者，辄闭閤自责，然后断其讼，以道譬之。或身到闾里，重相和解。
现代文：老百姓有争诉的，常闭门反省，然后再断案，用道德晓谕他们，有时亲自走到闾里，力劝和解。
English: When the common people have disputes, they often reflect behind closed doors, and then adjudicate the case, instruct them with morality, and sometimes go to the courtroom in person to urge reconciliation.

古文：自是之后，争隙省息，吏人怀而不欺。
现代文：自此以后，老百姓的争端少了，吏人怀德不相欺诈。
English: Since then, there have been fewer disputes among the common people, and officials no longer cheat each other.

古文：啬夫孙性私贼民钱，市衣以进其父，父得而怒曰： 有君如是，何忍欺之！ 促归伏罪。
现代文：啬夫孙性私自收老百姓的钱，买衣送给他父亲，他父亲接了衣发怒说： 有这样好的相，哪能忍心欺骗他？ 督促他去伏罪。
English: Sun Zheng, a miserly husband, collected money from the common people and bought clothes to give to his father. His father took the clothes and angrily said, "With such a good appearance, how can you dare to deceive him? Urge him to commit a crime."

古文：性惭惧，诣阁持衣自首。
现代文：孙性又惭愧，又害怕，拿着衣到阁里自首。
English: Feeling ashamed and afraid, Sun Zhen took his clothes and went to the closet to turn himself in.

古文：祐屏左右问其故，性具谈父言。
现代文：吴祐把左右的人使开，问他为什么，孙性把他父亲的话都告诉了他。
English: Wu You pushed aside the people around him and asked him why. Sun Zi told him everything his father had said.

古文：祐曰： 掾以亲故，受污秽之名，所谓 观过斯知人矣 。 使归谢其父，还以衣遗之。
现代文：吴祐说 ：你因父亲的缘故，受了不好的名声，所谓 看了过错，就知道是怎样一个人呀。  打发他回去感谢他父亲，并且把买的衣服还是送了他。
English: Wu Yu said, "You have a bad reputation because of your father. If you look at the faults, you will know what kind of person you are." He sent him back to thank his father and sent him the clothes he had bought.

古文：又安丘男子毋丘长与母俱行市，道遇醉客辱其母，长杀之而亡，安丘追踪于胶东得之。
现代文：又安丘男子毋丘长与他母亲同在市里行走，碰了个醉汉，侮辱他母亲，毋丘长就杀了这个醉汉逃跑了，丘追踪到胶东捉了毋丘长。
English: Another Anqiu man, Bao Qiaolong, was walking with his mother in the city. He bumped into a drunk man and insulted his mother. Bao Qiaolong killed the drunk man and ran away. Bao Qiaolong tracked the man to Jiaodong and caught Bao Qiaolong.

古文：祐呼长谓曰： 子母见辱，人情所耻。
现代文：吴祐叫了毋丘长说 ：儿子的母亲被人侮辱，这是人情引以为耻的。
English: Wu Yu called out to Beozhuang and said, "The mother of my son has been insulted, which is a disgrace to humanity.

古文：然孝子忿必虑难，动不累亲。
现代文：然而孝子发怒一定要考虑到后果，行动不能连累父母。
English: However, when a filial son is angry, he must consider the consequences, and his actions must not involve his parents.

古文：今若背亲逞怒，白日杀人，赦若非义，刑若不忍，将如之何？ 长以械自系，曰： 国家制法，囚身犯之。
现代文：现在你背着父母发怒，白日杀人，赦了你，不义；加刑于你，又有些不忍，怎么办呢？ 毋丘长用械系着自己的双手说： 国家制法，我亲自犯法，您虽然可怜我，但这是不能施恩的。 
English: Now you are angry behind your parents' backs, you kill people in broad daylight, they forgive you, it's not fair; they can't bear to give you a longer sentence, so what should you do? You can't just tie your own hands with a piece of machinery and say: the state makes the laws, I break the laws myself, you may have pity on me, but you can't show me any mercy.

古文：明府虽加哀矜，恩无所施。 祐问长： 有妻、子乎？ 对曰： 有妻未有子也。 即移安丘逮长妻，妻到，解到桎梏，使同宿狱中，妻遂怀孕。
现代文：吴祐问毋丘长有妻子没有？答说： 有妻没有儿子。 于是移文到安丘，逮捕毋丘长的妻子，妻到，把毋丘长的桎梏解除，使她与毋丘长同宿于狱中，妻子因此怀了孕。
English: Wu Yu asked Bo Keokang if he had a wife, to which he replied that he had a wife but no son, so he sent messengers to Anqiu to arrest Bo Keokang's wife, and his wife came to him to have Bo Keokang's shackles removed so that she could live with him in prison. As a result, his wife became pregnant.

古文：至冬尽行刑，长泣谓母曰： 负母应死，当何以报吴君乎？ 乃啮指而吞之，含血言曰： 妻若生子，名之 吴生 ，言我临死吞指为誓，属儿以报吴君。 因投缳而死。
现代文：到冬末行刑，毋丘长哭着对他母亲说 ：辜负了母亲，罪该死，应该怎样报答吴君呢？ 于是咬了一个指头吞吃了，含血说： 妻若生子，取名 吴生 ，说我临死吞指为誓，嘱咐儿子报答吴君。 自缢而死。
English: At the end of the winter's execution, he cried for a long time and said to his mother: "I have failed my mother, my crime deserves death, how should I repay Wu Jun?" So he bit off a finger and ate it, saying with blood: "If my wife had a son, he would be named Wu Sheng, I swear on my deathbed that I will swallow my finger and tell my son to repay Wu Jun. I will commit suicide."

古文：祐在胶东九年，迁齐相，大将军梁冀表为长史。
现代文：吴祐在胶东九年，调任齐相，大将军梁冀表荐为长史。
English: Wu Yu was in Jiaodong for nine years, transferred to Qi phase, and was recommended by General Liang Jie for a long time.

古文：及冀诬奏太尉李固，祐闻而请见，与冀争之，不听。
现代文：后来梁冀诬奏陷害太尉李固，吴祐听说了，请见梁冀，为李固争辩，梁冀不听。
English: Later, Liang Jie falsely framed Lieutenant Li Gu, Wu Yu heard about it, please see Liang Jie, argue for Li Gu, Liang Jie did not listen.

古文：时扶风马融在坐，为冀章草，祐因谓融曰： 李公之罪，成于卿手。
现代文：当时，扶风马融在坐，为梁冀写奏章，吴祐对马融说： 李公的罪，成于您的手下。
English: At that time, Fu Feng and Ma Rong were sitting and writing music for Liang Jie. Wu Yu said to Ma Rong: Li Gong's crime was committed by your men.

古文：李公即诛，卿何面目见天下之人乎？ 冀怒而起入室，祐亦径去。
现代文：李公如果遭到诛杀，您有什么面目见天下人呢？ 梁冀发怒起身进房子里去了，吴祐也不辞而去。
English: If Li Gong was beaten to death, what kind of face would you have in front of the world? Liang Ji got angry and went into the house, and Wu Yu also left.

古文：冀遂出祐为河间相，因自免归家，不复仕，躬灌园蔬，以经书教授。
现代文：梁冀出吴祐为河间相，因此自己辞职归家，不再出来做官，亲自浇灌园蔬，用经书教授门生。
English: Liang Jie promoted Wu Yu to the post of deputy governor of Hebei Province. Therefore, Liang Jie resigned and returned home. He no longer worked as an official. He personally watered the vegetables in his garden and taught his disciples with scriptures.

古文：年九十八卒。
现代文：九十八岁卒。
English: Ninety-eight years old.

古文：长子凤，官至乐浪太守；少子恺，新息令；凤子冯，鲷阳侯相：皆有名于世。
现代文：长子吴凤，官至乐浪太守；少子吴恺，新息令；凤子吴冯，鲷阳侯相；都有名于当世。
English: The eldest son, Wu Feng, was the governor of Le Lang; the younger son, Wu Xi, was the governor of Xinxi; the eldest son, Wu Feng, was the governor of Shenyang; all of them were famous in the contemporary world.

古文：延笃字叔坚，南阳犨人也。
现代文：◆延笃传，延笃字叔坚，南阳郡韜人。
English: ◆Yan Duk Chuan, Yan Duk Zi Shu Jian, is from Nanyang County.

古文：少从颍川唐溪典受《左氏传》，旬日能讽之，典深敬焉。
现代文：少年时从颍川唐溪典学《左氏传》，仅十来天就能讽诵，唐溪典十分敬重他。
English: When he was a boy, he learned "The Biography of Zuo Shiwen" from Tongxi Classics of Luochuan. He could recite it by heart in just ten days. Tangxi Classics highly respected him.

古文：又从马融受业，博通经传及百家之言，能著文章，有名京师。
现代文：又从马融学习，博通经传及百家学说，能写文章，在京师很有名气。
English: He also learned from Ma Rong, and was able to write articles. He was very famous in Beijing.

古文：举孝廉，为平阳侯相。
现代文：推举为孝廉，任平阳侯相。
English: He was elected as Xiaolian and appointed as the prince of Pingyang.

古文：到官，表龚遂之墓，立铭祭祠，擢用其后于畎亩之间。以师丧弃官奔赴，五府并辟不就。
现代文：到任，修葺龚遂的坟墓，树立墓铭祭祀，选拔龚遂的后人于田间出来做官，因为老师逝世，弃官奔丧，五府都征召他，不就。
English: When he took office, he repaired Su Shi's grave, erected an epitaph and a memorial service, and selected Su Shi's descendants to go out into the fields to work as officials. Since his teacher had passed away, he had resigned his post and was in mourning, and all five prefectures had called him up, but it was not enough.

古文：桓帝以博士征，拜议郎，与朱穆、边韶共著作东观。
现代文：桓帝按博士征召，授议郎之职，与朱穆、边韶在东观从事著作。
English: Emperor Kuan summoned him as a doctor and gave him the post of councilor, and together with Zhu Mu and Bentham, he engaged in writing in Dongguan.

古文：稍迁侍中。帝数问政事，笃诡辞密对，动依典义。
现代文：升为侍中，桓帝多次向他问政事，不把实际情况告诉别人，一举一动，都如典章大义。
English: After he was promoted to chamberlain, Emperor Kanto repeatedly asked him about political affairs, but he did not tell others about the actual situation. Every move he made was as if he was carrying out a grand edict.

古文：迁左冯翊，又徙京兆尹，其政用宽仁，忧恤民黎，擢用长者，与参政事，郡中欢爱，三辅咨嗟焉。
现代文：升左冯翊，又调京兆尹。为政主张宽松仁爱，爱惜百姓。选用有道德修养的人，参加政事，郡里和爱，三辅赞叹他的政绩。
English: He promoted Feng Xuan to the left and transferred Jing Zhaoyun to the right. He advocated liberalism, benevolence and love for the people. He selected people with moral cultivation to participate in government affairs, and the county and the three auxiliary organs praised his political achievements.

古文：先是陈留边凤为京兆尹，亦有能名，郡人为之语曰： 前有赵、张、三王，后有边、延二君。 
现代文：以前，陈留边凤为京兆尹，也有能干的名声，郡里的人编了一句口语说： 前有照张三王，后有边延二君。 
English: In the past, Chen Ruzhuanfeng was the Beijing Zhaoyun, and also had a reputation for ability. The people in the county made up a colloquial saying: "Before, there were three kings of Zhaozhang, and after, there were two princes of Bian Yan."

古文：时，皇子有疾，下郡县出珍药，而大将军梁冀遣客赍书诣京兆，并货牛黄。
现代文：这时，皇子有病，下诏郡县寻求珍贵的药物，大将军梁冀派宾客持书到京兆贩卖牛黄。
English: At this time, the prince was ill, and the county was looking for precious medicines. General Liang Jie sent guests with letters to the Jingzhao to sell cow bile.

古文：笃发书收客，曰： 大将军椒房外家，而皇子有疾，必应陈进医方，岂当使客千里求利乎？ 遂杀之。
现代文：延笃开书逮捕了宾客，说： 大将军是皇后的外家，皇子有病，必须呈进医方，难道应该派宾客千里求利吗？ 
English: Yan Duku opened a book and arrested the guest, saying: The general is a foreign relative of the empress, the prince is ill and must be taken to a doctor. Is it right to send a guest thousands of miles away in search of profit?

古文：冀惭而不得言，有司承旨欲求其事。
现代文：于是杀了宾客，梁冀感到惭愧，但又不便说，官吏秉承梁冀的意旨，想因此生事。
English: So he killed the guests. Liang Jie felt ashamed, but it is inconvenient to say that the officials, adhering to Liang Jie's intention, wanted to cause trouble.

古文：笃以病免归，教授家巷。
现代文：延笃因病免职回家，在住的巷子里教书维持生活。
English: Due to illness, Yan Duc was relieved of his duties and returned home. He taught in the alley where he lived to make ends meet.

古文：时人或疑仁孝前后之证，笃乃论之曰：观夫仁孝之辩，纷然异端，互引典文，代取事据，可谓笃论矣。
现代文：当时人有的弄不清仁孝孰为先后的问题，延笃于是论之，他说 ：看来仁孝先后的争辩，意见纷纷，各人引经据典，更取事实证据，可以说得上是深论了。
English: At that time, some people couldn't figure out that the issue of benevolence and filial piety was a sequential issue, so Yan Du discussed it. He said, "It seems that the argument of benevolence and filial piety is sequential, opinions are one after another, each person quotes scriptures, and even takes factual evidence. It can be said that it is a deep discussion.

古文：夫人二致同源，总率百行，非复铢两轻重，必定前后之数也。
现代文：人的仁孝二者同源，统率人的一切言行，不必计较铢两轻重，分清孰前孰后了。
English: People's benevolence and filial piety both come from the same source, and govern all of their words and deeds. There is no need to weigh the two and distinguish between the former and the latter.

古文：而加欲分其大较，体而名之，则孝在事亲，仁施品物。
现代文：如果想分清二者的大略，总的说来，孝在养亲，仁及万物。
English: If you want to distinguish between the two, generally speaking, filial piety is in raising relatives, benevolence and all things.

古文：施物则功济于时，事亲则德归于已。
现代文：及物就是对社会作贡献，养亲就是道德的修养在于自己。
English: To inherit something is to contribute to society, and to raise a family is to cultivate one's own morality.

古文：于己则事寡，济时则功多。
现代文：在己事少，对社会作贡献则是多方面的。
English: With fewer responsibilities, their contribution to society is multifaceted.

古文：推此以言，仁则远矣。
现代文：由此说来，仁的作用是广阔的。
English: Therefore, the role of benevolence is broad.

古文：然物有出微而著，事有由隐而章。
现代文：然而，物有出于微小而终显著的，事情有由于隐晦而彰明的。
English: However, some things are obvious because they are small, and some things are obvious because they are obscure.

古文：近取诸身，则耳有听受之用，目有察见之明，足有致远之劳，手有饰卫之功，功虽显外，本之者心也。
现代文：近的就身躯来说，耳朵有听声音之用，眼睛有观察之明，脚管走路，手施保卫，它们的作用虽然是显露在外，而发号施令的是心。
English: Closely related to the body, the ears are for hearing, the eyes for seeing, the feet for walking, and the hands for guarding. Although their functions are external, it is the mind that gives orders.

古文：远取诸物，则草木之生，始于萌牙，终于弥蔓，枝叶扶疏，荣华纷缛，末虽繁蔚，致之者根也。
现代文：远的就物来说，草木的生，开始于萌芽，终成茂盛，枝叶分披，繁花似锦，末虽如此，而使它长得这样的是草木的根。
English: In terms of things far away, the life of plants and trees begins with budding and ends with flourishing, branches and leaves spread out, and flowers blooming. After all, it is the roots of plants and trees that make them grow like this.

古文：夫仁人之有孝，犹四体之有心腹，枝叶之有本根也。
现代文：仁人的有孝，正好比身体之有心腹，枝叶的有本根。
English: The filial piety of a benevolent person is just like the heart and stomach of the body, and the roots of the branches and leaves.

古文：圣人知之，故曰： 夫孝，天之经也，地之义也，人之行也。  君子务本，本立而道生，孝悌也者，其为仁之本与！ 然体在难备，物性好偏，故所施不同，事少两兼者也。
现代文：所以古时候的圣人说： 孝是天之经，地之义，人之行。  君子专心致力于基础工作，基础树立了，道就会产生。
English: That is why the sages of ancient times said: filial piety is the law of nature, the righteousness of the land, and the conduct of man. The gentleman devotes himself to the basic work, and once the foundation is established, the way will come into being.

古文：如必对其优劣，则仁以枝叶扶疏为大，孝以心体本根为先，可无讼也。
现代文：孝顺爹娘，敬爱兄长，这就是 仁 的基础吧。 然而这事体大，难得做到全面，物性又好偏，所以由于 施 的不同，事情很少两者得兼。如果一定要论其优劣，则仁以枝叶扶疏茂盛为大，孝以心体本根为先，这样，可不用争论了。
English: Filial piety to father and daughter, and respect for elder brothers and sisters, this is the foundation of benevolence. However, this is a big thing, it is rare to achieve comprehensiveness, and the physical nature is biased, so due to the difference in performance, things rarely have both. If we must discuss their merits and demerits, benevolence is based on the growth of branches and leaves, and filial piety is based on the root of the mind and body, so there is no need to argue.

古文：或谓先孝后仁，非仲尼序回、参之意。
现代文：有人说先孝后仁，不是仲尼序次颜回、曾参的意思。
English: Some people say that filial piety comes first, followed by benevolence, which is not the meaning of Zhongni sequence, Yan Hui, Zeng San.

古文：盖以为仁孝同质而生，纯体之者，则互以为称，虞舜、颜回是也。
现代文：大抵仁孝同源而生，纯德既备，或仁或孝，可以听其所称而已，如虞舜、颜回就是这样的。
English: For the most part, benevolence and filial piety are born from the same source, and pure virtue is ready, or benevolence or filial piety, you can just listen to what it is called, such as Yu Xi, Yan Hui is like this.

古文：若偏而体之，则各有其目，公刘、曾参是也。
现代文：如果不是这样，就各自为目，不能总称其美，如公刘以仁纪德，曾参以至孝称贤。
English: If this is not the case, they should be looked at individually and cannot always be called beautiful. For example, Prince Liu Yizhong, who was a virtuous and filial son, was praised for his virtue.

古文：夫曾、闵以孝悌为至德，管仲以九合为仁功，未有论德不先回、参，考功不大夷吾。
现代文：曾参、闵损把孝悌作为至德，管仲以九合诸侯为仁功，没有论德不推颜回、曾参为先，考校功勋不以管夷吾为大的。
English: Zeng Sanzang and Xizang regard filial piety as the highest virtue, Guanzhong regards the rise of the Nine Kingdoms as a benevolent deed, and there is no virtue that does not promote beauty, Zeng Sanzang is the first, and the school examination merit is not the greatest.

古文：以此而言，各从其称者也。
现代文：照这样说来，各从其称而已。 
English: As such, it's a case of calling a spade a spade.

古文：前越巂太守李文德素善于笃，时在京师，谓公卿曰： 延叔坚王佐之才，奈何屈千里之足乎？ 欲令引进之。
现代文：前越太守李文德平常与延笃相好，这时在京师，他对公卿们说 ：延叔坚有王佐之才，千里之足不得驰骋，为之奈何？ 
English: The former governor of the Yue Dynasty, Li Wende, was usually friendly with Yan Tu, but when he was in Beijing, he said to the nobles, "Yan Tu has the talent of a king, but he can't run a thousand miles. Why?

古文：笃闻，乃为书止文德曰：夫道之将废，所谓命也。
现代文：想使公卿们引荐他。延笃听说，写信给李文德阻止他说： 道将废弃，这是天命啊！
English: He wanted the nobles to recommend him. Yan Du wrote to Li Wende to stop him, saying: "The Tao will be abandoned, this is the fate of heaven!"

古文：流闻乃欲相为求还东观，来命虽笃，所未敢当。
现代文：听说您想为我请求回到东观去，您的意思虽然厚，但实不敢当。
English: I've heard that you want to ask me to go back to Dongguan. Although your intention is strong, you really don't dare.

古文：吾尝昧爽栉梳，坐于客堂。
现代文：我居常天未晓就起床梳洗，梳洗毕，坐在客堂上。
English: I always get up before dawn to wash and comb my hair, and when I'm done, I sit in the living room.

古文：朝则诵羲、文之《易》，虞、夏之《书》，历公旦之典礼，览仲尼之《春秋》。
现代文：上午诵读伏羲、文王的《易》，虞、夏之书，历公旦的典章礼制，浏览仲尼的《春秋》。
English: In the morning, read "Yi" by Fu Xun and King Wen, "Yu" and "Xia" books, "Li Gongdan" ceremony and etiquette, and read "Spring and Autumn" by Zhong Ni.

古文：夕则消摇内阶，咏《诗》南轩。百家众氏，投闲而作。
现代文：下午徘徊内阶，在南轩里吟咏《诗经》，闲时还看看百家众氏之书。
English: In the afternoon, I wandered around the inner staircase, chanted the "Song of Songs" in the Nanshan, and also looked at the books of hundreds of families in my spare time.

古文：洋洋乎其盈耳也，涣烂兮其溢目也，纷纷欣欣兮其独乐也。
现代文：声音嘹亮，洋洋啊满耳，文采绚烂啊满目，万物纷纷，欣欣然吾独乐其乐。
English: The voice is bright, the ears are full of music, the eyes are full of beautiful literature, and everything is in abundance. I am delighted to be able to enjoy myself.

古文：当此之时，不知天之为盖，地之为舆；不知世之有人，已之有躯也。
现代文：在这个时候，我不知天之为盖，地之为舆；不知世上还有人，自己还有躯体呢。
English: At this time, I didn't know that heaven was the ceiling and earth was the ceiling; I didn't know that there were still people in the world and that I still had a body.

古文：虽渐离击筑，傍若无人，高凤读书，不知暴雨，方之于吾，未足况也。
现代文：虽高渐离击筑而歌，旁若无人，高凤读书，不知天下暴雨，都是不足与我相比拟的。
English: Although Gao Qianliang is singing, no one is around, Gao Feng is reading, and I don't know if there is a rainstorm, they are all inadequate compared to me.

古文：且吾自束修已来，为人臣不陷于不忠，为人子不陷于不孝，上交不谄，下交不黩，从此而殁，下见先君远祖，可不惭赦。
现代文：我自年幼以来，就认为，做臣子，不能陷于不忠；做儿子，不能堕落于不孝；与地位高于我的人交朋友，不能谄媚，与地位低于我的人交朋友，不能轻慢。做到这样以至于死，在地下与先君远祖相见，就不会有愧色。
English: Since I was young, I have believed that as a courtier, I must not fall into disloyalty; as a son, I must not fall into filial piety; I must not make friends with people of higher status than me, I must not be flattering, and I must not make friends with people of lower status than me, I must not be contemptuous. If I can do this until I die, and meet my ancestors underground, I will not feel ashamed.

古文：如此而不以善止者，恐如教羿射者也。
现代文：这样而不知善之所当行，恐怕如教羿射，不能以小技为功一样。
English: If you don't know the right thing to do, I'm afraid it's like teaching archery, you can't rely on small skills.

古文：慎勿迷其本，弃其生也。
现代文：千万不能迷失根本，抛弃其所生呢。 
English: One must never lose sight of the fundamentals and abandon what one was born for.

古文：后遭党事禁锢。
现代文：后遭党事禁锢。
English: He was later banned from holding public office by the party.

古文：永康元年，卒于家。
现代文：永康元年，死在家里。
English: In the first year of Yongkang, he died at home.

古文：乡里图其形于屈原之庙。
现代文：乡里把他的形貌绘在屈原庙里。
English: The townspeople painted his likeness in the Quyuan Temple.

古文：笃论解经传，多所驳正，后儒服虔等以为折中。
现代文：延笃对经传多有校正。后儒服虔以为标准。
English: Yan Du has corrected many of the scriptures. Post-Confucian piety is considered the standard.

古文：所著诗、论、铭、书、应讯、表、教令，凡二十篇云。
现代文：所著诗、论、铭、书、应讯、表、教令，共二十篇。
English: He wrote twenty poems, essays, epitaphs, books, correspondence, tables, and edicts.

古文：史弼字公谦，陈留考城人也。父敞，顺帝时以佞辩至尚书、郡守。
现代文：◆史弼传，史弼字公谦，陈留郡考城县人，父亲陈敞，顺帝时因能说会道，谄媚阿谀，官至尚书、郡守。
English: ◆Shi Xuan Chuan, Shi Xuan Zi Gong Qian, Chen Liu County, Kaocheng County people, father Chen Chang, Shun Di because he can speak well, charming grandma, official to Shangshu, county governor.

古文：弼少笃学，聚徒数百。
现代文：史弼少年时好学，聚积同学几百人。
English: As a young boy, Shi Yao was eager to learn and gathered hundreds of classmates.

古文：仕州郡，辟公府，迁北军中候。
现代文：出仕州郡，征召公府，升北军中侯。
English: He served in Shuzhou County, was conscripted by the government, and rose to the rank of lieutenant-colonel in the Northern Army.

古文：是时，桓帝弟渤海王悝素行险辟，僣傲多不法。
现代文：这时，桓帝的弟弟渤海王悝平日行为险恶怪僻，不守法制，骄傲放纵。
English: At this time, Emperor Kantei's younger brother, Erhai Wangye, was behaving in a sinister and eccentric manner, disobeying the law and indulging in pride.

古文：弼惧其骄悖为乱，乃上封事曰：臣闻帝王之于亲戚，爱虽隆，必示之以威；体虽贵，必禁之以度。
现代文：史弼怕他骄横为乱，秘密上书桓帝说： 我听说帝王对于亲戚，虽属至亲，也要用威势相示，虽位居尊贵，也要用法度相禁。
English: Shi Yan was afraid of his arrogance and said in a secret letter to Emperor Huan: I have heard that for relatives, even if they are close relatives, the emperor should also show his authority, and even if he is in a noble position, he should also use the law to forbid it.

古文：如是，和睦之道兴，骨肉之恩遂。
现代文：这样，和睦之道兴，骨肉的恩情舒畅。
English: In this way, the path of harmony will be prosperous, and the gratitude of the flesh and blood will be comfortable.

古文：昔周襄王恣甘昭公，孝景皇帝骄梁孝王，而二弟阶宠，终用慢，卒周有播荡之祸，汉有爰盎之变。
现代文：从前周襄王放纵他弟弟甘昭公，孝景皇帝任梁孝王骄傲自大，这两个弟弟都由于宠爱，最终导致悖乱，周有流亡之祸，汉有袁盎遭刺杀之变。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Xiang Wang indulged his younger brother, Gan Zhaogong, and Emperor Xiaojing appointed Liang Xiaowang to be proud and arrogant. Both brothers were favored and eventually led to disorder. Zhou suffered the misfortune of exile, and Han and Yuan Ang were assassinated.

古文：窃闻渤海王悝，凭至亲之属，恃偏私之爱，失奉上之节，有僣慢之心，外聚剽轻不逞之徒，内荒酒乐，出入无常，所与群居，皆有口无行，或家之弃子，或朝之斥臣，必有羊胜、伍被之变。
现代文：我听说渤海王悝，凭借自己是皇上的至亲，依靠皇上的偏爱，失去了奉侍皇上的大节，有不遵守法制傲慢之心，在外聚集一些剽悍不法之徒，在内饮酒作乐，没有节制，出入无常，与他在一起的人，都是一些言行不一致的人，有的是家庭里不要了的败家子，有的是朝廷里放逐的臣子，一定要发生羊胜劝梁孝王求汉嗣，伍被劝淮南王谋反的变乱。
English: I heard that Wang Yao of Bohai, by virtue of being the emperor's closest relative, relied on the emperor's preference, lost the great festival of serving the emperor, did not abide by the rule of law and arrogance, gathered some fierce outlaws outside, drank and played music inside, did not exercise restraint, and was capricious. The people who were with him were all people whose words and deeds were inconsistent, some were unwanted losers in the family, and some were exiled courtiers in the court. There must be a mutiny in which Yang Sheng persuaded Liang Xiao Wang to ask for Han Hei, and Huainan Wang was persuaded to rebel.

古文：州司不敢弹纠，傅相不能匡辅。
现代文：州司对他不敢弹劾纠察，傅相不能尽匡辅的责任。
English: The prefectural governor did not dare to impeach or picket against him, and Fu Xiang could not fulfill his responsibility as a supporter.

古文：陛下隆于友于，不忍遏绝。恐遂滋蔓，为害弥大。
现代文：皇上深于手足之情，不忍阻止他，恐怕这样发展下去，为害更大。
English: The emperor is deeply attached to his brother and cannot bear to stop him, and I am afraid that if this continues, the damage will be even greater.

古文：乞露臣奏，宣示百僚，使臣得于清朝明言其失，然后诏公卿平处其法。
现代文：请把我的奏章公布，晓示百官，使我能够在朝廷明说他的过失，然后皇上下诏公卿平处其法。
English: Please publish my report and make it known to all officials, so that I can clearly state his fault to the Imperial Court, and then the Emperor will issue an edict to the court nobles to rectify his act.

古文：法决罪定，乃下不忍之诏。臣下固执，然后少有所许。
现代文：法决罪定，然后皇上下不忍加刑之诏命，我还固持己见，再少加处罚。
English: The verdict was guilty, and then the emperor issued an imperial edict to increase the punishment. I still held my own opinion and imposed a lesser punishment.

古文：如是，则圣朝无伤亲之讥，勃海有享国之庆。
现代文：这样，圣朝没有损骨肉之亲，勃海仍享封国之庆。
English: In this way, the Holy Dynasty did not harm the flesh and blood relatives, and Bohai still enjoyed the national celebration.

古文：不然，惧大狱将兴，使者相望于路矣。
现代文：否则，怕大狱一兴，使者相望于路，就不可挽救了。
English: Otherwise, there is no way to save the envoys, who will be looking at each other on the road, for fear of a great inferno breaking out.

古文：臣职典禁兵，备御非常，而妄知藩国，干犯至戚，罪不容诛。
现代文：我的职务是掌管禁兵，防备发生非常事变，知道藩国的情形，这是干犯至戚，罪不容诛。
English: My duty is to supervise the ban on soldiers, to prevent the occurrence of extraordinary events, and to know the situation of the domain. This is a crime of interference, and it is unacceptable.

古文：不胜愤懑，谨冒死以闻。
现代文：心中不胜愤慨，冒着死罪报告皇上。 
English: With great indignation in his heart, he risked the death penalty to report to the emperor.

古文：帝以至亲，不忍下其事。
现代文：帝因骨肉至亲，不忍查办。
English: Since the emperor was a close relative, he could not bear to investigate.

古文：后悝竟坐逆谋，贬为廮陶王。
现代文：后来刘悝竟犯逆谋获罪，贬为鞼陶王。
English: Later, Liu Ye was actually found guilty of treason and demoted to the position of King of Juntao.

古文：弼迁尚书，出为平原相。
现代文：史弼升为尚书，出为平原相。
English: Shi Shuxian was promoted to Shangshu and became a plain phase.

古文：时诏书下举钩党，郡国所奏相连及者多至数百，唯弼独无所上。
现代文：这时朝廷下诏检举与党人有关连的人，郡国所奏相连的多达数百人，只有史弼一个人也没有检举。
English: At this time, the imperial court issued an edict to prosecute those who were connected with the party members, and the county reported that there were as many as hundreds of people who were connected, but only Shi Yan did not prosecute.

古文：诏书前后切却州郡，髡笞掾史。
现代文：诏书前后严厉责斥州郡，剃发鞭打掾史。
English: Around the time of the imperial edict, he severely reprimanded the prefecture and county, and the history of shaving and whipping was recorded.

古文：从事坐传责曰： 诏书疾恶党人，旨意恳恻。
现代文：从事坐在客舍责问史弼： 诏书疾恶党人，旨意恳切。
English: Engaged in sitting in the guest house to ask questions of Shi Yuang: Zhaoshu ill-wishers, the will is earnest.

古文：青州六郡，其五有党，近国甘陵，亦考南北部，平原何理而得独无？ 弼曰： 先王疆理天下，画界分境，水土异齐，风俗不同。
现代文：青州所属，济南、乐安、齐国、东莱、平原、北海六郡，其中五郡有党人，近国甘陵，也有南北部之分，平原有什么理由说独无党人呢？ 史弼说： 先王界正天下，画界分境，水土不同，风俗各异。
English: Qingzhou belongs to Jinan, Le'an, Qi, Donglai, Plains, and the North Sea six counties, five of which have party members, and nearby Ganling, there are also points in the north and south, what is the reason for the plains to say that there are no party members? Shi Yu said: The first king is the world, the painting world is divided, the water and soil are different, and the customs are different.

古文：它郡自有，平原自无，胡可相比？
现代文：它郡自有，平原自无，哪里能相比拟？
English: It is owned by the county, but not by the plains. How can it be compared?

古文：若承望上司，诬谄良善，淫刑滥罚，以逞非理，则平原之人，户可为党。
现代文：如果按上司的意旨，诬陷好人，刑讯逼供，滥施刑罚，放肆胡为，那平原郡的人，户户都是党人。
English: If, according to the boss's intention, good people are framed up, confessions are extracted by torture, punishments are imposed indiscriminately, and wanton acts are committed, then every household in Pingyuan County will be a Party member.

古文：相有死而已，所不能也。 从事大怒，即收郡僚职送狱，遂举奏弼。
现代文：我平原相只有死罢了，是我所不能做的。 从事大怒，马上把郡里的僚属逮捕投入监狱，同时把史弼上奏朝廷。
English: The only thing I could do was to die, which I could not do. I went into a rage, immediately arrested my colleagues in the county and put them in prison, and at the same time reported Shi Yan to the imperial court.

古文：会党禁中解，弼以俸赎罪得免，济活者千余人。
现代文：遇上党禁缓解，史弼用工资赎罪得免，他所全活的有千多人。
English: When the party ban was eased, Shi Yan used his salary to atone for his sins. He saved the lives of more than a thousand people.

古文：弼为政特挫抑强豪，其小民有罪，多所容贷。
现代文：史弼为政，对那些豪强恶霸，狠狠打击，而对于小民百姓，如果犯了罪，就宽容他们，赦免他们。
English: Shi Yan is a politician, and he will strike hard at those powerful bullies, but for the common people, if they commit a crime, he will tolerate them and pardon them.

古文：迁河东太守，被一切诏书当举孝廉。弼知多权贵请托，乃豫敕断绝书属。
现代文：史弼升河东太守，奉权宜诏书，当举孝廉，史弼知道不少权贵会拉关系，走后门，于是预先命令断绝来往书信。
English: Shi Xun ascended to the position of the governor-general of the East River, and issued an imperial edict to promote filial piety. Knowing that many influential people would pull the strings, Shi Xun went to the back door, so he ordered in advance to cut off correspondence.

古文：中常侍侯览果遣诸生赍书请之，并求假盐税，积日不得通。
现代文：中常侍侯览果然派诸生送信说人情，并且要求借盐税，好多日子不被接待。
English: The middle-ranking attendant, Hou Xiang, actually sent a letter to the living to express his feelings, and asked to borrow salt tax, but it was not received for many days.

古文：生乃说以它事谒弼，而因达览书。
现代文：送信的人于是说有别的事情谒史弼，因此把侯览的信送给了他。
English: The sender then said that there was something else going on, so the letter was given to him.

古文：弼大怒曰： 太守忝荷重任，当选士报国，尔何人而伪诈无状！ 命左右引出，楚捶数百，府丞、掾史十余人皆谏人廷，弼不对。
现代文：史弼大怒说 ：太守身当重任，应当选士报国，你是什么人，这样欺诈无体统！ 命令左右的人把他带出去，打了几百大板，府丞、掾史十几个人都在公廷劝谏他，史弼不理。
English: Shi Yan said angrily, "It is the duty of the Taisho to choose a candidate to represent the country. What kind of person are you? This kind of deception is unseemly!" He ordered the people around him to take him out and beat him with several hundred large boards. More than a dozen people from the Fucho and the Shishi were in the court to dissuade him, but Shi Yan ignored them.

古文：遂付安邑狱，即日考杀之。
现代文：交安邑监狱，当天就拷问杀了。
English: He was tortured and killed on the same day.

古文：侯览大怨，遂诈作飞章下司隶，诬弼诽谤，槛车征。
现代文：侯览大为怨恨，就假造紧急的诏书下到司隶，诬蔑史弼诽谤朝廷，用囚车载送朝廷。
English: Hou Xiang was very resentful, so he forged an urgent imperial edict and went to Sili, slandered Shi Yan and slandered the imperial court, and was taken to the imperial court in a prison van.

古文：吏人莫敢近者，唯前孝廉裴瑜送到崤渑之间，大言于道傍曰： 明府摧折虐臣，选德报国，如其获罪，足以垂名竹帛，愿不忧不惧。 弼曰：  谁谓荼苦，其甘如荠。
现代文：吏人没有一人敢于接近他的。只有前孝廉裴瑜送到崤渑之间，在道路旁边大声喊说： 明府摧折暴虐的臣子，选举有德的人才报效国家，如果这样犯了罪，可以垂名竹帛，希望你不要害怕。 史弼说 ： 谁说茶味苦，它像荠一样甜呢。 
English: None of the magistrates dared to approach him. Only the former filial son Ren Pei Yu was sent to the cocoon between the cocoons and shouted loudly on the side of the road: Mingfu crushed the tyrannical courtier, elected a virtuous person to repay the country. If you commit a crime in this way, you can be known as a bamboo cocoon, I hope you are not afraid. Shi Yan said: Who says tea tastes bitter, it is as sweet as cocoons.

古文：昔人刎颈，九死不恨。 及下廷尉诏狱，平原吏人奔走诣阙讼之。
现代文：昔人割颈，九死无恨。 及下廷尉诏狱，平原吏人奔走朝廷申诉。
English: The ancients cut their throats, nine died without hatred, and the lower court officials were sent to prison, and the plain officials rushed to the court to appeal.

古文：又前孝廉魏劭毁变形服，诈为家僮，瞻护于弼。
现代文：又前孝廉魏勋，毁坏自己的形貌，变换自己的服装，假作家僮，看护史弼。
English: Another former filial piety Wei Xun, destroy their own appearance, change their own clothes, fake writers, care for Shi.

古文：弼遂受诬，事当弃市。
现代文：史弼受了诬陷，当弃市。
English: Shi Yan was framed and had to leave the city.

古文：劭与同郡人卖郡邸，行赂于侯览，得减死罪一等，论输左校。
现代文：魏勋与同郡人把郡里的寺邸卖了，向侯览行贿，得以减死罪一等，送左校劳动改造，当时人有对此事讥议说： 平原行贿以免君之罪，岂不是愚蠢。 
English: Wei Xun and his fellow county people sold the county's temple, bribed Hou Xiang, and were able to reduce the death penalty to the first degree and send him to the left school for labor reformation. At that time, some people scoffed at this matter and said: "Isn't it stupid to bribe the plain to avoid the prince's sin."

古文：时人或讥曰： 平原行货以免君，无乃蚩乎！ 陶丘洪曰： 昔文王牖里，闳、散怀金。史弼遭患，义夫献宝。
现代文：陶丘洪说： 从前文王被纣拘于里，闵夭、散宜生怀金送纣，纣免了文王的罪。史弼遭了祸患，正义之士因此献宝，这有什么可以怀疑的呢！ 
English: Tao Chuhong said, "Once upon a time, King Wen was held in captivity, and when he died, he was given a gold necklace. The necklace absolved King Wen's sin. Shih suffered a calamity, and a righteous man offered a treasure for it. How can there be any doubt about this?"

古文：亦何疑焉！ 于是议者乃息。刑竟归田里，称病闭门不出。
现代文：讥议的人就无话可说了。史弼刑满归里，托病闭门不外出。
English: The mockers had nothing to say. After serving his sentence, Shi Yan returned to his hometown. He asked for sick leave and did not go out.

古文：数为公卿所荐，议郎何休又讼弼有干国之器，宜登台相，征拜议郎。
现代文：多次被公卿推荐，议郎何休又称赞史弼有治国的才能，应当任以宰相之职，征召任为议郎。
English: He was repeatedly recommended by nobles, and He Xiu, the councilor, praised Shi Yan for his ability to govern the country, saying that he should be appointed to the post of prime minister and conscripted as a councilor.

古文：侯览等恶之。
现代文：侯览一班人嫉恶他。
English: He was the envy of all the voters.

古文：光和中，出为彭城相，会病卒。
现代文：光和中，出为彭城相，因病卒。
English: Light and medium, out for Pengcheng phase, due to illness.

古文：裴瑜位至尚书。
现代文：裴瑜位至尚书。
English: Pei Yu is a great writer.

古文：论曰： 夫刚烈表性，鲜能优宽；仁柔用情，多乏贞直。
现代文：史官评论说：刚烈的性格，很少能优容宽松；仁柔的人，因为重感情，大多缺少贞固正直之气。
English: The historian commented, "A strong-willed person can rarely be generous and easy-going; a gentle person, because of heavy feelings, mostly lacks the spirit of chastity and honesty.

古文：吴季英视人畏伤，发言烝烝，似夫儒者；而怀愤激扬，折让权枉，又何壮也！
现代文：吴季英看到别人有什么不幸，说话怅然有所失的样子，完全像个儒者；而心怀愤嫉，激昂慷慨，摧折权势邪恶，又何等勇猛啊！
English: Wu Jiying saw the misfortune of others, and spoke with a lost look, completely like a Confucian; but with a cynical heart, impassioned generosity, breaking the power of evil, and how brave!

古文：仁以矜物，义以退身，君子哉！
现代文：仁以爱物，义以退身，真是个有道德的人呀！
English: Benevolence with love, righteousness with retreat, what a virtuous person!

古文：语曰： 活千人者子孙必封。 史弼颉颃严吏，终全平原之党，而其后不大，斯亦未可论也。
现代文：俗语说： 救活千人，子孙必封官受爵。 史弼是个严吏，全活平原受牵连的所谓党人千余人，而他的后代子孙衰替，这也不可作为定论啊。
English: As the saying goes, "If you save a thousand lives, your descendants will be knighted." Shi Yan was a strict official who saved the lives of more than a thousand so-called Party members who were implicated in the plain, but his descendants and descendants declined, which is also not conclusive.

古文：卢植字子幹，涿郡涿人也。
现代文：◆卢植传，卢植字子干，涿郡涿县人。
English: ◆Lu Zhi Chuan, Lu Zhi Zi Gan, from Lu County.

古文：身长八尺二寸，音声如钟。
现代文：身长八尺二寸，声音如钟。
English: He is eight feet two inches tall and has a voice like a bell.

古文：少与郑玄俱事马融，能通古今学，好研精而不守章句。
现代文：年轻时与郑玄同学于马融，通古今之学，喜欢精研，不爱雕章琢句。
English: When he was young, he studied with Zheng Xuan at Ma Rong. He is familiar with ancient and modern learning, likes to study hard, and does not like to carve and study sentences.

古文：融外戚豪家，多列女倡歌舞于前。植侍讲积年，未尝转眄，融以是敬之。
现代文：马融属外戚豪家，讲席的前面，罗列女倡歌舞，卢植跟马融学习几年，眼睛珠子也没有转一转，马融因此敬重他。
English: Ma Rong belongs to a wealthy family. In front of the lectern, there is a row of women advocating song and dance. Lu Zhi has studied with Ma Rong for several years, and his eyes have not changed a bit. Therefore, Ma Rong respects him.

古文：学终辞归，阖门教授。
现代文：学完归家，闭门教学。
English: After finishing school, they return home and teach behind closed doors.

古文：性刚毅有大节，常怀济世志，不好辞赋，能饮酒一石。
现代文：性格刚毅有大节，经常怀抱立功立业之志，不好辞赋，能够一次饮酒一石。
English: He has a strong character, often has the ambition to make a great achievement, is not easily discouraged, and can drink one stone of alcohol at a time.

古文：时，皇太后父大将军窦武援立灵帝，初秉机政，朝议欲加封爵。
现代文：当时，皇后父亲大将军窦武拥立灵帝，刚刚秉持国家的机要政务，朝廷议论想加卢植的封爵。
English: At that time, the queen's father, General Dou Wu, supported Emperor Ling, and had just upheld the important political affairs of the country. The court discussed the knighthood of Gallu.

古文：植虽布衣，以武素有名誉，乃献书以规之曰：植闻嫠有不恤纬之事，漆室有倚楹之戚，忧深思远，君子之情。
现代文：卢植虽然是个布衣，认为窦武平日有好的名誉，于是写信规劝他说 ：我曾经听说寡妇有不忧纬少的事，漆室女倚柱悲吟，她们所忧伤的不是个人自己的事，都是为国而忧，忧深思远，这是君子爱国的高尚感情。
English: Although Lu Zhi was a clothier, he thought Dou Wu had a good reputation on a day-to-day basis, so he wrote a letter to persuade him: I once heard that widows have few things to worry about, lacquer room women are sad, they are not worried about their own personal affairs, they are worried about the country, they are worried about the future, this is a gentleman's patriotic noble feelings.

古文：夫士立争友，义贵切磋。
现代文：读书人要有正直的朋友，在于互相规诫，使自己不致陷于不义。
English: An honest friend is one who corrects his neighbor, lest he fall into injustice.

古文：《书》陈 谋及庶人 ，《诗》咏 询于刍荛 。
现代文：《书》说 要向老百姓商量。 《诗》咏 ：要问事于采薪的人。 
English: "Book" says to consult with the people. "Poem" : to ask the people who collect salaries.

古文：植诵先王之书久矣，敢爱其瞽言哉！
现代文：我卢植读先王的书很久了，岂敢吝惜我不明事理的话吗？
English: I have been reading the books of the late king for a long time. How dare I begrudge him for not knowing the facts?

古文：今足下之于汉朝，犹旦、奭之在周室，建立圣主，四海有系。论者以为吾子之功，于斯为重。
现代文：现在您对于汉朝来说，正如周公旦、召公在周朝，建立圣主，关系天下，舆论认为您的功劳，以此为重。
English: Now, for the Han Dynasty, you are just like Zhou Gongdan and Zhao Gong in the Zhou Dynasty, establishing the Holy Lord, the relationship between the world and the world, and the public opinion believes that your merit is based on this.

古文：天下聚目而视，攒耳而听，谓准之前事，将有景风之祚。
现代文：天下注目而视您，倾着耳朵在听您的，说根据从前的事实，会有景风之福。
English: The eyes of the world are on you, the ears are listening to you, saying that according to the facts of the past, there will be the blessing of the scenery.

古文：寻《春秋》之义，王后无嗣，择立亲长，年均以德，德均则决之卜筮。
现代文：按《春秋》的大义，王后无子，要选择亲属中的年长者以为王子；年龄相同，那就选择道德修养好的；道德修养相同，那就决定于占卦。
English: According to the great justice of "Spring and Autumn," if the queen has no son, it is necessary to choose the elder of the relatives as the prince; if the age is the same, then choose the moral cultivation is good; if the moral cultivation is the same, then it is decided by divination.

古文：今同宗相后，披图案牒，以次建之，何勋之有？
现代文：现在同宗继后，披图案牒，按秩序建立，有什么功劳？
English: What merit is there now in the succession of the same lineage, in the imposition of patterns, and in the establishment of order?

古文：岂横叨天功以为已力乎！
现代文：难道可以叨天功以为己力吗？
English: Is it possible to take credit for one's own work?

古文：宜辞大赏，以全身名。
现代文：应当辞去大赏，保全名声。
English: He should give up the award and save his reputation.

古文：又比世祚不竞，仍外求嗣，可谓危矣。
现代文：又近来世祚不强，还向外求嗣，可以说是危险了。
English: And recently, he is not strong in the afterlife, and he is still looking for a successor, which can be said to be dangerous.

古文：而四方未宁，盗贼伺隙，恒岳、勃碣，特多奸盗，将有楚人胁比，尹氏立朝之变。
现代文：而四方不安宁，盗贼乘机而起，恒岳、勃碣、盗贼特别多，可能要发生楚人威胁子比，周卿尹士立王子朝夺王子猛位的变乱。
English: But the four quarters are restless, thieves take advantage of the opportunity to rise, Hengyue, Burgundy, thieves are particularly numerous, there may be a rebellion of the Chu people to threaten Zibi, and Prince Zhou Qing Yin Shili Dynasty to seize the prince's throne.

古文：宜依古礼，置诸子之官，征王侯爱子，宗室贤才，外崇训道之义，内息贪利之心，简其良能，随用爵之，强干弱枝之道也。
现代文：应当依照古礼，安置诸子的官位，征召王侯的爱子，宗室的贤才，在外推崇训道大义，在内止息贪求权利的思想，挑选贤能之士，随时任用封爵，这是强干弱枝的办法啊。 
English: In accordance with ancient rites, the sons of princes should be placed in official positions, the prince's beloved son and the family's wise men should be enlisted, the principle of discipline and righteousness should be promoted outside, the idea of greed for power should be stopped inside, the wise men should be selected, and they should be knighted at any time. This is a method for the strong and the weak.

古文：武并不能用。
现代文：窦武都不能用。
English: Neither Dou nor Wu can be used.

古文：州郡数命，植皆不就。
现代文：州郡多次召命，卢植都不就。
English: The state and county repeatedly called for help, but Lu Zhi was not satisfied.

古文：建宁中，征为博士，乃始起焉。
现代文：建宁中，征召为博士，才开始出来做官。
English: Jian Ningzhong, called up as a doctor, only began to work as an official.

古文：熹平四年，九江蛮反，四府选植才兼文武，拜九江太守，蛮寇宾服。
现代文：熹平四年，九江蛮反叛，四府选举卢植才兼文武，任为九江太守。蛮寇老老实实归服。
English: In the fourth year of Heping, Jiujiang rebelled violently, and the four prefectures elected Lu Yuecai, also known as Wenwu, as the governor of Jiujiang. The barbarians honestly submitted.

古文：以疾去官。
现代文：因病辞官。
English: Resigned due to illness.

古文：作《尚书章句》、《三礼解诂》。
现代文：作《尚书章句》、《三体解诂》。
English: He is the author of "Chapter and Verse of Shangshu" and "Three-Body Solution."

古文：时，始立太学《石经》，以正《五经》文字，植乃上书曰：臣少从通儒故南郡太守马融受古学，颇知今之《礼记》特多回冗。
现代文：这时设立太学《石经》，以校正《五经》文字，卢植于是上书说 ：我年少时从通儒先南郡太守马融学古学，稍微知道现在的《礼记》重复杂乱的地方不少。
English: At this time, the Taixue "Shi Jing" was set up to correct the text of the "Five Classics," and Lu Zhi then wrote: When I was young, I learned ancient studies from Tong Ru Xian Nan County Tai Shou Ma Rong, and I knew a little about the complicated and chaotic parts of the current "Li Ji."

古文：臣前以《周礼》诸经，发起秕谬，敢率愚浅，为之解诂，而家乏，无力供缮写上。原得将能书生二人，共诣东观，就官财粮，专心研精，合《尚书》章句，考《礼记》失得，庶裁定圣典，刊正碑文。
现代文：我以前认为《周礼》诸经论义乖僻，贸然为之作注解，家贫无法缮写，希望能偕同书生二人，同去东观，靠公家的财力与粮食，专心研究，整理《尚书》章句，考《礼记》的所失，庶几审定圣典，刊正碑文。
English: I used to think that the "Zhou Li" sutras and doctrines were eccentric, and I hastily made annotations for it. I was too poor to write it down. I hoped that I could take two scholars and go to Dongguan together, rely on the public's financial resources and grain, concentrate on research, sort out the chapters of "Shang Shu," examine the loss of "Li Ji," examine several sacred texts, and publish the official inscription.

古文：古文科斗，近于为实，而厌抑流俗，降在小学，中兴以来，通儒达士班固、贾逵、郑兴父子，并敦悦之。
现代文：古文科斗，接近事实，流俗压抑，降在小学。中兴以来，通儒达士如班固、贾逵、郑兴父子，都悦礼乐而敦诗书。
English: The ancient literature and science struggle, close to the facts, suppressed by popular customs, dropped to primary school. Since the rise of ZTE, the connoisseurs of Confucianism, such as Ban Gu, Jia Wei, and Zheng Xing, both father and son, are fond of ceremonial music and poetry.

古文：今《毛诗》、《左氏》、《周礼》各有传记，其与《春秋》共相表里，宜置博士，为立学官，以助后来，以广圣意。
现代文：现在《毛诗》、《左氏》、《周礼》各有传记，与《春秋》互相发明，应当置博士，为立学官，以勉后来，推广圣人的思想。 
English: Nowadays, "Mao Shi," "Zao Shi" and "Zhou Li" all have biographies, and they are mutually invented with "Spring and Autumn." It is necessary to appoint a doctor to be the academic officer, and then promote the saint's thought.

古文：会南夷反叛，以植尝在九江有恩信，拜为庐江太守。
现代文：值南蛮反叛，因卢植曾经在九江对老百姓有恩信，任命他为庐江太守。
English: During the Southern Barbarian Rebellion, because Lu Zhi once had the trust of the people in Jiujiang, he was appointed the governor of the Li River.

古文：植深达政宜，务存清静，弘大体而已。
现代文：卢植深明为政所应该做的事，不扰民，以清静为本，弘扬大体罢了。
English: Lu Zhi Shengming is what the government should do, do not disturb the people, take tranquility as the basis, and promote it as a whole.

古文：岁余，复征拜议郎，与谏议大夫马日磾、议郎蔡邕、杨彪、韩说等并在东观，校中书《五经》记传，补续《汉记》。
现代文：一年多，再征召任议郎，与谏议大夫马日石单、议郎蔡邕、杨彪、韩说等在东观，校正其中的《五经》记传，补续《汉记》。
English: For more than a year, Ren Erlang was called up again, and together with Erlang doctor Ma Rishi Shan, Erlang doctors Cai Qi, Yang Biao, Han Xie, etc. in Dongguan, to proofread the "Five Classics" biography and supplement the "Chinese Classics."

古文：帝以非急务，转为侍中，迁尚书。
现代文：皇上认为这不是当务之急，调为侍中，升尚书。
English: The Emperor thought that this was not an urgent matter, so he transferred him to the position of chamberlain and promoted him.

古文：光和元年，有日食之异，植上封事谏曰：臣闻《五行传》 日晦而月见谓之朓，王侯其舒 。
现代文：光和元年，发生日蚀，卢植上密奏劝谏说 ：我听说《五行传》 ：日晦暗而月亮现出来，是月行速在日前，叫做月兆。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, there was a solar eclipse, and Lu Zhi was advised by Misao to say, "I heard from "The Tale of the Five Elements": The sun was darkened and the moon appeared. The speed of the moon's movement was the day before yesterday, which is called the lunar crescent.

古文：此谓君政舒缓，故日食晦也。
现代文：这是君舒缓则臣下骄慢的反映。 就是说君政舒缓，所以日食色暗。
English: This is a reflection of the fact that when the emperor is at ease, the vassals are proud; that is to say, when the monarchy is at ease, the eclipse is dark.

古文：《春秋传》曰 天子避位移时 ，言其相掩不过移时。
现代文：《春秋传》曰 天子避正寝 ，是说回避一下日食的时间。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" says that the Son of Heaven avoids going to bed, which means avoiding the time of the solar eclipse.

古文：而间者日食自巳过午，既食之后，云雾晻暧。
现代文：日食只一会儿就过去了，近来日食自巳时过午时，既食以后，还云雾掩蔽。
English: Solar eclipses only last for a short time. Recently, solar eclipses have been covered by clouds and fog since the afternoon.

古文：比年地震，彗孛互见。
现代文：近年地震，彗星孛星互见。
English: In recent years, earthquakes, comets and shooting stars have occurred.

古文：臣闻汉以火德，化当宽明。
现代文：我听说汉以火德，教化在宽明。
English: I've heard that the Han people's virtue is fire and their enlightenment is broad-mindedness.

古文：近色信谗，忌之甚者，如火畏水故也。
现代文：接近女色、相信陷害忠良的话，都是应该着重反对的，因为火怕水的原因啊！
English: Approaching a woman and believing that she is a traitor should be emphatically opposed, because fire is afraid of water!

古文：案今年之变，皆阳失阴侵，消御灾凶，宜有其道。
现代文：查今年的变异，都是阳失其道，被阴侵扰，消除御防灾凶，应当有办法啊。
English: According to this year's variation, it is the sun that has lost its way, being disturbed by the yin, eliminating the prevention of disasters, there should be a way.

古文：谨略陈八事：一曰用良，二曰原禁，三曰御疠，四曰备寇，五曰修礼，六曰遵尧，七曰御下，八曰散利。
现代文：谨略陈八事：一用良，二原禁，三御疠，四备寇，五修礼，六遵尧，七御下，八散利。
English: Eight things are worth mentioning: one is good, two is forbidden, three is auspicious, four is auspicious, five is auspicious, six is auspicious, seven is auspicious and eight is auspicious.

古文：用良者，宜使州郡核举贤良，随方委用，责求选举。
现代文：用良，应当使州郡严格挑选贤良之士，按才任用，责任选举。
English: In order to make good use of them, the state and county should strictly select virtuous people, appoint them according to their merits, and elect them according to their responsibilities.

古文：原禁者，凡诸党锢，多非其罪，可加赦恕，申宥回枉。
现代文：原禁，所有党锢，绝大多数是没有罪的，可以赦免宽恕，平反冤假错案。
English: Originally banned, all party cadres, the vast majority of whom are not guilty, can be pardoned and pardoned, and wrongful cases can be redressed.

古文：御疠者，宋后家属，并以无辜委骸横尸，不得收葬，疫疠之来，皆由于此。
现代文：御疠，宋后因王甫、程阿陷害，忧愤而死，他的父亲兄弟都以无罪被诛死，尸体抛弃，不准收葬，疫疠的发生，都由于此。
English: Wang Fu and Cheng Ah framed the empress Dowager Song, who died of grief and anger. His father and brothers were all strangled for no reason, their bodies were thrown away, they were not allowed to be buried, and the epidemic occurred because of this.

古文：宜敕收拾，以安游魂。
现代文：应当下令收拾，以安游魂。
English: They should be ordered to clean up and live in peace.

古文：备寇者，侯王之家，赋税减削，愁穷思乱，必致非常，宜使给足，以防未然。
现代文：备寇，侯王之家，赋税减削，因为穷困就想为乱，一定要发生非常变故，应当使他们生活供给充足，防止祸患的发生。
English: Preparation for invasion, the house of the lord of the manor, tax reduction, because poverty wants to be chaos, there must be a great change, they should make their living supply sufficient to prevent the occurrence of disasters.

古文：修礼者，应征有道之人，若郑玄之徒，陈明《洪范》，攘服灾咎。
现代文：修礼，应当征召有道德的人，如郑玄一流，讲述《洪范》天地的大法，排除收服灾咎。
English: When performing rituals, it is necessary to recruit moral people, such as the first-class Zheng Xuan, to recite the Great Law of Heaven and Earth from "Hong Fan" and eliminate the guilt of accepting disasters.

古文：遵尧者，今郡守刺史一月数迁，宜依黜陟，以章能否，纵不九载，可满三岁。
现代文：遵尧，现在郡守刺史，一月调动几次，应当按照考绩，升进其明者，黜退其幽者，以分别其能者不能者，即使不能九年考功，三岁考绩也行。
English: Zunyi, the current county governor, who has been transferred several times in January, should be promoted according to performance appraisal. Those who are bright should be promoted, those who are obscure should be promoted, and those who can't should be separated according to their ability. Even if it can't be a nine-year performance appraisal, a three-year performance appraisal is also possible.

古文：御下者，请谒希爵，一宜禁塞，迁举之事，责成主者。
现代文：御下，请客送礼，拉人情，搞关系，一律禁绝，推贤举能的事，责成主管部门办好。
English: Ladies and gentlemen, please refrain from giving gifts, pulling people's affections, and engaging in relationships, and ask the competent departments to do a good job.

古文：散利者，天子之体，理无私积，宜弘大务，蠲略细微。
现代文：散利，作天子的，按理不应有私人积蓄，应当弘扬大事，除去细微末节。 
English: As the son of Heaven, he should not have private savings. He should promote major events and eliminate minor details.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：皇帝没有采纳。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：中平元年，黄巾贼起，四府举植，拜比中郎将，持节，以护乌桓中郎将宗员副，将北军五校士，发天下诸郡兵征之。
现代文：中平元年，黄巾贼起，四府推举卢植任为北中郎将，持朝廷节，护乌桓中郎将宗员为副，率领北军五校士，调天下诸郡兵征讨黄巾。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, when the Yellow Turban Rebellion broke out, the four prefectures elected Lu Zhi as the Northern Vice Admiral to hold the Imperial Court Festival, and Gu Wukan as the Vice Admiral to lead the Northern Army's Five Academicians to recruit soldiers from all over the country to fight the Yellow Turban Rebellion.

古文：连战破贼帅张角，斩获万余人。
现代文：连续几个战役，把贼帅张角打败，斩获万余人。
English: After several consecutive battles, he defeated the thief Zhang Qiao and gained more than 10,000 people.

古文：角等走保广宗，植筑围凿堑，造作云梯，垂当拔之。帝遣小黄门左丰诣军观贼形势，或劝植以赂送丰，植不肯。
现代文：张角等逃到广宗，卢植筑围凿壕沟，造作云梯，广宗城快攻破了，皇帝派小黄门左丰到军队里观看贼的形势，有人劝卢植给左丰送钱物，卢植不肯。
English: Zhang Jiao and others fled to Guangzong, Lu Zi built a fence, dug a trench, and made a ladder. Guangzong City was soon breached. The emperor sent Xiao Huangmen Zuofeng to the army to watch the situation of the thieves. Some people advised Lu Zi to send money to Zuofeng, but Lu Zi refused.

古文：丰还言于帝曰： 广宗贼易破耳。
现代文：左丰回到朝廷里对皇上说 ：广宗贼好破呢，卢中郎坚固营垒，停止进攻，等待天诛。 
English: Zuo Feng returned to the imperial court and said to the emperor, "The Guangzong bandits are easy to defeat. Lu Zhonglang should fortify the camp, stop the attack, and wait for divine intervention."

古文：卢中郎固垒息军，以待天诛。 帝怒，遂槛车征植，减死罪一等。及车骑将军皇甫嵩讨平黄巾，盛称植行师方略，嵩皆资用规谋，济成其功。
现代文：皇帝听说，大怒，派囚车把卢植召回，减死罪一等。车骑将军皇甫嵩讨平黄巾贼之后，盛赞卢植指挥军队的谋略，皇甫嵩完全依靠卢植的规划计谋，因而获得成功。
English: Hearing of this, the emperor flew into a rage and sent a cart to call Lu Zhi back, commuting his death sentence to the first degree. After the cart-riding general Huang Fusong defeated the Yellow Turban thief, he praised Lu Zhi's strategy of commanding the army. Huang Fusong completely relied on Lu Zhi's planning and strategy, and thus achieved success.

古文：以其年复为尚书。
现代文：这年，卢植又被任为尚书。
English: In the same year, Lu Zhi was again appointed as Shangshu.

古文：帝崩，大将军何进谋诛中官，乃召并州牧董卓，以惧太后。
现代文：皇帝逝世，大将军何进谋划诛杀宦官，于是召并州牧董卓，吓唬太后。
English: After the emperor's death, General He Jin plotted to kill the eunuch, so he summoned the provincial governor, Mu Dongzhuo, to scare the empress dowager.

古文：植知卓凶悍难制，必生后患，固止之。进不从。
现代文：卢植知道董卓凶恶不易控制，一定要发生后患，坚决反对，何进不听他的。
English: Lu Zhi knew that Dong Zhuo's viciousness was not easy to control, and there must be after-effects, and resolutely opposed it. He Jin did not listen to him.

古文：及卓至，果陵虐朝廷，乃大会百官于朝堂，议欲废立。
现代文：董卓到达京师，果然践蹋朝廷，不把朝廷放在眼里。大会百官于朝堂，想废帝另立。
English: When Dong Zhuo arrived in Beijing, he successfully overthrew the imperial court. He did not care about the imperial court. Hundreds of officials gathered in the imperial palace, wanting to depose the emperor.

古文：群僚无敢言，植独抗议不同。
现代文：百官没有人出来吭一声，卢植独抗议不赞同。
English: None of the officials came out to speak, and Lu did not agree with the protest against independence.

古文：卓怒罢会，将诛植，语在《卓传》。
现代文：董卓发怒，解散了大会，准备诛杀卢植，语在《董卓传》。
English: Angry, Dong Zhuo dissolved the assembly and prepared to kill Lu Zhi, according to "The Biography of Dong Zhuo."

古文：植素善蔡邕，邕前徙朔方，植独上书请之。
现代文：卢植素来与蔡邕友好，蔡邕以前被谪徙朔方，卢植独上书为他申诉。
English: Lu Zhi has always been friendly with Cai Zhen. Cai Zhen was previously exiled to the Shuo side, and Lu Zhi independently petitioned for him.

古文：邕时见亲于卓，故往请植事。
现代文：蔡邕这时为董卓亲近，因此去为卢植说情。
English: At this time, Cai Qi was close to Dong Zhuo, so he went to intercede for Lu Zhi.

古文：又议郎彭伯谏卓曰： 卢尚书海内大儒，人之望也。
现代文：又议郎彭伯谏董卓说 ：卢尚书是海内的一位大儒，众望所归，现在先把他杀了，天下都会为之震惊恐惧。 
English: Another petitioner, Peng Boqin Dong Zhuo, said: Lu Shangshu is a great man of the sea, who is highly respected. If we kill him now, the whole world will be shocked and afraid.

古文：今先害之，天下震怖。 卓乃止，但免植官而已。植以老病求归，惧不免祸，乃诡道从轘辕出。
现代文：董卓才没有杀害他，只把卢植的官撤了而已。卢植因年老多病请求回家，怕不免遭到董卓的暗害，于是诈从頧辕道出。
English: Dong Zhuo did not kill him, he only removed Lu Zhi's official. Lu Zhi requested to go home because of his old age and illness, fearing that he would inevitably be assassinated by Dong Zhuo, so he cheated his way out.

古文：卓果使人追之，到怀，不及。
现代文：董卓果然派人追他，到怀，没有追上。
English: Dong Zhuo did indeed send someone to chase him, but they did not catch up.

古文：遂隐于上谷，不交人事。
现代文：卢植就隐居上谷，不与世人来往。
English: Lu Zhe lived in seclusion in Shanggu without any contact with the outside world.

古文：冀州牧袁绍请为军师。
现代文：冀州牧袁绍请他作军师。
English: Jizhou Mu Yuan Shao asked him to be a military instructor.

古文：初平三年卒。
现代文：初平三年逝世。
English: Hatsuhira died three years later.

古文：临困，敕其子俭葬于土穴，不用棺椁，附体单帛而已。
现代文：临死，命令他儿子把他殓葬于土穴中，不用棺椁，仅以单帛附体而已。
English: On his deathbed, he ordered his son to bury him in a hole in the ground, without a coffin, just a single coffin.

古文：所著碑、诔、表、记凡六篇。
现代文：所著碑、诔、表、记共六篇。
English: He wrote a total of six articles, including a monument, an inscription, a table and a record.

古文：建安中，曹操北讨柳城，过涿郡，告守令曰： 故北中郎将卢植，名著海内，学为儒宗，士之楷模，国之桢干也。
现代文：建安中，曹操去北方讨伐柳城，经过涿郡，告守令说： 已故北中郎将卢植，名著海内，学问为儒者所宗仰，是知识分子的楷模，国家的栋梁。
English: In the middle of Jian'an, Cao Cao went to the north to fight Liucheng, and after passing Shixian County, he reported to Shou Rong and said: The late Beizhong Lang planted Lu, a famous book in the sea, a scholar admired by Confucians, a model for intellectuals, and a pillar of the country.

古文：昔武王入殷，封商容之闾；郑丧子产，仲尼陨涕。
现代文：从前周武王入殷，封商容的闾里；郑国子产逝世，仲尼为之流泪。
English: From the previous week, King Wu of Zhou entered Yin and sealed the tomb of Shang Rong; Zheng Guozibang died, and Zhong Ni shed tears for him.

古文：孤到此州，嘉其余风。
现代文：我到此州，喜其流风余韵。
English: When I came to this state, I liked its laid-back style.

古文：《春秋》之义，贤者之后，宜有殊礼。
现代文：《春秋》的大义，贤者的后代，应当待以殊礼。
English: The great righteousness of "Spring and Autumn," the descendants of the sages, should be treated with special honor.

古文：亟遣丞掾除其坟墓，存其子孙，并致薄醊，以彰厥德。 子毓，知名。
现代文：应急派遣丞掾打扫坟墓，存问其子孙，并进行祭奠，来表彰他的德行。 卢植的儿子卢毓，也有名于时。
English: In case of an emergency, he would send Joongjo to clean the grave, inquire about his children and grandchildren, and hold a memorial service to commend his virtuous deeds.

古文：论曰：风霜以别草木之性，危乱而见贞良之节，则卢公之心可知矣。
现代文：史官评论说：风霜可以识别草木之性，国家危乱时，贞良的大节可以显现出来。卢公的一片忠心，是昭然若揭的。
English: The historian commented: The wind and frost can identify the nature of plants and trees. When the country is in crisis, the great festival of Zhengyang can be revealed. Lu Gong's loyalty is obvious.

古文：夫蜂虿起怀，雷霆骇耳，虽贲、育、荆、诸之论，未有不冘豫夺常者也。
现代文：蜂蜇起于怀中，雷霆震于身际，虽然勇猛有力如孟贲、夏育、荆轲、专诸之流，也没有不犹豫失去常态的。
English: The bee rises in the bosom, the thunder shakes in the body, although the brave and powerful, such as Meng Yao, Xia Yu, Jing Yao, and others, do not lose their normal state without hesitation.

古文：当植抽白刃严阁之下，追帝河津之间，排戈刃，赴戕折，岂先计哉？
现代文：当卢植抽白刃严阁之下，追帝河津一带，冒着戈刃，赴戕折，置死生于不顾，什么也不考虑。
English: When Lu Zhi drew the white sword under the severe situation, he chased the emperor around Hezu, braved the sword, went to the turning point, put his life in disregard, and did not consider anything.

古文：君子之于忠义，造次必于是，颠沛必于是也。
现代文：君子对于忠义，不管在仓卒紧急的情况下，或者是在极为艰难困顿的环境中，都是始终如一，毫不动摇的。
English: A gentleman is consistent and unwavering in his loyalty, whether in a time of emergency or under extremely difficult circumstances.

古文：赵岐字邠卿，京兆长陵人也。
现代文：◆赵岐传，赵岐字邠卿，京兆郡长陵县人。
English: ◆Zhao Qizhong, Zhao Qizhongqing, from Changling County, Jingzhao County.

古文：初名嘉，生于御史台，因字台卿，后避难，故自改名字，示不忘本土也。
现代文：开始名赵嘉，生于御史台，因此字台卿，后来避难，自己改名字，表示不忘记本土。
English: His original name was Zhao Jia. He was born in Gushidai, so he was called Lord of Gushidai. Later, he took refuge and changed his name to show that he would not forget his native land.

古文：岐少明经，有才艺，娶扶风马融兄女。
现代文：赵岐年轻时通经术，多才多艺，娶扶风马融哥哥的女儿为妻。
English: When Zhao Qi was young, he was versed in Chinese medicine and was multi-talented. He married the daughter of Fu Feng's brother, Ma Rong.

古文：融外戚豪家，岐常鄙之，不与融相见，仕州郡，以廉直疾恶见惮。
现代文：马融是外戚豪家，赵岐鄙视他们，不与马融见面。仕州郡，廉正疾恶，为人所畏。
English: Ma Rong is a relative of a wealthy family. Zhao Qi despised them and did not meet with Ma Rong. Shizhou County is a place where people fear corruption.

古文：年三十余，有重疾，卧蓐七年，自虑奄忽，乃为遗令敕兄子曰： 大丈夫生世，遁无箕山之操，仕无伊、吕之勋，天不我与，复何言哉！
现代文：三十多岁时，患重病，卧床七年，自己考虑活不了，于是做了遗嘱告诉他哥哥的儿子说 ：大丈夫生在世上，隐居没有许由的操守，做官没有伊尹、吕尚的功勋，老天爷又不予我年寿，还说什么呢！
English: When he was in his thirties, he was seriously ill and had been bedridden for seven years. He thought he would not live, so he made a will and told his brother's son: "It's okay to be born in the world, there's no reason to live in seclusion, there's no merit of Yi Yun or Lü Shang to be an official, and God does not give me a long life, what else can I say!

古文：可立一员石于吾墓前，刻之曰： 汉有逸人，姓赵名嘉。
现代文：可立一圆石于墓前，刻碑说： 汉有隐逸人，姓赵名嘉。
English: A round stone can be placed in front of the tomb, engraved with the inscription: Han You Ying Yat, surnamed Zhao Mingjia.

古文：有志无时，命也奈何！ 
现代文：有志无时，命啊！奈何 ！ 
English: If you have the will, you can do it!

古文： 其后疾瘳。
现代文：后来病好了。
English: He later recovered.

古文：永兴二年，辟司空掾。议二千石得去官为亲行服，朝廷从之。
现代文：永兴二年，征召为司空掾，建议二千石应该去官，为父母亲行服，朝廷采纳了。
English: In the second year of Yongxing, he was conscripted as the Secretary of the Empty Palace, and suggested that the two thousand stones should go to the officials and serve the parents, which was accepted by the imperial court.

古文：其后为大将军梁冀所辟，为陈损益求贤之策，冀不纳。
现代文：后来被大将军梁冀所征，向梁冀建议损益求贤的策谋，梁冀没有采纳。
English: Later, he was conscripted by the general Liang Jie, and he suggested to Liang Jie the strategy of seeking virtue in losses and gains, but Liang Jie did not adopt it.

古文：举理剧，为皮氏长。
现代文：推举治理繁剧，任为皮氏长。
English: He was elected to govern the province, and was appointed as the mayor of Pi.

古文：会河东太守刘祜去郡，而中常侍左悺兄胜代之，岐耻疾宦官，即日西归。
现代文：适值河东太守刘离郡，中常侍左的哥哥左胜代替了刘，赵岐疾恶宦官，并且以与他共事可耻，当天就西归。
English: At the right time, Liu, the governor of Hedong, left the county. Zu Sheng, the elder brother of Zuo, the middle-ranking attendant of Zuo, replaced Liu. Zhao Qizhi, the evil eunuch, and it was shameful to work with him. He returned to the west on the same day.

古文：京兆尹延笃复以为功曹。
现代文：京兆尹延笃再以他为功曹。
English: Jing Zhao Yin Yan Duc once again took him as a hero.

古文：先是中常侍唐衡兄玹为京兆虎牙都尉，郡人以玹进不由德，皆轻侮之。
现代文：起先，中常侍唐衡的哥哥唐王玄为京兆虎牙都尉，郡里人认为唐王玄任虎牙都尉，不是由于有德，都轻视他，侮慢他。
English: At first, Tang Heng's elder brother, Tang Wang Xuan, was the first lieutenant of Beijing Zhao Huya. The people in the county thought that Tang Wang Xuan was the first lieutenant of Beijing Zhao Huya not because he was virtuous, but they despised and scorned him.

古文：岐及从兄袭又数为贬议，玹深毒恨。
现代文：赵岐及从兄赵袭又多次贬低他，唐王玄恨极了。
English: Zhao Qi and his younger brother Zhao Qi repeatedly belittled him, which Tang Wang Xuan hated.

古文：延熹元年，玹为京兆尹，岐惧祸及，乃与从子戩逃避之。
现代文：延熹元年，唐王玄为京兆尹，赵岐害怕大祸来临，于是与侄儿赵戬逃跑了。
English: In the first year of the Yanxi Dynasty, Tang Wang Xuan was the Jing Zhaoyun, and Zhao Qi was afraid of a great calamity coming, so he and his nephew Zhao Xi ran away.

古文：玹果收岐家属宗亲，陷以重法，尽杀之。
现代文：唐王玄果然逮捕赵岐家属宗亲，陷害他们犯了重法，统统杀掉。
English: Tang Wang Xuan arrested Zhao Qi's family members and relatives, framed them for serious crimes, and killed them all.

古文：岐遂逃难四方，江、淮、海、岱，靡所不历。自匿姓名，卖饼北海市中。
现代文：赵岐于是逃难四方，历经江、淮、海、岱，隐匿姓名，卖饼北海市中。
English: Zhao Qi then fled in all directions, passing through the Yangtze River, Huai River, Sea of China, and the Yangtze River, anonymously selling cakes in Beihai City.

古文：时安丘孙嵩年二十余，游市见岐，察非常人，停车呼与共载。岐惧失色，嵩乃下帷，令骑屏行人。
现代文：这时安丘孙嵩，二十余岁，在市里闲游看见赵岐，以为不是平常人，停下车子叫赵岐上车，赵岐吓得面色如土，孙嵩于是把车上的帷子放下，命令驾车的人把行人赶开。
English: At this time, Anqiu Sun Song, more than 20 years old, was idling in the city when he saw Zhao Qi. Thinking that he was not an ordinary person, he stopped the car and asked Zhao Qi to get on the car. Zhao Qi was scared and looked like dirt. Sun Song then put down the curtains on the car and ordered the driver to drive the pedestrians away.

古文：密问岐曰： 视子非卖饼者，又相问而色动，不有重怨，即亡命乎？
现代文：悄悄地问赵岐： 看你这个人，不是卖饼的，又问你忽然面色都变了，不是有重大的仇怨，就是一个亡命之徒呢。
English: He quietly asked Zhao Qi: Look at you, this person, you are not a seller of cakes, and you suddenly changed your face, you don't have a major grudge, you are a desperado.

古文：我北海孙宾石，阖门百口，势能相济。 岐素闻嵩名，即以实告之，遂以俱归。
现代文：我北海孙宾石，全家百口，能够帮助你。 赵岐平素听到过孙嵩的名声，就将实际的情况告诉了孙嵩，一同到了孙家。
English: Zhao Qiping, who had heard of Sun Song's fame, told Sun Song the actual situation and went to Sun Song's house together.

古文：嵩先入白母曰： 出行，乃得死友。 迎入上堂，飨之极欢。
现代文：孙嵩先告诉他母亲说 ：出行，得了一个好友。 再把赵岐迎到上堂，招待他极为欢洽。
English: Sun Song first told his mother, "I have made a good friend by traveling," and then welcomed Zhao Qi to the upper hall, inviting him to have a great time.

古文：藏岐复壁中数年，岐作《厄屯歌》二十三章。
现代文：把赵岐藏在复壁中几年，赵岐作《厄屯歌》二十三章。
English: After hiding Zhao Qi in the wall for several years, Zhao Qi composed the 23rd chapter of "Uttun Song."

古文：后诸唐死灭，因赦乃出。
现代文：后来诸唐氏死灭，朝廷大赦，赵岐才得出来。
English: Later, the Tang Dynasty died out, the imperial court granted amnesty, and Zhao Qi came out.

古文：三府闻之，同时并辟。
现代文：三府听说赵岐回来了，同时征召。
English: The three prefectures heard that Zhao Qi had returned, and he was conscripted at the same time.

古文：九年，乃应司徒胡广之命。
现代文：九年，才应司徒胡广之命。
English: It took nine years for the film to be made, at the behest of Stutthof's successor, Hu Guang.

古文：会南匈奴、乌桓、鲜卑反叛，公卿举岐，擢拜并州刺史。
现代文：值南匈奴、乌桓、鲜卑反叛，公卿推举赵岐，升为并州刺史。
English: The Southern Xiongnu, Wu Huan, and Xianbei rebelled, and Zhao Qi was elected by the nobles and promoted to the position of the state secretary.

古文：岐欲奏守边之策，未及上，会坐党事免，因撰次以为《御寇论》。
现代文：赵岐想上奏守御边疆的策略，还没有来得及，因党事免官，撰成《御寇论》。
English: Zhao Qi wanted to play up the strategy of guarding the imperial frontier, but before he could, he was dismissed from his post due to party affairs, and compiled "Okuron."

古文：灵帝初，复遭党锢十余岁。
现代文：灵帝初，又遭党锢十余年。
English: At the beginning of the Lingdi era, the party persecuted him for more than ten years.

古文：中平元年，四方兵起，诏选故刺史、二千石有文武才用者，征岐拜议郎。
现代文：中平元年，四方兵起，诏选前刺史、二千石中有文武才用的，征召赵岐任命为议郎。
English: In the first year of the Middle-Pyeongchang period, when the four armies were mobilized, and before the general election, Zhao Qi was summoned to be appointed as a councilor.

古文：车骑将军张温西征关中，请补长史，别屯安定。
现代文：车骑将军张温西征关中，请补赵岐为长史，驻守安定。
English: In the cavalry general Zhang Wenxi's expropriation, please supplement Zhao Qi as a long history, stationed stability.

古文：大将军何进举为敦煌太守，行至襄武，岐与新除诸郡太守数人俱为贼边章等所执。
现代文：大将军何进举赵岐为敦煌太守，走到襄武，赵岐与新任命的各郡太守好几个人，都被贼边章等人所执。
English: General Ho promoted Zhao Qi to be the governor of Dunhuang, and when he came to Xiangwu, Zhao Qi and several newly appointed governors of various counties were all held by Kida Bianzhang and others.

古文：贼欲胁以为帅，岐诡辞得免，展转还长安。
现代文：贼想胁迫赵岐为帅，赵岐用诈词得免，辗转回到长安。
English: The thief wanted to coerce Zhao Qi into being handsome, but Zhao Qi used deception to get out of it and returned to Chang'an.

古文：及献帝西都，复拜议郎，稍迁太仆。
现代文：献帝西都，再任为议郎，升为太仆。
English: He was given the title of Emperor, re-appointed as Heiro, and promoted to Taifu.

古文：及李傕专政，使太傅马日磾抚慰天下，以岐为副。
现代文：李莈专政，使太傅马日石单安抚慰劳天下，赵岐为副。
English: The dictatorship of Li Zhe made Taifu Ma Rishi single-handedly pacify and comfort the world, with Zhao Qi as his deputy.

古文：日磾行至洛阳，表别遣岐宣扬国命，所到郡县，百姓皆喜曰： 今日乃复见使者车骑。 
现代文：马日石单行到洛阳，别遣赵岐宣扬国家的命令，所到郡县，老百姓都高兴地说 ：今天竟见到使者车骑。 
English: Ma Rishi went to Luoyang alone and did not send Zhao Qi to preach the country's orders. When he arrived at counties and counties, the people were happy to say: Today I actually saw the envoy riding.

古文：是时，袁绍、曹操与公孙瓒争冀州，绍及操闻岐至，皆自将兵数百里奉迎，岐深陈天子恩德，宜罢兵安人之道，又移书公孙瓒，为言利害。
现代文：这时袁绍、曹操与公孙瓒争夺冀州，袁绍和曹操听说赵岐到达，都亲自率兵在数百里外欢迎他，赵岐宣扬天子的恩德和应当撤兵安人的道理，又写信给公孙瓒，说明利害得失。
English: At this time, Yuan Shao, Cao Cao and Gongsun Qi were competing for Jizhou. When Yuan Shao and Cao Cao heard that Zhao Qi had arrived, they personally led an army to welcome him hundreds of miles away. Zhao Qi preached the benevolence of the Son of Heaven and the principle that soldiers should be withdrawn to save people, and also wrote to Gongsun Qi to explain the gains and losses.

古文：绍等各引兵去，皆与岐期会洛阳，奉迎车驾。
现代文：袁绍等各带兵回去，都与赵岐约在洛阳相会，奉迎皇上。
English: Yuan Shao and others all returned with soldiers and met with Zhao Qiyou in Luoyang to welcome the emperor.

古文：岐南到陈留，得笃疾，经涉二年，期者遂不至。
现代文：赵岐南到陈留，得了重病，经历二年，约会的没有到。
English: Zhao Qinan came to Chenliu, fell seriously ill, and after two years, the date did not come.

古文：兴平元年，诏书征岐，会帝当还洛阳，先遣卫将军董承修理宫室。
现代文：兴平元年，诏书征召赵岐，正好帝要还洛阳，先打发卫将军董承修理宫室。
English: In the first year of the Xingping era, Zhao Qi was summoned by imperial edict. Just as the emperor was about to return to Luoyang, he first sent the guard general Dong Cheng to repair the palace.

古文：岐谓承曰： 今海内分崩，唯有荆州境广地胜，西通巴蜀，南当交址，年谷独登，兵人差全。
现代文：赵岐对董承说 ：现在海内四分五裂，只有荆州境域阔大，地方形势也好，西通巴蜀，南当交阝止，年谷丰收，军队户口还完整。
English: Zhao Qi said to Dong Cheng: At present, the inland is fragmented. Only Jingzhou has a vast territory, and the local situation is good. The west is close to Bashu, the south is at a standstill, the harvest is good, and the military account is still complete.

古文：岐虽迫大命，犹志报国家，欲自乘牛车，南说刘表，可使其身自将兵来卫朝廷，与将军并心同力，共奖王室。
现代文：我赵岐虽然迫于李莈的命令，但志在报效国家，想自己乘牛车往南说刘表，可以使他带兵来保卫朝廷，与将军同心同力，共同辅助王室。
English: Although I, Zhao Qi, was forced by the order of Li Xi, I aspired to serve the country, and I wanted to take the ox cart to the south to say Liu watch, so that he could bring soldiers to defend the imperial court, and work together with the general to assist the royal family.

古文：此安上救人之策也。 承即表遣岐使荆州，督租粮。
现代文：这是安上救百姓的办法。 董承就上表派赵岐使荆州，督办租粮。
English: This is a safe way to save the people. Dong Cheng sent Zhao Qi to Jingzhou to supervise the grain rent.

古文：岐至，刘表即遣兵诣洛阳助修宫室，军资委输，前后不绝。
现代文：赵岐到，刘表就派兵去洛阳帮助修理宫室，军械粮草的运输，前后络绎不绝。
English: When Zhao Qi arrived, Liu Bei sent soldiers to Luoyang to help repair the palace, and the transportation of military equipment and grain was incessant.

古文：时，孙嵩亦寓于表，表不为礼，岐乃称嵩素行笃烈，因共上为青州刺史。
现代文：这时孙嵩也在刘表那里作客，刘表不以礼待他，赵岐于是向刘表称述孙嵩德行非凡，因共上为青州刺史。
English: At this time, Sun Song was also a guest of Liu Biao, Liu Biao did not treat him with courtesy, so Zhao Qi told Liu Biao that Sun Song's moral conduct was extraordinary, because it was the history of Qingzhou.

古文：岐以老病，遂留荆州。
现代文：赵岐因年老有病，就留在荆州。
English: Due to old age and illness, Zhao Qi stayed in Jingzhou.

古文：曹操时为司空，举以自代。
现代文：曹操这时为司空，举赵岐代自己为司空。
English: At this time, Cao Cao was the steward of the sky, and Zhao Qidai raised himself as the steward of the sky.

古文：光禄勋桓典、少府孔融上书荐之，于是就拜岐为太常。
现代文：光禄勋桓典、少府孔融上书推荐赵岐，于是任命赵岐为太常。
English: Kōroku Shunkan-sensei and Shōfu Konryū recommended Zhao Qi in their letters of recommendation, and Zhao Qi was then appointed to the position of Taijō.

古文：年九十余，建安六年卒。
现代文：年九十余岁，建安六年卒。
English: He is more than 90 years old, and has been in Jian'an for six years.

古文：先自为寿藏，图季札、子产、晏婴、叔向四像居宾位，又自画其像居主位，皆为赞颂。
现代文：赵岐先自己做了土冢圹，绘季札、子产、晏婴、叔向四像居宾位，又画自己的像居主位，都作赞词。
English: Zhao Qixian himself made the mound, painted the four images of the season, the child, the baby, and the uncle to stay at the guest's place, and painted his own image to stay at the main place, all for praise.

古文：敕其子曰： 我死之日，墓中聚沙为床，布簟白衣，散发其上，覆以单被，即日便下，下讫便掩。 岐多所述作，著《孟子章句》、《三辅决录》传于时。
现代文：令他的儿子说： 我死的那天，墓中聚沙为床，用白衣布簟，散发其上，用单被盖着，当天就下圹，下放好了，就掩埋。 赵岐述作很多，著有《孟子章句》、《三辅决录》，流传于世。
English: His son said: On the day of my death, the sand in the grave was gathered into a bed, covered with a white cloth, spread on it, covered with a sheet, lowered on the same day, lowered, and buried.Zhao Qi wrote a lot, authored "Mencius Chapter" and "Three Auxiliary Decrees," which have been passed down to the world.

