古文：命，吉凶之主也。
现代文：命，是吉凶的主宰。
English: Life is the master of fortune and misfortune.

古文：自然之道，适偶之数，非有他气旁物厌胜感动使之然也。
现代文：是自然形成的道，呈偶然巧合的定数，并非有其他的气，别的物体压制影响而使之如此。
English: It is a naturally occurring path, a random constant, and it is not the result of other qi or other objects suppressing its influence.

古文：世谓子胥伏剑，屈原自沉，子兰、宰嚭诬谗，吴、楚之君冤杀之也。
现代文：社会上一般人认为伍子胥以剑自杀，屈原自投汨罗，是由于帛喜、子兰诬陷进谗，被吴王和楚王冤枉杀害的。
English: It is generally believed in society that Wu Zixuan committed suicide with a sword, and Qu Yuan committed suicide by throwing himself into the Luo River. This was due to the fact that Yu Xi and Zilan were framed and imprisoned, and were unjustly killed by King Wu and King Chu.

古文：偶二子命当绝，子兰、宰嚭适为谗，而怀王、夫差适信奸也。
现代文：其实正好二人的命该完绝，帛喜、子兰碰巧去进谗言，而吴王夫差和楚顷襄王恰巧又相信这些奸佞的人。
English: In fact, the lives of these two people should have been ended. Gong Xi and Zilan happened to go to the gossips, while Wu Wangfusha and Chu Yao Xiang Wang also happened to believe these traitors.

古文：君适不明，臣适为谗，二子之命，偶自不长。
现代文：君主正巧不贤明，臣子碰巧去进谗，他二人的命又正好自己不长。
English: The monarch just happens to be unwise, the courtier just happens to go to prison, and the lives of both of them just happen to be short.

古文：二偶三合，似若有之，其实自然，非他为也。
现代文：二人碰巧该短命，三种因素凑合在一起，好象是有 他气 、 旁物 的作用，其实是顺应自然，并非它们的影响。
English: Two people happen to have a short life, and three factors come together, as if they have the effect of otherness, by-products. In fact, it is in accordance with nature, not their influence.

古文：夏、殷之朝适穷，桀、纣之恶适稔，商、周之数适起，汤、武之德适丰。
现代文：这都是夏朝和殷朝的气数正好穷尽，桀、纣作恶正好满盈；商朝和西周的气数正巧兴起，汤、武贤德正巧丰厚。
English: All of this is due to the fact that the qi of the Xia and Yin dynasties was just exhausted, and the evil deeds of Yan and Zhou were just in full bloom; the qi of the Shang and Western Zhou dynasties was just emerging, and the virtues of Tang and Wu were just abundant.

古文：关龙逢杀，箕子、比干囚死，当桀、纣恶盛之时，亦二子命讫之期也。
现代文：关龙逢被杀害，箕子被囚禁，比干被挖心，是正当桀、纣作恶最盛的时候，也是他二人寿命该结束的时候。
English: When Guan Longfeng was killed, Xunzi was imprisoned, and Bi Gan's heart was ripped out, it was the time when the righteous and the wicked were at their peak, and it was also the time when the lives of the two of them should have ended.

古文：任伊尹之言，纳吕望之议，汤、武且兴之会，亦二臣当用之际也。
现代文：听信伊尹的话，采纳吕望的主张，是商汤、周武命定将要兴起时机，也是他二臣命该被重用的时候。
English: Listening to the words of Yi Yin and adopting the proposition of Lü Wang, it was the time when Shang Tang and Zhou Wu were destined to rise, and it was also the time when his two ministers were destined to be reused.

古文：人臣命有吉凶，贤不肖之主与之相逢。
现代文：作臣子的命有吉有凶，总会与贤或不贤的君主相遇。
English: A courtier's life is full of ups and downs, and he will always meet with a virtuous or vicious monarch.

古文：文王时当昌，吕望命当贵；高宗治当平，傅说德当遂。
现代文：周文王时运该昌盛，吕望的命当尊重；殷高宗治期注定要太平，傅说德才注定该成功。
English: The time of King Zhou Wen should be prosperous, and the life of Lü Wang should be respected; the reign of Emperor Yin Gao is destined to be peaceful, and Fu said that virtue is destined to be successful.

古文：非文王、高宗为二臣生，吕望、傅说为两君出也。君明臣贤，光曜相察；上修下治，度数相得。
现代文：这并非文王、高宗为二位臣子而生，吕望、傅说为两位君主而出，而是君主英明臣子贤德，光耀相互辉映，上君下臣都是善于治理国家，度数相互一致的缘故。
English: This is not because King Wen and Emperor Gaozong were born from two vassals, while Prince Lvang and Emperor Fu were born from two sovereigns. Rather, it is because the sovereign is wise, the vassal is virtuous, and the brilliance of the two is reflected in each other. The superior lord and the inferior lord are both good at governing the country, and the degrees are consistent with each other.

古文：颜渊死，子曰 天丧予 。
现代文：颜渊死了，孔子说： 老天要灭我啊。 
English: When Yan Yuan died, Confucius said, "God is going to destroy me."

古文：子路死，子曰 天祝予。 
现代文：子路死了，孔子说： 老天要绝我啊。 
English: When Zi Lu died, Confucius said, "May God strike me dead."

古文：孔子自伤之辞，非实然之道也。
现代文：这是孔子自己悲伤的话，并非真实的道理。
English: This is the sad words of Confucius himself, but it is not the real truth.

古文：孔子命不王，二子寿不长也。
现代文：孔子命中注定不能称王，颜渊、子路二人寿命注定活不长。
English: Confucius was fated not to become king, Yan Yuan and Zi Lu were fated not to live long.

古文：不王不长，所禀不同，度数并放，适相应也。
现代文：不能称王与命活不长，是禀受气不同的缘故，度数同时表现出来，碰巧相互应验。
English: It cannot be said that the king and the life are not long, it is because of the different qi, the frequency is manifested at the same time, and it happens to meet each other.

古文：二龙之祆当效，周历适闿椟；褒姒当丧周国，幽王禀性偶恶。
现代文：二龙的妖像该当应验，于是周厉王恰好打开匣子；褒姒该使西周灭亡，所以周幽王生性正好恶劣。
English: The two dragon's demonic images should be fulfilled, so Zhou Li Wang just happened to open the box; Bo Xun should make Xi Zhou perish, so Zhou Yu Wang's birth is just bad.

古文：非二龙使历王发孽，褒姒令幽王愚惑也。遭逢会遇，自相得也。
现代文：这并非是二龙让周厉王放走妖孽，褒姒使周幽王愚昧迷乱，而是双方碰到一起，自然相互一致的结果。
English: This is not the result of the two dragons letting Zhou Li Wang let go of the witchcraft, and the dragonfly making Zhou Yu Wang confused, but the result of the two sides meeting together and naturally agreeing with each other.

古文：僮谣之语当验，斗鸡之变适生；瞿鹆之占当应，鲁昭之恶适成。
现代文：僮谣的话该当应验，斗鸡的事变就正好发生；鸜鹆的占卜正当应验，鲁昭王作恶的事恰好构成。
English: The words of the folk tale should be fulfilled, and the event of the cockfight just happened; the divination of the dragonfly was justly fulfilled, and the evil deed of Lu Zhao Wang was justly constituted.

古文：非僮谣致斗竞，瞿鹆招君恶也。期数自至，人行偶合也。
现代文：这并非童谣引来斗鸡的竞争，鸜鹆招来君主的作恶，而是时期度数自然到了，又与人的行为恰好碰在一起。
English: This is not a nursery rhyme to attract the competition of cockfighting, or a cocoon to attract the evil of the monarch, but the period degree has naturally arrived, and it just happens to collide with human behavior.

古文：尧命当禅舜，丹硃为无道；虞统当传夏，商均行不轨。
现代文：尧的帝位应当禅让给舜，所以丹朱行为没有道义；虞的天下应该相传给夏，所以商均行为不合法度。
English: Zheng's imperial throne should be transferred to Zheng, so there is no morality in Dan Zhu's actions; the world of Zheng should be passed down to Xia, so Shangyun's actions are illegal.

古文：非舜、禹当得天下，能使二子恶也；美恶是非适相逢也。
现代文：并非是舜、禹该得天下而使丹朱、商均二人作恶，其实美恶是非是正好相互碰在一起的。
English: It is not that Zhai and Yu deserved to rule the world and made Dan Zhu and Shangyun commit evil acts. In fact, good and evil are right next to each other.

古文：火星与昴星出入，昴星低时火星出，昴星见时火星伏，非火之性厌服昴也，时偶不并，度转乖也。
现代文：火星与昴星升起落下的时间不一样，昴星落下时火星则升起，昴星出现时则火星隐伏，这并不是火星的特性压制了昴星，而是它们出没的时间碰巧不一致，运转的度数相反的缘故。
English: The time of rising and setting of Mars is different from that of Krypton. When Krypton falls, Mars rises, and when Krypton appears, Mars hides. It is not the characteristics of Mars that suppresses Krypton, but the time of their appearance happens to be inconsistent, due to the opposite degree of operation.

古文：正月建寅，斗魁破申，非寅建使申破也，转运之衡，偶自应也。
现代文：正月北斗的斗柄正好指向寅，斗魁正好指着申，并非是斗柄指向寅就有意使斗魁指着申，而是运转着的北斗星与寅和申的位置碰巧自然相应。
English: On the first day of the lunar month, the handle of the Big Dipper points exactly to Yin, and the leader of the Big Dipper points exactly to Yin. It is not because the handle of the Big Dipper points to Yin that the leader of the Big Dipper points to Yin, but the position of the running Big Dipper coincidentally and naturally corresponds to that of Yin and Yin.

古文：父殁而子嗣，姑死而妇代，非子妇嗣代使父姑终殁也，老少年次自相承也。
现代文：父亲死了儿子继承，婆婆死了媳妇代替，这并非因为儿子继承、媳妇代替使得父亲、婆婆寿终死去，而是老少年龄顺序自然相互继承。
English: When the father dies, the son inherits, and when the mother-in-law dies, the daughter-in-law takes over. This is not because the son inherits and the daughter-in-law takes over, causing the father and mother-in-law to die, but because the old and young naturally inherit from each other.

古文：世谓秋气击杀谷草，谷草不任，雕伤而死。
现代文：世人认为是秋天的气打击、肃杀了谷物和草类，谷物草类受不了，结果凋谢伤生而死。
English: The world thinks it is the autumn wind that strikes and kills the grain and grasses. The grain and grasses can't stand it, and as a result, they wither and die.

古文：此言失实。
现代文：这话不确实。
English: That's not true.

古文：夫物以春生夏长，秋而熟老，适自枯死，阴气适盛，与之会遇。
现代文：植物春天发芽，夏天生长，秋天就成熟衰老，正好自然枯萎死去，这时寒气恰巧旺盛，跟它碰到一起。
English: Plants sprout in the spring, grow in the summer, mature and age in the fall, and just wither and die naturally. At this time, the cold weather happens to be strong and meets it.

古文：何以验之？
现代文：用什来证明呢？
English: What proof do you have?

古文：物有秋不死者，生性未极也。
现代文：植物有秋天不枯死的，是因为生命还没有到头。
English: The reason why plants do not die in autumn is because their life is not over yet.

古文：人生百岁而终，物生一岁而死，死谓阴气杀之，人终触何气而亡？
现代文：人活一百岁而寿终，植物活一年而枯死。植物死了说是寒气肃杀的，那么人寿终又是触了什么气而死的？
English: People live for a hundred years and die, plants live for a year and die. When plants die, they are said to be killed by the cold, so what is it that causes people to die?

古文：论者犹或谓鬼丧之。
现代文：议论的人还可能说是鬼丧命的。
English: The gossips might also say that it is haunted.

古文：夫人终鬼来，物死寒至，皆适遭也。
现代文：人死鬼来，物死寒到，这都是恰巧碰上的。
English: People are dying, things are freezing to death, and it all just happened.

古文：人终见鬼，或见鬼而不死；物死触寒，或触寒而不枯。
现代文：人死见到了鬼，但有人见了鬼却没有死；植物死了是碰上寒气，但有的碰上寒气却没有枯死。
English: People die when they see ghosts, but some people see ghosts and don't die; plants die when they get cold, but some plants don't die when they get cold.

古文：坏屋所压，崩崖所坠，非屋精崖气杀此人也。屋老崖沮，命凶之人，遭居适履。
现代文：被倒塌的房屋压死，被崩塌的山石砸死，并不是房屋和山崖的精气故意杀害这个人，而是房屋陈旧，山崖松坏，命该遭凶而死的人，恰好住进这房屋，踏上这山崖的缘故。
English: To be crushed to death by a collapsing house, to be crushed to death by a collapsing rock, is not the intentional killing of this person by the spirit of the house and the cliff, but the reason why the house is old, the cliff is worn out, and the person who deserves to die by violence just happens to live in this house and step on this cliff.

古文：月毁於天，螺消於渊。
现代文：天上的月亮亏缺、水潭中的螺蚌就该缩小。
English: The moon in the sky is deficient, and the snail in the pool should shrink.

古文：风从虎，云从龙。
现代文：风随着虎出现，云随着龙出现。
English: The wind appears with the tiger, the clouds appear with the dragon.

古文：同类通气，性相感动。
现代文：同类之物气能相通，性能相感动。
English: Things of the same kind can communicate with each other, and their performance is affected by each other.

古文：若夫物事相遭，吉凶同时，偶适相遇，非气感也。
现代文：至于说物体与事情相互碰上，吉利与凶险的情况同时发生，只不过是偶然碰巧在一起，并非是与气相感应而造成的。
English: As for the objects and things colliding with each other, the auspicious and dangerous situations happening at the same time, it is just a coincidence, not caused by the interaction with the qi.

古文：杀人者罪至大辟。
现代文：杀人的罪恶达到极点该处死。
English: The crime of murder is so heinous that it deserves the death penalty.

古文：杀者罪当重，死者。命当尽也。
现代文：杀人的罪该重判，被害的命该完结。
English: The crime of murder should be given a heavy sentence, and the victim's life should be terminated.

古文：故害气下降，囚命先中；圣王德施，厚禄先逢。
现代文：所以灾害的气下降，有凶杀之命的先碰上；圣贤的君王施恩，有富贵之命的先遇上。
English: Therefore, when calamities come, those with murderous intent are the first to meet them; when wise kings show mercy, those with rich intent are the first to meet them.

古文：是故德令降於殿堂，命长之囚，出於牢中。
现代文：因此赦免令从朝廷传下来，命长的囚徒得从牢中逃脱。
English: As a result, a pardon order came down from the court, and the most senior prisoner had to escape from prison.

古文：天非为囚未当死，使圣王出德令也，圣王适下赦，拘囚适当免死。
现代文：上天不是以为囚徒不该死。就让圣贤的君王发出赦免令，而是君王正好下赦免令，拘禁的囚徒恰巧该当免去死罪，就像人晚上睡觉白天起床一样。
English: It is not that Heaven thinks that the prisoner does not deserve to die, so that the king of saints and sages issues a pardon, but the king just issues a pardon, and the imprisoned prisoner just happens to be exempt from the death penalty, just as people sleep at night and get up during the day.

古文：犹人以夜卧昼起矣，夜月光尽，不可以作，人力亦倦，欲壹休息；昼日光明，人卧亦觉，力亦复足。
现代文：晚上太阳光消逝了，不能够干活，人的精力也很疲倦，想好好休息一下；白天太阳光明亮，人睡觉醒来，精力又重新十足。
English: In the evening, the sun has disappeared, unable to work, people's energy is also very tired, want to take a good rest; during the day, the sun is bright, people sleep and wake up, and their energy is full again.

古文：非天以日作之，以液息之也，作与日相应，息与夜相得也。
现代文：这并非上天安排日出干活，安排晚上休息，而是干活要与日出相一致，休息要与夜晚相一致的缘故。
English: This is not because the heavens have arranged for the sunrise to work and the evening to rest, but because the work should be consistent with the sunrise and the rest should be consistent with the night.

古文：雁鹄集於会稽，去避碣石之寒，来遭民田之毕，蹈履民田，啄食草粮。
现代文：大雁与天鹅在会稽山聚集，是为了离开山区躲避碣石的寒冷，飞来正遇上百姓的田里秋收完毕，就践踏民田，啄食掉在地上的谷物。
English: The geese and swans gather at Mount Kechizan in order to leave the mountainous area and avoid the cold of the rocks. When the autumn harvest is over, they trample the fields of the people and eat the grain that has fallen to the ground.

古文：粮尽食索，春雨适作，避热北去，复之碣石。
现代文：粮食吃完了，春天的雨水正好发作，为了躲避暑热又向北飞去，回致碣石。
English: After the grain was eaten, the spring rains came just in time. In order to escape the heat, they flew north again, back to the flint.

古文：象耕灵陵，亦如此焉。
现代文：象在灵陵耕地，也是这道理。
English: This is also the reason why people like to cultivate in Lingling.

古文：传曰： 舜葬苍梧，象为之耕。禹葬会稽，鸟为之佃。 
现代文：传上说： 舜葬在苍梧，象为他耕地；禹葬在会稽，鸟为他种田。 
English: According to legend: Zou was buried in Cangwu, as if he had ploughed the land; Yu was buried in Huiqi, and the bird had ploughed the land for him.

古文：失事之实，虚妄之言也。
现代文：前面的话违背事情的真相，是虚假胡说。
English: The above statement contradicts the truth of the matter and is false nonsense.

古文：丈夫有短寿之相，娶必得早寡之妻；早寡之妻，嫁亦遇夭折之夫也。
现代文：丈夫有短命相，迎娶肯定得到早寡的妻；早寡的妻，出嫁又会碰上夭折的丈夫。
English: The husband has a short life expectancy, marrying will certainly get the widow's wife; the widow's wife, marrying will meet the husband who died prematurely.

古文：世曰： 男女早死者，夫贼妻，妻害夫。 
现代文：世人说： 男女早死的，要么丈夫害死妻子，要么妻子克死丈夫。 
English: The world says: When a man or a woman dies prematurely, either the husband kills the wife, or the wife kills the husband.

古文：非相贼害，命有然也。使火燃，以水沃之，可谓水贼火。
现代文：其实并非互相克害，是命该自然如此，把火点燃，用水泼它，可以说是水克火。
English: In fact, it is not mutual restraint, it is fate that it should be so, light the fire, splash it with water, it can be said to be water against fire.

古文：火适自灭，水适自覆，两各自败，不为相贼。
现代文：要是火正好自己熄灭，水恰好自己倒翻，双方各自自己毁灭，不能算作相互克害。
English: If the fire happens to be extinguished by itself, the water happens to be overturned by itself, and both sides are destroyed by themselves, it cannot be counted as mutual harm.

古文：今男女之早夭，非水沃火之比，适自灭覆之类也。
现代文：如今男女过早的死去，不是用水泼火之类，而是正巧自己熄灭、自己倒翻之类。
English: Nowadays, men and women die prematurely, not by throwing water on a fire, but by accidentally extinguishing themselves or falling over.

古文：贼父之子，妨兄之弟，与此同召。
现代文：所谓贼害父亲的儿子，克死哥哥的弟弟，是跟上述相同的道理造成的。
English: The so-called thief harms his father's son, kills his brother's brother, is caused by the same reason as above.

古文：同宅而处，气相加凌，羸瘠消单，至於死亡，可谓相贼。
现代文：如果同屋相处，气相互压制，各自消瘦得只剩下一把骨头，直到死亡，这才可以说是相互克害。
English: If you live together in the same house, suppress each other's qi, and each of you is so thin that there is only one bone left until death, this can only be said to be mutual suppression.

古文：或客死千里之外，兵烧厌溺，气不相犯，相贼如何？
现代文：有人在千里之外的他乡死去，或战死、或烧死、或压死、或淹死，其气不相互触犯，怎么能是相互克害？
English: If people die thousands of miles away in a foreign land, or die in battle, or are burned to death, or crushed to death, or drowned, how can their spirits not be in conflict with each other, how can they be mutually destructive?

古文：王莽姑正君，许嫁二夫，二夫死，当适赵而王薨。
现代文：王莽的姑母王政君许配嫁给二个男人，二个男人都死了，正当要嫁给赵王的时候，赵王死了。
English: Wang Mang's aunt Wang Zhengjun promised to marry two men, but both men died. When she was about to marry Zhao Wang, Zhao Wang died.

古文：气未相加，遥贼三家，何其痛也！
现代文：他们的气并没有相互压制，远远地就克害了三家，怎么这样使人痛心呢？
English: Their anger did not suppress each other, and they harmed the three families from afar. How can this make people sad?

古文：黄次公取邻巫之女，卜谓女相贵，故次公位至丞相。
现代文：黄次公娶了邻居巫卜的女儿，世人说她骨相尊贵，所以黄次公官做到丞相。
English: Huang Zikong married the daughter of his neighbor Wubu. People said that she was noble, so Huang Zikong became chancellor.

古文：其实不然。
现代文：其实不是这样。
English: Actually, that's not true.

古文：次公当贵，行与女会；女亦自尊，故入次公门。
现代文：黄次公该当尊贵，正好与她相遇；她自身也有贵命，所以到了黄次公家。
English: Huang Zikong should be honored, just met her; she herself also has a noble life, so she came to Huang Zikong.

古文：偶适然自相遭遇，时也。
现代文：偶然碰巧这样自然相遇，这是时运。
English: To meet so naturally, by chance, is a stroke of luck.

古文：无禄之人，商而无盈，农而无播，非其性贼货而命妨谷也。命贫，居无利之货，禄恶，殖不滋之谷也。
现代文：没有禄命的人，经商而不赚钱，务农而没有种播。这并非是他们生性要克财物，命中注定要害谷物，而是天命该贫困，囤积了无利的货物；禄命该不好，种植了不能生长的谷物。
English: Those who do not have a good fortune, do business without making money, do farming without sowing seeds. This is not because they are born with wealth and are destined to harm grain, but because they are destined to be poor and have hoarded goods that are not profitable; they are destined to have a bad fortune and have planted grain that cannot grow.

古文：世谓宅有吉凶，徙有岁月。
现代文：世人说住宅有吉有凶，搬家有时间禁忌。
English: People say that a house has its ups and downs, and moving is a taboo.

古文：实事则不然。
现代文：事实却不是这样。
English: This is not the case.

古文：天道难知，假令有命凶之人，当衰之家，治宅遭得不吉之地，移徙适触岁月之忌。
现代文：天道难于知道，假使有命凶的人，该当衰败的家庭，盖住宅得到了不吉利的地方，搬家碰巧触犯了时间的禁忌。
English: It is difficult to know the way of heaven, if there is a fatal person, it should be a decaying family, the building of the house has got an unlucky place, and moving house happens to violate the taboo of time.

古文：一家犯忌，口以十数，坐而死者，必禄衰命泊之人也。
现代文：一家触犯禁忌，人口以十计算，因触犯而死的，肯定是禄弱命薄的人。
English: If a family, with a population of ten, breaks a taboo and dies as a result of the transgression, it must have been a weak and feeble person.

古文：推此以论，仕宦进退迁徙，可复见也。
现代文：以此而论，做官的进升、退隐、调任问题，就能回答清楚了。
English: On this basis, the questions of promotion, retirement and transfer of officials can be answered clearly.

古文：时适当退，君用谗口；时适当起，贤人荐己。
现代文：时运正该退隐，君主就会采纳谗言；时运正该起用，自有贤德的人举荐自己。
English: When it is time to retire, the monarch will accept advice; when it is time to serve, those who have their own virtues will recommend themselves.

古文：故仕且得官也，君子辅善；且失位也，小人毁奇。
现代文：所以仕途将要得官做，君子就会辅佐亲善；快要丢官退隐，小人就会诽谤奇才。
English: Therefore, the career will be promoted, the gentleman will support the goodwill; the villain will slander the prodigy when he is about to lose his position and retire.

古文：公伯寮诉子路於季孙，孔子称命。
现代文：公伯寮在季孙面前控告子路，孔子宣称是命中注定。
English: Gongbo Liao sued Zi Lu in front of Ji Sun, and Confucius declared that it was fated.

古文：鲁人臧仓谗孟子於平公，孟子言天。
现代文：鲁国人臧仓在鲁平公面前诽谤孟子，孟子说是天命如此。
English: The Lu people of Kamakura slandered Mencius in front of Lu Ping, and Mencius said that it was his destiny.

古文：道未当行，与谗相遇；天未与己，恶人用口。
现代文：好的政治主张不该实行，就会跟谗言相互碰在一起；上天还没有给自己贵命，恶人就会讲坏话。
English: If a good political idea should not be carried out, it will collide with slander; if God has not given himself a precious life, the wicked will speak evil words.

古文：故孔子称命，不怨公伯寮；孟子言天，不尤臧仓，诚知时命当自然也。
现代文：所以孔子宣称是命中注定，而不怨恨公伯寮；孟子说是天命如此，而不归咎于臧仓，他们确实知道时和命该当这样。
English: Therefore, Confucius declared that it was predestined by fate, but did not resent Gongbiao; Mencius said that it was predestined by heaven, but did not blame Kamakura, they really knew that the time and fate should be like this.

古文：推此以论，人君治道功化，可复言也。
现代文：以此而论，君主治理政治的功绩教化问题，也就能说清楚了。
English: On this basis, the issue of the monarch's political governance and enlightenment can also be made clear.

古文：命当贵，时适平；期当乱，禄遭衰。
现代文：天命该高贵，时运就正好平安；治期当混乱，禄命就恰巧衰弱。
English: If the destiny is noble, the fortune will be peaceful; if the reign is chaotic, the fortune will be weak.

古文：治乱成败之时，与人兴衰吉凶适相遭遇。
现代文：治理国家大事成败的时机，与人的兴衰、吉凶正巧相互一致。
English: The timing of the success or failure of the governance of major national events coincides with the rise and fall of people and the coincidence of good luck and bad luck.

古文：因此论圣贤迭起，犹此类也。
现代文：依这样说来，圣贤一个跟着一个兴起，就是这类道理了。
English: According to this, the rise of sages one after another is just such a reason.

古文：圣主龙兴於仓卒，良辅超拔於际会。
现代文：英明的君主是在偶然的时机创立帝业，好的辅佐是在碰巧的机会被破格提拔。
English: A wise ruler is one who creates an empire at a fortuitous time, while a good aide is one who is exceptionally promoted at a fortuitous time.

古文：世谓韩信、张良辅助汉王，故秦灭汉兴，高祖得王。
现代文：一般人认为是韩信、张良辅佐帮助了汉王刘邦，所以秦朝灭亡汉朝兴起，汉高祖得称帝王。
English: It is generally believed that Han Xin and Zhang Liang Fu Yu helped the Han King Liu Bang, so the Qin Dynasty fell and the Han Dynasty arose, and the founder of the Han Dynasty was called the Emperor.

古文：夫高祖命当自王，信、良之辈时当自兴，两相遭遇，若故相求。
现代文：汉高祖命该自然称王，韩信、张良之类人时运该自然兴起，双方相互碰在一起，就像有意互相寻找一样。
English: Henkel's ancestral mission should naturally become king, Han Xin, Zhang Liang and other people should naturally arise, and the two sides should encounter each other, just as if they were deliberately looking for each other.

古文：是故高祖起於丰、沛，丰、沛子弟相多富贵，非天以子弟助高祖也，命相小大，适相应也。
现代文：所以汉高祖在丰邑、沛县兴起，是丰邑、沛县的子弟骨相多富贵，并非上天以子弟来帮助汉高祖，而是他们禄命与骨相的贵贱恰巧与取得的富贵相适应。
English: Therefore, Henkel's ancestors arose in Fengyi and Peixian. The children of Fengyi and Peixian were as rich as each other. It was not that God used His children to help Henkel's ancestors, but that the nobility of their fate and their bones just happened to match the wealth they had acquired.

古文：赵简子废太子伯鲁，立庶子无恤，无恤遭贤，命亦当君赵也。
现代文：赵简子废除太子伯鲁，立了庶子无恤。无恤恰好是贵命，也该当国君统治赵地。
English: Zhao Jianzi abolished the prince Boru and established the bastard Wuhong. Wuhong is a noble life and should be the ruler of Zhao.

古文：世谓伯鲁不肖，不如无恤；伯鲁命当贱，知虑多泯乱也。
现代文：一般人认为伯鲁不贤明，不如无恤。其实是伯鲁命该卑贱，心智才很糊涂。
English: Ordinary people think that Baloo is not wise, it is better to be ruthless. In fact, it is Baloo's life that is lowly, and his mind is very confused.

古文：韩生仕至太傅，世谓赖倪宽。
现代文：韩生官做到太傅，一般人认为是依赖倪宽，实在说不是这样。
English: Han Shengguan to achieve too Fu, the average person thinks that it is dependent on Ni Kuan, but it is not true.

古文：实谓不然，太傅当贵，遭与倪宽遇也。
现代文：其实太傅该当显贵，才恰好与倪宽相遇。
English: In fact, it was only when he happened to meet Ni Kuan that Taifu became prominent.

古文：赵武藏於裤中，终日不啼，非或掩其口，阏其声也；命时当生，睡卧遭出也。
现代文：赵武在裤子中隐藏，整天不啼哭，这并非有人遮住他的嘴，堵塞他出声；而是禄命和时运注定他该活，让他睡着碰巧得逃脱。
English: Zhao Wu hid in his pants and did not cry all day. It was not that someone covered his mouth and blocked his voice; it was that fate and fortune determined that he should live, and let him sleep and escape by chance.

古文：故军功之侯，必斩兵死之头；富家之商必夺贫室之财。
现代文：所以命定要立军功封侯的人，一定会斩注定被剑戟杀死者的头，命定要成富家商人的，肯定会强夺注定贫困人家的财物。
English: Therefore, the person who is destined to become a military hero will surely behead the person who is destined to be killed by the sword, and the person who is destined to become a rich merchant will surely seize the property of the destitute.

古文：削土免侯，罢退令相，罪法明白，禄秩适极。
现代文：命定要被削除封地，免去爵位，罢掉县令、黜退相职，犯罪触法事实确凿，这是俸禄、官秩恰巧到了极限。
English: He was ordered to have his fief removed, his title of nobility removed, the county magistrate removed, and his position as chief magistrate revoked. The fact that he had committed a crime against the law was conclusive. It was a case of his salary and official rank reaching their limits.

古文：故历气所中，必加命短之人；凶岁所著，必饥虚耗之家矣。
现代文：所以瘟疫之气所中伤的，肯定是加予命短的人；荒年所伤害的，一定是受饥饿注定要贫困的人家。
English: Therefore, those who are slandered by the plague must be those who are given a short life; those who are hurt by the famine must be those who are doomed to poverty by hunger.

