古文：卫鞅亡魏入秦，孝公以为相，封之于商，号曰商君。
现代文：卫鞅从魏国逃亡到秦国，秦孝公任命他为丞相，把商地分封给他，号称 商君 。
English: Wei Xuan fled from Wei to Qin. Qin Xiaogong appointed him as chancellor and gave him a parcel of commercial land. He was known as Shangjun.

古文：商君治秦，法令至行，公平无私，罚不讳强大，赏不私亲近，法及太子，黥劓其傅。
现代文：商君治理秦国，法令贯彻执行，公正而没有偏私。惩罚违法者不避忌强宗大族，奖赏有功者不偏袒亲属近臣，法令的实施涉及太子，连太子的老师也要处以刻面割鼻的刑罚。
English: Merchants govern Qin, laws and regulations are implemented in a fair and unbiased manner. Violators of the law are punished without shunning the powerful clans, and those who have performed meritorious deeds are rewarded without favoring relatives and courtiers. The implementation of laws and regulations involves the prince, and even the prince's teachers are punished by cutting their noses.

古文：期年之后，道不拾遗，民不妄取，兵革大强，诸侯畏惧。
现代文：法令施行一年之后，路上丢失的东西没有人去捡拾，老百姓不敢乱取非分的财物，国家的兵力大大加强，各诸侯因此畏惧秦国。
English: A year after the implementation of the decree, no one went to pick up the things lost on the road, the people did not dare to take the non-divided property, the country's military strength was greatly strengthened, and the lords were afraid of Qin.

古文：然刻深寡恩，特以强服之耳。
现代文：但是对百姓刻薄少恩惠,只是用强力的办法来使人称服罢了。
English: But to be unkind to the people, to be ungracious to them, is only to use force to make them submit.

古文：孝公行之八年，疾且不起，欲传商君，辞不受。
现代文：秦孝公用商君法令治国八年后，大病不起，想把王位传给商君，商君辞谢不接受。
English: After eight years of ruling the country by decree of Qin Xiaogong using merchants, he fell seriously ill and wanted to pass the throne to merchants. Merchants did not accept his resignation.

古文：孝公已死，惠王代后，莅政有顷，商君告归。
现代文：孝公去世后，他的儿子秦惠王继位，执政不久，商君请求回到自己的封地。
English: After the death of Prince Xiaogong, his son Qin Hui Wang succeeded to the throne. Shortly after taking office, the merchant requested to return to his fief.

古文：人说惠王曰： 大臣太重者国危，左右太亲者身危。
现代文：有人对惠王说： 大臣声望过重，将危及国家，左右辅佐的人员过分亲近，将危及君王自身。
English: Someone said to Hui Wang: If the prestige of the minister is too heavy, it will endanger the country, and if the left and right aides are too close, it will endanger the monarch himself.

古文：今秦妇人婴儿皆言商君之法，莫言大王之法。
现代文：如今，连秦国的妇女孩童都在谈论商君的法令，却没有人谈论大王您的法令。
English: Today, even the women and children of Qin are talking about the merchant's decree, but no one is talking about the great king's decree.

古文：是商君反为主，大王更为臣也。
现代文：这是商君反臣为主，而大王您倒变为人臣了。
English: This is because the merchant is primarily an anti-vassal, while you, the great king, have turned into a vassal.

古文：且夫商君，固大王仇雠也，愿大王图之。 
现代文：那商君本来就是大王的仇敌啊！希望大王对他采取措施。 
English: That merchant was originally the great king's enemy! I hope the great king will take measures against him.

古文：商君归还，惠王车裂之，而秦人不怜。
现代文：商君归魏不成，又返回秦国，秦惠王对他施用了车裂的酷刑，而秦国人并不哀怜他。
English: The merchant failed to return to Wei and returned to Qin. Qin Hui Wang tortured him with a chariot, but the Qin people did not pity him.

