古文：起玄黓执徐，尽阏逢敦，凡三年。
现代文：起，止，一共三年。陈宣帝太建四年
English: It lasted a total of three years. Chen Xuandi was emperor for four years.

古文：高宗宣皇帝上之下太建四年春，正月，丙午，以尚书仆射徐陵为左仆射牂，中书监王劢为右仆射。
现代文：春季正月，丙午，陈朝任命尚书仆射徐陵为左仆射，中书监王劢为右仆射。乙巳，北齐后主到南郊祭天。
English: On the afternoon of the third day of the first month of spring, the Chen dynasty appointed Shang Shu's servant, Sha Xuling, as his left-hand man, and the Chinese inspector of books, Wang Qi, as his right-hand man. At this time, the Northern Qi empress went to the Southern Suburbs to offer sacrifices to Heaven.

古文：已巳，齐主祀南郊。
现代文：庚午，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices.

古文：庚午，上享太庙。辛未，齐主赠琅邪王俨为楚恭哀帝以慰太后心，又以俨妃李氏为楚帝后。
现代文：辛未，北齐后主赠琅邪王高俨为楚恭哀帝的谥号以安慰太后的心，又封高俨的妃子李氏为楚帝后。
English: In Xinwei, the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi gave the evil King Gaozhuang the title of Chu Gong Lai Di to comfort the Empress Dowager's heart, and also made Gaozhuang's concubine Li the Empress of Chu.

古文：二月，癸西，周遣大将军昌城公深聘于突厥，司宾李除、小宾部贺遂礼聘于齐。
现代文：二月，癸酉，北周派大将军昌城公宇文深到突厥访问，司宾李除、小宾部贺遂礼到北齐访问。
English: In February, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent General Changcheng Gongyu Wenshen to Turkey for a visit, and the chief guest Li Zhen and the minor guest He Suili visited Northern Qi.

古文：深，护之子也。
现代文：宇文深是宇文护的儿子。
English: Uwenshin is the son of Uwenso.

古文：已卯，齐以卫菩萨为太尉。
现代文：己卯，北齐任命卫菩萨为太尉。
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi appointed Wei Bodhisattva as the first lieutenant.

古文：辛巳，以并省吏部尚书高元海为尚书左仆射。
现代文：辛巳，任命并省吏部尚书高元海为尚书左仆射。
English: Xin Si, appointed and provincial cadre department Shang Shou Gao Yuanhai as Shang Shou's right-hand man.

古文：已酉，封皇子叔卿为建安王。
现代文：乙酉，陈朝封皇子陈叔卿为建安王。
English: Acetylene, the Chen dynasty crowned the prince Chen Shujing as the King of Jianan.

古文：庚寅，齐以尚书左仆射唐邕为尚书令，侍中祖珽为左仆射。
现代文：庚寅，北齐任命尚书左仆射唐邕为尚书令，侍中祖为左仆射。
English: Goyang, North Qi appointed Shangshu's left-hand servant Tang Jun to be Shangshu's second-in-command, and Shangshu's right-hand servant Zuo to be the third-in-command.

古文：初，胡太后既幽于北宫，珽欲以陆令萱为太后，为令萱言魏保太后故事。且谓人曰： 陆虽妇人，然实雄杰。自女娲以来，未之有也。 
现代文：起先，胡太后被幽禁在北宫，祖打算以陆令萱为太后，向陆令萱讲述魏朝保太后的往事，并对别人说： 陆令萱虽然是个妇人，其实是个豪杰，自从女娲以来，还没有这样的人。 
English: At first, Empress Dowager Hu was confined in the North Palace. The ancestor planned to make Lu Lingyao the empress dowager, telling Lu Lingyao about the past of Empress Dowager Bao of the Wei Dynasty, and saying to others: Although Lu Lingyao is a woman, she is actually a hero, and there has not been such a person since the empress dowager.

古文：令萱亦谓珽为 国师 、 国宝 ，由是得仆射。
现代文：陆令萱也称祖为 国师 、 国宝 ，因而被任命为仆射。
English: Lu Lingyao also said that his ancestor was a national teacher and a national treasure, so he was appointed as a disciple.

古文：三月，癸卯朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月，癸卯朔，发生日食。
English: In March, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：初，周太祖为魏相，立左右十二军，总属相府；太祖殂，皆受晋公护处分，凡所征发，非护书不行。
现代文：当初，北周太祖在西魏当丞相时，曾经建立左右十二军，隶属相府；太祖死后，受晋公宇文护调度，凡属军队的征发调动，非得有宇文护的文书不可。
English: At the beginning, when Northern Zhou Taizu was the chancellor of the Western Wei Dynasty, he had established 12 armies on the left and right, which were subordinate to the chancellor's office. After the death of the grandfather, he was dispatched by the Jin Gong Uwenguo, and all conscription and mobilization of the army had to have the document of Uwenguo.

古文：护第屯兵侍卫，盛于宫阙。诸子、僚属皆贪残恣横，士民患之。
现代文：宇文护的府第驻军守卫，人数超过宫廷，他的儿子和僚属都贪婪残暴恣意横行，士民都深以为患。
English: The number of guards stationed at the residence of Umenosuke exceeded the number of guards at the palace. His sons and subordinates were greedy, cruel and arbitrary, and the people were deeply troubled.

古文：周主深自晦匿，无所关预，人不测其浅深。
现代文：北周国主对此一直隐晦退避，不加干涉，别人也猜不到他的深浅。
English: The ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty has always evaded this, not interfering, and others can't guess his depth.

古文：护问稍伯大夫庾季才曰： 比日天道何如？ 
现代文：宇文护问稍伯大夫庚季才说： 近日来天文星象怎么样？ 
English: Dr. Yuwen asked Dr. Geng Jicai: How are the astronomical stars these days?

古文：季才对曰： 荷恩深厚，敢不尽言？
现代文：季才回答说： 受到您深厚的恩泽，怎敢知无不言。
English: Ji Cai replied, "Having received your profound favor, how dare I know everything?

古文：顷上台有变，公宜归政天子，请老私门。
现代文：刚才上台星有变化，晋公您应该归政给天子，请求回家养老。
English: Just now, there is a change in the star on the stage. Jin Gong, you should return the government to the Son of Heaven, and ask to go home for retirement.

古文：此则享期颐之寿，受旦、之美，子孙常为籓屏。
现代文：这样就能享年高寿，受到周公旦、召公的美名，子子孙孙常为国家重臣。
English: In this way, they can live to a ripe old age, be well-known as Zhou Gongdan and Zhao Gongdan, and their children and grandchildren are often national chief ministers.

古文：不然，非复所知。 
现代文：不然，就不是我所能知道的了。 
English: Otherwise, it's not for me to know.

古文：护沉吟久之，曰： 吾本志如此，但辞未获免耳。
现代文：宇文护沈吟很久，说： 我本来的志向就是这样，但是经过推辞没有得到同意。
English: Uwen Gu paused for a long time and said, "This is what I originally wanted to do, but I didn't get approval after I declined.

古文：公既王官，可依朝例，无烦别参寡人也。 
现代文：你既然是天子的官员，可以按照朝廷的规定，不用麻烦你特意来见寡人了。 
English: Since you are an official of the Son of Heaven, you can come and go according to the regulations of the Imperial Court. There is no need for you to go out of your way to meet a few people.

古文：自是疏之。
现代文：从此以后对他疏远了。
English: I've been estranged from him ever since.

古文：卫公直，帝之母弟也，深昵于护。及沌口之败，坐免官，由是怨护，劝帝诛之，冀得其位。
现代文：卫公宇文直是北周武帝的同母兄弟，和宇文护的关系非常亲近；后来在沌口打了败仗，被罢免官职，因此怨恨宇文护，劝武帝杀死他，企图自己得到宇文护的职位。
English: Wei Gong Uwen Zhi was the half-brother of Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou, and had a very close relationship with Uwen Guo. Later, he lost a battle in Chaokou and was dismissed from his post, so he resented Uwen Guo and persuaded Emperor Wu to kill him in an attempt to get the post of Uwen Guo himself.

古文：帝乃密与直及右宫伯中大夫宇文神举、内史下大夫太原王轨、右侍上士宇文孝伯谋之。
现代文：武帝便秘密和卫公宇文直、右宫伯中大夫宇文神举、内史下大夫太原人王轨、右侍上士宇文孝伯进行策划。
English: Emperor Wu then secretly plotted with Wei Gong Uwen Zhi, Uwun Shengzhu, the Right Palace Senior Middle Doctor, Wang Lu, the Inner History Junior Doctor of Taiyuan, and Uwen Xiao, the Right Attendant Staff Sergeant.

古文：神举，显和之子；孝伯，安化公深之子也。
现代文：宇文神举是宇文显和的儿子；宇文孝伯是安化公宇文深的儿子。
English: Uwen Jingu is the son of Uwen Xianhe; Uwen Xiao Bo is the son of Anhua Gong Uwen Sheng.

古文：帝每于禁中见护，常行家人礼，太后赐护坐，帝立侍于旁。
现代文：武帝每次在宫中见到宇文护，都行兄弟之礼。太后赐宇文护坐，武帝就站立在一旁。
English: Whenever Emperor Wu saw Umenosuke in the palace, he would bow to him as a brother. The empress dowager gave Umenosuke a seat, and Emperor Wu stood aside.

古文：丙辰，护自同州还长安，帝御文安殿见之。因引护入含仁殿谒太后，且谓之曰： 太后春秋高，颇好饮酒，虽屡谏，未蒙垂纳。
现代文：丙辰，宇文护从同州回长安，武帝驾临文安殿见他，引导宇文护到含仁殿参见太后，并对他说： 母后年纪已高，很喜欢饮酒，我虽然屡次劝她，没有得到采纳。
English: Emperor Wu drove to Wen'an Palace to see him and guided him to Hanren Palace to see the empress dowager. He said to him, "The empress dowager is very old and likes to drink. Although I repeatedly advised her, she did not accept.

古文：兄今入朝，愿更启请。 
现代文：兄长今天参见时，希望您能劝说她。 
English: When my brother sees her today, I hope you can persuade her.

古文：因出怀中《酒诰》授之，曰： 以此谏太后。 
现代文：于是从怀里拿出《酒诰》给宇文护，说： 用这个来规劝母后。 
English: So he took out "Sake Lees" from his arms and gave it to Uwen Guo, saying, "Use this to persuade your mother."

古文：护既入，如帝所戒读《酒诰》；未毕，帝以玉珽自后击之，护踣于地。
现代文：宇文护进殿后，象武帝所说那样对太后诵读《酒诰》；还没有读完，武帝便在宇文护背后用玉笏打他，宇文护跌倒在地。
English: After he entered the palace, Emperor Wu read "The Wine Jar" to the empress dowager, as Emperor Wu had said. Before he had finished reading, Emperor Wu hit him with a jade hammer behind his back, causing him to fall to the ground.

古文：帝令宦者何泉以御刀斫之，泉惶惧，斫不能伤。卫公直匿于户内，跃出，斩之。
现代文：武帝命令太监何泉用御刀砍他，何泉心里惶恐惧怕，不敢用劲，没有把宇文护砍伤，卫公宇文直躲在门内，这时跳了出来，将宇文护杀死。
English: Emperor Wu ordered the eunuch He Quan to cut him with his sword. He Quan was afraid and did not dare to use his strength. He did not cut Uwen You. Wei Gong Uwen Zhi was hiding inside the door, when he jumped out and killed Uwen You.

古文：时神举等皆在外，更无知者。
现代文：当时宇文神举等都在殿外，没有别人知道。
English: At that time, Uwen Shincho and others were all outside the palace, and no one else knew about it.

古文：帝召宫伯长孙览等，告以护已诛，令收护子柱国谭公会、大将军莒公至、崇业公静、正平公乾嘉及其弟乾基、乾光、乾蔚、乾祖、乾威并柱国北地侯龙恩、龙恩弟大将军万寿、大将军刘勇、中外府司录尹公正、袁杰、膳部下大夫李安等，于殿中杀之。
现代文：武帝召见宫伯长孙览等人，告诉他们已将宇文护处死，命令拘捕宇文护的儿子柱国谭公宇文会、大将军莒公宇文至、崇业公宇文静、正平公宇文乾嘉，以及他的弟弟宇文乾基、宇文乾光、宇文乾蔚、宇文乾祖、宇文乾威和柱国北地人侯龙恩、侯龙恩的弟弟大将军侯万寿、大将军刘勇、中外府司录尹公正、袁杰、膳部下大夫李安等人，在殿中将他们杀死。
English: Emperor Wu summoned the palace chief, Sun Zhan, and others, and told them that he had executed Uwen, and ordered the arrest of Uwen's son, Zhu Guo Tan Gong Uwen Hui, the generals Zou Gong Uwen Zi, Chongye Gong Uwen Jing, Zhengping Gong Uwen Qian Jia, and his brother, Uwen Qian Ji, Uwen Qian Guang, Uwen Qian Wei, Uwen Qian Zu, Uwen Qian Wei, and Zhu Guo's northerner, Hou Long En, Hou Long En's younger brother, the general Hou Wan Shou, the general Liu Yong, the secretary of the Central and

古文：览，稚之孙也。
现代文：长孙览是长孙稚的孙子。
English: The eldest grandson is the grandson of the eldest grandson.

古文：初，护既杀赵贵等，诸将多不自安。侯龙恩为护所亲，其从弟开府仪同三司植谓龙恩曰： 主上春秋既富，安危系于数公。
现代文：当初，宇文护杀了赵贵等人，侯龙恩得到宇文护的信任，他的堂弟开府仪同三司侯植对侯龙恩说： 皇上年纪还轻，安危依靠几位公侯。
English: At the beginning, Uwen Guo killed Zhao Gui and others. Hou Long En gained the trust of Uwen Guo. His cousin, Kaifu Yi, said to Hou Long En, "The emperor is still young and depends on several princes for his safety."

古文：若多所诛戮以自立威权，岂唯社稷有累卵之危，恐吾宗亦缘此而败，兄安得知而不言！ 
现代文：如果对他们诛杀过多来树立自己的威望权力，不但国家极其危险，恐怕我们的宗族也因此而遭到衰败，兄长您怎能知而不言！ 
English: If you kill too many of them to establish your prestige and power, not only will the country be extremely dangerous, but I'm afraid our clan will also suffer decline. How can you not say anything, brother?

古文：龙恩不能从。
现代文：侯龙恩没有听他的话。
English: Hou Long En did not listen to him.

古文：植又承间言于护曰： 公以骨肉之亲，当社稷之寄，愿推诚王室，拟迹伊、周，则率土幸甚！ 
现代文：侯植又乘机对宇文护说： 晋公您以骨肉之亲，身受国家社稷的寄托，希望以诚意对待王室，按照伊尹、周公的榜样，那么境域之内都会觉得万幸！ 
English: Hou Zhi also took the opportunity to say to Yu Wenzhou: "Jin Gong, you are a flesh-and-blood relative, entrusted by the national society, hope to treat the royal family with sincerity, follow the example of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong, then you will feel very lucky within the territory!

古文：护曰： 我誓以身报国，卿岂谓吾有他志邪！ 
现代文：宇文护说： 我誓志以身报国，您难道认为我有别的企图吗！ 
English: I have vowed to serve my country. Do you think I have any other plans?

古文：又闻其先与龙恩言，阴忌之，植以忧卒。
现代文：又听到他以前和侯龙恩说的话，暗中对他产生忌恨，侯植因此忧愁而死去。
English: He also heard what he had said to Hou Long En before, and secretly felt envious of him. As a result, Hou Zhi died of grief.

古文：及护败，龙恩兄弟皆死，高祖以植为忠，特免其子孙。
现代文：等到宇文护失败，侯龙恩兄弟都被处死，武帝因为侯植的忠诚，特意赦免了侯植的子孙。
English: After the failure of Yuwen's protection, Hou Long En's brothers were all executed. Emperor Wu specially pardoned Hou Zhi's descendants because of Hou Zhi's loyalty.

古文：大司马兼小冢宰、雍州牧齐公宪，素为护所亲任，赏罚之际，皆得参预，权势颇盛。
现代文：大司马兼小冢宰、雍州牧齐公宇文宪，一向得到宇文护的信任，遇到对别人的赏罚，宇文宪都能参与意见，权势很大。
English: Uwen Xian, the grand secretary of Ma and Xiaobai, and Yongzhou Muqigong, has always been trusted by Uwen Ke, and when it comes to rewarding and punishing others, Uwen Xian can participate in opinions and has great power.

古文：护欲有所陈，多令宪闻奏，其间或有可不，宪虑主相嫌隙，每曲而畅之，帝亦察其心。
现代文：宇文护有什么要向朝廷上言的事，都叫宇文宪向武帝转达奏报，其中有时有不同的意见，宇文宪顾虑武帝和丞相之间猜疑而形成怨仇，都婉转地进行申述，武帝也察觉到他的用心。
English: When Uwen Guo had something to say to the imperial court, he would ask Uwen Xian to deliver a report to Emperor Wu. Sometimes there were different opinions, and Uwen Xian, concerned about the suspicion between Emperor Wu and the prime minister leading to a grudge, would gently make a complaint. Emperor Wu also noticed his intentions.

古文：及护死，召宪入，宪免冠拜谢；帝慰勉之，使诣护第收兵符及诸文籍。
现代文：宇文护死后，武帝召宇文宪进见，宇文宪脱下帽子向武帝拜谢；武帝对他加以安慰勉励，派他到宇文护的住所收取兵符和各种文书簿籍。
English: After the death of Uwenshu, Emperor Wu summoned Uwenshu for an inspection. Uwenshu took off his hat and bowed to Emperor Wu; Emperor Wu consoled and encouraged him, and sent him to Uwenshu's residence to receive military documents and various documents and books.

古文：卫公直素忌宪，固请诛之，帝不许。
现代文：卫公宇文直素来忌恨宇文崐宪，坚持请求武帝杀死他，武帝不肯答允。
English: Wei Gong Uwen Zhi Zi always hated Uwen Qian Xian and insisted on asking Emperor Wu to kill him. Emperor Wu refused to agree.

古文：护世子训为蒲州刺史，是夜，帝遣柱国越公盛乘传征训，至同州，赐死。
现代文：宇文护的长子宇文训是蒲州刺史，这天晚上，武帝派柱国越公宇文盛乘车去传唤宇文训，到同州，传达了武帝对他赐死的命令。
English: Uwenshu's eldest son, Uwenshu, was the governor of Puzhou. That evening, Emperor Wu sent the governor of Zhiguo, Uwensheng, to summon Uwenshu by car. He went to the same province and conveyed Emperor Wu's order to put him to death.

古文：昌城公深使突厥未还，遣开府仪同三司宇文德赍玺书就杀之。
现代文：昌城公宇文深出使突厥还没有回来，武帝派开府仪同三司宇文德送去诏书将他就地杀死。
English: The envoy sent by Changcheng Gong Uwenchen to the Turks had not yet returned, and Emperor Wu sent Kaifu Yi and the three Uwende to send an edict to kill him on the spot.

古文：护长史代郡叱罗协、司录弘农冯迁及所新任者，皆除名。
现代文：宇文护的长史代郡人叱罗协、司录弘农人冯迁和其他亲信，都被革职除名。
English: The county's longest-serving deputy county official, Zhao Luo Jie, and the county's chief secretary, Hong Nongren Feng Qian, and other close confidants of Wu Wenguo, were all dismissed and removed from their posts.

古文：丁巳，大赦，改元。
现代文：丁巳，大赦全国，改年号为 建德 。
English: Ding Si, amnesty for the whole country, change the year name to Jian De.

古文：以宇文孝伯为车骑大将军，与王轨并加开府仪同三司。
现代文：任命宇文孝伯为车骑大将军，和王轨一同加封开府仪同三司。
English: He appointed Uwen Xiao Bo as the general of the chariot and cavalry, and together with Wang Lu, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi and the three divisions.

古文：初，孝伯与帝同日生，太祖爱之，养于第中，幼与帝同学。
现代文：当初，宇文孝伯和武帝同一天出生，文帝宇文泰很喜爱他，养在府里，幼年时和武帝同学。
English: At first, Uwen Xiao Bo and Emperor Wu were born on the same day. Emperor Wu loved him very much. He was raised in the palace and went to school with Emperor Wu when he was young.

古文：及即位，欲引致左右，托言欲与孝伯讲习旧经，故护弗之疑也，以为右侍上士，出入卧内，预闻机务。
现代文：武帝即位后，想任用他作为帮助自己的近臣，假托要和宇文孝伯在一起探讨学习古代的经书，所以宇文护并不怀疑，任命他为右侍上士，在卧室内进进出出，参与机密的事情。
English: After Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he wanted to appoint him as a close vassal to help him, pretending to discuss and study ancient scriptures with Uwen Xiao Bo. Therefore, Uwen Guo did not doubt and appointed him as his right hand man, entering and exiting the bedroom, and participating in confidential matters.

古文：孝伯为人，沉正忠谅。朝政得失，外间细事，无不使帝闻之。
现代文：宇文孝伯为人深沈正直忠实可信，凡是朝政的得失，外面的小事，没有不使武帝知道的。
English: Uwen Xiao Bo was a profound, honest, faithful, and trustworthy person. There was nothing that Emperor Wu did not know about the gains and losses of the imperial government, and the small things outside.

古文：帝阅护书记，有假托符命妄造异谋者，皆坐诛；唯得庾季才书两纸，盛言纬候灾祥，宜返政归权，帝赐季才粟三百石，帛二百段，迁太中大夫。
现代文：武帝翻阅从宇文护家中所搜得的文件，看到有假托符命妄图制造异谋的，都被处死；唯独得到庚季才所写的两张纸，大谈星象变化的灾难吉祥，应该把朝政大权还给武帝，武帝赏赐给庚季才三百石小米，二百段布帛，提升为太中大夫。
English: Emperor Wu rummaged through the documents retrieved from Yuwen's tutor's house and saw that anyone who had a fake talisman and tried to create a conspiracy was put to death; however, he only got two pieces of paper written by Geng Qizai, talking about the changes in the stars, the disasters and the auspicious, and that he should return the supreme power of the imperial government to Emperor Wu. Emperor Wu rewarded Geng Qizai with three hundred koku of millet and two hundred pieces of cloth, and promoted him to the position of Tai Zhong Dafu.

古文：癸亥，以尉迟迥为太师，柱国窦炽为太傅，李穆为太保，齐公宪为大冢宰，卫公直为大司徒，陆通为大司马，柱国辛威为大司寇，赵公招为大司空。
现代文：癸亥，任命尉迟迥为太师，柱国窦炽为太傅，李穆为太保，齐公宇文宪为大冢宰，卫公宇文直为大司徒，陆通为大司马，柱国辛威为大司寇，赵公宇文招为大司空。
English: Zou Hai, appointed Fong Chi Kuan as the Grand Master, Zhu Guo Dou Blaze as the Grand Master, Li Mu as the Grand Master, Qi Gong U Wen Xian as the Grand Master, Wei Gong U Wen Zhi as the Grand Master, Lu Tong as the Grand Master, Zhu Guo Xin Wei as the Grand Master, Zhao Gong U Wen Zhao as the Grand Master.

古文：时帝始亲览朝政，颇事威刑，虽骨肉无所宽借。
现代文：当时武帝开始亲政，很注重威令用刑，尽管是骨肉至亲也不宽恕。
English: At that time, Emperor Wu began to rule personally, paying great attention to the use of coercion and punishment, even though he was a close relative.

古文：齐公宪虽迁冢宰，实夺之权。
现代文：齐公宇文宪名义上升为冢宰，实际上夺了他的实权。
English: In name, Qi Gongwu Wenxin rose to the position of deputy governor, but in reality, he usurped his real power.

古文：又谓宪侍读裴文举曰： 昔魏末不纲，太祖辅政；及周室受命，晋公复执大权；积习生常，愚者谓法应如是。
现代文：武帝对宇文宪的侍读裴文举说： 从前魏朝末年武帝不能操持朝廷大纲，所以才有太祖辅政；等到周朝建立，晋公宇文护又掌握大权；原只是多年的习惯，后来竟成为常规，愚人还说法度应该如此。
English: Emperor Wu said to Pei Wenqiu, who was reading the Constitution for Emperor Wu, "Once upon a time, at the end of the Wei Dynasty, Emperor Wu was not able to manage the general plan of the imperial court, so there was only the great-grandfather's auxiliary government; until the establishment of the Zhou Dynasty, Jin Gong Uwenguo also held great power; it was only a habit for many years, but later it became a regular practice, and fools still said that it should be so.

古文：岂有年三十天子而可为人所制乎！
现代文：哪有年已三十岁的天子还可以被别人箝制的道理！
English: There is no reason why a thirty-year-old heavenly son can still be controlled by others!

古文：《诗》云： 夙夜匪懈，以事一人。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 从早到晚不懈怠，用来侍奉一个人。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "From morning to night, without slacking, serve one person."

古文：一人，谓天子耳。
现代文：一个人，指的是天子。
English: A person refers to the Son of God.

古文：卿虽陪侍齐公，不得遽同为臣，欲死于所事。
现代文：您虽然陪伴侍奉齐公，不能怕得如同他的臣子，老死在侍读的事上。
English: Although you are accompanying and serving Lord Qi, you must not be afraid like his vassals, and always die in the matter of serving and reading.

古文：宜辅以正道，劝以义方，辑睦我君臣，协和我兄弟，勿令自致嫌疑。 
现代文：应当以正道去辅助他，用做人的道理去规劝他，使我们君臣和睦，使我们兄弟同心，不要使他自己招致嫌疑。 
English: It is necessary to assist him with the right path, to persuade him with the principle of being human, to make our princes and ministers peaceful, to make our brothers and sisters have the same heart, and not to make him himself suspect.

古文：文举咸以白宪，宪指心抚几曰： 吾之夙心，公宁不知！
现代文：裴文举把这番话都告诉了宇文宪，宇文宪指着自己的心口拍着小桌子说： 我平素的心意，您难道不知道吗！
English: Pei Wenju told all these words to Yu Wenxian. Yu Wenxian pointed to his heart, patted the small table and said, "My ordinary heart, don't you know it!"

古文：但当尽忠竭节耳，知复何言！ 
现代文：只是应该尽忠竭节罢了，我还有什么好说的。 
English: It's just that it should be Loyalty Day. I don't have anything else to say.

古文：卫公直，性浮诡贪狠，意望大冢宰；既不得，殊怏怏；更请为大司马，欲据兵权。
现代文：卫公宇文直性格浮躁诡诈贪婪狠毒，想做大冢宰；没能如愿，心里很不痛快；又请求当大司马，想掌握兵权。
English: Weigong Wenzhong was impetuous, deceitful, greedy, and vicious. He wanted to be the grand vizier; when he failed to do so, he was very unhappy; he also asked to be the grand steward, and wanted to control military power.

古文：帝揣知其意，曰： 汝兄弟长幼有序，岂可返居下列！ 
现代文：武帝猜到他的用意，说： 你们兄弟长幼有序，怎能反而处于下列！ 
English: Emperor Wu guessed his intention and said, "Your brothers, the eldest and the youngest, are in order, but how can you be in the following!

古文：由是用为大司徒。
现代文：因此任命他为大司徒。
English: Therefore, he was appointed as the chief disciple.

古文：夏，四月，周遣工部成公建、小礼部辛彦之聘于齐。
现代文：夏季四月，北周派工部成公建、小礼部辛彦之到北齐聘问。
English: In the summer of April, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Cheng Gongjian from the Ministry of Industry and Xin Yan from the Ministry of Civility to the Northern Qi Dynasty for an interview.

古文：庚寅，周追尊略阳公为孝闵皇帝。
现代文：庚寅，北周追尊略阳公宇文觉为孝闵皇帝。
English: Gyeong-in, North Zhou, Chosun, Yang Gong, and Wen Jue were the filial piety emperors.

古文：癸巳，周立皇子鲁公赟为太子，大赦。
现代文：癸巳，北周立皇子鲁公宇文为太子，大赦全国。
English: Soon after, Northern Zhou Dynasty's Prince Lukong Uwen became the crown prince and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：五月，癸卯，王劢卒。
现代文：五月，癸卯，王劢去世。
English: In May, Wang Xi passed away.

古文：齐尚书右仆射祖珽，势倾朝野。左丞相咸阳王斛律光恶之，遥见，辄骂曰： 多事乞索小人，欲行何计！ 
现代文：北齐尚书右仆射祖，势力可以倾动朝内外，左丞相咸阳王斛律光很厌恶他，远远地见到祖，总是骂道： 使国家多事、贪得无厌的小人，想搞什么样的诡计！ 
English: North Qi Shangshu's right-hand man Shao Zu, whose power could sway both inside and outside the court, was loathed by the left chancellor Xianyang Wang Hui Riguang. When he saw Zu from a distance, he always scolded him, saying: "What kind of trickery does a petty person who makes the country eventful and insatiably greedy want to engage in!

古文：又尝谓诸将曰： 边境消息，兵马处分，赵令恒与吾辈参论。
现代文：又曾对部下的将领们说： 军事兵马的处理，尚书令赵彦深还常常和我们一起商量讨论。
English: He also once said to his subordinate generals: "Regarding the handling of military soldiers and horses, Shang Shuling Zhao Yanshen often consults and discusses with us.

古文：盲人掌机密以来，全不与吾辈语，正恐误国家事耳。 
现代文：这个瞎子掌管机密以来，完全不和我们说，使人担心会误了国家的大事。 
English: Since this blind man has been in charge of secrets, he has not spoken to us at all, which makes people worry that they will miss the important things of the country.

古文：光尝在朝堂垂帘坐；珽不知，乘马过其前，光怒曰： 小人乃敢尔！ 
现代文：斛律光曾在朝堂上坐在帘子后面，祖不知道，骑马经过他的面前，斛律光大怒说： 这个小人竟敢这样！ 
English: Peliguang had sat behind a curtain in the morning hall. The ancestor didn't know. When a horse passed in front of him, Peliguang said angrily, "How dare this little man do this!"

古文：后珽在内省，言声高慢，光适过，闻之，又怒。
现代文：后来祖在门下省，说话声调既高又慢，正巧斛律光经过那里，听到祖说话的腔调，又大怒。
English: Later, when Zu was studying under the gate, he spoke in a high-pitched and slow tone. Just at that time, a flash of light passed by, and he was furious when he heard the tone of Zu's speech.

古文：珽觉之，私赂光从奴问之，奴曰： 自公用事，相王每夜抱膝叹曰： 盲人入，国必破矣！  
现代文：祖发觉后，私下贿赂斛律光的随从奴仆询问原因，奴仆说： 自从您当权以来，相王每天夜里手抱双膝叹气说： 瞎子入朝，国家必毁。  
English: After the ancestor found out, he privately bribed the servant of the follower of Baoliguang to inquire the reason. The servant said: Since you have been in power, the king has been holding his hands and knees every night and sighing: "If a blind man enters the court, the country will be destroyed."

古文：穆提婆求娶光庶女，不许。
现代文：穆提婆请求娶斛律光的妾所生的女儿做妻子，没有得到允许。
English: Muti's request to marry the daughter of the concubine of Yao Ruiguang as a wife was not allowed.

古文：齐主赐提婆晋阳田，光言于朝曰： 此田，神武帝以来常种禾，饲马数千匹，以拟寇敌。
现代文：齐王赐给穆提婆晋阳地方的田地，斛律光在朝上说： 这些田地，从神武帝以来一直种谷物，饲养几千匹马，打算对付入寇的外敌。
English: The King of Qi gave Mutiba the fields in the Jinyang region, and Bao Riguang said in the morning: These fields have been growing grain and raising thousands of horses since the time of Emperor Jinwu, intending to deal with foreign invaders.

古文：今赐提婆，无乃阙军务也。 
现代文：现在赏赐给穆提婆，恐怕会影响国家的军务吧！ 
English: I am afraid that awarding the prize to Mutiha will affect the country's military affairs.

古文：由是祖、穆皆怨之。
现代文：从此祖、穆提婆都怨恨他。
English: From then on, both his father and his mother resented him.

古文：斛律后无宠，珽因而间之。
现代文：斛律后得不到皇帝的宠爱，祖因此离间他们的关系。
English: The Emperor did not like her, and the relationship between them was severed.

古文：光弟羡，为都督、幽州刺史、行台尚书令，亦善治兵，士马精强，鄣候严整，突厥畏之，谓之 南可汗 。
现代文：斛律光的弟弟斛律羡是都督、幽州刺史、行台尚书令，也善于治军，兵士马匹都很精干强壮，设置的要塞堡垒规范整齐，突厥很怕他，称他为 南可汗 。
English: Baloch's younger brother, Baloch Sen, was the governor-general, governor of Yuzhou, and governor of Xingtai. He was also good at governing the army. The soldiers and horses were very lean and strong, and the fortresses and forts were set up in an orderly manner. The Turks were very afraid of him and called him the Southern Khan.

古文：光长子武都，为开府仪同三司，梁、兗二州刺史。
现代文：斛律光的长子斛律武都是开府仪同三司，梁、兖二州的刺史。
English: The eldest son of Pei Ruiguang, Pei Ruimu, was a member of the Kaifu Yi and the Three Departments, and a member of the Liang and Zou two states.

古文：光虽贵极人臣，性节俭，不好声色，罕接宾客，杜绝馈饷，不贪权势。
现代文：斛律光虽然贵极人臣，但生性节俭，不喜欢声色，很少接待宾客，拒绝接受馈赠，不贪图权势。
English: Although Gao Riguang was an extremely high-ranking courtier, he was frugal by nature, disliked ostentation, rarely received guests, refused to accept gifts, and did not covet power.

古文：每朝廷会议，常独后言，言辄合理。
现代文：每逢朝廷集会议事，常常在最后发言，说的话总是很符合情理。
English: Whenever there was a meeting of the imperial court, he would often make a speech at the end, and his words were always very reasonable.

古文：或有表疏，令人执笔，口占之，务从省实。
现代文：遇有上表或奏疏，叫人拿了笔，由自己口述，替他写下来，务必简短真实。
English: In the case of the above table or mishearing, ask the person to take a pen, dictate by himself, write it down for him, and be sure to be brief and truthful.

古文：行兵仿其父金之法，营舍未定，终不入幕；或竟日不坐，身不脱介胄，常为士卒先。
现代文：用兵时仿照他父亲斛律金的办法，军队的营房没有落实，自己不进帐幕；或者整天不坐，身上不脱铠甲，打仗时身先士卒。
English: When using soldiers, he imitated his father's method of borrowing money. The army's barracks were not implemented, and he did not enter the tent; or he did not sit all day, he did not take off his armor, and he was the first in the war.

古文：士卒有罪，唯大杖挝背，未尝妄杀，众皆争为之死。
现代文：士兵犯了罪，只用大棒敲打脊背，从不随意杀人，所以部下的士兵争相为他效命。
English: When a soldier committed a crime, he was only beaten on the back of the neck with a big stick, and never killed at will, so his subordinate soldiers vied for his life.

古文：自结发从军。未尝败北，深为邻敌所惮。
现代文：自从年轻时参加军队，没有打过败仗，深为相邻的敌方害怕。
English: Since he joined the army at a young age, he has never lost a battle and is deeply feared by the neighboring enemy.

古文：周勋州刺史韦孝宽密为谣言曰： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
现代文：北周的勋州刺史韦孝宽私下制造谣言崐说： 百升飞上天，明月照长安。 
English: North Zhou's son of Shizhou, Wei Xiaokuan, privately created a rumor and said: "The hundred rises to the sky, the bright moon shines on Chang'an."

古文：又曰： 高山不推自崩，槲木不扶自举。 
现代文：又说： 高山不推自崩，槲木不扶自举。 
English: He also said: "A mountain does not push itself down, and a tree does not help itself up.

古文：令谍人传之于鄴，鄴中小儿歌之于路。珽因续之曰： 盲老公背受大斧，饶舌老母不得语。 
现代文：派间谍把谣言传到邺城，叫邺城的小孩在路上歌唱。祖接续道： 盲老公背受大斧，饶舌老母不得语。 
English: He sent spies to spread the rumor to Lucheng, and asked the children of Lucheng to sing on the road. Zu Zi continued: The blind husband suffered from a large axe, and the rapping mother was speechless.

古文：使其妻兄郑道盖奏之。
现代文：叫妻兄郑道盖向后主奏报。
English: He asked his brother-in-law, Zheng Daogai, to play the piano backwards.

古文：帝以问珽，珽与陆令萱皆曰： 实闻有之。 
现代文：后主就此问祖，祖和陆令萱都说： 确实听说有这件事。 
English: Afterward, the master asked the ancestor about this, and both the ancestor and Lu Lingyao said, "I have indeed heard about this matter."

古文：珽因解之曰： 百升者，斛也。
现代文：祖还解释说： 百升，就是斛。
English: Zu also explained: "One hundred liters is a cormorant.

古文：盲老公，谓臣也，与国同忧。
现代文：盲老公，是指我，和国家同忧愁。
English: Blind husband, refers to me, and the country with sorrow.

古文：饶舌老母，似谓女侍中陆氏也。
现代文：饶舌老母，似乎指女侍中陆令萱。
English: Rap mother, seems to refer to the female attendant Zhonglu Lingzhu.

古文：且斛律累世大将，明月声震关西，丰乐威行突厥，女为皇后，男尚公主，谣言甚可畏也。 
现代文：况且斛律氏几代都是大将，斛律光字明月，声震光西，斛律羡字丰乐，威行突厥，女儿是皇后，儿子娶公主，谣言令人可畏。 
English: Moreover, several generations of the Luo family were generals. Luo's light character was bright moon, sound shock light west, Luo's envy character was full of joy, powerful Turk, daughter was a queen, son married a princess, rumors were frightening.

古文：帝以问韩长鸾，长鸾以为不可，事遂寝。
现代文：后主又问韩长鸾，韩长鸾以为不可能，这件事才结束。
English: Afterward, the master asked Han Changtao again. Han Changtao thought it was impossible, and the matter ended.

古文：珽又见帝，请间，唯何洪珍在侧。帝曰： 前得公启，即欲施行，长鸾以为无此理。 
现代文：珽又去见后主，请求后主屏退左右，当时只有何洪珍在旁边，后主说： 以前接到你的启奏，就准备执行，韩长鸾认为没有这种道理。 
English: Han Changyu also went to see the back master and asked the back master to step back from the screen. At that time, only He Hongzhen was nearby. The back master said, "When I received your opening music before, I was ready to carry it out. Han Changyu thought that there was no such reason.

古文：珽未对，洪珍进曰： 若本无意则可；既有此意而不决行，万一泄露，如何？ 
现代文：祖还没有回答，何洪珍向后主进言说： 如果本来没有这种意思就算了；既然有这种意思而不决定执行，万一泄露出去，怎么办？ 
English: Before the ancestor could answer, He Hongzhen said to the Lord: If there is no such intention, it doesn't matter; since there is such an intention but no decision to carry it out, what if it leaks out?

古文：帝曰： 洪珍言是也。 
现代文：后主说： 何洪珍的话说得对。 
English: The latter said: He Hongzhen's words are right.

古文：然犹未决。
现代文：但是还没有决定。
English: But nothing has been decided.

古文：会丞相府佐封士让密启云： 光前西讨还，敕令散兵，光引兵逼帝城，将行不轨，事不果而止。
现代文：恰逢丞相府佐封士让上密启说： 斛律光以前西征回来，皇上下诏命令将军队解散，斛律光却指挥军队进逼都城，准备进行违反法纪的活动，事情没有成功而停止了。
English: Just at the time of the Western Expedition, Emperor Gao Riguang ordered the army to be disbanded. However, Gao Riguang commanded the army to enter the capital and prepared to carry out activities that violated the law and regulations. However, the matter did not succeed and was stopped.

古文：家藏弩甲，奴僮千数，每遣使往丰乐、武都所，阴谋往来。
现代文：家里私藏弓弩和铠甲、僮仆奴婢数以千计，常常派使者去斛律羡、斛律武都的住所，阴谋往来。
English: He kept thousands of bows, arrows and armor, as well as thousands of servants and maidservants, in his house. He often sent emissaries to the residences of Balochistan, the military capital of Balochistan, to exchange intrigues.

古文：若不早图，恐事不可测。 
现代文：如果不趁早谋画，恐怕事情不可预测。 
English: If the imperial court does not take action a day earlier, the consequences of the matter are probably unpredictable.

古文：帝遂信之，谓何洪珍曰： 人心亦大灵，我前疑其欲反，果然。 
现代文：后主便相信了，对何洪珍说： 人心也太灵验，我以前怀疑他要造反，果真如此。 
English: Afterward, the master believed it and said to He Hongzhen, "The human heart is too powerful. I suspected that he would rebel, and it was true.

古文：帝性怯，恐即有变，令洪珍驰召祖珽告之： 欲召光，恐其不从命。 
现代文：后主性格懦弱胆小，只恐马上有变，叫何洪珍迅速把祖召来，告诉他说： 我要召斛律光来，恐怕他不肯服从命令。 
English: The latter, cowardly and timid, was afraid that there would be an immediate change, so he asked He Hongzhen to quickly call his ancestor and tell him: "I'm going to call Zou Liguang, I'm afraid he won't obey the order."

古文：珽请 遣使赐以骏马，语云： 明日将游东山，王可乘此同行。 
现代文：祖请求说： 派使者赐给他骏马，告诉他： 明天将去东山游玩，王可以骑这匹马和我一同前往。 
English: The ancestor requested, "Send a messenger to give him a donkey and a horse, and tell him, 'Tomorrow I will go to the East Mountain for a ride. The king can ride this horse with me.

古文：光必入谢，因而执之。 
现代文：斛律光一定会来向陛下道谢，趁此机会把他抓起来。 
English: Pelican Light will surely come to thank His Majesty and seize the opportunity to arrest him.

古文：帝如其言。
现代文：后主就照祖所说的那样去做。
English: The postmaster did as he was told.

古文：六月，戊辰，光入，至凉风堂，刘桃枝自后扑之，不仆，顾曰： 桃枝常为如此事。
现代文：六月，戊辰，斛律光进宫，到凉风堂，刘桃枝从他背后扑去，没有跌倒。斛律光回头说： 刘桃枝常常做这种事。
English: In June, at the time of Wu Chen, Bao Riguang entered the palace, and when he arrived at Liangfeng Hall, Liu Tao Zhi flung herself off his back without falling. Bao Riguang looked back and said, "Liu Tao Zi often does this kind of thing."

古文：我不负国家。 
现代文：我没有辜负国家。 
English: I did not fail my country.

古文：桃枝与三力士以弓弦罥其颈，拉而杀之，血流于地，刬之，迹终不灭。
现代文：刘桃枝和另外三个力士用弓弦缠住他的脖子，用力勒紧将他杀死，鲜血流在地上，经过铲除，血迹始终存在。
English: Liu Taozhi and three other wrestlers wrapped a bowstring around his neck and strangled him to death. Blood flowed on the ground, and after it was removed, the bloodstains remained.

古文：于是下诏称其谋反，并杀其子开府仪同三司世雄、仪同三司恒伽。
现代文：后主于是下诏说斛律光要造反，将他的儿子开府仪同三司斛律世雄、仪同三司斛律恒伽一并杀死。
English: The latter then issued an edict saying that Baoliguang wanted to rebel, and killed his son, Kaifu Yi, together with the three priests, Baolugu Shixiong, and Baolugu Hengga.

古文：祖珽使二千石郎邢祖信簿录光家。
现代文：祖珽派二千石郎邢祖信对斛律光的家产登记造册。
English: The ancestor sent 2,000 koku of rice to Luo Zuxin to register the family property of Luo Liguang.

古文：珽于都省问所得物，祖信曰： 得弓十五，宴射箭百，刀七，赐槊。 
现代文：祖在尚书都省问起所查到的东西，邢祖信说： 得到十五张弓，聚宴习射时用的箭一百支，七把刀，朝廷赏赐的长矛两杆。 
English: When the ancestor inquired about what he had found in Shangshudu Province, Zou Zuxin said, "I obtained fifteen bows, one hundred arrows for shooting practice at banquets, seven swords, and two spears given by the imperial court.

古文：珽厉声曰： 更得何物？ 
现代文：祖厉声说： 还得到什么东西？ 
English: Zu snapped, "What else did you get?"

古文：曰： 得枣杖二十束，拟奴仆与人斗者，不问曲直，即杖之一百。 
现代文：邢祖信回答说： 得到二十捆枣木棍，准备当奴仆和别人斗殴时，不问是非曲直，先打奴仆一百下。 
English: Zou Zuxin replied, "I have obtained twenty bundles of jujube sticks, and I am prepared to beat my slave a hundred times first, regardless of the rights and wrongs, when my slave fights with someone else.

古文：珽大惭，乃下声曰： 朝廷已加重刑，郎中何宜为雪！ 
现代文：祖大为惭愧，便低声说： 朝廷已经对他处以重刑，郎中不宜为他洗雪！ 
English: Shamefaced, Zoda said in a low voice, "The Imperial Court has already imposed a heavy sentence on him. It is not appropriate for his son-in-law to shovel snow for him!"

古文：及出，人尤其抗直，祖信慨然曰： 贤宰相尚死，我何惜馀生！ 
现代文：邢祖信离开尚书都省，有人责怪他过于坦率耿直，他感慨说： 贤良的宰相尚且被杀，我何必顾惜自己的余生！ 
English: When Zou Zuxin left Shangshudu Province, some people accused him of being too frank. He said with emotion, "A virtuous prime minister has just been killed, why should I spare my remaining life!

古文：齐主遣使就州斩斛律武都，又遣中领军贺拔伏恩乘驿捕斛律羡，仍以洛州行台仆射中山独孤永业代羡，与大将军鲜于桃枝发定州骑卒续进。
现代文：北齐后主派使者到梁州、兖州去，就地将斛律武都处死，又派中领军贺拔伏恩乘驿车去捉拿斛律羡，仍旧以洛州行台仆射中山人独孤永业代替斛律羡，和大将军鲜于桃枝征发定州的骑兵继续前进。
English: After the Northern Qi, the master sent an envoy to Liangzhou and Zhangzhou to execute the commander of the Li Liwu army on the spot. He also sent the leader of the Central Qi army, He Ba Fu'en, to catch the commander of the Liwu army by carriage. He still replaced the commander of the Liwu army with the commander of the Southern Qi army, Luo Zhou, and the commander of the Central Qi army, He Ba Fu'en, sent the commander of the Southern Qi army, He Ba Fu'en, to catch the commander of the Liwu army by carriage.

古文：伏恩等至幽州，门者白： 使人衷甲，马有汗，宜闭城门。 
现代文：贺拔伏恩等到幽州，守城门的人告诉斛律羡： 来的人内穿衣甲，马身有汗，应当关闭城门。 
English: When He Prabhu went to Yuzhou, the person guarding the city gate told Zhao Lucheng: The people who come wear armor, and the horse is sweaty. The city gate should be closed.

古文：羡曰： 敕使岂可疑拒！ 
现代文：斛律羡说： 怎能怀疑皇上派来的使者把他们拒之城外！ 
English: He said: "How can an envoy sent by the imperial court doubt and resist?

古文：出见之。
现代文：便出城会见使者。
English: and went out of the city to meet him.

古文：伏恩执而杀之。
现代文：贺拔伏恩将他捉住处死。
English: He Ba Fuen caught him and executed him.

古文：初，羡常以盛满为惧，表解所职，不许。
现代文：当初，斛律羡时常为一家权势太大而惧怕，曾经上表请求解除自己的职务，后主不许。
English: At first, he was often afraid that the family was too powerful. He once requested to be relieved of his duties, and his successor was not allowed.

古文：临刑，叹曰： 富贵如此，女为皇后，公主满家，常使三百兵，何得不败！ 
现代文：临刑时，他叹息说： 如此富贵，女儿是皇后，满家是公主，日常使用三百名士兵，怎能不败！ 
English: At the time of his execution, he sighed and said: "How can you be so rich, have a daughter who is a queen, a whole family who are princesses, and use three hundred soldiers every day, and still not be defeated!

古文：及其五子伏护、世达、世迁、世辨、世酋皆死。
现代文：他的五个儿子斛律伏护、斛律世达、斛律世迁、斛律世辨、斛律世酋都被处死。
English: His five sons, Lulufukuo, Lulusida, Lulusida, Lulusida, Lulusida, and Lulusida were all executed.

古文：周主闻光死，为之大赦。
现代文：北周后主听到斛律光死去的消息，为此大赦全国表示庆幸。
English: After hearing the news of the death of Bao Riguang, the head of the North Zhou Dynasty expressed his gratitude for the national amnesty.

古文：祖珽与侍中高元海共执齐政。
现代文：祖珽和侍中高元海共同执掌北齐的朝政。
English: Zu Xi and the chamberlain Gao Yuanhai jointly presided over the imperial government of Northern Qi.

古文：元海妻，陆令萱之甥也，元海数以令萱密语告珽。
现代文：高元海的妻子，是陆令萱的外甥女，高元海屡次把陆令萱的秘密话告诉祖。
English: Gao Yuanhai's wife was Lu Lingyao's niece. Gao Yuanhai repeatedly told Lu Lingyao's secret words to his ancestor.

古文：珽求为领军，齐主许之，元海密言于帝曰： 孝征汉人，两目又盲，岂可为领军！ 
现代文：祖要求做领军，北齐后主答允了，高元海秘密向后主说： 祖是汉人，双目失明，怎么能做领军！ 
English: Zu asked to be the leader of the army, Beiqi Houjun agreed, and Gao Yuanhai secretly said to Houjun: Zu is Han, he is blind, how can he be the leader of the army!

古文：因言珽与广宁王孝珩交结，由是中止。
现代文：并且说祖和广宁王高孝珩有勾结，因此没有任命。
English: He also said that Zu had colluded with Guangning Wang Gao Xiaozhuang, so he was not appointed.

古文：珽求见，自辨，且言： 臣与元海素嫌，必元海谮臣。 
现代文：祖求见后主，为自己辨白，说： 臣和高元海素来有怨仇，一定是高元海诽谤臣。 
English: The ancestor asked to see his heir, and tried to justify himself, saying: The retainer and Gao Yuanhai have always had a grudge, and Gao Yuanhai must have slandered the retainer.

古文：帝弱颜，不能讳，以实告之，珽因元海与司农卿尹子华等结为朋党。
现代文：后主脸皮薄，不能回避，只得把实话告诉他，祖于是说高元海和司农卿尹子华等人结成朋党。
English: Afterward, the master's face was thin, he couldn't avoid it, so he had to tell him the truth. The ancestor then said that Gao Yuanhai and Yin Zihua, the Minister of Agriculture and Rural Affairs, and others had formed a fraternal party.

古文：又以元海所泄密语告令萱，令萱怒，出元海为郑州刺史。
现代文：又把高元海所泄露的秘密话告诉陆令萱，陆令萱大怒，把高元海贬为郑州刺史。
English: He also told Lu Lingya the secret words leaked by Gao Yuanhai. Lu Lingya was furious and denounced Gao Yuanhai as a traitor to Zhengzhou.

古文：子华等皆被黜。
现代文：尹子华等人都被罢官。
English: Yin Zihua and others were all dismissed.

古文：珽自是专主机衡，总知骑兵、外兵事，内外亲戚，皆得显位。
现代文：祖珽从此专门主管朝廷的枢要机关，总辖执掌北齐的骑兵、外兵军务，内外亲戚都得到显要的官职。
English: Since then, Zu Xi has been in charge of the key organs of the imperial court. He is in charge of the cavalry and foreign military affairs of the Northern Qi, and his relatives at home and abroad have received important official positions.

古文：帝常令中要人扶侍出入，直至永巷，每同御榻论决政事，委任之重，群臣莫比。
现代文：后主常常叫亲近的太监搀扶祖出入，一直送到宫里的长巷，时常同后主在御榻上商量决定朝廷的政事，托付给祖的重要任务，是别的臣子所不能比拟的。
English: The Empress Dowager often had the eunuchs who were close to her escort her father in and out of the palace, taking them all the way to the palace's long alleys. She and the Empress Dowager often discussed and decided the political affairs of the imperial court on the Imperial couch. The important tasks entrusted to the Empress Dowager were incomparable to those of other courtiers.

古文：秋，七月，遣使如周。
现代文：秋季七月，陈宣帝派使者去北周。
English: In the autumn of July, Chen Xuandi sent an envoy to North Zhou.

古文：八月，庚午，齐废皇后斛律氏为庶人。
现代文：八月，庚午，北齐废皇后斛律氏为平民。
English: In August, at noon, the deposed Empress of Northern Qi, Gong Lu, became a commoner.

古文：以任城王湝为右丞相，冯翊王润为太尉，兰陵王长恭为大司马，广宁王孝珩为大将军，安德王延宗为大司徒。
现代文：任命任城王高为右丞相，冯翊王高润为太尉，兰陵王高长恭为大司马，广宁王高孝珩为大将军，安德王高延宗为大司徒。
English: He appointed Wang Gao of Rencheng as minister of the right, Wang Gao Run of Fengye as lieutenant, Wang Gao Changgyong of Lanling as grand steward, Wang Gao Xiaojun of Guangning as general, and Wang Gao Yanzong of Ande as grand steward.

古文：齐使领军封辅相聘于周。
现代文：北齐派领军封辅相到北周聘问。
English: The Northern Qi sent the leader of the army, Feng Fu, to the Northern Zhou to ask questions.

古文：辛未，周使司城中大夫杜杲来聘。
现代文：辛未，北周派司城中大夫杜杲来陈朝聘问。
English: Xin Wei, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent the chief physician of the city, Du Xi, to Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：上谓之曰： 若欲合从图齐，宜以樊、邓见与。 
现代文：宣帝对他说： 如果要和我国联合起来谋取北齐，应该把樊、邓二州让给我们。 
English: Emperor Xuan said to him, "If you want to unite with our country to seek Beiqi, you should give us Handan and Deng Erzhou."

古文：对曰： 合从图齐，岂弊邑之利！
现代文：使者回答说： 联合起来谋取北齐，难道仅仅是敝国一国的利益！
English: The envoy replied: "Is it only the interests of one country to unite to seek North Qi?

古文：必须城镇，宜待得之于齐，先索汉南，使臣不敢闻命。 
现代文：贵国一定要城镇，应该从北齐那里去得到，先要索取汉南一带地方，我作为使臣不敢传达这个要求。 
English: Your country must have towns, and you should get them from Beiqi. First, you should ask for places around Hannan. As an envoy, I do not dare to convey this request.

古文：初，齐胡太后自愧失德，欲求悦于齐主，乃饰其兄长仁之女置宫中，令帝见之，帝果悦，纳为昭仪。
现代文：当初，北齐胡太后因为自己行为不好而感到羞愧，为了得到北齐后主崐的喜欢，于是把哥哥胡长仁的女儿修饰打扮住在宫里，使后主能见到她，后主见后果然很喜欢，纳她为昭仪，地位仅次于皇后。
English: At first, Empress Dowager Beiqi Hu was ashamed of her bad behavior. In order to gain the favor of Empress Dowager Beiqi, she dressed up the daughter of her brother Hu Changren and lived in the palace so that the Empress Dowager could see her. As a result, the Empress Dowager was very fond of her and gave her the title of Zhaoyi, second only to the empress.

古文：又斛律后废，陆令萱欲立穆夫人；太后欲立胡昭仪，力不能遂，乃卑辞厚礼以求令萱，结为姊妹。
现代文：到斛律后被废掉，陆令萱想立穆夫人为皇后；胡太后想立胡昭仪为皇后，但是力不从心，于是用卑下的言辞和厚礼请求陆令萱，想和她结为姊妹。
English: After the succession law was abolished, Lu Lingyao wanted to make Lady Mu the empress; Hu Daihou wanted to make Hu Zhaoyi the empress, but she couldn't do it, so she asked Lu Lingyao with humble words and courtesy to marry her as a sister.

古文：令萱亦以胡昭仪宠幸方隆，不得已，与祖珽白帝立之。
现代文：陆令萱也因为胡昭仪正日益得到后主的宠爱，不得已，和祖一起向后主请求立胡昭仪为皇后。
English: Because Hu Zhaoyi was increasingly favored by the empress dowager, Lu Lingyao, as a last resort, together with his ancestor, asked the empress dowager to make Hu Zhaoyi the queen.

古文：戊子，立皇后胡氏。
现代文：戊子，立皇后胡氏。
English: Bo Zi, the Empress of the Hu clan.

古文：已丑，齐以北平王仁坚为尚书令，特进许季良为左仆射，彭城王宝德为右仆射。
现代文：己丑，北齐任命北平王高仁坚为尚书令，特进许季良为左仆射，彭城王高宝德为右仆射。
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi appointed Beiping Wang Gao Renjian as Shang Shuling, Xu Qiliang as Zuo Fuxia, and Pengcheng Wang Gao Baode as Zuo Fuxia.

古文：癸已，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：癸巳，北齐后主去晋阳。
English: Soon after, Beiqi's master went to Jinyang.

古文：九月，庚子朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月，庚子朔，发生日食。
English: In September, Geng Zi Shuo, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛亥，大赦。
现代文：辛亥，陈朝大赦全国。
English: On the 18th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：冬，十月，庚午，周诏： 江陵所虏充官口者，悉免为民。 
现代文：冬季，十月，庚午，北周诏令： 在江陵俘虏充当官府奴婢的，全部赦免为百姓。 
English: In winter, in October, at noon, the Northern Zhou Dynasty issued a decree: In Jiangling, all prisoners who served as slaves of the government were pardoned and became commoners.

古文：辛未，周遣小匠师杨勰等来聘。
现代文：辛未，北周派小匠师杨勰等来陈朝聘问。
English: Xin Wei, North Zhou sent small craftsman Yang Wei and others to come to Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：周绥德公陆通卒。
现代文：北周绥德公陆通去世。
English: Northern Zhou Shunde passed away.

古文：乙酉，上享太庙。
现代文：乙酉，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: Acetylene, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple for worship.

古文：齐陆令萱欲立穆昭仪为皇后，每私谓齐主曰： 岂有男为皇太子，而身为婢妾者乎！ 
现代文：北齐陆令萱想立穆昭仪为皇后，私下对北齐后主说： 难道有儿子是皇太子而自身是婢妾的！ 
English: The Northern Qi emperor wanted to make Mu Zhaoyi the empress, and privately said to the Northern Qi empress: "Is there a son who is the crown prince, but she herself is a concubine?"

古文：胡后有宠于帝，不可离间。令萱乃使人行厌蛊之术，旬朔之间，胡后精神恍惚，言笑无恒，帝渐畏而恶之。
现代文：胡皇后正得宠于后主，无法挑拨离间，陆令萱便叫方士施行诅咒人的巫术，仅仅十天到一个月之间，胡皇后精神恍惚，说笑都不正常，后主便遂渐害怕而厌恶她。
English: Queen Hu was being favored by her successor and was unable to sow discord, so Lu Lingyao ordered the sorcerer to perform the magic of cursing people. In just ten days to a month, Queen Hu was in a trance, her speech was abnormal, and her successor gradually feared and loathed her.

古文：令萱一旦忽以皇后服御衣被穆昭仪，又别造宝帐，爰及枕席器玩，莫非珍奇。
现代文：陆令萱有一天忽然用皇后的衣服给穆昭仪穿着起来，又另外做了华美的帐子，乃至枕席用器和玩赏物品，无不珍贵奇特。
English: One day, Lu Lingya suddenly dressed Mu Zhaoyi in the queen's clothes, and also made a gorgeous curtain, and even pillowcases and play items, all of which are precious and peculiar.

古文：坐昭仪于帐中，谓帝曰： 有一圣女出，将大家看之。 
现代文：叫穆昭仪坐在帐子里，对后主说： 发现一个贤德的女子，请陛下去看看。 
English: He told Mu Zhaoyi to sit in the tent and said to the empress dowager: "If you find a virtuous woman, please go and see her."

古文：及见昭仪，令萱乃曰： 如此人不作皇后，遣何物人作！ 
现代文：后主看到穆昭仪，陆令萱便说： 这样的人不当皇后，还有什么人可当！ 
English: After the lord saw Mu Zhaoyi, Lu Lingyao said: Such a person is not worthy of being a queen, who else can be!

古文：帝纳其言。
现代文：后主采纳了陆令萱的意见。
English: The emperor accepted Zou's suggestion.

古文：甲午，立穆氏为右皇后，以胡氏为左皇后。
现代文：甲午，立穆昭仪为右皇后，胡昭仪为左皇后。
English: At noon, Mu Zhaoyi was appointed as the Right Empress, and Hu Zhaoyi as the Left Empress.

古文：十一月，庚戌，周主行如羌桥，集长安以东诸军都督以上，颁赐有差。
现代文：十一月，庚戌，北周国主巡行去羌桥，召集长安以东军队中都督以上的官员，按情况分别给予赏赐。
English: In November, the Northern Zhou sovereigns went on a parade to Ganqiao, and summoned the officials above the rank of governor in the army east of Chang'an, and gave them rewards according to the situation.

古文：乙卯，还宫。
现代文：乙卯，回宫。
English: On the second day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：以赵公招为大司马。
现代文：任命赵公宇文招为大司马。
English: Zhao Gongyu Wenzhuo was appointed as the chief secretary.

古文：壬申，周主如斜谷，集长安以西诸军都督以上，颁赐有差。
现代文：壬申，北周国主去斜谷，召集长安以西军队中都督以上的官员，分别给予赏赐。
English: In Jinshin, the ruler of Northern Zhou went to the valley and called together the officials above the rank of governor in the army west of Chang'an, and gave them rewards.

古文：丙戌，还宫。
现代文：丙戌，回宫。
English: On the following day, he returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：庚寅，周主游道会苑，以上善殿壮丽，焚之。
现代文：庚寅，北周国主到道会苑游玩，因为上善殿壮丽，将它焚毁。
English: Gyeong-in, the ruler of North Chou, visited the Taoist Association Garden, and because the Shang Son Hall was magnificent, he burned it down.

古文：十二月，辛巳，周主祀南郊。
现代文：十二月，辛巳，北周国主到南郊祭天。
English: In December, the Northern Zhou Emperor went to the Southern Suburbs to hold a festival.

古文：齐胡后之立，非陆令萱意，令萱一旦于太后前作色而言曰： 何物亲侄，作如此语！ 
现代文：北齐册立胡皇后，不是陆令萱的意愿，有一天陆令萱在太后面前生气地说： 什么亲侄女，竟说出这种话来！ 
English: It was not Lu Lingyao's wish to have Queen Hu established in the Beiqi Annals. One day, Lu Lingyao said angrily in front of the empress dowager: "What kind of niece would say such a thing!

古文：太后问其故，令萱曰： 不可道。 
现代文：太后问她什么原故，陆令萱说： 不能说。 
English: When the Empress Dowager asked her why, Lu Lingyao said, "I can't say."

古文：固问之，乃曰： 语大家云： 太后行多非法，不可以训。 
现代文：坚持问她，才说： 胡皇后对皇上说： 太后有许多非法行为，不足为训。  
English: When he persisted in questioning her, he finally said: Empress Hu said to the emperor: The empress dowager has committed many illegal acts, which is not enough to be disciplined.

古文： 太后大怒，呼后出，立剃其发，送还家。
现代文：太后勃然大怒，把胡皇后叫出来，马上剃去她的头发，送她回家。
English: The Empress Dowager flew into a rage, called Queen Hu out, immediately shaved off her hair and sent her home.

古文：辛丑，废胡后为庶人。
现代文：辛丑，废胡皇后为平民。
English: Sin ugly, waste Hu empress as a civilian.

古文：然齐主犹思之，每致物以通意。
现代文：然而后主还想念她，常常送东西给她表示自己的意思。
English: However, he still misses her and often sends her gifts to show his feelings.

古文：自是令萱与其子侍中穆提婆势倾内外，卖官鬻狱，聚敛无厌。
现代文：从此以后陆令萱和她的儿子侍中穆提婆势力倾动朝廷内外，出卖官职，收受贿赂断案，聚敛钱财贪得无厌。
English: From then on, Lu Lingyao and her son, the attendant Mutiba, exerted their influence both inside and outside the imperial court, selling official positions, accepting bribes to have cases dismissed, and amassing money with insatiable greed.

古文：每一赐与，动倾府藏。
现代文：每次赏赐，动辄把官府储存的东西用光。
English: Every time a reward is given, it is easy to use up what the government has stored.

古文：令萱则自太后以下，皆受其指麾；提婆则唐邕之徒，皆重足屏气；杀生与夺，唯意所欲。乙巳，周以柱国田弘为大司空。
现代文：陆令萱对太后以下的人都可以指挥；唐邕一伙对穆提婆怕得不敢出声；这两人可以随心所欲地对别人生杀予夺。乙巳，北周任命柱国田弘为大司空。
English: Lu Lingya could command anyone below the empress dowager; Tang Yao and his group were too afraid to speak out against Muti Bao; the two men could kill and conquer others as they pleased. At this time, Northern Zhou appointed Zhuo Guo Tianhong as the grand secretary of the sky.

古文：乙卯，周主享太庙。
现代文：乙卯，北周国主到太庙祭祀。
English: At dusk, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty went to the Imperial Temple for a religious service.

古文：是岁，突厥木杆可汗卒，复舍其子大逻便而立其弟，是为佗钵可汗。
现代文：这一年，突厥木杆可汗去世，不立他的儿子大逻便而立弟弟，就是佗钵可汗。
English: In the same year, the Turk Muxu Khan died, and instead of raising his son Dai Luo, he raised his younger brother, the Zou Khan.

古文：佗钵以摄图为尔伏可汗，统其东面；又以其弟褥但可汗之子为步离可汗，居西面。
现代文：佗钵以摄图为尔伏可汗，统治突厥的东部；又任命弟弟褥但可汗的儿子为步离可汗，统治突厥的西部。
English: He appointed his younger brother, the son of Zandan Khan, to succeed him as khan and rule the western part of Turkey.

古文：周人与之和亲，岁给缯絮锦彩十万段。
现代文：北周和突厥和好亲睦，每年送给他们丝织的采缎十万段。
English: The Northern Zhou and the Turks were on friendly terms, and every year he sent them 100,000 silk reeds.

古文：突厥在长安者，衣锦食肉，常以千数。
现代文：在长安的突厥人，穿锦吃肉的常以千计。
English: In Chang'an, there are thousands of Turks who wear brocade and eat meat.

古文：齐人亦畏其为寇，争厚赂之。
现代文：北齐也怕突厥入境骚扰，争着用厚礼贿赂他们。
English: Northern Qi was also afraid of Turkish entry harassment, and tried to bribe them with gifts.

古文：佗钵益骄，谓其下曰： 但使我在南两儿常孝，何忧于贫！ 
现代文：佗钵可汗更加骄傲，对部下说： 只要在南面的两个儿子经常孝敬我，我就不怕贫穷！ 
English: Yan Khan was even more proud and said to his subordinates: "As long as my two sons in the south always show me filial respect, I am not afraid of poverty!"

古文：阿史那后无宠于周主，神武公窦毅尚襄阳公主，生女尚幼，密言于帝曰： 今齐、陈鼎峙，突厥方强，愿舅抑情慰抚，以生民为念！ 
现代文：阿史那后得不到北周国主武帝的宠爱，神武公窦毅娶襄阳公主为妻，女儿还小，秘密对武帝说： 现在北齐和陈朝鼎足而立，突厥势力正在强盛之际，希望舅父能够忍耐，加以劝慰安抚，把老百姓放在心上！ 
English: After that, Ashi did not receive the favor of Emperor Wu, the ruler of Northern Zhou. Shenwu Gong Dou Yi married Princess Xiangyang, his daughter was still young, and secretly said to Emperor Wu: Now that the Northern Qi and Chen Dynasties are standing tall, and the Turkic forces are growing strong, I hope my uncle can be patient, give advice and comfort, and keep the people in mind!

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：武帝对他的话深表同意予以采纳。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：高宗宣皇帝上之下太建五年春，正月，癸酉，以吏部尚书沈君理为右仆射。
现代文：太建五年春季，正月，癸酉，陈朝任命吏部尚书沈君理为右仆射。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Jian Dynasty, in the first month of the year, the Chen Dynasty appointed Shang Shuxu (尚書) and Shen Junli (沈君理) as the right-hand servants.

古文：戊寅，齐以并省尚书令高阿那肱录尚书事，总知外兵及内省机密，与侍中城阳王穆提婆、领军大将军昌黎王韩长鸾共处衡轴，号曰 三贵 ，蠹国害民，日月滋甚。
现代文：戊寅，北齐任命并省尚书令高阿那肱录尚书事，总管外兵和宫内的机密，和侍中城阳王穆提婆、领军大将军昌黎王韩长鸾一同担任朝廷中枢的要职，号称 三贵 ，祸国殃民，一天比一天厉害。
English: Wu Yin, Bei Qi appointed and ordered Gao Anaxun to record the records, in charge of foreign soldiers and palace secrets, and served as the center of the imperial court together with King Mudiwa of Chengyang and the leading general Changli King Han Changyu. They were known as the Three Greats, the scourge of the country and the people, and they became more and more powerful day by day.

古文：长鸾弟万岁，子宝行、宝信，并开府仪同三司，万岁仍兼侍中，宝行、宝信皆尚公主。
现代文：韩长鸾的弟弟韩万岁，他的儿子韩宝行、韩宝信，都是开府仪同三司，韩万岁仍兼侍中，韩宝行、韩宝信都娶公主为妻。
English: Han Changtao's younger brother, Han Wanlong, and his sons, Han Baorong and Han Baoshin, were both members of the Imperial Household Agency and the Third Division. Han Wanlong was also an aide-de-camp. Han Baorong and Han Baoshin both married princesses.

古文：每群臣旦参，帝常先引长鸾顾访，出后，方引奏事官。
现代文：每当群臣早朝，北齐后主常常先召韩长鸾入殿咨询，等他下殿后，才让奏事官上朝奏事。
English: Whenever a group of courtiers arrived in the early morning, the Empress of Northern Qi would often call Han Changyu into the palace for consultation first, and wait for him to leave the palace before allowing the reporting officer to report to the court.

古文：若不视事，内省有急奏事，皆附长鸾奏闻。军国要密，无不经手。
现代文：后主如果不上朝，内省有紧急的奏事，都由韩长鸾去向后主奏报，军事和国家的重要机密，没有不经他的手。
English: If the successor does not go to the imperial court, if there is an urgent report of introspection, Han Changtao will go to the successor to report, and military and national important secrets will not pass through his hands.

古文：尤疾士人，朝夕宴私，唯事谮诉。
现代文：他尤其痛恨士人，早晚朝见、宴会、私下朝见皇帝时，专门说别崐人的坏话。
English: He especially hated nobles. In morning and evening meetings, banquets, and private audiences with the emperor, he made a point of speaking ill of nobles.

古文：常带刀走马，未尝安行，嗔目张拳，有啖人之势。
现代文：他经常驰马带刀，从不缓步而行，瞪眼伸拳，摆出吃人的架势。
English: He often rides a horse with a knife, never walking slowly, staring with his eyes, extending his fists, and posing as a cannibal.

古文：朝士咨事，莫敢仰视，动致呵叱。
现代文：朝廷的官员同他商量事情时，不敢抬头看他，动辄遭到他的责骂。
English: Officials of the imperial court did not dare to look up at him when discussing matters with him, and were often scolded by him.

古文：每骂云： 汉狗大不可耐，唯须杀之！ 
现代文：每次都骂道： 汉狗使人很不耐烦，只能杀掉他们！ 
English: Every time he scolded: Han dogs make people very impatient, you can only kill them!

古文：庚辰，齐遣崔象来聘。
现代文：庚辰，北齐派崔象来陈朝聘问。
English: Geng Chen, Northern Qi sent Cui Xiang to Chen Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：辛巳，上祀南郊；甲午，享太庙；二月，辛丑，祀明堂。
现代文：辛巳，陈宣帝到南郊祭天；甲午，到太庙祭祀；二月，辛丑，到近郊东南的明堂祭祀。
English: At this time of the year, Chen Xuandi went to the southern suburbs to offer sacrifices to heaven; at this time of the year, he went to the Great Temple to offer sacrifices; and in February, at this time of the year, he went to Myeongdong in the southeastern suburbs to offer sacrifices.

古文：乙巳，齐立右皇后穆氏为皇后。
现代文：乙巳，北齐立右皇后穆氏为皇后。
English: At that moment, the North Qi Dynasty was established, with Empress Mu as its empress.

古文：穆后母名轻霄，本穆氏之婢也，面有黥字。
现代文：穆后的母亲名叫轻霄，原先是穆家的婢女，脸上有刺字。
English: Mu Qiang's mother's name was Qiao Xiao, and she was originally a servant of the Mu family. Her face was tattooed.

古文：后既以陆令萱为母，穆提婆为外家，号令萱曰 太姬 。
现代文：穆后认陆令萱为母亲，以穆提婆为外家，称陆令萱为 太姬 。
English: Mu Hou recognized Lu Linyi as her mother, with Muti Ba as a foreign family, and called Lu Linyi as the Great Grandmother.

古文：太姬者，齐皇后母号也，视一品，班在长公主上。
现代文：太姬，是北齐皇后母亲的称号，相当于一品，等级在皇帝的姊妹以上。
English: Taiki is the title of the mother of the Empress of Northern Qi, equivalent to one grade, a grade higher than the emperor's sister.

古文：由是不复问轻霄。
现代文：皇后因此不再理轻霄。
English: As a result, the empress no longer takes things so lightly.

古文：轻霄自疗面，欲求见后，太姬使禁掌之，竟不得见。
现代文：轻霄把脸治好，要求见皇后，太姬叫人禁止并用手掌打她，结果不能见到。
English: Xiaoxiao fixed her face and asked to see the empress, but the empress forbade it and hit her with her palm. As a result, she could not see.

古文：齐主颇好文学。
现代文：北齐后主很爱好文学。
English: The empress dowager of Northern Qi was very fond of literature.

古文：丙午，祖珽奏置文林馆，多引文学之士以充之，谓之待诏；以中书侍即博陵李德林、黄门侍郎琅邪颜之推同判馆事，又命共撰《修文殿御览》。
现代文：丙午，祖奏请设立文林馆，延揽了许多文学之士到馆里，称为待诏；任命中书侍郎博陵人李德林、黄门侍郎琅邪人颜之推为同判馆事，又叫他们共同编写《修文殿御览》。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the founder of the Song Dynasty requested the establishment of the Wenlin Museum and invited many literary figures to the museum, which was called the "waiting for the edict." He appointed Li Delin, a writer from Boling, and Huangmen, a writer from Huangmen, to be the co-judges of the museum, and also asked them to jointly compile the "Review of the Xiuwen Hall."

古文：甲寅，周太子赟巡省西土。
现代文：甲寅，北周太子宇文巡察西部的疆域。
English: Emperor Jia and Northern Zhou's Prince Uwen inspected the western territory.

古文：乙卯，齐以北平王坚录尚书事。
现代文：乙卯，北齐任命北平王高坚录尚书事。
English: Second, North Qi appointed Beiping Wang Gao Jian to record the records.

古文：丁巳，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：丁巳，北齐后主去晋阳。
English: Soon after, the head of the Northern Qi went to Jinyang.

古文：壬戌，周遣司会侯莫陈凯等聘于齐。
现代文：壬戌，北周派司会侯莫陈凯等人到北齐聘问。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Chairman Hou Mo, Chen Kai and others to the North Qi Dynasty to ask questions.

古文：庚辰，齐主还鄴。
现代文：庚辰，北齐后主回邺城。
English: Gengchen, the main route back to Lucheng after the Northern Qi.

古文：三月，己卯，周太子于岐州获二白鹿以献，周主诏曰： 在德不在瑞。 
现代文：三月，己卯，北周太子在岐州捉到两只白鹿献给武帝，北周武帝下诏说： 在品德不在祥瑞。 
English: In March, Prince Zhou of the Northern Zhou captured two white deer in Qizhou and dedicated them to Emperor Wu. Emperor Zhou of the Northern Zhou issued an edict saying, "There is no virtue in Xiang Rui."

古文：帝谋伐齐，公卿各有异同，唯镇前将军吴明彻决策请行。
现代文：陈宣帝计划讨伐北齐，公卿之间意见不一，只有镇前将军吴明彻决策请求行动。
English: Chen Xuandi planned to invade North Qi, and the nobles disagreed. Only the town's former general Wu Mingcher made a decision to request action.

古文：帝谓公卿曰： 朕意已决，卿可共举元帅。 
现代文：宣帝对公卿们说： 朕的主意已经决定，你们可以共同推举元帅。 
English: Emperor Xuan said to the nobles: My idea has been decided, you can jointly elect a marshal.

古文：众议以中权将军淳于量位重，共署推之。
现代文：大家商量认为中权将军淳于量地位最重要，共同签名推选他。
English: Everyone discussed and agreed that General Zhongquan Jun is the most important in the position of quantity, and jointly signed to elect him.

古文：尚书左仆射徐陵独曰： 吴明彻家在淮左，悉彼风俗；将略人才，当今亦无过者。 
现代文：唯独尚书左仆射徐陵说： 吴明彻家在淮左，熟悉那里的风俗；将略和才能，当今也没有超过他的。 
English: However, Shang Shuxi's left-hand man, Jie Xu Ling, said: Wu Mingche's family was in Huai Zuo, and he was familiar with the customs there; his skill and talent did not exceed his today.

古文：都官尚书河东裴忌曰： 臣同徐仆射。 
现代文：都官尚书河东裴忌说： 我同意徐仆射的看法。 
English: Shangshu Hedong Peiqi, a city official, said: I agree with Xu Puxia's view.

古文：陵应声曰： 非但明彻良将，裴忌即良副也。 
现代文：徐陵应声说： 不但吴明彻是良将，裴忌就是好的副帅。 
English: Tudou immediately went on to say: Not only is Mingcheng a good general, Peihui is also a good deputy.

古文：壬午，分命众军，以明彻都督征讨诸军事，忌监军事，统众十万伐齐。
现代文：壬午，分别命令众军，任命吴明彻为都督征讨诸军事，裴忌为监军事，统率十万军队进攻北齐。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, he separately ordered the troops, appointed Wu Mingche as the governor to recruit the military, and Pei as the military inspector, and led 100,000 troops to attack North Qi.

古文：明彻出秦郡。都督黄法出历阳。
现代文：吴明彻向秦郡进军，都督黄法氍向历阳进军。
English: Wu Mingcher marched to Qin County, and the governor Huang Fahu marched to Liyang.

古文：夏，四月，己亥，周主享太庙。
现代文：夏季，四月，己亥，北周国主到太庙祭祀。
English: In the summer, April, Ji Hai, the North Zhou sovereign went to the Great Temple for a ritual.

古文：癸卯，前巴州刺史鲁广达与齐师战于大岘，破之。
现代文：癸卯，陈朝的前巴州刺史鲁广达和北齐军队在大岘交战，将北齐军队打败。
English: At the same time, the former Bazhou vassal of the Chen Dynasty, Lu Guangda, and the Northern Qi army fought in Dalat and defeated the Northern Qi army.

古文：戊申，齐以兰陵王长恭为太保，南阳王绰为大司马，安德王延宗为太尉，武兴王普为司徒，开府仪同三司宜阳王赵彦深为司空。
现代文：戊申，北齐任命兰陵王高长恭为太保，南阳王高绰为大司马，安德王高延宗为太尉，武兴王高普为司徒，开府仪同三司宜阳王赵彦深为司空。
English: According to Wu Shen, North Qi appointed Lanling Wang Gao Changgong as Taibo, Nanyang Wang Gao Zhuo as Da Sima, Andong Wang Gao Yanzong as Taifeng, Wuxing Wang Gaopu as Sito, Kaifu Yi and Yiyang Wang Zhao Yanshen as Sikuo.

古文：齐人于秦郡置秦州，州前江浦通涂水，齐人以大木为栅于水中。
现代文：北齐在秦郡设置秦州，州前连通长江的水渠通滁水，北齐人用大树做栅栏放在水中。
English: North Qi set up Qin Prefecture in Qin County. Before the establishment of the prefecture, a canal connected to the Yangtze River carried water. The people of North Qi used large trees to make fences and placed them in the water.

古文：辛亥，吴明彻遣豫章内史程文季将骁勇拔其栅，克之。
现代文：辛亥，吴明彻派豫章内史程文季率领勇猛矫健的兵士拔掉栅栏，攻下秦州。
English: In Xinhai, Wu Mingcher dispatched Cheng Wencai, a member of the Yuzhang Inner History Chapter, to lead the brave and vigorous soldiers to pull down the fence and capture Qinzhou.

古文：文季，灵洗之子也。
现代文：程文季是程灵洗的儿子。
English: Cheng Wenqi is the son of Cheng Lingqin.

古文：齐人议御陈师，开府仪同三司王纮曰： 官军比屡失利，人情骚动。
现代文：北齐商议怎样抵抗陈朝的军队，开府仪同三司王说： 官军近来屡次失利，人们的情绪骚动不安。
English: When the Northern Qi were discussing how to resist the army of the Chen dynasty, Kaifu Yi said to the three kings: The government army has recently suffered repeated defeats, and people's emotions are turbulent and uneasy.

古文：若复出顿江、淮，恐北狄、西寇乘弊而来，则世事去矣。
现代文：如果再派军队驻屯长江、淮河一带，只怕北面的突厥和西面的周朝，乘我军的弊疲来进犯。
English: If troops are stationed along the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River, the Turks in the north and the Zhou Dynasty in the west will take advantage of the weakness of our army to attack.

古文：莫若薄赋省徭，息民养士，使朝廷协睦，遐迩归心。
现代文：不如轻徭薄赋，与民休息善待士人，使朝廷和睦，远近都从心里归附。
English: It is not as good as being frivolous and shallow, treating the scholars with the people and making the imperial court harmonious, and adhering to it from the heart.

古文：天下皆当肃清，岂直陈氏而已。 
现代文：天下都应当肃清；岂只陈朝而已。 
English: The whole world should be purged; is it just the Chen dynasty?

古文：不从。
现代文：后主不听。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：遣军救历阳，庚申，黄法击破之。
现代文：派军队去援救历阳，庚申，被陈朝黄法氍打败。
English: He sent troops to rescue Liyang and Goshun, but they were defeated by the Chen Dynasty's Huang Fa Jun.

古文：又遣开府仪同三司尉破胡、长孙洪略救秦州。
现代文：后主又派开府仪同三司尉破胡、长孙洪略援救秦州。
English: Later, the lord sent Kaifu Yi and the three lieutenants to defeat Hu, and the eldest son Hongli to rescue Qinzhou.

古文：赵彦深私问计于秘书监源文宗曰： 吴贼侏张，遂至于此。
现代文：赵彦深私下向秘书监源文宗讨教计策，说： 吴地的贼寇十分嚣张，竟然到了这种地步。
English: Zhao Yanshen privately discussed strategies with his secretary, Guan Yuan Wenzong, and said: The bandits in Wudi are so arrogant that they have come to this point.

古文：弟往为秦、泾刺史，悉江、淮间情事，今何术以御之？ 
现代文：老弟以前曾经是秦、泾二州的刺史，熟悉长江、淮河间的情况，现在用什么办法去抵抗他！ 
English: My elder brother used to be a historian of Qin and Shandong, familiar with the situation between the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River. How can I resist him now?

古文：文宗曰： 朝廷精兵，必不肯多付诸将；数千已下，适足为吴人之饵。
现代文：源文宗说： 朝廷的精兵，一定不肯多配给将领，人数在几千以下，正好成了陈朝的食饵。
English: Yuan Wenzong said: The elite soldiers of the imperial court would certainly not be willing to give more to the generals. Their number was less than a few thousand, and they just became the cannon fodder of the Chen dynasty.

古文：尉破胡人品，王之所知。败绩之事，匪朝伊夕。
现代文：尉破胡的人品，您是知道的，打败仗的事，不是早晨就在晚上。
English: As you know, it is not a matter of defeating a war in the morning, but in the evening.

古文：国家待遇淮南，失之同于蒿箭。
现代文：国家对待淮南，有如将蓬蒿当箭，失去它并不可惜。
English: The state treats Huainan as if it were an arrow, and it is not a pity to lose it.

古文：如文宗计者，不过专委王琳，招募淮南三四万人，风俗相通，能得死力；兼令旧将将兵屯于淮北，足以固守。
现代文：按照我的想法，不如专门委派王琳，到淮南去招募三四万人，因为风俗习惯相通，能够出力卖命；同时派以前的将领带兵驻屯在淮北。
English: According to my idea, it would be better to specially appoint Wang Lin to go to Huainan to recruit 30,000 to 40,000 people, because the customs and habits are the same, and they can work hard; at the same time, the former generals and soldiers should be stationed in Huaibei.

古文：且琳之于顼，必不肯北面事之，明矣。
现代文：况且王琳对陈顼，一定不肯俯伏称臣，这是很清楚的。
English: Moreover, it is clear that Wang Lin will not bow down to Chen Qi.

古文：窃谓此计之上者。
现代文：我以为这是最好的计策。
English: I thought it was the best thing to do.

古文：若不推赤心于琳，更遣余人制肘，复成速祸，弥不可为。 
现代文：如果不对王琳推心置腹，还派别人去对他予以牵制，反会酿成祸患，更不能这样做。 
English: If you don't put your heart and soul into Wang Lin, and if you send someone else to restrain him, it will lead to disaster, and you can't do that.

古文：彦深叹曰： 弟此策诚足制胜千里，但口舌争之十日，已不见从。
现代文：赵彦深长叹说： 老弟的计策确实能取胜于千里之外，但是争论了十天，已经不被采纳。
English: Zhao Yanshen said with a long sigh: My brother's strategy can indeed win over thousands of miles away, but after ten days of debate, it has not been adopted.

古文：时事至此，安可尽言！ 
现代文：时局到了这种地步，没有什么可说了！ 
English: It's come to this, there's nothing left to say!

古文：因相顾流涕。
现代文：两人相视流泪。
English: As a result, the two looked at each other and burst into tears.

古文：文宗名彪，以字行，子恭之子也。
现代文：源文宗名彪，以字行于世，是源子恭的儿子。
English: Minamoto no Munzuna was the son of Minamoto no Tsugaru. He was famous for his calligraphy and was the son of Minamoto no Tsugaru.

古文：文宗子师为左外兵郎中，摄祠部，尝白高阿那肱： 龙见当雩。 
现代文：源文宗的儿子源师是左外兵郎中，主管祠部，曾经告诉高阿那肱： 龙出现了，应当举行求雨的雩祭。 
English: The son of Yuan Wensong, Yuan Shih, who was the head of the ancestral hall, once told Gao Ananzhong: A dragon has appeared, and a rain-seeking festival should be held.

古文：阿那肱惊曰： 何处龙见？
现代文：高阿那胧惊问： 什么地方有龙出现？
English: Gao Ananyi asked in surprise: Where do dragons appear?

古文：其色如何？ 
现代文：它的颜色怎样？ 
English: What is its color?

古文：师曰： 龙星初见，礼当雩祭，非真龙也。 
现代文：源师说： 是龙星刚出现，按礼应当举行求雨的雩祭，并不是真龙出现。 
English: Yuan Shi said: It is the dragon star that has just appeared, according to the ritual, the rain-seeking burnt offering should be held, and it is not the real dragon that has appeared.

古文：阿那肱怒曰： 汉儿多事，强知星宿！ 
现代文：高阿那肱发怒说： 汉儿多事，硬充懂得天上星宿的变化！ 
English: Gao Ananyuan said angrily, "Han Er is a man of many affairs, but he knows the changes of the stars in the sky!

古文：遂不祭。
现代文：不举行祭祀。
English: No religious services will be held.

古文：师出。窃叹曰： 礼既废矣，齐能久乎！ 
现代文：源师出来，私自感叹说： 礼仪都废除了，齐朝能长久吗！ 
English: When Genji came out, I sighed and said: The etiquette has been abolished, can Qi Dynasty last long?

古文：齐师选长大有膂力者为前队，又有苍头、犀角、大力，其锋甚锐，又有西域胡，善射，弦无虚发，众军尤惮之。
现代文：北齐军队挑选身材高大四肢有力的兵士做前队，又有苍头、犀角、大力等队，战斗力量都很锐利，还有西域地方的胡兵，善于射箭，弦无虚发，其他军队特别怕他们。
English: The Beiqi army selected soldiers with tall stature and powerful limbs to be the vanguard, and there were teams such as Cangzhou, Rhinoceros, and vigorous, all of which were sharp in combat strength. There were also Hu soldiers from the Western Regions, who were good at archery and had perfect hair. Other armies were particularly afraid of them.

古文：辛酉，战于吕梁。
现代文：辛酉，在吕梁进行战斗。
English: Xin Xin, fighting in Luliang.

古文：将战，吴明彻谓巴山太守萧摩诃曰： 若殪此胡，则彼军夺气，君才不减关羽矣。 
现代文：战斗开始前，吴明彻对巴山太守萧摩诃说： 如果消灭了这些胡兵，那么对方军队的气焰就被打掉，您的才能就不在关羽以下了。 
English: Before the battle began, Wu Mingcher said to Xiao Maqun, the governor of Bashan: If you eliminate these Hu soldiers, then the pride of the opposing army will be knocked out, and your talent will be no less than that of Guan Yu.

古文：摩诃曰： 愿示其状，当为公取之。 
现代文：萧摩诃说： 希望能告诉我胡兵的样子，一定替您消灭他们。 
English: Xiao Mazu said, "I hope you can tell me what Hu soldiers look like, and I will definitely eliminate them for you."

古文：明彻乃召降人有识胡者，使指示之，自酌酒以饮摩诃。
现代文：吴明彻便召来投降者中能识别胡兵的，叫他向萧摩诃指点，还亲自斟酒给萧摩诃。
English: Wu Mingcher then summoned someone from among the surrenderers who could identify the Hu soldiers, and asked him to point out to Xiao Maojun. He also personally poured wine for Xiao Maojun.

古文：摩诃饮毕，驰马冲齐军。
现代文：萧摩诃饮完酒，驰马向北齐军队冲去。
English: After drinking wine, Xiao Maqi rode his horse and rushed towards the Beiqi army.

古文：胡挺身出陈前十余步，彀弓未发，摩诃遥掷铣鋧，正中其额，应手而仆。
现代文：胡兵挺身突出阵前十几步路，引满弓弩还没有来得及射箭，萧摩诃远远地向他们投掷铁制的小凿子，正打中他们的额头，应手跌倒在地。
English: Hu soldiers stood up and advanced more than a dozen paces ahead of the formation. When they were full of bows and arrows, they did not have time to shoot arrows. Xiao Miao threw a small iron chisel at them from a distance. It hit their foreheads and they fell to the ground.

古文：齐军大力十余人出战，摩诃又斩之。
现代文：北齐军队中的大力队十几人出阵应战，又被萧摩诃斩杀。
English: More than a dozen members of the Northern Qi army's powerful force came out to fight, and were slaughtered by Xiao Maqi.

古文：于是齐军大败，尉破胡走，长孙洪略战死。
现代文：于是北齐的军队大败，尉破胡逃走，长孙洪略战死。
English: As a result, the Northern Qi army suffered a crushing defeat, with the general defecting and fleeing, and the eldest son Hong Liu dying in battle.

古文：破胡之出师也，齐人使侍中王琳与之俱。
现代文：尉破胡出师时，北齐派侍中王琳和他一齐去。
English: When the lieutenant broke Hu out of the division, the Northern Qi sent the attendant Wang Lin to go with him.

古文：琳谓破胡曰： 吴兵甚锐，宜以长策制之，慎勿轻斗！ 
现代文：王琳对尉破胡说： 吴明彻的士兵很厉害，应该用长远的计策去制服他们，小心谨慎不要轻易和对方战斗！ 
English: Wang Lin said to the lieutenant: Wu Mingche's soldiers are very powerful, we should use long-term strategies to subdue them, and be careful not to fight with the other side easily!

古文：破胡不从而败，琳单骑仅免，还，至彭城，齐人即使之赴寿阳召募以拒陈师，复以卢潜为扬州道行台尚书。
现代文：只有王琳一个人单骑逃脱。他回到了彭城，北齐立即派他去寿阳召募兵士以抵抗陈朝的军队，又任命卢潜为扬州道行台尚书。
English: He returned to Pengcheng, and Beiqi immediately sent him to Shouyang to recruit soldiers to resist the army of the Chen Dynasty, and appointed Lu Qian as Yangzhou Daogang Tai Shangshu.

古文：甲子，南谯太守徐槾克石粱城。
现代文：甲子，南谯太守徐攻克石梁城。
English: Gao Zi, the Southern Wei grand marshal Xu conquered Shiliang City.

古文：五月，己巳，瓦梁城降。
现代文：五月，己巳，瓦梁城向陈朝投降。
English: In May, Wariangcheng surrendered to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：癸酉，阳平郡降。
现代文：癸酉，阳平郡投降。
English: , Yangping County surrendered.

古文：甲戌，徐槾克庐江城。
现代文：甲戌，徐攻克庐江城。
English: Armor-piercing, assaulting the Lijiang River City.

古文：历阳窘蹙乞降，黄法缓之，则又拒守。
现代文：历阳城处境窘迫乞求向陈朝投降，黄法氍减缓了攻势，历阳却又拒守。
English: Liyang City was in a difficult situation and begged to surrender to the Chen Dynasty. Huang Fahui slowed down the offensive, but Liyang refused to defend itself.

古文：法怒，帅卒急攻，丙子，克之，尽杀戍卒。
现代文：黄法氍大怒，率领士兵加紧进攻，丙子，攻克历阳城，将守城的士兵全部杀死。
English: Huang Fazhao was enraged and led the soldiers to step up the attack, while Bing Zi attacked Liyang City and killed all the soldiers guarding the city.

古文：进军合肥，合肥朔旗请降，法禁侵掠，抚劳戍卒，与之盟而纵之。
现代文：于是向合肥进军，合肥见到陈朝的军旗便请求投降，黄法氍禁止部下对合肥骚扰抢劫，对守城的士兵加以安抚慰劳，同他们盟誓后便放他们回去。
English: Therefore, they marched to Hefei. When Hefei saw the military flag of the Chen Dynasty, it requested to surrender. Huang Fahui forbade his subordinates from harassing and robbing Hefei, comforted and consoled the soldiers guarding the city, swore an oath with them, and then let them go back.

古文：丁丑，周以柱国侯莫陈琼为大宗伯，荥阳公司马消难为大司寇，江陵总管陆腾为大司空。
现代文：丁丑，北周任命柱国侯莫陈琼为大宗伯，荥阳公司马消难为大司寇，江陵总管陆腾为大司空。
English: Ding Yuxi, the Northern Zhou Dynasty appointed Zhu Guohou Mo Chen Qiong as the Grand Patriarch, Ma Xidan of the Shenyang Company as the Grand Patriarch, and Lu Teng, the General Manager of Jiangling, as the Grand Patriarch.

古文：琼，崇之弟也。
现代文：侯莫陈琼是侯莫陈崇的弟弟。
English: Hou Mo Chen Qiong is the younger brother of Hou Mo Chen Chong.

古文：己卯，齐北高唐郡降。
现代文：己卯，北齐的北高唐郡向陈朝投降。
English: At the same time, North Gaotang County in North Qi surrendered to the Chen Dynasty.

古文：辛巳，诏南豫州刺史黄法徒镇历阳。
现代文：辛巳，陈宣帝诏令南豫州刺史黄法氍移镇历阳。
English: Soon after, Chen Xuandi issued an edict to the south of Henan Province to expel Huang Fa from the town of Liyang.

古文：乙酉，南齐昌太守黄咏克齐昌外城。
现代文：乙酉，南齐昌太守黄咏攻克齐昌的外城。
English: On the second day of the second month of the year, Huang Qi, the governor of South Qichang, invaded the outer city of Qichang.

古文：丙戌，庐陵内史任忠军于东关，克其东、西二城，进克蕲城；戊子，又克谯郡城。
现代文：丙戌，庐陵内史任忠率领军队到东关，攻克东关的东西二城，进而攻克蕲城；戊子，又攻克谯郡城。
English: In Buryatia, Buryat historian Ren Zhong led the army to Dongguan, conquered the eastern and western two cities of Dongguan, and then conquered Yucheng; Wuzi, and conquered Yucheng County.

古文：秦州城降。
现代文：秦州城投降。
English: Qinzhou surrendered.

古文：癸巳，瓜步、胡墅二城降。
现代文：癸巳，瓜步、胡墅二城投降。
English: On the following day, Guapu and Huzhu surrendered.

古文：帝以秦郡，吴明彻之乡里，诏具太牢，令拜祠上冢，文武羽仪甚盛，乡人荣之。
现代文：陈宣帝因为秦郡是吴明彻的故乡，下诏当地准备了用作祭祀的猪、牛、羊等牺牲，叫地方官到吴明彻的家祠和祖坟祭拜，文武仪仗中用鸟羽装饰的旌旗很多，乡人感到很光荣。
English: Because Qin County is Wu Mingche's hometown, Emperor Chen Xuandi issued an edict to prepare pigs, cattle, sheep and other sacrifices to be used as sacrifices, and asked local officials to go to Wu Mingche's family shrine and ancestral tomb to worship. There are many banners decorated with bird feathers in the literary and martial arts ceremonial battle, and the villagers feel very proud.

古文：齐自和士开用事以来，政体隳紊。
现代文：北齐从和士开掌权以来，朝政体制毁坏紊乱。
English: Since North Qi took power from Shikai, the dynasty's political system has been in disarray.

古文：及祖珽执政，颇收举才望，内外称美。
现代文：到祖执政时，颇能收罗荐举有才能声望的人，得到内外的美誉。
English: When his ancestor was in power, he was quite able to recruit and recommend talented and prestigious people, gaining a good reputation at home and abroad.

古文：珽复欲增损政务，沙汰人物，官号服章，并依故事。
现代文：祖还准备调整政务，筛选淘汰官崐员，官号以及标志官吏身份品级的服饰，仍然照旧。
English: Zou is also preparing to adjust government affairs, screening out officials and officials, official titles and clothing that mark the status of officials are still the same.

古文：又欲黜诸阉竖及群小辈，为政治之方，陆令萱、穆提婆议颇同异。
现代文：又打算罢免宫中的太监和小人之流，作为治理朝政的大纲，陆令萱、穆提婆的议论和祖不一。
English: He also planned to dismiss the eunuchs and lesser people in the palace. As an outline for governing the court, Lu Lingyao and Muti were not the same as the ancestors.

古文：珽乃讽御史中丞丽伯律，令劾主书王子冲纳赂。
现代文：祖便向御史中丞丽伯律暗示，叫他弹劾主书王子冲接受贿赂。
English: Zu then hinted to Mishi Chujo Reberu that he should impeach the chief scribe, Oishi Chong, for accepting bribes.

古文：知其事连提婆，欲使赃罪相及，望因此并坐及令萱。
现代文：因为知道这件事涉及穆提婆，想把他和贪赃罪联系起来，并希望因此使陆令萱连坐。
English: Because they knew that the matter involved Mutiwa, they wanted to link him to the crime of corruption, and they hoped that this would make Lu Rongjian sit with them.

古文：犹恐齐主溺于近习，欲引后党为援，乃请以胡后兄君瑜为侍中、中领军；又征君瑜兄梁州刺史君璧，欲以为御史中丞。
现代文：他还担心君主沉溺于亲近的人之中，所以想引揽后党作为自己的后援，便请齐后主任命胡后的哥哥胡君瑜为侍中、中领军；又征聘胡君瑜的哥哥梁州刺史胡君璧，想任命他为御史中丞。
English: He was also worried that the monarch would indulge in people close to him, so he wanted to recruit Hou Party as his backup, so he asked Qi Hou Lord to appoint Hu Hou's brother Hu Junyu as an attendant and leader; he also recruited Hu Junyu's brother Liang Zhou Zhishi Hu Junbi, and wanted to appoint him as an assistant secretary.

古文：令萱闻而怀怒，百方排毁，出君瑜为金紫光禄大夫，解中领军；君璧还镇梁州。
现代文：陆令萱听到这些事后心中恼怒，千方百计加以反对诋毁，把胡君瑜调出为金紫光禄大夫，解除中领军的职务；胡君璧回梁州当刺史。
English: After hearing these things, Lu Lingya felt angry and tried his best to oppose the slander. He transferred Hu Junyu to be the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu and removed him from the position of the leader of the central army; Hu Junbi returned to Liangzhou to make history.

古文：胡后之废，颇亦由此。
现代文：后来胡后被废，也主要由于这个原因。
English: Later, the huo was abolished, also mainly for this reason.

古文：释王子冲不问。
现代文：释放王子冲没有问罪。
English: Prince Chon was released without charge.

古文：珽日以益疏，诸宦者更共谮之。
现代文：祖珽日益被疏远，那些太监都一起说他的坏话。
English: Zu Xi became more and more estranged, and the eunuchs all spoke ill of him together.

古文：帝以问陆令萱，令萱悯默不对，三问，乃下床拜曰： 老婢应死。
现代文：后主向陆令萱询问，陆令萱忧愁地默不作答，连问三次，才下床向后主叩拜说： 我这个老婢该死。
English: Afterward, the lord inquired of Lu Lingyao. Lu Lingyao sorrowfully remained silent and did not answer. He asked three times in a row before getting out of bed and bowing to the lord, saying, "This old maid of mine deserves to die."

古文：老婢始闻和士开言孝征多才博学，意谓善人，故举之。
现代文：老婢起初听和士开说祖博学多才，认为他是个好人，所以才荐举他。
English: At first, the old maid heard from the priest that the ancestor was knowledgeable and multi-talented, and thought that he was a good man, so she recommended him.

古文：比来观之，大是奸臣。
现代文：近来看他，十足是个奸臣。
English: Looking at him recently, he's quite the backstabber.

古文：人实难知，老婢应死。 
现代文：人的实情难以深知，老婢该死。 
English: It is difficult to know the true condition of a person, and a maid deserves to die.

古文：帝令韩长鸾检按。
现代文：后主命令韩长鸾调查核实情况。
English: Afterward, the principal ordered Han Changtao to investigate and verify the situation.

古文：长鸾素恶珽，得其诈出敕受赐等十余事。
现代文：韩长鸾素来就讨厌祖，查出他伪作敕令骗取赏赐等十几件事。
English: Han Changyu has always disliked Zu, and has found out more than a dozen things about him, such as him forging imperial edicts to obtain rewards.

古文：帝以尝与之重誓，故不杀，解珽侍中、仆射，出为北徐州刺史。
现代文：后主因为曾经和祖立下重誓，所以没有杀他，只解除祖侍中、仆射的官职，派出任北徐州刺史。
English: Because he had made a solemn oath with his ancestor, he did not kill him, but only removed the official posts of the ancestor's attendants and servants, and sent them to the north of Xuzhou to assassinate him.

古文：珽求见帝，长鸾不许，遣人推出柏阁，珽坐，不肯行，长鸾令牵曳而出。
现代文：祖求见后主，韩长鸾不准，派人将他推出柏阁。祖坐在地上，不肯走，韩长鸾叫人把祖拉出去。
English: Han Changtao did not allow Zu to see his master, so he sent someone to push him out of the pavilion. Zu sat on the ground, refusing to leave, and Han Changtao called for someone to pull Zu out.

古文：癸巳，齐以领军穆提婆为尚书左仆射，侍中、中书监段孝言为右仆射。
现代文：癸巳，北齐任命领军穆提婆为尚书左仆射，侍中、中书监段孝言为右仆射。
English: At the same time, the Northern Qi appointed the leader of the army, Mutibah, as the left-hand servant of Shangshu, and the middle-ranking attendant and the middle-ranking supervisor, Duan Xiaogan, as the right-hand servant of Shangshu.

古文：孝言，韶之弟也。
现代文：段孝言是段韶的弟弟。
English: Duan Xiaojin is Duan Yao's younger brother.

古文：初，祖珽执政，引孝言为助，除吏部尚书。
现代文：当初，祖执政，引荐段孝言当助手，任命为吏部尚书。
English: At the beginning, when Zu was in power, he recommended Duan Xiaoyan as an assistant and appointed him as the secretary of the personnel department.

古文：孝言凡所进擢，非贿则旧，求仕者或于广会膝行跪伏，公自陈请，孝言气色扬扬，以为己任，随事酬许。
现代文：段孝言所任用提拔的人，不是对他进行贿赂的人就是他的故旧，求官的人或者在大庭广众的场合对段孝言膝行跪拜匍伏，公开向他陈述请求，段孝言脸色洋洋得意，把这当做自己的责任，看情况应酬许诺。
English: The person who was appointed and promoted by Duan Xiaojin was either a bribe-taker or an old-timer, and the person who was looking for a position or who publicly made a request to Duan Xiaojin by kneeling and bowing in front of him in public. Duan Xiaojin was very pleased with this and took it as his own responsibility. He promised to reward him according to the situation.

古文：将作丞崔成忽于众中抗言曰： 尚书，天下尚书，岂独段家尚书也！ 
现代文：将作丞崔成忽然在众人中高声说： 尚书，是天下的尚书，难道是段家的尚书！ 
English: Choi Seong-jong, who will be the composer, suddenly said in a loud voice among the crowd: Shangshu, is the world's Shangshu, is it Duan family's Shangshu!

古文：孝言无辞以应，唯厉色遣下而已。
现代文：段孝言无辞以对，只能沉着脸叫他下去而已。
English: Duan Xiao's words were right, he could only calmly tell him to go.

古文：既而与韩长鸾等共构祖珽，逐而代之。
现代文：不久以后段孝言和韩长鸾一起排斥祖，逐出祖由自己取代。
English: Soon after, Duan Xiaogan and Han Changtao ousted Zu together and replaced Zu with themselves.

古文：齐兰陵武王长恭，貌美而勇，以邙山之捷，威名大盛，武士歌之，为《兰陵王入陈曲》，齐主忌之。
现代文：北齐兰陵武王高长恭，容貌漂亮而且勇敢，因为邙山一仗的胜利，威名大振，武士们讴歌他，作《兰陵王入阵曲》，北齐后主因此对他产生妒忌。
English: Northern Qi Lanling Wudang Gao Chang Gong, handsome and brave, because of the victory in the Battle of Lushan, the prestige was great, the warriors sang him, made "Lanling King's Entry into the Battle," and the Queen of Northern Qi was jealous of him.

古文：及代段韶督诸军攻定阳，颇务聚敛，其所亲尉相愿问之曰： 王受朝寄，何得如此？ 
现代文：等到高长恭代替段韶督率军队进攻定阳，却聚敛财物，他的亲信尉相愿问他道： 大王受朝廷的重托，怎能这样？ 
English: When Gao Changxiong led the army to attack Dingyang in place of Duan Xi, but he had accumulated wealth, his trusted lieutenants wanted to ask him, "How can the great king do this with the heavy entrustment of the court?"

古文：长恭未应。
现代文：高长恭没有回答。
English: Gao Changgyong did not answer.

古文：相愿曰： 岂非以邙山之捷，欲自秽乎？ 
现代文：尉相愿说： 岂不是以邙山的大捷，给自己抹黑吗？ 
English: The lieutenant said, "Wouldn't it be better to take advantage of Lushan's great victory to discredit yourself?

古文：长恭曰： 然。 
现代文：高长恭说： 是这样。 
English: And he said, So be it.

古文：相愿曰： 朝廷若忌王，即当用此为罪，无乃避祸而更速之乎！ 
现代文：尉相愿说： 朝廷如果忌恨你，就会有这件事给你定罪名，这不是躲避灾祸而是招来灾祸！ 
English: The lieutenant said, "If the imperial court abhors you, there will be this matter to convict you. This is not to avoid disaster, but to invite disaster!"

古文：长恭涕泣前膝问计，相愿曰： 王前既有功，今复告捷，声威太重。
现代文：高长恭哭着俯身向他问计，尉相愿说： 王以前既然有功劳，这次打仗又得到胜利，威名太重。
English: Gao Changxiong, weeping, bent down to ask him for advice. The lieutenant said to him, "Since the king has meritorious deeds in the past, and this time he won the battle, his reputation is too great.

古文：宜属疾在家，勿预时事。 
现代文：最好假托有病在家，不要参与现时的事情。 
English: It's best to stay home if you're sick and not get involved in current events.

古文：长恭然其言，未能退。
现代文：高长恭同意他的话，但是没有能隐退。
English: Chang Qiong thought that what he said was right, but he did not back down.

古文：及江、淮用兵，恐复为将，叹曰： 我去年面肿，今何不发！ 
现代文：等到江、淮用兵，恐怕再次被任命将军，叹息说： 我去年脸上长痈，现在为什么不发出来！ 
English: Waiting for Jiang and Huai to use soldiers, I am afraid that I will be appointed as a general again, sighing and saying: I had a mole on my face last year, why not send it out now!

古文：自是有疾不疗。
现代文：从此有了病不肯医治。
English: From then on, there was no treatment for illness.

古文：齐主遣使鸩杀之。
现代文：北齐后主派使者送去毒酒将他害死。
English: After the Northern Qi, the master sent an emissary to bring poisoned wine to kill him.

古文：六月，郢州刺史李综克滠口城。
现代文：六月，陈朝的郢州刺史李综攻克滠口城。
English: In June, Li Zongshi of the Chen Dynasty conquered the city of Hukou.

古文：乙巳，任忠克合州外城。
现代文：乙巳，任忠攻克合州的外城。
English: On the second day, Ren Zhong attacked the outlying city of Kehezhou.

古文：庚戌，淮阳，沐阳郡并弃城走。
现代文：庚戌，淮阳、沭阳郡郡守都弃城逃走。
English: Geng Yao, Huai Yang, and the county governor of Puyang County all abandoned the city and fled.

古文：壬子，周皇孙衍生。
现代文：壬子，北周的皇孙宇文衍出生。
English: Emperor Jinshi, the grandson of Northern Zhou, was born.

古文：齐主游南苑，从官赐死者六十人。以高阿那肱为司徒。
现代文：北齐后主到南苑游玩，对六十个随从官员赐死。任命高阿那肱为司徒。
English: The empress dowager of Northern Qi visited Southern Yuan, put to death sixty officials who followed her, and appointed Gao Ananyu as her tutor.

古文：癸丑，程文季攻齐泾州，拔之。
现代文：癸丑，陈朝的程文季进攻北齐的泾州，将它攻克。
English: Cheng Wenzhi of the Chen Dynasty attacked Zhangzhou of the Northern Qi and conquered it.

古文：乙卯，宣毅司马湛陀克新蔡城。
现代文：乙卯，宣毅司马湛陀攻克新蔡城。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month, Xuan Yi, Sima Zhanqi and others conquered Xin Cai City.

古文：丙辰，齐使开府仪同三司王纮聘于周。
现代文：丙辰，北齐派开府仪同三司王到北周聘问。
English: Binchen, Beiqi sent Kaifu Yi and Sanshi Wang to North Zhou for an interview.

古文：癸亥，黄法克合州。
现代文：癸亥，陈朝黄法氍攻克合州。
English: Han Hai, Chen Dynasty and Huang Fa's invasion of Gaozhou.

古文：吴明彻进攻仁州，甲子，克之。
现代文：吴明彻进攻仁州，甲子，将它攻克。
English: Wu Mingcher attacked Renzhou, Jiazi, and conquered it.

古文：治明堂。
现代文：陈朝治理明堂。
English: The Ming Dynasty was ruled by the Chen Dynasty.

古文：秋，七月，戊辰，齐遣尚书左丞陆骞将兵二万救齐昌，出自巴、蕲，遇西阳太守汝南周炅。
现代文：秋季七月，戊辰，北齐派尚书左丞陆骞领兵二万救援齐昌，从巴水、蕲水之间出兵，和陈朝的西阳太守汝南周炅遭遇。
English: In the autumn of July, in Wucheng, North Qi dispatched Shang Shuzhu Zu Rong Lu to lead 20,000 soldiers to rescue Qichang, and sent troops from Bashui to Surabaya, and encountered the Xiyang Daju of the Chen Dynasty, Runan Zhouqi.

古文：炅留羸弱，设疑兵以当之，身帅精锐，由间道邀其后，大破之。
现代文：周炅留下身体瘦弱的士兵，设疑兵抵挡北齐军队，自己率领精锐的士兵，从小路阻击敌军背后，大败北齐军队。
English: Zhou Yu left soldiers who were physically weak, set up suspicious soldiers to resist the North Qi army, and led elite soldiers himself to block the enemy army from the back of the road, and defeated the North Qi army.

古文：己巳，征北大将军吴明彻军至峡口，克其北岸城；南岸守者弃城走。
现代文：己巳，征北大将军吴明彻的军队到达峡口，攻克峡口这个淮水北岸的城池；防守南岸的人弃城逃走。
English: At that moment, the army of General Wu Mingcher, the general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, arrived at the mouth of the gorge and conquered the mouth of the gorge, the city on the north bank of Huai Shui; the people defending the south bank abandoned the city and fled.

古文：周炅克巴州。
现代文：周炅攻克巴州。
English: Zhou Yu invaded Kepa Prefecture.

古文：淮北、绛城及穀阳士民，并杀其戍主，以城降。
现代文：淮北、绛城和谷阳的士民，各自杀死驻防军队的长官，献城投降。
English: The citizens of Huaibei, Lucheng and Guiyang each killed the commander of the garrison army and surrendered the city.

古文：齐巴陵王王琳与扬州刺史王贵显保寿阳外郭，吴明彻以琳初入，众心未固，丙戌，乘夜攻之，城溃，齐兵退据相国城及金城。
现代文：北齐巴陵王王琳和扬州刺史王贵显守卫寿阳的外城，吴明彻认为王琳初到这里，人心还不稳定，丙戌，乘夜晚攻城，城中溃散。北齐军队退守相国城和金城。
English: Wang Lin, the king of Northern Qi, and Wang Guixian, the king of Yangzhou Jishi, guarded the outer city of Shouyang. Wu Mingcher thought that Wang Lin had just arrived here, and people's hearts were still unstable. He took advantage of the night to attack the city, and the city was dispersed. The Northern Qi army retreated to protect the city of Shou Guo and Jincheng.

古文：八月，乙未，山阳城降。
现代文：八月，乙未，北齐的山阳城投降。
English: In August of the same year, Sanyang City in North Qi surrendered.

古文：壬寅，盱眙城降，壬子，戎昭将军徐敬辩克海安城。
现代文：壬寅，盱眙城投降。壬子，陈朝的戎昭将军徐敬辩攻克海安城。
English: In Renin, Lucheng surrendered. In Renzi, the Chen Dynasty's General Xu Jingwei defeated Hai'an City.

古文：青州东海城降。
现代文：青州的东海城投降。
English: Give up your career and surrender.

古文：戊午，平固侯敬泰等克晋州。
现代文：戊午，平固侯敬泰等攻克晋州。
English: In the afternoon, Pinggu Hou Jingtai and others conquered Jinzhou.

古文：九月，甲子，阳平城降。
现代文：九月，甲子，阳平城投降。
English: In September, Kozu and Yangpyeong surrendered.

古文：壬申，高阳太守沈善庆克马头城。
现代文：壬申，高阳太守沈善庆攻克马头城。
English: In Jinshin, Gaoyang governor Shen Zhanqing conquered the city of Ma Tou.

古文：甲戌，齐安城降。
现代文：甲戌，齐安城投降。
English: On Armistice Day, Qi'an surrendered.

古文：丙子，左卫将军樊毅克广陵楚子城。
现代文：丙子，陈朝的左卫将军樊毅攻克广陵楚子城。
English: On the third day of the third month, the left guard general Zou Yi conquered the Chu Zi city of Guangling.

古文：壬午，周太子赟纳妃杨氏。
现代文：壬午，北周太子宇文纳杨氏为妃。
English: At that time, she was the wife of the Northern Zhou Prince Uvena Yang.

古文：妃，大将军随公坚之女也。
现代文：杨妃是大将军随公杨坚的女儿。
English: Yangfei is the daughter of the general Yang Jian.

古文：太子好昵近小人，左宫正宇文孝伯言于周主曰： 皇太子四海所属，而德声未闻。臣忝宫官，实当其责。
现代文：太子喜欢和小人亲昵接近，左宫正宇文孝伯对北周国主武帝说： 皇太子受到天下的注目，但没有听到他品德的名声，臣有愧于担任宫官，实在应该由臣负责。
English: The crown prince likes to be close to the little people, and the left palace, Zhengyu Wenxiao, said to the northern Zhou sovereign, Emperor Wu: The crown prince has received worldwide attention, but he has not heard the reputation of his character. The vassal is not worthy of serving as a palace official, and the vassal should really be responsible.

古文：且春秋尚少，志业未成，请妙选正人，为其师友，调护圣质，犹望日就月将。
现代文：况且皇太子年纪还小，志向和学业还不成熟，请陛下精选正派人，作为他的良师益友，调理培养皇太子的素质，希望他每天每月有所进步。
English: Moreover, the Crown Prince is still young, and his aspirations and studies are still immature. I would like to ask His Majesty to select a decent person as his good teacher and friend, to adjust and cultivate the qualities of the Crown Prince, and hope that he will make progress every day and every month.

古文：如或不然，悔无及矣！ 
现代文：如果不这样，后悔就来不及了。 
English: If not, it will be too late to regret.

古文：帝敛容曰： 卿世载鲠直，竭诚所事。
现代文：武帝正容肃然起敬说： 你世代为人鲠直，忠于职崐守。
English: Emperor Wu Zheng Rong stood up in awe and said: Your generation is upright and loyal to duty.

古文：观卿此言，有家风矣。 
现代文：听到你这番话，可见你的家风。 
English: When I hear you say that, I can see your family's style.

古文：孝伯拜谢曰： 非言之难，受之难也。 
现代文：宇文孝伯拜谢说： 说这话并不难，难在接受这番话。 
English: Uwen Xiaobai Xie said, "It's not hard to say this, but it's hard to accept.

古文：帝曰： 正人岂复过卿！ 
现代文：武帝说： 正派人哪有超过你的！ 
English: Emperor Wu said: There is no more righteous person than you!

古文：于是以尉迟运为右宫正。
现代文：于是任命尉迟运为右宫正。
English: As a result, he appointed 尉迟运 to the position of the right palace chief.

古文：运，迥之弟子也。
现代文：尉迟运是尉迟迥的侄儿。
English: Fei Chi Yun is Fei Chi Yu's nephew.

古文：帝尝问万年县丞南阳乐运曰： 卿言太子何如人？ 
现代文：武帝曾经问万年县丞南阳人乐运说： 你说皇太子是怎样一种人？ 
English: Emperor Wu once asked the County Governor of Nanyang, Le Yue, "What kind of person is the crown prince?"

古文：对曰： 中人。 
现代文：乐运答道： 是中等人。 
English: Le Yun replied: He is an average person.

古文：帝顾谓齐公宪曰； 百官佞我，皆称太子聪明睿智。
现代文：武帝回头对齐公宇文宪说： 百官花言巧语谄媚我，都说皇太子聪明有特殊的才智。
English: Emperor Wu turned his head to look at Gongwu Wenxian and said, "All the officials are flattering me. They all say that the crown prince is clever and has special talent.

古文：唯运所言忠直耳。 
现代文：只有乐运的话忠诚坦率。 
English: Only if you are lucky will you be loyal and honest.

古文：因问运中人之状。
现代文：并向乐运询问中等人的样子。
English: He also asked LeYun what an average person looks like.

古文：对曰： 如齐桓公是也：管仲相之则霸，竖貂辅之则乱，可与为善，可与为恶。 
现代文：乐运答道： 像齐桓公就是中等人；管仲为相就可以使他成就霸业，竖貂辅政就会使国家混乱；可以使他为善，也可以使他为恶。 
English: Le Yun replied: Like Lord Qi Huan, he is a middle-ranking person; if he manages to mediate, he can achieve hegemony; if he instigates and supports the government, the country will be in chaos; he can be good or evil.

古文：帝曰： 我知之矣。 
现代文：武帝说： 我明白了。 
English: Emperor Wu said: I understand.

古文：乃妙选宫官以辅之。仍擢运为京兆丞。
现代文：于是精选宫官辅助皇太子，提拔乐运当京兆丞。
English: As a result, palace officials were handpicked to assist the crown prince, and Le Yun was promoted to the post of Keizhojo.

古文：太子闻之，意甚不悦。
现代文：皇太子听说后，心里很不高兴。
English: When the crown prince heard about this, he was very upset.

古文：癸未，沈君理卒。
现代文：癸未，陈朝的沈君理去世。
English: Recently, Chen Dynasty's Shen Junli passed away.

古文：壬辰晦，前鄱阳内史鲁天念克黄城。
现代文：壬辰晦，前鄱阳内史鲁天念攻克黄城。
English: At the end of the Ming Dynasty, Shulu Tiannian, a former warlord of Yanyang, conquered Huangcheng.

古文：冬，十月，甲午，郭默城降。
现代文：冬季，十月，甲午，郭默城投降。
English: In the winter, in October, in the afternoon of the 1st, Guo Mucheng surrendered.

古文：己亥，以特进领国子祭酒周弘正为尚书右仆射。
现代文：己亥，陈朝任命特进领国子祭酒周弘正为尚书右仆射。
English: Ji Hai, the Chen Dynasty appointed a special envoy to lead the National Children's Festival, and Zhou Hongzheng became his right-hand man.

古文：齐国子祭酒张雕，以经授齐主为侍读，帝甚重之。
现代文：北齐国子祭酒张雕，教授北齐后主经书任侍读，后主对他很器重。
English: Northern Qi Guozhi Festival wine Zhang Zhao, professor of Northern Qi, served as the chief scribe, and the chief was very respectful to him.

古文：雕与宠胡何洪珍相结，穆提婆、韩长鸾等恶之。
现代文：张雕和得宠的胡人何洪珍相勾结，穆提婆、韩长鸾等对他很厌恶。
English: Zhang Zhi and the favored Hu person He Hongzhen colluded with each other, and Muti Bao, Han Changtao, etc. were very disgusted with him.

古文：洪珍荐雕为侍中，加开府仪同三司，奏度支事，大为帝所委信，常呼 博士 。
现代文：何洪珍推荐张雕为侍中，加开府仪同三司，向后主上书奏报国家财政收支的事情，大受后主的信任，常常叫他 博士 。
English: He Hongzhen recommended Zhang Jia as a chamberlain, adding the post of prefectural etiquette to the three departments, and writing to the empress to report the state's financial revenue and expenditure. He was greatly trusted by the empress and often called him Doctor.

古文：雕自以出于微贱，致位大臣，欲立效以报恩，论议抑扬，无所回避，省宫掖不急之费，禁约左右骄纵之臣，数讥切宠要，献替帷幄，帝亦深倚仗之。
现代文：张雕意识到自己出身低贱，做到大臣，要立功报答皇恩，对别人议论褒贬，无所顾忌，节约宫廷中不急需的开支，制止约束后主周围骄横放纵的大臣，常常规劝责备宠臣显贵，对后主议兴议革，后主也很倚仗他。
English: Zhang Zhe realized that he was from a lowly background, and that to become a minister, he had to repay the royal favor with merit, praise and criticize others without any scruples, save expenses that were not urgently needed in the court, restrain arrogant and indulgent ministers around the queen mother, often exhort and rebuke favorite dignitaries, and discuss revolution with the queen mother. The queen mother also relied on him.

古文：雕遂以澄清为己任，意气甚高，贵幸皆侧目，阴谋陷之。
现代文：张雕便把澄清朝政作为己任，意气很高，权贵和宠臣对他都很嫉恨。
English: Zhang Qiao took it as his duty to clarify the government of the dynasty. He was very spirited, and the dignitaries and favorites were very jealous of him.

古文：尚书左丞封孝琰，隆之之弟子也，与侍中崔季舒，皆为祖珽所厚。
现代文：尚书左丞封孝琰，是封隆之的侄儿，和侍中崔季舒，都受到祖的厚待。
English: Shangshu Zuojo Fong Xiaojun, Fong Longzhi's nephew, and the chambermaid Cui Jishu were treated well by the ancestor.

古文：孝琰尝谓珽曰： 公是衣冠宰相，异于馀人。 
现代文：封孝琰曾经对祖说： 您是衣冠宰相，和别人不一样。 
English: Feng Xiaojuan once said to his ancestor: You are the prime minister of clothing and crown, and you are different from others.

古文：近习闻之，大以为恨。
现代文：后主的亲信们听后，大为痛恨。
English: After hearing this, the relatives of the late lord were very angry.

古文：会齐主将如晋阳，季舒与张雕议，以为： 寿阳被围，大军出拒之，信使往还，须禀节度。
现代文：恰好北齐后主将去晋阳，崔季舒和张雕商议，认为： 寿阳被围困，派遣大军去打仗，信使往返，应该向皇上禀告调度。
English: Just after the Northern Qi Emperor was about to leave for Jinyang, Cui Jishu and Zhang Qiao had a discussion and decided that: Shouyang was besieged, a large army should be sent to fight, messengers should be sent back and forth, and the emperor should be notified of the schedule.

古文：且道路小人，或相惊恐，以为大驾向并州，畏避南寇。
现代文：况且路上的小人会互相惊恐，以为皇上去并州，是由于害怕而避开南面的敌人。
English: Moreover, the villains on the road will be terrified of each other, thinking that the emperor went to annex the state, avoiding the enemy in the south due to fear.

古文：若不启谏，恐人情骇动。 
现代文：如果不向皇上启奏劝阻，只怕人心惊慌浮动。 
English: If the Emperor is not dissuaded, people are likely to panic.

古文：遂与从驾文官连名进谏。
现代文：便和随驾的文官联名进谏。
English: He and the accompanying civil servant then went to the funeral together.

古文：时贵臣赵彦深、唐邕、段孝言等，意有异同，季舒与争，未决。
现代文：当时显贵大臣赵彦深、唐邕、段孝言等，和他的意见不一致，崔季舒和他们争辩，没有结果。
English: At that time, prominent ministers such as Zhao Yanshen, Tang Jun and Duan Xiaoyan disagreed with him, and Cui Jishu argued with them, but to no avail.

古文：长鸾遽言于帝曰： 诸汉官连名总署，声云谏幸并州，其实未必不反，宜加诛戮。 
现代文：韩长鸾突然对后主说： 那些汉人官员联名上书，声称规劝皇上驾临并州，其实未必不想造反，应当对他们加以诛杀。 
English: Han Changyu suddenly said to his heir: Those Han officials who jointly signed a letter, claiming to persuade the emperor to come and annex the state, actually did not necessarily want to rebel, and they should be killed.

古文：辛丑，齐主悉召已署名者集含章殿，斩季舒、雕、孝琰及散骑常侍刘逖、黄门侍郎裴泽、郭遵于殿庭，家属皆徙北边，妇女配奚官，幼男下蚕室，没入赀产。
现代文：辛丑，后主把那些已经签名的人全都召集到含章殿，将崔季舒、张雕、封孝琰和散骑常侍刘逖、黄门侍郎裴泽、郭遵在殿前的庭院中斩杀，他们的家属都被流放到北方边地，妇女配给管理奴隶的崐官吏为妻，男童被阉割，家财被没收。
English: Sin ugly, the queen mother gathered all those who had signed the petition to the Hall of Signatures, and killed Cui Jishu, Zhang Zhi, Feng Xiaojun, and the horseback riding attendants Liu Wei, Huangmen attendant Peize, and Guo Zun in the courtyard in front of the hall. Their families were all exiled to the northern borderlands. Women were assigned to the eunuch officials who managed slaves as wives, boys were castrated, and family wealth was confiscated.

古文：癸卯，遂如晋阳。
现代文：癸卯，后主便去晋阳。
English: Soon after, the queen mother went to Jinyang.

古文：吴明彻攻寿阳，堰肥水以灌城，城中多病肿泄，死者什六七。
现代文：陈朝吴明彻进攻寿阳，筑起围堰引肥水灌城，城里的百姓患浮肿和腹泻病的很多，死去的有十分之六七。
English: Chen Chaowu Mingche attacked Shouyang, built a cofferdam to divert manure and fill the city with water. Many people in the city suffered from edema and diarrhea, and 67 out of 10 died.

古文：齐行台右仆射琅邪皮景和等救寿阳，以尉破胡新败，怯懦不敢前，屯于淮口，敕使屡促之。
现代文：北齐行台右仆射琅邪人皮景和等援救寿阳，因为尉破胡刚打了败仗，胆怯懦弱不敢前进，将军队驻扎在淮口，北齐后主便派使者屡次去催促他进军。
English: North Qi marched to Taiwan, and his right-hand man, the evil man Pijing He, and others came to the rescue of Shouyang. Because the warlord Hu had just lost the battle and was too cowardly to advance, he stationed his army in Huaikou. After that, the lord of North Qi repeatedly sent emissaries to urge him to march.

古文：然始渡淮，众数十万，去寿阳三十里，顿军不进。
现代文：皮景和这才渡过淮河，部众有几十万人，距离寿阳还有三十里时，又驻军不敢前进。
English: Pijing and this just crossed the Huai River, there are hundreds of thousands of people, there are still thirty miles from Shouyang, and the garrison does not dare to advance.

古文：诸将皆惧，曰： 坚城未拔，大援在近，将若之何？ 
现代文：吴明彻部下的将领都很害怕，说： 坚守的城池还没有攻克，齐国增援的大部队就在附近，这怎么办？ 
English: The generals of Wu Mingche's subordinates were very afraid, saying: The fortified city has not yet been conquered, the large reinforcement force of Qi is nearby, what should we do?

古文：明彻曰： 兵贵神速，而彼结营不进，自挫其锋，吾知其不敢战，明矣。 
现代文：吴明彻说： 兵贵神速，对方扎营不敢前进，自己挫伤了锋势，我知道对方不敢作战，这已经很明白了。 
English: Wu Mingcher said: The soldiers are very fast, the other side does not dare to advance, they have injured the front, I know that the other side does not dare to fight, this is already very clear.

古文：乙巳，躬擐甲胄，四面疾攻，一鼓拔之，生擒王琳、王贵显、卢潜及扶风王可硃浑道裕、尚书左丞李騊駼送建康。
现代文：乙巳，吴明彻亲自穿戴了铠甲和头盔，指挥部队从四面发动急攻，一鼓作气攻克寿阳，活捉王琳、王贵显、卢潜和扶风王可朱浑道裕、尚书左丞李送到建康。
English: At this time, Wu Mingche personally put on armor and helmet, and the commanding troops launched a sudden attack from four sides, and defeated Shouyang with great vigor. Wang Lin, Wang Guixian, Lu Qian and Fu Feng Wang Ke Zhu Hun Daoyu and Shang Shuzao Rong Li were captured alive and sent to Jiankang.

古文：景和北遁，尽收其驼马辎重。
现代文：皮景和向北逃走，他的骆驼马匹兵器粮草等被全部缴获。
English: He fled to the north, and his camels, horses, weapons, grain and grass were all captured.

古文：琳体貌闲雅，喜怒不形于色；强记内敏，军府佐吏千数，皆能识其姓名；刑罚不滥，轻财爱士，得将卒心；虽失地流寓在鄴，齐人皆重其忠义。
现代文：王琳的体态容貌安闲文雅，喜怒不形于色；记忆力强而头脑敏捷，军府里的僚佐官吏多到上千人，王琳都知道他们的姓名；不滥施刑罚，不重钱财，爱护部下，很得将领和士兵的欢心，虽然失地留居在邺城，北齐人都很敬佩他的忠义。
English: Wang Lin's physique and appearance are calm and elegant, and he is indifferent to joy and anger; his memory is strong and his mind is quick. There are thousands of officers and officials in the military government, and Wang Lin knows their names; he does not impose excessive punishment, does not care about money, loves his subordinates, and is very popular with generals and soldiers. Although he lost his land and stayed in Lucheng, the people of North Qi all admire his loyalty.

古文：及被擒，故麾下将卒多在明彻军中，见者皆歔欷，不能仰视，争为之请命及致资给。
现代文：他被捉住以后，以前部下的将士很多在吴明彻的军队里，看到王琳都唉声叹气，不忍抬头看他，争着为他请求保全性命，并送给王琳财物。
English: After he was caught, many of his former subordinates who were in Wu Mingche's army sighed when they saw Wang Lin. They couldn't bear to look up at him, pleaded for him to save his life, and gave Wang Lin their belongings.

古文：明彻恐其为变，遣使追斩之于寿阳东二十里，哭者声如雷。
现代文：吴明彻怕他走后生变，派人追到寿阳以东二十里的地方将他杀死，听到这事的人哭声如雷。
English: Wu Mingche was afraid that he would change after he left, so he sent someone to chase him to a place twenty miles east of Shouyang to kill him. The people who heard about this cried like crazy.

古文：有一叟以酒脯来祭，哭尽哀，收其血而去。
现代文：有一个老人备了酒肉来祭奠他，放声痛哭，收敛他的血而后离去。
English: An old man prepared wine and meat in his honour, wept loudly, collected his blood and left.

古文：田夫野老，知与不知，闻者莫不流涕。
现代文：农夫和民间的老人，不论是否了解王琳，但听到后没有不哭的。
English: Farmers and old folk, whether they know Wang Lin or not, cannot help but cry after hearing her.

古文：齐穆提婆、韩长鸾闻寿阳陷，握槊不辍，曰： 本是彼物，从其取去。 
现代文：北齐穆提婆、韩长鸾听到寿阳陷落，没有停止掷骰子，说： 本来是别人的东西，随他拿走好了。 
English: When Bei Qimutihwa and Han Changyu heard that Shouyang had fallen, they didn't stop throwing dice and said, "It was someone else's stuff, let him take it."

古文：齐主闻之，颇以为忧，提婆等曰： 假使国家尽失黄河以南，犹可作一龟兹国。
现代文：北齐后主听到寿阳陷落，很感忧愁，穆提婆等却说： 假如国家把黄河以南的地方都丢掉了，还可以做一个龟兹国。
English: When the Empress Dowager of Northern Qi heard of the fall of Shouyang, she was very sad, but Muti and others said: If the country were to lose everything south of the Yellow River, it could still become a country of turtles.

古文：更可怜人生如寄，唯当行乐，何用愁为！ 
现代文：更可怜人生短暂，应当及时行乐，何必为此忧愁！ 
English: Even more pitiful, life is short, it should be enjoyed in time, why be sad about it!

古文：左右嬖臣因共赞和之，帝即大喜，酣饮鼓舞，仍使于黎阳临河筑城戍。
现代文：后主周围的宏臣都附和赞成他的意见，后主听了大喜，开怀饮酒击鼓起舞，仍旧派人到黎阳沿黄河一带筑城派军队守卫。
English: The high-ranking courtiers around the queen mother all agreed with his opinion. The queen mother was overjoyed, drank wine, played the drums and danced. She still sent people to Liyang along the Yellow River to build a city and sent an army to guard it.

古文：丁未，齐遣兵万人至颍口，樊毅击走之。
现代文：丁未，北齐派一万军队到颍口，被樊毅击退。
English: Ding Wei, Bei Qi sent ten thousand troops to Hekou, and was repulsed by Zhai Yi.

古文：辛亥，遣兵援苍陵，又破之。
现代文：辛亥，派兵援救苍陵，又被打败。
English: Xinhai sent troops to rescue Goryo, but was defeated again.

古文：齐主以皮景和全军而还，赏之，除尚书令。
现代文：北齐后主因为皮景和全军回朝，对他加以赏赐，升职为尚书令。
English: The Empress Dowager of Northern Qi rewarded him with a promotion to Shang Shuling because of the return of Pijing and the whole army to the imperial court.

古文：丙辰，诏以寿阳复为豫州，以黄城为司州。
现代文：丙辰，陈宣帝下诏将寿阳恢复为豫州，以黄城为司州。
English: Xuancheng, Chen Xuandi issued an edict to restore Shouyang to Yuzhou and Huangcheng to Shizhou.

古文：以明彻为都督豫、合等六州诸军事、车骑大将军、豫州刺史，遣谒者萧淳风就寿阳册命，于城南设坛，士卒二十万，陈旗鼓戈甲。明彻登坛拜受，成礼而退，将卒荣之。
现代文：任命吴明彻为都督豫、合等六州诸军事、车骑大将军、豫州刺史，派谒者萧淳风去寿阳对吴明彻册命，在城南建起土坛，二十万士兵，排列了旗鼓戈甲，吴明彻登上土坛拜受了皇帝的册命，仪式结束，走下土坛，将士们都感到光荣。
English: Wu Mingche was appointed as the governor of the capital of Yu, the military commander of the six states, the general of the cavalry and the cavalry, and the historian of Yu, and sent the envoy Xiao Chunfeng to Shouyang to issue an order to Wu Mingche. An earthen altar was built in the south of the city. Two hundred thousand soldiers lined up with drums and gongs. Wu Mingche ascended the earthen altar and received the emperor's order. The ceremony was over, and the soldiers all felt honored as they walked down the earthen altar.

古文：上置酒，举杯属徐陵曰： 赏卿知人。 
现代文：陈宣帝备酒，举杯对徐陵说： 奖赏您能识别人才。 
English: Chen Xuandi prepared the wine, raised his glass to Xu Ling and said: I will reward you for being able to recognize talent.

古文：陵避席曰： 定策圣衷，非臣力也。 
现代文：徐陵离开坐席说： 这是陛下的圣明决策，不是臣的力量。 
English: Xu Ling left the table and said: This is His Majesty's sacred decision-making, not the minister's power.

古文：以黄法氍为征西大将军、合州刺史。
现代文：任命黄法氍为征西大将军、合州刺史。
English: Appointed Huang Fahu as the general of the Western Expedition, and made history in Hezhou.

古文：戊午，湛陀克齐昌城。
现代文：戊午，陈朝湛陀攻克齐昌城。
English: On the afternoon of the third day, Zhanhan captured Qichang City.

古文：十一月，甲戌，淮阴城降。
现代文：十一月，甲戌，淮阴城投降。
English: In November, Jiaozuo and Huaiyin surrendered.

古文：庚辰，威虏将军刘桃枝克朐山城。
现代文：庚辰，威虏将军刘桃枝攻克朐山城。
English: Geng Chen and General Liu Taoji conquered Lushan City.

古文：辛巳，樊毅克济阴城。
现代文：辛巳，樊毅攻克济阴城。
English: On that fateful day, I was defeated by a basketball.

古文：己丑，鲁广达攻济南徐州，克之；以广达为北徐州刺史，镇其地。
现代文：己丑，鲁广达进攻北齐的南徐州，攻克；任命鲁广达为徐州刺史，在这里镇守。
English: Lu Guangda attacked the southern Xuzhou of North Qi and conquered it. Lu Guangda was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou and served as the town guard here.

古文：齐北徐州民多起兵以应陈，逼其州城。祖珽命不闭城门，禁人不得出衢路，城中寂然。
现代文：北齐的北徐州百姓纷纷起兵响应陈朝的军队，直逼北徐州的州城，祖下令大开城门，禁止人们在大路上行走，城中一片寂静。
English: The people of North Xuzhou in North Qi rose up in response to the army of the Chen Dynasty, reaching the state capital of North Xuzhou. Zu ordered the city gate to be opened wide, forbidding people to walk on the highway, and the city was silent.

古文：反者不测其故，疑人走城空，不设备。
现代文：造反的人猜不出其中缘故，怀疑人走城空，不设防备。
English: The rebels could not guess the reason for this, suspecting that the man had left the city without taking precautions.

古文：珽忽令鼓噪震天，反者皆惊走。
现代文：祖突然叫人击鼓，鼓声震天，造反的都被吓得逃走。
English: The ancestor suddenly called for someone to beat the drum, the sound of the drum shook the heavens, and the rebels were scared into fleeing.

古文：既而复结陈向城，珽令录事参军王君植将兵拒之，自乘马临陈左右射。
现代文：不久又重新聚结起队伍向州城进发，祖命令录事参军王君植领兵进行抵抗，自己骑马到阵前引弓向左右两边射箭。
English: Soon after, the team regrouped and set off for the state capital. The ancestor ordered Wang Jun, who had joined the army, to lead the troops to resist. He rode to the front to guide the bow and shoot arrows to the left and right.

古文：反者先闻其盲，谓其必不能出，忽见之，大惊。
现代文：造反的人早先听说祖是瞎子，以为他一定不能出来，这时忽然见到祖，大为吃惊。
English: The rebels had earlier heard that Zu was blind and thought that he would not be able to come out, but when they suddenly saw Zu, they were very surprised.

古文：穆提婆欲令城陷，不遣援兵，珽且战且守，十余日，反者竟散走。
现代文：穆提婆存心让州城被攻陷，不发救兵，祖且战且守，十几天以后，造反的人终于散去。
English: Mutaibah deliberately let the state capital be conquered, did not send rescue troops, and the ancestors fought and defended it. After ten days, the rebels finally dispersed.

古文：诏悬王琳首于建康市。
现代文：陈宣帝下诏把王琳的首级挂在建康市示众。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan decreed that Wang Lin's head be displayed in Jiankang.

古文：故吏梁骠骑仓曹参军硃瑒致书徐陵求其首，曰： 窃以典午将灭，徐广为晋家遗老；当涂已谢，马孚称魏室忠臣。
现代文：以前的官吏梁朝的骠骑仓曹参军朱写信给徐陵请求得到王琳的首级，信上说： 我私下以为司马氏将灭亡时，徐广是晋朝的遗老；曹魏将衰败时，司马孚是魏室的忠臣。
English: Former official Cao Zhanjun Zhu, a former official of the Liang Dynasty, wrote to Xu Ling to ask for Wang Lin's head. The letter said: I privately thought that when the Sima clan would perish, Xu Guang would be the elder of the Jin Dynasty; when Cao Wei would decline, Sima Fu would be a loyal subject of Wei.

古文：梁故建宁公琳，当离乱之辰，总方伯之任，天厌梁德，尚思匡继，徒蕴包胥之志，终遘苌弘之眚，至使身没九泉，头行千里。
现代文：已故的梁朝建宁公王琳，正当离乱的时期，担当一方之长的责任，尽管上天讨厌梁朝的失德，但他还想匡正延续梁朝的纲纪，空怀申包胥的志向，最终犯下苌弘那样的错误，以致遭到杀害，首级被送到千里以外。
English: The late Liang Dynasty's Prince Lin of Jianning assumed the responsibility of the leader of one side during the period of legitimate disorder. Although the heavens hated the Liang Dynasty's immorality, he also wanted to maintain the discipline of the Liang Dynasty and the aspiration of the Empress Dowager, and finally made a mistake like Gong Hong, so that he was killed and his head was sent thousands of miles away.

古文：伏惟圣恩博厚，明诏爰发，赦王经之哭，许田横之葬。
现代文：希望皇上的恩德博大宽厚，明文诏示，象司马昭那样宽恕向雄对王经的痛哭，象汉高帝那样准许安葬田横。
English: It is hoped that Emperor Ndebo will be magnanimous and issue a clear edict that, like Sima Zhao, he will forgive Xiang Xiong's tears for Wang Jing, and like Emperor Gao, he will allow Tian You to be buried peacefully.

古文：不使寿春城下，唯传报葛之人；沧洲岛上，独有悲田之客。 
现代文：不要使寿春城下，只传来为报效诸葛诞而死的士兵的消息，沧州岛上，有为田横死难而悲伤的同情者。 
English: Don't let the news of the soldiers who died to celebrate Zhuge Liang's birthday be the only news coming from Shouchun. On Cangzhou Island, there are sympathizers who are saddened by Tian's death.

古文：陵为之启上。
现代文：徐陵替朱向皇帝启奏。
English: Xu Ling played for Zhu to the emperor.

古文：十二月，壬辰朔，并熊昙朗等首皆还其亲属。
现代文：十二月，壬辰朔，把熊昙朗和王琳的首级都还给他们的亲属。
English: In December, the heads of Xiong Yulang and Wang Lin were returned to their relatives.

古文：瑒瘗琳于八公山侧，义故会葬者数千人。
现代文：朱把王琳埋在八公山的山侧，一起来参加埋葬的王琳的故旧有几千人。
English: Zhu buried Wang Lin on the mountain side of the Eight Kingdoms Mountain, and several thousand people came to participate in Wang Lin's burial.

古文：瑒间道奔齐，别议迎葬，寻有寿阳人茅智胜等五人，密送其柩于鄴。
现代文：朱从偏僻的小路奔到北齐，另外商议派人迎葬的事，不久就有茅智胜等五个寿阳人，秘密地把王琳的灵柩送到北齐的邺城。
English: Zhu ran from a remote path to Beiqi, and also discussed the matter of sending someone to meet the funeral. Soon, five Shouyang people, including Mao Zhisheng, secretly sent Wang Lin's coffin to Shicheng in Beiqi.

古文：齐赠琳开府仪同三司、录尚书事，谥曰忠武王，给辒辌车以葬之。
现代文：北齐追赠王琳为开府仪同三司、录尚书事，谥号忠武王，用车运灵枢去埋葬。
English: Beiqi posthumously presented Wang Lin as the keeper of the imperial rescript and the three departments, the record of the imperial rescript, the nickname Zhongwu Wang, and used the car to transport the spirit center to be buried.

古文：癸巳，周主集群臣及沙门、道士，帝自升高坐，辨三教先后，以儒为先，道为次，释为后。
现代文：癸巳，北周国主召集群臣和僧人、道士，自己登上高坐，辩论三教次序的先后，以儒教为第一，道教其次，佛教最后。
English: At this time, the Northern Zhou ruler called together a group of ministers, monks, and Taoists, and ascended the throne to debate the order of the three religions, with Confucianism first, Taoism second, and Buddhism last.

古文：乙未，谯城降。
现代文：乙未，谯城投降。
English: On the last day of the second month, Handan surrendered.

古文：乙巳，立皇子叔明为宜都王，叔献为河东王。
现代文：乙巳，陈朝立皇子陈叔明为宜都王，陈叔献为河东王。
English: On the 19th day of the month, Fong's son Shuming was crowned King of Yidu, and Shukan was crowned King of Hedong.

古文：壬午，任忠克霍州。
现代文：壬午，陈朝的任忠攻克霍州。
English: In Renwu, Renzhong of the Chen Dynasty invaded Kehe Prefecture.

古文：诏征安州刺史周炅入朝。
现代文：陈宣帝下诏征召安州刺史周炅入朝。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan issued an edict to conscript Anzhou assassin Zhou Qi into the imperial court.

古文：初，梁定州刺史田龙升以城降，诏仍旧任。
现代文：当初，后梁的定州刺史田龙升举城投降，后来陈宣帝下诏叫他仍旧担任原职。
English: At first, Tian Long Sheng, the governor of Dingzhou of Hebei Province, surrendered the city. Later, Emperor Chen Xuan ordered him to remain in his original position.

古文：及炅入朝，龙升以江北六州、七镇叛入于齐，齐遣历阳王景安将兵应之。
现代文：等到周炅入朝，田龙升率领长江以北的六个州、七个镇反叛归附北齐，北齐派历阳王高景安率领军队响应。
English: When Zhou Enlai came to power, Tian Longsheng led six provinces and seven towns north of the Yangtze River to rebel and join Northern Qi. Northern Qi sent Liyang King Gao Jing'an to lead the army in response.

古文：诏以炅为江北道大都督，总众军以讨龙升，斩之。
现代文：陈宣帝下诏任命周炅为江北道大都督，总辖各路军队对田龙升进行讨伐，将他斩杀。
English: Emperor Chen Xuan issued an edict appointing Zhou Qi as the grand governor of Jiangbei Province, and the armies of all the provinces under his jurisdiction launched a crusade against Tian Longsheng and killed him.

古文：景安退走，尽复江北之地。
现代文：高景安退走，陈朝将长江以北一带地方全部收复。
English: Gao Jing'an retreated, and the Chen Dynasty recovered all the areas north of the Yangtze River.

古文：是岁，突厥求昏于齐。
现代文：这一年，突厥派人到北齐求婚。
English: That year, Turku sent a man to North Qi to propose marriage.

古文：高宗宣皇帝上之下太建六年春，正月，壬戌朔，周齐公宪等七人进爵为王。
现代文：太建六年春季正月，壬戌朔，北周齐公宇文宪等七人进爵为王。
English: In the first month of the spring of the sixth year of the Taijian era, seven people, including Ren Zhenshuo, Bei Zhou Qigong and Wen Xian, were knighted.

古文：己巳，周主享太庙；乙亥，耕藉田。
现代文：己巳，北周国主到太庙祭祀；乙亥，到藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: Once upon a time, the ruler of the Northern Zhou Dynasty went to the Imperial Temple for a religious ceremony; once upon a time, he went to a rented field for a farming ceremony.

古文：壬子，上享太庙。
现代文：壬子，陈宣帝到太庙祭祀。
English: Jinshi, Chen Xuandi went to the Great Temple to worship.

古文：甲申，广陵金城降。
现代文：甲申，广陵城牙城中的将士向陈朝投降。
English: On the day of Jiaxun, the central city of Guangling surrendered.

古文：二月，壬午朔，日有食之。乙未，齐主还鄴。
现代文：二月，壬辰朔，有日食。乙未，北齐后主回邺城。
English: In February, there is a solar eclipse in Imjin, and in February, there is a solar eclipse in Beiwei.

古文：丁酉，周纪国公贤等六人进爵为王。
现代文：丁酉，北周纪国公宇文贤等六人进爵为王。
English: Ding Yao, Bei Zhou Ji, Guogong Yu, Wen Xian and six others were knighted.

古文：辛亥，上耕藉田。
现代文：辛亥，陈宣帝到藉田举行耕种仪式。
English: In Xinhai, Chen Xuandi held a cultivation ceremony in a rented field.

古文：齐朔州行台南安王思好，本高氏养子，骁勇，得边镇人心。
现代文：北齐朔州行台南安王高思好，原先是高氏的养子，勇猛矫健，很得边镇的民心。
English: North Qishuo County, Jiangtai Nan'an Wang Gao Si Rong, was originally Gao's adopted son, brave and vigorous, very popular with the people of the border town.

古文：齐主使嬖臣斫骨光弁至州，光弁不礼于思好，思好怒，遂反，云 欲入除君侧之恶。 
现代文：北齐后主派宠臣斫骨光弁到朔州，他对高思好很不礼貌，高思好大怒，便起来造反，说： 我要去朝廷清除皇上身边的坏人。 
English: After the Northern Qi, the lord sent his favorite vassal, Gao Jian Guangben, to Shuozhou. He was very rude to Gao Siyi, and Gao Siyi was very angry, so he rebelled and said: I want to go to the court to clear the bad people around the emperor.

古文：进军至阳曲，自号大丞相。
现代文：进军到达阳曲，自称大丞相。
English: He marched to Dajangqu and called himself the grand chancellor.

古文：武卫将军赵海在晋阳，苍猝不暇奏，矫诏发兵拒之。
现代文：在晋阳的武卫将军赵海，仓促间来不及向朝廷启奏，便假借后主的诏命发动军队进行抵抗。
English: In Jinyang, Wuwei General Zhao Hai was in a hurry and did not have time to deliver a speech to the imperial court, so he falsely borrowed the empress's imperial command to launch an army to resist.

古文：帝闻变，使尚书令唐邕等驰之晋阳。
现代文：北齐后主听说有变，派尚书令唐邕等急驰到晋阳。
English: After the lord of Beiqi heard that there was a change, he sent Shang Shu to order Tang Jun and others to rush to Jinyang.

古文：辛丑，帝勒兵继进。
现代文：辛丑，后主亲自统率军队随后进发。
English: Sin ugly, the successor personally led the army and then set off.

古文：未至，思好军败，投水死。
现代文：还没到晋阳，高思好的军队失败，只得投水自尽。
English: Before reaching Jinyang, Gao Sihao's army failed, and he had to commit suicide by throwing himself into the water.

古文：其麾下二千人，刘桃枝围之，且杀且招，终不降，以至于尽。
现代文：他部下的二千军队，被刘桃枝包围，一面斩杀一面招降，他们始终不肯投降，直到全军覆没。
English: The two thousand troops under his command, surrounded by Liu Tao Zhi, were slaughtered and forced to surrender. They refused to surrender until the entire army was annihilated.

古文：先是，有人告思好谋反，韩长鸾女适思好子，奏言： 是人诬告贵臣，不杀无以息后。 
现代文：当初有人举报高思好预谋造反，韩长鸾的女儿是高思好的儿媳妇，便向朝廷上奏说： 这个人诬告大臣，不把他杀掉就不得安宁。 
English: At first, someone reported that Gao Siyou was plotting a rebellion. Han Changtao's daughter, who was Gao Siyou's daughter-in-law, reported to the imperial court: "This man is falsely accusing the minister. If we don't kill him, there will be no peace."

古文：乃斩之。
现代文：于是后主将举报人处死。
English: and beheaded her.

古文：思好既诛，告者弟伏阙下求赠官，长鸾不为通。
现代文：高思好死后，举报人的弟弟伏在宫阙下请求后主授给官职，韩长鸾不肯替他启奏。
English: After Gao Sihao's death, the whistleblower's younger brother, Fuxi, requested to be given an official post by the emperor, but Han Changyu refused to open for him.

古文：丁未，齐主还鄴。
现代文：丁未，北齐后主回邺城。
English: Ding Wei, after the Northern Qi, the main back to Shicheng.

古文：甲寅，以唐邕为录尚书事。
现代文：甲寅，任命唐邕为录尚书事。
English: Emperor Jiajing appointed Tang Jun to be the chief secretary.

古文：乙卯，周主如云阳宫。
现代文：乙卯，北周国主去云阳宫。
English: Second, the North Zhou sovereign went to Yunyang Palace.

古文：丙辰，周大赦。
现代文：丙辰，北周大赦全国。
English: Hsin-Chen, Northern Zhou amnestied the whole country.

古文：庚申，周叱奴太后有疾。
现代文：庚申，北周的叱奴太后生病。
English: Goshun, North Zhou's scolded empress dowager, is ill.

古文：三月，辛酉，周主还长安。
现代文：三月，辛酉，北周国主武帝回长安。
English: In March, Emperor Wu, the ruler of Northern Zhou, returned to Chang'an.

古文：癸酉，太后殂。
现代文：癸酉，叱奴太后去世。
English: , the Queen Mother passed away.

古文：帝居倚庐，朝夕进一溢米。
现代文：武帝住在居丧的房子，早晨和晚上只吃很少的饭。
English: Emperor Wu lived in a house of mourning and ate only a few meals in the morning and evening.

古文：群臣表请，累旬乃止。
现代文：群臣上表请求武帝不要缩食，几十天以后才停止。
English: At the request of a group of ministers, it was only stopped after dozens of days.

古文：命太子总厘庶政。
现代文：命令太子总管各项政务。
English: He ordered the crown prince to take charge of all government affairs.

古文：卫王直谮齐王宪于帝曰： 宪饮酒食肉，无异平日。 
现代文：卫王宇文直对武帝诬陷齐王宇文宪说： 宇文宪饮酒吃肉，和平时一样。 
English: Wei Wang Uwen Zhi said to Emperor Wu who framed Qi Wang Uwen Xian: "Uwen Xian drinks alcohol and eats meat, just like in peacetime.

古文：帝曰： 吾与齐王异生，俱非正嫡。特以吾故，同袒括发。
现代文：武帝说： 我和齐王是异母所生，都不是正宗嫡子，由于我的缘故，一起为太后服丧。
English: Emperor Wu said, "King Qi and I were born of different mothers, and neither of us is the legitimate son of the legitimate mother. Because of me, we mourned the death of the empress dowager together.

古文：汝当愧之，何论得失！
现代文：你应当感到羞愧，谈不到什么得和失！
English: You should be ashamed, there is no gain or loss to speak of!

古文：汝，亲太后之子，特承慈爱；但当自勉，无论他人。 
现代文：你，是太后的亲生儿子，特别受到她的慈爱；你应当自勉，不要去议论别人。 
English: You, the queen's own son, are especially beloved by her; you should restrain yourself from gossiping about others.

古文：夏，四月，乙卯，齐遣侍中薛孤康买吊于周，且会葬。
现代文：夏季四月，乙卯，北齐派侍中薛孤康买到北周吊唁叱奴太后去世，并参加葬礼。
English: In the summer of April, the Empress Dowager and the Northern Qi sent an attendant, Xue Kuokang, to North Zhou to offer condolences on the death of the Empress Dowager, and to attend the funeral.

古文：初，齐世祖为胡后造珠裙袴，所费不可胜计；为火所焚。
现代文：当初，北齐武成帝为胡后做珍珠编的裙裤，所用的钱无法计算；后来这件裙裤被火烧毁。
English: In the beginning, Emperor Wu Cheng of the Northern Qi Dynasty spent an incalculable amount of money to make a pearl knitted skirt for Queen Hu; later, the skirt was destroyed by fire.

古文：至是，齐主复为穆后营之。
现代文：这时，北齐后主又要替穆后做一件。
English: At this time, the master of the Northern Qi Empress wanted to do one more thing for the Mu Empress.

古文：使商胡赍锦彩三万，与吊使偕往市珠。
现代文：派经商的胡人带着三万段彩色丝绸，和吊唁的使者一起到北周采购珍珠。
English: He sent a merchant named Hu with thirty thousand pieces of colored silk and a messenger of condolence to Beizhou to purchase pearls.

古文：周人不与，齐主竟自造之。
现代文：北周人不肯卖给他们，后主竟自己设法做了一件。
English: The Northern Zhou people refused to sell it to them, but the queen mother managed to make one herself.

古文：及穆后爱衰，其侍婢冯小怜大幸，拜为淑妃；与齐主坐则同席，出则并马，誓同生死。
现代文：后来穆后失宠，穆后的侍婢冯小怜却大受后主的恩宠，被封为淑妃；和后主坐同席，出并马，两人发誓同生共死。
English: Later, Empress Mu fell out of favor, but Empress Mu's handmaid Feng Xiaorei was greatly favored by the empress and was given the title of concubine. They sat at the same table with the empress and went out together, and the two swore to live and die together.

古文：五月，庚申，同葬文宣皇后于永固陵，周主跣行至陵所。
现代文：五月，庚申，北周在永固陵葬文宣皇后；北周国主赤脚走到陵地。
English: In May, in Goshun, Northern Zhou buried Empress Wenzhong in Yonggu Mausoleum; the ruler of Northern Zhou walked barefoot to the mausoleum.

古文：辛酉，诏曰： 三年之丧，达于天子。
现代文：辛酉，下诏书说： 三年之丧，天子也要遵守。
English: Xin Xin, the next imperial edict said: The three-year mourning period must also be observed by the heavenly son.

古文：但军国务重，须自听朝。
现代文：但是国事军事很繁重，必须亲自上朝听政。
English: However, state affairs and military affairs are very heavy, and it is necessary to go to the court in person to listen to the government.

古文：衰麻之节，苫庐之礼，率遵前典，以申罔极。
现代文：对丧服的规定，居丧处所的礼仪，一律遵照以前的制度，以表明我对太后无穷的思念。
English: The regulations on mourning clothes and the etiquette of the place of residence for the deceased will all follow the previous system, to show my endless thoughts for the empress dowager.

古文：百僚宜依遗令，既葬而除。 
现代文：百官应该遵照过去的规定，太后埋葬以后就可以脱掉丧服。 
English: Officials should follow the rules of the past. After the empress is buried, they can take off their mourning clothes.

古文：公卿固请依权制，帝不许，卒申三年之制。
现代文：王公百卿坚持请求武帝临时改订丧礼的规定，武帝不准，最后重申服丧三年的制度。
English: Wang Gongbaiqing insisted on requesting Emperor Wu to temporarily change the funeral regulations, but Emperor Wu did not allow it, and finally reiterated the three-year mourning system.

古文：五服之内，亦令依礼。
现代文：凡属于丧服之内的亲疏五等，都按丧礼规定的五种服丧时间执行。
English: All of the five degrees of kinship and estrangement within the funeral service are carried out according to the five types of funeral service time specified in the funeral ceremony.

古文：庚午，齐大赦。
现代文：庚午，北齐大赦全国。
English: In the afternoon of the same day, North Qi issued a general amnesty to the whole country.

古文：齐人恐陈师渡淮，使皮景和屯西兗州以备之。
现代文：北齐怕陈朝军队渡过淮河，派皮景和屯兵在西兖州戒备。
English: The Northern Qi was afraid of the Chen Dynasty's army crossing the Huai River, and sent Pijing and the garrison to be on the alert in Xishuanzhou.

古文：丙子，周禁佛、道二教，经、像悉毁，罢沙门、道士，并令还俗。
现代文：丙子，北周禁止佛教、道教，把佛、道经典及偶象全部销毁，取缔僧人、道士，命令他们还俗。
English: Bing Zi, Northern Zhou banned Buddhism and Taoism, destroyed all the Buddhas, Taoist classics and idols, banned monks and Taoists, and ordered them to return to secular life.

古文：并禁诸淫祀，非祀典所载者尽除之。
现代文：并禁止所有滥设的祠庙，不是祀典记载中列名的人物，全部废除祭祀。
English: It also banned all temples and shrines that were set up without permission, and abolished all sacrificial rites for people who were not listed in the records of the ritual.

古文：六月，壬辰，周弘正卒。
现代文：六月，壬辰，陈朝的周弘正去世。
English: In June, Zhou Hongzheng of the Chen Dynasty died in Imjin.

古文：壬子，周更铸五行大布钱，一当十，与布泉并行。
现代文：壬子，北周改铸五行大布钱，以一当十，和布泉一同流通。
English: In Imzi, Northern Zhou changed to minting five-row large cloth money, with one being ten, and circulated together with cloth spring.

古文：戊午，周立通道观以壹圣贤之教。
现代文：戊午，北周建立通道观以统一圣贤的政教。
English: At the same time, the Northern Zhou Dynasty established the view of the channel to unify the politics and religion of the sages.

古文：秋，七月，庚申，周主如云阳，以右宫正尉迟运兼司武，与薛公长孙览辅太子守长安。
现代文：秋季七月，庚申，北周国主武帝去云阳，任命右宫正尉迟运兼司武，和薛公长孙览辅助太子镇守长安。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Wu of Northern Zhou went to Yunyang from Goshun, and appointed the chief lieutenant of the right palace, Chi Yun, as well as Si Wu, and Xue Gongchang, Sun Qian, to assist the prince in guarding Chang'an.

古文：初，帝取卫王直第为东宫，使直自择所居。
现代文：起初，北周武帝征收卫王宇文直的王府为东宫，让宇文直自己挑选居住的地方。
English: At first, the Northern Zhouwu Emperor requisitioned the royal palace of the Wei King Uwen Zhi as the East Palace, and let Uwen Zhi choose his own place to live.

古文：直历观府署，无如意者；末取废陟屺寺，欲居之。
现代文：宇文直看了所有府署的房子，没有一处中意的；最后选中荒芜的陟屺寺，要在那里居住。
English: Uwen looked at all the buildings of the prefectural office, but there was no one he liked. Finally, he chose the deserted Shun Temple to live there.

古文：齐王宪谓直曰： 弟子孙多，此无乃褊小？ 
现代文：齐王宇文宪对宇文直说： 弟弟的子孙很多，这个地方岂不小了些？ 
English: Qi Wang Yuwen Xian said to Yuwen Zhi: My brother's descendants are many, isn't this place a little smaller?

古文：直曰： 一身尚不自容，何论子孙！ 
现代文：宇文直说： 自己单身一人尚且得不到容纳，还谈什么子孙！ 
English: Uwen Zhi said: If you are single and cannot be accommodated, how can you talk about descendants!

古文：直尝从帝校猎而乱行，帝对众挞之。直积怨愤，因帝在外，遂作乱。
现代文：宇文直曾经跟随武帝到野外围猎时扰乱行列，被武帝当众鞭打，宇文直积下怨恨，当时武帝在外，他便聚众作乱。
English: Uwen Zhi once followed Emperor Wu to the field to disrupt the line when hunting. He was whipped by Emperor Wu in public, and Uwen Zhi accumulated resentment. When Emperor Wu was out, he gathered the crowd to make a disturbance.

古文：乙酉，帅其党袭肃章门。
现代文：乙酉，宇文直率领党羽袭击肃章门。
English: Acetylene, Uwen directly led the party to attack the Suizhang Gate.

古文：长孙览惧，奔诣帝所。
现代文：长孙览惧怕，逃奔到武帝那里。
English: The eldest grandson Yan was afraid and fled to Emperor Wu.

古文：尉迟运偶在门中，直兵奄至，手自阖门。
现代文：尉迟运恰好在肃章门里，宇文直的士兵突然来到，尉迟运用手将门关上。
English: He happened to be in the Zuozhang Gate when the soldiers of Yu Wenzhong suddenly arrived, and he used his hand to close the door.

古文：直党与运争门，斫伤运指，仅而得闭。
现代文：宇文直的党羽和尉迟运争夺大门，用刀砍伤尉迟运的手指，宫门刚刚能够关上。
English: Yu Wenzhong's faction and Ye Xizhang's faction fought for the gate and cut Ye Xizhang's finger with a knife. The gate was just able to close.

古文：直久不得入，纵火焚门。
现代文：宇文直进不了门，便放火焚烧肃章门。
English: Unable to enter the gate directly, Uwen set fire to the gate.

古文：运恐火尽，直党得进，取宫中材木及床榻以益火，膏油灌之，火转炽。
现代文：尉迟运恐怕火焰息灭，宇文直的党羽得以进入门内，便取来宫中的木材和床榻投入火中加大火势，还用油脂灌浇，火势越加炽烈。
English: Because of the delay, it is feared that the flames will die out. Once the party members of Uwen Zhi were able to enter the gate, they took wood and beds from the palace and threw them into the fire to increase the fire's intensity. They also doused it with grease, which made the fire even more intense.

古文：久之，直不得进，乃退。
现代文：过了很久，宇文直还是无法进入，于是退走。
English: After a long time, he still couldn't get in, so he left.

古文：运帅留守兵，因其退而击之，直大败，帅百馀骑奔荆州。
现代文：尉迟运率领留守的士兵，见他们退走而追击，宇文直大败，率领百余名骑兵逃奔荆州。
English: The lieutenant led the remaining soldiers, saw them retreat and chased them, and Uwen Zhi was defeated, leading more than a hundred cavalrymen to flee Jingzhou.

古文：戊子，帝还长安。
现代文：戊子，武帝回长安。
English: Emperor Wu returns to Chang'an.

古文：八月，辛卯，擒直，废为庶人，囚于别宫，寻杀之。
现代文：八月，辛卯，捉到宇文直，将他废为百姓，囚禁在别的宫里，不久后将他杀死。
English: In August, Xinwu captured Wu Wenzhi, deposed him as a commoner, imprisoned him in another palace, and killed him soon after.

古文：以尉迟运为大将军，赐赉甚厚。
现代文：任命尉迟运为大将军，赏赐他很多东西。
English: He appointed Fei Zhiyun as the general and rewarded him with many things.

古文：丙申，周主复如云阳。
现代文：丙申，北周国主再次去云阳。
English: Bishin, the North Zhou sovereign went to Yunyang again.

古文：癸丑，齐主如晋阳。
现代文：癸丑，北齐后主去晋阳。
English: 丑,北齐后主去晋阳.

古文：甲辰，齐以高劢为尚书右仆射。
现代文：甲寅，北齐任命高劢为尚书右仆射。
English: North Qi appointed Gao Jun as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：九月，庚申，周主如同州。
现代文：九月，庚申，北周国主去同州。
English: In September, Goshun, the ruler of Northern Zhou, went to Tongzhou.

古文：冬，十月，丙申，周遣御正弘农杨尚希、礼部卢恺来聘。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙申，北周派御正弘农人杨尚希、礼部卢恺到陈朝聘问。
English: In winter, in October, the Northern Zhou Dynasty sent Yang Shangxi, a farmer of the Imperial Prince Yang Zhenghong, and Lu Wei, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies, to Chen Dynasty for an interview.

古文：恺，柔之子也。
现代文：卢恺是卢柔的儿子。
English: Lulu is Lulu's son.

古文：甲寅，周主如蒲州；丙辰，如同州；十一月，甲戌，还长安。
现代文：甲寅，北周国主去蒲州；丙辰，去同州；十一月，甲戌，回长安。
English: Jia Yin, the ruler of North Zhou, went to Puzhou; Jian Chen, went to Tongzhou; in November, Jia Wei, returned to Chang'an.

古文：十二月，戊戌，以吏部尚书王瑒为右仆射，度支尚书孔奂为吏部尚书。
现代文：十二月，戊戌，陈朝任命吏部尚书王为右仆射，度支尚书孔奂为吏部尚书。
English: In December, Emperor Wu and Emperor Chen appointed Shang Shu Wang as his right-hand man, and Du Zhi Shang Shu Kong Yu as his right-hand man.

古文：瑒，冲之子也。
现代文：王是王冲的儿子。
English: Wang is the son of Wang Chong.

古文：时新复淮、泗，攻战、降附，功赏纷纭。
现代文：当时陈朝刚收复淮、泗，对攻战有功及投降归附的人论功行赏的事纷纭复杂。
English: At that time, the Chen dynasty had just regained power, and the matter of rewarding those who contributed to the offensive and surrendered was complicated.

古文：奂识鉴精敏，不受请托，事无凝滞，人皆悦服。
现代文：孔奂鉴别人才精到敏捷，不受别人的请托，处理事情从不拖拉，人们都心悦诚服。
English: Confucius said that one should be quick to learn from others, not rely on others, never delay in handling things, and people are sincerely convinced.

古文：湘州刺史始兴王叔陵，屡讽有司，求为三公。
现代文：湘州刺史始兴王陈叔陵，屡次向有关部门暗示，要求任命自己为三公。
English: Chen Shuling, the king of Xiangzhou, repeatedly hinted to the relevant departments that he wanted to be appointed as the three princes.

古文：奂曰： 衮章之职，本以德举，未必皇枝。 
现代文：孔奂说： 穿兖服的官职，本来是从品德的标准来推举的，未必都是皇帝的亲属。 
English: Confucius said: The positions of the three princes of Taiwan, originally selected and appointed according to ethical standards, may not necessarily be the royal family.

古文：因以白帝，帝曰： 始兴那忽望公！且朕儿为公，须在鄱阳王后。 
现代文：并把这件事报告宣帝。宣帝说： 始兴王怎么突然想做三公，况且朕的儿子当三公，必须排在我侄子鄱阳王之后。 
English: And he reported the matter to Emperor Xuan. Emperor Xuan said, "How could King Shixing suddenly want to become the Third Prince, and what's more, for my son to become the Third Prince, he must follow my nephew, King Shenyang."

古文：奂曰： 臣之所见，亦如圣旨。 
现代文：孔奂说： 臣的想法，和陛下的旨意一样。 
English: Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche said, "A minister's view is the same as God's will.

古文：齐定州刺史南阳王绰，喜为残虐，尝出行，见妇人抱儿，夺以饲狗。
现代文：北齐定州刺史南阳王高绰，生性喜欢做残忍暴虐的事情，曾经外出行走，看到有个怀抱婴儿的妇女，便夺下婴儿喂狗。
English: Nanyang Wang Gaoqiao, a constable from North Qiding Province, likes to do cruel and brutal things by nature. Once, when he was out walking, he saw a woman holding a baby in her arms and snatched the baby to feed the dog.

古文：妇人号哭，绰怒，以儿血涂妇人，纵狗使食之。常云： 我学文宣伯之为人。 
现代文：妇女哭喊，高绰大怒，醮了婴儿的鲜血涂在妇人身上，放狗去吃妇女，还常常说： 我是学文宣伯父的为人。 
English: Women cried and screamed, flew into a rage, smeared the blood of babies on women, let dogs eat women, and often said: I am the person of Uncle Xuewen Xuan.

古文：齐主闻之，锁诣行在，至而宥之。
现代文：北齐后主听到后，将他锁送到自己在外地的住处，来了以后又饶恕了他。
English: After hearing this, Bei Qi's master locked him up and sent him to his own residence in the countryside. When he came back, he forgave him.

古文：问： 在州何事最乐？ 
现代文：后主问： 你在州里感到最快乐的是什么事？ 
English: Then the interviewer asked: What makes you the happiest person in the state?

古文：对曰： 多聚蝎于器，置狙其中，观之极乐。 
现代文：高绰回答说： 捕捉许多蝎子放在容器里，再放进一只猴子，看蝎螫猴子极其可乐。 
English: Gao Pu replied, "To catch many scorpions and put them in a container, then put a monkey inside, and watch the scorpion sting the monkey is extremely fun.

古文：帝即命夜索蝎一斗，比晓，得三二升，置浴斛，使人裸卧斛中，号叫宛转。
现代文：后主立即命令在晚上捉一斗蝎子，到第二天清早，才捉到二三升，都放在澡盆里，叫人赤裸身子睡在盆里，这个被螫得宛转喊叫。
English: The latter immediately ordered a bucket of scorpions to be caught in the evening, and by the early morning of the next day, only two or three liters had been caught, all of which were placed in the bathtub, and the naked man was made to sleep in the tub. The man cried out in pain.

古文：帝与绰临观，喜噱不已。
现代文：后主和高绰亲临观看，不住地嬉笑。
English: The postmaster was overjoyed to see Gao Zhuang.

古文：因让绰曰： 如此乐事，何不早驰驿奏闻！ 
现代文：后主还责备他说： 这样快乐的事，为什么不派驿使赶快来向我报告！ 
English: The latter also reproached him, saying: "Why did you not send an envoy to report to me about such a happy event?

古文：由是有宠，拜大将军，朝夕同戏。
现代文：高绰因此得到后主的宠信，拜他为大将军，从早到晚和后主在一起嬉戏。
English: As a result, Gao Piao was favored by the empress dowager, who worshipped him as a great general and played with him from morning till night.

古文：韩长鸾疾之，是岁，出为齐州刺史。
现代文：韩长鸾对此很厌恶，这一年，高绰被派出为齐州刺史。
English: Han Changyu was disgusted by this. This year, Gao Zhuo was sent to be the chief historian of Qi Province.

古文：将发，使人诬告其反，奏云： 此犯国法，不可赦！ 
现代文：临出发前，韩长鸾派人诬告高绰要造反，上奏说： 这是违反国法，不能对他饶赦！ 
English: Before leaving, Han Changyu sent someone to falsely accuse Gao Pu of wanting to rebel, and said: This is a violation of the law of the country, and he cannot be pardoned!

古文：帝不忍明诛，使宠胡何猥萨与之手搏，扼而杀之。
现代文：后主不忍心公开将高绰处死，便叫宠信的胡人何猥萨和高绰徒手角斗，把高绰扼死。
English: Afterward, the master could not bear to publicly execute Gao Zhaoxing, so he asked his trusted confidant Hu to wrestle with Gao Zhaoxing and strangle Gao Zhaoxing.

