古文：万石君名奋，其父赵人也，姓石氏。
现代文：万石君名奋，他的父亲是赵国人，姓石。
English: His father is a native of Zhao, surnamed Shi.

古文：赵亡，徙居温。
现代文：赵国灭亡后，迁居到温县。
English: After the fall of Zhao, he moved to Wen County.

古文：高祖东击项籍，过河内，时奋年十五，为小吏，侍高祖。
现代文：高祖东进攻打项羽，途经河内郡，当时石奋十五岁，做小官吏，侍奉高祖。
English: Gao Zu Dong attacked Duxiang Yu, passing through Hanoi County. At that time, Shi Fen was fifteen years old, working as a minor official and serving Gao Zu.

古文：高祖与语，爱其恭敬，问曰： 若何有？ 
现代文：高祖和他谈话，喜爱他恭敬谨慎的态度，问他说： 你家中有些什么人？ 
English: Gaozu talked with him, liked his respectful and cautious attitude, and asked him: Who are some people in your family?

古文：对曰： 奋独有母，不幸失明。
现代文：回答说： 我家中只有母亲，不幸双目失明。
English: He replied, "In my family, there is only my mother, who unfortunately is blind.

古文：家贫。
现代文：家中很贫穷。
English: The family was very poor.

古文：有姊，能鼓琴。 
现代文：还有个姐姐，会弹琴。 
English: She also has an older sister who plays the piano.

古文：高祖曰： 若能从我乎？ 
现代文：高祖又说： 你能跟随我吗？ 
English: Gaozu also said, "Can you follow me?"

古文：曰： 原尽力。 
现代文：回答说： 愿竭尽全力侍奉。 
English: And he answered, I will serve thee with my whole strength.

古文：於是高祖召其姊为美人，以奋为中涓，受书谒，徙其家长安中戚里，以姊为美人故也。
现代文：于是，高祖召他的姐姐入宫做了美人，让石奋做中涓，受理大臣进献的文书和谒见之事，将他的家迁徙到长安的中戚里，这是因他的姐姐做了美人的缘故。
English: As a result, Gao Zu invited his sister to enter the palace as a beauty, let Shifen be the middle concubine, accepted the documents presented by the minister and the matter of the concubine, and moved his family to the middle relatives in Chang'an. This was because his sister was a beauty.

古文：其官至孝文时，积功劳至大中大夫。
现代文：石奋做官到孝文帝时，靠积累功劳当上了大中大夫。
English: When Shi Fen became an official to Emperor Xiaowen, he became a senior middle school doctor by accumulating merit.

古文：无文学，恭谨无与比。
现代文：他不通儒术，可是恭敬谨慎没有人比得上。
English: He doesn't know Confucianism, but his respect and caution are second to none.

古文：文帝时，东阳侯张相如为太子太傅，免。
现代文：文帝的时候，东阳侯张相如任太子太傅，后被免职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen, Zhang Xiangru, the Marquis of Dongyang, was appointed as the Crown Prince and later dismissed.

古文：选可为傅者，皆推奋，奋为太子太傅。
现代文：文帝选择可以做太傅的人，大家都推举石奋，石奋做了太子太傅。
English: Emperor Wen chose the person who could be the grand tutor, and everyone recommended Shi Fen, and Shi Fen became the prince grand tutor.

古文：及孝景即位，以为九卿；迫近，惮之，徙奋为诸侯相。
现代文：等到景帝即位，使他官居九卿之位；因他过于恭敬谨慎而接近自己，景帝也畏惧他，调他做了诸侯丞相。
English: When Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, he placed him in the position of the nine nobles; because he was too respectful and cautious to get close to himself, Emperor Jing was also afraid of him and transferred him to the position of vassal minister.

古文：奋长子建，次子甲，次子乙，次子庆，皆以驯行孝谨，官皆至二千石。於是景帝曰： 石君及四子皆二千石，人臣尊宠乃集其门。 
现代文：他的长子石建，二子石甲，三子石乙，四子石庆，都因为性情顺驯，对长辈孝敬，办事谨慎，官位做到二千石，于是景帝说： 石君和四个儿子都官至二千石，做为臣子的尊贵荣耀竟然集中在他们一家。 
English: His eldest son, Shi Jian, his second son, Shi Jia, his third son, Shi B, and his fourth son, Shi Qing, were all submissive by nature, respectful of their elders, prudent in their work, and achieved an official rank of two thousand koku, so Emperor Jing said: Shi Jun and his four sons were all officials of up to two thousand koku, and the honor of being a courtier was concentrated in their family.

古文：号奋为万石君。
现代文：就称呼石奋为万石君。
English: He called Shi Fen "Wan Shi Jun."

古文：孝景帝季年，万石君以上大夫禄归老于家，以岁时为朝臣。
现代文：景帝末年，万石君享受上大夫的俸禄告老回家，在朝廷举行盛大典礼朝令时，他都作为大臣来参加。
English: In the last years of Emperor Jing, Wanshi Jun enjoyed the salary of a senior doctor and retired to his home. When the grand ceremony of the imperial edict was held at the imperial court, he came to participate as a minister.

古文：过宫门阙，万石君必下车趋，见路马必式焉。
现代文：经过皇宫门楼时，万石君一定要下车急走，表示恭敬，见到皇帝的车驾一定要手扶在车轼上表示致意。
English: When passing through the gatehouse of the imperial palace, Wanshi Jun must get off the car and walk quickly to show his respect. When he sees the emperor's car, he must put his hand on the wheel to show his respect.

古文：子孙为小吏，来归谒，万石君必朝服见之，不名。
现代文：他的子孙辈做小官，回家看望他，万石君也一定要穿上朝服接见他们，不直呼他们的名字。
English: His children and grandchildren are minor officials, and they come home to visit him. Banshikun must also wear a court dress to meet them, and not call them by their first names.

古文：子孙有过失，不谯让，为便坐，对案不食。
现代文：子孙中有人犯了过错，他不责斥他们，而是坐到侧旁的座位上，对着餐桌不肯吃饭。
English: If one of his children or grandchildren made a mistake, he would not reprimand them, but would sit on the seat next to them and refuse to eat at the table.

古文：然后诸子相责，因长老肉袒固谢罪，改之，乃许。
现代文：这样以后其他的子孙们就纷纷责备那个有错误的人，再通过族中长辈求情，本人裸露上身表示认错，并表示坚决改正，才答允他们的请求。
English: After this, the other descendants blamed the person who made the mistake, and then asked for forgiveness through the elders of the tribe, and he admitted his mistake bare-chested and said that he would resolutely correct it before agreeing to their request.

古文：子孙胜冠者在侧，虽燕居必冠，申申如也。
现代文：已成年的子孙在他身边时，既使是闲居在家，他也一定要穿戴整齐，显示出严肃整齐的样子。
English: When his grown-up grandchildren are around him, even if they are idling at home, he must dress neatly and show a serious and neat appearance.

古文：僮仆如也，唯谨。
现代文：他的仆人也都非常恭敬，特别谨慎。
English: His servants are also very respectful, especially discreet.

古文：上时赐食於家，必稽首俯伏而食之，如在上前。
现代文：皇帝有时赏赐食物送到他家，必定叩头跪拜之后才弯腰低头去吃，如在皇帝面前一样。
English: The emperor sometimes sent food to his house as a reward, and he had to bow down and kneel before he could eat it, just as if he were in front of the emperor.

古文：其执丧，哀戚甚悼。
现代文：他办理丧事时，非常悲哀伤悼。
English: When he conducted the funeral, he was very sad and sorrowful.

古文：子孙遵教，亦如之。
现代文：子孙后代遵从他的教诲，也像他那样去做。
English: His descendants followed his teachings and did as he did.

古文：万石君家以孝谨闻乎郡国，虽齐鲁诸儒质行，皆自以为不及也。
现代文：万石君一家因孝顺谨慎闻名于各郡县和各诸侯国，即使齐鲁二地品行朴实的儒生们，也都认为自己不如他们。
English: Wanshi Jun's family is famous for its filial piety and prudence in all counties and states. Even the simple-minded Confucians in Qilu think they are not as good as them.

古文：建元二年，郎中令王臧以文学获罪。
现代文：建元二年，郎中令王臧因为推崇儒学获罪。
English: In the 2nd year of the first century, his vassal Wang Yao was convicted of advocating Confucianism.

古文：皇太后以为儒者文多质少，今万石君家不言而躬行，乃以长子建为郎中令，少子庆为内史。
现代文：皇太后认为儒生言语大多文饰浮夸而不够朴实，现在万石君一家不多说话而身体力行，就让万石君的大儿子石建做了郎中令，小儿子石庆做了内史。
English: The empress dowager thought that most of the Confucian language was pompous and not simple enough. Now, the Wanseki family does not talk much, but they do their best. They let Wanseki's eldest son, Shi Jian, be the middle son, and his youngest son, Shi Qing, be the inner historian.

古文：建老白首，万石君尚无恙。
现代文：石建年老头发花白了，万石君的身体依旧健康无病。
English: Shi Jian's hair has turned white with age, while Wan Shikun's body is still healthy and disease-free.

古文：建为郎中令，每五日洗沐归谒亲，入子舍，窃问侍者，取亲中稖厕窬，身自浣涤，复与侍者，不敢令万石君知，以为常。
现代文：石建做了郎中令，每五天休假一天，回家拜见父亲时，先是进入侍者的小屋，私下向侍者询问父亲情况，拿走他的内衣去门外水沟亲自洗涤，再交给侍者，不敢让父亲知道，他经常这样做。
English: Shi Jian was the second-in-command. He took a day off every five days. When he went home to visit his father, he first entered the waiter's hut, privately asked the waiter about his father's condition, took his underwear to the gutter outside the door to wash it himself, and then handed it to the waiter. He did not dare to let his father know that he often did this.

古文：建为郎中令，事有可言，屏人恣言，极切；至廷见，如不能言者。
现代文：石建做郎中令时，有事要向皇帝谏说，能避开他人时就畅所欲言，说得峻急；到了朝廷谒见时，就好像不会说话一样。
English: When Shi Jian was a middle-ranking retainer, he had something to say to the emperor; when he could avoid others, he spoke freely and urgently; when he met with the imperial court, it was as if he could not speak.

古文：是以上乃亲尊礼之。
现代文：因此皇帝就对他亲自表示尊敬和礼遇。
English: Therefore, the emperor showed him respect and courtesy in person.

古文：万石君徙居陵里。
现代文：万石君迁居到陵里。
English: Manseki moved to Negri.

古文：内史庆醉归，入外门不下车。
现代文：担任内史的儿子石庆酒醉归来，进入里门时没有下车。
English: Shi Qing's son, who was in charge of internal history, came back drunk and did not get off the bus when he entered the inner gate.

古文：万石君闻之，不食。
现代文：万石君听到这件事后不肯吃饭。
English: After hearing this, Wanshi didn't want to eat.

古文：庆恐，肉袒请罪，不许。
现代文：石庆恐惧，袒露上身请求恕罪，万石君仍不允许。
English: Shih Ching is afraid, bares his upper body and asks for forgiveness, but Wan Shih Jun still won't allow it.

古文：举宗及兄建肉袒，万石君让曰： 内史贵人，入闾里，里中长老皆走匿，而内史坐车中自如，固当！ 
现代文：全族的人和哥哥石建也袒露上身请求恕罪，万石君才责备说： 内史是尊贵的人，进入里门时，里中的父老都急忙回避他，而内史坐在车中依然故我，不知约束自己，本是应该的嘛！ 
English: The whole family and his brother Shi Jian also bared their upper bodies to ask for forgiveness. Wanshi Juncai reproached him, saying: Neishi is an honorable person. When he entered the inner door, all the parents in the family hurriedly avoided him, but Neishi was still sitting in the car, so I, I don't know how to restrain myself, it should have been!

古文：乃谢罢庆。
现代文：说完就喝令石庆走开。
English: After that, they shouted for Shi Qing to leave.

古文：庆及诸子弟入里门，趋至家。
现代文：从此以后，石庆和石家的弟兄们进入里门时，都下车快步走回家。
English: From then on, whenever Shi Qing and the brothers of the Shi family entered the inner gate, they all got off and walked briskly home.

古文：万石君以元朔五年中卒。
现代文：万石君在武帝元朔五年去世。
English: Wanshi died in the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign.

古文：长子郎中令建哭泣哀思，扶杖乃能行。岁馀，建亦死。
现代文：大儿子郎中令石建因悲哀思念而痛哭，以致手扶拐杖才能走路，过了一年多，石建也去世了。
English: The eldest son's brother-in-law made Shi Jian cry bitterly because of his sad thoughts, so that he could only walk with crutches. More than a year later, Shi Jian also passed away.

古文：诸子孙咸孝，然建最甚，甚於万石君。
现代文：万石君的子孙们都很孝顺，然而石建最突出，超过了万石君。
English: Banshikun's children and grandchildren are all very dutiful, but Shi Jian is the most outstanding, surpassing Banshikun.

古文：建为郎中令，书奏事，事下，建读之，曰： 误书！ 马 者与尾当五，今乃四，不足一。上谴死矣！ 
现代文：石建做郎中令时，一次书写奏章，奏章批复下来，石建再读时，非常惊恐地说道 写错了！ 马 字下面的四点和下曲的马尾应该五笔，现在才写四笔，少了一笔，皇上发现责怪下来就该死了！ 
English: When Shi Jian was the second-in-command, he once wrote a musical score, and the score was approved, but when Shi Jian re-read it, he was very alarmed and said that he had written it wrong! The four dots below the horse and the horse's tail in the next piece should be five strokes, but now he only wrote four strokes, missing one stroke, and the emperor found that he should die if he blamed it!

古文：甚惶恐。其为谨慎，虽他皆如是。
现代文：可见他为人的谨慎，即使对待其他的事也都像这样。
English: You can see that he's a cautious person, even when it comes to other things.

古文：万石君少子庆为太仆，御出，上问车中几马，庆以策数马毕，举手曰： 六马。 
现代文：万石君的小儿子石庆做太仆，为皇帝驾车外出，皇帝问他驾车的马有几匹，石庆用马鞭一一点数马匹后，才举手示意说： 六匹。 
English: Wan Shikun's youngest son, Shi Qing, was a servant and drove the car for the emperor. The emperor asked him how many horses he was driving. After Shi Qing counted the horses with a whip, he raised his hand and said, "Six."

古文：庆於诸子中最为简易矣，然犹如此。
现代文：石庆在几个儿子中算是最随便的了，然而尚且如此小心谨慎。
English: Shi Qing is the most casual of the sons, yet he is still so cautious.

古文：为齐相，举齐国皆慕其家行，不言而齐国大治，为立石相祠。
现代文：石庆做齐国的国相，齐国上下都敬慕他们的家风，所以不用发布政令齐国就非常安定，人们就为石庆立了 石相祠 。
English: Shi Qing was the minister of state of Qi, and people all over Qi admired their family style. Therefore, without issuing a decree, Qi was very stable, and people set up the Stone Ancestral Shrine for Shi Qing.

古文：元狩元年，上立太子，选群臣可为傅者，庆自沛守为太子太傅，七岁迁为御史大夫。
现代文：武帝元狩元年，皇帝确立太子，从群臣中挑选能够做太子老师的人，石庆从沛太守任上调为太子太傅，过了七年升任御史大夫。
English: In the first year of Emperor Wu's reign, the emperor established the position of prince and selected a person who could be the prince's teacher from among the courtiers. Shi Qing was promoted from the position of Pei Taifu to the position of prince taifu, and after seven years he was promoted to the position of goshi taifu.

古文：元鼎五年秋，丞相有罪，罢。
现代文：武帝元鼎五年秋，丞相赵周因罪被罢官。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of Emperor Wu's reign, the prime minister Zhao Zhou was removed from office for a crime.

古文：制诏御史： 万石君先帝尊之，子孙孝，其以御史大夫庆为丞相，封为牧丘侯。 
现代文：皇帝发下诏书给御史大夫： 先帝很敬重万石君，他们的子孙都很孝顺，命令御史大夫石庆担任丞相，封为牧丘侯。 
English: The emperor issued an imperial decree to Dr. Shih: The former emperor respected Dr. Shih very much, and their children and grandchildren were very dutiful. He ordered Dr. Shih to serve as chancellor and to be given the title of Mokuchuko.

古文：是时汉方南诛两越，东击朝鲜，北逐匈奴，西伐大宛，中国多事。
现代文：这是朝廷正在南面诛讨南越、东越，在东面攻打朝鲜，在北面驱逐匈奴，在西方征伐大宛，国家正值多事之秋。
English: This meant that the imperial court was waging war against South Vietnam and East Vietnam in the south, attacking Korea in the east, expelling the Huns in the north, and conquering Dawan in the west. The country was in the midst of an eventful autumn.

古文：天子巡狩海内，修上古神祠，封禅，兴礼乐。
现代文：加上皇帝巡视全国各地，修复上古的神庙，到泰山祭天，到梁父祭地，大兴礼乐。
English: In addition, the emperor toured all over the country, restored the ancient temples, went to Mount Tai to celebrate the festival, and to the Liang father festival, and held grand ceremonial music.

古文：公家用少，桑弘羊等致利，王温舒之属峻法，兒宽等推文学至九卿，更进用事，事不关决於丞相，丞相醇谨而已。
现代文：国家财政发生困难，皇帝就让桑弘羊等谋取财利，王温舒等实行苛峻的法律，使兒宽等推尊儒学，他们都官至九卿，交替升迁当政，朝中大事不取决于丞相，丞相只是一味忠厚谨慎罢了。
English: When the state's finances ran into difficulties, the emperor allowed Kuang Hongyang and others to seek financial gain, Wang Wenshu and others to implement harsh laws, and Erhuang and others to promote Confucianism. All of them rose to the ranks of nine nobles and were promoted to political positions in turn. The major events of the dynasty did not depend on the prime minister. The prime minister was merely loyal and prudent.

古文：在位九岁，无能有所匡言。尝欲请治上近臣所忠、九卿咸宣罪，不能服，反受其过，赎罪。
现代文：石庆在位九年，没有能够发表什么匡正时弊的言论，他曾想要惩治皇帝的近臣所忠、九卿咸宣的罪过，不仅不能使他们服罪，反而遭受了惩处，以米粟入官才得免罪。
English: During the nine years of his reign, Shi Qing was not able to make any remarks to rectify the ills of the times. He had wanted to punish the sins of the emperor's close vassals, the nine nobles, and the nine emperors. Not only could he not make them confess their sins, but he was punished instead. He was only able to be absolved of his sins by entering the government office with a grain of rice.

古文：元封四年中，关东流民二百万口，无名数者四十万，公卿议欲请徙流民於边以適之。
现代文：汉武帝元封四年，关东百姓有两百万人流离失所，没有户籍的有四十万人，公卿大臣商议请求皇帝迁徙流民到边疆去，以此来惩罚他们。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Hanwu's reign, there were two million displaced people in Guandong and 400,000 people without household registration. The ministers of the nobility deliberated and requested the emperor to relocate the displaced people to the frontier in order to punish them.

古文：上以为丞相老谨，不能与其议，乃赐丞相告归，而案御史大夫以下议为请者。
现代文：皇帝认为丞相年老谨慎，不可能参与这种商议，就让他请假回家，而查办御史大夫以下商议提出这种请求的官吏。
English: The emperor thought that the prime minister was too old and cautious to take part in such discussions, so he let him go home on leave, and the officials who made such a request were investigated and discussed by the imperial historian.

古文：丞相惭不任职，乃上书曰： 庆幸得待罪丞相，罢驽无以辅治，城郭仓库空虚，民多流亡，罪当伏斧质，上不忍致法。原归丞相侯印，乞骸骨归，避贤者路。 
现代文：丞相因不能胜任职务而愧疚，就上书给皇帝说： 我石庆承蒙宠幸得以位居丞相，可是自己才能低劣不能辅佐陛下治理国家，以致城郊仓库空虚，百姓多流离失所，罪该处死，皇帝不忍心依法处治我，我愿归还丞相和侯爵的印信，请求告老还乡，给贤能的人让位。 
English: The prime minister, feeling guilty for not being able to fulfill his duties, sent a letter to the emperor saying: I, Shi Qingcheng, have been favored with the position of prime minister, but my inferior talent cannot assist His Majesty in governing the country, so that the warehouses on the outskirts of the city are empty, many people have been displaced, and the crime is punishable by death. The emperor does not have the heart to punish me according to law. I would like to return the seal letter of the prime minister and the marquis, and ask him to return to his hometown and give way to a capable person.

古文：天子曰： 仓廪既空，民贫流亡，而君欲请徙之，摇荡不安，动危之，而辞位，君欲安归难乎？ 
现代文：皇帝说： 粮仓已经空虚，百姓贫困流离失所，而你却要请求迁徙他们，社会已经动荡不安了，社会的动荡使国家发生危机，在这种时候你却想辞去职位，你要把责难归结到谁身上呢？ 
English: The emperor said: The granary is empty, the people are poor and displaced, and you want to ask them to move, the society is unstable, the social turmoil has caused a crisis in the country, at this time you want to resign from the post, who do you want to blame?

古文：以书让庆，庆甚惭，遂复视事。
现代文：用诏书责备石庆，石庆非常惭愧，才又重新处理政事。
English: He reprimanded Shi Qing with an edict, and Shi Qing was so ashamed that he re-engaged in political affairs.

古文：庆文深审谨，然无他大略，为百姓言。
现代文：石庆为人思虑细密，处事审慎拘谨，却没有什么高明的见解及为百姓说话的表现。
English: Shi Qing is a thoughtful and meticulous person, he is prudent and prudent, but he has no high-level opinions and no performance of speaking for the people.

古文：後三岁馀，太初二年中，丞相庆卒，谥为恬侯。
现代文：从此又过了三年多，在太初二年，丞相石庆去世，赐谥号为恬侯。
English: Since then, more than three years have passed, and in the second year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the Prime Minister Shi Qing passed away, and his posthumous name was given as Gong Hou.

古文：庆中子德，庆爱用之，上以德为嗣，代侯。
现代文：石庆的次子名德，石庆很喜爱并器重他，皇帝让石德做石庆的继承人，承袭侯爵的爵位。
English: Shih Qing's second son, Mende, was loved and respected by Shih Qing. The emperor asked Shih De to be Shih Qing's heir and inherit the title of marquis.

古文：後为太常，坐法当死，赎免为庶人。
现代文：后来做到了太常。因为触犯法律判处死刑，纳米粟入官赎罪后成了平民。
English: Later, he did it too often. Because he was sentenced to death for violating the law, he became a civilian after he entered the civil service to atone for his crime.

古文：庆方为丞相，诸子孙为吏更至二千石者十三人。
现代文：石庆做丞相时，他的子孙中从小吏升到两千石职位的有十三人。
English: When Shi Qing was chancellor, thirteen of his children and grandchildren rose from minor officials to positions worth two thousand koku.

古文：及庆死後，稍以罪去，孝谨益衰矣。
现代文：等到石庆死后逐渐因不同罪名而被免职，孝顺谨慎的家风也更加衰落了。
English: After the death of Shi Qing, he was gradually removed from office for various crimes, and the filial piety and prudence of the family further declined.

古文：建陵侯卫绾者，代大陵人也。
现代文：建陵侯卫绾，是代郡大陵人。
English: Jianling Houwei Jun, is the representative of County Daling.

古文：绾以戏车为郎，事文帝，功次迁为中郎将，醇谨无他。
现代文：卫绾凭借车技而当了郎官，事奉文帝，由于不断立功被升为中郎将，除了忠厚谨慎一无所长。
English: By virtue of his driving skills, Wei Xuan became a vassal and served Emperor Wen. Due to his continuous meritorious service, he was promoted to the middle vassal. He was good at nothing but being loyal and prudent.

古文：孝景为太子时，召上左右饮，而绾称病不行。
现代文：景帝做太子时，他请皇帝身边的近臣饮宴，而卫绾借口生病不肯去。
English: When Emperor Jing was crown prince, he invited close vassals around the emperor to a banquet, but Wei Xuan refused to go on the pretext of illness.

古文：文帝且崩时，属孝景曰： 绾长者，善遇之。 
现代文：文帝临死时嘱咐景帝说： 卫绾是忠厚的人，你要好好对待他。 
English: When Emperor Wen was about to die, he instructed Emperor Jing to say, "Weihong is a loyal person, you should treat him well.

古文：及文帝崩，景帝立，岁馀不噍呵绾，绾日以谨力。
现代文：等到文帝死去，景帝即位，景帝一年多没责斥过卫绾，卫绾只是一天比一天更谨慎地尽责。
English: When Emperor Wen died and Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, Emperor Jing did not reprimand Emperor Wei for more than a year. Emperor Wei was just more and more careful to fulfill his duties.

古文：景帝幸上林，诏中郎将参乘，还而问曰： 君知所以得参乘乎？ 
现代文：景帝有一次驾临上林苑，命令中郎将卫绾和自己共乘一辆车，回来后问卫绾： 知道你为什么能和我同乘一车吗？ 
English: Once, Emperor Jing came to Shanglinyuan and ordered Zhong Lang to share a car with Wei Xuan. When he returned, he asked Wei Xuan, "Do you know why you can share a car with me?"

古文：绾曰： 臣从车士幸得以功次迁为中郎将，不自知也。 
现代文：卫绾说： 我从一个小小的车士幸运地因立功逐渐升为中郎将，不知道是什么缘故。 
English: Wei Wei said, "I was lucky to be promoted from a small driver to a middle manager due to my hard work. I don't know why.

古文：上问曰： 吾为太子时召君，君不肯来，何也？ 
现代文：景帝又问： 我做太子时召请你参加宴饮，你不肯来，为什么呢？ 
English: Emperor Jing also asked: When I was crown prince, I invited you to a banquet, but you refused to come. Why?

古文：对曰： 死罪，实病！ 
现代文：回答说： 臣该死，那时实在生病了！ 
English: He replied: "Damn it, the minister was really ill at the time!

古文：上赐之剑。
现代文：景帝赐给他一把剑。
English: Emperor Jing gave him a sword.

古文：绾曰： 先帝赐臣剑凡六，剑不敢奉诏。 
现代文：卫绾说： 先皇帝曾经赐给我总共六把宝剑，我不敢再接受陛下的赏赐。 
English: Wei Wei said: The previous emperor once gave me a total of six swords, I dare not accept His Majesty's reward again.

古文：上曰： 剑，人之所施易，独至今乎？ 绾曰： 具在。 
现代文：景帝说： 剑是人们所喜爱之物，往往用来送人或交换他物，难道你能保存到现在吗？ 卫绾说： 全都还在。 
English: Emperor Jing said, "The sword is a favorite of the people, and is often used to give to people or exchange for other things. Can you really keep it until now?" Wei Wei said, "It's all still there."

古文：上使取六剑，剑尚盛，未尝服也。
现代文：皇帝派人去取那六把剑，宝剑完好地在剑套中，不曾使用过。
English: The emperor sent someone to fetch the six swords, which were still in their sheaths and had never been used.

古文：郎官有谴，常蒙其罪，不与他将争；有功，常让他将。
现代文：中郎将属下的郎官犯了错误，卫绾常常代他们受过，不和其他的人去争辩；有了功劳，常常谦让给他人。
English: The middle vassal made a mistake in appointing his subordinate vassals, and Wei Xuan often suffered on their behalf, refusing to argue with others; when he got credit, he often humbly conceded to others.

古文：上以为廉，忠实无他肠，乃拜绾为河间王太傅。
现代文：皇帝认为他品行方正，对自己忠诚没有杂念，就任命他做了河间王刘德的太傅。
English: The emperor thought that his character was upright and that he was loyal to himself without any ulterior motives, so he appointed him to be the eunuch of Liu De, the king of Hema.

古文：吴楚反，诏绾为将，将河间兵击吴楚有功，拜为中尉。
现代文：吴楚七国之乱时，皇帝任命卫绾做了将军，率领河间王的军队攻打吴楚叛军有功，任命他做了中尉。
English: During the Seven Kingdoms War of Wu-Chu, the emperor appointed Weizhong as a general. He led the army of King He to successfully attack the rebel army of Wu-Chu, and appointed him as a lieutenant.

古文：三岁，以军功，孝景前六年中封绾为建陵侯。
现代文：过了三年，因为战功，在景帝前元六年受封为建陵侯。
English: After three years, because of his war service, he was awarded the title of Jianling Hou in the sixth year of the reign of Emperor Jing.

古文：其明年，上废太子，诛栗卿之属。
现代文：第二年，景帝废黜栗太子刘荣，杀了太子的舅父等人。
English: The following year, Emperor Jing deposed the crown prince Liu Rong and killed the prince's uncle and others.

古文：上以为绾长者，不忍，乃赐绾告归，而使郅都治捕栗氏。
现代文：景帝认为卫绾是忠厚的人，不忍心让他治理这件大案，就赐他休假回家。而让郅都逮捕审理栗氏族人。
English: Emperor Jing thought that Wei Xuan was a loyal person, and could not bear to let him manage this big case, so he gave him leave to go home. And let Xuan Du arrest and try the people of the Chestnut clan.

古文：既已，上立胶东王为太子，召绾，拜为太子太傅。
现代文：处理完这件案子，景帝任命胶东王刘彻做了太子，征召卫绾，任命他为太子太傅。
English: After dealing with this case, Emperor Jing appointed Liu Che, the King of Jiaodong, as the crown prince, conscripted Wei Wei, and appointed him as the crown prince.

古文：久之，迁为御史大夫。
现代文：又过了很久，升迁为御史大夫。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to chief historian.

古文：五岁，代桃侯舍为丞相，朝奏事如职所奏。
现代文：过了五年，取代桃侯刘舍做了丞相，在朝廷上只奏报职份内的事情。
English: Five years later, he replaced Liu She, the ruler of Taohou, as chancellor, and only reported matters within his position to the imperial court.

古文：然自初官以至丞相，终无可言。
现代文：然而从他最初做官起直到他位列丞相，终究没有什么可称道或指责之处。
English: However, from his first days in office until he became prime minister, there was nothing to praise or criticize.

古文：天子以为敦厚，可相少主，尊宠之，赏赐甚多。
现代文：皇帝认为他敦厚，可以辅佐少主，对他很尊重宠爱，赏赐的东西很多。
English: The emperor thought that he was brave and could help the young lord. He respected and favored him, and gave him many gifts.

古文：为丞相三岁，景帝崩，武帝立。
现代文：卫绾做丞相三年，景帝驾崩，武帝即位。
English: Emperor Wei served as chancellor for three years, Emperor Jing died, and Emperor Wu ascended the throne.

古文：建元年中，丞相以景帝疾时诸官囚多坐不辜者，而君不任职，免之。
现代文：建元年间，因景帝卧病时，各官署的许多囚犯多是无辜受冤屈的人，他身为丞相，未能尽职尽责，被免去丞相官职。
English: During the first year of the Jianwen era, when Emperor Jing was ill in bed, many of the prisoners in government offices were innocent people who had been wronged. As chancellor, he failed to fulfill his duties and was removed from his post as chancellor.

古文：其後绾卒，子信代。坐酎金失侯。
现代文：后来卫绾去世，儿子卫信承袭了建陵侯的爵位。
English: Later, Wei Xuan died, and his son Wei Xun inherited the title of Jianling Marquis.

古文：塞侯直不疑者，南阳人也。
现代文：后来因为助祭献金不合规定而失去爵位。塞侯直不疑是南阳人。
English: Later, he lost his title due to irregularities in the offering of money to the altar servers. There is no doubt that Saeho was from Nanyang.

古文：为郎，事文帝。
现代文：他做郎官事奉文帝。
English: He served Emperor Wen as a vassal.

古文：其同舍有告归，误持同舍郎金去，已而金主觉，妄意不疑，不疑谢有之，买金偿。
现代文：与他同住一室的人请假探家，错拿走他人的金子而去，过了些时候，金子的主人才发觉，就胡乱猜疑直不疑，直不疑向他道歉并承认了这件事，买金子偿还他。
English: The person who lived in the same room with him asked for leave to search the house, took someone else's gold by mistake and left. After a while, the owner of the gold only found out, suspected him, apologized and admitted the matter, and bought gold to repay him.

古文：而告归者来而归金，而前郎亡金者大惭，以此称为长者。
现代文：等到请假探家的人回来归还了金子，使那个先前丢失金子的人极为惭愧，因此人们称直不疑是个忠厚的人。
English: When the prospector returned from leave and returned the gold, the man who had lost the gold was so ashamed that he was known to be a loyal man.

古文：文帝称举，稍迁至太中大夫。
现代文：文帝也称赞提拔了他，逐渐升至太中大夫。
English: Emperor Wen also praised and promoted him, and he was gradually promoted to the position of Grand Vice Admiral.

古文：朝廷见，人或毁曰： 不疑状貌甚美，然独无柰其善盗嫂何也！ 
现代文：一次上朝廷见时，有人谗毁他说： 直不疑相貌很美，然而惟独没有办法处置他喜欢和嫂子私通的事啊！ 
English: Once, when he went to the imperial court for a meeting, someone scolded him and said, "Without a doubt, his appearance is very beautiful, but there is no way to deal with the fact that he likes to fornicate with his sister-in-law!"

古文：不疑闻，曰： 我乃无兄。 
现代文：直不疑听说后，说： 我是没有兄长的。 
English: When he heard about it, he said, "I don't have an older brother.

古文：然终不自明也。
现代文：说过后他终究不再做其他辩解。
English: After saying that, he finally stopped making any other excuses.

古文：吴楚反时，不疑以二千石将兵击之。
现代文：吴楚七国之乱时，直不疑以二千石的官职率兵攻打叛军。
English: During the War of the Seven Kingdoms of Wu-Chu, there is no doubt that he led the troops to attack the rebels with an official position of 2,000 koku.

古文：景帝後元年，拜为御史大夫。
现代文：景帝后元年，任命他为御史大夫。
English: In the first year after the reign of Emperor Jing, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Historian.

古文：天子修吴楚时功，乃封不疑为塞侯。
现代文：景帝表彰平定吴楚叛乱的有功人员，封直不疑为塞侯。
English: Emperor Jing commended the meritorious personnel who had quelled the Wu Chu rebellion, and they were undoubtedly knighted.

古文：武帝建元年中，与丞相绾俱以过免。
现代文：武帝建元年间，他和丞相卫绾都因过失被免去官职。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu in the first year of the Jianyuan era, both he and the chancellor Wei Xuan were removed from office for negligence.

古文：不疑学老子言。
现代文：直不疑学习老子的学说。
English: It is imperative to study the teachings of Lao Tzu.

古文：其所临，为官如故，唯恐人知其为吏迹也。
现代文：他治理每个地方时，担任官职都因循前任所为，唯恐人们知道他做官的事迹。
English: In each place he governed, he assumed office by following the actions of his predecessors, so that people would not know his deeds as an official.

古文：不好立名称，称为长者。
现代文：他不喜欢树立自己的名声，被人称为长者。
English: He doesn't like to make a name for himself and be known as an elder.

古文：不疑卒，子相如代。
现代文：直不疑去世后，他的儿子相如承袭侯爵之位。
English: After his death, his son succeeded to the title of marquis.

古文：孙望，坐酎金失侯。
现代文：到孙子直望时，由于助祭献金不合要求而失去侯爵之位。
English: When he looked directly at his grandson, he lost his marquisate because the sacrificial offering did not meet the requirements.

古文：郎中令周文者，名仁，其先故任城人也。
现代文：郎中令周文，名仁，他的祖先原是任城人。
English: His forefathers were originally from Rencheng.

古文：以医见。
现代文：凭借医术谒见天子。
English: By virtue of medical skills, we can see the Son of God.

古文：景帝为太子时，拜为舍人，积功稍迁，孝文帝时至太中大夫。
现代文：景帝做太子时，任命他做舍人，累积功劳逐渐提升，文帝时官至太中大夫。
English: When Emperor Jing was crown prince, he appointed him as a layman, and his accumulated merits gradually increased, and he was promoted to the position of Tai Zhong Daifu during the reign of Emperor Wen.

古文：景帝初即位，拜仁为郎中令。
现代文：景帝刚继位，就任命周仁做了郎中令。
English: As soon as Emperor Jing succeeded to the throne, he appointed Zhou Ren as his second-in-command.

古文：仁为人阴重不泄，常衣敝补衣溺袴，期为不絜清，以是得幸。
现代文：周仁为人深隐持重不泄露别人的话语，常常穿着破旧缀有补丁的衣服和能够吸附尿液的内裤，故意使容服不洁，使妃嫔不愿接近因此得到景帝宠爱。
English: Zhou Ren was a secretive person who did not divulge other people's words. He often wore worn-out clothes with patches and underwear that could absorb urine. He deliberately made his clothes unclean so that the concubines would not approach him, and thus he was favored by Emperor Jing.

古文：景帝入卧内，於後宫祕戏，仁常在旁。
现代文：景帝进入寝宫和妃嫔淫亵戏耍时，周仁常在旁边。
English: When Emperor Jing entered his bedchamber to play lewd games with his concubines, Zhou Ren was often by his side.

古文：至景帝崩，仁尚为郎中令，终无所言。
现代文：景帝驾崩，周仁还在做郎中令，可他始终无所进言。
English: Emperor Jing is dead, and Zhou Ren is still acting as his second-in-command, but he still has nothing to say.

古文：上时问人，仁曰： 上自察之。 
现代文：皇帝有时询问别人的情况，周仁总是说： 皇上亲自考察他吧。 
English: The emperor sometimes inquired about other people's conditions, and Zhou Ren always said, "Let the emperor examine him in person."

古文：然亦无所毁。
现代文：可是也没有对别人讲什么坏话。
English: But he didn't say anything bad about others either.

古文：以此景帝再自幸其家。家徙阳陵。
现代文：因此景帝曾经一再驾临他的家，他家后来迁徙到阳陵。
English: Therefore, Emperor Jing had repeatedly visited his home, and his family later moved to Yangling.

古文：上所赐甚多，然常让，不敢受也。
现代文：皇帝赏赐的东西很多，他却常常推让，不敢接受。
English: The emperor rewarded him with many things, but he often gave in and did not dare to accept.

古文：诸侯群臣赂遗，终无所受。
现代文：诸侯百官赠送的东西，他始终没有接受。
English: He never accepted anything that was given to him by any of the hundreds of lords and officials.

古文：武帝立，以为先帝臣，重之。
现代文：汉武帝即位，认为他是先帝的大臣而尊重他。
English: Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne, and respected him, considering him to be the minister of the former emperor.

古文：仁乃病免，以二千石禄归老，子孙咸至大官矣。
现代文：周仁因病免职朝廷让他享受每年二千石的俸禄返乡养老，他的子孙都做到了大官。
English: When Zhou Ren was relieved of his duties due to illness, the imperial court allowed him to enjoy an annual salary of two thousand koku to return home to retire, and his children and grandchildren all became high-ranking officials.

古文：御史大夫张叔者，名欧，安丘侯说之庶子也。
现代文：御史大夫张叔名欧，是安丘侯张说的庶子。
English: Master of History Zhang Xunmei Ou is the illegitimate son of Anqiu Hou Zhang.

古文：孝文时以治刑名言事太子。
现代文：文帝时以研究法家学说侍奉太子。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wen, he served the crown prince by studying the teachings of the legalists.

古文：然欧虽治刑名家，其人长者。
现代文：张欧虽然研究法家学说，他为人却很忠厚。
English: Although Zhang Ou studies the teachings of the Legalists, he is a very loyal person.

古文：景帝时尊重，常为九卿。
现代文：景帝时很受尊重，常常位居九卿之列。
English: Emperor Jing was highly respected and often ranked among the nine nobles.

古文：至武帝元朔四年，韩安国免，诏拜欧为御史大夫。
现代文：到了武帝元朔四年，韩安国被免职，皇帝任命张欧做了御史大夫。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Wu's reign, Han An Guo was dismissed from his post, and the emperor appointed Zhang Ou as imperial historian.

古文：自欧为吏，未尝言案人，专以诚长者处官。
现代文：自从张欧做官以来，没有说过惩办人，一心用诚实忠厚态度做官。
English: Since Zhang Ou became an official, he has never said anything about punishing people, and has been committed to being an official with an honest and loyal attitude.

古文：官属以为长者，亦不敢大欺。
现代文：部属都认为他是个忠厚的人，也不敢过分地欺骗他。
English: His subordinates all consider him to be a loyal person and do not dare to deceive him excessively.

古文：上具狱事，有可卻，卻之；不可者，不得已，为涕泣面对而封之。
现代文：皇上把准备审理的案件交给他，有能够退回重审的就退回；不能退回重审的，因事不得已，就流着眼泪亲自看着封好文书。
English: The Emperor gave him the cases that were ready to be tried, and those that could be returned for retrial were returned; those that could not be returned for retrial, he had no choice but to look at the sealed documents with tears streaming down his face.

古文：其爱人如此。
现代文：他爱护他人就是如此。
English: That's how caring he is.

古文：老病笃，请免。
现代文：后来他年老病重，请求免去官职。
English: Later, when he was old and seriously ill, he asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：於是天子亦策罢，以上大夫禄归老于家。家於阳陵。
现代文：天子也就颁布诏书，准许他的请求，按照上大夫的俸禄让他回乡养老。他住在阳陵。
English: Tianzi also issued an edict, granting his request to let him return to his hometown to retire in accordance with the salary of a senior doctor. He lives in Yangling.

古文：子孙咸至大官矣。
现代文：他的子孙都做到了大官。
English: His children and grandchildren have all achieved high office.

古文：太史公曰：仲尼有言曰 君子欲讷於言而敏於行 ，其万石、建陵、张叔之谓邪？
现代文：太史公说：孔子曾经有过这样一句话： 君子要言语迟钝而做事敏捷 ，这句话说的是万石君、建陵侯和张叔吧！
English: Taishi said, "Confucius once said, 'A gentleman should be slow in speech but quick in action.' This saying applies to Wan Shi Jun, Jian Ling Hou, and Zhang Shuai."

古文：是以其教不肃而成，不严而治。
现代文：因此他们做事不峻急却能使事情成功，措施不严厉而能使社会安定。
English: Therefore, they do things slowly but can make things successful, and the measures are not strict but can make the society stable.

古文：塞侯微巧，而周文处讇，君子讥之，为其近於佞也。
现代文：塞侯直不疑过于巧诈，而周文失于卑恭谄媚，君子讥讽他们，因为他们形近谄佞。
English: There is no doubt that the Seljuqs were too cunning, while the Zhou Wens were too subservient and obsequious. The nobles ridiculed them because they were almost like baboons.

古文：然斯可谓笃行君子矣！
现代文：但他们也可算是行为敦厚的君子了。
English: But they can also be considered well-behaved gentlemen.

