古文：慕容垂李勣女解袱人漕店人张琮刘门奴阎庚明崇俨王怀智沙门英禅师陈导王志巴峡人陆余庆
现代文：慕容垂李勣女解袱人漕店人张琮刘门奴阎庚明崇俨王怀智沙门英禅师陈导王志巴峡人陆余庆
English: Mu Rong, Liu Men Niu, Yan Gengming, Wang Huai Zhi, Shamen Ying, Chen Guo, Wang Zhibaxia, Lu Yuqing

古文：慕容垂唐太宗征辽，行至定州，路侧有一鬼，衣黄衣，立高冢上，神采特异。
现代文：慕容垂唐太宗征辽的时候，走到定州。路旁有一鬼，穿着黄色的衣服，站在高高的坟墓上面，神采特异。
English: When Murong, the descendant of Tang Taizong, conquered Liao, he went to Dingzhou. There was a ghost on the side of the road, dressed in yellow clothes, standing on top of a high grave, fascinated.

古文：太宗遣使问之，答曰：我昔胜君昔，君今胜我今。
现代文：太宗派人问他，鬼回答说：我昔胜君昔，君今胜我今。
English: A man from the Great Sect asked him, and the ghost replied, "I used to beat you in the past, but you beat me now."

古文：荣华各异代，何用苦追寻。
现代文：荣华各异代，何用苦追寻。
English: Ronghua in different generations, what is the use of hard pursuit.

古文：言讫不见，问之，乃慕容垂墓。
现代文：说完不见了。太宗一打听，才知道这是慕容垂的墓。
English: Taizong didn't hear the end of it, and only when he inquired did he find out that this was the grave of Murongdiao.

古文：李勣女
现代文：李勣女
English: Li Yingmei

古文：贞观元年，李勣爱女卒，葬北邙，使家僮庐于墓侧。
现代文：贞观元年，李绩心爱的女儿死了，葬在北邙。让家僮住在坟墓的旁边。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, Li Jie's beloved daughter died and was buried in Beilun. Let Jiayu live next to the grave.

古文：一日，女子忽诣家僮曰：我本不死，被大树之神窃我。今值其神出朝西岳，故得便奔出。
现代文：一天，女子忽然告诉家僮说：我本来不应该死，是被大树之神偷去的，现在趁着那个大树之神去朝拜西岳，所以才能跑出来。
English: One day, the woman suddenly told Ieharu, "I shouldn't have died in the first place, I was stolen by the tree god, and now I'm taking advantage of the tree god to worship Seigaku, so I can run away."

古文：知尔在此，是以来。
现代文：我知道你在这里，就来了。
English: I knew you were here, so I came.

古文：我已离父母，复有此辱耻，不可归。幸你匿我，我能以致富报尔。
现代文：我已经离开了父母，又受到这样的羞辱，不能回去了，希望你隐藏我，我能使你致富来报答你。
English: I have left my parents and been humiliated like this, I can't go back, I hope you hide me, I can make you rich to repay you.

古文：家僮骇愕，良久乃许，遂别置一室。
现代文：家僮惊愕半天才答应，就另安排了一间屋子。
English: Surprised, Iehata agreed, and arranged for another room.

古文：其女或朝出暮至，或夜出晓来，行步如风。
现代文：那女子或早或晚地来，行走如风。
English: The woman comes early or late and walks like the wind.

古文：一月后，忽携黄金十斤以赐，家僮受之。
现代文：一个月以后，忽然带来黄金十斤送给他，家僮收下。
English: A month later, he suddenly brought ten catties of gold to give to him, and the family accepted it.

古文：出卖数两，乃民家所失，主者执家僮以告。
现代文：拿出去卖了几两。才知道黄金是百姓家丢的。失主抓住家僮来告官。
English: He took it out and sold a few. Only then did he know that the gold had been lost by a commoner. The owner of the lost gold grabbed his family heirlooms and went to the police.

古文：洛阳令推穷其由，家僮具述此事，及追取，此女已失，其余金尽化为黄石焉。
现代文：洛阳令盘问其中的原委。家僮详述此事。等到追取的时候，那女子已经不见了。那些剩下的金子都变成了黄色的石头。
English: Luo Yang ordered to cross-examine one of the original committee members. Jiaying explained the matter in detail. By the time of the pursuit, the woman had disappeared. The remaining gold had turned into yellow stones.

古文：解袱人
现代文：解袱人
English: Relieving the Burden

古文：江南有数人行船，见岸上两人，与船并行数里。
现代文：江南有几个人在行船，看见岸上有两个人与船并行好几里。
English: In the south of the Yangtze River, several people were on a boat and saw two people on the shore walking several miles alongside the boat.

古文：岸上人云：暂寄歇息。
现代文：岸上人说：暂且到船上歇息一下。
English: The man on the shore said, "Let's go to the boat and rest for a while."

古文：船人许之。
现代文：船上人同意了。
English: The crew agreed.

古文：怪其跳踯上船，其疾如风。
现代文：岸上人跳上船来，其快如风。
English: People on the shore jumped into the boat as fast as the wind.

古文：须臾，两人云：暂至村，各有小袱，且寄船上，慎勿开也。
现代文：一会儿，两人说：暂且到村里，我们各有个小包袱，先寄放在船上，千万不要打开。
English: After a while, the two of them said, "Let's go to the village for the time being. We each have a small bag. First, we'll put it on the boat. Don't open it."

古文：殷勤戒之，两人去后，船中一人解袱共看。
现代文：再三告诫。两人离开后，船上一个人解开包袱，大伙一齐看。
English: After the two left, a person on the boat unpacked the luggage, and everyone watched.

古文：每袱有五百贴子，似纸，非篆隶，并不可识。共惊，还结如故。
现代文：每个包袱有五百贴子，好象是纸，字不是篆隶，都不认识，大伙都很惊讶，依然照样系上。
English: Each bag has five hundred posts, as if it were paper, the characters are not serifs, they do not know, everyone is very surprised, it is still attached.

古文：俄顷二人回，云：开讫，何因讳？
现代文：一会儿两人回来了，说：解开包袱了，为什么隐瞒？
English: After a while, the two came back and said, "We've unpacked, why are you hiding it?

古文：乃捉解袱人云：是此人解。
现代文：就抓住解袱人说：是这个人解开的。
English: And he took hold of him that was loosed, and said, This man did loose him.

古文：遂掷解袱上岸，如掷婴儿。
现代文：就扔解袱者到岸上，象扔婴儿一样。
English: And they threw him on the beach like a baby.

古文：又于村中取人，拥之而去。
现代文：又在村中找来人，相拥而去。
English: They also found people in the village and hugged each other.

古文：经数日，一人欲放解袱者，一人不许，曰：会遣一二年受辛苦。
现代文：过了几天，一人想放走解袱人，一人不同意。说：应该让他受一二年的辛苦。
English: A few days later, one of them wanted to let the reliever go, but the other disagreed, saying that he should be made to suffer for a year or two.

古文：乃解至富人家。
现代文：就到了富人家。
English: They arrived at the rich man's house.

古文：其人家有好马，恒于庭中置槽，自看饮饲。
现代文：这户人家有好马，总在院中置槽饲养，自己看管马的饮食。
English: This family has good horses. They always keep them in a stable at the hospital and take care of their horses' diet themselves.

古文：此时已夜，堂门闭，欲取富人无由。
现代文：这时已经半夜了，堂门紧闭，想抓获富人没有机会。
English: By this time it was midnight, the doors were closed and there was no chance of catching the rich man.

古文：一人云：此人爱马，解马放，即应开门出。
现代文：一人说：这人爱马，解开马放了，他立刻能开门出来。
English: One of them said, "This man loves horses. He untied the horse and let it go. He was able to open the door immediately."

古文：如言，富人果出。一人提之，应手即死。
现代文：就象说的那样，富人果然就出来了，一人抗起他、触手就死了。
English: Just as he said, the rich man did indeed come out, one person resisted him, and the tentacle died.

古文：取得富人，遂弃解袱人而去。
现代文：抓获了富人，就丢开解袱人走了。
English: When they had seized the rich man, they let the steward go.

古文：此家忙惧，唯见此人在，即共殴。
现代文：这家慌乱惊恐，只看见这个人在，就一块打他。
English: The family panicked and panicked, only to see this man in the street and beat him up together.

古文：缚之送县，以解袱等事为辞。
现代文：绑上他送到县衙。解袱人就将解开包袱等事做为开脱的言辞。
English: They tied him up and sent him to the county magistrate's office. The person relieving him of the burden then used the words "untying the burden" as an excuse.

古文：州县不信，遂断死，此人自雪无由，久禁乃出。
现代文：州县不信，就判他死罪。这人自己雪冤没有理由。关了很久才放出来。
English: The state and county didn't believe him, so they sentenced him to death. There was no reason for this man to take revenge. He was locked up for a long time before he was released.

古文：漕店人
现代文：漕店人
English: The rowers are coming

古文：贞观中，长安城西漕店人，葬父母，凶具甚华。
现代文：贞观年间，长安城西漕店人安葬他的父母，祭具非常豪华。
English: During the reign of Zhenguan, a man from Xizodian, Chang'an City, buried his parents, and the altar fittings were very luxurious.

古文：一二年后，忽见亡弟来，容貌憔悴。
现代文：一、二年之后，忽然看见他死去的弟弟来了，容貌憔悴。
English: A year or two later, he suddenly saw his dead brother arrive, looking haggard.

古文：言为兄厚葬父母之故，被差为林皋驿马，只承困苦不堪，故来请兄代。
现代文：说因为哥哥厚葬父母的缘故，他被差为林皋驿马。承受困苦，不堪忍受，请哥哥代替他。
English: He said that because his brother had buried his parents, he had been sent to live in the forest. Unable to bear the hardship, he asked his brother to take his place.

古文：兄大惊惧，更多与纸钱，遣努力且作。
现代文：哥哥大为惊恐，更多地给他纸钱，让他努力去干。
English: Terrified, his brother gave him more paper money and told him to work hard.

古文：其后数月，又见弟来云，只承不济，兄遂不免去，其兄应时而卒。
现代文：过了几个月，又见弟弟来了说承受不了，哥哥不能不去。他哥哥马上就死了。
English: A few months later, he saw his brother again and said he couldn't bear it, his brother couldn't go. His brother died immediately.

古文：张琮
现代文：张琮
English: Zhang Ye

古文：永徽初，张琮为南阳令。
现代文：永徽初年，张琮为南阳令。
English: In the first year of Yonghui, Zhang Ye became the leader of Nanyang.

古文：寝阁中，闻阶前竹有呻吟之声，就视则无所见。
现代文：晚上在楼上睡觉，听到阶前的竹子有呻吟的声音，靠近一看没看到什么。
English: At night, when I was sleeping upstairs, I heard the bamboo groaning in front of the steps. When I looked closer, I didn't see anything.

古文：如此数夜，怪之，乃祝曰：有神灵者，当相语。
现代文：这样过了几晚，张很奇怪就祈祝说：有神灵降临，应该和我说话。
English: After a few nights like this, Zhang very strangely prayed and said, "A god has come down, you should talk to me."

古文：其夜，忽有一人从竹中出，形甚弊陋，前自陈曰：朱粲之乱，某在兵中，为粲所杀。
现代文：这天晚上，忽然有一人从竹林中走出，相貌很丑陋，上前自我介绍说：朱粲叛乱时，我在军中，被朱粲所杀。
English: That evening, a very ugly-looking man suddenly came out of the bamboo grove and introduced himself: "When Zhu Xi rebelled, I was in the army and was killed by Zhu Xi.

古文：尸骸正在明府阁前，一目为竹根所损，不堪楚痛。
现代文：尸体正好在你府内楼前。一只眼睛被竹根伤了，不能忍受痛苦。
English: The body was right in front of your building. One of his eyes was injured by a bamboo root, and he couldn't bear the pain.

古文：以明府仁明，故辄投告。
现代文：因明府仁义贤明，所以就将来相告。
English: Because of the benevolence, righteousness and wisdom of the Ming government, they will inform each other in the future.

古文：幸见移葬，敢忘厚恩。
现代文：如有幸被移葬他处，不敢忘了你的大恩。
English: If you are lucky enough to be moved to another place, don't forget your great kindness.

古文：令谓曰：如是何不早相闻。
现代文：南阳令对他说：如果这样，为什么不早告诉我！
English: Nanyang Commander said to him, "If so, why didn't you tell me earlier!"

古文：乃许之。
现代文：就答应了。
English: I said yes.

古文：明日，为具棺榇，使掘之，果得一尸，竹根贯其左目。
现代文：第二天，为他准备了棺材，命人挖掘竹林，果然见到一具尸体，竹根穿过他的左眼睛。
English: The next day, a coffin was prepared for him, and someone was ordered to dig in the bamboo forest, where they found a corpse with a bamboo root through his left eye.

古文：仍加时服，改葬城外。
现代文：为他穿上时新衣服，改葬在城外。
English: They dressed him in new clothes and buried him outside the city.

古文：其后令笞杀一乡老，其家将复仇，谋须令夜出，乃要杀之。
现代文：后来，南阳令用笞刑打死了一乡下老人。他的家属想要复仇，阴谋算计只须南阳令晚上出来，就要杀他。
English: Later, Nanyang Rong killed an old man in the countryside with a beating. His family members wanted to take revenge, and they planned to kill him as soon as Nanyang Rong came out at night.

古文：俄而城中失火，延烧十余家，令将出按行之。
现代文：不久，城中失火，漫延烧了十几家。南阳令想出去巡视火情。
English: Not long after, a fire broke out in the city, burning more than a dozen houses. Nanyang Ling wanted to go out to inspect the fire situation.

古文：乃见前鬼遮令马曰：明府深夜何所之，将有异谋。
现代文：就见前几天那个鬼拦住马说：你深夜去什么地方？将有阴谋。
English: Just a few days before I met him, the ghost stopped the horse and said, "Where are you going late at night? There will be a plot."

古文：令问为谁，曰：前时得罪于明府者。
现代文：南阳令问谁干的？鬼说：前些时被你得罪的人。
English: Nanyang Rong asked who did it? The ghost said, "Someone you offended some time ago."

古文：令乃复入。
现代文：南阳令就又回去了。
English: Nanyang Rong went back again.

古文：明日，掩捕其家，问之皆验，遂穷治之。
现代文：第二天就缉捕了他的家属。经过审问都验证了鬼说的事。
English: The next day, his family members were arrested. After interrogation, they all verified what the ghost said.

古文：夜更祭其墓，刻石铭于前曰：身殉国难，死不忘忠。
现代文：就彻底地将他们绳之以法。晚上又祭拜鬼的墓，刻石碑树在墓前。铭文说：身殉国难，死不忘忠。
English: In the evening, they worshipped the ghost's grave and carved a stone and a tree in front of the grave. The inscription said: "Martyred for the country, loyal to the death."

古文：烈烈贞魂，实为鬼雄。
现代文：烈烈贞魂，实为鬼雄。
English: A strong and virtuous soul, he is truly a hero.

古文：刘门奴
现代文：刘门奴
English: Liu Men'nu

古文：高宗营大明宫，宣政殿始成，每夜，闻数十骑行殿左右，殿中宿卫者皆见焉，衣马甚洁。
现代文：高宗建造大明宫，宣政殿刚刚完成的时候，每到晚上都看见数十名骑马的人行驰在殿的左右。殿中守夜的卫兵都看见了，衣服马匹非常整洁，如此十多天。
English: When Gao Zong was building the Daming Palace and the Xuan Zheng Palace had just been completed, every evening he saw dozens of people on horseback riding around the palace. The guards on duty in the palace all saw it, the clothes and horses were very neat, and this went on for more than ten days.

古文：如此十余日，高宗乃使术者刘门奴问其故，对曰：我汉楚王戊之太子也。
现代文：高宗让术士刘门奴问其中的原因。对方回答说：我是汉代楚王戊的太子。
English: Gao Zong asked the sorcerer Liu Mennu to ask the reason. The other replied: "I am the crown prince of the Han Dynasty's King Chu Wu."

古文：及王诛后，天子念我，置而不杀，养于宫中。后以病死，葬于此。
现代文：怎么能有遗留的后代呢？回答说：楚王起兵时，天子顾念我，放掉就没杀我，养在宫中，后来因病而死，埋在这个地方。
English: How can there be any leftover descendants? Hua replied, "When King Chu raised an army, the Heavenly Son cared for me, released me and did not kill me, raised me in the palace, and later died of illness and was buried in this place.

古文：天子怜我，殓以玉鱼一双，今在正殿东北角。
现代文：天子可怜我，用玉鱼一双殉葬，现在放在正殿的东北角。
English: The Son of Heaven took pity on me and buried me with a pair of jade fish, which are now in the northeast corner of the main hall.

古文：史臣遗略，是以不见于书。
现代文：史官漏掉了这些事。所以不见于史书。
English: Historians missed it, so it's not in the history books.

古文：门奴曰：今皇帝在此，汝何敢庭中扰扰乎？
现代文：门奴说：现在皇帝在此，你怎敢在院中搔扰？
English: The manservant said: Now that the emperor is here, how dare you disturb him in the courtyard?

古文：对曰：此是我故宅，今既在天子宫中，动出颇见拘限，甚不乐。乞改葬我于高敞美地，诚所望也。
现代文：回答说：这是我过去住的地方。现在既然在天子宫中，行动很受拘束，请求改葬我在高敞美丽的地方，这是我真诚希望的。
English: He replied: "This is the place where I used to live. Now that I am in the womb of heaven, and my movements are very constrained, I would like to request that I be reburied in a spacious and beautiful place. This is my sincere wish."

古文：慎无夺我玉鱼。
现代文：千万不要拿走我的玉鱼。
English: Don't you dare take my jade fish.

古文：门奴奏之，帝命改葬。
现代文：门奴向皇帝秉奏了这件事。
English: The valet played the matter up to the emperor.

古文：发其处，果得古坟，棺已朽腐，旁有玉鱼一双，制甚精巧。
现代文：皇帝命令改葬，挖开这个地方，果然有一古墓，棺木已经腐朽了，旁边有玉鱼一双，制造很精巧。
English: The emperor ordered a reburial, dug up the place, and sure enough, there was an ancient tomb, the coffin was rotten, and next to it was a pair of jade fish, very delicately made.

古文：乃敕易棺榇，以礼葬之于苑外，并以玉鱼随之。
现代文：皇帝下令换了棺材，以礼节把他移葬在宫外，并把玉鱼随葬。
English: The emperor ordered the coffin to be changed, and he was buried outside the palace with the etiquette, and the jade fish was buried with him.

古文：于此遂绝。
现代文：此后就没有鬼出现了。
English: After that, there were no more ghosts.

古文：阎庚
现代文：阎庚
English: Yan Geng

古文：张仁亶，幼时贫乏，恒在东都北市寓居。
现代文：张仁亶小时贫穷。常在东都北市寄居。
English: Zhang Renya was poor as a child. He often lived in Dongdubei City.

古文：有阎庚者，马牙荀子之子也，好善自喜。
现代文：有个叫阎庚的人，是马牙荀子的儿子，乐善好施。
English: There was a man named Yan Geng, the son of a horse-toothed mule, who was good at giving alms.

古文：慕仁亶之德，恒窃父资，以给其衣食，亦累年矣。
现代文：仰慕仁亶的品德，常常偷他父亲的钱财来接济仁亶的吃穿。
English: He admired Rinchen's virtue and often stole his father's money to help feed and clothe Rinchen.

古文：荀子每怒庚云：汝商贩之流，彼才学之士，于汝何有，而破产以奉？
现代文：荀子总是怒骂阎庚说：你是商贩之流，他是才学之士。对你来说有什么理由破费钱财来奉养他呢？
English: The cripple always scolded Yan Geng, saying, "You are a merchant, he is a scholar. What is the reason for you to spend money to support him?

古文：仁亶闻其辞，谓庚曰：坐我累君，今将适诣白鹿山。所劳相资，不敢忘也。
现代文：仁亶听到这话，对阎庚说：因为我而连累了你。现在我想去白鹿山，劳烦你相送财物，不敢忘记。
English: When Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche heard this, he said to Yan Geng, "Because of me, I have burdened you. Now I want to go to the White Deer Mountain, and I dare not forget to trouble you to send money to each other.

古文：庚久为仁亶胥附之友，心不忍别，谓仁亶曰：方愿志学，今欲皆行。
现代文：阎庚长期是仁亶形影不离的朋友，心中不忍分别，对仁亶说：我也正想志于才学，现在打算和你一同去。
English: Yan Geng, who had been an inseparable friend of Ren Yao for a long time, could not bear to part, and said to Ren Yao: "I also want to study, and now I plan to go with you."

古文：仁亶奇有志，许焉。庚乃私备驴马粮食同去。
现代文：仁亶赞许他有此志向，同意了，阎庚就私下准备好了驴马粮食一同走了。
English: Yan Geng privately prepared donkey and horse food and they left together.

古文：六日至陈留，宿逆旅。
现代文：六天后，到了陈留，住在客店。
English: Six days later, he arrived in Chenlu and stayed at an inn.

古文：仁亶舍其内房，房内有床。
现代文：仁亶住在内房，房外面也有床。
English: Rinchen lives in the inner room and has a bed outside the room.

古文：久之，一客后至，坐于床所。
现代文：很久，又来了一个客人，坐在床上。
English: After a long time, another guest came and sat on the bed.

古文：仁亶见其视瞻非凡，谓庚自外持壶酒至。仁亶以酒先属客，客不敢受，固属之，因与合饮。
现代文：仁亶看他气质非凡，让阎庚到外面拿壶酒来，仁亶把酒请客人，客人不敢接受，仁亶坚持请他，就和他一起喝酒。
English: Seeing his extraordinary temperament, Renju asked Yan Geng to go outside and bring a pot of wine. Renju offered the wine to the guests, but the guests were afraid to accept it. Renju insisted on inviting him, and they drank with him.

古文：酒酣欢甚，乃同房而宿。
现代文：酒喝得很高兴，就一同回房休息。
English: They drank happily and went back to the room together to rest.

古文：中夕，相问行李，客答曰：吾非人，乃地曹耳。
现代文：半夜，仁亶问他要到哪里去，他回答说：我不是人，是地曹。
English: In the middle of the night, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche asked him where he was going. He replied, "I'm not a human, I'm a gnome."

古文：地府令主河北婚姻，绊男女脚。
现代文：地府令我主持河北一带婚姻事宜，为男女作合。
English: The prefectural government ordered me to preside over the marriage affairs in Hebei, and to make a match for men and women.

古文：仁亶开视其衣装，见袋中细绳，方信焉。
现代文：仁亶看他的衣服，看见袋中的细绳，方才相信。
English: Only after looking at his clothes and seeing the string in the bag did Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche believe.

古文：因求问己荣位年寿，鬼言：亶年八十余，位极人臣。
现代文：仁亶就问他自己的官位年寿。鬼说仁亶能活到八十多岁，位极人臣。
English: Rinchen then asked him how old he would be at the end of his term of office. The ghost said that Rinchen would live to be more than eighty years old, an extremely senior minister.

古文：复问庚，鬼云：庚命贫，无位禄。
现代文：仁亶又问阎庚的情况。鬼说阎庚命苦，不能做官。
English: Rinchen also asked about Yan Geng's condition. The ghost said that Yan Geng had a hard life and could not be an official.

古文：仁亶问何以致之，鬼云：或绊得佳女，配之有相，当能得耳。
现代文：仁亶问用什么办法能达到好的结果？鬼说：如果能找到美女许配他，或许能达到目的。
English: The genie said, "If I can find a beautiful woman to marry him, maybe I can achieve my goal."

古文：今河北去白鹿山百余里，有一村中王老女，相极贵。
现代文：现在河北离白鹿山一百余里的村中王老的女儿，面相极其尊贵。
English: Now Hebei is more than a hundred miles away from the White Deer Mountain. Wang Lao's daughter is extremely dignified.

古文：顷已绊与人讫，当相为，解彼绊此，以成阎侯也。
现代文：已经许配给别人了，我当解除那个婚约而促成这个婚姻来成全阎侯。
English: I have been betrothed to someone else, I should break off that marriage and make this marriage happen to complete the hell.

古文：第速行，欲至其村，当有大雨濡湿，以此为信。
现代文：马上走，将到村子的时候，会有场大雨，以此证明我的话。
English: Go immediately, and when you get to the village, there will be a heavy rain to prove my words.

古文：因诀去。
现代文：说完就告别而去。
English: After saying this, he bade farewell and left.

古文：仁亶与庚，行六七日，至村，遇大雨，衣装湿汙。乃至村西，求王氏舍焉。款门，久之方出，谢客云：家有小不得意，所以迟迟，无讶也。
现代文：仁亶和阎庚走了六、七天，到村边遇到大雨，衣服湿了，就到了村西王家，敲门半天，才出来迎接客人，说：家里人不顺心的事，所以开门迟了，不要见怪。
English: After walking for six or seven days, Rinchen Dorjee Rinpoche and Yan Geng encountered heavy rain on the outskirts of the village, and their clothes got wet. They arrived at the Wang family's house in the west of the village. They knocked on the door for half a day before coming out to greet the guests, saying, "This is not what the family wanted, so don't be surprised that the door is open late."

古文：仁亶问其故，云：己唯一女，先许适西村张家。
现代文：仁亶问其中的原因？他说：我只有一个女儿，先前许配西村张家。
English: He said: "I only have one daughter, who was previously engaged to the Nishimura Zhang family.

古文：主人辞以田舍家，然有喜色。仁亶固求，方许焉。
现代文：主人以田舍之家推辞，但面露喜色，仁亶执意相求，主人就同意了，阎庚用驴马及其他携带的东西当作礼物。
English: The owner declined to use the farmhouse, but with a happy face, Yan Geng persisted in his request. The owner agreed, and Yan Geng used the donkey, horse, and other things he was carrying as gifts.

古文：以马驴及他赍为贽，当日成亲毕，留阎侯止王氏，仁亶独往，主人赠送之。其后数年，仁亶迁侍御史、并州长史、御史大夫知政事，后庚累遇提挈，竟至一州。
现代文：几天后成亲完毕，仁亶留阎庚在王家，独自走了，主人送走了他。这之后几年，仁亶官至侍御史并州长史御史大夫知政事。后来阎庚多次遇到提拔。最后官至一州刺史。
English: A few days later, after the marriage was over, Yan Geng stayed at the king's house. He went alone, and the master sent him away. A few years later, Yan Geng was promoted to the position of attendant to the governor and the governor's secretary. Later, Yan Geng was promoted many times. He was promoted to the final position of the governor and the governor's secretary.

古文：明崇俨
现代文：明崇俨
English: Ming Chongzhen

古文：唐正谏大夫明崇俨，少时，父为县令。县之门卒有道术，俨求教。教以见鬼方，兼役使之法。遗书两卷，俨阅之，书人名也。
现代文：唐正谏大夫明崇俨，年轻时，父亲是县令，有个门卒会道术，崇俨向他求教，他教给崇俨见鬼和驱使鬼的方法，给崇俨书两卷，崇俨一看，书上写着人名。
English: When he was young, his father was a county magistrate, and he had a disciple of Taoism. He asked him for advice. He taught him how to see ghosts and how to drive them away. He gave him two volumes of books. When he looked at them, the books had people's names written on them.

古文：俨于野外独处，按而呼之，皆应曰：唯。
现代文：明崇俨在野外独处时，就按书上的人名召呼他们。都回答说：唯！
English: When Ming Chongyu was alone in the field, he called them by their names in the book. They all replied, "Wai!

古文：见数百人。
现代文：见几百人来到。
English: I saw hundreds of people coming.

古文：于是每须役使，则呼其名，无不立至者。
现代文：于是每当驱使他们，就召呼他的名字，没有不立刻就到的。
English: And when they had driven them out, they called on his name; and immediately he came to them.

古文：俨尝行，见名流合祔二亲者，輀已出郊，俨随而行，召其家人谓曰：汝主君合葬二亲乎？
现代文：崇俨有次出行，看到名流之家想合葬二位父母，丧车已出了郊外。崇俨随之而行，召呼他的家人对他说：你家主人想合葬二位老人吗？
English: On one of his trips, when he saw that a famous family wanted to bury two parents together, and the funeral car had already left the suburbs, he followed them and called his family members to say to him, "Does your family want to bury two elderly people together?"

古文：曰：然。
现代文：回答说：是这样。
English: The general said yes.

古文：曰：汝取灵柩，得无误发他人冢乎？
现代文：崇俨说：你们挖取棺材会不会误挖了别人的坟呢？回答说：不能。
English: "Could you have dug up someone else's grave by mistake when you were digging up the coffin?" he asked. "No," she replied.

古文：曰：无。俨曰：吾前见紫车，后有夫人，年五十余，长大名家妇也。
现代文：崇俨说：我刚才看见紫车后面有个夫人，年纪有五十多岁，是个名家妇女。
English: "I just saw a lady in the back of the purple car. She is more than 50 years old and comes from a famous family," said Ms. Chong.

古文：而后有一鬼，年甚壮，寡发弊衣，距跃大喜，而随夫人。夫人泣而怒曰： 合葬何谓也？ 
现代文：后面有一个鬼，年纪正当壮年，头发稀少，衣服破旧，跳跃着很惊喜的样子跟随着夫人，夫人哭泣着怒斥他说： 跟我合葬怎么称呼啊？ 
English: In the back there was a ghost, just the right age, with sparse hair and shabby clothes, following the lady with a look of great surprise as he jumped. The lady cried and scolded him: "What do you call burying with me?

古文：汝试以吾言白汝主君，云明正谏有言如此。
现代文：你把我说的话告诉你家主人，说：明正谏这样说的。
English: And thou shalt speak my words unto thy master, saying, Thus and thus said Jephthah.

古文：祔亲者闻之，大惊，泣而谓俨曰：吾幼失父，昨迁葬，决老竖取之，不知乃误如此。
现代文：合葬二老的主人听到这话，非常惊讶，哭着对崇俨说：我很小的时候就没有父亲，昨天迁坟，是由老仆办理的，不知道会错到这种程度。
English: Hearing this, the owner of the two old men's joint burial was very surprised and cried to Chong Qi, saying, "When I was very young, I didn't have a father. Yesterday, the grave was moved by the servants. I didn't know it would go this far.

古文：崇俨乃与至发墓所，命开近西境，按铭记，果得之。
现代文：崇俨和他们一起来到挖掘墓地的地方，让挖开靠近西侧的地方，按照铭文，果然找到了。
English: Together with them, Mr. Chong came to the place where the cemetery was excavated. They dug up the area close to the west side, and according to the inscription, they found it.

古文：乃弃他人之骨，而祔其先人。
现代文：于是抛开别人的尸骨而将亲人合葬在一起。
English: So they left the bones of others and buried their relatives together.

古文：俨在内言事，及人间厌胜至多，备述人口，故不繁述。
现代文：崇俨在朝内的故事，在民间传说很多，详尽地出于口头流传，所以就不多说了。
English: There are many stories of Chongzhen in the imperial court in folklore, all of which are detailed and passed down orally, so I won't say much more.

古文：王怀智
现代文：王怀智
English: Wang Huai Zhi

古文：唐坊州人上柱国王怀智，显庆初年。
现代文：唐朝坊州的人王怀智，显应初年死了。
English: Wang Huai Zhi, a man from Fangzhou in the Tang Dynasty, died in the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：其母孙氏，及弟怀善、怀表并存。
现代文：他的母亲孙氏和弟弟怀善、怀表还都活着。
English: His mother, Ms. Sun, his brother, Huai Zhen, and his pocket watch are still alive.

古文：至四年六月，雍州高陵，有一人失其姓名，死经七日，背上已烂而苏，云：在地下见怀智，见任太山录事。
现代文：到了显庆四年六月，雍州高陵有一个人，忘了他什么名字，死了七天了，背上已经腐烂又苏醒过来，说他在地下见到了怀智。
English: In June of the 4th year of Xianqing, there was a man in Gaoling, Yongzhou, who had forgotten his name and had been dead for seven days. His back had rotted, but he woke up and said that he had seen Huai Zhi underground.

古文：遣此人执笔，口授为书，谓之曰：汝虽合死，今方便放汝归家，宜为我持此书至坊州。访我家，白我母云： 怀智今为太山录事，幸蒙安太。
现代文：怀智被任命为太山录事，让他执笔口授了一封信，对他说：你虽然应该死，现在我方便就放你回家，应该替我拿这封信到坊州，找到我家，告诉我母亲说： 怀智现在是太山录事，幸运安泰。
English: Huai Zhi was appointed to record Tai Shan affairs. He had him write and dictate a letter to him, saying: Although you should die, now I will let you go home at my convenience. You should take this letter to Fangzhou for me, find my home, and tell my mother: Huai Zhi is now recording Tai Shan affairs, lucky and safe.

古文：但家中曾贷寺家木作门，此既功德物，早偿之。
现代文：只是家中曾借寺庙的木头做门，这既然是功德之物，就应该早早还给寺庙。
English: However, the family once borrowed wood from a temple to make a door. Since this was a meritorious deed, it should have been returned to the temple early on.

古文：怀善将死，不合久住。
现代文：怀善快要死了。你不应在他那儿久住。
English: Huai Shan is about to die. You shouldn't stay with him for long.

古文：速作经像求助，不然，恐无济理。
现代文：快点供经像救助。不然恐怕没有救助的机会了。
English: Hurry up and provide a miraculous rescue. Otherwise, I'm afraid there's no chance of rescue.

古文：此人既苏，即赍书特送其舍。
现代文：这人死而复生后，就带着书信特意送到他家。
English: After this man was resurrected from the dead, he took a letter and deliberately sent it to his house.

古文：所谓家事，无不暗合。
现代文：所说的家事，无不暗暗符合。
English: The household chores mentioned are all in line with each other.

古文：至三日，怀善暴死。
现代文：到了第三天，怀善暴死。
English: On the third day, Huai Zhen died violently.

古文：合州道俗闻者，莫不增修功德。
现代文：全州道家、俗家听说了这件事，无不增加修建功德的事。
English: All Daoists and laymen in Jeonju heard about this event, all of which added to the merits of the construction.

古文：鄜州人勋卫侯智纯说之。
现代文：这是鄜州勋卫侯智纯说的事。
English: This is what Zhangzhou's Lord Wei Hou Zhichun said.

古文：沙门英禅师
现代文：沙门英禅师
English: Shamen Ying Zen Master

古文：唐法海寺沙门英禅师，具言每见鬼，寺主沙门惠兰，怪而问焉。
现代文：唐法海寺僧人英禅师，说他总见到鬼。寺主僧惠兰，就惊奇地问他？
English: The monk of Tangfahai Temple, Ying Zenshi, said that he always saw ghosts. The head monk of the temple, Huilan, asked him in surprise, "Why?"

古文：英曰：向秦庄襄王遣人传语： 饥虚甚，以师大慈，又自有所见，从者二百许人，勿辞劳费也。
现代文：英禅师说：最近秦庄襄王派人传话。说他饿得厉害，以我的慈悲心肠，又自有所见，跟随他的二百多人，都是不辞劳苦的。
English: The English Zen master said, "Recently, Qinzhuang Xiangwang sent a messenger to say that he was very hungry. With my compassionate heart and my own judgment, the more than two hundred people who followed him worked very hard.

古文：吾也报云： 后日晓时书来，专相候待。
现代文：我已经告诉他了，后天早晨吃饭的时候来，专门等候招待。
English: I have already told him to come the morning after tomorrow at dinner time, just to wait for an invitation.

古文：惠兰便备酒脯之类。至时秦王果来，侍从甚众，贵贱罗列，坐食甚急，谓英曰：弟子不食八十年矣。
现代文：慧兰就准备了酒肉之类的东西，到时秦王果然来了，侍从很多，不分贵贱站到一起，坐下吃饭很急。秦王对英禅师说：我已经八十年没吃饭了。
English: Hui Lan prepared meat and wine and other things, and when the time came, King Qin did indeed come. There were many attendants, both high and low, and they all stood together. It was very urgent to sit down to eat. King Qin said to Ying Zenshi, "I haven't eaten for eighty years."

古文：英问其故，答曰：吾生时未有佛法，地下见责功德，吾但以放生矜恤茕孤应之。
现代文：英禅师询问其中的原因？回答说：我活着时候还没有佛法，在地下被责问到功德之事，我只以放生、体恤孤独来应付。
English: The British Zen master asked the reason for this and replied, "When I was alive, there was no Dharma. When I was underground, I was asked about my merits. I only dealt with it by letting go and experiencing loneliness.

古文：以福薄，受罪未了。受此一餐，更四十年。
现代文：因为欠缺福德，受罪没完，今天吃这一顿饭，要过了四十年才能再吃。
English: Because of the lack of merit, the suffering has not ended. If you eat this meal today, it will take you forty years to eat it again.

古文：方便得食。因指坐上人云：是陈轸，多为虚诈。
现代文：就指着座上人说：这是陈轸，因为太虚伪奸诈。
English: He pointed to the person at the podium and said, "This is Chen Yao, because he is so hypocritical and treacherous."

古文：又指二人云：是白起、王翦，为杀人多，受罪亦未了。
现代文：又指着二人说：这是白起、王翦，因为杀人太多，受罪也没完。
English: Pointing to the two, he said: "It was all in vain, Wang Yao, because there were too many people killed, and the suffering did not end.

古文：英曰：王何不从人索食，而自受饥窘也。
现代文：英禅师说：怎么不朝人索要食物，而自己忍受饥饿呢？
English: Ying Zenshi said, "Why don't you ask for food from others, instead of starving yourself?"

古文：答曰：慈心少，且余人又不相见。吾贵人，不可妄作祸祟，所以然也。
现代文：回答说：好心人太少了，况且其他人又不能见面，我是富贵之人，不能轻易去人间做坏事，所以就到了现在这种地步。
English: He replied, "There are too few good-hearted people, and besides, I can't meet other people. I am a rich person, and I can't easily go to the world to do bad things. That's why it's come to this.

古文：因指酒脯曰：寺主将来耶？深耽愧。
现代文：又指着酒肉说：寺主让我来，很打扰，非常惭愧。
English: He also pointed to the meat and wine and said: "The head of the temple asked me to come, I'm very sorry, I'm very ashamed.

古文：临去时，谓英曰：甚愧禅师，弟子有物在，当相送。城东门通化外尖冢，是弟子墓。
现代文：临走时对英禅师说：很对不起禅师，弟子有东西在，应该送给您，城东门通化外尖尖的坟，是我的墓。
English: As he was about to leave, he said to Ying Zenshi: "I'm very sorry, Zen master. A disciple has something here that should be given to you. The pointed grave outside the east gate of the city is my grave.

古文：时人不知，妄云吕不韦冢耳。
现代文：人们都不知道，胡说是吕不韦墓。
English: People don't even know that it's the tomb of Lü Bu Wei.

古文：英曰：往赤眉贼发掘，何得更有物在？
现代文：英禅师说：以前赤眉贼兵挖掘过了，怎么还能有东西在呢？
English: Ying Zenshi said, "The Red-browed Thieves have dug up everything before, how can there still be something there?

古文：鬼曰：贼将麄物去，细者深，贼取不得。见在。
现代文：鬼说：贼兵将粗糙的东西拿去了。细软在里面，贼兵拿不走，还在。
English: The ghost said, "The bandits took away the coarse things. The soft things are inside, but the bandits can't take them away. They're still there."

古文：英曰：贫道出家，无用物处，必莫将来。
现代文：英禅师说：我是出家人，没有用东西的地方，将来也用不着。
English: Ying Zenshi said, "I am a monk. I don't need anything, and I won't need it in the future.

古文：言讫谢去。
现代文：英禅师说完，秦王告别走了。
English: After Ying Zenshi finished speaking, Qin Wang said goodbye and left.

古文：陈导
现代文：陈导
English: Chen Duan

古文：唐陈导者，豫章人也，以商贾为业。
现代文：唐朝陈导是江西人，以经商为业。龙朔年中，他乘船去楚地。
English: Chen Du, a native of Jiangxi in the Tang Dynasty, was a businessman. In the middle of the Long Shuo period, he went to Chu by ship.

古文：龙朔中，乃泛舟之楚，夜泊江浦，见一舟溯流而来，亦宿于此。
现代文：夜晚船停在江边。
English: At night, the boat stops by the river.

古文：导乃移舟近之，见一人厖眉大鼻如吏，在舟检勘文书，从者三五人。
现代文：看见一只船逆流而来，也停在这个地方。陈导就移舟靠近它，看见一人浓眉大鼻好象官吏，在检查文书，随从者有三五个人。
English: Chen Du saw a boat coming against the current and also stopped at this place. He moved the boat closer to it and saw a man with a heavy brow and a big nose, who looked like an official, checking documents. He was accompanied by three or five people.

古文：导以同旅相值，因问之曰：君子何往？
现代文：陈导因同行而相见，就问他说：您去哪儿？
English: When Chen Du saw him because he was traveling with him, he asked him, "Where are you going?"

古文：幸喜同宿此浦。
现代文：有幸同住这里。
English: We are lucky to live here.

古文：厖眉人曰：某以公事到楚，幸此相遇。
现代文：浓眉人说：因为公事到楚地，有幸在此相遇。
English: The bushy-browed man said, "I am fortunate to have met you here because my business has brought me to Chuchi.

古文：导乃邀过船中，厖眉亦随之。
现代文：陈导就邀请他到自己的船中，浓眉人就随他过来了。
English: Chen Du invited him to his boat, and the bushy-browed man followed him.

古文：导备酒馔，饮经数巡，导乃问以姓氏，厖眉人曰：某姓司徒，名弁。
现代文：陈导准备了酒菜。酒过数巡。陈导就问他姓名？浓眉人说：我姓司徒，名弁。
English: Chen Du prepared the food and wine. After a few rounds of drinking, Chen Du asked him his name. The thick-browed man said, "My surname is Szeto, and I am famous."

古文：被差至楚，已来充使。
现代文：被差往楚地，充当使者。
English: He was sent to Chudi as an emissary.

古文：导又问曰：所主何公事也？
现代文：陈导又问：办什么公事呢？
English: Chen Du also asked: What kind of official business do you do?

古文：弁曰：公不宜见问。
现代文：司徒弁说：你不该问，你这次出来，千万不要在楚地停留。
English: Stuben said: You shouldn't ask. If you come out this time, don't stay in Chu.

古文：君子此行，慎勿以楚为意，愿适他土耳。导曰：何也？
现代文：赶快去别的地方吧！
English: Go somewhere else!

古文：弁曰：吾非人也，冥司使者。
现代文：陈导说：为什么？司徒弁说：我不是人，是阴间使者。
English: Chen Du said, "Why?" Stuben said, "I am not a human, but a messenger from the underworld."

古文：导惊曰：何故不得之楚？
现代文：陈导惊讶地说：什么原因不能去楚地呢？
English: Surprised, Chen Du said, "What's the reason you can't go to Chu?"

古文：弁曰：吾往楚行灾，君亦其人也。感君之惠，故相报耳。
现代文：司徒弁说：我去楚地行布灾难。你也是应得灾的，感谢你的恩惠，所以才告诉你。
English: Stuben said: "I went to Chu to spread disaster. You also deserve disaster, thank you for your favor, so I'm telling you."

古文：然君须以钱物计会，方免斯难。
现代文：但你必须用钱财物品打点，方能免除这场灾难。
English: But you have to use money and goods to save yourself from this disaster.

古文：导恳苦求之，弁曰：但俟我从楚回，君可备婚钱一二万相贶，当免君家。
现代文：陈导退切地苦求他。司徒弁说：只等我从楚地回来，您可准备纸钱一二万相送，就能免去你家的灾祸。
English: Chen Du desperately pleaded with him. Stuben said, "Just wait until I get back from Chu, you can prepare one hundred and twenty thousand paper money to send, and you will be able to save your family from disaster."

古文：导许诺，告谢而别。
现代文：陈导答应，告辞分别了。
English: Chen Du agreed, and they said their goodbyes.

古文：导以悭鄙为性，托以他事未办所许钱，使者怒，乃命从者持书一缄与导。
现代文：这年果然荆楚之地起了大火，接连烧了几万家，没有幸存的。陈导自从分别司徒后，因忧虑在心，就乘船回去了。等到了江西，司徒弁也来了，陈导悭啬成性，借故其它原因，没有置办他许下的钱财。
English: This year, indeed, a great fire broke out in the land of Jingchu, burning tens of thousands of houses one after another, with no survivors. Since Chen Du had separated from Stowe, he was worried and took a boat back. When he arrived in Jiangxi, Stowe Ben also came. Chen Du was stingy and, for other reasons, did not buy the money he had promised.

古文：导开读未终，而宅内掀然火起，凡所财物悉尽。
现代文：使者生气了，就让一个随从拿封信给陈导，陈导拆开没有读完，而家中立刻起了大火。凡是他的财物全部烧光。
English: The envoy became angry and asked one of his attendants to take the letter to Chen Du. Chen Du did not finish reading the letter before it was opened, and a fire immediately broke out in his home. All of his belongings were burnt to ashes.

古文：是夕无损他室，仅烧导家。
现代文：这晚没有损害别人家，只烧了陈导家，司徒弁也不见了。
English: There was no damage to other people's homes that night. Only Chen Duan's home was burned, and Stuben was gone.

古文：弁亦不见，盖以导悭啬负前约而致之也。
现代文：这都是因为陈导悭啬，背叛以前的诺言而造成的。
English: All of this was caused by the stinginess of Chen Duoduo and his betrayal of his previous promises.

古文：王志
现代文：王志
English: Wang Zhi

古文：唐显庆三年，岐州人王志，任益州县令，考满还乡。
现代文：唐显庆三年，岐州人王志任益州县令。任期已满，将要还乡。
English: In the third year of Tang Xianqing, Wang Zhi, a native of Qizhou, served as the county magistrate of Yizhou County. His term of office has expired, and he will return to his hometown.

古文：有女美，未嫁道亡，停县州寺中累月。
现代文：有个女儿很美，未到出嫁就死了。停在县里的寺庙中几个月了。
English: There was a very beautiful daughter who died before she was married, and she was kept in a temple in the county for several months.

古文：寺中先有学生停一房，夜初见此女来，妆饰华丽，欲伸缱绻，学生纳之。
现代文：寺中先就有个学生住在别一房里。天刚黑看见这个女子来，妆色、服饰豪华美丽，想和他拥抱，学生接纳了她，相好了一个月。
English: At first, there was a student in the temple who lived in another room. It was just after dark when he saw this woman, her makeup and clothes were luxurious and beautiful, and he wanted to hug her. The student accepted her and they made out for a month.

古文：相知经月，此女赠生一铜镜，巾栉各一。
现代文：这个女子赠给学生一面铜镜。衣巾、梳子各一个。
English: The woman presented the students with a bronze mirror, a handkerchief and a hairbrush.

古文：令欲上道，女与生密共辞别。
现代文：县令王志打算上路。女子与学生暗里辞别。
English: Wang Zhi, the county magistrate, plans to go on a trip. The woman secretly bids farewell to the students.

古文：家人求此物不得，令遗巡房求索，于生房得之。
现代文：女子家人找不到这些东西，县令让按屋查找，在学生房中找到了这些东西。
English: The woman's family couldn't find these things, so the county magistrate asked the housekeeper to look for them, and she found them in the student's room.

古文：令遗左右缚此生，以为私盗。
现代文：县令让随从绑上学生，把他当成偷盗之人。
English: The county magistrate had his attendant tie up the student and treat him as a thief.

古文：学生诉其事，非唯得此物，兼留上下二衣。
现代文：学生告诉了他们的事，说：不但有这些东西，还留下了上下二件衣服。
English: The students told their story, saying that in addition to these things, they also left behind two pieces of clothing.

古文：令遗人开棺验之，果无此衣。
现代文：县令派人打开棺材检查，果然没了这些衣服。
English: The prefectural government sent someone to open the coffin and inspect it, and sure enough, the clothes were gone.

古文：既见此征，于是释之。
现代文：既然看见了这些证据，就把学生放了。
English: Having seen this evidence, they released the student.

古文：问其乡里，乃岐州人，因从父南任，父母俱亡，游诸州学问，不久当还。
现代文：问他原籍？乃是岐州人，因跟从父亲南方任职，父母都死了，他就游历各地、增长见识，不久就该回乡了。
English: Ask him about his origin? He is a native of Qizhou. Because he followed his father to work in the south and both his parents died, he traveled all over the country, gained knowledge, and soon had to return to his hometown.

古文：令给衣马装束同归，以为女夫，怜爱甚重。巴峡人
现代文：县令给他衣服马匹，一起还乡。把他当成女婿，非常怜爱。巴峡人
English: The county magistrate gave him clothes and horses, and they returned to their hometown together. He treated him like a son-in-law, and was very compassionate.

古文：调露年中，有人行于巴峡。
现代文：调露年中，有人经过巴峡，晚上停船休息。
English: During the summer, some people pass through the Bach Gorge and stop to rest in the evening.

古文：夜泊舟，忽闻有人朗咏诗曰：秋迳填黄叶，寒摧露草根。猿声一叫断，客泪数重痕。
现代文：忽然听见有人朗诵诗歌：秋迳填黄叶，寒摧露草根。猿声一叫断，客泪数重痕。
English: Suddenly, I heard someone reciting a poem: "Autumn leaves turn yellow, and cold weather brings dew to the grass roots." A monkey's cry interrupted the recitation, and the guests were overcome with tears.

古文：其音甚厉，激昂而悲。如是通霄，凡吟数十遍。
现代文：那声非常凄厉，激昂悲越，这样朗诵了一宿，有几十遍。
English: The voice was very poignant, so emotional and sad that it was recited for an entire night, dozens of times.

古文：初闻，以为舟行者未之寝也，晓访之而更无舟船，但空山石泉，谿谷幽绝，咏诗处有人骨一具。
现代文：刚开始以为行船的人没有睡觉，早晨一打听知道没有其它船停泊，只有空山石泉、谿谷幽绝。诵诗的地方有一具死人尸骨。
English: At first, they thought that the boatmen had not slept. In the morning, a dozen of them heard that there were no other boats moored, only empty mountains, stone springs, and secluded valleys. There was a dead man's skeleton in the place where the poem was recited.

古文：陆余庆
现代文：陆余庆
English: Lu Yuqing

