古文：汉恭宪王元佐字惟吉，初名德崇，母元德皇后。
现代文：汉恭宪王元佐字惟吉，初名德崇，母亲是元德皇后。
English: Han Gongxian Wang Yuan Sa Zi Wei Ji, his first name was De Chong, his mother was Empress Yuan De.

古文：少聪警，貌类太宗，帝钟爱之。
现代文：年幼时禀性聪警，相貌像太宗，太宗很钟爱他。
English: When he was young, he was a brilliant policeman. He looked like Taizong, and Taizong loved him very much.

古文：年十三，从猎近郊，兔走乘舆前，太宗使元佐射，一发而中，契丹使在侧，惊异之。
现代文：十三岁时，跟从太宗在近郊打猎，有只兔子在皇帝车马前奔跑，太宗让元佐射杀，元佐一发而中，契丹使者在旁边，深感惊异。
English: At the age of thirteen, while hunting with Taizong in the suburbs, a rabbit ran in front of the emperor's chariot and horse. Taizong asked the commander to shoot it, and as soon as the commander did, the Khitan envoy was nearby, and he was deeply surprised.

古文：从征太原、幽蓟。
现代文：跟从太宗征战太原、幽蓟。
English: He followed Emperor Taizong to invade Taiyuan and became a hermit.

古文：太平兴国中，出居内东门别第，拜检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，封卫王，赴上中书。
现代文：太平兴国年间，出宫住在内东门别宅，任检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，封为卫王，在中书省办公。
English: During the Taiping Xingguo period, he left the palace and lived in a separate house at the Inner East Gate. He was appointed as a school inspector and a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters. He was given the title of the King of Guards and worked at the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：后徙居东宫，改赐今名，加检校太尉，进封楚王。
现代文：后来迁居东宫，改赐现在的名字，加任检校太尉，进封为楚王。
English: Later, he moved to the East Palace, changed his name to his current one, was appointed as a school inspector, and was given the title King of Chu.

古文：初，秦王廷美迁涪陵，元佐独申救之。
现代文：当初，秦王廷美迁往涪陵，只有元佐申救他。
English: At first, Qin Wang Tingmei moved to Fuling, and only Yuan Sashen saved him.

古文：廷美死，元佐遂发狂，至以小过操挺刃伤侍人。
现代文：廷美死后，元佐就发狂了，以致因为小错就用尖刀杀伤侍者。
English: After Ting Mei's death, the colonel went mad, so much so that he killed a waiter with a sharp knife because of a small mistake.

古文：雍熙二年，疾少间，帝喜，为赦天下。
现代文：雍熙二年，病情略有好转，太宗很高兴，为此而大赦天下。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Yongxi, his condition improved slightly. Emperor Taizong was very pleased and pardoned him for this.

古文：重阳日内宴，元佐疾新愈不与，诸王宴归，暮过元佐第。
现代文：重阳日宫内宴会，元佐病刚好，不在赴宴之列，诸王宴会后回来，晚上经过元佐的宅第。
English: On the day of Chongyang, there was a banquet in the palace. It just so happened that Genzo was ill, and he was not among those who went to the banquet. After the banquet, the kings came back, and in the evening they passed by Genzo's residence.

古文：曰： 若等侍上宴，我独不与，是弃我也。 遂发忿，被酒，夜纵火焚宫。
现代文：元佐说 ：你们都侍候皇上宴会，只有我未到，这是抛弃我啊！ 于是发怒，酗酒，晚上纵火烧宫。
English: Genso said, "You all waited for the Emperor's banquet, but I didn't make it. That's abandoning me!" So he got angry, drank too much, and set fire to the palace in the evening.

古文：诏遣御史捕元佐，诣中书劾问，废为庶人，均州安置。
现代文：太宗诏令派御史捕捉元佐，送到中书省审问，废为平民，安置在均州。
English: Emperor Taizong issued an edict to send Mi Shi to capture the commander, and he was sent to the Chinese Literature Ministry for interrogation, but he was turned into a commoner and resettled in Junzhou.

古文：宰相宋琪率百官三上表，请留元佐京师。
现代文：宰相宋琪率领百官三次上表，请求留元佐在京师。
English: Prime Minister Song Qi led hundreds of officials to petition three times to ask Yuan Zuo to stay in Beijing.

古文：行至黄山，召还，废居南宫，使者守护。
现代文：元佐走到黄山，太宗召他回来，废居南宫，使者守护。
English: Genso went to the Yellow Mountain, Taizong called him back, and he stayed in the Southern Palace as an envoy.

古文：谘议赵齐王遹、翊善戴元顿首请罪，帝赦之曰： 是子朕教之犹不悛，汝等安能辅导耶？ 
现代文：咨议赵齐、王，翊善戴元叩头请罪，太宗赦免他们说： 这个儿子我教他还不改，你们怎么能辅导呢？ 
English: He consulted Zhao Qi, Wang, and Shanshan Daiyuan, and asked for their forgiveness. The emperor pardoned them and said, "I have taught this son, but he still does not change. How can you counsel him?

古文：真宗即位，起为左金吾卫上将军，复封楚王，听养疾不朝，再加检校太师、右卫上将军。
现代文：真宗即位后，起任元佐为左金吾卫上将军，重新封为楚王，听任他养病不上朝，再加检校太师、右卫上将军。
English: After Emperor Jinsong ascended to the throne, he was appointed as the first lieutenant general of Zuo Kingu Wei, re-christened as the King of Chu, and allowed to recover from his illness before ascending to the throne.

古文：元佐生日，真宗赐以宝带。
现代文：元佐生日，真宗赐给他宝带。
English: On Motosa's birthday, Shinso gave him a treasure belt.

古文：平居不接人事，而事或预知。
现代文：平常生活不接待人客，但是有时能预先知道要发生的事情。
English: In normal life, we do not receive guests, but sometimes we can know in advance what is going to happen.

古文：帝尝遣术士管归真为醮禳，左右未及白，元佐遽曰： 管归真至矣。 帝闻之曰： 岂非为物所凭乎？ 封泰山，真拜太傅；祀汾阴，迁太尉兼中书令。又加太师、尚书令兼中书令，遂拜天策上将军、兴元牧，赐剑履上殿，诏书不名。时禁中火，元佐表停奉禀助完宫阙，不许。
现代文：真宗听说后说 ：难道不是有物可凭吗？ 封禅泰山后，实拜元佐为太傅；祭祀汾阴，升元佐为太尉兼中书令。又加任太师、尚书令兼中书令，于是拜为天策上将军、兴元牧，赐带剑上殿，诏令上书不称名。当时宫中失火，元佐上表停止领俸禄以资助完葺宫殿，真宗不同意。
English: After hearing this, Shinshu said, "Isn't there something we can rely on? After the enthronement of Taizan, Shibuya worshiped Genzo as taifu; after the offering of the sacred fire, Shibuya was promoted to Genzo as taifu and chushirei. He was also appointed as taishi, chushirei and chushirei, and then he worshiped the heavenly general, Xingyuanmu, and was given a sword to go up to the palace, but the chushirei was not famous. At that time, there was a fire in the palace, and Genzo stopped receiving salary to finance the completion of the

古文：加兼雍州牧。
现代文：加兼雍州牧。
English: Add Yongzhou pasture.

古文：仁宗为皇太子，兼兴元牧。
现代文：仁宗为皇太子，兼任兴元牧。
English: Ninsong was crown prince and concurrently served as the head of the Xingyuan Patriarchate.

古文：仁宗即位，兼江陵牧。
现代文：仁宗即位后，元佐兼任江陵牧。
English: After Emperor Ninsong ascended to the throne, he also served as the second-in-command of Gangneung Province.

古文：薨，年六十二，赠河中、凤翔牧，追封齐王，谥恭宪。
现代文：去世时，年已六十二岁，赠河中牧、凤翔牧，追封为齐王，谥号为恭宪。
English: At the time of his death, he was already sixty-two years old. He was presented with the Kawazhong Maki and the Fengxiang Maki. His posthumous name was Qi Wang, and his posthumous name was Gongxian.

古文：宗室子弟特给假七日，以卤簿鼓吹导至永安，陪葬永熙陵。
现代文：宗室子弟特给假七天，以卤簿鼓吹送葬到永安，陪葬在永熙陵。
English: The son-in-law of the family specifically gave seven days of leave, and sent the funeral to Yong'an with a halogen book and accompanied the burial in Yongxi Mausoleum.

古文：明导二年，改封潞王。
现代文：明道二年，改封为潞王。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, his title was changed to Shao Wang.

古文：昭成太子元僖，初名德明。
现代文：又改为魏王。有儿子三人：允升、允言、允成。昭成太子元僖，初名德明。
English: He also changed his name to Wei Wang. He had three sons: Yun Sheng, Yun Yan, and Yun Cheng. The first name of Prince Yuan Xuan was Deming.

古文：太平兴国七年出阁，授检校太保、同平章事，封广平郡王，与兄卫王德崇同日受封。
现代文：太平兴国七年出宫，授任检校太保、同平章事，封为广平郡王，与其兄卫王德崇同日受封。
English: In the seventh year of Taiping Xingguo's reign, Taiping Xingguo left the palace, and was appointed as the inspector of schools, Tongping Zhangji, and was given the title of Guangping County King. He received the title on the same day as his brother Wei Wang Dezong.

古文：八年，进封陈王，改名元佑。
现代文：太平兴国八年，进封为陈王，改名元佑。
English: In the eighth year of the Taiping Restoration, he was enthroned as King Chen and changed his name to Yuan You.

古文：诏自今宰相班宜在亲王上，宰相宋琪、李昉清遵旧制，不允。
现代文：诏令从今以后宰相班次应当在亲王之上，宰相宋琪、李日方请求遵照旧制，皇上不允许。
English: The imperial edict decreed that from now on, the prime minister's shift should be higher than that of the prince. The prime minister, Song Qi, and the prime minister, Li Nihong, requested that the old system be followed, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：宋琪等恳请久之，上早 宰相之任，实总百揆，与群司礼绝；藩邸之设，止奉朝请而已。
现代文：宋琪等恳请很久，皇上说： 宰相职责，实在总理百事，与各部门礼制不同，藩王的设立，只不过奉朝请而已。
English: Song Qi and others pleaded for a long time, and the emperor said: The duties of the prime minister are really the prime minister's responsibility, which is different from the etiquette of various departments, and the establishment of the king of the domain is just a request to the imperial court.

古文：元佐等尚幼，欲其知谦损之道，卿等无固让也。 
现代文：元佐等年纪还小，想让他们知道谦逊的道理，你们不要再谦让了。 
English: The lieutenant colonel and the others are still young. If you want them to know the meaning of humility, you should stop being so humble.

古文：雍熙二年，元佐被疾，以元僖为开封尹兼侍中，改今名，进封许王，加中书令。
现代文：雍熙二年，元佐有病，任元僖为开封尹兼侍中，改为今名，进封为许王，加任中书令。
English: In the second year of the Yongxi Dynasty, when the Yuan Zuo was ill, he was appointed to the position of Kaifeng Yin and Servant of the Emperor, changed his name to his current name, was assigned to the position of Xu Wang, and was also appointed to the position of Zhongshirong.

古文：上为娶隰州团练使李谦溥女为夫人，因渭宰相曰： 朕尝语诸子，今姻偶皆将相大臣之家，六礼具备，得不自重乎？ 淳化元年，宰相吕蒙正复上言，乞班诸王下，诏不允。
现代文：皇上替他娶隰州团练使李谦溥的女儿为夫人，于是对宰相说： 我曾经对儿子们讲过，现在配偶都来自将相大臣之家，六礼都备，能不自重吗？ 淳化元年，宰相吕蒙正再次上言，请求班次放在诸王下，皇上下诏不允许。
English: The emperor married the daughter of Li Qianqian, the commander of the Zhangzhou Regiment, for him, so he said to the prime minister: I once told my sons that now the spouses are from the family of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the minister of the

古文：三年十一月己亥，元僖早入朝，方坐殿庐中，觉体中不佳，径归府。
现代文：淳化三年十一月己亥日，元僖早上入朝，正坐在殿堂中，感觉身体不好，径自回府。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year in November of the 3rd year of the Chunhua era, Yuan Xuan entered the court in the morning. He was sitting in the hall of fame, feeling unwell, and went back to the capital.

古文：车驾遽临视，疾已亟，上呼之犹能应，少顷遂薨。上哭之恸，废朝五日，赠皇太子，谥恭孝。
现代文：皇上亲自去看望，病已很深，皇上叫他还能答应，不久就死去，皇上痛哭，因此停朝五天，赠为皇太子，谥号为恭孝。
English: The emperor himself went to visit him. He was already very ill. The emperor asked him if he could still agree to go. He died soon. The emperor cried bitterly. Therefore, he stayed in the imperial palace for five days. He was given the title of crown prince and the posthumous name of Junko.

古文：元僖姿貌雄毅，沈静寡言，尹京五年，政事无失。
现代文：元僖姿貌雄毅，沉默寡言，管理京师五年，政事没有过错。
English: Geng Yao is a strong-looking and taciturn man. He has been in charge of Beijing for five years and has never done anything wrong in politics.

古文：及薨，上追念不已，悲泣达旦不寐，作《思亡子诗》示近臣。
现代文：死后，皇上追念不已，悲苦到天明不睡，作《思亡子诗》给近臣们看。
English: After his death, the emperor pined for his son endlessly, grieved until dawn, and composed the "Poem of the Lost Son" for his close retainers to read.

古文：未几，人有言元僖为嬖张氏妾所惑，张颇专恣，捶婢仆有至死者，而元僖不知。
现代文：不久，有人说元僖被爱妾张氏迷惑，张氏很专恣，捶打奴婢仆人有时打死了，而元僖却不知道。
English: Before long, it was said that Yuan Xuan was bewitched by his beloved concubine, the Zhang clan. The Zhang clan was very tyrannical and sometimes beat their servants to death, but Yuan Xuan didn't know about it.

古文：张又于都城西佛寺招魂葬其父母，僣差逾制。
现代文：张氏又在都城西佛寺招魂埋葬她的父母，僭越礼制。
English: Ms. Zhang also buried her parents in the capital's West Buddha Temple, with the highest etiquette.

古文：上怒，遣昭宣使王继恩验问，张缢死。
现代文：皇上大怒，派昭宣使王继恩验问，张氏缢死。
English: The emperor was enraged and sent Zhaoxuan to interrogate Wang Jian. Zhang died.

古文：左右亲吏悉决杖停免，毁张氏父母冢墓，亲属皆配流。
现代文：身边亲吏都停职免职，毁张氏父母坟墓，其亲属都流放。
English: All the officials close to him were suspended and dismissed, the graves of Zhang's parents were destroyed, and his relatives were exiled.

古文：开封府判官、右谏议大夫吕端，推官、职方员外郎陈载，并坐裨赞有失，端黜为卫尉少卿，载为殿中侍御史。
现代文：开封府判官、右谏议大夫吕端，推官、职方员外郎陈载，都因辅助有失，吕端贬为卫尉少卿，陈载贬为殿中侍御史。
English: The magistrate of Kaifeng, the doctor of the Right Division of the Legislative Yuan, Lü Duan, and the magistrate, the member of the staff, the younger brother of Chen Zai, were all demoted to the rank of junior captain of the imperial guard, and Chen Zai was demoted to the position of the palace attendant.

古文：许王府谘议、工部郎中赵令图，侍讲、库部员外郎阎象，并坐辅道无状，削两任免。
现代文：许王府咨议、工部郎中赵令图，侍讲、库部员外郎阎象，都因辅导无状，削免两人职务。
English: Xu Wangfu's adviser, Zhao Lingtu, a vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry, and Yan Zhao, a vice-minister of the Ministry of Finance, were both dismissed from their posts for coaching without a certificate.

古文：诏停册礼，以一品卤簿葬。
现代文：诏令停止册封礼，以一品卤簿埋葬。
English: The Emperor issued a decree to stop the ceremonial sealing of the book and to bury it in a book of bricks.

古文：真宗即位，始诏中外称太子之号焉。
现代文：真宗即位后，开始诏令中外称元僖太子之号。
English: After Shinshu ascended the throne, he began to call himself the crown prince of the Yuan Dynasty in China and abroad.

古文：乾兴初，改谥。
现代文：乾兴初年，改谥号。
English: In the first year of the rise of Qianxing, the company changed its name.

古文：无子，仁宗时，诏以允成子宗保出后昭成太子为孙。
现代文：没有子女，仁宗时，诏令将允成的儿子宗保出继给昭成太子为孙。
English: When Emperor Renzong had no children, the imperial edict named Emperor Yuncheng's son, Emperor Zongbao, as the successor to Emperor Akechi's son, Emperor Akechi.

