古文：子言之曰： 为上易事也，为下易知也，则刑不烦矣。 
现代文：孔子说： 君长如果对臣下不苛虐，臣下就会觉得君长容易侍悦臣下如果没有欺诈之沙己君长就觉得容易了解臣下的实情。这样一来，刑罚就可以放到一边不用了。 
English: Confucius said: If the ruler is not harsh on his subjects, his subjects will find it easy to serve him. If there is no deception, the ruler will find it easy to understand the true situation of his subjects. In this way, punishment can be put aside.

古文：子曰： 好贤如《缁衣》，恶恶如《巷伯》，则爵不渎而民作愿，刑不试而民咸服。
现代文：孔子说： 如果能够像《缎衣》那首诗所说的那样去尊敬贤人，像《巷伯》那首诗所说的那样去痛恨坏人，官场上就不会那么醒耀，百姓中就会兴起谨厚之风，不用刑罚而百姓就心悦诚服。
English: Confucius said: "If one can respect the wise, as the poem "The Robe" says, and hate the wicked, as the poem "The Alderman" says, then one will not shine so brightly in the official world, and a spirit of respect will arise among the people. Without punishment, the people will be pleased and sincerely satisfied.

古文：大雅曰： 仪刑文王，万国作孚。  
现代文：《大雅》上说： 只要大家都来效法文王，在所有的诸侯国中就会兴起诚信之风。  
English: "Daya" said: As long as everyone follows the example of the French king, the spirit of honesty will arise in all the principalities.

古文：子曰： 夫民，教之以德，齐之以礼，则民有格心；教之以政，齐之以刑，则民有遁心。
现代文：孔子说： 对于百姓，如果用道德教育他们，用礼法约束他们，那么百姓就会有向善之心；如果用政令教育他们，用刑罚约束他们，那么百姓就会有逃避之心。
English: Confucius said: As for the common people, if you educate them with morals and discipline them with etiquette, then the common people will have a heart for goodness; if you educate them with government orders and discipline them with punishments, then the common people will have a heart for escape.

古文：故君民者，子以爱之，则民亲之；信以结之，则民不倍；恭以莅之，则民有孙心。
现代文：所以，作为领导百姓的国君，应当像爱护子女一样爱护百姓，百姓就会亲近他；用诚信去团结百姓，百姓就不会背叛；用恭敬的态度去对待百姓，百姓就会产生顺从之心。
English: Therefore, as the sovereign who leads the people, he should love the people as he loves his children, and the people will be close to him; unite the people with integrity, and the people will not betray; treat the people with a respectful attitude, and the people will have a submissive heart.

古文：《甫刑》曰： 苗民罪用命，制以刑，惟作五虐之刑曰法。
现代文：《甫刑》上说： 苗族百姓不听从蛋尤的命令，于是蛋尤就用刑罚制裁他们，制定了五种残暴的刑罚叫做 法 。 
English: "Final Punishment" said: The Miao people did not obey Miao Yu's orders, so Miao Yu punished them with punishments, and formulated five cruel punishments called laws.

古文：是以民有恶德，而遂绝其世也。  
现代文：于是百姓不讲道德，起而背叛，最终遭到了民族的灭亡。 
English: As a result, the people became immoral and betrayed, and eventually the nation was destroyed.

古文：子曰： 下之事上也，不从其所令，从其所行。
现代文：孔子说， 臣下事奉君长，不是听从君长所下的命令，而是盯着君长的实际行动，君长咋干臣下就咋干。
English: Confucius said that a vassal serves his lord, not by obeying the orders given by the lord, but by watching the actual actions of the lord. If the lord does something, the vassal will do something.

古文：上好是物，下必有甚者矣。
现代文：君长喜欢某样东西，臣下必定有超过他的。
English: If the ruler likes something, his vassal must be better than him.

古文：故上之所好恶，不可不慎也，是民之表也。 子曰： 禹立三年，百姓以仁遂焉，岂必尽仁？
现代文：所以，君长喜欢什么、讨庆什么，不可不格外慎重，因为臣下是把君长的行为作为表率的， ·孔子说： 禹即帝位三年，百姓在仁的方面就有所成就，这难道是百姓个个都能仁吗？
English: Therefore, it is necessary to be extremely cautious about what the monarch likes and what to celebrate, because the vassals take the behavior of the monarch as a model. · Confucius said: Yu is three years on the throne, and the people have achieved something in terms of benevolence. Is it possible for all the people to be benevolent?

古文：《诗》云： 赫赫师尹，民具尔瞻。 《甫刑》曰： 一人有庆，兆民赖之。 
现代文：只是由于禹本人好仁，百姓受其影响罢了。《诗经》上说： 赫赫有名的尹太师，百姓都在注视着你，《甫刑》上说幻 天子一人有美德，普天之下的百姓都会得到好处。 
English: It's just that the people were influenced by Yu's benevolence. "The Book of Songs" said: "Famous and renowned Yin Taishi, the people are all watching you," and "The Last Judgment" said that only the Son of Heaven has virtue, and the people all over the world will benefit.

古文：大雅曰： 成王之孚，下土之式。  
现代文：《大雅》上说： 成主守信有威望；身为夭下好榜样。 
English: "Daya" said: There is prestige in becoming the master and keeping the faith; being a good example for the younger generation.

古文：子曰： 上好仁，则下之为仁争先人。
现代文：卜孔子说： 君长好仁，那么臣下就会争先恐后地好仁。
English: Confucius said: If the ruler is kind, then his subjects will be eager to be kind.

古文：故长民者章志、贞教、尊仁，以子爱百姓；民致行己以说其上矣。
现代文：所以君长应当表明自己的好仁志向，以正道教育民众，推崇仁道，以爱护子女的态度爱护百姓；会无不尽力地去行仁，以迎合君长爱仁的所好。 
English: Therefore, the monarchs should show their benevolent aspirations, educate the people in the right way, promote the benevolent way, and love the people with the attitude of loving their children; they will do their best to practice benevolence in order to meet the wishes of the monarchs.

古文：《诗》云： 有梏德行，四国顺之。  
现代文：《诗经》 天子有正直的德行，四方诸侯就无不服从言 百姓就上说。
English: "The Book of Songs" The Son of Heaven has the virtue of honesty, and the princes of the four quarters do not disobey His word, so the people say.

古文：子曰： 王言如丝，其出如纶；王言如纶，其出如綍。
现代文：孔子说： 君王所说的话本来只有丝那般细，可辗转传到百姓耳里，就变成了有缓带那般粗；君主所说的话本来只有缓带那般细，可辗转传到百姓耳里，就变成了有绳索那般粗。
English: Confucius said: The words spoken by the monarch were originally only as thin as silk, but when they were transmitted to the people's ears, they became as thick as a ribbon; the words spoken by the monarch were originally only as thin as a ribbon, but when they were transmitted to the people's ears, they became as thick as rope.

古文：故大人不倡游言。
现代文：所以君长不能讲华而不实的话。
English: That's why you can't say anything flashy.

古文：可言也，不可行。
现代文：能够说到，但不能做到，君子就不说。
English: If you can say it, but can't do it, a gentleman won't say it.

古文：君子弗言也；可行也，不可言，君子弗行也。
现代文：能够做到，但不可告人，君子就不做。这样一来，老百姓就会言不违背其行，行不违背其言。《诗经》上说： 谨慎行事且得体，不要超过了礼仪。  
English: If you can do it, but don't tell anyone, a gentleman won't do it. In this way, the common people will say that they won't go against their actions, and they won't go against their words. "The Book of Songs" says: Be careful and decent, don't exceed the etiquette.

古文：故言必虑其所终，而行必稽其所敝；则民谨于言而慎于行。
现代文：孔子说： 君子用言行引导人们行善，用言行禁止人们作恶，所以讲话一定要考虑它的后果，做事一定要考察它会带来什么弊端，这样一来，老百姓就说话谨慎做事小心了。
English: Confucius said: A gentleman uses words and deeds to guide people to do good, and uses words and deeds to prohibit people from doing evil. Therefore, speech must consider its consequences, and doing things must consider what drawbacks it will bring. In this way, the common people will speak cautiously and do things carefully.

古文：《诗》云： 慎尔出话，敬尔威仪。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 说话开口要谨慎，行为举止要端正。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Be careful when opening your mouth, and behave properly.

古文：大雅曰： 穆穆文王，于缉熙敬止。  
现代文：《大雅》上说： 端重恭敬的文王啊，盛德光明而又举止谨慎！  
English: "Daya" said: "O dignified and respectful King Wen, your virtue is bright and your manners are prudent!

古文：子曰： 长民者，衣服不贰，从容有常，以齐其民，则民德壹。
现代文：孔子说： 做百姓君长的人，衣服固定不变，举止有一定之规，以此为百姓树立榜样，那么百姓的道德才会齐一。
English: Confucius said: A ruler of the people should have a fixed dress code and a certain standard of behavior to set an example for the people, so that the people's morality will be uniform.

古文：《诗》云： 彼都人士，狐裘黄黄，其容不改，出言有章，行归于周，万民所望。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 那位来自西都镐京的君子，狐皮袍子罩黄衫，他的仪容不改常规，他的讲话出口成章。他行将回归西都，深为万民仰望。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: That gentleman from the western capital of Beijing, fox-skin robe and yellow shirt, his appearance does not change the routine, his speech is complete. He is about to return to the western capital, and is deeply admired by all the people.

古文：子曰： 为上可望而知也，为下可述而志也，则君不疑于其臣，而臣不惑于其君矣。
现代文：孔子说： 君长的外貌和内心如一，臣下看到他的外貌就知道他的内心；臣下竭诚事君，从他的言貌就可以看出他的为人。这祥一来，君就不会怀疑其臣，而臣也不会不了解其君。
English: Confucius said, "The appearance and the heart of a ruler are one and the same. If a subject sees his appearance, he will know his heart. If a subject is sincere, his words will reveal his character. If this is the case, the subject will not doubt his subject, and the subject will not misunderstand his ruler."

古文：《尹吉》曰： 惟尹躬及汤，咸有壹德。 
现代文：伊尹告诫太申诊只有我伊尹和汤，都有纯一的德行。
English: Only I, Yin and Tang, have the same virtue.

古文：《诗》云： 淑人君子，其仪不忒。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 善人和君子，他们的仪容不会有差错。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Our sovereign is a benevolent gentleman, and his words and deeds never deviate.

古文：子曰： 有国者章义恶，以示民厚，则民情不贰。
现代文：孔子说： 作为一国的国君，用奖赏表彰善人，用刑罚惩治坏人，让百姓清楚地看到他鼓励什么，这样百姓就会一心为善。
English: Confucius said: As the sovereign of a country, you should commend the good people with rewards and punish the bad people with punishments, so that the people can clearly see what he encourages, so that the people will be single-minded in doing good.

古文：《诗》云： 靖共尔位，好是正直。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 安分恭敬地做好你的本职工作，喜欢的都是正直人。 
English: There is a saying in the Book of Songs: "Be devoted to duty, be loyal and honest."

古文：子曰： 上人疑则百姓惑，下难知则君长劳。
现代文：孔子说： 当国君的如果好恶不明，百姓就会迷惑而不知所从；臣下如果心怀鬼胎，就会使君长格外劳神。
English: Confucius said: When the ruler's likes and dislikes are unclear, the people will be confused and do not know what to do; if the vassal has a ghost fetus in his heart, he will make the ruler work extra hard.

古文：故君民者，章好以示民俗，慎恶以御民之淫，则民不惑矣。
现代文：所以作为民众的国君，应该表彰善人使百姓知道有所效法，谨慎地惩治坏人以做效尤，这样一来百姓就不会迷惑而不知所从了。
English: Therefore, as the ruler of the people, it is necessary to commend the good people so that the people know what to follow, and carefully punish the bad people to set an example, so that the people will not be confused and do not know where to go.

古文：臣仪行，不重辞，不援其所不及，不烦其所不知，则君不劳矣。
现代文：作为臣下，符合道义的事就要奉行，不尚清谈，不援引国君力所不能及的事让国君去做，不絮叨国君有所不知的事让国君去听，这样一来当国君的就省心了。
English: As a vassal, you must do what is morally right. If you don't speak clearly, don't ask the sovereign to do what is beyond his power, and don't tell the sovereign what he doesn't know, he will lose heart.

古文：《诗》云： 上帝板板，下民卒。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 如果国君好恶无常，百姓都得遭殃。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: If the sovereign is capricious, the people will suffer.

古文：小雅曰： 匪其止共，惟王之邛。  
现代文：《小雅》上说： 臣下不忠于他的职守，这是国君辛劳的原因。 
English: "Xiao Ya" said: The subject is not loyal to his duties, which is the reason for the hard work of the sovereign.

古文：子曰： 政之不行也，教之不成也，爵禄不足劝也，刑罚不足耻也。
现代文：孔子说： 政令之所以不能推行，教化之所以不能成功，是由于爵禄的颁发失当，不足以劝人向善，还由于刑罚的惩善而扬恶，不足以使坏人感到羞耻。
English: Confucius said: The reason why government decrees cannot be implemented and enlightenment cannot be successful is due to the improper awarding of peerage, which is not enough to persuade people to be good, and also due to the punishment of punishment and the promotion of evil, which is not enough to make bad people feel ashamed.

古文：故上不可以亵刑而轻爵。
现代文：所以君长不可以随心所欲的动用刑罚，不可随随便便颁发爵禄。
English: Therefore, the monarch should not be able to use punishment as he pleases, and should not be able to hand out peerages at will.

古文：《康诰》曰： 敬明乃罚。 
现代文：《康浩》上说： 动用刑罚一定要慎重。 
English: "Kanghao" said: The use of punishment must be prudent.

古文：《甫刑》曰： 播刑之不迪。  
现代文：《甫刑》上说： 施行刑罚要合理。 
English: The "Final Punishment" said: the punishment should be reasonable.

古文：子曰： 大臣不亲，百姓不宁，则忠敬不足，而富贵已过也；大臣不治而迩臣比矣。
现代文：孔子说： 大臣离心离德，不亲近国君；政教繁苛，百姓不得安宁。究其原因，在于臣不忠于其君，君不敬于其臣，而大臣所享受的富贵已经超过了界限。大臣不肯为国君尽心办事，近臣就会私相勾结。
English: Confucius said: "Ministers are detached from virtue and are not close to the sovereign; politics and religion are cumbersome, and the people are not at peace. The reason is that the minister is not loyal to his prince, the prince does not respect his minister, and the wealth enjoyed by the minister has exceeded the limit. If the minister is not willing to work hard for the sovereign, the close ministers will collude with each other.

古文：故大臣不可不敬也，是民之表也；迩臣不可不慎也，是民之道也。
现代文：所以，对大臣不可不敬，因为大臣是百姓的楷模；对近臣不可不慎加选择，因为近臣是百姓的导向。
English: Therefore, you should not disrespect the minister, because the minister is the model for the people; you should not carelessly choose the close minister, because the close minister is the guide for the people.

古文：君毋以小谋大，毋以远言近，毋以内图外，则大臣不怨，迩臣不疾，而远臣不蔽矣。
现代文：应该和大臣商议的事，不应拿去和小臣商议；应该和近臣谈论的事，不应拿去和远臣谈论；应该和内臣谋虑的事，不应拿去和外臣谋虑。如果这样做了，大臣就不会产生怨恨，近臣就不会产生嫉妒，远臣有意见也可以反映上来。
English: Matters that should be discussed with a minister should not be discussed with a junior minister; matters that should be discussed with a close minister should not be discussed with a distant minister; matters that should be discussed with a vassal should not be discussed with a foreign minister. If this is done, the minister will not be resentful, the close minister will not be jealous, and the distant minister can also express his opinion.

古文：叶公之顾命曰： 毋以小谋败大作，毋以嬖御人疾庄后，毋以嬖御士疾庄士、大夫、卿士。  
现代文：祭公的遗嘱说： 不要用小臣的主意败坏大臣的作为，不要因宠幸的姬妾而厌弃庄重守礼的嫡夫人，不要因宠幸的臣子而厌弃庄重守礼的臣子。  
English: The sacrificial prince's will said: Don't use the idea of a vassal to corrupt the actions of a minister, don't reject a dignified and respectful wife because of a favored concubine, and don't reject a dignified and respectful vassal because of a favored vassal.

古文：子曰： 大人不亲其所贤，而信其所贱；民是以亲失，而教是以烦。
现代文：孔子说：冲君长不信任他的贤人，而信任卑贱的小人，于是百姓也跟着亲近失德的人，而教令也因此变得烦乱了。
English: Confucius said: Chong Jun Chang did not trust his sages, but trusted the lowly villains, so the people also followed the people who were close to the immoral, and the edict also became upset.

古文：《诗》云： 彼求我则，如不我得；执我仇仇，亦不我力。 《君陈》曰： 未见圣，若己弗克见；既见圣，亦不克由圣。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 当初朝廷需要我，好像唯恐得不到。一旦请去撂一边，不让我把重任挑，《君陈》上说： 人们在没有见到圣人之道时，好像自己不能见到。等到自己见到了圣人之道，又不能够运用圣人之道。  
English: "The Book of Songs" said: At first, the imperial court needed me, as if they were afraid of not being able to get me. Once they asked me to step aside, they wouldn't let me choose the important task. "King Chen" said: When people don't see the way of the sage, it's as if they can't see it themselves. When they see the way of the sage, they can't use the way of the sage.

古文：子曰： 小人溺于水，君子溺于口，大人溺于民，皆在其所亵也。
现代文：孔子说： 小人喜欢玩水，就容易被水淹死；君子喜欢议论，就容易祸从口出；执政者喜欢玩弄百姓，就容易被百姓推翻。
English: Confucius said: "If a villain likes to play with water, he will easily be drowned by water; if a gentleman likes to talk, it is easy for evil to come out of his mouth; if a ruler likes to play with the people, it is easy for the people to overthrow him."

古文：夫水近于人而溺人，德易狎而难亲也，易以溺人；口费而烦，易出难悔，易以溺人；夫民闭于人，而有鄙心，可敬不可慢，易以溺人。
现代文：原因都在于对接近最多的东西态度轻慢。水与人们那么接近，而人却往往被水淹死，就是因为水看起来柔和容易接近而实际上却是难于亲近的，所以容易淹死人。好说漂亮话，又好絮絮叨叨，说出去容易，后悔药难吃，所以嘴也容易招致祸害。老百姓不懂道理，心怀鄙诈，对他们可以恭敬而不可以怠慢，否则就容易招来灭顶之祸。
English: Water is so close to people, but people are often drowned by water. That is because water looks soft and easy to approach, but in fact it is difficult to get close, so it is easy to drown people. It is easy to say pretty words, it is easy to gossip, it is easy to speak out, it is difficult to eat regret medicine, so the mouth is also easy to cause harm. Ordinary people do not understand reason, they are contemptuous, they can be respected but not neglected, otherwise it is easy to cause disaster.

古文：故君子不可以不慎也。
现代文：所以君子不可以不十分小心。
English: So a gentleman must not be too careful.

古文：《太甲》曰： 毋越厥命以自覆也；若虞机张，往省括于厥度则释。 
现代文：《太甲》上说： 不要颠三倒四地乱下政令，以自取灭亡，就像打猎的人，扣住扳机，仔细察看，等到箭头、箭尾、目标三者成一条直线，再发射。 
English: "Taijia" said: "Don't make a mess of government decrees and self-destruct, just like a hunter. Pull the trigger, take a closer look, wait until the arrow, arrowhead, and target are in a straight line, and then fire.

古文：《兑命》曰： 惟口起羞，惟甲胄起兵，惟衣裳在笥，惟干戈省厥躬。 
现代文：《说命》 上说： 嘴是用来说话的，如果出言不当就会带来羞辱；盔甲是用以自卫的，如果用的不当就会引起战争；放在箱子里的礼服,是准备行礼时穿的，不可随便送人；干戈是用来讨伐坏人的，但在使用之前要反躬自省，不要加害无辜。 
English: "Saying the Mandate" says: The mouth is used for speaking, and if it is used improperly, it will bring humiliation; the armor is used for self-defense, and if it is used improperly, it will cause war; the dress that is placed in the box is worn when preparing to perform the salute, and should not be sent to anyone; the sword is used to fight the bad guys, but before using it, you should reflect on yourself and not harm the innocent.

古文：《太甲》曰： 天作孽，可违也；自作孽，不可以逭。 《尹吉》曰： 惟尹躬天，见于西邑；夏自周有终，相亦惟终。  
现代文：·《太甲》上说： 上天降下的灾祸，还可以攘避；自己造成的灾祸，无法躲开，伊尹告诫太甲说： 我伊尹的先祖曾见到过夏代西邑的政治，夏禹以忠信治民而得享天命，辅佐他的人也因此而得享天命。 
English: · "Taiga" said: The calamity sent down by heaven can still be avoided; the calamity caused by oneself cannot be avoided. Yi Yin admonished Taiga, saying: My ancestors of Yi Yin had seen the politics of Xiyu in the Xia Dynasty. Xia Yu enjoyed the fate of heaven by faithfully governing the people, and those who assisted him also enjoyed the fate of heaven.

古文：子曰： 民以君为心，君以民为体；心庄则体舒，心肃则容敬。
现代文：孔子说： 人民把君主当作心脏，君主把人民当作身体。必胸身身心广大就会身体安舒，体一定也乐于适应；内心严肃就会容止恭敬。
English: Confucius said: The people regard the monarch as the heart, and the monarch regards the people as the body. If the chest and body are broad, the body will be comfortable, and the body will be willing to adapt; if the heart is serious, it will tolerate respect.

古文：心好之，身必安之；君好之，民必欲之。心以体全，亦以体伤；君以民存，亦以民亡。
现代文：内心喜好的东西，君主喜好的东西，体安然无恙的话，心脏也就会得到保护百姓也一定愿意得到;身体如果出了毛病脏也会跟着受到损伤。君主由于人民的拥护而存在，君主也由于人民的反对而灭亡。
English: If the body is safe and sound, the heart will also be protected, and the people will certainly be willing to receive it; if the body is out of order, the organs will also be damaged. The monarch exists due to the support of the people, and the monarch also perishes due to the opposition of the people.

古文：《诗》云： 昔吾有先正，其言明且清，国家以宁，都邑以成，庶民以生；谁能秉国成，不自为正，卒劳百姓。
现代文：《诗经》上说： 从前我们有先君，他的教令通达事理而又条理清楚。国家赖此先君才得以安宁，都邑赖此先君才得以建成，百姓赖此先君才得以安居乐业，当今有谁能够处理国家大事？不自以为是，而尽干一些骚扰百姓的事情呢！
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Once upon a time, we had a forefather, whose edicts were logical and well-organized. The country relied on this forefather to be peaceful, the cities relied on this forefather to be built, and the people relied on this forefather to live and work in peace. Who can handle national affairs today? Don't be self-righteous, but do something that disturbs the people!

古文：《君雅》曰： 夏日暑雨，小民惟曰怨；资冬祁寒，小民亦惟曰怨。  
现代文：《君牙》上说： 夏天酷热湿闷，老百姓只知道埋怨天；到了冬天严寒来临，老百姓还是只知道埋怨天。 
English: "Jun Ya" said: In the hot and humid summer, the people only know how to complain about the weather; when the winter comes, the people still only know how to complain about the weather.

古文：子曰： 下之事上也，身不正，言不信，则义不壹，行无类也。 
现代文：孔子说： 臣下的事奉君上，如果自身不正，说话不讲信用那么君上就不以为忠，朋友就不以为信。 
English: Confucius said, "It is the duty of a vassal to serve his lord. If he is dishonest and does not speak truthfully, then his lord will not consider him loyal and his friends will not consider him trustworthy."

古文：子曰： 言有物而行有格也；是以生则不可夺志，死则不可夺名。
现代文：孔子说： 讲话有根据，做事有规矩。所以活着的时候无人能够改变他的志向，死了以后也无人能够剥夺他的美名。
English: Confucius said, "Speech is well-founded, and actions are well-ordered. Therefore, no one can change his aspirations while he is alive, and no one can deprive him of his good name after he dies.

古文：故君子多闻，质而守之；多志，质而亲之；精知，略而行之。
现代文：所以君子应该博闻，在弄清楚了以后就牢记在心；应该多识，在弄清楚了以后就学而不庆；应该知识精深，求其大体而实行之。
English: Therefore, a gentleman should be well-informed, and keep it in mind after he has figured it out; he should be knowledgeable, and learn after he has figured it out, and not celebrate; he should be knowledgeable, and strive to implement it in general.

古文：《君陈》曰： 出入自尔师虞，庶言同。 《诗》云： 淑人君子，其仪一也。  
现代文：《君陈》上说： 颁布政令，接受建议，要让大家都来考虑，使大家的意见一致，《诗经》上说： 善人和君子，言行总一致。  
English: "Jun Chen" said: When issuing decrees and accepting suggestions, it is necessary to let everyone consider and make everyone's opinions consistent. "Song of Songs" said: Good men and gentlemen, words and deeds are always consistent.

古文：子曰： 唯君子能好其正，小人毒其正。
现代文：孔子说： 只有君子能够喜好对自己正言规劝的人，小人则仇恨对自己正言规劝的人。
English: Confucius said, "Only a gentleman can like those who speak well of him, while a ruffian hates those who speak well of him."

古文：故君子之朋友有乡，其恶有方；是故迩者不惑，而远者不疑也。《诗》云： 君子好仇。  
现代文：所以君子的朋友是有一定的，君子厌恶的人也是有一定的。由于君子的好恶有定，所以和君子交往多的人不会产生疑惑，和君子交往少的人也不会产生疑惑。《诗经》上说： 君子必得良友。  
English: Therefore, a gentleman has a certain number of friends, and a gentleman has a certain number of people he dislikes. Since a gentleman's likes and dislikes are fixed, people who have more contact with a gentleman will not have doubts, and people who have less contact with a gentleman will not have doubts. "The Book of Songs" says: A gentleman must have good friends.

古文：子曰： 轻绝贫贱，而重绝富贵，则好贤不坚，而恶恶不着也。
现代文：孔子说： 清旨够轻易地和贫贱的朋友绝交，而难于和富贵的朋友绝交，这说明他好贤的意志不坚定和痛恨坏人的态度不明朗。
English: Confucius said: It is easy enough for a virtuous man to break off relations with a poor friend, but it is difficult for him to break off relations with a rich friend. This shows that his virtuous will is not firm and his attitude of hating evil-doers is not clear.

古文：人虽曰不利，吾不信也。
现代文：即令有人说他不是为了个人私利，我也不会相信。
English: I wouldn't believe him if he said it wasn't for personal gain.

古文：《诗》云： 朋有攸摄，摄以威仪。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 朋友之间互相督促勉励，督促勉励以礼义。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Friends should encourage each other, and encourage each other with courtesy.

古文：子曰： 私惠不归德，君子不自留焉。
现代文：孔子说： 他人以小恩小惠的礼品相赠，但有违于道德，在这种情况下，君子是不会接受其馈赠的。
English: Confucius said: It is immoral for others to give each other small gifts, but in this case, a gentleman will not accept their gifts.

古文：《诗》云： 人之好我，示我周行。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 真正爱我的人，应当给我指出忠信之道。 
English: The "Song of Songs" says, "He who truly loves me should show me the way of faithfulness."

古文：子曰： 茍有车，必见其轼；茍有衣，必见其敝；人茍或言之，必闻其声；茍或行之，必见其成。
现代文：孔子说： 一个人如果有车子，就一定能够看到他的车轼；一个人如果有衣服，就一定能够看到他的衣袖。
English: Confucius said: If a person has a car, he must be able to see his car hood; if a person has clothes, he must be able to see his sleeves.

古文：《葛覃》曰： 服之无射。  
现代文：一个人如果说过话，就一定能够听到他的声音；一个人如果做了什么事，就一定能够看到它的后果。
English: If a person says something, he must be able to hear his voice; if a person does something, he must be able to see its consequences.

古文：恒其德侦，妇人吉，夫子凶。  
现代文：《葛覃》上说： 旧衣服，穿不厌。  
English: "Old clothes, I can't get tired of wearing them," he said in "Kurt."

