古文：十年春，王二月，公会齐侯、郑伯于中丘。
现代文：十年春季，周王朝历法正月，鲁隐公在中丘会见齐僖公、郑庄公。
English: In the spring of the 10th year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Lu Ying Gong met with Qi Rong Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong in Zhongqiu.

古文：夏，翚帅师会齐人、郑人伐宋。
现代文：夏季，羽父合齐僖公、郑庄公，进攻宋国。
English: In the summer, the feathered fathers, Qi Jun Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong, attacked Song.

古文：六月壬戌，公败宋师于菅。
现代文：同年六月壬戌，隐公在菅地打败宋军。
English: In June of the same year, Yinggu defeated the Song army at Sugandi.

古文：辛未，取郜。
现代文：辛未日，郑国军队开进郜地。
English: On the eve of Xin's death, Zheng's army marched into Shantou.

古文：辛巳，取防。
现代文：辛巳日，郑国军队又开进防地。
English: On the following day, the Zheng army entered the defensive again.

古文：秋，宋人、卫人入郑。
现代文：秋季，宋国人和卫国人一起入侵郑国。
English: In autumn, the Song people and the defenders of the country invaded Zheng together.

古文：宋人、蔡人、卫人伐戴。
现代文：宋国人、蔡国人、卫国人一起攻打戴国。
English: Song people, Cai people, and defenders of the country attacked Dai Province together.

古文：郑伯伐取之。
现代文：郑国国君也趁机攻打戴国并占领了它。
English: Zheng Guo Guojun also took the opportunity to attack Dai Guo and occupied it.

古文：冬十月壬午，齐人、郑人入郕。
现代文：冬季十月壬午日，齐军、郑军攻入郕国
English: In the winter of October, on the morning of the seventh day of the ninth month, the Qi army and the Zheng army invaded Shandong

古文：十年春，王正月，公会齐侯、郑伯于中丘。
现代文：十年春季，周王朝历法的正月，鲁隐公在中丘会见齐僖公、郑庄公。
English: In the spring of the tenth year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Lu Ying Gong met with Qizhi Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong in Zhongqiu.

古文：癸丑，盟于邓，为师期。
现代文：二月二十五日，在邓地结盟，决定出兵日期。
English: On February 25, they formed an alliance in Dangdi and decided on the date of dispatching troops.

古文：夏五月，羽父先会齐侯、郑伯伐宋。
现代文：夏季五月，羽父事先会合齐僖公、郑庄公，进攻宋国。
English: In the summer of May, the feathered father had previously gathered Qizhi Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong to attack Song.

古文：六月戊申，公会齐侯、郑伯于老桃。
现代文：六月某一天，隐公在老桃会见齐僖公、郑庄公。
English: One day in June, Ying Gong met with Qi Rong Gong and Zheng Zhuang Gong in Lao Tao.

古文：壬戌，公败宋师于菅。
现代文：初七日，隐公在菅地打败宋军。十五日，郑国军队开进郜地。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Yingguo defeated the Song army in Sugandi. On the fifteenth day, the Zheng army drove into Shantian.

古文：庚午，郑师入郜；辛未，归于我。
现代文：十六日，郑国把郜地归属于我国。
English: On the 16th, Zheng Guo assigned the Yunnan Province to China.

古文：庚辰，郑师入防；辛巳，归于我。
现代文：二十五日，郑国军队又开进防地。二十六日，郑国把防地归属于我国。
English: On the 25th, Zheng's army entered the defense area again. On the 26th, Zheng assigned the defense area to our country.

古文：君子谓： 郑庄公于是乎可谓正矣。
现代文：君子说： 郑庄公这样做，可以说合于正道了。
English: The gentleman said, "Since Zheng Zhuang Gong has done this, it can be said that he is on the right path.

古文：以王命讨不庭，不贪其土，以劳王爵，正之体也。 
现代文：用天子的命令讨伐不来朝觐的诸侯，自己不贪求土地，而以犒赏受天子的爵位的鲁国，这是得到治理政事的本体了。 
English: Using the order of the Son of Heaven to fight against the lords who did not come to the imperial court, and not coveting the land themselves, but using the reward to reward the Lu Kingdom, which received the peerage of the Son of Heaven, this is the essence of getting governance.

古文：蔡人、卫人、郕人不会王命。
现代文：蔡国人、卫国人、郕国人没有按照天子的命令会师讨伐宋国。
English: Cai Guo Ren, Wei Guo Ren, and Yan Guo Ren did not unite their forces to fight against Song in accordance with the order of the heavenly son.

古文：秋七月庚寅，郑师入郊。
现代文：秋季，七月初五日，郑国的军队进入本国的远郊，仍然停留在那里。
English: In the autumn, on the 5th day of the 7th month, the Zheng troops entered the outskirts of the country and remained there.

古文：犹在郊，宋人、卫人入郑。
现代文：宋军、卫军趁此攻进郑国。
English: The Song and Wei armies took advantage of this to invade Zheng.

古文：蔡人从之，伐戴。
现代文：蔡军跟在后面进攻戴地。
English: Cai Jun followed behind and attacked Daidi.

古文：八月壬戌，郑伯围戴。
现代文：八月初八日，郑庄公包围戴地。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month, Zheng Zhuanggong besieged Daiji.

古文：癸亥，克之，取三师焉。
现代文：初九日，攻克戴地，俘虏了三国军队。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, they conquered Daiji and captured the troops of the three countries.

古文：宋、卫既入郑，而以伐戴召蔡人，蔡人怒，故不和而败。
现代文：宋军、卫军已经攻入郑国，而又为了攻打戴地才联合蔡军，蔡国人发怒。由于三支军队不合作而失败。
English: The Song army and the guard army had already invaded Zheng, but in order to attack Daiji, they united with Cai's army. Cai's people were angry. They failed because the three armies did not cooperate.

古文：九月戊寅，郑伯入宋。
现代文：九月的一天，郑庄公率军攻入宋国。
English: One day in September, Zheng Zhuanggong led an army into Song.

古文：冬，齐人、郑人入郕，讨违王命也。
现代文：冬季，齐军、郑军攻入郕国，这是讨伐郕国违背天子的命令。
English: In the winter, the Qi army and the Zheng army invaded Yunnan. This was a crusade against Yunnan in defiance of God's order.

