古文：真德秀，字景元，后更为希元，建之浦城人。
现代文：真德秀字景元，后来改景元为希元，是建州浦城人。
English: Zhende Xiuzi Jingyuan, later changed to Xiyuan, was a native of Jianzhou Pucheng.

古文：四岁受书，过目成诵。
现代文：他四岁的时候开始读书，记性及悟性都很好，能做到过目成诵。
English: He started to read when he was four years old. His memory and comprehension are very good, and he can recite everything by heart.

古文：十五而孤，母吴氏力贫教之。
现代文：十五岁的时候失去父亲，由母亲吴氏独力抚养。
English: He lost his father when he was 15 years old, and was raised by his single mother, Ms. Wu.

古文：同郡杨圭见而异之，使归共诸子学，卒妻以女。
现代文：同郡的杨圭发现真德秀为可塑之才，便在他的学习方面给予极大关怀，杨圭还将自己的女儿许配给了真德秀。
English: Yang Gui from the same county found that Zhendexiu was a malleable talent and gave him great care in his studies. Yang Gui also betrothed his daughter to Zhendexiu.

古文：登庆元五年进士第，授南剑州判官。
现代文：庆元五年，真德秀考中进士，被授南剑州判官。
English: In the fifth year of the Qing Dynasty, he was promoted to the middle school of the Zhendexiu Examination, and was awarded the Southern Jianzhou Judge.

古文：继试，中博学宏词科，入闽帅幕，召为太学正，嘉定元年迁博士。
现代文：不久又试中博学宏词科，从而进入福建帅幕，并被朝廷召为太学正。嘉定元年，真德秀擢升博士。
English: Soon after, he passed the entrance examination of the erudite and grand words department, thus entering Fujian Shuai Maku, and was called by the imperial court to be Taishu Zheng. In the first year of Jiading, Zhende Xiu was promoted to doctor.

古文：往来之称谓，犒军之金帛，根括归明流徙之民，皆承之唯谨，得无滋嫚我乎？抑善谋国者不观敌情，观吾政事。
现代文：现在号称改革，却不能采取措施使敌人有所畏服，恐怕敌人就会利用我们给予他们的岁币不断增加国力，并乘我不备发动新的阴谋。
English: Now they claim to be reforming, but they can't take measures to intimidate the enemy. I'm afraid that the enemy will use the money we give them to constantly increase their national strength and take advantage of me to launch new plots.

古文：今号为更化，而无以使敌情之畏服，正恐彼资吾岁赂以厚其力，乘吾不备以长其谋，一旦挑争端而吾无以应，此有识所为寒心。 又言： 侂胄自知不为清议所贷，至诚忧国之士则名以好异，于是忠良之士斥，而正论不闻，正心诚意之学则诬以好名，于是伪学之论兴，而正道不行。
现代文：这样的话，一旦其挑起争端，而我们又没有应对之策，那就实在寒心了。 真德秀又说： 韩胄知道自己不受清正之议的好评，知道那些至诚忧国之士指责他好大喜功，所以就竭力排斥忠良，致使正义不伸，正论不闻，正道不行。正心诚意之理学被他诬为虚妄好名的伪学，并受到大肆攻击和禁锢。
English: In this way, once it provokes a dispute, and we have no way to deal with it, it is really cold-hearted. Zhen De Xiu also said: Han Xuan knows that he is not well received by the pure and honest discussion, knows that those who are most sincere and concerned about the country accuse him of being very good, so he tries his best to exclude the faithful, so that justice is not achieved, the correct theory is not heard, and the correct path is not possible. The science of sincerity is falsified by him as a false science with a good name, and is subjected to heavy attacks and imprisonment.

古文：今日改弦更张，正当褒崇名节，明示好尚。
现代文：现在是改弦更张的好时期，朝廷应当褒崇名节，明示好尚。 
English: Now is a good time to change course. The Imperial Court should praise famous festivals and express its preference.

古文：召试学士院，改秘书省正字兼检讨玉牒。二年，迁校书郎。
现代文：真德秀在受到皇帝召见后，被召试学士院，改任秘书省正字兼检讨玉牒，嘉定二年，又升为校书郎，并再次受皇帝召见。
English: After being summoned by the emperor, Zhen Dexiu was summoned to the Examination Academy, and was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Justice and the review of the imperial edict. In the second year of Jiading, he was promoted to the school scribe, and was once again summoned by the emperor.

古文：又对，言暴风、雨雹、荧惑、蝻蝗之变，皆赃吏所致。
现代文：他陈述暴风、雨雹、荧惑、蝻蝗之灾变，皆由贪官污吏所导致。
English: He said that the storms, hailstorms, flash floods and locust plagues were all caused by corrupt officials.

古文：寻兼沂王府教授、学士院权直。
现代文：不久，真德秀兼沂王府教授、学士院权直。
English: Before long, Zhendexiu was also a professor at the Shaowangfu and Quanzhi of the Academy.

古文：三年，迁秘书郎。
现代文：嘉定三年，真德秀升秘书郎。
English: Jiading three years, Zhende Xiu Sheng secretary.

古文：入对，乞开公道，窒旁蹊，以抑小人道长之渐；选良牧，励战士，以扼群盗方张之锐。
现代文：他向皇帝建议要开公道，阻旁蹊，以抑小人往上爬；选良将，励军士，以扼群盗的兴起之势。
English: He suggested to the emperor to open a fair way, block the side-track, so as to restrain the villain from climbing up; select the good general, encourage the sergeant, so as to curb the rise of bandits.

古文：四年，选著作佐郎。
现代文：嘉定四年，真德秀升为著作佐郎。
English: In the fourth year of Jiading, Zhende Xiu Rong was promoted to Shuxing Saro.

古文：同列相惎谗之，德秀恬不与较。
现代文：遭到同列的攻击和诽谤，他处之恬然，不与之计较。
English: When he is attacked and slandered in the same way, he shrugs it off.

古文：宰相将用德秀，会言官牴之，德秀力辞。
现代文：宰相打算起用真德秀，遭到言官非议，真德秀也就极力推辞了。
English: The prime minister planned to appoint Zhendexiu, but was criticized by the spokesman, and Zhendexiu also strongly rejected the move.

古文：兼礼部郎官，上疏言： 金有必亡之势，亦可为中国忧。
现代文：真德秀在兼礼部郎官时曾上疏说 ：金朝有必亡的趋势，这虽是好事，但也可变为中国之忧。
English: When he was a vice-minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zhen Dexiu once said: The Kim dynasty has a tendency to perish. Although this is a good thing, it can also become a worry for China.

古文：盖金亡则上恬下嬉，忧不在敌而在我，多事之端恐自此始。 五年，迁军器少监，升权直。
现代文：因为金亡后，很容易使我方丧失斗志，形成上恬下嬉的状况。所以真正的忧患不在敌方而在我方，多事之端，恐怕要从此开始了。 嘉定五年，真德秀迁军器少监，升权直。
English: Because after the death of Kim, it is easy for our side to lose the fighting spirit and form a situation of happiness. Therefore, the real sorrow is not on the enemy side, but on our side, the end of many things, I am afraid to start from here. In Jiading five years, Zhendexiu moved to the junior inspector of military equipment, and was promoted to the directorship.

古文：六年，迁起居舍人，奏： 权奸擅政十有四年，朱熹、彭龟年以抗论逐，吕祖俭、周端朝以上书斥，当时近臣犹有争之者。
现代文：嘉定六年，真德秀升任中书舍人，他上奏说： 韩胄等权奸擅政十四年，朱熹、彭龟年等人尽遭贬逐，吕祖俭、周端朝等因发表不同意见而遭斥责，即便如此，当时仍有大臣不畏权势，据理力争。
English: In the sixth year of Jiading, Zhendexiu was promoted to the position of the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He reported: Han Zheng and other traitors had been in power for 14 years, Zhu Xi and Peng Guiren had all been ousted, and Lv Zu Jian and Zhou Duan Xiao had been reprimanded for expressing dissenting opinions. Even so, there were still ministers who did not fear power and fought for the truth.

古文：其后吕祖泰之贬，非惟近臣莫敢言，而台谏且出力以挤之，则嘉泰之失已深于庆元矣。
现代文：然而，自从吕祖泰遭贬谪后，且不说大臣不敢再多言，那些台谏之官反而为虎作伥，帮助韩胄。所以说嘉泰年间出现的问题较之庆元年间更严重了。
English: However, since Lü Zuotai was dethroned, and not to say that the ministers did not dare to say more, those officials of the Taiwu, on the other hand, did their best to help Han Zheng. Therefore, the problems that occurred during the Jiatao era were more serious than those during the Qingyuan era.

古文：更化之初，群贤皆得自奋。未几，傅伯成以谏官论事去，蔡幼学以词臣论事去，邹应龙、许奕又继以封驳论事去。是数人者，非能大有所矫拂，已皆不容于朝。故人务自全，一辞不措。
现代文：更化之初，群臣都能奋发努力，可是不久，傅伯成以谏官身份发议论而罢官；蔡幼学以词臣身份发议论而罢官；邹应龙、许奕以发议论而罢官，这几个人所发议论皆不出格，但也不能为朝廷所容忍，所以人们开始明哲保身、缄口不言。
English: At the beginning of the reform, all the ministers were able to make strenuous efforts, but soon, Fu Bocheng resigned as a eunuch; Cai Youxue resigned as a eunuch; Zou Yinglong and Xu Yi resigned as eunuchs. The arguments made by these people were not extraordinary, but they could not be tolerated by the imperial court, so people began to be wise and keep their mouths shut.

古文：设有大安危、大利害，群臣喑嘿如此，岂不殆哉！
现代文：如果遇有大的安危、大的利害时，群臣也如此漠然，那就太危险了。
English: It would be too dangerous if, in the face of great danger and great interests, the ministers were also so indifferent.

古文：今欲与陛下言，勤访问、广谋议、明黜陟三者而已。 时钞法楮令行，告讦繁兴，抵罪者众，莫敢以上闻。
现代文：现在我要对陛下说的无非有三点：即勤访问，广谋议，明黜陟。 当时，朝廷为了解决财政危机，大量征收杂税并且发行 会子 ，在这一活动中，兴起了举报之风，许多人都因偷漏税款而得罪，却无人敢报告朝廷。
English: Now, I would like to say three things to Your Majesty: prompt visit, wide-ranging discussion, and clear understanding. At that time, in order to solve the financial crisis, the Imperial Court levied a large amount of miscellaneous taxes and issued meeting certificates. In this activity, a trend of reporting arose. Many people were offended by tax evasion, but no one dared to report to the Imperial Court.

古文：德秀奏： 或一夫坐罪，而并籍昆弟之财；或亏陌四钱，而没入百万之赀。
现代文：真德秀为此上奏说 ：有的一夫坐罪，就牵连没收其兄弟的财产；有的偷漏税款很少，就惩罚性地没收人家百万之财。
English: For this reason, Zhendexiu made a report, saying: Some people commit a crime and are implicated in the confiscation of their brother's property; some people have little tax evasion and are punished with the confiscation of their million-dollar wealth.

古文：至于科富室之钱，拘盐商之舟，视产高下，配民藏楮，鬻田宅以收券者，虽大家不能免，尚得名便民之策？ 自此籍没之产以渐给还。
现代文：征收富室之钱，拘扣盐商之船，视财富高低强行分配钱券，以致使人们不得不鬻田卖房来收取钱券，这难道是便民之策吗？ 由于真德秀的批评，朝廷不得已将所没收的财产渐次送还原主。
English: Is it a convenience measure to collect the money of the rich, detain the ship of the salt merchant, and forcibly distribute money coupons according to the level of wealth, so that people have to sell their homes to collect money coupons? Due to the criticism of Zhen De Xiu, the court had to gradually return the confiscated property to the original owner.

古文：兼太常少卿。又言金人必亡，君臣上下皆当以祈天永命为心。
现代文：真德秀兼太常少卿时，又言金朝必亡，认为君臣上下应当更加保持谨慎。
English: When Zhendexiu was still a minor general, he also said that the Kim dynasty was doomed, and believed that the officials should be more cautious.

古文：充金国贺登位使，及盱眙，闻金人内变而返。
现代文：真德秀充任金朝贺登位使，在行至盱眙时，听说金朝发生内变而返。
English: When he was on his way to the capital, he heard that there had been a coup in the Kim dynasty.

古文：言于上曰： 臣自扬之楚，自楚之盱眙，沃壤无际，陂湖相连，民皆坚悍强忍，此天赐吾国以屏障大江，使强兵足食为进取资。
现代文：并向皇帝禀告说 ：我从扬州到楚州，又由楚州到达盱眙，一路上见沃野千里，陂湖相连，老百姓大多坚悍强忍，这是我长江之北最好的屏障，也为我方兵强马壮、不断进取提供了可靠的保证。
English: He also reported to the emperor: "I went from Yangzhou to Chuzhou, and from Chuzhou to Handan. Along the way, I saw thousands of miles of fertile fields, and Handan Lake is connected. Most of the people are tough and strong. This is the best barrier north of the Yangtze River, and it also provides a reliable guarantee for our soldiers to be strong and forge ahead.

古文：顾田畴不辟，沟洫不治，险要不扼，丁壮不练，豪杰武勇不收拾，一旦有警，则徒以长江为恃。
现代文：然而，纵观千里沃野，大量的土地未得到开垦，水利未得到整修，险要地段没有加以控制，丁壮没有加以训练，豪杰武勇没有得到收编，一旦出现紧急情况，则只有以长江为屏障。
English: However, throughout the vast fertile fields, a large amount of land has not been reclaimed, water conservancy has not been renovated, critical areas have not been controlled, Ding Zhuang has not been trained, heroes and warriors have not been incorporated, and in the event of an emergency, only the Yangtze River is a barrier.

古文：岂如及今大修垦田之政，专为一司以领之，数年之后，积储充实，边民父子争欲自保，因其什伍，勒以兵法，不待粮饣尚，皆为精兵。 又言边防要事。
现代文：现在应颁布大兴水利、鼓励垦田之政策，并设一专门机构负责督导。如此一来，数年之后，积蓄充实，边民父子都会争先保卫国家，朝廷则乘势以军制加以整编，使之成为保卫国家的精兵悍卒。 
English: Now is the time to promulgate the policy of greatly improving water conservancy and encouraging rice fields, and set up a special agency to be responsible for supervision. In this way, after a few years, the savings will be abundant, the border residents and their children will compete to defend the country, and the imperial court will take advantage of the situation to reorganize the military system to make it an elite soldier to defend the country.

古文：时史弥远方以爵禄縻天下士，德秀慨然谓刘爚曰： 吾徒须急引去，使庙堂知世亦有不肯为从官之人。 遂力请去，出为秘阁修撰、江东转运副使。
现代文：史弥远欲以高官厚禄拉拢天下之士，真德秀慨然对刘飊说： 我辈应迅速离开这是非之地，让朝廷知道世间也有不肯受人愚弄之人。 遂力请离朝，出为秘阁修撰、江东转运副使。
English: Shi Miyan wanted to attract the world's people with the high-ranking official's generous salary, and Zhendexiu indignantly said to Liu Bei: Our generation should quickly leave this is the wrong place, let the imperial court know that there are people in the world who do not want to be fooled by others.

古文：山东盗起，朝廷犹与金通聘，德秀朝辞，奏： 国耻不可忘，邻盗不可轻，幸安之谋不可恃，导谀之言不可听，至公之论不可忽。 宁宗曰： 卿力有余，到江东日为朕撙节财计，以助边用。 
现代文：山东盗贼兴起，朝廷仍与金朝保持使臣往来。真德秀上奏说 ：国耻不可忘，邻盗不可轻，苟安之谋不可依，阿谀之言不可听，至公之论不可忽。 宁宗说： 你有能力，到江东后可为朕理财，以资边防费用。 
English: With the rise of the bandits in Shandong, the imperial court still maintained diplomatic relations with the Kim dynasty. Zhende Xiu said in his report: "National shame should not be forgotten, neighboring bandits should not be taken lightly, peace-keeping measures should not be followed, the words of the imam should not be listened to, and public opinion should not be ignored." Ningzong said: "You have the ability to manage my finances and finance border defense costs after you come to the east of the Yangtze River.

古文：江东旱蝗，广德、太平为甚，德秀遂与留守、宪司分所部九郡大讲荒政，而自领广德、太平。
现代文：江东发生旱灾和蝗灾，尤以广德、太平两地最为严重。真德秀到任后，与留守、宪司等密切配合，大讲荒政，他自己还专门负责广德和太平的救灾工作。
English: Droughts and locust plagues occurred in the east of the Yangtze River, especially in the two provinces of Quang Duc and Taiping, which were the most serious. After taking office, Zhen De Xiu worked closely with the left-behind people and the Constitutional Secretary to talk about despotism. He was also specifically responsible for the disaster relief work in Quang Duc and Taiping.

古文：亲至广德，与太守魏岘同以便宜发廪，使教授林庠振给，竣事而还。
现代文：他到广德后，与太守魏岘商议，决定开仓济民，并让教授林庠具体组织赈给，将一切工作安排妥当之后才离开广德。
English: After he arrived in Guangde, he discussed with the Emperor Wei Wei and decided to open a warehouse to help the people, and asked Professor Lin Wei to give him a specific organization, and only left Guangde after all the work arrangements were in place.

古文：百姓数千人送之郊外，指道傍丛冢泣曰： 此皆往岁饿死者。
现代文：临行时，当地百姓数千人一直将他送到郊外，有人还指着道旁林立的坟冢哭泣说 ：这里埋葬的都是以往的饿死者，如果没有真德秀公，我们的命运将会与死者一样。 
English: When he was about to leave, thousands of local people followed him all the way to the suburbs. Some people also pointed to the graves lining the roadside and cried, saying, "All the starving people who died in the past are buried here. If it weren't for Zhendexiu, our fate would be the same as that of the dead."

古文：微公，我辈已相随入此矣。 索毁太平州私创之大斛。新徽州守林琰无廉声，宁国守张忠恕私匿振济米，皆劾之，而以李道传摄徽。
现代文：真德秀还毁掉了太平州私创的盘剥老百姓的大斛。新徽州太守林琰贪赃枉法，无廉洁之名，宁国太守张忠恕瞒匿赈济之粮，都受到真德秀的弹劾，后来由李道传替代林琰而摄管徽州。
English: Zhendexiu also destroyed Taiping's self-created big yoke of exploiting the common people. New Huizhou's governor Lin Xi, who was known to be corrupt and dishonest, and Ningguo's governor Zhang Zhongshu, who concealed the grain supply, were both impeached by Zhendexiu. Later, Li Daochuan replaced Lin Xi and took charge of Huizhou.

古文：先是，都司胡貙、薛拯每诮德秀迂儒，试以事必败，至是政誉日闻，因倡言旱伤本轻，监司好名，振赡太过，使岘劾庠以撼德秀。
现代文：起初，都司胡木规、薛拯时常讥诮真德秀迂腐，料定德秀做事必碰壁，及至真德秀有政绩政誉时，胡、薛则认为旱情本来不严重，因监司邀功好名，致使赈济太过，他们还唆使太守魏岘弹劾林庠，借以攻击、摇撼真德秀。
English: At first, both Hu Mu Gui and Xue Zheng often ridiculed Zhendexiu for his pedantry, saying that Zhendexiu would inevitably hit a wall in his work, and when Zhendexiu had political achievements and political reputation, Hu and Xue believed that the drought was not serious, because the supervisor invited the good name, causing the economy to be too much. They also instigated the governor Wei Wei to impeach Lin Qi, in order to attack and shake Zhendexiu.

古文：德秀上章自明，朝廷悟，与岘祠，授庠干官，而道传寻亦召还。
现代文：真德秀上奏章说明事实真相，得到朝廷理解，魏岘受到处罚，降祠官，林庠授干官，李道传也很快奉诏回朝廷工作。
English: Zhen De Xiu wrote a report to explain the facts and gained the understanding of the imperial court. Wei Wei was punished, demoted to the position of an official of an ancestral shrine, Lin Zheju became a cadre, and Li Daochuan was soon ordered to return to work at the imperial court.

古文：德秀以右文殿修撰知泉州。番舶畏苛征，至者岁不三四，德秀首宽之，至者骤增至三十六艘。
现代文：真德秀以右文殿修撰知泉州，当时许多外国船只因惧怕征收苛捐杂税，而不愿到泉州从事贸易活动，每年到港船只仅有三、四艘而已。真德秀到任后，实行宽税政策，使外来船只骤增至三十六艘。
English: At that time, many foreign ships did not want to engage in trading activities in Quanzhou for fear of the imposition of heavy taxes and surcharges, and only three or four ships arrived in Quanzhou every year. After Zhendexiu took office, he implemented a lenient tax policy, so that the number of foreign ships suddenly increased to thirty-six.

古文：输租令民自概，听讼惟揭示姓名，人自诣州。
现代文：收租讲求公平，诉讼依照法律，因而赢得人心。
English: He won the hearts of the people by insisting that rent collection should be fair and lawsuits should be conducted in accordance with the law.

古文：泉多大家，为闾里患，痛绳之。
现代文：泉州有许多豪右之家仗势凌人，真德秀对此状况毫不客气地加以绳正。
English: In Quanzhou, there are many powerful families that wield overwhelming power, and Zhendexiu unceremoniously rectified this situation.

古文：有讼田者，至焚其券不敢争。
现代文：海贼作乱于泉州沿海，一度逼近泉州城，官军被打败。
English: The pirates wreaked havoc along the Quanzhou coast, once approaching Quanzhou City, and the government army was defeated.

古文：海贼作乱，将逼城，官军败衄，德秀祭兵死者，乃亲授方略，禽之。
现代文：真德秀临危不惧，他一方面祭悼阵亡将士，一方面亲自拟定战略战术，终于将海贼擒获。
English: Zhendexiu was not afraid of danger. On the one hand, he paid tribute to the fallen soldiers, on the other hand, he personally worked out the strategy and tactics, and finally captured the pirates.

古文：复遍行海滨，审视形势，增屯要害处，以备不虞。
现代文：他还亲自赴沿海巡查、审视地形，增强要塞地段的防备，以备不测。
English: He also personally went to the coast to inspect and examine the terrain and strengthen the defense of the fortress section to prepare for any eventuality.

古文：十二年，以集英殿修撰知隆兴府。
现代文：嘉定十二年，真德秀以集英殿修撰知隆兴府。
English: In the twelfth year of Jiading, Zhendexiu wrote about Longxingfu with the help of Shueydian.

古文：承宽弛之后，乃稍济以严。尤留意军政，欲分鄂州军屯武昌，及通广盐于赣与南安，以弭汀、赣盐寇。
现代文：在任职期间，他既注意营造宽松之氛围，又注意展现法纪之威严，并特别留意于军政，他曾打算调鄂州之军屯驻武昌，流通广盐到赣州和南安，从而消除汀、赣盐寇的生存根基。
English: During his tenure, he paid attention to creating a relaxed atmosphere and displaying the majesty of law and order, and paid special attention to military affairs. He had planned to transfer the army of Ezhou to Wuchang and distribute Guangyan salt to Ganzhou and Nan'an, thereby eliminating the basis for the survival of Ting and Zouyan.

古文：未及行，以母丧归。
现代文：真德秀的这个计划因要服母丧而没有得到实施。
English: This plan of Zhendexiu was not implemented because he had to attend his mother's funeral.

古文：明年，蕲、黄失守，盗起南安，讨之数载始平，人服德秀先见。
现代文：第二年，蕲州、黄州失守，盗贼起于南安，官军花了数年时间才将其镇压。人们因此而佩服真德秀有先见之明。
English: In the following year, Zhangzhou and Huangzhou were lost, and the thieves started in Nan'an. It took the government army several years to suppress them. People therefore admired Zhendexiu for his foresight.

古文：十五年，以宝谟阁待制、湖南安抚使知潭州。
现代文：嘉定十五年，真德秀以宝谟阁待制、湖南安抚使知潭州。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jiading, Zhendexiu led Zhitanzhou with the support of Baomu Pavilion and the pacification of Hunan.

古文：以 廉仁功勤 四字励僚属，以周惇颐、胡安国、朱熹、张栻学术源流勉其士。
现代文：他以 廉、仁、公、勤 四个字约束和激励部下，以周敦颐、胡安国、朱熹、张木式之学识与风范来勉励僚属。
English: He restrained and inspired his subordinates with the four characters of "Clemency," "Kindness," "Civility" and "Diligence," and encouraged his colleagues with the knowledge and demeanor of Zhou Dunyao, Juan Guo, Zhu Xi and Zhang Mu Xi.

古文：罢榷酤，除斛面米，申免和籴，以苏其民。
现代文：他还为百姓罢除榷酤，解除斛面米，申免和籴。
English: He also removed the shackles for the people, lifted the shackles of rice and rice, and petitioned for pardon and amnesty.

古文：民艰食，既极力振赡之，复立惠民仓五万石，使岁出粜。
现代文：老百姓如遇生活困苦，真德秀便极力设法赈济，并设立了五万石的惠民仓，以做救急之用。
English: If ordinary people are in need, Zhendexiu will try his best to help them, and has set up a 50,000-crop benefit warehouse for emergency use.

古文：又易谷九万五千石，分十二县置社仓，以遍及乡落。
现代文：他还准备谷米九万五千石，分十二县置社仓，以救济那些处于偏远乡落的百姓。
English: He also prepared 95,000 koku of grain and rice and set up warehouses in 12 counties to help the people in remote villages.

古文：别立慈幼仓立义阡。惠政毕举。
现代文：另外，真德秀还设立了慈幼仓和义田，其惠政之举可以说不胜枚举。
English: In addition, Zhendexiu also established the Cixi Juvenile Detention Center and the Yida Juvenile Detention Center, and his acts of benefiting the country are countless.

古文：月试诸军射，捐其回易之利及官田租。
现代文：真德秀为了搞好军队训练，主动捐献回易之利及官田之租。
English: In order to do a good job of military training, Zhen Dexiu took the initiative to donate back the profits and the rent of government land.

古文：凡营中病者、死未葬者、孕者、嫁娶者，赡给有差。
现代文：对营中的生病者、死未葬者、怀孕者、嫁娶者，也都适当给以优抚和帮助。
English: The sick in the camp, the unburied dead, the pregnant, and the married were also given proper care and help.

古文：朝廷从寿昌朱橐请，以飞虎军戍寿昌，并致其家口，力争止之。
现代文：朝廷听从寿昌朱橐的建议，将飞虎军调守寿昌，真德秀据理力争，阻止这次调动。
English: The imperial court followed the suggestion of Zhu Xi of Shuchang and transferred the Flying Tiger Army to guard Shuchang. Zhende Xiu fought hard to prevent this transfer.

古文：江华县贼苏师入境杀劫，檄广西共讨平之。
现代文：江华县之贼苏师率众入辖境杀劫，真德秀令广西之军和湖南之军合力讨伐成功。
English: Su Shi, the thief of Jianghua County, led the crowd into the jurisdiction to kill and rob, and Zhende Xiu ordered the army of Guangxi and the army of Hunan to jointly fight successfully.

古文：司马遵守武冈，激军变，劾遵而诛其乱者。
现代文：司马遵领兵驻守武冈，因其专横引起军队哗变，真德秀弹劾司马遵，并且诛灭了乱军。
English: Sima Zun led the troops stationed in WuGang. Because of his high-handedness, he caused a mutiny in the army. Zhendexiu impeached Sima Zun and annihilated the rebel army.

古文：理宗即位，召为中书舍人，寻擢礼部侍郎、直学士院。
现代文：理宗即位后，真德秀被召为中书舍人，不久，真德秀擢升礼部侍郎、直学士院。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Rizong, Zhendexiu was called to be a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters. Soon after, Zhendexiu was promoted to attendant of the etiquette department and the academy.

古文：入见，奏： 三纲五常，扶持宇宙之栋干，奠安生民之柱石。
现代文：他在受皇帝召见时说： 三纲五常，是支撑宇宙的栋梁，是安定生民的柱石。
English: When he was summoned by the emperor, he said: "The three principles and five constants are the pillars that support the universe and the pillars that stabilize the people.

古文：晋废三纲而刘、石之变兴，唐废三纲而安禄山之难作。我朝立国，先正名分。陛下不幸处人伦之变，流闻四方，所损非浅。
现代文：晋朝废三纲五常而引起刘、石之变，唐朝废三纲五常而引出安史之乱，我朝立国，当先正名分，维护三纲五常，陛下不幸处人伦之变，致使流言蜚语四处流传，这对陛下的损害是很大的。
English: When the Jin Dynasty abolished the three programs and five constants, it brought about the changes of Liu and Shi; when the Tang Dynasty abolished the three programs and five constants, it brought about the Anshi Rebellion; when the Ming Dynasty founded the country, it was necessary to first rectify and maintain the three programs and five constants; when His Majesty unfortunately dealt with the changes in people's ethics, it caused rumors and gossip to spread everywhere, which was very harmful to His Majesty.

古文：霅川之变，非济王本志，前有避匿之迹，后闻讨捕之谋，情状本末，灼然可考。
现代文：較川之变，并非济王蓄意所为，因前有避匿之迹象，后有讨捕之阴谋，事情原委本来是十分清楚的。
English: The change of the river was not a deliberate act by King Jie, because there were signs of hiding before, and there was a plot to catch him afterwards. The original committee was very clear about the matter.

古文：愿讨论雍熙追封秦王舍罪恤孤故事，济王未有子息，亦惟陛下兴灭继绝。 上曰： 朝廷待济王亦至矣。 德秀曰： 若谓此事处置尽善，臣未敢以为然。
现代文：希望陛下效仿雍熙追封秦王舍罪恤孤之故事，济王没有子嗣，还望陛下兴灭继绝。 皇帝说 ：朝廷对待济王可谓至诚尽心了。 真德秀说 ：如果陛下认为济王之事处理得很完善，我是不敢苟同的。
English: He hoped that his majesty would follow the example of the story of Yong Xi's pursuit of the Qin king, who had no children, and also hoped that his majesty would succeed. The emperor said: The court's treatment of King Jie can be described as sincere. Zhen De Xiu said: If your majesty thinks that the matter of King Jie has been handled perfectly, I would not agree.

古文：观舜所以处象，则陛下不及舜明甚。
现代文：如果对比一下舜帝处象的故事，我则认为陛下远不如舜聪明，陛下应当以二帝、三王为师。 
English: If we compare the story of Emperor Zou's situation, I think that His Majesty is far less intelligent than Zou, and His Majesty should learn from the two emperors and three kings.

古文：人主但当以二帝、三王为师。 上曰： 一时仓猝耳。 德秀曰： 此已往之咎，惟愿陛下知有此失而益讲学进德。 次言： 霅川之狱，未闻参听于公朝，淮、蜀二阃乃出于佥论所期之外。
现代文：皇帝说 ：此事处置确实仓促了。 真德秀说： 此事已成为过去，只愿陛下知道有此过失，吸取教训，更加正心诚意，讲学重德， 真德秀接着说： 較川之狱，未闻公断于朝，淮、蜀之边防亦出于公论所期之外。
English: The emperor said, "The handling of this matter was indeed hasty." Zhen Dexiu said, "This matter has become a thing of the past. I only wish that Your Majesty would know that there was such a mistake, learn a lesson, be more upright and sincere, and emphasize virtue in lectures." Zhen Dexiu then said, "The prison in Sichuan is unheard of in the DPRK, and the border defense in Huai and Shu is also out of public opinion.

古文：天下之事非一家之私，何惜不与众共之？ 且言： 乾道、淳熙间，有位于朝者以馈及门为耻，受任于外者以包苴入都为羞。
现代文：天下之大事，决非一家之私事，为什么不顺应民心，与国人共议大事呢？ 真德秀还说： 乾道、淳熙年间，在朝之臣概以接收馈赠为耻，地方官吏也以接收贿赂为羞，然而，现在贿赂之风公行，且相互熏染，恬不知怪。 
English: The major events of the world are by no means the private affairs of a family, so why not follow the popular will and discuss major events with the people? Zhen Dexiu also said: In the Qian and Junxi years, the courtiers of the court were ashamed to receive gifts, and local officials were ashamed to accept bribes. However, now the style of bribery is public, and it is infected with each other, which is not surprising.

古文：今馈赂公行，薰染成风，恬不知怪。 又疏言： 朝廷之上，敏锐之士多于老成，虽尝以耆艾褒傅伯成、杨简，以儒学褒柴中行，以恬退用赵蕃、刘宰，至忠亮敢言如陈宓、徐侨，皆未蒙录用。 上问谦吏，德秀以知袁州赵夫对，亲擢夫直秘阁、为监司。
现代文：真德秀又上疏说： 朝廷之上，敏锐之士多于老成，傅伯成、杨简因老成持重而受褒奖，柴中行因潜心儒学也受到奖掖，赵蕃、刘宰因淡于名利而受到重用，但是，像陈宓、徐侨这些忠亮敢言之士却未蒙录用。 皇帝询问哪些人可以称得上是廉吏，真德秀以知袁州赵艭夫为例做了回答，皇帝遂亲自提升赵艭夫直秘阁为监司。
English: Zhen Dexiu also went on to say: Above the imperial court, there are more keen people than Laocheng; Fu Bocheng and Yang Jian were praised for holding Laocheng in high esteem; Chai Zhong Xing was also commended for devoting himself to Confucianism; Zhao Wei and Liu Zai were reused because they were less famous and wealthy; however, these loyal and bold speakers, such as Chen Wei and Xu Xiao, were not hired. The emperor asked who could be called corrupt officials, Zhen Dexiu answered with the example of Zhao Weifu of Zhizhou, and the emperor then personally promoted Zhao Weifu to the direct

古文：具手札入谢，因言崔与之帅蜀，杨长儒帅闽，皆有廉声，乞广加咨访。
现代文：真德秀致书皇帝表示谢意，并说崔与之治理川蜀、杨长儒统辖福建，都有廉洁之名声，希望皇帝对他们加以重用。
English: Zhendexiu wrote to the emperor to express his gratitude, and said that Cui and his administration of Sichuan and Shu, and Yang Changru's administration of Fujian, all had a reputation for integrity, and he hoped that the emperor would make good use of them.

古文：上初御清暑殿，德秀因经筵侍上，进曰： 此高、孝二祖储神燕闲之地，仰瞻楹桷，当如二祖实临其上。
现代文：皇帝初住清暑殿时，真德秀为其讲解经传史鉴，并且进言： 清暑殿乃高、孝二祖修身养心之地，仰观楹桷，仿佛二祖还临驾于上。
English: When the emperor first lived in Qingxiao Hall, Zhendexiu gave him a lecture on the history of the scriptures, and said: Qingxiao Hall is a place for high and filial two ancestors to cultivate themselves and nourish their hearts. Looking up, it is as if the two ancestors are still present.

古文：陛下所居处密迩东朝，未敢遽当人主之奉。
现代文：陛下所居之御靠近东朝，并未深得人主之奉。
English: His Majesty's residence was close to the Eastern Court, and he was not deeply devoted to the Lord.

古文：今宫阁之义浸备，以一心而受众攻，未有不浸淫而蠹蚀者，惟学可以明此心，惟敬可以存此心，惟亲君子可以维持此心。 因极陈古者居丧之法与先帝视朝之勤。
现代文：现在宫之议渐渐具备，如果以一心而受众人攻击，难免会产生浸淫和蠹蚀之人，只有勤学可以明净此心，只有恭敬虔诚可以寄存此心，只有亲和君子可以维持此心。 真德秀为此极力陈说古之居丧之德和先帝视朝之勤勉。
English: Now the palace's opinion is gradually emerging that if you are attacked by everyone with a single heart, you will inevitably produce people who are lecherous and corrupt. Only diligent study can clear this heart, only reverence and piety can store this heart, and only affinity and gentleman can maintain this heart. For this reason, Zhen De Xiu tried his best to demonstrate the ancient virtue of living and mourning and the diligence of the former emperor.

古文：宁宗小祥，诏群臣服纯吉，德秀争之曰： 自汉文帝率情变古，惟我孝宗方衰服三年，朝衣朝冠皆以大布，惜当时不并定臣下执丧之礼，此千载无穷之憾。
现代文：宁宗驾崩周年之际，皇帝下诏文武百官可除孝服，真德秀争辩说： 自从汉文帝轻率变更古礼后，只有孝宗穿丧服三年，朝衣朝冠均以大布做成，可惜孝宗并没有在当时给群臣定下执丧之礼，这不能不说是一种万古遗憾。
English: On the occasion of the anniversary of Ningzong's death, the emperor issued an edict that all officials could remove their filial piety, and Zhendexiu argued: Since the Han Emperor rashly changed the ancient rites, only Xiaozong wore mourning clothes for three years, and the morning dress and crown were all made of large cloth. Unfortunately, Xiaozong did not set the funeral rites for his retainers at that time, which can not but be said to be an age-old regret.

古文：孝宗崩，从臣罗点等议，令群臣易月之后，未释衰服，惟朝会治事权用黑带公服，时序仍临慰，至大祥始除。
现代文：孝宗驾崩后，当时朝廷听从罗点的建议，诏令群臣易月之后，不脱丧服，如遇朝会治事等活动则穿黑带公服，这种状况要一直持续到帝王驾崩后两周年祭日为止。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaozong, the imperial court at that time followed the advice of Luo Deng, and ordered the courtiers not to take off their mourning clothes after the death of the emperor, and to wear black-belted official clothes in the event of activities such as the administration of the imperial court. This situation would continue until the two-year anniversary of the emperor's death.

古文：侂胄枋政，始以小祥从吉。
现代文：韩胄擅权后，始规定在帝王驾崩周年日可除丧服。
English: After Han Xuan seized power, he began to stipulate that mourning clothes could be removed on the anniversary of the emperor's death.

古文：且带不以金，鞓不以红，佩不以鱼，鞍轿不以文绣。此于群臣何损？
现代文：况且腰带不用金，鞋靴不用红色，佩带不用鱼符，鞍轿不用文绣，这对于群臣又有什么影响呢？ 
English: Moreover, the belt does not use gold, the shoes do not use red, the wearing belt does not use fish charms, the saddle does not use embroidery, what effect does this have on the ministers?

古文：朝仪何伤？ 议遂格。
现代文：真德秀的建议被采纳。
English: Zhendexiu's suggestion was accepted.

古文：监察御史梁成大又劾之，请加窜殛。上曰： 仲尼不为已甚。 乃止。
现代文：真德秀屡进耿直之言，皇帝皆虚心采纳，但权臣史弥远则更惧怕和嫉妒他，因而总想找机会整整他，由于害怕舆论谴责，史弥远一直未敢轻举妄动。
English: All emperors humbly accepted Zhendexiu's frank and forthright words, but the powerful minister Shi Yiyuan was more afraid and jealous of him, so he always wanted to find an opportunity to straighten him out. Due to fear of public condemnation, Shi Yiyuan has not dared to act rashly.

古文：既归，修《读书记》，语门人曰： 此人君为治之门，如有用我者，执此以往。 汀寇起，德秀荐陈韡有文武才干，常平使者史弥忠言于朝，遂起韡讨平之。
现代文：后来给事中王、盛章受其指使攻击真德秀所主济王赠典，接着殿中侍御史莫泽也弹劾真德秀，真德秀遂以焕章阁待制提举玉隆宫，谏议大夫朱端常再一次弹劾真德秀，致使真德秀落职罢祠。后来，监察御史梁成大又弹劾真德秀，准备将真德秀置之于死地。幸亏皇帝说了句 仲尼不为已甚 ，才制止了这种迫害行动。真德秀离朝归家后，修撰了《读书记》。他对门徒说： 这本书为人君治政的入门书，如果我被起用，我将携此前往。 汀州之寇盗兴起后，真德秀向常平使者史弥忠推荐有文武之才的陈韦华，朝廷遂起用陈韦华将寇盗讨平。
English: Later, the king of affairs, Shengzhang, under his instruction, attacked Zhendexiu's master, King Jiu, and gave him a gift certificate. Next, the attendant of the palace, Smozer, also impeached Zhendexiu. Zhendexiu then raised the Yulong Palace with the Huanzhang Pavilion waiting system. The deliberation doctor Zhu Duanzhang once again impeached Zhendexiu, causing Zhendexiu to resign from his post and leave the temple. Later, the inspector general Liang Chengda also impeached Zhendexiu, preparing to put Zhendexiu to death. Fortunately, the

古文：绍定四年，改职与祠。
现代文：绍定四年，真德秀改职与祠。
English: In the fourth year of Shaoding, Zhendexiu changed his job and his ancestral hall.

古文：五年，进徽猷阁、知泉州。
现代文：绍定五年，真德秀进徽猷阁知泉州。
English: In the fifth year of Shaoding, Zhendexiu entered Quanzhou, Hebei Province.

古文：迎者塞路，深村百岁老人亦扶杖而出，城中欢声动地。
现代文：他到任之时，欢迎的人群塞满了道路，就连偏僻乡村的百岁老人亦拄着拐杖赶来了，泉州城因此欢声动地。
English: When he arrived, the welcoming crowd filled the road, and even a hundred-year-old man from a remote village arrived on crutches, so Quanzhou City was jubilant.

古文：决讼自卯至申未已。或劝啬养精神，德秀谓郡弊无力惠民，仅有政平、讼理事当勉。
现代文：在这之前，泉州之诸小城曾预借二税达六、七角，真德秀赴任后，禁止向市民搞预借活动。有些市民几个月交不起一文钱，州郡财计亦为之窘迫。
English: Prior to this, the small towns of Quanzhou had pre-borrowed two taxes up to six or seven times. After Zhendexiu took office, it was forbidden to engage in pre-borrowed activities from citizens. Some citizens could not pay a penny for several months, and the state and county finances were also in dire straits.

古文：建炎初置南外宗政司于泉，公族仅三百人，漕司与本州给之，而朝廷岁助度牒。
现代文：有些官吏认为不能对百姓太宽恤。真德秀则认为百姓太困苦，宁愿自己去分担他们的忧愁。建炎初年，朝廷初置南外宗政司于泉州，当时信徒只有三百来号人，由漕司及本州提供费用，朝廷每年亦资助度牒。
English: Some officials believed that they should not be too lenient with the people. Zhen De Xiu, on the other hand, believed that the people were too poor and preferred to share their sorrows. In the first year of Jian Yan, the imperial court first placed the Nanguo Patriarchate in Quanzhou. At that time, there were only about 300 believers. The emperor and the state provided expenses, and the imperial court also provided subsidies every year.

古文：已而不复给，而增至二千三百余人，郡坐是愈不可为。德秀请于朝，诏给度牒百道。
现代文：但时过境迁，原来的三百人现已增至二千三百余人，而费用不复给，真德秀陈请于朝廷，皇上因之下诏给度牒于百道。
English: However, with the passage of time, the original three hundred people have now increased to more than two thousand three hundred people, and the expenses will not be reimbursed. Zhendexiu petitioned the imperial court, and the emperor issued a decree to Baidu.

古文：弥远薨，上亲政，以显谟阁待制知福州。
现代文：史弥远死后，理宗始亲政。真德秀以显谟阁待制知福州。
English: After the death of Shi Miyato, Ritsuzo began to take a hands-on approach to politics. Shindexiu used his influence to establish Fuzhou.

古文：戒所部无滥刑横敛，无徇私黩货，罢市令司，曰： 物同则价同，宁有公私之异？ 闽县里正苦督赋，革之。属县苦贵籴，便宜发常平赈之。
现代文：他在任期间，训戒下属不得滥用刑法，不得横征暴敛，不得徇私舞弊，不得罢行欺市。他说： 物同则作同，怎可有公私之别呢？ 当时，闽县的里正因横征暴敛而被革职，属县的老百姓苦于贵籴，真德秀则公平地以常平仓之粮赈济之。
English: During his term of office, he admonished his subordinates not to abuse the criminal law, not to collect exorbitant taxes, not to engage in self-serving fraud, and not to go on strike to deceive the market. He said: The same thing is the same, how can there be a difference between public and private? At that time, Li County was being dismissed due to exorbitant taxation, the county's old people were suffering from high prices, and the virtuous were fairly supporting them with grain from the Changping warehouse.

古文：海寇纵横，次第禽殄之。
现代文：福州沿海寇盗横行，真德秀一一将其擒获讨平。
English: Fuzhou coastal banditry rampant, Zhendexiu won the battle.

古文：未几，闻金灭，京湖帅奉露布图上八陵，而江、淮有进取潼关、黄河之议。
现代文：不久，真德秀听说金朝灭亡后，京、湖许多将帅摩拳擦掌，上表请收复失地，江、淮前线也有进取潼关、黄河的议论。
English: Soon, Zhendexiu heard that after the fall of the Kim dynasty, many generals in Beijing and Hubei were eager to recover the lost territory, and there were also discussions on the Jiang and Huai fronts to enter Shaoguan and the Yellow River.

古文：德秀以为忧，上封事曰： 移江、淮甲兵以守无用之空城，运江、淮金谷以治不耕之废壤，富庶之效未期，根本之弊立见。惟陛下审之重之。 
现代文：真德秀深以为忧，他为此上疏说： 调江、淮之军去守那些无用的空城，运江、淮之粮去治那些不能耕作的废壤，不仅达不到富庶之目的，反而会招来许多根本之弊端，愿陛下对此慎之又慎，切不可轻率行事。 
English: Zhen Dexiu was deeply worried. For this reason, he went on to say: "Moving the Huai River and Huai River army to guard those useless empty cities, and transporting the Huai River and Huai River grain to cure those waste soils that cannot be cultivated, will not only fail to achieve the goal of prosperity, but will cause many fundamental drawbacks. May His Majesty be cautious and prudent about this, and must not act rashly.

古文：召为户部尚书，入见，上迎谓曰： 卿去国十年，每切思贤。 乃以《大学衍义》进，复陈祁天永命之说，谓 敬者德之聚。
现代文：真德秀被召为户部尚书，在入见皇帝时，皇帝亲自出来迎接，并且对真德秀说 ：你离开朝廷十年，朕时常牵挂于你。 真德秀向皇帝进呈自己所著的《大学衍义》，并且陈述祈天永命之说，他认为 ：敬者乃道德的一种凝聚。
English: Zhendexiu was called to be the household secretary of Shangshu, and when he went to see the emperor, the emperor himself came out to greet him, and said to Zhendexiu: You have left the imperial court for ten years, I often worry about you. Zhendexiu presented his book "University Derivation" to the emperor, and stated the saying of praying for eternal life. He believed that: Respectful people are a condensation of morality.

古文：仪狄之酒，南威之色，盘游弋射之娱，禽兽狗马之玩，有一于兹，皆足害敬 。
现代文：仪狄的美酒，南威的女色，郊游射猎的娱乐，禽兽狗马的珍玩，有一样沾染上了，都足以害敬害德。 
English: The fine wine of Yidi, the womanhood of Nanwei, the entertainment of outing shooting, the precious play of animals, dogs and horses, are all contaminated with the same thing, which is enough to harm and injure virtue.

古文：上欣然嘉纳，改翰林学士、知制诰，时政多所论建。
现代文：皇帝欣然嘉纳，真德秀因此改任翰林学士、知制诰。他对时政多有论建。
English: The emperor gladly accepted the offer, and Zhendexiu was consequently appointed as a scholar of Hanlin and a scholar of Zhizhi. He was often critical of the politics of the time.

古文：逾年，知贡举，已得疾，拜参知政事，同编修敕令、《经武要略》。三乞祠禄，上不得已，进资政殿学士、提举万寿观兼侍读，辞。
现代文：过一年，真德秀知贡举，身体也在此时得了病，皇帝拜他为参知政事，同编修敕令和《经武要略》，真德秀三乞祠禄，皇帝不得已，进真德秀资政殿学士，提举万寿观兼侍读，真德秀推辞不就。
English: A year later, Zhendexiu learned about the tribute, and his body also got sick at this time. The emperor worshiped him as a political advisor, and he was the co-editor of the revision of the imperial edict and the "Outline of the Military Doctrine." Zhendexiu begged for a small fortune. The emperor had no choice but to enter the Zhendexiu Scholarship Hall and become a bachelor. Zhendexiu promoted the view of longevity and served as a tutor. Zhendexiu's refusal was not enough.

古文：疾亟，冠带起坐，迄谢事，犹神爽不乱。
现代文：此时，他的病情愈来愈严重，但其穿戴起坐直至去世都表现得神清气爽，有条不紊。
English: At this time, his condition became more and more serious, but he appeared to be refreshed and orderly from the time he was dressed until his death.

古文：遗表闻，上震悼，辍视朝，赠银青光禄大夫。
现代文：皇帝听到真德秀辞世的消息后，悲痛不已，并停止视朝，以示哀悼，赠真德秀为银青光禄大夫。
English: After the emperor heard the news of Zhendexiu's death, he was grief-stricken, and stopped looking at the DPRK to express his condolences, and presented Zhendexiu as a silver Qingguanglu doctor.

古文：德秀长身广额，容貌如玉，望之者无不以公辅期之。立朝不满十年，奏疏无虑数十万言，皆切当世要务，直声震朝廷。四方人士诵其文，想见其风采。
现代文：真德秀身材颀长，面额宽广，容貌如玉，见到过他的人都期望他能官至公辅，真德秀在朝廷做官不满十年，所上奏疏不下数十万言，其言论多切中时弊，因此，其正直的名声震动朝廷，四方人士皆争相传诵其文章，并希望目睹其风采。
English: Zhendexiu was a tall and slender man with a broad face and a perfect appearance. People who met him expected him to be promoted to the rank of civil servant. Zhendexiu had been an official in the imperial court for less than ten years, and he had made hundreds of thousands of speeches. Many of his speeches were timely. As a result, his reputation for honesty shook the imperial court, and people from all over the country scrambled to read his articles and hoped to witness his style.

古文：及宦游所至，惠政深洽，不愧其言，由是中外交颂。
现代文：真德秀任官所至，都能够做到施惠政于民，实现他的主张和诺言，因而也就更加得到朝野称道。
English: When Jindexiu was appointed to the government, he was able to achieve the policy of benefiting the people and realize his ideas and promises. Therefore, he was even more praised by both the emperor and the people.

古文：都城人时惊传倾洞，奔拥出关曰： 真直院至矣！ 果至，则又填塞聚观不置。时相益以此忌之，辄摈不用，而声愈彰。
现代文：当时都城之人经常奔涌出门，因为他们听到传闻说真德秀到来了。真德秀到达后，人们更是将道路围得水泄不通，可谓不顾一切地来观睹真德秀，权臣史弥远因而就特别忌恨他。
English: At that time, people in the capital often rushed out of their homes because they heard rumors that Zhendexiu had arrived. After Zhendexiu arrived, people even surrounded the roads so that they could not be passed. It can be said that they were desperate to come and watch Zhendexiu. The powerful vassal Shi Yuan was particularly hated because of this.

古文：及归朝，适郑清之挑敌，兵民死者数十万，中外大耗，尤世道升降治乱之机，而德秀则既衰矣。
现代文：但是，史弥远越是排挤真德秀，真德秀的名声反而越大。史弥远死后，真德秀归朝任事，又逢史弥远之爪牙郑清之轻率挑起战事，致使兵民死者无数，国家元气亦因此大伤。本来，在这种世道升降治乱之时，给真德秀提供了施展才能的机会，可惜，此时的真德秀已年迈体衰，力不从心了。
English: However, the more Shi Yidang pushed out Zhen De Xiu, the greater the reputation of Zhen De Xiu became. After Shi Yidang's death, Zhen De Xiu returned to the imperial court, and Zheng Qing, Shi Yidang's minion, rashly provoked a war, resulting in countless deaths of soldiers and people, and the country's vitality was greatly injured. Originally, at this time of the rise and fall of the world, Zhen De Xiu was given the opportunity to display his talents. Unfortunately, at this time, Zhen De Xiu was old and weak, and his strength was not enough.

古文：杜范方攻清之误国，且谓其贪黩更甚于前，而德秀乃奏言： 此皆前权臣玩悽之罪，今日措置之失，譬如和、扁继庸医之后，一药之误，代为庸医受责。 其议论与范不同如此。
现代文：杜范力言郑清之误国，认为其贪婪狡诈较史弥远更为严重。真德秀则认为 ：追根溯源，还是史弥远擅权所造成的恶果，这与扁鹊继庸医之后，一药之误，便代为庸医受责是一样的道理。 真德秀之议论与杜范看法之不同由此可见一斑。
English: Du Fan insisted that Zheng Qing was a traitor and that his greed and cunning were more serious than Shiyan. Zhendexiu, on the other hand, believed that tracing back to the source, it was the evil consequences caused by Shiyan's abuse of power, which was the same reason as Bianqi, after following a quack doctor, was blamed for being a quack doctor. The difference between Zhendexiu's argument and Du Fan's opinion can be seen from this.

古文：然自侂胄立伪学之名以锢善类，凡近世大儒之书，皆显禁以绝之。
现代文：然而，自从韩胄将道学诬为伪学，且大肆排挤打击道学家之后，凡近世大儒之书，皆遭禁绝。
English: However, since Han Zheng falsely accused Taoism of being a pseudoscience, and violently ousted and attacked Taoists, all the books written by the great Confucian scholars of modern times have been banned.

古文：德秀晚出，独慨然以斯文自任，讲习而服行之。
现代文：真德秀晚出，独慨然以斯文自任，研究讲习而付诸实行。
English: Zhendexiu came out late, but he did not hesitate to take the initiative to study and practice.

古文：党禁既开，而正学遂明于天下后世，多其力也。
现代文：党禁解除后，道学所以能明于天下和后世，很大程度上取决于真德秀的努力。
English: After the lifting of the party ban, the ability of Taoism to be known to the world and future generations depends largely on the efforts of Zhendexiu.

古文：所著《西山甲乙稿》、《对越甲乙集》、《经筵讲义》、《端平庙议》、《翰林词草四六》、《献忠集》、《江东救荒录》、《清源杂志》、《星沙集志》。
现代文：真德秀著有《西山甲乙稿》、《对越甲乙集》、《经筵讲义》、《端平庙议》、《翰林词草四六》、《献忠集》、《江东救荒录》、《清源杂志》、《星沙集志》。
English: Zhendexiu is the author of "Xishan Jia Yi Jiao," "Toward Yue Jia Yi Jiao," "Economic Lectures," "Duanping Temple Debate," "Hanlin Jiso 46," "Dedication Collection," "Jiangdong Salvation Record," "Qingyuan Magazine" and "Star Sand Collection."

古文：既薨，上思之不置，谥曰文忠。
现代文：去世后，皇帝念其功德，赐其谥号 文忠 。
English: After his death, the emperor read his merits and gave him the nickname Wenzhong.

古文：魏了翁，字华父，邛州蒲江人。
现代文：魏了翁字华父，邛州蒲江人。
English: Wei Ya Weng Zi Huafu, a native of Pujiang, Ganzhou.

古文：年数岁，从诸兄入学，俨如成人。
现代文：数岁即从诸兄入学，俨然像成年人。
English: A few years old, he entered the school from his older brothers, looking like an adult.

古文：少长，英悟绝出，日诵千余言，过目不再览，乡里称为神童。
现代文：稍微大一点，聪明颖悟特出，日读千余言，过目不忘，乡里称他为神童。
English: Slightly older, clever and exceptionally bright, he reads more than a thousand words a day and never forgets what he has read. The village calls him a child prodigy.

古文：年十五，著《韩愈论》，抑扬顿挫，有作者风。
现代文：十五岁，撰写《韩愈论》，文章抑扬顿挫，有韩愈的遗风。
English: At the age of fifteen, he wrote "Hanyu Theory," the article is full of ups and downs, there is a legacy of Han Yu.

古文：庆元五年，登进士第。
现代文：宋宁宗庆元五年，魏了翁登进士第。
English: In the fifth year of Qingyuan, Song Ningzong became a scholar.

古文：时方讳言道学，了翁策及之。
现代文：这时国家忌讳谈论道学，魏了翁在试策中却谈到它。
English: At that time, it was a national taboo to talk about Taoism, but Wei Leong mentioned it in the pilot plan.

古文：授佥书剑南西川节度判官厅公事，尽心职业。
现代文：中进士后，他被授予佥书剑南西川节度判官厅公事，他尽心尽力地工作。
English: After graduating from middle school, he was awarded the official post of the South Xichuan Festival Magistrate's Office, and he worked with all his heart.

古文：嘉泰二年，召为国子正。
现代文：宁宗嘉泰二年，他被皇帝征召为国子正。
English: In the second year of Ningzong Jia Tai, he was conscripted by the emperor to be the son of the country.

古文：明年，改武学博士。
现代文：第二年，改为武学博士。
English: In the second year, it was changed to Doctor of Martial Arts.

古文：开禧元年，召试学士院。
现代文：宁宗开禧元年，他被召考试学士院。
English: In the first year of Ning Zong's reign, he was called to the Examination Academy.

古文：韩侂胄用事，谋开边以自固，遍国中忧骇而不敢言。
现代文：当时韩胄当权，策划用开拓边疆的办法来巩固自己的地位，全国上下都忧虑惊骇，但是没有一个人敢说话。
English: At that time, Han Xuan was in power, planning to use the method of opening up the frontier to consolidate his position. The whole country was worried and shocked, but no one dared to speak.

古文：了翁乃言： 国家纪纲不立，国是不定，风俗苟偷，边备废弛，财用凋耗，人才衰弱，而道路籍籍，皆谓将有此北伐之举，人情恟恟，忧疑错出。
现代文：魏了翁却在对策中说 ：我们国家现在纪纲还没有建立，国事又不稳定，风俗苟且偷安，边防废弛，财用耗竭凋敝，人才衰落，而全国到处人们籍籍议论，都认为将有大举北伐的行动，人情骚动不安，忧惧和疑虑交织在人们心里。
English: Wei Lioweng, however, said in his reply: Our country's discipline has not yet been established, the state of affairs is unstable, customs are scrupulous and deceptive, border defenses are weak, financial resources are exhausted, and talent is declining. However, people from all over the country are discussing their nationalities, and they all believe that there will be a large-scale Northern Expedition, and people's feelings are agitated and uneasy, and fears and doubts are interwoven in people's hearts.

古文：金地广势强，未可卒图，求其在我，未见可以胜人之实。
现代文：今天金国的土地广阔，势力强盛，不可能猝然把它消灭，我们看看自己，也没有看到战胜敌人的实力。
English: Today, the land of the People's Republic of China is vast and powerful. It is impossible to suddenly wipe it out. When we look at ourselves, we do not see the strength to defeat the enemy.

古文：盍亦急于内修，姑逭外攘。不然，举天下而试于一掷，宗社存亡系焉，不可忽也。 策出，众大惊。
现代文：既然这样，我们何不赶紧在内部整顿自己，暂时改变把重点放在对外战争上面，不然的话，把全国所有的人力财力都试之于孤注一掷，宗庙社稷的存亡都取决于这一次行动，这是决不可轻视的。 他的策论一出来，大家都非常惊骇。
English: Since this is the case, why don't we hasten to rectify ourselves internally and temporarily change our focus to foreign wars, otherwise, all the human and financial resources of the whole country will be thrown into a desperate situation, and the survival of the patriarchal temple and community will depend on this action, which is by no means to be despised.

古文：改秘书省正字。
现代文：魏了翁被改任为秘书省的正字官。
English: Wei Liaowong was reappointed as secretary of the provincial orthographic officer.

古文：御史徐柟即劾了翁对策狂妄，独侂胄持不可而止。
现代文：御史徐木冉立即弹劾他在对策中骄横狂妄，要求惩戒，得到其他大臣的同意，唯独韩胄一人坚持不可，这件事才算了结。
English: He was immediately impeached for being arrogant and presumptuous in his countermeasures, and was asked to be disciplined. The other ministers agreed, but Han Ye alone could not insist, and the matter was settled.

古文：明年，迁校书郎，以亲老乞补外，乃知嘉定府。
现代文：明年，魏了翁调任校书郎，他以双亲年老请求补任外官，这样得知嘉定府。
English: The next year, Wei Liaowong was transferred to the post of school scribe. He asked to be appointed as a substitute foreign minister due to his elderly parents, and thus learned of Jiading.

古文：行次江陵，蜀大将吴曦以四川叛，了翁策其必败。
现代文：他赴任走到江陵，闻知蜀中大将吴曦据四川反，魏了翁估计吴曦一定会很快失败。
English: When he went to Jiangling, he heard that Wu Xi, the general of Shu, was defeated in Sichuan, and Wei Yaowen estimated that Wu Xi would soon fail.

古文：又明年，曦诛，蜀平，了翁奉亲还里。
现代文：第二年吴曦果然伏诛，四川平定，魏了翁奉双亲回归乡里。
English: In the second year, Wu Xi did indeed surrender, Sichuan was pacified, and Wei and Weng returned to their hometown with their parents.

古文：侂胄亦以误国诛。
现代文：这时韩胄也以误国罪伏诛。
English: At this time, Han Zheng also committed treason.

古文：朝廷收召诸贤，了翁预焉。
现代文：朝廷征集诸贤，魏了翁是被征召的对象。
English: The imperial court conscripted all the sages, and Wei Liao Weng was the conscripted object.

古文：会史弥远入相专国事，了翁察其所为，力辞召命。
现代文：恰值史弥远入朝做宰相，专擅国柄，魏了翁观察史弥远的所作所为，力辞征召的命令。
English: Just as Shiyan entered the imperial court to become the prime minister, he was especially good at the national character. Wei Liaoong observed Shiyan's behavior and ordered him to be conscripted.

古文：丁生父忧，解官心丧，筑室白鹤山下，以所闻于辅广、李燔者开门授徒，士争负笈从之。
现代文：不久，他遭父丧，就辞去官职，一心居丧，筑室于白鹤山下，开门讲学，把他从辅广和李燔处学到的学问全部传授给学生，四方的士子都争着背负书箱来从他学习。
English: Soon after his father's death, he resigned from his official post and devoted himself to mourning. He built a room at the foot of the White Crane Mountain, opened the door to lecture, and taught all the knowledge he had learned from Fu Guang and Li Qian to his students. Scholars from all over the country competed to carry the bookcase to learn from him.

古文：由是蜀人尽知义理之学。
现代文：从此，四川的人都知道义理学的道理。
English: Since then, the people of Sichuan have known the truth of the doctrine of justice.

古文：差知汉州。
现代文：后魏了翁被朝廷差遣知汉州。
English: After the Wei Dynasty, he was sent to Hanzhou by the imperial court.

古文：汉号为繁剧，了翁以化善俗为治。
现代文：汉州素称复杂蛮横，魏了翁治理汉州从改善风俗入手。
English: Hanzhou is known to be complex and brutal. Wei Lioweng's governance of Hanzhou began with improving customs.

古文：首蠲积逋二十余万，除科抑卖酒之弊，严户婚交讦之禁，复为文谕以厚伦止讼，其民敬奉条教不敢犯。
现代文：他首先豁免了积累起来的逃税二十多万，又废除了妨碍卖酒的苛税，并严格人民因婚姻问题而喜欢互相攻讦的禁令；同时写文告晓谕老百姓，要他们敦厚人伦，停止争讼，经过教化，汉州的老百姓都能够严格遵守这些教化的条文，不敢违犯。
English: First of all, he exempted the accumulated tax evasion of more than 200,000 yuan, abolished the harsh tax that hindered the sale of alcohol, and strictly prohibited the people from attacking each other because of marriage problems. At the same time, he wrote a message to the people, asking them to be kind to each other and stop the dispute. After enlightenment, the people of Hanzhou can strictly abide by these teachings and do not dare to violate them.

古文：会境内桥坏，民有压死者，部使者以闻，诏降官一秩、主管建宁府武夷山冲佑观。
现代文：但是不巧，汉州境内有座桥坏了，老百姓有人被压死，部里的使者把这种情况反映给朝廷，皇帝就下令把魏了翁的官降低一级，让他主管武夷山冲佑观。
English: Unfortunately, however, a bridge broke down in Hanzhou, and some people were crushed to death. An envoy from the ministry reported this situation to the imperial court, and the emperor ordered Wei Yaowong's official to be downgraded to the next level, making him the head of Wuyishan Chongyou Guan.

古文：未数月，复元官、知眉州。
现代文：但没有几个月，又恢复他的原官，令他知眉州。
English: But within a few months, he was reinstated to his original post, which made him famous in Meizhou.

古文：眉虽为文物之邦，然其俗习法令，持吏短长，故号难治。
现代文：眉州虽然是文物之邦，但它的风俗习于法令，老百姓喜欢用法令挟制官吏的短长，所以称为难治。
English: Although Meizhou is a country of cultural relics, its customs are based on laws and regulations. The people like to use laws and regulations to constrain officials, so it is called difficult to govern.

古文：闻了翁至，争试以事。
现代文：当眉州人听说魏了翁来做官，就争着考验他以各种事情。
English: When Meizhou people heard that Wei Lvong had come to be an official, they tried to test him with various things.

古文：乃尊礼耆耇，简拔俊秀，朔望诣学宫，亲为讲说，诱掖指授，行乡饮酒礼以示教化，增贡士员以振文风。
现代文：但魏了翁到眉州后尊礼老人，提拔品德优秀和有才能的人，每月初一、十五还探视学宫，并且亲自为学生讲课，对他们加以诱导、鼓励、指点、教授。他又举行乡饮酒礼以敦促教化，并增加推荐士子的人数来振兴文风。
English: However, after Wei Lvong came to Meizhou, he honored the elderly, promoted the morally excellent and talented people, visited the school palace on the first day and the fifteenth day of each month, and personally lectured to the students to induce, encourage, guide and teach them. He also held a township drinking ceremony to urge enlightenment, and increased the number of recommended scholars to revitalize the literary style.

古文：复蟆颐堰，筑江乡馆，利民之事，知无不为。
现代文：同时，修复莫虫颐堰，建造江乡馆，凡是利民的事情，他知道的没有不做。
English: At the same time, he did everything he knew to do to benefit the people, such as repairing the Mo Muxu Weir and building the Jiangxiang Pavilion.

古文：士论大服，俗为之变，治行彰闻。
现代文：这样，眉州的士论大服，风俗为之一变，治理的政绩远近闻名。
English: In this way, the etiquette and customs in Meizhou have undergone great changes, and the political achievements of governance are well known.

古文：嘉定四年，擢潼川路提点刑狱公事。
现代文：宋宁宗嘉定四年，魏了翁被提拔担任潼川路提点刑狱公事。
English: In the fourth year of Song Ningzong Jiading, Wei Lioweng was promoted to the post of Shichuan Road Detention Officer.

古文：八年，兼提举常平等事，迁转运判官。
现代文：嘉定八年又兼提举常平仓等事，调任转运判官。
English: In the eighth year of Jiading, he was also promoted to the position of the judge of transshipment.

古文：戢吏奸，询民瘼，举刺不避权右，风采肃然。
现代文：他在任内，努力制止官吏的奸诈，询问老百姓的疾苦，检举指责不避权势和豪强，这样一来，风气为之肃然。
English: During his term of office, he made efforts to stop the treachery of officials, inquire about the sufferings of the common people, and report accusations without avoiding power and arrogance. As a result, the culture is solemn.

古文：上疏乞与周惇颐、张载、程颢、程颐锡爵定谥，示学者趣向，朝论韪之，如其请。
现代文：在这期间，他向皇帝上疏，请求给周敦颐、张载、程颢、程颐颁赐爵位，议定谥号，以昭示学者学习的趣向。经朝廷讨论，认为他说的正确，同意他的请求。
English: During this period, he petitioned the emperor to confer titles of nobility on Zhou Dunyao, Zhang Zai, Cheng Yao and Cheng Yao, and agreed on a nickname to indicate the scholar's interest in learning. After discussion, the imperial court agreed that what he said was correct.

古文：遂宁阙守，了翁行郡事。
现代文：遂宁缺郡守，魏了翁代行郡里的事。
English: Suining is in need of a county magistrate, and Wei Yaowong is acting on behalf of the county.

古文：即具奏乞修城郭备不虞，廷议靳其费，了翁增埤浚隍，如待敌至者。
现代文：他上疏请求修建遂宁的城墙，以防患于不测。经朝廷讨论，减少了他请求的经费，魏了翁遂亲自率领军民增高城墙，疏浚城池，就好像敌人就要来一样。
English: After discussion with the imperial court, the funds he requested were reduced, and Wei Leong personally led the army and people to increase the height of the city wall and dredge the city pond, as if the enemy was about to come.

古文：后一年，溃卒攻掠郡县，知其有备不敢逞，人始服豫防之意。
现代文：后一年，前线溃散的士兵攻掠各郡县，知道遂宁有防备不敢进攻，人们才开始佩服魏了翁对预防有先见之明。
English: In the following year, soldiers scattered from the front attacked and plundered various counties. Knowing that Sui would rather be prepared than attack, people began to admire Wei Liaowong's foresight in prevention.

古文：十年，迁直秘阁、知泸州、主管潼川路安抚司公事。
现代文：嘉定十年，魏了翁调迁直秘阁，又知泸州，并主管潼川路安抚司公事。
English: In the 10th year of Jiading, Wei Lioweng was transferred to the direct cabinet, also known as Luzhou, and was in charge of the public affairs of the Luchuan Road Pacification Division.

古文：丁母忧，免丧，差知潼川府。
现代文：后居母丧，丧服期满后，被差遣知潼川府。
English: After his mother's death, he was sent to live in Zhishenchuan Prefecture after his mourning period was over.

古文：约己裕民，厥绩大著。
现代文：他在潼川府廉洁奉公，实施富民政策，政绩非常显著。
English: He served the public with integrity in Beichuan, implemented the policy of enriching the people, and his political achievements are very significant.

古文：若游似、吴泳、牟子才，皆蜀名士，造门受业。
现代文：像游侣、吴泳、牟子才，都是四川的名士，也都到他的门下受业。
English: Like You Guo, Wu Yong, and Mu Zi Cai, they are all famous people in Sichuan, and they all studied under him.

古文：十五年，被召入对，疏二千余言。
现代文：嘉定十五年，魏了翁被征召入朝奏对，他的奏疏有二千余言。
English: In the fifteenth year of Jiading, Wei Lioweng was conscripted into the morning chorus. His chorus has more than two thousand words.

古文：首论人与天地一本，必与天地相似而后可以无旷天位，并及人才、风俗五事，明白切畅。
现代文：在奏疏中，他首先论述了人和天地是同一本源，认为人君必须与天地相配，然后才可以不荒废天位，以及论述了人才、风俗等五件事，这些论述都明白晓畅，非常切合实际。
English: In the Song of Songs, he first discussed that man and heaven and earth are the same source, that man must be compatible with heaven and earth before he can not waste the heavenly throne, and discussed talent, customs and other five things. These discussions are clear and smooth, very practical.

古文：又论郡邑强干弱枝之弊，所宜变通。
现代文：在奏疏中，他还论述了郡县强干弱枝的弊病，提出应该加以改变。
English: In the report, he also discussed the ills of counties and counties with strong branches and weak branches, and proposed that they should be changed.

古文：盖自了翁去国十有七年矣，至是上迎劳优渥，嘉纳其言。
现代文：自从魏了翁离开朝廷至当时已经有十七年了，因此皇帝对他特别表示慰劳和优待，称赞并采纳他的意见。
English: It had been seventeen years since Wei Liao Weng left the imperial court, so the emperor gave him special consolation and preferential treatment, praised and accepted his opinion.

古文：进兵部郎中，俄改司封郎中兼国史院编修官。
现代文：他被提升为兵部郎中，又改任司封郎中兼国史院编修官。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Hyobusho-roju (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of War) and was also appointed to the post of Shifo-roju (Junior Secretary of the Ministry of War) and Editor-in-Chief of the Academy of National History.

古文：转对，论江、淮、襄、蜀当分为四重镇，择人以任，虚心以听，假以事权，资以才用，为联络守御之计。
现代文：不久，他奏事，上疏论述江、淮、襄、蜀应当分为四个重镇，要求选派得力人守卫，皇帝要虚心听取这些将领的意见，给他们以实权，并资助他们以费用人才，作为朝廷联络和防守的大计。
English: Not long after, he made a report, in which he argued that Jiang, Huai, Xiang, and Shu should be divided into four major towns, and demanded that strong men should be sent to guard them. The emperor should humbly listen to the opinions of these generals, give them real power, and subsidize them with expensive talents, as a grand plan for liaison and defense of the imperial court.

古文：次论蜀边垦田及实录阙文等事，皆下其章中书。
现代文：后又上疏论述了四川边境的垦田和编写实录缺乏文件资料等事情，皇帝都把他的奏章下到了中书宰相的议事办公机构。
English: Later, he also made a brief mention of Putian on the Sichuan border and the lack of documents and materials for compiling the record. The emperor sent his report to the deliberation office of the Prime Minister.

古文：十六年，为省试参详官，迁太常少卿兼侍立修注官。
现代文：嘉定十六年，魏了翁任省试参详官，又调任太常少卿兼侍立修注官。
English: In the 16th year of Jiading, Wei Lioweng was appointed as the provincial probation officer, and he was also transferred to the position of the too-frequent junior secretary and the attendant senior revision officer.

古文：十七年，迁秘书监，寻以起居舍人再辞而后就列。
现代文：嘉定十七年，魏了翁调秘书监，不久任起居舍人，他再三推辞，朝廷不准，最后还是就职。
English: In the 17th year of Jiading, Wei Liao Weng was transferred to the post of secretary and superintendent, and was soon appointed to the post of resident. He repeatedly refused to resign, and the imperial court did not allow him to resign, but he finally took office.

古文：入奏，极言事变倚伏、人心向背、疆埸安危、邻寇动静，其几有五，谓： 宜察时几而共天命，尊道揆而严法守，集思广益，汲汲图之，不犹愈于坐观事会，而听其势之所趋乎？ 又论士大夫风俗之弊，谓： 君臣上下同心一德，而后平居有所补益，缓急有所倚仗。
现代文：他入朝中奏事，极力论述了事变的相因和隐伏、人心的向背、疆场的安危、敌寇的动静等五种机遇，然后他说： 我们应该审察时机而恭敬天命，尊重道德准则而严格法纪，集思广益、孜孜不倦地去想办法削弱敌人，这样不比坐着等待机会，听任形势的自由发展更好吗？ 他又论述了当前士大夫风气的败坏，他说： 君臣上下只有同心一德，而后平时才有所裨益，缓急才会有所依靠。
English: He went to report to the Central Committee of the Korean Workers' Party, and tried his best to discuss the five opportunities, such as the cause and hiddenness of the incident, the backwardness of the people's heart, the danger of the battlefield, and the movement of the enemy's pirates. Then he said: We should examine the opportunity and respect the fate of heaven, respect the moral code and strict law and discipline, gather ideas and work tirelessly to find ways to weaken the enemy. Isn't this better than sitting and waiting for opportunities and allowing the situation to develop freely? He also discussed the corruption of the current scholar-officer ethos. He said: Officials and subordinates only have the same

古文：如人自为谋，则天下之患有不可终穷者。
现代文：假如人人都各自为谋，那么国家的祸乱就没有停止的时候了。
English: If everyone acts independently, then there will be no time to stop the national calamity.

古文：今则面从而腹诽，习谀而踵陋，臣实惧焉。
现代文：今天我们士大夫中间许多人表面上服从朝廷而心里却暗中非议，习惯于阿谀奉承而行为却非常丑陋，这样下去，臣实在很为国家担心。
English: Today, many of our judges and magistrates obey the imperial court on the surface, but do not discuss it in their hearts. They are accustomed to flattery, but their behavior is very ugly. If this continues, the minister is really worried about the country.

古文：盍亦察人心之邪正，推世变之倚伏，开拓规模，收拾人物，庶几临事无乏人之叹。 其言剀切，无所忌避，而时相始不乐矣。
现代文：皇帝何不考察人心的邪正，推测事变的相因和隐伏，扩大规模，多聚集些人才，这样，遇到事变庶几不会有缺人之叹。 他说的话都非常符合当时的实际，毫无忌讳和回避，可是这样一来，当时的宰相就对他开始不高兴了。
English: Why didn't the emperor examine the wickedness of people's hearts, speculate on the causes and secrets of the incident, expand the scale, and gather more talents, so that there would hardly be a shortage of people in the event of an incident.His words were very much in line with the reality of the time, without any taboo or avoidance, but as a result, the prime minister at the time began to be unhappy with him.

古文：宁宗崩，理宗自宗室入即位，时事忽异，了翁积忧成疾，三疏求闲不得请，迁起居郎。
现代文：宁宗逝世后，理宗以宗室入朝即皇帝位，时事突然发生了变化，魏了翁因而积忧成疾，他三次上疏要求闲职都得不到批准，后调任起居郎。
English: After the death of Emperor Ningzong, Emperor Rizong ascended to the throne with his family, and the situation suddenly changed. As a result, Emperor Wei became very worried. His three requests for a vacant position were not approved, and he was later transferred to the position of kijiro.

古文：明年，改元宝庆，雷发非时，上有 朕心终夕不安 之语，了翁入对，即论： 人主之心，义理所安，是之谓天，非此心之外，别有所谓天地神明也。
现代文：明年，改元宝庆，由于雷声响的不是时候，理宗有 朕心终夜不得安宁 的话。魏了翁于是入对，他说： 人君的心是义理所居的地方，这就叫作天，不是说这个心以外还另外有什么所谓天地神明的东西。
English: The following year, at the time of the change of the era to Baoqing, since it was not the right time for the thunder to sound, Li Zong said, "My heart will not be at peace all night long." Wei Liaoong then agreed, saying, "A person's heart is the place where Yili lives, which is called heaven, not to say that there are other so-called gods and goddesses in addition to this heart.

古文：陛下盍即不安而求之，对天地，事太母，见群臣，亲讲读，皆随事反求，则大本立而无事不可为矣。 又论： 讲学不明，风俗浮浅，立朝无犯颜敢谏之忠，临难无仗节死义之勇。
现代文：陛下何不就心的不安而寻求不安的道理，陛下面对天地，事奉太母，接见群臣，亲自讲读，都应该遇事情反求于自己，这样就会建立根本而没有什么事情不可以做的了。 他又说： 现在学校教学的目的不明确，风俗轻浮浅薄，使立在朝廷中的没有犯颜敢谏的忠臣，而碰到危难时又没有敢仗义死节的勇士。
English: Why doesn't His Majesty seek the truth of uneasiness in light of the uneasiness in his heart? Facing heaven and earth, serving his mother, receiving ministers, and giving lectures in person, His Majesty should turn to himself in the face of things. In this way, he will establish the fundamental and there is nothing that cannot be done. He also said: Nowadays, the purpose of school teaching is not clear, and customs are frivolous and shallow, so that there are loyal servants in the imperial court who do not dare to commit crimes, but when they are in danger, there are no warriors who dare to defend the Day of the Righteous Dead.

古文：愿敷求硕儒，丕阐正学，图为久安长治之计。 又请申命大臣，于除授之际，公听并观，然后实意所孚，善类皆出矣。
现代文：陛下应该征求硕儒，大力阐明正学，计划做长治久安的打算。 他又请求皇帝明确命令大臣，在对官员的选拔过程中，要秉着公心听取意见和全面地进行观察，只有这样才能与选拔官吏的实际意义相符合，而品德高尚和有才能的人才会都出来做官。
English: He also asked the emperor to give a clear order to the minister to conscientiously listen to opinions and comprehensively observe the selection process of officials. Only in this way can it be consistent with the actual meaning of selecting officials, and people with high moral character and talent will come out to serve as officials.

古文：属济王黜削以死，有司顾望，治葬弗虔。
现代文：适逢济王遭废黜削夺而死，官吏们心存疑虑和观望，办理济王的丧葬不够虔诚。
English: At the time when King Jie was overthrown and died, the officials had doubts and expectations, and the funeral of King Jie was not pious enough.

古文：了翁每见上，请厚伦纪，以弭人言。
现代文：魏了翁在每次朝见皇帝时却总请求皇帝敦厚人伦和纪纲，以便消除人们的议论。
English: Wei Lioweng, however, always asked the emperor to be kind to the people and the discipline in order to eliminate people's discussion every time he met the emperor.

古文：应诏言事者十余人，朝士惟了翁与洪咨夔、胡梦昱、张忠恕所言能引义劘上，最为切至，而了翁亦以疾求去。
现代文：当时应诏命奏事的人有十几个，朝中的士大夫只有魏了翁与洪咨夔、胡梦昱、张忠恕所说的能够援引义理谏诤皇上，说得最为恳切和透彻。而魏了翁也因此请求以病辞官。
English: At that time, there were more than a dozen people who responded to the imperial edict, and only Wei Lioweng, Hong Zhiyao, Hu Mengyao, and Zhang Zhongshu, who could quote Emperor Yiliang, spoke most earnestly and thoroughly. And Wei Lioweng also requested to resign from the post because of illness.

古文：右正言李知孝劾梦昱窜岭南，了翁出关饯别，遂指了翁首倡异论，将击之，弥远犹外示优容。
现代文：右正言李知孝当时上疏弹劾胡梦昱，使他谪窜岭南，魏了翁出关为胡梦昱送行，李知孝遂指责魏了翁最先倡导异论，准备上疏弹劾，但史弥远在表面上还表示对魏了翁的优待和宽容。
English: At that time, the right-wing righteous speaker Li Zhihong was on the verge of impeaching Hu Mengyao, making him go to Lingnan, and Wei Yaoweng went out to see off Hu Mengyao. Li Zhihong then accused Wei Yaoweng of being the first to advocate dissent and prepare for impeachment on the verge of impeachment, but Shi Miyan also expressed his preferential treatment and tolerance for Wei Yaoweng on the surface.

古文：俄权尚书工部侍郎，了翁力以疾辞，乃以集英殿修撰知常德府。
现代文：不久，皇帝命令魏了翁暂时代理尚书省的工部侍郎，魏了翁极力以病推辞，于是就以集英殿修撰的名义知常德府。
English: Soon after, the emperor ordered Wei Yaowong to temporarily serve as a chamberlain of the engineering department of the Ministry of Literature and Literature. Wei Yaowong tried his best to excuse himself with illness, so he went to Zhizhangdefu in the name of Shueiden Shuxuan.

古文：越二日，谏议大夫朱端常遂劾了翁欺世盗名，朋邪谤国，诏降三官、靖州居住。
现代文：过了两天，谏议大夫朱端常弹劾魏了翁欺世盗名，说他和奸邪小人拉帮结党诽谤朝廷，皇帝于是下诏把魏了翁降官三级，并命令他到靖州居住。
English: Two days later, Zhu Duanzhang, the doctor of deliberation, impeached Wei Lioweng for cheating the world and stealing the name, saying that he and the traitorous villain helped the party to slander the imperial court. The emperor then issued a decree to demote Wei Lioweng to the third level and ordered him to live in Jingzhou.

古文：初，了翁再入朝，弥远欲引以自助，了翁正色不挠，未尝私谒。
现代文：起初，魏了翁再次入朝时，史弥远本想援引他做自己的帮手，但是魏了翁一脸正气，毫不屈服，他从来没有以私人的身份去拜谒过史弥远。
English: At first, when Wei Liaowong re-entered the imperial court, Shi Miyan originally wanted to invoke him as his helper, but Wei Liaowong had a righteous face and did not give in. He never went to visit Shi Miyan in a private capacity.

古文：故三年之间，循格序迁，未尝处以要地。
现代文：因此三年之中，他只能按正常的秩序提升，从来没有居于重要的地位。
English: Therefore, in three years, he could only be promoted according to the normal order, and never occupied an important position.

古文：了翁至靖，湖、湘、江、浙之士，不远千里负书从学。
现代文：魏了翁到靖州后，湖、湘、江、浙的儒生，都不远千里背负书箱来从他学习。
English: After Wei Liao Weng arrived in Jingzhou, Confucian students from Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu and Zhejiang traveled thousands of miles to learn from him.

古文：乃著《九经要义》百卷，订定精密，先儒所未有。
现代文：他撰写了《九经要义》一百卷，该书考订精密，为过去儒学所没有。
English: He wrote 100 volumes of "The Essentials of the Nine Classics," a book with a level of precision previously unattainable by Confucian scholars.

古文：绍定四年复职，主管建宁府武夷山冲佑观。
现代文：理宗绍定四年，魏了翁恢复了官职，主管武夷山的冲佑观。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of Shaoding, Wei Liao Weng resumed his official position as the head of the Wuyishan Chongyou Guan.

古文：五年，改差提举江州太平兴国宫，寻知遂宁府，辞不拜。
现代文：绍定五年，又改提举江州太平兴国宫，不久又知遂宁府，他辞谢不拜受。
English: In the fifth year of Shao Ding, he also changed the name to Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace, and soon became known as Suining Palace. His resignation was not accepted.

古文：进宝章阁待制、潼川路安抚使、知泸州。
现代文：后升任宝章阁待制、潼川路安抚使、知泸州。
English: After that, he was promoted to the position of Ho-Shang-Gaku-Waiting-System, the pacifying envoy of the Hechuan Road, and the leader of the Chihshang Prefecture.

古文：泸大藩，控制边面二千里，而武备不修，城郭不治。
现代文：泸州是一个大藩屏，控制边境的面积达两千里，而武备都不修，城廓废弛。
English: Zhangzhou is a large fiefdom, controlling a border area of two thousand miles, but the military equipment is not repaired, and the city walls are dilapidated.

古文：了翁乃奏葺其城楼橹雉堞，增置器械，教习牌手，申严军律，兴学校，蠲宿负，复社仓，创义冢，建养济院。
现代文：魏了翁乃奏请修缮泸州的城楼垣墙和雉堞，并增置军械，训练盾牌手，申明军纪，兴办学校，蠲免欠税，恢复社仓，修建义冢，修办养济院。
English: Wei asked Wengnai to repair the castle walls and battlements in Ganzhou, and to add armaments, train shield-bearers, affirm military discipline, build schools, exempt tax arrears, restore warehouses, build relief camps, and renovate nursing homes.

古文：居数月，百废具举。
现代文：只有几个月，百废就俱兴。
English: In just a few months, all the waste was recycled.

古文：弥远薨，上亲庶政，进华文阁待制，赐金带，因其任。
现代文：时值史弥远逝世，皇帝亲自主管朝政，魏了翁被提升为华文阁待制，赏赐了金带，仍留居原任。
English: At the time of Shi Yidong's death, the emperor was personally in charge of the imperial government. Wei Lioweng was promoted to Huaweng Pavilion, awarded a gold belt, and remained in his original position.

古文：了翁念国家权臣相继，内擅国柄，外变风俗，纲常沦斁，法度堕弛，贪浊在位，举事弊蠹，不可涤濯。
现代文：魏了翁考虑到国家权臣相继出现，他们在朝内把持国柄，朝外改变风俗，使国家的纲常沦丧，法度废弛，贪污邪恶者在位，举办任何事情都弊蠹丛生，简直不能够清除。
English: Wei Lvong took into account that the state's power holders appeared one after another, they controlled the country's character within the DPRK, changed the customs outside the DPRK, caused the country's system to fall into ruin, the law was weak, corruption and evil people were in power, and the organization of anything was full of malpractices, which could hardly be eliminated.

古文：遂应诏上章论十弊，乞复旧典以彰新化： 一曰复三省之典以重六卿，二曰复二府之典以集众议，三曰复都堂之典以重省府，四曰复侍从之典以来忠告，五曰复经筵之典以熙圣学，六曰复台谏之典以公黜陟，七曰复制诰之典以谨命令，八曰复听言之典以通下情，九曰复三衙之典以强主威，十曰复制阃之典以黜私意。
现代文：于是，他便就应诏上疏，论述十大弊端，请求恢复旧日的典章制度，以昭明新的教化：其一是恢复三省的制度以加强六部的地位；其二是恢复二府的制度以聚集众多的建议；其三是恢复都堂的制度以加强省府的权力；其四是恢复侍从的制度以经常听到忠告；其五是恢复经筵的制度以广大皇帝的学识；其六是恢复台谏的制度以昭示官员罢黜和提升的公平；其七是恢复制诰的制度以严肃皇帝的命令；其八是恢复听言的制度以通达下面的民情；其九是恢复三衙的制度以加强皇帝的威严；其十是恢复制阃的制度以避免任用将领唯凭私人的意志。
English: Therefore, he responded to the edict of Shangzhu, discussed the ten drawbacks, and requested the restoration of the old ceremonial system to demonstrate the new enlightenment: the first was to restore the system of the three provinces to strengthen the status of the six departments; the second was to restore the system of the two prefectures to gather a large number of suggestions; the third was to restore the system of the capital to strengthen the power of the provincial government; the fourth was to restore the system of the attendants to often hear advice; the fifth was to restore the system of the eunuchs to the vast knowledge of the emperor; the sixth was to restore the system of the eunuchs to show the fairness of

古文：疏列万言，先引故实，次陈时弊，分别利害，粲若白黑。
现代文：他这篇奏疏罗列万言，先引典故事实，次陈当代的时弊，分别说明其好坏利害，粲然黑白分明。
English: In this essay, he recited thousands of words, first quoting the truth of the story, and then the contemporary times and problems, respectively, to explain their good and bad interests, so black and white.

古文：上读之感动，即于经筵举之成诵。
现代文：皇上读了后很受感动，就在经筵上捧起高声朗诵。
English: After reading it, the emperor was so moved that he picked up the sutra and read it aloud.

古文：其后，旧典皆复其初。
现代文：从此以后，旧的典章制度都逐渐恢复。
English: Since then, the old award system has been gradually restored.

古文：臣庶封章多乞召还了翁及真德秀，上因民望而并招之，用了翁权礼部尚书兼直学士院。
现代文：众大臣在奏章里多数都请求召还魏了翁和真德秀两人，皇帝也因他们两人素有民望，因此下令召还他们。当时用魏了翁暂时代理礼部尚书兼直学士院。
English: Most of the ministers requested the recall of Wei Liao Weng and Zhen De Xiu in the report, and the emperor also ordered them to be recalled because they were both popular. At that time, Wei Liao Weng was temporarily in charge of the Ceremonial Department of the Imperial Academy.

古文：入对，首乞明君子小人之辨，以为进退人物之本，以杜奸邪窥伺之端。
现代文：魏了翁入朝奏对，他首先请求明君子和小人的区别，以作为进退人才的根本和杜绝奸邪小人窥伺权柄的道路。
English: When Wei Weng entered the imperial court, he first asked for the distinction between a gentleman and a villain to be made as the basis for advancing and retreating talents and the way to prevent evil villains from spying on power.

古文：次论故相十失犹存，又及修身、齐家、选宗贤、建内小学等，皆切于上躬者。
现代文：其次论述了过去宰相的十种失误，认为现今犹存，以及修身、齐家，选择宗室贤能，建立内廷小学等事，都是切合皇帝本身实际情况的。
English: Secondly, the ten kinds of mistakes of the past prime ministers were discussed, and it was believed that the things that still exist today, as well as self-cultivation, family unity, the selection of the ancestral house, and the establishment of the Inner Court Primary School, are all in line with the actual situation of the emperor himself.

古文：他如和议不可信，北军不可保，军实财用不可恃，凡十余端。
现代文：他其他的奏议，如宋蒙和议的不可信，金军必不可保，宋军的实力和财用不可恃等，一共有十几项。
English: His other proposals, such as the credibility of the Song-Mongolian peace talks is not credible, the gold army is indispensable, the strength and financial use of the Song army are indispensable, etc., a total of more than a dozen items.

古文：复口奏利害，昼漏下四十刻而退。
现代文：他又口头陈述了当前的利害，一直到昼漏下四十刻才拜退。
English: He also verbally stated the current interests, and did not retreat until forty minutes after noon.

古文：兼同修国史兼侍读，俄兼吏部尚书。
现代文：他被任命兼同修国史兼侍读，不久又兼吏部尚书。
English: He was appointed to be a student of the history of the country and an attendant, and soon he was also a clerk.

古文：经帏进读，上必改容以听，询察政事，访问人才。
现代文：他每次在经筵帏幕进讲，皇上都和颜悦色地用心听，并向他询问一些政事，访问国内的人才。
English: Every time he spoke through the curtain, the emperor listened attentively and politely, and asked him about some political affairs and visited domestic talents.

古文：复条十事以献，皆苦心空臆，直述事情，言人所难。
现代文：他又再一次疏列十件事情以呈献，都是他劳苦用心挖空脑袋想出来的。每件事情他都直接陈述，说人家所不敢说。
English: Once again, he listed ten things to present, all of which he painstakingly dug out of his head. He stated everything directly, saying what others dared not say.

古文：上悉嘉纳，且手诏奖谕。
现代文：皇上对他所奏的事，也都嘉许采纳，并且亲自手写诏书加以奖励晓谕。
English: The Emperor also approved of what he had done, and personally wrote an imperial edict to reward him.

古文：又奏乞收还保全弥远家御笔，乞定赵汝愚配享宁庙，乞趣崔与之参预政事，乞定履亩之令以宽民力，乞诏从臣集议以救楮弊，乞储阃才以备缓急。
现代文：魏了翁后来又上疏请求收回和保全史弥远家里的御笔；请求让赵汝愚配享宁宗庙；请求敦促崔与之参预朝政；请求确定田亩税以宽松民力；请求下诏让随从的大臣集体讨论以挽救楮币的弊端；请求网罗将才以应国家的缓急。
English: Wei Lioweng later petitioned Shang Shou to recover and preserve Shi Yiyuan's family's imperial pen; petitioned Zhao Rugu to be assigned to enjoy Ning's ancestral temple; petitioned to urge Cui to participate in pre-dictatorial politics with him; petitioned to determine the tax on farmland by easing the people's power; petitioned to issue an edict to let the following ministers discuss collectively to save the drawbacks of the imperial money; petitioned to capture the general to meet the country's priorities.

古文：又因进故事：如储人才、凝国论，如力图自治之策，如下罪己之诏，如分别襄、黄二帅是非，如究见黄陂叛卒利害，如分任诸帅区处降附。
现代文：又因此陈述了过去的几个成例：如储备人才，凝聚国论；如努力图谋自治的办法；如皇帝下诏罪己；如分别襄、黄二帅的是非；如探究发现黄陂叛卒的利害；如分任各将帅区别，处理降附的人员等。
English: Therefore, several examples from the past are described: such as reserving talents and consolidating the theory of the country; such as striving to find a method of self-governance; such as the emperor issuing an edict against himself; such as distinguishing between Xiang and Huang Ershuai; such as exploring and discovering the interests of Huang Qi's traitors; such as the difference between the generals assigned to each commander and dealing with the subordinate personnel, etc.

古文：还朝六阅月，前后二十余奏，皆当时急务。
现代文：魏了翁回朝六个月，前后二十多次上奏，都是有关当时的急务。
English: Wei Liao Weng returned to China for six months, and played more than twenty times before and after, all of which were related to the urgent tasks at that time.

古文：上将引以共政，而忌者相与合谋排摈，而不能安于朝矣。
现代文：皇帝将引用他共同主管政事，可是妒忌他的人却相与合谋共同排挤他，这样魏了翁就不能在朝中安身了。
English: The emperor will make him co-head of government affairs, but those who are jealous of him will conspire together to oust him, so that Wei Rong will not be able to settle down in the court.

古文：执政遂谓近臣惟了翁知兵体国，乃以端明殿学士、同佥书枢密院事督视京湖军马。
现代文：当时的执政故意说皇帝身边的近臣只有魏了翁最懂得军事和最体察国情，因此魏了翁被委任为端明殿学士、同佥书枢密院事，去督视京湖的军事。
English: The government at that time deliberately said that only Wei Liao Weng, a close vassal of the emperor's side, knew the most about military affairs and the most about the national situation. Therefore, Wei Liao Weng was appointed as a scholar of the Duanming Palace and a member of the Privy Council to supervise the military affairs of the Beijing Lake.

古文：会江、淮督府曾从龙以忧畏卒，并以江、淮付了翁。
现代文：这时恰逢江、淮的督府曾从龙以忧愁和恐惧，得病逝世，遂把江淮也一并托付给魏了翁。
English: At this time, it happened that the governor of Jiang and Huai died of illness from sorrow and fear, and then entrusted Jiang and Huai to Wei Yaowen.

古文：朝论大骇，以为不可，三学亦上书争之。
现代文：但这样一来，朝廷的舆论却因而大骇，群臣都认为这样做不可，三学士也都上书争辩。
English: However, as a result of this, public opinion in the imperial court was horrified. The courtiers all thought that this was unacceptable, and the three academicians also argued in writing.

古文：适边警沓至，上心焦劳，了翁嫌于避事，既五辞弗获，遂受命开府，宣押同二府奏事，上勉劳尤至。
现代文：这时边防警报纷至沓来，皇帝心里非常焦急，魏了翁为了避开事情的嫌疑，曾五次上疏辞职都没有被批准，反而被授予开府让其自辟幕僚，以及宣押同二府一样奏事的权力，皇上对他的关怀鼓励慰劳尤其是无微不至。
English: At this time, border alarms came in waves, and the emperor was very anxious. In order to avoid suspicion of the matter, Wei Lioweng resigned five times without being approved. Instead, he was granted the power to open the government and let him appoint his own staff, as well as the power to promulgate the report of the same matter as the two governments. The emperor's concern, encouragement and consolation to him was particularly meticulous.

古文：寻兼提举编修《武经要略》，恩数同执政，进封临邛郡开国侯，又赐便宜诏书如张浚故事。
现代文：不久，魏了翁又兼提举编修《武经要略》，恩宠和礼遇同宰相、枢密使等执政一样，又进封为临邛郡开国侯，并赐便宜诏书，像张浚过去的故事。
English: Soon, Wei Liao Weng also proposed to compile and edit the "Outline of the Martial Arts," and was treated with the same grace and courtesy as the prime minister, the privy council and other rulers. He was also appointed as the founding prince of Linyi County, and was given a favorable imperial edict, like the story of Zhang Jun in the past.

古文：朝辞，面赐御书唐人严武诗及 鹤山书院 四大字，仍赐金带鞍马，诏宰臣饮饯于关外。
现代文：当魏了翁向朝廷告别的时候，皇帝还当面赐给他御笔亲写的唐人严武的诗及 鹤山书院 四个大字，又赏赐了金带、鞍马，同时命令宰相为他于关外饯行。
English: When Wei Lioweng bade farewell to the imperial court, the emperor also personally gave him a handwritten poem by the Tang Dynasty poet Yan Wu and the Four Great Characters of Heshan Academy, and awarded him with a gold belt and a pommel horse. At the same time, he ordered the prime minister to escort him outside the customs.

古文：乃酌上下流之中，开幕府江州，申儆将帅，调遣援师，褒死事之臣，黜退懦之将，奏边防十事。
现代文：魏了翁离开朝廷后，选择了长江下流的中间，在江州开设了幕府，他申明军纪，儆戒将帅，调遣援兵，褒奖忠勇死难的官员，废黜退缩怯懦的将领，并上奏边防十件事。
English: After Wei Lioweng left the imperial court, he chose the middle of the lower reaches of the Yangtze River and opened a shogunate in Jiangzhou. He affirmed military discipline, disciplined generals, dispatched reinforcements, commended officials who died bravely, deposed retreating and cowardly generals, and reported on ten border defense matters.

古文：甫二旬，召为佥书枢密院事。赴阙奏事，时以疾力辞不拜。
现代文：刚满二十天，他就被召为佥书枢密院事，赶赴朝中奏事，当时他以病竭力推辞，不肯拜受。
English: Just twenty days later, he was summoned to the Privy Council to deliver an imperial edict, and he hurried to the Imperial Court to deliver the edict. At that time, he tried his best to excuse himself by saying that he was ill, and refused to accept the invitation.

古文：盖在朝诸人始谋假此命以出了翁，既出，则复以建督为非，虽恩礼赫奕，而督府奏陈动相牵制，故遽召还，前后皆非上意也。
现代文：魏了翁的忽去忽回，是由于朝中的一些人，开始时策划利用他督视京湖军马的机会使他离开朝廷，等到他离开朝政以后，又以他在江、淮建立督府的事为非，对他进行攻击，虽然当时在表面上对魏了翁好像恩宠有加，可是他在督府奏的事情，却动不动受到他们的牵制，而且最后又突然召他回来，这些前后所发生的事情，却都不是出于皇帝的本意。
English: Wei Lioweng's absence and return was due to the fact that some people in the imperial court initially planned to take advantage of the opportunity for him to supervise the military horses of Beijing and Hubei to make him leave the imperial court. After he left the imperial government, they attacked him on the grounds that he had established the governor's office in Jiangsu and Huai. Although Wei Lioweng seemed to be favored on the surface at that time, his activities in the governor's office were constantly hampered by them, and finally he was suddenly called back. These events did not come from the emperor's intention.

古文：寻改资政殿学士、湖南安抚使、知潭州，复力辞，诏提举临安府洞霄宫。
现代文：不久，魏了翁被改任为资政殿学士，湖南安抚使、知潭州，他又再一次的力辞，诏命让他提举临安府洞霄宫。
English: Soon, Wei Yaowon was reappointed as a scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics, Hunan Pacifying Envoy, and Zhitanzhou, and he once again made a strong speech, ordering him to raise the Lin'an Cave Palace.

古文：未几，改知绍兴府、浙东安抚使。
现代文：没有多久，他被改知绍兴府、浙东安抚使。
English: Before long, he was given the title of Shaoxing Prefecture, East Zhejiang Pacifying Envoy.

古文：嘉熙元年，改知福州、福建安抚使。
现代文：理宗嘉熙元年，他又改知福州、福建安抚使。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Dezong of Jiaxi, he also changed his title to Fuzhou and Fujian Peaceful Envoy.

古文：累章乞骸骨，诏不允。
现代文：他屡次上疏，请求退职，诏令都不允许。
English: He repeatedly resigned and asked to be relieved of his duties, but was not allowed to do so.

古文：疾革，复上疏。
现代文：后来他生命垂危，再一次上疏。
English: Later, when he was on the verge of death, he once again went into hiding.

古文：门人问疾者，犹衣冠相与酬答，且曰： 吾平生处己，澹然无营。 复语蜀兵乱事，蹙额久之，口授遗奏，少焉拱手而逝。
现代文：他的学生来探望他的病情，魏了翁仍衣冠整齐地和他们互相问答，并且说： 我平生安排自己，澹然无所经营。 当他谈到蜀兵的乱事，额头还皱了许久，最后他口授了遗奏，不一会儿才拱手而逝。
English: His students came to visit his illness, Wei Lvong was still neatly dressed and asked and answered questions with them, and said: I have arranged myself all my life, but I have nothing to do. When he talked about the chaos of Shu soldiers, his forehead was wrinkled for a long time, and finally he dictated the posthumous music, and soon passed away.

古文：后十日，诏以资政殿大学士、通奉大夫致仕。
现代文：十天后，诏命方到，令他以资政殿大学士、通奉大夫退休。
English: Ten days later, the imperial edict arrived, ordering him to retire as a scholar of the Imperial Household and a doctor of the Imperial Household.

古文：遗表闻，上震悼，辍视朝，叹惜有用才不尽之恨。
现代文：他的遗表奏闻后，皇帝非常震惊哀悼，为他停止视朝，感叹有用才不尽之意。
English: After hearing of his posthumous epitaph, the emperor was very shocked and mourned for him to stop looking at the DPRK, lamenting the usefulness.

古文：诏赠太师，谥文靖，赐第宅苏州，累赠秦国公。
现代文：下诏追赠魏了翁为太师，谥号 文靖 ，并赐第宅于苏州，又累积赠他为秦国公。
English: The following edict posthumously bestowed upon Wei the title of Grand Master, the posthumous name of Wenjing, and bestowed upon him the first residence in Suzhou, and cumulatively bestowed upon him the title of Qin Guogong.

古文：所著有《鹤山集》、《九经要义》、《周易集义》、《易举隅》、《周礼井田图说》、《古今考》、《经史杂抄》、《师友雅言》。
现代文：魏了翁生前所著的书有：《鹤山集》、《九经要义》、《周易集义》、《易举隅》、《周礼井田图说》、《古今考》、《经史杂抄》、《师友雅言》。
English: The books written by Wei Lioweng before his death include: "Crane Mountain Collection," "The Essentials of the Nine Classics," "Zhou Yi Ji Yi," "Easy to lift the corner," "Zhou Li Yida Tu Say," "Ancient and Modern Research," "Miscellaneous History of the Classics," and "Teacher and Friend Sayings."

