古文：王懿到彦之垣护之张兴世
现代文：○王懿王懿字仲德，是太原祁县人，自己说是汉朝司徒王允的弟弟幽州刺史王懋的七世孙。
English: ○ Wang Xuan Wang Xuan Zi Zhongde, a native of Taiyuan County, is said to be the seventh-generation grandson of Yuzhou scholar Wang Xuan, the younger brother of the Han Dynasty scholar Wang Yun.

古文：仲德少沈审有意略，事母甚谨，学通阴阳，精解声律。
现代文：祖父王宏在石季龙那里做官，父亲王苗跟随苻坚做官，都达到二千石的级别。王仲德少年的时候性格沉稳，有主意和智谋，侍奉母亲很恭谨，学问通晓阴阳，精解声律。
English: Wang Zhongde's grandfather Wang Hong served as an official under Shi Jilong, and his father Wang Miao followed Yu Jian as an official, both reaching the rank of two thousand koku. Wang Zhongde had a calm personality as a young man, had ideas and wisdom, served his mother very respectfully, was knowledgeable about yin and yang, and understood the sound rhythm.

古文：苻氏之败，仲德年十七。
现代文：苻氏失败，王仲德年龄十七岁。
English: Zou failed, leaving Wang Zhongde at the age of seventeen.

古文：及兄叡同起义兵，与慕容垂战败，仲德被重创走，与家属相失。
现代文：他和他的哥哥王睿一同发兵起义，和慕容垂作战失败，王仲德受了重伤逃走，和家属失去了联系。
English: Together with his brother Wang Rui, he sent troops to revolt and fought unsuccessfully against Murongtli. Wang Zhongde was seriously injured and fled, losing contact with his family.

古文：路经大泽，困未能去，卧林中。
现代文：路上经过一个大泽，被困住不能离去，躺在林子里。
English: On the way, we passed through Osawa, got stuck and couldn't get away, and ended up lying in the woods.

古文：有一小儿青衣，年可七八岁，骑牛行，见仲德惊曰： 汉已食未？ 仲德言饥，小儿去，须臾复来，得饭与之。
现代文：有一个小孩穿着青色的衣服，年龄大约七八岁，骑着牛正在走路，见了王仲德吃惊地说： 这位汉子吃饭了没有？ 王仲德说肚子很饿，小孩走了，过了一会又返回来，拿了饭给他吃。
English: There was a child in blue clothes, about seven or eight years old, who was riding a cow. When he saw Wang Zhongde, he was surprised and said, "Has this man eaten?" Wang Zhongde said that he was very hungry, and the child left. After a while, he returned and brought him some food.

古文：食毕欲行，而暴雨莫知津径，有一白狼至前，仰天而号，号讫衔仲德衣，因度水，仲德随后得济，与叡相及。
现代文：吃过后想走，却下起了暴雨，看不见路径，有一条白狼来到跟前，仰天叫着，叫罢衔起了王仲德的衣服，于是渡水，王仲德随在它的后面，也得以渡过，与王睿相遇。
English: After eating, he wanted to walk, but it started to rain heavily and he couldn't see the path. A white wolf came to him, yelled at the sky, lifted Wang Zhongde's clothes, and then crossed the water. Wang Zhongde followed it and was able to cross the water and meet Wang Rui.

古文：度河至滑台，复爲翟辽所留，使爲将帅。
现代文：他们渡过黄河到了滑台，又被翟辽所挽留，让他做将帅。
English: They crossed the Yellow River to the slide, and were held back by Zou Liao, who made him captain.

古文：积年仲德欲南归，乃弃辽奔泰山。
现代文：几年以后王仲德想要南归，于是便丢开翟辽奔往泰山。
English: A few years later, Wang Zhongde wanted to return to the south, so he left Qilianiao and ran to Mount Tai.

古文：辽追骑急，夜行忽见前有猛炬导之，乘火行百许里以免。
现代文：翟辽的骑兵追赶得很急，仲德夜间行走忽然看见前头有熊熊的火炬在引导着他们，借着火光走了一百来里才得以逃脱。
English: Gong Liao's cavalry chased them very quickly. Walking at night, Zhong De suddenly saw a torch in front of him guiding them. He walked for a hundred miles by the light of the torch before he was able to escape.

古文：晋太元末，徙居彭城。
现代文：晋朝太元末年，迁居彭城。
English: He moved to Pengcheng at the end of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：兄弟名犯晋宣、元二帝讳，故皆以字行。
现代文：兄弟名字犯了晋朝宣、元二帝的忌讳，所以都以字行世。
English: The brothers' names violated the taboo of the Jin Dynasty's Emperor Xuan and the Yuan Dynasty's Second Emperor, so they all went into the world with the same name.

古文：叡字元德。
现代文：王睿字元德。
English: Wang Rui's character is Yuan De.

古文：北土重同姓，并谓之骨肉，有远来相投者，莫不竭力营赡。
现代文：北方重视同姓，都称做骨肉，有远来相投的人，无不竭力赡养和相助。
English: The north attaches great importance to people with the same surname. They are all called "flesh and blood," people who are distantly related, and they all make every effort to support and help each other.

古文：若有一人不至者，以爲不义，不爲乡邑所容。仲德闻王愉在江南贵盛，是太原人，乃远来归愉。
现代文：如果有一个人不到的，就被认为是不义，不为同乡人所宽容，王仲德听说王愉在江南十分显贵，是太原人，就远来投奔王愉。
English: Wang Zhongde heard that Wang Yu was very prominent in the south of the Yangtze River and was from Taiyuan, so he came all the way to Wang Yu.

古文：愉接遇甚薄，因至姑孰投桓玄。
现代文：王愉接待非常微薄，于是便到姑熟去投桓玄。
English: Wang Yu's reception was very poor, so he went to his aunt's to vote for Huan Xuan.

古文：值玄篡，见辅国将军张畅，言及世事。
现代文：正遇上桓玄篡位，见到了辅国将军张畅，说到了这事。
English: He just happened to meet Huan Xuan, the usurper of the throne, and met Zhang Chang, the general of the auxiliary state, who told him about it.

古文：仲德曰： 自古革命诚非一族，然今之起者恐不足以济大事。 
现代文：王仲德说： 自古革命诚然不止一族，然而现在的起事者恐怕不能够成大事。 
English: Wang Zhongde said: It is true that since ancient times, revolutions have been led by more than one people, but I am afraid that the current insurgents will not be able to achieve great things.

古文：元德果劲有计略，宋武帝甚知之，告以义举，使于都下袭玄。
现代文：王元德果决刚劲很有谋略，宋武帝十分了解他，把举义的事情告诉了他，让他到京城去袭击桓玄。
English: Wang Yuanzhong was very resourceful. Emperor Songwu knew him well and told him about the uprising, and asked him to go to Beijing to attack Emperor Kan.

古文：仲德闻其谋，谓元德曰： 天下事不可不密，且兵亦不贵迟巧。
现代文：王仲德听到了他们的谋划，对王元德说： 天下的事情不可不保密，而且兵也不以迟缓巧妙为贵。
English: Wang Zhongde heard of their plan and said to Wang Yuande: The affairs of the world must not be kept secret, and soldiers should not be too slow.

古文：玄情无远虑，好冒夜出入，今取之正须一夫力耳。 
现代文：桓玄性情没有远虑，喜好夜晚出入，现在捉他正需要一个勇士的力量。 
English: Huan Xuan has a reckless nature and likes to come and go at night. It takes the strength of a warrior to catch him now.

古文：事泄，元德爲玄诛，仲德窜走。
现代文：事情秘密泄露，王元德被桓玄杀死，王仲德逃走。
English: The secret of the affair leaked out, Wang Yuande was killed by Huan Xuan, and Wang Zhongde fled.

古文：会义军克建邺，仲德抱元德子方回出候武帝，帝于马上抱方回，与仲德相对号恸。
现代文：正遇上义军攻克了建邺，王仲德抱着元德的儿子王方回出来迎候武帝，武帝在马上抱着方回，与仲德相对痛哭。
English: Just as the rebels were conquering Jianye, Wang Zhongde came out to meet Emperor Wu, holding his son Wang Fang in his arms. Emperor Wu immediately hugged Fang Wei and wept with Zhongde.

古文：追赠元德给事中，封安复县侯，以仲德爲镇军中兵参军。
现代文：追赠王元德为给事中，封为安复县侯，任命王仲德为镇军中兵参军。
English: Wang Yuande was posthumously awarded the title of county magistrate of Anfu County, and Wang Zhongde was appointed as a soldier of the town army to join the army.

古文：武帝伐广固，仲德爲前驱，战辄破之，大小二十余战。
现代文：武帝讨伐广固，王仲德担任前驱，逢有战斗就战败敌人，进行了大小二十多次战斗。
English: Emperor Wu fought against Guanggu, with Wang Zhongde as the forerunner. Whenever there was a battle, he defeated the enemy and fought more than 20 large and small battles.

古文：卢循寇逼，衆议并欲迁都，仲德正色曰： 今天子当阳南面，明公命世作辅，新建大功，威震六合。
现代文：卢循的军队前来进攻，众人的议论都想要迁都，王仲德脸色严正地说： 当今天子对着太阳、面向南方，各位明公著名当世，共同辅佐，新建大功，威震四海。
English: Lu Xun's army came to attack, and everyone wanted to move the capital, Wang Zhongde said with a serious face: Today, facing the sun and facing the south, you are all famous in the world, jointly assisting, building a great achievement, and shaking the four seas.

古文：祅寇豕突，恃我远征，既闻凯入，将自奔散。
现代文：妖寇猖狂，是趁我们远征，一旦凯旋入京，他们将自行逃散。
English: The yokokos are running amok, taking advantage of our expedition. Once they have made a triumphant return to Kyoto, they will disperse on their own.

古文：今日投草莽则同匹夫，匹夫号令，何以威物？
现代文：如果今日投向草莽，则和匹夫相同，匹夫来发号令，怎么能有权威？
English: If you vote for grasshopper today, then you are the same as a peacock. If a peacock gives orders, how can it have authority?

古文：此谋若立，请从此辞。 
现代文：这种计谋如果能够确立，在下请求从此告辞。 
English: If such a scheme can be established, I hereby request that you withdraw from the case.

古文：帝悦。
现代文：武帝很高兴。
English: Desong is very happy.

古文：及武帝与循战于左里，仲德功冠诸将，封新淦县侯。
现代文：后来武帝与卢循在左里作战，王仲德功劳冠于诸将，封为新淦县侯。
English: Later, Emperor Wu and Lu Xun fought in Zuoli. Wang Zhongde was awarded the title of "Hero of Xinyi County" for his services to the generals.

古文：义熙十二年北伐，进仲德征虏将军，加冀州刺史，督前锋诸军事。
现代文：义熙十二年北伐，晋升王仲德为征虏将军，担任冀州刺史，督前锋诸军事。
English: In the 12th year of Yixi's Northern Expedition, Wang Zhongde was promoted to be a conscript general, served as a historian of Jizhou, and was the vanguard of the military.

古文：冠军将军檀道济、龙骧将军王镇恶向洛阳，甯朔将军刘遵考、建武将军沈林子出石门，宁朔将军朱超石、胡藩向半城，咸受统于仲德。
现代文：冠军将军檀道济、龙骧将军王镇恶开向洛阳，宁朔将军刘遵考、建武将军沈林子出往石门，宁朔将军朱超石、胡藩开向半城，都受王仲德的统率。
English: The champion general Dang Daoji and the dragon general Wang Zhenxiong drove to Luoyang, the Ningshuo general Liu Zunkao and the Jianwu general Shen Linzi went to Shimen, and the Ningshuo general Zhu Chaoishi and the Hu clan drove to the middle of the city, all under the leadership of Wang Zhongde.

古文：仲德率龙骧将军朱牧、甯远将军竺灵秀、严纲等开钜野入河，乃总衆军进据潼关。
现代文：王仲德率龙骧将军朱牧、宁远将军竺灵秀、严纲等开往钜野进入黄河，于是总合各路军队进据潼关。
English: Wang Zhongde led the Longjing generals Zhu Mu, Ningyuan generals Xing Lingxiu, Yan Gang and others to enter the Yellow River into the wilderness, so the army of all directions entered Shaoguan.

古文：长安平，以仲德爲太尉谘议参军。
现代文：长安平定，任命王仲德为太尉咨议参军。
English: Chang'an was pacified, and Wang Zhongde was appointed as the first lieutenant to join the army.

古文：武帝欲迁都洛阳，衆议咸以爲宜。
现代文：武帝打算迁都到洛阳，众人讨论都认为是适当的。
English: Emperor Wu planned to move the capital to Luoyang, and everyone thought it was appropriate.

古文：仲德曰： 非常之事人所骇，今暴师经载，士有归心，故当以建邺爲王基。
现代文：王仲德说： 不同寻常的事是人们所惊骇的，现在军队在外已经很久，士人都想回去，所以应当以建邺为王业的基础。
English: Wang Zhongde said: People are shocked by unusual things. Now the army has been away for a long time, and the scholars all want to go back. Therefore, the foundation of the royal cause should be to build a castle.

古文：迁都宜候文轨大同。 
现代文：迁都应该等到国家全部统一以后。 
English: Relocation should wait until after the country is fully unified.

古文：帝深纳之。
现代文：武帝十分赞同。
English: The emperor accepted it completely.

古文：使卫送姚泓先还彭城。
现代文：派人护送姚泓先回彭城。
English: Send someone to escort Yao Yao back to Pengcheng first.

古文：武帝受命，累迁徐州刺史，加都督。
现代文：武帝即位，他逐步升迁为徐州刺史，担任都督。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, and he was gradually promoted to be the governor of Xuzhou Province.

古文：元嘉中，到彦之北侵，仲德同行。
现代文：元嘉时期，到彦之向北拓展疆土，王仲德同行。
English: During the Yuan and Jia Dynasties, Zhu Yan expanded his territory to the north, and Wang Zhongde accompanied him.

古文：魏弃河南，司、兖三州平定，三军咸喜，而仲德有忧色，曰： 诸贤不谙北土情僞，必堕其计。 
现代文：魏国丢弃了河南，司、兖三州平定，三军都很高兴，而王仲德却有忧虑，他说： 诸位贤士不熟悉北国的虚实情况，一定会落入他们的圈套。 
English: Wei abandoned Henan, and the Three Provinces were pacified. The three armies were very happy, but Wang Zhongde was worried. He said, "You sages are not familiar with the true situation in the north, and you will surely fall into their trap."

古文：诸军进屯灵昌，魏军于委粟津度河，虎牢、洛阳并不守。
现代文：各路军队进驻灵昌，魏军从委粟津渡过黄河，虎牢、洛阳都丢掉了。
English: Troops from all directions were stationed in Lingchang, the Wei army crossed the Yellow River from Wuzin, and lost control of Tigardong and Luoyang.

古文：彦之闻二城并没，欲焚舟步走。
现代文：到彦之听说两座城市都失陷了，打算烧掉船只步行逃走。
English: When Kazuhiko heard that both cities had fallen, he planned to burn the ships and flee on foot.

古文：仲德曰： 洛阳既败，虎牢无以自立，理数必然也。
现代文：王仲德说： 洛阳既然失败，虎牢无法自立，道理必然是这样。
English: Wang Zhongde said: Since Luoyang has failed, the tiger prison cannot stand on its own, the reason must be this.

古文：今贼去我犹自千里，滑台尚有强兵。
现代文：现在贼兵走了我们还仍有土地千里，滑台还驻有强兵。
English: Now that the bandits are gone, we still have thousands of miles of land, and there are still strong soldiers stationed on the slide.

古文：若便舍舟，士卒必散。
现代文：如果就舍掉船只，士卒必定溃散。
English: If you abandon the ship, the soldiers will surely scatter.

古文：且当入济至马耳谷口,更详所宜。 
现代文：而且应当进入济水到达马耳谷口，再仔细研究下一步的对策。 
English: Moreover, it is necessary to enter Jishui and reach the mouth of the Malta Valley, and then carefully study the next countermeasures.

古文：乃回军沿济南历城步上，焚舟弃甲，还至彭城。
现代文：结果是回军沿着济南历城步行而上，烧掉了船只，丢弃了兵甲，回到彭城。
English: As a result, the Hui army marched up Licheng, Jinan, burned their ships, abandoned their armor, and returned to Pengcheng.

古文：仲德坐免官。
现代文：王仲德因此而被免官。
English: As a result, Wang Zhongde was removed from office.

古文：寻与檀道济救滑台，粮尽乃归。自是复失河南。
现代文：不久和檀道济救滑台，粮食用尽而退回，从此重又丢掉了河南。
English: Not long after, he returned to the rescue slide with the aid of the aid station, exhausted the grain and returned. Since then, he has lost Henan.

古文：九年，又爲徐州刺史。
现代文：元嘉九年，又担任徐州刺史。
English: In the ninth year of Yuan Jia, he also served as Xuzhou chief historian.

古文：仲德三临徐州，威德着于彭城。
现代文：王仲德三临徐州，威德显扬于彭城。
English: Wang Zhongde came to Xuzhou for the third time, and Wei De was prominent in Pengcheng.

古文：立佛寺，作白狼、童子像于塔中，以在河北所遇也。
现代文：他建立佛寺，在塔中塑了白狼、童子像，是根据他在河北的经历而做的。
English: He built a Buddhist temple and sculpted a white wolf and a boy in the pagoda, based on his experience in Hebei.

古文：进号镇北大将军。
现代文：晋升称号为镇北大将军。
English: His promotion title is General of Zhenbei University.

古文：任昉、范云皆与善。
现代文：元嘉十五年去世，谥号为桓侯。
English: Yuan Jia died fifteen years later, and his posthumous name was Huan Hou.

古文：后卒于北中郎谘议参军。
现代文：也在庙中设立了白狼、童子坛，每次祭祀，一定要同时为他们祈祷。
English: White wolves and children's altars have also been set up in the temple. Every time there is a religious service, it is necessary to pray for them at the same time.

古文：所着诗赋百馀篇。
现代文：儿子王正循承袭了他的爵位，后来被家童杀死。
English: His son, Wang Zhengxun, inherited his title and was later killed by a family member.

古文：溉字茂灌，撝弟子也。
现代文：○到溉到溉字茂灌，是到扌为弟弟的儿子。
English: ○ Zuiryu Zuiryu Maoyu is the son of Zuyu's younger brother.

古文：父坦，齐中书郎。
现代文：父亲到坦，是齐朝的中书郎。
English: His father went to Tang and became the Qi Dynasty's second-in-command.

古文：溉少孤贫，与兄沼弟洽俱知名，起家王国左常侍。
现代文：到溉少年时是个孤儿，家中贫寒，和哥哥到沼、弟弟到洽都很出名，由王国左常侍起家。
English: When he was a boy, he was an orphan, and his family was poor. He was famous for going to the swamp with his older brother and to the market with his younger brother. He often served his family from the kingdom.

古文：乐安任昉大相赏好，恒提携溉、洽二人，广爲声价。
现代文：乐安人任窻十分欣赏喜爱，总是提携到溉、到洽二人，广为提高他们的身价。
English: The people of Le'an appreciate and love Ren Zheng very much, and always partner with him to irrigate and negotiate, so as to widely improve their status.

古文：所生母魏本寒家，悉越中之资，爲二儿推奉昉。
现代文：他的生母魏氏本是寒家，全部拿出越中的家产，为了两个儿子而推奉任窻。
English: His birth mother, a member of the Wei clan, was originally from a poor family. She took out all of her family's property in Yuezhong and was promoted to the position of empress for the sake of her two sons.

古文：梁天监初，昉出守义兴，要溉、洽之郡，爲山泽之游。
现代文：梁朝天监初年，任日方出京为义兴太守，邀请到溉、到洽到郡上去，游览山泽。
English: In the first year of Liang Chao's tenure as overseer of heaven, the Japanese side went to Beijing as the Yixing daimyo, invited to Irrigation, to Chaozhou, and to the county, and toured Yamazawa.

古文：昉还爲御史中丞，后进皆宗之。
现代文：任窻回京担任御史中丞，后进士人都很推尊他。
English: He returned to Kyoto to serve as Goshi Chujo, and was highly respected by later scholars.

古文：时有彭城刘孝绰、刘苞、刘孺，吴郡陆倕、张率，陈郡殷芸，沛国刘显及溉、洽，车轨日至，号曰兰台聚。
现代文：当时有彭城的刘孝绰、刘苞、刘孺，吴郡的陆翺、张率，陈郡的殷芸，沛国的刘显和到溉、到洽，车辆天天前来，号称兰台聚。
English: At that time, there were Liu Xiaochu, Liu Hui and Liu Hui from Pengcheng, Lu Hui and Zhang Rui from Wu County, Yin Yi from Chen County, and Liu Xianhe from Pei Province. Vehicles came every day, known as Lan Tai Ju.

古文：陆倕赠昉诗云： 和风杂美气，下有真人游，壮矣荀文若，贤哉陈太丘。
现代文：陆翺赠任窻的诗中说： 和风杂美气，下有真人游，壮矣苟文若，贤哉陈太丘。
English: According to a poem by Lu Yao, presented by Ren Yao: "Harmonious style, mixed beauty, under the real people's tour, strong and well-written, virtuous Chen Taiqiu."

古文：今则兰台聚，方古信爲俦。
现代文：今则兰台聚，方古信为俦。
English: Now, the media is gathering, and Fang Guoxin is gone.

古文：任君本达识，张子复清修，既有绝尘到，复见黄中刘。 
现代文：任君本达识，张子复清修，既有绝尘到，复见黄中刘。 
English: Renjun is the embodiment of wisdom, Zhang Zi is the embodiment of refinement, both have reached the absolute dust, and have seen the Huangzhong Liu.

古文：时谓昉爲任君，比汉之三君，到则溉兄弟也。
现代文：当时称任窻为任君，比作汉代的三君，到则是指到溉兄弟。
English: At that time, Renqi was called Renjun, likened to the three princes of the Han Dynasty, and then referred to the irrigation brothers.

古文：除尚书殿中郎。
现代文：他被任命为殿中郎。
English: He was appointed as a palace chamberlain.

古文：后爲建安太守，昉以诗赠之，求二衫段云： 铁钱两当一，百代易名实，爲惠当及时，无待凉秋日。 
现代文：后来做了建安太守，任窻将诗赠给他，向他要两件上衣，说： 铁钱两当一，百代易名实，为惠当及时，无待秋凉日。 
English: Later, when he became the Jian'an eunuch, Ren Hao gave him a poem and asked him for two coats, saying: Iron money should be treated as one, and names should be changed for a hundred generations. It is timely to benefit, and there is no need to wait for a cool autumn day.

古文：溉答云： 馀衣本百结，闽中徒八蚕，假令金如粟，讵使廉夫贪。 
现代文：到溉答诗说： 余衣本百结，闵中徒八蚕，假令金如素，讵使廉夫贪。 
English: According to the riddle, the poem says: There are a hundred knots in the remaining clothes, eight silkworms in the cocoon, and the gold is as good as gold. The cocoon makes the honest man greedy.

古文：还爲太子中舍人。
现代文：回京后担任太子中舍人。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he served as the prince's junior attendant.

古文：溉长八尺，眉目如点，白皙美须髯，举动风华，善于应答。
现代文：到溉身高八尺，眉目如同点画，脸色白净，胡须很美，举止风度好，善于应对。
English: He is eight feet tall at birth, his eyebrows are like dots, his face is white, his beard is beautiful, his manners are good, and he is good at coping.

古文：上用爲通事舍人，中书郎，兼吏部，太子中庶子。
现代文：皇上任命为通事舍人、中书郎，兼吏部、太子中庶子。
English: The emperor appointed Tsujitsushonin, Chushiro, Ritsube, and the Prince's illegitimate son.

古文：湘东王绎爲会稽太守，以溉爲轻车长史，行府郡事。
现代文：湘东王萧绎做会稽太守，让到溉担任轻车长史、行府郡事。
English: Hunan Wang Xiaoyuan was appointed as the chairman of the board of supervisors of the association, and he was responsible for the history of light vehicles and the administration of the county.

古文：武帝敕绎曰： 到溉非直爲汝行事，足爲汝师。 
现代文：武帝给萧绎的诏令说： 到溉不只是为你办事，而且足可以做你的老师。 
English: Emperor Wu issued a decree to Xiao Yuanzhong, saying, "I have come not only to do things for you, but also to be your teacher.

古文：溉尝梦武帝遍见诸子，至湘东而脱帽与之，于是密敬事焉。
现代文：到溉曾经梦见武帝遍见各个儿子，到了湘东王而脱下帽子给了他，于是暗中十分谨慎地侍奉他。
English: Zuorigi once dreamed that Emperor Wu saw all his sons everywhere, and when he came to the King of Shandong, he took off his hat and gave it to him, so he secretly served him very carefully.

古文：遭母忧，居丧尽礼。
现代文：母亲去世，守丧非常尽礼。
English: He suffered the death of his mother and devoted himself to filial piety.

古文：所处庐开方四尺，毁瘠过人。
现代文：所住的房子仅四尺见方，消瘦过人。
English: The house he lived in was only four feet square, and he was extremely thin.

古文：服阕，犹蔬食布衣者累载。
现代文：服丧期满，仍然素食布衣地过了多年。
English: After the mourning period, they take off their clothes, eat vegetables and wear cloth clothes for many years.

古文：历御史中丞，都官、左户二尚书，掌吏部尚书。
现代文：他曾历任御史中丞、都官、左户二尚书，掌吏部尚书。
English: He had successively held the posts of Goshi Chujo, To-kan, Sadou Nishosho, and Shori-bu Shosho.

古文：时何敬容以令参选，事有不允，溉辄相执。
现代文：当时何敬容依据诏令参加选拔贤士，事情不够公平，到溉坚持不同意。
English: At that time, He Jingrong participated in the selection of sages according to the imperial edict, the matter was not fair enough, and he insisted on disagreeing.

古文：敬容谓人曰： 到溉尚有馀臭，遂学作贵人。 
现代文：何敬容对别人说： 到溉尚有余臭，却学做贵人了。 
English: He Jingrong said to others: There is still a lingering smell after irrigation, but I have learned to be a nobleman.

古文：敬容日方贵宠，人皆下之，溉忤之如初。
现代文：何敬容一天天富贵得宠，人们都在他以下，到溉则像当初一样和他对立。
English: He is getting richer and richer day by day, and people are below him, but they still oppose him as they did in the beginning.

古文：溉祖彦之初以担粪自给，故世以爲讥云。
现代文：到溉的祖父到彦之起初曾经以担粪自给为生，所以社会上有人拿这来讥笑他。
English: At the beginning, Zuihiko's grandfather Zuihiko used to carry manure for a living, so some people in the community used this to ridicule him.

古文：后省门鸱尾被震，溉左迁光禄大夫。
现代文：后来省门上鸱鸟的尾巴被震坏，到溉降职国光禄大夫。
English: Later, the tail of the ostrich on the provincial gate was damaged by the quake, and Dr. Guanglu, who was demoted, went to Irrigation.

古文：所莅以清白自修，性又率俭，不好声色，虚室单床，傍无姬侍。
现代文：所在职位都是以清白自修，性格朴素节俭，不好声色，虚室单床，旁边没有姬妾服侍。
English: The positions they hold are all self-cultivation with innocence, simple and frugal personality, bad tone, empty room, single bed, no concubine serving next to them.

古文：冠履十年一易，朝服或至穿补，传呼清路，示有朝章而已。
现代文：鞋帽十年一换，朝服有时穿到破烂缝补，出门传呼清路，只是显示具有朝廷规章罢了。
English: The shoes and hats are changed every ten years, the court dress is sometimes worn to patch up the torn seams, and people go out to call for a clear path, just to show that they have the rules of the court.

古文：后爲散骑常侍、侍中、国子祭酒。
现代文：后来担任散骑常侍、侍中、国子祭酒。
English: Later, he served as a samurai for horseback riding, a samurai, and a Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer.

古文：表求列武帝所撰正言于学，请置正言助教二人，学生二十人。
现代文：上表请求把武帝所撰写的《正言》列为学校的教科书，请求设置《正言》助教二人，学生二十人。
English: The above table requests that the "Motto" written by Emperor Wu be listed as a school textbook, and requests that two teaching assistants and twenty students be set up for the "Motto."

古文：尚书左丞贺琛又请加置博士一人。
现代文：尚书左丞贺琛又请求加置博士一人。
English: Senior Vice-Minister of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, He Jun, also requested that one more doctor be appointed.

古文：溉特被武帝赏接，每与对棋，从夕达旦。
现代文：到溉特别被武帝所欣赏和接待，常常和他下棋，从夜晚直到早晨。
English: Zuorigi was especially appreciated and received by Emperor Wu, and often played chess with him from evening until morning.

古文：或复失寝，加以低睡，帝诗嘲之曰： 状若丧家狗，又似悬风槌。 
现代文：有时又没有睡觉，就随便躺下睡一会，武帝写诗嘲笑他说： 状若丧家狗，又似悬风槌。 
English: Sometimes, when he did not sleep, he would lie down and sleep for a while. Emperor Wu wrote a poem mocking him, saying, "He looks like a lost dog, and like a weathervane."

古文：当时以爲笑乐。
现代文：当时的人们把这作为笑谈。
English: People at the time laughed it off.

古文：溉第居近淮水，斋前山池有奇礓石，长一丈六尺，帝戏与赌之，并礼记一部，溉并输焉。
现代文：到溉的宅院住得接近淮水，斋房前的山池有一块奇怪的礓石，长一丈六尺，武帝开玩笑地和他以此打赌，另外加上《礼记》一部，到溉都输了。
English: The homestead of Zuorigi lived close to Huai Shui, and the mountain pond in front of the hut had a strange piece of flint, six feet long. Emperor Wu jokingly bet with him on this, and added a part of "Li Ji," and Zuorigi lost.

古文：未进，帝谓朱异曰： 卿谓到溉所输可以送未？ 
现代文：东西却没有送来，武帝对朱异说： 您说到溉所输的东西会不会送来？ 
English: But the things were not sent, and Emperor Wu said to Zhu Ying: When you say that you will send the things you lost, will you send them?

古文：敛板对曰： 臣既事君，安敢失礼。 
现代文：朱异拿好手板严肃地说： 臣子既然侍奉君主，怎敢失礼？ 
English: Zhu Yi took the good tablet and said solemnly: Since the vassal serves the monarch, how dare he be rude?

古文：帝大笑，其见亲爱如此。
现代文：武帝大笑，他就是这样地受到亲爱。
English: Emperor Wu laughed loudly. This was how he was loved.

古文：石即迎置华林园宴殿前。
现代文：礓石随后就移置到了华林园的安殿前面。
English: The flint was then moved to the front of the Anden Hall of the Hualin Garden.

古文：移石之日，都下倾城纵观，所谓到公石也。
现代文：移石头的那天，首都倾城而出，前来观看，把它称作到公石。
English: On the day of the removal of the stone, the capital rushed out of the city, came to watch, and called it the male stone.

古文：溉弈棋入第六品，常与朱异、韦黯于御坐校棋比势，复局不差一道。
现代文：到溉下棋入第六品，常常与朱异、韦黯在皇帝座前进行下棋比赛，几局不差一步。
English: He often played chess with Zhu Yiyi and Wei Qian in front of the emperor's throne, and several games were within one step of each other.

古文：后因疾失明，诏以金紫光禄大夫、散骑常侍就第养疾。
现代文：后来因为生病，眼睛失明，诏令以金紫光禄大夫、散骑常侍的身份回到家中养病。
English: Later, because of illness, his eyes were blinded, and he was ordered to return home to recuperate in the capacity of Jin Zi Guanglu doctor and horseback riding attendant.

古文：溉少有美名，遂不爲仆射，人爲之恨，溉澹如也。
现代文：到溉少年时代就有美名，却没有当上仆射，人们都为他感到遗憾，而到溉却把它看得很淡。
English: When he was a young boy, he had a good reputation, but he was not a villain. People felt sorry for him, but when he was a boy, they saw it as nothing.

古文：家门雍睦，兄弟特相友爱，初与弟洽恒共居一斋，洽卒后，便舍爲寺。
现代文：他的家庭非常和睦，兄弟特别互相友爱，起初和弟弟到洽总是住在一所斋房中，到洽死了以后，便把这所房子施舍为寺院。
English: His family was very harmonious, and the brothers were especially friendly to each other. At first, he and his younger brother Decha always lived in a hut, and after Decha's death, he donated the house to the temple.

古文：蒋山有延贤寺，溉家世所立。
现代文：蒋山有座延贤寺，是到溉家族的人建立的。
English: There is a Yan Xian Temple in Jiangshan, which was built by people who came to the irrigation family.

古文：溉得禄俸，皆充二寺。
现代文：到溉得到的俸禄，全都赠给了这两个寺院。
English: The entire stipend received for irrigation was donated to these two temples.

古文：因断腥膻，终身蔬食。
现代文：于是他吃饭断绝了腥膻，终身吃素食。
English: As a result, he cut off the yakitori and ate vegetarian food for the rest of his life.

古文：别营小室，朝夕从僧徒礼诵。
现代文：他另外盖了一座小房子，一天到晚跟着僧徒礼拜诵经。
English: He also built a small house and followed the monks to worship and chant all day long.

古文：武帝每月三致净馔，恩礼甚笃。
现代文：武帝每月三次送来净食，恩赐和礼遇得十分丰厚。
English: Emperor Wu sent pure food three times a month, and the gifts and courtesy were very plentiful.

古文：性不好交游，唯与朱异、刘之遴、张绾同志友密。
现代文：他性格不好交游，只和朱异、刘之遴、张绾等同僚友谊密切。
English: He is not good at making friends, and only has close friendships with colleagues such as Zhu Ying, Liu Zhixuan and Zhang Ye.

古文：及卧疾，门可罗雀，唯三人每岁时恒鸣驺枉道以相存问，置酒极欢而去。
现代文：等他卧床生病，门可罗雀，只有上述三人，每到年节总是由随从开路绕道到他这里来相慰问，摆上酒菜，极尽欢乐然后离开。
English: When he was bedridden and ill, only the above-mentioned three people could visit him. Every New Year's Eve, his attendants would always take a detour to visit him to offer condolences, serve food and wine, and have a good time before leaving.

古文：乙太清二年卒，临终托张、刘勒子孙薄葬之礼。
现代文：他于太清二年去世，临终托张、刘监督子孙实行薄葬礼仪。
English: He died in the second year of the Qing Dynasty. On his deathbed, he asked Zhang and Liu to supervise his descendants to carry out the funeral rites.

古文：曰： 气绝便敛，敛以法服，先有冢竁，敛竟便葬，不须择日。
现代文：他说： 气绝就要殡殓，穿上合乎礼法的衣服，先挖好墓穴，殓罢便葬，不需要择日子。
English: He said: It is absolutely necessary to have a funeral, put on clothes that conform to etiquette, dig a good grave first, and then bury it. There is no need to choose a day.

古文：凶事必存约俭，孙侄不得违言。 
现代文：丧事一定要节俭，孙子侄儿都不能违背遗言。 
English: Funeral must be frugal, grandchildren and nephews can not go against the last words.

古文：护之所莅，多聚敛贿货，七年，坐下狱免官。
现代文：于是便隔开家人请僧人读经赞佛，等他死去，面色如同平常，手屈二指，就是佛道所说的得果。当时朝廷有很多变故，于是便没有什么谥赠。
English: So he separated his family and invited a monk to read a sutra praising the Buddha. When he died, his face was as usual and his hands were folded in two, which is the result of Buddha's teaching. At that time, there were many changes in the imperial court, so there was no gift.

古文：明年，起爲太中大夫，未拜，以愤卒。
现代文：有文集二十卷在当时流行。
English: Twenty-volume anthologies were popular at the time.

古文：諡壮侯。
现代文：○垣崇祖
English: ○Gaki Takashi

古文：崇祖字敬远，一字僧宝，护之弟子也。
现代文：垣崇祖字敬远，一字僧宝，是垣护之弟弟的儿子。
English: He was the son of Kaki's younger brother.

古文：父询之，骁敢有气力。
现代文：父亲垣询之，骁勇有气力。
English: My father asked him about it, and he replied that he was brave and strong.

古文：元凶弑逆，副辅国将军张柬。
现代文：元凶劭弑杀皇上，他担任辅国将军张柬的副官。
English: A former assassin of the emperor, he served as an aide-de-camp to the auxiliary general Zhang Kamm.

古文：时张超之手行大逆，亦领军隶柬，询之规杀之，虑柬不同，柬宿有此志，又未测询之同否，互相观察。
现代文：当时张超之动手把皇上杀死，也是隶属于张柬的一个领军。垣询之打算把他杀掉，顾虑张柬不同意；张柬早有这种想法，又不知道垣询之是否同意，互相观察。
English: At that time, Zhang Chaozhi took the initiative to kill the emperor, and he was also a leader of the army subordinated to Zhang Cang. He wanted to kill him, but Zhang Cang disagreed; Zhang Cang had this idea for a long time, but he did not know whether he agreed or not, and they observed each other.

古文：会超之来论事，柬色动，询之觉之，即共定谋，遣召超之。
现代文：正巧张超之要前来商量事情，张柬脸色变化，垣询之觉察到了，便共同定下计谋，派人召见张超之。
English: It just so happened that Zhang Chaozhi wanted to come to discuss the matter. Zhang Xiang's face changed, and he sensed that Zhang Chaozhi was inquiring. They jointly decided on a plan and sent someone to summon Zhang Chaozhi.

古文：超之疑之不至，改宿他所，询之不知，径往斫之，杀其仆于床，因与柬南奔。
现代文：张超之心里怀疑而没到，另外住到了其他地方。垣询之不知道，径直前往去杀他，在床上杀死了他的仆人，于是和张柬一起南逃。
English: Zhang Chaozhi suspected in his heart, but did not go there. He also lived in another place. Without asking, he went straight to kill him, killed his servant in bed, and then fled south with Zhang Han.

古文：时孝武已即位，以爲积射将军。
现代文：当时孝武帝已经即位，让他做了积射将军。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu had already ascended to the throne, so he made him a general.

古文：梁山之役，力战中流矢卒，赠冀州刺史。
现代文：梁山战役，奋力作战，中了流箭身亡，追赠为冀州刺史。
English: Liangshan Campaign, fought hard, was hit by a stray arrow and died, posthumously became the history of Jizhou.

古文：崇祖年十四，有干略，伯父护之谓门宗曰： 此儿必大吾门。 
现代文：垣崇祖十四岁时，很有才干谋略，伯父垣护之对自己宗族的人说： 这孩子必定会光大我们的族门！ 
English: At the age of fourteen, Kaki Takasu's uncle, Kaki Moriyuki, said to the members of his clan: "This child will surely bring glory to our clan!"

古文：后随徐州刺史薛安都入魏。
现代文：后来跟随徐州刺史薛安都入魏朝。
English: Later, he followed Xue Andu, the prince of Xuzhou, into the Wei Dynasty.

古文：寻又率门宗据朐山归宋，求淮北立功，明帝以爲北琅邪、兰陵二郡太守，封下邳子。
现代文：不久又派门宗占据朐山归宋朝，求往淮北立功，明帝让他担任北琅笽、兰陵二郡太守，封为下邳子。
English: Not long after, he sent Menzong to occupy Lushan and return it to the Song Dynasty, and asked Huaibei to make contributions. The Ming Emperor made him the governor of Beilun and Lanling counties, and he was given the title of the lower eunuch.

古文：及齐高帝镇淮阴，崇祖时戍朐山，既受都督，祗奉甚至，帝以其武勇，善待之，崇祖谓其妹夫皇甫肃曰： 此真吾君也 ，遂密布诚节。
现代文：后来齐高帝镇守淮阴，垣崇祖当时戍守朐山，接受他的统率，对他十分敬奉，高帝因为他的武勇，待他很好，垣崇祖对他的妹夫皇甫肃说： 这真是我的君主。 于是秘密表白了自己的忠诚之节。
English: Later, Emperor Gao was in charge of Huaiyin. At that time, Emperor Gao was in charge of Lushan. Emperor Gao accepted Emperor Gao's leadership and highly respected Emperor Gao. Emperor Gao treated Emperor Gao well because of Emperor Gao's bravery. Emperor Gao said to Emperor Fushu, his brother-in-law, "This is really my sovereign." Emperor Fushu then secretly declared his loyalty.

古文：高帝威名已着，宋明帝尤所忌疾，征爲黄门郎，规害高帝，崇祖建策以免，由是甚见亲，参豫密谋。
现代文：高帝的威名已经很大，宋明帝尤其忌恨，征调他为黄门郎，谋划害死高帝，垣崇祖献计使他得以免祸，从此更加亲信，参与密谋。
English: The prestige of Emperor Gao was already great, and Emperor Songming was particularly jealous of him. He recruited him as Huangmen Lang, plotted to kill Emperor Gao, and gave him the gift of Qi Chongzu to save him from harm. From then on, he was more trusted and participated in the conspiracy.

古文：元徽末，高帝惧祸，令崇祖入魏。
现代文：元徽末年，高帝惧怕遭祸，让垣崇祖入魏朝。
English: In the last years of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Gao, fearing disaster, allowed Qigong Chongzu to enter the Wei Dynasty.

古文：崇祖即以家口托皇甫肃，勒数百人将入魏界，更听后旨，会苍梧废，召崇祖还都。
现代文：垣崇祖便把家小托付给皇甫肃，带着几百人将要进入魏朝边界，再听以后的指示。正赶上苍梧王被废黜，召垣崇祖回到京都。
English: He entrusted his household to Emperor Fushu, and he and several hundred people were about to enter the border of the Wei Dynasty to receive further instructions. Just in time for the dethronement of King Cangwu, he was called back to Kyoto.

古文：及齐高帝新践阼，恐魏致讨，以送刘昶爲辞。
现代文：齐高帝新登帝位，恐怕魏朝讨伐，便以送刘昶作为缓和。
English: When Emperor Qigong ascended to the throne, he was afraid that the Wei Dynasty would attack, so he sent Liu Bei as a reprieve.

古文：以爲军冲必在寿春，非崇祖莫可爲捍，徙爲豫州刺史、监豫、司二州诸军事，封望蔡侯。
现代文：高帝认为军队的入侵必将是在寿春，非垣崇祖无人可以抗御，便调他为豫州刺史、监豫司二州诸军事，封为望蔡侯。
English: Emperor Gao believed that the invasion of the army would certainly be in Shouchun, and no one could resist if there was no Qigong Chongzu, so he transferred him to be the historian of Yuzhou, the supervisor of the military of the two states of Yuzhou, and was given the title of Wang Caihou.

古文：建元二年，魏遣刘昶攻寿春，崇祖乃于城西北立堰塞肥水，堰北起小城，使数千人守之。
现代文：建元二年，魏朝派刘昶进攻寿春，垣崇祖便在城西北建立堤堰堵塞肥水，在堰北建起一座小城，派了几千人守卫。
English: In the second year of the first century, the Wei Dynasty sent Liu Xuan to attack Shuchun, and the Qian Chongzu built a dike to block the fertile water in the northwest of the city, built a small city in the north of the dam, and sent several thousand people to guard.

古文：谓长史封延伯曰： 虏必悉力攻小城，若破此堰，放水一激，急逾三峡，自然沈溺，岂非小劳而大利邪？ 
现代文：他对长史封延伯说： 敌人必定全力进攻小城，如果破开这道堤堰，放水一冲，比三峡还急，自然淹没，岂不是出小力而获大利？ 
English: He said to Changshi Feng Yanbo, "The enemy will surely attack the small city with all its might. If this dike is broken and the water is released, it will be faster than the Three Gorges and will naturally flood. Isn't it a small force that wins big?

古文：及魏军由西道集堰南，分军东路，肉薄攻小城，崇祖着白纱帽，肩舆上城，手自转式，日晡时，决小史埭，水势奔下，魏攻城之衆，溺死千数，大衆退走。
现代文：后来魏军由西路聚集到堰南，分军到东路，赤膊攻击小城，垣崇祖戴着白纱帽，坐轿上城，亲自转动车前扶手。下午半晌时，决开了小史埭，水势奔腾而下，魏朝的攻城军队，淹死了一千余人，大部队退走。
English: Later, the Wei army gathered from the west road to the south of the weir, and the detachment to the east road, and attacked the small city shirtless. Wearing a white gauze cap, Gaki Chongzu rode a sedan to the city, and personally turned the front handrail. At half past one in the afternoon, the small dam was opened, and the water rushed down. The siege army of the Wei Dynasty drowned more than one thousand people, and the large army retreated.

古文：初，崇祖于淮阴见高帝，便自比韩、白，唯上独许之。
现代文：起初，垣崇祖在淮阴见到了高帝，便自比韩信、白起，只有皇上独自认可。
English: At first, when Emperor Gao met Emperor Gao in Huaiyin, he compared himself to Han Xin and Bai Qi, and only the Emperor recognized him.

古文：及破魏军啓至，上谓朝臣曰： 崇祖恒自拟韩、白，今真其人也。 
现代文：等战败魏军的捷报送到，皇上对朝臣说： 崇祖总是自比韩、白，现在真是其人呀。 
English: When the report of the victory of the defeated Wei army was delivered, the emperor said to the courtier: Chongzu always compared himself to Han and Bai, and now he is really a different person.

古文：进爲都督。
现代文：晋升他为都督。
English: He was promoted to the post of governor-general.

古文：崇祖闻陈显达、李安人皆增给军仪，乃啓求鼓吹横吹。
现代文：垣崇祖听说陈显达、李安人都增加了军事仪仗，便也上表请求鼓吹横吹乐队。
English: Hearing that Chen Xianda and Li An had both increased their military honors, Qi Chongzu also went to the table to request the promotion of the band.

古文：上敕曰： 韩、白何可不与衆异。 
现代文：皇上的敕令说： 韩、白怎能不与众异样？ 
English: The emperor's edict said: "How can Han and Bai not be different from everyone else?

古文：给鼓吹一部。
现代文：给他配了乐队一部。
English: Part of the trumpet band.

古文：崇祖虑魏复攻淮北，啓徙下蔡戍于淮东。
现代文：垣崇祖担心魏朝再攻淮北，上表请求迁徙下蔡戍到淮东。
English: Fearing that the Wei Dynasty would attack northern Huai again, Emperor Gaozong requested that Cai Jun move to eastern Huai.

古文：其冬，魏果欲攻下蔡，及闻内徙，乃扬声平除故城。
现代文：当年冬天，魏朝果然要攻下蔡，等听说内迁，于是扬言要平除故城。
English: In the winter of that year, the Wei Dynasty really wanted to conquer Cai, and when they heard about the internal relocation, they threatened to level the old city.

古文：衆疑魏当于故城立戍，崇祖曰： 下蔡去镇咫尺，魏岂敢置戍，实是欲除此城，正恐奔走，杀之不尽耳。 
现代文：众人怀疑魏朝会在故城建立戍卫，垣崇祖说： 下蔡离军镇近在咫尺，魏人岂敢设置戍卫？实际是想要除掉此城。我正怕他们不住地奔走，砍杀不尽哩！ 
English: Many people suspected that the Wei Dynasty would set up a garrison in the old city. Gao Chongzu said: "The Lower Cai is so close to the military town, how dare the Wei people set up a garrison? In fact, they want to get rid of this city. I am afraid that they will run around and cut and kill endlessly!"

古文：魏果夷掘下蔡城，崇祖大破之。
现代文：魏军果然挖掘下蔡城，垣崇祖把他们打得大败。
English: The Wei army did indeed excavate Caicheng, and they were soundly defeated by Qi Chongzu.

古文：武帝即位，爲五兵尚书，领骁骑将军。
现代文：武帝即位，他担任五兵尚书，兼任骁骑将军。
English: Emperor Wu ascended to the throne, he served as the five soldiers Shangshu, concurrently serving as the cavalry general.

古文：初，豫章王有盛宠，武帝在东宫，崇祖不自附。
现代文：起初，豫章王十分得宠，武帝在东宫，垣崇祖不肯趋附。
English: At first, King Yuanzhang was very favored, Emperor Wu was in the East Palace, and Emperor Gaozong refused to follow him.

古文：及破魏军，诏使还朝，与共密议，武帝疑之，曲加礼待。
现代文：等破了魏军，诏令让他回朝，和他共同密议，武帝对他怀疑，曲意加以礼待。
English: After defeating the Wei army, Emperor Wu ordered him to return to the imperial court and held secret talks with him. Emperor Wu suspected him and treated him with courtesy.

古文：酒后谓曰： 世间流言，我已豁怀抱，自今已后，富贵见付也。 
现代文：酒后对他说道： 世间传言说，我已经敞开怀抱，从今往后，以富贵相赠。 
English: After drinking, she said to him, "The rumor in the world says that I have opened my arms, and from now on, I will share my wealth with everyone.

古文：崇祖拜谢。
现代文：垣崇祖拜谢。
English: Take a moment to thank your ancestors.

古文：太守孔山士叹曰： 闻柳下惠之风，贪夫廉，懦夫有立志。复见之矣。 
现代文：○张兴世
English: ○ Zhang Xingshi

古文：终于奉朝请。张兴世字文德，竟陵人也。
现代文：张兴世字文德，竟陵人。
English: Zhang Xingshi, a man of letters and virtue, is actually a mausoleum man.

古文：本单名世，宋明帝益爲兴世。
现代文：本来是单名世，宋明帝给他增加为兴世。
English: Originally it was a single-name dynasty, but Emperor Song Ming gave it a new name, the Xing Dynasty.

古文：少家贫，白衣随王玄谟代蛮。
现代文：少年的时候家贫，以平民身份随王玄谟讨伐蛮邦。
English: When he was a boy, his family was poor, and he followed Wang Xuanmu to fight against the barbarians as a commoner.

古文：后随孝武镇寻阳，补南中郎参军督护，从入讨元凶。
现代文：后来随着孝武帝镇守寻阳，补任南中郎参军都护，随从入京讨伐元凶劭。
English: Later, with Emperor Xiaowu as the guardian of Huanyang, he appointed Nan Zhong Lang to join the army to protect the capital, and followed him to Beijing to fight against Yuan Xuejun.

古文：及南郡王义宣反，又随玄谟出梁山，有战功。
现代文：后来南郡王刘义宣反叛，又随从王玄谟前往梁山，立有战功。
English: Later, the king of Nan County, Liu Yixuan, rebelled and followed Wang Xuanmu to Liangshan, where he distinguished himself in battle.

古文：明帝即位，四方反叛，进兴世龙骧将军，领水军拒南贼。
现代文：明帝即位，四方反叛，晋升张兴世为龙骧将军，率领水军抵御南方的贼寇。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, the four sides rebelled, promoted Zhang Xingshi to the rank of Longyu general, and led the navy to resist the southern bandits.

古文：时台军据赭圻，朝廷遣吏部尚书褚彦回就赭圻行选。
现代文：当时朝廷的军队占据赭圻，朝廷派遣吏部尚书褚彦回到赭圻选拔贤才。
English: At that time, the army of the imperial court occupied Handan, and the imperial court sent the head of the personnel department, Shang Shuxin, back to Handan to select talents.

古文：是役也，皆先战授位，檄板不供，由是有黄纸劄。
现代文：这次战役，都是在战前先授予了职位，书写檄文的木板不够用，于是用黄纸小札。
English: In this campaign, the posts were all awarded before the war, and the wooden boards used to write obituaries were not enough, so small yellow paper cards were used.

古文：南贼屯在鹊尾，既相持久不决，兴世建议曰： 贼据上流，兵张地胜，今以奇兵潜出其上，使其首尾周惶,进退疑沮，粮运艰碍，乃制胜之奇。 
现代文：南方的贼寇屯驻在鹊尾。双方相持很久没有决战，张兴世建议说： 贼军占据上游，气势很盛，现在派遣奇兵悄悄地出现在它的上游，使它首尾不安，进退疑虑，粮食运输艰难，这才是制胜的奇计。 
English: Zhang Xingshi suggested that since the two sides had not fought a decisive battle for a long time, Zhang Xingshi said, "The bandit army occupies the upstream, and its momentum is very strong. Now, we will send a miracle soldier to quietly appear in its upstream, making it uneasy, doubtful, and difficult to transport grain. This is the winning strategy."

古文：沈攸之、吴喜并赞其计，分战士七千配之。
现代文：沈攸之、吴喜都很赞同他的计策，分出七千战士配备给他。
English: Shen Youzhi and Wu Xi both agreed with his strategy and provided him with seven thousand soldiers.

古文：兴世乃令轻舸泝流而上，旋复回还，一二日中辄复如此，使贼不爲之防。
现代文：张兴世于是命令乘轻舟溯流而上，很快又回来，一两天中反复如此，使贼对此不加防备。
English: Zhang Xingshi then ordered to take a light boat upstream, and soon came back, repeating this for a day or two, so that the thieves were unprepared for this.

古文：贼帅刘胡闻兴世欲上，笑之曰： 我尚不敢越彼下取扬州，兴世何人欲据我上。 
现代文：贼军统帅刘胡听说张兴世打算到上游去，讥笑他说： 我尚且不敢超过他们向下游攻取扬州，张兴世是什么人，竟想占据我的上游地带！ 
English: Liu Hu, the commander of the rebel army, heard that Zhang Xingshi was planning to go upstream and mocked him, saying, "I don't even dare to go further downstream than them to capture Yangzhou. What kind of person is Zhang Xingshi to want to occupy my upstream zone!"

古文：兴世谓攸之等曰： 上流唯有钱溪可据。 
现代文：张兴世对沈攸之等人说： 上游只有钱溪据守。 
English: Zhang Xingshi said to Shen Youzhi and others: Upstream, only Qianxi is defended.

古文：乃往据之。
现代文：于是便前往占据了它。
English: So they went and occupied it.

古文：及刘胡来攻，将士欲迎击之，兴世曰： 贼来尚远而气骤盛矣。
现代文：等刘胡前来进攻，将士们准备迎击他，张兴世说： 贼军尚远，而且士气紧张旺盛。
English: When Liu Hu came to attack and the soldiers were preparing to meet him, Zhang Xingshi said: The thief army is still far away, and morale is tense.

古文：夫骤既力尽，盛亦易衰，此曹刿所以破齐也。
现代文：紧张过后力量用尽，旺盛也很容易衰竭，这正是曹刿打败齐国的原因。
English: After the tension, the strength is exhausted, and the vigor is also easy to exhaust, which is precisely the reason why Cao Pi defeated Qi Guo.

古文：将士不得妄动。 
现代文：将士们不可妄动。 
English: The soldiers must not make any rash moves.

古文：贼来转近，兴世乃命寿寂之、任农夫率壮士击走之。
现代文：贼军越来越近，张兴世就命令寿寂之、任农夫率领壮士把他们击退。
English: As the bandits got closer and closer, Zhang Xingshi ordered Shou Zhanzhong and Ren Nongfu to lead the strong men to repel them.

古文：袁顗愠曰： 贼据人肝藏里，云何得活。 
现代文：袁靑生气地说： 贼兵处在人的肝脏里，怎么还能活得成？ 
English: Yuan Qi said angrily, "How can a thief soldier live in a human liver?

古文：是月朔，赭圻军士伐木爲栅，于青山遇一童子曰： 贼下旬当平，无爲自苦。 
现代文：这个月的初一，赭圻的兵士伐木做成栅栏，在青山遇到一个童子说： 贼军在下旬就会平定，用不着自讨苦吃。 
English: On the first day of this month, a scruffy soldier was felling trees to make a fence. In Aoyama, he met a boy who said, "The bandits will be subdued by the end of the month, so there's no need to be hard on yourself."

古文：忽不见。
现代文：忽然就不见了。
English: And suddenly it was gone.

古文：至是果败。
现代文：到了这时，果然打败了敌军。
English: By this time, they had defeated the enemy.

古文：兴世又遏其粮道，贼衆渐饥，刘胡弃军走，袁顗仍亦奔散，兴世遂与吴喜共平江陵。
现代文：张兴世又切断了他们的粮道，贼军逐渐发生饥饿，刘胡丢下军队逃跑了，袁靑也奔散了，张兴世于是和吴喜共同平定了江陵。
English: Zhang Xingshi also cut off their food supply, and the bandit army gradually starved. Liu Hu abandoned the army and fled, and Yuan Shao also scattered. Zhang Xingshi and Wu Xi then jointly leveled Gangneung.

古文：迁右军将军，封作唐县侯。
现代文：他被调任右军将军，封为作唐县侯。
English: He was transferred to the post of general of the right army and given the title of Count of Tang County.

古文：历雍州刺史，左卫将军。
现代文：历任雍州刺史、左卫将军。
English: The successors of Yongzhou Shishi, General Zuo Wei.

古文：以疾，徙光禄大夫，寻卒。
现代文：因为有病，改任光禄大夫，不久死去。
English: Because of his illness, he was reassigned to the post of doctor of Guanglu and died soon after.

古文：兴世居临沔水，自襄阳以下至于江二千里，先无洲屿，兴世初生，当其门前水中，一旦忽生洲，年年渐大。
现代文：张兴世的住处临近沔水，从襄阳以下到长江二千里，原先并没有沙洲，张兴世出生，在他家门前的水中，有一天忽然生出一个沙洲，一年年渐渐变大。
English: Zhang Xingshi's place of residence is near Surabaya. From Xiangyang to the Yangtze River, there are two thousand miles. Originally, there was no sandbar. Zhang Xingshi was born. One day, a sandbar suddenly appeared in the water in front of his house. It gradually grew larger every year.

古文：及兴世爲方伯，而洲上遂十馀顷。
现代文：等到张兴世做了诸侯，洲上已有十几顷大。
English: By the time Zhang Xingshi became a vassal, there were more than ten hectares of land on the island.

古文：父仲子由兴世致位给事中，兴世欲将往襄阳，爱乡里不肯去。
现代文：父亲张仲子由于张兴世而做了给事中，张兴世打算要往襄阳去，他则因为热爱家乡而不忍离开。
English: Zhang Xingshi's father, Zhang Zhongzi, did something because of Zhang Xingshi. Zhang Xingshi planned to go to Xiangyang, but he couldn't bear to leave because he loved his hometown.

古文：尝谓兴世曰： 我虽田舍老公，乐闻鼓角，汝可送一部，行田时欲吹之。 
现代文：他曾经对张兴世说： 我虽然是田舍老公，却喜欢听演奏鼓角，你可以送我一支乐队，种田的时候想吹奏一番。 
English: He once said to Zhang Xingshi: Although I am the husband of the farm, I like to listen to the drums. You can send me a band. When I am farming, I would like to play the drums.

古文：兴世素恭谨畏法，譬之曰： 此是天子鼓角，非田舍公所吹。 
现代文：张兴世平素做事恭谨害怕法律，便给他解释说： 这是天子的鼓角，不是田舍公所能吹奏的。 
English: Zhang Xing, who had always done things respectfully and feared the law, explained to him: This is the son of heaven's drum, and it is not possible for Tian She Gong to play it.

古文：兴世欲拜墓，仲子谓曰： 汝卫从太多，先人必当惊怖。 
现代文：张兴世想去拜扫祖坟，张仲子说： 你的侍卫太多，先人一定会受惊害怕。 
English: Zhang Xingshi wanted to visit and sweep the ancestral grave, Zhang Zhongzi said: Your bodyguards are too many, the ancestors must be frightened.

古文：兴世减撤而行。
现代文：张兴世减撤了一些人才去了。
English: Zhang Xingshi reduced and removed some talented people.

古文：子欣泰。
现代文：他的儿子叫张欣泰。
English: His son's name is Zhang Xintai.

古文：欣泰字义亨，不以武业自居，好隶书，读子史。
现代文：○张欣泰张欣泰字义亨，不以武业自居，喜爱隶书，攻读诸子和史籍。
English: ○ Zhang Xintai Zhang Xintai is called Yiheng, he doesn't consider himself a martial artist, he likes to study history books, and he likes to study children's and historical books.

古文：年十馀，诣吏部尚书褚彦回，彦回问： 张郎弓马多少？ 
现代文：十几岁的时候，曾经到吏部尚书褚彦回那里去，褚彦回问： 张郎的弓马有多少？ 
English: When he was a teenager, he once went back to Shang Shuxin, the head of the personnel department, who asked him: How many horses and bows does Zhang Lang have?

古文：答曰： 性怯畏马，无力牵弓。 
现代文：他回答说： 我生性怕马，无力张弓。 
English: He answered, "I am afraid of horses and I cannot draw my bow.

古文：彦回甚异之。
现代文：褚彦回感到他非常奇异。
English: Yan Yan felt that he was very strange.

古文：历诸王府佐。
现代文：后来历任各个王府的佐官。
English: Later he served as an adjutant in various royal courts.

古文：宋元徽中，兴世在家，拥雍州还资见钱三千万，苍梧王自领人劫之，一夜垂尽，兴世忧惧病卒。
现代文：宋朝元徽年间，张兴世在家，拥有从雍州带回来的现钱三千万，苍梧王亲自带人前去抢劫，一夜几乎抢尽，张兴世忧惧病死。
English: During the Song Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty, Zhang Xingshi was at home. He had 30 million yuan in cash brought back from Yongzhou. Cangwu Wang personally led people to rob him. He almost robbed all of it in one night. Zhang Xingshi was worried that he would die of illness.

古文：欣泰兄欣华时爲安成郡，欣泰悉封馀财以待之。
现代文：张欣泰的哥哥张欣华当时掌管安成郡，张欣泰把余财全部封存起来等待他。
English: Zhang Xintai's brother Zhang Xinhua was in charge of Ancheng County at the time, and Zhang Xintai sealed up all his remaining money and waited for him.

古文：齐建元初，爲尚书都官郎。
现代文：齐朝建元初年，他做尚书都官郎。
English: In the first year of the first year of the Qi Dynasty, he was a Shang Shudu official.

古文：武帝与欣泰早款遇，及即位，以爲直合将军。
现代文：武帝与张欣泰很早就关系很好。即位以后，就任命他为直阁将军。
English: Emperor Wu had a very good relationship with Zhang Xintai for a long time. After he ascended the throne, he appointed him as Zhokou General.

古文：后爲武陵内史，坐赃私杀人被纠，见原。
现代文：后来为武陵内史，因为赃物杀人被弹劾，受到宽大。
English: Later, he was impeached and pardoned by the Wuling Inner Court for killing people with stolen goods.

古文：还复爲直合、步兵校尉，领羽林监。
现代文：仍然为直阁将军、步兵校尉，兼任羽林监。
English: He is still General Naoko, an infantry lieutenant, and also serves as a forest ranger.

古文：欣泰通涉雅俗，交结多是名素，下直辄着鹿皮冠，衲衣锡杖，挟素琴。
现代文：张欣泰全面涉猎雅俗文化，交结的多是名流，值勤归来就戴鹿皮冠，僧衣锡杖，挟着素琴。
English: Zhang Xintai comprehensively dabbled in elegant and vulgar culture. Most of his acquaintances were celebrities. When he returned from duty, he wore a deerskin crown, a monk's robe, a tin cane, and a suqin.

古文：有以啓武帝，帝曰： 将家儿，何敢作此举止。 
现代文：有人把这告诉了武帝，武帝说： 将官家的儿子，怎么敢有这样的举止！ 
English: Someone told Emperor Wu about this, and Emperor Wu said, "How dare the son of a shogun behave like that!

古文：后从驾出新林，敕欣泰廉察，欣泰停仗，于松树下饮酒赋诗。
现代文：后来随御驾出去到新林，皇帝让张欣泰进行查访，张欣泰放下锡杖，在松树下饮酒作诗。
English: Later, he drove with the emperor to Xinlin. The emperor asked Zhang Xintai to pay a visit. Zhang Xintai put down his cane and drank wine under the pine trees to compose a poem.

古文：制局监吕文度以啓武帝，帝大怒，遣出。
现代文：制局监吕文度以此上奏武帝，武帝大怒，把他赶了出去。
English: The superintendent of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, Lü Wenda, reported this to Emperor Wu, who was furious and drove him out.

古文：数日意释，召谓曰： 卿不乐武职，当处卿清贵。 
现代文：几天后气消了，又把他召来，对他说： 卿不喜欢武职，应当安排你一个清贵的职位。 
English: After a few days, he lost his temper and summoned him again and said to him, "Sir, you don't like the military, you should be assigned to a noble post."

古文：除正员郎。
现代文：任命为正员郎。
English: He was appointed to Shokanshiro.

古文：出爲镇军中兵参军、南平内史。
现代文：出京任镇军中兵参军、南平内史。
English: The soldiers of the town army who went to Beijing and joined the army, Nanping's internal history.

古文：巴东王子响杀僚佐，上遣中庶子胡谐之西讨，使欣泰爲副。
现代文：巴东王萧子响杀死了手下的辅佐官员，皇上派遣中庶子胡谐之西讨，让张欣泰为副官。
English: Xiao Zixing, the king of Badong, killed his assistant officials, and the emperor sent his son-in-law Hu Junzhi to the West, making Zhang Xintai his adjutant.

古文：欣泰谓谐之曰： 今太岁在西南，逆岁行军，兵家深忌，若且顿军夏口，宣示祸福，可不战而禽也。 
现代文：张欣泰对胡谐之说： 现在太岁星在西南，逆着太岁行军，是兵家很深的忌讳，如果先停军在夏口，向对方指明祸福，就可以不战而将他擒获。 
English: Zhang Xintai said to Hu Huningzhi: Now Tai Lianxing is in the southwest, marching against Tai Lianxing is a deep taboo for soldiers. If you stop the army in Xia Kou first and point out the misfortune and good fortune to the other side, you can capture him without fighting.

古文：谐之不从，进江津，尹略等见杀。
现代文：胡谐之不听从，进驻江津，尹略等人被杀。
English: Hu Junzhi did not obey, and was stationed in Jiangjin. Yin Luo and others were killed.

古文：事平，欣泰徙爲随王子隆镇西中兵，改领河东内史。
现代文：事情平定，张欣泰调任随王萧子隆的镇西中兵，改为兼任河东内史。
English: After the matter was settled, Zhang Xintai was transferred to the Zhenxi Middle School of Wang Xiaozilong, and was also assigned to the Inner History of Hedong Province.

古文：子隆深相爱重，数与谈宴，意遇与谢脁相次。
现代文：萧子隆对他深深地喜爱和重视，多次和他一起宴饮交谈，诚意的款待可以和谢罣排在一起。
English: Xiao Zilong deeply loved and valued him, and had banquets and conversations with him many times. The sincere hospitality can be ranked with Xie Xuan.

古文：典签密啓之，武帝怒，召还都。
现代文：典签秘密启奏，武帝很恼怒，召他回京。
English: Emperor Wu was very angry and summoned him back to Beijing.

古文：屏居家巷，置宅南冈下，面接松山，欣泰负弩射雉，恣情闲放，声伎杂艺，颇多开解。
现代文：他隔离开别人住在自家的巷子里，在南冈下面建了一所宅子，面对松山，张欣泰背着弓射野鸡，任情闲放，欣赏乐伎和各种艺人，有许多事情开心解闷。
English: He lived in his own lane, away from others, and built a small house at the foot of Nangao Mountain. Facing Matsuyama, Zhang Xintai shot pheasants with a bow on his back. He was free to relax, enjoy the games and various entertainers, and had many fun things to do.

古文：明帝即位，爲领军长史，迁谘议参军。
现代文：明帝即位，担任领军长史，调任咨议参军。
English: Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, served as the leader of the army for a long time, and was transferred to join the army.

古文：上书陈便宜二十条，其一条言宜毁废塔寺，帝并优诏报答。
现代文：他上书陈述应办的事情二十多条，其中一条说应该毁废塔寺，明帝都用优奖的诏书作了答复。
English: He submitted a letter stating more than twenty things that should be done, one of which said that the waste pagoda and temple should be destroyed. Emperor Ming replied with an award-winning edict.

古文：建武二年，魏围锺离，欣泰爲军主，随崔慧景救援。
现代文：建武二年，魏军包围了钟离，张欣泰作为军中主将，跟随崔慧景前往救援。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, the Wei army surrounded Zhongli, and Zhang Xintai, as the commander of the army, followed Cui Huijing to the rescue.

古文：及魏军退，而邵阳洲上余兵万人，求输马五百匹假道，慧景欲断路攻之。
现代文：等魏军撤退，而邵阳洲上还有余下的兵士一万人，请求送马五百匹作代价给他们让出一条退路，崔慧景想断绝归路向他们进攻。
English: When the Wei army retreated, and there were still ten thousand soldiers left on Shaoyangzhou, he asked for five hundred horses to be sent as a price to give them a way out. Cui Huijing wanted to cut off the way back and attack them.

古文：欣泰说慧景曰： 归师勿遏，古人畏之，死地兵不可轻也。 
现代文：张欣泰劝告崔慧景说： 归乡的军队不要阻截他们，古人对此就很畏惧，身在死地的兵士不可轻视。 
English: Zhang Xintai advised Cui Huijing, "Don't let the returning troops intercept them. The ancients were very afraid of this. Soldiers who are on the verge of death should not be despised.

古文：慧景乃听过。
现代文：崔慧景于是便听任他们通过。
English: Cui Huijing then let them pass.

古文：时领军萧坦之亦援锺离，还啓明帝曰： 邵阳洲有死贼万人,慧景、欣泰放而不取 。
现代文：当时领军萧坦之也增援钟离，回去启奏明帝说： 邵阳洲有处于死地的贼军一万人，崔慧景、张欣泰把他们放走了，而不去攻取。 
English: At that time, Xiao Tanzhi, the leader of the army, also reinforced Zhong Li, and went back to Qisong Mingdi and said: There are ten thousand thieves in Shaoyangzhou, and Cui Huijing and Zhang Xintai let them go, instead of attacking.

古文：帝以此皆不加赏。
现代文：明帝因此对他们都不加奖赏。
English: Emperor Ming therefore did not reward them.

古文：四年，出爲永阳太守。
现代文：建武四年，出京担任永阳太守。
English: In the fourth year of Jianwu, he went to Beijing to serve as the Yongyang governor.

古文：永元初，还都。
现代文：永元初年，回到京城。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he returned to Beijing.

古文：崔慧景围城，欣泰入城守备。
现代文：崔慧景包围了城市，张欣泰入城守备。
English: Cui Huijing surrounded the city, Zhang Xintai entered the city to defend.

古文：事甯，除庐陵王安东司马。
现代文：事情平定后，任命为庐陵王安东司马。
English: After the matter was settled, he was appointed as the crown prince of Fuling Wang An Dong Sima.

古文：梁武帝起兵，东昏以欣泰爲雍州刺史。
现代文：梁武帝起兵，东昏侯以张欣泰为雍州刺史。
English: Emperor Liangwu raised an army, and Zhang Xintai, the Dongwu marquis, became the ruler of Yongzhou.

古文：欣泰与弟前始安内史欣时密谋结太子右率胡松、前南谯太守王灵秀、直合将军鸿选、含德主帅苟励、直后刘灵运等，并同契会。
现代文：张欣泰和弟弟前始安内史张欣时密谋联合太子右率胡松、前南谯太守王灵秀、直阁将军萧鸿选、含德主帅苟励、直后刘灵运等，一同会合相约。
English: Zhang Xintai and his younger brother Zhang Xinshi conspired to unite the Prince's right-hand man Hu Song, the former Southern Wei Empress Wang Lingxiu, the General Xiao Hongxuan, the German coach Gou Li, and Liu Lingyun immediately after the meeting.

古文：帝遣中书舍人冯元嗣监军救郢，茹法珍、梅虫儿及太子右率李居士、制局监杨明泰等十馀人相送中兴堂。
现代文：皇帝派中书舍人冯元嗣监军去救郢郡，茹法珍、梅虫儿和太子右率李居士、制局监杨明泰等十几人相送到中兴堂。
English: The emperor sent Feng Yuan Ci, the person in charge of the Central Library, to supervise the troops to save the county. More than a dozen people, including Ru Fazhen, Meizhou Er, Li Jushi, the right-hand man of the prince, and Yang Mingtai, the inspector of the Bureau of Engraving and Printing, were sent to Zhongxing Hall.

古文：欣泰等使人怀刀，于坐斫元嗣，硕坠果柈中。
现代文：张欣泰等派人怀中藏着刀，在座位上杀了冯元嗣，人头落在了果盘中。
English: Zhang Xintai and others sent someone with a knife hidden in his arms to kill Feng Yuanci on the seat, and the man's head fell into the fruit bowl.

古文：又斫明泰，破其腹。
现代文：又杀了杨明泰，剖开了他的肚子。
English: He also killed Yang Mingtai and cut open his stomach.

古文：虫儿伤数创，手指皆坠。
现代文：梅虫儿伤了好几处，手指都掉下来了。
English: Mei Zi Er was injured in several places, and his fingers fell off.

古文：居士踰墙得出，茹法珍亦散走还台。
现代文：李居士跳墙得以逃出，茹法珍也跑掉回到了台阁。
English: Li Kuishi was able to escape by jumping over the wall, and Ru Fazhen also ran away and returned to the pavilion.

古文：灵秀仍往石头迎建安王宝寅，率文武数百，唱警跸，至杜姥宅。
现代文：王灵秀便往石头城去迎接建安王萧宝寅，率领文武官员数百人，喝令开道，到了杜姥宅。
English: Wang Lingxiu then went to Stone Town to meet the Jianan King Xiao Baoying, led hundreds of civil and military officials, shouted instructions, and arrived at Du Baobao's house.

古文：欣泰初闻事发，驰马入宫，冀法珍等在外，城内处分，必尽见委，因行废立。
现代文：张欣泰刚听到事情发生时，驰马进宫，希望茹法珍等人在宫外，城内的处置，一定会全部委托给他，便可以进行废立。
English: As soon as Zhang Xintai heard of the incident, he galloped into the palace, hoping that the disposition of Zhu Fazhen and others outside the palace and inside the city would all be entrusted to him, and then he could carry out the demolition.

古文：既而法珍得返，处分关门上仗，不配欣泰兵，鸿选在殿内亦不敢发，城外衆寻散。
现代文：随后茹法珍得以返回，命令关上门拿上武器，不配给张欣泰军兵，萧鸿选在殿内也不敢发兵，城外的众人不久散去。
English: Subsequently, Ru Fazhen was able to return, ordered to close the door and take up arms. Zhang Xin did not deserve to be given Thai soldiers, Xiao Hongyan did not dare to send troops inside the hall, and the people outside the city soon dispersed.

古文：少日事觉，欣泰、胡松等皆伏诛。
现代文：不几日事情被发觉，张欣泰、胡松等人都被处死。
English: Within a few days of the incident being discovered, Zhang Xintai, Hu Song and others were all executed.

古文：欣泰少时，有人相其当得三公，而年裁三十。
现代文：张欣泰少年时期，有人给他相面，说他会得到三公的职位，而年龄才三十岁。
English: When Zhang Xintai was a boy, someone gave him a face-to-face meeting, saying that he would get the position of the Three Princes, and he was only thirty years old.

古文：后屋瓦坠伤额，又问相者，云： 无复公相，年寿更增，亦可得方伯耳。 
现代文：后来屋子上的瓦掉下来砸伤了额头，又去问那个相面的人，那人说： 不再是三公之相，年寿有了增加，也可以做个诸侯。 
English: Later, a tile on the house fell down and hurt the crane's forehead, and he went to ask the person who made the portrait. The person said, "It's no longer a portrait of the three princes. Now that I'm older, I can also be a prince."

古文：死时年三十六。
现代文：死的时候年龄三十六岁。
English: He was thirty-six years old when he died.

