古文：○真宗三四年春正月辛巳，诏执事汾阴懈怠者，罪勿原。
现代文：大中样符四年春正月初七，下诏负责经理祭祀汾阴事务懈怠者，罪不可赦。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of the junior high school year, the following edict was issued to the manager in charge of sacrificial rites and warding off evil spirits. Those who slack off in this matter will not be forgiven.

古文：乙酉，习祀后土仪。
现代文：十一日，操习祠祀后土仪式。
English: On the 11th day, the ancestral shrine ceremony and the post-ceremony ceremony began.

古文：丁亥，将祀汾阴，谒启圣院太宗神御殿、普安院元德皇后圣容。
现代文：十三日，将要祠祀汾阴，朝拜启圣院太宗神御殿、普安院元德皇后圣容。
English: On the 13th, the ancestral hall will be dedicated to Shanyin, and the Imperial Palace of the Taizong Emperor and the Empress Shanyong of the Yuande Emperor of the Pu'an Emperor will be dedicated.

古文：丙申，诏以六月六日天书再降日为天贶节。
现代文：二十二日，诏令以六月六日天书再降日为天贩节。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that June 6th would be the next day to fall from the heavens.

古文：丁酉，奉天书发京师。
现代文：二十三日，奉天书从京师出发。
English: On the 23rd, Bong Tianshu set off from Beijing.

古文：日上有黄气如匹素，五色云如盖，紫气翼仗。
现代文：太阳上有黄气像一匹绢，五色云像头盖，紫气翼仗。
English: On the sun, there is yellow gas like a stallion, five-colored clouds like a head cover, and purple gas wings.

古文：庚子，右仆射、判河阳张齐贤见于汜水顿。
现代文：二十六日，右仆射、判河阳张齐贤在祀水边朝见皇上。
English: On the 26th, Zhang Qixian, the right-hand man of Emperor Jian, visited the emperor at the water's edge.

古文：陈尧叟献白鹿。
现代文：陈尧雯贡白鹿。
English: Chen Yuwen tribute white deer.

古文：辛丑，陈幄殿于訾村，望拜诸陵。
现代文：二十七日，在警村设置宫殿帷幕，望拜诸陵。
English: On the 27th, a palace curtain was set up in the police village to pay homage to the tombs.

古文：甲辰，至慈涧顿，赐道傍耕民茶荈。
现代文：三十日，到慈涧停留。赐给道旁耕民茶霸。
English: On the 30th, he stopped at Cixi. He gave tea bags to the farmers along the road.

古文：二月戊申，赐扈驾诸军缗钱。
现代文：二月初四，赐给护驾各军络钱。
English: On the fourth day of the second month, he gave money to the soldiers.

古文：华州献芝草。
现代文：华州贡献芝草。
English: Huazhou's contribution is turfgrass.

古文：东京狱空。
现代文：东京监狱空。
English: Tokyo's prisons are empty.

古文：壬子，出潼关，渡渭河，遣近臣祠西岳。
现代文：初八，出撞关，渡渭河，派遣近臣祠祀西岳。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he went to the collision pass, crossed the Lugu River, and dispatched his close vassals to the ancestral hall to worship the West Mountain.

古文：癸丑，次河中府。
现代文：初九，到达河中府。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, I arrived in Hechu Prefecture.

古文：丁巳，黄云随天书辇。次宝鼎县奉祗宫。
现代文：十三日，黄云跟随天书车举，到达宝鼎县奉雇宫。
English: On the 13th day, Huang Yun followed the sky book cart to reach the Baoding County Fengye Palace.

古文：戊午，登后圃延庆亭。
现代文：十四日，登后圃延庆亭。
English: On the 14th, the Yangqing Pavilion was built.

古文：己未，瀵泉涌，有光如烛。
现代文：十五日，滇泉涌，有光如烛。
English: On the fifteenth day, there was light like a candle in the spring.

古文：辛酉，祀后土地祗。
现代文：十七日，祠祀后土地雇。
English: On the seventeenth day, after the ancestral shrine, the land was hired.

古文：是夜，月重轮，还奉祗宫，紫气四塞。幸开元寺，作大宁宫。
现代文：这天晚月亮重轮。回到奉雇宫，紫气塞满四方，到开元寺，作大宁宫。
English: That night, the moon was full. I went back to the Fengye Palace, which was filled with purple air, and went to the Kaiyuan Temple to make the Daining Palace.

古文：壬戌，甘州回鹘、蒲端、三麻兰、勿巡、蒲婆、大食国、吐蕃诸族来贡。
现代文：十八日，甘州回鹊、蒲端、三麻兰、勿巡、蒲婆、大食国、吐蕃各族来进贡。
English: On the 18th, tributes were brought from all ethnic groups in Ganzhou, including the Hui, Putang, Sanmalan, Besuan, Putuo, Daxi, and Tubo.

古文：大赦天下，常赦不原者咸赦除之。
现代文：大赦全国，常赦不可能赦免者都予以赦免。
English: The amnesty will cover the whole country, and those who cannot be pardoned will be pardoned.

古文：文武官并迁秩，该叙封欲回授祖父母者听。四品以上，迨事太祖、太宗潜藩或尝更边任家无食禄者，录其子孙。
现代文：文武官员升官晋爵，允许把自己的叙封回授给祖父母；四品以上，曾经侍奉太祖、太宗潜藩或曾经更换边任家没有食禄者，录用其子孙。
English: Civil and military officials were promoted to higher ranks and given peerages, and were allowed to give their titles back to their grandparents; those with four or more pins, who had served the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather's clan, or who had changed their families and had no stipend, were allowed to employ their children and grandchildren.

古文：建宝鼎县为庆成军。
现代文：建宝鼎县为庆成军。
English: Jianbaoding County is the center of the Qingcheng Army.

古文：建隆佐命及公王将相丘冢，所在致祭。
现代文：建隆时期的佐命功臣和公王将相丘家，所在各地致祭。
English: During the time of Emperor Jianlong, the great generals and princes of the Sui and Qiu dynasties made offerings to the deities in various regions.

古文：给西京分司官实奉三分之一。
现代文：给西京分司官员实棒三分之一。
English: Give the officials of the West Beijing Division a third of the real stick.

古文：令法官慎刑名，有情轻法重者以闻。
现代文：命令法官慎重刑名，有情轻法重者报告朝廷。
English: He ordered the judges to be cautious in handing down punishments, and to report to the imperial court those who had committed crimes.

古文：赐天下酺三日。
现代文：赐给天下臣民三天聚饮。
English: Give the subjects of the world three days to gather and drink.

古文：大宴群臣于穆清殿，赐父老酒食衣币。
现代文：在穆清殿大宴大臣，赐给父老酒食衣币。
English: At the grand banquet minister of Muqing Hall, he gave his father wine, food and clothing coins.

古文：作《汾阴配飨铭》、《河渎四海赞》。
现代文：作盼阴配享锻、河读四海赞。
English: Make the hope of yin with the enjoyment of forging, the river reading with the four seas.

古文：召草泽李渎、刘巽，渎以疾辞，授巽大理评事。
现代文：召用草泽平民李读、刘翼，李读因病推辞，授刘翼为大理评事。
English: Li Yue and Liu Ying, both citizens of Kusazawa, were appointed, but Li Yue resigned due to illness, and Liu Ying was appointed as a Dalian commentator.

古文：乙丑，观酺。
现代文：二十一日，观赏臣民聚饮。
English: On the twenty-first day, the watching subjects gathered to drink.

古文：加号西岳。
现代文：加号西岳。
English: The plus sign is Mount Seidake.

古文：诏葺夷齐祠。
现代文：诏令修缮夷、齐祠。
English: The edict was issued to renovate and improve the temple.

古文：丁卯，赐宁王元偓服带、鞍马有加。
现代文：二十三日，赐宁王赵元握很多服带鞍马。
English: On the 23rd, Zhao Yuanji, the King of Ning, gave him a lot of clothes, saddles and horses.

古文：乙巳，次华州，幸云台观。
现代文：二十五日，到达华州，到云台观。
English: On the 25th, I arrived in Huazhou and visited Yuntai.

古文：庚午，宴宣泽亭，紫云如龙，起岳上。
现代文：二十六日，宴宣泽亭，紫云如龙，从岳上升起。
English: On the 26th, at the banquet of Xuan Ze Pavilion, purple clouds, like dragons, rose from Mt.

古文：召见隐士郑隐、李宁，赐茶果、束帛。
现代文：召见隐士郑隐、李宁，赐给茶果束帛。
English: He summoned the hermits Zheng Yin and Li Ning, and gave them tea and fruit bunches.

古文：辛未，次阌乡县，召见道士柴又玄，问以无为之要。
现代文：二十七日，到达阖乡县，召见道士柴又玄，询问无为的要领。
English: On the 27th day, he arrived in Xiangxiang County and summoned the Taoist priest, Chai Yatai Xuan, to inquire about the essentials of doing nothing.

古文：壬申，宴虢州父老于湖城行宫。三月甲戌，次陕州，召草泽魏野，辞疾不至。
现代文：二十八日，在湖城行宫宴请貌州父老。三月初一，到达陕州，召用平民魏野，以病推辞不到任。
English: On the 28th, he went to the palace banquet in Hucheng to invite the elders of Maozhou. On the first day of March, he arrived in Shaanxi, summoned Wei Ye, a commoner, and did not resign due to illness.

古文：乙亥，赐运船卒时服。
现代文：初二，赐给运船士卒时装。
English: In the second year of junior high school, fashion was given to a shipping clerk.

古文：己卯，次西京。
现代文：初六，到达西京。
English: In my sixth year of junior high school, I arrived in Saikyo.

古文：庚辰，罢河北缘边工役。
现代文：初七，废除河北沿边工役。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the labor service along the border of Hebei Province was abolished.

古文：壬午，幸上清宫。
现代文：初九，到上清宫。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, I went to the Shangqing Palace.

古文：甲申，幸崇法院，移幸吕蒙正第，赐服御、金币。
现代文：十一日，到崇法院，又到吕蒙正府第，赐服御金币。
English: On the 11th day of the month, he went to the Chong Court and the Lv Mengzheng Mansion to present imperial gold coins.

古文：丙戌，大宴大明殿。
现代文：十三日，大宴大明殿。
English: On the 13th, a grand banquet was held at the Daming Palace.

古文：丁亥，诏葺所经历代帝王祠庙。
现代文：十四日，诏令修缮所经过地方历代帝王祠庙。
English: On the 14th, the Imperial Rescript Repair Station passed through the local emperors' ancestral temples.

古文：己丑，御五凤楼观酺。
现代文：十六日，到五凤楼观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the 16th, he went to Wu Feng Lou to watch his subjects gather for a drink.

古文：壬辰，诏朝陵自西京至巩县不举乐。
现代文：十九日，诏令朝陵从西京到巩县不用乐。
English: On the 19th, it was decreed that the imperial mausoleum would not be moved from West Beijing to Gongxian.

古文：癸巳，禁扈从人践田稼。
现代文：二十日，禁止启从践踏庄稼。
English: On the 20th, it was forbidden for practitioners to trample on crops.

古文：甲午，发西京。
现代文：二十一日，从西京出发。
English: On the 21st, they set off from Saikyo.

古文：丙申，谒安陵、永昌诸陵。
现代文：二十三日，朝拜安陵、永昌诸陵。
English: On the 23rd, they paid homage to the An Mausoleum and the Yongchang Mausoleums.

古文：壬寅，幸列子庙，表潘孝子墓。
现代文：二十九日，到列子庙，表潘孝子墓。
English: On the 29th, they went to Leshi Temple to see the tomb of Pan Xiaozi.

古文：夏四月甲辰朔，上至自汾阴。
现代文：夏四月初一，真宗从汾阴回到京城。
English: In the summer, on the first day of April, Shinso returned to Kyoto from Suyin.

古文：壬子，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：初九，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: At the age of nine, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to seek treatment.

古文：驸马都尉李遵勖责授均州团练副使。
现代文：驹马都尉李遵降授为均州团练副使。
English: Lieutenant Li Zun, the commander of the cavalry, was awarded the title of vice-envoy of the Junzhou regimental drill.

古文：峡路钤辖执为乱夷人王群体等，帝悯其异俗，免死配隶。
现代文：峡路铃辖俘获为乱夷人王群体等，真宗怜悯他们是少数民族，免死配隶。
English: Kyo-ro-ringu was captured as a group of rebel barbarian kings, etc. True Buddhism pities them because they are an ethnic minority, and they are spared death.

古文：丙辰，大宴含光殿。
现代文：十三日，大宴含光殿。
English: On the 13th, a grand banquet was held at the Hall of Illumination.

古文：己未，钱种放归终南。
现代文：十六日，为种放归终南山饯行。
English: On the 16th, he went to Nanshan for the final release of the seeds.

古文：甲子，王旦加右仆射，元佐为太尉，元偓进封相王。
现代文：二十一日，王旦加衔右仆射，赵元佐为太尉，赵元握进封相王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Tan was promoted to the rank of Right Footman, Zhao Yuan Zuo was promoted to the rank of Second Lieutenant, and Zhao Yuan Niu was promoted to the rank of Prince of Fuxi.

古文：乙丑，幸元偓宫视疾。
现代文：二十二日，到赵元握宫探病。
English: On the 22nd, he went to Zhao Yuanjigong for a check-up.

古文：葺尚书省。
现代文：修缮尚书省。
English: The renovation is still in its infancy.

古文：加王钦若吏部尚书，陈尧叟户部尚书，冯拯工部尚书。
现代文：加王钦若吏部尚书，陈尧雯为户部尚书，冯拯为工部尚书。
English: If Wang Qin is the secretary of the personnel department, Chen Yuwen is the secretary of the household department, and Feng Zheng is the secretary of the engineering department.

古文：丙寅，以张齐贤为左仆射。
现代文：二十三日，任命张齐贤为左仆射。
English: On the 23rd, Zhang Qixian was appointed as Zuofei.

古文：丁卯，许国公吕蒙正薨。
现代文：二十四日，许国公吕蒙正逝世。
English: On the 24th, Prince Xu Mengzheng passed away.

古文：五月丙子，加交阯郡王李公蕴同平章事。
现代文：五月初三，加交趾郡王李公蕴同平章事。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Wang Li Gongyun of Jiakoji County was arrested.

古文：癸未，庐、宿、泗等州麦自生。
现代文：初十，庐、宿、泅等州麦自生。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the year, wheat sprouted naturally in the states of Shandong, Shandong and Shandong.

古文：辛卯，幸北宅视德存疾。
现代文：十八日，到北宅探视赵德存病情。
English: On the 18th, he went to the North House to visit Zhao Decun's illness.

古文：京兆旱，诏振之。
现代文：京兆早灾，诏令贩济。
English: Jingzhao early disaster, the imperial edict to sell the economy.

古文：癸巳，诏州城置孔子庙。
现代文：二十日，诏令州城设置孔子庙。
English: On the 20th, the imperial edict set up a Confucius temple in the state capital.

古文：乙未，加上五岳帝号，作《奉神述》。
现代文：二十二日，加上五岳帝号，作捧神述。
English: On the 22nd, with the addition of the Emperor Wuyue's name, it became a story about the gods.

古文：丁酉，虑囚，死罪流徒降等，杖以下释之。辛丑，视德存疾。
现代文：二十四日，讯问记录囚犯罪状，死罪流徙以下降等治罪，杖刑以下释放，二十八日，探视赵德存病情。
English: On the 24th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner, the death penalty was reduced to a lesser punishment, and the cane was released, and on the 28th, the illness of Zhao Decun was visited.

古文：六月丙午，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of June, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：亳州二龙见禹祠。
现代文：毫州二龙出现在禹祠。
English: Maozhou two dragons appear in Yu Ancestral Hall.

古文：德存卒。
现代文：赵德存去世。
English: Zhao Dequn passed away.

古文：丙寅，遣使安抚江、淮南水灾，许便宜从事。
现代文：二十四日，派遣使臣安抚江、淮南水灾百姓，允许根据实际情况处理有关事情。
English: On the 24th, it dispatched envoys to appease the people affected by the floods in the Yangtze River and Huainan Province, and allowed them to deal with the relevant matters according to the actual situation.

古文：诏授交、甘等州、大食、蒲端、三麻兰、勿巡国奉使官。
现代文：诏令授给交州、甘州等州和大食、蒲端、三麻兰、勿巡国奉使官。
English: The imperial edict was issued to the envoys of Jiaozhou, Ganzhou and other provinces, as well as the envoys of Dashi, Putan, Sanmalan and Muzhu.

古文：秋七月壬申朔，除闽、浙、荆湖、广南岁丁钱四十五万。
现代文：秋七月初一，废除闽、浙、荆湖、广南地区每年丁钱四十五万。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, 450,000 dingqian will be abolished annually in the regions of Handan, Zhejiang, Jinghu and Guangnan.

古文：壬午，韩国、吴国、隋国长公主进封卫国、楚国、越国长公主。
现代文：十一日，韩国、吴国、隋国长公主进封为卫国、楚国、越国长公主。
English: On the 11th day, the eldest princesses of Korea, Wu, and Sui were enthroned as the eldest princesses of Wei, Chu, and Yue.

古文：镇、眉、昌等州地震。
现代文：镇、眉、昌等州发生地震。
English: Earthquakes occurred in Zhen, Meizhou, Chang and other provinces.

古文：己丑，诏先蠲滨、棣州水灾田租十之三，今所输七分更除其半。
现代文：十八日，诏令先免除滨、棣州水灾田租十分之三，现要输纳的七分又免除一半。
English: On the 18th, the imperial decree exempted three-tenths of the flood-stricken farmland rent in Bin and Ganzhou, and half of the seven-tenths now to be lost.

古文：丙申，江、洪、筠、袁江涨，没民田。
现代文：二十五日，江、洪、箔、袁州江水涨溢，淹没民田。
English: On the 25th, water from the Jiang, Hong, Foil and Yuanzhou Rivers overflowed and flooded people's fields.

古文：八月乙巳，太白昼见。
现代文：八月初四，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 4th of August, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：丙午，幸南宫视惟叙疾。
现代文：初五，到南宫探视赵惟叙病情。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he went to the Southern Palace to visit Zhao Weizong and explain his illness.

古文：诏除纁田租。
现代文：诏令免除田租税。
English: The imperial edict exempted the rice field tax.

古文：庚戌，曲宴诸王、宰相。
现代文：初九，曲宴诸王和宰相。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, a musical banquet was held for kings and prime ministers.

古文：癸丑，赐青州孤老茕独民帛。
现代文：十二日，赐给青州孤老百姓帛。
English: On the 12th, the Qingzhou lonely people were given the award.

古文：惟叙卒。
现代文：赵惟叙去世。
English: Zhao Weixiu passed away.

古文：丙辰，录唐长孙无忌、段秀实等孙，授官。
现代文：十五日，录用唐朝长孙无忌、段秀实等人的后人，授给官职。
English: On the fifteenth day, the descendants of the Tang Dynasty's eldest grandson, Wu Bo, Duan Xiusi and others were appointed to official positions.

古文：丁巳，诏文武官有言刑政得失、边防机事者并赐对。
现代文：十六日，诏令文武官员有言刑政得失、边防要事者都予赐对。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict ordered the civil and military officials to discuss the merits and demerits of the criminal policy and the important matters of border defense.

古文：癸亥，甘州回纥可汗夜落纥奉表诣阙。
现代文：二十二日，甘州回给可汗夜落给奉表到朝廷。
English: On the 22nd, Ganzhou was returned to the Khan, and a copy was sent to the imperial court at nightfall.

古文：乙丑，刻御制《大中祥符颂》于左承天祥符门。河决通利军，合御河，坏州城及伤田庐，遣使发粟振之。
现代文：二十四日，在左承天样符门雕刻御制大中样符颂。黄河在通利军决口，会合御河，冲坏州城和田庐，派遣使臣开仓发粟贩济灾民。
English: On the 24th, the Imperial Standard Song was engraved on the Zuosheng Heavenly Standard Gate. The Yellow River was at the mouth of the Tongli Army, meeting the Ohe River, rushing to the Badzhou City and Tianyi, and sending envoys to open warehouses to send millet traders to help the victims.

古文：九月丁丑，泾原钤辖曹玮言笼竿川熟户蕃部以闲田输官，请于要害地募兵以居，从之。
现代文：九月初七，径原铃辖曹玮报告说笼竿川熟户蕃部以闲田输官，请求在要害地区募兵占据，批准了这个请求。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, Cao Jie, the governor of Jingyuanling, reported that a well-known family in Guekang River had requested to recruit soldiers to occupy key areas, and the request was approved.

古文：戊子，幸太乙宫祈晴。
现代文：十八日，到太乙宫祈祷天晴。
English: On the 18th, I went to Taiyi Palace to pray for good weather.

古文：辛卯，向敏中等为五岳奉册使。
现代文：二十一日，向敏中等为五岳奉册使。
English: On the 21st, Xiang Min was appointed as the envoy to Wuyue.

古文：癸巳，御乾元楼观酺。
现代文：二十三日，到乾元楼观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Qianyuan Building to watch his subjects drinking together.

古文：冬十月戊申，御朝元殿发五岳册。
现代文：冬十月初九，到朝元殿颁布五岳册。
English: On the 9th day of the 10th month of winter, the Emperor went to the Asamoto-den to issue the Gogaku-kan.

古文：丁巳，定江、淮盐酒价，有司虑失岁课，帝曰： 苟便于民，何顾岁入也。 
现代文：十八日，确定江淮盐酒价格，有关部门担心损失岁课，真宗说： 如果有利于百姓，还顾虑什么财政收人呢广
English: On the 18th, the price of Jianghuai salt liquor was determined, and the relevant departments were worried about the loss of the year-old class. Zhenzong said: If it is beneficial to the people, what is the concern of the financial revenue?

古文：十一月庚午，占城国贡狮子。
现代文：十一月初一，占城国进贡狮子。
English: On the first day of the first month of November, the lion of tribute from the province of Chengdu went up.

古文：丙子，御试服勤词学、经明行修贡举人。
现代文：初七，亲自策试服勤词学、经明行修贡举人。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he personally organized the audition, diligently studied the words, and raised the tribute.

古文：十二月乙巳，诏楚、泰州潮害稼，复租。没溺人赐千钱、粟一斛。
现代文：十二月初六，下诏：楚州、泰州潮水损害庄稼，免除租税；淹死的人赐给一千钱、一解粟。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, the following edict was issued: the tides in Chuzhou and Taizhou damaged crops, and they were exempted from taxes; those who drowned were given a thousand coins and a poppy.

古文：是岁，西凉府、夏、丰、交州、甘州、诸溪峒蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，西凉府、夏州、丰州、交州、甘州各溪酮蛮来进贡。
English: In this year, Xiliangfu, Xiazhou, Fengzhou, Jiaozhou and Ganzhou all paid tribute.

古文：畿内蝗。
现代文：瓷内蝗灾。
English: The plague of locusts in porcelain.

古文：河北、陕西、剑南饥。
现代文：河北、陕西、剑南饥荒。
English: Hebei, Shaanxi and Jian'an suffered from famine.

古文：吉州、临江军江水溢，害民田舍。
现代文：吉州、临江军江水溢出河道，损害百姓田地和住宅。
English: In Jizhou and Linjiang, water overflowed from the Military River, damaging people's fields and homes.

古文：兖州虸蚄虫，不为灾。
现代文：充州幼蝗虫，没有造成灾害。
English: A swarm of young locusts in Chongzhou did not cause any disasters.

古文：五年正月乙亥，赐处州进士周启明粟帛。
现代文：大中样符五年正月初七，赐给处州进士周启明粟帛。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the junior high school sample, Zhou Qiming, a scholar from Wenzhou, was given a poppy seed.

古文：戊寅，雨木冰。
现代文：初十，降木冰。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the snow fell.

古文：壬午，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：十四日，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On the 14th, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：河决棣州。
现代文：黄河在棣州决口。
English: The Yellow River bursts its banks in Zhangzhou.

古文：二月庚戌，诏贡举人公罪听赎。
现代文：二月十二日，诏令贡举人公罪允许赎还。
English: On February 12th, the Imperial Edict on the Crime of Public Offering was issued, permitting the redemption.

古文：丙寅，诏官吏安抚滨、棣被水农民。
现代文：二十八日，诏令官吏安抚滨、棣州遭水灾农民。
English: On the 28th, officials were ordered to pacify farmers in Bin and Ganzhou who were affected by floods.

古文：三月己丑，御试礼部举人。
现代文：三月二十二日，亲自策试礼部举人。
English: On March 22nd, he personally organized the ceremony.

古文：丁未，峒酋田仕琼等贡溪布。
现代文：丁未日，酮酋田仕琼等进贡溪布。
English: Dingwei, Ketong, Hetian, Shiqiong and other tributary creeks.

古文：庚戌，王旦等并加特进、功臣。
现代文：庚戊日，王旦等都加衔特进、功臣。
English: Geng Er, Wang Dan and others were promoted to the ranks of special promotion and meritorious service.

古文：丁巳，免滨、棣民物入城市者税一年。
现代文：丁巳日，免除滨州、棣州百姓物品进人城市的一年租税。
English: On the same day, the goods of the people of Binzhou and Zhangzhou were exempted from the one-year tax on entering the city.

古文：夏四月戊申，以向敏中为平章事。
现代文：夏四月十一日，任命向敏中为平章事。
English: On April 11th, the appointment of Xiang Minzhong became a matter of public record.

古文：有司请违法贩茶者许同居首告，帝谓以利败俗非国体，不许。
现代文：有关部门请求违法贩茶者许同居者检举告发，真宗认为以利败俗不是国家的基本政策，没有批准。
English: The relevant departments requested the illegal tea sellers to allow the cohabitants to report and denounce. Shinshu believed that profiteering and debauchery were not the basic policy of the country, and did not approve.

古文：壬子，除通、泰、楚州盐亭户积负丁额课盐。
现代文：十五日，免除通州、泰州、楚州盐亭户拖欠的丁额盐税。
English: On the 15th, it exempted households of Tongzhou, Taizhou and Chuzhou salt pans from the arrears of the ding amount of salt tax.

古文：乙丑，枢密直学士边肃责授岳州团练副使。
现代文：二十八日，枢密直学士边肃降为岳州团练副使。
English: On the 28th, he was demoted to vice-envoy of the Yuezhou Rehearsal Team.

古文：五月辛未，江、淮、两浙旱，给占城稻种，教民种之。
现代文：五月初四，江、淮、两浙早灾，供给占城稻种，教百姓栽种。
English: On the fourth day of the fifth month, the early disasters of the Yangtze River, the Huai River and the two Zhejiang rivers provided the city with rice seeds and taught the people to grow them.

古文：戊寅，修仪刘氏进封德妃。
现代文：十一日，修仪刘氏进封德妃。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Liu Xiuyi was married to Defei Feng.

古文：丁亥，免棣州租十之三。
现代文：二十日，减免棣州租税十分之三。
English: On the 20th, the reduction and exemption of three-tenths of Zhangzhou tax increased.

古文：戊子，赐近臣金华殿所种麦。
现代文：二十一日，赐给近臣金华殿所种麦。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, he gave his close vassal, Jin Hwa-dono, the barley he had grown.

古文：六月庚申，赐杭州草泽林逋粟帛。
现代文：六月二十四日，赐给杭州隐士林通粟帛。
English: On June 24th, Lin Tong Maoguo, a hermit from Hangzhou, was given the award.

古文：壬戌，诏常参官举幕职、州县官充京官。
现代文：二十六日，诏令常参官推举幕职、州县官担任京官。
English: On the 26th, the Emperor issued an edict to promote the regular staff officers to the post of shogun, and the prefectural and county officials to the post of Beijing officials.

古文：癸亥，赐邵武军被水者钱粟。
现代文：二十七日，赐给邵武军遭水灾者钱粟。
English: On the 27th, Qianmao was given to the flood victims of the Shaowu army.

古文：秋七月戊辰，作保康门。
现代文：秋七月初二，作保康门。
English: On the 2nd day of the 7th month of the autumn, it was used as a public health gate.

古文：八月丙申朔，日有食之。
现代文：八月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of August, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁酉，禁周太祖葬冠剑地樵采。
现代文：初二，禁止在周太祖葬冠剑地打柴。
English: On the second day of junior high school, it is forbidden to collect firewood in the burial place of Zhou Taizu.

古文：戊戌，张齐贤为司空致仕。
现代文：初三，张齐贤为司空，退休。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhang Qixian became a steward and retired.

古文：甲辰，诏枢密直学士限置六员。
现代文：初九，诏令枢密直学士限置六员。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, the Imperial Edict limited the number of Privy Scholars to six.

古文：庚戌，淮南旱，减运河水灌民田，仍宽租限，州县不能存恤致民流亡者罪之。
现代文：十五日，淮南早灾，减运河水灌溉民田，并且放宽缴租期限；州县不能抚恤而导致百姓流亡者治罪。
English: On the 15th, the early disaster in Huainan reduced the canal water to irrigate the people's fields, and the rent payment period was relaxed; the state and county could not provide pensions, which led to the criminalization of the people's exiles.

古文：己未，作五岳观。
现代文：二十四日，建造五岳观。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the construction of the five mountains was completed.

古文：九月辛未，张齐贤入对。
现代文：九月初六，张齐贤到朝廷回答真宗的问题。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, Zhang Qixian went to the imperial court to answer questions about the True Sect.

古文：壬申，观新作延安桥。
现代文：初七，观看新建延安桥。
English: On the seventh day of the seventh month, watch the newly built Yan'an Bridge.

古文：幸大相国寺、上清宫。
现代文：到大相国寺、上清宫。
English: To the Dai-sokoku-ji Temple and the Jo-seonggung Palace.

古文：射于宜春苑。
现代文：在宜春苑射箭。
English: Archery practice at Yichun Garden.

古文：癸酉，徙澄海三指挥屯岭北州郡。
现代文：初八，把澄海三指挥迁屯到岭北州郡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the commander of the Third Division of the Chenghai Army was transferred to Lingbei County.

古文：戊子，王钦若、陈尧叟并为枢密使、同平章事，丁谓为户部侍郎、参知政事。
现代文：二十三日，王钦若、陈尧雯为枢密使、同平章事，丁谓为户部侍郎、参知政事。
English: On the 23rd, Wang Qinruo and Chen Yuwen were appointed as Privy Counsellors and Tongping, respectively, and Ding Zuo was appointed as Household Attendant and Sangchi, respectively.

古文：庚寅，幸故郓王、兖王宫。
现代文：二十五日，到已故军仔王、充王宫。
English: On the 25th, they went to the palace of the late King Junzi.

古文：冬十月戊午，延恩殿道场，帝瞻九天司命天尊降。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，延恩殿道场，真宗观看降在这里的九天司命天尊。
English: On the 24th day of October in winter, at the Yennden dojo, the True Sect watched the nine-day-old Bodhisattva of Divine Providence descend here.

古文：己未，大赦天下，赐致仕官全奉。
现代文：二十五日，大赦全国，赐给退休官员全棒。
English: On the 25th, a nationwide amnesty was granted to retired officials.

古文：辛酉，作《崇儒术论》，刻石国学。
现代文：二十七日，作偿儒术洛，刻石国学。
English: On the 27th, the performance of Confucianism in Luo, and the carving of a stone for the study of Chinese.

古文：闰月己巳，上圣祖尊号。
现代文：闰十月初五，上圣祖尊号。
English: On the 5th day of the 10th month of the leap year, the name of Shang Sheng Zu Zun was given.

古文：辛未，谢太庙。
现代文：初七，谢太庙。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, Xie Taimiao was born.

古文：壬申，立先天、降圣节，五日休沐、辍刑。
现代文：初八，确定先天节、降圣节，休假都为五日，停止刑罚。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, it was determined that the holidays for the Day of the Forerunner and the Day of the Fallen would both be five days, and the penalty was suspended.

古文：乙亥，诏上圣祖母懿号，加太庙六室尊谥。
现代文：十一日，诏令上圣祖母爵号，加太庙六室尊溢。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict was issued to confer the title of Grandmother on the saint, and the six rooms of the Cathay Temple were filled to overflowing.

古文：丙子，群臣上尊号曰崇文广武感天尊道应真佑德上圣钦明仁孝皇帝。
现代文：十二日，大臣上尊号为崇文广武感天尊道应真佑德上圣钦明仁孝皇帝。
English: On the 12th, the minister's superior honorific title was Chongwen Guangwu Kuan Tian Zun Dao Ying Zhenyu De Shang Shengqin Ming Renhiao Emperor.

古文：丁丑，出舒州所获瑞石，文曰 志公记 。
现代文：十三日，出示舒州所获瑞石，文为 志公记 。
English: On the 13th, he presented the precious stone obtained in Shuzhou, and the text was "Zhi Gong Ji."

古文：戊寅，建景灵宫太极观于寿丘。辛巳，建安军铸圣像。
现代文：十四日，在寿丘建造景灵宫、太极观。十七日，建安军铸造圣像。
English: On the 14th, the Jingling Palace and the Taiji Temple were built in Shouqiu. On the 17th, the Jianan Army cast the holy image.

古文：龙见云中。
现代文：云中显现龙。
English: A dragon appears in the clouds.

古文：戊子，御制配享乐章并二舞名，文曰《发祥流庆》，武曰《降真观德》。
现代文：二十四日，真宗制作配享乐章和二舞名称，文为泼样流贪，武为峰真观德。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Shinshu sect produced the pleasure movement and the names of the two dances, with the text "Paso" and "Ryuko," and "Wu" as the pinnacle of the Shinkundo.

古文：十一月丙申，亲祀玉皇于朝元殿。
现代文：十一月初三，在朝元殿亲自祠祀玉皇。
English: On the third day of the first month of November, he personally went to the ancestral hall to worship the Jade Emperor.

古文：甲辰，加王旦门下侍郎，向敏中中书侍郎，楚王元佐太师，相王元偓太傅，舒王元偁太保。
现代文：十一日，加王旦为门下侍郎，向敏中为中书侍郎，楚王赵元佐为太师，相王赵元侵为太傅，舒王赵元翱为太保。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Ga Wangdan was the under-secretary, Xiang Minzhong was the secretary, Chu Wang Zhao Yuan Zuo was the deacon, Si Wang Zhao Yuan Yao was the deacon, and Shu Wang Zhao Yuan Jie was the deacon.

古文：内外官加恩。
现代文：内外官员加恩。
English: Foreign and domestic officials flocked to Gahn.

古文：置玉清昭应宫使。以王旦为之。
现代文：设置玉清昭应宫使，任命王旦担任。
English: Tamakiyo Akira was set up as a palace envoy, and Wang Dan was appointed to the post.

古文：丁未，作《汴水发愿文》。
现代文：十四日，作沛水发愿办。
English: On the 14th, the water-saving campaign was launched.

古文：庚戌，诏允言朝参。
现代文：十七日，诏令赵允言上朝参见皇上。
English: On the 17th, Zhao Yun ordered the emperor to see the emperor.

古文：乙卯，罢献珍禽异兽。
现代文：二十二日，废除进献珍禽异兽。
English: On the 22nd, the introduction of rare birds and animals was abolished.

古文：十二月甲子，置景福殿使。
现代文：十二月初一，设置景福殿使。
English: On the first day of December, the Gyeongbokgung Palace Envoy was established.

古文：戊辰，作景灵宫。
现代文：初五，建造景灵宫。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the construction of Jingling Palace began.

古文：京师大寒，鬻官炭四十万，减市直之半以济贫民。
现代文：京师大寒，警卖官炭四十万，减市值一半接济贫民。
English: Beijing shivering in the cold, the police sold official charcoal for 400,000 yuan, reducing the market value by half to help the poor.

古文：壬申，改谥玄圣文宣王曰至圣文宣王。
现代文：初九，改溢玄圣文宣王为至圣文宣王。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, he changed his name from Xuanshengwen Xuanwang to Shianshengwen Xuanwang.

古文：戊寅，溪峒张文乔等八百人来朝。
现代文：十五日，溪酮张文乔等八百人来朝贡。
English: On the fifteenth day, eight hundred people came to pay tribute.

古文：己卯，知天雄军寇准言狱空，诏奖之。
现代文：十六日，天雄知军寇准报告说狱空，下诏奖赏。
English: On the 16th, Tianxiong Zhijun's army, Kojun, reported that the prison was empty, and issued a reward.

古文：乙酉，振泗州饥。
现代文：二十二日，贩济泅州饥民。
English: On the 22nd, he sold food to the starving people in Luzhou.

古文：丙戌，诏天庆等节日，民犯罪情轻者释之。
现代文：二十三日，下诏：天庆节等节日，百姓犯罪情节轻者释放。
English: On the 23rd, the following edict was issued: On festivals such as the Tianqing Festival, people who have committed minor crimes will be released.

古文：丁亥，立德妃刘氏为皇后。
现代文：二十四日，立德妃刘氏为皇后。
English: On the 24th, Empress Dowager Liu became empress.

古文：是岁，交州、甘州、西凉府、溪峒蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，交州、甘州、西凉府、溪酮蛮来进贡。
English: In this year, Jiaozhou, Ganzhou, Xiliangfu and Xi Ketong paid tribute.

古文：京城、河北、淮南饥，减直鬻谷以济流民。
现代文：京城、河北、淮南饥荒，减价卖谷以接济贫民。
English: Beijing, Hebei and Huainan suffered from famine, and sold grain at reduced prices to help the poor.

古文：六年春正月癸巳朔，上御朝元殿受朝。
现代文：大中样符六年春正月初一，真宗到朝元殿接受朝贺。
English: On the first day of the first month of the year in the spring of the sixth year, Shinso went to the Asamoto-den to receive morning greetings.

古文：司天监言五星同色。
现代文：司天监报告说五星同色。
English: The chief astronomer reported that all five stars were the same color.

古文：庚子，诏减配隶法十二条。
现代文：初八，诏令减去配隶法十二条。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month, the Imperial Edict minus 12 articles of the Law of the People's Republic of China came into effect.

古文：戊申，禁内臣出使预民政。
现代文：十六日，禁止内臣出使参决民政。
English: On the 16th, vassals were prohibited from sending envoys to participate in civil affairs.

古文：己酉，赐京师酺五日。
现代文：十七日，赐给京师臣民聚饮五天。
English: On the 17th, five days were given to the people of Beijing to gather and drink.

古文：辛亥，进封卫国、楚国、越国长公主三人为徐国、邠国、宿国。
现代文：十九日，进封卫国、楚国、越国长公主三人为徐国洲国、宿国长公主。
English: On the 19th, the three eldest princesses of Jinfeng Wei Guo, Chu Guo and Yue Guo were the eldest princesses of Xu Guozhou Guo and host Guo.

古文：庚申，置淑仪、淑容、顺仪、顺容、婉仪、婉容，在昭仪上。
现代文：二十八日，设置淑仪、淑容、顺仪、顺容、婉仪、婉容，位在昭仪之上。
English: On the 28th, Shu Yi, Shu Rong, Shun Yi, Shun Rong, Wan Yi, Wan Rong were set up on top of Zhaoyi.

古文：置司宫令，在尚宫上。
现代文：设置司宫令，位在尚宫之上。
English: It was set up by the Imperial Household Agency, and was located on top of the Imperial Palace.

古文：以婕妤杨氏为婉仪，贵人戴氏为修仪，美人曹氏为婕妤。
现代文：以婕好杨氏为婉仪，贵人戴氏为修仪，美人曹氏为婕好。
English: The good-looking Mr. Yang is called Wan Yi, the dignified Mr. Dai is called Xi Yi, and the beautiful Ms. Cao is called Xing Yi.

古文：辛酉，诏宗正寺以帝籍为玉牒。
现代文：二十九日，诏令宗正寺以帝籍为玉碟。
English: On the 29th, the Imperial edict ordered Sosei-ji Temple to use the imperial name as the gemstone plate.

古文：二月戊辰，观酺。
现代文：二月初六，观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the 6th day of the 2nd month, watch the subjects gather and drink.

古文：己亥，泰州言海陵草中生圣米，可济饥。
现代文：己亥日，泰州报告说海陵草中生出圣米，可以接济饥民。
English: On the day of the Chinese New Year, Taizhou reported that holy rice had sprung up in Hailing grass, which could be used to feed the hungry.

古文：三月丁未，诏沙门岛流人罪轻者徙近地。
现代文：三月十六日，诏令沙门岛流人罪轻者迁往内地。
English: On March 16th, it was decreed that those with minor offenses who had been exiled to Shamen Island would be relocated to the mainland.

古文：乙卯，建安军铸玉皇、圣祖、太祖、太宗尊像成，以丁谓为迎奉使。
现代文：二十四日，建安军铸造玉皇、圣祖、太祖、太宗尊像成功，以丁谓为迎奉使。
English: On the 24th, the Jianan Army successfully cast the statues of the Jade Emperor, the Holy Father, the Great Father, and the Great Patriarch, with Ding Zuo as the welcoming envoy.

古文：夏四月庚辰，诏淮南给饥民粥，麦登乃止。
现代文：夏四月十九日，诏令淮南供给饥民粥，麦丰收后停止。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, Huainan was ordered to supply porridge to the starving people, and it was stopped after the wheat harvest.

古文：壬午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十一日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 21st, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：癸未，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：二十二日，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On the 22nd, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：丙戌，诏诸州死罪可疑者详审以闻。
现代文：二十五日，诏令各州可疑的死刑案件详细审查后上报。
English: On the 25th, it ordered all states to report suspicious death penalty cases after a detailed review.

古文：五月壬辰，诏伎术官未升朝特赐绯紫者勿佩鱼。
现代文：五月初二，诏令未升朝的伎术官特赐绊紫者勿佩鱼。
English: On the 2nd day of the 5th month, the magistrate who did not ascend to the throne gave a special gift to the stumbling fish.

古文：甲辰，圣像至。
现代文：十四日，圣像迎到朝廷。
English: On the 14th, the icon arrived at the Imperial Court.

古文：丙午，诏圣像所经郡邑减系囚死罪，流以下释之。
现代文：十六日，下诏：圣像所经过郡邑减关押囚犯死罪，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: The Holy Image Center, after going through the counties and towns, reduced the death penalty for the prisoners and released them from the sentence of banishment.

古文：升建安军为真州。
现代文：升建安军为真州。
English: The Korean People's Army was promoted to Jeongju.

古文：乙卯，谒圣像，奉安于玉清宫。
现代文：二十五日，朝拜圣像，恭敬安置在玉清宫。
English: On the 25th, the holy image was venerated and respectfully placed in the Jade Emperor's Palace.

古文：丁巳，遣使奏告诸陵。
现代文：二十七日，派遣使臣奏告各陵。
English: On the 27th, envoys were dispatched to report to each mausoleum.

古文：六月壬戌，惟和卒。
现代文：六月初二，赵惟和去世。
English: On June 2, Zhao Weihe passed away.

古文：赵州黑龙见。
现代文：赵州黑龙出现。
English: Zhaozhou Heilongjiang appeared.

古文：丁卯，寿丘献紫茎金芝。
现代文：初七，寿丘进献紫茎金芝。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, Jukuoka presented purple stem ginseng.

古文：癸酉，保安军雨，河溢，兵民溺死，遣使振之。
现代文：十三日，保安军降雨，河水溢出，兵民淹死，派遣使臣予以贩济。
English: On the 13th, it rained, the river overflowed, soldiers and civilians drowned, and envoys were sent to help.

古文：丙子，诏翰林学士陈彭年等删定《三司编敕》。
现代文：十六日，诏令翰林学士陈彭年等删定三司编救。
English: On the 16th, Hanlin Scholar Chen Pengnian and others were ordered to be removed from the Third Division.

古文：丁丑，崇饰诸州黄帝祠庙。
现代文：十七日，崇饰各州黄帝祠庙。
English: On the 17th, the temples and shrines of the Yellow Emperor were decorated in all prefectures.

古文：秋七月癸巳，上清宫道场获龙于香合中。
现代文：秋七月初三，上清宫道场在香合中获得龙。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, the dojo of the Upper Qing Palace won the dragon in the incense ceremony.

古文：己亥，中书门下表请元德皇后祔庙。
现代文：初九，中书门下省奉表请求元德皇后附祭太庙。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, the provincial governor at the gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters sent a request to the Empress of the Yuan Dynasty to add a temple to the temple.

古文：庚子，行配祔礼。
现代文：初十，举行配撇礼。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a skipping ceremony is held.

古文：癸卯，诏天下勿税农器。
现代文：十三日，诏令全国不收农器税。
English: On the 13th, it was decreed that no agricultural tax would be collected nationwide.

古文：己酉，亳州官吏父老三千三百人诣阙请谒太清宫。
现代文：十九日，毫州官吏父老三千三百人到朝廷请求拜渴太清宫。
English: On the 19th, 3,300 officials from Maozhou went to the imperial court to request that they pay homage to the Taiching Palace.

古文：八月庚申，诏来春亲谒亳州太清宫。
现代文：八月初一，下诏来年春天亲自朝拜毫州太清宫。
English: On the first day of August, he announced that he would personally pay homage to the Mianzhou Taiqing Palace in the spring of next year.

古文：辛酉，以丁谓为奉祀经度制置使。
现代文：初二，以丁谓为奉祀经度制置使。
English: On the second day of the first month, the name of Ding Zui was used as the name of the longitude system.

古文：丙寅，禁太清宫五里内樵采。
现代文：初七，禁止太清宫五里内打柴采集。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, it is forbidden to collect firewood within five miles of the Taiqing Palace.

古文：庚午，加号太上老君混元上德皇帝。
现代文：十一日，加号太上老君混元上德皇帝。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the plus sign of "Taishang Laojun" was mixed with the former Emperor of Shangde.

古文：置礼仪院。
现代文：设置礼仪院。
English: A ceremonial hall was set up.

古文：九月庚寅，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：九月初一，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On the first day of September, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：丁酉，出玉宸殿种占城稻示百官。
现代文：初八，向百官出示玉哀殿所种占城稻。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, he showed the hundred officials the rice grown in the city of Tamaya.

古文：冬十月辛酉，元德皇后祔庙。
现代文：冬十月初三，元德皇后迁附太庙。
English: On the 3rd day of the 10th month of winter, the Empress of the Yuan Dynasty moved to the Grand Temple.

古文：甲子，亳州太清宫枯桧再生。
现代文：初六，毫州太清宫枯桧再生。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the withered reeds of the Taichung Palace in Maozhou were reborn.

古文：真源县菽麦再实。
现代文：真源县寂麦再次结实。
English: Shingen County's jiaomei is growing strong again.

古文：癸酉，谒玉清昭应宫。
现代文：十五日，朝拜玉清昭应宫。
English: On the 15th, the morning worship of the Jade Emperor Zhao Ying Palace began.

古文：己卯，作《步虚词》付道门。
现代文：二十一日，作涉虚讨付道门。
English: On the twenty-first day, it was time to discuss the matter.

古文：壬午，降圣节赐会如先天节仪。
现代文：二十四日，降圣节赐会像先天节仪礼一样。
English: On the 24th, the blessing of the Day of Atonement will take place in the same way as the ceremony of the Day of Atonement.

古文：十一月辛亥，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：十一月二十三日，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On November 23rd, he went to Zhao Yuancheng's palace to check on his health.

古文：癸丑，赐御史台《九经》、诸史。
现代文：二十五日，赐给御史台九经、诸史。
English: On the 25th day of the month, Goshidai was given the Nine Classics and the Histories.

古文：甲寅，判亳州丁谓献芝草三万七千本。
现代文：二十六日，判毫州丁谓进献芝草三万七千株。
English: On the 26th, it was decided that 37,000 seedlings of maozhou dingzai should be donated.

古文：乙卯，龟兹遣使来贡。
现代文：二十七日，龟兹派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 27th, Kuez sent an envoy to collect the tribute.

古文：十二月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：十二月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of December, a solar eclipse.

古文：庚申，泾原钤辖曹玮言发兵讨原州界拨藏族违命者，捕获甚众。
现代文：初三，径源铃辖曹玮报告说发兵攻讨原州界拨藏族违命者，捕获甚多。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Cao Qi, the governor of Jingyuanling, reported that he had sent troops to crack down on the Tibetan violators of the original state boundary, and they had captured a lot.

古文：回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：回鹊派遣使臣来进贡。
English: He sent envoys to Elu to collect the tribute.

古文：己巳，天书扶侍使赵安仁等上奉天书车辂、鼓吹、仪仗。
现代文：十二日，天书扶持使赵安仁等上奉天书车格、鼓吹、仪仗。
English: On the twelfth day, the heavenly book support made Zhao Anren and others go up to worship the heavenly book, preach, and fight.

古文：壬申，献天书于朝元殿，遂告玉清昭应宫及太庙。
现代文：十五日，在朝元殿献天书，于是祭告玉清昭应宫和太庙。
English: On the fifteenth day, a heavenly book was dedicated in the Chogen-den, and then the Imperial Palace and Imperial Temple were dedicated to the Jade Emperor.

古文：乙亥，幸开宝寺、上清宫。
现代文：十八日，到开宝寺、上清宫。
English: On the 18th, they went to Kaiboji Temple and the Upper Qing Palace.

古文：己卯，幸太一宫。
现代文：二十二日，到太一宫。
English: On the 22nd, I went to Taichung.

古文：戎、泸蛮寇平。
现代文：戎、沪蛮寇平定。
English: The Ebis and the barbarian hordes of Shanghai were defeated.

古文：是岁，西蕃、高州蛮、龟兹来贡。
现代文：这一年，西蕃、高州蛮、龟兹来进贡。
English: In this year, Xidi, Gaozhou, and Guizi came to pay tribute.

古文：七年春正月辛丑，虑囚。
现代文：大中样符七年春正月十四日，记录讯问囚犯罪状。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the seventh year of the Spring Festival, the record of the interrogation prisoner's criminal status.

古文：壬寅，车驾奉天书发京师。
现代文：十五日，真宗一行奉天书从京师出发。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Shinshu sect set out from the capital, Kyoto.

古文：丙午，次奉元宫。
现代文：十九日，到达奉元宫。
English: On the 19th, they arrived at Fengyuan Palace.

古文：判亳州丁谓献白鹿一，芝九万五千本。
现代文：判毫州丁谓进献一只白鹿、九万五千株芝草。
English: Zhanmaozhou Ding said that he would donate a white deer and 95,000 plants of turfgrass.

古文：戊申，王旦上混元上德皇帝册宝。
现代文：二十一日，王旦呈上混元上德皇帝册宝。
English: On the twenty-first day, Wang Dan presented the treasure of the Shang Dynasty to the German Emperor.

古文：己酉，朝谒太清宫。
现代文：二十二日，朝拜太清宫。
English: On the 22nd, they paid homage to the Taiqing Palace.

古文：天书升辂，雨雪倏霁，法驾继进，佳气弥望。
现代文：天书升格，雨雪突然停止，天气放晴，车驾继续前进，佳气弥望。
English: The weather forecast is upgraded, the rain and snow suddenly stop, the weather clears up, the car continues to move forward, and the good weather is expected.

古文：是夜，月重轮，幸先天观、广灵洞霄宫。
现代文：这天夜里，月亮重轮，到先天观、广灵洞霄宫。
English: On this night, the moon revolves around the celestial body and arrives at Guangling Cave.

古文：曲赦亳州及车驾所经流以下罪。
现代文：大赦毫州和车驾所经过地区流刑以下罪犯。
English: The amnesty will cover criminals who have been sentenced to exile in any prefecture or region.

古文：升亳州为集庆军节度，减岁赋十之二。
现代文：升毫州为集庆军节度，减岁赋十分之二。
English: Shengmaozhou is the top military festival, with a reduction of two-tenths of a year.

古文：改奉元宫为明道宫。
现代文：改奉元宫为明道宫。
English: Bongwon Palace was changed to Myeongdong Palace.

古文：太史言含誉星见。
现代文：太史报告说含誉星出现。
English: Taishi reported the appearance of a famous star.

古文：庚戌，御均庆楼，赐酺三日。
现代文：二十三日，到均庆楼，赐臣民聚饮三天。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Junqing Building and gave his subjects three days to gather and drink.

古文：壬子，诏所过顿递侵民田者，给复二年。
现代文：二十五日，诏令所经过地区侵害民田者，免除赋役二年。
English: On the 25th, those who violated people's fields in the areas where the edict passed were exempted from two years of forced labor.

古文：丙辰，建南京归德殿，赦境内及京畿车驾所过流以下罪。
现代文：二十九日，建造南京归德殿，赦免境内和京瓷车驾所过地区流刑以下罪犯。
English: On the 29th, the Nanjing Kuide Hall was built, and the criminals who were sentenced to exile or less were pardoned within the territory and in the area where the Kyocera car was driven.

古文：追赠太祖幕府元勋僚旧，录常参官逮事者并进秩，欲授子孙者听。
现代文：追赠太祖幕府元勋旧僚，录用侍棒的常参官，并升官晋爵，想授给子孙者也允许。
English: It is also permitted to bestow posthumously on the descendants of the great-grandfather the shogunate's original order of merit for former colleagues, the appointment of a regular staff officer with a baton, and promotion to a peerage.

古文：作鸿庆宫。
现代文：建造鸿庆宫。
English: Construction of Hongqing Palace.

古文：二月戊午，次襄邑县，皇子来朝。
现代文：二月初二，到达襄邑县，皇子来朝见。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, after arriving at Yangyi County, the prince came to see the emperor.

古文：庚申，夏州赵德明遣使诣行阙朝贡。
现代文：初四，夏州赵德明派遣使臣到行宫朝贡。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Xiazhou Zhao Deming sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：辛酉，至自亳州。
现代文：初五，真宗从毫州回到朝廷。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Shinso returned to the imperial court from Maizhou.

古文：丙寅，诏天地坛非执事辄临者斩。
现代文：初十，诏令非执事人员经常到天地坛者斩杀。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, non-deacons were ordered to kill those who often went to the Temple of Heaven and Earth.

古文：辛未，飨太庙。
现代文：十五日，祭享太庙。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the temple is dedicated.

古文：壬申，恭谢天地，大赦天下。
现代文：十六日，恭谢天地，大赦全国。
English: On the 16th, thanks to heaven and earth, a nationwide amnesty was declared.

古文：乙亥，益州铸大铁钱。
现代文：十九日，益州铸造大铁钱。
English: On the 19th, large iron coins were minted in Yizhou.

古文：三月，城淯井监。
现代文：三月，在清井监建城。
English: In March, in Kiyoi Jiancheng.

古文：癸己，雄州甲仗库火。
现代文：初八，雄州甲仗库发生火灾。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, a fire broke out in the A-battalion depot in Xiongzhou.

古文：甲午，制加宰相王旦、向敏中、楚王元佐、相王元偓、舒王元偁、荣王元俨枢密使、同平章事。
现代文：初九，制书加宰相王旦、向敏中、楚王赵元佐、相王赵元握、舒王赵元翱、荣王赵元俨为枢密使、同平章事。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Prime Minister Wang Dan, Xiang Minzhong, Chu Wang Zhao Yuan Zuo, Si Wang Zhao Yuan Jia, Shu Wang Zhao Yuan Qi, and Rong Wang Zhao Yuan Qi were appointed as Privy Envoys.

古文：乙未，宴翔鸾阁。
现代文：初十，在翔莺阁举行宴会。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, a banquet was held at Xiangyu Pavilion.

古文：辛丑，发粟振仪州饥。
现代文：十六日，开仓贩济仪州饥民。
English: On the 16th, the opening of the warehouse brought the starving people of Jiizhou.

古文：复诸州观察使兼刺史。
现代文：恢复各州观察使兼刺史。
English: Restoration of the States' Observers and Historians.

古文：甲辰，幸元偁宫视疾。
现代文：十九日，到赵元翱宫探病。
English: On the 19th, he went to Zhao Yuanzhang's palace to check on his health.

古文：丁未，封皇子庆国公。
现代文：二十二日，封皇子为庆国公。
English: On the 22nd, the crown prince was enthroned as the Prince of Qing.

古文：青州民赵嵩百一十岁，诏存问之。
现代文：青州百姓赵篙一百一十岁，诏令慰问他。
English: Zhao Qi, a 110-year-old citizen of Qingzhou, was comforted by the imperial edict.

古文：夏四月丁巳，西凉府厮铎督遣使来贡。
现代文：夏四月初二，西凉府厮铎督派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, the governor of Xiliangfu sent envoys to collect tribute.

古文：己未，赐淮南诸州民租十之二。
现代文：初四，免除淮南各州百姓租税十分之二。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the people of Huainan were exempted from two-tenths of the tax.

古文：癸亥，河南府狱空，有鸠巢其户，生二雏。
现代文：初八，河南府狱空，上面有鸿巢，生下二只小鸿。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, in the prison of Henan, there was a rooster's nest, and two roosters were born.

古文：甲子，以归义军留后曹贤顺为归义军节度使。
现代文：初九，任命归义军留后曹贤为归义军节度使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Cao Xian was appointed as the special envoy of the Gui-yi Army after the Gui-yi Army left.

古文：丙子，舒王元偁薨。
现代文：二十一日，舒王赵元翱逝世。
English: On the twenty-first day, Shu Wang Zhao Yuanqi passed away.

古文：五月壬辰，王旦为兖州景灵宫朝修使，乙未，又为天书刻玉使。
现代文：五月初七，王旦为充州景灵宫朝修使，初十，又命令为天书刻玉使。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the year, Wang Dan was appointed as the morning attendant of the Jingling Palace in Chenzhou, and on the tenth day of the month, he was also ordered to be the messenger of the heavenly book.

古文：泾原言叶施族大首领艳般率族归顺。
现代文：径源报告说叶施族大首领艳般率领族人归顺朝廷。
English: The source reported that Ye Shi's great leader Yan led his people to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：六月乙卯，禁文字斥用黄帝名号故事。
现代文：六月初一，禁止文字直接使用黄帝名号故事。
English: On the first day of June, the direct use of the name of the Yellow Emperor was prohibited.

古文：丙辰，眉州通判董荣受赇鬻狱，长安知县王文龟酗酒滥刑，并投荒裔。
现代文：初二，眉州通判董荣接受贿赂警狱，长安知县王文龟酗酒滥刑，都被发配到边远地区。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Meizhou Judge Dong Rong was sent to a police prison for accepting bribes, and Wang Wenqiu of Chang'an County, Chang'an County, was sentenced for alcohol abuse. They were all sent to remote areas.

古文：戊午，戒州县官吏决罪逾法。
现代文：初四，告诫州县官吏超过法律规定处决罪案。
English: On the fourth day of the new year, state and county officials were admonished for executing criminals in excess of the law.

古文：壬申，封婉仪杨氏为淑妃。
现代文：十八日，封婉仪杨氏为淑妃。
English: On the 18th, Ms. Yang was given the title of "Lady Su" (淑妃).

古文：乙亥，枢密使王钦若罢为吏部尚书，陈尧叟为户部尚书。
现代文：二十一日，枢密使王钦若罢为吏部尚书，陈尧雯为户部尚书。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Privy Councilor Wang Qinruo became the secretary of the personnel department, and Chen Yuwen became the secretary of the household department.

古文：以寇准为枢密使、同平章事。
现代文：任命寇准为枢密使、同平章事。
English: The appointment of Qozun as a privy envoy was a matter of equal importance.

古文：丙子，诏棣州经水，流民归业者给复三年。
现代文：二十二日，下诏：棣州经受水灾，流民归业者免除赋役三年。
English: On the 22nd, the following edict was issued: Zhangzhou suffered from floods, and the displaced persons who returned to work were exempted from forced labor for three years.

古文：秋七月辛丑，交州李公蕴败鹤柘蛮，献捷。
现代文：秋七月十七日，交州李公蕴打败鹤拓蛮，献上捷报。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Jiaozhou Li Gongyun defeated He Tuoban and presented the winning report.

古文：癸卯，太白昼见。
现代文：十九日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 23rd, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：甲辰，以同州观察使王嗣宗、内客省使曹利用并为枢密副使。
现代文：二十日，任命同州观察使王嗣宗、内客省使曹利用为枢密副使。
English: On the 20th, Wang Shizong, the Tongzhou Observation Envoy, and Cao Lian, the Neigak Provincial Envoy, were appointed as Privy Vice-Envoys.

古文：八月甲寅，置景灵宫使，以向敏中为之。
现代文：八月初一，设置景灵宫使，任命向敏中担任。
English: On the first day of August, the Jingling Palace Envoy was set up, and Xiang Min was appointed to the post.

古文：乙卯，除江、淮、两浙被灾民租。
现代文：初二，免除江、淮、两浙遭灾百姓租税。
English: On the second day of the first month, the people who suffered from the disasters in Jiangsu, Huai and Zhejiang were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：丁巳，杨光习坐擅领兵出砦，又诬军中谋杀司马张从吉，配隶邓州。
现代文：初四，杨光习因擅自率兵出寨，又诬军中谋杀司马张从吉，被配隶邓州。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Yang Guangxi was assigned to Denzhou for leading soldiers out of the village without permission, and for the murder of Sima Zhang Congji in the guerrilla army.

古文：乙丑，给河东沿边将士皮裘毡袜。
现代文：十二日，供给河东沿边将士皮制衣裤。
English: On the 12th, the supply of clothing trousers made of sheepskin along the edge of the Hedong River.

古文：甲戌，河决澶州。
现代文：二十一日，黄河在擅州决口。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Yellow River broke through the Gongzhou Pass.

古文：丁丑，命内臣奉安太祖、太宗圣像于鸿庆宫。
现代文：二十四日，命令内臣恭敬安置太祖、太宗圣像于鸿庆宫。
English: On the 24th, he ordered the courtiers to respectfully place the holy statues of the Grand Patriarch and the Grand Patriarch in the Hongqing Palace.

古文：辛巳，诏岭南戍兵代还日，人给装钱五百。
现代文：二十八日，诏令岭南戍兵代换回来时每人供给五百络行装钱。
English: On the 28th, the emperor ordered Lingnan to provide 500 rupees per person to the soldiers when they came back.

古文：九月丙戌，含誉星再见。
现代文：九月初三，含誉星再次显现。
English: On the third day of September, the famous star reappeared.

古文：辛卯，尊上玉皇圣号曰太上开天执符御历含真体道玉皇大天帝。
现代文：初八，尊上玉皇圣号为太上开天执符御历含真体道玉皇大天帝。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the sacred name of the venerated Jade Emperor is Daijo Kaiten Hifu Goryo Shintai Daitendai.

古文：戊戌，御试服勤词学、经明行修举人。
现代文：十五日，亲自策试服勤词学、经明行修举人。
English: On the fifteenth day, he personally organized the audition, diligently studied the words, followed the rules and promoted the candidates.

古文：辛丑，幸五岳观。
现代文：十八日，到五岳观。
English: On the 18th, I went to see Mt.

古文：冬十一月乙酉，滨州河溢。
现代文：冬十一月初三，滨州黄河水溢出河道。
English: On the third day of winter in early November, the Yellow River in Binzhou overflowed its course.

古文：玉清昭应宫成，诏减诸路系囚罪流以下一等。
现代文：玉清昭应宫建成，诏令减轻各路关押囚犯流刑以下一等。
English: In response to the completion of the Jade Emperor's Palace, the Emperor issued a decree to reduce the number of prisoners held in various ways to one class below the banishment.

古文：己丑，加王旦司空、修宫使。
现代文：初七，加王旦司空，担任修宫使。
English: In the seventh year of junior high school, he was assigned to work as a palace repairman.

古文：壬辰，御乾元门观酺。
现代文：初十，到乾元门观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he went to the Qianyuan Gate to watch his subjects gather and drink.

古文：十二月癸丑朔，日当食不亏。
现代文：十二月初一，日食，但没有亏蚀现象产生。
English: On the first day of December, there was a solar eclipse, but no erosion occurred.

古文：丙辰，诏王钦若等五人各举京朝、幕职、州县官详练刑典、晓时务、任边寄者二人。
现代文：初四，诏令王钦若等五人各自推举京朝官、幕职和州县官熟习刑典、通晓时务、堪任边事者二人。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the emperor ordered Wang Qinru and five others to each nominate two officials for the Beijing imperial court, the shogunate, and the prefectural and county governments who were familiar with the Criminal Law, knowledgeable about current affairs, and capable of handling border affairs.

古文：丁巳，诏川、峡、闽、广转运、提点刑狱官察属吏贪墨惨刻者。
现代文：初五，诏令川峡闽广转运使、提点刑狱官考察检举所属官吏贪赃刻剥者。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the prison officials of the Sichuan-Qingdao-Guangzhou Corridor should be transferred and investigated, and the corrupt officials should be prosecuted.

古文：己未，作元符观。
现代文：初七，建造元符观。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Fu Guan, the founder of the temple, died.

古文：庚申，契丹使萧延宁等辞归国。
现代文：初八，契丹使臣萧延宁等告辞回国。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Khitan envoy Xiao Yanning and others left for home.

古文：辛酉，加楚王元佐尚书令，相王元偓太尉，荣王元俨兼中书令，忠武军节度使魏咸信同平章事，余并进秩。
现代文：初九，加楚王赵元佐尚书令，相王赵元握太尉，荣王赵元俨兼中书令，忠武军节度使魏咸信同平章事，其余官吏都升官晋爵。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Zhao Yuanzu, the king of Jiachu, was promoted to Shang Shuling, Zhao Yuanjie, the king of Xiang, was promoted to Tai Lian, Zhao Yuanxuan, the king of Rong, was promoted to Zhong Shuling, Wei Xianxin, the commander of the Loyalist Army, was promoted to the same rank as Wei Xianxin, and the rest of the officials were promoted to the peerage.

古文：泾原路请筑笼竿城。
现代文：径源路请求修筑笼竿城。
English: Jianyuan Road requests the construction of a cage-and-pole city.

古文：是岁，夏州、西凉府、高丽、女真来贡。
现代文：这一年，夏州、西凉府、高丽、女真来进贡。
English: This year, Xiazhou, Xiliangfu, Goryeo, and Nianzhen came to pay tribute.

古文：淮南、江、浙饥，除其租。
现代文：淮南、江浙饥荒，免除租税。
English: Huainan and Jiangsu and Zhejiang suffered from famine and were exempted from taxes.

古文：天下户九百五万五千七百二十九，口二千一百九十七万六千九百六十五。
现代文：全国户数为九百零五万五千七百二十九，口数为二千一百九十七万六千九百六十五。
English: The number of households nationwide was 9,055,729 and the number of households was 21,976,965.

古文：八年春正月壬午朔，谒玉清昭应宫，奉表告尊上玉皇大天帝圣号，奉安刻玉天书于宝符阁，还御崇德殿受贺，赦天下，非十恶、枉法赃及己杀人者咸除之。
现代文：大中样符八年春正月初一，朝拜玉清昭应宫，奉表告尊上玉皇大天帝圣号，恭敬安置刻玉天书于宝符阁，回来到崇德殿接受朝贺，赦免全国，除十恶、枉法贪赃和已经杀人外都赦免罪行。
English: On the first day of the first month of the eighth year of the Spring Festival, Daizhong Sampu paid homage to the Jade Emperor, and was presented with the sacred name of the Jade Emperor, and respectfully placed the engraved Jade Book of Heaven in the treasure cabinet, and returned to the Chongde Hall to receive morning greetings, and pardoned the whole country, and pardoned all crimes except the ten evils, illegal corruption, and murder.

古文：文武官满三岁者，有司考课以闻。
现代文：文武官员任满三年者有关部门考核上报。
English: Civil and military officials who have been in office for three years will be reported to the relevant departments for assessment.

古文：乙酉，诏环州缘边卒人赐薪水钱。
现代文：初四，诏令赐给环州沿边士卒薪水钱。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, the edict gave the salary money to the border guards along the Huanzhou.

古文：庚寅，置清卫二指挥奉宫观。
现代文：初九，设置清卫二指挥奉事宫观。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, the command of Qing Wei II was set up to serve the palace view.

古文：乙未，皇女入道。
现代文：十四日，皇女人道。
English: On the 14th, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：戊戌，徙棣州城。
现代文：十七日，迁徙棣州城。
English: On the 17th, they moved to Zhangzhou City.

古文：庚戌，诏王钦若等举供奉官至殿直有武干者一人。
现代文：二十九日，诏令王钦若等推举供奉官至殿直有武勇才干者一人。
English: On the 29th, the emperor ordered Wang Qin to nominate one brave and talented person to serve as an official.

古文：二月，泗州周宪百五岁，诏赐束帛。
现代文：二月，泅州周宪一百零五岁，下诏赐给束帛。
English: In February, when Zhangzhou Zhou Xian was 105 years old, he issued the following edict.

古文：甲寅，宗正寺火。
现代文：初三，宗正寺发生火灾。
English: On the third day of the new year, a fire broke out at Sojo-ji Temple.

古文：丙辰，唃厮啰、立遵贡名马。
现代文：初五，角厮缪、李立遵进贡名马。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Kakuno Shomu and Li Li Zun entered the famous tribute horse.

古文：丙寅，以元佐为天策上将军、兴元牧，赐剑履上殿，诏书不名。
现代文：十五日，以赵元佐为天策上将军、兴元牧，赐剑履上殿，诏书不称姓名。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Zhao Yuan Zuo was appointed as the supreme commander and Xing Yuan Mu was given a sword to carry into the palace. The edict did not mention any names.

古文：丁卯，遣使巡抚淮、浙路。
现代文：十六日，派遣使臣巡抚淮浙路。
English: On the 16th, an envoy was dispatched to patrol Huai Zhe Road.

古文：癸酉，祈雨。
现代文：二十二日，祈祷降雨。
English: On the 22nd, pray for rain.

古文：丙子，诏进士六举、诸科九举者许奏名。
现代文：二十五日，诏令进士六次举试、各科九次举试者，允许奏名。
English: On the 25th, it was decreed that candidates who had passed six examinations and nine examinations in each subject would be allowed to have their names read out.

古文：庚辰，大雨。
现代文：二十九日，大雨。
English: On the 29th, it rained heavily.

古文：三月乙酉，幸元偓宫视疾。
现代文：三月初五，到赵元握宫探病。
English: On the fifth day of March, he went to Zhao Yuan's palace to check on his health.

古文：戊戌，宴宗室，射于苑中。
现代文：十八日，宴饮宗室，在苑中射箭。
English: On the 18th, a banquet was held in the family room, followed by archery in the garden.

古文：壬寅，御试礼部贡举人。
现代文：二十二日，亲自策试礼部贡举人。
English: On the 22nd, he personally organized a tribute from the Ministry of Rehearsal.

古文：夏四月辛酉，赐宰相《五臣论》。
现代文：夏四月十二日，赐给宰相瓦臣你。
English: On the twelfth day of the fourth month of the summer, the chancellor, Vasen, was given to you.

古文：壬戌，以寇准为武胜军节度使、同平章事，王钦若、陈尧叟并为枢密使、同平章事。
现代文：十三日，任命寇准为武胜军节度使、同平章事，王钦若、陈尧雯都为枢密使、同平章事。
English: On the 13th, Kuo Jun was appointed as the festival envoy of the victorious army, and Wang Qin Ruo and Chen Yuwen were both appointed as the privy envoys and the same rank.

古文：戊辰，德彝卒。
现代文：十九日，赵德彝去世。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Deyu passed away.

古文：壬申，荣王元俨宫火，延及殿阁内库。
现代文：二十三日，荣王元俨宫发生火灾，波及殿阁内库。
English: On the 23rd, a fire broke out in the Rongwang Yuancheng Palace, affecting the inner storeroom of the palace.

古文：癸酉，诏求直言。
现代文：二十四日，诏求直言。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the emperor asked for a direct speech.

古文：命丁谓为大内修葺使。
现代文：命令丁谓为皇宫修缮使。
English: He ordered Ding Zuo to be the palace repairman.

古文：戊寅，王膺坐应诏言事乖缪贬。
现代文：二十九日，王膺因应诏言事错谬被贬降。
English: On the 29th, Wang Hui was demoted for responding to the edict incorrectly.

古文：五月壬午，荣王元俨罢武信军节度使，降封端王。
现代文：五月初三，荣王赵元俨罢武信军节度使，降封为端王。
English: On the third day of the fifth month, the Rongwang, Zhao Yuanxuan, dismissed the Wuxin Army's envoy to the festival, and was demoted to the title of Huanwang.

古文：庚寅，荧惑犯轩辕。
现代文：十一日，荧惑星侵犯轩辕星。
English: On the 11th day, the fluorescent planet encroached on the star.

古文：壬辰，废内侍省黄门。禁金饰服器。
现代文：十三日，废除内侍省黄门，禁止用金装饰服装器皿。
English: On the 13th, the Huangmen of Naishi Province was abolished, and the use of gold to decorate clothing utensils and dishes was prohibited.

古文：庚子，放宫人一百八十四人。
现代文：二十一日，释放宫人一百八十四人。
English: On the twenty-first day, one hundred and eighty-four prisoners were released.

古文：六月己酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月初一，日食。
English: On the first day of June, a solar eclipse.

古文：辛未，诏诸州以《御制七条》刻石。
现代文：二十三日，诏令各州将谁口制七条刻石。
English: On the 23rd, each state was ordered to carve seven pieces of stone.

古文：乙亥，惟忠卒。
现代文：二十七日，赵惟忠去世。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Weizhong passed away.

古文：闰月己卯，赦天下。
现代文：闰六月初一，赦免全国。
English: On the first day of the leap month of June, amnesty will be granted to the whole country.

古文：庚辰，王钦若上《彤管懿范》。
现代文：初二，王钦若呈上彤管爵范。
English: On the second day of the junior high school, Wang Qin would have been given the title of grand marshal.

古文：七月丙辰，以诸州牛疫免牛税一年。
现代文：七月初九，因各州牛疫免除牛税一年。
English: At the beginning of July, all states were exempted from cattle tax for one year due to rinderpest.

古文：戊午，王嗣宗为大同军节度使。
现代文：十一日，王嗣宗为大同军节度使。
English: On the 11th day of the month, Wang Shizong was appointed as the festival envoy of the Datong Army.

古文：丙寅，幸相王元偓新宫。
现代文：十九日，到相王赵元握新宫。
English: On the 19th, he went to the new palace of Zhao Yuanjie, the king of physiognomy.

古文：以宫城火，诏诸王徙宫于外。
现代文：因宫城火灾，诏令各王迁徙到宫外。
English: Due to the fire in Miyagi, the Emperor ordered the emperors to move outside the palace.

古文：丙子，幸瑞圣园观稼，宴射于水心殿。
现代文：二十九日，到瑞圣园观看庄稼，在水心殿设宴射箭。
English: On the 29th, they went to Rui Sheng Yuan to see the crops, and had a banquet and archery in the Water Spirit Hall.

古文：八月己卯，大理少卿阎允恭、开封判官韩允坐枉狱除名。
现代文：八月初二，大理少卿阎允恭、开封判官韩允因肆意处理狱案被除名。
English: On the second day of the month of August, Yan Yunqong, the Dalian minor secretary, and Han Yun, the Kaifeng judge, were removed from the list for their wanton handling of the prison case.

古文：戊戌，诏京兆、河中府、陕、同、华、虢等州贷贫民麦种。
现代文：二十一日，诏令京兆河中府、陕同华貌等州贷给贫民麦种。
English: On the 21st, it was decreed that Beijing, Shandong, Hebei and other provinces should lend wheat seeds to the poor.

古文：九月，注辇国贡土物、珍珠衫帽。
现代文：九月，注辈国进贡土特产和珍珠衫帽。
English: In September, local special products and pearl shirts and hats from Chuseong Province were donated.

古文：甲寅，唃厮啰聚众数十万，请讨平夏人以自效。
现代文：初七，确厮缪聚众数十万，请求讨平夏人效命朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, hundreds of thousands of people gathered to request that Xia people be purged to serve the imperial court.

古文：丁卯，宴宗室，射于后苑。
现代文：二十日，宴请宗室，在后苑射箭。
English: On the 20th, he held a banquet for his father-in-law and went archery in the backyard.

古文：己巳，赐注辇使袍服、牲酒。
现代文：二十二日，赐给注举使臣袍服和牲酒。
English: On the twenty-second day, he gave the envoys a robe and a bottle of wine.

古文：冬十月乙巳，王钦若上《圣祖先天纪》。
现代文：冬十月二十八日，王钦若呈上圣祖先天重己。
English: On the 28th day of the 10th month of winter, Wang Qin Ruo presented his sacred ancestor Tian Rongji.

古文：戊申，回鹘呵罗等来贡。
现代文：三十一日，回鹊呵罗等来进贡。
English: On the thirty-first day, people came from as far away as Koro to pay tribute.

古文：十一月辛酉，相王元偓加兼中书令，端王元俨进封彭王。
现代文：十一月十五日，相王赵元握加兼中书令，端王赵元俨进封为彭王。
English: On November 15th, King Zhao Yuanzhong and King Zhao Yuanzhong signed the imperial edict, and King Zhao Yuanzhong was enthroned as King Peng.

古文：癸亥，高丽使同东女真来贡。
现代文：十七日，高丽使臣同东女真一起来进贡。
English: On the 17th, the Korean envoys came to pay tribute together with Dong Yeonjin.

古文：十二月戊寅，皇子冠。
现代文：十二月初二，皇子长大成人。
English: On the second day of December, the prince became an adult.

古文：丁亥，侍禁杨承吉使西蕃还，以地理图进。
现代文：十一日，侍禁杨承吉出使西蕃回国，进献地理图。
English: On the 11th day, Yang Chengji sent an envoy to Xidi to return to China and present a geographical map.

古文：辛卯，皇子庆国公封寿春郡王。
现代文：十五日，皇子庆国公封为寿春郡王。
English: On the 15th, Prince Qingguo was officially crowned King of Shuchun County.

古文：是岁，占城、宗哥族及西蕃首领来贡。
现代文：这一年，占城、宗哥族和西蕃首领来进贡。
English: This year, the leaders of Zhancheng, Zongxiao and Xidi came to pay tribute.

古文：坊州大雨，河溢。
现代文：坊州大雨，河水溢出河道。
English: Heavy rain in Fangzhou, the river overflowed the river.

古文：陕西饥。
现代文：陕西饥荒。
English: Famine in Shaanxi.

古文：九年春正月丙辰，置会灵观使，以丁谓为之，加刑部尚书。
现代文：大中样符九年春正月十一日，设置会灵观使，任命丁谓担任，加衔刑部尚书。
English: On the eleventh day of the first month of the ninth year of the Spring, the high school set up a spiritual outlook commission, appointed Ding Zuo to serve, and raised the title of the criminal department to Shang Shu.

古文：壬申，以张士逊、崔遵度为寿春郡王友。
现代文：二十七日，以张士逊、崔遵度为寿春郡王友。
English: On the 27th, Zhang Shisong and Cui Zundu were appointed as Wangyou of Shuchun County.

古文：二月丁亥，王旦等上《两朝国史》。
现代文：二月十二日，王旦等呈上两朝国史。
English: On February 12, Wang Dan and others presented the history of the two dynasties.

古文：戊子，加旦守司徒，修史官以下进秩、赐物有差。
现代文：十三日，加王旦守司徒，修史官以下进升赐物不等。
English: On the thirteenth day, Wangtan guards and scholars were added, and the promotion gifts ranged from the historian to the next.

古文：甲午，诏以皇子就学之所名资善堂。
现代文：十九日，下诏把皇子就学之地定名为资善堂。
English: On the 19th, the next imperial edict named the place where the prince studied as Shizen-do.

古文：延州蕃部饥，贷以边谷。
现代文：延州蕃部饥荒，贷给边谷。
English: Famine in Yanzhou's Hebei Province, loaned to Edge Valley.

古文：三月丙午，除雷州无名商税钱。
现代文：三月初二，免除雷州无名商税钱。
English: On the second day of March, the nameless merchants in Leizhou were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：秦州曹玮抚捍蕃境得宜，诏嘉之。
现代文：秦州曹玮安抚保卫蕃境恰到好处，下诏嘉奖。
English: Qinzhou Cao Wei's pacification and protection of the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region was just right, and the award was issued.

古文：己酉，王钦若上《宝文统录》。
现代文：初五，王钦若呈上宝文统录。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Wang Qinrao presented a list of valuable articles.

古文：辛酉，以西蕃宗哥族李立遵为保顺军节度使。
现代文：十七日，任命西蕃宗哥族李立遵为保顺军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Li Lizun, a brother of Xidi Zong, was appointed as the festival envoy of the Bo Shun Army.

古文：壬戌，诏举官必择廉能。
现代文：十八日，诏令举荐官员必须选择清廉能干者。
English: On the 18th, the imperial edict recommended that officials must choose a clean and competent person.

古文：癸亥，置修玉牒官。
现代文：十九日，设置修撰玉碟官。
English: On the 19th, it set up an office to revise jade plates.

古文：乙丑，著作佐郎高清以赃贿仗脊，配沙门岛。
现代文：二十一日，著作佐郎高清因贪赃受贿杖脊，流配沙门岛。
English: On the twenty-first day, the author, Saro Takakiyo, received a bribe for corruption, and was exiled to Shaman Island.

古文：夏四月庚辰，周伯星见。
现代文：夏四月初七，周伯星出现。
English: In the summer, on the seventh day of the fourth month, Zhou Bo Xing appeared.

古文：丙申，赐天下酺。
现代文：二十三日，赐给全国臣民聚饮。
English: On the 23rd, it was given to all the country's subjects to drink together.

古文：振延州蕃族饥。
现代文：贩济延州蕃部饥民。
English: Vendors give food to starving people in Yanbian County.

古文：庚子，幸陈尧叟第视疾。
现代文：二十七日，到陈尧雯府第探病。
English: On the 27th, he went to Chen Yuwen's home to check on her.

古文：壬寅，以唐相元稹七世孙为台州司马。
现代文：初十，到南宫探视赵惟宪病情。二十九日，以唐朝宰相元棋七世孙为台州司马。
English: On the first day of the tenth month, he went to the Southern Palace to visit Zhao Weixian's illness. On the 29th day, the seventh-generation grandson of the Tang Dynasty Prime Minister Yuan Qi was named Taizhou Sima.

古文：五月乙巳，邠宁环庆部署王守斌言夏州蕃骑千五百来寇庆州，内属蕃部击走之。
现代文：五月初二，宁环庆部署王守斌报告说夏州一千五百藩骑来攻打庆州，内属藩部打退他们。
English: On the second day of the first month of May, Wang Shubin, who was stationed in Ninghu and Qinghai, reported that 1,500 clansmen from Xiazhou rode to attack Qingzhou, and the internal clan department drove them back.

古文：癸丑，幸南宫视惟宪疾。
现代文：初十，到南宫探视赵惟宪病情。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he went to the Southern Palace to visit Zhao Weixian's illness.

古文：甲寅，惟宪卒。
现代文：十一日，赵惟宪去世。
English: On the 11th day, Zhao Weixian passed away.

古文：乙卯，毛尸等三族蕃官冯移埋率属来归，诏抚之。
现代文：十二日，毛尸等三族藩官冯移埋率领属众来归顺，下诏安抚他们。
English: On the twelfth day, the three clan officials, including Mao Guo and Feng Yibing, led their subordinates to surrender, and issued an edict to pacify them.

古文：丙辰，诏天下系囚死罪减等，流以下释之。
现代文：十三日，诏令全国关押囚犯死罪减一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 13th, the emperor decreed that the death penalty for prisoners nationwide would be reduced by one grade, and those sentenced to banishment or less would be released.

古文：丁巳，向敏中为宫观庆成使。
现代文：十四日，向敏中为宫观庆成使。
English: On the 14th, Xiang Min Middle School sent an envoy for Gongguan Qingcheng.

古文：甲子，左天厩草场火。
现代文：二十一日，左天厩草场发生火灾。
English: On the twenty-first day, a fire broke out in Zuotianmao's pasture.

古文：庚午，太白昼见。
现代文：二十七日，太白星白天出现。
English: On the 26th, a very white star appeared during the day.

古文：六月戊寅，幸会灵观，宴祝禧殿，癸未，京畿蝗。
现代文：六月初六，到会灵观。在祝禧殿宴饮。十一日，京瓷发生蝗灾。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the

古文：秋七月，抚水蛮寇宜州，广南西路请便宜掩击，许之。
现代文：秋七月，抚水蛮攻打宜州，广南西路请求相机自主出击，真宗答应了这个请求。
English: In the autumn and July, when Fushui brutally attacked Yizhou, Guangnan West Road requested the camera to attack independently, and Zhenzong agreed to this request.

古文：丁未，增筑京师新城。
现代文：初五，增筑京师新城。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the construction of the Beijing New Town was increased.

古文：丙辰，开封府祥符县蝗附草死者数里。
现代文：十四日，开封府样符县蝗虫附草而死者数里。
English: On the 14th, the death toll from the locusts in Sampu County, Kaifeng went up by several miles.

古文：戊午，停京城工役。
现代文：十六日，停罢京城工役。
English: On the 16th, the strike of workers in the capital ended.

古文：癸亥，以畿内蝗，下诏戒郡县。
现代文：二十一日，因瓷内发生蝗灾下诏告诫郡县。
English: On the twenty-first day, due to the locusts in the porcelain, the county was warned.

古文：甲子，诏京城禁乐一月。
现代文：二十二日，下诏京城禁止用乐一月。
English: On the 22nd, Beijing issued a decree banning the use of music in January.

古文：丁卯，幸太乙宫、天清寺。
现代文：二十五日，到太乙宫和天清寺。
English: On the 25th, they went to the Taiyi Palace and the Tianqing Temple.

古文：八月壬申，知秦州曹玮言伏羌砦蕃部厮鸡波与宗哥族连结为乱，以兵夷其族帐。
现代文：八月初一，秦州知州曹玮报告说伏羌寨蕃部厮鸡波与宗哥族联合叛乱，率兵平其族帐。
English: On the first day of August, Cao Wei of Chizhou, Qin Province, reported that Fuzhaizhai and Zongge jointly rebelled and led troops to settle their accounts.

古文：丙子，令江、淮发运司留上供米五十万以备饥年。
现代文：初五，命令江、淮发运司留下供米五十万备作饥年之用。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, he ordered the Jiang and Huai Shipping Departments to reserve 500,000 tons of rice for the famine.

古文：磁、华、瀛、博等州蝗，不为灾。
现代文：磁、华、赢、博等州蝗虫没有造成灾害。
English: The locusts in the provinces of Hebei, Hebei, Fujian and Hebei did not cause any disasters.

古文：丙戌，制玉皇圣号册文。
现代文：十五日，制玉帛圣号册文。
English: On the fifteenth day, the production of the Jade Urn Holy Sign Book began.

古文：以陈尧叟为右仆射。
现代文：任命陈尧雯为右仆射。
English: He appointed Chen Yuwen as his right-hand man.

古文：戊子，以旱，罢秋宴。
现代文：十七日，因早灾废除秋宴。
English: On the 17th, the autumn banquet was cancelled due to the early disaster.

古文：壬辰，群臣请受尊号册宝，表五上，从之。
现代文：二十一日，大臣请求接受尊号册宝，五次上表，答应了。
English: On the twenty-first day, the minister requested to accept the honorary title of treasure, five times the table, and agreed.

古文：九月癸卯，雄、霸河溢。
现代文：九月初二，雄州、霸州河水溢出河道。
English: On the second day of September, the Xiongzhou and Bazhou rivers overflowed their channels.

古文：甲辰，以丁谓为平江军节度使。
现代文：初三，任命丁谓为平江军节度使。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, Ding Zuo was appointed as the envoy of the Pingjiang Army.

古文：丙午，陈彭年、王曾、张知白并参知政事。
现代文：初五，陈彭年、王曾、张知白并为参知政事。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Chen Pengnian, Wang Zeng, and Zhang Zhibai were also appointed to participate in the political affairs.

古文：丁未，曹玮言宗哥唃厮啰、蕃部马波叱腊、鱼角蝉等寇伏羌砦，击败之，斩首千余级。
现代文：初六，曹玮报告说宗哥族确厮锣、蕃部马波叱腊鱼角蝉等攻打伏羌寨，击退他们，斩首一千多级。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Cao Pi reported that the Zong Brother Tribe, including the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Zou Brother Tribe, the Z

古文：庚戌，以不雨，罢重阳宴。
现代文：初九，因没降雨废除重阳宴。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Chongyang banquet was cancelled due to lack of rain.

古文：利州水，漂栈阁。
现代文：利州水漂栈阁。
English: Lizhou Water Drift Inn Pavilion.

古文：甲寅，雨。督诸路捕蝗。
现代文：十三日，降雨，督促各路捕捉蝗虫。
English: On the 13th, it rained, urging everyone to catch locusts.

古文：丁巳，诏以旱蝗得雨，宜务稼省事及罢诸营造。
现代文：十六日，诏令以早灾蝗灾得雨，庆该趁机搞好农田管理，废罢营造工程。
English: On the 16th, the imperial edict said that the locusts were an early disaster, and it should be celebrated to take advantage of the opportunity to do a good job in farmland management, and the construction project should be scrapped.

古文：戊午，禁诸路贡瑞物。
现代文：十七日，禁止各路进贡瑞物。
English: On the 17th, the entry of tributes from all directions was prohibited.

古文：戊辰，青州飞蝗赴海死，积海岸百余里。
现代文：二十七日，青州飞蝗飞到海中死去，堆积海边达百余里。
English: On the 27th, the Qingzhou flying locusts flew into the sea and died, piling up more than a hundred miles along the coast.

古文：己巳，诏民有出私廪振贫乏者，三千石至八千石，第授助教、文学、上佐之秩。
现代文：二十八日，下诏：百姓中有出私仓粮食贩济贫民者，三千石至八千石分别授为助教、文学、上佐之职。
English: On the 28th, the following edict was issued: Those among the common people who sold grain from their private storehouses to help the poor were awarded the positions of teaching assistant, literature, and colonel from 3,000 koku to 8,000 koku respectively.

古文：冬十月己卯，王钦若表上《翊圣保德真君传》。
现代文：冬十月初八，王钦若奉表呈上翎圣保德真君伶。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, Wang Qinruo was presented with a scroll inscribed with the words "Saint Bao De Zhen Jun."

古文：壬申，诏冯拯等各举殿直以上武干者一人。
现代文：壬申日，诏令冯拯等分别举荐殿直以上有武才者一人。
English: On the day of Jinshin, the emperor ordered Feng Zheng and others to separately recommend one person with military talent above the immediate family.

古文：壬辰，置直龙图阁。
现代文：二十一日，设置直龙图阁。
English: On the 21st, the Zhilong Pavilion was set up.

古文：十一月，会灵观甘露降。
现代文：十一月，会灵观降甘露。
English: In November, the nectar of spiritual contemplation falls.

古文：乙巳，诏河、陕诸路州简禁军五百人。
现代文：初五，下诏河、陕各路州精简禁军五百人。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, 500 soldiers of the Forbidden Army were reduced to a minimum in each of the provinces of Zhejiang and Shaanxi.

古文：丁未，河西节度使石普坐妄言灾异，除名流贺州。
现代文：初七，河西节度使石普因妄言灾异，除名流放贺州。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the Hexi Festival caused Shipu to be expelled and banished to Hezhou because of his false speech.

古文：丁卯，以唐裴度孙坦为郑州助教。
现代文：二十七日，任命唐朝裴度孙裴坦为郑州助教。
English: On the 27th, Tang Dynasty Pei Du Sun Pei Tan was appointed as Zhengzhou assistant professor.

古文：是岁，西蕃宗哥族、邛部山后蛮、夏州、甘州来贡。
现代文：这一年，西蕃宗哥族、邓部山后蛮、夏州、甘州来进贡。
English: In this year, the Xishuizong brothers, Dengbeshan Houman, Xiazhou and Ganzhou came to pay tribute.

古文：诸州有陨霜害稼及水灾者，遣使振恤，除其租。
现代文：各州有降霜损害庄稼和水灾者，派遣使臣贩济抚恤，免除租税。
English: In each state, those who suffered frost damage to crops and floods were sent as envoys to provide subsidies and exempt from taxes.

古文：天禧元年春正月辛丑朔，改元。
现代文：天禧元年春正月初一，改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Spring, the Yuan was changed.

古文：诣玉清昭应宫荐献，上玉皇大天帝宝册、衮服。
现代文：到玉清昭应宫敬献食物，上玉皇大天帝宝册、礼服。
English: They came to the Jade Emperor's Palace to offer food, the Emperor's treasure book, and ceremonial dress.

古文：壬寅，上圣祖宝册。
现代文：初二，上圣祖宝册。
English: On the second day of the school year, the book of the holy ancestors begins.

古文：己酉，上太庙谥册。
现代文：初九，上太庙溢册。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the record of the temple is complete.

古文：庚戌，享六室。
现代文：初十，祭享太庙六室。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the sixth room of the Great Temple was dedicated.

古文：辛亥，谢天地于南郊，大赦，御天安殿受册号。
现代文：十一日，在南郊谢天地，大赦，到天安殿接受册号。
English: On the 11th, in the southern suburbs, he thanked heaven and earth for the amnesty, and went to Tian'anmen Square to receive his record number.

古文：乙卯，宰相读天书于天安殿，遂幸玉清昭应宫，作《钦承宝训述》示群臣。
现代文：十五日，宰相在天安殿读天书，于是到玉清昭应宫，做钦承宝训述给大臣们看。
English: On the fifteenth day, the prime minister read the heavenly book in the Tian'an Hall, and then went to the Jade Qing Zhaoying Palace to give the ministers a lecture.

古文：壬戌，诏以四月旦日为天祥节。
现代文：二十二日，诏令以四月初一为天样节。
English: On the 22nd, it was decreed that the first day of April would be celebrated as the Day of Heaven.

古文：丙寅，命王旦为兖州太极观奉上册宝使。
现代文：二十六日，命令王旦为充州太极观奉上册宝使。
English: On the 26th, Wang Dan was ordered to be a registered envoy for the Taijiquan in Chenzhou.

古文：二月庚午，诏振灾，发州郡常平仓。
现代文：二月初一，诏令贩济灾民，调拨州郡常平仓粮食。
English: On the first day of February, the prefectural government ordered vendors to help the victims of the disaster, allocating grain from the county's Changping warehouse.

古文：壬申，御正阳门观酺。
现代文：初三，到正阳门观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the third day of the first month, go to the Zhengyang Gate to watch the subjects gather and drink.

古文：丁丑，置谏官、御史各六员，每月一员奏事，有急务听非时入对。
现代文：初八，设置谏官、御史各六名，每月由一人奏事，有急事允许随时人对。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, six eunuchs and six magistrates were set up, with one person reporting for duty each month. People were allowed to leave at any time for urgent matters.

古文：戊寅，王旦加太保、中书侍郎、平章事，向敏中加吏部尚书。
现代文：初九，王旦加为太保、中书侍郎、平章事，向敏中加为吏部尚书。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Wang Danzhong was promoted to Taiho, Chusho-zirang, and Taira-zhangji, and Xiangmin was promoted to Ribe-shangshu.

古文：楚王元佐领雍州牧；相王元偓加尚书令兼中书令，进封徐王；彭王元俨加太保；寿春郡王祯兼中书令。
现代文：楚王赵元佐领雍州牧；相王元握加为尚书令兼中书令，进封为徐王；彭王元俨加为太保；寿春郡王祯兼中书令。
English: King Chu Zhao Yuan Zu led Yongzhou Mu; King Si Wang Yuan Jie added Shang Shuling and Zhong Shuling, and was crowned as King Xu; King Peng Wang Yuan Jie added Tai Bao; King Shuchun County Wang Jie and Zhong Shuling.

古文：王钦若加右仆射，赵德明加太傅，中外官并加恩。
现代文：王钦若加为右仆射，赵德明加为太傅，中外官员都得到恩赏。
English: Wang Qinruo was awarded the title of Right Footman, Zhao Deming was awarded the title of Taifu, and both Chinese and foreign officials were rewarded.

古文：辛巳，考课京朝官改秩及考者。
现代文：十二日，考核京朝官改秩和满任者。
English: On the 12th, the evaluation of the Beijing imperial court officials changed the rank and those who completed their duties.

古文：壬午，定宗室子授官之制。
现代文：十三日，确定宗室子授官制度。
English: On the 13th, the system of conferring the title of grand chamberlain was established.

古文：庚寅，进封李公蕴为南平王。
现代文：二十一日，进封李公蕴为南平王。
English: On the twenty-first day, Li Gongyun was crowned King of Nanping.

古文：秦州神武军破宗歌族、马波叱腊等于野吴谷，多获人马。
现代文：秦州神武军在野吴谷打败宗哥族和马波叱腊等，获得很多人马。
English: The Qin State Shenwu Army defeated the Zongge tribe and the Ma Bo people in the wild Wugu Valley, gaining a lot of horses.

古文：己亥，陈彭年卒。
现代文：二十日，陈彭年去世。
English: On the 20th, Chen Pengnian passed away.

古文：三月辛丑，以不雨，祷于四海。
现代文：三月初二，因不降雨祈祷四海。
English: On the second day of the third month, because there was no rain, the four seas rose in prayer.

古文：壬寅，不雨，罢上巳宴。
现代文：初三，没降雨，罢除上巳宴。
English: On the third day of the junior high school, there was no rain, so the banquet was cancelled.

古文：庚申，免潮州逋盐三百七十万有奇。
现代文：二十一日，免除潮州拖欠盐税三百七十多万。
English: On the 21st, more than 3.7 million salt tax arrears in Chaozhou were exempted.

古文：辛酉，令作淖糜济怀、卫流民。
现代文：二十二日，命令制作淖糜接济怀、卫流民。
English: On the 22nd, an order was issued to build a bridge to connect Jiaozhuai and Wei.

古文：夏四月庚辰，陈尧叟卒。
现代文：夏四月十二日，陈尧雯去世。
English: On April 12th, Chen Yuxuan passed away.

古文：戊子，邵州野竹生实，以食饥。
现代文：二十日，召体州野竹结实，可以充饥。
English: On the 20th, the wild bamboo in Zhaozhou was strong enough to satisfy their hunger.

古文：五月戊戌，诏所在安恤流民。
现代文：五月初一，诏令所在各地安抚流民。
English: On the first day of May, the Imperial Rescript Offices were set up in various regions to pacify the displaced people.

古文：戊申，以王旦为太尉、侍中，五日一入中书，旦恳辞不拜。
现代文：十一日，任命王旦为太尉、侍中，五天一人中书，王旦诚恳推辞不拜。
English: On the 11th day, Wang Dan was appointed to the rank of captain and chamberlain. Five days later, he wrote a letter to the emperor. Wang Dan earnestly declined the appointment.

古文：己酉，荧惑犯太微。
现代文：十二日，荧惑星侵犯太微垣。
English: On the 12th, the fluorescent planet encroached too close.

古文：乙卯，纵岁献鹰犬。
现代文：十八日，纵放每年进献的鹰犬。
English: On the 18th, the eagle dog, which is donated every year, was set free.

古文：己未，奉太祖圣容于西京应天院，向敏中为礼仪使。
现代文：二十二日，奉太祖圣容安置在西京应天院，向敏中为礼仪使。
English: On the 22nd, he was placed in Yingtian Temple in West Beijing in honor of the great-grandfather Shen Rong, and became the ceremonial envoy to Xiang Min Middle School.

古文：诸路蝗食苗，诏遣内臣分捕，仍命使安抚。
现代文：各路蝗虫吞食庄稼，诏令派遣内臣分别捕捉，并且命令使臣安抚各地。
English: Locusts were devouring crops in all directions, and the emperor ordered to send vassals to capture them separately, and ordered the envoys to pacify the regions.

古文：六月壬申，赦西京系囚，死罪减一等，流以下释之。
现代文：六月初五，赦免西京关押囚犯，死罪减一等，流罪以下释放。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of June, prisoners held in Xijing were pardoned, the death penalty was reduced by one grade, and those sentenced to exile or less were released.

古文：父老年八十者赐茶帛，除其课役。
现代文：父老年八十者赐给茶帛，免除课役。
English: If the father is 80 years old, he will be given a tea caddy and will be exempt from school duties.

古文：戊寅，除升州后湖租钱五十余万，听民溉田。
现代文：十一日，免除升州后湖租钱五十余万，允许百姓灌溉田地。
English: On the 11th day of the month, more than 500 thousand yuan of rent money was exempted from the Shangzhou Houhu, and the people were allowed to irrigate the fields.

古文：陕西、江、淮南蝗，并言自死。
现代文：陕西、江、淮南蝗灾，都报告说死去。
English: Locusts in Shaanxi, Jiangsu and Huainan have all been reported dead.

古文：庚辰，盗发后汉高祖陵，论如律，并劾守土官吏，遣内侍王克让以礼治葬，知制诰刘筠祭告。
现代文：十三日，盗发后汉高祖陵墓，论如律，并弹勃当地官吏，派遣内侍王克让以礼治葬，知制浩刘箔祭告。
English: On the 13th, after the theft of the tomb of the founder of the Han Dynasty, it was discussed according to the law, and the local officials were shot, and the king's chamberlain, Keren, was dispatched to conduct the funeral with courtesy, and the governor, Hao Liufei, was announced.

古文：因诏州县申前代帝王陵寝樵采之禁。
现代文：于是诏令州县，申明前代帝王陵墓禁止采集打柴。
English: As a result, the Emperor issued an edict to prefectures, stating that the collection of firewood from the tombs of the former emperors was prohibited.

古文：乙酉，免大食国蕃客税之半。
现代文：十八日，免除大食国商人税一半。
English: On the 18th, half of the tax on large-scale merchants was exempted.

古文：龟兹国使张复延等贡玉勒鞍马，令给其直。
现代文：龟兹国使臣张复延等进贡玉勒鞍马，命令按价付值。
English: Zhang Fuyan, the envoy of Guizi, ordered to pay the tribute according to the price.

古文：己丑，王旦对于崇政殿。
现代文：二十二日，王旦于崇政殿答皇上问。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Dan went to answer the emperor's question at the Su Zheng Palace.

古文：秋七月丁未，霖雨，放朝。
现代文：秋七月十一日，阴雨连绵，停止朝会。
English: On the 11th day of the 7th month of autumn, it rained incessantly, and the imperial court assembly was suspended.

古文：己未，幸魏咸信第视疾。
现代文：二十三日，到魏咸信府第探病。
English: On the 23rd, he went to Weihanshin Prefecture to check on his health.

古文：甲子，魏咸信卒。
现代文：二十八日，魏咸信去世。
English: On the 28th, Wei Xianxin passed away.

古文：八月庚午，以王钦若为左仆射兼中书侍郎、平章事。
现代文：八月初五，任命王钦若为左仆射兼中书侍郎、平章事。
English: On the 5th day of the 8th month, Wang Qinruo was appointed as the left-hand servant of the shooters and the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the flat.

古文：壬申，向敏中加右仆射兼门下侍郎。
现代文：初七，向敏中加为右仆射兼门下侍郎。
English: In the seventh year of his junior high school career, he was promoted to right-hand man and footman.

古文：王旦对于便殿。
现代文：王旦于便殿答皇上问。
English: Wang Dan answered the emperor's question in the hall.

古文：丙子，诏京城禁围草地听民耕牧。
现代文：十一日，诏令京城禁止圈围草地，允许百姓耕牧。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict forbade the encirclement of grassland in the capital, allowing the people to cultivate and graze.

古文：丁丑，禁采狨。
现代文：十二日，禁止采打各地猿猴。
English: On the 12th, it was forbidden to capture monkeys in various regions.

古文：戊寅，免牛税一年。
现代文：十三日，免除牛税一年。
English: On the 13th, the cattle tax will be exempted for one year.

古文：九月癸卯，以参知政事王曾为礼部侍郎，李迪为参知政事，马知节知枢密院事，曹利用、任中正、周起并同知枢密院事。
现代文：九月初八，任命参知政事王曾为礼部侍郎，李迪为参知政事，马知节知枢密院事，曹利用、任中正、周起都为同知枢密院事。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of the year, Wang Zeng was appointed as the attendant of the ceremonial department, Li Di as the attendant of the governor, Ma Zhi as the attendant of the privy council, Cao Yu, Ren Zhongzheng, and Zhou Qi as the attendant of the privy council.

古文：丙午，幸王旦第视疾。
现代文：十一日，到王旦府第探病。
English: On the 11th day, he went to Wangtan Fudai to check on his health.

古文：戊申，以蝗，罢秋宴。
现代文：十三日，因蝗灾废罢秋宴。
English: On the 13th, the autumn banquet was cancelled due to a plague of locusts.

古文：己酉，王旦薨。
现代文：十四日，王旦逝世。
English: On the 14th, Wang Tan passed away.

古文：甲寅，诏能拯救汴渠覆溺者给赏，或溺者贫者，以官钱给之。
现代文：十九日，诏令能拯救汁渠覆溺者给予奖赏，贫民溺死者官府供给钱。
English: On the 19th, a decree was issued to reward those who could save people from drowning, and the government provided money to poor people who drowned.

古文：丁未，教卫士骑射。
现代文：丁未日，教卫士骑马射箭。
English: On the day of Ding Wei, he taught the guards to ride horses and shoot arrows.

古文：冬十月辛未，诏阁门自今审官、三班院、流内铨，后殿日引公事，勿过两司。
现代文：冬十月初六，诏令门，从今以后审官院、三班院、流内锉，在后殿引奏公事，每天不要超两个部门。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of the winter, at the Zhaoling Gate, from now on, the Court of Auditors, the Third Class Court, and the Inner Palace will be in the back of the hall, and do not exceed two departments per day.

古文：壬申，谕诸州非时灾沴不以闻者论罪。
现代文：初七，告谕各州遭到灾害不上报者以罪论处。
English: On the seventh day of the new year, it was announced that those who did not report disasters in each state would be punished with a crime.

古文：己卯，罢京东上贡物。
现代文：十四日，废罢京东上贡物。
English: On the 14th, the ban on bringing tribute to the capital was lifted.

古文：辛卯，赐寿春郡王及王友张士逊等诗。
现代文：二十六日，赐寿春郡王及其友张士逊等人诗。
English: On the 26th, he gave poems to Shuchun County King and his friend Zhang Shisong.

古文：十一月己亥，诏曲宴日辍后殿视事。
现代文：十一月初五，诏令宴会日停止后殿处理政事。
English: On the 5th day of the 11th month, the Emperor ordered the banquet day to be stopped and the back hall to deal with political affairs.

古文：辛丑，曹玮平鬼留家族。
现代文：初七，曹玮平定鬼留家族。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Cao Yu defeated the ghost family.

古文：壬寅，诏淮、浙、荆湖治放生池，禁渔采。
现代文：初八，诏令淮、浙、荆湖修治放生池，禁止在其中打鱼。
English: On the 8th day of the first month of the year, Huai, Zhe and Jing lakes were ordered to repair the ponds, and it was forbidden to fish in them.

古文：乙卯，幸太一宫，大雪，帝谓宰相曰： 雪固丰稔之兆，第民力未充，虑失播种。卿等其务振劝，毋遗地利。 
现代文：二十一日，到太一宫，大雪，真宗对宰相说： 雪诚然是丰收的好兆头，只是民力没有得到充分舒缓，担心失掉播种机会，你们务必全力劝农，不要遗失地利。 
English: On the twenty-first day, when there was heavy snowfall in Taichung, Zhenzong said to the prime minister: "Snow is indeed a good sign of a good harvest, but the people's power has not been fully relieved. If you are worried about losing the opportunity to sow, you must do your best to persuade farmers not to lose ground."

古文：壬戌，契丹使耶律准来贺承天节。
现代文：二十八日，契丹使臣耶律准来祝贺承天节。
English: On the 28th, the Khitan envoy, Yerudjon, came to congratulate the Chonden Festival.

古文：高丽使徐讷率女真首领入对崇政殿，献方物。
现代文：高丽使臣徐呐率女真首领人对崇政殿，进献土特产。
English: The Goryeo envoy Xu Nan led by the Jurchen leader presented local specialties to the Chongzheng Palace.

古文：十二月丙寅，京城雪寒，给贫民粥，并瘗死者。
现代文：十二月初二，京城降雪骤寒，供给贫民粥，并掩埋死者。
English: On the second day of the first month of December, the snowfall and sudden cold in Beijing, the poor were provided with porridge, and the dead were buried.

古文：乙亥，罢京城工役。
现代文：十一日，废罢京城工役。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the strike of workers in the capital ended.

古文：丙子，严寒，放朝。
现代文：十二日，严寒，停五天朝会。
English: On the 12th, it was bitterly cold, and the five-day morning assembly was suspended.

古文：丁丑，放逋负，释系囚。
现代文：十三日，免除拖欠，释放囚犯。
English: On the 13th, the arrears were waived and the prisoners were released.

古文：己卯，女真国人归，给装钱。
现代文：十五日，女真国人回国，供给行装钱。
English: On the fifteenth day, the Jurchen returned to the country to supply the money.

古文：高丽使徐讷赐射瑞圣园。
现代文：高丽使臣徐呐赐射瑞圣园。
English: Goryeo envoy Xu Nanjie shoots at the sacred garden.

古文：辛卯，诏陕西缘边鬻谷者勿算。
现代文：二十七日，诏令陕西沿边卖谷者不收税。
English: On the 27th, it was decreed that grain sellers along the border of Shaanxi would not be taxed.

古文：壬辰，遣使缘汴河收瘗流尸。
现代文：二十八日，派遣使臣沿汁河收埋漂流的尸体。
English: On the 28th, envoys were dispatched to collect and bury the floating bodies along the Ju River.

古文：是岁，三佛齐、龟兹国来贡。
现代文：这一年，三佛齐国、龟兹国来进贡。
English: This year, the three Buddhist states of Qi and Kuez came to pay tribute.

古文：诸路蝗，民饥。
现代文：各路蝗灾，民众饥谨。
English: A plague of locusts in every direction, and the people are starving.

古文：镇戎军风雹害稼，诏发廪振之，蠲租赋，贷其种粮。
现代文：镇戎军风雹损害庄稼，诏令开仓贩济，免除租税，贷给种粮。
English: The Zhenrong army caused damage to crops, ordered the opening of warehouses to sell grain, exempted from taxes, and gave loans to grow grain.

古文：二年春正月乙未，真游殿芝草生。
现代文：天禧二年春正月初一，真游殿生出芝草。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of the Tianxi Spring, Shibaso sprouted in Mayu's palace.

古文：壬寅，振河北、京东饥。
现代文：初八，贩济河北、京东饥民。
English: In the eighth year of the Heian period, he became a peddler of food to the starving people of Hebei and Jingdong.

古文：辛亥，赐寿春郡王《恤民歌》。
现代文：十七日，赐给寿春郡王钾恤民歌。
English: On the 17th, a potash shirt with a folk song was given to the king of Shuchun County.

古文：戊午，王钦若等上《天禧大礼记》四十卷。
现代文：二十四日，王钦若等呈上沃禧大礼主己四十卷。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, Wang Qinruo and others presented forty volumes of the Wo Xiyi Grand Rite.

古文：己未，遣使谕京东官吏安抚饥民，又命诸路振以淖糜。
现代文：二十五日，派遣使臣告谕京东官吏安抚饥民，又命令各路供给饥民薄粥。
English: On the 25th, an envoy was dispatched to tell the officials of Beijing and Dongguan to pacify the starving people, and ordered all roads to supply starch porridge to the starving people.

古文：二月丙寅，甘州来贡。
现代文：二月初二，甘州来进贡。
English: On the second day of the second month of February, Gansu came to pay tribute.

古文：丁卯，寿春郡王加太保，进封升王。
现代文：初三，寿春郡王加为太保，进封为升王。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Wang Juchun was promoted to Taibo, and Jinfei was promoted to Shangwang.

古文：诏近臣举常参官堪任御史者。
现代文：诏令近臣举荐常参官可以担任御史者。
English: The imperial edict decreed that a close vassal could recommend a regular staff officer to serve as a historian.

古文：庚午，右正言刘烨请自今言事许升殿，从之。
现代文：初六，右正言刘烨请求自今以后言事都允许上殿，真宗批准了这个请求。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the Upright Patriarch Liu Bei requested that from now on all speeches and matters be allowed to be delivered in the main hall, and the True Sect approved this request.

古文：庚辰，振京西饥。
现代文：十六日，贩济京西饥民。
English: On the 16th, a vendor brought food to the starving people in West Beijing.

古文：乙酉，幸徐王元偓宫视疾。
现代文：二十一日，到徐王赵元握宫探病。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to the palace of King Zhao Yuan of Xu to investigate the illness.

古文：三月辛丑，修京城。
现代文：三月初八，修治京城。
English: On the 8th day of the 3rd month, the reconstruction of the capital city began.

古文：丙辰，先贷贫民粮种止勿收。
现代文：二十三日，先贷给贫民的种粮停止，不要收回。
English: On the 23rd, advance loans to grow grain for the poor will be stopped and will not be taken back.

古文：夏四月戊子，幸飞山雄武教场，宴赐从臣将士。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，到飞山雄武教场，宴请从臣将士。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of the summer, he went to the Feishan Xiongwu training ground and held a banquet for his vassals.

古文：庚寅，赦天下，死罪减一等，流以下释之。
现代文：二十七日，赦免全国，死罪减一等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 27th, the entire country was pardoned, the death penalty was reduced by one grade, and those sentenced to exile or less were released.

古文：闰月，辰州讨下溪州蛮，斩首六十余级，降千余人。
现代文：闰四月，辰州讨平下溪州蛮，斩首六十多人，降服一千多人。
English: In leap April, Chenzhou subdued the Xizhou barbarians, beheading more than sixty people and subduing more than a thousand people.

古文：己亥，诏户部尚书冯拯等举幕职、令录堪充京官者各二人。
现代文：初七，诏令户部尚书冯拯等举荐幕职、令录官可以担任京官者各二名。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, it was decreed that the head of the household, Shangshu Feng Zheng, and others could recommend two people each for the post of shogun, and the record officer could serve as the Beijing official.

古文：癸卯，马知节为彰德军留后。
现代文：十一日，马知节为彰德军留后。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the German army remained behind for the Machi Festival.

古文：丁未，灵泉出京师，饮者愈疾。
现代文：十五日，京师出现灵泉，饮者病情好转。
English: On the 15th, a spiritual spring appeared in Beijing, and the drinker's condition improved.

古文：作祥源观。
现代文：建造样源观。
English: View of the construction prototype.

古文：壬子，幸徐王元偓宫视疾。
现代文：二十日，到徐王赵元侄宫探病。
English: On the 20th, he went to Xu Wang Zhao Yuan's nephew's palace to investigate the illness.

古文：五月壬戌，诏长吏恤孝弟力田者。
现代文：五月初一，诏令长吏抚恤孝弟力田者。
English: On the first day of May, the prefect of the imperial edict granted a pension to the filial younger brother of Rikita.

古文：甲子，徐王元偓薨。
现代文：初三，徐王赵元握逝世。
English: On the third day of the third month, Xu Wang Zhao Yuanjie passed away.

古文：丁卯，释下溪州蛮彭儒猛罪。
现代文：初六，免释下溪州蛮彭儒猛罪。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, he was pardoned for the heinous crime of being a barbarian in Xizhou.

古文：丙戌，西京讹言妖如帽，夜蜚，民甚恐。
现代文：二十五日，西北谣传妖如帽，夜里飞起，百姓甚为恐惧。
English: On the 25th, rumors spread in the northwest that the demon was like a hat, flying in the night, and the people were very afraid.

古文：六月壬辰，诏三班使臣经七年者考课迁秩。
现代文：六月初一，诏令三班使臣任期七年者予以考核迁官。
English: On the first day of June, the Emperor ordered that the three groups of envoys with a seven-year term be evaluated and transferred.

古文：己亥，诏诸州上佐、文学、参军谪降十年者，听还乡。
现代文：初八，诏令各州上佐、文学、参军贬降达十年者，允许回乡。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the imperial edict decreed that those who had been demoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel, literature, or military service for up to ten years in each province were allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：乙巳，讹言帽妖至京师，民夜叫噪达曙，诏捕尝为邪法人耿概等弃市。
现代文：十四日，谣传帽妖到京城，百姓夜里叫唤鼓噪到天亮，诏令逮捕曾经为邪法人耿概等斩杀于闹市。
English: On the 14th, rumors spread that the caped demon had arrived in the capital, the people shouted and drummed at night until dawn, and those who had been arrested for the evil corporation Geng Yu and others were beheaded in the downtown area.

古文：辛亥，彗出北斗魁。
现代文：二十日，彗星出现在北斗魁。
English: On the 20th, the comet appeared behind the Big Dipper.

古文：秋七月壬申，以星变赦天下，流以下罪减等，左降官羁管十年以上者放还京师，京朝官丁忧七年未改秩者以闻。
现代文：秋七月十二日，因星变异赦免全国，流刑以下减等，左降官羁管十年以上者放回京师，京朝官因服父母丧七年没迁官者上报朝廷。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, the whole country was pardoned due to the change of the star, the punishment of those who had been exiled or less was reduced, those who had been in custody for more than ten years were returned to Beijing, and those who had not moved for seven years were reported to the imperial court.

古文：丁亥，彗没。
现代文：二十七日，彗星消失。
English: On the 27th, the comet disappeared.

古文：八月庚寅，群臣请立皇太子，从之。
现代文：八月初一，大臣请立皇太子，应允。
English: On the first day of August, the minister asked the crown prince to be appointed, and he agreed.

古文：壬寅，下溪州彭儒猛纳所掠汉生口、器甲等，诏赐袍带。
现代文：十三日，下溪州彭儒猛缴纳所掠汉族生口、器甲等，下诏赐给袍带。
English: On the 13th, Peng Rong of Shimohe County vigorously paid the ransomed Han people's livestock, tools and armor, and gave them robes and belts.

古文：甲辰，立皇子升王为皇太子。
现代文：十五日，立皇子升王为皇太子。
English: On the fifteenth day, Prince Shogo was appointed crown prince.

古文：大赦天下，宗室加恩，群臣赐勋一转。
现代文：大赦全国，宗室加恩，大臣赐勋转一官。
English: The whole country was amnestied, the family was pardoned, and the minister bestowed honors and promoted one official.

古文：戊申，黎州山后两林百蛮都王李阿善遣使来贡。
现代文：十九日，黎州山后两林百蛮都王李阿善派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 19th, Li Ashen, the king of the capital of Li Zhou, sent envoys to pay tribute.

古文：壬子，彭王元俨进封通王。
现代文：二十三日，彭王赵元俨进封为通王。
English: On the 23rd, Peng Wang Zhao Yuanqi was promoted to Tong Wang.

古文：以李迪兼太子宾客。
现代文：以李迪兼太子宾客。
English: With Li Di and the Crown Prince as guests.

古文：癸丑，作《元良箴》赐皇太子。
现代文：二十四日，作元良筋赐给皇太子。
English: On the 24th, the original manuscript was given to the crown prince.

古文：甲寅，楚王元佐加兴元牧，徐国长公主进封福国，邠国长公主进封建国，宿国长公主进封鄂国。
现代文：二十五日，楚王赵元佐加为兴元牧，徐国长公主进封为福国长公主，国长公主进封为建国长公主，宿国长公主进封为鄂国长公主。
English: On the 25th, King Chu Zhao Yuanzaka was enthroned as Xingyuanmu, Empress Dowager Xu was enthroned as Empress Dowager Fu, Empress Dowager Guo was enthroned as Empress Dowager Jianguo, and Empress Dowager Zhou was enthroned as Empress Dowager Guo.

古文：乙卯，诏畎索河水入金水河。
现代文：二十六日，诏令疏通索河水进人金水河。
English: On the 26th, an order was issued to divert the water of the So River into the Jinshui River.

古文：丙辰，以德雍、德文、惟政并为诸州防御使，允成、允升、允宁并为诸州团练使。
现代文：二十七日，任命赵德雍、赵德文、赵惟政为各州防御史，赵允成、赵允升、赵允宁为各州团练使。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Deyong, Zhao Dewen and Zhao Weizheng were appointed as the defense historians of each state, and Zhao Yuncheng, Zhao Yunsheng and Zhao Yuning were appointed as the regimental drill envoys of each state.

古文：九月丁卯，册皇太子。
现代文：九月初八，册封皇太子。
English: On the eighth day of the ninth month, he was crowned crown prince.

古文：庚午，诏全给外戍诸军物。
现代文：十一日，诏令全给外戍各军物品。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the imperial edict ordered that all military goods be given to foreigners.

古文：庚辰，御乾元门观酺。
现代文：二十一日，到乾元门观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the twenty-first day, he went to Qianyuan Gate to watch his subjects gather and drink.

古文：冬十月庚子，御玉宸殿，召近臣观刈占城稻，遂宴安福殿。
现代文：冬十月十一日，到玉哀殿召近臣观看割占城稻，于是在安福殿聚宴。
English: On the 11th day of October in winter, he summoned his vassals to the Gyokuei-den to watch the occupation of the castle, and they held a banquet at the Anfuku-den.

古文：十二月辛丑，以张旻为武宁军节度使、同平章事。
现代文：十二月十三日，任命张为武宁军节度使、同平章事。
English: On December 13th, Zhang was appointed as the military envoy of the National Day of the People's Liberation Army of the People's Republic of China.

古文：是岁，占城国、甘州、溪峒、黎州山后蛮来贡。
现代文：这一年，占城国、甘州、溪酮、黎州山后蛮来进贡。
English: In this year, Zhancheng, Ganzhou, Xietong and Lizhou were the first to pay tribute.

古文：陕西旱，振之。
现代文：陕西早灾，贩济饥民。
English: Early disaster in Shaanxi Province, people selling food to the hungry.

古文：江阴军蝻，不为灾。
现代文：江阴军纳虫没有造成灾害。
English: The Jiangyin army did not cause any disasters.

古文：三年春正月癸亥，贡举人郭贞等见崇政殿。
现代文：天禧三年春正月初五，贡举人郭祯等到崇政殿朝见。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the first month of the third year of the Spring Festival, the tribute person Guo Jue waited until the morning of the morning of the Sui Dynasty.

古文：贞冒丧赴举，命典谒诘之，即引咎，殿三举。
现代文：郭祯冒丧赴举，命令典渴谙问他，郭祯引咎自责，殿三举。
English: Guo Gan went to the funeral, ordered Dian Qian to question him, Guo Gan blamed himself, and the hall was raised three times.

古文：二月乙未，河南府地震。
现代文：二月初七，河南府发生地震。
English: On February 7, an earthquake occurred in Henan Province.

古文：三月戊午朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，日食。
English: In the third year of junior high school, my body was not comfortable.

古文：遣吕夷简体访陕、亳民讹言。
现代文：派遣吕夷简亲自查访陕州、毫州百姓流传的谣言。
English: Li Yijian was dispatched to personally investigate the rumors spread by the people of Shaanxi and Wanzhou.

古文：丙寅，御试礼部贡举人。
现代文：初九，亲自策试礼部贡举人。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, he personally organized a gift-giving ceremony.

古文：癸未，翰林学士、工部尚书钱惟演等坐知举失实，降一官。
现代文：二十日，翰林学士、工部尚书钱惟演等因知贡举失实，降贬一官。
English: On the 20th, Hanlin Baccalaureate, the Ministry of Industry and Commerce's Shang Shucheng, and others were demoted one rank for knowing that the tribute was false.

古文：甲申，颍州石陨出泉，饮之愈疾。
现代文：二十七日，颖州石陨出泉，饮之可以使病者痊愈。
English: On the 27th, a stone meteorite from Yingzhou emerged from a spring, and drinking from it can cure the sick.

古文：夏四月甲午，西上阁门使高继勋坐市马亏直削官。
现代文：夏四月初七，西上间门使高继勋因买马亏值被削夺官职。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Gao Jixun, the gatekeeper of the Western Shang Dynasty, was deprived of his official position due to the loss of horse-buying.

古文：五月丁巳，大食国来贡。
现代文：五月初一，大食国来进贡。
English: On the first day of May, the nation of gluttons came to pay tribute.

古文：乙丑，左谏议大夫戚纶坐讪上，贬岳州副使。
现代文：初九，左谏议大夫戚纶因汕讽皇上，贬为岳州副使。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Zuo Jian, a doctor of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, was demoted to the rank of vice-envoy to Yuezhou for ridiculing the emperor.

古文：辛未，虑囚。
现代文：十五日，讯问记录囚犯罪状。
English: On the 15th, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of the prisoner.

古文：六月癸未，浚淮南漕渠，废三堰。
现代文：六月癸未日，疏浚淮南槽渠。废罢三堰。
English: On the last day of June, the Huainan Channel was dredged, and three weirs were abandoned.

古文：甲午，王钦若为太子太保。
现代文：初九，王钦若为太子太保。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, Wang Qin became the prince's guardian.

古文：河决滑州。
现代文：黄河在滑州决口。
English: The mouth of the Yellow River in Leshou.

古文：戊戌，以寇准为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、平章事，丁谓为吏部尚书、参知政事。
现代文：十三日，任命寇准为中书侍郎兼吏部尚书、平章事，丁谓为吏部尚书、参知政事。
English: On the 13th, Kojun was appointed as the attendant of the General Secretary and the Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary

古文：滑州决河，泛澶、濮、郓、齐、徐境，遣使救被溺者，恤其家。
现代文：滑州黄河决口，泛滥擅、攫、军仔、齐、徐州境内，派遣命使臣拯救被淹者，抚恤其家。
English: At the mouth of the Yellow River in Luzhou, flooding occurred in the territories of Xuzhou, Guanzhong, Jinsai, Qi and Xuzhou. Envoys were dispatched to rescue the flooded people and support their families.

古文：秋七月壬申，曹璨卒。
现代文：秋七月十七日，曹璨去世。
English: On the 17th day of the 7th month of autumn, Cao Pi passed away.

古文：群臣表上尊号曰体元御极感天尊道应真宝运文德武功上圣钦明仁孝皇帝。
现代文：大臣奉表上尊号为体元御极感天尊道应真宝运文德武功上圣钦明仁孝皇帝。
English: The minister presented the honorary title to the emperor, saying that he was deeply moved by the divine message, and that the divine message should be conveyed to the emperor.

古文：八月丁亥，大赦天下。
现代文：八月初三，大赦全国。
English: On the third day of August, a nationwide amnesty was declared.

古文：普度道释童行。
现代文：普度道释童行。
English: Putuo Road Children's Parade.

古文：滑州龙见，河决。
现代文：滑州龙显现，黄河决口。
English: The Slippery Dragon appears, and the Yellow River breaks through.

古文：辛卯，太白昼见。
现代文：初七，太白星白天出现。
English: It's hard to believe, but Taibai Star appears during the day.

古文：己亥，庆州亡去熟户委乞等来归。
现代文：十五日，庆州逃亡熟户委乞等来归顺。
English: On the 15th, the Gyeongju Fugitive Familiar House Committee begged others to surrender.

古文：庚戌，遣使抚恤京东西、河北水灾。
现代文：二十六日，派遣使臣抚恤京东西、河北水灾。
English: On the 26th, an envoy was dispatched to pay tribute to the victims of floods in eastern and western Beijing and Hebei Province.

古文：九月乙丑，庆州骨咩、大门等族归附。
现代文：九月十二日，庆州骨洋、大门等族归附朝廷。
English: On September 12th, Gyeongju Bone Yang, Gate and other clans were annexed to the imperial court.

古文：辛巳，遣中官存问高丽贡使之被溺者。
现代文：二十八日，派遣中官慰问高丽被淹的进贡使者。
English: On the 28th, a tributary envoy was dispatched by the Vice-Admiral to offer condolences to the flood victims in Korea.

古文：冬十一月己巳，谒景灵宫。
现代文：冬十一月十七日，朝拜景灵宫。
English: On the 17th day of the 11th month of winter, the worship of Jingling Palace began.

古文：庚午，飨太庙。
现代文：十八日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the 18th, the ritual at the Imperial Temple was over.

古文：辛未，祀天地于圜丘，大赦天下。
现代文：十九日，在圆丘祭祀天地，大赦全国。
English: On the 19th, the heavens and earth were sacrificed at the round mound, and a nationwide amnesty was declared.

古文：选两任五考无责罚者试身、言、书、判。
现代文：选择两任五考没有受到处罚者试身、言、书、判官。
English: Those who have not been punished in the two-term five-examination will be selected for physical examination, speech, writing, and judge.

古文：丁丑，御天安殿受尊号册。
现代文：二十五日，到天安殿接受尊号册。
English: On the 25th, he went to Tian'an Hall to receive the honor roll.

古文：十二月丙戌，富州蛮酋向光泽表纳土，诏却之。
现代文：十二月初四，富州蛮酋向光泽奉表纳土归顺，下诏拒却。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of December, the Fuzhou barbarian chiefs submitted to the luster and refused to accept it.

古文：辛卯，向敏中加左仆射、中书侍郎兼礼部尚书、平章事，寇准加右仆射，通王元俨进封泾王，曹利用、丁谓并为枢密使，百官加恩。
现代文：初九，向敏中加为左仆射、中书侍郎兼礼部尚书、平章事，寇准加为右仆射，通王赵元俨进封为径王，曹利用、丁谓为枢密使，百官加恩。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Xiang Min was added as the left servant, Shang Shu and Ping Zhangji as the middle servant, Kou Jun was added as the right servant, King Zhao Yuanqi was added as the king, Cao Yu and Ding Zui were added as the confidential envoys, and hundreds of officials were added.

古文：癸巳，以任中正、周起并为枢密副使。
现代文：十一日，任命任中正、周起为枢密副使。
English: On the 11th, Ren Zhongzheng and Zhou Qi were appointed as Privy Vice-Envoys.

古文：是岁，高丽、女真来贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽、女真来进贡。
English: This year, Goryeo and Nyoman came to pay tribute.

古文：江、浙及利州路饥，诏振之。
现代文：江浙和利州路饥荒，下诏贩济。
English: Famine in Jiangsu, Zhejiang, and Lizhou, the following edict to sell rice.

古文：四年春正月乙丑，以华州观察使曹玮为镇国军留后、佥枢密院事。
现代文：天禧四年春正月十三日，以华州观察使曹玮为镇国军留后、金署枢密院事。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the year of the fourth year of the Heavenly Jubilee, Cao Pi, who was sent to Huazhou as an observation envoy for the town's national army, came to the Privy Council of the State Administration of Finance.

古文：丙寅，开扬州运河。
现代文：十四日，开凿扬州运河。
English: On the 14th, the Yangzhou Canal was excavated.

古文：己巳，幸元符观。
现代文：十七日，到元符观。
English: On the 17th, he arrived at Yuanfu.

古文：庚午，赠处士魏野著作郎，赐其家粟帛。
现代文：十八日，赠处士魏野为著作郎，赐其家粟帛。
English: On the 18th, he presented the official Wei Ye as the author's son and gave his family a millet bowl.

古文：二月，帝不豫。
现代文：二月，真宗身体不适。
English: In February, Makimune began to feel unwell.

古文：癸未，遣使安抚淮南、江、浙、利州饥民。
现代文：初一，派遣使臣安抚淮南、江、浙、利州饥民。
English: On the first day of the new year, envoys were dispatched to pacify the starving people in Huainan, Jiangsu, Zhejiang and Lizhou.

古文：滑州决河塞。
现代文：滑州黄河决口堵住。
English: The mouth of the Yellow River in Luzhou has been blocked.

古文：辛丑，发唐、邓八州常平仓振贫民。
现代文：十九日，开唐、邓八州常平仓贩济贫民。
English: On the 19th, the Changping warehouse trader from Kaitang and Dengbazhou went to help the poor.

古文：三月戊午，以淄州民饥，贷牛粮。
现代文：三月初七，以淄州百姓饥荒贷给牛和粮。
English: On the seventh day of the third month of the year, the famine of the people of Zhangzhou was used as a loan to give cattle and grain.

古文：甲子，振蕃部粟。
现代文：十三日，贩给蕃部粮粟。
English: On the 13th, he sold corn syrup to Xibe.

古文：庚午，诏川峡致仕官听还本贯。
现代文：十九日，下诏：川峡退休官员允许回到本地。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: Retired officials in Chuangxia were allowed to return to the local area.

古文：癸酉，川、广举人勿拘定额。
现代文：二十二日，川、广举人不拘限定额。
English: On the 22nd, Kawa and Hiroshi nominated people regardless of the quota.

古文：己亥，振益、梓民饥。
现代文：己亥，贩济益、梓州饥民。
English: Ji Hai, a trader, and the starving people of Zizhou.

古文：己卯，向敏中薨。
现代文：二十八日，向敏中去世。
English: On the 28th, Xiang Minzhong passed away.

古文：夏四月丁亥，大风，昼晦。
现代文：夏四月初六，大风，白天阴暗。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, it was windy and the day was overcast.

古文：庚寅，分江南转运使为东、西路。
现代文：初九，分江南转运使为东西路转运使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, the Southern Yangtze River Transportation Company became the East-West Road Transportation Company.

古文：丙申，杖杀前定陶县尉麻士瑶于青州。
现代文：十五日，在青州杖杀前定陶县尉麻士瑶。
English: On the fifteenth day, before the murder of Jie in Qingzhou, Dingtao County Lieutenant Ma Shizhen.

古文：五月丁巳，发粟振秦、陇。
现代文：五月初七，开仓发粟贩济秦、陇州饥民。
English: On the seventh day of the fifth month of the year, the poppy sellers of Jichin and the starving people of Bozhou opened their warehouses.

古文：六月丙申，以寇准为太子太傅、莱国公。
现代文：六月十六日，任命寇准为太子太傅和莱国公。
English: On June 16th, he appointed Qozun as the Crown Prince Taifu and the Prince of Lai.

古文：河决滑州。
现代文：黄河在滑州决口。
English: The mouth of the Yellow River in Leshou.

古文：壬寅，御试礼部奏名举人九十三人。
现代文：二十二日，亲自策试礼部奏名举人九十三人。
English: On the 22nd, he personally organized the audition of 93 singers.

古文：秋七月丁巳，太白昼见。
现代文：秋七月初八，太白星白天出现。
English: On the eighth day of the seventh month of autumn, the white star appeared in the daytime.

古文：辛酉，京城大雨，水坏庐舍大半。
现代文：十二日，京城大雨，雨水冲坏庐舍大半。
English: On the 12th, there was heavy rain in Beijing, and the rainwater washed away most of the houses.

古文：丙寅，以李迪为吏部侍郎兼太子少傅、平章事，冯拯为枢密使、吏部尚书、同平章事。
现代文：十七日，任命李迪为吏部侍郎兼太子少傅、平章事，冯拯为枢密使、吏部尚书、同平章事。
English: On the 17th, Li Di was appointed as the attendant of the staff and the young master of the prince, and the secretary of the secretary, and Feng Zheng was appointed as the confidential envoy, the secretary of the staff, and the secretary of the secretary.

古文：以霖雨坏营舍，赐诸军缗钱。
现代文：因阴雨连绵毁坏营舍，赐给各军络钱。
English: Due to the continuous destruction of the camp due to the rain, the army was given a lot of money.

古文：庚午，以丁谓为平章事，曹利用同平章事。
现代文：二十一日，任命丁谓为平章事，曹利用同平章事。
English: On the 21st, Ding Zuo was appointed as a member of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress, and Cao Yu as a member of the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress.

古文：癸酉，入内副都知周怀政伏诛。
现代文：二十四日，人内副都知周怀政被处以死刑。
English: On the 24th, Zhou Huai Zheng, vice-governor of Tochi, was sentenced to death.

古文：丁丑，太子太傅寇准降授太常卿，翰林学士盛度、枢密直学士王曙并罢职。
现代文：二十八日，太子太傅寇准贬为太常卿，翰林学士盛度、枢密直学士王曙都罢职。
English: On the 28th, the Crown Prince Taifu Kojun was demoted to the position of Tai Changqing, and the Hanlin Scholar Shengdu and the Privy Direct Scholar Wang Shugu both resigned.

古文：八月，永兴军都巡检使朱能杀中使叛。
现代文：八月，永兴军都巡检使朱能杀死中使叛乱。
English: In August, the Yongxing Army sent Zhu Neng on a patrol to kill the rebels.

古文：乙酉，以任中正、王曾并参知政事。
现代文：初六，任命任中正、王曾参知政事。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Ren Zhongzheng and Wang Zengsang were appointed to the post of governor.

古文：诏利、夔路置常平仓。
现代文：诏令利州、夔州路设置常平仓。
English: Li Zhou and Zhangzhou Road were ordered to set up permanent warehouses.

古文：丙戌，朱能自杀。
现代文：初七，朱能自杀。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, Zhu Neng committed suicide.

古文：壬寅，寇准贬道州司马。
现代文：二十三日，寇准贬为道州司马。
English: On the 23rd, Kojun was demoted to Dōshū Sima.

古文：甲辰，赐诸军器币。
现代文：二十五日，赐给各军器币。
English: On the 25th, coins were given to each military unit.

古文：入内押班郑志诚坐交朱能，削两任、配隶房州。
现代文：人内押班郑志诚因与朱能交结被削夺两任，配隶房州。
English: Zheng Zhicheng, the person in charge of the detachment, was stripped of two positions because of his relationship with Zhu Neng. He was assigned to Fuzhou.

古文：九月己酉，分遣近臣张知白、晁迥、乐黄目等各举常参官，诸路转运及劝农使各举堪京官、知县者二人，知制诰、知杂御史、直龙图阁各举堪御史者一人。
现代文：九月初一，分派近臣张知白、晃迥、乐黄目等各自举荐常参官，各路转运使和劝农使各自举荐可以担任京官、知县者二名，知制浩、知杂御史、直龙图阁各自举荐可担任御史者一名。
English: On the first day of September, close vassals such as Zhang Zhibai, Xuan Zheng, and Le Huangme were assigned to recommend their own regular staff officers, and the envoys of transportation and the envoys of agriculture could recommend their own staff officers to serve as Beijing officials and two county magistrates, and the magistrates of Zhizhao, Zhizhu, and Zhilong could recommend their own staff officers to serve as a historian.

古文：丙辰，始御崇德殿视事，治朱能党，死、流者数十人。
现代文：初八，开始到崇德殿处理政事，惩治朱能党羽，死者、流放者数十人。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, he began to go to the Chongde Hall to deal with political affairs and punish Zhu Neng's party members, resulting in dozens of deaths and exiles.

古文：己未，久雨，放朝。壬戌，给事中朱巽、工部郎中梅询坐不察朱能奸谪官。
现代文：十一日，长久下雨，停止朝会十四日，给事中朱翼、工部郎中梅询因没能检举朱能奸恶被贬官。
English: On the 11th day, it rained for a long time, the imperial court was suspended on the 14th day, and Zhu Ying and Roh Zhongmei of the Ministry of Industry were demoted for failing to report Zhu Neng's treachery.

古文：丁卯，赦天下。
现代文：十九日，赦免全国。
English: Dingwu, amnesty to the world.

古文：己巳，遣使安抚永兴军。
现代文：二十一日，派遣使臣安抚永兴军。
English: On the 21st, he sent envoys to pacify the Yongxing Army.

古文：壬申，赐京城酺。
现代文：二十四日，赐给京城臣民聚宴。
English: On the 24th, a banquet was given to the citizens of Kyoto.

古文：冬十月戊寅，命依唐制，双日不视事。
现代文：冬十月初一，命令按照唐制双日不上朝处理政事。
English: In the winter, on the first day of October, the order was given not to go to the court to deal with political affairs in accordance with the Tang system.

古文：壬午，幸正阳门观酺。
现代文：初五，到正阳门观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the subjects gathered at the Zhengyang Gate to watch the parade.

古文：帝自不豫，浸少临行，至是人情大悦。
现代文：真宗自从身体不适，很少亲自行走，到这时人们非常高兴。
English: Since Masamune had been unwell, he rarely went out on his own, so people were very happy to see him.

古文：壬辰，以王钦若为资政殿大学士。
现代文：十五日，以王钦若为资政殿大学士。
English: On the 15th, Wang Qinruo was promoted to Senior Vice President.

古文：甲辰，减水灾州县秋租。
现代文：二十七日，减免水灾州县秋税。
English: On the 27th, the autumn tax of flood-stricken counties will be reduced and exempted.

古文：丙午，召皇子、宗室、近臣玉宸殿观稻，赐宴。
现代文：二十九日，召皇子、宗室、近臣到玉哀殿观看稻谷，赐给宴席。
English: On the 29th, the prince, his family, and his close vassals were summoned to the Gyokuei-den to view the rice, which was then given to the banquet.

古文：十一月戊午，召近臣于龙图阁观御制文词，帝曰： 朕听览之暇，以翰墨自娱，虽不足垂范，亦平生游心于此。 
现代文：十一月十一日，召近臣在龙图阁观看御制文词。真宗说： 肤处理政事、批阅奏章之余，常常喜爱以写诗作文作为娱乐，虽然不足以垂范后世，也喜平生游心于此。 
English: On November 11, he summoned his close vassals to the Longtu Pavilion to view the imperial edict. Shinso said: In addition to dealing with political affairs and approving musical scores, he often liked to write poetry as entertainment. Although it was not enough to set an example for future generations, he was also happy to devote his life to it.

古文：宰臣丁谓请镂板宣布。
现代文：宰臣丁谓请济南市刻版印刷流布。
English: Zaisen Ding said that he would like to ask Jinan City to print and distribute the engraving.

古文：庚申，内出御制七百二十二卷付宰臣。
现代文：十三日，内出御制七百二十二卷给宰臣看。
English: On the thirteenth day, Naide showed the 722-volume imperial edict to the aide-de-camp.

古文：丙寅，丁谓加门下侍郎兼太子太傅，李迪加中书侍郎兼尚书左丞，依前少傅。
现代文：十九日，丁谓加为门下侍郎兼太子太傅，李迪加为中书侍郎兼尚书左承，仍任少傅。
English: On the 19th, Ding Zi Jia was appointed as a footman and the prince's daifu, and Li Di Jia was appointed as a junior footman and the heir to the throne.

古文：迪、谓忿争于帝前。
现代文：李迪、丁谓在真宗面前纷争不已。
English: Li Di and Ding Zuo continue to quarrel in front of Shensong.

古文：戊辰，罢谓为户部尚书，迪为户部侍郎。
现代文：二十一日，丁谓罢为户部尚书，李迪为户部侍郎。
English: On the twenty-first day, Ding Zhaozhe became the head of the household, and Li Di became the head of the household.

古文：任中正、王曾、钱惟演并兼太子宾客，张士逊、林特并兼太子詹事，晏殊为太子左庶子。
现代文：任中正、王曾、钱惟演都兼太子宾客，张士逊、林特兼太子詹事，晏殊为太子左庶子。
English: Ren Zhongzheng, Wang Zeng and Qian Wei played both the prince and the guests, Zhang Shisong, Lin Te and the prince Zhanji, especially the prince's left illegitimate son.

古文：己巳，诏谓赴中书视事如故。
现代文：二十二日，诏令丁谓像从前一样到中书省处理政务。
English: On the 22nd, Ding Zhaorong went to the Ministry of Education and Culture to deal with government affairs as before.

古文：庚午，诏自今除军国大事仍旧亲决，余皆委皇太子同宰相、枢密使等参议行之。
现代文：二十三日，诏令从今以后除军国大事亲自决断外，其余事情都委托皇太子与宰相、枢密使等一起商议执行。
English: On the 23rd, the imperial edict decreed that from now on, except for major military events to be decided personally, all other matters would be entrusted to the crown prince to discuss and implement together with the prime minister and the privy council.

古文：太子上表陈让，不允。
现代文：太子上表谦让，没应允。
English: The crown prince did not accept the offer.

古文：以丁谓兼太子少师，冯拯兼少傅，曹利用兼少保。
现代文：任命丁谓兼太子少师，冯拯兼少傅，曹利用兼少保。
English: Appointed Ding Zhao and Prince Junior Master, Feng Zheng and Junior Master, Cao Lian and Junior Master.

古文：辛未，诏自今群臣五日于长春殿起居，余只日视朝于承明殿。
现代文：二十四日，诏令自今以后大臣每五天在长春殿起居，其他时间双日在承明殿处理国事。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that from now on, ministers would live in the Nagaharu-den every five days, and deal with state affairs in the Shomei-den on alternate days.

古文：甲戌，丁谓等请作天章阁奉安御集。
现代文：二十七日，丁谓等请求建造天章阁安置陈列真宗文集。
English: On the 27th, Ding Zetian and others requested the construction of Tianzhang Pavilion to display the collection of writings of Jinsong.

古文：十二月乙酉，皇太子亲政，诏内臣传旨须覆奏。
现代文：十二月初九，皇太子亲政，诏令内臣传旨必须复奏。
English: On the 9th day of the 12th month of the year, the crown prince took personal control of the government, and issued a decree that the imperial envoy's message must be recited.

古文：丁亥，龟兹、甘州回鹘遣使来贡。
现代文：十一日，龟兹、甘州回给派遣使臣来进贡。
English: On the 11th day, Guizi and Ganzhou returned the dispatched envoys to pay tribute.

古文：己丑，王钦若加司空。
现代文：十三日，王钦若加为司空。
English: On the 13th, Wang Qinruo was promoted to the position of deputy commander.

古文：庚寅，议事资善堂，命张景宗侍皇太子。
现代文：十四日，在资善堂商议政事，命令张景宗侍奉皇太子。
English: On the 14th, they discussed political affairs at Shisen-do Hall and ordered Zhang Jingzong to serve the crown prince.

古文：丁酉，以王钦若为山南东道节度使、同平章事。
现代文：二十一日，任命王钦若为山南东道节度使、同平章事。
English: On the 21st, it was announced that Wang Qinru would be appointed as Shannan's host festival envoy.

古文：闰月丁卯，以唃厮啰为边患，诏陈尧咨等巡抚。
现代文：闰十二月，因确厮缪制造边患，派遣陈尧咨等巡视安抚。
English: In the intercalary month of December, due to the fact that he was busy creating border problems, he dispatched Chen Bingzhe and others to inspect and pacify.

古文：庚午，京城谷贵，减直发常平仓。
现代文：二十四日，京城谷价贵，减价出售常平仓粮食。
English: On the 24th, Jingcheng Valley was expensive, and grain from Changping warehouse was sold at a reduced price.

古文：乙亥，帝不豫，力疾御承明殿，赐手书宰相，谕以辅导储贰之意。
现代文：二十九日，真宗身体不适，勉强到承明殿，赐给宰相手书，告谕辅佐皇太子治国的道理。
English: On the 29th, Shingon was not feeling well, so he reluctantly went to Shomei-den and gave the abbot a letter, instructing him to assist the crown prince in governing the country.

古文：是岁，京西、陕西、江、淮、荆湖诸州稔。
现代文：这一年，京西、陕西、江、淮、荆湖各州丰收。
English: This year, the harvest in the provinces of Beijing and Xi'an, Shaanxi, Jiangsu, Huai and Jinghu was the best.

古文：五年春正月己丑，帝疾愈，出幸启圣院。
现代文：天禧五年春正月十三日，真宗病情好转，到达启圣院。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the fifth year of the reign of Heaven, the illness of the True Parents had improved, and they arrived at Kai Sheng Yuan.

古文：癸巳，诏天下死罪降，流以下释之。
现代文：十七日，诏令天下死罪减等，流刑以下释放。
English: On the 17th, the imperial edict decreed that the death penalty would be reduced to a lesser degree, and those sentenced to exile or less would be released.

古文：乙未，遣使抚京东水灾。
现代文：十九日，派遣使臣安抚京东水灾灾民。
English: On the 19th, an envoy was sent to pacify the victims of the floods in Beijing.

古文：丁酉，以张士逊为枢密副使。
现代文：二十一日，任命张士逊为枢密副使。
English: On the 21st, Zhang Shisong was appointed as the Vice-Minister of the Privy Council.

古文：己亥，宴近臣承明殿。
现代文：二十三日，在承明殿宴请近臣。
English: On the 23rd, he held a banquet for his close vassals at the Jomyo-den.

古文：二月甲寅，审刑院言天下无断狱。
现代文：二月初九，审刑院报告说全国没有拖延不决的案件。
English: On the 9th of February, the Sentencing Court reported that there were no pending cases nationwide.

古文：丙寅，赐天下酺。
现代文：二十一日，赐全国臣民聚饮。
English: On the twenty-first day of the month, let all the subjects of the country come together to drink it.

古文：庚午，以孔子四十七世孙圣祐袭封文宣公。
现代文：二十五日，以孔子四十七世孙孔圣佑袭封为文宣公。
English: On the 25th, the 47th-generation grandson of Confucius, Kong Shengyu, was proclaimed as the emperor.

古文：三月辛巳，御正阳门观酺。
现代文：三月初六，到正阳门观看臣民聚饮。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month, they went to the Zhengyang Gate to watch the subjects gather and drink.

古文：辛丑，京东、西水灾，赐民租十之五。
现代文：二十六日，京东、西水灾，赐免百姓租税十分之五。
English: On the 26th, after the floods in East and West Beijing, the people were exempted from paying five-tenths of the tax.

古文：壬寅，丁谓加司空，冯拯加左仆射，曹利用加右仆射，任中正工部尚书。
现代文：二十七日，丁谓加为司空，冯拯加为左仆射，曹利用加为右仆射，任中正加为工部尚书。
English: On the 27th day of the month, Ding Zuoxuan was promoted to the position of the second-in-command, Feng Zheng was promoted to the position of the second-in-command, Cao Lian was promoted to the position of the second-in-command, and Ren Zhongzheng was promoted to the position of the third-in-command.

古文：夏四月丙辰，客星出轩辕。
现代文：夏四月十一日，客星出轩辕星。
English: On the 11th day of the 4th month of summer, the guest star appeared.

古文：五月乙亥，虑囚，降天下死罪。
现代文：五月初一，讯问记录囚犯罪状，全国死罪囚犯减等。
English: On the first day of May, the interrogation recorded the criminal status of prisoners, and the death penalty prisoners nationwide were reduced.

古文：六月丙午，太白昼见。
现代文：六月初二，太白星白天出现。
English: On the second day of June, Taibai Star appeared in the daytime.

古文：秋七月甲戌朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：戊寅，新作景灵宫万寿殿。
现代文：初五，新建景灵宫万寿殿。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, the Jingling Palace Manju Hall was newly built.

古文：八月壬戌。荧惑犯南斗。
现代文：八月十九日，荧惑星侵犯南斗星。
English: On August 19th, the fluorescent planet invaded the Southern Dipper.

古文：九月戊寅，唃厮啰请降。
现代文：九月初六，确厮缪请求降服。
English: On the 6th day of the 9th month, he made a sincere request for surrender.

古文：冬十月癸卯，蠲京东西、淮、浙被灾民租。
现代文：冬十月初一，免除京东西、淮遭灾百姓租税。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the people who suffered from the disasters in Beijing, Dongxi and Huai were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：壬子，依汉、唐故事，五日一受朝，遇庆会，皇太子押班。
现代文：初十，按照汉、唐惯例，五日接受一次朝贺，遇到庆典集会，由皇太子领班。
English: On the 10th day of the first month, in accordance with Han and Tang custom, a morning greeting was received on the 5th day, and when there was a celebration gathering, the crown prince led the way.

古文：十一月戊子，王钦若以山南东道节度使坐擅赴阙，降司农卿、分司南京。
现代文：十一月十七日，任山南东道节度使的王钦若，因擅自赴朝，降为司农卿，分司南京。
English: On November 17th, Wang Qinruo, who was appointed as the host of the Shannan Festival, was demoted to the Secretary of Agriculture, Division of Nanjing for going to the DPRK without permission.

古文：是岁，高丽遣使来贡。
现代文：这一年，高丽派遣使臣来进贡。
English: That year, Goryeo dispatched envoys to South Korea to pay tribute.

古文：京东、河北、两川、荆湖稔。
现代文：京东、河北、两川、荆湖地区丰收。
English: The regions of Jingdong, Hebei, Liangchuan and Jinghu had a bumper harvest.

古文：乾兴元年春正月辛未朔，改元。
现代文：乾兴元年春正月初一，改元。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year of the first year.

古文：丁亥，御东华门观灯。
现代文：十七日，到东华门观灯。
English: On the 17th, I went to Donghua Gate to watch the lanterns.

古文：戊戌，蠲秀州水灾民租。
现代文：二十八日，免除秀州水灾百姓租税。
English: On the 28th, the people of Xiuzhou who were affected by the floods were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：二月庚子，大赦天下。
现代文：二月初一，大赦全国。
English: On the first day of February, a nationwide amnesty was declared.

古文：癸卯，上尊号曰应天尊道钦明仁孝皇帝。
现代文：初四，上尊号为应天尊道钦明仁孝皇帝。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, Emperor Ying Tian Zun Dao Qin Ming Ren Xiao was enthroned.

古文：诏苏、湖、秀州民饥，贷以廪粟。
现代文：诏令苏、湖、秀州饥民，贷给仓粟。
English: The emperor ordered the starving people in Su, Hubei, and Xiuzhou to borrow corn.

古文：甲辰，制封丁谓为晋国公，冯拯为魏国公，曹利用为韩国公。
现代文：初五，制书封丁谓为晋国公，冯拯为魏国公，曹利用为韩国公。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Ding, a bookmaker, was called the prince of Jin, Feng Zheng, the prince of Wei, and Cao Yu, the prince of Korea.

古文：庚戌，诏徐州振贫民。
现代文：十一日，下诏徐州贩济贫民。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the Xuzhou hawkers came down to help the poor.

古文：甲寅，对宰相于寝殿。帝不豫增剧，祷于山川神祗。
现代文：十五日，在寝殿召对宰相。真宗身体不适，病情加重，向山川神雇祈祷。
English: On the fifteenth day, the prime minister was summoned to his bedchamber. Shinshu was unwell and his condition worsened. He prayed to Yamakawa Shinnyo.

古文：戊午，帝大渐，遗诏皇太子于柩前即皇帝位。
现代文：十九日，真宗病危，留下遗诏皇太子在枢前即皇帝位。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Zhenzong was critically ill, and he left a will that the crown prince should become the emperor.

古文：尊皇后为皇太后，权处分军国事，淑妃为皇太妃。
现代文：尊皇后为皇太后，代行处理军国事务，淑妃为皇太妃。
English: The revered empress is the empress dowager, acting to deal with military affairs, and the consort is the empress dowager.

古文：帝是日崩于延庆殿，年五十五，在位二十六年。
现代文：真宗这天在延庆殿逝世，终年五十五岁，在位二十六年。
English: Shinsong died that day at Yanqing Palace, at the age of fifty-five, having reigned for twenty-six years.

古文：十月己酉，葬永定陵。
现代文：十月十三日，葬于永定陵。
English: On October 13, he was buried in Yongding Mausoleum.

古文：己未，祔太庙。
现代文：二十三日，附祭太庙。
English: On the 23rd, there will be an additional festival at the Imperial Temple.

古文：天圣二年十一月，上尊谥曰文明武定章圣元孝皇帝，庙号真宗。
现代文：天圣二年十一月，上尊溢为文明武定章圣元孝皇帝，庙号真宗。
English: In November of the second year of Heaven's sanctity, Emperor Sheng Yuanxiao of the Civilized Martial Law Chapter was enthroned, and the temple was given the name of Shinshu.

古文：庆历七年，加谥膺符稽古神功让德文明武定章圣元孝皇帝。
现代文：庆历七年，加溢膺符稽古神功让德文明武定章圣元孝皇帝。
English: In the seventh year of Qing Lian, Emperor Sheng Yuan Xiao of the German Civilization and Martial Arts, who practiced the ancient sacred art of Kung Fu, was born.

古文：赞曰：真宗英悟之主。
现代文：评论说：真宗是英明颖悟的帝王。
English: Comment: Shinshu is an emperor who is wise and enlightened.

古文：其初践位，相臣李沆虑其聪明，必多作为，数奏灾异以杜其侈心，盖有所见也。
现代文：他初登皇位时，宰相李杭怕他聪明一定有多方面的爱好和作为，就多次陈奏灾情来杜绝他的奢侈之心，这真是有所预见啊。
English: When he first ascended the throne, Prime Minister Li Hang, fearing that he was clever and must have many hobbies and activities, repeatedly played up the disaster situation to put an end to his extravagant heart, which was really foresighted.

古文：及澶洲既盟，封禅事作，祥瑞沓臻，天书屡降，导迎奠安，一国君臣如病狂然，吁，可怪也。
现代文：等到与辽在擅渊结盟，封禅的事兴起，样瑞之物纷至沓来，天书屡次降临，拜迎祭奠，这些曾使全国的君臣像发了狂一样，唉，真是奇怪呀！
English: Wait until the alliance with Liao in Hengyuan, the rise of the fief of Zen, the appearance of auspicious things, the frequent arrival of heavenly books, and the worship of offerings, these have made the princes and courtiers across the country like mad, alas, it is really strange!

古文：他日修《辽史》，见契丹故俗而后推求宋史之微言焉。
现代文：他日撰写杠史看到契丹的旧风俗，而后可以推求这一段宋史的微妙含义了。
English: He saw the old customs of Khitan when he was writing the history of the bar on the other day, and then he could deduce the subtle meaning of this period of Song history.

古文：宋自太宗幽州之败，恶言兵矣。
现代文：宋朝从太宗雍熙年间幽州之败后，不愿再谈及兵事了。
English: After the defeat of Yuzhou during the reign of Emperor Taizong Yongxi, the Song Dynasty was no longer willing to talk about military affairs.

古文：契丹其主称天，其后称地，一岁祭天不知其几，猎而手接飞雁，鸨自投地，皆称为天赐，祭告而夸耀之。
现代文：契丹之主称为天，王后称为地，一年中祭天不知有几次，出去射猎而手接飞雁，鸭自己落到地上，都称为是天所赐予的，祭奠、祷告并向人夸耀。
English: The lord of the Khitan is called heaven, the queen is called earth, and there are several times a year when a sacrifice is made to heaven. If you go out shooting and catch a flying goose, or if a duck lands on the ground, it is all said to have been given by heaven. They offer sacrifices, pray, and boast to others.

古文：意者宋之诸臣，因知契丹之习，又见其君有厌兵之意，遂进神道设教之言，欲假是以动敌人之听闻，庶几足以潜消其窥觎之志欤？
现代文：由此推想，大概宋朝的各位臣子，因为知道契丹的风俗，又看到自己的君主有厌恶兵战的思想，于是进献神教设道的言论，想借此启动敌人的视听，这样或许可以暗暗打消他们凯觑大宋的主意吧？
English: From this, it can be deduced that the courtiers of the Song Dynasty, knowing the customs of the Khitan, and seeing that their monarch had an aversion to military warfare, then made a speech advocating Shintoism, hoping to use this to start the enemy's audio-visual. Perhaps this could secretly dispel their idea of looking down on the Great Song Dynasty?

古文：然不思修本以制敌，又效尤焉，计亦末矣。
现代文：然而不从根本修治国政来制服敌人，却又效法他们，这算是低劣的主意。
English: However, it is a bad idea to copy the enemy without fundamentally reforming the country's politics to subdue the enemy.

古文：仁宗以天书殉葬山陵，呜呼贤哉！
现代文：仁宗把天书殉葬在真宗陵墓。唉呀，这真是贤能的表现。
English: Rinzong buried the heavenly book in the mausoleum of Jinsong. Alas, this is really a manifestation of virtue.

