古文：宋子曰：气至于芳，色至于青色，味至于甘，人之大欲存焉。
现代文：宋先生说：芳香馥郁的气味，浓艳美丽的颜色，甘甜可口的滋味，人们对这些东西都有着强烈的欲望。
English: Mr. Song said, "People have a strong desire for aromatic and rich smells, rich and beautiful colors, and sweet and delicious tastes.

古文：芳而烈，青色而艳，甘而甜，则造物有尤异之思矣。
现代文：有些东西芳香特别浓烈，有些东西颜色格外艳丽，有些东西滋味尤其可口，这些都是大自然给予人类的特殊恩赐。
English: Some things have a particularly strong aroma, some things have a particularly bright color, and some things have a particularly delicious taste. These are all special gifts that nature has given to mankind.

古文：世间作甘之味什八产于草木，而飞虫竭力争衡，采取百花酿成佳味，使草木无全功。
现代文：世间具有甜味的东西，十之八九来自于草木，而蜜蜂却极力争先，采集百花酿成佳蜜，使草木不能全部占有甜蜜的功劳。
English: Of all the things in the world that have a sweet taste, eight out of ten come from plants, while bees strive to be the first to collect flowers and make honey, so that plants cannot take all the credit for sweetness.

古文：孰主张是，而颐养遍于天下哉？
现代文：究竟是什么样的力量在主宰这件事，而使天下人都为之受益呢？
English: What kind of force is dominating this matter and benefiting everyone in the world?

古文：○蔗种
现代文：蔗种
English: Sugar cane

古文：凡甘蔗有二种，产繁闽、广间，他方合并得其什一而已。
现代文：甘蔗有两种，主要盛产于福建和广东一带，其他各个地方所种植的加起来都不到这两个地方的十分之一。
English: There are two types of sugar cane, which are mainly produced in Fujian and Guangdong. The total amount of sugar cane grown in other places is less than one-tenth of that in these two places.

古文：似竹而大者为果蔗，截断生啖，取汁适口，不可以造糖。似荻而小者为糖蔗，口啖即棘伤唇舌，人不敢食，白霜、红砂皆从此出。
现代文：其中甘蔗形状像竹子而又粗大的，叫做果蔗，截断后可以直接生吃，汁液甜蜜可口，不适合用来制糖；另一种像芦荻那样细小的，叫做糖蔗，生吃时容易刺伤唇舌，所以人们不敢生吃，白砂糖和红砂糖，都是用这种甘蔗制造的。
English: One of them is a coarse sugar cane shaped like a bamboo, called fruit cane, which can be eaten directly raw after being cut off. The juice is sweet and delicious, and is not suitable for making sugar. The other is a fine cane shaped like a reed, called sugar cane, which is easy to hurt the lips and tongue when eaten raw, so people do not dare to eat it raw. Both white sugar and red sugar are made from this sugar cane.

古文：凡蔗古来中国不知造糖，唐大历间，西僧邹和尚游蜀中遂宁始传其法。
现代文：古代时中国还不知道用甘蔗制糖，直到唐代宗大历年间，西域僧人邹和尚到四川遂宁县旅游时，才传授了制糖的方法。
English: In ancient times, China did not yet know how to make sugar from sugar cane. It was not until the Tang Dynasty, during the reign of Emperor Zong Da Lian, that a monk from the Western Regions traveled to Suining County in Sichuan and taught the method of making sugar.

古文：今蜀中种盛，亦自西域渐来也。
现代文：现在四川境内种植的很多甘蔗，就是从西域逐渐传入的。
English: Much of the sugar cane now grown in Sichuan was gradually introduced from the western region.

古文：凡种荻蔗，冬初霜将至将蔗斫伐，去杪与根，埋藏土内。雨水前五六日，天色晴明即开出，去外壳，斫断约五六寸，以两个节为率。密布地上，微以土掩之，头尾相枕，若鱼鳞然。
现代文：种植荻蔗的方法是，在初冬将要下霜之前将荻蔗砍倒，去掉头和尾，埋在泥土里，在第二年 雨水 节气的前五六天，趁天气晴朗时将荻蔗挖出，剥掉外面的叶鞘，砍成五六寸长一段，以每段都要留有两个节为准，把它们密排在地上，稍微盖上少量土，让它们像鱼鳞似的头尾相枕。
English: The method of planting cane is to cut down the cane before the frost in early winter, remove the head and tail, and bury it in the soil. In the second year, five or six days before the rainy season, take advantage of the sunny weather to dig out the cane, peel off the outer leaf sheath, and cut it into a five or six inch long section, with two knots left in each section. They are densely arranged on the ground, slightly covered with a small amount of soil, so that they are like fish scales.

古文：两芽平放，不得一上一下，致芽向土难发。
现代文：每段荻蔗上的两个芽都要平放，不能一上一下，致使向下的种芽难以萌发出土。
English: The two buds on each section of cane should be laid flat, not one on top of the other, which makes it difficult for the downward buds to germinate.

古文：芽长一二寸，频以清粪水浇之，俟长六七寸，锄起分栽。
现代文：到荻蔗芽长到一两寸的时候，要注意经常浇灌清粪水；等到长至六七寸的时候，就要挖出来移植分栽了。
English: When the cane sprouts grow to one or two inches, it is necessary to pay attention to regular watering with clear manure; when they grow to six or seven inches, they must be dug out and transplanted.

古文：凡栽蔗必用夹沙土，河滨洲土为第一。
现代文：种蔗必须选用沙壤土，地域最好靠近河边。
English: To grow cane, sandy loam soil must be used, and it is best to be near a river.

古文：试验土色，掘坑尺五许，将沙土入口尝味，味苦者不可栽蔗。
现代文：鉴别这种土壤的方法是，挖个一尺五寸左右深的坑，用嘴尝一下坑底泥土的味道，如果尝出有苦味就不能用来栽种糖蔗。
English: The way to identify this kind of soil is to dig a pit about a foot and a half deep, and taste the soil at the bottom of the pit with your mouth. If you taste a bitter taste, you can't use it to grow sugar cane.

古文：凡洲土近深山上流河滨者，即土味甘，亦不可种。
现代文：在深山之中，一些河流上游两岸的土地上，即使土壤有甜的味道，也不能种植糖蔗。
English: Deep in the mountains, on the upstream banks of some rivers, even if the soil has a sweet taste, sugar cane cannot be grown.

古文：盖山气凝寒，则他日糖味亦焦苦。
现代文：这是因为山地气候寒冷，产出的蔗糖也会有苦味。
English: This is because the mountain climate is cold, and the sucrose produced will also have a bitter taste.

古文：去山四五十里，平阳洲土择佳而为之。
现代文：种糖蔗应该在离山地约四五十里的平坦开阔、日照充足的土地附近选择较好的地段来栽种。
English: Sugar cane should be planted in a good location near a flat, open, sunny land about forty or fifty miles from the mountains.

古文：凡栽蔗治畦，行阔四尺，犁沟深四寸。
现代文：此外，黄泥土也不适于种植糖蔗。种蔗时要把田地平整成每行宽四尺的畦，犁出约四寸深的沟，把糖蔗种在沟内，大约每七尺的距离种三株。
English: In addition, loess soil is also not suitable for growing sugar cane. When growing sugar cane, the field should be leveled into a four-foot-wide row of ploughs, digging a trench about four inches deep, and planting sugar cane in the trench, planting three plants about every seven feet.

古文：蔗栽沟内，约七尺列三丛，掩土寸许，土太厚则芽发稀少也。芽发三四个或六七个时，渐渐下土，遇锄耨时加之。
现代文：种蔗后再给它盖上一寸厚的土，如果盖得太厚发芽就少。当每一株长出三四个或六七个芽的时候，要开始给它培土，把土继续盖到畦上。
English: After planting the cane, cover it with an inch of soil. If it is too thick, there will be fewer sprouts. When each plant grows three, four or six or seven sprouts, start to cover it with soil and continue to cover the soil to the stalk.

古文：加土渐厚，则身长根深，庶免欹倒之患。
现代文：每次翻地除草时都要记得培土，土层逐渐加厚，糖蔗就会越长越高，根也会越扎越深，这样可以避免倒伏的危险。
English: Every time you turn over the ground to weed, remember the soil. The soil layer will gradually thicken, the sugar cane will grow higher and higher, and the roots will grow deeper and deeper, so you can avoid the danger of falling over.

古文：凡锄耨不厌勤过，浇粪多少视土地肥硗。
现代文：中耕除草的活儿不嫌次数多，施肥的多少就要看土地的肥瘦程度了。
English: The work of weeding in the middle of cultivation is often unpleasant, and the amount of fertilization depends on the degree of fatness of the land.

古文：长至一二尺，则将胡麻或芸苔枯浸和水灌，灌肥欲施行内。
现代文：等到甘蔗苗长到一两尺时，就要把胡麻或油菜籽枯饼浸泡后掺水一起浇灌，肥要浇灌在行内。
English: When the sugar cane seedlings grow to one or two feet, it is necessary to soak the sesame or rapeseed cake and water it with water. The fertilizer should be poured inside the row.

古文：高二三尺则用牛进行内耕之。
现代文：等到甘蔗苗长高到两三尺时则要用牛进入行间进行耕作。
English: When the sugar cane seedlings grow to a height of two or three feet, the cows are used to farm between the rows.

古文：半月一耕，用犁一次垦土断傍根，一次掩土培根，九月初培土护根，以防斫后霜雪。
现代文：每半月犁耕一次以切断一次旁根，翻土一次，培土一次。到了九月初则要大培土保护甘蔗根，以防甘蔗砍收后的宿根被霜雪冻坏。
English: Once every half month, ploughing is carried out to cut off the side roots, the soil is turned over and the soil is prepared. At the beginning of September, large amounts of soil are prepared to protect the sugar cane roots, to prevent the post-harvest roots of the sugar cane from being damaged by frost and snow.

古文：○蔗品
现代文：蔗品
English: Sugar cane products

古文：凡荻蔗造糖，有凝冰、白霜、红砂三品。
现代文：用糖蔗可以造出冰糖、白糖和红糖三种糖。
English: Sugar cane can be used to make rock sugar, white sugar and brown sugar.

古文：糖品之分，分于蔗浆之老嫩。
现代文：糖的品种不同，是由荻蔗的老嫩程度决定的。
English: The different varieties of sugar are determined by the degree of ripeness of the cane.

古文：凡蔗性至秋渐转红黑色，冬至以后由红转褐，以成至白。
现代文：荻蔗的外皮到秋天就会逐渐变成深红色，到了冬至以后就会由红色转变为褐色，然后出现白色的蔗蜡。
English: The outer skin of the cane will gradually turn crimson in the autumn, and after the winter solstice, it will turn from red to brown, and then white cane wax will appear.

古文：五岭以南无霜国土，蓄蔗不伐以取糖霜。若韶、雄以北十月霜侵，蔗质遇霜即杀，其身不能久待以成白色，故速伐以取红糖也。
现代文：在华南五岭以南没有霜冻的地区，荻蔗冬天也被留在地里而不砍收，让它长得更好些以用来制造白糖；但是在广东韶关、南雄以北地区，十月份就会出现霜冻，蔗质一经霜冻就要受到破坏，那些地区的荻蔗就不能在地里留很长时间等它变成白色再收，因此要赶紧砍伐用来造红糖。
English: In the frost-free areas south of the South China Five Ridges, the cane is also left in the ground in winter without being harvested, so that it can grow better to be used to make white sugar; however, in the areas north of Shouguan and Nanxiong in Guangdong, frost will occur in October, and the cane quality will be destroyed once it is frosted. The cane in those areas cannot be left in the ground for a long time until it turns white and is harvested again, so it must be quickly cut down to make brown sugar.

古文：凡取红糖，穷十日之力而为之。
现代文：制造红糖必须在十天之内全力完成。
English: The production of brown sugar must be fully completed within ten days.

古文：十日以前其浆尚未满足，十日以后恐霜气逼侵，前功尽弃。故种蔗十亩之家，即制车釜一付以供急用。
现代文：因为十天以前荻蔗糖浆还没有长足，而十天以后又怕受霜冻的侵袭而导致前功尽弃，所以种蔗多达十亩的人家就要准备榨糖和煮糖用的车和锅以供急用。
English: Because ten days ago, the sugar cane syrup had not yet grown enough, and ten days later, they were afraid of being attacked by frost, causing the previous work to be abandoned, so people who grow up to ten acres of sugar cane have to prepare cars and pots for pressing sugar and cooking sugar for emergency use.

古文：若广南无霜，迟早惟人也。
现代文：至于在广东南部没有霜冻的地区，荻蔗收割的早迟就随人自主安排了。
English: As for the frost-free areas in southern Guangdong, the cane harvest will be arranged independently sooner or later.

古文：○造糖
现代文：造糖
English: Synthetic sugar

古文：凡造糖车，制用横板二片，长五尺，厚五寸，阔二尺，两头凿眼安柱，上┺出少许，下┺出板二三尺，埋筑土内，使安稳不摇。
现代文：造糖用的轧浆车的形制和规格，是用每块长约五尺、厚约五寸、宽约二尺的上下两块横板，在横板两端凿孔安上柱子。柱子上端的榫头从上横板露出少许，下端的榫头要穿过下横板二至三尺，这样才能埋在地下，使整个车身安稳而不摇晃。
English: The shape and specifications of a sugar-making pulp mill are based on two upper and lower cross-plates, each about five feet long, about five inches thick, and about two feet wide. Holes are drilled at both ends of the cross-plate to install a column. The upper end of the column is slightly exposed from the upper cross-plate, and the lower end of the column has to pass through the lower cross-plate two to three feet, so that it can be buried in the ground, so that the entire body is stable and does not shake.

古文：上板中凿二眼，并列巨轴两根，轴木大七尺围方妙。
现代文：在上横板的中部凿两个孔眼，并排安放两根大木轴，做轴的木料的周长大于七尺为最好。
English: Drill two holes in the middle of the upper crosspiece, and place two large wooden shafts side by side. The circumference of the wood used to make the shaft should be at least seven feet.

古文：两轴一长三尺，一长四尺五寸，其长者出┺安犁担。
现代文：两根木轴中一根长约三尺，另外一根长约四尺五寸，长轴的榫头露出上横板用来安装犁担。
English: One of the two wooden shafts is about three feet long, the other is about four feet five inches long, and the long shaft has a cross-beam exposed at the end to install the cross-beam.

古文：担用屈木，长一丈五尺，以便驾牛团转走。
现代文：犁担是用一根长约一丈五尺的弯曲的木材做成的，以便套牛轭使牛转圈走。
English: The yoke was made of a curved piece of wood, about five feet long, to encircle the oxen.

古文：轴上凿齿分配雌雄，其合缝处须直而圆，圆而缝合。
现代文：轴端凿有相互配合的凹凸转动齿轮，两轴的合缝处必须又直又圆，这样缝才能密合得好。
English: The shaft end is chiseled with concave-convex rotating gears that fit each other. The seam between the two shafts must be straight and round so that the seams can fit well.

古文：夹蔗于中，一轧而过，与棉花赶车同义。
现代文：把甘蔗夹在两根轴之间一轧而过，这和轧棉花的赶车的道理是相同的。
English: The reason for rolling sugar cane between two axles is the same as that for cotton.

古文：蔗过浆流，再拾其滓，向轴上鸭嘴扌及入，再轧，又三轧之，其汁尽矣，其滓为薪。
现代文：甘蔗经过压榨便会流出糖浆水，再把蔗渣插入轴上的 鸭嘴 处进行第二次压榨，然后又压榨第三次，蔗汁就会被压榨尽了，剩下的蔗渣可以用做烧火的燃料。
English: After the sugar cane is pressed, the syrup water will flow out, and then the cane residue is inserted into the beak on the shaft for the second pressing, and then pressed for the third time. The cane juice will be squeezed out, and the remaining cane residue can be used as fuel for the fire.

古文：其下板承轴，凿眼，只深一寸五分，使轴脚不穿透，以便板上受汁也。
现代文：下横板用来支撑木轴，装木轴的地方只凿了一寸五分深的两个小孔，使轴脚不能穿透下横板，以便在板面上承接蔗汁。
English: The lower cross-beam was used to support the wooden shaft. Two small holes, only one-fifth of an inch deep, were drilled in the place where the wooden shaft was mounted, so that the shaft foot could not penetrate the lower cross-beam, in order to receive the cane juice on the board surface.

古文：其轴脚嵌安铁锭于中，以便捩转。
现代文：轴的下端要安装铁条和锭子以便于转动。
English: The lower end of the shaft should be fitted with iron bars and pliers to facilitate rotation.

古文：凡汁浆流板有槽，枧汁入于缸内。
现代文：蔗汁通过下横板上的槽导流进糖缸里。
English: The cane juice flows into the sugar bowl through a channel on the lower horizontal board.

古文：每汁一石下石灰五合于中。
现代文：每石蔗汁加入石灰约五合。
English: Add about five parts of lime to each stone of cane juice.

古文：凡取汁煎糖，并列三锅如 品 字，先将稠汁聚入一锅，然后逐加稀汁两锅之内。
现代文：在取用蔗汁熬糖时，把三口铁锅排列成品字形，先把浓蔗汁集中在一口锅里，然后再把稀蔗汁逐渐加入到其余两口锅里。
English: When using cane juice to boil sugar, arrange the three iron pots into a finished shape. First, concentrate the thick cane juice in one pot, and then gradually add the thin cane juice to the remaining two pots.

古文：若火力少束薪，其糖即成顽糖，起沫不中用。
现代文：如果是柴火不够火力不足，哪怕只少一把火，也会把糖浆熬成质量低劣的顽糖，满是泡沫而没有用处了。
English: If the firewood is not strong enough, even if there is only a small fire, it will boil the syrup into poor quality hard candy, full of foam and useless.

古文：○造白糖
现代文：造白糖
English: White sugar syrup

古文：凡闽、广南方经冬老蔗，用车同前法。
现代文：我国南方的福建和广东一带有过了冬的成熟老甘蔗，它的压榨方法与前面所讲过的方法一样。
English: In Fujian and Guangdong in the south of China, there is an overwintered mature old sugar cane, and its pressing method is the same as the method mentioned above.

古文：榨汁入缸，看水花为火色。
现代文：将榨出的糖汁引入糖缸之中，熬糖时要通过注意观察蔗汁沸腾时的水花来控制火候。
English: Introduce the squeezed sugar juice into the sugar bowl. When boiling sugar, control the heat by paying attention to the water spray when the cane juice is boiling.

古文：其花煎至细嫩，如煮羹沸，以手捻试，粘手则信来矣。
现代文：当熬到水花呈细珠状，好像煮开了的羹糊似的时，就用手捻试一下，如果粘手就说明已经熬到火候了。
English: When the water is boiled until it forms fine beads, as if it were boiled custard, try twisting it with your hand. If it sticks, it means that it has been boiled until it is hot.

古文：此时尚黄黑色，将桶盛贮，凝成黑沙。然后以瓦溜置缸上。
现代文：这时的糖浆还是黄黑色，把它盛装在桶里，让它凝结成糖膏，然后把瓦溜放在糖缸上。
English: At this time, the syrup is still yellow-black, it is placed in a bucket, it is allowed to condense into sugar paste, and then the bricks are placed on the sugar bowl.

古文：共溜上宽下尖，底有一小孔，将草塞住，倾桶中黑沙于内。
现代文：这种瓦溜上宽下尖，底下留有一个小孔，用草将小孔塞住，把桶里的糖膏倒入瓦溜中。
English: The rickshaw is wide at the top and narrow at the bottom. There is a small hole at the bottom. Plug the hole with grass and pour the sugar paste from the bucket into the rickshaw.

古文：待黑沙结定，然后去孔中塞草，用黄泥水淋下。其中黑滓入缸内，溜内尽成白霜。
现代文：等糖膏凝固以后就除去塞在小孔中的草，用黄泥水从上淋浇下来，其中黑色的糖浆就会淋进缸里，留在瓦溜中的全都变成了白糖。
English: After the sugar paste has set, the grass stuffed in the small hole is removed, and the yellow muddy water is poured down from the top, in which the black syrup will be poured into the jar, and all that is left in the mortar and pestle will turn into white sugar.

古文：最上一层厚五寸许，洁白异常，名曰洋糖，下者稍黄褐。
现代文：最上面的一层约有五寸多厚，非常洁白，名叫 西洋糖 ，下面的一层稍带黄褐色。
English: The uppermost layer is about five inches thick, very white, called Western sugar, and the lower layer is slightly yellow-brown.

古文：造冰糖者将洋糖煎化，蛋青澄去浮滓，候视火色。
现代文：制造冰糖的方法是：将最上层的白糖加热溶化，用鸡蛋清澄清并去除掉面上的浮渣，要注意适当控制火候。
English: The method of making rock sugar is: heat the top layer of white sugar to dissolve, use egg white to clarify and remove the scum on the surface, pay attention to proper control of heat.

古文：将新青竹破成篾片，寸斩撒入其中。
现代文：将新鲜的青竹破截成一寸长的篾片，撒入糖液之中。
English: Fresh green bamboo shoots are cut into one-inch long slices and sprinkled into the sugar solution.

古文：经过一霄，即成天然冰块。
现代文：经过一夜之后就自然凝结成天然冰块那样的冰糖。
English: After one night, it will naturally condense into rock candy like natural ice.

古文：造狮、象、人物等，质料精粗由人。
现代文：制作狮糖、象糖及人物等形状的糖，糖质的精粗就可以随人们自主选用了。
English: To make sugar in the shape of lion candy, elephant candy and human figures, the fine and coarse sugars can be freely selected by people.

古文：凡白糖有五品，石山为上，团枝次之，瓮鉴次之，小颗又次，沙脚为下。
现代文：白糖中分为五等，其中 石山 为最上等， 团枝 稍微差些， 瓮鉴 又差些， 小颗 更差些， 沙脚 则为最差。
English: White sugar is divided into five grades, of which ishi-yama is the highest grade, tassel is slightly worse, tsukudani is slightly worse, kakizaki is slightly worse, komatsu is slightly worse, and sandalwood is the worst.

古文：○饴饧
现代文：饴饧
English: 

古文：凡饴饧，稻、麦、黍、粟皆可为之。
现代文：饴饧可以用稻、麦、黍和粟来做成。
English: It can be made from rice, wheat, millet and poppy seeds.

古文：《洪范》云： 稼穑作甘。 
现代文：《尚书·洪范》篇中说： 用五谷食粮制造甜美的东西。 
English: "Shangshu · Hongfan" said in the article: Use five-grain food to make sweet things.

古文：及此乃穷其理。
现代文：现在就可以明白五行生五味的道理了。
English: Now you can understand the reason for the five elements and five tastes.

古文：其法用稻麦之类浸湿，生芽暴干，然后煎炼调化而成。
现代文：制作饴饧的方法是，将稻麦之类泡湿，等到它发芽后晒干，然后煎炼调化而成。
English: The method of making koji is to soak rice and other grains until they sprout, dry them in the sun, and then strain and blend them.

古文：色以白者为上，赤色者名曰胶饴，一时宫中尚之，含于口内即溶化，形如琥珀。
现代文：色泽以白色的为上等品，红色的叫做 胶饴 ，在皇宫内一时很受欢迎，这种糖含在嘴里就会溶化，外形像琥珀一样。
English: The white color is the top grade, and the red one is called "glucose syrup," which was very popular in the imperial palace for a while. This sugar melts in the mouth and looks like amber.

古文：南方造饼饵者谓饴饧为小糖，盖对蔗浆而得名也。
现代文：南方制作糕点饼干的称饴饧为小糖，大概是以此区别于蔗糖而取的名字。
English: Nanfang's biscuits are called "small sugar," which is probably the difference between them and cane sugar.

古文：饴饧人巧千方以供甘旨，不可枚述。惟尚方用者名 一窝丝 ，或流传后代不可知也。
现代文：饴饧制造的技巧和方法很多，人们巧妙地将饴饧制成各种美味食品，多得不能一一列举；但是宫廷中皇族们所吃的叫做 一窝丝 的糖，有没有流传到后世，就不知道了。
English: There are many techniques and methods for making candy. People have skillfully made candy into all kinds of delicious foods, too many to list. However, it is not known whether the sugar called "a bunch of silk" eaten by the royal family in the court has been passed down to future generations.

古文：○蜂蜜
现代文：蜂蜜
English: Honey from cows

古文：凡酿蜜蜂普天皆有，唯蔗盛之乡则蜜蜂自然减少。
现代文：酿蜜的蜜蜂普天之下到处都有，但是在盛产甘蔗的地方，蜜蜂自然就会减少。
English: Honey bees are found all over the world, but where sugar cane is abundant, bees naturally decrease.

古文：蜂造之蜜出山岩土穴者十居其八，而人家招蜂造酿而割取者，十居其二也。
现代文：蜜蜂所酿造的蜂蜜，其中十分之八是野蜂在山崖和土穴里酿造的，出自人工养蜂的蜜只占十分之二。
English: Of the honey made by bees, eight-tenths is made by wild bees on cliffs and in burrows, and only two-tenths comes from artificial beekeeping.

古文：凡蜜无定色，或青或白，或黄或褐，皆随方土花性而变。
现代文：蜂蜜没有固定的颜色，有青色的、白色的、黄色的、褐色的，随各地方的花性和种类的不同而不同。
English: Honey does not have a fixed colour, it can be blue, white, yellow or brown, depending on the local flowers and species.

古文：如菜花蜜、禾花蜜之类，百千其名不止也。
现代文：例如，菜花蜜、禾花蜜等，名目何止成百上千啊！
English: For example, there are hundreds and thousands of names for nectar from vegetables, grass and flowers.

古文：凡蜂不论于家于野，皆有蜂王。
现代文：不论是野蜂还是家蜂，其中都有蜂王。
English: Whether it is a wild bee or a domestic bee, there is a queen bee.

古文：王之所居造一台如桃大，王之子世为王。
现代文：蜂王居住的地方，造一个有如桃子般大小的台，蜂王之子世代继承王位。
English: Where the queen bee lives, build a platform the size of a peach, and the queen bee's children will inherit the throne for generations.

古文：王生而不采花，每日群蜂轮值，分班采花供王。
现代文：蜂王一生之中从来不外出采蜜，每天由群蜂轮流分班值日，采集花蜜供蜂王食用。
English: The queen bee never goes out to collect honey in her life. Every day, the bees take turns on duty, collecting nectar for the queen bee to eat.

古文：王每日出游两度，游则八蜂轮值以待。
现代文：蜂王在春夏造蜜季节每天出游两次，出游时，有八只蜜蜂轮流值班伺候。
English: In the spring and summer honey-making season, the queen bee travels twice a day. When she travels, eight bees take turns on duty.

古文：蜂王自至孔隙口，四蜂以头顶腹，四蜂傍翼飞翔而去，游数刻而返，翼顶如前。
现代文：等到蜂王自己爬出洞穴口时，就有四只蜂用头顶着蜂王的肚子，把它顶出，另外四只蜂在周围护卫着蜂王飞翔而去，游不多久就会回来，回来时还像出去时那样顶着蜂王的肚子并护卫着把蜂王送进蜂巢之中。
English: When the queen bee herself crawls out of the mouth of the cave, there are four bees holding the queen bee's stomach with their heads and push it out. The other four bees are around to escort the queen bee as she flies away. She will return after a short swim. When she returns, she will carry the queen bee's stomach and escort her into the hive as she did when she went out.

古文：畜家蜂者或悬桶檐端，或置箱牖下，皆锥圆孔眼数十，俟其进入。
现代文：喂养家蜂的人，有的把蜂桶挂在房檐底下的一头，有的就把蜂箱放在窗子下面，都钻几十个小圆孔让蜂群进入。
English: Some people who feed bees hang the beehive under the eaves, while others put the beehive under the window and drill dozens of small round holes for the bees to enter.

古文：凡家人杀一蜂二蜂皆无恙，杀至三蜂则群起螫人，谓之蜂反。
现代文：养蜂的人，如果打死一两只家蜂都还没有什么问题，如果打死三只以上家蜂，蜜蜂就会群起而攻击螫人，这叫做 蜂反 。
English: If a beekeeper kills one or two bees, there is no problem. If he kills three or more bees, the bees will swarm and attack the beekeeper. This is called bee revolt.

古文：凡蝙蝠最喜食蜂，投隙入中，吞噬无限。
现代文：蝙蝠最喜欢吃蜜蜂，一旦它钻空子进入蜂巢那它就会吃个没完没了。
English: Bats like to eat honeybees. Once it gets into the hive, it will eat endlessly.

古文：杀一蝙蝠悬于蜂前，则不敢食，俗谓之枭令。
现代文：如果打死一只蝙蝠悬挂在蜂巢前方，其他的蝙蝠也就不敢再来吃蜜蜂了，俗话叫做 杀一儆百 。
English: If you kill a bat hanging in front of a beehive, the other bats will not dare to eat bees again.

古文：凡家蓄蜂，东邻分而之西舍，必分王之子去而为君，去时如铺扇拥卫。
现代文：家养的蜜蜂从东邻分群到西舍时，一定会分一个蜂王之子去当新的蜂王，届时蜂群将组成扇形阵势簇拥护卫新的蜂王而飞走。
English: When domestic bees migrate from the eastern neighbor hive to the western hive, they will certainly divide a son of the queen bee to become the new queen bee. At that time, the swarm will form a fan-shaped formation to protect the new queen and fly away.

古文：乡人有撒洒糟香而招之者。
现代文：乡下养蜂的人常常有喷洒甜酒糟而用它的香气来招引蜜蜂。
English: Beekeepers in the countryside often spray sweet wine lees and use its aroma to attract bees.

古文：凡蜂酿蜜，造成蜜脾，其形鬣鬣然。
现代文：蜜蜂酿蜜之前会先筑出酿蜜用的空间，称为 蜜脾 ，它的形状好像动物排列整齐的鬃毛。
English: Before bees make honey, they first build a space for making honey, called the honey spleen, which is shaped like an animal's neatly arranged bristles.

古文：咀嚼花心汁吐积而成。润以人小遗，则甘芳并至，所谓臭腐神奇也。
现代文：蜜蜂用嘴咀嚼采到的花心汁液，吐出以后累积久了就变成了蜜，再用人尿去浸润，蜂蜜会变得芬芳甜美，这就是所谓 臭腐化神奇 的道理。
English: Honeybees use their mouths to chew the juice of the flower cores they have collected. After it is spit out, it accumulates for a long time and turns into honey. If it is then impregnated with human urine, the honey will become fragrant and sweet. This is the so-called "magic of putrefaction."

古文：凡割脾取蜜，蜂子多死其中。其底则为黄蜡。
现代文：要取出蜜脾获得蜂蜜时，因为要用布包住蜜脾来回扭转，里面的蜂蛹、幼虫大部分都会死掉，蜜脾的底部会有黄色的蜂蜡生成。
English: When extracting the spleen to obtain honey, because the spleen must be wrapped in a cloth and twisted back and forth, most of the beehives and larvae inside will die, and yellow beeswax will form at the bottom of the spleen.

古文：凡深山崖石上有经数载未割者，其蜜已经时自熟，土人以长竿刺取，蜜即流下。
现代文：在深山中的一些岩石上，偶尔会发现经过好几年都没有割下来取蜜的野生蜜脾，其中所含的蜜已经相当成熟。当地人只需用一根长竿刺破蜜脾，蜜汁就会流下来。
English: On some rocks deep in the mountains, you can occasionally find wild honey spleens that have not been cut down for several years, and the honey contained in them is already quite mature. Locals just need to pierce the spleen with a long pole and the honey will flow down.

古文：或未经年而攀缘可取者，割炼与家蜜同也。
现代文：有一些蜜脾的时间还不到一年，这就需要有人爬上去割取，取蜜的方法就跟自家养蜂取蜜一样。
English: There are some honey spleens that are less than a year old, which requires someone to climb up and cut them. The method of extracting honey is the same as that of home beekeeping.

古文：土穴所酿多出北方，南方卑湿，有崖蜜而无穴蜜。
现代文：洞穴中出产的蜂蜜绝大部分来自北方，南方地势低，气候又潮湿，只有在山崖上才有蜜蜂筑巢酿蜜，而从没有见到在洞穴里筑巢的。
English: The vast majority of honey produced in caves comes from the north. In the south, the terrain is low and the climate is humid. Only on the cliffs do bees build nests to make honey, and they have never been seen building nests in caves.

古文：凡蜜脾一斤炼取十二两。
现代文：一斤蜜脾中可以获得十二两蜜。
English: In one kilo of spleen honey, you can get twelve honey.

古文：西北半天下，盖与蔗浆分胜云。
现代文：西北地区的蜂蜜占全国糖产量的一半，几乎与南方的蔗糖不相上下。
English: Honey from the northwest region accounts for half of the country's sugar production and is almost on a par with cane sugar from the south.

古文：○附：造兽糖
现代文：附：造兽糖
English: Attached: Animal sugar syrup

古文：凡造兽糖者，每巨釜一口受糖五十斤。
现代文：要制造动物形状的糖，其方法是，在一口大锅中放五十斤白糖，然后加热慢慢熬化。
English: To make animal-shaped sugar, the method is to put fifty pounds of white sugar in a large pot, and then heat it slowly.

古文：其下发火慢煎，火从一角烧灼，则糖头滚旋而起。
现代文：要让火从锅的一角开始烧热，这样熔化的糖液会翻滚搅动。
English: Start the fire in one corner of the pan, so the molten sugar liquid will tumble and stir.

古文：若釜心发火，则尽尽沸溢于地。
现代文：如果在锅底的中心部位开始加热，糖液就会因急速沸腾而溅到地上。
English: If you start heating in the center of the bottom of the pan, the sugar liquid will splash to the ground due to rapid boiling.

古文：每釜用鸡子三个，去黄取清，入冷水五升化解。逐匙滴下用火糖头之上，则浮沤黑滓尽起水面，以笊篱捞去，其糖清白之甚。
现代文：每只锅用三个鸡蛋的蛋清，加五升冷水调匀，把这种蛋清水一勺一勺地慢慢加在沸腾的糖液上，黑色的渣滓就会随浮沫漂起来，把它用笊篱捞出，锅里的糖液就会变得很干净。
English: Use the egg white from three eggs in each pan and add five litres of cold water to equalise the cucumber. Slowly add this egg white water, spoonful by spoonful, to the boiling sugar solution. The black residue will float up with the foam. Fish it out with a hedge and the sugar solution in the pan will become very clean.

古文：然后打入铜铫，下用自风慢火温之，看定火色然后入模。
现代文：把这些糖液放进有柄的小铜锅里，下面用小火保温，注意适当控制火候，然后将糖汁倒进动物模型里。
English: Put the sugar solution into a small copper pot with a handle, keep it warm under low heat, pay attention to proper control of heat, and then pour the sugar juice into the animal model.

古文：凡狮象糖模，两合如瓦为之，杓写糖入，随手覆转倾下。
现代文：狮子、大象形状的糖模是由两片像瓦一样的模子合在一起做成的。
English: The lion and elephant-shaped sugar molds are made by joining two pieces of tile-like mold together.

古文：模冷糖烧，自有糖一膜靠模凝结，名曰享糖，华筵用之。
现代文：用勺子把糖汁倒进模型中，随手翻转模子就能把兽糖做出来。因模子温度低而糖液较热，接触到模子的地方自然就会有一层糖凝结成动物的形状，这种糖名叫 享糖 。盛大的酒席上都要用到它。
English: Using a spoon to pour the sugar juice into the model, you can easily flip the mold to make animal sugar. Due to the low temperature of the mold and the hot sugar solution, a layer of sugar will naturally condense into the shape of an animal where it comes into contact with the mold. This sugar is called "Genki sugar." It is used at grand banquets.

