古文：甚哉，白马之祸，悲夫，可为流涕者矣！
现代文：多么厉害呀，白马驿的灾祸，可悲啊，该为它哭泣吧！
English: How great is the calamity of the white stallion, how sad, how weep for him!

古文：然士之生死，岂其一身之事哉？
现代文：但士人的生死，难道是一个人自己的事吗？
English: But is a person's life and death really his or her own business?

古文：初，唐天祐三年，梁王欲以嬖吏张廷范为太常卿，唐宰相裴枢以谓太常卿唐常以清流为之，廷范乃梁客将，不可。
现代文：当初，唐夭佑三年，梁王想让他宠爱的官吏张廷范做太常卿，唐宰相裴枢认为唐代常任命清流之士来担任太常卿，张廷范是梁的客将，不可以任太常卿。
English: At the beginning of the third year of the Tang Dynasty, Liang Wang wanted his favorite official Zhang Tingfan to become the First Secretary of the State Council. Tang Prime Minister Pei Zu believed that the Tang Dynasty often appointed clear-flowing people to serve as First Secretary of the State Council. Zhang Tingfan was Liang's guest and could not be appointed First Secretary of the State Council.

古文：梁王由此大怒，曰： 吾常语裴枢纯厚不陷浮薄，今亦为此邪！ 
现代文：梁王因此大怒，说： 我常常称赞裴枢纯朴厚道不落于轻浮浅薄，现在也做这样的事吗！ 
English: King Liang was very angry and said, "I have often praised Pei Zu for his pure, simple and virtuous ways and not falling into frivolity and shallowness, and now I am doing the same thing!"

古文：是岁四月，彗出西北，扫文昌、轩辕、天市，宰相柳璨希梁王旨，归其谴于大臣，于是左仆射裴枢、独孤损、右仆射崔远、守太保致仕赵崇、兵部侍郎王赞、工部尚书王溥、吏部尚书陆扆皆以无罪贬，同日赐死于白马驿。
现代文：这年四月，彗星在西北方出现，掠过文昌、轩辕、天市星域，宰相柳璨迎合梁王意图，把老天的谴责归咎于大臣，于是左仆射裴枢、独孤损、右仆射崔速、以太保退休的赵崇、兵部侍郎王赞、工部尚书王溥、吏部尚书陆康都无罪受到贬斥，同一天在白马驿赐死。
English: In April of that year, a comet appeared in the northwest, sweeping through Wenchang, Xuanxuan, and Tianshi star region. Prime Minister Liu Xuan pandered to Liang Wang's intention and blamed the minister for God's condemnation. As a result, the left servant Sha Pei Zu, the sole loser, the right servant Sha Cui Hai, the retired Zhao Chong, the military servant Wang Zan, the work department Shang Shu Wang Yao, and the administrative department Shang Shu Lu Kang were all innocently reprimanded and sentenced to death on the same day in Baimao.

古文：凡搢绅之士与唐而不与梁者，皆诬以朋党，坐贬死者数百人，而朝廷为之一空。
现代文：凡是归附唐而不归附梁的官吏，都被诬陷为朋党，受牵连被贬赐死的有几百人，朝廷因此空乏无人。
English: All officials who belonged to Tang but not to Liang were framed as cronies, and several hundred people were implicated and sentenced to death. As a result, the imperial court was left empty-handed.

古文：明年三月，唐哀帝逊位于梁，遣中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事张文蔚为册礼使，礼部尚书苏循为副；中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事杨涉为押传国宝使，翰林学士、中书舍人张策为副；御史大夫薛贻矩为押金宝使，尚书左丞赵光逢为副。
现代文：第二年三月，唐哀帝让位给梁，派中害侍郎、同中书门下平章事张文蔚任册礼使，礼部尚书苏循任副使；中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事杨涉任押传国宝使，翰林学士、中书舍人张策任副使；御史大夫薛贻矩任押金宝使，尚书左丞趟光逢任副使。
English: In March of the following year, Emperor Tangai abdicated to Liang, and sent Zhang Wenwei, the attendant of the middle school, and Zhang Su, the subordinate of the middle school, as the envoy, and Shang Shuxu, the vice-envoy of the ministry of etiquette; Yang Tang, the attendant of the middle school, and Yang Tang, the subordinate of the middle school, as the national treasure envoy, Hanlin, the scholar, and Zhang Zhe, the subordinate of the middle school, as the vice-envoy; Xue Bing, the doctor of history, as the envoy of the gold deposit, and Shang Shuzhu,

古文：四月甲子，文蔚等自上源驿奉册宝，乘辂车，导以金吾仗卫、太常卤簿，朝梁于金祥殿。
现代文：四月甲子，张文蔚等人从上源驿进奉册书国宝，乘坐辖车，以金吾仗卫、太常卤簿开道，在金祥殿朝拜梁。
English: April Jiazi, Zhang Wenwei and others entered the National Treasure of the Book of Records from Shangyuanlu, took the government-owned car, opened the way with King Wudongwei and Taizhongluo Book, and worshiped Liang at the Jinshang Hall.

古文：王衮冕南面，臣文蔚、臣循奉册升殿，进读已，臣涉、臣策奉传国玺，臣贻矩、臣光逢奉金宝，以次升，进读已，降，率文武百官北面舞蹈再拜贺。
现代文：梁王穿龙袍戴皇冠向南而坐，大臣张文蔚、苏循手捧册书登上殿堂，读完册书后，大臣杨涉、张策手捧传国玉印，大臣薛贻矩、赵光逢手捧金宝，依次登上殿堂，进读完毕，退下殿堂，率领文式百官向北行大礼再拜称贺。
English: Liang Wang, wearing a dragon robe and crown, sat facing south. Minister Zhang Wenwei and Su Xun held the book in their hands and ascended to the Great Hall of the People. After reading the book, Minister Yang Zhan and Zhang Zhe held the Imperial Seal of the People, and Minister Xue Yucheng and Zhao Guangfeng held the Golden Treasure. They ascended to the Great Hall of the People in turn. After reading, they retired from the Great Hall of the People and led hundreds of officials to the north to pay homage and congratulate.

古文：夫一太常卿与社稷孰为重？
现代文：一个太常卿和国家相比哪个重要？
English: What is the importance of a First Lord of the Admiralty compared to the country?

古文：使枢等不死，尚惜一卿，其肯以国与人乎？
现代文：假使裴枢等人不被赐死，尚且珍惜一太常卿职位，难道肯把国家让给别人吗？
English: If Baizhu and others are not put to death, and they still cherish the position of Tai Changqing, will they give up the country to others?

古文：虽枢等之力未必能存唐，然必不亡唐而独存也。
现代文：虽然裴枢等人的力量不一定能使唐不亡，但他们一定不会让唐灭亡而让自己独自活下来。唉！
English: Although the power of Baizhu and others may not be able to make Tang immortal, they will not let Tang perish and let themselves survive alone. Alas!

古文：呜呼！唐之亡也，贤人君子既与之共尽，其馀在者皆庸懦不肖、倾险狯猾、趋利卖国之徒也。
现代文：唐的灭亡，贤人君子已经和它同归于尽，那么别的活着的人不过都是懦弱不贤、阴险狡猾、卖国谋利的人罢了。
English: With the fall of Tang, all the wise men and gentlemen have gone down with it, so all the other living people are nothing more than cowards, treacherous, cunning, and traitors.

古文：不然，安能蒙耻忍辱于梁庭如此哉！作《唐六臣传》。
现代文：如果不是造样，怎么会在梁的朝廷蒙受这样的奇耻大辱呢！作《唐六臣传》。
English: If it wasn't an imitation, how could Liang's imperial court suffer such a great humiliation!

古文：○张文蔚张文蔚，字右华，河间人也。
现代文：张文蔚字右华，河间人。
English: Zhang Wenwei, also known as Yuhua, is a native of Kawama.

古文：初以文行知名，举进士及第。
现代文：最初因文章德行出名，考中进士。
English: At first, he was famous for his articles on virtue, and was promoted to a scholar in the middle school entrance examination.

古文：唐昭宗时，为翰林学士承旨。
现代文：唐昭宗时，任翰林学士承旨。
English: At the time of Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty, he was appointed as Hanlin Scholar.

古文：是时，天子微弱，制度已隳，文蔚居翰林，制诏四方，独守大体。
现代文：这时，天子微弱无力，制度已经败坏，张文蔚身居翰林，起草制诏下发各地，独能遵循大的体制。
English: At this time, the emperor was weak and powerless, and the system had been corrupted. Zhang Wenyi lived in the jungle, drafting edicts and issuing them to all parts of the country. He was the only one who could follow the great system.

古文：昭宗迁洛，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：唐昭宗迁到洛阳，拜他为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Tang Zhaozong moved to Luoyang, and he was worshipped as the attendant of Zhongshu and the disciple of Zhongshu.

古文：柳璨杀裴枢等七人，蔓引朝士，辄加诛杀，缙绅相视以目，皆不自保，文蔚力讲解之，朝士多赖以全活。
现代文：柳璨杀害裴枢等七人，到处牵连朝廷士大夫，动辄加以诛杀，官吏们以眼神示意，不敢说话，都自身难保，张文蔚竭力为他们辩护解脱，朝中士大夫大多靠他纔得以保全活下来。
English: Liu Bei killed seven people, including Pei Zu, and dragged the imperial court doctor everywhere, beating him to death at every turn. The officials indicated with their eyes that they did not dare to speak, as they were all in danger. Zhang Wenwei tried his best to defend and liberate them, and most of the imperial court sergeant doctors were able to survive thanks to him.

古文：梁太祖立，仍以文蔚为相，梁初制度皆文蔚所裁定。
现代文：梁太祖登位，仍然任命张文蔚为宰相，梁代初年的制度都是张文蔚裁定的。
English: When Liang Taizu ascended the throne, he still appointed Zhang Wenwei as prime minister. The system in the first year of Liang's reign was all decided by Zhang Wenwei.

古文：文蔚居家亦孝悌。
现代文：张文蔚在家也很守孝道。
English: Zhang Wenwei is also very filial at home.

古文：开平二年，太祖北巡，留文蔚西都，以暴疾卒，赠右仆射。
现代文：开平二年，梁太祖巡视北方，留张文蔚守西都，暴病而死，追赠右仆射。
English: In the second year of Kaiping, Liang Taizu made a tour of the north, leaving Zhang Wenyi to guard the western capital. He died of a violent illness and was posthumously awarded the right to shoot arrows.

古文：○杨涉杨涉，祖收，唐懿宗时宰相；父严，官至兵部侍郎。
现代文：杨涉，祖父杨收，是唐懿宋时的宰相；父亲杨严，官做到兵部侍郎。
English: Yang Zhan, grandfather Yang Jie, was the prime minister during the Tang and Song Dynasties; his father, Yang Yan, was a military officer.

古文：涉举进士，昭宗时为吏部尚书。
现代文：杨涉考中进士，唐昭宗时任吏部尚书。
English: Yang Zhankao was promoted to middle school teacher, and Tang Zhaozong was appointed as the head of the cadre department at that time.

古文：哀帝即位，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：唐哀帝登位，拜为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: Emperor Tangye ascended to the throne, and he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters and the disciple of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：涉，唐名家，世守礼法，而性特谨厚，不幸遭唐之乱，拜相之日，与家人相对泣下，顾谓其子凝式曰： 吾不能脱此网罗，祸将至矣，必累尔等。 
现代文：杨涉，出身在唐的名家，世代奉守礼法，而性格特别恭谨忠厚，不幸遭逢唐末的乱世。被任命为宰相那天，与家人相对而哭泣，望着他的儿子杨凝式说： 我不能逃脱这个罗网，灾祸快到了，必定会连累你们。 
English: Yang Zhan, who was born in a famous family in the Tang Dynasty, followed the etiquette for generations, and his character was particularly respectful and loyal. Unfortunately, he suffered from the chaotic world at the end of the Tang Dynasty. On the day he was appointed prime minister, he cried with his family and looked at his son Yang Rongshih and said: "I can't escape this trap, the disaster is coming soon, it will definitely affect you."

古文：唐亡，事梁为门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，在位三年，俯首无所施为，罢为左仆射，知贡举，后数年卒。
现代文：唐灭亡后，在梁任门下侍郎、同中书门下平章事，在位三年，俯首低眉，无所作为，罢相为左仆射，主持贡举考试，几年以后死去。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, he served as a chamberlain under the Liang Dynasty and as a secretary under the Tongzhong Dynasty. He reigned for three years, bowed his head, did nothing, acted as a lackey, presided over the tribute examination, and died a few years later.

古文：子凝式，有文词，善笔札，历事梁、唐、晋、汉、周，常以心疾致仕，居于洛阳，官至太子太保。
现代文：儿子杨凝式，著述有文采，擅长公文与书信，在梁、唐、晋、汉、周五朝都做过官，常常因心病辞官，住在洛阳，官做到太子太保。
English: His son, Yang Jingshi, was a brilliant writer, good at official documents and letters. He served as an official in the Liang, Tang, Jin, Han, and Friday Dynasties. He often resigned from his post due to mental illness. He lived in Luoyang and served as the Crown Prince's bodyguard.

古文：○张策张策，字少逸，河西敦煌人也。
现代文：张策字少逸，河西墩煌人。
English: Zhang Zehi's characters are few and far between, but the people of Hexi are brilliant.

古文：父同，为唐容管经略使。
现代文：父亲张同，任唐容管经略使。
English: His father, Zhang Tong, was appointed Tang Rongguan, a minor envoy.

古文：策少聪悟好学，通章句。父同，居洛阳敦化里，浚井得古鼎，铭曰： 魏黄初元年春二月，匠吉千。 
现代文：张策从小聪明颖悟好学，精通章句之学父亲张同，住在洛阳敦化里，疏浚水井时获得一个古鼎，铭文刻着： 魏黄初元年春二月，工匠吉千。 
English: Zhang Ce's father, Zhang Tong, lived in Dunhua, Luoyang, and obtained an ancient tripod when he was dredging a well. The inscription reads: In the spring and February of the first year of the Wei and Huang dynasties, the craftsman Ji Qian.

古文：同以为奇，策时年十三，居同侧，启曰： 汉建安二十五年，曹公薨，改元延康。
现代文：张同觉得神奇，张策当时十三岁，站在张同身旁，说： 漠建安二十五年，曹操死，改年号为延康。
English: Zhang Tong thought it was amazing that Zhang Ce, who was 13 years old at the time, stood next to Zhang Tong and said: "In the 25th year of Jianan, Cao Cao died, and the new year's name was Yan Kang.

古文：是岁十月，文帝受禅，又改黄初，是黄初元年无二月也，铭何谬邪？ 
现代文：当年十月，魏文帝受禅即位，又改年号为黄初，因此黄初元年没有二月，铭文多么荒谬呵！ 
English: In October of that year, Emperor Weiwen was enthroned by Zen, and the year was changed to Huangchu, so there was no February in the first year of Huangchu, how absurd the inscription was!

古文：同大惊异之。策少好浮图之说，乃落发为僧，居长安慈恩寺。
现代文：张同十分惊异，张策从小喜好佛教学说，于是剃去头发做僧人，住在长安慈恩寺。
English: Zhang Tong was very surprised. Zhang Ce said that he liked Buddhist teaching since childhood, so he shaved his hair to become a monk and lived in Chang'an Cien Temple.

古文：黄巢犯长安，策乃返初服，奉父母以避乱，居田里十馀年。
现代文：黄巢侵犯长安，张策纔还俗，事奉父母躲避战乱，在乡间过了十多年。
English: Huang Chao invaded Chang'an, Zhang Zehuan returned to the secular world, served his parents to avoid war, and spent more than ten years in the countryside.

古文：召拜广文馆博士。
现代文：召拜为广文馆博士。
English: He was called to be a doctor of the Guangwen Museum.

古文：邠州王行瑜辟观察支使。
现代文：郇州王行瑜征辟他任观察支使。
English: Zhangzhou Wang Xingyu recruited him as an observer.

古文：晋王李克用攻行瑜，策与婢肩舆其母东归，行积雪中，行者怜之。
现代文：晋王李克用进攻王行瑜，张策和奴婢用轿子抬着他的母亲束归，在积雪中赶路，路上的人都可怜他们。
English: Li Ke, the king of Jin, attacked Wang Xingyu, and Zhang Ce and his servants carried his mother back home in a palanquin. They drove through the snow, and everyone on the road pitied them.

古文：梁太祖兼四镇，辟郑、滑支使，以母丧解职。
现代文：梁太祖兼领四镇，召他为郑、滑二州观察支使，因为母亲去世而解职。
English: Liang Taizu concurrently led the four towns, called him to be the observer of Zheng and Nian two states, and dismissed him because of his mother's death.

古文：服除，入唐为膳部员外郎。
现代文：服丧期满，在唐任膳部员外郎。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as a member of the catering department in Tang Dynasty.

古文：华州韩建辟判官，建徙许州，以为掌书记，建遣策聘于太祖，太祖见而喜曰： 张夫子至矣。 
现代文：华州韩建召他为判官，韩建改任许州，任命他为掌书记。韩建派张策出使梁太祖，梁太祖兄到他高兴地说： 张夫子到了。 
English: Huazhou Han Jian called him to be a judge, Han Jian was reassigned to Huzhou and appointed him to be the secretary. Han Jian sent Zhang Ce to send Liang Taizu, Liang Taizu's brother came to him and said happily: Zhang Fuzi has arrived.

古文：遂留以为掌书记，荐之于朝，累拜中书舍人、翰林学士。
现代文：于是留他任掌书记，把他推荐给朝廷，累官拜为中书舍人、翰林学士。
English: So he kept him on as chief secretary, recommended him to the imperial court, and was revered as a scholar of Chinese literature and scholar of Hanlin.

古文：太祖即位，迁工部侍郎奉旨。
现代文：梁太祖登位，升任工部侍郎奉旨。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne and was promoted to the position of Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：开平二年，拜刑部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，迁中书侍郎。
现代文：开平二年，拜官刑部侍郎、同中书门下平章事，升迁中书侍郎。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the position of the attendant of the Penal Department of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and to the position of the junior attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and to the junior attendant of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：以风恙罢为刑部尚书，致仕，卒于洛阳。
现代文：因风病罢为刑部尚书，辞官居家，死于洛阳。
English: Due to rheumatism, he resigned from the Department of Criminal Law and stayed at home. He died in Luoyang.

古文：○赵光逢赵光逢，字延吉，父隐，唐左仆射。光逢在唐以文行知名，时人称其方直温润，谓之 玉界尺。 
现代文：趟光逢字延吉，父亲赵隐，任唐左仆射赵光逢在唐以文章德行出名，当时人称赞他正直温和，称他为 玉界尺 。
English: Zhao Guangfeng was born in Yanji, his father, Zhao Yin, was a left-hand servant of the Tang Dynasty. Zhao Guangfeng was famous in the Tang Dynasty for his literary virtues. At that time, people praised him for his honesty and gentleness, calling him the ruler of the jade realm.

古文：昭宗时为翰林学士承旨、御史中丞，以世乱弃官，居洛阳，杜门绝人事者五六年。
现代文：唐昭宗时任翰林学士承旨、御史中丞，因为世道混乱弃官，住在洛阳，闭门杜绝人际交往五六年。
English: At that time, Tang Zhaozong served as Hanlin Scholar Zheng Zi and Gushi Zhong Rong, but because of the chaos in the world, he resigned his post and lived in Luoyang, closed his door and cut off interpersonal communication for 56 years.

古文：柳璨为相，与光逢有旧恩，起光逢为吏部侍郎、太常卿。
现代文：柳璨任宰相，和赵光逢有旧恩，起用趟光逢为吏部侍郎、太常卿。
English: Yanukovych was appointed prime minister, and Zhao Guangfan had an old favor with Yanukovych. Yanukovych appointed Watan Guangfan as the secretary of the Ministry of Civil Service and the First Secretary of the Central Committee.

古文：唐亡，事梁为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，累迁左仆射，以太子太保致仕。
现代文：唐灭亡后，在梁任中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，屡次升迁至左仆射，以太子太保辞官居家。
English: After the fall of the Tang Dynasty, Liang served as the secretary of the Central Committee of the CPC, and was promoted several times to the position of the Left Footman of the Central Committee of the CPC, while Ether Zi lived in the residence of the Taibo Dictator.

古文：末帝即位，起为司空、同中书门下平章事，复以司徒致仕。
现代文：梁末帝登位，起用为司空、同中书门下平章事，又以司徒辞官居家。
English: Emperor Liang Mucu ascended to the throne, appointed as the secretary of the sky, the same as the middle school teacher, and also lived at home as a scholar.

古文：唐天成中，即其家拜太保，封齐国公，卒，赠太傅。
现代文：唐天成年问，在家中拜为太保，封齐国公，死，追赠太傅。
English: When Tang Tian Rongcheng died, he was given the title of Taifu (Grand Duke) posthumously.

古文：○薛贻矩薛贻矩，字熙用，河东闻喜人也，仕唐为兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨。
现代文：薛贻矩字熙用，河东闻喜人，在唐任兵部侍郎、翰林学士承旨。
English: Xue Yuanzhong was a well-known poet, and the people of Hedong were fond of him. In Tang Dynasty, he served as an attendant of the military department and a scholar of Hanlin.

古文：昭宗自岐还长安，大诛宦者，贻矩时为中尉韩全诲等作画像赞，坐左迁。
现代文：唐昭宗从岐州回长安，大杀宦官，薛贻矩当时为中尉韩全诲等人撰画像赞语，受牵连被贬官。
English: Tang Zhaozong returned to Chang'an from Qizhou, killed a eunuch, and Xue Yanzhong wrote a praise poem for Lieutenant Han Quanzhong and others at that time. He was implicated and demoted.

古文：贻矩乃自结于梁太祖，太祖言之于朝，拜吏部尚书，迁御史大夫。
现代文：薛贻矩于是自己结交梁太祖，梁太祖在朝廷上替他说话，拜为吏部尚书，迁御史大夫。
English: Xue Xuan then made a friend of Liang Taizu himself. Liang Taizu spoke for him at the imperial court, served as the secretary of the government, and was transferred to the position of imperial historian.

古文：天祐三年，太祖自长芦还军，哀帝遣贻矩来劳，贻矩以臣礼见，太祖揖之升阶，贻矩曰： 殿下功德及人，三灵改卜，皇帝方行舜、禹之事，臣安敢违？ 
现代文：天佑三年，梁太祖从长芦回师，唐哀帝派薛贻矩前来慰劳，薛贻矩按臣子的礼节进见，梁太祖还礼让他上台阶，薛贻矩说： 殿下的功德延及百姓，天、地、人三灵改变选择，皇帝正要做舜、禹禅让的事，臣子我怎敢违背？ 
English: Three years ago, by God's blessing, Liang Taizu returned from Changlu to teach, and Emperor Tang sent Xue Yanzhong to comfort him. Xue Yanzhong proceeded according to the etiquette of a vassal, and Liang Taizu gave him the courtesy of letting him go up the steps. Xue Yanzhong said, "The merits of His Highness extend to the people, and the three spirits of heaven, earth, and man change their choices. The emperor is about to do something that Yu Zhen will not allow, so how can I, a vassal, disobey?

古文：乃称臣拜舞，太祖侧身以避之。
现代文：于是自称臣子行朝拜之礼，梁太祖侧身避让。
English: As a result, the self-proclaimed vassal performed the morning prayer, and Liang Taizu avoided it.

古文：贻矩还，遂趣哀帝逊位。
现代文：薛贻矩返回，就催促唐哀帝让位。
English: As soon as Xue Yu returned, he urged Emperor Tang to give up his seat.

古文：太祖即位，拜贻矩中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，累拜司空。
现代文：梁太祖登位，拜薛贻矩为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事，累官拜为司空。
English: When Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, Bai Xueyuan was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, the lower level of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the highest level of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and the highest level of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：贻矩为梁相五年，卒，赠侍中。
现代文：薛贻矩在梁任宰相五年，死，追赠侍中。
English: Xue Yucheng, who served as Liang's prime minister for five years, died and was posthumously awarded the title of chamberlain.

古文：苏循，不知何许人也。
现代文：苏循，不知道是什么地方的人。
English: Su Su, who doesn't know where he is.

古文：为人巧佞，阿谀无廉耻，惟利是趋。
现代文：为人乖巧奸佞，阿谀奉承，毫无廉耻，惟利是图。
English: He is a good liar, a flatterer, shameless, and a schemer.

古文：事唐为礼部尚书。
现代文：在唐任礼部尚书。
English: In Tang Dynasty, he was a member of the etiquette department.

古文：是时，梁太祖已弑昭宗，立哀帝，唐之旧臣皆愤惋切齿，或俯首畏祸，或去不仕，而循特附会梁以希进用。
现代文：这时，梁太祖已杀掉唐昭宗，拥立唐哀帝，唐的故旧大臣都痛恨得咬牙切齿，有的低头畏惧灾祸，有的离开朝廷不愿做官，丽苏循专门迎合梁以求进用。
English: At this time, Liang Taizu had already killed Tang Zhaozong and supported the rise of Tang Ai. Tang's former ministers hated him so much that they gritted their teeth. Some bowed their heads in fear of disaster, while others left the imperial court because they did not want to become officials. Lishu followed Liang in order to advance his career.

古文：梁兵攻杨行密，大败于珝河，太祖躁忿，急于禅代，欲邀唐九锡，群臣莫敢当其议，独循倡言： 梁王功德，天命所归，宜即受禅。 
现代文：梁军进攻杨行密，在淖河大败，梁太祖急躁愤懑，急于取代唐，想向唐索取赐予功臣的九锡，群臣没有人敢提出此议，只有苏循一人带头说： 梁王的大功大德，是天命所归，应当立即接受禅让。 
English: Liang's army attacked Yang Xingmi and suffered a crushing defeat at the Wei River. Liang Taizu was impatient and angry, anxious to replace Tang, and wanted to ask Tang for the nine pennies given to the meritorious vassal. None of the vassals dared to propose this. Only Su Xun took the lead and said, "King Liang's great merits and virtues are the result of God's providence, and he should immediately accept Zen's concession."

古文：明年，梁太祖即位，循为册礼副使。
现代文：第二年，梁太祖登位，苏循任册礼副使。
English: The following year, Liang Taizu ascended to the throne, and Su Xun was appointed deputy envoy.

古文：循有子楷，乾宁中举进士及第，昭宗遣学士陆扆覆落之，楷常惭恨。
现代文：苏循有一个儿子苏楷，干宁年间考中进士，唐昭宗派学士陆康复核取消了他，苏楷常常惭愧怀恨。
English: Su Xuan had a son, Su Kai, who passed the junior high school entrance examination in the Han Dynasty, but was disqualified from the Tang Zhao Sect's bachelor land rehabilitation examination. Su Kai was often ashamed and held a grudge.

古文：及昭宗遇弑，唐政出于梁，楷为起居郎，与柳璨、张廷范等相结，因谓廷范曰： 夫谥者，所以易名而贵信也。
现代文：到唐昭宗被杀后，唐的朝政一概出自梁，苏楷任起居郎，和柳璨、张廷范等人相勾结，于是对张廷范说： 谧号是用来改变称呼而以诚信马贵。
English: After Emperor Zhaozong of Tang was killed, the Tang Dynasty's political leaders were all from Liang, and Su Kai was appointed as the second-in-command, in collusion with Liu Bei, Zhang Tingfan, and others. Therefore, he said to Zhang Tingfan: "The second-in-command is used to change the title, but it is more important to be honest."

古文：前有司谥先帝曰 昭 ，名实不称，公为太常卿，予史官也，不可以不言。 
现代文：以前官府给先帝的谧号叫 昭 ，名不副寅，你是太常卿，我是史官，不能不说。 
English: In the past, the nickname given to the former emperor by the government was "Zhao" (昭), not "Zhe" (寅). You are the Grand Admiral, I am a historian, I must say.

古文：乃上疏驳议。
现代文：于是上疏反驳谧议。
English: As a result, Shang So rebutted the objection.

古文：而廷范本梁客将，尝求太常卿不得者，廷范亦以此怨唐，因下楷疏廷范，廷范议曰： 臣闻执事坚固之谓恭，乱而不损之谓灵，武而不遂之谓庄，在国逢难之谓闵，因事有功之谓襄，请改谥昭宗皇帝曰恭灵庄闵皇帝，庙号襄宗。 
现代文：而张廷范原是梁的客将，曾谋求做太常卿没有得到，廷范也因此怨唐，因而把苏楷的上疏下发给张廷范，张廷范论议说： 我听说处理政事坚牢稳固叫做恭，混乱而无损害叫做灵，英武而不专断叫做庄，当政时遭难叫做闵，因事立功叫做襄，请改昭宗皇帝的谧号叫恭灵庄闵皇帝，庙号叫襄宗。 
English: Zhang Tingfan was originally Liang's guest, who had sought to become the Tai Changqing, but did not get it. Tingfan also resented Tang for this, so he sent Zhang Tingfan the top and bottom of the Su Kai. Zhang Tingfan argued: I heard that dealing with political affairs firmly and steadily is called Jing, chaos and no damage is called Ling, Yingwu and not arbitrary is called Zhuang, suffering during politics is called Shao, and making contributions is called Xiang. Please change the nickname of the Zhaozong Emperor to Jingling, Zhuang Emperor, and the temple name to Xiangzong.

古文：梁太祖已即位，置酒玄德殿，顾群臣自陈德薄不足以当天命，皆诸公推戴之力。
现代文：梁太祖登位后，在玄德殿摆酒宴，对着群臣自称功德微薄不配承受天命，都是各位推举拥戴的功劳。
English: After Liang Taizu ascended the throne, he held a wine banquet in the Xuande Hall, and told the courtiers that his merits were meager and he did not deserve to bear the fate of heaven. These are the merits that you all praise and support.

古文：唐之旧臣杨涉、张文蔚等皆惭惧俯伏不能对，独循与张祎、薛贻矩盛称梁王功德，所以顺天应人者。
现代文：唐的旧臣杨涉、张文蔚等人惭愧畏惧，俯身不能回答，只有苏循和张棒、薛贻矩等人盛赞梁王的功德，说梁王是顺应天命符合人心的。
English: Tang's former vassals Yang Zhan, Zhang Wenwei and others were ashamed and afraid, and bowed down and could not answer. Only Su Xun, Zhang Jian and Xue Yanzhong praised the merits of King Liang, saying that King Liang was obedient to the Mandate of Heaven and was in line with people's hearts.

古文：循父子皆自以附会梁得所托，旦夕引首，希见进用，敬翔尤恶之，谓太祖曰： 梁室新造，宜得端士以厚风俗，循父子皆无行，不可立于新朝。 
现代文：苏循父子都自认为依附梁得到托身之所，朝夕盼望，希望受到重用，敬翔特别憎恶他们，对梁太祖说： 梁刚建国，应当进用正直的士人使风俗淳厚，苏循父子都没有德行，不能让他们在新朝中立身。 
English: Su Xun and his son both thought that they had gained a place to hide by relying on Liang, and they hoped for it day and night, hoping to be reused. Respectful Xiang especially hated them, and said to Liang Taizu: Liang Gang founded the country, and should use honest scholars to make the customs pure. Su Xun and his son were not virtuous, and could not let them stay in the new dynasty.

古文：于是父子皆勒归田里，乃依硃友谦于河中。
现代文：于是父子两人都被勒令回到乡里，于是到河中依附朱友谦。
English: As a result, both father and son were ordered to return to the countryside, so they went to the river to cling to Zhu Youqian.

古文：其后，友谦叛梁降晋，晋王将即帝位，求唐故臣在者，以备百官之阙，友谦遣循至魏州。
现代文：后来，朱友谦背叛梁向晋投降，晋王即将登位，寻求活着的唐的旧臣，以填补官员的缺额，朱友谦于是派苏循到魏州。
English: Later, Zhu Youqian betrayed Liang to surrender to Jin, who was about to ascend to the throne and was looking for Tang's surviving former vassals to fill the shortage of officials. Zhu Youqian then sent Su Xun to Weizhou.

古文：是时梁未灭，晋诸将相多不欲晋王即位。
现代文：这时梁还没有灭亡，晋的将相们大多不愿晋王登位。
English: At this time, Liang had not yet died, and most of Jin's generals did not want Jin to ascend the throne.

古文：晋王之意虽锐，将相大臣未有赞成其议者。
现代文：晋王的打算虽然锋苦毕露，将相大臣们没有人赞成这个主意。
English: Although Jin Wang's plan was painstakingly revealed, none of the ministers agreed with the idea.

古文：循始至魏州，望州廨听事即拜，谓之 拜殿 。
现代文：苏循刚到魏州时，看见州府厅堂就下拜，叫做 拜殿 。
English: When Su Xun first arrived in Weizhou, he saw the state capital hall and bowed down, which is called the worship hall.

古文：及入谒，蹈舞呼万岁而称臣，晋王大悦。
现代文：到进见晋王时，行舞蹈礼口呼万岁而自称为臣子，晋王非常高兴。
English: When he came to see Jin Wang, he performed a dance salute and called himself a vassal. Jin Wang was very happy.

古文：明日又献 画日笔 三十管，晋王益喜，因以循为节度副使。
现代文：第二天又进献三十支 画日笔 ，晋王更加欢喜，于是任苏循为节度副使。
English: The next day, he donated another thirty Japanese-style pens, which made Jin Wang even happier, so he appointed Su Xun as the vice-envoy of the festival.

古文：已而病卒。
现代文：不久病死。
English: He died of illness soon after.

古文：庄宗即位，赠左仆射。
现代文：唐庄宗登位，赠左仆射。
English: Emperor Tangzhuang Zong ascended to the throne, bestowing the title of Left Footman.

古文：楷，同光中为尚书员外郎。
现代文：苏楷，同光年间任尚书员外郎。
English: Su Kai, Tongguang's younger brother, was also a clerk.

古文：明宗即位，大臣欲理其驳谥之罪，以忧死。
现代文：唐明宗登位，大臣们打算审察他辩驳谧号的罪过，因为忧虑而死。
English: Tang Mingzong ascended to the throne, the ministers planned to examine him for the sin of disputing the throne, and he died of anxiety.

古文：当唐之亡也，又有杜晓者，字明远。
现代文：当唐灭亡的时候，又有一个叫杜晓的人，字明远。
English: When Tang perished, there was another man named Du Xiao, whose name was Mingyuan.

古文：祖审权，父让能，皆为唐相。
现代文：祖父杜审权，父亲杜让能，都是唐的宰相。
English: His grandfather, Du Xianquan, and his father, Du Zhaneng, were both prime ministers of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：昭宗时，王行瑜、李茂贞兵犯京师，昭宗杀让能于临皋以自解。
现代文：唐昭宗时，王行瑜、李茂贞率兵侵犯京师，唐昭宗在临皋杀死杜让能为自己开脱。
English: When Tang Zhaozong, Wang Xingyu and Li Maozhen led troops to invade Beijing, Tang Zhaozong killed Dujang in Linyi to absolve himself.

古文：晓以父死无罪，居丧哀毁；服除，布衣幅巾，自废十馀年。
现代文：杜晓因父亲无罪而死，服丧时遇度悲哀损害了身体；服丧完后，身穿布衣戴头巾，自暴自弃十多年。
English: Du Xiao died because of his father's innocence, and when he was in mourning, he suffered from grief, which damaged his body. After the funeral, he wore a cloth and a headscarf, and abandoned himself for more than ten years.

古文：崔胤判盐铁，辟巡官，除畿县尉，直昭文馆，皆不起。
现代文：崔胤主管盐铁时，征召他为巡官，任命为京师附近的县尉，直昭文馆，都不赴任。
English: When Cui Yan was in charge of salt and iron, he was conscripted as an inspector, appointed as a county officer near Beijing Division, and Naosho Library, but none of them went to work.

古文：崔远判户部，又辟巡官，或谓晓曰： 嵇康死，子绍自废不出仕，山涛以物理责之，乃仕。
现代文：崔远判户部时，又召他任巡官，有人对杜晓说： 嵇康死后，他的儿子嵇绍自暴自弃不出来做官，山涛用道理说服他，纔出来做官。
English: When Cui Yuan adjudicated the household department, he also called him to be an inspector. Someone said to Du Xiao: After the death of Yu Kang, his son Yu Shao could not give himself up to become an official. Shantao used reason to convince him to become an official.

古文：吾子忍令杜氏岁时铺席祭其先人同匹庶乎？ 
现代文：你忍心让杜氏逢年遇节同百姓一样铺上席子祭祀自己的先人吗？ 杜晓因此纔赴任。
English: Do you have the heart to allow the toji to lay out mats and offer sacrifices to their ancestors every year, just like the common people? Du Xiao therefore took office.

古文：晓乃为之起。累迁膳部郎中、翰林学士。
现代文：累官升迁膳部郎中、翰林学士。
English: He rose through the ranks to become a member of the kitchen staff, and graduated from the Hanlin Academy.

古文：梁太祖即位，迁工部侍郎奉旨。
现代文：梁太祖登位，改任工部侍郎奉旨。
English: Liang Taizu ascended to the throne and was appointed as the Chamberlain of the Ministry of Works.

古文：开平二年，拜中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
现代文：开平二年，拜为中书侍郎、同中书门下平章事。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was appointed as the attendant of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and became a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：友珪立，迁礼部尚书、集贤殿大学士。
现代文：朱友珪登位，升任礼部尚书、集贤殿大学士。
English: Zhu Yuxuan ascended to the throne, and was promoted to the position of the Rectification Department's Senior Scholar, and Jixian Temple's Senior Scholar.

古文：袁象先等讨贼，兵大掠，晓为乱兵所杀，赠右仆射。
现代文：袁象先等人讨伐贼军，军兵大肆掳掠，杜晓被乱兵杀死，追赠右仆射。
English: Yuan Xiangxian and others fought against the invaders, and the soldiers plundered and pillaged. Du Xiao was killed by the rebels, and his right-hand man was posthumously shot.

古文：呜呼！
现代文：唉！
English: Alas!

古文：始为朋党之论者谁欤？
现代文：谁是最早编造朋党之论的人呢？
English: Who was the first to invent the theory of cronyism?

古文：甚乎作俑者也，真可谓不仁之人哉！
现代文：始作俑者太肆无忌惮，真可称为不仁义的人啊！
English: The instigator of the riot is so unscrupulous that he can truly be called an uncharitable person!

古文：予尝至繁城，读《魏受禅碑》，见汉之群臣称魏功德，而大书深刻，自列其姓名，以夸耀于世。
现代文：我曾到繁城读《魏受禅碑》，见到汉的群臣称颂魏的功德，而且用大字深深刻在碑上，自己列上姓名，来向世人夸耀。
English: I once went to Chengdu to read the "Wei Jie Zhen Monument" and saw a group of Han ministers praising Wei's merits and boasting to the world by listing their own names on the monument in large and profound characters.

古文：又读《梁实录》，见文蔚等所为如此，未尝不为之流涕也。
现代文：又读《梁寅录》，获知张文蔚等人的这些所作所为，不得不为此哭泣。
English: I also read "Liang Yin Lu" and learned about these actions of Zhang Wenwei and others, and I had to cry about it.

古文：夫以国予人而自夸耀，及遂相之，此非小人，孰能为也？
现代文：把国家送给别人而自相夸耀，随后就做别人的宰相，这些事如果不是小人，谁能做得出来呢！
English: To boast of giving away the country to others, and then to become someone else's prime minister - who can do these things if they are not a villain!

古文：汉、唐之末，举其朝皆小人也，而其君子者何在哉！
现代文：汉、唐末世，整个朝廷都是小人，而那些君子在哪里呢！
English: At the end of the Han and Tang dynasties, the entire imperial court was made up of villains, but where were the gentlemen?

古文：当汉之亡也，先以朋党禁锢天下贤人君子，而立其朝者，皆小人也，然后汉从而亡。
现代文：当汉快要灭亡的时候，首先用朋党的罪名来禁锢天下的贤人君子，而交于朝廷的，都是小人，然后汉接着就灭亡了。
English: When Han was about to perish, he first used the accusation of cronyism to imprison the world's wise men and gentlemen, and those who were handed over to the imperial court were all villains, and then Han was destroyed.

古文：及唐之亡也，又先以朋党尽杀朝廷之士，而其馀存者，皆庸懦不肖倾险之人也，然后唐从而亡。
现代文：到唐快要灭亡时，又是先用朋党的罪名全部杀掉朝廷贤士，而其余活下来的，都是软弱无能、倾邪阴险的人，然后唐接着就灭亡了。
English: When Tang was about to perish, he first used the accusation of cronyism to kill all the court sages, and the rest who survived were weak, incompetent, and perfidious people. Then Tang went on to perish.

古文：夫欲空人之国而去其君子者，必进朋党之说；欲孤人主之势而蔽其耳目者，必进朋党之说；欲夺国而与人者，必进朋党之说。
现代文：那些想使别人的国家空虚无人而除去它的君子的人，必定上奏说别人是朋党；想孤立君主的势力而蒙蔽君主耳目的人，必定上奏说别人是朋党；想篡夺国家政权送给别人的人，必定上奏说别人是朋党。
English: Those who want to empty other people's countries and remove their nobles must say that others are cronies; those who want to isolate the power of the monarch and blind the eyes of the monarch must say that others are cronies; those who want to usurp state power and give it to others must say that others are cronies.

古文：夫为君子者，故尝寡过，小人欲加之罪，则有可诬者，有不可诬者，不能遍及也。
现代文：作为君，历来过失很少，小人们想加罪于君子，就有可以诬告者，有不可以诬告者，不能什么都牵连到。
English: As a gentleman, there are very few lapses. If the little people want to add guilt to a gentleman, there are those who can falsely accuse, those who cannot falsely accuse, and those who cannot implicate anything.

古文：至欲举天下之善，求其类而尽去之，惟指以为朋党耳。
现代文：至于准备把整个天下的好人，寻求其同类而全部除去，只有指责他们为朋党罢了。
English: As for the good people who are ready to wipe out the whole world in search of their own kind, all they can do is accuse them of being cronies.

古文：故其亲戚故旧，谓之朋党可也；交游执友，谓之朋党可也；宦学相同，谓之朋党可也；门生故吏，谓之朋党可也。
现代文：因此他们的亲戚旧友，可以叫做朋党；和他们交往的挚友，可以叫做朋党；一起仕宦求学的人，可以叫做朋党；门生部属，可以叫做朋党。
English: Therefore, their relatives and old friends can be called friends; their best friends can be called friends; those who study together can be called friends; and their disciples and subordinates can be called friends.

古文：是数者，皆其类也，皆善人也。
现代文：这几种人，都是他们的同类，都是好人。
English: These kinds of people are all their own kind, all good people.

古文：故曰：欲空人之国而去其君子者，惟以朋党罪之，则无免者矣。
现代文：因此说：想使别人的国家空虚无人而除去它的君子，只要用朋党的罪名来加罪，就没有能幸免的人。
English: Therefore, it is said: If a gentleman who wants to make another's country empty and devoid of people removes it, as long as he adds the charge of cronyism, no one can be spared.

古文：夫善善之相乐，以其类同，此自然之理也。
现代文：好人和好人乐于相处，因为他们是同一类的人，这是自然而然的道理。
English: Good people and good people are happy to get along, because they are the same kind of people, this is a matter of course.

古文：故闻善者必相称誉，称誉则谓之朋党，得善者必相荐引，荐引则谓之朋党，使人闻善不敢称誉，人主之耳不闻有善于下矣，见善不敢荐引，则人主之目不得见善人矣。
现代文：因此听说是好人就必定相互称赞，相互称赞就叫做朋党；好人必定相互推荐，相互推荐就叫做朋党。假使获知是好人却不敢称赞，君主听不到天下有好人；见到好人却不敢推荐，那么君主就不能见到好人了。
English: Therefore, when people hear that a person is a good person, they are bound to praise each other, and when they praise each other, they are called friends; when a person is a good person, they are bound to recommend each other, and when they recommend each other, they are called friends. If people know that a person is a good person, but they do not dare to praise him, the ruler will not hear that there are good people in the world; if they see a good person, but they do not dare to recommend him, then the ruler will not be able to see a good person.

古文：善人日远，而小人日进，则为人主者，伥伥然谁与之图治安之计哉？
现代文：好人日益疏远，而小人日益进用，那么作为君主，怅然若失和谁商议治理国家的大计呢？
English: Good people are increasingly alienated, while villains are increasingly used, so as a monarch, who do you discuss the general plan of governing the country with?

古文：故曰：欲孤人主之势而蔽其耳目者，必用朋党之说也。
现代文：因此说：想要孤立君主的势力而蒙蔽君主耳目的人，必定会上奏朋党的说法。
English: Therefore, he said, those who want to isolate the monarch's power and pull the wool over the monarch's eyes will certainly play up the cronyism.

古文：一君子存，群小人虽众，必有所忌，而有所不敢为，惟空国而无君子，然后小人得肆志于无所不为，则汉魏、唐梁之际是也。
现代文：一个君子存在，小人虽然人多势众，但必定有所顾忌，有不敢做昀事情。只有让整个国家空虚而没有君子，然后小人们纔能放肆地无所不为，漠和魏、唐和梁交替的时候就是这样。
English: A gentleman exists. Although villains are numerous and powerful, they must have scruples and dare not do bad things. The only way is to make the whole country empty without a gentleman, and then the villains can do anything they want. This is how it is when there is a change of Mo and Wei, Tang and Liang.

古文：故曰：可夺国而予人者，由其国无君子，空国而无君子，由以朋党而去之也。
现代文：因此说：能够篡夺国家送给别人，是因为这个国家没有君子，整个国家空虚而没有君子，是因为用朋党的罪名剪除了君子。
English: Therefore, it is said: the ability to usurp the country and give it to others is because there are no gentlemen in this country, the whole country is empty and there are no gentlemen, because the gentleman was cut off with the accusation of cronyism.

古文：呜呼，朋党之说，人主可不察哉！
现代文：唉，朋党的邪说，君主能不明辨吗！
English: Alas, pals' heresy, can the sovereign not discern it!

古文：《传》曰 一言可以丧邦 者，其是之谓与！
现代文：经传上说 一句话可以让国家灭亡 ，就是说的这样的事吧！
English: According to legend, a single word can destroy a country, and that's exactly what happened!

古文：可不鉴哉！
现代文：能不借鉴吗！
English: Can we not learn from this?

古文：可不戒哉！
现代文：能不引以为戒吗！
English: Can we not take this as a warning?

