古文：南越王尉佗者，真定人也，姓赵氏。
现代文：南越王尉佗是真定人，姓赵。
English: South Vietnam's Wang Lijuan was a Zhending man, surnamed Zhao.

古文：秦时已并天下，略定杨越，置桂林、南海、象郡，以谪徙民，与越杂处十三岁。
现代文：秦国兼并了六国，攻取并平定了杨越，设置了桂林、南海和象郡，把犯罪而被迁徙的百姓安置到这些地方，同越人杂居了十三年。
English: Qin State annexed the Six Kingdoms, conquered and pacified Yang Yue, and set up Guilin, Nanhai and Xiang County. It resettled the people who had been deported for crimes to these places, and they lived together with the Yue people for 13 years.

古文：佗，秦时用为南海龙川令。
现代文：尉佗，秦朝时被任命做了南海郡的龙川县令。
English: During the Qin Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of Longchuan County in Nanhai County.

古文：至二世时，南海尉任嚣病且死，召龙川令赵佗语曰： 闻陈胜等作乱，秦为无道，天下苦之，项羽、刘季、陈胜、吴广等州郡各共兴军聚众，虎争天下，中国扰乱，未知所安，豪杰畔秦相立。
现代文：到秦二世时，南海郡尉任嚣得病将死，把龙川令赵佗召来，并对他说： 听说陈胜等发动了叛乱，秦朝推行暴虐无道的政策，天下百姓对此感到怨恨，项羽和刘邦、陈胜、吴广等，都在各自的州郡，同时聚集民众，组建军队，象猛虎般地争夺天下，中原地区扰攘动乱，不知何时方得安宁，豪杰们背叛秦朝，相互对立。
English: At the time of Qin II, the Nanhai County Lieutenant Ren Han, who was dying of illness, summoned Longchuan to summon Zhao Wei and said to him: I heard that Chen Sheng and others launched a rebellion, the Qin Dynasty implemented a tyrannical and ruthless policy, and the people around the world felt resentment. Xiang Yu and Liu Bang, Chen Sheng, Wu Guang and others were all in their respective states and counties, and at the same time they gathered people and formed an army to compete for the world like a fierce tiger. The Central Plains region was in turmoil, and I don't know when peace was achieved. Heroes betrayed the Qin Dynasty and opposed each

古文：南海僻远，吾恐盗兵侵地至此，吾欲兴兵绝新道，自备，待诸侯变，会病甚。
现代文：南海郡偏僻遥远，我怕强盗的军队侵夺土地，打到这里，我想发动军队切断通往中原的新修大路，自己早作防备，等待诸侯的变化，恰巧我的病重了。
English: Nanhai County is remote and far away. I was afraid that the robber army would invade the land and attack here. I wanted to mobilize the army to cut off the newly built highway to the Central Plains. I prepared myself early and waited for the change of princes. It just so happened that I was seriously ill.

古文：且番禺负山险，阻南海，东西数千里，颇有中国人相辅，此亦一州之主也，可以立国。
现代文：再说番禺这个地方，背后有险要的山势可以依，南有大海作屏障，东西几千里，有些中原人辅助我们，这也能当一州之主，可以建立国家。
English: In addition, Panyu is a place where we can rely on the dangerous mountain behind us, the south has the sea as a barrier, the east and west are thousands of miles away, and some Central Plains people help us. This can also be the master of a state and can build a country.

古文：郡中长吏无足与言者，故召公告之。 
现代文：南海郡的长官中没有谁值得我同他研究这些事，所以把你召来告诉你这些事。 
English: There is no chief in Nankai County who is worthy of my studying these matters with him, so I have called you here to tell you these things.

古文：即被佗书，行南海尉事。
现代文：任嚣当即向赵佗颁布任命文书，让他代行南海郡的职务。
English: Ren Ren immediately issued an appointment document to Zhao Wei, allowing him to act on behalf of Nanhai County.

古文：嚣死，佗即移檄告横浦、阳山、湟谿关曰： 盗兵且至，急绝道聚兵自守！ 
现代文：任嚣死后，赵佗就向横浦、阳山、湟谿关传布檄文，说： 强盗的军队将要到来，要疾速断绝道路，集合军队，保卫自己。 
English: After the death of Ren Ren, Zhao Wei spread the message to the cities of Yokoura, Yangshan and Shaoguan, saying: The robber army is about to arrive, we must quickly cut off the road, gather the army and defend ourselves.

古文：因稍以法诛秦所置长吏，以其党为假守。
现代文：赵佗借此机会，逐渐用法律杀了秦朝安置的官吏，而用他的亲信做代理长官。
English: Zhao Jun took this opportunity to gradually use the law to kill the officials installed by the Qin Dynasty, and used his cronies as acting officials.

古文：秦已破灭，佗即击并桂林、象郡，自立为南越武王。
现代文：秦朝被消灭后，赵佗就攻击并兼并了桂林和象郡，立自己为南越武王。
English: After the Qin Dynasty was destroyed, Zhao Wei attacked and annexed Guilin and Xiang County, establishing himself as the King of South Vietnam.

古文：高帝已定天下，为中国劳苦，故释佗弗诛。
现代文：汉高祖已经平定了天下，因为中原百姓劳顿困苦，所以汉高祖放过了赵佗，没有杀他。
English: Han Gao Zu has already leveled the world. Because the Central Plains people are hardworking and poor, Han Gao Zu spared Zhao Yao and did not kill him.

古文：汉十一年，遣陆贾因立佗为南越王，与剖符通使，和集百越，毋为南边患害，与长沙接境。
现代文：汉高帝十一年，派遣陆贾去南越，命令赵佗因袭他的南越王的称号，同他剖符定约，互通使者，让他协调百越，使其和睦相处，不要成为汉朝南边的祸害。南越边界与北方的长沙接壤。
English: In the eleventh year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Gao sent Lu Jia to South Vietnam and ordered Zhao Jun, who assumed his title of King of South Vietnam, to sign a treaty with him and exchange envoys, so that he could coordinate the Hundred Yue, so that they could live in harmony and not become a scourge to the south of the Han Dynasty. The border of South Vietnam borders Changsha in the north.

古文：高后时，有司请禁南越关市铁器。
现代文：高后时期，有关部门的官吏请求禁止南越在边境市场上购买铁器。
English: During the post-high school period, officials from relevant departments requested that South Vietnam be prohibited from purchasing ironware at the border market.

古文：佗曰： 高帝立我，通使物，今高后听谗臣，别异蛮夷，隔绝器物，此必长沙王计也，欲倚中国，击灭南越而并王之，自为功也。 
现代文：赵佗说： 高帝立我为南越王，双方互通使者和物资，如今高后听信谗臣的意见，把蛮夷视为异类，断绝我们所需要的器物的来源，这一定是长沙王的主张，他想依中原的汉王朝，消灭南越，兼作南越王，自己建立功劳。 
English: Zhao Wei said: Emperor Gao appointed me as the king of South Vietnam, and both sides exchanged envoys and materials. Today, the empress Gao listens to the opinions of her vassals, regards the barbarians as outliers, and cuts off the source of the goods we need. This must be the idea of the king of Changsha. He wants to destroy South Vietnam according to the Han Dynasty in the Central Plains, and at the same time be the king of South Vietnam, and establish his own merit.

古文：於是佗乃自尊号为南越武帝，发兵攻长沙边邑，败数县而去焉。
现代文：于是赵佗就擅加尊号，自称南越武帝，出兵攻打长沙国的边境城邑，打败了几个县才离去。
English: As a result, Zhao Wei took the name of Qajun and called himself Emperor Wu of South Vietnam. He sent troops to attack the border towns of Changsha and defeated several counties before leaving.

古文：高后遣将军隆虑侯灶往击之。
现代文：高后派遣将军隆虑侯周灶前去攻打赵佗。
English: After high school, he dispatched General Longxian Hou Zhou Zhao to attack Zhao Yong.

古文：会暑湿，士卒大疫，兵不能逾岭。
现代文：正遇上酷暑潮湿的气侯，士卒中的多数人都得了重病，致使大军无法越过阳山岭。
English: In the hot and humid weather, most of the soldiers were seriously ill, making it impossible for the army to cross the Yangshan Mountains.

古文：岁馀，高后崩，即罢兵。
现代文：又过了一年多，高后死去，汉军就停止了进攻。
English: After more than a year, Gao Hou died, and the Chinese army stopped attacking.

古文：佗因此以兵威边，财物赂遗闽越、西瓯、骆，役属焉，东西万馀里。
现代文：赵佗因此凭借他的军队扬威于边境，用财物贿赂闽越、西瓯和骆越，使他们都归属南越，使他的领地从东到西长达一万余里。
English: Therefore, Zhao Wei used his army to assert his authority on the border, and bribed Xiang Yue, Xidi and Luo Yue with money and goods, so that they all belonged to South Vietnam, making his territory more than ten thousand miles long from east to west.

古文：乃乘黄屋左纛，称制，与中国侔。
现代文：赵佗竟然乘坐黄屋左纛之车，以皇帝身份发号施令，同汉朝地位相等。
English: Zhao Wei actually took Huangya Zuoqi's car and issued orders as an emperor, which was equal to the status of the Han Dynasty.

古文：及孝文帝元年，初镇抚天下，使告诸侯四夷从代来即位意，喻盛德焉。
现代文：待到汉文帝元年，天子刚刚统治天下，便派出使者向诸侯和四方蛮夷的君长，告知他从代国来京即位的想法，让他们知道天子的圣明美德。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Hanwen, when the heavenly son had just begun to rule the world, he sent an envoy to the princes and the barbarian monarchs of the four directions to inform them of his idea of coming to Beijing to take the throne, so that they would know the holy virtues of the heavenly son.

古文：乃为佗亲冢在真定，置守邑，岁时奉祀。召其从昆弟，尊官厚赐宠之。
现代文：于是为赵佗在真定的父母的坟墓，设置守墓的人家，每年按时举行祭祀，又召来他的堂兄弟，用尊贵的官职和丰厚的赏赐表示对他们的宠爱。
English: Therefore, for Zhao Jun's parents' grave in Zhending, he set up a family to guard the grave, held a ritual on time every year, and summoned his cousins to show his favor to them with an honorable official post and a rich reward.

古文：诏丞相陈平等举可使南越者，平言好畤陆贾，先帝时习使南越。
现代文：天子命令丞相陈平等推荐可以出使南越的人，陈平说好畴人陆贾在先帝时曾多次出使南越。
English: The emperor ordered the prime minister, Chen Pingliang, to recommend people who could be sent to South Vietnam. Chen Ping said that Lu Jia, who had been sent to South Vietnam many times during the reign of the former emperor, was a good person.

古文：乃召贾以为太中大夫，往使。因让佗自立为帝，曾无一介之使报者。
现代文：天子就召来陆贾，任命他为太中大夫，前往南越当使者，借机责备赵佗自立为皇帝，竟然不派一个使者向天子报告。
English: Tianzi then summoned Lu Jia, appointed him as the First Lady's doctor, and sent him to South Vietnam as an envoy. He took the opportunity to reproach Zhao Jun for becoming emperor without sending an envoy to report to Tianzi.

古文：陆贾至南越，王甚恐，为书谢，称曰： 蛮夷大长老夫臣佗，前日高后隔异南越，窃疑长沙王谗臣，又遥闻高后尽诛佗宗族，掘烧先人冢，以故自弃，犯长沙边境。
现代文：陆贾到了南越，南越王赵特别恐惧，向天子写信道歉，说： 蛮夷大长老夫臣佗，从前高后隔离歧视南越，我私下疑心长沙王是个善进谗言的臣子，又在这遥远之地听说高后杀尽了赵佗的宗族，挖掘并烧毁祖先的坟墓，因此自暴自弃，侵犯长沙的边境地区。
English: When Lu Jia arrived in South Vietnam, King Zhao of South Vietnam was particularly afraid and wrote a letter of apology to the Son of Heaven, saying: "The barbaric great elder, Zhen Xuan, used to segregate and discriminate against South Vietnam. I privately suspect that the King of Changsha is a minister who is good at gossiping. In this distant land, I heard that Gao Xuan had killed Zhen Xuan's clan and dug up and burned the graves of his ancestors. Therefore, he abandoned himself and violated the border area of Changsha.

古文：且南方卑湿，蛮夷中间，其东闽越千人众号称王，其西瓯骆裸国亦称王。
现代文：而且南方低湿之地，在蛮夷中间，东边的闽越只有上千民众，却称其君长为王；西面的西瓯和骆越这样的裸体之国也得称王。
English: Moreover, in the south of the low-moist land, in the middle of the barbarians, the east of the Yangtze River only has thousands of people, but it calls its monarch a king; the west of the West Yangtze River and Luo Yue, such as the naked country, must also be called a king.

古文：老臣妄窃帝号，聊以自娱，岂敢以闻天王哉！ 
现代文：所以我狂妄地窃取皇帝的尊号，聊以自我安慰，怎敢把这事禀告天子呢！ 
English: Therefore, I arrogantly stole the emperor's honorary title and talked about it to comfort myself. How dare I denounce this to the Son of Heaven!

古文：乃顿首谢，原长为籓臣，奉贡职。
现代文：赵佗深深叩头谢罪，表示要长久做汉朝的藩属臣子，遵守向天子纳贡的职责。
English: Zhao Wei bowed deeply and expressed his gratitude, saying that he wanted to be a vassal of the Han Dynasty for a long time and comply with the duty of paying tribute to the Son of Heaven.

古文：於是乃下令国中曰： 吾闻两雄不俱立，两贤不并世。
现代文：于是赵佗就向全国发布命令，说： 我听说两个英雄豪杰是不能并存的，两个贤哲之人也不能共同生活在同一世界。
English: So Zhao Wei issued an order to the whole country, saying: I have heard that two heroes cannot coexist, and two sages cannot live together in the same world.

古文：皇帝，贤天子也。自今以後，去帝制黄屋左纛。 
现代文：汉朝皇帝，是贤明的天子，从今以后，我去掉帝制，不再乘坐黄屋左纛的车子。 
English: The emperor of the Han Dynasty is a wise son of heaven. From now on, I will abolish the imperial system and no longer ride in Huangya Zuo's carriage.

古文：陆贾还报，孝文帝大说。
现代文：陆贾回京报告此事，汉文帝非常高兴。
English: Lu Jia returned to Beijing to report the matter, and Emperor Han was very pleased.

古文：遂至孝景时，称臣，使人朝请。
现代文：沿续到汉景帝时代，赵佗向汉朝称臣，春秋两季派人到长安朝见天子。
English: Continued to the era of Emperor Han Jing, Zhao Wei praised the Han Dynasty, and sent people to the Chang'an Dynasty in the spring and autumn to meet the emperor.

古文：然南越其居国窃如故号名，其使天子，称王朝命如诸侯。
现代文：但是在南越国内，赵佗一直窃用皇帝的名号，只是他派使者朝见天子时才称王，接受天子的命令如同诸侯一样。
English: However, in South Vietnam, Zhao Wei had been stealing the name of the emperor. He only claimed to be the king when he sent an envoy to meet the emperor, and accepted the emperor's orders like a vassal.

古文：至建元四年卒。
现代文：到建元四年，赵佗死去。
English: In the fourth year of the first year of the Jian Yuan Dynasty, Zhao Jun died.

古文：佗孙胡为南越王。
现代文：赵佗的孙子赵胡当了南越王。
English: Zhao Yu's grandson, Zhao Hu, became the king of South Vietnam.

古文：此时闽越王郢兴兵击南越边邑，胡使人上书曰： 两越俱为籓臣，毋得擅兴兵相攻击。
现代文：这时闽越王郢发动战争，攻打南越边境城镇，赵胡派人向汉天子写信说： 南越和闽越都是汉朝的藩臣，不能擅自发兵相互攻击。
English: At this time, Gou Yue Wang Yao launched a war to attack South Vietnam's border towns. Zhao Hu sent a letter to Han Tianzi saying: South Vietnam and Gou Yue are both vassals of the Han Dynasty and cannot attack each other without authorization.

古文：今闽越兴兵侵臣，臣不敢兴兵，唯天子诏之。 
现代文：如今闽越发兵侵犯臣，臣不敢发兵抗击，希望天子下诏书处理这事。 
English: Now, Xuan Yue has sent troops to encroach on the vassal. The vassal does not dare to send troops to fight back. I hope that the emperor will handle this matter with an edict.

古文：於是天子多南越义，守职约，为兴师，遣两将军往讨闽越。
现代文：于是天子赞扬南越有忠义行为，遵守职责和盟约，为他们出兵，派遣两位将军前去讨伐闽越。
English: As a result, Heavenly Son praised the South Vietnamese for their loyal behavior, compliance with duties and covenants, and dispatched troops to fight for them, sending two generals to fight against Hoa Viet.

古文：兵未逾岭，闽越王弟馀善杀郢以降，於是罢兵。
现代文：汉军还没越过阳山岭，闽越王的弟弟馀善杀死了郢，投降了汉朝，于是停止了讨伐行动。
English: The Han army had not yet crossed the Yangshan Mountains, when Yu Sheng, the younger brother of Yu Yue Wang, killed Yu Yu and surrendered to the Han Dynasty, thus stopping the crusade.

古文：天子使庄助往谕意南越王，胡顿首曰： 天子乃为臣兴兵讨闽越，死无以报德！ 
现代文：汉天子派庄助去向南越王讲明朝廷的意思，赵胡深深叩头说： 天子是为臣发兵讨伐闽越的，就是臣死了也无法报答天子的恩德！ 
English: Han Tian Zi sent Zhuang Zi to explain the meaning of the Ming Dynasty to the king of South Vietnam. Zhao Hu bowed deeply and said: Tian Zi sent troops to fight for his vassal, even if the vassal died, he could not repay Tian Zi's kindness!

古文：遣太子婴齐入宿卫。
现代文：赵胡就派太子婴齐到朝廷去充当宿卫。
English: Zhao Hu sent all the princes and princesses to the imperial court to act as guards.

古文：谓助曰： 国新被寇，使者行矣。
现代文：他又对庄助说： 国家刚刚遭受敌人的侵略，请使者先走吧。
English: He also said to Zhuangzu: The country has just been invaded by the enemy, please let the envoy go first.

古文：胡方日夜装入见天子。 
现代文：赵胡正在日夜准备行装，去京城朝见天子。 
English: Zhao Hu is preparing day and night to pack up and go to Beijing in the morning to see the Son of Heaven.

古文：助去後，其大臣谏胡曰： 汉兴兵诛郢，亦行以惊动南越。
现代文：庄助离开后，他的大臣向赵胡进谏说： 汉朝发兵诛杀郢，也是用这个行动来警告南越。
English: After the departure of Zhuangzu, his minister said to Zhao Hu Jintao: "The Han Dynasty sent soldiers to kill us, and also used this action to warn South Vietnam.

古文：且先王昔言，事天子期无失礼，要之不可以说好语入见。
现代文：而且先王过去曾说过，事奉天子，只希望不要失礼，重要的是不可因为爱听使者的好话而去朝见天子。
English: Moreover, the former king had said in the past that he only hoped not to be impolite when serving the heavenly son, and that it was important not to go to see the heavenly son because he liked to hear the good words of the messenger.

古文：入见则不得复归，亡国之势也。 
现代文：要是去朝见天子就不能再回来了，这是亡国的形势啊。 
English: If you go to see the emperor, you can't come back. This is the situation of a ruined country.

古文：於是胡称病，竟不入见。
现代文：于是赵胡就以生病为借口，最终也没去朝见汉天子。
English: As a result, Zhao Hu used illness as an excuse and ultimately did not go to the imperial court to meet Han Tianzi.

古文：後十馀岁，胡实病甚，太子婴齐请归。
现代文：过了十多年，赵胡真病得很严重，太子婴齐请求回国。
English: After more than ten years, Zhao Hu Zhen was seriously ill, and all the princes and princesses requested to return to China.

古文：胡薨，谥为文王。
现代文：赵胡死了，加给他文王的谥号。
English: When Zhao Hu died, he was given the nickname King Wen.

古文：婴齐代立，即藏其先武帝玺。
现代文：婴齐代立为南越王之后，就把他祖先的武帝印玺藏了起来。
English: After the infant Qi Dynasty was established as the king of South Vietnam, he hid the imperial seal of his ancestors.

古文：婴齐其入宿卫在长安时，取邯郸樛氏女，生子兴。
现代文：婴齐到长安做宿卫时，取了邯郸樛家的女儿做妻子，生了儿子叫赵兴。
English: When Yingqi went to Chang'an to work as a night watchman, he took the daughter of the Xing family as his wife and had a son named Zhao Xing.

古文：及即位，上书请立樛氏女为后，兴为嗣。
现代文：待到他即位为王，便向汉天子上书，请求立妻子樛氏为王后，赵兴为太子。
English: When he ascended the throne as king, he wrote a letter to Emperor Han, requesting that his wife, Lady Zou, be made queen, and that Zhao Xing be made crown prince.

古文：汉数使使者风谕婴齐，婴齐尚乐擅杀生自恣，惧入见要用汉法，比内诸侯，固称病，遂不入见。遣子次公入宿卫。
现代文：汉朝屡次派使者婉转劝告婴齐去朝拜天子，婴齐喜欢恣意杀人，惧怕进京朝拜天子，会被强迫比照内地诸侯，执行汉朝法令，因此以有病为托辞，竟未去朝见天子，只派遣儿子次公入京当了宿卫。
English: The Han dynasty repeatedly sent emissaries to gently advise the infants to go to worship the heavenly son. The infants liked to kill arbitrarily, feared to go to Beijing to worship the heavenly son, and would be forced to follow the laws of the Han dynasty according to the inland princes. Therefore, they used illness as an excuse, but did not go to the court to see the heavenly son. They only sent their son Zigong to Beijing to be a bodyguard.

古文：婴齐薨，谥为明王。
现代文：婴齐死去，加给他明王的谥号。
English: When the infant Qi died, he was given the nickname Ming Wang.

古文：太子兴代立，其母为太后。
现代文：太子赵兴代立为南越王，他母亲当了太后。
English: Prince Zhao Xing became the king of South Vietnam, and his mother became the empress dowager.

古文：太后自未为婴齐姬时，尝与霸陵人安国少季通。
现代文：太后在没嫁给婴齐做妾时，曾经同霸陵人安国少季通奸。
English: When the empress dowager was not married to the concubine, she once committed adultery with the tyrant An Guo.

古文：及婴齐薨後，元鼎四年，汉使安国少季往谕王、王太后以入朝，比内诸侯；令辩士谏大夫终军等宣其辞，勇士魏臣等辅其缺，卫尉路博德将兵屯桂阳，待使者。
现代文：等到婴齐死后，元鼎四年，汉朝派安国少季前去规劝南越王和王太后，让他们比照内地的诸侯，进京朝拜天子。命令辩士谏大夫终军等宣传这个意思，让勇士魏臣等辅助不足之处，卫尉路博德率兵驻守在桂阳，等待使者。
English: After the death of the infant Qi, in the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Han Dynasty sent An Guo Shoshu to persuade the King of South Vietnam and the Empress Dowager to let them follow the example of the princes of the inland and go to Beijing to worship the Son of God. He ordered the debater, the doctor, the last troops to propagate this meaning, and let the warrior, Wei Chen, and other auxiliary deficiencies, and the guard lieutenant, Lu Bode, and his troops to stay in Guiyang and wait for the messenger.

古文：王年少，太后中国人也，尝与安国少季通，其使复私焉。
现代文：南越王年轻，王太后是中原人，曾同安国少季通奸，此次安国少季来当使者，又和她通奸。
English: The king of South Vietnam was young, and the queen mother was from the Central Plains. She had committed adultery with Anguko Shoseki. This time, Anguko Shoseki came as an envoy and committed adultery with her.

古文：国人颇知之，多不附太后。
现代文：南越国的人们多半知道这事，大多不依附王太后。
English: Most people in South Vietnam are aware of this, and most do not cling to the Queen Mother.

古文：太后恐乱起，亦欲倚汉威，数劝王及群臣求内属。
现代文：太后害怕发生动乱，也想依靠汉朝的威势，屡次劝说南越王和群臣请求归属汉朝。
English: The empress dowager was afraid of turmoil and wanted to rely on the might of the Han Dynasty. She repeatedly persuaded the King of South Vietnam and his ministers to request to belong to the Han Dynasty.

古文：即因使者上书，请比内诸侯，三岁一朝，除边关。
现代文：于是就通过使者上书天子，请求比照内地诸侯，三年朝见天子一次，撤除边境的关塞。
English: Therefore, he sent a letter to the emperor through an emissary, requesting that he meet with the emperor once every three years in the morning, in accordance with the emperors of the inland provinces, and that the border barriers be removed.

古文：於是天子许之，赐其丞相吕嘉银印，及内史、中尉、太傅印，馀得自置。
现代文：于是天子答应了他们的要求，把银印赐给南越丞相吕嘉，也赐给内史、中尉、大傅等官印，其余的官职由南越自己安置。
English: As a result, the Emperor agreed to their request and gave the silver seal to the South Vietnamese prime minister, Lyu Gia, as well as the official seals to the minister of internal affairs, lieutenant, and grand chief, and the rest of the official posts were placed by the South Vietnamese themselves.

古文：除其故黥劓刑，用汉法，比内诸侯。
现代文：废除他们从前的黥刑和劓刑，用汉朝的法律，比照内地的诸侯。
English: They abolished the former whipping and flogging, and applied the laws of the Han Dynasty to the princes of the inland.

古文：使者皆留填抚之。
现代文：使者都留下来镇抚南越。
English: Envoys were left behind to pacify South Vietnam.

古文：王、王太后饬治行装重赍，为入朝具。
现代文：南越王及王太后整治行装和贵重财物，为进京朝见天子做准备。
English: The King of South Vietnam and the Queen Mother tidied up their belongings and valuables in preparation for their visit to Beijing to meet the emperor.

古文：其相吕嘉年长矣，相三王，宗族官仕为长吏者七十馀人，男尽尚王女，女尽嫁王子兄弟宗室，及苍梧秦王有连。
现代文：南越丞相吕嘉年龄很大，辅佐过三位国王，他的宗族内当官做长吏的就有七十多人，男的都娶王女做妻子，女的都嫁给王子及其兄弟宗室之人，同苍梧郡的秦王有联姻关系。
English: Lu Jia, the Minister of Southern Vietnam, was very old. He had assisted three kings. There were more than seventy officials in his family. The men all married princesses, and the women married princes and their brothers. He was related by marriage to King Qin of Giangwu County.

古文：其居国中甚重，越人信之，多为耳目者，得众心愈於王。
现代文：他在南越国内的地位非常显要，南越人都信任他，很多人都成了他的亲信，在得民心方面超过了南越王。
English: His status in South Vietnam was very important. All South Vietnamese trusted him, and many became his close confidants. He was more popular than the king of South Vietnam.

古文：王之上书，数谏止王，王弗听。
现代文：南越王要上书给皇帝，他屡次建议王放弃这个举动，南越王没有听从。
English: The king of South Vietnam wanted to send a letter to the emperor. He repeatedly advised the king to abandon this action, but the king of South Vietnam did not listen.

古文：有畔心，数称病不见汉使者。
现代文：他产生了背叛南越王的想法，屡次托病不去会见汉朝使者。
English: He conceived the idea of betraying the King of South Vietnam and repeatedly begged to be excused from meeting the emissaries of the Han Dynasty.

古文：使者皆注意嘉，势未能诛。
现代文：使者都非常留意吕嘉的言行，因为形势的关系，没有诛杀吕嘉。
English: The envoys paid great attention to Lujia's words and deeds. Because of the situation, they did not kill Lujia.

古文：王、王太后亦恐嘉等先事发，乃置酒，介汉使者权，谋诛嘉等。
现代文：南越王和王太后也怕吕嘉首先发难，就安排酒宴，想借助汉朝使者的权势，计划杀死吕嘉等人。
English: The King of South Vietnam and the Queen Mother were also afraid that Lü Jia would be the first to attack, so they arranged a banquet and planned to kill Lü Jia and others with the help of the power of the Han Dynasty envoy.

古文：使者皆东乡，太后南乡，王北乡，相嘉、大臣皆西乡，侍坐饮。
现代文：宴席上，使者都面朝东，太后面朝南，王面朝北，丞相吕嘉和大臣都面朝西，陪坐饮酒。
English: At the banquet, the envoys all faced east, the empress dowager faced south, the king faced north, and the prime minister, Lü Jia, and the ministers all faced west. They all drank alcohol together.

古文：嘉弟为将，将卒居宫外。
现代文：吕嘉的弟弟当将军，率兵守候在宫外。
English: Lujia's younger brother became a general and waited outside the palace with his soldiers.

古文：酒行，太后谓嘉曰： 南越内属，国之利也，而相君苦不便者，何也？ 
现代文：饮酒当中，太后对吕嘉说： 南越归属汉朝，是国家的利益，而丞相您抱怨这不好，是什么原因？ 
English: While drinking, the empress dowager said to Lü Jia: South Vietnam belongs to the Han Dynasty, which is in the interests of the country, and you, the prime minister, are complaining that this is not good. What is the reason?

古文：以激怒使者。
现代文：王太后想以此激怒汉朝使者。
English: The empress dowager wanted to provoke the envoys of the Han Dynasty.

古文：使者狐疑相杖，遂莫敢发。
现代文：使者犹豫不决，终究没敢动手杀吕嘉。
English: The messenger hesitated, but finally did not dare to kill Lü Jia.

古文：嘉见耳目非是，即起而出。
现代文：吕嘉看到周围人不是自己的亲信，随即站起身走了出去。
English: Lu Jia saw that the people around her were not her close friends, and immediately stood up and walked out.

古文：太后怒，欲鏦嘉以矛，王止太后。
现代文：王太后发怒了，想用矛撞击吕嘉，王阻止了太后的行为。
English: The empress dowager became angry and wanted to hit Lujia Rong with a spear. Wang prevented the empress dowager from doing so.

古文：嘉遂出，分其弟兵就舍，称病，不肯见王及使者。
现代文：吕嘉就出去了，并把弟弟的兵士分来一部分，安排到自己的住处周围，托病不肯去会见王和使者。
English: Lü Jia then went out and divided his brother's soldiers into groups and arranged them around his residence. He feigned illness and refused to meet the king and the envoy.

古文：乃阴与大臣作乱。
现代文：吕嘉就暗中同大臣们准备发动叛乱。
English: Lujia secretly plotted with the ministers to launch a rebellion.

古文：王素无意诛嘉，嘉知之，以故数月不发。
现代文：南越王一向无意杀害吕嘉，吕嘉知道这一点，因此过了几个月都没有发动叛乱。
English: The king of South Vietnam never intended to kill Lü Jia, and Lü Jia knew this, so he did not launch a rebellion for several months.

古文：太后有淫行，国人不附，欲独诛嘉等，力又不能。
现代文：王太后有淫乱行为，南越国的人都不归附她，她想独自杀害吕嘉，可是又没有能力做这件事情。
English: The empress dowager committed adultery, and the people of South Vietnam did not support her. She wanted to kill Lu Jia on her own, but she did not have the power to do it.

古文：天子闻嘉不听王，王、王太后弱孤不能制，使者怯无决。
现代文：天子听说吕嘉不服从南越王，南越王王和太后力弱势孤，不能控制吕嘉，使者又胆怯而无决断的能力。
English: Tianzi heard that Lü Jia did not obey the King of South Vietnam, the King of South Vietnam and the Empress Dowager were weak and alone, unable to control Lü Jia, and the messenger was timid and had no decisive ability.

古文：又以为王、王太后已附汉，独吕嘉为乱，不足以兴兵，欲使庄参以二千人往使。
现代文：又认为王和太后已经归附汉朝，独有吕嘉作乱，不值得发兵，想派庄参率两千人出使南越。
English: He also thought that the king and the empress dowager had already been annexed to the Han Dynasty, and that Lujia was the only one to create turmoil, and that it was not worth sending troops. He wanted to send 2,000 people from Zhuang Zhan to South Vietnam.

古文：参曰： 以好往，数人足矣；以武往，二千人无足以为也。 
现代文：庄参说： 若是为友好谈判而去，几个人就足够了；若是为动武而去，两千人干不了什么。 
English: Zhuang Zhan said, "If you go for friendly negotiations, a few people will be enough; if you go for the use of force, two thousand people can't do much.

古文：辞不可，天子罢参也。
现代文：庄参推辞不肯去，天子罢免了庄参的官。
English: Zhuang Zhan refused to go, and Tianzi dismissed Zhuang Zhan's official.

古文：郏壮士故济北相韩千秋奋曰： 以区区之越，又有王、太后应，独相吕嘉为害，原得勇士二百人，必斩嘉以报。 
现代文：郏地壮士、原济北王的相韩千秋奋然说道： 这么一个小小的南越，又有南越王和太后做内应，独有丞相吕嘉从中破坏，我愿意得到二百个勇士前往南越，一定杀死吕嘉，回来向天子报告。 
English: Han Qianqiu, a brave man from Xiangdi and an associate of the former King of North Vietnam, said enthusiastically, "Such a small South Vietnam, with the King of South Vietnam and the Empress Dowager doing the backstabbing, and only the Prime Minister Lü Jia being destroyed, I am willing to get two hundred warriors to go to South Vietnam, definitely kill Lü Jia, and come back to report to the Son of Heaven.

古文：於是天子遣千秋与王太后弟樛乐将二千人往，入越境。
现代文：于是天子派遣韩千秋和王太后的弟弟樛乐，率兵二千人前往南越。
English: As a result, Heavenly Son dispatched Han Qianqiu and the Empress Dowager's younger brother Huan Le to lead 2,000 soldiers to South Vietnam.

古文：吕嘉等乃遂反，下令国中曰： 王年少。太后，中国人也，又与使者乱，专欲内属，尽持先王宝器入献天子以自媚，多从人，行至长安，虏卖以为僮仆。
现代文：他们进人南越境内，吕嘉人终于造反了，并向南越国的人下令说： 国王年轻，太后是中国人，又同汉朝使者有淫乱行为，一心想归属汉朝，把先王的珍宝重器全部拿去献给汉天子，谄媚汉天子；带走很多随从的人，走到长安，便把他们卖给汉人作僮仆。
English: They entered the territory of South Vietnam. The people of Lujia finally rebelled and ordered the people of South Vietnam to say: The king is young, the queen mother is Chinese, and she committed adultery with the envoy of the Han Dynasty. She wanted to belong to the Han Dynasty, took all the precious and heavy weapons of the former king to offer to Han Tianzi, and flattered Han Tianzi. She took away many followers, went to Chang'an, and sold them to the Chinese as slaves.

古文：取自脱一时之利，无顾赵氏社稷，为万世虑计之意。 
现代文：她只想得到自己逃脱一时的好处，没有顾及到赵氏的国家政权，没有为后世永久之计而谋划的意思。 
English: She only wanted to get the benefit of escaping for a while, did not take into account the national power of the Zhao clan, and had no intention of planning for a permanent plan for future generations.

古文：乃与其弟将卒攻杀王、太后及汉使者。
现代文：于是吕嘉就同他弟弟率兵攻击并杀害了南越王，王太后和汉朝的使者。
English: So Lü Jia and his younger brother led an army to attack and kill the King of South Vietnam, the Queen Mother and the emissaries of the Han Dynasty.

古文：遣人告苍梧秦王及其诸郡县，立明王长男越妻子术阳侯建德为王。
现代文：他又派人告知苍梧秦王和各郡县官员，立明王的长子与南越籍的妻子所生的儿子术阳侯赵建德当南越王。
English: He also sent someone to inform King Cang Wu Qin and the county officials that the eldest son of King Liming and the son of his wife of South Vietnamese origin, Zhiyang Hou Zhao Jiande, would become the king of South Vietnam.

古文：而韩千秋兵入，破数小邑。
现代文：这时韩千秋的军队进入南越境内，攻破几个小城镇。
English: At this time, Han Qianqiu's army entered the territory of South Vietnam and broke through several small towns.

古文：其後越直开道给食，未至番禺四十里，越以兵击千秋等，遂灭之。
现代文：以后，南越人径直让开道路，供给饮食，让韩千秋的军队顺利前进，走到离番禺四十里的地方，南越用兵攻击韩千秋等，于是把他们全部消灭。
English: After that, the South Vietnamese left the road directly, provided food and drink, and allowed Han Qianqiu's army to advance smoothly. When they reached a place forty miles from Panyu, the South Vietnamese used soldiers to attack Han Qianqiu and so on, and then eliminated them all.

古文：使人函封汉使者节置塞上，好为谩辞谢罪，发兵守要害处。
现代文：吕嘉让人把汉朝使者的符节用木匣装好，封上，放置到边塞之上说了些好听的骗人的话向汉朝谢罪，同时派兵守卫在要害的地方。
English: Lujia had someone put the Han Dynasty envoy's symbols in a wooden box, sealed it, placed it on the border fortress, said some nice deceiving words to thank the Han Dynasty, and at the same time sent soldiers to guard the critical place.

古文：於是天子曰： 韩千秋虽无成功，亦军锋之冠。 
现代文：于是天子说： 韩千秋虽然没有成功，但也够得上军人的先锋之冠了。 
English: Then Heavenly Son said, "Although Han Qianqiu did not succeed, he was enough to win the crown of a military pioneer.

古文：封其子延年为成安侯。
现代文：天子封韩千秋的儿子韩延年为成安侯。
English: Han Qianqiu, the son of Han Qianqiu, the son of Han Qianqiu, the son of Han Qianqiu.

古文：樛乐，其姊为王太后，首原属汉，封其子广德为龙亢侯。
现代文：樛乐，他姐姐是王太后，她首先愿意归属汉朝，因此封樛乐的儿子樛广德为龙亢侯。
English: Huan Le, his sister was the Queen Mother, she first wanted to belong to the Han Dynasty, so the son of Huan Le, Huan Guangde, was made the Prince of Longyan.

古文：乃下赦曰： 天子微，诸侯力政，讥臣不讨贼。
现代文：天子就发布赦令说： 天子衰微，诸侯极力征讨，人们就讽刺大臣不知讨伐叛贼。
English: Tianzi issued a pardon order, saying: Tianzi is fading, the princes are trying hard to collect, and people are caricaturing the minister for not knowing how to fight the traitors.

古文：今吕嘉、建德等反，自立晏如，令罪人及江淮以南楼船十万师往讨之。 
现代文：如今吕嘉、赵建德等造反，很安然地自立为王。我命令罪人同江淮以南的水兵共十万人前去讨伐他们。 
English: Now, Lujia, Zhao Jiande and others have rebelled and become kings. I order the sinners to go and fight them with a total of one hundred thousand sailors south of the Huai River.

古文：元鼎五年秋，卫尉路博德为伏波将军，出桂阳，下汇水；主爵都尉杨仆为楼船将军，出豫章，下横浦；故归义越侯二人为戈船、下厉将军，出零陵，或下离水，或柢苍梧；使驰义侯因巴蜀罪人，发夜郎兵，下牂柯江：咸会番禺。
现代文：元鼎五年秋天，卫尉路博德当了伏波将军，率兵走出桂阳，直下汇水；主爵都尉杨仆当了楼船将军，走世豫章，直下横浦；原来归降汉朝被封侯的两个南越人当了戈船将军和下厉将军，率兵走出零陵，然后一军直下离水，一军直抵苍梧；让驰义侯利用巴蜀的罪人，调动夜郎的兵卒，直下牂柯江。最后都在番禺会师。
English: In the autumn of the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the guard lieutenant Lu Bode became the general of Fubo and led the soldiers out of Guiyang and straight down to Huisui; the lord lieutenant Yang Hupu became the general of the Lou ship, went to Shiyuzhang, and went straight down to Yokoura; the two South Vietnamese who originally returned to the Han Dynasty and were sealed became the general of the Gosen ship and the general of the Lower Li, and led the soldiers out of the Zero Ling, and then one army went straight down from the water, and one army went straight up to the Gou; let the Zhiyi marquis use the sinners of Bashu

古文：元鼎六年冬，楼船将军将精卒先陷寻陕，破石门，得越船粟，因推而前，挫越锋，以数万人待伏波。
现代文：元鼎六年冬天，楼船将军率领精锐兵卒，首先攻下了寻陕，然后攻破石门，缴纳了南越的战船和粮食，乘机向前推进，挫败南越的先头部队，率数万大军等候伏波将军。
English: In the winter of the 6th year of the Yuan Dynasty, General Loufeng led the elite soldiers, first captured Xuan Shan, then broke through the stone gate, paid the South Vietnamese warships and grain, took the opportunity to advance, defeated the South Vietnamese vanguard, and led tens of thousands of troops to wait for General Fubo.

古文：伏波将军将罪人，道远，会期後，与楼船会乃有千馀人，遂俱进。
现代文：伏波将军率领被赦的罪人，道路遥远，正巧又误了会师的日期，因此同楼船将军会师的才有一千余人，于是一同前进。
English: General Fubo led the forgiven sinners, the road was far away, and the date of joining the division was coincidentally missed, so there were only more than a thousand people joining the division with the general of the same ship, so they advanced together.

古文：楼船居前，至番禺。
现代文：楼船将军在前边，直打到番禺。
English: The general of the ro-ship is in the front, and it is going straight to Panyu.

古文：建德、嘉皆城守。
现代文：赵建德和吕嘉都在城中防守。
English: Zhao Jiande and Lü Jia both defended in the middle of the city.

古文：楼船自择便处，居东南面；伏波居西北面。
现代文：楼船将军自己选择有利的地方，驻兵在番禺的东南面；伏波将军驻军在番禺西北边。
English: General Loufeng himself chose a favorable place, stationed troops in the southeast of Panyu; General Fubo stationed troops in the northwest of Panyu.

古文：会暮，楼船攻败越人，纵火烧城。
现代文：正当天黑时，楼船将军攻击并打败了南越人，放大火烧番禺城。
English: It was in the dark of night that General Lousen attacked and defeated the South Vietnamese, setting fire to Panyu.

古文：越素闻伏波名，日暮，不知其兵多少。
现代文：南越人平时就听到过伏波将军的大名，现在天黑，不知道他有多少军队。
English: The South Vietnamese usually heard the name of General Fubo, but now it's dark and they don't know how many troops he has.

古文：伏波乃为营，遣使者招降者，赐印，复纵令相招。
现代文：伏波将军就安营扎寨，派使者招来那些投降的人，赐给他们官印，又放他们回去招降别的人。
English: General Fubo set up camp, sent messengers to those who had surrendered, gave them official seals, and let them go back to recruit others.

古文：楼船力攻烧敌，反驱而入伏波营中。
现代文：楼船将军奋力攻击，焚烧敌人，反而驱赶乱兵跑入伏波将军的营中来投降。
English: General Loufeng attacked vigorously, burned the enemy, but drove the ruffians into the camp of General Fubo to surrender.

古文：犁旦，城中皆降伏波。
现代文：黎明时分，城中的敌兵都投降了伏波将军。
English: At dawn, all the enemy soldiers in the city surrendered to General Fubo.

古文：吕嘉、建德已夜与其属数百人亡入海，以船西去。
现代文：吕嘉和赵建德已在夜里同几百个部下逃入大海，乘船西去。
English: Lu Jia and Zhao Jiande had fled into the sea at night with several hundred of their subordinates and sailed west.

古文：伏波又因问所得降者贵人，以知吕嘉所之，遣人追之。
现代文：伏波将军又乘机询问已投降的南越贵人，才知道吕嘉的去向，派人去追捕他。
English: General Fubo also took the opportunity to inquire about the South Vietnamese nobles who had surrendered. Only then did he learn of Lü Jia's whereabouts and sent someone to hunt him down.

古文：以其故校尉司马苏弘得建德，封为海常侯；越郎都稽得嘉，封为临蔡侯。
现代文：原校尉现为伏波将军的司马之官的苏弘捕到赵建德，被封为常海侯；南越人郎官都稽抓到吕嘉，被封为临蔡侯。
English: Su Hong, a former school captain who is now the Sima officer of General Fubo, was arrested to Zhao Jiande and was named Changhai Hou; South Vietnamese officials were arrested to Lujia and were named Lin Cai Hou.

古文：苍梧王赵光者，越王同姓，闻汉兵至，及越揭阳令定自定属汉；越桂林监居翁谕瓯骆属汉：皆得为侯。
现代文：苍梧王赵光，同南越王同姓，听说汉朝军队已到，同南越名字叫定的揭阳县令，决定归属汉朝；南越桂林郡监居翁，告知瓯骆归降汉朝。他们都被封了侯。
English: Cangwu King Zhao Guang, who had the same surname as the king of South Vietnam, heard that the Han Dynasty army had arrived and decided to belong to the Han Dynasty by the order of Jieyang County, which had the same name as South Vietnam, and the overseer of Guilin County, South Vietnam, told Luo Luo to return to the Han Dynasty. They were all put under house arrest.

古文：戈船、下厉将军兵及驰义侯所发夜郎兵未下，南越已平矣。
现代文：戈船将军和下厉将军的军队，以及驰义侯所谓调动的夜郎军队还未到达，南越已经被平定了。
English: The armies of Generals Goh Chun and Ge Li, as well as the so-called Yelang army mobilized by Chiyi Hou, had not yet arrived, and South Vietnam had already been pacified.

古文：遂为九郡。
现代文：于是汉朝在此设置了九个郡。
English: As a result, the Han Dynasty set up nine counties here.

古文：伏波将军益封。楼船将军兵以陷坚为将梁侯。
现代文：伏波将军增加了封邑，楼船将军的军队攻破敌人的坚固防守，因而被封为将梁侯。
English: General Fubo increased the number of fiefs, and General Lousheng's army broke through the enemy's strong defense, and was thus named General Liang.

古文：自尉佗初王後，五世九十三岁而国亡焉。
现代文：从赵佗最初称王以后，传国五世，共九十三年，南越国就灭亡了。
English: Ninety-three years have passed since Zhao Jun first proclaimed himself king, passing on the country to the fifth generation.

古文：太史公曰：尉佗之王，本由任嚣。
现代文：太史公说： 尉佗当上南越王，本是由于任嚣的提拔和劝说。
English: Tai Shikong said: It was due to persistent promotion and persuasion that Ip Man became the king of South Vietnam.

古文：遭汉初定，列为诸侯。
现代文：正赶上汉朝初步安定，他被封为诸侯。
English: Just as the Han Dynasty was beginning to stabilize, he was made a prince.

古文：隆虑离湿疫，佗得以益骄。
现代文：隆虑侯领兵伐南越，碰上酷暑潮湿的气侯，士卒多染上疾病，无法进军，致使赵佗越发骄傲。
English: He led the army to invade South Vietnam, and when he encountered the hot and humid weather, many soldiers were infected with diseases and could not march into the army, causing Zhao Hao to become more and more proud.

古文：瓯骆相攻，南越动摇。
现代文：由于同瓯骆互相攻击，南越国势动摇。
English: As a result of the mutual attacks with the Xiangluo, the national power of South Vietnam was shaken.

古文：汉兵临境，婴齐入朝。
现代文：汉朝的大军压境，南越太子婴齐只得前往长安当宿卫。
English: The Han Dynasty's large army pressed the border, and the South Vietnamese prince had to go to Chang'an to be a night watchman.

古文：其後亡国，徵自樛女；吕嘉小忠，令佗无後。
现代文：后来南越亡国，征兆就在婴齐娶了樛氏女。吕嘉小小的忠诚，致使赵佗断绝了王位的继承人。
English: Later, after the fall of South Vietnam, it was a sign that he married a daughter of the Xiong family in the infancy. Lu Jia's small loyalty caused Zhao Xiong to cut off the heir to the throne.

古文：楼船从欲，怠傲失惑；伏波困穷，智虑愈殖，因祸为福。
现代文：楼船将军放纵欲望，变得怠惰傲慢，放荡惑乱。伏波将军大志不顺，智谋思虑越来越丰富，因祸得福。
English: General Loufeng indulged his desires, became lazy and arrogant, and indulged in debauchery and confusion. General Fubo's ambitions did not go well, his wisdom and thoughts became more and more abundant, and he was blessed by misfortune.

古文：成败之转，譬若纠墨。
现代文：可见成败的转换，就同纠墨一样，难以预料。
English: It can be seen that the transformation of success and failure is as unpredictable as the twisting of ink.

