古文：石璧谋
现代文：石璧谋
English: Shi Bicheng

古文：桓公曰： 寡人欲西朝天子而贺献不足，为此有数乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 我想西行朝拜天子而贺献费用不足，解决这个问题有办法么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: I want to go west to worship the Son of Heaven, but the offering fee is insufficient. Is there a way to solve this problem?

古文：管子对曰： 请以令城阴里，使其墙三重而门九袭。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请下令在阴里筑城，要求有三层城墙，九道城门。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Please give the order to build the city in the shade, and ask for three layers of walls and nine gates."

古文：因使玉人刻石而为璧，尺者万泉，八寸者八千，七寸者七千，珪中四千，瑗中五百。 
现代文：利用此项工程使玉匠雕制石壁，一尺的定价为一万钱，八寸的定为八干，七寸的定为七干，石珪值四千，石瑗值五百。 
English: Using this project, the jeweler was able to carve stone walls. The price of a foot was increased to ten thousand yuan, eight inches was set as eight stems, seven inches was set as seven stems, the value of the stone was four thousand, and the value of the stone was five hundred.

古文：璧之数已具，管子西见天子曰： 弊邑之君欲率诸侯而朝先王之庙，观于周室。请以令使天下诸侯朝先王之庙，观于周室者，不得不以彤弓石璧。
现代文：石莹如数完成后，管仲就西行朝见天子说： 敝国之君想率领诸侯来朝拜先王宗庙，观礼于周室，请发布命令，要求天下诸侯凡来朝拜先王宗庙并观礼于周室的，都必须带上彤弓和石壁。
English: After the stone carving was completed, Guanzhong went west to meet the emperor and said, "If you, the prince of Shandong, want to lead the princes to pay homage to the ancestral temple of the previous king and pay homage in the weekly room, please issue an order to require that all the princes of the world who come to pay homage to the ancestral temple of the previous king and pay homage in the weekly room must bring a bow and stone wall.

古文：不以彤弓石璧者，不得入朝。 
现代文：不带彤弓石壁者不准入朝。 
English: No one is allowed to enter the Imperial Palace without a bow and arrow.

古文：天子许之曰： 诺。 
现代文：周天子答应说： 可以这样做。 
English: Zhou Tianzi agreed and said, "You can do this."

古文：号令于天下。
现代文：便向天下各地发出了号令。
English: He then issued an order to all parts of the world.

古文：天下诸侯载黄金珠玉五谷文采布泉输齐以收石璧。
现代文：天下诸侯都运载着黄金、珠玉、粮食、彩绢和布帛到齐国来购买石壁。
English: Princes from all over the world came to Qi with gold, jewels, grain, jade and cloth to buy stone walls.

古文：石璧流而之天下，天下财物流而之齐。
现代文：齐国的石壁由此流通于天下，天下的财物归于齐国。
English: As a result, the stone walls of Qi were circulated throughout the world, and the wealth of the world belonged to Qi.

古文：故国八岁而无籍，阴里之谋也。
现代文：所以，齐国八年没有征收赋税，就是这个阴里之谋的作用。
English: Therefore, the fact that the State of Qi has not levied taxes for eight years is the result of this conspiracy.

古文：菁茅谋
现代文：菁茅谋
English: Jing Maomou

古文：桓公曰： 天子之养不足，号令赋于天下则不信诸侯，为此有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公曰： 天子之养不足，号令赋于天下则不信诸侯，为此有道乎？ 
English: King Kan said, "The son of heaven is not well-reared. If a command is given to the world, the princes will not believe. Is there a reason for this?"

古文：管子对曰： 江淮之间有一茅而三脊母至其本，名之曰菁茅。
现代文：管子对曰： 江淮之间有一茅而三脊母至其本，名之曰菁茅。
English: The pipe says: There is a corm between the Jianghuai and the three dorsal roots to its base, the name is Jingmao.

古文：请使天子之吏环封而守之。
现代文：请使天子之吏环封而守之。
English: Please make the officials of the heavenly son encircle and protect it.

古文：夫天子则封于太山、禅于梁父。
现代文：夫天子则封于太山、禅于梁父。
English: Her husband, Tenzin, is enshrined in Taishan, and Zen is enshrined in Liangpu.

古文：号令天下诸侯曰： 诸从天子封于太山、禅于梁父者，必抱菁茅一束以为禅籍。
现代文：号令天下诸侯曰： 诸从天子封于太山、禅于梁父者，必抱菁茅一束以为禅籍。
English: The princes of the world were ordered to say: All those who are sealed in Taishan by the Son of Heaven, and who meditate in the Father of Heaven, must hold a bunch of ginseng for meditation.

古文：不如令者不得从。  
现代文：不如令者不得从。  
English: If you don't do as you're told, you don't get to go.

古文：天子下诸侯载其黄金。
现代文：天子下诸侯载其黄金。
English: The princes under the Son of Heaven carry their gold.

古文：争秩而走，江淮之菁茅坐长而十倍，其贾一柬而百金。
现代文：争秩而走，江淮之菁茅坐长而十倍，其贾一柬而百金。
English: In the race for the first place, Jianghuai's Jingmao is ten times longer, and its Jia is a hundred times more valuable.

古文：故天子三日即位，天下之金四流而归周若流水。
现代文：故天子三日即位，天下之金四流而归周若流水。
English: As a result, the divine son ascended to the throne on the third day, and all the gold in the world flowed in all directions.

古文：故周天子七年不求贺献者，菁茅之谋也。
现代文：故周天子七年不求贺献者，菁茅之谋也。
English: The late Zhou Tianzi did not solicit congratulatory offerings for seven years. This was also Jing Mao's strategy.

古文：桓公曰： 寡人多务，令衡籍吾国之富商蓄贾称贷家，以利吾贫萌、农夫，不失其本事。
现代文：桓公说： 我需要办理的事情很多，只好派官向富商蓄贾和高利贷者征收赋税，来帮助贫民和农夫维持农事。
English: He said, "I have a lot of things to do, so I had to send officials to collect taxes from rich merchants and usurers and usurers to help the poor and farmers maintain agriculture."

古文：反此有道乎？ 
现代文：但若改变这种办法，还有别的出路么？ 
English: But if we change this approach, is there any other way out?

古文：管子对曰： 唯反之以号令为可耳。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 只有运用号令来改变这种办法才行。 
English: Guanzhong replied: It is only possible to change this method by issuing an order.

古文：桓公说： 行事奈何？ 
现代文：桓公说： 具体做法如何？ 
English: Kanko said: What is the specific approach?

古文：管子对曰： 请使宾胥无驰而南，隰朋驰而北，宁戚驰而东，鲍叔驰而西。
现代文：管仲回答说： 请把宾须无派到南方，隰朋派到北方，宁戚到东方，鲍叔到西方。
English: Guanzhong replied: Please send your guests to the south, your friends to the north, your relatives to the east, and your uncle to the west.

古文：四子之行定，夷吾请号令谓四子曰： 子皆为我君视四方称贷之间，其受息之氓几何千家，以报吾。  
现代文：四人的派遣一定下来，我就对他们宣布号令说： 你们都去为国君调查四方各放贷地区的情况，调查那里负债的人有多少于家，回来向我报告。  
English: The dispatch of the four people must come down, and I announced to them the command: You all go to investigate the situation of the lending areas in the four directions for the sovereign, investigate how many people are indebted there, and come back to report to me.

古文：鲍叔驰而西，反报曰： 西方之氓者，带济负河，菹泽之萌也。
现代文：鲍叔驰到了西方，回来报告说： 西部的百姓，是住在济水周围、大海附近、草泽之地的百姓。
English: Uncle Bao went to the west and came back to report: The people in the west are the people who live around Jishui, near the sea, in the grassland.

古文：渔猎取薪蒸而为食。
现代文：他们以渔猎打柴为生。
English: They make a living by fishing, hunting and collecting firewood.

古文：其称贷之家多者千钟，少者六、七百钟。
现代文：那里的高利贷者多的放债有干钟粮食，少的有六、七百钟。
English: The usurers there, the greater number of them, have six or seven hundred bushels of grain, and the lesser number six or seven hundred bushels.

古文：其出之，钟也一钟。
现代文：他们放债，一借出一钟粮食收利一钟。
English: They lend, and receive in return for every hour of grain they lend, another hour of profit.

古文：其受息之萌九百余家。 
现代文：那里借债的贫民有九百多家。 
English: There are more than 900 indebted poor people there.

古文：宾胥无驰而南。反报曰： 南方之萌者，山居谷处，登降之萌也。
现代文：宾须无驰车去了南方，回来报告说： 南方的百姓，是住在山上谷中、登山下谷的百姓。
English: The guest went to the south without a car, and reported back: The people of the south are the people who live in the middle of the mountain valley and in the valley below the mountain.

古文：上斫轮轴，下采杼栗，田猎而为食。
现代文：他们以砍伐木材，采摘橡栗，并从事狞猎为生。
English: They make a living by cutting wood, picking acorns, and engaging in hunting.

古文：其称贷之家多者千万，少者六、七百万。
现代文：那里的高利贷者多的放债有一千万，少的有六、七百万。
English: The loan sharks there have as many as ten million loans, and as few as six or seven million.

古文：其出之，中伯伍也。其受息之萌八百余家。 
现代文：他们放债，利息柑当百分之五十。那里借债的贫民有八百多家。 
English: They lend money at 50 percent interest, and there are more than 800 poor people who have borrowed money there.

古文：宁戚驰而东。反报曰： 东方之萌，带山负海，若处，上断福，渔猎之萌也。
现代文：宁戚驰车去了东方，回来报告说； 东方的百姓，是居山靠海，地处山谷，上山伐木，并从事渔猎的百姓。
English: Ning Qizhi drove to the East and returned with a report: The people of the East live in the mountains by the sea, live in the valleys, go up the mountains to cut wood, and engage in fishing and hunting.

古文：治葛缕而为食。
现代文：他们以纺织葛藤粗线为生。
English: They make a living by weaving kudo coarse thread.

古文：其称贷之家棗丁、惠、高、国，多者五千钟，少者三千钟。
现代文：那里的高利贷者有丁、惠、高、国四家，多的放债有五干钟粮食，少的有三干钟。
English: The usurers there are from four families: Ding, Hui, Gao and Guo. Most of the money-lenders have five hours of grain, while a few have three hours.

古文：其出之，中钟五釜也。
现代文：他们放债，是借出一钟粮食，收到五釜。
English: When they lend money, they lend grain for one hour and receive five kettles.

古文：其受息之萌八、九百家。 
现代文：那里借债的贫民有八、九百家。 
English: There are eight or nine hundred families of poor people in debt there.

古文：隰朋驰而北。反报曰： 北方之萌者，衍处负海，煮泲水为盐，梁济取鱼之萌也。
现代文：隐朋驰车到了北方，回来报告说： 北方的百姓，是住在水泽一带和大海附近，从事煮盐或在济水捕鱼的百姓。
English: Hinpont drove to the north and returned with a report: The people of the north are those who live around the lakes and rivers and near the sea, and are engaged in boiling salt or catching fish in Jishui.

古文：薪食。
现代文：他们也依靠打柴为生。
English: They also depend on firewood for their livelihood.

古文：其称贷之家多者千万，少者六、七百万。
现代文：那里的高利贷者，多的放债有一千万，少的有六、七百万。
English: The loan sharks there have as many as ten million loans, and as few as six or seven million.

古文：其出之，中伯二十也。
现代文：他们放债，利息相当百分之二十。
English: They lend money at interest rates of up to 20 per cent.

古文：受息之萌九百余家。 
现代文：那里借债的贫民有九百多家。 
English: There are more than 900 indebted poor people there.

古文：凡称贷之家出泉三千万，出粟三数千万钟，受子息民三万家。
现代文：上述所有高利贷者，共放债三千万钱，三千万钟左右的粮食。借债贫民三千多家。
English: All of the above-mentioned loan sharks have lent a total of 30 million yuan and about 30 million tons of grain. There are more than 3,000 poor borrowers.

古文：四子已报，管子曰： 不弃我君之有萌中一国而五君之正也，然欲国之无贫，兵之无弱，安可得哉？ 
现代文：四位大臣报告完毕，管仲说： 不料我国的百姓等于一国而有五个国君的征敛，这样还想国家不穷，军队不弱，怎么可能呢？ 
English: After the four ministers finished their report, Guan Zhong said, "Unsurprisingly, the people of our country are equal to one country, but there are five sovereigns. How is it possible to think that the country is not poor and the army is not weak?

古文：桓公曰： 为此有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 有办法解决么？ 
English: Kan said: Is there a way to solve this?

古文：管子曰： 惟反之以号令为可。
现代文：管仲说： 只有运用号令来改变这种情况才行。
English: "The only way to change the situation is to use a signal," Mr. Guan said.

古文：请以令贺献者皆以鐻枝兰鼓，则必坐长什倍其本矣，君之栈台之职亦坐长什倍。
现代文：请命令前来朝拜贺献的，都须献来织有 枝兰鼓 花纹的美锦，美锦的价格就一定上涨十倍。君上在 栈台 所藏的同类美锦，也会涨价十倍。
English: If you order all those who come to pay homage to you to offer brocades woven with the cascade pattern, the price of the brocades will surely rise tenfold. The price of the same kind of brocades in your lord's treasury will also rise tenfold.

古文：请以令召称贷之家，君因酌之酒，太宰行觞。
现代文：再请下令召见高利贷者，由君上设宴招待。
English: Also, please order the usurers to be summoned, and your majesty will host a banquet for them.

古文：桓公举衣而问曰： 寡人多务，令衡籍吾国。
现代文：太宰敬酒后，桓公便提衣起立而问大家： 我需要办理的事情很多，只好派官在国内收税。
English: After Dazai's toast, Emperor Kan stood up and asked everyone: I have a lot of things to do, so I had to send an officer to collect taxes in China.

古文：闻子之假贷吾贫萌，使有以终其上令。
现代文：听说诸位曾把钱、粮借给贫民，使他们得以完成纳税任务。
English: I heard that you used to lend money and grain to the poor so that they could pay their taxes.

古文：寡人有鐻枝兰鼓，其贾中纯万泉也。愿以为吾贫萌决其子息之数，使无券契之责。 
现代文：我藏有 枝兰鼓 花纹的美锦，每正价值万钱，我想用它来为贫民们偿还本息，使他们免除债务负担。 
English: I have in my possession a piece of brocade, the value of which is ten thousand rupees, and I would like to use it to pay off the principal and interest of the poor and relieve them of the burden of debt.

古文：称贷之家皆齐首而稽颡曰： 君之忧萌至于此！请再拜以献堂下。 
现代文：高利贷者都将俯首下拜说： 君上如此关怀百姓，请允许我们把债券捐献于堂下就是了。 
English: The usurers will all bow their heads and say: Your Majesty is so concerned about the people, please allow us to donate the bonds to you.

古文：桓公曰： 不可。
现代文：桓公再说： 那可不行。
English: Prince Kan said again, "That won't work."

古文：子使吾萌春有以倳耜，夏有以决芸。寡人之德子无所宠，若此而不受，寡人不得于心。 
现代文：诸位使我国贫民春得以耕，夏得以耘，我感谢你们，无所奖励，这点东西都不肯收，我心不安。 
English: You have enabled the poor of our country to plough in the spring and to hoe in the summer. I thank you, but there is no reward. I refuse to accept this. My heart is uneasy.

古文：故称贷之家曰皆： 再拜受。 
现代文：这样，高利贷者们都会说： 我们再拜接受了。 
English: Then the moneylenders will say, "We'll take it again."

古文：所出栈台之织未能三千纯也，而决四方子息之数，使无券契之责。
现代文：国家拿出栈台的织锦还不到三千纯，便清偿了四方贫民的本息，免除了他们的债务。
English: The state took out the brocade of the trestle, which was less than three thousand years old, and paid off the principal and interest of the poor in all directions, and discharged their debts.

古文：四方之萌闻之，父教其子，兄教其弟曰： 夫垦田发务，上之所急，可以无庶乎？
现代文：四方贫民听到后，一定会父告其子，兄告其弟说： 种田除草，是君主的迫切要求，我们还可以不用心么？ 
English: After hearing this, the poor in the four directions will surely accuse their father, their son, and their brother, saying: "Planting and weeding is an urgent requirement of the monarch, can we not be concerned?

古文：君之忧我至于此！ 
现代文：国君对我们的关怀一至于此！ 
English: So much for your concern for us!

古文：此之谓反准。 
现代文：这套办法就叫作 反准 的措施。 
English: This set of measures is called countermeasures.

古文：管子曰： 昔者癸度居人之国，必四面望于天下，天下高亦高。
现代文：管仲说： 从前癸度到一个国家，一定要从四面八方调查外国情况，天下各国物价高，本国也应高。
English: Guanzhong said: Once you arrive in a country, you must investigate the situation of foreign countries from all directions. Prices are high in all countries, and they should be high in your own country.

古文：天下高我独下，必失其国于天下。 
现代文：如果各国物价高而本国独低，必然被天下各国把本国吞掉。 
English: If prices are high in all countries, but low in one's own country, one's own country will inevitably be swallowed up by all other countries.

古文：桓公曰： 此若言曷谓也？ 
现代文：桓公说： 这话是什么意思呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "What does this mean?"

古文：管子对曰： 昔莱人善染。练茈之于莱纯锱，緺绶之于莱亦纯锱也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 从前莱国擅长染色工艺，紫色的绢在莱国的价钱一纯只值一销金子，紫青色的丝绦也是一纯值一锱金子。
English: Guanzhong replied, "In the past, Laos was good at dyeing. In Laos, the price of a pure purple silk ribbon was only worth one gold coin, and the price of a pure violet silk ribbon was also worth one gold coin.

古文：其周中十金。
现代文：而在周地则价值十斤黄金。
English: In Zhou, it is worth ten catties of gold.

古文：莱人知之，闻纂茈空。
现代文：莱国商人知道后，很快把紫绢收购一空。
English: After learning of this, the merchants of Lai soon bought up all of Ziyang.

古文：周且敛马作见于莱人操之，莱有推马。
现代文：周国却拿出票据作为抵押，从莱国商人手里把紫绢收购起来，莱国商人只握有等于货币的票据。
English: However, Zhou Guo took out bills as collateral and purchased Ziyang from Lao merchants. Lao merchants only held bills equal to the currency of Zham.

古文：是自莱失纂茈而反准于马也。
现代文：这是莱国自己失掉了收集起来的紫绢，而只好用票据收回钱币了。
English: This is because the country of Laos itself has lost the collected zircons, and had to use bills to recover the coins.

古文：故可因者因之，乘者乘之，此因天下以制天下。
现代文：因此，可以利用就要利用，可以掌握就要掌握，这就是周人利用外国来控制外国的情况。
English: Therefore, if it can be used, it should be used, and if it can be controlled, it should be controlled. This is how Zhou used foreign countries to control foreign countries.

古文：此之谓国准。 
现代文：这也叫作国家的平准措施。 
English: This is a national standardisation measure.

古文：桓公曰： 齐西水潦而民饥，齐东丰庸而粟贱，欲以东之贱被西之贵，为之有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 齐国西部发生水灾而人民饥荒，齐国东部五谷丰足而粮价低廉。想用东部的粮价低廉来补助西部的粮价昂贵，有办法么？ 
English: Huan Gong said, "Floods occurred in the western part of Qi and the people suffered from famine. In the eastern part of Qi, grain was plentiful and grain prices were low. Is there any way to use the low grain prices in the east to subsidize the high grain prices in the west?"

古文：管子对曰： 今齐西之粟釜百泉，则鏂二十也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 现在西部的粮价每釜百钱，每枢就是二十钱。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Nowadays, grain prices in the west are as high as 100 yuan per caldron, and 20 yuan per spindle.

古文：齐东之粟釜十泉，则鏂二钱也。
现代文：东部的粮食每釜十钱，每钅区只是二钱。
English: In the east, grain costs ten yuan per caldron, but only two yuan per corm.

古文：请以令籍人三十泉，得以五谷菽粟决其籍。
现代文：请下令向每一口人征税三十钱，并要用粮食来缴纳。
English: Let it be decreed that there shall be a levy of thirty pence per head, to be paid in grain.

古文：若此，则齐西出三斗而决其籍，齐东出三釜而决其籍。
现代文：这样，齐国西部每人出粮三斗就可以完成，齐国东部则要拿出三釜。
English: In this way, the western part of Qi will be able to complete three buckets of grain per person, while the eastern part of Qi will have to come up with three buckets.

古文：然则釜十之粟皆实子仓廪，西之民饥者得食，寒者得衣；无本者予之陈，无种者予之新。
现代文：那么，一釜仅卖十钱的齐东粮食就全都进入国家粮仓了。西部的百姓也就可以饥者得食，寒者得衣，无本者国家贷予陈粮，无种者国家贷予新粮了。
English: Then, all the grain from Qidong, which sells for only ten yuan per pot, will go into the national granary. The people in the west will also be able to get food for the hungry, clothes for the cold, the state will lend stale grain to those who do not have it, and the state will lend new grain to those who do not have seeds.

古文：若此，则东西之相被，远近之准平矣。 
现代文：这样，东西两地得以相互补助，远近各方也就得到调节了。 
English: In this way, the East and the West have been able to supplement each other, and the far and near sides have been adjusted.

古文：桓公曰， 衡数吾已得闻之矣，请问国准。 
现代文：桓公说： 平衡供求的理财方法我已经知道了，请问关于国家的平准措施。 
English: Huan Gong said: I already know the financial management method of balancing supply and demand, please ask about the national leveling measures.

古文：管子对曰： 孟春且至，沟渎阮而不遂，溪谷报上之水不安于藏，内毁室屋，坏墙垣，外伤田野，残禾稼。
现代文：管仲回答说： 初春一到，沟渠堵塞不通，溪谷堤坝里的水泛滥成灾，内则毁坏房屋、墙垣，外则损害囚地、庄稼。
English: Guanzhong replied, "When early spring arrives, the ditches are blocked and impassable, and the water in the valley embankment floods, destroying houses and walls on the inside, and damaging farmland and crops on the outside.

古文：故君谨守泉金之谢物，且为之举。
现代文：因此，国家应注意百姓为上交水利费用而抛卖的物资，并把它收购起来。
English: Therefore, the state should pay attention to the materials sold by the people for the payment of water conservancy fees, and purchase them.

古文：大夏，帷盖衣幕之奉不给，谨守泉布之谢物，且为之举。
现代文：夏季，兵车的帷盖衣幕供应不足。国家应注意百姓为上交布帛而抛卖的物资，并把它收购起来。
English: In the summer, the supply of curtains and curtains for military vehicles is insufficient. The state should pay attention to the materials sold by the people for the delivery of cloth and purchase them.

古文：大秋，甲兵求缮，弓弩求弦，谨丝麻之谢物，且为之举。
现代文：秋季，盔甲兵器要修缮，弓弩要上弦。国家要注意百姓为上交丝麻而抛卖的物资，并把它收购起来。
English: In autumn, armor and weapons need to be repaired, and bows and arrows need to be sharpened. The state should pay attention to the materials sold by the people for the silk, and purchase them.

古文：大冬，任甲兵，粮食不给，黄金之赏不足，谨守五谷黄金之谢物，且为之举。
现代文：冬季，雇人做盔甲兵器，粮食供应不足，黄金赏赐不足，国家应注意百姓为上交粮食、黄金而抛卖的物资，并把它收购起来。
English: In winter, people are hired to make armor and weapons, grain supply is insufficient, and gold rewards are insufficient. The state should pay attention to the materials sold by the people for grain and gold, and purchase them.

古文：已守其谢，富商蓄贾不得如故。
现代文：国家把这些物资掌握起来以后，富商蓄贾就无法施其故技了。
English: After the state has mastered these materials, rich businessmen will no longer be able to do what they have always done.

古文：此之谓国准。 
现代文：这就是国家的平准措施。 
English: This is a national standardisation measure.

古文：龙斗于马谓之阳，牛山之阴。
现代文：龙在马渎南面、牛山北面博斗。
English: The dragon fights in the south of the horse and in the north of the cow mountain.

古文：管子入复于桓公曰： 天使使者临君之郊，请使大夫初饬、左右玄服天之使者乎！ 
现代文：管仲向桓公报告说： 上天派使者来到城郊，请让大夫穿上黑服，左右随员也穿上黑服，去迎接天使好了！ 
English: Guanzhong reported to Huan Gong: Heaven has sent an emissary to the outskirts of the city, please let the doctor put on black clothes, and the attendants on both sides also put on black clothes to meet the angel!

古文：天下闻之曰： 神哉齐桓公，天使使者临其郊。 
现代文：天下各国听到以后说： 神哉，齐桓公，上天都派使者来到他的城郊！ 
English: When the nations of the world heard of this, they said: "O God, King Zikhan, the heavens have sent messengers to his outskirts!"

古文：不待举兵，而朝者八诸侯。
现代文：还没有等到齐国动兵，来朝者就有八国诸侯。
English: Even before the Qi State mobilized its troops, there were princes from eight countries who came to the DPRK.

古文：此乘天威而动天下之道也。
现代文：这就是利用天威来震动天下各国的办法。
English: This is the way to use the power of heaven to shake the nations of the world.

古文：故智者役使鬼神而愚者信之。
现代文：可见，智者可以役使鬼神而愚者信之。
English: It is clear that a wise man can make use of ghosts and gods, while a fool believes in them.

古文：桓公终神，管子入复桓公曰： 地重，投之哉兆，国有恸。
现代文：桓公祭神完毕，管仲向桓公报告说： 地震是瘟疫的先兆。国家会发生不幸。
English: After the completion of the deity offering to Kanko, Guanzhong reported to Kanko: The earthquake is a harbinger of a plague. There will be misfortune in the country.

古文：风重，投之哉兆。
现代文：发生风暴，也是瘟疫的先兆。
English: The occurrence of a storm is also a harbinger of plague.

古文：国有枪星，其君必辱；国有彗星，必有流血。
现代文：国家若出现枪星，其国君必将受辱；若出现慧星，必然有流血之事。
English: If a shooting star appears in a country, its ruler will certainly be humiliated; if a comet appears, there will inevitably be bloodshed.

古文：浮丘之战，彗之所出，必服天下之仇。
现代文：浮丘战役，慧星就曾出现，因而必须对付天下的敌人。
English: In the Battle of the Floating Mound, the comet appeared, so we must deal with the enemies of the world.

古文：今彗星见于齐之分，请以令朝功臣世家，号令于国中曰： 彗星出，寡人恐服天下之仇。请有五谷菽粟布帛文采者，皆勿敢左右。
现代文：现在慧星又出现在齐国地界，请下令召集功臣世家，并向全国发布号令说： 现在慧星出现，我恐怕又要出兵对付天下的仇敌，存有五谷寂米、布帛彩绢的人家，都不得私自处理。
English: Now that the comet has appeared again on the border of Qi, please issue an order to convene the families of the heroes and issue an order to the whole country, saying: Now that the comet has appeared, I am afraid that I will have to send troops to deal with the enemies of the world. People who have grain, rice, cloth, and cloth products should not deal with them privately.

古文：国且有大事，请以平贾取之。 
现代文：国家将有战事，要按照平价由国家收购。 
English: The country will be at war, and it should be purchased by the country according to parity.

古文：功臣之家、人民百姓皆献其谷菽粟泉金，归其财物，以佐君之大事。
现代文：功臣之家和居民百姓都把他们的粮食、钱币与黄金呈献出来，无偿提供他们的财物来支援国家大事。
English: Both the homes of the heroes and the local people presented their grain, coins and gold, and offered their property free of charge to support the national cause.

古文：此谓乘天灾而求民邻财之道也。 
现代文：这乃是利用天的灾异求取民财的办法。 
English: This is a method of taking advantage of natural disasters to obtain people's wealth.

古文：桓公曰： 大夫多并其财而不出，腐朽五谷而不散。 
现代文：桓公说： 许多大夫都隐藏他们的财物而不肯提供出来，粮食烂了也不肯散给贫民。 
English: Huan Gong said: Many doctors hide their wealth and refuse to give it out, and refuse to distribute food to the poor when it is rotten.

古文：管子对曰： 请以令召城阳大夫而请之。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 请下令召见城阳大夫并对他进行谴责。 
English: Guanzhong replied: Please issue an order to summon Dr. Chengyang and reprimand him.

古文：桓公曰： 何哉？ 
现代文：桓公说： 怎样对他谴责呢？ 
English: Prince Kan said, "How can I condemn him?"

古文：管子对曰：  城阳大夫，嬖宠被絺，鹅骛含余，齐钟鼓之声，吹笙篪，同姓不入，伯叔父母远近兄弟皆寒而不得衣，饥而不得食。
现代文：管仲回答说： 这样讲： 城阳大夫，你姬妾穿着高贵的衣服，鹅鸭有吃不完的剩食，鸣钟击鼓，吹笙奏篪，同姓进不了你的家门，伯叔父母远近兄弟也都寒不得衣，饥不得食。
English: Guanzhong replied, "Say it like this: Dr. Chengyang, your wife and concubine are dressed in expensive clothes, the geese and ducks have leftover food that they can't finish eating, the bells are beating drums, the gongs are blowing, the same surname can't enter your home, your uncles, parents, and brothers and sisters are all cold and hungry.

古文：子欲尽忠于寡人，能乎？故子毋复见寡人。 
现代文：你这样还能尽忠于我么？你再也不要来见我了。 
English: Can you still be loyal to me like this? Don't ever come to see me again.

古文：灭其位，杜其门而不出。 
现代文：然后免掉他的爵位，封禁门户不许他外出。 
English: And then strip him of his knighthood and lock him up and don't let him out.

古文：功臣之家皆争发其积藏，出其资财，以予其远近兄弟。
现代文：这样一来，功臣之家都争着动用积蓄，拿出财物来救济远近兄弟。
English: As a result, the families of the heroes all scrambled to use their savings and take out their belongings to help their brothers near and far.

古文：以为未足，又收国中之贫病孤独老不能自食之萌，皆与得焉。
现代文：这还感到不够，又收养国内的贫、病、 孤、独、老年等不能自给的人，使之得有生计。
English: Feeling that this was not enough, they also adopted poor, sick, orphaned, lonely, and elderly people in the country who could not provide for themselves, so that they could have a livelihood.

古文：故桓公推仁立义、功臣之家兄弟相戚，骨肉相亲，国无饥民。
现代文：所以，桓公推仁行义，功臣世家也就兄弟关心，骨肉亲爱，国内没有饥饿的人民了。
English: Therefore, Emperor Kan pushed for benevolence and righteousness, and the families of heroes were also concerned about their brothers and sisters. Dear flesh and blood, there are no hungry people in the country.

古文：此之谓缪数。
现代文：这就叫作 缪术 。
English: This is called "musing."

古文：桓公曰： 峥丘之战，民多称贷负子息，以给上之急，度上之求。
现代文：桓公说： 睁丘那次战役，许多百姓都借债负息，以此来满足国家的急需，交上国家的摊派。
English: Huan Gong said: Since the Battle of Jianqiu, many people have borrowed and paid interest in order to meet the urgent needs of the country and pay the state's assessment.

古文：寡人欲复业产、此何以洽？ 
现代文：我想恢复他们的生产，这应当如何解决？ 
English: I want to resume their production, how should this be resolved?

古文：管子对曰： 惟缪数为可耳。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 只有实行 缪术 才可以。 桓公说： 好。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "It is only possible if you practice the art of Miao." Kuan Gong said, "Good.

古文：令左右州曰， 表称贷之家，皆垩白其门而高其闾。 州通之师执折箓曰： 君且使使者。 
现代文：便命令左右各州说： 要表彰那些放债的人家，把他们的大门一律粉刷，把他们的里门一律加高， 州长又报告乡师并拿着放债人的名册说： 国君将派遣使者下来拜问。 
English: And he commanded all the provinces round about, saying, Let them that are moneylenders be admonished, and let all their gates be painted, and let all their posts be made high: and the governor reported to the magistrates, and took the roll of them that were moneylenders, and said, The king will send and call them.

古文：桓公使八使者式璧而聘之，以给盐菜之用。
现代文：桓公果然派八名使者送来玉壁来聘问，谦说给一点微薄的零用。
English: King Kan sent eight envoys to ask for advice from Gyokubi, and modestly offered him a small allowance.

古文：称贷之家皆齐首稽颡而问曰： 何以得此也？ 
现代文：放债者俯首叩头而询问说： 我们为什么得此厚礼呢？ 
English: The moneylenders bowed their heads and asked, "Why have we been given such a great gift?

古文：使者曰： 君令曰： 寡人闻之《诗》曰：恺悌君子，民之父母也。
现代文：使者说： 君令这样讲： 寡人听到《诗经》说：和易近人的君子，是人民的父母。
English: The messenger said, "The king's edict is as follows: Many have heard it said in the Book of Psalms, 'A gentle man is the father of a people.'

古文：寡人有峥丘之战，吾闻子假贷吾贫萌，使有以给寡人之急，度寡人之求，使吾萌春有以倳耜，夏有以决芸，而给上事，子之力也。
现代文：寡人曾遇到峥丘的战役。听说你们借债给贫民，让他满足了我的急用，交上了我的摊派。使我的贫民春能种，夏能耘，而供给国家需要，这是你们的功绩。
English: I have heard that you lend money to the poor, so that they can meet my urgent needs and pay my share of the taxes, so that my poor can plant in the spring and harvest in the summer, and supply the needs of the country. This is your achievement.

古文：是以式璧而聘子，以给盐菜之用。
现代文：所以带着各种玉壁来送给你们，作为微薄的零用。
English: That's why I brought all kinds of jade walls to give to you, as a meager allowance.

古文：故子中民之父母也。  
现代文：你们真是等于百姓的父母了。  
English: You really are the people's parents.

古文：称贷之家皆折其券而削其书，发其积藏，出其财物，以赈贫病，分其故赀，故国中大给，峥丘之谋也。此之谓缪数。
现代文：放债的人家都就此毁掉了债券和借债文书，献出他们的积蓄，拿出他们的财物，贩济贫病百姓。既然分散了他们积累的资财，故全国大大丰足起来，这都是峥丘之谋的作用。这个也叫作 缪数 。
English: The moneylenders destroyed their bonds and loan documents, gave away their savings, took out their belongings, and sold them to help the poor and sick people. Since the wealth they had accumulated was dispersed, the whole country became very rich. All of this was the result of Mengqiu's plan. This is also called Miao's number.

古文：桓公曰： 四郊之民贫，商贾之民富，寡人欲杀商贾之民以益四郊之民，为之奈何？ 管子对曰： 请以令决洛之水，通之杭庄之间。 桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：桓公说： 农民穷，商人富，我想要削减商人财利以增补农民，应该怎么办？ 管仲回答说： 请下令疏通洼地积水，使它流进两条平行大街的中间地区。 桓公说： 可以。 
English: Huan Gong said, "Farmers are poor, and merchants are rich. If I want to reduce the wealth of merchants to supplement the wealth of farmers, what should I do?" Guan Zhong replied, "Please order the clearing of the water-logged depression so that it can flow into the middle area of the two parallel streets." Huan Gong said, "Yes."

古文：行令未能一岁，而郊之民殷然益富，商贸之民廓然益贫。
现代文：行令不到一年，农民果然逐步富裕起来，商人果然逐步贫穷了。
English: Less than a year after the edict was issued, the peasants did indeed gradually become rich, and the merchants did indeed gradually become poor.

古文：桓公召管子而问曰： 此其故何也？ 
现代文：桓公召见管仲询问说： 这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Huan Gong was summoned to see Guanzhong and asked: What is the reason for this?

古文：管子对曰： 洛之水通之杭庄之间，则屠酤之汁肥流水，则蚊虻巨雄、翡燕小鸟皆归之，宜昏饮，此水上之乐也。
现代文：管仲回答说： 疏通洼地的积水，使它流进两条大街中间，屠户和酒馆的油水就都流到水里来，蚊母鸟那样的大鸟和弱燕那样的小鸟全都飞集此处，宜于黄昏饮酒，这简直是一种水上的行乐。
English: Guanzhong replied: Dredge the water in the depression and let it flow into the middle of the two streets. The oil and water of the butcher and the tavern will flow into the water. The large birds like the mosquito and the small birds like the swallow will all fly here. It is suitable for drinking at dusk. This is simply a kind of water amusement.

古文：贾人蓄物而卖为雠，买为取，市未央毕，而委舍其守列，投蚊虵巨雄；新冠五尺请挟弹怀丸游水上，弹翡燕小鸟，被于暮。
现代文：商人带着货物，销售则急于脱手，收购则急于买进，买卖未完而提早结束，离开货摊，捕捉蚊母之类的大鸟去了。刚成年的青年，也都争先恐后地挟弹怀丸往来于水上，弹打翡翠、燕子一类小鸟，直到夜暮方休。
English: Merchants carry goods, sellers are eager to get rid of them, buyers are eager to buy them, sales are not completed and end early, leaving the stall to catch large birds such as mosquitoes. Young adults are also scrambling to catch small birds on the water, playing small birds such as emeralds and swallows until late at night.

古文：故贱卖而贵买，四郊之民卖贱，何为不富哉？
现代文：因此就出现商人贱卖贵买的局面。农民则相应卖贵而买贱，怎能不富呢？
English: As a result, a situation arises in which merchants sell low and buy high, while farmers sell high and buy low. How can they not become rich?

古文：商贾之人，何为不贫乎？ 
现代文：商人又怎能不穷呢？ 桓公说： 好。 
English: How can a merchant not be poor? Kanko said, "Okay."

古文：桓公曰： 善。 桓公曰： 五衢之民，衰然多衣弊而屦穿，寡人欲使帛、布、丝、纩之贾贱，为之有道乎？ 管子曰： 请以令沐途旁之树枝，使无尺寸之阴。 
现代文：桓公说： 五方百姓太穷，多是衣敝而鞋破，我想使帛、布、丝、絮的价钱贱下来，有办法么？ 管仲说： 请下令把路旁树枝剪去，要使它没有尺寸的树荫。 
English: Huan Gong said, "The people in the five directions are too poor, and most of them have rags and broken shoes. I want to lower the price of cocoons, cloth, silk, and lint. Is there any way?" Guanzhong said, "Please order the branches of the trees along the road to be cut off, so that there will be no dimensional shade.

古文：桓公曰： 诺。 
现代文：桓公说： 可以。 
English: Kaneko said, "Yes."

古文：行令未能一岁，五衢之民皆多衣帛完屦。
现代文：行令不到一年，所有五方百姓多数是身穿帛衣而鞋子完好。
English: Less than a year after the edict was issued, most of the people in the five provinces were wearing loincloths and their shoes were still in good condition.

古文：桓公召管子而问曰： 此其何故也？ 
现代文：桓公召见管仲询问说： 这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Huan Gong was summoned to see Guanzhong and asked: What is the reason for this?

古文：管子对曰： 途旁之树未沐之时，五衢之民，男女相好往来之市者，罢市相睹树下，谈语终日不归。
现代文：管仲回答说： 当路旁树枝未剪时，五方百姓中，男女相好往来赶集的人们，散市后相会于树荫之下，闲谈而终日不归。
English: Guanzhong replied: When the roadside branches are not cut, the people of the five provinces, men and women who like to come and go to gather, meet under the shade of trees after the market, gossip and do not return all day.

古文：男女当壮，扶辇推舆，相睹树下，戏笑超距，终日不归。
现代文：壮年男女推车的，相会于树荫之下，游戏舞蹈而终日不归。
English: Mature men and women in wheelchairs meet under the shade of a tree, play and dance and never return.

古文：父兄相睹树下，论议玄语，终日不归。
现代文：父老兄弟相会于树荫之下，议论玄虚而终日不归。
English: Fathers and brothers meet under the shade of a tree, discuss the occult and never return.

古文：是以田不发，五谷不播，桑麻不种，茧缕不治。
现代文：因此造成土地不开发，五谷不播种，桑麻不种植，丝线也无人纺织。
English: As a result, no land is developed, no grain is sown, no mulberry is planted, and no one weaves silk.

古文：内严一家而三不归，则帛、布、丝、纩之贾安得不贵？ 
现代文：从内部看，一个家庭就有此 三个不归 的情况，帛、布、丝、絮的价钱怎能不贵呢？ 
English: From the inside, a family has these three situations of no return. How can the price of cocoons, cloth, silk and lint not be expensive?

古文：桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：桓公说： 讲得好。 
English: Kan said, "That's great!

古文：桓公曰： 粜贱，寡人恐五谷之归于诸侯，寡人欲为百姓万民藏之，为此有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 粮价贱，我怕粮食外流到其他诸侯国去，我要使百姓万民储备粮食，有办法么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: Grain prices are low. I am afraid that grain will be exported to other provinces. I want the people to stockpile grain. Is there any way?

古文：管子曰： 今者夷吾过市，有新成囷京者二家，君请式璧而聘之。 恒公曰： 诺。 
现代文：管仲说： 今天我路过市区，看到有两家新建了粮仓，请君上分别送上玉壁礼问之。 桓公说： 可以。 
English: Guanzhong said, "Today, I passed through the city and saw two newly built grain silos. I would like to ask Your Excellency to present them separately." Huan Gong said, "Yes."

古文：行令半岁，万民闻之，舍其作业而为囷京以藏菽粟五谷者过半。桓公问管于曰： 此其何故也？ 
现代文：行令半年，万民听说以后，有半数以上的人家都放弃了日常事务而建仓存粮。桓公问管仲说； 这是什么原因呢？ 
English: Half a year after the edict was issued, more than half of the people gave up their daily chores and built warehouses to store grain. Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "What is the reason for this?"

古文：管子曰： 成囷京者二家，君式璧而聘之，名显于国中，国中莫不闻。
现代文：管仲说： 新建粮仓的两户人家，君上分别送上玉壁礼问之，名扬国中，国中无人不知。
English: Guanzhong said: The two households of the newly built granary, which were sent separately by the prince to the jade wall, are famous in the country, and no one in the country knows.

古文：是民上则无功显名于百姓也，功立而名成；下则实其囷京，上以给上为君。
现代文：这两家对国君并无功劳而扬名全国，一下子功立名成；对个人又存了粮食，也可以交纳国家。
English: These two families did not have any merit for the sovereign, but became famous throughout the country, and suddenly became famous; they also saved grain for individuals, and could also pay the state.

古文：一举而名实俱在也，民何为也？ 
现代文：一举而名实兼得，人们何乐而不为呢？ 
English: People can get both fame and reality in one fell swoop, so why not enjoy it?

古文：桓公问管子曰： 请问王数之守终始，可得闻乎？ 
现代文：桓公问管仲说： 请问王者的理财政策都应、控制哪些最早的时机，这一点可以告诉我么？ 
English: Huan Gong asked Guanzhong, "Could you please tell me which are the earliest opportunities that should be controlled by the king's financial management policy?"

古文：管子曰： 正月之朝，谷始也；日至百日，黍秫之始也；九月敛实，平麦之始也。 
现代文：管仲说： 一是正月上旬，种谷的开始时期；二是冬至后百日，种黍稷的开始时期；三是九月收秋，种大麦的开始时期。 
English: Guanzhong said: First, it is the early part of the first month, the beginning period of planting corn; second, it is 100 days after the winter solstice, the beginning period of planting alfalfa; third, it is the autumn harvest in September, the beginning period of planting barley.

古文：管子问于桓公： 敢问齐方于几何里？ 
现代文：管仲问桓公说： 齐国的国土有多少里？ 
English: Guan Zhong asked Kan Gong: How many miles is the territory of Qi?

古文：桓公曰： 方五百里。 
现代文：桓公： 方五百里。 
English: Kanko: It's 500 miles away.

古文：管子曰： 阴雍长城之地，其于齐国三分之一，非谷之所生也。
现代文：管仲说： 平阴堤防及长城占地，有齐地三分之一，不是产粮的地方。
English: Guanzhong said: The flat-shaded embankment and the Great Wall occupy one-third of the land, which is not a place for grain production.

古文：、龙夏，其于齐国四分之一也；朝夕外之，所墆齐地者五分之一，非谷之所生也。
现代文：海庄、龙夏一带的山地，有四分之一；海潮围绕、海水淹滞的土地，有五分之一，也不是产粮的地方。
English: Haizhuang and the mountainous areas around Longxia account for a quarter; the land around the tides and flooded by seawater accounts for a fifth, and it is not a grain-producing area.

古文：然则吾非托食之主耶？ 
现代文：那么，我们还不是一个寄食于别国的君主么？ 
English: So, are we not still a monarch who feeds on other countries?

古文：桓公遽然起曰： 然则为之奈何？ 
现代文：桓公惶恐地站起来说： 那么该怎么办？ 
English: Panicked, Huan stood up and said, "Then what should we do?"

古文：管子对曰： 动之以言，溃之以辞，可以为国基。
现代文：管仲回答说： 掌握调节经济的号令，也可以作为国家的基础。
English: Guanzhong replied: Mastering the command to regulate the economy can also serve as the foundation of the country.

古文：且君币籍而务，则贾人独操国趣；君谷籍而务，则农人独操国固。
现代文：君上若专务征收货币，富商就会操纵金融；若专务征收粮食，地主就会操纵粮食。
English: If the ruler collects money, the rich merchant will manipulate finance; if he collects grain, the landowner will manipulate grain.

古文：君动言操辞，左右之流君独因之，物之始吾已见之矣，物之终吾已见之矣，物之贾吾已见之矣。 
现代文：但君上依靠号令，使左有四方的商品流通由政府掌握，那么，商品的生产我们就早已了解，商品的消费我们也早已了解，从而商品的价格我们也就早已了如指掌了。 
English: But if the sovereign, relying on a decree, puts the four-sided circulation of commodities under the control of the government, then we already know the production of commodities, we already know the consumption of commodities, and we already know the prices of commodities.

古文：管子曰： 长城之阳，鲁也；长城之阴，齐也。
现代文：管仲又接着说： 长城以南是鲁国，长城以北是齐国。
English: Guanzhong went on to say: South of the Great Wall is Lu Province, and north of the Great Wall is Qi Province.

古文：三败杀君二重臣定社稷者，吾此皆以孤突之地封者也。
现代文：在过去两国的不断冲突中，还要把交界上孤立突出的地盘让给鲁国。
English: In the constant conflict between the two countries in the past, the isolated and prominent land on the border was also ceded to Lu.

古文：故山地者山也，水地者泽也，薪刍之所生者斥也。 
现代文：所以齐国山地还依旧是山，水地还依旧是水，满是生长着柴草的土地而已。 
English: Therefore, the mountainous areas of Qi Province are still mountains, the water areas are still water, and the land is still covered with brushwood.

古文：公曰： 托食之主及吾地亦有道乎？ 
现代文：桓公说： 一个是解决 寄食之主 的问题，一个是土地被削问题，对此还有什么办法么？ 
English: Huan Gong said: One is to solve the problem of the host, and the other is the problem of land being cut off. Is there any other way to do this?

古文：管子对曰： 守其三原。 
现代文：管仲回答说： 要掌握三个来源。 
English: Guanzhong replied, "We need to grasp three sources.

古文：公曰： 何谓三原？ 
现代文：桓公说： 何谓三个来源？ 
English: Kanko said, "What are the three sources?"

古文：管子对曰： 君守布则籍于麻，十倍其贾，布五十倍其贾。
现代文：管仲回答说： 掌握成品布先在原料麻上取收入，麻价十倍，布价就可能五十倍，这是理财之法。
English: Guanzhong replied: Mastering the finished cloth first earns income on raw hemp, and the price of hemp is ten times, and the price of cloth may be fifty times. This is a method of financial management.

古文：公曰： 善。 
现代文：桓公说： 好。 
English: Ruding said: Well said!

