古文：黄帝问曰：余闻气穴三百六十五以应一岁，未知其所，愿卒闻之。
现代文：黄帝问道：我听说人体上的气穴有三百六十五个，以应一年之日数，但不知其所在的部位，我想听你详尽地讲讲。
English: Huang Di asked: I have heard that there are three hundred and sixty-five air pockets on the human body, corresponding to the number of days in a year, but I do not know where they are located. I would like to hear you explain in detail.

古文：岐伯稽首再拜对曰：窘乎哉问也！
现代文：岐伯稽首拜了两拜回答说：你所提出的这个问题太重要了！
English: Qiboxing bowed his head twice and replied, "The issue you raised is too important!

古文：其非圣帝，孰能穷其道焉！
现代文：若不是圣帝，谁能穷究这些深奥的道理！
English: If it were not for the Holy Father, who would be able to fathom these profound truths!

古文：因请溢意，尽言其处。
现代文：因此请允许我将气穴的部位都一一讲出来。
English: Therefore, please allow me to tell you the parts of the air hole one by one.

古文：帝捧手逡巡而却曰：夫子之开余道也，目未见其处，耳末闻其数，而目以明，耳以聪矣。
现代文：黄帝拱手谦逊退让地说：先生对我讲的道理，使我很受启发，虽然我尚未看到其具体部位，未听到其具体的数字，然而已经使我耳聪目明地领会了。
English: Huang Di humbly conceded and said, "I am very inspired by what you have told me. Although I have not yet seen its specific parts or heard its specific numbers, I have clearly understood it.

古文：岐伯曰：此所谓： 圣人易语，良马易御 也。
现代文：岐伯说：你领会得如此深刻，这真是所谓 圣人易语，良马易御 啊！
English: Qibo said, "Your understanding is so profound, this is truly the so-called sage's language, my good horse!"

古文：帝曰：余非圣人之易语也，世言真数开人意，今余所访问者真数，发蒙解惑，未足以论也。
现代文：黄帝说道：我并不是易语的圣人，世人说气穴之数理可以开阔人的意识，现在我向你所询问的是气穴的数理，主要是开发蒙昧和解除疑惑，还谈不到什么深奥的理论。
English: The Yellow Emperor said, "I am not a sage of the language of exchange. People say that the mathematics of the qi hole can open up people's consciousness. What I am asking you about now is the mathematics of the qi hole. It is mainly to develop obscurities and resolve doubts, and there is no profound theory to talk about.

古文：然余愿闻夫子溢志尽言其处，令解其意，请藏之金匮，不敢复出。
现代文：然而我希望听先生将气穴的部位尽情地全都讲出来，使我能了解它的意义，并藏于金匮之中，不敢轻易传授于人。
English: However, I would like to hear the teacher explain all the parts of the qi hole to my heart's content, so that I can understand its meaning, and hide it in the lack of money and dare not easily teach it to others.

古文：岐伯再拜而起曰：臣请言之。
现代文：岐伯拜了两拜站起来说：我现在就谈吧！
English: Qibo bowed twice, stood up and said, "Let's talk about it now!"

古文：背与心相控而痛，所治天突与十椎及上纪。
现代文：背部与心胸互相牵引而痛，其治疗方法应取任脉的天突穴，督脉的十椎下，以及上纪。
English: The back and the heart and chest are mutually pulling each other and causing pain. The treatment method should be based on the supraorbital foramen, the submandibular foramen, and the supracondylar foramen.

古文：上纪者胃脘也，下纪者关元也。
现代文：上纪就是胃脘部的中脘穴，下纪就是关元穴。
English: The upper jaw is the middle temporal cavity of the gastric umbilicus, and the lower jaw is the clavicle.

古文：背胷邪系阴阳左右，如此其病前后痛濇，胷胁痛而不得息，不得卧，上气短气，偏痛，脉满起，斜出尻脉，络胷胁，支心贯鬲，上肩加天突，斜下肩，交十椎下。
现代文：背在后为阳，胸在前为阴，经脉斜系于阴阳左右，因此其病前胸和后背互相牵引而痛涩，胸胁痛得不敢呼吸，不能仰卧，上气喘息，呼吸短促，或一侧偏痛，若经脉的邪气盛满则溢于络，此络从尻脉开始斜出，络胸胁部，支脉连于心、贯穿横膈，上肩而至天突穴，再斜下肩交于背部十椎治疗背部与心胸互相牵引的疼痛。
English: The back is the yang, the chest is the yang in the front, and the meridians are obliquely connected to the yin and yang. Therefore, the anterior chest and posterior back of the patient pull each other and are painful. The chest is so painful that it does not dare to breathe, it cannot lie on its back, the upper air is wheezing, shortness of breath, or one side is migraine. If the evil spirit of the meridians is full, it overflows into the network. This network begins to obliquely protrude from the buttock vein. The network of the chest is connected to the heart through the transverse ilium,

古文：脏俞五十穴。
现代文：五脏各有五俞，五五二十五，左右共五十穴。
English: Each of the five viscera has five gills, 55 to 255, with a total of 50 cavities on the left and right.

古文：腑俞七十二穴。
现代文：六腑各有六俞，六六三十六，左右共七十二穴。
English: Each hexagon has six hexagons, six hexagons and thirty-six hexagons, for a total of seventy-two holes.

古文：热俞五十九穴。
现代文：治热病的有五十九穴。
English: There are fifty-nine acupoints for curing fever.

古文：水俞五十七穴。
现代文：治诸水病的有五十七穴。
English: There are fifty-seven wells for curing water-borne diseases.

古文：头上五行，行五，五五二十五穴。
现代文：在头部有五行，每行五穴，五五共有二十五穴。
English: In the head there are five rows of rhizomes, each row has five holes, and there are a total of twenty-five holes.

古文：中𦛗两旁各五，凡十穴。
现代文：脊椎两旁各有五穴，二五共有十穴。
English: There are five holes on each side of the spine, and a total of ten holes on both sides.

古文：大椎上两旁各一，凡二穴。
现代文：大椎两傍各有一个，共有二穴。
English: There is one on each side of the large vertebra, with a total of two holes.

古文：目瞳子、浮白二穴。
现代文：目瞳子、浮白穴二穴，左右共有四穴。
English: Eye pupil, floating white hole two holes, left and right a total of four holes.

古文：两髀厌分中二穴。
现代文：两髀厌分中，共有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the middle of the two halves.

古文：犊鼻二穴。
现代文：犊鼻穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the proboscis.

古文：耳中多所闻二穴。
现代文：耳中多所闻有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the middle of the ear.

古文：眉本二穴。
现代文：眉本有二穴。
English: There are two holes at the base of the brow.

古文：完骨二穴。
现代文：完骨穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the postmortem.

古文：项中央一穴。
现代文：项中央有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the middle.

古文：枕骨二穴。
现代文：枕骨有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the occipital bone.

古文：上关二穴。
现代文：上关穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the upper pass.

古文：大迎二穴。
现代文：大迎穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the large hole.

古文：下关二穴。
现代文：下关穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes at the lower pass.

古文：天柱二穴。
现代文：天柱穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the pillar.

古文：巨虚上下廉四穴。
现代文：巨虚上下廉，左右共有四穴。
English: It's huge, hollow, and has four holes on the left and right.

古文：曲牙二穴。
现代文：曲牙有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the curved teeth.

古文：天突一穴。
现代文：天突穴有一穴。
English: There is a hole in the bolt hole.

古文：天府二穴。
现代文：天府穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in Tenfu-ana.

古文：天牖二穴。
现代文：天牖穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the geyser.

古文：扶突二穴。
现代文：扶突穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the buttress.

古文：天窻二穴。
现代文：天窗穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the skylight.

古文：肩解二穴。
现代文：肩解有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the shoulder strap.

古文：关元一穴。
现代文：关元穴有一穴。
English: There is a hole at the base of the pass.

古文：委阳二穴。
现代文：委阳穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the Wenyang hole.

古文：肩贞二穴。
现代文：肩贞穴有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the epiglottis.

古文：瘖门一穴。
现代文：窨门穴有一穴。
English: There's a hole in the lock.

古文：齐一穴。
现代文：齐有一穴。
English: There's a hole.

古文：胷俞十二穴。
现代文：胸俞左右共十二穴。
English: There are a total of twelve holes on the left and right sides of the pectoral fins.

古文：背俞二穴。
现代文：背俞有二穴。
English: The dorsal fin has two holes.

古文：膺俞十二穴。
现代文：膺俞左右共十二穴。
English: There are a total of twelve holes on the left and right of the gong.

古文：分肉二穴。
现代文：分肉有二穴。
English: There are two holes in the meat.

古文：踝上横二穴。
现代文：踝上橫左右共四穴。
English: There are a total of four holes on the ankle.

古文：阴阳蹻四穴。
现代文：阴蹻穴、阳蹻穴，共有四穴。
English: There are a total of four holes, including a yin and yang hole and an impotence hole.

古文：水俞在诸分，热俞在气穴，寒热俞在两骸厌中二穴。
现代文：治诸水病的五十七穴，皆在诸经的分肉之间；治热病的五十九穴，皆在精气聚会之处；治寒热的俞穴，取两膝关节外侧两骨间的凹陷处左右共二穴。
English: The fifty-seven acupoints for curing water ailments are all located between the meridians of the meridians; the fifty-nine acupoints for curing heat ailments are all located at the place where the qi gathers; and the acupoints for curing cold and heat are located at the recess between the two bones on the outer side of the knee joint.

古文：大禁二十五，在天府下五寸。
现代文：有大禁的穴位，禁止二十五刺，在天府穴下五寸处。
English: There is a big forbidden hole, forbidden twenty-five thorns, five inches below the Tianfu hole.

古文：凡三百六十五穴，针之所由行也。
现代文：以上共计三百六十五穴都是针刺的部位。为腧穴。
English: The above total of three hundred and sixty-five holes are acupuncture points. They are acupuncture points.

古文：黄帝曰：余已知气穴之处，游针之居，愿闻孙络溪谷，亦有所应乎？
现代文：黄帝说道：我已经知道气穴的部位，即是行针刺的处所，还想听听孙络与溪谷是否也与一岁相应呢？
English: Huang Di said: I already know the part of the air hole, that is, the place of acupuncture, but I still want to hear whether Sun Luo and Valley also correspond to the one-year-old?

古文：岐伯曰：孙络三百六十五穴会，亦以应一岁，以溢奇邪，以通荣卫。
现代文：岐伯说：孙络与三百六十五气穴相会，以应一年，以阻挡奇邪之气，以通荣卫之气。
English: Qibo said: Sun Luo met with three hundred and sixty-five air holes to correspond to one year, to block the strange and evil air, and to pass the honor and protection air.

古文：荣卫稽留，卫散荣溢，气竭血着，外为发热，内为少气。疾泻无怠，以通荣卫。见而泻之，无问所会。帝曰：善。
现代文：若奇邪之气稽留于荣卫，则卫气外散、荣气满溢，若卫气散尽、营血不足，外则发热，内则少气，因此治疗时应迅速采用针刺的泻法不可等待，以通荣卫之气，凡是见到有荣卫之气不通畅的地方就立即用泻法，不必问其是否为气穴。黄帝说：好。
English: If the strange evil qi is left in Rong Wei, then the qi will be dispersed and the qi will be overflowing. If the qi is exhausted and the blood supply is insufficient, the outside will be hot and the inside will have less qi. Therefore, when treating, the acupuncture laxation method should be used quickly. Do not wait, use the laxation method to pass the qi of Rong Wei. If you see a place where the qi of Rong Wei is not smooth, use the laxation method immediately. Do not ask if it is a qi hole. Huangdi said: Good.

古文：愿闻溪谷之会也。
现代文：我想听听溪骨之会合是怎样的。
English: I'd like to hear what the meeting at the creek is like.

古文：岐伯曰：肉之大会为谷，肉之小会为溪，肉分之间，溪谷之会，以行荣卫，以会大气。
现代文：岐伯说：较大的肌肉与肌肉会合的部位叫谷，较小的肌肉与肌肉会合的部位叫溪。分肉之间，溪谷会合的部位，能通行荣卫之气，会合宗气。
English: Qi Bo said: The place where the larger muscle and muscle meet is called the valley, and the place where the smaller muscle and muscle meet is called the stream. Between the meat, the place where the valley meets, can pass the Rongwei qi, and meet the Zongqi.

古文：邪溢气壅，脉热肉败，荣卫不行，必将为脓。内销骨髓，外破大腘。留于节凑，必将为败。
现代文：若邪气溢满，正气壅滞，则脉发热，肌肉败坏，荣卫之气不能畅行，必将郁热腐肉成脓，内则消烁骨髓，外则可溃大肉，若邪留连于关节肌腠，必使髓液皆溃为脓，而使筋骨败坏。
English: If the evil qi is overflowing and the positive qi is stagnant, then the pulse will be feverish and the muscles will be corrupted. If the qi of Rong Wei cannot flow smoothly, it will surely turn the hot rotting meat into maggots, the inside will dissipate the bone marrow, and the outside can break the meat. If the evil qi remains attached to the articular muscle, the myelin will all be broken into maggots, and the muscle and bone will be corrupted.

古文：积寒留舍，荣卫不居。卷肉缩筋，肋肘不得伸，内为骨痹，外为不仁，命曰不足，大寒留于溪谷也。
现代文：若寒邪所客，积留而不去，则荣卫之气不能正常运行，以致肌肤受寒、筋膜蜷缩，双肘不得伸展，内则发生骨痹，外则肌肤麻木不仁，病名为 不足 ，乃由寒邪留滞溪谷所致。
English: If the cold does not go away, the qi of Rong Wei will not be able to run normally, so that the skin is cold, the fascia is curled, the elbows cannot be stretched, the bones are palsied inside, and the skin is insensitive outside. The disease is called insufficiency, which is caused by the cold staying in the valley.

古文：溪谷三百六十五穴会，亦应一岁。
现代文：溪谷与三百六十五气穴相会，以应一年。
English: The valley meets with three hundred and sixty-five gas holes, corresponding to one year.

古文：其小痹淫溢，循脉往来，微针所及，与法相同。
现代文：若是邪在皮毛孙络的小痹，则邪气随脉往来无定，用微针即可治疗，方法与刺孙络是一样的。
English: If it is the polio of the evil in the fur of the grandson, then the evil will come and go with the pulse. It can be treated with a micro-needle, and the method is the same as the stabbing of the grandson.

古文：帝乃辟左右而起，再拜曰：今日发蒙解惑，藏之金匮，不敢复出。
现代文：黄帝于是屏退身边的人起身拜了两拜说道：今天承你启发，解除了我的疑惑，应把它藏于金匮之中，不敢轻易拿出传人。
English: The Yellow Emperor then screened off the people around him, stood up, bowed twice and said: Today, following your inspiration, I have resolved my doubts. I should hide it in the gold, and not dare to easily bring out the heir.

古文：乃藏之金兰之室，署曰： 气穴所在 。
现代文：将要把它藏于金兰之室，提名叫做 气穴所在 。
English: I'm going to hide it in Jinlan's room, the nomination is called "Where the Gas Holes Are."

古文：岐伯曰：孙络之脉别经者，其血盛而当泻者，亦三百六十五脉，并注于络，传注十二脉络，非独十四脉络也。内解泻于中者，十脉。
现代文：岐伯说：孙络之脉是属于经脉支别的，其血盛而当泻的，也是与三百六十五脉相同，若邪气侵入孙络，同样是传注于络脉，复注于十二经络，那就不只是十四经络的范围了，亦随时能够向内注泻于五脏。
English: Qibo said, "The veins of the Sun Lo belong to the branch of the meridians, and their blood pressure is the same as that of the three hundred and sixty-five veins. If evil spirits invade the Sun Lo, they will also be transmitted to the veins and reinfused into the twelve meridians, which is not only the scope of the fourteen meridians, but can also be infused into the internal organs at any time.

