古文：段荣段荣，字子茂，姑臧武威人也。
现代文：段荣，字子茂，姑臧武威人氏。
English: Duan Rong, Zhizi Mao, and Gu Yao Wu Wei Ren.

古文：祖信，仕沮渠氏，后入魏，以豪族徙北边，仍家于五原郡。
现代文：祖父段信，仕沮渠氏，后入魏朝，因豪族身份被迁徙回北方，依然定居在五原郡。
English: Duan Xin's grandfather, a member of the Depuqu clan, later entered the Wei Dynasty, but was moved back to the north due to his status as a powerful clan, and still settled in Wuhuan County.

古文：父连，安北府司马。
现代文：父亲连，安北府司马。
English: My father's company, Anbei Prefecture Sima.

古文：荣少好历术，专意星象。
现代文：段荣少时喜好历术，专攻星象。
English: When he was young, Duan Rong liked to study astrology, specializing in the stars.

古文：正光初，语人曰： 《易》云 观于天文以察时变 ，又曰 天垂象，见吉凶 ，今观玄象，察人事，不及十年，当有乱矣。 
现代文：正光初年，对人说： 《易》云 观察天文以测定时事的变迁 ，又称 上天显示征兆，人世出现吉凶 ，今观天象，察人事，不到十年，国家当有大乱。 
English: In the first year of Zhengguang, he said to the people: "It is better to observe astronomy to measure the changes of current affairs, also known as the heavens show signs, the human world appears auspicious and inauspicious, now look at the sky, look at people, less than ten years, the country should have great turmoil.

古文：或问曰： 起于何处，当可避乎？ 
现代文：有人问： 天象从哪个地方出现？可以躲避吗？ 
English: Some people asked: Where do the celestial objects appear from? Can they be avoided?

古文：荣曰： 构乱之源，此地为始，恐天下因此横流，无所避也。 
现代文：段荣答： 造乱之源，此地为始，大概天下就要因此大乱，那是无法逃避的。 
English: Duan Rong replied: The source of the chaos started here, and the whole world will probably be in turmoil because of it. That is unavoidable.

古文：未几，果如言。
现代文：不长时间，果如其言。
English: It didn't take long, and it worked.

古文：荣遇乱，与乡旧携妻子，南趣平城。
现代文：段荣遭乱，同乡邻朋友携带妻子，向南跑到平城。
English: When Duan Rong was in turmoil, a friend from a neighboring village ran south to Pingcheng with his wife.

古文：属杜洛周为乱，荣与高祖谋诛之，事不捷，共奔尔朱荣。
现代文：适值杜洛周作乱，段荣与高祖图谋杀掉洛周，没有成功，一块投奔了尔朱荣。
English: Du Luo Zhou made a disturbance at the right time, Duan Rong and Gao Zu Tu murdered Luo Zhou, but did not succeed, and together they ran into Le Zhu Rong.

古文：后高祖建义山东，荣赞成大策。
现代文：后高祖在山东举起义旗，段荣赞助促成了大计的筹谋。
English: After Gaozu raised the banner of righteousness in Shandong, Duan Rong's sponsorship contributed to the overall planning.

古文：为行台右丞，西北道慰喻大使，巡方晓喻，所在下之。
现代文：任行台右丞，西北道慰喻大使，巡察晓谕，所到之处，纷纷归顺高祖。
English: He was appointed as the Taiyu-jo, the consolation ambassador of the Northwest, and the inspector-general, and everywhere he went, he submitted to Gao Zu.

古文：高祖南讨邺，留荣镇信都，仍授镇北将军，定州刺史。
现代文：高祖南行讨邺，留段荣镇守信都，委任其为镇北将军、定州刺史。
English: Gao Zu went to the south to discuss the matter, and stayed in Rongzhen to guard the capital, and was appointed as the general of the north of the town and the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：时攻邺未克，所须军资，荣转输无阙。
现代文：此时高祖虽然未能攻占邺城，但所需要的粮草给养，完全仰仗段荣的转运输送。
English: At this time, although Gao Zu failed to capture Lucheng, the required grain and grass supply was entirely dependent on Duan Rong's transfer and transportation.

古文：高祖入洛，论功封姑臧县侯，邑八百户。
现代文：高祖进洛阳后，论功行赏，封段荣姑臧县侯，食邑八百户。
English: After Gao Zu entered Luoyang, he was awarded for his meritorious deeds, and he was given the title of county magistrate of Ronggu County, with 800 households in his hometown.

古文：转授瀛州刺史。
现代文：转授瀛州刺史。
English: Transferred to the History of Zhangzhou.

古文：荣妻，皇后姊也，荣恐高祖招私亲之议，固推诸将，竟不之州。
现代文：段荣之妻，皇后的姊姊，荣担心为高祖招致任人唯亲的议论，一个劲地推荐他人，终于没有赴任。
English: Duan Rong's wife, the queen's sister, Rong was worried that Gao Zuo would attract nepotism, so she persistently recommended others, and finally did not take up the post.

古文：寻行相州事，后为济州刺史。
现代文：不久，行相州刺史事，稍后，拜济州刺史。
English: Soon, the history of Xingxiang County was written, and later, the history of Baiji County was written.

古文：天平三年，转行泰州事。
现代文：天平三年，转行泰州刺史事。
English: After three years at Tianping, he changed his career to become a historian in Taizhou.

古文：荣性温和，所历皆推仁恕，民吏爱之。
现代文：段荣性格温和，在任职之地均推行仁政，因此深得民吏的敬爱。
English: Duan Rong is a mild-mannered person, and he has implemented benevolent policies in all the places where he has held office. Therefore, he is deeply loved by the civil servants.

古文：初，高祖将图关右，与荣密谋，荣盛称未可。
现代文：当初，高祖计划进攻关右，同段荣密谋，却没有得到支持。
English: At first, Gaozu planned to attack Guan Rong and conspire with Duan Rong, but he did not receive support.

古文：及渭曲失利，高祖悔之，曰： 吾不用段荣之言，以至于此。 
现代文：在渭曲失利之后，高祖才后悔，说： 我不听段荣的话，得到了这样的结果。 
English: It was only after the defeat in the koto that Gao Zu regretted, saying, "I didn't listen to Duan Rong's words and got this result."

古文：四年，除山东大行台、大都督，甚得物情。
现代文：四年，拜山东大行台、大都督，甚得民心。
English: In four years, he became the leader of Shandong Province and the governor of Shandong Province, winning the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：元象元年，授仪同三司。
现代文：元象元年，授仪同三司。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Xiang, the award ceremony was held with three divisions.

古文：二年五月卒，年六十二。
现代文：二年五月卒，年六十二。
English: He was 62 when he died in May 2002.

古文：赠使持节、定冀沧瀛四州诸军事、定州刺史、太尉、尚书左仆射，谥曰昭景。
现代文：赠使持节、定冀沧瀛四州诸军事、定州刺史、太尉、尚书左仆射，谥昭景。
English: He gave gifts to military leaders of the four prefectures of Jizhou, Dingzhou, Zhishi, Taiyi, Shangshuzhaopu, and Zou Zhaojing.

古文：皇建初，配飨高祖庙庭。
现代文：皇建初年，配享高祖庙。
English: In the first year of imperial construction, the imperial court decided to have him officiate at the temple of Gaozu.

古文：二年，重赠大司马、尚书令、武威王。
现代文：二年，重赠大司马、尚书令、武威王。
English: At the end of Wuping's life, he was appointed by the imperial court as Shang Shuxi's right-hand man. He only worked for about a hundred days, and then resigned from his official post, saying he was ill.

古文：长子韶嗣。
现代文：长子段韶继嗣。
English: The eldest son became the heir.

古文：韶，字孝先，小名铁伐。
现代文：段韶，字孝先，小名铁伐。
English: Duan Xuan, Zi Xiaoxian, Xiao Ming Tie Fa.

古文：少工骑射，有将领才略。
现代文：少年时善骑会射，有武将之才。
English: As a young boy, he was good at riding and shooting, and had the talent of a warrior.

古文：高祖以武明皇后姊子，尽器爱之，常置左右，以为心腹。
现代文：因他是武明皇后姊姊的儿子，高祖很是器重，常安排在自己的左右，作为心腹看待。
English: Because he was the son of Empress Wu Ming's sister, Gaozu was very important, often placed on his right and left, and regarded as a confidant.

古文：建义初，领亲信都督。
现代文：建义初年，为亲信都督。
English: In the first year of Jianyi, he became the trusted governor.

古文：中兴元年，从高祖拒尔朱兆，战于广阿。
现代文：中兴元年，跟随高祖抗抵尔朱兆，参加广阿大战。
English: In the first year of the People's Republic of China, he followed Gao Zu to resist Zhu Zhao and participated in the Guang'a War.

古文：高祖谓韶曰： 彼众我寡，其若之何？ 
现代文：高祖对韶说： 彼众我寡，怎么办呀？ 
English: Gao Zu said to Zou: They are all my brothers and sisters, what should I do?

古文：韶曰： 所谓众者，得众人之死；强者，得天下之心。
现代文：韶答： 所谓众者，是得众人之死；强者，是得天下之心。
English: Answer: The so-called great man is he who conquers the death of all men; the strong man is he who conquers the heart of the world.

古文：尔朱狂狡，行路所见，裂冠毁冕，拔本塞源，邙山之会，搢绅何罪，兼杀主立君，不脱旬朔，天下思乱，十室而九。
现代文：尔朱兆狂妄奸狡，一路上看到的，是裂冠毁冕，拔本塞源。邙山聚会，扌晋绅有何罪过？又杀主立君，不过半月，天下思乱，十室有九。
English: Zhu Zhao was arrogant and cunning, and what he saw along the way was the crown of the crown, the source of the block. What is the crime of the Lushan gathering, the Zi Jin gentry? And the murder of the ruler, but half a month, the world is in turmoil, and there are nine ten rooms.

古文：王躬昭德义，除君侧之恶，何往而不克哉！ 
现代文：王亲行德义，除君侧的恶人，何往而不胜！ 
English: If the crown prince acts righteously, the evildoers on the monarch's side will be eliminated.

古文：高祖曰： 吾虽以顺讨逆，奉辞伐罪，但弱小在强大之间，恐无天命，卿不闻之也？ 
现代文：高祖说： 我虽是以顺伐逆，奉命讨罪，但弱小处于强大之中，恐怕没有上天的庇佑，你没有听说过吗？ 
English: Gao Zu said: Although I am a follower of the law, I have been ordered to atone for my sins, but I am weak in the midst of the powerful, and I am afraid that I do not have the protection of heaven. Haven't you heard?

古文：答曰： 韶闻小能敌大，小道大淫，皇天无亲，唯德是辅，尔朱外贼天下，内失善人，知者不为谋，勇者不为斗，不肖失职，贤者取之，复何疑也。 
现代文：答： 韶听说过小能敌大。小道大淫，皇天无亲，唯德是辅。尔朱兆外害天下，内失善人，智者不为谋，勇者不为斗。不肖者失职，贤者夺过来，还有什么疑惑的？ 
English: Answer: I have heard that the small can be the enemy of the great. The small road is a big whore, the emperor has no relatives, and virtue is a supplement. If Zhu Zhao harms the world, the good man will fail, the wise man will not do anything, and the brave man will not fight. The ugly man will fail, and the wise man will take over, what is there to doubt?

古文：遂与兆战，兆军溃。
现代文：于是便同尔朱兆展开交战，兆军溃败。
English: As a result, he started a war with Er Zhu Zhao, and Zhao's army was defeated.

古文：攻刘诞于邺。
现代文：进攻邺地的刘诞。
English: Liu Xing in the attack on Shunde.

古文：及韩陵之战，韶督率所部，先锋陷阵。
现代文：韩陵之战，韶率领自己的部众，首先冲进敌阵。
English: In the Battle of Hanling, Zou, leading his men, was the first to rush into the enemy lines.

古文：寻从高祖出晋阳，追尔朱兆于赤谼岭，平之。
现代文：不久随从高祖离开晋阳，将尔朱兆追赶到赤谷共岭消灭。
English: Soon after Gaozhu left Jinyang, he chased Er Zhuzhao to Akaya and eliminated him.

古文：以军功封下洛县男。
现代文：因军功封下洛县男。
English: A man from Lower Lok County was awarded the title for his military service.

古文：又从袭取夏州，擒斛律弥娥突，加龙骧将军、谏议大夫，累迁武卫将军。
现代文：又跟随高祖偷袭，夺取了夏州，活捉了斛律弥娥突，加龙骧将军、谏议大夫，累迁武卫将军。
English: He also followed Gao Zu's sneak attack and captured Xiazhou. He also captured Li Rui, Mei Etu, General Garong Zang, Dr. Zang Rong, and General Wu Wei.

古文：后恩赐父荣姑臧县侯，其下洛县男启让继母弟宁安。
现代文：后又将其父姑臧县侯的爵号授给了韶，其下洛县男则上表请求转让给了继母弟宁安。
English: Later, he conferred the title of marquis of Guxian County on his father, and the title of Shangluo County was transferred to his stepmother's brother, Ning'an.

古文：兴和四年，从高祖御周文帝于邙山。
现代文：兴和四年，从高祖在邙山抵御周文帝。
English: In the four years of the Heian period, Emperor Gaozu resisted Emperor Zhou in Shaoshan.

古文：高祖身在行间，为西魏将贺拔胜所识，率锐来逼。
现代文：高祖在兵卒之中，被西魏将军贺拔胜认出，马上带领精锐逼来。
English: Gaozu was among the soldiers and was recognized by the Western Wei general He Baxian, who immediately led the elite to force him.

古文：韶从傍驰马引弓反射，一箭毙其前驱，追骑慑惮，莫敢前者。
现代文：韶骑马从旁跃过，并回身用箭射击，只一箭就将最前面的追敌射下马去，另外的害怕了，不敢向前。
English: The horse rider jumped over from the side, and turned around to shoot with an arrow. With just one arrow, he shot the foremost pursuer off the horse. The others were afraid and did not dare to move forward.

古文：西军退，赐马并金，进爵为公。
现代文：西军撤退，朝廷赏赐马匹和金子，晋爵为公。
English: The Western army retreated, the imperial court rewarded horses and gold, and promotion to the peerage became official.

古文：武定四年，从征玉壁。
现代文：武定四年，从高祖征讨玉壁。
English: In the fourth year of Wuding, the conquest of the Jade Wall from Gaozu began.

古文：时高祖不豫，攻城未下，召集诸将，共论进止之宜。
现代文：时高祖身患疾病，城又没能攻下，便召集诸将，讨论行动方案。
English: When Gaozu fell ill and failed to capture the city, he called together his generals to discuss a plan of action.

古文：谓大司马斛律金、司徒韩轨、左卫将军刘丰等曰： 吾每与段孝先论兵，殊有英略，若使比来用其谋，亦可无今日之劳矣。
现代文：高祖对大司马斛律金、司徒韩轨、左卫将军刘丰等人说： 我每次同段孝先论兵，都能听到许多高见，如果让他来参谋参谋，就可能没有今日的劳累了。
English: Gao Zu said to Daishi Ma Yulujin, Szeto Hanluo, General of the Left Division Liu Feng and others, "I can hear many high opinions every time I discuss the same section of filial piety. If he were to come as a staff officer, he might not be as tired as he is today."

古文：吾患势危笃，恐或不虞，欲委孝先以邺下之事，何如？ 
现代文：我担心局势危急，恐怕出现不测，准备委托孝先承担邺下的重任，怎么样？ 
English: I'm worried that the situation is critical, I'm afraid that something unexpected will happen, I'm ready to entrust Xiao Xian to take on the heavy responsibility, how about it?

古文：金等曰： 知臣莫若君，实无出孝先。 
现代文：金等回答说： 知臣莫如君，孝先是最合适的。 
English: Kim et al. replied, "There is no such thing as a wise retainer, but a filial son is the most suitable."

古文：仍谓韶曰： 吾昔与卿父冒涉险艰，同奖王室，建此大功。
现代文：高祖又对韶说： 往昔我和你的父亲冒着危险，同佐王室，建立了大功。
English: Gao Zu also said to Zou: In the past, your father and I risked our lives to join the royal family and made great achievements.

古文：今病疾如此，殆将不济，宜善相翼佐，克兹负荷。 
现代文：眼下病重得厉害，大概不行了，你应该小心辅助朝廷，承担起这一重任。 
English: At the moment, you are seriously ill and probably won't make it. You should carefully assist the imperial court and take on this important task.

古文：即令韶从显祖镇邺，召世宗赴军。
现代文：马上下令韶随显祖镇守邺城，召世宗赶赴玉壁军中。
English: He immediately ordered Zou to follow Xianzu to defend the city of Zou and summoned Shizong to rush to the Jade Wall Army.

古文：高祖疾甚，顾命世宗曰： 段孝先忠亮仁厚，智勇兼备，亲戚之中，唯有此子，军旅大事，宜共筹之。 
现代文：高祖病更严重了，遗令世宗说： 段孝先忠孝仁厚，智勇双全，亲戚之中，只有此人，军旅大事，应同他商议。 
English: Gao Zu's illness became more serious, and he ordered Shizong to say: Duan Xiaoxian is loyal, filial and benevolent, and he is both wise and brave. Among his relatives, he is the only one with whom military matters should be discussed.

古文：五年春，高祖崩于晋阳，秘不发丧。
现代文：五年春，高祖死于晋阳，秘不发丧。
English: In the spring of the fifth year, Gao Zu died in Jinyang.

古文：俄而侯景构乱，世宗还邺，韶留守晋阳。
现代文：不久侯景造乱，世宗还邺，留韶镇守晋阳。
English: Not long after, Houjing caused a riot, Shizong was overthrown, and Ruyu Zhengu guarded Jinyang.

古文：世宗还，赐女乐十数人，金十斤，缯帛称是，封长乐郡公。
现代文：世宗归，赐给韶女乐十几人，金十斤，还有缯帛，封长乐郡公。
English: Shizong Gui, gave more than a dozen women, ten catties of gold, as well as a gong, to the governor of Changle County.

古文：世宗征颍川，韶留镇晋阳。
现代文：世宗征讨颍川，留韶守晋阳。
English: Shizong led a campaign to subjugate Shichuan, and left Shichuan to defend Jinyang.

古文：别封真定县男，行并州刺史。
现代文：别封真定县男，行并州刺史事。
English: A man from Zhending County, Beifeng County, made history by joining the state.

古文：显祖受禅，别封朝陵县，又封霸城县，加位特进。
现代文：显祖受禅，别封朝陵县公，又封霸城县侯，加位特进。
English: Emperor Xianzu accepted Zen, and was given the title of Chorying County magistrate. He was also given the title of Baecheng County magistrate, and was promoted to the highest rank.

古文：启求归朝陵公，乞封继母梁氏为郡君。
现代文：上表请求归还朝陵县公，乞请封继母梁氏为郡君。
English: The petition asks for the return of the Choryo County title, and asks that his stepmother, Mrs. Liang, be given the title of county princess.

古文：显祖嘉之，别以梁氏为安定郡君。
现代文：显祖嘉奖了他，别封梁氏为安定郡君。
English: Emperor Xianzu commended him, and Liang was awarded the title of Prince of Ding'an County.

古文：又以霸城县侯让其继母弟孝言。
现代文：又将霸城县侯让给了自己的继母弟孝言。
English: He also ceded the lordship of Hachijo County to his stepmother's brother, Takanobu.

古文：论者美之。
现代文：是时受到了舆论的夸赞。
English: At the time, it was praised by the public.

古文：天保三年，为冀州刺史、六州大都督，有惠政，得吏民之心。
现代文：天保三年，任冀州刺史、六州大都督，有惠政，深得吏民爱戴。
English: In the three years of Tianbao, he was appointed as the governor of Jizhou Province and the governor of six provinces. He had favorable policies and was deeply loved by officials and the people.

古文：四年十二月，梁将东方白额潜至宿预，招诱边民，杀害长吏，淮、泗扰动。
现代文：四年十二月，梁将东方白额偷偷来到宿预，引诱边民，杀害长吏，致使淮、泗骚动。
English: In December of the fourth year, Liang secretly brought the Oriental White-fronted Goat to Suqiu, lured the border people, killed the officials, and caused the Huai and Yao agitation.

古文：五年二月，诏征韶讨之。
现代文：五年二月，帝下诏征韶讨伐。
English: In February of the fifth year, the emperor issued an edict to subjugate them.

古文：既至，会梁将严超达等军逼泾州；又陈武帝率众将攻广陵，刺史王敬宝遣使告急；复有尹思令率众万余人谋袭盱贻。
现代文：韶率军抵达。适逢梁将严超达等围逼泾州；又陈武帝率众将要进攻广陵；刺史王敬宝遣使向朝廷告急；还有尹思令，拥众万人，准备袭击盱眙。
English: He arrived with his army. It was a time when Liang was going to besiege and besiege Zhangzhou; Emperor Chen and his people were going to attack Guangling; the envoy of King Jing Bao of Zhishi sent an urgent message to the imperial court; and Yin Siling, supported by tens of thousands of people, was preparing to attack Zhang.

古文：三军咸惧。
现代文：三军恐惧。
English: The three armies are afraid.

古文：韶谓诸将曰： 自梁氏丧乱，国无定主，人怀去就，强者从之。
现代文：韶对诸将说： 自从梁氏丧乱，国无定主，人心离散，强者从之。
English: Zou said to the generals: Since the Liang Dynasty was destroyed, the country has no stable master, the people are scattered, and the strong follow the weak.

古文：霸先等智小谋大，政令未一，外托同德，内有离心，诸君不足忧，吾揣之熟悉矣。 
现代文：陈霸先等人智小谋大，政令不一，外虽同德，内实离心，你们不必忧虑，我的计划已思虑周全了。 
English: Chen Baxian and others have great wisdom, but their decrees are not consistent. Although they have the same morality on the outside, they are not sincere on the inside. You do not have to worry. My plan has been well thought out.

古文：乃留仪同敬显俊、尧难宗等围守宿预，自将步骑数千人倍道赴泾州。
现代文：于是留下仪同敬显俊、尧难宗等围守宿预，自己率领数千步骑兵急行军赶赴泾州。
English: Therefore, he left Yi, together with Jing Xianjun, Gong Nanzong and others, to besiege the prefectural capital, and led thousands of cavalry troops to rush to Ganzhou.

古文：途出盱眙，思令不虞大军卒至，望旗奔北。
现代文：路经盱眙，思令没有料到大军会从天而降，望风披靡。
English: Passing by, Shiling did not expect that a large army would descend from the sky, and the wind was overwhelming.

古文：进与超达合战，大破之，尽获其舟舰器械。
现代文：继续前进，又与严超达交战，获胜，夺取了所有的舟船器械。
English: He continued to advance and fought with Yan Chaoda again, won, and seized all the boat and ship equipment.

古文：谓诸将士曰： 吴人轻躁，本无大谋，今破超达，霸先必走。 
现代文：韶对诸将道： 吴人浮躁，本无大谋，今天打败了超达，陈霸先肯定会逃走。 
English: Zou said to the generals: Wu people are impetuous and have no grand strategy. Today, they defeated the super-tao. Chen Baxian will definitely escape.

古文：即回赴广陵。
现代文：旋即回师广陵。
English: Guangling, the turn-and-go division.

古文：陈武帝果遁去。
现代文：陈武帝果然跑了。
English: Chen Wudi did indeed run away.

古文：追至杨子栅，望扬州城乃还，大获其军资器物，旋师宿预。
现代文：追赶到了杨子栅，看得见扬州城才回来，并且缴获了许多的军资器物，马上撤退到宿预。
English: They chased them to Yangzirai, and only returned when they could see Yangzhou City. They captured a lot of military equipment, and immediately retreated to Shukuhaku.

古文：六月，韶遣辩士喻白额祸福，白额于是开门请盟。
现代文：六月，韶派游说之士劝降白额，白额因此开门请盟。
English: In June, the lobbyists of the Kuomintang persuaded the white quota to be lowered, so the white quota opened the door to apply for alliance.

古文：韶与行台辛术等议，且为受盟。
现代文：韶与行台辛术等人议论，同意白额的请求。
English: Zou discussed with Xingtaichinshu and others, and agreed to the request of Bai Rong.

古文：盟讫，度白额终不为用，因执而斩之，并其诸弟等并传首京师。
现代文：结盟完毕，估计白额会脚踩两只船，韶下令将白额抓起来，并杀了他，连同他的弟弟们的头颅，传送到了京师。
English: After the alliance was completed, it was estimated that Baige would step on two boats, and Zou ordered Baige to be arrested, and killed him, together with the heads of his brothers, and sent to Beijing Division.

古文：江淮帖然，民皆安辑。
现代文：江淮安静，民皆乐业。
English: Jianghuai River is quiet, people are happy.

古文：显祖嘉其功，诏赏吴口七十人，封平原郡王。
现代文：显祖嘉奖他的功劳，诏令赏赐吴人七十，封平原郡王。
English: Emperor Xianzu commended him for his service, and issued a decree awarding him the title of King of Pingyuan County.

古文：清河王岳之克郢州，执司徒陆法和，韶亦豫行，筑层城，于新蔡立郭默戍而还。
现代文：清河王岳攻克郢州，活捉了司徒陆法和，这次行动，韶也参加了，筑建鲁城，在新蔡置郭默戍后返回京城。
English: King Yue of Qinghe conquered Zhangzhou, captured Stulfa and Zhou alive, and Zhou also participated in this operation, built Lucheng, and returned to Beijing after the construction of the new Cai Guo.

古文：皇建元年，领太子太师。
现代文：皇建元年，领太子太师。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's reign, the post of crown prince and grandmaster was created.

古文：大宁二年，除并州刺史。
现代文：太宁二年，拜并州刺史。
English: In the second year of Tainin, he became a state history.

古文：高归彦作乱冀州，诏与东安王娄睿率众讨平之，迁太傅，赐女乐十人，并归彦果园一千亩。
现代文：高归彦在冀州作乱，帝诏令韶与东安王娄睿又率众平定。迁太傅，帝赐其女乐十人和归彦的果园一千亩。
English: Gao Guihang made a disturbance in Jizhou, and the emperor ordered him and Dong'an's King Zhaorui to lead the people to pacify it. Qian Taifu, the emperor gave his ten female musicians and Guihang's orchard one thousand mu.

古文：仍莅并州，为政举大纲，不存小察，甚得民和。
现代文：依然任职并州，为政是举大纲，不存小察，所以甚得民心。
English: He is still in office and has been merged into a prefecture. His policy is to raise the general outline, and there is no oversight, so he has won the hearts and minds of the people.

古文：十二月，周武帝遣将率羌夷与突厥合众逼晋阳，世祖自邺倍道兼行赴救。
现代文：河清二年十二月，周武帝派将军率领羌夷与突厥合众围攻晋阳，世祖从邺出发兼程前往救助。
English: In December of the second year of Heqing, Zhou Wudi sent a general to lead the Qianyi and Turkic United States to besiege Jinyang, and Shizuo set off from Handan to go to the rescue.

古文：突厥从北结阵而前，东距汾河，西被风谷。
现代文：突厥从北组成战阵往前推进，东抵汾河，西达风谷。
English: The Turks advanced from the north in a line of battle, reaching the Li River in the east and the Sida Valley in the west.

古文：时事既仓卒，兵马未整，世祖见如此，亦欲避之而东。
现代文：情况危急，兵马未整，世祖见此阵势，也想往东逃避。
English: The situation was critical, the soldiers and horses were unprepared, Shizu saw this situation and also wanted to escape to the east.

古文：寻纳河间王孝琬之请，令赵郡王尽护诸将。
现代文：但很快接受了河间王孝琬的请求，下令赵郡王保护好诸将。
English: However, he quickly accepted the request of Kawama Wang Xiaohui and ordered Zhao Guo Wang to protect the generals.

古文：时大雪之后，周人以步卒为前锋，从西山而下，去城二里。
现代文：此时正是大雪之后，周人用步卒作为前锋，从西山冲下，离城只有二里多路。
English: At this time, it was just after the heavy snow, Zhou Ren used the pawn as a striker and rushed down from the West Mountain, only two miles away from the city.

古文：诸将咸欲逆击之。
现代文：诸将都想迎击。
English: All generals want to counterattack.

古文：诏曰： 步人气势自有限，今积雪既厚，逆战非便，不如阵以待之。
现代文：韶说： 步走的人气势必然有限，眼下积雪深厚，交战不便，不如严阵待守。
English: Zou said: The popularity of walking is bound to be limited. At present, the snow is deep and it is inconvenient to fight. It is better to be on the defensive.

古文：彼劳我逸，破之必矣。 
现代文：彼劳我逸，打败他们是有把握的。 
English: The enemy soldiers are fatigued, our army is idle, we can surely defeat the enemy troops.

古文：既而交战，大破之，敌前锋尽殪，无复孑遗，自余通宵奔遁。
现代文：不久交战，大胜，敌人的前锋全被消灭，没有一个活的，后边的部众连夜逃走了。
English: Soon there was a battle, a great victory, the enemy's forwards were all wiped out, not a single one was left alive, and the rear troops fled during the night.

古文：仍令韶率骑追之，出塞不及而还。
现代文：帝下令韶率骑追击，出塞后没有赶上就回来了。
English: The emperor ordered his son to lead the cavalry in pursuit, but he did not catch up and came back.

古文：世祖嘉其功，别封怀州武德郡公，进位太师。
现代文：世祖赏其功，别封韶怀州武德郡公，进位太师。
English: He was awarded the title of Wude County Duke of Huai Province and promoted to the rank of Grand Master.

古文：周冢宰宇文护母阎氏先配中山宫，护闻阎尚存，乃因边境移书，请还其母，并通邻好。
现代文：周冢宰宇文护母阎氏先配中山王，护听说母亲还在人世，于是就修书齐氏，请归还阎氏，并愿通好。
English: Zhou Yuwen, the guardian of Yan's mother, first accompanied Zhongshan Wang. He heard that his mother was still alive, so he asked Shushi Qi, please return it to Yan, and wish them well.

古文：时突厥屡犯边，韶军于塞下。
现代文：此时突厥多次骚扰边地，韶驻军塞下防御。
English: At this time, the Turks repeatedly harassed the borderlands, forcing the garrison to mount a defense.

古文：世祖遣黄门徐世荣乘传赍周书问韶。
现代文：世祖派黄门徐世荣乘驿车带着宇文护的信向韶请教。
English: The Ancestor sent Huangmen Xu Shirong in a carriage with a letter from Yu Wenguo to consult Yu.

古文：韶以周人反覆，本无信义，比晋阳之役，其事可知。
现代文：韶认为周人反复，不讲信义，其晋阳之役，就是证明。
English: Zou believed that Zhou's repeated failure to uphold the principle of honesty and sincerity in the Battle of Jinyang was proof of this.

古文：护外托为相，其实王也，既为母请和，不遣一介之使申其情理，乃据移书即送其母，恐示之弱。
现代文：宇文护对外是丞相，在内其实为王。既为母亲请和，却不派一介之使申其情怀。我们则依据一纸之书，就送还其母，这恐怕是在向周示弱。
English: To the outside world, he was the chancellor, but inside he was actually the king. Although he was reconciled with his mother, he did not send an envoy to express his feelings. We sent him back to his mother on the basis of a letter, which was probably a sign of weakness to Zhou.

古文：如臣管见，且外许之，待后放之未晚。不听。
现代文：我认为，姑且佯装同意，等些日子再放不迟。帝不听。
English: I think that, even if we pretend to agree, it is not too late to wait a few days. The emperor will not listen.

古文：遂遣使以礼将送。
现代文：于是派遣使者依礼送还。
English: So an emissary was sent to return the gift.

古文：护既得母，仍遣将尉迟迥等袭洛阳。
现代文：宇文护得到母亲后，依然遣将尉迟迥等袭击洛阳。
English: Even after he got his mother, he still sent his lieutenant, Chi Xuan, and others to attack Luoyang.

古文：诏遣兰陵王长恭、大将军斛律光率众击之，军于邙山之下，逗留未进。
现代文：帝诏令兰陵王长恭、大将军斛律光率部抵御，军队驻扎在邙山下，滞留未进。
English: The emperor ordered Lanling Wang Changgong and the general Bao Lu to resist, and the army was stationed at the foot of Lushan Mountain and did not advance.

古文：世祖召谓曰： 今欲遣王赴洛阳之围，但突厥在此，复须镇御，王谓如何？ 
现代文：世祖召韶询问： 现在我想派王去解救洛阳之围，但突厥驻军在这里，又要派人防御，王认为该如何处置？ 
English: Sezu Zhao asked: Now I want to send Wang to relieve the siege of Luoyang, but the Turkish garrison is here, and I have to send people to defend it. What do you think Wang should do?

古文：韶曰： 北虏侵边，事等疥癣，今西羌窥逼，便是膏肓之病，请奉诏南行。 
现代文：韶说： 北虏侵扰边地，是容易处理的事情，如今西羌窥视逼近内地，这才是心腹之病，我请求受诏南行。 
English: Zou said, "It is easy to deal with the northern invaders invading the borderlands. Now that the western invaders are approaching the inland, this is a disease of the inner circle. I request to be allowed to go south.

古文：世祖曰： 朕意亦尔。 
现代文：世祖说： 我的意思也是这样。 
English: The patriarch said, "That's what I mean.

古文：乃令韶督精骑一千，发自晋阳。
现代文：于是便命令韶督察一千精骑，从晋阳出发。
English: So he ordered the inspector Xing to ride out from Jinyang with a thousand horsemen.

古文：五日便济河，与大将共量进止。
现代文：五天后就渡过了黄河，韶与手下大将商议办法。
English: Five days later, he crossed the Yellow River. He and his generals discussed what to do.

古文：韶旦将帐下二百骑与诸军共登邙阪，聊观周军形势。
现代文：韶清早带领两百骑与诸军一同登上邙阪，想看看周军的阵势。
English: Early in the morning, Zou led two hundred horsemen and other troops to board the Shenghan, wanting to see the Zhou army's position.

古文：至大和谷，便值周军，即遣驰告诸营，追集兵马。
现代文：来到大和谷，就遇上了周军，旋即派人驰告各营，集中兵马。
English: When they came to Yamato-dani, they encountered the Zhou army, and immediately sent people to report to each battalion to concentrate the soldiers and horses.

古文：仍与诸将结阵以待之。
现代文：韶马上同诸将摆开阵势以作防备。
English: He immediately took up a defensive position with his generals.

古文：韶为左军，兰陵王为中军，斛律光为右军，与周人相对。
现代文：韶为左军，兰陵王为中军，斛律光为右军，与周人相对。
English: Zou was the left army, Lanling Wang was the middle army, and Zou Liguang was the right army, opposite Zhou Ren.

古文：韶遥谓周人曰： 汝宇文护幸得其母，不能怀恩报德，今日之来，竟何意也？ 
现代文：韶对着周人喊： 你们的宇文护有幸得到母亲，却不怀恩报德，今天来，究竟是何意思？ 
English: Hao shouted to Zhou Ren: Your Yuwen Guo was fortunate to have a mother, but he did not repay her kindness. Come today, what does it mean?

古文：周人曰： 天遣我来，有何可问。 
现代文：周人说： 老天派我们来的，有什么大惊小怪的？ 
English: The man said: "God sent us here, so what's all the fuss about?

古文：韶曰： 天道赏善罚恶，当遣汝送死来耳。 
现代文：韶说： 上天赏善罚恶，大概是派你们来送死的吧？ 
English: Zou said, "Heaven rewards good and punishes evil, so it must have sent you here to die, right?"

古文：周军仍以步人在前，上山逆战。
现代文：周军便将步卒摆放在前，向山上冲去。
English: Zhou's army then placed their pawns in front of them and rushed up the mountain.

古文：韶以彼徒我骑，且却且引，待其力弊，乃遣下马击之。
现代文：韶认为敌徒步我骑马，就指挥部众边退边引诱，候其疲惫，一齐下马攻击。
English: Thinking that the enemy was on foot and I was on horseback, I lured everyone in the headquarters to step back, waited for them to get tired, and dismounted together to attack.

古文：短兵始交，周人大溃。
现代文：短兵相接，周军大溃。
English: The short-ranged soldiers met, and the Zhou army was routed.

古文：其中军所当者，亦一时瓦解，投坠溪谷而死者甚众。
现代文：其中军所指处，也是迅速瓦解，投坠溪谷而死的就有许多。
English: Among them, the military post was also rapidly disintegrating, and many died after falling into the valley.

古文：洛城之围，亦即奔遁，尽弃营幕，从邙山至谷水三十里中，军资器物弥满川泽。
现代文：包围洛城的敌人，马上逃遁，弃置营幕而不顾，从邙山到谷水三十里的距离内，到处都是抛撒着的军资器物。
English: The enemy, who had surrounded Los Angeles, immediately fled, abandoning their camp. Within a distance of thirty miles from Lushan to Guishui, there were scattered military equipment everywhere.

古文：车驾幸洛阳，亲劳将士，于河阴置酒高会，策勋命赏，除太宰，封灵武县公。
现代文：帝亲自来到洛阳，慰问将士，在河阴摆设宴席，款待人们，又策勋命赏，拜韶太宰，封灵武县公。
English: The emperor himself came to Luoyang to offer condolences to the soldiers, hold a banquet in Heyin and entertain the people. He also planned to award medals, pay homage to the grand vizier, and seal Lingwu County.

古文：天统三年，除左丞相，永昌郡公，食沧州干。
现代文：天统三年，除左丞相，又封永昌郡公，食沧州干。
English: Three years into the reign of Emperor Tenmu, in addition to the post of Left Minister, he was also awarded the title of Yongchang County Governor, and became the governor of Cangzhou.

古文：武平二年正月，出晋州道，到定陇，筑威敌、平寇二城而还。
现代文：武平二年正月，韶由晋州道抵达定陇，筑威敌、平寇二城后返回京师。
English: In the first month of the second year of Wuping, he arrived in Dinglu from Jinzhou Road, and after conquering two cities, he returned to Beijing.

古文：二月，周师来寇，遣韶与右丞相斛律光、太尉兰陵王长恭同往捍御。
现代文：二月，周师寇掠，帝派韶与右丞相斛律光、太尉兰陵王长恭一同抵御。
English: In February, Zhou's division invaded and plundered the country, and Emperor Gao sent his emissaries to resist, together with the Minister of the Right, Gao Riguang, and the Second Lieutenant, Lanling Wang Changxiong.

古文：以三月暮行达西境。
现代文：三月底到达西部边境。
English: They reached the western border at the end of March.

古文：有柏谷城者，乃敌之绝险，石城千仞，诸将莫肯攻围。
现代文：柏谷城这个地方，是敌人把守着的天险，石城千仞，诸位将领没有哪个敢于围攻。
English: This place, Kashiwa-dani Castle, is a natural hazard guarded by the enemy. It is a city of a thousand castles, and none of your generals would dare to besiege it.

古文：韶曰： 汾北、河东，势为国家之有，若不去柏谷，事同痼疾。
现代文：韶说： 汾北、河东若要为国家所有，如不拔除柏谷，就像得了痼疾。
English: Zou said: "If the north of Anhui and the east of Hedong are to be owned by the state, if Kashiwagok Valley is not uprooted, it will be like having malaria.

古文：计彼援兵，会在南道，今断其要路，救不能来。
现代文：估计他们的援兵，当在南道会合，如今截断这一要路，使他的援兵无法赶来。
English: Estimating that his reinforcements would meet in Southern Province, he now cut off this important route, making it impossible for his reinforcements to arrive.

古文：且城势虽高，其中甚狭，火弩射之，一旦可尽。 
现代文：他们的城墙虽高，但是很狭窄，用火弩射击，完全可以攻下。 
English: Although their walls are high, they are very narrow and can be completely taken down by shooting them with flints.

古文：诸将称善，遂鸣鼓而攻之。城溃，获仪同薛敬礼，大斩获首虏，仍城华谷，置戍而还。
现代文：诸将认为他的主意好，于是鸣鼓齐攻之，城墙坍塌，俘虏了仪同薛敬礼，砍下了许多首级，仍然在华谷筑城，置戍后凯旋。
English: The generals thought his idea was a good one, so they attacked with drums beating in unison, the city walls collapsed, they captured Yi and Xue Jiali, and cut off many heads. They still built the city in Huagu, and returned in triumph after placing the anchor.

古文：封广平郡公。
现代文：朝廷封韶广平郡公。
English: The imperial court named him Guangping County Governor.

古文：是月，周又遣将寇边。
现代文：是月，周又派将军寇掠齐国边境。
English: In the same month, Zhou sent another general to raid the Qi border.

古文：右丞相斛律光先率师出讨，韶亦请行。
现代文：右丞相斛律光首先率领军队出讨，韶也请求同行。
English: The Minister of the Right, Yao Liguang, first led the army to negotiate, and Yao also requested to accompany him.

古文：五月，攻服秦城。
现代文：五月，攻打服秦城。
English: In May, they attacked Qincheng.

古文：周人于姚襄城南更起城镇，东接定阳，又作深堑，断绝行道。
现代文：周人在姚襄城南再起城镇，东接定阳，又挖出深堑，断绝大道。
English: Zhou people rebuilt the town in the south of Yao Xiangcheng, and connected Dingyang to the east. They also dug out a deep ditch and cut off the avenue.

古文：韶乃密抽壮士，从北袭之。
现代文：韶就偷偷抽调壮士，从北边发起袭击。
English: He secretly dispatched soldiers to launch an attack from the north.

古文：又遣人潜渡河，告姚襄城中，令内外相应。渡者千有余人，周人始觉。
现代文：又派人秘密地渡过黄河，与姚襄城内联络，请他们作内应，过河来的有一千多人，周人才开始发现。
English: He also sent someone to secretly cross the Yellow River and contact Yao Xiang in the city, asking them to respond. There were more than a thousand people who crossed the river, but Zhou only began to find out.

古文：于是合战，大破之，获其仪同若干显宝等。
现代文：于是交战，周人大败，虏获其仪同若干显宝等。
English: As a result, there was a battle, and Zhou was soundly defeated and his regalia and a number of valuable treasures were captured.

古文：诸将咸欲攻其新城，韶曰： 此城一面阻河，三面地险，不可攻，就令得之，一城地耳。
现代文：诸将都想向新城发起进攻。韶不同意，说： 此城一面临河，三面险地，不能进攻。即使攻了下来，也只不过是一座城池而已。
English: The generals all wanted to launch an attack on the new city. Zou disagreed, saying, "This city faces the river on one side and is vulnerable on three sides, so it cannot be attacked. Even if it is attacked, it is just a city."

古文：不如更作一城壅其路，破服秦，并力以图定阳，计之长者。 
现代文：倒不如再作一城雍塞其归路，攻克服秦，齐心协力进击定阳，这是最好的选择。 
English: It would be better to make a city of Yongsai its way back, attack and overcome Qin, and make a concerted effort to attack Dingyang. This is the best choice.

古文：将士咸以为然。
现代文：将士都认为这个主意好。
English: The generals all think it's a good idea.

古文：六月，徙围定阳，其城主开府仪同杨范固守不下。
现代文：六月，转围定阳，但定阳城主帅开府仪同杨范闭城固守，韶军未能攻下。
English: In June, they encircled Dingyang, but the commander of Dingyang City, Kaifu Yi, together with Yang Fan, kept the city closed, and the Wei army was unable to capture it.

古文：韶登山望城势，乃纵兵急攻之。
现代文：韶登山观看城中的情势，之后便纵兵猛攻。
English: He climbed a mountain to observe the situation in the city, after which he launched an all-out attack.

古文：七月，屠其外城，大斩获首级。
现代文：七月，夺取外城，斩获了许多首级。
English: In July, they captured the outer city, and many heads were cut off.

古文：时韶病在军中，以子城未克，谓兰陵王长恭曰： 此城三面重涧险阻，并无走路，唯恐东南一处耳。
现代文：这时韶突然在军中病倒，由于内城还没有攻下，他对兰陵王长恭说： 此城三面是深涧，没有退路，只有东南一处可以与外面沟通。
English: At this time, Zou suddenly fell ill in the army. Since the inner city had not yet been conquered, he said to Lanling Wang Changxiong: The three sides of this city are deep, there is no escape, and only the southeast can communicate with the outside.

古文：贼若突围，必从此出，但简精兵专守，自是成擒。 
现代文：贼如果突围，必须走东南这条路，我们挑选精兵把守，自然可以捉住逃敌。 
English: If a thief breaks out of the encirclement, he must take the southeastern road. We will select the best soldiers to guard, and naturally we can catch the fleeing enemy.

古文：长恭乃令壮士千余人设伏于东南涧口。
现代文：长恭便下令一千多壮士在东南涧口埋伏。
English: Chang Gong then ordered more than a thousand strong men to lie in ambush in the southeastern Hukou.

古文：其夜果如所策，贼遂出城，伏兵击之，大溃，范等面缚，尽获其众。
现代文：这天深夜果然像韶预计的那样，敌人弃城而逃，伏兵一拥而上，周军大溃，杨范两手反绑投降，其众全被俘虏。
English: In the middle of the night that day, just as Yao had predicted, the enemy abandoned the city and fled, the ambushed soldiers surged forward, the Zhou army was routed, Yang Fan surrendered with both hands tied behind his back, and all of them were taken prisoner.

古文：韶疾甚，先军还。
现代文：韶病更重了，因而提前回到了京师。
English: His rickets got worse, so he returned to the capital ahead of schedule.

古文：以功别封乐陵郡公。
现代文：以功别封乐陵郡公。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Leling County Governor.

古文：竟以疾薨。
现代文：终于病死。
English: He finally died of illness.

古文：上举哀东堂，赠物千段、温明秘器、辒辌车，军校之士陈卫送至平恩墓所，发卒起冢。
现代文：帝在东堂为韶举哀，赠帛千段及温明秘器、车京车，出殡之日，军士们列成仪仗一直送到了平恩墓地，帝又征调民夫为其起冢。
English: The emperor held a memorial service for him in the East Hall, and presented him with a thousand pieces of silver, a Wenming secret utensil, and a Peking Opera car. On the day of the funeral, the soldiers were sent to the Ping'an Cemetery in a ceremonial procession. The emperor also conscripted and transferred the commoners to carry out the funeral.

古文：赠假黄钺、使持节、都督朔并定赵冀沧齐兖梁洛晋建十二州诸军事，相国、太尉、录尚书事、朔州刺史，谥曰忠武。
现代文：赠假黄钺、使持节、都督朔并定赵翼沧齐兖梁洛晋建十二州诸军事、相国、太尉、录尚书事、朔州刺史，谥号忠武。
English: On the occasion of the Yellow Ribbon Day, the Envoys' Day, and the concurrent appointment of Zhao Yingcang and Luo Jinjian as prefectural governors, Zhao Yingcang and Luo Jinjian were awarded the military titles of the 12 prefectures, the titles of "friend of the country," "captain," "recorded in the annals of history," "recorded in the annals of history," and the honorary title of "loyal soldier."

古文：韶出总军旅，入参帷幄，功既居高，重以婚媾，望倾朝野。
现代文：韶出掌军旅，入参帷幄，又建有高功，加之婚姻，名望极高。
English: He was awarded the Medal of Military Valor, became a member of the Korean People's Army, and achieved great feats. In addition, he was married, so his reputation was very high.

古文：长于计略，善于御众，得将士之心，临敌之日，人人争奋。
现代文：他擅长计谋，善于御众，因此深得将士的爱戴。与敌交战，人人奋勇当先。
English: He is good at scheming and is good at dealing with the public, which is why he is deeply loved by soldiers. When fighting with the enemy, everyone strives to be the first.

古文：又雅性温慎，有宰相之风。
现代文：他的性情温文尔雅，极有宰相的风度。
English: His temperament is also very gentle and cautious, and he has the demeanor and temperament of a prime minister.

古文：教训子弟，闺门雍肃，事后母以孝闻，齐世勋贵之家罕有及者。
现代文：教训子弟，闺门雍肃，服侍后母十分孝顺，齐世勋贵之家没有比得上他的。
English: His apprentice, his daughter-in-law, served his stepmother with great filial piety, and there was no one in Qisexungui's family who could compare to him.

古文：然僻于好色，虽居要重，微服间行。
现代文：但是韶很好色，虽居要职，时常微服间行。
English: However, he was greedy for women, and although he was in a prominent position, he often put on casual clothes to visit porn stars.

古文：有皇甫氏，魏黄门郎元瑀之妻，弟谨谋逆，皇甫氏因没官。
现代文：有位皇甫氏，是魏黄门郎元王禹的妻子，其弟谋反，皇甫氏被没入官。
English: There was an Empress Fu who was the wife of Wei Huangmen Lang Yuan Wang Yu. Her brother plotted a rebellion, and Empress Fu was deprived of her position.

古文：韶美其容质，上启固请，世宗重违其意，因以赐之。
现代文：韶喜欢上了她的容质，上表固请，世宗不想违背他的心意，就将皇甫氏赏赐给了他。
English: Yao liked her disposition, and Sejong didn't want to go against his heart, so he gave him the gift of the crown prince.

古文：尤啬于财，虽亲戚故旧略无施与。
现代文：韶很吝啬，即使是亲戚故旧，他也一毛不拔。
English: He is very stingy. Even if he is an old relative, he won't take a dime from him.

古文：其子深尚公主，并省丞郎在家佐事十余日，事毕辞还，人唯赐一杯酒。
现代文：其子深迎娶公主时，丞、郎等来家理事十多天，婚事结束，辞还，每人只赏赐了一杯酒。
English: When his son married the princess, his father-in-law, his brother-in-law, and his brother-in-law came to govern the family for more than ten days. When the marriage was over, they resigned, and only one glass of wine was given to each of them.

古文：长子懿嗣。
现代文：长子懿嗣继。
English: He was succeeded by his eldest son, Takeshi.

古文：懿，字德猷，有资仪，颇解音乐，又善骑射。
现代文：懿，字德猷，美姿仪，通音乐，又善于骑射。
English: ,字德,美姿儀,通musik, and good at riding and shooting.

古文：天保初，尚颍川长公主。
现代文：天保初，娶颍川长公主。
English: At the beginning of the Tenpo era, he married the eldest princess of the Shikawa clan.

古文：累迁行台右仆射，兼殿中尚书，出除兖州刺史。
现代文：累迁行台右仆射，兼殿中尚书，出任兖州刺史。
English: He successively moved to and from Taiwan as a right-hand man, and also wrote books in the palace, and served as a historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：卒。
现代文：卒。
English: To die.

古文：子宝鼎嗣。
现代文：子宝鼎嗣位。
English: Zibo Ding succeeded to the throne.

古文：尚中山长公主，武平末，仪同三司。
现代文：娶中山长公主。武平末年，任仪同三司。
English: He married the first princess of Zhongshan. In the last years of the Wu-Ping Dynasty, Ren Yi was appointed to the Third Division.

古文：隋开皇中，开府仪同三司、骠骑大将军，大业初，卒于饶州刺史。
现代文：隋开皇中，任开府仪同三司、骠骑大将军，大业初，卒于饶州刺史任上。
English: In the middle of the Sui Dynasty, Ren Kaifu was appointed to the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of

古文：韶第二子深，字德深。
现代文：韶第二子深，字德深。
English: The second son is Shen, and the character De is Shen.

古文：美容貌，宽谨有父风。
现代文：美容貌，宽厚谨慎有父的风度。
English: Good-looking, generous, discreet, with a father's demeanor.

古文：天保中，受父封姑臧县公。
现代文：天保中，受父封姑臧县公。
English: In Tenpo Junior High School, he was given the title of Guye County Governor by his father.

古文：大宁初，拜通直散骑侍郎。
现代文：大宁初，拜通直散骑侍郎。
English: At the beginning of Danying, he asked for a ride from a horseman.

古文：二年，诏尚永昌公主，未婚，主卒。
现代文：二年，帝下诏让娶永昌公主，未结婚，公主死。
English: Two years later, Emperor Taizang married Princess Yongchang, but she did not marry, and the princess died.

古文：河清三年，又诏尚东安公主。
现代文：河清三年，又下诏让娶东安公主。
English: In the third year of Heqing, he issued another edict to marry Dongan Princess.

古文：以父频著大勋，累迁侍中、将军、源州大中正，食赵郡干。
现代文：因父频频立功，他也累迁侍中、将军、源州大中正，食赵郡干。
English: Due to his father's frequent meritorious service, he was also successively transferred to attendants, generals, and vice-chancellors of the Yuanzhou University.

古文：韶病笃，诏封深济北王，以慰其意。
现代文：韶病重时，诏封深济北王，用作安慰。
English: When he was seriously ill, he used the imperial seal of the Northern King of the Jin Dynasty as a consolation.

古文：武平末，徐州行台左仆射、徐州刺史。
现代文：武平末，为徐州行台左仆射、徐州刺史。
English: At the end of Wuping, he was a left-handed shooter of Xuzhou Xingtai and a historian of Xuzhou.

古文：入周，拜大将军，郡公，坐事死。
现代文：入周，拜大将军、郡公，后犯事死。
English: During the week, General Bai, the county magistrate, and the perpetrator died.

古文：韶第三子德举，武平末，仪同三司。
现代文：韶第三子德举，武平末，任仪同三司。
English: Zou's third son, Deju, was the last of the Wu Ping, Ren Yi and Sanji.

古文：周建德七年，在邺城与高元海谋逆，诛。
现代文：周建德七年，在邺城与高元海等人谋反，被朝廷诛杀。
English: In the seventh year of Zhou Jiande's reign, he plotted a rebellion with Gao Yuanhai and others in Handan, and was killed by the imperial court.

古文：韶第四子德衡，武平末，开府仪同三司，隆化时，济州刺史。
现代文：韶第四子德衡，武平末，任开府仪同三司，隆化时，为济州刺史。
English: His fourth son, Takehira, later known as Buhei, was appointed to Kaifu-gi and Sanji, and when he became emperor, he was appointed to write the history of Jeju.

古文：入周，授仪同大将军。
现代文：入周，授仪同大将军。
English: Arriving at the fortress, he was given the same ceremony as a general.

古文：韶第七子德堪，武平中，仪同三司。
现代文：韶第七子德堪，武平中，任仪同三司。
English: Zou's seventh son, De Kan, was a middle school student in Wuping. Ren Yi was also a third-grade teacher.

古文：隋大业初，汴州刺史，卒于汝南郡守。
现代文：隋大业中，为汴州刺史，卒于汝南郡太守位上。
English: In the Sui Dynasty, he was the prefect of Zhangzhou, and died on the throne of Yunnan County.

古文：荣第二子孝言，少警发有风仪。
现代文：段荣第二子孝言，少年时出众颇有风仪。
English: Duan Rong's second son, Xiao Yan, was an outstanding young man with great manners.

古文：魏武定末，起家司徒参军事。
现代文：魏武定末，起家司徒参军事。
English: At the end of the Wei and Wu Dynasties, the founder of the family, Stout, joined the military.

古文：齐受禅，其兄韶以别封霸城县侯授之。
现代文：齐受魏禅，其兄韶将别封的霸城县侯转让给了他。
English: Bei Qi received Zen during the Wei Dynasty, and his brother Duan Qi gave him the title of Marquis of Baicheng County, which was also awarded by the imperial court.

古文：累迁仪同三司、度支尚书、清都尹。
现代文：累迁仪同三司、度支尚书、清都尹。
English: The relocation ceremony is the same as the three divisions, the imperial edict, and the Qing Dynasty.

古文：孝言本以勋戚绪余，致位通显，至此便骄奢放逸，无所畏惮。
现代文：孝言是依仗勋戚余绪爬上显位的，至此之后便骄奢放逸，而无所顾忌。
English: Filial piety is to rely on the merits and merits of relatives to climb to prominence, and then they are proud and indulgent, and have no scruples.

古文：曾夜行，过其宾客宋孝王家宿，唤坊民防援，不时应赴，遂拷杀之。
现代文：有次夜行，来到宾客宋孝王家住宿，召唤坊民护卫，坊民没有按时赶来，他就将这个人拷打死了。
English: One night, he came to the guest Song Xiao Wang's house for accommodation, summoned the villagers to escort him. When the villagers did not arrive on time, he tortured the man to death.

古文：又与诸淫妇密游，为其夫觉，复恃官势，拷掠而殒。
现代文：又同某淫妇出游，被其丈夫发觉，他又依仗官势，打死了这位丈夫。
English: He also went on a journey with a prostitute, and when her husband found out, he killed him, taking advantage of his position.

古文：时苑内须果木，科民间及僧寺备输，悉分向其私宅种植。
现代文：时皇苑中需要栽植果木，朝廷科征民间以及佛寺输送来的，他全部栽种到了自己的私宅中。
English: When there was a need to plant fruit trees in the imperial garden, he planted them all in his private residence, using the fruit trees sent by the imperial court to the people and Buddhist temples.

古文：又殿内及园中须石，差车牛从漳河运载，复分车回取。
现代文：又宫殿和园中需要石头，皇宫派车从漳河运来，孝言则分车收取。
English: In addition, the palace and the garden needed stone. The palace sent a car to transport it from Luohe, while Xiao Yan collected it in a separate car.

古文：事悉闻彻，出为海州刺史。
现代文：这些事全被皇上查觉，驱出都城为海州刺史。
English: All of these things were discovered by the emperor, who drove them out of the capital to write history for Haizhou.

古文：寻以其兄故，征拜都官尚书，食阳城郡干，仍加开府。
现代文：不久因为其兄韶的关系，征拜为都官尚书，食阳城郡干，依然加开府。
English: Soon, because of his elder brother's relationship, he was recruited as a magistrate of Shangshu, Shiyangcheng County, and was still added to Kaifu.

古文：迁太常卿，除齐州刺史，以赃贿为御史所劾。
现代文：迁太常卿，除徐州刺史。由于收赃受贿，被御史纠劾。
English: Qian Taizhongqing, in addition to Xuzhou stabbing history. Due to accepting bribes, he was impeached by history.

古文：属世祖崩，遇赦免。
现代文：适逢世祖驾崩，遇赦得免。
English: When the patriarch died, he was pardoned.

古文：拜太常卿，转食河南郡干，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：拜太常卿。转食河南郡干，迁吏部尚书。
English: Bye Taizongqing. He changed his residence to Henan County, and wrote a book on the relocation of officials.

古文：祖珽执政，将废赵彦深，引孝言为助。
现代文：祖珽执政，想罢免赵彦深，就引孝言为帮助。
English: Zhu Xi was in power and wanted to remove Zhao Yanshen, so he brought in Xiao Yan to help.

古文：除兼侍中，入内省，典机密，寻即正，仍吏部尚书。
现代文：除兼侍中，进内省，掌管机密，很快迁为侍中，仍任吏部尚书。
English: In addition to being an aide-de-camp, he entered the Ministry of the Interior, in charge of secrets, and was soon transferred to the aide-de-camp, still serving as the secretary of the Ministry of the Interior.

古文：孝言既无深鉴，又待物不平，抽擢之徒，非贿则旧。
现代文：孝言既无知人之明，又不能公平待人，其选拔的人中，不是由于贿赂，就是因为故旧。
English: Filial piety does not know what is best, nor does it treat people fairly. The people it selects are either bribed or old-fashioned.

古文：有将作丞崔成，忽于众中抗言曰： 尚书天下尚书，岂独段家尚书也！ 
现代文：有位将作丞名叫崔成的，忽然在人群中大声呼喊： 尚书是天下的尚书，难道只是段家的尚书！ 
English: A master calligrapher named Cui Cheng, suddenly shouted loudly in the crowd: Shangshu is the world's Shangshu, is it just the Duan family's Shangshu!

古文：孝言无辞以答，惟厉色遣下而已。
现代文：孝言无言以对，只得命令手下将此人拉出。
English: Takasago was speechless and had to order his men to pull the man out.

古文：寻除中书监，加特进。
现代文：不久为中书监，加特进。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the book supervisor, and his seal was added as a special promotion.

古文：又托韩长鸾，共构祖珽之短。
现代文：又与韩长鸾勾结，共同陷害祖。
English: He also colluded with Han Changtao to frame Zu.

古文：及祖出后，孝言除尚书右仆射，仍掌选举，恣情用舍，请谒大行。
现代文：祖离开京城，孝言任尚书右仆射，依然掌管铨选举荐，但他还是恣情取舍，所以请托之风大行。
English: After his father left the capital, Xiao Yan was appointed as Shang Shu's right-hand man, still in charge of the election and recommendation, but he still chose arbitrarily, so please rely on him.

古文：敕浚京城北隍，孝言监作，仪同三司崔士顺、将作大匠元士将、太府少卿郦孝裕、尚书左民郎中薛叔昭、司州治中崔龙子、清都尹丞李道隆、邺县令尉长卿、临漳令崔象、成安令高子彻等并在孝言部下。
现代文：帝敕令疏浚京城北隍，由孝言监工，而仪同三司崔士顺、将作大匠元士将、太府少卿郦孝裕、尚书左民郎中薛叔昭、司州治中崔龙子、清都尹丞李道隆、邺县令尉长卿、监漳令崔象、成安令高子彻等都是他的部下。
English: The dredging of the northern moat of Beijing was ordered by the emperor and overseen by Xiao Yan, and his subordinates included the Third Secretary Cui Shishun, the future great craftsman Yuan Shijo, the Taifu Shaoqing Gao Xiaoyu, the Shangshu Zuomin Langzhong Xue Shuzhao, the Shizhou Jizhong Cui Longzi, the Qing capital Yinzheng Li Daolong, the Jixian Rongzheng, the Jongzhen Rongzheng, the Jongzhen Rongzheng Cui Xiang, and the Cheng'an Rongzheng Gao Zicheng.

古文：典作日，别置酒高会，诸人膝行跪伏，称觞上寿，或自陈屈滞，更请转官，孝言意色扬扬，以为己任，皆随事报答，许有另授。
现代文：动工这天，孝言大摆酒席，诸人膝行跪伏，举杯祝福，或自陈屈滞，请求转官。孝言得意扬扬，以为己任，分别给予回答，许诺加授。
English: On the day of the start of construction, Xiao Gan held a grand banquet, and everyone knelt down, raised a cup of blessing, or requested a transfer from Chen Qiuyao. Xiao Gan was elated, thought it was his duty, and gave a separate answer, promising to confer.

古文：富商大贾多被铨擢，所进用人士，咸是粗险放纵之流。
现代文：富商大贾多被拔擢，虽然进用了一些人士，但他们都是粗鲁放纵之辈。
English: Rich businessman Jia Duo was promoted, and although some people were promoted, they were all rude and indulgent.

古文：寻迁尚书左仆射，特进、侍中如故。
现代文：很快迁为尚书左仆射，特进、侍中依制保留。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of Shosho's left-hand manservant, while the position of Tokujin and chamberlain were retained according to the system.

古文：孝言富贵豪侈，尤好女色。
现代文：孝言富贵豪侈，尤其喜好女色。
English: He is rich and extravagant, and prefers women.

古文：后娶娄定远妾董氏，大耽爱之，为此内外不和，更相纠列，坐争免官，徙光州。
现代文：后娶娄定运妾董氏，特别地给以宠爱，为此使得内外不和睦，互相纠纷，因而被人检举，免官后流放光州。
English: After marrying Gong Dingyun's concubine, Ms. Dong, he especially favored her, which caused discord and disputes both at home and abroad. As a result, he was reported and exiled to Gwangju after being relieved of his duties.

古文：隆化败后，有敕追还。
现代文：隆化事败，有敕令被追赶回来。
English: Longhua failed, and was chased back by the imperial command.

古文：孝言虽黩货无厌，恣情酒色，然举止风流，招致名士，美景良辰，未尝虚弃，赋诗奏伎，毕尽欢洽。
现代文：孝言虽然无休止地贪污纳贿，纵情酒色，可是举止风流，招引名士，良辰美景，未尝虚度，赋诗奏乐，极尽欢悦。
English: Although he endlessly took bribes and indulged in drinking, he was a philanderer, courted celebrities, enjoyed beautiful scenery, never wasted time, composed poetry and music, and enjoyed life to the full.

古文：虽草莱之士，粗闲文艺，多引入宾馆，与同兴赏，其贫踬者亦时有乞遗。
现代文：虽乡鄙之士，只要粗通文艺，孝言都能引入宾馆，一同欣赏。有时对贫踬之人也有施舍。
English: Although they are from the countryside, as long as they have a basic knowledge of literature and art, they can bring filial piety to the hotel and enjoy it together. Sometimes there are alms for the poor.

古文：世论复以此多之。
现代文：因此受到了时论的赞誉。
English: Therefore, it has been praised by the theory of time.

古文：齐亡入周，授开府仪同大将军，后加上开府。
现代文：齐亡入周，授开府仪同大将军，后加上开府。
English: Qi died within a week, and he was given the ceremony of opening the government and the title of general, followed by the opening of the government.

古文：史臣曰：段荣以姻戚之重，遇时来之会，功伐之地，亦足称焉。
现代文：史臣曰：段荣以姻戚的重位，遇上了最好的时机，在建功立业方面，有值得称道的建树。
English: Shichen said: Duan Rong, with the important position of a relative by marriage, has met the best opportunity, and has made commendable achievements in building a career.

古文：韶光辅七君，克隆门业，每出当阃外，或任以留台，以猜忌之朝，终其眉寿。
现代文：段韶光荣地辅佐了七个君主，能光大自家门庭事业，每当带重兵于外地，或镇守于京师，在那猜忌成性倾轧成风的王朝，却能保持品节而善终。
English: Duan Xuan gloriously assisted seven monarchs. He was able to make a great contribution to the cause of his own court. Whenever he took heavy troops to other places or guarded the capital, he was able to maintain good taste and end well in the dynasty where suspicion became the norm.

古文：属亭候多警，为有齐上将，岂其然乎？
现代文：正逢疆场多警、战事不断，为北齐一代名将，不是偶然的。
English: It is no coincidence that there are many policemen on the battlefield at the same time, and the war is incessant. He is a famous general of the Beiqi generation.

古文：当以志谢矜功，名不逾实，不以威权御物，不以智数要时，欲求覆餗，其可得也？
现代文：其原因该是他诚心不自矜功劳，也不追求超过实际的虚名，更不以权势威严来接人待物，不以技巧机谋来捞取好处。要这样的人遇上麻烦，又怎么可能呢?
English: The reason for this is that he is sincere and does not take credit, nor does he pursue a false reputation that exceeds reality, nor does he treat others with power and authority, nor does he use skill and cunning to gain benefits. How is it possible for such a person to get into trouble?

古文：语曰 率性之谓道 ，此其效欤？
现代文：古语说 率性之谓道 ，逭大概就是它的明证吧!
English: The ancients said that spontaneity is called the Tao, and this is probably a clear proof of it!

古文：赞曰：荣发其原，韶大其门。
现代文：赞曰：段荣开了源头，段韶拓高门楣。
English: Zang said: Duan Rong opened the source, Duan Xuan expanded the gate.

古文：位因功显，望以德尊。
现代文：高位由其功勋而显著，名望由其德行而尊荣。
English: High positions are distinguished by their merits, and fame is honored by their virtues.

