古文：顷襄王二十年，秦白起拔楚西陵，或拔鄢、郢、夷陵，烧先王之墓。王徙东北，保于陈城。
现代文：楚襄王二十年，秦将白起攻陷楚国的西陵，另一支秦军攻陷鄢、郢、夷陵，放火焚烧楚国先君的陵墓，顷襄王被逼迁都于东北的陈城，来保存社稷。
English: In the 20th year of the reign of King of Chu Xiang, the Qin general Bai Qi attacked and captured the western mausoleum of Chu. Another Qin army attacked and captured the imperial mausoleum, and set fire to the imperial mausoleum of the first emperor of Chu. King of Chu Xiang was forced to move to Chencheng in the northeast to preserve the imperial mausoleum.

古文：楚遂削弱，为秦所轻。
现代文：楚国从此而日渐衰弱，被秦国轻视。
English: From then on, the State of Chu gradually weakened and was despised by the State of Qin.

古文：于是白起又将兵来伐。
现代文：不久，白起又率军伐楚。
English: Soon after, Baiqi led the army to attack Chu again.

古文：楚人有黄歇者，游学博闻，襄王以为辩，故使于秦。
现代文：楚国有个名叫黄歇的人，到各地游学，博学多闻，楚襄王认为他是大辩之才，于是派他出使秦国，去游说秦王。
English: There was a man in the State of Chu named Huang Xie. He traveled all over the country to study and was well-read. King Chu Xiang thought he was a great debater, so he sent him to the State of Qin to lobby the Qin king.

古文：说昭王曰： 天下莫强于秦、楚，今闻大王欲伐楚，此犹两虎相斗而驽犬受其弊，不如善楚。
现代文：黄歇到秦国后对秦昭王说： 天下诸侯实力，没有比秦、楚两国再强大的了，如今听说大王想要攻打楚国，臣以为这样无异于两虎相争，最终说不定会让猎犬占了便宜，大王倒不如与楚修好。
English: After Huang Xie arrived in Qin, he said to Qin Zhao Wang: The power of the princes in the world is no more powerful than that of Qin and Chu. Now that I heard that the great king wanted to attack Chu, I thought that this was tantamount to a fight between two tigers. In the end, the hounds might take advantage of this, and the great king might as well make peace with Chu.

古文：臣请言其说。
现代文：请允许我说说其中的缘由。
English: Allow me to explain why.

古文：臣闻之： 物至而反，冬夏是也。致至而危，累棋是也。 
现代文：臣听人这样说： 物极必反，正如冬夏相替；安极而危，好比堆叠棋子。 
English: A vassal listener said: "Things that are extreme must be reversed, just like the alternation of winter and summer; things that are extreme and dangerous are like stacked chess pieces.

古文：今大国之地半天下，有二垂，此从生民以来，万乘之地未尝有也。
现代文：如今秦国据有天下半数土地，西北两方俱达到极边远之境，有史以来，没有哪个大国能与秦比肩而立。
English: Today, Qin owns half of the world's land, and both the northwest and the far west are extremely remote. In the history of the world, no other country can stand shoulder to shoulder with Qin.

古文：先帝文王、庄王、王之身，三世而不接地于齐，以绝从亲之要。
现代文：从先帝孝文王、庄襄王，到大王共历三代，从未忘记开疆拓土以求与齐接壤共边，从而切断诸侯合纵抗秦的交通之道。
English: From Emperor Xiaowen Wang, Zhuangxiang Wang, to the Great King, there were three generations, and they never forgot to expand the territory to seek common borders with Qi, thus cutting off the way of communication between the princes and the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今王三使盛桥守事于韩，成桥以北入燕。是王不用甲，不伸威，而出百里之地，王可谓能矣。
现代文：大王多次派盛桥到韩国担任监国要职，盛桥不负所托，并北燕之地入秦国，这样大王不用劳师动众，不用吹灰之力拓地百里。
English: The great king repeatedly sent Shengqiao to South Korea to assume the important position of supervising the country. Shengqiao did not live up to the commission, and entered the land of North Yan into Qin. In this way, the great king did not have to work hard to motivate the people, and did not have to blow the dust to open up a hundred miles.

古文：王又举甲兵而攻魏，杜大梁之门，举河内，拔燕、酸枣、虚、桃人，楚、燕之兵云翔不敢校，王之功亦多矣。
现代文：大王又发兵攻魏，封锁大梁城，占领河内，攻取南燕、酸枣、虚、桃人等地，楚、燕两国军队只是作壁上观，不敢与秦军交锋，大王之功也算不小了。
English: The great king also sent troops to attack Wei, blockaded Dalian City, occupied Hanoi, and captured Nanyan, Jujiazui, Hu, Taoman and other places. The armies of Chu and Yan were just spectators on the wall, and did not dare to clash with the Qin army. The great king's achievement was not small.

古文：王申息众二年，然后复之，又取蒲、衍、首垣，以临仁、平兵、小黄、济阳婴城，而魏氏服矣。
现代文：此时假如大王能休兵两年，再出兵攻取蒲、衍、首垣，兵临仁、平丘，那么小黄、济阳之地将不战而降，魏氏俯首臣服。
English: At this time, if the great king can take a two-year leave of absence, and then send troops to capture Po, Yan, Shougaki, Hei Linren, and Pingqiu, then the land of Xiao Huang and Jiyang will surrender without a fight, and the Wei clan will bow their heads in submission.

古文：王又割濮、磨之北属之燕，断齐、秦之要，绝楚、魏之脊。天下五合、六聚而不敢救也，王之威亦惮矣。
现代文：大王再割濮、磨以北之地与燕，加以拉拢，则掌握齐秦间的通道，斩断楚魏之间的联系，这样一来，山东诸国即使结聚联盟，也无法挽救其危亡的命运了。
English: The great king then cut the plough and the mill to the north of the land and Yan, and pulled it together, then mastered the channel between Qi and Qin, and cut off the connection between Chu and Wei. In this way, even if the Shandong countries gathered an alliance, they could not save their perilous fate.

古文：王若能持功守威，省攻伐之心而肥仁义之诫，使无复后患，三王不足四，五伯不足六也。
现代文：眼下大王威名正盛，倘能守成功业，停止攻伐而施行仁义，不仅免除后患，而且那 三王 就不愁变成 四王 ，而五霸也不难变成 六霸 了。
English: At the moment, the great king's prestige is at its peak. If he can keep his successful career, stop attacking and implement benevolence and righteousness, he will not only avoid future troubles, but also the three kings will not be afraid to become four kings, and the five overlords will not be difficult to become six overlords.

古文： 王若负人徒之众，材兵甲之强，壹毁魏氏之威，而欲以力臣天下之主，臣恐有后患。
现代文：反之，如果大王倚仗兵威，乘着击败魏国的余锐威服天下诸侯，臣担心秦国自此后患无穷。
English: On the other hand, if the great king relied on his military prowess and took advantage of his victory over Wei to subjugate the world's lords, the vassal feared that Qin would suffer immeasurably from then on.

古文：《诗》云： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 凡事都有一个很好的开始，却少有圆满的结局。 
English: The Book of Songs says: Everything has a good beginning, but few things have a happy ending.

古文：《易》曰： 狐濡其尾。 此言始之易，终之难也。
现代文：《易经》中也有类似的例子： 狐狸涉水过河，开始时小心翼翼，生怕弄湿了尾巴，可是由于多种原因，到达对岸时还是把尾巴弄湿了。 
English: There is also a similar example in the I Ching: A fox waded across a river. At first, he was careful not to get his tail wet, but for various reasons, he still got his tail wet when he reached the opposite bank.

古文：何以知其然也?
现代文：这些都说明了始易终难的道理。凭什么断定事理必然如此呢？
English: How is that possible?

古文：智氏见伐赵之利，而不知榆次之祸也；吴见伐齐之便，而不知干隧之败也。
现代文：有事实可据。智伯只看到攻打赵国很有利，可惜却没有注意到榆次之祸，吴王发现攻打齐国有利可图，可惜料不到有干遂之败。
English: There is factual evidence. Zhi Bo only saw that attacking Zhao was very advantageous, but unfortunately he did not notice the second disaster. King Wu found that attacking Qi was profitable, but unfortunately he did not expect to succeed.

古文：此二国者，非无大功也，设利于前，而易患于后也。
现代文：这两个国家都曾战功赫赫，只是由于贪图眼前利益，最终不免灭国亡身。
English: Both countries have made great achievements in the war, but because of their greed for immediate profits, they will eventually perish.

古文：吴之信越也，从而伐齐，既胜齐人于艾陵，还为越王禽于三江之浦。智氏信韩、魏，从而伐赵，攻晋阳之城，胜有日矣，韩、魏反之，杀智伯瑶于凿台之上，今王妒楚之不毁也，而忘毁楚之强魏也。
现代文：吴王相信越国，放心地全力攻齐，取得了艾陵大捷，胜利归来却被越王擒杀于三江之浦；智伯轻信韩、魏，与之合力攻赵，围攻晋阳，不料大胜在即，韩、魏两军阵前倒戈杀智伯于凿台之上。如今大王念念不忘灭掉楚国，却没有注意到楚国的覆灭会增强魏国的实力。
English: King Wu believed in Yue, confidently attacked with all his might, achieved a great victory in Ailing, but was defeated and killed by King Yue in Sanjiangpu; Zhibo believed in Han and Wei, and joined forces with them to attack Zhao and besiege Jinyang. Unexpectedly, the great victory was imminent, and the two armies of Han and Wei reversed their positions and killed Zhibo on the chisel table. Now the great king did not forget to destroy Chu, but did not notice that the destruction of Chu would enhance the strength of Wei.

古文：臣为大王虑而不取。
现代文：臣因而替大王深感忧虑。
English: As a result, the vassal was deeply worried for the great king.

古文：《诗》云： 大武远宅不涉。 
现代文：《诗经》中说： 有威望的大国，不必征战，自能怀敌附远。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: A great and prestigious country does not need to go to war, it can keep its enemies at a distance.

古文：从此观之，楚国，援也；邻国，敌也。《诗》云： 他人有心，予忖度之。
现代文：以此来看，地处僻远的楚国应当是秦国的盟友，邻近之国方是肘腋之患。
English: From this point of view, the distant Chu Kingdom should be an ally of the Qin Kingdom, and the neighboring countries are a problem.

古文：跃跃毚兔，遇犬获之。 今王中道而信韩、魏之善王也，此正吴信越也。
现代文：《诗经》中又说： 别人有害我之心，我应时刻提防，再狡猾的兔子，也躲不过猎犬的追捕。 
English: "The Book of Songs" also says: "Other people are harmful to my heart. I should always be on my guard. Even the most cunning rabbit cannot escape the pursuit of hounds."

古文：臣闻，敌不可易，时不可失。
现代文：如今大王为韩、魏所惑而加以亲信，无异于吴王轻信越国，到头来后悔莫及。
English: Today, the great king has been deceived by Han and Wei and has trusted them, which is no different from King Wu's gullible belief in Yue Guo. In the end, he regretted it.

古文：臣恐韩、魏之卑辞虑患，而实欺大国也。
现代文：臣听说： 敌人不可轻视，时机不容错过。 
English: The vassal heard: the enemy must not be despised, the opportunity must not be missed.

古文：此何也?王既无重世之德于韩、魏，而有累世之怨矣。韩、魏父子兄弟接踵而死于秦者，百世矣。
现代文：臣认为韩、魏两国是担心亡国灭族才卑躬屈膝臣服于大王的，并非真心臣服，为什么积怨甚深，韩、魏两国人民的父子兄弟，历代死于秦人手中的不可胜数，国家残破，宗庙坍塌，百姓被剖腹毁容，身首异处，暴尸于荒野，触目可见，而被掳掠押送的，相随于路。
English: The vassal thought that the Han and Wei countries were worried about the destruction of the country and the extermination of the people before they bowed down and submitted to the great king. It was not a sincere submission. Why was there so much resentment? The father and son brothers of the people of the Han and Wei countries have died in countless numbers at the hands of the Qin people throughout the ages, the country was ruined, the ancestral temple collapsed, the people were disemboweled and disfigured, their heads were in different places, the dead bodies were in the wilderness and were visible to the naked eye, and those who were abducted and escorted followed the road.

古文：本国残，社稷坏，宗庙隳，刳腹折颐，首身分离，暴骨草泽，头颅僵仆，相望于境；父子老弱系虏，相随于路；鬼神狐祥无所食，百姓不聊生，族类离散，流亡为臣妾，满海内矣。韩、魏之不亡，秦社稷之忧也。
现代文：鬼神无人供奉，而百姓无法生存，沦落为别人奴仆臣妾的，遍布诸侯各国。
English: Ghosts and gods were worshipped by no one, while the people were unable to survive and were reduced to the status of slaves, vassals and concubines of others. This was the case throughout all the principalities and countries.

古文：今王之攻楚，不亦失乎!
现代文：韩、魏不亡，秦国则永难安忱无忧，此时大王却全力攻楚，难道不是大大的失策吗？
English: Han and Wei will never die, while Qin is eternally secure and worry-free. At this time, the great king is attacking with all his might. Isn't this a big blunder?

古文：是王攻楚之日，则恶出兵？
现代文：何况大王出兵伐楚，将取道何处呢？
English: What's more, the great king sent troops to fight the Chu, but where will they go?

古文：王将藉路于仇雠之韩、魏乎!
现代文：大王不会向仇敌韩、魏借道吧？
English: Won't the great king borrow from his enemies Han and Wei?

古文：兵出之日而王忧其不反也，是王以兵资于仇雠之韩、魏。
现代文：恐怕出兵之日，大王就开始担忧能否再回秦国了。借道两国，无异于大王把大批兵马拱手赠与韩、魏。
English: I am afraid that on the day of the dispatch of troops, the great king began to worry about whether he could return to Qin. By way of the two countries, it is tantamount to the great king giving away a large number of soldiers and horses to Korea and Wei.

古文：王若不藉路于仇雠之韩、魏，必攻阳、右壤，随阳、右壤，此皆广川大水，山林溪谷不食之地，王虽有之，不为得地。是王有毁楚之名，无得地之实也。
现代文：如果大王不向两国借道，那只能攻打楚国随阳、右壤。而随阳、右壤都是高山大河、森林溪谷，人烟稀少，大王即使占有这些地方，又有什么用？徒有灭楚之名，而无得地之实。
English: If the great king does not borrow from the two countries, he can only attack the Suiyang and Right Soils of Chu. And the Suiyang and Right Soils are high mountain rivers, forests and valleys, and are sparsely populated. Even if the great king occupies these places, what is the use? There is only the name of destroying Chu, but no actual land.

古文：且王攻楚之日，四国必应悉起应王。
现代文：况且大王攻打楚国之时，齐、赵、韩、魏四国势必乘虚而入。
English: Moreover, when the Great King attacked Chu, Qi, Zhao, Han, and Wei were bound to take advantage of the situation.

古文：秦、楚之构而不离，魏氏将出兵而攻留、方与、銍、胡陵、砀、萧、相，故宋必尽。
现代文：秦兵陷于楚战，无暇他顾，魏国必定攻取留、方与、胡陵、砀、萧、相等地，宋国故地尽属于魏。
English: The Qin soldiers were trapped in the battle of Chu, and had no time to look around. The Wei state would certainly capture the cities of Zu, Fang and, Huling, Handan, Xiao, and so on. The Song homeland belonged entirely to Wei.

古文：齐人南面，泗北必举。此皆平原四达，膏腴之地也，而王使之独攻。
现代文：齐国南下攻取泗北之地，大王出兵击溃楚国，不料让他人坐收渔人之利，既扩张了韩、魏国土，又增强了齐国实力。
English: When the State of Qi went south to conquer the northern part of Shandong, the Great King sent troops to defeat the State of Chu. However, he allowed others to take advantage of the fishermen. This not only expanded the territory of Korea and Wei, but also strengthened the power of the State of Qi.

古文：王破楚于以肥韩、魏于中国而劲齐，韩、魏之强足以校于秦矣。齐南以泗为境，东负海，北倚河，而无后患，天下之国，莫强于齐。
现代文：韩、魏两国强大起来，就会与秦分庭抗礼。而齐国以泗水为西境，东临大海，北靠黄河，再无后顾之忧，将成为诸侯中的最强者。
English: When Han and Wei became powerful, they would fight against Qin, while Qi, with Surabaya as its western border, the sea to the east, and the Yellow River to the north, would have no worries and would become the strongest among the princes.

古文：齐、魏得地葆利，而详事下吏，一年之后，为帝若未能，于以禁王之为帝有余。
现代文：齐、魏获得土地保有利益，再加上官吏的悉心治理，一年之后虽然尚无能力称帝，但有足够的力量阻拦大王建号称帝。
English: Qi and Wei obtained land-holding interests, coupled with the diligent governance of officials, and a year later, although they were not yet able to proclaim the emperor, they had enough power to stop the great king Jian from proclaiming the emperor.

古文：夫以王壤土之博，人徒之众，兵革之强，一举众而注地于楚，诎令韩、魏，归帝重于齐，是王失计也。
现代文：以大王疆土之广，民众之多，兵革之强，出兵与楚国结怨，反倒让韩、魏支持齐王称帝，这是大王失策之处。
English: Due to the vast territory of the great king, the large number of people, and the strong military power, the dispatch of troops caused resentment with Chu, but on the other hand, Han and Wei supported King Qi to become emperor. This was the great king's blunder.

古文： 臣为王虑，莫若善楚。
现代文：臣诚心为大王考虑，最好是和楚国言归于好，和睦相处。
English: I think for the great king, there is no better way than to be friendly with Chu.

古文：秦、楚合而为一，临以韩，韩必授首。
现代文：秦楚一体，兵临韩境，韩必俯首称臣。
English: Qin Chu is one, soldiers are on the Korean border, and Han must bow his head and call himself a minister.

古文：王襟以山东之险，带以河曲之利，韩必为关中之候。
现代文：大王据定崤山之险，保有河曲之利，韩国必然成了替秦伺察天下诸侯动静的吏属。
English: According to the great king, the danger of Lushan was fixed, and the advantage of keeping the river bend was kept. Korea inevitably became the official vassal of the Qin Dynasty to observe the movement and tranquility of the world.

古文：若是，王以十成郑，梁氏寒心，许、鄢陵婴城，上蔡、召陵不往来也。
现代文：这时大王以十万大兵进逼郑地，魏国必然震恐，许和鄢陵两城马上会闭城自守，上蔡、召陵都不和魏国往来。
English: At this time, the Great King invaded Zheng with a hundred thousand soldiers, and Wei was inevitably terrified. The two cities of Xu and Fuling would immediately close the city to defend themselves, and Shangcai and Zhaoling would not deal with Wei.

古文：如此，而魏亦关内侯矣。
现代文：这样，魏国也就成为秦在东方的侦察官。
English: In this way, Wei became Qin's scout in the East.

古文：王一善楚，而关内二万乘之主注地于齐，齐之右壤可拱手而取也。
现代文：大王一旦与楚国修好，韩、魏两国自会戮力攻齐，齐国右方的土地大王就垂手可得。
English: Once the Great King had made peace with the State of Chu, the two countries of Han and Wei would make a concerted effort to make peace, and the Great King of the land to the right of the State of Qi would be at his fingertips.

古文：是王之地一任两海，要绝天下也。
现代文：这时秦之土地，自西海至东海，横绝天下。
English: At this time, the land of Qin, from the West Sea to the East Sea, dominated the world.

古文：是燕、赵无齐、楚，无燕、赵也。
现代文：燕、赵与齐、楚相互隔绝，然后加以胁迫，四国不待出兵攻打，便会臣服于秦。 
English: Yan, Zhao, Qi, and Chu isolated themselves from each other and then coerced each other. The four kingdoms would submit to Qin without waiting for him to attack.

