古文：○钦宗钦宗恭文顺德仁孝皇帝，讳桓，徽宗皇帝长子，母曰恭显皇后王氏。
现代文：钦宗恭文顺德仁孝皇帝，名桓，徽宗皇帝的长子，母亲是恭显皇后王氏。
English: Emperor Qinzong Qianwen Shunde Renxiao, named Huan, was the eldest son of Emperor Huizong, and his mother was Empress Gongxian Wang.

古文：元符三年四月乙酉生于坤宁殿。
现代文：元符三年四月十三日，生于坤宁殿。
English: He was born on April 13th, Yuanfu 3rd, in Kunning Palace.

古文：初名亶，封韩国公，明年六月进封京兆郡王。
现代文：开始名，封为韩国公，次年六月进封京兆郡王。
English: At the beginning, he was named the Prince of Korea, and in June of the following year, he was named the King of Gyeongju County.

古文：崇宁元年二月甲午，更名烜，十一月丁亥，又改今名。
现代文：崇宁元年二月初九，改名为恒，十一月初六，又改名桓。
English: On the 9th day of the 2nd month of the 1st year of Chongning, he changed his name to Heng, and on the 6th day of the 11th month, he changed his name to Huan.

古文：大观二年正月，进封定王。
现代文：大观二年正月，进封定王。
English: In the first month of the second year of Daikan, he was crowned king.

古文：政和元年三月，讲学于资善堂。
现代文：政和元年川三月，在资善堂读书学习。
English: In March of the first year of the Meiji era, he began to study at Shizen-do.

古文：三年正月，加太保。
现代文：政和三年正月，加衔太保。
English: In the first month of the third year of the Meiji era, he was promoted to Taibo.

古文：四年二月癸酉，冠于文德殿。
现代文：政和四年二月二十七日，在文德殿举行成人礼。
English: The Coming-of-Age Ceremony was held in the Emperor's Study Hall on February 27th in the year of Reiwa.

古文：五年二月乙巳，立为皇太子，大赦天下。
现代文：政和五年二月初五，被立为皇太子，大赦全国。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the 5th year of Zheng He, he was appointed crown prince and granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：丁巳，谒太庙。
现代文：十七日，朝拜太庙。
English: On the 17th, they paid their respects at the Imperial Temple.

古文：诏乘金辂，设卤簿，如至道、天禧故事，及宫僚参谒并称臣，皆辞之。
现代文：下诏可以乘金饰的大车，设置仪仗队，像至道、天禧规定的那样，官僚参见朝拜时都称臣，钦宗全部辞谢了。
English: According to the edict, they can ride in a gold-decorated carriage and set up an honor guard. As stipulated by the Supreme Way and the Jubilee of Heaven, the bureaucrats see to it that they all praise their subordinates when they pay homage to the emperor, and the Qinzong all decline to do so.

古文：六年六月癸未，纳妃朱氏。
现代文：政和六年六月二十一日，纳娶妃子朱氏。
English: On June 21, 1867, Na married his concubine, Zhu.

古文：宣和七年十二月戊午，除开封牧。
现代文：宣和七年十二月二十一日，任命为开封牧。
English: On the 21st day of December in the year of the declaration of peace, he was appointed as the shepherd of Kaifeng.

古文：庚申，徽宗诏皇太子嗣位，自称曰道君皇帝，趣太子入禁中，被以御服。
现代文：二十三日，徽宗下诏皇太子继承皇位，自称为道君皇帝，催促太子进人皇宫，换上皇帝衣装。
English: On the 23rd, Emperor Huizong decreed that the crown prince should succeed to the throne, and proclaimed himself Emperor Daojun, urging the prince to enter the imperial palace and put on the emperor's clothes.

古文：泣涕固辞，因得疾。
现代文：钦宗哭着一定要推辞，因而得病。
English: Khin Tsung cried and had to turn down the offer, which made him ill.

古文：又固辞，不许。
现代文：又坚决推辞，没有允许。
English: He also firmly refused and did not allow it.

古文：辛酉，即皇帝位，御垂拱殿见群臣。
现代文：二十四日，即皇帝位，到垂拱殿会见大臣们。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, that is, the emperor's enthronement, he went to the Hanging Arch to meet with the ministers.

古文：是日，日有五色晕，挟赤黄珥，重日相荡摩久之。
现代文：这天，太阳周围出现五色光圈，带着赤黄色光气，云气在太阳旁边往来摇动摩擦了很久。
English: On this day, a five-colored aperture appeared around the sun, with a red-yellow luminous gas, and the cloud gas shook and rubbed next to the sun for a long time.

古文：乃引道君皇帝出居龙德宫，皇后出居撷景园。
现代文：于是道君皇帝搬到龙德宫，皇后搬到撷景园。
English: So Emperor Daojun moved to the Longde Palace, and the empress moved to the Jiuyuan Garden.

古文：以少宰李邦彦为龙德宫使，太保、领枢密院事蔡攸、门下侍郎吴敏副之。
现代文：任命少宰李邦彦为龙德宫使，太保领枢密院事蔡枚、门下侍郎吴敏为副使。
English: He appointed Shanzai Li Bangyan as the Longde Courtyard Envoy, Taibo leader and Privy Councillor Cai Mai, and his manservant Wu Min as deputy envoys.

古文：是时，金人已分道犯境。
现代文：这时，金军已经兵分几路南侵。
English: At this time, the gold army has been divided into several routes to invade the south.

古文：壬戌，赦大逆、反叛以下罪，进百官秩一等，赏诸军，立妃朱氏为皇后，以太子詹事耿南仲签书枢密院事。
现代文：二十五日，赦免大逆、反叛以下囚犯罪行，文武百官升秩一等，赏赐各军，立妃子朱氏为皇后，任命太子詹事耿南仲为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 25th, he pardoned the prisoners who committed crimes of high treason and rebellion, promoted one hundred civil and military officials to the first rank, rewarded the armies, appointed the concubine Zhu as empress, and appointed the prince Zhanji Geng Nanzhong as the signer of the letter of the Privy Council.

古文：癸亥，诏太傅燕王、越王入朝不趋，赞拜不名。
现代文：二十六日，下诏太傅燕王、越王朝拜不趋，赞拜时不称姓名。
English: On the 26th, Taifu Yan Wang and the Viet Dynasty were ordered not to worship, and not to mention their names when praising.

古文：诏非三省、枢密院所得旨，有司勿行。
现代文：诏令不是三省、枢密院所签署的命令，有关部门不要执行。
English: The edict is not an order signed by the three provinces or the Privy Council, and the relevant departments should not implement it.

古文：甲子，斡离不陷信德府，粘罕围太原。
现代文：二十七日，斡离不攻陷信德府，粘罕围攻太原。
English: On the 27th, it was decided not to attack Shinde, but to besiege Taiyuan.

古文：诏京东、淮西、浙募兵入卫。
现代文：下诏京东、淮西、浙募兵勤王。
English: The following is the edict of Jingdong, Huaxi and Zhejiang to recruit soldiers to serve the king.

古文：太学生陈东等上书，数蔡京、童贯、王黼、梁师成、李彦、朱勔罪，谓之六贼，请诛之。
现代文：太学生陈东等上书，历数蔡京、童贯、王敞、梁师成、李彦、未疏的罪行，称他们为六贼，请求杀掉他们。
English: Chen Dong, a student, wrote a letter, enumerating the crimes of Cai Jing, Tong Quan, Wang Chang, Liang Shicheng, Li Yan, and Wei Zuo, calling them the six thieves and requesting that they be killed.

古文：丙寅，上道君皇帝尊号曰教主道君太上皇帝，皇后曰道君太上皇后。
现代文：二十九日，敬上道君皇帝尊号为教主道君太上皇帝，皇后为道君太上皇后。
English: On the 29th, the honorific title of the Emperor Daojun was changed to the Emperor Daojun and the Empress Daojun to the Empress Daojun.

古文：诏改元。
现代文：下诏改元。
English: The following edict changed the era.

古文：靖康元年春正月丁卯朔，受群臣朝贺，退诣龙德宫，贺道君皇帝。
现代文：靖康元年春正月初一，接受大臣们朝拜和祝贺，退殿后到龙德宫，祝贺道君皇帝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the first year of the Jing Kang, he received the worship and congratulations of the ministers. After leaving the palace, he went to the Longde Palace to congratulate Emperor Daojun.

古文：诏中外臣庶实封言得失。
现代文：下诏中外臣僚和庶民密封上书，陈述朝政得失。
English: In the following edict, Chinese and foreign ministers and ordinary people sealed a letter, stating the gains and losses of the imperial government.

古文：金人破相州。
现代文：金军攻破相州。
English: The Chinese army broke through to Sangju.

古文：戊辰，破濬州。
现代文：初二，攻破浚州。
English: In the second year of junior high school, break through the dredging state.

古文：威武军节度使梁方平师溃，河北、河东路制置副使何灌退保滑州。
现代文：威武军节度使梁方平的军队溃败，河北、河东路制置副使何灌退保滑州。
English: Liang Fangping's army was defeated by the Weiwu army, and He Guanzhong, the deputy commander of Hebei and Hedong Roads, retreated to Baozhu.

古文：己巳，灌奔还，金人济河，诏亲征。
现代文：初三，何灌溃归京城，金军渡过黄河，钦宗下诏亲征。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, He Guanzhong returned to Beijing, the Golden Army crossed the Yellow River, and Qin Zong issued an edict to personally enlist.

古文：道君皇帝东巡，以领枢密院事蔡攸为行宫使，尚书右丞宇文粹中副之。
现代文：道君皇帝东巡，任命枢密院事蔡枚为行宫使，尚书右承宁文粹中为副使。
English: Emperor Daojun was on an eastward tour, and appointed the Privy Councillor Cai Mei as the envoy to the palace, and Shang Shuxu Ucheng Ning Wenzhong as the deputy envoy.

古文：诏自今除授、黜陟及恩数等事，并参酌祖宗旧制。
现代文：下诏从今以后官吏的任命、升降及恩赏等方面情况，一律参照祖宗规定的制度实行。
English: The following edict decreed that from now on, the appointment, promotion and reward of officials should all be carried out in accordance with the system stipulated by the ancestors.

古文：罢内外官司、局、所一百五处，止留后苑，以奉龙德宫。
现代文：废罢朝廷内外官司、局、所一百零五处，只留后苑，用于侍奉龙德宫。
English: 105 departments, bureaus and offices inside and outside the Imperial Court were abolished, leaving only the backyard to serve the Longdegu.

古文：以门下侍郎吴敏知枢密院事，吏部尚书李棁同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命门下侍郎吴敏为知枢密院事，吏部尚书李为同知枢密院事。
English: He appointed his servant Wu Min to be the Secretary of the Privy Council, and his secretary, Shang Shuli, to be the Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：贬太傅致仕王黼为崇信军节度副使、安置永州。
现代文：以太傅职衔退休的王敞被贬为崇信军节度副使，安置永州。
English: Wang Chang, who retired with the title of Taifu, was demoted to vice-envoy of the Chongxin Army and placed in Yongzhou.

古文：赐翊卫大夫、安德军承宣使李彦死，并籍其家。
现代文：诩卫大夫、安德军承宣使李彦被赐死，并且籍没家产。
English: Dr. Xing Wei and the Andean Military Succession Proclamation caused Li Yan to be put to death, and he was deprived of his family property.

古文：放宁远军节度使朱勔归田里。
现代文：宁远军节度使未疏被削官放归田里。
English: The Ningyuan Army's festival made Misao, who had been demoted, return to the fields.

古文：帝欲亲征，以李纲为留守，以李棁为副。
现代文：钦宗想亲征，任命李纲为东京留守，李为副留守。
English: Qinzong wanted to enlist in person, and appointed Li Gang to be stationed in Tokyo, and Li to be the deputy stationmaster.

古文：给事中王寓谏亲征，罢之。
现代文：给事中王辨劝谏钦宗亲征，被罢免。
English: For this matter, Wang Bin advised Yu Qinzong to personally enlist, and he was dismissed.

古文：庚午，道君皇帝如亳州，百官多潜遁。
现代文：初四，道君皇帝到达毫州，百官多暗暗逃跑。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, Emperor Daojun arrived in Maozhou, and more than a hundred officials secretly fled.

古文：宰相欲奉帝出襄、邓，李纲谏止之。
现代文：宰相打算奉皇上出巡襄、邓地区，李纲劝谏制止了。
English: The prime minister planned to go on an imperial tour to the Xiang and Deng regions, but Li Gang advised him to stop it.

古文：以纲为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命李纲为尚书右承。
English: Li Gang was appointed as the right-hand successor of Shang Shu.

古文：辛未，以李纲为亲征行营使，侍卫亲军马军都指挥使曹曚副之。
现代文：初五，任命李纲为亲征行营使，侍卫亲军马军都指挥使曹蒙为副使。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Li Gang was appointed as the envoy of the pro-enlistment camp, and Cao Meng, the deputy envoy of the pro-enlistment camp, was appointed as the deputy envoy.

古文：太宰兼门下侍郎白时中罢。李邦彦为太宰兼门下侍郎，守中书侍郎张邦昌为少宰兼中书侍郎，尚书左丞赵野为门下侍郎，翰林学士承旨王孝迪为中书侍郎，同知枢密院事蔡懋为尚书左丞。
现代文：太宰兼门下侍郎白时中被罢免，李邦彦为太宰兼门下侍郎，守中书侍郎张邦昌为少宰兼中书侍郎，尚书左承赵野为门下侍郎，翰林学士承旨王孝迪为中书侍郎，同知枢密院事蔡愈为尚书左承。
English: Dazai and his attendants were dismissed at the time of Bai, with Li Bangyan as Dazai and his attendants, Gu Zhongshushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushushush

古文：壬申，金人渡河，遣使督诸道兵入援。
现代文：初六，金军渡过黄河，钦宗派遣使臣督促各道兵马人援京师。
English: On the sixth day of the first lunar month, the Chinese army crossed the Yellow River, and Emperor Qin sent envoys to urge soldiers and horsemen from all provinces to come to the aid of the Beijing division.

古文：癸酉，诏两省、枢密院官制一遵元丰故事。
现代文：初七，下诏两省、枢密院官制一律遵照元丰时期的规定。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, the two provinces and the Privy Council were abolished in accordance with the provisions of the Yuanfeng period.

古文：金人犯京师，命尚书驾部员外郎郑望之、亲卫大夫康州防御使高世则使其军。
现代文：金军攻打京师，命令尚书驾部员外郎郑望之、亲卫大夫康州防御使高世则出使金军。
English: The Golden Army attacked the Beijing Division, and ordered Shang Shuxu's driver, Wairo Zheng Wangzhi, and the bodyguard, Kangzhou's defense commander, Gao Se, to dispatch the Golden Army.

古文：诏从官举文武臣僚堪充将帅有胆勇者。
现代文：下诏从官推举文武臣僚可以担任将帅有胆识有勇谋的人。
English: The following edict was issued to nominate military officers and ministers who could serve as generals who are handsome, courageous and resourceful.

古文：是夜，金人攻宣泽门，李纲御之，斩获百余人，至旦始退。
现代文：这天夜晚，金军攻打育泽门，李纲率军抵抗，斩杀俘获一百多人，到第二天早晨金军才撤退。
English: That night, the Chinese army attacked Ikuzemon, Li Gang led the resistance, killed and captured more than a hundred people, and the Chinese army retreated in the morning of the next day.

古文：甲戌，金人遣吴孝民来议和，命李棁使金军。
现代文：初八，金军派遣吴孝民来议和，钦宗命令李出使金军。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Jin army sent Wu Xiaomin to negotiate peace, and Qin Zong ordered Li to dispatch the Jin army.

古文：金人又使萧三宝奴、耶律忠、张愿恭来。
现代文：金军又派萧三宝奴、耶律忠、张愿恭来议和。
English: The Golden Army also sent Xiao Sanbao, Yerutzhong, and Zhang Jianxiong to negotiate peace.

古文：以吏部尚书唐恪同知枢密院事。
现代文：任命吏部尚书唐烙为同知枢密院事。
English: The appointment of the official Shangshu Tang as the Tongzhi Privy Councillor.

古文：乙亥，金人攻通津、景阳等门，李纲督战，自卯至酉，斩首数千级，何灌战死。
现代文：初九，金军攻打通津、景阳等门，李纲督战，自卯至酉，斩首数千级，何灌战死。
English: In the early 9th century, the Golden Army attacked Tongjin, Jingyang and other gates. Li Gangdu fought from Yu to Zou, decapitating thousands of levels, and He Gan died in battle.

古文：李棁与萧三宝奴、耶律忠、王汭来索金帛数千万，且求割太原、中山、河间三镇，并宰相、亲王为质，乃退师，丙子，避正殿，减常膳。
现代文：李与萧三宝奴、耶律忠、王一起到京城，金军索求金帛数千万，并且要求朝廷割让太原、中山、河间三镇，以及把宰相和亲王作为人质，才同意退军。初十，不到正殿，减少常用的饮食。
English: Li went to Beijing with Xiao Sanbo Nu, Yelutzhong and Wang. The Golden Army demanded tens of millions of gold ingots, and demanded that the imperial court cede Taiyuan, Zhongshan and the three towns of Kawama, as well as take the prime minister and the prince as hostages, before agreeing to withdraw. On the tenth day of the first month, they did not reach the main hall, and reduced their usual diet.

古文：括借金银，籍倡优家财。
现代文：括借金银，籍没倡优家财产。
English: He borrowed gold and silver, and did not inherit the property of the privileged family.

古文：庚辰，命张邦昌副康王构使金军，诏称金国加 大 字。
现代文：十四日，命令张邦昌陪同康王赵构出使金营，下诏称金国为大金国。
English: On the 14th, he ordered Zhang Bangchang to accompany Kang Wang Zhao to set up an envoy camp, and the next edict called Jin Guo Daikin Guo.

古文：辛巳，道君皇帝幸镇江。
现代文：十五日，道君皇帝到达镇江。
English: On the 15th, Emperor Daojun arrived in Zhenjiang.

古文：以兵部尚书路允迪签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命兵部尚书路允迪为签书枢密院事。
English: He appointed Shang Shullu Yundi from the Ministry of Military Affairs as the Privy Councillor to sign the document.

古文：金人陷阳武，知县事蒋兴祖死之。
现代文：金军攻陷阳武，知县事蒋兴祖战死。
English: The Chinese army invaded Yangwu, and the county magistrate, Chiang Xingzu, died in battle.

古文：壬午，大风走石，竟日乃止。
现代文：十六日，大风刮走石块，整整一天才停止。
English: On the sixteenth day, the wind blew away the stones, and it did not stop for a whole day.

古文：封子谌为大宁郡王。
现代文：封儿子赵堪为大宁郡王。
English: Fong's son, Zhao Kan, became the king of Danying County.

古文：甲申，省廉访使者官，罢钞旁定贴钱及诸州免行钱，以诸路赡学户绝田产归常平司。
现代文：十八日，省廉访使者官，罢除钞旁定贴钱及各州免行钱，把各路赡学户绝田产归到常平司。
English: On the 18th, the provincial anti-corruption envoy, removed the fixed money from the banknotes and the free money from each state, and transferred the support of the students from each road to the Changping Division.

古文：统制官马忠以京西募兵至，击金人于顺天门外，败之。
现代文：统制官马忠率京西募兵到达，在顺天门外出击金军，打败金兵。
English: The commanding officer Ma Zhong arrived in the west of Beijing to recruit soldiers, and went out to attack the Golden Army at Shuntianmen, defeating the Golden Army.

古文：乙酉，路允迪使粘罕军于河东。
现代文：十九日，路允迪到河东出使粘罕军营。
English: On the 19th, Lu Yundi sent an envoy to the Mu Han military camp in Hedong.

古文：平阳府将刘嗣初以城叛。
现代文：平阳府将领刘嗣初据城叛宋。
English: Liu Zhi, the general of Pingyang, was the first to rebel against the Song Dynasty.

古文：丁亥，靖难军节度使、河北河东路制置使种师道督泾原、秦凤兵入援，以师道同知枢密院事，为京畿、河北、河东宣抚使，统四方勤王兵及前后军。
现代文：二十一日，静难军节度使、河北河东路制置使种师道督促径原、秦凤兵马人援京师，任命种师道为同知枢密院事，为京瓷、河北、河东宣抚使，统率各地勤王兵和前后军。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, the Jingnan Army's festival envoy, the East Hedong Road of Hebei Province's establishment of the envoy to urge the Qianyuan, the Qin Feng soldiers and horses to support the Beijing division, and the appointment of the envoy to the Tongzhi Privy Council, the Kyocera, Hebei, and Hedong Province's envoy, and the command of the royalist soldiers and the front and rear armies in various regions.

古文：庚寅，盗杀王黼于雍丘。
现代文：二十四日，王敞在雍丘被人杀死。
English: On the 24th, Wang Chang was killed in Yongqiu.

古文：癸巳，大雾四塞。
现代文：二十七日，大雾弥漫四周。
English: On the 27th, the fog was thick all around.

古文：乙未，贬少保、淮南节度使梁师成为彰化军节度副使，行及八角镇，赐死。
现代文：二十九日，贬少保、淮南节度使梁师成为彰化军节度副使，走到八角镇，被赐死。
English: On the 29th day of the month, Liang Shih, who was demoted from the position of Minor Protector of Huainan to the position of Vice-Envoy of Changhua Army, went to Bajiao Town and was sentenced to death.

古文：二月丁酉朔，命都统制姚平仲将兵夜袭金人军，不克而奔。
现代文：二月初一，命令都统制姚平仲率兵夜袭金军军营，没有成功，退走。
English: On the first day of February, Yao Pingzhong, who commanded the capital, led his troops to attack the camp of the Jin army at night. They were not successful and withdrew.

古文：戊戌，罢李纲以谢金人，废亲征行营司。
现代文：初二，罢免李纲的职务，用来回谢金军，废除亲征行营司。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, Li Gang was dismissed from his post, which was used to return thanks to the Golden Army and abolish the personal enlistment battalion.

古文：金人复来议和。
现代文：金军又来议和。
English: The Chinese army again came to negotiate peace.

古文：庚子，命附马都尉曹晟使金军。
现代文：初四，命令驹马都尉曹晨出使金军。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the year, he ordered Lieutenant Cao Chen to dispatch the gold army.

古文：辛丑，又命资政殿大学士宇文虚中、知东上阁门事王球使之，许割三镇地。
现代文：初五，又命令资政殿大学士宁文粹中、知东上阎门事王球出使金营，答应割让三镇土地。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, he also ordered the vice-president of the University of Shining Literature, Zhidong Shangyanmen, to send money to the camp and promised to cede the land of the three towns.

古文：太学诸生陈东等及都民数万人伏阙上书，请复用李纲及种师道，且言李邦彦等疾纲，恐其成功，罢纲正堕金人之计。
现代文：太学生陈东等人和京城百姓数万人到朝廷上书，请求重新任用李纲和种师道，并且说李邦彦等人嫉恨李纲，恐怕李纲成功，罢除李纲正合金军心愿。
English: The student Chen Dong and tens of thousands of people in Beijing sent a letter to the imperial court, requesting the reappointment of Li Gang and the appointment of a teacher, and said that Li Bangyan and others were jealous of Li Gang, I am afraid that Li Gang will succeed, and the removal of Li Gang is the wish of the military.

古文：会邦彦入朝，众数其罪而骂。
现代文：恰逢李邦彦上朝，人们历数他的罪行，痛骂他。
English: It coincided with Li Bangyan's ascension to the throne. People recounted his crimes and reviled him.

古文：吴敏传宣，众不退，遂挝登闻鼓，山呼动地。
现代文：吴敏传达皇上命令，人们仍然不退散，于是敲击登闻鼓，山呼动地。
English: Wu Min conveyed the emperor's order, but the people still did not disperse, so they beat the Dengwen Drum, and the mountain shook violently.

古文：殿帅王宗濋恐生变，奏上勉从之。
现代文：殿帅王宗楚恐怕出现变乱，奏请钦宗勉强答应人们的要求。
English: The commander of the palace, Wang Zongchu, was afraid that there would be turmoil, so he asked Qin Zong to reluctantly agree to the people's request.

古文：遣耿南仲号于众曰： 已得旨宣纲矣。 
现代文：派遣耿南仲大声告诉大家说： 已经得到皇上命令召用李纲。 
English: The dispatcher, Geng Nanzhong, told everyone in a loud voice, "We have received the emperor's order to summon Li Gang.

古文：内侍朱拱之宣纲后期，众脔而磔之，并杀内侍数十人。
现代文：内侍朱拱之宣布李纲没有按时到，人们把他碎尸万段，并杀死内侍数十人。
English: When the palace attendant Zhu Gong announced that Li Gang had not arrived on time, people cut up his body into thousands of pieces and killed dozens of palace attendants.

古文：乃复纲右丞，充京城防御使。
现代文：于是才恢复李纲尚书右承职务，担任京城防御使。
English: As a result, Li Gang was reinstated as the successor to Shang Shuxu and served as the capital defense envoy.

古文：壬寅，追封范仲淹魏国公，赠司马光太师，张商英太保，除元祐党籍学术之禁。
现代文：初六，追封范仲淹为魏国公，赠司马光为太师，张商英为太保，废除对元党籍学术的禁止。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, Fan Zhongran was posthumously awarded the title of Wei Guogong, Sima Guang was awarded the title of Taishi, and Zhang Shangying was awarded the title of Taibo, and the ban on academic Yuan Party membership was abolished.

古文：诏诛士民杀内侍为首者，禁伏阙上书，废苑囿宫观可以与民者。
现代文：下诏诛杀士民杀死内侍的带头人，禁止到朝廷上书，废除可以归还人们的苑囿宫观。金军派使臣王来。
English: Under the edict, it was forbidden to kill the leaders of the courtiers who killed the courtiers, it was forbidden to write to the imperial court, and it was abolished that people could return to the view of the palace. The Jin army sent an envoy to the king.

古文：金人使王汭来。
现代文：初七，命令肃王赵枢出使金军。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, he ordered the king of Su, Zhao Zu, to dispatch the gold army.

古文：癸卯，命肃王枢使金军。以观文殿学士、大名尹徐处仁为中书侍郎，宇文虚中签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命观文殿学士、大名府尹徐处仁为中书侍郎，宁文粹中为签书枢密院事。
English: He appointed the scholar of the Academy of Confucius and the Daimyofu, Yin Xudanren, as the secretary of the Chinese book, and Ning Wenzhong as the secretary of the Privy Council for signing the book.

古文：蔡懋罢。
现代文：蔡愈罢职。
English: Cai Yu stepped down.

古文：乙巳，宇文虚中、王球复使金军。
现代文：初九，宁文虚中、王球又出使金军。
English: On the 9th day of the 9th month, while Ning Wenxu was in the middle, Wang Qiu sent out the Golden Army again.

古文：康王至自金军。
现代文：康王从金军营回到京师。
English: King Kang returned to the capital from the Jin camp.

古文：金人遣韩光裔来告辞，遂退师，京师解严。
现代文：金军派韩光裔来告辞，于是退兵，京师解除了戒严。
English: The Chinese army sent Han Guangyuan to bid farewell, then withdrew, and the Beijing division lifted the martial law.

古文：丙午，康王构为太傅、静江奉宁军节度使。
现代文：初十，命令康王赵构为太傅、静江奉宁军节度使。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, he ordered Kang Wang Zhao Jie to be the Taifu, and Jingjiang Bongning Army to be the festival envoy.

古文：省明堂班朔布政官。
现代文：精减明堂班朔布政官。
English: Jingyuan Mingtang Banshuo clothed as a politician.

古文：丁未，日有两珥。
现代文：十一日，太阳周围出现两道光气。
English: On the 11th day, two rays of light appeared around the sun.

古文：戊申，赦天下。
现代文：十二日，赦免全国。
English: On the 12th, the amnesty was extended to the whole country.

古文：诏谕士民，自今庶事并遵用祖宗旧制，凡蠹国害民之事，一切寝罢。
现代文：诏谕士民，自今以后国家一切事务一律遵照祖宗旧制办理，凡是蠢国害民之事一律停止、废除。
English: He issued an edict to the scholars and the people that from now on, all affairs of the country would be handled in accordance with the old system of the ancestors, and all the things that harmed the people of the country would be stopped and abolished.

古文：己酉，罢宰执兼神霄玉清万寿宫使及殿中监、符宝郎。
现代文：十三日，罢除宰执兼神霄玉清万寿宫使及殿中监、符宝郎。
English: On the thirteenth day, the chief steward and messenger of Shinsyo Tamakiyo Manju-gu Shrine, as well as the palace overseer and the treasure hunter were dismissed.

古文：诏用祖宗故事，择武臣得军心者为同知、签书枢密院，边将有威望者为三衙。
现代文：下诏按照祖宗规章制度，选择得军心的武臣为同知、签书枢密院，有威望的边将为三衙统帅。
English: The following edict, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the ancestors, selects the warriors who have won the hearts of the army as the confidants and signatories of the Privy Council, and the prestigious side will be the commander of the three armies.

古文：以金人请和，诏官民昔尝附金而复归本朝者，各还其乡国。
现代文：因金朝请求讲和，下诏官民从前曾经依附金朝而复归本朝的人，各自回到原来的地方。
English: At the request of the Kim dynasty to make peace, the government and people who had previously supported the Kim dynasty and returned to their own country were ordered to return to their original places.

古文：庚戌，李邦彦罢，以张邦昌为太宰兼门下侍郎，吴敏为少宰兼中书侍郎，李纲知枢密院事，耿南仲为尚书左丞，李棁为尚书右丞。
现代文：十四日，李邦彦被免，任命张邦昌为太宰兼门下侍郎，吴敏为少宰兼中书侍郎，李纲知枢密院事，耿南仲为尚书左承，李为尚书右承。
English: On the 14th, Li Bangyan was dismissed, and Zhang Bangchang was appointed as Dazai and attendant, Wu Min as Shanzai and attendant, Li Gangzhi as Privy Councillor, Geng Nanzhong as left successor of Shangshu, and Li as right successor of Shangshu.

古文：辛亥，诏监察御史言事如祖宗法。
现代文：十五日，下诏监察御史言事如祖宗法。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, the following edict was issued:

古文：宇文粹中罢知江宁府。
现代文：宁文粹中罢为江宁知府。
English: Ningwenzhou became Jiangning Prefecture in the Middle Ages.

古文：癸丑，种师道罢为中太一宫使。
现代文：十七日，种师道罢为中太一宫使。
English: On the seventeenth day, he was promoted to the position of Chutai Ichinomiya envoy.

古文：赠右正言陈瓘为右谏议大夫。
现代文：赠右正言陈酵为右谏议大夫。
English: The Right Honourable Chen Ye was awarded the title of Right Honourable Doctor.

古文：甲寅，贬太师致仕蔡京为秘书监、分局南京，太师、广阳郡王童贯为左卫上将军，太保、领枢密院事蔡攸为太中大夫、提举亳州明道宫。
现代文：十八日，以太师职衔退休的蔡京被贬为秘书监，安置南京，太师、广阳郡王童贯贬为左卫上将军，太保、领枢密院事蔡枚为太中大夫、提举毫州明道宫。
English: On the 18th, Cai Jing, who retired with the title of ether master, was demoted to secretary supervisor and placed in Nanjing, while the ether master and Wang Tongjun of Guangyang County were demoted to the general of the Left Division, and the ether guard and the secretary of the Imperial Privy Council, Cai Mian, were demoted to the junior doctor of the imperial court and promoted to the Mianzhou Mingdao Palace.

古文：先是，粘罕遣人来求赂，大臣以勤王兵大集，拘其使人，且结约余睹以图之。
现代文：原来，粘罕派人前来贿赂，大臣以勤王兵全部集结，拘留了金军使臣，并且结约余睹图谋金军。
English: Originally, Mui Han sent people to bribe, and the minister gathered all the loyal soldiers, detained the envoys of the Golden Army, and made an agreement to conspire with the Golden Army.

古文：至是，粘罕怒，及攻太原不克，分兵趣京师，过南、北关，权威胜军李植以城降。
现代文：到这时，粘罕恼怒，进攻太原久攻不克，于是分兵赶赴京师，过南、北关，代理威胜军李植据城投降。
English: At this time, he was irritated and the attack on Taiyuan did not succeed for a long time, so the detachment rushed to the Beijing Division, passed the South and the North Pass, and the agent of the victorious army, Li Shizheng, surrendered.

古文：乙卯，陷隆德府，知府张确、通判赵伯臻、司录张彦遹死之。
现代文：十九日，攻陷隆德府，知府张确、通判赵伯臻、司录张彦战死。
English: On the 19th, Longdefu was captured, and the governor Zhang Ji, the judge Zhao Bozhen, and the recorder Zhang Yan died in the battle.

古文：丙辰，有二流星，一出张宿入浊没，一出北河入轸。
现代文：二十日，有二颗流星，一颗出张宿进人浊星而消失，一颗出北河星进人较宿。
English: On the 20th, there were two meteors. One went out of Zhangye and entered Renren and disappeared, and one went out of Beihe and entered Renren.

古文：己未，诏遥郡承宣使有功应除正任者，自今除正任刺史。
现代文：二十三日，下诏边远州郡承宣使有功应当授给正式官职的人，从今以后任命为刺史。
English: On the 23rd, the outlying prefectures issued the edict that those who have made meritorious contributions should be awarded official posts, and henceforth be appointed to the post of chief historian.

古文：辛酉，梁方平坐弃河津，伏诛。
现代文：二十五日，梁方平因放弃黄河渡口不守被处以死刑。
English: On the 25th, Liang Fangping was sentenced to death for abandoning the Yellow River ferry.

古文：王孝迪罢。
现代文：王孝迪被罢免。
English: Wang Xiaodi was dismissed.

古文：命给事中王云、侍卫亲军马军都指挥使曹曚使金国，镇洮军节度使、中太乙宫使种师道为河北、河东路宣抚使，保静军节度使、殿前副都指挥使姚古为制置使。
现代文：命令给事中王云、侍卫亲军马军都指挥使曹蒙出使金国，镇姚军节度使、中太乙宫使种师道为河北、河东路宣抚使，保静军节度使、殿前副都指挥使姚古为制置使。
English: The order was given that Wang Yun of the Central Military Commission, the commander of the bodyguards of the pro-army Ma Junjun, sent Cao Meng as the envoy to Jin Province, the commander of the Zhenyao Army as the envoy to the festival, the commander of the Zhongtaiyitong Army as the envoy to the Hebei and Hedong Road, the commander of the Bo Jing Army as the envoy to the festival, and the deputy commander of the palace front as the envoy to the Yao Gu.

古文：乙丑，御殿复膳。
现代文：二十九日，开始上殿，恢复饮食。
English: On the 29th, he began to go to the temple and resume eating.

古文：丙寅，下哀痛之诏于陕西、河东。
现代文：三十日，向陕西、河东下发哀痛诏书。
English: On the 30th, an official letter of condolence was sent to Shaanxi and Hedong provinces.

古文：是月，金人犯泽州之高平，知州高世由往犒之，乃去。
现代文：这个月，金军进攻泽州的高平，知州高世由前去搞劳金军，金兵才退去。
English: This month, the gold army attacked Gaoping in Zezhou, and Chizhou Gaosei went forward to engage the gold army, and the gold army only retreated.

古文：三月丁卯朔，遣徽猷阁待制宋焕奉表道君皇帝行宫。
现代文：三月初一，派遣徽酞阁待制宋焕奉表道君皇帝行宫。
English: On the first day of March, Song Huan, the emperor of Hubei, was sent to the imperial palace.

古文：诏侍从言事。
现代文：下诏侍从官上书言事。
English: The following is a transcript of the official's speech.

古文：诏非三省、枢密院所奉旨，诸司不许奉行。
现代文：下诏不是三省、枢密院所签署的命令各部门不许奉行。
English: The following edict is not an order signed by the three provinces and the Privy Council, and departments are not allowed to follow it.

古文：罢川路岁所遣使。
现代文：罢除川路每年派遣使臣。
English: Every year, envoys were dispatched to remove Kawaji.

古文：募人掩军民遗骸，遣使分就四郊致祭。
现代文：招募人掩埋军民尸体，派人在京城四郊祭奠。
English: Recruit people to bury the bodies of soldiers and civilians, and send people to the four suburbs of Beijing to pay tribute.

古文：戊辰，李棁罢为鸿庆宫使。
现代文：初二，李罢为鸿庆宫使。
English: In the second year of junior high school, Li became an envoy of Hongqing Palace.

古文：己巳，张邦昌罢为中太一宫使。
现代文：初三，张邦昌罢为中太一宫使。
English: In the third year of junior high school, Zhang Bangchang became the ambassador of the Chinese emperor.

古文：徐处仁为太宰兼门下侍郎，唐恪为中书侍郎，翰林学士何为尚书右丞，御史中丞许翰同知枢密院事。
现代文：徐处仁为太宰兼门下侍郎，唐烙为中书侍郎，翰林学士何镐为尚书右承，御史中承许翰为同知枢密院事。
English: Xu Zhandren was the Dazai and the attendant of his disciple, Tang Yao was the attendant of the middle school, Hanlin Baccalaureate He Yao was the right successor of Shang Shuxu, and Gu Shizhong Cheng Xu Han was the Tongzhi Privy Councilor.

古文：庚午，宇文虚中罢知青州。
现代文：初四，宁文虚中罢为青州知州。
English: In the fourth year of junior high school, Ning Wenxu dropped out of middle school and went to Chizhou, Qingzhou.

古文：癸酉，诣景灵东宫行恭谢礼。
现代文：初七，到景灵东宫行恭谢礼。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, they went to Jingling East Palace to pay their respects.

古文：命赵野为道君皇帝行宫奉迎使。
现代文：命令赵野为道君皇帝行宫奉迎使。
English: He ordered Zhao Ye to welcome Emperor Daojun to the palace.

古文：甲戌，恭谢景灵西宫及建隆观。
现代文：初八，恭谢景灵西宫及建隆观。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, congratulations to Jingling Xi Gong and Jian Longguan.

古文：乙亥，诣阳德观、凝祥池、中太乙宫、佑神观、相国寺。
现代文：初九，到阳德观、凝样池、中太一宫、佑神观、相国寺。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, I went to Yangde Guan, Jiechi Pond, Zhongtaiyi Temple, You Shen Guan, and Shokoku Temple.

古文：丙子，改撷景园为宁德宫。
现代文：初十，改撷景园为宁德宫。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1st year of the 1

古文：录司马光后。
现代文：录用司马光后代。
English: The descendants of Sima Guang were hired.

古文：己卯，燕王俣、越王偲为太师。
现代文：十三日，燕王赵误、越王赵为太师。
English: On the 13th, Yan Wang Zhao Mei and Yue Wang Zhao became grand masters.

古文：壬午，诏金人叛盟深入，其元主和议李邦彦、奉使许地李棁、李邺、郑望之悉行罢黜。
现代文：十六日，下诏：金军背弃盟约，侵略中原，原来力主议和的代表人物李邦彦、奉使许地李和李邺、郑望之全部罢默。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: the gold army had reneged on the treaty and invaded the Central Plains. Li Bangyan, the representative who had originally advocated peace, and the envoys Xu Di, Li He, and Zheng Wang all remained silent.

古文：又诏种师道、姚古、种师中往援三镇，保塞陵寝所在，誓当固守。
现代文：又下诏种师道、姚古、种师中率军前往救援三镇，保塞陵寝所在地，应当坚决守卫。
English: He also issued an order that the seed division of Dao, Yao Gu, and the seed division of the middle army should go to the rescue of the three towns and guard the location of the Mausoleum, and should resolutely guard it.

古文：癸未，遣李纲迎道君皇帝于南京，以徐处仁为礼仪使。
现代文：十七日，派遣李纲到南京迎奉道君皇帝，任命徐处仁为礼仪使。
English: On the 17th, Li Gang was sent to Nanjing to welcome Emperor Feng Daojun, and appointed Xu Zhandren as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：殿中侍御史李擢、左司谏李会罢。
现代文：殿中侍御史李摺、左司谏李会被罢免。
English: The palace chamberlains, Shi Li Suri and Zuo Si, were removed from their posts.

古文：乙酉，迎道君皇帝于宜春苑，太后入居宁德宫。
现代文：十九日，在宜春苑迎奉道君皇帝，太后人居宁德宫。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Bong Doojun was welcomed in Yichun Court, and the Empress Dowager lived in Ningde Palace.

古文：丙戌，知中山府詹度为资政殿大学士，知太原府张孝纯、知河间府陈遘并为资政殿学士，知泽州高世由直龙图阁，赏城守之劳也。
现代文：二十日，提升中山知府詹度为资政殿大学士，太原知府张孝纯、河间知府陈遵并为资政殿学士，泽州知州高世由直龙图阁，以奖赏他们守城的功劳。
English: On the 20th, Zhongshan Prefecture's Zhandu was promoted to Senior Scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics, Taiyuan Prefecture's Zhang Xiaozhun and Kawama Prefecture's Chen Zun were promoted to Senior Scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics, and Zhezhou Prefecture's Gaoshe was promoted to Senior Scholar of the Palace of Capital and Politics by Zhi Long Tu Ge, as a reward for their efforts in defending the city.

古文：丁亥，朝于宁德宫，诏扈从行宫官吏，候还京日优加赏典，除有罪之人迫于公议已行遣外，余令台谏勿复用前事纠言。
现代文：二十一日，朝拜宁德宫。下诏： 启从行宫官吏，等到回京城后优加奖赏；除有罪的人，迫于公议已经处罚贬遣的外，其他人命令台谏不要因前事弹勃他们。 
English: On the twenty-first day, they paid homage to Ningde Palace. The following edict was issued: The officials who had been sent to the palace were to be rewarded when they returned to Beijing; except for the guilty ones, who had been punished and demoted due to public opinion, the others ordered the emperor not to beat them because of the past.

古文：庚寅，肃王枢为太傅。
现代文：二十四日，任命肃王赵枢为太傅。
English: On the 24th, Su Wang Zhao Zu was appointed as the Grand Master.

古文：姚古复隆德府。
现代文：姚古收复隆德府。
English: Yao Gu recovered Longdefu.

古文：辛卯，复威胜军。
现代文：二十五日，收复威胜军。
English: On the 25th, the victorious army was recovered.

古文：壬辰，太保景王杞、济王栩为太傅。
现代文：二十六日，太保景王枷巳、济王赵栩为太傅。
English: On the 26th, Taibo King Jing and King Zhao were promoted to taifu.

古文：有流星出紫微垣。
现代文：有流星出现在紫微垣。
English: A meteor appeared in Zi Weigaki.

古文：甲午，康王构为集庆、建雄军节度使，尚书户部侍郎钱盖为陕西制置使。
现代文：二十八日，任命康王赵构为集庆、建雄军节度使，尚书户部侍郎钱盖为陕西制置使。
English: On the 28th, Kang Wang Zhao Jie was appointed as the festival envoy of the Jiuqing and Jianxiong armies, and Shang Shuhou's household attendant Qian Gai was appointed as the Shaanxi envoy.

古文：命陈东初品官，赐同进士出身，辞不拜。
现代文：命令陈东为初品宫，赐给同进士出身，推辞不接受。
English: Chen Dong was ordered to be the first prize palace, given to students from the same class, and his resignation was not accepted.

古文：籍朱勔家。
现代文：籍没未豹家产。
English: He was born into a poor family.

古文：乙未，诏金归朝官民未发遣者，止之。
现代文：二十九日，下诏：金国归朝官民没有动身的，停止发遣。
English: On the 29th, the following edict was issued: If the officials and citizens who returned to the DPRK have not yet departed, stop sending them.

古文：丙申，贬蔡京为崇信军节度副使。
现代文：三十日，贬蔡京为崇信军节度副使。
English: On the 30th, Cai Jing was demoted to vice-envoy of the Song Dynasty for the Chongxin Army.

古文：是春，夏人取天德、云内、武州及河东八馆。
现代文：这年春天，夏军攻取天德、云内、武州及河东八馆。
English: In the spring of that year, Xia's army captured Tiande, Yunnan, Wuzhou and the Eight Pavilion of Hedong.

古文：夏四月戊戌，夏人陷震威城，摄知城事朱昭死之。
现代文：夏四月初二，夏军攻陷震威城，摄知城事朱昭战死。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of the summer, Xia's army captured Zhenwei City, and Zhu Zhao died in the battle.

古文：己亥，迎太上皇帝入都门。
现代文：初三，迎奉太上皇帝进人都门。
English: On the third day of junior high school, everyone entered the gate to welcome the new Empress Dowager.

古文：壬寅，朝于龙德宫。
现代文：初六，朝拜龙德宫。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the lunar calendar, the Longde Palace is worshipped.

古文：癸卯，立子谌为皇太子。
现代文：初七，立儿子赵堪为皇太子。
English: On the seventh day of his junior year, he made his son Zhao Kan the crown prince.

古文：耿南仲为门下侍郎。
现代文：任耿南仲为门下侍郎。
English: He was appointed as Geng Nanchu's personal attendant.

古文：乙巳，置《春秋》博士。
现代文：初九，设置春和博士。
English: On the first day of the ninth month, spring and graduation ceremonies are held.

古文：戊申，置详议司于尚书省，讨论祖宗法。
现代文：十二日，在尚书省设置详议司，讨论祖宗法。
English: On the 12th, the Detailed Discussion Division was set up in Shangshu Province to discuss the Ancestral Law.

古文：己酉，乾龙节，群臣上寿于紫宸殿。
现代文：十三日，乾龙节，大臣们在紫哀殿祝寿。
English: On the 13th, the Qianlong Festival, the ministers celebrated their birthdays at the Purple Shrine.

古文：庚戌，赵野罢。
现代文：十四日，赵野被罢免。
English: On the 14th, Zhao Ye was dismissed.

古文：壬子，金人使贾霆、冉企弓来。
现代文：十六日，金国派贾霆、冉企弓来。
English: On the 16th, Jin Guo sent Jia Ting and Ran Qiyu.

古文：癸丑，封太师、沂国公郑绅为乐平郡王。
现代文：十七日，封太师、沂国公郑绅为乐平郡王。
English: On the seventeenth day, Fong Taishi and Zheng Sheng, the prince of Shandong Province, became the king of Leping County.

古文：贬童贯为昭化军节度副使、安置郴州。
现代文：贬童贯为昭化军节度副使，安置郴州。
English: Dang Tong Rong became the vice-envoy of the Shaohua Army and was stationed in Zhangzhou.

古文：减宰执俸给三之一及支赐之半。
现代文：减少宰执棒给的三分之一和支赐的一半。
English: Decrease the amount given by the ruler by one-third and the amount of support by one-half.

古文：诏开经筵。
现代文：下诏开设经筵。
English: He issued the following edict to open Jingzhu.

古文：令吏部稽考庶官，凡由杨戬、李彦之公田，王黼、朱勔之应奉，童贯西北之师，孟昌龄河防之役，夔蜀、湖南之开疆，关陕、河东之改币，及近习所引，献颂可采，特赴殿试之流，所爵赏，悉夺之。
现代文：命令吏部考核庶官，凡是因杨戮、李彦搜刮公田，王敞、未疏的应奉局，童贯在西北兴师，孟昌龄河防之役，夔蜀、湖南开疆，关陕、河东改币，以及近习引荐，献颂可采，特赴殿试之流，所得到的官爵和赏赐，全部削夺。
English: He ordered the cadre department to evaluate the lower-ranking officials, and all the titles and rewards obtained by Yang Jian and Li Yan for searching the public land, Wang Jian and Wang Shou for serving the government, Tong Quan for establishing a division in the northwest, Meng Changling for the defense of the river, Gong Shu, Hunan for opening the frontier, Guan Shan, and Hedong for changing the currency, as well as the titles and rewards obtained by being recommended by the cadres, praised by the cadres, and specially sent to the palace for trial were all taken away.

古文：甲寅，种师道加太尉、同知枢密院事、河北河东路宣抚使。
现代文：十八日，种师道加官太尉、同知枢密院事、河北河东路宣抚使。
English: On the 18th, the chief breeder, Dao Jia, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and Hebei Hedong Road was promoted to the position of envoy.

古文：乙卯，诏自今假日特坐，百司毋得休务。
现代文：十九日，下诏：从今以后节假日照常办公，各部门不得休息。
English: On the 19th, the following edict was issued: From now on, the office will be open as usual on holidays, and all departments are not allowed to take a break.

古文：以平凉军节度使范讷为右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：任命平凉军节度使范呐为右金吾卫上将军。
English: He appointed Fan Na, the commander of the Pingliang Army, as the Supreme Commander of the Right Wing of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：丙辰，诏有告奸人妄言金人复至以恐动居民者，赏之。
现代文：二十日，下诏：有告发奸人妄言金军又到导致居民骚动的人，予以奖赏。
English: On the 20th, the following edict was issued: Those who reported traitors who made false claims that the Golden Army had arrived and caused disturbances among the residents were to be rewarded.

古文：戊午，进封南康郡王栻为和王，平阳郡王榛为信王。
现代文：二十二日，进封南康郡王越试为和王，平阳郡王赵棒为信王。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Yuexian of Nankang County, Jinfeng, was crowned as the Prince of Peace, and Wang Zhaobang of Pingyang County was crowned as the Prince of Faith.

古文：己未，复以诗赋取士，禁用《庄》、《老》及王安石《字说》。
现代文：二十三日，又以诗赋取士，禁止采纳在于、老开及王安石序说中的学说。
English: On the 23rd, he sent a poem to the scholars, forbidding the adoption of the doctrines in the Lu, Lao Kai and Wang An Shi sequence.

古文：壬戌，诏亲擢台谏官，宰执勿得荐举，著为令。
现代文：二十六日，下诏：由皇上亲自提拔台谏官，宰执不要荐举，颁布为法令。
English: On the 26th, the following edict was issued: The emperor should personally promote the eunuchs, and the chief should not recommend them, and it was promulgated as a decree.

古文：追政和以来道官、处士、先生封赠奏补等敕书。
现代文：追回政和以来道官、处士、先生封赠奏补等救书。
English: Since the restoration of political peace, the magistrates, clerks, and teachers have all donated supplementary relief materials.

古文：甲子，令在京监察御史、在外监司、郡守及路分钤辖已上，举曾经边任或有武勇可以统众出战者，人二员。
现代文：二十八日，命令在京的监察御史，在朝廷外的监司、郡守及路分铃辖以上官员，推荐曾经在边境任职或者是武勇过人可以率领军队作战的人，每人推举二名。
English: On the 28th, he ordered the supervising magistrate in Beijing and the supervising magistrate, county governor, and officials at or above the sub-district of Lu outside the imperial court to recommend two people who had served at the border or were too brave to lead the army in battle.

古文：东兵正将占沆与金人战于交城县，死之。
现代文：东兵正将占杭在交城县与金军作战，战死。
English: The eastern soldiers were fighting against the Chinese army in Jiaocheng County and were killed in battle.

古文：乙丑，诏三衙并诸路帅司各举谙练边事、智勇过人并豪俊奇杰、众所推服、堪充统制将领者各五名。
现代文：二十九日，下诏三衙及各路帅司分别荐举熟悉边事、智勇过人，并且为豪俊奇杰所推服可以统制将领的人五名。
English: On the 29th, the following three generals and commanders-in-chief separately recommended five people who were familiar with local affairs, had superior wisdom and courage, and were recommended by Gao Jun Qijie as people who could control the generals.

古文：贬蔡攸节度副使，安置朱勔于循州。
现代文：贬蔡枚为节度副使，籽豹安置循州。
English: Cai Mei was demoted to vice-minister of discipline, and Cai Jiao was placed in Xuzhou.

古文：五月丙寅朔，朝于龙德宫，令提举官日具太上皇帝起居平安以闻。
现代文：五月初一，朝拜龙德宫，命令提举官每天报告太上皇帝起居平安情况。
English: On the first day of May, he ordered the officials in charge of the Longde Palace to report to him every day on the emperor's safe living conditions.

古文：丁卯，诏天下有能以财谷佐军者，有司以名闻，推恩有差。
现代文：初二，下诏全国有能用财谷辅助军队的人，有关部门把他们的名字上报朝廷，给予不等的恩惠。
English: On the second day of the first month of the year, the emperor decreed that there were people throughout the country who could use their wealth to support the army, and the relevant departments reported their names to the imperial court and gave them various favors.

古文：以少傅、镇西军节度余深为特进、观文殿大学士。
现代文：任命少傅、镇西军节度使余深为特进、观文殿大学士。
English: The appointment of a young foreman and the Zhenxi Military Festival made Yu Sheng a special promotion and a scholar of the Guanwen Temple.

古文：戊辰，罢王安石配享孔子庙庭。
现代文：初三，罢除王安石配享孔子庙庭。
English: On the third day of the new year, Wang Anshi was removed from his post and given the Confucius Temple garden.

古文：庚午，少傅、安武军节度使钱景臻，镇安军节度使、开府仪同三司刘宗元并为左金吾卫上将军。
现代文：初五，少傅、安武军节度使钱景臻，镇安军节度使、开府仪同三司刘宗元，并为左金吾卫上将军。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Qian Jingzhen, the young master and the commander of the Anwu Army Festival, and Liu Zongyuan, the commander of the Zhen'an Army Festival and the leader of the opening ceremony and the third secretary, were promoted to the general of the Left King Wuwei.

古文：保信军节度使刘敷、武成军节度使刘敏、向德军节度使张楙、岳阳军节度使王舜臣、应道军节度度使朱孝孙、泸川军节度使钱忱并为右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：保信军节度使刘敷、武成军节度使刘敏、向德军节度使张增、岳阳军节度使王舜臣、应道军节度使朱孝孙、沪川军节度使钱忱并为右金吾卫上将军。
English: Liu Shiki was appointed to the festival of the Hosshin Army, Liu Min to the festival of the Wucheng Army, Zhang Zeng to the festival of the German Army, Wang Xiancheng to the festival of the Yueyang Army, Zhu Xiaosun to the festival of the Yingtao Army, Qian Zhen to the festival of the Huchuan Army, and he was appointed to the general of the Right Jingu Wei.

古文：是日，寒。
现代文：这天，寒冷。
English: On this day, it was cold.

古文：辛未，申铜禁。
现代文：初六，重申铜禁命令。
English: On the sixth day of the month, the copper ban order was reiterated.

古文：诏：无出身待制已上，年及三十而通历任实及十年者，乃得任子。
现代文：下诏：没有出身的待制以上官员，年龄三十岁连续任官达到十年的，才能享受恩荫待遇。
English: The following edict: for officials above the age of thirty who have been continuously appointed for ten years and have no family background, they can only enjoy preferential treatment.

古文：监察御史余应求坐言事迎合大臣，罢知卫州。
现代文：监察御史余应求因言事迎合大臣，罢为卫州知州。
English: Supervisor Mishi Yu should demand that the minister be pandered to because of his words and deeds, and he should be dismissed as the chizhou of Weizhou.

古文：甲戌，曲赦河北路。
现代文：初九，因特殊情况赦免河北路。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Hebei Road was pardoned due to special circumstances.

古文：乙亥，申销金禁。
现代文：初十，重新下发以金饰物的禁令。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the ban on gold ornaments was re-issued.

古文：丁丑，诏以俭约先天下，澄冗汰贪，为民除害，授监司、郡县奉行所未及者，凡十有六事。
现代文：十二日，下诏全国以俭约为先，澄洗冗员，裁汰贪官，为民除害，重申先前下达给监司、郡县施行而尚未奉行的共十六件事。
English: On the 12th, the following edict was issued to the whole country to take frugality as the first priority, clear out redundant personnel, eliminate corrupt officials, and eliminate harm to the people, reiterating a total of 16 matters that had previously been issued to supervisors and counties but had not yet been implemented.

古文：姚古将兵至威胜，闻粘罕将至，众惊溃，河东大振。
现代文：姚古率兵到威胜，听说粘罕即将到达，士兵惊溃，河东大为震动。
English: Yao Gu led the troops to Weisheng, heard that Mu Han was about to arrive, the soldiers were stunned, and Hedong was greatly shaken.

古文：河北、河东路制置副使种师中与金人战于榆次，死之。
现代文：河北、河东路制置副使种师中在榆次与金军作战，战死。
English: He was killed in the battle with the Chinese army in Xuji, Hebei Province, when he was a member of the vice-envoy seed division set up on Hedong Road.

古文：己卯，借外任官职田一年。
现代文：十四日，借给外任官员职田一年。
English: On the 14th, he loaned Uchida to a foreign official for one year.

古文：开府仪同三司高俅卒。
现代文：开府仪同三司高球去世。
English: Kaifu Yi passed away at the same time as the third division of high school basketball.

古文：辛巳，损太官日进膳。
现代文：十六日，减少太官每天进膳次数。
English: On the 16th, reduce the number of times the eunuch eats meals every day.

古文：追削高俅官。
现代文：追削高球官职。
English: Pursuit of high-ball official position.

古文：甲申，罢详议司。
现代文：十九日，罢除详议司。
English: On the 19th, the detailed discussion division was dismissed.

古文：己丑，以河东经略安抚使张孝纯为检校少保、武当军节度使。
现代文：二十四日，任命河东经略安抚使张孝纯为检校少保、武当军节度使。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Zhang Xiaochun, the Minister of Economic Affairs and Trade of Hedong Province, as the junior guard of the inspection and inspection of schools, and the senior envoy of the Wudang Army Festival.

古文：壬辰，诏天下举习武艺、兵书者。
现代文：二十七日，下诏全国推荐精习武艺、兵书的人。
English: On the 27th, it issued a nationwide recommendation for people to study martial arts and military books.

古文：乙未，诏姚古援太原。
现代文：三十日，诏命姚古救援太原。
English: On the 30th, the emperor ordered Yao Gu to rescue Taiyuan.

古文：六月丙申朔，以道君皇帝还朝，御紫宸殿，受群臣朝贺。
现代文：六月初一，因道君皇帝回到朝廷，钦宗到紫哀殿，接受大臣们的朝拜和祝贺。
English: On the first day of June, Emperor Daojun returned to the imperial court, and Jin Zong went to the Purple Shrine to receive the worship and congratulations of the ministers.

古文：诏谏官极论阙失。
现代文：下诏谏官充分陈述朝政缺失。
English: In the following edict, the eunuch made a full statement on the shortcomings of the imperial government.

古文：戊戌，令中外举文武官才堪将帅者。
现代文：初三，命令朝廷内外推举文武官员中才能可以担任将帅的人才。
English: In the third year of his junior high school, he ordered the imperial court and beyond to nominate military and civilian officials who could serve as generals.

古文：时太原围急，群臣欲割三镇地，李纲沮之，乃以李纲代种师道为宣抚使、援太原。
现代文：当时太原被围，形势危急，大臣们打算割让三镇土地，李纲坚决反对，于是任命李纲代替种师道为宣抚使，援救太原。
English: At that time, Taiyuan was besieged and the situation was critical. The ministers planned to cede three towns of land, but Li Gang resolutely opposed it. Therefore, Li Gang was appointed as the propaganda envoy to rescue Taiyuan in place of Seishi Dao.

古文：辛丑，以资政殿学士刘韐为宣抚副使，陕西制置司都统制解潜为制置副使。
现代文：初六，任命资政殿学士刘旨为宣抚副使，陕西制置司都统制解潜为制置副使。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, Liu Zhi, a Scholar of the Academy of Governance, was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Publicity, and the Vice-Minister of Propaganda and Publicity of Shaanxi Province was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Propaganda.

古文：太白犯岁星。
现代文：太白星侵犯岁星。
English: Too white star encroaches on the year star.

古文：壬寅，封郓国公楃为安康郡王，韩国公楗为广平郡王，并开府仪同三司。
现代文：初七，封邪国公越憧为安康郡王，韩国公赵健为广平郡王，都为开府仪同三司。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Fong Yat Guo Yue Long was crowned King of Ankang County, and Korean King Zhao Jian was crowned King of Quang Binh County, both of which were Kaifu Rites and Three Divisions.

古文：诏： 今日政令，惟遵奉上皇诏书，修复祖宗故事。
现代文：下诏： 现在的政令，只遵奉上皇发布的诏书，队复完善祖宗的规章制度。
English: The following edict: The current decree only follows the edict issued by the last emperor, and the rules and regulations of the ancestors have been restored and improved.

古文：群臣庶士亦当讲孔、孟之正道，察安石旧说之不当者，羽翼朕志，以济中兴。 
现代文：大臣庶士们应当讲求孔子、孟子的正统学说，考察王安石学说中的不当之处，帮助实现肤的志愿，从而完成赵宋中兴的大业。 
English: The ministers-in-waiting should preach the orthodox doctrines of Confucius and Mencius, investigate the improper points in Wang Anshi's doctrines, and help to realize their own wishes, thus completing the great cause of Zhao Songzhongxing.

古文：癸卯，以侍卫亲军马军副都指挥使、镇西军承宣使王禀为建武军节度使，录坚守太原之功也。
现代文：初八，任命侍卫亲军马军副都指挥使、镇西军承宣使王享为建武军节度使，这是录用坚守太原有功之臣。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, the deputy commander-in-chief of the palace guards, the deputy commander-in-chief of the Horse Guards and the deputy commander-in-chief of the Horse Guards, and the deputy commander-in-chief of the Western Zhen Army, Wang Xuan, were appointed as the festival envoys of the Jianwu Army. This was the appointment of a meritorious minister who adhered to Taiyuan.

古文：甲辰，路允迪罢为醴泉观使。
现代文：初九，路允迪罢为醛泉观使。
English: On the 9th day of the first month, Lu Yundi became the inspector of aldehyde spring.

古文：乙巳，左司谏陈公辅以言事责监合州酒务。
现代文：初十，左司谏陈公辅因言事不当被责监合州酒务。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, the Left Magistrate, Chen Gongyu, was charged with supervising Hezhou's liquor business for improper speech.

古文：壬子，天狗坠地。有声如雷。
现代文：十七日，天狗星坠落，有声如雷。
English: On the 17th day of the month, the Dog Star fell, and thunderous sounds were heard.

古文：癸丑，虑囚。
现代文：十八日，讯察囚犯罪状。
English: On the 18th, the criminal status of the prisoner was investigated.

古文：丙辰，太白、荧感、岁、镇四星合于张。
现代文：二十一日，太白星、荧惑星、岁星、镇星在张宿会合。
English: On the 21st, the Taibai Star, the Fluorescent Star, the Year Star, and the Town Star gathered in Zhangshu.

古文：辛酉，罢都水、将作监承受内侍官。
现代文：二十六日，罢除都水、将作监承受内侍官。
English: On the 26th, Tousui was removed from his post, and he became a supervisor instead of an inner chamberlain.

古文：熙河都统制焦安节坐不法，李纲斩之。
现代文：熙河都统制焦安节因做不法事获罪，李纲斩杀了他。
English: The governor of Heihe, Jiao An Si, was found guilty of doing something illegal, and Li Gang killed him.

古文：壬戌，姚古坐拥兵逗遛，贬为节度副使、安置广州。
现代文：二十七日，姚古因拥兵逗留不进，贬为节度副使，安置广州。
English: On the 27th, Yao Gu was demoted to vice-envoy to the Qing Dynasty and relocated to Guangzhou.

古文：彗出紫微垣。
现代文：彗星出现在紫微垣。
English: The comet appeared in Shihihihigaki.

古文：秋七月乙丑朔，除元符上书邪等之禁。
现代文：秋七月初一，废除元符上书邪等的禁令。
English: On the first day of the seventh month of autumn, the ban on the printing of Yuan characters was abolished.

古文：宋昭政和中上书谏攻辽，贬连州；庚午，诏赴都堂。
现代文：宋昭政和上书劝谏攻辽，贬连州；初六，下诏宋昭到朝廷。
English: Song Zhaozheng and the emperor sent a letter to the emperor, urging him to attack Liao and disparage Lianzhou. On the sixth day of the first month of the year, Song Zhaozhou went to the imperial court.

古文：乙亥，安置蔡京于儋州，攸雷州，童贯吉阳军。
现代文：十一日，蔡京安置在澹州；蔡枚安置在雷州；童贯安置在吉阳军。
English: On the 11th, Cai Jing was placed in Zhangzhou; Cai Mei was placed in Leizhou; Tong Yan was placed in Jiyangjun.

古文：己卯，免借河北、河东、陕西路职田。
现代文：十五日，罢免河北、河东、陕西路借职田。
English: On the 15th, the Hebei, Hedong, and Shaanxi Road Lending Fields were removed.

古文：乙酉，诏蔡京子孙二十三人已分窜远地，遇赦不许量移。
现代文：二十一日，下诏：蔡京子孙二十三人已经分别贬窜边远地区，遇到赦免不许移近安置。
English: On the 21st, the following edict was issued: 23 of Cai Jing's children and grandchildren had been exiled to outlying areas, and were not allowed to move closer to resettle in the event of an amnesty.

古文：是日，京死于潭州。
现代文：这天，蔡京死于潭州。
English: On this day, Cai Jing died in Tanzhou.

古文：丁亥，令侍从官共议改修宣仁圣烈皇后谤史。
现代文：二十三日，命令侍从官共同商议修改宣仁圣烈皇后谤史。
English: On the 23rd, he ordered the attendants to jointly discuss the revision of the history of defaming Empress Xuanren.

古文：辛卯，遣监察御史张澂诛童贯，广西转运副使李升之诛赵良嗣，并窜其子孙于海南。
现代文：二十七日，派遣监察御史张膺诛杀童贯，广西转运副使李瘴之诛杀赵良嗣，并且把他们的子孙贬到海南。
English: On the 27th, they dispatched the inspector general of history, Zhang Ye, to kill Tong Quan, and the deputy envoy of Guangxi transshipment, Li Xizhe, to kill Zhao Liang Ci, and to deport their children and grandchildren to Hainan.

古文：壬辰，侍御史李光坐言事贬监当。
现代文：二十八日，侍御史李光因言事不当被贬为监当官。
English: On the 28th, the chamberlain, Li Guang, was demoted to the position of supervisor due to improper speech.

古文：是月，解潜与金人战于南关，败绩。
现代文：这个月，解潜与金军战于南关，失败。
English: This month, the Submarine Liberation Army and the Chinese People's Liberation Army fought in Nanguan, but failed.

古文：刘韐自辽州引兵与金人战，败绩。
现代文：刘洽从辽州率兵与金军作战，失败。
English: Liu Ciao led troops from Liaozhou to fight against the Jin army, but failed.

古文：八月甲午朔，录陈瓘后。
现代文：八月初一，录用陈酵后代。
English: On the first day of August, the descendants of Chen Ye were hired.

古文：丙申，复命种师道以宣抚使巡边，召李纲还。
现代文：初三，又命令种师道以宣抚使的身份巡视边境，召回李纲。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he also ordered Zeng Shidao to patrol the border as an envoy and recall Li Gang.

古文：庚子，诏以彗星，避殿减膳，令从臣具民间疾苦以闻。
现代文：初七，下诏因彗星出现不上殿，减少饮食，命令从臣陈述民间疾苦上报朝廷。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, because of the appearance of the comet, the emperor did not go to the palace, reduced his diet, and ordered his courtiers to report the hardships of the people to the imperial court.

古文：河东察访使张灏与金人战于文水，败绩。
现代文：河东察访使张颧与金军战于文水，失败。
English: The inspectors from Hedong sent Zhang Ye to fight against the Chinese army in Wenshui, but failed.

古文：辛丑，诏求民之疾苦者十七事，悉除之。
现代文：初八，下诏影响百姓疾苦的十七件事，全部废除。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, all the seventeen things that affected the suffering of the people were abolished.

古文：丁未，斡离不复攻广信军、保州，不克，遂犯真定。
现代文：十四日，斡离不又攻打广信军、保州，没能攻下，于是侵犯真定。
English: On the 14th, without mediation, he attacked the Guangxin Army and Bozhou, but failed to capture them, so he invaded Zhending.

古文：戊申，都统制张思正等夜袭金人于文水县，败之。
现代文：十五日，都统制张思正等在文水县夜袭金军，打败金兵。
English: On the 15th, Zhang Sizheng, the governor of the capital, and others attacked the gold army at night in Wenshui County and defeated the gold soldiers.

古文：己酉，复战，师溃，死者数万人，思正奔汾州。
现代文：十六日，又与金军交战，军队失败，死了数万人，张思正退到汾州。
English: On the 16th, he fought with the Chinese army again. The army failed, tens of thousands of people died, and Zhang Sizhong retreated to Zhangzhou.

古文：都统制折可求师溃于子夏山。
现代文：都统制折可求的军队在子夏山失败。
English: The army, which could have demanded a compromise from the central government, failed in Zixia Mountain.

古文：威胜、隆德、汾、晋、泽、绛民皆渡河南奔，州县皆空。
现代文：威胜、隆德、汾、晋、泽、绛等地的百姓都渡过黄河南逃，州县都成为空城。
English: The people of Wison, Lund, Handan, Jin, Ze, Handan and other places have all crossed the Yellow River and fled to the south, and all counties have become empty cities.

古文：金人乘胜攻太原。
现代文：金军乘胜进攻太原。
English: The Chinese army took advantage of the victory to attack Taiyuan.

古文：录张庭坚后。
现代文：录用黄庭坚的后代。
English: The descendants of Huang Tingjian were hired.

古文：乙卯，遣徽猷阁待制王云、阁门宣赞舍人马识远使于金国，秘书著作佐郎刘岑、太常博士李若水分使其军议和。
现代文：二十二日，派遣徽酞阁待制王云、阎门宣赞舍人马识远出使金国，秘书著作佐郎刘岑、太常博士李若水分别出使金军议和。
English: On the 22nd, Wang Yun, the governor of Hubei Province, and Yanmen, the governor of Yan'an Province, were dispatched to negotiate peace with the Chinese army. Liu Zhen, the secretary-general of Sauron, and Li Ruoshui, the doctor of Taizang, were sent to negotiate peace.

古文：戊午，许翰罢知亳州。
现代文：二十五日，许翰罢为毫州知州。
English: On the 25th, Xu Han became the leader of Wuzhou Zhizhou.

古文：己未，太宰徐处仁罢知东平，少宰吴敏罢知扬州。
现代文：二十六日，太宰徐处仁罢为东平知府，少宰吴敏罢为扬州知州。
English: On the 26th, Dazaifu Xu Zhuren was promoted to Dongping Prefecture, and Shazaifu Wu Min was promoted to Yangzhou Prefecture.

古文：以唐恪为少宰兼中书侍郎，何为中书侍郎，礼部尚书陈过庭为尚书右丞，开封尹聂昌同知枢密院事，御史中丞李回签书枢密院事。
现代文：任命唐烙为少宰兼中书侍郎，何镐为中书侍郎，礼部尚书陈过庭为尚书右承，开封府尹聂昌为同知枢密院事，御史中承李回为签书枢密院事。
English: He appointed Tang Yao as Junior Secretary and Junior Secretary of the Privy Council, He Jun as Junior Secretary of the Privy Council, Shang Shu Chen of the Ministry of Ceremonies as Junior Secretary of the Privy Council, Yin Yuchang of Kaifeng as Junior Secretary and Junior Secretary of the Privy Council, and Li Hui of the Ministry of History as Junior Secretary of the Privy Council.

古文：庚申，遣王云使金军，许以三镇赋税。
现代文：二十七日，派遣王云出使金军，答应用三镇赋税索回三镇。
English: On the 27th, Wang Yun sent an envoy of the Chinese army to the three towns to collect taxes.

古文：是月，福州军乱，杀其知州事柳庭俊。
现代文：这个月，福州军叛乱，杀死知州柳庭俊。
English: This month, the Fuzhou Army rebelled and killed Liu Tingjun of Chizhou.

古文：九月丙寅，金人陷太原，执安抚使张孝纯，副都总管王禀、通判方笈皆死之。
现代文：九月初三，金军攻陷太原，俘虏安抚使张孝纯，副都总管王享、通判方岌都战死。
English: On the third day of early September, the Chinese army captured Taiyuan. Zhang Xiaochun, the prisoner pacification envoy, Wang Xuan, the deputy head of the capital, and Tong Han, the governor of the capital, were killed in the battle.

古文：辛未，贬吴敏为崇信军节度副使、安置涪州。
现代文：初八，贬吴敏为崇信军节度副使，涪州安置。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the year, Wu Min was demoted to vice-envoy of the Song Festival of the Chongxin Army, and was resettled in Ganzhou.

古文：移蔡攸于万安军，寻与弟翛及朱勔皆赐死。
现代文：蔡枚移到万安军安置，不久与弟蔡桔及籽刃都被赐死。
English: Cai Mei was transferred to the Wan'an Army for resettlement, and soon he and his brother Cai Kuei and Cai Blade were all put to death.

古文：乙亥，诏编修敕令所取靖康以前蔡京所乞御笔手诏，参祖宗法及今所行者，删修成书。
现代文：十二日，下诏编修救令所取出靖康以前蔡京所请求的御笔手诏，参照祖宗法度及现在所行法令，删修成书。
English: On the 12th, the handwritten edict requested by Cai Jing before Jing Kang was taken out of the edict editing and revising rescue order, and the edict was edited into a book with reference to the ancestral law and the current law.

古文：丁丑，礼部尚书王为尚书左丞。
现代文：十四日，任命礼部尚书王辨为尚书左承。
English: On the 14th, the Rector of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, Shang Shuxu Wang Bing, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's successor.

古文：戊寅，有赤气随日出。
现代文：十五日，红色光气随太阳而出。
English: On the fifteenth day, a red glow came out with the sun.

古文：李纲罢知扬州。
现代文：李纲罢为扬州知州。
English: Li Gang is now Yangzhou Chizhou.

古文：壬午，枭童贯首于都市。
现代文：十九日，砍下童贯的头在都市示众。
English: On the 19th, the severed head of Tonglan was displayed to the public in the city.

古文：癸未，赐布衣尹焞为和靖处士。
现代文：二十日，赐布衣尹停为和靖处士。
English: On the 20th, he gave Buyi Yinzuo the title of Hejing officer.

古文：甲申，日有两珥、背气。
现代文：二十一日，太阳周围出现两道光气，外围出现背气。
English: On the twenty-first day, two rays of light appeared around the sun, and a backwash appeared on the periphery.

古文：丙戌，建三京及邓州为都总管府，分总四道兵。
现代文：二十三日，在三京和邓州建置都总管府，分领四道军队。
English: On the 23rd, the capital's headquarters were established in Sanjing and Dengzhou, and the four armies were separated.

古文：庚寅，以知大名府赵野为北道都总管，知河南府王襄为西道都总管，知邓州张叔夜为南道都总管，知应天府胡直孺为东道都总管。
现代文：二十七日，任命大名知府赵野为北道都总管，河南知府王襄为西道都总管，邓州知州张叔夜为南道都总管，应天知府胡直孺为东道都总管。
English: On the 27th, Zhao Ye, the famous prefectural governor, was appointed as the chief administrator of the Northern Capital, Wang Xiang, the prefectural governor of Henan Province, was appointed as the chief administrator of the Western Capital, Zhang Shuyai, the prefectural governor of Dangzhou Chizhou, was appointed as the chief administrator of the Southern Capital, and Hu Zhizhong, the prefectural governor of Yingtan Province, was appointed as the chief administrator of the Host Capital.

古文：又罢李纲提举洞霄宫。
现代文：又罢李纲为洞霄宫提举。
English: Li Gang was once again promoted to the Dongxiao Palace.

古文：辛卯，遣给事中黄锷由海道使金国议和。
现代文：二十八日，派遣给事中黄愕由海道出使金国议和。
English: On the 28th, in the midst of the dispute, Huang Appa was dispatched by the sea route to negotiate a peace treaty with China.

古文：是月，夏人陷西安州。
现代文：这个月，夏军攻陷西安州。
English: This month, Xia's army captured Xi'an.

古文：冬十月癸巳朔，御殿复膳。
现代文：冬十月初一，恢复上殿和饮食。
English: On the first day of October in winter, it is time to return to the hall and resume eating and drinking.

古文：贬李钢为保静军节度副使、安置建昌军。
现代文：贬李纲为保静军节度副使，安置建昌军。
English: Li Gang was demoted to the vice-envoy of the Baoding Military Region, and the Jianchang Military Region was established.

古文：丁酉，金人陷真定，都钤辖刘竧死之。
现代文：初五，金军攻陷真定，都铃辖文上身战死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, the Chinese army invaded and occupied Shinding, and Du Lingji died in battle.

古文：有流星如杯。
现代文：有流星如杯。
English: There are meteors like cups.

古文：戊戌，金人使杨天吉、王汭来。
现代文：初六，金国派杨天吉、王来。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, Jin Guo sent Yang Tianji and Wang Lai.

古文：庚子，日有青、赤、黄恩气。
现代文：初八，太阳上出现青、赤、黄光气。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, blue, red, and yellow auroras appeared on the sun.

古文：金人陷汾州，知州张克戬、兵马都监贾亶死之。又攻平定军。
现代文：金军攻陷汾州，知州张克戮、兵马都监贾战死；金军又攻打平定军。
English: The gold army invaded and occupied Bozhou, Zhang Keliang of Zhizhou and Jia, the commander of the army and cavalry, were killed in battle; the gold army also attacked and defeated the Pingding army.

古文：辛丑，下哀痛诏，命河北、河东诸路帅臣传檄所部，得便宜行事。
现代文：初九，下哀痛诏，命令河北、河东各路帅臣向所辖地区传达命令，可以不上奏自行决断政事。
English: On the morning of the 9th day of the 9th month, he issued a sorrowful edict, ordering the marshals of Hebei and Hedong to convey the order to the areas under their jurisdiction, and they could decide the political affairs on their own without reporting.

古文：壬寅，天宁节，率群臣诣龙德宫上寿。
现代文：初十，天宁节，钦宗率大臣们到龙德宫向徽宗祝寿。
English: On the tenth day of the first lunar month, Tianning Festival, Emperor Qinzong led his ministers to Longde Palace to wish Emperor Huizong a happy birthday.

古文：甲辰，诏用蔡京、王黼、童贯所荐人。
现代文：十二日，下诏任用蔡京、王敞、童贯所推荐的人才。
English: On the 12th, talent recommended by Cai Jing, Wang Zhan and Tong Ran was appointed.

古文：丙午，集从官于尚书省，议割三镇。
现代文：十四日，在尚书省招集侍从官，商议割让三镇。
English: On the 14th, officials were convened in Shangshu Province to discuss the cession of three towns.

古文：召种师道还。
现代文：招回种师道。
English: Recruitment of seedlings is underway.

古文：丁未，以礼部尚书冯澥知枢密院事。
现代文：十五日，任命礼部尚书冯懈为知枢密院事。
English: On the fifteenth day, he appointed the head of the Ceremonial Department, Shangshu Feng Lian, as a member of the Privy Council.

古文：己酉，阅炮飞山营。
现代文：十七日，检阅炮飞山营。
English: On the 17th, they inspected the artillery flying mountain camp.

古文：庚戌，以范讷为宁武军节度使、河北河东路宣抚使。
现代文：十八日，任命范呐为宁武军节度使、河北河东路宣抚使。
English: On the 18th, Fan Na was appointed as the Ningwu Army Festival Envoy and the Hebei Hedong Road Proclamation Envoy.

古文：辽故将小胡录攻陷麟州建宁砦，知砦杨震死之。壬子，诏太常礼官集议金主尊号。
现代文：辽朝故将勒绿攻陷麟州建宁寨，知寨杨震战死。二十日，下诏太常礼官一起讨论金主尊号。
English: On the 20th day of the month, officials of the Liao Dynasty discussed the honorific title of Jin Shuzhong together.

古文：命尚书左丞王副康王使斡离不军，辞。
现代文：命令尚书左承王辨陪同康王出使斡离不军，王辨推辞。
English: He ordered Shangshu Zuo Cheng Wang Bin to accompany the envoy sent by Kang Wang and not to leave the army. Wang Bin refused.

古文：乙卯，雨木冰。
现代文：二十三日，降木冰。
English: On the 23rd, the snow began to fall.

古文：丙辰，金人陷平阳府，又陷威胜、隆德、泽州。
现代文：二十四日，金军攻陷平阳府，又攻陷威胜、隆德、泽州。
English: On the 24th, the Chinese army invaded Pingyang Prefecture, and also invaded Wisong, Lund, and Zezhou.

古文：丁巳，高丽入贡，令明州递表以进，遣其使还。
现代文：二十五日，高丽来进贡，命令明州递表以进，遣其使臣回国。
English: On the 25th, Goryeo came to pay tribute, ordered Mingzhou to submit a report, and sent its envoy back to the country.

古文：戊午，贬王为单州团练副使，命冯澥代行。
现代文：二十六日，贬王辨为单州团练副使，命冯懈代替他陪同康王出使金军。
English: On the 26th, Wang was demoted to the vice-envoy of the single-state regimental drill, and Feng Lian was appointed to accompany Kang Wang to dispatch the Golden Army.

古文：庚申，日有两珥及背气。
现代文：二十八日，太阳旁边出现两道光环，外围有背气。
English: On the 28th, two halos appeared next to the sun, surrounded by dark clouds.

古文：侍御史胡舜陟请援中山，不省。
现代文：侍御史胡舜陆请求救援中山，没有得到回答。
English: Waiter Shi Hu Yulun's request to rescue Zhongshan went unanswered.

古文：辛酉，种师道薨。
现代文：二十九日，种师道逝世。
English: On the 29th, Seishi Dao passed away.

古文：十一月丙寅，夏人陷怀德军，知军事刘铨、通判杜翊世死之。
现代文：十一月初五，夏军攻陷怀德军，知军事刘锉、通判杜诩世战死。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November, Xia's army invaded the White German army, and the intellectuals Liu Wei and Tong Zhan and Du Xi died in the battle.

古文：籍谭稹家。
现代文：籍没谭棋家。
English: He is not a professional chess player.

古文：戊辰，康王未至金军而还。
现代文：初七，康王没有到金营就退回。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, King Kang did not go to the gold camp and returned home.

古文：冯澥罢。
现代文：冯懈被罢免。
English: Feng Lax was ousted.

古文：己巳，集百官议三镇弃守。
现代文：初八，召集文武百官讨论三镇弃守问题。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, hundreds of civil and military officials were convened to discuss the abandonment of the three towns.

古文：庚午，诏河北、河东、京畿清野，令流民得占官舍寺观以居。
现代文：初九，下诏河北、河东、京瓷转移人口物资，命令流民可以占居官舍寺观。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the year, Hebei, Hedong, and Kyocera ordered the transfer of population materials, and ordered the displaced people to occupy the official residences and temples.

古文：辛未，有流星如杯。
现代文：初十，有流星如杯。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, there is a meteor like a cup.

古文：壬申，禁京师民以浮言相动者。
现代文：十一日，禁止京城百姓以浮言相鼓动。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the people of Beijing were prohibited from agitating with false rumors.

古文：癸酉，右谏议大夫范宗尹以首议弃地罢。
现代文：十二日，右谏议大夫范宗尹因首先提出弃地被罢免。
English: On the 12th, Fan Zongyin, the doctor of the right-hand panel, was dismissed because he first proposed abandoning the land.

古文：金人至河外，宣抚副使折彦质领师十二万拒之。
现代文：金军到达黄河外，宣抚副使折彦质率领十二万军队抵抗金军。
English: When the Chinese army reached beyond the Yellow River, Vice-Minister of Propaganda Orihiko led 120,000 troops to resist the Chinese army.

古文：甲戌，师溃。
现代文：十三日，军队失败。
English: On the 13th, the army was defeated.

古文：金人济河，知河阳燕瑛、西京留守王襄弃城遁。
现代文：金军越渡黄河，河阳知府燕瑛、西京留守王襄弃城逃跑。
English: The Chinese army crossed the Yellow River, and Wang Xiang abandoned the city and fled to Yen Ying in Heyang Prefecture and Wang Xiang abandoned the city in Xijing.

古文：乙亥，命刑部尚书王云副康王使斡离不军。许割三镇，奉衮冕、车辂，尊其主为皇叔，且上尊号。
现代文：十四月，命刑部尚书王云陪同康王出使斡离不军，答应割让三镇，贡送礼服礼帽，尊金主为皇叔，并且敬上尊号。
English: In April, Shangshu Wangyun of the Ministry of Justice and Public Security accompanied the envoy sent by Kang Wang to mediate for him not to leave the army. He promised to cede three towns, send a gift of a ceremonial dress and hat, honor the king as his uncle, and respect his honorary title.

古文：丙子，金人渡河，折彦质兵尽溃，提刑许高兵溃于洛口。
现代文：十五日，金军渡过黄河，折彦质军队全部溃败，提刑许高的军队在洛口溃败。
English: On the 15th, the Chinese army crossed the Yellow River, defeated all the Yan troops, and defeated the troops with high penalties in Lokou.

古文：金人来言，欲尽得河北地。
现代文：金军派人来说，想要河北全部土地。
English: The Chinese military sent someone to say that they wanted all the land in Hebei.

古文：京师戒严。
现代文：京师开封戒严。
English: The capital is under martial law.

古文：遣资政殿学士冯澥及李若水使粘罕军。
现代文：派遣资政殿学士冯懈和李若水出使粘罕军。
English: Feng Lian and Li Ruoshui, academicians of the Academy of Arts and Sciences, were dispatched as envoys of the Kuihang Army.

古文：丁丑，何罢。
现代文：十六日，何镐被罢免。
English: On the 16th, He Yao was removed from office.

古文：以尚书左丞陈过庭为中书侍郎，兵部尚书孙傅为尚书右丞。
现代文：任命尚书左承陈过庭为中书侍郎，兵部尚书孙傅为尚书右承。
English: He appointed Shangshu Zuo's successor Chen Guoting as the attendant of the middle secretary, and Hyobu Shangshu Sunfu as Shangshu Zuo's successor.

古文：命成忠郎郭京领选六甲正兵所。
现代文：命令成忠郎郭京领选六甲正兵所。
English: He ordered Cheng Zhong Lang Guo Jing to lead the selection of the Rokko Military Academy.

古文：签书枢密院事李回以万骑防河，众溃而归。
现代文：签书枢密院事李回率领一万骑兵防守黄河，军队溃败回撤。
English: Li Hui, the Privy Councillor who signed the document, led ten thousand cavalry to defend the Yellow River, and the army was defeated and withdrew.

古文：是日，塞京城门。
现代文：这天，堵塞京师城门。
English: On this day, the gate of the capital city was blocked.

古文：戊寅，进龙德宫婉容韦氏为贤妃，康王构为安国、安武军节度使。
现代文：十七日，进龙德宫婉容韦氏为贤妃，康王赵构为安国、安武军节度使。
English: On the 17th, Wan Rong Wei entered the Longde Palace as a virtuous empress, and Kang Wang Zhao Jie was the festival envoy of An Guo and An Wu Army.

古文：罢清野。
现代文：停止转移人口物资。
English: Stop the transfer of people and goods.

古文：辛巳，以知怀州霍安国为徽猷阁待制，通判林渊直徽猷阁，赏守御之功也。
现代文：二十日，任命怀州知州霍安国为徽酞阁待制，通判林渊直徽酞阁，奖赏他们守卫抵抗金军的功劳。
English: On the 20th, Huizhou, Zhizhou, and Hoan Guo were appointed as Huiyang Courthouses to wait for the system, and Lin Yuanzhong was appointed as the judge of Huiyang Courthouses, and they were rewarded for their efforts in guarding against the Golden Army.

古文：壬午，斡离不使杨天吉、王汭、勃堇撒离栂来。
现代文：二十一日，斡离不派杨天吉、王、勃荃撒离姆来。
English: On the 21st, Yang Tianji, Wang, and Bo Tsuen were sent to mediate the divorce.

古文：命耿南仲使斡离不军，聂昌使粘罕军，许画河为界。
现代文：命令耿南仲出使斡离不军，聂昌出使粘罕军，答应划河为界。
English: He ordered Geng Nanzhong to send an envoy to negotiate the withdrawal of troops, and He Chang to send an envoy to negotiate the withdrawal of troops, and promised to draw the river as a boundary.

古文：康王至磁州，州人杀王云，止王勿行，王复还相州。
现代文：康王到达磁州，州人杀死王云，要求康王停止前行，康王又回到相州。
English: Kang Wang arrived in the magnetic state, the people of the state killed Wang Yun, asked Kang Wang to stop moving forward, and Kang Wang returned to the magnetic state.

古文：遣蜡书间行出关召兵，又约康王及河北守将来援。
现代文：二十三日，任命尚书右承孙傅为同知枢密院事，御史中承曹辅为签书枢密院事。
English: On the 23rd, Sun Fu, the right-hand successor of Shang Shu, was appointed Tongzhi Privy Councillor, and Cao Fu, the middle-ranking successor of Gu Shi, was appointed Signatory Privy Councillor.

古文：多为逻兵所获。丁亥，大风发屋折木。
现代文：任命京兆府路安抚使范致虚为陕西五路宣抚使，命令他督促勤王兵人援京师。二十六日，大风吹倒房屋，折断树木。
English: On the 26th, a strong wind blew down houses and snapped trees.

古文：李回罢。
现代文：李回罢免。
English: Li Wei was dismissed.

古文：戊子，金人攻通津门，范琼出兵焚其砦。
现代文：二十七日，金军攻打通津门，范琼出兵烧金军营寨。
English: On the 27th, the gold army attacked Tongjin Gate, and Fan Qiong sent troops to burn the gold military camp.

古文：己丑，南道总管张叔夜将兵勤王，至玉津园，以叔夜为延康殿学士。
现代文：二十八日，南道总管张叔夜率兵勤王，到达玉津园，任命张叔夜为延康殿学士。
English: On the 28th, Zhang Shuyai, the general manager of the Southern Highway, arrived at the Jade Garden with a large number of soldiers, and appointed Zhang Shuyai as the academician of Yankang Palace.

古文：斡离不遣刘晏来。
现代文：斡离不派刘晏来。
English: Liu Ye will not be sent to mediate the divorce.

古文：庚寅，幸东壁劳军。
现代文：二十九日，到东壁慰劳军队。
English: On the 29th, the army came to the East Wall to offer consolation.

古文：诏三省长官名悉依元丰旧制。
现代文：下诏三省长官官名全部依照元丰旧制。
English: In the following edict, the names of the three provincial governors are all in accordance with the Yuanfeng old system.

古文：领开封府何为门下侍郎。
现代文：任命领开封府何镐为门下侍郎。
English: He appointed the leader of the opening of the feudal government, He Xuan, as his subordinate attendant.

古文：闰月壬辰朔，金人攻善利门，统制姚仲友御之。
现代文：闰十一月初一，金军攻打善利门，统制姚仲友抵抗金军。
English: On the first day of the eleventh month of the leap year, the gold army attacked the virtuous gate, and controlled Yao Zhongyou to resist the gold army.

古文：奇兵作乱，杀使臣，王宗濋斩数十人乃定。
现代文：骑兵作乱，杀死使臣，王宗灌斩杀数十人才平定。
English: The cavalry made a riot, killed the envoys, and Wang Zonghan killed dozens of people to pacify them.

古文：唐恪出都，人欲击之，因求去，罢为中太一宫使。
现代文：唐烙出京城，有人要打死他，他请求离去，罢为中太一宫使。
English: Tang was burnt out of the capital. Someone wanted to kill him. He asked to leave and became the envoy of Emperor Taizong.

古文：以门下侍郎何为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
现代文：任命门下侍郎何镐为尚书右仆射兼中书侍郎。
English: He appointed his underling chamberlain, He Jian, as his right-hand man and chancellor's chamberlain.

古文：刘韐坐弃军，降五官予祠。
现代文：刘洽因弃军获罪，降职五级，让他主管宫祠。
English: Liu Ciao was found guilty of deserting the army, demoted five levels, and put in charge of the palace shrine.

古文：癸巳，京师苦寒，用日者言，借土牛迎春。
现代文：初二，京师特别寒冷，采纳日官意见，借土制的牛驱寒迎春。
English: On the second day of the Chinese New Year, it was particularly cold in Beijing, and in accordance with the advice of the Japanese government, a local cow was used to drive away the cold and usher in spring.

古文：朱伯友坐弃郑州，降三官罢。
现代文：朱伯友因放弃郑州获罪，降三官罢免。
English: Zhu Boyou was found guilty of abandoning Zhengzhou and was demoted three ranks.

古文：西道总管王襄弃西京去。
现代文：西道都总管王襄放弃西京逃走。
English: Wang Xiang, the chief administrator of the Western Capital, abandoned Xijing and fled.

古文：知泽州高世由以城降于金。
现代文：泽州知州高世由据城投降金国。
English: Zhezhou Chizhou Gaoshe surrendered to Jin Province.

古文：燕瑛欲弃河阳，为乱兵所杀。
现代文：燕瑛想放弃河阳，被乱兵杀死。
English: Yan Ying wanted to give up Heyang and was killed by the rioters.

古文：河东诸郡，或降或破殆尽。
现代文：河东各郡，有的投降，有的沦陷，几乎全完了。
English: The counties in the east of the river, some have surrendered, some have fallen, and almost all have been completed.

古文：都民杀东壁统制官辛亢宗。
现代文：京城百姓杀死东壁统制官辛亢宗。
English: The people of the capital city killed the governor of the Eastern Wall, Xin Yanzong.

古文：罢民乘城，代以保甲。
现代文：罢民登城，代以保甲。
English: The people went to the city, and Bao Jia went in their place.

古文：粘罕军至城下。
现代文：粘罕率金军到达城下。
English: The gold army arrived at the foot of the castle at a rate of knots.

古文：甲午，时雨雪交作，帝被甲登城，以御膳赐士卒，易火饭以进，人皆感激流涕。
现代文：初三，当时京城雨雪交作，钦宗披甲登城，用皇帝的饮食赏赐士卒，换上熟饭给士卒吃，士卒都感动得泪流满面。
English: On the third day of the first month of the year, when rain and snow mixed in Beijing, Qinzong, wearing armor, went to the city, rewarded the soldiers with the emperor's diet, and gave them cooked rice to eat. The soldiers were moved to tears.

古文：金人攻通津门，数百人缒城御之，焚其炮架五、鹅车二。
现代文：金军攻打通津门，数百人用绳子悬着排列在墙上抵抗金军，焚毁金军二个炮架、二辆鹅车。
English: The Chinese army attacked the Tongjin Gate, hundreds of people with ropes hanging on the wall resisted the Chinese army, and burned two gun mounts and two goose carts of the Chinese army.

古文：驿召李纲为资政殿大学士、领开封府。
现代文：派骚传召李纲为资政殿大学士，统领开封府。
English: Paixao summoned Li Gang to be the vice-president of the palace, and he led the opening of the palace.

古文：金人陷怀州，霍安国、林渊及其钤辖张彭年、都监赵士詝、张谌皆死之。
现代文：金军攻陷怀州，霍安国、林渊及其铃辖张彭年、都监赵士泞、张堪都战死。
English: The Chinese army invaded Huai Zhou, and Zhang Peng Nian, Zhao Shijuan, and Zhang Kan, governors of Huo'an, Linyuan, and its surrounding areas, all died in the battle.

古文：乙未，金人入青城，攻朝阳门。
现代文：初四，金军进青城，攻打朝阳门。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the Golden Army entered Qingcheng and attacked Chaoyangmen.

古文：冯澥与金人萧庆、杨真诰来。
现代文：冯懈与金军使臣萧庆、杨真浩来。
English: Feng Lian and the envoys of the Jin Army, Xiao Qing and Yang Zhenhong.

古文：丙申，帝幸宣化门，以障泥乘马，行泥淖中，民皆感泣。
现代文：初五，钦宗到宣化门，因泥阻挡而乘马，在泥淖中经过，百姓都感动得哭了。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Qin Zong went to Xuanhua Gate. Because of the mud, he rode a horse and passed through the mud. The people were moved to tears.

古文：张叔夜数战有功，帝如安上门召见，拜资政殿学士。
现代文：张叔夜数战有功，钦宗到安上门召见他，任命为资政殿学士。
English: Zhang Shuyai had distinguished himself in several battles. Qin Zong summoned him to the Anshan Gate and appointed him as a scholar of the Palace of Senior Officials.

古文：金人执胡直孺，又陷拱州。
现代文：金军俘获胡直孺，又攻陷拱州。
English: The Chinese army captured Hu Zhiyao and invaded and occupied Gongzhou.

古文：丁酉，赤气亘天。
现代文：初六，红气布满天空。
English: On the 6th day of the first month, the sky was filled with red.

古文：以冯澥为尚书左丞。
现代文：任命冯解为尚书左承。
English: Feng Jie was appointed as Shang Shuzo's successor.

古文：戊戌，殿前副都指挥使王宗濋与金人战于城下，统制官高师旦死之。
现代文：初七，殿前副都指挥使王宗灌与金军在城下交战，统制官高师旦战死。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the deputy commander of the palace, Wang Zongkan, fought with the Jin army under the castle, and the controlling officer Gao Shitan died in the battle.

古文：庚子，以资政殿学士张叔夜签书枢密院事。
现代文：初九，任命资政殿学士张叔夜为签书枢密院事。
English: On the ninth day of the first month of the year, Zhang Shuya, a scholar of the House of Councillors, was appointed as the signer of the letter of the Privy Council.

古文：金人攻宣化门，姚仲友御之。
现代文：金军攻打宣化门，姚仲友率兵抵抗。
English: The Chinese army attacked Xuanhua Gate, and Yao Zhongyou led the resistance.

古文：辛丑，金人攻南壁，杀伤相当。
现代文：初十，金军攻打南壁，二军杀伤相当。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the gold army attacked the south wall, and the two armies had a similar number of casualties.

古文：壬寅，诏河北守臣尽起军民兵，倍道入援。
现代文：十一日，下诏河北守臣征发所有的军民为兵，星夜兼程赶往京城参加抵抗金军。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the governor of Hebei Province issued an edict to conscript all soldiers and civilians as soldiers, and they rushed to the capital on a starry night to join the resistance against the Golden Army.

古文：癸卯，金人攻南壁，张叔夜、范琼分兵袭之，遥见金兵，奔还，自相蹈藉，溺隍死者以千数。
现代文：十二日，金军攻打南壁，张叔夜、范琼分兵袭击金军，在很远的地方看见金兵，逃回，士卒自相践踏，溺死踩死的以千计。
English: On the twelfth day, the gold army attacked the south wall, Zhang Shulong and Fan Qiong attacked the gold army at night, saw the gold soldiers in a far away place, fled back, the soldiers trampled each other, and thousands of them drowned and trampled to death.

古文：甲辰，大雨雪。
现代文：十三日，降大雨雪。
English: On the 13th, heavy rain and snow fell.

古文：金人陷亳州。
现代文：金军攻陷毫州。
English: The Chinese army invaded and occupied Maozhou.

古文：遣间使召诸道兵勤王。
现代文：遣间使召集各道兵勤王。
English: The envoy summoned soldiers from all provinces to be loyal to the king.

古文：乙巳，大寒，士卒噤战不能执兵，有僵仆者。
现代文：十四日，大寒，士卒寒冷得浑身发抖，握不住兵器，有冻僵倒在地上的。
English: On the 14th day, it was very cold. The soldiers were shivering from the cold, unable to hold their weapons, and some of them froze to the ground.

古文：帝在禁中徒跣祈晴。
现代文：钦宗在皇宫中光着脚祈祷天气晴朗。
English: Emperor Qinzong prays for fine weather with bare feet in the palace.

古文：时勤王兵不至，城中兵可用者惟卫士三万，然亦十失五六。
现代文：当时勤王兵不到，城中可以作战的军队只有卫士三万人，然而也失去了十之五六。
English: At that time, the loyal soldiers did not arrive, and the army that could fight in the city was only thirty thousand guards, but they also lost fifty-six out of ten.

古文：金人攻城急。
现代文：金军猛攻京城。
English: The Chinese army stormed the capital.

古文：丙午，雨木冰。
现代文：十五日，降木冰。
English: On the 15th, the ice fell.

古文：丁未，始避正殿。
现代文：十六日，开始不上正殿。
English: On the 16th, he began not to go up to the main hall.

古文：己酉，遣冯澥、曹辅与宗室仲温、士讠布使金军请和。
现代文：十八日，派遣冯懈、曹辅与宗室赵仲温、赵士饰一起出使金军请求议和。
English: On the 18th, Feng Lian and Cao Yu were dispatched together with Zhao Zhongwen and Zhao Shizhao to the Jin army to request peace.

古文：命康王为天下兵马大元帅，速领兵入卫。
现代文：命令康王为天下兵马大元帅，迅速率兵人卫京师。
English: He ordered Kang Wang to be the grand marshal of the world's soldiers and horses, and quickly led the soldiers to defend Beijing.

古文：辛亥，金人来议和，要亲王出盟。
现代文：二十日，金军派人来议和，要求亲王亲自出使金军签订盟约。
English: On the 20th, the Golden Army sent someone to negotiate peace, demanding that the prince personally send the Golden Army to sign a treaty.

古文：壬子，金人攻通津、宣化门，范琼以千人出战，渡河，冰裂，没者五百余人，自是士气益挫。
现代文：二十一日，金军攻打通津、宣化门，范琼率兵一千人出来迎战，渡河中结冰破裂，淹死了五百多人，从此士气更加低落。
English: On the twenty-first day, the Golden Army attacked Tongjin and Xuanhua Gate. Fan Qiong led a thousand soldiers to meet the battle, and the ice broke during the river crossing, drowning more than five hundred people. From then on, morale was even lower.

古文：甲寅，大风自北起，俄大雨雪，连日夜不止。
现代文：二十三日，大风从北方刮来，不久降大雨雪，一天一夜没有停止。
English: On the 23rd, a strong wind blew from the north, and heavy rain and snow soon fell. It did not stop for a day and a night.

古文：乙卯，金人复使刘晏来，趣亲王、宰相出盟。
现代文：二十四日，金军又派刘晏来，督促亲王、宰相作为人质到金军营中去。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the Jin army also sent Liu Ye to urge the prince and the prime minister to go to the Jin army camp as hostages.

古文：丙辰，妖人郭京用六甲法，尽令守御人下城，大启宣化门出攻金人，兵大败。
现代文：二十五日，妖人郭京用六甲法，命令守御京城的人全部退下，大开宣化门，出来进攻金军，结果宋军大败。
English: On the 25th, the wizard Guo Jing used the six-square method to order all the people guarding the imperial capital to retreat, open the Xuanhua Gate, and attack the Golden Army. As a result, the Song Army was defeated.

古文：京托言下城作法，引余兵遁去。
现代文：郭京借口下城作法，率领剩下的军队逃跑了。
English: Guo Jing used the excuse of leaving the city to lead the rest of the army to escape.

古文：金兵登城，众皆披靡。
现代文：金军登城，宋军纷纷倒下。
English: The Jin army entered the city, and the Song army fell one after another.

古文：金人焚南薰诸门。
现代文：金军焚烧南薰各门。
English: The Chinese army set fire to every gate in Nanxuan.

古文：姚仲友死于乱兵，宦者黄经国赴火死，统制官何庆言、陈克礼、中书舍人高振力战，与其家人皆被害。
现代文：姚仲友死于乱兵之手，宦官黄经国赴火烧死，统制官何庆言、中书舍人高振力战，与他们家人都被杀害。
English: Yao Zhongyou died at the hands of the rioting soldiers, eunuch Huang Jingguo went to the fire and burned to death, and the commanding officer He Qingyan, and the Chinese scholar Ren Gao Zhenli, and their families were all killed.

古文：秦元领保甲斩关遁，京城陷。
现代文：秦元率领保甲斩关逃跑，京城陷落。
English: Qin Yuan led Bao Jia to escape and the capital fell.

古文：卫士入都亭驿，执刘晏，杀之。
现代文：卫士进人都亭骚，俘获刘晏，杀掉了他。
English: The guards entered the courtyard, captured Liu Yao and killed him.

古文：丁巳，奉道君皇帝、宁德皇后入居延福宫。
现代文：二十六日，奉迎道君皇帝、宁德皇后人居延福宫。
English: On the 26th, Emperor Bongyongdaojun and Empress Ningde arrived at Yanfu Palace.

古文：命何及济王栩使金军。
现代文：命令何镐和济王赵栩出使金军。
English: He ordered He Xuan and Zhao, the king of Jie, to bring out an army of envoys.

古文：戊午，何入言，金人邀上皇出郊。
现代文：二十七日，何镐回来说，金军要求上皇出郊。
English: On the 27th, Ho Ho returned to say that the Golden Army demanded that the Emperor leave the countryside.

古文：帝曰： 上皇惊忧而疾，必欲之出，朕当亲往。 
现代文：钦宗说： 上皇受惊扰得了病，一定要到郊外去的话，肤应该亲自去。 
English: Qinzong said, "The Emperor was taken by surprise and fell ill. If you must go to the suburbs, you should go in person."

古文：自乙卯雪不止，是日霁。
现代文：从二十四日起降雪不停，今天才晴。
English: It's been snowing non-stop since the 24th, and it only cleared up today.

古文：夜有白气出太微，彗星见。
现代文：晚上有白气出现在太微星垣，彗星出现。
English: In the evening, white gas appears in the faint star field, and comets appear.

古文：庚申，日赤如火，无光。
现代文：二十九日，太阳红似火而无光。
English: On the 29th, the sun was as red as fire, but there was no light.

古文：辛酉，帝如青城。
现代文：三十日，钦宗到青城。
English: On the 30th, Qin Zong arrived in Qingcheng.

古文：十二月壬戌朔，帝在青城。
现代文：十二月初一，钦宗在青城。
English: On the first day of December, Qin Zong was in Qingcheng.

古文：萧庆入居尚书省。
现代文：萧庆进居尚书省。
English: Xiao Qing moved to Shangshu Province.

古文：是日，康王开大元帅府于相州。
现代文：这天，康王在相州开设大元帅府。初二，钦宗从青城回。
English: On this day, King Kang opened the Grand Marshal's Palace in Sangju. On the second day of the first grade, Qin Zong returned from Qingcheng.

古文：癸亥，帝至自青城。
现代文：初三，金军大肆搜刮金帛。
English: On the third day of the new year, the gold medalists raced to win gold medals.

古文：甲子，大索金帛。丙寅，遣陈过庭、刘韐使两河割地。辛未，定京师米价，劝粜以振民。
现代文：初五，派遣陈过庭、刘洽出使两河割交土地。初十，确定京师米价，劝富户出桌用来贩济贫民。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, Chen was dispatched to go through the court, and Liu Chia sent an envoy to cross the land between the two rivers. On the tenth day of the first month, the price of rice in Beijing was determined, and rich households were advised to go out to sell rice to help the poor.

古文：癸酉，斩行门指挥使蒋宣、李福。
现代文：十二日，斩杀行门指挥使蒋宣、李福。
English: On the 12th, Jiang Xuan and Li Fu, the commanding officers, were executed.

古文：乙亥，康王如北京。
现代文：十四日，康王到北京。
English: On the 14th, King Kang arrived in Beijing.

古文：丙子，尚书省火。
现代文：十五日，尚书省发生火灾。
English: On the 15th, a fire broke out in Shangshu Province.

古文：庚辰，雨雹。
现代文：十九日，降冰雹。
English: On the 19th, hail fell.

古文：癸未，大雪，寒。
现代文：二十二日，大雪寒冷。
English: On the 22nd, it was snowing and cold.

古文：纵民伐紫筠馆花木为薪。
现代文：允许百姓砍伐紫箔馆花木为薪炭。
English: People are allowed to cut down trees and shrubs for firewood.

古文：庚寅，康王如东平。
现代文：三十日，康王到达东平。
English: On the 30th, King Kang arrived in Dongping.

古文：二年春正月辛卯朔，命济王栩、景王杞出贺金军，金人亦遣使入贺。
现代文：靖康二年春正月初一，命令济王赵栩、景王枷巳出城祝贺金军新春，金军也派人来祝贺新春。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the second year of Jingkang, he ordered King Zhao and King Jing to go out of the city to congratulate the Golden Army on the New Year, and the Golden Army also sent people to congratulate the New Year.

古文：壬辰，金人趣召康王还。
现代文：初二，金军催促钦宗召回康王。
English: On the second day of the first month, the Jin army urged Qinzong to recall King Kang.

古文：遣聂昌、耿南仲、陈过庭出割两河地，民坚守不奉诏，凡累月，止得石州。
现代文：派遣聂昌、耿南仲、陈过庭出割两河土地，两河人民坚守，拒不奉命，共几个月，金军只得到石州。
English: They dispatched Qichang, Geng Nanzhong, and Chen to the court to carve out the land of the two rivers. The people of the two rivers stood firm and refused to follow orders for a total of several months. The Chinese army only gained Shishu.

古文：甲午，诏两河民开门出降。
现代文：初四，下诏两河人民开门投降。
English: On the fourth day of the first month, the people of the two rivers opened their doors and surrendered.

古文：乙未，有大星出建星，西南流入于浊没。
现代文：初五，有大星出现在建星，向西南方向流进浊星消失。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, a large star appeared in Jianxing, and it flowed to the southwest and disappeared into Huanxing.

古文：丁酉，雨木冰。
现代文：初七，降木冰。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th month of the lunar calendar, the snow falls.

古文：己亥，阴曀，风迅发。夜，西北阴云中有如火光。
现代文：初九，天气阴暗，风迅速刮起；晚上，西北方向阴云中好像有火光。
English: At nine o'clock in the morning, the weather was gloomy, and the wind was blowing rapidly. In the evening, there seemed to be fire in the clouds to the northwest.

古文：庚子，金人索金银急。
现代文：初十，金军搜索金帛很急。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the Jin army was in a hurry to search for gold ingots.

古文：何、李若水劝帝亲至军中，从之，以太子监国而行。
现代文：何镐、李若水劝钦宗亲自到金军营中去，钦宗答应，任命太子监国，然后前往。
English: He Yao and Li Ruoshui urged Qinzong to go to the gold camp in person. Qinzong agreed, appointed the prince as the supervisor of the country, and then went.

古文：乙巳，籍梁师成家。
现代文：十五日，籍没梁师成家。
English: On the 15th, Liang Shi became a family member.

古文：丙午，刘韐自经于金军。
现代文：十六日，文伟浓金军中自杀。
English: On the 16th, Wen Wei Nong, a member of the Golden Army, committed suicide.

古文：太学生徐揆上书，乞守门请帝还阙。
现代文：太学生徐撰上书，乞求守卫城门，请钦宗回宫。
English: The student Xu wrote a letter, begging to guard the city gate and ask Qin Zong to return to the palace.

古文：金人取至军中，揆抗论，为所杀。
现代文：金军把徐撰带到军中，徐撰抗论被金军杀掉。
English: The gold army brought Xu Zhan to the army, and Xu Zhan's resistance was killed by the gold army.

古文：至夜，金人劫神卫营。
现代文：到晚上，金军劫掠神卫营。
English: In the evening, the Chinese army plundered the Shenwei camp.

古文：丁未，大雾四塞。
现代文：十七日，大雾弥漫京城四方。
English: On the 17th, a heavy fog covered all four sides of the capital.

古文：金人下含辉门剽掠，焚五岳观。
现代文：金军到含辉门票掠，焚烧五岳观。
English: The Golden Army went to Hanhui to loot tickets and burn the Five Mountains.

古文：二月辛酉朔，帝在青城，自如金军，都人出迎贺。
现代文：二月初一，钦宗在青城，自己前往金军，京城人们出来迎驾。
English: On the first day of February, Qinzong was in Qingcheng and went to the Golden Army on his own. The people of Beijing came out to welcome him.

古文：丙寅，金人堑南薰门路，人心大恐。
现代文：初六，金军挖断南薰门路，人心大为恐慌。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the gold army dug up the Nanxuanmen Road, and people panicked.

古文：已而金人令推立异姓，孙傅方号恸，乞立赵氏，不允。
现代文：不久，金军命令拥立异姓，孙傅悲痛大哭，请求立赵氏，没有允许。
English: Soon, the Jin Army ordered the establishment of a different surname. Sun Fu cried with grief and requested the establishment of the Zhao clan, but was not allowed.

古文：丁卯，金人要上皇如青城。
现代文：初七，金军要上皇到青城。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the imperial army was to march to Qingcheng.

古文：以内侍邓述所具诸王孙名，尽取入军中。
现代文：按内侍邓述所排列的诸王孙名字，全部带到金军营中。
English: According to the names of the kings and grandsons arranged by the chamberlain Deng, they were all brought to the gold camp.

古文：辛未，金人逼上皇召皇后、皇太子入青城。
现代文：十一日，金军逼迫上皇召皇后、皇太子进人青城。
English: On the 11th day, the Golden Army forced the retired emperor to summon the empress and the crown prince to Qingcheng.

古文：庚辰，康王如济州。
现代文：二十日，康王到达济州。
English: On the 20th, King Kang arrived in Jeju.

古文：癸未，观文殿大学士唐恪仰药自杀。
现代文：二十三日，观文殿大学士唐烙服药自杀。
English: On the 23rd, Tang Yao, a scholar at Guanwenden University, committed suicide by taking pills.

古文：乙酉，金人以括金未足，杀户部尚书梅执礼、侍郎陈知质、刑部侍郎程振、给事中安扶。
现代文：二十五日，金军因搜刮金子数没有达到要求，杀死户部尚书梅执礼、侍郎陈知质、刑部侍郎程振、给事中安扶。
English: On the 25th, because the number of gold collected did not meet the requirements, the Golden Army killed the head of the household, Shang Shumei, the courtier, Chen Zhiguo, the head of the criminal department, Cheng Zhen, and the assistant.

古文：三月辛卯朔，帝在青城。
现代文：三月初一，钦宗在青城。
English: On the first day of March, Qin Zong was in Qingcheng.

古文：丁酉，金人立张邦昌为楚帝。
现代文：初七，金军立张邦昌为楚帝。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, the Jin army established Zhang Bangchang as the Emperor of Chu.

古文：庚子，金人来取宗室，开封尹徐秉哲令民结保，毋藏匿。
现代文：十日，金军来搜取宗室，开封府尹徐秉哲令民结保，不要藏匿他们。
English: On the 10th, the Chinese army came to search the family home, and the governor of Kaifeng, Yin Xu Bingzhe, ordered the people to be safe and not to hide them.

古文：丁巳，金人胁上皇北行。
现代文：二十七日，金军带着上皇北行。
English: On the 27th, the gold army led by the retired emperor marched north.

古文：夏四月庚申朔，大风吹石折木。
现代文：夏四月初一，大风吹起石块，折断树木。
English: On the first day of April in summer, high winds blow up rocks and break trees.

古文：金人以帝及皇后、皇太子北归。
现代文：金军带着钦宗及皇后、皇太子北归。
English: The Chinese army led by Qinzong, the empress and the crown prince returned to the north.

古文：凡法驾、卤簿，皇后以下车辂、卤簿，冠服、礼器、法物，大乐、教坊乐器，祭器、八宝、九鼎、圭璧，浑天仪、铜人、刻漏，古器、景灵宫供器，太清楼秘阁三馆书、天下州府图及官吏、内人、内侍、技艺、工匠、娼优，府库畜积，为之一空。
现代文：皇上的车驾、仪仗，皇后以下的车格、仪仗，冠服、礼器等法物，大乐教坊乐器，祭器八宝、九鼎、圭璧，浑天仪、铜人、刻漏，古器和景灵宫供器，太清楼秘阁三馆书、天下州府图及官吏、内人、内侍、技艺、工匠、女昌伎，府库积蓄，全部被金军搜刮走，京城皇宫为之一空。
English: The emperor's carriage and ceremonial chariots, the carriage and ceremonial chariots of empresses and below, ceremonial robes, ceremonial objects, musical instruments of the Great Music School, sacred objects such as the Eight Treasures, the Nine Treasures, the Gui Bi, the Hun Tian Yi, the Bronze Man, the Engraved Leak, ancient objects and the offering vessels of the Jingling Palace, the books of the Three Secret Galleries of the Taiching Palace, the maps of the prefectures of the world and officials, servants, chambermaids, skills, craftsmen, female shanggui, and the prefectural treasury savings, were all

古文：辛酉，北风大起，苦寒。
现代文：初二，北风大起，特别寒冷。
English: On the second day of the first month, the north wind blew, and it was particularly cold.

古文：五月庚寅朔，康王即位于南京，遥上尊号曰孝慈渊圣皇帝。
现代文：五月初一，康王在南京即位，遥上钦宗尊号为孝慈渊圣皇帝。
English: On the first day of May, King Kang ascended to the throne in Nanjing and was given the title of Holy Emperor of the Filial Piety.

古文：绍兴三十一年五月辛卯，帝崩问至。
现代文：绍兴三十一年五月十九日，钦宗逝世的消息传到朝廷。
English: On May 19th, 31st, in Shaoxing, the news of Qinzong's death reached the imperial court.

古文：七月己丑，上尊谥曰恭文顺德仁孝皇帝，庙号钦宗。
现代文：七月十八日，敬上尊溢为恭文顺德仁孝皇帝，庙号钦宗。
English: On the 18th of July, he was enthroned as the Emperor Junzong, with the temple name of Qinzong.

古文：三十二年闰二月戊寅，祔于太庙。
现代文：绍兴三十二年闰二月十一日，奉钦宗神主祭于祖庙。
English: On February 11th of the 32nd year of Shaoxing, the main festival of Fengqin sect deities was held in the ancestral temple.

古文：赞曰：帝在东宫，不见失德。
现代文：评论说：钦宗在东宫为太子的时候，不见有失德行为。
English: Comment: When Emperor Qinzong was crown prince in the East Palace, there was no immoral behavior.

古文：及其践阼，声技音乐一无所好。
现代文：到他被迫登上皇帝位，声伎音乐之类玩乐的事情一无所好。
English: By the time he was forced to ascend to the emperor's throne, there was nothing amusing about things like sound puppet music.

古文：靖康初政，能正王黼、朱勔等罪而窜殛之，故金人闻帝内禅，将有卷甲北旆之意矣。
现代文：靖康初年刚刚执掌国家大权，能够判王敞、籽刃等人的罪刑，并流放、诛杀他们，故金国听说钦宗受禅即帝位，曾经有卷甲北归的打算。
English: In the first year of Jingkang's reign of state power, he was able to sentence Wang Quanzhang, Cai Jian and others, and exile and kill them. Therefore, Jin Guo heard that Qin Zong's acceptance of Zen was the imperial throne, and he once had the intention of returning to the north.

古文：惜其乱势已成，不可救药，君臣相视，又不能同力协谋，以济斯难，惴惴然讲和之不暇。
现代文：可惜混乱的局面已经形成，不可救药；君臣互相观望，又不能同心协力，共同谋划，来度过这场空前的灾难，只好惴惴不安地忙着讲和还应付不过来。
English: Unfortunately, the chaotic situation has already formed and there is no remedy; monarchs and ministers are looking at each other, but they can't work together and plan together to get through this unprecedented disaster, so they have to be anxiously busy talking and still can't cope.

古文：卒致父子沦胥，社稷芜茀。
现代文：最终导致父子沦人敌国，国家混乱不堪。
English: In the end, father and son became enemies of the state, and the country fell into chaos.

古文：帝至于是，盖亦巽懦而不知义者欤！
现代文：钦宗皇上到这时，大概也是懦弱胆怯到不知什么是正义之举了！
English: At this time, Emperor Qinzong was probably too cowardly to know what justice was!

古文：享国日浅，而受祸至深，考其所自，真可悼也夫！真可悼也夫！
现代文：钦宗居帝位的时间那么短暂，而遭受的祸患却那么深远，考察钦宗遭受祸难的由来，真是可伤悼啊！真是可伤悼啊！
English: The time of Emperor Qinzong's reign was so short, but the calamities he suffered were so far-reaching. Examining the origin of the calamities suffered by Emperor Qinzong is really sad! It is really sad!

