古文：王僧虔张绪
现代文：王僧虔是琅邪临沂人。
English: Wang Zengqian is a person who hates evil.

古文：王僧虔，琅邪临沂人也。
现代文：他祖父王殉，是晋朝司徒。
English: His grandfather, Wang Zhidi, was a tutor of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖珣，晋司徒。伯父太保弘，宋元嘉世为宰辅。宾客疑所讳，弘曰： 身家讳与苏子高同。 
现代文：他伯父太保王弘，在宋元嘉时代是宰辅。宾客猜疑他有忌讳，王弘说： 身家忌讳同晋苏子高一样。 
English: His uncle, Taiho Wanghong, was the vice-premier during the Song and Yuan Dynasty. The guests suspected him of having a taboo. Wanghong said, "My family has the same taboo as Jin Su Zigao."

古文：父昙首，右光禄大夫。
现代文：他的父亲是王昙首，为右光禄大夫。
English: His father was Wang Shanshu, a doctor of the Right Guanglu School.

古文：昙首兄弟集会诸子孙，弘子僧达下地跳戏，僧虔年数岁，独正坐采蜡烛珠为凤凰。
现代文：王昙首兄弟召集子孙们聚会，王弘的儿子僧达下地跳着戏耍，王僧虔当时祇几岁，独自端端正正坐在那儿辨蜡烛油做凤凰。
English: Wang Xizhou's brothers gathered their children and grandchildren for a gathering. Wang Hong's son, Wang Zengda, danced and played. Wang Zenggyi, who was only a few years old at the time, was sitting there, looking at the candle oil to make a phoenix.

古文：弘曰： 此儿终当为长者。 
现代文：王弘说： 造孩子终究会成为显贵的人。 
English: Wang Hong said: After all, those who make children will eventually become prominent people.

古文：僧虔弱冠，弘厚，善隶书。
现代文：王僧虔年轻时很忠厚，善于写隶书。
English: When he was young, Wang Zengqian was very loyal and good at writing letters.

古文：宋文帝见其书素扇，叹曰： 非唯迹逾子敬，方当器雅过之。 
现代文：宋文帝见到他书写的白扇，感叹说： 不仅书迹超过子敬，器度典雅也超过了他。 
English: Song Emperor Wen saw the white fan he had written on and lamented, "Not only does his handwriting surpass Zi Jing's, but his elegant style also surpasses him."

古文：除秘书郎，太子舍人。
现代文：授王僧虔秘书郎，太子舍人。
English: The king's secretary, the prince's secretary, the prince's secretary.

古文：退默少交接，与袁淑、谢庄善。
现代文：他退让沉默少有交往，和袁淑、谢庄交谊深厚。
English: He was retiring and silent, rarely socialized, and had a deep friendship with Yuan Shu and Xie Zhuang.

古文：转义阳王文学，太子洗马，迁司徒左西属。
现代文：改任义阳王文学，太子洗马，升任司徒左西属。
English: He was transferred to the post of Yiyang Wang Literature, Prince Zema, and promoted to the post of Stutsu Zuoxi.

古文：兄僧绰，为太初所害，亲宾咸劝僧虔逃。僧虔涕泣曰： 吾兄奉国以忠贞，抚我以慈爱，今日之事，苦不见及耳。
现代文：王僧虔的哥哥王僧绰，被太初帝刘劬所害，亲戚宾朋都劝王僧虔逃走，王僧虔流着眼泪说： 我的哥哥以忠贞奉侍国家，以慈爱抚养我成人，今天的事，痛苦的是见不着哥哥了。
English: Wang Zengqiao, Wang Zengqiao's brother, was victimized by the first emperor Liu Bei. Relatives and friends all advised Wang Zengqiao to flee. Wang Zengqiao shed tears and said: My brother served the country with loyalty and raised me to adulthood with love. Today, it is painful not to see my brother.

古文：若同归九泉，犹羽化也。 
现代文：假若能够同归九泉，就好像是羽化登仙啊。 
English: If we could all go back to the same place, it would be like being reincarnated into immortality.

古文：孝武初，出为武陵太守。
现代文：孝武初年，出任武陵太守。
English: In Takatake's first year, he was appointed the governor of Wuling.

古文：兄子俭于中途得病，僧虔为废寝食。
现代文：他哥哥的儿子王俭在他上任途中患病，王僧虔为他吃不下睡不着。
English: His brother's son, Wang Jian, fell ill on his way to the post, and Wang Xiangyan could not eat or sleep.

古文：同行客慰喻之。
现代文：同行的人劝慰他。
English: His companions tried to console him.

古文：僧虔曰： 昔马援处儿侄之间一情不异，邓攸于弟子更逾所生，吾实怀其心，诚未异古。
现代文：王僧虔说： 从前马援对待儿子和侄子情无二致，邓攸对他弟弟的儿子更超过亲生的，我怀的那心思，确实没有半点不同于古人。
English: Wang Zengqian said: Once upon a time, Ma Yuan treated his son and nephew with the same affection. Deng You treated his brother's son even more than his own. The thoughts I harbored were really no different from those of the ancients.

古文：亡兄之胤，不宜忽诸。若此儿不救，便当回舟谢职，无复游宦之兴矣。 
现代文：亡兄的血脉，不宜忽视，假若这个孩子不能救治，便当掉转船头辞去职位，不再有出来做官的兴致了。 
English: The bloodline of the deceased brother should not be ignored. If this child cannot be cured, he should turn around and resign from his post, and no longer have the interest to become an official.

古文：还为中书郎，转黄门郎，太子中庶子。
现代文：返朝为中书郎，改任黄门郎，太子中庶子。
English: He returned to the court as Chushiro, and was reappointed as Huangmenro, the prince's younger illegitimate son.

古文：孝武欲擅书名，僧虔不敢显迹。
现代文：孝武帝想独揽书坛声名，王僧虔不敢显露自己善书迹象。
English: Emperor Xiaowu wanted to monopolize the reputation of the book world, and Wang Sangyan did not dare to show signs of his good books.

古文：大明世，常用拙笔书，以此见容。
现代文：大明时代，他常常把字写得很笨拙，因此孝武帝能容纳他。
English: In the Daming era, he often wrote clumsily, so Emperor Xiaowu could accommodate him.

古文：出为豫章王子尚抚军长史，迁散骑常侍，复为新安王子鸾北中郎长史、南东海太守，行南徐州事，二蕃皆帝爱子也。
现代文：出任豫章王子尚抚军长史，迁散骑常侍，又做新安王子鸾北中郎长史、南柬海太守，行南徐州事，这两位藩王都是皇帝的爱子。
English: Yuzhang Prince Shang Fuzi served as the commander of the army, and the imperial equerry of the cavalry, and Xin'an Prince Zou Bei Zhong Lang Chang Shi, the governor of the South Cambodian Sea, served in the South Xuzhou affairs. Both of these lords were the emperor's favorite sons.

古文：寻迁豫章内史。
现代文：不久，王僧虔遥豫章内史。
English: Before long, Wang Xiangqian became a distant footnote in history.

古文：入为侍中，迁御史中丞，领骁骑将军。
现代文：入朝任侍中，迁御史中丞，领骁骑将单。
English: He entered the imperial court as a chamberlain, was transferred to the position of vice-commander of the imperial court, and became a general of cavalry.

古文：甲族由来多不居宪台，王氏以分枝居乌衣者，位官微减，僧虔为此官，乃曰： 此是乌衣诸郎坐处，我亦可试为耳。 
现代文：世家大族向来不做御史台官职，王氏是以分支居住在乌衣巷的，位宫稍减，王僧虔做了御史中丞，就说： 这可是乌衣巷中诸公子安然处之的，我也可以试一下。 
English: The great families of the dynasty had never held the post of imperial historian. The Wang family lived in Uyi Lane as a branch of the Wang clan, and the imperial court was slightly reduced. When Wang Xiangqian became the imperial historian, he said, "This is where the nobles of Uyi Lane live in peace. I can also try it."

古文：复为侍中，领屯骑校尉。
现代文：复为侍中，领屯骑校尉。
English: He was reinstated as a chamberlain, and became captain of the cavalry.

古文：泰始中，出为辅国将军、吴兴太守，秩中二千石。
现代文：泰始年间，出任辅国将军、吴兴太守，秩俸为中二千石。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizhi, he served as an auxiliary general and Wu Xing governor-general, with a salary of 2,000 koku.

古文：王献之善书，为吴兴郡，及僧虔工书，又为郡，论者称之。
现代文：王献之擅长书法，任吴兴郡太守，待到王僧虔工于书法，又作吴兴太守，议论的人称道这件事。
English: Wang Xianzhi was good at calligraphy. He was appointed the governor of Wuxing County, and later became the governor of Wuxing County after Wang Xiangjian devoted himself to calligraphy. People who discuss this matter praise this.

古文：徙为会稽太守，秩中二千石，将军如故。
现代文：王僧虔被徙为会稽太守，俸禄为中二千石，将军职依旧不变。
English: Wang Zengqian was transferred to the position of the auditor-general, with a salary of 2,000 koku, and his military position remained unchanged.

古文：中书舍人阮佃夫家在会稽，请假东归。
现代文：中书舍人阮佃夫家在会稽，请假束归。
English: Nguyn Xuân Phúc, a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, is on vacation.

古文：客劝僧虔以佃夫要幸，宜加礼接。
现代文：幕僚因为阮佃夫受皇帝宠信而劝王僧虔优礼接待。
English: The staff members advised the king to receive the monk with courtesy because Nguyn Xuân was favored by the emperor.

古文：僧虔曰： 我立身有素，岂能曲意此辈。
现代文：僧虔说： 我立身有素，岂能曲意逢迎这些人。
English: The monk said, "I am well-established, so how can I meet these people?

古文：彼若见恶，当拂衣去耳。 
现代文：他要觉得不好，就应当拂袖而去。 
English: If he didn't like it, he should have walked away.

古文：佃夫言于宋明帝，使御史中丞孙夐奏： 僧虔前莅吴兴，多有谬命，检到郡至迁，凡用功曹五官主簿至二礼吏署三传及度与弟子，合四百四十八人。
现代文：医哒向塞旦嘘进谗言，唆使御史中丞莲复弹劾说： 王僧虔前往吴兴任职，错误的政令很多，经检查从王僧虔到任至离职转任，总共用功曹、五宫、主簿至二礼吏署三传及度与弟子，合计四百四十八人。
English: The doctor lied to Sedan and instigated the historian Zhongzheng Lian to repeat the impeachment, saying: Wang Sangyan went to Wu Xing to hold office, and there were many wrong decrees. After inspection, from Wang Sangyan's appointment to his departure, a total of four hundred and forty-eight people, including the gong cao, the five palaces, the master book, the two etiquette officers, the three transmissions, and the disciples.

古文：又听民何系先等一百十家为旧门。
现代文：又听由何系先等民一百一十家为旧门。
English: It was also decided that the old gate would be used by 110 families of the first-class citizens.

古文：委州检削。 
现代文：委州检削。 
English: Guizhou Province.

古文：坐免官。
现代文：王僧虔因此获罪被免官。
English: He was relieved of his duties.

古文：寻以白衣兼侍中，出监吴郡太守，迁使持节、都督湘州诸军事、建武将军、行湘州事，仍转辅国将军，湘州刺史。
现代文：不久土僧虔以平民的身份兼侍中，出朝监吴郡太守，迁使持节、都督湘州诸军事、建武将军、行湘州事，又改任辅国将军，湘州刺史。
English: Soon after, Tsuchigami Tsuchigami, as a commoner and an attendant, was appointed as the imperial inspector and the governor of Wu County, transferred to the military, the military governor of Hunan Province, the general of Jianwu, and the affairs of Hunan Province, and was also appointed as the general of the auxiliary province, and the historian of Hunan Province.

古文：所在以宽惠著称。
现代文：他所到之处都因宽厚仁惠而被人称道。
English: Everywhere he went, he was praised for his generosity and benevolence.

古文：巴峡流民多在湘土，僧虔表割益阳、罗、湘西三县缘江民立湘阴县，从之。
现代文：巴峡流民大多在湘州的管辖地，王僧虔上表奏请割益阳、罗、湘西三县沿江一带百姓设立湘阴县，皇上依从了他的奏请。
English: Most of the Ba Gorge refugees were under the jurisdiction of Hunan. Wang Xiangqian issued a proclamation asking the people of the three counties along the Yiyang, Luo and West Hunan rivers to set up Hunan County. The emperor complied with his proclamation.

古文：元徽中，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：元徽年间，王僧虔升任吏部尚书。
English: During the Yuanhui era, Wang Zengqian was promoted to the post of secretary of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：高平檀珪罢沅南令，僧虔以为征北板行参军，诉僧虔求禄不得，与僧虔书曰： 五常之始，文武为先，文则经纬天地，武则拨乱定国。
现代文：高平檀珪罢沅南令，王僧虔任用他做征北板行参军。擅珪因为求官禄没有得到向王僧虔申诉，他给王僧虔的信中说：五常之始，文武为先，文则要经天纬地，武则应拨乱定国。
English: Gaoping Danzhang dismissed the Southern Commander, and Wang Zengqian appointed him to join the army in the Northern Expedition. Unable to appeal to Wang Zengqian because he did not get the official reward, he said in a letter to Wang Zengqian: At the beginning of the Five Dynasties, literature and military affairs come first, literature should go through the heaven and earth, and military affairs should be assigned to a certain country.

古文：仆一门虽谢文通，乃忝武达。
现代文：我弓虽说有欠文通，却也能愧居武达。
English: Although I have a poor command of the bow, I can still be a good archer.

古文：群从姑叔，三媾帝室，祖兄二世，糜躯奉国，而致子侄饿死草壤。
现代文：那么多堂姑堂叔、三次同皂家通婚，祖辈兄辈，为国捐躯，可是竟然使得他们的 广侄在草野中饿死。
English: So many cousins, aunts, uncles, three times married to the soap family, ancestors and brothers, sacrificed their lives for the country, but actually made their great-nephews starve to death in the grasslands.

古文：去冬今春，频荷二敕，既无中人，屡见嗟夺。
现代文：去年冬天到今年春天，接连两道敕书，因在君王身边没有有权势的人，屡屡错失时机。
English: From last winter to this spring, there were two consecutive coups, and because there were no powerful people around the king, the opportunity was repeatedly missed.

古文：经涉五朔，逾历四晦，书牍十二，接觐六七，遂不荷润，反更曝鳃。
现代文：经历了五个朔，越过了四个晦日，写过十二封书柬，拜见了六七回，还是像身处涸辙的鱼，没有荷蒙雨水泽润，反遭曝鳃的苦痛。
English: After five new moons, four New Year's Eves, twelve letters written, and six or seven visits, I am still like a fish in a dry rut, no hormones, no rain, but the pain of exposure.

古文：九流绳平，自不宜独苦一物，蝉腹龟肠，为日已久。
现代文：九流人物用一定标绳去衡最，白认属不应该独让我一人受苦，腹如蝉腹，肠似龟肠，迫于饥饿，已很长时间。
English: Ninth-rate characters use a certain standard rope to weigh the most, white affiliation should not let me alone suffer, belly like a cicada's belly, intestines like a turtle's intestines, forced by hunger, it has been a long time.

古文：饥虎能吓，人遽与肉；饿麟不噬，谁为落毛？
现代文：饥饿的老虎可以吓退，是因为有人立即给其肉吃；饥饿的麒麟不反咬，谁为落毛。
English: A hungry tiger can be scared away because someone immediately gives it meat to eat; a hungry giraffe does not bite back, who is shedding hair.

古文：去冬乞豫章丞，为马超所争；今春蒙敕南昌县，为史偃所夺。
现代文：去冬求做豫章丞，被马超争去；今春敕命做南昌县县令，被史偃夺去。
English: He went to winter to ask for the post of Yu Zhangzheng, but was fought by Ma Chao; this spring, he was ordered to be the county magistrate of Nanchang County, but was taken away by Shi Xuanru.

古文：二子勋荫人才，有何见胜？
现代文：这两位的祖荫功德，本身才干，有哪点胜过了我?
English: What is it about these two, their ancestral merits, their talent, that surpasses mine?

古文：若以贫富相夺，则分受不如。身虽孤微，百世国士，姻媾位宦，亦不后物。
现代文：假如以富有贫穷决定予夺，则我白认不如我自身虽说单薄，但百世国士，姻媾位宦，也不落后于他人。
English: If I decide to win by being rich or poor, then I will admit that I am not as good as myself, although I am thin, but I am a hundred-year-old statesman, married and divorced, and I am not behind others.

古文：尚书同堂姊为江夏王妃，檀珪同堂姑为南谯王妃；尚书妇是江夏王女，檀珪祖姑嫔长沙景王；尚书伯为江州，檀珪祖亦为江州；尚书从兄出身为后军参军，檀珪父释褐亦为中军参军。
现代文：尚书的同堂姐是江夏王妃，我檀砖的同堂姑是南谯王妃；尚书媳妇是江夏王女，我的祖姑是长沙景王嫔；尚书的伯父为官江州，我的祖父也在江州做过官；尚书堂兄出身为后军参军，我的父亲脱下布衣也做了中军参军。
English: Shang Shuxu's cousin is the Princess of Jiangxia, and my cousin's cousin is the Princess of Nanxun; Shang Shuxu's daughter-in-law is the Princess of Jiangxia, and my great-aunt is the Princess of Changsha; Shang Shuxu's uncle was an official of Jiangzhou, and my grandfather was also an official of Jiangzhou; Shang Shuxu's cousin was born to join the rear army, and my father took off his cloth and joined the Chinese army.

古文：仆于尚书，人地本悬，至于婚宦，不至殊绝。
现代文：对我和尚书来说，人和地本来都相距很远，但是至于结婚做官的欲望，我还不肯完全失去。
English: For me and Shangshu, people and land are far apart, but as for the desire to get married and become an official, I am not willing to lose it completely.

古文：今通塞虽异，犹忝气类，尚书何事乃尔见苦？
现代文：现在仕途通塞虽说不同，但我还是忝列其中，尚书究竟因为何事如此作难我呢?
English: Now, although my career path is different, I am still one of them. What is it that makes Shang Shu so difficult for me?

古文：泰始之初，八表同逆，一门二世，粉骨卫主，殊勋异绩，已不能甄，常阶旧途，复见侵抑。 
现代文：泰始初年，八方之外，同为叛逆，我一门二世，粉骨碎身，保卫主上，这些非常的功勋业绩，已经不能彰明，常阶旧途，又被侵占压制。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, outside the eight directions, we were all rebels. I was a second-year student, my bones were shattered, and I defended the Lord. These extraordinary feats of valor can no longer be demonstrated, and the old way has been occupied and suppressed.

古文：僧虔报书曰： 征北板比岁处遇小优，殷主簿从此府入崇礼，何仪曹即代殷，亦不见诉为苦。
现代文：王僧虔回信说：征北板行参军近年来待遇小有优待，殷主钟由此府而受尊敬优待，何仪曹立即代殷任职，也没见说是苦差。
English: Wang Zengqian replied in a letter: In recent years, joining the army on the Northern Expeditionary Force has been treated as a privilege, and Yin Shuzhong has received respect and preferential treatment from the government. He Yi Cao immediately took office on behalf of Yin, but it was a hard job.

古文：足下积屈，一朝超升，政自小难。
现代文：足下积年受屈，要一朝破格超升，确有些困难。
English: After years of suffering underfoot, it is indeed somewhat difficult to break through and rise above the norm.

古文：泰始初勤苦十年，自未见其赏，而顿就求称，亦何可遂。
现代文：泰始初年勤苦十年，从未见封赏，而现在立即就要得到相应的官职，又怎能办到。
English: In the first year of Taizhi, he worked hard for ten years, never saw a reward, and now he needs to get the corresponding official position immediately. How can he do it?

古文：吾与足下素无怨憾，何以相侵苦，直是意有佐佑耳。 
现代文：我与足下向来没怨恨遗憾的事由，凭什么要作难你呢，衹是思想观点稍有出入罢了。
English: I have never resented or regretted what happened to me, so why should I trouble you? It's just a slight difference in thoughts and opinions.

古文：珪又书曰： 昔荀公达汉之功臣，晋武帝方爵其玄孙；夏侯惇魏氏勋佐，金德初融，亦始就甄显，方赏其孙，封树近族。
现代文：檀珪又写信说：先前荀公达是汉的功臣，晋武帝给他的玄孙封爵。夏侯惇是曹魏的勋佐，晋朝刚刚建立，才着手提拔彰明，就封赏了他的孙子，栽培他的近族。
English: Dang Tao also wrote, "Previously, Zi Gongda was a hero of the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Jinwu gave his great-great-grandson a knighthood. Xia Hou Zi was a member of the Order of Cao Wei. When the Jin Dynasty was just established, he began to promote Zhang Ming, and then he rewarded his grandson and cultivated his close relatives.

古文：羊叔子以晋泰始中建策伐吴，至咸宁末，方加褒宠，封其兄子；卞望之以咸和初殒身国难，至兴宁末，方崇礼秩，官其子孙；蜀郡主簿田混，黄初末死故君之难，咸康中方擢其子孙。
现代文：羊叔子因为在晋泰始年间创建伐吴的策略，到咸宁末年，给予褒奖宠用，封赏了他哥哥和儿子。卞望之因为咸和初年在国难中殉职，到兴宁末年，给予尊敬优待的品级，让他的子孙做了官。蜀郡主簿田混，在黄初末年死于故君之难，到咸康年间就选拔他的子孙。
English: Because Yang Shuzi created the strategy of felling Wu during the first year of the Jin and Tai Dynasties, he rewarded his brother and son in the last year of the Han and Ning Dynasties. Because Han and Ning Dynasties died in the first year of the National Disaster, he gave them the rank of respect and preferential treatment in the last year of the Heung and Ning Dynasties, and let his descendants become officials. Shu County's chief bookkeeper, Tian Gong, died in the last year of the Yellow Dynasty, and his descendants were selected during the Heung and Kang Dynasties.

古文：似不以世代远而被弃，年世疏而见遗。
现代文：似乎不因为年代久远了而遗弃。
English: It does not seem to have been abandoned because of its age.

古文：檀珪百罹六极，造化罕比，五丧停露，百口转命，存亡披迫，本希小禄，无意阶荣。
现代文：我屡屡遭逢六种凶难，天地之间少有能相比的，五丧停露，百口转命，存亡被迫，本来衹希图小有俸禄，无意于品秩的荣宠。
English: I have repeatedly encountered six kinds of fierce hardships, few of which can be compared between heaven and earth, five deaths, hundreds of lives, and forced survival. Originally, I wanted to have a small salary, and had no intention of being honored.

古文：自古以来有沐食侯，近代有王官。
现代文：自古以来衹有享受俸禄而无实职的所谓沐食侯，近代有天子之官的所谓王官。
English: Since ancient times, there have been so-called imperial officials who enjoy a salary but do not have a real job, and in modern times, there have been so-called imperial officials who are the sons of heaven.

古文：府佐非沐食之职，参军非王官之谓。质非匏瓜，实羞空悬。
现代文：府佐不属于沐食一类的职位，参军也不是王官的称谓，我原本不是匏瓜，实在羞于这样地空挂着。
English: Fusa does not belong to the position of a kind of indulgence, nor is joining the army the title of a royal official. I am not originally a melon, and I am really ashamed to be hanging in the air like this.

古文：殷、何二生，或是府主情味，或是朝廷意旨，岂与悠悠之人同口而语！
现代文：殷、何二位由此职而受到尊崇优待，有的是出自府主的人情，有的是出自朝廷的旨意，怎能与我这个相距遥远的人同曰而语呢?
English: Yin, how can two people who have been honored and treated well by this position, some from the ruler's human feelings, and some from the will of the imperial court, speak the same language as me, a person who is far away?

古文：使仆就此职，尚书能以郎见转不？
现代文：假使我就任这一职位，尚书能让我由此转郎官吗?
English: If I take this position, will Shang Shu allow me to transfer my position?

古文：若使日得五升禄，则不耻执鞭。 
现代文：假如让我一天能有五升俸禄，我将不觉得为足下持鞭驾车是可羞耻的事。
English: If I had a salary of five shillings a day, I would not feel ashamed to drive with a whip under my feet.

古文：僧虔乃用为安城郡丞。
现代文：王僧虔于是任用他为安城郡丞。
English: Wang Sangyan then appointed him as Ancheng county magistrate.

古文：珪，宋安南将军韶孙也。
现代文：檀珪是宋安南将军檀韶的孙子。
English: Dang Quan is the grandson of Song Annan General Dang Quan.

古文：僧虔寻加散骑常侍，转右仆射。
现代文：不久，王僧虔加散骑常侍，转右仆射。
English: Soon after, Wang Zengqi and Wang Zengqi's attendants rode off, turning to the right to shoot.

古文：升明元年，迁尚书仆射，寻转中书令，左仆射。
现代文：升明元年，迁尚书仆射，不久转中书令，左仆射。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, he was transferred to Shang Shupurei, and soon after to Zhong Shurei, Zuo Shupurei.

古文：二年，为尚书令。
现代文：升明二年，为尚书令。
English: Two years after ascending the throne, he became Shang Shuling.

古文：僧虔好文史，解音律，以朝廷礼乐多违正典，民间竞造新声杂曲，时太祖辅政，僧虔上表曰： 夫悬钟之器，以雅为用；凯容之礼，八佾为仪。
现代文：王僧虔爱好文史，懂得音律，因为朝廷礼乐多有违反典章法则，民间竞相编造新声杂曲，当时太祖辅政，王僧虔上表奏说：悬钟一类的乐器，凭高雅而被采用；和悦圣颜的礼乐，用 八佾 才合仪礼。
English: Wang Zengqian was fond of literature and history, and knew the musical rhythms, because the imperial court music mostly violated the rules of ceremony, and the people competed to make up new sounds. At that time, the great-great-grandfather, Wang Zengqian, said at the performance: musical instruments such as hanging bells were used because of their elegance; and the sacred music was pleasing to the holy face, and it was necessary to use eight gongs to match the ceremony.

古文：今总章羽佾，音服舛异。
现代文：现在，在举行各种礼仪的西向堂裹，羽舞的行列，音乐服饰错误奇特。
English: Now, in the West Hall, where all kinds of ceremonies are held, the feather dance procession, the musical costumes are strangely wrong.

古文：又歌钟一肆，克谐女乐，以歌为务，非雅器也。
现代文：又歌钟一列十六枚，能够和合歌舞伎，以歌舞为正务，就不成其为雅器了。
English: Also, a line of sixteen singing bells, if it can harmonize with kabuki and take singing and dancing as its main duty, will not become a refined instrument.

古文：大明中，即以宫悬合和《鞞》、《拂》，节数虽会，虑乖《雅》体，将来知音，或讥圣世。
现代文：大明年问，就用宫悬和合《鞟》、《拂》，节数虽会，担心的是有违《雅》体，将来懂得音律的人，或许讥笑当今圣世。
English: When asked about the New Year's Eve, they will use the Palace Hanging to harmonize "" and "拂." Although the number of sections will be, they are worried that it is contrary to the "Ya" body. In the future, people who understand the rhythm may mock today's sacred world.

古文：若谓钟舞已谐，重违成宪，更立歌钟，不参旧例。
现代文：若说钟舞已经和谐也就罢了，可重又违反旧定法规，不参照旧例，更立了歌钟。
English: If you say that the bell dance has been harmonious, it is enough to repeat and violate the old rules and regulations, without reference to the old cases, and even set up a singing bell.

古文：四县所奏，谨依《雅》条，即义沿理，如或可附。
现代文：四悬所奏，谨依《雅》条，顺其义理，或可附庸。
English: The four suspended pieces should be played according to the "Grade" article, according to its logic, or may be subordinate.

古文：又今之《清商》，实由铜爵，三祖风流，遗音盈耳，京洛相高，江左弥贵。
现代文：再者现在的《清商》，实由铜爵，三祖风流，遣音充满耳际，京、洛相互推崇，江左更为尊贵。
English: In addition, the current "Qing Merchants" is actually composed of the bronze peer, the three ancestors of the style, the pronunciation is full of ears, Beijing and Luo respect each other, and Jiang Zuo is more honorable.

古文：谅以金石干羽，事绝私室，桑濮郑卫，训隔绅冕，中庸和雅，莫复于斯。
现代文：推想金石干羽的乐舞，不会陈设于私家内室，桑、濮、郑、卫的音韵，远远隔绝了绅冕势要的耳朵。中庸和雅的乐曲，从此难以恢复。
English: Presumably, the music and dance of Jinshi Ganfei would not be displayed in a private home, and the melodies of Sang, Gong, Zheng and Wei would be far away from the ears of the gentry. The music of moderation and elegance would be difficult to recover from.

古文：而情变听移，稍复销落，十数年间，亡者将半。
现代文：而情感的变化，听觉的迁移，逐渐又销落了，十数年间，散失掉的将达半数。
English: But the changes in emotion, the migration of hearing, have gradually been lost again, and in more than ten years, half of what has been lost will be lost.

古文：自顷家竞新哇，人尚谣俗，务在噍杀，不顾音纪，流宕无崖，未知所极，排斥正曲，崇长烦淫。
现代文：自此家家竞选新声，人人推崇谣俗，追求急促的噍杀之声，不顾及音纪，流宕无崖，不知极限，排斥纯正乐曲，崇尚播扬烦琐没有节制的俗乐。
English: Since then, everyone has been campaigning for new sounds, everyone has been advocating folk customs, pursuing fast-paced battle sounds, disregarding musical notation, drifting without a cliff, not knowing the limit, rejecting pure music, and advocating the spread of tedious and unrestrained folk music.

古文：士有等差，无故不可去乐，礼有攸序，长幼不可共闻。
现代文：人有等级差别，不能无缘无故地去掉音乐；礼乐有远近序列，长幼不能共听。
English: People have class differences, and music cannot be removed without reason; liturgical music has a sequence of near and far, and it cannot be listened to by both adults and children.

古文：故喧丑之制，日盛于廛里；风味之响，独尽于衣冠。
现代文：因此喧嚣丑陋的创作，在烟里盛一日；富有情趣的音响，独限于文明礼教的地方。
English: Therefore, the noisy and ugly creation is in the smoke all day; the amusing sound is limited to the place of civilization and etiquette.

古文：宜命有司，务勤功课，缉理遗逸，迭相开晓，所经漏忘，悉加补缀。
现代文：应当命令有关官员，努力成就业绩，搜辑整理遗失散逸的佳作，不断互相开导启发，凡已经遗漏忘却的，全数予以补充连缀。
English: Relevant officials should be ordered to work hard to make achievements, collect and sort out lost and stray masterpieces, constantly enlighten and inspire each other, and supplement and connect all that has been omitted and forgotten.

古文：曲全者禄厚，艺妙者位优。
现代文：乐曲全的给予厚禄，技艺精妙的处之优位。
English: A generous reward is given for a complete piece of music, and a place is reserved for the most skillful.

古文：利以动之，则人思刻厉。
现代文：用名利激励，那么就会人人思谋刻苦用功。
English: Inspire with fame and fortune, then everyone will think about hard work.

古文：反本还源，庶可跂踵。 
现代文：返本还源，可以有望。
English: It will soon be possible to restore the original appearance of elegant music.

古文：事见纳。
现代文：这个奏议被朝廷采纳了。
English: This petition was accepted by the Imperial Court.

古文：建元元年，转侍中，抚军将军，丹阳尹。
现代文：建元元年，王僧虔转侍中，抚军将军，丹阳尹。
English: In the first year of Jianyuan, Wang Xiangqian transferred to the general of Fuzhou army, Danyang Yin.

古文：二年，进号左卫将军，固让不拜。
现代文：建元二年，进爵号为左卫将军，王僧虔坚决推让不肯接受任命。
English: In the second year of the first century, the knighthood was given to General Zuo Wei, but Wang Xiangyan resolutely refused to accept the appointment.

古文：改授左光禄大夫，侍中、尹如故。
现代文：改授左光禄大夫，侍中、丹阳尹依前未变。
English: He was promoted to the position of Sakoroku-dokufu, while Danyang Yin Yi, a chamberlain, remained unchanged.

古文：郡县狱相承有上汤杀囚，僧虔上疏言之曰： 汤本以救疾，而实行冤暴，或以肆忿。
现代文：郡县监狱接连有用送汤药的方式杀死囚犯的事，僧虔上疏陈说这件事说： 汤药本来是用作救人治病的，可是实际上却用来施行冤杀，或者用来发泄怨气。
English: Regarding the county jail's use of soup medicine to kill prisoners one after another, the monk said, "The soup medicine was originally used to save people and cure diseases, but it was actually used to carry out unjust killings, or to vent anger.

古文：若罪必入重，自有正刑；若去恶宜疾，则应先启。
现代文：假若罪行一定要处以重罚，自有正式法刑；假若除恶需要从速，那也应先行奏报。
English: If the crime must be punished with a heavy penalty, it has its own formal legal punishment; if the elimination of evil needs to be accelerated, it should also be reported in advance.

古文：岂有死生大命，而潜制下邑。
现代文：哪有事关生死的大事，而由地方上暗中操持。
English: There is no major life-or-death matter that is secretly managed by the local government.

古文：愚谓治下囚病，必先刺郡，求职司与医对共诊验；远县，家人省视，然后处理。
现代文：我认为治疗下囚的疾病，必须要先投刺告郡，求得职管官员与医生当面共同检验诊治；远县囚徒患病，也应让他家人省视，然后处理。
English: In my opinion, in order to treat the illness of a prisoner, it is necessary to first file a complaint with the county and seek the inspection and treatment of officials and doctors in person; if a prisoner from a distant county is ill, his family should also be consulted and then dealt with.

古文：可使死者不恨，生者无怨。 
现代文：这样可以使得死去的人不怀恨，而活着的人没有怨心。 
English: In this way, the dead will not hold grudges, and the living will not hold grudges.

古文：上纳其言。
现代文：皇上接纳了他的建议。
English: The Emperor adopted his opinion.

古文：僧虔留意雅乐，升明中所奏，虽微有厘改，尚多遗失。
现代文：王僧虔对用于郊庙朝会的正乐颇为留意，升明年间奏陈的，虽然稍有更改，还是遗失很多。
English: Wang Sangyan was quite attentive to the main music used for the suburban temple imperial court, and although there were slight changes to the rhythms played during the ascension ceremony, a lot was still lost.

古文：是时上始欲通使，僧虔与兄子俭书曰： 古语云 中国失礼，问之四夷 。
现代文：这时皇上刚想派遣使臣，王僧虔给他哥哥的儿子王俭写信说： 占话说 中原失礼。问之四夷 。
English: At this time, the emperor just wanted to send an envoy. Wang Sangyan wrote a letter to his brother's son, Wang Jian, saying: "It is impolite to speak of fortune-telling in the Central Plains. Ask the Four Emperors."

古文：计乐亦如。
现代文：考虑音乐的事也是这样。
English: It's the same when it comes to music.

古文：苻坚败后，东晋始备金石乐，故知不可全诬也。
现代文：苻坚失败之后，束晋才备有金石乐，所以不能全都否定。
English: After the failure of Jianjian, Sokjin only had Jinshi Le, so it can't all be denied.

古文：北国或有遗乐，诚未可便以补中夏之阙，且得知其存亡，亦一理也。
现代文：北国或许有遗留的音乐，确不可用来补充中夏的缺漏，能够了解它的存亡，也是一个理由。
English: There may be some music left in the North, but it cannot be used to fill the void of the mid-summer, and being able to understand its existence is also a reason.

古文：但《鼓吹》旧有二十一曲，今所能者十一而已，意谓北使会有散役，得今乐署一人粗别同异者，充此使限。虽复延州难追，其得知所知，亦当不同。
现代文：衹有《鼓吹》原先有二十一曲，现在会的入也就十分之一罢了，料想出使北国的人中该有干杂事的，能在现在的乐署找一个可以粗略地区别我与北国音乐同异的人，充作这个使团的人数，即使延州难追，但他能够了解到他所了解的，也自当不同了。
English: Originally, there were twenty-one pieces of "Preach," but now the number of participants is only one-tenth of that. I thought that there should be someone from the North to do the chores, and I was able to find someone in the current music department who could roughly distinguish me from the music of the North. The number of people who will serve as this mission, even if it is difficult to catch up with Yanzhou, but he can understand what he understands, is also different.

古文：若谓有此理者，可得申吾意上闻否？
现代文：假如认为我说的有理，能把我的意思申说给皇上听吗?想想这件事吧。 
English: If you think what I say is reasonable, can you tell the Emperor what I mean? Think about it.

古文：试为思之。 
现代文：这事到底没实行。
English: Think about it for me.

古文：事竟不行。太祖善书，及即位，笃好不已。
现代文：太祖擅长书法，等到做了皇帝，仍然笃好不歇。
English: The great-grandfather was good at calligraphy, and when he became emperor, he still loved it.

古文：与僧虔赌书毕，谓僧虔曰： 谁为第一？ 
现代文：与王僧虔比赛，书写完毕，对王僧虔说： 谁第一? 
English: After he finished writing, he said to Wang Sangyan, "Who is the first?"

古文：僧虔曰： 臣书第一，陛下亦第一。 
现代文：王僧虔说： 臣书第一，陛下书也是第一。 
English: Wang Zengqian said: The subject's letter is the first, and the majesty's letter is also the first.

古文：上笑曰： 卿可谓善自为谋矣。 
现代文：皇上笑着说： 爱卿可说是善于为自己谋划。 
English: The Emperor said with a smile, "Aikyo is good at planning for himself.

古文：示僧虔古迹十一帙，就求能书人名。
现代文：拿出十一帙古人书迹给王僧虔看，就便探求善书的人的名姓。
English: Taking out eleven ancient manuscripts to show Wang Xiangqian, he searched for the names of people who were good at writing.

古文：僧虔得民间所有帙中所无者一一吴大皇帝、景帝、归命侯书，桓玄书，及王丞相导、领军洽、中书令珉、张芝、索靖、卫伯儒、张翼十二卷奏之。
现代文：王僧虔把从民间得到的而帙中没有的：吴大皇帝、景帝、归命侯书，桓玄书，及丞相王导、领军王洽、中书令王珉、张芝、索靖、卫伯儒、张翼十二卷上奏皇上。
English: Wang Xiangqian played the twelve volumes of Emperor Wu, Emperor Jing, Guiming Hou Shu, Huan Xuan Shu, as well as the prime minister Wang Du, the leader of the army Wang Cai, the middle-ranking official Wang Qian, Zhang Zhi, Suo Jing, Wei Bo Ju, and Zhang Ying, which were obtained from the people but not in the imperial rescript.

古文：又上羊欣所撰《能书人名》一卷。
现代文：同时献上羊欣撰写的《能书人名》一卷。
English: At the same time, a volume of "Nengshu Renmei" written by Yang Xin was presented.

古文：其年冬，迁持节、都督湘州诸军事、征南将军、湘州刺史，侍中如故。清简无所欲，不营财产，百姓安之。
现代文：那年冬天，王僧虔迁持节、都督湘州诸军事、征南将军、湘州刺史，侍中依前不变清廉简朴，没有什么贪欲，不营谋财产，百姓因此安居乐业。
English: In the winter of that year, Wang Xiangqian moved to hold the festival, the military governor of Hunan Province, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the historian of Hunan Province, and the attendants remained unchanged, clean and simple. There was no greed, no pursuit of property, so the people lived and worked in peace.

古文：世祖即位，僧虔以风疾欲陈解，会迁侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，王僧虔因患风疾想辞职，适逢遣侍中、左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司。
English: The founder of the dynasty was the emperor. Wang Sangyan wanted to resign due to his illness, which coincided with the appointment of the third secretary, the third secretary, the third secretary, the third secretary, the third secretary and the third secretary.

古文：僧虔少时群从宗族并会，客有相之者云： 僧虔年位最高，仕当至公，余人莫及也。 
现代文：王僧虔年轻时跟随宗族众人聚会，有客为他看相说： 僧虔寿位最高，做官会做到公的地位，其余的人没有比得上的。 
English: When Wang Zengqian was young, he used to attend gatherings with other members of his clan. A guest said of him: "Zengqian has the highest longevity, and he has achieved public status as a government official. The rest of the people are no match.

古文：及授，僧虔谓兄子俭曰： 汝任重于朝，行当有八命之礼，我若复此授，则一门有二台司，实可畏惧。 
现代文：等到授职时，王僧虔对他哥哥的儿子王俭说： 你的权职比朝臣都重，行将有八命的优礼，我若又得造一授命，那么我们一门将有两位台司，实在令人生畏。 
English: When it came time for the investiture, Wang Sangyan said to his brother's son, Wang Jian: "Your power and position are more important than that of a courtier. You will have to perform the honor of having eight lives. If I have to make another investiture, then we will have two stage managers in one family. It's really scary."

古文：乃固辞不拜，上优而许之。
现代文：于是坚决辞让不接受，皇上褒奖他并答应了他。
English: As a result, he resolutely refused to accept the offer, and the Emperor praised him and agreed.

古文：改授侍中、特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：改授侍中、特进、左光禄大夫。
English: He was promoted to Samurai Junior High School, Special Promotion, and Sakoroku Doctor.

古文：客问僧虔固让之意，僧虔曰： 君子所忧无德，不忧无宠。
现代文：有人间王僧虔为何要坚决推让，王僧虔说： 君子忧愁的是没有德行，不忧愁不受宠幸。
English: Some people asked Wang Sangyan why he should resolutely give in. Wang Sangyan said, "A gentleman is sad because he has no virtue. If he is not sad, he will not be favored."

古文：吾衣食周身，荣位已过，所惭庸薄无以报国，岂容更受高爵，方贻官谤邪！ 
现代文：我周身衣食、荣誉、地位已经过分，惭愧的是自己平庸力薄，没有用来报效国家的，哪容再受高爵显位，留待他人非议呢! 
English: My food, clothing, honor, and status have been excessive. I am ashamed of my mediocre strength, which has not been used to serve the country. How can I be knighted again and be criticized by others?

古文：兄子俭为朝宰，起长梁斋，制度小过，僧虔视之不悦，竟不入户，俭即毁之。
现代文：他哥哥的儿子王俭为朝廷宰辅，建造长梁斋，规格稍为过分，王僧虔看着不高兴，居然不进门，王俭就拆毁了长梁斋。
English: His brother's son, Wang Jian, was the imperial court's second-in-command, and he built Changliangzhai. The specifications were a little excessive, and Wang Xiangqian was not happy to see it, and he did not enter the door. Wang Jian then demolished Changliangzhai.

古文：永明三年，薨。
现代文：永明三年，逝世。
English: Yongming three years, passed away.

古文：僧虔颇解星文，夜坐见豫章分野当有事故，时僧虔子慈为豫章内史，虑其有公事。
现代文：王僧虔颇能辨识星象，一天夜坐，看见豫章分野合当有事，当时王僧虔的儿子王慈做豫章内史，担心他那裹发生公事变故。
English: Wang Zengqian was quite able to discern the stars. One night, he sat up and saw that there was something wrong in the field of Yuzhang. At that time, Wang Zi, the son of Wang Zengqian, was doing the internal history of Yuzhang, and he was worried that there would be a business accident.

古文：少时，僧虔薨，慈弃郡奔赴。
现代文：不多久，王僧虔逝世，王慈丢下郡事赶忙奔丧。
English: Not long after, Wang Zengqian passed away, and Wang Ci left the county and hurried to his death.

古文：僧虔时年六十。
现代文：当时王僧虔六十岁。
English: At that time, Wang Sangyan was sixty years old.

古文：追赠司空，侍中如故。
现代文：追赠司空，侍中一职依旧不变。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of tsukasa, but the position of chamberlain remained unchanged.

古文：谥简穆。
现代文：谧号为简穆。
English: His nickname was Jianmu.

古文：其论书曰： 宋文帝书，自云可比王子敬，时议者云 天然胜羊欣，功夫少于欣 。王平南廙，右军叔，过江之前以为最。亡曾祖领军书，右军云 弟书遂不减吾 。变古制，今唯右军、领军；不尔，至今犹法钟、张。亡从祖中书令书，子敬云 弟书如骑骡，骎骎恒欲度骅骝前 。
现代文：王僧虔评论书法时说： 宋文帝的书法，自己说可以同王子敬相比，当时评议的人说 天然胜羊欣，功夫少于欣，王平南王广，是右军将军王羲之的叔父，在晋室过江之前算是最好的亡；竹祖领军将军王洽的书，右军将军王羲之说 弟书遂不减吾，变更汉魏质朴书风，现在惟推右军、领军；否则，至今还是效法钟繇、张芝亡堂祖父中书令王珉的书，子敬说 弟书如骑骡，驶驱恒欲度骅骝前 。
English: Commenting on the calligraphy, Wang Xiangqian said: Song Emperor's calligraphy, he said, can be compared to Prince Jing. At that time, the commentators said that nature is better than Yang Xin, less effort than Xin. Wang Ping Nan Wang Guang, the uncle of the right army general Wang Xizhi, was the best death before the Jin dynasty crossed the river. The book of the leader of the right army general Wang Xizhi, the book of the leader of the right army general Wang Xizhi said. The brother of the book did not reduce us, changed the Han and Wei simple book style, and now only promoted the right army and the leader of the army.

古文：庾征西翼书，少时与右军齐名，右军后进，庾犹不分，在荆州与都下人书云 小儿辈贱家鸡，皆学逸少书，须吾下，当比之 。
现代文：庾征西庾翼的书，年轻时同右军齐名，王右军后来大有进步，庾翼还不分辨，在荆州给都下人的信说： 小儿们以家鸡为贱，都学习逸少的书法，须我到都下，可要与他比比。 
English: When he was young, the book of Zheng Zheng Xi Xing Ying was as famous as that of the Right Army. Later, Wang Ying Army made great progress, but Zheng Ying was still indistinguishable. In Jingzhou, he sent a letter to the people living in the capital, saying: "Children are inferior to chickens, and they all learn poor calligraphy. If I go to the capital, I can compare with him.

古文：张翼，王右军自书表，晋穆帝令翼写题后答，右军当时不别，久后方悟，云 小人几欲乱真 。
现代文：张翼书写的王右军自书表，晋穆帝让张翼写题后答，王右军当时没分辨出来是他人所书，久后才省悟，说 这小于几乎可以以假乱真 。
English: Wang Yujun took Zhang Ying's writing from the book list. Jin Mu Di let Zhang Ying write the title and then replied that Wang Yujun didn't recognize it as someone else's writing at the time, and only after a long time did he come to his senses and said that it was less than that, and it was almost possible to confuse truth with falsehood.

古文：张芝、索靖、韦诞、钟会、二卫并得名前代，无以辨其优劣，唯见其笔力惊异耳。
现代文：张芝、索靖、韦诞、钟会、二卫都是前代名家，无法分辨他们谁优谁劣，衹是见到他们的笔力感到惊异罢了。
English: Zhang Zhi, Suo Jing, Wei Xing, Zhong Hui, and Erwei are all famous artists of the previous generation. It is impossible to distinguish who is superior and who is inferior. I was just surprised to see their penmanship.

古文：张澄当时亦呼有意。
现代文：张澄当时也称为有意象。
English: At that time, Zhang Cheng was also referred to as a phantom.

古文：郗愔章草亚于右军。
现代文：郗悄章草亚于右军。
English: The right-wing troops were quickly outnumbered.

古文：郗嘉宾草亚于二王，紧媚过其父。
现代文：郗嘉宾草书亚于二王，紧敛秀媚超过他的父亲郗情。
English: The guest of honor, Cursive, is Yu Erwang, whose beauty surpasses that of his father.

古文：桓玄自谓右军之流，论者以比孔琳之。
现代文：桓玄自称是王右军一类，但论说的人把他比作孔琳之。
English: Kuan Xuan claimed to be a member of Wang Yu's army, but commentators likened him to Confucius.

古文：谢安亦入能书录，亦自重，为子敬书嵇康诗。
现代文：谢安也名列能书人名录中，也自重，为子敬书写过嵇康诗。
English: Xie An is also listed in the list of people who can write, and he is also self-respecting. He has written poems for his son.

古文：羊欣书见重一时，亲受子敬，行书尤善，正乃不称名。
现代文：羊欣书法被推崇一时，直接受过于敬的教导，行书特别好，止书与他的名气不够相称。
English: Yang Xin's calligraphy was highly respected for a while, and he was directly taught with too much respect. His penmanship was particularly good, but his penmanship was not commensurate with his fame.

古文：孔琳之书天然放纵，极有笔力，规矩恐在羊欣后。
现代文：孑琳之书法天然放纵，极有笔力，结构章法可能要落羊欣之后。
English: Yulin's calligraphy is naturally indulgent, has great penmanship, and the structure may be inferior to that of Yang Xin.

古文：丘道护与羊欣俱面受子敬，故当在欣后。
现代文：丘道护和羊欣都曾受到子敬的当面指教，所以应在羊欣之下。
English: Hill guard and Yang Xin have both received face-to-face instruction from Zixian, so they should be under Yang Xin.

古文：范晔与萧思话同师羊欣，后小叛，既失故步，为复小有意耳。
现代文：范鞋和萧思话都以羊欣为师，后来小有背离，失掉了老步法，算是稍有意象罢了。
English: Both Fan Shu and Xiao Sizhe took Yang Xin as their teacher. Later, Xiao You deviated and lost the old footwork, which is only a slight illusion.

古文：萧思话书，羊欣之影，风流趣好，殆当不减，笔力恨弱。
现代文：萧思话书是羊欣的影子，风流趣好，几乎相当，遗憾的是笔力显弱。
English: Xiao Si's story book is a shadow of Yang Xin's, with a good flow of humour, almost comparable. Unfortunately, the penmanship is weak.

古文：谢综书，其舅云紧生起，是得赏也，恨少媚好。谢灵运乃不伦，遇其合时，亦得入流。
现代文：谢综的书，他舅父说， 紧生起，是得赏鉴真趣，可惜少了秀媚，谢灵运书法同他们不属同类，不过能被当时的人看重，也能步入能书人的行列。
English: Xie Zomei's books, his uncle said, were born out of the need to appreciate authenticity, but unfortunately lacked beauty. Xie Lingyun's calligraphy is not the same as theirs, but it could be valued by the people at that time, and it could also enter the ranks of those who can write.

古文：贺道力书亚丘道护。
现代文：贺道力的书亚于丘道护。
English: He Daoli's Shuya is in charge of protecting the hill.

古文：庾昕学右军，亦欲乱真矣。 
现代文：庾听学右军书，他的作品也可乱真。 
English: Listen to Yu Junshu, his works can also be chaotic.

古文：又著《书赋》传于世。
现代文：王僧虔还着有《书赋》在世上流传。
English: Wang Zengqian still has "Book Fu" circulating in the world.

古文：第九子寂，字子玄，性迅动，好文章，读《范滂传》，未常不叹挹。
现代文：他的第九个儿子名寂，字子玄，生性敏捷，喜好文章，读《范滂传》，没有不感慨叹服的。
English: His ninth son, Mei Jia, Zhi Zi Xuan, is quick-witted, likes articles, and reads "Fan Yu Chuan." No one can help but be impressed.

古文：王融败后，宾客多归之。
现代文：卫融败后，宾客大多投奔他。
English: After Wei Rong's defeat, most of the guests ran to him.

古文：建武初，欲献《中兴颂》，兄志谓之曰： 汝膏梁年少，何患不达？不镇之以静，将恐贻讥。 
现代文：建武初年，想进献《中兴颂》，他哥哥王志对他说： 你是富贵人家子弟，年纪轻，担心什么将来不发达，不用沉静去镇治心性，将会贻笑他人。 
English: In the first year of Jianwu, his brother Wang Zhi said to him: "You are a rich man's son, young, worried about what will not be developed in the future, you do not need to calm down and control your mind, you will mock others.

古文：寂乃止。
现代文：王寂这才中止。
English: It was only then that Wang Jaku stopped.

古文：初为秘书郎，卒，年二十一。
现代文：起先做秘书郎，死时二十一岁。
English: He started out as a secretary and was 21 when he died.

古文：僧虔宋世尝有书诫子曰：知汝恨吾不许汝学，欲自悔厉，或以阖棺自欺，或更择美业，且得有慨，亦慰穷生。
现代文：王僧虔在宋时曾经有书信训诫儿子说：知道你恨我不赞许你的学识，想要你自己检讨而磨炼自己，或者用阖棺论定来欺骗自己，或者重新选择更好的事业，并且能有所激愤，也可慰我余生。
English: In the Song Dynasty, Wang Zengqian once wrote a letter to his son, saying, "Knowing that you hate me, I do not approve of your learning. I want you to examine yourself and temper yourself, or use the coffin theory to deceive yourself, or re-choose a better cause, and can be angry, but also comfort me for the rest of my life."

古文：但亟闻斯唱，未睹其实。请从先师听言观行，冀此不复虚身。
现代文：衹是屡次听到这种高调，没看到你的实行请让我遵从孔圣先师的教训，听其言而观其行，希望这一点不再在你身上落空。
English: I have heard this high-pitched call many times, but I have not seen you practice it. Please let me follow the teachings of Master Kong Sheng, listen to his words and observe his actions. I hope that this will no longer fail you.

古文：吾未信汝，非徒然也。
现代文：我不相信你，不是凭空的。
English: I don't believe you, not out of the blue.

古文：往年有意于史，取《三国志》聚置床头，百日许，复从业就玄，自当小差于史，犹未近彷佛。曼倩有云： 谈何容易。 
现代文：往年你有志于史学，拿了《三国志》堆放床头，一百天左右，又转业去学玄学，玄学自然与史学稍有不同，但还不是差不多的程度。曼倩说过： 谈何容易。 
English: In previous years, you were interested in history. You took the "History of the Three Kingdoms" and put it on your bedside table. After a hundred days or so, you switched to studying metaphysics. Naturally, metaphysics is slightly different from history, but not to the same extent. Manchu said: It's easy to talk about.

古文：见诸玄，志为之逸，肠为之抽，专一书，转诵数十家注，自少至老，手不释卷，尚未敢轻言。
现代文：见之于玄学的，心志被其涣散，肠胃被其抽取，专攻一书，转而要诵读数十家的注解，从小到老，手不释卷，还不敢轻易发言。
English: Seen in metaphysics, the mind is scattered by it, the stomach is extracted by it, specializing in one book, turning to read dozens of annotations, from small to old, the hand does not release the volume, but also dare not speak easily.

古文：汝开《老子》卷头五尺许，未知辅嗣何所道，平叔何所说，马、郑何所异，《指例》何所明，而便盛于麈尾，自呼谈士，此最险事。
现代文：你展开《老子》卷头五尺来艮，不懂得王弼辅嗣说的什么，何晏平叔说的是什么，马融、郑玄有哪些不同，《指》《例》阐明了什么，你便衣冠整齐手执尘的尾巴毛做的拂尘，自吹是谈士，这是最危险的事。
English: If you open the first five feet of the volume of "Lao Zi" and do not understand what Wang Xizhuo said, what He Jianping said, what are the differences between Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan, what is clarified in "Fingering" and "Example," and you brush the dust with the tail hair of the plain clothes crown and the neat hand holding the dust, and boast that you are a talker, this is the most dangerous thing.

古文：设令袁令命汝言《易》，谢中书挑汝言《庄》，张吴兴叩汝言《老》，端可复言未尝看邪？
现代文：假使袁令命你谈《易经》，谢中书挑选你来谈《庄子》，张吴兴请你谈《老子》，真的能说不曾看过吗?
English: If Yuan Ling ordered you to talk about "I Ching," Xie Zhongshu selected you to talk about "Zhuang Zi," and Zhang Wu Xing asked you to talk about "Lao Zi," can you really say that you have not read it?

古文：谈故如射，前人得破，后人应解，不解即输赌矣。
现代文：谈论典故犹如射覆，前人得破，后人应解，解不了也就输赌了。
English: Talking about allusions is like overthrowing, the predecessors have to break, the descendants should solve, and if they can't solve, they will lose the bet.

古文：且论注百氏，荆州《八帙》，又《才性四本》、《声无哀乐》，皆言家口实，如客至之有设也。
现代文：况且论注如许家数，荆州《八帙》，又有《才性四本，《声无哀乐》，这都是言谈家们必备的谀论资料，就像客来时应有的陈设。
English: Moreover, there are so many annotations, such as Jingzhou's "The Eight-Eyed Raven" and "The Four Talents" and "Voice Without Sorrow," which are all necessary annotation materials for storytellers, just like the furnishings that guests should have when they come.

古文：汝皆未经拂耳瞥目，岂有庖厨不脩，而欲延大宾者哉？
现代文：而你都不用耳去拂一下用眼去瞥一下。哪有不整治庖厨就想宴请贵宾的道理呢?
English: And you don't even have to use your ears to brush it with your eyes to glance at it. What is the reason for wanting to entertain VIPs without tidying up the kitchen?

古文：就如张衡思侔造化，郭象言类悬河，不自劳苦，何由至此？
现代文：就如张衡思维等同造化，变幻无穷；郭象言谈口若悬河，滔滔不绝，从不劳苦，何由至此?
English: Just as Zhang Heng's thinking is the same as creation, the changes are endless; Guo Xiangyan talks like a river, talks endlessly, never works hard, why is this?

古文：汝曾未窥其题目，未辨其指归一一六十四卦，未知何名；《庄子》众篇，何者内外；《八帙》所载，凡有几家；《四本》之称，以何为长一一而终日欺人，人亦不受汝欺也。
现代文：你不曾看到他的题目，不能辨别他的意向；六十四卦，不知各自叫做什么，《庄》众篇，哪些属内篇，哪些属外篇；《八帙》记载的，总共有几家；《四本》之论说，是何说为长。却整天欺骗他人，他人也不受你欺骗。
English: You haven't seen his title, so you can't discern his intention; the sixty-four sagas, you don't know what they're called, the Zhuang books, which ones belong to the inner book, which ones belong to the outer book; there are a total of several books recorded in the Eight Trigrams; the discussion of the Four Books, which one is the longest. But you deceive others all day long, and others will not be deceived by you.

古文：由吾不学，无以为训。
现代文：因我学识不渊博，所以没有训诫的凭依。
English: Because I am not learned, I have no basis for discipline.

古文：然重华无严父，放勋无令子，亦各由己耳。
现代文：然而虞舜没有受尊敬的父亲，唐尧没有好儿子，凡事都由各人自身的努力罢了。
English: However, Gu Yao did not have a respected father, and Tang Yao did not have a good son. Everything depended on the efforts of each person.

古文：汝辈窃议亦当云： 阿越不学，在天地间可嬉戏，何忽自课谪？
现代文：你们这些人私下议论也可能说： 哪天不学?在天地之间可嬉戏，为何忽然自己责难?
English: You people may also say in private: What day do you not study? You can play between heaven and earth, why do you suddenly blame yourself?

古文：幸及盛时逐岁暮，何必有所减？ 
现代文：幸而在少壮追衰老，何必有所减? 
English: Fortunately, in the young and vigorous pursuit of aging, why must there be a decrease?

古文：汝见其一耳，不全尔也。
现代文：你衹见其中一点，不全面。
English: If you see one of them, it's not comprehensive.

古文：设令吾学如马、郑，亦必甚胜；复倍不如今，亦必大减。
现代文：假设让我的学识像马融、郑玄那样，也一定很强；再又我学识加倍不如现在这样，也必定大减。
English: Assuming that my knowledge is like that of Ma Rong and Zheng Xuan, it must be very strong; then again, if I double my knowledge, it will not be as good as it is now, and it will also be greatly reduced.

古文：致之有由，从身上来也。
现代文：招致哪样的结果都有它一定的原因，这原因就产生于自身。
English: Every effect has a cause, and that cause is self-generated.

古文：汝今壮年，自勤数倍许胜，劣及吾耳。
现代文：你现正当壮年，衹要自己能有现在几倍的勤奋就能胜我；就是差了也能有我这样。
English: You are now in the prime of life, and if you can be several times as diligent as you are now, you can beat me; even if you are not, you can be like me.

古文：世中比例举眼是，汝足知此，不复具言。
现代文：世上类似的例子举目皆是，你足可明白这些，我不再一一说了。
English: There are many similar examples in the world, you can easily understand these, I will not say more.

古文：吾在世，虽乏德素，要复推排人间数十许年，故是一旧物，人或以比数汝等耳。
现代文：我在世上虽说缺乏德望，要再在人间往后推移几十年，衹不过是件古董，但有的人或许还要拿我作比来数说你们。
English: Although I lack prestige in the world, if I were to live on earth for a few more decades, I would be nothing more than an antique, but some people may still compare me to you.

古文：即化之后，若自无调度，谁复知汝事者？
现代文：即使死后，假如自己没有一定安排，谁又能再知道你的事呢?
English: Even after death, if you do not have a certain arrangement, who can know about you?

古文：舍中亦有少负令誉弱冠越超清级者，于时王家门中，优者则龙凤，劣者犹虎豹，失荫之后，岂龙虎之议？
现代文：家族中也有少年时起就有好声誉年纪轻轻就超越清级的，现时王家门中优秀的就成龙成凤，庸劣的还可成虎成豹，失去先世祖荫之后，难道还能有成龙成虎之说吗?
English: There are also boys in the family who have a good reputation from the time they are young and surpass the middle class. At present, the excellent ones in the royal family can become dragons and phoenixes, and the mediocre ones can become tigers and leopards. After losing the ancestral shade, can there still be a dragon and tiger?

古文：况吾不能为汝荫，政应各自努力耳。
现代文：况且我也不能成你的荫庇，正应该各自努力啊。
English: Besides, I can't be your shadow. We should all make our own efforts.

古文：或有身经三公，蔑尔无闻；布衣寒素，卿相屈体。
现代文：有的人曾经贵为三公，转服如云雾消失了；有的人出身贫寒、身处平民百姓之中，却是卿相的贵体暂时受屈。
English: Some people were once high-ranking nobles, but they changed their clothes and disappeared like a cloud; some people were born poor and lived among the common people, but their noble bodies temporarily suffered.

古文：或父子贵贱殊，兄弟声名异。
现代文：有的人身为父子，却贵贱悬殊；有的人同为兄弟，声名却是大不相同。
English: Some are like father and son, but of very different quality; some are like brothers, but have very different reputations.

古文：何也？
现代文：为什么呢?
English: What is it for?

古文：体尽读数百卷书耳。
现代文：领悟了数百卷书罢了。
English: It's just a matter of understanding hundreds of books.

古文：吾今悔无所及，欲以前车诫尔后乘也。汝年入立境，方应从官，兼有室累，牵役情性，何处复得下帷如王郎时邪？
现代文：我现在后悔已来不及了，想用前车的覆辙训诫你们这些后车的乘者，你已到三十而立的时候，刚刚做官，兼有家室拖累，牵制情性发展，何处再能放下室内帷幕像王郎时期一样呢?
English: I am too late to regret now, I want to use the mistakes of the front car to admonish you, the passengers of the rear car. When you have reached thirty, you have just become an official, you have a family to drag you down, and you have restrained your emotional development. Where else can you put down the indoor curtain like in the days of Wang Lang?

古文：为可作世中学，取过一生耳。
现代文：为可作世中学，取过一生罢了。
English: In order to become a world-class high school, it only takes a lifetime.

古文：试复三思，勿讳吾言。
现代文：请再多想想，不要顾及我说的话。
English: Please think about it some more and disregard what I said.

古文：犹捶挞志辈，冀脱万一，未死之间，望有成就者，不知当有益否？
现代文：好似鞭策志儿等人，希望或许于万一，在我未死的时间内，亟盼有所成就，不知会有益处不?
English: It's as if they are hoping that maybe, just in case, in the time I have left before I die, they will be able to achieve something. I wonder if there is any benefit in that?

古文：各在尔身己切，岂复关吾邪？
现代文：事关你们各自的切身利害，难道还关系到我吗?
English: Does it matter to me when it concerns your own vital interests?

古文：鬼唯知爱深松茂柏，宁知子弟毁誉事！
现代文：做了鬼就衹知道欢喜坟头边松荫柏茂，如何知道子弟的声名好坏!
English: If you are a ghost, how do you know how to enjoy the pine trees on the edge of the grave? How do you know whether your child's reputation is good or bad?

古文：因汝有感，故略叙胸怀。
现代文：我因你产生感触，所以略微叙述自己的想法。
English: I'm moved by you, so I'll just say a little bit about what I think.

古文：张绪，字思曼，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：张绪字思曼，吴郡吴地人。
English: Zhang Xuzi Siman, a native of Wu County, Wuxi.

古文：祖茂度，会稽太守。
现代文：他祖父名叫茂度，曾任会稽太守。
English: His grandfather's name was Maudu, and he was once appointed as the auditor-general of the association.

古文：父寅，太子中舍人。
现代文：他父亲名叫寅，任太子中舍人。
English: His father's name was Yin, and he was the youngest son of the crown prince.

古文：绪少知名，清简寡欲，叔父镜谓人曰： 此儿，今之乐广也。 
现代文：张绪少时颇有名气，清雅简朴没有贪欲，他叔父张镜对人说： 这孩子是当今的乐广。 
English: When Zhang Xu was young, he was quite famous, elegant and simple without greed. His uncle Zhang Jing said to people: This child is today's Leguang.

古文：州辟议曹从事，举秀才。
现代文：州官征张绪做议营从事，荐举他做秀才。
English: The state official solicited Zhang Xu to engage in advocacy and recommended him as a talented person.

古文：建平王护军主簿，右军法曹行参军，司空主簿，抚军、南中郎二府功曹，尚书仓部郎。
现代文：任过建平王护军主簿，右军法曹行参军，司空主簿，抚军、南中郎：二府功曹，尚书仓部郎。
English: He served as the main bookkeeper of Jianping Wang's protection army, the legal officer of the right army, the main bookkeeper of Jianping Wang's protection army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of Jianping Wang's right army, the legal officer of J

古文：都令史谘郡县米事，绪萧然直视，不以经怀。
现代文：都令史询问郡县米事，张绪面对这些表现冷淡，从不放在心上。
English: Du Lingshi inquired about the county and county rice affairs, Zhang Xu was cold in the face of these performances, and never took them to heart.

古文：除巴陵王文学，太子洗马，北中郎参军，太子中舍人，本郡中正，车骑从事中郎，中书郎，州治中，黄门郎。
现代文：授予他巴陵王文学、太子洗马、北中郎参军、太子中舍人、本郡中正、车骑从事中郎、中书郎、州治中、黄门郎。
English: He was awarded the titles of Baling King of Literature, Prince of Horse-washing, North Middle Brother of the Army, Prince of Middle Brother of the Army, County Middle Manager, Middle Brother of the Horse-riding, Middle Brother of the Book, Middle Brother of the State, and Yellow Gate.

古文：宋明帝每见绪，辄叹其清淡。
现代文：宋明帝见到张绪时，每每为他的清淡而感叹。
English: Every time Song Mingdi saw Zhang Xu, he admired his lightness.

古文：转太子中庶子，本州大中正，迁司徒左长史。
现代文：转太子中庶子，本州大中正，迁司徒左长史。
English: He was an illegitimate child of the crown prince, a junior high school student at Honshu University, and a disciple of Emperor Jian.

古文：吏部尚书袁粲言于帝曰： 臣观张绪有正始遗风，宜为宫职。 
现代文：吏部尚书袁粲对皇帝说： 臣观察张绪具有正始年间遗留下来的风尚，适合担任宫廷职官。 
English: The clerk, Shangshu Yuan Qi, said to the emperor: The vassal observes that Zhang Xu has the style left over from the beginning of the year, and is suitable for serving as a palace official.

古文：复转中庶子，领翊军校尉，转散骑常侍，领长水校尉，寻兼侍中，迁吏部郎，参掌大选。
现代文：复转中庶子，领翊军校尉，转散骑常侍，领长水校尉，没多久兼侍中，遥吏部郎，参与掌管全国官吏的任免、考课、升降、调动等事务。
English: He was an illegitimate son in the middle of his career, a lieutenant of the Imperial Japanese Army, a cavalry officer in the Imperial Japanese Army, a lieutenant of the Imperial Japanese Navy, and not long after, a junior officer, and a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs. He was involved in the appointment and dismissal, examinations, promotion, and transfer of officials throughout the country.

古文：元徽初，东宫罢，选曹拟舍人王俭格外记室，绪以俭人地兼美，宜转秘书丞，从之。
现代文：元徽初年，东宫罢，选曹拟任舍人王俭为格外记室，张绪认为王俭人地兼美，应当转秘书丞，皇上听从了他的意见。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, in the East Palace, the Cao proposed to appoint Wang Jian as a special secretary. Zhang Xu believed that Wang Jian was both a man and a woman, and should be made a secretary. The emperor listened to his opinion.

古文：绪又迁侍中，郎如故。
现代文：张绪又迁任侍中，吏部郎一职依前不变。
English: Zhang Xu was also transferred to the position of chamberlain, while the position of secretary remained unchanged.

古文：绪忘情荣禄，朝野皆贵其风。尝与客闲言，一生不解作诺。
现代文：张绪对爵位俸禄不动情感，朝野都看重他的风度，他曾经同宾客聊天，说平生不懂曲意逢迎他人。
English: Zhang Xu does not show any emotion for the title of nobility, and the court attaches great importance to his demeanor. He once chatted with guests, saying that he did not understand the meaning of the song and welcomed others.

古文：时袁粲、褚渊秉政，有人以绪言告粲、渊者，即出绪为吴郡太守，绪初不知也。
现代文：当时袁粲、褚渊执掌朝政，有人把张绪的话告诉袁粲、褚渊，他们即让张绪外出做吴郡太守，张绪起初不知道这些。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao and Yuanyuan were in charge of the imperial government. Someone told Yuan Shao and Yuanyuan about Zhang Xu's words, and they let Zhang Xu go out to be the governor of Wu County. Zhang Xu did not know this at first.

古文：迁为祠部尚书，复领中正，迁太常，加散骑常侍，寻领始安王师。
现代文：后迁祠部尚书，复领中正，迁太常，加散骑常侍，没过多久领始安王师。
English: After the relocation, the head priest of the ancestral hall, Shang Shu, reassumed the leadership of the middle-ranking, relocated too often, and added a free-riding attendant, and soon led the King Shi An division.

古文：升明二年，迁太祖太傅长史，加征虏将军。
现代文：升明二年，迁太祖太傅长史，加征虏将军。
English: In the second year after his ascension to the throne, he transferred his great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather, great-grandfather and great-grandfather.

古文：齐台建，转散骑常侍，世子詹事。
现代文：齐朝建立，张绪转散骑常侍，世子詹事。
English: It was established in the Qi Dynasty, with Zhang Xuan riding as an attendant, and his son Zhan Zhi as the leader.

古文：建元元年，转中书令，常侍如故。
现代文：建元元年，转中书令，常侍职依前未变。
English: In the first year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, the title of chancellor was changed to chancellor, but the position of chancellor remained unchanged.

古文：绪善言，素望甚重，太祖深加敬异。
现代文：张绪很会说话，家世清白，向来很被人敬重。太祖对他特别敬重。
English: Zhang Xu is very eloquent, comes from a pure family, and has always been highly respected by people. The great-grandfather held him in high esteem.

古文：仆射王俭谓人曰： 北士中觅张绪，过江未有人，不知陈仲弓、黄叔度能过之不耳？ 
现代文：仆射王俭对人说： 北士中觅张绪，过江没有人，不知陈仲弓、黄叔度能超过他不? 
English: His attendant Wang Jian said to the man, "Among the soldiers from the north, no one has crossed the river to find Zhang Xiu. Don't you know that Chen Zhongyu and Huang Shudu can surpass him?

古文：车驾幸庄严寺听僧达道人讲，座远，不闻绪言，上难移绪，乃迁僧达以近之。
现代文：太祖驾临庄严寺听僧达道人讲，离得太远，听不到张绪说话，皇上觉得把张绪迁到僧达道人附近是难于办到的，于是就把僧达道人迁移到张绪附近。
English: The great-great-grandfather came to the Solemn Temple to listen to the Taoist monk, but it was too far away to hear Zhang Xiu speak. The emperor found it difficult to move Zhang Xiu to the vicinity of the Taoist monk, so he moved the Taoist monk to the vicinity of Zhang Xiu.

古文：寻加骁骑将军。
现代文：时隔不久，加张绪骁骑将军。
English: Soon after, Zhang Xu was added to the general's cavalry.

古文：欲用绪为右仆射，以问王俭，俭曰： 南士由来少居此职。 
现代文：皇上想用张绪做右仆射，征求王俭的意见，王俭说： 南士从来少有任此职的。 
English: The emperor wanted to use Zhang Xiu as his right-hand man, and asked Wang Jian for his opinion. Wang Jian said: Nanshi has rarely held this position.

古文：褚渊在座，启上曰： 俭年少，或不尽忆。
现代文：褚渊也在座，向皇上奏说： 王俭年轻，可能记不全。
English: Gongyuan was also present and reported to the emperor: "Wang Jian is young and may not remember everything.

古文：江左用陆玩、顾和，皆南人也。 
现代文：江左用陆玩、顾和，都是南方人。 
English: Jiang Zuo used the land to play, and Gu He was a southerner.

古文：俭曰： 晋氏衰政，不可以为准则。 
现代文：王俭说： 束晋政治衰弱，不能作为准则。 
English: Wang Jian said: The politics of Sokjin is weak and cannot be used as a guideline.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：皇上终于作罢。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：四年，初立国学，以绪为太常卿，领国子祭酒，常侍、中正如故。绪既迁官，上以王延之代绪为中书令，时人以此选为得人，比晋朝之用王子敬、王季琰也。
现代文：建元四年，刚刚设立国学，用张绪做太常卿，领国子祭酒，常侍、中正职依前不变张绪调动了官职，皇上以王延之代替张绪为中书令，当时人认为遣次人选很合适，就像晋朝任用王子敬、王季琰。
English: In the fourth year of the founding of the Republic of China, when the Chinese Academy of Nationalities had just been established, Zhang Xiu was appointed as the First Secretary of the State, the leader of the national children's sacrificial wine, and the regular attendants and the middle and senior officials were transferred to the official positions according to the previously unchanged Zhang Xiu. The emperor replaced Zhang Xiu with Wang Yan as the middle and senior officials. At that time, people thought that the appointment of the second person was very suitable, just like the appointment of Prince Kei and Wang Jiqi by the Jin Dynasty.

古文：绪长于《周易》，言精理奥，见宗一时。
现代文：张绪对《周易》很有研究，讲述精到，道理奥妙，被尊为一代宗师。
English: Zhang Xu has done a lot of research on "Zhou Yi," the story is well told, the reason is mysterious, and he is respected as a generation of guru.

古文：常云何平叔所不解《易》中七事，诸卦中所有时义，是其一也。
现代文：经常讲何平叔不解的《易》中七事，诸卦中所有时义，就是其中之一。
English: One of the seven things in Yi that He Pingshu is often puzzled about is the meaning of all the tenses in the sagas.

古文：世祖即位，转吏部尚书，祭酒如故。
现代文：世祖即皇帝位，张绪转吏部尚书，祭酒官职依前不变。
English: The founder of the dynasty was the emperor, Zhang Xu was transferred to the post of secretary, and the post of sacrificial liquor officer remained unchanged.

古文：永明元年，迁金紫光禄大夫，领太常。
现代文：永明元年，迁金紫光禄大夫，领太常。
English: In the first year of the Yongming era, Dr. Jin Ziguanglu was transferred to the imperial court.

古文：明年，领南郡王师，加给事中，太常如故。
现代文：第二年，领南郡王师，加给事中，太常官职依前不变。
English: In the second year, Wang Shi, the leader of Nanshan County, was added to the matter, and the position of the permanent secretary remained unchanged.

古文：三年，转太子詹事，师、给事如故。
现代文：永明三年，转太子詹事，南郡王师、给事中宫职依前不变。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the position of Prince Zhan, but he still held the positions of the king's teacher and secretary.

古文：绪每朝见，世祖目送之。
现代文：张绪每次朝见，世祖都目送他。
English: Every time Zhang Xu saw the morning, the ancestors saw him off.

古文：谓王俭曰： 绪以位尊我，我以德贵绪也。 
现代文：世祖对王俭说： 张绪因我的权位高贵而尊重我，我因他的德操高尚而看重他。 
English: The patriarch said to Wang Jian: Zhang Xu respects me because of the nobility of my power, and I value him because of his noble morality.

古文：迁散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫、师如故。
现代文：迁张绪散骑常侍，金紫光禄大夫、师职依前不变。
English: Zhangxu Zangjie's regular attendant, Jin Ziguanglu's doctor, and the teacher's position remain unchanged.

古文：给亲信二十人。
现代文：给亲信二十人。
English: Twenty to his cronies.

古文：复领中正。
现代文：复又领中正。
English: He also concurrently held the post of vice-premier.

古文：长沙王晃属选用吴兴闻人邕为州议曹，绪以资籍不当，执不许。
现代文：长沙王萧晃嘱托张绪选用吴兴闻人邕为州议曹，张绪认为他资历不合，坚持不答应。
English: Changsha King Xiao Huan asked Zhang Xu to choose Wu Xingwen as the state councillor, but Zhang Xu thought that his qualifications did not match and insisted on not agreeing.

古文：晃遣书佐固请之，绪正色谓晃信曰： 此是身家州乡，殿下何得见逼！ 
现代文：萧晃派书佐再三要求他，张绪严肃地对萧晃的信使说： 这是我的州乡，殿下怎么能逼迫我呢! 
English: Xiao Huan's secretary repeatedly asked him to do so, and Zhang Xu solemnly said to Xiao Huan's messenger: This is my hometown, how can your highness persecute me!

古文：七年，竟陵王子良领国子祭酒，世祖敕王晏曰： 吾欲令司徒辞祭酒以授张绪，物议以为云何？ 
现代文：永明七年，竟陵王萧子良领国子祭酒，世祖敕告王晏说：我想让司徒辞祭酒，把这一官职授予张绪，舆论会因此说什么呢? 
English: In the seventh year of the Yongming era, King Xiao Ziliang of Ling actually led the national son's sacrificial wine. The ancestor told Wang Yao, "I want to let the priest remove the sacrificial wine and award this official post to Zhang Xu. What will the public opinion say?

古文：子良竟不拜，以绪领国子祭酒，光禄、师、中正如故。
现代文：萧子良到底没受祭酒之职。皇上以张绪领国子祭酒，金紫光禄大夫、南郡玉师、中正之职依前不变。
English: In the end, Xiao Ziliang did not receive the position of sacrificial wine. The emperor was led by Zhang Xu as the leader of the national son's sacrificial wine, and the positions of Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, Nan Gu Yu Shi, and Zhong Zheng remained unchanged.

古文：绪口不言利，有财辄散之。
现代文：张绪口不言利，有了财物就随意散发了。
English: Zhang Xukou did not say anything, and the property was dispersed.

古文：清言端坐，或竟日无食。门生见绪饥，为之辨餐，然未尝求也。
现代文：坐姿端庄，言谈清雅，有时整天不吃东西，门生看见他饥饿，替他具办了熟食品，但他从未要求过。
English: He sat in a dignified posture, spoke with elegance, and sometimes did not eat all day. When his disciples saw that he was hungry, they prepared some cooked food for him, but he never asked for it.

古文：卒时年六十八。
现代文：逝世时六十八岁。
English: He was sixty-eight at the time of his death.

古文：遗命作芦葭轜车，灵上置杯水香火，不设祭。
现代文：遣命用芦苇做丧车，灵上放置香火和一杯水，不要设祭。
English: Use reeds to make a funeral carriage, put incense and a glass of water on the spirit, and do not set up a festival.

古文：从弟融敬重绪，事之如亲兄，赍酒于绪灵前酌饮，恸哭曰： 阿兄风流顿尽！ 
现代文：他堂弟张融敬重他，待他就像亲哥哥，带酒在张绪灵前酌饮，十分哀痛地哭着说： 阿兄的风流顿刻全无了! 
English: His cousin Zhang Rong respected him and treated him like a brother. He brought wine and drank it in front of Zhang Xuling. He cried with great sorrow and said, "My brother's love affair is suddenly over!"

古文：追赠散骑常侍、特进、金紫光禄大夫。
现代文：追赠散骑常侍、特进、金紫光禄大夫。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of Zanyi Changzhi, Specially Promoted, and Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor.

古文：谥简子。
现代文：谧号为简王。
English: His nickname is Jane Wang.

古文：子克，苍梧世正员郎，险行见宠，坐废锢。
现代文：他的儿子张克，苍梧王时代是正员郎，因为行为邪恶而得到苍梧王宠幸，后受到罢官并禁止再任职的处治。
English: His son Zhang Ke, who was a high-ranking official at the time of King Cangwu, was favored by King Cangwu because of his evil behavior, and was later dismissed and banned from holding office again.

古文：克弟允，永明中安西功曹，淫通杀人，伏法。
现代文：张克的弟弟张允，永明年间做过安西功曹，因淫乱通奸而杀人，被依法处死。
English: Zhang Ke's younger brother, Zhang Yun, who had served as Anxi Gong Cao for a long time, was sentenced to death for adultery.

古文：允兄充，永明元年为武陵王友，坐书与尚书令王俭，辞旨激扬，为御史中丞到捴所奏，免官禁锢。
现代文：张允的哥哥张充，永明元年，做武陵王的幕友，因写给尚书令王俭的信中，言词激动，而被御史中丞到捅参劾，被免去官职并禁止再次录用。
English: Zhang Yun's brother Zhang Chong, who was a close friend of King Wuling in the first year of the Ming Dynasty, was removed from his official position and prohibited from re-hiring because of his heated words in a letter he wrote to Shang Shuling Wang Jian.

古文：论者以为有恨于俭也。
现代文：有人议论觉得这是因为与王俭有仇怨的缘故。
English: Some people speculated that this was due to a grudge against Wang Jian.

古文：案建元初，中诏序朝臣，欲以右仆射拟张岱。
现代文：考建元初年，中枢在下诏序列朝臣时，原想把右仆射一职授予张岱。
English: In the first year of the Jianyuan, when the center was in the lower echelon of courtiers, he originally wanted to award the position of right-hand man to Zhang Xuan.

古文：褚渊谓 得此过优，若别有忠诚，特进升引者，别是一理，仰由裁照。 
现代文：褚渊说他得遣一职位过分优待了，假若他另有忠诚的表现，特进升迁，那就是另外一个理由，仰由圣上裁照 。
English: Shanyuan said that he had to leave a position because of excessive preferential treatment. If he had another manifestation of loyalty, a special promotion, that would be another reason, subject to the approval of His Holiness.

古文：诏 更量 。
现代文：皇上韶为 另作考虑 。
English: However, the Emperor had other ideas.

古文：说者既异，今两记焉。
现代文：既有不同说法，现把两者都记录在这里。
English: Since there are different accounts, both are recorded here.

古文：史臣曰：王僧虔有希声之量，兼以艺业。
现代文：史臣曰：王僧虔具有本可宏大声音而却能隐忍衹发极细微的声音的度量，更兼专精艺业。
English: Shichen said: Wang Zengqian has the ability to make a very large sound, but can bear to make a very small sound, and is also an expert in the arts.

古文：戒盈守满，屈己自容，方轨诸公，实平世之良相。
现代文：可他保守满足，力戒盈溢，委屈自身以便被他人所容纳，甘愿同诸公并驾齐驱，实在是太平盛世的好宰相。
English: However, he was content to be conservative, refrained from excesses, humbled himself in order to be accepted by others, and was willing to go hand in hand with the princes. He was truly a good prime minister for a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：张绪凝衿素气，自然标格，搢绅端委，朝宗民望。
现代文：张绪质朴凝聚，气韵清钝，自然风范，捂绅楷模，朝臣宗师，百姓仰望。
English: Zhangxu is a simple and cohesive place, with a clear and blunt atmosphere, a natural demeanor, a model of a gentleman, a mentor of courtiers, and the people look up to him.

古文：夫如绪之风流者，岂不谓之名臣！
现代文：像张绪这样的风流人物，能不说是名臣吗?
English: Can a womanizer like Zhang Xu be called a great minister?

古文：赞曰：简穆长者，其义恢恢；声律草隶，燮理三台。
现代文：赞曰：简穆是位显贵的人，他的义方宽广。精于声律草隶，仕宦三台协调治理国事。
English: Zang said: "Jian Mu is a distinguished person, his righteous side is broad. He is good at the rhythms of the grass, and he is the leader of the three departments to coordinate the governance of state affairs.

古文：思曼廉静，自绝风埃；游心爻系，物允清才。
现代文：思曼清廉沉静，自绝风尘，潜心钻研《周易》，是公认的优秀人才。
English: Shiman is clean, honest, calm, self-effacing, and dedicated to studying "Zhou Yi," and is recognized as an outstanding talent.

