古文：王家屏，字忠伯，大同山阴人。
现代文：王家屏，字忠伯，大同山阴人。
English: Wang Jiaping, Zhaozhong Bo, Datong Mountain Yin people.

古文：隆庆二年进士。
现代文：隆庆二年的进士。
English: Longqing two-year starter.

古文：选庶吉士，授编修，预修《世宗实录》。
现代文：选作庶吉士，授职为编修，参与修撰《世宗实录》。
English: He was selected as a member of the Shobokichi, given the post of editor, and participated in the compilation of the "Sejong Record."

古文：高拱兄捷前为操江都御史，以官帑遗赵文华，家屏直书之，时拱方柄国，嘱稍讳，家屏执不可。
现代文：高拱的哥哥高捷以前做操江都御史，拿官钱送给赵文华，王家屏秉直记述此事。当时高拱正掌握国政，嘱咐他稍加避讳，王家屏坚持不同意。
English: Gao Gong's brother Gao Jie used to be the governor of the Yangtze River, and he gave official money to Zhao Wenhua. Wang Jiaping wrote about this matter directly. At that time, Gao Gong was in charge of state affairs, and he told him to keep a low profile. Wang Jiaping insisted that he did not agree.

古文：万历初，进修撰，充日讲官。
现代文：万历初年，他晋升为修撰，担当日讲官。
English: In the first year of Wanli, he was promoted to Shuxian, in charge of the Japanese lecturer.

古文：敷奏剀挚，帝尝敛容受，称为端士。
现代文：陈述奏进颇切实际，皇帝曾经慎重接受，称他为端正之士。
English: The report was quite realistic, and the emperor cautiously accepted it, calling him a man of integrity.

古文：张居正寝疾，词臣率奔走祷祈，独家屏不往。
现代文：张居正卧病，词臣们奔走替他祈祷，唯独王家屏没有去。
English: Zhang Ju was ill in bed, and his courtiers rushed to pray for him, but Wang Jiaping did not go.

古文：再迁侍讲学士。
现代文：又调任侍讲学士。
English: He was also transferred to the post of assistant lecturer.

古文：十二年，擢礼部右侍郎，改吏部。甫逾月，命以左侍郎兼东阁大学士，入预机务。
现代文：万历十二年晋升为礼部右侍郎，改任吏部职，才过一个月，任命他为左侍郎兼东阁大学士，参与机要事务的处理。
English: In the twelfth year of Wanli, he was promoted to the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was appointed to the post of the Secretary, and only a month later, he was appointed as the Left Attendant and the East Pavilion University Scholar, to participate in the handling of important matters.

古文：去史官二年即辅政，前此未有也。
现代文：离开史官之职才两年就辅佐大政，以前还没有过。
English: Only two years after leaving the post of historian, he became an aide to the prime minister, something that had never happened before.

古文：申时行当国，许国、王锡爵次之，家屏居末。
现代文：申时行主持国政，许国、王锡爵仅次于申时行，王家屏排在最后。
English: Shen Shigang presided over state affairs, Xu Guo and Wang Xizhe were second only to Shen Shigang, and Wang Jiaping was last.

古文：每议事，秉正持法，不亢不随。
现代文：每次议论政事，他都处事公正，坚持法度，刚正不附众。
English: Every time he discussed politics, he always dealt with things fairly, adhered to the law, and did not follow the crowd.

古文：越二年，遭继母忧。
现代文：过了两年，遇上继母的丧事。
English: Two years later, my stepmother passed away.

古文：诏赐银币，驰传，行人护行。服甫阕，诏进礼部尚书，遣行人召还。
现代文：皇帝赏赐他银币，快马传递，专人替他护行，丧服刚满期，诏令晋升他为礼部尚书，派遣行人召他回朝。
English: The emperor rewarded him with silver coins, conveyed him on a fast horse, had a special escort escort for him, his funeral clothes had just expired, issued a decree to promote him to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and sent a messenger to call him back to the imperial court.

古文：抵京师，三月未得见。
现代文：抵达京师，三个月没能见到皇帝。
English: When he arrived in Beijing, he did not see the emperor for three months.

古文：家屏以为言，请因圣节御殿受贺，毕发留中章奏，举行册立皇太子礼。
现代文：王家屏因此上奏，请求在圣节御殿接受朝贺，而后将留在宫内的奏章发给有关部门，举行册立皇太子的礼仪。
English: Therefore, Wang Jiaping made a request to receive the morning greetings in the Holy Festival Palace, and then sent the written message left in the palace to the relevant departments to hold the ceremony of enthroning the crown prince.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：复偕同官疏请。
现代文：又与同官上奏恳请。
English: I would also like to make a heartfelt appeal with my colleague.

古文：帝乃于万寿节强一临御焉。
现代文：皇帝才在万寿节勉强光临了一次。
English: The emperor only came once, reluctantly, on the All-Year's Eve.

古文：俄遣中官谕家屏，奖以忠爱。
现代文：很快就派宦官传旨王家屏，以忠诚仁爱奖励他。
English: He soon sent an eunuch to pass on the message to Wang Jiaping, rewarding him with loyalty and benevolence.

古文：家屏疏谢，复请帝勤视朝。
现代文：王家屏上奏感谢，又请求皇帝多视察朝政。
English: Wang Jiaping expressed his thanks and asked the emperor to pay more attention to the government.

古文：居数日，帝为一御门延见，自是益深居不出矣。
现代文：过了几天，皇帝驾临一宫门接见了他，此后便深居不出。
English: A few days later, the emperor arrived at Ichinomiya-mon Gate to receive him, after which he was unable to live there.

古文：评事雒于仁进四箴，帝将重罪之。
现代文：评事名隹于仁上奏四条劝告之语，皇帝准备从重惩治他。
English: The commentator, Mingshu Yu Ren, recited four words of advice, and the emperor prepared to punish him severely.

古文：家屏言： 人主出入起居之节，耳目心志之娱，庶官不及知、不敢谏者，辅弼之臣得先知而预谏之，故能防欲于微渺。
现代文：王家屏劝谏 ：皇帝出入起居，是耳目心志的娱乐，一般官吏是不该知道，不敢劝谏的，辅佐的大臣应当先知道并干预、劝谏，所以能防止欲念于微渺之时。
English: Wang Jiaping advised: The emperor's comings and goings are entertainment for the ears, eyes, and mind. Ordinary officials should not know and dare not advise, and the assistant ministers should first know and intervene and advise, so they can prevent the desire from fading away.

古文：今于仁以庶僚上言，而臣备位密勿，反缄默苟容，上亏圣明之誉，下陷庶僚蒙不测之威，臣罪大矣，尚可一日立于圣世哉！ 
现代文：现在名隹于仁以一般臣子的身份劝谏，辅臣不与皇帝亲近、密切，反而缄默敛容，对上亏污了圣明的赞誉，对下使一般的臣僚蒙受不可预测的威胁，我的罪行很大，还能在圣世立身一天吗？ 
English: Now, Meng Xuan Yu Ren is advising him as an ordinary courtier. The assistant minister is not close and intimate with the emperor, but is silent and restrained. He has tarnished the praise of the Holy Ming for the former, and subjected the ordinary ministers to unpredictable threats for the latter. My crime is great. Will I still be able to stand up in the holy world?

古文：帝不怿，留中，而于仁得善去。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，将奏章留在了宫中，而名隹于仁得以完好地离去。
English: The emperor was not happy, and left the record in the palace, while Nagamine Yujin was able to leave in good condition.

古文：十八年，以久旱乞罢，言： 迩年以来，天鸣地震，星陨风霾，川竭河涸，加以旱潦蝗螟，疫疠札瘥，调燮之难，莫甚今日。
现代文：万历十八年因为天气久旱请求免职，称： 近年以来，天鸣地震，星陨风霾，川竭河涸，加上旱涝蝗灾，瘟疫死亡，调和的困难没有比现在更甚的。
English: In the 18th year of Wanli, he asked to be relieved of his duties because of the long drought, saying: In recent years, the Tianming earthquake, the meteor storm, the haze, the dry river, the drought, the locust plague, and the death of the plague, the difficulties of reconciliation have not been greater than now.

古文：况套贼跳梁于陕右，土蛮猖獗于辽西，贡市属国复鸱张虎视于宣、大。
现代文：何况河套贼人在陕西作乱，土蛮在辽西猖獗，通贡贸易的属国又虎视眈眈于宣府大同地区。
English: What's more, the Hetao bandits wreaked havoc in Shaanxi, the barbarians were rampant in western Liaoning, and the tributary states of the Tonggong trade were eager to establish a foothold in the Datong area of Xuanfu.

古文：虚内事外，内已竭而外患未休；剥民供军，民已穷而军食未裕。
现代文：空虚内藏对付外敌，国内资财已经枯竭而外患并没休止；剥削百姓供养军队，百姓已经穷困而军粮还不充裕。
English: Empty internal reserves to deal with foreign enemies, domestic resources and wealth have been depleted while external threats have not ceased; the people have been exploited to feed the army, the people have been impoverished and there is not enough grain for the army.

古文：且议论纷纭，罕持大体；簿书凌杂，只饰靡文。
现代文：况且议论纷纭，很少考虑国家大体；帐簿混乱，只有粉饰的虚文。
English: Moreover, there is much discussion, but little consideration of the country as a whole; the accounts are confused, and there are only whitewashed fictions.

古文：纲维纵弛，悽玩之习成；名实混淆，侥幸之风启。
现代文：纲纪松弛，养成了懈怠玩乐的习惯；虚名与实际混淆，侥幸的风气开启。
English: Discipline is relaxed, and the habit of slack play is developed; false reputation is confused with reality, and the culture of chance begins.

古文：陛下又深居静摄，朝讲希临。
现代文：陛下又深居宫中不理朝政，很少上朝、参与经筵。
English: His Majesty also lived deep in the palace and ignored court politics, rarely going to court and taking part in economic affairs.

古文：统计臣一岁间，仅两觐天颜而已。
现代文：统计我一年之中，仅仅两次见到过陛下的天颜。
English: According to my statistics, I have only seen His Majesty's face twice in the past year.

古文：间尝一进瞽言，竟与诸司章奏并寝不行。
现代文：其间曾有一次进呈盲目之言，竟然与诸司的奏章一起沉寂未有施行。
English: In the meantime, there was a time when blind words were uttered, and it turned out that they were not carried out together with the music of the various departments.

古文：今骄阳烁石，小民愁苦之声殷天震地，而独未彻九阍。
现代文：现在骄阳烁石，百姓的愁苦声音弥漫天际震动大地，陛下却没有撤去九重深禁，出见朝臣。
English: Now, the sun is shining brightly, the sky is filled with the mournful voices of the people, and the earth is shaking. However, His Majesty did not lift the nine-year ban and met with courtiers.

古文：此臣所以中夜旁皇，饮食俱废，不能自已者也。
现代文：这就是我彻夜彷徨，饮食均已怠废，不能自止的原因。
English: That's why I've been up all night, skipping meals and unable to stop myself.

古文：乞赐罢归，用避贤路。 
现代文：请求赏赐我罢职归乡，避身让贤。 
English: I request that you reward me by allowing me to resign from my post and return to my hometown.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：时储位未定，廷臣交章请册立。
现代文：当时皇储还没确定，朝廷大臣都奏疏请求进行册立。
English: At that time, the crown prince had not yet been determined, and the ministers of the Imperial Court all sent their requests for registration.

古文：其年十月，阁臣合疏以去就争。
现代文：当年十月，内阁大臣联合奏疏争论去留。
English: In October of that year, the cabinet ministers jointly sent a dissenting opinion to stay.

古文：帝不悦，传谕数百言，切责廷臣沽名激扰，指为悖逆。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，传达几百字的谕告，严厉地指责朝廷大臣为沽名刺激扰乱圣心，指责为悖乱叛逆。
English: The emperor was displeased and sent a decree of several hundred words, severely accusing the imperial court ministers of disturbing the sacred heart for the sake of reputation, accusing them of rebellion.

古文：时行等相顾错愕，各具疏再争，杜门乞去。
现代文：申时行等人相对惊愕，各自草拟奏章再次争辩，关上大门请求辞职。
English: Shin Shigyo and others were relatively stunned. They argued again about their respective drafts of the movement, closed the door and asked to resign.

古文：独家屏在阁，复请速决大计。
现代文：唯有王家屏在阁中，又奏请迅速决定大计。
English: Only Wang Jiaping was in the cabinet, and he pleaded for a quick decision on the plan.

古文：帝乃遣内侍传语，期以明年春夏，廷臣无所奏扰，即于冬间议行，否则待逾十五岁。家屏以口敕难据，欲帝特颁诏谕，立具草进。
现代文：皇帝派遣内侍传话，就在冬日议定举行，否则就等待过了十五岁再议。王家屏认为口头敕令难以为据，想皇帝特别颁布诏令，马上草拟奏章呈奉。
English: The emperor dispatched a courier to deliver the message, and it was agreed to be held on the winter day, otherwise it would wait for the fifteen-year-old reconsideration. Wang Jiaping thought that the oral edict was difficult to justify, and if the emperor wanted to issue a special edict, he would immediately draft a musical score and submit it.

古文：帝不用，复谕二十年春举行。
现代文：皇帝不采纳，又谕告在万历二十年春季举行册立大礼。
English: The emperor did not accept it, and announced that the grand ceremony of the establishment of the state would be held in the spring of the 20th year of Wanli.

古文：家屏喜，即宣示外廷，外廷欢然。
现代文：王家屏心中欢喜马上向外廷宣告，外廷一片欢乐。
English: Wang Jiaping immediately announced to the court the joy in his heart, and the court was overjoyed.

古文：而帝意实犹豫，闻家屏宣示，弗善也，传谕诘责。
现代文：然而皇帝的心意实际上还在犹豫，听说王家屏宣告了，不乐意，传下旨谕责备。
English: However, the emperor's mind was actually still hesitating. When he heard that Wang Jiaping had made the announcement, he was not pleased and issued an edict of reprimand.

古文：时行等合词谢，乃已。
现代文：申时行等人联合谢罪，才算作罢。
English: Only when the petitioner, the petitioner's party, and others jointly apologize for the crime, is it considered to be abandoned.

古文：明年秋，工部主事张有德以册立仪注请。
现代文：第二年秋季，工部主事张有德仅就册立的仪礼奏请。
English: In the autumn of the following year, the head of the engineering department, Zhang Youde, only performed the ceremonial music.

古文：帝复以为激扰，命止其事。
现代文：皇帝又认为是刺激骚扰，下令终止这件事。
English: The emperor also considered it to be a provocation and ordered the matter to be terminated.

古文：国执争去，时行被人言，不得已亦去，锡爵先以省亲归，家屏遂为首辅。
现代文：许国坚持争辩而离职，申时行被人谗言，不得已也离去，王锡爵此前就已回乡探亲，于是王家屏做了首辅。
English: Xu Guo insisted on arguing and left his post. Shen Shixing was criticized and had no choice but to leave. Wang Xizhe had already returned to his hometown to visit relatives, so Wang Jiaping became the first assistant.

古文：以国谏疏己列名，不当独留，再疏乞罢。
现代文：因为许国的谏疏自己也列了名，不应该单独留下，再次上奏请求罢免官职。
English: Because Xu Guo's Zou Zuo also listed his name, he should not be left alone, and once again petitioned to be removed from office.

古文：不允，乃视事。
现代文：皇帝不同意，才仍然负责事务。
English: The emperor did not agree, but remained in charge of affairs.

古文：家屏制行端严，推诚秉公，百司事一无所挠。
现代文：王家屏的品行端庄严谨，竭诚秉公办事，百司的事务没有一件加以阻挠。
English: Wang Jiaping's conduct is dignified and rigorous, and he works wholeheartedly and impartially. He does not obstruct any of the affairs of the Hundred Division.

古文：性忠谠，好直谏。
现代文：性情忠诚正直，喜欢直谏。
English: He is loyal and honest, and likes to be direct.

古文：册立期数更，中外议论纷然。
现代文：册立的时间几次更改，朝廷内外议论纷纷。
English: The time of registration was changed several times, and there was much discussion both inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：家屏深忧之，力请践大信，以塞口语，消宫闱衅。
现代文：王家屏深感忧虑，极力请求皇帝履行信言，以便堵塞人们的口舌，消除宫闱间的嫌隙。
English: Wang Jiaping was deeply worried and strongly requested the emperor to fulfill his promise in order to block people's tongues and eliminate the rift between the palace and the palace.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：二十年春，给事中李献可等请豫教，帝黜之。
现代文：万历二十年春季，给事中李献可等人奏请做准备，皇帝罢黜了他。
English: In the spring of the 20th year of Wanli, Li Xianke and others were invited to prepare for the event, and the emperor dismissed him.

古文：家屏封还御批力谏。
现代文：王家屏将皇帝的批示封好归还并极力劝谏。
English: Wang Jiaping returned the emperor's order sealed and strongly advised him not to do so.

古文：帝益怒，谴谪者相属。
现代文：皇帝更加恼怒，谴责降职的人不断。
English: The emperor became even angrier, denouncing the demotivators incessantly.

古文：家屏遂引疾求罢，上言：
现代文：王家屏于是称病请求罢职，上奏称：
English: Wang Jiaping then called in sick and asked to resign, saying in his report:

古文：汉汲黯有言： 天子置公卿辅弼之臣，宁令从臾承意陷主于不义乎！ 
现代文： 汉代汲黯曾经说过： 天子设置公卿辅佐大臣，宁愿他们阿谀奉承圣意将皇帝推入不义的恶名之中吗？ 
English: In the Han Dynasty, Ku Ying once said: "If the Son of Heaven were to set up a court noble and an assistant minister, would they rather flatter the holy will and push the emperor into the infamy of injustice?"

古文：每感斯言，惕然内愧。
现代文：每每为此言所感动，担忧而且惭愧。
English: I'm moved, worried and ashamed by these words.

古文：顷年以来，九阍重闭，宴安怀毒，郊庙不飨，堂陛不交。
现代文：近年来，深宫之门关闭，皇帝安于宴乐，犹如服毒，不祭祀郊庙，君臣缺乏交流。
English: In recent years, the gate of the Deep Palace has been closed, the emperor is content with the banquet, as if taking poison, does not worship the suburban temple, and the monarchs and ministers lack communication.

古文：天灾物怪，罔彻宸聪；国计民生，莫关圣虑。
现代文：天灾与怪异之物，帝王不知；国计民生，不关圣上的思虑。
English: Natural disasters and strange things, the emperor does not know; national economy and people's livelihood, do not concern the sacred thoughts.

古文：臣备员辅弼，旷职鳏官，久当退避。
现代文：我们作为辅佐，渎职失责，很早就该退避。
English: We, as assistants, have been derelict in our duties and have failed in our responsibilities. We should have retreated a long time ago.

古文：今数月间，请朝讲，请庙飨，请元旦受贺，请大计临朝，悉寝不报。
现代文：就是现在数月期间，奏请朝讲，庙祭，元旦接受朝贺，请国家大考察时临朝，都沉寂没有答复。
English: Even now, during the past few months, there has been no response to the invitation to the morning lecture, the temple festival, the New Year's Day to accept morning greetings, and the invitation to visit the National University.

古文：臣犬马微诚，不克感回天意，已可见矣。
现代文：我作为犬马的微薄诚意，不能感召天意，已经明见了。
English: My meager sincerity as a dog and horse, unable to invoke the will of heaven, has become clear.

古文：至豫教皇储，自宣早计，奈何厌闻直言，概加贬谪。
现代文：至于准备皇储，自然应当早做谋划，无奈皇帝厌恶听到直言，一概加以贬斥。
English: As for the preparation of the crown prince, it was natural that plans should have been made earlier. However, the emperor was disgusted to hear the blunt speech and dismissed it altogether.

古文：臣诚不忍明主蒙咈谏之名，熙朝有横施之罚，故冒死屡陈。
现代文：我的确不忍心贤明的皇上蒙受拒绝劝谏的名声，兴盛的朝廷出现蛮横的责罚，所以冒死罪多次陈述。
English: Indeed, I could not bear to see the wise emperor suffer the reputation of refusing to be persuaded, and the flourishing imperial court appear to be arbitrarily punishing, so I risked the death penalty and made several statements.

古文：若依违保禄，淟涊苟容，汲黯所谓 陷主不义 者，臣死不敢出此，愿赐骸骨还田里。
现代文：如果依顺违心的事，保求俸禄，苟且容忍污浊，汲黯所说 使皇上陷入不义的污潭 ，我至死也不敢说出这种话，希望皇上赐我告老还乡。 
English: If I obey what is against my heart, ask for a salary, tolerate the filth, and let the emperor fall into the cesspool of injustice, I will not dare to say such words until I die. I hope the emperor will give me a chance to return to my hometown.

古文：帝得奏不下。
现代文：皇帝接到奏章后不下发。
English: The emperor did not release the letter after receiving it.

古文：次辅赵志皋亦为家屏具揭。
现代文：次辅赵志皋也替王家屏详细奏请。
English: Second assistant Zhao Zhixuan also played for Wang Jiaping in detail.

古文：帝遂责家屏希名托疾。
现代文：于是皇帝责备王家屏希求名声诳称有病。
English: So the emperor reproached Wang Jia Pingxi for seeking fame and pretending to be ill.

古文：家屏复奏，言：
现代文：王家屏再次上奏称：
English: Wang Jiaping went on the air again and said:

古文：名非臣所敢弃，顾臣所希者，陛下为尧、舜之主，臣为尧、舜之臣，则名垂千载，没有余荣。
现代文： 名誉，不是我所敢抛弃的，不过我所希望的是陛下成为尧、舜一样的君主，我做尧、舜的臣子，就名垂千载，没有其他荣耀。
English: My reputation is not something I dare to give up, but what I hope is that Your Majesty will become a great and great-like monarch. As a great and great-like courtier, I will be famous for thousands of years, and there is no other glory.

古文：若徒犯颜触忌，抗争偾事，被谴罢归，何名之有！
现代文：如果徒然侵犯龙颜触犯禁忌，抗争惹事，被谴责而罢官回乡，有什么名声？
English: If you violate the taboos of Longyan in vain, fight and cause trouble, and are condemned and dismissed to return to your hometown, what reputation do you have?

古文：必不希名，将使臣身处高官，家享厚禄，主愆莫正，政乱莫匡，可谓不希名之臣矣，国家奚赖焉？
现代文：必定就不希求名声，将使我身居高官，家庭享受丰厚的俸禄，不纠正圣上的差错，不匡扶政治的危乱，可以称得上是不希求名誉的大臣吗，国家依赖什么呢？
English: He must not seek fame, he will make me a high-ranking official, my family will enjoy a rich salary, he will not correct the sacred mistakes, he will not support the political crisis, can he be called a minister who does not seek fame, what does the country rely on?

古文：更使臣弃名不顾，逢迎为悦，阿谀取容，许敬宗、李林甫之奸佞，无不可为，九庙神灵必阴殛臣，岂特得罪于李献可诸臣已哉！
现代文：若换成我抛弃名誉于不顾，以逢迎为喜悦，取阿谀的嘴脸，许敬宗、李林甫式的奸诈谄媚，没有不能做的，九庙的神灵必然会暗地诛杀我，难道是特意得到李献可等诸大臣已经得到的罪名吗？ 
English: If I were to abandon my honor in disregard, take pleasure in being welcomed, take the face of grandma, Xu Jingzong, Li Linfu-style treachery and flattery, there is nothing that can not be done, the gods of the nine temples will inevitably secretly kill me. Is it a crime that has been specially obtained by Li Xianke and other ministers?

古文：疏入，帝益不悦。
现代文：奏疏呈入宫中，皇帝更加不高兴。
English: The Emperor was even more displeased when Sozo entered the palace.

古文：遣内侍至邸，责以径驳御批，故激主怒，且托疾要君。
现代文：派内侍到他府邸，责备他直接反驳皇帝的批示，故意刺激圣上发怒，并称病要挟君王。
English: They sent a chambermaid to his residence and reproached him for directly contradicting the emperor's orders, deliberately provoking the emperor to anger, and saying that the illness was threatening the king.

古文：家屏言： 言涉至亲，不宜有怒。
现代文：王家屏申辩： 谏言涉及至亲，不应该发怒。
English: Wang Jiaping's defense: The criticism involves a close relative, and one should not get angry.

古文：事关典礼，不宜有怒。臣与诸臣但知为宗社大计，尽言效忠而已，岂意激皇上之怒哉？ 
现代文：我和诸位大臣只知道为了宗庙社稷的大计，尽力劝谏以为效忠罢了，岂敢有意刺激皇上动怒呀？ 
English: I and the ministers only know that we are trying to persuade him to be loyal for the sake of the grand plan of the Imperial Family, but how dare we provoke the Emperor's anger?

古文：于是求去益力。
现代文：因此更加极力地请求辞职。
English: Hence the more emphatic calls for his resignation.

古文：或劝少需就大事。
现代文：有人劝他稍作等待以便完成大事。
English: He was advised to wait a little to accomplish great things.

古文：家屏曰： 人君惟所欲为者，由大臣持禄，小臣畏罪，有轻群下心。
现代文：王家屏称 ：皇帝为所欲为是由于大臣保求俸禄，小臣畏惧治罪，有轻视群臣的心思。
English: Wang Jiaping said: The emperor does whatever he wants because the minister guarantees the salary, the junior minister is afraid to commit crimes, and has the thought of despising the group of ministers.

古文：吾意大臣不爱爵禄，小臣不畏刑诛，事庶有济耳。 
现代文：我认为大臣要不恋爵禄，小臣要不畏惧刑罚诛杀，事情可能有救。 
English: I think that the minister should not be greedy for peerage, and the junior minister should not be afraid of punishment, and things may be saved.

古文：遂复两疏恳请。
现代文：于是又两次奏疏恳请。
English: So I asked him to play two more times.

古文：诏驰传归。
现代文：诏令他乘驿车回乡。
English: He was ordered to take a train back to his hometown.

古文：家屏柄国止半载，又强半杜门，以戆直去国，朝野惜焉。
现代文：王家屏执掌国政仅半年，又大半闭门，因为刚直辞官，朝野都为此惋惜。
English: Wang Jiaping has been in charge of state affairs for only half a year, and most of it has been behind closed doors. Because he resigned his post forthrightly, both the government and the opposition regret this.

古文：阅八年，储位始定。
现代文：经过八年皇储之位才确定。
English: It took eight years for the position of crown prince to be confirmed.

古文：遣官赍敕存问，赉金币羊酒。
现代文：皇帝派官员传敕令问候他，赏赐他金币、羊、酒。
English: The emperor sent officials to send greetings to him and rewarded him with gold coins, sheep and wine.

古文：又二年卒，年六十八。
现代文：又过了两年，他去世，享年六十八岁。
English: He died two years later, aged 68.

古文：赠少保，谥文端。
现代文：追赠少保，谥号文端。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Junior Public Security Officer.

古文：熹宗立，再赠太保，任一子尚宝丞。
现代文：熹宗即位，再追赠为太保，任用他的一个儿子为尚宝丞。
English: Emperor Taizong ascended to the throne and was posthumously awarded the title of Taibo, appointing one of his sons as Shang Baorong.

古文：家屏家居时，朝鲜用兵。
现代文：王家屏闲居在家的时候，朝廷对朝鲜作战。
English: While Wang Jiaping was idling at home, the imperial court was at war with North Korea.

古文：贻书经略顾养谦曰： 昔卫为狄灭，齐桓率诸侯城楚丘，《春秋》高其义；未闻遂与狄仇，连诸侯兵以伐之也。
现代文：他致函经略顾养谦说 ：过去卫国被狄人消灭，齐桓公率领诸侯修筑楚丘城，《春秋》赞赏他的大义；没有听说就与狄人结仇怨，联络诸侯的兵马讨伐他们的。
English: He sent a letter saying: In the past, our country was destroyed by the Di people. Prince Qi Huan led the princes to build the city of Chu Qiu. "Spring and Autumn" praised his great righteousness. Without hearing about it, he made enemies with the Di people and contacted the soldiers of the princes to fight them.

古文：今第以保会稽之耻，激厉朝鲜，以城楚丘之功，奖率将吏，无为主而为客，则善矣。 
现代文：现在只管心存会稽的耻辱，刺激朝鲜，以筑楚丘之城的功绩，奖励全体将领官吏，不做主人而做客人就是善事啊。 
English: Now it is only a matter of bearing in mind the shame of the inspection, stimulating North Korea, rewarding all generals and officials with the merit of building the city of Chuqiu, and being a guest rather than a host is a good deed.

古文：养谦不能用，朝鲜兵数年无功。
现代文：顾养谦不采纳，在朝鲜作战几年没有战功。
English: Gu Yingqian did not accept it, and there was no war achievement in the Korean War for several years.

古文：其深识有谋，皆此类也。
现代文：他的深识谋略，就是如此。
English: His deep knowledge and strategy, that is.

古文：陈于陛，字元忠，大学士以勤子也。
现代文：陈于陛，字元忠，大学士陈以勤的儿子。
English: Chen Yuxing, Zi Yuanzhong, the son of the university scholar Chen Yiqin.

古文：隆庆二年进士。
现代文：隆庆二年的进士。
English: Longqing two-year starter.

古文：选庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：选任庶吉士，授职为编修。
English: He was selected to be appointed to the post of deputy editor, and the post of editor was conferred on him.

古文：万历初，预修世、穆两朝实录，充日讲官。
现代文：万历初年，参与编修世宗、穆宗两朝的实录，担当日讲官。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he participated in the compilation of the records of the two dynasties of Shizong and Muzong, and was in charge of the Japanese lecturer.

古文：累迁侍讲学士，擢詹事，掌翰林院。
现代文：调任侍讲学士，晋升为詹事，负责翰林院。
English: He was transferred to the post of assistant lecturer and promoted to Zhanji, in charge of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：疏请早建东宫。
现代文：奏请皇帝早日建立东宫。
English: He asked the emperor to build the East Palace as soon as possible.

古文：十九年，拜礼部右侍郎，领詹事府事。
现代文：万历十九年，任命为礼部右侍郎，掌管詹事府的事务。
English: In the 19th year of the Wanli calendar, he was appointed as the Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies, in charge of the affairs of Zhanji Prefecture.

古文：明年，改吏部，进左侍郎，教习庶吉士。
现代文：第二年改任吏部职，晋升左侍郎，教导庶吉士。
English: In the following year, he was appointed to the position of the secretary, promoted to the position of the left attendant, and taught the children.

古文：奏言元子不当封王，请及时册立豫教，又请早朝勤政，皆不报。
现代文：奏称嫡长子不应该分封为王，奏请及时册立太子以便储君的培养，并请求皇帝早上临朝处理政务，都没有答复。
English: There was no reply to the report that the eldest son should not be given the title of king, the report that the crown prince should be appointed in a timely manner to facilitate the training of the crown prince, and the request that the emperor deal with government affairs in the morning.

古文：又明年，进礼部尚书，仍领詹事府事。
现代文：他又在第二年晋升为礼部尚书，仍然负责詹事府的事务。
English: In the following year, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was still responsible for the affairs of Zhan Prefecture.

古文：于陛少从父以勤习国家故实。
现代文：陈于陛从小跟随父亲学习国家的历史。
English: As a child, Chen Yuqing followed his father to study the country's history.

古文：为史官，益究经世学。
现代文：做了史官，更加研究经邦济世的学问。
English: He became a historian and studied more about the history of the Joseon Dynasty.

古文：以前代皆修国史，疏言： 臣考史家之法，纪、表、志、传谓之正史。
现代文：因为前代都撰修了国史，奏疏说： 我考察史学家的方法，纪、表、志、传称为正史。
English: Because the previous generation had all written national history, Song Suo said: I examine the methods of historians, and the chronicle, table, aspiration, and legend are all called official history.

古文：宋去我朝近，制尤可考。
现代文：宋代距离我朝较近，制度更加可以考究。
English: The Song Dynasty is closer to our dynasty, and the system can be more refined.

古文：真宗祥符间，王旦等撰进太祖、太宗两朝正史。
现代文：真宗祥符年间，王旦等人撰修呈献太祖，太宗两朝的正史。
English: During the Shensong Xiangfu era, Wang Dan and others wrote and presented the official history of Taizong and the two dynasties.

古文：仁宗天圣间，吕夷简等增入真宗朝，名《三朝国史》。
现代文：仁宗天圣年间，吕夷简等人增补了真宗朝，命名为《三朝国史》。
English: During the reign of Emperor Nanzong, Lu Yijian and others added the Zhenzong Dynasty and named it "Three Dynasties National History."

古文：此则本朝君臣自修本朝正史之明证也。
现代文：这就是当朝的君臣自己撰修当朝正史的明显例证。
English: This is a clear example of the monarchs and ministers of the dynasty writing the official history of the dynasty themselves.

古文：我朝史籍，止有列圣实录，正史阙焉未讲。
现代文：我朝的史籍，只有列圣的实录，正史空缺不讲。
English: The historical records of my dynasty only contain the actual records of canonization, not to mention the gaps in official history.

古文：伏睹朝野所撰次，可备采择者无虑数百种。
现代文：观看朝野的撰书，可供采选不用考虑的就有数百种。
English: Looking at Asano's books, there are hundreds of titles to choose from.

古文：倘不及时网罗，岁月浸邈，卷帙散脱，耆旧渐凋，事迹罕据。
现代文：倘若不及时收集，岁月久远，卷帙散失脱落，老人渐渐去世，事迹缺乏论据。
English: If it is not collected in time, the years will be long gone, the scrolls will be scattered and lost, the old man will gradually die, and the deeds will lack evidence.

古文：欲成信史，将不可得。
现代文：想成为信史，将不可能求得。
English: If you want to be a credible historian, it will be impossible to achieve.

古文：惟陛下立下明诏，设局编辑，使一代经制典章，犁然可考，鸿谟伟烈，光炳天壤，岂非万世不朽盛事哉！ 
现代文：只有陛下马上颁布明令，设馆局编辑，使一代的经籍制度、典章，显然可以考察，鸿谋伟烈，光照天地，难道不是万世不朽的盛事吗？ 
English: If only His Majesty would immediately issue a clear order to set up a library bureau to edit, so that the generation of books and records system and regulations can be clearly examined, and the grand plan is great and powerful, illuminating the world, wouldn't it be an immortal event?

古文：诏从之。
现代文：诏令依从他。
English: He complied.

古文：二十二年三月，遂命词臣分曹类纂，以于陛及尚书沈一贯、少詹事冯琦为副总裁，而阁臣总裁之。
现代文：万历二十二年三月，便命令词臣分类编纂，由陈于陛和尚书沈一贯、少詹事冯琦担任副总裁，而内阁大臣任总裁。
English: In March of the 22nd year of the Wanli calendar, he ordered the classification of words to be compiled, with Chen Yu, the monk Shushun, and the minor Zhan Zhi, Feng Qi, as vice-presidents, and the cabinet minister as president.

古文：其年夏，首辅王锡爵谢政，遂命于陛兼东阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：当年夏季，首辅王锡爵辞职，于是任命陈于陛兼任东阁大学士入阁参与机要事务。
English: In the summer of that year, Wang Xizhe, the vice-premier of Shoufu, resigned, and Chen Yu was appointed to the cabinet to participate in important affairs.

古文：疏陈亲大臣、录遗贤、奖外吏、核边饷、储将才、择边吏六事。
现代文：上奏陈述要皇帝亲近大臣、录用遗老贤士、奖励京城之外的官吏、核查边关粮饷、储蓄将才、选任边防官吏等六件事。
English: The report stated that the emperor should be close to the ministers, recruit veteran sages, reward officials outside the capital, check the border grain, save generals, and select border defense officials.

古文：末言： 以肃皇帝之精明，而末年贪黜成风，封疆多事，则倦勤故也。
现代文：最后说： 肃皇帝虽然精明，而末年却贪赃渎职成风，边疆多事，是厌倦勤政的缘故。
English: Finally, he said: Although Emperor Su was shrewd, in his later years he became corrupt and derelict in his duties. He was tired of diligent administration because the frontier was eventful.

古文：今至尊端拱，百职不修，不亟图更始，后将安极。 
现代文：现在皇上一方操持，百职不修行，不赶紧图谋更新，往后将怎能平安？ 
English: At present, the emperor is on one side, and does not practice the hundred duties, and does not hastily try to renew them. How can there be peace in the future?

古文：帝优诏答之，而不能用。
现代文：皇帝下优诏答复他，却不采用他的建议。
English: The emperor sent a reply to him, but did not adopt his suggestion.

古文：帝以军政失察，斥两都言官三十余人。
现代文：皇帝以军政失察为名，斥责了两都三十多名言官。
English: The emperor rebuked more than 30 officials in both capitals in the name of military and political mismanagement.

古文：于陛与同官申救至再，又独疏请宥，俱不纳。
现代文：陈于陛与同官一再申诉救助，并单独奏疏请求皇帝宽恕，都不接纳。
English: Chen Yu and his colleagues repeatedly appealed for help, and separately petitioned the emperor for forgiveness, but were not accepted.

古文：以甘肃破贼功，加太子少保。
现代文：因甘肃击败贼民的功绩，加封为太子少保。
English: Because of Gansu's achievements in defeating the bandits, he was awarded the title of crown prince minor protector.

古文：乾清、坤宁两宫灾，请面对，不报。
现代文：乾清、坤宁两宫遭灾，奏请面奏皇上，没有答复。
English: The two palaces of Qianqing and Kunning suffered from disasters, and there was no reply from the emperor.

古文：乞罢，亦不许。
现代文：请求罢免自己官职，皇帝也不同意。
English: The emperor did not agree to his request to be removed from office.

古文：其秋，二品三年满，改文渊阁，进太子太保。
现代文：当年秋季，二品的考绩满了三年，改任文渊阁职责，晋升为太子太保。
English: In the autumn of that year, after three years of performance appraisal of the second grade, he was reassigned to the duties of Wenyu Pavilion and promoted to Prince Taibo.

古文：时内阁四人。赵志皋、张位、沈一贯皆于陛同年生，遇事无龃龉。
现代文：当时内阁的四个人，赵志皋、张位、沈一贯与陈于陛都是同年出生，遇事彼此没有龃龉。
English: The four members of the cabinet at that time, Zhao Zhixuan, Zhang Yi, Shen Gang and Chen Yuxing, were all born in the same year and had no quarrel with each other.

古文：而帝拒谏益甚，上下否隔。
现代文：但是皇帝拒绝劝谏更加严重，上下彼此隔膜。
English: But the emperor refused to be persuaded, and the quarrel became more serious.

古文：于陛忧形于色，以不能补救，在直庐数太息视日影。
现代文：陈于陛忧形于色，因不能进行补救，在供职的地方多次注视日影叹息。
English: Chen Yuxing was so worried that he couldn't take any remedial measures. He looked at the sun and sighed many times in the place where he worked.

古文：二十四年冬，病卒于位，史亦竟罢。
现代文：万历二十四年冬季，病逝在职任上，史籍之事也最终作罢。
English: In the winter of the 24th year of Wanli, he died of illness in office, and the matter of the historical record was finally abandoned.

古文：赠少保，谥文宪。
现代文：赠封少保，谥号文宪。
English: He was awarded the title of Shao Bao, and his posthumous name was Wen Xing.

古文：终明世，父子为宰辅者，惟南充陈氏。
现代文：整个明代，父子任过宰辅的，只有南充的陈氏。
English: In the entire Ming Dynasty, only the Chen clan in Nanchong had a father and son serving as vice-governors.

古文：世以比汉韦、平焉。沈鲤，字仲化，归德人。
现代文：沈鲤，字仲化，归德人。
English: Shen Yi, Zha Zhonghua, Gui De Ren.

古文：祖瀚，建宁知府。
现代文：祖父沈瀚，任过建宁知府。
English: His grandfather, Shen Han, was once the governor of Jianning.

古文：鲤，嘉靖中举乡试。
现代文：沈鲤，嘉靖年间乡试中举。
English: Shen Qi and Jia Jing won the junior high school examination in their hometown.

古文：师尚诏作乱，陷归德，已而西去。
现代文：师尚诏叛乱，攻占归德，而后向西逃去。
English: His master Shang Zhao rebelled, occupied and returned to Germany, and then fled to the west.

古文：鲤策贼必再至，急白守臣，捕杀城中通贼者，严为守具。
现代文：沈鲤谋思贼民必将再来，急忙告诫驻守大臣，捕杀城中与贼民勾通的人，严加防守。
English: Shen Yao thought that the bandits would surely come again, and hurriedly warned the garrison minister to hunt down and kill the people in the city who were colluding with the bandits, and to strictly defend the city.

古文：贼还逼，见有备，去。
现代文：贼民返回，逼近城池，看见有了防备便离去了。
English: The robbers returned, approached the city, saw that it was guarded, and left.

古文：奸人倡言屠城，将驱掠居民，鲤请谕止之，众始定。
现代文：有奸人倡议屠城，准备驱逐劫掠城中居民，沈鲤请求下令阻止，民众这才安定。
English: A traitor proposed to massacre the city, prepared to expel and plunder the inhabitants of the city, and Shen Yi asked for an order to stop it. This was the only way for the people to be stable.

古文：四十四年，成进士，改庶吉士，授检讨。
现代文：嘉靖四十四年，考中进士，改任庶吉士，授职为检讨。
English: In the 44th year of Jiajing, he was promoted to the middle school entrance examination, and was reappointed to the second grade, and the awarding of the post was reviewed.

古文：大学士高拱，其座主又乡人也，旅见外，未尝以私谒。
现代文：大学士高拱，是他的主考官和同乡，在外以礼序见，但未曾因私事拜访。
English: Gao Gong, a university scholar, is his chief examiner and a fellow villager, whom he sees outside with the proper etiquette, but has never visited for personal reasons.

古文：神宗在东宫，鲤为讲官。
现代文：神宗在东宫的时候，沈鲤任讲官，神宗曾经指令诸位讲官在扇子上书写文字。
English: When Shenzong was in the East Palace, Shen Ye was the lecturer. Shenzong once ordered the lecturers to write words on fans.

古文：尝令诸讲官书扇，鲤书魏卞兰《太子颂》以进，因命陈清大义甚悉。
现代文：沈鲤书写了魏卞阑的《太子颂》进奉，神宗要他很详尽解释大义。
English: Shen Yao wrote Wei Yao's "Ode to the Crown Prince" and sent it to Shentong. Shentong asked him to explain the Great Principle in detail.

古文：神宗咨美，遂蒙眷。
现代文：神宗做了赞美，使他备受宠爱。
English: Shenzong praised him, which made him very popular.

古文：比即位，用宫寮恩，进编修。
现代文：当神宗即位，因为在东宫任幕僚的恩惠，晋升为编修。
English: When Emperor Jinsong ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the position of editor-in-chief by virtue of his position as an aide-de-camp in the East Palace.

古文：旋进左赞善。
现代文：很快晋升左赞善。
English: He was soon promoted to Zuozan Son.

古文：每直讲，举止端雅，所陈说独契帝心。
现代文：每次秉直讲授，举止端庄雅正，陈说的事情独合皇帝的心意。
English: Each time he gave a straightforward lecture, his demeanor was dignified and elegant, and the things he said were in line with the emperor's will.

古文：帝亟称之。
现代文：皇帝极为称赏他。
English: The emperor spoke highly of him.

古文：连遭父母丧，帝数问沈讲官何在，又问服阕期，命先补讲官俟之。万历九年还朝。
现代文：他接连遭受父母逝世的打击，皇帝多次询问沈讲官在哪里，又询问丧服期满了没有，指令让他先补任讲官。万历九年，返回朝廷。
English: He suffered the blow of the death of his parents one after another. The emperor repeatedly asked where Shen Lecturer was, and also asked if the mourning period was over. He was ordered to fill in as a lecturer first. In the ninth year of Wanli, he returned to the imperial court.

古文：属当辍讲，特命展一日，示优异焉。
现代文：按理应该暂停讲授，皇帝特意命令延长一天，以示对他特别优厚。
English: The lecture should have been suspended, but the emperor ordered it to be extended by one day as a special favor to him.

古文：明年秋，擢侍讲学士，再迁礼部右侍郎。
现代文：第二年秋天，晋升为侍讲学士，再升任礼都右侍郎。
English: In the autumn of the following year, he was promoted to the rank of Samurai Lecturer, and then to the rank of Reito Right Attendant.

古文：寻改吏部，进左侍郎。
现代文：不久改任吏部职，升任左侍郎。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of secretary and was promoted to the position of left attendant.

古文：屏绝私交，好推毂贤士，不使知。
现代文：摒绝私交，推举贤士不使人知晓。
English: Do not make personal friends, and do not let people know that you have chosen a wise man.

古文：十二年冬，拜礼部尚书。
现代文：万历十二年冬季，任命为礼部尚书。
English: In the winter of the twelfth year of Wanli, he was appointed as the head of the etiquette department.

古文：去六品甫二年，至正卿。
现代文：离六品官任才两年就做了正卿。
English: Only two years after he was appointed to Ropponikan, he was made a full-fledged lord.

古文：素负物望，时论不以为骤。
现代文：不负众望，当时的舆论没有认为他升官太快。
English: He lived up to everyone's expectations, and the public opinion at the time did not think that his promotion was too fast.

古文：久之，《会典》成，加太子少保。
现代文：此后很久，《会典》撰成，他被加封太子少保。
English: Long after that, the "Charter" was compiled, and he was given the title of Crown Prince and Junior Protector.

古文：鲤初官翰林，中官黄锦缘同乡以币交，拒不纳。
现代文：沈鲤起初做翰林官时，宦官黄锦攀同乡送钱币给他，他拒不接收。
English: At the beginning of his career as a forest official, eunuch Huang Jinpang, a fellow villager, sent him money, but he refused to accept it.

古文：教习内书堂，侍讲筵，皆数与巨珰接，未尝与交。
现代文：教导于内书堂，侍讲经筵，都多次与大宦官接触，未曾同他们交往。
English: Teaching in the inner library, and serving as a lecturer on the sutras, all of them have had many contacts with grand eunuchs, but have never interacted with them.

古文：及官愈高，益无所假借，虽上命及政府指，不徇也。
现代文：等到官阶愈高，更加不与他们勾连，即使皇上下令以及政府的旨意，他也没有徇私顺从。
English: The higher the official rank, the more he did not collude with them. Even if the emperor's order and the government's will, he did not selfishly obey.

古文：十四年春，贵妃郑氏生子，进封皇贵妃。
现代文：万历十四年春季，郑贵妃生了儿子，加封为皇贵妃。
English: In the spring of the 14th year of Wanli, Empress Zheng Guifei gave birth to a son, and was given the additional title of Empress Guifei.

古文：鲤率僚属请册建皇长子，进封其母，不许。
现代文：沈鲤率领僚属请求册封皇长子，进而加封他的母亲，神宗不同意。
English: Shen Zong did not agree to the request of Shen Yu and his colleagues to have the eldest son of the emperor and then his mother crowned.

古文：未几，复以为言，且请宥建储贬官姜应麟等。
现代文：不久，他又以此劝谏，并请求宽恕因为建议立储遭贬官的姜应麟等人。
English: Soon after, he used the same method of persuasion to beg forgiveness from Jiang Yinglin and others who had been demoted for suggesting the establishment of a reserve fund.

古文：忤旨谯让。
现代文：违背圣旨，被痛加责备。
English: He was severely rebuked for going against God's will.

古文：帝既却群臣请，因诏谕少俟二三年。
现代文：神宗已对群臣的册立请求一概拒绝，于是下诏稍候二三年再说。
English: Shinso had already rejected all of the ministers' requests for registration, so the next imperial edict would not be issued for another two or three years.

古文：至十六年，期已届，鲤执前旨固请，帝复不从。
现代文：到了万历十六年，预定的时间已到，沈鲤拿着先前的圣旨坚持请求，神宗又不依从。
English: In the 16th year of the Wanli calendar, when the predetermined time had come, Shen Yao took the previous sacred edict and insisted on the request, but Shen Zong did not comply.

古文：鲤素鲠亮。
现代文：沈鲤一向正直、光明。
English: Shen Yi has always been honest and bright.

古文：其在部持典礼，多所建白。
现代文：他在礼部主持典礼，有许多建议。
English: He presided over the ceremony in the ceremonial department and had many suggestions.

古文：念时俗侈靡，稽先朝典制，自丧祭、冠婚、宫室、器服率定为中制，颁天下。
现代文：考虑到时俗的侈靡，考察先朝的典礼制度，从丧祭、冠婚、宫室、器服来确定国家的制度，颁行全国。
English: Taking into account the extravagance of the times and customs, the ceremonial system of the previous dynasty was examined, and the national system was determined from the funerals, weddings, palaces, and costumes, and issued nationwide.

古文：又以士习不端，奏行学政八事。
现代文：又因为士人的习尚不端正，请施行学政八件事。
English: In addition, because the practice of scholars is still not correct, please implement the eight things of academic politics.

古文：又请复建文年号，重定《景帝实录》，勿称戾王。
现代文：又奏请恢复建文的年号，重新审定《景帝实录》，不要称成阝戾王。
English: He also requested that the year of the founding document be restored, and the "Record of Emperor Jing" be re-approved, and that it not be called "King Gong."

古文：大同巡抚胡来贡议移祀北岳于浑源，力驳其无据。
现代文：大同巡抚胡来贡提议将北岳的祭祀移到浑源，他极力驳斥他没有根据。
English: Datong Governor Hu Laigong proposed to move the Beidake's sacrificial rites to Hunyuan, but he strenuously refuted that he had no basis.

古文：太庙侑享，请移亲王及诸功臣于两庑，毋与帝后杂祀。
现代文：太庙的祭祀，请将亲王和诸位功臣移到两边的厢房，不要与皇帝、皇后混杂祭祀。
English: For the ritual of the Imperial Temple, please move the prince and all the heroes and heroines to the side rooms, and do not mix the ritual with the emperor and the empress.

古文：进世庙诸妃葬金山者，配食永陵。
现代文：将世庙的诸位葬在金山的妃子，配祭于永陵。
English: The members of the World Temple will be buried in the concubines of Jinshan Mountain, and the accompanying offerings will be placed in Yongling.

古文：诸帝陵祀，请各遣，官毋兼摄。
现代文：各位帝陵的祭祀，请求分别派遣官员不要兼任。
English: Your Imperial mausoleums, please send your officials separately so that they do not have to serve concurrently.

古文：诸王及妃坟祝版称谓未协者，率请裁定。
现代文：诸王和妃子的坟祝版称谓不相配的，请全部重新确定。
English: If the titles of the tombs of kings and concubines do not match, please re-determine them all.

古文：帝忧旱，步祷郊坛，议分遣大臣祷天下名山大川。
现代文：神宗担忧旱灾，前往郊坛祈祷，议论分别派遣大臣到全国的名山大川祈祷。
English: The Shinshu sect is worried about the drought, goes to the suburbs to pray, and discusses sending ministers to pray at famous mountains and rivers throughout the country.

古文：鲤言使臣往来驿骚，恐重困民，请刘斋三日，以告文授太常属致之，罢寺观勿祷，帝多可其奏。
现代文：沈鲤劝谏，说使臣往来滋扰，恐怕又加重百姓负担，奏请皇帝斋戒三日，用文告授予太常负责此事，罢除寺观的祈祷，神宗大都同意了他的奏疏。
English: Shen Zong advised him, saying that the envoys' visits were a nuisance and would probably increase the burden on the people. Shen Zong asked the emperor to fast for three days, and sent a message to the emperor to assign Taizang to be in charge of the matter and to cancel the prayers of the temple inspection. Most of the gods agreed to his report.

古文：郑贵妃父成宪为父请恤，援后父永年伯例，鲤力驳之。
现代文：郑贵妃的父亲成宪为父亲请求抚恤，援引皇后的父亲永年伯为例子，沈鲤极力驳斥。
English: Zheng Guifei's father Cheng Xian requested a pension for his father, citing the queen's father Yongnianbo as an example, and Shen Rong strongly refuted it.

古文：诏畀葬资五千金，鲤复言过滥。
现代文：诏令给与五千金的葬礼费，沈鲤又称过多了。
English: According to the imperial edict, a funeral fee of five thousand gold was given, but Shen Yao said it was too much.

古文：顺义王妻三娘子请封，鲤不予妃号，但称夫人。
现代文：顺义王以三娘子为妻请求加封，沈鲤不给予她妃号，只称夫人。
English: Shunyi Wang asked for a seal with his third daughter as his wife, but Shen Yi did not give her the title of empress, and only called her his wife.

古文：真人张国祥言肃皇享国久长，由虔奉玄修所致，劝帝效之，鲤劾国祥诋诬导谀，请正刑辟。
现代文：道教真人张国祥称肃皇在位长久，是虔诚信奉玄学修炼的结果，劝神宗效法，沈鲤弹劾国祥是诋毁圣祖诱导阿谀，请求将他以刑辟正法。
English: Zhang Guoxiang, a real person of Taoism, said that the long reign of Emperor Sui was the result of the cultivation of piety, sincerity and metaphysics, and advised the Shenzong to follow the law. Shen Ying impeached Guoxiang for slandering the holy ancestor and inducing the grandmother, and requested that he be punished to correct the law.

古文：事亦寝。
现代文：事情也就中止了。
English: The case was dropped.

古文：秦王谊璟故由中尉入继，而乞封其弟郡王，中贵为请，申时行助之，鲤不可。
现代文：秦王谊漶原是由中尉即位，却请求封他的弟弟任郡王，中贵们替他请求，申时行也帮助他，沈鲤不同意。
English: Qin Wang Yixuan was originally enthroned by a lieutenant, but he asked for his brother to be appointed as the county king. The nobles asked for him, and Shin Shixing also helped him, but Shen Yao did not agree.

古文：唐府违帛请封妾子，执不从，帝并以特旨许之。
现代文：唐王府违反定制请求册封妾的儿子，他坚持不同意，神宗都以特别圣旨予以批准。
English: The Tang royal court violated the custom of requesting the son of a concubine to be canonized, but he insisted that he did not agree, and the Shensong all approved it with a special edict.

古文：京师久旱，鲤备陈恤民实政以崇俭戒奢为本，且请减织造。
现代文：京师长期干旱，沈鲤陈述恤民的实政根本在于以推崇节俭戒除奢靡，并请求减少织造。
English: Beijing suffered from a long-term drought, and Shen Qi stated that the real policy of benefiting the people was to promote frugality to prevent extravagance, and to reduce weaving.

古文：已，京师地震，又请谨天若戒，恤民穷。
现代文：不久，京师发生地震，又请求神宗谨循天戒，体恤百姓的贫穷。
English: Soon after, an earthquake occurred in Beijing, and he asked Shenzong to follow the precepts of heaven and sympathize with the poverty of the people.

古文：畿辅大侵，请上下交修，词甚切。
现代文：京郊大荒，他奏请皇上臣下多交流，话语很恳切。
English: The suburbs of Kyoto were in a state of upheaval. He asked the Emperor and his subjects to communicate more, and his words were very sincere.

古文：帝以四方灾，敕廷臣修省，鲤因请大损供亿营建，振救小民。
现代文：皇帝因为四方的灾难，敕令朝廷大臣反省，沈鲤于是奏请大量减少营造的供给，以赈济、救助百姓。
English: Because of the disaster in the four directions, the emperor ordered the minister of the imperial court to reflect, and Shen Yi then requested a large reduction in the supply of buildings to relieve and rescue the people.

古文：帝每嘉纳。
现代文：神宗常常嘉许并接纳了。
English: Shenzong often praised and accepted it.

古文：初，藩府有所奏请，贿中贵居间，礼臣不敢违，辄如志。
现代文：起初，藩府有事奏请，贿赂中贵为内援，礼部大臣不敢违背，动辄如其所请。
English: At first, the government of the domain had a request, the bribe-giver was a domestic aid, and the Minister of Ceremonies did not dare to disobey, and did as he was asked.

古文：至鲤，一切格之，中贵皆大怨，数以事间于帝。
现代文：到了沈鲤执政时，一概阻隔。得势的宦官都很怨恨，多次借事端在皇帝面前挑拨。
English: When it came to the reign of Shen Yi, they all blocked him. The eunuchs who gained power were very resentful, and they repeatedly took advantage of the situation to provoke the emperor.

古文：帝渐不能无疑，累加诘责，且夺其俸。
现代文：神宗渐渐开始生疑，多次责难他，并剥夺了他的俸禄。
English: Shenzong gradually became suspicious, reprimanded him many times, and deprived him of his salary.

古文：鲤自是有去志。
现代文：沈鲤从此有了辞退的想法。
English: From then on, Shen Yao had the idea of resigning.

古文：而时行衔鲤不附己，亦忌之。
现代文：而且申时行怀恨沈鲤不依附自己，也忌恨他。
English: Moreover, when Shin acts with hatred, Shen Yi does not cling to himself, but also abhors him.

古文：一日，鲤请告，遽拟旨放归。
现代文：一天，沈鲤请求告退，他便草拟旨令放他回乡。
English: One day, after Shen Yao's request was rejected, he drafted an order to let him return to his hometown.

古文：帝曰： 沈尚书好官，奈何使去？ 
现代文：神宗询问 ：沈尚书是位好官，怎么让他离去？ 
English: Shenzong asked: Shen Shangshu is a good official, how can he leave?

古文：传旨谕留。
现代文：传旨告谕他留任。
English: He has been told to stay in his post.

古文：时行益忌。
现代文：申时行更加忌恨。
English: At the time of the petition, there was even more aversion.

古文：其私人给事中陈与郊为人求考官不得，怨鲤，属其同官陈尚象劾之。
现代文：他的私交给事中陈与郊替别人求考官的职位没有得到，怨恨沈鲤，嘱咐同官陈尚象弹劾沈鲤。
English: When Chen and Gu were unable to get the position of examiner they had applied for on behalf of others, he resented Shen Yi and ordered his colleague Chen Shangxiang to impeach Shen Yi.

古文：与郊复危言撼鲤，鲤求去益力。
现代文：陈与郊又以险恶之言攻击沈鲤，沈鲤更加请求辞职。
English: Chen and Suburban also attacked Shen Rong with vicious words, and Shen Rong even requested to resign.

古文：帝有意大用鲤，微言： 沈尚书不晓人意。 
现代文：神宗有意要重用沈鲤，暗地说： 沈尚书不通晓人意。 
English: Shenzong deliberately wanted to reuse Shen Yao, saying secretly: Shen Shangshu does not understand the will of the people.

古文：有老宫人从子为内竖者，走告鲤；司礼张诚亦属鲤乡人内竖廖某密告之。
现代文：有位老宫人的侄子是宫内小宦官，他跑去告诉沈鲤；司礼张诚也嘱咐沈鲤的同乡宦官廖某秘密地告诉了他。
English: The nephew of an old palace official, who was a minor eunuch in the palace, ran to tell Shen Qi; the eunuch Zhang Cheng also told Shen Qi's fellow eunuch Liao Mou to tell him in secret.

古文：鲤并拒之，曰： 禁中语，非所敢闻。 
现代文：沈鲤一概拒绝了，说： 禁宫中的话，不是我敢听的。 
English: Shen Ye flatly refused, saying, "I don't dare to listen to what is said in the Forbidden City.

古文：皆恚而去。
现代文：他们都恨恨而去。
English: They all left in disgust.

古文：鲤卒屡疏引疾归。
现代文：沈鲤最终多次上奏称病回乡。
English: In the end, Shen Rong repeatedly reported that he was ill and returned to his hometown.

古文：累推内阁及吏部尚书，皆不用。
现代文：多次被推举入内阁或吏部尚书，都没被任用。
English: He was repeatedly nominated to the cabinet or the ministry of justice, but was never appointed.

古文：二十二年，起南京礼部尚书，辞弗就。
现代文：万历二十二年，要他出任南京礼部尚书，他推辞不就职。
English: In the 22nd year of Wanli, when he was asked to serve as the secretary of the Nanjing Ceremonial Department, he declined to take up the post.

古文：二十九年，赵志皋卒，沈一贯独当国。
现代文：万历二十九年，赵志皋去世，沈一贯独掌国政。
English: In the 29th year of Wanli, Zhao Zhisheng died, leaving Shen in sole charge of state affairs.

古文：廷推阁臣，诏鲤以故官兼东阁大学士，入参机务，与朱赓并命。
现代文：朝廷推举内阁大臣，诏令沈鲤官复原职并兼任东阁大学士参与机要事务，与朱赓同时受命。
English: The imperial court appointed him as a cabinet minister, and ordered the reinstatement of Shen Yi as a cabinet minister and concurrently as a member of the Donggak University to participate in important affairs. He was appointed at the same time as Zhu Xi.

古文：屡辞不允。
现代文：沈鲤多次推辞，神宗都不同意。
English: Shen Rong repeatedly declined, but Shensong did not agree.

古文：明年七月始入朝，时年七十有一矣。
现代文：第二年七月才入朝廷，当时年龄为七十一岁。
English: He did not enter the imperial court until July of the following year, at which time he was seventy-one years old.

古文：一贯以士心夙附鲤，深忌之，贻书李三才曰： 归德公来，必夺吾位，将何以备之？ 
现代文：沈一贯因为士人的心都倾附于沈鲤，很忌恨他，送信给李三才称 ：归德公回来必定夺走我的职位，将拿什么对付他呢？ 
English: Shen always hated Shen Zhen because the hearts of the scholars were devoted to him. He sent a letter to Li Sancai saying, "If I return to Germany, he will surely take away my position. What will he do to him?"

古文：归德，鲤邑名，欲风鲤辞召命也。
现代文：归德是沈鲤乡邑的名称，想讥讽沈鲤推辞诏令。
English: "Kuide" is the name of the township of Shen Yi, which is intended to ridicule the imperial edict issued by Shen Yi.

古文：三才答书，言鲤忠实无他肠，劝一贯同心。
现代文：李三才回函，称沈鲤忠诚实在，没有其他心思，劝沈一贯与他同心执政。
English: Li Sancai replied to the letter, saying that Shen Yao's loyalty was real and that he had no other thoughts, and advised Shen to always govern with him.

古文：一贯由此并憾三才。
现代文：沈一贯从此也不满意李三才。
English: Shen has never been satisfied with Li Sancai.

古文：鲤既至，即具陈道中所见矿税之害。
现代文：沈鲤到任，详细陈说路途所见矿税的危害。
English: When he took office, Shen Hao gave a detailed account of the harm of the mineral tax that he saw along the way.

古文：他日复与赓疏论。
现代文：隔日又与朱赓奏疏评论。
English: The next day, he commented on the performance with Zhu Rongxiao.

古文：皆弗纳。
现代文：皇帝都没有接纳。
English: The emperor did not accept it.

古文：楚假王被讦事起，礼部侍郎郭正域请行勘，鲤是之。
现代文：楚地出现假王事件，礼部侍郎郭正域请求核查，沈鲤称是。
English: A false king incident occurred in Chu, and the attendant of the ceremonial department, Guo Zhengwei, requested verification, which Shen Wei said was the case.

古文：及奸人所撰《续忧危竑议》发，一贯辈张皇其事，令其党钱梦皋诬奏正域、鲤门生，协造妖言，并罗织鲤奸赃数事。
现代文：等到奸人所撰定的《续忧危议》事发，沈一贯等人夸大其事，指令党羽钱梦皋诬奏郭正域是沈鲤的门生，协力制造妖言，并且罗织沈鲤贪赃等数罪。
English: When the "Continuation of Worries and Dangers" incident occurred, which was written by the traitor, Shen Gangjun and others exaggerated the incident, ordered the party to falsely portray Guo Zhengwei as a protégé of Shen Yi, and worked together to fabricate rumors, and to cover up several crimes such as Shen Yi's corruption.

古文：帝察其诬，不问。
现代文：皇帝察觉其中的诬陷，没有追究。
English: The emperor was aware of the frame-up and did not investigate.

古文：而一贯辈使逻卒日夜操兵围守其邸。
现代文：然而沈一贯一伙派巡逻的士兵日夜率兵丁围守他的官邸。
English: However, Shen has always surrounded his official residence with a group of soldiers patrolling day and night.

古文：已而事解，复谮鲤诅咒。
现代文：不久事情解决了，又诬陷沈鲤有所诅咒。
English: Before long, the matter was resolved, and the false accusation of Shen Yao was cursed.

古文：鲤尝置小屏阁中，列书谨天戒、恤民穷、开言路、发章奏、用大僚、补庶官、起废弃、举考选、释冤狱、撤税使十事，而上书 天启圣聪，拨乱反治 八字。
现代文：沈鲤曾在阁中放置小屏风，列写有谨慎天戒、体恤民穷、开扩言路、转发奏章、重用大官、补充庶官、起用废弃者、举行考选、释放冤狱者、撤除税使等十件事，而且上面书写 天启圣聪，拨乱反治 八个字。
English: Shen Yi had placed a small screen in the pavilion, listing ten things, such as prudence, compassion for the poor, opening the way for the expansion of speech, forwarding the music chapter, reusing high officials, supplementing low-ranking officials, employing abandoned people, holding examinations and elections, releasing unjustly imprisoned people, and removing tax envoys, and above it was written Tianqi Shengcong, dialing eight words against the government.

古文：每入阁，辄焚香拜祝之，谗者遂指为诅咒。
现代文：每次进内阁，就焚香拜祝它，谗言的人于是指责这是诅咒。
English: Every time he enters the cabinet, he burns incense to worship it, and detractors accuse it of being a curse.

古文：帝取入视之，曰： 此岂诅咒耶？ 
现代文：皇帝取去察看，说： 这难道是诅咒吗？ 
English: The emperor inspected it and said, "Is this a curse?"

古文：谗者曰： 彼诅咒语，固不宣诸口。 
现代文：谗言者称 ：他诅咒的话当然不说出口。 
English: The critic said: Of course he doesn't say a curse word.

古文：赖帝知鲤深，不之信。
现代文：由于神宗对沈鲤深为了解，不相信此事。
English: Since Shenzong had a deep understanding of Shen Yao, he didn't believe it.

古文：先是，阁臣奏揭不轻进，进则无不答者。
现代文：在此之前，阁臣的奏揭不轻易呈入宫中，呈入的就没有不答复的。
English: Prior to this, it was not easy for a cabinet minister to submit a report to the palace, and those who did would not receive a reply.

古文：是时中外扞格，奏揭繁，多寝不下。
现代文：当时朝廷内外阻隔，奏揭繁多，大都留宫中而不下发。
English: At that time, there was a barrier between the inside and outside of the imperial court, and there were many reports, most of which remained in the palace and were not released.

古文：鲤以失职，累引疾求退。
现代文：沈鲤认为失职，屡次称病请求退休。
English: Shen Wei considered it a dereliction of duty, and repeatedly pleaded illness and asked to retire.

古文：奖谕有加，卒不能行其所请。
现代文：神宗对他多方奖谕，但最终不答应他的请求。
English: Shenzong praised him in many ways, but ultimately did not agree to his request.

古文：三十二年，叙皮林功，加太子太保。
现代文：万历三十二年，叙论平定皮林的功绩，被加封太子太保。
English: In the 32nd year of Wanli, he wrote a treatise on the exploits of Pei Ding Pilin and was awarded the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：寻以秩满，加少保，改文渊阁。
现代文：不久因官秩已满，加封为少保，改任文渊阁。
English: Soon, because his official rank had expired, he was given the additional title of Junior Public Security Officer and was reassigned to Bunyukaku.

古文：鲤初相，即请除矿税。
现代文：沈鲤初次任宰相，就请求清除矿税。
English: After his first appointment as prime minister, Shen Yi requested the removal of the mining tax.

古文：居位数年，数以为言。
现代文：在位几年，多次因此劝谏。
English: During his reign of a few years, he was persuaded to abdicate several times.

古文：会长陵明楼灾，鲤语一贯、赓各为奏，俟时上之。
现代文：遇上长陵明楼遭灾，沈鲤告诉沈一贯、朱赓各写一份奏章，等待时机呈上。
English: When Changling Minglou was hit by a disaster, Shen Yi told Shen Cong and Zhu Xi to each write a report and wait for the right time to submit it.

古文：一日大雨，鲤曰： 可矣。 
现代文：一天下大雨，沈鲤说： 可以了。 
English: After a day of heavy rain, Shen Yao said, "It's okay.

古文：两人问故，鲤曰： 帝恶言矿税事，疏入多不视，今吾辈冒雨素服诣文华奏之，上讶而取阅，亦一机也。 
现代文：两人询问原因，沈鲤说： 皇上厌恶谈矿税的事，奏疏呈入后大多不看，现在我们冒雨穿白衣到文华殿启奏此事，皇上惊讶而后取奏阅览，也是一个机会。 
English: The two inquired about the reason, and Shen Yi said: The emperor hates to talk about the mining tax, and most people do not look at the report after it is submitted. Now we are braving the rain to wear white clothes to the Wenhua Hall to open the report. The emperor was surprised and then took the report for reading, which is also an opportunity.

古文：两人从其言。
现代文：两人听从了他的话。
English: The two men obeyed his words.

古文：帝得疏，曰： 必有急事。 
现代文：神宗得到奏疏，说： 必定有紧急的事。 
English: When Shinso received the call, he said, "There must be an emergency.

古文：启视，果心动，然不为罢。
现代文：阅奏后果然心动，却不罢除矿税。
English: After the reading of the play, the heart is moved, but the mineral tax is not removed.

古文：明年长至，一贯在告，鲤、赓谒贺仁德门。
现代文：第二年夏至，沈一贯在休假，沈鲤、朱赓到仁德门朝贺。
English: On the summer solstice of the second year, Shen was always on vacation, and Shen Yi and Zhu Xi went to Rendemen to offer congratulations.

古文：帝赐食，司礼太监陈矩侍，小珰数往来窃听，且执笔以俟。
现代文：神宗赏赐御食，司礼太监陈矩侍候，小太监多次往来窃听，并执笔等候。
English: Shenzong rewarded the imperial food, the eunuch Chen Rong waited, and the minor eunuch eavesdropped many times and waited to write.

古文：鲤因极陈矿税害民状，矩亦戚然。
现代文：沈鲤极力陈述矿税危害百姓的情况，陈矩听后也觉得凄惨。
English: Shen Hao tried his best to explain how the mineral tax harmed the people, and Chen Rui also felt miserable after listening.

古文：鲤复进曰： 矿使出，破坏天下名山大川灵气尽矣，恐于圣躬不利。 
现代文：沈鲤进一步说 ：矿使派出后，将天下名山大川的灵气破坏殆尽了，恐怕对圣体不利。 
English: Shen Yao further said: After sending the miners, they destroyed the aura of the world-famous mountains and rivers. I am afraid this is not good for the holy body.

古文：矩叹息还，具为帝道之。
现代文：陈矩叹息着回去，详细向皇帝述说了。
English: Chen Mom returned with a sigh and told the emperor in detail.

古文：帝悚然遣矩咨鲤所以补救者。
现代文：皇帝惊悚，派遣陈矩向沈鲤咨询补救的办法。
English: The emperor was shocked and sent Chen Ru to consult with Shen Zhen about the remedy.

古文：鲤曰： 此无他，急停开凿，则灵气自复。 
现代文：沈鲤说 ：没有别的什么，赶紧停止开凿，则灵气自然恢复。 
English: Shen Yao said: There is nothing else, stop digging immediately, and the aura will naturally recover.

古文：帝闻，为首肯。
现代文：皇帝听了后点头同意。
English: After listening, the emperor nodded in agreement.

古文：一贯虑鲤独收其功，急草疏上。
现代文：沈一贯担心沈鲤独占功劳，赶紧草拟奏疏呈上。
English: Shen has always been worried about Shen Yao's exclusive credit, and hurriedly drafted a rough draft.

古文：帝不怿，复止。
现代文：皇帝不高兴，又终止了此事。
English: The emperor was displeased and put a stop to it.

古文：然越月果下停矿之命，鲤力也。
现代文：然而过了一个月又下达了停止矿税的命令，这是沈鲤的努力呀。
English: However, a month later, the order to stop the mining tax was issued, which is the effort of Shen Tao.

古文：鲤遇事秉正不挠。
现代文：沈鲤遇事秉正不屈服。
English: In the face of adversity, Shen Rong adheres to justice and does not give in.

古文：压于一贯，志不尽行。
现代文：被沈一贯压抑，志向得不到全面实现。
English: He was always suppressed by Shen, and his aspirations were never fully realized.

古文：而是时一贯数被论，引疾杜门，鲤乃得行阁事。
现代文：而此时沈一贯多次被议论，称病闭户，沈鲤得以处理内阁事务。
English: At this time, Shen has been discussed many times, saying that he was ill and closed his home, so that he could deal with cabinet affairs.

古文：皇孙生，诏赦天下。
现代文：皇孙出生，诏令大赦天下。
English: The emperor's grandson was born, and the imperial edict was issued to grant amnesty to the whole country.

古文：中官请征茶蜡夙逋，鲤以戾诏旨，再执奏，竟报寝，帝乳母翊圣夫人金氏，其夫官都督同知，殁，请以从子继。
现代文：宦官请求征收茶蜡和过去的拖欠，沈鲤认为这有悖于圣上旨意，再次上奏，最终停止了这件事。皇帝的乳母翊圣夫人金氏，她的丈夫任都督同知，死后，请求由侄子继任。
English: The eunuch requested to collect the tea wax and the past arrears. Shen Yu, who considered this to be contrary to the holy will, played again and finally stopped the matter. The emperor's wet nurse, Lady Jin, whose husband was a friend of the duke, after his death, requested to be succeeded by his nephew.

古文：鲤言都督非世官，乃已。
现代文：沈鲤称都督不是世袭的官职，事情才作罢。
English: Shen Yi said that the governorship is not a hereditary official position, and the matter should be dropped.

古文：真人张国祥谓皇孙诞生，己有祝釐功，乞三代诰命且世袭詹事主簿。
现代文：真人张国祥称皇孙的诞生，自己有祝愿赐予的功劳，请求三代享有皇帝的赐令并且世袭詹事主簿。
English: Zhang Guoxiang, the real Zhang Guoxiang, said that the birth of the emperor's grandson, he had the merit of wishing to bestow, and asked the three generations to enjoy the emperor's blessing and inherit the Zhanzhi master book.

古文：鲤力斥其谬，乃赉以金币。
现代文：沈鲤极力斥责他的荒谬，于是赏赐给他金币。
English: Shen Yi strongly rebuked him for his absurdity and rewarded him with a gold coin.

古文：帝惑中贵言，将察核畿辅牧地，谕鲤撰敕。
现代文：神宗听信宦官之言，准备考察核实京郊的牧地，诏谕沈鲤撰写敕令。
English: Shenzong listened to the words of the eunuch, prepared to inspect and verify the pastures in the suburbs of Beijing, and the edict was written by Shen Qi.

古文：鲤言： 近年以来，百利之源，尽笼于朝廷，常恐势极生变。
现代文：沈鲤劝谏 ：近年来，百利的源头，都被朝廷掌握，我经常担忧事情到了极点产生变故。
English: Shen Yuxuan: In recent years, the source of Baileys has been controlled by the imperial court. I am often worried that things have come to a head and things will change.

古文：况此牧地，岂真有豪右隐占新垦未科者？
现代文：况且这些牧地，难道真的有豪右隐瞒新开垦地没科税？
English: Moreover, these pastures, do they really have the right to conceal the newly reclaimed land without tax?

古文：奸民所传，未足深信。 
现代文：奸民的传言，未必值得相信。 
English: Rumours of traitors are not necessarily to be believed.

古文：遂止。
现代文：事情遂得终止。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：云南武弁杀税使杨荣。
现代文：云南的武弁杀了税使杨荣。
English: Wu Ben of Yunnan killed the tax collector Yang Rong.

古文：帝怒甚，将遣官逮治。
现代文：皇帝很恼怒，准备派遣官员将他们逮捕惩治。
English: The emperor was furious and prepared to send officials to arrest and punish them.

古文：鲤具陈荣罪状，请诛为首杀荣者，而贷其余，乃不果逮。
现代文：沈鲤详细陈述了杨荣的罪状，请求诛杀带头杀杨荣的人，而宽免其他的人，于是果然没有广泛拘捕。
English: Shen Yao detailed the charges against Yang Rong and requested that the person who led the killing of Yang Rong be killed, while the others be pardoned. As a result, there was no widespread arrest.

古文：陕西税使梁永求领镇守事，亦以鲤言罢。
现代文：陕西税使梁永请求负责镇守的事务，也因为沈鲤的劝谏作罢。
English: The Shaanxi government asked Liang Yong to be in charge of the affairs of the town guard, but also because of the persuasion of Shen Yi.

古文：辽东税使高淮假进贡名，率所统练甲至国门。
现代文：辽东税使高淮假借进贡的名义，率领所统领的兵丁来到京师城门。
English: Liaodong taxation caused Gao Huai to lead the soldiers under his command to the gate of Beijing Shicheng under the pretext of paying tribute.

古文：鲤中夜密奏其不可，诏责淮而止。
现代文：沈鲤半夜密奏此不能行，皇帝下诏指责高淮而阻止了他。
English: Shen Zhen could not play secretly in the middle of the night, and the emperor issued an edict to accuse Gao Huai and stop him.

古文：时一贯虽称疾杜门，而章奏多即家拟旨，鲤力言非故事。
现代文：当时沈一贯虽然称病闭门在家，而奏章大多送到家中由他拟旨，沈鲤极力数说这没有先例。
English: At that time, although Shen always said that he was sick at home behind closed doors, and most of the musical scores were sent to his home by him, Shen Yu insisted that this was unprecedented.

古文：鲤既积忤一贯，一贯将去，虑鲤在，贻己后忧欲与俱去，密倾之。
现代文：沈鲤既然与沈一贯积怨，沈一贯即将离职，顾虑沈鲤在职，给自己留下后顾之忧，想与他一起离开内阁，秘密倾覆他。
English: Since he and Shen Rong have always had a grudge against each other, Shen Rong is always about to leave office, and he is worried about Shen Rong being in office. He wants to leave the cabinet with him and secretly overthrow him.

古文：帝亦嫌鲤方鲠，因鲤乞休，遽命与一贯同致仕。
现代文：神宗也嫌沈鲤刚正，趁着沈鲤请求退休，于是指令他与沈一贯一起退休。
English: Shenzong also disliked Shen Zhen's uprightness, and took advantage of Shen Zhen's request to retire, and ordered him to retire together with Shen Zhen.

古文：赓疏乞留鲤，不报。
现代文：朱赓上奏请求挽留沈鲤，没有答复。
English: There was no response to Zhu Rong's request to retain Shen Rong.

古文：既抵家，疏谢，犹极陈怠政之弊，以明作进规。
现代文：抵家后，他上奏答谢，仍然极力陈述懈怠政务的弊端，显明进取规章。
English: After arriving home, he wrote a letter of thanks, still vigorously stated the drawbacks of slack government affairs, and showed enterprising regulations.

古文：年八十，遣官存问，赉银币。
现代文：他八十岁时，神宗派官去探视，赏给他银两。
English: When he was eighty years old, the Shin sect sent an official to visit him and awarded him two silver coins.

古文：鲤奏谢，复陈时政要务。
现代文：沈鲤上奏答谢，又陈述当时政治的要务。
English: Shen Rong made a speech of thanks, and also stated the political priorities at that time.

古文：又五年卒，年八十五。
现代文：又过了五年沈鲤去世，享年八十五岁。
English: Five years later, Shen Qi died at the age of eighty-five.

古文：赠太师，谥文端。
现代文：赠封为太师，谥号文端。
English: He was awarded the title of Grand Master and given the posthumous name of Wenda.

古文：于慎行，字无垢，东阿人。
现代文：于慎行，字无垢，东阿人。
English: Yu Shengxing, the character is pure, the East A people.

古文：年十七，举于乡。
现代文：十七岁时，乡试中举。
English: At the age of seventeen, he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：御史欲即鹿鸣宴冠之，以未奉父命辞。
现代文：御史想在为新举子举行的宴会上为他加冠，他以没得到父亲的许可而推辞了。
English: Goshi wanted to crown him at a banquet held for his new son-in-law, but he refused, saying he did not have his father's permission.

古文：隆庆二年成进士。
现代文：隆庆二年，考中进士。
English: In the second year of Longqing, he passed the middle school entrance examination.

古文：改庶吉士，授编修。
现代文：改任庶吉士，授职为编修。
English: He was reappointed to the position of deputy kishi, and the post of editor was no longer conferred.

古文：万历初，《穆宗实录》成，进修撰，充日讲官。
现代文：万历初年，《穆宗实录》撰成，晋升为修撰，担任日讲官。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, he compiled "Mu Zong Shih Lu" and was promoted to the post of compiler, and served as a Japanese lecturer.

古文：故事，率以翰林大僚直日讲，无及史官者。
现代文：先朝成例，都是由翰林大臣负责日讲，没有涉及史官的事。
English: In the case of the previous dynasty, all ministers of Hanlin were in charge of the Japanese language, and there was no involvement of historians.

古文：慎行与张位及王家屏、沈一贯、陈于陛咸以史官得之，异也。
现代文：于慎行与张位、王家屏、沈一贯、陈于陛都是以史官身份参与日讲，是为少见。
English: It is rare for Yu Sheng Xing, Zhang Yi, Wang Jia Ping, Shen Tong, and Chen Yu Shi to participate in the lecture as historians.

古文：尝讲罢，帝出御府图画，令讲官分题。
现代文：他有一次讲课后，皇帝拿出宫藏图画，请讲官分别题字。
English: After one of his lectures, the emperor took out a picture from the imperial collection and asked the lecturer to inscribe it separately.

古文：慎行不善书，诗成，属人书之，具以实对。
现代文：于慎行不擅长书法，诗词做成后，吩咐别人书写好，并详细地从实告诉了皇帝。
English: Yu Shengxing was not good at calligraphy. After the poem was completed, he ordered others to write it well and told the emperor in detail.

古文：帝悦，尝大书 责难陈善 四字赐之，词林传为盛事。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，曾经大书 责难陈善 四个字赏赐给他，这在词林诗界传为盛事。
English: The emperor was very pleased. He had been given the four-character reward of Daishu (great book) 非難难陈善 (condemnation of Chen Zhen), which was said to be a great event in the poetry world.

古文：御史刘台以劾张居正被逮，僚友悉避匿，慎行独往视之。
现代文：御史刘台因为弹劾张居正被逮捕，同僚和朋友都躲避他，唯独于慎行前往探视。
English: Chief historian Liu Tai was arrested because of the impeachment of Zhang Jiu Zheng. Colleagues and friends avoided him, but only carefully went to visit him.

古文：及居正夺情，偕同官具疏谏。
现代文：等到张居正服丧未满夺情出仕时，他与同官便上奏劝谏。
English: When Zhang Ju, who was in mourning, was not yet old enough to take up his post, he and his colleagues went to persuade him.

古文：吕调阳格之，不得上。
现代文：吕调阳从中阻拦，没能递入宫中。
English: Lv Duyang blocked it from entering the palace.

古文：居正闻而怒，他日谓慎行曰： 子吾所厚，亦为此耶？ 
现代文：张居正听说后恼怒，日后对于慎行说： 你是我所厚爱的人，也这样做吗？ 
English: Zhang Juzheng was angry after hearing this, and later said to Sheng Xing: "You are someone I deeply love, do you do the same?

古文：慎行从容对曰： 正以公见厚故耳。 
现代文：于慎行从容自如地回答 ：正是因为您厚爱我的缘故。 
English: Yu Shengyong calmly replied, "It's because you love me so much."

古文：居正怫然。
现代文：张居正很不高兴。
English: Zhang Jizheng was very unhappy.

古文：慎行寻以疾归。
现代文：于慎行不久就称病回乡。
English: Yu Shengxing soon called in sick and returned to his hometown.

古文：居正卒，起故官。
现代文：张居正去世后，他出任原职。
English: After the death of Zhang Juzheng, he took up his original post.

古文：进左谕德，日讲如故。
现代文：晋升左谕德，主持日讲如故。
English: He was promoted to Zuokude, and presided over the Nichiren Shoshu as before.

古文：时居正已败，侍郎丘橓往籍其家。
现代文：当时张居正已被追究论罪，侍郎丘木舜前往江陵抄家。
English: At that time, Zhang Jizheng had already been investigated and convicted, and his servant, Qiu Muxuan, went to Gangneung to search his home.

古文：慎行遗书，言居正母老，诸子覆巢之下，颠沛可伤，宜推明主帷盖恩，全大臣簪履之谊。
现代文：于慎行致函给他，称张居正的母亲年老，诸位儿子在覆巢之下，颠沛流离值得同情，应该推及明主覆盖之恩，成全大臣曾经侍候皇上的情谊。
English: Yu Shengxing sent a letter to him, saying that Zhang Juzheng's mother was old, his sons were under the cover of the nest, and their wandering was worthy of sympathy, and the grace of being covered by the Lord should be promoted. Minister Cheng Quan once served the emperor's friendship.

古文：词极恳挚，时论韪之。
现代文：话语极为诚恳真挚，当时的舆论也认为他是对的。
English: The words were very sincere and sincere, and the public opinion at that time also thought he was right.

古文：由侍讲学士擢礼部右侍郎。
现代文：他由侍讲学士晋升为礼部右侍郎。
English: He was promoted from the Bachelor of Ceremonial Arts to the Right Hand Man of Ceremonial Arts.

古文：转左，改吏部，掌詹事府。
现代文：又转任左侍郎，改任吏部职，负责詹事府。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of left attendant, and was reassigned to the position of secretary, in charge of Zhanji-fu.

古文：寻迁礼部尚书。
现代文：不久，升任礼部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：慎行明习典制，诸大礼多所裁定。
现代文：于慎行明了典章制度，诸多大礼都是由他裁定。
English: Yu Shengxing clarified the award system, and many grand gifts were decided by him.

古文：先是，嘉靖中孝烈后升祔，祧仁宗。
现代文：在此之前，嘉靖中期孝烈后升格祭祀于仁宗的宗庙。
English: Prior to this, after the mid-Jiajing period, the filial piety and martyrs were elevated to be enshrined in the ancestral temple of the Rinzong.

古文：万历改元，穆宗升祔，复祧宣宗。
现代文：改换万历年号，穆宗升格祭祀于宣宗的宗庙。
English: The Manchu era name was changed, and the Mu Sect was elevated to be enshrined in the ancestral temple of the Xuan Sect.

古文：慎行谓非礼，作《太庙祧迁考》，言： 古七庙之制，三昭三穆，与太祖之庙而七。
现代文：于慎行称不合礼节，撰写《太庙祧迁考》，称： 古代七庙制度，三座昭庙三座穆庙，与太祖庙合为七庙。
English: Yu Shengxing said that it was not proper etiquette, writing "An Examination of the Relocation of the Great Temple," saying: the ancient seven-temple system, three Zhaomiao, three Mu temples, and the Great Ancestor Temple combined into seven temples.

古文：刘歆、王肃并以高、曾、祖、祢及五世、六世为三昭三穆。
现代文：刘歆、王肃一道将高祖、曾祖、祖父、自己以及五世、六世分为三昭三穆。
English: Liu Wei and Wang Su together divided Gao Zu, great-grandfather, grandfather, themselves, and the fifth and sixth generations into three Zhao and three Mu.

古文：其兄弟相传，则同堂异室，不可为一世。
现代文：兄弟相传皇位，就在同一祭堂不同的祭室，不能作为一世。
English: Brothers succeed to the throne one after the other, but in different ceremonial rooms of the same hall. This cannot be considered a lifetime.

古文：国朝成祖既为世室，与太祖俱百世不迁，则仁宗以下，必实历六世，而后三昭三穆始备。
现代文：我朝，成祖既然是世室，与太祖都是百世不变的，则从仁宗以下算，必然经历六世，此后三昭三穆才完备。
English: In our dynasty, since Cheng Zu is a lineage, and the great-grandfather is the same for a hundred generations, it is calculated from the Rinzong and below, it is inevitable to experience the sixth generation, after which the three generations are complete.

古文：孝宗与睿宗兄弟，武宗与世宗兄弟，韶穆同，不当各为一世。
现代文：孝宗与睿宗是兄弟，武宗与世宗是兄弟，昭穆相同，不应该各为一世。
English: Xiaozong and Ruizong are brothers, Wuzong and Shizong are brothers, they are the same as Shomu, they should not be separated.

古文：世宗升，距仁宗止六世，不当祧仁宗。
现代文：世宗升格祭祀，距离仁宗已有六世，不应该承祧仁宗。
English: It is the sixth generation since the ascension of the Sejong sect to the Rinzong sect, so it should not be followed by the Rinzong sect.

古文：穆宗升祔，当祧仁宗，不当祧宣宗。 
现代文：穆宗升格祭祀，应该承嗣仁宗，不应该在宣宗的宗庙。 
English: If the Mu Sect is to be elevated to a higher level of worship, it should be in succession to the Ren Sect, and not in the ancestral temple of the Xuan Sect.

古文：引晋、唐、宋故事为据，其言辨而核。
现代文：他引用晋代、唐代、宋代的先例做依据，既言论分明，事情核实。
English: He cited the precedents of the Jin, Tang and Song dynasties as a basis, both to make clear statements and to verify things.

古文：事虽不行，识者服其知礼。
现代文：事情虽然未能施行，有识之人佩服他知达礼仪。
English: Although the matter did not come to fruition, those in the know admired his knowledge of etiquette.

古文：又言： 南昌、寿春等十六王，世次既远，宜别祭陵园，不宜祔享太庙。 
现代文：他又谏称 ：南昌、寿春等十六个王，世系的次序相距久远，应该在别的陵园祭祀，不应该在太庙中祭祀。 
English: He also falsely claimed that the 16 kings of Nanchang, Shuchun and so on, whose lineages are far apart, should be enshrined in other cemeteries and not in the Imperial Temple.

古文：亦寝不行。
现代文：也没有听取他的意见。
English: Nor did they listen to his opinion.

古文：十八年正月，疏请早建东宫，出阁讲读。
现代文：万历十八年正月，上奏请求早日建立东宫，让嫡长子出宫接受讲读教育。
English: In the first month of the 18th year of Wanli, Shangso requested that the East Palace be built as soon as possible, so that the eldest son could leave the palace to receive reading education.

古文：及冬，又请。
现代文：到了冬季，又上奏请求。
English: In the winter, there was another request.

古文：帝怒，再严旨诘责。
现代文：皇帝恼怒，一再下严旨责难。
English: The emperor was infuriated and repeatedly issued stern reprimands.

古文：慎行不为慑，明日复言： 册立臣部职掌，臣等不言，罪有所归。
现代文：于慎行不为所动，第二天又劝谏 ：册立的事，由我部负责，我们不提，是罪过。
English: Yu Shengxing was not impressed, and on the next day, he again advised Zou: "Our department is responsible for the matters set forth in the book, and it is a sin for us not to mention them.

古文：幸速决大计，放归田里。 
现代文：希望皇帝迅速决定大计，将我放归乡里。 
English: I hope the emperor will make a quick decision and let me go back to my hometown.

古文：帝益不悦，责以要君疑上，淆乱国本，及僚属皆夺俸。
现代文：皇帝更加不高兴，责备他要挟皇帝，怀疑圣上，搅乱国家的根本，将他的同僚下属都剥夺了俸禄。
English: The emperor was even more displeased, accusing him of blackmailing the emperor, doubting the sacred, disrupting the foundation of the country, and depriving his colleagues and subordinates of their salaries.

古文：山东乡试，预传典试者名，已而果然。
现代文：山东的乡试，预先传说负责考试人的名字，事后果然如此。
English: In Shandong's township examinations, the name of the person in charge of the examination is announced in advance, and this is what happened.

古文：言者遂劾礼官，皆停俸。
现代文：言官便弹劾礼部官员，于是礼部官员都停发俸禄。
English: The magistrate then impeached the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies, as a result of which the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies stopped paying salaries.

古文：慎行引罪乞休。
现代文：于慎行称罪请求退休。
English: Yu Shengxing pleaded guilty and asked to retire.

古文：章累上，乃许。
现代文：奏章接连呈上，皇帝终于答应了。
English: The Emperor finally consented to the presentation of the scores one after another.

古文：家居十余年，中外屡荐，率报寝。
现代文：在家居住十多年，朝廷内外屡次举荐，均不答复。
English: After living at home for more than ten years, he was repeatedly recommended both inside and outside the Imperial Court, but no reply was given.

古文：三十三年，始起掌詹事府。
现代文：万历三十三年，才起用负责詹事府。
English: It has been 33 years since he was appointed to be in charge of Janzhi Prefecture.

古文：疏辞，复留不下。
现代文：他上奏推辞，皇帝又没有挽留他。
English: He sent in his resignation, but the emperor did not retain him.

古文：居二年，廷推阁臣七人，首慎行。
现代文：在家住了二年，朝廷推举七人任内阁大臣，第一个就是于慎行。
English: After living at home for two years, the imperial court appointed seven people as cabinet ministers, the first being Yu Shengxing.

古文：诏加太子少保兼东阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：诏令加封他为太子少保兼东阁大学士，入阁参与机要事务。
English: He was given the additional title of Junior Protector of the Crown Prince and Donggak University Scholar by imperial decree, and joined the cabinet to participate in important affairs.

古文：再辞不允，乃就道。
现代文：他再三推辞没有被同意，才取道赴京。
English: His repeated refusal was not accepted, so he took the road to Beijing.

古文：时慎行已得疾。
现代文：当时于慎行已经患病。
English: At that time, Yu Shengxing was already ill.

古文：及廷谢，拜起不如仪，上疏请罪。
现代文：到朝廷答谢，拜叩起身都不合礼仪，他上奏请罪。
English: It is not proper etiquette to go to the imperial court to say thank you, or to stand up and bow. He pleaded guilty.

古文：归卧于家，遂草遗疏，请帝亲大臣、录遣逸、补言官。
现代文：归乡卧病在家，于是草拟遗疏，请求皇帝亲近大臣，录用闲置的人才，补充言官。
English: After returning home, he fell ill and stayed at home, so he drafted a will, requesting the emperor to be close to the minister, hire idle talents, and supplement the speaker.

古文：数日卒，年六十三。
现代文：几天后去世，享年六十三岁。
English: He died a few days later, aged 63.

古文：赠太子太保，谥文定。
现代文：赠封太子太保，谥号文定。
English: He was given the title of Crown Prince Taibo, and his posthumous name was changed to Wending.

古文：慎行学有原委，贯穿百家。
现代文：于慎行的学问有师承源流，贯通百家之学。
English: The culture of prudence has teachers to carry on the source, and it runs through the learning of hundreds of families.

古文：神宗时，词馆中以慎行及临朐冯琦文学为一时冠。
现代文：神宗时，词馆中认为于慎行和临朐冯琦的文章学识是当时最好的。
English: At the time of Shenzong, Yu Shengxing and Linyi Fengyao's knowledge of the essay was considered to be the best at that time.

古文：李廷机，字尔张，晋江人。
现代文：李廷机，字尔张，晋江人。
English: Li Tingji, Zher Zhang, Jinjiang people.

古文：贡入太学，顺天乡试第一。
现代文：被推举进入太学，取得顺天乡试第一名。
English: He was selected to enter Taigaku and won the first place in the Shun Tianxiang examination.

古文：万历十一年，会试复第一，以进土第二授编修。
现代文：万历十一年，又取得会试第一名，以进士第二的身份授职为编修。
English: In the eleventh year of Wanli, he also won the first place in the entrance examination, and was awarded the post of editor as the second graduate.

古文：累迁祭酒。
现代文：升任祭酒。
English: Raised to the rank of sacred liquor.

古文：故事，祭酒每视事，则二生共举一牌诣前，大书 整齐严肃 四字。
现代文：先制，祭酒每次视察事务，则由两名学生同举一块牌走在前列，牌上大写着 整齐严肃 四个字。
English: As a preemptive measure, after each inspection of the sacrificial wine, two students hold up a sign and walk in the front, with the words "neat and serious" written in capital letters on the sign.

古文：盖高皇帝所制，以警师儒者。
现代文：大概是由高皇帝所制，用来警诫儒学之人。
English: It was probably made by Emperor Gao to warn people away from Confucianism.

古文：廷机见之惕然，故其立教，一以严为主。
现代文：李廷机看到它就肃然起敬，所以他在国子监任职时，一概以严格为主。
English: When Li Tingji saw it, he was awestruck, so when he served as the State Children's Supervisor, he was always strict.

古文：久之，迁南京吏部右侍郎，署部事。
现代文：很久之后，升任南京吏部右侍郎，负责吏部事务。
English: After a long time, he was promoted to the right-hand man of the Nanjing cadre, responsible for the affairs of the cadre.

古文：二十七年，典京察，无偏私。
现代文：万历二十七年，主持京察，没有偏私。
English: In the 27th year of Wanli, he presided over the Beijing inspection, and did not show any partiality.

古文：尝兼署户、工二部事，综理精密。
现代文：曾经兼管户部、工部的事务，总揽大事又精细周密。
English: He was in charge of the household department and the engineering department at the same time, taking care of all the important matters in a meticulous manner.

古文：奏行轸恤行户四事，商困大苏。
现代文：奏请皇帝施行抚恤商旅四件事，商旅的困窘得以缓解。
English: He petitioned the emperor to carry out four things for the relief of merchants and travelers, and the plight of merchants and travelers was alleviated.

古文：外城陵垣，多所缮治，费皆取公帑奇羡，不以烦民。
现代文：京城外的陵垣，大都得到修缮整治，费用都取自公款的节余钱，没有因此烦扰百姓。
English: Most of the mausoleums outside the capital have been repaired and renovated, and the costs were all taken from public funds, so they did not bother the people.

古文：召为礼部右侍郎，四辞不允，越二年始受任。
现代文：皇帝召见并任命他为礼部右侍郎，四次推辞，皇帝都不同意，过了二年他才上任。
English: The emperor summoned him and appointed him as the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department. He declined four times, but the emperor did not agree. It took him two years to take office.

古文：时已进左侍郎，遂代郭正域视部事。
现代文：当时他已经晋升为左侍郎，于是代替郭正域巡视礼部事务。
English: At that time, he had already been promoted to the left attendant, so he replaced Guo Zhengwei to inspect the ceremonial affairs.

古文：会楚王华奎因正域发其餽遗书，诬讦正域不法数事。
现代文：遇上楚王华奎因为郭正域揭发他馈赠礼物的书信，而诬蔑郭正域几件不法的事件。
English: When King Chu Hua Kui encountered Guo Zhengwei, he slandered Guo Zhengwei with several illegal incidents because Guo Zhengwei revealed his gift letter.

古文：廷机意右楚王，而微为正域解。
现代文：李廷机的意见有些偏袒楚王，因此就稍稍替郭正域解脱。
English: Li Tingji's opinion was somewhat biased in favor of King Chu, so he slightly relieved Guo Zhengwei.

古文：大学士沈一贯欲藉妖书倾正域，廷机与御史沈裕、同官涂宗浚俱署名上趣定皦生光狱，株连遂绝。
现代文：大学士沈一贯想借妖书将郭正域倾覆，李廷机与御史沈裕、同官涂宗浚都署名上奏，催促审定白敫生光的狱案，株连于是终结。
English: Shen, a university scholar, always wanted to overthrow Guo Zhengyi with the help of occult books. Li Tingji, his superior Shen Yu, and his colleague Tu Zongjun all signed petitions to urge the approval of Bai Xuan Shenglu's prison case, and the joint stock company was terminated.

古文：三十三年夏，雷震郊坛。
现代文：万历三十三年夏季，雷霆震击了郊坛。
English: In the summer of 1933, thunder shook the suburbs.

古文：既率同列条上修省事宜，复言今日阙失，莫如矿税，宜罢撤。
现代文：他既率领同僚条列修缮的事情奏上，又称现在的过失，没有比得了矿税的，应该罢除、撤消。
English: He not only led his colleagues to report the matter of systematic repairs, but also said that the current fault was no better than the mining tax, and should be removed and revoked.

古文：不报。
现代文：皇帝没有答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：其冬，类上四方灾异。
现代文：当年冬天，分类奏疏四方的灾难、异变。
English: In the winter of that year, the classification caused a series of disasters and abnormal changes.

古文：秦王谊漶由中尉进封，其庶长子应授本爵，夤缘欲封郡王，廷机三疏力持。
现代文：秦王谊漶由中尉加封，他的庶长子应该授予原来的爵位，他攀附着想分封为郡王，李廷机多次上奏极力坚持不同意。
English: Qin Wangye's title was added by a lieutenant, and his eldest illegitimate son should have been awarded the original title. He clung to the idea of being awarded the title of county king, but Li Tingji repeatedly insisted on disagreeing.

古文：王遣人居间，廷机固拒，特旨许之。
现代文：秦王派人从中调和，李廷机坚决拒绝，皇帝却特别颁旨同意。
English: King Qin sent someone to mediate, Li Tingji firmly refused, but the emperor gave special approval.

古文：益府服内请封，亦持不可。
现代文：益府的家臣奏请加封，他也坚持不同意。
English: Yifu's vassal, So, asked for an additional seal, but he also insisted that he did not agree.

古文：廷机遇事有执，尤廉洁，帝知之。
现代文：李廷机遇事有主见，尤其廉洁，皇帝了解他。
English: Li Ting had a strong opinion on everything, and was especially incorruptible. The emperor understood him.

古文：然性刻深，亦颇偏愎，不谙大体。
现代文：然而他的性情刻薄，也颇为偏激、刚愎，不存大体。
English: However, his temper is mean, and he is also quite irritable, stubborn, and generally lacking in self-control.

古文：楚宗人华勣以奏讦楚王，抚按官既拟夺爵，锢高墙，廷机授《祖训》谋害亲王例，议置之死。
现代文：楚王的宗族人华责力因为上奏攻击楚王，抚按官已经准备剥夺爵位，将他囚禁于高墙内，李廷机援引《祖训》中谋害亲王的例子，提议判他死罪。
English: Because Huareli, a member of King Chu's clan, had attacked King Chu, the tribune had already prepared to deprive him of his title and imprison him within the high walls. Li Tingji cited the example of assassinating the prince in the "Ancestor's Teaching" and proposed sentencing him to death.

古文：言路势张，政府暨铨曹畏之，不敢出诸外，年例遂废。
现代文：舆论拂扬，政府和吏部对此感到畏惧，不敢提出不同意见，年例考察由此废除。
English: Public opinion was on the rise, and the government and the Ministry of Public Administration were afraid of this and did not dare to put forward different opinions. As a result, the annual inspection was abolished.

古文：礼部主事聂云翰论之，廷机希言路意，中云翰察典。
现代文：礼部主事聂云翰疏论此事，李廷机观望舆论的意向，纠察聂云翰。
English: The head of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Zou Yunhan, did not comment on the matter, while Li Tingji watched the public opinion and picketed Zou Yunhan.

古文：给事中袁懋谦劾之。
现代文：给事中袁懋谦弹劾他。
English: He was impeached by Yuan Shih-hsien.

古文：廷机求退，不允。
现代文：李廷机请求隐退，皇帝不允许。
English: Li Tingji requested to retire into seclusion, but the emperor did not allow it.

古文：时内阁止朱赓一人。
现代文：当时内阁只有朱赓一个人。
English: At that time, only Zhu Rong was in the cabinet.

古文：给事中王元翰等虑廷机且入辅，数阴诋之。
现代文：给事中王元翰等人顾虑李廷机入阁辅政，屡次暗中诋毁他。
English: Wang Yuanhan and others were concerned about Li Tingji entering the cabinet and repeatedly slandered him.

古文：三十五年夏，廷推阁臣，廷机果与焉。
现代文：万历三十五年夏季，朝廷推举内阁大臣，李廷机果然参与其中。
English: In the summer of the 35th year of Wanli, the imperial court elected a cabinet minister, and Li Tingji participated in it.

古文：给事中曹于忭、宋一韩、御史陈宗契不可。
现代文：给事中曹于忭、宁一韩，御史陈宗契不同意。
English: Cao Yuxuan, Ning Yikhan, and Minister of History Chen Zongqi disagreed.

古文：相持久之，卒列以上。
现代文：相持了很久，最后条列上奏。
English: After holding each other for a long time, the last piece was played.

古文：帝雅重廷机，命以礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入参机务。
现代文：皇帝向来看重李廷机，任命他为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，入阁参与机要事务。
English: The emperor has always attached great importance to Li Tingji, appointed him as a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a scholar of the East Pavilion University, and entered the cabinet to participate in important affairs.

古文：廷机三辞始视事。
现代文：李廷机多次推辞后才负责事务。
English: Li Tingji was only put in charge of affairs after he repeatedly declined.

古文：元翰及给事中胡忻攻之不已，帝为夺俸，以慰廷机。
现代文：王元翰和给事中胡忻不断攻击他，皇帝剥夺了他们的俸禄，以安慰李廷机。
English: Wang Yuanhan and Hu Yao constantly attacked him, and the emperor deprived them of their salaries to appease Li Tingji.

古文：已而姜士昌、宋焘复以论廷机被黜，群情益愤。
现代文：不久，姜士昌、宁焘又因为疏论李廷机被罢黜，群情更加激愤。
English: Not long after, Jiang Shichang and Ning Yao were ousted from their posts for slandering Li Tingji, which further enraged the crowd.

古文：廷机力辨求罢，又疏陈十宜去，帝慰谕有加。
现代文：李廷机极力辩驳，请求罢免，又上奏陈述离职的十条理由，皇帝更加下谕令抚慰。
English: Li Tingji argued vigorously, requested to be dismissed, and submitted a report stating ten reasons for leaving the post. The emperor even issued an order to appease him.

古文：明年四月，主事郑振先论赓十二罪，并及廷机。
现代文：第二年四月，主事郑振先疏论朱赓的十二条罪状，并涉及李廷机。
English: In April of the following year, the person in charge, Zheng Zhenxian, briefly discussed Zhu Xi's twelve criminal charges, which also involved Li Tingji.

古文：廷机累疏乞休，杜门数月不出。
现代文：李廷机多次上奏请求退休，闭门数月不出来。
English: Li Tingji repeatedly petitioned for retirement and could not come out for several months behind closed doors.

古文：言者疑其伪，数十人交章力攻。
现代文：舆论怀疑他伪装，数十人交替上奏进行攻击。
English: Public opinion suspected that he was disguised, and dozens of people took turns to attack him.

古文：廷机求去不已，帝屡诏勉留，且遣鸿胪趣出，坚卧不起。
现代文：李廷机不断请求离职，皇帝屡屡颁诏对他进行勉励、挽留，并派鸿胪催他出来任职理事，他坚持卧床不起。
English: Li Tingji constantly requested to leave the post, and the emperor repeatedly issued decrees to encourage and retain him, and sent Hongyi to urge him to come out and serve as a director. He insisted on being bedridden.

古文：待命逾年，乃屏居荒庙，廷臣犹有繁言。
现代文：在家待命一年，摒绝外界，居住于荒庙之中，朝廷大臣依然有很多议论。
English: At home on call for a year, cut off from the outside world, living in a deserted temple, the Minister of the Imperial Court still has a lot to say.

古文：至四十年九月，疏已百二十余上，乃陛辞出都待命。
现代文：到了万历四十年九月，奏疏已上报了一百二十多次，于是向皇帝告辞，到都城外等待命令。
English: By September of the 40th year of Wanli, the report had been submitted more than one hundred and twenty times, so he said goodbye to the emperor and waited for orders outside the capital.

古文：同官叶向高言廷机已行，不可再挽，乃加太子太保。赐道里费，乘传，以行人护归。
现代文：同官叶向高称李廷机已经离去，不可以再做挽留，就加封李廷机为太子太保，赏赐路费，让他乘驿车，由行人司派人护送回乡。
English: Fellow official Ye Xianggao said that Li Tingji had already left and could no longer be retained, so he sealed Li Tingji as the prince's grand tutor, rewarded him with travel expenses, let him take a tuk-tuk, and sent an escort by the Pedestrian Division to escort him back to his hometown.

古文：居四年卒。
现代文：在家住了四年去世。
English: He lived at home for four years and then died.

古文：赠少保，谥文节。
现代文：赠封少保，谥号文节。
English: He was awarded the title of Shao Bao and given the honorary title of Wen Jie.

古文：廷机系阁籍六年，秉政止九月，无大过。
现代文：李廷机入阁六年，执政只有九个月，没有大的过失。
English: Li Tingji has been in the cabinet for six years and has been in power for only nine months. He has not made any major mistakes.

古文：言路以其与申时行、沈一贯辈密相授受，故交章逐之。
现代文：言官因为他与申时行、沈一贯等人相交甚为密切，所以纷纷弹劾驱逐他。
English: Because he was in close contact with people such as Shin Shih-kong and Shen Gang-wu, the officials impeached and expelled him one after another.

古文：辅臣以齮晷受辱，屏弃积年而后去，前此未有也。
现代文：辅臣以倾轧受辱，摒弃数年而后离职，这在以前是没有过的。
English: It has never happened before that an aide-de-camp has been humiliated, abandoned for several years and then left the post.

古文：廷机辅政时，四川巡抚乔璧星锐欲讨镇雄安尧臣，与贵州守臣持议不决。
现代文：廷机辅政时，四川巡抚乔璧星锐意讨伐镇雄安尧臣与贵州守将持议不决。
English: When Tingji was a vice-governor, the Sichuan governor Qiao Bixing was determined to fight against Zhen Xiong'an's vassals and the Guizhou governor.

古文：廷机力主撤兵，其后卒无事，议者称之。
现代文：廷机力主撤兵，后来终究无事，舆论都赞赏他。
English: After all, there was nothing wrong with the withdrawal of the troops, and the public opinion appreciated him.

古文：闽人入阁，自杨荣、陈山后，以语言难晓，垂二百年无人，廷机始与叶向高并命。
现代文：福建人自杨荣、陈山入阁后，因为语言难以明白知晓，有二百年再无人进入内阁。
English: Since Yang Rong and Chen Shan from Fujian entered the cabinet, because the language is difficult to understand, no one has entered the cabinet for two hundred years.

古文：后周如磐、张瑞图、林钎、蒋德璘、黄景昉复相继云。
现代文：这时李廷机与叶向高一同受命为阁臣，其后又有周如磐、张瑞图、林钎、蒋德王景、黄景盼相继入阁参予机务。
English: At this time, Li Tingji and Ye Xianggao were appointed as cabinet ministers, followed by Zhou Ruiban, Zhang Ritu, Lin Qi, Jiang De Wangjing and Huang Jingban.

古文：吴道南，字会甫，崇仁人。
现代文：吴道南，字会甫，崇仁人。
English: Wu Daonan, Zha Hui Fu, Chong Ren Ren.

古文：万历十七年进士及第。
现代文：万历十七年进士及第。
English: In the 17th year of Wanli, he was promoted to the first and second rank.

古文：授编修，进左中允。
现代文：授职为编修，晋升左中允。
English: He was given the post of editor and promoted to the position of left middle assistant.

古文：直讲东宫，太子偶旁瞩，道南即辍讲拱俟，太子为改容。
现代文：在东宫负责讲授，太子偶尔走神，吴道南即刻中止讲授，拱手等候，太子因此动容。
English: In charge of lecturing at the East Palace, the prince occasionally lost his mind. Wu Daonan immediately stopped the lecture and waited. The prince was moved.

古文：历左谕德少詹事。
现代文：历任左谕德少詹事。
English: Successive left-wing leaders have been less concerned about morality.

古文：擢礼部右侍郎，署部事。
现代文：晋升礼部右侍郎，负责礼部事务。
English: Promoted to the position of the Right Attendant of the Ceremonial Department, responsible for ceremonial affairs.

古文：历城、高苑牛产犊，皆两首两鼻，道南请尽蠲山东诸税，召还内臣，又因灾异言貂珰敛怨，乞下诏罪己，与天下更新。
现代文：历城、高苑的牛生产的牛犊，都是两个头、两个鼻子，因此吴道南奏请将山东的诸种税收全部免除，召回太监；又因为灾变而上谏言说宦官集聚怨恨，求皇帝下诏治自己的罪，使天下得以更新，都没有答复。
English: The calves produced by the cattle in Licheng and Gaoyuan are all two-headed and two-nosed. Therefore, Wu Dao Nanzo requested that all kinds of taxes in Shandong be exempted and eunuchs be recalled; and because of the disaster, he said that the eunuchs gathered resentment and asked the emperor to punish their sins and renew the world. There was no answer.

古文：皆不报。寻请追谥建文朝忠臣。
现代文：不久他奏请追加建文朝的忠臣的谥号。
English: Soon after, he asked for the additional honorific titles of loyal subjects of the Jianwen Dynasty.

古文：京师久旱，疏言： 天下人情郁而不散，致成旱灾。
现代文：京都干旱很久，他上奏称： 天下人的情怀郁郁而不扩展，造成了旱灾。
English: Kyoto has been in drought for a long time, he said in his report: People's feelings are depressed and do not expand, causing drought.

古文：如东宫天下本，不使讲明经术，练习政务，久置深闱，聪明隔塞，郁一也。
现代文：例如东宫是天下的根本，不使人为其讲明经术，训练处理政务，长期置身深宫，耳目闭塞，是第一件忧心之事。
English: For example, the East Palace is the foundation of the world, and it is the first thing to worry about if people are not allowed to explain the scriptures to it, train it to deal with government affairs, and stay in the Deep Palace for a long time with their ears and eyes closed.

古文：法司悬缺半载，谳鞫无人，囹圄充满，有入无出，愁愤之气，上薄日星，郁二也。
现代文：法司职位空缺半年，无人负责审判定罪，监狱犯人充塞，有进无出，愁怅与愤恨，上及星日，是第二件可忧虑的事。
English: The vacancy of the position of the legal department for half a year, no one is responsible for the trial and conviction, the prison is full of prisoners, there is no way in or out, sorrow and resentment, and the sun does not rise, is the second thing to worry about.

古文：内藏山积，而闾阎半菽不充，曾不发帑振救，坐视其死亡转徙，郁三也。
现代文：宫中内藏的财富堆积如山，而里巷却连半粒粮食也没有，不曾散发资财赈救，坐视他们死亡与流亡，是第三件可忧虑的事。
English: The third thing to worry about is that there is a mountain of wealth stored in the palace, but there is not even half a grain of grain in the alleys. There has been no distribution of wealth to help them, and they have been left to die and go into exile.

古文：累臣满朝荐、卞孔时，时称循吏，因权珰构陷，一系数年，郁四也。
现代文：重臣满朝荐、卞孔时，时人称好官，因为当权太监陷害，一旦囚禁就是数年，是第四件可忧虑的事。
English: When a high-ranking official is recommended to the imperial court and is executed, the people at the time praise him as a good official, because if he is framed by the eunuch in power, he will be imprisoned for several years. This is the fourth thing to worry about.

古文：废弃诸臣，实堪世用，一斥不复，山林终老，郁五也。
现代文：废弃的诸位大臣，实在堪为当世之用，一旦贬斥就不再起用，让他们在朝廷外老死终身，是第五件可忧虑之事。
English: Abandoned ministers are really of use to the world. Once they are discredited, they are no longer of use. Letting them die of old age outside the imperial court is the fifth worrying thing.

古文：陛下诚涣发德音，除此数郁，不崇朝而雨露遍天下矣。 
现代文：陛下诚心要焕发圣德的声誉，清除这几件可忧虑之事，马上就会雨露遍及天下。 
English: Your Majesty's earnest desire to burnish the reputation of sanctity, and to clear away these few troublesome matters, will soon rain dew all over the world.

古文：帝不省。
现代文：皇帝并不省悟。
English: The emperor did not listen.

古文：道南遇事有操执，明达政体。
现代文：吴道南遇事有主见，明了政体。
English: Wu Daonan has a strong opinion in times of trouble and understands the political system.

古文：朝鲜贡使归，请市火药，执不予。
现代文：朝鲜的朝贡使者回去时，请求购买火药，他坚决不给。
English: When the North Korean tributary envoy returned, he asked to buy gunpowder, which he resolutely refused to give.

古文：土鲁番贡玉，请勿纳。
现代文：吐鲁番贡奉玉石，他奏请皇帝不要接纳。
English: When Turufan offered jade as tribute, he begged the emperor not to accept it.

古文：辽东议开科试士，以岩疆当重武，格不行。
现代文：辽东议论开科取士，因为边塞疆土应当重视武备，他阻拦不准施行。
English: Liaodong talks about opening up science and technology, because the frontier territory should attach importance to armament, he is not allowed to implement it.

古文：父丧归。
现代文：父亲去世后他回到家乡。
English: He returned to his hometown after his father's death.

古文：服阕，即家拜礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务，与方从哲并命。
现代文：服丧期满，就在家里被任命为礼部尚书兼东阁大学士参与机要事务，与方从哲一起受命。
English: At the end of the period of mourning, he was appointed as a member of the Ceremonial Department and a scholar of Donggak University to participate in important affairs at home, and was ordered to work with Fang Congzhe.

古文：三辞不允，久之始入朝。
现代文：他多次推辞皇帝都不同意，此后很久才进京。
English: He repeatedly refused to accept the emperor's resignation, and it was a long time before he entered the capital.

古文：故事，廷臣受官，先面谢乃莅任。
现代文：旧制，朝廷大臣接受官职，先要当面称谢才就任。
English: Under the old system, when a minister of the Imperial Court accepted an official post, he or she had to express gratitude in person before taking office.

古文：帝不视朝久，皆先莅任。
现代文：皇帝很久不朝见了，大臣们都是先就职。
English: The emperor had not seen him for a long time, and the ministers were the first to take office.

古文：道南至，不获见，不敢入直。
现代文：吴道南上朝，没被召见，不敢就职。
English: Wu Daonan did not dare to take office in the morning without being summoned.

古文：同官从哲为言，帝令先视事，道南疏谢。
现代文：同官方从哲说，皇帝指令他先就职，吴道南上奏答谢。
English: According to official Zong Zhe, the emperor ordered him to take office first, and Wu Daonan sent a letter of thanks.

古文：居数日，言： 臣就列经旬，仅下瑞王婚礼一疏。
现代文：住了数日，奏称： 我就任十多天了，仅仅下发了瑞王婚礼一份奏疏。
English: After staying for a few days, he reported: I have been in office for more than ten days, and I have only sent down a report on the wedding of King Sui.

古文：他若储宫出讲、诸王豫教、简大僚、举遗失、撤税使、补言官诸事，廷臣舌敝以请者，举皆杳然，岂陛下简置臣等意。 
现代文：其他的如为太子讲学、诸王预先受教育、简选大臣、举荐未重用的贤士、撤除税使、补充言官等诸事，是朝廷大臣口干舌燥所请求的，都杳无音信，难道陛下将我们的建议闲置一边吗？ 
English: Other matters, such as lectures for the prince, the education of kings in advance, the brief selection of ministers, the recommendation of unimportant sages, the removal of tax inspectors, and the addition of spokesmen, all of which were requested by the ministers of the imperial court, have not been heard of. Is it possible that His Majesty has put our suggestions to one side?

古文：帝优诏答之，卒不行。
现代文：皇帝好言回答，最终却不施行。
English: The emperor kindly replied, but ultimately did not implement it.

古文：迨帝因 梃击 之变，召见群臣慈宁宫。道南始得面谢，自是不获再见。
现代文：等到皇帝因为 梃击 的变故，在慈宁宫召见群臣时，吴道南才得以向皇帝当面致谢，从此再也没有获得召见。
English: It wasn't until the emperor summoned his ministers to meet him at the Cining Palace because of the attack that Wu Daonan was able to thank the emperor in person. From then on, he was never summoned again.

古文：织造中官刘成死，遣其党吕贵往护，贵嗾奸民留己督造。
现代文：负责织造的宦官刘成死了，皇帝派他的党羽吕贵前去护灵，吕贵唆使奸民挽留他自己督导织造。
English: The eunuch in charge of weaving, Liu Cheng, died, and the emperor sent his henchman, Lü Gui, to protect the spirit. Lü Gui instigated the traitors to retain him to supervise the weaving.

古文：中旨许之，命草敕。
现代文：宫中传旨应许，命令阁臣草拟敕令。
English: He promised to transmit the imperial edict to the palace and ordered his ministers to draft the edict.

古文：道南偕从哲争，且询疏所从进，请永杜内降，弗听。
现代文：吴道南与方从哲一起争辩，并且询问奏疏的来源，奏请皇帝永远杜绝宫廷直接下达奏疏的做法，皇帝不听。
English: Wu Daonan argued with Fang Congzhe, and inquired about the source of the transcript, and asked the emperor to forever stop the practice of the court directly issuing transcripts. The emperor did not listen.

古文：鄱阳故无商税，中官为税使，置关湖口征课。
现代文：鄱阳原来没有商税，宦官出任税使，在湖口设关征税。
English: Originally, there was no commercial tax in Shenyang. Eunuchs served as tax officials and set up customs and levied taxes in Hukou.

古文：道南极言傍湖舟无所泊，多覆没，请罢关勿征，亦不纳。
现代文：吴道南极力劝谏，称沿湖的舟船没有停泊之处，大都倾覆沉没，请求皇帝罢除关卡，不要征税，皇帝也不采纳。
English: Wu Daonan tried his best to dissuade him, saying that the boats along the lake had no place to moor, and most of them capsized and sank. He asked the emperor to remove the checkpoints, not to impose taxes, and the emperor did not accept.

古文：道南辅大政不为诡随，颇有时望。
现代文：吴道南辅朝政不耍奸诡手法，在当时颇有名望。
English: At that time, Wu Daonan, the Vice-premier of the dynasty, was quite famous for not playing tricks.

古文：岁丙辰，偕礼部尚书刘楚先典会试。
现代文：丙辰年，他与礼部尚书刘楚先主持会试。
English: In the Year of the Rooster, he presided over the audition with Liu Chuxian, a member of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：吴江举人沈同和者，副都御史季文子，目不知书，贿礼部吏，与同里赵鸣阳联号舍。
现代文：吴江的举人沈同和是副都御史季文的儿子，目不识丁，贿赂礼部官吏，与同乡赵鸣阳的考舍联号。
English: Shen Tonghe, the founder of Wujiang, was the son of the vice-governor of the capital Jiwen, illiterate, bribed officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and had a joint examination room with fellow villager Zhao Mingyang.

古文：其首场七篇，自坊刻外，皆鸣阳笔也。
现代文：他首场考试的七篇文章，除了抄自坊刻本之外，都是赵鸣阳的手笔。
English: The seven essays in his first exam, in addition to being copied from the inscribed book, were all written by Zhao Mingyang.

古文：榜发，同和第一，鸣阳亦中式，都下大哗。
现代文：考榜发布，沈同和列第一，赵鸣阳也中了榜，京都民众哗然。
English: The examination list was released, Shen Tonghe ranked first, Zhao Mingyang also made the list, and the people of Kyoto were in an uproar.

古文：道南等亟检举，诏令覆试。
现代文：吴道南等人赶紧检举，皇帝下诏进行复试。
English: Wu Daonan and others hurriedly investigated, and the emperor ordered a retest.

古文：同和竟日构一文。
现代文：沈同和一天才写成一篇文章。
English: It took Shen Tonghe only one day to write an article.

古文：下吏，戍烟瘴，鸣阳亦除名。
现代文：将他交付法司审理，贬去戍守烟瘴之地，赵鸣阳也被除名。
English: He was handed over to the Department of Justice for trial, and was demoted to the position of 守烟. Zhao Mingyang was also removed from the list.

古文：先是，汤宾尹科场事，实道南发之，其党侧目。
现代文：在此之前，汤宾尹的科场舞弊案，实际上也是吴道南揭发的，他的党羽对他侧目相视。
English: Prior to this, Tang Bin Yin's scientific fraud case was actually exposed by Wu Daonan, and his party members looked at him sideways.

古文：御史李嵩、周师旦遂连章论道南，而给事中刘文炳攻尤力。
现代文：御史李嵩、周师旦便接连上奏疏论吴道南，而给事中刘文炳攻击得尤为积极。
English: Historians Li Song and Zhou Shitan successively wrote about Wu Daonan's laxity, and Liu Wenyu was particularly active in the attack.

古文：道南疏辨乞休，颇侵文炳。
现代文：吴道南上奏争辩，请求退休，对刘文炳很有些冒犯。
English: Wu Daonan made an argument and asked for retirement, which was very offensive to Liu Wenzhong.

古文：文炳遂极诋御史张至发助之。
现代文：刘文炳就极力诋毁他，御史张至发也上疏助攻。
English: Liu Wenxuan denigrated him as much as possible, and Zhang Zhifa also made a poor assist.

古文：道南不能堪，言： 台谏劾阁臣，职也，未有肆口嫚骂者。
现代文：吴道南无法忍受，称： 御史弹劾内阁大臣，是其职责，却没有肆口谩骂的事。
English: Wu Daonan could not bear it, saying: It is his duty to impeach cabinet ministers, but there was no abusive language.

古文：臣辱国已甚，请立罢黜。 
现代文：因为我已使国体受如此之辱，请求皇帝立即将我罢免。 
English: Because I have brought the state into such disrepute, I am asking the emperor to dismiss me immediately.

古文：帝雅重道南，谪文炳外任，夺嵩等俸。
现代文：万历皇帝对吴道南很是器重，将刘文炳罢出京城，剥夺了李嵩等人的俸禄。
English: Emperor Wanli was very important to Wu Daonan. He banished Liu Wenyi from Beijing and deprived Li Song and others of their salaries.

古文：御史韩浚、朱堦救文炳，复诋道南。
现代文：御史韩浚、朱土皆救助刘文炳，再次诋毁吴道南。
English: Historian Han Jun and Zhu Di both helped Liu Wenyi and slandered Wu Daonan again.

古文：道南益求去。
现代文：吴道南更加请求离去。
English: Wu Daonan even pleaded to leave.

古文：杜门逾年，疏二十七上，帝犹勉留。
现代文：闭门一年，呈交了二十七篇奏疏，皇帝依然进行勉励、挽留。
English: Closed for a year, twenty-seven reports were submitted, and the emperor still encouraged and retained them.

古文：会继母讣至，乃赐道里费，遣行人护归。
现代文：遇上继母的讣告至京，皇帝便赐给他路费，派遣行人护送他回乡。
English: When his stepmother's obituary reached Beijing, the emperor gave him travel expenses and sent a pedestrian escort to escort him back to his hometown.

古文：天启初，以覃恩即家进太子太保。
现代文：天启初年，因为皇帝广施惠，他在家中被晋升为太子太保。
English: In the first year of the Apocalypse, because the emperor was generous, he was promoted to Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：居二年卒。
现代文：两年后去世。
English: He died two years later.

古文：赠少保，谥文恪。
现代文：赠封为少保，谥号文恪。
English: He was awarded the title of Shōhō (Junior Security Guard) and given the posthumous title of Monk.

