古文：孔子闲居，子张、子贡、言游侍，论及于礼。
现代文：孔子在家休息，弟子子张、子贡、子游陪侍，说话时说到了礼。
English: Confucius was resting at home. His disciples Zhang Zigong and Ziyu accompanied him. When he spoke, he said a few words of thanks.

古文：孔子曰： 居，汝三人者，吾语汝以礼，周流无不遍也。 
现代文：孔子说： 坐下，我给你们三人讲讲什么是礼。礼详细地说什么地方都可以用到。 
English: Confucius said, "Sit down, and I will tell you three what etiquette is. Etiquette can be used anywhere.

古文：子贡越席而对曰： 敢问如何？ 
现代文：子贡站起来离席回话说： 请问礼到底应该怎么做呢？ 
English: Zigong stood up and left the table, saying, "What should I do with the gift?"

古文：子曰： 敬而不中礼，谓之野，恭而不中礼，谓之给，勇而不中礼，谓之逆。 
现代文：孔子说： 虔敬而不合乎礼，叫做土气；谦恭而不合乎礼，叫做巴结；勇敢而不合乎礼，叫做乖逆。 
English: Confucius said: "Piety without propriety is called rusticity; modesty without propriety is called flattery; courage without propriety is called rebelliousness.

古文：子曰： 给夺慈仁。 
现代文：孔子又说： 巴结混淆了慈悲和仁爱。 
English: Confucius also said: Flattery confuses compassion and benevolence.

古文：子贡曰： 敢问将何以为此中礼者？ 
现代文：子贡说： 请问怎么做才能做到合乎礼呢？ 
English: Zigong said: What should I do to be polite?

古文：子曰： 礼乎，夫礼所以制中也。 
现代文：孔子说： 礼吗？就是用来规范和节制行为使之适中的。 
English: Confucius said: "Rite? is used to regulate and control behavior to make it moderate.

古文：子贡退，言游进曰： 敢问礼也，领恶而全好者与？ 子曰： 然。 
现代文：子贡退下来，子游上前说： 请问，所谓礼是不是为了治理恶劣习性而保全良好品行的呢？ 孔子说： 是的。 
English: Zigong stepped back and Ziyu stepped forward and said, "Excuse me, isn't the purpose of so-called etiquette to control bad habits and preserve good morals?" Confucius said, "Yes."

古文：子贡问： 何也？ 
现代文：子贡问： 那应该怎么做呢？ 
English: Zigong asked: What should be done then?

古文：子曰： 郊社之礼，所以仁鬼神也；禘尝之礼，所以仁昭穆也；馈奠之礼，所以仁死丧也；射飨之礼，所以仁乡党也；食飨之礼，所以仁宾客也。
现代文：孔子说： 祭天祭地之礼，是用以致仁爱于鬼神的；秋尝夏禘之礼，是用以致仁爱于祖先的；馈食祭奠之礼，是用以致仁爱于死者的；举行乡射礼、乡饮酒礼，是用以致仁爱于乡亲邻里的；宴会饮酒的礼仪，是用以致仁爱于宾客的。
English: Confucius said: The rite of offering sacrifices to heaven and earth is to show benevolence and love to ghosts and gods; the rite of eating autumn and summer delicacies is to show benevolence and love to ancestors; the rite of giving food offerings is to show benevolence and love to the dead; the holding of the town shooting ceremony and the town drinking ceremony is to show benevolence and love to townspeople and neighbors; the banquet drinking ceremony is to show benevolence and love to guests.

古文：明乎郊社之义，禘尝之礼，治国其如指诸掌而已。
现代文：明白了祭天祭地的礼仪，秋尝夏禘的礼仪，那么治理国家就像在指着自己的手掌给别人看那样容易。
English: If one understands the etiquette of offering sacrifices to heaven and earth, the etiquette of the autumn and the summer solstice, then governing the country is as easy as pointing to one's palm to show others.

古文：是故居家有礼，故长幼辨；以之闺门有礼，故三族和；以之朝廷有礼，故官爵序；以之田猎有礼，故戎事闲；以之军旅有礼，故武功成。
现代文：因此，用这些礼仪，居家处事有礼，长幼就分辨清楚了；家族内部有礼，一家三代就和睦了；在朝廷上有礼，官职爵位就井然有序了；田猎时有礼，军事演习就熟练了；军队里有礼，就能建立战功了。
English: Therefore, with these etiquettes, if there is courtesy in the home, the elders and children can be distinguished clearly; if there is courtesy within the family, the three generations of the family will be harmonious; if there is courtesy in the court, the official titles will be in good order; if there is courtesy when hunting in the field, the military exercises will be proficient; if there is courtesy in the army, it will be able to build military merit.

古文：是以宫室得其度，鼎俎得其象，物得其时，乐得其节，车得其轼，鬼神得其享，丧纪得其哀，辩说得其党，百官得其体，政事得其施。
现代文：因为有了礼，宫室得以有了制度，祭器有了样式，各种器物符合时节，音乐符合节拍，车辆有了定式，鬼神得到了该有的祭享，丧葬有了适度的悲哀，辩说得以拥有支持的人，百官得以恪守其职分，政事得以顺利施行。
English: Because of the ritual, the palace was able to have a system, the sacrificial vessels had a style, various utensils matched the season, music matched the beat, vehicles had a set pattern, ghosts and gods were given the right to enjoy, funerals had a moderate sadness, people who argued were able to have support, officials were able to adhere to their duties, and government affairs were able to be implemented smoothly.

古文：加于身而措于前，凡众之动，得其宜也。 
现代文：加在每人身上的，摆在面前的，人们的种种行为举动都能够适宜得当。 
English: What is imposed on each person, what is put in front of them, people's various behaviors and actions can all be appropriate.

古文：言游退，子张进曰： 敢问礼何谓也？ 
现代文：子游退下去，子张上前问道： 请问什么是礼呢？ 
English: After Ziyu retreated, Zi Zhang stepped forward and asked, "Excuse me, what is courtesy?

古文：子曰： 礼者，即事之治也。
现代文：孔子说： 所谓礼，就是对事物的治理。
English: Confucius said, "Ritual is the governance of things."

古文：君子有其事，必有其治。
现代文：君子有什么事务，必有相应的治理手段。
English: Whatever affairs a gentleman has, there must be a corresponding means of governance.

古文：治国而无礼，譬犹瞽之无相，伥伥乎何所之？
现代文：治理国家假如没有礼，就好像盲人没有扶助的人，茫然不知该往哪走。
English: If there is no etiquette in governing the country, it is like a blind man who has no help and does not know where to go.

古文：譬犹终夜有求于幽室之中，非烛何以见？
现代文：又如整夜在暗室中找东西，没有烛光怎么能看得见呢？
English: It's like looking for something in a dark room all night. How can you see without candlelight?

古文：故无礼则手足无所措，耳目无所加，进退揖让无所制。
现代文：所以说没有礼就会手足无措，耳目也不知该听什么该看什么，进退、作揖、谦让都失去了尺度。
English: Therefore, if there is no courtesy, the hands and feet will be at a loss, the ears and eyes will not know what to listen to and what to see, and the advance and retreat, cheating, and condescension have lost their scale.

古文：是故以其居处，长幼失其别，闺门三族失其和，朝廷官爵失其序，田猎戎事失其策，军旅武功失其势，宫室失其度，鼎俎失其象，物失其时，乐失其节，车失其轼，鬼神失其享，丧纪失其哀，辩说失其党，百官失其体，政事失其施。
现代文：这样一来，居家处事就会长幼无别，家族之内祖孙三辈就失去了和睦，朝廷上官爵就失去了秩序，田猎练武就失去了策略，军队攻守就失去了控制，宫室建造就失去了制度，祭器就失去了式样，各种事物就失去了合适的时间，音乐就失去了节制，车辆就失去了定式，鬼神就失去了祭享，丧事就失去了合度的哀伤，辩说就失去了支持的人，百官就会失职，政事就不能施行。
English: In this way, there will be no difference between the elders and the children in the home, the three generations of grandparents and grandchildren in the family will lose harmony, the officials and nobles in the court will lose order, the field hunting and martial arts will lose strategy, the army will lose control, the palace construction will lose the system, the sacrificial instruments will lose the style, various things will lose the right time, the music will lose moderation, the vehicle will lose the style, the ghosts and gods will lose the enjoyment, the funeral will lose the sadness, the argument will lose the support of the people, the officials will lose their duties, and the government affairs cannot be implemented.

古文：加于身而措于前，凡众之动失其宜。
现代文：凡加在每个人身上的，摆在面前的，人们的种种行为举动都失其所宜。
English: What is imposed on everyone, what is put in front of them, all kinds of people's behaviors and actions are all inappropriate.

古文：如此，则无以祖洽四海。 
现代文：这样，就无法协调民众一致行动了。 
English: In this way, it is impossible to coordinate the people's concerted action.

古文：子曰： 慎听之，汝三人者。
现代文：孔子说： 仔细听着，你们三人！
English: Confucius said, "Listen carefully, you three!

古文：吾语汝，礼犹有九焉，大飨有四焉。
现代文：我告诉你们，礼还有九件事，其中四件是大飨礼所特有的。
English: I tell you, there are nine other things, four of which are unique to the Great Rite.

古文：苟知此矣，虽在畎亩之中，事之，圣人矣。
现代文：如果知道了这些，哪怕是个种田人，只要依礼而行，他也是圣人了。
English: If he knew this, even a farmer would be a saint as long as he followed the rules.

古文：两君相见，揖让而入，入门而悬兴。揖让而升堂，升堂而乐阕。
现代文：两位国君相见，互相作揖谦让后进入大门，入门后钟鼓等乐器齐奏，两人又互相作揖谦让后登上大堂，登上大堂之后乐声就停止了。
English: The two sovereigns met, bowed to each other and entered the gate. After entering, musical instruments such as bells and drums played in unison. After bowing to each other, the two ascended to the lobby. After ascending to the lobby, the music stopped.

古文：下管《象》舞，夏钥序兴。
现代文：这时在堂下又用管乐奏起《象》的乐曲，接着执籥的人又跳起《大夏》之舞和各种舞蹈。
English: At this time, the music of "Elephant" was played with pipe music under the hall, and then the person holding the gong danced the dance of "Big Summer" and various dances.

古文：陈其荐俎，序其礼乐，备其百官。
现代文：摆设笾豆与牲俎，按序安排礼乐，备齐各种执事人员。
English: Peas and livestock were set up, ceremonial music was arranged in order, and all kinds of deacons were prepared.

古文：如此而后君子知仁焉。
现代文：这样，来访的国君就感受到了主人的盛情厚意。
English: In this way, the visiting sovereign felt the generosity of the host.

古文：行中规，旋中矩，銮和中《采荠》。
现代文：在这里，人们来往走动都符合规定，周旋时步子都合乎规矩，车子的铃声也合着《采荠》乐曲的节拍。
English: Here, people's comings and goings are in accordance with the regulations, the steps are in accordance with the rules when turning around, and the bell of the car is also in accordance with the rhythm of the music of "Cherry Blossom."

古文：客出以《雍》，彻以《振羽》。
现代文：客人出去时，堂下奏起《雍》的乐章；撤去席上食具时，奏起《振羽》的乐章。
English: When the guests leave, the music of "Yong" is played in the hall; when the tableware is removed, the music of "Zhenyu" is played.

古文：是故君子无物而不在于礼焉。
现代文：所以，君子的行动没有一件事不在礼节之中。
English: Therefore, there is not a single act of a gentleman that is not within the bounds of propriety.

古文：入门而金作，示情也；升歌《清庙》，示德也；下管象舞，示事也。
现代文：客人进门时钟声响起，是表示欢迎之情；登堂时演奏《清庙》诗章，表示赞美其功德；堂下吹奏《象》的舞曲，表示崇敬祖先的功业。
English: When guests enter the hall, the bell sounds to welcome them; when they enter the hall, the hymn "Clear Temple" is played to praise their merits; and the dance music of "Elephant" is played to show reverence for the work of their ancestors.

古文：是故古之君子，不必亲相与言也，以礼乐相示而已。
现代文：所以，古代的大人君子相见，不必互相说话，只凭礼乐就可以传达情意了。
English: Therefore, in ancient times, when great men and gentlemen met, they didn't have to speak to each other, they could convey their feelings with only ceremonial music.

古文：夫礼者，理也；乐者，节也。无礼不动，无节不作。
现代文：礼，就是理；乐，就是节。没有道理的事不做，没有节制的事不为。
English: Etiquette is reason; fun is the festival. Do not do things that are unreasonable, do not do things that are immoderate.

古文：不能《诗》，于礼谬；不能乐，于礼素；薄于德，于礼虚。 
现代文：不懂得赋《诗》言志，礼节上就会出差错；不能用音乐来配合，礼节就显得单调枯燥；道德浅薄，礼就会显得虚假。 
English: If you don't know the spirit of the poem, you will make mistakes in etiquette; if you can't match it with music, the etiquette will appear monotonous and boring; if the morality is shallow, the etiquette will appear false.

古文：子贡作而问曰： 然则夔其穷与？ 
现代文：子贡站起来问道： 按这么说，夔对礼精通吗？ 
English: Zigong stood up and asked: According to this, is Zou proficient in etiquette?

古文：子曰： 古之人与？
现代文：孔子说： 夔不是古代的人吗？
English: Confucius said, "Weren't you an ancient man?

古文：上古之人也。
现代文：他是上古时代的人啊！
English: He is a man from ancient times!

古文：达于礼而不达于乐，谓之素；达于乐而不达于礼，谓之偏。
现代文：精通礼而不精通乐，叫做质朴；精通乐而不精通礼，叫做偏颇。
English: Mastering etiquette without mastering music is called simplicity; mastering music without mastering etiquette is called partiality.

古文：夫夔达于乐而不达于礼，是以传于此名也。
现代文：夔大概只精通乐而不精通礼，所以传下精通音乐的名声。
English: He was probably only good at music and not at etiquette, so he passed down the reputation of being good at music.

古文：古之人也，凡制度在礼，文为在礼，行之其在人乎？ 
现代文：不过古代的人，各项制度都存在于礼中，制度也靠礼来修饰，实行起来大概还是靠人吧。 
English: However, in ancient times, all kinds of systems existed in the ritual, and the system was also modified by the ritual, and it was probably carried out by people.

古文：三子者，既得闻此论于夫子也，焕若发蒙焉。
现代文：三个弟子听了孔子这番话，眼前豁然开朗，好像拨开了迷雾。
English: The three disciples listened to these words of Confucius, and their eyes suddenly brightened, as if the fog had been lifted.

古文：子夏侍坐于孔子曰： 敢问诗云 恺悌君子，民之父母 ，何如斯可谓民之父母？ 
现代文：子夏陪坐在孔子旁边，说： 请问《诗经》里说： 和悦可亲的君子，好比民众的父母 ，怎么样才能称得上民的父母呢？ 
English: Zixia sat next to Confucius and said, "Please tell me, in the Book of Songs, it says, 'How can a kind and amiable gentleman, like the parents of the common people, be called the parents of the common people?'

古文：孔子曰： 夫民之父母，必达于礼乐之源，以致五至而行三无，以横于天下，四方有败，必先知之，此之谓民之父母。 
现代文：孔子说： 作为民的父母，必须懂得礼乐的来源，达到 五至 实行 三无 ，以此施行于天下。四方出现祸患，必定预先知道。这样的人就可以称得上民的父母了。 
English: Confucius said: As the parents of the people, we must understand the source of the ritual music, reach the five-to-do, implement the three-nothing, and thus implement it in the world. If there is a disaster in the four directions, we must know in advance. Such a person can be called the parents of the people.

古文：子夏曰： 问何谓五至？ 
现代文：子夏说： 请问什么叫 五至 ？ 
English: Zixia said, "Excuse me, what is the meaning of the number five?

古文：孔子曰： 志之所至，诗亦至焉；诗之所至，礼亦至焉；礼之所至，乐亦至焉；乐之所至，哀亦至焉。
现代文：孔子说： 情意所至之处，《诗经》中的诗句就随之而至；诗句所至的同时，礼随之而至；礼所至之处，乐也随之而至；乐所至之处，哀也随之而至。
English: Confucius said: "Where there is affection, the verses of the Book of Poetry will follow; where there is poetry, there will be propriety; where there is propriety, there will be joy; where there is joy, there will be sorrow.

古文：诗礼相成，哀乐相生，是以正明目而视之，不可得而见，倾耳而听之，不可得而闻，志气塞于天地，行之克于四海，此之谓五至矣。 子夏曰： 敢问何谓三无？ 
现代文：《诗》和礼是相辅相成的，哀和乐是相互引发的，所以这种情景，擦亮眼睛来看，也不可能看见；侧着耳朵来听，也不可能听见。然而这种意志充满天地之间，流行起来会充满四海，这就叫做五至。 子夏问： 请问什么叫 三无 呢？ 
English: "Poetry" and "ritual" are complementary to each other, and sorrow and joy are caused by each other, so this kind of scene, if you look at it with bright eyes, you can't see it; if you listen to it with your ears, you can't hear it. However, this kind of will fills the sky and the earth, and if it becomes popular, it will fill the four seas, which is called "five zeroes." Zi Xia asked: What is "three zeroes"?

古文：孔子曰： 无声之乐，无体之礼，无服之丧，此之谓三无。 
现代文：孔子说： 无声的音乐，无仪式的礼节，不穿丧服而哀的丧礼，这叫做三无。 
English: Confucius said, "Silent music, no ceremonial etiquette, and a funeral without mourning clothes are called three nothings."

古文：子夏曰： 敢问三无何诗近之？ 
现代文：子夏说： 请问什么诗句接近三无的意思呢？ 
English: Zixia said, "What is the meaning of the poem that is close to nothing?

古文：孔子曰：  夙夜基命宥密 ，无声之乐也； 威仪逮逮，不可选也 ，无体之礼也； 凡民有丧，扶伏救之 ，无服之丧也。 
现代文：孔子说：  日夜谋划治国以安民 ，这句诗就接近无声的音乐。 仪容庄严和易，让人无可挑剔 ，这句诗就接近无仪式的礼节。 凡是民众有急难，全力救助不迟缓 ，这句诗就接近不穿丧服而哀的丧礼。 
English: Confucius said: If you plan to govern the country day and night and keep the people safe, this poem is close to silent music; if you are dignified and easy-going, you are impeccable; this poem is close to no-ceremony etiquette; if the people are in distress, all-out assistance will not be delayed; this poem is close to mourning without wearing mourning clothes.

古文：子夏曰： 言则美矣，大矣，言尽于此而已？ 
现代文：子夏说： 您的话太美了、太伟大了，话说到此就到尽头了吧？ 
English: Zixia said, "Your words are so beautiful, so great, that's the end of it, isn't it?

古文：孔子曰： 何谓其然？
现代文：孔子说： 怎么会这样呢？
English: Confucius said, "How can you say that?

古文：吾语汝，其义犹有五起焉。 子夏曰： 何如？ 
现代文：我告诉你，其中的含义还要从五个方面来说明。 子夏说： 如何说呢？ 
English: I tell you, the meaning of this has to be explained from five aspects.Zo Xia said: How to say it?

古文：孔子曰： 无声之乐，气志不违；无体之礼，威仪迟迟；无服之丧，内恕孔悲。
现代文：孔子说： 无声的音乐，不违背心意；无仪式的礼节，威仪从容；不穿丧服而哀的丧礼，内心同情而悲伤。
English: Confucius said: "Silent music does not go against one's will; there is no ceremonial etiquette, and dignity is relaxed; there is no mourning dress, but a mourning funeral, and the heart is sympathetic and sad.

古文：无声之乐，所愿必从；无体之礼，上下和同；无服之丧，施及万邦。
现代文：无声的音乐，心想事成；无仪式的礼节，上下和睦同心；不穿丧服而哀的丧礼，德行施予万邦。
English: Silent music accomplishes what the heart desires; without ceremonial etiquette, up and down are in harmony with one another; a funeral without mourning clothes, but with sorrow, is a virtue bestowed upon all nations.

古文：既然而又奉之以三无私，而劳天下，此之谓五起。 
现代文：这样，又用无私的精神来治理天下，这就叫做五起。 
English: In this way, and with a selfless spirit to govern the world, this is called the Five Principles.

古文：子夏曰： 何谓三无私？ 
现代文：子夏说： 请问什么叫三无私呢？ 
English: Zosia said, "What do you mean by the three selfless acts?"

古文：孔子曰： 天无私覆，地无私载，日月无私照。
现代文：孔子说： 上天覆盖万物没有偏私，大地承载万物没有偏私，日月普照天下没有偏私。
English: Confucius said: There is no partiality in the heaven that covers all things, in the earth that bears all things, and in the sun and moon that shine all over the world.

古文：其在诗曰： 帝命不违，至于汤齐。
现代文：这种精神在《诗经》中是这样说的， 上帝命令不违背，至于成汤登了位。
English: This spirit is described in the Book of Songs as follows: "God's command is not to be disobeyed. As for Cheng Tong, he ascended the throne."

古文：汤降不迟，圣敬日跻，昭假迟迟，上帝是祇。帝命式于九围。 是汤之德也。 
现代文：汤王降世正适时，盛德敬慎日积累积。虔诚祈祷久不息，无限崇敬事上帝，上帝命他统理九州岛域 ，这就是商汤的德行。 
English: Shang Tang's ascension to the throne came at just the right time, and his virtues and prudence have been accumulating day by day. He prayed earnestly for a long time without ceasing, and revered God without end. God ordered him to govern the Kyushu Islands. This is Shang Tang's virtue.

