古文：孝章皇帝八子：宋贵人生清河孝王庆，梁贵人生和帝，申贵人生济北惠王寿、河间孝王开，四王不载母氏。
现代文：◆章帝八王传，孝章皇帝八个儿子：宋贵人生清河孝王刘庆，梁贵人生和帝刘肇，申贵人生济北惠王刘寿、河间孝王刘开。其余四王不记母氏姓名。
English: According to the legend of Emperor Zhang, there were eight kings and eight sons of Emperor Xiaozhang: Song Guifei, Qinghe Xiaowang, Liu Qing, Liang Guifei, Emperor Liu Zhao, Shen Guifei, Jibei Hui Wang, Liu Shou, Hema Xiaowang, Liu Kai. The remaining four kings did not record their mother's names.

古文：千乘贞王伉，建初四年封。
现代文：千乘贞王刘伉，建初四年封。
English: It was built in the 4th year of the reign of Liu Zhen, the Queen of the Thousand Immaculate Conception.

古文：和帝即位，以伉长兄，甚见尊礼立十五年薨。
现代文：和帝即位，因为刘伉是长兄，对他非常尊重，待之以礼。立十五年逝世。
English: Emperor He ascended the throne, because Liu Ye was the eldest brother, he was highly respected and treated with courtesy. He died fifteen years later.

古文：子宠嗣，一名伏胡。
现代文：子刘宠继承王位。刘宠一名伏胡。
English: His son Liu Zhaocheng succeeded to the throne. Liu Zhaocheng was a Fuhu.

古文：永元七年，改国名乐安。
现代文：永元七年，改国名乐安。
English: In the seventh year of the eleventh month of the eleventh year of the eleventh month, he changed his name to Le An.

古文：立二十八年薨，是为夷王。
现代文：立二十八年逝世，是为夷王。
English: He died in the 28th year of his reign, and was the king of the barbarians.

古文：父子薨于京师，皆葬洛阳。
现代文：父子都死在京师，皆葬于洛阳。
English: Both father and son died in Beijing and were buried in Luoyang.

古文：子鸿嗣，安帝崩，始就国。
现代文：子刘鸿继承王位。安帝刘祜逝世，才去就国。
English: His son Liu Hong succeeded to the throne. Emperor Liu Bei died before he could be enthroned.

古文：鸿生质帝，质帝立，梁太后下诏，以乐安国土卑湿，租委鲜薄，改封鸿勃海王。
现代文：刘鸿生质帝刘瓒。质帝立，梁太后下诏，认为乐安国土卑湿，租赋输送太少，改封刘鸿勃海王。
English: Liu Hong was born as Emperor Liu Bei. When he was crowned emperor, Empress Dowager Liang issued an edict, saying that the land of Le'an was too humble, and the rent was too small, and he was renamed Liu Hongbo, King of the Sea.

古文：立二十六年薨，是为孝王。
现代文：立二十六年逝世，是为孝王。
English: His death, which occurred in the 26th year of his reign, was a great loss for King Takahito.

古文：无子，太后立桓帝弟蠡吾侯悝为勃海王，奉鸿祀。
现代文：孝王无子，太后立桓帝刘志弟蠡吾侯刘悝为渤海王，侍奉刘鸿的祭祀。
English: Xiao Wang had no children, and the empress dowager appointed Emperor Huan's younger brother Liu Shizhen and my lord Liu Ye as the king of Erhai, serving Liu Hong's sacrificial rites.

古文：延熹八年，悝谋为不道，有司请废之。帝不忍，乃贬为陶王，食一县。
现代文：延熹八年，刘悝阴谋不轨，有关官吏请废刘悝，质帝不忍心把他废掉，于是贬谪他为瘿陶王，食一县赋税。
English: Eight years later, Liu Ye's plot went awry, and the relevant officials asked Liu Ye to be abolished. Emperor Qiu couldn't bear to abolish him, so he demeaned him as a pottery king, eating a county's tax.

古文：悝后因中常侍王甫求复国，许谢钱五千万。
现代文：刘悝后来想依靠中常侍王甫恢复他的封国，答应以五千万钱作为感谢他的礼物。
English: Later, Liu Bei wanted to rely on Zhongzheng's attendant Wang Fu to restore his fiefdom, and promised to give him fifty million yuan as a thank-you gift.

古文：帝临崩，遗诏复为勃海王。
现代文：质帝临死，下诏恢复刘悝的勃海王。
English: When Emperor Qian was on his deathbed, he issued an edict to reinstate Liu Bei's Bo Hai Wang.

古文：悝知非甫功，不肯还谢钱。
现代文：刘悝知道不是王甫的功劳，不肯给王甫谢钱。
English: Liu Ye knew that it was not Wang Fu's merit, and refused to give Wang Fu the reward money.

古文：甫怒，阴求其过。
现代文：王甫发怒，暗中搜集刘悝的罪过。
English: Wang Fu became angry and secretly collected the sins of Liu Ye.

古文：初，迎立灵帝，道路流言悝恨不得立，欲抄征书，而中常侍郑飒、中黄门董腾并任侠通剽轻，数与悝交通。
现代文：起先，迎立灵帝刘弘，道路流言，说刘悝没有立为帝，怀恨在心，想强夺征召的文书，中常侍郑飒、中黄门董腾都负气使义与强悍轻捷之徒来往，多次与刘悝勾结。
English: At first, to welcome the spiritual emperor Liu Hong, the road rumors said that Liu Ye did not establish himself as an emperor, harbored hatred, and wanted to forcibly seize the instrument of conscription. The middle attendant Zheng Yi and the middle Huangmen Dong Teng were both negative and made the righteous and the strong and the light and the swift come and go, and colluded with Liu Ye many times.

古文：王甫司察，以为有奸，密告司隶校尉段颎。
现代文：王甫侦察，以为其中必有奸谋，秘密报告了司隶校尉段赹。
English: Wang Fu reconnaissance, thinking that there must be a conspiracy, secretly reported to Sili captain Duan Yu.

古文：熹平元年，遂收飒送北寺狱。
现代文：熹平元年，逮捕郑飒送北寺狱。
English: In the first year of Heping, Zheng Yao was arrested and sent to Beidi Prison.

古文：使尚书令廉忠诬奏飒等谋迎立悝，大逆不道。
现代文：使尚书令廉忠上奏诬蔑郑飒等阴谋迎立刘悝，大逆不道。
English: It is an act of high treason to make Shang Shuling order Lianzhong to play up the conspiracy of slandering Zheng Yao to usher in Liu Yao.

古文：遂招冀州刺史收悝考实，又遣大鸿胪持节与宗正、廷尉之勃海，迫责悝。悝自杀。
现代文：于是诏令冀州刺史逮捕刘悝考问落实，又遣大鸿胪持节与宗正、廷尉去勃海，逼迫谴责刘悝，刘悝自杀。
English: Therefore, he ordered Jizhou to arrest Liu Xuan to carry out the examination and interrogation. He also sent Dai Hongxuan to hold the festival with Zong Zheng and the courtier to Bohai, forced to condemn Liu Xuan, and Liu Xuan committed suicide.

古文：妃妾十一人，子女七十人，伎女二十四人，皆死狱中。
现代文：妃妾十一人，子女七十人，伎女二十四人，都死在监狱中。
English: Eleven concubines, seventy children, and twenty-four concubines died in prison.

古文：傅、相以下，以辅导王不忠，悉伏诛。
现代文：傅、相以下，按辅导勃海王刘悝不忠罪，统统处死。
English: Fu, Fang and their subordinates were all sentenced to death for the crime of disloyalty, as instructed by King Bo Hai.

古文：悝立二十五年国除。
现代文：刘悝立二十五年，封国被撤除。
English: In the 25th year of Liu Xuanli's reign, the state seal was removed.

古文：众庶莫不怜之。
现代文：百姓没有不同情他的。
English: The people were not unsympathetic to him.

古文：平春悼王全，以建初四年封。其年薨，葬于京师。
现代文：平春悼王刘全，以建初四年封，这年逝世，葬于京师。
English: Pingchun mourns King Liu Quan, who died in the same year and is buried in Beijing.

古文：无子，国除。
现代文：无子，封国撤除。
English: Without a son, the state was abolished.

古文：清河孝王庆，母宋贵人。
现代文：清河孝王刘庆，母亲是宋贵人。
English: Liu Qing, the filial son of the Qing Emperor, was the son of Song Guijin.

古文：贵人，宋昌八世孙，扶风平陵人也。
现代文：贵人，宋昌八世孙，扶风郡平陵县人。
English: Honorable person, eighth-generation grandson of Song Chang, from Pingling County, Fufeng County.

古文：父杨，以恭孝称于乡闾，不应州郡之命。
现代文：父亲宋扬，以恭谨孝顺为乡里称赞，不应州郡征召。
English: His father, Song Yang, was praised in the village for his respect, filial piety, and should not be conscripted by the county.

古文：杨姑即明德马后之外祖母也。
现代文：宋扬的姑姑就是明德马皇后的外祖母。
English: Song Yang's aunt was the maternal grandmother of Empress Mingde Ma.

古文：马后闻杨二女皆有才色，迎而训之。
现代文：马后听说宋杨的两个闺女都有才有色，接去培养教训。
English: The Empress Dowager heard that both of Song Yang's daughters were talented, so she took them to learn from them.

古文：永平末，选入太子宫，甚有宠。
现代文：永平末，两个闺女都被选入太子宫，太子非常喜欢她俩。
English: At the end of the Yongping era, both girls were selected into the prince's womb, and the prince liked them very much.

古文：肃宗即位，并为贵人。
现代文：肃宗即位，都为贵人。
English: Su Zong's accession to the throne made them all nobles.

古文：建初三年，大贵人生庆，明年立为皇太子，征杨为议郎，褒赐甚渥。
现代文：建初三年，大贵人生刘庆，第二年立为皇太子，征召宋杨为议郎，褒奖赏赐很厚。
English: In the first three years after the founding of the People's Republic of China, Liu Qing, a great man, was promoted to crown prince in the second year, and Song Yang was enlisted as a mediator. The rewards were very rich.

古文：贵人长于人事，供奉长乐宫，身执馈馔，太后怜之。
现代文：大贵人会做人，供奉长乐宫，亲自担任炊事工作，太后喜欢她。
English: The great dignitary would act as a human being, offer the Changle Palace, and personally serve as a cook. The empress dowager liked her.

古文：太后崩后，窦皇后宠盛，以贵人姊妹并幸，庆为太子，心内恶之，与母比阳主谋陷宋氏。
现代文：太后逝世之后，窦皇后很得肃宗的宠爱，因贵人姊妹两个都有宠于皇帝，刘庆又为太子，内心嫉妒她们，同她的母亲比阳主阴谋陷害宋氏。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Empress Dou was greatly favored by Su Zong. Because both of the noble sisters were favored by the emperor, and Liu Qing was also the crown prince, she was jealous of them and plotted with her mother, Bi Yang, to frame the Song clan.

古文：外令兄弟求其纤过，内使御者侦伺得失。
现代文：在外，让她的兄弟搜集她的过错，虽小过失也不遗漏；在内，使她左右的侍从女官侦探她的得失。
English: On the outside, let her brother collect her faults, although small faults are not omitted; on the inside, let her right and left attendants detect her gains and losses.

古文：后于掖庭门邀遮得贵人书，云 病思生菟，令家求之 ，因诬言欲作蛊道祝诅，以菟为厌胜之术，日夜毁谮，贵人母子遂渐见疏。
现代文：后来在掖庭门截获得贵人的书信，说： 病了想要些生菟，要家人找找。 因此诬蔑她说想作蛊道求鬼神降祸于窦皇后，把菟作为制胜之术，日夜诽谤诬陷，贵人母子就渐渐地见疏于皇上了。
English: Later, a letter from the noblewoman was intercepted at the gate of the imperial court, saying, "I am ill and would like to have some oysters, so I want my family to look for them." Therefore, she was slandered and said that she wanted to be a sorceress to ask the devil to bring harm to the Empress Dou, and she used the oyster as a winning strategy, slandering and framing day and night, and the noblewoman's mother and son gradually lost sight of the emperor.

古文：庆出居承禄观，数月，窦后讽掖庭令诬奏前事，请加验实。
现代文：刘庆出居承禄观，数月，窦后暗示掖庭令以贵人求生菟事上奏诬陷贵人，请加考验落实。
English: Liu Qing came out of the house with a view to fortune. A few months later, he hinted that the court had ordered him to play the role of a noble person in order to survive, and that the noble person had been framed. Please test and implement.

古文：七年，帝遂废太子庆而立皇太子，梁贵人子也。
现代文：七年，帝就废太子刘庆而立皇太子刘肇。刘肇是梁贵人的儿子。
English: In the seventh year, the emperor abolished Prince Liu Qing and established Crown Prince Liu Zhao. Liu Zhao was the son of Liang Guiren.

古文：乃下诏曰： 皇太子有失惑无常之性，爰自孩乳，至今益章，恐袭其母凶恶之风，不可以奉宗庙，为天下主。
现代文：于是下诏说 ：皇太子有迷惑无常的本性，起自孩时，到现在更加明显了。恐怕继承了他母亲凶恶的作风，不能奉祀宗庙，不能作天下主。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict said, "The crown prince has a confused and unstable nature, which has become more and more obvious since he was a child. I am afraid that he has inherited his mother's vicious style. He cannot worship the ancestral temple and cannot be the ruler of the world."

古文：大义灭亲，况降退乎！
现代文：大义灭亲，何况只是降退呢？
English: Killing relatives for the greater good, let alone just retreating?

古文：今废庆为清河王。
现代文：现在废刘庆皇太子为清河王。
English: The deposed crown prince Liu Qing is now the king of Qinghe.

古文：皇子保育皇后，承训怀衽，导达善性，将成其器。
现代文：皇太子刘肇由皇后保育长大，小时受母亲的教育，诱导他有了很好的性格，可望成为大器。
English: Crown Prince Liu Zhao grew up under the care of the empress. He was educated by his mother when he was a child, which instilled in him a good character, and he is expected to become a great leader.

古文：盖庶子慈母，尚有终身之恩，岂若嫡后事正义明哉！
现代文：大抵庶子以慈母为母，还有终身之恩，难道能与嫡后事正义明相比吗？
English: Most of the time, an illegitimate child is born to a loving mother, and there is also a lifelong grace. Can it be compared with the justice of the heir?

古文：今以为皇太子。 
现代文：现在以肇为皇太子。 
English: Now, Zhao is the crown prince.

古文：遂出贵人姊妹置丙舍，使小黄门蔡伦考实之，皆承讽旨傅致其事，乃载送暴室。
现代文：于是出贵人姊妹居丙，使小黄门蔡伦考问落实，都是秉承上面暗示的旨意，附会罗致事实，于是车送暴室。
English: As a result, out of the noble sisters living in C, the implementation of the examination of the small yellow door Cai Lun was carried out, all adhering to the intention implied above, with the addition of Luo to the fact, so the car was sent to the violence room.

古文：二贵人同时饮药自杀。
现代文：二贵人同时饮药自杀。
English: The two nobles committed suicide by drinking poison at the same time.

古文：帝犹伤之，敕掖庭令葬于樊濯聚。
现代文：帝还是哀伤她俩，令掖庭令葬于樊濯泉。
English: The emperor still grieved for the two of them and had them buried in the Jiuye Spring.

古文：于是免杨归本郡。
现代文：免去宋扬的官职回归本郡。
English: Song Yang was relieved of his official duties and returned to the county.

古文：郡县因事复捕系之，杨友人前怀令山阳张峻、左冯翊沛国刘均等奔走解释，得以免罪。
现代文：郡县又因事逮捕了他。宋扬的朋友前怀县令张峻、左冯翊沛国刘均等奔走解释，得以免于罪。
English: The county also arrested him for the incident. Song Yang's friends Zhang Jun, the former governor of Huai County, and Liu Bei, the governor of Zuofeng County, both rushed to explain and were acquitted of the crime.

古文：杨失志憔悴，卒于家。
现代文：宋扬失志憔悴忧郁，死在家里。
English: Discouraged and depressed, Song Yang died at home.

古文：庆时虽幼，而知避嫌畏祸，言不敢及宋氏，帝更怜之，敕皇后令衣服与太子齐等。
现代文：刘庆当时虽然年纪还小，也知道避嫌疑，害怕惹祸，说话不敢说到宋氏，帝更怜悯他，令皇后给刘庆的衣服与太子一样。
English: At that time, although Liu Qing was still young, he also knew how to avoid suspicion, was afraid of causing trouble, and did not dare to speak about the Song clan. The emperor was even more compassionate to him, so that the queen gave Liu Qing the same clothes as the prince.

古文：太子特亲爱庆，入则共室，出则同舆。
现代文：太子对刘庆特别亲爱，在宫里同室，出宫同一辆车子。
English: The prince is especially dear to Liu Qing. They share the same room in the palace and leave the palace in the same car.

古文：及太子即位，是为和帝，待庆尤渥，诸王莫得为比，常共议私事。
现代文：等到太子即位，是为和帝，对待刘庆更为优厚，诸王没有能比的，经常在一起讨论私事。
English: When the crown prince ascended to the throne, he treated Liu Qing more generously for the sake of harmony with the emperor. There is no comparison among kings, and they often discussed private affairs together.

古文：后庆以长，别居丙舍。
现代文：后来刘庆长大，另居丙。
English: Later, Liu Qing grew up and went to live with his uncle.

古文：永元四年，帝移幸北宫章德殿，讲于白虎观，庆得入省宿止。
现代文：永元四年，帝移幸北宫章德殿，讲习于白虎观，刘庆可以进宫住宿。
English: In the fourth year of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, the emperor moved to the Northern Palace of Zhang De, and studied at the White Tiger View, and Liu Qing could enter the palace for accommodation.

古文：帝将诛窦氏，欲得《外戚传》，惧左右不敢使，乃令庆私从千乘王求，夜独内之；又令庆传语中常侍郑众求索故事。
现代文：帝将诛杀窦氏，求得《外戚传》，怕左右的侍从不敢去找，于是令刘庆私下里向千乘王求取，晚上一个人拿了送给帝；又令刘庆传话给中常侍郑众搜求文帝诛薄昭、武帝诛窦婴的历史档案。
English: The emperor ordered Liu Qing to kill Dou and obtain "The Tale of the Maternal Relatives," fearing that the attendants on both sides would never dare to look for it. Therefore, Liu Qing secretly asked Qianren Wang to obtain it, and one person took it to the emperor in the evening. Liu Qing also ordered Liu Qing to send a message to Zhong Chang's attendant Zheng Cong to search for the historical archives of Emperor Wen's son Bo Zhao and Emperor Wu's son Dou's baby.

古文：及大将军窦宪诛，庆出居邸，赐奴婢三百人。舆马、钱帛、帷帐、珍宝、玩好充仞其第，又赐中傅以下至左右钱帛各有差。
现代文：等到大将军窦宪被诛，刘庆出居府第，赐奴婢三百人，舆马、钱帛、帷帐、珍宝、玩好，充满了府第，又赐中傅以下至左右钱帛不等。
English: When the great general Dou Xian was executed, Liu Qing left his residence and gave 300 slaves and maidservants, horses, money bags, curtains, precious treasures, and toys, filling the residence, and also gave money bags ranging from the middle to the left and right.

古文：庆多被病，或时不安，帝朝夕问讯，进膳药，所以垂意甚备。
现代文：刘庆多病，有时不安，帝早晚问讯，送饭送药，关心备至。
English: Liu Qing is often ill, sometimes anxious, the emperor asks for information in the morning and evening, sends meals and medicine, and is concerned about the preparation.

古文：庆小心恭孝，自以废黜，尤畏事慎法。
现代文：刘庆小心恭谨孝顺，自己认为是废黜之人，更加谨慎，怕触犯法禁。
English: Liu Qing is careful, respectful and filial, and he considers himself to be a dethroned person. He is more cautious, afraid of violating the law.

古文：每朝谒陵庙，常夜分严装，衣冠待明；约敕官属，不得与诸王车骑竞驱。
现代文：每次朝谒陵庙，经常是半夜起床，整齐装束，等待天明；约束自己的部属，不得与诸王车骑并驾齐驱。
English: Every time he visits the Mausoleum, he often gets up in the middle of the night, dresses neatly, and waits for the dawn; he restricts his subordinates, and they are not allowed to ride side by side with the royal chariots.

古文：常以贵人葬礼有阙，每窃感恨，至四节伏腊，辄祭于私室。
现代文：常以贵人葬礼不全，每每为之感叹遗恨，到了四时节气，伏日、腊日，就在家里私室祭祀。
English: It is often said that the funeral of a noble person is incomplete, and it is often lamented as a legacy of hatred. At the time of the four seasons, the day before the sun and the day after the sun, the private room is sacrificed at home.

古文：窦氏诛后，始使乳母于城北遥祠。
现代文：窦氏诛杀以后，才使乳母在城北遥遥祭祀。
English: It was only after the Dou clan was killed that the wet nurse was sacrificed in the far north of the city.

古文：及窦太后崩，庆求上冢致哀，帝许之，诏太官四时给祭具。
现代文：等到窦太后死了，刘庆请求上冢致哀，帝答应了他。诏令太官四时给祭具。
English: When Empress Dowager Dou died, Liu Qing asked for a funeral pyre to mourn her, and the emperor granted his request. He ordered the eunuch to bring the ritual objects at four o'clock.

古文：庆垂涕曰： 生虽不获供养，终得奉祭祀，私愿足矣。 
现代文：刘庆流着眼泪说 ：在生虽然得不到供养，死了能够奉祭祀，我的志愿满足了。 
English: Liu Qing said with tears streaming down his face, "Although I can't get any offerings while I'm alive, I can offer sacrifices when I'm dead. My will is satisfied."

古文：欲求作祠堂，恐有自同恭怀梁后之嫌，遂不敢言。
现代文：想要求作祠堂，恐有同于恭怀梁后的嫌疑，于是不敢说。
English: If you want to ask for an ancestral hall, there may be the same suspicion as if you were asking for a beam, so don't dare to say it.

古文：常泣向左右，以为没齿之恨。
现代文：常向左右之人哭泣，认为是终生的恨事。
English: He often cries to people around him, which he considers to be a lifelong hatred.

古文：后上言外祖母王年老，遭忧病，下土药，愿乞诣洛阳疗疾。
现代文：后来上书说外祖母王年纪老了，遭忧病，边远地方无医药，请求到洛阳来治病。
English: Later, the letter said that Wang's grandmother was old and suffered from depression, and there was no medicine in remote areas. She requested to come to Luoyang for treatment.

古文：于是诏宋氏悉归京师，除庆舅衍、俊、盖、暹等皆为郎。
现代文：于是诏令宋氏一家都回到京师来，授刘庆舅舅宋衍、宋俊、宋盖、宋暹等都为郎。
English: Therefore, the imperial edict ordered the entire Song family to return to Beijing to study, awarding Liu Qing's uncle Song Yan, Song Jun, Song Gai, Song Siam, etc. as his sons.

古文：十五年，有司以日食阴盛，奏遣诸王侯就国。
现代文：十五年，官吏认为日食阴盛，上奏请遣诸王侯就国。
English: In the fifteenth year, the officials thought that the solar eclipse was a bad omen, and requested that the princes be sent to the country.

古文：诏曰： 甲子之异，责由一人。
现代文：帝下诏说 ：甲子之异，责任在我一个人。
English: The emperor said, "I am the only one responsible for the difference between my two sons."

古文：诸王幼稚，早离顾复，弱冠相育，常有《蓼莪》、《凯风》之哀。
现代文：诸王幼小，很早就离开了父母，互相扶助而至弱冠，常有《蓼莪》、《凯风》思念父母之哀。
English: The princes were young and left their parents very early. They supported each other until they were weak. There is often a sadness of missing their parents in "The Plough" and "The Wind."

古文：选懦之恩，知非国典，且复须留。 
现代文：恩加怯懦，知道不是国家制度，暂且再留京师。 
English: Enga cowardly, knowing that it is not a national system, temporarily stay in Beijing again.

古文：至冬，从祠章陵，诏假诸王羽林骑各四十人。
现代文：到了冬天，诸王从帝祭祀章陵。诏令给诸王羽林骑各四十人。
English: In the winter, all the kings went to the imperial mausoleum to offer sacrifices. The imperial edict gave all the kings forty horsemen each.

古文：后中傅卫私为臧盗千余万，诏使案理之，并责庆不举之状。庆曰： 以师傅之尊，选自圣朝，臣愚唯知言从事听，不甚有所纠察。 
现代文：后来中傅卫讠斤私自贪赃千余万，诏令考问审理，并责备刘庆不揭发检举，刘庆说： 卫讠斤身为师傅，是朝廷选派，我只知道听他的话，照他的指示做，不能有什么纠察。 
English: Later, the middle-ranking official Wei Shujin embezzled more than ten million yuan, ordered the examination to be investigated, and reproached Liu Qing for not exposing the report. Liu Qing said: Wei Shujin is a master and is selected by the imperial court. I only know to listen to his words and follow his instructions, and there can be no picketing.

古文：帝嘉其对，悉以臧财赐庆。
现代文：帝表扬刘庆的对答，把卫讠斤贪污的全部财物给刘庆。
English: The emperor praised Liu Qing's reply and gave all the property that Wei Xuanjin had embezzled to Liu Qing.

古文：及帝崩，庆号泣前殿，呕血数升，因以发病。
现代文：帝逝世，刘庆号泣前殿，呕血数升，因此生了病。
English: After the emperor's death, Liu Qing cried and vomited several liters of blood, which led to his illness.

古文：明年，诸王就国，邓太后特听清河王置中尉、内史，赐什物皆取乘舆上御，以宋衍等并为清河中大夫。
现代文：第二年，诸王到国，邓太后特许清河王置中尉、内史，赐什物都是皇上所用的东西，宋衍等都为清河中大夫。
English: In the second year, when the emperors came to the country, Empress Dowager Deng specially granted Qinghe Wang Jie, lieutenant, and Naishi, and all the gifts were things used by the emperor. Song Yan and others were Qinghe junior doctors.

古文：庆到国，下令： 寡人生于深宫，长于朝廷，仰恃明主，垂拱受成。
现代文：刘庆到国，下令说： 我生于深宫，在朝廷里长大，上依赖明主，无为受成。
English: When Liu Qing arrived in the country, he gave the following order: "I was born in Sheng Gong, grew up in the imperial court, and rely on my lord.

古文：既以薄祐，早离顾复，属遭大忧，悲怀感伤。
现代文：又因福薄，很早就离开了父母，近来皇上逝世，遭此大忧，不胜悲伤。
English: Also, due to poor fortune, he left his parents very early, and recently the Emperor passed away, which caused him great sorrow and sadness.

古文：蒙恩大国，职惟籓辅，新去京师，忧心茕茕，夙夜屏营，未知所立。
现代文：受恩赐大国，我的职责是做朝廷的屏藩辅佐，新近就要离开京师，孤独一人，忧心如焚。日夜惶恐，不晓得怎么自处。
English: I have been blessed with a great country, and my duty is to be the assistant of the Pinghan Domain of the Imperial Court. I am about to leave Beijing, and I am lonely and worried. I am terrified day and night, and I don't know where to go.

古文：盖闻智不独理，必须明贤。
现代文：我听说即使是明智之士，也不能独自治理，一定要有贤明的人辅助。
English: I have heard that even a wise man cannot rule alone, but must be assisted by a wise man.

古文：今官属并居爵任，失得是均，庶望上遵策戒，下免悔咎。
现代文：现在官属各在其位，要斟酌得失，庶几可以上遵皇上的训戒，不免罪咎。
English: Now the officials are in their respective positions, and they have to weigh the pros and cons. Some of them can follow the emperor's instructions, but they will not be absolved of guilt.

古文：其纠督非枉，明察典禁，无令孤获怠慢之罪焉。 
现代文：要纠察督责错误与邪恶，明察典章制度之所禁，莫使我犯怠慢之罪为要。 
English: It is necessary to picket and supervise the errors and evils, to inspect the prohibitions of the disciplinary system, and to prevent me from committing the crime of negligence.

古文：邓太后以殇帝襁抱，远虑不虞，留庆长子祐与嫡母耿姬居清河邸。
现代文：邓太后以殇帝刘隆幼小，深怕发生意外，把刘庆的长子刘与嫡母耿姬留居清河府第。
English: Empress Dowager Deng kept Liu Qing's eldest son, Liu Long, and his mother, Geng Ji, in Qinghe Prefecture, fearing an accident.

古文：至秋，帝崩，立祐为嗣，是为安帝。
现代文：到秋天，殇帝逝世，立刘继位，是为安帝。
English: In the autumn, Emperor Xian died, and Emperor Liu succeeded to the throne, followed by Emperor An.

古文：太后使中黄门送耿姬归国。
现代文：太后派中黄门送耿姬归封国。
English: The empress dowager sent Zhonghuangmen to send Geng Ji back to the country.

古文：帝所生母左姬，字小娥，小娥姊字大娥，犍为人也。
现代文：帝生母左姬，字小娥，小娥姊字大娥，犍为人。
English: Emperor Taisheng's mother, Zuo Ji, was known as Xiao E, Xiao E's sister was known as Dae E, and she was a woman.

古文：初，伯父圣坐妖言伏诛，家属没官，二娥数岁入掖庭，及长，并有才色。
现代文：起先，伯父左圣因妖言获罪伏诛，家属没收入官，二娥才几岁就入掖庭，等到长大，都有才有色。
English: At first, Uncle Zuo Sheng was arrested for blasphemy, his family members did not have income officials, he was only a few years old when he entered the court, and when he grew up, he was only good-looking.

古文：小娥善《史书》，喜辞赋。
现代文：小娥通晓史书，喜欢辞赋。
English: Xiao E is familiar with the history books and likes to play with words.

古文：和帝赐诸王宫人，因入清河第。
现代文：和帝赐诸王宫人，因得以入清河府第。
English: And the emperor gave the palace people to the kings, because they were able to enter the Qinghe Prefecture.

古文：庆初闻其美，赏傅母以求之。
现代文：刘庆开始听说二娥长得漂亮，赏赐保母为他求得二娥。
English: Liu Qing began to hear that Er'e was beautiful, and rewarded the nanny for getting Er'e for him.

古文：及后幸爱极盛，姬妾莫比。
现代文：后来幸爱非常，其他姬妾不能相比。
English: Later, she was very lucky, other concubines could not compare.

古文：姊妹皆卒，葬于京师。
现代文：姊妹俩死后，葬于京师。
English: After the death of the two sisters, they were buried in Beijing.

古文：庆立凡二十五年，乃归国。
现代文：刘庆立为王共二十五年，才往封国。
English: Liu Qingli was king for a total of twenty-five years before he went into exile.

古文：其年病笃，谓宋衍等曰： 清河埤薄，欲乞骸骨于贵人冢傍下棺而已。
现代文：同年病重，对宋衍等说： 清河低湿土薄，想请求死后在贵人冢旁埋葬。
English: In the same year, he fell seriously ill and said to Song Yan and others, "The Qinghe River is low and the wetland is thin. I want to request to be buried next to the noblemen's coffin after I die."

古文：朝廷大恩，犹当应有祠室，庶母子并食，魂灵有所依庇，死复何恨？ 
现代文：朝廷大恩，还应当立个祠室，庶几母子同食，魂灵有所依庇，死了就再没有什么遗憾了。 
English: Thanks to the great kindness of the imperial court, there should also be a shrine room, where several mothers and children eat together, the souls are protected, and there is nothing to regret after death.

古文：乃上书太后曰： 臣国土下湿，愿乞骸骨，下从贵人于樊濯，虽殁且不朽矣。
现代文：于是上书太后说： 我的国土低湿，想死后请求下从贵人于樊濯，虽死也不朽啊！
English: So she wrote to the empress dowager saying, "My land is low-moisture, and I would like to die with a request from the nobles in Suizhou. Even if I die, I won't be immortal!"

古文：及今口目尚能言视，冒昧干请。
现代文：趁现在口还能说，目还能看，大着胆子请求。
English: Take advantage of the fact that your mouth can still speak and your eyes can still see, and make a bold request.

古文：命在呼吸，愿蒙哀怜。 
现代文：命在一呼一吸之间，希望得到哀怜。 
English: Life between a call and a breath, hope to be pitied.

古文：遂薨，年二十九。
现代文：死时年二十九。
English: He was 29 years old at the time of his death.

古文：遣司空持节与宗正奉吊祭；又使长乐谒者仆射、中谒者二人副护丧事；赐龙旂九旒，虎贲百人，仪比东海恭王。
现代文：朝廷派司空持节与宗正侍候吊祭，又使长乐谒者仆射、中谒者二人帮助护理丧事；赐龙九旒，虎贲百人，礼仪同乐海恭王一样。
English: The imperial court sent Sikyong and Zongzheng to wait for the hanging ceremony, and also sent Changle's eunuch and two middle-aged eunuchs to help care for the funeral; they gave the dragon nine eunuchs and the tiger one hundred eunuchs, and the etiquette was the same as that of King Haigong.

古文：太后使掖庭丞送左姬丧，与王合葬广丘。
现代文：太后使掖庭丞送左姬丧，与王合葬广丘。
English: The empress dowager sent Sui Tingzhen to bury Zuo Ji, and he was buried with Wang in Guangqiu.

古文：子愍王虎威嗣。
现代文：子愍王虎威继王位。
English: His son, King Huwei, succeeded to the throne.

古文：永初元年，太后封宋衍为盛乡侯，分清河为二国，封庆少子常保为广川王，子女十一人皆为乡公主，食邑奉。
现代文：永初元年，太后封宋衍为盛乡侯，分清河为二国，封刘庆少子常保为广川王，子女十一人皆为乡公主，食邑俸禄。
English: In the first year of the Yongzheng era, the empress dowager Song Yan was given the title of Shengxianghou (盛乡侯), Binqinghe was given the title of Binguo (二国), Liu Qing's younger son Changbao was given the title of Guangchuan Wang, and all eleven of her children were given the title of Town Princess, with food allowance.

古文：明年，常保薨，无子，国除。
现代文：第二年，常保逝世，无子，封国撤除。
English: In the second year, Tsuneyasu died without a son, and the feudal state was abolished.

古文：虎威立三年薨，亦无子。
现代文：虎威立三年逝世，也无子。
English: Hu Weili died three years later, also without a son.

古文：邓太后复立乐安王宠子延平为清河王，是为恭王。
现代文：邓太后再立乐安王刘宠的儿子延平为清河王，是为恭王。
English: Empress Dowager Deng re-appointed Yanping, the son of King Le'an and Liu Jiam, as the King of Qinghe and King Gong.

古文：太后崩，有司上言： 清河孝王至德淳懿，载育明圣，承天奉祚，为郊庙主。
现代文：太后逝世，官吏上言： 清河孝王大德纯粹懿美，生育圣明，受天命继承皇位，为国家主。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, the officials said, "Qinghe's filial piety and great virtue are pure and beautiful, and his birth is sacred. He was destined by heaven to succeed to the throne and become the ruler of the country."

古文：汉兴，高皇帝尊父为太上皇，宣帝号父为皇考，序昭穆，置园邑。大宗之义，旧章不忘。
现代文：汉朝建立，高祖皇帝尊父亲为太上皇，宣帝名父亲为皇考，左昭右穆，按秩序排列，还设置园邑，守护陵寝，大宗继嗣之义，过去的典章不能忘却。
English: The Han Dynasty was established. Emperor Gaozu honored his father as the Emperor, Emperor Xuan honored his father as the Emperor, and Emperor Zhao honored his father as the Emperor. They were arranged in order. They also set up garden villages, guarding the tomb, and the principle of succession. The past regulations must not be forgotten.

古文：宜上尊号曰孝德皇，皇妣左氏曰孝德后，孝德皇母宋贵人追谥曰敬隐后。 
现代文：应当上尊号叫孝德皇，皇妣左氏叫孝德后，孝德皇母宋贵人追谥叫敬隐后。 
English: It is fitting that the highest honorific title should be called the Emperor Xiaode, that the Empress Dowager Zuo should be called the Empress Dowager Xiaode, and that the Empress Dowager Xiaode's mother, the Empress Dowager Song Guijin should be called the Empress Dowager Jingyin.

古文：乃告祠高庙，使司徒持节与大鸿胪奉策书玺绶之清河，追上遵号；又遣中常侍奉太牢祠典，护礼仪侍中刘珍等及宗室列侯皆往会事。
现代文：于是祭祀高庙，使司徒持节与大鸿胪奉策书玺绶去清河，追上尊号；又遣中常侍奉持太牢祀的典仪，护礼仪侍中刘珍等及宗室列侯都去参加。
English: As a result, the high temple was sacrificed, so that the priests held the festival and the great nobles went to Qinghe to catch up with the honorifics; they also sent the regular attendants to hold the ceremony of holding the temple, and the attendants Liu Zhen, etc. and the family members of the princes all went to participate.

古文：尊陵曰甘陵，庙曰昭庙，置令、丞，设兵车周卫，比章陵。
现代文：尊陵叫甘陵，庙叫昭庙，设置令、丞，设兵车保卫，章陵一样。
English: The honorable mausoleum is called Ganling, the temple is called Zhao temple, the order and the banner are set up, the military vehicle is set up to protect, and the mausoleum is the same.

古文：复以广川益清河国。
现代文：又把广川并入清河国。
English: He also incorporated Guangchuan into Qinghe Province.

古文：尊耿姬为甘陵大贵人。
现代文：尊耿姬为甘陵大贵人。
English: Tsung Geng Ji was a great nobleman of Ganling.

古文：又封女弟侍男为涅阳长公主，别得为舞阴长公主，久长为濮阳长公主，直得为平氏长公主。
现代文：又封女弟侍男为涅阳长公主，别得为舞阳长公主，久长为濮阳长公主，直得为平氏长公主。
English: In addition, his younger sister's attendant was named Neiyang's eldest princess, followed by Maiyang's eldest princess, Jiuchang's eldest princess, and finally, the eldest princess of the Taira clan.

古文：余七主并早卒，故不及进爵，追赠敬隐后女弟小贵人印绶，追封谥宋杨为当阳穆侯。
现代文：其余七公主都死得早，所以没有进爵。追赠敬隐后女弟小贵人印绶，追封谥宋扬为当阳穆侯。
English: The remaining seven princesses all died early, so they did not receive a peerage. After posthumously honoring the deceased, their younger sisters were posthumously awarded the seal of minor nobility, and their father, Song Yang, was posthumously awarded the title of Dangyang Muhu.

古文：杨四子皆为列侯，食邑各五千户。
现代文：宋扬四个儿子都为列侯，食邑各五千户。
English: Song Yang's four sons were all vassals, and each had 5,000 households.

古文：宋氏为卿、校、侍中、大夫、谒者、郎吏十余人。
现代文：宋氏为卿、校、侍中、大夫、谒者、郎吏十余人。
English: There were more than ten members of the Song clan who were court nobles, schoolmasters, chamberlains, doctors, eunuchs, and servants.

古文：孝德后异母弟次及达生二人，诸子九人，皆为清河国郎中。
现代文：孝德后异母弟宋次及宋达生二人，诸子九人，都是清河国郎中。
English: Xiaode's two half-brothers, Song Zi and Song Dasheng, all nine of them, were the children of Qinghe Guorong.

古文：耿贵人者，牟平侯舒之孙也。贵人兄宝，袭封牟平侯。
现代文：耿贵人是牟平侯耿舒的孙子，贵人兄耿宝，袭封为牟平侯。
English: Geng Guizhong was the grandson of Muping marquis Geng Shu, and his elder brother Geng Bao was crowned as Muping marquis.

古文：帝以宝嫡舅，宠遇甚渥，位至大将军，事已见《耿舒传》。
现代文：帝因耿宝是嫡舅，宠爱待遇很厚，位至大将军，事已载在《耿舒传》中。
English: Emperor Geng is Geng Bao's father-in-law, and he is very much loved and treated as a great general. This has been recorded in the "Geng Shu Biography."

古文：延平立三十五年薨，子蒜嗣。
现代文：延平立三十五年逝世，儿子刘蒜继王位。
English: Yan Pingli died thirty-five years ago, and his son Liu Garlic succeeded to the throne.

古文：冲帝崩，征蒜诣京师，将议为嗣。会大将军梁冀与梁太后立质帝，罢归国。
现代文：冲帝刘炳逝世，征召刘蒜到京师，准备讨论继承帝位，而大将军梁冀与梁太后立了质帝刘瓒，刘蒜罢归国。
English: After the death of Emperor Liu Bei, Liu Garlic was summoned to Beijing to discuss the succession of the imperial throne, while General Liang Jie and Empress Liang established Emperor Liu Bei, and Liu Garlic returned to the country.

古文：蒜为人严重，动止有度，朝臣太尉李固等莫不归心焉。
现代文：刘蒜为人严谨，动静有规矩，朝臣太尉李固等没有不拥戴他的。
English: Liu Garlic was a strict person, with rules for movement and stillness. The courtier Lieutenant Li Gu and others did not fail to support him.

古文：初，中常侍曹腾谒蒜，蒜不为礼，宦者由此恶之。
现代文：起初，中常侍曹腾去拜谒刘蒜，刘蒜不以礼待之，宦官由此恶他。
English: At first, Zhongzheng's attendant Teng went to pay homage to Liu Garlic, but Liu Garlic did not treat him with courtesy, and the eunuch was angry with him.

古文：及帝崩，公卿皆正议立蒜，而曹腾说梁冀不听，遂立桓帝。
现代文：等到帝逝世，公卿都公议立刘蒜为帝，曹腾却说梁冀不准，于是立了桓帝。
English: After the emperor's death, the nobles all publicly voted to make Liu Garlic the emperor, but Cao Teng said that Liang Ji was not allowed, so he set up Emperor Huan.

古文：语在《李固传》。
现代文：语在《李固传》。
English: in the "Biography of Li Gu."

古文：蒜由此得罪。
现代文：刘蒜因此获罪。
English: As a result, Liu Knoblauch was convicted.

古文：建和元年，甘陵人刘文与南郡妖贼刘鲔交通，讹言清河王当统天下，欲共立蒜。
现代文：建和元年，甘陵人刘文与南郡妖贼刘鲔勾结，造谣说，清河王当继统天下，想立刘蒜为帝。
English: In the first year of the Jianhe era, Liu Wen, a resident of Ganling, colluded with Liu Yao, a thief from Nan County, to create a rumor that the king of Qinghe should succeed to rule the world, and wanted to make Liu Yan the emperor.

古文：事发觉，文等遂劫清河相谢暠，将至王宫司马门，曰： 当立王为天子，暠为公。 
现代文：事情被发觉，刘文等就劫持清河相谢詗，带到王宫司马门，说 ：当立王为天子，谢詗为公。 
English: When the matter was discovered, Liu Wen and others kidnapped Qinghe's consort, Xie Yao, and took her to the Sima Gate of the royal palace, saying, "The king should be the son of heaven, and Xie Yao should be the prince."

古文：暠不听，骂之，文因刺杀暠。
现代文：谢詗不听他们的，骂他们，刘文因此刺杀了谢詗。
English: Xie Yao did not listen to them and cursed them, so Liu Wen assassinated Xie Yao.

古文：于是捕文、鲔诛之。
现代文：于是逮捕了刘文、刘鲔，并把他们杀了。
English: So they arrested Liu Wen and Liu Yao and killed them.

古文：有司因劾奏蒜，坐贬爵为尉氏侯，徙桂阳，自杀。
现代文：官吏因上奏弹劾刘蒜，获罪贬爵为尉氏侯，迁徙到桂阳，自杀。
English: The officials impeached Liu Garlic because of the report, he was convicted and demoted to the rank of lord, he moved to Guiyang and committed suicide.

古文：立三年，国绝。
现代文：立三年，封国废绝。
English: Three years after its establishment, the feudal state was abolished.

古文：梁冀恶清河名，明年，乃改为甘陵。
现代文：梁冀厌恶清河这个名字，第二年，改为甘陵。
English: Liang Jie detested the name Qinghe, and changed it to Ganling the following year.

古文：梁太后立安平孝王子经侯理为甘陵王，奉孝德皇祀，是为威王。
现代文：梁太后立安平孝王子经侯理为甘陵王，侍奉孝德皇祭祀，是为威王。
English: The Empress Dowager Liang established Anping Prince Xiao as the King of Ganling, and he served the Emperor Xiaodong as a sacrificial offering. He was the King of Wei.

古文：理立二十五年薨，子贞王定嗣。
现代文：刘理立二十五年逝世，子贞王刘定继承王位。
English: Liu Lili died twenty-five years ago, and his son Zhen Wang Liu Ding succeeded to the throne.

古文：定立四年薨，子献王忠嗣。
现代文：刘定立四年逝世，子献王刘忠继承王位。
English: Liu Dingli died four years later, and his son Liu Zhong succeeded to the throne.

古文：黄巾贼起，忠为国人所执，既而释之。
现代文：黄巾贼兴起，刘忠被国人所执，没有多久就释放了。
English: Yellow scarf thieves arose, Liu Zhong was detained by the Chinese, and was released not long after.

古文：灵帝以亲亲故，诏复忠国。
现代文：灵帝认为应当亲所当亲，亲亲为大，诏令恢复刘忠的封国。
English: Lingdi thought that it was important to be close to one's relatives, and the imperial edict restored Liu Zhong's fief.

古文：忠立十三年薨，嗣子为黄巾所害，建安十一年，以无后，国除。
现代文：刘忠立十三年逝世，儿子被黄巾军杀害，建安十一年，因为无后，封国撤除。
English: Liu Zhongli died in the thirteenth year, his son was killed by the Yellow Turban Army, Jianan in the eleventh year, because there was no successor, the state was removed.

古文：济北惠王寿，母申贵人，颍川人也，世吏二千石。
现代文：济北惠王刘寿，母亲申贵人，颍川人。世世为吏二千石。
English: Liu Shou, Hui Wang of North Jeju, whose mother, Shen Guijin, was from Beichuan. He was an official of 2,000 koku.

古文：贵人年十三，入掖庭。
现代文：贵人年十三，进入掖庭。
English: In his thirteenth year, he entered the imperial court.

古文：寿以永元二年封，分太山郡为国。
现代文：刘寿是永元二年封为王的。分太山郡为国。
English: Liu Shou was crowned king in the second year of Yongyuan. Taishan County was divided into two parts.

古文：和帝遵肃宗故事，兄弟皆留京师，恩宠笃密。
现代文：和帝遵守肃宗的老例，兄弟都留在京师，恩爱至为亲密。
English: He and the emperor kept to the old custom of Suizong, the brothers all stayed in Beijing, and they were very close.

古文：有司请遣诸王归籓，不忍许之，及帝崩，乃就国。
现代文：官吏请使诸王回封国，帝不忍他们离开，等到帝逝世，才回到封国去。
English: The officials asked the kings to return to the fief. The emperor could not bear for them to leave, and waited until the emperor's death before returning to the fief.

古文：永初元年，邓太后封寿舅申转为新亭侯。
现代文：永初元年，邓太后封刘寿舅舅申转为新亭侯。
English: In the first year of the Yongzheng era, Liu Shou's uncle Shen, the Dowager Empress Dowager of the Deng Dynasty, was transferred to Xin Ting Hou.

古文：寿立三十一年薨，自永初己后，戎狄叛乱，国用不足，始封王薨，减赙钱为千万，布万区；嗣王薨五百万，布五千匹。
现代文：刘寿立三十一年逝世。自从永初以后，戎狄叛乱，国家的财用不够，刚刚封的王逝世，减少丧葬费为千万，布万匹；继承王位的王逝世，钱五百万，布五千匹。
English: Liu Shouli died in the 31st year. Since the beginning of time, the army of Di rebelled, the country's financial resources were insufficient, and the newly crowned king died, reducing the funeral expenses to ten million and the cloth to ten thousand; the king who inherited the throne died, five million and five thousand cloth.

古文：时，唯寿最尊亲，特赙钱三千万，布三万匹。
现代文：这时只有刘寿最为尊亲，特别送丧葬钱三千万，布三万匹。
English: At this time, only Liu Shou was the most respected relative, with a special funeral gift of thirty million yuan and thirty thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：子节王登嗣。
现代文：子节王刘登继王位。
English: Zijie Wang Liu Deng succeeded to the throne.

古文：永宁元年，封登弟五人为乡侯，皆别食太山邑。
现代文：永宁元年，封刘登的弟弟五人为乡侯，都另食税太山邑。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, Liu Deng's five younger brothers were all peasants in Taishan.

古文：登立十五年薨，子哀王多嗣。
现代文：刘登立十五年逝世，子哀王刘多继承王位。
English: Liu Dengli died fifteen years ago, and his son, the late King Liu Duo, succeeded to the throne.

古文：多立三年薨，无子。
现代文：刘多立三年逝世，没有儿子。
English: Liu Doli died three years later, without a son.

古文：永和四年，立战乡侯安国为济北王，是为王。
现代文：永和四年立战乡侯刘安国为济北王，是为厘王。
English: In the fourth year of the Yonghe era, Liu Anguo, the warlord of Xiangxiang, was crowned the King of Jiibei and the King of Li.

古文：安国立七年薨，子孝王次嗣。
现代文：刘安国立七年逝世，子孝王刘次继承王位。
English: Liu An Guo died seven years ago, and his son, Prince Liu Xiao, succeeded to the throne.

古文：本初元年，封次弟猛为亭侯。
现代文：本初元年，封刘次的弟弟刘猛为亭侯。
English: In the first year of this year, Liu Meng, the younger brother of Liu Zi, became the prince.

古文：次九岁丧父，至孝。
现代文：刘次九岁失去了父亲，性最孝。
English: Liu Zi lost his father when he was nine years old.

古文：建和元年，梁太后下诏曰： 济北王次以幼年守籓，躬履孝道，父没哀恸，焦毁过礼，草庐土席，衰杖在身，头不批沐，体生疮肿。
现代文：建和元年，梁太后下诏说： 济北王刘次以幼年守藩国，躬行孝道，父亲死了哀恸过度，居草庐，坐卧土席，丧杖不离身，头发不梳不洗，以至体生疮肿。
English: In the first year of the Jianhe era, Empress Dowager Liang issued an edict saying, "Jibei King Liu Zi used his childhood to guard the domain and practice filial piety. When his father died, he mourned excessively, lived in a straw hut, slept on a dirt floor, kept his cane with him, and did not comb or wash his hair, so much so that his body became swollen with sores.

古文：谅暗已来二十八月，自诸国有忧，未之闻也，朝廷甚嘉焉。
现代文：居丧以来，二十八月，自从各封国有丧，没有听说像他这样的。
English: Since the funeral, on the 28th of August, since the state funeral, I have not heard of anyone like him.

古文：《书》不云乎： 用德章厥善。 
现代文：朝廷认为这是难能可贵的。《书经》上不是说过吗： 以道德明之，使大家竞相为善。 
English: The imperial court considered this to be invaluable. Didn't it say in the "Shu Jing" (Book of Songs): It is good to make everyone compete with each other by making morality clear?

古文：《诗》云： 孝子不匮，永锡尔类。 
现代文：《诗经》说 ：孝子的孝行永远没有乏竭，长赐与你的族类，教道天下。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says, "The filial piety of a filial son is never exhausted. Long may you bestow it on your tribe, and teach it to the whole world."

古文：今增次封五千户，广其土字，以尉孝子恻隐之劳。 
现代文：现在增加封刘次五千户，使他的地方宽大一些，用以慰劳孝子悲痛的心情。 
English: Now, we will increase the number of sealed Liu Zi households to 5,000, to make his place more generous, and use it to comfort the grief of the filial son.

古文：次立十七年薨，子鸾嗣。
现代文：刘次立七年逝世，子刘鸾继承王位。
English: Liu Zili died seven years later, and his son Liu Hui succeeded to the throne.

古文：鸾薨，子政嗣。
现代文：刘鸾逝世，子刘政继承王位，没有儿子，
English: Liu Bei died, and his son Liu Zheng succeeded to the throne. He had no son,

古文：政薨，无子，建安十一年，国除。
现代文：建安十一年，封国撤除。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianan, the state of siege was lifted.

古文：河间孝王开，以永元二年封，分乐成、勃海、涿郡为国。
现代文：河间孝王刘开，是永元二年封的，分乐成、勃海、涿郡为国。
English: Liu Kai, the Prince of Kawama, was enthroned in the second year of Yongyuan, and the country was divided into Lecheng, Bohai, and Yunnan counties.

古文：延平元年就国。
现代文：延平元年到国。
English: Yanping came to the country in the first year of the year.

古文：开奉遵法度，吏人敬之。
现代文：刘开遵守法度，部属百姓都敬爱他。
English: Liu Kai abided by the law, and his subordinates loved him.

古文：永宁元年，邓太后封开子翼为平原王，奉怀王胜祀；子德为安平王，奉乐成王党祀。
现代文：永宁元年，邓太后封刘开儿子刘翼为平原王，侍奉怀王刘胜的祭祀，子刘德为安平王，侍奉乐成王刘党的祭祀。
English: In the first year of the Yongning era, the Empress Dowager Deng appointed Liu Kai's son Liu Ying as the King of the Plain and served the sacrifice of Huai King Liu Sheng, and his son Liu De as the King of Anping and served the sacrifice of Le Cheng King Liu Du.

古文：开立四十二年薨，子惠王政嗣。
现代文：刘开立四十二年逝世，子惠王刘政继承王位。
English: Liu Kaili died in 42, and his son Hui Wang Liu Zheng succeeded to the throne.

古文：政傲，不奉法宪，顺帝以侍御史吴郡沈景有强能称，故擢为河间相。
现代文：刘政骄傲凶狠，不守国家法纪。顺帝因侍御史吴郡沈景以精明强干著称，所以升他为河间相。
English: Liu Zheng was proud and fierce, and did not abide by national laws and regulations. Because Emperor Shun's attendant, Wu County's Shenjing, was famous for his shrewdness and strength, he was promoted to the position of khezi phase.

古文：景到国谒王，王不正服，箕踞殿上。
现代文：沈景到国拜谒王刘政，刘政衣冠不整，伸足坐殿上。
English: Shen Jing went to the country to pay homage to King Liu Zheng. Liu Zheng was not dressed properly and stretched his legs to sit on the palace.

古文：侍郎赞拜，景峙不为礼。
现代文：侍郎宣读行礼仪，沈景立着不为礼，问司仪的人，王在何处？
English: The attendant read out the etiquette, Shen Jing stood up and asked the master of ceremonies, "Where is the king?"

古文：问王所在，虎贲曰： 是非王邪？ 景曰： 王不服，常人何别！
现代文：虎贲说： 这不是王吗？ 沈景说： 王不着王服，与普通人有什么分别呢？
English: Tigress said, "Isn't this a king?" Shen Jing said, "If a king doesn't wear a royal robe, what's the difference between him and an ordinary person?"

古文：今相谒王，岂谒无礼者邪！ 
现代文：现在相来拜谒王，难道可以拜谒无礼的人吗？ 
English: Now you come to pay homage to the king, is it possible to pay homage to an impolite person?

古文：王惭而更服，景然后拜。
现代文：王惭愧，更换了衣服，沈景然后才拜。
English: Embarrassed, Wang changed his clothes and bowed before Shenjing.

古文：出住宫门外，请王傅责之曰： 前发京师，陛下见受诏，以王不恭，使相检督。
现代文：沈景出住宫门外，把刘政的师傅请来责问说： 前去京师，皇上诏我，因为王不恭谨，要我督察。
English: Shen Jing went to live outside the palace gate, invited Liu Zheng's master to come and interrogate him, saying: Go to the Beijing division, the emperor ordered me, because the king is not respectful, he wants me to inspect.

古文：诸君空受爵禄，而无训导之义。 
现代文：你们白白地拿了国家的俸禄，没有尽到训导王的责任。 
English: You have taken the reward of the kingdom without paying for it, and you have not fulfilled your duty to instruct the king.

古文：因奏治罪，诏书让政而诘责傅。
现代文：因上奏治罪。朝廷下诏责备刘政而诘问谴责师傅。
English: The imperial court issued an imperial edict to reprimand Liu Zheng for his crime and reprimanded Shifu.

古文：景因捕诸奸人上案其罪，杀戮尤恶者数十人，出冤狱百余人。
现代文：沈景因此逮捕了不少奸人，奏请治他们的罪。杀罪大恶极的几十人，释放冤枉入狱的百多人。
English: As a result, Shenjing arrested many traitors and tried them for their crimes, killed dozens of extremely evil people, and released more than a hundred people who were wrongfully imprisoned.

古文：政遂为改节，悔过自修。
现代文：刘政乃改正所为，悔过自新。
English: Liu Zheng is a reformed person, he has repented and reformed.

古文：阳嘉元年，封政弟十三人皆为亭侯。
现代文：阳嘉元年，封刘政弟弟十三个人都为亭侯。
English: In the first year of Yang Jia, thirteen of Liu Zheng's younger brothers were appointed as princes.

古文：政立十年薨，子贞王建嗣。
现代文：刘政立十年逝世，子贞王刘建继承王位。
English: Ten years after Liu Zhengrong's death, his son Liu Jian, the Prince of Zhengrong, succeeded to the throne.

古文：建立十年薨，子安王利嗣。
现代文：刘建立十年逝世，子安王刘利继承王位。
English: Ten years after Liu Jian died, his son Liu Li succeeded to the throne.

古文：利立二十八年薨，子陔嗣。陔立四十一年，魏受禅，以为崇德侯。
现代文：刘利立二十八年逝世，子刘陔继承王位，刘陔立四十一年，魏受汉朝禅让，以他为崇德侯。
English: Liu Lili died in 28, and his son Liu Bei succeeded to the throne. Liu Lili ruled for 41 years, and Wei was transferred to the Han Dynasty, with him as the prince of Chongde.

古文：蠡吾侯翼，元初六年邓太后征济北、河间王诸子诣京师，奇翼美仪容，故以为平原怀王后焉。留在京师。
现代文：蠡吾侯刘翼，元初六年邓太后征召济北、河间王诸子到京师，赞赏刘翼仪容美丽，故以他为平原怀王刘得的后代，留在京师。
English: My lord Liu Ying, in the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Empress Dowager Deng summoned the sons of Jiubei and Kawama kings to the Beijing division, and appreciated Liu Ying's beautiful appearance, so he was the descendant of the Plains King Liu Dede, and remained in the Beijing division.

古文：岁余，太后崩。
现代文：一年多，太后逝世。
English: More than a year later, the Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：安帝乳母王圣与中常侍江京等谮邓骘兄弟及翼，云与中大夫赵王谋图不轨，窥觎神器，怀大逆心。
现代文：安帝乳母王圣与中常侍江京等诬陷邓骘兄弟及刘翼，说他们与中大夫赵王图谋不轨，想夺取帝位，心怀大逆不道。
English: Wang Sheng, the Emperor An's wet nurse, and Jiang Jing, the middle-ranking attendant, framed the Deng brothers and Liu Ying, saying that they were plotting with Zhao Wang, the middle-ranking doctor, to seize the imperial throne, harboring high treason.

古文：贬为都乡侯，遣归河间。
现代文：降为都乡侯，送归河间。
English: He was relegated to a township and sent back to Kawama.

古文：翼于是谢宾客，闭门自处。
现代文：刘翼于是谢绝宾客，不与往来，闭门自居。
English: Liu Ying then declined the guests, refused to have any dealings with them, and shut himself away.

古文：永建五年，父开上书，愿分蠡吾县以封翼，顺帝从之。
现代文：永建五年，父亲刘开上书，请分蠡吾县以封刘翼，顺帝答应了。
English: In the fifth year of Yongjian, his father, Liu Kai, wrote a letter, asking for the division of our county to be named Liu Ying. Emperor Shun agreed.

古文：翼卒，子志嗣，为大将军梁冀所立，是为桓帝。
现代文：刘翼死，子刘志继承。被大将军梁冀立为桓帝。
English: Liu Ying died and was succeeded by his son Liu Zhi. He was installed as Emperor Huan by the great general Liang Ji.

古文：梁太后诏追尊河间孝王为孝穆皇，夫人赵氏曰孝穆后，庙曰清庙，陵曰乐成陵；蠡吾先侯曰孝崇皇，庙曰列庙，陵曰博陵。
现代文：梁太后追尊河间孝王为孝穆皇，夫人赵氏为孝穆后，庙叫清庙，陵叫乐成陵；蠡吾先侯叫孝崇皇，庙叫烈庙，陵叫博陵。
English: Empress Dowager Liang revered Emperor Kawama as Emperor Xiaomu, and his wife Empress Zhao as Empress Xiaomu. The temple is called Qing Temple, and the mausoleum is called Lesheng Mausoleum; the ancestor of Emperor Xingwu is called Emperor Xiaozong, the temple is called Martyrs' Temple, and the mausoleum is called Bo Mausoleum.

古文：皆置令、丞，使司徒持节奉策书、玺绶，祠以太牢。
现代文：都设置令、丞，使司徒持节奉策书、玺绶，祭用太牢。
English: They all set up orders and chants, so that the scribes would hold the festival, hold the sermon, and make the sacrifice.

古文：建和二年，更封帝弟都乡侯硕为平原王，留博陵，奉翼后。
现代文：建和二年，改封帝弟都乡侯刘硕为平原王，留在博陵，侍奉刘翼的后裔。
English: In the second year of Jianhe, Liu Shuo, the prince's younger brother, was renamed the king of the plain. He stayed in Boling and served the descendants of Liu Ying.

古文：尊翼夫人马氏为孝崇博园贵人，以涿郡之良乡、故安，河间之蠡吾三县为汤沐邑。
现代文：尊刘翼的夫人马氏为孝崇博园贵人，把涿郡的良乡、故安，河间的蠡吾三县为汤沐邑，把邑内的收入作沐浴之用。
English: Mr. Ma, the wife of the revered Liu Ying, is a dignitary of the Xiao Chongbo Garden. He regards the three counties of Liangxiang, Gao'an and Xingwu in He County as "Tangwu" counties, and uses the income in the county for bathing.

古文：硕嗜酒，多过失，帝令马贵人领王家事。
现代文：都乡侯刘硕好饮酒，多过失，帝使马贵人管理王的家务事。
English: Liu Shuo, the lord of the capital and the countryside, was a good drinker, but he made many mistakes. The emperor sent Ma Guiren to manage the king's household affairs.

古文：建安十一年，国除。
现代文：建安十一年，封国撤除。
English: In the eleventh year of Jianan, the state of siege was lifted.

古文：解渎亭侯淑，以河间孝王子封。
现代文：解渎亭侯刘淑，以河间孝王的儿子封。
English: Liu Shu, the lord of Zhaoju Pavilion, is portrayed as the son of Kawama Takao.

古文：淑卒，子嗣。
现代文：刘淑死，子刘苌继承。
English: Liu Shu died and was succeeded by his son Liu Wei.

古文：卒，子宏嗣，为大将军窦武所立，是为灵帝。
现代文：苌死，子刘宏继承，被大将军窦武立为灵帝。
English: He died and was succeeded by his son Liu Hong, who was made the spiritual emperor by the great general Dou Wu.

古文：建宁元年，窦太后诏追遵皇祖淑为孝元皇，夫人夏氏曰孝元后，陵曰敦陵，庙曰靖庙；皇考为孝仁皇，夫人董氏为慎园贵人，陵曰慎陵，庙曰奂庙。
现代文：建宁元年，窦太后诏追尊皇祖刘淑为孝元皇，夫人夏氏叫孝元后，陵叫敦陵，庙叫靖庙；皇考刘苌为孝仁皇，夫人董氏为慎园贵人，陵叫慎陵，庙叫奂庙。
English: In the first year of Jianning, the Dowager Empress Dowager Dowager Liu Shu's ancestor Liu Shu was called the Emperor Xia, his wife Xia was called the Empress Xia, his mausoleum was called the Tomb of Dun, and his temple was called the Temple of Jing; the Empress Dowager Liu Wei was called the Emperor Xia, and his wife Dong was called the Lady of Shanyuan, her mausoleum was called the Tomb of Shanyin, and her temple was called the Temple of Yao.

古文：皆置令、丞，使司徒持节之河间奉策书、玺绶，祠以太守，常以岁时遣中常侍持节之河间奉祠。
现代文：都设置令、丞，使司徒持节在河间奉策书、玺绶，用太牢祭祀，常以岁时派中常侍持节去河间侍奉祭祀。
English: Orders and decrees were set up to make the priests hold the festival in Kawama, and they were required to read the sutras and recite the rites, and to use the dungeon for the sacrificial rites. They were often sent to Kawama to serve the sacrificial rites according to their age.

古文：熹平三年，使使拜河间安王利子康为济南王，奉孝仁皇祀。
现代文：熹平三年，使使拜河间安王刘利子刘康为济南王，侍奉孝仁皇祭祀。
English: In the third year of Jianping, Liu Lizi Liu Kang, the envoy of King Baima of An, became the king of Jinan and served the Emperor Xiao Ren.

古文：康薨，子嗣，建安十二年，为黄巾贼所害。
现代文：刘康逝世，子刘斌贝继承。建安十二年，被黄巾贼杀害。
English: Liu Kang died and was succeeded by his son Liu Binbei, who was killed by a thief in the year 12 of Jian'an.

古文：子开嗣，立十三年，魏受禅，以为崇德侯。
现代文：子刘开继承，立十三年，魏接受汉朝的让位，以他为崇德侯。
English: He was succeeded by his son Liu Kai, and in the thirteenth year of his reign, Wei accepted the abdication of the Han Dynasty, with him as Chongde Hou.

古文：城阳怀王淑，以永元二年分济阴为国。
现代文：城阳怀王刘淑，是永元二年分济阴为国，立五年逝世，葬在京师。
English: Liu Shu, the King of Joyang Huai, became the ruler of Jiyin in the second year of Yongyuan and died five years later. He was buried in Jingshuo.

古文：立五年薨，葬于京师，无子，国除，还并济阴。
现代文：无子，封国撤除，仍并入济阴。
English: They had no children, the state seal was removed, and they were still merged into Jiyin.

古文：广宗殇王万岁，以永元五年封，分巨鹿为国。
现代文：广宗殇王刘万岁，是永元五年封的，分巨鹿为国。
English: Long live Liu Wanzhong, the king of the Guangzong Dynasty, who was enthroned in the fifth year of the Yongyuan Dynasty.

古文：其年薨，葬于京师。
现代文：这年逝世，葬于京师。
English: He died that year and was buried in Kyo-Shiro.

古文：无子，国除，并还巨鹿。
现代文：无子，封国撤除。仍并入巨鹿。
English: They had no children, and the feudal state was abolished. They were still merged into Koga.

古文：平原怀王胜，和帝长子也。
现代文：平原怀王刘胜，和帝长子。
English: Liu Sheng, the king of the Plain of Huai, and the emperor's eldest son.

古文：不载母氏。
现代文：没有记载母氏姓名。
English: There is no record of her mother's name.

古文：少有痼疾，延平元年封。
现代文：年少时有难治的疾病，延平元年封。
English: When he was young, he had an incurable disease. He was released in the first year of Yanping.

古文：立八年薨，葬于京师。
现代文：立八年逝世，葬于京师。
English: He died eight years later and was buried in Kyo-Shiro.

古文：无子，邓太后立乐安夷王宠子得为平原王，奉胜后，是为哀王。
现代文：无子，邓太后立乐安夷王刘宠子刘得为平原王，作为刘胜的后裔，是为哀王。
English: Without a son, the Empress Dowager Deng made Liu, the favorite son of King Le Anyi, the King of the Plain. As a descendant of Liu Sheng, he was the King of Sorrow.

古文：得立六年薨，无子，永宁元年，太后又立河间王开子都乡侯翼为平原王嗣。安帝废之。国除。
现代文：刘得立六年逝世，无子，永宁元年，太后又立河间王刘开子都乡侯刘翼为平原王的继承人，安帝把他废了，封国撤除。
English: Liu De Li died six years later, without a son. In the first year of the Yongning era, the empress dowager also appointed Liu Kaizhi, the king of Hebei Province, and Liu Ying, the lord of the township, as the heir to the king of the Plain. Emperor An abolished him and removed the state seal.

古文：论曰：传称吴子夷昧，甚德而度，有吴国者，必其子孙。
现代文：史官评论说：《左传》称吴子夷昧，甚有德行，气度也大。为吴国国王的，必定是他的子孙。
English: The historian commented: "Zo Zhuan" said that Wu Zi Yi was obscure, very virtuous, and had a great temperament. Those who were the kings of Wu must be his descendants.

古文：章帝长者，事从敦厚，继祀汉室，咸其苗裔，古人之言信哉！
现代文：章帝是个有修养的长者，处事敦实厚道，继承汉朝天下，都是他的子孙。古人的话真是可以相信的呀！
English: Emperor Zhang was a cultured elder, he was diligent and courteous, and his descendants inherited the Han Dynasty. The words of the ancients can really be believed!

