古文：完颜仲元完颜阿邻完颜霆乌古论长寿完颜佐石抹仲温乌古论礼蒲察阿里奥屯襄完颜蒲剌都夹谷石里哥术甲臣嘉纥石烈桓端完颜阿里不孙完颜铁哥纳兰胡鲁剌完颜仲元，本姓郭氏，中都人。
现代文：完颜仲元本姓郭，中都人。
English: Yan Zhong is originally surnamed Guo, a native of Zhongdu.

古文：大安中，李雄募兵，仲元与完颜阿邻俱应募，数有功。
现代文：大安年间，李雄招募兵士，郭仲元和完颜阿邻一起应募，多次立有战功。
English: During the Taian era, Li Xiong recruited soldiers, and Guo Zhongyuan and Guan Yan's neighbors applied for recruitment together, and made war achievements for many times.

古文：贞祐三年，与阿邻俱累功至节度。
现代文：贞祐三年，他和完颜阿邻都积累战功升任节度。
English: In the third year of Zhengyu, both he and his neighbor, Guanyan, were promoted to the highest ranks after accumulating military merits.

古文：仲元为永定军节度使，赐姓完颜氏。
现代文：郭仲元是永定军节度使，被赐姓完颜氏。
English: Guo Zhongyuan was the Yongding Army's ceremonial envoy and was given the surname of Guan Yan.

古文：仲元在当时兵最强，号 花帽军 ，人呼为 郭大相公 ，以与阿邻相别。
现代文：当时，郭仲元的兵力最强，号称 花帽军 ，人们都称呼他为 郭大相公 ，以便和完颜阿邻相区别。
English: At that time, Guo Zhongyuan's army was the strongest, known as the Flower Hat Army, and people called him Guo Daxianggong in order to distinguish him from Guan Yan's neighbors.

古文：顷之，兼本路宣抚使。
现代文：不久，又兼任本路宣抚使。
English: Not long after, he also served as the envoy to the Korean Peninsula.

古文：八月，遥授知河间府事。
现代文：八月，遥授郭仲元知河间府事。
English: In August, Guo Zhongyuan, a distant disciple of Guo, was appointed to the post of prefectural governor.

古文：数月，改知济南府事，权山东东路宣抚副使。
现代文：几个月后，又改知济南府事，权山东东路宣抚副使。
English: A few months later, he was transferred to Jinan prefectural government and appointed as the vice-envoy of the East Shandong Province.

古文：贞祐四年，山东乏粮，仲元军三万欲于黄河之侧或陕右分屯，上书乞补京官，且言恢复河朔之策，当诣阙面陈。
现代文：贞祐四年，山东缺粮，郭仲元和军队三万人准备到黄河边或陕右分开屯守，他便上书朝廷，请求补任京官，并且说自己有收复河朔的计策，必须到朝廷面奏。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengyu, Shandong was short of grain, and Guo Zhongyuan and his army of 30,000 were preparing to leave for the Yellow River or the right bank of the Shaanxi River to set up a garrison. He then wrote to the imperial court, requesting to be reappointed as the official of Beijing, and said that he had a plan to recover Hexuo, and that he had to present it to the imperial court.

古文：诏曰： 卿兄弟鸠集义旅，所在立功，忠义之诚，皎然可见。
现代文：皇帝下诏说 ：你们兄弟集合义军，在各自地方立功，忠义的情操，已昭然可见了。
English: The emperor issued an edict saying, "Your brothers should gather the rebel forces and perform meritorious service in their respective regions. The spirit of loyalty is already clearly visible."

古文：朕以参政侯挚与卿素厚，命于彼中行省，应悉朕心。
现代文：朕因为参政侯挚和你一向交情深厚，派他到那里担任行省官员，你应当可以理解我的心意了！
English: I sent him there to serve as a provincial official because I have always had a deep friendship with you since you were a member of the government. You should be able to understand my intentions!

古文：卿求入见，其意固嘉，东平方危，正赖卿等相为声援，俟兵势稍缓，即徙军附河屯驻，此时卿来，盖未晚也。
现代文：你要求到朝中参见，想法当然也是不错的，但东平处于危急之际，正需依赖你们加以声援，等战事稍为和缓之后，便可将军队迁移到黄河边驻守，那时你再来朝廷，为时未晚。
English: Your request to visit the DPRK and China is, of course, a good idea, but Dongping is in a critical situation and needs to rely on you for solidarity. After the war eases a little, the army can be moved to the Yellow River and stationed there. When you return to the imperial court, it will not be too late.

古文：尚思戮力，朕不汝忘。 
现代文：尚希戮力报效朝廷，我不会忘记你的。 
English: I hope you will do your best to serve the imperial court. I will not forget you.

古文：未几，改河北宣抚副使。
现代文：不久，改任他为河北宣抚副使。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the deputy envoy of Hebei Proclamation.

古文：仲元部将李霆等积功至刺史、提控，仲元奏赐金牌，霆等皆为名将，功名与仲元相埒。
现代文：郭仲元的部将李霆等都累积战功而被任命为刺史、提控，仲元上奏朝廷赐予金牌，李霆等都成为当时的名将，功名都和仲元相当。
English: Li Ting, Guo Zhongyuan's subordinate, and others all accumulated military exploits and were appointed as the head of the history and control department. Zhongyuan was awarded a gold medal by the imperial court. Li Ting and others all became famous generals at that time, and their achievements were comparable to those of Zhongyuan.

古文：仲元屡有功，以本职为从宜招抚使，计约从坦等军图恢复。
现代文：仲元屡立战功，以本职任从宜招抚使，计划约集从坦等军准备恢复失陷的地方。
English: Zhongyuan repeatedly distinguished himself in battle. He used his position to recruit envoys, and planned to gather troops from Tang and other armies to prepare for the recovery of lost territories.

古文：诏以仲元军猥多，差为三等，上等备征伐，中下给戍守，懦弱者皆罢去。
现代文：朝廷下诏说，仲元的军队人数多而杂滥，可大致分为三等，上等的准备征伐时使用，中下等的派去防守，懦弱的全部放走。
English: The Imperial edict said that the number of Zhongyuan's troops was large and indiscriminate, and could be roughly divided into three classes. The upper class was used to prepare for the conquest, the middle and lower classes were sent to defend, and all the cowardly ones were let go.

古文：红袄贼千余人据涟水县，仲元遣提控娄室率兵击破之，斩首数百，败祝春，擒郭伟，余众奔溃，遂复涟水县。
现代文：红袄贼一千多人占据涟水县，完颜仲元派提控娄室领兵攻破县城，斩首几百人，打败了祝春，活捉了郭伟，其余的都奔逃而散，于是收复了涟水县。
English: More than a thousand Red Skull bandits occupied Surabaya County, and Yan Zhongyuan sent a detachment to take control of Surabaya and led the troops to break through the county town, behead hundreds of people, defeat Zhu Chun, capture Guo Wei alive, and the rest fled and scattered, thus recovering Surabaya County.

古文：仲元兼单州经略使，娄室迁两阶，升职一等。
现代文：仲元兼任单州经略使，娄室晋升了两个品级，晋升职务一等。
English: Zhongyuan concurrently served as the lone provincial economic envoy, and Gongshu was promoted two grades and promoted to the first grade.

古文：未几，仲元遥授知归德府事。
现代文：不久，仲元被遥授知归德府事。
English: Soon after, Nakamoto was ordered to return to the German capital.

古文：是岁十月，徙军卢氏，改商州经略使，权元帅右都监。
现代文：当年十月，移军至卢氏，改任仲元为商州经略使，代元帅右都监。
English: In October of that year, the army was transferred to the Lu clan, and Nakamoto was reassigned as the Shangzhou Economic Delegate, acting Marshal and Right Supervisor.

古文：诏曰： 商、虢、潼关，实相连属，卿思为万全之计。 
现代文：朝廷下诏说 ：商、虢、潼关，实属相连一体，你要考虑个万全计策。 
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict saying, "Shang, Handan, and Shiguan are actually one and the same, and you must consider a comprehensive strategy."

古文：未几，潼关失守，仲元军趋商、虢，复至嵩、汝，皆弗及。
现代文：不久，潼关失守，仲元军队前往商、虢，又到嵩、汝之间，都未能和敌人交战。
English: Soon, Shaoguan fell into the enemy's hands, and Zhongyuan's troops were unable to engage the enemy when they went to Shang, Shao, Song, and Ru.

古文：仲元上书曰： 去年六月，臣尝请于朝廷，乞选名将督诸军，臣得推锋，身先士卒，粮储不继，竟不果行。
现代文：仲元上书朝廷说： 去年六月，我曾经请求朝廷，推选名将来督促各军，我当先锋，身先士卒，但粮草物资不能按时供应，未能成行。
English: In a letter to the Imperial Court, Nakamoto said, "Last June, I once asked the Imperial Court to select a name to urge the armies in the future. I should be the vanguard, the forerunner, but grain and grass materials could not be supplied on time, and the trip could not be made.

古文：今将坐甲待敌，则师老财殚，日就困弊。 
现代文：如今让军队坐等敌人，则师劳而财尽，越来越困顿不堪。 
English: Nowadays, if you let the army wait for the enemy, it will be exhausted and more and more difficult.

古文：其大概欲伐西夏以张兵势。
现代文：他大概想攻打西夏以张扬军威。
English: He probably wanted to attack Western Xia to expand his military power.

古文：又曰： 陕西一路，最为重地，潼关、禁坑及商州诸隘，俱当预备。
现代文：他又说 ：陕西一路最为重要，潼关、禁坑和商州各关隘都应当有所防备。
English: He also said: Shaanxi is the most important along the way, Shaoguan, the forbidden pit and all the passes in Shangzhou should be prepared.

古文：向者中都，居庸最为要害，乃由小岭、紫荆绕出，我军腹背受兵，卒不能守。
现代文：原来在中都时，居庸关是最要害的地方，敌人从小岭、紫荆绕行出兵，使我军腹背受敌，终于失守。
English: Originally, when we were in the middle of the capital, Juyongguan was the most critical place. The enemy sent troops from Xiaoling and Bauhinia, which made our army suffer from the enemy and finally lost the defense.

古文：近日由禁坑出，遂失潼关。
现代文：近日敌人由禁坑出兵绕行，因而潼关失陷。
English: Recently, the enemy sent troops from the forbidden pit to make a detour, resulting in the fall of Shaoguan.

古文：可选精兵分地戍之。 
现代文：可挑选精兵分别加以防守。 
English: You can select elite soldiers and defend them separately.

古文：其后乃置秦、蓝守御，及用兵西夏矣。
现代文：后来他在秦、蓝设置守卫部队，并且向西夏出兵。
English: Later, he set up guard troops in Qin and Lan, and sent troops to West Xia.

古文：兴定元年，复为单州经略使，败宋人二千于龟山，复败步骑千余于盱眙，败红袄于白里港，获老幼万余人，皆纵遣之。
现代文：兴定元年，仲元又被任命为单州经略使，打败了在龟山的两千名宋兵，又在盱眙击败了宋军步骑兵一千多人，接着在白里港打败了红袄军，俘虏了老幼一万多人，他全都把他们放走了。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Zhongyuan was also appointed as the special envoy of the single-state economy, defeated two thousand Song soldiers in Kameyama, defeated more than one thousand Song infantry and cavalry in Handan, and then defeated the Red Kite Army in Baili Port, and captured more than ten thousand people of all ages. He released them all.

古文：宋人围海州，仲元军高桥，令提控完颜阿邻领骑绕出其后夹击之。宋兵解去。
现代文：宋军围困海州时，仲元军队驻守在高桥，他命令提控完颜阿邻带领骑兵绕到敌军后面夹击，宋军解围而去。
English: When the Song army besieged Haizhou, Zhongyuan's army was stationed in Gaoqiao. He ordered Yan'an to take control and lead the cavalry to attack behind the enemy army. The Song army broke the siege and left.

古文：赐金带，优诏奖谕。
现代文：皇帝赐给金带，并下诏加以嘉奖。
English: The emperor gave him a gold belt and issued a decree to commend him.

古文：红袄贼陷曹马城，剽掠徐、单之间。提控高琬等分兵击之，俘生口二千。
现代文：红袄军攻占了曹马城，在徐、单两州间抢劫掠夺，提控高琬等人领兵出击，俘虏了两千人。
English: The Red Kite army captured Cao Ma City, robbed and plundered between the two states of Xu and Shan, took control of Gao Wei and others to lead the attack, and captured two thousand people.

古文：三年，仲元奏： 州城既固，积粮二十万石，集乡义军万余人，并闲训练，足以守御，乞以所部渡河。 
现代文：兴定三年，仲元上奏说： 目前州城坚固，并积蓄粮食二十万石，聚集了乡间的义军一万多人，又经过了较好的训练，足以防守，请让我部渡河守卫。 
English: In the third year of Xingding, Zhongyuan said in his report: At present, the state capital is strong, and it has accumulated 200,000 koku of grain, gathered more than 10,000 rebels in the countryside, and has undergone good training, enough to defend, please let me cross the river to guard.

古文：诏屯宿州，与右都监纥石烈德同行帅府事。
现代文：朝廷下诏让仲元军屯于宿州，和右都监纥石烈德共同行帅府事。
English: The imperial court decreed that Zhongyuan's army should be stationed in Suzhou, and that he and Shi Lede, the procurator of the right capital, should jointly conduct the affairs of the capital.

古文：仲元有足疾，满百日，诏曰： 卿处置机务，抚存将士，出兵使李辛可也。 
现代文：因为仲元腿部有病，过了百日以后，朝廷下诏说： 卿只须处置机要事务，抚恤将士，出兵时派李辛就行了。 
English: Because Zhongyuan was ill in the leg, after 100 days, the imperial court issued an edict saying: Sir, you only need to deal with urgent matters, such as raising soldiers' pensions and sending Li Xin to the front.

古文：四年，兼保静军节度使，寻为劝农使。
现代文：四年，兼任保静军节度使，不久又改为劝农使。
English: For four years, he also served as the military envoy to the Qing Dynasty, and was soon changed to the agricultural envoy.

古文：五年，为镇南节度使。
现代文：五年，任镇南节度使。
English: For five years, he served as the Zhenan Festival envoy.

古文：元光元年，知凤翔府事。
现代文：元光元年，完颜仲元被任命知凤翔府事。
English: In the first year of the Genko era, Kanen Nakamoto was appointed to the post of Chifeng Xiang.

古文：凤翔被围，左监军石盏合喜来济军。
现代文：凤翔被围困时，左监军石盏合喜领兵救援。
English: When Fengxiang was besieged, the Left Supervisor Army of Shizhen Hexi led the rescue.

古文：仲元让合喜总兵事。
现代文：仲元让石盏合喜总管军事。
English: Nakamoto made Shizuchome Hegi the head of the military.

古文：合喜曰： 公素得众心，不必以官位见让。 
现代文：合喜说： 明公一向深得人心，不必以官位相让。 
English: Hexi said, "Ming Gong has always won the hearts of the people, and there is no need to give up his official position.

古文：仲元请身先士卒，谕诸将士曰： 凡有奇功者，即承制超擢。 
现代文：仲元要求身先士卒，便传谕将士们说： 凡是建立奇功的，立即破格晋升。 
English: Zhongyuan asked the first to step forward, and then told the generals: Anyone who builds up miraculous performance will be promoted immediately.

古文：及危急乃辄注四品以下。
现代文：在形势危急时他可以有权立即委任四品以下官员。
English: In a critical situation, he may have the right to immediately appoint four or fewer officials.

古文：颜盏虾蟆力战功最，辄授通远军节度使。
现代文：颜盏虾虫麻拼力作战，功勋最大，他便任命虾虫麻通远军节度使。
English: Qian Zhan fought hard and achieved the greatest merit. He then appointed Qian Zhan Tong as the commander-in-chief of the army.

古文：围解，奏请擅除拜之罪。
现代文：敌军解围之后，他奏请朝廷处置自己擅自任命官员的罪责。
English: After the enemy's siege was lifted, he petitioned the imperial court to dispose of his criminal responsibility for appointing officials without authorization.

古文：宣宗嘉其功，皆许之。
现代文：金宣宗嘉奖他的功劳，全部按照他的要求任命了那些官员。
English: Kim Xuan Zong praised him for his service and appointed those officials in accordance with his request.

古文：迁元帅右监军，授河北东路洮委必剌猛安，赐金五十两、重币十五端、通犀带，优诏褒谕。
现代文：又改任仲元为元帅右监军，被授予河北东路洮委必剌猛安，赐给黄金五十两、帛十五端、通犀腰带等，优诏嘉奖。
English: He was also reappointed as the marshal of the Right Supervision Army, and was awarded the highest award of the East Hebei Provincial Committee of the Communist Party of China, and was awarded the gold fifty-two, the silver fifty-five, the rhinoceros belt, and other awards.

古文：正大间，为兵部尚书，皇太后卫尉，卒。
现代文：正大年间任兵部尚书、皇太后卫尉，去世。
English: During his time at Zhengda University, he served as the secretary of the military department and the captain of the imperial guards. He passed away.

古文：仲元为将，沈毅有谋，南渡后最称名将云。
现代文：完颜仲元为将，沉着刚毅而有智谋，是南渡之后最为人称道的名将。
English: Guanyan Zhongyuan was a general, calm, courageous and resourceful. He was the most famous general after Nandu.

古文：完颜阿邻，本姓郭氏，以功俱赐姓完颜。
现代文：完颜阿邻本姓郭，因为立功而一同被赐姓为完颜。
English: Kanyan's neighbor, whose real surname was Guo, was given the surname of Kanyan for his meritorious service.

古文：大安中，李雄募兵，阿邻与完颜仲元等俱应募，数有功。
现代文：大安年间，李雄招募兵士，阿邻和完颜仲元等一起应募，多次立功。
English: During the Taian era, Li Xiong recruited soldiers, and A Niang and Kanyan Zhongyuan applied for recruitment together and made meritorious service many times.

古文：宣宗即位，迁通州防御使。
现代文：宣宗即位后，被任命为通州防御使。
English: After Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he was appointed Tongzhou Defense Envoy.

古文：宣宗迁汴，阿邻改同知河间府事兼清州防御使，将所部兵驻清、沧，控扼山东。
现代文：金宣宗迁都汴京时，阿邻改任同知河间府事兼清州防御使，带领部众驻守于清州、沧州，控制山东一带。
English: When Kim Xuan Zong moved the capital to Beijing, Aqiang was assigned to Tongzhihe Prefecture and Qingzhou Defense Force, leading the troops stationed in Qingzhou and Cangzhou to control the Shandong area.

古文：迁横海军节度使，赐以国姓。
现代文：又迁任横海军节度使，赐姓完颜。
English: In addition, he was transferred to the position of the envoy of the Navy Festival, and his surname was changed to Kanen.

古文：阿邻与山东路宣抚副使颜盏天泽不相能，诏阿邻当与天泽共济国事，无执偏见，妄分彼此。
现代文：阿邻和山东路宣抚副使颜盏天泽互不相让，朝廷下诏让阿邻和天泽共同以国事为重，不要固执己见，乱分彼此。
English: A neighbor and Shandong Road Vice-Envoy Qianqian Tianze did not concede to each other, and the imperial court ordered A neighbor and Tianze to jointly focus on national affairs, not to stick to their own opinions and randomly divide each other.

古文：寻改泰定军节度使、山东西路宣抚使。
现代文：不久改任泰定军节度使、山东西路宣抚使。
English: Soon he was reassigned as the Tai Ding Army's military governor, and the Mountain East-West Road's propaganda envoy.

古文：是时，仲元亦积功劳，知济南府，赐姓完颜，与阿邻俱加从宜招抚使，诏书奖谕，且令计约涿州刺史从坦等军恢复中都。
现代文：当时，仲元也累积功劳而出知济南府事，被赐姓完颜氏，他和阿邻都被加封从宜招抚使，朝廷下诏书嘉奖，并且命令他们约集涿州刺史从坦等军收复中都。
English: At that time, Zhongyuan also accumulated merits and was awarded the surname of Guan Yan. He and his neighbors were also awarded the title of Zongyi Zhaofu Envoy, and the Imperial Court issued a certificate of commendation, and ordered them to gather around Zhangzhou Zishi to recover the capital from Tang and other armies.

古文：于是，仲元、阿邻部兵猥多，诏以三等差第之，上等备征伐，中下戍守，懦弱者罢去，量给地以赡其家。
现代文：当时，仲元、阿邻两部兵多而杂，诏令将军队分成三等加以区别，上等以备征战之用，中下等充当守卫任务，老弱者免去，量情给予土地以赡养家口。
English: At that time, there were many soldiers in the two divisions of Zhongyuan and Adjacent, and the imperial edict divided the army into three classes to distinguish them. The upper class was used to prepare for conscription, the middle and lower classes served as guard duties, the old and weak were exempted, and the land was given to support the family.

古文：阿邻所部 黄鹤袖军 驻鱼台者，桀骜不法，掠平民，劫商旅，道路不通，有司乞徙于滕州。
现代文：阿邻的部下 黄鹤袖军 驻屯在鱼台，骄横不守法纪，抢劫平民和过往商人旅客，使道路不能通行，有关方面请求将军队移至滕州。
English: A neighbor's subordinates, the Huang He Sleeve Army, stationed in Yutai, arrogantly disobeyed the law, robbed civilians and passing merchants and travelers, and made the road impassable. The relevant parties requested that the army be moved to Tengzhou.

古文：诏阿邻就处置之。
现代文：下诏让阿邻加以处置。
English: He issued the following edict: "Let the neighbors deal with it."

古文：顷之，破红袄贼郝定于泗水县柘沟村，生擒郝定，送京师斩之。
现代文：不久，在泗水县柘沟村打败了红袄贼军郝定，活捉了郝定，送到京城斩首。
English: Not long after, he defeated the Red Skull's army of bandits in Shuguo Village, Surabaya County, captured Shuding alive, and sent him to the capital to be beheaded.

古文：近制，赐本朝姓者，凡以千人败敌三千者赐及緦麻以上，败二千人以上者赐及大功以上，败千人以上赐止其家。
现代文：当时规定，被赐予国姓的人，凡能以千人打败敌军三千人的，可以封赐给服麻服以上的亲人；打败二千人以上的，封赐到服大功服以上的亲属；打败千人以上的只能封赐本家。
English: At that time, it was stipulated that the person who was given the surname of the country, and who could defeat 3,000 enemy troops with 1,000 people, could be awarded to relatives who had won more than 3,000 people; those who had won more than 2,000 people could be awarded to relatives who had won more than 2,000 people; and those who had won more than 1,000 people could only be awarded to their own family.

古文：阿邻既赐姓，以兄守楫及从父兄弟为请。
现代文：阿邻被赐姓之后，就请求朝廷封赐他的哥哥郭守楫和叔叔伯伯家的兄弟们。
English: After Ah-Nim was given a surname, he asked the court to bestow the title on his brother, Guo Shou-Yi, and the brothers of his uncle's family.

古文：宰臣奏阿邻功止赐一家，宣宗特诏许之。
现代文：宰臣上奏说，阿邻的功劳只能封赐他本家，而金宣宗特诏准许了阿邻的请求。
English: The vice-minister reported that the merit of the neighbor could only be awarded to his own family, and the special edict of Kim Xuan Zong granted the request of the neighbor.

古文：至是仲元上奏曰： 臣顷在军旅，才立微功，遽蒙天恩，赐之国姓，非臣杀身所能仰报。
现代文：于是，完颜仲元也上奏说 ：臣下近时在军队，刚立微功，便蒙皇恩，赐给国姓，这不是微臣以杀身所能仰报皇上的恩德。
English: As a result, Kanyan Nakamoto also made a report saying, "A vassal was in the army recently, and as soon as he made a small contribution, he received the grace of the emperor and was given a national surname. This is not a small vassal who can repay the grace of the emperor by killing himself.

古文：族兄徐州讥察副使僧喜、前汾州酒同监三喜、前解州盐管勾添章、守兴平县监酒添福犹姓郭氏。
现代文：我的族兄徐州讥察副使僧喜、前汾州酒同监三喜、前解州盐管勾添章、守兴平县监酒添福仍姓郭。
English: My elder brother, Xuzhou Zhencha deputy envoy Zeng Xi, former Xuzhou wine inspector Zeng Xi, former Xuzhou salt pipe inspector Zeng Xi, and Xingping County wine inspector Zeng Fu are still surnamed Guo.

古文：念臣与僧喜等昔同一家，今为两族，完颜阿邻与臣同功，皇恩所加并及本族，僧喜等四人乞依此例。 
现代文：念微臣和僧喜等人过去同是一家，如今成为两族，完颜阿邻和微臣同样的功勋，皇恩所加已及其本族，僧喜等四人也请依照此例。 
English: In memory of the fact that the Weizhong minister and the Monk Xi and others used to be in the same family, and now they have become two families, and have accomplished the same merits as the Weizhong minister and the neighbor, and the four people such as the Monk Xi and others have been added by the imperial grace, please follow this example.

古文：不许。
现代文：朝廷不允许。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：改辉州经略使。
现代文：阿邻又改任辉州经略使。
English: A neighbor was also reappointed as the Vice-Minister of Economy of Huizhou.

古文：阿邻有众万五千，诏分五千隶东平行省，其众泣诉云： 我曹以国家多难，奋义相从，捐田宅，离亲戚，转战至此，誓同立功，偕还乡里。
现代文：阿邻有军队一万五千人，朝廷下诏让分出五千隶属于东平行省。他的部众哭着说 ：我们因为国家多难，举起义旗跟从您，捐弃田宅，离开亲人，转战至此，誓同立功，同回乡里。
English: A neighbor had an army of fifteen thousand men, and the imperial court decreed that five thousand should be allocated to the East Parallel Province. His followers cried and said: Because of the difficulties of the country, we raised the banner of righteousness to follow you, gave up our farmhouses, left our relatives, went to war here, swore to do our best, and returned to the countryside together.

古文：今将分配他军，心实艰苦。
现代文：而今将被分到其他军队，心中实在难受。
English: Now he will be assigned to another army, and he feels really bad about it.

古文：乞以全军分驻怀、卫、辉州之间，捍蔽大河，惟受阿邻节制。 
现代文：请将全军分别驻守到怀、卫、辉州之间，守卫大河，只受阿邻管辖。 
English: Please station the whole army to Huai, Wei and Huizhou respectively, guard the great river, and only be subject to the jurisdiction of the neighbors.

古文：阿邻亦不欲分之，因以为请。
现代文：阿邻也不愿将军队分出去，便以此为由向朝廷请求。
English: A neighbor also did not want to send troops, so he appealed to the imperial court on this basis.

古文：宰臣奏： 若遂听之，非唯东平失备，他将仿效，皆不可使矣。 
现代文：宰臣上奏说： 如果因此听从的话，不仅东平失去防备力量，其他将领也会仿效，这样就难以指挥调动了。 
English: Zaisenjo said, "If you obey because of this, not only will Dongping lose its defensive power, but other generals will follow suit, and it will be difficult to command and mobilize."

古文：宣宗以为然。
现代文：金宣宗认为有道理。
English: Kim Seongjong thinks it makes sense.

古文：加遥授知河南府事，应援陕西。
现代文：于是加遥授阿邻为知河南府事，领兵援救陕西。
English: As a result, Qia Yao instructed his neighbor Wei Zhi to take charge of the affairs of Henan Province and lead the troops to rescue Shaanxi.

古文：阿邻将兵八千，西赴至潼关，闻京兆已被围，游骑至华州，陕西行院欲令阿邻驻军商、虢，拒东向之路。
现代文：阿邻带领八千军队，西驰到潼关，听说京兆已经被包围，游骑到达华州，陕西行院准备让阿邻把军队驻扎在商、虢之间，以扼守东面的道路。
English: A neighbor led eight thousand troops, drove west to Shaoguan, heard that Beijing and Shandong had been encircled, rode to Huazhou, and the Shaanxi Provincial People's Government prepared for A neighbor to station troops between Shang and Zhou to guard the road to the east.

古文：阿邻上奏： 臣本援陕西，遇难而止，岂人臣之节？
现代文：阿邻上奏朝廷说 ：我本领兵救援陕西，遇到有难而停留，这岂是人臣的礼节？
English: A neighbor appealed to the imperial court and said: I led the troops to rescue Shaanxi, and when I encountered difficulties, I stopped. Is this the etiquette of a vassal?

古文：夫自古用兵，步骑相参，乃可以得志。
现代文：自古用兵，步、骑兵参合使用，才能够取胜。
English: Since ancient times, soldiers, infantry and cavalry have been used together to win.

古文：今乃各有所属，临难不救，互分彼此。
现代文：如今军队各有统属，遇难不能相互救援，而是互相区别彼此所属。
English: Today, the military forces are subordinate to each other, and they cannot rescue each other in distress, but they can distinguish each other's affiliation.

古文：今臣所统皆步卒，愿赐马军千人，则京兆之围不足解矣。 
现代文：如今臣下所统率的都是步兵，希望赐给骑兵一千人，这样，京兆之围也就不愁解了。 
English: Now, the vassals are all infantry, and I hope to give the cavalry a thousand men, so that the siege of Beijing will not be a problem.

古文：宣宗谓皇太子曰： 阿邻赴难不回，固善矣。
现代文：金宣宗对皇太子说 ：阿邻赴难而不回兵，固然是好事。
English: Kim Sunjong said to the crown prince, "It is certainly a good thing for a neighbor to go into battle and not return."

古文：而军势单弱，且驻内地以观事变，并以虢州兵五千付之，使乘隙而进，卿以此意谕之也。 
现代文：但他军力单薄弱小，况且驻守内地以观察事态变化，可同时将虢州守军五千交给他，让他乘隙进击，你可以将这个意图告诉他。 
English: However, his military strength is weak and small, and moreover, he is stationed in the inland to observe changes in the state of affairs. At the same time, he can hand over the five thousand defense troops of Zhangzhou to him, and let him use the gap to attack. You can tell him this intention.

古文：兴定元年，迁元帅右都监，出秦州伐宋。宋统制吴筠守皂角堡，城三重，据山之巅。
现代文：兴定元年，升任元帅右都监。他出兵秦州攻打宋军，宋军统制吴筠据守皂角堡，修筑了三重城墙，占领山顶。
English: In the first year of Xingding, he was promoted to the position of marshal and procurator of the right capital. He sent troops to Qinzhou to attack the Song army, and the Song army under the command of Wu Gan defended Soap Cape Fort, built a triple city wall, and occupied the top of the mountain.

古文：阿邻分兵绝其汲路，克其外城，再克其次城。
现代文：阿邻分兵断绝了城里汲水必经之路，攻克外城，又攻克次城。
English: A neighborhood detachment of soldiers cut off the only way to draw water in the city, conquered the outer city, and conquered the second city.

古文：宋兵纵火而出，阿邻以骑兵邀之，遣步卒袭其后，宋兵败，生获吴筠及将校二百人，马数百匹，粮万石及兵甲衣袄。
现代文：宋兵放火突围，阿邻以骑兵拦击，又派步兵袭击敌人的后部，宋兵大败，活捉了吴筠和将校二百人，马几百匹，粮食一万石以及兵甲、衣袄等。
English: The Song soldiers set fire to break out of the encirclement, and the neighbors stopped them with cavalry, and sent infantry to attack the rear of the enemy. The Song soldiers were defeated, and they captured two hundred people, several hundred horses, ten thousand kilos of grain, as well as armor and clothing, and so on.

古文：五年正月，召至京师，疾病不能入见，力疾草奏，大略以南北皆用兵，当豫防其患，及防河数策。无何，卒，年四十五。
现代文：被追赠为金紫光禄大夫、西京留守。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Dr. Jin Zi Guanglu and stayed in West Beijing.

古文：敕有司给丧事。完颜阿里不孙，字彦成，曷懒路泰申必剌猛安人。
现代文：完颜阿里不孙，字彦成，是曷懒路泰申必刺猛安人。
English: After all, Yan Ali is not a grandson, and the character of Yan Cheng is a lazy person.

古文：明昌五年进士，调易州、忻州军事判官、安丰县令。
现代文：明昌五年考中进士，调任易州、忻州军事判官，安丰县县令。
English: He was promoted to the middle school of the Mingchang five-year examination, transferred to the military judge of Yizhou and Zhangzhou, and became the county magistrate of Anfeng County.

古文：补尚书省令史，除兴平军节度副使，应奉翰林文字，转修撰，充元帅左监军纥石烈执中经历官。
现代文：又补任尚书省令史，授兴平军节度副使，应奉翰林文字，又转任修撰，充任元帅左监军纥石烈执中的经历官。
English: In addition, he was appointed as the Vice-Minister of Song and Literature, the Vice-Minister of Festivals of the Xingping Army, and the Vice-Minister of Literature of the Hanlin Army. In addition, he was transferred to the post of revising and editing, and served as the experience officer of the Marshal of the Left Supervision Army, Zou Shi Rong.

古文：执中围楚州，纵兵大掠，坐不谏正，决杖五十。
现代文：纥石烈执中包围楚州时，放纵军队大肆掳掠，完颜阿里不孙因没有加以劝谏和纠正而坐罪，被打了五十杖。
English: During the siege of Chuzhou in the middle of the Warring States period, he indulged the army in large-scale looting and plundering. As a result, Ali Fusun was found guilty of failing to persuade and correct, and was beaten with fifty canes.

古文：大安初，改户部员外郎、钧州刺史。
现代文：大安初年，改任户部员外郎、钧州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, he was reappointed as a member of the household department, and became the son of Wairo and Shishu Sashi.

古文：执中行枢密院于西京，复以为经历官。
现代文：纥石烈执中在西京行枢密院事，又任命他为经历官。
English: In the middle of Zou Shi's reign, he was appointed to the Privy Council in Xijing, and he was also appointed as a probation officer.

古文：改威州刺史。
现代文：改任威州刺史。
English: He was appointed as Wizhou chief historian.

古文：贞祐初，累迁国子祭酒，历越王、濮王傅，改同知平阳府事，兼本路宣抚副使。
现代文：贞祐初年，累迁至国子祭酒，历任越王、濮王师傅，改任同知平阳府事，兼本路宣抚副使。
English: In the first year of Zhenyu, he was successively moved to Kuniko Matsuri Sake, successively served as a master of Yue Wang and Shao Wang, and was reassigned as a Tongzhi Pingyang prefectural official, as well as a vice-envoy of this road.

古文：召为兵部侍郎，迁翰林侍讲学士。
现代文：又召回任兵部侍郎，改迁翰林侍讲学士。
English: He was also called back to the post of Hyobu waiter and transferred to the post of Hanlin waiter and lecturer.

古文：改陕西路宣抚副使，迁元帅左都监。
现代文：改陕西路宣抚副使，迁为元帅左都监。
English: He was promoted to vice-envoy of the Western Shaanxi Road, and transferred to the position of marshal and left-wing inspector.

古文：改河平军节度使、河北西路宣抚副使。
现代文：改河平军节度使、河北西路宣抚副使。
English: He was the deputy envoy of the Qing Heping Army and the deputy envoy of the Western Xilu of Hebei Province.

古文：改御史中丞、辽东宣抚副使。
现代文：改御史中丞、辽东宣抚副使。
English: He was promoted to vice-commander of history and vice-envoy to Liaodong.

古文：再阅月，权右副元帅、参知政事、辽东路行尚书省事，赐御衣、厩马、安山甲。
现代文：又过了一个月，任代理右副元帅、参知政事、辽东路行尚书省事，赏赐给他御衣、皇厩中的御马、安山盔甲。
English: A month later, he was appointed acting right vice-marshal, councillor of state affairs, Liaodong Road, and rewarded with the imperial robe, the imperial horse in the imperial stable, and the Ansan armor.

古文：上京行省蒲察五斤奏其功，赐金百两、绢百匹。
现代文：上京行省蒲察五斤上奏朝廷为他请功，又赏赐给黄金百两、绢百匹。
English: When he went to Beijing, he petitioned the imperial court for a reward of five jin of puja, and was rewarded with one hundred taels of gold and one hundred yakitori.

古文：兴定元年，真拜参知政事，权右副元帅，行尚书省、元帅府于婆速路，承制除拜刺史以下。不协。
现代文：兴定元年，真拜参知政事，代理右副元帅，在婆速路行尚书省、设元帅府，承制可以任命刺史以下官员，但未能协调。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Zhenbei was appointed to the post of political adviser to the governor, acting as the right deputy marshal, and the marshal's office was set up in Baotou Shangshuo Province. Under the system, officials below the rank of secretary could be appointed, but it was not possible to coordinate.

古文：是时，蒲鲜万奴据辽东，侵掠婆速之境，高丽畏其强，助粮八万石。
现代文：当时，蒲鲜万奴占据辽东，入侵和抢掠婆速路地区，高丽人都害怕他兵力强盛，资助给他八万石粮食。
English: At that time, Pu Xianbannu occupied Liaodong, invaded and plundered the Ba Ba Expressway area, and the Korean people were afraid of his strong military strength, and funded him with eighty thousand koku of grain.

古文：上京行省蒲察五斤入朝，辽东兵势愈弱，五斤留江山守肇州，江山亦颇怀去就。
现代文：上京行省的蒲察五斤被召入朝之后，辽东的兵力更加薄弱，蒲察五斤留下江山防守肇州，江山对于自己何去何从，举棋不定。
English: After Putsa Wujin of Shangjing Xing Province was called into the North, the military strength of Liaodong was even weaker. Putsa Wujin left the country to defend Zhaozhou. The country was uncertain about where to go.

古文：及上京宣抚使蒲察移刺都改陕西行省参议官，而伯德胡土遂有异志。
现代文：当上京的宣抚使蒲察移剌都改任陕西行省的参议官之后，伯德胡土便产生了异心。
English: When the imperial envoy to Beijing had Pucha transferred to the capital of Shaanxi as a senator of the province, Baode Hutu became disgruntled.

古文：宣抚使海奴不迎制使，坐而受诏，阿里不孙械系之。
现代文：宣抚使海奴不迎奉朝廷传旨的使者，坐在那里接受诏书，阿里不孙将他关押起来。
English: The emperor's messenger, who had been sent by the imperial court, was not welcomed by the emperor, and he sat there to receive the imperial edict. Ali's grandson had him arrested.

古文：顷之，阿里不孙辄矫制大赦诸道，众乃稍安，而请罪于朝。
现代文：不久，阿里不孙又假传朝廷诏书大赦诸道，众人这才稍稍安定下来，阿里不孙便回朝廷请罪。
English: Soon after, Ali Fusun also falsely spread the rumor that the imperial edict had granted amnesty to all sects. Only then did everyone settle down a bit, and Ali Fusun returned to the imperial court to plead guilty.

古文：初，留哥据广宁，知广宁府事温迪罕青狗居盖州，妻子留广宁，与伯德胡土约为兄弟。
现代文：起先，留哥据守广宁，知广宁府事温迪罕青狗住在盖州，妻儿留在广宁。他和伯德胡土是结盟的兄弟。
English: At first, Liu Ge stayed in Guangning, knowing that the Guangning prefectural government, Wendy Han, the young dog lived in Gezhou, and his wife and children stayed in Guangning. He and Baode Hutu were allied brothers.

古文：青狗兵隶阿里不孙，内猜忌不协，蒲察移剌都尝奏青狗无隶阿里不孙。
现代文：温迪罕青狗的军队归阿里不孙管辖，但青狗内怀猜忌之心，不情愿听从指挥，蒲察移剌都曾经上奏朝廷，让青狗的军队不归属阿里不孙管辖。
English: The army of the Wendi Khan's young dogs was under the jurisdiction of Ali Fusun, but the young dogs harbored suspicions and were unwilling to obey the command. Puchazhizhidu once appealed to the court, so that the army of the young dogs did not belong to the jurisdiction of Ali Fusun.

古文：宣宗乃召青狗，青狗不受诏，阿里不孙杀之。
现代文：金宣宗便宣召青狗入京，青狗不肯听从。阿里不孙杀了温迪罕青狗。
English: Jin Xuan Zong then called on the Qinggu to enter Beijing, but the Qinggu refused to listen. Ali Fusong killed the Wendi Han Qinggu.

古文：胡土乃怨阿里不孙。
现代文：伯德胡土因此怨恨阿里不孙。
English: As a result, the people of Baode Hutu resented Ali for not having a grandson.

古文：既而胡土率众伐高丽，乃以兵戕杀阿里不孙。
现代文：不久，伯德胡土讨伐高丽，便用军队杀害了阿里不孙。
English: Soon after, Baode Hutu fought against Goryeo and killed Ali Fusun with his army.

古文：权左都监纳坦裕与监军温迪罕哥不霭、遥授东平判官参议军事郭澍谋诛胡土，未敢发，会上京留守蒲察五斤遣副留守夹谷爱答、左右司员外郎抹捻独鲁诣裕计事。
现代文：代理左都监纳坦裕和监军温迪罕歌不霭、遥授东平判官参议军事郭澍谋划杀掉伯德胡土，但还不敢实行。正值上京留守蒲察五斤派遣副留守夹谷爱答、左右司员外郎抹睰独鲁到纳坦裕这里商议事情。
English: Acting Left-Capital Supervisor Natanyu Tan'yu and Supervisor of the Army Wendy Han'gu, and Dongping Judge-Councillor-Military Guo Jian, who had been appointed to the position, plotted to kill Baode Hutu, but they did not dare to carry it out. At the time of leaving for Beijing, Putsa Wujin sent Deputy Left-Capital Supervisor Jigoku Aida, and Left-Right Supervisor Wai Lang and Maggot Toru to discuss the matter here in Natanyu.

古文：裕以谋告二人，二人许诺，遂召胡土至帐中杀之。
现代文：纳坦裕便将他们的计谋告诉了这两人，两人表示赞同。于是，召来伯德胡土，在帐中将他杀了。
English: Natanyu then told the two of them about their plan, and they agreed. So, he summoned Bodhidharma and killed him in the middle of an argument.

古文：阿里不孙已死，朝廷始得矫赦奏疏，诏有司奖谕。
现代文：阿里不孙死去后，朝廷才收到他写的有关矫诏大赦的请罪奏疏，并下令有关部门给予嘉奖。
English: It was only after the death of Ali Fusun that the imperial court received his petition for amnesty and ordered the relevant departments to give awards.

古文：未几，闻阿里不孙死于乱，诏赠平章政事、芮国公。
现代文：不久，听到了阿里不孙死于内乱的消息，便下诏追赠他为平章政事、芮国公。
English: Soon after, when he heard the news that Ali Fusun had died in the civil war, he posthumously awarded him the title of Pingzhang Zhengji (平章政事) and Gongguo (国公).

古文：纳合裕真授左都监，哥不霭进一阶，爱答、独鲁、郭澍迁官升职有差。
现代文：纳坦裕授为左都监，哥不霭晋升一品阶，爱答、独鲁、郭澍都升官提职不等。
English: Natan Yu was promoted to the position of Left Metropolitan Supervisor, while Brother Bo was promoted to the first grade, and Ai Du, Du Lu, and Guo Wei were promoted to various positions.

古文：阿里不孙宽厚爱人，敏于吏事，能治剧要，识者以为用之未尽云。
现代文：阿里不孙待人宽厚仁爱，办理政务敏捷，能够处置重大问题，认识他的人都认为尚未能尽用其才。
English: Ali Fusun treated people with generosity and benevolence, handled government affairs quickly, and was able to deal with major problems. People who knew him believed that he had not been able to make full use of his talent.

