古文：◎宪宗一
现代文：宪宗一
English: Kenzō I

古文：宪宗继天凝道诚明仁敬崇文肃武宏德圣孝纯皇帝，讳见深，英宗长子也。
现代文：宪宗继天凝道诚明仁敬崇文肃武宏德圣孝纯皇帝，叫朱见深，英宗长子。
English: Emperor Xu Mingshen, the eldest son of Emperor Yingzong, was named after Emperor Xian Zong, who followed the principles of heaven and earth, sincerity and benevolence, and reverence for the emperor.

古文：母贵妃周氏。
现代文：母贵妃周氏。
English: His mother was Guifei Zhou.

古文：初名见浚。
现代文：宪宗最初名叫朱见浚。
English: Kenzong's original name was Zhu Mijun.

古文：英宗留瓦剌，皇太后命立为皇太子。
现代文：英宗被扣留于瓦剌，皇太后令立他为皇太子。
English: Yingzong was detained in Wuhan, and the Empress Dowager made him crown prince.

古文：景泰三年，废为沂王。
现代文：景泰三年，废为沂王。
English: After three years of Jing Tai, he was dethroned as the King of Gongs.

古文：天顺元年，复立为皇太子，改名见深。
现代文：天顺元年，复立为皇太子，改名朱见深。
English: In the first year of Tianshun, he was reinstated as crown prince and changed his name to Zhu Mingshen.

古文：天顺八年正月，英宗崩。
现代文：天顺八年正月，英宗死。
English: In the first month of the eighth year of Tianshun, Yingzong died.

古文：乙亥，即皇帝位。
现代文：二十二日，即皇帝位。
English: On the 22nd, he became emperor.

古文：以明年为成化元年，大赦天下。
现代文：以第二年为成化元年，大加赦免。
English: With the second year as the first year of Chenghua, he was greatly pardoned.

古文：免明年田租三之一。
现代文：免次年田租三分之一。
English: A third of the next year's field rent will be waived.

古文：浙江、江西、福建、陕西、临清镇守内外官，诸边镇守内官，正统间所无者悉罢之。
现代文：浙江、江西、福建、陕西、临清镇守内外官，各边镇守内官，正统年间没有的一律全部罢除。
English: In Zhejiang, Jiangxi, Fujian, Shaanxi, and Linqing, the town guards and officials at home and abroad, and the town guards and officials at home and abroad, all of which did not exist during the orthodox years, were all dismissed.

古文：下番使者、缉事官校皆召还。
现代文：下番使者、给事官校全部召回京师。
English: The next messenger, the official school in charge of the matter, called all the teachers back to Beijing.

古文：二月庚子，始以内批授官。
现代文：二月十七日，开始大批授与亲信官职。
English: On February 17th, a large number of close confidants began to be awarded official positions.

古文：三月甲寅朔，尊皇后为慈懿皇太后，贵妃周氏为皇太后。
现代文：三月初一日，尊皇后为慈懿皇太后，贵妃周氏为皇太后。
English: On the first day of March, His Majesty the Empress was crowned Empress Dowager Cixi, and Her Royal Highness Princess Zhou was crowned Empress Dowager.

古文：戊午，放宫人。
现代文：五日，释放宫人。
English: On the fifth day, Miyato was released.

古文：丙寅，毁锦衣卫新狱。
现代文：十三日，捣毁锦衣卫新设监狱。
English: On the 13th, the newly-built prison of JinRuiWei was demolished.

古文：庚午，赐彭教等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十七日，赏赐彭教等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On the 17th, awards were given to young scholars such as Peng Jiao, with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：癸酉，诏内阁九卿考核天下方面官。
现代文：二十日，诏内阁九卿考核天下各方面官吏。
English: On the 20th, the nine ministers of the imperial edict cabinet evaluated the world's best officials in all aspects.

古文：戊寅，复立团营。
现代文：二十五日，又设团营。
English: On the 25th, another camp was set up.

古文：夏四月癸未朔，日当食，不见。
现代文：四月初一日，应当出现日食，但没出现。
English: On the first day of April, a solar eclipse should have occurred, but did not.

古文：五月丁巳，大风雨雹，敕群臣修省。
现代文：五月五日，刮大风下大雨降大冰雹。命群臣修身反省。
English: On May 5th, a strong wind, heavy rain, and large hailstones fell.

古文：庚申，葬睿皇帝于裕陵。
现代文：八日，葬睿皇帝于裕陵。
English: On the 8th, Emperor Rui was buried in Yuling.

古文：秋七月壬申，立吴氏为皇后。
现代文：七月二十一日，立吴氏为皇后。
English: On July 21st, Wu was proclaimed empress.

古文：八月癸未，御经筵。
现代文：八月二日，听群臣讲经论史。
English: On August 2nd, he listened to a group of ministers give a lecture on scripture and history.

古文：甲申，命儒臣日讲。
现代文：三日，命儒臣白天讲授。
English: On the third day, Zhu Xi gave a lecture during the day.

古文：癸卯，废皇后吴氏。下太监牛玉于狱。
现代文：二十二日，废皇后吴氏，下太监牛玉于狱。
English: On the 22nd, the deposed Empress Wu and the lower eunuch Niu Yu went to prison.

古文：冬十月壬辰，立王氏为皇后。
现代文：十月十二日，立王氏为皇后。
English: On October 12th, she was crowned empress.

古文：甲辰，立武举法。
现代文：二十四日，定武备选举之法。
English: On the 24th, the law to prepare for the election was passed.

古文：十二月甲辰，免京官杂犯罪。
现代文：十二月二十五日，减免京师官员杂犯罪行。
English: On December 25th, the reduction and exemption of Beijing division officials for miscellaneous crimes came into effect.

古文：是年，两畿、川、广、荆、襄盗贼大起。道路不通。
现代文：这年，两畿、川、广、荆、襄盗贼大起，道路被阻塞。
English: In this year, thieves in the two provinces of Gyeonggi, Gyeonggi, Gwangju, Gyeonggi, and Gyeongju rose up, and the roads were blocked.

古文：安南、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：安南、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: Annan, Us hid in the North to pay tribute.

古文：成化元年春正月乙卯，享太庙。
现代文：成化元年正月初七日，祭祀太庙。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the first month of the first year of Chenghua, the rituals of the Great Temple resumed.

古文：己未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 12th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：甲子，都督同知赵辅为征夷将军，充总兵官，佥都御史韩雍赞理军务，讨广西叛瑶。
现代文：十六日，都督同知赵辅为征夷将军，充任总兵官，佥都御史韩雍参与治理军务，征讨广西叛乱瑶民。
English: On the 16th, the governor of the capital, Tongzhi Zhao Fu, was appointed as the general of the army to subjugate the barbarians. He was also appointed as the commander-in-chief of the army. The governor of the capital, Han Yong, participated in the management of military affairs and the subjugation of the rebellious people of Guangxi.

古文：二月戊子，祭社稷。
现代文：二月十三日，祭祀社稷。
English: On February 13th, the ritual ended.

古文：甲午，耕耤田。
现代文：十七日，耕种謖田。
English: On the seventeenth day, the ploughing of the alfalfa field began.

古文：三月庚戌，四川山都掌蛮乱。
现代文：三月三日，四川山都掌蛮叛乱。
English: On March 3rd, the mountains of Sichuan were in the grip of a violent rebellion.

古文：丁巳，释奠于先师孔子。
现代文：十日，隆重祭奠先师孔子。
English: On the 10th, a grand ceremony was held to pay tribute to Confucius.

古文：夏五月辛酉，大雨雹。
现代文：五月十五日，下大雨、冰雹。
English: On May 15, heavy rain and hail fell.

古文：壬戌，避正殿减膳，敕群臣修省。
现代文：十六日，避开正殿减少饭食，命群臣修身反省。
English: On the 16th, he avoided the main hall, reduced his meals, and ordered his retainers to practice self-criticism.

古文：秋七月己酉，免天下军卫屯粮十之三。
现代文：七月四日，免天下军卫屯田粮食十分之三。
English: On July 4th, three-tenths of the grain in the military garrison was exempted.

古文：甲子，振两畿、浙江、河南饥。
现代文：十九日，赈救两畿、浙江、河南饥荒。
English: On the 19th, the famine in the two Kis, Zhejiang and Henan provinces was averted.

古文：八月丁丑，工部侍郎沈义、佥都御史吴琛振抚两畿饥民。
现代文：八月二日，工部侍郎沈义、佥都御史吴琛赈救安抚两畿饥民。
English: On August 2, Shen Yi, a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, and Wu Xi, the governor of the capital, came to the aid of the starving people of the two Kis.

古文：辛巳，瘗暴骸。
现代文：六日，掩埋外露尸骨。
English: On the sixth day, they buried the exposed bones.

古文：庚寅，毛里孩犯延绥，总兵官房能败之。
现代文：十五日，毛里孩侵犯延绥，总兵官房能击败。
English: On the 15th, the Maoris invaded Yancheng, and the General Staff Office was able to defeat them.

古文：冬十二月癸卯，抚宁伯朱永为靖虏将军，充总兵官，太监唐慎监军，工部尚书白圭提督军务，讨荆、襄贼。
现代文：十二月三十日，抚宁伯朱永为靖虏将军，出任总兵官，太监唐慎监督军队，工部尚书白圭领导军务，征讨荆、襄盗贼。
English: On December 30th, Zhu Yong, the Funing general, became the general of Jingrui and served as the chief military officer. Tang Shen, the eunuch, supervised the army. Shang Shuxu Bai Gui, the head of the Ministry of Industry, led the military affairs, and collected money from thieves.

古文：是月，韩雍大破大藤峡瑶，改名峡曰 断藤 。
现代文：当月，韩雍大败大藤峡瑶民。改大藤峡叫 断藤峡 。
English: In the same month, Han Yong defeated Dafuji Gorge and defeated the people. Dafuji Gorge was renamed "Broken Dafuji Gorge."

古文：是年，琉球、哈密、爪哇、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、哈密、爪哇、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Hami, Java, and Ushiku paid tribute to the court.

古文：二年春正月戊申，罢团营。
现代文：成化二年正月五日，罢免团营。
English: On the 5th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Chenghua, the camp was dismissed.

古文：乙卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十二日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the twelfth day, a grand festival of ghosts and gods was held in the southern suburbs.

古文：辛酉，英宗神主祔太庙。
现代文：十八日，英宗神牌附祭于太庙。
English: On the 18th, the Yingzong Shengpai Festival was held in the Grand Temple.

古文：二月癸未，礼部侍郎邹干巡视畿内饥民。
现代文：二月十一日，礼部侍郎邹干巡视畿内饥民。
English: On February 11th, Reibu waiter Shokan went on a tour of the starving people in the Kinai region.

古文：三月甲辰，赐罗伦等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赐罗伦等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3rd, Ji Loren and other new recruits had different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：己酉，李贤父卒，乞终制，不许。
现代文：八日，李贤之父死，请求离辞服满丧期，不许。
English: On the eighth day, Li Xian's father died, and he asked to resign after the period of mourning was over, but was not allowed.

古文：乙卯，朱永大破荆、襄贼刘通于南漳。闰月癸，振南畿饥。
现代文：十四日，朱永在南漳大破荆襄贼刘通。闰三月二日，赈救南畿饥荒。
English: On the 14th, Zhu Yong defeated the thief Liu Tong in Nanki. On the 2nd of March, Zhu Yong saved the famine in Nanki.

古文：乙未，朱永击擒刘通，其党石龙遁，转掠四川。
现代文：二十四日，朱永擒获刘通，其党徒石龙逃跑，转而攻掠四川。
English: On the 24th, Zhu Yongkang captured Liu Tong, and his followers Shilong fled to attack and plunder Sichuan.

古文：夏五月癸酉，修撰罗伦以论李贤起复谪福建市舶司提举。
现代文：五月三日，修撰罗伦因谈论不让李贤辞官守孝被贬官为福建市舶司提举。
English: On May 3rd, Shoshen Loreng was promoted to the post of Fujian Shipping Secretary for talking about not letting Li Xian dictate to the official, Shou Xiao.

古文：己卯，禁侵损古帝王、忠臣、烈士、名贤陵墓。
现代文：九日，禁止侵占古帝王、忠臣、烈士、名贤陵墓。
English: On the 9th, it was forbidden to occupy the mausoleums of ancient emperors, loyal subjects, martyrs and great sages.

古文：六月甲辰，赵辅师还。
现代文：六月五日，赵辅回师。
English: On June 5, Zhao Fu returned to his division.

古文：乙巳，免今年天下屯粮十之三。
现代文：六日，免当年天下屯田粮食十分之三。
English: On the 6th, three-tenths of that year's tonden grain was exempted.

古文：壬子，杨信为平虏将军，充总兵官，太监裴当监督军务，御寇延绥。
现代文：十三日，杨信任平虏将军，充任总兵官，太监裴当监督军务，在延绥抵御来犯之敌。
English: On the 13th, Yang trusted General Pingrui and served as the chief military officer. Eunuch Pei oversaw military affairs and resisted the invading enemy in Yancheng.

古文：秋七月辛巳，封弟见治为忻王，见沛徽王。
现代文：七月十二日，封其弟朱见治为沂王，朱见沛为徽王。
English: On July 12th, Zhu Mianji, his younger brother, was named the king of Shao, and Zhu Mianpei was named the king of Hui.

古文：戊戌，毛里孩犯固原。
现代文：二十九日，毛里孩侵犯固原。
English: On the 29th, Mao children invaded Guhara.

古文：八月丁巳，犯宁夏，都指挥焦政战死。
现代文：八月十八日，侵犯宁夏，都指挥焦政战死。
English: On August 18, after invading Ningxia, Du commanded Jiao Zheng and died in battle.

古文：丁卯，谕祭于谦，复其子冕官。
现代文：二十八日，告谕准许祭祀于谦，复于谦之子于冕官职。
English: On the 28th, a proclamation was issued authorizing the offering of sacrifices to Qian, and reinstating Qian's son to his official position.

古文：冬十月丁未，朱永击擒石龙，贼平，进永爵为侯。
现代文：十月九日，朱永击败荆襄贼，擒获石龙，荆、襄贼始平，进升朱永爵位为侯。
English: On October 9, Zhu Yong defeated Jing Xiangcai, captured Shilong, Jing and Xiangcai began to level, and promoted Zhu Yong to the title of marquis.

古文：十二月甲寅，李贤卒。
现代文：十二月十七日，李贤死。
English: On December 17, Li Xian passed away.

古文：丙辰，太常寺少卿兼翰林院侍读学士刘定之入阁预机务。
现代文：十九日，太常寺少卿兼翰林院侍读学士刘定之入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On the 19th, Liu Ding, the Junior Secretary of Taizhong Temple and an attendant bachelor of Hanlin Academy, came to Wenyuan Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：是月，断藤峡贼复起。
现代文：本月，断藤峡瑶贼又起。
English: This month, the rattlesnakes in the Fengtou Gorge have started up again.

古文：是年，哈密、琉球、安南、乌斯藏、瓦剌入贡。
现代文：当年，哈密、琉球、安南、乌斯藏、瓦剌入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Hami, Ryukyu, Annan, Ussuri, and Waha paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：三年春正月己卯，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化三年正月十二日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the third year of Chenghua, the grand festival in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：丙申，抚宁侯朱永为平胡将军，充总兵官，会杨信讨毛里孩。
现代文：二十九日，抚宁侯朱永为平湖将军，充任总兵官，会同杨信征讨毛里孩。
English: On the 29th, Zhu Yong, the lord of Fuxing, became the general of Pinghu and served as the chief military officer. Together with Yang Xinyu, he enlisted young men.

古文：二月丁酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：二月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of February, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：丁巳，湖广总兵官李震讨破靖州苗。
现代文：二十一日，湖广总兵官李震攻破靖州苗民。
English: On the twenty-first day, the commander-in-chief of Hukang, Li Zhen, defeated the Miao people of Jingzhou.

古文：三月戊辰，召商辂为兵部侍郎，复入阁。
现代文：三月三日，召商辂为兵部侍郎，恢复其进入文渊阁。
English: On March 3rd, Shangguan was summoned as the attendant of the military department, and his entry into the Wenyu Pavilion was restored.

古文：己巳，毛里孩犯大同。
现代文：四日，毛里孩侵犯大同。
English: On the fourth day, a group of children invaded Datong.

古文：辛巳，复开浙江、福建、四川、云南银场，以内臣领之。
现代文：十六日，又开浙江、福建、四川、云南银场。用内臣管领。
English: On the 16th, the silver fields of Zhejiang, Fujian, Sichuan and Yunnan were opened again, with Neichen in charge.

古文：夏四月，四川地屡震，自去年六月至于是月。
现代文：四月，四川多次发生地震。从去年六月直到今年四月。
English: In April, Sichuan was hit by multiple earthquakes, from last June until this April.

古文：乙巳，录囚。
现代文：十日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 10th, the prisoners were examined.

古文：癸丑，复立团营。
现代文：十八日，再设团营。
English: On the 18th, the camp was set up again.

古文：六月戊申，雷震南京午门，敕群臣修省。
现代文：六月十五日，雷电震动南京午门，命群臣修身反省。
English: On June 15th, the thunder and lightning shook the afternoon gate of Nanjing, causing the ministers to reflect on their lives.

古文：辛酉，襄城伯李瑾为征夷将军，充总兵官，兵部尚书程信提督军务，太监刘恒监军，讨山都掌蛮。
现代文：二十八日，襄城伯李瑾为征夷将军，充任总兵官，兵部尚书程信提督军务，太监刘恒监领军队，征讨山都掌蛮。
English: On the 28th, Xiangcheng's uncle Li Xi became the general of the expeditionary force, and was appointed as the chief military officer. The military department was still under the command of Admiral Cheng Xin, and the eunuch Liu Heng supervised and led the army. He was in charge of the expeditionary force.

古文：秋七月乙酉，停河南采办。
现代文：七月二十二日，停止河南采办。
English: On July 22nd, Henan stopped purchasing and operating.

古文：九月辛未，振湖广、江西饥。
现代文：九月九日，赈济湖广、江西饥荒。
English: On September 9, famine broke out in Fujian, Hunan, and Jiangxi.

古文：冬十二月庚子，左庶子黎淳追论景泰废立事，帝曰： 景泰事已往，朕不介意，且非臣下所当言。 
现代文：十二月八日，左庶子黎淳追究景泰帝废立之事，宪宗说： 景泰帝事情已经过去，朕不在意此事，况且这也不是臣下所当谈论的。 
English: On December 8th, when his son-in-law Li Chun inquired about the abdication of Emperor Jingtai, Emperor Xianzong said: "The matter of Emperor Jingtai has already passed. I don't care about this matter. Besides, this is not something that should be discussed by a subject.

古文：切责之。
现代文：适当责备黎淳。
English: Reprove Lai Chun properly.

古文：辛丑，杖编修章懋、黄仲昭，检讨庄，谪官有差。
现代文：九日，杖编修章懋、黄仲昭，检讨庄永日，各贬官不等。
English: On the 9th, the editor-in-chief of the cane, Xiu Zhangyong, Huang Zhongzhao, and the editor-in-chief of the cane, Zhuoyong, were reviewed, and each was demoted.

古文：是月，程信破山都掌蛮，平之。
现代文：本月，程信攻破并平定山都掌蛮。
English: This month, Chengxin broke through and subdued the Mountain Capital.

古文：是年，琉球、哈密、占城、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、哈密、占城、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Ryukyu, Hami, Zhancheng, and Usshang paid tribute to the court.

古文：朝鲜献海青、白鹊，谕毋献。
现代文：朝鲜进献海青、白鹊，告谕他们不要进献。
English: North Korea offered sea bream and paddlefish and told them not to offer them.

古文：四年春正月甲戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化四年正月十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 4th year of Chenghua, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：三月甲子，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：三月四日，免湖广受灾秋粮。
English: On March 4th, the affected autumn grain crops in Hunan Province were exempted from the disaster.

古文：甲申，诏中外势家毋得擅请田土。
现代文：二十四日，下诏中外豪富之家不得擅自请求要田土。
English: On the 24th, it was decreed that the homes of the rich Chinese and foreigners were not allowed to ask for land without permission.

古文：夏四月丁巳，录囚。
现代文：四月二十八日，审查囚犯。
English: On April 28th, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：陈文卒。
现代文：陈文死。
English: Chen Wen passed away.

古文：五月癸未，遣使录天下囚。
现代文：五月二十四日，派使者审查天下囚犯。
English: On May 24th, an envoy was sent to examine the prisoners.

古文：六月丙午，免江西被灾秋粮。
现代文：六月十八日，减免江西受灾秋粮。
English: On June 18th, the reduction and exemption of autumn grain affected by the disaster in Jiangxi.

古文：辛亥，开城贼满俊反，陕西总兵官宁远伯任寿、巡抚都御史陈价讨之。
现代文：二十三日，开城贼人满俊造反，陕西总兵官宁远伯任寿、巡抚都御史陈价奉命征讨。
English: On the 23rd, the Kaesong bandit Manjun rebelled, and the commander-in-chief of Shaanxi Province, Ningyuan Bo Rinshou, and the governor of the capital, Guishi Chengan, were ordered to investigate.

古文：甲寅，慈懿皇太后崩。
现代文：二十六日，慈懿皇太后死。
English: On the 26th, Empress Dowager Cixi died.

古文：秋七月癸酉，都督同知刘玉为平虏副将军，充总兵官，太监刘祥监军，副都御史项忠总督军务，讨满俊。
现代文：七月十六日，都督同知刘玉为平虏副将军，充任总兵官，太监刘祥监督军队，副都御史项忠总督军务，征讨满俊。
English: On July 16th, the governor of the capital, Tongzhi Liu Yu, became the vice-general of Pingrui and served as the chief military officer, the eunuch Liu Xiang supervised the army, and the vice-governor of the capital, Guozhizhong Zhong, was in charge of military affairs and recruited Manjun.

古文：八月癸巳，京师地震。
现代文：八月六日，京师发生地震。
English: On August 6, an earthquake occurred in the capital city of Kyoto.

古文：乙卯，朱永代刘玉为总兵官。
现代文：二十八日，朱永代替刘玉为总兵官。
English: On the 28th, Zhu Yong replaced Liu Yu as the chief military officer.

古文：是月，任寿、陈价、宁夏总兵官广义伯吴琮及满俊战，败绩，都指挥蒋泰、申澄被杀。
现代文：这月，任寿、陈价、宁夏总兵官广义伯吴琮与满俊激战，失败，都指挥蒋泰、申澄被杀。
English: This month, Ren Shou, Chen Qi, and the Ningxia commander-in-chief, Guang Yibo Wu Jun, fought fiercely with Man Jun, but failed. Both commanders, Jiang Tai and Shen Cheng, were killed.

古文：九月庚申，葬孝庄睿皇后于裕陵。
现代文：九月四日，葬孝庄睿皇后于裕陵。
English: On September 4, the funeral of Xiaozhuang Rui and the Empress was held at Yuling.

古文：辛酉，振陕西饥。
现代文：五日，赈救陕西饥荒。
English: On the 5th, the relief of Shaanxi famine began.

古文：壬申，以地震、星变下诏自责，敕群臣修省。
现代文：十六日，因地震、星变下诏自己责罚检查，命文武百官修身反省。
English: On the 16th, due to the earthquake and the star change, he ordered himself to be punished and inspected, and ordered the civil and military officials to reflect on themselves.

古文：甲申，给事中董旻、御史胡深等九人请罢商辂及礼部尚书姚夔，下狱，杖之。
现代文：二十八日，给事中董、御史胡深等九人请求罢免商辂及礼部尚书姚夔，被下狱杖打。
English: On the 28th, nine people, including Dong and Gu Shih Hu Sheng, who were involved in the case, requested the removal of Shang Shiu Yao and Shang Shiu Yao from the discussion and etiquette departments. He was beaten with a cane.

古文：冬十月乙未，项忠败贼于石城，伏羌伯毛忠战死。
现代文：十月九日，项忠在石城打败入侵之敌。伏羌伯毛忠战死。
English: On October 9, Xiang Zhong defeated the invading enemy in Shicheng. Fuxin Bo Mao Zhong died in the battle.

古文：十一月，项忠击擒满俊，送京师，伏诛。
现代文：十一月，项忠攻擒满俊，押送京师，被诛杀。
English: In November, Xiang Zhong attacked Yan Manjun, escorted him to Beijing, and was beaten to death.

古文：壬戌，毛里孩犯辽东，指挥胡珍战没。
现代文：六日，毛里孩侵犯辽东，指挥胡珍战死。
English: On the sixth day, the Maoris invaded Liaodong, and commander Hu Zhen died in battle.

古文：十二月己酉，辽东总兵官赵胜奏： 十一月初六日，虏贼千余攻指挥傅斌营，指挥胡珍率军来援，被贼射死。 
现代文：十二月二十三日，辽东总兵官赵胜奏： 十一月初六日，虏贼千余人进攻指挥傅斌军营，指挥胡珍率军来援，被贼射死。 
English: On December 23, Zhao Shengxiao, the chief military officer of Liaodong, said: On the 6th day of November, more than a thousand robbers attacked the Fu Bin military camp, and the commander Hu Zhen led the army to help. He was shot dead by the robbers.

古文：毛里孩犯延绥，都指挥佥事许宁击败之。
现代文：毛里孩侵掠延绥，都指挥佥事许宁击败毛里孩。
English: Maori invade Yancheng, both commanding Aneji Xuning to defeat the Maori.

古文：是年，琉球、乌斯藏、哈密、日本、满剌加入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、乌斯藏、哈密、日本、满剌加入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Ussuri, Hami, Japan, and Manchukuo joined in the tribute.

古文：五年春正月乙丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化五年正月十日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of Chenghua, in the southern suburb of Beijing, the grand festival heaven and earth.

古文：三月辛丑，赐张升等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十七日，赐张升等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 17th, Zhang Sheng was awarded the title of "Junior Scholar" with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏五月辛丑，礼部侍郎万安兼翰林院学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：五月十八日，礼部侍郎万安兼翰林院学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On May 18th, Wan'an, an attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and a bachelor of the Hanlin Academy, was assigned to participate in important affairs at the Wen Yuan Pavilion.

古文：六月癸丑朔，日有食之。辛酉，录囚。
现代文：六月一日，有日食。九日，审查囚犯。
English: On June 1, there was a solar eclipse. On the 9th, the prisoners were examined.

古文：秋八月辛酉，刘定之卒。
现代文：八月十日，刘定之死。
English: On August 10, Liu Ding died.

古文：冬十一月乙未，毛里孩犯延绥。
现代文：十一月十五日，毛里孩侵掠延绥。
English: On the 15th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the Maoris invaded Yancheng.

古文：是年冬，阿罗出入居河套。
现代文：当年，阿罗出侵入河套。
English: In that year, the Arao exodus invaded Hetao.

古文：琉球、哈密、乌斯藏、满剌加、安南、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：琉球、哈密、乌斯藏、满剌加、安南、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Hami, Ussuri, Manchukuo, Annam, and Turuban paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：六年春正月己丑，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化六年正月十日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 10th day of the first month of the sixth year of the Chenghua era, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：己亥，大同总兵官杨信败毛里孩于胡柴沟。
现代文：二十日，大同总兵官杨信在胡柴沟打败毛里孩。
English: On the 20th, Yang Xin, the general officer of Datong, defeated Mao Hao in Hu Chai Gou.

古文：二月辛未，大理寺少卿宋旻，侍郎曾翚、原杰、黄琛，副都御史滕昭巡视畿南、浙江、河南、四川、福建，考察官吏，访军民疾苦。
现代文：二月二十二日，大理寺少卿宋，侍郎曾、原杰、黄琛，副都御史滕昭巡视畿南、浙江、河南、四川、福建，考察官吏，访问军民疾苦。
English: On February 22, Song, the junior secretary of Dali Temple, Zeng, Yuanjie, Huang Qi, the chamberlain of Dali Temple, and the vice-governor of the capital, Sten Zhao, made a tour of Guinan, Zhejiang, Henan, Sichuan, and Fujian to inspect officials and visit the suffering of the military and the people.

古文：其余直省有巡抚等官者，命亦如之。
现代文：其余直属各省有巡抚等官的，命令按此办法执行。
English: For the rest of the provinces directly under the governor and other officials, the order will be implemented according to this method.

古文：丁丑，祷雨于郊坛。
现代文：二十八日，在郊坛祈祷下雨。
English: On the 28th, I prayed for rain at the suburb altar.

古文：戊寅，振广西饥。
现代文：二十九日，赈救广西饥荒。
English: On the 29th, I went to Guangxi to help with the famine.

古文：三月甲申，免湖广、山东被灾税粮。
现代文：三月五日，免湖广、山东遭灾税粮。
English: On March 5th, the disaster-hit grain in Huguang and Shandong was exempted from the tax.

古文：壬寅，诏延绥屯田。
现代文：二十三日，下诏延绥屯田。
English: On the 23rd, the troops left Yancheng Tunden.

古文：朱永为平虏将军，充总兵官，太监傅恭、顾恒监军，王越参赞军务，备阿罗出于延绥。
现代文：朱永为平虏将军，充任总兵官，太监傅恭、顾恒监督军队，王越辅助军务，在延绥防备阿罗出。
English: Zhu Yong was the general of Pingru and served as the chief military officer, the eunuchs Fu Qiong and Gu Heng supervised the army, Wang Yue assisted in military affairs, and guarded Aro in Yancheng.

古文：丁酉，王越败阿罗出于延绥东路。六月戊申朔，日有食之。
现代文：五月十九日，赈济畿内、山东、河南饥荒。二十日，王越在延绥东路打败阿罗出。六月初一日，有日食。
English: On May 19th, famine broke out in Gyeonggi Province, Shandong Province and Henan Province. On the 20th, Wang Yue defeated Alo Dang on the east road of Yancheng. On the first day of June, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：秋七月壬午，朱永败阿罗出于双山堡。
现代文：七月六日，朱永在双山堡大败阿罗出。
English: On July 6th, Zhu Yong defeated Aro in Shuangshan Fort.

古文：丙戌，都御史项忠、侍郎叶盛振畿辅饥民。都督李抚治屯营。
现代文：十日，都御史项忠、侍郎叶盛赈济京师周围饥民，都督李永日抚治屯营。
English: On the 10th, the governor of the capital, Shikotada, and his attendant, Iemori, went to help the starving people around the capital, and the governor of the capital, Li Yongri, went to the camp.

古文：甲辰，总兵官房能败阿罗出于开荒川。
现代文：二十八日，总兵官房能打败阿罗出于开荒川。
English: On the 28th, the General Quartermaster's Office was able to defeat Aro out of Kairakawa.

古文：是月，免南畿、四川被灾税粮，八月辛亥，振山西饥。
现代文：这月，免南畿、四川遭灾税粮。八月六日，赈济山西饥荒。
English: This month, Nanki and Sichuan were exempted from the disaster tax grain. On August 6, the famine in western Shanxi Province of Fujian Province began.

古文：癸丑，以水旱相仍，下诏宽恤。
现代文：八日，因水旱相连，下诏行宽恤之政。
English: On the eighth day, due to the continuous drought, the government issued a policy of lenient treatment.

古文：冬十月，免畿内、河南、山东被灾税粮。
现代文：十月，免畿内、河南、山东遭灾税粮。
English: In October, disaster-affected grain in the Kinai region, Henan and Shandong was exempt from the tax.

古文：十一月癸未，荆、襄流民作乱，项忠总督河南、湖广、荆、襄军务讨之。
现代文：十一月九日，荆、襄流民作乱，项忠总督河南、湖广、荆、襄军务征讨。
English: On November 9, the people of Jing and Xiang made a riot, and Xiang Zhong, the governor of Henan, Hukang, Jing and Xiang, went to collect military affairs.

古文：是月，孛罗忽渡河与阿罗出合。
现代文：这月，孛罗忽渡过黄河与阿罗出会合。
English: This month, Diao Luo suddenly crossed the Yellow River and met with Aro.

古文：十二月庚戌，遣使十四人分振畿辅。
现代文：十二月七日，派使者十四人赈济京城周围。
English: On December 7th, he sent 14 envoys to relieve the area around the capital.

古文：是年，琉球、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：当年，琉球、哈密、乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Hami, and Usshimo paid tribute to the court.

古文：七年春正月辛巳，命京官五品以上及给事中、御史各举堪州县者一人。
现代文：成化七年正月八日，命令京官五品以上及给事中、御史各推举能胜任州县官的一人。
English: On the 8th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of Chenghua, he ordered the Beijing officials to nominate at least five officials and to nominate one person who was competent to serve as a prefectural and county official.

古文：丙戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十三日，大祭天地于京都南郊。
English: On the 13th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs of Beijing.

古文：夏四月己巳，录囚。
现代文：四月二十七日，审查囚犯。
English: On April 27th, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：五月辛巳，瘗京师暴骸。
现代文：五月九日，掩埋京师暴露尸骨。
English: On May 9th, the remains of the Peking Division were buried and exposed.

古文：秋八月甲辰，振山东、浙江水灾。
现代文：八月四日，赈救山东、浙江水灾。
English: On August 4th, the flood disaster in Shandong and Zhejiang was averted.

古文：闰九月己未，浙江潮溢，漂民居、盐场，遣工部侍郎李颙往祭海神，修筑堤岸。
现代文：闰九月二十日，浙江海水涨潮，淹没民居、盐场，派工部侍郎李前去祭祀大海神，修筑堤岸。
English: On the 20th day of the 9th month of the leap year, the high tide of the sea in Zhejiang began to flood people's homes and salt farms, and Li, a servant of the Ministry of Works, was sent to worship the sea god and build an embankment.

古文：冬十月乙亥，王恕为刑部侍郎，总理河道。
现代文：十月七日，王恕为刑部侍郎，总理黄河水道之事。
English: On October 7th, Wang Shou became the Minister of the Ministry of Justice and the Prime Minister of the Yellow River Watercourse.

古文：十一月甲寅，立皇子祐极为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：十一月十六日，立皇子朱极为皇太子，大赦天下。
English: On November 16th, Prince Zhu Di became crown prince and was pardoned by the emperor.

古文：己未，荆、襄贼平，流民复业者一百四十余万人。
现代文：二十一日，荆、襄贼被平定，一百四十七万流民复业。
English: On the twenty-first day, Jing and the bandits were subdued, and 1.47 million people were reinstated.

古文：十二月甲戌，彗星见，下诏自责，敕群臣修省，条时政得失。
现代文：十二月七日，出现彗星，下诏自责，命群臣修身反省，陈述时政得失。
English: On December 7th, a comet appeared, and he issued an edict of self-condemnation, ordering his ministers to self-reflect, and to state the merits and demerits of the current government.

古文：壬午，彗星入紫微垣，避正殿，撤乐，御奉天门听政。
现代文：十五日，彗星进入紫微区，避开正殿，不奏音乐，在奉天门处理政事。
English: On the fifteenth day, the comet entered the purple micro-zone, avoided the main hall, did not play music, and dealt with political affairs at the Gate of Heaven.

古文：癸未，召朱永还，王越总督延绥军务。
现代文：十六日，召朱永回京，由王越总督延绥军务。
English: On the 16th, Zhu Yong was summoned back to Beijing, and the military affairs were extended by Governor Wang Yue.

古文：辛卯，减死罪以下。
现代文：二十四日，减免死罪以下罪行。
English: On the 24th, the following crimes were commuted to the death penalty.

古文：是年，癿加思兰入居河套，与阿罗出合。
现代文：这年，加思兰占据河套，与阿罗出合谋。
English: In this year, Gaslan occupied Hetao and conspired with Aro.

古文：安南黎灏攻占城，破之。
现代文：安南黎灏进攻占城并攻破。
English: Annan-Lihong's attack occupied the city and broke through.

古文：琉球、安南入贡。
现代文：琉球、安南入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Annan to pay tribute to the North.

古文：八年春正月庚戌，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化八年正月十三日，大祭天地于京城南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the 1st month of the 8th year of Chenghua, the grand festival was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：癸亥，皇太子薨。
现代文：二十六日，皇太子死。
English: On the 26th, the crown prince died.

古文：是月，延绥参将钱亮御毛里孩于安边营，败绩，都指挥柏隆、陈英战死。
现代文：本月，延绥参将钱亮在安边营抵抗毛里孩，溃败，都指挥柏隆、陈英战死。
English: This month, Yan Yuxuan sent Qian Liang to Anbian Camp to resist Mao Hai, and was defeated. Both commanders, Bai Long and Chen Ying, were killed in the battle.

古文：癿加思兰犯固原、平凉。
现代文：加思兰侵犯固原、平凉。
English: Kaaslan encroaches on solid ground and is flat and cool.

古文：三月癸丑，赐吴宽等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十七日，赐吴宽等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 17th, Wu Kuan and others were awarded the title of "Candidate" with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：夏四月，京师久旱，运河水涸。
现代文：四月，京师干旱很久，运河水干涸。
English: In April, there was a long drought in Beijing, and the water in the canals dried up.

古文：癸酉，遣使祷于郊社、山川、淮渎、东海之神。
现代文：七日，派使者向郊社、山川、淮水及东海神祈祷。
English: On the seventh day, an emissary was sent to the suburbs, mountains and rivers, Huai Shui and the East Sea to pray.

古文：乙酉，录囚。
现代文：十九日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 19th, the prisoners were examined.

古文：丁亥，遣使录天下囚。
现代文：二十一日，派使者审查天下囚犯。
English: On the 21st, an envoy was sent to examine the world's prisoners.

古文：五月癸丑，武靖侯赵辅为平虏将军，充总兵官，节制各边军马，同王越御癿加思兰。
现代文：五月十七日，武靖侯赵辅为平虏将军，兼任总兵官，节制各边境军马，同王越一起抗击加思兰。
English: On May 17th, Zhao Fu, the lord of Wujing, became the general of Pingrui, concurrently serving as the chief military officer, restraining the troops and horses at the border, and resisting Qaslan together with Wang Yue.

古文：秋九月丙午，谕安南黎灏还占城侵地。
现代文：九月十三日，告谕安南黎灏归还侵占的占城田地。
English: On September 13th, Annan ordered Lihong to return the occupied city fields.

古文：冬十一月己酉，宁晋伯刘聚代赵辅为将军，屯延绥。
现代文：十一月十七日，宁晋伯刘聚代替赵辅为将军，屯兵延绥。
English: On November 17th, Ning Jinbo Liu Ju replaced Zhao Fu as general, and the troops were withdrawn.

古文：十二月癸酉，振京师饥民。
现代文：十二月十一日，赈济京师饥民。
English: On December 11th, the starving people of Beijing were fed.

古文：是年，孛罗忽、癿加思兰屡入安边营、花马池，犯固原、宁夏、平凉、临巩、环庆，南至通渭。
现代文：这年，孛罗忽、加思兰多次侵入安边营、花马池，侵掠固原、宁夏、平凉、临巩、环庆，直到南边的通渭。
English: In this year, Jiao Luohu and Jia Xilan repeatedly invaded and plundered Anbian Camp, Huama Pond, Gouyuan, Ningxia, Pingliang, Lingang, Huanqing, and as far as Tonglu in the south.

古文：琉球、哈密、安南入贡。
现代文：琉球、哈密、安南入朝进贡。
English: Ryukyu, Hami and Annan paid tribute to the emperor.

古文：九年春正月丁未，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化九年正月十六日，在京城南郊大祭天地。
English: On the 16th day of the 1st month of the 9th year of Chenghua, in the southern suburb of Beijing, the grand festival heaven and earth.

古文：壬子，刘聚、王越败癿加思兰于漫天岭。
现代文：二十七日，刘聚、王越在漫天岭打败加思兰。
English: On the 27th, Liu Ju and Wang Yue defeated Gaslan in Mantianling.

古文：是月，土鲁番速檀阿力破哈密，据之。
现代文：这月，土鲁番速檀阿力攻破哈密并占据此地。
English: This month, the Turuban Haydan forces broke through Hami and occupied the area.

古文：夏四月辛酉朔，日有食之。
现代文：四月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of April, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：甲子，福余三卫寇辽东，总兵官欧信击败之。
现代文：四日，福余三卫侵犯辽东，被总兵官欧信击败。
English: On the fourth day, Fuyu Sanwei invaded Liaodong and was defeated by the general officer Ou Xin.

古文：戊辰，尽免山东税粮。
现代文：八日，全部减免山东税粮。
English: On the 8th, all Shandong tax and grain were reduced and exempted.

古文：瘗京畿暴骸。
现代文：掩埋京畿外露尸骨。
English: Bury the exposed bones outside Gyeonggi Province.

古文：壬午，阅武臣骑射于西苑。
现代文：二十二日，在西苑检阅武官骑射技术。
English: On the 22nd, the military attaché reviewed the riding and shooting techniques in the West Courtyard.

古文：秋七月壬辰，巡抚延绥都御史余子俊败癿加思兰于榆林涧。
现代文：七月三日，巡抚延绥都御史余子俊在榆林涧打败加思兰。
English: On July 3, the governor of Yancheng, Yu Zijun, defeated Ghaslan in Yulin.

古文：九月辛卯，镇守浙江中官李义杖杀宁波卫指挥马璋，诏勿问。
现代文：九月三日，镇守浙江中官李义杖杀宁波卫指挥马璋，下诏不问罪。
English: On September 3, the town guard of Zhejiang, Lieutenant-General Li Yizheng, killed the Ningbo garrison commander Ma Jun, and was acquitted.

古文：庚子，王越袭满都鲁、孛罗忽、癿加思兰于红盐池，大破之。诸部渐出河套。
现代文：十二日，王越在红盐池袭击满都鲁、孛罗忽、加思兰，大败满、孛、诸部，使其逐渐逃出河套。
English: On the 12th, Wang Yue attacked Manturu, Miroku, and Qaslan in Hongyanchi, and defeated Manman, Zou, and Zhu, causing them to gradually escape from the river.

古文：冬十一月丁酉，复阅骑射于西苑。
现代文：十一月十日，再次于西苑检阅骑射情况。
English: On November 10th, the situation of horse shooting was reviewed again in the West Courtyard.

古文：是年，免湖广、畿内、山西、南畿、陕西被灾税粮。
现代文：当年，免湖广、畿内、山西、南畿、陕西遭灾税粮。
English: In that year, the disaster-affected tax grain of Huguang, Kinai, Shanxi, Nanki and Shaanxi was exempted.

古文：振畿内、陕西饥，振山西者再，山东者三。
现代文：赈救畿内、陕西饥荒，山西是第二次赈济，山东第三次赈救。
English: Shanxi is the second time to provide relief, Shandong is the third time to provide relief.

古文：哈密、琉球、暹罗入贡。
现代文：哈密、琉球、暹罗入朝进贡。
English: Hami, Ryukyu, and Siam paid tribute to the dynasty.

古文：十年春正月丁亥朔，振京师贫民。
现代文：成化十年正月初一日，赈救京师贫困平民。
English: On the first day of the first month of the 10th year of the Chenghua era, he came to the rescue of the poor civilians in Beijing.

古文：丁酉，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：十一日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 9th, the grand festival took place in the southern suburbs.

古文：癸卯，王越总制延绥、甘肃、宁夏三边，驻固原。
现代文：十七日，王越总督节制延绥、甘肃、宁夏三边，驻防固原。
English: On the 17th, Wang Yue, the governor of Yancheng, Gansu, and Ningxia, stationed in Gouyuan.

古文：丙午，召刘聚还。
现代文：二十日，召刘聚回京。
English: On the 20th, Liu was summoned back to Beijing.

古文：三月，免南畿、湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：三月，免南畿、湖广受灾秋粮。
English: In March, Nanki and Hukang were exempted from the affected autumn grain.

古文：夏五月戊申，申藏妖书之禁。
现代文：五月二十四日，重申禁止收藏妖书禁令。
English: On May 24th, the ban on the collection of evil books was reaffirmed.

古文：是月，免山西、陕西被灾秋粮。
现代文：当月，免山西、陕西受灾秋粮。
English: In the same month, Shanxi and Shaanxi were exempted from the affected autumn grain.

古文：闰六月乙巳，筑边墙自紫城砦至花马池。
现代文：闰六月二十二日，从紫城砦到花马池修边墙。
English: On June 22nd, the border wall was repaired from Zicheng Fort to Huama Pond.

古文：秋七月甲寅，免江西被灾秋粮。
现代文：七月初一日，免江西遭灾秋粮。
English: On the first day of July, the autumn grain in Jiangxi was exempted from the disaster.

古文：八月辛卯，都督同知赵胜为平虏将军，充总兵官，太监刘恒、覃平监军。讨癿加思兰。
现代文：八月九日，都督同知赵胜为平虏将军，兼任总兵官，太监刘恒、覃平监督军队，征讨加思兰。
English: On August 9, Zhao Sheng, the governor of Tongzhi, became the general of Pingru, and also served as the chief military officer, while the eunuchs Liu Heng and Zou Ping supervised the army and recruited Qaslan.

古文：九月癸丑朔，日有食之。乙卯，免南畿水灾秋粮。
现代文：九月初一日，有日食。三日，免南畿遭水灾后秋粮。
English: On the first day of early September, there was a solar eclipse. On the third day, autumn crops were saved from flooding in Nanki.

古文：冬十一月丙子，免河南被灾税粮。
现代文：十一月二十五日，免河南受灾税粮。
English: On November 25th, Henan was exempted from the disaster-affected tax grain.

古文：十二月己丑，罢宝庆诸府采金。
现代文：十二月八日，停止宝庆各府采集金银。
English: On December 8th, the collection of gold and silver from all provinces in Baoqing was stopped.

古文：甲午，录妖书名示天下。
现代文：十三日，记载妖书名称告示天下。
English: On the 13th, the name of the recorded demon book was announced to the world.

古文：是年，琉球、乌斯藏、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这年，琉球、乌斯藏、土鲁番入朝进贡。
English: In that year, Ryukyu, Ussuri, and Turuban went to the court to pay tribute.

古文：十一年春正月癸亥，大祀天地于南郊。
现代文：成化十一年正月十三日，大祭天地于京师南郊。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the 11th year of Chenghua, the Grand Festival of Heaven and Earth was held in the southern suburb of Beijing.

古文：二月甲申，禁酷刑。
现代文：二月五日，禁止使用酷刑。
English: On 5 February, the use of torture was prohibited.

古文：三月壬子，赐谢迁等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月三日，赏赐谢迁等进士及第、出身各有差别。
English: On March 3, awards were given to new recruits such as Xie Qian, with different ranks and backgrounds.

古文：辛未，彭时卒。
现代文：二十二日，彭时死。
English: On the 22nd, Peng Shih died.

古文：夏四月乙酉，吏部侍郎刘珝、礼部侍郎刘吉并兼翰林学士，入阁预机务。
现代文：四月七日，吏部侍郎刘繩、礼部侍郎刘吉一起兼任翰林学士，入值文渊阁参与机要事务。
English: On April 7, Liu Jian, the attendant of the Personnel Department, and Liu Ji, the attendant of the Ceremonial Department, also served as scholars of Hanlin, and were assigned to Wenyu Pavilion to participate in important affairs.

古文：壬辰，乾清门灾。
现代文：十四日，乾清门发生火灾。
English: On the 14th, a fire broke out at the Qianqing Gate.

古文：己亥，录囚。
现代文：二十一日，审查囚犯。
English: On the 21st, the prisoners were reviewed.

古文：五月癸酉，免湖广被灾秋粮。
现代文：五月二十五日，免湖广遭灾秋粮。
English: On May 25th, the autumn grain that was spared from the disaster in Hubei Province was harvested.

古文：秋八月辛巳，浚通惠河。
现代文：八月五日，疏通通惠河。
English: On August 5, the Tonghui River was dredged.

古文：丁亥，满都鲁、癿加思兰遣使来朝。
现代文：十一日，满都鲁、加思兰派使者前来朝拜。
English: On the 11th day, Manduro and Ghaslan sent an envoy to pay homage.

古文：九月丁未朔，日有食之。
现代文：九月初一日，有日食。
English: On the first day of September, there was a solar eclipse.

古文：冬十一月癸丑，立皇子祐樘为皇太子，大赦。
现代文：十一月八日，立皇长子朱樘为皇太子，大加赦免。
English: On November 8th, Zhu Xi, the eldest son of the emperor, was appointed crown prince and pardoned.

古文：十二月戊子，复郕王帝号。
现代文：十二月十三日，恢复成阝王皇帝称号。
English: On December 13, he was restored to the title of Emperor Gongwang.

古文：丁酉，申自宫之禁。
现代文：二十二日，重申禁止自处宫刑。
English: On the 22nd, it reiterated the ban on self-imposed palace punishment.

古文：是年，土鲁番、琉球、暹罗、满剌加、安南入贡。
现代文：本年，土鲁番、琉球、暹罗、满剌加、安南入朝进贡。
English: This year, Turuban, Ryukyu, Siam, Manchukuo and Annan paid tribute to the DPRK.

古文：命琉球贡使二年一至。
现代文：命令琉球进贡使者二年进贡一次。
English: Ordered the Ryukyuan tribute envoy to pay tribute once every two years.

