古文：《齐民要术》：收瓜子法：常岁岁先取 本母子瓜 ，截去两头，止取中央子。 本母子 者，瓜生数叶便结子；子复早熟。
现代文：《齐民要术》：收瓜子法：每年选取 本母子瓜 ，将两头切掉，只用中间一段的种子。 本母子瓜 ，是刚生长出几张叶片就结成的瓜。
English: "Qiming Yaoshu": Harvesting melon seeds method: the mother melon is selected every year, the two ends are cut off, and only the middle section of seeds is used.This mother melon is a melon that has just grown a few leaves.

古文：用中辈瓜子者，蔓长二三尺，然后结子。用后辈子者，蔓长足，然后结子，子亦晚熟。
现代文：这样的瓜种，结瓜也会早。用中熟瓜作种子，蔓要长到二三尺长才会结瓜；用晚熟瓜作种子，瓜蔓要长足以后才会结瓜；瓜成熟的时间也很晚。
English: With such a melon seed, the melon will also be early. With medium-ripe melons as seeds, the vine will grow to two or three feet long before the melon is caked; with late-ripe melons as seeds, the melon will not be caked until the melon is grown; the time of melon maturation is also late.

古文：种早子，熟速而瓜小；种晚子，熟迟而瓜大。
现代文：种早熟瓜的种子，瓜成熟早，但瓜小；种晚熟瓜的种子，瓜成熟晚，但瓜却比较大。
English: The seeds of early-ripening melons ripen early, but the melon is small; the seeds of late-ripening melons ripen late, but the melon is relatively large.

古文：去两头者：近蒂子，瓜曲而细；近头子，瓜短而喎。
现代文：去掉本母子瓜的两头：靠近瓜蒂的种子，结成的瓜又弯曲又小；靠近瓜头的种子，结成的瓜又短又歪斜。
English: Remove the two ends of this cucumber: the seed close to the cucumber, the resulting melon is curved and small; the seed close to the head of the melon, the resulting melon is short and oblique.

古文：又收瓜子法：食瓜时，择美者收取。却以细糠拌之，日曝向燥，援而簸之；净而且速也引。
现代文：又有一种收瓜种子的方法：吃瓜时，遇上好瓜，便将瓜子收起，随时用细糠拌和，晒到快干未干时，把糠揉搓掉，簸治干净，动作要快些。
English: There is another way to collect melon seeds: when eating melon, if you encounter a good melon, you should collect the melon seeds, stir them with a fine whisk at any time, and when they are almost dry, rub off the stalks and clean them. The action should be faster.

古文：良田，小豆底佳，黍底次之。
现代文：种瓜要用好地，小豆茬地最好，黍子茬地为次。
English: It is necessary to use good soil to grow gourds, the best soil to grow red beans, and the second best soil to grow hazelnuts.

古文：刈讫即耕，频烦转之。
现代文：刈过随即翻耕，要频繁地耕。
English: After cutting, ploughing should be carried out immediately, and ploughing should be carried out frequently.

古文：二月上旬种者为上时，三月上旬为中时，四月上旬为下时。
现代文：二月上旬种瓜是最好的农时；其次是三月中旬，为中等农时；最迟为四月上旬，是下等农时。
English: The best time to grow melons is in early February, followed by mid-March, which is the middle time, and at the latest in early April, which is the low time.

古文：五月六月上旬，可种 藏瓜 。
现代文：五月和六月还可以种 藏瓜 。
English: In May and June, you can also grow gourds.

古文：凡种瓜法，先以水净淘瓜子，盐和之。
现代文：一般地种瓜法，都是先用水将瓜子淘洗干净，用盐拌和。
English: The general method of growing melons is to first wash the melon seeds with water and mix them with salt.

古文：盐和则不笼死。
现代文：用盐拌过，便不会被虫侵害。
English: Stirred with salt, it will not be harmed by insects.

古文：先卧锄，耧却燥土，不耧者，坑虽深大，常杂燥土，故瓜不生。
现代文：先将锄刀平拿着，将地表面上的干土刮去，不刮去干土，坑虽然挖得很深很大，仍然会掺杂有干土，所以瓜不易出苗。
English: First, hold the sickle flat and scrape away the dry soil on the surface of the ground. If you do not scrape away the dry soil, although the pit is very deep and large, it will still be mixed with dry soil, so the melon is not easy to sprout.

古文：然后掊蒲沟切。坑，大如斗口。纳瓜子四枚、大豆三个于堆旁向阳中。
现代文：然后刨蒲沟切掘成大小像斗口的坑，将四颗瓜子、三颗大豆，放在土堆旁向阳的一面。
English: Then the planer ditch is dug into a pit the size of a bucket, and four melon seeds and three soybeans are placed on the sunny side next to the mound.

古文：瓜生数叶，掐去豆。
现代文：等到瓜苗上生长出数张叶片以后，便可将豆苗掐掉。
English: After a few leaves have grown on the melon seedling, the bean seedling can be picked off.

古文：瓜性弱，苗不能独生，故须大豆为之起土。
现代文：瓜的萌发力差，不能单独出苗，所以需要大豆帮助顶土。
English: The germination power of melons is poor, and they cannot produce seedlings alone, so soybeans are needed to help the topsoil.

古文：瓜生不去豆，则豆反扇瓜，不得滋茂。
现代文：瓜出苗后，如不把豆苗除去，豆苗反而会将瓜苗扇盖住，使瓜生长不旺盛。
English: If you do not remove the bean seedlings after the seedling is out, the bean seedlings will cover the seedling fan instead, so that the growth of the melon is not vigorous.

古文：但豆断汁出，更成良润。
现代文：把豆苗掐断后，断口上便会有汁液流出，使瓜蒙受滋润。
English: After cutting off the bean seedling, the juice will flow out of the cut to moisten the melon.

古文：勿拔之，拔之，则土虚燥也。
现代文：切莫将豆拔掉，拔去豆，会使土虚容易干燥。
English: Do not pull out the beans. Pulling out the beans will cause the soil to dry out easily.

古文：多锄则饶子，不锄则无实。
现代文：锄的次数多，结瓜也会多；不锄，便不会结瓜。
English: The more times there is hoeing, the more cucumbers there will be; if there is no hoeing, there will be no cucumbers.

古文：五谷、蔬菜、果蓏之属，皆如此也。 蓏 ，郎果反。
现代文：五谷类，蔬菜类，果蓏类，都是这样。蓏：郎果反。
English: Cereals, vegetables, fruit and vegetables are all like this.

古文：治瓜笼法：旦起，露未解，以枚举瓜蔓，散灰于根下。后一两日，复以土堆其根，则永无虫矣。
现代文：防治瓜笼病法：清早起来，趁露水还未蒸发，用棍杖将瓜蔓挑起，在瓜根下撒上灰，过后一两天，再用土壅培在瓜根上，便不会再有虫了。
English: Prevention and control of melon cage disease: Get up early in the morning, take advantage of the dew before it evaporates, use a stick to pick up the melon vine, sprinkle the ashes under the melon root, and after a day or two, and then use the soil to cultivate the melon root, there will be no more insects.

古文：凡瓜所以早烂者，皆由脚蹑及摘时不慎，翻动其蔓故也。
现代文：凡是瓜不等成熟，便早早地坏掉的原因，皆是由于脚踏和摘瓜时不小心，翻乱了瓜蔓所引起。
English: All the reasons why the melons do not ripen and go bad early are caused by careless treading and picking, which upsets the vines.

古文：若以理慎护，及至霜下叶干，子乃尽矣。
现代文：如能按照这个道理谨慎爱护地去做，便可以一直等到天下霜，瓜的蔓叶枯干的时候，瓜才会结成。
English: If you can do it carefully and lovingly according to this principle, you can wait until the sky is frosty and the vine leaves of the melon are dry before the melon is formed.

古文：但依此法则不必别种早晚及中三辈之瓜。
现代文：按照这个方法，瓜园便没有必要分别种早瓜、中瓜和晚瓜三茬瓜了。
English: According to this method, there is no need for the melon garden to grow early, middle and late melons separately.

古文：区种瓜法：六月雨后种绿豆，八月中犁俺杀之，十月又一转，即十月中种瓜。
现代文：区种瓜法：六月间，下过雨种绿豆；八月中旬，用犁把绿豆翻入土中压死；十月，再耕一遍，十月中旬，便可种瓜。
English: The district method of growing melons: In June, it rained and the green beans sprouted; in mid-August, the green beans were turned into the soil with a hoe and crushed to death; in October, it was plowed again, and in mid-October, the melons could be grown.

古文：率两步为一区，坑大如盆口，深五寸。
现代文：一般多是离开两步远作一个区，坑的大小像盆口，五寸深。
English: Generally, it is more common to leave a zone two steps away, the size of the pit is like the basin mouth, five inches deep.

古文：以土壅其畔，如菜畦形。
现代文：用土壅培在坑的四边，做成菜畦的形状。
English: Cultivate the four sides of the pit with earthen pots to make the shape of a cucumber.

古文：坑底必令平正，以足踏之，令其保泽。
现代文：坑底必须平正，用脚把土踏实，使能保泽。
English: The bottom of the pit must be level, and the soil must be compacted with the feet to keep it shiny.

古文：以瓜子、大豆各十枚，遍布坑中。
现代文：取瓜种和大豆每样十颗，遍放在坑中。
English: Take ten melon seeds and ten soybeans each and place them all over the pit.

古文：瓜子、大豆两物为双，藉其起土故也。
现代文：应将瓜子和大豆搭配成对种，因为瓜要借用大豆的力量顶土。
English: It should be paired with melon seeds and soybeans, because the melon needs to borrow the power of soybeans to cover the soil.

古文：以粪五升覆之。
现代文：用粪土五升覆盖在上面。
English: Cover it with five litres of manure.

古文：亦令均平。
现代文：粪土也要撒盖均匀、平正。
English: The manure should also be spread evenly and evenly.

古文：又以土一斗薄散粪上，复以足微蹑之。
现代文：还要用一斗土，薄薄地撒盖在粪上，再用脚轻微地踏一遍。
English: It is also necessary to use a bucket of soil, spread it thinly over the dung, and then tread it lightly with the foot.

古文：冬月大雪时，速并力推雪于坑上为大堆。
现代文：冬季天降大雪时，应从速集中人力，将雪壅盖在坑上，使积聚成大堆。
English: When heavy snow falls in winter, manpower should be concentrated at once to cover the snow with snow ploughs, so that the snow accumulates in large piles.

古文：至春草生，瓜亦生，茎叶肥茂，异于常者。
现代文：到春天长出青草的时候，瓜也同时出土，瓜苗茎叶肥壮茂盛，胜过通常的瓜苗。
English: When the grass grows in the spring, the melon is also unearthed at the same time. The melon seedling stems and leaves are fat and lush, better than the usual melon seedling.

古文：且常有润泽，旱亦无害。
现代文：而且瓜田会经常保持湿润，即便天旱也不致受害。
English: Moreover, the melon fields are often kept moist, so even if there is a drought, the cucumbers will not suffer.

古文：五月瓜便熟。
现代文：五月间，瓜便早早地成熟了。
English: In May, the melons ripen early.

古文：其掐豆锄瓜之法，与常同。
现代文：区种瓜掐掉豆苗和锄瓜的方法，与通常的方法相同。
English: The method of removing bean seedlings and gourds is the same as the usual method.

古文：若瓜子尽生，则太概，宜掐去之。一区四根即足矣。
现代文：若一区十颗子全部出苗，便嫌太稠，可掐掉一些，一区留四棵苗便足够了。
English: If all ten seedlings in one area sprout, it will be too thick and can be pruned off. Four seedlings in one area will be enough.

古文：又法：冬天以瓜子数枚，纳热牛粪中，冻即拾聚，置之阴地。
现代文：又法：冬天将瓜子数个放入热牛粪中，粪冻后拾回，堆置在背阴的地方。
English: Another method: in winter, put several melon seeds into the hot cow dung, pick them up after the dung has frozen, and pile them in a shady place.

古文：量地多少，以足为限。
现代文：根据种瓜土地多少，以足够使用为度。
English: Depending on how much land is used to grow melons, it depends on how much is used.

古文：正月地释即耕，逐布之。率方一步，下一斗粪，耕土覆之。
现代文：正月，地里的冰化了便翻耕，趁墒播种，每一方步施粪肥一斗，用犁翻土覆盖。
English: In the first month of the year, when the ice in the field has melted, the plough is turned over, the plough is used to sow seeds, each side is step by step applied a bucket of manure, and the plough is used to turn over the soil.

古文：肥茂早熟，虽不及区种，亦胜凡瓜远矣。
现代文：瓜必肥壮茂盛，而且成熟早，虽然赶不上区种的瓜，但却远胜过普通的瓜。
English: The melon must be fat, lush, and mature early. Although it cannot catch up with the regional melon, it is far better than the ordinary melon.

古文：有蚁者，以牛羊骨带髓者，置瓜科左右；待蚁附，将弃之。弃二三，则无蚁矣。
现代文：有蚁时，用带有骨髓的牛羊骨，放在瓜蔸附近，等蚁聚集到骨上，拿起丢到远处；丢过两三次，便没有蚁了。
English: When there are ants, use a cow or sheep bone with bone marrow, place it near the melon seed, wait for the ants to gather on the bone, pick it up and throw it away; after two or three times, there are no ants.

古文：崔寔曰：十二月腊时祀炙萐，所甲切。树瓜田四角，去蚶。
现代文：崔寔说：将十二月腊祭时挂炙肉的蒲枝条，插在瓜田的四角，可以去瓜虫。蚶，瓜虫。
English: Cui Yao said, "You can remove the cucumber worms by inserting the cucumber sticks, which were used to hang the roasted meat during the December Wax Festival, into the four corners of the melon field.

古文：《龙鱼河图》曰：瓜有两鼻，杀人。
现代文：《龙鱼河图》说：有两个果蒂的瓜，吃了会死人。
English: "Dragonfish River Map" said: "If you eat a melon with two fruit, you will die."

古文：黄瓜：一名 胡瓜 。
现代文：黄瓜：又名胡瓜。
English: Cucumber: also known as cucumber.

古文：四月中种之。
现代文：四月中旬种植。
English: Plant in mid-April.

古文：宜竖柴木，令引蔓缘之。
现代文：适宜在瓜旁树立枝柴，让瓜蔓攀爬着生长。
English: It is suitable to set up branches and trees next to the melon, and let the melon vine climb and grow.

古文：《博闻录》：种花药，最忌麝。瓜尤忌之。媵栽数株蒜、薤，遇麝不损。
现代文：《博闻录》：栽种花药最忌讳麝香，瓜更是尤其忌讳，所以每一片田畦，都应栽上几颗蒜、薤，即使遇到麝香亦不会受损。
English: "Homonro": the most taboo anther to plant is fennel, and melon is especially taboo, so every piece of rice field should be planted with a few garlic and ginger, even if it encounters fennel, it will not be damaged.

