古文：王济婢王范妾宋宫人金荆杜嶷妾后周女子张公瑾妾范略婢胡亮妾
现代文：王济婢王范妾宋宫人金荆杜嶷妾后周女子张公瑾妾范略婢胡亮妾
English: Wang Jizhi concubine, Wang Fan concubine, Song palace person, Jin Jing, Du Xi concubine, Hou Zhou woman, Zhang Gongxi concubine, Fan Liang concubine, Hu Liang concubine

古文：梁仁裕婢张景先婢李训妾花严晋阳人妾
现代文：梁仁裕婢张景先婢李训妾花严晋阳人妾
English: Liang Renyu's servant Zhang Jing's servant Li Xun's concubine Hua Yan Jin Yangren's concubine

古文：王济婢
现代文：王济婢
English: Wang Jihi

古文：晋王济侍者，常于闱中就婢取济衣物，婢遂欲奸之。其人云： 不敢。 
现代文：晋朝王济的仆人，常常到王济的内室去通过婢女取王济的衣物。于是那个婢女就想要和那人通奸。那人说： 我不敢。 
English: The servants of the king of Jin, Wang Zi, often went to the inner chamber of Wang Zi to get Wang Zi's clothes through the maid. So the maid wanted to commit adultery with the man. The man said, "I don't dare."

古文：婢言若不从我，我当大叫，此人卒不肯。婢遂呼云： 某甲欲奸我。 
现代文：婢女说： 你如果不服从我，我就喊人。 那人最终不肯答应，婢女于是就呼喊说： 这个人想要奸污我。 
English: The maid said, "If you don't obey me, I'll call someone." The man finally refused, so the maid called out, "This man is trying to rape me."

古文：济即令杀之，此人具陈说，济不信，故牵将去。
现代文：王济就让人杀了那仆人。仆人将事情的经过全都向王济说了，王济却不相信，于是就将那人拉了出去。
English: Wang Zi had the servant killed. The servant told Wang Zi everything that had happened, but Wang Zi didn't believe him, so he dragged the man out.

古文：顾谓济曰： 枉不可受，要当讼府君于天。 
现代文：仆人回过头来对王济说： 冤枉不可以忍受，我要向苍天告你。 
English: The servant turned around and said to Wang Jie, "The injustice is unbearable. I will sue you to the heavens."

古文：济乃病，忽见此人语之曰： 前具告实，既不见理，便应去。 
现代文：王济于是就得了病，忽然他看见仆人对他说： 先前我把实情告你，你却不理睬，所以你就应当死。 
English: Then Wang Zi fell ill. Suddenly, he saw his servant saying to him, "I told you the truth before, but you ignored it. Therefore, you should die."

古文：济数日而死。
现代文：就这样，王济过了几天就死了。
English: Just like that, Wang Jizong died a few days later.

古文：王范妾
现代文：王范妾
English: Wang Fan concubine

古文：晋富阳县令王范妾桃英，殊有姿色，遂与阁下丁丰、史华期二人奸通。
现代文：晋朝富阳县令王范的小老婆桃英特别有姿色，与王范下人丁丰、史华期二人通奸。
English: The youngest wife of Wang Fan of the Jin Dynasty in Fuyang County, Taoying, was particularly attractive, and she committed adultery with two of Wang Fan's subordinates, Ding Feng and Shi Huaji.

古文：范当出行不还，帐内督孙元弼闻丁丰户中有环珮声，觇视，见桃英与同被而卧，无弼扣户叱之。
现代文：一次当王范出外办事还没回来，帐内督孙元弼听到丁丰屋里有环佩的声音，偷偷察看，看见桃英和丁丰在同一个被窝里躺着。
English: Once, when Wang Fan was out of the office and had not yet returned, the accountant Sun Yuanjun heard the sound of admiration in Ding Feng's house, secretly inspected it, and saw Taoying and Ding Feng lying in the same bed.

古文：桃英即起，揽裙理发，蹑履还内。
现代文：元弼扣门进去，呵叱他们，桃英立刻起来，提起裙子整理头发拖拉着鞋，回到里屋。
English: Yuan Xuan slammed the door, scolded them, and Taoying immediately got up, lifted her skirt, straightened her hair, dragged her shoes, and returned to the inner room.

古文：元弼又见华期带佩桃英麝香。
现代文：又一次元弼又看见华期佩带着桃英的香袋。
English: Once again, Yuan Xuan saw Huaji wearing a scented bag with peach blossoms.

古文：二人惧元弼告之，乃共谤元弼与桃英有私，范不辩察，遂杀元弼。
现代文：丁丰、华期害怕元弼告发他们，于是就一起诽谤元弼和桃英有私情。王范不经明察，就杀了元弼。
English: Ding Feng and Hua Ji were afraid that Yuan Xuan would expose them, so they slandered Yuan Xuan and Taoying as having a personal relationship. Wang Fan killed Yuan Xuan without a second thought.

古文：有陈超者，当时在座，劝成元弼罪。
现代文：有个叫陈超的人，当时在场，帮着说成了元弼的罪名。
English: A man named Chen Chao, who was present at the time, helped to pin the blame on Yuan Qi.

古文：诉怨皇天，早见申理，连时候汝，乃今相遇。 超叩头流血。鬼曰： 王范既为事主，当先杀之。贾景伯、孙文度在泰山玄堂下，共定死生名录。桃英魂魄，亦取在女青亭。 
现代文：后来王范外出回来，陈超也出城探视王范。走到赤亭山下，正遇雷雨，天色已晚，忽然有个人架着陈超的腋下直把他拽过去，进入荒泽里，在电光照射下看见一个鬼，脸特别的黑，眼睛没有瞳仁，说： 我是孙元弼，向皇天诉怨，已被审察处理，一直在等你，今天遇见了你。 陈超跪地磕头，共同定了死生名单，桃英的魂魄也提取在女青亭上了。
English: Later, Wang Fan went out and came back, and Chen Chao also went out of the city to visit Wang Fan. He walked to the foot of the Chateung Mountain, it was thunderstorming, and it was late in the day. Suddenly, a person stood under Chen Chao's armpit and pulled him straight over, into the wasteland. Under the electric light, he saw a ghost, his face was particularly dark, and his eyes had no pupil, and said: I am Sun Yuanxuan, I complained to the emperor, I have been examined and dealt with, I have been waiting for you, and I met you today. Chen Chao knelt down and bowed his head

古文：至天明，失鬼所在。
现代文：到了天亮，失去了鬼的踪迹。
English: By dawn, they had lost track of the ghost.

古文：超至杨都诣范，未敢谢之，便见鬼从外来，径入范帐。
现代文：陈超到了杨都去见王范，没敢把看到鬼这件事告诉他。忽然又看见鬼从外面来了，直进入王范的帐里。
English: When Chen Chao got to Yang, he went to see Wang Fan, but he didn't dare to tell him about seeing the ghost. Suddenly, he saw the ghost coming from outside, straight into Wang Fan's tent.

古文：至夜，范始眠，忽然大魇，连呼不醒，家人牵青牛临范上，并加桃人左索。
现代文：到了晚上，王范刚刚睡下，急然梦见可怕的事而呻吟大声惊叫，连忙呼唤，却不见王范醒来。家里的人就牵着青牛来到了王范的身边，并且又给王范在左手上绑上了用桃木做成的桃人，这样接近天亮王范才刚刚有些苏醒。
English: In the evening, Wang Fan had just fallen asleep. He suddenly dreamt of something terrible and moaned and screamed loudly. He quickly called out, but did not see Wang Fan wake up. The family took the young bull to Wang Fan's side, and tied a peach man made of peach wood to Wang Fan's left hand. Wang Fan had just woken up a little as dawn approached.

古文：向明小苏，十数日而死，妾亦暴亡。
现代文：可是过了十几天就死了。他的小老婆也突然死了。
English: But he died ten days later. His little wife also died suddenly.

古文：超乃逃走长干寺，易姓名为何规。
现代文：陈超于是逃到长干寺，并改名叫何规。
English: Chen Chao then fled to Changgan Temple and changed his name to He Rong.

古文：后五年二月三日，临水酒酣，超云： 今当不复畏此鬼也。 
现代文：五年后的二月三日那天，陈超到水边喝酒，酒喝到正痛快的时候，陈超说： 现在我不再害怕这鬼了。 
English: Five years later, on February 3rd, Chen Chao went to the water's edge to drink, and when he had drunk until he was drunk, Chen Chao said: Now I am no longer afraid of this ghost.

古文：低头，便见鬼影已在水中，以手博超，鼻血大出，可一升许，数日而死。
现代文：他低下头去，便看见了在水中有一鬼影用手抓他。这时陈超鼻子出了很多血，大约有一升左右。没过几天，陈超就死了。
English: He looked down and saw a ghostly figure in the water grabbing him by the hand. At that time, Chen Chao's nose bled a lot, about one liter. Within a few days, Chen Chao died.

古文：宋宫人
现代文：宋宫人
English: Song Gongren

古文：宋少帝子业常使妇人裸形相逐。
现代文：南朝宋少帝名叫子业，经常让女人光着身子互相追逐作为娱乐。
English: The Southern Song Dynasty's young emperor named Ziyang, often let women chase each other naked as entertainment.

古文：有一女子不从，命斩之。其夜，梦有一女子骂曰： 汝悖逆，明年不及熟矣。 
现代文：有一个女子不从，他就下令将那个女子杀了，那天晚上，少帝梦见一个女子骂着说： 你违反正道。不能活到明年庄稼成熟的时候了。 
English: That night, the young emperor dreamed of a woman who scolded him, saying, "You are going against the right path. You won't live to see next year's crops ripen."

古文：帝怒，于宫中求得似梦见者，斩之。
现代文：少帝大怒，在宫中找到了个长得象梦中看见的那个女子一样的人，把她杀了。
English: Enraged, the young emperor found someone in the palace who looked like the woman he had seen in his dream, and killed her.

古文：其夕，复梦所戮者曰： 汝枉杀我，我已诉上帝，集群巫与六宫捕鬼。 
现代文：当天晚上，少帝又梦见了被杀的那个人说： 你枉杀了我，我已经向上帝控告了。 少帝于是就召集一群巫士在六宫捉鬼。
English: That same night, the young emperor had another dream about the man who had been killed and said, "You killed me without reason, I have already complained to God." The young emperor then gathered a group of sorcerers to hunt ghosts in Rokugo.

古文：帝寻被杀。
现代文：少帝不久被杀死。
English: The young emperor was killed soon after.

古文：金荆
现代文：金荆
English: Golden wattle

古文：后魏末，嵩阳杜昌妻柳氏甚妒。
现代文：后魏末年，嵩阳杜昌的妻子柳氏，忌妒心特别强。
English: After the end of the Wei Dynasty, the wife of Songyang Duchang, Liu Shi, was particularly jealous.

古文：有婢金荆，昌沐，令理发，柳氏截其双指。
现代文：有个婢女叫金荆，杜昌洗头叫金荆给梳理头发，于是柳氏就割下了她的两个手指头。
English: There was a maid named Jin Jing, and Du Chang called Jin Jing to wash her hair and comb her hair, so Mr. Liu cut off two of her fingers.

古文：无何柳被狐刺，螫指双落。
现代文：过了不久，柳氏被野蜂蜇了两个手指头，这两个手指头都烂掉了。
English: Soon after, two of Mr. Liu's fingers were stung by a wasp, and both of them rotted away.

古文：又有一婢，名玉莲，能唱歌，昌爱而叹其善。
现代文：另有一个婢女，名叫玉莲，会唱歌，杜昌非常喜欢她并称赞她唱得好。
English: Another servant girl, named Yulian, could sing. Du Chang liked her very much and praised her for her good singing.

古文：柳氏乃截其舌。
现代文：柳氏于是就割掉了她的舌头。
English: Mr. Liu then cut out her tongue.

古文：后柳氏舌疮烂，事急，就稠禅师忏悔。
现代文：后来柳氏的舌头也生疮溃烂。病情很重，柳氏就去稠禅师那里表示忏悔。
English: Later, Ryuuji's tongue also developed sores and ulcers. His condition was very serious, so Ryuuji went to a Zen master to express his repentance.

古文：禅师已先知，谓柳氏曰： 夫人为妒，前截婢指，已失指。又截婢舌，今又合断舌。
现代文：禅师已经事先知道了，对柳氏说： 你因为忌妒，先前割断了婢女的手指，你已经失去了手指；后又割掉婢女的舌头，现在你又应该烂掉舌头。
English: The Zen master already knew in advance and said to Mr. Liu, "You have lost your fingers because you cut off your servant's fingers out of jealousy. Then you cut off your servant's tongue, and now you should also cut off your tongue."

古文：悔过至心，乃可以免。 
现代文：你只有从心里悔过，才可以避免。 
English: You can only avoid it if you sincerely repent.

古文：柳氏顶礼求哀，经七日，禅师大张口咒之，有二蛇从口出，一尺以上，急咒之，遂落地，舌亦平复。
现代文：柳氏跪在地上恭敬地请求怜悯。过了七天，禅师张大了口念咒语，有两条蛇从口中出来，有一尺多长，又急忙念咒语，于是蛇掉在地上。
English: After seven days, the Zen master opened his mouth to recite a spell, and two snakes more than a foot long came out of his mouth. He quickly recited the spell again, and the snakes fell to the ground.

古文：自是不复妒矣。
现代文：从这以后，柳氏不再忌妒了。
English: From then on, Mr. Liu was no longer jealous.

古文：杜嶷妾
现代文：杜嶷妾
English: Cuckoo concubine

古文：梁襄阳杜嶷新纳一妾，年貌兼美，宠爱特甚。
现代文：梁朝襄阳的杜嶷，刚娶了一个小妾，长得年轻美丽。杜嶷对她宠爱得特别厉害。
English: Liang Chaoxiangyang's Cuckoo has just married a young and beautiful concubine. Cuckoo is particularly fond of her.

古文：妾得其父书，倚帘读之。
现代文：一天她收到了父亲的一封信，正倚在门帘旁边看，杜嶷从外面回来。
English: One day, she received a letter from her father. She was leaning against the door curtain, watching the cuckoo come back from outside.

古文：嶷外还，而妾自以新来，羞以此事闻嶷，因嚼吞之。
现代文：他的妾自己认为是刚来到这里，害羞把这件事告诉杜嶷于将书信放到嘴里咽了。
English: His concubine, who thought she had just arrived, was too shy to tell Cuckoo about it and swallowed the letter in her mouth.

古文：嶷谓是情人所寄，遂命剖腹取书。
现代文：杜嶷误认为是情人寄来的，于是让人剖开她的肚子取出书信。
English: Mistaking the cuckoo for a letter from her lover, someone cut open her stomach to retrieve the letter.

古文：妾气未断，而书已出，嶷看讫，叹曰： 吾不自意，忽忽如此，伤天下和气，其能久乎。 
现代文：她的气还没有断，信就已经从肚子里取出来了。杜嶷看完书信，叹息说： 我本意不是这样的。如此糊涂，伤了天下的和气，那里还能长久呢！ 
English: Before her breath was out, the letter had already been taken out of her stomach. After reading the letter, Cuckoo sighed and said, "I didn't mean for it to be like this. I'm so confused, I've hurt the harmony of the world, but I can still live there for a long time!"

古文：其夜见妾诉冤，嶷旬日而死。
现代文：那天晚上杜嶷看见了他的小老婆诉说冤屈。杜嶷过了十天就死了。
English: That night Cuckoo saw his little wife complaining. Cuckoo died ten days later.

古文：后周女子
现代文：后周女子
English: Women's backstroke

古文：后周宣帝在东宫时，武帝训督甚严，恒使宦者成慎监察之，若有纤毫罪失而不奏，慎当死。
现代文：后周宣帝在东宫当太子时候，武帝训诫监督特别严格，经常派宦官成慎监督察看，如果有极小的问题不上奏，成慎就应当被处死。
English: Later, when Zhou Xuandi was the crown prince in the East Palace, Emperor Wu's discipline and supervision were particularly strict. He often sent eunuch Cheng Zhen to supervise and inspect. If there was a very small problem and did not play, Cheng Zhen should be executed.

古文：于是慎常陈太子不法之事，武帝杖之百余。
现代文：于是成慎常常把太子违法的事告诉给武帝，武帝为此百余次用木杖打太子。
English: As a result, Cheng Sheng often told Emperor Wu about the prince's illegal activities, and Emperor Wu hit the prince with a wooden cane more than a hundred times.

古文：及即位，顾见髀上杖瘢，问及慎所在。慎于时已出为郡，遂敕追之，至便赐死。
现代文：等到太子即位看见大腿上有木杖打的伤疤，就问成慎在哪里，那时成慎已经离开了朝庭到地方上做了郡守，于是下诏书追回了成慎，回来就处死。
English: When the crown prince saw the scars on his thigh from the beating with a wooden cane, he asked where Cheng Zhen was. At that time, Cheng Zhen had already left the court to become the county governor, so the next imperial edict recovered Cheng Zhen and he was executed upon his return.

古文：慎奋厉曰： 此是汝父为，成慎何罪？悖逆之余，滥以见及，鬼若有如，终不相放。 
现代文：成慎奋力大声地说： 这是你父亲做的，我有什么罪，你这样违背正道，对我滥施刑罚，鬼神如果知道了，最终都不能放过你。 
English: Cheng Sheng struggled to say out loud: "This was done by your father. What is my sin? You have violated the righteous way and imposed punishment on me. If the ghosts and gods knew, they would not be able to forgive you in the end."

古文：于时宫掖禁忌，相逢以目，不得转共言笑，分置监官，记录愆罪。
现代文：在当时后宫里禁忌很严，互相碰上只能用眼睛看，不能谈论说话，还分别设置了监督官，记录罪过。
English: At that time, taboos were very strict in the harem. When they encountered each other, they could only look at each other with their eyes, and could not talk to each other. Supervisors were also set up separately to record crimes.

古文：左皇后下有女子欠伸泪出，因被劾，谓有所思，奏使敕拷讯之。
现代文：左皇后下边有一个女子因为伸懒腰打呵欠流出眼泪，因此被揭发了罪行，说她有所想，于是就上奏皇帝，皇帝就下诏书令人讯问拷打她。
English: On the left, below the empress, there is a woman who sheds tears because she is lazy, yawns and yawns, so she is found guilty. She says she has something on her mind, so she appeals to the emperor, and the emperor issues an edict to interrogate and torture her.

古文：初击其头，帝便头痛，更击之，亦然。
现代文：开始击打她的头部，皇帝就头痛，再次打她，还是这样。
English: He started to hit her on the head, and the emperor had a headache, so he hit her again, and so on.

古文：遂大发怒曰： 此冤家耳。 乃使拉折其腰，帝复腰痛。
现代文：于是皇帝发怒说，这是个冤家，就派人拉出去折断了她的腰，皇帝又腰痛。
English: Then the emperor became angry and said that this was a wrongdoer, so he sent someone to pull her out and break her waist, and the emperor had backache again.

古文：其夜出南宫，病渐重，明旦还，腰痛不得乘马。
现代文：那天晚上皇帝去南宫，病情逐渐加重，第二天早晨，腰痛得不能骑马，就坐着车回来了。
English: That evening, the emperor went to the Southern Palace. His condition gradually worsened. The next morning, he had back pain so severe that he could not ride a horse, so he returned by car.

古文：御车而归，所杀女子之处，有黑晕如人形，时谓是血，随刷之，旋复如故，如此再三。有司掘除旧地，以新土填之，一宿之间如故。
现代文：杀那个女子的地方，有黑色的影子象人的形状，当时认为是血，随即将那地方冲刷干净，不久又象先前一样，就这样一连几回的出现，官吏挖去了那个地方的土，用新土填上，一宿之间又同以前一样。
English: At the place where the woman was killed, there was a black shadow in the shape of a man, which at the time was thought to be blood, and then the place was washed clean, and soon it reappeared several times in a row, as before. The officials dug up the soil in that place and filled it with new soil, and between one night and the next it was as before.

古文：因此七八日，举身疮烂而崩，及初下尸，诸局脚床，牢不可脱，唯此女子所引之床，独是直脚，遂以供用，盖亦鬼神之意焉。
现代文：这样过了七八天，皇帝全身疮烂而死。等到停床的时候，许多床脚都是固定在地上的，牢固得抬不起。只有这个女子所睡的床，能够移动，于是就用它供给使用。
English: After seven or eight days of this, the Emperor died, his whole body covered with sores. By the time the bed was stopped, many of the bed legs were fixed to the ground, too solid to be lifted. Only the bed slept in by this woman could be moved, so she used it for support.

古文：帝崩去成慎死，仅二十许日焉。
现代文：这大概也是鬼神的意思吧，皇帝之死距离处死成慎仅仅有二十多天的时间。
English: This is probably also the meaning of ghosts and gods. The death of the emperor is only more than twenty days away from the execution of Cheng Xuan.

古文：张公瑾妾
现代文：张公瑾妾
English: Zhang Gongyi's concubine

古文：唐魏郡马嘉运，以贞观六年正月居家，日晚出大门，忽见两人各捉马一匹，先在门外树下立，嘉运问是何人，答云： 东海公迎马生耳。 
现代文：唐朝魏郡有个叫马嘉运的人，在贞观六年正月住在家里。有一天天黑出大门，忽然看见两个人，每个人都牵着一匹马，早就在门外的大树底下站着。嘉运问来的是什么人？回答说： 是东海公让我们迎接你的。 
English: In the first month of the sixth year of Zhenguan, there was a man named Ma Jiayun in Wei County in the Tang Dynasty. One day, he went out of the gate in the dark, and suddenly saw two people, each holding a horse, standing under a big tree outside the gate. Jiayun asked who came? He replied: It was the East Sea Lord who let us greet you.

古文：嘉运素有学识，知名州里，每台使及四方贵客多请见之。及是弗复怪也。
现代文：嘉运一向很有学问，在州里很出名，台使以及四方的贵客常常请求接见他，因此这件事嘉运也就不再奇怪了。
English: Jiayun had always been well-educated and well-known in the prefecture. Envoys from Taiwan and distinguished guests from all over the country often requested to meet him, so this matter of Jiayun was no longer strange.

古文：谓使者曰： 吾无马。 
现代文：他对使者说： 我没有马。 
English: And he said unto the angel, I have no horse.

古文：使者进马，嘉运即于树下上马而去，其身倒卧于树下也。
现代文：使者于是就送上马，嘉运就在大树下骑上马离开了，他的身体却躺在了大树下边。
English: The messenger was then put on a horse, and Jiayun rode away under the tree, but his body lay under the tree.

古文：俄至一官曹，将入大门，有男女数十人，门外如讼者。
现代文：不一会嘉运的魂灵就来到了阴间的一个官府，刚要进大门，就看见门外边有男女几十个人，好象是告状的。
English: Not long after, the lucky souls arrived at a government office in the underworld. Just as they were about to enter the door, they saw dozens of men and women outside the door, as if they were complainants.

古文：有一妇人，先与嘉运相识，是同郡张公瑾妾，姓元氏，手执一纸文书，迎谓嘉运曰： 马生尚相识否？昔张总管交某数相见，总管无状，非理杀我，我诉天曹，于今三年，为王天主救护公瑾。
现代文：其中有一个妇人，先前和嘉运认识，是本郡里张公瑾的小老婆，姓元氏。她手里拿着一张文书，迎上去对嘉运说： 你还认识我不，从前张总管让我见你好几次，总管无缘无故地杀了我，我已向天曹告了他，到现在已三年了，是王天主救护公瑾，所以一直被压制着，现在才得到申冤。
English: One of them was a woman who had previously known Jiayun. She was the younger wife of Zhang Gongyao, surnamed Yuan, in this county. She held a document in her hand and greeted Jiayun, saying, "You still don't know me. The former Zhang general manager let me see you several times. The general manager killed me for no reason. I've reported him to Tiancao. It's been three years now. It was King God who saved Jiayu. So I've been suppressed, and now I've been vindicated."

古文：故常见抑，今乃得申，官已追之，不久将至。
现代文：官府已经追察张公瑾了。不久他就要到了。
English: The authorities have already tracked down Zhang Gongyao, and he will be arriving soon.

古文：疑我独见枉害，马生那亦来耶？ 
现代文：我以为只我一人是枉告，你现在也来了。 
English: I thought I was the only one who lied, and here you are.

古文：嘉运先知元氏被杀，及见方自知死。
现代文：嘉运先前知道元氏被杀一事，等见到她，才知道自己也已经死了。
English: Jiayun had previously known that Mr. Yuan had been killed, but it wasn't until he saw her that he realized that he, too, was dead.

古文：使者引入门，门者曰： 公眠未可谒，宜可就霍司刑。 
现代文：使者带着嘉运进门，看门的人说： 主公睡觉，不能接见，可去见霍司刑。 
English: The messenger entered the door with Jiayun, and the doorkeeper said, "The master is sleeping, so I can't receive him, but I can go to see him."

古文：乃益州行台郎中霍璋也，见嘉运延坐，曰： 此府记室官阙，东海公闻君才学，欲屈为此官耳。 
现代文：霍司刑是益州行台郎中霍璋，他见到嘉运请他坐下说： 这里官府缺少一个记室官，东海公听说你很有才学，想要委屈你做这个官。 
English: He saw Jiayun ask him to sit down and said, "The government office here is lacking a secretary. Donghaigong heard that you are very talented and wants to make you the secretary."

古文：嘉运曰： 贫守妻子，不愿为官，得免幸甚。 
现代文：嘉运说： 我贫穷但愿和妻子孩子在一起，不愿做官，能够免除那是很庆幸的。 
English: Jiayun said, "I am poor, but I want to be with my wife and children, and I don't want to be an official. It is very fortunate to be exempted from that.

古文：璋曰： 若不能作，自陈无学，君当有相识，可举令作。 
现代文：霍璋说： 你如果不能做，就自己说没有学识，那你可有认识的，可推举他来做。 
English: "If you can't do it, just say you don't have the knowledge. Then you can nominate someone you know to do it.

古文：俄有人来云： 公眠已起。 
现代文：不一会，有人来说： 主公已经睡醒了。 
English: After a while, someone said: "The Lord has woken up."

古文：引嘉运入，见一人在厅事坐，肥短黑色，呼嘉运前，谓曰： 闻君才学，欲屈为记室耳，能为之乎？ 
现代文：于是就带着嘉运进去，看见一个人在大厅里坐着，这个人肥胖矮小，脸色青黑，他叫嘉运上前，对嘉运说： 听说你很有学问所以想要委屈你做记室官，你能做吗？ 
English: So he took Jiayun inside and saw a man sitting in the hall. This man was short and fat, with a dark complexion. He called Jiayun forward and said to Jiayun: I heard that you are very learned, so I want to make you a secretary. Can you do it?

古文：嘉运拜射曰： 幸甚！但鄙夫田野，颇以经业教授后生，不足以当记室之任耳。 
现代文：嘉运拜谢说： 谢谢，但我是个种田的，只是从事教育学生的职业，不够做记室的官。 
English: Jiayun Bai Xie said: Thank you, but I am a farmer, but I am only engaged in the profession of educating students, not enough to be a registrar.

古文：公曰： 识霍璋否？ 
现代文：主公说： 你认识霍璋吗？ 
English: The main character said: Do you know Ho Chi Minh?

古文：答曰： 识之。 
现代文：嘉运说： 认识他。 
English: Jiayun said, "Get to know him.

古文：因使召璋，问以嘉运才术，璋曰： 平生知其经学，不见作文章。 
现代文：于是让人叫霍璋，问他嘉运的才学。霍璋说： 平时知道他研究学问，但没看见他的文章。 
English: So someone called Huo Wei and asked him about Jiayun's talent for learning. Huo Wei said: I usually know that he studies knowledge, but I didn't see his article.

古文：公曰： 谁有文章者？ 
现代文：主公说： 谁的文章做的好呢？ 
English: The protagonist said: Whose essay did well?

古文：嘉运曰： 有陈子良者，解文章。 
现代文：嘉运说： 有个叫陈子良的人懂得文章。 
English: Jiayun said: There is a man named Chen Ziliang who knows how to write.

古文：公曰： 放马生归。 
现代文：主公说： 放马生回去。 
English: The hero said: Let Ma Sheng go back.

古文：即命追子良，嘉运辞去，璋与之别。
现代文：就立刻命令人去追察子良。嘉运告辞离去。
English: He immediately ordered people to go after Ziliang. Jiayun resigned and left.

古文：嘉运问曰： 向见张公瑾妾，所言天主者为谁？ 
现代文：霍璋和他告别，嘉运问道说： 刚刚看见张公瑾的小老婆，她所说的天主是谁？ 
English: When Huo Wei said goodbye to him, Jiayun asked: "I just saw Zhang Gongyao's little wife, who is the God she is talking about?

古文：璋曰： 公瑾乡人王五戒者，死为天主，常救公瑾，故得到今，今已不免矣。 
现代文：霍璋说： 是张公瑾的同乡人叫王五戒。他死了以后做了天主。曾维护过公瑾，所以公瑾才能够活到现在，今天他已经不能免了。 
English: Huo Yao said: It was Zhang Gongyao's fellow villager Wang Wujing. After he died, he became a god. He had defended Gongyao, so Gongyao was able to live until now. Today, he is unavoidable.

古文：言毕而别，遣使者送嘉运至一小涩道，指令由此路归。其年七月，绵州人姓陈子良暴死，经宿而苏，自言见东海公，用为记室，辞不识文字。别有是人陈子良卒，公瑾亦亡。
现代文：说完就离去了。于是就派人送嘉运到了一条很难走的小道，指着叫他从这条路回去，那年的七月，绵州有个叫陈子良的人突然死了，过了一整夜又苏醒过来，他自己说看见了东海公，让他做记室，他推辞说不认字，另外有个叫陈子良的人却死了。张公瑾也死了。
English: In July of that year, in Mianzhou, a man named Chen Ziliang died suddenly. He woke up after a whole night. He said that he had seen Donghaigong and asked him to be his secretary. He pretended that he could not read. Another man named Chen Ziliang died. Zhang Gongyao also died.

古文：至贞观中，车驾在九成宫，闻之，使中书侍郎岑文本就问其事，文本录以奏云尔。
现代文：到了贞观年间，皇帝在九城官，听说了这件事，就派中书侍郎岑文本去打听这事，文本记录并上奏给了皇帝。
English: During the Zhenguan era, the emperor heard about this matter from the official in Jiucheng. He sent the official to inquire about the matter. The official recorded the matter and reported it to the emperor.

古文：嘉运后为国子博士，卒官。
现代文：嘉运后来做了国子博士。在做官期间死了。
English: Jiayun later became Dr. Kuniko. He died while in office.

古文：范略婢
现代文：范略婢
English: Fan Liaohi

古文：唐贞观中，濮阳范略妻任氏。
现代文：唐朝贞观年间，濮阳范略的妻子姓任。
English: During the Zhenguan period of the Tang Dynasty, the wife of Fenyang Fanliao was surnamed Ren.

古文：略先幸一婢，任以刀截其耳鼻，略不能制。
现代文：范略先前喜欢上了一个婢女，任氏就用刀子割掉了婢女的耳朵和鼻子。范略不能制止。
English: Fan Liang had previously fallen in love with a maidservant, and Ren used a knife to cut off the maidservant's ears and nose. Fan Liang could not be stopped.

古文：有顷，任有娠，诞一女，无耳鼻。女年渐大，其婢仍在，女问婢，具说所由。女悲泣，以恨其母。
现代文：不久，任氏怀了孕，生下了一个女儿没有耳朵和鼻子，女儿渐渐长大，那个婢女还在，任氏的女儿问那个婢女怎么没有耳朵鼻子，婢女把全部原因都告诉了她。
English: Soon, Ren became pregnant and gave birth to a daughter without ears and nose. The daughter gradually grew up, but the maid was still there. Ren's daughter asked the maid why she didn't have ears and a nose, and the maid told her all the reasons.

古文：母深有愧色，悔之无及。
现代文：任氏的女儿悲痛的哭了。从此她痛恨她的母亲，她的母亲也深深地惭愧，后悔已经来不及了。
English: Ms. Ren's daughter cried in grief. She hated her mother ever since, and her mother was deeply ashamed. It was too late to regret.

古文：胡亮妾
现代文：胡亮妾
English: Hu Liang concubine

古文：唐广州化蒙县丞胡亮从都督周仁轨讨僚，得一首领妾，幸之，将至县。
现代文：唐朝广州化蒙县丞胡亮，跟从都督周仁轨讨伐僚人，得到了一个头领的小老婆，胡亮非常喜欢她，把她带到县里。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Hu Liang, the chancellor of Huemong County, Guangzhou, who followed the governor Zhou Ronglu's crusade colleagues, got a leader's little wife. Hu Liang liked her very much and brought her to the county.

古文：亮向府不在，妻贺氏，乃烧钉烙其双目，妾遂自缢死。
现代文：一天胡亮去府里不在家，他的妻子贺氏就用烧红的钉子烙瞎了那个小妾的双眼，小妾于是就自己上吊死了。
English: One day, when Hu Liang went to the capital and was not at home, his wife, He, used red-hot nails to blind the eyes of the concubine, who then hanged herself.

古文：后贺氏有娠，产一蛇，两目无睛。以问禅师，师曰： 夫人曾烧钉烙一女妇眼，以夫人性毒，故为蛇报。此是被烙女妇也，夫人好养此蛇，可以免难，不然，祸及身矣。 贺氏养蛇，一二年渐大，不见物，唯在衣被中，亮不知也。
现代文：后来贺氏怀了孕，生下一条蛇，两眼没有眼珠，于是贺氏就去问禅师，禅师说： 你曾用烧红的钉子烙瞎了一个妇女的眼睛，因为你天性狠毒，所以要用蛇来报复，这就是被你烙瞎了眼的那个妇女变的，你好好的饲养着这条蛇，可以免除危难，不这样，灾祸就要到了。 贺氏饲养这条蛇一二年，蛇渐渐长大，但只藏在衣被里，胡亮不知道此事。
English: Later, Ms. He became pregnant and gave birth to a snake with no eyeballs in either eye, so Ms. He went to ask a Zen master. The Zen master said, "You once blinded a woman's eyes with a red-hot nail, and because of your venomous nature, you wanted to take revenge with a snake. This is how the woman you blinded turned out to be. If you keep this snake well, you can avoid danger; otherwise, disaster will come. Ms. He kept this snake for a year or two, and the snake gradually grew, but it was only hidden in the quilt. Ms. Hu did not know about this.

古文：发被见蛇，大惊，以刀砍杀之。
现代文：他打开被看见了蛇，非常吃惊，用刀子砍杀了那条蛇。
English: He opened it and saw a snake. He was very surprised and killed the snake with a knife.

古文：贺氏两目俱枯，不复见物，悔无及焉。
现代文：于是贺氏两眼都枯干了，再也看不到什么。后悔已来不及了。
English: As a result, both of He's eyes dried up and he could no longer see anything. It was too late to regret it.

古文：梁仁裕婢
现代文：梁仁裕婢
English: Liang Jin Yuhi

古文：唐梁仁裕为骁卫将军，先幸一婢。妻李氏，甚妒而虐，缚婢击其脑。
现代文：唐朝梁仁裕做骁卫将军，他喜欢上了一个婢女，而他的妻子李氏对这个婢女非常的妒忌，并且百般的虐待。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, when Liang Renyu was a general of the National Guard, he fell in love with a servant girl, and his wife, Li, was very jealous of this servant girl and abused her in various ways.

古文：婢号呼曰： 在下卑贱，制不自由，娘子锁项，苦毒何甚！ 
现代文：李氏用绳子将婢女捆绑起来击打她的头，婢女呼喊着说： 我的地位卑微低贱，行动不自由，你用绳勒我的脖子，是多么的残忍。 
English: Mr. Li tied up his maid with a rope and hit her on the head. The maid cried out, "I am in a lowly position and do not have freedom of movement. How cruel of you to tie a rope around my neck."

古文：婢死后月余，李氏病，常见婢来唤。
现代文：婢女死后一个多月，李氏就得了病，常常看见那个婢女来召唤她。
English: More than a month after the maid's death, Mr. Li fell ill. He often saw the maid calling for her.

古文：李氏头上生四处瘅疽，脑溃，昼夜鸣叫，苦痛不胜，数月而卒。
现代文：李氏的头上生了许多毒疮，脑袋也烂了，白天黑夜的嚎叫，痛苦实在难以忍受，几个月就死了。
English: Mr. Li had many poisonous sores on his head, his head was also rotten, he was howling day and night, the pain was really unbearable, and he died a few months later.

古文：张景先婢
现代文：张景先婢
English: Zhang Jingsenbi

古文：唐荆州枝江县主簿夏荣判冥司。
现代文：唐朝荆州枝江县的主簿夏荣，是阴间的判官。
English: Xia Rong, the main book of Jingzhou Shijiang County in the Tang Dynasty, is the judge of the underworld.

古文：县丞张景先宠一婢，其妻杨氏妒之。
现代文：有个县丞叫张景先，喜欢上了一个婢女，他的妻子杨氏非常的妒忌。
English: There was a county magistrate named Zhang Jingxian, who fell in love with a servant girl. His wife, Ms. Yang, was very jealous.

古文：景出使不在，妻杀婢，投之于厕。
现代文：一天，张景先出外办事不在家里，他的妻子就将这个婢女杀死了，并将尸体扔到了茅厕里。
English: One day, when Zhang Jingxian was away on business and not at home, his wife killed the maid and threw the body into the latrine.

古文：景至，绐之曰： 婢逃矣。 
现代文：张景先办事回来，妻子欺骗他说： 婢女逃跑了。 
English: When Zhang Jing came back from his business trip, his wife lied to him and said, "The maid ran away."

古文：景以妻酷虐，不问也。 
现代文：张景先认为妻子残酷虐待婢女，也就不再问了。
English: Zhang Jingxian thought that his wife was cruelly abusing her maid, so he no longer asked.

古文：婢讼之于荣，荣追对之，问景曰： 公夫人病困。 
现代文：那个婢女向夏荣告了杨氏。夏荣于是就追查核实这件事。他问张景先说： 你的妻子被病所困扰。 
English: The maid reported Mr. Yang to Xia Rong. Xia Rong then tracked down and verified the matter. He asked Zhang Jingxian: Your wife is plagued by illness.

古文：说形状，景疑其有私也，怒之。
现代文：并说了她的病状，张景先怀疑他和妻子有私情，就非常的气愤。
English: And said her condition, Zhang Jingxian suspected that he and his wife had an affair, he was very angry.

古文：荣曰： 公夫人枉杀婢，投于厕，今见推勘，公试问之。 
现代文：夏荣说： 你的妻子白白地杀死了一个婢女，并将尸体扔到茅厕里，现在要调查这件事，你试探地问问她。 
English: "Your wife killed a maid in vain and dumped her body in a latrine, and now you want to investigate the matter, you should probe her," said Xia Rong.

古文：景悟，问其妇。
现代文：张景先恍然大悟，于是就问他的妻子。
English: Zhang Jing suddenly realized, so he asked his wife.

古文：妇病甚，具首其事。
现代文：他的妻子病的很厉害，就从头到尾把事情的经过都说了。
English: His wife was very ill, so he told her the whole story.

古文：荣令厕内取其骸骨，香汤浴之，厚加殡葬。
现代文：夏荣叫人从茅厕里取出了那个婢女的尸骨，用香水冲洗干净，厚葬了她。
English: Xia Rong ordered someone to take out the bones of the maid from the latrine, rinse them with perfume, and bury her.

古文：婢不肯放，月余日而卒。
现代文：但是婢女仍不肯放过杨氏，一个多月后杨氏死了。
English: However, the maid still refused to let Mr. Yang go, and he died more than a month later.

古文：李训妾
现代文：李训妾
English: Li Huning's concubine

古文：唐左仆射韦安石女，适太府主薄李训。
现代文：唐朝左仆射韦安石的女儿，嫁给了太府主簿李训。
English: The daughter of Wei Anshi, a left-hand retainer of the Tang Dynasty, married Li Xun, the chief accountant of Taifu.

古文：训未婚以前，有一妾，成亲之后，遂嫁之，已易两主。
现代文：李训没结婚以前，曾有过一个小妾，与安石的女儿成亲以后，就把小妾嫁了出去，小妾已经嫁了两个人家。
English: Before Li Xun got married, he had a concubine. After he married Anshi's daughter, he married off the concubine. The concubine had already married two people.

古文：女患传尸瘦病，恐妾厌祷之。
现代文：却怀疑是李训嫁出去的小妾因为不满而诅咒。
English: However, she suspected that the concubine whom Li Xun married was cursing because she was dissatisfied.

古文：安石令河南令秦守一捉来，榜掠楚苦，竟以自诬，前后决三百以上，投井死。
现代文：于是韦安石就叫河南令秦守一将小妾捉来严刑拷打，小妾痛苦不堪，竟然屈打成招。小妾前后被打了三百多下，最后投井而死。
English: As a result, Wei Anshi asked Henan to order Qin Shouyi to capture the concubine and torture her severely. The concubine was in so much pain that she succumbed to the torture. The concubine was beaten more than three hundred times before and after, and finally she was thrown into a well and died.

古文：不出三日，其女遂亡，时人咸以为冤魂之所致也。
现代文：其后不到三天，安石的女儿就死丁。当时的人都认为是屈死的冤魂将她捉去了。
English: Less than three days later, Anshi's daughter died. At the time, people thought that she had been taken by a ghost.

古文：安石坐贬蒲州，太极元年八月卒。
现代文：后来安石因犯法被贬到蒲州，在太极元年八月死了。
English: Later, Anshi was banished to Puzhou for breaking the law, and died in August of the first year of the Taiji era.

古文：花严
现代文：花严
English: Hana Yan

古文：唐王弘，冀州衡水人，少无赖，告密罗织善人。
现代文：唐王弘，冀州衡水人，少无赖，告密罗织善人。
English: Tang Wanghong, Jizhou Hengshui people, less rogue, whistle-blowing Luo Wei good man.

古文：曾游河北赵定，见老人每年作邑斋，遂告杀二百人，授游击将军，俄除侍御史。
现代文：曾游河北赵定，见老人每年作邑斋，遂告杀二百人，授游击将军，俄除侍御史。
English: He once visited Zhaoding, Hebei Province, and saw that the old man made a feast every year. He then accused him of killing two hundred people, awarded him the title of guerrilla general, and expelled him from Russia.

古文：时有告胜州都督王安仁者，密差弘往推，索大枷夹颈，安仁不承伏，遂于枷上斫安仁死，便即脱之，其男从军，亦擒而斩之。
现代文：时有告胜州都督王安仁者，密差弘往推，索大枷夹颈，安仁不承伏，遂于枷上斫安仁死，便即脱之，其男从军，亦擒而斩之。
English: At that time, there was a defeated provincial governor, Wang Anren, who was pushed forward by Michizahiro, who put a large yoke around his neck, but Anren would not submit, so he tied the yoke around Anren's neck until he died, and then immediately took it off, and his son, who was in the army, was also beaten and beheaded.

古文：至汾州，与司马毛公对食，须臾喝下，斩取首，百姓震悚。
现代文：至汾州，与司马毛公对食，须臾喝下，斩取首，百姓震悚。
English: He went to Bozhou, had a meal with Sima Mao Gong, had a drink with him, chopped off his head, and the people were shocked.

古文：后坐诬枉，流雷州，将少姬花严，素所宠也。
现代文：后坐诬枉，流雷州，将少姬花严，素所宠也。
English: The posterior seat is falsified, the flow is thunderous, the will is small, the honeysuckle is strict, and it is also a favorite.

古文：弘于舟中，伪作敕追，花严谏曰： 事势如此，何忍更为不轨乎？ 
现代文：弘于舟中，伪作敕追，花严谏曰： 事势如此，何忍更为不轨乎？ 
English: Hong in the boat, pretending to chase the dragonfly, Hua Yan said: "Things are like this, what could be more wrong?

古文：弘怒曰： 此老妪欲败吾事！ 
现代文：弘怒曰： 此老妪欲败吾事！ 
English: Hong Rong said: This old man wants to defeat me!

古文：缚其手足，投之于江，船人救得之，弘又鞭二百而死，埋于江上。
现代文：缚其手足，投之于江，船人救得之，弘又鞭二百而死，埋于江上。
English: They tied his hands and feet and threw him into the river. The boatman saved him, but Hong died from two hundred lashes and was buried in the river.

古文：俄而伪敕友，御史胡元礼推之，锢身领回，至花严死处，忽云： 花严来唤对事。 
现代文：俄而伪敕友，御史胡元礼推之，锢身领回，至花严死处，忽云： 花严来唤对事。 
English: However, his false friend, the scholar Hu Yuanli, pushed him away and took him back to Hua Yan's place of death. Suddenly, Hua Yan called for help.

古文：左右皆不见，唯弘称叩头死罪，如授枷棒之声，夜半而卒。
现代文：左右皆不见，唯弘称叩头死罪，如授枷棒之声，夜半而卒。
English: Both left and right were gone, but Yuihong said that kowtowing was a capital offense, such as the sound of the yoke, and it was half past midnight.

古文：晋阳人妾
现代文：晋阳人妾
English: The concubines of Emperor Jinyang

古文：唐牛肃舅之尉晋阳也。
现代文：唐朝牛肃的舅父在晋阳当县尉。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, Giusu's uncle was a county official in Jinyang.

古文：县有人杀其妾，将死言曰： 吾无罪，为汝所杀，必报！ 
现代文：当时县里有个人杀了自己的小老婆，他的小老婆临死的时候说： 我没有罪，却被你所杀，我一定要报仇。 
English: At that time, there was a man in the county who killed his younger wife. When his younger wife was about to die, she said, "I am not guilty, but I was killed by you. I must take revenge."

古文：后数年，杀妾者夜半起，至母寝门呼。其母问故，其人曰： 适梦为虎所啮，伤至甚，遂死。觉而心悸，甚惊恶，故启之。 
现代文：几年以后，杀妾的那个人一天半夜里突然起来，到了他母亲的房门前大声的呼喊，他的母亲问他是什么原因，那个人说： 刚才梦见被老虎所咬，伤得很厉害，于是就死了，醒来心恍，惊恐害怕得很，所以来告诉你。 
English: A few years later, the man who had killed his concubine suddenly got up in the middle of the night and shouted loudly in front of his mother's door. His mother asked him what the reason was. The man said, "I just had a dream that I was bitten by a tiger. I was badly injured and died. I woke up in a daze, terrified and scared, so I came to tell you."

古文：母曰： 人言梦死者反生，梦想颠倒故也，汝何忧！
现代文：母亲说： 人们说，梦见死反而是活，梦中的事是颠倒的，你何必忧伤。
English: My mother said: People say that dreaming about death is living, and that things in dreams are upside down. Why should you be sad?

古文：然汝夜来未饭牛，亟饭之。 其人曰： 唯。 
现代文：可是你半夜起来没有喂牛，赶紧去喂它。 那人说： 行。 
English: But you didn't get up in the middle of the night to feed the cow.

古文：暗中见物，似牛之脱也，前执之，乃虎矣，遂为所噬，其人号叫竟死。
现代文：黑暗中，那人看见一个东西，好象是牛跑了，于是上前去捉它，却是一只虎。那人于是被虎所咬，号叫着死去了。
English: In the darkness, the man saw something that looked like a cow running away, so he went to catch it, but it was a tiger. The man was then bitten by the tiger and died screaming.

古文：虎既杀其人，乃入院，至其房而处其床，若寝者。其家何其寝，则闭锁其门而白于府。季休光为留守，则使取之。取者登焉，破其屋，攒矛以刺之，乃死。
现代文：老虎杀了那人以后，就进入了院子里，到了那人的房中躺在了床上，好象睡觉；那家人等着虎睡了，就锁紧房门并向官府禀报，季休光做留守，就派人去捉那只虎，捉拿人的到了，击破那人的屋门，拿起矛来刺那只虎，虎便死了。
English: After the tiger had killed the man, it went into the courtyard, and when it reached the man's house, it lay down on the bed, as if sleeping. The family waited for the tiger to fall asleep, locked the door of the house and reported to the authorities. When Ji Xiuquan was absent, they sent someone to catch the tiger. When the person was caught, they broke down the door of the man's house, picked up a spear to stab the tiger, and the tiger died.

古文：舅方为留守判官，得其头，漆之为枕。
现代文：牛肃的舅父当时做留守判官，得到了虎的头，上了油漆做个枕头。
English: At that time, Gusu's uncle, who was a judge, got the tiger's head and painted it to make a pillow.

古文：至今时人以虎为所杀之妾也。
现代文：到现在的人们都认为那只虎是被杀的妾。
English: To this day, people believe the tiger was a murdered concubine.

