古文：有司彻，扫堂。
现代文：有司撤去室中之馈及祝、佐食之俎，并于堂上打扫。
English: A steward removed the gifts and congratulations, as well as the sashimi bowls, from the room and cleaned the hall.

古文：司宫摄酒。
现代文：司宫设酒。
English: The shogun's palace is stocked with sake.

古文：乃燅尸俎，卒燅，乃升羊、豕、鱼三鼎，无腊与肤，乃设扃鼏，陈鼎于门外，如初。
现代文：又将尸俎上的祭品拿回灶上温热。温热后，将羊、豕、鱼升入鼎中，但不设兽和肤的专鼎；放好抬鼎的杠子与覆鼎的幂，将鼎陈设在庙门外，和先前一样。
English: After warming, the sheep, donkeys, and fish were lifted into the ding, but there was no special ding for the animal and skin; the bar for lifting the ding and the yoke for covering the ding were put in place, and the ding was displayed outside the temple gate, as before.

古文：乃议侑于宾，以异姓。
现代文：进而于宾客中选择佐助 尸 的人一一侑，侑须与 尸 异姓。
English: Then, among the guests, those who chose Sasuke's corpse were each given a different surname.

古文：宗人戒侑。侑出，俟于庙门之外。
现代文：宗人嘱咐侑后，侑出来到庙门外，等待 尸 之到来。
English: After my father-in-law told me to do so, I went outside the temple gate to wait for the body to arrive.

古文：司宫筵于户西，南面；又筵于西序，东面。尸与侑，北面于庙门之外，西上。
现代文：司宫接着为 尸 设席于室户之西，席的正面朝南；又为侑设席于西序，席的正面向东。 尸 和侑立于庙门外，面朝北，以西为上。
English: The chief priest's palace then set up a seat for the body in the west of Murodo, with the front of the seat facing south; and for the coffin set up a seat in the west row, with the seat facing east.The body and coffin stood outside the temple gate, facing north, with the west facing up.

古文：主人出迎尸，宗人摈。
现代文：主人出庙门迎 尸 ，宗人为傧相。
English: The owner comes out of the temple and greets the corpse, believing it to be a ghost.

古文：主人拜，尸答拜。
现代文：主人向 尸 行拜， 尸 答拜。
English: The master bows to the corpse, the corpse bows back.

古文：主人又拜侑，侑答拜。
现代文：主人又向侑行拜，侑答拜。
English: The host thanked me for coming, and I thanked him back.

古文：主人揖，先入门，右。尸入门，左；侑从，亦左。
现代文：主人向 尸 和侑拱手，先入门，站在右边。 尸 随之入门，站在左边；侑又随之入门，也站在左边。
English: The master gave his hand to the corpse and the donkey, and they entered the door first and stood on the right, the corpse followed and stood on the left, and the donkey followed and stood on the left.

古文：揖，乃让。主人先升自阼阶，尸、侑升自西阶，西楹西，北面东上。
现代文：接着主人、 尸 、侑相互揖让，至阶前又揖让。进而主人从东阶先登堂； 尸 和侑则随即从西阶登堂，立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北，以东为上。
English: Then the master, the corpse, and the skeleton give way to each other, and give way again to the front of the steps. Then the master enters the hall first from the east steps; the corpse and the skeleton then enter the hall from the west steps, standing on the west side of the west pillar, facing north, with the east facing up.

古文：主人东楹东，北面拜至，尸答拜。
现代文：主人则立于东楹柱的东边，面朝北，拜谢 尸 的驾临； 尸 答拜。
English: The owner stood on the east side of the east pillar, facing north, to thank the corpse for coming; the corpse replied.

古文：主人又拜侑，侑答拜。
现代文：主人又拜谢侑的驾临，侑答拜。
English: The host thanked me for coming, and I thanked him back.

古文：乃举，司马举羊鼎，司士举豕鼎、举鱼鼎，以入。
现代文：于是抬鼎，司马二人抬羊鼎，司士四人以二人抬豕鼎、二人抬鱼鼎。
English: So, two magistrates and two horses carried the sheep, four magistrates and two men carried the donkey, and two men carried the fish.

古文：陈鼎如初。
现代文：抬进来后将鼎陈设于东阶下，面面朝西，以北为上，和先前一样。
English: After being carried in, the throne was displayed under the east steps, facing west, with the north at the top, as before.

古文：雍正执一匕以从，雍府执二匕以从，司士合执二俎以从，司士赞者亦合执二俎以从。
现代文：雍正执一匕从于鼎后，雍府执二匕从于雍正之后，司士执拿两只俎又从于雍府之后，司士助手也执拿合在一起的两只俎又从于司士之后。
English: Yongzheng held one gong after Yu Ding, Yongfu held two gongs after Yongzheng, the magistrate held two gongs after Yongfu, and the magistrate's assistant also held two gongs together after the magistrate.

古文：匕皆加于鼎，东枋。
现代文：匕都置于鼎上，匕柄朝东。
English: The yakitori are placed on the top, and the yakitori handles face east.

古文：二俎设于羊鼎西，西缩。
现代文：两只俎设在羊鼎的西边，东西陈设。
English: Two yoke of oxen are placed on the west side of the yoke of oxen.

古文：二俎皆于二鼎西，亦西缩。
现代文：两只俎设在豕鼎和鱼鼎的西边，也东西陈设。
English: Two cormorants are set up on the west side of the cormorant and fish stands, and other things are also set up.

古文：雍人合执二俎，陈于羊俎西，并皆西缩。覆二疏匕于其上，皆缩俎，西枋。
现代文：雍府又合执两只俎，将其陈设在羊俎的西边，与前面所陈并排，都是东西陈设；将两只柄上刻有花纹图案的匕顺着放在俎上，匕柄向西。
English: Yongfu also combined two yakitori, displaying them on the west side of the yakitori, side by side with the yakitori displayed in the front, both are displayed in the east and west; two yakitori with patterns engraved on the handles were placed on the yakitori, with the handles facing west.

古文：主人降，受宰几。尸、侑降，主人辞，尸对。
现代文：主人下堂，接过冢宰交给的几。 尸 、侑下堂，主人辞谢， 尸 答谢。
English: The master went down to the hall and took over what the steward had handed over. The corpse went down to the hall and the master thanked him, and the corpse thanked him.

古文：宰授几，主人受，二手横执几，揖尸。
现代文：冢宰授几于主人，主人接过来，用双手横着拿几，并向 尸 作揖。
English: The master took over, holding the shovel horizontally with both hands, and made a sign to the corpse.

古文：主人升，尸、侑升，复位。
现代文：主人登堂， 尸 、侑登堂，主人返回东楹柱东边之位， 尸 、侑返回西楹柱西边之位。
English: The master enters the hall, the corpse and skeleton enter the hall, the master returns to the east side of the east pillar, and the corpse and skeleton return to the west side of the west pillar.

古文：主人西面，左手执几，缩之，以右袂推拂几三，二手横执几，进授尸于筵前。尸进，二手受于手间，主人退。
现代文：主人面朝西，左手顺几而拿着，右手以袖子拂拭几上灰尘三下；然后双手横拿着几，进至席前授给 尸 。 尸 进前两手相并执几中间接过来，主人退回东楹柱东边原位。 尸 将几转过来，由横着拿变为竖着拿。
English: The host, facing west, held it with his left hand, and with his right hand he wiped the dust on it with his sleeve three times; then he held it with his hands sideways and went to the front of the table to give it to the corpse.The corpse entered the front two hands and held it in the middle, and the host returned to the east side of the east pillar.

古文：尸还几，缩之，右手执外廉，北面奠于筵上，左之，南缩，不坐。
现代文：右手执拿几的外边，左手执拿几的里边，面朝北将几放在席上左侧，自北而南竖着放，放几时 尸 不坐下。
English: The right hand holds the outside of the table, the left hand holds the inside of the table, facing north, the table is placed on the left side of the seat, from north to south it is placed upright, and when it is placed, the corpse does not sit down.

古文：主人东楹东，北面拜。尸复位，尸与侑皆北面答拜。
现代文：主人站在东楹柱的东边，面朝北向 尸 行拜。 尸 返回西楹柱西边原位，与侑皆面朝北，向主人答拜。
English: The owner stood on the east side of the east pillar, facing north, and bowed to the corpse.The corpse returned to its original position on the west side of the west pillar, and both faced north, and bowed to the owner.

古文：主人降洗，尸、侑降，尸辞洗。主人对，卒洗，揖。
现代文：主人下堂洗手， 尸 、侑下堂， 尸 请主人不需洗手。
English: Master, go down and wash your hands. Corpse, go down and wash your hands. Master, please do not wash your hands.

古文：主人升，尸、侑升，尸西楹西北面拜洗。
现代文：主人答谢，坚持洗完手，并向 尸 行拱手礼。主人上堂， 尸 、侑也上堂， 尸 站在西楹柱的西边，面朝北拜谢主人洗手。
English: The owner thanked, insisted on washing his hands, and bowed to the corpse. The owner went to the hall, the corpse and the skeleton also went to the hall, the corpse stood on the west side of the Xidi pillar, facing north to thank the owner for washing his hands.

古文：主人东楹东北面奠爵答拜，降盥。尸、侑降，主人辞，尸对。
现代文：主人站在东槛柱的东边，面朝北放下酒爵答拜，又下堂清洗酒爵。 尸 侑也下堂，主人请 尸 不需下堂， 尸 答谢。
English: The owner stood on the east side of the east sill, facing north, put down the wine goblet and bowed, and then went down to clean the wine goblet. The corpse also went down, and the owner asked the corpse not to go down, and the corpse said thank you.

古文：卒盥。主人揖，升，尸、侑升。
现代文：洗爵完毕，主人向 尸 、侑拱手，然后登堂， 尸 、侑也登堂。
English: After the christening was over, the host shook hands with the corpse and the skeleton, and then they entered the hall. The corpse and the skeleton also entered the hall.

古文：主人坐取爵，酌献尸。尸北面拜受爵，主人东楹东北面拜送爵。
现代文：主人坐下，取酒爵斟酒后献给 尸 。 尸 面朝北向主人行拜，接过酒爵，主人站在东楹柱的东边，面朝北向 尸 行拜送爵。
English: The host sits down, takes the goblet, pours the wine, and then offers it to the corpse.The corpse bows to the host, facing north, and receives the goblet.The host stands on the east side of the east pillar and bows to the corpse, facing north.

古文：主妇自东房荐韭、菹、醢，坐奠于筵前，菹在西方。
现代文：主妇从东房取来韭菹和肉酱，坐下设于席的前面；韭菹在西边，肉酱在东边。
English: The housewife took the clams and meat sauce from the east room, sat down and placed them in front of the table; the clams on the west side, the meat sauce on the east side.

古文：妇赞者执昌、苴、醢以授主妇。
现代文：主妇助手端拿用昌蒲根制成的菹和带骨的肉酱，授给主妇。
English: The housewife's assistant presented the housewife with bamboo shoots made from Japanese parsley and bone-in meat sauce.

古文：主妇不兴，受；陪设于南，昌在东方。
现代文：主妇不起立，接过来，附设在韭菹和肉酱的南边，昌菹在东，带骨之肉酱在西。
English: The housewife didn't get up, she took over and placed it on the south side of the clam and meat sauce, the crested newt on the east, and the bone-in meat sauce on the west.

古文：兴，取笾于房，麷、蕡坐设于豆西，当外列，麷在东方。
现代文：接着起立，从房中取笾；笾中盛煮熟的麦和炒熟的大麻子，主妇坐下，将其设在四豆的西边，与昌菹、带骨之肉酱并列；盛煮熟的麦之笾在东，盛炒熟的大麻子之笾在西。
English: Then, standing up, she took a ladle from the room; in the ladle was a heap of boiled wheat and fried hemp seeds. The housewife sat down and placed it on the west side of the four beans, next to the cheongsam and the bone-in meat sauce; the heap of boiled wheat seeds was on the east, and the heap of fried hemp seeds was on the west.

古文：妇赞者执白、黑以授主妇。
现代文：主妇助手执拿盛熬稻之笾和盛熬黍之笾授给主妇。
English: The housewife's assistant holds the bowl of boiled rice and the bowl of boiled rice to give to the housewife.

古文：主妇不兴，受，设于初笾之南，白在西方；兴，退。
现代文：主妇不起立，接过来；并将其设在前面两只笾的南边，其中，盛熬稻之笾在西，盛熬黍之笾在东；然后起立，退下。
English: The housewife did not stand up, but took it over; and placed it on the south side of the first two stalks, of which the stalk of boiled rice was on the west, and the stalk of boiled rice was on the east; then she stood up and withdrew.

古文：乃升。
现代文：接着升出牲体而载于俎。
English: The animal is then lifted out of the water and placed on a raft.

古文：司马朼羊，亦司马载。
现代文：司马用匕将牲体从羊鼎中升出而载于俎上。
English: Sima used a plough to lift the animal out of the sheep pen and onto the plough.

古文：载右体，肩、臂、肫、胳、臑，正脊一、脡脊一、横脊一，短胁一、正胁一、代胁一，肠一、胃一、祭肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：俎上所载为牲之右半体，前胫骨，后胫骨，前脊骨一块、中脊骨一块，后脊骨一块，后肋骨一块，中肋骨一块，前肋骨一块，肠一段，胃一块，祭肺一块，凡此皆载在一只俎上。
English: On the yoke was the right half of the animal, the fore-shinbone, the hind-shinbone, one fore-spine, one middle-spine, one hind-spine, one hind-rib, one middle-rib, one fore-rib, one intestine, one stomach, one sacrificial lung, all on one yoke.

古文：羊肉湆：臑折、正脊一、正胁一、肠一、胃一、哜肺一，载于南俎。
现代文：司马又从羊肉汁中取出前肢下段半块、前脊骨一块、中肋骨一块、肠一截、胃一块、离肺一块，载于南边俎上。
English: Sima also took the lower half of the forelimb, a piece of the anterior spine, a piece of the middle rib, a piece of the intestine, a piece of the stomach, and a piece of the separated lung from the mutton gravy, and placed them on the southern yoke.

古文：司士朼豕，亦司士载，亦右体：肩、臂、肫、胳、臑，正脊一、脡脊一、横脊一，短胁一、正胁一、代胁一，肤五、哜肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：司士亦用匕将牲体从豕鼎中升出并载于俎上，俎上所载为牲之右半体，前胫骨，后胫骨，前脊骨一块，中脊骨一块，后脊骨一块，后肋骨一块，中肋骨一块，前肋骨一块，肤五块，祭肺一块，载于一只俎上。
English: The priest also used a yoke to lift the animal out of the yoke and placed it on the yoke. On the yoke was the right half of the animal, the front tibia, the back tibia, the front spine, the middle spine, the back spine, the back ribs, the middle ribs, the front ribs, five pieces of skin, and a sacrificial lung. It was placed on a yoke.

古文：侑俎：羊左肩、左肫、正脊一、胁一、肠一、胃一、切肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：侑俎上所载：羊的左肩，左后肢上截，前脊骨一块，肋骨一块，肠一截，胃一块，祭肺一块，凡此皆载于一只俎上。
English: On the yoke was the lamb's left shoulder, the upper part of the left hind leg, a piece of the front backbone, a rib, a piece of the intestine, a piece of the stomach, and a piece of the sacrificial lung, all of which were on one yoke.

古文：侑俎：豕左肩折、正脊一、胁一、肤三、切肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：另一只侑俎所载：豕的左肩半块，前脊骨一块，肋骨一块，肤三块，祭肺一块，凡此亦载于一只俎上。
English: In the other coffin: the left half of the coffin's shoulder, a piece of the anterior spine, a rib, three pieces of skin, and a sacrificial lung, all of which were also in one coffin.

古文：阼俎：羊肺一，祭肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：主人之俎所载：羊肺一块，祭肺一块，凡此亦载于一只俎上。
English: In his master's bag: one sheep's lung, one sacrificial lung, all in one bag.

古文：羊肉湆：臂一、脊一、胁一、肠一、胃一、哜肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：又从羊肉汁中取出左前肢一块，脊骨一块，肋骨一块，肠一截，胃一块，祭肺一块，载于一只俎上。
English: They also took a piece of the left forelimb, a piece of the backbone, a piece of the ribs, a piece of the intestine, a piece of the stomach, and a piece of the sacrificial lung from the sheep's gravy and placed them on a yoke.

古文：豕脀：臂一、脊一、胁一、肤三、哜肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：豕俎所载：前肢一段，脊骨一块，肋骨一块，肤三块，祭肺一块，凡此皆载于一只俎上。
English: In the coffin was a foreleg, a backbone, a rib, three pieces of skin, and a sacrificial lung, all in one coffin.

古文：主妇俎：羊左臑、脊一、胁一、肠一、胃一、肤一、哜羊肺一，载于一俎。
现代文：主妇之俎所载：羊的左前肢下段，脊骨一块，肋骨一块，肠一截，胃一块，肤一块，羊祭肺一块，凡此亦皆载于一只俎上。
English: The shepherd's bag contained: the lower part of the left forelimb of the sheep, a piece of backbone, a rib, a piece of intestine, a stomach, a skin, and a lamb's sacrificial lung, all of which were contained in one bag.

古文：司士朼鱼，亦司士载，尸俎五鱼，横载之，侑、主人皆一鱼，亦横载之，皆加膴祭于其上。
现代文：司士又用匕将鱼从鱼鼎中升出并载于俎上，其中 尸 俎鱼五条，横着载于俎上；侑俎和主人俎都是鱼一条，亦是横着载于俎上； 尸 、侑、主人之俎都放有大块鱼肉以用于祭祀。
English: The magistrate also used a shovel to lift the fish out of the fish tank and placed it on the shovel. Among them, five dead eels were placed horizontally on the shovel; the eel and the owner's eel were both fish, and were also placed horizontally on the shovel; the corpse, the eel, and the owner's eel were all placed with large pieces of fish meat for sacrifice.

古文：卒升。
现代文：载尸羊俎完毕。
English: The shepherding of the dead sheep is complete.

古文：宾长设羊俎于豆南，宾降。尸升筵自西方，坐，左执爵，右取韭、菹手耎于三豆，祭于豆间。尸取麷、蕡，宰夫赞者取白、黑以授尸。尸受，兼祭于豆祭。
现代文：上宾将羊俎设于豆的南边，然后下堂。 尸 从西边来到席上，坐下；左手执酒爵，右手取韭菹，在三只豆中蘸过之后，于豆间行祭。 尸 接着取煮熟的麦和炒熟的大麻子，宰夫助手则取熬稻和熬黍授给 尸 。 尸 接过来，并于刚祭过的豆间行祭。
English: The chief guest places the yakitori on the south side of the bean, and then goes down the hall.The corpse comes to the table from the west and sits down; the left hand holds the wine goblet, the right hand takes the yakitori, and after stewing in the three beans, the corpse is sacrificed among the beans.The corpse then takes the boiled wheat and the fried hemp, and the assistant steward takes the boiled rice and the boiled yakitori and gives it to the corpse.The corpse follows and is sacrificed among the beans that have just been sacrificed.

古文：雍人授次宾疏匕与俎。
现代文：雍人将柄上刻有花纹图案的疏匕和俎授给次宾。
English: Yongren gave the second-ranked guests a pair of Sosho gongs and a gong with a pattern engraved on the handle.

古文：受于鼎西，左手执俎左廉，缩之，却右手执匕枋，缩于俎上，以东面受于羊鼎之西。
现代文：次宾于鼎的西边接过来，左手执拿俎的左边，竖着俎，仰其右手执拿着匕柄，将其竖着放于俎上，面朝东于羊鼎之西接过俎。
English: The second guest picks up the yakitori on the west side of the yakitori, holds the yakitori on the left side of the yakitori in his left hand, holding the yakitori vertically, holds the yakitori handle in his right hand, and places it vertically on the yakitori. He picks up the yakitori facing east on the west side of the yakitori.

古文：司马在羊鼎之东，二手执桃匕枋以挹湆，注于疏匕，若是者三。尸兴，左执爵，右取肺，坐祭之，祭酒，兴，左执爵。
现代文：司马在羊鼎的东边，双手执持匕柄汲取肉汁注入疏匕，凡此共三次。 尸 起立，左手执酒爵，右手取羊祭肺，坐下行祭；又祭酒，起立，左手执酒爵。
English: Sima was on the east side of the yakitori, holding the yakitori handle with both hands to draw out the gravy and inject it into the yakitori, a total of three times. the corpse stood up, holding the wine in his left hand, the right hand took the lamb sacrifice lung, sat down and performed the sacrifice; also sacrificed wine, stood up, holding the wine in his left hand.

古文：次宾缩执匕俎以升，若是以授尸。尸却手受匕枋，坐祭，哜之，兴，覆手以授宾。
现代文：次宾竖着执拿匕、俎登堂，并就这样授给 尸 。 尸 仰其手接过匕柄，坐下行祭，尝肉汁；继而起立，翻过手心向下面将匕还给次宾。
English: The second guest enters the hall holding the yakitori and serving the yakitori to the corpse, who takes the yakitori by the handle, sits down to eat the yakitori, tastes the gravy, then stands up and hands the yakitori back to the second guest.

古文：宾亦覆手以受，缩匕于俎上以降。尸席末坐啐酒，兴，坐奠爵，拜，告旨，执爵以兴。
现代文：次宾亦翻过手心向下将匕接过来，并竖着放匕于俎上，而后下堂。 尸 坐在席的末端尝酒，起立，旋即坐下，放下酒爵，继而向主人行拜，告主人味美，接着执拿酒爵起立。
English: The second guest also turned over the palm of his hand to connect the tongs downward, and placed the tongs upright on the tongs, and then left the hall.The corpse sat at the end of the table, tasted the wine, stood up, immediately sat down, put down the wine, and then bowed to the host, told the host how delicious it was, and then stood up holding the wine.

古文：主人北面于东楹东，答拜。
现代文：主人于东楹柱的东边面朝北答拜。
English: The master bowed his head to the north on the east side of the east pillar.

古文：司马羞羊肉湆，缩执俎。尸坐奠爵，兴取肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴，反加于俎。
现代文：司马献上另一只羊俎，竖着端上。 尸 坐下，放下酒爵，起立取肺，坐下将肺撕开行祭，尝肺；起立，将其放回羊俎上。
English: The steward presented another lamb, which was standing on end.The corpseSit down, put down the wine goblet, stand up and take the lungs, sit down and tear the lungs apart for the sacrifice, taste the lungs; stand up and put it back on the lamb.

古文：司马缩奠俎于羊湆俎南，乃载于羊俎，卒载俎，缩执俎以降。尸坐执爵以兴。
现代文：司马竖着将俎放在羊俎的南边，并将此俎上的肉载于前一只羊俎上；载毕，亦竖着执拿空俎下堂。 尸 坐下执酒爵起。
English: Sima put the yoke upright on the south side of the yoke, and placed the meat from this yoke on the previous yoke; after carrying it, he also stood up to hold the empty yoke down.

古文：次宾羞羊燔，缩执俎，缩一燔于俎上，盐在右。尸左执爵，受燔，手耎于盐，坐振祭，哜之，兴，加于羊俎。
现代文：次宾献上羊之炙肉，竖着拿俎，俎上竖着放一块羊之炙肉，盐放在俎上右侧。 尸 左手执酒爵，右手从次宾所献俎上接过炙肉，蘸盐；接着坐下振祭，尝炙肉；然后起立，将炙肉加放在羊俎上面。
English: The second guest presents the roasted mutton, holding the yakitori upright, and places a piece of roasted mutton on the yakitori, with salt on the right side of the yakitori. the corpse holds the wine goblet in his left hand, and takes the roasted meat from the yakitori offered by the second guest in his right hand, sprinkles salt on it; then sits down and tastes the roasted meat; then stands up and places the roasted meat on top of the yakitori.

古文：宾缩执俎以降。尸降筵，北面于西楹西，坐卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴。
现代文：次宾竖着执俎下堂。 尸 自席上下来，面朝北立于西楹柱的西边，坐下饮尽酒爵中酒；继而端拿酒爵起立，又坐下放下酒爵，向主人行拜；然后再端拿酒爵起立。
English: The second guest stands up and holds the scepter down the hall. The corpse comes down from the table, faces north, stands on the west side of the west pillar, sits down and drinks all the wine in the wine; then stands up with the wine, sits down and puts down the wine, and bows to the master; then stands up with the wine.

古文：主人北面于东楹东答拜。
现代文：主人面朝北立于东楹柱的东边，向 尸 答拜。
English: The master, facing north, stood on the east side of the east pillar and bowed to the corpse.

古文：主人受爵。尸升筵，立于筵末。
现代文：主人从尸手中接过空爵。 尸 返回席位，立于席的末端。
English: The host took the coffin from the corpse, who returned to his seat and stood at the end of it.

古文：主人酌，献侑。
现代文：主人斟酒献给侑。
English: The host pours wine for the dragonfly.

古文：侑西楹西北面拜受爵。
现代文：侑立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北向主人行拜后接过酒爵。
English: Standing on the west side of the Xidi pillar, facing north, he bowed to the master and received the baron.

古文：主人在其右，北面答拜。
现代文：主人站在侑的右边，面朝北向侑答拜。
English: The owner stood on the right side of the yakitori, facing north, and bowed to the yakitori.

古文：主妇荐韭菹醢，坐奠于筵前，醢在南方。
现代文：主妇呈献韭菹、肉酱，坐下放在侑的席前，肉酱在南，韭菹在北。
English: The housewife presents the offerings of stew and meat sauce, sits down and places the stew in front of the table, with the meat sauce to the south and the stew to the north.

古文：妇赞者执二笾麷、蕡，以授主妇。
现代文：主妇助手执一盛煮熟的麦、一盛炒熟的大麻子的两只笾授给主妇。
English: The housewife's assistant gave the housewife a bowl of boiled wheat and a bowl of fried hemp seeds.

古文：主妇不兴，受之，奠麷于醢南，蕡在麷东。
现代文：主妇不起立，接过来，将盛煮熟的麦之笾放在肉酱的南边，又将盛炒熟的大麻子之笾放在盛煮炒的麦之笾的东边。
English: The housewife did not get up, but took over and placed the boiled wheat bran on the south side of the meat sauce, and the fried hemp seed bran on the east side of the boiled wheat bran.

古文：主妇入于房。
现代文：陈放完毕，主妇回到房中。
English: The housewife went back into the room.

古文：侑升筵自北方。
现代文：侑从北边登堂至席上。
English: from the north side of the hall to the seats.

古文：司马横执羊俎以升，设于豆东。
现代文：司马横着端拿羊俎登堂，并将其设在豆的东边。
English: Sima went to the hall holding a shepherd's crook and placed it on the east side of the bean.

古文：侑坐，左执爵，右取菹手耎于醢，祭于豆间，又取麷、蕡同祭于豆祭，兴，左执爵，右取肺，坐祭之，祭酒，兴，左执爵。
现代文：侑坐下，左手执酒爵，右手取菹蘸以肉酱后，于豆间行祭；又取煮熟的麦和炒熟的大麻子于刚祭过的豆间行祭；继而起立，左手执酒爵，右手取肺，坐下行祭，祭酒；接着又起立，左手执酒爵。
English: The priest sits down, holding the chalice in his left hand, and with his right hand he takes the yakitori with meat sauce and makes a sacrifice among the beans; he also takes the boiled wheat and the fried hemp seeds and makes a sacrifice among the beans that have just been offered; he then stands up, holding the chalice in his left hand, taking the lungs in his right hand, sits down and makes a sacrifice, offering wine; he then stands up again, holding the chalice in his left hand.

古文：次宾羞羊燔，如尸礼。
现代文：次宾呈献羊之炙肉，和献尸之礼相同。
English: The second guest presents the roasted meat of the sacrificial lamb, which is the same as the offering of the corpse.

古文：侑降筵自北方，北面于西楹西，坐卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜。主人答拜。
现代文：侑从北边下席，面朝北立于西楹柱的西边；坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，执拿酒爵起立；又坐下放下酒爵，向主人行拜。
English: The egret sits down from the north side, faces north and stands on the west side of the west pillar; sits down, drinks all the wine in the goblet, holds the goblet and stands up; sits down again, puts down the goblet and bows to its master.

古文：尸受侑爵，降洗。
现代文：主人答拜。 尸 从侑手中接过空爵，下堂清洗。
English: The owner bowed in response.The corpse was taken from the hands of the eunuch and cleaned in the hall.

古文：侑降立于西阶西，东面。
现代文：侑也下堂，立于西阶西边，面朝东。
English: The  also descends from the hall and stands on the west side of the west steps, facing east.

古文：主人降自阼阶，辞洗。尸坐奠爵于篚，兴对，卒洗。
现代文：主人则从东阶下堂，请 尸 不必洗爵。 尸 坐下将空爵放入篚中，然后起立答谢主人。
English: The owner then went down the hall from the east steps, and invited the corpse to come out without having to be baptized.The corpse sat down, placed the empty cross into the urn, and then stood up to thank the owner.

古文：主人升，尸升自西阶。
现代文：洗爵完毕，主人登堂， 尸 则从西阶登堂。
English: After the christening, the master enters the church, and the corpse enters from the west steps.

古文：主人拜洗。尸北面于西楹西，坐奠爵，答拜，降盥。
现代文：主人拜谢 尸 洗爵。 尸 面朝北立于西楹柱的西边，坐下放下酒爵，向主人答拜，继而下堂洗手。
English: The body of the deceased stood facing north on the west side of the west pillar, sat down, put down the wine goblet, bowed to his master, and then went down to wash his hands.

古文：主人降，尸辞，主人对。
现代文：主人陪同下堂， 尸 辞谢，主人答谢。
English: The master is escorted down the hall, the corpse says thank you, the master says thank you.

古文：卒盥。主人升。尸升，坐取爵，酌。
现代文：洗手完毕，主人登堂。 尸 登堂，坐下取酒爵斟上酒。
English: After washing his hands, the master enters the hall. The corpse enters the hall, sits down, takes the goblet and pours the wine.

古文：司宫设席于东序，西面。
现代文：司宫于东序设席，席的正面向西。
English: There are seats in the east row of the palace, and the seats face west.

古文：主人东楹东北面拜受爵，尸西楹西北面答拜。
现代文：主人立于东楹柱的东边，面朝北向 尸 行拜后接过酒爵， 尸 立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北答拜。
English: The host stood on the east side of the east pillar, facing north, and bowed to the corpse before receiving the wine. The corpse stood on the west side of the west pillar, facing north, and bowed.

古文：主妇荐韭、菹、醢，坐奠于筵前，菹在北方。
现代文：主妇呈献韭菹、肉酱，坐下陈设在主人席前；韭菹在北，肉酱在南。
English: The housewife presents the offerings of stew and meat sauce, sits down and places them in front of the host's table; the stew is in the north, the meat sauce in the south.

古文：妇赞者执二笾麷、蕡，主妇不兴，受，设麷于菹西北，蕡在麷西。
现代文：主妇助手执拿一盛煮熟的麦、一盛炒熟的大麻子的两只笾呈给主妇；主妇不起立，接过来；陈设盛煮熟的麦之笾于韭菹的西北边，陈设盛炒熟的大麻子之笾于盛煮熟的麦之笾的西边。
English: The housewife's assistant held out two baskets of boiled wheat and fried hemp seeds to the housewife; the housewife did not stand up and took over; the boiled wheat basket was set up on the northwest side of the basket, and the boiled hemp seed basket was set up on the west side of the boiled wheat basket.

古文：主人升筵自北方，主妇入于房。
现代文：主人从北边来到席上，主妇返回房中。
English: The master came to the table from the north, and the mistress returned to the room.

古文：长宾设羊俎于豆西。
现代文：宾长设羊俎于豆的西边。
English: Binchang set up a sheep pen on the west side of the bean.

古文：主人坐，左执爵，祭豆笾，如侑之祭，兴，左执爵，右取肺，坐祭之，祭酒，兴。
现代文：主人坐下，左手执酒爵，右手祭豆、祭笾，和侑祭之礼仪一样；继而起立，左手执酒爵，右手取祭肺；然后坐下用肺行祭，又祭酒，起立。
English: The host sits down, holds the wine in his left hand, and offers beans and yakitori in his right hand, the same as the ritual of the burnt offering; then he stands up, holds the wine in his left hand, and takes the sacrificial lung in his right hand; then he sits down and performs the ritual with the lung, and offers wine, and stands up.

古文：次宾羞匕湆。如尸礼。
现代文：次宾呈献羊匕和羊肉汁，和献 尸 之礼相同。
English: The second guest presents the sacrificial lamb stew and lamb gravy, which is the same as the offering of the corpse.

古文：席末坐啐酒，执爵以兴。
现代文：主人坐于席的末端，尝酒，然后执拿酒爵起立。
English: The host sits at the end of the table, tastes the wine, and then stands up holding the gong.

古文：司马羞羊肉湆，缩执俎。
现代文：司马献给主人另一只羊俎，献时竖着执俎。
English: Sima dedicated another sheep to his master, holding the yoke upright as he did so.

古文：主人坐，奠爵于左，兴，受肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴，反加于湆俎。
现代文：主人坐下，将酒爵放在左侧；接着起立，从司马所献俎上取过肺，坐下将肺撕开行祭，尝肺；然后起立，将肺放回司马所献俎上。
English: The host sits down and places the chalice on the left side; then he stands up, takes the lungs from Sima's offering, sits down, tears the lungs apart for the offering, tastes the lungs; then he stands up and places the lungs back on Sima's offering.

古文：司马缩奠湆俎于羊俎西，乃载之，卒载，缩执虚俎以降。
现代文：司马竖着将此俎放在前一只羊俎的西边，将此俎上的祭品载于前一只羊俎上；载毕，竖着执拿空俎下堂。
English: Sima placed this yoke upright on the west side of the previous yoke, and placed the sacrificial offering on this yoke on the previous yoke; after carrying it, he held the empty yoke upright and went down the hall.

古文：主人坐取爵以兴。
现代文：主人坐下取酒爵后起立。
English: The host sits down, takes a sip of wine and then stands up.

古文：次宾羞燔，主人受，如尸礼。
现代文：次宾呈献羊之炙肉给主人；主人接过来，其礼仪和献 尸 时一样。
English: The second guest presents the roasted meat of the sacrificial lamb to the host; the host receives it, and the etiquette is the same as when the corpse is offered.

古文：主人降筵自北方，北面于阼阶上，坐卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴。尸西楹西答拜。
现代文：主人从北边下席，面朝北立于东阶上，坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，执酒爵起立；又坐下放下酒爵，向 尸 行拜，然后执拿酒爵起立。 尸 于西楹柱的西边向主人答拜。
English: The host sits down from the north, faces north, stands on the east step, sits down, drinks all the wine in the goblet, stands up holding the goblet; sits down again, puts down the goblet, bows to the corpse, then stands up holding the goblet; the corpse bows to the host on the west side of the west pillar.

古文：主人坐奠爵于东序南。
现代文：主人坐下将空爵放在东序的南边。
English: The owner sat down and placed the empty jar on the south side of the east row.

古文：侑升。
现代文：侑登堂。
English: 登堂.

古文：尸、侑皆北面于西楹西。
现代文： 尸 、侑都面朝北立于西楹柱的西边。
English: The corpse and coffin both face north and stand on the west side of the west pillar.

古文：主人北面于东楹东，再拜崇酒。尸、侑皆答再拜。
现代文：主人面朝北立于东楹柱的东边，为谢完酒而行拜两次。 尸 和侑都答拜两次。
English: The master, facing north, stood on the east side of the east pillar, bowed twice to thank him for finishing the wine, and the corpse and coffin both bowed twice.

古文：主人及尸、侑皆升就筵。
现代文：主人和 尸 、侑都返回席上就位。
English: The master, the corpse, and the donkey all returned to their seats and took their places.

古文：司宫取爵于篚，以授妇赞者于房东，以授主妇。
现代文：司宫从篚中取出酒爵，于房户外的东边授给主妇助手，主妇助手又呈给主妇。
English: The palace steward took out the bottle of wine from the urn and gave it to the housewife's assistant on the east side outside the house. The housewife's assistant then presented it to the housewife.

古文：主妇洗爵于房中，出实爵，尊南，西面拜献尸。尸拜，于筵上受。
现代文：主妇于房中洗爵，出房，斟酒后置放于酒尊的南边，然后面朝西向 尸 行拜，端拿酒爵献给 尸 。 尸 于席上向主妇回拜，接过酒爵。
English: The housewife baptised the body in the room, went out of the room, poured the wine and placed it on the south side of the wine, then bowed to the corpse facing west and took the wine to the corpse. The corpse bowed back to the housewife at the table and received the wine.

古文：主妇西面于主人之席北，拜送爵，入于房，取一羊鉶，坐奠于韭菹西。
现代文：主妇面朝西立于主人之席的北边，行拜送爵；继而返回房中，取一盛羊羹之器一一铏，坐下放在韭菹的西边。
English: The housewife stood facing west on the north side of the master's seat, bowed to him, and then returned to the room, took a bowl of yakitori, sat down and placed it on the west side of the bowl.

古文：主妇赞者执豕鉶以从，主妇不兴，受，设于羊鉶之西，兴，入于房，取糗与腶修，执以出，坐设之，糗在蕡西。修在白西，兴，立于主人席北。西面。尸坐，左执爵，祭糗修，同祭于豆祭，以羊鉶之柶挹羊鉶，遂以挹豕鉶，祭于豆祭，祭酒。
现代文：主妇助手执拿一盛豕羹之器一一铏从于主妇之后；主妇不起立，接过来，将其设在羊铏的西边；继而起立，返入房中，取米粉糕点和经捣捶并加姜桂的干肉，执拿着出房；然后坐下，将米粉糕点放在盛炒熟的大麻子之笾的西边，将干肉设在盛熬稻之笾的西边；设毕起立，于主人之席的北边而立，面朝西。 尸 坐下，左手执酒爵，右手以米粉糕点和干肉于豆间行祭；又用羊铏中的勺子舀取羊羹，继而又舀取豕羹，于豆间行祭，然后祭酒。
English: The housewife's assistant holds a bowl of yakitori soup - one bowl follows the housewife; the housewife does not stand up, takes it over and places it to the west of the yakitori bowl; then stands up, returns to the room, takes the rice flour cake and the dried meat pounded with ginger and cinnamon, and holds it out of the room; then sits down, places the rice flour cake to the west of the bowl of fried hemp seeds, and places the dried meat to the west of the bowl of boiled rice; sets it up and stands up, standing on the north side of the owner's seat, facing west.

古文：次宾羞豕匕湆，如羊匕湆之礼。尸坐啐酒，左执爵，尝上鉶，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜，主妇答拜。执爵以兴。
现代文：次宾呈献豕匕和豕肉汁，其礼仪和前面献羊匕和羊肉汁时相同。 尸 坐着尝酒，左手执酒爵，右手取羊羹而尝之，继而执酒爵起立；又坐下放下酒爵，向主妇行拜；主妇答拜。 尸 执酒爵起立。
English: The second guest presents the doner kebab and doner gravy, and the etiquette is the same as when the first guest presents the doner kebab and doner gravy. The corpse sits and tastes the wine, holds the wine goblet in his left hand, takes the yakitori in his right hand and tastes it, then holds the wine goblet and stands up; he also sits down and puts down the wine goblet and bows to the hostess; the hostess bows back. The corpse holds the wine goblet and stands up.

古文：司士羞豕脀。
现代文：司士献上豕俎于 尸 。
English: The magistrate presented the coffin to the corpse.

古文：尸坐奠爵，兴受，如羊肉湆之礼，坐取爵，兴。
现代文： 尸 坐下放下酒爵，起立接过豕俎，其礼仪和接受前面所献后一只羊俎时相同，然后坐下，取拿酒爵起立。
English: Corpse: Sit down, put down the wine goblet, stand up and take the yoke, the etiquette is the same as when receiving the previous offering of the last lamb, then sit down, take the wine goblet and stand up.

古文：次宾羞豕燔。尸左执爵，受燔，如羊燔之礼，坐卒爵，拜。主妇答拜。
现代文：次宾呈献豕之炙肉于 尸 。 尸 左手执酒爵，右手接过豕之炙肉，其礼仪也和前面接受羊之炙肉时一样，然后坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，向主妇行拜。
English: The second guest presents the roasted meat of the ewe to the corpse. The corpse holds the wine in his left hand and receives the roasted meat of the ewe in his right hand, the etiquette is the same as when receiving the roasted meat of the sheep in front, and then sits down to drink the wine in the wine and bow to the hostess.

古文：受爵，酌，献侑。
现代文：主妇向 尸 答拜，接过空爵；又斟酒献给侑。
English: The housewife bowed to the corpse, received the empty knight, and poured wine for the cocoon.

古文：侑拜受爵，主妇主人之北西面答拜。
现代文：侑行拜后接过酒爵，主妇站在主人之席的北边，面朝西答拜。
English: After bowing and receiving the lord of the wine, the housewife stood on the north side of the master's seat, facing west and bowed.

古文：主妇羞糗、修，坐奠糗于麷南，修在蕡南。
现代文：主妇又呈献米粉糕点和干肉给侑，先坐下将米粉糕点放在盛煮熟的麦之笾的南边，将干肉放在盛炒熟的大麻子之笾的南边。
English: The housewife also presented rice flour cakes and dried meat to the cucumbers. First, she sat down and placed the rice flour cakes on the south side of the boiled wheat cucumbers, and placed the dried meat on the south side of the boiled hemp cucumbers.

古文：侑坐，左执爵，取糗、修兼祭于豆祭。
现代文：侑坐下，左手执酒爵，右手取米粉糕点和干肉于豆间行祭。
English: Sit down, with your left hand holding a bottle of wine, and with your right hand holding a rice flour cake and dried meat in the middle of the beans.

古文：司士缩执豕脀以升。
现代文：司士竖着执拿豕俎登堂。
English: The magistrate entered the courtroom holding his gong upright.

古文：侑兴取肺，坐祭之。
现代文：侑起立取肺，坐下祭肺。
English: Stand up and take a lung, sit down and offer a lung.

古文：司士缩奠豕脀于羊俎之东，载于羊俎，卒，乃缩执俎以降。
现代文：司士又竖着将豕俎设在羊俎的东边，并将豕俎上的祭品载于羊俎上，载毕，又竖着执拿空俎下堂。
English: And the priest shall set up the altar of burnt offering on the east side of the altar of burnt offering, and shall bring the burnt offering on the altar of burnt offering, and lay it in order on the altar of burnt offering, and the priest shall carry the burnt offering on the altar of burnt offering on the east side of the altar of burnt offering.

古文：侑兴。
现代文：侑起立。
English: Stand up.

古文：次宾羞豕燔，侑受如尸礼，坐卒爵，拜。主妇答拜。
现代文：次宾呈献豕之炙肉给侑；侑接过来，其礼仪和献 尸 时相同，然后坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，向主妇行拜。
English: The second guest presents the roasted meat of the donkey to the donkey; the donkey comes over, with the same etiquette as when the body is offered, and then sits down to drink all the wine in the jar and bow to the housewife.

古文：受爵，酌以致于主人。
现代文：主妇向侑答拜，接过空爵，斟酒后献给主人。
English: The housewife bowed to the dragonfly, took over the empty jar, poured the wine and presented it to the master.

古文：主人筵上拜受爵，主妇北面于阼阶上答拜。
现代文：主人于席上向主妇行拜后接过酒爵，主妇面朝北站在东阶上答拜。
English: After bowing to the hostess at the table, the host took the wine goblet. The hostess stood on the east step facing north and bowed.

古文：主妇设二鉶与糗、修，如尸礼。
现代文：主妇又陈设羊铏和豕铏及米粉糕点、干肉，其授受、奠设之仪和献 尸 时相同。
English: The housewife also set out lamb's lettuce and spring onions, rice flour cakes, and dried meat. The ceremony of giving and receiving, laying down, and the time of offering the corpse are the same.

古文：主人其祭糗、修，祭鉶，祭酒，受豕匕湆，拜啐酒，皆如尸礼。尝鉶不拜。
现代文：主人祭米粉糕点，祭干肉，祭铏，祭酒，接受豕匕和豕肉汁，行拜尝酒，其礼仪都和献 尸 时一样；不过尝羹时不行拜礼。
English: The host offers rice flour cakes, dry meat, cucumbers, and wine as offerings, receives the meat and meat juices, and performs the ritual of tasting the wine. The rituals are the same as for the offering of a corpse; however, the ritual of tasting the soup is not allowed.

古文：其受豕脀，受豕燔，亦如尸礼。坐卒爵，拜。
现代文：主人接受豕俎，接受豕之炙肉，其礼仪也和献 尸 时相同；主人坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，向主妇行拜。
English: The host receives the stew, and the roasted meat of the stew, and the etiquette is the same as for the offering of a corpse; the host sits down, drinks all the wine in the barrel, and bows to the hostess.

古文：主妇北面答拜，受爵。
现代文：主妇面朝北答拜，接过空爵。
English: The housewife bowed with her face to the north and accepted the ring.

古文：尸降筵，受主妇爵以降。
现代文： 尸 下席，从主妇手中接过酒爵下堂。
English: The corpse sat down and took the wine from the housewife's hand.

古文：主人降，侑降。
现代文：主人下堂，侑也下堂。
English: When the master leaves the hall, so does the egret.

古文：主妇入于房。
现代文：主妇则返入房中。
English: The housewife went back into the room.

古文：主人立于洗东北，西面。
现代文：主人立于洗的东北边，面朝西。
English: The owner stands on the northeast side of the wash, facing west.

古文：侑东面于西阶西南。尸易爵于篚，盥洗爵，主人揖尸、侑。
现代文：侑面朝东立于西阶的西南边。 尸 从篚中换一只酒爵，又于洗中洗手洗爵。主人向 尸 、侑拱手作揖。
English: The coffin faces east and stands on the southwest side of the west steps. The corpse exchanges a bottle of wine from the coffin, and washes his hands in the wash. The owner makes a coffin for the corpse and coffin.

古文：主人升。尸升自西阶，侑从。
现代文：主人登堂。 尸 从西阶登堂，侑则从于 尸 后登堂。
English: The master enters the hall, the corpse enters from the west steps, and the empress enters from behind the corpse.

古文：主人北面立于东楹东，侑西楹西北面立。
现代文：主人面朝北立于东楹柱的东边。侑则面朝北立于楹柱的西边。 尸 斟酒。
English: The master faces north and stands on the east side of the east pillar, while the concubine faces north and stands on the west side of the pillar.

古文：尸酌。主妇出于房。西面拜，受爵。尸北面于侑东答拜。
现代文：主妇出房后，面朝西向 尸 行拜，然后接过酒爵。 尸 面朝北立于侑的东侧答拜。
English: After the housewife went out of the house, she bowed to the corpse facing west, and then received the baron.The corpse faced north and bowed to the east side of the urn.

古文：主妇入于房。司宫设室于房中，南面。
现代文：主妇返入房中，司宫于房中设席，席的正面向南。
English: The lady-in-waiting returns to the room, and the king's palace sets up a seat in the room, the seat facing south.

古文：主妇立于席西。
现代文：主妇站在席的西边。
English: The housewife stood on the west side of the table.

古文：妇赞者荐韭、菹、醢，坐奠于筵前，菹在西方。
现代文：主妇助手呈献韭菹、肉酱，坐下放在席的前面，韭菹在西，肉酱在东。
English: The housewife's assistant presents the dumplings and meat sauce, sits down and places them in front of the table, the dumplings in the west, and the meat sauce in the east.

古文：妇人赞者执麷、蕡以授妇赞者，妇赞者不兴，受，设麷于菹西，蕡在麷南。
现代文：宗妇之少者捧拿煮熟的麦和炒熟的大麻子授给主妇助手；主妇助手不起立，接过来，将煮熟的麦放在韭菹的西边，又将炒熟的大麻子放在煮熟的麦的南边。
English: The daughter of the mother-in-law takes the cooked wheat and the fried hemp seeds and gives them to the housewife's assistant; the housewife's assistant does not stand up, but takes them and places the cooked wheat on the west side of the yoke, and the fried hemp seeds on the south side of the cooked wheat.

古文：主妇升筵。
现代文：主妇来到席上。
English: The housewife came to the table to sing.

古文：司马设羊俎于豆南。
现代文：司马将羊俎设于豆的南边。
English: Sima placed the shepherd's crook on the south side of the bean.

古文：主妇坐，左执爵，右取菹手耎于醢，祭于豆间；又取麷、蕡兼祭于豆祭。
现代文：主妇坐下，左手执酒爵，右手取韭菹蘸以肉酱后，于豆间行祭；又取煮熟的麦和炒熟的大麻子于刚祭过的豆间行祭。
English: The housewife sits down, holding a wine goblet in her left hand, and with her right hand she takes a roll of meat sauce and then makes a sacrifice among the beans; she also takes boiled wheat and fried hemp seeds and makes a sacrifice among the beans that have just been sacrificed.

古文：主妇奠爵，兴取肺，坐绝祭，哜之；兴加于俎，坐梲手，祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：主妇放下酒爵，起立取肺，坐下将肺撕开行祭，尝肺；起立将肺放回俎上，坐下用佩巾拭手，然后祭酒，尝酒。
English: The housewife puts down the wine goblet, stands up to take the lungs, sits down to tear the lungs open, performs the ritual, and tastes the lungs; stands up to put the lungs back on the urn, sits down to wipe her hands with a handkerchief, and then offers the wine and tastes the wine.

古文：次宾羞羊燔。
现代文：次宾呈献羊之炙肉给主妇。
English: The second guest presented the roasted meat of the sacrificial lamb to the hostess.

古文：主妇兴，受燔，如主人之礼。
现代文：主妇起立，接过炙肉，其授受之礼和献主人时相同。
English: The hostess stood up and took the roasted meat. The gift she gave and received was the same as when she offered it to the host.

古文：主妇执爵以出于房，西面于主人席北，立卒爵，执爵拜。尸西楹西北面答拜。
现代文：接着主妇执酒爵出房，面朝西于主人之席的北边，站着饮尽酒爵中酒，然后执空爵向 尸 行拜。 尸 立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北答拜。
English: Then the housewife went out of the room, facing west on the north side of the master's seat, stood and drank the wine in the wine, and then bowed to the corpse.The corpse stood on the west side of the west pillar, facing north.

古文：主妇入立于房。尸、主人及侑皆就筵。
现代文：主妇返入房中而立。 尸 、主人和侑都来到席上就位。
English: The housewife went back into the room and stood up. The corpse, the master and the donkey all came to the table and took their places.

古文：上宾洗爵以升，酌，献尸。尸拜受爵。
现代文：宾长清洗酒爵登堂，斟酒后献给 尸 。 尸 行拜后接过酒爵。
English: The head waiter came into the hall to wash the wine, and after pouring the wine, he offered it to the corpse, which bowed before him.

古文：宾西楹西北面拜送爵。尸奠爵于荐左。
现代文：宾长立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北行拜送爵。 尸 将酒爵放于先前所陈俎豆的左边。
English: The betrothed stands on the west side of the west pillar, facing north to pay respects to the deceased, and the corpse is placed on the left side of the previously roasted peas.

古文：宾降。
现代文：宾长下堂。
English: The guests also left the hall.

古文：主人降，洗爵，尸、侑降。
现代文：主人下堂，清洗酒爵。 尸 和侑也下堂。
English: The host goes downstairs to clean the liquor cabinet. The corpse and the coffin also go downstairs.

古文：主人奠爵于篚，辞。尸对。
现代文：主人将酒爵放入篚中，辞谢 尸 下堂。 尸 答谢。
English: The host put the bottle in the urn and thanked the corpse for leaving.

古文：卒洗，揖。尸升，侑不升。
现代文：洗爵完毕，主人向 尸 作揖。 尸 登堂，侑留下来。
English: When the christening was over, the master made a funeral wreath for the corpse. The corpse went into the church and the wreath remained.

古文：主人实爵酬尸，东楹东，北面坐奠爵，拜。尸西楹西北面答拜。
现代文：主人斟酒酬 尸 ，立于东楹柱的东边，面朝北坐下放下酒爵，向 尸 行拜。 尸 立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北答拜。
English: The host poured the wine, and the corpse, standing on the east side of the east pillar and facing north, sat down, put down the wine goblet, and bowed to the corpse, which stood on the west side of the west pillar and faced north.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵拜。尸答拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，又向 尸 行拜。尸答拜。
English: The chief guest sat down, drank the sacrificial wine, and then bowed to the corpse.

古文：降洗。尸降辞。
现代文：主人下堂洗爵。 尸 亦下堂，请主人不必洗爵。
English: My master is going down to the hall to be knighted. His body is also going down to the hall. Please don't have to knight my master.

古文：主人奠爵于篚，对，卒洗。主人升。尸升。
现代文：主人答谢，坚持将酒爵洗好，然后放入篚中。主人登堂， 尸 亦登堂。
English: The host thanked him and insisted that he wash the wine and then put it in the urn. The host and the corpse entered the church.

古文：主人实爵，尸拜受爵。
现代文：主人斟酒献给 尸 ， 尸 行拜后接过酒爵。
English: The host poured the wine for the corpse, and after the corpse had bowed, he received the lord of the wine.

古文：主人反位，答拜。尸北面坐，奠爵于荐左。
现代文：主人返回东楹柱东边面朝北之位向 尸 答拜。 尸 面朝北坐下，将酒爵放在宾长所献酒爵的南边。
English: The master returned to the east side of the east pillar, facing north, and bowed to the corpse, who sat down facing north, and placed the wine goblet on the south side of the wine goblet offered by the chief guest.

古文：尸、侑、主人皆升筵。
现代文： 尸 、侑、主人都来到席上就位。
English: The corpse, the skeleton, and the owner all came to the table and took their places.

古文：乃羞，宰夫羞房中之羞于尸、侑、主人、主妇，皆右之，司士羞庶羞于尸、侑、主人、主妇，皆左之。
现代文：于是呈献肴馔，宰夫呈献粉制糕点等内馐给 尸 、侑和主人、主妇，都放在右边；司士则呈献羊臐、豕膮等庶馐给 尸 、侑和主人、主妇，都放在左边。
English: Therefore, the offering dishes were placed on the right, and the steward presented the offerings of flour-based pastries and other inner dishes to the corpse, urn, and master and mistress; the magistrate presented the offerings of sheep stew, stew, and other side dishes to the corpse, urn, and master and mistress, all placed on the left.

古文：主人降，南面拜众宾于门东，三拜。
现代文：主人下堂，于门东面朝南向众宾行拜三次。
English: The host went down the hall and bowed to the guests three times, facing south on the east side of the gate.

古文：众宾门东，北面，皆答壹拜。
现代文：众宾于门东面朝北向主人各答拜一次。
English: The guests bowed once each to the host, facing north on the east side of the gate.

古文：主人洗爵，长宾辞。
现代文：主人清洗酒爵，宾长请主人不必洗爵。
English: The host cleans the wine glasses, but the head waiter asks the host not to do it.

古文：主人奠爵于篚，兴对，卒洗，升酌，献宾于西阶上。
现代文：主人将酒爵放入篚中，起立答谢，洗毕，登堂斟酒，于西阶上献给宾长。
English: The host put the wine in the urn, stood up to thank him, washed it, went into the hall to pour the wine, and presented it to the chief guest on the west steps.

古文：长宾升，拜受爵。主人在其右，北面答拜。
现代文：宾长登堂，行拜后接过酒爵；主人站在宾长的右边，面朝北答拜。
English: The head waiter entered the hall, bowed and then received the bartender; the owner stood on the right side of the head waiter, facing north and bowed.

古文：宰夫自东房荐脯、醢，醢在西。
现代文：宰夫从东房取来一笾干肉和一豆肉酱献上，肉酱在西，干肉在东。
English: Zayu took a stew of dried meat and a bean meat sauce from the east room and presented it. The meat sauce was in the west, and the dried meat was in the east.

古文：司士俎于豆北，羊胳一，肠一，胃一，切肺一，肤一。
现代文：司士则于豆在北边设俎，俎上所载：羊骼一块，肠一截，胃一块，切肺一块，肤一块。
English: The magistrate then placed a yakitori on the north side of the bean, and on the yakitori was written: a leg of lamb, a piece of intestine, a piece of stomach, a piece of lung, and a piece of skin.

古文：宾坐，左执爵，右取脯，手耎于醢，祭之，执爵兴，取肺，坐祭之，祭酒，遂饮，卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴。
现代文：宾长坐下，左手执酒爵，右手取干肉蘸以肉酱后行祭；继而执酒爵起立，取肺后又坐下祭肺；接着祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，并执酒爵起立；而后坐下放下酒爵，向主人行拜，执酒爵起立。
English: The head waiter sits down, holds a wine goblet in his left hand, takes a dried meat ball with meat sauce in his right hand, and then performs the ritual; he then holds a wine goblet and stands up, takes a lung and then sits down to offer the lung; he then offers wine, drinks the wine in the wine goblet, and holds the wine goblet and stands up; he then sits down, puts down the wine goblet, bows to the host, and holds the wine goblet and stands up.

古文：主人答拜，受爵，宾坐取祭以降，西面坐委西阶西南。
现代文：主人答拜，从宾长手中接过空爵。宾长坐下，取干肉与肺下堂，而后面朝西坐下将其放于西阶的西南边。
English: The host bowed and took the empty crane from the hands of the chief steward. The chief steward sat down, took the dried meat and lungs down the hall, and then sat down facing west and placed it on the southwest side of the west steps.

古文：宰夫执荐以从，设于祭东；司士执俎以从，设于荐东。
现代文：宰夫执豆、笾从宾长而下堂，并将其设于宾长所放干肉和肺的东边。司士则执俎从宰夫而下堂，并将其设于宰夫所放豆、笾的东边。
English: The steward carried the beans and bean curd down the hall from the chief steward and placed them on the east side of the place where the chief steward placed the dried meat and lungs. The judge carried the beans and bean curd down the hall from the steward and placed them on the east side of the place where the steward placed the beans and bean curd.

古文：众宾长升，拜受爵，主人答拜。坐祭，立饮，卒爵，不拜既爵。
现代文：众宾各以长幼次第登堂，向主人行拜，接受酒爵，主人一一答拜众宾先后坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，不为尽爵而拜。
English: The guests entered the hall in order of age, bowing to the host and accepting the sake sash. The host then bowed to the guests one by one. The guests then sat down to the sacrificial wine, drank all the wine in the sake sash, and bowed not for the sake of the sash.

古文：宰夫赞主人酌，若是以辩。
现代文：宰夫佐助主人斟酒，遍授众宾。
English: The butler, Sasuke, pours the wine for the host and gives the guests their orders.

古文：辩受爵。
现代文：众宾遍受酒爵。
English: The guests were treated to an array of fine wines.

古文：其荐脯、醢与脀，设于其位。
现代文：献给众宾的干肉、肉酱与俎均设在众宾各自的位置上。
English: The dried meat, meat sauce and stew dedicated to the guests were all placed at the guests' respective locations.

古文：其位继上宾而南，皆东面。
现代文：众宾各自的位置为自宾长而南排列，都面朝东。
English: The guests are arranged in a long line from the guests to the south, facing east.

古文：其脀体，仪也。
现代文：众宾俎上牲体亦依尊卑不同而载。
English: Animals are also carried on the rafts of the guests, depending on their rank.

古文：乃升长宾，主人酌，酢于长宾，西阶上北面，宾在左。
现代文：接着请长宾登堂。主人斟酒，代长宾自酬；主人立于西阶上，面朝北，长宾立于主人的左侧。
English: Next, invite the chief guest to enter the hall. The host pours the wine, and the chief guest goes on his own; the host stands on the west steps, facing north, and the chief guest stands on the left side of the host.

古文：主人坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴，宾答辩。
现代文：主人坐下放下酒爵，向长宾行拜，然后执拿酒爵起立；长宾答拜。
English: The host sits down, puts down the wine goblet, bows to the chief guest, then stands up holding the wine goblet; the chief guest returns the bow.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜。宾答拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，执拿酒爵起立；又坐下放下酒爵，向长宾行拜。
English: The host sits down to drink the sacrificial wine, drinks up the wine in the chalice, holds the chalice and stands up; he also sits down and puts down the chalice and bows to the chief guest.

古文：宾降。宰夫洗觯以升。
现代文：长宾答拜，下堂返回西阶西南之位。宰夫清洗酒觯登堂。
English: The chief guest answered the prayer, and returned to the southwest corner of the west aisle. The steward cleaned the wine goblets and entered the hall.

古文：主人受酌，降酬长宾于西阶南，北面。
现代文：主人接过酒觯斟酒，下堂于西阶南边酬献长宾，面朝北。
English: The host takes the goblet, pours the wine, and goes down the hall on the south side of the west staircase to present it to the guests, facing north.

古文：宾在左。
现代文：长宾站在主人的左边。
English: The long-term guest stands to the left of the host.

古文：主人坐奠爵，拜，宾答拜。
现代文：主人坐下放下酒爵，向长宾行拜，长宾答拜。
English: The host sat down, put down his wine goblet, bowed to the chief guest, and the chief guest bowed back.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵拜。宾答拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒后向长宾行拜。长宾答拜。
English: The host sat down and drank the sacrificial wine, and then bowed to the chief guest. The chief guest bowed back.

古文：主人洗，宾辞。
现代文：主人清洗酒爵，长宾请主人不必洗爵。
English: The host cleans the bottle, but the guest of honor does not have to do it.

古文：主人坐奠爵于篚，对，卒洗，升酌，降复位。
现代文：主人坐下将酒爵放入篚中，答谢长宾，洗爵完毕，登堂斟酒，而后下堂返回西阶南面朝北之位。
English: The host sits down, places the wine goblet in the urn, thanks the long-serving guest, completes the christening, enters the hall, pours the wine, and then returns to the west-facing south-facing north-facing seat.

古文：宾拜受爵，主人拜送爵。
现代文：长宾行拜后接过酒爵，主人答拜送爵。
English: After the long-term guests bowed, the host received the baron, and the host bowed and sent the baron away.

古文：宾西面坐，奠爵于荐左。
现代文：长宾面朝西坐下，将酒爵放在先前宰夫所放俎、豆的左边。
English: The long-serving guest sat down facing west and placed the sake bottle to the left of the bean sprouts and beans previously placed by the butler.

古文：主人洗，升酌，献兄弟于阼阶上。
现代文：主人清洗酒爵，登堂斟酒，于东阶上献给众兄弟。
English: The host cleans the wine glasses, enters the hall to pour the wine, and offers it to the brothers on the east steps.

古文：兄弟之长升，拜受爵。
现代文：兄弟之长登堂，向主人行拜后接过酒爵。
English: The eldest of the brothers entered the hall, bowed to the master and then took over the baronetcy.

古文：主人在其右答拜。
现代文：主人立于兄弟之长的右边答拜。
English: The host stood to the right of the eldest brother and bowed.

古文：坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵，皆若是以辩。
现代文：兄弟之长坐下祭酒；又起立饮酒，但不为尽爵而行拜。
English: The chief of the brothers sits down to drink the sacrificial wine; he also stands up to drink, but he does not go to worship for the sake of the peerage.

古文：辩受爵，其位在洗东，西面北上。
现代文：主人按此礼一一献酒于众兄弟。众兄弟各人遍受酒爵，众兄弟的位置在洗的东边，面朝西，以北为上。
English: According to this ritual, the host offers wine to all the brothers one by one. The brothers are each given a wine goblet, and the position of the brothers is on the east side of the wash, facing west, with north facing up.

古文：升受爵，其荐脀设于其位。
现代文：众兄弟各人登堂接受酒爵，他们的俎、豆、笾都设在各自的位置上。
English: All the brothers went into the hall to receive their cheques. Their gourds, beans and lees were all placed in their respective positions.

古文：其先生之脀，折，胁一，肤一。
现代文：长兄弟之俎所载：后肢一截，肋骨一块，肤一块。
English: The eldest brother's skull contained: one hind limb, one rib, and one skin.

古文：其众，仪也。
现代文：众兄弟俎上牲体依尊卑长幼不同而载。
English: The brothers loaded the animals on the rafts according to their rank, with the eldest and youngest being carried first.

古文：主人洗，献内宾于房中。
现代文：主人洗爵，斟酒后于房中献给姑姊妹和宗妇。
English: The host was christened, and after pouring the wine, he presented it to his sister-in-law and his wife in the room.

古文：南面拜受爵，主人南面于其右答拜。
现代文：姑姊妹及宗妇面朝南行拜后接过酒爵，主人面朝南站在姑姊妹及宗妇右侧答拜。
English: After the sister-in-law and the mother-in-law bowed to the south, the host stood on the right side of the sister-in-law and the mother-in-law, bowing to the south.

古文：坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵。
现代文：姑姊妹及宗妇坐下祭酒，又站起来饮酒，但也不为尽爵而行拜。
English: The sister-in-law and the mother-in-law sat down to drink the sacrificial wine and then stood up to drink again, but they did not go out to pray for the death of the duke.

古文：若是以辩，亦有荐脀。主人降洗，升献私人于阼阶。
现代文：主人照此遍授所有的姑姊妹和宗妇，姑姊妹及宗妇则遍受酒爵，而且他们各自的位置上也各设有俎、豆等。主人下堂清洗酒爵，登堂于东阶上献给家臣。
English: In accordance with this, the master awarded all the sisters-in-law and the mother-in-law, and the sisters-in-law and the mother-in-law received the wine badge, and they also each had a bowl, beans, etc. in their respective positions. The master went down to the hall to clean the wine badge, and went up to the hall on the east step to dedicate it to his vassal.

古文：拜于下，升受，主人答其长拜。
现代文：家臣于堂下向主人行拜，然后登堂接过酒爵，主人向家臣之长答拜。
English: The vassal bowed to the master in the hall, and then went up to the hall to receive the lord of the wine, and the master bowed to the head of the vassal.

古文：乃降，坐祭，立饮，不拜既爵。
现代文：家臣下堂，坐下祭酒，又站起来饮酒，但也不为尽爵而行拜。
English: The vassals went down to the hall, sat down to drink the sacrificial wine, and then stood up to drink again, but they did not go out to worship for the sake of the peerage.

古文：若是以辩。
现代文：主人照此礼遍授众家臣，众家臣遍受酒爵。
English: According to this ritual, the master bestows the title on all his vassals, and all his vassals receive the title.

古文：宰夫赞主人酌。
现代文：宰夫佐助主人斟酒。
English: Zaifu Sasuke pours the wine for his master.

古文：主人于其群私人，不答拜。
现代文：主人不向众家臣答拜。
English: The master does not answer to his vassals.

古文：其位继兄弟之南，亦北上，亦有荐脀。
现代文：众家臣的位置在众兄弟之位的南边，也是以北为上，并且也都设有各自的俎、豆等。
English: The position of the vassals is on the south side of the seat of the brothers, also with the north as the top, and they also have their own straw, beans, etc.

古文：主人就筵。
现代文：主人献毕，来到东序席上就位。
English: After the host gave the invocation, he came to the east front row and took his seat.

古文：尸作三献之爵。
现代文： 尸 端拿上宾所献之酒爵。
English: The corpse was presented with a bottle of wine by the guests.

古文：司士羞湆鱼，缩执俎以升。尸取膴祭祭之，祭酒，卒爵。
现代文：司士呈献浸于鱼汁中的鱼，竖着执俎登堂。 尸 取俎上鱼之腹部大肉行祭，又祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: The priest presents the fish, which has been soaked in fish juice, and enters the hall holding the gourd upright. The fish's belly is removed from the gourd, and the fish is sacrificed, and the sacrificial wine is drunk.

古文：司士缩奠俎于羊俎南，横载于羊俎，卒，乃缩执俎以降。尸奠爵拜。
现代文：司士竖着将鱼俎放在羊俎的南边，并将鱼横载于羊俎上面，载毕，又竖着执空俎下堂。 尸 放下酒爵向上宾行拜。
English: The magistrate placed the bait upright on the south side of the bait, and placed the fish horizontally on top of the bait. After the fish was loaded, the magistrate held the empty bait upright and went down the hall.

古文：三献北面答拜，受爵，酌献侑。
现代文：上宾面朝北答拜，接过空爵，斟酒后献给侑。
English: The guest of honor bowed to the north, received the air marshal, poured the wine, and then presented it to Yu.

古文：侑拜受，三献北面答拜。
现代文：侑向上宾行拜后接过酒爵，上宾面朝北答拜。
English: After bowing to the guest, the eunuch received the baron, and the guest bowed to the north.

古文：司士羞湆鱼一，如尸礼。
现代文：司马献上浸于鱼汁中的鱼一条，其礼仪和献 尸 之礼相同。
English: Sima offered a piece of fish soaked in fish juice, with the same etiquette as the offering of a corpse.

古文：卒爵拜。三献答拜，受爵，酌致主人。
现代文：侑饮尽酒爵中酒，向上宾行拜，上宾答拜，接过空爵，斟酒后又献给主人。
English: After drinking all the wine in the wine jar, he bowed to the guest, the guest bowed back, received the empty wine jar, weighed the wine and then presented it to the host.

古文：主人拜受爵，三献东楹东北面答拜。
现代文：主人向上宾行拜后接过酒爵，上宾站在东楹柱的东边，面朝北答拜。
English: After bowing to the guest of honor, the host received him. The guest of honor stood on the east side of the east pillar and bowed to the north.

古文：司士羞一湆鱼，如尸礼。
现代文：司士呈献浸于鱼汁中的鱼一条，其礼仪和献 尸 之礼相同。
English: The etiquette for offering a piece of fish soaked in fish juice is the same as for offering a corpse.

古文：卒爵拜。
现代文：主人饮尽酒爵中酒向上宾行拜。
English: The host drained the wine and bowed to the guests.

古文：三献答拜，受爵。尸降筵，受三献爵，酌以酢之。
现代文：上宾答拜后，接过空爵。 尸 下席，从上宾手中接过空爵，斟酒后酬献上宾。
English: After the guest of honor answered the prayer, he received the empty knight. The corpse of the lower seat, received the empty knight from the hands of the guest of honor, and presented it to the guest of honor after drinking.

古文：三献西楹西北面拜受爵，尸在其右以授之。尸升筵，南面答拜，坐祭，遂饮，卒爵拜。尸答拜。
现代文：上宾立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北向 尸 行拜后接过酒爵， 尸 站在上宾的右边将酒爵授给上宾。 尸 返回席上，面朝南向上宾答拜。上宾坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，然后向尸行拜。尸答拜。
English: The chief guest stood on the west side of the west pillar, facing north toward the corpse. After bowing, he received the wine sceptre. The corpse stood on the right side of the chief guest to give the wine sceptre to the chief guest. The corpse returned to the table, facing south to bow to the chief guest. The chief guest sat down, drank the sacrificial wine, and then bowed to the corpse. The corpse bowed.

古文：执爵以降，实于篚。
现代文：上宾执空爵下堂，并将其放入篚中。
English: The chief guest vacated the hall and placed it in the urn.

古文：二人洗觯，升实爵，西楹西，北面东上，坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴，尸、侑答拜。
现代文：二人一为 尸 、一为侑清洗酒觯，登堂斟酒，立于西楹柱的西边，面朝北，以东为上，坐下放下酒爵，向 尸 、侑行拜，而后执酒爵起立， 尸 、侑答拜。
English: Two persons, one for the body and one for the skull, wash the wine goblets, enter the hall to pour the wine, stand on the west side of the west pillar, face north, with the east facing up, sit down, put down the wine goblet, bow to the body and skull, and then stand up with the wine goblet, the body and skull bow.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜，尸、侑答拜。
现代文：二人坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，执酒爵起立，坐下放下酒爵，向 尸 、侑行拜， 尸 、侑答拜。
English: The two sat down to drink the sacrificial wine, drank all the wine in the wine jar, stood up to hold the wine jar, sat down to put down the wine jar, and bowed to the corpse and the skeleton, and the corpse and the skeleton bowed back.

古文：皆降洗，升酌，反位。尸、侑皆拜受爵，举觯者皆拜送。
现代文：二人都下堂清洗酒觯，登堂斟酒，返回西楹柱西边面朝北以东为上之位。 尸 、侑都向二人行拜后接过酒爵，二人都向 尸 、侑答拜送爵。
English: Both of them went down to the hall to clean the wine jars, went up to the hall to pour the wine, and returned to the west side of the west pillar, facing north to east for the top position. The corpse and the coffin both bowed to the two people and received the wine baron, and both of them bowed to the corpse and the coffin.

古文：侑奠觯于右。尸遂执觯以兴，北面于阼阶上酬主人。主人在右。坐奠爵，拜，主人答拜。不祭，立饮，卒爵，不拜既爵，酌，就于阼阶上酬主人。
现代文：侑将酒觯放在右边。 尸 进而执酒觯起立，面朝北到东阶上酬献主人；主人立于 尸 的右侧。 尸 坐下放下酒爵，向主人行拜；主人答拜。 尸 不祭酒，站着饮尽酒爵中酒，但不为尽爵而行拜；接着又斟酒，就位于东阶上酬献主人。
English: The urn is placed on the right side. The corpse then stands up holding the urn, faces north to the east step to reward the owner; the owner stands on the right side of the corpse. The corpse sits down, puts down the wine goblet, and bows to the owner; the owner bows back. The corpse does not sacrifice the wine, standing and drinking the wine in the goblet, but does not bow for the sake of the goblet; then it pours the wine, and it is located on the east step to reward the owner.

古文：主人拜受爵。尸拜送。尸就筵，主人以酬侑于西楹西，侑在左。
现代文：主人行拜后接过酒爵， 尸 答拜送爵。 尸 来到户西南面席上就位，主人于西楹柱的西边酬侑，侑立于主人的左边。
English: After the host had bowed, he received the lord of the wine, and the corpse bowed and sent the lord of the wine.The corpse came to the southwest side of the house and took a seat on the noodle table, and the host stood on the west side of the Xidi pillar, and stood on the left side of the host.

古文：坐奠爵，拜。执爵兴，侑答拜。
现代文：主人坐下放下酒爵，向侑行拜，而后执酒爵起立，侑答拜。
English: The host sits down, puts down the chalice, and bows to the gong, and then the host stands up, and the gong bows in return.

古文：不祭，立饮，卒爵，不拜既爵，酌，复位。
现代文：主人也不祭酒，站着饮尽酒爵中酒，但也不为尽爵而行拜；接着又斟酒，返回西阶上原位。
English: The host also does not offer wine, standing and drinking up the middle of the wine, but he does not bow for the sake of the wine; then he pours the wine and returns to the original position on the west steps.

古文：侑拜受，主人拜送。
现代文：侑向主人行拜后接过酒爵，主人答拜送爵。
English: After bowing to the host, the dragonfly received the wine, and the host bowed back to the dragonfly.

古文：主人复筵，乃升长宾。
现代文：主人回到东序西南席上，进而让长宾登堂。
English: The host returned to the south-west seat of the east row, and then let the guests enter the hall.

古文：侑酬之，如主人之礼。
现代文：侑酬献长宾，其礼仪和主人酬侑一样。
English: The etiquette of giving a gift to a long-term guest is the same as that of giving a gift to the host.

古文：至于众宾，遂及兄弟，亦如之，皆饮于上。
现代文：至于众宾酬献众兄弟，其礼仪也如此，且都于西阶上饮酒。
English: As far as the guests are concerned, the same is true for the brothers, and they all drink alcohol on the west steps.

古文：遂及私人，拜受者升受，下饮，卒爵，升酌，以之其位，相酬辩。
现代文：直至兄弟之长酬献家臣之长，家臣之长于堂下行拜后登堂接过酒爵，而后下堂饮酒；饮尽酒爵中酒后，又登堂斟酒，就所酬者之位，遍酬各家臣。
English: Until the elder of the brothers paid tribute to the elder of the vassals, and the elder of the vassals went down to the hall to pay homage, and then went up to the hall to receive the lord of the wine, and then went down to the hall to drink; after drinking the wine in the lord of the wine, he went up to the hall to pour the wine, and then paid each vassal in the place of the one who was paid.

古文：卒饮者实爵于篚。
现代文：最后饮酒的人将酒爵放入篚中。
English: The last person to drink puts the sherry in the urn.

古文：乃羞庶羞于宾、兄弟、内宾及私人。
现代文：继而呈献庶馐给众宾、众兄弟、姑姊妹、宗妇和众家臣。
English: He then presented the posthumous medals to the guests, brothers, sisters-in-law, mothers-in-law and courtiers.

古文：兄弟之后生者举觯于其长。洗，升酌，降，北面立于阼阶南，长在左。
现代文：兄弟中之幼者呈献酒觯于其长者，幼者清洗酒觯，登堂斟酒，下堂，面朝北立于东阶的南边，长者在幼者的左边。
English: The younger of the brothers presents the chalice to his elder, the younger cleans the chalice, enters the hall, pours the wine, leaves the hall, faces north and stands on the south side of the east steps, the elder is on the left of the younger.

古文：坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴，长答拜。
现代文：幼者坐下放下酒爵，向长者行拜，而后执拿酒爵起立，长者答拜。
English: The little ones sit down, put down their wine goblets, and bow to the elders, and then stand up holding their wine goblets, and the elders bow in return.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴，长答拜。
现代文：幼者坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，执酒爵起立，又坐下放下空爵，向长者行拜，而后执空爵起立，长者答拜。
English: The young sit down to drink the sacrificial wine, drink up the wine in the chalice, hold the chalice and stand up, sit down again to put down the empty chalice and bow to the elders, and then hold the empty chalice and stand up, and the elders bow.

古文：洗，升酌，降。
现代文：接着幼者清洗酒爵，登堂斟酒，而后下堂。
English: The youngster then cleans the wine glasses, goes into the hall to pour the wine, and then leaves the hall.

古文：长拜受于其位，举爵者东面答拜。
现代文：长者于洗东面朝西之位向幼者行拜后接过酒爵，幼者面朝东答拜。
English: The elders bowed to the young people in the east-facing west position after washing, and then received the wine, while the young people bowed to them in the east.

古文：爵止。
现代文：长者放下酒爵。
English: The old man put down his wine goblet.

古文：宾长献于尸，如初，无湆，爵不止。
现代文：宾长献酒给 尸 ，其礼仪和上宾三献时相同；然无鱼，酒爵不放下。
English: When the chief guest offers wine to the corpse, the etiquette is the same as when the third guest offers it; however, if there is no fish, the baron will not put it down.

古文：宾一人举爵于尸，如初，亦遂之于下。
现代文：次宾长敬献酒爵给 尸 ，其礼仪和前面二人分别献 尸 献侑时相同，同样的礼仪也及于众宾、众兄弟和众家臣。
English: The etiquette for the second guest to present a bottle of wine to the corpse is the same as for the first two guests to present the corpse separately, and the same etiquette applies to all guests, brothers, and vassals.

古文：宾及兄弟交错其酬，皆遂及私人，爵无算。尸出，侑从。
现代文：众宾和众兄弟交互献酬，都及于众家臣，酬献随己所欲，不计次第之数。 尸 出时，侑从于其后。
English: The guests and brothers reciprocally offer their gifts, and so do the vassals, according to their wishes, without regard to the number.

古文：主人送于庙门之外，拜，尸不顾，拜侑与长宾，亦如之。
现代文：主人送至庙门之外，并向 尸 行拜， 尸 不反顾；主人又行拜送侑和长宾，其礼仪和前面一样。
English: The host escorted him outside the temple gate and bowed to the corpse, the corpse did not look back; the host also bowed to see off the coffin and the chief guest, with the same etiquette as before.

古文：众宾从。
现代文：众宾则从长宾而出。
English: The guests were led out of the Nagabin.

古文：司士归尸、侑之俎。
现代文：司士送 尸 俎、侑俎于各自的家。
English: The coroner took the bodies to their respective homes.

古文：主人退，有司彻。
现代文：主人退回寝室，有司撤去堂上堂下之荐俎。
English: The master retreated to the bedroom, and a steward removed the recommending urns from the hall.

古文：若不宾尸，则祝、侑亦如之。尸食，乃盛俎、臑、臂、肫、脡脊、横脊、短胁、代胁，皆牢；鱼七；腊辩。无髀。
现代文：下大夫无傧 尸 之礼， 尸 七饭之前，祝侑 尸 之礼和上大夫傧 尸 之礼同。 尸 八饭之际，当将以下祭物盛于肵俎：羊、豕的前肢上段下段，后肢上段，中脊骨，后脊骨，后肋骨，前肋骨；鱼七条；兽右半体全部，除髀之外。
English: On the occasion of the funeral banquet, the following offerings should be placed in the yakitori: a sheep, the upper and lower forelimbs of a yakitori, the upper hind limbs of a yakitori, the middle backbone, the posterior backbone, the posterior ribs, the anterior ribs; seven fish; the entire right half of the animal, except the beak.

古文：卒盛，乃举牢肩。尸受，振祭，哜之。
现代文：盛俎完毕，上佐食呈上羊、豕的肩。 尸 接过来振祭，尝肩。
English: After the main course was served, the sashimi was served with lamb and pork shoulder. The corpse was brought to the shaking ceremony and the shoulder was tasted.

古文：佐食受，加于肵。
现代文：佐食再接过来，加放于肵俎上。
English: Sake is then taken over and added to the broth.

古文：佐食取一俎于堂下以入，奠于羊俎东。
现代文：佐食从堂下取一只空俎入室，继而陈放于羊俎的东边。
English: Sashiki took an empty yakitori bowl from under the hall, brought it into the room, and then placed it on the east side of the yakitori bowl.

古文：乃摭于鱼、腊俎，俎释三个。其馀皆取之，实于一俎以出。
现代文：接着将兽俎上的前肋骨、中肋骨、后肋骨和鱼俎上的三条鱼留下，其余的都载于空俎上面，而后执着俎出室。
English: Next, the front ribs, middle ribs, back ribs and three fish on the bait were left. The rest were placed on the empty bait, and then the bait was taken out of the room.

古文：祝、主人之鱼、腊取于是。尸不饭，告饱。
现代文：祝和主人俎上的鱼和兽都取于此俎。 尸 不再取饭，告主人已饱。
English: I wish that the fish and animals on my master's eel are all taken from this eel. The corpse will no longer fetch rice, telling his master that he is full.

古文：主人拜侑，不言，尸又三饭。
现代文：主人行拜相劝，但不说话； 尸 又取饭三次。
English: His master bowed and spoke to him, but did not say a word. The corpse was brought to the table three times.

古文：佐食受牢举，如傧。
现代文：佐食接过羊、豕的肺、脊献上，其礼仪如同傧尸之礼。
English: Sashiki received a sheep, a donkey's lungs, and a donkey's back. The etiquette was like that of a corpse.

古文：主人洗、酌，酳尸，宾羞肝，皆如傧礼。卒爵，主人拜，祝受尸爵，尸答拜。
现代文：主人清洗酒爵，斟酒，献给 尸 ，宾长呈献羊、豕的肝，其礼仪亦如同傧尸之礼。 尸 饮尽酒爵中酒，主人向 尸 行拜，祝从尸手中接过空爵， 尸 向主人答拜。
English: The host cleans the goblet, pours the wine, and offers it to the corpse; the chief guest presents a sacrificial lamb, the liver of a baboon, and the etiquette is also similar to that of the corpse.The corpse drinks the wine from the goblet, the host bows to the corpse, and wishes to receive the empty goblet from the corpse's hands, and the corpse bows to the host.

古文：祝酌授尸，尸以醋主人，亦如傧。
现代文：祝斟酒授给 尸 ， 尸 以之酬献主人，其礼似亦如同傧尸之礼。
English: A toast of wine is given to the corpse, and the corpse is offered to the host as a reward. The ceremony is similar to that of a corpse.

古文：其绥祭，其嘏，亦如傧。
现代文：进而所行绥祭和祝福主人之礼，也都和傧尸之礼相同。
English: Furthermore, the burnt offering and the blessing of the owner are the same as that of the corpse.

古文：其献祝与二佐食，其位，其荐脀，皆如傧。
现代文：接着主人献祝、献二佐食，其位置和所设俎、豆等，也都和傧尸之礼一样。
English: Next, the host offers a blessing and two side dishes, the location of which, as well as the bowls and beans, are all the same as for the corpse offering.

古文：主妇其洗献于尸，亦如傧。
现代文：主妇清洗酒爵，斟酒后献给 尸 ，其礼仪也和傧尸之礼相同。
English: The etiquette of the housewife, who cleans the goblet and pours the wine before offering it to the corpse, is the same as that of the corpse.

古文：主妇反取笾于房中，执枣、糗，坐设之，枣在稷南，糗在枣南。
现代文：主妇返回房中取笾，执一盛枣、一盛粉制糕点的笾出来，坐下将盛枣之笾设在稷的南边，又将盛粉制糕点之笾设在盛枣之笾的南边。
English: The housewife returns to the room, takes a spoon, takes out a bowl of dates and a bowl of pastry, sits down and places the bowl of dates on the south side of the bowl, and the bowl of pastry on the south side of the bowl.

古文：妇赞者执栗、脯，主妇不兴，受，设之，栗在糗东，脯在枣东。
现代文：主妇助手端拿栗和干肉出来，主妇又起立，接过来将栗设在粉制糕点的东边，又将干肉设在枣的东边。
English: The housewife's assistant brought out the chestnuts and dried meat, and the housewife stood up again, and then placed the chestnuts on the east side of the pastry, and the dried meat on the east side of the date.

古文：主妇兴。反位。尸左执爵，取枣、糗。
现代文：然后主妇起立，返回主人北边原位。 尸 左手执酒爵，右手取枣和粉制糕点。
English: Then the housewife stood up and returned to her original position on the north side of her master.The corpse was holding a wine goblet in her left hand, and taking dates and cake flour in her right hand.

古文：祝取栗、脯以授尸。尸兼祭于豆祭，祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：祝则取栗和干肉授给 尸 。 尸 一并于豆间行祭，又祭酒，尝酒。
English: Chestnuts and dried meat are given to the corpse as a blessing, and the corpse and the beans are sacrificed, and the sacrificial wine and wine are tasted.

古文：次宾羞牢燔，用俎，盐在右。尸兼取燔手耎于盐，振祭，哜之。
现代文：次宾用俎呈献羊、豕之炙肉，盐放在俎上右侧。 尸 从俎上取下炙肉蘸盐后振祭，又尝炙肉。
English: The second guest presents the roasted meat of the sacrificial sheep and donkey with a ladle, and the salt is placed on the right side of the ladle. corpse Remove the roasted meat from the ladle, sprinkle with salt, shake, and taste the roasted meat.

古文：祝受，加于肵。卒爵。
现代文：接着祝将炙肉接过来，加放在肵俎上面。 尸 饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: Next, the celebrant takes the roasted meat and places it on top of the yakitori, and the corpse drinks up the sake.

古文：主妇拜。
现代文：主妇向 尸 行拜。
English: The housewife bowed to the corpse.

古文：祝受尸爵。尸答拜。
现代文：祝从 尸 手中接过空爵。 尸 向主妇答拜。
English: I wish you to take over the empty chair from the corpse. The corpse bows to the housewife.

古文：祝易爵，洗，酌，授尸。尸以醋主妇，主妇主人之北拜受爵，尸答拜。
现代文：祝更换酒爵，清洗后斟酒授给尸。 尸 接过来酬献主妇，主妇站在主人的北边，行拜后接过酒爵； 尸 答拜。
English: Wish to replace the baron, after cleaning, pour the wine and give it to the corpse; the corpse came to reward the offering housewife, the housewife stood on the north side of the master, and received the baron after bowing; the corpse bowed.

古文：主妇反位，又拜。
现代文：主妇返回原位，又向 尸 行拜。
English: The housewife returned to her original position and again bowed to the corpse.

古文：上佐食绥祭，如傧。
现代文：接着上佐食行绥祭之礼，和傧尸之礼相同。
English: This is followed by a meal of sashimi and the offering of a hibiscus offering, which is the same as the offering of a dead body.

古文：卒爵拜，尸答拜。
现代文：主妇饮尽酒爵中酒后向 尸 行拜， 尸 答拜。
English: The housewife, after drinking all the wine in the bar, bowed to the corpse, and the corpse bowed back.

古文：主妇献祝，其酌如傧。
现代文：主妇斟酒献给祝，其礼仪和傧尸之礼一样。
English: The housewife pours wine for the toast, the etiquette of which is the same as that of the corpse.

古文：拜，坐受爵。
现代文：祝向主妇行拜后坐下接过酒爵。
English: After bowing to the hostess, he sat down to receive the wine.

古文：主妇主人之北答拜。
现代文：主妇立于主人的北边答拜。
English: The housewife stood to the north of her master and bowed.

古文：宰夫荐枣、糗，坐设枣于菹西，糗在枣南。
现代文：继而宰夫呈献枣和粉制糕点，坐下将枣设在菹的西边，又将粉制糕点设在枣的南上。
English: Next, Zaif presented dates and powdered pastry, sat down and placed the dates on the west side of the urn, and placed the powdered pastry on the south side of the dates.

古文：祝左执爵，取枣、糗祭于豆祭，祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：祝左手执酒爵，右手取枣和粉制糕点于刚祭过的豆间行祭，又祭酒，尝酒。
English: Wish the left hand to hold the liquor, the right hand to take the jujube and powdered pastry in the just-sacrificed beans, and also the sacrificial wine, and taste the wine.

古文：次宾羞燔，如尸礼。
现代文：次宾呈上炙肉，其礼仪和献 尸 时相同。
English: The next guest is presented with roasted meat, the etiquette of which is the same as that of a corpse offering.

古文：卒爵。
现代文：祝饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: Congratulations on drinking all the wine in the bottle.

古文：主妇受爵，酌献二佐食，亦如傧。
现代文：主妇从祝手中接过空爵，斟酒后献给二佐食，其礼仪也和傧尸之礼相同。
English: The hostess took the empty knighthood from the hands of the celebrant, poured the wine and presented it to Ersa, whose etiquette is also the same as that of the corpse.

古文：主妇受爵，以入于房。
现代文：二佐食饮尽酒爵中酒后，主妇接过空爵，返回房中。
English: After drinking all the wine in the wine jar, the housewife took over the empty jar and returned to the room.

古文：宾长洗爵，献于尸。尸拜受。宾户西北面答拜。
现代文：宾长清洗酒爵，斟酒后献给 尸 。 尸 向宾长行拜后接过酒爵，宾长立于室户的西边面朝北答拜。 尸 搁下酒爵。
English: The head waiter cleans the sake bottle, pours it and then offers it to the corpse.The corpse bows to the head waiter and then receives the sake bottle.The head waiter stands on the west side of Murodo, facing north, and bows in response.The corpse sets down the sake bottle.

古文：爵止。主妇洗于房中，酌，致于主人。
现代文：主妇于房中清洗酒爵，斟酒后献给主人。
English: The housewife cleans the wine glasses in the room, pours the wine and offers it to the host.

古文：主人拜受，主妇户西北面拜送爵。
现代文：主人向主妇行拜后接过酒爵，主妇立于室户的西边面朝北向主人行拜送爵。
English: After bowing to the hostess, the host receives the bottle of wine. The hostess stands on the west side of Murodo, facing north, and bows to the host to receive the wine.

古文：司宫设席。
现代文：司宫设席。
English: There are seats in the main hall.

古文：主妇荐韭、菹、醢，坐设于席前，菹在北方。
现代文：主妇接着呈上韭菹和肉酱，坐下设于席的前面，韭菹在北，肉酱在南。
English: The hostess then presented the clams and meat sauce, sat down in front of the table, clams in the north, meat sauce in the south.

古文：妇赞者执枣、糗以从，主妇不兴，受，设枣于菹北，糗在枣西。
现代文：主妇助手端拿着枣和粉制糕点从于主妇之后；主妇不起立，接过来，将枣设于韭菹的北边，将粉制糕点放在枣的西边。
English: The housewife's assistant follows her with the dates and the pastry; the housewife does not stand up and takes over, placing the dates on the north side of the urn and the pastry on the west side of the dates.

古文：佐食设俎，臂、脊、胁、肺皆牢，肤三，鱼一，腊臂。
现代文：佐食设俎，俎上所载：羊、豕之臂、脊、肋、肺各一块，肤三块，鱼一条，兽之左臂一段。
English: Sasaki set up a bowl, on which was placed: a piece of lamb, arm, spine, rib and lung of a donkey, three pieces of skin, a fish, and a section of the animal's left arm.

古文：主人左执爵，右取菹手耎于醢，祭于豆间，遂祭笾，奠爵，兴，取牢肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴，加于俎，坐梲手，祭酒，执爵以兴，坐卒爵，拜。
现代文：主人左手执酒爵，右手取韭菹蘸以肉酱后，于豆间行祭；进而祭笾，放下酒爵；接着起立，取羊、豕之肺，坐下撕开行祭，尝肺；又起立，将肺加放在俎上，坐下拭手后祭酒；然后执拿酒爵起立，又坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，向主妇行拜。
English: The host holds a wine gong in his left hand, and after taking a gong with meat sauce in his right hand, he performs a ritual among the beans; he then offers a gong and puts down the wine gong; he then stands up, takes a lung from a sheep or a donkey, sits down, tears it open, performs a ritual, and tastes the lung; he then stands up again, places the lung on the gong, sits down, and wipes his hands with the sacrificial wine; he then holds the wine gong, stands up, sits down again, drinks all the wine in the gong, and bows to the hostess.

古文：主妇答拜，受爵，酌以醋，户内北面拜，主人答拜。
现代文：主妇答拜，从主人手中接过空爵；斟酒后自酬，立于户内面朝北拜谢主人；主人答拜。
English: The housewife bowed in response, receiving the knighthood from the master's hands; after pouring the wine, she stood in the house facing north to thank the master; the master bowed in response.

古文：卒爵，拜。主人答拜。
现代文：主妇饮尽酒爵中酒，向主人行拜。主人答拜。
English: The housewife drank up the wine in the goblet and bowed to the host. The host bowed back.

古文：主妇以爵入于房。尸作止爵，祭酒，卒爵。
现代文：主妇执空爵返回房中。 尸 拿起先前搁下未饮之酒爵，祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: The housewife returns to the room, picks up the corpse, takes the previously left undrunk bottle of wine, the sacrificial wine, and drinks all the wine in the bottle.

古文：宾拜。
现代文：宾长向 尸 行拜。
English: The head waiter bowed to the corpse.

古文：祝受爵。尸答拜。
现代文：祝从 尸 手中接过空爵。 尸 向宾长答拜。
English: I wish you to take over the empty chair from the corpse. The corpse bows to the chief guest.

古文：祝酌授尸。宾拜受爵，尸拜送。
现代文：祝斟酒后授爵于 尸 、宾长向 尸 行拜后接过 尸 回酬之酒爵， 尸 向宾长答拜送爵。
English: After the toast, the host bestows a knighthood on the corpse. After bowing to the corpse, the host receives a knighthood. The corpse bows to the host and receives a knighthood.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵拜。尸答拜。
现代文：宾长坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒后向 尸 行拜。 尸 答拜。
English: The chief guest sat down, drank the sacrificial wine, and then bowed to the corpse.

古文：献祝及二佐食。
现代文：接着宾长斟酒献祝和二佐食。
English: The chief guest then pours out the wine to celebrate and serves the food.

古文：洗，致爵于主人。
现代文：献毕清洗酒爵，斟酒后又献给主人。
English: After washing, it is presented to the baron, and after pouring, it is presented to the host.

古文：主人席上拜受爵，宾北面答拜。
现代文：主人于席上向宾长行拜，接过酒爵，宾长面朝北答拜。
English: The host bowed to the guest at the table, received the wine, and the guest bowed to the north.

古文：坐祭，遂饮，卒爵，拜。
现代文：主人坐下祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，向宾长行拜。
English: The host sat down, drank the sacrificial wine, and bowed to the chief guest.

古文：宾答拜，受爵，酌，致爵于主妇。
现代文：宾长答拜，接过空爵。宾长继而又斟酒献给主妇。
English: The head waiter bowed and took over. The head waiter then poured wine for the hostess.

古文：主妇北堂。司宫设席，东面。
现代文：主妇立于房中北边，司宫设席，席的正面向东。
English: The housewife stands in the middle of the room on the north side, and the palace steward has a seat, the seat is facing east.

古文：主妇席北东面拜受爵，宾西面答拜。
现代文：主妇立于席的北边面朝东向宾长行拜后接过酒爵，宾长面朝西答拜。
English: The hostess stood on the north side of the table, facing east, and bowed to the head waiter before receiving the bartender. The head waiter bowed to the west side of the table.

古文：妇赞者荐韭、菹、醢，菹在南方。
现代文：主妇助手呈上韭菹和肉酱，韭菹设在南边，肉酱设在北边。
English: The housewife's assistant presented the lettuce and meat sauce, with the lettuce on the south side and the meat sauce on the north side.

古文：妇人赞者执枣、糗，授妇赞者；妇赞者不兴，受，设枣于菹南，糗在枣东。
现代文：宗妇之少者执拿枣和粉制糕点授给主妇助手；主妇助手不起立，接过来，将枣设于韭菹的南边，又将粉制糕点设在枣的东边。
English: The youngest son of the mother-in-law takes the dates and the flour cakes and gives them to the housewife's assistant; the housewife's assistant does not stand up, but takes them over and places the dates on the south side of the urn, and the flour cakes on the east side of the dates.

古文：佐食设俎于豆东，羊臑，豕折，羊脊、胁，祭肺一，肤一，鱼一，腊臑。
现代文：接着佐食将俎设在豆的东边，俎上所载：羊前肢一段，豕骨半块，羊脊骨一块，肋骨、肺、肤各一块，鱼一条，兽前肢一段。
English: Next, the sausage is placed in the basket on the east side of the beans. The basket contains: a lamb foreleg, half a shinbone, a lamb backbone, a rib, lung, and skin, a fish, and a foreleg.

古文：主妇升筵，坐，左执爵，右取菹手耎于醢，祭之，祭笾，奠爵，兴取肺，坐绝祭，哜之，兴加于俎，坐梲手，祭酒，执爵兴，筵北东面立卒爵，拜。宾答拜。
现代文：主妇来到席上坐下，左手执酒爵，右手取韭菹蘸以肉酱后插祭；又祭笾，放下酒爵，起立取肺，坐下将肺撕开行祭，尝肺；继而起立，将肺加放在俎上，坐下拭手；然后祭酒，执拿酒爵起立，于席的北边面朝东站着饮尽酒爵中酒，向宾长行拜。
English: The hostess comes to the table, sits down, holds the wine goblet in her left hand, takes the toad with meat sauce in her right hand and then inserts the offering; she also offers the wine goblet, puts down the wine goblet, stands up and takes the lungs, sits down and tears the lungs apart for the offering, tastes the lungs; she then stands up, places the lungs on the goblet, sits down and wipes her hands; she then offers the wine, holds the wine goblet and stands up, standing on the north side of the table facing east, drinking all the wine in the wine goblet and bowing to the guest.

古文：宾受爵，易爵于篚，洗、酌，醋于主人，户西北面拜，主人答拜。
现代文：宾长答拜，从主妇手中接过空爵。宾长接着从篚中更换一只酒爵，清洗斟酒后，代主人自酬，立于室户的西边面朝北向主人行拜，主人答拜。
English: The head waiter bowed and accepted the empty goblet from the housewife. The head waiter then replaced a wine goblet from the urn, washed and poured the wine, paid for himself on behalf of the owner, stood on the west side of Murodo facing north and bowed to the owner, and the owner bowed back.

古文：卒爵，拜，主人答拜。
现代文：宾长饮尽酒爵中酒，又向主人行拜，主人答拜。
English: The head waiter finished the wine and bowed to the host, and the host bowed back.

古文：宾以爵降奠于篚。
现代文：宾长执拿空爵下堂，将其放入篚中。
English: The head waiter took the empty knapsack and put it in the urn.

古文：乃羞。
现代文：进而行献馐之礼。
English: A server sets out the dishes.

古文：宰夫羞房中之羞，司士羞庶羞于尸、祝、主人、主妇，内羞在右，庶羞在左。
现代文：宰夫呈献内馐、司士呈献庶馐给尸、祝、主人、主妇，内馐设在右边，庶馐设在左边。
English: The steward presents the inner gong, the steward presents the outer gong to the corpse, the celebrant, the host, and the hostess. The inner gong is placed on the right, and the outer gong is placed on the left.

古文：主人降，拜众宾，洗，献众宾。
现代文：主人下堂拜谢众宾；清洗酒爵，斟酒献给众宾。
English: The host goes down to the hall to thank the guests; he cleans the wine glasses and pours the wine for the guests.

古文：其荐脀，其位，其酬醋，皆如傧礼。
现代文：众宾的俎、豆和位置、主人酬宾和自酬的礼仪，都和傧尸之礼一样。
English: The table, bean and place of the guests, the etiquette for the host to reward the guests and for the host to reward himself, are all the same as for the corpse ceremony.

古文：主人洗，献兄弟与内宾，与私人，皆如傧礼。
现代文：主人又清洗酒爵，斟酒后献给众兄弟、姑姊妹，宗妇和家臣，其礼仪都和傧尸之礼相同。
English: The host would also clean the goblet, pour the wine, and then present it to the brothers, sisters-in-law, wives, and vassals, all with the same etiquette as for the corpse.

古文：其位，其荐脀，皆如傧礼。
现代文：众兄弟、姑姊妹、宗妇和家臣的位置和俎、豆等也都和傧尸之礼相同。
English: The position of brothers, sisters-in-law, mothers-in-law, and vassals, as well as beans and peas, are also the same as the corpse ceremony.

古文：卒，乃羞于宾、兄弟、内宾及私人，辩。
现代文：宾长献酒给 尸 ， 尸 接过来又回敬宾长。
English: The head waiter offers wine to the corpse, the corpse comes over and returns the head waiter's salute.

古文：宾长献于尸，尸醋，献祝，致，醋。
现代文：宾长又献酒于祝、主人、主妇，然后自酬。
English: The head waiter also offers wine to the celebrant, host and hostess, and then pays for it himself.

古文：宾以爵降，实于篚。
现代文：宾长饮尽酒爵中酒后执空爵下堂，并将其放入篚中。
English: After drinking all the wine in the bar, the head waiter emptied the bar down the hall and put it in the urn.

古文：宾、兄弟交错其酬。
现代文：众宾、众兄弟交互旅酬，随己所欲，不计次第之数。
English: All the guests, all the brothers and sisters can travel as they please, without counting the number of steps.

古文：无算爵。利洗爵，献于尸，尸醋。
现代文：上佐食清洗酒爵，斟酒后献给 尸 。 尸 接过来回敬上佐食。
English: After washing the sakekasu and pouring the sake, the sakekasu is offered to the corpse, which then returns the honor to the sakekasu.

古文：献祝，祝受，祭酒，啐酒，奠之。
现代文：上佐食又献酒给祝。祝接过酒爵，祭酒，尝酒，而后放下酒爵。
English: Josashiki also offered sake to Zatsu. Zatsu took the sake cup, offered sake, tasted the sake, and then put down the sake cup.

古文：主人出，立于阼阶上，西面。
现代文：主人出室，立于东阶上，面朝西。
English: The master left the room and stood on the east steps, facing west.

古文：祝出，立于西阶上，东面。
现代文：祝出室，立于西阶上，面朝东。
English: Exit the room, stand on the west steps, facing east.

古文：祝告于主人曰；祝入。
现代文：祝告主人说： 礼成。 祝入室。
English: He congratulated the host and said, "Congratulations. Welcome to the room."

古文：主人降，立于阼阶东，西面。
现代文：主人下堂，立于东阶东边，面朝西。 尸 起立。
English: The owner went down the hall and stood on the east side of the east steps, facing west.

古文：尸谡，祝前，尸从，遂出于庙门。
现代文：祝于前面引导， 尸 从于祝后，走出庙门。
English: The corpse is led to the front of the temple, and the corpse is led out of the temple gate after the blessing.

古文：祝反，复位于室中。祝命佐食彻尸俎。
现代文：祝返回室中就位。接着祝命佐食撤去 尸 俎。
English: I wish you to return to the room and take your places. Next, I wish you to order Sasaki to remove the coffin.

古文：佐食乃出尸俎于庙门外，有司受，归之。
现代文：佐食遵命将 尸 俎拿到庙门外边；有司接过 尸 俎，送到 尸 的家里。
English: Sasaki complied with the order to take the coffin to the outside of the temple gate; Yushi took the coffin and sent it to the corpse's home.

古文：彻阼荐俎。
现代文：随后佐食又撤去主人的俎、豆。
English: Subsequently, Saseki removed the owner's lettuce and beans.

古文：乃餕，如傧。
现代文：进而行馂食之礼，其礼和傧尸时相同。
English: Then, the ritual of eating the corpse is performed, which is the same as the ritual of eating the corpse.

古文：卒餕，有司官彻馈，馔于室中西北隅，南面，如馈之设，右几，厞用席。
现代文：馂食完毕，司马、司士撤俎，宰夫取敦与豆，设于室中西北隅，正面朝南，与馈食之设相同，几放在右边，并用席子挡住光线。
English: After the meal is over, Sima and Sujin remove the bowl, and Zaif takes the bowl and beans. It is placed in the northwest corner of the room, facing south. It is the same as the setting for feeding, a few are placed on the right, and a mat is used to block the light.

古文：纳一尊于室中。
现代文：又于室中陈设一只酒尊。
English: In addition, a sake cup is displayed in the room.

古文：司宫扫祭。主人出，立于阼阶上。
现代文：司宫清扫豆间之祭物，将其埋于西阶的东边。主人出室，立于东阶上，面朝西。
English: The steward sweeps up the bean offering and buries it on the east side of the west steps. The master leaves the room and stands on the east steps, facing west.

古文：西面。祝执其俎以出，立于西阶上，东面。
现代文：祝执自己的俎出室，立于西阶上，面朝东。
English: Wishing for his own exit from the room, he stood on the west steps, facing east.

古文：司宫阖牖户。
现代文：司宫关好门窗。
English: The palace has closed its doors and windows.

古文：祝告利成，乃执俎以出于庙门外，有司受，归之。
现代文：祝告主人： 礼成 ，随后执着俎走出庙门外；有司从祝手中接过俎，并送到祝的家里。
English: He congratulated the host: "Reicheng," and then walked out of the temple gate with the gong in his hand; Yushi took the gong from him and brought it to Zhu's home.

古文：众宾出。主人拜送于庙门外，乃反。
现代文：众宾出室，主人到庙门外行拜相送，而后返回。
English: The guests leave the room, the host goes to the temple gate to pay homage to the couple, and then returns.

古文：妇人乃彻，彻室中之馔。
现代文：主妇助手撤去房中荐俎，又撤去刚设于室中西北隅的俎、豆等。
English: The housewife's assistant removed the recommending bowl in the room, and removed the bowl, beans, etc. that had just been placed in the northwest corner of the room.

