古文：顔延之沈怀文周朗后爲宋武帝豫章公世子中军行参军。
现代文：刘穆之听说了他的美好才学，准备让他做官，想先与他相见，颜延之不去。后来他做了宋武帝豫章公世子的中军行军参军。
English: Liu Muzhi heard about his wonderful talent and prepared to make him an official. He wanted to meet him first, but Yan Yan did not want to go. Later, he joined the Chinese army as the son of Emperor Songwu and Prince Yuzhang.

古文：及武帝北伐，有宋公之授，府遣延之庆殊命。
现代文：等武帝北伐的时候，授命为宋公，府中派颜延之前往庆贺这一特殊任命。
English: At the time of Emperor Wu's Northern Expedition, he was appointed Song Gong, and the central government sent Yan Yan to celebrate this special appointment.

古文：行至洛阳，周视故宫室，尽爲禾黍，凄然咏黍离篇。
现代文：行至洛阳，环视旧时的宫室，都已经成了庄稼地，便悲凄地吟咏起《黍离篇》。
English: If you go to Luoyang and look around the old palace, you will see that it has become a field of crops, and you will sadly sing "The Parting."

古文：道中作诗二首，爲谢晦、傅亮所赏。
现代文：路上作诗二首，为谢晦、傅亮所欣赏。
English: On the way, he composed two poems, which were appreciated by Xie Yu and Fu Liang.

古文：武帝受命，补太子舍人。
现代文：武帝受命登基，他被补为太子舍人。
English: Emperor Wu was ordered to ascend to the throne, and he was made the crown prince.

古文：雁门周续之隐庐山，儒学着称。
现代文：雁门人周续之隐居在庐山，以儒学著称。
English: The people of the Wild Goose Gate lived in seclusion in Shaoshan and were famous for their Confucianism.

古文：永初中，征诣都下，开馆以居之。
现代文：永初年间，被征调到京城，开设馆堂让他住在里面。
English: At the beginning of the 19th century, he was transferred to the capital and a museum was opened for him to live in.

古文：武帝亲幸，朝彦毕至。
现代文：武帝亲自去探视，朝廷的贤才都到了。
English: Emperor Wu himself went to visit, and the court's sages all arrived.

古文：延之宫官列卑，引升上席。
现代文：颜延之在宫中的官员中地位较低，却被引到了上席。
English: Yan Yan Zhi was a low-ranking official in the imperial court, but he was promoted to a high-ranking position.

古文：上使问续之三义，续之雅仗辞辩，延之每以简要连挫续之。
现代文：皇上让人问了周续之三个问题，周续之以很好的辩词作了回答，颜延之总是用简要的言语连续压倒周续之。
English: The emperor asked Zhou Lian three questions, Zhou Lian answered with a good defense, Yan Yan Zhi always used concise words to continuously overwhelm Zhou Lian.

古文：上又使还自敷释，言约理畅，莫不称善。
现代文：皇上又让他正面作出解释，言词简洁，说理畅达，无不称赞。
English: The emperor also asked him to make a positive explanation. His words were concise and reasoned, which was highly praised.

古文：再迁太子中舍人。
现代文：又调任太子中舍人。
English: He was also transferred to the position of the crown prince's middle son.

古文：时尚书令傅亮自以文义一时莫及，延之负其才，不爲之下，亮甚疾焉。
现代文：当时尚书令傅亮认为自己的文章在当时无人能比得上，颜延之凭依自己的才华，不肯在他以下，傅亮十分恼恨。
English: At that time, Shang Shuling Fu Liang thought that no one could match his article at that time. Yan Yan did not want to be inferior to him by virtue of his talent. Fu Liang was very angry.

古文：庐陵王义真待之甚厚，徐羡之等疑延之爲同异，意甚不悦。
现代文：庐陵王刘义真待颜延之很好，徐羡之等人怀疑颜延之与他是同党，心里很不高兴。
English: Liu Yizhen, the king of Fuling, treated Yan Yan very well. Xu Enzhi and others suspected that Yan Yan was a member of the same party as him, and they were very unhappy.

古文：少帝即位，累迁始安太守。
现代文：少帝即位后，颜延之逐步升迁到始安太守。
English: After the enthronement of the young emperor, Yan Yan was gradually promoted to the governor of Shi'an.

古文：领军将军谢晦谓延之曰： 昔荀勖忌阮咸，斥爲始平郡，今卿又爲始安，可谓 二始 。 
现代文：领军将军谢晦对颜延之说： 过去荀勖忌妒阮咸，排斥他去管理始平郡，现在您又掌管始安郡，这可以称作是 二始 了。 
English: Xie Hui, the leading general, said to Yan Yanzhi: In the past, you were jealous of Ruan Xian and excluded him from administering Shihping County. Now you are in charge of Shih'an County. This can be called the second beginning.

古文：黄门郎殷景仁亦谓之曰： 所谓人恶俊异，世疵文雅。 
现代文：黄门郎殷景仁也对他说： 这就是常说的人们嫌恶俊杰之士，世俗毁谤文雅之人。 
English: Huangmen Lang Yin Jingren also said to him, "This is what is often said, that people hate those who are good-looking, and the world slanders those who are refined.

古文：延之之郡，道经汨潭，爲湘州刺史张邵祭屈原文以致其意。
现代文：颜延之到始安郡去，路上经过汨潭时，为湘州刺史张邵写了一篇《祭屈原文》以表达心意。
English: Yan Yanzhi went to Shi'an County, and when he passed through Shitan on the way, he wrote an "original text of the festival" to express his thoughts for Zhang Shao, the chief historian of Hunan Province.

古文：元嘉三年，羡之等诛，征爲中书侍郎，转太子中庶子，领步兵校尉，赏遇甚厚。
现代文：元嘉三年，徐羡之等人被诛杀，颜延之被征召为中书侍郎，又转任太子中庶子，兼任步兵校尉，所受到的封赏和待遇非常优厚。
English: In the third year of Yuan Jia, Xu Enzhi and others were killed, Yan Yanzhi was conscripted as a junior secretary, and he was transferred to the prince's junior illegitimate son, and also served as an infantry lieutenant. The rewards and treatment he received were very generous.

古文：延之既以才学见遇，当时多相推服，唯袁淑年倍小延之，不相推重。
现代文：颜延之因为有才学而受赏识，当时的人大多对他推崇折服，惟有袁淑年纪比颜延之小一半，却并不称许尊重他。
English: Yan Yan was appreciated for his talent in learning. At that time, most people respected him. However, Yuan Shu, who was half Yan Yan's age, did not respect him.

古文：延之忿于衆中折之曰： 昔陈元方与孔元骏齐年文学，元骏拜元方于床下，今君何得不见拜？ 淑无以对。
现代文：颜延之气愤地在众人面前斥责他说： 从前陈元方与孔元骏做文学时年纪相同，而孔元骏却在陈元方的坐床前面下拜，现在你为什么不来拜我呢？ 袁淑无言对答。
English: Yan Yan angrily rebuked him in front of the crowd, saying, "Once upon a time, Chen Yuanfang and Kong Yuanzhang were the same age when they wrote literature, but Kong Yuanzhang bowed down in front of Chen Yuanfang's bed. Why don't you bow down to me now?" Yuan Shu was speechless.

古文：延之疏诞，不能取容当世，见刘湛、殷景仁专当要任，意有不平。
现代文：颜延之疏放怪诞，不能被当局所喜欢，他见刘湛、殷景仁独自担当要职，心里感到不平。
English: Yan Yan's extravagant and grotesque behavior could not be liked by the authorities. He felt uneasy when he saw Liu Zhan and Yin Jingren taking on important positions on their own.

古文：常言 天下事岂一人之智所能独了 。
现代文：常常说 天下事哪是靠一个人的智慧所能做完的 。
English: It is often said that nothing in the world can be accomplished by the wisdom of a single person.

古文：辞意激扬，每犯权要。
现代文：言词激烈，常常触犯权要人物。
English: He is a fiery speaker who often offends important figures.

古文：又少经爲湛父柳后将军主簿，至是谓湛曰： 吾名器不升，当由作卿家吏耳。 
现代文：又在少年时候他曾经做过刘湛的父亲刘柳的后将军主簿，到了现在，他对刘湛说： 我的名声和职位不上升，应当是因为做过您家的吏人的缘故吧！ 
English: Also, when he was a boy, he once made Liu Zhan's father Liu Liu's post-general's home directory. Now, he said to Liu Zhan: My reputation and position are not rising, it must be because of having been the official of your family!

古文：湛恨焉，言于彭城王义康，出爲永嘉太守。
现代文：刘湛很恼恨，告诉给了彭城王刘义康，把他派出京城去做永嘉太守。
English: Liu Zhan was very angry and told Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, to send him to Beijing to be Yongjia's governor.

古文：延之甚怨愤，乃作五君咏，以述竹林七贤，山涛、王戎以贵显被黜。
现代文：颜延之十分怨愤，便作了一首《五君咏》，以描述竹林七贤，山涛、王戎以显贵的身份被罢免。
English: Yan Yanzhi was very angry, so he composed a song "Five Kings" to describe the seven sages in the bamboo forest, and Shantao and Wang Rong were dismissed as dignitaries.

古文：咏嵇康云： 鸾翮有时铩，龙性谁能驯。 
现代文：咏稽康说： 鸾翮有时铩，龙性谁能训！ 
English: Zou Jikang said: "Sometimes, it's like a dragon, who can train it!

古文：咏阮籍云： 物故不可论，途穷能无恸。 
现代文：咏阮籍说： 物故不可论，途穷能无恸！ 
English: Nguyn Quc said: There is no need to discuss the past, the future is bright!

古文：咏阮咸云： 屡荐不入官，一麾乃出守。 
现代文：咏阮咸说： 屡荐不入官，一麾乃出守。 
English: "Repeatedly recommending someone does not mean they will be promoted, but once they are promoted, they will be sent to the front," Ruan Ham said.

古文：咏刘伶云： 韬精日沈饮，谁知非荒宴。 
现代文：咏刘伶说： 韬精日沉饮，谁知非荒宴！ 
English: Zhou Liuqi said: "If you drink a lot on a fine day, who knows if it will be a bad feast!

古文：此四句盖自序也。
现代文：这四句实际上就是他的自叙。
English: These four sentences are actually his autobiography.

古文：湛及义康以其辞旨不逊，大怒，欲黜爲远郡。
现代文：刘湛和刘义康因为他词语中的含义不谦逊，大怒，想把他罢免到远方的郡中去。
English: Liu Zhan and Liu Yikang were furious because the meaning of his words was not humble, and they wanted to banish him to a distant county.

古文：文帝与义康诏曰： 宜令思愆里闾，犹复不悛，当驱往东土；乃至难恕者，自可随事录之。 
现代文：文帝给刘义康的诏书中说： 应该让他在故乡思过，如果还是不改，就要放逐到东部去；要是发展到难以饶恕的地步，自然可以把情况如实记录下来。 
English: Emperor Wen said in his edict to Liu Yikang: He should be allowed to think about it in his hometown, and if he still does not change, he should be banished to the east; if it develops to an unforgivable level, it is natural to record the situation truthfully.

古文：于是延之屏居不豫人间者七载。
现代文：于是颜延之一连七年闲住在乡间，不问外界的事情。
English: As a result, Yan Yan lived idly in the countryside for seven years in a row, not asking about the outside world.

古文：中书令王球以名公子遗务事外，与延之雅相爱好，每振其罄匮。
现代文：中书令王球以名公儿子的身份超脱于时事之外，与颜延之彼此非常要好，常常救济他家的穷困。
English: In the middle of the book, Wang Qiu, as the son of a noble prince, is detached from current affairs, and he and Yan Yan are very good to each other, often relieving his family's poverty.

古文：晋恭思皇后葬，应须百官，皆取义熙元年除身。
现代文：晋朝的恭思皇后埋葬，参加丧事活动的众多官员，都取用义熙元年授官的人。
English: Many officials who took part in the funeral activities of the burial of the Empress Gongsi of the Jin Dynasty used the crown of the person who was awarded the post in the first year of Yixi.

古文：以延之兼侍中，邑吏送劄，延之醉，投劄于地曰： 顔延之未能事生，焉能事死。 
现代文：让颜延之兼任侍中，地方官吏呈送书信，颜延之喝醉了，把信扔在地上说： 颜延之侍候不了活着的人，怎么侍候得了死去的人呢？ 
English: Local officials presented a letter to Yan Yanzhi, who was also an attendant. Yan Yanzhi was drunk and threw the letter on the ground, saying: Yan Yanzhi can't serve the living, how can he serve the dead?

古文：文帝尝召延之，传诏频不见，常日但酒店裸袒挽歌，了不应对，他日醉醒乃见。
现代文：文帝曾经召见颜延之，频频传诏却不见他来，他天天只在酒店脱衣露体地唱着挽歌，完全不作回答，另一天酒醒以后才去晋见。
English: Emperor Wen once summoned Yan Yanzhi, but he did not see him despite frequent summonses. Every day, he would strip naked and sing elegies in the hotel. He did not answer at all, and only went to see Jin the next day after he had sobered up.

古文：帝尝问以诸子才能，延之曰： 竣得臣笔，测得臣文，啜得臣义，跃得臣酒。 
现代文：文帝曾经询问他几个儿子的才能如何，颜延之说： 颜竣学到了我的散文，颜测学到了我的韵文，颜学得到了我的忠义，颜跃学到了我的饮酒。 
English: Emperor Wen once asked Yan Yanzhi about the talents of his sons, and Yan Yanzhi said: Yan Shun learned my prose, Yan Zheng learned my rhyme, Yan Xue learned my loyalty, Yan Yue learned my drinking.

古文：何尚之嘲曰： 谁得卿狂？ 
现代文：何尚之嘲讽道： 谁学到了您的张狂？ 
English: He Shangzhi said sarcastically: Who has learned from your bravado?

古文：答曰： 其狂不可及。 
现代文：颜延之回答说： 我的张狂是无人可以学到的。 
English: Yan Yanzhi replied: No one can learn from my arrogance.

古文：尚之爲侍中在直，延之以醉诣焉。
现代文：何尚之担任侍中有一次值班，颜延之醉醺醺地来找他。
English: When He Shangzhi was on duty as a waiter, Yan Yanzhi came to him drunk.

古文：尚之望见便阳眠，延之发帘熟视曰： 朽木难雕。 
现代文：何尚之望见他来了就假装睡觉，颜延之挑开帘子仔细看了看说： 朽木难雕。 
English: When she saw him coming, she pretended to be asleep. Yan Yanzhi opened the curtain, took a closer look and said, "It's hard to carve through rotten wood."

古文：尚之谓左右曰： 此人醉甚可畏。 
现代文：何尚之对左右人说： 这个人醉了十分可怕。 
English: He said to the people around him, "It's terrible that this man is drunk.

古文：闲居无事，爲庭诰之文以训子弟。
现代文：颜延之在家闲居无事，便写了一篇叫作《庭诰》的文章训诫子弟。
English: Yan Yanzhi was idle at home and had nothing to do, so he wrote an article called "The Courtyard" to discipline his son.

古文：刘湛诛后，起延之爲始兴王浚后军谘议参军、御史中丞。
现代文：刘湛被处死以后，颜延之被起用为始兴王刘浚的后军咨议参军、御史中丞。
English: After Liu Zhan was executed, Yan Yanzhi was appointed as the second-in-command of Shixing King Liu Jun's rear army, and served as the second-in-command.

古文：在任从容，无所举奏。
现代文：他在任上很清闲，什么事情也不上奏。
English: He is very relaxed in office and does not make a fuss about anything.

古文：迁国子祭酒、司徒左长史。
现代文：调任国子祭酒、司徒左长史。
English: He was transferred to the post of Kuniko Matsuri sake brewer, Shito Sadanaga.

古文：何尚之素与延之狎，书与王球曰： 延之有后命，教府无复光晖。 
现代文：何尚之平素与颜延之狎昵，他给王球写信说： 颜延之以后会有其他任命，教府将不再有今天的光辉。 
English: He wrote to Wang Qiu saying, "After Yan Yan, there will be other appointments, and the Holy Office will no longer have the glory it has today.

古文：坐啓买人田不肯还直，尚书左丞荀赤松奏之曰： 求田问舍，前贤所鄙。
现代文：因为有人告他买了别人的田地而不肯按价还钱，尚书左丞荀赤松向皇上禀奏道： 买地要房，是从前的贤人所鄙视的。
English: Because someone accused him of buying someone else's field and refusing to pay the price, Shangshu Zuozhong (Shangshu Zuozhong) and Shaoqimong (Shaoqimong) appealed to the emperor: Buying land to buy a house was despised by the wise men of the past.

古文：延之唯利是视，轻冒陈闻，依傍诏恩，抵捍馀直，垂及周年，犹不毕了。
现代文：颜延之只看财利，轻率冒犯旧时的传统，倚仗诏赐的恩惠，排挤其他值勤官员，将近一年了，仍然没完没了。
English: It has been nearly a year since Yan Yanzhi only cared about money and profit, rashly offending the old-time tradition, relying on the grace given by the edict, and crowding out other officials on duty. It is still endless.

古文：昧利苟得，无所顾忌。
现代文：贪图财利，无所顾忌。
English: They are greedy for money and have no scruples.

古文：延之昔坐事屏斥，复蒙抽进，而曾不悛革，怨诽无已。
现代文：颜延之从前曾经因为犯事而被斥退，又被提拔上来，却竟然并不悔改，不停地怨愤诽谤。
English: In the past, Yan Yanzhi had been expelled for a crime and promoted again, but she did not repent and kept complaining and slandering.

古文：交游闒茸，沈迷曲蘖，横兴讥谤，诋毁朝士。
现代文：交结卑贱小人，沉迷在饮酒当中，胡乱讥刺诽谤，诋毁朝中官员。
English: He mingled with lowlifes, indulged in drinking, and mocked, slandered, and slandered officials of the DPRK and China.

古文：仰窃过荣，增愤薄之性，私恃顾眄，成强梁之心。
现代文：仰仗自己的过分荣耀，增生刻薄品性，私下凭恃皇上的关照，养成强横的心理。
English: They rely on their own excessive glory, increase their mean character, and privately rely on the care of Emperor Zou to develop a domineering mentality.

古文：外示寡求，内怀奔竞，干禄祈迁，不知极已。
现代文：对外表示要求很少，而内怀竞争意识，争薪水，求升官，不知道终止。
English: Outwardly, they have few demands, but inwardly they are competitive, fight for salary, seek promotion, and do not know when to quit.

古文：预宴班觞，肆詈上席。
现代文：参加宴会排定位次，肆意辱骂上座宾客。
English: Participating in the banquet row positioning times, wantonly abusing the last guest.

古文：山海容含，每存遵养。
现代文：皇上以海量宽容，常常加以教养训练。
English: The emperor was extremely tolerant and often disciplined them.

古文：爱兼雕虫，未忍遐弃。
现代文：爱心包括了具有雕虫小技的人，不忍将他抛弃。
English: Love includes a person with a little skill in carving insects, and cannot bear to abandon him.

古文：而骄放不节，日月弥甚。
现代文：而他却骄纵没有节制，一天一月逐渐增长。
English: He, on the other hand, is arrogant and unrestrained, and grows more and more every day.

古文：臣闻声问过情，孟轲所耻，况声非外来，问由己出。
现代文：我听说名声超过实际，孟子感到可耻，况且声不打外面来，名是从自己出。
English: I have heard that reputation exceeds reality, Mencius felt ashamed, moreover, he did not seek outside, the name came from himself.

古文：虽心智薄劣，而高自比拟，客气虚张，曾无愧畏。
现代文：虽然心智低劣，却自比很高，假气虚加张扬，竟不惭愧畏惧。
English: Although the mind is inferior, it has a high self-comparison, and it is not ashamed to be afraid.

古文：岂可复弼亮五教，增耀台阶。
现代文：怎么可能再辅佐五教，给朝廷增加光彩！
English: How is it possible to further support the Five Religions and add luster to the imperial court!

古文：请以延之讼田不实，妄干天听，以强陵弱，免所居官。 
现代文：请求以颜延之关于买田的讼词不真实、胡乱干扰皇上的视听、以强欺弱的原因，免除他所担任的官职。 
English: The request is to remove Yan Yan from his official position on the grounds that his words about buying land are untrue, that he interfered with the emperor's audio-visual system, and that he bullied the emperor.

古文：诏可。
现代文：诏令加以认可。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：后爲秘书监，光禄勋，太常。
现代文：后来他担任了秘书监、光禄勋、太常。
English: Later, he served as Secretary Supervisor, Guanglu Xun, and Taizhang.

古文：时沙门释慧琳以才学爲文帝所赏，朝廷政事多与之谋，遂士庶归仰。
现代文：当时和尚释慧琳因为才学被文帝所欣赏，朝廷的政事很多都与他谋划，于是士人和平民敬仰。
English: At that time, the monk Shih Huilin was appreciated by Emperor Wen for his talent in learning, and many of the court's political affairs were planned with him, so scholars and commoners admired him.

古文：上每引见，常升独榻，延之甚疾焉。
现代文：皇上每次引见他，常常上去坐在单独一个坐榻上，延之十分嫉妒他。
English: Every time the emperor saw him, he would often go and sit on a single couch, and he was very jealous of him.

古文：因醉白上曰： 昔同子参乘，袁丝正色。
现代文：有一次趁着醉酒告诉皇上说： 从前同子陪同乘车，袁丝神情严肃。
English: On one occasion, she took advantage of her drunkenness to tell the emperor: "Once upon a time, my son accompanied me on a car ride. Yuan Si looked serious.

古文：此三台之坐，岂可使刑余居之。 
现代文：这是三台的座位，怎么可以让受刑之后的人坐上？ 
English: This is a three-seater, so how can someone who has been incarcerated sit on it?

古文：上变色。
现代文：皇上发怒而面色改变。
English: The Emperor's face changed with anger.

古文：延之性既褊激，兼有酒过，肆意直言，曾无回隐，故论者多不与之，谓之顔彪。
现代文：颜延之性格既急躁，又加上饮酒过量后，放肆地直言，毫不回避，所以闲谈的人都不和他在一起，称他作颜彪。
English: Yan Yan's personality is both impetuous, and after drinking too much, he is boldly outspoken and does not shy away, so people who gossip are not with him, calling him Yan Biao.

古文：居身俭约，不营财利，布衣蔬食，独酌郊野。
现代文：他居身节俭，不谋取财利，布衣服、素饭菜，在郊野独自喝酒。
English: He lives frugally, does not seek financial gain, buys cloth clothes, vegetarian meals, and drinks alone in the countryside.

古文：当其爲适，傍若无人。
现代文：当他感到舒适的时候，旁若无人。
English: When he feels comfortable, no one is around.

古文：三十年，致事。
现代文：元嘉三十年，辞官归居。
English: Yuan Jia has been retired for 30 years.

古文：元凶弑立，以爲光禄大夫。
现代文：元凶劭杀死皇上自立，任命他为光禄大夫。
English: The culprit killed the emperor and appointed himself as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：长子竣爲孝武南中郎谘议参军。
现代文：长子颜竣为孝武帝南中郎咨议参军。
English: The eldest son Yan Jun joined the army at the request of Emperor Xiaowu.

古文：及义师入讨，竣定密谋，兼造书檄。劭召延之示以檄文，问曰： 此笔谁造？ 
现代文：后来义军入京讨伐，颜竣制订密谋，兼写了檄书，刘劭召来了颜延之拿了檄文让他看，问他说： 这文章是谁写的？ 
English: Later, when the rebels entered Beijing to fight, Yan Yan formulated a plot and also wrote an article. Liu Ye summoned Yan Yan, took the article and asked him, "Who wrote this article?"

古文：延之曰： 竣之笔也。 
现代文：颜延之说： 是颜竣的手笔。 
English: Yan Yanzhi said: It was Yan Shun's handwriting.

古文：又问： 何以知之？ 
现代文：又问： 你怎么知道？ 
English: He also asked: How do you know?

古文：曰： 竣笔体，臣不容不识。 
现代文：他说： 颜竣的文体，臣不会不认得。 
English: He said: Yan Shun's style, the minister will not fail to recognize.

古文：劭又曰： 言辞何至乃尔？ 
现代文：刘劭又说： 言辞怎么会到这种地步？ 
English: Liu Wei also said: How did the rhetoric get to this point?

古文：延之曰： 竣尚不顾老臣，何能爲陛下。 
现代文：颜延之说： 颜竣尚且不顾老臣我，怎么还能为了陛下？ 
English: Yan Yanzhi said: Yan Yanzhu is still young and does not care about the old minister, how can he still for the sake of his majesty?

古文：劭意乃释，由是得免。
现代文：刘劭的怒气才消了，于是得以免祸。
English: Only then did Liu Xuan's anger dissipate, and he was able to avoid disaster.

古文：孝武登阼，以爲金紫光禄大夫，领湘东王师。
现代文：孝武帝即位，任命他为金紫光禄大夫，兼任湘东王师。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, he appointed him as the doctor of Jin Zi Guanglu, and also as the teacher of the King of Shandong.

古文：尝与何偃同从上南郊，偃于路中遥呼延之曰： 顔公！ 
现代文：他曾与何偃一同跟从皇上到南郊去，何偃在路上远远地呼喊颜延之说： 颜公！ 
English: He had followed the emperor to the southern suburbs together with Ho Ye. On the way, Ho Ye called out to Yan Yan from a distance, saying: "Yan Gong!

古文：延之以其轻脱，怪之，答曰： 身非三公之公，又非田舍之公，又非君家阿公，何以见呼爲公？ 
现代文：颜延之因为他太轻佻，便加以责怪，回答他说： 我不是三公之公，也不是田家之公，又不是您家阿公，为什么呼我为公？ 
English: Yan Yanzhi reproached him for being too frivolous, and answered him: "I am not the prince of the three princes, nor the prince of the Tian family, nor the grandfather of your family, why do you call me a prince?

古文：偃羞而退。
现代文：何偃羞惭而退。
English: What a shameful retreat.

古文：竣既贵重，权倾一朝，凡所资供，延之一无所受。
现代文：颜竣后来贵重，权倾朝廷，凡是他所供应的资财，颜延之一点也不接受。
English: Yan Shun later became very valuable and powerful and favored the imperial court. Yan Yan did not accept any of the wealth he provided.

古文：器服不改，宅宇如旧，常乘羸牛车，逢竣卤簿，即屏住道侧。
现代文：器物服装都没有改变，宅院房舍依旧，常常乘着弱牛车，遇到了颜竣的仪仗队，便躲在路旁。
English: The utensils and clothing have not changed, the courtyard buildings are still the same, often riding a weak ox cart, met Yan Shun's honor guard, and then hid by the roadside.

古文：又好骑马遨游里巷，遇知旧辄据鞍索酒，得必倾尽，欣然自得。
现代文：他又爱好骑马在街巷中游逛，遇到好友熟人就坐在马鞍上要酒喝，得到了必定要喝尽，欣然自得。
English: He also likes to ride around on horseback in the streets, and when he meets friends and acquaintances, he sits on the saddle and asks for a drink, and when he gets it, he must drink it all, and is pleased with himself.

古文：尝语竣曰： 平生不喜见要人，今不幸见汝。 
现代文：他曾经告诉颜竣说： 平生不喜欢见要人，现在不幸见到了你。 
English: He once told Yan Shunlu, "I have never liked meeting important people in my life, but now I have the misfortune of meeting you.

古文：见竣起宅，谓曰： 善爲之，无令后人笑汝拙也。 
现代文：他见颜竣建造宅院，便对他说： 要很好地自为，不要让后世人笑你愚蠢。 
English: When he saw Yancheng building a mansion, he said to him, "Do well for yourself, and don't let posterity laugh at your stupidity."

古文：表解师职，加给亲信二十人。
现代文：他上表解去了王师的职务，配给他亲信二十人。
English: He dismissed Wang Shi from his post at the table and assigned him 20 close confidants.

古文：尝早候竣，遇宾客盈门，竣方卧不起，延之怒曰： 恭敬撙节，福之基也。
现代文：他曾经有一天早晨去找颜竣，遇到宾客盈门，颜竣还躺着没起，颜延之发怒说： 恭敬自谦，是福气的根基。
English: One morning, he went to look for Yan Shun and encountered a throng of guests at the door. Yan Shun was still lying down, and Yan Yan said angrily, "Being respectful and humble is the foundation of good fortune."

古文：骄佷傲慢，祸之始也。
现代文：骄矜傲慢，是灾祸的起点。
English: Pride and arrogance are the beginning of all evil.

古文：况出粪土之中，而升云霞之上，傲不可长，其能久乎。 
现代文：何况你是出自粪土当中，而升到云霞之上，骄气不可长，这样难道能持久吗？ 
English: What's more, you come from the muck and rise above the clouds. Your arrogance won't last long. Can it?

古文：延之有爱姬，非姬食不饱，寝不安。
现代文：颜延之有个爱姬，没有这个爱姬在跟前他便吃不饱，睡不安。
English: Yan Yan Zhi has an Aiki, without this Aiki in front of him, he can't get enough to eat and can't sleep.

古文：姬凭宠，尝荡延之坠床致损，竣杀之。
现代文：爱姬凭着得宠，曾经摇荡颜延之，以致使他从床上掉下来摔伤，颜竣便杀死了她。
English: Aiki, by virtue of being favored, once rocked Yan Yan so that he fell off the bed and hurt himself, and Yan Yan killed her.

古文：延之痛惜甚至，常坐灵上哭曰： 贵人杀汝，非我杀汝。 
现代文：颜延之痛惜至极，常常坐在灵柩上哭着说： 是贵人杀了你，不是我杀了你。 
English: Yan Yan was extremely regretful. She often sat on the coffin and cried, "It was the nobles who killed you, not I who killed you."

古文：以冬日临哭，忽见妾排屏风以压延之，延之惧坠地，因病。
现代文：有一次冬天在灵位前哭着，忽然看见妾推倒屏风来压颜延之，颜延之害怕地坠落在地上，于是生了病。
English: One winter, crying in front of the altar, he suddenly saw his concubine push down the screen to crush Yan Yan. Yan Yan fell to the ground in fear and became ill.

古文：孝建三年卒，年七十三。
现代文：孝建三年死去，年纪七十三岁。
English: Xiao Jian died three years ago at the age of seventy-three.

古文：赠特进，諡曰宪子。
现代文：赠为特进，谥号为宪子。
English: His posthumous name was Tokujin, and his posthumous nickname was Gosho.

古文：延之与陈郡谢灵运俱以辞采齐名，而迟速县绝。
现代文：颜延与陈郡谢灵运共以辞采齐名，而速度快慢悬殊。
English: Yan Yan and Chen County Xie Lingyun are equally famous for their words, but the speed is very different.

古文：文帝尝各敕拟乐府北上篇，延之受诏便成，灵运久之乃就。
现代文：文帝曾经分别下令让他们拟作乐府《北上篇》，颜延之受到诏令便作成了，谢灵运好久才写就。
English: Emperor Wen once separately ordered them to compose the "Northern Chapter" of Lefu. Yan Yan was ordered to complete it, but Xie Lingyun took a long time to write it.

古文：延之尝问鲍照己与灵运优劣，照曰： 谢五言如初发芙蓉，自然可爱。
现代文：颜延之曾问鲍照自己与谢灵运两人的优劣怎样，鲍照说： 谢的五言诗如初开的芙蓉，显得自然可爱。
English: Yan Yanzhi once asked Bao Zhao about the merits and demerits of himself and Xie Lingyun. Bao Zhao said: Xie's five-character poem is like a newly opened hibiscus, it is naturally lovely.

古文：君诗若铺锦列绣，亦雕缋满眼。 
现代文：您的诗像铺展的锦绣，也是彩绘满眼。 
English: The beauty of your poem is also the beauty of your painting.

古文：延之每薄汤惠休诗，谓人曰： 惠休制作，委巷中歌谣耳，方当误后生。 
现代文：颜延之常常贬斥汤惠休的诗，对别人说： 惠休的作品，只是里巷中的歌谣罢了，看来要贻误后生。 
English: Yan Yanzhi often disparaged Tang Huixiu's poems, saying to others: Huixiu's works are just songs in the alley, and it seems that he wants to delay future generations.

古文：是时议者以延之、灵运自潘岳、陆机之后，文士莫及，江右称潘、陆，江左称顔、谢焉。
现代文：当时谈论的人认为颜延之、谢灵运两人自从潘岳、陆机以后，文士无人能赶得上，江右最称道潘、陆，江左最称道颜、谢。
English: At that time, the people who were talking about it thought that Yan Yanzhi and Xie Lingyun were the top two. Since Pan Yue and Lu Ji, no one could catch up with the scribes. Jiang Yu was most famous for Daopan and Lu, and Jiang Zuo was most famous for Daoyan and Xie.

古文：竣字士逊，延之长子也。
现代文：○颜竣颜竣字士逊，是颜延之的长子。
English: ○ Yan Jian Yan Jian is Yan Yan's eldest son.

古文：早有文义，爲宋孝武帝抚军主簿，甚被嘉遇，竣亦尽心补益。
现代文：很早就有文才，担任宋武帝的抚军主簿，很受器重，颜竣也尽心效力。
English: There was a literary talent very early, serving as the main book of Emperor Songwu's army, which was highly valued, and Yan Shun also worked hard.

古文：元嘉中，上不欲诸王各立朋党，将召竣补尚书郎。
现代文：元嘉年间，皇上不想让诸王各自建立朋党，准备召颜竣补任尚书郎。
English: During the Yuan Jia era, the emperor did not want the kings to establish their own fraternal parties, and was preparing to call Yan Shuling to fill the post of Shang Shuro.

古文：江湛以爲在府有称，不宜回改，乃止。
现代文：江湛认为颜竣在府中已经有了职务，不宜更改，才停下了。
English: Jiang Zhan thought that Yan Jun already had a position in the government, and it was not appropriate to change it, so he stopped.

古文：随府转安北、镇军、北中郎府主簿。
现代文：随着宋武帝军府转移为安北、镇军、北中郎府主簿。
English: With the transfer of the Song Emperor Wu's military headquarters, it became the main book of Anbei, Zhenjun and Beizhonglang.

古文：初，沙门释僧含精有学义，谓竣曰： 贫道常见谶记，当有真人应符，名称次第，属在殿下。 
现代文：起初，和尚释僧含学问精深，他对颜竣说： 贫僧常常看见谶记，应当有真人和这相对应，名称次第，正好与殿下相合。 
English: At first, the monk, who was very learned, said to Yan Shun, "Poor monks often see bad memories. There should be a real person and this person, depending on the name, should coincide with His Royal Highness."

古文：后竣在彭城，尝于亲人叙之，言遂宣布，闻于文帝。
现代文：后来颜竣在彭城，曾经和亲人说起，这话于是传开，被文帝听到了。
English: Later, Yan Shun was in Pengcheng, and once he mentioned it to his relatives. The word then spread, and was heard by Emperor Wen.

古文：时元凶巫蛊事已发，故上不加推案。
现代文：当时元凶劭巫蛊的事已经揭露，所以皇上没有进行追究。
English: At that time, the culprit, Wu Xi, had already been exposed, so the emperor did not pursue the matter.

古文：孝武镇寻阳，迁南中郎记室。
现代文：孝武帝镇守寻阳，他调任南中郎记室。
English: Emperor Xiaowu assigned him to guard Huanyang, and he was transferred to the office of the Southern Middle Palace Recorder.

古文：三十年春，以父延之致仕，固求解职，赐假未发，而文帝崩问至，孝武举兵入讨，转谘议参军，领录事，任总内外，并造檄书。
现代文：元嘉三十年春天，因为他父亲颜延之辞官归田，他坚持要求解除自己的职务，赐给他假期，还没有出发，而文帝逝世的消息就到了，孝武帝起兵入京讨伐，转任他为咨议参军，兼任录事，总管内外各种事务，并且撰写檄书。
English: In the spring of the 30th year of the Yuan Dynasty, because his father Yan Yan's resignation was to return to the field, he insisted on relieving himself of his duties and giving him a vacation. Before he left, the news of the death of Emperor Wen arrived. Emperor Xiaowu led an army to fight in Beijing. He was transferred to join the army for consultation, concurrently served as a recorder, general manager of various affairs at home and abroad, and wrote an imperial edict.

古文：孝武发寻阳，便有疾，自沈庆之以下并不堪相见，唯竣出入卧内，断决军机。
现代文：孝武帝从寻阳发兵，便生了病，自沈庆之以下的人都不能相见，只有颜竣可以出入卧室以内，决断军机大事。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was ill after sending out troops to seek the sun, and no one from Shen Qingzhi and below could see each other. Only Yan Jun could enter and leave the bedroom to decide military matters.

古文：时孝武屡经危笃，不任谘禀，凡厥衆务，竣皆专断施行。
现代文：当时孝武帝屡次经历危险，不能负担咨询听取汇报，凡是各种事务，颜竣都专断施行。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu repeatedly experienced danger, could not afford to consult and listen to reports, and all kinds of affairs were carried out arbitrarily.

古文：孝武践阼，历侍中、左卫将军，封建城县侯。
现代文：孝武帝登基，他历任侍中、左卫将军，封为建城县侯。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and he successively served as an aide-de-camp and general of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard, and was given the title of Jiancheng County governor.

古文：孝建元年，转吏部尚书，领骁骑将军，留心选举，自强不息。
现代文：孝建元年转任吏部尚书，兼骁骑将军，他很留心选拔人材，自强不息。
English: In the first year of the reign of Xiao Jian, he was transferred to the post of the secretary of the cadre department, and also the general of the cavalry. He was very careful in selecting talent and continued to improve himself.

古文：任遇既隆，奏无不可。
现代文：他所受的信任待遇十分厚重，上奏事项无不许可。
English: He enjoys a very high level of trust, and there is no objection to the matter being reported.

古文：后谢庄代竣领选，意多不行。
现代文：后来谢庄代替颜竣负责选拔官吏，他的意见许多不能实行。
English: Later, Xie Zhuang replaced Yan Shun in charge of selecting officials, and many of his opinions could not be implemented.

古文：竣容貌严毅；庄风姿甚美，宾客喧诉，常欢笑答之。
现代文：颜竣容貌严厉刚毅，谢庄风姿十分美好，宾客喧嚷谈事，谢庄常常笑着回答。
English: Yan Jun's appearance is stern and tough, Xie Zhuang's demeanor is very beautiful, guests talk noisily, Xie Zhuang often answers with a smile.

古文：人言顔竣瞋而与人官，谢庄笑而不与人官。
现代文：人们说颜竣怒而给人官，谢庄笑而不给人官。
English: People say that Yan Zhuang angry and give officials, Xie Zhuang smile and not give officials.

古文：南郡王义宣、臧质等反，以竣兼领右将军。
现代文：南郡王刘义宣、臧质等人造反，让颜竣兼任右将军。
English: Liu Yixuan, the king of Nan County, and others such as Yan Jie rebelled, and Yan Shun was also appointed as the right general.

古文：义宣、质诸子藏匿建康、秣陵、湖熟、江宁县界，孝武大怒，免丹阳尹褚湛之官，收四县官长，以竣爲丹阳尹，加散骑常侍。
现代文：刘义宣、臧质的几个儿子藏在建康、秣陵、湖熟、江宁县的边界上，孝武帝大怒，免去了丹阳尹褚湛之的官职，逮捕了四个县的官长，以颜竣为丹阳尹，加任散骑常侍。
English: Liu Yixuan and several sons of Yan Jian hid on the borders of Jiankang, Fuling, Hukou, and Jiangning counties. Emperor Xiaowu was furious, removed Danyang Yin Xizhan from his official position, arrested the officials of four counties, and appointed Yan Jian as Danyang Yin, and appointed him as a horseback riding attendant.

古文：先是，竣未有子，而大司马江夏王义恭诸子爲元凶所杀，至是各産男，上自爲制名，名义恭子爲伯禽，以比鲁公伯禽，周公之子。名竣子爲辟强，以比汉侍中辟强，张良之子也。
现代文：在此以前，颜竣还没有儿子，而大司马江夏王刘义恭的几个儿子被元凶劭所杀，到现在各自产了男孩，皇上亲自为他们起名，给刘义恭的儿子取名为伯禽，用以比拟鲁公伯禽，周公的儿子；给颜竣的儿子取名为辟强，用以比拟汉代的侍中辟强，是张良的儿子。
English: Prior to this, Yan Chun did not have a son. However, several sons of Liu Yikong, the grand secretary of the Ma Jiangxia King, were killed by the original murderer. To this day, each of them has given birth to a boy. The emperor himself named them. Liu Yikong's son was named Bo Jiao, which was used to compare Lu Gong Bo Jiao, the son of Zhou Gong; Yan Chun's son was named Pei Qiang, which was used to compare the Han Dynasty's attendant Pei Qiang, the son of Zhang Liang.

古文：先是，元嘉中铸四铢钱，轮郭形制与五铢同，用费损无利，故百姓不盗铸。
现代文：以前，元嘉年间铸了四铢钱，轮廓形状与五铢钱相同，因为费用高没有余利，所以百姓不盗铸。
English: In the past, during the Yuan and Jia dynasties, four-baht coins were minted, with the same outline shape as five-baht coins. Because the cost was high and there was no surplus, the people did not steal the money.

古文：及孝武即位，又铸孝建四铢，所铸钱形式薄小，轮郭不成，于是人间盗铸者杂以铅锡，并不牢固。
现代文：等到孝武帝即位，又铸了孝建年间的四铢钱，所铸的钱形式薄小，轮廓不成形，于是社会上盗铸的人掺杂上铅锡，都很不牢固。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, he minted the four-baht coins minted during the reign of Emperor Xiaojian. The minted coins were small in size and had no shape, so the people in society who minted them mixed them with lead and tin, and they were not very strong.

古文：又翦凿古钱以取其铜，钱转薄小，稍违官式。
现代文：又剪凿古钱以取得它的铜，钱变得薄小，和官制的样式稍有不同。
English: They also cut the old money to get its copper, and the money became thin and slightly different from the official style.

古文：虽重制严刑，人吏官长坐死免者相系，而盗铸弥甚，百物踊贵，人患苦之。
现代文：虽然严刑惩治，吏人官长因此被罢免的不断，但是盗铸更凶，各种货物价格飞涨，人们都非常忧虑愁苦。
English: Although severe punishments were meted out and officials were constantly dismissed as a result, theft became more rampant and the prices of all kinds of goods soared. People were very worried.

古文：乃立品格，薄小无轮郭者悉加禁断。
现代文：于是定立标准，薄小没有轮廓的全部加以禁绝。
English: Therefore, the standard was set, and all thin and no contours were prohibited.

古文：始兴公沈庆之议： 宜听人铸钱。
现代文：始兴公沈庆之议论说： 应该允许人们铸钱。
English: Shixingguo Shenqing said: People should be allowed to mint money.

古文：置署，乐铸之家皆居署内。
现代文：设置官署，乐于铸钱的人家都住在官署内。
English: A government office is set up, and people who are happy to mint money live in the government office.

古文：去春所禁新品，一时施用，今铸悉依此格。
现代文：去年春天所铸的新钱，同时使用，现在铸钱都依照这个标准。
English: The new money minted last spring was used at the same time, and the money is now minted according to this standard.

古文：万税三千，严检盗铸，并禁翦凿。
现代文：铸一万收税三千，严格检查盗铸，同时禁止剪凿。
English: Cast ten thousand, collect three thousand in taxes, strictly check the theft of casting, and prohibit cutting.

古文：数年之间，公私丰赡，铜尽事息，奸僞自止。
现代文：几年之间，公私丰足，铜尽事息，奸诈行为自然停止。
English: In a few years, the public and private wealth will increase, the copper will be exhausted, and the treacherous behavior will naturally stop.

古文：禁铸则铜转成器，开铸则器化爲财。 
现代文：禁铸则铜转为器具，开铸则器具转为财富。 
English: Forbidden casting turns copper into utensils, open casting turns utensils into wealth.

古文：上下其事于公卿，竣议曰： 今云开署放铸，诚所欲同，但虑采山事绝，器用日耗。
现代文：把这件事交给公卿们讨论处理，颜竣议论说： 现在说开官署放开铸钱，我确实很想赞同，只是怕采矿的事情断绝，器具日益损耗。
English: Handing the matter over to the nobles to discuss and deal with, Yan Shun argued: Now that you say open the government office and release the minted money, I really want to agree, but I'm afraid that mining will be cut off and the equipment will be increasingly worn out.

古文：铜既转少，器亦弥贵。
现代文：铜既然转少，器具也就更贵。
English: Since there is less copper being turned, the equipment is more expensive.

古文：设器直一千，则铸之减半，爲之无利，虽令不行。 
现代文：假如器具价值一千，则铸造它就要减半，做事情没有利润，即使下命令也行不通。 
English: If an instrument is worth a thousand, it costs half as much to cast it, there is no profit in doing things, and even giving orders does not work.

古文：时议者又以铜难得，欲铸二铢钱。
现代文：当时议论的人又因为铜难得，想铸二铢钱。
English: At that time, because copper was scarce, people wanted to mint two-baht coins.

古文：竣又议曰： 今铸二铢，恣行新细，于官无解于乏，而人奸巧大兴，天下之货将糜碎至尽。
现代文：颜竣又议论说： 现在铸二铢钱，任意实行新而细小的形制，对于官府解决不了困乏，而人们的奸巧大兴，天下的钱币将会细碎至尽。
English: Yan Shun also argued: Now minting two-baht coins, arbitrarily implementing a new and small form system, can not solve the difficulties for the government, but people's treachery is booming, and the world's coins will be finely shredded.

古文：空曰严禁，而利深难绝，不过一二年间，其弊不可复救。
现代文：空说是严禁，而利益很大难以禁绝，不过一二年之间，它的弊端将不可能再进行救正。
English: It is strictly forbidden to say that it is empty, and the benefits are very difficult to prohibit, but within a year or two, it will be impossible to correct its drawbacks.

古文：此其甚不可一也。
现代文：这是它决不可以实行的理由之一。
English: This is one of the reasons why it should never be implemented.

古文：使奸人意骋，而贻厥愆谋，此又甚不可二也。
现代文：使奸诈人的心意得逞，而给他们提供罪恶谋划的条件，这是它决不可以实行的理由之二。
English: This is one of the two reasons why it must never be put into effect, for it would give the spirit of the treacherous the opportunity to succeed, and would provide them with the conditions for the planning of evil.

古文：富商得志，贫人因窘，此又甚不可三也。
现代文：让富商得志，使穷人困窘，这是它决不可以实行的理由之三。
English: One of the three reasons why it must never be implemented is that it would enrich the rich and humiliate the poor.

古文：若使交益深重，尚不可行，况又未见利，而衆弊如此，失算当时，取笑百代乎。 
现代文：如果能够受益深重尚且不可实行，况且又没有利益，而具有这样多的弊端呢，这样岂不是失算于当时，而取笑于百代么？ 
English: If the benefits are so great, but cannot be realized, and there is no benefit, but there are so many drawbacks, is this not a miscalculation at the time, but a joke in a hundred generations?

古文：前废帝即位，铸二铢，形式转细，官钱每出，人间即模效之，而大小厚薄皆不及也。
现代文：前废帝即位，铸造二铢钱，形式变小，每次官钱一出现，民间就模仿制造，而大小厚薄都赶不上。
English: After the former emperor was enthroned, the minting of two-baht coins began, and the form became smaller. Every time government money appeared, the people imitated and made it, but the size and thickness could not keep up.

古文：无轮郭，不磨鑢，如今之翦凿者，谓之耒子钱。
现代文：没有轮廓，不加打磨，像今天的剪凿钱一样，称为耒子钱。
English: Without contours, without grinding, like today's chiseled money, it is called dice money.

古文：景和元年，沈庆之啓通私铸，由是钱货乱败，一千钱长不盈三寸，大小称此，谓之鹅眼钱；劣于此者谓之綖环钱。
现代文：景和元年，沈庆之上表开始了私人铸钱，从此钱币混乱，一千钱长度不足三寸，大小和这一样的，叫作鹅眼钱；比这更差的叫作纟延环钱。
English: In the first year of the Jing and Yuan Dynasties, the private minting of money began on the table of Shenqing. Since then, the coins have been confused. The length of a thousand money is less than three inches, and the size is the same as this. It is called goose-eye money; worse than this is called coiling ring money.

古文：贯之以缕，入水不沈，随手破碎，市井不复料数，十万钱不盈一掬。
现代文：用绳子穿起来，放到水里也不下沉，随手便可以弄碎，街市上无法计算它的数量，十万钱还不满一捧。
English: Worn with a rope, it does not sink when placed in water, it can be broken by hand, its quantity cannot be calculated on the street market, and one hundred thousand yuan is not enough for a handful.

古文：斗米一万，商货不行。
现代文：一斗米一万钱，商品很难销行。
English: A barrel of rice costs 10,000 yuan, and the product is difficult to sell.

古文：明帝初，唯禁鹅眼、綖环，其馀皆通用。
现代文：明帝初年，只禁止鹅眼、纟延环，其余的都还通用。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, only goose eyes and hoop rings were prohibited, the rest were still in common use.

古文：复禁人铸，官署亦废，寻复普断，唯用古钱。
现代文：又禁止民间铸钱，官署也废除，不久重又普遍禁绝，只用古钱。
English: In addition, the minting of money by the people was prohibited, and the government also abolished the mint. Soon, it was banned again, and only old money was used.

古文：竣自散骑常侍、丹阳尹加中书令，表让中书令，见许。
现代文：颜竣从散骑常侍、丹阳尹升任中书令，上表辞让中书令，被批准。
English: Yan Shun was promoted from straggler to regular attendant, and Danyang Yin was promoted to middle secretary, and the above expression was approved.

古文：时岁旱人饥，竣上言禁饧一月，息米近万斛。
现代文：当时天旱人饥，颜竣上书禁止饴糖一个月，节省米近万斛。
English: At that time, people were starving due to drought, and Yan Shuling banned sugar for a month, saving nearly 10,000 baht worth of rice.

古文：复代谢庄爲吏部尚书，领太子右卫率，未拜，丁父忧。
现代文：重又代替谢庄为吏部尚书，兼太子右卫率，还没有上任，遇到了父亲的丧事。
English: He also replaced Xie Zhuang as the head of the administrative department of Shangshu, and was also the head of the prince's right guard. He had not yet taken office when he met his father's funeral.

古文：裁踰月，起爲右将军，丹阳尹如故。
现代文：丧事刚过了一个月，起任为右将军，丹阳尹依旧不变。
English: Just a month after the funeral, Danyang Yin was appointed as the right general, still unchanged.

古文：竣固辞，表十上不许。
现代文：颜竣坚持推辞，上表十次而没被批准。
English: Yan Jun insisted on withdrawing, and the above list was repeated ten times, but was not approved.

古文：遣中书舍人戴明宝抱竣登车，载之郡舍。
现代文：派遣中书舍人戴明宝抱着颜竣登车，载到了郡舍。
English: Dai Mingbao, who was dispatched from the middle school, held Yan Shun in his arms as he boarded the bus and was taken to the county seat.

古文：赐以布衣一袭，絮以彩纶，遣主衣就衣诸体。
现代文：赐给他布衣一件，用彩纶加以铺絮，让他立即把所赐的衣服穿在身上。
English: And thou shalt give him a linen cloth, and cover him with a covering of badgers' hair, and he shall put it on his body, and he shall be clean.

古文：竣藉蕃朝之旧臣，每极陈得失。
现代文：颜竣借着曾经做过孝武帝藩朝旧臣的身份，常常极力陈述朝廷得失。
English: Yan Shun, by virtue of his status as a former courtier of Emperor Xiaowu's domain, often tried his best to present the gains and losses of the imperial court.

古文：上自即吉之后，宫内颇有丑论，又多所兴造。
现代文：皇上自从除去丧服之后，宫内很有些丑闻，又有很多的土木兴造。
English: Since the Emperor removed his mourning clothes, there have been many scandals in the Imperial Palace, as well as many civil engineering projects.

古文：竣谏争恳切，并无所回避。
现代文：颜竣恳切地进行谏诤，完全没有什么回避。
English: Yan Shun earnestly performed the dance, there was no evasion at all.

古文：上意甚不悦，多不见从。
现代文：皇上心中十分不高兴，大多不被听从。
English: The emperor was very unhappy in his heart, and most of them were not obeyed.

古文：竣自谓才足干时，恩旧莫比，当赞务居中，永执朝政。
现代文：颜竣自认为才能足以济世治事，旧时的恩宠没人可比，理当居于中心辅佐皇帝，永远执掌朝政。
English: Yan Shunzhi believed that talent was enough to manage the affairs of the world, and the old-time grace was incomparable, and it was right to live in the center to assist the emperor, and to always be in charge of the government.

古文：而所陈多不被纳，疑上欲疏之，乃求出以卜时旨。
现代文：而所提出的建议大多不被采纳，他怀疑皇上是想疏远他，于是便请求外任，以观察时事动态。
English: Most of his proposals were not accepted, and he suspected that the emperor was trying to alienate him, so he asked for an external appointment to observe current events.

古文：大明元年，以爲东扬州刺史。
现代文：大明元年，任命他为东扬州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Great Ming Dynasty, he was appointed as the first governor of East Yangzhou.

古文：所求既许，便忧惧无计。
现代文：他的请求已经被允许，他于是又忧虑恐惧，没了办法。
English: His request had been granted, leaving him worried and scared.

古文：至州又丁母艰，不许去职，听送丧还都，恩待犹厚，竣弥不自安。
现代文：到了州上，又遇到了母亲的丧事，却不允许他离职，只是允许他送丧回京，恩待仍很优厚，颜竣自己更加感到不安。
English: When he arrived in Suzhou, he also encountered his mother's funeral, but he was not allowed to leave his job, but he was allowed to send the funeral back to Beijing. The treatment was still very generous, and Yan Jun himself felt even more uneasy.

古文：每对亲故，颇怀怨愤。
现代文：每当面对亲友故人，颇怀怨愤。
English: When confronted with the death of a relative or friend, they often harbor resentment.

古文：又言朝廷违谬，人主得失。
现代文：又谈论朝廷谬误，皇帝得失。
English: He also talked about the fallacies of the imperial court, and the emperor's gains and losses.

古文：及王僧达被诛，谓爲所谗构，临死陈竣前后忿怼，恨言不见从。
现代文：等王僧达被处死，认为是被他所诬陷，临死的时候叙述了颜竣前后如何不满，如何怨恨自己的建议不被听从。
English: When Wang Zongda was put to death, it was believed that he had framed him, and when he was about to die, he described how dissatisfied Yan Shun was before and after, and how he resented that his advice was not heeded.

古文：僧达所言，颇相符会，上乃使御史中丞庾徽之奏竣： 窥觇国柄，潜图久执。
现代文：王僧达所说的，颇相符合，皇上便指使御史中丞庾徽之上奏颜竣： 窥视国家权柄，图谋长久执掌。
English: What Wang Zongda said was quite consistent, and the emperor then ordered the Grand Historian Zhongzheng to play a trick on Gu Hui: peep into the power of the country and try to hold it for a long time.

古文：受任选曹，驱扇滋甚,出尹京辇,形势弥放。
现代文：接受任命主管选曹，驱使煽动更加严重，出任地方官长，形势越发放纵。
English: He accepted the appointment of chief selector, which made the incitement more serious. He was appointed as a local official, and the situation became more and more violent.

古文：传诏犯宪，旧须啓闻，而竣以通诉忤己，辄加鞭辱，罔顾威灵，莫此爲甚。
现代文：传诏触犯法令，旧事应该启奏，而颜竣因为通诉的人违反了自己的心意，便加以鞭打侮辱，不顾皇上的权威，没有比这更严重的。
English: There is nothing more serious than to disregard the emperor's authority by whipping and insulting a person who has violated his own will, disregarding the emperor's authority.

古文：怀挟奸数，包藏隐慝，豫闻中旨，罔不宣露。
现代文：心怀奸术，包藏邪恶。他参与朝廷的核心机密，无不泄露。
English: With treachery and evil in his heart, he participated in the core secrets of the imperial court and leaked everything.

古文：罚则委上，善必归己，胁惧上宰，激动闾阎。
现代文：惩罚则推给皇上，好事必归于自己，威胁上司，煽动群众。
English: Punishment is pushed to the emperor, good deeds must be attributed to oneself, threaten the boss, and incite the masses.

古文：末虑上闻，内怀猜惧，僞请东牧，以卜天旨。
现代文：后来担心被皇上听说，心里怀着猜测和恐惧，假意请求去做东部的郡守，用以试探天子的旨意。
English: Later, fearing to be overheard by the emperor, with conjecture and fear in his heart, he pretended to ask to become the county governor of the eastern part of the country, in order to test the will of the emperor.

古文：既获出藩，怨詈方肆，反唇腹诽，方之已轻。
现代文：获得出镇藩国以后，怨骂更加放肆，常说的反唇腹诽，形容他已嫌太轻。
English: After he was granted the right to leave the town and the domain, he became even more insolent in his insults, and he was often described as a backbiter.

古文：前冬母亡，诏赐还葬，事毕不去，盘桓经时。
现代文：前年冬天他的母亲去世，诏赐回来埋葬，事情办完仍不离开，盘桓了很久。
English: The winter before last, his mother passed away, he returned to bury her after the imperial edict was issued, but he didn't leave after the matter was settled, he lingered for a long time.

古文：方构间勋贵，造立同异，遂以己被斥外，国道将颠。
现代文：又离间大臣，制造矛盾，终于弄得自己被斥逐在外，国道将被破坏。
English: He also alienated ministers, created conflicts, and finally caused himself to be ousted. The national highway will be destroyed.

古文：兼行阙于家，早负世议，天伦怨毒，亲交震骇。
现代文：同时他又在家中表现恶劣，早已遭到世人的非议，家人怨恨，亲友震惊。
English: At the same time, he behaved badly at home, and has already been criticized by the world, resented by his family, and shocked by relatives and friends.

古文：街谈道说，非复风声，宜加显戮，以昭盛化。
现代文：现在已经是街谈巷议，不再是一般风闻，因此应该明正刑典，处决示众，以弘扬皇上隆盛的教化。
English: Now it is already the talk of the town, no longer a common rumor, so the criminal code should be made clear, and executions should be shown to the public in order to promote the enlightenment of the emperor's prosperity.

古文：请以见事免竣所居官,下太常削爵土。 
现代文：请求根据上述事实，免除颜竣所居的官职，下交给太常削去他的爵位和封地。 
English: On the basis of the above-mentioned facts, the petition requests that Yan Shun be relieved of his official position, and that his peerage and fiefdom be stripped from him.

古文：上未欲便加大戮，且止免官。
现代文：皇上不想就此把他杀死，姑且只是免去了他的官职。
English: The Emperor did not want to kill him for this, so he only removed him from his official position.

古文：竣频啓谢罪，并乞性命。
现代文：颜竣频频上书谢罪，并且乞求饶恕性命。
English: Yan Shun frequently wrote letters thanking for his sins and begging for his life to be spared.

古文：上愈怒，诏答曰： 宪司所奏，非宿昔所以相期。
现代文：皇上越发愤怒，下诏回答说： 御史所奏的情况，不是过去我对你的期望。
English: The Emperor became more and more enraged, and replied: "The historical situation is not what I expected from you in the past.

古文：卿受荣遇，政当极此。
现代文：卿受了荣耀的待遇，正应当极尽努力。
English: Sir has been treated honourably and is doing the best he can.

古文：讪讦怨愤，已孤本望，乃复过烦思虑，惧不全立，岂爲下事上诚节之至邪。 
现代文：诽谤怨愤，已经辜负了本来的希望，竟然又去过烦思虑，生怕不能安全立身，这难道是臣下侍奉主上至高的忠诚吗？ 
English: Is it the supreme loyalty of a vassal to serve his lord by slandering and resenting him, when he has already failed to live up to his original hope, and has even gone to the trouble of worrying that he may not be able to stand up safely?

古文：及竟陵王诞爲逆，因此陷之，言通于诞。
现代文：后来竟陵王刘诞叛逆，于是便借此陷害他，说他和刘诞勾结。
English: Later, the mausoleum king Liu Xing rebelled, so he used this to frame him, saying that he had colluded with Liu Xing.

古文：召御史中丞庾徽之于前立奏，奏成，诏先打折足，然后于狱赐死，妻息宥之以远。
现代文：召御史中丞庾徽之到殿前站立启奏，启奏完成，诏令先打折了他的脚，然后在狱中赐死，妻子儿媳赦免迁到远方。
English: The imperial edict first broke his foot, then he was sentenced to death in prison, and his wife and daughter-in-law were pardoned and moved to a distant place.

古文：奂，延之第三子也。
现代文：儿子颜辟强流放到交州，又在宫亭湖里把他沉入淹死。
English: He exiled his son Yan Biqiang to Jiaozhou and drowned him in Lake Gongting.

古文：顔师伯字长深，竣族兄也。
现代文：颜竣的文集流行于后世。○颜师伯颜师伯字长深，是颜竣的族兄。
English: Yan Shun's anthology became popular in later generations. ○ Yan Shi Bo Yan Shi Bo is a long and deep character, and is Yan Shun's older brother.

古文：父邵，刚正有局力，爲谢晦领军司马。
现代文：父亲颜邵，刚正而有气力，是谢晦的领军司马。
English: Father Yan Shao, upright and powerful, is the leading Sima of Xie Ying.

古文：晦镇江陵，请爲谘议参军，领录事，军府之务悉委焉。
现代文：谢晦镇守江陵，请他担任咨议参军，兼任录事，军府事务全都委托给他。
English: Xie Yu Zhengu Jiangling, asked him to serve as a consultant to join the army, also served as a recorder, the military affairs were all entrusted to him.

古文：邵虑晦有祸，求爲竟陵太守。
现代文：颜邵担心谢晦会有祸患，请求担任竟陵太守。
English: Yan Shao was worried that there would be a calamity for Xie Yue, and requested to serve as the governor of the imperial mausoleum.

古文：未及之郡，会晦见讨，邵饮药死。
现代文：还没有到任，就赶上谢晦被讨伐，颜邵饮药而死。
English: Before he took office, he caught up with Xie Yao, who was attacked, and Yan Shao, who died from drinking medicine.

古文：师伯少孤贫，涉猎书传，颇解声乐。
现代文：颜师伯少年的时候孤独贫困，涉猎群书，能解声乐。
English: When Yan Shibao was a teenager, he was lonely and poor, read a lot of books, and knew how to play vocal music.

古文：弟师仲妻，臧质女也。
现代文：弟弟颜师仲的妻子，是臧质的女儿。
English: The wife of Yan Shizhong, his younger brother, is the daughter of a tanner.

古文：质爲徐州，辟师伯爲主簿。
现代文：臧质做徐州的长官，聘任颜师伯为主簿。
English: He was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou, and Yan was appointed as his teacher.

古文：孝武爲徐州，师伯仍爲辅国安北行参军。
现代文：孝武帝掌管徐州，颜师伯仍然做辅国安北行参军。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was in charge of Xuzhou, and Yan Shibo still assisted Guoan in going north to join the army.

古文：王景文时爲谘议参军，爱其谐敏，进之孝武，以爲徐州主簿。
现代文：王景文当时做咨议参军，喜爱他的诙谐机敏，推荐给孝武帝，让他做徐州主簿。
English: At that time, Wang Jingwen made a recommendation to join the army, loved his wit and astuteness, recommended him to Emperor Xiaowu, and let him be the main book of Xuzhou.

古文：善于附会，大被知遇。
现代文：他善于迎合，大受信赖。
English: He's a people pleaser and very trustworthy.

古文：及去镇，师伯以主簿送故。
现代文：后来离开军镇，颜师伯以主簿送走了故人。
English: Later, after leaving the military town, Yan Shibao sent the deceased away with a book.

古文：孝武镇寻阳，啓文帝请爲南中郎府主簿，文帝不许，谓典签曰： 中郎府主簿，那得用顔师伯。 
现代文：孝武帝镇守寻阳，启奏文帝请求让颜师伯担任南中郎府主簿，文帝不答应，对典签说： 中郎府主簿，怎能用颜师伯？ 
English: Emperor Xiaowu sent a message to Emperor Wen requesting that Yan Shibo serve as the chief record keeper of the Southern Zhonglang Prefecture. Emperor Wen did not agree and said to the scribe: "Master record keeper of Zhonglang Prefecture, how can I use Yan Shibo?"

古文：孝武啓爲长流正佐，帝又曰： 朝廷不能除之，郎可自板，然亦不宜署长流。 
现代文：孝武帝启奏让他担任长流正佐，文帝又说： 朝廷不能任命他，我儿可以自己聘用，然而也不宜聘为长流。 
English: Emperor Wen said, "The court cannot appoint him. I can hire him myself. However, it is not appropriate to hire him as a member of the long line."

古文：乃板爲参军刑狱。
现代文：于是聘为参军刑狱。
English: As a result, he was recruited to join the military prison.

古文：及讨元凶，转主簿。
现代文：等后来讨伐元凶劭，转为主簿。
English: Later, it was changed to the main story.

古文：孝武践阼，以爲黄门侍郎，累迁侍中。
现代文：孝武帝登基，让他做了黄门侍郎，逐步升为侍中。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, he made him the Yellow Gate chamberlain, and he was gradually promoted to the position of chamberlain.

古文：大明元年，封平都县子。
现代文：大明元年，封为平都县子。
English: In the first year of the Daming Dynasty, it was given the title of Pingdu County.

古文：亲幸隆密，群臣莫二。
现代文：极受宠幸，群臣中没有第二人可比。
English: He was extremely favored, and there was no other comparable person among his retainers.

古文：多纳货贿，家累千金。
现代文：他大量纳贿，家中累积千金。
English: He took a lot of bribes and accumulated a lot of money at home.

古文：孝武尝与师伯摴蒱，帝掷得雉，大悦，谓必胜。
现代文：孝武帝曾经与颜师伯玩詂，孝武帝掷了一个雉，非常高兴，认为必胜。
English: Emperor Xiaowu once played dice with Yan Shibao. Emperor Xiaowu threw a dice, was very happy, and thought that he would win.

古文：师伯后得卢，帝失色，师伯遽敛子曰： 几作卢。 
现代文：颜师伯随后掷了一个卢，孝武帝不禁失色，颜师伯立即把子收起说： 几乎是个卢。 
English: Master Yan then threw a Lu, and Emperor Xiaowu couldn't help but lose his composure. Master Yan immediately gathered his son and said, "It's almost a Lu."

古文：尔日，师伯一输百万。
现代文：这一天，颜师伯一输百万。
English: On this day, Yan Shibo lost a million.

古文：仍迁吏部尚书、右军将军。
现代文：于是升迁为吏部尚书、右军将军。
English: As a result, he was promoted to General of the Right Division of the Imperial General Staff.

古文：上不欲威权在下，前后领选者唯奉行文书，师伯专情独断，奏无不可。
现代文：皇上不愿意让威权落在下面，前后主管选官的人都只是执行文书，而颜师伯专情独断，所奏无不获准。
English: The emperor did not want to let the authority fall below him. The people in charge of selecting officials before and after were only executing documents, while Yan Shibao was the sole arbiter, and everything he did was approved.

古文：七年，爲尚书右仆射。
现代文：大明七年，他做尚书右仆射。
English: In the seventh year of the Ming Dynasty, he became a scholar.

古文：时分置二选，陈郡谢庄、琅邪王昙生并爲吏部尚书。
现代文：当时分置两个选官机构，陈郡人谢庄、琅笽人王昙生同任吏部尚书。
English: At that time, there were two separate election bodies, with Chen County official Xie Zhuang and Xiang County official Wang Xinsheng both holding the same post.

古文：师伯子举周旋寒人张奇爲公车令，上以奇资品不当，使兼市买丞，以蔡道惠代之。
现代文：颜师伯的儿子举荐和他交往的贫寒人张奇为公车令，皇上因为张奇资格不当，让他兼任市买丞，以蔡惠道代替他。
English: Yan Shibao's son recommended Zhang Qi, a poor man with whom Yan Shibao had been in contact, as a bus conductor. The emperor, because of Zhang Qi's improper qualifications, made him concurrently the city's mayor and replaced him with Cai Huidao.

古文：令史潘道栖、褚道惠、顔禕之、元从夫、任澹之、石道儿、黄难、周公选等抑道惠敕，使奇先到公车，不施行奇兼市买丞事。
现代文：令史潘道栖、褚道惠、颜之、元从夫、任澹之、石道儿、黄难、周公选等扣压了给蔡道惠的诏令，让张奇先到公车，不施行张奇兼市买丞的工作。
English: He ordered Spahn Daoxu, Zou Daohui, Yan Zhi, Yuan Congfu, Ren Zhi Zhi, Shidaoer, Huang Nan, Zhou Gongxuan, etc. to withhold the edict to Cai Daohui, let Zhang Qi go to the bus first, and not to carry out the work of Zhang Qi and the mayor.

古文：师伯坐以子预职，庄、昙生免官，道栖、道惠弃市，禕之等六人鞭杖一百。
现代文：颜师伯因为儿子干预公职而获罪，谢庄、王昙生免官，潘道栖、褚道惠处斩，颜之等六人杖打一百。
English: Teacher Yan was found guilty of interfering with his son's public duties. Xie Zhuang and Wang Xinsheng were relieved of their posts, Pan Daoxu and Xing Daoxu were beheaded, and Yan Zhi and six others were caned.

古文：师伯寻领太子中庶人，虽被黜挫，受任如初。
现代文：颜师伯不久兼任太子中庶子，虽然被贬黜，而受信任仍如同从前。
English: Yan Shibao soon served as the prince's illegitimate son, and although he was disparaged, he was still trusted as before.

古文：孝武临崩，师伯受遗诏辅幼主，尚书中事专以委之。
现代文：孝武帝逝世，颜师伯接受遗诏辅助幼主，尚书省的事务专门委托给他。
English: After the death of Emperor Xiaowu, Yan Shibao accepted the will to assist his young master, and the affairs of Shangshu were specially entrusted to him.

古文：废帝即位，复还即真，加领卫尉。
现代文：废帝即位，又给他由代理改为实授，并且兼任卫尉。
English: When the deposed emperor ascended to the throne, he changed his title from deputy to actual, and also served as an officer of the Imperial Guard.

古文：师伯居权日久，天下辐协，游其门者，爵位莫不踰分。
现代文：颜师伯掌权日子久了，天下归聚，常和他家来往的人，爵位无不超越本分。
English: Yan Shifu has been in power for a long time, the world has come together, and those who often come and go with his family have all surpassed their duties.

古文：多纳货贿，家产丰积，妓妾声乐，尽天下之选，园池第宅，冠绝当时，骄奢淫恣，爲衣冠所疾。
现代文：贪污纳贿很多，家产丰厚，妓妾声乐，尽是天下精华，园池宅院，冠绝当时社会，骄奢淫逸，为士大夫所愤恨。
English: There was a lot of corruption and bribery, the family wealth was rich, the vocal music of prostitutes and concubines was the essence of the world, the gardens and courtyards were the crown of the society at that time, and the arrogance and lasciviousness were resented by the scholar-bureaucrats.

古文：又迁尚书仆射，领丹阳尹。
现代文：又改任尚书仆射兼丹阳尹。
English: He was also reappointed as Shang Shufu and Danyang Yin.

古文：废帝欲亲朝政，转师伯爲左仆射。
现代文：废帝想亲理朝政，转任颜师伯为左仆射。
English: The deposed emperor wanted to be personally in charge of the government, so he appointed Yan Shibao as his right-hand man.

古文：以吏部尚书王景文爲右仆射。
现代文：以吏部尚书王景文为右仆射。
English: The right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man of the right-hand man.

古文：夺其京尹，又分台任。
现代文：除去了他的京尹职务，又分割了他的台省职权。
English: His post of Beijing and Yin was eliminated, and his post of Taiwan Province was divided.

古文：师伯至是始惧，与柳元景谋废立。
现代文：颜师伯到现在才开始害怕，与柳元景谋划废立皇帝。
English: Yan Shibu only now began to be afraid, and plotted with Liu Yuanjing to depose the emperor.

古文：初，师伯专断朝事，不与沈庆之参怀，谓令史曰： 沈公爪牙者耳，安得预政事。 
现代文：起初，颜师伯专断朝廷事务，不与沈庆之商量，他对令史说： 沈公不过是皇上的爪牙，怎么能参与政治事务呢？ 
English: At first, Yan Shibao dictated the affairs of the imperial court without consulting Shen Qing. He said to Ling Shi: "Shen Gong is just the emperor's minion, how can he participate in political affairs?

古文：常谓子弟曰： 吾处世无才能，图作大老子耳。 
现代文：沈庆之听说后切齿痛恨，便泄露了他们的阴谋。
English: After hearing about it, Shen Qingzhi gritted his teeth in disgust and revealed their plot.

古文：世以长者称之。
现代文：不久他与太宰江夏王刘义恭一同被诛，六个儿子都被杀死。
English: Soon after, he was arrested together with Liu Yigong, the Dazaifu of Jiangxia, and all six of his sons were killed.

古文：卒于祠部尚书。
现代文：明帝即位后，追加谥号荒。
English: After Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, the additional nickname "Ara" came into use.

古文：周朗字义利，汝南安成人也。
现代文：○周朗周朗字义利，汝南安成人。
English: ○ Zhou Lang Zhou Lang Zi Yili, Ru Nan'an adult.

古文：父淳，宋初历位侍中，太常。
现代文：父亲周淳，宋朝初年历任侍中、太常。
English: His father, Zhou Jun, served as an attendant in the first year of the Song Dynasty and as the Grand Master.

古文：兄峤尚武帝第四女宣城德公主。
现代文：他的哥哥周峤娶了武帝的第四个女儿宣城德公主。
English: His brother Zhou Jun married Emperor Wu's fourth daughter, Princess Xuanchengde.

古文：二女适建平王宏、庐江王褘。
现代文：二女嫁给建平王萧宏、庐江王萧。
English: The second daughter married Jianping Wang Xiaohong and Liangjiang Wang Xiaohong.

古文：以贵戚显官。
现代文：因为是贵戚而得到显要职务。
English: He was given a prominent position because he was a close relative.

古文：朗少而爱奇，雅有风气，与峤志趋不同，峤甚疾之。
现代文：周朗从小就爱好奇特，风度文雅，与周峤志向不同，周峤十分嫉妒他。
English: Zhou Lang has been curious since he was a child, and has an elegant demeanor. He has different aspirations from Zhou Ye, and Zhou Ye is very jealous of him.

古文：爲江夏王义恭太尉参军。
现代文：接着他就做了江夏王刘义恭的太尉参军。
English: Next, he joined the army as a lieutenant of Liu Yigong, the king of Jiangxia.

古文：元嘉二十七年春，朝议北侵魏，当遣义恭出镇彭城，爲诸军大统。
现代文：元嘉二十七年春天，朝廷讨论北侵魏朝，要派刘义恭出京镇守彭城，为诸军的主帅。
English: In the spring of the 27th year of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court discussed the northern invasion of the Wei Dynasty and wanted to send Liu Yikong out of Beijing to guard Pengcheng as the commander of the army.

古文：朗闻之解职。
现代文：周朗听说后解去了职务。
English: After hearing this, Zhou Lang was relieved of his duties.

古文：及义恭出镇，府主簿羊希从行，与朗书戏之，劝令献奇进策。
现代文：后来刘义恭出镇，府主簿羊希随行，给周朗写信戏逗，劝他进献奇策。
English: Later, Liu Yikong went out of town, accompanied by the chief accountant of the government, Yang Xi, and wrote a playful letter to Zhou Lang, persuading him to come up with a brilliant plan.

古文：朗报书援引古义，辞意倜傥。
现代文：周朗复信引述古义，辞意潇洒。
English: Zhou Lang's reply letter quoted the ancient meaning, and his words were dashing.

古文：孝武即位，除建平王宏中军录事参军。
现代文：孝武帝即位，任命建平王刘宏为中军录事参军。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne and appointed Jianping King Liu Hong to join the Chinese army.

古文：时普责百官谠言，朗上书陈述得失，多自矜夸。书奏忤旨，自解去职。
现代文：当时普遍责令百官进献正直言论，周朗上书陈述得失，多是自我夸耀，书表上奏后违犯了皇帝的意旨，自己辞去职务。
English: At that time, hundreds of officials were generally ordered to submit honest statements. Zhou Lang's written statement of gains and losses was mostly self-aggrandizement. After the book was published, he violated the emperor's will and resigned from his post.

古文：后爲庐陵内史，郡界荒芜，颇有野兽。
现代文：后来担任庐陵内史，本郡的边界荒芜了，有不少野兽。
English: Later, he was in charge of the internal history of Fuling. The border of this county was desolate, and there were many wild animals.

古文：母薛氏欲见猎，朗乃合围纵火，令母观之。
现代文：当时他的母亲薛氏很想看打猎，周朗于是合围纵火，让母亲观看。
English: At that time, his mother Xue wanted to watch the hunting, so Zhou Lang surrounded and set fire to the crane and let his mother watch.

古文：火逸烧郡解，朗悉以秩米起屋，偿所烧之限。
现代文：火势蔓延，烧了郡府的官舍，周郎卖掉全部做俸禄的米建造房子，赔偿所烧的部分。
English: The fire spread and burned the official residence of the county government. Zhou Lang sold all the rice that was used to pay salaries and built a house to compensate for the burned part.

古文：称疾去官，爲州司所纠，还都谢孝武曰： 州司举臣愆失多不允，臣在郡猛兽三食人，虫鼠犯稼，以此二事上负陛下。 
现代文：后来以病辞职，被州官纠弹，他回到都城向孝武帝检讨说： 州里罗列臣的过失大多不够公正，臣在郡里的时候，猛兽多次吃人，害虫野鼠侵害庄稼，由于这两件事而对上辜负了陛下。 
English: Later, he resigned due to illness and was reprimanded by the prefectural officials. He returned to the capital to review with Emperor Xiaowu and said, "Most of the faults of the prefectural officials were not fair enough. When the minister was in the county, the ferocious beasts repeatedly ate people, and the pests and rats violated crops. Due to these two things, he failed His Majesty.

古文：上变色曰： 州司不允，或可有之。
现代文：皇上脸色严肃地说： 州官不够公正，或许有的。
English: The Emperor looked grave and said, "The prefect is not impartial enough. Perhaps he is.

古文：虫兽之灾，甯关卿小物。 
现代文：至于虫兽灾害，哪里只是和你有关的小事呢？ 
English: As for insect and animal disasters, where are the small things that only concern you?

古文：朗寻丁母忧，每哭必恸，其馀颇不依居丧常节。
现代文：周朗不久遇到了母亲的丧事，每次哭时都十分悲痛，其余时候却常常不依从居丧的常规。
English: Zhou Lang soon encountered his mother's funeral, every time he cried he was very sad, but the rest of the time he often did not follow the mourning routine.

古文：大明四年，上使有司奏其居丧无礼。
现代文：大明四年，皇上指示有关部门上奏他居丧无礼。
English: In the fourth year of the Ming Dynasty, the emperor instructed the relevant departments to play his funeral music.

古文：太学诸生慕其风，争事华辩。
现代文：诏令说： 周朗违背礼教，能说会道，应该铲除，小人不足以搅乱常刑，只需把他锁起来交付边疆。 
English: The edict said: Zhou Lang has violated the rules of etiquette, can speak fluently, and should be eradicated. A villain is not enough to disturb the permanent punishment, just lock him up and hand him over to the border.

古文：始着四声切韵行于时。
现代文：于是把他押往宁州，在路上将他杀死。
English: So they drove him to Ningzhou and killed him on the way.

古文：后卒于官。子舍。
现代文：○周舍
English: ○Circumference house

古文：舍字升逸，幼聪颖，顒异之。
现代文：周舍字升逸，幼年聪明，周感到他很奇异。
English: Zhou Sheshi's character is eccentric, he is clever at a young age, and Zhou feels he is very strange.

古文：临终谓曰： 汝不患不富贵，但当将之以道德。 
现代文：临终的时候对他说： 你别担心不会富贵，只是需要用道德加以统率。 
English: On his deathbed, he said to him: Don't worry that you won't be rich, you just need to be governed by morality.

古文：及长博学，尤精义理，善诵诗书，音韵清辩。
现代文：年长以后十分博学，尤其精于义理，关于诵读诗书，音韵清雅。
English: When they are older, they are very erudite, especially proficient in the principles of justice, in reciting poetry, and in elegant intonation.

古文：弱冠秀才，除太学博士。
现代文：二十岁举为秀才，任命为太常博士。
English: At the age of twenty, he was promoted to be an outstanding talent and was appointed as Dr. Taizang.

古文：从兄绵爲剡县，赃汙不少，籍没资财，舍乃推宅助焉。
现代文：堂兄周绵为剡县令，贪赃受贿不少，抄没了财产，周舍便拿出房宅帮助他。
English: His cousin Zhou Mian was the county magistrate of Handan County. He was corrupt and took a lot of bribes. When he lost his property, Zhou Xie took out his house to help him.

古文：建武中，魏人吴苞南归，有儒学。
现代文：建武年间，魏朝人吴苞归降南方，很有儒学。
English: During the Jianwu period, Wu Xi, a Wei dynasty person, returned to the south and was very Confucian.

古文：尚书仆射江祏招苞讲，舍造坐折苞，辞理遒逸，由是名爲口辩。
现代文：尚书仆射江纏招请吴苞讲学，周舍到场驳难吴苞，辞理潇洒有力，由此以善辩出名。
English: Shang Shuxu's servant Shojiang entangled and invited Wu Gan to give a lecture. Zhou Shie was there to refute Wu Gan. His speech was elegant and powerful, and he became famous for his ability to argue.

古文：王亮爲丹阳尹，闻而悦之，辟爲主簿，政事多委焉。
现代文：王亮做丹阳尹，听说后对他非常喜欢，聘为主簿，政事大多委托给他。
English: Wang Liang as Danyang Yin, after hearing that he was very fond of him, was hired as the main book, and most of the government affairs were entrusted to him.

古文：迁太常丞。
现代文：后来升迁为太常丞。
English: He was transferred to the post of Taijo-jo.

古文：梁武帝即位，吏部尚书范云与顒素善，重舍才器，言之武帝，召拜尚书祠部郎。
现代文：梁武帝即位，吏部尚书范云和周平时要好，很重视周舍的才能，说给了武帝，召他担任了尚书祠部郎。
English: When Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne, he wanted to appoint Shangshu Fanyun and Zhou Ping as officials, and he attached great importance to Zhou She's talent. He gave it to Emperor Wu and called him to serve as minister of the Shangshu Shrine.

古文：礼仪损益，多自舍出。
现代文：礼仪的增减，大多由周舍作出。
English: The addition and subtraction of etiquette is mostly done by Zhou She.

古文：先是，帝与诸王及吴平侯书皆云弟，舍立议，引武王、周公故事，皆曰汝，从之。
现代文：先前，武帝和诸王以及吴平侯写信都是称弟，周舍提出建议，援引了武帝、周公的典故，都是称 你 ，被采纳。
English: Previously, Emperor Wu, the kings and Wu Pinghou all wrote letters praising their younger brother, Zhou She made suggestions, and quoted the allusions of Emperor Wu and Zhou Gong, all of which were called You, and were adopted.

古文：累迁鸿胪卿。
现代文：逐步升为鸿胪卿。
English: He gradually rose to the rank of Hongyuqing.

古文：时王亮得罪归家，故人莫至，舍独敦恩旧。
现代文：当时王亮获罪归家，旧时朋友没人前往，周舍独自看重旧情。
English: At that time, Wang Liang was convicted and returned home. None of his old friends went to visit him. Zhou She alone valued his old feelings.

古文：及亮卒，身营殡葬，时人称之。
现代文：王亮死后，他亲自给办理殡葬，受到当时人们的称赞。
English: After Wang Liang's death, he personally handled the funeral and burial, which was praised by people at the time.

古文：迁尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，右卫将军。
现代文：调任尚书吏部郎、太子右卫率、右卫将军。
English: He was transferred to the post of Shosho Rikiburo, Prince Ue no kami, and Ue no shogun.

古文：虽居职屡徙，而常留省内，罕得休下。
现代文：虽然职位屡次变更，而一直留在省台。很少休官下放。
English: Although the position has changed several times, he has always remained in the province. He rarely leaves the post.

古文：国史诏诰，仪体法律，军旅谋谟，皆兼掌之。
现代文：国史诏诰，仪典法律，军旅谋划，全都兼管。
English: State history, ceremonial law, and military planning are all under his control.

古文：日夜侍上，豫机密二十馀年，未尝离左右。
现代文：日夜侍奉皇上，参与机密二十余年，不曾离开左右。
English: He served the emperor day and night, and was involved in confidential matters for more than 20 years. He never left the palace.

古文：帝以爲有公辅器。
现代文：武帝认为他具有宰相之才。
English: Emperor Wu thought he had the talent to be prime minister.

古文：初，范云卒，佥以沈约允当枢管，帝以约轻易不如徐勉，于是勉、舍同参国政。
现代文：当初，范云去世，众人认为沈约可能成为百官的轴心，武帝认为沈约性情轻率，不如徐勉，于是徐勉、周舍共同参与国政。
English: At first, when Fan Yun passed away, people thought that Shen Yotong could become the axis of a hundred officials. Emperor Wu thought that Shen Yotong's temperament was imprudent and inferior to Xu Mian, so Xu Mian and Zhou She jointly participated in national politics.

古文：勉小嫌中废，舍专掌权辖，雅量不及勉而清简过之，两人俱称贤相。
现代文：徐勉因为一个小错中途被免职，周舍独自掌握大权。他度量不及徐勉，而清廉简约过之，两人都被称为贤明宰相。
English: Xu Mian was removed from his post midway due to a minor mistake, leaving Zhou Shie in sole control of power. He was not as powerful as Xu Mian, while Qing Lian was more concise. Both of them were known as wise prime ministers.

古文：时议国史，疑文帝纪传之名。舍以爲 帝纪之笼百事，如干象之包六爻，今若追而爲纪，则事无所包，若直书功德，则传而非纪。
现代文：当时议论国史，对文帝写入纪还是写入传感到犹疑，周舍认为 帝纪可以包笼各种事情，如同《乾象》的包笼六爻，现在如果追写为纪，则事情无法包笼，如果直写他的功德，则该是传而不是纪。
English: At that time, when discussing national history, he was hesitant about whether Emperor Wen should be written into the chronicle or into the biography. Zhou She thought that the imperial biography could cover all kinds of things, just as the "Dry Elephant" was covered with six folds. Now, if it is written as a biography, then things cannot be covered. If it is written directly about his merits, then it should be a biography and not a biography.

古文：应于上纪之前，略有仰述 。
现代文：应当在上一篇纪之前，略有简述 。
English: A brief summary should be provided before the previous section.

古文：从之。
现代文：结果依从了他。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：舍占对辩捷，尝居直庐，语及嗜好，裴子野言从来不尝食姜。
现代文：周舍应对雄辩而敏捷。他曾经坐在值班的房间里，谈到个人的嗜好，裴子野说他从来不尝生姜。
English: Zhou Xie is eloquent and quick to respond. He once sat in the duty room and talked about his personal hobbies. Peizhino said that he never tasted ginger.

古文：舍应声曰： 孔称 不彻 ，裴乃不尝。 
现代文：周舍应声说道： 孔子称 不彻 ，裴公则不尝。 
English: Zhou She said in response: Confucius said it was not good, but Pei Gong did not like it.

古文：一坐皆悦。
现代文：在座的人们都很高兴。
English: Everyone here is very happy.

古文：与人论谑，终日不绝，而竟不言漏泄机事，衆尤服之。
现代文：他和别人辩论戏谑，终日不断，而从不说漏机密，众人尤其佩服。
English: He is particularly admired for debating and joking with others all day long, but never revealing secrets.

古文：性俭素，衣服器用，居处床席，如布衣之贫者。
现代文：他性格简易朴素，衣服器物，住处的床席，和百姓中的贫困者相同。
English: His character is frugal and simple, his clothes and utensils, and the bed in his dwelling are like those of the poor among the common people.

古文：每入官府，虽广厦华堂，闺阁重邃，舍居之则尘埃满积。
现代文：每次进入官府，即使是大厦的华美厅堂，闺阁的深隐之处，只要周舍居住，则灰尘积满。
English: Every time you enter the palace, even if it is a tall and magnificent building, the inner rooms are piled up, and the surrounding houses are filled with dust after living.

古文：以荻爲障，坏亦不修。
现代文：他以芦荻为屏障，坏了也不修整。
English: He uses reeds as a barrier and does not mend what is broken.

古文：历侍中、太子詹事。
现代文：历任侍中、太子詹事。
English: Successive chamberlains, Prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：普通五年，南津校尉郭祖深获始兴相白涡书，饷舍衣履及婢，以闻，坐免官。
现代文：普通五年，南津校尉郭祖深得到了始兴相白涡的书信，说是送给了周舍衣服、鞋子和奴婢，报告了朝廷，周舍因此而被免官。
English: Five years later, Guo Zu Sheng, a lieutenant of Nanzin, received a letter from Shi Xing Xiang Bai Yu, saying that he had given clothes, shoes and slaves to Zhou She. He reported this to the imperial court, and Zhou She was dismissed.

古文：以右骁骑将军知詹事。
现代文：以右骁骑将军兼做太子詹事。
English: With the right-hand cavalry general also acting as prince Zhan Zhi.

古文：卒。上临哭哀动左右，追赠侍中、护军将军，諡曰简子。
现代文：死后，皇上到场痛哭，感动左右，追赠他为侍中、护军将军，谥号为简子。
English: After his death, the emperor wept bitterly on the scene and was deeply moved. He was posthumously given the title of chamberlain and general of the escort, and his nickname was Janzi.

古文：初，帝锐意中原，群臣咸言不可，唯舍赞成之。
现代文：起初，武帝锐意进取中原，群臣都说不可，只有周舍赞成他。
English: At first, Emperor Wu was determined to advance into the Central Plains, but his ministers said it was impossible. Only Zhou She agreed with him.

古文：普通中，累献捷，帝思其功，下诏述其德美。
现代文：普通年间，屡次呈献捷报，武帝思念他的功劳，下诏书叙述他的美德。
English: During the ordinary years, he repeatedly presented successful reports, Emperor Wu thought about his merits, and the next imperial edict described his virtues.

古文：以爲 往者南司白涡之劾，恐外议谓朕有私，致此黜免。
现代文：认为： 从前南司关于白涡的弹劾，是恐怕外面议论朕有私情，以致将他罢免。
English: Thought: The former Nanshi's impeachment of Bai You is probably the result of people talking about my personal feelings, which led to his dismissal.

古文：追愧若人一介之善，外可量加褒异，以旌善人 。
现代文：现在回想起来，有愧于这样一位善人，另外可以依照事实加以奖赏，以便对善人进行表扬。 
English: Now that I think about it, it is not fair to such a good person, and it is also possible to reward him according to the facts in order to praise the good person.

古文：舍集二十卷。
现代文：周舍有文集二十卷。
English: Zhou She has a collection of twenty volumes.

古文：二子弘义、弘信，弟子弘正。
现代文：他的两个儿子名叫弘义、弘信，弟弟的儿子名叫弘正。
English: His two sons are named Hiroi and Hironobu, and his brother's son is named Hiromasa.

古文：弘正字思行。
现代文：○周弘正周弘正字思行。
English: ○ Zhou Hongzheng, Zhou Hongzheng, Zhou Hongzheng.

古文：父宝始，梁司徒祭酒。
现代文：父亲周宝始，是梁朝的司徒祭酒。
English: Father Zhou Baozhi, was the priest's sacrificial wine of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：弘正幼孤，及弟弘让、弘直俱爲伯父舍所养。
现代文：周弘正幼年成为孤儿，和弟弟弘让、弘直都为伯父周舍所抚养。
English: Zhou Hongzheng was orphaned at a young age, and he and his younger brothers, Hongzhan and Hongzhong, were raised by their uncle, Zhou She.

古文：年十岁，通老子、周易。
现代文：十岁时，通晓《老子》、《周易》。
English: At the age of ten, he was familiar with "Lao Zi" and "Zhou Yi."

古文：舍每与谈论，辄异之，曰： 观汝清理警发，后世知名，当出吾右。 
现代文：周舍每当和他谈论，就感到非常诧异，说： 看你谈话说理精辟，后世知名，一定会在我以上。 
English: Whenever Zhou Xie talked with him, he was very surprised and said: "Look at your conversation, your reasoning is incisive, well-known in the future, you will definitely be above me."

古文：河东裴子野深相赏纳，请以女妻之。
现代文：河东的裴子野对他非常赏识，请求把女儿嫁给他。
English: Hedong Peizhino appreciated him very much and befriended him. He also expressed his willingness to marry his daughter to him.

古文：十五，召补国子生，仍于国学讲易，诸生传习其义。
现代文：十五岁，召为国子生。他在国学里面讲《周易》，学生们便传习他的解释。
English: At the age of fifteen, he was called to be a student of the country. He spoke about "Zhou Yi" in Chinese studies, and the students learned his interpretation.

古文：以季春入学，孟冬应举，学司以日浅不许。
现代文：他在晚春入学，初冬应举，学司因为日子太短不允许。
English: He entered the school in late spring, and in early winter he had to go to school, but the school superintendent would not allow it because the days were too short.

古文：博士到洽曰： 周郎弱冠讲经，岂俟策试？ 
现代文：博士到洽说： 周郎二十就能讲经，难道还需要等待策试？ 
English: When the doctor arrived, he said, "Zhou Lang can give a sermon at the age of twenty. Do we really need to wait for a test?"

古文：普通中，初置司文义郎，直寿光省，以弘正爲司义侍郎。
现代文：普通年间，初设司文义郎，在寿光省值勤，以周弘正为司义侍郎。
English: In ordinary years, the first Sifengyirong was set up, with Zhou Hongzheng as the Sifengyirong on duty in Shouguang Province.

古文：弘正丑而不陋，吃而能谈，俳谐似优，刚肠似直，善玄理，爲当世所宗。
现代文：周弘正丑而不陋，吃而能谈，诙谐如同优人，刚肠好似直生，善谈玄理，为当世所推崇。
English: Zhou Hongzheng is ugly but not ugly, he can eat and talk, his wit is like that of a great man, his hard-heartedness is like that of a straight-shooter, he is good at talking about metaphysics, and he is respected by the contemporary world.

古文：藏法师于开善寺讲说，门徒数百，弘正年少，未知名，着红褌，锦绞髻，踞门而听，衆人蔑之，弗谴也。
现代文：有个藏法师在开善寺演讲，门徒数百人，周弘正年少，还不出名，穿着红裤子，锦带扎着头，坐在门口听讲，众人都很蔑视，但是并没有谴责他。
English: There was a Tibetan sorcerer giving a lecture at Kaisen-ji Temple. There were hundreds of disciples. Zhou Hong, who was young and not yet famous, wore red trousers and a brocade headband. He sat at the entrance listening to the lecture. Everyone despised him, but did not condemn him.

古文：既而乘间进难，举坐尽倾，法师疑非世人，觇知，大相赏狎。
现代文：随后他就抓住机会进行驳难，在座的人都被吸引，法师怀疑他不是世间凡人，等认清以后，非常欣赏和亲近。
English: Then he seized the opportunity to refute the difficulty, everyone present was attracted, the magician suspected that he was not an ordinary person in the world, and after recognizing it, he was very appreciative and close.

古文：刘显将之寻阳，朝贤毕祖道，显县帛十匹，约曰： 险衣来者以赏之。 
现代文：刘显将到寻阳去，朝廷的贤士们都去为他饯行。刘显拿了丝帛十匹悬赏，约定说： 有谁穿着奇特的衣服前来，就把这些帛赏给他。 
English: Liu Xian will go to seek the sun, and the wise men of the court will all go to accompany him. Liu Xian took ten silk cocoons and offered a reward, and agreed: Whoever comes wearing strange clothes will be rewarded with these cocoons.

古文：衆人竞改常服，不过长短之间。
现代文：众人都争相改变常规服装，但不过是长短的区别。
English: People are rushing to change their regular clothes, but it's just a difference in length.

古文：显曰： 将有甚于此矣。 
现代文：刘显说： 将会有比这更奇特的。 
English: Liu Xian said: "There will be more strange things than this.

古文：既而弘正绿丝布裤，绣假种，轩昂而至，折标取帛。
现代文：随后周弘正绿丝布裤，绣假种，轩昂而至，夺标取帛。
English: Subsequently, Zhou Hongzheng green silk trousers, embroidered fake seeds, arrived in high spirits and won the award.

古文：中大通三年，昭明太子薨，其嗣华容公不得立，乃以晋安王纲爲皇太子。
现代文：中大通三年，昭明太子去世，他的后代华容公不得立位继承，便以晋安王萧纲为皇太子。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, Prince Zhaoming died, and his descendant, Prince Huarong, was not allowed to succeed to the throne, so the crown prince was Jinan King Xiaogang.

古文：弘正奏记，请 抗目夷上仁之义，执子臧大贤之节 。
现代文：周弘正上奏记入史册，请求写上 超越目夷仁义风范，坚持子臧大贤节操 。
English: Zhou Hongzheng made an appeal to be recorded in the history books, requesting to be written as "transcending the barbarian and benevolent morality" and "adhering to the discipline of the great sages."

古文：其抗直守正如此。
现代文：他就是这样地耿直刚正。
English: That's how he stays so level-headed.

古文：常自称有才无相，仆射徐勉掌选，以其陋不堪爲尚书郎，乃献书于勉，其言甚切。
现代文：他常常自称有才无相，仆射徐勉掌管选拔官员，因为他长得丑陋，不能充当尚书郎，他便上书给徐勉，其中言论十分恳切。
English: He often claimed that he had no talent, and that he was a puppet of Xu Meng, who was in charge of the selection of officials. Because he was ugly and could not serve as a scholar, he wrote a letter to Xu Meng, in which he spoke very earnestly.

古文：稍迁国子博士。
现代文：后来逐步调任国子博士。
English: Later, he was gradually transferred to Dr. Kuniko.

古文：学中有宋元凶讲孝经碑，历代不改，弘正始到官，即表刊除。
现代文：学校中有宋朝元凶劭讲《孝经》碑，历代不改，周弘正刚刚到任，就上表删除。
English: In the school, there is a monument of "Filial Piety" recited by Song Dynasty's Yuan Xueyong, which has remained unchanged throughout the ages. Zhou Hongzheng has just taken office, and the above table has been deleted.

古文：时于城西立士林馆，弘正居以讲授，听者倾朝野焉。
现代文：当时在城西立有士林馆，周弘正住在那里进行讲授，听讲的人倾尽朝野。
English: At that time, the Shilin Hall was set up in the west of Jiankang City in the capital, and Zhou Hong was teaching a lecture in the hall. All the scholars from the imperial court and society went to listen to the lecture.

古文：弘正啓周易疑义凡五十条，又请释乾坤二系，复诏答之。
现代文：周弘正上表提出《周易》疑义共五十条，又请求解释《乾》《坤》二《系》，武帝复诏作了回答。
English: Zhou Hongzheng put forward a total of fifty doubts about the meaning of "Zhou Yi" on the table, and also requested an explanation of "Kian," "Kun" and two "systems," and Emperor Wu replied.

古文：后爲平西邵陵王府谘议参军，有罪应流徙，敕以赐干陀利国。
现代文：后来他做了平西邵陵王府咨议参军，因为犯了罪应该流放，诏令赐他前往干陀利国。
English: Later, he was advised to join the army by the Shao Ling royal palace in Pingxi. Because he had committed a crime, he should be exiled, and the imperial edict gave him the right to go to Guandong Province.

古文：未去，寄系尚方。
现代文：没有前往，囚禁在尚方狱中。
English: He did not go and was imprisoned in Shangfang Prison.

古文：于狱上武帝讲武诗，降敕原罪，仍复本位。
现代文：他在狱中给武帝呈上了一首《讲武诗》，降旨赦免了他的罪过，仍然恢复本来的官位。
English: While in prison, he presented Emperor Wu with a poem, "On Martial Poetry," and the emperor pardoned his sins and restored his original official position.

古文：弘正博物，知玄象，善占候。
现代文：周弘正知识广博，懂得玄象，善于占候。
English: Zhou Hongzheng has extensive knowledge, understands occult phenomena, and is good at divination.

古文：大同末，尝谓弟弘让曰： 国家阨在数年，当有兵起,吾与汝不知何所逃之。 
现代文：大同末年，他曾经对弟弟周弘让说： 国家的困厄就在数年之间，当会有兵乱出现，我和你不知道往哪里逃走。 
English: At the end of the Datong era, he once said to his brother Zhou Hongzhang: The country's troubles are just a few years away. When there is a war, you and I don't know where to run.

古文：及武帝纳侯景，弘正谓弘让曰： 乱阶此矣。 
现代文：后来武帝招纳了侯景，周弘正对周弘让说： 祸根就在这里了。 
English: Later, Emperor Wu recruited Houjing, Zhou Hongzheng said to Zhou Hongzheng: The root of the evil is here.

古文：台城陷，弘正谄附王伟，又与周石珍合族，避景讳，改姓姬氏，拜太常。
现代文：台城陷落，周弘正谄附王伟，又和周石珍合族，避侯景的忌讳，改姓姬氏，任命为太常。
English: After the fall of Taicheng, Zhou Hongzheng became a follower of Wang Wei and a member of Zhou Shizhen's clan. He changed his surname from Houjing to Hsieh and was appointed as Taizhong.

古文：景将篡之际，使掌礼仪。
现代文：侯景将要篡位的时候，让他掌管礼仪。
English: When Hou Jing is about to usurp the throne, let him be in charge of etiquette.

古文：及王僧辩东讨，元帝谓僧辩曰： 王师近次，朝士孰当先来？ 
现代文：后来王僧辩东讨，元帝对王僧辩说： 君王的军队驻扎近处，朝中的士人谁会首先过来？ 
English: Later, the prince argued with the monk, and the former emperor said to the prince: The king's army is stationed nearby, who will be the first to come?

古文：王僧辩曰： 其周弘正乎。
现代文：王僧辩说： 可能是周弘正吧。
English: Wang Xiang argued: It may be Zhou Hongzheng.

古文：弘正智不后机，体能济胜，无妻子之顾，有独决之明，其馀碌碌不逮也。 
现代文：周弘正智力不落后于时机，体力能够胜利到达，无妻子儿女的顾虑，有独自决断的精明，其余的碌碌之辈不能相比。 
English: Zhou Hongzheng's intelligence does not lag behind the time, his physical strength can achieve victory, he does not have the worries of his wife and children, and he has the shrewdness to make his own decisions. The rest of the rich people cannot be compared.

古文：俄而前部传云弘正至，僧辩飞骑迎之。
现代文：很快前面军中传禀周弘正到来，王僧辩飞马迎了上去。
English: Soon, Zhou Hongzheng, the leader of the front army, arrived, and Wang Sangye greeted the horse.

古文：及见，欢甚，曰： 吾固知王僧达非后机者，公可坐吾膝上。 
现代文：见了以后，极为高兴，说： 我本来就知道王僧达不是落后于时机的人，您可以坐在我的膝盖上。 
English: After seeing him, she was extremely happy and said, "I already knew that Wang Xanda was not a man who lagged behind the times. You can sit on my knee."

古文：对曰： 可谓进而若将加诸膝，老夫何足以当。 
现代文：回答说： 可以说进前，而如果是坐在膝盖上，老夫怎么能当得起？ 
English: He replied: It is permissible to say forward, but if it is sitting on the knee, how can the old man stand up?

古文：僧辩即日啓元帝，元帝手书与弘正，仍遣使迎之，谓朝士曰： 晋氏平吴，喜获二陆，今我讨贼，亦得两周。 
现代文：王僧辩当天就启奏元帝，元帝写了手书送给周弘正，便派使者前去迎接，然后对朝士说： 晋朝平定吴国，喜获二陆，现在我来讨贼，也得了两周。 
English: On the same day, Wang Sangye sent a message to Emperor Yuan. Emperor Yuan wrote a handwritten letter and sent it to Zhou Hongzheng. He then sent an envoy to meet the envoy. He then said to the Emperor: The Jin Dynasty conquered the State of Wu and gained two provinces. Now I am going to chase the thieves and have gained two weeks.

古文：及至，礼数甚优，朝臣无比。
现代文：来到以后，礼仪十分隆重，朝臣们无可比拟。
English: After arriving, the etiquette is very grand, and the courtiers are incomparable.

古文：授黄门侍郎，直侍中省。
现代文：授予他黄门侍郎，值勤侍中省。
English: Liang Zhengdong appointed him as the Yellow Gate chamberlain, and he was on duty in the chamberlain's office.

古文：俄迁左户尚书，加散骑常侍。
现代文：随即升为左户尚书，加官散骑常侍。
English: He was immediately promoted to Sadoguchishosho, and given the additional post of Sanzhishi no Tsunenobu.

古文：及侯景平，僧辩啓送秘府图籍，敕弘正雠校。
现代文：他夏天只穿犊鼻裤，朱红衣，被有关部门所弹劾。
English: He was impeached by the relevant department for wearing only snub-nosed trousers and a vermilion jacket in the summer.

古文：时朝议迁都，但元帝再临荆陕，前后二十馀年，情所安恋，不欲归建业。
现代文：他就是这样地放达。元帝曾经著有《金楼子》，并说： 我在诸僧中特别看重招提寺的琰法师，在隐士中特别看重华阳的陶真白，在士大夫中特别看重汝南的周弘正，他对于义理清转无穷，确是一时的名士。 
English: Emperor Yuan once wrote "The Golden Tower" and said, "Among the monks, I particularly value the Zheng Dao of Zhodi Temple, among the hermits, I particularly value the Tao Zhen Bai of Huayang, and among the scholars, I particularly value the Zhou Hong Zheng of Runan. He has done an infinite number of things for Yili Qing, and is truly a celebrity of the moment."

古文：兼故府臣僚皆楚人，并欲即都江陵，云： 建康盖是旧都，雕荒已极。
现代文：当时朝廷议论迁都，但是元帝两次来到荆陕一带，前后二十余年，感情上安宁留恋，不想回建邺。加上旧时府中的臣僚都是楚地人，都想定都江陵，他们说： 建康因为是旧都，已经极其凋敝荒芜。
English: At that time, the imperial court discussed the relocation of the capital, but Emperor Yuan twice came to the area of Jing and Shaanxi, and for more than 20 years, he was emotionally calm and nostalgic, and did not want to return to Jiankang. In addition, the ministers in the old government were all from Chudi, and they all assumed that the capital was Jiangling. They said: Jiankang, because it is the old capital, has been extremely desolate and desolate.

古文：且王气已尽，兼与北止隔一江，若有不虞，悔无所及。
现代文：而且王气已尽，加上与北国只隔着一条长江，如果有什么意外，后悔莫及。
English: Moreover, the king's power has been exhausted, and there is only one Yangtze River separating it from the north country. If there is any accident, there is nothing to regret.

古文：且臣等又闻荆南有天子气，今其应矣。 
现代文：而且我们又听说荆南有天子气，现在就要应验了。 
English: Moreover, we also heard that Jing Nan has the spirit of a son of heaven, which is now about to be fulfilled.

古文：元帝无去意。
现代文：元帝没有离去的意思。
English: The former emperor has no intention of leaving.

古文：时尚书左仆射王褒及弘正咸侍，帝顾曰： 卿意何如？ 
现代文：当时尚书左仆射王褒及周弘正都在旁边，元帝回头对他们说： 你们的意思如何？ 
English: At that time, Shangshu's left-hand servants Shaowangbo and Zhou Hongzheng were nearby. The Yuan Emperor turned to them and said: What do you mean?

古文：褒等以帝猜忌，弗敢衆中公害，唯唯而已。
现代文：王褒等人因为元帝猜忌，不敢在众人面前公开说明，点头答应而已。
English: Wang Bao and others did not dare to explain openly in front of everyone because of the emperor's suspicion, and only nodded their heads in agreement.

古文：他日，弘正乃正色谏，至于再三，曰： 若如士大夫，唯圣王所都，本无定处。至如黔首，未见入建邺城，便谓未是天子，犹列国诸王。
现代文：王褒后来因为清闲，秘密劝谏迁回丹阳十分迫切，元帝虽然听从了，但脸上却很不高兴。到了第二天，他在众人面前对王褒说： 您昨天劝谏返回建邺，不是没有道理，我昨天夜里想了，还是怀有疑惑。 王褒知道不会采纳，才放下了。后来的一天，周弘正就正色劝谏，一直提了两三次，他说： 如象士大夫，专听圣王选定都城，便认为不是天子，好像是列国诸王。
English: The next day, he said to Wang Bao in front of everyone: "You advised him to return to Jianye yesterday, and it was not without reason. I thought about it last night, but I still had doubts. Wang Bao knew that he would not accept it, so he put it down. One day later, Zhou Hongzheng advised him to return to Danyang, and he kept mentioning it two or three times. He said: "If you are like a scholar, listening to the holy king select the capital, you will think that he is not the son of heaven, but the kings of the nations."

古文：今日赴百姓之心,不可不归建邺。 
现代文：今天顺应百姓的心愿，不可不归建邺。 
English: Today, in accordance with the wishes of the people, we must return to Jianye.

古文：当时颇相酬许。
现代文：元帝当时很表示同意。
English: At the time, Emperor Yuan expressed his agreement.

古文：弘正退后，黄罗汉、宗懔乃言 弘正、王褒并东人，仰劝东下，非爲国计 。
现代文：周弘正退下以后，黄罗汉、宗懔便说： 周弘正、王褒都是东方人，劝告东下，不是为国家考虑。 
English: After Zhou Hongzheng stepped down, Huang Luohan and Zonglu said: Zhou Hongzheng and Wang Bao are both from the East, and it is not for the country to advise them to go to the East.

古文：弘正窃知其言，他日乃复上前面折二人，曰： 若东人劝下东，谓之私计，西人劝住西，亦是私计不？ 
现代文：周弘正暗中知道了他们的话，一天便在皇上面前当面质问他们二人，说： 如果东方人劝迁往东方，是为了私利，那么西方人劝留在西方，也是为了私利吗？ 
English: Zhou Hongzheng secretly learned of their words, and one day he questioned the two of them face to face in front of the emperor, saying: If easterners are persuaded to move to the east for their own benefit, then are westerners persuaded to stay in the west for their own benefit?

古文：衆人默然，而人情并劝迁都。
现代文：众人都不说话，而人们的情绪，都在劝告迁都。
English: Many people are not talking, but people's emotions are urging the relocation of the capital.

古文：上又曾以后堂大集文武，其预会者四五百人，帝欲遍试人情，曰： 劝吾去者左袒。 
现代文：皇上又曾经在后堂大集文武官员，参加聚会的人四五百人，元帝想普遍地测试人们的心情，便说： 劝我迁走的袒露出左臂。 
English: The emperor also once had a large gathering of cultural and military officials in the back hall, with four or five hundred people attending the gathering. The former emperor wanted to test people's moods in a general way, so he said: The person who advised me to move showed his left arm.

古文：于是左袒者过半。
现代文：随后袒露左臂的超过半数。
English: She then bared more than half of her left arm.

古文：武昌太守朱买臣，上旧左右，而阉人也，颇有干用，故上擢之。
现代文：武昌太守朱买臣，是皇上从前的侍从，是个太监，很有干才，所以皇上提拔重用他。
English: Wuchang's eunuch Zhu Mai Sheng, the emperor's former attendant, was a very capable eunuch, so the emperor promoted and reused him.

古文：及是劝上迁，曰： 买臣家在荆州，岂不愿官长住，但恐是买臣富贵，非官富贵邪！ 
现代文：到了现在，他劝告皇上迁都，说： 我朱买臣家在荆州，难道不愿意皇家常住？但却恐怕是买臣富贵，而不是官家富贵！ 
English: Now, he advised the emperor to move the capital, saying, "I am from Zhuhai and my family is in Jingzhou. Don't you want the royal family to live here permanently? But I'm afraid it's the wealthy merchants, not the wealthy officials!

古文：上深感其言，卒不能用。
现代文：皇上深深为他的话所感动，而到底也没有采用。
English: The emperor was deeply moved by his words, but in the end did not adopt them.

古文：及魏平江陵，弘正遁归建邺。
现代文：等魏朝平了江陵，周弘正逃归建邺。
English: After the Wei Dynasty leveled Gangneung, Zhou Hongzhen fled to Jianye.

古文：太平元年，授侍中，领国子祭酒，迁太帝卿、都官尚书。
现代文：太平元年，任命他为侍中，兼任国子祭酒，调为太常卿、都官尚书。
English: In the first year of the Taiping era, he was appointed as a chamberlain, concurrently served as the son of the country's sacrificial wine, and was transferred to the position of Tai Changqing, the highest-ranking official in the capital.

古文：陈武帝授太子詹事。
现代文：陈武帝被任命为太子詹事。
English: Chen Wu Di was appointed as the crown prince of Zhanji.

古文：天嘉元年，迁侍中、国子祭酒，往长安迎宣帝。
现代文：天嘉元年，调任侍中、国子祭酒，前往长安迎接宣帝。
English: In the first year of Tianjia, he was transferred to the position of chamberlain, Kuniko Matsuri sake, and went to Chang'an to meet Emperor Xuan.

古文：三年，自周还。
现代文：三年，从周朝返回。
English: Three years later, he returned from Zhou Dynasty.

古文：废帝嗣位，领都官尚书，总知五礼事。
现代文：废帝继承了皇位，由他兼任都官尚书，总管五礼事务。
English: After the dethronement of the former emperor, Zhou Hongzheng also served as the city's ceremonial secretary, in charge of the five etiquettes of auspicious, auspicious, honored, military, and evil.

古文：宣帝即位，迁特进，领国子祭酒，加扶。
现代文：宣帝即位，调任特进，兼任国子祭酒，加派扶掖人。
English: Emperor Xuanxuan ascended the throne, transferred to the special promotion, concurrently served as the son of the country's sacrificial liquor, and dispatched the Fusiliers.

古文：太建五年，授尚书右仆射。
现代文：太建五年，他被任命为尚书右仆射。
English: In the fifth year of Tai Jian, he was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand man.

古文：寻敕侍东宫讲论语、孝经。
现代文：不久下诏令让他去到东宫讲《论语》、《孝经》。
English: Soon after, he was ordered to go to the East Palace to lecture on "Analects of Confucius" and "Book of Filial Piety."

古文：太子以弘正德望素重，有师资之敬焉。
现代文：太子因为周弘正德行名望一向很重，对他有着如对师长的敬意。
English: Prince Zhou Hongzheng has always been highly respected for his virtuous conduct, and he is held in the same esteem as a teacher.

古文：弘正特善玄言，兼明释典，虽硕德名僧，莫不请质疑滞。
现代文：周弘正特别善于玄谈，又兼懂得佛典，即使是大贤名僧，无人不向他请教疑难问题。
English: Zhou Hongzheng is particularly good at mysticism, and also understands Buddhist scriptures. Even if he is a great sage and famous monk, no one will not ask him for advice on difficult questions.

古文：六年，卒官，年七十九，赠侍中、中书监，諡曰简子。
现代文：太建六年，周弘正死在官任上，终年七十九岁。追赠为侍中、中书监，谥号为简子。
English: Six years after Taiken's death, Zhou Hongzheng died in office at the age of 79. He was posthumously awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School and Junior High School Supervisor, and his posthumous name was Jianzi.

古文：所着周易讲疏十六卷，论语疏十一卷，庄子疏八卷，老子疏五卷，孝经疏二卷，集二十卷，行于代。
现代文：他所著的《周易讲疏》十六卷，《论语疏》十一卷，《庄子疏》八卷，《老子疏》五卷，《孝经疏》二卷，文集二十卷，流行于当代。
English: His "Zhou Yi Luo Shuo" (16 volumes), "Analects of Confucius" (11 volumes), "Zhuang Zi Shuo" (8 volumes), "Lao Zi Shuo" (5 volumes), "Xiao Jing Shuo" (2 volumes), and 20 volumes of anthologies are popular in contemporary times.

古文：子豫玄，年十四，与俱载入东，乘小船度岸，见藤花，弘正挽之，船覆俱溺，弘正仅免，豫玄遂得心惊疾。
现代文：儿子周豫玄，十四岁的时候，和他一齐到东方去，乘小船靠岸，看见了藤花，周弘正用手去牵引，船翻了，都坠落在水中，周弘正勉强脱险，周豫玄则由此得了心惊病。
English: Zhou Yu Xuan's son, when he was 14 years old, went to the East together with him. He took a small boat to the shore and saw wisteria. Zhou Hong was pulling it with his hands. The boat capsized and they both fell into the water. Zhou Hong was barely able to get out of danger, but Zhou Yu Xuan suffered from shock.

古文：次子坟，尚书吏部郎。
现代文：次子周坟，为尚书吏部郎。
English: The second son, Zhou Bin, was the secretary of the Ministry of Education.

