古文：起旃蒙作噩，尽玄黓执徐，凡八年。
现代文：起，止，一共八年。晋武帝泰始元年
English: It lasted for eight years. It was the first year of Emperor Jinwu's reign.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始元年春，三月，吴主使光禄大夫纪陟、五官中郎将洪璆与徐绍、孙彧偕来报聘。绍行至濡须，有言绍誉中国之美者，吴主怒，追还，杀之。
现代文：春季，三月，吴主派遣光禄大夫纪陟、五官中郎将洪，与徐绍、孙一起去魏国回报聘问。徐绍走到濡须的时候，有人说徐绍曾称赞中原之国的美好，吴主动怒，追回徐绍，把他杀死。
English: In the spring, in March, the Lord of Wu dispatched the Guanglu doctor Guizhou and the five official middlemen Hong to return to Wei with Xu Shao and Sun. When Xu Shao went to Wushu, some people said that Xu Shao had praised the beauty of the Central Plains country. Wu took the initiative to get angry, chase back Xu Shao and kill him.

古文：夏，四月，吴改元甘露。
现代文：夏季，四月，吴国改年号为甘露。
English: In the summer, in April, Wu Guo changed the name of the year to Nectar.

古文：五月，魏帝加文王殊礼，进王妃曰后，世子曰太子。
现代文：五月，魏元帝施与晋文王特殊的礼遇，晋升王妃为王后，世子改称为太子。
English: In May, Emperor Wei Yuan gave a special courtesy to King Jinwen, promoting the princess to queen and the heir to the throne to crown prince.

古文：癸未，大赦。
现代文：癸未，大赦天下。
English: On the 30th, he ordered a general amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，吴主逼杀景皇后，迁景帝四子于吴；寻又杀其长者二人。
现代文：秋季，七月，吴主逼杀吴帝皇后，把景帝的四个儿子迁到吴，不久，又把四人中两个年龄大的杀了。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Lord of Wu persecuted and killed the Empress of Wu, moved the four sons of Emperor Jing to Wu, and soon killed the two oldest of the four.

古文：八月，辛卯，文王卒，太子嗣为相国、晋王。
现代文：八月，辛卯，晋文王司马昭去世，太子司马炎继位，做了相国、晋王。
English: In August, Xinwu, Jinwen King Sima Zhao died, and Prince Sima Yan succeeded to the throne and became the fatherland and Jin King.

古文：九月，乙未，大赦。
现代文：九月，乙未，大赦天下。
English: In September, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：戊子，以魏司徒何曾为晋丞相；癸亥，以骠骑将军司马望为司徒。
现代文：戊子，任命魏司马何曾为晋丞相。癸亥，任命票骑将军司马望为司徒
English: Wu Zi, appointed Wei Sima He Zeng as the prime minister of Jin Dynasty. Yan Hai, appointed the general of the cavalry, Sima Wang, as the leader of the cavalry

古文：乙亥，葬文王于崇阳陵。
现代文：乙亥，在崇阳陵理葬晋文王。
English: Emperor Jimmu was buried in the Chongyang Mausoleum.

古文：冬，吴西陵督步阐表请吴主徙都武昌；吴主从之，使御史大夫丁固、右将军诸葛靓守建业。
现代文：冬季，吴国西陵督步阐上表，请求吴主把国都迁到武昌，吴主听从了他的建议，委派御史大夫丁固、右将军诸葛靓镇守建业。
English: In winter, the governor of the Western Necropolis of the State of Wu asked the Lord of Wu to move the national capital to Wuchang. The Lord of Wu listened to his suggestion and appointed the Imperial Historian Ding Gu and the Right General Zhuge Liang to guard the construction.

古文：阐，骘之子也。
现代文：步阐是步骘的儿子。
English: Bu Xing is the son of Bu Yao.

古文：十二月，壬戌，魏帝禅位于晋；甲子，出舍于金墉城。
现代文：十二月，壬戌，魏元帝把皇位禅让给晋王。甲子，魏元帝搬到金墉城居住。
English: In December, Emperor Wei Yuan abdicated the imperial throne to Emperor Jin of Jin, and Emperor Wei Yuan moved to Jinshan City to live.

古文：太傅司马孚拜辞，执帝手，流涕歔欷不自胜，曰： 臣死之日，固大魏之纯臣也。 
现代文：太傅司马孚与魏元帝辞别，拉着魏元帝的手，流泪叹息不能自制，说： 我到死的那一天，仍然是大魏真正的臣子。 
English: Grand Master Sima Fu bade farewell to Emperor Wei Yuan, took Emperor Wei Yuan's hand, shed tears and sighed uncontrollably, saying, "To the day I die, I will still be a true vassal of the Great Wei Dynasty."

古文：丙寅，王即皇帝位，大赦，改元。
现代文：丙寅，晋王司马炎登上皇帝位，大赦天下，改年号为泰始。
English: Cui Yin, Jin king Sima Yan ascended to the imperial throne, amnestied the world, and changed the year name to Tai Shi.

古文：丁卯，奉魏帝为陈留王，即宫于鄴；优崇之礼，皆仿魏初故事。
现代文：丁卯，尊奉魏元帝为陈留王，宫室安排在邺城，优厚高贵的礼制待遇，都仿效魏国初期的制度。
English: Dingwu, honoring Wei Yuan Emperor as Chen Liu Wang, the palace arranged in Shicheng, and the generous and noble ceremonial treatment, all follow the system of the early Wei Dynasty.

古文：魏氏诸王皆降为候。
现代文：魏宗室诸王都降为侯。
English: The kings of the Wei dynasty were all reduced to the rank of marquess.

古文：追尊宣王为宣皇帝，景王为景皇帝，文王为文皇帝。尊王太后曰皇太后。
现代文：追尊晋宣王司马懿为宣皇帝，晋景王司马师为景皇帝，晋文王司马昭为文皇帝；尊王太后为皇太后。
English: King Sima Zhao of the Jin Dynasty was Emperor Xuan, King Sima Shi of the Jin Dynasty was Emperor Jing, King Sima Zhao of the Jin Dynasty was Emperor Wen, and Empress Dowager Son was Empress Dowager.

古文：封皇叔祖父孚为安平王，叔父干为平原王、亮为扶风王、伷为东莞王、骏为汝阴王、肜为梁王、伦为琅邪王，弟攸为齐王、鉴为乐安王、机为燕王，又封群从司徒望等十七人皆为王。
现代文：封皇帝的叔祖司马孚为安平王；叔父司马斡为平原王，司马亮为扶风王，司马为东莞王，司马骏为汝阴王，司马肜为梁王，司马伦为琅邪王，封皇帝之弟司马攸为齐王、司马鉴为乐安王、司马机为燕王。又把司徒司马望等诸子侄共十七人都封为王。
English: The emperor's great-uncle Sima Fu was named Anping King; his uncle Sima Yu was named Plain King, Sima Liang was named Fu Feng King, Sima was named Dongguan King, Sima Jie was named Ru Yin King, Sima Jie was named Liang King, Sima Lun was named Yu Yao King, the emperor's younger brother Sima You was named Qi King, Sima Jian was named Le An King, and Sima Ji was named Yan King. In addition, a total of seventeen of the emperor's sons and nephews, including Sima Wang, were named kings.

古文：以石苞为大司马，郑冲为太傅，王祥为太保，何曾为太尉，贾充为车骑将军，王沈为骠骑将军。其馀文武增位进爵有差。
现代文：任命石苞为大司马，郑冲为太傅，王祥为太保，何曾为太尉，贾充为车骑将军，王沈为骠骑将军；其余的文武官员，提级进爵各有差别。
English: He appointed Shi Hao as the grand steward, Zheng Chong as the eunuch, Wang Xiang as the eunuch, He Zeng as the eunuch, Jia Chong as the cavalry general, Wang Shen as the cavalry general; the rest of the civil and military officials were promoted to the peerage.

古文：乙亥，以安平王孚为太宰，都督中外诸军事。
现代文：乙亥，任命安平王司马孚为太宰，统领朝廷内外的军事事务。
English: Emperor Yihai appointed Anping King Sima Fu as Dazai, in charge of military affairs inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：未几，又以车骑将军陈骞为大将军，与司徒义阳王望、司空荀顗，凡八公，同时并置。
现代文：过了不久，又任命车骑将军陈骞为大将军，与司徒义阳王司马望、司空荀等，总共是八公，同时并列设置。
English: Soon after, he also appointed the general of cavalry and chariots, Chen Kun, as the grand general, together with the general of soldiers, Yiyang Wang, Sima Wang, Sikuo Kun, and so on, a total of eight generals, and at the same time, they were set up side by side.

古文：帝惩魏氏孤立之敝，故大封宗室，授以职任，又招诸王皆得自选国中长吏；卫将军齐王攸独不敢，皆令上请。
现代文：晋武帝以魏氏孤立无援的弊害作为警戒，因而大封宗室，赋与他们职权。晋武帝又诏告诸王可以自己选择封国中的官吏，只有卫将军齐王司马攸不敢自选，全部官吏都请求晋武帝指派。
English: Emperor Jinwu was wary of the disadvantages of the Wei clan's isolation and helplessness, so he appointed the daifeng family and gave them authority. Emperor Jinwu also decreed that the kings could choose their own officials in the fief. Only the Wei general Qi Wang Sima You did not dare to choose his own. All officials asked Emperor Jinwu to appoint them.

古文：诏除魏宗室禁锢，罢部曲将及长吏纳质任。
现代文：晋武帝下诏，免除魏宗室的禁锢令，废除部曲将领及州郡长吏纳人质于京师的制度。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict, exempting Wei's family from the ban, and abolishing the system of taking captives in Beijing.

古文：帝承魏氏刻薄奢侈之后，欲矫以仁俭，太常丞许奇，允之子也，帝将有事于太庙，朝议以奇父受诛，不宜接近左右，请出为外官；帝乃追述允之夙望，称奇之才，擢为祠部郎。
现代文：晋武帝是继魏氏苛酷奢侈的政治之后登极的，他以仁厚节俭的作风纠正魏氏的弊端。太常丞许奇是许允的儿子。晋武帝将要在太庙行事，朝廷中议事的时候，大臣们认为，许奇的父亲因过被诛，许奇不宜在武帝身边供职，应当委派他担任朝廷外的官职。晋武帝于是追述许允的名望，称赞许奇的才能，提拔他担任祠部郎。
English: Emperor Jinmu ascended to the throne after the harsh and extravagant politics of the Wei clan, and he corrected the shortcomings of the Wei clan with a benevolent and frugal style. Emperor Taizanjo Xuqi is the son of Xu Yun. Emperor Jinmu will act in the Great Temple, and when the court was in deliberation, the ministers believed that Xu Qi's father was not suitable to serve around Emperor Wu due to his past, and Xu Qi should be appointed to a position outside the court. Emperor Jinmu then mentioned Xu Yun's reputation, praised Xu Qi's talent, and promoted him to be the priest of the shrine.

古文：有司言御牛青丝纼断，诏以青麻代之。
现代文：有关部门称，宫中所用的青丝牵牛绳断了，晋武帝下诏，用青麻代替青丝。
English: The relevant departments said that the green silk cow rope used in the palace was broken, and Emperor Jinwu issued an edict to replace the green silk with green hemp.

古文：初置谏官，以散骑常侍傅玄、皇甫陶为之。
现代文：当初设置谏官的时候，任命散骑常侍傅玄、皇甫陶担任。
English: When eunuchs were first established, the equestrian attendants Fu Xuan and Wang Futao were appointed.

古文：玄，干之子也。
现代文：傅玄是傅斡的儿子。
English: Fu Xuan is Fu Yu's son.

古文：玄以魏末士风颓敝，上疏曰： 臣闻先王之御天下，教化隆于上，清议行于下。
现代文：傅玄看到魏末士风衰败，于是上疏说： 我听说先王治理天下，教化昌盛上，公正的评论通行于下。
English: Fu Xuan saw the decline of the Wei dynasty at the end of the 19th century, so Shang Zuo said: I heard that the former king governed the world, and that enlightenment flourished, and fair comments were passed down.

古文：近者魏武好法术而天下贵刑名，魏文慕通达而天下贱守节，其后纲维不摄，放诞盈朝，遂使天下无复清议。
现代文：近世以来，魏武帝喜好法术而天下重视刑名；魏文帝思慕通达而天下轻贱操守名分，从这以后纲纪不整，浮夸虚无的风气充满朝廷，于是使天下不再有公正的评论。
English: Since the modern era, Emperor Weiwu liked magic and the world paid attention to the name of the punishment; Emperor Weiwen thought of excellence and the world was light and kept the name. Since then, the discipline was not in order, and the pompous and vain atmosphere filled the imperial court, so that the world no longer had a fair comment.

古文：陛下龙兴受禅，弘尧、舜之化，惟未举清远有礼之臣以敦风节，未退虚鄙之士以惩不恪，臣是以犹敢有言。 
现代文：陛下接受禅让登极，弘扬尧、舜之风，唯独没有选拔清明广远有礼法之臣，以促进风化与操守；没有斥退虚浮鄙陋之人，以惩戒不恭敬不谨慎的人，因此我才冒昧地说这番话。 
English: I have ventured to say this because Your Majesty has accepted Zen Buddhism as the highest form of Buddhism, and has promoted the etiquette of etiquette and etiquette, but has not selected courtiers who are clear-sighted and have a wide range of etiquette and etiquette to promote etiquette and etiquette; has not rejected those who are vain and vulgar, and has not disciplined those who are disrespectful and imprudent.

古文：上嘉纳其言，使玄草诏进之，然亦不能革也。
现代文：晋武帝赞许并采纳了他的意见，让傅玄起草诏书以便实行，但是也未能改变当时的风气。
English: Emperor Jinwu approved and adopted his opinion, and asked Fu Xuan to draft an edict to implement it, but he was unable to change the culture of the time.

古文：初，汉征西将军司马钧生豫章太守量，量生颖川太守俊，俊生京兆尹防，防生宣帝。
现代文：当初，汉征西将军司马钧生下豫章太守司马量，司马量生下颍川太守司马，司马生下京兆尹司马防，司马防生下晋宣帝司马懿。
English: At the beginning, the Western Han general Sima Qian gave birth to Yu Zhang, the grand marshal of Sima Qian, Sima Qian gave birth to Xingchuan, the grand marshal of Sima Qian, Sima Qian gave birth to Jing Zhaoyin, the grand marshal of Sima Qian, and Sima Qian gave birth to Jin Xuan, the grand marshal of Sima Qian.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始二年
现代文：泰始二年
English: Taishi two years old

古文：春，正月，丁亥，即用魏庙祭征西府君以下并景帝凡七室。
现代文：春季，正月，丁亥，就便利用魏庙，祭祀征西府君司马钧以下，连同景帝司马师共七个堂屋。
English: In spring, the first month of the year, Dinghai, they used the Wei Temple to offer sacrifices to the Western Conquest Monk Sima Qian and his followers, together with the Emperor Sima Shi, a total of seven courtyards.

古文：辛丑，尊景帝夫人羊氏曰景皇后，居弘训宫。
现代文：辛丑，尊奉景帝夫人羊氏为景皇后，居住在弘训宫。
English: Sin Ug, who revered Emperor Jing's wife Yang as the Empress of Jing, lived in Hongxun Palace.

古文：丙午，立皇后弘农杨氏；后，魏通事郎文宗之女也。
现代文：丙午，立弘农人杨氏为皇后。皇后是魏通事郎杨文宗的女儿。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Yang, a farmer from Lihong, became the empress. The empress was the daughter of Yang Wenzong, the son of Wei Tongzhi.

古文：群臣奏： 五帝即天帝也，王气时异，故名号有五。
现代文：群臣上书说： 五帝就是天帝，王气时时不同，所以名号有五个。
English: The group of ministers submitted a letter saying, "The five emperors are heavenly emperors, and the king's temperament varies from time to time, so there are five names.

古文：自今明堂、南郊宜除五帝座。 
现代文：从现在起，明堂、南郊都应当除去五帝的位置。 
English: From now on, the position of the five emperors should be removed from Myeongdong and the southern suburbs.

古文：从之。
现代文：晋武帝听从了这一建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：帝，王肃外孙也，故郊祀之礼，有司多从肃议。
现代文：晋武帝是王肃的外孙，所以祭天地的礼仪，有关官吏大都遵从王肃的意见。
English: Emperor Jinwu was the grandson of Wang Su, so the etiquette of sacrificing heaven and earth, the relevant officials mostly follow Wang Su's advice.

古文：二月，除汉宗室禁锢。
现代文：二月，解除魏对汉宗室的禁锢。
English: In February, the ban on Han Zongshu was lifted.

古文：三月，戊戌，吴遣大鸿胪张俨、五官中郎将丁忠来吊祭。
现代文：三月，戊戌，吴国派遣大鸿胪张俨、五官中郎将丁忠到晋朝吊祭。
English: In March, the State of Wu dispatched Zhang Zhen, the Grand Dragon, and Ding Zhong, the middle-ranking official, to the Jin Dynasty Hanging Festival.

古文：吴散骑常侍庐江王蕃，体气高亮，不能承颜顺指，吴主不悦，散骑常侍万彧、中书丞陈声从而谮之。
现代文：吴国散骑常侍、庐江人王蕃，气质、风度高尚，不会看人脸色顺从其意行事，吴主对此不高兴。散骑常侍万、中书丞陈声便乘机诬陷他。
English: The Lord of Wu was displeased with the fact that Wang Qian, a knight-errant from the Minjiang River and a knight-errant from the State of Wu, had a noble temperament and demeanor, and would not look at people's faces and would act according to their wishes. The knight-errant and chancellor Chen Sheng took the opportunity to frame him.

古文：丁忠使还，吴主大会群臣，蕃沉醉顿伏。
现代文：丁忠出使回来。吴主大会群臣，王蕃喝醉了酒，趴伏在那里起不来。
English: When Ding Zhong returned from his mission, the ministers of the Great Assembly of the Lords of Wu, Wang Yao was drunk and lay on the floor unable to get up.

古文：吴主疑其诈，舆蕃出外。顷之，召还。
现代文：吴主疑心他是故意装出来的，就用车子把他送出去，过了一会儿，又召他回来。
English: Suspecting that he had faked it on purpose, Mr. Wu sent him out in his car and called him back a short while later.

古文：蕃好治威仪，行止自若。吴主大怒，呵左右于殿下斩之，出，登来山，使亲近掷蕃首，作虎跳狼争咋啮之，首皆碎坏。
现代文：王蕃容貌举止庄严，行止自如，吴主勃然大怒，喝令左右在殿堂之下把他杀了，然后出去登来山，让左右亲随抛掷王蕃的首级，像虎狼那样争抢啃咬，使其首级啐裂。
English: Wang Yao's appearance and demeanor were solemn, and he behaved freely. The Lord of Wu flew into a rage, and shouted to the left and right to kill him under the hall of fame, and then went out to climb the mountain, and let the right and left relatives throw Wang Yao's necklace, and fight like tigers and wolves to bite and split his necklace.

古文：丁忠说吴主曰： 北方无守战之备，弋阳可袭而取。 
现代文：丁忠对吴主说： 北方的晋国没有做好战备，我们可以袭击并夺取弋阳。 
English: Ding Zhong said to Lord Wu: Jin in the north is unprepared for battle, we can attack and take Fenyang.

古文：吴主以问群臣，镇西大将军陆凯曰： 北方新并巴、蜀，遣使求和，非求援于我也，欲蓄力以俟时耳。
现代文：吴主询问群臣，镇西大将军陆凯说； 北方新近吞并了巴、蜀，派使者来求和，这并不是向我们求援，只不过是想积蓄力量以等待时机。
English: The lord of Wu asked his ministers, and the general of Zhenxi, Lu Kai, said: The north has recently annexed Ba and Shu, and sent an envoy to sue for peace. This is not to ask for our help, but to accumulate strength to wait for the right time.

古文：敌势方强，而欲徼幸求胜，未见其利也。 
现代文：敌人的势力正当强大的时候，想要侥幸取胜，我看不出这样做有什么好处。 
English: I don't see the advantage of trying to win by chance when the enemy's forces are just as strong.

古文：吴主虽不出兵，然遂与晋绝。
现代文：吴主虽然不出兵了，但是却与晋国断绝了关系。
English: Although Lord Wu did not join the army, he severed ties with Jin.

古文：凯，逊之族子也。
现代文：陆凯是陆逊同族兄弟的儿子。
English: Lu Kai is the son of Lu Xun's brother.

古文：夏，五月，壬子，博陵元公王沈卒。
现代文：夏季，五月，壬子，博陵元公王沈去世。
English: Summer, May, Ren Zi, Boling Yuan Prince Shen passed away.

古文：六月，丙午晦，日有食之。
现代文：六月，丙午晦，出现日食。
English: In June, at the end of the afternoon, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：文帝之丧，臣民皆从权制，三日除服。
现代文：晋文帝的丧事，臣民都遵守临时制定的法令，服丧三日。
English: At the time of Emperor Jinwen's funeral, his subjects all complied with the temporary decree and observed a three-day mourning period.

古文：既葬，帝亦除之，然犹素冠疏食，哀毁如居丧者。
现代文：葬礼结束，晋武帝也除去丧服，但仍然戴白冠，吃素食，哀伤如同丧期。
English: After the funeral, Emperor Jinwu also removed his mourning clothes, but still wore a white crown, ate vegetarian food, and mourned as if it were the mourning period.

古文：秋，八月，帝将谒崇阳陵，群臣奏言，秋暑未平，恐帝悲感摧伤。
现代文：秋季，八月，晋武帝将要拜谒崇阳陵，群臣上奏称，秋暑还没有平息，恐怕皇帝悲哀伤感会损害健康。
English: In the autumn, in August, Emperor Jinwu was going to pay homage to the Zou Chongyang Mausoleum. A group of courtiers reported that the autumn heat had not yet subsided, and I was afraid that the emperor's sadness would damage his health.

古文：帝曰： 朕得奉瞻山陵，体气自佳耳。 
现代文：晋武帝说： 朕能够瞻仰先人陵墓，身体、精神自然就会好。 
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "If I can visit the mausoleums of my ancestors, my body and spirit will naturally improve.

古文：又诏曰： 汉文不使天下尽哀，亦帝王至谦之志。
现代文：又下诏说： 汉文帝不使天下的臣民都为他而悲哀，这也达到帝王谦逊的最高点了。
English: He also said, "It is also the Emperor's extremely humble intention that the Chinese language should not make the whole world mourn.

古文：当见山陵，何心无服！
现代文：要拜见先人陵墓，怎么忍心不穿丧服！
English: If you want to visit the mausoleum of your ancestors, how can you bear not to wear mourning clothes!

古文：其议以衰绖从行。群臣自依旧制。 
现代文：应当决定穿丧服，群臣自然可依照旧制行事。 
English: It should be decided to wear mourning clothes, and the courtiers can naturally act in accordance with the old system.

古文：尚书令裴秀奏曰： 陛下既除而复服，义无所依；若君服而臣不服，亦未之敢安也。 
现代文：尚书令裴秀上奏说： 陛下已经除去了丧服而现在又穿上，这样做于礼仪没有依据，如果君王穿丧服而臣下却不穿，做臣子的心里也不安。 
English: Shang Shu ordered Pei Xiu to report: Your Majesty has already removed the mourning clothes and now put them on again. There is no basis for this in etiquette. If the monarch wears mourning clothes but his subjects do not, the hearts of his subjects will not be at ease.

古文：诏曰： 患情不能跂及耳，衣服何在！
现代文：晋武帝下诏说： 朕担忧的是，哀慕之心不能充分地表达出来，不在乎丧服。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying, "I am worried that the heart of mourning cannot be fully expressed, no matter what the mourning clothes are.

古文：诸君勤勤之至，岂苟相违。 
现代文：诸位一片殷勤的好意，朕不忍再违背了。 
English: You are earnest and sincere, how can you casually renege?

古文：遂止。
现代文：于是同意不穿丧服。
English: So he stopped short of killing him.

古文：中军将军羊祜谓傅玄曰： 三年之丧，虽贵遂服，礼也，而汉文除之，毁礼伤义。
现代文：中军将军羊祜对傅玄说： 三年之丧，即使尊贵为天子也要身穿孝服，这是礼制。
English: The Chinese general Yang Xuan said to Fu Xuan: "In the three years of mourning, even if the noble is the son of heaven, he must wear filial piety. This is the etiquette.

古文：今主上至孝，虽夺其服，实行丧礼。
现代文：但是汉帝却把它废除了，毁坏、损伤礼义，我常常因此叹息。如今皇帝至孝，虽然除去了丧服，仍实行丧礼。
English: But the Han emperor abolished it, destroying and damaging the etiquette, and I often sigh because of it. Today, the emperor is very filial, and although he has removed the mourning clothes, he still performs the funeral.

古文：若因此复先王之法，不亦善乎！ 
现代文：如果能借此机会恢复先王的法规，难道不是很好吗？ 
English: Wouldn't it be nice if we could take this opportunity to restore the laws of the first king?

古文：玄曰： 以日易月，已数百年，一旦复古，难行也。 
现代文：傅玄说： 把穿丧服的时间从以月计改为以日计，已经有几百年了，一旦要恢复古制，是很难行得通的。 
English: Fu Xuan said: It has been hundreds of years since the time for wearing mourning clothes was changed from monthly to daily. It would be very difficult to restore the old system.

古文：祜曰： 不能使天下如礼，且使主上遂服，不犹愈乎！ 
现代文：羊祜说： 不能使天下人都遵从礼法，暂且使皇帝再穿孝服，不是还好些吗？ 
English: The shepherd said: If it is not possible to make everyone in the world follow the etiquette, would it not be better to make the emperor wear filial piety for the time being?

古文：玄曰： 主上不除而天下除之，此为但有父子，无复君臣也。 
现代文：傅玄说： 皇帝不除丧服而天下除丧服，这就是只有父子，不再有君臣的行为。 
English: Fu Xuan said: The emperor does not remove the mourning clothes, but the whole world removes the mourning clothes. This is only the father and son, and there is no longer the behavior of princes and ministers.

古文：乃止。戊辰，群臣奏请易服复膳，诏曰： 每感念幽冥，而不得终苴绖之礼，以为沉痛。况当食稻衣锦乎！
现代文：羊祜于是不再提让天下恢复古制的话。戊辰，群臣上奏请求晋武帝更换正常的服饰和膳食，晋武帝下诏说： 每当感念先灵，而朕不能完成穿丧服之礼，就为此沉痛，更不要说吃稻米、穿锦绣了。
English: At that time, a group of courtiers petitioned Emperor Jinwu to change the normal clothing and meals. Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying, "Whenever I think of my ancestors, and I can't complete the ritual of wearing mourning clothes, I feel sad, not to mention eating rice and wearing brocade."

古文：适足激切其心，非所以相解也。
现代文：这样做只会激起朕的痛切之心，不能够缓解朕的沉痛。
English: To do so would only stir my aching heart, not ease my pain.

古文：朕本诸生家，传礼来久，何至一旦便易此情于所天！
现代文：朕本生于儒者之家，礼法传习已久，何至于一时之间便对自己的父亲改了这种感情！
English: I was born in a Confucian family, and I have been studying etiquette for a long time. How could I suddenly change this feeling towards my father!

古文：相从已多，可试省孔子答宰我之言，无事纷纭也！ 
现代文：听从你们的已经够多了，你们可以对照孔子回答宰我的话反省自己，不要再多说了。 
English: I've listened to you enough, you can reflect on yourself in the light of Confucius' answer to my question, and say no more.

古文：遂以疏素终三年。
现代文：于是以素食素服度过三年。
English: As a result, I spent three years in vegetarian clothes.

古文：臣光曰：三年之丧，自天子达于庶人，此先王礼经，百世不易者也。
现代文：臣司马光曰：上自天子，下至平民百姓，都要服丧三年，这是先王礼经所规定，百世不可改变。
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said, "From the Son of Heaven down to the common people, everyone must serve a three-year mourning period. This is stipulated in the previous king's ritual, and it cannot be changed for a hundred generations."

古文：汉文师心不学，变古坏礼，绝父子之恩，亏君臣之义；后世帝王不能笃于哀戚之情，而群臣谄谀，莫肯厘正。
现代文：汉文帝以已意为师，不守成规，改变古制，败坏礼法，断绝父子之间的恩德，毁坏君臣之间的情义，使后世的帝王不能真诚专一于哀悼先人的感情，而群臣谄媚、阿谀，没有人肯加以改正。
English: Emperor Hanwen took the past as his teacher, did not stick to the rules, changed the ancient system, corrupted the etiquette, severed the benevolence between father and son, and destroyed the relationship between monarchs and ministers, so that the emperors of future generations could not sincerely concentrate on mourning the feelings of their ancestors, while the ministers were flattering and flattering, and no one was willing to correct them.

古文：至于晋武独以天性矫而行之，可谓不世之贤君；而裴、傅之徒，固陋庸臣，习常玩故，不能将顺其美，惜哉！
现代文：到了晋武帝，唯独以自己的天性加以纠正并实行，可称是非凡的贤君。而裴秀、傅玄之徒，是见识鄙陋的平庸之臣，习惯于常规，拘守行之已久的习俗，不能够承顺晋武帝的美意，可惜啊！
English: By the time of Emperor Jinwu, only those who use their own nature to correct and implement them can be called extraordinary sages. And the followers of Peixiu and Fu Xuan are mediocre courtiers who see the meanness, are accustomed to routine, adhere to long-established customs, and are unable to comply with Emperor Jinwu's goodwill. What a pity!

古文：吴改元宝鼎。
现代文：吴国改年号为宝鼎。
English: The new name of the State of Wu is Baoding.

古文：吴主以陆凯为左丞相，万彧为右丞相。
现代文：吴主任命陆凯为左丞相，万为右丞相。
English: Lord Wu appointed Lu Kai as the left minister and Wan as the right minister.

古文：吴主恶人视己，群臣侍见，莫敢举目。
现代文：吴主憎恶别人注视他，群臣朝见或在一旁侍候，没有人敢抬眼看他。
English: The Lord of Wu hated to be watched by others. His courtiers either attended court or waited on the sidelines. No one dared to look up at him.

古文：陆凯曰： 君臣无不相识之道，若猝有不虞，不知所赴。 
现代文：陆凯说： 君臣之间没有不相识的道理，如果突然发生了意料不到的事情，就不知道该怎么办了。 
English: Lu Kai said: There is no reason for not knowing each other between officials. If something unexpected suddenly happens, you won't know what to do.

古文：吴主乃听凯自视，而它人如故。
现代文：吴主于是听凭陆凯注视他，而对别人却依然如故。
English: The Lord of Wu then allowed Lu Kai to keep an eye on him, but he still treated others the same way.

古文：吴主居武昌，扬州之民溯流供给，甚苦之，又奢侈无度，公私穷匮。
现代文：吴主居住在武昌，扬州的百姓逆流而上提供物资，异常劳苦。再加上吴主奢侈无度，使得国家和人民都穷困匮乏。
English: Lord Wu lived in Wuchang, and the people of Yangzhou went upstream to provide materials and worked extremely hard. Coupled with the extravagance of Lord Wu, the country and the people were impoverished.

古文：凯上疏曰： 今四边无事，当务养民丰财，而更穷奢极欲，无灾而民命尽，无为而国财空，臣窃痛之。
现代文：陆凯上疏说： 如今四周边境都没有战事，应当致力于休养民力，积蓄财富，然而却愈发穷奢极欲；还没有发生灾难而百姓的精力已尽，还没有什么作为而国库的资财已经空虚，我私下为此感到忧虑。
English: Lu Kai Shang Zuo said: Nowadays, there are no wars around the border. It should be devoted to rest and recuperation of the people's strength and accumulation of wealth, but it has become increasingly extravagant; there has been no disaster and the people's energy has been exhausted, there has been nothing to do and the treasury's assets have been empty. I am privately worried about this.

古文：昔汉室既衰，三家鼎立；今曹、刘失道，皆为晋有，此目前之明验也。
现代文：从前汉室衰微，三家鼎立，如今曹、刘失道，都被晋所占有，这是近在眼前的、十分明显的证据。
English: Once upon a time, the Han dynasty was on the wane and the three dynasties were on the rise. Now that Cao and Liu have lost their way, they are all occupied by the Jin dynasty. This is a very obvious and recent evidence.

古文：臣愚，但为陛下惜国家耳。
现代文：我蠢笨无知，只是为陛下珍惜国家而已。
English: I am stupid and ignorant, but I cherish the country for His Majesty.

古文：武昌土地危险脊确，非王者之都。且童谣云： 宁饮建业水，不食武昌鱼；宁还建业死，不止武昌居。 
现代文：武昌地势高险，土质薄，多山石，并非帝王建都的地方，况且童谣说： 宁饮建业水，不食武昌鱼；宁还建业死，不在武昌居。 
English: Wuchang is located in a high-risk area, with thin soil and mountainous rocks. It is not the place where the emperor built the capital. Moreover, the nursery rhyme says: "I'd rather drink Jianye water than eat Wuchang fish; I'd rather die in Jianye than live in Wuchang."

古文：以此观之，足明民心与天意矣。
现代文：由此看来，是可以证明人心与天意了。
English: From this point of view, it is possible to prove the heart of man and the will of God.

古文：今国无一年之蓄，民有离散之怨，国有露根之渐，而官吏务为苛急，莫之或恤。
现代文：现在国家仅有不足一年的积蓄，百姓有离散的怨言，国家这棵大树已经渐渐露出了根本，而官吏却致力于苛刻催逼百姓，没有人体恤他们。
English: At present, the country only has less than a year's savings, the people have scattered complaints, and the big tree of the country has gradually revealed its root, but the officials are committed to harshly pushing the people, and no one feels sorry for them.

古文：大帝时，后宫列女及诸织络数不满百，景帝以来，乃有千数，此耗财之甚者也。
现代文：大帝的时候，后宫的女子以及各种织工，人数不足百人，景帝以来，人数已经上千，这就使资财的耗费非常严重了。
English: At the time of the Great Emperor, the number of women in the harem and all kinds of weavers was less than a hundred. Since Emperor Jing, the number has been over a thousand, which makes the cost of capital very serious.

古文：又左右之臣，率非其人，群党相扶，害忠隐贤，此皆蠹政病民者也。
现代文：另外，您身边的臣子，大多没有什么才能，他们结成帮派相互扶持，陷害忠良，埋没贤达，这都是些损政害民的人。
English: In addition, most of the courtiers around you have little talent. They form gangs to support each other, frame the loyal, and bury the wise. These are all people who damage politics and harm the people.

古文：臣愿陛下省息百役，罢去苛扰，料出宫女，清选百官，则天悦民附，国家永安矣。 
现代文：我希望陛下减省、停止多种劳役，免去苛刻的骚扰，清理、减少宫女，严格选拔官吏，那么就会使天喜悦而民归附，国家长久安定了。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will reduce and stop various labor services, avoid harsh harassment, clean up and reduce the number of concubines, and strictly select officials. Then it will please the heavens and the people will be attached, and the country will be stable for a long time.

古文：吴主虽不悦，以其宿望，特优容之。
现代文：吴主虽然不高兴，但由于陆凯的名望大，就对他特别宽容。
English: Although Lord Wu was not happy, he was particularly tolerant of Lu Kai because of his great reputation.

古文：九月，诏： 自今虽诏有所欲，及已奏得可，而于事不便者，皆不可隐情。 
现代文：九月，晋武帝下诏书： 从现在开始，即使诏令有要求，以及已上奏并获得批准，但是在实际执行中有不便之处的，都不得隐瞒实情。 
English: In September, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict: From now on, even if the edict has requirements, and has been promulgated and approved, but there are inconveniences in the actual implementation, the truth must not be concealed.

古文：戊戌，有司奏： 大晋受禅于魏，宜一用前代正朔、服色，如虞遵唐故事。 
现代文：戊戌，有关部门上奏称： 大晋受到魏的禅让，应当一概沿用前代历法与车马祭牲的颜色，如同虞舜遵循唐尧旧制一样。 
English: In Wuyi, the relevant departments reported that: the Great Jin Dynasty was influenced by the Wei Dynasty, and should follow the previous calendar and the colors of the chariot and horse sacrifices, just as the Yuyi Dynasty followed the old Tang Dynasty system.

古文：从之。
现代文：晋武帝听从了这一意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：冬，十月，丙午朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月丙午朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October at the crack of dawn, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：永安山贼施但，因民劳怨，聚众数千人，劫吴主庶弟永安侯谦作乱，北至建业，众万馀人，未至三十里住，择吉日入城。
现代文：永安山贼施但，乘百姓劳苦有怨言，聚集了民众数千人，动持了吴主庶弟、永安侯孙谦作乱。他们向北到建业，徒众有一万余人，离建业不到三十里时驻扎下来，选择吉日进城。
English: The Yongan mountain bandits took advantage of the people's hard work and complaints, gathered thousands of people, and instigated the Wu Lord's half-brother, Yongan Hou Sun Qian, to make a riot. They went north to Jianye, with more than 10,000 followers. When they were less than 30 miles away from Jianye, they settled down and chose a good day to enter the city.

古文：遣使以谦命召丁固、诸葛靓，固、靓斩其使，发兵逆战于牛屯。
现代文：施但派使者以孙谦的名义召丁固、诸葛靓，丁固、诸葛靓杀了使者，发兵在牛屯迎战施但。
English: Shidan sent an envoy in the name of Sun Qian to summon Ding Gu and Zhuge Liang. Ding Gu and Zhuge Liang killed the envoy and sent an army to fight Shidan in Niu Tun.

古文：但兵皆无甲胄，即时败散。
现代文：施但的兵士都没有盔甲，立时就被打败而逃散了。
English: Shidan's soldiers, all without armor, were immediately defeated and dispersed.

古文：谦独坐车中，生获之。
现代文：孙谦独自坐在车子里，被活捉了。
English: Sun Qian was sitting alone in the car when he was captured alive.

古文：固不敢杀，以状白吴主，吴主并其母及弟俊皆杀之。
现代文：丁固不敢杀他，把情况禀告吴主，吴主连同孙谦的母亲及弟弟孙俊都杀了。
English: Ding Gu did not dare to kill him and reported the situation to Wu Shuzhen. Wu Shuzhen killed Sun Qian together with Sun Qian's mother and brother Sun Junlong.

古文：初，望气者云： 荆州有王气，当破扬州。 
现代文：当初，望云气的人说：荆州有帝王之气，应当能攻破扬州。
English: At first, people who wanted to conquer Yangzhou said, "Jingzhou has the spirit of an emperor, it should be able to conquer Yangzhou."

古文：故吴主徙都武昌。
现代文：因此吴主迁都到武昌。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu moved the capital to Wuchang.

古文：及但反，自以为得计，遣数百人鼓噪入建业，杀但妻子，云 天子使荆州兵来破扬州贼。 
现代文：等到施但造反，吴主自以为预言应验了，就派遣数百人击鼓叫进入建业，杀了施但的妻子儿女，说： 天子派荆州兵来打败扬州贼。 
English: When Shidan rebelled, the Lord of Wu thought that the prophecy had come true, so he sent hundreds of people to beat drums and enter Jianye, killing Shidan's wives and children, saying, "God sent the Jing soldiers to defeat the Yang thieves."

古文：十一月，初并圜丘、方丘之祀于南北郊。
现代文：十一月，晋开始把冬至一圜丘祭天、夏至在方泽祭地的仪式合并于南郊和北郊。
English: In November, Jin began to combine the ceremonies of the winter solstice and the summer solstice at the Fangze festival site in the southern and northern suburbs.

古文：罢山阳公国督军，除其禁制。
现代文：晋罢免了汉朝后裔居住的山阳国的监督卫队，解除了对山阳国的禁制。
English: The governor's army of Sanyang Duchy was dismissed, and its prohibitions were removed.

古文：十二月，吴主还都建业，使后父卫将军、录尚书事滕牧收留镇武昌。
现代文：十二月，吴主又把国都迁回建业，派皇后的父亲、卫将军、录尚书事滕牧留下来镇守武昌。
English: In December, Emperor Wu moved the capital back to Jianye, and sent the queen's father, General Wei, to stay behind to guard Wuchang.

古文：朝士以牧尊戚，颇推令谏争，滕后之宠由是渐衰，更遣牧居苍梧，虽爵位不夺，其实迁也，在道以忧死。
现代文：朝廷中的官吏因滕牧是显贵的皇亲，都推举他，让他向上谏争，滕皇后因此逐渐地失去了恩宠。吴主又让滕牧去苍梧居住，虽然没有削夺他的爵位，实际上是把他放逐了，他在半路上由于忧郁而死去。
English: Because Teng Mu was a distinguished imperial relative, the officials in the imperial court all promoted him and let him fight his way to the top. As a result, the Queen of Teng Mu gradually lost favor. The Lord of Wu also let Teng Mu go to live in Gorgo. Although he did not take away his title, he actually banished him. He died of melancholy on the way.

古文：何太后常保佑滕后，太史又言中宫不可易。
现代文：何太后时常护佑着滕后，又加上太史说皇后不可更换，吴主信巫术，所以滕后没有被废，日常供养在升平宫，不再进见吴主。
English: Empress Dowager He often protected Empress Teng, and added that Emperor Taishi said that the empress could not be replaced, and Emperor Wu believed in witchcraft. Therefore, Empress Teng was not discarded, and she was provided for daily at the Shangping Palace, and she no longer saw Emperor Wu.

古文：吴主信巫觋，故得不废，常供养升平宫，不复进见，诸姬佩皇后玺绂者甚众，滕后受朝贺表疏而已。吴主使黄门遍行州郡，料取将吏家女，其二千石大臣子女，皆岁岁言名，年十五、六一简阅，简阅不中，乃得出嫁。
现代文：宫中的姬妾很多人都佩带着皇后印玺绶带，滕后却只是接受大臣们的朝贺和上奏的表疏而已。吴主派遣宦官走遍了州郡，挑先将吏家中的女子；只要是二千石大臣家里的女儿，每年都要申报姓名年龄，到了十五六岁就要进行考察、检选，没有被选中的才可以出嫁。
English: Many of the concubines in the palace wore the Queen's seal ribbon, but Teng Huan only received the morning greetings and the table notes of the ministers. Lord Wu sent eunuchs to travel throughout the prefectures and counties, selecting the women in the families of the generals first; as long as they were the daughters of the families of the 2,000-koku ministers, they had to declare their names and ages every year. At the age of fifteen or sixteen, they had to be examined and selected. If they were not selected, they could not marry.

古文：后宫以千数，而采择无已。
现代文：后宫女子已有上千人，吴主仍然不断地挑选新人入宫。
English: There are thousands of women in the harem, and the Lord of Wu is still constantly selecting new women to enter the palace.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始三年春，正月，丁卯，立子衷为皇太子。
现代文：泰始三年春季，正月丁卯，晋武帝立其子司马衷为皇太子。诏令中说： 近代每当立太子，必定大赦天下。
English: In the spring of the third year of Taizhi, in the first month of Dingwu, Emperor Jinwu appointed his son Sima Zhen as crown prince. The imperial edict said: In modern times, whenever a crown prince is appointed, there must be a general amnesty throughout the world.

古文：诏以 近世每立太子必有赦，今世运将平，当示之以好恶，使百姓绝多幸之望。
现代文：如今世事的盛衰变化将要走向清平，应当表示出喜好与憎恶，使百姓断绝绕幸的希望。
English: Now that the changes in the rise and fall of the world's affairs are going to be smooth, it is necessary to express likes and dislikes, so that the people can break the hope of misfortune.

古文：曲惠小人，朕无取焉！ 
现代文：曲意地赐以微小的仁爱，为朕所不取。 
English: I will not take any of the little kindnesses that are so sweetly given to me.

古文：遂不赦。
现代文：于是不赦天下。
English: So the world is unforgiving.

古文：司隶校尉上党李憙劾奏故立进令刘友、前尚书山涛、中山王睦、尚书仆射武陔各占官稻田，请免涛、睦等官，陔已亡，请贬其谥。
现代文：司隶校尉、上党人李，揭发从前的立进县令刘友、前尚书山涛、中山王司马睦、尚书仆射武陔等都有霸占官府稻田的行为，请求免去山涛、司马射睦等人的官职，武陔已经死亡，请求将他的谥号降级。
English: Li Sili, a lieutenant of the school and a member of the Shang Party, revealed that Liu You, the former county magistrate of Lijin County, the former Shang Shushan Tao, the Zhongshan King Sima Mutu, and the Shang Shubu Sho Wusong all occupied the rice paddies of the government office, and requested that Shantao, Sima Shumong, and others be removed from their official positions. Wusong had died, and requested that his nickname be downgraded.

古文：诏曰： 友侵剥百姓以谬惑朝士，其考竟以惩邪佞。
现代文：晋武帝下诏说： 刘友欺凌掠夺百姓，迷惑朝廷官吏，应对其拷问处死以惩罚邪佞之人。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying: Liu You bullied and plundered the people, confused the imperial officials, and should be tortured to death to punish the evil-doers.

古文：涛等不贰其过，皆勿有所问。
现代文：如果山涛等人不再重犯已往的过错，对他们就免于追究。
English: If Shantao and others do not repeat the mistakes of the past, they will be exempt from prosecution.

古文：憙亢志在公，当官而行，可谓邦之司直矣。
现代文：李一心为公，对官员行使职责，可称为邦国中之司直了。
English: Li devoted himself to public service and performed his duties to officials. He can be called the most upright person in the country.

古文：光武有云： 贵戚且敛手以避二鲍。 
现代文：汉光武帝有言： 贵戚尚且缩起手以躲避二鲍。 
English: Emperor Han Guangwu had a saying: A noble relative still shrinks his hands to avoid two bow.

古文：其申敕群寮，各慎所词，宽宥之恩，不可数遇也！ 
现代文：即指整肃百官群僚，使他们各自谨慎于自己的职责。而宽容的恩典是不应该经常使用的！ 
English: That is to say, purge the officers and men, and let each one be careful in his duty, for the gift of forbearance is not to be used too often!

古文：睦，宣帝之弟子也。
现代文：司马睦是晋宣帝弟弟的儿子。
English: Sima Mutsu was the son of Emperor Jinxuan's younger brother.

古文：臣光曰：政之大本，在于刑赏，刑赏不明，政何以成！
现代文：臣司马光曰：政治的根本在于刑与赏，刑赏不分明，政治如何能成就！
English: Sima Guang, a courtier, said, "The basis of politics lies in punishment and reward. Punishment and reward are indistinguishable. How can politics be accomplished?"

古文：晋武帝赦山涛而褒李憙，其于刑、赏两失之。
现代文：晋武帝赦免山涛而褒奖李，在刑与赏两方面都丧失了。
English: Emperor Jinwu pardoned Shantao and rewarded Li, losing the advantage in both punishment and reward.

古文：使憙所言为是，则涛不可赦；所言为非，则憙不足褒。
现代文：如果李所言是正确的，那么山涛就不可以赦免；所言为非，李就不值得褒奖。
English: If what Li said is true, then Shan Tao cannot be pardoned; if it is not true, then Li does not deserve the award.

古文：褒之使言，言而不用，怨结于下，威玩于上，将安用之！
现代文：褒奖李让他说话，他说了却又不采用，结果在下属中结下怨恨，在上则使权威被轻慢，这样又将如何使用李？
English: Reward Lee let him speak, he said it but did not adopt it, the result is to create resentment among subordinates, on the other hand, authority is despised, so how will Lee be used?

古文：且四臣同罪，刘友伏诛而涛等不问，避贵施贱，可谓政乎！
现代文：况且四位大臣罪行相同，但刘友被处死而对山涛等人却不问罪，避开权贵而施法于轻贱，这能说是治政之道吗？
English: Moreover, the four ministers committed the same crime, but Liu You was put to death, while Shantao and others were not charged with a crime. Can this be said to be a way of governing?

古文：创业之初，而政本不立，将以垂统后世，不亦难乎！
现代文：正处于创业之初却不能树立治理国家的根本，要想把基业传给后世，不是很难的事吗？
English: It is at the beginning of entrepreneurship, but it is not possible to establish the fundamentals of governing the country. Is it not difficult to pass on the foundation to future generations?

古文：帝以李憙为太子太傅，徽犍为李密为洗马。
现代文：晋武帝任命李为太子太傅，征召为人李密为太子洗马。
English: Emperor Jinwu appointed Li as the prince's daifu, and conscripted Li Mi to wash the prince's horse.

古文：密以祖母老，固辞，许之。
现代文：李密因为祖母上了年纪，坚决辞让不受，晋武帝允许了。
English: As Li Mi's grandmother was getting old, she was adamant that she would not accept any concessions, and Emperor Jinmu gave her permission.

古文：密与人交，每公议其得失而切责之，常言： 吾独立于世，顾影无俦；然而不惧者，以无彼此于人故也。 
现代文：李密与人交往，往往公然议论其得失优劣而严厉地责备其人，他常常说： 我独自立于人世，自顾其影而没有伴侣，但我却心无恐惧，就是因为我对别人没有厚此薄彼的缘故。 
English: When Li Mi interacts with people, he often openly discusses his merits and demerits and severely reproaches his people. He often says: I stand alone in the world, I care about my shadow and have no partner, but I have no fear in my heart, just because I do not care about others.

古文：吴大赦，以右丞相万彧镇巴丘。
现代文：吴国大赦天下，任命右丞相万镇守巴丘。
English: The General Assembly of the State of Wu granted amnesty to the whole country and appointed Minister of the Right, Wan Zhen Shou Baqiu.

古文：夏，六月，吴主作昭明宫，二千石以下，皆自入山督伐木。
现代文：夏季，六月，吴主兴建昭明宫，俸禄二千石以下的官吏，都亲自进山督促伐木。
English: In the summer, in June, when Emperor Wu was building the Zhaoming Palace, all officials with a salary of less than 2,000 koku personally went into the mountains to urge logging.

古文：大开苑囿，起土山、楼观，穷极伎巧，功役之费以亿万计。
现代文：大规模地开辟苑囿，兴建土山、楼台，极尽才艺工巧，工程、劳役的花费以亿万计算。
English: Large-scale development of garden plots, construction of earth mounds, and construction of towers, with the utmost skill and craftsmanship. The cost of engineering and labor is calculated in the hundreds of millions.

古文：陆凯谏，不听。
现代文：陆凯进谏劝阻，也没有用。
English: It was no use for Lu Kaijin to try to dissuade him.

古文：中书丞华覈上疏曰： 汉文之世，九州晏然，贾谊独以为如抱火厝于积薪之下而寝其上。
现代文：中书丞华核上疏说： 汉文帝时，九州安逸，唯独贾谊认为，当时的局势就如同在燃烧着的柴堆上睡觉。
English: Chuanshujo Hua Kucun Shangsuo said: When Emperor Hanwen came to power, Kyushu was at ease, but Jia Yi believed that the situation at that time was like sleeping on a burning pyre.

古文：今大敌据九州之地，有太半之众，欲与国家为相吞之计，非徒汉之淮南、济北而已也，比于贾谊之世，孰为缓急？
现代文：现在，强大的敌人占有九州之地，拥有一多半民众，计谋着想要吞并我国，不仅仅是汉代时的淮南王、济北王而已。和贾谊的时代相比，哪一个局势更加紧迫？
English: Now, a powerful enemy occupies the land of Kyushu, owns more than half of the people, and is scheming to annex our country, not just the kings of Huainan and Jibei in the Han Dynasty. Compared with the era of Jia You, which situation is more urgent?

古文：今仓库空匮，编户失业；而北方积谷养民，专心向东。
现代文：现在国库空虚匮乏，编入户籍的平民，失去谋生的常业，而北方的晋国，积蓄粮食，休养民力，一心一意地谋取东南。
English: At present, the state treasury is empty and deficient, and the civilians who have been registered for household registration have lost their regular occupation of earning a living. On the other hand, Jin Guo in the north is accumulating grain, resting and recuperating the people's strength, and single-mindedly seeking the southeast.

古文：又，交趾沦没，岭表动摇，胸背有嫌，首尾多难，乃国朝之厄会也。
现代文：另外，交趾陷落，岭外一带不稳固，我们前后都有仇敌，首尾布满威胁，这正是本朝危难的时刻。
English: In addition, the fall of Jiaozuo, the instability in the area outside the ridge, we have enemies in front and behind, and threats are everywhere. This is the time of this morning's crisis.

古文：若舍此急务，尽力功作，卒有风尘不虞之变，当委版筑而应烽燧，驱怨民而赴白刃，此乃大敌所因以为资者也。 
现代文：如果舍弃当前紧迫的事务，尽全力于营造，一旦有意料不到的战乱发生，就要丢下营造之事而响应烽火告急，驱使积怨之民奔赴利刃相接的战场，这便是强大的敌人所乘机加以利用的机会。 
English: If you abandon the current pressing matters and do your best to build, in the event of an unexpected war, you will have to abandon the construction and respond to the bonfire, driving the resentful people to rush to the adjacent battlefield. This is an opportunity for the powerful enemy to take advantage of.

古文：时吴俗奢侈，覈又上疏曰： 今事多而役繁，民贫而俗奢，百工作无用之器，妇人为绮靡之饰，转相仿效，耻独无有。
现代文：当时吴国民风奢侈，华核又上疏说： 现在事情很多而劳役繁杂，百姓贫苦而民俗奢侈，各种工匠制做无用的器物，妇女的打扮华丽浮艳，互相仿效，以唯独没有自己为耻。
English: At that time, the people of Wu were extravagant, and the core of the Chinese nation was impoverished, saying, "Nowadays, things are many and labor is complicated, the people are poor and folk customs are extravagant, all kinds of craftsmen make useless utensils, women's dress is gorgeous and flashy, they imitate each other, and they are ashamed of not being themselves.

古文：兵民之家，犹复逐俗，内无甔石之储而出有绫绮之服，上无尊卑等级之差，下有耗财费力之损，求其富给，庸可得乎？ 
现代文：兵士、平民之家，也在追逐流俗，家里没有一锅米、一石粮的储蓄，出门却穿着丝织的鲜丽服装；上没有尊卑等级的差别，下却有耗财费力的损耗，想得到富裕丰足，岂能够实现？ 
English: The families of soldiers and commoners are also chasing after customs. They do not have a pot of rice or a stone of grain to save at home, but they go out wearing beautiful silk clothes. There is no difference between the upper and lower levels, but there is a loss of money and effort at the bottom. If you want to get rich and full, can you achieve it?

古文：吴主皆不听。
现代文：这些话吴主一概听不进去。
English: Wu Shuzhen couldn't listen to any of these words.

古文：秋，七月，王祥以睢陵公罢。
现代文：秋季，七月，王祥以睢陵公的爵位被免职。
English: In the autumn, in July, Wang Xiang was dismissed from his post with the title of Prince of Fuling.

古文：九月，甲申，诏增吏俸。
现代文：九月，甲申，晋武帝下诏，增加官吏的薪俸。
English: In September, Emperor Jianwu of Jiaxing issued a decree to increase the salaries of officials.

古文：以何曾为太保，义阳王望为太尉，荀顗为司徒。
现代文：晋武帝任命何曾为太保，义阳王司马望为太尉，荀为司徒。
English: Emperor Jinwu appointed He Zeng as Taibo, Yiyang King Sima Wang as Taifu, and Zou as Sitoru.

古文：禁星气、谶纬之学。
现代文：禁止占星、望气以及谶纬之学。
English: The study of astrology, divination and divination is forbidden.

古文：吴主以孟仁守丞相，奉法驾东迎其父文帝神于明陵，中使相继，奉问起居。
现代文：吴主任命孟仁署理丞相事，侍奉吴主车驾向东迎其父文帝神灵到明陵。路上使者来往不绝，敬问神灵的日常起居。
English: Emperor Wu appointed Meng Ren to be the acting prime minister, and Wu's chauffeur drove east to welcome the spirit of his father Emperor Wen to the Ming Tombs. Envoys came and went on the road, respectfully inquiring about the daily life of the spirit.

古文：巫觋言见文帝被服颜色如平生。
现代文：巫者声称见到了文帝，其服装、面色和活着的时候一样。
English: The sorcerer claims to have seen Emperor Wen, whose clothes and face are the same as when he was alive.

古文：吴主悲喜，迎拜于东门之外。
现代文：吴主又悲又喜，在东门外迎拜。
English: The Lord of Wu was both sad and happy, and bowed down to him outside the east gate.

古文：既入庙，比七日三祭，设诸倡伎，昼夜娱乐。
现代文：等到把文帝的神灵迎进祖庙，接连在七日之内拜祭子三次，安排了各类歌舞艺人，白天黑夜地娱乐。
English: They waited until the spirit of Emperor Wen was welcomed into the ancestral temple, worshipped the deity three times within seven days, and arranged various kinds of song and dance artists to entertain day and night.

古文：是岁，遣鲜卑拓跋沙漠汗归其国。
现代文：这一年，晋朝遣返鲜卑的拓跋沙漠汗回国。
English: In this year, the Jin dynasty repatriated the humble Tuoba Desert Khan back to China.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始四年
现代文：泰始四年
English: Taishi four years old

古文：春，正月，丙戌，贾充等上所刊修律令。帝亲自临讲，使尚书郎裴楷执读。
现代文：春季，正月，丙戌，贾充待人奉上他们所修改的律令，晋武帝来到讲解之处，让尚书郎裴楷在一帝诵读。
English: In spring, in the first month of the year, the revised ritsuryo edicts were presented to the emperor, and Emperor Jinmu came to the place of explanation and asked Shang Shulang Pei Kai to recite them.

古文：楷，秀之从弟也。
现代文：裴楷是裴秀的堂弟。
English: Pei Kai is Pei Xiu's cousin.

古文：侍中卢珽、中书侍郎范阳张华请抄新律死罪条目，悬之亭传以示民，从之。
现代文：侍中卢、中书侍郎范阳人张华，请求抄写新律令有关死罪的条目，在驿站张贴，以告示民众，晋武帝听从了这一建议。
English: The Emperor Jinmu listened to the request of Zhang Hua, the attendant of the Middle Lu and the attendant of the Chinese book, Fan Yang, to copy the articles of the new law concerning the death penalty and post them at the station to inform the public.

古文：又诏河南尹杜预为黜陟之课，预奏： 古者黜陟，拟议于心，不泥于法；末世不能纪远而专求密微，疑心而信耳目，疑耳目而信简书。简书愈繁，官方愈伪。
现代文：晋武帝又命令河南尹杜预对官吏的进退升降进行考核，杜预上奏说： 古时候进退人才，筹划于心，不拘泥于不法规；到了衰亡之世，不能考虑长久的通行而专求细密、周到，心存疑忌就相信所见所闻，对所见所产生怀疑又相信文书、信札，文书、术札越来越繁琐，为官之道越来越虚伪。
English: Emperor Jinwu also ordered Henan Yin Duyuan to assess the promotion and demotion of officials. Duyuan said: In ancient times, the promotion and demotion of talents was planned in the heart, not adhering to laws and regulations; in the decline of the world, it was impossible to consider long-term circulation, but to be meticulous and thoughtful. If you have doubts, believe what you see and hear. If you have doubts about what you see, believe in documents, letters, documents, and cards. The official way is becoming more and more complicated, and the official way is becoming more and more hypocritical.

古文：魏氏考课，即京房之遗意，其文可谓至密，然失于苛细以违本体，故历代不能通也。
现代文：魏氏考核官吏的方法，正是汉代京房遗留的法则，其文辞条令可称为极欺细密，然而不足的是苛求细枝末节而违背了主体，所以历代都不能通行无阻。
English: Wei's method of assessing officials is exactly the law left over from the Han Dynasty's imperial palace. Its wording can be called extremely meticulous, but what is lacking is the pursuit of minutiae and violates the main body, so all generations can not pass unimpeded.

古文：岂若申唐尧之旧制，取大舍小，去密就简，俾之易从也！
现代文：还不如申明唐尧时期的旧制度，取其大而舍其小，去其细密而从其简明，使之易于遵循。
English: It would be better to affirm the old system during the Tang Dynasty, taking the large and leaving the small, removing the detailed and simplifying it, and making it easy to follow.

古文：夫曲尽物理，神而明之，存乎其人；去人而任法，则以文伤理。
现代文：要想说透事物的常理，彰明精神实质，全在于人本身；抛开人而依赖法令，就会以文辞、条令损害事理。
English: If you want to explain the common sense of things and clarify the spiritual essence, it all depends on the people themselves; if you abandon the people and rely on laws and regulations, you will damage the cause with words and regulations.

古文：莫若委任达官，各考所统，岁第其人，言其优劣。如此六载，主者总集，采案其言，六优者超擢，六劣者废免，优多劣少者平叙，劣多优少者左迁。
现代文：不如委任显贵的官员，各自考核其所统领范畴内的官吏，每年都进行考查，议论其优劣，这样连续六年，主管人综合六年的情况，审查对其六年的评议，六年成绩都是优良的人，可以超格选拔；六年成绩都是劣的，就要废黜免职。优多劣少的人平级调任，劣多优少的人就要降职。
English: It would be better to appoint high-ranking officials, each of whom would evaluate the officials within the scope of their leadership, conduct an annual examination, and discuss their merits and demerits. In this way, for six consecutive years, the person in charge would review the situation for six years and review their six-year evaluation. If the results for six years are excellent, the person can be selected; if the results for six years are poor, the person should be dismissed. If the results for six years are poor, the person should be demoted. If the results for six years are excellent, the person should be demoted. If the results for six years are poor, the person should be demoted. If the results

古文：其间所对不钧，品有难易，主者固当准量轻重，微加降杀，不足曲以法尽也。
现代文：在这当中如有对答不平衡，品评有难有易，主管人自然应当准确地衡量轻重，稍加损益，不必曲折以求尽合于法。
English: Among them, if there is an unbalanced response, and the quality evaluation is difficult and easy, the supervisor should naturally accurately measure the weight, slightly increase the profit and loss, and do not have to make twists and turns to fully comply with the law.

古文：其有优劣徇情，不叶公论者，当委监司随而弹之。
现代文：有对优劣的品评徇私情，不符合公正的议论的，应当交付监察部门进行劾察。
English: If there are comments on the merits and demerits, or personal feelings, which do not conform to fair discussion, they should be handed over to the supervision department for impeachment and investigation.

古文：若令上下公相容过，此为清议大颓，虽有考课之法，亦无益也。 
现代文：假如使上下公然地容忍过错，那么这就使公正的评论彻底地衰败，即使有对官吏考核的法令，也不会有益处。 
English: If faults are openly tolerated by superiors and subordinates, then fair criticism will be completely ruined, and even a decree on the evaluation of officials will be of no use.

古文：事竟不行。
现代文：这件事到底也没有实行。
English: In the end, this did not happen.

古文：丁亥，帝耕籍田于洛水之北。
现代文：丁亥，晋武帝在洛水之北耕种奉祀宗庙的籍田。
English: Dinghai, Emperor Jinwu cultivated the ancestral fields of the ancestral temple in the north of Luoshui.

古文：戊子，大赦。
现代文：戊子，晋武帝大赦天下。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：二月，吴主以左御史大夫丁固为司徒，右御史大夫孟仁为司空。
现代文：二月，吴主任命左御史大夫丁固为司徒，右御史大夫孟仁为司空。
English: In February, Emperor Wu appointed the Left Grand Historian Ding Gu as the tutor, and the Right Grand Historian Meng Ren as the secretary.

古文：三月，戊子，皇太后王氏殂。
现代文：三月，戊子，皇太后王氏去世。
English: In March, Empress Dowager Wang passed away.

古文：帝居丧之制，一遵古礼。
现代文：晋武帝居丧期的制度，一概遵循古时候的礼节。
English: The system of the residence and burial period of Emperor Jinwu follows the ancient etiquette.

古文：夏，四月，戊戌，睢陵元公王祥卒，门无杂吊之宾。
现代文：夏季，四月戊戌，睢陵元公王祥去世，家中去唁的宾客中没有缺乏德行之人。
English: In the summer, in April, when the former prince of Fuling, Wang Xiang, passed away, none of the guests who went to his home lacked virtue.

古文：其族孙戎叹曰： 太保当正始之世，不在能言之流；及间与之言，理致清远，岂非以德掩其言乎！ 
现代文：他的同族兄弟的孙子王戎叹道： 太保王祥在正始时期，没有被列于能言善谈的那一流里，有时候与他交谈，思想情趣清明广远，莫不是他的德掩盖了他言谈方面才能？ 
English: Wang Rong, the grandson of his compatriot, lamented: In the early days, Wang Xiang was not listed in the first class of those who could speak well. I sometimes talked with him, and his thoughts were clear and far-reaching. Wasn't it his virtue that covered up his talent in speaking?

古文：已亥，葬文明皇后。
现代文：已亥，安葬文明皇后。
English: The queen of civilization has been laid to rest.

古文：有司又奏： 既虞，除衰服。 诏曰： 受终身之爱而无数年之报，情所不忍也。 
现代文：主管部门上奏说： 安魂的祭礼已经完毕，可以除去丧服， 晋武帝下诏说： 受到母亲一生的爱抚，却没有用几年的时间回报，从感情上不忍心。 
English: The competent department reported: The ritual of the soul's repose has been completed, and the mourning clothes can be removed. Emperor Jinwu issued the following edict: I have been caressed by my mother for my entire life, but it has not been reciprocated for several years. Emotionally, I cannot bear it.

古文：有司固请，诏曰： 患在不能笃孝，勿以毁伤为忧。
现代文：主管部门坚持请晋武帝除去丧服，晋武帝下诏说： 我所担忧的是不能够一心一意地尽孝，你们不要为我过度悲伤而忧虑。
English: The competent department insisted that Emperor Jinwu remove his mourning clothes. Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying, "What I am worried about is not being able to devote myself wholeheartedly to filial piety. Don't worry about my excessive grief.

古文：前代礼典，质文不同，何必限以近制，使达丧阙然乎！ 
现代文：前代的礼仪典制形式内容也有所不同，何必要用近代的制度加以限制，使通用的丧礼废缺呢？ 
English: The form and content of the ceremonial system of the previous generation were also different. Why is it necessary to use the modern system to restrict it and make the universal funeral ceremony obsolete?

古文：群臣请不已，乃许之。然犹素冠疏食以终三年，如文帝之丧。
现代文：群臣仍然请求不已，晋武帝便听从了，但是仍然戴白冠，吃素食，坚持了三年，如同为晋文帝守丧一样。
English: The courtiers continued to plead, and Emperor Jinwu complied, but he still wore a white crown, ate vegetarian food, and persisted for three years, just as he did for Emperor Jinwen.

古文：秋，七月，众星西流如雨而陨。
现代文：秋季，七月，众多流星落向西方如雨水倾泻而下。
English: In autumn, in July, many meteors fall and rain down on the west.

古文：己卯，帝谒崇阳陵。
现代文：已卯，晋武帝拜谒崇阳陵。
English: Emperor Jinwu has already paid his respects at the Chongyang Mausoleum.

古文：九月，青、徐、兗、豫四州大水。
现代文：九月，青、徐、兖、豫四州洪水泛滥。
English: In September, the four prefectures of Qing, Xu, Handan and Henan were flooded.

古文：大司马石苞久在淮南，威惠甚著。
现代文：大司马厂长包长期住在淮南，威望与恩惠在当地很有名。
English: Da Sima Bao, the director of the factory, has lived in Huainan for a long time. He is famous for his prestige and favors in the local area.

古文：淮北监军王琛恶之，密表苞与吴人交通。
现代文：淮北监军王琛憎恨他，秘密地上报，说石苞与吴国相勾结。
English: Wang Qi, the military inspector of Huaibei, hated him and secretly reported that Shi Qi had colluded with Wu Guoxiang.

古文：会吴人将入寇，苞筑垒遏水以自固，帝疑之。
现代文：正巧吴国将要入侵晋，石苞构筑工事，阻断水流以使防卫更加坚固，晋武帝便对石苞产生了怀疑。
English: It just so happened that the State of Wu was about to invade Jin, and the stone rafts were being constructed to block the water flow and make the defense more solid. Emperor Jinwu became suspicious of the stone rafts.

古文：羊祜深为帝言苞必不然，帝不信，乃下诏以苞不料贼势，筑垒遏水，劳扰百姓，策免其官。遣义阳王望帅大军以征之。
现代文：羊祜深切地对晋武帝说： 石苞肯定不会如此。 晋武帝不相信，下命令以石苞没有料到敌方形势，构筑工事，阻断水流，使百姓劳累被惊扰为由，免去他的官职，派遣义阳王司马望率领大军征召石苞。
English: Emperor Jinwu did not believe it, and issued an order to dismiss Shi Yan from his official position on the grounds that he did not anticipate the enemy's situation, built construction, blocked the water flow, and made the people tired and disturbed, and sent Yiyang King Sima Wang to lead a large army to conscript Shi Yan.

古文：苞辟河内孙铄为掾，铄先与汝阴王骏善，骏时镇许昌，铄过见之。骏知台已遣军袭苞，私告之曰： 无与于祸！ 
现代文：当时，石苞征召河内孙铄为副官，孙铄从前就与汝阴王司马骏相友善。司马骏当时镇守许昌，孙铄路过那里去他，司马骏知道朝廷已经派出军队袭击石苞，就私下对孙铄说： 你不要卷入祸事里去。 
English: At that time, Shikotsu summoned Hanoi's Sun Yat-sen as his aide-de-camp. Sun Yat-sen had previously been friendly with the king of Ruyin, Sima Yi. Sima Yi was the governor of Xuchang at the time, and Sun Yat-sen passed by on his way there. Knowing that the imperial court had sent troops to attack Shikotsu, Sima Yi privately said to Sun Yat-sen, "Don't get involved in the disaster."

古文：铄既出，驰诣寿春，劝苞放兵，步出都亭待罪，苞从之。
现代文：孙铄从司马骏那里来，急驰到寿春，劝说石苞放下兵器、军队，步行走出驿站待罪，石苞听从了他的话。
English: Sun Yat-sen came from Sima Yi and hurried to Shuchun, persuading Shi Yat-sen to put down his weapons and troops, and walk out of the station to await punishment. Shi Yat-sen obeyed his words.

古文：帝闻之，意解。苞诣阙，以乐陵公还第。
现代文：晋武帝听到这个消息，放下了心，石苞来到皇帝殿庭，以乐陵公的身份被遣回了他的住所。
English: When Emperor Jinwu heard the news, his heart sank. Shi Hao came to the emperor's palace and was sent back to his residence as the Prince of Le Ling.

古文：吴主出东关，冬，十月，使其将施绩入江夏，万彧寇襄阳。
现代文：吴主出东关；冬季，十月，派他的将领施绩进入江夏，派万入侵襄阳。
English: The Lord of Wu went out to Dongguan; in winter, in October, he sent his generals to enter the Jiangxia and invade Xiangyang.

古文：诏义阳王望统中军步骑二万屯龙陂，为二方声援。
现代文：晋武帝命义阳王司马望统领中军步兵、骑兵二万人驻扎在龙陂，声援江夏与襄阳两方面。
English: At the behest of Emperor Jinmu, Yiyang King Sima Wang led 20,000 Chinese infantry and cavalry stationed in Longjing to support Jiangxia and Xiangyang.

古文：会荆州刺史胡烈拒绩，破之，望引兵还。
现代文：这时，荆州刺史胡烈抵御施绩的入侵并打败了施绩，司马望便领兵返回。
English: At this time, Jing Zhou stabbed Shi Hulei to resist the invasion of the performance and defeated the performance, Sima Wang then led the troops back.

古文：吴交州刺史刘俊、大都督脩则、将军顾容前后三攻交趾，交趾太守杨稷皆拒破之，郁林、九真皆附于稷。
现代文：吴国交州刺史刘俊、大都督则、将军顾容前后三次攻打趾，都因交趾太守杨稷的抵抗而失败了。郁林、九真两地都归附于杨稷。
English: Liu Jun, the governor of Jiaozhou in the State of Wu, Dadu Zu, and General Gu Rong attacked Jiaozuo three times before and after, but all of them failed due to the resistance of Yang Hui, the governor of Jiaozuo. Both Yulin and JiuZhen were annexed to Yang Hui.

古文：稷遣将军毛炅、董元攻合浦，战于古城，大破吴兵，杀刘俊、脩则，馀兵散还合浦。
现代文：杨稷派将军毛炅、董元攻打合浦，在古城交战，大破吴兵，杀死刘俊、则，剩下的散兵逃回了合浦。
English: Yang Pi sent generals Mao Kun and Dong Yuan to attack Hapu. They fought in the ancient city, defeated the Wu soldiers, killed Liu Jun, and the remaining scattered soldiers fled back to Hapu.

古文：稷表炅为郁林太守，元为九真太守。
现代文：杨稷表奏毛炅为郁林太守，董元为九真太守。
English: Yang Hao played Mao Yao as the governor of Yulin, and Dong Yuan as the governor of Jiu Zhen.

古文：十一月，吴丁奉、诸葛靓出芍陂，攻合肥，安东将军汝阴王骏拒却之。
现代文：十一月，吴国丁奉、诸葛靓从芍陂出兵，攻打合肥，遭到安东将军、汝阴王司马骏的抵抗，吴兵退却。
English: In November, Wu Guoding Bong and Zhuge Liang sent troops from Handan to attack Hefei. They were resisted by General Anton and Ruyin King Sima Yi, and the Wu soldiers retreated.

古文：以义阳王望为大司马，荀顗为太尉，石苞为司徒。
现代文：晋武帝任命义阳王司马望为大司马，荀为太尉，石苞为司徒。
English: Emperor Jinwu appointed King Sima Wang of Yiyang as the grand steward, Yao as the second lieutenant, and Shijie as the steward.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始五年春，正月，吴主立子瑾为皇太子。
现代文：泰始五年春季，正月，吴主立其子孙谨为皇太子。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Taizhi, in the first month of the year, Emperor Wu appointed his grandson as the crown prince.

古文：二月，分雍、凉、梁州置秦州，以胡烈为刺史。
现代文：二月，晋分出雍州、凉州、梁州的一部分设置秦州，任命胡烈为秦州刺史。
English: In February, the Jin separated Yongzhou, Liangzhou and a part of Liangzhou to set up Qinzhou, and appointed Hu Lie as the head of Qinzhou.

古文：先是，邓艾纳鲜卑降者数万，置于雍、凉之间，与民杂居，朝廷恐其久而为患，以烈素著名于西方，故使镇抚之。
现代文：从前，邓艾曾经招纳投降的鲜卑人数成万，安置在雍州、凉州之间，与汉民族杂居，朝廷担心日久会生出祸患，因为胡烈西部素有声望，所以派他去镇守安抚。
English: In the past, Deng Ai used to recruit tens of thousands of people who had surrendered, and placed them between Yongzhou and Liangzhou, and mixed with the Han people. The imperial court was worried that a disaster would occur in the long run, because Hule West had a reputation, so he was sent to the town guard to pacify.

古文：青、徐、兗三州大水。
现代文：青、徐、兖三州洪水泛滥。
English: Flooding in the three states of Qing, Xu and Handan.

古文：帝有灭吴之志，壬寅，以尚书左仆射羊祜都督荆州诸军事，镇襄阳；征东大将军卫瑾都督青州诸军事，镇临菑；镇东大将军东莞王亻由都督徐州诸军事，镇下邳。
现代文：晋武帝有灭吴的志向。壬寅，任命尚书左仆射羊祜统领荆州诸项军事，镇守襄阳；任命征东大将军卫统领青州诸项军事，镇守襄阳；任命镇东大将军、东莞王司马统领徐各项军事，镇守下邳。
English: Emperor Jinwu had the ambition to exterminate the Wu. Ren Yin appointed Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Zhaoyang, to lead the military affairs of Jingzhou and garrison Xiangyang; appointed the general of the Eastern Expedition, Wei, to lead the military affairs of Qingzhou and garrison Xiangyang; appointed the general of the Eastern Expedition, Dongguan, Wang Sima to lead the military affairs of Xu and garrison Xiangyang.

古文：祜绥怀远近，甚得江、汉之心。
现代文：羊祜对远近百姓都安抚关切，在江、汉地区深得人心。
English: With the concern of appeasing the people near and far, Yang Kuo has won the hearts of the people in Jiangsu and Han regions.

古文：与吴人开布大信，降者欲去，皆听之。
现代文：他与吴人开诚布公讲信用，投降的吴人想离开，都听从他们的心愿。
English: He spoke openly and honestly with the Wu people about trust. The surrendered Wu people wanted to leave, and they all obeyed their wishes.

古文：减戍逻之卒，以垦田八百馀顷。
现代文：羊祜裁减守边、巡逻的士兵，让他们开垦了八百多顷农田。
English: He reduced the number of soldiers guarding and patrolling the border, allowing them to reclaim more than 800 hectares of farmland.

古文：其始至也，军无百日之粮，及其季年，乃有十年之积。
现代文：他刚到那里的时候，军队的粮食不足以维持百日，等到了后期，已经有了够吃的十年的积粮。
English: When he first arrived there, the army did not have enough food to last a hundred days. By the end of the war, there was enough food to last ten years.

古文：祜在军，常轻裘缓带，身不被甲，铃阁之下，侍卫不过十数人。
现代文：羊祜在军中，时常穿着轻暖的裘皮衣服，衣带宽松，不披挂铠甲。他居住的地方，侍卫也不过十几人。
English: When he was in the army, he often wore light and warm fur clothes, with a loose belt and no armor. Where he lived, there were only a dozen or so guards.

古文：济阴太守巴西文立上言： 故蜀之名臣子孙流徙中国者，宜量才叙用，以慰巴、蜀之心，倾吴人之望。 
现代文：济阴太守、巴西人文立上书说： 过去流离转徙到中原地区的蜀地名臣的子孙，应当依据他们的才能分级进用，以慰籍巴、蜀之地的民心，以使吴人对我倾心。 
English: The grand marshal of Jilin Province and the Brazilian humanities scholar wrote: The descendants of the famous Shu dignitaries who were displaced and migrated to the Central Plains in the past should be graded according to their talents, so as to comfort the hearts of the people of Ba and Shu, and make the people of Wu fall in love with me.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：晋武帝听从了他的话。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：己未，诏曰： 诸葛亮在蜀，尽其心力，其子瞻临难而死义，其孙京宜随才署吏。 
现代文：已未，晋武帝下诏说： 诸葛亮在蜀地竭尽心力，他的儿子诸葛瞻，面临危难守节而死，他的孙子诸葛京，应根据其才能安排官职。 
English: Not long after, Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying: Zhuge Liang did his best in Shu, his son Zhuge Zhan died defending the festival in the face of danger, and his grandson Zhuge Jing should be assigned an official post according to his ability.

古文：又诏曰： 蜀将傅佥父子死于其主。
现代文：又下诏说： 蜀将傅佥父子，为他们主人而死。
English: He also issued the following edict: Shu will kill Fu Xi and his son for the sake of their master.

古文：天下之善一也，岂由彼此以为异哉！
现代文：天下美好的道德是统一的，怎么能够因为彼此对立就不同样看待呢？
English: The world's beautiful morals are unified, how can they be treated differently because they are opposed to each other?

古文：佥息著、募没入奚官，宜免为庶人。 
现代文：傅佥的儿子傅著、傅募，因为是罪犯家属被没入官署做杂役，应赦免他们，成为平民。 
English: Fu Yao's sons, Fu Zhu and Fu Bai, should be pardoned and become civilians, because they are the family members of criminals who were absorbed into the government to work as unskilled laborers.

古文：帝以文立为散骑常侍。
现代文：晋武帝任命文立为散骑常侍。
English: Emperor Jinwu appointed Wenli as a knight errant.

古文：汉故尚书犍为程琼，雅有德业，与立深交。
现代文：蜀汉从前的尚书、犍为人程琼、德行政业绩都很有名，与文立有很深的交情。
English: Shu Han's former Shang Shu, Zou Renmin, Cheng Qiong, and German administrative achievements are all famous, and they have a deep friendship with Wenli.

古文：帝闻其名，以问立，对曰： 臣至知其人，但年垂八十，禀性谦退，无复当时之望，故不以上闻耳。 
现代文：恶武帝听到他的名望，就问文立，文立回答说： 我极其了解这个人，只是他年龄将近八十，禀性谦恭退让，再没有他当年的心愿，所以我没把他的情况告诉您。 
English: Upon hearing of his reputation, Emperor Qianwu inquired of Wenli, who replied, "I know this man very well. However, he is nearly eighty years old, has a stubborn, humble and yielding nature, and no longer has the aspirations he had back then. Therefore, I did not tell you about him."

古文：琼闻之，曰： 广休可谓不党矣，此吾所以善夫人也。 
现代文：程琼听说了文立的话以后，说： 文立可以称之为不结党了，这正是我之所以称赞他的原因。
English: After Cheng Qiong heard what Wenli said, she said: Wenli can be called a non-party member, which is exactly why I praised him.

古文：秋，九月，有星孛于紫宫。
现代文：秋季，九月，有异星出现于紫宫星座。
English: In autumn, in September, a strange star appears in the constellation of the Purple Palace.

古文：冬，十月，吴大赦，改元建衡。
现代文：冬季，十月，吴国实行大赦，改年号为建衡。
English: In the winter, in October, the State of Wu implemented an amnesty and changed the year name to Jianheng.

古文：封皇子景度为城阳王。
现代文：晋封皇子司马景度为城阳王。
English: Sima Jiedu, the prince of Jinfu, became the king of Chengyang.

古文：初，汝南何定尝为吴大帝给使，及吴主即位，自表先帝旧人，求还内侍。
现代文：当初，汝南何定国经担任吴大帝的内侍，等到吴主孙皓即位，何定就自己表白是先帝的旧人，请求还去做内侍。
English: At the beginning, Ru Nan He Ding Guo Jing served as the Emperor Wu's personal attendant. When the Emperor Sun Yat-sen ascended the throne, He Ding confessed that he was the former emperor's old man and asked to be the personal attendant.

古文：吴主以为楼下都尉，典知酤籴事，遂专为威福；吴主信任之，委以众事。
现代文：吴主让他当了楼下都尉，掌管买酒买粮等事，他便独断专行，做威做福，吴主信任他，很多事情都交给他去办。
English: The Lord of Wu made him the captain downstairs, in charge of buying wine, buying grain, and other things, and he acted arbitrarily, doing what he wanted to do. The Lord of Wu trusted him, and many things were left to him to do.

古文：左丞相陆凯面责定曰： 卿见前后事主不忠，倾乱国政，宁有得以寿终者邪！
现代文：左丞相陆凯当面指责何定说： 你看看前后侍奉主人不忠诚、祸害扰乱国家政权的人，难道有得以寿终正寝的吗？
English: Lu Kai, Minister of the Left, accused He Ding in person, saying: "Look at those who have served their masters faithlessly and disrupted the state power, have they been able to sleep peacefully at the end of their lives?

古文：何以专为奸邪，尘秽天听！宜自改厉，不然，方见卿有不测之祸。 
现代文：你为什么专做邪恶事，污染圣上的视听，你应当改掉恶习，不然的话，正要看看你料想不到的祸事。 
English: Why do you insist on doing evil things, polluting the sacred audio-visual, you should get rid of bad habits, otherwise, you are about to see the unexpected disaster.

古文：定大恨之。
现代文：何定对陆凯恨之入骨。
English: You must have a lot of hatred for Lu Kai.

古文：凯竭心公家，忠恳内发，表疏皆指事不饰。
现代文：陆凯一心一意为国家，忠诚恳切发自内心，所上表疏全都摆出事实，不为文饰。
English: Lu Kai is devoted to the country, and his loyalty is sincere from the bottom of his heart. All of the above statements are facts, not embellishments.

古文：及疾病，吴主遣中书令董朝问所欲言，凯陈 何定不可信用，宜授以外任。
现代文：等陆凯病倒了，吴主派中书令董朝去问陆凯有什么话要说，陆凯陈述道： 何定不可信用，应当授予他朝廷以外的官职。
English: When Lu Kai fell ill, Lord Wu sent a medium to ask Dong Chao what Lu Kai had to say. Lu Kai stated: He is not trustworthy and should be given an official position outside the imperial court.

古文：奚熙小吏，建起浦里田，亦不可听。
现代文：奚熙这个小官，建起浦里田，也不要听他的话。
English: Don't listen to this petty official, Gongxi, who built up Uratian.

古文：姚信、楼玄、贺邵、张悌、郭逴、薛莹、滕修及族弟喜、抗，或清白忠勤，或资才卓茂，皆社稷之良辅，愿陛下重留神思，访以时务，使各尽其忠，拾遗万一。 
现代文：姚信、楼玄、贺邵、张悌、郭、薛莹、滕以及我的同族弟弟陆喜、陆抗，这些人有的清白、忠诚、勤恳；有的资质才能卓越、优秀，他们都是国家贤能的辅佐，希望陛下多留神费心，国家的事与他们商议，使他们各尽忠诚，能够纠正、补漏于万一。 
English: Yao Xin, Lou Xuan, He Shao, Zhang Xuan, Guo, Xue Ying, Teng, and my fellow brothers Lu Xi and Lu Anti, some of these people are innocent, loyal, and diligent; some have outstanding and excellent qualifications. They are all capable assistants of the state. I hope that His Majesty will pay more attention and take more time to discuss state affairs with them, so that they are loyal to each other, and can correct and make up for any mistakes.

古文：邵，齐之孙；莹，综之子；玄，沛人；修，南阳人也。
现代文：贺邵是贺齐的孙子；薛莹是薛综的儿子；楼玄是沛人；滕是南阳人。
English: He Shao is the grandson of He Qi; Xue Ying is the son of Xue Simi; Lou Xuan is Pei Ren; Teng is Nanyang Ren.

古文：凯寻卒。吴主素衔其切直，且日闻何定之谮，久之，竟徙凯家于建安。
现代文：陆凯不久就去世了，吴主平时就对陆凯的严厉耿直怀恨于心，况且耳朵里天天听到何定的谗言，日久天长，终于把陆凯的家属放逐到建安去了。
English: Lu Kai died soon after, and in ordinary times, Lord Wu held a grudge against Lu Kai's strictness. Moreover, he heard certain insults in his ears every day. After a long time, he finally banished Lu Kai's family members to Jian'an.

古文：吴主遣监军虞汜、威南将军薛珝、苍梧太守丹杨陶璜从荆州道，监军李勖、督军徐存从建安海道，皆会于合浦，以击交趾。
现代文：吴主派遣监军虞汜，威南将军薛，苍梧太守、丹阳人陶璜，沿着荆州道；命令监军李勖、督军徐存从建安海路，在合浦会合，然后去攻打交趾。
English: The Lord of the State of Wu dispatched the supervising army, Yu Kun, the general of Winan, Xue, the Cangwu governor, and the Danyang man, Tao Kun, along the Jingzhou Road; ordered the supervising army, Li Kun, and the commanding army, Xu Cun, to meet at Hapu from the Jian'an Sea Road, and then to attack and fight against each other.

古文：十二月，有司奏东宫施敬二傅，其仪不同。
现代文：十二月，主管部门上奏晋武帝，太子向两位者师施行恭敬之礼，礼仪应与凡人有所不同。
English: In December, the competent department reported to Emperor Jinwu, and the prince paid respect to the two teachers. The etiquette should be different from that of ordinary people.

古文：帝曰： 夫崇敬师傅，所以尊道重教也。何言臣不臣乎！
现代文：晋武帝说： 崇敬师傅的目的，是为了尊道重教，怎么能说臣下不像臣下呢！
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "The purpose of revering the master is to respect the way and the teachings. How can you say that a subject is not like a subject?

古文：其令太子申拜礼。 
现代文：应当让太子再行拜礼。 
English: The crown prince should be allowed to perform the ritual again.

古文：春，正月，吴丁奉入涡口，扬州刺史牵弘击走之。
现代文：泰始六年春季，正月，吴国丁奉进入涡口，扬州刺史牵弘将他击退。
English: In the spring of the sixth year of Tai Shi, the first month of the year, Wu Guoding entered the vortex, and Yangzhou Jishi Yu Hong repelled him.

古文：吴万彧自巴丘还建业。
现代文：吴国万从巴丘返回建业。
English: Wu Guowan returned to Jianye from Bachiu.

古文：夏，四月，吴左大司马施绩卒。
现代文：夏季，四月，吴国左大司马施绩去世。
English: In the summer, in April, Ma Shiji, the senior secretary of Wu Guoza University, passed away.

古文：以镇军大将军陆抗都督信陵、西陵、夷道、乐乡、公安诸军事，治乐乡。
现代文：任命镇军大将军陆抗统领信陵、西陵、夷道、乐乡、公安各地的军事，治所设在乐乡。
English: Appointed the general of the town army, Lu Antian, to lead the military of Xinling, Xiling, Yiduo, Lexiang and public security in various regions, and the government office was set up in Lexiang.

古文：抗以吴主政事多阙，上疏曰： 臣闻德均则众者胜寡，力侔则安者制危，此六国所以并于秦、西楚所以屈于汉也。
现代文：陆抗因吴主处理政事多有过失，上疏说： 我听说在恩德均等的情况下，人多的一方可以战胜人少的一方；在力量相同的情况下，安定的的一方可以制服危难的一方，这正是六国之所以被秦吞并、西楚之所以屈服于汉的原因。
English: Lu Qi said, "I have heard that under the condition of equal benevolence and equality, the side with more people can defeat the side with fewer people; under the condition of equal strength, the stable side can subdue the side in danger. This is precisely the reason why the six countries were annexed by Qin and the western Chu succumbed to Han."

古文：今敌之所据，非特关右之地、鸿沟以西，而国家外无连衡之授，内非西楚之强，庶政陵迟，黎民未乂。
现代文：现在敌人所凭据的，不只是关西地区，不只是鸿沟以西，而国家外没有六国时连衡之援助，内没有当时西楚那样强大，各种政务衰落，百姓没有得到治理。
English: Now the enemy has evidence not only from the Kansai region, not only from the west of the gap, but outside the country there is no consistent assistance from six countries, inside the country is not as strong as the west at that time, various government affairs have declined, and the people have not been governed.

古文：议者所恃，徒以长江、峻山限带封域；此乃守国之末事，非智者之所先也。
现代文：议论的人们所倚仗的，只不过以长江、高山这些天险为疆界，这是守卫国土中不足为凭的小事，并不是有才智的人首先要考虑的。
English: The people who are talking about the war are only relying on the Yangtze River and the mountains as the boundary. This is a small matter that is insufficient to defend the country, and is not the first thing that intelligent people should consider.

古文：臣每念及此，中夜抚枕，临餐忘食。
现代文：我每当想到此，半夜里抚摸枕头睡不着，面对饭菜忘记了进食。
English: Every time I think about it, I can't sleep without touching my pillow in the middle of the night, and I forget to eat when it comes to meals.

古文：夫事君之义，犯而勿欺，谨陈时宜十七条以闻。 
现代文：侍奉君主的道理在于可以冒犯他却不可以欺骗他，我恭敬地陈述于时势合宜的十七条，使您能够听到。 
English: In the service of the sovereign, whom it is lawful to offend, but not to deceive, I respectfully submit the seventeen articles, as they are at this time, for your perusal.

古文：吴主不纳。
现代文：吴主没有采纳他的意见。
English: Lord Wu did not accept his opinion.

古文：李勖以建安道不利，杀导将冯斐，引军还。
现代文：李勖因为走建安那条路不顺利，杀了带路的将官冯斐，带领军队返回。
English: Because the road to Jian'an was not smooth, Li Gan killed the general Feng Fei who led the way and led the army back.

古文：初，何定尝为子求婚于勖，勖不许，乃白勖枉杀冯斐，擅彻军还，诛勖及徐存，并其家属，仍焚勖尸。
现代文：当初，何定曾经为他的儿子向李勖求婚，李勖没有答应，于是何定就说李勖杀冯斐是冤枉了冯斐，李勖是擅自后撤返回的，便杀了李勖、徐存连同他们的家属，还把李勖的尸首焚烧了。
English: At first, He Ding had proposed marriage to Li Qian for his son, but Li Qian did not agree, so He Ding said that Li Qian had killed Feng Fei because he had wronged Feng Fei, and Li Qian had retreated without permission, so he killed Li Qian and Xu Cun together with their families, and also burned Li Qian's corpse.

古文：定又使诸将各上御犬，一犬至直缣数十匹，缨绁直钱一万，以捕兔供厨。
现代文：何定又让各位将官进献御犬，一头犬的价值高达几十匹细绢，拴狗的缰绳价值一万钱，用这些犬捕捉兔子供应厨房。
English: He also invited generals to donate their dogs. A dog is worth up to dozens of fine yakitori, and a dog's bridle is worth ten thousand yuan. These dogs are used to catch rabbits and supply the kitchen.

古文：吴人皆归罪于定，而吴主以为忠勤，赐爵列侯。
现代文：吴人都归罪于何定，而吴主却认为他忠诚殷勤，赐予他列侯的爵位。
English: The people of Wu all blamed He Ding, but the Lord of Wu thought he was loyal and diligent, and gave him the title of prince.

古文：陆抗上疏曰： 小人不明理道，所见既浅，虽使竭情尽节，犹不足任，况其奸心素笃而憎爱移易哉！ 
现代文：陆抗上疏说： 小人不明事理，见识浅薄，即使让他竭心尽力，也还是不能够胜任其职，更何况他一向专心于邪恶，爱与憎在他的心中都是颠倒的呢！ 
English: Lu Zhaozhou said: "The villain is unreasonable and shallow-minded. Even if he is allowed to do his best, he is still unable to perform his duties. What's more, he has always concentrated on evil, and love and hate are reversed in his heart!"

古文：吴主不从。
现代文：吴主不听从陆抗的话。
English: Lord Wu did not listen.

古文：六月，戊午，胡烈讨鲜卑秃发树机能于万斛堆，兵败被杀。
现代文：六月，戊午，胡烈在万斛堆讨伐鲜卑人秃发树机能，兵败被杀。
English: In June, at noon, Hu Lieh was killed in the battle against the despicable Bald-Haired Tree Tribe in Wanlu County.

古文：都督雍、凉州诸军事扶风王亮遣将军刘旂救之，旂观望不进。亮坐贬为平西将军，旂当斩。
现代文：都督雍州。凉州诸军事的扶风王司马亮，派遗将军刘去救援胡烈，刘观望不前，司马亮获罪被贬为平西将军。
English: Wang Sima Liang, the governor of Yongzhou and the military leader of Liangzhou, sent General Liu to rescue Hu Lie, but Liu did not move forward. Sima Liang was found guilty and demoted to General of Pingxi.

古文：亮上言： 节度之咎，由亮而出，乞丐旂死。 
现代文：刘应当被斩首，司马亮上书说： 部署调度的罪过，是由我而出的，请求宽免刘死罪。 
English: Liu should be beheaded, Sima Liang wrote: The crime of deployment and scheduling is my fault, and I request that Liu be pardoned for the crime of capital punishment.

古文：诏曰： 若罪不在旂，当有所在。 
现代文：晋武帝下诏说： 假如罪过不在刘，那就应当有承罪之人。 
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict saying: If the crime is not Liu's, then there should be someone to confess the crime.

古文：乃免亮官。
现代文：于是免去司马亮的官职。
English: As a result, Sima Liang was removed from his post.

古文：遣尚书乐陵石鉴行安西将军，都督秦州诸军事，讨树机能。
现代文：晋朝派尚书乐陵人石鉴代理安西将军，统领秦州各项军事，讨伐秃发树机能。
English: The Jin Dynasty sent Shang Shule Lingren Shi Jian as the representative of General Anxi to command the various military forces of Qinzhou and fight against the baldness.

古文：树机能兵盛，鉴使秦州刺史杜预出兵击之。
现代文：秃发树机能兵力强盛，石鉴派秦州刺史杜预出兵攻打他。
English: Bald-haired Shuxuan had a strong army, and Shi Jian sent soldiers from Qinzhou to attack him.

古文：预以虏乘胜马肥，而官军县乏，宜并力大运刍粮，须春进讨。
现代文：杜预认为，敌人乘胜士气正盛，马又肥壮，而官军匮乏，应当集中力量运输草料和粮食，等到春天再出兵进讨。
English: Du Yuanyuan believed that the enemy's morale was high after the victory, the horses were fat and strong, and the government army was in short supply. They should concentrate their efforts on transporting grass and grain, and wait until spring to send troops to attack.

古文：鉴奏预稽乏军兴，槛车征诣廷尉，以赎论。
现代文：石鉴上奏杜预延误了军用物资的征集调拨，用囚车把他押送到廷尉，以免去侯爵赎罪。
English: Du Yu delayed the collection and allocation of military supplies, and sent him to the courtier in a prison van, so as not to go to the marquis to atone for his sins.

古文：既而鉴讨树机能，卒不能克。
现代文：后来石鉴征讨秃发树机能，最终也未能取胜。
English: Later, Shijian discussed the function of the bald tree, but ultimately failed to win.

古文：秋，七月，乙巳，城阳王景度卒。
现代文：秋季，七月，乙巳，城阳王司马景度去世。
English: In the autumn, in July, King Sima Jiedu of Chengyang passed away.

古文：丁未，以汝阴王骏为镇西大将军，都督雍、凉等州诸军事，镇关中。
现代文：丁未，晋任命汝阴王司马骏为镇西大将军，统领雍、凉等州的各项军事行动，镇守关中。
English: Ding Wei, Jin appointed Ruyin King Sima Qiao as the general of Zhenxi, commanding various military operations in Yong, Liang and other states, and guarding Guanzhong.

古文：冬，十一月，立皇子东为汝南王。
现代文：冬季，十一月，晋立皇子司马柬为汝南王。
English: In the winter, in November, the prince Sima Kam, son of Jin, became the king of the south of the country.

古文：吴主从弟前将军秀为夏口督，吴主恶之，民间皆言秀当见图。
现代文：吴主的堂弟、前将军孙秀任夏口督将，吴主憎恨他。民间流传着孙秀早晚会被人算计的说法。
English: Lord Wu's cousin, the former general Sun Xiu, was appointed governor of Xiakou, and Lord Wu hated him. It was said that Sun Xiu would be taken advantage of sooner or later.

古文：会吴主遣何定将兵五千人猎夏口，秀惊，夜将妻子、亲兵数百人来奔。
现代文：正巧这时吴主让何定带着五千名士兵在夏口打猎，孙秀惊慌失措，夜里带着妻子儿女及亲兵几百人来投奔晋朝。
English: It just so happened that at this time, the Lord of Wu sent He Ding with five thousand soldiers to go hunting in Xia Kou. Sun Xiu panicked and rushed to Jin Dynasty at night with his wife, children and several hundred soldiers.

古文：十二月，拜秀骠骑将军、开府仪同三司，封会稽公。
现代文：十二月，晋朝授予孙秀票骑将军、开府仪同三司官职，封为会稽公。
English: In December, the Jin Dynasty awarded Sun Xiu the post of general of ticket and cavalry, the post of Kaifu Yi and the post of three officials, and the post of auditor.

古文：是岁，吴大赦。
现代文：这一年，吴国实行大赦。
English: This year, the State of Wu implemented an amnesty.

古文：初，魏人居南匈奴五部于并州诸郡，与中国民杂居；自谓其先汉氏外孙，因改姓刘氏。
现代文：当初，魏人把南匈奴的五部安置在并州诸郡中居住，与中原地区汉族杂居。南匈奴人自称他们的祖先是汉朝的外孙，所以改姓为刘氏。
English: At first, the Wei people resettled the five parts of the Southern Xiongnu in the counties of the adjacent states, and mixed with the Han people in the Central Plains. The Southern Xiongnu people claimed that their ancestors were the grandchildren of the Han Dynasty, so they changed their surname to Liu.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始七年春，正月，匈奴右贤王刘猛叛出塞。
现代文：泰始七年春季，正月，匈奴右贤王刘猛叛逃出边塞。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of the Taizhi era, in the first month, the Hun king Liu Meng defected from the frontier fortress.

古文：豫州刺史石鉴坐击吴军虚张首级，诏曰： 鉴备大臣，吾所取信，而乃下同为诈，义得尔乎！
现代文：豫州刺史石鉴在攻打吴军时虚报俘获首级的数量，因而获罪，晋武帝下诏说： 石鉴身为大臣，我很信任他，而他却恶劣到弄虚做假，从道理上来看，怎么能如此行事呢？
English: Shi Jian, the governor of Yuzhou, was found guilty of falsely reporting the number of heads captured when attacking the Wu army. Emperor Jinwu issued a decree saying: Shi Jian, as a minister, I trust him very much, but he is so bad that he falsifies and fakes. From a rational point of view, how can he act like this?

古文：今遣归田里，终身不得复用。 
现代文：现在遣返他回故乡，终身不得再起用。
English: He will now be sent back to his home town and will not be allowed to work again for life.

古文：吴人刁玄诈增谶文云： 黄旗紫盖，见于东南，终有天下者，荆、扬之君。 
现代文：吴人刁玄伪造谶文说： 黄色的旗帜、紫色的车盖，出现于东南方，最终得天下者，是荆、扬之地的君主。 
English: The people of Wuxuan forged an inscription saying: The yellow flag and the purple car cover appeared in the southeast, and the one who finally won the world was the ruler of the land of Jing and Yang.

古文：吴主信之。是月晦，大举兵出华里，载太后、皇后及后宫数千人，从牛渚西上。
现代文：吴主信以为真，有的最后一天，从华里大规模地出兵，车上载着太后、皇后以及后宫几千人，从牛渚向西进发。
English: Wu Shuxin believed this to be true, and on the last day of the year, he sent a large number of troops from Huali, carrying the empress dowager, the queen and several thousand people from the harem, and marched westward from Niuhu.

古文：东观令华谮等固谏，不听。
现代文：东观令华核等人坚持谏阻，吴主不听。
English: Dongguan ordered Hua Jiu and others to persist in their resistance, but Lord Wu did not listen.

古文：行遇大雪，道涂陷坏，兵士被甲持仗，百人共引一车，寒冻殆死，皆曰： 若遇敌，便当倒戈。 
现代文：行进途中遇到大雪，道路塌陷损毁，兵士身披铠甲，手持兵器，一百个人拉着一辆车子，天气寒冷，几乎要把人冻死，兵士们都说： 如果遇到敌兵，我们就倒弋。 
English: On the way, they encountered heavy snow, the road was collapsed and damaged, the soldiers were wearing armor and carrying weapons, a hundred people pulled a car, the weather was cold and almost froze people to death, the soldiers all said: If we encounter enemy soldiers, we will be doomed.

古文：吴主闻之，乃还。
现代文：吴主听到这些话，就返回了。
English: When Lord Wu heard these words, he returned home.

古文：帝遣义阳王望统中军二万、骑三千屯寿春以备之，闻吴师退，乃罢。
现代文：晋武帝派遣义阳王司马望统率中军二万人、骑兵三千人驻扎在寿春以防备敌军，听到吴军退却的消息，就停止了军事行动。
English: Emperor Jinwu dispatched the Yiyang King Sima Wangtong to lead the Chinese army of twenty thousand people and three thousand cavalry stationed in Shuchun to guard against the enemy. When he heard the news that the Wu army was retreating, he stopped the military operation.

古文：三月，丙戌，巨鹿元公裴秀卒。
现代文：三月，丙戌，钜鹿元公裴秀去世。
English: In March, Baekhyun Baekhyun, the former governor of Elu, passed away.

古文：夏，四月，吴交州刺史陶璜袭九真太守董元，杀之；杨稷以其将王素代之。
现代文：夏季，四月，吴国交州刺史陶璜袭击九真太守董元，将他杀死；杨稷用他的部将王素代替董元。
English: In the summer, in April, the Wuzhong Jiaozhou assassin Tao Zang attacked the Jiu Zhen Empress Dowager Dong Yuan and killed him; Yang Xi used his subordinate Wang Su to replace Dong Yuan.

古文：北地胡寇金城，凉州刺史牵弘讨之。
现代文：北地胡人进犯金城，凉州刺史牵弘去征讨。
English: The Hokkien Hu people attacked Jincheng, and the Liangzhou Zhishihongong people went to conquer it.

古文：众胡皆内叛，与树机能共围弘于青山，弘军败而死。
现代文：内地各族胡人都叛乱，众多的胡人和秃发树机能一同在青山包围了牵弘，牵弘兵败而死。
English: The Hu people of all ethnic groups in the inland rebelled. A large number of Hu people and bald-haired trees surrounded Yuhong in Aoyama, and Yuhong was defeated and died.

古文：初，大司马陈骞言于帝曰： 胡烈、牵弘皆勇而无谋，强于自用，非绥边之材也，将为国耻。 
现代文：当初，大司马陈骞对晋武帝说： 胡烈、牵弘都勇而无谋，固执，自以为是，并不是安抚边地的人材，他们终将造成国家耻辱。 
English: At first, Grand Master Ma Chenqi said to Emperor Jinwu: Hu Lie and Zhihong are brave but unscrupulous, stubborn and self-righteous, and they are not to appease the people on the periphery, they will eventually cause national disgrace.

古文：时弘为扬州刺史，多不承顺骞命，帝以为骞与弘不协而毁之，于是征弘，既至，寻复以为凉州刺史。
现代文：当时牵弘任扬州刺史，时常不顺从陈骞的命令，晋武帝认为陈骞是与牵弘不和才对他进行诽谤。于是征召牵弘，牵弘来到，不久又任命为凉州刺史。
English: At that time, Tsuchihiro served as Yangzhou scribe and often disobeyed Chen Xi's orders. Emperor Jinwu thought that Chen Xi was not on good terms with Tsuchihiro and slandered him. Therefore, Tsuchihiro was conscripted, Tsuchihiro came, and soon he was appointed as Yangzhou scribe.

古文：骞窃叹息，以为必败。
现代文：陈骞暗自叹息，认为必然失败。
English: Chen Yao privately sighed, thinking that this move would surely lead to failure.

古文：二人果失羌戎之和，兵败身没，征讨连年，仅而能定，帝乃悔之。
现代文：胡、牵两人果然丧失了与羌戎和睦的关系，兵败身死。连年出兵征讨，仅能维持表面安定，晋武帝于是后悔没听陈骞的话。
English: Hu and Tong really lost their harmonious relationship with Qiong Rong, and the two soldiers were defeated and died. After years of conscription, they were only able to maintain a semblance of stability, and Emperor Jinmu regretted not listening to Chen Rong's words.

古文：五月，立皇子宪为城阳王。
现代文：五月，立皇子司马宪为城阳王。
English: In May, the prince Sima Xian became the King of Chengyang.

古文：辛丑，义阳成王望卒。
现代文：辛丑，义阳成王司马望去世。
English: Sin ugly, Yiyang Cheng Wang Sima Wang passed away.

古文：侍中、尚书令、车骑将军贾充，自文帝时宠任用事。帝之为太子，充颇有力，故益有宠于帝。
现代文：侍中、尚书令、车骑将军贾充，自晋文帝时就受到宠信而当权，晋武帝能成为太子，贾充起了很大作用，所以他更加受到晋武帝宠爱。
English: Jia Chong, an attendant, Shang Shuling, and chariot and cavalry general, has been favored and in power since the time of Emperor Jinwen. Emperor Jinwu could become the prince, and Jia Chong played a great role, so he was even more favored by Emperor Jinwu.

古文：充为人巧谄，与太尉、行太子太傅荀顗、侍中、中书监荀勖、越骑校尉安平冯紞相为党友，朝野恶之。
现代文：贾充为人虚伪谄媚，他与太尉、行太子太傅荀，侍中、中书监荀勖，越骑校尉、安平人冯相互结为党羽，朝野上下都憎恨他们。
English: Jia Gong was a hypocritical and charming person. He and the captain, the crown prince, the grand steward, the chamberlain, the inspector of Chinese books, the captain of the Yue cavalry, and the Anping man, Feng, formed a party, and they were hated by both the government and the people.

古文：帝问侍中裴楷以方今得失，对曰： 陛下受命，四海承风，所以未比德于尧、舜者，但以贾充之徒尚在朝耳。
现代文：晋武帝询问侍中裴楷当今朝政的得失，裴楷回答说： 陛下受命于天，四海承受教化，之所以德惠还未能与尧、舜相比，只因为朝廷中还有贾充之徒而已。
English: Emperor Jinwu asked the chamberlain Pei Kai about the gains and losses of today's imperial politics. Pei Kai replied: "Your Majesty was ordered by heaven and received enlightenment from all over the world. The reason why De Hui has not been able to compare with Yao and Shun is only because there are Jia Chong's followers in the imperial court.

古文：宜引天下贤人，与弘政道，不宜示人以私。
现代文：应当召引任用天下德才兼备的人一同弘扬为政之道，不应当让天下人看到您以个人偏爱用人。 
English: It is necessary to call for the appointment of people with both virtue and talent to work together to promote the way of politics, and it is not necessary to let the world see that you employ people with personal preferences.

古文：侍中乐安任恺、河南尹颖川庾纯皆与充不协，充欲解其近职，乃荐恺忠贞，宜在东宫；帝以恺为太子少傅，而侍中如故。
现代文：侍中、乐安人任恺，河南尹、颍川人庾纯都与贾充不和，贾充想免除任恺担任的亲近君王的职务，就向晋武帝推荐任恺，说任恺忠诚可靠，应当在东宫任职，晋武帝便让任恺担任太子少傅，而他所担任的侍中职务不变。
English: Jia Chong did not get along well with the attendants, Le An, Henan Yin, and Shichuan, and Jia Chong wanted to get rid of the position of close to the king held by the attendant, so he recommended the attendant to the Emperor Jinwu, saying that the attendant was loyal and reliable and should serve in the East Palace. The Emperor Jinwu then let the attendant serve as the prince's junior tutor, and the attendant position he held remained unchanged.

古文：会树机能乱秦、雍，帝以为忧，恺曰： 宜得威望重臣有智略者以镇抚之。 
现代文：当时，秃发树机能侵犯、骚扰秦、雍之地，晋武帝为此而忧虑。任恺说： 应当派一位有威望、有智谋才略、身居要职的大臣去安抚。 
English: At that time, Emperor Jinmu was worried about the bald tree's ability to encroach on and harass the lands of Qin and Yong. Ren Zheng said, "We should send a minister with prestige, wisdom and talent, who holds an important position, to pacify it."

古文：帝曰： 谁可者？ 
现代文：晋武帝问： 谁可以担当此任？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu asked: Who can be in charge of this post?

古文：恺因荐充，纯亦称之。
现代文：任恺乘机推荐贾充，庾纯也推举他。
English: Ren Hao took the opportunity to recommend Jia Chong, and Hao Jun also recommended him.

古文：秋，七月，癸酉，以充为都督秦、凉二州诸军事，侍中、车骑将军如故；充患之。
现代文：秋季，七月癸酉，晋武帝命贾充统领秦、凉州各军事，他的侍中、车骑将军职务依旧。
English: In the autumn, at the end of July, Jia Chong was appointed by Emperor Jinwu to lead the military of Qin and Liangzhou. His position as an attendant and chariot and cavalry general remained unchanged.

古文：吴大都督薛珝与陶璜等兵十万，共攻交趾，城中粮尽援绝，为吴所陷，虏杨稷、毛炅等。
现代文：贾充对此很忧虑。吴国大都督薛与陶璜等人，率十万大军一同攻打交趾，交趾城中粮尽援绝，被吴兵打破，杨稷、毛炅等人被俘。
English: Jia Chong was very worried about this. The Grand Duke of Wu, Xue, together with Tao Jun and others, led a hundred thousand army to attack and fight Kote, and the grain in Kote was exhausted. It was broken by the Wu soldiers, and Yang Jun and Mao Jun and others were captured.

古文：璜爱炅勇健，欲活之，炅谋杀璜，璜乃杀之。
现代文：陶璜爱惜毛炅的勇健，想留他一条性命。毛炅却图谋杀陶璜，陶璜于是杀死毛炅。
English: Tao Zhen cherished Mao Zhen's bravery and wanted to spare his life. However, Mao Zhen tried to murder Tao Zhen, so Tao Zhen killed Mao Zhen.

古文：脩则之子允，生剖其腹，割其肝，曰： 复能作贼不？ 
现代文：则的儿子允，破开毛炅的肚子，割下他的肝脏，说： 看你还能不能再做贼？ 
English: The son agreed, cut open the stomach of the felt, cut out his liver, and said, "See if you can still be a thief."

古文：炅犹骂曰： 恨不杀汝孙皓，汝父何死狗也！ 
现代文：毛炅嘴里还在骂，说： 我恨不能杀了你们孙，你爹是一条死狗！ 
English: The felt was still cursing in his mouth, saying: I wish I could kill your grandchildren, your father is a dead dog!

古文：王素欲逃归南中，吴人获之，九真、日南皆降于吴。
现代文：王素想逃回到南中，吴人捉住了他，九真、日南都了降了吴。
English: Wang Su wanted to escape back to Nanzhong, but the Wu people caught him. Jiuzhen and Nichinan both surrendered to Wu.

古文：吴大赦，以陶璜为交州牧。
现代文：吴国大赦罪人，任命陶璜为交州牧。
English: The State of Wu granted amnesty to the criminals and appointed Tao Jun as the pastor of Jiaozhou.

古文：璜讨降夷獠，州境皆平。
现代文：陶璜讨伐征服了夷獠，交州疆界都予平定。
English: The Tao and Qiang clashed and conquered the Yi and Qiang, and the border between the two states was finally settled.

古文：八月，丙申，城阳王宪卒。
现代文：八月丙申，城阳王司马宪去世。
English: In August, Chengyang Wang Sima Xian passed away.

古文：分益州南中四郡置宁州。
现代文：晋朝分出益州南部、中部的四个郡，设置宁州。
English: Jin Dynasty divided Yizhou into four counties in the southern and central parts, and set up Ningzhou.

古文：九月，吴司空孟仁卒。
现代文：九月，吴国司孟仁去世。
English: In September, Wu Guosi Meng Ren passed away.

古文：冬，十月，丁丑朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，丁丑朔，出现日食。
English: Winter, October, Ding Xi Shuo, solar eclipse.

古文：十一月，刘猛寇并州，并州刺史刘钦等击破之。
现代文：十一月，刘猛侵犯并州，被并州刺史刘钦击败。
English: In November, Liu Meng invaded the annexation state and was defeated by the annexation state leader Liu Qin.

古文：贾充将之镇，公卿饯于夕阳亭。
现代文：贾充将要赴镇守之任，公卿大臣们在夕阳亭为他饯行。
English: Jia Chong is about to take up the post of town watchman, and court nobles and ministers are waiting for him at the Sunset Pavilion.

古文：充私问计于荀勖，勖曰： 公为宰相，乃为一夫所制，不亦鄙乎！
现代文：贾充悄悄问荀勖有没有什么计谋，荀勖说： 您身为宰相，却被一人所控制，难道不让人小看吗？
English: Jia Chong quietly asked Yao if he had any plans, and Yao said, "You are the prime minister, but you are controlled by one person. Doesn't that make people look down on you?

古文：然是行也，辞之实难，独有结婚太子，可不辞而自留矣。 
现代文：但是此次之行，推辞掉实在很困难，只有和太子结亲，才可以不用推辞外出之任而自然地留下来。 
English: But on this trip, it is very difficult to decline. Only if you are related to the crown prince can you naturally stay without declining to go out.

古文：充曰： 然孰可寄怀？ 勖曰： 勖请言之。 
现代文：贾说： 那么谁可以去表达我的意愿呢？ 荀勖说： 请让我去说吧。 
English: Jia said: Then who can express my will? Zou said: Please let me say it.

古文：因谓冯紞曰： 贾公远出，吾等失势。太子婚尚未定，何不劝帝纳贾公之女乎！ 
现代文：因而就对冯说： 贾公要是出远门话，我们都会失去权势，太子的婚事还没有定下来，何不劝说武帝纳娶贾公的女儿？ 
English: Therefore, he said to Feng, "If Jia Gong goes far away, we will lose power. The prince's marriage has not yet been settled. Why not persuade Wu Di Na to marry Jia Gong's daughter?"

古文：紞亦然之。
现代文：冯也赞同这个主意。
English: Feng also agreed with the idea.

古文：初，帝将纳卫瓘女为太子妃，充妻郭槐赂杨后左右，使后说帝，求纳其女。
现代文：当初，晋武帝将要纳卫的女儿做太子之妃，贾充的妻子郭槐贿赂了杨皇后身边的人，让杨皇后劝说武帝请求纳娶贾充的女儿。
English: At first, Emperor Jinwu wanted to make Nawei's daughter the princess of the crown prince. Jia Chong's wife, Guo Wei, bribed the people around Empress Yang to persuade Empress Yang to ask Emperor Wu to marry Jia Chong's daughter.

古文：帝曰： 卫公女有五可，贾公女有五不可：卫氏种贤而多子，美而长、白；贾氏种妒而少子，丑而短、黑。 
现代文：晋武帝说： 卫公的女儿有五可，贾公的女儿有五不可：卫氏种族优秀而且儿子多，容貌美好而且身材修长，皮肤白洁。贾氏传统妒嫉而且少子女，容貌丑陋，身材矮小，皮肤黑。 
English: Emperor Jinwu said, "The daughters of the Duke of Wei have five qualities, and the daughters of the Duke of Jia have five imperfections: the Duke of Wei is an excellent race and has many sons, he is beautiful and slender, and his skin is white; the Duke of Jia is traditionally jealous and has few children, he is ugly and short, and his skin is dark.

古文：后固以为请，荀顗、荀勖、冯瓘皆称充女绝美，且有才德，帝遂从之。留充复居旧任。
现代文：但杨皇后坚持为贾氏请求武帝，荀、荀勖、冯都称赞贾充的女儿极其美丽，而且德才兼备，晋武帝于是听从了他们的意见留下贾充仍然担任旧职。
English: However, Empress Yang persisted in asking Emperor Wu for the Jia clan. Emperor Wu listened to the opinions of Emperor Wu and allowed Jia Chong to keep his old position. Emperor Wu praised Jia Chong's daughter as extremely beautiful and virtuous.

古文：十二月，以光禄大夫郑袤为司空，袤固辞不受。
现代文：十二月，晋任命光禄大夫郑袤为司空，郑袤坚决辞让不接受。
English: In December, Jin appointed Guanglu's doctor, Zheng Yao, as Secretary of the Air Force. Zheng Yao resolutely refused to accept the offer.

古文：是岁，安乐思公刘禅卒。
现代文：这一年，安乐思公刘禅去世。
English: In the same year, Liu Zhen passed away.

古文：吴以武昌都督广陵范慎为太尉。
现代文：吴国任命武昌都督、广陵人范慎为太尉。
English: Wu appointed Wuchang governor and Guangling man Fan Sheng as lieutenant.

古文：右将军司马丁奉卒。
现代文：右将军司马丁奉去世。
English: General of the Right Division Martin Bong passed away.

古文：吴改明年元曰凤凰。
现代文：吴国改明年年号为凤凰。
English: Wu Guo will change its name to Fenghuang next year.

古文：世祖武皇帝上之上泰始八年
现代文：泰始八年春季，正月，晋监军何桢讨伐刘猛。
English: In the spring of the eighth year of Taizhi, the first month of the year, the Jin supervisory army He Ying fought against Liu Meng.

古文：春，正月，监军何桢讨刘猛，屡破之，潜以利诱其左部帅李恪，恪杀猛以降。
现代文：多次打败刘猛，何桢暗中以利益引诱刘猛的左部帅李恪，李恪杀了刘猛投降了晋。
English: He defeated Liu Meng many times. He secretly lured Liu Meng's left wing commander Li Ke with benefits. Li Ke killed Liu Meng and surrendered to Jin.

古文：二月，辛卯，皇太子纳贾妃。
现代文：二月，辛卯，晋皇太子纳贾妃。
English: In February, Xinwu, the crown prince of Jin, Najia.

古文：妃年十五，长于太子二岁，妬忌多权诈，太子嬖而畏之。
现代文：贾妃年龄十五，比太子大两岁。她生性妒忌，机巧狡诈，太子宠爱她又怕她。
English: Jiafei is fifteen years old, two years older than the prince. She is jealous by nature, cunning and crafty. The prince loves her and is afraid of her.

古文：壬辰，安平献王孚卒，年九十三。
现代文：壬辰，安平献王司马孚去世，享年九十三岁。
English: Imjin, Anping King Sima Fu passed away at the age of ninety-three.

古文：孚性忠慎，宣帝执政，孚常自退损。
现代文：司马孚禀性忠诚谨慎，宣帝执政时，司马孚时常自我退让、谦抑。
English: Sima Fu was loyal and cautious. When Emperor Xuan was in power, Sima Fu was often self-effacing and modest.

古文：后逢废立之际，未尝预谋。
现代文：以后每逢帝王废立之际，司马孚都不曾参与谋划。
English: Later, during the period of the abolition and establishment of the sovereign, he did not participate in the planning.

古文：景、文二帝以孚属尊，亦不敢逼。
现代文：景、文二帝因司马孚属于长辈，也不敢强迫他。
English: Because Sima Fu, the second emperor of Jing and Wen, belonged to the elders, they did not dare to force him.

古文：及帝即位，恩礼尤重。
现代文：到晋武帝即位，对司马孚礼遇格外格厚重、尊贵。
English: When Emperor Jinwu ascended the throne, Sima Fu was treated with extraordinarily lavish and noble courtesies.

古文：元会，诏孚乘舆上殿，帝于阼阶迎拜。
现代文：元旦朝见群臣，晋武武帝让司马孚乘轿子上殿，晋武帝在阶迎接拜见。
English: On the morning of New Year's Day, Emperor Jinwu met with his courtiers and had Sima Fu carried up to the palace in a palanquin. Emperor Jinwu greeted him on the steps.

古文：既坐，亲奉觞上寿，如家人礼。
现代文：司马孚坐下后，晋武帝亲捧上酒杯，为司马孚祝寿，就像普通家中的礼节。
English: After Sima Fu sat down, Emperor Jinwu personally held up a glass of wine to wish Sima Fu a happy birthday, just like the etiquette of an ordinary family.

古文：帝每拜，孚跪而止之。
现代文：晋武帝每次向司马孚行拜礼，司马孚就跪下制止他。
English: Every time the emperor went to pray, Sima Fu would kneel down to stop him.

古文：孚虽见尊宠，不以为荣，常有忧色。
现代文：司马孚虽然被尊重恩宠，却并不以此为荣耀，常常面有忧虑之色。
English: Although Sima Fu was respected and favored, he was not proud of it and often had a sad look.

古文：临终，遗令曰： 有魏贞士河内司马孚字叔达，不伊不周，不夷不惠，立身行道，终始若一。
现代文：临终，留下遗言说： 魏朝的忠贞不移的人士、河内人司马孚，字叔达，不像伊尹，不像周公，不像伯夷，不像柳下惠，但是立身行道，始终如一。
English: On his deathbed, he left his last words, saying: "Hanoi's Sima Fu, also known as Shuda, who was an unswerving loyalist of the Wei Dynasty, was unlike Yi Yin, unlike Zhou Gong, unlike Bo Yi, and unlike Liu Shimo Hui, but he was steadfast and consistent.

古文：当衣以时服，敛以素棺。 
现代文：应当穿上平时的衣服，用朴素的棺材装殓。 
English: It should be dressed in ordinary clothes and decorated with a simple coffin.

古文：诏赐东园温明秘器，诸所施行，皆依汉东平献王故事。
现代文：晋武帝下令，赐予司马孚专供王公贵族所用的棺木东园温明秘器。各项事宜的施行，全都按照汉代东平献王的先例。
English: Emperor Jinwu ordered that Sima Fu be given the coffin Dongyuan Wenming Secret, which was exclusively used by princes and aristocrats. All matters were carried out in accordance with the precedent of Dongping's offering to the king in the Han Dynasty.

古文：其家遵孚遗旨，所给器物，一不施用。
现代文：司马孚的家属仍遵照司马孚的遗意，凡是朝廷所供给的器具物品，一概不使用。
English: Sima Fu's family members still follow Sima Fu's wishes and do not use any equipment or goods provided by the imperial court.

古文：帝与右将国皇甫陶论事，陶与帝争言，散骑常侍郑徽表请罪之，帝曰： 忠谠之言，唯患不闻。徽越职妄奏，岂朕之意！ 
现代文：晋武帝和右将军皇甫陶在一起论事，皇甫陶与晋武帝争论起来。散骑常侍郑徽上表，请求给皇甫陶判罪。晋武帝说： 忠城正直的言论，唯恐听不到，郑徽逾越职位，胡乱禀奏，这岂是朕的意思？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu and the right general, Emperor Futao, were discussing a matter together, and Emperor Futao and Emperor Jinwu got into an argument. Zheng Hui, the horseback riding attendant, came to the table and asked for Emperor Futao to be convicted. Emperor Jinwu said: "If you don't listen to the honest speech of Zhongcheng, Zheng Hui will overstep his position and play a chaotic game. Is this what I mean?"

古文：遂免徽官。
现代文：于是免去郑徽的官职。
English: As a result, Zheng Hui was relieved of his duties.

古文：夏，汶山白马胡侵掠诸种，益州刺史皇甫晏欲讨之。
现代文：夏季，汶山白马胡欺凌、掠夺各民族，益州刺史皇甫晏要去征讨。
English: In the summer, the white horse of Wenshan bullied and plundered all ethnic groups, and the imperial prince of Yizhou had to go to collect.

古文：典学从事蜀郡何旅等谏曰： 胡夷相残，固其常性，未为大患。
现代文：典学从事、蜀郡人何旅等认谏阻说： 胡夷互相残杀，本来是他们平时的本性，并没有造成大的祸患。
English: How many people in Shu County, who are engaged in classic studies, recognize and oppose this, saying: The Hui killed each other, which was their usual nature, and did not cause a great disaster.

古文：今盛夏出军，水潦将降，必有疾疫，宜须秋、冬图之。 
现代文：现在是盛夏时节，如果出兵，将遇到雨季，必然要发生疾病、瘟疫，应当等到秋、冬季节再谋划这件事。 
English: Now is the height of the summer season. If troops are sent out, they will encounter the rainy season, and diseases and plagues will inevitably occur. We should wait until the autumn and winter seasons to plan for this.

古文：晏不听。
现代文：皇甫晏不听。
English: Empress Dowager Cixi did not listen.

古文：胡康木子烧香言军出必败，晏以为沮众，斩之。
现代文：胡人名叫康木子烧香的人说，军队出去必打败仗。皇甫晏认为他给众人泄气，扰乱军心，就杀了他。
English: A Wu man named Kang Muzi, who burned incense, said that the army would go out and defeat the war. The emperor thought that he had discouraged the people and disturbed the military spirit, so he killed him.

古文：军至观阪，牙门张弘等以汶山道险，且畏胡众，因夜作乱，杀晏，军中惊扰，兵曹从事犍为杨仓勒兵力战而死。
现代文：军队行进到观孤时，牙门张弘等人因为汶山道路险要难行，又害怕胡人，就趁夜里叛乱，杀死皇甫晏。军中惊慌混乱，兵曹从事、犍为人杨仓统率军队拼力战斗而死。
English: When the army was marching to Guanzhong, Zhang Hong and others took advantage of the night to rebel and kill the Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress Dowager Empress.

古文：弘遂诬晏，云 率己共反 ，故杀之，传首京师。
现代文：张弘于是诬陷皇甫晏，说： 皇甫晏领着我们共同谋反。 因而杀皇甫晏，首级传送到京成。
English: Zhang Hong then framed Wang Fuxi, saying: "Wang Fuxi led us to conspire together, so he killed Wang Fuxi and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：晏主簿蜀郡何攀，方居母丧，闻之，诣洛证晏不反，弘等纵兵抄掠。
现代文：皇甫晏的主簿蜀郡人何攀，因母亲去世正在守丧，听到这个消息，便到洛阳去证明皇甫晏没有造反。张弘等人放纵兵士抢劫掠夺财物。
English: He Pan, a resident of Shu County, who was the main accountant of Wang Fuxi, was in mourning for the death of his mother. Hearing this news, he went to Luoyang to prove that Wang Fuxi had not rebelled. Zhang Hong and others allowed soldiers to rob and plunder property.

古文：广汉主簿李毅言于太守弘农王濬曰： 皇甫侯起自诸生，何求而反！
现代文：广汉主簿李毅对太守、弘农人王浚说： 皇甫侯是读书人出身，他有什么可图的而要造反？
English: Li Yi, the main book of Guanghan, said to Wang Jun, the governor of Guanghan and a farmer from Hongnan, "The emperor's father-in-law was born as a reader. What can he do to rebel?

古文：且广汉与成都密迩，而统于梁州者，朝廷欲以制益州之衿领，正防今日之变也。
现代文：况且广汉与成都贴近，但却统属于梁州，这其中缘由就是朝廷要以梁州来制约益州的咽喉要害，正为了防范今日的突发事故。
English: Moreover, Guanghan is close to Chengdu, but it all belongs to Liangzhou. One of the reasons for this is that the imperial court wants to use Liangzhou to restrict the throat of Yizhou, precisely in order to prevent today's emergencies.

古文：今益州有乱，乃此郡之忧也。
现代文：如今益州发生动乱，便是本郡的忧患。
English: The current unrest in Yezhou is a cause for concern for the county.

古文：张弘小竖，众所不与，宜即时赴讨，不可失也。 
现代文：张弘小子，众人都不屑与其为伍，应当立刻去讨伐，不要失去机会。 
English: Zhang Hongjiao, everyone disdains to be in his company, should immediately go to the crusade, do not lose the opportunity.

古文：濬欲先上请，毅曰： 杀主之贼，为恶尤大，当不拘常制，何请之有！ 
现代文：王浚还要先向上请示，李毅说： 杀了主人的贼子，罪恶尤其大，应当不受常规限制，还有什么可请示的？ 
English: Wang Jun also wanted to ask for instructions from above first, Li Yi said: If a thief killed his master, the crime is especially great and should not be subject to normal restrictions. What else could he ask for?

古文：濬乃发兵讨弘。
现代文：于是王浚便发兵讨伐张弘。
English: As a result, Wang Jun sent troops to fight Zhang Hong.

古文：诏以濬为益州刺史。
现代文：晋武帝下诏，任命王浚为益州刺史。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict, appointing Wang Jun as the crown prince of Yizhou.

古文：濬击弘，斩之，夷三族。
现代文：王浚攻打张弘，将他杀死，并灭三族。
English: Wang Jun attacked Zhang Hong, killed him, and exterminated the three tribes.

古文：封濬关内侯。
现代文：晋朝封王浚为关内侯。
English: The Jin Dynasty made Wang Jun the lord of Guanai.

古文：初，濬为羊祜参军，祜深知之。
现代文：当年，王濬曾是羊祜的参军，羊祜深知王浚为人。
English: At that time, Wang Qian was a member of the army of Yang Qian, and Yang Qian was well aware of Wang Jun as a person.

古文：祜兄子暨白濬 为人志大奢侈，不可专任，宜有以裁之。 
现代文：羊祜的侄子羊暨对羊祜说： 王浚为人志向大，好奢侈，不可让他专权，应当有控制他的办法。 
English: Wang Jun's nephew, Yang Cui, said to Wang Jun: Wang Jun is ambitious and extravagant. He should not be allowed to have exclusive power. There should be a way to control him.

古文：祜曰： 濬有大才，将以济其所欲，必可用也。 
现代文：羊祜说： 王浚很有才能，足以达到目的，完全可以用他。 
English: The shepherd said, "Wang Junma is very talented, and he is able to achieve his goal. I can totally use him."

古文：更转为车骑从事中郎。
现代文：王浚又升迁为车骑从事中郎。
English: Wang Jun was promoted to be a middle-ranking official in the cavalry.

古文：濬在益州，明立威信，蛮夷多归附之；俄迁大司农。
现代文：王浚在益州，明显地树立自己的威望和信用，蛮夷大都投奔依附他；不久，王浚又升迁为大司农。
English: Wang Jun clearly established his prestige and credibility in Yizhou, and most barbarians rushed to follow him. Soon, Wang Jun was promoted to the position of chief farmer.

古文：时帝与羊祜阴谋伐吴，祜以为伐吴宜藉上流之势，密表留濬复为益州刺史，使治水军。
现代文：当时，晋武帝与羊祜秘密谋划讨伐吴国，羊祜认为功打吴国，应当凭借上游地势，就秘密上书晋武帝，请求留下王浚还让他担任益州刺史，派他去治理水军。
English: At that time, Emperor Jinwu and Yang Di secretly plotted to attack the State of Wu. Yang Di thought that the success of attacking the State of Wu should be based on the upstream terrain, so he secretly wrote to Emperor Jinwu, asking him to keep Wang Jun and also to let him serve as the governor of Yizhou and send him to govern the navy.

古文：寻加龙骧将军，监益、梁诸军事。
现代文：不久又授予王浚龙骧将军职，掌管益州、梁州各项军事。
English: Soon after, Wang Junlongjun was awarded the post of general in charge of all military affairs in Yizhou and Liangzhou.

古文：诏濬罢屯田兵，大作舟舰。
现代文：晋武帝命令王濬解散屯田军，大量建造战船。
English: Emperor Jinwu ordered Wang Qian to disband the military garrisons and build a large number of warships.

古文：别驾何攀以为 屯田兵不过五六百人，作船不能猝办，后者未成，前者已腐。
现代文：别驾何攀认为，屯田只不过有五六百人，不能很快地把船造出来，后面的船还没有造成，前面造好的船也已经朽烂了。
English: Don't be fooled into thinking that because there are only five or six hundred people in Tonden, the boats can't be built quickly. The boats at the back haven't been built yet, and the boats at the front have already rotted away.

古文：宜召诸郡兵合万馀人造之，岁终可成。 
现代文：应当召集各郡士兵，凑足一万多人造船，年终就能完成任务。
English: Soldiers from all counties should be called up, and more than ten thousand people should work together to build a ship, and the task will be completed by the end of the year.

古文：濬欲先上须报，攀曰： 朝廷猝闻召万兵，必不听；不如辄召，设当见却，功夫已成，势不得止。 
现代文：王浚想先向上报告请示，何攀说： 朝廷突然听到要召集一万名兵士的消息，肯定不会同意。不如先自做主张马上去办，假如被拒绝，工程人力已定局，其趋势已不能阻止了。 
English: Wang Jun wanted to report to the top for instructions first, but He Pang said: The imperial court suddenly heard the news that 10,000 soldiers would be called up, and would certainly not agree. It would be better to make your own proposal first and do it immediately. If it was rejected, the engineering manpower was a foregone conclusion, and the trend could no longer be stopped.

古文：濬从之，令攀典造舟舰器仗。
现代文：王浚听从了何攀的话，命令何攀掌管制造战船及所需用具、兵器。
English: Wang Jun obeyed Ho Pang's words and ordered Ho Pang to take charge of the manufacture of warships and the necessary equipment and weapons.

古文：于是作大舰，长百二十步，受二千馀人，以木为城，起楼橹，开四出门，其上皆得驰马往来。
现代文：于是制做大战船，船身长度为一百二十步，能容纳二千余人，用木头造成楼，筑起望敌军的高台，四面开出可以进出的门，船上可以骑着马往来奔跑。
English: So they made a great warship. The length of the hull was one hundred and twenty paces, and it could accommodate more than two thousand people. They made a tower out of wood, built a high platform to watch the enemy army, opened doors on all four sides so that people could get in and out, and they could ride horses on the ship.

古文：时作船木柿，蔽江而下，吴建平太守吴郡吾彦取流柿以白吴主曰： 晋必有攻吴之计，宜增建平兵以塞其冲要。 
现代文：当时造般砍削下的木片，遮盖了江面，顺江水而下，吴国建平太守、吴郡人吾彦，拿着顺江流而下的木片禀报吴主说： 晋国必然有攻吴的计划，应当增加建平的兵力，以堵住要害地区。 
English: At that time, pieces of wood that had been cut and chopped in all directions were made to cover the surface of the river, and they floated down along the river. Wu Guo Jianping, the governor of Wuzhou, and Wu Guonjin, Wu Yan, took the pieces of wood that were flowing down along the river and reported to the Lord of Wu, saying: Jin Guo must have a plan to attack Wuzhou, and Jianping's forces should be increased in order to block the critical areas.

古文：吴主不从。彦乃为铁锁横断江路。
现代文：吴主不听，吾彦就用铁锁横拦江面，阻断江上通路。
English: Wu Lord did not listen, so Azhiko used an iron lock to block the river, blocking the path upstream.

古文：王濬虽受中制募兵，而无虎符；广汉太守敦煌张斅收从事列上。
现代文：王濬虽然接受了朝廷的命令招募兵员，但是他却没有虎符。广汉太守、郭煌人张学就拘捕了王浚的从事而上报。
English: Although Wang Qian accepted the order of the imperial court to recruit soldiers, he did not have a tiger emblem. The governor of Guanghan, Guo Huan, and Zhang Xue arrested Wang Jun and reported him.

古文：帝召斅还，责曰： 何不密启而便收从事？ 
现代文：晋武帝召回张学，责备他说： 你为什么不秘密禀告却直接就收捕了他的从事？ 
English: Emperor Jinwu recalled Zhang Xue and scolded him: "Why didn't you secretly report him, but directly arrested him?

古文：斅曰： 蜀、汉绝远，刘备尝用之矣。
现代文：张学回答说： 蜀汉之地极其僻远，当年刘备就曾以此地割据。
English: Zhang Xue replied: Shu Han's land is extremely remote. Back then, Liu Bei used it as a base.

古文：辄收，臣犹以为轻。 
现代文：立时收捕了他的，我还觉得这是轻的呢！ 
English: They arrested him immediately, and I still think it was a light sentence!

古文：帝善之。
现代文：晋武帝称赞了他。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：壬辰，大赦。
现代文：壬辰，晋朝大赦天下。
English: On the 19th, there was a general amnesty.

古文：秋，七月，以贾充为司空，侍中、尚书令、领兵如故。
现代文：秋季，七月，晋朝任命贾充为司空，其侍中、尚书令、领兵等职务依旧。
English: In the autumn, in July, the Jin Dynasty appointed Jia Chong as Siku, and his duties as an attendant, Shang Shuling, and military leader remained unchanged.

古文：充与侍中任恺皆为帝所宠任，充欲专名势，而忌恺，于是朝士各有所附，朋党纷然。
现代文：贾充与侍中任恺都被晋武帝所宠爱、信任，贾想独占名淮、权势而嫉妒任恺，于是朝中官吏各自都有依附的靠山，各种宗派集团众多而庞杂。
English: Emperor Jinmu loved and trusted both Jia Chong and his attendant, Ren Qi. Jia wanted to monopolize fame and power and was jealous of Ren Qi. As a result, officials in the dynasty each had their own supporters, and various sectarian groups were numerous and complex.

古文：帝知之，召充、恺宴于式乾殿而谓之曰： 朝廷宜一，大臣当和。 
现代文：晋武帝知道了这些情况，召来贾充、任恺，在式乾殿宴请他们，说： 朝廷应当是一个统一的整体，大臣之间要和睦相处。 
English: When Emperor Jinwu learned of these circumstances, he summoned Jia Chong and Ren Zong and invited them to a banquet at the Shikian Palace, saying, "The imperial court should be a unified whole, and ministers should live in harmony with each other."

古文：充、恺各拜谢。
现代文：贾充、任恺各自拜谢了晋武帝。
English: Jia Chong and Ren Qi each bowed to Emperor Jinwu.

古文：既而充、恺以帝已知而不责，愈无所惮，外相崇重，内怨益深。
现代文：以后贾充、任恺认为晋武帝已经知道了他们之间不和却又没有责备他们，更加无所顾忌，表面上他们互相推崇、尊重，内心里的怨恨却越来越深。
English: Later, Jia Chong and Ren Hui thought that Emperor Jinmu already knew about the discord between them but did not blame them, and they were even more reckless. On the surface, they respected and respected each other, but the resentment in their hearts was getting deeper and deeper.

古文：充乃荐恺为吏部尚书，恺侍觐转希，充因与荀勖、冯紞承间共谮之，恺由是得罪，废于家。
现代文：贾充于是荐举任恺任吏部尚书，任恺侍从会见皇帝的机会变少了，贾充便与荀勖、冯一起乘机诬陷任恺，任恺因此获罪，被罢免呆在家里。
English: Jia Chong then recommended the appointment of Ren Ren as the secretary of the Imperial Household, and the opportunity for Ren Ren's attendant to meet the emperor became less. Jia Chong then took the opportunity to frame Ren Ren with Zou and Feng. As a result, Ren Ren was found guilty and was dismissed to stay at home.

古文：八月，吴主征昭武将军、西陵督步阐。
现代文：八月，吴主征召昭武将军、西陵督步阐。
English: In August, Emperor Wu conscripted General Zhaowu and Inspector Xiling.

古文：阐世在西陵，猝被徴，自以失职，且惧有谗，九月，据城来降，遣兄子玑、璿诣洛阳为任。
现代文：步阐世代居住在西陵，突然被召，自以为是因公事失职，而且害怕有人进了谗言，九月，占据西陵城投降晋国，派侄子步、步到洛阳去当人质。
English: In September, he occupied Xiling City, surrendered to Jin, and sent his nephew step by step to Luoyang to be a hostage.

古文：诏以阐为都督西陵诸军事、卫将军、开府仪同三司、侍中，领交州牧，封宜都公。
现代文：晋朝诏令任命步阐为都督西陵诸事、卫将军、开府仪同三司、侍中，兼任交州牧，封步阐为宜都公。
English: According to the imperial edict of the Jin Dynasty, the appointment steps were as follows: the governor of Xiling, the general of Wei, the three officials of Kaifu, and the chamberlains, who also served as the governor of Jiaozhou, and the sealing step was as follows: the governor of Yidu.

古文：冬，十月，辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：冬季，十月，辛未朔，出现日食。
English: In winter, in October, before the new year, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：敦煌太守尹璩卒。
现代文：晋朝敦煌太守尹璩去世。
English: Jin Dynasty Dunhuang Governor Yin Xi passed away.

古文：凉州刺史杨欣表敦煌令梁澄领太守。
现代文：凉州刺只杨欣上表，请示让敦煌令澄兼任太守。
English: Liangzhou stabbed only Yang Xin on the table, please instruct Dunhuang Lingcheng to also serve as the governor.

古文：功曹宋质辄废澄，表议郎令狐丰为太守。
现代文：功曹宋质擅自废黜了梁澄，上表请让议郎令狐丰任敦煌太守。
English: Gong Cao Song Quan deposed Liang Cheng without authorization. The above table asks that Heirong Linghu Feng be appointed as the governor of Dunhuang.

古文：杨欣遣兵之计，为质所败。
现代文：杨欣派兵攻打宋质，结果被宋质打败。
English: Yang Xin sent troops to attack Song Quan, but was defeated by Song Quan.

古文：吴陆抗闻步阐叛，亟遣将军左弈、吾彦等讨之。
现代文：吴陆抗听到步阐背叛的消息，马上派将军左奕、吾彦等去讨伐。
English: When Wu Lukang heard the news of the betrayal, he immediately sent generals Zuo Yi and Azhiko to fight.

古文：帝遣荆州刺史杨肇迎阐于西陵，车骑将军羊祜帅步军出江陵，巴东监军徐胤帅水军击建平，以救阐。
现代文：晋武帝派荆州刺史杨肇到西陵迎接步阐，车骑将军羊祜统率步兵进攻江陵，巴东军徐胤率水军攻打建平救援步阐。
English: Emperor Jinwu sent Yang Zhao, the statesman of Jingzhou, to Xiling to welcome the parade, and the cavalry general Yang Xun led the infantry to attack Jiangling, and the Ba Dong Army Xu Yan led the navy to attack and rescue the parade.

古文：陆抗敕西陵诸军筑严围，自赤谿至于故市，内以围阐，外以御晋兵，昼夜催切，如敌已至，众甚苦之。
现代文：陆抗命令西陵各军筑造高峻的围墙，从赤溪一直到故市，内可用来围困步阐，外可以此抵御晋兵。阱抗白天黑夜地催逼筑围，就好像敌人已经来到眼前，众人为此异常劳苦。
English: Lu ordered the armies of Xiling to build a high wall, stretching from Chaxi to the ancient city, which could be used to encircle the city on the inside, and to resist the Jin soldiers on the outside. The soldiers were forced to build the wall day and night, as if the enemy had already arrived, and everyone worked extremely hard to do so.

古文：诸将谏曰： 今宜及三军之锐，急攻阐，比晋救至，必可拔也，何事于围，以敝士民之力！ 
现代文：诸位将官进谏说： 当前应乘三军的锐气，急速攻打步阐，等晋的救兵到来，必定已克西陵，何必去做筑围事，使士兵、百姓的气力都疲惫了。 
English: All the generals said, "We should take advantage of the vigor of the three armies and attack quickly. By the time Jin's rescuers arrive, they will have destroyed Xiling. There is no need to build a siege. The strength of the soldiers and the people will be exhausted."

古文：抗曰： 此城处势既固，粮谷又足，且凡备御之具，皆抗所宿规，今反攻之，不可猝拔。
现代文：陆抗说： 西陵城所处的地势已是很稳固了，粮谷又充足，况具所有守备防御的设施、器具，都是我早先西陵任职时所设置准备的，现在反过来攻打它，不可能很快取胜。
English: Lu Anti said: Xiling City is already in a very stable situation, with plenty of grain and grain, and all the facilities and equipment for defense and defense were set up and prepared when I was in Xiling earlier. Now, if we attack it in turn, it is impossible to win quickly.

古文：北兵至而无备，表里受难，何以御之！ 
现代文：晋兵到来而我们没有防备，内外受敌，靠什么来抵御？ 
English: When the Jin soldiers arrived, we were unprepared and were attacked by enemies both at home and abroad. How could we defend ourselves?

古文：诸将皆欲攻阐，抗欲服众心，听令一攻，果无利。
现代文：诸将都想攻打步阐，陆抗想使众人心服，就听任他们去试一试，果然没有得到好处，于是开始齐心协力筑围防守。
English: The generals all wanted to attack, and the generals wanted to convince the people, so they let them try, but they did not get the benefit, so they began to work together to build a defensive perimeter.

古文：围备始合，而羊祜兵五万至江陵。诸将咸以抗不宜上，抗曰： 江陵城固兵足，无可忧者。
现代文：这时，羊祜的五万兵到了江陵。诸位将官都认为陆抗不适宜去西陵，陆抗说： 江陵城坚固，兵员足，没有什么可担忧的。
English: At this time, the fifty thousand soldiers of the Yoke of Sheep and Goats arrived in Gangneung. The generals all thought that Lu Kang was not suitable to go to Xiling. Lu Kang said, "Gangneung City is strong, it has enough soldiers, there is nothing to worry about."

古文：假令敌得江陵，必不能守，所损者小。
现代文：假如敌人得到了江陵，必然守不住，我们的损失小。
English: If the enemy gained control of Jiangling, it would be impossible to defend, and our losses would be small.

古文：若晋据西陵，则南山群夷皆当扰动，其患不可量也！ 
现代文：如果晋兵占据了西陵，那么南山的众多夷人都会骚乱动摇，这样的话，祸患就不可估量了！ 
English: If the Jin soldiers occupy Xiling, then the many barbarians in Nanshan will be disturbed and shaken. In this case, the disaster will be immeasurable!

古文：乃自帅众赴西陵。
现代文：于是，亲自率领部众奔赴西陵。
English: As a result, he personally led the troupe to the Western Tombs.

古文：初，抗以江陵之北，道路平易，敕江陵督张咸作大堰遏水，渐渍平土以绝寇叛。
现代文：当初，陆抗因江陵以北道路平坦开阔，命令江陵督张咸兴造大坝阻断水流，浸润平地以断绝敌人侵犯和内部叛乱。
English: At first, because the road north of Gangneung was flat and wide, Lu An ordered the governor of Gangneung, Zhang Xianxing, to build a dam to block the water flow and infiltrate the flat land to cut off enemy encroachment and internal rebellion.

古文：羊祜欲因所遏水以船运粮，扬声将破堰以通步军。
现代文：羊祜想借大坝阻住的水用船运送粮草，就故意扬言要破坝以通过步兵。
English: The shepherd, who wanted to use the water blocked by the dam to transport grain and grass by boat, deliberately threatened to break the dam in order to pass the infantry.

古文：抗闻之，使咸亟破之。诸将皆惑，屡谏，不听。
现代文：陆抗听到这个消息，让张咸急速毁坏大坝，诸将都迷感不解，多次谏阻陆抗也不听。
English: Upon hearing this news, the land resistance asked Zhang Xian to rapidly destroy the dam. The generals were bewildered and did not listen to the land resistance for many times.

古文：祜至当阳，闻堰败，乃改船以车运粮，大费功力。
现代文：结果羊祜到了当阳，听说大坝已毁，只好改用车子运粮，耗费子许多人力和时间。
English: As a result, when the sheep arrived in Dangyang, they heard that the dam had been destroyed, so they had to use cars to transport grain, which took a lot of manpower and time.

古文：十一月，杨肇至西陵。
现代文：十一月，晋朝杨肇到达西陵。
English: In November, Yang Zhao of the Jin Dynasty arrived at Xiling.

古文：陆抗令公安督孙遵循南岸御羊祜，水军督留虑拒徐胤，抗自将大军凭围对肇。
现代文：陆抗命令公安督孙遵沿着南岸抵御羊祜，水军督留虑抵御徐胤，陆抗亲自率领大军凭藉长围与杨肇对峙。
English: Lu ordered the public security director, Sun Zun, to resist the mutineers along the south bank, the navy director to resist Xu Yin, and Lu himself led a large army to confront Yang Zhao with a long perimeter.

古文：将军硃乔营都督俞赞亡诣肇。
现代文：将军朱乔营中的都督俞赞逃到了杨肇那里。
English: General Zhu Qiao's general in the camp fled to Yang Zhao.

古文：抗曰： 赞军中旧吏，知吾虚实。
现代文：陆抗说： 俞赞是军队中的旧官吏，了解我军虚实。
English: Lu Anti said: Hezan is an old official in the army, and he understands the truth and falsehood of our army.

古文：吾常虑夷兵素不简练，若敌攻围，必先此处。 
现代文：我常常担心夷兵平时的训练不够，敌人如果围攻，必定先打夷兵防守的地方。 
English: I often worry that the training of the barbarians in peacetime is not enough. If the enemy besieges, it must first attack the place where the barbarians are defending.

古文：即夜易夷兵，皆以精兵守之。
现代文：于是当夜更换夷兵，全都用精兵把守。
English: As a result, the barbarian soldiers were changed that night, and all of them were guarded by elite soldiers.

古文：明日，肇果攻故夷兵处。抗命击之，矢石雨下，肇众伤、死者相属。
现代文：第二天，杨肇果然攻打原来夷兵防守的地方，陆抗下令反击，箭与石块像下雨一样袭来，杨肇的部众死伤不断。
English: The next day, Yang Zhao attacked the place where the barbarians had been defending. The rebels ordered a counterattack, and the arrows and stones fell like rain. Yang Zhao's troops were constantly killed and wounded.

古文：十二月，肇计屈，夜遁。
现代文：十二月，杨肇无计可施，夜里逃走了。
English: In December, Yang Zhao had no choice but to flee in the night.

古文：抗欲追之，而虑步阐畜力伺间，兵不足分，于是但鸣鼓戒众，若将追者。
现代文：陆抗想追杨肇，又担心步阐一直积蓄力量，窥伺时机，自己的兵力不足以分开对付两头，就只擂鼓警戒部众，作出要追赶的样子来。
English: Lu Rongji wanted to chase Yang Zhao, but he was worried that Pu Xuan had been accumulating strength and spied an opportunity. His own strength was not enough to deal with the two sides separately, so he just beat the drum to alert the troops and made it look like he wanted to catch up.

古文：肇众凶惧，悉解甲挺走。
现代文：杨肇的部众恐惧骚动，全都丢弃铠甲脱身而逃。
English: Fearing unrest, Yang Zhao's followers abandoned their armor and fled.

古文：抗使轻兵蹑之，肇兵大败，祜等皆引军还。
现代文：陆抗派轻兵紧随在后，杨肇兵大败，羊祜等人都领兵而还。
English: The light soldiers of the Land Anti-Japanese Resistance followed closely behind, Yang Zhaotong suffered a crushing defeat, and Yang Hui and others led the troops to fight back.

古文：抗遂拔西陵，诛阐及同谋将吏数十人，皆夷三族，自馀所请赦者数万口。
现代文：陆抗于是攻克西陵，杀死步阐以及与他同谋的将吏共几十人，全都夷灭三族，请求对余下几万人赦免。
English: The rebels then conquered Xiling, killed Bu Xing and dozens of generals and officials who had conspired with him, annihilated all three ethnic groups, and asked for amnesty for the remaining tens of thousands.

古文：东还乐乡，貌无矜色，谦冲如常。
现代文：陆抗返回东边的乐乡，脸上没有骄傲、自负之色，还像以往一样谦虚。
English: Lu Ge returned to his happy home in the east, his face devoid of pride and arrogance, and still as modest as ever.

古文：吴主加抗都护。
现代文：吴主加封陆抗为都护。
English: The Lord of Wu and Feng Lunan became the protectors of the capital.

古文：羊祜坐贬平南将军，杨肇免为庶人。
现代文：晋朝羊祜获罪，被贬为平南将军。杨肇被免去官职成为平民。
English: Yang Zhao of the Jin Dynasty was found guilty and demoted to the rank of General of Pingnan. Yang Zhao was removed from his official position and became a commoner.

古文：吴主既克西陵，自谓得天助，志益张大，使术士尚广筮取天下，对曰： 吉。
现代文：吴主攻克西陵后，自认为是得到了上天的佑助，志向益发显扬。他让术士尚广为他占卜是否能得到天下，尚广回答说： 吉。
English: After Emperor Wu conquered the Western Tombs, he believed that he had received the blessing of heaven, and his ambition became more and more prominent. He asked the sorcerer Shangguang to tell him whether he could obtain the kingdom of heaven. Shangguang replied: "Good luck."

古文：庚子岁，青盖当入洛阳。 
现代文：庚子年，青色的车盖会进入洛阳。 
English: In the year of the Rooster, the blue cover will enter Luoyang.

古文：吴主喜，不修德政，专为兼并之计。
现代文：吴主大喜，不整治政令，一心一意地谋划兼并天下的事情。
English: Wu Shou was overjoyed, did not tidy up the government decrees, and single-mindedly plotted the annexation of the world.

古文：贾充与朝士宴饮，河南尹庾纯醉，与充争言。
现代文：贾充与晋朝廷官员在一起宴饮，河南尹庾纯喝醉了酒，与贾充争论起来。
English: Jia Chong and the officials of the Jin court feasted together. Henan Yin Yuchun got drunk and argued with Jia Chong.

古文：充曰： 父老，不归供养，卿为无天地！ 
现代文：贾充说： 你的父亲年老，不回家去奉养，你是无天无地之人！ 
English: Jia Chong said: Your father is old and does not go home to support him. You are a lawless person!

古文：纯曰： 高贵乡公何在？ 
现代文：庾纯反问： 你的先主高贵乡公在何处？ 
English: Zou Chun asked back: Where is your ancestor, the noble townsman Zhou?

古文：充惭怒，上表解职；纯亦上表自劾。
现代文：贾充又羞又怒，上表请求辞官；庾纯也上表弹劾自己。
English: Embarrassed and angry, Jia Chong asked to be removed from his post; Hao Chun also impeached himself.

古文：诏免纯官，仍下五府正其臧否。
现代文：晋武帝下诏，免去庾纯官职，按制度让五公府评定他的善恶、得失。
English: Emperor Jinwu issued an edict, exempting Xizhun from official duties, and according to the system, let the five public offices evaluate his good and evil, gains and losses.

古文：石苞以为纯荣官忘亲，当除名，齐王攸等以为纯于礼律未有违。
现代文：石苞认为，庾纯以做官为荣耀而忘记了父母，应当除去其名籍；齐王司马攸等人认为，庾纯并没有违反礼仪、律令。
English: Shi Hao believed that Hao Chun forgot his parents for the glory of being an official and should be stripped of his family name; Qi Wang Sima You and others believed that Hao Chun did not violate etiquette and laws.

古文：诏从攸议，复以纯为国子祭酒。
现代文：晋武帝听从了司马攸的建议，又任命庚纯为国子祭酒。
English: Emperor Jinwu listened to Sima You's suggestion and appointed Gengjun as the national son's sacrificial wine.

古文：吴主之游华里也，右丞相万彧与右大司马丁奉、左将军留平密谋曰： 若至华里不归，社稷事重，不得不自还。 
现代文：去年吴主去华里游玩时，右丞相万与右大司马丁奉、左将军留平密谋说： 如果皇上到华里不回来，国家的事情重大，我们就不得不自己返回了。 
English: Last year, when Emperor Wu went to Huali for a tour, Minister of the Right, Rong Wan, conspired with the Right Senior Secretary, Martin Bong, and the Left General, Ruiping, and said, "If the Emperor does not return to Huali, the state affairs are serious, we will have to return by ourselves."

古文：吴主颇闻之，以彧等旧臣，隐忍不发。
现代文：吴主听到了他们的话，因为万等人是旧臣，就克制忍耐着没有发做。
English: Lord Wu heard their words, and since all of them were former retainers, he restrained himself and did not do anything.

古文：是岁，吴主因会，以毒酒饮彧，传酒人私减之。
现代文：这一年，吴主借着会见的机会，拿毒酒给万喝，递送酒杯的人暗中把毒酒减少了。
English: This year, the Lord of Wu took the opportunity of the meeting to give poisoned wine to all, and the person who delivered the wine cup secretly reduced the poisoned wine.

古文：又饮留平，平觉之，服他药以解，得不死。
现代文：吴主又拿着毒酒给留平喝，留平察觉，服别的药解了毒，得以不死。
English: The Lord of Wu took the poisoned wine and gave it to Ruiping to drink. Ruiping was aware of this and took another potion to dissolve the poison so that he would not die.

古文：彧自杀；平忧懑，月馀亦死。
现代文：万自杀而死，留平忧愤郁闷，一个多月以后也死了。
English: Wan committed suicide and died, leaving Ruiping sad, angry and depressed. He also died more than a month later.

古文：徙彧子弟于庐陵。
现代文：吴主把万的子侄都放逐到庐陵。
English: The Lord of Wu banished all of Man's sons and nephews to Fuling.

古文：初，彧请选忠清之士以补近职，吴主以大司农楼玄为宫下镇，主殿中事。
现代文：当初，万请求挑选忠诚、清正的人来补充君主左右的职位，吴主任命大司农楼玄为宫下镇，主管宫中事务。
English: At first, Wan requested that loyal and upright people be selected to supplement the positions around the monarch, and the Lord of Wu appointed the director of the farmhouse, Xuan, as the town under the palace to be in charge of the affairs of the palace.

古文：玄正身帅众，奉法而行，应对切直，吴主浸不悦。
现代文：楼玄修身率众，遵奉法度行事，对答恳切耿直，吴主渐渐地心中不快。
English: Lou Xuan led the crowd in self-cultivation, acted in accordance with the law, and was sincere in his answers. Lord Wu gradually became unhappy in his heart.

古文：中书令领太子太傅贺邵上疏谏曰： 自顷年以来，朝列纷错，真伪相贸，忠良排坠，信臣被害。
现代文：中书令兼太子太傅贺邵上疏进谏说： 自近年以来，百官杂乱，真伪相混。忠良之人被排挤、贬斥，诚实的大臣遭受陷害。
English: "Since recent years, there has been confusion among officials, and truth and falsehood have been mixed up. Loyal people have been ousted and disparaged, and honest ministers have been set up," said He Shao Shangshuo Jinjun, the Clerk of the Supreme People's Court and the Crown Prince.

古文：是以正士摧方而庸臣苟媚，先意承指，各希时趣。
现代文：因此正真之士削去棱角，而平庸之臣苟且逢迎，揣摩旨意，奉承恭顺，各自都迎合时尚的趋向。
English: As a result, the upright cut corners, while the mediocre courted, calculated, flattered, and pandered to fashion trends.

古文：人执反理之评，士吐诡道之论，遂使清流变浊，忠臣结舌。
现代文：人们坚持的是不合道理的评论，说出的是违背道义的言谈，于是使得清高之士变得混浊，忠诚之臣不敢说话。
English: People insist on unreasonable comments and say things that are against morality, thus making the high-ranking officials become confused, and the loyal ministers dare not speak.

古文：陛下处九天之上，隐百里之室，言出风靡，令行景从。
现代文：陛下处于九天之上，深居于百里之远的屋室，圣言一出，百姓顺风倾倒，命令传布，天下紧相追随，如影随形。
English: His majesty is above the nine heavens, and dwells in a chamber a hundred leagues distant. As soon as the holy word is uttered, the people are swept along by the wind, the order is spread, and the whole world follows closely, like a shadow.

古文：亲洽宠媚之臣，日闻顺意之辞，将谓此辈实贤而天下已平也。
现代文：陛下与受宠、巴结的臣子亲近和协，每天听到的是顺承心意的言辞，将会以为这些人确有德才而且天下也已经平定。
English: His Majesty, who is close to and consorts with favoured and fawned-upon courtiers, and hears every day words of obedience to his heart, will think that these people are indeed virtuous and that the world has been pacified.

古文：臣闻兴国之君乐闻其过，荒乱之主乐闻其誉；闻其过者过日消而福臻，闻其誉者誉日损而祸至。
现代文：我听说振兴国家的君王乐于听到自己的过失，荒废紊乱的君方愿意听到别人的称赞。愿意听自己过失的人，他的过失一天比一天减少而福佑也谅到了；喜欢听别人对自己赞誉的人，他的好名声一天一天地丧失而灾祸也就来临。
English: I have heard that a king who revives his country is glad to hear of his own faults; that a ruined and disorderly prince is glad to hear of the praise of others; that a man who is glad to hear of his own faults, has his faults daily lessened, and blessings daily pardoned; that a man who is glad to hear of the praise of others, has his good name daily lost, and calamity daily come.

古文：陛下严刑法以禁直辞，黜善士以逆谏口，杯酒造次，死生不保，仕者以退为幸，居者以出为福，诚非所以保光洪绪，熙隆道化也。
现代文：陛下严厉刑法用以制止正直的言辞；摈弃品行高尚的人以拒绝直言规劝，哪怕是一杯酒的过失，死生就得不到保障，做官的人以退职为幸运，居住都城的人以离国为福气，这实在不是保住荣耀的伟业、使道德风习昌盛兴隆的作法。
English: His Majesty's severe criminal law is used to suppress honest speech; people who abandon moral conduct and high-mindedness refuse to speak out and persuade, even if the fault is a glass of wine, death and life are not guaranteed, officials are lucky to retire, and those who live in the capital are lucky to leave the country. This is really not a way to preserve the glory of the great cause and make moral customs flourish.

古文：何定本仆隶小人，身无行能，而陛下爱其佞媚，假以威福。
现代文：何定本来是地位卑贱的人，身无品行及才能，而陛下却喜爱他的奸巧谄媚，给予他权势。
English: He must have been a lowly man, devoid of virtue and talent, but his majesty loved his cunning and charm, and gave him power.

古文：夫小人求入，必进奸利。
现代文：小人谋求进入，必然会进献包藏奸心的好处。
English: If a villain seeks to enter, he will inevitably offer the benefits of treachery.

古文：定间者忘兴事役，发江边戍兵以驱麋鹿，老弱饥冻，大小怨叹。
现代文：何定近来妄地兴起劳役，发动江边防守的兵士去驱赶麋鹿，老人与体弱的人饥寒交迫；成人与孩童怨恨叹息。
English: What is certain is that recently, forced laborers have risen up, and soldiers defending the riverside have been dispatched to drive away the elk. The elderly and the infirm are hungry and cold; adults and children are resentful.

古文：《传》曰： 国之兴也，视民如赤子；其亡也，以民为草芥。 
现代文：《左传》说： 国家兴盛，视百姓如同幼儿；国家衰亡，把百姓当作一棵小草。 
English: "Zo Zhuan" said: When a country prospers, it treats the people like infants; when a country declines, it treats the people like grass.

古文：今法禁转苛，赋调益繁，中官、近臣所在兴事，而长吏畏罪，苦民求办。
现代文：现在法律、禁令变得苛刻，赋税征调日益繁杂，宦官、近臣，到处兴起事端，而地方官长害怕获罪，劳苦百姓去满足他们的要求。
English: Now laws and prohibitions have become harsh, taxes and levies have become more and more complicated, eunuchs and courtiers have caused trouble everywhere, and local officials are afraid of being punished, and the people are working hard to meet their demands.

古文：是以人力不堪，家户离散，呼嗟之声，感伤和气。
现代文：因此人力担负不起沉重的负荷，家家户户离别四散，叹息之声，使和顺的风气受到了伤害。
English: Therefore, the people's strength is unbearable, households are scattered, and the sound of weeping and wailing disturbs the country's peaceful spirit.

古文：今国无一年之储，家无经月之蓄，而后宫之中坐食者万有馀人。
现代文：现在国家没有一年的储备，百姓之家没有度过一个月的积蓄，而后宫中不劳而食的人有一万多。
English: Now the country does not have a year's reserve, the people's home has not spent a month's savings, and there are more than ten thousand people in the harem who do not work.

古文：又，北敌注目，伺国盛衰，长江之限，不可久恃，苟我不能守，一苇可杭也。
现代文：另外，北方的敌人虎视眈眈，窥伺我国的盛衰。长江之险阻，不能长久地依赖，假如我们没有守备的能力，一束苇草当作船就能渡过来。
English: In addition, the enemy in the north is keeping an eye on the dragonfly, spying on the rise and fall of our country. The Yangtze River is a dangerous obstacle that cannot be relied on for a long time. If we do not have the ability to guard, a bunch of reeds can be used as a boat.

古文：愿陛下丰基强本，割情从道，则成、康之治兴，圣祖之祚隆矣！ 
现代文：希望陛下充实基础，强化根本，割断私人的情欲，遵循正道，那么周代成王、康王时代的治平之世就会兴起，圣祖孙权开创的基业就会昌盛。 
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will enrich the foundation, strengthen the foundation, cut off private passions, and follow the right path, so that the era of Zhou Dynasty and the era of Kang Dynasty will rise, and the foundation created by Sun Quan will flourish.

古文：吴主深恨之。
现代文：结果吴主对贺邵恨之入骨。
English: As a result, Lord Wu became very fond of He Shao.

古文：于是左右共诬楼玄、贺邵相逢，驻共耳语大笑，谤讪政事，俱被诘责。送玄付广州，邵原复职。
现代文：从这时起，吴主左右的人就一起诬陷楼玄与贺邵，说他们二人相逢，停下车子交头接耳，然后一起大笑，毁谤、讽刺政事，于是两人都遭到审讯、谴责，楼玄被送到广州，贺邵受到宽赦恢复了官职。
English: From then on, people around Wu Shuzhong framed Lou Xuan and He Shao together, saying that the two of them met, stopped the car to listen to each other, and then laughed together, slandering and satirizing political affairs. As a result, both of them were interrogated and condemned, Lou Xuan was sent to Guangzhou, and He Shao was pardoned and resumed his official duties.

古文：既而复徙玄于交趾，竟杀之。
现代文：不久，又把楼玄迁徙到交趾，最终杀了他。
English: Soon after, he moved Lou Xuan to Jiaozuo and eventually killed him.

古文：久之，何定奸秽发闻，亦伏诛。
现代文：天长日久，何定邪恶丑陋的行为显露传播来，也被处以死刑。
English: For a long time, certain evil and ugly behaviors were revealed and spread, and they were also sentenced to death.

古文：羊祜归自江陵，务修德信以怀吴人。
现代文：羊祜从江陵回来以后，致力于整治道德信义以使吴人归顺。
English: After returning from Gangneung, Yang Hui devoted himself to rectifying the morality and righteousness so that the Wu people would be submissive.

古文：每交兵，刻日方战，不为掩袭之计。
现代文：每次与吴国交战，都要约定日期才开战，不做乘其不备、突然袭击的打算。
English: Each time they fought with Wu, they had to agree on a date before going to war, and they did not plan to take advantage of their unpreparedness and make a surprise attack.

古文：将帅有欲进谲计者，辄饮以醇酒，使不得言。
现代文：将帅当中有要献诡诈计谋的人，羊祜总是给他喝醇厚的美酒，使他酒醉不能说话。
English: Among the generals, there was one who wanted to plot and scheme, but the shepherd always gave him strong wine to drink, so that he was too drunk to speak.

古文：祜出军行吴境，刈谷为粮，皆计所侵，送绢偿之。
现代文：羊祜的军队外出在吴境内行走，割子谷子做口粮，全都记下所取的数量，然后送去绢偿还。
English: In the territory of the State of Wu, every time that mutton was used to feed soldiers, it was calculated clearly, and the compensation was the best.

古文：每会众江、沔游猎，常止晋地，若禽兽先为吴人所伤而为晋兵所得者，皆送还之。
现代文：每次与部众在长江、沔水一带打猎，经常只限于晋的领地，如果禽兽先被吴人所杀伤而后被晋兵所得，都要送还吴人。
English: Every time he went hunting with his subordinates along the Yangtze River and Surabaya, it was often limited to the territory of the Jin. If the animals were killed by the Wu people first and then taken by the Jin soldiers, they had to be returned to the Wu people.

古文：于是吴边人皆悦服。
现代文：于是吴国边境的百姓对羊祜心悦诚服。
English: As a result, the people on the border of the State of Wu were very pleased with the sheep.

古文：祜与陆抗对境，使命常通。抗遗祜酒，祜饮之不疑；抗疾，求药于祜，祜以成药与之，抗即服之。
现代文：羊祜与陆在边境相对，双方的使者常奉命相互来往，陆抗送给羊祜的酒，羊祜喝起来从不生疑； 陆抗病了，向羊祜求药，羊祜把成药送给他，陆抗也马上就服下。
English: The two sides' envoys were often ordered to interact with each other. When Lu sent wine to Yang, Yang drank it and never hesitated. When Lu got sick, he asked Yang for medicine. Yang gave him the finished medicine, and Lu accepted it immediately.

古文：人多谏抗，抗曰： 岂有鸩人羊叔子哉！ 
现代文：许多人谏阻陆抗，陆抗说： 怎么会有用毒酒杀人的羊祜？ 
English: Many people protested against Lu Qi, and Lu Qi said, "How can there be a sheep thief who uses poisoned wine to kill people?"

古文：抗告其边戍曰： 彼专为德，我专为暴，是不战而自服也。
现代文：陆抗对守边的士兵说： 别人专门行恩惠，我们专门做恶，这就等于不战而自己就屈服了。
English: The land resisters said to the soldiers guarding the border: "Others specialize in doing favors, we specialize in doing evil. This is tantamount to surrendering without a fight."

古文：各保分界而已，无求细利。 
现代文：现在双方各自保住疆界就可以了，我们不要再想占小便宜。 
English: Preserving the demarcation line for each other is, do not pursue small profits.

古文：吴主闻二境交和，以诘抗，抗曰： 一邑一乡不可以无信义，况大国乎！
现代文：吴主听说双方边境交往和谐，就以此事责难陆抗，陆抗说： 一邑一乡都不可以不讲信义，更何况大国呢！
English: When Lord Wu heard that the border exchanges between the two sides were harmonious, he blamed Lu Miao for this. Lu Miao said, "A township and a village can't be trusted, let alone a big country!"

古文：臣不如此，正是彰其德，于祜无伤也。 
现代文：我如果不这样做，正是显扬了羊祜的恩惠，对羊祜毫无损伤。 
English: If I don't do that, I'm just promoting the virtues of mutton, and I'm not doing him any harm.

古文：吴主用诸将之谋，数侵盗晋边。
现代文：吴主采用诸将的策略，多次侵犯掠夺晋国边境。
English: Lord Wu adopted the strategy of using generals to repeatedly invade and plunder the borders of Jin.

古文：陆抗上疏曰： 昔有夏多罪而殷汤用师，纣作淫虐而周武授钺。
现代文：陆抗上疏说： 从前夏朝多行罪恶而商汤用兵，商纣王邪恶残暴而周武王举起讨伐大斧。
English: Lu Zuoxiao said: From the previous Xia Dynasty, Shang Tang committed many crimes and used soldiers, Shang Han Wang was evil and cruel, and Zhou Wu Wang raised a large axe to fight.

古文：苟无其时，虽复大圣，亦宜养威自保，不可轻动也。
现代文：假如不到时机，即使至圣之人，也应当积蓄威势而自保，不可以轻举妄动。
English: If the time is not right, even the most holy man should save his strength for self-protection, and should not act rashly.

古文：今不务力农富国，审官任能，明黜陟，慎刑赏，训诸司以德，抚百姓以仁，而听诸将徇名，穷兵黩武，动费万计，士卒调瘁，寇不为衰而我已大病矣。
现代文：现在不致力于兴农事以富国，不审查官吏任用贤能，不明确进退、升降的标准，不谨慎地使用刑罚奖赏，不以道德教诲各部门，不以仁爱安抚百姓，而却听任诸将追求功名，穷兵黩武，动不动就耗费数以万计的钱财，士卒凋伤憔悴，敌军还没有削弱而我们却已经很劳累了。
English: Now, instead of devoting itself to reviving agriculture and enriching the country, instead of examining the ability of officials to be appointed, instead of clarifying the standards for promotion and demotion, instead of prudently using punishment and reward, instead of teaching morality to various departments, instead of appeasing the people with benevolence and love, it has allowed generals to pursue fame, poor soldiers to fight, and tens of thousands of money to be spent at every turn. The soldiers are withered, the enemy army has not yet weakened, and we are already very tired.

古文：今争帝王之资而昧十百之利，此人臣之奸便，非国家之良策也！
现代文：现在以争夺天下帝王霸业的资本，去贪图几十几百的小便宜，这是臣下邪恶的便利，并不是国家的良策。
English: Now, by competing for the capital of the world's emperor's hegemony, to covet dozens and hundreds of small bargains, this is the evil convenience of the vassals, and is not a good policy of the country.

古文：昔齐、鲁三战，鲁人再克，而亡不旋踵。
现代文：从前齐、鲁打了三次仗，鲁人两次克敌制胜，但是，不及转足之间鲁国就灭亡，这是什么原因？
English: In the past, Qi and Lu fought three times, and the Lu people defeated the enemy twice, but the Lu nation was destroyed before they could turn around. What is the reason for this?

古文：何则？大小之势异也。况今师所克获，不补所丧哉？ 
现代文：势力的大小有差别，何况如今军队战胜所得到的，还不能够弥补它所丧失的呢！ 
English: There is a difference in the size of forces, and what's more, what the army gains from a victory cannot make up for what it loses!

古文：吴主不从。
现代文：吴主不听。
English: Lord Wu did not listen.

古文：羊祜不附结中朝权贵，荀勖、冯紞之徒皆恶之。
现代文：羊祜不攀附结交朝廷中的权贵，荀勖、冯之徒都憎恨他。
English: Sheepherd did not cling to the dignitaries in the court, who were his friends, and he was hated by the followers of Yao and Feng.

古文：从甥王衍尝诣祜陈事，辞甚清辩；祜不然之，衍拂衣去。
现代文：羊祜堂外甥王衍曾经去羊祜那里陈述事情，言辞非常清晰明辨；羊祜对他并不赞赏，王衍拂衣而去。
English: Wang Yan, a nephew of the Sheepfold, once went to the Sheepfold to explain the situation, and his words were very clear and distinct; the Sheepfold did not appreciate him, and Wang Yan left.

古文：祜顾谓宾客曰： 王夷甫方当以盛名处大位，然败俗伤化，必此人也。 
现代文：羊祜回过头对宾客们说： 王衍应当能以极大的名声达到高位，然而败坏风俗、损伤教化的必定是他。 
English: The shepherd turned around and said to the guests: Wang Yan should be able to reach a high position with a great reputation, but he must be the one who corrupts customs and damages education.

古文：及攻江陵，祜以军法将斩王戎。
现代文：等到攻打江陵时，羊祜曾依军法要斩王戎。
English: When attacking Gangneung, Yang Hui once wanted to behead Wang Rong in accordance with the Military Law.

古文：衍，戎之从弟也，故二人皆憾之，言论多毁祜，时人为之语曰： 二王当国，羊公无德。 
现代文：王衍是王戎的堂弟，所以两人都怨恨羊祜，言谈之间经常诽谤羊祜。当时的人为此有句话说： 二王执掌朝政，羊公一无是处。 
English: Wang Yan was the cousin of Wang Rong, so both of them resented Yang Quan, and often slandered Yang Quan in their conversations. People at the time had a saying for this: Two kings hold the throne, and the shepherd is no good.

