古文：凡与敌战，若道路不能通，粮饷不能进，推计不能诱，利害不能惑，须用正兵。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果前进道路不畅通，粮饷供应不能运进保障，所施计谋不能引诱敌人上钩，所设利害不能迷惑敌人，在这种情况下作战，就必须采用正兵作战。
English: In any war against the enemy, if the way forward is not smooth, the supply of grain and straw cannot be transported and guaranteed, the strategy cannot lure the enemy onto the hook, and the interests cannot confuse the enemy, in such a case, it is necessary to fight with the front line.

古文：正兵者，拣士卒，利器械，明赏罚，信号令。且战且前，则胜矣。
现代文：所谓 正兵 ，就是指使用经过选拔而训练有素、武器精良、赏罚严明、号令统一的正规大部队，采取边打边进、步步为营的正面进攻战法，这样作战就能取得胜利。
English: The so-called "regular soldiers" refers to the use of regular large units that have been selected and are well-trained, with sophisticated weapons, strict rewards and punishments, and unified orders, and adopt the frontal attack method of fighting while advancing and marching step by step, so that the battle can be won.

古文：法曰： 非正兵，安能致远？ 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 不发动正面进攻，怎么能够进行远程作战呢！ 
English: As stated in the Art of War: Without launching a frontal attack, how is it possible to conduct long-range combat?

古文：宋檀道济为高祖北伐前锋，至洛阳，凡拔城破垒，俘四千余人。
现代文：东晋将领檀道济随同中外大都督刘裕北伐后秦而担任晋军前锋指挥官，他率军正面进攻洛阳，采取正规战法，迅速攻城破垒，俘获敌人四千余人。
English: The Eastern Jin general, Dang Daoji, along with the Chinese and foreign great governor Liu Yu, became the forward commander of the Jin army after the northern invasion of Qin. He led the army to attack Luoyang head-on, adopted regular warfare, quickly attacked the city, and captured more than four thousand enemies.

古文：议者谓应戮以为京观。
现代文：这时，他的部下有人提出把这些俘虏都杀害埋入坑内，垒起大丘，以威吓当地人。
English: At this point, some of his men suggested killing and burying the captives and building a large mound to intimidate the locals.

古文：道济曰： 伐罪吊民，正在今日。
现代文：但檀道济却反对说： 我军出征是为了讨伐罪恶，安抚人民，今天的事正要体现这种精神。
English: But Dang Daojie objected, saying, "Our army went to war to fight evil and pacify the people, and today's event is meant to embody this spirit."

古文：王师以正为律，何必杀人！ 
现代文：我们是王师，要以正道为行兵律令，为什么要靠杀人显威风呢？ 
English: We are the king's teachers, and we must take the right path as the marching order. Why should we show our dignity by killing people?

古文：皆释而遣之。
现代文：随后将俘虏全部释放遣送回家。
English: Release all the prisoners and send them away.

古文：于是戎夷感悦，相率归之者众。
现代文：于是，后秦民众为之感化而欣悦，相继前来归附的人很多。
English: As a result, the post-Qin people were inspired and delighted by it, and many people came to join it one after another.

