古文：崔琰字季珪，清河东武城人也。
现代文：崔琰字季皀，是清河郡东武城县人。
English: Cui Yao, surnamed Ji Yao, was from Dongwucheng County, Qinghe County.

古文：少朴讷，好击剑，尚武事。
现代文：年少时朴实而不善言辞，爱好击剑，崇尚武事。
English: When he was young, he was simple and not good at words. He loved fencing and martial arts.

古文：年二十三，乡移为正，始感激，读论语、韩诗。
现代文：二十三岁的时候，乡里将他转为正卒，他才开始感奋激发，研读《论语》、《韩诗》。
English: When he was twenty-three years old, his village made him a regular student, and he began to be inspired to study "Analects" and "Korean Poetry."

古文：至年二十九，乃结公孙方等就郑玄受学。
现代文：到了二十九岁时，就结交了公孙方等人，到郑玄那里从师学习。
English: At the age of twenty-nine, he made friends with Gongsun Fang and others, and went to study under Zheng Xuan.

古文：学未期，徐州黄巾贼攻破北海，玄与门人到不其山避难。
现代文：学习还不到一年，徐州的黄巾军就攻破了北海，郑玄和他的弟子们到不其山中躲避战乱。
English: After less than a year of study, the Yellow Turban Army of Xuzhou broke through the North Sea, and Zheng Xuan and his disciples went to the mountains to escape the war.

古文：时谷籴县乏，玄罢谢诸生。
现代文：当时在县里买进的粮食很匮乏，郑玄只好遣散学生不再讲学。
English: At that time, the grain purchased in the county was very scarce, and Zheng Xuan had no choice but to dismiss the students and no longer lecture.

古文：琰既受遣，而寇盗充斥，西道不通。
现代文：崔琰被遣散，当时盗匪贼寇到处都是，西行的道路无法通行。
English: At that time, thieves and bandits were everywhere, and the westbound road was impassable.

古文：于是周旋青、徐、兖、豫之郊，东下寿春，南望江、湖。
现代文：于是崔琰就在青、徐、兖、豫四州的郊野徘徊逗留，往东去到寿春，往南也到了长江、洞庭湖地区。
English: So Cui Gan lingered in the countryside of the four states of Qing, Xu, Handan and Henan, went east to Shouchun, and south to the Yangtze River and Dongting Lake areas.

古文：自去家四年乃归，以琴书自娱。
现代文：崔琰自从离开家乡，四年后才回来，在家里以弹琴阅读作为娱乐。
English: Ms. Cui, who returned four years after leaving her hometown, entertained herself at home by playing the piano and reading.

古文：大将军袁绍闻而辟之。
现代文：大将军袁绍闻讯就征召崔琰。
English: When General Yuan Shao heard the news, he conscripted Cui Yao.

古文：时士卒横暴，掘发丘陇，琰谏曰： 昔孙卿有言： 士不素教，甲兵不利，虽汤武不能以战胜。 
现代文：当时袁绍的士兵专横残暴，四处掘开坟墓，崔琰劝谏袁绍说： 从前荀况说过： 平时不教训士兵，哪怕是装备良好的军队，战斗力也不会强大，哪怕是商汤、周武王那样的人，也不能依靠这样的军队取得胜利。 
English: At that time, Yuan Shao's soldiers were despotic and cruel, digging up graves everywhere. Cui Zhen advised Yuan Shao, saying, "I once said: In peacetime, soldiers are not disciplined. Even if the army is well-equipped, the combat effectiveness will not be strong. Even people like Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu cannot rely on such an army to achieve victory.

古文：今道路暴骨，民未见德，宜敕郡县掩骼埋胔，示憯怛之爱，追文王之仁。 
现代文：现在尸骨被暴露在道路上，百姓没有见到您的德政，应该下令命各郡县将路上的尸骨掩埋起来，以表示您对死者的悲痛之情，以追随周文王的仁政。 
English: Now the bones of the dead are exposed on the road, the people have not seen your benevolent government, you should order the counties to bury the bones on the road, to show your sorrow for the dead, to follow the benevolent government of King Zhouwen.

古文：绍以为骑都尉。
现代文：袁绍任命崔琰为骑都尉。
English: Yuan Shao appointed Cui Jun as a cavalry captain.

古文：后绍治兵黎阳，次于延津，琰复谏曰： 天子在许，民望助顺，不如守境述职，以宁区宇。 
现代文：后来袁绍在黎阳练兵，将部队驻扎在延津渡口，崔琰又劝谏说： 天子现在在许昌，百姓都希望帮助顺从朝廷的人，不如固守边境，向天子陈述职守，以安定这片区域。 
English: Later, Yuan Shao trained soldiers in Liyang and stationed his troops at the Yanjin Ferry. Cui Yu also advised Yu Yu that: The Son of Heaven is now in Xuchang, and the people all hope to help those who obey the imperial court. It is better to hold fast to the border and explain their duties to the Son of Heaven in order to stabilize this region.

古文：绍不听，遂败于官渡。
现代文：袁绍没有听从他的话，就在官渡战败。
English: Yuan Shao did not listen to his words and was defeated at Guandu.

古文：及绍卒，二子交争，争欲得琰。
现代文：等到袁绍去世，他的两个儿子互相争斗，都想要得到崔琰。
English: By the time Yuan Shao died, his two sons were fighting each other to get hold of Cui Yu.

古文：琰称疾固辞，由是获罪，幽于囹圄，赖阴夔、陈琳营救得免。
现代文：崔琰称病，坚决推辞，因此遭罪，被幽禁在监狱中，后来仰赖阴夔、陈琳的营救，才免于一死。
English: Cui Yao claimed to be ill and resolutely refused, and as a result, he suffered a crime and was confined in prison. Later, he relied on Yin Yao and Chen Lin for rescue to avoid death.

古文：太祖破袁氏，领冀州牧，辟琰为别驾从事，谓琰曰： 昨案户籍，可得三十万众，故为大州也。 
现代文：太祖攻破袁氏后，兼任冀州牧，征召崔琰担任别驾从事，对崔琰说： 昨日统计户籍，结果可以达到三十万之众，那冀州就是大州了。 
English: After the great-grandfather defeated the Yuan clan, he also served as the pastor of Jizhou, and recruited Cui Yao to serve as the other driver. He said to Cui Yao: Yesterday, the household registration was counted, and the result could reach 300,000 people. Najizhou is a big state.

古文：琰对曰： 今天下分崩，九州幅裂，二袁兄弟亲寻干戈，冀方蒸庶暴骨原野。
现代文：崔琰回答说： 现在天下分裂离散，袁尚、袁谭两兄弟间互相进攻，冀州的百姓尸横遍野。
English: Cui Rong replied, "Nowadays, the world is divided and scattered. The two brothers Yuan Shang and Yuan Tan are attacking each other, and the dead bodies of the people of Jizhou are everywhere.

古文：未闻王师仁声先路，存问风俗，救其涂炭，而校计甲兵，唯此为先，斯岂鄙州士女所望於明公哉！ 
现代文：没有听说正义的军队的仁政先到，探查各地民情风俗，将他们从水深火热中拯救出来，却算计兵力，把它当做首要解决的事，这难道是本州的百姓对明公您的期待吗？ 
English: Did you not hear that the righteous army of benevolence and politics arrived first, explored the folk customs of various regions, and saved them from the depths of the fire, but counted the troops and regarded it as the primary solution? Is this what the people of this state expect from you, Ming Gong?

古文：太祖改容谢之。
现代文：太祖动容，向崔琰道歉。
English: The great-grandfather was moved and apologized to Choi Min.

古文：于时宾客皆伏失色。
现代文：当时在座的宾客都吓得变了脸色。
English: The guests present at the time turned pale with fright.

古文：太祖征并州，留琰傅文帝於邺。
现代文：太祖讨伐并州，留下崔琰在邺城辅佐还是世子的文帝。
English: The great-great-grandfather fought for the annexation of the state, leaving Choe Hee in Yeongseong as an assistant to his son, Emperor Wen.

古文：世子仍出田猎，变易服乘，志在驱逐。
现代文：文帝依然外出狩猎，改换服饰、车马，兴致都在于追赶猎物。
English: Emperor Wen is still out hunting, changing his clothes, car and horse, and his interest is in chasing the prey.

古文：琰书谏曰： 盖闻盘于游田，书之所戒，鲁隐观鱼，春秋讥之。
现代文：崔琰上书劝谏说： 听说周文王不敢以田猎为乐趣，这也是《尚书》中所劝诫的；鲁隐公外出观鱼，《春秋》因此讥讽他。
English: Cui Yao wrote a letter to persuade him, saying: I heard that King Zhou Wen did not dare to take field hunting as fun, which is also the exhortation in the "Shang Shu"; Lu Yin Gong went out to watch fish, "Spring and Autumn" therefore ridiculed him.

古文：此周、孔之格言，二经之明义。
现代文：这是周公、孔子的名言准则，两部经典的要旨义理。
English: This is the famous principle of Zhou Gong and Confucius, and the essence of the two classics.

古文：殷鉴夏后，诗称不远；子卯不乐，礼以为忌，此又近者之得失，不可不深察也。
现代文：殷朝延续夏桀的统治方法，《诗经》中说殷朝的借鉴不能长远；子日、卯日因是疾日不奏音乐，《礼记》中将这件事作为忌讳，这又是时间距离比较近的得失事例，不可以不深入考察啊。
English: The Yin Dynasty continued the ruling methods of the Xia Dynasty. In "The Book of Songs," it is said that the reference of the Yin Dynasty cannot be long-term; Zi Sun and Wu Sun did not play music because of illness. In "The Book of Rites," this matter is regarded as a taboo. This is also a case of gain and loss that is relatively close in time, and must be examined in depth.

古文：袁族富强，公子宽放，盘游滋侈，义声不闻，哲人君子，俄有色斯之志，熊罴壮士，堕於吞噬之用。
现代文：袁氏家族富庶强盛，袁家的公子不受拘束，放荡不羁，四处游乐，用度奢侈，天下人没有听说过关于他们的正义之事，贤能有品德的君子，不久就有远遁避世的想法，勇猛的壮士，不愿意完全被他们任命。
English: The Yuan family is rich and powerful, the sons of the Yuan family are unrestrained, debauched, play everywhere, spend extravagantly, the world has not heard of their justice, the virtuous and virtuous gentleman will soon have the idea of fleeing the world, and the brave men are not willing to be completely appointed by them.

古文：固所以拥徒百万，跨有河朔，无所容足也。
现代文：所以就算他们拥有百万百姓，地盘横跨河朔地区，也没有立足之地。
English: So even if they have a million people and their territory stretches across the Hexuo region, they have no foothold.

古文：今邦国殄瘁，惠康未洽，士女企踵，所思者德。
现代文：现在国家凋敝，恩惠的德政还没有广布天下，天下百姓都踮起脚跟盼望着有德的君主。
English: Now that the country is withering away, the benevolent German government has not yet spread widely throughout the world. People all over the world are looking forward to the rise of a virtuous monarch.

古文：况公亲御戎马，上下劳惨，世子宜遵大路，慎以行正，思经国之高略，内鉴近戒，外扬远节，深惟储副，以身为宝。
现代文：况且您亲自率领军队，各种事情都辛苦地操劳，世子您应该遵循正道，谨慎地端正言行，考虑治理国家的重大谋略，在内借鉴教训，在外发扬高远的气节，多加考虑您作为太子的职责，看重自己的身份。
English: Moreover, you personally lead the army and work hard in all kinds of things. As the son of the world, you should follow the right path, speak and act correctly with caution, consider the major strategies for governing the country, learn from the lessons inside, carry forward the lofty spirit outside, and pay more attention to your duties as the prince and value your own identity.

古文：而猥袭虞旅之贱服，忽驰骛而陵险，志雉兔之小娱，忘社稷之为重，斯诚有识所以恻心也。
现代文：而您现在却降低身份，随意穿着不合身份的卑贱服装，奔走趋赴，身临险地，兴趣都在于捕获野鸡兔子这些小小的娱乐，忘了国家才是更重要的，这实在是让有见识的人为之忧心啊。
English: And now you are lowering your status, casually wearing low-class clothes that do not fit your status, rushing around, in danger, interested in catching pheasants and rabbits, these small entertainments, forgetting that the country is more important. This is really worrying for people with insight.

古文：唯世子燔翳捐褶，以塞众望，不令老臣获罪於天。 
现代文：希望世子您烧毁打猎的器具，丢弃打猎的服装，以满足众人的期望，不让老臣得罪上天。 
English: I hope that you will burn your hunting equipment and discard your hunting clothes in order to meet the expectations of many people and not let your father-in-law offend heaven.

古文：世子报曰： 昨奉嘉命，惠示雅数，欲使燔翳捐褶，翳已坏矣，褶亦去焉。后有此比，蒙复诲诸。 
现代文：世子回复说： 昨天听闻您的恳切教诲，向我展示先贤事例，希望我烧毁打猎的器具，丢弃打猎的服装，现在器具已经烧毁，服装也丢弃了，以后再有类似的事情，希望还能得到您的教诲。 
English: The worldling replied, "Yesterday I heard your earnest teachings, showed me the examples of the sages, and hoped that I would burn the hunting tools and discard the hunting clothes. Now the tools have been burned and the clothes have been discarded. If something similar happens in the future, I hope to receive your teachings.

古文：太祖为丞相，琰复为东西曹掾属徵事。
现代文：太祖担任丞相的时候，崔琰又担任了东西曹掾属征事。
English: When the great-grandfather served as chancellor, Cui Yao also served as the head of the East and West Cao Pi recruitment.

古文：初授东曹时，教曰： 君有伯夷之风，史鱼之直，贪夫慕名而清，壮士尚称而厉，斯可以率时者已。故授东曹，往践厥职。 
现代文：刚授予崔琰东曹的职务时，告诫说： 您有伯夷的风范，史鱼的正直，贪婪的人因仰慕您的声名而变得清廉，勇武的壮士因崇尚您的名声而更加努力，这是可以做为时代的表率的，所以授予东曹的职位，前去践行你的职责吧。 
English: When he had just conferred the post of Eastern Cao on Cui Yao, he admonished: You have the demeanor of a peasant, the honesty of a fisherman, the greedy people have become clean because they admire your reputation, and the brave men have made more efforts because they admire your reputation. This can be used as a model for the times, so confer the post of Eastern Cao, and go and perform your duties.

古文：魏国初建，拜尚书。
现代文：魏国刚建立时，崔琰被任命为尚书。
English: When the State of Wei was first established, Cui Jian was appointed as Shang Shu.

古文：时未立太子，临菑侯植有才而爱。
现代文：当时还没有册立太子，临菑侯曹植有才能而且有仁爱之心。
English: At that time, there was no crown prince yet. Linyi Hou Cao Zhi was talented and kind-hearted.

古文：太祖狐疑，以函令密访於外。
现代文：太祖心中犹豫，用信函下达命令让人在宫外秘密探访。
English: The great-grandfather hesitated and sent a letter ordering someone to secretly visit outside the palace.

古文：唯琰露板答曰： 盖闻春秋之义，立子以长，加五官将仁孝聪明，宜承正统。
现代文：只有崔琰没有缄封奏章回复说： 我知道《春秋》的要义，册立太子应是长子为先，况且五官中郎将曹丕仁德孝顺，聪慧明智，应该承继大统。
English: Only Cui Yao did not read the seal and replied, "I know the essence of "Spring and Autumn." The crown prince should be the eldest son first. Moreover, the middle son of the five officials should be benevolent, dutiful, intelligent and wise, and should succeed to the throne.

古文：琰以死守之。 
现代文：崔琰以死坚守这个准则。 
English: Cui Yong adhered to this principle with his life.

古文：植，琰之兄女婿也。
现代文：曹植，是崔琰兄长的女婿。
English: Cao Zhi is the son-in-law of Cui Yao's elder brother.

古文：太祖贵其公亮，喟然叹息，迁中尉。
现代文：太祖看重他的公正和高风亮节，深有感慨而叹息，提升他为中尉。
English: The great-grandfather valued his justice and high winds, sighed with deep emotion, and promoted him to lieutenant.

古文：琰声姿高畅，眉目疏朗，须长四尺，甚有威重，朝士瞻望，而太祖亦敬惮焉。
现代文：崔琰声音洪亮姿态优雅，眉目清秀，须长四尺，姿态很威严庄重，朝中士人对他很是敬仰，太祖也敬畏他。
English: Choe Ryong's voice is booming, his posture is elegant, his eyes are clear, his mustache is four feet long, and his posture is very dignified. The sergeants in the morning admire him very much, and the ancestors also revere him.

古文：琰尝荐钜鹿杨训，虽才好不足，而清贞守道，太祖即礼辟之。
现代文：崔琰曾经举荐钜鹿人杨训，认为他虽然才能不够，大清廉忠贞，坚守道义，太祖立刻按理解征召他。
English: Cui Yao once recommended Yang Xun, an elk man, to Taizu, believing that although he was not talented enough, he was honest and loyal, and adhered to morality. Taizu immediately conscripted him according to his understanding.

古文：后太祖为魏王，训发表称赞功伐，襃述盛德。
现代文：后来太祖成为魏王，杨训上表称许赞扬太祖的征战之功，记述他崇高的品德。
English: Later, the great-grandfather became the king of Wei, and Yang Xun praised the great-grandfather's military exploits and described his noble character.

古文：时人或笑训希世浮伪，谓琰为失所举。
现代文：当时有人讥笑杨训迎合权势，虚伪无度，认为崔琰举荐的不好的人。
English: At that time, some people ridiculed Yang Xun for pandering to power and hypocrisy, and thought that he was a bad person recommended by Cui Wei.

古文：琰从训取表草视之，与训书曰： 省表，事佳耳！
现代文：崔琰向杨训拿来奏表的草稿看，写信给杨训说： 阅读这篇奏表，只是事情做得好罢了！
English: Cui Wei showed the draft of the report card to Yang Xun and wrote to Yang Xun saying, "Reading this report card, it's just a matter of doing things well!

古文：时乎时乎，会当有变时。 
现代文：时代啊时代，会有改变的时候。 
English: Times, oh times, they are a-changin'.

古文：琰本意讥论者好谴呵而不寻情理也。
现代文：崔琰的本意是讥讽那些喜欢谴责呵叱却不寻求情理的人。
English: Cui Wei's intention was to ridicule those who like to condemn and scold but do not seek reason.

古文：有白琰此书傲世怨谤者，太祖怒曰： 谚言 生女耳 ， 耳 非佳语。 会当有变时 ，意指不逊。 
现代文：有人说崔琰这封信是轻视世人，充满怨恨非议，太祖大怒说： 谚语说 生了女儿罢了 ， 罢了 不是好话。 会有改变的时候 ，意味很不恭敬。 
English: Some people said that Cui Ye's letter was contemptuous of the world, full of resentment and criticism, and the great-grandfather angrily said: The proverb says that a daughter has just been born, it is not a good word.

古文：於是罚琰为徒隶，使人视之，辞色不挠。
现代文：就判罚崔琰为刑徒奴隶，太祖派人去看他，但崔琰言辞神色刚正不屈。
English: He sentenced Choe Hee to be a slave. Taejo sent someone to see him, but Choe Hee's expression was rigid and unyielding.

古文：太祖令曰： 琰虽见刑，而通宾客，门若市人，对宾客虬须直视，若有所瞋。 
现代文：太祖下令说： 崔琰虽然被判刑，但还能和宾客们沟通，门庭若市，很是热闹，对待宾客都是卷曲胡须，直视他们，好像有所嗔怪。 
English: Grandfather ordered: Although Cui Yong was sentenced, he was still able to communicate with the guests. The courtyard was lively, very lively. He treated the guests with curly beards and looked directly at them, as if there was something strange.

古文：遂赐琰死。
现代文：于是就将崔琰赐死了。
English: As a result, Choe Son Gwon was killed.

古文：始琰与司马朗善，晋宣王方壮，琰谓朗曰： 子之弟，聪哲明允，刚断英跱，殆非子之所及也。 
现代文：当初，崔琰和司马朗关系密切，晋宣王司马懿正值壮年，崔琰对司马朗说： 你的弟弟，聪慧贤哲，明理公允，刚毅果断，才智特殊大概不是你能比得上的。 
English: At the beginning, Cui Yao and Sima Lang had a close relationship. When Wang Sima Yao of Jin Xuan was in his prime, Cui Yao said to Sima Lang: Your younger brother, intelligent and wise, reasonable and fair, strong and resolute, with special talent, is probably not comparable to you.

古文：朗以为不然，而琰每秉此论。
现代文：司马朗不这么认为，但崔琰经常秉持这个看法。
English: Sima Lang does not think so, but Cui Wei often holds this view.

古文：琰从弟林，少无名望，虽姻族犹多轻之，而琰常曰： 此所谓大器晚成者也，终必远至。 
现代文：崔琰的堂弟崔林，年少时没有什么名声威望，即使是族中亲戚也大多看轻他，但崔琰经常说： 这就是所谓的才能大的人成功晚的人，最后一定有很好的成就。 
English: When he was young, Cui Yao's cousin Cui Lin didn't have much fame and prestige. Even his relatives in the tribe mostly looked down on him, but Cui Yao often said: This is what is called a person with great talent, a person who succeeds late, and finally must have good achievements.

古文：涿郡孙礼、卢毓始入军府，琰又名之曰： 孙疏亮亢烈，刚简能断，卢清警明理，百炼不消，皆公才也。 
现代文：涿郡的孙礼、卢毓刚刚进入魏王军府，崔琰又评论他们说： 孙礼豁达坚毅，刚强果断，卢毓机智敏锐，明白事理，百折不挠，都是可以担任三公的贤才。 
English: Sun Li and Lu Yao of Handan County had just entered the Wei King's General Headquarters, and Cui Yao also commented on them: Sun Li was open-minded and courageous, strong and decisive, and Lu Yao was sharp-witted, rational, and tireless. They were all capable of serving as the Three Wise Men.

古文：后林、礼、毓咸至鼎辅。
现代文：后来崔林、孙礼、卢毓都做到了宰辅之职。
English: Later, Cui Lin, Sun Li, and Lu Wei all became vice-premiers.

古文：及琰友人公孙方、宋阶早卒，琰抚其遗孤，恩若己子。
现代文：等到崔琰的朋友公孙方、宋阶早年去世，崔琰抚养他们的遗孤，就像对自己的儿子一样恩养他们。
English: When Cui Gan's friends Gongsun Fang and Song Ji died at an early age, Cui Gan raised their orphaned children as if they were her own sons.

古文：其鉴识笃义，类皆如此。
现代文：崔琰审察辨识人才，坚守情谊，大都是像这样的事。
English: Most of the things that Cui Junxuan observed, such as identifying talents and adhering to friendship, were like this.

古文：初，太祖性忌，有所不堪者，鲁国孔融、南阳许攸、娄圭，皆以恃旧不虔见诛。
现代文：当初，太祖性格好猜忌，有他不能容忍的人，如鲁国人孔融、南阳人许攸、娄圭，都因为倚仗太祖旧部的身份，对太祖不恭敬被诛杀。
English: At first, the great-grandfather had a suspicious character. Some people he could not tolerate, such as Kong Rong from Lu, Xu You from Nanyang, and Xing Gui, were all killed because they relied on the identity of the old part of the great-grandfather and did not respect the great-grandfather.

古文：而琰最为世所痛惜，至今冤之。
现代文：而崔琰是最被世人感到心痛惋惜的，到现在都还为他抱冤。
English: However, Cui Gan is the most pitied by the world, and people are still holding a grudge against him.

古文：毛玠字孝先，陈留平丘人也。
现代文：毛玠字孝先，陈留郡平丘县人。
English: He was a native of Pingqiu County, Chenlu County.

古文：少为县吏，以清公称。
现代文：年少时当过县吏，以清廉公允为人称道。
English: When he was a young man, he was a county official and was known for his honesty and integrity.

古文：将避乱荆州，未至，闻刘表政令不明，遂往鲁阳。
现代文：毛玠打算到荆州躲避战乱，还没有到，得知刘表法令不明确，就前往鲁阳。
English: Mao Xuan planned to go to Jingzhou to escape the war, but before he arrived, he learned that the Liu watch law was not clear, so he went to Luyang.

古文：太祖临兖州，辟为治中从事。
现代文：太祖来到衮州，征召他为治中从事。
English: The great-grandfather came to Zhangzhou and recruited him to be engaged in middle-level governance.

古文：玠语太祖曰： 今天下分崩，国主迁移，生民废业，饥馑流亡，公家无经岁之储，百姓无安固之志，难以持久。
现代文：毛玠对太祖说： 现在天下分崩离析，国君四处流离不在京都，百姓荒废本业，缺乏食物，四处流亡，公家没有能维持一年的储备，百姓没有安稳固定的想法，这样是很难长久坚持的。
English: Mao Tse-tung said to Taizu, "Nowadays, the world is falling apart, the sovereign is wandering all over the place and is not in Kyoto, the people have abandoned their profession, lack of food, and are exiled everywhere, the public sector does not have enough reserves to last a year, and the people do not have a stable and fixed idea. It is difficult to persist for a long time.

古文：今袁绍、刘表，虽士民众强，皆无经远之虑，未有树基建本者也。
现代文：现在袁绍、刘表虽然兵民众多，势力强大，但都没有长远的思量，没有树立基础、建立根本。
English: Now, although Yuan Shao and Liu Biao have many soldiers and people and powerful forces, they do not have long-term thinking, do not establish a foundation and establish a foundation.

古文：夫兵义者胜，守位以财，宜奉天子以令不臣，脩耕植，畜军资，如此则霸王之业可成也。 
现代文：军事，要合乎道义的才能胜利，要依靠财力才能守住地位，应该尊奉天子，号令那些不肯服从的人，努力发展农业，储备军用物资，这样，称霸称王的伟业就能成功了。 
English: In the military, it is necessary to be moral to win, to rely on financial resources to hold the position, to respect the Son of God, to order those who refuse to obey, to work hard to develop agriculture, to reserve military materials, so that the great cause of dominating the king can succeed.

古文：太祖敬纳其言，转幕府功曹。
现代文：太祖郑重地接纳了他的建议，调任他为幕府功曹。
English: The great-grandfather solemnly accepted his suggestion and appointed him as a shogunate meritorious officer.

古文：太祖为司空丞相，玠尝为东曹掾，与崔琰并典选举。其所举用，皆清正之士，虽於时有盛名而行不由本者，终莫得进。
现代文：太祖担任司空丞相时，毛玠曾经担任东曹掾，和崔琰一起主管官员的选拔举荐，那些被他举荐任用的人，都是清廉公正的士人，那些虽然在当时负有盛名但是行为没有准则的人，最后都没有得到举荐。
English: When the great-great-grandfather served as the prime minister, Mao Jun had served as the East Cao Jun, and together with Cui Jun recommended the selection of the competent officials. Those who were recommended by him were all honest and fair scholars. Those who had a reputation at the time but did not have a code of conduct did not get recommended in the end.

古文：务以俭率人，由是天下之士莫不以廉节自励，虽贵宠之臣，舆服不敢过度。
现代文：他追求以节俭作为他人表率，因此天下的士人没有不以清廉节义勉励自己的，即使是显贵受宠信的臣子，车马服饰也不敢超越限度。
English: He pursued frugality as a model for others, so the world's scholars did not have to encourage themselves with honesty and integrity. Even if they were nobles and favored courtiers, they did not dare to exceed the limits of chariot and horse costumes.

古文：太祖叹曰： 用人如此，使天下人自治，吾复何为哉！ 
现代文：太祖感叹说： 像这样任用人才，让天下百姓自己治理自己，我还需要做什么呢！ 
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said: What else do I need to do after appointing talents like this and letting the people of the world govern themselves?

古文：文帝为五官将，亲自诣玠，属所亲眷。
现代文：文帝还是五官中郎将时，亲自去见毛玠，将自己的亲属嘱托给他任用。
English: When Emperor Wen was still a middle-ranking official, he personally went to see Mao Kun and entrusted his relatives to him for appointment.

古文：玠答曰： 老臣以能守职，幸得免戾，今所说人非迁次，是以不敢奉命。 
现代文：毛玠回答说： 老臣因为能恪尽职守，才侥幸免于获罪，现在您说说的人不符合提升的标准，所以不敢遵从您的命令。 
English: Mao Yu replied, "The old minister was able to get away with the crime because he was able to fulfill his duties. Now you say that the person does not meet the criteria for promotion, so he does not dare to follow your order.

古文：大军还邺，议所并省。
现代文：大军返回邺城后，大臣们商议将官职合并。
English: After the large army returned to Lucheng, the ministers discussed merging the posts.

古文：玠请谒不行，时人惮之，咸欲省东曹。
现代文：毛玠对私下对他的请求都没有同意，当时的人忌惮他，都想要撤除东曹的职位。
English: Mao Yao did not agree to his request in private. People at the time were afraid of him and wanted to remove Dong Cao from his position.

古文：乃共白曰： 旧西曹为上，东曹为次，宜省东曹。 
现代文：就一起上告说： 从前西曹在上，东曹其次，应该撤除东曹。 
English: They appealed together, saying: In the past, the West Cao was on top, and the East Cao was second, and the East Cao should be removed.

古文：太祖知其情，令曰： 日出於东，月盛於东，凡人言方，亦复先东，何以省东曹？ 
现代文：太祖知道他们的想法，下令说： 太阳从东面升起，月亮在东面明亮，普通人说到方向，也是先说东方，为什么要撤除东曹？ 
English: The great-grandfather knew what they were thinking and ordered: "The sun rises in the east, the moon shines brightly in the east, and when ordinary people talk about the direction, they say the east first. Why remove Dong Cao?

古文：遂省西曹。
现代文：于是撤除了西曹。
English: As a result, the high-ranking official was removed.

古文：初，太祖平柳城，班所获器物，特以素屏风素冯几赐玠，曰： 君有古人之风，故赐君古人之服。 
现代文：当初，太祖平定流程，赏赐所缴获的物品，特地将素色屏风和凭几赐给毛玠，说： 您有古代贤人的风范，所以赐给您古人的用具。 
English: At first, the great ancestor smoothed out the process and rewarded the seized items. He specially gave the plain-colored screen and some money to Mao Yao, saying: You have the style of an ancient sage, so I give you the tools of the ancients.

古文：玠居显位，常布衣蔬食，抚育孤兄子甚笃，赏赐以振施贫族，家无所馀。迁右军师。
现代文：毛玠身居高位经常穿布衣吃素菜，尽心尽力地抚养教育哥哥的儿子。所得到的赏赐都救济布施贫困的族人，家中没有什么钱财后来被提升为右军师。
English: Mao Dun, who held a high position, often wore cloth clothes and ate vegetarian food. He did his best to raise and educate his brother's son. The rewards he received were all for the relief of the poor people. There was little money in the family, and he was later promoted to the right army division.

古文：魏国初建，为尚书仆射，复典选举。
现代文：魏国建立初期，毛玠担任尚书仆射，又主管官员选拔任用。
English: In the early days of the founding of the State of Wei, Mao Yao served as Shang Shu's aide-de-camp, and the responsible officials were selected and appointed.

古文：时太子未定，而临菑侯植有宠，玠密谏曰： 近者袁绍以嫡庶不分，覆宗灭国。
现代文：当时太子人选还没有确定，而临菑侯曹植受到恩宠，毛玠暗中劝谏太祖说： 眼前有袁绍因为嫡子庶子不区分，导致宗族覆灭，国家败亡。
English: At that time, the choice of the crown prince had not yet been determined, but Cao Zhi, the lord of Linyi, was favored, and Mao Zheng secretly advised the great-grandfather to say: In front of us is Yuan Shao, because he did not distinguish between the legitimate son and the illegitimate son, which led to the destruction of the clan and the defeat of the country.

古文：废立大事，非所宜闻。 
现代文：太子的废立是大事，不应该是我们听到的消息。 
English: The dethronement of the crown prince is a major event and should not be the news we hear about.

古文：后群僚会，玠起更衣，太祖目指曰： 此古所谓国之司直，我之周昌也。 
现代文：后来百官聚会，毛玠起身去厕所，太祖看着他说： 这就是所谓的国家的正直的人，我的周昌啊。 
English: Later, when the officials gathered, Mao Dun got up to go to the toilet, and Taizu looked at him and said, "This is the so-called honest man of the country, my Zhou Chang."

古文：崔琰既死，玠内不悦。
现代文：崔琰被赐死，毛玠心中不高兴。
English: When Choi Min was sentenced to death, Mao Yao was not happy.

古文：后有白玠者： 出见黥面反者，其妻子没为官奴婢，玠言曰 使天不雨者盖此也 。 太祖大怒，收玠付狱。
现代文：后来有人举报毛玠说： 毛玠出门看到因犯罪被在脸上刺字的人，将他们的妻子儿女都籍没为官家奴婢，毛玠还说 天不下雨大概就是因为这些吧 。 
English: Later, someone reported to Mao Xuan that: Mao Xuan went out and saw people who had been tattooed on their faces for crimes. He did not consider their wives and children to be official slaves. Mao Xuan also said that it was probably because of these reasons that it did not rain.

古文：大理锺繇诘玠曰： 自古圣帝明王，罪及妻子。
现代文：太祖非常生气，将毛玠收押关进监狱大理寺卿锺繇诘问毛玠说： 自古以来圣哲贤明的君主，犯罪了也要殃及家人。
English: The great-great-grandfather was very angry, and he took Mao Kun into custody and put him in prison. The lord of the Dali Temple asked Mao Kun, "Since ancient times, the saintly and wise monarch, if he commits a crime, it will also affect his family.

古文：书云： 左不共左，右不共右，予则孥戮女。 
现代文：《尚书》中说： 车左不尽车左的职责，车右不尽车右的职责，我就会将你们的子孙一起诛杀。 
English: "Shangshu" said: If the left car does not perform the duties of the left car, and the right car does not perform the duties of the right car, I will kill your children and grandchildren together.

古文：司寇之职，男子入于罪隶，女子入于舂槁。
现代文：《周礼》中记载司寇的职责，男子犯罪，就没入官府为奴隶，女子犯罪就没入官府舂米。
English: "Weekly Rituals" records the duties of the Scouts. If a man commits a crime, he is not taken to the government office as a slave. If a woman commits a crime, she is not taken to the government office.

古文：汉律，罪人妻子没为奴婢，黥面。
现代文：汉代律法规定，有罪之人的妻子儿女没入官府为奴婢，在脸上刺字。
English: Han Dynasty law stipulated that the wives and children of the guilty were to be taken into the government as slaves, and their faces were to be tattooed.

古文：汉法所行黥墨之刑，存於古典。
现代文：汉朝法律实行的在脸上刺字的刑罚，在古代典籍中已经有记载。
English: The punishment of tattooing a character on the face, which was enforced by Han Dynasty law, has been recorded in ancient classics.

古文：今真奴婢祖先有罪，虽历百世，犹有黥面供官，一以宽良民之命，二以宥并罪之辜。
现代文：现在真正的奴隶祖先有罪，虽然经过了百代，依然还要在脸上刺字，供官府役使，一方面是为了减轻普通百姓的负担，另一方面是为了宽恕犯人的罪过。
English: Now the true slave ancestors are guilty, although after a hundred generations, they still have to tattoo their faces to serve the government, on the one hand to lighten the burden of ordinary people, on the other hand to forgive the sins of prisoners.

古文：此何以负於神明之意，而当致旱？
现代文：这样怎么会违背神明的意思而导致出现旱灾呢？
English: How could this lead to drought, contrary to the will of the gods?

古文：案典谋，急恒寒若，舒恒燠若，宽则亢阳，所以为旱。
现代文：依照《尚书》中的说法，律法严峻，天气就会寒冷，律法宽松，天气就会炎热，所以才导致旱灾。
English: According to the Shangshu, if the law is severe, the weather will be cold, and if the law is lax, the weather will be hot, which will lead to drought.

古文：玠之吐言，以为宽邪，以为急也？
现代文：毛玠你说的话，是认为律法太严峻呢，还是太宽松呢？
English: Do you think the law is too harsh or too lenient?

古文：急当阴霖，何以反旱？
现代文：如果是律法严峻，那就应该降雨不断，怎么反而大旱呢？
English: For if the law had been faultless, there would have been much rain; but there has been no drought.

古文：成汤圣世，野无生草，周宣令主，旱魃为虐。
现代文：在成汤那个圣明的时代，田野中不长青草，周宣王是很好的君主，但也出现大旱灾。
English: In the enlightened era of Chengdu and Tang, grass did not grow in the fields. King Zhou Xuan was a good monarch, but there was also a great drought.

古文：亢旱以来，积三十年，归咎黥面，为相值不？
现代文：天下大旱以来，已经有三十年了，将过错归咎于给犯人脸上刺字，相互之间有关联吗？
English: Thirty years on from the drought, is there a link between the crime of tattooing prisoners' faces?

古文：卫人伐邢，师兴而雨，罪恶无徵，何以应天？
现代文：春秋时期的卫人征伐邢国，刚发兵就天降大雨，如果邢国的罪恶没有征兆，上天怎么会出现预示？
English: During the Spring and Autumn Period, the Guardians of Heaven and Earth conquered the State of Qi. As soon as they sent troops, heavy rain fell from the sky. If there was no sign of the evil of the State of Qi, how could the heavens foreshadow it?

古文：玠讥谤之言，流於下民，不悦之声，上闻圣听。
现代文：毛玠你讽刺诽谤的话已经流传到下层百姓中，百姓不满意的声音，君主已经听说了。
English: Mao Xuan, your sarcastic and slanderous words have spread to the lower-class people, and the voice of the people's dissatisfaction has been heard by the monarch.

古文：玠之吐言，势不独语，时见黥面，凡为几人？
现代文：毛玠你说出这样的话，一定不是对自己说的，当时你看到的脸上刺字的人，一个有几个？
English: Mao Kun, when you say something like that, you must not be saying it to yourself. How many people did you see at the time who had tattoos on their faces?

古文：事已发露，不得隐欺，具以状对。 
现代文：脸上刺字的奴婢，你认识吗？事情已经被揭露出来，你不能隐瞒欺骗，将详细情形完整地说出来。 
English: Do you know the male and female slaves who have tattoos on their faces? The matter has been exposed. You can't hide the deception and give a full account of the details.

古文：玠曰： 臣闻萧生缢死，困於石显；贾子放外，谗在绛、灌；白起赐剑於杜邮；晁错致诛於东市；伍员绝命於吴都。
现代文：毛玠说： 我听说萧望自缢而死，是因为被石显陷害；贾谊被流放外地，是因为被周勃、灌婴的谗言中伤；白起在杜邮被赐剑自刎；晁错在东市被斩杀；伍子胥在吴都死去。
English: Mao Yu said: I heard that Xiao Wang committed suicide and died because he was framed by Shi Xian; Jia Yi was exiled because he was slandered by Zhou Bo and Huan Yu; Bai Qi was given a sword to commit suicide in Du Po; Zou Er was beheaded in Dongshi; Wu Zi Yu died in Wudu.

古文：斯数子者，或妒其前，或害其后。
现代文：这几个人，有的因为被人公开嫉妒，有的因为被人暗中陷害。
English: These few people, some because they were publicly envied, some because they were secretly framed.

古文：臣垂龆执简，累勤取官，职在机近，人事所窜。
现代文：我年少的时候就担任县吏，通过累计勤勉获得官职，官职又在机密近要的地方，涉及很多人事关系。
English: When I was young, I worked as a county official. Through accumulated diligence, I obtained an official position. The official position is in a confidential and important place, involving many personnel relationships.

古文：属臣以私，无势不绝，语臣以冤，无细不理。
现代文：如果有人想借私情请托办事，无论什么样的权势我都是回绝的，如果有人向我陈诉冤情，无论多小的事情我都认真审理。
English: If someone wants to ask me to do something for personal reasons, no matter what kind of power I have, I will refuse. If someone complains to me, no matter how small the matter is, I will seriously consider it.

古文：人情淫利，为法所禁，法禁于利，势能害之。
现代文：如果人的心理是想不断追求利益，这是律法所禁止的，如果依照律法禁止非法取得私利的行为，有权势的人就会陷害他。
English: If a person's mentality is to constantly pursue profit, which is prohibited by the law, and if the act of illegally obtaining personal gain is prohibited according to the law, the powerful will frame him.

古文：青蝇横生，为臣作谤，谤臣之人，势不在他。
现代文：那些谗佞小人，对我进行诽谤，那些诽谤我的一定不是其他人。
English: Those who slander me, those who defame me, must not be other people.

古文：昔王叔、陈生争正王廷，宣子平理。
现代文：从前王叔、陈生与伯舆在朝堂山争论，范宣子公平处理。
English: Once upon a time, Wang Xiu, Chen Sheng and Bo Myou had an argument on Chaodang Mountain, and Fan Xuan Zi handled it fairly.

古文：命举其契，是非有宜，曲直有所，春秋嘉焉，是以书之。
现代文：他让他们各自拿出证据，使对错评论得当，是非各得其所，《春秋》中赞扬这件事，所以将其记录下来。
English: He asked each of them to come up with evidence, so that the right and wrong comments were appropriate, and the rights and wrongs were appropriate. "Spring and Autumn" praised this matter, so it was recorded.

古文：臣不言此，无有时、人。
现代文：我没有说过那样的话，也没有时间、地点。
English: I didn't say anything like that, there's no time or place.

古文：说臣此言，必有徵要。
现代文：说我说过这样的话，一定要有证据。
English: If I said something like that, there must be evidence.

古文：乞蒙宣子之辨，而求王叔之对。
现代文：请求得到范宣子那样的评断，和王叔那样的人对质。
English: Request to get the judgment like Fan Xuan Zi, and the confrontation like Uncle Wang.

古文：若臣以曲闻，即刑之日，方之安驷之赠；赐剑之来，比之重赏之惠。
现代文：如果确实是我的过错，即将行刑的那天，我会像得到车马赠送那样坦然赴死；赐来让我自刎的剑，我会将它看做厚重赏赐的恩惠。
English: If it is indeed my fault, on the day of my execution, I will die as calmly as if I had been given a horse and carriage; if I were given a sword with which to kill myself, I would consider it a great boon.

古文：谨以状对。 
现代文：希望用这份状书回答你的话。 
English: We hope to answer your words with this petition.

古文：时桓阶、和洽进言救玠。
现代文：当时桓阶与和洽进言援救毛玠。
English: At that time, Kanpo and Kazuchika came forward to rescue Mao Ying.

古文：玠遂免黜，卒于家。
现代文：毛玠就免于一死，被罢免了官职，后来在家中去世。
English: Mao Yao was spared death, was removed from office, and later died at home.

古文：太祖赐棺器钱帛，拜子机郎中。
现代文：太祖赏赐棺木、祭器、钱和绢帛，任命他的儿子毛机为郎中。
English: The great-grandfather rewarded him with a coffin, sacrificial vessels, money and a plough, and appointed his son Mao Ji as his assistant.

古文：徐奕字季才，东莞人也。
现代文：徐奕字季才，东莞人。
English: Xu Yi Zi Ji Cai, from Dongguan.

古文：避难江东，孙策礼命之。
现代文：到江东地区躲避战乱，孙策按照礼节任命他。
English: To the east of the Yangtze River to escape the war, Sun Ce appointed him in accordance with etiquette.

古文：奕改姓名，微服还本郡。
现代文：徐奕改换了姓名，穿着平民衣服回到故郡。
English: Xu Yi changed his name and returned to his former county in civilian clothes.

古文：太祖为司空，辟为掾属，从西征马超。
现代文：太祖担任司空，征召他为掾属，跟随太祖往西征讨马超。
English: The great-grandfather served as a steward of the sky, conscripted him as a member of the clan, and followed the great-grandfather to the west to fight Ma Chao.

古文：超破，军还。
现代文：马超被攻破，大军返回。
English: Ma Chao was defeated and the army returned.

古文：时关中新服，未甚安，留奕为丞相长史，镇抚西京，西京称其威信。
现代文：当时关中地区刚被征服，还不是很安定，太祖就将徐奕留下担任丞相长史，镇守安抚西京，西京的百姓都称赞他的威望信誉。
English: At that time, the Guanzhong area had just been conquered and was not very stable. The great-grandfather left Xu Yi to serve as chancellor for a long time, and the town guard pacified Xijing. The people of Xijing all praised his prestige and credibility.

古文：转为雍州刺史，复还为东曹属。
现代文：后来徐奕转任雍州刺史，又返回担任东曹属。
English: Later, Xu Yi was transferred to the post of Yongzhou magistrate, and then returned to the post of Dong Cao subordinate.

古文：丁仪等见宠於时，并害之，而奕终不为动。
现代文：丁仪等人在当时很受宠信，都嫉妒徐奕，徐奕始终没有什么反应。
English: Ding Yi and others were very popular at that time. They were all jealous of Xu Yi. Xu Yi never reacted.

古文：出为魏郡太守。
现代文：徐奕出京担任魏郡太守。
English: Xu Yi went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Wei County.

古文：太祖征孙权，徙为留府长史，谓奕曰： 君之忠亮，古人不过也，然微太严。
现代文：太祖征讨孙权，将徐奕转为留府长史，对徐奕说： 您的忠诚坚贞，古人也比不上，但稍微有些严苛了。
English: The great-grandfather conquered Sun Quan and turned Xu Yi into the governor of Liufu. He said to Xu Yi, "Your loyalty and steadfastness are unmatched by the ancients, but you are a bit harsh."

古文：昔西门豹佩韦以自缓，夫能以柔弱制刚强者，望之於君也。
现代文：从前西门豹佩戴皮绳以缓解自己的急躁，能凭借柔弱克制刚强，是我们对您的期望。
English: Once upon a time, the western leopards wore leather cords to ease their impatience. We expect you to be strong by virtue of your softness and restraint.

古文：今使君统留事，孤无复还顾之忧也。 
现代文：现在让您主管留守事宜，我没有什么可顾虑的了。 
English: Now that your supervisor is staying, I have nothing to worry about.

古文：魏国既建，为尚书，复典选举，迁尚书令。
现代文：魏国建立以后，徐奕被任命为尚书，又主管官员选拔举荐，又提升为尚书令。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, Xu Yi was appointed as Shangshu, and the competent officials selected and recommended him, and he was promoted to Shangshu Ling.

古文：太祖征汉中，魏讽等谋反，中尉杨俊左迁。
现代文：太祖征讨汉中时，魏讽等人密谋反叛，中尉杨俊被降职。
English: When Emperor Taizu invaded Han, Wei Yi and others conspired to rebel, and Lieutenant Yang Jun was demoted.

古文：太祖叹曰： 讽所以敢生乱心，以吾爪牙之臣无遏奸防谋者故也。
现代文：太祖感叹说： 魏讽之所以胆敢生出叛乱之心，都是因为辅助我的大臣中没有能够阻止奸邪防备阴谋的人。
English: The great-grandfather sighed and said, "The reason why Wei Lin dared to have a rebellious heart was because there was no one in the ministry to assist me who could stop the treachery and plot.

古文：安得如诸葛丰者，使代俊乎！ 
现代文：怎么样才能得到像诸葛丰那样的人，让他们代替杨俊呢？ 
English: How can we get someone like Zhu Gefeng to replace Yang Jun?

古文：桓阶曰： 徐奕其人也。 
现代文：桓阶说： 徐奕这个人可以。 
English: Kanpo said, "Xu Yi is a good singer.

古文：太祖乃以奕为中尉，手令曰： 昔楚有子玉，文公为之侧席而坐；汲黯在朝，淮南为之折谋。
现代文：太祖就任命徐奕为中尉，亲下命令说： 从前楚国有子玉，晋文公因此不能安坐；汲黯在汉朝庭上，淮南王因此图谋不成功。
English: The great-grandfather appointed Xu Yi as a lieutenant, and personally ordered: In the past, Chu had Zidama, so Jin Wen Gong could not sit quietly; He was in the court of the Han Dynasty, so King Huainan's plot was unsuccessful.

古文：诗称 邦之司直 ，君之谓与！ 
现代文：《诗经》中说 国家的正直之人 ，说的就是您啊！ 
English: In the Book of Songs, it says, "Honest men of the nation," and it is you who are speaking!

古文：在职数月，疾笃乞退，拜谏议大夫，卒。
现代文：徐奕在官任上几个月，因为病重请求离职，被任命为谏议大夫，不久就逝世了。
English: A few months into his term of office, Xu Yi was asked to resign due to serious illness, and was appointed as a medical doctor. He passed away soon after.

古文：何夔字叔龙，陈郡阳夏人也。
现代文：何夔字叔龙，陈郡阳夏人。
English: He Zhaozhu Shulong, Chen County Yang Xia Ren.

古文：曾祖父熙，汉安帝时官至车骑将军。
现代文：他的曾祖父何熙，在汉安帝时做到了车骑将军的位置。
English: His great-grandfather, He Xi, achieved the position of chariot and cavalry general in the Han Dynasty.

古文：夔幼丧父，与母兄居，以孝友称。
现代文：何夔年幼时父亲就去世了，和母亲与兄长住在一起，他以恭孝友爱为人称道。
English: His father died when he was young, and he lived with his mother and older brother. He was known for his filial piety.

古文：长八尺三寸，容貌矜严。
现代文：身高八尺三寸，相貌矜持严整。
English: He is eight feet three inches tall, with a reserved and neat appearance.

古文：避乱淮南。
现代文：他曾经到淮南地区躲避战乱。
English: He once went to Huainan to escape the war.

古文：后袁术至寿春，辟之，夔不应，然遂为术所留。
现代文：后来袁术到了寿春，征召他为官，何夔没有答应，但最后还是被袁术强留下。
English: Later, Yuan Shuxun came to Shuchun and recruited him as an official. He Yao did not agree, but in the end he was left behind by Yuan Shuxiang.

古文：久之，术与桥蕤俱攻围蕲阳，蕲阳为太祖固守。术以夔彼郡人，欲胁令说蕲阳。
现代文：很久之后，袁术和桥蕤一起围攻蕲阳，太祖率军死守蕲阳，袁术因为和何夔是蕲阳本郡人，打算胁迫他前去游说蕲阳城里的人。
English: After a long time, Yuan Shou and Qiao Yao besieged Poyang together. Grandfather led the army to defend Poyang. Since Yuan Shou and He Yao were from Poyang County, Yuan Shou intended to coerce him to go and lobby the people in Poyang.

古文：夔谓术谋臣李业曰： 昔柳下惠闻伐国之谋而有忧色，曰 吾闻伐国不问仁人，斯言何为至于我哉 ！ 
现代文：何夔对袁术的谋臣李业说： 从前柳下惠得知要讨伐别国的计划，脸上有忧虑的神情，说 我听说讨伐别国是不需要询问仁义之人的，这样的话怎么会到我这里来呢 ！ 
English: He Yao said to Li Ye, Yuan Shu's adviser: Once upon a time, Liu Xiahui learned of Yuan Shu's plan to invade other countries. She had a worried look on her face and said, "I've heard that you don't need to ask people of benevolence and righteousness about invading other countries. If that's the case, why did you come to me?"

古文：遂遁匿灊山。
现代文：于是就逃走躲藏在灊山。
English: So he ran away and hid in Shaoshan.

古文：术知夔终不为己用，乃止。
现代文：袁术知道何夔终究不会被自己任用，就打消了让他去劝降的念头。
English: Yuan Shuxu knew that he would not be appointed by himself after all, so he dismissed the idea of persuading him to resign.

古文：术从兄山阳太守遗母，夔从姑也，是以虽恨夔而不加害。
现代文：袁术的堂兄山阳太守袁遗的母亲，是何夔的堂姑，所以袁术虽然心中怨恨何夔但也没有伤害他。
English: Yuan Shuxu's cousin, Shanyang Daju, the mother of Yuan Yu, was He Yao's cousin, so although Yuan Shuxu hated He Yao in his heart, he did not hurt him.

古文：建安二年，夔将还乡里，度术必急追，乃间行得免，明年到本郡。
现代文：建安二年，何夔即将返回故乡，估计袁术一定会迅速追上来，就从小路走，得以顺利离开，第二年回到故郡。
English: In the second year of Jian'an, when He Yao was about to return to his hometown, he expected that Yuan Shu would quickly catch up with him, so he took the path and was able to leave smoothly, and returned to his hometown the next year.

古文：顷之，太祖辟为司空掾属。
现代文：不久，太祖征召他担任司空掾属。
English: Soon after, Emperor Taizu conscripted him to serve as the second-in-command.

古文：时有传袁术军乱者，太祖问夔曰； 君以为信不？ 
现代文：当时有人传言说袁术军中出现动乱，太祖问何夔说： 您认为可信吗？ 
English: At that time, there was a rumor that there was turmoil in Yuan Shuxun's army. The great-grandfather asked He Jun and said: Do you think it is credible?

古文：夔对曰： 天之所助者顺，人之所助者信。
现代文：何夔回答说： 上天帮助的是顺应天意的人，百姓帮助的是信守承诺的人。
English: He Rong replied: Heaven helps those who conform to the will of Heaven, and the people help those who keep their promises.

古文：术无信顺之实，而望天人之助，此不可以得志於天下。
现代文：袁术没有顺应天意和信守承诺的作为，却希望上天和人民都帮助他，这是不会实现自己的志向的。
English: Yuan Shu did not conform to the will of heaven and keep his promise, but hoped that heaven and the people would help him. This would not achieve his ambition.

古文：夫失道之主，亲戚叛之，而况於左右乎！
现代文：失去道义的君主，亲朋好友都会背叛他，更何况是左右的人呢！
English: If a monarch loses his moral compass, his relatives and friends will all betray him, not to mention those around him!

古文：以夔观之，其乱必矣。 
现代文：按我的看法，这个动乱是一定的。 
English: In my opinion, this turmoil is inevitable.

古文：太祖曰； 为国失贤则亡。
现代文：太祖说： 治理国家，失去了贤能之人。
English: The great-grandfather said, "We have lost a capable person to govern the country.

古文：君不为术所用；乱，不亦宜乎！ 
现代文：国家就会灭亡。您不肯被袁术任用；那他军中动乱，不是应该发生的吗！ 
English: The country will perish. You do not want to be appointed by Yuan Shou; then shouldn't there be turmoil in his army?

古文：太祖性严，掾属公事，往往加杖；夔常畜毒药，誓死无辱，是以终不见及。
现代文：太祖性情严酷，掾属处理公事，经常受到杖刑；何夔经常带着毒药，发誓宁愿死也不愿受到侮辱，所以一直都没有受到杖刑。
English: The great-grandfather had a harsh temperament. He was often punished with a cane for handling public affairs. He often carried poison and swore that he would rather die than be insulted, so he was never punished with a cane.

古文：出为城父令。
现代文：后来何夔出京担任城父令。
English: Later, Ho Ho went to Beijing to serve as the mayor of the city.

古文：迁长广太守。
现代文：又调任为长广太守。
English: He was also transferred to the position of Changguang Taishu.

古文：郡滨山海，黄巾未平，豪杰多背叛，袁谭就加以官位。
现代文：长广郡靠山临海，黄巾军还没有平定，当地英雄豪杰大多反叛，袁谭立即授予他们官职。
English: The mountains of Changguang County are adjacent to the sea, the Yellow Turban Army has not yet been subdued, and most of the local heroes and heroes have rebelled. Yuan Tan immediately awarded them official positions.

古文：长广县人管承，徒众三千馀家，为寇害。
现代文：长广县人管承，有兵众三千多家，成为贼寇祸害。
English: Changguang County, with more than 3,000 soldiers, has become a scourge of banditry.

古文：议者欲举兵攻之。
现代文：商议的人打算率军攻打他。
English: The negotiators planned to lead an army against him.

古文：夔曰： 承等非生而乐乱也，习於乱，不能自还，未被德教，故不知反善。
现代文：何夔说： 管承等人也不是生来就愿意为害百姓的，他们习惯于作乱，不能自行改正，没有受到仁德的教化，所以不知道改过向善。
English: He Wei said: Guancheng and others are not born with the desire to harm the people. They are accustomed to creating chaos, cannot correct themselves, and have not been educated by benevolence, so they do not know how to change for the better.

古文：今兵迫之急，彼恐夷灭，必并力战。
现代文：现在用军队追击他们太急，他们担心被消灭，一定联合起来全力作战。
English: It is too urgent to pursue them with troops now. They are worried about being wiped out, so they must unite and fight with all their strength.

古文：攻之既未易拔，虽胜，必伤吏民，不如徐喻以恩德，使容自悔，可不烦兵而定。 
现代文：既然攻打他们不容易攻克，即使取胜，也一定会伤害到官吏百姓，不如慢慢地将我们的恩德告知他们，让他们得以自己悔改，那就可以不用出兵也可以平定他们了。 
English: Since attacking them is not easy, and even if we win, it will certainly hurt the officials and the people, it is better to slowly inform them of our benevolence, so that they can repent themselves, then they can be pacified without sending troops.

古文：乃遣郡丞黄珍在，为陈成败，承等皆请服。
现代文：就派遣郡丞黄珍前去，向他们陈述成败的利害关系，管承等人都请求归附。
English: Huang Zhen, the county magistrate, was dispatched to explain to them the stakes of success or failure, and the stewards and others all requested to be annexed.

古文：夔遣吏成弘领校尉，长广县丞等郊迎奉牛酒，诣郡。
现代文：何夔派遣官员成弘兼任校尉，长广县丞等人带着牛和酒到郊外迎接，将他们带到郡中治所。
English: He sent officials including Cheng Hong, who also served as a school captain, and Chang Guang Xian Rong, to the suburbs with cattle and wine to welcome them and take them to the county civil affairs office.

古文：矣平贼从钱，众亦数千，夔率郡兵与张辽共讨定之。
现代文：矣平的贼寇从钱，部众也有几千人，何夔率领郡中军队和张辽一起征讨并平定了他。
English: Yiping's bandits from Qian also had several thousand followers. He Ying led the county's middle army and Zhang Liao together to fight and subdue him.

古文：东牟人王营，众三千馀家，胁昌阳县为乱。
现代文：东牟人王营，部众有三千多家，胁迫昌阳县中的百姓作乱。
English: Dongmuren Wangying, with more than 3,000 followers, coerced the people of Changyang County to riot.

古文：夔遣吏王钦等，授以计略，使离散之。
现代文：何夔派官吏王钦等人，告诉他们计策，让王营的部众都四散逃离。
English: He sent officials Wang Qin and others to tell them the strategy, so that the king's camp's subordinates would all scatter and flee.

古文：旬月皆平定。
现代文：一个月的时间就全都平定了。
English: In a month's time, everything was smoothed over.

古文：是时太祖始制新科下州郡，又收租税绵绢。
现代文：这时候太祖刚刚制定好新的法令颁发到各地州郡，又征收租税和绢匹棉帛。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather had just formulated a new decree to be issued to various states and counties, and levied taxes and taxes.

古文：夔以郡初立，近以师旅之后，不可卒绳以法，乃上言曰： 自丧乱已来，民人失所，今虽小安，然服教日浅。
现代文：何夔认为长广郡刚刚设立，最近又有过战事，不能突然用法令约束，就上书说： 自从祸乱以来，百姓流离失所，现在虽然稍稍安定，但百姓接受教化的时日还短。
English: He Yu thought that Changguang County had just been established, and there had recently been a war, so it could not be suddenly restricted by laws and regulations. He wrote a letter saying: Since the disaster, the people have been displaced. Although it is slightly stable now, the time for the people to be educated is still short.

古文：所下新科，皆以明罚敕法，齐一大化也。
现代文：现在颁发的新法令，都用严明的刑罚来整饬法令，统一国家的教化。
English: The new decrees issued now all use severe punishments to rectify decrees and unify the country's indoctrination.

古文：所领六县，疆域初定，加以饥馑，若一切齐以科禁，恐或有不从教者。
现代文：现在我管理的六个县，地界刚刚划定，又加上饥荒，如果一切事宜都用禁令来整治，恐怕会有不服从教化的人。
English: The six counties I am now in charge of have just been demarcated, and with the famine, if everything is handled with a ban, I'm afraid there will be people who don't obey the indoctrination.

古文：有不从教者不得不诛，则非观民设教随时之意也。
现代文：要是有不服从教化的，就不得不诛杀，那就不是观察民情设立教化顺应时机的本意了。
English: If there is disobedience to the indoctrination, they will have to fight and kill, which is not the intention of observing the people's sentiment and setting up the indoctrination according to the time.

古文：先王辨九服之赋以殊远近，制三典之刑以平治乱，愚以为此郡宜依远域新邦之典，其民间小事，使长吏临时随宜，上不背正法，下以顺百姓之心。
现代文：古代帝王将王畿以外的地方划分成九等地区来征收赋税，用以区别距离的远近，制定三种刑法制度来平定社会动乱，我认为这个郡应该遵循偏远地区，新封藩国的典例，郡中的民间小事，让长吏根据实际情况临时处理，对上不违背严正的律法，对下也能顺应百姓的心意。
English: The ancient emperors divided the places other than Wangqi into nine regions to collect taxes, to distinguish the distance, and to formulate three kinds of criminal law systems to quell social unrest. I think that this county should follow the example of remote areas, newly-annexed provinces, and minor civil matters in the county, and let the officials temporarily deal with them according to the actual situation, so as not to violate the strict law on the one hand, and to comply with the will of the people on the other.

古文：比及三年，民安其业，然后齐之以法，则无所不至矣。 
现代文：等到三年之后，百姓安居乐业，再用律法来整治，那就没有什么办不到的了。 
English: If we wait until after three years, when the people are living in peace and enjoying their work, and then use the law to rectify the situation, then nothing will be impossible.

古文：太祖从其言。
现代文：太祖听从了他的建议。
English: The great-grandfather followed his advice.

古文：徵还，参丞相军事。
现代文：征召他回京，参与丞相府的军事事宜。
English: He was called back to Beijing to take part in military affairs at the prime minister's office.

古文：海贼郭祖寇暴乐安、济南界，州郡苦之。
现代文：海盗郭祖进犯乐安、济南地界并劫掠，各州郡都苦不堪言。
English: The pirate Guo Zu invaded and plundered the Le'an and Jinan territories, and every prefecture and county suffered.

古文：太祖以夔前在长广有威信，拜乐安太守。
现代文：太祖因为何夔之前在长广郡有威望，任命他为乐安太守。
English: The great-grandfather appointed him as the governor of Le'an because he had prestige in Changguang County before.

古文：到官数月，诸城悉平。
现代文：何夔到职几个月，各城都平定了。
English: No matter how many months he has been in office, every city has been leveled.

古文：入为丞相东曹掾。
现代文：何夔入京担任丞相府东曹掾。
English: He Jian entered Beijing to serve as the Eastern Cao Jian of the Prime Minister's Office.

古文：夔言於太祖曰： 自军兴以来，制度草创，用人未详其本，是以各引其类，时忘道德。
现代文：对太祖说： 自从军队兴盛以来，各项制度都是初步拟定，任用的人没有详细了解他们的本心，所以各自招揽相似的人，经常忘记道义品德的选择。
English: To the great-grandfather, he said: Since the military flourished, all systems have been preliminary, and the appointees did not have a detailed understanding of their true intentions, so they each recruited similar people and often forgot the choice of moral character.

古文：夔闻以贤制爵，则民慎德；以庸制禄，则民兴功。
现代文：何夔听说依照贤能来制定爵位，那百姓就会注重道德修养；根据功绩制定俸禄，百姓就会致力于建立功业。
English: It is often said that if a peerage is established according to merit, the people will pay attention to moral cultivation; if a salary is established according to merit, the people will be committed to building a career.

古文：以为自今所用，必先核之乡闾，使长幼顺叙，无相逾越。
现代文：我认为从现在开始的官吏任用，一定要先在市井街巷中核查，让长幼有序，不要互相逾越礼节。
English: I think that the appointment of officials from now on must first be checked in the streets and alleys, so that the elders and children are orderly and do not overstep each other's etiquette.

古文：显忠直之赏，明公实之报，则贤不肖之分，居然别矣。
现代文：表明对忠诚正直之人的奖赏，彰显对公正实诚之人的回报，那贤能和不贤的区别，就会很明显了。
English: Showing the reward of the faithful and just, and the reward of the just and true, the distinction between the virtuous and the wicked will be clear.

古文：又可脩保举故不以实之令，使有司别受其负。
现代文：还可以制定不按实际情况却举荐故旧的法令，让各处官员各自承担责任。
English: It is also possible to enact decrees that do not correspond to the actual situation but recommend the old way, so that officials from all over the country can assume their responsibilities.

古文：在朝之臣，时受教与曹并选者，各任其责。
现代文：在朝中的大臣，当时接受教令和各曹一起被选拔的人，各自承担责任。
English: The ministers in the imperial court, those who received the edict at that time and those who were selected together with each Cao, each shouldered their responsibilities.

古文：上以观朝臣之节，下以塞争竞之源，以督群下，以率万民，如是则天下幸甚。 
现代文：对上可以观察朝中官员的节义，对下也可以堵住争夺官位的源头，以督促群臣，做百姓的表率，如果这样做，那天下就非常幸运了。 
English: On the one hand, it is possible to observe the righteousness of officials in the DPRK and China, and on the other hand, it is possible to block the source of competition for official positions, to urge the ministers, and to set an example for the people. If this is done, the world will be very lucky.

古文：太祖称善。
现代文：太祖称赞他说得对。
English: The great-grandfather was right to praise him.

古文：魏国既建，拜尚书仆射。
现代文：魏国建立之后，何夔被任命为尚书仆射。
English: After the founding of the State of Wei, He Zhen was appointed as the leading scholar of the State of Wei.

古文：文帝为太子，以凉茂为太傅，夔为少傅；特命二傅与尚书东曹并选太子诸侯官属。
现代文：文帝还是太子时，任命凉茂为太傅，何夔为少傅；太祖特地下令太傅和少傅与尚书东曹共同选为太子手下的主要官员。
English: When Emperor Wen was still crown prince, he appointed Liang Mao as taifu and He Xi as shoofu; Taizoute ordered taifu and shoofu to be selected together with Shang Shudong Cao as the main officials under the crown prince.

古文：茂卒，以夔代茂。
现代文：凉茂去世后，何夔替代了他的职位。
English: After the death of Liangmao, He Ying replaced him.

古文：每月朔，太傅入见太子，太子正法服而礼焉；他日无会仪。
现代文：每个月的朔日，太傅入宫拜见太子，太子穿上正式的服装以礼接待；其他时日就没有会面的礼仪。
English: On the first day of every month, the Grand Duke enters the palace to meet the Crown Prince, who is dressed in formal attire and receives him with courtesy; on other days, there is no courtesy of meeting.

古文：夔迁太仆，太子欲与辞，宿戒供，夔无往意；乃与书请之，夔以国有常制，遂不往。
现代文：何夔调任太仆，太子想要和他辞别，斋戒供奉，何夔也没有前往的意思；太子就给他书信请他前来，何夔认为国家有一定的制度，就没有前往。
English: The prince wanted to say goodbye to him, fast and offer sacrifice, but he had no intention of going; the prince sent him a letter to invite him to come, but he thought that the country had a certain system, so he did not go.

古文：其履正如此。
现代文：他行为正直到这种程度。
English: That's the extent of his behavior.

古文：然於节俭之世，最为豪汰。
现代文：但在节俭用度的时候，何夔是最豪华奢侈的。
English: But when it comes to frugality, Ho Ho is the ultimate in luxury.

古文：文帝践阼，封成阳亭侯，邑三百户。
现代文：文帝登基后，封何夔为成阳亭侯，食邑三百户。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Feng Hejun became the lord of Chengyang Pavilion, with 300 households in the food village.

古文：疾病，屡乞逊位。
现代文：何夔生病，多次请求辞官。
English: He Yan fell ill and repeatedly asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：诏报曰： 盖礼贤亲旧，帝王之常务也。
现代文：文帝下诏回复说： 对贤人以礼相待，对故旧亲近，是君主的日常工作。
English: Emperor Wen replied in his edict: "Treating the wise with courtesy and being close to the past is the daily work of a monarch.

古文：以亲则君有辅弼之勋焉，以贤则君有醇固之茂焉。
现代文：从亲近来看，您有辅佐江山的功劳，从贤能来看，您有纯正坚贞的优秀品质。
English: From the point of view of closeness, you have the merit of supporting the mountains and rivers, and from the point of view of virtue, you have the excellent quality of pure and firmness.

古文：夫有阴德者必有阳报，今君疾虽未瘳，神明听之矣。
现代文：暗中做有德于人的事一定会得到回报，现在您的病虽然还未痊愈，但神明已经听到了请求。
English: Secretly doing virtuous deeds will surely be rewarded. Although your illness has not yet been cured, the gods have heard your request.

古文：君其即安，以顺朕意。 
现代文：您还是安心休息，以顺着我的心意吧。 
English: You can rest assured and follow my wishes.

古文：薨，谥曰靖侯。
现代文：何夔去世，谧号称靖侯。
English: He Zheng passed away, and his posthumous name was Jing Hou.

古文：子曾嗣，咸熙中为司徒。
现代文：他的儿子何曾继承爵位，咸熙年间担任司徒。
English: His son, He Zeng, succeeded to the title of nobility and served as a scholar during the reign of Emperor Han.

古文：邢颙，字子昂，河间鄚人也。
现代文：邢颙，字子昂，河间国鄚县人。
English: ,字子昂, a native of  County, Kawama Province.

古文：举孝廉，司徒辟，皆不就。
现代文：被推举为孝廉，又被司徒征召，都没有赴任。
English: He was elected as a filial piety, and was also called up by the scholars, but he did not take up the post.

古文：易姓字，適右北平，从田畴游。
现代文：改换姓名，到了右北平郡，跟着田畴游历。
English: He changed his name and traveled to Ping County in North Hebei Province.

古文：积五年，而太祖定冀州。
现代文：过了五年，太祖平定冀州。
English: Five years later, Taizu conquered Jizhou.

古文：颙谓畴曰： 黄巾起来二十馀年，海内鼎沸，百姓流离。
现代文：刑颙对田畴说： 黄巾军起兵已经二十多年了，天下纷扰动乱，百姓流离失所。
English: "It has been more than 20 years since the Yellow Turban Army raised an army. The whole country has been in turmoil, and the people have been displaced.

古文：今闻曹公法令严。
现代文：现在听说曹公律法严明。
English: Now I've heard that Cao Gong's law is strict.

古文：民厌乱矣，乱极则平。
现代文：百姓已经厌恶动乱，乱到极点就要被平定了。
English: The people have already abhorred the turmoil, and the turmoil will be quelled when it reaches its climax.

古文：请以身先。 
现代文：请允许我先离开。 
English: I beg you to go to him first.

古文：遂装还乡里。
现代文：就整理行装返回故里。
English: So they packed up and went back to their hometown.

古文：田畴曰： 邢颙，民之先觉也。 
现代文：田畴说： 刑颙，是百姓中先觉悟的人。 
English: Tian Zang said: "Xing Yao was the first among the common people to become enlightened.

古文：乃见太祖，求为乡导以克柳城。
现代文：就去拜见太祖，请求担任向导以攻下柳城。
English: He went to see his ancestor and asked him to act as a guide to help him capture Liucheng.

古文：太祖辟颙为冀州从事，时人称之曰： 德行堂堂邢子昂。 
现代文：太祖征召刑颙担任冀州从事，当时的人都称赞刑颙说： 德行出众邢子昂。 
English: The great-great-grandfather conscripted him to serve in Jizhou, and people at that time praised him, saying: "He is a man of great virtue.

古文：除广宗长，以故将丧弃官。
现代文：他担任广宗县长，因为原来的部下去世而辞官。
English: He served as the governor of Guangzong County, but resigned because his former subordinate died.

古文：有司举正，太祖曰： 颙笃於旧君，有一致之节。 
现代文：主管官吏的官员举报这件事，太祖说： 刑颙对旧友有深厚情谊，有前后一致的节操。 
English: The official in charge of the officials reported the matter, and the great-grandfather said: "Chong Li has a deep friendship with old friends and has consistent discipline.

古文：勿问也。
现代文：没有过问。
English: No questions asked.

古文：更辟司空掾，除行唐令，劝民农桑，风化大行。
现代文：后来又征召刑颙为司空掾，担任行唐县令，鼓励百姓辛勤耕作，风俗教化广为推行。
English: Later, he also conscripted the executioners to serve as Sikyong, acting as the governor of Tang County, encouraging the people to work hard in farming, and promoting the popularization of customs.

古文：入为丞相门下督，迁左冯翊，病，去官。
现代文：又入京担任丞相门下督，提升为左冯翊，因病辞官。
English: He also entered Beijing to serve as a subordinate governor of the Minister of Education, promoted to Zuo Fengjun, and resigned due to illness.

古文：是时，太祖诸子高选官属，令曰： 侯家吏，宜得渊深法度如邢颙辈。 
现代文：这时候，太祖的众位儿子选取主要属官，诏令说： 侯爵府中的官吏，应该得到知识渊博行为规整像刑颙那样的人。 
English: At this time, the great-grandfather's sons selected the main subordinate officers, and the edict said: The officials in the marquis's office should be given people who are knowledgeable and disciplined like the executioner.

古文：遂以为平原侯植家丞。
现代文：于是邢颙就成了平原侯曹植的家丞。
English: As a result, Zou became the family chieftain of the plains of Cao Zi.

古文：颙防闲以礼，无所屈挠，由是不合。
现代文：刑颙按照礼节防备禁止不合适的言行，从来没有屈服，因此和曹植关系不好。
English: In accordance with the etiquette of prevention and prohibition of inappropriate words and deeds, he never gave in, so the relationship with Cao Zhi was not good.

古文：庶子刘桢书谏植曰： 家丞邢颙，北土之彦，少秉高节，玄静澹泊，言少理多，真雅士也。
现代文：曹植的家臣、庶子刘桢写信劝说曹植： 家丞邢颙，是北方的饱学之士，年少时就秉持高尚的节操，性情清净淡泊，话少但道理深刻，真是品格高尚的人。
English: Cao Zhi's vassal and son-in-law, Liu Yao, wrote a letter to persuade Cao Zhi: Iecheng Yao is a well-educated person from the north. When he was young, he adhered to noble self-discipline, his disposition was pure and light, his words were few but his reason was profound. He was truly a person of noble character.

古文：桢诚不足同贯斯人，并列左右。
现代文：刘桢实在不足以和这样的人并列，一同在您左右。
English: It's really not enough for Liu Wei to stand side by side with such a person and be around you.

古文：而桢礼遇殊特，颙反疏简，私惧观者将谓君侯习近不肖，礼贤不足，采庶子之春华，忘家丞之秋实。
现代文：但刘桢我受到特殊的礼待，刑颙反而粗疏简陋，我私下担心旁观的人会说您习惯亲近不贤德的人，对贤能的人没有足够的礼遇，对待庶子就像摘取春天的花朵，对待家丞就像忘记秋天的果实。
English: However, Liu Ye and I were treated with special courtesy. On the other hand, Xing Ye was rude and vulgar. I was privately worried that onlookers would say that you are used to being close to people who are not virtuous, and that you do not have enough courtesy for people who are virtuous. Treating an illegitimate child is like picking spring flowers, and treating a family member is like forgetting the fruits of autumn.

古文：为上招谤，其罪不小，以此反侧。 
现代文：为主上招来诽谤，这罪过不小，因此辗转反侧不能安心。
English: To invite calumny on behalf of the Lord is no small sin, so it is not safe to turn the other way.

古文：后参丞相军事，转东曹掾。
现代文：后来刑颙参与丞相府军事事宜，转任东曹掾。
English: Later, he participated in the military affairs of the Prime Minister's Office and was transferred to Dong Cao Pi.

古文：初，太子未定，而临菑侯植有宠，丁仪等并赞翼其美。
现代文：当初，太子人选还没确定，而临菑侯曹植得到太祖宠信，丁仪等人也一起辅助他的美名。
English: At first, the prince candidate had not yet been determined, but Linyi Hou Cao Zhi received the great-grandfather's favorite letter, and Ding Yi and others also assisted his good name.

古文：太祖问颙，颙对曰： 以庶代宗，先世之戒也。
现代文：太祖询问刑颙，刑颙回答说： 以庶子替代嫡子，是历朝的戒条。
English: The great-great-grandfather asked Chihiro about it, and Chihiro replied, "Replacing a legitimate son with an illegitimate son is a precept of all dynasties.

古文：愿殿下深重察之！ 
现代文：希望殿下您深入的考虑这件事！ 
English: I hope Your Highness will consider this matter in depth!

古文：太祖识其意，后遂以为太子少傅，迁太傅。
现代文：太祖了解他的心意，后来就让他担任太子少傅，又提升为太傅。
English: The great-grandfather understood his intention, and later he made him serve as the prince's junior tutor, and he was promoted to the tutor.

古文：文帝践阼，为侍中尚书仆射，赐爵关内侯，出为司隶校尉，徙太常。
现代文：文帝登基后，刑颙担任侍中尚书仆射，赐爵为关内侯，又出任司隶校尉，调任太常。
English: After Emperor Wen ascended to the throne, Xingyao served as an aide-de-camp to Shang Shufu, was given the title of Baron of Guanai, and also served as an officer of the imperial guard, and was transferred to Taizheng.

古文：黄初四年薨。子友嗣。
现代文：黄初四年去世，他的儿子邢友承袭了他的爵位。
English: Huang died at the age of four, and his son Xing You inherited his title.

古文：鲍勋字叔业，泰山平阳人也，汉司隶校尉鲍宣九世孙。
现代文：鲍勋字叔业，泰山郡平阳县人，是汉朝司隶校尉鲍宣的第九代孙。
English: Bao Xun Zi Shuye, a native of Pingyang County, Taishan County, is the ninth generation grandson of the Han Dynasty Sili Captain Bao Xuan.

古文：宣后嗣有从上党徙泰山者，遂家焉。
现代文：鲍宣的后代中有从上党县搬迁到泰山的，就在那里安居。
English: Some of Baoxuan's descendants moved from Shangdang County to Mount Tai and settled there.

古文：勋父信，灵帝时为骑都尉，大将军何进遣东募兵。
现代文：鲍勋的父亲鲍信，汉灵帝时曾担任骑都尉，大将军何进派他到东面招募士兵。
English: Bao Xun's father, Bao Xin, had served as a cavalry captain under Han Lingdi. General He Jin sent him to the east to recruit soldiers.

古文：后为济北相，协规太祖，身以遇害。
现代文：后来鲍信担任济北国相，协助辅佐太祖，但遇害身亡。
English: Later, Baoxin served as the Minister of North Jeju Province and helped to assist Taizu, but he was killed.

古文：语在董卓传、武帝纪。
现代文：这件事在《董卓传》、《武帝纪》中另有记载。
English: This event is also recorded in "The Biography of Dong Zhuo" and "The History of Emperor Wu."

古文：建安十七年，太祖追录信功，表封勋兄邵新都亭侯。
现代文：建安十七年，太祖追叙鲍信的功绩，上表请封鲍勋的哥哥鲍邵为新都亭侯。
English: In the 17th year of Jianan, the great-grandfather recounted the exploits of Baoxin, and the above table invited Baoxun's brother Bao Shao to be the new prince of the capital.

古文：辟勋丞相掾。
现代文：征召鲍勋为丞相掾。
English: Bao Xun was called up to serve as chancellor.

古文：二十二年，立太子，以勋为中庶子。
现代文：建安二十二年，册立太子，任命鲍勋为中庶子。
English: In the 22nd year of Jianan, the crown prince was enthroned, and Bao Xun was appointed as the middle son.

古文：徙黄门侍郎，出为魏郡西部都尉。
现代文：又提升为黄门侍郎，出任魏郡西部都尉。
English: He was also promoted to Huangmen waiter, and served as the western captain of Wei County.

古文：太子郭夫人弟为曲周县吏，断盗官布，法应弃市。
现代文：太子郭夫人的弟弟是曲周的县吏，被判决偷到官府布料，按法令应该到街头示众。
English: Mrs. Guo's younger brother, a county official in Quzhou, was convicted of stealing cloth from a government office and was ordered to demonstrate in the streets.

古文：太祖时在谯，太子留邺，数手书为之请罪。
现代文：太祖当时在谯县，太子留守邺城，多次手写书信为夫人的弟弟请求处罚。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather was in Handan County, and the prince stayed in Handan City. He repeatedly wrote handwritten letters to request punishment for his wife's younger brother.

古文：勋不敢擅纵，具列上。
现代文：鲍勋不敢擅自宽纵，就详细写明上报。
English: Baoxun did not dare to indulge himself without permission, so he wrote a detailed report.

古文：勋前在东宫，守正不挠，太子固不能悦，及重此事，恚望滋甚。
现代文：鲍勋之前在东宫，恪守正道不屈服，太子本来就对他不满意，等到加上这件事，对他的怨恨更深。
English: Before, Bao Xun was in the East Palace, adhering to the right path and not giving in. The prince was already dissatisfied with him, and when this incident was added, his resentment was even deeper.

古文：会郡界休兵有失期者，密敕中尉奏免勋官。
现代文：恰好有人在魏军边界休整军队时超过了期限，太子就秘密下令让中尉上奏罢免鲍勋的官职。
English: Just as someone exceeded the time limit while recuperating the troops on the border of the Wei army, the prince secretly ordered the lieutenant captain to remove Bao Xun from his official position.

古文：久之，拜侍御史。
现代文：过了很久，鲍勋又被任命为侍御史。
English: After a long time, Bao Xun was also appointed as an attendant of history.

古文：延康元年，太祖崩，太子即王位，勋以驸马都尉兼侍中。
现代文：延康元年，太祖去世，太子继位魏王，鲍勋以驸马都尉的身份兼任侍中。
English: In the first year of Yan Kang, the great-grandfather died, the prince succeeded to the throne of Wei Wang, and Bao Xun concurrently served as an attendant with the identity of the captain of the horse.

古文：文帝受禅，勋每陈 今之所急，唯在军农，宽惠百姓。
现代文：文帝接受禅让即位，鲍勋经常说： 当务之急，只在军事和农业，宽厚慈惠百姓。
English: When Emperor Wen accepted Zen's abdication and ascended the throne, Bao Xun often said: The most urgent task is to be kind and benevolent to the people in the military and agriculture.

古文：台榭苑囿，宜以为后。 
现代文：楼台水榭林苑园圃，应该在此之后。 
English: The garden of Loudai Shuiyuan Forest Garden should start after this.

古文：文帝将出游猎，勋停车上疏曰： 臣闻五帝三王，靡不明本立教，以孝治天下。
现代文：文帝即将出宫游览打猎，鲍勋停下车上奏说： 臣听说三皇五帝，没有不确立根本，树立教化，以孝道治理天下的。
English: When Emperor Wen was about to leave the palace for a hunting trip, Bao Xun stopped the car and said: "Minister, I heard that the three emperors and five emperors did not fail to establish the fundamentals, establish enlightenment, and govern the world with filial piety.

古文：陛下仁圣恻隐，有同古烈。
现代文：陛下您仁德圣明，有恻隐之心，这跟古代的烈士是一样的。
English: Your Majesty, you are as benevolent and compassionate as the ancient martyrs.

古文：臣冀当继踪前代，令万世可则也。
现代文：臣希望您追随前代脚步，让后世都可以效法。
English: I hope that you will follow in the footsteps of your predecessors, so that future generations can follow suit.

古文：如何在谅闇之中，修驰骋之事乎！
现代文：怎么能还在服丧时期，就想要做外出游猎的事呢！
English: How can you still want to go hunting when you're in mourning?

古文：臣冒死以闻，唯陛下察焉。 
现代文：臣冒着死罪让您知道这些话，希望陛下好好考虑。 
English: I hope that Your Majesty will consider these words, which I am risking my life to let you know.

古文：帝手毁其表而竞行猎，中道顿息，问侍臣曰： 猎之为乐，何如八音也？ 
现代文：文帝亲手将他的奏表撕毁，继续追逐打猎，中途停下来休息，问身边的侍从说： 打猎作为娱乐，跟八音乐器比怎么样？ 
English: Emperor Wen tore up his music box with his own hands, continued to chase the hunt, stopped to rest halfway, and asked the attendants around him: Hunting as entertainment, how does it compare to the eight musical instruments?

古文：侍中刘晔对曰： 猎胜於乐。 
现代文：侍中刘晔回答说： 打猎比音乐更好。 
English: Liu Yao, a chamberlain, replied, "Hunting is better than music.

古文：勋抗辞曰： 夫乐，上通神明，下和人理，隆治致化，万邦咸乂。
现代文：鲍勋严词回应说： 音乐，对上连连通神明，对下平和人的道德规范，安定天下施行教化，天下都会安定。
English: Bao Xun replied sternly: "Music, to connect the gods above and the moral norms of the peaceful people below, and to carry out enlightenment in a stable world, the world will be stable."

古文：移风易俗，莫善於乐。
现代文：改变风俗习惯，没有比音乐更好的了。
English: There is nothing better than music to change customs and habits.

古文：况猎，暴华盖於原野，伤生育之至理，栉风沐雨，不以时隙哉？
现代文：况且外出打猎，将帝王的车盖暴露在原野中，伤害生息育民的至高道理，冒着风雨辛苦奔波，不是违背时间发展了吗？
English: Moreover, going out to hunt, exposing the emperor's car cover to the wilderness, harming the supreme principle of living and raising the people, and braving the wind and rain, is not it against the development of time?

古文：昔鲁隐观渔於棠，春秋讥之。
现代文：从前鲁隐公到棠地去观鱼，《春秋》中讥讽了他。
English: In the past, Lu Yinggu went to Tangdi to watch fish. In "Spring and Autumn," he was ridiculed.

古文：虽陛下以为务，愚臣所不愿也。 
现代文：即使陛下您将打猎做为正当事务，也是臣不希望的。 
English: Even if, Your Majesty, you consider hunting to be a legitimate activity, I do not wish it.

古文：因奏： 刘晔佞谀不忠，阿顺陛下过戏之言。
现代文：又上奏说： 刘晔奉承讨好，是不忠之人，用过于玩笑的言论阿谀奉承陛下。
English: The report also said: Liu Ye is a flatterer and an unfaithful person. He flattered His Majesty with overly jocular remarks.

古文：昔梁丘据取媚於遄台，晔之谓也。
现代文：从前梁丘据在遄台讨好主上，刘晔也是这样的。
English: Once upon a time, Liang Qiu used to curry favor with the boss in the ring, and Liu Ye did the same.

古文：请有司议罪以清皇庙。 
现代文：请相关部门商议定罪以肃清宗庙。 
English: Ask the relevant departments to negotiate a crime to clean up the ancestral temple.

古文：帝怒作色，罢还，即出勋为右中郎将。
现代文：文帝大怒，变了脸色，停止打猎回到宫中，立即让鲍勋出京担任右中郎将。
English: Emperor Wen was furious, changed his face, stopped hunting and returned to the palace. He immediately sent Bao Xun to Beijing to serve as the right middle-rank general.

古文：黄初四年，尚书令陈群、仆射司马宣王并举勋为宫正，宫正即御史中丞也。
现代文：黄初四年，尚书陈群、仆射司马宣王一同举荐鲍勋担任宫正，宫正就是御史中丞。
English: In the first four years of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Shangshu Chenqun and his attendant Ma Xuanwang recommended Bao Xun to be the palace general, and the palace general was Mishi Zhongzheng.

古文：帝不得已而用之，百寮严惮，罔不肃然。
现代文：文帝不得已而任用了他，群臣畏惧，没有不严肃谨慎的。
English: Emperor Wen had no choice but to appoint him, and the courtiers were afraid of him, so he had to be very careful.

古文：六年秋，帝欲征吴，群臣大议，勋面谏曰： 王师屡征而未有所克者，盖以吴、蜀唇齿相依，凭阻山水，有难拔之势故也。
现代文：黄初六年秋天，文帝想要讨伐吴国，朝臣们广泛讨论，鲍勋当面劝谏说： 朝廷军队多次出征却没有能攻克的，是因为东吴、西蜀互相依靠，凭借山水地势的阻挡，难以有能攻克的形势。
English: In the autumn of the sixth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Emperor Wen wanted to invade the State of Wu. The courtiers had a wide-ranging discussion, and Bao Xun advised him in person: The reason why the imperial army went to war many times but was unable to conquer was because the Eastern Wu and Western Shu relied on each other, and with the blocking of the landscape, it was difficult to have a situation that could be conquered.

古文：往年龙舟飘荡，隔在南岸，圣躬蹈危，臣下破胆。
现代文：往年进攻时龙船在水中浮动，但也被阻隔在南岸，陛下亲自历经危险，臣子们也披肝沥胆。
English: In previous years, the dragon boat floated in the water during the attack, but it was also blocked on the south bank. His Majesty himself experienced danger, and the courtiers also put their heart and soul into it.

古文：此时宗庙几至倾覆，为百世之戒。
现代文：当时宗庙几乎到了覆灭的地步，是以后百代的训诫。
English: At that time, the ancestral temple had almost reached the point of ruin, and it was a lesson for the next hundred generations.

古文：今又劳兵袭远，日费千金，中国虚耗，令黠虏玩威，臣窃以为不可。 
现代文：现在又要兴师动众去攻打遥远的地方，每日损耗千金，中原地区财力白白消耗，让狡猾的敌人轻视国威，臣自认为这样不可行。 
English: Now it is necessary to mobilize the army to attack distant places, daily loss of thousands of dollars, the Central Plains region's financial resources are consumed in vain, and let the cunning enemy despise the national prestige. The minister himself believes that this is not feasible.

古文：帝益忿之，左迁勋为治书执法。
现代文：文帝更加愤怒，将鲍勋降职为治书执法。
English: Emperor Wen became even angrier and demoted Bao Xun to the post of law enforcer.

古文：帝从寿春还，屯陈留郡界。
现代文：文帝从寿春回京，部队驻扎在陈留郡境内。
English: Emperor Wen returned to Beijing from Shuchun, and the troops were stationed in Chenliu County.

古文：太守孙邕见，出过勋。
现代文：太守孙邕拜见文帝，出来探访鲍勋。
English: The daimyō, Sun Yat-sen, paid a visit to Emperor Wen and came out to visit Baoxun.

古文：时营垒未成，但立标埒，邕邪行不从正道，军营令史刘曜欲推之，勋以堑垒未成，解止不举。
现代文：当时军营壁垒还没修筑完成，只是树立了标志矮栏，孙邕没有从正路过来，而是斜着穿过矮栏，军营令史刘曜想追究这件事，鲍勋以防御工事还没有建成的理由，阻止了这件事，没有上报。
English: At that time, the military camp barrier had not yet been completed, but a low fence had been erected. Sun Yat-sen did not come from the main road, but crossed the low fence diagonally. The military camp commander Shi Liu You wanted to investigate this matter. Bao Xun stopped this matter and did not report it, citing the reason that the fortification had not yet been completed.

古文：大军还洛阳，曜有罪，勋奏绌遣，而曜密表勋私解邕事。
现代文：大军返回洛阳，刘曜因事获罪，鲍勋上奏将他贬逐出京，而刘曜暗中上表说明鲍勋私下调解刘邕过错的事。
English: The army returned to Luoyang, Liu You was found guilty for the incident, Bao Xun made a speech to expel him from Beijing, and Liu You secretly made a speech to explain that Bao Xun privately mediated the fault of Liu Ye.

古文：诏曰： 勋指鹿作马，收付廷尉。 
现代文：文帝下诏说： 鲍勋指鹿为马，将他收押交付廷尉审理。 
English: Emperor Wen issued the following edict: Bao Xun referred to a deer as a horse, and he was taken into custody and handed over to a court lieutenant for trial.

古文：廷尉法议： 正刑五岁。 
现代文：廷尉依法判处： 剃发戴枷作劳役五年。 
English: The court official sentenced him according to the law: Shave your hair, wear shackles and do forced labor for five years.

古文：三官駮： 依律罚金二斤。 
现代文：三官驳回： 应该按律法判决处罚金子二斤。 
English: Three officials rejected: It should be judged according to the law and fined two pounds of gold.

古文：帝大怒曰： 勋无活分，而汝等敢纵之！
现代文：文帝非常生气说： 鲍勋已经没有活路了，你们这些人还敢宽纵他！
English: Emperor Wen was very angry and said, "There is no way for Baoxun to live. You people still dare to indulge him!

古文：收三官已下付刺奸，当令十鼠同穴。 
现代文：将三官以下的官员收押交付刺奸官，将他们一网打尽。 
English: The officials below the third rank will be taken into custody and delivered to the assassins, and they will be eliminated.

古文：太尉锺繇、司徒华歆、镇军大将军陈群、侍中辛毗、尚书卫臻、守廷尉高柔等并表 勋父信有功於太祖 ，求请勋罪。
现代文：尉锺繇、司徒华歆、镇军大将军陈群、侍中辛毗、尚书卫臻、守廷尉高柔等人一同上疏 鲍勋的父亲鲍信对太祖有功 ，请求赦免鲍勋的刑罚。
English: 尉, С徒华, the general of the town army, Chen Qun, the chamberlain, Xin Pi, Shang Shu Wei Zhen, the courtier, Gao Rong, and others went to the court together. Bao Xun's father, Bao Xin, who had meritorious service to the great ancestor, requested that Bao Xun's punishment be pardoned.

古文：帝不许，遂诛勋。
现代文：文帝没有同意，就将鲍勋杀了。
English: Emperor Wen did not agree and killed Bao Xun.

古文：勋内行既脩，廉而能施，死之日，家无馀财。
现代文：鲍勋修养内在品德，为官清廉而且乐善好施，他去世的时候，家中没有多余的钱财。
English: Bao Xun cultivated his inner moral character, was a clean and honest official, and was good at doing good. When he died, there was no extra money in his family.

古文：后二旬，文帝亦崩，莫不为勋叹恨。
现代文：二十天后，文帝也驾崩，没有不为鲍勋感叹惋惜的。
English: Twenty days later, Emperor Wen also passed away, and there was nothing but lamentation and regret for Bao Xun.

古文：司马芝字子华，河内温人也。
现代文：司马芝字子华，河内郡温县人。
English: Sima Zhi Zi Hua, a native of Wen County, Hanoi County.

古文：少为书生，避乱荆州，於鲁阳山遇贼，同行者皆弃老弱走，芝独坐守老母。
现代文：年少时是书生，到荆州躲避战乱，在鲁阳山遭遇贼寇，同行的人都抛下老人弱者逃跑，司马芝独自坐着守着老母亲。
English: When he was young, he was a scholar. He went to Jingzhou to escape the war. He encountered bandits in Luyang Mountain. His companions all fled, leaving the old and weak behind. Sima Zhi sat alone, watching over his old mother.

古文：贼至，以刃临芝，芝叩头曰： 母老，唯在诸君！ 
现代文：贼人来到，将刀刃放在司马芝面前，司马芝向他们叩头说： 母亲年迈，只能托付给各位了！ 
English: Thieves came and put the blade in front of Sima Zhi. Sima Zhi kowtowed to them and said: My mother is old, I can only entrust her to you!

古文：贼曰： 此孝子也，杀之不义。 
现代文：贼人说： 这是孝子啊，杀了他不合道义。 
English: The thief said, "This is a filial son. It is immoral to kill him."

古文：遂得免害，以鹿车推载母。
现代文：于是司马芝免于一死，用鹿车载着母亲推着走。
English: As a result, Sima Zhi was spared from death and carried his mother in a deer cart and pushed her along.

古文：居南方十馀年，躬耕守节。
现代文：在南方居住十几年，亲自耕种，坚守节义。
English: Lived in the south for more than ten years, personally cultivated, and adhered to the festival.

古文：太祖平荆州，以芝为菅长。
现代文：太祖平定荆州，让司马芝担任菅县县长。
English: The great ancestor Pingding Jingzhou, let Sima Zhi serve as the governor of Kan County.

古文：时天下草创，多不奉法。
现代文：当时天下刚刚创建，很多人都不奉公守法。
English: At that time, the country had just been founded, and many people did not obey the law.

古文：郡主簿刘节，旧族豪侠，宾客千馀家，出为盗贼，入乱吏治。
现代文：郡中主簿刘节，是出身大族的豪侠，有一千多家宾客，在外成为盗贼，在城中扰乱官吏的治理。
English: Liu Jie, the head of the county, is a hero from a large clan. There are more than a thousand guests, who become thieves outside and disrupt the governance of officials in the city.

古文：顷之，芝差节客王同等为兵，掾史据白： 节家前后未尝给繇，若至时藏匿，必为留负。 
现代文：不久，司马芝派刘节的门客王同等人当兵，掾史依据旧例说： 刘节家中前后没有参加过徭役的，如果他们到时把人藏起来，您一定要为滞留误期而负责的。 
English: Soon after, Sima Zhi sent Liu Jie's protégé Wang and others to serve as soldiers. According to the old example, Zou Shi said, "If there is anyone in Liu Jie's family who has not participated in the military service before or after, if they hide someone when they arrive, you must be responsible for the delay.

古文：芝不听，与节书曰： 君为大宗，加股肱郡，而宾客每不与役，既众庶怨望，或流声上闻。
现代文：司马芝没有听从，给刘节写信说： 您家是大族，在郡中地位重要，但您门下宾客经常不参加徭役，既会让百姓怨恼忿恨，也有可能会有流言传给上级知道。
English: Sima Zhi did not listen and wrote a letter to Liu Zhi saying: Your family is a large clan and has an important position in the county, but your guests often do not participate in the corvee, which will not only make the people resentful and angry, but may also spread rumors to their superiors.

古文：今调同等为兵，幸时发遣。 
现代文：现在调派王同等人当兵，希望您按时遣送。 
English: Now we are sending soldiers of the same caliber as Wang. I hope you will send them on time.

古文：兵已集郡，而节藏同等，因令督邮以军兴诡责县，县掾史穷困，乞代同行。
现代文：当时士兵已经在郡中集合，而刘节将王同等人藏匿起来，还因此让督邮用战时的法令制度责问县衙，县掾史没有办法，请求替代王同服役。
English: At that time, soldiers had already gathered in the county, and Liu Jie hid Wang Tong's peers, and therefore let the postmaster use the wartime legal system to ask the county magistrate, but the county magistrate had no way to ask Wang Tong to serve instead.

古文：芝乃驰檄济南，具陈节罪。
现代文：司马芝就派人带着檄文快马赶到济南，将刘节的罪行全都详细陈述。
English: Sima Zhi sent someone to Jinan with a copy of the indictment and a fast horse to give a detailed account of all of Liu Jie's crimes.

古文：太守郝光素敬信芝，即以节代同行，青州号芝 以郡主簿为兵 。
现代文：济南太守郝光对司马芝向来敬重信任，立即让刘节代替王同服役，青州百姓都称司马芝 让郡中主簿当兵 。
English: Jinan Governor Gongguang always respected and trusted Sima Zhi, and immediately let Liu Jie serve in place of Wang Tong. The people of Qingzhou all said that Sima Zhi let the county's chief secretary serve as a soldier.

古文：迁广平令。
现代文：司马芝被提升为广平令。
English: Sima Zhi was promoted to Guangping.

古文：征虏将军刘勋，贵宠骄豪，又芝故郡将，宾客子弟在界数犯法。
现代文：征虏将军刘勋，仗着显贵受宠信，骄矜豪横，又因为是司马芝故地的将领，他的门客弟子在境内多次违犯律法。
English: Liu Xun, the conscript general, was favored and trusted by virtue of his eminence, and he was arrogant and domineering. Moreover, because he was the general of Simazi's hometown, his protégé disciple repeatedly violated the law in the territory.

古文：勋与芝书，不著姓名，而多所属讬，芝不报其书，一皆如法。
现代文：刘勋给司马芝写信，没有写上姓名，只是有很多请托，司马芝没有回复他的书信，一切都安律法处理。
English: Liu Xun wrote a letter to Sima Zhi, without writing his name, but there were many requests. Sima Zhi did not reply to his letter, and everything was handled according to the law.

古文：后勋以不轨诛，交关者皆获罪，而芝以见称。
现代文：后来刘勋因为心怀不轨被诛杀，跟他交往或相关的人都获罪了，只有司马芝以能识人为人赞许。
English: Later, Liu Xun was beaten to death because he was up to no good, and everyone who associated with him or was related to him was convicted. Only Sima Zhi was praised for his ability to recognize people.

古文：迁大理正。
现代文：司马芝被提升为大理正。
English: Sima Zhi was promoted to Dali Zheng.

古文：有盗官练置都厕上者，吏疑女工，收以付狱。
现代文：有人偷了官府的白练放在大厕所上面，官吏怀疑是女工做的，将她抓捕关进监狱。
English: Someone stole a government office's toilet seat and placed it on top of a large toilet. Officials suspected that it was done by a female worker and arrested her and put her in prison.

古文：芝曰： 夫刑罪之失，失在苛暴。
现代文：司马芝说： 惩罚违法行为的缺失，就在于严苛暴力。
English: Sima Zhi said: The lack of punishment for illegal behavior lies in the severity of violence.

古文：今赃物先得而后讯其辞，若不胜掠，或至诬服。
现代文：现在先搜到赃物然后再审讯供词，如果犯人经受不住拷问，有可能会出现犯人无辜却认罪的情况。
English: Now, the stolen goods are first searched and then the confession is interrogated. If the prisoner cannot withstand the torture, there may be a situation where the prisoner is innocent but confesses.

古文：诬服之情，不可以折狱。
现代文：这种无辜却认罪的情况，是不能判决案件的。
English: This innocent-but-pleading-guilty situation is no way to decide a case.

古文：且简而易从，大人之化也。
现代文：况且精简而容易服从，是品德高尚的人的教化。
English: Moreover, it is simple and easy to obey, and it is the education of a person of high moral character.

古文：不失有罪，庸世之治耳。
现代文：不放过有罪的人，只是平庸社会的治理方法而已。
English: Not letting the guilty go free is just a mediocre social governance method.

古文：今宥所疑，以隆易从之义，不亦可乎！ 
现代文：现在宽宥有嫌疑的人，以倡导容易施行的原则，不也是可以的吗！ 
English: Isn't it also okay now to pardon people who are under suspicion, in order to promote the principle of easy execution?

古文：太祖从其议。
现代文：太祖听从了他的建议。
English: The great-grandfather followed his advice.

古文：历甘陵、沛、阳平太守，所在有绩。
现代文：司马芝曾担任过甘陵郡、沛国、阳平郡的太守，所在任职的地方都有成绩。
English: Sima Zhi once served as the governor of Ganling County, Peiguo County, and Yangping County, and achieved great results wherever he served.

古文：黄初中，入为河南尹，抑强扶弱，私请不行。
现代文：黄初年间，司马芝入京担任河南尹，抑制豪强，帮扶弱小，对私下的请求都没有同意。
English: During the early years of Huang, Sima Zhi entered Beijing as Henan Yin, suppressing the brave and strong, helping the weak and small, and did not agree to any private requests.

古文：会内官欲以事讬芝，不敢发言，因芝妻伯父董昭。
现代文：恰好宫中属官想要将事情请求司马芝，不敢直说，就通过司马芝妻子的伯父董昭的关系请求。
English: It just so happened that a palace official wanted to ask Sima Zhi about the matter, but he did not dare to say it directly, so he asked through the relationship of Sima Zhi's wife's uncle, Dong Zhao.

古文：昭犹惮芝，不为通。
现代文：董昭也害怕司马芝，没有帮他传达。
English: Dong Zhao was also afraid of Sima Zhi, and did not help him to communicate.

古文：芝为教与群下曰： 盖君能设教，不能使吏必不犯也。
现代文：司马芝因此对属下训诫说： 君王设立教化，不能让官吏一定不会违犯。
English: Sima Zhi therefore admonished his subordinates, saying, "A monarch cannot set up a system of enlightenment and make officials not violate it.

古文：吏能犯教，而不能使君必不闻也。
现代文：官吏违反教令，也不能让君主一定不知道。
English: If officials violate the edict, the monarch cannot be sure of not knowing about it.

古文：夫设教而犯，君之劣也；犯教而闻，吏之祸也。
现代文：设立了教化还有人违犯，是君主的弱小；违犯的教化让君主知道，就是官吏的祸害。
English: It is a sign of weakness for a monarch to set up an edification and still have people violate it. It is a scourge for officials to let the monarch know that they have violated the edification.

古文：君劣於上，吏祸於下，此政事所以不理也。
现代文：在上位的君主弱小，在下位的官吏祸害，这就是政治事务无法治理的原因。
English: The feebleness of princes in high places, and the malignity of magistrates in low places, are the causes of the ungovernability of political affairs.

古文：可不各勉之哉！ 
现代文：难道能不各自努力吗！ 
English: Can't we all just get along?

古文：於是下吏莫不自励。
现代文：于是下属的吏役没有不勉励自己的。
English: As a result, the subordinate officials did not fail to encourage themselves.

古文：门下循行尝疑门幹盗簪，幹辞不符，曹执为狱。
现代文：司马芝门下巡视的人曾怀疑守门的人偷盗了簪子，守门吏役的供词和事实不相符，官曹将他抓捕关进监狱。
English: The person patrolling Sima Zhi's gate once suspected that the gatekeeper had stolen a pair of pliers. The gatekeeper's confession did not match the facts, and the official Cao arrested him and put him in prison.

古文：芝教曰： 凡物有相似而难分者，自非离娄，鲜能不惑。
现代文：司马芝教训说： 事物都有相似之处而难以区别，倘若不是离娄那样的人，很少有能不被迷惑的。
English: Sima Zhi said: Things have similarities and are difficult to distinguish. If you are not like Yuyao, there are few people who can not be confused.

古文：就其实然，循行何忍重惜一簪，轻伤同类乎！
现代文：就这件事的实际情况来看，巡视的人怎么忍心因为十分珍惜一根发簪，而轻易伤害自己同类的人吗！
English: As far as the actual situation of this matter is concerned, how can the inspectors bear to easily hurt their own kind because they cherish a hairpin?

古文：其寝勿问。 
现代文：还是将这件事搁置不要再过问了。 
English: It's better to put the matter on hold and not ask any more questions.

古文：明帝即位，赐爵关内侯。
现代文：明帝登基后，给司马芝赐爵位关内侯。
English: Emperor Wei Ming ascended to the throne, and gave Tsuchizake the title of Guanai Hou.

古文：顷之，特进曹洪乳母当，与临汾公主侍者共事无涧神系狱。
现代文：不久，特进曹洪的乳母当和临汾公主侍者因为一起侍奉无涧山神被抓捕下狱。
English: Soon after, Dang, the nanny of Cao Hong, and Linyi, the princess's attendant, were arrested and jailed for serving Muxanshan together.

古文：卞太后遣黄门诣府传令，芝不通，辄敕洛阳狱考竟，而上疏曰： 诸应死罪者，皆当先表须报。
现代文：卞太后派宦官到司马芝府中传令，司马芝没有向上级同胞，自己下令让洛阳狱吏考查完毕，然后上书说： 那些应该判处死罪的情况，都应该先上表奏报。
English: The empress dowager sent an eunuch to Sima Zhi's residence to deliver the order. Sima Zhi did not order his superior compatriots, he ordered the Luoyang prison officials to complete the examination, and then wrote: Those cases that should be sentenced to death should be reported first.

古文：前制书禁绝淫祀以正风俗，今当等所犯妖刑，辞语始定，黄门吴达诣臣，传太皇太后令。
现代文：过去制定文书禁止断绝不合礼制的祭祀以端正风俗，现在这些人犯下了有关妖邪的罪行，供词刚刚确定，宦官吴达来到臣这里，传达太皇太后旨令。
English: In the past, a document was drawn up to prohibit the breaking off of sacrificial rites that were not in accordance with the ritual system and to rectify customs. Now these people have committed crimes related to evil spirits. The confession has just been confirmed. The eunuch Wu Da came to the minister to convey the order of the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：臣不敢通，惧有救护，速闻圣听，若不得已，以垂宿留。
现代文：臣不敢上报，担心有人会援助维护他们，迅速上报让陛下知道，如果不得已，也只好先暂停这件事。
English: The ministers did not dare to report it, fearing that someone would come to their aid and protect them. They quickly reported it to let His Majesty know that if they had to, they would have to suspend the matter first.

古文：由事不早竟，是臣之罪，是以冒犯常科，辄敕县考竟，擅行刑戮，伏须诛罚。 
现代文：这件事没有早日审查完毕，是臣的罪过，所以违背通常的制度，就命令县官考查完毕，擅自执行刑罚，请求惩治责罚。 
English: It was the vassal's fault for not completing the examination of this matter as soon as possible. Therefore, contrary to the usual system, he ordered the county official to complete the examination, execute the punishment without authorization, and request punishment.

古文：帝手报曰： 省表，明卿至心，欲奉诏书，以权行事，是也。
现代文：明帝手写内容回复说： 看了奏表，知道你的诚心，想要依凭诏书，依靠权力办事，是对的。
English: Emperor Ming replied in a handwritten note: "Having read the report, I know your sincerity, and you are right to want to act in accordance with the imperial edict and rely on your power.

古文：此乃卿奉诏之意，何谢之有？
现代文：这是您奉着诏书之意行事，有什么需要道歉的呢？
English: You acted in accordance with the edict. What do you need to apologize for?

古文：后黄门复往，慎勿通也。 
现代文：以后宦官再去你的住处，千万不要为他通报。 
English: If the eunuch comes to your house again, don't let him know.

古文：芝居官十一年，数议科条所不便者。
现代文：司马芝担任大理正十一年，多次处理律法中不方便处理的案例。
English: Sima Zhi served as Dali Zheng for eleven years and repeatedly dealt with cases that were inconvenient to deal with in the law.

古文：其在公卿间，直道而行。
现代文：他在朝臣百官之间，秉持道义行事。
English: He acted in a moral way among hundreds of courtiers.

古文：会诸王来朝，与京都人交通，坐免。
现代文：恰好各位藩王入京朝见，和京城中人有联络串通，司马芝受牵连被免职。
English: It just so happened that the lords of the domain came to Beijing to meet with the imperial court, and made contact and colluded with people in the capital. Sima Zhi was implicated and removed from his post.

古文：后为大司农。
现代文：后来司马芝担任大司农。
English: Later, Sima Zhi served as the Chief Secretary of Agriculture.

古文：先是诸典农各部吏民，末作治生，以要利入。
现代文：之前各位典农都尉各自带着吏役百姓，从事商业谋生，以获得利益。
English: Previously, each of the feudal farmers captains took officials and commoners with them and engaged in business to earn a living and make a profit.

古文：芝奏曰： 王者之治，崇本抑末，务农重谷。
现代文：司马芝上奏说： 君主治理天下，推崇本业，抑制末业，看重农业生产和粮食谷物。
English: Sima Zhi said in his report: Monarchs govern the world, promote their own work, restrain their subordinates, and attach importance to agricultural production and grain.

古文：王制： 无三年之储，国非其国也。 
现代文：《礼记·王制》中说： 没有三年的粮食储备，国家就不成为国家了。 
English: "The Book of Rites and the System of Kings" says: "Without a three-year grain reserve, a country ceases to be a country."

古文：管子区言以积谷为急。
现代文：管子也说要以囤积粮食为急切事务。
English: Guanzi also said that hoarding grain should be treated as an urgent matter.

古文：方今二虏未灭，师旅不息，国家之要，惟在谷帛。
现代文：现在东吴和西蜀还没有平定，国家战事还没有停息，现在国家的重要任务，只在于粮食布帛。
English: At present, Eastern Wu and Western Shu have not yet been pacified, and the national war has not yet ceased. The important task of the country now lies only in grain distribution.

古文：武皇帝特开屯田之官，专以农桑为业。
现代文：太祖武皇帝特地开设屯田的官职，专门负责耕种养殖。
English: Emperor Taizongwu specially set up the official position of tonden, which was specifically responsible for farming and breeding.

古文：建安中，天下仓廪充实，百姓殷足。
现代文：建安年间，天下仓库储粮充足，百姓殷实富足。
English: During the period of Jian'an, the world's warehouses had sufficient grain reserves, and the people were prosperous.

古文：自黄初以来，听诸典农治生，各为部下之计，诚非国家大体所宜也。
现代文：从黄初年间以来，任由众位典农谋求生计，各自为手下人计划，实在不是国家大局应该出现的状况。
English: Since the beginning of the Yellow Emperor's reign, it is not the situation that the overall situation of the country should be that many farmers are left to seek their livelihoods and plan for their subordinates.

古文：夫王者以海内为家，故传曰： 百姓不足，君谁与足！ 
现代文：君主将天下四海都当做自己家，所以《左传》中说： 如果百姓的用度不够，您怎么又会够呢！ 
English: The monarch regards the four corners of the world as his home, so "Zo Zhuan" said: If the people's consumption is not enough, how can you have enough!

古文：富足之田，在於不失天时而尽地力。
现代文：收成好的肥沃田地，在于没有错失良好的自然条件并且发挥土地的生产能力。
English: A good harvest of fertile fields lies in not missing good natural conditions and giving play to the productive capacity of the land.

古文：今商旅所求，虽有加倍之显利，然於一统之计，已有不赀之损，不如垦田益一亩之收也。
现代文：现在从事商业所求得的，虽然有明显的成倍增长的利益，但对于一整个计划来说，已经有数不清的损耗，还比不上开垦田地增加一亩土地的收成。
English: Although there is a clear exponential growth in profits, for an entire plan, there have been countless losses, and it is not comparable to the harvest of an additional mu of land by cultivating fields.

古文：夫农民之事田，自正月耕种，耘锄条桑，耕种麦，获刈筑场，十月乃毕。
现代文：农夫耕种土地，从正月开始耕田播种，耕耘采桑，开垦田地种植麦子，收获之后筑造场地，一直到十月份才忙完。
English: The farmer cultivates the land, starting from the first month with sowing the fields, ploughing and harvesting mulberry, clearing the fields to plant wheat, and building the site after the harvest, until October.

古文：治廪系桥，运输租赋，除道理梁，墐涂室屋，以是终岁，无日不为农事也。
现代文：修整仓库搭建桥梁，运送佃租赋税，清理道路整理屋梁，用泥涂抹房屋，因此一年到头，没有哪一天不做农活的。
English: Repairing warehouses, building bridges, transporting straw, paying taxes, clearing roads, straightening roof beams, and plastering houses with mud, so there is not a day in the year when they are not doing farm work.

古文：今诸典农，各言 留者为行者宗田计，课其力，势不得不尔。
现代文：现在各位典农，各自说 留下的人为外出的人管理田地，分出他们的力气，是形势不得不这样做。
English: Now, all of you tenant farmers, each of you says, "The people who stayed behind to manage the fields for those who went out, to allocate their strength, is a situation that has to be done."

古文：不有所废，则当素有馀力。 
现代文：没有荒废的，那应当向来有多出来的劳力的。 
English: If there is no waste, there should always be more labor.

古文：臣愚以为不宜复以商事杂乱，专以农桑为务，於国计为便。 明帝从之。
现代文：臣自认为不应该还让商业纷乱，应该专门以农业为要务，为国家考虑，这样比较好。 
English: The vassal thought that it would be better not to let the commercial turmoil continue, and that it would be better to focus on agriculture as a priority for the country.

古文：每上官有所召问，常先见掾史，为断其意故，教其所以答塞之状，皆如所度。芝性亮直，不矜廉隅。
现代文：明帝听从了他的建议。每次有上级官员召见官吏，往往先去见上官的掾史，让他们为自己推断被召见的原因，并教给他们回复上级让他们满意的情况，见面时就全部按掾史教的那样做。司马芝性情诚实正直，不夸耀，严正端方。
English: Emperor Ming listened to his advice. Every time a higher-ranking official summoned an official, he would often first go to see the superior officer, let them deduce for themselves the reason for being summoned, and teach them to reply to the superior to their satisfaction. When they met, they would do everything as taught by the superior. Simazi's temperament was honest and upright, not boastful, and strict and upright.

古文：与宾客谈论，有不可意，便面折其短，退无异言。
现代文：和宾客谈论的时候，有不合自己心意的，就当面指出他的不足之处，过后就没有不好的言论。
English: When talking with guests, if there is something that is not to their liking, they point out his shortcomings in person, and there are no bad comments afterwards.

古文：卒於官，家无馀财，自魏迄今为河南尹者莫及芝。
现代文：司马芝在官任上去世，家中没有多余的财物，从魏朝到现在，担任河南尹的，没有人比得上司马芝。
English: Sima Zhi died in office, there was no extra wealth in the family, from the Wei Dynasty to the present, as the Yin of Henan, no one can match the boss Ma Zhi.

古文：芝亡，子岐嗣，从河南丞转廷尉正，迁陈留相。
现代文：司马芝去世后，他的儿子司马岐承继了他的位置，从河南丞转任廷尉正，提升为陈留相。
English: After Sima Zhi's death, his son Sima Qi succeeded to his position, and was transferred from Henan Zheng to Tingfu Zheng, and promoted to Chen Liushang.

古文：梁郡有系囚，多所连及，数岁不决。
现代文：梁郡拘押在狱中的囚犯，多数都互相牵连，好几年不能判决。
English: Most of the prisoners detained in prison in Liang County are implicated in each other and cannot be sentenced for several years.

古文：诏书徙狱于岐属县，县请豫治牢具。
现代文：明帝下诏将这些案件转移到司马岐所管辖的县中，县里申请先制造监狱用具。
English: Emperor Ming decreed that these cases be transferred to the counties under the jurisdiction of Simaqi, and the counties applied to manufacture prison equipment first.

古文：岐曰： 今囚有数十，既巧诈难符，且已倦楚毒，其情易见。
现代文：司马岐说： 现在囚犯有数十个，他们既机巧伪诈，供词难以对应，又已经对酷刑疲倦，其中的情况显而易见。
English: Simaqi said: There are dozens of prisoners now, and it is obvious that they are not only cunning and deceitful, their confessions are difficult to match, but they are also tired of being tortured.

古文：岂当复久处囹圄邪！ 
现代文：怎么让他们再长久地关押在监狱中呢！ 
English: How can they be kept in prison any longer?

古文：及囚室，诘之，皆莫敢匿诈，一朝决竟，遂超为廷尉。
现代文：等到囚犯们都到了，司马岐诘问他们，都没有敢隐瞒欺骗，一个早上就判决完毕，于是司马岐就升迁为廷尉。
English: When all the prisoners arrived, Sima Qiji interrogated them, and none of them dared to conceal their deception. The sentence was completed in one morning, and Sima Qiji was promoted to court lieutenant.

古文：是时大将军爽专权，尚书何晏、邓飏等为之辅翼。
现代文：当时大将军司马爽独揽大权，尚书何晏、邓飏等人在他身边辅助。
English: At that time, the great general Sima Shuang was in sole possession of power, and Shangshu He Rong, Deng Yao and others assisted him.

古文：南阳圭泰尝以言迕指，考系廷尉。
现代文：南阳人圭泰曾在言语上违背了他们的指示，就被廷尉查考抓捕。
English: Gui Tai, a resident of Nanyang, had verbally violated their instructions and was arrested by a court inspector.

古文：飏讯狱，将致泰重刑。
现代文：邓飏审理案件，将要判处圭泰重刑。
English: Deng Yao will try the case, and Gui Tai will be sentenced to a heavy sentence.

古文：岐数飏曰： 夫枢机大臣，王室之佐，既不能辅化成德，齐美古人，而乃肆其私忿，枉论无辜。
现代文：司马岐多次对邓飏说： 重要职位的大臣，是皇室的辅助，不能辅助教化，推广德行，与古人媲美，反而还放纵自己的私愤，冤枉无辜之人。
English: Sima Qi repeatedly said to Deng Wei: The ministers in important positions are the auxiliary of the royal family. They cannot help to enlighten and promote virtue, which is comparable to the ancients. On the contrary, they indulge their private anger and wrong innocent people.

古文：使百姓危心，非此焉在？ 
现代文：让百姓心存畏惧的，原因不就是在这里吗？ 
English: Isn't this the reason why the people are afraid?

古文：飏於是惭怒而退。
现代文：于是邓飏羞惭愤怒地离开了。
English: So Deng Yao left in shame and anger.

古文：岐终恐久获罪，以疾去官。
现代文：司马岐一直担心时间久了就会获罪，就因病辞官。
English: Sima Qi had been worried that he would be found guilty after a long time, so he resigned due to illness.

古文：居家未期而卒，年三十五。
现代文：在家中不到一年就去世了，年仅三十五岁。
English: He died at home less than a year later, aged just 35.

古文：子肇嗣。
现代文：他的儿子司马肇继承了侯位。
English: His son Sima Zhao succeeded to the throne.

古文：评曰：徐奕、何夔、邢颙贵尚峻厉，为世名人。
现代文：评曰：徐奕、何夔、邢颙尊贵高尚，性情严厉，是当时知名的人。
English: The review said: Xu Yi, He Xuan and Xuan Yu were noble and noble, with a stern disposition. They were well-known people at that time.

古文：毛玠清公素履，司马芝忠亮不倾，庶乎不吐刚茹柔。
现代文：毛玠清廉公正，行为朴实，司马芝忠诚坚贞，言行公正，几乎不会欺软怕硬。
English: Mao Kun is honest and fair, his behavior is simple, Sima Zhi is loyal and steadfast, his words and deeds are fair, and he will hardly bully the soft or be afraid of the hard.

古文：崔琰高格最优，鲍勋秉正无亏，而皆不免其身，惜哉！
现代文：崔琰的高尚品格最为突出，鲍勋持守正道，言行没有欠缺，但都没有免于杀身之祸，可惜啊！
English: Cui Wei's noble character is the most prominent, Bao Xun adheres to the right path, words and deeds are not lacking, but they are not immune to the scourge of suicide, what a pity!

古文：大雅贵 既明且哲 ，虞书尚 直而能温 ，自非兼才，畴克备诸！
现代文：《诗经·大雅》看重 既能区分善恶,又能辨别是非 ，《尚书》推崇 正直也能温和 ，自己不是德才兼备的贤人，就努力储备这些吧！
English: "Shijing · Daya" attaches importance to being able to distinguish between good and evil, and to be able to distinguish right and wrong, "Shangshu" promotes honesty and can also be moderate, and he is not a wise man with both virtue and talent, so try to reserve these!

