古文：凡敌人强盛，吾士卒疑惑，未肯用命，须置之死地，告令三军，示不获已。
现代文：凡是敌人兵力强大、士气旺盛，而我军士卒疑虑重重、不肯拼尽全力作战时，那就必须把他们置于 死地 ，并且通告全军，这是迫不得已的作法。
English: Whenever the enemy's troops are strong and their morale is high, but our sergeants are full of doubts and are unwilling to fight to the best of their ability, they must be put to death and the whole army must be notified. This is a last resort.

古文：杀牛燔车，以享战士，烧弃粮食，填夷井灶，焚舟破釜，绝去其生虑，则必胜。
现代文：然后，杀牛烧车，犒劳战士，烧弃粮食，填平井灶，焚船毁锅，断绝一切的侥幸心理。
English: Then, kill cattle, burn cars, reward labor soldiers, burn grain, fill wells, burn ships, and break all luck.

古文：法曰： 必死则生。 
现代文：这样，作战就一定能胜利。
English: In this way, the battle will surely be victorious.

古文：秦将章邯已破楚将项梁军，以为楚地兵不足忧，乃渡河击赵，大破之。
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 抱定必死的决心作战就能获得胜利生存下来。 秦国将领章邯率军打败楚将项梁军以后，就认为楚地的兵力不值得忧虑了，于是挥军渡过黄河攻打赵国，大败赵军。
English: It is true what the Art of War says: If you fight with a death-defying determination, you can achieve victory and survive. After the Qin general Zhang Jun led the army to defeat the Chu general Xiang Liang's army, he thought that the military strength of Chu was not worth worrying about, so he led the army across the Yellow River to attack Zhao and defeated the Zhao army.

古文：当此时，赵歇为王，陈余为将，张耳为相，兵败皆走入钜鹿城。
现代文：这个时候赵歇为赵王，陈馀为将领，张耳为丞相，兵败后都逃进了巨鹿城。
English: At this time, Zhao Xie was Zhao Wang, Chen Yu was the general, and Zhang Er was the chancellor. After the defeat, they all fled into the Giant Deer City.

古文：章邯令王离、涉闲围钜鹿，章邯军其南，筑甬道而输之粟。
现代文：章邯命令王离、涉间率部包围巨鹿城。章邯军驻扎在巨鹿南侧，修筑甬道为其输送粮食。
English: Zhang Ye ordered Wang Li and Wanzhima to encircle the castle. Zhang Ye's army was stationed on the south side of the castle, building a causeway to transport grain.

古文：楚怀王以宋义为上将，项羽为次将，范增为裨将，救赵。诸别将皆属焉。
现代文：楚怀王任命宋义为上将军，项羽为次将，范增为末将，率兵去援救赵国；其他各将领都隶属于宋义指挥。
English: King Chuhuai appointed Song Yi as the senior general, Xiang Yu as the second general, and Fan Zeng as the last general to lead the troops to rescue Zhao; all other generals were subordinated to the command of Song Yi.

古文：宋义行至安阳，留四十余日不进，遣其子宋襄相齐，自送之无盐，饮酒高会。
现代文：宋义行军到安阳，停留四十多天不前进，还派遣他的儿子宋襄去辅佐齐国，并且亲自送他到无盐，并且大摆筵席。
English: Song Yi marched to Anyang, stayed there for more than forty days and did not advance. He also sent his son Song Xiang to assist Zuoqi, and personally sent him to Wuxi, and held a grand banquet.

古文：项羽曰： 今国兵新破，王坐不安席，扫境内而专诸将军，国家安危，在此一举。
现代文：项羽对此极为不满地说： 如今我国军队刚刚打了败仗，王为此坐卧不安，将平定国土的责任专门托付给将军，国家的安危，全在此一举。
English: Xiang Yu was extremely dissatisfied with this and said, "Nowadays, our army has just lost the battle. The king is uneasy about this and has entrusted the responsibility of pacifying the country to the generals. The safety of the country is at stake.

古文：今不恤士卒而徇其私，非社稷之臣。 
现代文：现在，你身为上将军却不体恤士兵，只钻营个人私利，这不是国家忠臣应该做的！ 
English: Today, they do not feel sorry for their subordinates, but for themselves. They do not share the same fate as the country.

古文：项羽晨朝宋义，即其帐中，斩之，下令军中曰： 宋义与齐谋反，楚王阴令羽诛之。 
现代文：第二天，项羽利用早晨进见上将军宋义的机会，就在其帐中把他杀了，然后通令全军说： 宋义与齐国勾结图谋反叛，楚怀王密令我把他杀掉了。 
English: The next day, Xiang Yu took advantage of the opportunity to visit General Song Yi in the morning and killed him on his account, and then ordered the whole army to say: Song Yi colluded with Qi to plot a rebellion, and King Chu Huai secretly ordered me to kill him.

古文：是时，诸将皆慑服，莫敢支吾，皆曰： 首立楚者，将军家也。今将军诛叛乱。 
现代文：此时，众将都为项羽的举动所畏服，没有一个敢于抗拒不从的，大家齐声说道： 首先起来恢复楚国的，是将军你家的人，如今将军又剪除了叛乱。 
English: At this time, the generals were all awed by Xiang Yu's actions. No one dared to resist, and everyone said in unison: The first to rise up to restore the state of Chu was the general's family, and now the general has eliminated the rebellion.

古文：即共立羽为假上将军。
现代文：于是，大家立即拥立项羽为代理上将军。
English: As a result, everyone immediately supported Xiang Yu as acting general.

古文：使人追宋义子襄，及之齐，杀之。
现代文：项羽派人追赶宋义之子宋襄，追到齐国将其杀死。
English: Cao Yu sent people to chase Song Xiang, the son of Song Yi, and killed him in Qi Province.

古文：使桓楚报命于楚怀王，因命项羽为上将军。
现代文：其后，项羽派遣桓楚向楚怀王报告了所发生的情况，楚怀王便任命项羽为上将军。
English: Afterwards, Xiang Yu sent Kan Chu to report what had happened to King Chu Hui, who then appointed Xiang Yu to the position of senior general.

古文：当阳君、蒲将军皆属焉。
现代文：当阳君黥布和蒲将军等都隶属于项羽指挥。
English: Dangyangjun Zengbu and General Pu are all under Xiang Yu's command.

古文：项羽以杀宋义，威震楚国，名闻诸侯。
现代文：项羽因杀掉以权谋私的宋义，从此便威震楚国，名扬诸侯。
English: Because he killed Song Yi, who used his power for personal gain, Xiang Yu became a powerful figure in Chu and gained fame among the princes.

古文：乃遣当阳君、蒲将军率二万众渡河救钜鹿。
现代文：不久，他派遣当阳君、蒲将军率兵二万渡过漳河，救援巨鹿。
English: Soon after, he sent Dangyangjun and General Pu with 20,000 soldiers across the Li River to rescue the giant deer.

古文：战少利，陈余复请兵，项羽乃悉兵渡河，沉舟，破釜甑，烧庐舍，持三日粮，以示士卒必死，无还心。
现代文：与秦军交战稍得些许胜利，陈馀再次请求救兵。于是，项羽就亲率全部人马渡过漳河，并下令把渡船沉入河底，砸毁饭锅蒸笼，烧掉营垒屋舍，携带三天的干粮，以此向士卒表明决一死战而无一点退还之心。
English: After a slight victory in the battle with the Qin army, Chen Yu once again asked for help. Therefore, Xiang Yu led all his men and horses across the Li River, and ordered the ferry to sink to the bottom of the river, smash the rice steamer, burn the camp house, and carry three days of dry grain. In this way, he showed the soldiers that he would fight to the death and had no intention of returning anything.

古文：于是至则围王离，与秦军遇，九战，绝其甬道，大破之，杀苏角，虏王离。
现代文：项羽率军一到巨鹿，便包围了王离，与秦军多次交战，切断了秦军的运粮道路，终于大败秦军，击杀了秦将苏角，俘获了王离。
English: As soon as Xiang Yu led his army to Jugu, he encircled Wang Liang, fought with the Qin army many times, cut off the Qin army's grain transportation road, and finally defeated the Qin army, killed Qin general Su Jiao, and captured Wang Liang.

古文：当是时，楚兵冠诸侯，诸侯救钜鹿下者十余壁，莫敢纵兵。及楚兵击秦军，诸侯皆从壁上观。
现代文：是时，楚军声威已经雄冠诸侯。此前，巨鹿城下已有诸侯援军十多个营垒，但却没有敢于出战的；到了楚军进击秦军的时候，诸侯军的将领们都站在壁垒上观望而不出兵助战。
English: At that time, the prestige of the Chu army had already been crowned by the lords. Previously, there had been more than ten camps of the lords' reinforcements under the castle of Koulu, but they did not dare to go to war; when the Chu army attacked the Qin army, the generals of the lords' army stood on the ramparts and watched without sending troops to help the war.

古文：楚战士无不以一当十，楚兵呼声动天地，诸侯人人惴恐。
现代文：楚军将士无不以一当十，英勇奋战，杀声震天；而诸侯军无不人人颤栗惊恐。
English: The soldiers of the Chu army were all ten to one, fighting bravely, and the killing sound shook the sky; and the armies of the princes were all trembling and terrified.

古文：于是，大破秦军。
现代文：最后楚军终于大败了秦军。
English: In the end, the Chu army finally defeated the Qin army.

