古文：宋翻辛雄羊深杨机高崇宋翻，字飞鸟，广平列人人也，吏部尚书弁族弟。
现代文：宋翻，字飞乌，广平列人人氏，吏部尚书宋弁同族弟弟。
English: He was a younger brother of Song Ben, a member of the same ethnic group as Song Tuo, Zi Fei Wu, Guang Ping Li Ren, and Li Bu Shang Shu.

古文：少有操尚，世人以刚断许之。
现代文：少年即有志操，世人都认为他刚毅果断。
English: When a boy has ambition, the world thinks he is brave and decisive.

古文：世宗初，起家奉朝请，本州治中、广平王郎中令。
现代文：世宗即位之初，起家为官，任本州治中、广平王郎中令。
English: At the beginning of Sejong's accession to the throne, he started his family as a government official, serving as Honshu chujo and Guangping wangro chujo.

古文：寻拜河阴令。
现代文：不久被朝廷拜授为河阴令。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of He Yin Rong by the imperial court.

古文：翻弟道玙，先为冀州京兆王愉法曹行参军。愉反，逼道玙为官，翻与弟世景俱囚廷尉。
现代文：宋翻弟弟宋道玙，先为冀州京兆王元愉法曹行参军，元愉反叛，逼宋道玙为官，宋翻与弟弟宋世景都被囚禁在廷尉那里。
English: Song Dou's younger brother, Song Daojun, first joined the army for the Jizhou Jingzhao King, Yuan You Fa Cao Xing. Yuan You rebelled and forced Song Daojun to become an official. Both Song Dou and his younger brother, Song Shijing, were imprisoned there.

古文：道玙后弃愉归罪京师，犹坐身死，翻、世景除名。
现代文：宋道玙后来背弃元愉归罪京师，还是被处死了，宋翻、世景被除名。
English: Song Daoxuan later turned his back on Yuan Yu and became a criminal of the Beijing division, but he was still executed, and Song Tuo and Shijing were also expelled.

古文：久之，拜翻治书侍御史、洛阳令、中散大夫、相州大中正，犹领治书。
现代文：很久以后，朝廷拜翻为治书侍御史、洛阳令、中散大夫、相州大中正，犹领治书职。
English: After a long time, the Imperial Court changed the title of the post to the post of the secretary of history, the post of the governor of Luoyang, the post of the doctor of Zhongshan, the post of the vice-president of the University of Xiangzhou, and the post of the secretary of the Judiciary.

古文：又迁左将军、南兗州刺史。
现代文：又迁任左将军、南兖州刺史。
English: He was also transferred to the position of General of the Left, and became the governor of Southern Luzhou.

古文：时萧衍遣将先据荆山，规将寇窃。
现代文：当时萧衍派将领先占据荆山，准备侵犯。
English: At that time, Xiao Yan's faction would take the lead to occupy Jingshan and prepare to invade.

古文：属寿春沦陷，贼遂乘势径趋项城。
现代文：逢寿春沦陷，敌人乘势径直奔项城而来。
English: After the fall of Fengshuchun, the enemy took advantage of the situation and came straight to Xiangcheng.

古文：翻遣将成僧达潜军讨袭，频战破之，自是州境帖然。
现代文：宋翻派将成僧达前去偷袭，频频打败敌人，从此以后州境安宁。
English: The Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's Song Dynasty's

古文：孝庄时，除司徒左长史、抚军将军、河南尹。
现代文：孝庄时，除官为司徒左长史、抚军将军、河南尹。
English: At the time of Xiaozhuang, the officials who were removed from their posts were Szeto Zuochangshi, General Fuzhuan, and Henan Yin.

古文：初，翻为河阴令，顺阳公主家奴为劫，摄而不送，翻将兵围主宅，执主婿冯穆，步驱向县。
现代文：当初，宋翻任河阴令，顺阳公主家奴抢劫民财，顺阳公主摄夺而不送官，宋翻领兵围困公主家宅，绑起驸马冯穆，向县衙而去。
English: At first, Song turned over the command to He Yin, the slave of Princess Shunyang's family robbed the people's wealth, Princess Shunyang captured and did not send an official, Song turned over the leader of the soldiers, besieged the princess's house, tied up the horse Feng Mu, and fled to the county.

古文：时正炎暑，立之日中，流汗沾地。
现代文：当时正值天热，人们暴晒日中，流汗沾地。
English: At that time, it was a hot day, people were exposed to the sun, sweating profusely.

古文：县旧有大枷，时人号曰 弥尾青 。及翻为县主，吏请焚之。
现代文：县里原来有大刑枷，时人称为 弥尾青 ，等宋翻为县令，吏卒请求把它烧掉。
English: There used to be a large shackle in the county, known at the time as the Miao Qing, but Song turned it into a county ordinance, and officials requested that it be burned.

古文：翻曰： 且置南墙下，以待豪家。 
现代文：宋翻说： 暂且放置南墙下，以待豪家。 
English: Song Qian said: Let it be placed under the south wall for the time being, to wait for the rich family.

古文：未几，有内监杨小驹诣县请事，辞色不逊，命取尾青以镇之。
现代文：没多久，有内监杨小驹到县中请事，言辞不逊，宋翻命人取出弥尾青惩罚他。
English: Not long after, Yang Xiaojuan, an internal affairs inspector, went to the county government to make an official request, and his words were insolent. Song Fan ordered someone to take out Yao Qing and punish him.

古文：既免，入诉于世宗。
现代文：放出之后，杨小驹在世宗面前控诉。
English: After being released, Yang Xiaohui filed a complaint in front of Shizong.

古文：世宗大怒，敕河南尹推治其罪。
现代文：世宗大怒，敕河南尹验核其罪。
English: Shizong was furious, and sent Yin from Henan to check his guilt.

古文：翻具自陈状。
现代文：宋翻说出全部情况。
English: Song Fan told the whole story.

古文：诏曰： 卿故违朝法，岂不欲作威以买名？ 
现代文：帝下诏说： 卿故意违犯朝中法律，难道不是作威以沽名钓誉吗？ 
English: The imperial edict said, "Sir, you have deliberately violated the laws of the DPRK and China. Isn't it just a threat to gain reputation?

古文：翻对： 造者非臣，买名者亦宜非臣。
现代文：宋翻回答说： 造枷的不是为臣，买名的也不是为臣。
English: Song Tuo replied: It is not the vassal who makes the yoke, and it is not the vassal who buys the name.

古文：所以留者，非敢施于百姓，欲待凶暴之徒如小驹者耳。 
现代文：之所以要把它留下来，臣不敢在百姓头上施刑，是用它来对付凶暴之徒如杨小驹之类人罢了。 
English: The reason why he wanted to keep it was that he did not dare to inflict punishment on the people. He only wanted to use it to deal with violent people such as Yang Xiaojuan.

古文：于是威振京师。
现代文：从此威震京城。
English: Since then, it has been shaking the capital.

古文：及为洛阳，迄于为尹，畏惮权势，更相承接，故当世之名大致灭损。
现代文：等到为政洛阳，终于为尹，他畏惧权势，巴结奉承达官贵人，所以当世之名大致都减损完了。
English: When it came to Luoyang for politics, and finally to Yin, he was afraid of power and flattered dignitaries, so his reputation in the world was largely diminished.

古文：道玙既不免难，始均亦遇世祸，时咸怪之。
现代文：永安三年，死于任上。朝廷赠其为侍中、卫将军、相州刺史。
English: In the third year of Yongan, he died in office. The Imperial Court presented him with the titles of Samurai Middle Rank, General of the Imperial Guard, and Soushū Shishi.

古文：无子，兄毓以第三子子叔继。
现代文：出帝初年，重新赠官骠骑大将军、仪同三司、尚书左仆射、雍州刺史，谥称贞烈。
English: In the first year after the emperor's enthronement, he was re-awarded the titles of Grand General of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse, Grand Marshal of the Horse.

古文：辛雄，字世宾，陇西狄道人。
现代文：辛雄，字世宾，陇西狄道人。
English: Xin Xiong, known as the world's guest, is a disciple of Xidi Taoism.

古文：父暢，字幼达，大将军谘议参军、汝南乡郡二郡太守，太和中，本郡中正。
现代文：父亲辛畅，字幼达，任大将军谘议参军、汝南乡郡二郡太守，太和年间，为本郡中正。
English: His father, Xin Chang, was a young man, and was appointed as a general to advise on joining the army. He was also the governor of two counties in Runan Township, and was the county's vice-governor during the Taiga era.

古文：雄有孝性，颇涉书史，好刑名，廉谨雅素，不妄交友，喜怒不形于色。
现代文：辛雄很有孝性，广泛涉猎书册史籍，喜欢刑名法术，廉洁谨慎，雅洁素泊，不随便交朋友，喜怒哀乐不轻易现于脸上。
English: Xin Xiong is very filial, extensively dabbles in books and historical books, likes criminal spells, is honest and prudent, elegant and unpretentious, does not make friends casually, and does not easily show emotions on his face.

古文：释褐奉朝请。
现代文：脱下布衫，奉朝请做官。
English: Take off your cloth shirt and serve the emperor as an official.

古文：父于郡遇患，雄自免归，晨夜扶抱。
现代文：他父亲在郡任上患病，辛雄自请免官回家侍奉，晨扶夜抱。
English: His father fell ill while serving as a county official, and Xin Xiong asked to be relieved of his duties so that he could return home to serve, helping in the morning and taking care of him at night.

古文：怿重之，每谓人曰： 必也无讼乎？
现代文：等到父亲病逝，服丧期间，忧伤太过，人形全无，难以辨识，世人盛赞他的孝行。
English: When his father died of illness, during the mourning period, the sadness was too much, the dolls were all gone, it was difficult to identify, and the world praised his filial piety.

古文：辛雄其有焉。 由是名显。
现代文：正始初年，授官给事中，十年没有升迁，于是辛雄自称有病，免职而归。
English: At the beginning of the first year, during the awarding of officials, there was no promotion for ten years, so Xin Xiong claimed to be ill and was dismissed.

古文：怿迁太尉，又为记室参军。
现代文：清河王元怿任司空，征他为户曹参军，管理农业事宜。
English: The Qing Dynasty King Yuan Rong appointed him as the Secretary of the Air, recruited him as the Household Cao to join the army, and managed agricultural affairs.

古文：神龟中，除尚书驾部郎中，转三公郎。
现代文：怿迁任司徒，辛雄也跟着授官户曹参军。神龟年间，辛雄升为尚书驾部郎中，转任三公郎。
English: During the years of the Divine Turtle, Hsin-hsiung was promoted to junior member of the Shoshu chauffeur's club and transferred to the position of third son.

古文：其年，沙汰郎官，唯雄与羊深等八人见留，余悉罢遣，更授李琰等。
现代文：这一年，筛选淘汰郎一级官员，只有辛雄等八人被留职，其余都或罢或迁，改为任李琰等人为郎。
English: This year, the screening eliminated the first-level officials, only eight people such as Xin Xiong were retained, and the rest were either dismissed or transferred, and were replaced by the highest-ranking officials such as Li Jie.

古文：先是，御史中尉、东平王元匡复欲舆棺谏诤，尚书令、任城王澄劾匡大不敬，诏恕死为民。
现代文：在这以前，御史中尉、东平王元匡打算抬棺上朝诤谏，尚书令、任城王元澄弹劾元匡对皇上大不敬，皇帝下诏免元匡死罪、削职为民。
English: Prior to this, Lieutenant Mishi and Dongping Wang Yuanquan planned to carry the coffin to the imperial funeral, Shang Shuling and Rencheng Wang Yuancheng impeached Yuanquan for disrespecting the emperor, and the emperor pardoned Yuanquan of the death penalty and reduced his position for the people.

古文：雄奏理匡曰： 窃惟白衣元匡，历奉三朝，每蒙宠遇。
现代文：辛雄上书议论说： 臣私下考虑平民元匡，前后尽职三朝，每每蒙受皇帝恩宠。
English: Xin Xiong commented in his letter: The vassal privately considered the commoner Yuan Kuang, performed his duties for three dynasties, and was favored by the emperor every time.

古文：謇谔之性，简自帝心；鹰鹯之志，形于在昔。
现代文：正直之性，圣上心中有数；勇猛之志，过去多有表现。
English: Honesty is what counts in the heart of a saint; bravery is what has been shown in the past.

古文：故高祖锡之以匡名，陛下任之以弹纠。
现代文：所以高祖赐给他 匡 的名字，陛下您任命他为弹纠一职。
English: Therefore, Emperor Gaozu Xiaowen gave him the name Kuang, and Your Majesty ordered him to be in charge of the important task of impeachment.

古文：至若茹皓升辇，匡斥宜下之言；高肇当政，匡陈擅权之表。
现代文：以至于像茹皓升职，匡有斥其宜下之言；高肇当政，匡陈奏其弄权章表。
English: So much so that, when Zhu Rong was promoted, Kuang Quan said that it was best to reject him; when Gao Zhao was in power, Kuang Quan played his power play.

古文：刚毅忠款，群臣莫及；骨鲠之迹，朝野共知。
现代文：元匡的刚正坚毅、忠诚款直，群臣没有能赶上他的；正直耿节的行为，朝野上下，人所共知。
English: The Yuan Kuang's uprightness, firmness, loyalty and uprightness, the ministers could not catch up with him; the behavior of honesty and integrity, up and down, is well known to everyone.

古文：当高肇之时，匡造棺致谏，主圣臣直，卒以无咎。
现代文：处在高肇时期，元匡造棺陈奏，圣主英明，大臣忠直，终而无可罪责。
English: When Gao Zhao was in power, he carried the coffin to the imperial court. At that time, the emperor was a saint, the ministers were honest, and the imperial court never blamed him.

古文：假欲重造，先帝已容之于前，陛下亦宜宽之于后，况其元列由绪与罪按不同也。
现代文：假使圣上打算重任元匡官职，先帝已有宽容之例在前，陛下您也应宽容在后，何况其当初谏诤行为与因罪伏罚性质不同啊。
English: If His Holiness intends to return to the post of Yuan Kuang, the former emperor has already shown tolerance in the past, and Your Majesty should also be tolerant in the future, not to mention the fact that his original act was different in nature from the punishment for crime.

古文：脱终贬黜，不在朝廷，恐杜忠臣之口，塞谏者之心，乖琴瑟之至和，违盐梅之相济。
现代文：如他以贬黜终结，脱离朝廷，我担心这会杜绝忠臣之口，填塞谏奏之心，妨碍琴瑟之音的和谐，违背国政的济接。
English: If he ends up being disgraced and leaves the imperial court, I fear that this will close the mouths of loyal subjects, fill the hearts of those who play the harp, hinder the harmony of the sound of the lyre, and violate the harmony of state affairs.

古文：祁奚云：叔向之贤，可及十世。而匡不免其身，实可嗟惜。 
现代文：祁奚说，叔向的贤德，可施及十世，而今元匡却其身难免，实在是令人嗟叹惋惜。 
English: Zou said that Shu Xiang's virtues can be applied to the tenth generation, but now Yuan Kuang is unavoidable, it is really regrettable.

古文：未几，匡除龙骧将军、平州刺史。
现代文：没多久，元匡又被朝廷任为龙骧将军、平州刺史。
English: Not long after, Yuan Kuang was appointed by the imperial court to be the general of Longjing and the governor of Pingzhou.

古文：右仆射元钦谓左仆射萧宝夤曰： 至如辛郎中才用，省中诸人莫出其右。 
现代文：右仆射元钦对左仆射萧宝夤说： 至如像辛郎中的才干，省中诸人没有超过他的。 
English: His right-hand man, Sha Yuanqin, said to his left-hand man, Sha Xiao Baojun, "As great as Xin Lang's talent is, no one in the province surpasses him."

古文：宝夤曰： 吾闻游仆射云： 得如雄者四五人共治省事，足矣。 
现代文：宝夤说： 我听游仆射说： 得到像辛雄这样的四五个人共同处理省中事务，就足够了。 
English: Baojun said, "I heard Yu Ducheng say, 'It is enough to get four or five people like Xin Xiong to jointly handle the affairs of the province and the middle school.

古文：今日之赏，何其晚哉！ 
现代文：您今天才夸奖他，不觉太晚了！ 
English: You only praised him today, but it's too late!

古文：初，廷尉少卿袁翻以犯罪之人，经恩竞诉，枉直难明，遂奏曾染风闻者，不问曲直，推为狱成，悉不断理。
现代文：当初，廷尉少卿袁翻因犯罪的人，凭恩竞相诉讼，是非曲直难以断明，于是上奏皇上称这些人只要是他们曾经被人议论的，不问曲直，一律判罪，全不用仔细调查判断。
English: At first, the person who committed the crime, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the courtier, the court

古文：诏令门下、尚书、廷尉议之。
现代文：皇帝得知，诏令门下、尚书、廷尉一起讨论此事。
English: The emperor learned that, under the direction of the emperor, Shang Shu and the courtier discussed the matter together.

古文：雄议曰：
现代文：辛雄议论说：
English: Xin Xiong commented:

古文：《春秋》之义：不幸而失，宁僭不滥。
现代文： 《春秋》的说法：不幸而有过失，宁愿遗漏罪人也不滥责好人。
English: The saying of "Spring and Autumn" is: it is unfortunate to be at fault, and it is better to omit sinners than to abuse good people.

古文：僭则失罪人，滥乃害善人。
现代文：失检则遗漏罪人，滥责则伤害好人。
English: Broadly, it will allow criminals to escape punishment; strictly, it will make good people suffer.

古文：今议者不忍罪奸吏，使出入纵情，令君子小人薰莸不别，岂所谓赏善罚恶，殷勤隐恤者也！
现代文：而今有议论者不忍得罪奸吏，致使他们任情胡来，以致君子小人香臭无别，这哪是什么赏善罚恶，心存恻隐怜恤的做法呢？
English: But now some commentators can't bear to let the criminals off the hook, causing them to indulge in nonsense, so that there is no difference between a gentleman and a villain. What is this practice of rewarding good and punishing evil, and having a hidden compassion?

古文：仰寻周公不减流言之愆，俯惟释之不加惊马之辟，所以小大用情，贵在得所。
现代文：仰寻周公不追究流言的过失、俯思释之不调查惊马的罪责，这都是以事情大小，以情况定夺的做法，目的是以得失为贵。
English: Looking to Zhou Gong for negligence in not investigating the rumor, and looking down on Zhou Gong for not investigating the culpability of the horse, these are all practices that are determined by the size of the matter and the situation, with the aim of valuing the gains and losses.

古文：失之千里，差在毫厘。
现代文：事情往往是差之毫厘，失之千里。
English: Things are often a matter of a few millimeters and a thousand miles.

古文：雄久执案牍，数见疑讼，职掌三千，愿言者六。
现代文：臣辛雄久掌案牍，屡见疑难诉讼。臣从处理的众多案子中提炼出六点看法。
English: Minister Xin Xiong has been in charge of cases for a long time, and has often seen difficult lawsuits. Minister distilled six points from the many cases handled.

古文：一曰：御史所纠，有注其逃走者。
现代文： 一是：御史所纠，有注明当事者其人逃走的。
English: First, there is a dispute over the history, and there is an indication that the parties involved have fled.

古文：及其出诉，或为公使，本曹给过所有指，如不推检，文案灼然者，雪之。
现代文：等到他出庭诉讼，或为公使，本衙判明其过有所指，如不推检，文案明白，昭雪不论。
English: Wait until he appears in court proceedings, or if he is a minister, the court will find out that his offense is significant. If there is no investigation, the copy will be clear, no matter what.

古文：二曰：御史赦前注获见赃，不辨行赇主名。检无赂以置直之主，宜应洗复。
现代文：二是：御史赦原查明赃物，不明行贿主人名字，检按没有贿赂所受对象为谁的，宜应剔除。
English: The second is: to identify the stolen goods, the name of the owner of the bribe is unknown, and the object of the bribe is unknown, it should be eliminated.

古文：三曰：经拷不引，傍无三证，比以狱案既成，因即除削。
现代文：三是：经过拷打不供罪，旁边又无三证，即使罪名已立，也应解罪。
English: The third is: if a person does not confess to a crime after being tortured and does not have three pieces of evidence, he or she should be acquitted even if the crime has already been established.

古文：或有据令奏复者，与夺不同，未获为通例。
现代文：或有根据律令奏复的，与夺不同，不能按此办理。
English: If there is a possibility of filing a reply according to the ritsuryo, it is different from seizing, and cannot be handled according to this.

古文：又须定何如得为证人。
现代文：这一条，又必须确定什么样的人才能为证人。
English: In this article, it is also necessary to determine what kind of person can be a witness.

古文：若必须三人对见受财，然后成证，则于理太宽。
现代文：如若必须三人同时见到当事人接受财物，然后才能定为证人，那于法理太宽。
English: If it is necessary for three people to see the party receiving the property at the same time before they can be designated as witnesses, that is too broad in the legal theory.

古文：若传闻即为证，则于理太急。
现代文：若据传闻作证即为证人，则于法理又太急迫。
English: If a witness testifies based on hearsay, it is too urgent from the legal point of view.

古文：令请以行赇后三人俱见，物及证状显著，准以为验。
现代文：现在我建议当事人行贿后三人都见到了，赃物及提供的情况相同，则视为事实成立。
English: Now I suggest that if all three parties have seen the stolen goods after the bribe has been paid, and the circumstances of the stolen goods and the offer are the same, then it is deemed to be a fact.

古文：四曰：赦前断事，或引律乖错，使除复失衷，虽案成经赦，宜追从律。
现代文：四是：赦前断事，或是因引据刑律乖离错误，致使定夺失公，虽然定成经赦，也应回到准律定夺的轨道上来。
English: The fourth is: to decide the case before pardoning, or to deviate from the criminal law due to the error of citing the criminal law, resulting in the loss of justice. Although it is decided by pardoning, it should also return to the track of legal decision-making.

古文：五曰：经赦除名之后，或邀驾诉枉，被旨重究；或诉省称冤，为奏更检。
现代文：五是：经赦除名之后，或是向圣上诉说枉曲，被圣上下旨重新追究；或上省诉冤，上书要求重新审理。
English: The fifth is: after being pardoned and removed from the list, either appeal to the bishop to say that it was a wrongdoing and be re-investigated by the bishop's order; or appeal to the province for redress of grievances and submit a letter requesting a re-trial.

古文：事付有司，未被研判，遂遇恩宥。
现代文：上书交付有关部门之后，未被研究判理，便遇上恩赦。
English: After the petition was handed over to the relevant departments, he was pardoned without being investigated.

古文：如此之徒，谓不得异于常格，依前案为定。
现代文：像这样的一些人，也不能与通常的办案程序相违，依照前判为定。
English: For some people like this, it is not possible to deviate from the usual case-handling procedures, and they will be sentenced according to the previous judgment.

古文：若不合拷究，已复之流，请不追夺。
现代文：如若不与拷究相符合，已复案的人，请不追夺。
English: If it is not consistent with the investigation, please do not pursue the person whose case has been reopened.

古文：六曰：或受辞下检反覆，使鞫狱证占分明，理合清雪，未及告案，忽逢恩赦。
现代文：六是：或受辞下检反覆，使究狱证占分明，理应清雪罪名，没来得及上告检按，忽然就碰上恩赦。
English: The sixth is: or the resignation of the repeated inspection, so that the prison certificate is clearly accounted for, should be cleared of charges, did not have time to appeal the inspection, and suddenly encountered amnesty.

古文：若从证占而雪，则违正格；如除其名，罪滥洁士。
现代文：假若依据证占而昭雪其罪，则违反正常的法律程序；如果除其名字，那就滥罪洁白之士。
English: If his crime is cleared up on the basis of circumstantial evidence, it is a violation of normal legal procedures; if his name is removed, then he is innocent.

古文：以为罪须案成，雪以占定，若拷未毕格及要证一人未集者，不得为占定。
现代文：臣认为他们的罪行必须按察之后才能成立，昭雪必须以占定为准则，如若拷问没有完成程式以及重要证人有一人没有到的，则不能算作结案。
English: The minister believed that their crimes could only be established after an investigation, and that Akiyuki must take possession as a criterion. If the torture did not complete the procedure and one important witness did not arrive, the case could not be considered closed.

古文：古人虽患察狱之不精，未闻知冤而不理。
现代文： 古来人士虽然担心检察狱案的工作不能尽量精细，但臣没有听说有谁明知冤屈却不审理。
English: Although the ancients worried that the work of the procuratorate prison case could not be as fine as possible, the minister did not hear who knew the grievances but did not hear them.

古文：今之所陈，实士师之深疑，朝夕之急务，愿垂察焉。
现代文：臣今日所陈奏的，实在是朝野人士众目所待，国家朝夕之间必须处理的紧急事情，愿皇上垂情深察为盼。 
English: What the minister presented today is really what the people of the court and the country have been waiting for. It is an urgent matter that must be dealt with between the morning and the evening of the country. I hope that the emperor will look deeply into it.

古文：诏从雄议。
现代文：皇上下诏，依从辛雄所议。
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict to do as he suggested.

古文：自后每有疑议，雄与公卿驳难，事多见从，于是公能之名甚盛。
现代文：从此以后，每有疑议，辛雄与公卿大臣辩论，总是最后按照他的意见办，于是他的才名日盛一日。
English: From then on, whenever there was a doubt, Xin Xiong debated with the noble minister and always acted according to his opinion in the end. As a result, his reputation grew day by day.

古文：又为《禄养论》，称仲尼陈五孝，自天子至庶人无致仕之文。
现代文：辛雄又作《禄养论》，称赞孔子陈述五孝，自天子至平民没有 退休 的文字。
English: Xin Xiong also wrote "The Theory of Reward and Upbringing," a text praising Confucius for stating the Five Filial Duties and that there is no retirement from being a son of heaven to a commoner.

古文：《礼记》： 八十，一子不从政；九十，家不从政。 
现代文：《礼记》： 八十岁，一个儿子不从政；九十岁，一家不从政。 
English: "Li Ji": At the age of eighty, a son does not participate in politics; at the age of ninety, a family does not participate in politics.

古文：郑玄注云： 复除之。 
现代文：郑玄注说： 恢复其官职。 
English: Zheng Xuan commented: He can be reappointed.

古文：然则止复庶民，非公卿大夫士之谓。
现代文：然而，这只是指恢复庶民而言，并非指的公卿士大夫。
English: However, this only refers to the restoration of the common people, not to the nobility.

古文：乃诛之，时年五十。
现代文：我认为宜顺其禄养，不必限定年龄。 论文奏上，肃宗收下了。
English: I think it is appropriate to raise them according to their age, and there is no need to set an age limit.

古文：没其家口。
现代文：辛雄因母亲去世离任回家。
English: Due to his mother's death, Xin Xiong left his post to return home.

古文：二子士璨、士贞，逃入关中。雄从父兄纂，字伯将。
现代文：丧期一满，右仆射元钦上书建议还授辛雄郎官职。不久，兼任司州别驾，加前军将军。辛雄从父兄辛纂，字伯将。
English: As soon as the period of mourning was over, his right-hand man, Shao Yuanqin, suggested in a letter that Xin Xiong Lang should also be given an official post. Soon, he also served as the governor of Shizhou and the general of the former army. Xin Xiong was named after his father and brother, Xin Cao, and became known as a great general.

古文：学涉文史，温良雅正。
现代文：学业博涉文史，性情温良雅正。
English: His academic background is rich in literature and history, and his temperament is mild and elegant.

古文：初为兗州安东府主簿。
现代文：初为官任兖州安东府主簿。
English: He was first appointed as the chief registrar of Zhangzhou Andong Prefecture.

古文：与秘书丞同郡李伯尚有旧，伯尚与咸阳王禧同逆，逃窜投纂。
现代文：与秘书丞同郡李伯尚有旧交，伯尚与咸阳王元禧一同叛逆，事败后逃窜到辛纂处。
English: He had an old friendship with the secretary of the same county, Li Boshang. Boshang rebelled together with Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, and fled to Xinzhuang after the defeat.

古文：事觉，坐免官。
现代文：事情被发觉后，被免去官职。
English: He was removed from his post after the affair was discovered.

古文：积十余年，除奉朝请。
现代文：过了十多年，应朝请为官。
English: After more than ten years, he was invited to become an official.

古文：稍转太尉骑兵参军，每为府主清河王怿所赏。
现代文：渐转为太尉骑兵参军，经常被府主清河王元怿所嘉赏。
English: Gradually, he joined the army as a cavalry captain, and was often praised by the governor of Qinghe, Wang Yuanxuan.

古文：及欲定考，怿曰： 辛骑兵有学有才，宜为上第。 
现代文：等到定考官绩，元怿说： 辛骑兵有学识有才能，应考绩为上第。 
English: When it came time for the official performance appraisal, Yuan Zheng said: Xin cavalrymen have knowledge and talent, and their performance appraisal should be the highest.

古文：转越骑校尉。
现代文：转任越骑校尉。
English: Transferred to the post of Viet Cavalry Captain.

古文：尚书令李崇北伐蠕蠕，引为录事参军。
现代文：尚书令李崇北伐柔然，引荐他为录事参军。
English: Shang Shu ordered Li Chongbei to march to the north, and introduced him to join the army.

古文：临淮王彧北征，以纂随崇有称，启为长史。
现代文：临淮王元北征，以辛纂跟随李崇有功，启奏他为长史。
English: During the Northern Expedition of King Huai of the Yuan Dynasty, he followed Li Chongyong with Sin Zuo, and initiated him into a long history.

古文：及广阳王渊北伐，又引为长史。
现代文：等到广阳王元渊北伐，又引荐他为长史。
English: Wait until Guangyang Wang Yuan Yuan's Northern Expedition, and introduce him as a long history.

古文：寻拜谏议大夫。
现代文：不久拜授谏议大夫。
English: Soon after, he was awarded the title of Doctor of Counseling.

古文：雅为彧所称叹，屡在朝廷荐举之。
现代文：大为元所称叹，屡屡在朝廷称赞荐举他。
English: He was greatly admired by Yuan and was repeatedly praised and recommended by the imperial court.

古文：萧衍遣将曹义宗攻新野，诏纂持节、兼尚书左丞、南道行台，率众赴接，至便破之。
现代文：萧衍派将曹义宗攻打新野，帝诏辛纂为持节、兼尚书左丞、南道行台，率部支援，到新野便打败了敌人。
English: Xiao Yan sent Cao Yizong to attack Nino, and Emperor Xin sent Ji Jie, Jian Shang Shuzo, Nan Dao Xing Tai, and other leaders to support him, and they defeated the enemy in Nino.

古文：义宗等以其劲速，不敢复进。
现代文：义宗等人以其劲速，不敢再前进。
English: Yoshimune and the others, with their speed, did not dare to advance any further.

古文：于时海内多虞，京师更无继援，惟以二千余兵捍御疆埸。
现代文：当时国家处多事之秋，京城更无援兵可调，辛纂只有以二千多名士兵捍御疆场。
English: At that time, the country was going through a tumultuous time, and there were no reinforcements available in the capital. Xin Cao could only defend his territory with more than two thousand soldiers.

古文：又诏为荆州军司，除骁骑将军，加辅国将军。
现代文：帝又诏辛纂为荆州军司，除任骁骑将军，加授辅国将军。
English: Emperor Zhao Xin also made him the military commander of Jing Province, removed him from the post of general of cavalry, and promoted him to the post of general of auxiliary troops.

古文：纂善抚将士，人多用命，贼甚惮之。
现代文：辛纂善于抚慰将士，战士个个勇敢无当，敌人很是害怕。
English: Xin Cao was good at soothing the soldiers. The soldiers were all very brave, and the enemy was very scared.

古文：会肃宗崩，讳至。咸以对敌，欲秘凶问。
现代文：恰逢肃宗逝世，大家都认为大敌当前，应封锁凶丧消息。
English: Su Zong's death coincided with the time when everyone thought that the news of the death of the great enemy should be blocked.

古文：纂曰： 安危在人，岂关是也！ 
现代文：辛纂说： 安危在人，与敌有什么相干。 
English: Xin Cao said: When people are in danger, what does the enemy have to do with it?

古文：遂发丧号哭，三军缟素。
现代文：于是发丧号哭，三军全都披麻戴孝。
English: As a result, cries of mourning were heard, and all three armies put on mourning clothes.

古文：还入州城，申以盟约。
现代文：还军入州城，申以盟约。
English: Returned troops entered the city of Shuzhou and signed a treaty.

古文：寻为义宗所围，相率固守。
现代文：很快城被义宗围起来，城中守军固城自守。
English: Soon the city was surrounded by Yoshimune, and the defenders in the city defended themselves.

古文：庄帝即位，除通直散骑常侍、征虏将军、兼尚书，仍行台。
现代文：庄帝即位，除授他为通直散骑常侍、征虏将军、兼任尚书，仍为行台。
English: When Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne, in addition to being awarded the title of Zongzhi Zanzhi Changzhi, Zongzhi Zanzhi Changzhi, Zongzhi Zanzhi Changzhi, Zongzhi Zanzhi Changzhi, and Zongzhi Zanzhi Zanzhi, he was also awarded the title of Xingtai.

古文：后大都督费穆击义宗，擒之。
现代文：后来大都督费穆攻击曹义宗，擒获了他。
English: Later, the Grand Duke Feimu attacked Cao Yizong and captured him.

古文：入城，因举酒属纂曰： 微辛行台之在斯，吾亦无由建此功也。 
现代文：军队入城，费穆举起酒杯对辛纂说： 如不是有辛行台在此，我也无法建立这个功勋。 
English: When the army entered the city, Feimu raised his glass to Xin Cao and said, "If it weren't for Xin Xing Tai here, I wouldn't have been able to achieve this feat."

古文：入朝，言于庄帝，称纂固节危城，宜蒙爵赏，以劝将来。
现代文：入朝，费穆在庄帝面前说起这件事，称辛纂固守危城，应蒙赏爵，以激励将来的人。
English: When he entered the imperial court, Feimu spoke about this matter in front of Emperor Zhuang, saying that Xin Cao had firmly defended the dangerous city and should be awarded a knighthood in order to inspire future people.

古文：帝乃下诏慰勉之。
现代文：帝于是下诏慰勉。
English: The emperor then issued an imperial edict of consolation.

古文：寻除持节、平东将军、中郎将，赐绢五十匹、金装刀一口。
现代文：不久，除任持节、平东将军、中郎将，赐给绢五十匹，金装刀一口。
English: Soon, in addition to the appointment of Jisai, General Pingdong and Vice Admiral, he was given fifty yakitori and a gold-plated sword.

古文：永安二年，元颢乘胜，卒至城下。尔朱世隆狼狈退还，城内空虚，遂为颢擒。
现代文：永安二年，元颢乘着胜利的劲头，突然兵临京都城下，朱世隆狼狈逃回城中，城内空虚，于是被元颢擒获。
English: In the second year of Yongan, Yuan Shao took advantage of the momentum of victory, suddenly soldiers arrived at the foot of Kyoto Castle, Zhu Shilong fled back to the city, the city was empty, so he was captured by Yuan Shao.

古文：及庄帝还宫，纂谢不守之罪。
现代文：等到庄帝还宫，辛纂谢请城池失守之罪。
English: When Emperor Zhuang returned to the palace, Xin Zongxie pleaded guilty to the crime of losing the castle.

古文：帝曰： 于时朕亦北巡。
现代文：庄帝说： 那时朕也北逃。
English: Zhuang Di said: At that time, I also fled north.

古文：东军不守，岂卿之过？ 
现代文：东军不守，哪是卿的过错？ 
English: If the Eastern Army did not defend, what was Sir's fault?

古文：还镇虎牢，俄转中军将军、荥阳太守。
现代文：又让他镇虎牢关，不久转任中军将军、荥阳太守。
English: He also put him in charge of controlling the tiger, and soon he was transferred to be the general of the Chinese army and the governor of Shenyang.

古文：民有姜洛生、康乞得者，旧是太守郑仲明左右，豪猾偷窃，境内为患。
现代文：百姓中有叫姜洛生、康乞得的，原来是太守郑仲明左右，恣肆奸滑，偷窃民财，境内为患。
English: Among the common people, there were people called Jiang Losen and Kang Begged, but it turned out that they were all around the governor, Zheng Zhongming, and they were wantonly treacherous, stealing people's wealth, and causing trouble within the territory.

古文：纂伺捕擒获，枭于郡市，百姓忻然。
现代文：辛纂伺捕擒住，斩于郡市，百姓欢欣鼓舞。
English: Xin Cao was captured and beheaded in the county and city, and the people rejoiced.

古文：加镇东将军。
现代文：朝廷加授其为镇东将军。
English: The imperial court awarded him the title of Zhendong General.

古文：太昌中，除左光禄大夫。
现代文：太昌年间，除任左光禄大夫。
English: During the Taichang era, he was removed from his post as Sakoroku doctor.

古文：纂侨寓洛阳，乃为河南邑中正。
现代文：辛纂侨居洛阳，仍为河南邑中正。
English: Xin Cao lived in Luoyang and was still a middle-ranking official in Henan.

古文：永熙三年，除使持节、河内太守。
现代文：永熙三年，除任使持节、河内太守。
English: In the third year of Yongxi, he was dismissed from the post of envoy and became the governor of Hanoi.

古文：齐献武王赴洛，兵集城下，纂出城谒王曰： 纂受诏于此，本有御防。
现代文：齐献武王兵赴洛阳，兵集城下，辛纂出城谒见王说： 纂我受诏在此，本有防御。
English: The king's soldiers went to Luoyang to make a joint offering, and the soldiers gathered under the city. Xin Cao came out of the city to see the king and said, "I received the imperial edict here, and there is a defense.

古文：大王忠贞王室，扶奖颠危，纂敢不匍匐。 
现代文：大王忠贞王室，扶持危颠，辛纂我敢不匍匐待您。 
English: Great King Loyalty Royal Family, support the crisis, I dare not treat you badly.

古文：王曰： 吾志去奸佞，以康国道，河内此言，深得王臣之节。 
现代文：王说： 我志在除奸，以康正国道，河内这话，深得王臣之节。 
English: The king said, "I am determined to get rid of the traitors, and to make the country prosperous and just." These words of Hanoi deeply touched the hearts of the princes.

古文：因命前侍中司马子如曰： 吾行途疲弊，宜代吾执河内手也。 
现代文：因命前侍中司马子如说： 我一路劳顿疲惫，你代我与河内联手。 
English: Because before his death, his aide-de-camp, Sima Zi, said: "I'm exhausted and tired all the way, you should join hands with Hanoi on my behalf."

古文：便入洛。
现代文：于是大军入洛阳。
English: As a result, the large army entered Luoyang.

古文：九月，行西荆州事、兼尚书、南道行台，寻正刺史。
现代文：九月，辛纂行西荆州事、兼尚书、南道行台，不久为正刺史。
English: In September, Xin Zuo went to West Jingzhou, and also to Shangshu, and to Southern Dao, and soon became a full-fledged historian.

古文：时蛮酋樊五能破析阳郡，应宇文黑獭。
现代文：当时，蛮酋樊五能攻破析阳郡，响应宇文黑獭。
English: At that time, the five barbarian chiefs were able to break through Seiyang County and respond to Uwen Heihe.

古文：纂议欲出军讨之，纂行台郎中李广谏曰： 析阳四面无民，唯一城之地耳。
现代文：辛纂建议出军讨伐，他的行台郎中李广谏说： 析阳四面无民，只有一城之地罢了。
English: Xincang suggested sending troops to fight, and his retainer Li Guangyao said: "There are no people in all directions in Seiyang, there is only one city.

古文：山路深险，表里群蛮。
现代文：山路危险深幽，里外都是蛮贼。
English: The mountain roads are treacherous. Thieves are everywhere.

古文：今若少遣军，则力不能制贼；多遣，则减彻防卫，根本虚弱。
现代文：现在如少派军队，则力量不足制住敌人；多派，则需减撤后方防卫，根本虚弱。
English: At present, if a small number of troops are sent, the strength is insufficient to hold back the enemy; if there are many troops, the rear defense needs to be reduced and withdrawn, which is fundamentally weak.

古文：脱不如意，便大挫威名。
现代文：万一不能达到预期目的，则会大大损害我军威名。
English: In the unlikely event that it fails to achieve its intended purpose, it will greatly damage the reputation of our army.

古文：人情一去，州城难保。 
现代文：人心一乱，州城难保。 
English: When people's hearts are in turmoil, it is difficult to protect the state capital.

古文：纂曰： 岂得纵贼不讨，令其为患日深！ 
现代文：辛纂说： 岂能放纵敌人而不征讨，让他们为患日深！ 
English: Xin Cao said: "How can we indulge the enemy without soliciting, and let them be in deep trouble!

古文：广曰： 今日之事，唯须万全。
现代文：李广说： 今日之事，惟须想个万全之计。
English: Li Guang said: In today's situation, we only need to think of a perfect plan.

古文：且虑在心腹，何暇疥癣？
现代文：况且心腹有患，何暇顾及疥癣。
English: What's more, he is a close confidant, so he has plenty of time to take care of her.

古文：闻台军已破洪威，计不久应至。
现代文：我听说台军已破洪威，量其不久便该来了。
English: I've heard that the Taiwanese army has broken through and should be arriving soon.

古文：公但约勒属城，使各修完垒壁，善抚百姓，以待救兵。
现代文：公只管督管城中，使人各自修缮壁垒，好好抚慰百姓，等待救兵到来。
English: The public superintendent was in charge of the city, making people repair the barriers, soothe the people, and wait for the arrival of the rescuers.

古文：虽失析阳，如弃鸡肋。 
现代文：虽然失去析阳，就好比弃掉鸡肋骨，无甚可惜。 
English: Although it is a pity to lose the sun, it is like throwing away chicken ribs.

古文：纂曰： 卿言自是一途，我意以为不尔。 
现代文：辛纂说： 卿说的自然是一种办法，我却不是这样考虑。 
English: Xin Cao said, "What you said is naturally a method, but I don't think of it that way.

古文：遂遣兵攻之，不克而败，诸将因亡不返。
现代文：于是派兵攻击，不能克敌而败，诸将逃亡不归。
English: So he sent troops to attack, but they were unable to defeat the enemy and were defeated. They all fled and never returned.

古文：故吾诸子。
现代文：城中人又秘密招来西边敌人，黑獭派都督独孤如愿率领军队偷偷前来，突入州城，拿下州府。辛纂左右只剩下五六个人，短兵接战，被敌擒获，杀害了他。朝廷赠他为都督定、殷二州诸军事，骠骑大将军，尚书左仆射，司徒公，定州刺史。高崇的儿子高谦之，字道让。
English: The people in the city also secretly invited the enemy from the west, and the Black Skull faction's governor alone led the army to come secretly, rushed into the state capital, and took over the state capital. There were only five or six people left around Xin Cao. Short soldiers engaged in battle, were captured by the enemy, and killed him. The court presented him as the governor of the capital, the military of the two states of Yin, the general of the cavalry, the left-handed shot, the right-handed shot, the right-handed shot, and the right-handed shot. Gao Gao, the son of Gao Chong, gave up the word.

古文：囗 子谦之，字道让。少事后母李以孝闻，李亦抚育过于己生，人莫能辨其兄弟所出同异。
现代文：少小时侍奉后母李氏，孝名远扬，李氏抚养他所耗费的心血也过于自己亲生孩子，以致旁人难以辨别他们兄弟所出的同异差别。
English: He served his stepmother, the Li clan, for a short time, and his filial piety is well-known. The Li clan spent more effort on raising him than their own children, so that it is difficult for others to distinguish the differences between their brothers.

古文：论者两重之。
现代文：时人把他们一样看重。
English: At that time, people valued them equally.

古文：及长，屏绝人事，专意经史，天文、算历、图纬之书，多所该涉，日诵数千言，好文章，留意《老》、《易》。
现代文：等到长大，摒绝人事，专攻经史，天文历法、算学图纬之类书籍，广泛涉猎，每天诵读几千字，喜好文章，留心《老》、《易》。
English: When he grows up, he will give up personal affairs, specialize in books such as history, astronomical calendar, and mathematical graphs, widely dabble in hunting, read several thousand words a day, like articles, and pay attention to "Lao" and "Yi."

古文：袭爵，释褐奉朝请，加宣威将军，转奉车都尉、廷尉丞。
现代文：继承父亲爵位，脱下布衣，接受朝廷任职，朝廷加授他为宣威将军，转任奉车都尉、廷尉丞。
English: He inherited his father's title, took off his robe, and accepted a post in the imperial court. The imperial court also awarded him the title of General Xuan Wei, and he was transferred to the positions of Lieutenant of the Imperial Chariot and Lieutenant of the Imperial Chariot.

古文：正光中，尚书左丞元孚慰劳蠕蠕，反被拘留。
现代文：正光年间，尚书左丞元孚慰劳蠕蠕，反被拘留。
English: During the Zhengguang years, Shangshu Zuojo Yuanfu was detained.

古文：及蠕蠕大掠而还，置孚归国。
现代文：等到蠕蠕大肆掠抢而还，安排元孚回国。
English: Wait until Creep Creep returns from plundering, and arrange for Yuan Fu to return to China.

古文：事下廷尉，卿及监以下谓孚无坐，惟谦之以孚辱命，□以流罪。
现代文：此事交廷尉处置，廷尉卿及监以下官员都称元孚无罪，只有高谦之认为元孚有辱使命，应处以流放之罪。
English: The matter was referred to the imperial lieutenant for disposition. The imperial lieutenant and the officials below the inspector all said that Yuan Fu was not guilty. Only Gao Qianzhi thought that Yuan Fu had dishonored his mission and should be punished with banishment.

古文：尚书同卿执，诏可谦之奏。
现代文：尚书同卿与之争执不下，皇帝下诏同意高谦之所奏。
English: Shang Shu couldn't argue with him, and the emperor issued an edict agreeing to the performance by Gao Qian.

古文：孝昌初，行河阴县令。
现代文：孝昌初年，代河阴县令。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, he became the deputy county magistrate of Heyin County.

古文：先是，有人囊盛瓦砾，指作钱物，诈市人马，因逃去。
现代文：这以前，有人在袋子里装上瓦砾，称是钱物，诈骗别人马匹，得手后逃走。
English: Previously, someone had loaded rubble into a bag, claimed it was money, swindled people out of their horses and then fled.

古文：诏令追捕，必得以闻。
现代文：皇帝下诏追捕，并要求把结果上报。
English: The imperial edict ordered the local authorities to hunt down the criminals, and they must report the case to the imperial court.

古文：谦之乃伪枷一囚立于马市，宣言是前诈市马贼，今欲刑之。
现代文：高谦之于是用枷锁绑着一名假囚徒置于马市，声称这人就是以前在马市上诈取马匹的贼，今天就要行刑了。
English: Gao then tied a fake prisoner with chains and placed him in the horse market, claiming that this person was a thief who had previously swindled horses in the horse market and would be executed today.

古文：密遣腹心察市中私议者。
现代文：暗地里派心腹窥探集市看客中议论的人。
English: They secretly sent their henchmen to spy on the people who were talking among the market-goers.

古文：有二人相见忻然曰： 无复忧矣。 
现代文：有两人看到这种情景高兴地说： 我们不用担惊受怕了。 
English: Two people were happy to see this and said, "We don't have to be scared anymore."

古文：执送按问，具伏盗马，徒党悉获。
现代文：这两人立即被抓了起来，进行审问，他们都承认了骗取马匹的罪行，他们的同伙也被挖了出来。
English: The two men were immediately arrested and interrogated, they both confessed to the crime of defrauding horses, and their accomplices were also dug out.

古文：并出前后盗窃之处，资货甚多，远年失物之家，各来得其本物。
现代文：这次连带查出他们前后盗窃的案子，搜出很多赃物，很久以前失去自家物件的人，都各自来领取被盗物品。
English: This time, the case of their theft was jointly investigated, and a lot of stolen goods were found. People who lost their own belongings a long time ago all came to collect the stolen items.

古文：具以状奏。
现代文：这一切，高谦之写成奏本，上表皇帝去了。
English: All of this, Gao Qianzhi wrote into a transcript, and the emperor went to the table.

古文：寻诏除宁远将军，正河阴令。
现代文：不久，皇帝下诏升任他为宁远将军，正式任河阴县令。
English: Soon after, the emperor issued an edict elevating him to the position of Ningyuan general, and he officially became the county magistrate of Hexin County.

古文：在县二年，损益治体，多为故事。
现代文：在河阴两年，增益减损，政体昭然，所办的事情，多成为治事典范。
English: In the past two years, the gains and losses, the political system is obvious, and the things done have mostly become a model of governance.

古文：弟道穆为御史，在公亦有能名，世美其父子兄弟并著当官之称。
现代文：他的弟弟高道穆任御史，在公事上也颇有干才，世人以他们父子兄弟为官都著名而在当时传为美谈。
English: His younger brother, Gao Daomujin, was also quite capable in public affairs. The world was famous for their father and son brothers as officials, and it was a fairy tale at the time.

古文：旧制，二县令得面陈得失，时佞幸之辈恶其有所发闻，遂共奏罢。
现代文：旧制，两个县的县令可以在朝面陈得失，而当时奸佞侥幸的人憎恨他掌握了某些情况，于是一起上书请求罢免他的官职。
English: Under the old system, the county magistrates of the two counties could win or lose in the face of the government, but at that time, the people who were lucky and lucky hated him for grasping certain situations, so they jointly petitioned to remove him from office.

古文：谦之乃上疏曰： 臣以无庸，谬宰神邑，实思奉法不挠，称是官方，酬朝廷无赀之恩，尽人臣守器之节。
现代文：高谦之于是上疏说： 臣以平庸之才，忝居神邑县令之位，臣心中确实想执法严明，秉公办事，以答谢朝廷浩荡之恩，竭尽人臣忠直之节。
English: Gao Qianzhi then said to Shang Zuo, "As a minister with mediocre talent, living in the position of the county magistrate of Shenyi, I really want to enforce the law strictly and act impartially in my heart, in order to thank the vast grace of the imperial court, and do my best to be a loyal and upright person."

古文：但豪家支属，戚里亲媾，缧绁所及，举目多是，皆有盗憎之色，咸起怨上之心。
现代文：然而豪贵之家，支属广布，六亲七戚，够上判罪者，比比皆是，他们对我都起憎恨之色，对皇上皆起怨怒之心。
English: However, there are many members of noble families, with many branches, six or seven relatives, who have been convicted, and they all hate me and resent the emperor.

古文：县令轻弱，何能克济？
现代文：而县令职位轻弱，哪能尽数纠正。
English: County magistrates are weak and feeble, how can they be subdued?

古文：先帝昔发明诏，得使面陈所怀。
现代文：先帝过去发布明诏，让县令们可以在圣上那里面陈掌握的情况。
English: In the past, the former emperor had issued a clear edict, allowing the prefectural governor to make a speech in person.

古文：臣亡父先臣崇之为洛阳令，常得入奏是非，所以朝贵敛手，无敢干政。
现代文：臣先父高崇任洛阳令时，经常能够进入朝廷面陈是非，所以能使朝中显贵敛手旁立，不敢违逆政体所禁。
English: My deceased father, Gao Chong, was once the county magistrate of Luoyang County. He often went to the palace to report on the local political situation. Therefore, the princes and nobles of the imperial court were self-restrained and did not dare to interfere in the county's political affairs.

古文：近日以来，此制遂寝，致使神宰威轻，下情不达。
现代文：最近以来，这项制度渐渐废止，致使县令威轻，下情不能上达。
English: Recently, this system has been gradually abolished, resulting in the county's authority is light, and the situation cannot be reached.

古文：今二圣远遵尧舜，宪章高祖。
现代文：今日二圣远遵尧舜，效法高祖。
English: Today, the two emperors are following the example of Gaozu.

古文：愚臣望策其驽蹇，少立功名。
现代文：愚臣希望效其鲁钝蹇慢之才，早立功名。
English: Foolish minister hopes to emulate his rude, obtuse, and slow-witted talent and make a name for himself early.

古文：乞新旧典，更明往制。
现代文：臣请求更新旧典彰明往制。
English: The minister requested that the old law be updated to reflect the previous system.

古文：庶奸豪知禁，颇自屏心。 
现代文：以期奸诈豪纵之徒知禁难犯，收敛贼心。 
English: In order to prevent the treacherous and arrogant from committing crimes, it is necessary to restrain the thief.

古文：诏曰： 此启深会朕意，付外量闻。 
现代文：诏书称： 这个奏启与朕意深相符合，立即交付执行。 
English: The imperial edict said: This report is in line with our intention and will be implemented immediately.

古文：谦之又上疏曰：
现代文：高谦之又上疏说：
English: Gao Qianzhi went on to say:

古文：臣闻夏德中微，少康成克复之主；周道将废，宣王立中兴之功。
现代文： 臣听说夏朝德运衰败，少康成为克复之主；周道将要废弃，宣王立下中兴之功。
English: The vassal heard that the Xia Dynasty's virtue movement was in decline, and Shokang became the master of recovery; Zhou Dao was about to be abandoned, and it was Xuan Wang's achievement to set it up.

古文：则知国无常安，世无恆敝，唯在明主所以变之有方，化之有道耳。
现代文：由此可知，国家没有恒常的安宁，世事也无永久的弊端，只是在于英明的君主以行之有效的办法改变现状，化弊有道有术而已。
English: From this it can be seen that there is no permanent peace in the country, and there is no permanent evil in the world, but only in the wise monarch to change the status quo in an effective way, and there are ways and means to eliminate the evil.

古文：自正光已来，边城屡扰，命将出师，相继于路，军费戎资，委输不绝。
现代文： 自从正光年间以来，边城屡遭侵扰，将帅出师，相继于路，军费戎资，输送不绝。
English: Since the Zhengguang era, the border city has been repeatedly harassed, the commander-in-chief has been dispatched, the roads have been built, the military expenses have increased, and the military funds have been continuously transported.

古文：至如弓格赏募，咸有出身；槊刺斩首，又蒙阶级。
现代文：至于弓格赏募，都有出身；杀敌斩首，又蒙恩赐。
English: As for the bow and arrow rewards and rewards, they all come from the same place; killing enemies, beheading them, and receiving gifts.

古文：故四方壮士，愿征者多，各各为己，公私两利。
现代文：所以四方之士，愿意应征的人数很多，各自为己，公私两利。
English: Therefore, there are many people from the four sides who are willing to apply for conscription, each for themselves, for the benefit of both public and private.

古文：若使军帅必得其人，赏勋不失其实，则何贼不平，何征不捷也！
现代文：如果军中统帅选准其人，犒赏功勋不失其实，那么什么样的贼不能平，什么征战不能大捷而还！
English: If the commander-in-chief of the army selects the right person and rewards the merits without losing the truth, then what kind of thief can not be leveled, what kind of war can not be successful and returned!

古文：诸守帅或非其才，多遣亲者妄称入募，别倩他人引弓格，虚受征官。
现代文：诸守帅也许不是那类人才，多派亲近进入军中，另请他人拉弓引驽，虚受征官。
English: The commanders-in-chief may not be that kind of talent. Many of them are close to entering the army, invite others to pull the bow and arrows, and falsely accept conscription.

古文：身不赴陈，惟遣奴客充数而已，对寇临敌，曾不弯弓。
现代文：自己身不赴阵，只派奴客之类入军中领战，对寇临敌，手不弯弓，兵不血刃。
English: He himself does not go to the front, but only sends slaves to join the army to lead the war, to attack the enemy, the hand does not bend the bow, and the soldier does not bleed.

古文：则是王爵虚加，征夫多阙，贼虏何可殄除，忠贞何以劝诫也？
现代文：像这样则会导致王爵之赏虚加其人，征夫也无参军的积极性，那贼虏怎能被剿灭，拿什么来劝诫人们的忠诚贞节？
English: Thus, the truth is that the imperial court has left some dukedoms vacant, and most of the soldiers are missing. How can the enemy be eliminated? How can brave and loyal people be exhorted and encouraged?

古文：且近习、侍臣、戚属、朝士，请托官曹，擅作威福。
现代文：况且近臣、侍臣、亲戚、朝士，纷纷托求官衙，擅作威福。
English: Moreover, close vassals, vassals, relatives, and courtiers, have been begging for an official post, and they are good at being arrogant.

古文：如有清贞奉法不为回者，咸共谮毁，横受罪罚。
现代文：如果清廉贞节执法不二的人，也会一同遭到诬陷，无端受到惩罚。
English: If a person who is clean, honest and law-abiding is involved, he or she will also be framed and punished without reason.

古文：在朝顾望，谁肯申闻？
现代文：朝臣顾望，谁肯诉说实际情况？
English: The courtiers are timidly hovering around this, who would dare to report it to the imperial court?

古文：蔽上拥下，亏风坏政。
现代文：这样下去，就会导致圣上被蒙蔽，坏人被纵容，亏损皇风，破坏政体。
English: If this continues, it will lead to the sacred being hoodwinked, bad people being indulged, loss of imperial style, and destruction of the political system.

古文：使谗谄甘心，忠谠息义。
现代文：使谄谀小人意气洋洋，忠谠之言，不复鼓耳。
English: Make the villain's spirit exuberant, and the words of loyalty will not fall on deaf ears.

古文：况且频年以来，多有征发，民不堪命，动致流离，苟保妻子，竞逃王役，不复顾其桑井，惮比刑书。
现代文： 况且连年以来，国家多有征战，民不堪命，动不动流离失所，保全妻子儿女，竞争地逃王家兵役，不再顾及其桑蚕粮田，害怕国家刑律。
English: Moreover, for many years, the country has been at war, the people are desperate, constantly displaced, protecting their wives and children, competing to escape the royal military service, no longer paying attention to their mulberry and silkworm grain fields, and fearing the national criminal law.

古文：正由还有必困之理，归无自安之路。
现代文：这正是由于还家必有困顿之理，归来没有自安之路所致。
English: Therefore, when they come back, they will be plagued by difficulties, and there is no way for them to save themselves.

古文：若听归其本业，徭役微甄，则还者必众，垦田增辟，数年之后，大获课民。
现代文：假如朝廷听任百姓归其本业，微征徭役，那么归家还田者人数必定很多，他们定会垦田辟土，数年之后，朝廷一定会大获税民。
English: If the imperial court allowed the common people to return to their original occupation, such as collecting taxes, then the number of people returning to their families to return their fields would certainly be large. They would certainly return their fields, and after a few years, the imperial court would certainly gain a large number of taxpayers.

古文：今不务以理还之，但欲严符切勒，恐数年之后，走者更多，安业无几。
现代文：而今官府不做以理召还流民的工作，只管严令强迫，这样下去，臣担心数年之后，逃离家园者更多，安居乐业者无人了。
English: But now the government does not do the work of calling back the displaced with reason, but only with strict compulsion. If this continues, the minister is worried that after a few years, there will be more people who have fled their homes, and there will be no one to live and work in peace.

古文：故有国有家者，不患民不我归，唯患政之不立；不恃敌不我攻，唯恃吾不可侮。
现代文： 所以有国有家者，不操心百姓不归顺自己，只担心政策得不到落实执行，不侥幸敌人不侵犯我，只依赖自己不可侮犯的信心。
English: Therefore, those who have state-owned enterprises do not worry about the people's disobedience to themselves, only worry about the policy not being implemented, not being lucky that the enemy does not invade me, and only rely on the confidence that they cannot be offended.

古文：此乃千载共遵，百王一致。
现代文：这个道理乃是千年共遵，百王一致的普遍真理。
English: This is a principle that has been observed for thousands of years and has been recognized by hundreds of emperors.

古文：且琴瑟不韵，知音改弦更张；騑骖未调，善御执辔成组。
现代文：而且琴瑟之声不协调，知音的人便改弦更张；拉车的马匹脚步不一，善于驾驶的便要调整缰索。
English: Moreover, if the sound of the harp is not coordinated, the person who is familiar with the sound will change the strings and change the tension; the horses pulling the cart will have different steps, and those who are good at driving will have to adjust the reins.

古文：谚云： 迷而知反，得道不远。 
现代文：谚语说： 迷途知返，得道不远。 
English: A proverb says: If you know how to get lost, you won't get far.

古文：此言虽小，可以谕大。
现代文：这话虽不起眼，但道理极深。
English: Although it is a small thing to make up words, it can be used as a metaphor for big things.

古文：陛下一日万机，事难周览；元、凯结舌，莫肯明言。
现代文：陛下日理万机，事情难以全面掌握，元、凯无言，不肯直陈。
English: His majesty is in a hurry, things are difficult to fully grasp, and Yuan and Kai are speechless, unwilling to speak out.

古文：臣虽庸短，世受荣禄，窃慕前贤匪躬之义，不避斧钺之诛，以希一言之益。
现代文：臣谦之虽平庸无才，但世代蒙受圣上荣禄，窃自向往前贤尽忠不惜身的义举，不怕身遭刀斧之刑，只要有一句有益于皇上，义不辞死。
English: Although he was mediocre and untalented, he received the highest honor in his generation. He stole from himself the desire to be virtuous, to be loyal, and to sacrifice his life for the cause of righteousness. He was not afraid of being punished with a sword and an axe. As long as there was one sentence that was beneficial to the emperor, he would not hesitate to die.

古文：伏愿少垂览察，略加推采，使朝章重举，军威更振，海内起惟新之歌，天下见复禹之绩。则臣奏之后，笑入下泉。
现代文：只求圣上略垂览察，微加推寻采纳，使朝章重新振举，军威更而复振，四海之内响起维新之歌，天下之人见到大禹之绩，那么臣上奏之后，便可含笑九泉而无丝毫遗憾了。 
English: I only ask the saint to take a brief look at it, push it a little, and adopt it, so that the morning chapter will be reinvigorated, military power will be reinvigorated even more, the song of reform will ring out in the four seas, and people around the world will see the performance of Dayu. Then, after the minister plays it, he can smile and have no regrets.

古文：灵太后得其疏，以责左右近侍。
现代文：灵太后得到高谦之的疏章，责问左右近臣，追问怎么回事。
English: When the Dowager Empress received Gao Qian's posthumous medal, she scolded her vassals left and right, asking what was going on.

古文：诸宠要者由是疾之，乃启太后云： 谦之有学艺，宜在国学，以训胄子。 
现代文：这些得宠显要的人由此记恨高谦之，于是有人向太后建议： 高谦之有学识艺才，适宜在国学任职，以训导王公贵戚的后代。 
English: As a result, these favored and important people remembered and hated Gao Qianzhi, so someone suggested to the empress dowager: Gao Qianzhi is knowledgeable and talented, and is suitable to serve in the study of Chinese classics to teach the descendants of Wang Gong's noble relatives.

古文：诏从之，除国子博士。
现代文：下诏任命，除授国子博士。
English: Appointed by imperial edict, he was also awarded the title of Kuniko Doctor.

古文：谦之与袁翻、常景、郦道元、温子升之徒，咸申款旧。
现代文：高谦之到了国子学，与袁翻、常景、郦道元、温子升等人，重温旧情。
English: When Gao Qianzhi went to study at Kuniko, he revisited the past with Yuan Fu, Changjing, Xing Dogen, and Wenzhisheng.

古文：好于赡恤，言诺无亏。
现代文：高谦之喜欢赡养孤老、抚恤贫弱，答应的从不失言。
English: Gao Qianzhi likes to support the elderly and the poor, and never fails to keep his promises.

古文：居家僮隶，对其兒不挞其父母，生三子便免其一，世无髡黥奴婢，常称 俱禀人体，如何残害？ 
现代文：对待家中仆僮奴隶，当着他们子女的面从不鞭打其父母，奴仆中若有人生有三个儿子，他便免除其中一子做奴仆的义务，他家中从来没有受过刑的奴婢。他常说，奴仆也是人的血肉之躯，怎能忍心残害。
English: He never whipped his parents in front of their children. If any of his slaves had three sons, he would release one of them from the obligation to be a slave. There was never a slave in his family who was punished. He often said that slaves were also human flesh and blood, how could they bear to be mutilated.

古文：以父舅氏沮渠蒙逊曾据凉土，国书漏阙，谦之乃修《凉书》十卷，行于世。
现代文：高谦之因父舅氏沮渠蒙逊曾经据占凉州，国史缺漏，他于是编《凉书》十卷，流行于世。
English: Gao Qianzhi, because of his father's and uncle's frustration, Mengxun once occupied Liangzhou, and the national history was missing, so he compiled "Ling Shu" ten volumes, which was popular in the world.

古文：凉国盛事佛道，为论贬之，因称佛是九流之一家。
现代文：凉国佛道兴盛，谦之作论贬抑，称佛教是九流之中的一家。
English: Buddhism flourished in Liangguo, but Qianzhi belittled it, saying that Buddhism was one of the nine schools.

古文：当世名士，竞以佛理来难，谦之还以佛义对之，竟不能屈。
现代文：惹得当世名士，竞相以佛理前来诘难，谦之也以佛教义理对答，名士们终不能使谦之心悦诚服。
English: The world's celebrities have been provoked, competing to use Buddhist principles to solve problems, and the humble have also responded with Buddhist principles. In the end, the celebrities cannot satisfy the humble heart.

古文：以时所行历，多未尽善，乃更改元修撰，为一家之法，虽未行于世，议者叹其多能。
现代文：高谦之又因当时实行的历法，许多地方不完备，于是便改元修订，成为一家之法，虽然他订的历法没有被采用，评论的人却叹服其多才多艺。
English: Gao Qianzhi also, because the calendar implemented at that time was incomplete in many places, so he revised the calendar and revised it to become a family calendar. Although his calendar was not adopted, commentators marveled at his versatility.

古文：于时朝议铸钱，以谦之为铸钱都将长史。
现代文：在这个时候，朝廷议论铸造钱币的事情，任命高谦之为铸钱都将长史。
English: At this time, the imperial court discussed the issue of minting coins, and the appointment of Gao Qianjun as a mint will have a long history.

古文：乃上表求铸三铢钱曰：
现代文：他上书请求铸造三铢钱说：
English: He wrote to request the minting of the three-baht coin, saying:

古文：盖钱货之立，本以通有无，便交易。
现代文： 大凡钱货之立，本意是互通有无，便利交易。
English: The great money and goods stand, the intention is to exchange goods and services, and facilitate transactions.

古文：故钱之轻重，世代不同。
现代文：所以钱的重量，世代不同。
English: Therefore, the weight of money varies from generation to generation.

古文：太公为周置九府圜法，至景王时更铸大钱。
现代文：姜太公为周朝置九府圆法，到景王时更而铸造大号钱币。
English: Jiang Taigong set up a nine-prefecture round method for the Zhou Dynasty, and even minted large-sized coins when he came to Jingwang.

古文：秦兼海内，钱重半两。
现代文：秦朝统一海内，钱重半两。
English: When the Qin Dynasty unified China, the minted money was twice as heavy as before.

古文：汉兴，以秦钱重，改铸榆荚钱。
现代文：汉兴，因秦朝钱重，改造榆荚钱。
English: Established in the Han Dynasty, the Qin Dynasty coins were too heavy, so they were recast as lighter money.

古文：至文帝五年，复为四铢，孝武时，悉复销坏，更铸三铢。至元狩中，变为五铢。
现代文：到了汉文帝五年，又变为四铢钱。孝武帝时，全部销毁，改造三铢钱，到了元狩年间，又变为五铢钱。
English: In the 5th year of Emperor Hanwen, it was changed to 4 monme. In the 3rd year of Emperor Xiaowu, it was completely destroyed and transformed into 3 monme. In the 1st year of Emperor Yuan, it was changed back to 5 monme.

古文：又造赤仄之钱，以一当五。
现代文：又造赤仄钱，以一当五个五铢钱。
English: They also made red money, with a value of one yuan and five yuan.

古文：王莽摄政，钱有六等，大钱重十二铢，次九铢，次七铢，次五铢，次三铢，次一铢。
现代文：王莽摄政，钱有六等，大钱重十二铢，次九铢，次七铢，次五铢，次三铢，次一铢。
English: Wang Mang, the regent, had six grades of money, with the heaviest weighing 12 baht, the next nine baht, the next seven baht, the next five baht, the next three baht, and the next one baht.

古文：魏文帝罢五铢钱，至明帝复立。
现代文：魏文帝罢除五铢钱。到了明帝又恢复了。
English: Emperor Wei Wen abolished the five-baht coin, and Emperor Ming Cao Ruizhong restored it.

古文：孙权江左，铸大钱，一当五百。
现代文：孙权立国江左，铸造大钱，一当五百。
English: Sun Quan founded Guo Jiang Zuo and minted a lot of money, five hundred at a time.

古文：权赤乌年，复铸大钱，一当千。
现代文：孙权在位的赤乌年间，又造大钱，以一当千。
English: During the reign of Sun Quan, Sun Quan also minted a large amount of money, to the tune of one thousand.

古文：轻重大小，莫不随时而变。
现代文：由此可见，钱币规制大小轻重，无不随时变化。
English: The weight and size of money have always changed with the change of dynasties.

古文：窃以食货之要，八政为首；聚财之贵，诒训典文。
现代文： 臣认为财政经济的重要，在食、货、祀、司空、司徒、司寇、宾、师八政之中列在首位；聚集财物的可贵，典籍之中，论述俯拾皆是。
English: In the opinion of the minister, finance and economy are important, and they are ranked first in food, goods, worship, division of the sky, division of the party, division of the country, guests, and teachers; the value of gathering wealth, among the classics, are all discussed.

古文：是以昔之帝王，乘天地之饶，御海内之富；莫不腐红粟于太仓，藏朽贯于泉府。储畜既盈，民无困敝，可以宁谧四极，如身使臂者矣。
现代文：所以古来帝王，乘着天地的丰饶，临着海内的富足，无不广集粮食于太仓，富藏钱币于府库，储备既多，民免困穷，朝廷便可以让天下四方安宁下来，就如驱使身体伸出胳膊那样容易。
English: Therefore, emperors in ancient times, taking advantage of the abundance of heaven and earth, facing the richness of the sea, all collected grain in Taicang, stored coins in the government treasury, and had a lot of reserves. The people were spared from poverty, and the court could make the world calm down in all directions, just as easy as driving the body to stretch out an arm.

古文：昔汉之孝武，地广财丰，外事四戎，遂虚国用。
现代文：过去汉代的孝武皇帝，虽然地广财丰，但连年征战戎敌，于是国库空虚。
English: In the past Han Dynasty, Emperor Xiaowu, despite his vast wealth, had to wage war against his enemies year after year. As a result, the treasury was empty.

古文：于是草莱之臣，出财助国；兴利之计，纳税庙堂。
现代文：这时，民间富绅，献财助国；兴利之计，纳税朝廷。
English: At this time, the people's rich gentry donated money to help the country; the profit-making scheme was to pay taxes to the imperial court.

古文：市列榷酒之官，邑有告缗之令。
现代文：市场之上，设立收税之官；邑里乡间，置有催赋之令。
English: On the market, a tax collector was set up; in the town and countryside, there was an order to encourage donations.

古文：盐铁既兴，钱币屡改，少府遂丰，上林饶积。
现代文：盐铁经营既然方兴未艾，朝廷便屡改钱币，少府于是充实起来，上林也变得十分富足。
English: Since the salt and iron business was still in its infancy, the imperial court repeatedly changed the coins. As a result, Shofu became rich, and Shanglin also became very rich.

古文：外辟百蛮，内不增赋者，皆计利之由也。
现代文：尽管国家拓疆辟土，但国内却不加赋税，这都是计利的缘故啊。
English: Although the country is expanding its territory, there is no tax increase in the country. This is all due to profit-taking.

古文：今群妖未息，四郊多垒，征税既烦，千金日费，资储渐耗，财用将竭，诚杨氏献税之秋，桑、兒言利之日。
现代文：而今群妖未息，四方多存壁垒，征税既已麻烦，而千金却一日尽完，官仓府库储备渐渐耗尽，财货度用也将枯竭，诚是当初杨代献策之秋，桑、儿言利之日。
English: But now, the demons have not subsided, there are many barriers in the four directions, taxation is already troublesome, but the money is exhausted, the reserves of the government warehouse are gradually exhausted, and the use of money and goods will also be exhausted. It was originally the autumn of Yang's proposal, and the day of Mulberry and Son's profit.

古文：夫以西京之盛，钱犹屡改，并行小大，子母相权，况今寇难未除，州郡沦败，民物凋零，军国用少，别铸小钱，可以富益，何损于政，何妨于人也？
现代文：而且以当初西京的兴盛，钱币犹且屡次改动，大小货币并行于世，子母之钱相权不悖，更何况今日寇难未除，州郡沦败，民物凋零，军队国家缺少日用，另外铸造小钱，可以有益于国家富足，那里会损害政体，妨害百姓呢？
English: Moreover, with the prosperity of the Western Capital at the beginning, the coins were repeatedly changed, the large and small currencies coexisted in the world, and the money of the son and mother was compatible with the power. What's more, today, the difficulties have not been eliminated, the states and counties have fallen, the folk goods have withered, the army and the country lack daily use, and the minting of small money can be beneficial to the country's wealth. Where will it damage the political system and hinder the people?

古文：且政兴不以钱大，政衰不以钱小，惟贵公私得所，政化无亏，既行之于古，亦宜效之于今矣。
现代文：而且政事兴旺不因为钱大，政体衰落也不因为钱小，而只重在公私得失与否，政治教化亏损与否，改铸钱币之事既已有古人所做在先，今天我们也当效法啊。
English: Moreover, political affairs do not prosper because of large amounts of money, and the political system does not decline because of small amounts of money. Instead, they only focus on public and private gains and losses, and political indoctrination losses and gains. As the ancients have already done in the past, we should also follow their example today.

古文：昔禹遭大水，以历山之金铸钱，救民之困；汤遭大旱，以庄山之金铸钱，赎民之卖子者。
现代文：过去禹遭大水，用历山之金铸钱，拯救民困。汤遭大旱，拿庄山之金铸钱，赎回百姓卖掉的子女。
English: In the past, Yu suffered great floods and used the gold of Leshan to mint money to save the people. Tang suffered great droughts and used the gold of Zhuangshan to mint money to redeem the children sold by the people.

古文：今百姓穷悴，甚于曩日，钦明之主岂得垂拱而观之哉？
现代文：今天百姓穷困憔悴，过于往日，英明之主哪能够袖手旁观呢？
English: Today the people are poor and destitute, more so than in the past. How can a wise master stand by and watch?

古文：臣今此铸，以济交乏，五铢之钱，任使并用，行之无损，国得其益，穆公之言于斯验矣。
现代文： 臣今日所铸之钱，是用来接济流通的贫乏，五铢之钱，任其使用并行，流通无损，只会国家受益，穆公之言在这一点上应验了。
English: The money minted by the minister today is used to relieve the scarcity of circulation, and the five-baht money, if it is allowed to be used in parallel and the circulation is not damaged, will only benefit the country. The words of Mu Gong have come true on this point.

古文：臣虽术愧计然，识非心算，暂充钱官，颇睹其理。
现代文：微臣我虽然理钱之术不如计然，识非心算，暂且充当钱官，也对其道理有些理解。
English: Although I am not as good at money management as I used to be, I have some understanding of the reason for temporarily acting as a money officer.

古文：苟有所益，不得不言。
现代文：只要此举利于国家，我便不能沉默。
English: I will not be silenced as long as it is in the interest of the country.

古文：脱以为疑，求下公卿博议，如谓为允，即乞施行。
现代文：如有疑虑，请求公卿大臣广为议论。如果大家都认为公平允当，即请求施行。 
English: If there is any doubt, request the Kugyo-daijin to discuss it widely. If everyone thinks it is fair, request implementation.

古文：诏将从之，事未就，会卒。
现代文：皇帝下诏准备按他的意见办，事情未成，他便死了。
English: The emperor issued an edict to do as he wished, but before it could be carried out, he died.

古文：初，谦之弟道穆，正光中为御史，纠相州刺史李世哲事，大相挫辱，其家恆以为憾。
现代文：当初，高谦之弟弟高道穆，正光年间任御史，纠察相州刺史李世哲的案子，大加凌辱，世哲家人深深记恨。
English: At the beginning, Gao Qian's younger brother Gao Daomu, who was appointed to the position of imperial historian during the Zhengguang era, picketed the case of Li Shizhe, the imperial historian of Xiangzhou, and he was greatly humiliated. The family of Li Shizhe deeply regretted it.

古文：至是，世哲弟神轨为灵太后深所宠任，直谦之家僮诉良，神轨左右之，入讽尚书，判禁谦之于廷尉。
现代文：到这时，李世哲弟李神轨被灵太后深为宠爱，恰逢谦之家僮控告主人，神轨操纵了这名家僮，并与尚书说了此事，于是判定禁囚高谦之于廷尉。
English: At this time, Li Shizhe's younger brother, Li Shenglu, was deeply loved by the Empress Dowager. It coincided with the time when Gao Qian, a member of the Qian family, sued his master. Shenglu manipulated this member of the Qian family and told the matter to Shang Shu, who then sentenced Gao Qian, a prisoner, to be a courtier.

古文：时将赦，神轨乃启灵太后发诏，于狱赐死，时年四十二。
现代文：准备释放他时，李神轨启奏灵太后，请求发布诏书，在狱中赐死，死时，高谦之才四十二岁。
English: When he was about to be released, Li Shenluo asked the spiritual empress Dowager to issue an edict, and Gao Xizhi was sentenced to death in prison. At the time of his death, Gao Xizhi was only 42 years old.

古文：朝士莫不哀之。
现代文：朝中人士无不叹惜哀痛。
English: People in the DPRK and the PRC all lamented and grieved.

古文：所著文章百余篇，别有集录。
现代文：高谦之所著文章百余篇，别有集录。
English: There are more than a hundred articles written by Gao Qianzi, and there is no collection.

古文：永安中，赠征虏将军、营州刺史，谥曰康。又除一子出身，以明冤屈。
现代文：永安年间，朝廷赠他征虏将军、营州刺史，谥曰康，又授一个儿子出身为官，以此昭明谦之冤屈。
English: During the Yongan era, the imperial court presented him with a conscripted general, Yingzhou Zhishi, and the title of Kang, and also gave him a son who became an official, in order to show his grievances.

古文：谦之妻中山张氏，明识妇人也，教劝诸子，从师受业，常诫之曰： 自我为汝家妇，未见汝父一日不读书。
现代文：高谦之的妻子中山张氏，是有见识的妇女。教育子女，从师学授业。经常告诫他们说： 自从我成为你们家主妇，从未看见你父亲一天不读书。
English: Mr. Gao's wife, Ms. Zhongshan Zhang, was an insightful woman. She educated her children, learning from their teachers. She often admonished them: "Since I became your housewife, I have never seen your father not reading for a single day.

古文：汝等宜各修勤，勿替先业。 
现代文：你们应该各自发奋努力，不要废弃祖宗之业。 
English: You should work hard individually and not abandon the cause of your ancestors.

古文：谦之长子子儒，字孝礼。
现代文：高谦之长子子儒，字孝礼。
English: Gao Qian's eldest son, Zhu, is a filial son.

古文：元颢入洛，其叔道穆从驾北巡。子儒后逾河至行宫，庄帝见之，具访洛中事意，子儒备陈元颢败在旦夕。
现代文：元颢入洛阳，他的叔叔高道穆跟随皇驾北巡，高子儒随后渡河到了皇帝行宫，庄帝见到他，仔细询问洛阳的情况，子儒详细陈述元颢败在旦夕。
English: Yuan Xuan entered Luoyang. His uncle Gao Daomu followed the emperor on a northern tour. Gao Ziru then crossed the river to the emperor's palace. Zhuang Di met him and carefully inquired about the situation in Luoyang. Ziru made a detailed statement about Yuan Xuan's defeat on the eve of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：帝谓道穆曰： 卿初来日，何故不与子儒俱行？ 
现代文：皇帝对道穆说： 卿初来时，为什么不与子儒一起？ 
English: The emperor said to Daomu: When you first came, why didn't you come with Ziru?

古文：对曰： 臣家百口在洛，须其经营。
现代文：道穆说： 臣家百口在洛阳，必须他维持经营。
English: Daumu said: There are hundreds of vassals in Luoyang, he must maintain the business.

古文：且欲其今日之来，知京师后事。 
现代文：而且要他今天来此，也可通报京师后来发生的事情。 
English: Moreover, if he were to come here today, he could also inform the Beijing division about what happened later.

古文：帝曰： 子儒非直合卿本怀，亦大慰朕意。 
现代文：皇帝说： 子儒不但不负爱卿你的期待，也大慰朕意。 
English: The emperor said, "Ziru has not only lived up to your expectations, but also greatly consoled me.

古文：仍授秘书郎中，转通直郎。
现代文：于是授予他秘书郎中，转授通直郎。
English: So he was given the position of secretary to a junior high school student, and was later transferred to Tsuchinoiro.

古文：后除安东将军、光禄大夫、司徒中兵参军、兼祭酒。袭爵。
现代文：后来又升任安东将军、光禄大夫、司徒中兵参军、兼任祭酒，袭任父爵。
English: Later, he was promoted to General Anton, Doctor Guanglu, and Lieutenant-Colonel Szeto, joined the army, and also served as a sacrificial wine, succeeding his father.

古文：兴和初，除兼殿中侍御史。
现代文：兴和初年，除授兼殿中侍御史。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, he was posthumously awarded the title of chancellor.

古文：时四方多有流民，子儒为梁州、北豫、西兗三州检户使，所获甚多。
现代文：当时四方多有流民，子儒为梁州、北豫、西兖三州检户使，所获流民很多。
English: At that time, there were many displaced people in the four directions. Ziru was the chief inspector of households in the three provinces of Liangzhou, Beiyu and Xidi, and he received many displaced people.

古文：后以公事去官。
现代文：后来因为公事离职。
English: He later left the company for business reasons.

古文：武定六年卒，时年四十一。
现代文：武定六年死，当时四十一岁。
English: Wu Ding died six years later, at the age of 41.

古文：子儒弟绪，字叔宗，明悟好学。
现代文：子儒弟弟高绪，字叔宗，聪明捷悟，勤奋好学。
English: Zi Ju's younger brother Gao Xiu, nicknamed Uncle Zong, was clever, diligent and eager to learn.

古文：谦之常谓人曰： 兴吾门者，当是此兒。 
现代文：高谦之常对人说： 兴我门庭的，当是此儿。 
English: Gao Qianzhuang often said to people: "The one who revives my courtyard should come here."

古文：及长，涉猎书传，好文咏。
现代文：等到他长大，涉猎书传，喜好文咏。
English: When he grew up, he dabbled in books and enjoyed reading.

古文：司空行参军、转长流参军。除镇远将军、冀州仪同府中兵参军，为府主封隆之所赏。
现代文：任司空行参军、转任长流参军，升任镇远将军、冀州仪同府中兵参军，被府主封隆之所赏识。
English: He joined the army at the rank of Sikyu, transferred to the army at the rank of Changliu, and was promoted to the rank of Zhenyuan General, and joined the army at the rank of Jizhou Yi with the middle-ranking soldiers of the prefecture, which was appreciated by the prefect Fong Long.

古文：隆之行梁州、济州，引自随，恆令总摄数郡。
现代文：隆之到梁州、济州，让他跟随左右，总是让其管理数郡。
English: Take Takashi to Liangzhou and Jeju, let him follow around, and always let him manage several counties.

古文：武定三年卒，年三十二。
现代文：武定三年死，年仅三十二岁。
English: Wu Ding died three years later, aged only thirty-two.

古文：绪弟孝贞，武定中，司徒士曹参军。
现代文：高绪弟孝贞，武定年间，任司徒司曹参军。
English: Gao Guo's younger brother, Xiaozhen, joined the army during the Wuding period as an apprentice sergeant.

古文：孝贞弟孝干，司空东阁祭酒。
现代文：孝贞弟孝干，任司空东祭酒。
English: Takasada's younger brother, Takagan, became the steward of the East Sky Festival.

古文：谦之弟恭之，字道穆，行字于世。
现代文：高谦之弟恭之，字道穆，以字被世人称呼。
English: Gao Qian's younger brother, Gao Zhizhi, was nicknamed "Do Mu" by the world.

古文：学涉经史，非名流俊士，不与交结。
现代文：高道穆学涉经史，不是名流隽士，他便不与他们交接。
English: Gao Daomu's studies are related to the history of the classics, and he is not a famous scholar, so he does not interact with them.

古文：幼孤，事兄如父母。
现代文：幼时即孤，事兄如奉父母。
English: When he was young, he was an orphan, and his elder brother followed his parents.

古文：每谓人曰： 人生厉心立行，贵于见知，当使夕脱羊裘，朝佩珠玉者。
现代文：经常对人说： 人生厉心立行，贵于被知，当使晚脱羊裘，朝佩珠玉者。
English: He often said to people: Life is worth living, but it is more valuable to be known. It is better to take off the sheepskin coat in the evening and put on the jewels in the morning.

古文：若时不我知，便须退迹江海，自求其志。 
现代文：如时不我知，便须退迹江海，自求其志。 
English: If the world does not know me, it should hide in the jungle to maintain its lofty and lofty aspirations.

古文：御史中尉元匡高选御史，道穆奏记于匡曰： 道穆生自蓬檐，长于陋巷。
现代文：御史中尉元匡高选御史，高道穆上书给元匡说： 高道穆生自贫寒，长于陋巷。
English: The lieutenant of history, Yuan Kuang Gao, selected history, and Gao Daomu sent a letter to Yuan Kuang saying: Gao Daomu was born poor and grew up in the alley.

古文：颇猎群书，无纯硕之德；尚好章咏，乏雕掞之工。
现代文：颇读群书，却无纯大之德；喜好文章，却乏雕饰之工。
English: He reads a lot of books, but lacks the virtue of purity; he likes articles, but lacks the work of carving.

古文：虽欲厕影髦徒，班名俊伍，其可得哉？
现代文：虽想跻身名士，列名俊伍，能够得到吗？
English: Although you want to be a celebrity, a member of the elite, can you get it?

古文：然凝明独断之主，雄才不世之君，无藉朽株之资，求人屠钓之下；不牵暗投之诮，取士商歌之中。
现代文：然而碰上凝明独断之主，雄才一世之君，不藉朽株之资，求人于屠夫钓翁之中，不虑暗投之诮，取士荒野之中。
English: However, when encountering the lord of the single-minded and arbitrary, the prince of the male talent, he does not rely on the money of the rotten tree, he asks for people among the butchers and fishermen, does not hesitate to secretly cast the anchor, and takes soldiers in the wilderness.

古文：是以闻英风而慷慨，望云路而低徊者，天下皆是也。
现代文：村野之人闻英风而慷慨，望官途而低徊者，天下到处都是。
English: The people of the village are generous and generous, and those who are low and low are everywhere in the world.

古文：若得身隶绣衣，名充直指，虽谢周生骑上之敏，实有茅氏就镬之心。 
现代文：臣如能够身得绣衣，名充官伍，即使不如周生才干敏捷，实有茅氏敢进油锅之心。 
English: If a minister can dress in embroidered clothes and rise to the top of the official ranks, even if he is not as talented and agile as Zhou Sheng, he really has the heart of Maos dare to enter the oil pan.

古文：匡大喜曰： 吾久知其人，适欲召之。 
现代文：元匡看完大喜，说： 我很久以前就知道这个人了，正要征召他。 
English: After watching the celebration, Yuan Kuang said, "I knew this man a long time ago, and I was about to conscript him.

古文：遂引为御史。
现代文：于是引荐他为御史。
English: Therefore, he was recommended to become a goshi.

古文：其所纠擿，不避权豪，台中事物，多为匡所顾问。
现代文：高道穆所纠摘的，不论权豪，都在弹劾之列，朝野之政，元匡多有过问。
English: What Gao Daomu rectified, regardless of the powerful, were all included in the impeachment, the government of the morning and the field, and the Yuan Kuangduo had more questions.

古文：道穆曾进说于匡曰： 古人有言，罚一人当取千万人惧，豺狼当道，不问狐狸。
现代文：高道穆曾对元匡进言说： 古人有言，罚一人应当使千万人都害怕，豺狼当道，不问狐狸。
English: Gao Daomu once said to Yuan Kuang Jinhu: The ancients said that the punishment of one person should make tens of thousands of people afraid, and the wolf should be the way, not the fox.

古文：明公荷国重寄，宜使天下知法。 
现代文：明公你肩负国家重托，应使天下人知法。 
English: Ming Gong, you are entrusted with a great responsibility by the state. You should make the whole world know the Fa.

古文：匡深然之。
现代文：元匡觉得他的话十分有道理。
English: Yuan Kuang thought his words were very reasonable.

古文：正光中，出使相州。
现代文：正光年间，道穆出使相州。
English: When the sun is shining, the envoys are sent out.

古文：刺史李世哲即尚书令崇之子，贵盛一时，多有非法，逼买民宅，广兴屋宇，皆置鸱尾，又于马埒堠上为木人执节。
现代文：刺史李世哲即尚书令李崇之子，贵盛一时，经常做违法的事，逼迫百姓卖出住宅，他大建房宅，在其中置放鹞鹰，又在习射驰道的土堆上安置持节的木人。
English: Li Shizhe, the son of the famous calligrapher Li Chong, was once a very wealthy man. He often did illegal things, forcing people to sell their houses. He built a large house, put a bald eagle in it, and placed a wooden man holding a festival on a mound in Xizhe Road.

古文：道穆绳纠，悉毁去之，并发其赃货，具以表闻。
现代文：高道穆纠查出来，尽都毁坏废除，并且揭发其贪污受贿的赃物，上表朝廷。
English: Gao Daumu investigated, destroyed and abolished, and exposed the stolen goods of his corruption and bribery, including the imperial court.

古文：又尔朱荣讨蠕蠕，道穆监其军事，荣甚惮之。
现代文：又朱荣讨伐柔然，高道穆监察其军事，朱荣也很怕他。
English: In addition, Zhu Rong fought softly, Gao Daomu supervised his military, and Zhu Rong was also afraid of him.

古文：还，除奉朝请，俄除太尉铠曹参军。
现代文：还朝后，任官奉朝请，不久就除授太尉铠曹参军。
English: After returning to China, he was appointed as an official at the request of the Chinese government, and shortly after that, he was promoted to the rank of first lieutenant and joined the army.

古文：萧宝夤西征，以道穆为行台郎中，军机之事，多以委之。
现代文：萧宝夤西征，任高道穆为行台郎中，军机大事，萧宝夤经常委任于他。
English: During Xiao Baojun's westward expedition, Gao Daomu was appointed as a military commander, and Xiao Baojun often delegated to him in military affairs.

古文：大都督崔延伯败后，贼势转强，属请益兵，朝廷不许。
现代文：大都督崔延伯战败以后，敌人势力转而强大，宝夤屡屡请求增加兵力，朝廷不同意。
English: After the defeat of the great governor Cui Yanbo, the enemy forces became strong. Baojun repeatedly requested to increase the number of troops, but the imperial court did not agree.

古文：宝夤谓道穆曰： 非卿一行，兵无益理。 
现代文：萧宝夤对高道穆说： 卿如不亲自走一趟，是达不到增兵目的的。 
English: Xiao Baojun said to Gao Daumu: If you don't go there in person, you won't be able to achieve the purpose of increasing troops.

古文：遂令乘传赴洛。
现代文：于是令他驰驿赴京。
English: As a result, he was ordered to go to Kyoto.

古文：灵太后亲问贼势，道穆具以状对，太后怒曰： 比来使人皆言贼弱，卿何独云其强也！ 
现代文：灵太后亲自向他询问敌人的情况，高道穆汇报了具体情况。太后大怒说： 以往来的人都说敌人势力单弱，卿为什么独说它们强大呢！ 
English: The Empress Dowager personally asked him about the situation of the enemy, and Gao Daomu reported the specific situation. The Empress Dowager said angrily: In the past, people said that the enemy forces were weak. Sir, why do you say that they are strong?

古文：道穆曰： 前使不实者，当是冀陛下恩颜，望沾爵赏。
现代文：道穆说： 以前使者汇报不实，是希望陛下龙颜和悦，希求得到赏爵之赐。
English: Daumu said: Previously, the emissary reported untruthfully, hoping to please His Majesty and obtain the gift of a knighthood.

古文：臣既忝使人，不敢虚妄。
现代文：为臣既忝居使人，不敢虚妄不实。
English: A vassal who lives in seclusion does not dare to be insincere.

古文：愿令近臣亲检，足知虚实。 
现代文：臣希望您派近臣检视，便可知道真实情况了。 
English: The minister hopes that you will send a close minister to inspect it, and then you will know the true situation.

古文：事讫当反，遇病不行。
现代文：事完之后，应当返回，可道穆染上疾病，留在京城。
English: After that, he should return, but he may get sick and stay in Beijing.

古文：后属兄谦之被害，情不自安，遂托身于庄帝。
现代文：后来，其兄高谦之被害，道穆惴惴不安，于是托身于庄帝。
English: Later, when his brother Gao Qian was injured, Dao Muxuan was uneasy, so he took refuge in Zhuangdi.

古文：帝时为侍中，特相钦重，引居第中，深相保护。
现代文：庄帝当时为侍中，特别钦佩敬重他，引居自家府中，深相保护。
English: Emperor Zhuang was a chamberlain at that time, and he was especially admired and respected. He moved into his own residence and was deeply protected.

古文：俄而，帝以兄事见出。
现代文：不久，庄帝因其兄的事情被黜罢官职。
English: Soon after, Zhuang Di was removed from his post because of his brother's affair.

古文：道穆惧祸，乃携家趣济阴，变易姓名，往来于东平毕氏，以避时难。
现代文：高道穆害怕遇上灾祸，于是携家奔济阴而去，改换姓名，往来于东平毕氏，以躲避灾难。
English: Gao Daomu was afraid of encountering disaster, so he took his family to Jijin, changed his name, and went back and forth to Dongping Bi to avoid disaster.

古文：庄帝即位，征为尚书三公郎中，加宁朔将军。
现代文：庄帝即位，征高道穆为尚书三公郎中，加授宁朔将军。
English: Emperor Zhuang ascended to the throne. Zheng Gao Daomu was one of the three princes of Shangshu, and was awarded the title of Ningshuo General.

古文：寻兼吏部郎中，与薛昙尚书使晋阳，授尔朱荣职，赐爵龙城侯。
现代文：不久兼吏部郎中，与薛昙尚书一起出使晋阳，授朱荣官职，朝廷赐予他龙城侯爵位。
English: Not long after, he was also a junior official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, and he was sent to Jinyang together with Xue Bing Shangshu. Zhu Rong was given an official post, and the imperial court gave him the title of Marquis of Longcheng.

古文：九月，除太尉长史，领中书舍人。
现代文：九月，除任太尉长史，领中书舍人。
English: In September, he was relieved of his duties as Tai Lai Chang Shi and became a junior high school teacher.

古文：遭母忧去职，帝令中书舍人温子升就宅吊慰，诏摄本任，表辞不许。
现代文：遭母丧去职归家守丧，庄帝派中书舍人温子升到他家中吊唁，帝下诏让他复职，道穆上表不同意。
English: After his mother's death, he returned home to mourn. Emperor Zhuang sent the middle school teacher, Wen Zi, to his home to offer condolences. The emperor ordered him to be reinstated, but Daomu disagreed.

古文：三年，加前军将军。
现代文：三年，加授前军将军。
English: In three years, he was promoted to the rank of general.

古文：及元颢逼虎牢城，或劝帝赴关西者，帝以问道穆，道穆对曰： 关中今日残荒，何由可往？
现代文：等到元颢兵逼虎牢城，有人劝庄帝赴关西，庄帝询问高道穆，道穆回答说： 关中现在残破荒凉，有什么理由前去。
English: When Yuan Shao's soldiers were closing in on the Tiger's Stronghold, someone advised Zhuang Di to go to Kansai. Zhuang Di asked Gao Daomu, and Daomu replied: Guanzhong is now in ruins and desolate, what is the reason to go there?

古文：臣谓元颢兵众不多，乘虚深入者，由国家将帅征捍不得其人耳。
现代文：臣认为元颢兵马不多，乘虚深入国境的原因，是因为国家征伐固守的将帅不得其人。
English: The minister believed that there were not many soldiers and horses in the Yuan Dynasty, and the reason for taking advantage of the situation to go deep into the border was because there was no general in the country who was able to conquer and defend the country.

古文：陛下若亲率宿卫，高募重赏，背城一战，臣等竭其股肱之力，破颢孤军，必不疑矣。
现代文：陛下您如亲自率领宿卫将士，高募重赏勇敢将士，背城一战，为臣竭尽辅佐之力，打败元颢孤军，必定是必然的事。
English: Your Majesty, if you personally lead the guesthouse guards, highly recruit and reward brave soldiers, fight a battle behind the city, and do your best to support your vassals, defeating the isolated army of Yuan Shao, it must be inevitable.

古文：如恐成败难测，非万乘所履，便宜车驾北渡，循河东下。
现代文：假如担心成败难测，觉得这不是陛下所能冒的险，也应车驾北渡，沿河东下。
English: If you are worried about unpredictable success or failure, and feel that this is not a risk that your majesty can take, you should also drive north and east along the river.

古文：征大将军天穆合于荥阳，向虎牢；别征尔朱王军，令赴河内以掎角之。
现代文：征召大将军元天穆在荥阳会合，进军虎牢；另征朱王的军队，让他奔赴河内以为犄角之势。
English: General Yuan Tianmu was called up to meet in Shenyang and march into the Tiger's Lair; Zhu Wang's army was also called up, and he rushed to Hanoi, believing that the situation was critical.

古文：旬月之间，何往不克！
现代文：这样旬月之间，何往不克。
English: Between the months of the year like this, there is no going back.

古文：臣窃谓万全之计，不过于此。 
现代文：臣私以为万全之计不过如此。 
English: My subordinates and I thought this was the best solution.

古文：帝曰： 高舍人语是。 
现代文：庄帝说： 高舍人说的是。 
English: Zhuang Di said: What Gaoshe said is true.

古文：其夜到河内郡北，未有城守可依，帝命道穆秉烛作诏书数十纸，布告远近，于是四方知乘舆所在。
现代文：这天夜里庄帝到河内郡北面，没有城守可依，庄帝命高道穆点蜡烛写诏书数十纸，告示远近，于是四方之人都知道皇驾所在。
English: On this night, Zhuangdi arrived in the north of Hanoi County. There was no castle guard to rely on. Zhuangdi ordered Gao Daumu to write dozens of imperial decrees with candles and announce them far and near, so people from all over knew where the emperor was.

古文：除中军将军、给事黄门侍郎、安喜县开国公，食邑千户。
现代文：皇帝除授他为中军将军、给事黄门侍郎、安喜县开国公，食邑一千户。
English: The emperor conferred on him the titles of General of the Chinese Army, Attendant of the Yellow Gate, and Founder of Anxi County, and he became the ruler of a thousand households.

古文：于时尔朱荣欲回师待秋，道穆谓荣曰： 元颢以蕞尔轻兵，奄据京洛，使乘舆飘露，人神恨愤，主忧臣辱，良在于今。
现代文：这时朱荣打算回师等待秋天到来，高道穆对朱荣说： 元颢以蕞尔微小的兵力，占领京城洛阳，致使皇帝乘舆飘泊零落，人神恨愤，主忧臣辱，实在于今。
English: At this time, Zhu Rong planned to return to the division to wait for the autumn to come. Gao Daomu said to Zhu Rong: Yuan Shao occupied the capital Luoyang with a small army, causing the emperor to wander and fall apart. People and gods are angry, the master is worried about the subject, and the humiliation is really now.

古文：大王拥百万之众，辅天子而令诸侯，自可分兵河畔，缚筏造船，处处遣渡，径擒群贼，复主宫阙，此桓文之举也。
现代文：大王拥众百万，辅佐天子而令诸侯，自己即可分兵于黄河水边，缚筏造船，处处遣渡，径擒群贼，复主宫阙，这是当年桓文之举也。
English: The great king supported millions of people, assisted the son of heaven and led the princes, and he himself could divide the troops on the Yellow River waterfront, tie up the shipbuilding, send them everywhere, fight the bandits, and restore the lord's palace. This was also the move of Huanwen.

古文：且一日纵敌，数世之患，今若还师，令颢重完守具，征兵天下，所谓养虺成蛇，悔无及矣。 
现代文：况且一旦纵敌，数世受其祸患，今天如若还师，令元颢重新修好防守设备，征兵天下，正是所谓养虺成蛇，悔之不及的行为。 
English: Moreover, once the enemy was defeated, several generations suffered from its misfortune. Today, if the division is restored, the Yuan Dynasty will re-repair the defensive equipment, and the world will be conscripted. This is the so-called raising the dragon into a snake, and it is an unrepentant act.

古文：荣深然之，曰： 杨黄门侃已陈此计，当更议决耳。 
现代文：朱荣深以为然，说： 杨黄门侃已经陈说此计，卿今又如此说法，我当重新予以讨论决定。 
English: Zhu Rong was deeply convinced and said, "Yang Huangmenkan has already said this strategy, and you are now saying it again. I should discuss and decide it anew.

古文：及庄帝反政，因宴次谓尔朱荣曰： 前若不用高黄门计，则社稷不安。
现代文：等到庄帝返政，在一次宴会上对朱荣说： 前番如果不采用高黄门这个计策，则国家至今不安。
English: When Emperor Zhuang returned to power, he said to Zhu Rong at a banquet: "If we don't adopt the Gaohuangmen strategy the first time, the country will still be uneasy."

古文：可为朕劝其酒令醉。 
现代文：你可代替朕劝他酒，一定要他醉。 
English: You can persuade him to drink instead of me, and make sure he gets drunk.

古文：荣对曰： 臣本北征蠕蠕，高黄门与臣作监军。临事能决，实可任用。 
现代文：朱荣回答说： 为臣先前北征柔然，高黄门给臣作监军，临事决断迅速，实可任用。 
English: Zhu Rong replied, "For me, the Northern Expedition was smooth, Gao Huangmen gave me the supervision of the army, the decision-making was quick, and I could actually be appointed.

古文：除征南将军、金紫光禄大夫、兼御史中尉。
现代文：除授高道穆为征南将军、金紫光禄大夫、兼任御史中尉。
English: In addition, Gao Daomu was awarded the title of Southern Expeditionary General, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor, and concurrently served as Lieutenant of History.

古文：寻即真，仍兼黄门。
现代文：不久正除御史中尉，仍兼黄门职。
English: Soon after, Lieutenant Mishi was dismissed, but he continued to hold the position of Yellow Gate.

古文：道穆外秉直绳，内参机密，凡是益国利民之事，必以奏闻。
现代文：高道穆外秉绳纠之职，内参家国大计，凡是益国利民之事，必定奏闻皇上。
English: Gao Daomu adhering to the rope-pulling duty outside, the grand plan of the country within the family, and all things that benefit the country and the people must be reported to the emperor.

古文：谏诤极言，无所顾惮。
现代文：谏诤极言，无所忌怕。
English: There's nothing to be afraid of.

古文：选用御史，皆当世名辈，李希宗、李绘、阳休之、阳斐、封君义、邢子明、苏淑、宋世良等四十人。
现代文：选用御史，都是当代有名望的人，李希宗、李绘、阳休之、阳斐、封君义、邢子明、苏淑、宋世良等四十人，都任过御史。
English: The emperors were all famous contemporary figures. Li Xizong, Li Miao, Yang Xuzhi, Yang Fei, Feng Junyi, Zang Zi Ming, Su Shu, Song Shiliang and other forty people were appointed as emperors.

古文：于时用钱稍薄，道穆表曰： 四民之业，钱货为本，救弊改铸，王政所先。
现代文：当时钱币渐薄，高道穆上表说： 四民之业，钱货为本，救弊改铸，王政之先。
English: At that time, coins were getting thinner and thinner, Gao Daomu said on the table: the four people's business, money and goods as the basis, remedying defects and reforming, before the royal government.

古文：自顷以私铸薄滥，官司纠绳，挂网非一。
现代文：一向以来，私铸钱币薄且多，官司所纠，挂万漏一。
English: Since time immemorial, privately minted coins have been thin and plentiful, and have been the subject of lawsuits.

古文：在市铜价，八十一文得铜一斤，私造薄钱，斤余二百。
现代文：市场铜价，八十一文钱可买铜一斤，私造薄钱，斤余铜可得钱二百文。
English: The market price of copper, eighty-one cents can buy a pound of copper, privately made thin money, a pound of copper can get two hundred cents.

古文：既示之以深利，又随之以重刑；惧罪者虽多，奸铸者弥众。
现代文：既以深厚的利益示民，又以重刑罪民，受到处罚的虽多，但奸商铸造的也更猛。
English: Although there are many people who have been punished both for showing the people their deep profits and for committing serious crimes, the crimes committed by profiteers are even more severe.

古文：今钱徒有五铢之文，而无二铢之实，薄甚榆荚，上贯便破，置之水上，殆欲不沉。
现代文：而今钱空有五铢之文，而实际上连二铢的重量也没有，甚至薄如榆荚，一穿便破，放在水上，恨不得都掉不下去。
English: But now the money is empty and has the weight of five cormorants, but in fact it does not even have the weight of two cormorants. It is even as thin as cormorants. Once it is worn, it will break. If it is placed on water, it will not fall down.

古文：此乃因循有渐，科防不切，朝廷之愆，彼复何罪？
现代文：这种现象因循有渐，防堵不彻，是朝廷的过失，这些人有什么罪失。
English: This phenomenon is gradual, prevention is not thorough, it is the fault of the imperial court, what are the faults of these people.

古文：昔汉文帝以五分钱小，故铸四铢，至武帝复改三铢为半两。
现代文：过去汉文帝以五分钱小，改铸四铢钱，至武帝又改三铢为半两。
English: In the past, Emperor Wen of Han changed the mintage of five-cent coins to four-cent coins, and Emperor Wu changed the mintage of three-cent coins to half-two-cent coins.

古文：此皆以大易小，以重代轻也。
现代文：这都是以大易小，以重代轻的事实。
English: It's a case of less is more.

古文：论今据古，宜改铸大钱，文载年号，以记其始，则一斤所成止七十六文。
现代文：论今据古，我认为朝廷应改铸大钱，文载年号，以记其始，则一斤铜铸成钱只有七十六文。
English: On the subject of the present and the past, I think that the imperial court should change the casting of big money. The year of the document is recorded to remember its beginning, while a kilo of copper cast into money is only seventy-six.

古文：铜价至贱五十有余，其中人功、食料、锡炭、铅沙，纵复私营，不能自润。
现代文：铜价最贱五十多文一斤，其中人工、食料、锡炭、铅沙都算进去，即使私人铸钱，也无钱可赚。
English: The cheapest copper price is more than 50 yuan per kilogram, which includes labor, food, tin, charcoal, and lead sand. Even if a private person mints money, there is no money to be made.

古文：直置无利，自应息心，况复严刑广设也。
现代文：无利可图，那么私铸之人，自然就收了这颗心，何况还有那么严厉的刑罚摆在那里。
English: If there is no profit, they will naturally lose heart, and what's more, there will be severe punishments?

古文：以臣测之，必当钱货永通，公私获允。 
现代文：以臣推测，这样做后，必然会使钱货畅通，公私各便。 
English: In my opinion, money should be linked to the sale of goods, and both public and private minting of money should be allowed.

古文：后遂用杨侃计，铸永安五铢钱。
现代文：后来就采用了杨侃的计策，铸造永安五铢钱。
English: Later, the imperial court adopted Yang Kan's suggestion and minted Yong'an five-baht coins.

古文：仆射尔朱世隆当朝权盛，因内见衣冠失仪，道穆便即弹纠。
现代文：仆射朱世隆当朝权盛，因在宫廷内看见他衣冠失仪，高道穆便立即纠劾。
English: When Zhu Shilong was in power, Gao Daomu immediately reprimanded his servant Gao Shilong because he saw his clothes and crown were improper in the court.

古文：帝姊寿阳公主行犯清路，执赤棒卒呵之不止，道穆令卒棒破其车。
现代文：皇帝姐姐寿阳公主行犯官路，手拿赤棒的士卒呵斥不止，高道穆命令士卒用棒砸破她的车子。
English: When Princess Shouyang, the sister of Emperor Xiaozhuang, was traveling, she violated the rules of the clear road. A soldier with a red wooden stick yelled at people, and her car kept moving forward.

古文：公主深以为恨，泣以诉帝。
现代文：公主深深记恨在心，哭泣着到皇帝面前告状。
English: The princess bore the grudge deeply in her heart and went crying to the emperor to complain.

古文：帝谓公主曰： 高中尉清直之人，彼所行者公事，岂可私恨责之也？ 
现代文：皇帝对公主说： 高中尉是清正刚直之人，他所行的是公事，朕怎么能以私恨责怪他？ 
English: The emperor said to the princess, "Lieutenant Gao is a pure and upright person. What he did was a public duty. How can I accuse him of self-hatred?

古文：道穆后见帝，帝曰： 一日家姊行路相犯，极以为愧。 
现代文：道穆后来见庄帝，庄帝说： 一日家中姐姐行路相犯，朕极以为愧。 
English: Afterward, Daumu met Zhuang Di. Zhuang Di said, "One day, my elder sister committed a road traffic accident. I am very ashamed.

古文：道穆免冠谢曰： 臣蒙陛下恩，守陛下法，不敢独于公主亏朝廷典章，以此负陛下。 
现代文：高道穆免冠谢罪说： 臣蒙受陛下恩，遵守陛下刑法，不敢独独在公主身上亏损朝廷典章，因此辜负陛下。 
English: Gao Daumu was absolved of the crime of showing gratitude, saying, "Owing to His Majesty's grace, I obeyed His Majesty's criminal law, and I dared not lose the Imperial Order on the princess alone. Therefore, I failed His Majesty.

古文：帝曰： 朕以愧卿，卿反谢朕。 
现代文：皇帝说： 朕对不起卿，卿却反而说对不起我。 
English: The emperor said, "I'm sorry, sir," but the gentleman said, "I'm sorry."

古文：寻敕监仪注。
现代文：不久帝命记下此事。
English: Soon, he was ordered to supervise the etiquette system of the imperial court.

古文：又诏曰： 秘书图籍所在，内典□书，又加缮写，缃素委积，盖有年载。
现代文：又下诏说： 秘书省是国家图籍所在的地方，掌管群籍，又加缮写，尺牍委积，已有多年。
English: He also said: The Ministry of State Secretaries is the place where the national register is located. It has been in charge of the national register for many years.

古文：出内繁芜，多致零落，可令御史中尉、兼给事黄门侍郎道穆总集帐目，并牒儒学之士，编比次第。 
现代文：出纳繁芜，多致零落。可令御史中尉、兼给事黄门侍郎高道穆总集账目，并集儒学之士，编排次序。 
English: The cashier was cumbersome and often disjointed. It was possible to order Lieutenant Goshi and the attendant of the Yellow Gate, Gao Domu, to compile a complete set of accounts, and also to gather Confucian scholars and arrange them in order.

古文：道穆又上疏曰： 臣闻舜命皋陶，奸宄是托；禹泣罪人，尧心为念，所以举直错枉，事切曩贤；明德慎罚，议存先典。
现代文：高道穆又上疏说： 为臣闻舜命皋陶，奸宄受惩；禹泣罪人，尧心为念。所以举直置枉，事关先贤；明德慎刑，议存旧典。
English: Gao Daumu also said in his sermon: "For a subject, it is better to die; for a traitor, it is better to be punished; for a criminal, it is better to be punished. Therefore, it is a matter of sages to set things straight; for the wise, it is a matter of prudence; and for the wise, it is a matter of old books."

古文：高祖太和之初，置廷尉司直，论刑辟是非，虽事非古始，交济时要。
现代文：高祖太和初年，设置廷尉司直，论证刑罚是非，虽然事非古来就有，然切时要。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Gaozutai, a court official was set up to set the record straight and demonstrate the rights and wrongs of the punishment. Although it has existed since ancient times, it is time to act.

古文：所谓礼乐互兴，不相沿袭者矣。
现代文：所谓礼乐互兴，不相沿袭就是这个道理。
English: This is the reason for the so-called reciprocal enjoyment of ceremonial music.

古文：臣以无庸，忝当今任，所思报效，未忘寝兴。
现代文：臣以无用，忝居今任，所思报效，日思夜务。
English: A vassal is useless, he should stay in his current position, think about what he can do, and think about his duties day and night.

古文：但识谢知今，业惭稽古，未能进一言以利国，说一策以兴邦，索米长安，岂不知耻？
现代文：但是见识不足知今，学业惭愧古人，未能进一言以利国，说一策以兴邦，食俸长安，岂不知愧。
English: However, the ancients were ashamed of their studies because they did not have enough knowledge. They were not ashamed of not being able to say a word to benefit the country, to say a word to prosper the country, and to have a good salary.

古文：至于职司其忧，犹望僶俛。
现代文：至于为臣职责所忧，犹望陛下体察。
English: As for being worried about his duties as a vassal, His Majesty Yubang felt it.

古文：窃见御史出使，悉受风闻，虽时获罪人，亦不无枉滥。
现代文：窃见御史出使，都是由于某事某人已经传开，虽然惩罚了罪人，但也不免枉滥好人。
English: The envoys sent by the emperor were all sent because of something someone had spread. Although they punished the guilty, they also abused the good people.

古文：何者？
现代文：什么原因呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：得尧之罚，不能不怨。
现代文：得尧之罚，不能不怨。
English: Even if you are punished by a saintly emperor like Yu, you cannot help but feel resentment.

古文：守令为政，容有爱憎。
现代文：守令为政，容有爱憎。
English: Shourei is the government, and love and hate are tolerated.

古文：奸猾之徒，恆思报恶，多有妄造无名，共相诬谤。
现代文：奸猾之徒，总是以恶报恩，多有莫须有的无名罪状，共相诬谤。
English: Treacherous people always repay kindness with evil. Many of them have unsubstantiated and nameless charges, all of which are slanderous.

古文：御史一经检究，耻于不成，杖木之下，以虚为实，无罪不能自雪者，岂可胜道哉？
现代文：御史一经检考，耻于罪名不成，于是杖木之下，以虚为实，无罪而不能雪冤的，哪里可以尽数？
English: Once the history has been examined, it is not possible to be ashamed of the crime, so under the cane, with the false as the true, the innocent and the unjust, where can you count?

古文：臣虽愚短，守不假器，绣衣所指，冀以清肃。若仍踵前失，或伤善人，则尸禄之责，无所逃罪。
现代文：为臣虽然愚陋短见，才不称职，绣衣所指，都希求肃清，如仍蹈前失，或许伤害好人，则对不起俸禄，无可逃避罪责。
English: As a vassal, although he is stupid and shortsighted, he is incompetent. As the embroidered clothes indicate, he is eager to clean up. If he still makes mistakes and may hurt good people, he will lose his salary and can not escape culpability.

古文：所以夙夜为忧，思有悛革。
现代文：所以昼思夜忧，思有变革。
English: That's why I think about change day and night.

古文：如臣鄙见，请依太和故事，还置司直十人，名隶廷尉，秩以五品，选历官有称、心平性正者为之。
现代文：依臣鄙见，请依太和旧例，仍然设置司直十人，属官廷尉，给五品官秩，选拔那些政绩很好、心平性直的人充任其职。
English: In my humble opinion, I would ask you to follow the old practice and still set up ten officials, who are subordinate to officials and court officers, to give five official ranks, and select those who have good political performance and are fair-minded to serve in their positions.

古文：御史若出纠劾，即移廷尉，令知人数。
现代文：御史如出纠劾，即移交廷尉，令知人数。
English: If the imperial historian goes to Beijing to lodge an impeachment, he should immediately inform the imperial lieutenant, so that they know the number of imperial historians going out.

古文：廷尉遣司直与御史俱发，所到州郡，分居别馆。
现代文：廷尉派司直与御史一起出发，所到州郡，分开居住。
English: The imperial lieutenant sent Shizinao and Mishi to leave together, so they went to Shoushu County and lived separately.

古文：御史检了，移付司直覆问，事讫与御史俱还。
现代文：御史检核完了，移交司直复检，事情完后与御史一起还朝。
English: After the inspection of the official history was completed, the transfer of the official history was directly reviewed, and after the matter was over, the official history was returned to the emperor together with the official history.

古文：中尉弹闻，廷尉科按，一如旧式。
现代文：中尉弹劾报送朝廷，廷尉按察虚实，一如旧式。
English: The impeachment was reported to the imperial court by the lieutenant, and the court lieutenant acted according to the truth, as in the old style.

古文：庶使狱成罪定，无复稽宽；为恶取败，不得称枉。
现代文：如使狱成罪定，不再宽假；作恶取败，不得称枉。
English: If they are sentenced to prison, they will no longer be pardoned; if they commit evil or defeat, they must not be unjustly punished.

古文：若御史、司直纠劾失实，悉依所断狱罪之。
现代文：如司直、御史纠劾失实，都按所断三狱的罪行定论。
English: If the corrections made by Goshi and Sisho are untrue, they will be punished according to the size of their error in dismissing the case.

古文：听以所检，迭相纠发。
现代文：听其以所检查的，迭相纠发。
English: Allow the subject of the complaint to report them, and allow them to report each other.

古文：如二使阿曲，有不尽理，听罪家诣门下通诉，别加按检。
现代文：如果二使阿曲，有不尽理，听任罪家到门下省上诉，另加按查检校。
English: If the second-grade teacher is negligent, the offender will be allowed to appeal to the next province, and the school will be inspected.

古文：如此，则肺石之傍，怨讼可息；丛棘之下，受罪吞声者矣。 
现代文：如此，则肺石之傍，怨讼可息；丛荆之下，受罪者不再吱声了。 
English: In this way, by the side of the lung stone, the grievance can breathe; under the thicket, the victim will no longer squeak.

古文：诏从之，复置司直。
现代文：帝下诏从之，又设置司直一官。
English: The emperor issued an edict to obey it, and also set up the post of Shizucho.

古文：及尔朱荣之死也，帝召道穆付赦书，令宣于外。
现代文：等到朱荣死后，皇帝召请高道穆草拟赦书，宣告天下。
English: After Zhu Rong's death, the emperor summoned Gao Daomuso to draft a letter of pardon and proclaim him emperor.

古文：因谓之曰： 自今日后，常得精选御史矣。 
现代文：因对他说： 从今以后，应当精选御史了。 
English: For he said unto him, From henceforth there shall be a great reckoning for thee.

古文：先是，荣等常欲以其亲党为御史，故有此诏。
现代文：这以前，朱荣常常想让他的亲信党羽任御史，所以令他作此诏书。
English: Originally, Er Zhu Rong and others often wanted to install their own party leaders as imperial historians, so Emperor Xiaozhuang only issued this edict.

古文：及尔朱世隆等率其部类战于大夏门北，道穆受诏督战，又赞成太府卿李苗断桥之计，世隆等于是北遁。
现代文：等到朱世隆等人率其部下战于大夏门北，高道穆受诏督战，又参与谋划太府卿李苗的断桥计策，朱世隆等人于是北逃。
English: Wait until Zhu Shilong and others led their subordinates to fight in the north of Daxiamen, Gao Daomu was ordered to fight, and also participated in the planning of the bridge-breaking strategy of Taifuqing Li Miao, Zhu Shilong and others then fled north.

古文：加卫将军、假车骑将军、大都督、兼尚书右仆射、南道大行台。
现代文：朝廷加授其为卫将军、假车骑大将军、大都督、兼尚书右仆射、南道大行台。
English: The imperial court also awarded him the titles of Wei general, fake car riding general, grand governor, concurrently with Shang Shujiu, and Nando Daigongdae.

古文：又除车骑将军，余官如故。
现代文：又除授他为车骑将军，余官仍旧。
English: He was also stripped of his title of General of Cavalry and Chariots, but retained his other posts.

古文：时虽外托征蛮，而帝恐北军不利，欲为南巡之计。
现代文：当时虽然对外说征讨蛮人，而皇帝担心北军不利，实则谋划南逃计策。
English: At that time, although the imperial court said to the outside world that they wanted to invade the barbarians in the south, Emperor Xiaozhuang was really worried that the war in the north would be unfavorable, and wanted to take the opportunity to avoid the south as an excuse.

古文：未发，会尔朱兆入洛，道穆虑祸及己，托病去官。
现代文：车驾未出发，逢朱兆攻入洛阳，高道穆担心祸及自己，托病辞官。
English: Before the car drove off, Feng Zhu Zhao entered Luoyang. Gao Daomu was worried about the accident and himself, and called in sick.

古文：世隆以道穆忠于前朝，遂害之，时年四十二。
现代文：朱世隆以高道穆忠于前朝，于是加害于他，时年四十二岁。
English: Zhu Shilong was forty-two years old when he harmed Gao Daomu for being loyal to the former dynasty.

古文：泰昌中，赠使持节、都督雍秦二州诸军事、车骑大将军、仪同三司、雍州刺史。
现代文：太昌年间，朝廷赠他为使持节，都督雍、秦二州诸军事，车骑大将军，仪同三司，雍州刺史。
English: During the Taichang era, the imperial court presented him with gifts on the Envoys' Day, including the military of the capital city of Yong, the two states of Qin, the general of the cavalry, the three departments of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and the history of Yongzhou.

