古文：陈完者，陈厉公他之子也。
现代文：陈完，是陈厉公陈他的儿子。
English: After Chen, it was Chen Li Gong Chen's son.

古文：完生，周太史过陈，陈厉公使卜完，卦得《观》之《否ǐ》： 是为观国之光，利用宾于王。
现代文：完初生的时候，周太史正好路过陈国，陈厉公请他给陈完卜卦，卜得的卦是《观卦》变为《否卦》，太史说： 卦辞的意思是：观看国家的风俗民情，利于做君王的上宾。
English: When he was born, Zhou Taishi happened to pass by Chen Guorong. Chen Liguang asked him to give Chen Guorong to him. The Guorong that was given to Chen Guorong was "Guorong" changed to "Guorong." Taishi said: "Guorong" means: to observe the customs and people of the country, it is beneficial to be the chief guest of the king.

古文：此其代陈有国乎？
现代文：这是说他将取得陈国君位拥有国家吧？
English: Does this mean that he will take the throne of Chen Guojun and own the country?

古文：不在此而在异国乎？
现代文：也许是不在陈国而在他国吧？
English: Maybe not in China, but in another country?

古文：非此其身也，在其子孙。
现代文：或者是不应验在他人身上，而应验在他的子孙身上。
English: Or it may not be fulfilled in another person, but in his descendants.

古文：若在异国，必姜姓。
现代文：如果是在他国，必定是姜姓国。
English: If it is in another country, it must be a country with the surname Jiang.

古文：姜姓，四岳之后。
现代文：姜姓是帝尧时四岳的后代。
English: The surname Jiang is a descendant of the four mountains at the time of the imperial edict.

古文：物莫能两大，陈衰，此其昌乎？ 
现代文：事物不可能是两个同时强大，陈国衰落后，他这一支将要昌盛起来吧！ 
English: It is impossible for two things to be strong at the same time. After the decline of Chen Guo, his group will flourish!

古文：厉公者，陈文公少子也，其母蔡女。
现代文：厉公，是陈文公的小儿子，他的母亲是蔡国女子。
English: Li Gong is the youngest son of Chen Wen Gong, and his mother is a Cai Guo woman.

古文：文公卒，厉公兄鲍立，是为桓公。
现代文：文公去世后，厉公的哥哥陈鲍即位，这就是桓公。
English: After the death of King Wen, King Liguo's brother Chen Bao ascended to the throne. This is King Huan.

古文：桓公与他异母。
现代文：桓公和弟弟陈不是一母所生。
English: Prince Kan and his brother Chen were not born from the same mother.

古文：及桓公病，蔡人为他杀桓公鲍及太子免而立他，为厉公。
现代文：趁桓公生病的时候，蔡国人替陈他杀死了桓公陈鲍和太子陈免，拥立陈他为国君，这就是厉公。
English: Taking advantage of Huan Gong's illness, the people of Cai killed Huan Gong Chen Bao and Prince Chen Meng on behalf of Chen, and made Chen the ruler of the country. This was the Liguo.

古文：厉公既立，娶蔡女。
现代文：厉公即位以后，娶蔡国的女子为妻。
English: After Li Gong ascended the throne, he married a woman from Cai Guo.

古文：蔡女淫于蔡人，数归，厉公亦数如蔡。
现代文：这个蔡女和蔡国人通奸，多次回蔡国去，厉公也经常去蔡国。
English: This Cai woman committed adultery with a Cai Guo man and went back to Cai Guo many times. Li Gong also often went to Cai Guo.

古文：桓公之少子林怨厉公杀其父与兄，乃令蔡人诱厉公而杀之。
现代文：桓公的小儿子陈林怨恨厉公杀死了他的父兄，就让蔡国人诱骗厉公并将他杀死了。
English: Huan's younger son Chen Lin resented Liguo for killing his father and brother, so he asked Cai Guo Ren to trick Liguo and kill him.

古文：林自立，是为庄公。
现代文：陈林自立为国君，这就是庄公。
English: Chen Lin became the sovereign of the country. This is Zhuang Gong.

古文：故陈完不得立，为陈大夫。
现代文：因此陈完不能立为国君，只是陈国大夫。
English: Therefore, Chen Guan could not be made the sovereign, but only Chen Guofei.

古文：厉公之杀，以淫出国，故《春秋》曰 蔡人杀陈他 ，罪之也。
现代文：厉公的被杀，是由于为淫乱而出国，所以《春秋》里说 蔡人杀陈他 ，这是在指责他的罪过。
English: Rigong was killed because he went abroad for fornication, so "Spring and Autumn" said that Cai Ren killed him, which was accusing him of sin.

古文：庄公卒，立弟杵臼，是为宣公。
现代文：庄公去世后，他的弟弟杵臼即位，这就是陈宣公。
English: After the death of Zhuang Gong, his younger brother Jiusu ascended to the throne, which is Chen Xuan Gong.

古文：宣公二十一年，杀其太子御寇。
现代文：宣公二十一年，杵臼杀死了太子御寇。
English: In the twenty-first year after the proclamation of the Republic, Shimusu killed the Crown Prince Miko.

古文：御寇与完相爱，恐祸及己，完故奔齐。
现代文：御寇和陈完关系亲密，恐怕灾祸牵连到自己，所以陈完逃到了齐国。
English: Okura and Chen Guan had a close relationship, so Chen Guan fled to Qi Province, fearing that the calamity would affect him.

古文：齐桓公欲使为卿，辞曰： 羁旅之臣幸得免负檐，君之惠也，不敢当高位。 
现代文：齐桓公想要任他为卿，他推辞说： 我这个寄居在外的小臣有幸能够免除种种负担，已经是您给我的恩惠了，不敢再担任这么高的职位。 
English: When Prince Qi Huan wanted to make him a lord, he declined, saying, "As a minister living abroad, I have the privilege of being exempt from all kinds of burdens. It is already a favor you have given me. I dare not hold such a high position again."

古文：桓公使为工正。
现代文：齐桓公让他任管理百工的工正。
English: Lord Qi Kuan appointed him as the foreman to manage the hundred workers.

古文：齐懿仲欲妻完，卜之。占曰： 是谓凤皇于蜚，和鸣锵锵。
现代文：齐懿仲想把女儿嫁给陈完为妻，为此事进行占卜，占卜的结果说： 这叫做凤凰飞翔，和谐的鸣声锵锵。
English: Qi Yuzhong wanted to marry his daughter to Chen Quan as his wife, so he divined the matter. The result of the divination said: This is called the phoenix flying, the harmonious singing.

古文：有妫ī之后，将育于姜。
现代文：有妫氏的后代，将在姜氏那里成长。
English: If there are descendants of the Min clan, they will grow up with the Jiang clan.

古文：五世其昌，并于正卿。
现代文：五代之后就要昌盛，和正卿的地位一样。
English: After five generations, it will be prosperous, the same as the status of Zhengqing.

古文：八世之后，莫之与京。 
现代文：八代之后，没有人能比他地位高。 
English: After eight generations, no one can be higher than him.

古文：卒妻完。
现代文：他终于把女儿嫁给陈完为妻。
English: He finally married off his daughter to Chen.

古文：完之奔齐，齐桓公立十四年矣。
现代文：陈完逃到齐国的时候，齐桓公已在位十四年了。
English: When Chen finally fled to Qi, Prince Qi Huan had been on the throne for fourteen years.

古文：完卒，谥为敬仲。
现代文：陈完去世后，谥号是敬仲。
English: After Chen's death, his nickname was Jingzhong.

古文：仲生稚孟夷。
现代文：敬仲生了稺孟夷。
English: Keizhong gave birth to Gong Mengyi.

古文：敬仲之如齐，以陈字为田氏。
现代文：敬仲到齐国之后，把陈氏改为田氏。
English: After Jingzhong arrived in Qi, he changed the Chen clan to the Tian clan.

古文：田稚孟夷生愍孟庄，田愍孟庄生文子须无。
现代文：田稺孟夷生了湣孟庄，田湣孟庄生了文子须无。
English: Tianyao Mengyi gave birth to Tianyao Mengzhuang, Tianyao Mengzhuang gave birth to Fanzi Suzu.

古文：田文子事齐庄公。
现代文：田文子侍奉齐庄公。
English: Tianwenzi served Qi Zhuang.

古文：晋之大夫栾逞作乱于晋，来奔齐，齐庄公厚客之。
现代文：晋国大夫栾逞在晋国作乱，逃到齐国来，齐庄公给他优厚的待遇。
English: Jin Guo's doctor Zou Gang made trouble in Jin Guo and fled to Qi Guo. Qi Zhuang gave him generous treatment.

古文：晏婴与田文子谏，庄公弗听。
现代文：晏婴和田文子劝谏，庄公不听从。
English: Chuangyu and Wada Fumiko tried to persuade him, but Zhuang didn't listen.

古文：文子卒，生桓子无宇。
现代文：田文子去世，他生的儿子是桓子无宇。
English: Tianwen Zi died, and his son was Han Zi Mu Yu.

古文：田桓子无宇有力，事齐庄公，甚有宠。
现代文：田桓子无宇有力气，侍奉齐庄公，很受宠信。
English: Tian Huan Zi was immensely powerful. He served Qizhuang and was very popular.

古文：无宇卒，生武子开与厘ī子乞。
现代文：无宇去世，他生的儿子是武子开和釐子乞。
English: Muxiu died, and his sons were Wu Zikai (武子开) and Yu Zikai (子乞).

古文：田厘子乞事齐景公为大夫，其收赋税于民以小斗受之，其禀予民以大斗，行阴德于民，而景公弗禁。
现代文：釐子田乞侍奉齐景公，是大夫，他向百姓征收赋税时用小斗收进，赐给百姓粮食时用大斗，暗中向百姓施以恩德，而齐景公也不加禁止。
English: He used a small bucket when collecting taxes from the people, and a large bucket when giving food to the people. He also secretly gave favors to the people, and Qi Jing was not prohibited from doing so.

古文：由此田氏得齐众心，宗族益强，民思田氏。
现代文：因此田氏得到齐国的民心，他们家族越来越强大，百姓心向田氏。
English: As a result, the Tian clan won the hearts of the people of Qi, and their family became more and more powerful. The hearts of the people turned to the Tian clan.

古文：晏子数谏景公，景公弗听。
现代文：晏子多次向景公进谏，景公不听。
English: The mule repeatedly approached the king, but he did not listen.

古文：已而使于晋，与叔向私语曰： 齐国之政其卒归于田氏矣。 
现代文：不久晏子到晋国出使，他与叔向私下里说： 齐国的政权最终要归到田氏的手里呀。 
English: Not long after, Zou Zi went on a mission to Jin Province, and he and his uncle said to each other in private, "The political power of Qi Province will eventually fall into the hands of the Tian clan."

古文：晏婴卒后，范、中行氏反晋。
现代文：晏婴去世后，范氏和中行氏在晋国反叛。
English: After the death of Xingying, the Fan and Zhongxing clans rebelled in Jin.

古文：晋攻之急，范、中行请粟于齐。田乞欲为乱，树党于诸侯，乃说景公曰： 范、中行数有德于齐，齐不可不救。 
现代文：晋国加紧追击他们，范氏和中行氏向齐国请求借粮，田乞想作乱，要在诸侯中结党，于是对齐景公说： 范氏和中行氏多次对齐国施加恩德，齐国不能不救他们。 
English: Jin intensified its pursuit of them. The Fan and Zhongxing clans repeatedly asked Qi to lend them grain, and Tian Xian wanted to create turmoil and form a party among the princes. So he said to Qi Jinggong: The Fan and Zhongxing clans have repeatedly imposed benefits on Qi, and Qi cannot but save them.

古文：齐使田乞救之而输之粟。
现代文：齐国就派田乞前去援救，并且给他们送去了粮食。
English: The State of Qi sent Tian Begging to rescue them and sent them grain.

古文：景公太子死，后有宠姬曰芮子，生子荼。
现代文：齐景公的太子去世了，景公有个宠姬叫芮子，芮子生的儿子叫荼。
English: The prince of Qi Jinggong passed away. Jinggong had a pet called Zizi, and Zizi's son was named Zhuang.

古文：景公病，命其相国惠子与高昭子以子荼为太子。
现代文：景公生病时，让他的宰相国惠子和高昭子立儿子荼为太子。
English: When Jing Gong fell ill, he asked his prime ministers, Guo Huizi and Gao Akiko, to set up his son, Zhuo, as crown prince.

古文：景公卒，两相高、国立荼，是为晏孺子。
现代文：景公去世后，高、国两位宰相立荼为国君，这就是晏孺子。
English: After the death of King Gyeonggong, Gao and the two prime ministers of the country were enthroned as the country's king.

古文：而田乞不说，欲立景公他子阳生。
现代文：可是田乞很不高兴，想立景公的另一个儿子阳生。
English: However, Tian Qian was very unhappy and wanted to marry Yang Sheng, another son of King Jing.

古文：阳生素与乞欢。
现代文：阳生平时和田乞关系很好。
English: Yang Sheng usually has a good relationship with Wada Qiao.

古文：晏孺子之立也，阳生奔鲁。
现代文：晏孺子即位后，阳生就逃到了鲁国。
English: After Xunzi ascended the throne, Yang Sheng fled to Lu.

古文：田乞伪事高昭子、国惠子者，每朝代参乘，言曰： 始诸大夫不欲立孺子。
现代文：田乞假装侍奉高昭子和国惠了，每次上朝都替参乘在车上陪侍。并且说： 起初各位大夫都不想立孺子。
English: Tian Qian pretended to serve Gao Akiko and Guo Hui, and every time he went to the emperor, he accompanied him in the car. And he said: At first, the doctors didn't want to play dice.

古文：孺子既立，君相之，大夫皆自危，谋作乱。 
现代文：孺子即位后，您两位任宰相，大夫们人人自危，图谋作乱。 
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Hirohito, you two were appointed as prime ministers, and the doctors all risked their lives and plotted to create turmoil.

古文：又绐大夫曰： 高昭子可畏也，及未发先之。 
现代文：田乞又骗大夫们说： 高昭子十分可怕，趁他还没动手我们先动手杀掉他！ 
English: Tian Qian also deceived the doctors, saying: Gao Zhao Zi is very scary, let's kill him before he starts!

古文：诸大夫从之。
现代文：大夫们都依从他。
English: The doctors obeyed him.

古文：田乞、鲍牧与大夫以兵入公室，攻高昭子。
现代文：田乞、鲍牧和大夫们领兵进入宫廷，攻击高昭子。
English: Tian Qian, Bao Mu and the doctors led soldiers into the court and attacked Gao Akiko.

古文：昭子闻之，与国惠子救公。
现代文：昭子听说后，与国惠子去救国君。
English: When Akiko heard about this, she and Kunihiko went to rescue Kuniakimi.

古文：公师败。
现代文：国君的军队失败了。
English: The sovereign's army failed.

古文：田乞之众追国惠子，惠子奔莒ǔ，遂返杀高昭子。
现代文：田乞的部下去追国惠子，惠子逃到莒，于是又返回去杀高昭子。
English: The beggar's followers went to chase away Keiko, but she escaped to Shibuya and then returned to kill Takaakiko.

古文：晏圉奔鲁。
现代文：晏婴的儿子晏圉逃奔鲁国。
English: The infant's son fled to the country of Lu.

古文：田乞使人之鲁，迎阳生。
现代文：田乞派人到鲁国，迎回阳生。
English: Tian Qian sent people to Lu Province to welcome Yang Sheng back.

古文：阳生至齐，匿田乞家。
现代文：阳生回到齐国，藏在田乞家中。
English: Yang Sheng returned to Qi and hid in a beggar's house.

古文：请诸大夫曰： 常之母有鱼菽ū之祭，幸而来会饮。 
现代文：田乞邀请大夫们说： 田常的母亲准备了粗疏的酒食，请各位赏光来聚会饮酒。 
English: Tian Qian invited the doctors and said, "Tian Chang's mother has prepared coarse food and drink. Please come to the party and drink.

古文：会饮田氏。
现代文：大夫们都来田氏家饮酒。
English: The doctors all came to Mr. Tian's house to drink.

古文：田乞盛阳生橐中，置坐中央。发橐，出阳生，曰： 此乃齐君矣。 
现代文：田乞把阳生装在口袋里，放在中央的座位上，饮宴中，田乞打开口袋，放出阳生，他说： 这才是齐国的国君呀。 
English: Tian Qian put Yang Sheng in his pocket and put it on the central seat. During the banquet, Tian Qian opened his pocket and let Yang Sheng out. He said, "This is the sovereign of Qi."

古文：大夫皆伏谒。
现代文：大夫们都俯身拜见。
English: The doctors all bowed their heads.

古文：将盟立之，田乞诬曰： 吾与鲍牧谋共立阳生也。 
现代文：即将订盟拥立阳生，田乞撒谎说： 我是与鲍牧合谋一起拥立阳生的。 
English: About to sign an alliance to support Yang Sheng, Tian Qian lied and said: I conspired with Bao Mu to support Yang Sheng.

古文：鲍牧怒曰： 大夫忘景公之命乎？ 
现代文：鲍牧怒冲冲地说： 大夫们忘记景公的遗命了吗？ 
English: Bao Mu said angrily, "Have the doctors forgotten about the death of Prince Jing?

古文：诸大夫欲悔，阳生乃顿首曰： 可则立之，不可则已。 
现代文：大夫们想反悔，阳生就叩头说： 看我可以就拥立我为王，不可以就罢黜我吧。 
English: The doctors wanted to repent, but Yang Sheng bowed down and said, "Look, I can make myself king, but if you can't, you can depose me."

古文：鲍牧恐祸及己，乃复曰： 皆景公之子，何为不可！ 
现代文：鲍牧恐怕灾祸落到自己身上，就重新说： 都是景公的儿子，怎么不可以呢！ 
English: Fearing that a calamity might befall him, Bao Mu said again, "They are all the sons of King Jing, how can it be wrong?"

古文：遂立阳生于田乞之家，是为悼公。
现代文：终于在田乞家中立阳生为国君，这就是悼公。
English: Finally, in the beggar's field, the neutral Yang Sheng became the sovereign, this is the mourning.

古文：乃使人迁晏孺子于骀，而杀孺子荼。
现代文：于是派人把晏孺子迁到骀，并且杀死了孺子荼。
English: So they sent someone to move the nippers to the cocoon, and killed the nippers.

古文：悼公既立，田乞为相，专齐政。
现代文：悼公即位后，田乞任宰相，独揽齐国政权。
English: After the enthronement of King Mu, Tian Qian was appointed prime minister and took sole control of the Qi state.

古文：四年，田乞卒，子常代立，是为田成子。
现代文：四年之后，田乞去世，他的儿子田常接替了职位，这就是田成子。
English: Four years later, Tian Qi died, and his son Tian Chang took over the position, this is Tian Cheng Zi.

古文：鲍牧与齐悼公有郄，杀悼公。
现代文：鲍牧和齐悼公不和，杀死了悼公。
English: Bao Mu and Qi Yigong had a disagreement and killed Yigong.

古文：齐人共立其子壬，是为简公。
现代文：齐国人共同拥立悼公的儿子壬，这就是齐简公。
English: The people of Qi jointly supported Ren, the son of Yigong, which is Qi Jian Gong.

古文：田常成子与监止俱为左右相，相简公。
现代文：田常成子与监止一起任左右相，辅佐简公。
English: Tanotsune Shigeko, together with Okitsune, served as the left and right phases, and assisted Janko.

古文：田常心害监止，监止幸于简公，权弗能去。
现代文：田常心中忌妒监止，因为监止很受齐简公的宠信，他的权力不能除去。
English: In Tian Chang's heart, he envied Guanzhong, because Guanzhong was very favored by Qi Jiangong, and his power could not be removed.

古文：于是田常复修厘子之政，以大斗出贷，以小斗收。
现代文：于是田常就重新使用他父亲釐子的措施，用大斗把粮食贷给百姓，用小斗收回。
English: As a result, Tian Chang reused the measure of his father's mule, lending grain to the people with a large bucket and taking it back with a small bucket.

古文：齐人歌之曰： 妪乎采芑，归乎田成子！ 
现代文：齐国人唱歌颂扬他说： 老太太采芑菜呀，送给田成子！ 
English: The people of Qi sing and praise him, saying: "The old lady picked the pickled vegetables and gave them to Tian Rongzi!

古文：齐大夫朝，御鞅谏简公曰： 田、监不可并也，君其择焉。 
现代文：齐国的大夫们上朝，御鞅向简公进谏说： 田常、监止不可以同时任用，请君主来选择吧！ 
English: The doctors of the State of Qi went to the emperor, and the empress said to Jian Gong, "Tianzhong and Guanzhong cannot be appointed at the same time, please ask the monarch to choose!"

古文：君弗听。
现代文：简公不听。
English: Jian Gong did not listen.

古文：子我者，监止之宗人也，常与田氏有郄。
现代文：子我是监止的同族，平时与田氏不和。
English: My son and I are from the same clan, but we are not on good terms with the Tian family.

古文：田氏疏族田豹事子我有宠。
现代文：田氏的远房同族田豹侍奉子我而受宠。
English: The distant relatives of the Tian clan, the Tian leopards, were favored to serve me.

古文：子我曰： 吾欲尽灭田氏适，以豹代田氏宗。 
现代文：子我说： 我想把田氏的直系子孙都杀光，让你来接续田氏宗族。 
English: I said, "I want to kill all the direct descendants of the Tian clan and let you succeed the Tian clan."

古文：豹曰： 臣于田氏疏矣。 
现代文：田豹说： 我只是田氏的远房啊。 
English: The leopard said, "I'm just a distant relative of Mr. Tian."

古文：不听。
现代文：子我不听。
English: The emperor does not allow it.

古文：已而豹谓田氏曰： 子我将诛田氏，田氏弗先，祸及矣。 
现代文：不久田豹对田氏说： 子我将要诛灭田氏，如果田氏不先下手，灾祸就要来了。 
English: Before long, Tianbao said to Tian: "Son, I'm going to destroy Tian. If Tian doesn't strike first, disaster will come."

古文：子我舍公宫，田常兄弟四人乘如公宫，欲杀子我。
现代文：子我住在简公的宫里，田常兄弟四人也乘车到了宫中，想杀了我。
English: My son lived in the palace of Jian Gong, the four Tian Chang brothers also took a car to the palace and wanted to kill me.

古文：子我闭门。
现代文：子我闭门。
English: I'm closing the door.

古文：简公与妇人饮檀台，将欲击田常。
现代文：简公正与宠妃在檀台饮酒作乐，就想攻打田常。
English: After drinking and making merry with her favorite concubine on the balcony, Jane Justice wanted to attack Tian Chang.

古文：太史子余曰： 田常非敢为乱，将除害。 
现代文：太史子余说： 田常不敢作乱，他是要为国除害。 
English: Grand Historian Zi Yu said: Tian Chang did not dare to make trouble, he wanted to eliminate harm for the country.

古文：简公乃止。
现代文：简公才停止了。
English: It was only then that Jane stopped.

古文：田常出，闻简公怒，恐诛，将出亡。
现代文：田常出宫后，听说简公发努，恐怕自己要被杀，想出外逃亡。
English: After Tian Chang left the palace, he heard that Jian Gong was in trouble and feared that he would be killed, so he wanted to escape.

古文：田子行曰： 需，事之贼也。 
现代文：田子行说： 迟疑不决，是事业的大敌。 
English: Tian Zixing said, "Hesitancy and indecision are the great enemies of the cause."

古文：田常于是击子我。
现代文：田常于是攻击了我。
English: Tanotsune then attacked me.

古文：子我率其徒攻田氏，不胜，出亡。
现代文：子我率领他的部下进攻田氏，不能取胜，只能外出逃亡。
English: My son led his men to attack Mr. Tian, but they could not win, so they had to go out and flee.

古文：田氏之徒追杀子我及监止。
现代文：田氏的部下追赶并杀死了子我和监止。
English: Mr. Tian's men chased and killed my son and my supervisor.

古文：简公出奔，田氏之徒追执简公于徐州。
现代文：简公出逃，田氏的部下追到徐州把简公捉住了。
English: Jian Gong fled, and Tian's subordinates chased him to Xuzhou and caught him.

古文：简公曰： 蚤从御鞅之言，不及此难。 
现代文：简公说： 如果早点听御鞅的话，也不会受到这样的灾难。 
English: Jian Gong said: If I had listened to you earlier, I would not have suffered such a disaster.

古文：田氏之徒恐简公复立而诛己，遂杀简公。
现代文：田氏的部下担心简公恢复君位后会杀他们，就把简公杀了。
English: Tian's subordinates feared that Jian Gong would kill them after he was restored to the throne, so they killed Jian Gong.

古文：简公立四年而杀。
现代文：简公即位四年被杀。
English: Emperor Jiankuo was killed four years into his reign.

古文：于是田常立简公弟骜，是为平公。
现代文：于是田常拥立简公的弟弟骜即位，这就是齐平公。
English: As a result, Tian often supported the ascension to the throne of Jian Gong's younger brother Zou, which was Qi Ping Gong.

古文：平公即位，田常为相。
现代文：平公即位后，任田常为宰相。
English: After the enthronement of TAIRA no Kimi, Tanetsune was appointed Prime Minister.

古文：田常既杀简公，惧诸侯共诛己，乃尽归鲁、卫侵地，西约晋韩、魏、赵氏，南通吴、越之使，修功行赏，亲于百姓，以故齐复定。
现代文：田常杀了简公以后，害怕各国诸侯联合诛杀自己，就把侵占鲁国、卫国的土地全部归还。西边同晋国、韩氏、魏氏、赵氏订约，南方与吴国、越国互通使臣，修好功德，施行赏赐，亲近百姓，因此齐国重新安定下来。
English: After Tian Chang killed Jian Gong, he was afraid that the princes of various countries would jointly fight and kill him, so he returned all the lands that had been occupied by Lu and defended the country. In the west, he signed a treaty with Jin, Han, Wei and Zhao, and in the south, he exchanged envoys with Wu and Yue, repaired merits, implemented rewards, and was close to the people. As a result, Qi was re-stabilized.

古文：田常言于齐平公曰： 德施人之所欲，君其行之；刑罚人之所恶，臣请行之。 
现代文：田常对齐平公说： 施行恩德是人们所希望的，由您亲自施行；惩罚是人们所厌恶的，请让臣去执行。 
English: Tian Chang said to Qiping Gong: the implementation of benevolence is what people hope for, you should personally implement it; punishment is what people dislike, please let the minister carry it out.

古文：行之五年，齐国之政皆归田常。
现代文：这样做了五年，齐国的政权都归田常把持了。
English: After doing this for five years, the political power of Qi was under the control of Tian Chang.

古文：田常于是尽诛鲍、晏、监止及公族之强者，而割齐自安平以东至琅邪，自为封邑。
现代文：于是田常把鲍氏、晏氏、监止和公族中较强盛的全部诛杀了，并分割齐国从安平以东到琅邪的土地，作为自己的封地。
English: As a result, Tian Chang killed all of the more powerful members of the Bao, Yao, Jianzhong and Guozhong clans, and divided the land of Qi from east of Anping to Shiji as his own fief.

古文：封邑大于平公之所食。
现代文：他的封地比齐平公享有的土地还要大。
English: His fief is even larger than the land owned by Qi Ping Gong.

古文：田常乃选齐国中女子长七尺以上为后宫，后宫以百数，而使宾客舍人出入后宫者不禁。
现代文：田常挑选身高七尺以上的齐国女子做后宫姬妾，姬妾达一百多人，并且让宾客侍从随便出入后宫，不加禁止。
English: Tian Chang selected Qijiu women with a height of seven feet or more to be harem concubines, with more than one hundred concubines, and allowed guests and attendants to enter and leave the harem at will, without any prohibition.

古文：及田常卒，有七十余男。
现代文：到田常去世的时候，姬妾生下七十多个儿子。
English: By the time of Tanetsune's death, his concubine had given birth to more than seventy sons.

古文：田常卒，子襄子盘代立，相齐。
现代文：田常去世后，他的儿子襄子田盘接替他的职位，任齐国宰相。
English: After the death of Tian Chang, his son Xiangzi Tianban took over his position and became the prime minister of Qi.

古文：常谥为成子。
现代文：田常的谥号是成子。
English: Tanotsune's nickname is Nariko.

古文：田襄子既相齐宣公，三晋杀知伯，分其地。
现代文：田襄子做齐宣公宰相后，晋国韩、赵、魏三家杀死了知伯，瓜分了他的领地。
English: After Tian Xiangzi became the prime minister of Qi Xuan Gong, the three families of Jin, Han, Zhao and Wei killed Zhi Bo and divided his territory.

古文：襄子使其兄弟宗人尽为齐都邑大夫，与三晋通使，且以有齐国。
现代文：襄子也让他的兄弟和本族人都去做齐国大小城邑的大夫，与三晋互通使臣，几乎已经拥有齐国。
English: Xiangzi also asked his brothers and his own people to become doctors in the cities and towns of Qi, and to exchange envoys with the Three Kingdoms of Jin. He almost owned Qi.

古文：襄子卒，子庄子白立。
现代文：襄子去世后，他的儿子庄子田白继承父位。
English: After the death of Xiangzi, his son Zhuo Zi Tianbai succeeded his father.

古文：田庄子相齐宣公。
现代文：田庄子担任齐宣公的丞相。
English: Tian Zhuangzi served as Qi Xuan Gong's chancellor.

古文：宣公四十三年，伐晋，毁黄城，围阳狐。
现代文：宣公四十三年，齐国进攻晋国，攻毁黄城，围困阳狐。
English: In the 43rd year of Xuan Gong, Qi attacked Jin, attacked and destroyed Huangcheng, and besieged Yangfo.

古文：明年，伐鲁、葛及安陵。
现代文：第二年，进攻鲁城、葛邑和安陵。
English: In the second year, they attacked Lucheng, Geyun and Anling.

古文：明年，取鲁之一城。
现代文：再一年，夺取了鲁国的一座城池。
English: The following year, he captured a castle in Lu.

古文：庄子卒，子太公和立。
现代文：田庄子去世后，他的儿子太公田和继承父位。
English: After the death of Tian Zhuangzi, his son Taigong Tianhe succeeded to his father's throne.

古文：田太公相齐宣公。
现代文：田太公辅佐齐宣公。
English: Tian Tai Gong Suke Sazi Xuan Gong.

古文：宣公四十八年，取鲁之郕。
现代文：宣公四十八年，齐国夺取鲁国的郕城。
English: In the 48th year of Xuanguang, the State of Qi conquered the State of Lu.

古文：明年，宣公与郑人会西城。
现代文：第二年，齐宣公与郑国人在西城相会。
English: In the second year, Qi Xuan Gong and Zheng Guozhong met in Xicheng.

古文：伐卫，取毌丘。
现代文：齐国攻伐卫国，攻占了丘。
English: Qi attacked and defended the country and captured the hill.

古文：宣公五十一年卒，田会自廪丘反。
现代文：宣公五十一年，齐宣公去世，田会在廪丘反叛。
English: In the 51st year of Xuan Gong, Qi Xuan Gong passed away, and the Tian Hui rebelled in Mengqiu.

古文：宣公卒，子康公贷立。
现代文：齐宣公去世后，他的儿子康公贷即位。
English: After the death of Qi Xuan Gong, his son Kang Gong Lian ascended to the throne.

古文：贷立十四年，淫于酒妇人，不听政。
现代文：贷即位十四年，沉溺于酒色，不理政事。
English: He had been on the throne for fourteen years, indulged in alcohol, and ignored political affairs.

古文：太公乃迁康公于海上，食一城，以奉其先祀。
现代文：太公田和就把他迁到海滨，只给一座城做食邑，以便供给对其祖先的祭祀。
English: Taikong Tianhe moved him to the seashore and gave him only one city to make a food town in order to supply the sacrifices to his ancestors.

古文：明年，鲁败齐平陆。
现代文：第二年，鲁军在平陆打败齐军。
English: The following year, the Russian army defeated the Qi army in Pinglu.

古文：三年，太公与魏文侯会浊泽，求为诸侯。
现代文：三年之后，齐太公田和与魏文侯在浊泽相会，请求成为诸侯。
English: Three years later, Qi Taigong Tianhe and Wei Wenhou met in Heze and requested to become princes.

古文：魏文侯乃使使言周天子及诸侯，请立齐相田和为诸侯。周天子许之。
现代文：魏文侯就派使臣报告周天子和各国诸侯，请求立齐相田和为诸侯，周天子准许这一请求。
English: Wei Wenhou sent an envoy to report to Zhou Tianzi and the princes of various countries, requesting the establishment of Qi Aiden and Zhou Tianzi as princes. Zhou Tianzi granted this request.

古文：康公之十九年，田和立为齐侯，列于周室，纪元年。
现代文：齐康公十九年，田和正式成为齐侯，列名于周朝正室，开始纪年元年。
English: In the 19th year of King Qikang, Tian He officially became the Prince of Qi, and was listed as the lawful wife of the Zhou Dynasty, beginning in the first year of the calendar.

古文：齐侯太公和立二年，和卒，子桓公午立。
现代文：齐侯太公田和在位二年去世，他的儿子桓公田午即位。
English: Qihou Taikonta died two years into his reign, and his son Kuan Konta ascended the throne.

古文：桓公午五年，秦、魏攻韩，韩求救于齐。
现代文：桓公午五年，秦国、魏国进攻韩国，韩国向齐国求救。
English: In the afternoon of the 5th day of the 5th month, Qin and Wei attacked Korea, and Korea appealed to Qi for help.

古文：齐桓公召大臣而谋曰： 蚤救之孰与晚救之？ 
现代文：齐桓公田午召集大臣商议说： 早点去援救好，还是晚点去援救好？ 
English: In the afternoon, Emperor Qiguan convened the ministers to discuss: Is it better to go to the rescue earlier or later?

古文：驺忌曰： 不若勿救。 
现代文：驺忌说： 不如不救。 
English: He said, "It's better not to save them."

古文：段干朋曰： 不救，则韩且折而入于魏，不若救之。 
现代文：段干朋说： 如果不救，韩国失败就要并入魏国，不如去救它。 
English: Duan Gangpen said, "If we don't save South Korea, it will be merged into the State of Wei if it fails. It is better to save it."

古文：田臣思曰： 过矣君之谋也！
现代文：田臣思说： 您的计谋错了！
English: Tian Xinsi said: Your stratagem is wrong!

古文：秦、魏攻韩，楚、赵必救之，是天以燕予齐也。 
现代文：秦、魏攻打韩国，楚、赵一定去救它，这是上天把燕国送给齐国。 
English: Qin and Wei attacked Korea, and Chu and Zhao must go to save it. This was God's gift of Yan Province to Qi Province.

古文：桓公曰： 善。 
现代文：桓公说： 好极了！ 
English: Kan said, "That's great!

古文：乃阴告韩使者而遣之。
现代文：于是暗中告诉韩国使者一定去援救，并把它送走。
English: So he secretly told the South Korean envoy that he would definitely go to the rescue, and sent it away.

古文：韩自以为得齐之救，因与秦、魏战。
现代文：韩国自以为得到了齐国的救兵，因而与秦、魏交战。
English: South Korea thought that it had received a rescue from Qi, and thus went to war with Qin and Wei.

古文：楚、赵闻之，果起兵而救之。
现代文：楚赵两国知道以后，果然发兵救援。
English: After Chu Zhao and the two countries knew, they sent troops to rescue.

古文：齐因起兵袭燕国，取桑丘。
现代文：齐国趁机出兵袭击燕国，占领了桑丘。
English: Qi took the opportunity to attack Yan and occupied Sanqiu.

古文：六年，救卫。
现代文：桓公六年，出兵援救卫国。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Kan's reign, troops were dispatched to help defend the country.

古文：桓公卒，子威王因齐立。
现代文：桓公去世，他的儿子威王因齐即位。
English: Prince Kan passed away, and his son Wei Wang Yingqi ascended to the throne.

古文：是岁，故齐康公卒，绝无后，奉邑皆入田氏。
现代文：这一年，原来的齐康公去世，断绝了后代，封地都归田氏所有。
English: In this year, the original Lord Qikang passed away, cutting off his descendants, and the fiefs all went to the Tian family.

古文：齐威王元年，三晋因齐丧来伐我灵丘。
现代文：齐威王元年，三晋趁齐国有丧事来进攻灵丘。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Qi Wei, the Three Kingdoms of Jin took advantage of the state funeral of Qi to attack Lingqiu.

古文：三年，三晋灭晋后而分其地。
现代文：三年，韩、赵、魏灭晋后并瓜分了它的土地。
English: Three years later, Han, Zhao, and Wei conquered Jin and divided its land.

古文：六年，鲁伐我，入阳关。
现代文：六年，鲁国进攻齐国，攻入阳关。
English: In the sixth year, Lu attacked Qi and entered Yangguan.

古文：晋伐我，至博陵。
现代文：晋国进攻齐国，打到博陵。
English: Jin attacked Qi and reached Boling.

古文：七年，卫伐我，取薛陵。
现代文：七年，卫国攻打齐国，夺取薛陵。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Wei, he attacked Qi and captured Xue Ling.

古文：九年，赵伐我，取甄。
现代文：九年，赵国进攻齐国，占领甄城。
English: In the ninth year, Zhao attacked Qi and occupied Zhencheng.

古文：威王初即位以来，不治，委政卿大夫，九年之间，诸侯并伐，国人不治。
现代文：威王刚刚即位时，不理国事，把政事交给卿大夫办理，九年之间，各国诸侯都来讨伐，齐国人不得太平。
English: When King Wei had just ascended the throne, he ignored the affairs of state and left the government affairs to the court doctor. In nine years, the princes of all countries came to fight, and the people of Qi could not have peace.

古文：于是威王召即墨大夫而语之曰： 自子之居即墨也，毁言日至。
现代文：于是威王召见即墨大夫对他说： 自从您治理即墨，毁谤您的言论每天都有。
English: Therefore, King Wei summoned Dr. Jimo and said to him, "Since you have been in charge of Jimo, there have been slanderous remarks about you every day.

古文：然吾使人视即墨，田野辟，民人给，官无留事，东方以宁。
现代文：可是我派人到即墨视察，田野得到开发，百姓生活富足，官府没有积压公事，齐国的东方因而得到安。
English: However, I sent people to Jimo to inspect, the fields were developed, the people's lives were rich, the government did not have a backlog of public affairs, and the east of Qi was thus safe.

古文：是子不事吾左右以求誉也。 
现代文：这是由于您不会逢迎我的左右以求得赞扬啊！ 
English: That's because you don't fawn all over me for praise!

古文：封之万家。召阿大夫语曰： 自子之守阿，誉言日闻。
现代文：于是，封给他一万户食邑，又召见阿城大夫对他说： 自从你治理阿城，赞扬你的话每天都能听到。
English: So he gave him ten thousand households, and summoned the city doctor, who said to him, "Since you have been in charge of the city, I have heard your praises every day.

古文：然使使视阿，田野不辟，民贫苦。
现代文：可是我派人到阿城视察，田野荒废，百姓贫苦。
English: But I sent someone to inspect Acheng. The fields were deserted and the people were poor.

古文：昔日赵攻甄，子弗能救。
现代文：从前赵军进攻甄城，你未能援救。
English: When Zhao's army attacked Zhencheng, you failed to come to the rescue.

古文：卫取薛陵，子弗知。
现代文：卫国夺取薛陵，你也不知道。
English: You don't know why the imperial guard seized Xue Ling.

古文：是子以币厚吾左右以求誉也。 
现代文：这是你用财物贿赂我的左右来求得赞扬吧！ 
English: This is you using your wealth to bribe my right and left in order to win praise!

古文：是日，烹阿大夫，及左右尝誉者皆并烹之。
现代文：当天就烹杀了阿城大夫，并把左右曾经吹捧过他的人也都一起烹杀了。
English: On the same day, he killed Dr. Acheng, and he also killed all the people who had praised him.

古文：遂起兵西击赵、卫，败魏于浊泽而围惠王。
现代文：于是发兵往西边进攻赵、卫，在浊泽打败魏军并围困了魏惠王。
English: Therefore, they sent troops to the west to attack Zhao and Wei, defeated the Wei army in Heze and besieged Wei Hui Wang.

古文：惠王请献观以和解，赵人归我长城。
现代文：魏惠王请求献出观城来讲和。赵国人归还了齐国的长城。
English: King Wei Hui requested that the Great Wall of Qi be given to the people of Zhao.

古文：于是齐国震惧，人人不敢饰非，务尽其诚。
现代文：于是齐国全国震惊，人人都不敢文过饰非，努力表现出他们的忠诚。
English: As a result, the whole country of Qi was shocked, and everyone dared not write about the wrongdoing, and tried to show their loyalty.

古文：齐国大治。
现代文：齐国得到很好的治理。
English: Qi has been well governed.

古文：诸侯闻之，莫敢致兵于齐二十余年。
现代文：诸侯听到以后，不敢对齐国用兵有二十多年。
English: After hearing this, the lords did not dare to align their armies for more than twenty years.

古文：驺忌子以鼓琴见威王，威王说而舍之右室。
现代文：驺忌子由于善弹琴而进见齐威王，威王很喜欢他，并让他住在宫中的右室。
English: Because of his skill at playing the harp, Zou Yizi came to see King Zi Wei. King Zi Wei liked him very much and let him live in the right room of the palace.

古文：须臾，王鼓琴，驺忌子推户入曰： 善哉鼓琴！ 
现代文：没多久，威王正在弹琴，驺忌子推门就进来说： 琴弹得好极了！ 
English: Not long after, Wei Wang was playing the piano, and Zou Yizi pushed open the door and said, "You play the piano so well!

古文：王勃然不说，去琴按剑曰： 夫子见容未察，何以知其善也？ 
现代文：威王突然不高兴，离开琴手按宝剑说： 先生只看到我的样子，还没有认真观察，怎么能知道弹得好呢？ 
English: Wei Wang was suddenly not happy. He left the musician and pointed to his sword and said, "Master, you only see my appearance, you haven't observed me carefully. How can you know if I can play well?

古文：驺忌子曰： 夫大弦浊以春温者，君也；小弦廉折以清者，相也；攫é之深，之愉者，政令也；钧谐以鸣，大小相益，回邪而不相害者，四时也：吾是以知其善也。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 大弦缓慢并且温和，这是象征国君；小弦高亢明快并且清亮，象征宰相；手指勾弦用力，放开舒缓，象征政令；发出的琴声和谐，大小配合美妙，曲折不正之声而不相干扰，象征四时：我由此能知道您弹得好。 
English: Zou Yizi said: The major chord is slow and gentle, which is a symbol of the sovereign; the minor chord is crisp and clear, symbolizing the prime minister; the finger hooks the string with force, releasing it with ease, symbolizing the government decree; the sound of the harp is harmonious, the size is wonderful, the twists and turns do not interfere with the sound, symbolizing four o'clock: I can know that you play well.

古文：王曰： 善语音。 
现代文：威王说： 你很善于谈论音乐。 
English: Wei Wang said: You are very good at talking about music.

古文：驺忌子曰： 何独语音，夫治国家而弭人民皆在其中。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 何止是谈论音乐，治理国家和安抚人民都在其中啊！ 
English: Zou Yizi said: More than just talking about music, governing the country and appeasing the people are all part of it!

古文：王又勃然不说曰： 若夫语五音之纪，信未有如夫子者也。
现代文：威王又突然不高兴说： 如果谈论五音的调理，我相信没有比得上您的。
English: Wei Wang was suddenly unhappy again and said: If we talk about the conditioning of the five tones, I believe there is nothing comparable to yours.

古文：若夫治国家而弭人民，又何为乎丝桐之间？ 
现代文：如果是治理国家和安抚人民，又怎么能在琴弦之中呢？ 
English: If it is to govern the country and pacify the people, how can it be in the middle of the strings?

古文：驺忌子曰： 夫大弦浊以春温者，君也；小弦廉折以清者，相也；攫之深而舍之愉者，政令也；钧谐以鸣，大小相益，回邪而不相害者，四时也。
现代文：驺忌子说： 大弦缓慢并且温和，象征国君；小弦高亢明快并且清亮，象征丞相；勾弦用力但放开舒缓，象征政令；弹出的琴声和谐，大小配合美妙，曲折不正之声不相干扰，象征四时。
English: Zou Yizi said: The major chord is slow and gentle, symbolizing the monarch; the minor chord, high and clear, symbolizing the prime minister; the hooked chord is strong but relaxed, symbolizing the government decree; the sound of the piano is harmonious, the size is wonderful, and the twists and turns do not interfere with the wrong sound, symbolizing four o'clock.

古文：夫复而不乱者，所以治昌也；连而径者，所以存亡也。故曰琴音调而天下治。
现代文：回环往复而不乱，是由于政治昌明；连贯而轻快，是由于保了将亡之国：所以说琴音调谐就能保天下太平。
English: Reverberating and not chaotic, it is due to political prosperity; coherent and brisk, it is due to the protection of the dying country: so that the tuning of the harp can keep the world peaceful.

古文：夫治国家而弭人民者，无若乎五音者。 王曰： 善。 
现代文：治理国家和安抚人民，没有比五音的道理更相像的了。 威王说： 好极了。 
English: To govern the country and to pacify the people, there is nothing more similar than the principle of the five tones.

古文：驺忌子见三月而受相印。
现代文：驺忌子进见威王才三个月就接受了相印。
English: It only took three months for Zou Yizi to see Wei Wang and accept the seal.

古文：淳于髡见之曰： 善说哉！
现代文：淳于髡见了他说： 您真会说话呀！
English: When he saw Junyu, he said, "You really can talk!"

古文：髡有愚志，愿陈诸前。 
现代文：我有些浅薄的看法，希望在您面前陈述。 
English: I have some shallow thoughts that I'd like to share with you.

古文：驺忌子曰： 谨受教。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 恭敬地接受教诲。 
English: Zou Yizi said: Respectfully accept the teachings.

古文：淳于髡曰： 得全全昌，失全全亡。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 侍奉国君能周到无误，你的身名就都能兴盛；如果稍有不周或失误，身名都要毁灭。 
English: Junyu said, "If you can serve the sovereign well, your reputation will flourish; if you are a little careless or make a mistake, your reputation will be ruined."

古文：驺忌子曰： 谨受令，请谨毋离前。 
现代文：驺忌了说： 恭敬地接受指教，我要把您的话谨记在心。 
English: "Respectfully accept my advice, and I will keep your words in mind," he said.

古文：淳于髡曰： 狶膏棘轴，所以为滑也，然而不能运方穿。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 用猪油涂抹棘木车轴，是为了使它润滑，然而，如果轴孔是方形的就无法转动。 
English: Jun Yuxuan said: "We use lard to lubricate the axle, but if the axle hole is square, it can't turn.

古文：驺忌子曰： 谨受令，请谨事左右。 
现代文：驺书子说： 谨受指教，我要小心地在国君左右侍奉。 
English: Zou Shouzi said, "I'm willing to be instructed, and I'll be careful to serve around the sovereign."

古文：淳于髡曰： 弓胶昔干，所以为合也，然而不能傅合疏罅。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 拿胶粘用久了的弓干，是为了粘合在一起，然而胶不可能把缝隙完全合起来。 
English: Jun Yuxuan said, "The purpose of using glue to stick the long-used bow stems is to bond them together. However, glue cannot completely close the gaps.

古文：驺忌子曰： 谨受令，请谨自附于万民。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 谨受指教，我要使自己依附于万民。 
English: Zou Yizi said, "I am willing to be instructed, and I will attach myself to the people."

古文：淳于髡曰： 狐裘虽敝，不可补以黄狗之皮。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 狐皮袄即使破了，也不能用黄狗皮去补。 
English: Chun Yuxuan said, "Even if the fox skin is broken, it can't be mended with yellow dog skin.

古文：驺忌子曰： 谨受令，请谨择君子，毋杂小人其间。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 谨受指教，我要小心地挑选君子，不让小人混杂在其中。 
English: Zou Yizi said, "Please be advised that I must carefully select gentlemen and not allow villains to mingle among them.

古文：淳于髡曰： 大车不较，不能载其常任；琴瑟不较，不能成其五音。 
现代文：淳于髡说： 大车如果不较正，就不能正常载重；琴瑟不把弦调好，就不能使五音和谐。 
English: Chunyu said: If the cart is not relatively upright, it cannot carry the normal load; if the harp is not tuned well, it cannot make the five tones harmonize.

古文：驺忌子曰： 谨受令，请谨修法律而督奸吏。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 谨受指教，我要认真制订法律并监督奸猾的官吏。 
English: Zou Yizi said, "I will earnestly formulate laws and supervise the treacherous officials.

古文：淳于髡说毕，趋出，至门，而面其仆曰： 是人者，吾语之微言五，其应我若响之应声，是人必封不久矣。 
现代文：淳于髡说完后，快步走出，到门外对他的仆人说： 这个人，我对他说了五条隐语，他回答我就像回声的响应一样，这个人不久必定要受封啊！ 
English: After Chunyu Yao finished speaking, he quickly walked out and said to his servant outside the door: "This man, I spoke five secret words to him, he answered me like an echo response, this man will soon be sealed!"

古文：居期年，封以下邳，号曰成侯。
现代文：过了一年，威王把下邳封给驺忌子，封号是成侯。
English: After a year, King Wei gave the lower yakitori seal to Zou Yizi, and the seal name was Chenghou.

古文：威王二十三年，与赵王会平陆。
现代文：威王二十三年，齐王与赵王在平陆相会。
English: In the 23rd year of King Wei, King Qi and King Zhao met in Pinglu.

古文：二十四年，与魏王会田于郊。
现代文：二十四年，齐王与魏王在郊外一起打猎。
English: In the twenty-fourth year, King Qi and King Wei went hunting together in the suburbs.

古文：魏王问曰： 王亦有宝乎？ 
现代文：魏王问道： 大王也有珍宝吗？ 
English: Wei Wang asked: Does the great king also have treasures?

古文：威王曰： 无有。 
现代文：威王说： 没有。 
English: Wei Wang said: No.

古文：梁王曰： 若寡人国小也，尚有径寸之珠照车前后各十二乘者十枚，奈何以万乘之国而无宝乎？ 
现代文：魏王说： 像寡人的国家这样小，还有能照亮前后各十二辆车的直径一寸的夜明珠十颗，齐国这样的万乘之国怎么能没有宝物呢？ 
English: Wei Wang said: As a small country with few people, there are also ten night pearls with a diameter of one inch that can illuminate each of the twelve cars in front and behind. How can a country like Qi not have treasures?

古文：威王曰： 寡人之所以为宝与王异。
现代文：威王说： 寡人当作宝物的与大王不同。
English: King Wei said, "It is different from a great king to be treasured by few.

古文：吾臣有檀子者，使守南城，则楚人不敢为寇东取，泗上十二诸侯皆来朝。
现代文：我有个大臣叫檀子的，派他镇南城，楚国人就不敢向东方侵犯掠夺，泗水之滨的十二诸侯都来朝拜。
English: I have a minister called Danzi. He was sent to Nancheng Town. The people of Chu would not dare to invade and plunder the East. The twelve princes of the coast of Surabaya came to pay homage.

古文：吾臣有朌子者，使守高唐，则赵人不敢东渔于河。
现代文：我有个大臣叫盼子的，派他镇守高唐，赵国人就不敢到东边的黄河里捕鱼。
English: I have a minister called Pan Zi, who was sent to guard Gaotang. People from Zhao don't dare to go fishing in the Yellow River in the east.

古文：吾吏有黔夫者，使守徐州，则燕人祭北门，赵人祭西门，徙而从者七千余家。
现代文：我有个官吏叫黔夫的，派他镇守徐州，燕国人就到北门祭祀，赵国人就到西门来祭祀，以求神灵保佑不受攻伐，迁移追随他的有七千多家。
English: I have an official named Yanfu. I sent him to guard Xuzhou. The people of Yan went to the North Gate to offer sacrifices, and the people of Zhao went to the West Gate to offer sacrifices, in order to seek the blessing of the gods from being attacked. More than seven thousand people followed him.

古文：吾臣有种首者，使备盗贼，则道不十遗。
现代文：我有个大臣叫种首的，派他戒备盗贼，结果就路不拾遗。
English: I had a minister called the head of the seed, sent him to guard against thieves, and as a result there was nothing to be found.

古文：将以照千里，岂特十二乘哉！ 
现代文：这些都将光照千里，哪里仅仅只是十二辆车呢！ 
English: All of this will light up thousands of miles, where there are only twelve cars!

古文：梁惠王惭，不怿而去。
现代文：魏惠王心中惭愧，败兴离去。
English: Wei Hui Wang felt ashamed in his heart and left.

古文：二十六年，魏惠王围邯郸，赵求救于齐。
现代文：威王二十六年，魏惠王包围邯郸，赵国向齐国请求救援。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of King Wei, King Wei Hui besieged Yunnan, and the State of Zhao appealed to the State of Qi for help.

古文：齐威王召大臣而谋曰： 救赵孰与勿救？ 
现代文：齐威王召集大臣商议说： 救赵好还是不救赵好？ 
English: King Qi Wei called the ministers to discuss and said: Is it better to save Zhao or not to save Zhao?

古文：驺忌子曰： 不如勿救。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 不如不救。 
English: Zou Yizi said, "It's better not to save them."

古文：段干朋曰： 不救则不义，且不利。 
现代文：段干朋说： 不救就是不义，并且对我们不利。 
English: Duan Gangpen said: "Not to help is injustice, and it is not good for us.

古文：威王曰： 何也？ 
现代文：威王说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Wei Wang said: Why?

古文：对曰： 夫魏氏并邯郸，其于齐何利哉？
现代文：段干朋回答说： 魏国并吞邯郸，这对齐国有什么好处呢？
English: Duan Gangpen replied, "The annexation of Wei to Qi, what is the benefit to Qi?

古文：且夫救赵而军其郊，是赵不伐而魏全也。
现代文：如果救赵，军队驻在赵国郊外，这就使赵国不被攻伐而魏军也会完好无损。
English: If Zhao is saved, the army will be stationed on the outskirts of Zhao, which will prevent Zhao from being attacked and the Wei army will be intact.

古文：故不如南攻襄陵以弊魏，邯郸拔而乘魏之弊。 
现代文：所以不如向南进攻魏国的襄陵使魏军疲惫，邯郸即使被攻下，我们也可以利用魏国的疲惫使它受挫。 
English: Therefore, it is better to attack the Xiangling of Wei to the south to make the Wei army tired. Even if it is attacked, we can also use the fatigue of Wei to frustrate it.

古文：威王从其计。
现代文：威王听了他的计谋。
English: King Wei listened to his stratagem.

古文：其后成侯驺忌与田忌不善，公孙阅谓成侯忌曰： 公何不谋伐魏，田忌必将。
现代文：后来成侯驺忌与田忌关系不好，公孙阅对成侯驺忌说： 您为什么不考虑伐魏？那样，田忌一定领兵。
English: Later, the relationship between Chenghou and Tianyi was not good. Gongsun Yue said to Chenghou: "Why don't you consider attacking Wei? In that case, Tianyi will definitely lead the army."

古文：战胜有功，则公之谋中也；战不胜，非前死则后北，而命在公矣。 
现代文：如果战胜有功，那是您的计谋正确；如果打不胜，田忌不是向前死战就是向后败北，他的命就在您的手里了。 
English: If the victory is meritorious, then your strategy is correct; if it is not victorious, then Tianyi will either fight to the death or be defeated, and his life will be in your hands.

古文：于是成侯言威王，使田忌南攻襄陵。
现代文：于是成侯向威王建议，派田忌南攻襄陵。
English: Therefore, Cheng Hou suggested to Wei Wang to send Tian Yin Nan to attack Xiangling.

古文：十月，邯郸拔，齐因起兵击魏，大败之桂陵。
现代文：十月邯郸被攻克，齐国趁机起兵进攻魏军，在桂陵大败魏军。
English: The October Uprising was defeated, and Qi took the opportunity to attack the Wei army, defeating the Wei army in Guilin.

古文：于是齐最强于诸侯，自称为王，以令天下。
现代文：于是齐国成为诸侯中最强的国家，自称为王，来号令天下。
English: As a result, the State of Qi became the strongest state among the princes, calling itself the king and ruling the world.

古文：三十三年，杀其大夫牟辛。
现代文：威王三十三年，威王杀了他的大夫牟辛。
English: In the thirty-third year of King Wei, King Wei killed his doctor Muxing.

古文：三十五年，公孙阅又谓成侯忌曰： 公何不令人操十金卜于市，曰 我田忌之人也。
现代文：威王三十五年，公孙阅又对成侯驺忌说： 您为什么不让人拿黄金十斤到街上去占卜，说 我是田忌的人。
English: In the thirty-fifth year of King Wei's reign, Gongsun Yue again said to Cheng Hou Jie: "Why don't you let people take ten catties of gold to the streets to do divination and say that I am Tian Jie's person.

古文：吾三战而三胜，声威天下。
现代文：我们三战三胜，声威满天下。
English: We have won three battles and three victories, and our reputation has spread all over the world.

古文：欲为大事，亦吉乎不吉乎 ？ 
现代文：想要做大事，是吉利还是不吉利？  
English: Is it lucky or unlucky to want to do big things?

古文：卜者出，因令人捕为之卜者，验其辞于王之所。田忌闻之，因率其徒袭攻临淄，求成侯，不胜而奔。
现代文：问卜的人走了以后，就派人逮捕为他占卜的先生，在威王那里验证问卜之辞，田忌听说之后，就率领他的部下袭击临淄，捕捉成侯，没有取胜就逃跑了。
English: After the fortuneteller left, he sent someone to arrest the teacher who had divined for him, and verified the words of the fortuneteller with King Wei. After hearing this, Tianyi led his men to attack Linyi, capture Chenghou, and fled without winning.

古文：三十六年，威王卒，子宣王辟强立。
现代文：威王三十六年，齐威王去世，他的儿子宣王辟彊即位。
English: In the thirty-sixth year of King Wei, King Qi Wei died, and his son, King Xuanzang, ascended the throne.

古文：宣王元年，秦用商鞅。周致伯于秦孝公。
现代文：宣王元年，秦国任用商鞅，周天子把霸主的称号授予秦孝公。
English: In the first year of King Xuan, the State of Qin appointed Shang Yu, and Zhou Tianzi awarded the title of overlord to Qin Xiaogong.

古文：二年，魏伐赵。
现代文：宣王二年，魏国进攻赵国。
English: In the second year of King Xuan, Wei attacked Zhao.

古文：赵与韩亲，共击魏。赵不利，战于南梁。
现代文：赵国与韩国友好，一起攻打魏国，赵国战况不利，在南梁战败。
English: Zhao was friendly with South Korea and attacked Wei together. Zhao was in an unfavorable situation and was defeated at Nanliang.

古文：宣王召田忌复故位。
现代文：宣王召回田忌恢复他原来的职位。
English: Xuanwang recalled Tianyi to resume his former position.

古文：韩氏请救于齐。
现代文：韩国向齐国请求救援。
English: South Korea appeals to China for help.

古文：宣王召大臣而谋曰： 蚤救孰与晚救？ 
现代文：宣王召集大臣商议说： 早去救援好还是晚去救援好？ 
English: Xuan Wang called the ministers together to discuss: Is it better to go to the rescue early or late?

古文：驺忌子曰： 不如勿救。 
现代文：驺忌子说： 不如不救。 
English: Zou Yizi said, "It's better not to save them."

古文：田忌曰： 弗救，则韩且折而入于魏，不如蚤救之。 
现代文：田忌说： 如果不救，韩国就要失败而并入魏国，不如早去援救它。 
English: Tabi said, "If we don't save it, South Korea will fail and be merged into the State of Wei. It's better to rescue it as soon as possible."

古文：孙子曰： 夫韩、魏之兵未弊而救之，是吾代韩受魏之兵，顾反听命于韩也。
现代文：孙膑说： 如果韩、魏的军队尚未疲惫就去援救，那就是我们代替韩国受魏军的攻击，回过头来反倒听从韩国的指挥。
English: Sun Yat-sen said, "If the Han and Wei armies go to the rescue before they are exhausted, it means that we will be attacked by the Wei army instead of South Korea, and turn around and obey the command of South Korea.

古文：且魏有破国之志，韩见亡，必东面而诉于齐矣。
现代文：况且魏国已有攻破韩国的打算，韩国就要亡国，必定要到东边来向齐国告求救兵。
English: Moreover, Wei had already planned to invade South Korea. If South Korea was to be destroyed, it would have to come to the east to appeal to Qi for help.

古文：吾因深结韩之亲而晚承魏之弊，则可重利而得尊名也。 宣王曰： 善。 
现代文：我们趁机与韩国结下亲密的关系，又可晚一些去利用魏军的疲惫，这样就能有更大的利益并得到受人尊敬的名声。 宣王说： 很好。 
English: We can take advantage of the opportunity to establish a close relationship with South Korea, and later take advantage of the exhaustion of the Wei army, so that we can have greater benefits and gain a respected reputation.

古文：乃阴告韩之使者而遣之。
现代文：于是暗中告诉韩国使者并把他送走。
English: So he secretly told the South Korean envoy and sent him away.

古文：韩因恃齐，五战不胜，而东委国于齐。
现代文：韩国由于依仗齐国救援，结果五战都失败了，只好向东把国家托付给齐国。
English: Relying on Qi for rescue, South Korea lost all five wars and had to entrust the country to Qi.

古文：齐因起兵，使田忌、田婴将，孙子为师，救韩、赵以击魏，大败之马陵，杀其将庞涓，虏魏太子申。
现代文：齐国趁势出兵，派田忌、田婴为统帅，孙膑为军师，进击魏国以救援韩、赵，并在马陵大败魏军，杀死魏将庞涓，俘虏了魏太子申。
English: Taking advantage of the situation, the State of Qi dispatched troops, sent Tianqi and Tianying as commanders, and Sun Qian as a military division, to attack the State of Wei to rescue Han and Zhao, and defeated the Wei army in Maling, killed the Wei general Pang Qian, and captured the Wei prince Shen.

古文：其后三晋之王皆因田婴朝齐王于博望，盟而去。
现代文：此后，三晋的君主都由田婴引见，在博望朝拜齐王，盟誓之后离去。
English: After that, the monarchs of the three Jin dynasties were all introduced by Tian Ying, bowed to King Qi in Bohang, and left after taking an oath.

古文：七年，与魏王会平阿南。
现代文：宣王七年，齐王与魏王在平阿以南相会。
English: In the seventh year of King Xuan, King Qi and King Wei met in the south of Ping'an.

古文：明年，复会甄。
现代文：第二年，又在甄城相会。
English: The next year, they met again in Chengzheng.

古文：魏惠王卒。
现代文：魏惠王去世。
English: Wei Hui Wang passed away.

古文：明年，与魏襄王会徐州，诸侯相王也。
现代文：再一年，齐宣王与魏襄王在徐州相会，诸侯互相称王。
English: The following year, King Qi Xuan and King Wei Xiang met in Xuzhou, and the princes proclaimed each other king.

古文：十年，楚围我徐州。
现代文：宣王十年，楚军包围齐国的徐州。
English: In the tenth year of King Xuan, the Chu army encircled Xuzhou in Qi.

古文：十一年，与魏伐赵，赵决河水灌齐、魏，兵罢。
现代文：十一年，齐国与魏国攻打赵国，赵国决黄河水淹齐国、魏国的军队，齐、魏退兵。
English: In the eleventh year, Qi and Wei attacked Zhao, Zhao defeated the Yellow River and flooded the armies of Qi and Wei, and Qi and Wei withdrew.

古文：十八年，秦惠王称王。
现代文：十八年，秦惠王称王。
English: In the 18th year, Qin Hui Wang was crowned king.

古文：宣王喜文学游说之士，自如驺衍、淳于髡、田骈、接予、慎到、环渊之徒七十六人，皆赐列第，为上大夫，不治而议论。
现代文：宣王喜爱博学和能言善辩的士人，像驺衍、淳于髡、田骈、接予、慎到、环渊一流的七十六人，都赐给府第，让他们担任上大夫，让他们不处理政事而专门议论学术。
English: King Xuan loved scholars who were erudite and eloquent. Seventy-six first-class scholars, such as Xuan Yan, Chun Yu Yao, Tian Yao, Zhaoyu, Shen Zhuo, and Huan Yuan, were all given to the prefecture to serve as senior doctors. They were not allowed to deal with political affairs, but were only allowed to discuss academic affairs.

古文：是以齐稷下学士复盛，且数百千人。
现代文：因此齐国的稷下学士又多起来了，将近数百以至上千人。
English: As a result, the number of bachelors under the leadership of Qi increased again, from several hundred to more than a thousand.

古文：十九年，宣王卒，子愍王地立。
现代文：宣王十九年，齐宣王去世，他的儿子湣王田地即位。
English: In the 19th year of King Seonjo, King Seonjo died and his son, King Taejo ascended to the throne.

古文：愍王元年，秦使张仪与诸侯执政会于啮桑。
现代文：湣王元年，秦国派张仪与各国执政大臣在啮桑相会。
English: In the first year of the Qin Dynasty, Zhang Yi of the Qin faction met with the ruling ministers of various countries in Jinsang.

古文：三年，封田婴于薛。
现代文：三年，湣王把田婴封在薛。
English: Three years later, King Yao sealed Tianying in Xue.

古文：四年，迎妇于秦。
现代文：四年，湣王从秦国迎娶他的夫人。
English: In four years, King Yao married his wife from Qin.

古文：七年，与宋攻魏，败之观泽。
现代文：七年，齐国与宋国攻打魏国，在观泽把魏军打败。
English: In the seventh year, Qi and Song attacked Wei and defeated the Wei army at Guanzhe.

古文：十二年，攻魏。
现代文：湣王十二年，齐国攻打魏国。
English: In the twelfth year of King Gong, Qi attacked Wei.

古文：楚围雍氏，秦败屈丐。
现代文：楚国围攻韩国的雍氏，秦国打败楚将屈丐。
English: Chu besieged Korea's Yong, and Qin defeated Chu.

古文：苏代谓田轸曰： 臣愿有谒于公，其为事甚完，使楚利公，成为福，不成亦为福。
现代文：苏代对楚国大臣田轸说： 臣有事愿拜见您，这件事非常完满，会使楚国对您有利，成功了是福，不成功也是福。
English: The Sudai said to the Minister of the State of Chu, Tian Xuan: "The minister wishes to see you on a matter, this matter is very complete, it will make the State of Chu beneficial to you, success is a blessing, failure is also a blessing."

古文：今者臣立于门，客有言曰魏王谓韩冯í、张仪曰： 煮枣将拔，齐兵又进，子来救寡人则可矣；不救寡人，寡人弗能拔。 
现代文：今天我站在门口，有人说到魏王曾对韩冯、张仪说： 煮枣将要失陷，齐军又来进犯，您二位来救寡人就可以不败；不来救寡人，寡人就无能为力了。 
English: Today, as I stood at the door, someone told me that King Wei once said to Han Feng and Zhang Yi: "Boiled dates are about to fall, and the Qi army will attack again. If you two come to save someone, you will not be defeated; if you do not come to save someone, you will not be able to do anything.

古文：此特转辞也。
现代文：这只是婉转之辞。
English: It's just a euphemism.

古文：秦、韩之兵毋东，旬余，则魏氏转韩从秦，秦逐张仪，交臂而事齐楚，此公之事成也。 
现代文：秦、韩的军队不向东救魏，十几天之后，魏国就要转变策略，韩国追随秦国，秦国驱逐张仪，拱手侍奉齐、楚，这样，您的事就成功了。 
English: If the armies of Qin and Han did not go east to save Wei, after a dozen days, Wei would have to change its strategy. South Korea would follow Qin, Qin would expel Zhang Yi, and serve Qi and Chu. In this way, your cause would be successful.

古文：田轸曰： 奈何使无东？ 
现代文：田轸说： 怎么才能使秦、韩军队不向东进呢？ 
English: Tian Yao said, "How can we prevent the Qin and Korean armies from marching eastward?"

古文：对曰： 韩冯之救魏之辞，必不谓韩王曰 冯以为魏 ，必曰 冯将以秦韩之兵东却齐宋，冯因抟三国之兵，乘屈丐之弊，南割于楚，故地必尽得之矣 。
现代文：苏代回答说： 韩冯救魏的言辞，一定不会对韩王说 我是为了魏国 ，必定说 我将用秦、韩的兵力向东打退齐、宋，我趁势聚合三国的军队，利用屈丐战败后的疲备，向南要求楚国割地，韩国失去的旧地一定能全部收回。 
English: Su Dai replied, "Han Feng's words of saving Wei will certainly not say to the king of Han, 'I am for Wei,' but will definitely say, 'I will use the military forces of Qin and Han to retreat to the east and defeat Qi and Song. I will take advantage of the situation to gather the armies of the three countries, take advantage of the fatigue after the defeat of Qu Gai, and go to the south to ask Chu to divide the land. Korea will definitely be able to recover all the lost old land.

古文：张仪救魏之辞，必不谓秦王曰 仪以为魏 ，必曰 仪且以秦韩之兵东距齐宋，仪将抟三国之兵，乘屈丐之弊，南割于楚，名存亡国，实伐三川而归，此王业也 。
现代文：张仪救魏的言辞，一定不会对秦王说 我是为了魏国 ，必定说 我将用秦、韩的兵力向东抵挡齐、宋，我将聚合三国的军队，趁屈丐战败后的疲惫，向南要楚国割地，名义上是为保存将亡的国家，实际上是攻伐三川之后返回来，这是王者的事业。 
English: Zhang Yi's words of saving Wei will certainly not say to the Qin King, "I am for Wei," but will definitely say, "I will use the forces of Qin and Han to resist Qi and Song to the east, I will gather the armies of the three countries, take advantage of the tiredness after the defeat of the Qugu, and go south to cut the land of Chu. In name, it is to preserve the dying country, but in fact, it is to return after attacking the three rivers. This is the king's cause.

古文：公令楚王与韩氏地，使秦制和，谓秦王曰 请与韩地，而王以施三川，韩氏之兵不用而得地于楚 。
现代文：您让楚王给韩国土地，让秦国控制两国议和，您对秦王说 请让楚国给韩国土地，而大王可以在三川一带施逞威风，韩国的军队没有动用就从楚国得到了土地。 
English: You asked King Chu to give land to Korea, and let Qin control the peace talks between the two countries. You said to King Qin, "Please let Chu give land to Korea, and the king can use his power in the Sanchuan area. The Korean army got the land from Chu without using it."

古文：韩冯之东兵之辞且谓秦何？
现代文：韩冯向东发兵的言辞会怎样对秦国说呢？
English: What will Han Feng's rhetoric of sending troops to the east say to Qin?

古文：曰 秦兵不用而得三川，伐楚韩以窘魏，魏氏不敢东，是孤齐也 。
现代文：他说 秦国不用兵就得到了三川，进攻楚国、韩国、使魏国受到困窘，魏国便不敢向东联齐，这样就孤立了齐国 。
English: He said that Qin won the Three Rivers without using troops, attacked Chu and Korea, and embarrassed Wei. Wei did not dare to join Qi in the east, thus isolating Qi.

古文：张仪之东兵之辞且谓何？
现代文：张仪向东发兵的言辞会怎样说呢？
English: What would Zhang Yi's rhetoric of sending troops to the east say?

古文：曰 秦韩欲地而兵有案，声威发于魏，魏氏之欲不失齐楚者有资矣 。
现代文：他说 秦国、韩国想得到土地却按兵不动，声威震动了魏国，魏国不想失去和齐、楚的关系也就有所凭借了。 
English: He said that Qin and Korea wanted to get land but did not move an inch, and Wei was shaken by the prestige, and Wei did not want to lose the relationship with Qi and Chu.

古文：魏氏转秦韩争事齐楚，楚王欲而无与地，公令秦韩之兵不用而得地，有一大德也。
现代文：魏国转就对秦国、韩国的态度，争着侍奉齐国和楚国，楚国正想得到魏国侍奉而又不想给韩国土地，您让秦国、韩国不用兵就能得到土地，这是对两国有大恩德啊。
English: Wei changed its attitude toward Qin and Korea, competing to serve Qi and Chu. Chu wanted to be served by Wei but did not want to give land to Korea. You let Qin and Korea get land without soldiers, which was a great boon to the two countries.

古文：秦韩之王劫于韩冯、张仪而东兵以徇服魏，公常执左券以责于秦韩，此其善于公而恶张子多资矣。 
现代文：秦韩两国国王受韩冯、张仪的威胁，向东发兵以便使魏国顺服，您可以常常持胜券去责问秦、韩，这样就使秦、韩两国喜欢您而厌恶张仪用的本钱太多了。 
English: The kings of Qin and Han were threatened by Han Feng and Zhang Yi, and sent troops to the East to make Wei submit. You can often ask Qin and Han with a winning ticket, so it costs too much to make Qin and Han like you and dislike Zhang Yi.

古文：十三年，秦惠王卒。
现代文：湣王十三年，秦惠王去世。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of King Gong, King Qin Hui passed away.

古文：二十三年，与秦击败楚于重丘。
现代文：二十三年，齐军和秦军在重丘击败楚军。
English: In 233, the Qi army and the Qin army defeated the Chu army at Chongqiu.

古文：二十四年，秦使泾阳君质于齐。
现代文：二十四年，秦国派泾阳君到齐国作人质。
English: In the 24th year of the Qin Dynasty, he was sent to Qi as a hostage.

古文：二十五年，归泾阳君于秦。
现代文：二十五年，把泾阳君送回秦国。
English: Twenty-five years later, he sent Fenyang back to Qin.

古文：孟尝君薛文入秦，即相秦。
现代文：孟尝君薛文到秦国，立即任秦国宰相，不久又逃离秦国。
English: Meng Yuqun and Xue Wen went to Qin and were immediately appointed as the Prime Minister of Qin, but soon fled Qin.

古文：文亡去。二十六年，齐与韩魏共攻秦，至函谷军焉。
现代文：二十六年，齐国与韩国、魏国一起进攻秦国，到函谷关驻扎军队。
English: In the 26th year, Qi, together with Korea and Wei, attacked Qin, and stationed troops in Hanyu Pass.

古文：二十八年，秦与韩河外以和，兵罢。
现代文：二十八年，秦把河外之地给韩国以求和，三国军队撤去。
English: In the 28th year, Qin gave the land outside the river to South Korea to seek peace, and the troops of the three countries withdrew.

古文：二十九年，赵杀其主父。
现代文：二十九年，赵国人杀了他们的主父。
English: In 1929, the people of Zhao killed their master.

古文：齐佐赵灭中山。
现代文：齐国帮助赵国灭了中山国。
English: Qi helped Zhao destroy Zhongshan.

古文：三十六年，王为东帝，秦昭王为西帝。
现代文：湣王三十六年，齐湣王自称东帝，秦昭王自称西帝。
English: In the 36th year of the reign of Qianlong, King Qianlong claimed to be the Eastern Emperor, and King Qin Zhao claimed to be the Western Emperor.

古文：苏代自燕来，入齐，见于章华东门。
现代文：苏代从燕国来到齐国，在章华东门拜见齐王。
English: The Su Dynasty came from Yan Province to Qi Province and paid homage to King Qi at the Zhanghua East Gate.

古文：齐王曰： 嘻，善，子来！
现代文：齐王说： 嘿，很好，先生您来了！
English: Qi Wang said: Hey, very good, sir, you're here!

古文：秦使魏冉致帝，子以为何如？ 
现代文：秦国派魏冉送来了帝号，您认为怎么样？ 
English: Qin sent Wei Ran to deliver the imperial banner. What do you think?

古文：对曰： 王之问臣也卒，而患之所从来微。
现代文：苏代回答说： 大王对臣的提问太仓卒了，而祸患的生产常常是不明显的。
English: Sudai replied: The great king is too hasty in asking questions of his vassals, and the production of disasters is often not obvious.

古文：愿王受之而勿备称也。
现代文：希望大王接受帝号，但不要马上就准备称帝。
English: It is hoped that the king will accept the title of emperor, but do not immediately prepare to praise the emperor.

古文：秦称之，天下安之，王乃称之，无后也。
现代文：秦国称帝后，如果天下安定，大王再称帝，也不算晚。
English: After the Qin Dynasty was proclaimed emperor, if the world was stable, the great king would be proclaimed emperor again, it was not too late.

古文：且让争帝名，无伤也。
现代文：况且在争称帝名时表示谦让，也没什么关系。
English: Moreover, it doesn't matter if you show modesty when competing for the emperor's name.

古文：秦称之，天下恶之，王因勿称，以收天下，此大资也。
现代文：如果秦国称帝后，天下都憎恶他，大王也就不要称帝，以此收拢天下人心，这是很大的本钱。
English: If the whole world hates him after the Qin State proclaims him emperor, the great king should not proclaim him emperor, so as to win the hearts of the world. This is a great capital.

古文：且天下立两帝，王以天下为尊齐乎？尊秦乎？ 
现代文：况且天下并立两帝，大王认为天下是尊崇齐国呢，还是尊崇秦国呢？ 
English: Moreover, there were two emperors in the world at the same time. Did the great king think that the world would honor Qi or Qin?

古文：王曰： 尊秦。 
现代文：湣王说： 尊崇秦国。 
English: Shao Wang said: It is best to respect Qin.

古文：曰： 释帝，天下爱齐乎？爱秦乎？ 
现代文：苏代说： 如果放弃帝号，天下是敬爱齐国呢，还是敬爱秦国呢？ 
English: Sudai said, "If we give up the title of emperor, will the world respect and love Qi or Qin?"

古文：王曰： 爱齐而憎秦。 
现代文：湣王说： 敬爱齐国而憎恶秦国。 
English: Shao Wang said: It is better to love Qi and hate Qin.

古文：曰： 两帝立约伐赵，孰与伐桀宋之利？ 
现代文：苏代说： 东西两帝订立盟约进攻赵国有利，还是讨伐宋国的暴君有利？ 
English: Su Dai said: Is it advantageous for the two eastern and western emperors to conclude a treaty and attack Zhao, or is it advantageous to fight the tyrant of Song?

古文：王曰： 伐桀宋利。 
现代文：湣王说： 讨伐宋国的暴君有利。 
English: Shao Wang said: It is advantageous to fight against the tyrants of the Song Dynasty.

古文：对曰： 夫约钧，然与秦为帝而天下独尊秦而轻齐，释帝则天下爱齐而憎秦，伐赵不如伐桀宋之利，故愿王明释帝以收天下，倍约宾秦，无争重，而王以其间举宋。
现代文：苏代说： 盟约是均等的，可是与秦国一起称帝，天下只尊崇秦国而轻视齐国，放弃了帝号，天下就会敬爱齐国而憎恨秦国，进攻赵国不如讨伐宋国的暴君有利，所以希望大王明确地放弃帝号以收拢天下人心，背弃盟约，抛开秦国，不与秦国争高低，大王要利用这个时机攻下宋国。
English: Su Dai said, "The covenant is equal, but together with Qin, we call ourselves emperor. The world only respects Qin and despises Qi. If we give up the imperial title, the world will respect Qi and hate Qin. Attacking Zhao is not as advantageous as fighting the tyrants of Song. Therefore, we hope that the great king will clearly give up the imperial title to win the hearts of the world, renege on the covenant, abandon Qin, and not compete with Qin. The great king should use this opportunity to conquer Song."

古文：夫有宋，卫之阳地危；有济西，赵之阿东国危；有淮北，楚之东国危；有陶、平陆，梁门不开。
现代文：战国宋国，魏国的阳地也就危急了；占有济水以西，赵国的阿地以东一带就危急了；占有淮水以北，楚国的东部就危急了；占有陶、平陆，魏都大梁的城门就被堵塞了。
English: In the Warring States, the Song Dynasty and the Wei Dynasty, the Yang Di was also in danger; the areas west of Jishui and east of Adi in the Zhao Dynasty were in danger; the areas north of Huai Shui and east of Chu were in danger; the cities of Tao, Pinglu and Daliang in the Wei Dynasty were blocked.

古文：释帝而贷之以伐桀宋之事，国重而名尊，燕楚所以形服，天下莫敢不听，此汤武之举也。
现代文：放弃帝号而用讨伐宋国暴君的事代替，这样，国家地位提高，名声受人尊崇，燕国、楚国会因形势所迫而归服，天下各国都不敢不听从齐国，这是像商汤和周武王那样的义举呀。
English: Abandoning the imperial title and fighting against the tyrant of the Song Dynasty was substituted. In this way, the status of the country was improved, its reputation was respected, the Yan and Chu states were forced to submit to the situation, and all countries in the world did not dare to disobey Qi. This was a righteous deed like Shang Tang and King Zhou Wu.

古文：敬秦以为名，而后使天下憎之，此所谓以卑为尊者也。
现代文：名义上敬重秦国的称帝，然后让天下人都憎恨它，这就是所谓由卑下变为尊贵的办法。
English: Nominally respect the emperor of Qin, and then let the world hate it, this is the so-called way from lowly to noble.

古文：愿王孰虑之。 
现代文：希望大王认真地考虑。 
English: I hope you will give it some thought.

古文：于是齐去帝复为王。秦亦去帝位。
现代文：于是齐国放弃帝号，重新称王，秦国也放弃了帝位。
English: As a result, the State of Qi renounced the title of emperor and reverted to the title of king, and the State of Qin also renounced the imperial throne.

古文：三十八年，伐宋。
现代文：湣王三十八年，齐国讨伐宋国。
English: In the thirty-eighth year of the reign of King Qian, the State of Qi invaded the State of Song.

古文：秦昭王怒曰： 吾爱宋与爱新城、阳晋同。
现代文：秦昭王发怒说： 我爱宋国和爱新城、阳晋是一样的。
English: Qin Zhao Wang said angrily: I love Song and Xincheng and Yangjin equally.

古文：韩聂与吾友也，而攻吾所爱，何也？ 
现代文：齐国的韩聂和我是朋友，可是却进攻我所爱的地方，为什么呢？ 
English: Han Xuan of Qi and I are friends, but he attacked the place I love. Why?

古文：苏代为齐谓秦王曰： 韩聂之攻宋，所以为王也。
现代文：苏代为齐国对秦王说： 韩聂进攻宋国，就是为了大王。
English: The Su Dynasty said to the Qin King: Han Yu's attack on Song was for the sake of the Great King.

古文：齐强，辅之以宋，楚魏必恐，恐必西事秦，是王不烦一兵，不伤一士，无事而割安邑也，此韩聂之所祷于王也。 
现代文：齐国强大，再有宋国的辅助，楚、很必然恐慌，恐慌就一定向西侍奉秦国，这样，大王不用一兵，不伤一卒，不用费事就会使魏国割让安邑，这就是韩聂告求于大王的。 
English: If Qi was strong and supported by Song, Chu and Panic were inevitable, Panic would definitely serve Qin to the west. In this way, the great king would not need a single soldier, would not hurt a single person, and would not have to do anything to make Wei cede An'yun. This is what Han Xuan asked the great king.

古文：秦王曰： 吾患齐之难知。一从一衡，其说何也？ 
现代文：秦王说： 我担心齐国很难看透，一会儿合纵，一会儿连横，这怎么解释呢？ 
English: Qin Wang said, "I'm worried that Qi is hard to see through. One moment it's vertical, the next it's horizontal. How can this be explained?"

古文：对曰： 天下国令齐可知乎？
现代文：苏代回答说： 天下各国的情况能让齐国都知道吗？
English: Su Dai replied: Can the Qijiu know the situation of every country in the world?

古文：齐以攻宋，其知事秦以万乘之国自辅，不西事秦则宋治不安。
现代文：齐国进攻宋国，它知道侍奉秦国应该有万乘之国的力量辅助自己，不向西侍奉秦国，宋国也就不会安定。
English: When Qi attacked Song, it knew that if it served Qin, it should have the power of Wanxiang to assist it. If it did not serve Qin to the west, Song would not be stable.

古文：中国白头游敖之士皆积智欲离齐秦之交，伏式结轶西驰者，未有一人言善齐者也，伏式结轶东驰者，未有一人言善秦者也。
现代文：中原那些白发的游说之士都绞尽脑汁想离间齐、秦的联合，那些驾车纷纷向西奔驰的人们，没有一个人是去谈论和齐国交好的；那些驾车纷纷向东奔驰的人们，没有一个人是去谈论同秦国交好的。
English: Those white-haired lobbyists in the Central Plains are all racking their brains to break away from the union of Qi and Qin; those who are driving to the west are not talking about friendship with Qi; those who are driving to the east are not talking about friendship with Qin.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么？
English: Why is that?

古文：皆不欲齐秦之合也。
现代文：因为他们都不想让齐、秦联合。
English: Because they don't want Qi and Qin to unite.

古文：何晋楚之智而齐秦之愚也！
现代文：为什么三晋与楚那么聪明而齐、秦那么愚蠢呢？
English: Why are Sanjin and Chu so smart, while Qin is so stupid?

古文：晋楚合必议齐秦，齐秦合必图晋楚，请以此决事。 秦王曰： 诺。 
现代文：三晋与楚联合一定要商议进攻齐、秦，齐、秦联合一定要谋划进攻三晋及楚。请大王根据这种情况决定行事吧！ 秦王说： 好吧！ 
English: The three Jin and Chu federations must discuss the attack of Qi and Qin, and the Qi and Qin federations must plan the attack of the three Jin and Chu. Let the king decide according to this situation! The king of Qin said: Okay!

古文：于是齐遂伐宋，宋王出亡，死于温。
现代文：于是齐国就去讨伐宋国，宋王出逃，死在温城。
English: As a result, the State of Qi went to fight the State of Song, and the King of Song fled and died in Wencheng.

古文：齐南割楚之淮北，西侵三晋，欲以并周室，为天子。
现代文：齐国在南方占据了楚国的淮水以北土地，在西边侵入了三晋，还打算吞并周室，立为天子。
English: In the south, the State of Qi occupied the land north of Huai Shui in the State of Chu, invaded the Three Jin in the west, and also planned to annex Zhou and establish himself as the Son of Heaven.

古文：泗上诸侯邹鲁之君皆称臣，诸侯恐惧。
现代文：泗水一带的诸侯如邹、鲁等国的国君都向齐国称臣，各国诸侯都很恐惧。
English: Princes in the vicinity of Surabaya, such as the princes of the states of Qi and Lu, all declared their allegiance to the state of Qi, and the princes of all countries were very afraid.

古文：三十九年，秦来伐，拔我列城九。
现代文：湣王三十九年，秦国来进攻齐国，攻下城邑九座。
English: In the thirty-ninth year of the reign of Qin, Qin attacked Qi and captured nine cities and towns.

古文：四十年，燕、秦、楚、三晋合谋，各出锐师以伐，败我济西。
现代文：湣王四十年，燕、秦、楚及三晋合谋，各用派出精兵来进攻齐国，在济水以西打败齐军。
English: In the 40th year of the reign of King Min, Yan, Qin, Chu, and the three Jin conspired to attack Qi with their elite soldiers, defeating the Qi army west of Jishui.

古文：王解而却。
现代文：齐王的军队溃散退却。
English: King Qi's army scattered and retreated.

古文：燕将乐毅遂入临菑，尽取齐之宝藏器。
现代文：燕将乐毅于是攻入齐都临淄，全部掠取了齐国收藏的珍宝礼器。
English: Yan then invaded Linyi, the capital of Qi, and plundered all the precious ceremonial objects in Qi's collection.

古文：愍王出亡，之卫。卫君辟宫舍之，称臣而共具。
现代文：湣王出逃到卫国，卫国国君打开王宫让他居住，向他称臣并供给他用具。
English: King He fled to Japan, and the Emperor of Japan opened the royal palace for him to live in, praised him as a vassal, and provided him with equipment.

古文：愍王不逊卫人侵之。
现代文：湣王却很傲慢，卫国人就去侵扰他。
English: However, Shao Wang was very arrogant, and the defenders of the country went to harass him.

古文：愍王去，走邹、鲁，有骄色，邹、鲁君弗内，遂走莒。
现代文：湣王只得离开卫国，跑到邹国、鲁国，表现出傲慢的神气，邹、鲁的国君都不收留他，于是又跑到莒。
English: King Yao had no choice but to leave the Northern Wei Kingdom and run to the Southern Wei Kingdom and the Northern Lu Kingdom, displaying an arrogant air. The princes of the Southern Wei Kingdom and the Northern Lu Kingdom did not accept him, so he ran back to the Southern Wei Kingdom.

古文：楚使淖齿将兵救齐，因相齐愍王。淖齿遂杀愍王而与燕共分齐之侵地卤器。
现代文：这时楚国派淖齿领兵救援齐国，因而就辅佐齐湣王，结果淖齿竟把湣杀了，并与燕国一起瓜分了侵占齐国的土地和掠夺的宝器。
English: At this time, Chu dispatched the leader of the soldiers to rescue Qi, and thus assisted the king of Qi. As a result, the king of Qi actually killed the king of Qi, and divided the land occupied by Qi and the plundered treasures with the state of Yan.

古文：愍王之遇杀，其子法章变名姓为莒太史敫家庸。
现代文：湣王遇害之后，他的儿子法章更名改姓去莒太史敫的家中当佣人。
English: After Gong Wang was killed, his son Fa Zhang changed his name and surname to work as a servant in Gong Taishi's home.

古文：太史敫女奇法章状貌，以为非恒人，怜而常窃衣食之，而与私通焉。
现代文：太史敫的女儿感到法章的相貌不凡，认为他不是平常之人，怜爱他因而时常愉着送他一些衣食，并且和他私通。
English: Taishi Yan's daughter felt that Fa Zhang's appearance was extraordinary, thought that he was not an ordinary person, pitied him, so she often enjoyed giving him some food and clothing, and had sexual intercourse with him.

古文：淖齿既以去莒，莒中人及齐亡臣相聚求愍王子，欲立之。
现代文：淖齿离开莒城之后，莒城里的人和齐国逃亡的大臣聚在一起寻找湣王的儿子，想要立他为齐王。
English: After Kaji left Shicheng, the people of Shicheng and the fleeing ministers of Qi gathered together to look for the son of King Kaji and wanted to make him the king of Qi.

古文：法章惧其诛己也，久之，乃敢自言 我愍王子也 。
现代文：法章先是害怕他们要杀害自己，过了很久，才敢自己声言 我就是湣王的儿子 。
English: Law first feared they were going to kill him, and it was a long time before he dared to say to himself, "I am the son of the king of snakes."

古文：于是莒人共立法章，是为襄王。
现代文：于是莒人共同让法章即位，这就是襄王。
English: As a result, all of them agreed to let Fa Zha ascend to the throne, and this is the beginning of Xiang Wang.

古文：以保莒城而布告齐国中： 王已立在莒矣。 
现代文：由于拥有莒城而向齐国各地布告： 新王已经在莒即位了。 
English: Because of his possession of Lucheng, he announced to all parts of Qi Province: The new king has already ascended the throne.

古文：襄王既立，立太史氏女为王后，是为君王后，生子建。
现代文：襄王即位后，立太史氏的女儿为王后，称为君王后，生了儿子名建。
English: After Emperor Xiang ascended the throne, the daughter of Emperor Taishi became the queen, known as the empress dowager, and gave birth to a son, Miao Jian.

古文：太史敫曰： 女不取媒因自嫁，非吾种也，污吾世。 
现代文：太史敫说： 女儿不经媒人而私自嫁人，不能算我的后代，她玷污了我们的家风。 
English: "My daughter, who married a man without a matchmaker, cannot be counted as my offspring. She has tarnished our family tradition," said Ms. Taishi.

古文：终身不睹君王后。
现代文：他就终身不与君王后见面。
English: He would never meet the Queen.

古文：君王后贤，不以不睹故失人子之礼。
现代文：君王后贤惠，并不因为父亲不见她的缘故就失掉了做子女的礼节。
English: Empress Dowager Xian Hui did not lose the etiquette of being a child because her father did not see her.

古文：襄王在莒五年，田单以即墨攻破燕军，迎襄王于莒，入临菑。
现代文：襄王在莒住了五年，田单依靠即墨军民打败了燕军，到莒迎接襄王，回到临淄。
English: Xiang Wang lived in Handan for five years. Tian Shan relied on the Mexican army and people to defeat the Yan army, went to Handan to meet Xiang Wang, and returned to Linyi.

古文：齐故地尽复属齐。
现代文：齐国原有的土地全部重新归属齐国。
English: All of Qi's original lands reverted to Qi.

古文：齐封田单为安平君。
现代文：齐王封田单为安平君。
English: The king of Qi, Anping, is the only one with a fiefdom.

古文：十四年，秦击我刚寿。
现代文：襄王十四年，秦军进攻齐国的刚寿。
English: In the fourteenth year of King Xiang, the Qin army attacked Gansu in Qi.

古文：十九年，襄王卒，子创建。
现代文：十九年，襄王去世，他的儿子田建即位。
English: In the 19th year, King Xiang died, and his son Tian Jian took the throne.

古文：王创建六年，秦攻赵，齐楚救之。
现代文：齐王建即位六年，秦国进攻赵国，齐、楚去救它。
English: Six years after the enthronement of King Qi Jian, Qin attacked Zhao, and Qi and Chu tried to save it.

古文：秦计曰： 齐楚救赵，亲则退兵，不亲遂攻之。 
现代文：秦国盘算说： 齐、楚援救赵国，如果他们关系亲近，我们就退兵；如果他们不亲近，我们就进攻它。 
English: Qin calculated: Qi and Chu will come to the rescue of Zhao. If they are close, we will withdraw; if they are not close, we will attack.

古文：赵无食，请粟于齐，齐不听。
现代文：赵国没有粮食，请求齐国支援粟米，齐国不答应。
English: Zhao did not have grain and asked Qi to support it with corn. Qi did not agree.

古文：周子曰： 不如听之以退秦兵，不听则秦兵不却，是秦之计中而齐楚之计过也。
现代文：周子说： 不如答应它以便使秦兵撤退，不答应它秦兵就不会撤退，这样就使秦国的计谋得逞，而齐、楚的计谋失败了。
English: Zhou Zi said: It is better to agree to it in order to make the Qin soldiers withdraw, otherwise the Qin soldiers will not withdraw, thus making the Qin strategy succeed, while the Qi and Chu strategies failed.

古文：且赵之于齐楚，扞蔽也，犹齿之有唇也，唇亡则齿寒。
现代文：况且赵国对于齐、楚来说，就是屏障啊，好像牙齿外面有嘴唇一样，嘴唇没有了，牙齿就会受寒。
English: Moreover, for Qi and Chu, Zhao Guo is a barrier, as if there were lips on the outside of the teeth. Without lips, the teeth would get cold.

古文：今日亡赵，明日患及齐楚。
现代文：今天赵国灭亡，明天祸患就该到齐国、楚国了。
English: Today, the Zhao Kingdom perished, and tomorrow, the disaster will come to the Qi and Chu Kingdoms.

古文：且救赵之务，宜若奉漏瓮沃焦釜也。
现代文：而且救赵的事，应该像捧着漏水的瓮去浇烧焦的锅一样。
English: Moreover, rescuing Zhao should be like holding a leaky spade to pour water on a scorched pot.

古文：夫救赵，高义也；却秦兵，显名也。
现代文：救赵、是高尚的义举；使秦兵退却，可以显扬威名。
English: To save Zhao is a noble act of righteousness; to make the Qin soldiers retreat, can show the prestige.

古文：义救亡国，威却强秦之兵，不务为此而务爱粟，为国计者过矣。 
现代文：仗义解救将亡的国家，扬威退却强秦的军队，不尽力去做这件事而专注于吝惜粮食，为国家出谋划策的人错了。 
English: It is wrong to save a dying country by fighting for justice, to retreat to strengthen the Qin's army, to focus on saving grain without making every effort to do this, and to make suggestions for the country.

古文：齐王弗听。
现代文：齐王不听劝谏。
English: King Qi did not listen to his advice.

古文：秦破赵于长平四十余万，遂围邯郸。
现代文：秦军在长平打败了赵国的四十多军队，接着就包围了邯郸。
English: The Qin army defeated more than forty armies of Zhao in Changping, and then surrounded Yu.

古文：十六年，秦灭周。
现代文：齐王建十六年，秦国灭亡周室。
English: In the 16th year of the reign of King Qi Jian, the Qin State was destroyed.

古文：君王后卒。
现代文：齐国君王后去世。
English: The Empress Dowager of Qi passed away.

古文：二十三年，秦置东郡。
现代文：二十三年，秦国设置东郡。
English: In the 23rd year of the Qin Dynasty, Dong County was established.

古文：二十八年，王入朝秦，秦王政置酒咸阳。
现代文：二十八年，齐王到秦国朝拜，秦王政在咸阳设酒宴款待。
English: In the 28th year, King Qi made a pilgrimage to Qin, and Qin Wang Zheng held a wine banquet in Xianyang.

古文：三十五年，秦灭韩。
现代文：三十五年，秦国灭亡韩国。
English: Thirty-five years ago, the Qin dynasty was overthrown in South Korea.

古文：三十七年，秦灭赵。
现代文：三十七年，秦国灭亡赵国。
English: In the thirty-seventh year of the Qin Dynasty, the Zhao Dynasty fell.

古文：三十八年，燕使荆轲刺秦王，秦王觉，杀轲。
现代文：三十八年，燕国派荆轲刺杀秦王，秦王发觉了，杀死了荆轲。
English: In the 38th year of Yan's reign, he sent Jing Jiao to assassinate King Qin. When King Qin found out, he killed Jing Jiao.

古文：明年，秦破燕，燕王亡走辽东。
现代文：第二年，秦军攻破燕都，燕王逃跑到辽东。
English: In the second year, the Qin army broke through Yandu, and Yan Wang fled to Liaodong.

古文：明年，秦灭魏，秦兵次于历下。
现代文：再一年，秦国灭亡魏国，秦军驻扎在历下。
English: A year later, the Qin State was destroyed by the Wei State, and the Qin Army was stationed in Lixia.

古文：四十二年，秦灭楚。
现代文：四十二年，秦国灭亡楚国。
English: Forty-two years ago, the Qin Dynasty was overthrown by the Chu Dynasty.

古文：明年，虏代王嘉，灭燕王喜。
现代文：第二年，俘虏了代王嘉，杀死燕王喜，灭亡燕国。
English: In the second year, he captured Wang Jia, killed Yan Wangxi, and destroyed Yan's kingdom.

古文：四十四年，秦兵击齐。
现代文：齐王建四十四年，秦国进攻齐国。
English: In the 44th year of the reign of King Qi Jian, Qin attacked Qi.

古文：齐王听相后胜计，不战，以兵降秦。
现代文：齐王听从宰相后胜的计谋，不交战就率军投降秦国。
English: King Qi listened to the stratagem of the prime minister Hou Sheng and led his army to surrender to Qin without a fight.

古文：秦虏王建，迁之共。
现代文：秦国俘虏了齐王建，把他迁到共城。
English: Qin captured Qi Wangjian and transferred him to Gongcheng.

古文：遂灭齐为郡。
现代文：终于灭亡齐国改为一郡。
English: Finally, the destruction of Qi was changed to a county.

古文：天下壹并于秦，秦王政立号为皇帝。
现代文：天下由秦统一，秦王政建立称号叫做皇帝。
English: The world was unified by the Qin Dynasty, and the title of emperor was established by the Qin Dynasty.

古文：始，君王后贤，事秦谨，与诸侯信，齐亦东边海上，秦日夜攻三晋、燕、楚，五国各自救于秦，以故王创建四十余年不受兵。
现代文：起初，君王后有贤德，侍奉秦国比较谨慎，与诸侯相交有信用，齐国又处在东部海滨，秦国日夜进攻三晋、燕、楚，这五国面对秦国的进攻只有分别谋求自救，因此齐王建在位四十多年没有遭受战祸。
English: At the beginning, the empress and the king were virtuous, they were cautious in serving Qin, and they had good relations and trust with the princes. Qi was also located on the eastern seaboard. Qin attacked Sanjin, Yan and Chu day and night. Faced with Qin's attack, these five countries only sought self-rescue separately. As a result, King Jian of Qi did not suffer the disaster of war during his reign of more than forty years.

古文：君王后死，后胜相齐，多受秦间金，多使宾客入秦，秦又多予金，客皆为反间，劝王去从朝秦，不修攻战之备，不助五国攻秦，秦以故得灭五国。
现代文：君王后一去世，后胜做了齐国宰相，他接受了秦国间谍的许多金钱，派很多宾客到秦国，秦国又给他们很多钱，宾客们都回来进行反间活动，劝说齐王放弃合纵而归向秦国，秦国因此能灭亡五国。
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Hou Sheng became the prime minister of Qin. He accepted a lot of money from the spies of Qin, sent many guests to Qin, and Qin gave them a lot of money. The guests all came back to carry out anti-foreign activities, persuading King Qi to give up the merger and return to Qin. As a result, Qin was able to destroy the Five Kingdoms.

古文：五国已亡，秦兵卒入临淄，民莫敢格者。
现代文：五国灭亡后，秦军终于攻入临淄，百姓没人敢反抗。
English: After the destruction of the Five Kingdoms, the Qin army finally entered Linyi, and no one dared to resist.

古文：王建遂降，迁于共。
现代文：齐王建于是投降，被迁到共城。
English: Qi Wangjian then surrendered and was transferred to the capital.

古文：故齐人怨王建不蚤与诸侯合从攻秦，听奸臣宾客以亡其国，歌之曰： 松耶柏耶？
现代文：所以齐国人抱怨王建不早与诸侯合纵攻秦，听信奸臣及宾客的话以致亡国，人们编了歌唱道： 松树呢，还是柏树呢？
English: Therefore, the people of Qi complained that Wang Jian did not join the princes in attacking Qin early, and listened to the words of treacherous ministers and guests, resulting in the destruction of the country. People made up a song: Pine tree, or cypress tree?

古文：住建共者客耶？ 
现代文：让王建住到共城的不是宾客吗？ 
English: Isn't it the guests who let Wang Jian live in the commune?

古文：疾建用客之不详也。
现代文：意思是痛恨王建使用宾客不注意审察。
English: It means that he hates Wang Jian for using guests without paying attention to the examination.

古文：太史公曰：盖孔子晚而喜《易》。
现代文：太史公说：大概孔子晚年喜欢读《易经》。
English: Taishigong said, "Probably, in his later years, Confucius liked to read the I Ching."

古文：《易》之为术，幽明远矣，非通人达才孰能注意焉！
现代文：《易经》作为一学问，从有形无形的物象中预知未来，道理很深奥，如果不是博古通今明智达理的人，谁能专注于它呢！
English: "I Ching" as a learning, from the tangible and intangible objects to predict the future, the reason is very profound, if not Bo Guotong now wise and reasonable people, who can focus on it!

古文：故周太史之卦田敬仲完，占至十世之后；及完奔齐，懿仲卜之亦云。
现代文：所以周太史为田敬仲完卜卦，能占卜到十代以后；到田完逃奔齐国，懿仲为他卜卦也是如此。
English: Therefore, when Zhou Taishi finished divination for Tian Jingzhong, he was able to divine until ten generations later; when he finished divination for Tian Jingzhong, he fled to Qi, and the same is true for his divination.

古文：田乞及常所以比犯二君，专齐国之政，非必事势之渐然也，盖若遵厌兆祥云。
现代文：田乞和田常所以接连杀害两们国君，独揽齐国政权，不一定是事情的形势逐渐发展到了这样地步，大概像是要遵循或符合占卜的预兆吧！
English: Tian Qian and Tian Chang, so the successive killing of the two sovereigns and the monopolization of the power of Qi, does not necessarily mean that the situation has gradually developed to such a degree, probably as if to follow or conform to the omens of divination!

