古文：为故人行私谓之 不弃 ，以公财分施谓之 仁人 ，轻禄重身谓之 君子 ，枉法曲亲谓之 有行 ，弃官宠交谓之 有侠 ，离世遁上谓之 高傲 ，交争逆令谓之 刚材 ，行惠取众谓之 得民 。
现代文：为老朋友行私被称为不遗故旧，把公家财产分送给人被称为仁爱的人，轻视利禄看重自身被称为君子，违反法制偏袒亲属被称为品行好，放弃官职看重私交被称为侠义，逃避现实避开君主被认为清高傲世，私斗不休违抗禁令被称为刚直好汉，施行恩惠笼络民众被称为得民心。
English: To act selfishly for an old friend is called "preserving the past," to distribute public property to others is called "benevolence," to despise Li Luo and value oneself is called "gentleman," to violate the legal system and favor relatives is called "good conduct," to give up official position and value personal friendship is called "chivalry," to escape from reality and avoid the monarch is considered to be "clear and lofty," to fight selfishly and defy the ban is called "upright and honest," and to grant favors to the people is called "winning the hearts of the people."

古文：不弃者，吏有奸也；仁人者，公财损也；君子者，民难使也；有行者，法制毁也；有侠者，官职旷也；高傲者，民不事也；刚材者，令不行也；得民者，君上孤也。
现代文：不遗故旧，官吏就会行奸；做仁爱的人，国家财富就有损失；做君子，民众就不听使唤；品行好，法制就遭到破坏；讲侠义，官职就会出现空缺；清高傲世，民众就不侍奉君主；做刚直好汉，法令就不能推行；得民心，君主就会遭到孤立。
English: If you do not respect the past, officials will commit treason; if you are a benevolent person, the national wealth will be lost; if you are a gentleman, the people will not listen to you; if you are a good person, the legal system will be destroyed; if you are a chivalrous person, there will be a vacancy in the official position; if you are high and proud, the people will not serve the monarch; if you are an upright man, the law cannot be implemented; if you win the hearts of the people, the monarch will be isolated.

古文：此八者，匹夫之私誉，人主之大败也。
现代文：这八种名声，是个人的私誉，君主的大祸。
English: These eight reputations are the private glory of the individual and the calamity of the prince.

古文：反此八者，匹夫之私毁，人主之公利也。
现代文：与这八种相反的，则是个人的恶名，君主的公利。
English: As opposed to these eight, there is the reputation of the individual and the public interest of the monarch.

古文：人主不察社稷之利害，而用匹夫之私毁，索国之无危乱，不可得矣。
现代文：君主不考察对于国家的利害关系，而采纳个人的私誉，要想国家没有危乱，是不可能做到了。
English: If the country is not in danger, it is impossible for the monarch to adopt a personal reputation without considering the interests of the country.

古文：任人以事，存亡治乱之机也，无术以任人，无所任而不败。
现代文：任用什么人办事，是国家存亡治乱的关键。没有政治手腕而用人，没有一次任用不是失败的。
English: The key to a country's survival is who it appoints to run its affairs. If people are appointed without political skill, not a single appointment will be successful.

古文：人君之所任，非辩智则修洁也。
现代文：君主要任用的人，不是有口才、有智巧，就是品行好。
English: Princes generally appoint men who are either eloquent, or clever, or of good conduct.

古文：任人者，使有势也。
现代文：任用人，是使他有权有势。
English: The person who makes the appointment is the one who makes him powerful.

古文：智士者未必信也，为多其智，因惑其信也。
现代文：聪明人未必可靠，只因为赞赏他的智辩，就以为他们可靠而加以任用。
English: Clever men are not necessarily reliable, but they are appointed because their wit is appreciated and they are thought to be reliable.

古文：以智士之计，处乘势之资而为其私急，则君必欺焉。
现代文：凭聪明人具有的计谋，再加上处在有权有势的地位而去干私人急事，君主就一 定会受到欺骗。
English: With the cunning of a clever man, coupled with a private emergency in a powerful position, the monarch is sure to be deceived.

古文：为智者之不可信也，故任修士者，使断事也。
现代文：因为聪明人不可靠，所以君主可能去任用那些老好人，叫他们处理政事。
English: As wise men are not to be trusted, the sovereign may appoint good old men to administer the affairs of state.

古文：修士者未必智，为洁其身、因惑其智。
现代文：老好人未必有智谋，仅由于觉得他们品德纯洁，就以为他们有智谋。
English: Good men may not be wise, but they are thought to be wise only because they are thought to be virtuous.

古文：以愚人之所惽，处治事之官而为所然，则事必乱矣。
现代文：这种人以愚夫的糊涂，处在治理国家政事的官位上，自以为是地处理问题，政事必然要被搞乱。
English: This kind of person, with the stupidity of a fool, is in the position of governing the country's political affairs, dealing with problems self-righteously, and political affairs are bound to be disrupted.

古文：故无术以用人，任智则君欺，任修则君事乱，此无术之患也。
现代文：所以没有政治手腕而用人，任命聪明，人的话，君主就受欺骗；任用老好人的话，君主的政事就被搞乱。
English: Therefore, if a person is appointed without political skill, the appointment will be clever. If a person is appointed, the monarch will be deceived; if a good person is appointed, the monarch's political affairs will be disrupted.

古文：明君之道，贱德义贵，下必坐上，决诚以参，听无门户，故智者不得诈欺。
现代文：这就是没有政治手腕导致的祸患。明君的治国原则是，地位低的能够议论地位高的；官吏有罪，下属不告发则同罪；用检验的方法判明事情的真相；不偏听偏信；所以聪明人无法弄诈行欺。
English: This is the calamity caused by the lack of political skill. The principle of Mingjun's governance is that a low-ranking person can talk about a high-ranking person; an official is guilty, and if a subordinate does not report it, it is the same crime; the truth of the matter is determined by the method of examination; do not listen to prejudice; therefore, a clever person cannot cheat.

古文：计功而行赏，程能而授事，察端而观失，有过者罪，有能者得，故愚者不任事。
现代文：按功行赏，量才授职，分析事情的起因来考察官吏的过失，有过错的人给予处罚，有才能的人给予赏赐，所以愚蠢的人就不能担任政事了。
English: Officials should be rewarded according to their merits and promoted according to their abilities, the causes of affairs should be analyzed to examine the faults of officials, those who are at fault should be punished, and those who are talented should be rewarded. Therefore, stupid people should not be allowed to take part in political affairs.

古文：智者不敢欺，愚者不得断，则事无失矣。
现代文：聪明人不敢行骗，愚蠢的人不得决断，政事就没有失误了。
English: Clever people do not dare to cheat, stupid people are not allowed to make decisions, and there are no mistakes in politics.

古文：察士然后能知之，不可以为令，夫民不尽察。
现代文：只有明察的人才能通晓的东西，不可用来作为法令，因为民众不都是明察的。
English: What is known only to the discerning should not be used as a law, for the people are not all discerning.

古文：贤者然后行之，不可以为法，夫民不尽贤。
现代文：只有贤能的人才能做到的事情，不可用来作为法律，因为民众不都是贤能的。
English: What can only be done by a man of virtue cannot be used as a law, because the people are not all virtuous.

古文：杨朱、墨翟，天下之所察也，干世乱而卒不决，虽察而不可以为官职之令。
现代文：杨朱、墨翟是天下公认明察的人，但他们想整顿乱世，终究却找不到解决的办法；他们的学说虽属明察，却并不能作为官方的法令。
English: Yang Zhu and Mo Xuan are universally recognized as perceptive people, but they want to rectify the chaotic world, but in the end they can't find a solution; although their doctrine is perceptive, it can't be used as an official decree.

古文：鲍焦、华角，天下之所贤也，鲍焦木枯，华角赴河，虽贤不可以为耕战之士。
现代文：鲍焦、华角是天下公认贤能的人，鲍焦抱木而死，华角投河自尽；他们虽属贤能，却并不能成为耕作打仗的人。
English: Bao Jiao and Hua Jiao were acknowledged as men of virtue. Bao Jiao hugged a tree and died, and Hua Jiao threw himself into a river. Although they were men of virtue, they could not become men of cultivation and war.

古文：故人主之察，智士尽其辩焉；人主之所尊，能士能尽其行焉。
现代文：所以，君主要加以明察的，智士就在这方面竭尽巧辩；君主要予以推崇的，能人就在这方面全力去干。
English: Therefore, when the prince observes it, the wise men do their best in this regard; when the prince praises it, the able men do their best in this regard.

古文：今世主察无用之辩，尊远功之行，索国之富强，不可得也。
现代文：当代君主把没有实际功效的行为认为可尊，而想求得国家的富强，这是不可能的事。
English: It is impossible for a contemporary monarch to regard as honourable an act that has no practical effect, and to seek the wealth and strength of the country.

古文：博习辩智如孔、墨，孔、墨不耕耨，则国何得焉？
现代文：像孔子、墨子那样知识渊博、机智巧辩的人，但他们不从事耕作，国家能得到什么好处呢？
English: People as knowledgeable, witty and eloquent as Confucius and Mozi, but they do not engage in farming, what benefits can the country get?

古文：修孝寡欲如曾、史，曾、史不战攻，则国何利焉？
现代文：像曾参、史鲍那样讲究孝道、清心寡欲的人，但他们不参加打仗，国家能得到什么利益呢？
English: Like Zeng Zang and Shi Bao, people who pay attention to filial piety and cleanliness, but they do not participate in the war, what benefit can the country get?

古文：匹夫有私便，人主有公利。
现代文：个人有私利，君主有公利。
English: Individuals have private interests, the monarch has public interests.

古文：不作而养足，不仕而名显，此私便也；息文学而明法度，塞私便而一功劳，此公利也。
现代文：不耕作而给养充足，不做官而声名显赫，这是私利；废除私学而彰明法度，堵塞私利而一概按功行赏，这是公利。
English: It is self-interest not to farm but to be well-fed, not to be an official but to be famous; it is public interest to abolish private education but to clarify the law, to block private interests but to reward everyone according to their merits.

古文：错法以道民也，而又贵文学，则民之所师法也疑；赏功以劝民也，而又尊行修，则民之产利也惰。
现代文：一方面设置法令来引导民众，另一方面却又推崇私学，民众就会对遵守法令产生怀疑；一方面奖赏功劳。来鼓励民众，另一方面却又祟尚修身养性，民众就会懒于耕战。
English: On the one hand, laws and regulations are set up to guide the people, but on the other hand, private education is praised, and the people will have doubts about compliance with the laws and regulations; on the one hand, merit is rewarded to encourage the people, but on the other hand, self-cultivation and self-cultivation are blamed, and the people will be lazy to fight.

古文：夫贵文学以疑法，尊行修以贰功，索国之富强，不可得也。
现代文：推崇私学而使法令受到怀疑，崇尚修身养性而使论功行赏出现双重标准，要想求得到国家的富强是不可能的。
English: It is impossible to achieve national prosperity and strength by promoting self-education, which casts doubt on laws and regulations, and advocating self-cultivation, which creates a double standard for the reward of meritorious deeds.

古文：搢笏干戚，不适有方铁铦；登降周旋，不逮日中奏百；《狸首》射侯，不当强弩趋发；干城距衡冲，不若堙穴伏橐。
现代文：朝用笏板和仪仗兵器，敌不过大刀长矛；讲究升降转身繁琐礼仪，其效用难以和日行百里的士卒训练相提并论；奏着《狸首》乐章而演习射靶的仪式，比不上硬弓劲射的真功夫；捍卫城邑、抗拒冲车的防御战术，比不上通过地道水灌烟熏的进攻战术。
English: The North's use of the seesaw and ceremonial weapons is no match for swords and spears; the elaborate etiquette of ascending and descending and turning around is difficult to compare with the training of Japanese soldiers; the ceremony of practicing shooting targets while playing the "Bullhead" movement is not comparable to the true skill of hard bow shooting; the defensive tactics of defending cities and resisting rushing cars are not comparable to the offensive tactics of blowing smoke through underground water.

古文：古人亟于德，中世逐于智，当今争于力。
现代文：古代的人在道德上竞争，中世的人在智谋上角逐，现在的人在力量上较量。
English: The ancients competed in morality, the Middle Ages in cunning, and the moderns in strength.

古文：古者寡事而备简，朴陋而不尽，故有珧铫而推车者。
现代文：古时候事少而设施简单，器具粗陋而不完善，所以有蚌壳做的除草农具和简陋的手推车。
English: In ancient times, there were few things and simple facilities, and the equipment was crude and imperfect, so there were weeding tools made of clam shells and simple carts.

古文：古者人寡而相亲，物多而轻利易让，故有揖让而传天下者。
现代文：古时候人少而互相亲爱，物品丰富而轻视财利、容易谦让，所以有拱手把天下让给别人的作法。
English: In ancient times, people were few but loved each other dearly, goods were plentiful but money and profit were despised, and it was easy to concede, so there was a practice of giving up the world to others.

古文：然则行揖让，高慈惠，而道仁厚，皆推政也。
现代文：既然如此，那么他们行礼谦让，推祟仁慈恩惠，称道仁义忠厚，就都属于原始的政治措施了。
English: That being the case, their acts of courtesy and accommodation, their denunciations of benevolence and bounty, and their praises of benevolence, righteousness, and loyalty, all belong to primitive political measures.

古文：处多事之时，用寡事之器，非智者之备也；当大争之世，而循揖让之轨，非圣人之治也。
现代文：处在多事的时代，却仍用少事时代的简陋器具，这不是聪明人该奉行的路线；处在大争的社会，却仍遵循礼让不止的老规矩，这不是圣人治理国家的方法。
English: It is not the course for a wise man to follow when he is in a time of much activity, but still uses the crude tools of a time of little activity; it is not the way for a sage to govern a country when he is in a society of great strife, but still follows the old rules of courtesy.

古文：故智者不乘推车，圣人不行推政也。
现代文：所以聪明人不坐古代的手推车，圣人不采用手推车式的原始政治。
English: That is why wise people do not use the ancient wheelbarrow, and sages do not use the wheelbarrow of primitive politics.

古文：法所以制事，事所以名功也。
现代文：法律是用来制约事务的，事务是用来显示功效的。
English: Laws are used to regulate affairs, and affairs are used to show effectiveness.

古文：法有立而有难，权其难而事成，则立之；事成而有害，权其害而功多，则为之。
现代文：设立法制如有困难，考虑到虽有困难但能成事，则应予设立；事务既成而有害处，考虑到虽有害处但功大干过，则应予实施。
English: If there are difficulties in establishing a legal system, it should be established, taking into account that although there are difficulties, it can accomplish things; if the work is completed but harmful, it should be implemented, taking into account that although it is harmful, it has done a great deal of work.

古文：无难之法，无害之功，天下无有也。
现代文：不遇到困难的法制，不伴随害处的事功，天下是没有的。
English: There is no legal system in the world that does not encounter difficulties, and there is no deed that is not accompanied by harm.

古文：是以拔千丈之都，败十万之众，死伤者军之乘，甲兵折挫，士卒死伤，而贺战胜得地者，出其小害计其大利也。
现代文：因此攻克周长千丈的大都城，击败十万之众的敌军，尽管我方伤亡人数达到三分之一，武器装备严重受损，士卒伤亡惨重；但仍然要庆贺打了胜仗，获得疆土。
English: As a result, we conquered the sprawling metropolis and defeated a hundred thousand-strong enemy army. Although our casualties reached one third, our weapons and equipment were seriously damaged, and our soldiers suffered heavy casualties, we still have to celebrate the victory and gain territory.

古文：夫沐者有弃发，除者伤血肉。
现代文：其原因正在于考虑到了代价小而获利大。
English: This is due to the fact that the cost is small and the profit is large.

古文：为人见其难，因释其业，是无术之事也。
现代文：洗头总有脱发，开刀总会流血伤肉；要是有人看到这点难处，就放弃洗头治病，便是不懂得权衡利弊的人。
English: There will always be hair loss after shampooing, and there will always be bleeding and bruising after cutting; if someone sees this difficulty and gives up shampooing to cure the disease, it is a person who does not know how to weigh the pros and cons.

古文：先圣有言曰： 规有摩而水有波，我欲更之，无奈之何！ 
现代文：先圣说过这样的话： 圆规再精确也会存在误差，水面再平静也会存在波纹。我想改变这种状况，是没有办法的！ 
English: The ancients said something like this: No matter how accurate the compass is, there will be errors, and no matter how calm the water is, there will be ripples. If I want to change this situation, there is no way!

古文：此通权之言也。
现代文：这是通晓权衡利弊的说法。
English: It's a case of weighing up the pros and cons.

古文：是以说有必立而旷于实者，言有辞拙而急于用者。
现代文：因此主张有言之成理但不切实际的，言论有词句笨拙但能立即付诸实施的。
English: So the claims are plausible but impractical, the rhetoric is clunky but immediately actionable.

古文：故圣人不求无害之言，而务无易之事。
现代文：所以圣人不强求挑不出毛病的言论，而致力于那些无可更易的事务。
English: That is why sages do not insist on saying things that cannot be faulted, but are committed to those things that cannot be made easier.

古文：人之不事衡石者，非贞廉而远利也，石不能为人多少，衡不能为人轻重，求索不能得，故人不事也。
现代文：人们不在衡器、量器上打主意，并不是因为他们正直廉洁，不追求财利，而是因为量器本身不能给人增多或减少财物，衡器本身不能给人加重或减轻财物，对它们有要求并不能得到什么；所以人们不去多打主意。
English: It is not because they are honest and incorruptible and do not pursue financial gain, but because the measuring instrument itself cannot increase or decrease a person's wealth, the measuring instrument itself cannot increase or decrease a person's wealth, and there is nothing to be gained by making demands on them, that people do not seek advice.

古文：明主之国，官不敢枉法，吏不敢为私利，货赂不行，是境内之事尽如衡石也。
现代文：明君的国家，官员不敢违反法禁，吏属不敢谋取私利，人们不用财物进行贿赂活动，这样，国内的事务就会都像衡器、量器一样公正无私了。
English: In Mr. Ming's country, officials do not dare to violate the law, officials do not dare to seek personal gain, and people do not use property to bribe. In this way, domestic affairs will be as fair and selfless as weighing instruments and measuring instruments.

古文：此其臣有奸者必知，知者必诛。
现代文：这样，大臣中干坏事的就一定会被察觉，察觉了的就一定给予惩罚。
English: In this way, ministers who do bad things will definitely be detected, and those who are detected will definitely be punished.

古文：是以有道之主，不求清洁之吏，而务必知之术也。
现代文：所以懂得法治的君主，不寻求廉洁的官吏，而致力于一定能察觉臣下奸邪行为的方法。
English: Therefore, a monarch who understands the rule of law does not look for incorruptible officials, but devotes himself to methods that can definitely detect the treachery of his vassals.

古文：慈母之于弱子也，爱不可为前。
现代文：慈母对于幼子的爱是任何其他的爱都无法超过的。
English: A mother's love for her child is like no other.

古文：然而弱子有僻行，使之随师；有恶病，使之事医。
现代文：但是孩子有不良行为，就得让他受老师管教；有了重病，就得让他就医治疗。
English: But if a child misbehaves, he must be disciplined by the teacher; if he is seriously ill, he must seek medical treatment.

古文：子母之性，爱也；臣主之权，策也。
现代文：不受老师管教，就会犯法受刑：不就医治疗，就会临近死亡。母子之间的天性，是爱；君臣之间虑的，是近利远害。
English: If you do not accept the teacher's discipline, you will be punished for breaking the law; if you do not seek medical treatment, you will be close to death. The nature between mother and child is love; the concern between monarchs and ministers is short-term benefit and long-term harm.

古文：母不能以爱存家，君安能以爱持国？
现代文：母亲尚且不能用爱来保全家庭，君主怎能用爱来维护国家呢？
English: If a mother cannot protect her family with love, how can a prince protect his country with love?

古文：明主者通于富强，则可以得欲矣。
现代文：明君通晓富国强兵的办法，就可以达到自己的目的。
English: Ming Jun is familiar with the method of enriching the country and strengthening the army, so he can achieve his goal.

古文：故谨于听治，富强之法也。
现代文：所以慎重地处理政事，就是富国强兵的方法。
English: Therefore, the prudent handling of political affairs is the way to enrich the country and strengthen the army.

古文：明其法禁，察其谋计。
现代文：君主应该严明法令，明察计谋。
English: The monarch should issue strict decrees and keep a close eye on the machinations.

古文：法明则内无变乱之患，计得于外无死虏之祸。
现代文：法令严明，内部就没有动荡叛乱的祸患；计谋得当，对外就没有国破为虏的灾难。
English: If the laws are strict, there will be no internal turmoil and rebellion; if the strategies are proper, there will be no external disaster of the country falling into the hands of the enemy.

古文：故存国者，非仁义也。
现代文：所以保全国家不是靠的仁义道德。
English: Therefore, the preservation of the country does not rely on benevolence and morality.

古文：仁者，慈惠而轻财者也；暴者，心毅而易诛者也。
现代文：讲究仁义道德，也就是要博爱慈惠并轻视财利；为人暴戾，也就是心地残忍并轻易杀伐。
English: To pay attention to the morality of benevolence and righteousness, that is, to be benevolent and benevolent and despise financial gain; to be violent, that is, to be cruel and easy to kill.

古文：慈惠，则不忍；轻财，则好与。
现代文：博爱慈惠，就不会下狠心；轻视财利，就乐善好施。
English: If you are benevolent and benevolent, you will not be cruel; if you despise money and profit, you will be kind and generous.

古文：心毅，则憎心见于下；易诛，则妄杀加于人。
现代文：心地残忍，憎恶态度就会在下属面前暴露；轻易杀伐，就会胡乱地屠戮无辜。
English: If you are cruel at heart, your hateful attitude will be exposed in front of your subordinates; if you kill easily, you will indiscriminately slaughter the innocent.

古文：不忍，则罚多宥赦；好与，则赏多无功。
现代文：不下狠心，就会赦免许多该受处罚的人；乐善好施，就会赏赐许多没有功劳的人。
English: If you are not cruel, you will pardon many people who deserve punishment; if you are kind and generous, you will reward many people who do not deserve it.

古文：憎心见，则下怨其上；妄诛，则民将背叛。
现代文：憎恶态度表露出来，就会使臣民怨恨君主；胡乱地屠戮无故，民众就会背叛君主。
English: If the attitude of hatred is revealed, the subjects will resent the monarch; if there is wanton killing without reason, the people will turn against the monarch.

古文：故仁人在位，下肆而轻犯禁法，偷幸而望于上；暴人在位，则法令妄而臣主乖，民怨而乱心生。
现代文：所以仁人处在君位上，臣下就会胡作非为而轻易犯法，以侥幸的心理希望得到君主的恩惠；暴人处在君位上，法令就会妄行，君臣就会离心离德，民众就会怨声载道而产生叛乱心理。
English: Therefore, if a benevolent person is on the throne, his or her subjects will easily break the law by doing something outrageous, hoping to get the monarch's favor with a lucky mentality; if a tyrant is on the throne, the law will be carried out, the monarch and his or her subjects will be alienated from morality, and the people will complain and have a rebellious mentality.

古文：故曰：仁暴者，皆亡国者也。
现代文：所以说：仁爱和残暴，二者都能导致国家灭亡。
English: Therefore, it is said that both benevolence and cruelty can lead to the destruction of a country.

古文：不能具美食而劝饿人饭，不为能活饿者也；不能辟草生粟而劝贷施赏赐，不能为富民者也。
现代文：不能提供丰盛食品而去劝饿人吃饭，不算是能救活饿人的人；不能开荒种地生产粮食而去劝君主施舍赏赐，不能算作造福民众的人。
English: Those who cannot provide plentiful foodstuffs to persuade the hungry to eat are not regarded as those who can save the lives of the hungry; those who cannot open up wasteland to produce grain and persuade the monarch to give alms are not regarded as those who benefit the people.

古文：今学者之言也，不务本作而好末事，知道虚圣以说民，此劝饭之说。
现代文：当今学者高谈阔论，其主张不是要致力于耕作而是要追求仁政，只知道称引虚假的圣人来取悦民众，这就等于是凭空劝人吃饭之类的说教了。
English: Today's scholars talk a lot, and their claim is not to devote themselves to farming, but to pursue benevolent politics. All they know is to invoke false saints to please the people, which is tantamount to persuading people to eat out of thin air.

古文：劝饭之说，明主不受也。
现代文：凭空劝人吃饭的说教，明君是不接受的。
English: Mingjun does not accept the preaching of persuading people to eat out of thin air.

古文：书约而弟子辩，法省而民讼简，是以圣人之书必著论，明主之法必详尽事。
现代文：书的内容太简约，弟子就会发生争论；法律条文太省略，民众就会争论不休而轻慢不拘。因此圣人著书一定观点鲜明，明君立法一定详尽规定所要裁断的事情。
English: If the content of a book is too simple, disciples will argue; if the legal provisions are too short, the people will argue incessantly and carelessly. Therefore, the sage's writing must have a clear point of view, and the Mingjun legislation must exhaustively stipulate the matters to be adjudicated.

古文：尽思虑，揣得失，智者之所难也；无思无虑，挈前言而责后功，愚者之所易也。
现代文：竭尽思虑，估量得失，聪盼人也感到困难；不动脑筋，根据已有的法律条例来责求当前事务的功效，愚笨的人也容易做到。
English: It is difficult for the thoughtful, for the discerning, for the hopeful; it is easy for the stupid, for the thoughtless, to demand the efficiency of current affairs in accordance with the existing laws and regulations.

古文：明主虑愚者之所易，以责智者之所难，故智虑力劳不用而国治也。
现代文：明君采用愚笨的人也容易做到的途径，不采用聪明人也感到困难的途径，所以不用费心费力，国家就可以治理好。
English: Ming Jun uses the way that is easy for stupid people to do, and does not use the way that is difficult for smart people. Therefore, the country can be governed well without much effort.

古文：酸甘咸淡，不以口断而决于宰尹，则厨人轻君而重于宰尹矣。
现代文：酸甜咸淡究竟如何，如果不亲自用嘴品尝而取决于主管饭食的官员，厨师们就会轻视君主而尊重小官了。
English: Chefs would despise monarchs and respect minor officials if they didn't personally taste the sour, sweet, salty and light taste of the food and it depended on the officials in charge of the meal.

古文：上下清浊，不以耳断而决于乐正，则瞽工轻君而重于乐正矣。
现代文：音乐的高低清浊，如果不亲自去听作出判断而取决于主管乐队的官吏，奏乐的盲人们就会轻视君主而尊重乐官了。
English: If it were up to the officials in charge of the orchestra to judge the quality of the music without personally listening to it, the blind musicians would despise the monarch and respect the musicians.

古文：治国是非，不以术断而决于宠人，则臣下轻君而重于宠人矣。
现代文：治国的是非得失，如果不通过政治手段来判断而取决于宠臣，臣下就会轻视君主而尊重宠臣了。
English: Governing the country is a must-win situation. If it is not judged through political means and depends on the favorite, the subjects will despise the monarch and respect the favorite.

古文：人主不亲观听，而制断在下，托食于国者也。
现代文：君主不亲自了解政事，而让臣下来决断一切，自己就会变成寄食在国内的客人了。
English: If the monarch does not personally understand the political affairs, but lets the vassal come down and decide everything, he will become a guest eating in the country.

古文：使人不衣不食而不饥不寒，又不恶死，则无事上之意。
现代文：假使人们不吃不穿而不饿不冷，又不怕死，就没有待奉君主的愿望了。
English: If people do not eat, do not wear clothes, do not feel hungry or cold, and do not fear death, there will be no desire to serve the monarch.

古文：意欲不宰于君，则不可使也。
现代文：意愿不受君主控制，君主就无法加以支使。
English: If the will is not under the monarch's control, the monarch cannot direct it.

古文：今生杀之柄在大臣，而主令得行者，未尝有也。
现代文：如果让生杀大权落到大臣手里，而君命仍得贯彻执行的，那是从来没有过的。
English: If the power of life and death were to fall into the hands of a minister, and the sovereign's orders still had to be carried out, that would be unprecedented.

古文：虎豹必不用其爪牙而与鼷鼠同威，万金之家必不用其富厚而与监门同资。
现代文：虎豹不用它的爪牙，就会和小家鼠的威风无异；拥有万贯家财的人不使用他雄厚的资产，就会跟看门人一样贫穷。
English: The tiger and the leopard, if they do not use their minions, will be as powerful as mice; the man of great wealth, if he does not use his great assets, will be as poor as a janitor.

古文：有土之君，说人不能利，恶人不能害，索人欲畏重己，不可得也。
现代文：拥有国土的君主，喜欢某人而不能给他好处，憎恶某人而不能给他处罚；要想求得别人畏惧并尊重自己，是不可能的。
English: It is impossible for a sovereign lord of a country to like a man without doing him some good, to hate a man without punishing him, and to be feared and respected by others.

古文：人臣肆意陈欲曰 侠 ，人主肆意陈欲曰 乱 ；人臣轻上曰 骄 ，人主轻下曰 暴 。
现代文：臣子随心所欲被说成是侠，君主随心所欲被说成是乱；臣下轻慢君主被说成是骄，君主轻视臣下被说成是暴。
English: A vassal can be said to be a knight at will, a monarch can be said to be a ruffian at will; a vassal who despises a monarch can be said to be arrogant, and a monarch who despises a vassal can be said to be violent.

古文：行理同实，下以受誉，上以得非。
现代文：这两种行为实质是相同的，但臣下因此受到称誉，君主因此遭到诽谤。
English: The two actions are essentially the same, but the vassal is praised for it and the sovereign is slandered for it.

古文：人臣大得，人主大亡。
现代文：臣子得到很多好处，君主却要蒙受重大损失。
English: The vassal receives many benefits, but the monarch has to suffer heavy losses.

古文：明主之国，有贵臣，无重臣。
现代文：在明君的国家里，有贵臣而没有重臣。
English: In Ming Jun's country, there are vassals but no senior vassals.

古文：贵臣者，爵尊而官大也；重臣者，言听而力多者也。
现代文：所谓贵臣，就是爵位尊贵而职务高的官员；所谓重臣，就是主张被君主采用、势力又大的臣子。
English: The so-called vassal is an official with a high rank and high position; the so-called senior vassal is a powerful vassal who advocates being adopted by the monarch.

古文：明主之国，迁官袭级，官爵受功，故有贵臣。言不度行而有伪，必诛，故无重臣也。
现代文：在明君的国家里，升官晋级，赐予爵位，根据都在于他们的功劳，所以就有贵臣出现；而对于那些言行不一、弄虚作假的人，必然地给予重罚，所以就没有重臣存在。
English: In the country of Mingjun, the promotion of officials and the granting of peerages are based on their merits, so there are high-ranking ministers; and for those who do not act in accordance with their words and deeds, and who are deceitful, they are inevitably given heavy punishment, so there are no high-ranking ministers.

