古文：邵惠公颢子什肥导、护什肥子胄导子广亮翼椿众杞简公连莒庄公洛生子菩提虞国公仲子兴邵惠公颢，太祖之长兄也。
现代文：邵惠公宇文颢，是太祖的长兄。
English: Shao Huigong Yuwenqian is the eldest brother of the great-grandfather.

古文：德皇帝娶乐浪王氏，是为德皇后。
现代文：德皇帝娶了乐浪人王氏，造就是德皇后。
English: The German Emperor married the Le Ronin Wang clan, making her the German Empress.

古文：生颢，次杞简公连，次莒庄公洛生，次太祖。
现代文：德皇后生下宇文颢，其次是杞简公宇文连，再次是吕庄公宇文洛生，又次是太祖。
English: Empress De gave birth to Uwen Yao, followed by Jian Gong Uwen Lian, Luzhuang Gong Uwen Lousheng, and then Taizu.

古文：颢性至孝，德皇后崩，哀毁过礼，乡党咸敬异焉。
现代文：宇文颢极为孝顺，德皇后去世后，他哀痛异常伤损身体超越了礼制，乡里的人都惊异敬重他。
English: After the death of the German Empress, his grief and unusually injured body exceeded the etiquette, and the people in the village were surprised and respected him.

古文：德皇帝与卫可孤战于武川南河，临阵坠马，颢与数骑奔救，击杀数十人，贼众披靡，德皇帝乃得上马引去。
现代文：德皇帝与卫可孤在武川南河交战，战斗中落马，宇文颢和几名骑兵奔去救援，杀死了几十个人，贼兵逃走，德皇帝才得以上马退去。
English: The German emperor and Wei Kekuo fought in the South River of Wuchuan. He fell off his horse during the battle. Yu Wenjun and several cavalrymen ran to the rescue and killed dozens of people. The robber soldiers fled, and the German emperor had to retreat on horseback.

古文：俄而贼追骑大至，颢遂战殁。
现代文：不久敌军追赶的骑兵蜂摊而至，宇文颢于是战死。
English: Soon after, the enemy chased the cavalry and Uwen Yao was killed in the battle.

古文：保定初，追赠太师、柱国大将军、大冢宰、大都督、恒朔等十州诸军事、恒州刺史。
现代文：保定初年，他被追赠为太师、柱国大将军、大冢宰、大都督、恒朔等十州诸军事、恒州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was posthumously awarded the titles of Grand Master, General of the Pillar State, Grand Empress Dowager, Grand Governor, Military Commander of the Ten States including Hengshuo, and Historian of Hengshuo.

古文：封邵国公，邑万户。
现代文：封为邵国公，食邑一万户。
English: It was given the title of Shao Guogong, and served 10,000 households.

古文：谥曰惠。
现代文：谧号为蛊。
English: His posthumous name is.

古文：颢三子什肥、导、护。护别有传。
现代文：皇塞题有宇文什肥、室塞遵、圭塞谨三个儿子宇文护另有传记。
English: The three sons of Emperor Seti, Uwen Shihi, Murose Zun, and Guisei, also have biographies.

古文：什肥年十五而惠公殁，自伤早孤，事母以孝闻。
现代文：室文什肥在十五岁时父亲邵惠公就死去，自己为早年失去父亲而悲伤，事奉鸥亲以孝顺而闻名。
English: At the age of fifteen, Shuhi's father Shao Huigong died. He was saddened by the loss of his father at an early age and was known for his filial piety.

古文：永安中，太祖入关，什肥不能离母，遂留晋阳。
现代文：蛆年间，主担进入盟中，宇文什肥不能离开母亲，于是留在晋阳。
English: In the year of the rooster, the principal entered the league, and Uwen Shihi could not leave his mother, so he stayed in Jinyang.

古文：及太祖定秦、陇，什肥为齐神武所害。
现代文：太祖平定了秦、陇一带后，皇塞仕胆被齐控迭杀害。
English: After Emperor Taizu had pacified the Qin and Qian regions, Emperor Xie Shiyi was killed in a series of executions.

古文：保定初，追赠大将军、小冢宰、大都督、冀定等州诸军事、冀州刺史。
现代文：堡室初年，他被追赠为大将军、小冢宰、大都督、冀州、定州等州诸军事、冀州刺史。
English: In the first year of the castle room, he was posthumously awarded the title of general, petty governor, grand governor, military governor of Jizhou, Dingzhou and other provinces, and historian of Jizhou.

古文：袭爵邵国公。
现代文：承袭邵国公的爵位。
English: He inherits the title of Shao Guogong.

古文：谥曰景。
现代文：谧号为景。
English: The scene is set for the new year.

古文：子冑嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文胄继承他的爵位。
English: His son Baekhyun succeeded him.

古文：冑少而孤贫，颇有干略。
现代文：宇文胄年幼时就丧父贫困，很有才能谋略。
English: He lost his father at a young age and grew up in poverty. He was very capable of strategizing.

古文：景公之见害也，以年幼下蚕室。
现代文：量公被害后，室塞皇以年幼之躯被施予宫刑。
English: After the imperial edict was issued, Emperor Shusai was given a palace punishment for his young body.

古文：保定初，诏以晋公护子会绍景公封。
现代文：堡定初年，太祖下诏以晋公宇文护的儿子宇文会继承景公的封号。
English: In the first year of fortification, the great-great-grandfather issued an edict that Jin Gong's son, Uwen Hui, would inherit Jinggong's title.

古文：天和中，与齐通好，冑始归关中。
现代文：天和年问，北周与北齐通好，宇文胄才回到关中。
English: As far as the weather and the year are concerned, North Zhou and North Qi had a good relationship, and it was only after that that Uwen Zang returned to Guanzhong.

古文：授大将军、开府仪同三司，袭爵邵公。
现代文：被任为大将军、开府仪同三司，承袭邵公的爵号。
English: He was appointed as the grand general, Kaifu Yi Tong San Si, inheriting Shao Gong's title.

古文：寻除宗师中大夫，进位大将军，出为原州刺史，转荥州刺史。
现代文：不久又任宗师中大夫，升任大将军，外任为原州刺史，又改任荣州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the head teacher, junior doctor, and promoted to general. He was also appointed as the governor of Wonju and the governor of Wonju.

古文：大象末，隋文帝辅政，冑举州兵应尉迟迥，与清河公杨素战，败，遂走，追获于石济，遂斩之。
现代文：大象末年，隋文帝辅佐朝政，宇文胄起兵响应尉迟迥，与清河公杨素作战，战败，于是逃走，在石济被追上捉住，于是被杀死。
English: In the last years of the elephant, the Sui and Wen dynasties assisted and supported the imperial government, and Uwen Hui raised an army in response to the delayed response, fought with the Qing River King Yang Su, was defeated, then fled, was caught in Shijie, and was killed.

古文：国除。
现代文：封国被撤销。
English: His fiefdom was abolished.

古文：干仁，幼好学，聪惠。
现代文：宇文会字干仁，年幼时喜欢学习，聪明智慧。
English: Uwunkai's character, Ganren, liked to study when he was young, and was smart and wise.

古文：魏恭帝二年，以护平江陵之功，赐爵江陵县公。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，因为宇文护平定江陵的功劳，被赐爵号为江陵县公。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was given the title of "Governor of Gangneung County" for his contribution to the defense and pacification of Gangneung.

古文：保定初，绍景公后，拜骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：保定初年，被定为景公的后嗣，拜任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was designated as the heir of King Gyeonggong, and was appointed as the general of the cavalry, the chief of the imperial guard, and the third secretary.

古文：二年，除蒲州潼关六防诸军事、蒲州刺史。
现代文：保定二年，任蒲州潼关六防诸军事、蒲州刺史。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was appointed as the military commander of the six defense zones of Shiguan in Puzhou and the military governor of Puzhou.

古文：冑至自齐，改封谭国公。
现代文：宇文胄从齐回来后，改封为谭国公。
English: After his return from Qi, Uwen Zang changed his title to Tan Guogong.

古文：寻进位柱国。
现代文：不久提升为柱国。
English: It was soon promoted to a pillar state.

古文：建德初，与护同伏诛。
现代文：建德初年，他与宇文护一起被诛杀。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was killed together with Uwen Rong.

古文：三年五月，追赠，复封旧爵。
现代文：建德三年五月，追赠封号，再次被封为原来的爵号。
English: In May of the third year of Jiande, he was awarded a posthumous title and was once again given his original title.

古文：导字菩萨。
现代文：字文导字菩萨。
English: Words lead to words, and words lead to the Buddha.

古文：少雄豪，有仁惠，太祖爱之。
现代文：年少时英武豪迈，仁爱善良，太祖很喜爱他。
English: When he was young, he was brave and heroic, benevolent and kind. Grandfather loved him very much.

古文：初与诸父在葛荣军中，荣败，迁晋阳。
现代文：当初和各位叔父在葛荣的军队中，葛荣失败后，迁居晋阳。
English: At first, he and his uncles were in Ge Rong's army. After Ge Rong's defeat, they moved to Jinyang.

古文：及太祖随贺拔岳入关，导从而西，常从征伐。
现代文：到太祖跟随贺拔岳进入关中时，宇文导随着西行，经常随军出征作战。
English: When Emperor Taizu followed Mt. Hebatake into Guanzhong, Uwenduo followed him westward and often went out to fight with the army.

古文：太祖讨侯莫陈悦，以导为都督，镇原州。
现代文：太祖讨伐侯莫陈悦，任命字文导为都督，镇守原州。
English: The great-great-grandfather fought against the feudal lord Mo Chen Yue, appointed the poet Wen Du as the governor of the capital, and became the town guard of Wonju.

古文：及悦败，北走出故塞，导率骑追之，至牵屯山及悦，斩之，传首京师。
现代文：侯莫陈悦战败，向北逃出故塞，宇文遵率领骑兵追击，到牵屯山追上了侯莫陈悦，将他杀死，把他的首级传送到京城。
English: Hou Mo Chen Yue was defeated and fled north out of the old fortress. Wu Wenzhong led the cavalry in pursuit. He caught up with Hou Mo Chen Yue at Tutun Mountain, killed him, and sent his head to Beijing.

古文：以功封饶阳县侯，邑五百户，拜冠军将军，加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：宇文导因为战功被封为饶阳县侯，食邑五百户，被任为冠军将军，加授通直散骑常侍。
English: Because of his war exploits, Yu Wendao was awarded the title of marquis of Raoyang County, 500 households in the food village, he was appointed as a champion general, and he was also awarded the title of non-commissioned officer.

古文：魏文帝即位，以定策功，进爵为公，增邑五百户，拜使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：魏文帝即位后，因谋立皇帝之功，宇文导升为公爵，增加采邑五百户，被任为使持节、散骑常侍、车骑大将军、左光禄大夫。
English: After Emperor Weiwen ascended to the throne, because of his contribution to the establishment of the emperor, Uwen Du was promoted to duke, increased the number of counties by 500, and was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the rider of the horse, the general of the chariot and the horse, and the doctor of the left light.

古文：三年，太祖东征，导入宿卫，拜领军将军、大都督。
现代文：魏文帝三年，太祖东征，宇文导入宫宿卫，任领军将军、大都督。
English: In the third year of Emperor Weiwen's reign, Emperor Taizu went on an eastward expedition, and Uwen was brought into the palace to serve as the palace guard, the leading general, and the grand governor.

古文：齐神武渡河侵冯翊，太祖自弘农引军入关，导督左右禁旅会于沙苑，与齐神武战，大破之。
现代文：齐神武渡过黄河侵犯遇翅，左担从弓堰率军入题，室塞遵率左右禁军与主担在迎面会合，同变王眯交战，大败敌军。
English: Qi Shenwu crossed the Yellow River to encroach upon and meet the wing, the left shoulder led the army from the bow weir into the subject, and the left and right forbidden army led by Muxi Zun and the main shoulder met face-to-face, and fought with the mutant Wang Xi, and defeated the enemy army.

古文：进位仪同三司。
现代文：被提升为仪同三司。
English: He was promoted to the Third Division of the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.

古文：明年，魏文帝东征，留导为华州刺史。
现代文：第二年，魏文帝束征，留下宇文导任萋州刺史。
English: In the second year, Emperor Weiwen was conscripted, leaving Yuwen as the director of the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：及赵青雀、于伏德、慕容思庆等作乱，导自华州率所部兵击之，擒伏德，斩思庆。
现代文：到趟直雀、王丛彊、塞查墨庆等人叛乱时，圭塞遵从茎州率领所属军队攻击他们，擒获丁于伏德，杀死了慕容思庆。
English: When the rebels including Zhaozhang, Wang Conglu and Secha Moqing rebelled, Guisei followed Zhuozhou and led his army to attack them, captured Ding in Fude, and killed Murong Siqing.

古文：进屯渭桥，会太祖军。
现代文：进兵驻守脑，同左担的军队会合。
English: The marching troops encamped at the head of the line and rendezvoused with the troops on the left.

古文：事平，进爵章武郡公，增邑并前二千户。
现代文：战乱平定后，被加封章武郡公的爵位，增加的采邑同以前的采邑共二千户。
English: After the war was settled, he was given the title of the Duke of Zhangwu County, and the number of villages increased to a total of two thousand, the same as the previous villages.

古文：寻加侍中、开府、骠骑大将军、太子少保。
现代文：不久加授侍中、开府、骠骑大将军、太子少保。
English: He was soon awarded the titles of Samurai Junior High School, Kaifu, Shikitei Taisho, and Taishi Shobo.

古文：高仲密以北豫降，太祖率诸将辅魏皇太子东征，复以导为大都督、华东雍二州诸军事，行华州刺史。
现代文：高仲密率北豫外降，太祖率领各位将领辅佐魏皇太子东征，再次任命宇文导为大都督、华州束雍州二州诸军事，代任华州刺史。
English: Gao Zhongmi led North Henan to abdicate, Taizu led the generals to assist the Eastern Expedition of Crown Prince Wei, and reappointed Yu Wendao as the Grand Governor, Huazhou to command the military of the two states of Yongzhou, and to stand in for Huazhou to make history.

古文：导治兵训卒，得守捍之方。
现代文：宇文导训练士卒，精通防御之道。
English: He is a graduate of the Yuwendu training program and is proficient in the art of defense.

古文：及大军不利，东魏军追至稠桑，知关中有备，乃退。
现代文：等到大军失利，束魏的军队追到稠桑，得知关中已有防备，就退走了。
English: After the defeat of the great army, Shu Wei's army chased the thick mulberry, learned that Guanzhong had been prepared, and retreated.

古文：会侯景举河南来附，遣使请援，朝议将应之，乃征为陇右大都督、秦南等十五州诸军事、秦州刺史。
现代文：正好遇上侯景以黄河以南之地前来归附，派使者来请求援助，朝廷商议准备接应他，于是宇文导被征入任陇右大都督、秦南等十五州诸军事、秦州刺史。
English: It just so happened that Hou Jing came south of the Yellow River to annex it, sent an envoy to request assistance, and the imperial court deliberated to prepare to receive him. As a result, U Wenduo was conscripted into the military of the fifteen states such as Gu Yu, Qin Nan, and Qin State.

古文：及齐氏称帝，太祖发关中兵讨之，魏文帝遣齐王廓镇陇右，征导还朝。
现代文：到齐神武称帝时，太祖调发关中的军队讨伐他，魏文帝派齐王元廓镇守陇右，征召宇文导回朝。
English: When Qi Shenwu was proclaimed emperor, the Great Ancestor dispatched troops from Guanzhong to fight against him. Emperor Weiwen sent Qi Wangyuankuo to guard the town of Zhenyu and conscripted Uwen to return to the imperial court.

古文：拜大将军、大都督、三雍二华等二十三州诸军事，屯咸阳。
现代文：拜任大将军、大都督、三雍二华等二十三州诸军事，驻守咸阳。
English: The military of 23 prefectures, including the general, the grand governor, and Sanyong Erhua, were stationed in Xianyang.

古文：大军还，乃旋旧镇。
现代文：大军回后，宇文导就回到原来镇守的地方。
English: After the return of the large army, Uwenduo returned to the place of the original town guard.

古文：导性宽明，善于抚御，凡所引接，人皆尽诚。
现代文：宇文导性情宽厚贤明，很会安抚控御部下，凡是他推荐提拔的人，都能竭尽忠诚。
English: Yu Wenduo is generous and wise, and is very good at appeasing and controlling his subordinates. Anyone he recommends for promotion can be loyal to the best of his ability.

古文：临事敬慎，常若弗及。
现代文：他处事恭敬谨慎，常常好像惟恐来不及。
English: He is deferential and cautious, and often seems to be running out of time.

古文：太祖每出征讨，导恒居守，深为吏民所附，朝廷亦以此重之。
现代文：太祖每次出征讨伐，宇文导总是留守关中，深得官吏百姓仰附，朝廷也因此看重他。
English: Every time the great-grandfather went out to fight, Uwenduo always stayed behind in Guanzhong. He was deeply admired by the officials and the people, and the imperial court also valued him.

古文：魏恭帝元年十二月，薨于上邽，年四十四。
现代文：魏恭帝元年十二月，死于上郏，终年四十四岁。
English: Emperor Wei Gong died in Shangguan in December of the first year of the year, at the age of forty four.

古文：魏帝遣侍中、渔阳王绳监护丧事。
现代文：魏恭帝派侍中、渔阳王元绳监理他的丧事。
English: Emperor Wei Gong sent an attendant, Yuyang Wang Yuan Rope, to supervise his funeral.

古文：赠本官，加尚书令、秦州刺史，谥曰孝。
现代文：赠给他原来的官职，加授尚书令、秦州刺史，谧号为孝。
English: He was given his original official position, and was additionally awarded the titles of Shang Shuling and Qinzhou Zhishi. His posthumous name was Yu Xiao.

古文：朝议以导抚和西戎，威恩显著，欲令世镇陇右，以彰厥德，乃葬于上邽城西无疆原。
现代文：朝廷商议认为他安抚和辑西戎，威望恩德显著，想让他永远镇守陇右，以彰显他的仁德，于是就将他葬在上郑城西的无疆原。
English: The imperial court deliberated that he appeased and pacified Xi Rong, and his prestige and virtue were remarkable, and they wanted him to keep his right hand forever to show his benevolence, so they buried him in the boundless plains west of Shang Zhengcheng.

古文：华戎会葬有万余人，奠祭于路，悲号满野，皆曰 我君舍我乎 。大小相率，负土成坟，高五十余尺，周回八十余步。
现代文：中外参加他葬礼的人有一万多，在路上祭奠他，到处都是悲伤痛哭声，都说： 我们的君公丢下我们了呀。 众人前后相随，背着土堆成坟丘，高五十多尺，周围八十多步。
English: More than ten thousand people from home and abroad attended his funeral, paying homage to him on the road, and everywhere there were cries of grief and weeping, all saying: Our prince has abandoned us. The people followed behind, carrying mounds of earth into graves, more than fifty feet high, and more than eighty steps around.

古文：为官司所止，然后泣辞而去。
现代文：被官吏制止，众人才哭着离去。
English: After being stopped by officials, everyone left crying.

古文：其遗爱见思如此。
现代文：他留下的仁爱受到人们这样地思念。
English: His legacy of kindness is so sorely missed.

古文：天和五年，重赠太师、柱国、豳国公。
现代文：天和五年，被重新追赠为太师、柱国、豳国公。
English: Ten and five years later, he was posthumously re-awarded the titles of Grand Master, Pillar of the State, and Prince of Shandong Province.

古文：导五子，广、亮、翼、椿、众。
现代文：宇文导有五个儿子，他们是宇文广、宇文亮、宇文翼、宇文椿、宇文众。
English: Uwen Du has five sons, they are Uwen Guang, Uwen Liang, Uwen Ying, Uwen Tsubaki and Uwen Ju.

古文：亮、椿并出后于杞。
现代文：宇文亮、宇文桩都被过继给杞国公为后。
English: Both Uwenliang and Uwenzhu were adopted by the Duke of Shandong.

古文：广字干归。
现代文：字文广字整堡。
English: Word wide character block.

古文：少方严，好文学。
现代文：年少时方正严肃，喜爱文学。
English: When he was young, Fang Zheng was serious and loved literature.

古文：初封永昌郡公。
现代文：开始被封为永昌郡公。
English: He was first appointed as the Yongchang County magistrate.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，改封天水郡公。
现代文：耋菌壶即位后，改封为天水郡公。
English: After the enthronement of Koji Kettle, he was given the title of Lord of Tianshui County.

古文：世宗即位，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，出为秦州刺史。
现代文：世塞即位，字文广任骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，出任塞业刺史。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Zhiwenguang served as the General of the Cavalry, the Kefu Yi and the Three Departments, and the Secretary of State.

古文：武成初，进位大将军，迁梁州总管，进封蔡国公，增邑万户。
现代文：亘递初年，晋升大将军，升任梁州总管，晋封蔡国公，增加采邑一万户。
English: In the first year of Watanabe, he was promoted to the general, promoted to the general manager of Liangzhou, promoted to Cai Guogong, and increased the number of villages by 10,000.

古文：保定初，入为小司寇。
现代文：保定初年，召入任小司寇。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was called up to serve as a minor scout.

古文：寻以本官镇蒲州，兼知潼关等六防诸军事。
现代文：不久，以原来的官职镇守蒲州，兼任潼关等六防诸军事。
English: Soon, with the original official post of guarding the town of Puzhou, he also served as a military guard at six defense posts, including Shaoguan.

古文：年，除秦州总管、十三州诸军事、秦州刺史。
现代文：保定二年，任秦州总管、十三州诸军事、秦州刺史。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was appointed the general manager of Qin State, the military of the thirteen states, and the historian of Qin State.

古文：广性明察，善绥抚，民庶畏而悦之。
现代文：宇文广能明辨事理，善于抚慰人心，百姓对他既敬畏又喜爱。
English: Uwen Guang can clearly distinguish between reason and reason, and is good at soothing people's hearts. The people both fear and love him.

古文：时晋公护诸子及广弟杞国公亮等，服玩侈靡，踰越制度，广独率由礼则，又折节待士，朝野以是称焉。
现代文：当时晋公宇文护的各位儿子和字文广的弟弟杞国公宇文亮等人，服用与玩赏的物品侈奢华丽，超越了制度，宇文广独自遵循礼制，又屈己对待士人，朝廷内外因此都称赞他。
English: At that time, the sons of Jin Gongwu Wenguo and the younger brother of Zhi Wenguo, Ying Guogongwu Wenguangliang, and others, took and played with luxurious items, surpassing the system. Wenguang independently followed the etiquette, and also bowed down to the nobles. Both inside and outside the court praised him for this.

古文：曾侍食于高祖，所食瓜美，持以奉进，高祖悦之。
现代文：他曾经为高祖侍奉饮食，他吃的瓜很甜美，就拿着瓜进奉给高祖，高祖很高兴。
English: He once served meals to Gao Zu. The melon he ate was very sweet, so he took the melon and offered it to Gao Zu. Gao Zu was very happy.

古文：四年，进位柱国。
现代文：保定四年，晋升为柱国。
English: In the fourth year of Baoding, he was promoted to the pillar country.

古文：广以晋公护久擅威权，劝令挹损，护不能纳。
现代文：字文广因为晋公宇文护长时间独揽大权，就劝他减少权势，宇文护没有采纳。
English: Because Jin Gong Uwenguo had monopolized power for a long time, Zi Wenguang advised him to reduce his power, but Uwenguo did not accept.

古文：天和三年，除陕州总管，以病免。
现代文：天和三年，授任陕州总管，因病被免除。
English: Three years ago, he was appointed as the governor of Shaanxi Province. However, he was exempted due to illness.

古文：及孝公追封豳国公，诏广袭爵。
现代文：到孝公被迫封为豳国公后，高祖命宇文广承袭豳国公爵位。
English: After Takaharu was forced to be made Duke of Shikoku, Gaozu ordered Umenko to succeed him as Duke of Shikoku.

古文：初，广母李氏以广患弥年，忧而成疾，因此致没。
现代文：当初，宇文广的母亲李氏因为宇文广生病整整一年，积忧成疾，因此而去世。
English: At first, Mr. Li, the mother of Mr. Wu Wenguang, was worried sick for a whole year because of Mr. Wu Wenguang's illness, and died as a result.

古文：广既居丧，更加绵笃，乃以毁薨。
现代文：宇文广在母亲丧期中，更加病危，因伤损过度而逝世。
English: During the period of his mother's death, Uwenguang became even more critically ill and died from excessive injuries.

古文：世称母为广病，广为母亡，慈孝之道，极于一门。
现代文：世人说他的母亲是因为宇文广而生病，宇文广是因为他的母亲而去世，慈爱和孝顺的道义，盛极于一家。
English: The world said that his mother was ill because of Uwengang, and Uwengang died because of his mother. The morality of love and filial piety prevailed in the family.

古文：高祖素服亲临，百僚毕集。
现代文：高祖身穿素服亲自前往他家，百官也全部到齐。
English: Gao Zu, dressed in plain clothes, personally went to his home, and all the officials also came.

古文：其故吏仪同李充信等上表曰：
现代文：宇文广从前的属吏仪同李充信等人上表说：
English: Wu Wenguang, a former subordinate official, said at the meeting with Li Chunxin and others:

古文：臣闻资孝成忠，生民高义；旌德树善，有国常规。
现代文：臣下们听说积累孝行就会养成忠义，这是生民的大义；表彰仁德树立良善，这是国家的常规。
English: Subjects have heard that the accumulation of filial piety will develop loyalty, which is the great righteousness of the people; the commendation of benevolence to establish goodness, which is the country's routine.

古文：窃惟故豳国公臣广，懿亲令望，具瞻攸在，道冠群后，功懋维城。
现代文：我们私下以为原豳国公臣宇文广，是名声美好的皇室宗亲，至今仍为众人所瞻望，其仁德居各郡守、将领之首，在皇室宗亲中功绩最大。
English: Privately, we thought that the former public official of Shandong Province, Uwenhuang, was a famous royal ancestor, who is still looked up to by many people. His benevolence and virtue ranked first among the county governors and generals, and his achievements were the greatest among the royal ancestors.

古文：受脤建旆，威行秦、陇；班条驱传，化溢崤、函。
现代文：字文广受命领兵，威震秦、陇之地；推行教令，遍及崤山、函谷关一带。
English: Ziwen was widely ordered to lead the troops, shaking the land of Qin and Qi; the implementation of the edict spread throughout the Lushan and Hanyuguan regions.

古文：比腠理舛和，奉诏还阙，药石所及，沉痾渐愈。
现代文：等到他染病在身，奉诏回到京师，经医治，病情逐渐痊愈。
English: When he was still ill, he was ordered to return to the capital. After treatment, his condition gradually improved.

古文：而灾衅仍集，丁此穷忧，至性过人，遂增旧疾，因兹毁顿，以至薨殂。
现代文：可是祸端一起降临，遭遇母亲去世的大忧，他纯厚的孝心超过常人，于是原有的病情更加严重，因此卧病不起，直至死去。
English: However, misfortune struck at the same time, he suffered the great sorrow of his mother's death, and his pure filial piety exceeded that of ordinary people. As a result, his original illness became more serious, so he was bedridden until he died.

古文：寻绎贯切，不能自已。
现代文：我们寻味此情，心中悲伤不已。
English: We feel this and we are heartbroken.

古文：臣等接事，每承余论。
现代文：我们与他共事，经常蒙受他的教诲。
English: We worked with him and were constantly mentored by him.

古文：仰之平昔，约己立身，位极上公，赋兼千乘，所获禄秩，周赡无余，器用服玩，取给而已。
现代文：仰观他平时的言行，总是约束自己修养自身，他身居王公高位，收取的赋税极多，他所获得的俸禄，全部都周济了他人，至于器皿用具服饰玩物，仅够需用而已。
English: Looking up at his usual words and deeds, he always restrained himself and cultivated himself. He was a high-ranking prince, collected a lot of taxes, and all the salaries he received were donated to others. As for utensils, tools, clothing and toys, they were only enough for necessities.

古文：每言及终始，尤存简素。
现代文：他每次谈到身后的丧事，都特别强调要简约朴素。
English: He made a point of keeping things simple whenever he spoke of the tragedy that had befallen him.

古文：非秦政而褒吴礼，讥石椁而美厚薪。
现代文：指责秦朝的暴政而赞扬吴国的礼制，讥讽用石棺厚葬而赞美推崇以厚薪薄葬。
English: Accusing the tyranny of the Qin Dynasty while praising the etiquette of the State of Wu, ridiculing the use of sarcophagi for thick burials while praising and respecting the use of thick and thin burials.

古文：今卜兆有期，先远方及，诚恐一从朝露，此志莫伸。
现代文：如今地选墓的时间已经临近，出殡埋葬的日期已经到来，我们担心他人生短暂，而他的这种心愿不能伸张。
English: Now that the time for choosing a grave is approaching, and the date for the funeral and burial has arrived, we are worried that his life is short and his wish cannot be carried out.

古文：伏惟陛下弘不世之慈，垂霈然之泽，留情既往，降愍幽魂，爰敕有司，申其宿志，窀穸之礼，庶存俭约。
现代文：念及陛下弘扬罕见的慈爱，施舆莫大的恩泽，以前给他倾注的恩情已随他远去，那么就将哀怜他的感情赐给他的幽魂，下令给有关官吏，伸张他的宿愿，埋葬的礼节，应当保持节俭。
English: Remembering that His Majesty has shown rare kindness, bestowed great favors, and that the favors previously showered on him have gone with him, then bestow the feelings of pity on his ghost, order the relevant officials to carry out his long-cherished wish, and the burial etiquette should be kept frugal.

古文：诏曰： 省充信等表，但增哀悼。
现代文：高祖下韶说： 看了李充信等人的奏表，更增加了我的哀悼之情。
English: Gao Zu said, "Seeing the report card of Li Chunxin and others has increased my feelings of mourning.

古文：豳国公广藩屏令望，宗室表仪，言着身文，行成士则。
现代文：豳国公宇文广是藩王的楷模，宗室的表率，他的言论为自己增添了光彩，他的行为成为了士人的准则。
English: Gongwu Wenguang of the State of Shandong was the model of the king of the domain and the example of the family. His speech added luster to himself, and his behavior became the standard for scholars.

古文：方凭懿戚，用匡朝政，奄丁荼蓼，便致毁灭。
现代文：正当他凭藉皇亲的身份，匡扶朝廷政治的时候，突然遭受丧母的痛苦，以至于逝世。
English: Just when he was using his status as a member of the imperial family to support the politics of the imperial court, he suddenly suffered the pain of losing his mother and died.

古文：启手归全，无忘雅操。
现代文：他尽孝善终，不要忘记他高雅的情操。
English: He did his best to be a filial son, and don't forget his high morals.

古文：言念既往，震于厥心。
现代文：追思往昔，心中震痛。
English: My heart aches as I think back on the past.

古文：昔河间才藻，追叙于中尉；东海谦约，见称于身后。
现代文：从前河间王才思华美，被迫任为中尉；束海王谦逊简约，死后被人称颂。
English: In the past, King Kawama was a brilliant thinker and was forced to be appointed as a lieutenant; King Sokkai was humble and simple, and was praised after his death.

古文：可斟酌前典，率由旧章。
现代文：可以参照从前的典制，遵循原来的规章。
English: You can refer to the previous licensing system and follow the original regulations.

古文：使易箦之言，得申遗志；黜殡之请，无亏令终。 于是赠本官，加太保。
现代文：使宇文广临终的话和生前的志愿得以伸张；节俭殡葬的请求，不会亏损他至死保持着的美好的名声。 于是追赠宇文广原来的官职，加封太保。
English: The request for a frugal funeral would not compromise the good reputation that he had maintained until his death, so he posthumously bestowed on Uwen Guang his former official post and the title of Tai Po.

古文：葬于陇西。
现代文：葬于陇西。
English: He was buried in Shaanxi Province.

古文：所司一遵诏旨，并存俭约。
现代文：有关官员也完全按照韶书中的旨意，一切都节俭从事。
English: The officials concerned are also fully in accordance with the will of the imperial edict, and everything is done sparingly.

古文：子洽嗣。大定中，隋文辅政，以宗室被害，国除。
现代文：宇文广的儿子宇文洽承袭了他的爵位。大定年间，隋文帝辅佐朝政，宇文洽因为是北周的宗室而被杀害，封国被撤销。
English: The son of Uwen Guang, Uwen Cai, succeeded to his title. During the reign of Emperor Datong, when the Sui and Wen dynasties were in power, Uwen Cai was killed because she was the ancestral wife of Northern Zhou, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：亮字干德。
现代文：宇文亮字干德。
English: Yuwen Liangzhu Gangde.

古文：武成初，封永昌郡公。
现代文：武成初年，被封为永昌郡公。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wu, he was named Yongchang County Grand Duke.

古文：后袭烈公爵，除开府仪同三司、梁州总管。
现代文：后来承袭烈公的爵位，任开府仪同三司、梁州总管。
English: Later, he inherited the title of Ryogong and was appointed as the third secretary of Kaifu Yi Tong and the general manager of Liangzhou.

古文：天和末，拜宗师中大夫，进位大将军。
现代文：天和末年，拜任宗师中大夫，晋升大将军。
English: At the end of his life, he succeeded his father as junior doctor and was promoted to general.

古文：豳国公薨，以亮为秦州总管，广之所部，悉以配焉。
现代文：豳国公死后，任命宇文亮为秦州总管，宇文广的部属，全部分配给他。
English: After the death of Qin Guogong, he appointed Uwen Liang as the general manager of Qin State, and all the subordinates of Uwen Guang were assigned to him.

古文：亮在州甚无政绩。
现代文：宇文亮在秦州没有丝毫的政绩。
English: Yu Wenliang did not have the slightest political achievement in Qinzhou.

古文：寻进位柱国。
现代文：不久晋升为柱国。
English: It was soon promoted to a pillar state.

古文：晋公护诛后，亮心不自安，唯纵酒而已。
现代文：晋公宇文护被诛杀后，宇文亮心中不安，衹有纵情饮酒而已。
English: After Jin Gong Uwen Rong was beaten to death, Uwen Liang felt uneasy and indulged in heavy drinking.

古文：高祖手敕让之。
现代文：高祖亲自写诏书指责他。
English: Gaozu personally wrote an imperial edict to rebuke him.

古文：建德中，高祖东伐，以亮为右第二军总管。
现代文：建德年间，高祖束征，任命宇文亮为右第二军总管。
English: During the Jiande era, Gao Zu was conscripted and appointed Yu Wenliang as the commander of the Second Army of the Right.

古文：并州平，进位上柱国。
现代文：并州平定后，他被晋升为上柱国。
English: And after the state was pacified, he was promoted to the top pillar state.

古文：仍从平邺，迁大司徒。
现代文：仍然跟随高祖平定邺城，提升为大司徒。
English: He still followed Gao Zu in conquering Shicheng and was promoted to Daishi.

古文：宣帝即位，出为安州总管。
现代文：宣帝即位后，出任安州总管。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, he served as the Governor of Anzhou.

古文：大象初，诏以亮为行军总管，与元帅、郧国公韦孝宽等伐陈。
现代文：大象初年，宣帝任命宇文亮为行军总管，同元帅、郧国公韦孝宽等人一起讨伐陈国。
English: In the first year of the elephant, Emperor Xuan appointed Wu Wenliang as the general manager of the march, and together with the marshal, Wei Xiaokuan, the Duke of Shandong, and others, they fought against Chen.

古文：亮自安陆道攻拔黄城，辄破江侧民村，掠其生口，以赐士卒。
现代文：字文亮从安陆出发攻陷黄城，又立刻攻破长江边目姓的村庄，抢掠那裹的人，赏赐给士卒。
English: Zhu Wenliang set out from Anlu to invade Huangcheng, and immediately broke through the villages along the Yangtze River, robbed the people there, and rewarded the soldiers.

古文：军还至豫州，亮密谓长史杜士峻曰： 主上淫纵滋甚，社稷将危。
现代文：部队回师到豫州，宇文亮偷偷地对长史杜士峻说： 皇上更加荒淫纵欲，国家将会危亡。
English: When the troops returned to Yuzhou, Yu Wenliang secretly said to Changshi Du Shizhun: "If the emperor indulges in more debauchery, the country will be in danger."

古文：吾既忝宗枝，不忍坐见倾覆。
现代文：我既然忝为宗室，不忍心袖手旁观国家灭亡。
English: Since I am a descendant, I cannot bear to stand by and watch the country's demise.

古文：今若袭取郧国公而并其众，推诸父为主，鼓行而前，谁敢不从。 遂夜将数百骑袭孝宽营。
现代文：现在如果偷袭郧国公而吞并他的军队，推举各位叔伯父为君主，大张旗鼓地前进，有谁敢不听从。 于是在夜晚率领几百名骑兵偷袭韦孝宽的大营。
English: Now, if you were to attack the Duke of Shan and absorb his army, and promote your uncles and uncles as monarchs, and advance with great fanfare, who would dare not to obey? So, at night, he led several hundred cavalry to attack Wei Xiaokuan's large camp.

古文：会亮国官茹宽知其谋，先以驰告，孝宽乃设备。
现代文：正好宇文亮封国的属官茹宽得知他的阴谋，事先迅速报告了韦孝宽，韦孝宽于是作好了防备。
English: Just at that time, Ru Kuan, a subordinate official of the state of Uwen Lianghu, learned of his plot and quickly reported to Wei Xiaokuan in advance. Wei Xiaokuan then made preparations.

古文：亮不克，遯走，孝宽追斩之。
现代文：宇文亮失败，逃走，韦孝宽追上杀死了他。
English: Yu Wenliang failed and ran away. Wei Xiaokang caught up with him and killed him.

古文：子明坐亮诛。
现代文：他的儿子宇文明因宇文亮而获罪被诛杀。
English: His son, U Bunmei, was beaten to death after being found guilty because of Uwenliang.

古文：诏以亮弟椿为烈公后。
现代文：宣帝下诏任命宇文亮的弟弟宇文桩作为烈公的后嗣
English: Emperor Xuan issued a decree appointing Uwenliang's younger brother, Uwenzhuan, as the heir to the throne

古文：翼字干宜。
现代文：宇文翼字室道。
English: Uwen Tsubasa's calligraphy workshop.

古文：武成初，封西阳郡公。
现代文：亘眯初年，被封为西阳郡公。
English: In the first year of his reign, he was made the governor of Xiyang County.

古文：早薨，谥曰昭。
现代文：早年去世，谧号为昭。
English: He died at an early age, and his nickname was Zhao.

古文：无子，以杞国公亮子温为嗣。
现代文：他没有儿子，以杞国公宇文亮的儿子宇文温作为后嗣。
English: He did not have a son, so he chose Uwenwen, the son of Uwenliang, the governor of Shan State, as his heir.

古文：后坐亮反诛，国除。
现代文：后来宇文温因为宇文亮谋反而获罪被诛杀，封国被撤销。
English: Later, Uwenwen was killed because he was found guilty of conspiring with Uwen Liang, and the state seal was revoked.

古文：椿字干寿。
现代文：宇文椿字干寿。
English: The characters "宇文椿" and "干寿" are rhymes.

古文：初封永昌郡公。
现代文：开始被封为永昌郡公。
English: He was first appointed as the Yongchang County magistrate.

古文：保定中，授开府仪同三司、宗师中大夫。
现代文：保定年间，任开府仪同三司、宗师中大夫。
English: During his time in Baoding, he held the positions of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji and Soshi Junior High School Teacher.

古文：建德初，加大将军。
现代文：建德初年，加授大将军。
English: In the first year of Jiande, he was promoted to major general.

古文：寻除岐州刺史。
现代文：不久任岐州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Qizhou.

古文：四年，关中民饥，椿表陈其状，玺书劳慰。
现代文：建德四年，关中百姓饥荒，宇文椿上表陈述那裹的状况，高祖用玉玺封记诏书慰劳他。
English: In the four years of Jiande, Guanzhong people suffered from famine. Uwen Tsubaki made a report on the situation in Guanzhong, and Gao Zuo consoled him with an imperial edict sealed with a jade seal.

古文：因令所在开仓赈恤。
现代文：因而下令当地官府开仓赈恤灾民。
English: As a result, the local government was ordered to open a warehouse to accommodate the victims.

古文：四年，高祖东伐，椿与齐王宪攻拔武济等五城。
现代文：建德四年，高祖东征，宇文椿与齐王宇文宪攻陷武济等五座城。
English: In the fourth year of Jiande, Gao Zu marched eastward, and Uwen Tsubaki and Qi Wang Uwen Xian captured Wuji and other five cities.

古文：五年，高祖出晋州，椿率众屯栖鸡原。
现代文：建德五年，高祖从晋州出兵，宇文椿率兵驻守栖鸡原。
English: In the fifth year of Jiande, Gaozu sent troops from Jinzhou, and Uwencun led the troops to garrison Qiqihara.

古文：宣帝即位，拜大司寇。
现代文：宣帝即位后，拜任大司寇。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xuan, he took over the post of Grand Secretary of the Kuomintang.

古文：亮诛后，诏令绍烈公封。
现代文：宇文亮被诛杀后，宣帝下诏命他继承烈公的封号。
English: After Uwen Liang was beaten to death, Emperor Xuan decreed that he should inherit the title of "hero."

古文：寻进位上柱国，转大司徒。
现代文：不久升任上柱国，又改任大司徒。
English: He was soon promoted to the post of Shangzhu Guo, and then to the post of Daishi.

古文：大定初，为隋文帝所害，并其五子西阳公道宗、本、仁邻、武子、礼献。
现代文：大定初年，被隋文帝杀害，一同被害的还有他的五个儿子西阳公宇文道宗、宇文本、宇文仁邻、宇文武子、宇文礼献。
English: In the first year of Dading, he was killed by Emperor Sui Wen, together with his five sons, Xiyang Gong, Uwen Daozong, Uwen Wenjun, Uwen Renjiao, Uwen Wu Zi and Uwen Li Xian.

古文：众字干道。
现代文：宇文众字整道。
English: The path of Uwen Zongzha is clear.

古文：保定初，封天水郡公。
现代文：游初年，被封为天水郡公。
English: In the first year of the tour, he was made the governor of Tianshui County.

古文：少而不惠，语默不常，人莫能测。
现代文：他年少时较愚笨，闭口不语不同于常人，别人都不能揣度到他的心思。
English: When he was young, he was more stupid, he was taciturn, unlike ordinary people, and others could not fathom his thoughts.

古文：隋文帝践极，初欲封为介公，后复诛之，并二子仲和、孰伦。
现代文：隋文帝即位后，开始准备封他为立公，后来又杀死了他，一同被杀的还有他的两个儿子宇文仲和、宇文孰伦。
English: After the Sui Emperor ascended to the throne, he began to prepare to make him emperor, and later killed him, along with his two sons, Uwen Zhonghe and Uwen Yulun.

古文：杞简公连，幼而谨厚，临敌果毅。
现代文：杞简公宇文连，年幼时恭谨敦厚，临阵果敢刚毅。
English: Yan Jiangong and Yu Wenlian, when they were young, were respectful and dignified, and they were courageous and strong-willed.

古文：随德皇帝逼定州，军于唐河，遂俱殁。
现代文：他跟随德皇帝进逼定州，屯兵在唐河，于是同德皇帝一起阵亡。
English: He followed the German emperor into forced Dingzhou, stationed troops in the Tang River, and then died together with the German emperor.

古文：保定初，追赠使持节、太傅、柱国大将军、大司徒、大都督、定冀等十州诸军事、定州刺史；封杞国公，邑五千户；谥曰简。
现代文：保定初年，他被迫赠为使持节、太傅、柱国大将军、大司徒、大都督、定州冀州等十州诸军事、定州刺史；封杞国公，食邑五千户；谧号为简。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was forced to give the military of ten states, including Jingshou and Jizhou, the military of ten states, including Jingshou and Jizhou, and the history of Jingshou, as well as 5,000 households of food villages; his nickname was Jian.

古文：子宝为齐神武所害。
现代文：他的儿子宇文元宝被齐神武杀害。
English: His son, Uwen Genpo, was killed by Qi Shenwu.

古文：保定初，追赠大将军、小司徒、都督、幽燕等六州诸军事、幽州刺史。
现代文：保定初年，被迫赠为大将军、小司徒、大都督、幽州燕州等六州诸军事、幽州刺史。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was forced to be presented as the grand general, Xiao Szeto, the grand governor, Yuzhou Yanzhou and other six states of military and Yuzhou stabbing history.

古文：袭爵杞国公，谥曰烈。
现代文：承袭杞国公爵位，谧号为烈。
English: He succeeded to the title of Duke of Shandong Province, and his posthumous name was Deng Rong.

古文：以章武公导子亮嗣。
现代文：以章武公宇文导的儿子宇文亮作为他的后嗣。
English: He named Uwen Liang, the son of Zhangwukong Uwen Du, as his heir.

古文：莒庄公洛生，少任侠，尚武艺，及壮，有大度，好施爱士。
现代文：莒庄公宇文洛生，年少时为人仗义，喜爱武艺，到壮年时，有阔达的度量，喜欢施财敬爱文士。
English: When he was young, he was a virtuous person and loved martial arts. When he was in his prime, he was generous and liked to give money and loved scribes.

古文：北州贤俊，皆与之游，而才能多出其下。
现代文：北州的贤人俊士，都同他交往，但才能大多比不上他。
English: All the wise men and handsome men in the north of the state have had dealings with him, but most of them are no match for his talent.

古文：及葛荣破鲜于修礼，乃以洛生为渔阳王，仍领德皇帝余众。
现代文：到葛荣击败鲜于修礼后，就任命宇文洛生为渔阳王，仍然统领德皇帝余留的军队。
English: After Ge Rong defeated Shanzhixi, he appointed Uwen Lousheng as Yuyang King, still leading the remaining troops of the German Emperor.

古文：时人皆呼为洛生王。
现代文：当时的人都称他为洛生王。
English: At that time, people called him the King of Luosheng.

古文：洛生善将士，帐下多骁勇。
现代文：宇文洛生善于统御将士，他的属下大多是骁勇的人。
English: Uwenluo was good at commanding generals, and most of his subordinates were brave men.

古文：至于攻战，莫有当其锋者，是以克获常冠诸军。
现代文：到了作战时，没有能抵挡住他锋芒的人，所以他攻克和获取的地方经常居于各军的首位。
English: When it came to fighting, there was no one who could stand up to his sharpness, so the places he conquered and acquired often ranked first in each army.

古文：尔朱荣定山东，收诸豪杰，迁于晋阳，洛生时在虏中。
现代文：尔宋荣平定山东后，收捕各路豪杰，将他们迁到晋阳，宇文洛生当时也在俘虏之中。
English: After the Song and Rong dynasties conquered Shandong, they captured all the heroes and moved them to Jinyang. At that time, Uwen Lousheng was also among the captives.

古文：荣雅闻其名，心惮之。
现代文：尔朱荣平时就听说他的大名，心中对他很忌惮。
English: Le Zhu Rong had heard of his daimyo in ordinary times, and was wary of him in his heart.

古文：寻为荣所害。
现代文：不久字文洛生就被尔朱荣杀害。
English: Soon after, Luo Sheng was killed by Er Zhu Rong.

古文：保定初，追赠使持节、太保、柱国大将军、大冢宰、大宗伯、大都督、并肆等十州诸军事、并州刺史；封莒国公，邑五千户；谥曰庄。
现代文：保定初年，他被追赠为使持节、太保、柱国大将军、大冢宰、大宗伯、大都督、并州肆州等十州诸军事、并州刺史；封为莒国公，食邑五千户；谧号为庄。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was posthumously awarded the titles of the military commander of ten states, such as the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, the military commander of ten states, and the military commander of ten states.

古文：子菩提，为齐神武所害。
现代文：宇文洛生的儿子宇文菩提，被齐神武杀害。
English: Uwen Bodhi, the son of Uwen Losheng, was killed by Qi Shenwu.

古文：保定初，追赠大将军、小宗伯、大都督、肆恒等六州诸军事、肆州刺史，袭爵莒国公，谥曰穆。
现代文：保定初年，被追赠为大将军、小宗伯、大都督、肆州恒州等六州诸军事、肆州刺史，承袭莒国公的爵号，谧号为穆。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was posthumously awarded the titles of grand general, small Zongbo, grand governor, Zhou Hengzhou and other six states of military and Zhou Zhishi, inheriting the title of Zangguogong, and his nickname was Mu.

古文：以晋公护子至为嗣。
现代文：以晋公宇文护的儿子宇文至作为他的后嗣。
English: He named Uwenshi, the son of Shinkong Uwenshu, as his heir.

古文：至字干附。初封崇业公，后袭穆公爵。
现代文：宇文至字干附开始被封为崇业公，后来承袭穆公爵号。
English: At first, Uwen Zi Zi Gan Zui was given the title of Chongye Gong, and later he inherited the title of Duke of Mu.

古文：建德初，父护诛，诏以卫王直子宾为穆公后。
现代文：建德初年，因为他的父亲字文护而获罪被诛杀，高祖命以卫王宇文直的儿子宇文宾作为穆公的后嗣。
English: In the first year of Jiande, because his father, Zi Wen Gu, was found guilty and killed, Gao Zu ordered that Uwenbin, the son of Wei Wang Uwennao, be the heir of Mu Gong.

古文：三年，追复至爵。
现代文：建德三年，又追封恢复宇文至的爵号。
English: After three years of Jiande, the title of Yu Wenzhi was restored.

古文：宾字干瑞。
现代文：宇文宾字干瑞。
English: Wu Wenbin is pronounced Gan Rui.

古文：寻坐直诛。
现代文：他承袭穆公爵位不久因宇文直而获罪被诛杀。
English: Soon after he succeeded to the Dukedom of Mu, he was convicted of treason and beaten to death.

古文：建德六年，更以齐王宪子广都公袭爵。
现代文：建德六年，改为齐王宇文宪的儿子广都公宇文贡承袭爵位。
English: In the sixth year of Jiande, it was changed to the son of Qi Wang Yuwenxian, Guangdu Gongwu Wengong, inheriting the title.

古文：字干祯。
现代文：宇文贡字干祯。
English: The characters "宇文貢" and "干" were changed.

古文：宣帝初，被诛，国除。
现代文：宣帝初年，被诛杀，封国被撤销。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xuan, he was assassinated, and the state was revoked.

古文：虞国公仲，德皇帝从父兄也。
现代文：虞国公宇文仲，是德皇帝的堂兄。
English: Yu Guogong Uwenzhong was a cousin of the German Emperor.

古文：卒于代。
现代文：死在代地。
English: He died on the spot.

古文：保定初，追赠使持节、太傅、柱国大将军、大司徒、大都督、燕平等十州诸军事、燕州刺史；封虞国公，邑三千户。
现代文：保定初年，被迫赠为使持节、太傅、柱国大将军、大司徒、大都督、游业圣业等十州诸军事、燕州刺史；封为虞国公，食邑三千户。
English: In the first year of Baoding, he was forced to present the military of the ten states and the history of Yanzhou to the military of the ten states, such as the Jizhi Festival, the Taifu, the general of the pillar state, the big Sittu, the big governor, and the holy cause of tourism; he was awarded the title of Yu Guogong, and there were three thousand households in the food village.

古文：子兴嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文兴承袭了他的爵位。
English: His son, Uwen Xing, inherited his title.

古文：兴生，兵乱，与仲相失，年又冲幼，莫知其戚属远近。
现代文：宇文兴出生时，正逢战乱，与宇文仲失散，他又年幼，不知道亲戚的亲疏远近。
English: When Uwen Xing was born, the war was raging, and he and Uwen Zhong were separated. He was young and did not know how close relatives were.

古文：与太祖兄弟，初不相识。
现代文：和太祖兄弟们，开始互不认识。
English: And the great-grandparents, they don't know each other.

古文：齐神武寇沙苑，兴预在行间，军败被虏，随例散配诸军。
现代文：齐神武侵犯沙苑时，宇文兴混在队伍中，队伍失败后被俘，按例分配在各军。
English: When Qi Shenwu invaded Sha Yuan, Uwen Xing was mixed in the team. After the team failed, he was captured and assigned to each army as usual.

古文：兴性弘厚，有志度，虽流离世故，而风范可观。
现代文：宇文兴性情宽厚，有志向和器量，虽然流落在人世，但他很有风度。
English: Yu Wenxing is generous in nature, ambitious and resourceful. Although he is a fugitive, he is very personable.

古文：魏恭帝二年，举贤良，除本郡丞，徙长累县令。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，被推举为贤良，任本郡郡丞，升任长际县令。
English: In the second year of Emperor Wei Gong, he was elected as a virtuous person, appointed as the county magistrate of the county, and promoted to the county magistrate of the county.

古文：保定二年，诏仲子兴始附属籍。
现代文：保定二年，高祖下诏命宇文仲的儿子宇文兴开始归附家族的名册。
English: In the second year of Baoding, Gao Zu issued an edict ordering Uwen Zhong's son, Uwen Xing, to begin adding to the family register.

古文：高祖以兴宗戚近属，尊礼之甚厚，拜使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督，封大宁郡公。
现代文：高祖认为宇文兴是同宗亲戚，以非常尊厚的礼节对待他，拜任他为使持节、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、都督，封大宁郡公。
English: Gao Zu believed that Yu Wenxing was a relative of the same family, and treated him with very respectful etiquette. He worshiped him as the envoy, the cavalry general, the Kaifu ceremony and the three departments, the governor, and the governor of Daining County.

古文：寻除宗师中大夫。
现代文：不久又任宗师中大夫。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the head teacher junior high school teacher.

古文：四年，出为泾州刺史。
现代文：保定四年，出任泾州刺史。
English: Baoding for four years, served as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：五年，又征拜宗师，加大将军，袭爵虞国公。
现代文：保定五年，又征入任宗师，加授大将军，承袭虞国公的爵位。
English: After five years of Baoding, he was conscripted as a grandmaster and promoted to general, inheriting the title of Yu Guogong.

古文：天和二年薨，高祖亲临，恸焉。
现代文：天和二年去世，高祖亲临吊丧，极为悲痛。
English: When Gao Zu passed away two years ago, Gao Zu attended the funeral in person, which was extremely sad.

古文：诏大司空、申国公李穆监护丧事。
现代文：下诏命大司空、申国公李穆监理他的丧事。
English: He gave the following order to Daishi Ku and Shin Kokugo Li Mu to supervise his funeral.

古文：赠使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、恒幽等六州诸军事、恒州刺史，谥曰靖。
现代文：追赠他为使持节、柱国大将军、大都督、恒州幽州等六州诸军事、恒州刺史，谧号为靖。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of the Military Commander of the Six Provinces, the Military Commander of the Six Provinces, the Military Commander of the Six Provinces, and the Military Commander of the Six Provinces, the Military Commander of the Six Provinces, and the Military Commander of the Six Provinces.

古文：子洛嗣。
现代文：他的儿子宇文洛承袭他的爵位。
English: His son, Uvenro, succeeded to his title.

古文：洛字永洛。
现代文：宇文洛字永络。
English: Yu Wenluo and Yongluo.

古文：九岁，命为虞国公世子。
现代文：九岁时，被命为虞凰公的嫡长子。
English: At the age of nine, he was appointed as the eldest legitimate son of Yuhuang.

古文：天和四年，诏袭兴爵。
现代文：玉卫四年，奉诏承袭主塞兴的爵位。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Yu Wei, he was given the title of Lord Sa Xing.

古文：建德初，拜使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：塑初年，被拜任为使持节、车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the first year of plastic, he was appointed as the commander of the festival, the general of the chariot and cavalry, and the third division of the ceremony.

古文：及静帝崩，隋文帝以洛为介国公，为隋室宾云。
现代文：到壹瞳死后，堕土墟任命室塞整为金鱼金，作为瞪室的宾王。
English: After Hitomi's death, the Ruins of Fallen Earth appointed Shusetsu to be the King of Goldfish, as the King of the House of Goldfish.

古文：史臣曰：自古受命之君及守文之主，非独异姓之辅也，亦有骨肉之助焉。
现代文：史臣曰：自古以来创业的帝王和守成的君主，并不是衹有异姓的人来辅佐，也有骨肉至亲的帮助。
English: Shichen said: since ancient times, the emperors and monarchs who have started businesses have not only been assisted by people with different surnames, but also have the help of relatives.

古文：其茂亲有鲁卫梁楚，其疏属有凡蒋荆燕，咸能飞声腾实，不泯于百代之后。
现代文：周王室的近亲有鲁、卫、梁、楚等国，远亲有凡、蒋、荆、燕等国，他们都能名实俱优，在百代之后都不会泯灭。
English: The close relatives of the Zhou royal family are Lu, Wei, Liang, Chu and other countries, and the distant relatives are Fan, Jiang, Jing, Yan and other countries. They can all be excellent in name and in reality, and will not be extinguished after hundreds of generations.

古文：至若豳孝公之勋烈，而加之以善政；蔡文公之纯孝，而饰之以俭约：峨峨焉，足以轥轹于前载矣。
现代文：至如豳孝公的功业，再加上妥善的法则政令；蔡文公的至孝，再加上俭朴节约：盛美啊，完全可以超越前人。
English: Just like the exploits of Zou Xiaogong, coupled with proper laws and decrees; the filial piety of Cai Wengong, coupled with frugality and economy: Shengmei, can completely surpass its predecessors.

古文：当隋氏之起，乘天威而服海内，将相王侯，莫不隳肝胆以效款，援符命以颂德。
现代文：当隋氏兴起时，凭藉天威威服海内，王侯将相，没有不披肝沥胆向隋氏效忠的，都引证符命为隋氏歌功颂德。
English: When the Sui Dynasty arose, it was by virtue of the power of heaven that it conquered the sea, and the princes were the rulers of the country. No one was loyal to the Sui Dynasty without putting his heart and soul into it, and they all cited the characters of life as a tribute to the Sui Dynasty.

古文：冑以葭莩之亲，据一州而协义举，可谓忠而能勇。
现代文：宇文胄以北周王室远亲的身份，占据一州而协助正义的举动，可以称得上是忠勇双全。
English: As a distant relative of the Northern Zhou royal family, the act of occupying a prefecture and assisting justice can be said to be a combination of loyalty and courage.

古文：功业不遂，悲夫！
现代文：他的功业没有完成，可惜呀!
English: It's a shame his work isn't finished!

古文：亮实庸才，图非常于巨逆。
现代文：宇文亮本是平庸之才，却大逆不道图谋发动突如其来的事变。
English: Yu Wenliang is a mediocre talent, but he is a traitor who is plotting to start a sudden change.

古文：古人称不度德、不量力者，其斯之谓欤。
现代文：古人讲不测度自己的品德、不估量自己的能力。
English: The ancients spoke of the immeasurability of one's own virtue, and did not measure one's own ability.

