古文：季武子为三军，叔孙穆子曰： 不可。
现代文：季武子打算建立三军，叔孙穆子说： 不可以。
English: When Jiwuko planned to establish the Three Armies, her great-uncle Muso said, "No.

古文：天子作师，公帅之，以征不德。
现代文：天子拥有六军，由在王室为卿的公统率，用来征讨不义之国。
English: The Son of Heaven has six armies, led by the nobles in the royal court, to conquer the unjust nations.

古文：元侯作师，卿帅之，以承天子。
现代文：大诸侯国的国君拥有三军，由卿统帅，用来随从天子征讨。
English: The sovereign of a great vassal state has three armies, led by a lord commander, to be used to follow and conquer the Son of Heaven.

古文：诸侯有卿无军，帅教卫以赞元侯。
现代文：一般诸侯国的国君有卿而没有三军，由卿统率经过训练的武卫之士来辅助大诸侯国的国君。
English: Generally, the sovereign of a vassal state has nobles, but not three armies. The nobles lead trained military guards to assist the sovereign of a great vassal state.

古文：自伯、子、男有大夫无卿，帅赋以从诸侯。
现代文：自伯、子、男以下的小国有大夫而没有周天子任命的卿，只是负责出一些兵车甲士跟随诸侯作战。
English: There were no lords appointed by Zhou Tianzi, but only small state-owned doctors under the rank of Zibo, Zi and Miao, who were responsible for sending some chariots and soldiers to fight alongside the lords.

古文：是以上能征下，下无奸慝。
现代文：这样上才能匡正下，下面才没有奸恶。
English: Only in this way can the top be rectified, and there will be no evil below.

古文：今我小侯也，处大国之间，缮贡赋以共从者，犹惧有讨。
现代文：如今我们鲁国是效果，处在齐、楚等大国之间，即使整治好兵车甲士来供应大国，还恐怕被讨伐。
English: Today, our country, the Republic of Lu, is a rookie, and we are between the great powers such as Qi and Chu. Even if we manage to supply the great powers with soldiers and chariots, we may still be attacked.

古文：若为元侯之所，以怒大国，无乃不可乎？ 
现代文：倘若要建立大诸侯国才有权拥有的三军，势必会激怒大国，恐怕不行吧？ 
English: If it is necessary to establish the three armies, which only the great principalities have the right to possess, it is bound to anger the great powers, is it not?

古文：弗从，遂作中军。自是齐、楚代讨于鲁，襄、昭皆如楚。
现代文：季武子没有听从穆子的劝告，于是在原来上军下军的基础上又组建了中军。从此之后齐、楚两大诸侯国轮番攻打鲁国，鲁襄公、鲁昭公被迫先后去楚国表示臣服。
English: Ji Wuzi did not listen to Mu Zi's advice, so he formed the Chinese army on the basis of the original army. From then on, Qi and Chu, the two major states, took turns to attack Lu, and Lu Xianggong and Lu Zhaogong were forced to go to Chu to show their submission.

