古文：火贾耽刘希昂范璋胡荣杨祯卢郁刘威
现代文：火贾耽刘希昂范璋胡荣杨祯卢郁刘威
English: Liu Xiangfan, Hu Rong, Yang Jia, Lu Yu, Liu Wei

古文：土马希范
现代文：土马希范
English: Tumasifan

古文：火
现代文：火
English: Tue

古文：刘希昂元和中，内侍刘希昂将遇祸。家人上厕，忽闻厕中云：即来，且从容。
现代文：贾耽唐代元和年间，内侍刘希昂将要遭遇灾祸之前，家里人上厕所，突然听到里面说：就来，请不要着急。
English: During the Jia Tan Tang Dynasty in the Yuan and Wu Dynasties, before the servant Liu Xiong was about to encounter a disaster, the family went to the toilet and suddenly heard someone say, "Just come, please don't worry."

古文：家人惊报希昂。
现代文：家人感到奇怪，向希昂报告。
English: The family was puzzled and reported it to Xiong.

古文：希昂自往听之。又云：即出来，即出来。
现代文：刘希昂亲自去听，里面又说：就出来，就出来。
English: Liu Xiong went to listen in person, and inside he said, "Just come out, just come out."

古文：昂曰：何不出来？
现代文：希昂便说：那你为什么还不出来？
English: Theon said, "Then why don't you come out?"

古文：遂有一小人，可长尺余。
现代文：于是走出一个小人，一尺多高。
English: Then a small man stepped out, more than a foot tall.

古文：一家持枪跨马，而走出迅疾，趁不可及，出门而无所见。
现代文：全家人跨马持枪追打起来。但那小人跑得极快，怎么也追不上，一出大门就不见了。
English: The whole family started chasing him on horseback with guns. But the little man was running so fast that they couldn't catch up with him. As soon as he left the gate, he disappeared.

古文：未几而复至。
现代文：不久他又来了。
English: He came back a short time later.

古文：七月十三日中，忽有一白衣女人，独行至门，曰：缘游看去家远，暂借后院盘旋，可乎？
现代文：七月十三日中午，忽然有个穿白衣服的女人，独自来到门口，说：因为我边走边看离家已远，只好暂借你家后院逗留一下，可以吗？
English: At noon on July 13th, a woman dressed in white suddenly came to the door alone and said, "Since I can see I'm a long way from home as I walk, can I stay in your backyard for a while?"

古文：希昂令借之。勒家人领过，姿质甚分明。
现代文：刘希昂答应了，让家人带她过去，她的身形姿质很分明。
English: Liu Xiong agreed and let her family take her there. Her body shape and posture were very clear.

古文：良久不见出，遂令人觇之，已不见。
现代文：去了好久却不见出来，于是，希昂让家人去偷偷看看，她已不见了。
English: She didn't come out for a long time, so Theon asked his family to sneak a look. She was gone.

古文：希昂不信，自去观之，无所见，唯有一火柴头在厕门前。
现代文：刘希昂不信，亲自去看，什么也没看见，只有一火柴头在厕所门前。
English: Liu Xiong did not believe it and went to see for himself. He did not see anything, only a match head in front of the toilet door.

古文：家属相谓曰：此是火灾欲起。
现代文：家人们议论说：这是火灾的预兆。
English: Family members speculated that it was a harbinger of a fire.

古文：觅术士镇厌之，当镇厌日，火从厨上发，烧半宅且尽。
现代文：便寻找有法术的人来治它，正当作法的时候，大火从厨房上着起来，几乎烧光半个宅院就。
English: They looked for someone with magic to cure it, and when they did the right thing, the fire spread from the kitchen and almost burned down half of the house.

古文：至冬，希昂忤宪宗，罪族诛。
现代文：到冬天，刘希昂触怒了宪宗皇帝，被诛灭九族。
English: By winter, Liu Xiong had incurred the wrath of Emperor Xianzong, and the Nine Tribes were annihilated.

古文：范璋
现代文：范璋
English: Fan Ye

古文：宝历二年，明经范璋居梁山读书。
现代文：唐代宝历二年，明经范璋居住在梁山读书。
English: In the second year of the Tang Dynasty, the Ming Dynasty, Fan Qi lived and studied in Liangshan.

古文：夏中深夜，忽厅厨中有拉物声，范慵省之。
现代文：夏天的一个深夜，忽然听到厨房有拉东西的声音，他懒洋洋地没有起来。
English: Late one night in the summer, he suddenly heard the sound of something being pulled in the kitchen. He lazily did not get up.

古文：至明，见束薪长五寸余，齐整可爱，积于灶上。地上危累蒸饼五枚。
现代文：到天亮时，只见一捆五寸多长的小柴禾，整整齐齐地摆在锅台边，十分可爱。地上还摞着五枚饼子。
English: By dawn, all I could see was a bundle of small faggots, more than five inches long, neatly arranged on the edge of the pan, very cute. There were also five biscuits on the floor.

古文：又一夜，有物扣门，因拊掌大笑，声如婴儿。
现代文：又一天夜晚，有个东西来敲门，并拍掌大笑，声音象婴儿。
English: Another night, something came knocking at the door, clapping its hands and laughing, sounding like a baby.

古文：如此经三夕。
现代文：一连三天都是这样。
English: This went on for three days.

古文：璋素有胆气，乃乘其笑，曳巨薪逐之。
现代文：范障平素有胆量，就乘它笑的时候，拽起一块大木柴追了出来。
English: When he laughs, he pulls up a large piece of firewood and chases it out.

古文：其物状如小犬，连却击之，变成火，满川而灭。
现代文：那东西象小狗，连续不断地击打，竟然变成了火，满地闪光后便消失了。
English: It was like a little dog, it kept beating and beating until it turned into fire, flashed all over the ground and then disappeared.

古文：胡荣
现代文：胡荣
English: Hu Rong

古文：长庆元年春，楚州淮岸屯官胡荣家，有精物，或隐或见。或作小儿，为着女人红裙，扰乱于人。
现代文：唐代长庆元年春天，楚州淮河岸边的屯官胡荣家中，有个妖精忽隐忽现，有时候变成个小孩儿，穿着女人的红裙子，袭扰于人。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, in the home of Hu Rong, a military governor on the banks of the Huai River in Chuzhou, a fairy suddenly appeared, sometimes turning into a child, wearing a woman's red skirt, and harassing people.

古文：或称阿姑。
现代文：有人称她阿姑。
English: Some people call her aunt.

古文：时复一处火发，所烧即少，皆救得之。
现代文：当时又有一处发生火灾，烧毁的财物很少，就被扑灭了。
English: At that time, another fire broke out, but very little property was burned and it was put out.

古文：三月，火大起，延烧河市营戍庐舍殆尽。
现代文：三月，一场大火灾发生了，火势蔓延到集市、军营、民房，烧了个干干净净。
English: In March, a big fire broke out. The fire spread to a market, a military camp, and a private house, and burned everything to the ground.

古文：岁中，胡云亦死。
现代文：这年内，胡荣也死了。
English: Within the year, Hu Rong also died.

古文：杨祯
现代文：杨祯
English: by Yang Hui

古文：进士杨祯，家于渭桥。
现代文：进士杨祯，家住在长安渭水桥旁。
English: Conscript Yang Wei, his family lives in Chang'an, next to the Shuishu Bridge.

古文：以居处繁杂，颇妨肄业。乃诣昭应县，长借石瓮寺文殊院。
现代文：因这里繁华喧杂，颇妨碍学业，他便到了昭应县，长期寄读于石瓮寺文殊院。
English: Because of the hustle and bustle here, which hindered his studies, he went to Zhaoying County and studied for a long time at Shijiazhuang Temple Wenshu Academy.

古文：居旬余，有红裳既夕而至。
现代文：住了十多天，有位红衣女子一到晚间就来了。
English: After staying for more than ten days, a woman in a red dress arrived in the evening.

古文：容色姝丽，姿华动人。祯常悦者，皆所不及。
现代文：她容貌美丽，姿色动人，杨祯平时喜爱的女子，都赶不上她。
English: She has a beautiful face and a charming appearance. The women Yang Jun usually likes can't keep up with her.

古文：徐步于帘外，歌曰：凉风暮起骊山空，长生殿锁霜叶红。
现代文：她在帘外漫步，唱道：凉风暮起骊山空，长生殿锁霜叶红。
English: She strolled outside the curtain and sang: The cool breeze at dusk fills the mountain sky, and the leaves of the Chosei-den Palace turn red with frost.

古文：朝来试入华清宫，分明忆得开元中。
现代文：朝来试入华清宫，分明忆得开元中。
English: In the morning, I tried to enter the Huaqing Palace, and I clearly remembered the beginning of the year.

古文：祯曰：歌者谁耶，何清苦之若是？
现代文：杨祯问唱歌的是谁，为什么唱得如此凄凉？
English: Yang Hui asked who was singing and why was the singing so desolate?

古文：红裳又歌曰：金殿不胜秋，月斜石楼冷。
现代文：那女子又唱道：金殿不胜秋，月斜石楼冷。
English: The woman also sang: The golden hall does not win the autumn, and the moon-shaped stone tower is cold.

古文：谁是相顾人，褰帷吊孤影。
现代文：谁是相顾人，褰帷吊孤影？
English: Who is the partner, who is the shadow?

古文：祯拜迎于门。
现代文：杨祯礼拜着迎到门外。
English: Yang Mi bowed to welcome them outside the door.

古文：既即席，问祯之姓氏，祯具告。
现代文：就坐之后，她问杨祯的姓名，杨祯全说了。
English: After she was seated, she asked Yang Mi for her name, and Yang Mi said it all.

古文：祯祖父母叔兄弟中外亲族，曾游石瓮寺者，无不熟识。
现代文：祖父母叔兄弟中外亲族，凡是游历过石瓮寺的人，她没有不熟悉的，但都未听他们讲过这种事。
English: She was not unfamiliar with her grandparents, uncles, relatives at home and abroad, or anyone who had visited Shijiazhuang Temple, but she had never heard them talk about such things.

古文：祯异之曰：得非鬼物乎？
现代文：杨祯怀疑地问道：你难道是鬼吗？
English: Yang Mi asked suspiciously: Are you a ghost?

古文：对曰：吾闻魂气升于天，形魄归于地，是无质矣，何鬼之有？
现代文：那女子回答道：我听说人死之后，魂气升上天，形魄归到地，这是不用怀疑的，哪里有什么鬼呢？
English: The woman replied, "I have heard that when a person dies, his spirit ascends to heaven and his body returns to earth. There is no need to doubt this. Where are the ghosts?

古文：曰：又非狐狸乎？
现代文：杨祯又问：那你是狐狸吧？
English: Yang Mi asked again: So you are a fox, right?

古文：对曰：狐狸者，接人矣，一中其媚，祸必能及。
现代文：女子回答道：狐狸接触的人，一旦染上它的媚气，灾祸就要临头。
English: The woman replied, "Once a person who comes into contact with a fox is infected with its charm, disaster is imminent.

古文：某世业功德，实利生民。某虽不淑，焉能苟媚而欲奉祸乎？
现代文：我的功德事业，实在想有利于百姓，小女子虽然不够娴淑，但又怎么会苟且献媚而使你遭难呢？
English: My meritorious cause, I really want to benefit the people, although the little girl is not pretty enough, but how can she be meticulous and flattering and make you suffer?

古文：祯曰：可闻姓氏乎？
现代文：杨祯说：可以告诉我你的姓名吗？
English: Yang Mi said, "Can you tell me your name?"

古文：某燧人氏之苗裔也。
现代文：那女子说：我是燧人氏的后代，始祖对人类有大功绩。
English: The woman said, "I am a descendant of the Hayato clan, whose ancestors have made great contributions to mankind.

古文：始祖有功烈于人，乃统丙丁，镇南方。复以德王神农、陶唐氏。后又王于西汉。
现代文：历代先人先是管制火，镇守南方，又凭德统治神农氏、陶唐氏，以后统治西汉，沿袭旧制又接受宋的封邑。
English: The predecessors of all generations first controlled fire, guarded the south, and ruled the Shennong and Daotang clans by virtue of Germany, and later ruled the Western Han Dynasty. They followed the old system and accepted the Song fiefs.

古文：因食采于宋，远祖无忌，以威猛暴耗，人不可亲，遂为白泽氏所执。
现代文：远祖本来没有什么忌讳，但因他声威猛烈，脾气暴躁，人们不能亲近他。后来，他被白泽氏捉住了。
English: Originally, there was nothing taboo about the distant ancestor, but people couldn't get close to him because of his powerful voice and hot temper. Later, he was captured by the Shirasawa clan.

古文：今樵童牧竖，得以知名。
现代文：现在连樵夫牧童都知道他的名字。
English: Now even the woodcutter herdsmen know his name.

古文：汉明帝时，佛法东流。摩胜、竺法兰二罗汉，奏请某十四代祖，令显扬释教，遂封为长明公。
现代文：汉明帝时，佛法东传，摩胜和竺法兰二位罗汉奏请我十四代祖，让他显扬佛教，随即将他封为长明公。
English: At the time of Emperor Han Ming, Buddhism was spreading to the East, and the two emperors, Maw Sheng and Qu Flan, invited my 14th-generation ancestor to promote Buddhism, and then made him the Prince of Changming.

古文：魏武季年，灭佛法，诛道士，而长明公幽死。
现代文：魏武帝末年，毁佛法，杀道士，长明公遭囚禁而死。
English: In the last years of Emperor Weiwu, he destroyed Buddhism and killed Taoists. Changming Gong was imprisoned and died.

古文：魏文嗣位，佛法重兴，复以长明世子袭之。
现代文：魏文继承王位后，重兴佛法，又让长明公世子袭位。
English: After Wei Wen succeeded to the throne, he revived Buddhism and allowed the heir of Changming Gong to succeed to the throne.

古文：至开元初，玄宗治骊山，起至华清宫，作朝元阁，立长生殿，以余材因修此寺。
现代文：到开元初年，唐玄宗治理骊山，造华清宫，修朝元阁，建长生殿，最后用剩余的材料修造起这个寺院。
English: By the first year of the first century, Tang Xuan Zong governed Lushan, built the Huaqing Palace, repaired the Yuan Pavilion, built the Changsheng Hall, and finally used the remaining materials to build this temple.

古文：群象既立，遂设东幢。
现代文：那些佛象也都塑好，就摆在东边的殿堂。
English: Those Buddha images were also made and placed in the hall on the east side.

古文：帝与妃子，自汤殿宴罢，微行佛庙，礼陁伽竟，妃子谓帝曰： 当于飞之秋，不当今东幢岿然无偶。
现代文：皇帝与妃子沐浴之后参加殿宴，然后微服来到佛庙，顶礼膜拜。妃子对皇帝说： 正当夫妇相合的秋天，这里不应当只有东殿堂独自岿立。
English: After bathing, the emperor and his concubine attended the palace banquet, and then they came to the Buddhist temple in their short robes to pay homage. The concubine said to the emperor: When the couple meet in the autumn, the East Hall should not be the only one standing here.

古文：帝即日命立西幢，遂封某为西明夫人。因赐琥珀膏，润于饥骨。设珊瑚帐，固予形貌。
现代文：皇帝当天就命令修建西殿堂，随即封我为西明夫人，并赐给琥珀膏，以润滑我的肌骨；设立珊瑚帐幕，防止我的行貌遭到破坏。
English: On the same day, the emperor ordered the construction of the West Hall of the Imperial Palace. I was immediately named Lady Siming, and was given amber ointment to lubricate my muscles and bones; a coral tent was set up to prevent my appearance from being damaged.

古文：于是选生及蛾，即不复强暴矣。
现代文：于是过往的书生及飞虫，便不再对我不敬了。
English: As a result, the bookworms and flying insects of the past no longer treat me with disrespect.

古文：祯曰：歌舞丝竹，四者孰妙？
现代文：杨祯问：歌舞丝竹，这四者哪一个更美妙？
English: Yang Wei asked: Song and dance silk bamboo, which one of these four is more wonderful?

古文：曰：非不能也，盖承先祖之明德，禀炎上之烈信，故奸声乱色，不入于心。
现代文：那女子回答说：不是我不行呵。要知道，这全是因为我继承祖先的明德，禀受炎帝之功业，所以那些邪恶的乐声和迷惑人的歌舞，进不了我的内心。
English: The woman replied, "It's not me. You know, it's all because I've inherited the wisdom of my ancestors and the merits of Emperor Yan, so those evil music and confusing songs and dances can't get into my heart.

古文：某所能者，大则铄金为五兵，为鼎鼐钟镛；小则化食为百品，为炮燔烹炙。
现代文：我所能做的，大的就是把金属锻制成五种兵器，炼就成巨鼎大钟；小的就是把食物变成上百种，用炮燔烹炙的方法。
English: The biggest thing I can do is to forge metal into five kinds of weapons, and refine it into a huge big clock; the small thing is to turn food into hundreds of ways to cook with cannons.

古文：动即煨山岳而烬原野，静则烛幽暗而破昏蒙。
现代文：我一动就能使山岳起火并烧尽原野，一静就如烛光幽暗而破昏蒙。
English: I can set fire to the mountains and burn up the fields with a single movement, and the silence is as dark and gloomy as candlelight.

古文：然则抚朱弦，咀玉管，骋纤腰，矜皓齿，皆冶容之末事，是不为也。
现代文：然而抚弄红色的琴弦，嘴吹玉箫，展细腰，炫耀皓白的牙齿，都是妖冶丽容们做的末等事，这我不做。
English: However, caressing the red strings, playing the tambourine with my mouth, stretching my thin waist, and showing off my white teeth are all trivial things that fairies do, which I do not do.

古文：昨闻足下有幽隐之志，籍甚既久，愿一款颜。
现代文：昨天听说你有幽静隐居的志向，入寺很久了，所以想见见尊颜。
English: I heard yesterday that you aspire to live in seclusion. You've been at the temple for a long time, so I'd like to meet you.

古文：由斯而来，非敢自献。
现代文：我是因为这个目的来的，不敢自荐。
English: I have come for this purpose, I dare not introduce myself.

古文：然宵清月朗，喜觌良人，桑中之讥，亦不能耻。
现代文：然而月白风清之良宵，喜逢好人，男女私下相会而被讥笑也在所难免，但也并不算可耻。
English: However, when the moon is white and the wind is clear, it is a good night to meet good people, and it is inevitable for men and women to meet in private and be ridiculed, but it is not shameful.

古文：倘运与时会，少承周旋，必无累于盛德。
现代文：倘若有幸与你时时相会，少承周旋，一定不会影响你的盛德。
English: If you have the good fortune to meet with you from time to time, and have little to do with you, it will not affect your virtue.

古文：祯拜而纳之。
现代文：杨祯拜谢而且接纳了她。
English: Yang Mi thanked her and accepted her.

古文：自是晨去而暮还，唯霾晦则不复至。
现代文：从此，她早晨离开晚上回来，只是阴天的时候除外。
English: From then on, she left in the morning and returned in the evening, except on cloudy days.

古文：常遇风雨，有婴儿送红裳诗：其词云：烟灭石楼空，悠悠永夜中。
现代文：当遇到风雨时，便有小孩送红裳女子的诗，上面写道：烟灭石楼空，悠悠永夜中。
English: When encountering wind and rain, a child sent a poem by a woman in a red dress, which read: "Smoke extinguishes the stone tower sky, and the yo-yo is forever in the middle of the night."

古文：虚心怯秋雨，艳质畏飘风。
现代文：虚心怯秋雨，艳质思飘风。
English: Modesty is afraid of the autumn rain, and cheerfulness is afraid of the wind.

古文：向壁残花碎，侵阶坠叶红。
现代文：向壁残花碎，侵阶坠叶红。
English: The remnants of the flowers crumble against the wall, and the leaves turn red.

古文：还如失群鹤，饮恨在雕笼。
现代文：还如失群鹤，饮恨在雕笼。
English: Or like a lost flock of cranes, drinking hatred in a carved cage.

古文：每侵星请归，祯追而止之。
现代文：每到星落天晓如要求回去时，杨祯都要追出来，她阻止他说：你违背了早晚的养身之道呵。
English: Every time Yang Xuan had to chase him back when he asked her to go back at dusk, she stopped him and said, "You have violated the morning and evening regimen."

古文：答曰：公违晨夕之养，就岩谷而居者，得非求静，专习文乎？
现代文：你到深山里居住，难道不是寻求安静，好专心温习文章吗？
English: When you go to live in the mountains, aren't you looking for peace and quiet so that you can concentrate on reading?

古文：奈何欲使采过之人，称君为亲而就偶。
现代文：怎么能想让我这样的人，视你为亲人而做夫妻之事呢？
English: How can you want someone like me to think of you as a relative and do the husband-and-wife thing?

古文：一被瑕玷，其能洗涤乎？
现代文：一旦被玷污了声名，怎么能洗得清呢？
English: Once a reputation is tarnished, how can it be washed clean?

古文：非但损公之盛名。亦当速某之生命耳。
现代文：这样不但毁了你的大名，也会缩短我的生命呵。
English: This will not only ruin your reputation, but will also shorten my life.

古文：归半年，家童归，告祯乳母。
现代文：杨祯回家半年。家童回家之后就把此事告诉了杨祯的奶娘。
English: Yang Hui has been home for half a year. After the children came home, they told Yang Hui's nanny about this.

古文：母乃潜伏于佛榻，俟明以观之。果自隙而出，入西幢，澄澄一灯矣。
现代文：奶娘就来此潜伏在佛台底下，等到天明时一看，那女子果然从门缝中走出去，进入西殿堂。原来是澄亮的一盏灯。
English: The wet nurse came here and lurked under the Buddhist altar, and when she looked up at dawn, the woman had indeed walked out through a crack in the door and entered the West Hall. It turned out to be a bright lamp.

古文：因扑灭，后遂绝红裳者。
现代文：于是把它扑灭。此后，就再也见不到那位红衣女子了。
English: He put it out, and the woman in red was never seen again.

古文：卢郁
现代文：卢郁
English: Lu Yu

古文：进士卢郁者，河朔人，徙家长安。
现代文：进士卢郁，是黄河以北的人，徙居到长安城。
English: Jin Shi Lu Yu, a person from the north of the Yellow River, migrated to Chang'an City.

古文：尝北游燕赵，遂客于内黄。
现代文：他曾经游历过燕赵之地，就客居在河南的内黄。
English: He once traveled to the land of Yan Zhao and stayed in Neihuang, Henan Province.

古文：郡守馆郁于廨舍。
现代文：那次，郡守把他安置在府内馆舍。
English: That time, the county governor placed him in a government building.

古文：先是其舍无居人，及郁至，见一姥，发尽白，身庳而肥，被素衣来。
现代文：这个馆舍先前没人居住。卢郁来了之后，看见一位老妇，头发全白了，身体矮小且肥胖，披着白色的衣服。
English: The building was previously uninhabited. When Lu Yu arrived, he saw an old woman with white hair, short and fat, wearing a white dress.

古文：谓郁曰：妾侨居于此且久矣，故相候谒。
现代文：她对卢郁说：我在这里侨居很久了，所以来拜谒你。
English: She said to Lu Yu: I have been living here for a long time, so I came to visit you.

古文：已而告去。
现代文：她很快就告辞而去。
English: She was soon on her way.

古文：是夕，郁独居堂之前。夜潮寒，有风雪，其姥又至。
现代文：这天晚上，卢郁独自居住在前厅，夜间潮寒，又刮风又下雪。
English: That evening, Lu Yu was living alone in the front hall. The night was cold, windy and snowy.

古文：谓郁曰：贵客独处，何以为欢耶。
现代文：那个老妇又到了，对卢郁说：贵客独自在此，用什么寻欢？
English: The old woman came again and said to Lu Yu, "Your distinguished guest is here alone. What are you using to seek pleasure?

古文：命坐语谓。
现代文：让他坐起来闲谈。
English: Sit him down for a chat.

古文：姥曰：妾姓石氏，家于华阴郡，后随吕御史者至此，且四十年。
现代文：老妇说：我姓石，家在华阴郡，后来随吕御史来到这里，将近四十年了。
English: The old woman said, "My family name is Shi. My home is in Huayin County. Later, I came here with Lv Yishi. It's been almost forty years.

古文：家苦贫，幸贵客见哀。
现代文：我家既穷又苦，幸亏贵客垂怜。
English: My family is poor and hard-up, but we are lucky to have you as our guests.

古文：于是郁命食，而老姥卒不顾。
现代文：于是，卢郁让仆人拿来食物，而老妇却看都不看。
English: As a result, Lu Yu asked the servant to bring food, but the old woman did not even look at it.

古文：郁问之曰：姑何为不食？
现代文：卢郁问她说：你为什么不吃呢？
English: Lu Yu asked her: Why don't you eat cucumbers?

古文：姥曰：妾甚饥，然不食粟。以故寿而安。
现代文：老妇说：我很饥饿，但不吃粟谷，由于这个原因我才能长寿而且安乐。
English: The old woman said, "I am very hungry, but I don't eat millet. For this reason, I can live a long and happy life."

古文：郁好奇，闻之甚喜，且以为有道术者。
现代文：闻言，卢郁又好奇又高兴，并认为她是个有道术的人。
English: Hearing this, Lu Yu was curious and happy, and thought that she was a person with Taoism.

古文：因问曰：姑既不食粟，何胞其腹耶？
现代文：于是问道：你既然不吃粟谷，那用什么充饥呢？
English: Then he asked, "Since you don't eat millet, what do you use to satisfy your hunger?"

古文：岂常饵仙药乎？
现代文：难道总吃仙药么？
English: Do you always eat magic potions?

古文：姥曰：妾家于华阴，先人好神仙，庐于太华。妾亦常隐于山中，从道士学长生法。
现代文：老妇说：我家住华阴，祖先喜好神仙之术，在华山的太华峰搭了间草棚子，我也曾隐居山中，跟道士练长生之法。
English: The old woman said, "My family lives in Huayin. My ancestors liked the magic of the immortals. They built a grass hut on Mount Huashan's Taihua Peak. I also used to live in seclusion in the mountains, practicing the law of longevity with Taoists.

古文：道士教妾吞火，自是绝粒。今已年九十矣，未审一日有寒暑之疾。
现代文：道士教我吞火，从此不食米粒，现在已经九十岁了，一次也没有患过感冒。
English: A Taoist monk taught me to swallow fire, and since then I haven't eaten a grain of rice. I'm now ninety years old, and I've never had a cold.

古文：郁又问曰：某早岁常遇至人，教吸气之术，自谓其妙。
现代文：卢郁又问道：我早年曾经遇到位高人，教我吸气的功夫，自认它很玄妙。
English: Lu Yu also asked: In my early years, I once met a high-ranking person who taught me the art of inhaling, and I thought it was very mysterious.

古文：后以奔走名利，从都国之贡，昼趋而夜息。
现代文：后来奔走于名利场中，作为国家选拔人材之事，白天奔波夜晚而息。
English: Later, he ran in the fame and fortune field, as a matter of national selection of human resources, he ran during the day and died at night.

古文：不意今夕遇姑，语及平生之好。
现代文：想不到今晚有幸遇到了你，会说到我平生的喜好！
English: I can't believe I'm lucky enough to meet you tonight, and I'm going to tell you about my favorite thing in life!

古文：然不知吞火岂神仙之旨乎？
现代文：可是，不知道吞火之术是不是神仙的要旨？
English: However, I don't know if fire-eating is the essence of immortals.

古文：姥曰：子不闻至人，寒暑不能侵者耶。
现代文：老妇说：你没听说吗？凡是高人，寒暑都不能侵犯他。
English: The old woman said, "Didn't you hear? No matter how tall a man is, he can't be affected by cold or heat.

古文：故入火，火不能焚。入水，水不能溺。
现代文：因此，进火，火不能焚烧；入水，水不能淹。
English: Therefore, into the fire, the fire can not burn; into the water, the water can not flood.

古文：如是则吞火固其宜也。
现代文：这样，吞火之术对他们来讲，固然是很合适的了。
English: In this way, the fire-eating trick is certainly very suitable for them.

古文：郁曰：愿观姑吞火可乎。
现代文：卢郁说：想看看你吞火，可以吗？
English: Lu Yu said: Would you like to see you swallow fire?

古文：姥曰：有何不可哉。
现代文：老妇说：有什么不可以的呢？
English: The old woman said, "What's not to like?"

古文：于是以手采炉中火而吞之，火且尽，其色不动。
现代文：于是，她用手抓起炉里的火就吞了进去，火吞光了，她仍不动声色。
English: So she took hold of the fire in the stove with her hand and swallowed it. The fire swallowed her up, but she did not move.

古文：郁且惊且异，遂起束带再拜。谢曰：鄙野之人，未尝闻神仙事。
现代文：卢郁又惊又奇，于是起身束紧衣带又向她拜了几拜，谢道：粗俗之人，不知道神仙的事情。
English: Lu Yu was surprised and surprised, so he got up, put on a pair of tights, and bowed to her for a few moments. He thanked her, saying, "You are a vulgar person, you don't know the things of the gods."

古文：今夕遇仙姑，以吞火之异，实平生所未闻者。
现代文：今晚遇到仙姑，用吞火之奇术，使我看到了平生未闻之事。
English: Tonight I met a fairy godmother, who used the magic of fire-eating to make me see things I had never heard of before.

古文：姥曰：此小术尔，何足贵哉。
现代文：老妇说：这是小法术，有什么值得称道呢？
English: The old woman said, "This is a small spell. What is there to praise?

古文：言讫，且告去，郁因降阶送之。
现代文：说完，便告辞而去，于是卢郁下台阶相送。
English: After saying this, he said goodbye and left, so Lu Yu went down the steps to see him off.

古文：既别，郁遂归于寝堂。
现代文：已经分手，卢郁就回到卧室睡下。
English: After they broke up, Lu Yu went back to his bedroom to sleep.

古文：既深，有仆者告郁曰，西庑下有火发。
现代文：半夜，有仆人来告诉他：西厢房起火了！
English: In the middle of the night, a servant came to tell him: "The west wing is on fire!"

古文：郁惊起而视之，其西庑舍已焚。
现代文：卢郁惊恐地跑出去观看，那西厢房已经焚烧起来。
English: Lu Yu ran out in fright to watch. The west wing of the house was already on fire.

古文：于是里中人俱至竞以水沃之，迨旦方绝。
现代文：于是邻里的人都来了，竞相用水浇火，天亮时才把火扑灭。
English: So all the neighbours came and competed in dousing the fire with water, only putting it out at dawn.

古文：及穷火发之迹，于庑下坎中，得一石火通，中有火甚多。
现代文：等到勘查火灾现场时，在西厢房的门坎下，找到一个石火通，其中还有许多火。
English: When they arrived at the scene of the fire, under the door of the west wing, they found a stone fireplace with many flames.

古文：先是有败草积其上，故延而至烧。
现代文：先是有枯草堆在它的上面，蔓延起来以至燃烧。
English: First there was a pile of dead grass on top of it, which spread and burned.

古文：郁方悟老姥乃此火通耳。
现代文：这时，卢郁才明白：那位老妇就是这个火通。
English: At this time, Lu Yu realized that the old woman was the matchmaker.

古文：果所谓姓石氏，居于华山者也。
现代文：果然如她所说的，姓石，住在华山中呵。
English: As she said, her surname is Shi, and she lives in the middle of the Huashan Mountains.

古文：郁因质问吕御史，有郡中老吏，谓郁曰：吕御史，魏之从事也。居此宅，迨今四十年矣。
现代文：卢郁于是就询问起吕御史来。郡中有个老官吏，对他讲：吕御史是魏国的从事官，居住在这个房子里，到现在已四十年了。
English: Lu Yu then inquired about Lv Yishi. An old official in the county told him: Lv Yishi is a Wei official who has lived in this house for forty years.

古文：咸如老姥言也。
现代文：这跟老妇讲的完全一样。
English: It's just like the old woman said.

古文：又青州济南平陵城北石虎，一夜自移城东南善石沟上，有狼狐千余迹随之，迹皆成路。
现代文：又听说，青州的平陵城北的石虎，一夜之间，自己移动到城东南善石沟上，有狼狐等一千多个脚印跟随着它，脚印过处便成了一条路。
English: It was also heard that the stone tiger from Pingling in Qingzhou, north of the city, moved itself overnight to the southeast of the city to Zhenshi Ditch. More than a thousand footprints of wolves and foxes followed it, and the footprints became a road everywhere.

古文：刘威
现代文：刘威
English: Liu Wei

古文：丁卯岁，庐州刺史刘威移镇江西。既去任而郡中大火。
现代文：丁卯年，庐州刺史刘威调任去镇守江西，离任后郡中发生大火。
English: In the year of Ding Yu, Liu Wei, the governor of Zhangzhou, was transferred to the town of Jiangxi. After he left the post, a large fire broke out in the county.

古文：庐候吏巡火甚急，而往往有持火夜行者，捕之不获。或射之殪，就视之，乃棺材板腐木败帚之类。
现代文：庐州官吏急忙巡察火情，这时，竟可以看见有人举着火把趁着夜色还在到处乱窜，捕捉又捉不到，有时用箭射死一看，原来是烂棺材板子和腐烂的扫帚之类东西。
English: Zhangzhou officials hurriedly inspected the fire situation, at this time, they could actually see someone holding a torch and taking advantage of the night to scramble around, catching and not catching, sometimes shooting with arrows. It turned out to be things like a rotten coffin board and a rotten broom.

古文：郡人愈恐。
现代文：郡中人越发恐惧。
English: Fears are growing in the county.

古文：数月，除张宗为庐州刺史，火灾乃止。
现代文：几个月后，委任张宗为庐州刺史，火灾才停止。
English: A few months later, Zhang Zong was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the fire only stopped.

古文：土
现代文：土
English: Sat.

古文：马希范
现代文：马希范
English: Mahifan

古文：楚王马希范修长沙城，开濠毕，忽有一物，长十丈余，无头尾手足，状若土山。自北岸出，游泳水上。
现代文：楚王马希范修长沙城，刚刚开出水濠，忽然有一个怪物，十多丈长，没头没尾没手足，象座土山一样从北岸冒出来，在水上游了半天，到南岸就不见了。
English: King Chu Masifan Xiu Changsha City, just opened the sluice, suddenly there was a monster, more than ten long, no head, no tail, no limbs, like the earthen mountain, emerged from the north shore, swam on the water for half a day, and disappeared to the south shore.

古文：久之，入南岸而没，出入俱无踪迹。
现代文：它出入均无痕迹，有人叫它土龙。没多久，马希范就死了。
English: It went in and out without a trace, and some people called it a clay dragon. It didn't take long for Mahifan to die.

