古文：夫辩者，将以明是非之分，审治乱之纪，明同异之处，察名实之理，处利害，决嫌疑。
现代文：辩论的目的，是要分清是非的区别，审察治乱的规律，搞清同异的地方，考察名实的道理，断决利害，解决疑惑。
English: The purpose of the debate is to distinguish the difference between right and wrong, examine the law of chaos management, clarify the similarities and differences, examine the truth of the name, decide the interests, and resolve the doubts.

古文：焉摹略万物之然，论求群言之比。
现代文：于是要探求万事万物本来的样子，分析、比较各种不同的言论。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to explore everything as it is, and to analyze and compare all kinds of different statements.

古文：以名举实，以辞抒意，以说出故。
现代文：用名称反映事物，用言词表达思想，用推论揭示原因。
English: Use names to reflect things, use words to express thoughts, and use inferences to reveal causes.

古文：以类取，以类予。
现代文：按类别归纳，按类别推论。
English: Induction by category, inference by category.

古文：有诸己不非诸人，无诸己不求诸人。
现代文：自己赞同某些论点，不反对别人赞同，自己不赞同某些观点，也不要求别人。
English: They agree with certain arguments, do not object to others agreeing, do not agree with certain points of view, and do not require others.

古文：或也者，不尽也。
现代文：或，是并不都如此。
English: Or, at least, not all of them.

古文：假者，今不然也。
现代文：假，是现在不如此。
English: False, but that is no longer the case.

古文：效者，为之法也，所效者，所以为之法也。
现代文：效，是为事物立个标准，用它来作为评判是非的标准。
English: Effectiveness is to set a standard for things and use it as a standard for judging right and wrong.

古文：故中效，则是也；不中效，则非也。
现代文：符合标准，就是对的；不符合标准，就是错的。
English: If it meets the standard, it is right; if it does not meet the standard, it is wrong.

古文：此效也。
现代文：这就是效。
English: That's the effect.

古文：辟也者，举也物而以明之也。
现代文：辟，是举别的事物来说明这一事物。
English: To illustrate something is to use something else to illustrate it.

古文：侔也者，比辞而俱行也。援也者，曰： 子然，我奚独不可以然也？ 
现代文：侔，是两个词义相同的命题可以由此推彼。援，是说 你正确，我为什么偏不可以正确呢？ 
English: Well, two propositions with the same meaning can be derived from this. Help, that is to say, you are right, why can't I be right?

古文：推也者，以其所不取之同于其所取者，予之也。 是犹谓 也者，同也。 吾岂谓 也者，异也。
现代文：推，是用对方所不赞同的命题，相同于对方所赞同的命题，以此来反驳对方的论点。 是犹谓 是含义相同。 吾岂谓 ，是含义不相同。
English: In other words, it is to use the proposition that the other party does not agree with, the same as the proposition that the other party agrees with, in order to refute the other party's argument.

古文：夫物有以同而不率遂同。
现代文：事物不可能在某一方面相同，但不会全都相同。
English: Things can't be the same in one respect, but they can't all be the same.

古文：辞之侔也，有所至而正。
现代文：推论的 侔 ，有一定限度才正确。
English: There is a limit to the extent to which deductive reasoning can be correct.

古文：其然也，有所以然也；其然也同，其所以然不必同。
现代文：事物如此，有所以如此的原因，其然相同，其所以然就不必同。
English: Things are the way they are, there is a reason why they are the way they are, if they are the same, the reason why they are the way they are does not have to be the same.

古文：其取之也，有所以取之；其取之也同，其所以取之不必同。
现代文：对方赞同，有所以赞同的原因；赞同是相同的，之所以赞同就不必同。
English: If the other party agrees, there is a reason for the agreement; if the agreement is the same, the reason for the agreement does not have to be the same.

古文：是故辟、侔、援、推之辞，行而异，转而危，远而失，流而离本，则不可不审也，不可常用也。
现代文：所以辟、侔、援、推这些论式，运用起来就会发生变化，会转成诡辩，会离题太远而失正，会脱离论题进而离开本意，这就不能不审察，不能经常运用。
English: Therefore, the use of these formulas of "push," "encourage," "assist" and "suggest" will change, will turn into sophistry, will deviate too far from the topic and become incorrect, will deviate from the topic and leave the original intention. This must be examined and cannot be used frequently.

古文：故言多方，殊类，异故，则不可偏观也。
现代文：所以，言语有多种不同的表达方式，事物有不同的类，论断的根据、理由也不同，那么，在推论中就不能偏执观点。
English: Therefore, words have many different expressions, things have different types, and the basis and reasons for judgment are also different. Therefore, it is impossible to be paranoid in reasoning.

古文：夫物或乃是而然，或是而不然，或一周而不一周，或一是而一不是也。
现代文：事物有些为 是 而正确，有些为 是 而不正确。有些为 不是 而正确，有些为一方面普遍，而另一方面却不普遍。
English: There are things that are true for yes, and things that are not true for yes, and things that are not true for no, and things that are universal on the one hand and not universal on the other.

古文：不可常用也，故言多方殊类异故，则不可偏观也，非也。
现代文：有些为一方面是正确的，而另一方面却是不正确的。不能按常理来推论事物，所以言词有很多方面、很多类别、很多差异和缘故，在推论中不能偏执观点，不正确的。
English: Some things are correct on the one hand, but incorrect on the other. Things cannot be deduced according to common sense, so words have many aspects, many categories, many differences and causes. In the deduction, it is impossible to be paranoid and incorrect.

古文：白马，马也；乘白马，乘马也。
现代文：白马是马；乘白马是乘马。
English: A white horse is a horse; riding a white horse is riding a horse.

古文：骊马，马也；乘骊马，乘马也。
现代文：骊马是马；乘骊马是乘马。婢是人；爱婢是爱人。
English: A mule is a horse; a rider on a mule is a rider on a horse; a maid is a person; a mistress is a mistress.

古文：臧，人也；爱臧，爱人也。此乃是而然者也。
现代文：奴是人；爱奴是爱人。这就是 是而然 的情况。
English: He is a human being; loving him is loving a human being. This is a natural state of affairs.

古文：获之亲，人也；获事其亲，非事人也。
现代文：婢的双亲，是人；婢事奉她的双亲，不是事奉别人。
English: Her father and her mother were human beings, and she was brought up to serve her father and her mother, not to serve other people.

古文：其弟，美人也；爱弟，非爱美人也。
现代文：她的弟弟，是一个美人，她爱她的弟弟，不是爱美人。
English: Her brother is a beauty, she loves her brother, not a beauty.

古文：车，木也；乘车，非乘木也。
现代文：车是木头做的；乘车却不是乘木。
English: Cars are made of wood; riding in a car is not like riding in a tree.

古文：船，木也；人船，非人木也。
现代文：船是木头做的；进入船，不是进入木头。
English: The boat is made of wood; go into the boat, not into the wood.

古文：盗人人也；多盗，非多人也；无盗，非无人也。
现代文：盗是人；多盗并不是多人；没有盗，并不是没有人。
English: A thief is a man; many thieves are not many men; no thief is not no man.

古文：奚以明之？
现代文：以什么说明呢？
English: What is the explanation?

古文：恶多盗，非恶多人也；欲无盗，非欲无人也。
现代文：厌恶多盗，并不是厌恶多人；希望没有盗，不是希望没有人。
English: To detest many thieves is not to detest many men; to wish that there were no thieves is not to wish that there were no men.

古文：世相与共是之。
现代文：这是世人都认为正确的。
English: This is what the world thinks is right.

古文：若若是，则虽盗人人也；爱盗非爱人也；不爱盗，非不爱人也；杀盗人非杀人也，无难盗无难矣。
现代文：如果象这样，那么虽然盗是人，但爱盗却不是爱人；不爱盗，不意味着不爱人；杀盗，也不是杀人，这没有什么疑难的。
English: If it is like this, then although a thief is a person, loving a thief is not loving a person; not loving a thief does not mean not loving a person; killing a thief is not killing a person, there is no doubt about it.

古文：此与彼同类，世有彼而不自非也，墨者有此而非之，无也故焉，所谓内胶外闭与心毋空乎？
现代文：这个与那个都是同类。然而世人赞同那个自己却不以为错，墨家提出这个来非议他们，没有其他缘故，有所谓内心固执、耳目闭塞与心不空吗？
English: This and that are of the same kind. However, the world agrees with that one but does not think it is wrong. The Mohists raised this to criticize them for no other reason. Is there any so-called inner stubbornness, closed eyes and ears, and a heart that is not empty?

古文：内胶而不解也。
现代文：内心固执，得不到解说。
English: Stubborn at heart, can't be solved.

古文：此乃是而不然者也。
现代文：这就是 是而不然 的情况。
English: This is not a spontaneous situation.

古文：且夫读书，非好书也。且斗鸡，非鸡也；好斗鸡，好鸡也。
现代文：读书，不是喜欢书。将要斗鸡，不是斗鸡；喜欢斗鸡，就是喜欢鸡。
English: Reading is not liking books. Going to a cockfight is not cockfighting; liking a cockfight is liking chickens.

古文：且入井，非入井也；止且入井，止入井也。
现代文：将要跳入井，不是入井；阻止将要跳入井，就是阻止入井。
English: To jump into a well is not to enter it; to prevent jumping into a well is to prevent entering it.

古文：且出门，非出门也；止且出门，止出门也。
现代文：将要出门，不是出门；阻止将要出门，就是阻止出门。
English: To go out is not to go out; to prevent going out is to prevent going out.

古文：若若是，且夭，非夭也；寿夭也。
现代文：如果象这样，将要夭折，不是夭折；寿终才是夭折。
English: If it's like this, you're going to die young, not die young; you're going to die young.

古文：有命，非命也；非执有命，非命也，无难矣。
现代文：有命，不是命；不认为有命，不是命，这没有什么疑难。
English: There is life, not life; do not think that there is life, not life, there is no doubt about it.

古文：此与彼同类。
现代文：这个与那个同类。
English: This one is the same as that one.

古文：世有彼而不自非也，墨者有此而罪非之，无也故焉，所谓内胶外闭与心毋空乎？
现代文：世人称赞那个却不以为自己错了，墨家提出这个来非议他们，没有其他缘故，有所谓内心固执、耳目闭塞与心不空吗？
English: The world praises those who do not think that they are wrong, and the monks bring this up to criticize them, for no other reason, is there something called inner stubbornness, closed eyes and ears, and a heart that is not empty?

古文：内胶而不解也。
现代文：内心固执，不得其解。
English: Stubborn at heart, can't be solved.

古文：此乃是而不然者也。
现代文：这是 不是而然 的情况。
English: This is not a spontaneous situation.

古文：爱人，待周爱人而后为爱人。
现代文：爱人，要等到普遍爱了所有的人，然后才可以称为爱人。
English: A lover cannot be called a lover until he has universally loved all men.

古文：不爱人，不待周不爱人；不周爱，因为不爱人矣。
现代文：不爱人，不必等到普遍不爱所有的人；不普遍爱，因为不爱人。
English: If you don't love someone, you don't have to wait until you universally don't love everyone; you don't love everyone because you don't love anyone.

古文：乘马，不待周乘马然后为乘马也；有乘于马，因为乘马矣。
现代文：乘马，不必等到乘了所有的马才称为乘马；只要有马可乘，就可以称为乘马了。
English: To ride a horse, it is not necessary to wait until all the horses have been ridden before calling it riding a horse; as long as there is a horse to ride, it can be called riding a horse.

古文：逮至不乘马，待周不乘马而后不乘马。
现代文：至于不乘马，要等到不乘所有的马，然后才可以称为不乘马。
English: As for not riding a horse, you have to wait until you don't ride all horses before you can call it not riding a horse.

古文：此一周而一不周者也。
现代文：这是一方面普遍而另一方面不普遍的情况。
English: This is a situation that is common on the one hand, but not on the other.

古文：居于国，则为居国；有一宅于国，而不为有国。
现代文：居住在国内，就是在国内。有一座房子在国内，不是有整个国家。
English: To live in the country is to be in the country; to have a house in the country is not to have the whole country.

古文：桃之实，桃也；棘之实，非棘也。
现代文：桃的果实，是桃。棘的果实，不是棘。
English: The fruit of a peach is a peach. The fruit of a thorn is not a thorn.

古文：问人之病，问人也；恶人之病，非恶人也。
现代文：慰问人的疾病，是慰问人。厌恶人的疾病，不是厌恶人。
English: The disease of comforting people is comforting people. The disease of loathing people is not loathing people.

古文：人之鬼，非人也；兄之鬼，兄也。
现代文：人的鬼，不是人。哥哥的鬼，是哥哥。
English: The ghost of a man is not a man. The ghost of a brother is a brother.

古文：祭人之鬼，非祭人也；祭兄之鬼，乃祭兄也。
现代文：祭人的鬼，不是祭人。祭哥哥的鬼，是祭哥哥。
English: The ghost of the sacrificial man is not the sacrificial man. The ghost of the sacrificial brother is the sacrificial brother.

古文：之马之目盼则为之马盼；之马之目大，而不谓之马大。
现代文：这一匹马的眼睛一边小，就称它是眼睛一边小的马；这一匹马的眼睛大，却不能称这一匹马大。
English: If the horse's eye is small, it is called a small-eyed horse; if the horse's eye is large, it is not called a large horse.

古文：之牛之毛黄，则谓之中黄；之牛之毛众，而不谓之牛众。
现代文：这一头牛的毛黄，就称它是一头毛黄的牛；这一头牛的毛多，却不能称这一头牛多。
English: If a cow has a lot of hair, it is called a hairy cow; if a cow has a lot of hair, it is not called a hairy cow.

古文：一马，马也；二马，马也。
现代文：一匹马，是马，两匹马，也是马。
English: One horse is a horse, two horses are horses.

古文：马四足者，一马而四足也，非两马而四足也。
现代文：马四个蹄子，是说一匹马四个蹄子，不是两匹马四个蹄子。
English: A horse with four hooves means one horse with four hooves, not two horses with four hooves.

古文：一马，马也。马或白者，二马而或白也，非一马而或白。
现代文：马有的是白色的，是说两匹马中有白色的，并不是一匹马而有的是白色的。
English: Some of the horses are white, that is to say, some of the two horses are white, not one horse but some are white.

古文：此乃一是而一非者也。
现代文：这就是一方面对而另一方面错的情况。
English: This is a case of right on the one hand and wrong on the other.

