古文：孔子蚤晨作，负手曳杖，逍遥于门而歌曰： 泰山其颓乎！
现代文：孔子早晨起来，背着手拖着手杖，在门口优游地漫步，吟唱道： 泰山要崩塌了吗？
English: Confucius got up in the morning, dragged his cane behind his back, and strolled leisurely through the doorway, chanting, "Is Mount Tai about to collapse?"

古文：梁木其坏乎！
现代文：梁木要毁坏了吗？
English: Will the beams be destroyed?

古文：哲人其萎乎！ 
现代文：哲人要困顿了吗？ 
English: Is the philosopher about to be stumped?

古文：既歌而入，当户而坐。
现代文：唱完回到了屋内，对着门坐着。
English: After singing, I went back inside and sat facing the door.

古文：子贡闻之，曰： 泰山其颓，则吾将安仰？
现代文：子贡听到歌声，说： 泰山要是崩塌了，我仰望什么呢？
English: When Zigong heard the singing, he said, "If Mount Tai collapses, what will I look up to?

古文：梁木其坏，则吾将安杖？
现代文：梁木要是毁坏了，我依靠什么呢？
English: If the beam is destroyed, what can I rely on?

古文：哲人其萎，吾将安放？
现代文：哲人要是困顿了，我去效仿谁呢？
English: If a philosopher is stumped, whom shall I emulate?

古文：夫子殆将病也。 
现代文：老师大概要生病了吧？ 
English: The teacher is probably sick, right?

古文：遂趋而入。
现代文：于是快步走了进去。
English: So he trotted in.

古文：夫子叹而言曰： 赐！
现代文：孔子叹了一口气说： 赐！
English: Confucius sighed and said, "Grant it!

古文：汝来何迟。
现代文：你怎么来的这样晚？
English: How come you're here so late?

古文：予畴昔梦坐奠于两楹之闲，夏后氏殡于东阶之上，则犹在阼；殷人殡于两楹之闲，则与宾主夹之；周人殡于西阶之上，则犹宾之。
现代文：我昨夜梦见自己坐在两楹之间祭奠。夏朝人将灵柩停在对着东阶的堂上，那还是处在主位上；殷人将灵柩停在堂前束西楹之间，那是处在宾位和主位之间；周人将灵柩停在对着西阶的堂上，那就是迎接宾客的地方。
English: Last night I dreamed that I was sitting between two coffins to pay my respects. Xia Dynasty people placed the coffin on the hall facing the east steps, which is still on the main seat; Yin people placed the coffin on the hall facing the west steps, which is between the guest seat and the main seat; Zhou people placed the coffin on the hall facing the west steps, which is the place to welcome guests.

古文：而丘也即殷人，夫明王不兴，则天下其孰能宗余？
现代文：而我孔丘是殷人。现今没有明王兴起，天下谁能尊奉我呢？
English: But I, Confucius, am an ordinary person. Today, without the rise of an enlightened king, who in the world can worship me?

古文：余殆将死。 
现代文：我大概快要死了。 
English: I'm probably going to die.

古文：遂寝病，七日而终。时年七十二矣。
现代文：随后卧病在床，七天就去世了，死时七十二岁。
English: Then he lay sick in bed for seven days and died at the age of seventy-two.

古文：哀公诔曰： 昊天不吊，不整遗一老，俾屏余一人以在位。
现代文：鲁哀公哀悼孔子说： 上天不怜悯我，不愿留下这一位老者，让他保障我一人居于君位，使我忧愁而痛苦。
English: Lu Aigong mourned for Confucius and said, "Heaven has no pity on me, and does not want to leave this old man, so let him guarantee that I alone stay on the throne, causing me sorrow and pain."

古文：茕茕余在疚，于乎！哀哉！
现代文：呜呼哀哉！
English: Alas, alas!

古文：尼父无自律。 
现代文：尼父，失去您我就没有榜样来自律了。 
English: Father, without you, I have no example to follow.

古文：子贡曰： 公其不没于鲁乎？
现代文：子贡说： 您不想在鲁国善终吗？
English: Zigong said, "Don't you want to have a happy ending in Lu?"

古文：夫子有言曰： 礼失则昏，名失则愆。
现代文：老师曾说过： 礼仪丧失就会昏暗不清，名分丧失就会造成过错。 
English: The teacher once said: The loss of etiquette will lead to obscurity, and the loss of prestige will lead to mistakes.

古文：失志为昏，失所为愆。 
现代文：失去志向是昏暗，失去身份是过错。
English: If you lose your will, you will be confused, and if you lose what you want, you will make mistakes.

古文：生不能用，死而诔之，非礼也；称一人，非名。
现代文：老师活着时您不重用，死后才致哀悼，这不合礼仪；自称一人，这不符合鲁国国君的名分。
English: It is not proper etiquette to pay tribute to a teacher only after his death, and it is not in keeping with the dignity of the ruler of the State of Lu to claim to be the only one.

古文：君两失之也。 
现代文：您把礼和名都丧失了。 
English: You have lost your honour and your name.

古文：既卒，门人疑所以服夫子者。
现代文：孔子去世后，弟子们犹豫不定，不知该用什么等级的丧制。
English: After the death of Confucius, his disciples hesitated, not knowing what level of mourning should be used.

古文：子贡曰： 昔夫子丧颜回也，若丧其子而而无服。丧子路亦然。
现代文：子贡说： 以前先生对待颜回的丧事，如果儿子去世一样，但没穿丧服，对待子路的丧事也是一样。
English: Zigong said, "In the past, my husband treated Yan Hui's funeral the same as if his son had died, but he didn't wear mourning clothes, and he treated Ziluo's funeral the same way.

古文：今请丧夫子若丧父而无服。 
现代文：今天对待先生的丧事就像对待父亲的丧事一样，但不穿那样等级的衣服。 
English: Today, I treat my husband's funeral like my father's, but I don't dress like it.

古文：于是弟子皆吊服而加麻。出有所之，则由绖。
现代文：于是弟子们都穿上吊丧的服装系上麻带，出门到那里都系上麻带。
English: So the disciples all put on mourning clothes and tied hemp belts around their waists. When they went out, they all wore hemp belts.

古文：子夏曰： 入宜绖可也，出则不绖。 
现代文：子夏说： 回到家可以系麻带，出去可以不用系。 
English: Zixia said, "You can wear a hemp belt when you go home, but you don't have to when you go out.

古文：子游曰： 吾闻诸夫子，丧朋友，居则绖，出则否；丧所尊，虽绖而出，可也。 
现代文：子游说： 我听老师说过，对待朋友的丧事，在家时系麻带，出去则不系。自己的尊辈去世了，即使系着麻带出去也是可以的。 
English: I heard a teacher say that when dealing with the funeral of a friend, you should wear a hemp ribbon at home, but not when you go out. If your senior has passed away, you can still go out with a hemp ribbon.

古文：孔子之丧，公西赤掌殡葬焉。
现代文：孔子的丧事，由公西主持。
English: The funeral of Confucius was presided over by Gong Xi.

古文：含以踈米三具，袭衣十有一称，加朝服一，冠章甫之冠，佩象环，径五寸而綨组绶，桐棺四寸，柏棺五寸，饬棺墙，置翣设披，周也；设崇，殷也；绸练设旐，夏也。
现代文：他在孔子口中放三勺米，给孔子穿上十一套衣服，加上朝廷官服一套，戴甫帽，佩戴象牙环佩，环佩直径五寸，用青白色的丝带系着。桐木棺厚四寸，柏木棺厚五寸，装饰了遮挡棺柩的帷帐，设置了障棺的霎扇，还设置了牵抚灵车的披具，这是按照周朝的礼制；旗上有齿形边饰，这是按照殷代的礼制；魂幡用绸练做成，这是按照夏朝的礼制。
English: He put three spoonfuls of rice in the mouth of Confucius, dressed Confucius with eleven sets of clothes, plus one set of imperial official uniforms, wore a monk's hat, wore an ivory ring, the ring was five inches in diameter, and was tied with a blue and white ribbon. The paulownia coffin was four inches thick, the cypress coffin was five inches thick, and was decorated with a curtain to cover the coffin, a coffin fan was set up, and a shroud was set up to hold the hearse, which was in accordance with the Zhou Dynasty's etiquette; the flag had tooth-shaped edges, which was

古文：兼用三王礼，所以尊师，且备古也。
现代文：兼用夏、商，周三代君王的礼制，是表示尊敬老师，并且都具备了古代礼仪。
English: The use of Xia, Shang, and the third generation of the king's etiquette is to show respect for the teacher, and they all have ancient etiquette.

古文：葬于鲁城北泗水上，藏入地不及泉。
现代文：孔子的灵柩葬在鲁城北面的泗水边，埋入地下，碰不到地下水。
English: The coffin of Confucius was buried on the edge of the Surabaya River, north of the city of Lu. It was buried underground, so it did not touch the groundwater.

古文：而封为偃斧之形，高四尺，树松柏为志焉。
现代文：上面的封土为半斧形，高四尺，周围以松柏为标志。
English: The seal above is half-axe-shaped, four feet high, surrounded by conifers.

古文：弟子皆家于墓，行心丧之礼。
现代文：孔子的弟子都把家建在坟墓的四周，行心丧的礼仪。
English: The disciples of Confucius all built their homes around their tombs, following the etiquette of mourning.

古文：既葬，有自燕来观者，舍于子夏氏。子贡谓之曰： 吾亦人之葬圣人，非圣人之葬人。
现代文：安葬完毕，有人从燕国来参观，住在子夏家里，子夏对他说： 这是我们普通人安葬圣人，不是圣人安葬普通人，有什么好看的？
English: After the burial, someone from Yan's country came to visit and stayed in Zixia's home. Zixia said to him, "This is ordinary people burying a saint, not a saint burying an ordinary person. What is there to see?

古文：子奚观焉？昔夫子言曰： 吾见封若夏屋者，见若斧矣。从若斧者也。 马鬣封之谓也。今徒一日三斩板而以封，尚行夫子之志而已。
现代文：以前老师说过： 我见过坟墓像夏朝房屋的，也见过像斧形的，我赞成斧形的，斧形的坟俗称马鬣封， 现今我们一天之内三次换板夯土就筑成了，只不过是实现了老师的生前愿望，有什么好看的？ 
English: In the past, the teacher said: I have seen tombs resembling the houses of the Xia Dynasty, and I have also seen tombs shaped like axes. I approve of axe-shaped tombs. Axe-shaped tombs are commonly known as horse-shaped tombs. Today, we have built three times in one day by changing the board and raking the soil. It is just the realization of the teacher's lifetime wish. What is there to see?

古文：何观乎哉？ 子三年丧毕，或留或去。惟子贡庐于墓六年。
现代文：孔子的弟子守丧三年以后，有的留下了，有的离开了，只有子贡筑屋于墓旁守了六年。
English: Three years after the death of Confucius's disciple, some remained, some left, only Zigong Zikuya stayed by the grave for six years.

古文：自后群弟子及鲁人处墓如家者，百有馀家。因名其居曰 孔里 焉。
现代文：从此以后孔子弟子和鲁国人在墓边建家而住的有一百多家，因此将此地命名为孔里。
English: Since then, more than a hundred disciples of Confucius and Lu people have built homes and lived by the tomb, so this place was named Kongli.

