古文：陈留阮籍，谯国嵇康，河内山涛，三人年皆相比，康年少亚之。
现代文：陈留阮籍、谯国嵇康、河内山涛，这三个人年纪很接近。嵇康的年纪比他们要稍微小一些。
English: Chen Liu Ruan Zi, Yan Guo Yan Kang and Hanoi Shantao, these three people are very close in age. Yan Kang is slightly younger than them.

古文：预此契者：沛国刘伶，陈留阮咸，河内向秀，琅邪王戎。
现代文：参与他们聚会的人还有：沛国刘伶、陈留阮咸、河内向秀、琅琊王戎。
English: Other participants in their gathering included: Pei Guo Liu Ye, Chen Liu Ruan Han, Hanoi Xiu Xiu, and Qu Wang Rong.

古文：七人常集于竹林之下，肆意酣畅，故世谓 竹林七贤。 
现代文：七个人经常在竹林之下聚会，畅所欲言，所以人们叫他们为 竹林七贤 。
English: Seven people often meet under the bamboo grove and talk freely, so people call them the seven sages of the bamboo grove.

古文：阮籍遭母丧，在晋文王坐进酒肉。
现代文：阮籍在为母亲服丧期间，在晋文王的宴席上喝酒吃肉。
English: During his mother's funeral, Nguyen Quoc drank wine and ate meat at King Jinwen's banquet.

古文：司隶何曾亦在坐，曰： 明公方以孝治天下，而阮籍以重丧，显于公坐饮酒食肉，宜流之海外，以正风教。 
现代文：司隶校尉何曾也在座，对晋文王说： 您正在用孝道治理天下，可是阮籍身居重丧却公然在您的宴席上喝酒吃肉，应该把他流放到荒漠地方，以正民风。 
English: Lieutenant Colonel He Zeng, who was also present, said to King Jinwen: You are governing the world with filial piety, but Nguyn Quc, who has passed away, openly drank alcohol and ate meat at your banquet. He should be exiled to a desert place, in accordance with the righteous customs of the people.

古文：文王曰： 嗣宗毁顿如此，君不能共忧之，何谓？
现代文：文王说： 嗣宗哀伤劳累到这个样子，您不能和我一道为他担忧，还说什么呢！
English: King Wen said, "Heir Zong is so sad and exhausted. You can't be worried about him with me. What else can I say?

古文：且有疾而饮酒食肉，固丧礼也！ 
现代文：再说有病而喝酒吃肉，这本来就合乎丧礼啊！ 
English: Besides, if someone is ill and drinks alcohol and eats meat, that would be a proper funeral!

古文：籍饮啖不辍，神色自若。
现代文：阮籍则一直吃喝不停，神色自若。
English: Nguyn Quc, on the other hand, has been eating and drinking non-stop, looking very confident.

古文：刘伶病酒，渴甚，从妇求酒。
现代文：刘伶喝多了酒，口渴得厉害，就又向妻子要酒喝。
English: Liu Yao had drunk too much wine and was very thirsty, so he asked his wife for more wine.

古文：妇捐酒毁器，涕泣谏曰： 君饮太过，非摄生之道，必宜断之！ 伶曰： 甚善。
现代文：妻子把酒倒掉，把酒器也毁了，哭着劝告他说： 您喝得太过分了，这样对身体非常不好，一定要把酒戒掉！ 刘伶说： 很好。
English: His wife poured out the wine and destroyed the drinking vessels, crying and advising him: You have drunk too much, this is very bad for your health, you must stop drinking! Liu Ye said: That's fine.

古文：我不能自禁，唯当祝鬼神，自誓断之耳！
现代文：不过我自己不能戒掉，只有在鬼神面前祷告发誓才能戒掉啊。
English: But I can't quit on my own. I can only quit by praying and swearing in front of ghosts and gods.

古文：便可具酒肉。 
现代文：你赶快去准备酒肉。 
English: Hurry up and prepare the meat and wine.

古文：妇曰： 敬闻命。 
现代文：他妻子说： 遵命。 
English: His wife said, "Follow my orders."

古文：供酒肉于神前，请伶祝誓。
现代文：于是把酒肉供在神前，请刘伶祷告、发誓。
English: So he offered the meat and wine before God, and asked Liu Yao to pray and swear.

古文：伶跪而祝曰： 天生刘伶，以酒为名，一饮一斛，五斗解酲。
现代文：刘伶跪着祷告说： 天生我刘伶，靠喝酒出名；一喝就十斗，五斗才解酲。
English: Liu Ye knelt down to pray and said: "I was born Liu Ye, and I became famous by drinking alcohol. One drink costs ten bucks, and it takes five bucks to get rid of a hangover.

古文：妇人之言，慎不可听。 
现代文：妇人家的话，千万不要听。 
English: Never listen to a woman.

古文：便引酒进肉，隗然已醉矣。
现代文：说完就拿过酒肉吃喝，一会儿就又喝得最醉醺醺地倒下了。
English: Having said this, he took the wine and meat to eat and drink, and in a moment he was drunk again and fell down in a drunken stupor.

古文：刘公荣与人饮酒，杂秽非类，人或讥之。
现代文：刘公荣和别人喝酒时，会和不同身分、地位的人在一起，杂乱不纯，有人因此指责他。
English: When Liu Gong Rong drinks with others, he will be with people of different status and status, which is messy and impure, and some people accuse him of this.

古文：答曰： 胜公荣者，不可不与饮；不如公荣者，亦不可不与饮；是公荣辈者，又不可不与饮。 
现代文：他回答说： 胜过公荣的人，我不能不和他一起喝；不如公荣的人，我也不能不和他一起喝；和公荣同类的人，更不能不和他一起喝。 
English: He replied: "I can't help drinking with those who are better than the honorable ones; I can't help drinking with those who are inferior to the honorable ones; and I can't help drinking with those who are similar to the honorable ones.

古文：故终日共饮而醉。
现代文：所以他整天都和别人共饮而醉倒。
English: So he spent the day drinking with others and getting drunk.

古文：步兵校尉缺，厨中有贮酒数百斛，阮籍乃求为步兵校尉。
现代文：宫中步兵校尉的职位空出来了，因为宫里厨房中贮藏着好几百斛酒，阮籍就向朝廷请求出任步兵校尉一职。
English: The position of the palace infantry captain became vacant, because there were hundreds of bottles of wine stored in the palace kitchen. Nguyn Quc asked the court to take up the position of the infantry captain.

古文：刘伶恒纵酒放达，或脱衣裸形在屋中，人见讥之。
现代文：刘伶经常不加节制地喝酒，放纵自己，有时候在家里喝醉了就赤身露体，有人看见了就责备他。
English: Liu Wei often drank without restraint, indulged himself, and sometimes got drunk at home and went naked. Some people saw this and scolded him.

古文：伶曰： 我以天地为栋宇，屋室为衣，诸君何为入我中？ 
现代文：刘伶说： 我把天地当做我的房子，把屋子当做我的衣裤，你们跑到我的裤子里来干什么！ 
English: Liu Wei said: I regard heaven and earth as my house, and the house as my trousers, what are you doing running into my trousers!

古文：阮籍嫂尝还家，籍见与别。
现代文：阮籍的嫂子有一次回娘家，阮籍去看她，给她道别，有人责怪阮籍不守礼法。
English: Nguyn Quc's sister-in-law once returned to her daughter's home. Nguyn Quc went to see her and say goodbye to her. Some people accused Nguyn Quc of not following the etiquette.

古文：或讥之。籍曰： 礼岂为我辈设也？ 
现代文：阮籍说： 礼法难道是为我们这类人制订的吗？ 
English: Nguyn Quc said: "Is the etiquette for people like us?

古文：阮公邻家妇有美色，当垆酤酒。
现代文：阮籍邻居的主妇容貌甚美，总在酒庐旁卖酒。
English: The housewife of a Nguyn neighbor is very beautiful and always sells alcohol next to the bar.

古文：阮与王安丰常从妇饮酒，阮醉，便眠其妇侧。
现代文：阮籍和安丰侯王戎常常到这家主妇那里买酒喝，阮籍喝醉了，就睡在那位主妇身旁。
English: Nguyn Quc and An Phng Văn Rng would often buy alcohol from the housewife. Nguyn Quc would get drunk and sleep next to the housewife.

古文：夫始殊疑之，伺察，终无他意。
现代文：那家的丈夫起初特别怀疑阮籍，就在一旁观察，却发现他自始至终也没有别的意图。
English: The husband of the family was initially very suspicious of Nguyn Quc and watched from the sidelines, but found that he had no other intention all along.

古文：阮籍当葬母，蒸一肥豚，饮酒二斗，然后临诀，直言 穷矣 ！
现代文：阮籍在葬母亲的时候，蒸熟一个小肥猪，喝了两斗酒，然后去向母亲遗体诀别，只是说了一句： 完了！ 
English: When Nguyen Quoc was burying his mother, he steamed a small fat pig, drank two barrels of wine, and then went to say goodbye to his mother's body, saying only one thing: It's over!

古文：都得一号，因吐血，废顿良久。
现代文：总共才号哭了一声，就口吐鲜血，身体损伤。
English: In total, she cried only once, vomited blood and suffered physical injuries.

古文：阮仲容、步兵居道南，诸阮居道北。北阮皆富，南阮贫。
现代文：衰弱了很久。阮仲容、步兵校尉阮籍住在道南，其他阮姓住在道北；道北阮家都很富有，道南阮家比较贫穷。
English: Nguyn Trng Rng, Infantry Captain Nguyn Trng Nguyn's family lived in the south of the province, and other Nguyn families lived in the north of the province; Nguyn families in the north of the province were very rich, while Nguyn families in the south of the province were relatively poor.

古文：七月七日，北阮盛晒衣，皆纱罗锦绮。仲容以竿挂大布犊鼻于中庭。
现代文：七月七日那天，道北阮家大晒衣服，晒的都是华贵的绫罗绸缎；阮仲容却用竹竿挂起一条粗布短裤晒在院子里。
English: On the day of July 7th, the Nguyn family in the north of the province was having their clothes dry-cleaned. The clothes they were drying were expensive silk and satin, but Nguyn Trng Rng hung up a pair of coarse cloth shorts with a bamboo pole and left them to dry in the yard.

古文：人或怪之，答曰： 未能免俗，聊复尔耳！ 
现代文：有人对他的做法感到奇怪，他回答说： 我还不能免除世俗之情，姑且这样做做罢了！ 
English: Some people were surprised at his actions, but he replied: "I can't get rid of worldly feelings, so let's just do it this way!"

古文：阮步兵丧母，裴令公往吊之。
现代文：步兵校尉阮籍死了母亲，中书令裴楷去吊唁。
English: Infantry Captain Nguyen Quoc's mother died, and he sent a condolence letter to Pei Kai.

古文：阮方醉，散发坐床，箕踞不哭。
现代文：阮籍刚喝醉了，腋头散发、伸开两腿坐在坐床上，没有哭。
English: Nguyn Quc had just gotten drunk, spread steamed buns, stretched his legs and sat on the bed, but did not cry.

古文：裴至，下席于地，哭吊喭毕，便去。
现代文：裴楷到后，退下来垫个坐席坐在地上，哭泣尽哀；吊唁完毕，就走了。
English: After Pei Kai arrived, he retreated and sat down on the ground to make a seat, weeping and mourning; after the condolences, he left.

古文：或问裴： 凡吊，主人哭，客乃为礼。
现代文：有人问裴楷： 大凡吊唁之礼，主人哭，客人才行礼。
English: Someone asked Pei Kai: When there is great condolence, the host cries, and the guest only salutes.

古文：阮既不哭，君何为哭？ 
现代文：阮籍既不哭，您为什么哭呢？ 
English: Nguyn Quc does not cry, so why are you crying?

古文：裴曰： 阮方外之人，故不崇礼制；我辈俗中人，故以仪轨自居。 
现代文：裴楷说： 阮籍是超脱世俗的人，所以不尊崇礼制；我们这种人是世俗中人，所以自己要遵守礼制准则。 
English: Pei Kai said: Nguyen Quoc is a man who is detached from the world, so he does not respect the etiquette; people like us are worldly people, so we must abide by the etiquette guidelines.

古文：时人叹为两得其中。
现代文：当时的人很赞赏这句话，认为对双方都照顾得很恰当。
English: People at the time appreciated this remark and thought that both sides were treated properly.

古文：诸阮皆能饮酒，仲容至宗人间共集，不复用常杯斟酌，以大瓮盛酒，围坐，相向大酌。
现代文：姓阮这一族的人都能喝酒，有一次阮仲容参加族人聚会，就不再用普通的杯子倒酒喝，而用大酒瓮装酒，大家坐成个圆圈，面对面大喝一番。
English: People with the surname Ruan can drink alcohol. Once, Ruan Zhongrong took part in a gathering of ethnic people. Instead of pouring wine with ordinary cups, he used large wine glasses to hold the wine. Everyone sat in a circle and drank a lot face to face.

古文：时有群猪来饮，直接去上，便共饮之。
现代文：当时有一群猪也来喝酒，他们径直把浮面一层酒舀掉，就又一道喝起来。
English: At that time, a group of pigs also came to drink, and they went straight to the surface of a layer of wine, and then drank together.

古文：阮浑长成，风气韵度似父，亦欲作达。
现代文：阮浑长大成人了，风采、气度像父亲，也想学做放达的人。
English: As an adult, Ruan Hun has grown up, and his style and demeanor are like his father's. He also wants to learn to be a person who is outgoing.

古文：步兵曰： 仲容已预之，卿不得复尔。 
现代文：他父亲阮籍对他说： 仲容已经入了我们这一流了，你不能再这样做了！ 
English: His father, Nguyen Quoc, said to him: "Zhong Rong has joined our class, you can't do this anymore!

古文：裴成公妇，王戎女。
现代文：裴的妻子，是王戎的女儿。
English: Pei's wife is Wang Rong's daughter.

古文：王戎晨往裴许，不通径前。
现代文：王戎一天清早到裴家去，不经通报就一直进去。
English: Wang Rong went to Pei's house early one morning and went in without notice.

古文：裴从床南下，女从北下，相对作宾主，了无异色。
现代文：裴看见他来，从床前下床，他妻子从床后下床，和王戎宾主相对，没有一点难为情的样子。
English: Bae saw him coming and got out of bed from the front of the bed, and his wife got out of bed from the back of the bed, facing Wang Rongbin, without a hint of embarrassment.

古文：阮仲容先幸姑家鲜卑婢。
现代文：阮咸原来喜欢上了姑姑家一个鲜卑族的婢女。
English: Nguyen Ham originally fell in love with his aunt's maid, a member of the Xianbei ethnic group.

古文：及居母丧，姑当远移，初云当留婢，既发，定将去。
现代文：在给母亲守孝期间，他姑姑要迁到远处，刚开始说要把这个婢女给留下，但是等到快要出发的时候，又坚持把她带走。
English: When his aunt was about to move far away to be closer to her mother, she initially said she wanted to keep the maid, but when it was time to leave, she insisted on taking her with her.

古文：仲容借客驴箸重服自追之，累骑而返。曰： 人种不可失！ 
现代文：于是阮咸就借了一个朋友的驴子，穿上孝服亲自去追她们，然后就和这个婢女一起骑着驴回来了，并且说道： 传宗接代的人是不能失去的。 
English: So Nguyen Hanh borrowed a friend's donkey, put on the filial piety robe and chased them himself. Then he rode back on the donkey with the servant girl and said, "You can't lose the person who will carry on the family line."

古文：即遥集之母也。
现代文：这个婢女也就是阮遥集的母亲。
English: This maid is also the mother of Ruan Yaxi.

古文：任恺既失权势，不复自检括。
现代文：任恺失去权势以后，不再自我检束了。
English: After Ren Hui lost power, he no longer checked himself.

古文：或谓和峤曰： 卿何以坐视元裒败而不救？ 
现代文：有人问和峤说： 你为什么眼看着元哀被搞垮而袖手不管呢？ 
English: Someone asked Huan: "Why did you stand by and watch Yuanmao's downfall?"

古文：和曰： 元裒如北夏门，拉自欲坏，非一木所能支。 
现代文：和峤说： 元哀就好比北夏门，本来要毁坏，不是一根木头所能支撑得了的。 
English: He said, "Yuan'ai is like the Northern Summer Gate. It was meant to be destroyed, but not a single piece of wood could hold it up.

古文：刘道真少时，常渔草泽，善歌啸，闻者莫不留连。
现代文：刘道真年轻时，常常到草泽去打鱼，他擅长用口哨吹小曲，听到的人都流连忘返。
English: When Liu Daozhen was young, he often went to Kusawa to fish. He was good at whistling ditties, and anyone who heard them would never forget them.

古文：有一老妪，识其非常人，甚乐其歌啸，乃杀豚进之。
现代文：有一个老妇人，知道他不是一个普通的人，而且很喜欢他的口哨，就杀了个小猪送他吃。
English: An old woman, who knew that he was not an ordinary man, and who liked his whistle, killed a piglet and gave it to him to eat.

古文：道真食豚尽，了不谢。
现代文：道真吃完了小猪，一点也不道谢。
English: Michizane finished eating the piglet and left without saying thank you at all.

古文：妪见不饱，又进一豚，食半余半，迺还之。
现代文：老妇人看见他还没吃饱，又送上个小猪。刘道真吃了一半，剩下一半，就退回给老妇人。
English: When the old woman saw that he had not eaten enough, she gave him another piglet. Liu Daozhen ate half of it, and returned the other half to the old woman.

古文：后为吏部郎，妪儿为小令史，道真超用之。
现代文：后来担任吏部郎，老妇人的儿子是个职位低下的令史，道真就越级任用他。
English: Later, he served as a bureaucrat. The old woman's son was a low-ranking official, and Michizane promoted him to a higher rank.

古文：不知所由，问母；母告之。
现代文：令史不知道是什么原因，去问母亲，母亲告诉他经过。
English: Ling Shi didn't know what the reason was, so he asked his mother, who told him what had happened.

古文：于是赍牛酒诣道真，道真曰： 去！
现代文：于是他带上牛肉酒食去拜见道真，道真说： 走吧，走吧！
English: So he took beef, wine and food with him to pay homage to Dao Zhen. Dao Zhen said, "Let's go, let's go!"

古文：去！无可复用相报。 
现代文：我没有什么可以再用来回报你的了。 
English: I don't have anything else to give you in return.

古文：阮宣子常步行，以百钱挂杖头，至酒店，便独酣畅。
现代文：阮宣子常常信步而行，拿一百钱挂在手杖上，到了旅店，就独自开怀畅饮。
English: Nguyn Thnh Tc often walked confidently, carrying a hundred dollars on his cane. When he arrived at the hotel, he drank alone.

古文：虽当世贵盛，不肯诣也。
现代文：即使是当时的显要人物，他也不会去拜访。
English: He wouldn't even visit dignitaries of the day.

古文：山季伦为荆州，时出酣畅。
现代文：山季伦都督荆州时，经常出游畅饮。
English: When Jingzhou, the capital of Shandong Province, is at its peak, he often goes out for a drink.

古文：人为之歌曰： 山公时一醉，径造高阳池。
现代文：人们给他编首歌说： 山公时一醉，径造高阳池。
English: People made up a song for him, saying: "When the mountain lord was drunk, he went out and built Goyang Pond."

古文：日莫倒载归，茗艼无所知。
现代文：日暮倒载归，酩酊无所知。
English: The sun sets, and nothing is known.

古文：复能乘骏马，倒箸白接篱。
现代文：复能乘骏马，倒著白接篱。
English: Fu Neng rode a donkey and rode backwards through a white picket fence.

古文：举手问葛强，何如并州儿？ 
现代文：举手问葛强，何如并州儿？ 
English: Raise your hand and ask Ge Qiang, what is it like to be a son of the state?

古文：高阳池在襄阳。
现代文：高阳池在襄阳县。
English: Gaoyang Pond is in Xiangyang County.

古文：强是其爱将，并州人也。
现代文：葛强是他的爱将，是并州人。
English: Ge Qiang is his favorite player, and he is from Nianzhou.

古文：张季鹰纵任不拘，时人号为江东步兵。
现代文：张季鹰天性任性放纵，当时人们称他为 江东步兵 。
English: Zhang Jiaying was known as the "Kangdong Infantryman" at that time, due to his natural capricious indulgence.

古文：或谓之曰： 卿乃可纵适一时，独不为身后名邪？ 
现代文：有个人对他说： 你怎么能一直都只是考虑一时的痛快，难道你就不能考虑一下自己身后的名声吗？ 
English: One person said to him: "How can you always be thinking about the thrill of the moment, can't you think about the reputation behind you?

古文：答曰： 使我有身后名，不如即时一杯酒！ 
现代文：张季鹰说： 与其让我身后有一个好名声，还不如现在有一杯好酒。 
English: Zhang Jiying said: "Rather than having a good reputation behind me, it is better to have a glass of good wine now."

古文：毕茂世云： 一手持蟹螯，一手持酒杯，拍浮酒池中，便足了一生。 
现代文：毕茂世说： 一只手拿着蟹螯，一只手拿着酒杯，在酒池里游泳，这就足以了结这一辈子了。 
English: "One hand holding a crab claw, one hand holding a wine glass, swimming in a wine pool, that's enough to end one's life," said Bi Maoxie.

古文：贺司空入洛赴命，为太孙舍人。经吴阊门，在船中弹琴。
现代文：司空贺循到京都洛阳去就职，担任太孙舍人，经过吴地的阊门时，在船上弹琴。
English: Siku He Xun went to Kyoto Luoyang to take office, served as the great-grandson, and played the piano on the boat when passing through the gate of Wudi.

古文：张季鹰本不相识，先在金阊亭，闻弦甚清，下船就贺，因共语。
现代文：张季鹰本来与他素不相识，这时候正在金阊亭上，听见琴声非常清朗，于是从亭上下到船中，走近贺循。
English: Zhang Qiyang had never met him before. At this time, he was on the Golden Kite Pavilion. He heard the sound of the piano very clearly, so he went down from the pavilion to the boat and approached He Xuan.

古文：便大相知说。问贺： 卿欲何之？ 
现代文：于是就一起谈论起来，结果彼此加深了了解，非常高兴。张季鹰问贺循： 你要到哪里去？ 
English: As a result, they began to talk together, and as a result, they deepened their understanding of each other. They were very happy. Zhang Qiyang asked He Xuan: Where are you going?

古文：贺曰： 入洛赴命，正尔进路。 
现代文：贺循说： 到洛阳去就职，正在赶路。 
English: He Xun said: I am on my way to take office in Luoyang.

古文：张曰： 吾亦有事北京。 
现代文：张季鹰说： 我也有事要到洛阳。 
English: Zhang Jiying said: I also have something to do in Luoyang.

古文：因路寄载，便与贺同发。
现代文：便顺路搭船，和贺循一同上路。
English: He took a boat along the way and went on the road with He Cun.

古文：初不告家，家追问迺知。
现代文：他并没有告诉家里，家里追寻起来，才知道这回事。
English: He didn't tell his family, who only found out when they tracked him down.

古文：祖车骑过江时，公私俭薄，无好服玩。
现代文：车骑将军祖逖过江到南方时，公库私府都很穷，没有什么名贵的服饰和值钱的东西。
English: When the chariot and cavalry general Zu Rong crossed the river to the south, both the public treasury and the private government were poor, and there were no precious clothes and valuable things.

古文：王、庾诸公共就祖，忽见裘袍重叠，珍饰盈列，诸公怪问之。
现代文：有一次，王导、庾亮等人一起去看望祖逖，忽然看见皮袍一包一包的，珍宝服饰放的满满的。
English: On one occasion, Wang Du, Zou Liang and others went to visit the ancestor together, and suddenly saw that the leather robes were packed one by one, and the precious clothing was full.

古文：祖曰： 昨夜复南塘一出。 
现代文：王导等人感到很奇怪，就问祖逖，他回答说： 昨天夜里又到南塘走了一趟。 
English: Wang Du and the others felt very strange, so they asked Zu Yao. He replied, "I went to Nantang again last night.

古文：祖于时恒自使健儿鼓行劫钞，在事之人，亦容而不问。
现代文：祖逖当时经常派手下的勇士公开抢劫，主管的人也容忍而不敢追究他。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi often sent his warriors to openly rob, and the people in charge also tolerated and dared not pursue him.

古文：鸿胪卿孔群好饮酒。
现代文：鸿肿卿孔群喜欢喝酒。
English: Hongyuqing Kong Qun likes to drink.

古文：王丞相语云： 卿何为问饮酒？
现代文：丞相王导对他说： 你为什么经常喝酒？
English: The chancellor Wang Du said to him: Why do you often drink?

古文：不见酒家覆瓿布，日月糜烂？ 
现代文：你难道没看见酒店盖酒坛的布，过不了多少时间就腐烂了吗？ 孔群说： 不是这样。
English: Can't you see that the cloth used to cover the wine cellar of the hotel has rotted after a short period of time? Kong Qun said: Not so.

古文：群曰： 不尔，不见糟肉，乃更堪久。 
现代文：您难道没看见糟肉，反而更能耐久吗？ 
English: Do you not see the rotten meat, but rather more durable?

古文：群尝书与亲旧： 今年田得七百斛秫米，不了麴糱事。 
现代文：孔群曾经给亲友写信说： 今年田地里只收到七百石秫米，不够酿酒用的。 
English: Kong Qun once wrote a letter to his relatives and friends, saying: This year, only 700 kilos of glutinous rice were received in the fields, which is not enough to make wine.

古文：有人讥周仆射： 与亲友言戏，秽杂无检节。 周曰： 吾若万里长江，何能不千里一曲。 
现代文：有人指责尚书左仆射周：和亲友言谈玩笑，粗野驳杂，失于检点节制，周说： 我好比万里长江，怎么能一泻千里也不拐一个弯儿！ 
English: Some people accused Zhou, the left-hand man of Shangshu, of talking and joking with his relatives and friends, of being rude and careless, and of losing control of his temper. Zhou said, "I am like the Yangtze River, how can I cover thousands of miles without turning a corner!"

古文：温太真位未高时，屡与扬州、淮中估客樗蒱，与辄不竞。
现代文：温太真官职还不高的时候，屡次和扬州、淮中的客商赌博，一赌起来，总是赌不过人家。
English: When the official position of Wen Taizhen was not high, he repeatedly gambled with merchants in Yangzhou and Huaizhong. When he gambled, he always lost.

古文：尝一过，大输物，戏屈，无因得反。
现代文：有一次，他又去了，大大地输了一笔钱，玩得钱都输光了，没法回去。
English: Once he went there again and lost a lot of money. He lost all his money and couldn't go back.

古文：与庾亮善，于舫中大唤亮曰： 卿可赎我！ 
现代文：他和庾亮很友好，就在船上大声招呼庾亮说： 你该来赎我！ 
English: He was very friendly with Hao Liang. On the boat, he called out to Hao Liang and said, "You should come and ransom me!"

古文：庾即送直，然后得还。
现代文：庾亮立刻送钱过去，他才能够回来。
English: Hao Liang immediately sent money over so that he could return.

古文：经此四。
现代文：他多次做过这种事。
English: He's done this many times before.

古文：温公喜慢语，卞令礼法自居。
现代文：温太真喜欢说些轻慢放肆的话，尚书令卞壸以礼法之士自居。
English: Wen Taizhen likes to say some frivolous and impudent words, but he still considers himself a man of etiquette.

古文：至庾公许，大相剖击。
现代文：两人到庾亮那里去，相互之间极力争论、反驳。
English: The two of them went to Zhaoliang's place and argued and contradicted each other.

古文：温发口鄙秽，庾公徐曰： 太真终日无鄙言。 
现代文：温峤出口庸俗、粗鄙，庾亮却慢悠悠他说： 太真整天出言不俗。 
English: Wen Xuan's words are vulgar and coarse, but his eloquence is slow and leisurely. He said: "Tai Zhen speaks well all day long.

古文：周伯仁风德雅重，深达危乱。
现代文：周伯仁德行高尚庄重，深知国家的危乱。
English: Zhou Boren was dignified and noble, and was well aware of the country's crisis.

古文：过江积年，恒大饮酒。
现代文：过江以后，经常豪饮，曾经一连三天不醒。
English: After crossing the river, he often drank heavily and once stayed awake for three days in a row.

古文：尝经三日不醒，时人谓之 三日仆射 。
现代文：当时的人把他叫做三日仆射。
English: People at the time called him the "Three-Day Shooter."

古文：卫君长为温公长史，温公甚善之。
现代文：卫君长是温峤的长史，温峤很是欣赏他。
English: Wei Junchang is the long history of Wen Wei, and Wen Wei appreciates him very much.

古文：每率尔提酒脯就卫，箕踞相对弥日。
现代文：经常很随意地带着酒肉到卫君长那里，两人伸开腿对面坐着，一喝就是一整天。
English: He would often casually bring wine and meat to Wei Junlong, and the two of them would sit opposite each other with their legs outstretched, drinking all day long.

古文：卫往温许，亦尔。
现代文：卫君长到温峤那里去时也是这样子的。
English: It was the same when Wei Jun grew up and went to Wenzhou.

古文：苏峻乱，诸庾逃散。
现代文：苏峻发动叛乱的时候，庚姓一族的人都逃散了。
English: When Su Jun launched the rebellion, all the people of the Geng family fled.

古文：庾冰时为吴郡，单身奔亡，民吏皆去。唯郡卒独以小船载冰出钱塘口，蘧篨覆之。
现代文：庾冰当时任吴郡内史，独自逃亡，百姓官吏都离开他跑了，只有郡衙里一个差役独自用只小船装着他逃到钱塘口，用席子遮掩着他。
English: At that time, Xing Bing was in charge of the internal history of Wuxi County. He fled alone. The people and officials all left him and ran away. Only a police officer in the county magistrate's office used a small boat to carry him to the mouth of Qiantang and covered him with a mat.

古文：时峻赏募觅冰，属所在搜检甚急。
现代文：当时苏峻悬赏募集人来搜捕庾冰，要求各处搜查，催得非常紧急。
English: At that time, Su Jun offered a bounty to recruit people to search for ice, requiring searches everywhere, which was very urgent.

古文：卒舍船市渚，因饮酒醉还，舞棹向船曰： 何处觅庾吴郡？此中便是。 
现代文：那个差役把船停在市镇码头上走了，后来趁着喝醉了回来，舞着船桨对着船说： 还到哪里去找庾吴郡，这里面就是！ 
English: The policeman parked the boat at the town wharf and walked away. Later, he took advantage of being drunk to come back, paddling the boat and saying to the boat: "Where else can you find the county of Zengwu, it's in here!"

古文：冰大惶怖，然不敢动。
现代文：庾冰听了，非常恐惧，可是不敢动。
English: Hearing this, Hao Bing was very scared, but he did not dare to move.

古文：监司见船小装狭，谓卒狂醉，都不复疑。
现代文：监司看见船小舱窄，认为是差役烂醉后胡说，一点也不再怀疑。
English: The superintendent saw the narrow cabin of the boat and thought it was just the policeman's drunken nonsense. He no longer had any doubts.

古文：自送过浙江，寄山阴魏家，得免。
现代文：自从送过浙江，寄住在山阴县魏家以后，庚冰才得以脱险。
English: It was only after he had been sent to Zhejiang and lodged in Weijia, Shanyin County, that Geng Bing was able to escape.

古文：后事平，冰欲报卒，适其所愿。
现代文：后来平定了叛乱，庾冰想要报答那个差役，满足他的要求。
English: After the rebellion was quelled, Yu Bing wanted to repay the policeman and meet his demands.

古文：卒曰： 出自厮下，不愿名器。
现代文：差役说： 我是差役出身，不羡慕那些官爵器物。
English: The guard said: I come from a guard background, and I don't envy those knightly possessions.

古文：少苦执鞭，恒患不得快饮酒。使其酒足余年毕矣，无所复须。 
现代文：只是从小就苦干当奴仆，经常发愁不能痛快地喝酒；如果让我这后半辈子能有足够的酒喝，这就行了，不再需要什么了。 
English: It's just that I've been working hard as a slave since I was a child, and I'm often worried that I can't drink happily; if I can have enough wine to drink for the rest of my life, that's fine, I don't need anything else.

古文：冰为起大舍，市奴婢，使门内有百斛酒，终其身。
现代文：庾冰给他修了一所大房子，买来奴婢，让他家里经常有成百石的酒，就这样供养了他一辈子。
English: Hao Bing built him a big house, bought him male and female slaves, and let him often have hundreds of kilos of wine at home, thus providing for him for the rest of his life.

古文：时谓此卒非唯有智，且亦达生。
现代文：当时的人认为这个差役不只有智谋，而且对人生也很达观。
English: At that time, people thought that this policeman was not only resourceful, but also had a good outlook on life.

古文：殷洪乔作豫章郡，临去，都下人因附百许函书。
现代文：殷洪乔出任豫章太守，临走时，京都人士趁便托他带去一百来封信。
English: When Yin Hongqiao became the governor of Yuzhang, people in Kyoto took the opportunity to ask him to take a hundred letters with him.

古文：既至石头，悉掷水中，因祝曰： 沈者自沈，浮者自浮，殷洪乔不能作致书邮。 
现代文：他走到石头城，把信全都扔到江里，接着祷告说： 要沉的自己沉下去，要浮的自己浮起来，我殷洪乔不能做送信的邮差！ 
English: He went to Stone Town, threw all the letters into the river, and then prayed: "If I must sink, I will sink; if I must float, I will float. I, Yin Hongqiao, cannot be a postman who sends letters!"

古文：王长史、谢仁祖同为王公掾。
现代文：长史王濛和谢仁祖同是王导的属官。
English: Wang Xi and Xie Renzu were both subordinate officers of Wang Du.

古文：长史云： 谢掾能作异舞。 
现代文：王濛说： 谢掾会跳一种特殊的舞。 
English: Wang Yao said: Xie Yao will dance a special dance.

古文：谢便起舞，神意甚暇。
现代文：谢仁祖就起来跳舞，神情意态非常悠闲。
English: Xie Renzo got up and danced, looking very relaxed.

古文：王公熟视，谓客曰： 使人思安丰。 
现代文：王导仔细地看着他，对客人说： 他让人想起安丰。 
English: Wang Du looked at him carefully and said to his guest: He reminds people of Anfeng.

古文：王、刘共在杭南，酣宴于桓子野家。
现代文：王濛和刘惔一同在乌衣巷桓子野家开宴畅饮。
English: Wang Hui and Liu Hui had a banquet and a drink together at Kanzi's home in Wuyi Lane.

古文：谢镇西往尚书墓还，葬后三日反哭。
现代文：这时，镇西将军谢尚从他叔父、尚书谢裒的陵墓回来一一他在谢裒安葬后三天奉神主回祖庙哭祭一一大家想邀请他来宴饮。
English: At this time, Zhenxi General Xie Shang returned from the mausoleum of his uncle, Shang Shuxiu Xie Yao - three days after Xie Yao's burial, he returned to the ancestral temple to hold a memorial service - everyone wanted to invite him to a banquet.

古文：诸人欲要之，初遣一信，犹未许，然已停车。
现代文：开头派个送信人去请，他还没有答应，可是已经把车停下；又去请，便立刻掉转车头来了。
English: At first they sent a messenger to invite him, but he had not yet agreed, but had already stopped the car; when they went to invite him again, he immediately turned the car around.

古文：重要，便回驾。
现代文：大家都到门外去迎接，他就亲亲热热地拉着人家的手下了车。
English: Everyone went to the door to greet him, and he enthusiastically pulled someone's hand out of the car.

古文：诸人门外迎之，把臂便下，裁得脱帻箸帽。酣宴半坐，乃觉未脱衰。
现代文：进门后，刚刚来得及脱下头巾，戴上便帽就入座，直到痛饮中途，才发觉还没有脱掉孝服。
English: After entering the door, I just had time to take off my headscarf, put on a cap and sat down. It wasn't until halfway through the heavy drinking that I realized I hadn't taken off my filial piety.

古文：桓宣武少家贫，戏大输，债主敦求甚切，思自振之方，莫知所出。
现代文：桓温年轻时家里很贫困，有一次赌博输得很惨，债主催他还债叉催得很急。他考虑着自救的办法，却又想不出。
English: When Kuan Wen was young, his family was very poor. Once, he lost a lot of money in a gambling game, and the organizer of the debt was in a hurry to repay the debt. He thought about a way to save himself, but he couldn't think of it.

古文：陈郡袁耽，俊迈多能。
现代文：陈郡的袁耽英俊豪迈，多才多艺，桓温想去向他求救。
English: Chen County's Yuan Tan is handsome, courageous, and versatile. Kuan Wen wanted to go to him for help.

古文：宣武欲求救于耽，耽时居艰，恐致疑，试以告焉。应声便许，略无慊吝。
现代文：当时袁耽正在守孝，桓温担心引起疑虑，试着把自己的想法告诉他，他随口就答应了，没有丝毫的不满意和为难。
English: At that time, Yuan Tan was taking care of his filial duty, and Huan Wen was worried about causing doubts and tried to tell him his thoughts. He readily agreed, without the slightest dissatisfaction or embarrassment.

古文：遂变服怀布帽随温去，与债主戏。
现代文：于是换了孝服，把戴的布帽揣起来跟桓温走，去和债主赌博。
English: So he changed his filial piety, put away the cloth cap he was wearing and went with Kuan Wen to gamble with the creditor.

古文：耽素有蓺名，债主就局曰： 汝故当不办作袁彦道邪？ 
现代文：袁耽赌博的技巧一向出名，债主却不认识他，临开局时说： 你想必不会成为袁彦道吧？ 
English: Yuan Tan's gambling skills have always been famous, but the creditor did not know him. At the beginning of the game, he said, "Surely you don't want to be like Yuan Yan?"

古文：遂共戏。
现代文：便和他一起赌。
English: So I bet with him.

古文：十万一掷，直上百万数。
现代文：一次就押十万钱做赌注，一直升到一次百万钱。
English: He would bet 100,000 yuan at a time, rising to one million yuan at a time.

古文：投马绝叫，傍若无人，探布帽掷对人曰： 汝竟识袁彦道不？ 
现代文：每掷筹码就大声呼叫，旁若无人。赢够了，他才伸手从怀里摸出布帽来掷向对手说： 你到底认识不认识袁彦道？ 
English: Every time he threw a chip, he called out loudly, as if no one was around. When he had won enough, he reached out and pulled a cloth cap from his arms to throw it at his opponent and said, "Do you know Yuan Yan Dao?"

古文：王光禄云： 酒，正使人人自远。 
现代文：光禄大夫王蕴说： 酒正好能让每个人在醉眼朦胧中忘掉自己。 
English: Wang Yun, the doctor of Guanglu, said: "Wine can make everyone forget themselves in a drunken haze.

古文：刘尹云： 孙承公狂士，每至一处，赏玩累日，或回至半路却返。 
现代文：丹阳尹刘谈说： 孙承公是个狂放的士人，每到一个风景胜地，就一连几天地赏玩，有时已经回到半路又返回去。 
English: Danyang Yin Liu said: Sun Chenggong is a wild scholar. Whenever he goes to a scenic spot, he enjoys it for several days in a row, and sometimes he has already returned halfway and returned.

古文：袁彦道有二妹：一适殷渊源，一适谢仁祖。
现代文：袁彦道有两个妹妹：一个嫁给殷渊源，一个嫁给谢仁祖。
English: Yuan Yan Dao had two younger sisters: one married to Yin Yuan Yuan, and one married to Xie Renzo.

古文：语桓宣武云： 恨不更有一人配卿。 
现代文：有一次他对桓温说： 遗憾的是不能再有一个妹妹许配给你！ 
English: Once he said to Kan-Wen, "Unfortunately, I can't have another sister to marry you off to!"

古文：桓车骑在荆州，张玄为侍中，使至江陵，路经阳岐村，俄见一人，持半小笼生鱼，径来造船云： 有鱼，欲寄作脍。 
现代文：车骑将军桓冲任荆州刺史时在江陵镇守，当时张玄任侍中，奉命到江陵出差，坐船路经阳歧村，忽然看见一个人拿着半小筐活鱼，一直走到船旁来，说： 有点鱼，想托你们切成生鱼片。 
English: General Huan Chong, who was in charge of the cavalry and cavalry in Jingzhou, was stationed in Jiangling when the history was written. At that time, Zhang Xuan was an attendant. He was ordered to go to Jiangling on a business trip. On the boat ride through Yangbi village, he suddenly saw a man holding half a small basket of live fish and walked up to the boat and said, "I have some fish and would like to ask you to cut it into sashimi."

古文：张乃维舟而纳之。
现代文：张玄就叫人拴好船让他上来。
English: Zhang Xuan asked someone to row a good boat for him to come up.

古文：问其姓字，称是刘遗民。
现代文：问他的姓名，他自称是刘遗民。
English: When asked his name, he claimed to be Liu Youmin.

古文：张素闻其名，大相忻待。
现代文：张玄一向听到过他的名声，就非常高兴地接待了他。
English: Zhang Xuan had always heard of his reputation and was very happy to receive him.

古文：刘既知张衔命，问： 谢安、王文度并佳不？ 
现代文：刘遗民知道张玄是奉命出差以后，问道： 谢安和王文度都好吗？ 
English: After Liu Youmin learned that Zhang Xuan had been sent on a business trip, he asked: Are Xie An and Wang Wendu well?

古文：张甚欲话言，刘了无停意。
现代文：张玄很想和他谈论一下，刘遗民却完全无意停留。
English: Zhang Xuan really wanted to talk to him, but Liu Youmin had no intention of staying.

古文：既进脍，便去，云： 向得此鱼，观君船上当有脍具，是故来耳。 
现代文：等到把生鱼片拿进来，他就要走，说： 刚才得到这点鱼，估计您的船上一定有刀具切鱼，因此才来呢。 
English: When he had brought in the sashimi, he was about to leave, saying, "I just got this fish, and I'm guessing you must have fish-cutting tools on your boat, which is why I came."

古文：于是便去。
现代文：于是就走了。
English: So he left.

古文：张乃追至刘家，为设酒，殊不清旨。张高其人，不得已而饮之。
现代文：张玄就跟着送到刘家。刘遗民摆上酒，酒很浊，酒味也很不好，可是张玄敬重他的为人，不得已喝下去。
English: Zhang Xuan was then sent to Liu's house. Liu's relatives offered him wine. The wine was very bitter and tasted bad, but Zhang Xuan respected him as a person and had to drink it.

古文：方共对饮，刘便先起，云： 今正伐荻，不宜久废。 
现代文：刚和他一起对饮，刘遗民先就站起来，说： 现在正是割获的时候，不宜停工太久。 
English: Just after having a drink with him, Liu Youmin stood up first and said, "Now is the time to acquire, it is not appropriate to stop work for too long.

古文：张亦无以留之。
现代文：张玄也没有办法留住他。
English: Zhang Xuan had no way to keep him.

古文：王子猷诣郗雍州，雍州在内，见有，云： 阿乞那得此物？ 
现代文：王子猷去拜访雍州刺史郗恢，郗恢还在里屋，王子猷看见厅上有毛毯，说： 阿乞怎么得到这样的好东西！ 
English: The prince went to visit the Yongzhou embroidery factory, but the factory was still in the back room. The prince saw a blanket in the hall and said, "How can a beggar get such a good thing!"

古文：令左右送还家。
现代文：便叫随从送回自己家里。
English: So he called his servant and had him brought to his house.

古文：郗出见之，王曰： 向有大力者负之而趋。 
现代文：郗恢出来寻找毛毯，王子猷说： 刚才有个大力士背着它跑了。 
English: When he came out again to look for the blanket, the prince said, "Just now, a strong man ran away with it.

古文：郗无忤色。
现代文：郗恢也没有不满情绪。
English: There is no discontent.

古文：谢安始出西戏，失车牛，便杖策步归。
现代文：谢安当初到西边去赌博，输掉了车子和驾车的牛，只好拄着拐棍走回家。
English: At first, Xie An went to the west to gamble, lost the car and the driving cow, and had to walk home with a crutch.

古文：道逢刘尹，语曰： 安石将无伤？ 
现代文：半路上碰见丹阳尹刘恢，刘谈说道： 安石恐怕丧气了吧！ 
English: On the way, he met Danyang Yin Liu Wei, and Liu Wei said: "I'm afraid Anshi is disappointed!

古文：谢乃同载而归。
现代文：谢安就搭他的车回去。
English: Xie An took his car to go back.

古文：襄阳罗友有大韵，少时多谓之痴。
现代文：襄阳人罗友有突出的风度，年轻时人们大多认为他傻。
English: Luo You, a resident of Yangyang, has an outstanding demeanor. When he was young, most people thought he was stupid.

古文：尝伺人祠，欲乞食，往太蚤，门未开。
现代文：有一次他打听到有人要祭神，想去讨点酒饭，去得太早了，那家大门还没开。
English: Once he heard that someone wanted to make a religious offering and wanted to get some food and drink. He went too early and the door of the house was not open.

古文：主人迎神出见，问以非时，何得在此？答曰： 闻卿祠，欲乞一顿食耳。 
现代文：后来那家主人出来迎神，看见他，就问：还不到时候，怎么能在这里等着，他回答说： 听说你祭神，想讨一顿酒饭罢了。 
English: Then the owner of the house went out to meet God. When he saw him, he asked, "How can you be waiting here before it is time?" He answered, "I heard that you were offering a sacrifice to God, and were only looking for a meal."

古文：遂隐门侧。
现代文：便闪到门边躲着。
English: Then he darted to the door to hide.

古文：至晓，得食便退，了无怍容。
现代文：到天亮，得了吃食使走了，一点也不感到羞愧。
English: In the morning, after eating and drinking, he left without feeling any shame.

古文：为人有记功，从桓宣武平蜀，按行蜀城阙观宇，内外道陌广狭，植种果竹多少，皆默记之。
现代文：他为人处事记忆力强，曾随从桓温平定蜀地，占领成都后，他巡视整个都城，宫殿楼阁的里里外外，道路的宽窄，所种植的果木、竹林的多少，都一一记在心里。
English: He has a strong memory for dealing with people. He once followed Huan Wen to subdue Shu, and after the occupation of Chengdu, he inspected the entire capital city, inside and outside the palace, the width and narrowness of the road, the number of fruit trees and bamboo forests planted, all in his heart.

古文：后宣武漂洲与简文集，友亦预焉。共道蜀中事，亦有所遗忘，友皆名列，曾无错漏。
现代文：后来桓温在溧洲和简文帝举行会议，罗友也参加了；会上一起谈及蜀地的情况，桓温也有所遗忘，这时罗友都能按名目一一列举出来，一点也没有错漏。
English: Later, Kuan Wen held a meeting with Emperor Jianwen in Luzhou, and Luo You also attended; at the meeting, they talked about the situation in Shu, and Kuan Wen also forgot something. At this time, Luo You could be listed by name one by one, and there was no mistake.

古文：宣武验以蜀城阙簿，皆如其言。坐者叹服。谢公云： 罗友讵减魏阳元！ 
现代文：桓温拿蜀地记载都城情况的簿册来验证，都和他说的一样，在座的人都很赞叹佩服。谢安说： 罗友哪里比魏阳元差！ 
English: Kuan Wen took the book of records of the situation of the capital city in Shu to verify that they were all the same as he said, and the people present were very impressed. Xie An said: Luo You is worse than Wei Yang Yuan!

古文：后为广州刺史，当之镇，刺史桓豁语令莫来宿。答曰： 民已有前期。主人贫，或有酒馔之费，见与甚有旧，请别日奉命。 
现代文：后来罗友出任广州刺史，当他要到镇守地赴任的时候，荆州刺史桓豁和他说，让他晚上来往宿，他回答兑： 我已经先有了约会，那家主人贫困，可是也许会破费钱财置办酒食，他和我有很深的老交情，我不能不赴约，请允许我以后再遵命。 
English: Later, Luo You served as the mayor of Guangzhou. When he wanted to go to the town to take office, the mayor of Jingzhou said to him, let him come and go at night. He replied: I already have an appointment. The owner of the house is poor, but he may spend money on wine and food. He and I have a deep old friendship. I can't go without an appointment. Please allow me to follow my orders later.

古文：征西密遣人察之。至日，乃往荆州门下书佐家，处之怡然，不异胜达。
现代文：桓豁暗中派人观察他，到了晚上，他竟到荆州刺史的属官书佐家去，在那里处得很愉快，和对待名流显贵没有什么两样。
English: Huan suddenly sent someone to observe him in the dark, and in the evening, he actually went to the house of Shusa, a subordinate official of Jingzhou Zhishi. He was very happy there, and treated no differently from celebrities and dignitaries.

古文：在益州语儿云： 我有五百人食器。 
现代文：任益州刺史时，对他儿子说： 我有五百人的食具。 
English: He told his son, "I have enough utensils for 500 people.

古文：家中大惊。
现代文：家里人大吃一惊。
English: The family was taken aback.

古文：其由来清，而忽有此物，定是二百五十沓乌樏。
现代文：他向来清白，却突然有这种用品，原来是二百五十套黑食盒。
English: He had always been clean, but suddenly he had these supplies, which turned out to be two hundred and fifty sets of black food boxes.

古文：桓子野每闻清歌，辄唤 奈何！ 
现代文：桓子野每逢听到优美的歌声，总是帮腔呼喊 奈何！ 
English: Whenever Kanshino hears a beautiful song, he always shouts out, "What!

古文：谢公闻之曰： 子野可谓一往有深情。 
现代文：谢安听见了，说： 子野称得上是一往情深了。 
English: Hearing this, Xie'an said, "Sono has earned the reputation of being very affectionate.

古文：张湛好于斋前种松柏。时袁山松出游，每好令左右作挽歌。
现代文：张湛喜欢在房屋前栽种松柏；当时袁山松外出游赏，常常喜欢叫随从唱挽歌。
English: Zhang Zhan liked to plant conifers in front of the house; when Yuan Shansong went out to admire, he often liked to have his followers sing elegies.

古文：时人谓 张屋下陈尸，袁道上行殡 。
现代文：人们形容说： 张湛是在房前停放尸首，袁山松是在道上出殡。 
English: People described: Zhang Zhan is parking the corpse in front of the house, Yuan Shansong is performing the funeral on the road.

古文：罗友作荆州从事，桓宣武为王车骑集别。
现代文：罗友任荆州刺史桓温的从事，有一次桓温聚集大家给车骑将军王洽送别，罗友前来坐了很久，才告辞退出。
English: Luo You was engaged in the Jingzhou stabbing history of Huan Wen. Once, Huan Wen gathered everyone to see off the cavalry general Wang Cha. Luo You came and sat for a long time before leaving.

古文：友进坐良久，辞出，宣武曰： 卿向欲咨事，何以便去？ 
现代文：桓温问他： 你刚才像是要商量什么事，为什么就走呢？ 
English: Kuan Wen asked him, "You seemed to want to discuss something just now, why did you leave?

古文：答曰： 友闻白羊肉美，一生未曾得吃，故冒求前耳。无事可咨。
现代文：罗友回答说： 我听说白羊肉味道很美，一辈子还没有机会吃过，所以冒昧地请求前来罢了，其实没有什么事要商量的。
English: Luo You replied, "I heard that white mutton tastes very good, and I haven't had a chance to eat it in my whole life, so I just ventured to ask you to come. In fact, there's nothing to discuss."

古文：今已饱，不复须驻。 
现代文：现在已经吃饱了，就没有必要再留下了。 
English: Now that they have eaten their fill, there is no need to stay any longer.

古文：了无惭色。
现代文：说时，没有一点羞愧的样子。
English: He said it without a hint of shame.

古文：张驎酒后挽歌甚凄苦，桓车骑曰： 卿非田横门人，何乃顿尔至致？ 
现代文：张湛酒后唱起了挽歌，非常凄苦。车骑将军桓冲说： 你不是田横的门客，怎么一下午就凄苦到了极点？ 
English: After drinking, Zhang Zhan sang a dirge, which was very bitter. The chariot-riding general, Huan Chong, said: You are not a customer of Tian Yang, how did you reach the extreme of bitterness in one afternoon?

古文：王子猷尝暂寄人空宅住，便令种竹。
现代文：王子猷曾经暂时借住别人的空房，随即叫家人种竹子。
English: Prince Zou once temporarily borrowed someone else's empty room, and then called his family to grow bamboo.

古文：或问： 暂住何烦尔？ 
现代文：有人问他： 暂时住一下，何必这样麻烦！ 
English: Someone asked him: Stop for a moment, why go to all the trouble!

古文：王啸咏良久，直指竹曰： 何可一日无此君？ 
现代文：王子猷吹口哨并吟唱了好一会，才指着竹子说： 怎么可以一天没有这位先生！ 
English: The prince whistled and chanted for a long time, and then he pointed to the bamboo and said, "How can there be a day without this gentleman?"

古文：王子猷居山阴，夜大雪，眠觉，开室，命酌酒。
现代文：王徽之住在山阴的时候，有天夜里下大雪，他睡醒后，打开房门，让人倒酒来喝。
English: When Wang Huizhi lived in the shadow of the mountain, there was a heavy snowfall one night. After he woke up, he opened the door and let people pour wine to drink.

古文：四望皎然，因起仿偟，咏左思招隐诗。
现代文：眺望四方，只见一片皎洁，于是起身徘徊，诵念左思的《招隐诗》，忽然想起了戴逵。
English: Looking out in all directions, I saw only a beautiful scene, so I got up and wandered around, reciting the "Invitation to Hiding Poem" that I had been thinking about, and suddenly remembered to wear a scarf.

古文：忽忆戴安道，时戴在剡，即便夜乘小船就之。
现代文：戴逵当时住在剡溪附近，于是王徽之立刻乘着小船去造访他。
English: At that time, Dai Qian lived near the Qianxi River, so Wang Huizhi immediately took a small boat to visit him.

古文：经宿方至，造门不前而返。
现代文：过了一夜才到，可是到了戴逵家门前，王徽之却并不进去，而是径自转身回家了。
English: It took him one night to get there, but when he arrived in front of Dai Ye's house, Wang Huizhi didn't go in, but turned around and went home.

古文：人问其故，王曰： 吾本乘兴而行，兴尽而返，何必见戴？ 
现代文：有人问他这是为什么，他说： 我本是乘着兴致来，兴致消失了便回去。何必定要见到戴逵呢？ 
English: When someone asked him why, he said: "I originally came here on a whim, but my interest waned and I went back. Why do I have to see Dai Yao?

古文：王卫军云： 酒正自引人箸胜地。 
现代文：卫将军王荟说： 酒正好把人引入一种美妙的境界。 
English: Wang Wei said: "Wine just brings people into a wonderful realm.

古文：王子猷出都，尚在渚下。
现代文：王徽之坐船进京，船还靠在岸边暂歇。
English: Wang Huizhi entered Beijing by ship, and the ship was still resting on the shore.

古文：旧闻桓子野善吹笛，而不相识。
现代文：他从前就听说过桓伊擅长吹笛，彼此却不认得。
English: He had heard before that Huan Yi was good at playing the flute, but they didn't recognize each other.

古文：遇桓于岸上过，王在船中，客有识之者云： 是桓子野。 
现代文：正好遇到桓伊从岸上经过，而王徽之在船里。同船有人认识桓伊，说： 这就是桓子野。 
English: He just happened to meet Kani passing by on the shore, while Wang Huizhi was in the boat. Someone on the boat knew Kani and said, "This is Kanshino."

古文：王便令人与相闻云： 闻君善吹笛，试为我一奏。 
现代文：王徽之于是令人与他互通消息，说： 我听说你擅长吹笛子，试着为我弹奏一次吧。 
English: Wang Huizhi then asked people to exchange information with him, saying: I heard that you are good at playing the flute, try to play it for me once.

古文：桓时已贵显，素闻王名，即便回下车，踞胡床，为作三调。
现代文：桓伊其时地位已很显赫，可是一向听闻王徽之的名声。于是掉转车头，走下车来，坐在交椅上为王徽之吹奏了三支曲子。
English: At that time, Huan Yi's position was already very prominent, but he had always heard of Wang Hui's reputation. So he turned the car around, got out of the car, sat on a chair and played three pieces for Wang Hui.

古文：弄毕，便上车去。客主不交一言。
现代文：曲终就上车走了，主客双方没有交谈一句。
English: At the end of the concert, they got on the bus and left, without a word of conversation between the hosts and guests.

古文：桓南郡被召作太子洗马，船泊荻渚。
现代文：南郡公桓玄应召出任太子洗马，坐船赴任，船停在获渚。
English: Minami-gun's Prince Kangen was summoned to serve as Prince Saima, and took a boat to the post, stopping at Guozhizhong.

古文：王大服散后已小醉，往看桓。
现代文：王大服五石散后已经有点醉了，这时去探望桓玄。
English: Wang Daifu was already a little drunk after losing five stone, so he went to visit Kuan Xuan.

古文：桓为设酒，不能冷饮，频语左右： 令温酒来！ 
现代文：桓玄为他安排酒食，他不能喝冷酒，连连告诉随从说： 叫他们温酒来！ 
English: Kuan Xuan arranged food and drink for him. He couldn't drink cold wine, so he kept telling his attendants, "Get them to bring warm wine!"

古文：桓乃流涕呜咽，王便欲去。
现代文：桓玄于是低声哭泣，王大就想走。
English: Kuan Xuan then cried in a low voice, and Wang Da wanted to leave.

古文：桓以手巾掩泪，因谓王曰： 犯我家讳，何预卿事？ 
现代文：桓玄拿手巾擦着眼泪，随即对王大说： 犯了我的家讳，关你什么事！ 
English: Kuan Xuan took a hand towel and wiped his tears, then said to Wang Da: "You broke my family vow, what does it matter to you!

古文：王叹曰： 灵宝故自达。 
现代文：王大赞叹说： 灵宝的确旷达！ 
English: Wang Da was full of praise and said, "The spiritual treasure is truly vast!

古文：王孝伯问王大： 阮籍何如司马相如？ 
现代文：王孝伯问王大： 阮籍比起司马相如怎么样？ 
English: Wang Xiao Bo asked Wang Da: How is Nguyen Quan compared to Sima Xiangru?

古文：王大曰： 阮籍胸中垒块，故须酒浇之。 
现代文：王大说： 阮籍心里郁积着不平之气，所以需要借酒浇愁。 
English: Wang Da said: Ruan Qi Rong's heart is full of discontent, so he needs to use alcohol to drown his sorrows.

古文：王佛大叹言： 三日不饮酒，觉形神不复相亲。 
现代文：王佛大叹息说： 三天不喝酒，就觉得身体和精神不再相依附了。 
English: Wang Foda sighed and said: After three days of not drinking, I felt that my body and spirit were no longer attached to each other.

古文：王孝伯言： 名士不必须奇才。但使常得无事，痛饮酒，熟读离骚，便可称名士。 
现代文：王孝伯说： 名士不一定要有什么特别的才能，只要能常常悠闲无事，痛饮老酒，熟读《离骚》，就算得上是一位名士啦。 
English: Wang Xiao Bo said: A celebrity does not necessarily have to have any special talent, as long as he can often be idle, drink old wine, and read "Leaving So-and-So," he can be considered a celebrity.

古文：王长史登茅山，大恸哭曰： 琅邪王伯舆，终当为情死。 
现代文：长史王伯舆登上茅山，非常伤心地痛哭道： 琅邪王伯舆，终归要为情死！ 
English: Changshi Wangbaiwu ascended Maoshan, and wept bitterly with great sorrow: "If you persecute the evil Wangbaiwu, you will eventually die of love!"

