古文：文襄世宗文襄皇帝，讳澄，字子惠，神武长子也，母曰娄太后。生而岐嶷，神武异之。
现代文：世宗文襄皇帝讳名澄，字子惠，神武的长子，母亲娄太后。幼年聪慧，神武很是看重他。
English: Emperor Wenxiang was the eldest son of Emperor Shenwu, and his mother was the empress dowager. He was very intelligent as a child, and Shenwu highly valued him.

古文：魏中兴元年，立为渤海王世子。
现代文：魏中兴元年，立为渤海王世子。
English: In the first year of the Wei and Qing dynasties, he was appointed as the successor of the King of Bohai.

古文：就杜询讲学，敏悟过人，询甚叹服。
现代文：从杜询习学，敏悟过人，询很是佩服。
English: Du Enquirer is a great source of inspiration and inspiration. I really admire Du Enquirer.

古文：二年，加侍中、开府仪同三司，尚孝静帝妹冯翊长公主，时年十二，神情俊爽，便若成人。
现代文：二年，加侍中、开府仪同三司，尚孝静帝妹冯翊长公主，时年十二，神情俊爽，就像成人。
English: In the second year, in addition to the junior attendants, Kaifu Yi and Sanji, Shang Xiao Jing's younger sister, Princess Feng Yu, was 12 years old, with a handsome appearance, just like an adult.

古文：神武试问以时事得失，辨析无不中理，自是军国筹策皆预之。
现代文：神武试探着同他讨论局势得失问题，剖析颇为合理，自此之后，便参预了军国大事的筹谋。
English: Shenwu tried to discuss the pros and cons of the situation with him, and the analysis was quite reasonable. Since then, he has participated in the preparation of military events.

古文：天平元年，加使持节、尚书令、大行台、并州刺史。
现代文：天平元年，加使持节、尚书令、大行台、并州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Tenpyo era, it was added to the Jishijisai, Shangshurei, Daigandai, and Shuzushi histories.

古文：三年，入辅朝政，加领左右、京畿大都督。
现代文：三年，入朝辅政，加领左右、京畿大都督。
English: Three years later, he entered the government as an aide-de-camp, and became the governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：时人虽闻器识，犹以少年期之，而机略严明，事无凝滞，于是朝野振肃。
现代文：时人虽然听说过文襄的气量见识，但还是按对待少年人的标准来期待着他。机敏严明，事无凝滞，使得朝野振肃。
English: Although people at the time had heard of Wen Xiang's energy and insight, they still looked forward to him according to the standard of treating young people.

古文：元象元年，摄吏部尚书。
现代文：元象元年，摄吏部尚书。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Xiang, the director of photography department was established.

古文：魏自崔亮以后。选人常以年劳为制，文襄乃厘改前式，铨擢唯在得人。
现代文：魏自崔亮以后，选拔人才常以年龄功劳为准则，文襄便变革旧式，铨选唯在才能。
English: After Wei Zi Cui Liang, the selection of talents was often based on age and merit. Wen Xiang then reformed the old style, and the selection was only based on talent.

古文：又沙汰尚书郎，妙选人地以充之。
现代文：又淘汰不称职的尚书郎，拔擢优秀人物充任。
English: In addition, the incompetent Shang Shuro was eliminated, and an outstanding person was appointed to the post.

古文：至于才名之士，咸被荐擢，假有未居显位者，皆致之门下，以为宾客，每山园游燕，必见招携，执射赋诗，各尽其所长，以为娱适。
现代文：因此才名之士，咸受推举，即使有未居显位的，也要招致门下，作为宾客，每逢游山玩水，一定带领前往。射箭赋诗，各尽其所能，以为娱乐。
English: For this reason, even those who do not hold prominent positions should be invited to the door as guests, and whenever they go hiking, they must be led to go. Archery and poetry, they do their best to entertain.

古文：兴和二年，加大将军，领中书监，仍摄吏部尚书。
现代文：兴和二年，加大将军，领中书监，仍摄吏部尚书职。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, he was promoted to the rank of general and was assigned to the position of middle school librarian.

古文：自正光已后，天下多事，在任群官，廉洁者寡。
现代文：从正光以来，天下多事，在职官吏，廉洁者少。
English: Since Zheng Guang, there have been many things going on in the world, but few officials are honest.

古文：文襄乃奏吏部郎崔暹为御史中尉，纠劾权豪，无所纵舍，于是风俗更始，私枉路绝。
现代文：文襄便奏请拜吏部郎崔暹为御史中尉，纠弹权豪，无所宽免，于是风俗更改，私枉绝路。
English: Wen Xiang then asked the chief secretary, Cui Siam, to be the lieutenant of the imperial history, the power of correction, and there was no mercy, so the customs were changed, and I lost my way.

古文：乃榜于街衢，具论经国政术，仍开直言之路，有论事上书苦言切至者，皆优容之。
现代文：还在街衢张贴告示，详述治国政术，大开直言之路，有论事上书、苦言切谏者，均能宽容听取。
English: They also posted notices on the street, elaborated on the art of governing the country, and opened up the road of straight talk. Those who have written about the matter and spoken bitterly can be listened to with tolerance.

古文：武定四年十一月，神武西讨，不豫，班师，文襄驰赴军所，侍卫还晋阳。
现代文：武定四年十一月，神武西征，突然生病，还师，文襄快马赶赴幕府，护卫着返回晋阳。
English: In November of the fourth year of Wuding, Shenwu westward expedition, suddenly fell ill, returned to the division, Wenxiang fast horse rushed to the shogunate, escorted back to Jinyang.

古文：五年正月丙午，神武崩，秘不发丧。
现代文：五年正月初八，神武驾崩，秘不发丧。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the fifth year, Jinwu passed away.

古文：辛亥，司徒侯景据河南反，颍州刺史司马世云以城应之。
现代文：十三日，司徒侯景占据河南反叛，颍州刺史司马世云在颍州城响应。
English: On the 13th, Siu Houjing occupied Henan to rebel, and Sima Shiyun, the governor of Zhangzhou, responded in Zhangzhou City.

古文：景诱执豫州刺史高元成、襄州刺史李密、广州刺史暴显等。
现代文：景诱捕豫州刺史高元成、襄州刺史李密、广州刺史暴显等。
English: The scene entraps the Yuzhou stabber Gao Yuancheng, the Xiangzhou stabber Li Mi, and the Guangzhou stabber Buxian.

古文：遣司空韩轨率众讨之。
现代文：朝廷派遣司空韩轨领兵征讨。
English: The Imperial Court dispatched the Korean Railroad Company to lead soldiers to enlist.

古文：夏四月壬申，文襄朝于邺。
现代文：夏四月初六，文襄朝邺。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, the Wenxiang Morning Post is held.

古文：六月己巳，韩轨等自颍州班师。
现代文：六月初四，韩轨等从颍州班师。
English: On the 4th day of the 6th month of the year, the Korean track and other teams started from Bozhou.

古文：丁丑，文襄还晋阳，乃发丧，告喻文武，陈神武遗志。
现代文：十二日，文襄还晋阳，才发丧，晓告文武，公布神武遗志。
English: On the twelfth day, Wen Xiang was still in Jinyang, and it was only after the funeral that Wen Wu was notified and Shen Wu's will was announced.

古文：七月戊戌，魏帝诏以文襄为使持节、大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、渤海王。
现代文：七月初三，魏帝诏令文襄为使持节、大丞相、都督中外诸军、录尚书事、大行台、渤海王。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month, Emperor Wei decreed that Wenxiang was the envoy holding festival, the grand secretary of the general secretary, the governor of the armies at home and abroad, the record of the records, the grand guidebook, and the king of Erhai Lake.

古文：文襄启辞位，愿停王爵。
现代文：文襄上奏辞位，也希望停止王爵。
English: Wen Xiang made a speech and also hoped to stop Wang Jie.

古文：壬寅，魏帝诏太原公洋摄理军国，遣中使敦喻。
现代文：初七，魏帝诏太原公洋摄理军国大事，并派中使宣诏敦促。
English: On the seventh day of the first month, Emperor Wei ordered Taiyuan Gongyang to take charge of the military affairs of the country, and sent an envoy to issue an edict to urge him.

古文：八月戊辰，文襄启申神武遗令，请减国邑分封将督，各有差。
现代文：八月初四，文襄启奏，申述神武遗令，请减少食邑重新分配给将督，各有等差。
English: On the 4th day of the 8th month of the lunar month, the opening of the sermon, the appeal of the last order of Shenwu, please reduce the food and wine and redistribute it to the generals, each with a difference.

古文：辛未，朝邺，固辞丞相。
现代文：初七，朝邺，坚决推辞丞相职。
English: On the morning of the 7th day of the first month, he resolutely resigned from the post of chancellor.

古文：魏帝诏曰： 既朝野攸凭，安危所系，不得令遂本怀，须有权夺，可复前大将军，余如故。 
现代文：魏帝诏令说： 既然朝野仰仗，安危所系，不能满足自己的愿望，应该有所权衡，可复大将军职，余官依然保留。 
English: Wei Emperor's edict said: Since the government and the country are dependent on each other for their security and cannot satisfy their own wishes, there should be a trade-off, the general post can be restored, and the remaining posts can still be retained.

古文：王寻览书，问谁为作。
现代文：献议的人都认为侯景还有北望之心，只是使者携带的音信没有到达而已。
English: The people who proposed the idea thought that Houjing still had the heart of Beibang, but the message carried by the messenger had not arrived.

古文：或曰： 其行台郎王伟。 
现代文：后来侯景的部将蔡遵道北归，说侯景有悔过之心。
English: Later, Houjing's minister, Cai Zundao, returned to the north, saying that Houjing had a heart of repentance.

古文：王曰： 伟才如此，何因不使我知？ 
现代文：王认为这是真的，可以劝诱回来，乃写信给侯景，景也回了信。
English: Wang thought this was true and could be persuaded to return, so he wrote to Hou Jing, who also wrote back.

古文：王欲间景于梁，又与景书而谬其辞，云本使景阳叛，欲与图西，西人知之，故景更与图南为事。
现代文：王看完侯景回信，问是谁写的。有人说： 大概是行台郎王伟。 王说： 王伟有如此文才，为什么不让我知道？ 王想离间景与梁朝的关系，又给景写信，却谬误其言辞，称本打算让景佯装反叛，准备同他一道图谋西方，西人得到这一消息，所以景被迫和我们一块改向打南方的主意。
English: After Wang finished reading Hou Jing's reply letter, he asked who wrote it. Some people said: It was probably Wang Wei, the son of Emperor Xingtai. Wang said: Wang Wei has such literary talent, why didn't he let me know? Wang wanted to break the relationship between Jing and the Liang Dynasty, and wrote a letter to Jing, but he made a mistake in his words, saying that he had planned to let Jing pretend to rebel and was ready to plot the West with him. Westerners got this news, so Jing was forced to change his idea to fight the South together with us.

古文：漏其书于梁，梁人亦不之信。
现代文：并将书信中的内容有意泄露给梁，梁人不太相信。
English: He also deliberately leaked the contents of the letter to Liang, who did not quite believe it.

古文：壬申，东魏主与王猎于邺东，驰逐如飞。
现代文：初八，东魏帝与王在邺城东边狩猎，驰逐如飞。
English: On the eighth day of the first month, the Eastern Wei emperor and the king were hunting on the east side of Lucheng.

古文：监卫都督乌那罗受工伐从后呼曰： 天子莫走马，大将军怒。 
现代文：监卫都督乌那罗受工伐在后边呼喊道： 天子莫要跑马，大将军发火了。 
English: The guard of the city governor, Unaro, shouted in the back, "Don't run away, the general is angry."

古文：王尝侍饮，举大觞曰： 臣澄劝陛下酒。 
现代文：王曾侍奉魏帝饮酒，他举着大杯说： 臣澄劝陛下喝一杯酒。 
English: Wang had served wine to Emperor Wei. He held up a large glass and said, "Minister Chen, advise Your Majesty to drink a glass of wine."

古文：东魏主不悦曰： 自古无不亡之国，朕亦何用如此生！ 
现代文：魏帝不高兴，说： 从古到今没有不灭亡的国家，朕怎么用如此之人！ 
English: Emperor Wei was not pleased and said, "From ancient times to the present, there has never been a country that has not perished. How can I use such a person!"

古文：王怒曰： 朕！
现代文：王恼怒了，说： 朕！
English: The king became angry and said, "Woe is me!

古文：朕！
现代文：朕！
English: Me!

古文：狗脚朕！ 
现代文：狗脚朕！ 
English: I'll be damned!

古文：使崔季舒殴之三拳，奋衣而出。
现代文：指使崔季舒打了三拳，王拍打着衣服走出去了。
English: After instructing Cui Jishu to punch three times, Wang flapped his clothes and walked out.

古文：寻遣季舒入谢。
现代文：很快打发季舒进来赔礼请罪。
English: Soon, Ji Shu was sent in to apologize and plead guilty.

古文：东魏主赐季舒彩，季舒未敢即受，启之于王，王使取一段。
现代文：魏帝赐给季舒绵绣，季舒不敢马上接受，禀告于王，王让取了一段。
English: Emperor Wei gave Ji Shu embroidery, Ji Shu did not dare to accept it immediately, but reported it to the king, and the king gave him a piece.

古文：东魏主以四百匹与之，曰： 亦一段耳。 
现代文：魏帝要送四百匹给王，王说： 我也只要一段。 
English: Emperor Wei wanted to send 400 cows to the king, but the king said, "I only want one."

古文：东魏主不堪忧辱，咏谢灵运诗曰： 韩亡子房奋，秦帝鲁连耻。本自江海人，忠义感君子。 
现代文：魏帝忍受不了忧愁侮辱，咏诵谢灵运的诗句说： 韩亡子房奋，秦帝鲁连耻，本自江海人，忠义感君子。 
English: Emperor Wei could not bear the sadness and insults, and recited the poem of Xie Lingyun: Han Zixi Fang Fen, Qin Emperor Lulian Shame, originally from Jianghai, a gentleman with a sense of loyalty.

古文：因流涕。
现代文：并且痛哭流涕。
English: And wept bitterly.

古文：三月辛亥，王南临黎阳，济于虎牢，自洛阳从太行而反晋阳。
现代文：三月二十日，王南临黎阳，于虎牢渡河，从洛阳出发经过太行后返回晋阳。
English: On March 20th, Wang Nan went to Liyang, crossed the river at Hougang, and returned to Jinyang after starting from Luoyang and passing through Taihang.

古文：于路遗书百僚，以相戒励。朝野承风，莫不震肃。
现代文：在路途上给百僚写信，其目的是想告诫勉励他们，因而朝野承风，莫不振肃。
English: On the way, he wrote a letter to the centenarians, the purpose of which was to admonish and encourage them, so he had to follow the trend.

古文：又令朝臣牧宰各举贤良及骁武胆略堪守边城，务得其才，不拘职业。
现代文：王又下令朝臣牧宰各举荐贤良以及骁武胆略能镇守边城的人，不限职业，务得其才。
English: The king also ordered the courtiers and shepherds to recommend the most virtuous and courageous people who could guard the border town, regardless of occupation, and ensure that they were able to do so.

古文：六月，王巡北边城戍，赈赐有差。
现代文：六月，王巡察北方城戍，赈济百姓，赏赐官吏各有等次。
English: In June, the king made a tour of the northern cities and towns, giving alms to the people and rewarding the officials.

古文：七月，王还晋阳。
现代文：七月，王回晋阳。
English: In July, Wang returned to Jinyang.

古文：辛卯，王遇盗而殂，时年二十九。
现代文：初二，王被盗贼杀死，时年二十九岁。
English: On his second day of junior high school, Wang was killed by a thief. He was 29 years old at the time.

古文：葬于峻成陵。
现代文：葬于峻成陵。
English: He was buried in the Juncheng Mausoleum.

古文：齐受禅，追谥为文襄皇帝，庙号世宗。
现代文：齐受禅，追谥为文襄皇帝，庙号世宗。
English: Qi accepted Zen, became Emperor Wenxiang, and took the temple name of Shizong.

古文：时有童谣曰： 百尺高竿摧折，水底燃灯灯灭。 
现代文：王死前有童谣说： 百尺高竿摧折，水底燃灯灯灭。 
English: Before Wang died, there was a nursery rhyme that said: A hundred-foot-tall pole is broken, and the underwater light is extinguished.

古文：识者以为王将殂之兆也。
现代文：有见识的人认为这是王将要遇难的征兆。
English: Wise men saw this as a sign that the king was about to be overthrown.

古文：数日前，崔季舒无故于北宫门外诸贵之前诵鲍明远诗曰： 将军既下世，部曲亦罕存。 
现代文：几天前，崔季舒在北宫门外诸贵面前无缘无故地诵读鲍明远的诗说： 将军既下世，部曲亦罕存。 
English: A few days ago, Cui Jishu recited Bao Mingyuan's poem for no reason in front of the nobles outside the gate of the North Palace, saying: "Since the general has passed away, the poem is rare.

古文：声甚凄断，泪不能已，见者莫不怪之。
现代文：其声音极为凄伤，且泪流满面，见到此种情景的人没有不感到惊诧的。
English: His voice was so sad, and his face so tearful, that no one could fail to be surprised at the sight.

古文：初，梁将兰钦子京为东魏所虏，王命以配厨。
现代文：当初，梁将兰钦的儿子京被东魏虏获，王下令配役厨房。
English: At first, Liang ordered Lanqin's son Jing to be captured by the Eastern Wei Dynasty, and Wang ordered him to be assigned to the kitchen.

古文：钦请赎之，王不许。
现代文：钦请求赎回，王不同意。
English: Qin asked for redemption, but Wang disagreed.

古文：京再诉，王使监厨苍头薛丰洛杖之，曰： 更诉当杀尔。 
现代文：京再诉请，王指使监厨的苍头薛丰洛杖打他，还威胁说： 再投诉的话就杀了你。 
English: Beijing appealed again, and Wang ordered the head of the supervising cook, Xue Fengluo, to beat him with a cane. He also threatened: "If you complain again, I will kill you."

古文：京与其党六人谋作乱。
现代文：京与党徒六人阴谋作乱。
English: Kyo conspired with six party members to start a riot.

古文：时王居北城东柏堂莅政，以宠琅邪公主，欲其来往无所避忌，所有侍卫，皆出于外。太史启言宰辅星甚微，变不出一月。
现代文：此时王在北城东边的木百堂理事，所以全部的侍卫，都放在了外边。太史启奏说宰辅星十分微弱，不出一个月就有大变。
English: At this time, the king was in the east of the northern city, the director of the wooden church, so all the attendants were placed outside. Taishi Kiso said that Zai Fuxing was very weak, and there would be a big change in less than a month.

古文：王曰： 小人新杖之，故吓我耳。 
现代文：王览奏后说： 小人刚刚被揍了一顿，就想法吓唬我。 
English: After the performance, Wang Shan said, "The villain had just been beaten up, and he wanted to scare me.

古文：将欲受禅，与陈元康、崔季舒等屏斥左右，署拟百官。
现代文：准备接受魏的禅让，与陈元康、崔季舒等摈斥左右，安置百官。
English: He was ready to accept Wei's concessions, and he and Chen Yuankang, Cui Jishu, and others rebuffed and resettled hundreds of officials.

古文：京将进食，王却，谓诸人曰： 昨夜梦此奴斫我，宜杀却。 
现代文：京准备送进饭食，王退避，对很多人讲： 昨晚梦见此奴砍我，应该杀了他。 
English: Kyo prepares to serve the meal, but Wang retreats, telling many people: Last night I dreamt that this guy slashed me, I should kill him.

古文：京闻之，置刀于盘，冒言进食。
现代文：京听说后，将刀收藏在食盘之中，托言送饭。
English: After Kyo heard about it, he kept the knife in his dinner plate and gave it as a present.

古文：王怒曰： 我未索食，尔何据来！ 
现代文：王发着火说： 我还没有要吃饭，你为什么这快把饭送上来了？ 
English: Wang Fa was on fire and said, "I haven't wanted to eat yet, why did you bring the meal up so quickly?"

古文：京挥刀曰： 来将杀汝！ 
现代文：京拿出刀来，挥舞着说： 想来杀你。 
English: Kyo took out a knife and waved it, saying, "I want to kill you."

古文：王自投伤足，入于床下。
现代文：王反抗，扭伤了脚，钻进坐榻之下。
English: Wang resisted, sprained his foot, and crawled under his bunk.

古文：贼党去床，因而见杀。
现代文：贼党搬开坐榻，一下子就杀死了王。
English: The robbers moved away from the couch and killed the king at once.

古文：先是讹言曰： 软脱帽，床底喘 ，其言应矣。
现代文：早些时候有谣言说： 软脱帽，座底喘。 此时验证了这句话。
English: Earlier, there was a rumor saying: "Softly doffing the cap, sitting on the bottom panting." At this time, this sentence was verified.

古文：时太原公洋在城东双堂，入而讨贼，脔割京等，皆漆其头。
现代文：太原公洋在城东的双堂，听报后，火速赶往木百堂讨贼，抓住京后，一块一块地割光了他身上的肉，还用漆漆黑了他的头。
English: After hearing the news, Taiyuan Gongyang rushed to Shuangdong in the east of the city to find the thief. He grabbed Jingou, cut off his flesh piece by piece, and blackened his head with lacquer.

古文：秘不发丧，徐出言曰： 奴反，大将军被伤，无大苦也。 
现代文：王遇害，却秘不发丧，慢慢放出风来说： 奴反，大将军受了一点伤，没有什么关系。 
English: The king was killed, but he did not mourn, he slowly let out the wind and said: "Slave rebels, the great general was a little injured, it does not matter.

