古文：俗人险心，好信禁忌，知者亦疑，莫能实定。
现代文：一般人都存在着侥悻免祸的心理，喜好迷信禁忌，聪明的人也有怀疑，谁也不能核实判断。
English: The average person has the mentality of avoiding misfortune, likes superstitions and taboos, smart people also have doubts, and no one can verify the judgment.

古文：是以儒雅服从，工伎得胜。
现代文：因此博学的儒生信从了禁忌之说，而工伎之家占了上风。
English: As a result, the erudite Confucianism followed the taboo theory, and the gungi family gained the upper hand.

古文：吉凶之书，伐经典之义；工伎之说，凌儒雅之论。
现代文：宣扬迷信禁忌的书，战胜了经典上的道理；工伎之家的言论，压倒了博学之士的言论。
English: The book that promotes superstitious taboos has defeated the truth of the classics; the remarks of the workaholics have overwhelmed the remarks of the learned.

古文：今略实论，令览，揔核是非，使世一悟。
现代文：现在略为据实评论一下，让世人都观看清楚，总起来考核一下是非，使社会上的人都能醒悟。
English: Now I would like to make a few comments based on facts, so that the world can see clearly and make a general assessment of the rights and wrongs, so that people in society can wake up.

古文：《移徙法》曰： 徙抵太岁，凶；负太岁，亦凶。 抵太岁名曰岁下，负太岁名曰岁破，故皆凶也。
现代文：《移徙法》上说： 搬迁到面对太岁所在的方位不吉利，搬迁到背对太岁所在方位也不吉利。 面对太岁名叫 岁下 ，背对太岁名叫 岁破 ，所以都不吉利。
English: The "Immigration Law" says: It is unlucky to relocate to a position where you are facing too old, and it is also unlucky to relocate to a position where you are turning your back on too old. Facing too old is called years down, turning your back on too old is called years up, so it is unlucky.

古文：假令太岁在甲子，天下之人皆不得南北徙，起宅嫁娶亦皆避之。
现代文：假如太岁在子位，天下的人都不得往南北方向搬迁，盖房子嫁女娶妇也都要避开这个方位。
English: If you are too old to have children, people all over the world are not allowed to move in a north-south direction. Building a house, marrying a woman, and marrying a woman should also avoid this direction.

古文：其移东西，若徙四维，相之如者皆吉。
现代文：人们向东或向西搬迁，或者向四角方位搬迁，互相往来的，全都吉利。
English: People move to the east or west, or to the four corners, and all of them are lucky.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：不与太岁相触，亦不抵太岁之冲也。
现代文：因为没有与太岁相触犯，也没有向着与太岁相对的冲位。
English: Because there is no contact with the opponent, and there is no thrust against the opponent.

古文：实问：避太岁者，何意也？
现代文：如实问一下：避开太岁，是什么意思呢？
English: Let's be honest: what does it mean to avoid getting too old?

古文：令太岁恶人徙乎？
现代文：要说是太岁厌恶人们搬迁吗？
English: Is it too late to say that people hate to move?

古文：则徙者皆有祸。
现代文：那么搬迁的人家都会有灾祸。
English: Then there will be a disaster for the relocated families.

古文：令太岁不禁人徙，恶人抵触之乎？
现代文：要说是太岁不禁止人们搬迁，只是厌恶人们抵触它吗？
English: To say that Tai Lian does not prohibit people from moving, but just disgusts people to resist it?

古文：则道上之人，南北行者皆有殃。
现代文：那么在路上往南北方向行走的人都应该遭殃。
English: So anyone walking in a north-south direction on the road should suffer.

古文：太岁之意，犹长吏之心也。
现代文：太岁的心意，如同官长的心意一样。
English: The old man's mind, like the magistrate's.

古文：长吏在涂，人行触车马，干其吏从，长吏怒之，岂独抱器载物，去宅徙居触犯之者，而乃责之哉？
现代文：官长在路上，有人行走时碰上了官长的车马，触犯了官长的随从，官长就会对他发怒，哪里只是对拿着用具、载着什物、离开住宅搬迁新居而触犯了他的人才加以责罚呢？
English: When the magistrate is on the road and someone walks by and bumps into the magistrate's carriage and horse, offending the magistrate's entourage, the magistrate will be angry with him. Where is the punishment for the person who offends the magistrate by taking tools, carrying things, and leaving the house to move to a new home?

古文：昔文帝出，过霸陵桥，有一人行逢车驾，逃於桥下，以为文帝之车已过，疾走而出，惊乘舆马。
现代文：过去，汉文帝出行，经过霸陵桥，有一个行人遇上了文帝的车队，就逃到桥下躲避，认为文帝的车子已经过去，就从桥下赶快跑出来，惊了文帝驾车的马。
English: In the past, Emperor Wen of Han went on a trip and passed through the Badaling Bridge. A pedestrian encountered Emperor Wen's motorcade and fled under the bridge to avoid it. Thinking that Emperor Wen's car had already passed, he quickly ran out from under the bridge and startled Emperor Wen's driving horse.

古文：文帝怒，以属廷尉张释之。释之当论。
现代文：文帝发了怒，把他交给廷尉张释之处理，张释之定了他的罪。
English: Emperor Wen flew into a rage and handed him over to the courtier Zhang Xizhi, who sentenced him to death.

古文：使太岁之神行若文帝出乎？
现代文：要说太岁之神出行像汉文帝出行一样吗？
English: Would you say that Taisei no Kami travels like Emperor Han travels?

古文：则人犯之者，必有如桥下走出之人矣。
现代文：那么触犯它的人，一定有如那个从桥下跑出来的人一样了。
English: Then anyone who violates it must be like the man who ran out from under the bridge.

古文：方今行道路者，暴溺仆死，何以知非触遇太岁之出也？
现代文：现在行走在道路上的人，突然得病倒地而死，怎么知道他们不是触犯了正在出行的太岁神呢？
English: How do people walking on the road now, who suddenly fall ill and die, know that they are not offending the god of the year, who is on his way?

古文：为移徙者，又不能处。
现代文：宣扬搬迁禁忌的人对此又不能判明。
English: Those who preach the taboo of moving cannot be sure of this.

古文：不能处，则犯与不犯未可知。
现代文：不能判明，那么是否触犯了太岁神就无法知道。
English: If you can't find out, then you can't know if you've offended the god of the year.

古文：未可知，则其行与不行未可审也。
现代文：无法知道，那么太岁神出行不出行也是不可确知的了。
English: It is impossible to know, so it is impossible to know for sure that the sun god will not travel.

古文：且太岁之神审行乎？
现代文：要说太岁之神真的出行吗？
English: Does the god of old age really travel?

古文：则宜有曲折，不宜直南北也。
现代文：那么它出行的道路应该有曲折，不应该南北径直走。
English: Then the road it travels should have twists and turns, and it should not go straight from north to south.

古文：长吏出舍，行有曲折。
现代文：官长从官舍出行，出行的路也会有曲折。
English: When government officials travel from their official residences, there will be twists and turns along the way.

古文：如天神直道不曲折乎？
现代文：要说天神走的是直道而不拐弯吗？
English: Are we to say that Tenjin takes the straight road and does not turn?

古文：则从东西、四维徙者，犹干之也。
现代文：那么，从东西方和四角搬迁的人，仍然会触犯太岁神。
English: So, people who relocate from the east, west and four corners will still offend the god of the year.

古文：若长吏之南北行，人从东如西，四维相之如，犹抵触之。
现代文：就像官长从南往北走，人们从东往西，从四角相往来，仍然会触犯他一样。
English: Just as government officials go from south to north, and people go from east to west, from the four corners to each other, they will still offend him.

古文：如不正南北，南北之徙又何犯？
现代文：如果太岁出行不是走正南正北，那么往南北的搬迁又有什么触犯呢？
English: If you don't travel north-south when you're too old, what's wrong with moving north-south?

古文：如太岁不动行乎，则宜有宫室营堡，不与人相见，人安得而触之？
现代文：如果说太岁神是安居不行动的吗？那么，它就应当有宫室营堡，不与人相见，人怎么能够触犯它呢？
English: If it is said that the great god lives in peace and does not act? Then, it should have a palace, not meet with people, how can people offend it?

古文：如太岁无体，与长吏异，若烟云虹霓，直经天地，极子午南北陈乎？
现代文：如果说太岁神没有形体，和官长不同，像烟云彩虹那样一直贯穿天地，从极北分布到极南吗？
English: If it is said that the sun god has no body, and is different from the government officials, does it go through heaven and earth like a rainbow of smoke clouds, spreading from the extreme north to the extreme south?

古文：则东西徙，若四维徙者，亦干之。
现代文：那么，从东西搬迁像从四角搬迁的人一样也会触犯它。
English: So moving from the east to the west, like someone moving from the four corners, would also violate it.

古文：譬若今时人行触繁雾蜮气，无从横负乡皆中伤焉。
现代文：好像现在人们行走接触到浓雾毒气一样，无论纵横背向面对都会受到伤害。
English: It's as if people are now walking around exposed to a thick fog of poison gas, and they will be harmed no matter whether they are facing the back or the front.

古文：如审如气，人当见之，虽不移徙，亦皆中伤。
现代文：如果太岁神真的像气一样，人们就该碰到它，即使不搬迁，也都会受到伤害。
English: If the sun god is really like qi, people should encounter it, and even if they do not move, they will be harmed.

古文：且太岁，天别神也，与青龙无异。
现代文：况且太岁是从属于天的神，与青龙神没有什么不同。
English: Moreover, Tai Lian is a god belonging to heaven, and is no different from the Blue Dragon God.

古文：龙之体不过数千丈，如令神者宜长大，饶之数万丈，令体掩北方，当言太岁在北方，不当言在子。
现代文：青龙神的形体不过几千丈，假如太岁神的形体应当又长又大，增加到几万丈，让太岁的身体遮盖住整个北方，应当说太岁在北方，不应当说太岁只在 子 这一个位置上。
English: The shape of the Blue Dragon God is only a few thousand meters high. If the shape of the Dragon God should be long and large, increasing to tens of thousands of meters high, so that the body of the Dragon God covers the entire north, it should be said that the Dragon God is in the north, and it should not be said that the Dragon God is only in the position of the son.

古文：其东有丑，其西有亥，明不专掩北方，极东西之广，明矣。
现代文：太岁的东边有丑，太岁的西边有亥，说明太岁神并没有将整个北方都盖住，也没有将东西两边的广大区域全部占了，这是很清楚的。
English: It is clear that the god of longevity did not cover the entire north, nor did he occupy all the vast areas on both sides of the east and west.

古文：令正言在子位，触土之中，直子午者不得南北徙耳，东边直丑巳之地，西边直亥、未之民，何为不得南北徙？
现代文：如果确定说太岁是在子位，那么只有在大地的中心地区正当子午位置的人不能向南北搬迁罢了，大地的东部地区正当丑、巳位置的地方，大地的西部地区正当亥、未位置的人家，为什么不能向南北搬迁呢？
English: If it is determined that the Tai Lai is in the Zi position, then only the people in the central region of the earth with the proper meridian position cannot move to the north and south. The eastern region of the earth with the proper Ug, Me position, and the western region of the earth with the proper Hai, Unpositioned people's homes, why can't they move to the north and south?

古文：丑与亥地之民，使太岁左右通，得南北徙及东西徙。
现代文：对于在丑地与亥地的人家，假使太岁在子位的同时还向东西移动的话，那么按说他们不但不能向南北方向搬迁，而且也不能向东西方向搬迁。
English: For the people in the Ugly Place and the Haitian Place, if the great-grandchildren move to the east and west at the same time as the children, then it is said that they can not only move to the north and south, but also can not move to the east and west.

古文：何则？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：丑在子东，亥在子西，丑、亥之民东西徙，触岁之位；巳、未之民东西徙，忌岁所破。
现代文：丑在子的东边，亥在子的西边，丑、亥之地的人家向东西方搬迁，触犯了太岁所在的位置；巳、未之地的人家向东西方搬迁，触犯了太岁所冲的方位。
English: On the east side of the Ugly Goat, on the west side of the Boar Goat, the people of the Ugly Goat and the Boar Goat moved to the east and west, violating the position of the Monkey Goat; the people of the Snake Goat and the Bear Goat moved to the east and west, violating the position of the Monkey Goat.

古文：儒者论天下九州，以为东西南北，尽地广长，九州之内五千里，竟三河土中。
现代文：儒者议论天下分为九州，认为从东到西，从南到北，全境的广度和长度，在九州之内纵横各有五千里，境内以 三河 作为大地的中心地区。
English: Confucians argue that the world is divided into Kyushu, believing that from east to west, from south to north, the breadth and length of the entire territory, within Kyushu, each has five thousand miles in length and width, with the Three Rivers as the center of the earth.

古文：周公卜宅，《经》曰： 王来绍上帝，自服於土中。 
现代文：周公占卜住宅位置的吉凶，经书上说： 周成王来占卜上天之命，亲自在全国的中心治理天下。 
English: Zhou Gong divined the fortunes of the residential location, the scripture said: Zhou Cheng Wang came to divine the fate of heaven, and personally governed the world in the center of the country.

古文：雒则土之中也。
现代文：可见洛邑是大地的中心了。
English: It can be seen that Luoyang is the center of the earth.

古文：邹衍论之，以为九州之内五千里，竟合为一州，在东位，名曰赤县州。
现代文：邹衍论述这个问题，认为九州之内纵横各五千里，九州全境合为一个大州，在天下的东南部，名叫赤县神州。
English: Yu Yan discussed this issue, arguing that within Kyushu there are five thousand miles in length and width, and the entire territory of Kyushu is combined into one large state, in the southeast of the world, called Akagata Shenzhou.

古文：自有九州者九焉，九九八十一，凡八十一州。
现代文：天下各自分为九州的大州共有九个。九九八十一，总共八十一个州。
English: There are a total of nine large prefectures in the world, each of which is Kyushu. In 1989, there were a total of eighty-one prefectures.

古文：此言殆虚。
现代文：这种说法也许不真实。
English: That may not be true.

古文：地形难审，假令有之，亦一难也。
现代文：大地的形状很难确知，假使大地上确有八十一州，那么也可以作为对搬迁禁忌说法的一种责难。
English: The shape of the earth is difficult to determine, and if there are indeed eighty-one states on the earth, then it can also be used as a rebuke to the taboo of relocation.

古文：使天下九州，如儒者之议，直雒邑以南，对三河以北，豫州、荆州、冀州之部有太岁耳。
现代文：如果天下的九个州，如儒者所议论的那样，正当洛邑以南，正对 三河 以北，那么豫州、荆州、冀州之地就有太岁。
English: If the world's nine states, as discussed by Confucians, are just south of Luoyang and just north of Sanhe, then the lands of Yuzhou, Jingzhou and Jizhou are too old.

古文：雍、梁之间，青、兗、徐、扬之地，安得有太岁？
现代文：雍州、梁州之间，青、兖、徐、扬等州的地方，怎么会有太岁呢？
English: Between the states of Yongzhou and Liangzhou, between the states of Qing, Zhou, Xu and Yang, how can there be too old?

古文：使如邹衍之论，则天下九州在东南位，不直子午，安得有太岁？
现代文：如果像邹衍所论述的那样，那么天下九州在东南方位，不正当子午，怎么会有太岁呢？
English: If Kyushu is located in the southeastern part of the world, it is not the meridian, so how can it be too old?

古文：如太岁不在天地极，分散在民间，则一家之宅，辄有太岁。虽不南北徙，犹抵触之。
现代文：如果太岁不在天地的尽头，而是分散在民间，那么一户人家的住宅中，就有太岁，即使不向南北方向搬迁，仍然会触犯太岁。
English: If the Tai Lai is not at the end of the world, but scattered among the people, then there will be a Tai Lai in a family's home, and even if it is not relocated to the north and south, it will still violate the Tai Lai.

古文：假令从东里徙西里，西里有太岁，从东宅徙西宅，西宅有太岁，或在人之东西，或在人之南北，犹行途上，东西南北皆逢触人。
现代文：假如从东街迁住西街，西街有太岁；从东宅迁往西宅，西宅也有太岁。太岁或在人的东西方，或在人的南北方，如同人行走在路上，无论东西南北方太岁都会与人相逢。
English: If you move from the East Street to the West Street, the West Street will be too old; if you move from the East House to the West House, the West House will also be too old. Too old or in the east and west of people, or in the north and south of people, just like people walking on the road, whether it is east, west, south or north, too old will meet with people.

古文：太岁位数千万亿，天下之民徙者皆凶，为移徙者何以审之？
现代文：太岁所在位置的数目要以千、万、十万来计算，天下的老百姓凡搬迁的都会碰上凶，要搬迁的人怎么能确知太岁的位置呢？
English: The number of locations where the Tai Lai is located should be calculated in thousands, tens of thousands, and hundreds of thousands. People all over the world who relocate will encounter evil. How can people who want to relocate know the location of the Tai Lai?

古文：如审立於天地之际，犹王者之位在土中也。
现代文：如果太岁果真立在天地之间，好比君王的位置在大地的中央一样。
English: If the sun really stood between heaven and earth, it would be like the position of a king in the middle of the earth.

古文：东方之民，张弓西射，人不谓之射王者，以不能至王者之都，自止射其处也。
现代文：东方的百姓，张开弓箭向西射，人们不认为这是在射君王，是因为箭不能射到君王的都城，箭身只落在它的射程之内。
English: When the people of the East stretch out their bows and arrows against the West, it is not considered that they are shooting at the king, for the arrow does not reach the king's city, but the shaft of the arrow falls within its range.

古文：今徙岂能北至太岁位哉！
现代文：现在搬迁的人难道能往北一直搬到太岁所在的位置上吗！
English: Will the people who are moving now be able to move all the way north to the place where Tai Lai is located!

古文：自止徙百步之内，何为谓之伤太岁乎？
现代文：搬迁在很短的距离内就停止了，为什么说它侵犯了太岁呢？
English: Relocation stops within a short distance, so why is it infringing on the elderly?

古文：且移徙之家禁南北徙者，以为岁在子位，子者破午，南北徙者抵触其冲，故谓之凶。
现代文：而且宣扬搬迁禁忌的人之所以禁止人们朝南、朝北搬迁，是由于太岁在子位，与子位相对的午位就是 岁破 ，往南北方搬迁不是 抵太岁 就是 负太岁 ，所以称之为凶。
English: Moreover, the reason why people who propagate the taboo of relocation prohibit people from moving southward and northward is because they are too old at the child position, and the noon position opposite the child position is too old, and moving to the north and south is either too old or too old, so it is called fierce.

古文：夫破者须有以椎破之也。
现代文：所谓破，必须有用来击毁对方的东西。
English: The so-called break, there must be used to destroy the other side of things.

古文：如审有所用，则不徙之民，皆被破害；如无所用，何能破之！
现代文：如果太岁确实有用来槌打的东西，那么不搬迁的老百姓也都会受到槌打的伤害；如果太岁根本没有用来槌打的东西，怎么能够伤害人呢？
English: If the old man really has something to hammer, then the people who do not move will also be harmed by hammering; if the old man does not have anything to hammer, how can it hurt people?

古文：夫雷，天气也，盛夏击折，折木破山，时暴杀人。
现代文：雷是天上的气形成的，盛夏时节雷击断树木，击毁山峰，有时会突然杀死人。
English: Lightning is created by air in the sky. In the height of summer, lightning strikes trees, destroys mountains, and sometimes suddenly kills people.

古文：使太岁所破，若迅雷也，则声音宜疾，死者宜暴；如不若雷，亦无能破。
现代文：如果说太岁击破东西时像迅猛的雷一样，那么它的声音应当迅猛，杀死人应当很突然；如果不像雷那样迅猛，也就不能吉破东西。
English: If thunder is said to be like a swift thunder when it breaks things, then its sound should be swift, killing people should be very sudden; if it is not as swift as thunder, it cannot break things.

古文：如谓冲抵为破，冲抵安能相破？
现代文：如果认为冲抵太岁称为破，那么冲抵本身怎么能相互为破呢？
English: If it is considered that the offset is too old to be broken, how can the offset itself be broken?

古文：东西相与为冲，而南北相与为抵。
现代文：东西方相互为冲，而南北方相互为抵。
English: East and West oppose each other, while North and South oppose each other.

古文：如必以冲抵为凶，则东西常凶而南北常恶也。
现代文：如果一定认为冲抵是凶的话，那么东西方常常是凶而南北方常常是恶了。
English: If we must believe that rushing is evil, then the east and west are often evil and the north and south are often evil.

古文：如以太岁神，其冲独凶，神莫过於天地，天地相与为冲，则天地之间无生人也。
现代文：如果认为太岁是神，与它相冲特别不吉利的话，那么神没有超过天神、地神的，天地相互为冲，那么在天地之间就没有一个活人了。
English: If it is considered that Taishi is a god, and it is particularly unlucky to collide with it, then the god does not exceed the angel god and the earth god, and heaven and earth collide with each other, then there is no living person between heaven and earth.

古文：或上十二神，登明、从魁之辈，工伎家谓之皆天神也。
现代文：栻上的十二神如登明、从魁之类，工伎家说它们都是天神，常常立在子丑等方位上，全都有冲抵之气。
English: The twelve deities on the yoke, such as Dengming and Congkuo, are said to be celestial deities. They often stand in the Zigu position, and all of them have a rushing air.

古文：常立子、丑之位，俱有冲抵之气，神虽不若太岁，宜有微败。
现代文：十二神的神灵虽然不如太岁神，触犯了它们也该会造成一些微小的祸害。
English: Although the deities of the twelve gods are not as good as the ancient gods, offending them should also cause some minor disasters.

古文：移徙者虽避太岁之凶，犹触十二神之害，为移徙时者，何以不禁？
现代文：搬迁的人即使避开了太岁之凶，仍然会触犯十二神之害。宣扬搬迁禁忌的人，为什么不禁止人们搬迁呢？
English: People who relocate, even if they avoid the evils of old age, will still offend the twelve gods. Why don't those who preach the taboo of relocation ban people from relocating?

古文：冬气寒，水也，水位在北方。
现代文：冬天气候寒冷，是因为冬天属 水 ，而 水 位在北方的缘故。
English: The climate is cold in winter, because winter is water, and the water level is high in the north.

古文：夏气热，火也，火位在南方。
现代文：夏天气候炎热，是因为夏天属 火 ，而 火 位在南方的缘故。
English: Summer is hot because summer is fire, and fire is in the south.

古文：案秋冬寒，春夏热者，天下普然，非独南北之方水火冲也。
现代文：考察秋冬寒冷，春夏温暖，天下普遍是这样，不只是南北两个方位水火所冲的地方才寒冷和炎热。
English: Investigate the cold in autumn and winter, warm in spring and summer, this is generally the case all over the world. It is not only the places where the two directions of north and south are washed by water and fire that are cold and hot.

古文：今太岁位在子耳，天下皆为太岁，非独子、午冲也。
现代文：如今太岁的位置只是在子位罢了，天下都是太岁的位置，不只是子午位相冲的地方才是太岁的位置。
English: Today, the position of the solstice is only in the sub-position, the whole world is the position of the solstice, not only the place where the meridians collide is the position of the solstice.

古文：审以所立者为主，则午可为大夏，子可为大冬。
现代文：如果真以太岁所在的方位为主，那么午位可算是炎夏，子位可算是严冬。
English: If the position of the true ethereal year is the main one, then the noon position can be regarded as a hot summer, and the child position can be regarded as a severe winter.

古文：冬夏南北徙者，可复凶乎？
现代文：冬天往南迁或夏天往北迁的人，会再遇到凶吗？
English: Will those who migrate south in the winter or north in the summer encounter evil again?

古文：立春，艮王、震相、巽胎、离没、坤死、兑囚、乾废、坎休。王之冲死，相之冲囚，王相冲位，有死囚之气。
现代文：立春，八卦的变化情况是艮王、震相、巽胎、离没、坤死、兑囚、乾废、坎休。 王 所冲的位置是 死 ， 相 所冲的位置是 囚 ，和 王 、 相 相冲的位置有死亡、囚禁的凶气。
English: At the beginning of spring, the changes of the eight trigrams are the king of death, the shock phase, the fetus, the separation, the death of Kun, the prisoner, the dry waste, and the rest. The position of the king is death, the position of the phase is the prisoner, and the king and the position of the phase are death and imprisonment.

古文：乾坤六子，天下正道，伏羲、文王象以治世。
现代文：八卦反映了天下万物发展的正常道理，伏羲和周文王取法八卦来治理天下。
English: The Eight Trigrams reflect the normal principle of the development of all things in the world. Fuxi and Zhou Wenwang used the Eight Trigrams to govern the world.

古文：文为经所载，道为圣所信，明审於太岁矣。
现代文：有关八卦的文字被记载在《周易》这部经书里，八卦所含的道理被圣人所信任采用，比触犯太岁遭祸的说法清楚多了。
English: The text about the Eight Trigrams is recorded in "Zhou Yi," a scripture book, and the truth contained in the Eight Trigrams is trusted and adopted by sages. It is much clearer than the saying that the offender is too old to suffer.

古文：人或以立春东北徙，抵艮之下，不被凶害。
现代文：有的人在立春那天往东北方搬迁，到达艮的方位，却不会遭受凶害。
English: Some people moved to the northeast on the day of the first day of spring, reaching the position of the dragonfly, but they would not be harmed.

古文：太岁立於子，彼东北徙，坤卦近於午，犹艮以坤，徙触子位，何故独凶？
现代文：太岁正好在子位，他们往东北搬迁，坤卦接近午位，就像从艮往坤，搬迁触犯子位，为什么偏遭凶祸呢？
English: Taishi is exactly in the sub position, they moved to the northeast, Kun Gua is close to the noon position, just like moving from Yunnan to Kun, the relocation affects the criminal sub position, why is it affected by the disaster?

古文：正月建於寅，破於申，从寅、申徙，相之如者，无有凶害。
现代文：夏历正月北斗星柄指向寅位时，申处于冲位，从东北、西南方向搬迁，相互往来的人，却不会有凶害。
English: In the first month of the lunar calendar, when the star of the Big Dipper points to the position of the crescent, the crescent is in the position of the stroke, and it is moved from the northeast and southwest. However, there will be no harm to the people who interact with each other.

古文：太岁不指午，而空曰岁破；午实无凶祸，而虚禁南北，岂不妄哉！
现代文：子位的太岁实际上并不破午位，而凭空说 岁破 ，午位实际没有凶祸，而无缘无故禁止往南北搬迁，难道不荒唐吗？
English: Isn't it absurd to say that the old age of the child is actually not breaking the noon, and that there is actually no evil in the noon, but that there is no reason to ban relocation to the north and south?

古文：十二月为一岁，四时节竟，阴阳气终，竟复为一岁，日月积聚之名耳，何故有神而谓之立於子位乎？
现代文：十二个月为一年，四季节气完结，阴阳之气终了，又开始了新的一年。 岁 不过是天、月积累起来的名称罢了，为什么会有岁神而说它正好在子位呢？
English: Twelve months make up a year, the four seasons are over, the yin and yang are over, and a new year has begun.Year is just a name accumulated by the heavens and the moon, so why is there a god of the year and say that it is just in the position of the son?

古文：积分为日，累日为月，连月为时，纪时为岁。
现代文：积累时分成为日，积累日子成为月，月与月相连成为四季，合四季就成为年。
English: The accumulated minutes become days, the accumulated days become months, the months become the four seasons, and the four seasons become the year.

古文：岁则日、月、时之类也。
现代文：岁也就同日、月、季之类的名称一样。
English: The year is also the same as the day, month, season and other names.

古文：岁而有神，日、月、时亦复有神乎？
现代文：岁如果有太岁神，那么日、月、季也同样有神吗？
English: If there is a god for the year, is there also a god for the day, month and season?

古文：千五百三十九为一统，四千六百一十七岁为一元。
现代文：一千五百三十九年称为一统，四千六百一十七年称为一元。
English: In 1539 it was called one unit, and in 4617 it was called one yuan.

古文：岁犹统元也。
现代文：岁就和统、元是一样的。
English: The age is the same as the unification and the original.

古文：岁有神，统元复有神乎？
现代文：岁如果有神，那么统、元同样也有神吗？
English: If there is a god for the past, does the past also have a god?

古文：论之以为无。
现代文：我论证它是不存在的。
English: I argue that it does not exist.

古文：假令有之，何故害人？
现代文：假如有神，为什么祸害人呢？
English: If there is a God, why does evil exist?

古文：神莫过於天地，天地不害人。
现代文：神当中没有超过天神、地神的，天神地神却不祸害人。
English: Among the gods, no one surpasses the gods of heaven and earth, but the gods of heaven and earth do not harm people.

古文：人谓百神，百神不害人。
现代文：人们说存在百神，百神却不祸害人。
English: People say that there are a hundred gods, but a hundred gods do not harm people.

古文：太岁之气，天地之气也，何憎於人，触而为害？
现代文：太岁之气，就是天地的气，怎么会对人憎恨呢，触犯了它能造成祸害呢？
English: How can the spirit of the ages, that is, the spirit of heaven and earth, hate a person? If it is offended, can it cause harm?

古文：且文曰： 甲子不徙。 
现代文：而且《移徙法》中说： 太岁在甲子位就不能南北搬迁。 
English: Moreover, the "Migration Law" says: If you are too old, you cannot move from north to south.

古文：言甲与子殊位，太岁立子不居甲，为移徙者，运之而复居甲。
现代文：说明甲与子的方位不同，太岁在子位就不能又处于甲位，而是由于宣扬搬迁禁忌的人通过运转 栻 才使太岁又处于甲位的。
English: This shows that the position of A is different from that of Zi. Tai Lai can not be in A again after being in Zi, but it is only because of the people who propagate the taboo of relocation that Tai Lai is in A again through the operation of.

古文：为之而复居甲，为移徙时者，亦宜复禁东西徙。
现代文：既然运转 栻 又使太岁处于甲位，那么宣扬搬迁禁忌的人，也应该同时禁止往东西搬迁。
English: Since the operation of the  also puts the Tai Lai in the A position, then those who promote the taboo of relocation should also prohibit relocation to the east and west.

古文：甲与子钧，其凶宜同。
现代文：甲与子的地位相同，它们引起的凶祸也应当相同。
English: A and Z have the same status, and the evil caused by them should be the same.

古文：不禁甲，而独忌子，为移徙时者，竟妄不可用也。
现代文：不禁忌迁往甲位而唯独禁忌迁往子位，宣扬搬迁禁忌的人，毕竟荒唐不可信用。
English: It is not taboo to move to the first rank, but it is taboo to move to the second rank. After all, those who promote the taboo of moving cannot be trusted.

古文：人居不能不移徙，移徙不能不触岁，触岁不能不得时死。
现代文：人们居住不可能不搬迁，搬迁不可能不触犯太岁，触犯太岁的不可能在某个时候死去。
English: People can't live without moving, can't move without becoming too old, and can't become too old without dying at some point.

古文：工伎之人，见今人之死，则归祸於往时之徙。
现代文：工伎之人，看到现在人死了，就归祸于过去的搬迁触犯了禁忌。
English: Seeing that people are now dead, people in the engineering industry have broken the taboo by blaming the relocation on the past.

古文：俗心险危，死者不绝，故太岁之言，传世不灭。
现代文：一般人都存在着侥幸免祸的心理，死人的事又不断发生，所以有关太岁的禁忌，世代相传而不灭绝。
English: The average person has the mentality of being lucky and avoiding disaster, and deadly things keep happening, so the taboos about being too old are passed down from generation to generation without becoming extinct.

