古文：王罴，字熊罴，京兆霸城人，汉河南尹遵之后，世为州郡著姓。
现代文：王罴，字熊罴，京兆霸城人。西汉河南尹王遵的后代，世代都是州郡中的大姓。
English: Wang Yao, Zhe Xiong Yao, people of Beijing Zhaobao City. Descendants of Yin Wang Zun in the South of the Western Han Dynasty, all generations are the eldest surnames in the county.

古文：罴质直木强，处物平当，州闾敬惮之。
现代文：他性格质朴正直刚强，处理事情公平恰当，州中的人们都敬服和畏惧他。
English: His character is simple, honest and strong, he handles things fairly and properly, and people in the state respect and fear him.

古文：魏太和中，除殿中将军，稍迁雍州别驾，清廉疾恶，励精公事。
现代文：北魏孝文帝太和年间，他任殿中将军，不久迁任雍州别驾。他清正廉洁，疾恶如仇，励精图治，尽力公事。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiaowen of the Northern Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as a general in the palace, and soon moved to Yongzhou Beikai. He was honest and clean, evil-minded, diligent in governance, and diligent in public affairs.

古文：刺史崔亮有知人之鉴，见罴雅相钦挹。
现代文：刺史崔亮有知人之明，对王罴十分器重和关照。
English: Zhang Shi Cui Liang was a close acquaintance and showed great care and attention to Wang Qianlu.

古文：亮后转定州，启罴为长史。
现代文：崔亮后来任真州刺史，奏报朝廷请王罴任长史。
English: Later, Cui Liang was appointed as the chief historian of Zhenzhou, and the imperial court asked Wang Qi to be appointed as the chief historian.

古文：执政者恐罴不称，不许。
现代文：朝廷中掌握重权的人担心王罴不能胜任，没有同意。
English: Those in the imperial court who wielded great power feared that Wang Xi was not competent and did not give their consent.

古文：及梁人寇硖石，亮为都督南讨，复启罴为长史，带锐军。
现代文：梁朝人侵犯硖石，崔亮任都督率军南讨，又启奏朝廷，请求以王罴为长史，并让他率领精锐军队。
English: When the Liang Dynasty invaded Shaoshi, Cui Liang was appointed as the governor to lead the army to the south to discuss the matter. He also appealed to the imperial court, requesting that Wang Qian be given a long history, and that he be allowed to lead the elite army.

古文：朝廷以亮频举罴，故当可用。
现代文：朝廷看崔亮几次举荐王罴，所以任用了他。
English: The imperial court saw that Cui Liang recommended Wang Xi several times, so he was appointed.

古文：及克硖石，罴功居多。
现代文：硖石克复之后，王罴的功劳最多。
English: After the recovery of Zangshi, Wang Hui deserves most of the credit.

古文：先是南岐、东益氐羌反叛，乃拜罴冠军将军，镇梁州，讨平诸贼。
现代文：南岐和东益州的氐族和羌族反叛，朝廷命王罴为冠军将军，镇守梁州，讨平夷族叛兵。
English: The Southern Qi and Eastern Yizhou were rebelled by the Yi and Yao ethnic groups, and the imperial court ordered Wang Yao to be the champion general, guarding Liangzhou and suppressing the rebels of the Yi ethnic group.

古文：还，授西河内史，辞不拜。
现代文：归来，朝廷封他为西河内史，他没有接受。
English: When he returned, the court gave him the title of Xihe Inner Historian, which he did not accept.

古文：时人谓曰； 西河大邦，奉禄优厚，何为致辞？ 
现代文：当时有人对他说： 西河地域辽阔，俸禄优厚，你为什么辞去这个职务？ 
English: At that time, someone said to him: Xihe region is vast, the salary is rich, why did you resign from this position?

古文：罴曰： 京洛材木，尽出西河，朝贵营第宅者，皆有求假。
现代文：他答道 ：京城洛阳建筑需要的木材，都是西河出产。朝廷的显贵政要们营造府第，都必需有求必应。
English: He replied: The timber needed for the construction of the capital Luoyang is all produced by the West River. The dignitaries and politicians of the imperial court had to have their demands met in order to build palaces.

古文：如其私办，则力所不堪，若科发人间，又违犯宪法。
现代文：如果私下办理，则人力物力都负担不起；如果向百姓摊派，又违犯宪典。
English: If it is done privately, it will not be able to afford the manpower and material resources; if it is allocated to the people, it will violate the Constitution.

古文：以此致辞耳。 
现代文：所以，我要辞去这个职务。 
English: Therefore, I am resigning from this position.

古文：后以军功封定阳子，除荆州刺史。
现代文：后来他因立有军功被封为定阳子，任荆州刺史。
English: Later, he was awarded the title of Dingyangzi for his military exploits, and was appointed as the leader of Jingzhou.

古文：梁复遣曹义宗围荆州，堰水灌城，不没者数版。
现代文：南梁又派曹义宗领兵围攻荆州，堵水浇灌城池，城墙没有被淹住的地方只有几块木板宽。
English: Nanliang also sent Cao Yizong to lead the troops to besiege Jingzhou, block the water and water the city pond. The place where the city wall was not flooded was only a few planks wide.

古文：时既内外多虞，未遑救援，乃遗罴铁券，云城全当授本州刺史。
现代文：当时朝廷内外都有祸乱，没有力量救援，于是送给王罴一份铁铸的券书，说如果能保全城池，就命他为本州刺史。
English: At that time, there were calamities both inside and outside the imperial court, and there was no power to rescue. Therefore, a cast iron certificate was given to Wang Qiu, saying that if he could preserve the city, he would be ordered to write the history of Honshu.

古文：城中粮尽，罴乃煮粥与将士均分食之。
现代文：城中粮食吃尽，王罴便煮粥与将士平均分食。
English: Having run out of food in the city, Wang Xi cooked porridge and shared it equally with the generals.

古文：每出战，常不擐甲胄，大呼告天曰： 荆州城，孝文皇帝所置。
现代文：每次出城，他常不披挂甲胄，大声祭告上天说： 荆州城，是孝文皇帝时所设置。
English: Every time he went out of the city, he often did not wear armor and shouted to the heavens: "Jingzhou City was established by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：天若不佑国家，使箭中王罴额；不尔，王罴须破贼。 
现代文：上天如果不扶助我们的国家，让箭射中我的前额；如果不是这样，就让我打败敌兵。 
English: If God does not help our country, let an arrow hit my forehead; if not, let me defeat the enemy soldiers.

古文：屡经战阵，亦不被伤。
现代文：他屡经战阵，也没有被伤害。
English: He has been through many battles and has not been harmed.

古文：弥历三年，义宗方退。
现代文：经过三年，曹义宗才撤退。
English: It took three years for Cao Yizong to withdraw.

古文：进封霸城县公。
现代文：他被封爵为霸城县公。
English: He was given a knighthood for his services to the county.

古文：元颢入洛，以罴为左军大都督。
现代文：元颢率南朝军队占据洛阳，便任命王罴为左军大都督。
English: When the Southern Dynasty army led by Yuan Shikai occupied Luoyang, he appointed Wang Shikai as the commander of the Left Army.

古文：颢败，庄帝以罴受颢官，故不得本州，更除岐州刺史。
现代文：元颢失败，孝庄帝因王罴接受了元颢的封官，所以不能在本州任职，另外命他为岐州刺史。
English: The Yuan Dynasty failed, and Emperor Xiaozhuang could not serve in his own state because Wang Xi accepted the appointment of the Yuan Dynasty. In addition, he ordered him to make history in Qizhou.

古文：时南秦数叛，以罴行南秦州事。
现代文：这时南秦数次背叛，朝廷命王罴代行南秦州刺史的职务。
English: At this time, the Southern Qin rebelled several times, and the imperial court ordered Wang Qian to act as the representative of the Southern Qin State.

古文：罴至州，召其魁帅为腹心，击捕反者略尽。
现代文：他到任后，召集当地的首领作为心腹，将反叛者拘捕殆尽。
English: After he took office, he summoned local chiefs as confidants and arrested all the rebels.

古文：乃谓魁帅等曰： 汝党皆死尽，何用活为！ 
现代文：他对首领们说 ：你们的同党都已死尽，你们何必再活着！ 
English: He said to the leaders: "Your comrades are all dead, why should you live any longer!

古文：乃以次斩之。
现代文：便将他们一一斩首。
English: and beheaded them one by one.

古文：自是南秦无复反者。
现代文：从此南秦不再有人反叛。
English: From then on, no one rebelled in Southern Qin.

古文：又诏罴行秦州事。
现代文：朝廷又命他代行秦州刺史。
English: The imperial court also ordered him to carry out the history of Qin State on his behalf.

古文：寻迁泾州刺史。
现代文：不久迁任为泾州刺史。
English: He was soon transferred to be the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：未及之部，属周文帝征兵为勤王之举，罴请前驱效命，遂为大都督，镇华州。
现代文：还没有到任所，宇文泰为了勤王征集军队，他请求作为前驱为朝廷效命，便被任命为大都督，镇守华州。
English: Before he arrived at his post, Uwentai gathered troops for the sake of loyalty to the king. He asked to serve as a forerunner for the imperial court, and was appointed grand governor, guarding Huazhou.

古文：孝武西迁，进车骑大将军、仪同三司，别封万年县伯，乃除华州刺史。
现代文：孝武帝西迁后，晋封王罴为车骑大将军、仪同三司，又封爵为万年县伯，任华州刺史。
English: After Emperor Xiaowu moved to the west, Wang Xi was awarded the titles of General of Cavalry and Cavalry and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and he was also awarded the title of Count of the County of 10,000 Years and appointed as the Historian of Huazhou.

古文：齐神武率军进潼关，人怀危惧，罴劝劢交士，众心乃安。
现代文：高欢率军进攻潼关，人人心怀恐惧，他劝慰将士，大家才平静下来。
English: Gao Huan led the army to attack Shaoguan. Everyone was afraid. He consoled the soldiers, and everyone calmed down.

古文：神武退，拜骠骑大将军，加侍中、开府。
现代文：高欢撤退后，朝廷命他为骠骑大将军，加封为侍中、开府。
English: After Gao Huan's retreat, the imperial court appointed him as the general of the imperial cavalry, and he was given the additional titles of chamberlain and governor.

古文：尝修州城未毕，梯在城外。
现代文：他曾派人修筑州城，没有完工，施工用的梯子留在城墙外面。
English: He had sent someone to build the city of Chikushu, but it was never completed, and the construction ladders were left outside the city walls.

古文：神武遣韩轨、司马子如从河东宵济袭罴，罴不觉。
现代文：高欢派韩轨、司马子如从河东晚上涉水袭击王罴，他没有发觉。
English: He did not notice the high-spirited Koreans, such as Han Gang and Sima Zi, wading into the water in the evening from the east of the river to attack Wang Hui.

古文：比晓，轨众已乘梯入城。
现代文：拂晓时，韩轨等人已顺着梯子进入城中。
English: At dawn, Han Rong and the others had climbed down the ladder and entered the city.

古文：罴尚卧未起，闻阁外汹汹有声，便袒身露髻徒跣，持一白棒，大呼而出，谓曰： 老罴当道卧，貉子那得过！ 
现代文：他还睡在床上没有起来，听见门外杀声阵阵，便光着身子，裸露着发髻，赤着双脚，手拿一根白木棒，大声呼喊着奔出，说： 老熊当道卧，你们这些貉子怎么能过去！ 
English: He was still asleep in bed and did not get up, when he heard the sounds of murder outside the door, he ran out bare-chested, bare-chested, bare-footed, with a white wooden stick in his hand, shouting loudly, saying: "Old bear, lie down, how can you lice get past!

古文：敌见，惊退。
现代文：敌兵看见，吃惊退走。
English: The enemy soldiers saw this and retreated in surprise.

古文：逐至东门，左右稍集，合战破之。轨遂投城遁走。
现代文：他赶到东门，将士汇集，合力将入侵的敌兵打败，韩轨跳下城墙逃跑。
English: He rushed to the East Gate, gathered his soldiers, and together they defeated the invading enemy soldiers. Han Rail jumped off the city wall to escape.

古文：文帝闻而壮之。
现代文：西魏文帝听说后，很为他的壮举称赞。
English: Upon hearing this, Emperor Wen of Western Wei praised him highly for his feat.

古文：时关中大饥，征税人间谷食，以供军费。
现代文：这时关中发生大饥荒，朝廷命他向百姓征收粮食以作军费。
English: At this time, a great famine occurred in Guanzhong, and the imperial court ordered him to collect grain from the people for military expenses.

古文：或隐匿者，令递相告，多被篣捶，以是人有逃散。
现代文：如有隐藏不交的，令百姓互相告发，很多人被鞭笞拷打，因此有很多人逃散。
English: If there are hidden ones, the people will inform on each other, and many people will be whipped and tortured, so many people will run away.

古文：唯罴信著于人，莫有隐者，得粟不少诸州，而无怨讟。
现代文：惟有王罴以信义著称，百姓没有隐匿粮食的，他征收到的粮食也不比别州的少，百姓也没有怨言。
English: However, Wang Xi was known for his loyalty. The people did not hide grain. The grain he collected and received was not less than that of other states, and the people did not complain.

古文：沙苑之役，神武士马甚盛。
现代文：沙苑之役，高欢的军队斗志旺盛。
English: During the Battle of Sha Yuan, the high-spirited troops were full of fighting spirit.

古文：文帝以华州冲要，遣使劳罴，令加守备。
现代文：文帝因华州地处通往长安的咽喉要道，派使者慰劳王罴，命他加紧防守。
English: Because Huazhou was located on the main road leading to Chang'an, Emperor Wen sent an envoy to comfort Wang Yao and ordered him to step up his defense.

古文：及神武至城下，谓罴曰； 何不早降？ 
现代文：高欢来到华州城下，对王罴说： 你为何不快快投降？ 
English: Gao Huan came to the city of Huazhou and said to Wang Xi: Why are you not quick to surrender?

古文：罴乃大呼曰： 此城是王罴家，死生在此，欲死者来！ 
现代文：王罴大声喊道 ：这座城池就是我的家，死活都在此处，想死的就来吧！ 
English: Wang Yao shouted loudly, "This castle is my home. All the living and the dead are here. Come if you want to die!"

古文：神武不敢攻。
现代文：高欢不敢攻打。
English: Gao Huan did not dare to attack.

古文：后移镇河东，以前后功进爵扶风郡公。
现代文：他后来移镇河东，积累前后功勋晋爵为扶风郡公。
English: He later moved to the town of Hedong, accumulating the titles of Meritorious Service and Promotion as the governor of Fufeng County.

古文：河桥之战，王师不利，赵青雀据长安城，所在莫有固志。
现代文：河桥之战，西魏军队失利，赵青雀据守长安，各地的守军都没有坚守的意志。
English: The Battle of Heqiao, the defeat of the West Wei army, Zhao Qingjiao's defense of Chang'an, the defenders around the country did not have the will to hold on.

古文：罴乃大开州门，召城中战士谓曰： 如闻天子败绩，不知吉凶，诸人相惊，咸有异望。
现代文：王罴打开华州的城门，召集城中的将士，对他们说： 听说天子被打败，不知道吉凶祸福，人们互相惊扰，都有各种不同的想法。
English: Wang Yao opened the gates of Huazhou and gathered the soldiers in the city. He said to them, "We have heard that Tianzi has been defeated, but we don't know whether it is good or bad. People are scaring each other and have all kinds of different ideas.

古文：王罴受委于此，以死报恩。
现代文：王罴受朝廷委任驻守这里，决心以死报答君恩。
English: Wang Xi was appointed by the imperial court to stay here, and he was determined to repay the favor with his death.

古文：诸人若有异图，可来见杀。
现代文：你们如有异谋，可来杀死我。
English: You can come and kill me if you want.

古文：必恐城陷没者，亦任出城。
现代文：害怕州城陷没敌手的，也可以任意出城逃命。
English: For fear of losing the city to the enemy, you can also escape from the city at will.

古文：如有忠诚，能与王罴同心，可共固守。 
现代文：如果有人忠于朝廷，能与我同心协力的，可共同坚守。 
English: If someone is loyal to the Imperial Court and can work with me, we can stick together.

古文：军人见其诚信，皆无异心。
现代文：将士们见他诚恳信任，都没有别的想法。
English: When the soldiers saw that he sincerely trusted them, they had no other thoughts.

古文：及军还，征拜雍州刺史。
现代文：军队返回后，朝廷授命他为雍州刺史。
English: After the army returned, the imperial court ordered him to write the history of Yongzhou.

古文：是蠕蠕度河南寇，候骑已至豳州。
现代文：这时，蠕蠕族的军队渡过黄河向南进犯，侦察的骑兵已经到达幽州。
English: At this time, the army of the Cree crossed the Yellow River to invade the south, and the reconnaissance cavalry had already arrived in Yuzhou.

古文：朝廷虑其深入，乃征发士马，屯守京城，堑诸街巷，以备侵轶。
现代文：朝廷担心他们深入腹地，便征发人马，驻扎在京城。在街市上修筑堡垒，以防备敌人侵入。
English: The imperial court was worried that they would go deep into the hinterland, so they conscripted men and horses and stationed them in the capital. They built fortresses on the streets to prevent the enemy from invading.

古文：右仆射周惠达召罴议之。
现代文：右仆射周惠达召请王罴商议对策。
English: His right-hand man, Zhou Huida, summoned Wang Yao to discuss countermeasures.

古文：罴不应命，卧而不起，谓其使曰： 若蠕蠕至渭北者，王罴率乡里自破之，不烦国家兵。何为天子城中，遂作如此惊动！
现代文：他不接受周惠达的邀请，躺在床上没有起来，对来人说： 如果蠕蠕人到达渭北，我率领乡兵把他们赶走，不烦劳国家的军队，为什么天子居住的京城中，做出这样惊慌失措的举动？
English: He did not accept Zhou Huida's invitation, lay in bed and did not get up, and said to the people: If the worms reach the north of Shandong, I will lead the local soldiers to drive them away, and not bother the national army, why in the capital where the heavenly son lives, make such a panicked move?

古文：由周家小兒恇怯致此。 
现代文：想不到周家这位小儿如此胆怯！ 
English: I didn't expect this child of the Zhou family to be so timid!

古文：罴轻侮权贵，守正不回，皆此类也。
现代文：他轻慢权贵，守正不阿，都像这件事。
English: He is contemptuous of the powerful and does not respect the law, just like this case.

古文：未几，还镇河东。
现代文：不久，仍镇守河东。
English: Before long, he was still in charge of Hedong.

古文：罴性俭率，不事边幅。
现代文：他性情俭约随便，不修边幅。
English: His disposition is frugal, casual, and unkempt.

古文：尝有台使至，罴为设食，使乃裂去薄饼缘。
现代文：曾有省台的使者到他这里，他为使者设下饭食，使者撕去薄饼的边不吃。
English: An emissary from the provincial government once came to him. He prepared a meal for the emissary, but the emissary tore off the edge of the pancake and refused to eat it.

古文：罴曰： 耕种收获，其功已深，舂爨造成，用力不少，尔之选择，当是未饥。 
现代文：他颇为不快，说： 农夫耕种收获，费工颇多；舂米炊火，做成饼子，又用力不少。你这样挑剔，大概是没有挨过饿。 
English: He was quite displeased and said, "A farmer cultivates and harvests with a lot of effort; glutinous rice is cooked and made into cakes with a lot of effort. If you are so picky, you have probably never been hungry.

古文：命左右撤去之。
现代文：命左右将饭食撤去。
English: Remove the food as soon as possible.

古文：使者愕然大惭。
现代文：使者非常吃惊和惭愧。
English: The messenger was very surprised and ashamed.

古文：又客与罴食瓜，客削瓜皮，侵肉稍厚，罴意嫌之。
现代文：又有一位客人与他一起吃瓜，客人把瓜皮削得太厚，去掉的肉稍多，他心里很不高兴。
English: Another guest ate melon with him. The guest peeled the skin of the melon too thick and removed a little more flesh, and he was very unhappy.

古文：及瓜皮落地，乃引手就地取而食之。
现代文：瓜皮落到地上，他便用手从地上捡起来吃掉。
English: When the melon rind fell to the ground, he picked it up with his hands and ate it.

古文：客甚愧色。
现代文：客人见了大为愧疚。
English: The guests were very sorry to see him.

古文：性又严急，尝有吏挟私陈事者，罴不暇命捶扑，乃手自取鞾履，持以击之。
现代文：他的性情又很严厉峻急，有一个官吏向他陈报事情夹带私怨，他来不及命皂役拷打他，便抓起靴子去打这个人。
English: His temper was also very harsh and violent. An official reported to him that he had a personal grudge against him, and before he could torture him, he grabbed his boots and went to beat the man.

古文：每至享会，自秤量酒肉，分给将士。
现代文：每逢宴会，他亲自用秤称酒和肉，分给将士们。
English: At every banquet, he personally weighed the wine and meat with a scale and distributed them to the soldiers.

古文：时人尚其均平，嗤其鄙碎。
现代文：人们都称赞他的公平，又鄙薄他的琐碎。
English: People praise his fairness and despise his pettiness.

古文：罴举动率情，不为巧诈，凡所经处，虽无当时功迹，咸去乃见思。
现代文：他的举动天真自然，不巧伪欺诈。他所任职的地方，虽然当时没有明显的功绩，但是离开后人们都想念他。
English: His actions were innocent and natural, not skillful or fraudulent. Although there was no obvious merit in his position at the time, people missed him after he left.

古文：上甚伤惜之。赠上柱国、冀州刺史，谥曰庄。
现代文：他死在任上，朝廷赠封他为太尉、都督、相冀等十州刺史，谥号为忠。
English: He died in office, and the imperial court bestowed upon him the titles of captain, governor, and governor of ten prefectures. His posthumous name was Rousei no Tadazane.

古文：子谟嗣。
现代文：他安于贫穷简朴，不经营家产。
English: He was content to live in poverty and simplicity, and did not manage the family property.

古文：谟弟轨，大业末郡守。
现代文：后来虽然官位很高，在家乡的旧宅仍不改换原来的样子。
English: Later, although the official rank was very high, the old house in his hometown still did not change its original appearance.

古文：少子文楷，起部郎。
现代文：死的时候，家境十分困窘，当时人们都佩服他的清廉。
English: At the time of his death, his family was in a very difficult situation. At the time, people admired his integrity.

古文：王思政，太原祁人，汉司徒允之后也。
现代文：王思政，太原祈地人，汉代司徒王允的后代。
English: Wang Sizheng, Taiyuan prayer man, descendant of the Han Dynasty monk Wang Yun.

古文：自魏太尉凌诛后，冠冕遂绝。
现代文：自从魏太尉王凌被诛杀后，他家才没有人做官。
English: It was only after Wei's Lieutenant Wang Ling was beaten to death that no one in his family became an official.

古文：父佑，州主簿。
现代文：他的父亲王，任州主簿。
English: His father, Wang, was the state chief accountant.

古文：思政容貌魁梧，有筹策，解褐员外散骑侍郎。
现代文：思政容貌魁伟高大，胸有谋略。初入仕途任员外散骑侍郎。
English: Shizeng was tall and handsome, with a strategic mind. At the beginning of his career, he was appointed as a non-commissioned officer's equerry.

古文：属万俟丑奴、宿勤明达等扰乱关右，北海王颢讨之，闻思政壮健，启与随军，所有谋议，并与参详。
现代文：万俟丑奴、宿勤明达等人扰乱关中，北海王元颢领兵讨伐，听说思政壮健勇武，奏请朝廷，让他随军。军中所有的谋划，都请他参加。
English: In the event that the Ugly Bastard, Mingda Suqin and others disrupted the middle of the pass, the North Sea King Yuan Qi led the crusade. He was said to be politically strong and brave, and he asked the court to let him follow the army. He was invited to participate in all the army's plans.

古文：时孝武在籓，素闻其名，乃引为宾客，遇之甚厚。
现代文：当时孝武帝还在藩国为王，早就听说了他，便聘请他为宾客，对他的礼遇甚为优厚。
English: At that time, Emperor Xiaowu was still the king of the domain. He had already heard about him, so he invited him as a guest. He was treated with great courtesy.

古文：及登大位，委以心膂。
现代文：孝武帝登皇帝位，把他看作心腹。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended to the throne, and regarded him as a confidant.

古文：预定策功，封祁县侯，为武卫将军。
现代文：由于参与册立帝位有功，他被封为祈县侯，任武卫将军。
English: Due to his participation in the enthronement of the emperor, he was named the prefect of Qi County and appointed as the general of Wuwei.

古文：俄而齐神武潜有异图，帝以思政可任大事，拜使持节、中军大将军、大都督，总宿卫兵。
现代文：不久高欢暗中图谋废去孝武帝，孝武帝因为王思政可以担当大事，便封他为使持节、中军大将军、大都督，总领皇宫的宿卫军。
English: Not long after, Gao Huan secretly plotted to depose Emperor Xiaowu. Since Emperor Xiaowu could take charge of important matters, he appointed Wang Si Zheng as the envoy, the general of the Chinese army, the grand governor, and the leader of the palace guards.

古文：思政乃言于帝曰： 洛阳四面受敌，非用武之地。
现代文：他便对孝武帝说 ：洛阳四面受敌，不是建功立业的地方。
English: He then said to Emperor Xiaowu: "Luoyang is besieged on all sides, it is not a place to make achievements.

古文：关中有崤函之固，且士马精强。
现代文：关中有崤山和函谷关的坚固屏障，而且兵强马壮。
English: In the pass, there are the solid barriers of Shaoshan Pass and Hantang Pass, and the soldiers are strong.

古文：宇文夏州纠合同盟，愿立功效若闻车驾西幸，必当奔走奉迎。
现代文：宇文泰聚集盟军，愿意为朝廷立功效命。如果听说您要西去，他一定会奔走迎接。
English: If he hears that you want to go west, he will certainly run to meet you.

古文：藉天府之资，因已成之业，二年修复旧京，何虑不克。 
现代文：凭借那里丰富的资产，依靠原有的根基，用两年时间修复长安旧京，何愁不会拥有天下。 
English: With the rich assets there, relying on the original foundation, and using two years to repair Chang'an old Beijing, what worries will not have the world.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：孝武帝很是同意他的意见。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：及神武兵至河北，帝乃西迁。
现代文：高欢的军队到达黄河以北，孝武帝西迁长安。
English: Gao Huan's army reached the north of the Yellow River, and Emperor Xiaowu moved west to Chang'an.

古文：进爵太原郡公，拜光禄卿、并州刺史，加散骑常侍、大都督。
现代文：封王思政为太原郡公，任命为光禄卿、并州刺史，加封为散骑常侍、大都督。
English: Wang Shizheng was given the title of Taiyuan County Magistrate, the title of Guangluqing, and the title of State Historian, as well as the title of Sanzhi (free-riding) Attendant and Grand Governor.

古文：大统之后，思政虽被任委，自以非相府之旧，每不自安。
现代文：大统年以后，他虽然被朝廷委任职务，却自认为不是宇文氏的旧吏，心中常不自安。
English: Although he was appointed to the post by the Imperial Court after the Taito era, he did not consider himself to be an old official of the Umun clan, and was often uneasy in his heart.

古文：周文帝曾在同州，与群公宴集，出锦罽及杂绫绢数千段，令诸将摴蒲取之。
现代文：宇文泰在同州宴集朝臣，拿出彩色的毡以及各种各样的绫和绢数千段，命各位将领樗蒲以获取。
English: At a dinner gathering of courtiers in the same state, Uwentai took out thousands of colorful dragonflies and various kinds of dragonflies and dragonflies, and ordered the generals to obtain the dragonflies.

古文：物尽，周文又解所服金带，令诸人遍掷，曰： 先得卢者即与之。 
现代文：物品被诸将取尽，宇文泰又解下自己佩带的金带，令大家都掷色子，说： 先掷出黑颜色一面的就把金带送给他。 
English: The items were exhausted by the generals, and Wu Wentai again untied the gold belt he was wearing, causing everyone to throw dice, saying, "If you throw out the black side first, give him the gold belt."

古文：群公掷将遍，莫有得者。
现代文：群臣都掷遍了，也没有人得到。
English: The courtiers have thrown everything at it, and no one has got it.

古文：次至思政，乃敛容跪而誓曰： 王思政羁旅归朝，蒙宰相国士之遇，方愿尽心效命，上报知已。
现代文：轮到王思政，他面容严肃地跪在地上起誓说 ：我以客居的身份归附朝廷，承蒙宰相给我国士的待遇，所以愿意尽心尽力为国效命，以报答宰相的知遇之恩。
English: When it was Wang Sizheng's turn, he solemnly knelt down on the ground and swore: "I am attached to the imperial court as a guest, and I have received the treatment of the prime minister to our countrymen, so I am willing to do my best to serve the country and repay the prime minister's kindness."

古文：若此诚有实，令宰相赐知者，愿掷即为卢；若内怀不尽，神灵亦当明之，使不作也，便当杀身以谢所奉。 
现代文：如果我的诚心是真实的，让宰相把金带授予忠于他的人，希望一掷便为黑色；如果内怀别念，神灵也应明察，掷后不出现黑色。我便杀身以谢宰相。 
English: If my sincerity is true, let the prime minister award the gold belt to those who are loyal to him, and hope that the throw will be black; if I remember, the gods should also see that there is no black after the throw. I will kill myself to thank the prime minister.

古文：辞气慷慨，一座尽惊。
现代文：词气慷慨激昂，一座都很吃惊。
English: The tone was impassioned, and everyone was taken aback.

古文：即拔所佩刀，横于膝上，揽摴蒲，拊髀掷之。
现代文：他立即拔下身上的佩刀，横在膝上，抓过樗蒲，一下掷出。
English: He immediately drew his saber from his body, crossed his knees, grabbed the thistle, and threw it.

古文：比周文止之，已掷为卢矣。
现代文：宇文泰要制止他时，黑色的一面已经出现。
English: When Wu Wentai wanted to stop him, the dark side had already appeared.

古文：徐乃拜而受带。
现代文：他便庄重地向宇文泰叩拜，接受金带。
English: He then solemnly bowed to Uwentai and accepted the gold belt.

古文：自此朝寄更深。
现代文：从此，宇文泰对他更加信任。
English: From then on, Uwentai trusted him even more.

古文：及河桥之战，思政下马，用长槊左右横击，一击踣数人。
现代文：河桥之役，他被敌人包围，便下马用长矛左右横刺，每一枪都刺倒好几个敌兵。
English: In the Battle of the River Bridge, when he was surrounded by the enemy, he dismounted and stabbed with a spear from side to side, stabbing down several enemy soldiers with each shot.

古文：时陷阵既深，从者死尽，思政被重创闷绝。
现代文：这时，他陷入敌阵已经很深，跟从他的人全部牺牲，他身受重创晕倒在地。
English: By this time, he had fallen deep into the enemy lines, all of his followers had been killed, and he fell to the ground with severe injuries.

古文：会日暮，敌亦收军。
现代文：适逢天色已晚，敌人也收军回营。
English: When it was too late, the enemy also withdrew back to camp.

古文：思政久经军旅，战唯著破衣弊甲，敌人疑非将帅，故得免。
现代文：他久经战阵，每次上阵只穿破衣旧甲，敌人怀疑他不是将帅，所以免于被抓。
English: He has been in battle for a long time. Every time he goes into battle, he only wears a tattered old uniform. The enemy suspects that he is not a general, so he is exempt from being caught.

古文：有帐下督雷五安于战处哭求思政，会已苏，遂相得。
现代文：他的帐下督军雷五安在战场上哭喊着找他，恰巧他已苏醒，便找到了他。
English: Lei Wu'an, his subordinate, was crying and shouting on the battlefield, looking for him. By chance, he had already woken up, so they found him.

古文：乃割衣裹创，扶思政上马，夜久方得还军。
现代文：雷五安割下衣襟替他包扎伤口，扶他上马，深夜才回到军中。
English: Lei Wu'an cut off his lower collar and bandaged his wound, helped him onto the horse, and only returned to the army late at night.

古文：仍镇弘农，除侍中、东道行台。
现代文：他奉命镇守弘农，被封为侍中、东道行台。
English: He was ordered to guard the town of Hongnong, and was appointed as an attendant and host.

古文：思政以玉壁地险要，请筑城。
现代文：他认为玉壁地处险要，请求在那里修筑城池。
English: He considered the location of Tamakabe to be precarious and requested that a castle be built there.

古文：即自营度，移镇之。
现代文：他亲自规划经营，城池建好后便驻扎在这里镇守。
English: He planned and managed it himself, and after the construction of the castle, he was stationed here to guard the town.

古文：管汾晋并三州诸军事、并州刺史、行台如故，仍镇玉壁。
现代文：又迁任为汾、晋、并三州诸军事、并州刺史，行台职务不变，仍然镇守玉壁。
English: He was also transferred to Shun, Jin, and the three states of military, and the state of stabbing history. His duties remained unchanged, and he was still the town guard of Yubi.

古文：八年，东魏复来寇，卒不能克。
现代文：大统八年，东魏军队又来侵犯，始终不能攻克。
English: In the eighth year of the Great Reunification, the Eastern Wei army invaded again, but was never able to conquer.

古文：以全城功，授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：因保全城池的功劳，他被授予骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: For his contribution to the preservation of the city, he was awarded the title of General of the Horse Cavalry, the Kaifu Medal, and the Third Division.

古文：高仲密以北豫州来附，周文亲接援之，乃驿召思政，将镇成皋。
现代文：高仲密献出北豫州归附西魏，宇文泰亲自率军接应，便派使者召思政镇守成皋。
English: Gao Zhongmi offered to annex Northern Henan to the Western Wei Dynasty, and Wu Wentai personally led the army to accept, and then sent an envoy to summon Shizheng Town to defend Chengdu.

古文：未至而班师，复命思政镇弘农。
现代文：他还未到成皋，宇文泰已经回来，仍命他镇守弘农。
English: He has not yet arrived in Chengdu, but Uwentai has already returned, and he is still the town guard of Hongnong.

古文：思政入弘农，令开城门，解衣而卧，慰勉将士，示不足畏。
现代文：他进入弘农后，命军士打开城门，自己解衣躺下休息，慰劳将士，以显示对敌人的藐视。
English: After he entered Hongnong, he ordered the sergeant to open the gate, undressed himself, lay down to rest, and comforted the soldiers to show his contempt for the enemy.

古文：数日后，东魏将刘丰生率数千骑至城下，惮之，不敢进，乃引军还。
现代文：数日后，东魏将领刘丰生率领数千名骑兵来到弘农城下，因畏惧而不敢进攻，便撤军离去。
English: A few days later, the Eastern Wei general Liu Fengsheng led thousands of cavalry to the town of Hongnong, but they were afraid to attack and withdrew.

古文：于是修城郭，起楼橹，营田农，积刍秣，凡可以守御者皆具焉。
现代文：于是，他率领军民修建城郭，造起城楼，训练农夫，积蓄粮秣，凡是可以作为守御的措施都具备了。
English: As a result, he led the army and people to build the castle, built the castle, trained the farmers, accumulated grain, and had all the measures that could be used as protection.

古文：弘农之有备，自思政始也。
现代文：弘农有战守的准备，从他这里才开始。
English: Hongnong is prepared for the battle, and it all starts with him.

古文：十二年，加特进，兼尚书左仆射、行台、都督、荆州刺史。
现代文：大统十二年，朝廷加封他为特进，兼尚书左仆射、行台、都督、荆州刺史。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court awarded him the title of "Special Advancement," and he was also awarded the titles of "Shishi Zuoying," "Gongdai," "Dudu" and "Jingzhou Zhishi."

古文：境内卑湿，城堑多坏。
现代文：荆州境内地势低洼潮湿，城墙壕堑多有毁坏。
English: The terrain in Jingzhou is low-lying and wet, and the city wall trenches are mostly destroyed.

古文：思政乃命都督蔺小欢督工匠缮修之。
现代文：他命都督蔺小欢督领工匠修缮。
English: He ordered the governor of the capital, Xiao Huan, to lead the craftsmen to repair it.

古文：掘得黄金三十斤，夜中密送。
现代文：工役施工时掘出黄金三十斤，夜里悄悄给他送去。
English: The foreman dug out thirty catties of gold during the construction and quietly sent it to him at night.

古文：至旦，思政召佐史，以金示之曰： 人臣不宜有私。 
现代文：天明，他召来佐史，拿来黄金让他看，说： 做臣子的不应该有私心。 
English: At dawn, he summoned Sasuke, brought gold for him to see, and said, "A vassal should not be selfish.

古文：悉封金送上。
现代文：全部把黄金封上送交朝廷。
English: All the gold was sealed and sent to the imperial court.

古文：周文嘉之，赐钱二十万。
现代文：宇文泰夸奖他，赐给他二十万钱。
English: Uwentai praised him and gave him two hundred thousand yuan.

古文：思政之去玉壁也，周文命举代人，思政乃进所部都督韦孝宽。
现代文：他要离开玉壁，宇文泰让他举荐接替他的人，他便推荐部下的都督韦孝宽。
English: He wanted to leave Yubi, and Uwentai asked him to recommend someone to replace him, and he recommended his subordinate, the governor Wei Xiaokuan.

古文：其后东魏来寇，孝宽卒能全城，时论称其知人。
现代文：后来东魏军队前来侵犯，韦孝宽保全了城池，人们都称赞思政举荐得人。
English: Later, the East Wei army came to invade, Wei Xiaokuan preserved the city, and people all praised Shizheng as a recommended person.

古文：十三年，侯景叛东魏，请援乞师。
现代文：大统十三年，侯景背叛东魏，向西魏乞求军队救援。
English: In the 13th year of the Great Reunification, Hou Jing betrayed the Eastern Wei Dynasty and begged the Western Wei Dynasty for military rescue.

古文：当时未即应接。
现代文：当时西魏没有立即派军队接应。
English: At that time, the Western Wei Dynasty did not immediately send troops to respond.

古文：思政以为若不因机进取，后悔无及，即率荆州步骑万余，从鲁关向阳翟。
现代文：王思政认为如果不利用机会进取，以后会后悔莫及。便立即率领荆州的步骑两军一万多人，从鲁关进向阳翟。
English: Wang Sizheng thought that if he did not take advantage of the opportunity to forge ahead, he would regret it in the future. He immediately led more than 10,000 people from Jingzhou to ride the two armies from Luguan to Xiangyang.

古文：周文闻思政已发，乃遣太尉李弼赴颍川。
现代文：宇文泰听说他已经出发，便派太尉李弼奔赴颍川。
English: Upon hearing that he had already set off, Uwentai sent First Lieutenant Li Yibeng to Luchuan.

古文：东魏将高岳等闻大军至，收军而遁。
现代文：东魏将领高岳等听说西魏大军到来，便收军撤退。
English: When the Eastern Wei generals Gao Yue and others heard that the Western Wei army had arrived, they withdrew.

古文：思政入守颍川。
现代文：王思政领军入守颍川。
English: Wang Sizheng led an army to defend the Lugu River.

古文：景引兵向豫州，外称略地，乃密遣送款于梁。
现代文：侯景引兵进向豫州，对外声称要进攻别国的土地，又暗中派人送信向南梁通款降服。
English: Hou Jing led an army into Yuzhou, claimed to attack the land of another country, and secretly sent people to send money to Nan Liang Tong to surrender.

古文：先是，周文遣帅都督贺兰愿德助景扞御，景既有异图，因厚抚愿德等，冀为己用。
现代文：原先，宇文泰派帅都督贺兰愿德帮助侯景用兵，侯景既暗中投梁，因而优厚地抚慰贺兰愿德等人，希望他们能被自己利用。
English: Originally, Uwen Tai sent the commander-in-chief of the capital, He Lanqian De, to help Hou Jing to use soldiers. Since Hou Jing had secretly sent soldiers, he generously comforted He Lanqian De and others, hoping that they could be used by themselves.

古文：思政知景诡诈，乃密追愿德。
现代文：王思政知道侯景诡诈，便秘密追回贺兰愿德。
English: Wang Sizheng knew that Hou Jing was deceitful, so he secretly tracked down Helan Qiande.

古文：思政分布诸军，据景七州十二镇。
现代文：他调动军队，占据了侯景拥有的七州十二镇。
English: He mobilized the army and occupied twelve towns in seven states owned by Hou Jing.

古文：周文乃以所授景使持节、太傅、大将军，兼尚书令、河南大行台、河南诸军事，回授思政，思政并让不受。频使敦喻，唯受河南诸军事。
现代文：宇文泰便把原来授予侯景的使持节、太傅、大将军、兼尚书令、河南大行台、河南诸军事等职授给王思政，他全不接受，宇文泰多次派使者敦促劝谕，他只接受了河南诸军事一职。
English: Wu Wentai then gave Wang Sizheng all the military posts such as envoy, taifu, general, concurrently with Shang Shuling, Henan Dagongtai, and Henan, which were originally awarded to Hou Jing. He did not accept any of them. Wu Wentai repeatedly sent envoys to urge and persuade him, and he only accepted the military posts in Henan.

古文：十四年，拜大将军。
现代文：大统十四年，他被封为大将军。
English: In the 14th year of the Great Reunification, he was given the title of General.

古文：九月，东魏太尉高岳、行台慕容绍宗、仪同刘丰生等率步骑十万来攻颍川，杀伤甚众。
现代文：九月，东魏太尉高岳、行台慕容绍宗、仪同刘丰生等人率领步骑两军十万人进攻颍川，杀伤西魏很多人马。
English: In September, the East Wei Tai Fong Gao Yue, Xing Tai Murong Shaozong, Yi Tong Liu Fengsheng and others led 100,000 people of the two armies to attack Luochuan, killing many horses of the West Wei.

古文：岳又筑土山以临城中，飞梯火车，尽攻击之法。
现代文：高岳又在城外修筑土山以俯视城中，使用飞梯火车，千方百计进行攻击。
English: Gao Yue also built a dirt hill outside the city to overlook the city, using a flying ladder train to attack in every possible way.

古文：思政亦作火，因迅风便投之土山。
现代文：王思政也制造带火的短矛，顺着大风掷到土山上。
English: Wang Sizheng also made a short spear with fire, and threw it onto the dirt hill with the wind.

古文：又射以火箭，烧其攻具。
现代文：用火箭射击，烧毁土山上攻守的器具。
English: Shoot with rockets, burn the offensive and defensive equipment on the mound.

古文：仍募勇士，缒而出战，据其两土山，置楼堞以助防守。
现代文：又招募勇士，顺着绳子出城作战，占领了东魏军队的两座土山，在上面建造楼垛以帮助防守。
English: He also recruited warriors to fight along the rope out of the city, occupied two earthen mountains of the East Wei army, and built towers on top to help the defense.

古文：齐文襄更益兵，堰洧水以灌城。
现代文：高欢又派来救兵，并筑堰堵截洧水以淹灌颍川。
English: Gao Huan was also sent to rescue the soldiers, and built a weir to block and cut off the water to flood the Lugu River.

古文：时虽有怪兽，每冲坏其堰。
现代文：当时有一种怪兽，常将土堰拱坏。
English: At that time, there was a monster that often broke the earthen dam.

古文：然城被灌已久，多亦崩颓。
现代文：然而，由于城被淹很久，很多地方已经崩毁。
English: However, since the city has been flooded for a long time, many places have collapsed.

古文：岳悉众苦攻。
现代文：高岳率全军奋力进攻。
English: The entire army, with a high rate of attrition, attacked vigorously.

古文：思政身当矢石，与士卒同劳苦。
现代文：王思政亲身抵挡着箭石的攻击，与士兵同甘共苦把守颍川。
English: Wang Sizheng personally resisted the attack of the arrow stone, and together with the soldiers, they worked hard to defend the Lugu River.

古文：岳乃更修堰，作铁龙杂兽，用厌水神。
现代文：高岳重新修筑土堰，在铁笼中放上畜禽，以祭祀水神。
English: Gao Yue rebuilt the earthen weir and placed livestock and poultry in iron cages to worship the water god.

古文：堰成，水大至。城中泉涌溢，悬釜而炊，粮力俱竭。
现代文：堤堰筑成，水大量涌来，城中积水很深，只得将锅吊起来做饭，粮食吃尽，人力耗尽。
English: When the dike was built, a large amount of water gushed in, and the accumulated water in the city was very deep. I had to hang up the pot to cook, and I ran out of food and manpower.

古文：慕容绍宗、刘丰生及其将慕容永珍意以为闲，共乘楼船以望城内，令善射人俯射城中。
现代文：慕容绍宗、刘丰生和他们的将领慕容永珍认为已安然无事，一起乘坐楼船去了望城中动静，命善于射箭的人向城中俯射。
English: Murong Shaosong, Liu Fengsheng and their generals, Murong Yongzhen, thought that everything was safe and sound, and together they rode on a barge to look out for movement in the city. Those who were good at archery would dive into the city.

古文：俄而大风暴起，船乃飘至城下。城上人以长钩牵船，弓弩乱发。
现代文：忽然大风突起，楼船飘至城下，城上人用长钩抓住船，弓箭一齐射来。
English: Suddenly, a gale sprang up, the houseboat floated to the bottom of the city, the people on the city seized the boat with a long hook, and a volley of bows and arrows came.

古文：绍宗窃急，透水而死。
现代文：慕容绍宗见无路可逃，跳进水中被淹死。
English: Seeing no way to escape, Murong Shaosong jumped into the water and drowned.

古文：丰生浮向土山，复中矢而毙。
现代文：刘丰生游向土山，身上中箭死去。
English: Liu Fengsheng swam to the hillside and was hit by an arrow and died.

古文：禽永珍，并获船中器械。
现代文：慕容永珍被生擒，船中器械也全被西魏军队缴获。
English: Murong Yongzhen was captured alive, and all the ship's equipment was seized by the West Wei army.

古文：思政谓永珍曰： 仆之破亡，在于晷漏。
现代文：王思政对永珍说： 我的灭亡，只在早晚之间。
English: Wang Sizheng said to Yongzhen: My demise is only between morning and evening.

古文：诚知杀卿无益，然人臣之节，守之以死。 
现代文：实在清楚杀死你也没有什么益处，然而人臣的大节，死也要坚守。 
English: It is very clear that there is no benefit in killing you, but death must be adhered to as a matter of principle.

古文：乃流涕斩之。
现代文：便挥泪将他斩首。
English: and beheaded him in tears.

古文：并收绍宗等尸，以礼埋瘗。
现代文：并收殓慕容绍宗等人的尸体，按礼仪埋葬。
English: And the bodies of Murong Shaosong and others were collected and buried according to etiquette.

古文：岳既失绍宗等，志气沮丧，不敢逼城。
现代文：高岳失去慕容绍宗等人，情绪沮丧，不敢再逼近城来。
English: After losing Murong Shaosong and others, Gao Yue was depressed and did not dare to approach the city again.

古文：齐文襄闻之，乃率步骑十万来攻。
现代文：高欢听说后，亲率十万人马前来进攻。
English: After Gao Huan heard about it, he and a hundred thousand people came to attack.

古文：思政知不济，率左右据土山，因仰天大哭，左右皆号恸。
现代文：思政知道无法保守城池，便率周围的人占据土山，因而仰天大哭，他左右的人也都号啕痛哭。
English: Si Zheng knew that he could not keep the castle, so he led the people around him to occupy the earthen mound. As a result, he cried loudly, and the people around him also cried bitterly.

古文：思政西向再拜，便欲自刭。
现代文：他向西叩拜之后，便想拔剑自杀。
English: After he bowed to the West, he wanted to draw his sword and kill himself.

古文：先是，文襄告城中人曰： 有能生致王大将军者，封侯重赏。
现代文：这之前，高欢曾告诫城中的人说 ：有谁能生擒王大将军，给予封侯的重赏。
English: Prior to this, Gao Huan had warned the people in the city, saying, "Whoever can capture the king's general alive will be rewarded with the title of prince."

古文：若大将军身有损伤，亲近左右皆从大戮。 
现代文：如果王大将军身上受到损伤，他所亲近的人也都要被杀戮。 
English: If General Wang is injured, everyone close to him will be killed.

古文：都督骆训固止之，不得引决。
现代文：都督骆训奋力制止，他才没有自尽。
English: The governor Luo Xun tried his best to stop him, but he did not commit suicide.

古文：齐文襄遣其通直散骑常侍赵彦深，就土山遗以白羽扇而说之，牵手以下。
现代文：高欢派他的通直散骑常侍赵彦深到土山上，送给他一把白羽毛做的扇子，并劝说他，拉着他的手走下土山。
English: Gao Huan sent his regular attendant Zhao Yanshen to the dirt mountain, gave him a fan made of white feathers, and persuaded him to walk down the dirt mountain holding his hand.

古文：引见文襄，辞气慷慨，涕泪交流，无挠屈之容。
现代文：他见到高欢，言词激昂慷慨，涕泪交流，毫无屈服的面容。
English: He saw high spirits, impassioned and generous words, tearful exchanges, and faces that did not give in.

古文：文襄以其忠于所事，起而礼之，接遇甚厚。
现代文：高欢因为他忠诚赤心，站起身向他施礼，对他接待得非常优厚。
English: Gao Huan, because of his loyalty and sincerity, stood up and bowed to him, and received him very well.

古文：其督将分禁诸州地牢。数年尽死。
现代文：他的部将们分别关押在各州的地牢内，数年内全部死去。
English: His lieutenants were held in separate dungeons in different states and all died within a few years.

古文：思政初入颍川，士卒八千人。
现代文：王思政初进入颍川，共有士卒八千人。
English: It was the first time for Wang Sizheng to enter Luochuan, with a total of eight thousand soldiers.

古文：被围既久，城中无盐，肿死者十六七，及城陷之日，存者才三千人。
现代文：被围困许久，城中没有盐吃，身上肿胀，死去的十有六七。城被攻陷的时候，活着的只有三千人。
English: They were besieged for a long time, there was no salt to eat in the city, their bodies became swollen, and sixty-seven out of ten died. When the city was captured, only three thousand people were alive.

古文：虽外无救援，遂无叛者。
现代文：虽然外面没有救援，但却没有人叛变。
English: Although there was no rescue outside, no one mutinied.

古文：思政常以勤王为务，不营资产。
现代文：他常以保卫皇室作为自己的义务，从不经营家产。
English: He has always seen it as his duty to protect the royal family and has never run a family business.

古文：尝被赐园地，思政出征后，家人种桑果杂树。
现代文：朝廷曾赐给他土地，他出征以后，家人在园中种植桑果等各种树木。
English: The court had given him land, and after he went to war, his family planted mulberries and other trees in the garden.

古文：及还，见而怒曰： 匈奴未灭，去病辞家，况大贼未平，欲事产业，岂所谓忧公忘私邪！ 
现代文：他归来后，看见了发恼说： 匈奴未被消灭，霍去病便辞别家庭。更何况现在敌人没有平定，却想经营家产，难道是忧公忘私的表现吗？ 
English: After his return, he saw the anger and said: "The Xiongnu has not been eliminated, but when he got sick, he left his family. Moreover, now that the enemy has not been pacified, but wants to manage the family property, is it a manifestation of selfishness?

古文：命左右拔而弃之。
现代文：命左右随从将果树拔起扔掉。
English: Life and limb follow the fruit trees uprooted and thrown away.

古文：故身陷之后，家无蓄积。
现代文：所以，他被俘之后，家中没有积蓄。
English: So after he was captured, the family had no savings.

古文：及齐文宣受东魏禅，以思政为都官尚书、仪同三司。
现代文：齐文宣帝受东魏禅让称帝，命王思政为都官尚书、仪同三司。
English: Qibun Xuandi was proclaimed emperor by the Eastern Wei Emperor Zenzang, and Wang Sizheng was appointed as the official of the capital, and the three departments of the imperial rescript and etiquette were established.

古文：入隋，终于汴州刺史。
现代文：去世后，赠封给原来的职务，又加封为兖州刺史。
English: After his death, he was awarded the original post, and was also awarded the title of Zhangzhou History.

古文：尉迟迥，字薄居罗，代人也。
现代文：尉迟迥，字薄居罗，代地人。
English: 尉迟,字薄居羅,代地人.

古文：其先，魏之别种，号尉迟部，因而氏焉。
现代文：他的祖先是北魏的另外一支，号称尉迟部，因而就作为自己的姓氏。
English: His ancestor was from another branch of the Northern Wei Dynasty, known as "尉迟部," hence his surname.

古文：武成初，追赠柱国大将军、太傅、长乐郡公，谥曰定。
现代文：尉迟迥七岁，尉迟纲六岁，他们的父亲病重，将他们喊来，抚摸着他们的头说： 你们都有富贵的面相，只可惜我见不到你们了，各自都要努力。 
English: They were seven and six years old, respectively, and their father was seriously ill. He called them in, stroked their heads, and said, "You all have rich faces. It's just a pity I can't see you. Each of you must work hard."

古文：迥少聪敏，美容仪。
现代文：尉迟迥从小聪明敏捷，仪容俊美。
English: From a young age, Ye Xizhao was smart and agile, with a handsome appearance.

古文：及长，有大志，好施爱士。
现代文：长大后胸怀大志，喜好施舍，敬重人才。
English: When they grow up, they have great aspirations, like to give alms, and respect talented people.

古文：尚魏文帝女金明公主，拜驸马都尉，封西都侯。
现代文：他娶了西魏文帝的女儿金明公主，被任命为驸马都尉，封为西都侯。
English: He married Princess Jinming, the daughter of Emperor Wen of the Western Wei Dynasty, and was appointed the captain of the imperial horse and the governor of the Western Capital.

古文：大统十一年，拜侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进爵魏安郡公。
现代文：大统十一年，他被封为侍中、骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，晋封爵位为魏安郡公。
English: In the eleventh year of the Great Reunification, he was appointed as a chamberlain, a cavalry general, and the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and was promoted to the highest rank of Wei'an County.

古文：十五年，迁尚书左仆射，兼领军将军。
现代文：大统十五年，他又迁升为尚书左仆射，兼领军将军。
English: In the fifteenth year of unification, he was promoted to Shang Shuxu Zuoxi, and also became the leading general.

古文：迥通敏有干能，虽任兼文武，颇允时望，周文以此深委仗焉。
现代文：他通脱敏捷，颇有才干。虽然职兼文武，却颇负时望，宇文泰因此很重用和依仗他。
English: He is quick-witted and talented. Although he is both a scholar and a military man, he has not lived up to the expectations of the time. Therefore, he is very important to and depended on by Wu Wentai.

古文：十六年，拜大将军。
现代文：大统十六年，他被封为大将军。
English: In the 16th year of the Great Reunification, the imperial court awarded him the rank of general.

古文：侯景之渡江也，梁元帝时镇江陵，请修邻好。
现代文：侯景背魏渡江投奔南梁，梁元帝当时镇守江陵，请求与邻国修好。
English: Hou Jingbei crossed the Wei River and went to Nanliang. Emperor Liangyuan was guarding Gangneung at the time, and requested to make peace with the neighboring country.

古文：其弟武陵王纪在蜀称帝，率众东下，将攻之。
现代文：他的弟弟武陵王萧纪在蜀称帝，率军东下，将要攻打江陵。
English: His younger brother, Wuling King Xiaoji, proclaimed himself emperor in Shu and led his army eastward, intending to attack Jiangling.

古文：梁元帝大惧，移书请救。
现代文：梁元帝大为恐惧，送信给西魏请求救援。
English: Emperor Liang Yuan was terrified and sent a telegram to the Western Wei Dynasty asking for help.

古文：周文曰： 蜀可图矣！
现代文：宇文泰说 ：蜀地可以图取呀！
English: Uwentai said: "Shu Di can be drawn!

古文：取蜀制梁，在兹一举。 
现代文：占据蜀地，制服梁朝，在此一举。 
English: Occupy Shunde, subdue the Liang Dynasty, in one fell swoop.

古文：乃与群公会议，诸将多有异同。
现代文：便与朝臣们议论，将领多持不同意见。
English: He then discussed the matter with his courtiers, but the generals mostly disagreed.

古文：唯迥以为纪既尽锐东下，蜀必空虚，王师临之，必有征无战。
现代文：惟有尉迟迥认为萧纪既然率所有的精锐部队东下，蜀地一定空虚，西魏军队到来后，一定会有征无战。
English: However, there was a lieutenant who thought that since Xiao Ji had led all the elite troops to the east, Shu land must be empty, and after the arrival of the West Wei army, there would definitely be no war.

古文：周文以为然，谓曰： 伐蜀之事，一以委汝。 
现代文：宇文泰认为他分析得正确，对他说： 伐蜀的事情完全委托给你。 
English: Uwentai thought that his analysis was correct and said to him: "The matter of felling Shu is entirely entrusted to you.

古文：于是令迥督开府元珍、乙弗亚、侯吕陵始、叱奴兴、綦连雄、宇文升等六军甲士取晋寿，开平林旧道。
现代文：于是，命他率开府元珍、乙弗亚、侯吕陵始、叱奴兴、綦连雄、宇文升等六军将士攻取晋寿，开辟平林旧道。
English: Therefore, he ordered him to lead six soldiers including Fuyuan Zhen, Yifu Ya, Hou Luling Shi, Shen Nuxing, Qian Lianxiong, and Wu Wensheng to capture Jinshou and open up the old road of Pinglin.

古文：迥前军临剑阁，纪安州刺史乐广以州先降。
现代文：尉迟迥的前军到达剑阁，安州刺史乐广献出州城率先投降。
English: After a long delay, the former army arrived at Jiange, and Anzhou Sisi Leguang took the lead in surrendering the city.

古文：纪梁州刺史杨乾运时镇潼水，先已遣使诣阙，密送诚款，然恐其下不从，犹据潼水别营拒守。
现代文：萧纪的梁州刺史杨乾运这时镇守潼水，早已派使者到西魏朝廷，秘密送上降表。然而恐怕他的部下不同意，仍占据潼水安营把守。
English: At that time, Yang Qianjun, Xiao Ji's subordinate in Liangzhou, was in charge of the defense of Surabaya. He had already sent an envoy to the Western Wei Dynasty to secretly submit a surrender. However, I am afraid that his subordinates did not agree and still occupied Surabaya.

古文：迥遣元珍、侯吕陵始等袭之，乾运还保潼川。
现代文：尉迟迥派元珍、侯吕陵始等发起进攻，杨乾运退回潼川。
English: Yang Jianyun sent Yuan Zhen, Hou Luling Shi and others to launch an attack, and Yang Jianyun retreated back to Luochuan.

古文：珍等遂围之，乾运降。
现代文：元珍等人领军将他包围，乾运投降。
English: Yuan Zhen and other leaders surrounded him and surrendered.

古文：迥至潼川，大饷将士，度涪江，至青溪，登南原，勒兵讲武，修缮约束，阅器械，自开府以下赏金帛各有差。
现代文：尉迟迥到达潼川，大肆犒劳全军将士，然后渡过涪江，来到青溪，登上南原，将军队驻扎下来讲解兵书，制定规约，修整器械，自开府以下的将士奖赏金钱布帛数量各有不同。
English: He arrived at the Li River after a long delay, lavishly rewarded the soldiers of the whole army, and then crossed the Li River, came to Qingxi, boarded the South Plains, stationed the army to explain the soldier's book, formulate the regulations, and repair the equipment. The number of monetary rewards for soldiers from Kaifu and below varies.

古文：时夏中连雨，山路险峻，将士疲病者十二三，迥亲自劳问，加以汤药，引之而西。
现代文：这时，正值盛夏阴雨连绵，山路险峻难行，将士们疲惫生病的十有二三。他亲自慰问，送去汤药，率军西进。
English: At this time, it was the height of summer with continuous rain and gloom, the mountain roads were steep and difficult to travel, and two-thirds of the generals were tired and sick. He personally offered condolences, sent soup and medicine, and led the army westward.

古文：纪益州刺史萧捴婴城自守，进军围之。
现代文：纪益州刺史萧扌为固城自守，尉迟迥派兵将他包围。
English: Xiao Yao, the governor of Ji'izhou, defended Gucheng from the attack, and his subordinates sent troops to surround him.

古文：初，纪至巴郡，遣前南梁州刺史史欣景、幽州刺史赵拔扈等为捴外援。
现代文：当初，萧纪到巴郡，派前梁州刺史史欣景、幽州刺史赵拔扈等人作为萧扌为的外援。
English: At first, Xiao Ji went to Ba County and sent former Liangzhou chief historian Xinjing and Yuzhou chief historian Zhao Baqi and others as foreign aid for Xiao Yu.

古文：迥分遣元珍、乙弗亚等击破之。
现代文：尉迟迥分别派遣元珍、乙弗亚等人将他们打败。
English: He later sent Yuan Zhen, Yifu Ya and others to defeat them.

古文：拔扈等遁走，欣景遂降。
现代文：赵拔扈等逃跑，史欣景投降。
English: Zhao Bajiao and others fled, and Shi Xinjing surrendered.

古文：捴被围五旬，频战为迥所破。
现代文：萧扌为被包围五十来天，双方多次交战，终被尉迟迥将益州攻破。
English: Xiao Yao was besieged for 50 days, and the two sides fought many times. Finally, he was defeated by Yizhou.

古文：遣使乞降，许之。
现代文：萧扌为派人请降，尉迟迥答应了他。
English: Xiao Yu sent someone to ask him to surrender, and the lieutenant reluctantly agreed.

古文：捴乃与纪子宜都王圆肃率其文武诣军门请见，迥以礼接之。其吏人等各令复业，唯收僮隶及储积以赏将士。
现代文：萧扌为便与萧纪的儿子宜都王萧圆肃率领文武官员到尉迟迥的军帐前求见，他按礼节接见他们，让官吏们各恢复旧职，只没收他们的奴仆和储蓄的财产，以犒赏西魏将士。
English: For this reason, Xiao Rong and Xiao Ji's son, Yi Du Wang Xiao Yuan Su, led the civil and military officials to the military account of the late lieutenant to ask for a meeting. He received them according to etiquette, let the officials resume their old positions, and only confiscated their slaves and savings of property to reward the West Wei soldiers.

古文：号令严肃，军无私焉。
现代文：他的军队号令严明，将士们没有私心。
English: His military orders are strict, and his soldiers are selfless.

古文：诏以迥为大都督、益潼等十二州诸军事、益州刺史。
现代文：朝廷下诏命他为大都督、益潼等十二州诸军事、益州刺史。
English: The imperial court decreed that he should be the grand governor, the military commander of the twelve states including Yixing, and the historian of Yixing.

古文：三年，加督六州，通前十八州诸军事。
现代文：废帝三年，增加督管六州，加上原来的共十八州诸军事。
English: Three years after the dethronement of the emperor, the supervision of six states was increased, adding to the original total of eighteen states including the military.

古文：以平蜀功，封一子安固郡公。
现代文：因平蜀的功劳，朝廷加封他的一个儿子为安国郡公。
English: Due to the merits of Pingshu, the imperial court made one of his sons the prince of Anguo County.

古文：自剑阁以南得承制封拜及黜陟。
现代文：自剑阁以南，他可以根据朝廷制度封位和降免官吏。
English: From the south of Jiange, he can appoint and demote officials according to the imperial system.

古文：迥乃明赏罚，布恩威，绥辑新邦，经略未附，人夷怀而归之。
现代文：他赏罚分明，布植恩泽和威信，安抚新取得的土地上的百姓，经营那些暂时没有归附的地方，汉人和夷族的百姓都怀念并归顺他。
English: He gave clear rewards and punishments, spread grace and prestige, pacified the people on the newly acquired land, and managed those places that had not been annexed for the time being. The Han people and the people of the Yi nationality all remembered and submitted to him.

古文：性至孝，色养不怠，身虽在外，所得四时甘脆，必先荐奉，然后敢尝。
现代文：他的性情十分孝顺，对父母奉养从不懈怠，自己虽经常在外，然而得到四季的新鲜食品，一定先奉献给父母，然后自己才敢吃。
English: His disposition is very filial, and he never slackens in his devotion to his parents. Although he is often away, he gets fresh food from all four seasons and must first dedicate it to his parents before he dares to eat it himself.

古文：大长公主年高多病，迥往在京师，每退朝参候起居，忧悴形于容色。
现代文：他的母亲大长公主年迈多病，过去在京城，每次退朝他都去侍奉母亲的起居，忧虑的神情形于脸色。
English: His mother, the eldest princess, was very old and ill, and used to live in the capital. Every time he retired, he would go to serve his mother's household. His face was a picture of worry.

古文：大长公主每为之和颜进食，以宁迥心。
现代文：大长公主每次都和颜悦色地进食，以宽慰儿子的心。
English: The eldest princess always ate with a cheerful countenance to comfort her son's heart.

古文：周文知其至性，征迥入朝，以慰其母意。
现代文：宇文泰知道他的性情，将他调回朝中，以宽慰他母子二人的心情。
English: Knowing his disposition, Uwentai transferred him back to the Imperial Court to ease the feelings of his mother and son.

古文：遣大鸿胪郊劳，仍赐迥衮冕之服。
现代文：并派大鸿胪的官员到郊外去迎接慰劳他，赐给他公侯用的衮衣和冠冕。
English: He also sent officials from Dahongshang to the suburbs to meet and console him, and gave him a prince's robe and crown.

古文：蜀人思之，为立碑颂德。
现代文：他离开后，蜀人思念他，为他立碑歌颂功德。
English: After he left, the people of Shu thought about him and set up a monument to praise his merits.

古文：六官初建，拜小宗伯。
现代文：文官制度刚实行，他被封为小宗伯。
English: The civil service system had just come into effect, and he was given the title of Junior Minister.

古文：周孝闵帝践阼，进位柱国大将军，以迥有平蜀功，同霍去病冠军之义，改封宁蜀公。
现代文：周孝闵帝即位，晋封他为柱国大将军，因他有平蜀的功劳，仿效汉代霍去病冠军的意思，改封他为宁蜀公。
English: Emperor Zhou Xiaohui ascended to the throne, he was promoted to the general of Zhu Guo, because he had the merit of Ping Shu, he imitated the Han Dynasty Ho to go to the sick champion, he was renamed Ning Shu Gong.

古文：迁大司马。
现代文：又迁任为大司马。
English: He was also transferred to the post of grand secretary.

古文：寻以本官镇陇右。
现代文：不久，以现有的官职镇守陇右。
English: Soon, the existing official post of town guard was abolished.

古文：武成元年，进封蜀国公，邑万户，除秦州总管、秦渭等十四州诸军事、陇右大都督。
现代文：武成元年，朝廷又晋封他为蜀国公，食邑一万户，任秦州总管、秦渭等十四州诸军事、陇右大都督。
English: In the first year of Wucheng, the imperial court also promoted him to the prince of Shu Province, with 10,000 households in food villages, and he was appointed as the general manager of Qin State, the military governor of 14 states including Qin Hui, and the governor of Shu Yu.

古文：保定二年，拜大司马。
现代文：保定二年，封他为大司马。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was given the title of grand steward.

古文：及晋公护东伐，迥帅师攻洛阳。
现代文：晋公宇文护东伐，他率军进攻洛阳。
English: Jin Gong Yuwen protected the eastward march, and he led the army to attack Luoyang.

古文：齐王宪等军于芒山，齐众度河，诸军惊散。
现代文：齐王宇文宽等人驻扎在邙山，齐军渡过黄河，周军因惊慌四散逃去。
English: Qi Wang Yuwenkuang and others were stationed in Lushan, the Qi army crossed the Yellow River, and the Zhou army fled in panic.

古文：迥率麾下反行却敌，于是诸将遂得全师而还。
现代文：他率本部人马一边退却一边反击敌人，于是周军可以完整地退回。
English: He led the headquarters men and horses to retreat while counterattacking the enemy, so the Zhou army could return completely.

古文：迁太保、太傅。
现代文：他又迁任太保、太傅。
English: He was also transferred to the posts of Taibo and Taifu.

古文：建德初，拜太师，寻加上柱国。宣帝即位，以迥为大右弼，转大前疑，出为相州总管。
现代文：宣帝即位，命他为大右弼，出任为相州总管。
English: Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne and appointed him as the Grand Right Hand of the State, and he served as the Governor-General of Xiangzhou.

古文：宣帝崩，隋文帝辅政，以迥位望宿重，惧为异图，乃令迥子魏安郡公惇赍诏书以会葬征迥。
现代文：宣帝驾崩，杨坚辅助朝政，杨坚认为尉迟迥位高望重，担心他会谋图反叛，便命他的儿子魏安郡公尉迟带上诏书，以参加宣帝的葬礼为名征调他回京。
English: When Emperor Xuan died, Yang Jian assisted the imperial government. Yang Jian thought that the position of lieutenant was highly respected and feared that he would plot a rebellion, so he ordered his son, the Wei'an County public officer, to bring the imperial rescript and recruit him to return to Beijing in the name of attending Emperor Xuan's funeral.

古文：寻以郧国公韦孝宽代迥为总管。
现代文：不久命郧国公韦孝宽代替他任相州总管。
English: He was soon replaced by Wei Xiaokang, the governor of Shandong Province, as the chief administrator of Xiangzhou.

古文：迥以隋文帝当权，将图篡夺，遂谋举兵，留惇而不受代。
现代文：他因杨坚当权图谋篡夺皇位，便密谋举兵起事。他留下尉迟而不接受韦孝宽代理。
English: Because Yang Jian was plotting to usurp the imperial throne, he conspired to raise an army to revolt. He delayed accepting Wei Xiaokang as his deputy.

古文：隋文帝又令候正破六韩裒诣迥喻旨，密与总管府长史晋昶等书，令为之备。
现代文：杨坚又命侯正破六韩裒到尉迟迥那里宣读圣旨，暗中给总管府长史晋昶等人书信，命他早作准备。
English: In addition, Yang Jian ordered Hou Zheng to break the six-horse arch and go to Fuxi to read out the edict, and secretly sent a letter to the chief administrator Shi Jinsheng and others, ordering him to make preparations as soon as possible.

古文：迥闻之，杀昶，集文武士庶等登城北楼而令之。
现代文：尉迟迥听说后，杀掉晋昶，召集文武官员等登上州城的北城楼而号令他们。
English: After hearing of this, the lieutenant killed Jin Qi, and summoned the civil and military officials to the north tower of the state capital and ordered them to leave.

古文：于是众咸从命，莫不感激。
现代文：于是，大家都乐于从命，无不感激奋发。
English: As a result, everyone was happy to do their duty, and everyone was grateful for their efforts.

古文：乃自称大总管，承制署官司。
现代文：他自称大总督，根据制度设置官司。
English: He claimed to be the supreme governor and instituted legal proceedings in accordance with the system.

古文：于时赵王招已入朝，留少子在国，迥又奉以号令。
现代文：这时，赵王宇文招已经入朝，留下小儿子在封国守卫，尉迟迥又奉他的号令。
English: At this time, Zhao Wang Yuwenzhu had already entered the imperial court, leaving his youngest son to guard the country, and the second-in-command followed his orders.

古文：迥弟子大将军、成平郡公勤时为青州总管，初得迥书表送之，寻亦从迥。
现代文：尉迟迥兄弟的儿子、大将军、成平郡公尉迟勤这时任青州总管，最初收到尉迟迥要他举兵响应的书信，他送给了朝廷，不久，又随尉迟迥起事。
English: The son of Ye Xizhen's brother, the general and the public officer of Chengping County, who was the general manager of Qingzhou at that time, initially received a letter from Ye Xizhen asking him to raise an army, which he sent to the court, and soon he followed Ye Xizhen to rise up.

古文：徐州总管司录席毗与前东平郡守毕义绪据兗州及徐州之兰陵郡，亦以应迥。
现代文：尉迟迥所管辖的相、卫、黎、毛？贝、赵、冀、瀛、沧，和尉迟勤统率的青、齐、胶、光、莒等州一起响应，有军队数十万。
English: The provinces of Guizhou, Guizhou, Liaoning, Hebei, Zhao, Hebei, Fujian and Sichuan, which were under Guizhou's jurisdiction, responded together with the provinces of Qinghai, Qi, Jiaozuo, Guangxi and Fujian, which were under Guizhou's jurisdiction, with hundreds of thousands of troops.

古文：永桥镇将纥豆陵惠以城降迥。
现代文：荥州刺史邵国公宇文胄、申州刺史李惠、东楚州刺史费也利进国、东潼州刺史曹孝达也各自据守本州响应。
English: Shao Guogong Yu Wenyi from Zhangzhou, Li Hui from Shenzhou, Fei from East Chuzhou also entered the country, and Cao Xiaoda from East Zhangzhou also responded by staying in their home states.

古文：迥又北结高宝宁以通突厥；南连陈人，许割江淮之地。
现代文：永桥镇将纥豆陵惠献城投降。尉迟迥又向北联合高宝宁以与突厥沟通；南面与陈人联合，答应割让江淮之间的土地给陈国。
English: Yongqiao Town surrenders the city of Jiuzu Ling Hui to the Turks, and the Northern Wei allies with Gao Bao Ning to communicate with the Turks; the Southern Wei allies with the Chen people and agrees to cede the land between the Huai River and the Yangtze River to Chen Guo.

古文：隋文帝于是征兵讨迥，即以韦孝宽为元帅，阴罗云监诸军，郕国公梁士彦、乐安公元谐、化政公宇文忻、濮阳公宇文述、武乡公崔弘度、清河公杨素、陇西公李询、延寿公于仲文等皆为行军总管。
现代文：杨坚因此征兵讨伐尉迟迥，便命韦孝宽为元帅，阴罗云负责监察各路军队，成国公梁土彦、乐安公元谐、化政公宇文忻、濮阳公宇文述、武乡公崔弘度、清河公杨素、陇西公李询、延寿公于仲文等都为行军总管。
English: As a result, Yang Jian delayed the recruitment of the battalion commander, and then ordered Wei Xiaokuan to be the marshal, Yin Luo Yun was responsible for supervising the various armies, Chengguo Gongliang Dibian, Le An Dibian Dibian, Huazheng Gongwu Wenshu, Shenyang Gongwu Wenshu, Wuxiang Gong Cui Hongdu, Qinghe Gong Yang Su, Shaanxi Gong Li Xun, and Yanzhong Gong Yuzhong Wenshu were all the general managers of the march.

古文：迥遣所署大将军石愻攻建州，刺史宇文弁以州降愻。
现代文：尉迟迥派他任命的大将军石孙心进攻建州，刺史宇文弁献城投降。
English: General Shi Sunxin, whom he had appointed, was sent to attack Jianzhou by the commander, and the general, Shi Yuwenben, surrendered the city.

古文：迥又遣西道行台韩长业攻陷潞州，执刺史赵威，署城人郭子胜为刺史。
现代文：他又派西道行台韩长业攻陷潞州，生擒刺史赵威，任命城人郭子胜为刺史。
English: He also sent Han Changye of the Western Road and Taiwan to invade Zhangzhou, and appointed Guo Zisheng, a citizen of the city, as the chief of staff.

古文：上仪同赫连士猷攻晋州，即据小乡城。
现代文：上仪同赫连士猷进攻晋洲，占据小乡城。
English: Shang Yi attacked Jinzhou with Heren Shizhao and occupied the small township.

古文：纥豆陵惠袭陷定州之钜鹿郡，遂围恆州。
现代文：纥豆陵惠攻破定州的钜鹿郡，围攻恒州。
English: Peasling Hui attacked and broke through the Elk County of Dingzhou and besieged Hengzhou.

古文：上大将军宇文威攻汴州，上开府莒州刺史乌丸尼、开府尉迟俊率胶、光、青、齐、莒、兗之众围沂州。
现代文：上大将军宇文威攻打汴州，上开府莒州刺史乌丸尼、开府尉迟俊率胶、光、青、齐、莒、兖等地的军队围攻忻州。
English: The commander-in-chief, General Yu Wenwei, attacked Bozhou, and the troops from Bozhou, Shangkaifu, Shishi, Umaruni, and Kaifu, Lieutenant Chi Jun, led by Guo, Guang, Qing, Qi, Yao, and Yao, besieged Bozhou.

古文：大将军檀让攻陷曹、亳二州，屯兵梁郡。
现代文：大将军檀让攻取曹亳二州，驻扎在梁郡。
English: General Tan let Cao Pi capture two states and stationed in Liang County.

古文：大将军、东南道行台席毗众号八万，军于籓城，攻陷昌虑、下邑、丰县。
现代文：大将军、东南道行台席毗率众号称八万，驻守藩城，攻占昌虑、下邑、丰县。
English: The great general, the leader of the Southeast Road Gangdai seat, and the leader of the famous eighty thousand, stationed in the domain, conquered Changxian, Shimo-eup, and Feng County.

古文：李惠自申州攻永州，焚之而还。
现代文：申州刺史李惠自申州进攻永州，将州城焚烧后撤退。
English: Li Hui attacked Yongzhou from Shenzhou, burned the city, and then withdrew.

古文：宇文胄军于洛口。开府梁子康攻怀州。
现代文：荥州刺史宇文胄驻扎在洛口，开府梁子康进攻怀州。
English: Yu Wenzhen, the governor of Zhangzhou, was stationed in Lokou, and Liang Zikang, the governor of Kaifu, led the attack on Waizhou.

古文：魏安公惇率众十万人入武德，军于沁东。
现代文：魏安公尉迟率十万大军进入武德，驻扎在沁水之东。
English: Lieutenant Wei An belatedly led 100,000 troops into Wude and stationed them in the east of Surabaya.

古文：孝宽等诸军隔水，相持不进。
现代文：北周元帅韦孝宽等率军与他隔水相望，相互对峙。
English: The Northern Zhou Marshal Wei Xiaokuan and his army stood across the water from him and confronted each other.

古文：隋文帝又遣高颎驰驿督战。
现代文：杨坚又派高赹赶来督战。
English: Yang Jian also sent Gao Yao to supervise the battle.

古文：惇布兵二十余里，麾军小却，欲待孝宽军半度而击之。
现代文：尉迟布兵二十多里，指挥军队稍微向后退却，想等韦孝宽的军队半渡沁水再去进攻。
English: The lieutenant delayed sending his soldiers more than twenty miles, and the commander of the army retreated a little backwards, wanting to wait for Wei Xiaokuan's army to cross the Yanshui River before attacking.

古文：孝宽因其却，乃鸣鼓齐进，惇遂大败。
现代文：孝宽却乘他们退却，便鸣鼓进击，尉迟大败。
English: However, Takahiro took advantage of their retreat, marched in with drums beating, and was soundly defeated.

古文：孝宽乘胜进至鄴，迥与其子惇、佑等又悉其卒十三万，阵于城南。
现代文：韦孝宽率军乘胜进抵邺城。尉迟迥与儿子尉迟、尉迟等又指挥他们的全部军队共十三万人，在邺城南面布下阵势。
English: Wei Xiaokuan led the army to take advantage of the victory and arrived in Lucheng. Lucheng marched with his sons Lucheng and Lucheng and commanded their entire army, a total of 130,000 people, to set up a position in the south of Lucheng.

古文：迥别统万人，皆绿巾锦袄，号曰黄龙兵。
现代文：尉迟迥又另外统率一万人，都头裹绿巾，身穿锦锻衣服，号称黄龙兵。
English: He later led another ten thousand people, all with their heads wrapped in green scarves and wearing brocaded clothes, and became known as the Yellow Dragon Soldier.

古文：勤率众五万自青州赴迥，以三千骑先到。
现代文：尉迟勤率五万人马从青州赶来助阵，先头的三千骑兵提前到达。
English: Fifty thousand cavalrymen arrived from Qingzhou to help, and the first three thousand cavalrymen arrived ahead of schedule.

古文：迥旧集军旅，虽老，犹被甲临阵。
现代文：尉迟迥过去招募的军队将士年纪虽然大，仍全身披挂上阵。
English: Although the army soldiers recruited in the past are old, they still go into battle fully clothed.

古文：其麾下兵皆关中人，为之力战。
现代文：他的部下都是关中人，所以都奋力作战。
English: His subordinates were all Guanzhong people, so they all fought hard.

古文：孝宽等军失利而却。
现代文：韦孝宽的军队失利退却。
English: Wei's army retreated in defeat.

古文：鄴中士女观者如堵。高颎与李询乃整阵先犯观者，因其扰而乘之。迥众大败，遂入鄴城。
现代文：邺城的士民百姓观阵打仗的人山人海，高赹与李询便整顿队伍先侵击百姓，乘人群扰乱后向尉迟迥的军队猛攻，尉迟迥的军队大败，退入邺城。
English: The soldiers and people of Lucheng watched the battle and saw the sea of people. Gao Wei and Li Xun led the rectification team to invade the people first, using the crowd to disturb and then storming the army of Lucheng. The army of Lucheng was defeated and retreated to Lucheng.

古文：迥走保北城，孝宽纵兵围之。
现代文：尉迟迥退保北城，韦孝宽挥军包围。
English: Wei Xiaokuan's army encircled Beicheng after he delayed withdrawing from the city.

古文：李询、贺娄子干以其属先登。
现代文：李询、贺娄子干首先登上城墙。
English: Li Ying and He Yanzi were the first to climb the city wall.

古文：迥上楼，射杀数人，乃自杀。
现代文：尉迟迥登上城楼，用箭射杀数名敌人，然后自杀。
English: The lieutenant climbed the tower, shot several enemies with arrows, and then committed suicide.

古文：勤、惇、佑等东走青州，未至，开府郭衍追及之，并为衍所获。
现代文：尉迟勤、尉迟、尉迟等败走青州。还未到达，开府郭衍赶上，将他们全部擒获。
English: Ye Ziqin, Ye Ziqin and Ye Ziqin were defeated and fled to Qingzhou. Before they arrived, Kaifu Guoyan caught up with them and captured them all.

古文：隋文帝以勤初有诚款，特释之。
现代文：杨坚因尉迟勤当初有诚意归附，特意将他释放。
English: Yang Jian initially had the sincerity to attach him due to his late attendance, and deliberately released him.

古文：李惠先是自缚归罪，隋文帝复其官爵。
现代文：李惠因自缚请罪，杨坚恢复了他的官爵。
English: Li Hui pleaded guilty to self-bondage, and Yang Jian restored his title.

古文：迥末年衰耄，惑于后妻王氏，而诸子多不睦。
现代文：尉迟迥后来年纪衰老，又被后妻王氏所蒙蔽，儿子之间关系多不和睦。
English: The relationship between the two sons was often not amicable, with the younger son later growing old and being deceived by his wife Wang.

古文：运弟勤，大象末，青州总管，起兵应伯迥。
现代文：起兵以后，他任开府、小御正崔达弩为长史，其他委任的大多是齐人。崔达弩是一个读书人，胸中没有谋略，举措大多不合纲纪，不能匡救时弊。
English: After the army was raised, he appointed the head of the government and the petty regent, Cui Daru, for a long time, and most of the other appointees were Qi people. Cui Daru was a reader, he had no strategy in his heart, most of his measures were not in accordance with the discipline, and he could not save the current situation.

古文：勤弟敬，尚明帝女河南公主，位仪同三司。王轨，太原祁人也，小名沙门。
现代文：尉迟迥从起兵到失败，共经过六十八天。王轨，太原祁地人。小名沙门。
English: Sixty-eight days passed from the time the army was raised to the time it was defeated. Wang Luo, a native of Taiyuan, Shandong Province, was nicknamed Shamen.

古文：汉司徒允之后，世为州郡冠族。
现代文：汉代司徒王允的后代，世代都是州郡的大族。
English: The descendants of Wang Yun, a scholar of the Han Dynasty, have been a large family in Zhoushu County for generations.

古文：累叶仕魏，赐姓乌丸氏。
现代文：几代在魏做官，被朝廷赐姓乌丸氏。
English: Several generations worked as officials in Wei, and were given the surname of Wumaru by the imperial court.

古文：父光，少雄武，有将帅才略。
现代文：他的父亲王光，少小就英雄威武，有将帅才能。
English: His father, Wang Guang, was a hero from a young age and had a talent for military strategy.

古文：频有战功，周文帝遇之甚厚。位至骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、平原县公。
现代文：多次立有战功。宇文泰对他十分信任，官位至骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司、平原县公。
English: He had distinguished himself in battle many times. Uwentai trusted him very much, and he rose to the rank of General of Cavalry, Kaifu Yi Tong Sanji, and Pingyuan County official.

古文：轨性质直，起家事辅城公。
现代文：王轨性情朴实正直，起家入仕，就跟着辅城公。
English: Wang Lu's nature is simple and honest. When he entered the service, he was followed by Fu Cheng.

古文：及武帝即位，累迁内史下大夫，遂处腹心之任。
现代文：武帝即位，他迁任内史下大夫，常被武帝委以心腹的重任。
English: When Emperor Wu ascended the throne, he was transferred to the post of doctor of internal history, and was often entrusted with important duties by Emperor Wu's committee.

古文：从平并、鄴，以功进位上大将军，进爵郯国公。
现代文：武帝准备诛杀晋公宇文护，他赞成这个决策。建德初年，他转任内史中大夫，加封为开府仪同三司，又被封为上开府仪同大将军，封爵为上黄县公。
English: Emperor Wu was preparing to kill Jin Gong Yu Wengu, and he approved of this decision. In the first year of Jian De, he was transferred to the position of the doctor of internal history, and was awarded the title of the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and was also awarded the title of the general of the Kaifu ceremony, and was knighted as the governor of Shanghuang County.

古文：及陈将吴明彻入寇吕梁，徐州总管梁士彦频与战不利，乃退保州城。
现代文：军国大政，都可参与。南陈将领吴明彻入侵吕梁，徐州总管梁士彦多次与陈军作战，连连失利，便退守州城。
English: Southern Chen's general Wu Mingche invaded Luliang. Xuzhou's commander-in-chief, Liang Shihyan, fought against Chen's army many times, but after repeated defeats, he retreated to Zhucheng.

古文：明彻遂堰清水以灌之，列船舰于城下，以图攻取。
现代文：吴明彻便堵截清水河的水以淹灌徐州城，将战船开到城下，准备发起进攻。
English: Wu Mingcher then blocked the water of the Qingshui River to flood the city of Xuzhou, drove the warship under the city, and prepared to launch an attack.

古文：诏以轨为行军总管，率诸军赴救。
现代文：朝廷命王轨任行军总管，率领军队救援徐州。
English: The imperial court ordered Wang Lu to be the general manager of the march and lead the army to rescue Xuzhou.

古文：轨潜于清水入淮口，多竖大木，以铁锁贯车轮，横截水流，以断其船路，方欲密决其堰以毙之。
现代文：王轨暗中派人在清水河的入淮口竖立许多大木桩，用铁链连结车轮，横截河流，断绝陈军船只的退路，正想偷偷掘开堤堰放水，使敌船无法开动而将他们困毙。
English: Wang Lu secretly sent people to erect many large wooden piles at the entrance of the Qingshui River, connect the wheels with iron chains, cross the river, cut off the escape route of Chen Jun's ships, and was trying to secretly excavate the dike and release water, so that the enemy ship could not move and trap them to death.

古文：明彻知之，乃破堰遽退，冀乘决水以得入淮。
现代文：吴明彻知道了，便打破土堰迅速撤退，希望乘着退回的河水将船驶入淮河。
English: Knowing this, Wu Mingcher broke the earthen dam and quickly retreated, hoping to sail the boat into the Huai River with the returned water.

古文：比至清口，川流已阔，水势亦衰，船并碍于车轮，不复得过。
现代文：来到清口，河流已经很宽阔，水势大为衰减，船又被车轮阻挡，无法通过。
English: When we arrived at the mouth of the river, the river was already very wide, the water level had greatly decreased, and the boat was blocked by the wheels, making it impossible to pass.

古文：轨因率兵围而蹙之。唯有骑将萧摩诃以二十骑先走，得免。
现代文：王轨乘机率兵将敌人包围，只有骑兵将领萧摩诃率二十名骑兵提前撤走，才免于一死。
English: Wang Lu took advantage of the opportunity to surround the enemy with his soldiers. Only the cavalry general Xiao Maqun and twenty cavalrymen withdrew ahead of time and were spared from death.

古文：明彻及将士三万余人并器械辎重并就俘获。
现代文：吴明彻和三万多将士，连同器械辎重全部被俘获。
English: Wu Mingcher and more than thirty thousand soldiers, together with their equipment and baggage, were all captured.

古文：陈之锐卒，于是歼焉。
现代文：陈朝的精锐部队，这次被歼灭殆尽。
English: The elite troops of the Chen Dynasty were annihilated this time.

古文：进位柱国，仍拜徐州总管。
现代文：王轨被晋封为柱国，拜授徐州总管。
English: Wang Lu was promoted to pillar state and given the title of Xuzhou governor.

古文：轨性严重，善谋略，兼有吕梁之捷，威振敌境。陈人甚惮之。
现代文：他性情严肃庄重，善于计谋，加上吕梁大捷，他的威望震动敌境，陈朝人都很害怕他。
English: He had a serious and dignified disposition and was good at scheming. Together with Lü Liang Dajie, his prestige shook the enemy territory. The Chen dynasty was very afraid of him.

古文：宣帝之征吐谷浑也，武帝令轨与宇文孝伯并从，军中进趣，皆委轨等，宣帝仰成而已。
现代文：宣帝征讨吐谷浑，武帝命他与宇文孝伯一起跟从宣帝出发，军中的进止攻取，宣帝都委托给他，宣帝只是获取成果而已。
English: Emperor Wu ordered him and Uwen Xiao Bo to go with Emperor Xuanzong to conquer Tuyagun. Emperor Xuanzong entrusted him with the advance and capture of the army, but Emperor Xuanzong only obtained the results.

古文：时宫尹郑译、王端并得幸于宣帝。
现代文：这时，宫尹郑译、王端都受宣帝宠幸。
English: At this time, both Gong Yin Zheng and Wang Du were favored by Emperor Xuan.

古文：宣帝军中颇有失德，译等皆预焉。
现代文：宣帝在军中颇有些失德的事情，郑译等人都参与了。
English: Emperor Xuancheng did some immoral things in the army, and Zheng Yu and others were all involved.

古文：军还，轨等言之于武帝。武帝大怒，乃挞宣帝，除译等名，仍加捶楚。
现代文：军队回来后，王轨等人向武帝奏报了宣帝在军中的情况，武帝大为恼怒，便鞭打宣帝，免去郑译等人的官职，并加以痛打。
English: After the army returned, Wang Luo and others reported to Emperor Wu about the situation of Emperor Xuan in the army. Emperor Wu was very angry, so he whipped Emperor Xuan, removed Emperor Zheng and others from their official positions, and beat them severely.

古文：宣帝因此大衔之。
现代文：宣帝因此对王轨等怀恨在心。
English: Emperor Xuan thus harbored a grudge against Wang Luo and others.

古文：轨又尝与小内史贺若弼言及此事，且言皇太子必不克负荷。
现代文：王轨又曾与小内史贺若弼说到这件事，并且说皇太子一定不能承担管理朝政的重责。
English: Wang Luo had also talked about this matter with Konishi Horakazu, and said that the crown prince must not assume the heavy responsibility of managing the imperial government.

古文：弼深以为然，劝轨陈之。
现代文：贺若弼也认为很对，劝他陈奏给武帝。
English: Horakado also thought it was right, and advised him to play for Emperor Wu.

古文：轨后因侍坐，乃白武帝言： 皇太子多凉德，恐不了陛下家事。
现代文：他利用侍坐的机会，便对武帝说： 皇太子多有薄德，恐怕不能担负陛下您的家事。
English: Taking advantage of the opportunity to sit as an attendant, he said to Emperor Wu, "The crown prince has many weaknesses, and I'm afraid I can't take on your majesty's household chores.

古文：愚臣暗短，不足以论是非。
现代文：我昏聩短浅，不足以评论是非。
English: I am too stupid and short-sighted to comment on the rights and wrongs.

古文：陛下恆以贺若弼有文武奇才，识度宏远，而弼比再对臣，深以此事为虑。 
现代文：您常认为贺若弼有文臣武将的奇异才能，胸怀恢宏宽阔，而贺若弼一再对我说，他深为此事忧虑。 
English: You often think that He Ruoxuan has the extraordinary talent of a scholar-warrior and a broad mind, but He Ruoxuan has repeatedly told me that he is deeply worried about this matter.

古文：武帝召弼问之。
现代文：武帝召见贺若弼并询问他。
English: Emperor Wu summoned Horatio and interrogated him.

古文：弼曰： 皇太子养德春宫，未闻有过。
现代文：贺若弼答道： 皇太子在东宫蓄养道德，没听说有什么过错。
English: Hera replied, "The crown prince is cultivating morality in the East Palace. I haven't heard of any wrongdoing.

古文：未审陛下何从得闻此言？ 
现代文：不知道陛下您从哪里听到这些话？ 
English: I don't know, Your Majesty, where did you hear that?

古文：既退，轨诮弼曰： 平生言论，无所不道，今者乃尔翻覆！ 
现代文：贺若弼退出宫殿后，王轨责备他说： 你平常说话，没有不守信的，今天为什么反复无常？ 
English: After He Ruoqian left the palace, Wang Luo scolded him, "You usually speak without breaking your word. Why are you so capricious today?

古文：弼曰： 此公之过也。
现代文：贺若弼说 ：这是你的过错啊。
English: Herakazu said, "It's your fault."

古文：皇太子国之储副，岂易为言，事有差跌，便至灭门之祸。
现代文：皇太子是国家的储君，怎么能轻易去说他？事情稍有不慎，便有杀身灭门之祸。
English: The crown prince is the country's crown prince. How can he be so easily dismissed? If there is the slightest carelessness, there will be a massacre.

古文：本谓公密臧否，何得遂至昌言？ 
现代文：本来让你秘密陈奏，你怎么能这样公开去讲？ 
English: How can you talk about it publicly when you were supposed to keep it a secret?

古文：轨默然久之，乃曰： 吾专心国家，遂不存私计。
现代文：王轨默然许久才说 ：我一心为了国家，便没有私心。
English: Wang Luo was silent for a long time before he said, "I only care about the country, so I have no selfishness."

古文：向者对众，良实非宜。 
现代文：上次当众陈奏，实在不恰当。 
English: The last time we performed it in public, it was really inappropriate.

古文：其后轨因内宴上寿，又捋武帝须曰： 可爱好老公，但恨后嗣弱耳 ！
现代文：以后他因内宫设宴为武帝祝寿，又捋武帝的胡须，说 ：多可爱的老头啊，可惜您的儿子太不行了。 
English: Later, he congratulated Emperor Wu on his birthday at a banquet held at the Inner Court, and also stroked Emperor Wu's beard, saying, "What a lovely old man, it's a pity your son is too weak."

古文：武帝深以为然。但汉王次长，又不才，此外诸子并幼，故不能用其说。
现代文：武帝认为他说的很对，但二儿子汉王没有才能，其他儿子都年纪幼小，所以无法采用他的建议。
English: Emperor Wu thought he was right, but his second son Han Wang was not talented, and his other sons were too young to follow his advice.

古文：及宣帝即位，追郑译等复为近侍。
现代文：宣帝继位，重新恢复郑译等人的职务，作为自己的近侍。
English: Emperor Xuan ascended the throne, and he reinstated Zheng Yue and others as his close attendants.

古文：轨自知必及于祸，谓所亲曰： 吾昔在先朝，实申社稷至计。
现代文：王轨知道自己必有灾祸，对亲近的人说： 我过去在先帝在世时，实在是为了国家而提出更换太子的建议。
English: Wang Luo knew that he was heading for disaster, and said to those close to him: In the past, when the former emperor was alive, I actually proposed replacing the crown prince for the sake of the country.

古文：今日之事，断可知矣。
现代文：今天事情的后果，很容易判断。
English: It is easy to judge the consequences of today's events.

古文：此州控带淮南，邻接强寇，欲为身计，易同反掌。
现代文：我所管辖的徐州紧靠淮南，与敌国相邻。要想为自己打算，易如反掌。
English: Xuzhou, which is under my jurisdiction, is close to Huainan and is adjacent to the enemy country. If you want to plan for yourself, it's as easy as pie.

古文：但忠义之节，不可亏违。
现代文：但忠臣的节义，不可损辱。
English: However, the loyalty of a loyal subject must not be violated.

古文：况荷先帝厚恩，每思以死自效，岂以获罪于嗣主，便欲背德于先帝？
现代文：更何况蒙受先帝的厚恩，常想着以死报效，怎么能因为获罪于宣帝，便去背叛先帝呢？
English: Not to mention the fact that he was favored by the former emperor and often thought of taking revenge by death. How could he betray the former emperor because he was convicted by Emperor Xuan?

古文：止可于此待死，义不为他计。冀千载之后，知吾此心。 
现代文：我只能够在这里等死，决不作其他打算，希望千载之后人们能了解我的忠心。 
English: I can only wait here until I die, never intending to do anything else, and hope that after a thousand years people will understand my loyalty.

古文：大象元年，帝使内史杜虔信就徐州杀轨。
现代文：大象元年，宣帝派内史杜虔信到徐州将王轨杀害。
English: In the first year of the elephant, Emperor Xuanzong sent Inner Shi Du Qianxin to Xuzhou to kill Wang Lu.

古文：御正中大夫颜之仪切谏，帝不纳，遂诛之。
现代文：御正大夫颜之仪恳切进谏劝阻，宣帝不采纳，仍然将他诛杀。
English: Imperial Doctor Yan Zhi Yi earnestly tried to dissuade him, but Emperor Xuan did not accept, and still killed him.

古文：轨立朝忠恕，兼有大功，忽以无罪被戮，天下知与不知皆伤惜。
现代文：他对朝廷忠贞，又立有大功，忽然无罪被杀戮，天下人不管认识或不认识他的人都很悲伤惋惜。
English: He was loyal to the imperial court and had made great contributions. Suddenly, he was killed without any guilt. People all over the world, whether they knew him or not, were very sad and regretful.

