古文：陈彭年，字永年，抚州南城人。
现代文：陈彭年，字永年，抚州南城人。
English: Chen Pengnian, surnamed Yongnian, from Nancheng, Fuzhou.

古文：父省躬，鹿邑令。
现代文：他的父亲陈省躬，曾任鹿邑县令。
English: His father, Chen Shoumoi, was once a Luyi County magistrate.

古文：彭年幼好学，母惟一子，爱之，禁其夜读书。
现代文：陈彭年幼年好学，他母亲只有他一个儿子，所以宠他爱他，不准他在晚上苦读书。
English: Chen Peng was eager to learn at a young age. His mother only had one son, so she doted on him and did not allow him to study hard at night.

古文：彭年篝灯密室，不令母知。
现代文：陈彭年只好在密室里点灯，不让母亲知道。
English: Chen Pengnian had to turn on the lights in the locked room to keep his mother from finding out.

古文：年十三，著《皇纲论》万余言，为江左名辈所赏。
现代文：他十三岁时，就写了一篇一万多字的《皇纲论》，受到江左名流们的赏识。
English: When he was thirteen years old, he wrote a ten-thousand-word essay, "On the Imperial Program," which was appreciated by prominent people in Jiangsu Province.

古文：唐主李煜闻之，召入宫，令子仲宣与之游。
现代文：南唐后主李煜听说此事，召他入宫，并叫儿子李仲宣与他交游。
English: When the Queen of Southern Tang, Li Xi, heard about this, he invited him to the palace and asked his son, Li Zhongxuan, to travel with him.

古文：金陵平，彭年师事徐铉为文。
现代文：金陵平定后，陈彭年从师徐铉学习做文章。
English: After the subjugation of Jinling, Chen Pengnian learned to write articles from his teacher Xu Yao.

古文：太平兴国中，举进士，在场屋间颇有隽名。
现代文：宋朝太平兴国年间，陈彭年参加进士考试，在考生中颇有美名。
English: During the Song Dynasty's period of peace and prosperity, Chen Pengnian took part in the entrance examination and was quite famous among the candidates.

古文：尝因京城大酺，跨驴出游构赋，自东华门至阙前，已口占数千言。
现代文：曾因参加京城大宴会，骑驴出游作诗，从东华门到宫阙之前，便已口吟数千言。
English: Due to his participation in a large banquet in Beijing, he rode a donkey to travel and write poetry. Before he went from Donghua Gate to the Imperial Palace, he had already recited thousands of words.

古文：然佻薄好嘲咏，频为宋白所黜，雍熙二年始中第。
现代文：然而他性格轻佻而又喜欢咏诗嘲刺人，因而多次被宋白压制，直到雍熙二年才考取进士。
English: However, he had a frivolous personality and liked to recite poems and taunt people, so he was repeatedly suppressed by Song Bai. It was not until the second year of the reign of Yongxi that he passed the examination to become a scholar.

古文：调江陵府司理参军。
现代文：中进士后，陈彭年被调任江陵府司理参军。
English: After graduating from middle school, Chen Pengnian was transferred to the position of Secretary of Gangneung Prefecture to join the army.

古文：因监决死囚，怖之，换江陵主簿，历澧、怀二州推官。
现代文：因监斩死囚时害怕，改任江陵主簿，后历任澧、怀二州推官。
English: Because he was afraid when he supervised the beheading of death row prisoners, he was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of Gangneung, and later successively served as the deputy governor of Gangneung and the governor of Huai Erzhou.

古文：在怀，深为知州乔惟岳倚任。
现代文：在怀州任上，深受知州乔惟岳重用。
English: During his tenure in Waizhou, he was deeply influenced by Zhouzhou Qiao Wei Yue.

古文：会樊知古为河北转运，以亲嫌，徙泽州，丁内艰免。
现代文：当樊知古任河北转运使时，陈彭年为避亲戚之嫌，改调泽州推官，又因遇母亲丧事免行。
English: When Zou Zhigu was appointed as the Hebei transfer envoy, Chen Pengnian avoided the relatives' suspicion and was transferred as the Zezhou envoy. He was also exempted from the trip due to his mother's death.

古文：御史中丞王化基荐其才，改卫尉寺丞，迁秘书郎，为大理寺详断官。
现代文：御史中丞王化基推荐陈彭年的才华。陈彭年因此改任卫尉寺丞，升秘书郎，后任大理寺详断官。
English: Wang Huaki, the chief historian, recommended Chen Pengnian's talent, and Chen Pengnian was consequently promoted to the position of the guard of the temple, the secretary of the secretary, and later the detailed adjudicator of Dali Temple.

古文：坐事出监湖州盐税，寻又停官。
现代文：因犯有错误被调出到地方，任湖州盐税监官，不久又停职。
English: For making a mistake, he was transferred to a local area and appointed as the Huzhou salt tax inspector. He was suspended soon after.

古文：彭年素贫窭，居丧免职，赖仆人佣贩以济。
现代文：陈彭年素来贫寒，服丧免职期间，靠仆人贩卖救济过日。
English: Chen Pengnian has always been poor. During the mourning period, he relied on servants to sell relief to get by.

古文：真宗即位，复为秘书郎。
现代文：宋真宗即位后，陈彭年复职，仍任秘书郎。
English: After the enthronement of Song Zhenzong, Chen Pengnian was reinstated and continued to serve as secretary.

古文：乔惟岳刺史海州，及知苏、寿二州，并表彭年通判州事。
现代文：乔惟岳任海州刺史和苏、寿二州知州时，均上表推荐陈彭年任州通判官。
English: When Qiao Wei Yue was appointed as the chief judge of Haizhou and the chief judge of Suzhou and Shouli, Chen Pengnian was recommended to be appointed as the chief judge.

古文：咸平三年，屡上疏言事，召试学士院，迁秘书丞、知阆州。
现代文：咸平三年，陈彭年多次上疏议论国事，被召去参加学士院考试，后升秘书丞、阆州知州。
English: In the third year of Xianping, Chen Pengnian was summoned to attend the college entrance examination, and was promoted to secretary-general and secretary of Zhangzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：未行，改金州。
现代文：尚未赴任时，便又改任金州知州。
English: When he was not yet in office, he was reappointed to Jinzhou and Zhizhou.

古文：四年，上疏曰： 夫事有虽小而可以建大功，理有虽近而可以为远计者，其事有五：一曰置谏官，二曰择法吏，三日简格令，四曰省冗员，五曰行公举。
现代文：咸平四年，上疏说： 有的事看来虽小却可建大功，有的道理看来虽浅近却可为长远设计，这类事有五件：一是设置谏官，二是选拔法官，二是简化法律，四是裁减冗员，五是实行公正推举。
English: In the fourth year of Xianping, Shang Zuo said: There are five things of this kind: one is to set up eunuchs, the second is to select judges, the second is to simplify laws, the fourth is to reduce redundant personnel, and the fifth is to implement fair elections.

古文：此五者，实经世之要道，致治之坦涂也。 会诏举贤良方正，翰林学士朱昂以彭年闻，召之，辞以贫乏，请终秩。
现代文：这五件事，确实是治国的重要方法，求得太平的坦荡途径。 当时正值皇帝下诏推举贤良方正，翰林学士朱昂遂将陈彭年向上推荐，皇帝下令召见，陈彭年以贫乏为由推辞不赴，并请求停职。
English: These five things are indeed an important method of governing the country and a straightforward way to achieve peace. At that time, when the emperor issued an edict to promote the virtuous Fang Zheng, Zhu Ang, a scholar of Hanlin, recommended Chen Peng Nian to the top, the emperor ordered to summon him, Chen Peng Nian refused to go on the grounds of poverty, and requested suspension.

古文：景德初，代还，真秘阁。
现代文：景德初年，陈彭年复出，在秘书阁任职。
English: In the first year of Jingde, Chen Pengnian made a comeback and served in the cabinet of secretaries.

古文：杜镐、刁衎荐其该博，命直史馆兼崇文院检讨。
现代文：杜镐、刁絗又推荐他，说他才识博大精深，陈彭年因此被派到史馆任职，兼任崇文院检讨官。
English: Du Yu and Zou also recommended him, saying that he was knowledgeable and profound. Therefore, Chen Pengnian was sent to the History Museum to serve as a reviewer of the Chongwen Academy.

古文：又代潘慎修起居注，赐绯鱼。
现代文：后又代替潘慎修起居注，被皇上赏赐绯鱼袋。
English: Later, he replaced Pan Shenxiu and was awarded a carp bag by the emperor.

古文：献《大宝箴》曰：
现代文：陈彭年因此献上一篇《大宝箴》。箴文说：
English: Therefore, Chen Pengnian presented a "Great Treasure Proverb." The proverbs said:

古文：二仪之内，最灵者人。
现代文：天地之内，最有灵的是人类。
English: Within heaven and earth, the most spiritual beings are human beings.

古文：生民之中，至大者君。
现代文：人类之中，最伟大的是君主。
English: Among human beings, the greatest is the monarch.

古文：民既可畏，天亦无亲。
现代文：人民既可畏，上天也无私。
English: The people are both fearless and selfless.

古文：所辅者德，所归者仁。
现代文：辅助君王的是德，人民归服的是仁。
English: It is virtue that supports the king, and it is benevolence that the people submit to.

古文：恭己御下，辉光益新。
现代文：律己御下，您的光辉日新月异。
English: Ritsuko, your brilliance is growing day by day.

古文：载籍斯在，谋猷备陈。
现代文：经典文献都在这里了，治国方略也已备妥。
English: The classic documents are all here, and the strategy for governing the country is also ready.

古文：内绥万姓，外抚百蛮。
现代文：内安百姓，外抚群蛮。
English: The people of Inner An, the barbarians of Outer Fuzhou.

古文：治乱所始，言动之间。
现代文：安定与混乱的开始，就在那言谈举止之间。
English: Between that speech and that action lies the beginning of stability and chaos.

古文：观之则易，处之甚难。
现代文：看来容易，做来极难。
English: It seems easy, but it is extremely difficult to do.

古文：由是先哲，喻彼投艰。
现代文：因此那古时哲人，将此喻为自投艰难。
English: That's why ancient philosophers referred to it as "self-inflicted hardship."

古文：苟能虑未，乃可防闲。
现代文：若能想到未来，就可防患未然。
English: If you can think about the future, you can prevent problems in advance.

古文：审求逆耳，无恶犯颜。
现代文：察访寻求那逆耳的忠言，不要厌恶那有损颜面的言论。
English: Seek advice from those who listen, and don't be put off by those who talk behind your back.

古文：既庶而富，教化乃施。
现代文：人民富庶了，就可施行教育。
English: When the people are rich, education can be carried out.

古文：慈俭之政，富庶之基。
现代文：仁慈、勤俭的政策，是人民富庶的基础。
English: The policy of benevolence and diligence is the foundation of the people's prosperity.

古文：鳏寡孤独，人之所悲。
现代文：鳏寡孤独之人，是人类都应怜悯的。
English: Widowed and lonely people are the most pitiful of all human beings.

古文：发号施令，宜先及之。
现代文：发号施令时，理当先行顾及。
English: When issuing an order, it is reasonable to take this into account in advance.

古文：黄发鲐背，心实多知。
现代文：黄发驼背的长者，内心实多智慧。
English: The elderly man with yellow hair and hunched back is very wise at heart.

古文：左右侍从，何尚于兹。
现代文：作为君王的随从，还有谁比他们更好？
English: As a royal retinue, who better than them?

古文：瞻言百辟，咸代天工。
现代文：广开言论，可巧夺天工。
English: Open your mouth wide, and you can outwit nature.

古文：傥无虚授，可建大中。
现代文：若无虚授，便可建造自然。
English: If there is no false teaching, then nature can be built.

古文：克彰慎柬，惟藉至公。
现代文：克服障碍慎重选择，就只有靠大公无私的品德。
English: The only way to overcome obstacles and make prudent choices is to rely on selflessness.

古文：知人则哲，听德则聪。
现代文：能知人即是睿智，能听取有道之人的建议则是聪明。
English: It is wisdom to know a man, and it is understanding to hearken to the counsel of a wise man.

古文：才固难备，道亦少同。
现代文：才能固然难完全，道德也少有相同。
English: Talent, of course, is difficult to perfect, and morals are rarely the same.

古文：葑菲罔舍，杞梓乃充。
现代文：只要有一技之长都不舍弃，才能使栋梁大才充足。
English: As long as one does not give up one's skill, it is only possible to make the pillars large enough.

古文：不扶自直，惟蓬在麻。
现代文：不要扶就能自直，只有那蓬草中的麻杆。
English: Don't help me, I can straighten myself up. It's just that hemp pole in the fluffy grass.

古文：非拣莫见，惟金在沙。
现代文：不经淘洗不能发现，只有那沙中的金粒。
English: You can't find it without scouring, only the grains of gold in the sand.

古文：参备顾问，必辨忠邪。
现代文：多备顾问，必可辨别忠邪。
English: An abundance of counselors is essential to discerning between good and evil.

古文：献替以正，裨益无涯。
现代文：官职上下更换，便会有无穷裨益。
English: There are endless benefits to moving up and down the ranks.

古文：自匿草泽，亦有国华。
现代文：自愿隐匿在草泽之中的人，也有许多国家精英。
English: Those who voluntarily hide in the grass are also the elite of many countries.

古文：访此髦士，可拒朋家。
现代文：访寻这班老人，就可抵制朋党之祸。
English: By visiting these elderly people, we can resist the scourge of cronyism.

古文：三章之立，庶民作程。
现代文：三章的设立，使百姓行动有了程序。
English: The establishment of the three chapters gave the people's action a procedure.

古文：钦哉恤哉，可以措刑。
现代文：恭敬与怜恤啊，可使刑法废弃。
English: Respect and mercy can make criminal law obsolete.

古文：七代之建，奸孽是平。
现代文：七代的建置，使奸邪罪孽得到剿平。
English: The establishment of the seven generations has eliminated the evil of treachery and wickedness.

古文：本仁本义，可以弭兵。
现代文：以仁义为本，便可以消除战争。
English: Based on benevolence and righteousness, war can be eliminated.

古文：是为齐礼，亦曰好生。
现代文：这就是合乎礼制，也叫爱惜生命。
English: This is in accordance with etiquette, and is also called cherishing life.

古文：有教无类，自诚而明。
现代文：教育没有分别，内心真诚便能明了一切。
English: Education makes no difference, sincerity makes everything clear.

古文：宗庙社稷，飨之以恭。
现代文：宗庙与社稷，要恭敬祭祀。
English: The ancestral temple and shrine should be respected and worshipped.

古文：宫室苑囿，诫之在丰。
现代文：宫室与苑圃，则要警惕过于丰富。
English: In the palace and garden, be wary of too much.

古文：春鬼秋狝，不废三农。
现代文：春秋狩猎，不要妨碍农事。
English: Spring and autumn hunting, do not interfere with farming.

古文：击石拊石，用格神宗。
现代文：敲石击磬，用来感动祖宗。
English: Knock on the stone and hit the gong, used to move the ancestors.

古文：使人以悦，乃克成功。
现代文：使人快乐，便能成功。
English: If you make people happy, you will be successful.

古文：治国以政，罔或不从。
现代文：用政策来治国，便没人不听从。
English: If you use policy to govern the country, no one will disobey you.

古文：济济多士，用之有光。
现代文：贤才济济，利用便会光大事业。
English: Talents abound, and the best use of them will lead to a great career.

古文：硁硁小器，谋之弗臧。
现代文：浅陋小器，谋划不会精良。
English: Shallow and petty, not good at planning.

古文：忠言致益，岂让膏粱。
现代文：忠言带来的益处，怎么会逊于膏粱。
English: How can the benefits of good advice be inferior to the benefits of bad advice?

古文：六艺为乐，宁后笙簧。
现代文：六艺带来的欢乐，哪在笙簧之后。
English: The joy brought by the six arts, which is behind the reed spring.

古文：任贤勿贰，尧所以昌。
现代文：用贤不疑，尧因此昌盛。
English: The use of wisdom is unquestionable, so the dragonfly thrives.

古文：改过不吝，汤所以王。
现代文：不怕改过，汤因此称王。
English: He's not afraid to make amends, and that's why soup is king.

古文：六合至广，万汇尤多。
现代文：宇宙最为广大，人类尤其众多。
English: The universe is the most vast, and mankind is the most numerous.

古文：风俗靡一，嗜欲相摩。如驭朽索，若防决河。
现代文：风俗不同，嗜欲相异，如驭着一根已朽马缰，若防堵一条溃决的河。
English: Different customs, different appetites, like riding a dead horse, like blocking a raging river.

古文：左契斯执，六辔遂和。
现代文：抓住了左契，马车就可安稳。
English: If you hold on to the left clutch, the carriage can travel smoothly.

古文：导之以德，民免婴罗。
现代文：用德来引导，人便能避免犯法。
English: Guided by virtue, one can avoid breaking the law.

古文：不懈于位，俗乃偃戈。
现代文：为政者不懈地工作，民俗自会变得平和。
English: If politicians work tirelessly, folk customs will naturally become peaceful.

古文：先王之训，罔不咸然。
现代文：先王的遗训，莫不都如此。
English: The last king's last instruction is that this is the case.

古文：吾君之治，亦取斯焉。
现代文：我君的治国，也取法这些。
English: These are also the methods I use to govern the country.

古文：小心翼翼，终日乾乾。
现代文：小心翼翼，终日自强不息。
English: Careful, self-improvement all day long.

古文：三灵降鉴，百禄无愆。
现代文：三灵垂鉴，百官无错。
English: The Three Spirits of Wisdom, there is no mistaking it.

古文：由兹率土，永戴先天。
现代文：由此举国人民，永远爱戴上天。
English: As a result, the people of the whole country will always love the sky.

古文：巍巍洪业，亿万斯年。
现代文：巍巍洪业，万年永存。
English: Shun Hongye, and live forever.

古文：顷之，预修《册府元龟》。
现代文：不久，参加修撰《册府元龟》。
English: Soon after, he participated in the compilation of "Changfu Yuancheng."

古文：三年，迁右正言，充龙图阁待制，赐金紫。
现代文：景德三年，升右正言，任龙图阁待制，被赏赐金印紫绶。
English: In the third year of Jingde's reign, he was promoted to the post of the Right Magistrate, was put in charge of the Longtu Pavilion, and was awarded the Golden Seal and Purple Ribbon.

古文：先是，诏谏官御史举职言事，唯彭年与侍御史贾翱数有章奏，建白弹射，真宗令中书置籍记之。
现代文：先前，皇帝下诏令谏官御史上书述职论事。只有陈彭年与侍御史贾翱多次上呈奏章，提出建议，抨击时弊，宋真宗命中书官记录在籍。
English: Previously, the emperor issued a decree ordering the eunuchs to record the history of the scribe's profession. Only Chen Pengnian and the attendant Shi Jiaxuan repeatedly presented the record, made suggestions, and criticized the times. Song Zhenzong's record of the scribe was registered.

古文：加刑部员外郎。
现代文：后加官刑部员外郎。
English: He was later promoted to be a member of the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：与晁迥同知贡举，请令有司详定考试条式。
现代文：与晁迥一同负责科举事宜时，请皇上下令政府详细制定考试条例。
English: When he was jointly in charge of the imperial examination, he asked the emperor to order the government to formulate detailed examination regulations.

古文：真宗因命彭年与戚纶参定，多革旧制，专务防闲。
现代文：宋真宗因此任命陈彭年与戚纶一起来制订，陈彭年对旧制度多有改革，注重防备不法行为。
English: Therefore, Song Zhenzong appointed Chen Pengnian to work with his relatives to formulate it. Chen Pengnian made many reforms to the old system, focusing on the prevention of illegal acts.

古文：其所取者，不复拣择文行，止较一日之艺，虽杜绝请托，然置甲等者，或非宿名之士。
现代文：凡录取者，只比较考场的艺业，不再选择文章、品行。这虽杜绝了关系托请，但录入甲等的人，也有不是平素闻名的。
English: Those who are admitted only compare the arts in the examination hall, and no longer choose articles and conduct. Although this eliminates the relationship request, those who are admitted to A-level are not always famous.

古文：大中祥符中，议建封禅，彭年预详定仪注，上言辨正包茅之用。
现代文：大中祥符中，议论举行封禅的事，陈彭年参与了制定祭祀的礼仪，并上书辩证讨论包茅的用法。
English: In the middle of the Great Middle Xiangfu, Chen Pengnian participated in the formulation of the sacrificial ritual, and discussed the use of the mantle dialectically.

古文：礼成，进秩工部郎中，加集贤殿修撰。
现代文：祭祀成功后，陈彭年晋升为工部郎中，加集贤殿修撰的职务。
English: After the success of the sacrificial rites, Chen Pengnian was promoted to the vice-minister of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce, and was given the additional duty of compiling the collection.

古文：三年，改兵部郎中、龙图阁直学士。
现代文：大中祥符三年，改任兵部郎中、龙图阁直学士。
English: In the third year of junior high school, he was transferred to the junior high school of the military department and the junior high school of Longtu Pavilion.

古文：迁右谏议大夫兼秘书监，诏就赐食厅编次《太宗御集》，赐勋上柱国。
现代文：后陈彭年又升任右谏议大夫兼秘书监，被诏令在赐食厅里编撰《太宗御集》，又被封赐上柱国的爵位。
English: Later, Chen Pengnian was promoted to the post of the right-hand collegiate doctor and secretary supervisor. He was ordered by the emperor to compile the "Taizong Imperial Collection" in the dining hall, and was awarded the title of Shangzhuang.

古文：尝因奏对，真宗谓之曰： 儒术汙隆，其应实大，国家崇替，何莫由斯。
现代文：有一次当面上奏时，宋真宗对陈彭年说 ：儒家学说的兴衰，影响实在大，国家的兴衰，莫不都因此而来。
English: Once, during a face-to-face recital, Song Zhenzong said to Chen Pengnian: "The rise and fall of Confucianism has a great impact, and the rise and fall of the country are all due to it."

古文：故秦衰则经籍道息，汉盛则学校兴行。
现代文：所以秦朝衰亡则经典文献衰落，汉朝强盛则学校大兴。
English: Therefore, the decline and fall of the Qin Dynasty led to the decline of classical literature, while the rise of the Han Dynasty led to the flourishing of schools.

古文：其后命历迭改，而风教一揆。
现代文：此后朝代多次更替变换，重视教育的风气则都一致。
English: Since then, the dynasty has been replaced and transformed many times, and the culture of attaching importance to education is consistent.

古文：有唐文物最盛，朱梁而下，王风寝微。
现代文：唐朝文化最发达，朱氏梁国以后，则王者风气日渐衰落。
English: The culture of the Tang Dynasty was the most developed, but after the Zhu and Liang dynasties, the culture of emperors gradually declined.

古文：太祖、太宗丕变弊俗，崇尚斯文。
现代文：到本朝太祖、太宗时大改陋俗，崇尚文化教育。
English: In the time of Taizu and Taizong of this dynasty, they changed the vulgar customs and advocated cultural education.

古文：朕获绍先业，谨导圣训，礼乐交举，儒术化成，实二后垂裕之所致也。
现代文：朕继承先业，谨遵圣人的遗训，使国家礼乐大兴，儒学昌盛，实际上都是两位先王遗留的恩泽所致。
English: Inheriting the predecessor's work, I will faithfully follow the sage's last teachings, so that the national liturgy will flourish and Confucianism will flourish. In fact, it is all due to the grace left by the two former kings.

古文：又君之难，由乎听受；臣之不易，在乎忠直。
现代文：君王最难的，是能听取臣下的意见，而臣属最不易的，便是绝对正直忠心。
English: The most difficult thing for a king is to be able to listen to the opinions of his subjects, and the most difficult thing for a subject is absolute honesty and loyalty.

古文：其君以宽大接下，臣以诚明奉上，君臣之心皆归于正。
现代文：如果君王能以宽大胸怀接纳下属，臣下便会以诚实光明奉献给他，这样君臣的心就归到正道上了。
English: If the king can accept his subordinates with a broad mind, his subjects will offer him with honesty and light, so that the hearts of his subjects will return to the right path.

古文：直道而行，至公相遇，此天下之达理，先王之成宪，犹指诸掌，孰谓难哉！ 彭年曰： 陛下圣言精诣，足使天下知训，伏愿躬演睿思，著之篇翰。 真宗为制《崇儒术》、《为君难为臣不易》二论示之。彭年复请示辅臣，刻石国子监焉。
现代文：正直办事、公平待人，此是天下通理，也是先王留下的现成经验，就好比数指头，谁说困难呢？ 陈彭年说 ：陛下的金口玉言，足可教化天下百姓，我愿恭敬演绎您的精深思想，把它们记录下来。 宋真宗于是写了《崇儒术》和《为君难为臣不易》两篇文章给陈彭年，陈彭年再请求辅弼大臣们，将两文刻到石碑上，放置在国子监里面。
English: Chen Pengnian said, "Your Majesty's wise words are enough to enlighten the people of the world. I would like to respectfully interpret your profound thoughts and record them." So, Song Zhenzong wrote two articles, "Worshipping Confucianism" and "It's Difficult for a King to Be a Subject," to Chen Pengnian. Chen Pengnian then asked the assistant ministers to engrave the two articles on a stone tablet and place them inside the imperial palace.

古文：六年，召入翰林，充学士兼龙图阁学士，同修国史。
现代文：大中祥符六年，陈彭年被召进翰林院，充任翰林学士兼龙图阁学士，又兼修国史。
English: Six years into his junior high school career, Chen Peng was called to the Hanlin Academy, where he served as a Hanlin scholar and a Longtuge scholar, and also studied national history.

古文：彭年尝谒王旦，旦辞不见。
现代文：陈彭年曾去拜访宰相王旦，王旦推辞不接见。
English: Chen Pengnian once went to visit Prime Minister Wang Dan, but Wang Dan declined to meet him.

古文：翌日，见向敏中。敏中以彭年所上文字示旦，旦瞑目不览，曰： 是不过兴建符瑞，图进取耳。 真宗奉祀亳州太清宫，丁谓为经度制置使，以彭年副之。
现代文：第二天，见到向敏中，向敏中又将陈彭年上奏的文章给王旦看，王旦又闭目不看，并说 ：这不过是兴建符瑞、贪图进取的论调罢了。 宋真宗在亳州太清宫祭祀，任丁谓做此次祭典的经度制置使，而以陈彭年任副职。
English: The next day, he saw Xiang Minzhong, and Xiang Minzhong showed Wang Dan the article on Chen Pengnian's performance, and Wang Dan closed his eyes and said, "This is nothing more than an argument about building fury and being greedy for advancement." Song Zhenzong held a ceremony at the Chenzhou Taiching Palace, and Ding was appointed as the longitude standard-setting envoy for the ceremony, while Chen Pengnian was appointed as the deputy.

古文：又与谓同知礼仪院，礼成，加给事中。
现代文：后陈彭年又与丁谓同任知礼仪院的官职。这次祭礼完成后，陈彭年又被加封为给事中。
English: Later, Chen Pengnian and Ding Zui were also appointed to the same official post of the Chili Rite Academy. After the completion of this ceremony, Chen Pengnian was also given the title of middle-ranking official.

古文：时谓恳让进秩，彭年亦辞之，不许，又为天书同刻玉副使。
现代文：当时丁谓恳求辞谢这次升爵进级，陈彭年也跟着辞谢加封，但没被允许，并加升为天书同刻玉副使。
English: At that time, Ding Zuo pleaded for his resignation to be promoted to the rank of knight, and Chen Peng Nian also sealed his resignation, but was not allowed, and was promoted to vice-envoy of Tianshu Tongke Jade.

古文：国史成，迁工部侍郎。
现代文：国史修成后，升任工部侍郎。
English: After the completion of the national history, he was promoted to the post of chamberlain of the engineering department.

古文：九年，拜刑部侍郎、参知政事，判礼仪院，充会灵观使。
现代文：大中祥符九年，官拜刑部侍郎、参知政事兼判礼仪院，又充任会灵观使。
English: In the ninth year of junior high school, he was a courtier of the criminal justice department, a senator and a judge of the etiquette institute, and also served as a spiritual adviser of the association.

古文：天禧大礼，为天书仪卫副使。
现代文：天禧改元大礼举行时，陈彭年任天书仪卫副使。
English: Chen Pengnian served as the deputy envoy of Tianshu Yi Wei at the time of the Grand Ceremony of the Tenth Anniversary of the Reorganization of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：又为参详仪制奉宝册使。
现代文：后又任参详仪制奉宝册使。
English: Later, he was also appointed as an envoy to the Song dynasty for the production of a treasure book.

古文：正月九日，侍真宗朝天书，将诣太庙，退就中书阁中如厕，眩仆，肩舆还家。
现代文：这年正月九日，陈彭年随侍宋真宗朝拜天书，将前往太庙时，回中书阁上厕所，忽昏倒在地，用肩轿抬回家。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of this year, Chen Pengnian followed the attendant Song Zhenzong to worship the heavenly book, and when he was going to the Great Temple, he went back to the Chinese bookcase to go to the toilet, suddenly fainted and fell to the ground, and carried it home with a shoulder saddle.

古文：遣中使挟医诊疗，旦夕存问。
现代文：皇帝派遣中使官带御医前往诊断治疗，旦夕看望问候。
English: The emperor dispatched an envoy with his doctor to diagnose and treat the disease, and visited him on the eve of the New Year to offer greetings.

古文：进兵部侍郎，表求罢奉，不许。
现代文：陈彭年这时又被升为兵部侍郎，他上书请求免去俸禄，也没被允许。
English: At this time, Chen Pengnian was promoted to the position of the attendant of the military department. He submitted a request to be exempted from the salary, but it was not allowed.

古文：二月，卒，年五十七。
现代文：二月，病逝，终年五十七岁。
English: He died of illness in February, at the age of 57.

古文：真宗亲临，涕泗久之。
现代文：宋真宗亲自参加吊丧，痛哭流涕了很久。
English: Song Zhenzong attended the funeral in person and cried for a long time.

古文：又睹所居陋弊，叹息数四。
现代文：又见陈彭年居室简陋不堪，宋真宗叹息不已。
English: Chen Pengnian's living room was also seen to be in a very poor condition, and Song Zhenzong was overcome with grief.

古文：废朝，赠右仆射，谥曰文僖，录子佺期大理寺丞，孙彦先太常寺奉礼郎。
现代文：又特为陈彭年停止早朝，赠给他右仆射的官衔，谥号为 文僖 ，并录用他的儿子陈亻全期做大理寺丞，孙子陈彦先则任太常寺奉礼郎。
English: In addition, especially for Chen Pengnian, he stopped the early morning, gave him the official title of the right-hand man, and the nickname was Wenyi, and hired his son Chen Ying to be the chief priest of Dali Temple for the whole period, and his grandson Chen Yan was appointed as the chief priest of Taiji Temple.

古文：真宗前后赐彭年御制歌诗凡六篇。
现代文：宋真宗前后赐给陈彭年的御制诗歌共计六篇。
English: A total of six imperial poems were given to Chen Pengniu by Song Zhenzong.

古文：彭年妻入谒，出彭年像示之，锡赍甚厚。
现代文：陈彭年的妻子入宫朝见时，宋真宗又拿出陈彭年的画像给她看，并赏赐许多东西。
English: When Chen Pengnian's wife entered the palace for a morning meeting, Song Zhenzong took out a picture of Chen Pengnian to show her, and rewarded her with many things.

古文：彭年性敏给，博闻强记，慕唐四子为文，体制繁靡。
现代文：陈彭年性格聪敏、博闻强记，他的文章摹仿唐代四大才子，风格繁复华丽。
English: Chen Pengnian is an intelligent person with a strong knowledge of history. His articles imitate the four great talents of the Tang Dynasty, with a complex and gorgeous style.

古文：贵至通显，奉养无异贫约。
现代文：他虽尊贵到高居显职，但对亲人的奉养却与贫苦时无异。
English: Although he is distinguished enough to hold high office, his devotion to his relatives is the same as when he was poor.

古文：所得奉赐，惟市书籍。
现代文：他平时所得的俸禄与赏赐，都只用来购买书籍。
English: The salary and rewards he usually earns are only used to buy books.

古文：大中祥符间，附王钦若、丁谓，朝廷典礼，无不参预。
现代文：大中祥符年间，依附王钦若、丁谓等人，当时朝廷典礼，他都无不参加制订。
English: During the Xiangfu Year of the Middle School, he was attached to Wang Qinruo, Ding Zuo and others. At that time, he took part in the formulation of the imperial ceremony.

古文：其仪制沿革、刑名之学，皆所详练，若前世所未有，必推引依据以成就之。
现代文：陈彭年对礼仪典制沿革、刑名学说，都很熟练，若是前代没曾有的礼制，他则必定通过旁征博引来证明。
English: Chen Pengnian is very proficient in the history of the ceremonial system and the theory of the name of punishment. If the previous generation did not have a ceremonial system, he will certainly prove it through the side exposition.

古文：故时政大小，日有谘访，应答该辩，一无凝滞，皆与真宗意谐。
现代文：所以当时的大小政事，宋真宗总要每日向他咨询，陈彭年则回答详细明白，毫无疑难不通之处，而且与宋真宗的想法相符合。
English: Therefore, at that time, Song Zhenzong always consulted him on major and minor political affairs on a daily basis, and Chen Pengnian answered in detail, without any doubt, and in line with Song Zhenzong's thoughts.

古文：及升内阁，李宗谔、杨亿皆在后。
现代文：陈彭年升为内阁侍郎时，李宗谔、杨亿都在他手下。
English: When Chen Pengnian was promoted to the position of cabinet secretary, Li Zongyao and Yang Yi were both under his command.

古文：宗谔卒，亿病退，而彭年专任矣。
现代文：后来李宗谔去世，杨亿因病离退，这样陈彭年便独当大任了。
English: Later, Li Zongyao passed away and Yang Yili retired due to illness, so Chen Pengnian became the sole leader.

古文：事务既丛，形神皆耗，遂举止失措，颠倒冠服，家人有不记其名者。
现代文：因事务繁忙，陈彭年后来变得形神交瘁，以致举止失措，衣服帽子也穿颠倒，甚至连家人的名字也记不起来。
English: Due to the busy business, Chen Pengnian later became confused, so that his demeanor was lost, his clothes and hat were worn upside down, and he could not even remember the names of his family members.

古文：奉诏同编《景德朝陵地里》、《封禅》、《汾阴》三记，《阁门》、《客省》、《御史台仪制》，又受诏编御集及宸章，集历代妇人文集。
现代文：陈彭年曾奉诏参与编撰《景德朝陵地里记》、《封禅记》、《汾阴记》三文，及《门》、《客省》、《御史台仪制》等书，又受诏编辑御集、宸章，汇编历代妇女的文集。
English: Chen Pengnian had participated in compiling the three articles of "Record of the Jingde Dynasty's Mausoleum," "Record of Feudal Zen" and "Record of the Qin Dynasty," as well as the books of "Gate," "Guest Province" and "Ritual System of the Grand Historian," and was also the editor of the imperial anthology and the imperial seal, compiling the anthologies of women throughout the ages.

古文：所著《文集》百卷，《唐纪》四十卷。
现代文：他的著作有《文集》一百卷、《唐纪》四十卷。
English: His works include a hundred volumes of "Collected Works" and forty volumes of "Tang Dynasty."

