古文：文公立四年，楚成王伐宋，公率齐、秦伐曹、卫以救宋。
现代文：晋文公即位第四年，楚成王出兵攻打宋国。文公率领齐、秦两国的军队征伐曹、卫两国，以解救宋都之围。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Jinwen's reign, King Chu Cheng sent troops to attack Song. Emperor Jinwen led the armies of Qi and Qin to conquer Cao and Wei in order to relieve the siege of the Song capital.

古文：宋人使门尹班告急于晋，公告大夫曰： 宋人告急，舍之则宋绝，告楚则不许我。
现代文：宋国派门尹班到晋国告急，晋文公对大夫们说： 宋国来告急，如果丢下不管，宋国就会与我国断交。
English: Song State sent Men Yinban to Jin State for emergency. Jin Wengong said to the doctors: Song State has come for emergency. If you leave it unattended, Song State will break off diplomatic relations with our country.

古文：我欲击楚，齐、秦不欲，其若之何？ 
现代文：如果请求楚国退兵解围，楚国肯定不回答应。我想攻打楚国，齐、秦两国又不愿意，你看应该怎么办呢？ 
English: If you ask Chu to withdraw its troops and relieve the siege, Chu will definitely not respond. I want to attack Chu, but Qi and Qin are not willing to do so. What should you do?

古文：先轸曰： 不若使齐、秦主楚怨。 
现代文：先轸说： 不如让齐、秦两国都去怨恨楚国。 
English: Senju said: It is better to let Qi and Qin both countries hate Chu.

古文：公曰： 可乎？ 
现代文：文公说： 那行吗？ 
English: Wengong said, "Is that okay?"

古文：先轸曰： 使宋舍我而赂齐、秦，藉之告楚，我分曹、卫之地以赐宋人。
现代文：先轸回答说： 让宋国舍弃我国，而去向齐国和秦国送财物，通过齐、秦去请求楚国退兵。我国将获得的曹、卫二国土地赐给宋国。
English: Xian Qi replied: Let Song abandon our country and send money and goods to Qi and Qin, and through Qi and Qin ask Chu to withdraw its troops. Our country will give the land of Cao and Wei to Song.

古文：楚爱曹、卫，必不许齐、秦。
现代文：楚国喜欢曹国和卫国，必定不答应齐国和秦国的请求。
English: Chu likes Cao and defends the country, and will certainly not agree to the request of Qi and Qin.

古文：齐、秦不得其请，必属怨焉，然后用之，蔑不欲矣。 
现代文：齐、秦两国请求不成，必然因此而怨恨楚国，然后我国再叫齐、秦两国参战，两国就不会不愿意了。 
English: If the requests of Qi and Qin are not fulfilled, it is inevitable that they will resent Chu for this, and then our country will call Qi and Qin to join the war, and the two countries will not be unwilling.

古文：公说，是故以曹田、卫田赐宋人。
现代文：晋文公听了很高兴，因此将曹、卫两国的田地赐给了宋国。
English: Jinwen Gong was very pleased to hear this, so he gave the fields of Cao and Wei to Song.

古文：令尹子玉使宛春来告曰： 请复卫侯而封曹，臣亦释宋之围。 
现代文：楚国的令尹子玉派宛春来传话，说： 请你们恢复卫侯的君位，把土地退还曹国，我们就解除对宋国的包围。 
English: Yin Ziyu, the governor of Chu, sent a message to Wan Chun, saying, "Please restore the prince of Wei and return the land to Cao, and we will lift the siege of Song."

古文：舅犯愠曰： 子玉无礼哉！
现代文：子犯发怒说： 子玉真无礼啊！
English: The child offender said angrily: "That's really rude, kidama!

古文：君取一，臣取二，必击之。 
现代文：晋君只得到一项好处，而子玉却得到两项好处，一定要攻打他。 
English: Jinjun only got one benefit, but Zidama got two benefits, be sure to attack him.

古文：先轸曰： 子与之。
现代文：先轸说： 你应该答应他的请求。
English: The foreman said, "You should agree to his request."

古文：我不许曹、卫之请，是不许释宋也。宋众无乃强乎！
现代文：我们不答应曹、卫两国的请求，等于不允许解除对宋国的包围，宋国投降了楚国，楚国的兵力不就更强大了吗？
English: If we do not agree to the request of Cao and Wei, it is tantamount to not allowing the lifting of the encirclement of Song. Song surrendered to Chu, so shouldn't the military strength of Chu be stronger?

古文：是楚一言而有三施，子一言而有三怨。
现代文：这样，楚国一句话对三个国家施了恩，而我们一句话却招致了三个国家的怨恨。
English: In this way, the one sentence of the State of Chu has benefited the three countries, while our one sentence has caused the resentment of the three countries.

古文：怨已多矣，难以击人。
现代文：怨恨已经多了，战争难以打下去。
English: There is already too much resentment, and it is difficult to continue the war.

古文：不若私许复曹、卫以携之，执宛春以怒楚，既战而后图之。 
现代文：不如私下允许恢复曹、卫两国，来离间他们，然后逮捕宛春来激怒楚国，等战争打起来之后再作打算。 
English: It would be better to privately allow the restoration of Cao and Wei to separate them, and then arrest Wanchun to infuriate Chu, and wait for the war to start before making plans.

古文：公说，是故拘宛春于卫。
现代文：晋文公很高兴，于是把宛春囚禁在卫国。
English: Jinwen Gong was very pleased, so he imprisoned Wanchun in the defense of the country.

古文：子玉释宋围，从晋师。
现代文：子玉解除了对宋国的包围，转而追逐晋军。
English: Zidama lifted the siege of Song and chased the Jin army instead.

古文：楚既陈，晋师退舍，军吏请曰： 以君避臣，辱也。
现代文：楚军摆开战阵之后，晋文公下令退却三十里，军吏请求说： 作为国君却避开敌国的臣子，是一种耻辱。
English: After the Chu army set up battle lines, Emperor Jin ordered a retreat of thirty miles, and the military officials pleaded: "As a sovereign, it is a disgrace to avoid the enemy's vassals.

古文：且楚师老矣，必败。何故退？ 
现代文：而且楚军已经疲劳，必然战败，我军为什么要撤退呢？ 
English: Moreover, the Chu army was already fatigued and would inevitably be defeated. Why should our army retreat?

古文：子犯曰： 二三子忘在楚乎？
现代文：子犯说： 你们都忘记了以前晋文公在流亡楚国时所作的诺言了吗？
English: The son-in-law said, "Have you all forgotten the promise that Prince Jinwen made when he was in exile in Chu?

古文：偃也闻之：战斗，直为壮，曲为老。
现代文：我狐偃听说过，用兵作战，理直才会气壮，理曲士气就会低落。
English: I've heard it said that if you use soldiers to fight, your morale will be low.

古文：未报楚惠而抗宋，我曲楚直，其众莫不生气，不可谓老。
现代文：我们尚未报答以前楚国对晋文公的恩惠，而来救宋国，这是我方理曲而楚国理直，楚军士气就旺盛，不可认为他们已经疲劳不堪。
English: We have not yet repaid the former favor of the State of Chu to Jin Wenguo, and come to the rescue of the State of Song. This is my logic and the logic of the State of Chu. The morale of the soldiers of the State of Chu is strong, and it cannot be considered that they are exhausted.

古文：若我以君避臣，而不去，彼亦曲矣。 
现代文：如果我方做到以国君避开臣子，而楚军还不撤退，那对方也就理曲了。 
English: If we manage to avoid the vassal with the sovereign, and the Chu army does not retreat, then the other side will be justified.

古文：退三舍避楚。
现代文：于是晋军就撤退九十里，避开楚军。
English: As a result, the Jin army retreated ninety miles, avoiding the Chu army.

古文：楚众欲止，子玉不肯，至于城濮，果战，楚众大败。
现代文：楚军将士都主张停止战事，子玉不肯。到了城濮，果然发生了战争，结果楚军被打得大败。
English: The soldiers and officers of the Chu army all advocated the cessation of hostilities, but Zidama refused. When they arrived at the citadel, war did indeed break out, and as a result the Chu army was soundly defeated.

古文：君子曰： 善以德劝。 
现代文：君子评论说： 这是善于以德义来进行勉励。 
English: The gentleman commented, "This is a person who is good at using virtue to encourage others.

