古文：起强圉协洽四月，尽著雍涒滩，凡一年有奇。
现代文：起强圉协洽四月，尽著雍涒滩，凡一年有奇。
English: It's a strange time of the year, April, when the cormorants are at their strongest and the beaches are at their fullest.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝下之下光启三年夏，四月，甲辰朔，约逐苏州刺史张雄，帅其众逃入海。
现代文：唐僖宗光光启三年夏季，四月，甲辰朔，徐约赶走苏州刺史张雄，张雄率领他的人马逃往海上。
English: In the summer of the third year of Tang Xizong Guang Guangqi, in April, Jia Chen Shuo and Xu Yu drove away the Suzhou assassin Zhang Xiong. Zhang Xiong led his men and horses to flee to the sea.

古文：高骈闻秦宗权将寇淮南，遣左厢都知兵马使毕师鐸将百骑屯高邮。
现代文：高骈听说秦宗权将要侵扰淮南，派遣左厢都知兵马使毕师铎带领一百骑兵驻扎高邮。
English: Gao Qi heard that Qin Zongquan was going to invade Huainan, and dispatched the left wing of the Sich soldiers and horses to send Bi Shizhen to lead a hundred cavalry stationed in Gaoyou.

古文：时吕用之用事，宿将多为所诛，师鐸自以黄巢降将，常自危。
现代文：当时吕用之当权，有丰富经验的老将大多被他诛杀，毕师铎因为是从黄巢那里投降过来的将领，常常为自己的安危担忧。
English: At that time, Lv Ying was in power, and most of the veterans with rich experience were killed by him. Because Bi Shizhen was a general who had surrendered from the Yellow Nest, he often worried about his own safety.

古文：师鐸有美妾，用之欲见之，师鐸不许。用之因师鐸出，窃往见之。师鐸惭怒，出其妾，由是有隙。
现代文：毕师铎有一个漂亮的小妾，吕用之想见见她，毕师铎不准许；吕用这趁着毕师铎外出的机会，偷偷地前去看那美妾，毕师铎羞愧恼怒，将小妾休掉，为此毕师铎与吕用之结下了仇怨。
English: Bi Shizhen had a beautiful concubine. Lv Yanzhi wanted to see her, but Bi Shizhen did not allow it. Lv Yanzhi took advantage of the opportunity for Bi Shizhen to go out and secretly went to see the beautiful concubine. Bi Shizhen was ashamed and angry, and dismissed the concubine. For this reason, Bi Shizhen and Lv Yanzhi had a grudge.

古文：师鐸将如高邮，用之待之加厚，师鐸益疑惧，谓祸在旦夕。
现代文：毕师铎将要去高邮，吕用之对待他更加优厚，毕师铎却越来越疑虑恐惧，认为大祸就在眼前了。
English: Bi Shizhao will go to Gaoyou, Lv Yizhe treats him more generously, but Bi Shizhao is more and more suspicious and fearful, thinking that a big disaster is in sight.

古文：师鐸子娶高邮镇遏使张神剑女，师鐸密与之谋，神剑以为无是事。
现代文：毕师铎的儿子纳娶高邮镇遏使张神剑的女儿为妻，毕师铎去与张神剑秘密商谋，张神剑认为吕用之不会加害毕师铎。
English: Bi Shijian's son Na married Gaoyou Zhen to prevent Zhang Shenjian's daughter from becoming his wife. Bi Shijian went to secretly negotiate with Zhang Shenjian. Zhang Shenjian believed that Lü would not harm Bi Shijian.

古文：神剑名雄，人以其善用剑，故谓之 神剑 。
现代文：张神剑本名张雄，人们因为他善于用剑，所以叫他张神剑。
English: Zhang Shenjian's real name is Zhang Xiong. People call him Zhang Shenjian because he is good at using a sword.

古文：时府中藉藉，亦以为师鐸且受诛，其母使人语之曰： 设有是事，汝自努力前去，勿以老母、弱子为累！ 
现代文：当时高邮府内众说纷纭，也有的人认为毕师铎将要遭受杀身大祸，毕师铎的母亲派人对毕师铎说： 如果有这样的事，你自己要想方设法离开逃走，不要因为年老的母亲、弱小的儿子拖累了你！ 
English: At that time, there were conflicting opinions within the Gaoyou Post Office. Some people thought that Bi Shizhen was about to suffer a fatal accident. Bi Shizhen's mother sent a message to Bi Shizhen saying, "If such a thing happens, you should try your best to leave and escape. Don't let your old mother and weak son drag you down!"

古文：师鐸疑未决。
现代文：毕师铎犹豫不决。
English: Bi Shizhen hesitated.

古文：会骈子四十三郎者素恶用之，欲使师鐸帅外镇将吏疏用之罪恶，闻于其父，密使人绐之曰： 用之比来频启令公，欲因此相图，已有委曲在张尚书所，宜备之！ 
现代文：恰好高骈的一个叫四十三郎的儿子一向憎恨吕用之，想让毕师铎率领在外镇守的将领官吏分条陈述吕用之的罪恶行径，报告给他的父亲高骈，并且暗中派人欺骗毕师铎说： 吕用之近年来一再诱导高骈，想要以此来谋害你，已经有机密文书在张神剑那里，应当早作防备！ 
English: It just so happened that a son of Gao Gan, called Forty-Three Brother, had always hated Lyu Gan. He wanted Bi Shizhen to lead the generals and officials guarding the outside town to break down Lyu Gan's evil deeds and report them to his father Gao Gan. He also secretly sent someone to deceive Bi Shizhen, saying, "In recent years, Lyu Gan has repeatedly induced Gao Gan. He wants to use this to murder you. There is already a secret document in Zhang Shenqi's place. You should take precautions at an early stage!"

古文：师鐸问神剑曰： 昨夜使司有文书，翁胡不言？ 
现代文：毕师铎去问张神剑说： 昨天夜间淮南节度使司送来了机密信函，你怎么不对我说？ 
English: Bi Shijie went to ask Zhang Shenjian and said: Yesterday night, the Huainan Festival Envoy Division sent a confidential letter, why didn't you tell me?

古文：神剑不寤，曰： 无之。 
现代文：张神剑不清楚怎么回事，说： 没有什么机密信函。 
English: Zhang Shenjian did not know what was going on and said: There is no confidential letter.

古文：师鐸不自安，归营，谋于腹心，皆劝师鐸起兵诛用之。师鐸曰： 用之数年以来，人怨鬼怒，安知天不假手于我诛之邪！
现代文：毕师铎不能安下心来，便回到军营中，与心腹亲信商量对策，都劝毕师铎发兵讨伐吕用之，毕师铎说： 多年来，对吕用之人民怨恨，鬼神愤怒，苍天是不是要借助我的力量来诛灭吕用之呀！
English: Unable to calm down, Bi Shizhen returned to the military camp and discussed the countermeasures with his closest confidants. They all advised Bi Shizhen to send troops to fight against Lü Yizhi. Bi Shizhen said: Over the years, the people of Lü Yizhi have been resentful, the ghosts and gods have been angry, and heaven is not going to use my power to destroy Lü Yizhi!

古文：淮宁军使郑汉章，我乡人，昔归顺时副将也，素切齿于用之，闻吾谋，必喜。 
现代文：淮宁军使郑汉章，是我的同乡，当初离开黄巢投奔高骈时是个副将，一向痛恨吕用之，如果知道了我讨伐吕用之的计谋，他一定会高兴的。 
English: Zheng Hanzhang, the military envoy of Huaining, is my fellow villager. He was a vice-general when he left Huangxu to join Gaochun. He has always hated Lyu Yingzhi. If he knew my strategy to fight Lyu Yingzhi, he would definitely be happy.

古文：乃夜与百骑潜诣汉章，汉章大喜，悉发镇兵及驱居民合千馀人从师鐸至高邮。
现代文：于是毕师铎连夜与一百骑兵秘密到达郑汉章那里，郑汉章大为高兴，把镇所的军队全部发动起来又驱使当地百姓总共一千余人跟随毕师铎到达高邮。
English: As a result, Bi Shizhen secretly arrived at Zheng Hanzhang's place overnight with a hundred cavalry. Zheng Hanzhang was very happy, mobilized the entire township army and drove a total of more than a thousand local people to follow Bi Shizhen to Gaoyou.

古文：师鐸诘张神剑以所得委曲，神剑惊曰： 无有。 
现代文：毕师铎追问张神剑收到的秘密文书，张神剑惊异地说： 根本没有机密信函。 
English: Bi Shizhen questioned Zhang Shenjian about the secret document he received, and Zhang Shenjian said in surprise: There is no confidential letter at all.

古文：师鐸声色浸厉，神剑奋曰： 公何见事之暗！
现代文：毕师铎的声色更加严厉，张神剑激奋地说道： 你看事情怎么这样糊涂！
English: Bi Shizhao's tone became harsher, and Zhang Shenjian said excitedly: "Look how things are so confused!

古文：用之奸恶，天地所不容。
现代文：吕用之奸邪凶恶，是天地所不容的。
English: It is intolerable for heaven and earth to see the evil and viciousness of the treachery of Lü Ying.

古文：况近者重赂权贵得岭南节度，复不行，或云谋窃据此土，使其得志。吾辈岂能握刀头，事此妖物邪！
现代文：况且近来他大肆贿赂身居高位有权势的人，得到岭南东道节度使的官职，又不前去赴任，有的人说吕用之是在筹谋夺取这里的地盘，假使他的狂妄野心得逞，我们这些人怎么能够手握刀把为这种妖魔鬼怪做事！
English: Moreover, recently, he has been bribing high-ranking and powerful people to get the official post of the host of the Lingnan Festival, but he did not go to the post. Some people say that Lü Ying is planning to seize the territory here. If his arrogant ambition succeeds, how can we people work for such a monster with sword in hand!

古文：要此数贼以谢淮海，何必多言！ 
现代文：我们要把吕用之这几个乱臣贼子千刀万剐以答谢淮海一带的人民，还有什么可说的！ 
English: We must repay the gratitude of the people around the Huaihai Sea by putting these ruffian thieves to the sword. What more can we say!

古文：汉章喜，遂命取酒，割臂血沥酒，共饮之。乙巳，众推师鐸为行营使，为文告天地，移书淮南境内，言诛用之及张守一、诸葛殷之意。
现代文：郑汉章听后大快，于是命令拿酒来，用刀划破胳膊让血滴到酒里，把酒喝掉，乙巳，大家推举毕师铎为行营使，起草檄文祭告天地，向淮南境内传送檄文，说明讨伐吕用之以及张守一、诸葛殷的意图。
English: Zheng Hanzhang was very happy to hear this, so he ordered to bring wine, cut his arm with a knife to let the blood drip into the wine, and drank the wine. At this time, everyone nominated Bi Shizhen as the envoy, drafted the imperial edict to announce to the world, and transmitted the imperial edict to Huainan, explaining the intention to fight against Lv Ying and Zhang Shouyi and Zhuge Yin.

古文：以汉章为行营副使，神剑为都指挥使。
现代文：委任郑汉章为行营副使，张神剑为都指挥使。
English: Zheng Hanzhang was appointed as the deputy envoy to the camp, and Zhang Shenjian as the envoy to the capital.

古文：神剑以师鐸成败未可知，请以所部留高邮，曰： 一则为公声援，二则供给粮饷。 
现代文：张神剑因为毕师铎的成功和失败还难以预料，请求带领所部人马留在高邮，他对毕师铎说： 这样，一则为你做声援，二则可供给军粮兵饷。 
English: Zhang Shenjian, because Bi Shizhao's success and failure were still difficult to predict, asked him to lead the staff to stay in Gaoyou. He said to Bi Shizhao: In this way, the first is to support you, and the second is to provide military food for soldiers.

古文：师鐸不悦，汉章曰： 张尚书谋亦善，苟终始同心，事捷之日，子女玉帛相与共之，今日岂可复相违！ 
现代文：毕师铎对此不高兴，郑汉章说： 尚书张神剑的计谋也不错，如果你们自始至终同心同德，等到事毕告捷的日子，美女宝玉缎帛共同分享，现在怎么可以不保持一致！ 
English: Bi Shizhen was not happy about this, Zheng Hanzhang said: Shangshu Zhang Shenjian's strategy is also good. If you have the same heart and mind from beginning to end, and wait for the day when things turn out well, and share the beauty of Bao Yulun together, how can you not be consistent now!

古文：师鐸乃许之。
现代文：毕师铎于是同意张神剑留守高邮。
English: Bi Shizhen then agreed to let Zhang Shenjian stay in Gaoyou.

古文：戊申，师鐸、汉章发高邮。
现代文：戊申，毕师铎、郑汉章从高邮出发。
English: Wushin, Bi Shijuan and Zheng Hanzhang set off from Gaoyou.

古文：庚戌，诇骑以白高骈，吕用之匿之。
现代文：庚戌，毕师铎派告密骑兵前往广陵向高骈禀告出师情由，被吕用之隐匿起来。
English: Geng Zheng, Bi Shizhen sent a snitch cavalry to Guangling to tell Gao Zheng the reason for the division, and was hidden by Lu Yingzhi.

古文：硃珍至淄青旬日，应募者万馀人，又袭青州，获马千匹。
现代文：朱珍到达淄青召募军队，十几天内就有一万余人应募，朱珍又率众攻打青州，获得马匹一千。
English: Zhu Zhen arrived in Qingdao to recruit troops. Within ten days, more than ten thousand people were recruited, and Zhu Zhen led the crowd to attack Qingdao, gaining a thousand horses.

古文：辛亥，还，至大梁，硃全忠喜曰： 吾事济矣！ 
现代文：辛亥，朱珍返回，到达大梁，朱全忠高兴地说： 我的事业成功了！ 
English: Xinhai, Zhu Zhen returned, arrived at the girder, Zhu Quanzhong said happily: My career is a success!

古文：蔡将卢瑭屯于万胜，夹汴水而军，以绝汴州运路，硃全忠乘雾袭之，掩杀殆尽。
现代文：蔡州军队将领卢瑭驻扎中牟县万胜镇，他在汴水两侧安置军营，以便断绝汴州城的运输途径，朱全忠乘着大雾去攻打，将卢瑭的人马几乎消灭光了。
English: The general of the Caizhou army, Lu Wei, was stationed in Wansheng Town, Zhongmou County. He placed military camps on both sides of Surabaya in order to cut off the transportation routes of Caizhou City. Zhu Quanzhong took advantage of the fog to attack and almost wiped out Lu Wei's men and horses.

古文：于是蔡兵皆徙就张晊，屯于赤冈，全忠复就击之，杀二万馀人。
现代文：于是，蔡州的军队都转移到张那里，汴州城北的赤冈驻扎；朱全忠再次率众前去攻打，斩杀二万余人。
English: As a result, the army of Caizhou was transferred to Zhang, and Akaoka, north of Zhangzhou, was stationed there; Zhu Quanzhong once again led the crowd to attack and killed more than 20,000 people.

古文：蔡人大惧，或军中自相惊，全忠乃还大梁，养兵休士。
现代文：蔡州人十分恐惧，有时在军营内就自相惊慌起来，朱全忠于是回到大梁，休养整顿军队。
English: The people of Caizhou were very afraid, and sometimes they panicked each other in the military camp. Zhu Quanzhong then returned to Daliang to recuperate and reorganize the army.

古文：辛未，高骈密以金遗守者，毕师鐸闻之，壬午，复迎骈入道院，收高氏子弟甥侄十馀人同幽之。
现代文：辛未，高骈暗中向看守他的士兵赠送金钱，毕师铎察觉到这事，壬午，又把高骈接入道院，把高骈的儿子兄弟外甥侄子十几个都一同集中幽禁起来。
English: Soon after, Gao Yao secretly gave money to the soldiers guarding him. Bi Shizhen noticed this, and in the afternoon, he also put Gao Yao into the Taoist monastery, and concentrated and imprisoned Gao Yao's sons, brothers, nephews, and more than a dozen nephews.

古文：前苏州刺史张雄帅其众自海溯江，屯于东塘，遣其将赵晖入据上元。
现代文：以前的苏州刺史张雄率领他的人马从海上沿着长江逆流而上，在东塘驻扎，他还派遣属下将领赵晖开进并占据了上元。
English: Zhang Xiong, the former governor of Suzhou, led his men from the sea upstream along the Yangtze River and stationed them in Dongtang. He also sent his subordinate general Zhao Ying to enter and occupy Shangyuan.

古文：毕师鐸之攻广陵也，吕用之诈为高骈牒，署庐州刺史杨行密行军司马，追兵入援。
现代文：毕师铎攻打广陵时，吕用之假借高骈的名义颁布公文，暂任庐州刺史杨行密为行军司马，命他派军队来广陵救援。
English: When Bi Shizhao attacked Guangling, Lv Yizhi issued an official document in the name of Gao Zheng under the guise of a letter of marching orders. Yang Xingmi, the governor of Zhangzhou, temporarily served as the marshal and ordered him to send troops to rescue Guangling.

古文：庐江人袁袭说行密曰： 高公昏惑，用之奸邪，师鐸悖逆，凶德参会，而求兵于我，此天以淮南授明公也，趣赴之。 
现代文：庐江人袁袭劝告杨行密说： 高骈昏庸糊涂，吕用之奸诈邪恶，毕师铎叛逆作乱，这三个人合在一起可以说是恶劣德行的大汇聚，现在来请求我们出兵救援，这是天意把淮南授给你，你应当马上前赴广陵。 
English: Yuan Qi, a native of the Minjiang River, advised Yang Xingmi, saying: "Gao Yao is dim-witted, Lu Ying is treacherous and evil, Bi Shizhen is rebellious and disorderly. Taken together, these three people can be said to be a large gathering of bad morals. Now come and ask us to send troops to rescue you. It is the will of Heaven to give Huainan to you. You should go to Guangling immediately."

古文：行密乃悉发庐州兵，复借兵于和州刺史孙端，合数千人赴之，五月，至天长。
现代文：杨行密于是把庐州军队全部发动起来，又向和州刺史孙端求借军队，集合几千人马开赴广陵。五月，到达天长。
English: Yang Xingmi then mobilized the entire Bozhou army, and asked for a loan of troops from Sun Duan, the governor of Bozhou, and gathered several thousand horses to go to Guangling. In May, he reached Tianlang.

古文：郑汉章之从师鐸也，留其妻守淮口，用之帅众攻之，旬日不克，汉章引兵救之。
现代文：当初郑汉章跟随毕师铎出征广陵，留下他的妻子守卫淮口，吕用之便带领人马攻打淮口，十天时间没有攻克，郑汉章率领军队回来应救。
English: At the beginning, Zheng Hanzhang followed Bi Shizhen to go to Guangling, leaving his wife to guard Huaikou. Lu Yingzhi then led men and horses to attack Huaikou. It took ten days to conquer Huaikou, and Zheng Hanzhang led the army back to help.

古文：用之闻行密至天长，引兵归之。
现代文：吕用之听说杨行密到达天长，便带着人马返回。
English: When Lyu Yingzhi heard that Yang Xingmi had arrived in Tianchang, he returned with his entourage.

古文：丙子，硃全忠出击张晊，大破之。
现代文：丙子，朱全忠派出军队攻打张，张大败。
English: Bongzi, Zhu Quanzhong sent troops to attack Zhang, Zhang was defeated.

古文：秦宗权闻之，自郑州引精兵会之。
现代文：秦宗权获悉，从郑州带领精壮军队与张相会以抗击朱全忠。
English: Qin Zongquan was informed that he would lead a strong army from Zhengzhou to meet Zhang to fight Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：张神剑求货于毕师鐸，师鐸报以俟秦司空之命，神剑怒，亦以其众归杨行密。及海陵镇遏使高霸、曲溪人刘金、盱胎人贾令威悉以其众属焉。
现代文：张神剑向毕师铎请求资财，毕师铎回答他要等秦彦的命令，张神剑很恼怒，也带领他的人马投归了杨行密；接着海陵镇遏使高霸、曲溪人刘金、盱眙人贾令威都率领所部人马归属杨行密。
English: Zhang Shenjian asked Bi Shijuan for money and resources. Bi Shijuan replied that he wanted to wait for Qin Yan's order. Zhang Shenjian was very angry and led his men to Yang Xingmi. Then, Hailing Town ordered Gaoba, Quxi's Liu Jin, and Xing's Jia Lingwei to lead their men and horses to Yang Xingmi.

古文：行密众至万七千人，张神剑运高邮粮以给之。
现代文：杨行密的军队达到一万七千人，张神剑运送高邮的粮食供给这些军队需用。
English: Yang Xingmi's army reached 17,000 men, and Zhang Shenjian transported grain from Gaoyou to supply the army's needs.

古文：硃全忠求救于衮、郓，硃瑄、硃瑾皆引兵赴之，义成军亦至。
现代文：朱全忠向兖州、郓州请求救援，朱、朱瑾都带领人马前往，义成军也赶到。
English: Zhu Quanzhong requested rescue from Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou. Zhu and Zhu Xi both led men and horses to go there, and the Yicheng Army also arrived.

古文：辛巳，全忠以四镇兵攻秦宗权于边孝村，大破之，斩首二万馀级，宗权宵遁，全忠追之，至阳武桥而还。
现代文：辛巳，朱全忠指挥四个镇所的军队在汴州北郊的边孝村攻打秦宗权，将他打败，斩杀两万余人。秦宗权夜间逃跑，朱全忠追赶他，直到阳武桥才返回。
English: Suddenly, Zhu Quanzhong commanded the troops of four townships to attack Qin Zongquan in Bianxiao Village on the northern outskirts of Zhangzhou, defeating him and killing more than 20,000 people. Qin Zongquan fled at night, and Zhu Quanzhong chased him until he returned to Yangwu Bridge.

古文：全忠深德硃瑄，兄事之。
现代文：朱全忠深深地感恩朱，把他当作兄弟对待。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was deeply grateful to Zhu and treated him as a brother.

古文：蔡人之守东都、河阳、许、汝、怀、郑、陕、虢者，闻宗权败，皆弃去。
现代文：蔡州军队中护守东都、河阳、许州、汝州、怀州、郑州、陕州、虢州的人，听说秦宗权失败，都纷纷离去。
English: When the people in the Caizhou army who were protecting Dongdu, Heyang, Huzhou, Ruzhou, Huaizhou, Zhengzhou, Shaanxi and Ganzhou heard that the Qin suzerainty had failed, they all left one after another.

古文：宗权发郑州，孙儒发河阳，皆屠灭其人，焚其庐舍而去，宗权之势自是稍衰。
现代文：秦宗权征发郑州，孙儒征发河阳，都大肆屠杀那里的人民，焚烧当地的房屋而后离去，秦宗权的势力从这以后有所衰落。
English: Qin suzerainty conquered and dispatched Zhengzhou, and Sun Ru conquered and dispatched Heyang. Both of them massacred the people there, burned the local houses and then left. The power of Qin suzerainty has declined since then.

古文：朝廷以扈驾都头杨守宗知许州事，硃全忠以其将孙从益知郑州事。
现代文：朝廷任命扈驾都头杨守宗掌管许州事宜，朱全忠委任属下将领孙从益掌管郑州事宜。
English: The imperial court appointed Yang Shouzong, the head of the capital, to be in charge of the affairs of Huzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong appointed his subordinate general Zong Yi to be in charge of the affairs of Zhengzhou.

古文：钱镠遣东安都将杜稜、浙江都将阮结、静江都将成及将兵讨薛朗。
现代文：钱派遣东安都将杜棱、浙江都将阮结、静江都将成及带领军队讨伐薛朗。
English: Qian dispatched Dong'an will be Du Ren, Zhejiang will be Ruan Jie, and Jingjiang will be Cheng and led the army to fight against Xue Lang.

古文：甲午，秦彦将宣歙兵三万馀人，乘竹筏沿江而下，赵晖邀击于上元，杀溺殆半。
现代文：甲午，秦彦带领宣歙军队三万余人，乘坐竹筏沿着长江向下开进，赵晖在上元拦截阻击，斩杀和溺死水中的人将近一半。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the year, Qin Yan led more than 30,000 troops of Xuan Ye to ride down the Yangtze River on bamboo rafts. Zhao Wei intercepted and blocked the attack in Shangyuan, killing and drowning nearly half of the people in the water.

古文：丙申，彦入广陵，自称权知压淮南节度事，仍以毕师鐸为行军司马，补池州刺史赵锽为宣歙观察使。
现代文：丙申，秦彦进入广陵城，自称暂时管理淮南节度使事务，仍然委任毕师铎为行军司马，补授池州刺史赵为宣歙观察使。
English: Bishen, Qin Yan entered Guangling City, claiming to temporarily manage the affairs of the Huainan Festival, but still appointed Bi Shizhao as the marching steward, and the supplementary teacher, Chizhou Shishi Zhao, as the Xuanlong observation envoy.

古文：戊戌，杨行密帅诸军抵广陵城下，为八寨以守之，秦彦闭城自守。
现代文：戊戌，杨行密率领各路军队抵达广陵城下，安设八个营寨自守，秦彦则关闭城门固守。
English: At the same time, Yang Xingmi led all the troops to arrive at the foot of Guangling Castle, set up eight camps to defend themselves, and Qin Yan closed the city gate to defend himself.

古文：六月，戊申，天威都头杨守立与凤翔节度使李昌符争道，麾下相殴，帝命中使谕之，不止。
现代文：六月，戊申，神策军中的天威都头杨守立与凤翔节度使李昌符二人争抢道路，部下殴打起来，唐僖宗命令宦官传谕劝解，竟不能罢休。
English: In June, in Buxin, Yang Shuling and Feng Xiang, the two heads of the Heavenly Capital in the Divine Providence Army, fought with Li Changfu to seize the road, and their subordinates beat them up. Tang Yanzong ordered eunuchs to preach and persuade, but they could not stop.

古文：是夕，宿卫皆严兵为备。
现代文：这天夜晚，宫中值宿士兵严阵以待防备不测。
English: On this night, the soldiers on duty in the palace formed a tight formation to be prepared for any eventuality.

古文：己酉，昌符拥兵烧行宫，庚戌，复攻大安门。
现代文：已酉，李昌符带领军队焚烧唐僖宗的行宫；庚戌，李昌符又攻打大安门。
English: Already defeated, Li Changfu led the army to burn the imperial palace of Tang Xizong; defeated, Li Changfu attacked the Da'an Gate.

古文：守立与昌符战于通衢，昌符兵败，帅麾下走保陇州。
现代文：杨守立与李昌符在宫外道路上对战，最后李昌符的军队战败，率领手下人马逃往陇州固守。
English: Yang Shouli and Li Changfu fought on the road outside the palace. In the end, Li Changfu's army was defeated and he led his men to flee to Zhangzhou to hold on.

古文：杜让能闻难，挺身步入侍。韦昭度质其家于军中，誓诛反贼，故军士力战而胜之。
现代文：在这期间，杜让能听说皇宫有难，挺身而出进入宫中护卫唐僖宗；韦昭度则把他的家人放在军营中作为人质，以表示他誓死斩杀谋反贼子的决心，因此军中士卒竭力苦战，终于战胜。
English: During this period, Dujuan Neng heard that the palace was in trouble and stepped forward to enter the palace to escort Tang Xizong; Wei Zhaodu put his family in the military camp as hostages to express his determination to kill the anti-thief, so the army sergeant fought hard and finally won.

古文：守立，复恭之假子也。
现代文：杨守立，是杨复恭的养子。
English: Yang Shouli is the adopted son of Yang Fuqiong.

古文：壬子，以扈驾都将、武定节度使李茂贞为陇州招讨使，以讨昌符。
现代文：壬子，朝廷任命扈驾都武、武定节度李茂贞为陇州招讨使，以讨伐李昌符。
English: According to Jinzi, the imperial court appointed Li Maozhen, who was in charge of the capital city of Wu and the Wuding Festival, as the recruiting envoy of Zhangzhou to fight against Li Changfu.

古文：甲寅，河中牙将常行儒杀节度使王重荣。
现代文：甲寅，河中牙将常行儒将节度使王重荣杀死。
English: A Yin, a middle-aged man in the middle of the river, killed a regular Confucian scholar, Wang Chongrong.

古文：重荣用法严，末年尤甚。行儒尝被罚，耻之，遂作乱。
现代文：王重荣执行法度极其严格，到了晚年更为厉害；常行儒曾经被王重荣处罚，对此感到很耻辱，于是发动了叛乱。
English: Wang Chongrong was very strict in enforcing the law, and became even more so in his later years. Regular Confucianists were once punished by Wang Chongrong, and they felt very humiliated, so they launched a rebellion.

古文：夜，攻府舍，重荣逃于别墅。明旦，行儒得而杀之。
现代文：夜间，常行儒攻打王重荣的府第，王重荣逃到别墅；第二天早晨，常行儒抓获王重荣并将他杀掉。
English: At night, the regular Ju attacked Wang Chung-Rong's mansion, and Wang Chung-Rong fled to a villa; the next morning, the regular Ju captured Wang Chung-Rong and killed him.

古文：制以陕虢节度使王重盈为护国节度使，又以重盈子珙权知陕虢留后。
现代文：朝廷下命委任王重荣的哥哥陕虢节度使王重盈为护国节度使，又任命王重盈的儿子王珙暂任陕虢留后。
English: The imperial court appointed Wang Chung Rong's brother, Shaanxi Jiedu, to be Wang Chung Ying's delegate to the National Defense Festival, and appointed Wang Chung Ying's son, Wang Hui, to temporarily stay in Shaanxi Jiedu.

古文：重盈至河中，执行儒，杀之。
现代文：王重盈到达河中，抓获常行儒，将他杀掉。
English: Wang Chung Ying reached the middle of the river, captured the Confucian scholar and killed him.

古文：戊午，秦彦遣毕师鐸、秦稠将兵八千出城，西击杨行密。稠败死，士卒死者什七八。
现代文：戊午，秦彦派遣毕师铎、秦稠带领军队八千人出广陵城，向西攻打杨行密，秦稠战败身亡，所部士卒战死的占十分之七八。
English: At noon, Qin Yan dispatched Bi Shijun and Qin Cong to lead an army of eight thousand out of Guangling City to attack Yang Xingmi in the west. Qin Cong was defeated and killed, accounting for seventy-eight out of ten deaths of officers and men.

古文：城中乏食，樵采路绝，宣州军始食之。
现代文：广陵城内缺乏粮食，出外打柴的道路也被断绝，秦彦率领的宣州军队开始吃人充饥。
English: There was a shortage of grain in Guangling, and the road to go out to fetch firewood was cut off. The Xuanzhou army led by Qin Yan began to eat people to satisfy their hunger.

古文：壬戌，亳州将谢殷逐其刺史宋兗。
现代文：壬戌，毫州将领谢殷驱逐毫州刺史宋衮。
English: At the end of the year, the millizhou general Xie Yin drove out the millizhou general Shi Songjun.

古文：孙儒既去河阳，李罕之召张全义于泽州，与之收合馀众。
现代文：孙儒既然已离开了河阳，李罕之便在泽州召来张全义，和他一道把剩下的人马收集起来。
English: Since Sun Ru had already left Kheyang, Li Han Zhi summoned Zhang Quan Yi in Zezhou, and together they gathered the remaining men and horses.

古文：罕之据河阳，全义据东都，共求援于河东。李克用以其将安金俊为泽州刺史，将骑助之，表罕之为河阳节度使，全义为河南尹。
现代文：李罕之占据河阳，张全义占据东都洛阳，一同向河东节度使李克用请求援助；李克用任命手下将领安金俊为泽州刺史，带领骑兵前往援助，并进呈表章任命李罕之为河阳节度使，张全义为河南尹。
English: Li Han Zhi occupied Heyang, Zhang Quan Yi occupied Luoyang, the eastern capital, and together they sent a request for assistance to the Hedong Sect to Li Kegui; Li Kegui appointed his subordinate general An Jinjun as the historian of Zhezhou, led the cavalry to the assistance, and presented a badge to appoint Li Han as the Heyang Sect envoy, and Zhang Quan Yi as the Henan Yin.

古文：初东都经黄巢之乱，遗民聚为三城以相保，继以秦宗权、孙儒残暴，仅存坏垣而已。
现代文：当初，东都洛阳经过黄巢的战乱，劫后遗留的百姓聚集成为三个城以相互保护，接着又有秦宗权、孙儒的残酷暴行，留下的仅仅是残垣断壁。
English: At first, the eastern capital Luoyang went through the war of the Yellow Nest, and the people left behind after the calamity gathered to form three cities to protect each other, followed by the cruel atrocities of Qin Zongquan and Sun Ru, leaving only the remnants of broken walls.

古文：全义初至，白骨蔽地，荆棘弥望，居民不满百户，全义麾下才百馀人，相与保中州城，四野俱无耕者。
现代文：张全义刚到这里时，只见白骨遍地，放眼望去到处是丛生的草木，居民总共不到一百户，张全义的部下才一百多人，共同守卫三城中间的中州城，四周田野都没有耕作的人。
English: When Zhang Quanyi first arrived here, he only saw white bones all over the place. Looking around, he saw thick vegetation everywhere. The total number of residents was less than a hundred households, and Zhang Quanyi's subordinates were only more than a hundred people. They jointly guarded Zhongzhou City, the middle of the three cities, and there were no farmers in the fields around.

古文：全义乃于麾下选十八人材器可任者，人给一旗一榜，谓之屯将，使诣十八县故墟落中，植旗张榜，招怀流散，劝之树艺。
现代文：张全义于是在手下中挑选了十八个才能器度可以任用的人，每人发给一面旗帜一张榜文，称作屯将，派他们分别到河南十八个县旧有的村落之中，立起大旗张贴榜文，招收抚恤四处流散的百姓，规劝他们种植耕作。
English: Zhang Quanyi then selected eighteen talented people among his subordinates who could be appointed. Each of them was given a banner and a list, known as a "town marshal," and sent them to the old villages in eighteen counties in Henan Province to set up a large banner and post the list, recruit the people who were scattered everywhere, and persuade them to plant and cultivate.

古文：惟杀人者死，馀但笞杖而已，无严刑，无租税，民归之者如市。
现代文：只有犯了杀人罪的处死，其他罪过仅予笞打杖击，没有严酷刑罚，不收田租赋税，因此老百姓前来归顺的象赶集一样。
English: Only those who have committed the crime of homicide are put to death, other crimes are only beaten with a cane, there is no severe torture punishment, and land rent and taxes are not collected, so the people who come to submit are like rushing to the market.

古文：又选壮者教之战陈，以御寇盗。
现代文：张全义还挑选精明强壮百姓教授作战阵法，以防御贼寇强盗。
English: Zhang Quanyi also selected shrewd and strong people to teach the battle array method to defend against thieves and robbers.

古文：数年之后，都城坊曲，渐复旧制，诸县户口，率皆归复，桑麻蔚然，野无旷土。
现代文：几年之后，河南各地的城市店铺乃至小巷，都渐渐地恢复了原来的规模式样，各县的民户人口，大多都回归，各种农作物生长茂盛，田野里再也没有空旷的地方。
English: A few years later, urban stores and even alleys in various parts of Henan gradually resumed their original patterns. The population of private households in each county mostly returned, various crops grew luxuriantly, and there were no more open spaces in the fields.

古文：其胜兵者，大县至七千人，小县不减二千人，乃奏置令佐以治之。
现代文：各地负担供养的军队，大县达到七千人，小县也不少于二千人，于是张全义进呈奏章请设置县令佐官治理地方。
English: The military forces supported by various regions reached 7,000 in large counties and no less than 2,000 in small counties. Therefore, Zhang Quanyi presented a petition asking for the establishment of county-level officers to govern localities.

古文：全义明察，人不能欺，而为政宽简。
现代文：张全义精明强士，人们对他不能有欺隐，同时他办理政务又宽厚简明。
English: Zhang Quanyi is a shrewd and strong man. People cannot deceive him. At the same time, he is generous and concise in handling government affairs.

古文：出，见田畴美者，辄下马，与僚佐共观之，召田主，劳以酒食；有蚕麦善收者，或亲至其家，悉呼出老幼，赐以茶纟采衣物。
现代文：张全义外出，看见田地中的作物很茂盛，就下马，与身边的臣僚共同观赏，召来田地的主人，用美酒好饭慰劳他；有善于养蚕种麦的人获得丰收，张全义有时就到这些人的家里，把男女老幼都叫出来，赏赐给他们茶叶丝绸和衣物等物。
English: When Zhang Quanyi went out and saw that the crops in the fields were very lush, he dismounted and watched with the ministers around him. He called the owner of the field and consoled him with good wine and good rice. People who were good at raising silkworms and planting wheat had a good harvest. Zhang Quanyi sometimes went to these people's homes, called out men, women and children, and gave them tea, silk and clothing.

古文：民间言： 张公不喜声伎，见之未尝笑，独见佳麦良茧则笑耳。 
现代文：当时在民间传着这样的话： 张全义大人不喜好歌妓舞女，看到这些没见过他发笑；唯独看到茂盛的麦田和上好的蚕丝他就满面笑容。 
English: At that time, there was a popular saying: Zhang Quanyi did not like female singers and dancers, and he did not laugh when he saw them; however, when he saw the lush wheat fields and fine silk, his face was full of smiles.

古文：有田荒秽者，则集众杖之；或诉以乏人牛，乃召其邻里责之曰： 彼诚乏人牛，何不助之！ 
现代文：有的人将田地荒芜了，张全义就召集众人当面杖打进行惩罚；有的人申诉说缺乏人手和耕牛，张全义便把他的邻居叫来责问： 他如果确实缺少劳力耕牛，你们为什么不帮助他！ 
English: Some people left the fields barren, and Zhang Quanyi gathered everyone to punish them by beating them in the face with a cane; some people complained about the lack of manpower and oxen, and Zhang Quanyi called his neighbors to ask: If he really lacks the labor to plow oxen, why don't you help him!

古文：众皆谢，乃释之。
现代文：大家都表示谢罪，张全义才把人放回。
English: Everyone said they were sorry, and Zhang Quanyi let them go.

古文：由是邻里有相助，故比户皆有蓄积，凶年不饥，遂成富庶焉。
现代文：由于这样，在邻里之间互通有无彼此帮助，因此各户钱粮都有积蓄，灾年也不致有饥荒，于是富庶起来。
English: As a result of this, there was no mutual help between neighbors, so each household had savings of money and grain, and there was no famine in the disaster year, so they became rich.

古文：杜稜等败薛朗将李君暀于阳羡。
现代文：杜棱等人在阳羡打败薛朗的将领李君
English: Du Ren and others defeated Xue Lang's general Li Jun in Yang Zhen

古文：秋，七月，癸未，淮南将吴苗帅其徒八千人逾城降杨行密。
现代文：秋季七月，癸未，淮南将领吴苗率领手下八千人马越过城池向杨行密投降。
English: In the autumn of July, Wu Miao, the general of Huainan, led his eight thousand soldiers across the city to surrender to Yang Xingmi.

古文：八月，壬寅朔，李茂贞奏陇州刺史薛知筹以城降，斩李昌符，灭其族。
现代文：八月，壬寅朔，李茂贞奏报陇州刺史薛知筹献出陇州城投降，斩杀李昌符，诛灭了李昌符的全族人。
English: In August, Ren Yinshuo, Li Maozhen, reported to Zhangzhou Zhi Shi Xue Zhixing to surrender Zhangzhou City, killed Li Changfu, and annihilated Li Changfu's whole family.

古文：硃全忠引兵过亳州，遣其将霍存袭谢殷，斩之。
现代文：朱全忠带领军队经过毫州，派遣属下将领霍存攻打谢殷，将他斩杀。
English: Zhu Quanzhong led the army through Wanzhou and sent his subordinate general Huo Cun to attack Xie Yin and kill him.

古文：丙子，以李茂贞同平章事、充凤翔节度使。
现代文：丙子，朝廷任命李茂贞为同平章事、充任凤翔节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Li Maozhen as Tongping Zhengji and Fengxiang Zhengduo.

古文：以韦昭度守太保、兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷任命韦昭度兼理太保、兼任侍中。
English: The imperial court appointed Wei Zhaodu concurrently as the regent and chamberlain.

古文：硃全忠欲兼兗、郓，而以硃瑄兄弟有功于己，攻之无名，乃诬瑄招诱宣武军士，移书诮让。
现代文：朱全忠想要兼并兖州、郓州，可是因为朱兄弟曾经救援汴州对自己有功，攻打没有理由，于是朱全忠诬陷朱招纳引诱宣武军的士卒，送去书信责备他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong wanted to annex Ganzhou and Ganzhou, but because the Zhu brothers had contributed to the rescue of Ganzhou, there was no reason to attack, so Zhu Quanzhong framed Zhu Zhenna to lure the soldiers of the Xuanwu Army and sent a letter to blame him.

古文：瑄复书不逊，全忠遣其将硃珍、葛从周袭曹州，壬子，拔之，杀刺史丘弘礼。
现代文：朱给朱全忠的回信也不恭谨，朱全忠便派遣属下将领朱珍、葛从周袭击曹州，壬子，攻克，杀死曹州刺史丘弘礼。
English: Zhu's reply to Zhu Quanzhong was also disrespectful. Zhu Quanzhong then dispatched his subordinate generals Zhu Zhen and Ge Zhou to attack Caozhou, Imzi, conquer and kill Caozhou assassin Qiu Hongli.

古文：又攻濮州，与兗、郓兵战于刘桥，杀数万人，硃瑄、硃瑾仅以身免。
现代文：接着朱全忠的军队又攻打濮州，在刘桥与兖州、郓州的军队展开激战，斩杀几万人，朱、朱瑾仅仅保住性命。
English: Next, Zhu Quanzhong's army attacked Bozhou. At Liuqiao, they fought fiercely with the armies of Bozhou and Bozhou, killing tens of thousands of people. Zhu and Zhu Xi only saved their lives.

古文：全忠与兗、郓始有隙。
现代文：朱全忠与兖州的朱、郓州的朱瑾从此结下了怨仇。
English: Zhu Quanzhong and Zhu of Ganzhou and Zhu Xi of Ganzhou have been feuding ever since.

古文：秦彦以张雄兵强，冀得其用，以仆射告身授雄，以尚书告身三通授裨将冯弘鐸等。
现代文：秦彦感到张雄的军队强大，希望能够被他所用，便把仆射告身的职衔授给张雄，又将尚书告身文书三份授给副将冯弘铎等人。
English: Qin Yan felt that Zhang Xiong's army was strong and hoped that it could be used by him, so he gave Zhang Xiong the title of "surrendering soldier" and gave three copies of the letter of resignation to Vice Admiral Feng Hongyao and others.

古文：广陵人竞以金玉珠缯诣雄军贸食，通犀带一，得米五升，锦衾一，得糠五升。
现代文：广陵城内的人们竞相带着珠宝玉器黄金绸缎到张雄的军营换取粮食，一个通天犀带，只换得大米五升，一个锦缎被子，只换得粗糠五升。
English: People in the city of Guangling raced to take jewelry, jade, gold and silk brocades to Zhang Xiong's military camp in exchange for grain, a rhinoceros ribbon only exchanged for five liters of rice, and a brocade quilt only exchanged for five liters of coarse straw.

古文：雄军既富，不复肯战。未几，复助杨行密。
现代文：张雄的军队既然富有起来，便不愿意再去交战，不久，又去协助杨行密。
English: Since Zhang Xiong's army had become rich, they were no longer willing to fight, and soon they went to help Yang Xingmi.

古文：丁卯，彦悉出城中兵万二千人，遣毕师鐸、郑汉章将之，陈于城西，延袤数里，军势甚盛。
现代文：丁卯，秦彦将广陵城内的军队一万二千人全部调出，派毕师铎、郑汉章统率，布置在广陵城的西部，绵延几里地，军队气势很盛。
English: Dingwu and Qinhan mobilized all of the twelve thousand troops in Guangling City, and sent Bi Shizhen and Zheng Hanzhang to lead the troops. They were deployed in the western part of Guangling City, stretching for several miles. The army was very powerful.

古文：行密安卧帐中，曰： 贼近告我。 
现代文：杨行密却安安稳稳地躺在军帐里面说： 贼寇靠近时再告诉我。 
English: Yang Xingmi, however, was lying safely and soundly inside his army account, saying, "Let me know when the bandits are approaching."

古文：牙将李宗礼曰： 众寡不敌，宜坚壁自守，徐图还师。 
现代文：牙将李宗礼说： 敌我人数相差太大，我们应当加固壁垒自我坚守，再慢慢图谋把军队迁回。 
English: Li Zongli, the commander, said: "The difference in the number of the enemy and us is too big. We should strengthen the barriers and stick to ourselves, and then slowly try to move the army back.

古文：李涛怒曰： 吾以顺讨逆，何论众寡！大军至此，去将安归！
现代文：李涛愤怒地说： 我们顺应天道讨伐逆贼，哪管人多人少，军队已经来到这里，回去能到哪里去！
English: Li Tao said angrily: We are following the heavenly way to fight against the traitors, no matter how many or how few, the army has come here, where can we go back!

古文：涛愿将所部为前锋，保为公破之！ 
现代文：我愿意带领所部人马做前锋，保证为杨公你打败贼寇！ 
English: I am willing to lead the staff to be a striker, to ensure that you defeat the bandits for Yang Gong!

古文：涛，赵州人也。
现代文：李涛是赵州人。
English: Li Tao is from Zhaozhou.

古文：行密乃积金帛麰米于一寨，使羸弱守之，多伏精兵于其旁，自将十馀人冲其陈，兵始交，行密阳不胜而走，广陵兵追之，入空寨，争取金帛麰米，伏兵四起，广陵众乱。行密纵兵击之，俘斩殆尽，积尸十里，沟渎皆满，师鐸、汉章单骑仅免。
现代文：杨行密于是把金钱布帛小麦稻米都堆积到一个营寨，派瘦弱的士卒看守，在这旁边埋伏下许多精壮强兵，自己带领一千多人冲击广陵军队的阵营。双方军队开始交战后，杨行密假装不能取胜而逃跑，广陵军队追击他，进入没有强兵防守的那个营寨，争先恐后地抢夺金钱布帛、小麦稻米，这时，埋伏的杨行密军队从四面发起进攻，广陵军队大乱，杨行密指挥军队勇猛攻打，俘虏斩杀，几乎将广陵军队消灭光，地上的死尸有十里，沟渠里都填满了，毕师铎、郑汉章仅以单身骑马逃走。
English: Yang Xingmi then piled up all the money, cloth, wheat and rice into a camp, sent weak soldiers to guard it, and led more than a thousand strong soldiers to attack the camp of the Guangling army. After the two armies began to fight, Yang Xingmi pretended that he could not win and ran away. The Guangling army chased him, entered the camp that was not defended by strong soldiers, and scrambled to snatch money, cloth and wheat and rice. At this time, the ambushed Yang Xingmi army launched an attack from all sides, the Guangling army was in chaos, Yang Xingmi commanded the army to fight bravely, killed the prisoners,

古文：自是秦彦不复言出师矣。
现代文：从这以后秦彦再也不提出动军队了。
English: After that, Qin Yan never proposed to mobilize the army again.

古文：九月，以户部侍郎、判度支张浚为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：九月，朝廷任命户部侍郎、判度支张浚为兵部侍郎、同平章事。
English: In September, the Imperial Court appointed the Household Attendant and the Judgement Officer, Zhang Jun, as the Hyobu Attendant and Tonghei Shoji.

古文：高骈在道院，秦彦供给甚薄，左右无食，至然木像、煮革带食之，有相啖者。
现代文：高骈被囚禁在广陵城内的道院，秦彦供给他的吃用东西极其缺少，身边的人没有吃的，以致燃烧道院内的木像煮皮带吃，有的竟相互吃人肉。
English: Gao Yao was imprisoned in the Taoist Temple in Guangling City. Qin Yan was extremely short of food to feed him, and the people around him had no food. As a result, they burned the wooden statues in the Taoist Temple to eat boiled leather belts, and some even ate human flesh with each other.

古文：彦与毕师鐸出师屡败，疑骈为厌胜，外围益急，恐骈党有内应者。
现代文：秦彦与毕师铎出动军队一再失败，怀疑是高骈通过巫术诅咒他们，广陵城外的围攻又越来越紧迫，秦彦担心高骈的党羽中有作内应的人。
English: Qin Yan and Bi Shijun repeatedly failed to send troops. It was suspected that Gao Gan had cursed them through witchcraft. The siege outside Guangling was getting more and more urgent. Qin Yan was worried that there were insiders in Gao Gan's party.

古文：有妖尼王奉仙言于彦曰： 扬州分野极灾，必有一大人死，自此喜矣。 
现代文：有一个行妖术的尼姑王奉仙对秦彦说： 扬州上空的天象预兆这里要有大灾大难，一定要有一个大人物死去，而后才会顺心如意。 
English: Wang Fengxian, a sorcerer's nun, said to Qin Yan, "The celestial phenomenon over Yangzhou is an omen that there will be a great calamity here. A great man must die, and then everything will go as planned."

古文：甲戌，命其将刘匡时杀骈，并其子弟甥侄无少长皆死，同坎瘗之。
现代文：甲戌，秦彦命令属下将领刘匡时将高骈斩杀，连同高骈的儿子兄弟外甥侄子不论年龄大小全都处死，把他们一同埋葬在一个大坑内。
English: Gao Jian, Qin Yan ordered his subordinate general Liu Kuang Shi to behead Gao Jian, along with Gao Jian's sons, brothers, nephews and nephews, regardless of age, and bury them together in a large pit.

古文：乙亥，杨行密闻之，帅士卒缟素向城大哭三日。
现代文：乙亥，杨行密得知高骈被害，率领军中士卒身穿丧服向着广陵城大声痛哭三天。
English: When Yi Hai and Yang Xingmi learned of Gao Yao's death, they led the army sergeants in mourning to Guangling City and wept loudly for three days.

古文：硃珍攻濮州，硃瑄遣其弟罕将步骑万人救之。辛卯，硃全忠逆击罕于范，擒斩之。
现代文：朱珍攻打濮州，朱派遣弟弟朱罕带领步兵、骑兵一万人前往救援；辛卯，朱全忠在濮州的范县迎战朱罕，将朱罕擒获斩杀。
English: Zhu Zhen attacked Bozhou, Zhu sent his brother Zhu Han to lead 10,000 infantry and cavalry to rescue; Xin Wu, Zhu Quanzhong fought Zhu Han in Fan County, Bozhou, and killed Zhu Han.

古文：冬，十月，秦彦遣郑汉章将步骑五千出击张神剑、高霸寨，破之，神剑奔高邮，霸奔海陵。
现代文：冬季，十月，秦彦派遣郑汉章带领步兵骑兵五千人前去攻打张神剑、高霸的营寨，取得胜利，张神剑逃奔高邮，高霸逃奔海陵。
English: In the winter, in October, Qin Yan sent Zheng Hanzhang to lead 5,000 infantry and cavalry to attack the camp of Zhang Shenjian and Gaoba, and achieved victory. Zhang Shenjian fled to Gaoyou, and Gaoba fled to Hailing.

古文：丁未，硃珍拔濮州，刺史硃裕奔郓，珍进兵攻郓。
现代文：丁未，朱珍攻克濮州，濮州刺史朱裕逃奔郓州；朱珍进兵攻打郓州。
English: Ding Wei, Zhu Zhen conquered Luzhou, Luzhou stabbed Zhu Yu fled to Luzhou; Zhu Zhen marched into Luzhou.

古文：瑄使裕诈遗珍书，约为内应，珍夜引兵赴之，瑄开门纳汴军，闭而杀之，死者数千人，汴军乃退。
现代文：朱让朱裕假装给朱珍写信，相约为朱珍做内应，朱珍夜间带领人马前赴郓州，朱打开城门接纳汴州军队，然后关门斩杀，杀死了几千人，汴州军队于是退走。
English: Zhu asked Zhu Yu to pretend to write a letter to Zhu Zhen, which was equivalent to Zhu Zhen's doing the inner work. Zhu Zhen led people and horses to Luzhou at night. Zhu opened the city gate to accept the Luzhou army, and then closed the door and killed several thousand people. The Luzhou army then retreated.

古文：瑄乘胜复取曹州，以其属郭词为刺史。
现代文：朱乘胜又攻占曹州，委任属下郭词为曹州刺史。
English: Zhu Rensheng conquered Caozhou again and appointed his subordinate Guo Zhi as the governor of Caozhou.

古文：甲寅，立皇子升为益王。
现代文：甲寅，唐僖宗立皇子李升为益王。
English: In the year of Jia Yin, Li Sheng, the son of Emperor Zongli of Tang Dynasty ascended to the throne.

古文：杜稜等拔常州，丁从实奔海陵。
现代文：杜棱等人攻克常州，丁从实奔往海陵。
English: Du Ren and others conquered Changzhou, and Ding Congsheng rushed to Hailing.

古文：钱镠奉周宝归杭州，属高鞬，具部将礼，郊迎之。
现代文：钱迎奉周宝返回杭州，佩戴衣甲弓箭，向周宝行部将礼节，亲自到杭州郊外迎接他。
English: Qian Yingfeng returned to Hangzhou to pay homage to Zhou Bao. Wearing armor and bow and arrow, he extended courtesies to Zhou Bao and personally went to the outskirts of Hangzhou to greet him.

古文：杨行密围广陵且半年，秦彦、毕师鐸大小数十战，多不利。
现代文：杨行密围攻广陵将近半年，秦彦、毕师铎与他交战大大小小几十次，大多失利。
English: Yang Xingmi besieged Guangling for nearly half a year, and Qin Yan and Bi Shijun fought with him dozens of times, mostly losing.

古文：城中无食，米斗直钱五十缗，草根木实皆尽，以堇泥为饼食之，饿死者太半。
现代文：城内没有粮食，一斗米竟值五十缗钱，草根和花木的果实都吃完了，便用黏土做饼充饥，饿死的人超过一半。
English: There was no food in the city, and a barrel of rice was worth fifty shekels. When they had eaten all the roots of the grass and the fruits of the flowers and trees, they used the clay to make cakes to satisfy their hunger. More than half of the people died of starvation.

古文：宣军掠人诣肆卖之，驱缚屠割如羊豕，讫无一声，积骸流血，满于坊市。
现代文：宣州军队抢掠百姓到店铺出卖，驱赶捆绑屠杀宰割就象对待猪羊一样，一直到街上没有一点声音，堆积的尸骨和流淌的鲜血，布满了店铺。
English: The Xuanzhou army robbed and plundered the people and sold them to shops. They drove them away, tied them up, slaughtered them and butchered them as if they were pigs or sheep, until there was not a sound in the streets. The shops were covered with piles of bones and blood.

古文：彦、师鐸无如之何，嚬蹙而已。
现代文：秦彦、毕师铎对这种状况也没办法，只是皱眉头罢了。
English: Qin Yan and Bi Shizhen could do nothing about this situation, but just frowned.

古文：外围益急，彦、师鐸忧懑，殆无生意，相对抱膝，终日悄然。
现代文：广陵城外的围攻更加紧迫，秦彦和毕师铎忧心重重抑郁不快，笼罩着死气沉沉的气氛，两个人面对面抱着膝盖，一天到晚都是一副忧愁的样子。
English: The siege outside the city of Guangling was more urgent. Qin Yan and Bi Shizhen were worried, depressed and unhappy. A gloomy atmosphere prevailed. The two men held their knees facing each other and looked sad all day long.

古文：行密亦以城久不下，欲引还。
现代文：而杨行密也因为好长时间不能攻下广陵城，想要带领军队返回庐州。
English: Yang Xingmi also wanted to lead the army back to Zhangzhou because he could not capture Guangling City for a long time.

古文：己巳夜，大风雨，吕用之部将张审威帅麾下士三百，晨，伏于西壕，俟守者易代，潜登城，启关纳其众，守者皆不斗而溃。
现代文：已巳夜晚，狂风暴雨大作，吕用之的属下将领张审威率领手下士卒三百人，在早晨埋伏在城西堑壕，等到城内的护守士卒换班，偷偷地登上城墙，打开关卡把他的人马都放进去，城内的守卫士卒未经一战就溃散了。
English: It was already night and the storm was raging. Lü Yingzhi's subordinate general Zhang Xiuwei led three hundred of his subordinate soldiers. In the morning, they lay in ambush in the west trench of the city. When the guards in the city changed shifts, he secretly climbed the city wall, opened the gate and put all his men inside. The guards in the city were dispersed without a fight.

古文：先是，彦、师鐸信重尼奉仙，虽战陈日时，赏罚轻重，皆取决焉。
现代文：在这之前，秦彦、毕师铎信赖器重尼姑王奉仙，连兴兵作战的阵容日期时辰，奖赏惩罚的多少，都由尼姑王奉仙来决定。
English: Prior to this, Qin Yan and Bi Shijun relied heavily on the nun Wang Fengxian, and the date and time of the lineup of Lianxing soldiers and the amount of rewards and punishments were decided by the nun Wang Fengxian.

古文：至是复咨于奉仙曰： 何以取济？ 
现代文：到这时，秦彦、毕师铎又询问王奉仙说： 怎样才能挽救局面？ 
English: At this time, Qin Yan and Bi Shizhen also asked Wang Fengxian: How can we save the situation?

古文：奉仙曰： 走为上策。 
现代文：王奉仙回答说： 离城出走是最好的对策！ 
English: Wang Fengxian replied: "Leaving the city is the best countermeasure!

古文：乃自开化门出奔东塘。
现代文：于是，秦彦、毕师铎从开化门出城奔往东塘。
English: As a result, Qin Yan and Bi Shizhao rushed out of the city from Kaifu Gate to Dongtang.

古文：行密帅诸军合万五千人入城，以梁缵不尽节于高氏，为秦、毕用，斩于戟门之外。韩问闻之，赴井死。
现代文：杨行密带领各路人马合计一万五千人进入广陵城，因为梁缵未能对高骈效忠至死，后来为秦彦、毕师铎效力，杨行密便在戟门外的外面将他斩杀；韩问听说与他一样的梁缵已被杨行密处死，便跳井自杀。
English: Yang Xingmi led a total of fifteen thousand people from all walks of life into Guangling City. Because Liang Qian could not be loyal to Gao Qian to the death, and later served Qin Yan and Bi Shijun, Yang Xingmi cut him to death outside the gate; Han Qian heard that Liang Qian, who was the same as him, had been executed by Yang Xingmi, so he jumped into a well and committed suicide.

古文：以高骈从孙愈摄副使，使改殡骈及其族。
现代文：杨行密委任高骈胞弟的孙子高愈暂为副使，命令重新安葬高骈和被害的族人。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Gao Yao, the grandson of Gao Yao's younger brother, as deputy envoy, and ordered the reburial of Gao Yao and the victims.

古文：城中遗民才数百家，饥羸非复人状，行密辇西寨米以赈之。
现代文：广陵城内剩下的百姓仅有几百家，饥饿瘦弱得都没有人样子，杨行密便从广陵城西的营寨载运粮米来赈济他们。
English: There were only a few hundred families left in the city of Guangling. They were so thin and weak from hunger that they didn't look human. Yang Xingmi transported grain and rice from the camp west of the city of Guangling to help them.

古文：行密自称淮南留后。
现代文：杨行密自称淮南留后。
English: Yang Xingmi claimed to have stayed in Huainan.

古文：秦宗权遣其弟宗衡将兵万人渡淮，与杨行密争扬州，以孙儒为副，张佶、刘建锋、马殷及宗权族弟彦晖皆从。
现代文：秦宗权派遣胞弟秦宗衡带领军队一万人渡过淮河，与杨行密争夺扬州。委任孙儒为副将，将张佶、刘建锋、马殷以及秦宗权的族弟秦彦晖都跟随前往。
English: Qin Zongquan dispatched his brother Qin Zongheng to lead an army of ten thousand across the Huai River to compete closely with Yang Xing for Yangzhou. Sun Ru was appointed vice-general, and Zhang Ye, Liu Jianfeng, Ma Yin, and Qin Zongquan's younger brother Qin Yanquan all followed.

古文：十一月，辛未，抵广陵城西，据行密故寨，行密辎重之未入城者，为蔡人所得。
现代文：十一月，辛未，秦宗衡率领人马抵达广陵城西部，占据杨行密原有的营寨，杨行密军队没有运入城内的器械、粮草等物，都被蔡州军队缴获。
English: In November, Xinwei, Qin Zongheng and his men arrived in the western part of Guangling City and occupied the original camp of Yang Xingmi. Yang Xingmi's army did not bring equipment, grain and grass into the city, but they were all seized by the Caizhou army.

古文：秦彦、毕师鐸至东塘，张雄不纳，将渡江趣宣州。
现代文：秦彦、毕师铎到达东塘，张雄拒不接纳，便想渡过长江奔赴宣州。
English: Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan arrived in Dongtang, but Zhang Xiong refused to accept them, so they wanted to cross the Yangtze River to go to Xuanzhou.

古文：宗衡召之，乃引兵还，与宗衡合。
现代文：这时秦宗衡召请他们，于是秦彦、毕师铎带领人马返回，秦宗衡联合起来。
English: At this time, Qin Zongheng called for them, so Qin Yan and Bi Shijuan led the troops back, and Qin Zongheng joined forces.

古文：未几，宗权召宗衡还蔡，拒硃全忠。
现代文：不久，秦宗权召令秦宗衡回蔡州，抗击朱全忠。
English: Soon, Qin Zongquan ordered Qin Zongheng to return to Caizhou to fight against Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：孙儒知宗权势不能久，称疾不行。
现代文：孙儒知道秦宗权的权势不会太长久，便以有病为托辞拒不开拔。
English: Sun Ju knew that the power of the Qin Dynasty would not last for long, so he used his illness as an excuse to refuse to abdicate.

古文：宗衡屡促之，儒怒，甲戌，与宗衡饮酒，座中手刃之，传首于全忠。
现代文：秦宗衡多次催促他，孙儒十分恼怒。甲戌，孙儒与秦宗衡一起喝酒，在座位中亲手将秦宗衡斩杀，又把他的首级送到朱全忠那里。
English: Qin Zongheng urged him many times, and Sun Ru was very angry. To make matters worse, Sun Ru drank alcohol with Qin Zongheng, and personally beheaded Qin Zongheng in his seat, and sent his head to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：宗衡将安仁义降于行密。
现代文：秦宗衡的将领安仁义向杨行密投降。
English: Qin Zongheng's general An Renyi surrendered to Yang Xingmi.

古文：仁义，本沙陀将也，行密悉以骑兵委之，列于田頵之上。
现代文：安仁义本来是李克用沙陀军的将领，杨行密把全部骑兵都交给他带领，并且把他的地位排列在田的前面。
English: An Renyi was originally the commander of Li Ke's Shatou army. Yang Xingmi put all the cavalry under his command and placed him in front of Tian.

古文：儒分兵掠邻州，未几，众至数万，以城下乏食，与彦、师鐸袭高邮。
现代文：孙儒分派人马抢掠邻近各州，不久，他的军队就达到几万人，因为广陵城一带缺乏粮食，孙儒便与秦彦、毕师铎去攻打高邮。
English: Sun Ru assigned men and horses to plunder the neighboring states. Soon, his army reached tens of thousands of people. Because there was a lack of grain around Guangling City, Sun Ru, Qin Yan and Bi Shijie went to attack Gaoyou.

古文：初，宣武都指挥使硃珍与排陈斩斫使李唐宾，勇略、功名略相当，全忠每战，使二人偕，往无不捷，然二人素不相下。
现代文：当初，宣武都指挥使朱珍与排阵斩斫使李唐宾二人勇猛与胆略、功劳与声誉不相上下，朱全忠每次作战，都让二人同行，所到之处没有不取胜的，可是朱珍、李唐宾二人却一向不肯屈居下位。
English: At the beginning, the commander of the Xuanwu Capital ordered Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin to form a platoon, so that the two of them were brave and daring, and their merits and reputation were on a par with each other. Zhu Quanzhong had the two of them accompany him to every battle, and there was no place where he did not win, but Zhu Zhen and Li Tangbin were always unwilling to take a back seat.

古文：珍使人迎其妻于大梁，不白全忠，全忠怒，追还其妻，杀守门者，使亲吏蒋玄晖召珍，以汉宾代总其众。
现代文：朱珍派人到大梁迎接妻子，而没告诉朱全忠，朱全忠很恼怒，追回他的妻子，杀掉守门的人，派他的亲近吏员蒋玄晖去召朱珍来，让李唐宾代替朱珍总理他的人马。
English: Zhu Zhen sent someone to Daliang to meet his wife, but did not tell Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong was very angry, chased his wife, killed the gatekeeper, sent his close official Jiang Xuanqi to summon Zhu Zhen, and let Li Tangbin replace Premier Zhu Zhen and his men.

古文：馆鐸巡官冯翊敬翔谏曰： 硃珍未易轻取，恐其猜惧生变。 
现代文：馆驿巡官冯翊人敬翔规劝朱全忠说： 朱珍不可轻易取代，恐怕他会猜疑畏惧发动变乱。 
English: The inspector of the Imperial Household Agency, Feng Xuanren, advised Zhu Quanzhong by saying: Zhu Zhen should not be easily replaced. I am afraid that he will be suspicious and afraid of starting a revolution.

古文：全忠悔，使人追止之。
现代文：朱全忠后悔，便派人追上蒋玄晖，停止原有的安排。
English: Zhu Quanzhong regretted, and sent someone to catch up with Jiang Xuancheng and stop the original arrangement.

古文：珍果自疑，丙子夜，珍置酒召诸将。
现代文：朱珍果然已有疑心，丙子夜晚，朱珍设置酒席召请各位将领。
English: Zhu Zhen certainly had suspicions. That night, Zhu Zhen set up a banquet to invite the generals.

古文：唐宾疑其有异图，斩关奔大梁，珍亦弃军单骑继至。
现代文：李唐宾怀疑朱珍要有叛乱的图谋，斩杀关卡士卒奔赴大梁，朱珍也扔下军队只身一人骑马接着赶到大梁。
English: Li Tangbin suspected that Zhu Zhen had a plan to rebel. He killed the guards and rushed to the girder. Zhu Zhen also left the army and rode alone to the girder.

古文：全忠两惜其才，皆不罪，遣还濮州，因引兵归。
现代文：朱全忠爱惜这两个人的才能，都不加谴责，派遣他们返回濮州，二人便带领人马回去。
English: Zhu Quanzhong cherished the talents of these two people, and did not condemn them. He sent them back to Zhangzhou, and the two of them led the people back.

古文：全忠多权数，将佐莫测其所为，惟敬翔能逆知之，往往助其所不及。全忠大悦，自恨得翔晚，凡军机、民政悉以咨之。
现代文：朱全忠善于玩弄权术，手下将领臣僚对他的所做所为都难以预测，只有敬翔能够预先知道，往往帮助朱全忠完善他未想到的地方，朱全忠很是高兴，为自己这么晚才得到敬翔这一人才感到遗憾，所有机要军务、地方行政事宜都和敬翔商议。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was good at playing power games. It was difficult to predict what his subordinates, including generals and ministers, would do to him. Only Qixiang could know in advance, and he often helped Zhu Quanzhong to improve areas that he had not thought of. Zhu Quanzhong was very happy and felt sorry that he was so late to get the talent of Qixiang. All important military and local administrative matters were discussed with Qixiang.

古文：辛巳，高邮镇遏使张神剑帅麾下二百人逃归扬州。丙戌，孙儒屠高邮。
现代文：辛巳，高邮镇遏使张神剑率领部下二百人出逃归附扬州的杨行密；丙戌，孙儒在高邮城展开大屠杀。
English: Soon after, Gaoyou Town was besieged, forcing Zhang Shenjian and 200 of his subordinates to flee to Yang Xingmi in Yangzhou; meanwhile, Sun Ru carried out a massacre in Gaoyou Town.

古文：戊子，高邮残兵七百人溃围而至，杨行密虑其为变，分隶诸将，一夕尽坑之。明日，杀神剑于其第。
现代文：戊子，高邮的残余军队七百人突围赶到扬州，杨行密担心他们发生变乱，把他们分由各位将领管领，在一个夜晚全部活埋了，第二天，杨行密在府第又将张神剑杀死。
English: Wuzi, Gaoyou's remaining army of seven hundred people broke through the siege and rushed to Yangzhou. Yang Xingmi was worried that they would cause a riot, so he divided them up among the generals and buried them all alive in one night. The next day, Yang Xingmi killed Zhang Shenjian in the capital.

古文：杨行密恐孙儒乘胜取海陵，壬寅，命镇遏使高霸帅其兵民悉归府城，曰： 有违命者，族之！ 
现代文：杨行密担心孙儒在攻战高邮后会乘胜进攻海陵，壬寅，命令镇遏使高霸率领海陵的军队人民全部迁入广陵城内，并说： 如有违犯命令的人，斩灭全族。 
English: Yang Xingmi was worried that Sun Ru would take advantage of the victory to attack Hailing after attacking Gaoyou. Ren Yin ordered the town to move all the people of the army led by Gao Ba into the city of Guangling, and said: If there are people who violate the order, exterminate the whole family.

古文：于是数万户弃资产、焚庐舍、挈老幼迁于广陵。
现代文：于是，几万户百姓抛弃资财家产、焚烧田间房舍、扶老携幼迁到广陵城。
English: As a result, tens of thousands of people abandoned their wealth and property, burned their houses in the fields, and moved to Guangling City.

古文：戊戌，霸与弟暀、部将余绕山、前常州刺史丁从实至广陵，行密出郭迎之，与霸、往约为兄弟，置其将卒于法云寺。
现代文：戊戌，高霸与胞弟高、属下将领余绕山、前任常州刺史丁从实一同赶到广陵，杨行密到城外迎接，与高霸？高结拜为兄弟，把他们的将领士卒安置在法云寺。
English: Wu Xi, Gao Ba and his brother Gao, their subordinate generals Yu Yuanshan and Changzhou's former general Zi Ding all rushed to Guangling together, Yang Xingmi went to the outskirts of the city to meet them, and worshiped Gao Ba and Gao Zi as brothers, and placed their generals and officers in the Fanyun Temple.

古文：己亥，秦宗权陷郑州。
现代文：乙亥，秦宗权攻克郑州。
English: In the second year of the Heian period, the Qin Dynasty conquered Zhengzhou.

古文：朝廷以淮南久乱，闰月，以硃全忠兼淮南节度使、东南面招讨使。
现代文：朝廷因为淮南一带长期以来战乱不停，于闰十一月，任命朱全忠兼任淮南节度使、东南面招讨使。
English: The imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as the envoy of Huainan Festival and the envoy of southeastern invitation in leap November because of the long-term war in Huainan.

古文：陈敬瑄恶顾彦朗与王建相亲，恐其合兵图己，谋于田令孜，令孜曰： 建，吾子也，不为杨兴元所容，故作贼耳。
现代文：陈敬瑄对顾彦朗与王建相互亲近友好耿耿于怀，担心他们会联合军队来算计自己，便去和田令孜商量，田令孜说： 王建是我的养子，因为杨兴元容不下他，所以作了贼寇。
English: Chen Jingyao was deeply concerned about the close friendship between Gu Yanlang and Wang Jian, worried that they would join forces to calculate themselves, so he went to Wada Lingzi for consultation. Tian Lingzi said: Wang Jian is my adopted son, because Yang Xingyuan cannot tolerate him, so he became a thief.

古文：今折简召之，可致麾下。 
现代文：现在我写封信相召，他会到你的手下效力的。 
English: Now I am writing to summon him, and he will serve under you.

古文：乃遣使以书召之，建大喜，诣梓州见彦朗曰： 十军阿父见召，当往省之。
现代文：于是，田令孜派人给王建送去信函召请他，王建十分高兴，前赴梓州会见顾彦朗说： 神策十军观军容使我的义父田令孜召请我，我应当前去探望。
English: As a result, Tian Rongzi sent a letter to Wang Jian to invite him. Wang Jian was very happy and went to Zizhou to meet Gu Yanlang and said: "God has sent ten armies to watch the army, and my father-in-law Tian Rongzi has invited me. I should go and visit."

古文：因见陈太师，求一大州，若得之，私愿足矣！ 
现代文：顺便去见见太师陈敬，向他要一个大州，如果得到了，我的愿望就得到满足了！ 
English: By the way, I went to see Grand Master Chen Jing and asked him for a large state. If I get it, my wish will be fulfilled!

古文：乃留其家于梓州，率麾精兵二千，与从子宗钅岁、假子宗瑶、宗弼、宗侃、宗弁俱西。
现代文：于是，王建把家人留在梓州，率领手下精壮人马二千，与侄子王宗、养子王宗徭、王宗弼、王宗侃、王宗弁一同向西开进。
English: As a result, Wang Jian left his family in Zizhou and led 2,000 strong men and horses to head west with his nephew Wang Zong, adopted son Wang Zongyao, Wang Zongyao, Wang Zongkan and Wang Zoben.

古文：宗瑶，燕人姜郅；宗弼，许人魏弘夫；宗侃，许人田师侃；宗弁，鹿弁也。
现代文：王宗瑶是燕州人，原名叫姜郅；王宗弼是许州人，原名叫魏弘夫；王宗侃也是许州人，原名叫田师侃；王宗弁原名叫鹿弁。
English: Wang Zonglu is a native of Yanzhou and was originally named Jianglu; Wang Zonglu is a native of Huzhou and was originally named Wei Hongfu; Wang Zokan is also a native of Huzhou and was originally named Tian Shikan; Wang Zuben was originally named Deer Ben.

古文：建至鹿头关，西川参谋乂李谓敬瑄曰： 王建，虎也，奈何延之入室！
现代文：王建到达鹿头关，西川人参谋李对陈敬说： 王建这个人，是一头猛虎，怎么能引他入室呢？
English: Wang Jian arrived at Deer's Head Pass, and the West Sichuan staff officer Li said to Chen Jing: Wang Jian, this person, is a fierce tiger, how can he be brought into the house?

古文：彼安肯为公下乎！ 
现代文：他哪里会甘心情愿地在你的手下！ 
English: Where would he be happy to work under you!

古文：敬瑄悔，亟遣人止之，且增修守备。
现代文：陈敬感到后悔，立即派人去阻止王建西进，并且加强守卫防备。
English: Chen Jing felt regretful and immediately sent someone to stop Wang Jian's westward march and strengthen the guard.

古文：建怒，破关而进，败汉州刺史张顼于绵竹，遂拔汉州，进军学射山，又败西川将句惟立于蚕北，又拔德阳。
现代文：王建很恼怒，攻破鹿头关向前开进，在绵竹打败汉州刺史张顼，于是攻克汉州，向学射山进军，又在成都县的蚕此镇打败西川将领句惟立，接着攻克德阳。
English: Wang Jian was very angry. He broke through the Deer's Head Pass and drove forward. In Mianzhu, he defeated the Hanzhou assassin Zhang Qian. He then conquered Hanzhou, marched to Xueyashan, defeated the West River general Gu Weili in the town of Silkworm in Chengdu County, and then conquered Deyang.

古文：敬瑄遣使让之，对曰： 十军阿父召我来，乃门而拒之，重为顾公所疑，进退无归矣。 
现代文：陈敬派出使者斥责王建，王建回答说： 神策十军观军容使我的义父田令孜召我来，到了门口却又拒绝我，这会让顾彦朗怀疑，我前后都没有归宿了。 
English: Chen Jing sent an envoy to reprimand Wang Jian. Wang Jian replied, "God sent ten armies to watch the military parade to make my father-in-law Tian Lingzi call me, but when he arrived at the door, he refused me. This would make Gu Yanlang suspect that I have no home.

古文：田令孜登楼慰谕之，建与诸将于清远桥上髡发罗拜，曰： 今既无归，且辞阿父作贼矣！ 
现代文：田令孜登上大玄楼慰问劝说王建，王建与各位将领在大玄楼前的清远桥上剃去头发围着下拜，说： 现在我们既然已经没有归宿，那么就辞别义父去作贼寇了！ 
English: Tian Lingze went up to the Great Entrance Hall to offer condolences and persuade Wang Jian. Wang Jian and all the generals shaved their hair on the Qingyuan Bridge in front of the Great Entrance Hall and bowed down, saying: Now that we have no home, then we will say goodbye to our father-in-law and become thieves!

古文：顾彦朗以其弟彦晖为汉州刺史，发兵助建，急攻成都，三日不克而退，还屯汉州。
现代文：顾彦朗委任他的弟弟顾彦晖为汉州刺史，发兵援助王建，猛烈进攻成都，三天没有攻克下来，便退兵撤走，回到汉州驻扎。
English: Gu Yanlang appointed his younger brother Gu Yanju to write the history of Hanzhou, sent troops to aid Wang Jian, and launched a fierce attack on Chengdu. After three days of not conquering the city, he withdrew his troops and returned to Hanzhou.

古文：敬瑄告难于朝，诏遣中使和解之；又令节茂贞以书谕之，皆不从。
现代文：陈敬瑄把王建谋乱一事呈报朝廷，唐僖宗派遣宦官为他们劝和，又命令李茂贞写信劝解，结果都不听从。
English: Chen Jingyao reported Wang Jian's conspiracy to the imperial court, Tang Yanzong sent eunuchs to persuade them to make peace, and ordered Li Maozhen to write a letter of persuasion, but they did not listen.

古文：杨行密欲遣高霸屯天长以拒孙儒，袁袭曰： 霸，高氏旧将，常挟两端，我胜则来，不胜则叛。
现代文：杨行密想派遣高霸驻扎天长以抗击孙儒，袁袭对杨行密说： 高霸是高骈的旧将，反复无常，我们胜了，他前来归附，失利了他又反叛。
English: Yang Xingmi wanted to send Gaoba to stay in Tianchang to fight against Sun Ru. Yuan Li said to Yang Xingmi: Gaoba is an old general of Gaoba. He is capricious. We won. He came to join us. When he lost, he rebelled again.

古文：今处之天长，是自绝其归路也，不如杀之。 
现代文：现在要把他安排到天长，这样他就再也不可能回来了，不如把他杀掉。 
English: Now we're going to put him away for the rest of his natural life, so he'll never be able to come back, so we might as well kill him.

古文：己酉，行密伏甲执霸及丁从实、余绕山，皆杀之。
现代文：已酉，杨行密埋伏下甲士拿获高霸以及丁从实、余绕山，把他们全部杀死。
English: After the battle, Yang Xingmi's ambushed soldiers captured Gaoba, as well as Ding Zongshi and Yu Yuanshan, and killed them all.

古文：又遣千骑掩杀其党于法云寺，死者数千人。
现代文：又派遣一千骑兵在法云寺乘其不备袭击了高霸的部下，杀死几千人。
English: He also dispatched a thousand cavalry to take advantage of his unpreparedness and attacked Gaoba's subordinates in Foyun Temple, killing several thousand people.

古文：是日，大雪，寺外数坊地皆赤。
现代文：这一天，下大雪，法云寺外几条街的地面却都被鲜血染红。
English: On this day, there was heavy snowfall, but the ground of several streets outside the Fayun Temple was stained red with blood.

古文：高暀出走，明日，获而杀之。
现代文：高出寺逃跑，第二天，也被抓获杀死。
English: Koideji ran away and was caught and killed the next day.

古文：吕用之在天长也，绐杨行密日： 用之有银五万铤，埋于所居，克城之日，愿备麾下一醉之资。 
现代文：吕用之在天长时，欺骗杨行密说： 我有银子五万，埋在住所地下，等到攻克广陵城时，我愿意献给你做饮酒庆功的资财。 
English: Lu Yanzhi deceived Yang Xingmin, saying: "I have fifty thousand silver, buried in the basement of my residence. When I conquer Guangling City, I am willing to give you the money to drink and celebrate.

古文：庚戌，行密阅士卒，顾用之曰： 仆射许此曹银，何食言邪！ 
现代文：庚戌，杨行密检阅士卒，回头对吕用之说： 你许诺给他们银子，怎么不履行诺言呀！ 
English: When Geng Yao and Yang Xingmi inspected the soldiers, they turned to Lv Yizhi and said, "You promised to give them money, why didn't you keep your promise?"

古文：因牵下械系，命田頵鞫之，云： 郑杞、董瑾谋因中元夜，邀高骈至其第建黄箓斋，乘其入静，缢杀之，声言上升。
现代文：于是把他拉下戴上刑具，命令田审讯，吕用之说： 我曾与郑杞、董瑾谋划趁七月十五道家的中元日夜晚，邀请高骈到住所摆设黄斋，趁着他入静时，把他勒死，对外就声称高骈升天了。
English: So he pulled him down and put him in a torture device, ordered Tian to interrogate him, and Lyu Yizhong said: I had planned with Zheng Yao and Dong Yao to take advantage of the New Year's Eve night of July 15th to invite Gao Yao to the residence to set up a hongzai, and take advantage of him to strangle him when he fell asleep, and claimed to the outside world that Gao Yao had ascended to heaven.

古文：因令莫邪都帅诸军推用之为节度使。 
现代文：乘机命令莫邪都帅各军拥立我吕用之为节度使。 
English: He took the opportunity to order all the troops to support me and use me as a messenger of discipline.

古文：是日，腰斩用之，怨家刳裂立尽，并诛其族党。
现代文：当天，吕用之被腰斩，和吕用之有怨仇的人立刻把他的尸体切割光，接着又将吕用之的家族党羽诛杀。
English: On the same day, Lü Yingzhi was beheaded, and people with a grudge against Lü Yingzhi immediately cut up his body, and then killed Lü Yingzhi's family members.

古文：军士发其中堂，得桐入，书骈姓名于胸，桎梏而钉之。
现代文：军中士卒打开吕用之的厅堂，搜得一个桐木做的人像，胸部写着高骈的姓名，手上戴着镣铐，身上钉着钉子。
English: An army sergeant opened the hall used by Lyu and found a portrait made of paulownia wood, with Gao Yao's name written on the chest, his hands shackled and nails nailed to his body.

古文：袁袭言于行密曰： 广陵饥弊已甚，蔡贼复来，民必重困，不如避之。 
现代文：袁袭对杨行密说： 广陵城内的饥荒已相当严重，孙儒的蔡州贼寇又来进攻，老百姓一定更加困苦，不如避开这里。 
English: Yuan Wei said to Yang Xingmi: The famine in Guangling City is already quite serious. Sun Ru's Caizhou bandits have attacked again. The common people must be in even greater distress. It is better to avoid this place.

古文：甲寅，行密遣和州将延陵宗以其众二千人归和州，乙卯，又命指挥使蔡俦将兵千人，辎重数千两，归于庐州。
现代文：甲寅，杨行密派遣和州将领延陵宗带领所部人马二千返回和州。乙卯，杨行密又命令指挥使蔡俦带领一千人马，和几千辆车的军需器械、粮草等，回到庐州。
English: In A, Yang Xingmi dispatched He Prefecture General Yan Lingzong to return to He Prefecture with 2,000 men and horses. In B, Yang Xingmi also ordered the commander to have Cai Jun return to He Prefecture with 1,000 men and horses, and several thousand vehicles of military equipment, grain and grass.

古文：赵晖据上元，会周宝败，浙西溃卒多归之，众至数万。
现代文：赵晖占据了上元县，适逢周宝军队溃败，浙西溃散的兵卒大多投归赵晖，他的人马达到几万。
English: Zhao Wei occupied Shangyuan County, which coincided with the defeat of Zhou Bao's army. Most of the soldiers scattered to the west of Zhejiang returned to Zhao Wei, and his manpower reached tens of thousands.

古文：晖遂自骄大，治南朝台城而居之，服用奢僭。
现代文：赵晖于是骄傲自大起来，修治南朝的台城而在那里居住，穿着衣服和使用器物奢侈华丽超越本份。
English: As a result, Zhao Wei became arrogant and lived in Taicheng during the Southern Dynasties, wearing luxurious clothes and using luxurious utensils.

古文：张雄在东塘，晖不与通问。
现代文：张雄在东塘，赵晖不和他通信问候。
English: Zhang Xiong is in Dongtang, and Zhao Jun did not correspond with him for greetings.

古文：雄溯江而上，晖以兵塞其中流。
现代文：张雄沿着长江逆行向上开进，赵晖派出军队在长江中流阻塞张雄人马。
English: Zhang Xiong marched up the Yangtze River in a retrograde direction, and Zhao Wei sent troops to block Zhang Xiong's advance in the middle reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：雄怒，戊午，攻上元，拔之。
现代文：张雄勃然大怒，戊午，攻打上元县，予以占据。
English: Zhang Xiong flew into a rage, and Wu Wu attacked Shangyuan County and occupied it.

古文：晖奔当涂，未至，为其下所杀。
现代文：赵晖逃奔当涂，还没到达那里，就被属下斩杀。
English: Zhao Yao fled to Dangtu, but before he got there, he was killed by his subordinates.

古文：馀众降，雄悉坑之。
现代文：剩余的人马投降，张雄将他们全部活埋。
English: The remaining men and horses surrendered, and Zhang Xiong buried them alive.

古文：硃全忠遣内客将张延范致朝命于杨行密，以行密为淮南节度副使，又以宣武行军司马李璠为淮南留后，遣牙将郭言将兵千人送之。
现代文：朱全忠派遣内客将张廷范向杨行密传达朝廷的命令，任命杨行密为淮南节度副使，并委任宣武行军司马李为淮南留后，派遣牙将郭言带领军队一千人护送他赴送。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent his guest Zhang Tingfan to convey the order of the imperial court to Yang Xingmi, appointed Yang Xingmi as the deputy envoy of Huainan Festival, and appointed Ma Li, the secretary of propaganda and marching troops, to stay in Huainan. After that, he sent the commander Guo Yan to escort him with a thousand troops.

古文：感化节度使时溥自以于全忠为先进，官为都统，顾不得领淮南，而全忠得之，意甚恨望。
现代文：感化节度使时溥自以为在朱全忠之前入仕做官，官职当到都统，反而不能管领淮南，而被朱全忠获得，心中很是怨恨不满。
English: The influence of the festival made Shi Jie think that he had entered the service and became an official before Zhu Quanzhong. When the official post came to Tudong, he could not control Huainan, but was obtained by Zhu Quanzhong. He was very resentful and dissatisfied.

古文：全忠以书假道于溥，溥不许。
现代文：朱全忠写信给时溥希望让李借道经过他那里，时溥不准许。
English: Zhu Quanzhong wrote a letter to Shi Yan, hoping that Li would take a detour to pass by him, but Shi Yan did not allow it.

古文：璠至泗州，溥以兵袭之，郭言力战得免而还，徐、汴始构怨。
现代文：李到达泗州，时溥派令军队袭击他，护送的牙将郭言奋力应战才免于一死退了回来，徐州、汴州从此结下了怨恨。
English: When Li arrived in Ganzhou, Shijiazhuang sent troops to attack him. Guo Yan, the commander of the escort, fought back and was saved from death. From then on, Xuzhou and Ganzhou harbored a grudge.

古文：十二月，癸巳，秦宗权所署山南东道留后赵德諲陷荆南，杀节度使张瑰，留其将王建肇守城而去，遗民才数百家。
现代文：十二月，癸巳，秦宗权所任命的山南东道留后赵德攻克荆南，杀死节度使张，留下属将王建肇守护荆南城然后离去，城中遗留下的百姓只有几百家。
English: In December, after staying in Shannan, Zhao De conquered Jingnan, killed Zhang, who was appointed by Qin Zongquan, and left his subordinate Wang Jian Zhao to guard Jingnan City. There were only a few hundred people left in the city.

古文：饶州刺史陈儒陷衢州。
现代文：饶州刺史陈儒攻克衢州。
English: Raozhou rebelled against Chen Ru and defeated Zhangzhou.

古文：上蔡贼帅冯敬章陷蕲州。
现代文：上蔡贼寇头目冯敬章攻克蕲州。
English: Feng Jingzhang, the leader of the Upper Cai Cleptocracy, conquered Zhangzhou.

古文：乙未，周宝卒于杭州。
现代文：乙未，周宝死于杭州。
English: Second, Zhou Bao died in Hangzhou.

古文：钱镠以杜稜为常州制置使。
现代文：钱委任杜陵为常州制置使。
English: Qian appointed Du Ling as the Changzhou-based envoy.

古文：命阮结等进攻润州，丙申，克之。刘浩走，擒薛朗以归。
现代文：命令阮结等人进攻润州，丙申，攻克润州；刘浩逃走，阮结擒获薛朗返回。
English: He ordered Ruan Jie and others to attack Rongzhou, Bishen to conquer Rongzhou, Liu Hao to escape, and Ruan Jie to capture Xue Long and return.

古文：僖宗惠圣恭定孝皇帝下之下文德元年春，正月，甲寅，孙儒杀秦彦、毕师鐸、郑汉章。
现代文：文德元年春季，正月，甲寅，孙儒将秦彦、毕师铎、郑汉章杀死。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Wende era, in the first month of the year, Gao Yin and Sun Ru killed Qin Yan, Bi Shijuan and Zheng Han Zhang.

古文：彦等之归秦宗衡也，其众犹二千馀人，其后稍稍为儒所夺。裨将唐宏知其必及祸，恐并死，乃诬告彦等潜召汴军。
现代文：秦彦等人归附秦宗衡时，他们的人马还有二千多，后来被孙儒逐渐吞并，秦彦的裨将唐宏知道会遇到大的灾祸，担心一起去送死，于是诬告秦彦等人暗中召来汴州军队。
English: When Qin Yan and others were attached to Qin Zongheng, they still had more than two thousand people. Later, they were gradually absorbed by Sun Ru. Qin Yan's benefactor Tang Hong knew that he would encounter a great disaster and feared that they would be sent to death together, so he falsely accused Qin Yan and others of secretly summoning the Zhangzhou army.

古文：儒杀彦等，以宏为马军使。
现代文：孙儒杀掉秦彦等人，任命唐宏为马军使。
English: Sun Ju killed Qin Yan and others, and appointed Tang Hong as Ma's military envoy.

古文：张守一与吕用之同归杨行密，复为诸将合仙丹，又欲干军府之政，行密怒而杀之。
现代文：张守一当初和吕用之一起归附杨行密，他为各位将领做仙丹，又想干预节度使司的政务，杨行密很恼怒，把他杀掉。
English: Zhang Shouyi was initially attached to Yang Xingmi from the time of Lv Ying, who was a fairy godmother to the generals and also wanted to interfere in the political affairs of the Secretary of the State Council. Yang Xingmi was very angry and killed him.

古文：蔡将石璠将万馀人寇陈、亳，硃全忠遣硃珍、葛从周将数千骑击擒之。
现代文：蔡州将领石带领一万余人侵扰陈州、毫州、朱全忠派遣朱珍、葛从周带领几千骑兵攻打擒拿石。
English: Cai Zhou sent Collar Stone with more than ten thousand people to invade Chen Zhou and Maozhou, Zhu Quanzhong sent Zhu Zhen, and Ge Cong Zhou led several thousand cavalry to attack Jina Stone.

古文：癸亥，以全忠为蔡州四面行营都统，代时溥，诸镇兵皆受全忠节度。
现代文：癸亥，唐僖宗颂诏任命朱全忠为蔡州四面行营都统，取代时溥，各镇军队都受朱全忠指挥调遣。
English: At the end of the Heian period, Zhu Quanzhong was appointed as the commander of all the armies in the four directions of Caizhou by the edict of Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty. He replaced Shi Jia, and the armies of all the towns were commanded and dispatched by Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：张廷范至广陵，杨行密厚礼之。及闻李璠来为留后，怒，有不受之色。
现代文：张廷范到达广陵，杨行密以隆重的礼节接待他；等到听说李要来做淮南留后，便很不满，显同不接受的脸色。
English: When Zhang Tingfan arrived in Guangling, Yang Xingmi received him with grand etiquette; when he heard that Li was coming to stay in Huainan, he was very dissatisfied and showed the same unacceptable face.

古文：廷范密使人白全忠，宜自以大军赴镇，全忠从之。至宋州，廷范自广陵逃来，曰： 行密未可图也。 
现代文：张廷范秘密派人告诉朱全忠，应当亲自率领大军赶赴广陵，朱全忠听从了他的意见；朱全忠到达宋州时，张廷范从广陵逃来，说： 杨行密不便谋取。 
English: Zhang Tingfan secretly sent someone to tell Zhu Quanzhong that he should personally lead a large army to rush to Guangling, and Zhu Quanzhong listened to his opinion; when Zhu Quanzhong arrived in Songzhou, Zhang Tingfan fled from Guangling and said: Yang Xingmei is inconvenient to seek.

古文：甲子，李璠至，言徐军遮道，全忠乃止。
现代文：甲子，李赶到，说时溥的徐州军队拦住了前方的道路，朱全忠于是停止进军。
English: Once Li arrived, he said, the timid Xuzhou army blocked the road ahead, and Zhu Quanzhong stopped marching.

古文：丙寅，钱镠斩薛朗，剖其心以祭周宝，以阮结为润州制置使。
现代文：丙寅，钱斩杀薛朗，剖开他的心脏以癸奠周宝，委任阮结为润州制置使。
English: Cui Yin, Qian killed Xue Lang, cut open his heart to pay tribute to Zhou Bao, and appointed Ruan Jie as the Yongzhou construction and installation envoy.

古文：二月，硃全忠奏以杨行密为淮南留后。
现代文：二月，朱全忠奏请任命杨行密为淮南留后。
English: In February, Zhu Quanzhong asked Yang Xingmi to stay in Huainan.

古文：乙亥，上不豫。
现代文：乙亥，唐僖宗患病。
English: On the 19th, the world was pardoned.

古文：壬午，发风翔。己丑，至长安。
现代文：壬午，唐僖宗从凤翔出发，己丑，到达长安。
English: In the morning of the third day of the third month, Tang Xizong set out from Fengxiang and arrived in Chang'an.

古文：庚寅，赦天下，改元。
现代文：庚寅，天下大赦，改年号为文德。
English: Geng Yin, amnesty to the world, change the year.

古文：以韦昭度兼中书令。
现代文：朝廷任命韦昭度兼任中书令。
English: The imperial court appointed Wei Zhaodu to serve as the second-in-command.

古文：魏博节度使乐彦祯，骄泰不法，发六州民筑罗城，方八十里，人苦其役。
现代文：魏博节度使乐彦祯，骄横不法，征发六州的人民，在魏州城墙外修筑外城方圆八十里，人们苦于沉重的劳役。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made the people of the six prefectures arrogant, arrogant and lawless, and built an outer city with a radius of eighty miles outside the walls of Weizhou. People suffered from heavy labor.

古文：其子从训，尤凶险，既杀王鐸，魏人皆恶之。
现代文：乐彦祯的儿子乐从训尤其凶狠险恶，他杀害了王铎以后，魏州的老百姓都憎恨他。
English: Le Congxun, the son of Le Yanxuan, was particularly vicious and sinister. After he killed Wang Yao, the people of Wei Zhou hated him.

古文：从训聚亡命五百馀人为亲兵，谓之子将。牙兵疑之，籍籍不安。
现代文：乐从训召集亡命徒五百多人组成亲军，称为 子将 ，魏州牙兵对此有了疑心，吵闹不安。
English: Le called up more than 500 deserters from the training to form a pro-army, known as Zi Zheng, but the Wei Zhou dental soldiers were suspicious and noisy.

古文：从训惧，易服逃出，止于近县，彦祯因以为相州刺史。
现代文：乐从训十分恐惧，更换衣服逃出魏州城，停留在附近州县，乐彦祯于是委任乐从训做相州刺史。
English: Le Congxun was very afraid, so he changed his clothes and fled from Weizhou City and stayed in the nearby counties. Le Yanjun then appointed Le Congxun to be the chief historian of Xiangzhou.

古文：从训遣人至魏运甲兵、金帛，交错于路，牙兵益疑。
现代文：乐从训派人到魏州拉运甲胄武器、金银布帛，来往于道路，牙兵更加疑虑。
English: Le sent people from the training to Weizhou to transport armor, weapons, gold and silver cloth, and to and from the road, the dental soldiers were more doubtful.

古文：彦祯惧，请避位，居龙兴寺为僧，从推都将赵文弁知留后事。
现代文：乐彦祯害怕出事，请求离开魏博节度使的官位，隐居到龙兴寺做僧人，大家公推都将赵文主持魏博留后事宜。
English: Fearing an accident, Le Yanju requested to leave the post of Wei Bo's festival envoy and live in seclusion as a monk at Longxing Temple. Everyone publicly recommended that Zhao Wen preside over Wei Bo's post-stay affairs.

古文：从训引兵三万至城下，文弁不出战，众复杀之，推牙将贵乡罗弘信知留后事。
现代文：乐从训带领军队三万到达魏州城下；赵文不出城迎战，大家又把他杀掉，推举牙将、贵乡人罗弘信掌管魏博留后事宜。
English: Le Zongxun led an army of thirty thousand to the city of Weizhou; Zhao Wen did not leave the city to fight, everyone killed him again, and promoted the commander of the teeth, Luo Hongxin, who was from Guixiang, to be in charge of the affairs of Weibao.

古文：先是，人有言 见白须翁，言弘信当为地主 者。
现代文：在这之前，有人说： 看到一个白胡须老人，他说罗弘信应当做这里的主将。 
English: Before that, someone said, "I saw an old man with a white beard, and he said that Luo Hongxin should be the captain here."

古文：文弁既死，众群聚呼曰： 谁欲为节度使者？ 
现代文：赵文既然死了，众人便聚集呼喊说： 有谁想做节度使？ 
English: Now that Zhao Wen was dead, the crowd gathered and shouted, "Who wants to be the festival marshal?

古文：弘信出应曰： 白须翁已命我矣。 
现代文：罗弘信出来答应说： 那个白须老人已经指定我了。 
English: Luo Hongxin came out and promised, "That white-bearded old man has already designated me."

古文：众环视曰： 可也。 
现代文：众人围看后说： 可以。 
English: After everyone looked around, they said, "Yes."

古文：遂立之。
现代文：于是拥立罗弘信为魏博留后。
English: As a result, Luo Hongxin was appointed as Wei Bo's successor.

古文：弘信引兵出，与从训战，败之。
现代文：罗弘信带领军队出城，与乐从训交战，打败了乐从训。
English: Luo Hongxin led the army out of the city, fought with Le Congxun and defeated Le Congxun.

古文：从训收馀众保内黄，魏人围之。
现代文：乐从训收集剩余的人马退保内黄，魏州军队随着围攻内黄。
English: Le Congxun gathered the remaining men and horses to withdraw from Inner Huang, and the Weizhou army followed to besiege Inner Huang.

古文：先是，硃全忠将讨蔡州，遣押牙雷鄴以银万两请籴于魏。牙兵既逐彦祯，杀鄴于馆。
现代文：在这之前，朱全忠要讨伐蔡州，派遣押牙将雷邺带着白银一万两到魏州请求购买粮食，魏州牙兵既然驱逐了节度使乐彦祯，便将雷邺在馆舍斩杀。
English: Prior to this, Zhu Quanzhong wanted to attack Caizhou. He sent Li Jian, the commander of the Wei State Dental Corps, with ten thousand taels of silver to Weizhou to request the purchase of grain. Since the Wei State Dental Corps had expelled the imperial envoy Le Yanqian, Li Jianqian was beheaded in the palace.

古文：从训既败，乃求救于全忠。
现代文：乐从训失败以后，即向朱全忠请求救援。
English: After Le failed the training, he asked Zhu Quanzhong for help.

古文：初，河阳节度使李罕之与河南尹张全义刻臂为盟，相得欢甚。
现代文：当初，河阳节度使李罕之与河南尹张全义在臂膀刺字结盟，彼此相处十分融洽。
English: At first, the Heyang Festival made Li Han Zhi and Henan Yin Zhang Quan Yi have an alliance in the arm tattoo, and they got along very well with each other.

古文：罕之勇而无谋，性复贪暴，意轻全义，闻其勤俭力穑，笑曰： 此田舍一夫耳！ 
现代文：李罕之勇猛而没有智谋，性情又贪婪粗暴，心中轻视张全义，他听说张全义勤奋节俭注重农耕，嘲笑说： 这不过是一个田间的农夫罢了！ 
English: Li Han was brave but not clever. He was greedy and rude. He despised Zhang Quanzhi in his heart. When he heard that Zhang Quanzhi was diligent, frugal and focused on farming, he scoffed and said, "This is just a farmer in the field!"

古文：全义闻之，不以为忤。
现代文：张全义听到这话，并不和他计较做对。
English: When Zhang Quanyi heard this, he did not hesitate to do the right thing.

古文：罕之屡求谷帛，全义皆与之，而罕之征求无厌，河南不能给，小不如所欲，辄械河南注吏至河阳杖之，河南将佐皆愤怒。
现代文：李罕之多次向张全义索要谷物布帛，张全义每次都给他。可是李罕之索要没有止境，河南难以供给，稍微不能满足他的欲望，他就用刑具拘拿河南的官吏押到河阳用棍棒欧打，河南的将领佐官都很愤怒。
English: Li Hanzhi repeatedly asked Zhang Quanyi for grain cloth, and Zhang Quanyi gave it to him every time. However, Li Hanzhi's demands were endless, Henan was difficult to supply, and he could not satisfy his desires. He used torture instruments to detain Henan officials and pushed them to Heyang to beat them with sticks. Henan's generals and adjutants were very angry.

古文：全义曰： 李太傅所求，奈何不与！ 
现代文：张全义却说： 太尉李罕之所要的东西，怎么能不给！ 
English: Zhang Quanyi, however, said: "How can we not give Captain Li Han what he wants!

古文：竭力奉之，状若畏之者，罕之益骄。
现代文：竭力奉送，样子象怕李罕之似的，李罕之便更加骄横起来。
English: He tried his best to serve the food, looking as if he was afraid of Li Han, but Li Han became even more arrogant.

古文：罕之所部不耕稼，专以剽掠为资，啖人为粮，至是悉其众攻绛州，绛州刺史王友遇降之；进攻晋州，护国节度使王重盈密结全义以图之。
现代文：李罕之的手下人马不耕种庄稼，专门通过抢劫掠夺搜刮资财，吃人肉当作粮食，到这时李罕之发动全部人马攻打绛州，绛州刺史王友遇投降。李罕之又进攻晋州，护国节度使王重盈暗中联合张全义以图谋对付李罕之。
English: Li Hangzhi's men and horses did not cultivate crops, they specialized in robbing and pillaging for money, and eating human flesh for food. At this time, Li Hangzhi launched all the men and horses to attack Zhangzhou, and Zhangzhou's prince Wang You surrendered. Li Hangzhi also attacked Jinzhou, and the national defense festival made Wang Chongyun secretly unite with Zhang Quanyi to plot against Li Hangzhi.

古文：全义潜发屯兵，夜乘虚袭河阳，黎明，入三城，罕之逾垣步走，全义悉俘其家，遂兼领河阳节度使。
现代文：张全义暗中派发河南各县的民兵，夜间，趁着李罕之防备空虚攻打河阳，黎明时分，张全义的人马进入河阳三个城区，李罕之翻过城墙徒步逃跑，张全义把李罕之的家人全部俘获，于是兼任河阳节度使。
English: Zhang Quanyi secretly dispatched militiamen from various counties in Henan. At night, he took advantage of Li Han's lack of preparedness to attack Heyang. At dawn, Zhang Quanyi's men and horses entered the three urban areas of Heyang. Li Han climbed over the city wall to escape on foot. Zhang Quanyi captured all of Li Han's family members, so he also served as the festival envoy of Heyang.

古文：罕之奔泽州，求救于李克用。
现代文：李罕之逃奔泽州，向李克用请求救援。
English: Li Han fled to Zhezhou and asked Li Ke for help.

古文：三月，戊戌朔，日有食之，既。
现代文：三月，戊戌朔，发生日食，是日全食。
English: In March, the solar eclipse occurred. It was a total solar eclipse.

古文：己亥，上疾复作，壬寅，大渐。
现代文：己亥，唐僖宗疾病再次发作，壬寅，病情恶化。
English: Ji Hai, Tang Yanzong's illness flares up again, Ren Yin, his condition worsens.

古文：皇弟吉王保，长而贤，群臣属望。
现代文：僖宗的弟弟吉王李保，年龄大又有才能，朝中群臣都寄希望于他。
English: Yi Zong's younger brother, Ji Wang Li Bao, was old and talented, and all the courtiers in the court pinned their hopes on him.

古文：十军观军容使杨复恭请立其弟寿王杰。
现代文：神策十军观军容使杨复恭却请求拥立僖宗的弟弟寿王李杰。
English: However, Yang Fuqiong, who was a military strategist, asked Shouwang Lijie, the younger brother of Shunzong, to support him.

古文：是日，下诏，立杰为皇太弟，监军国事。
现代文：这一天，颁下诏书，立李杰为皇太弟，摄理军国大事。
English: On this day, the imperial rescript was issued, and Li Jie was appointed as the emperor's younger brother and the supervisor of military affairs.

古文：右军中尉刘季述遣兵迎杰于六王宅，入居少阳院，宰相以下就见之。
现代文：右军中尉刘季述派遣军队到六王宅迎接李杰，迁入少阳院居住，自宰相以下朝中大臣都到少阳院拜见李杰。
English: Liu Jishu, a lieutenant of the Right Army, dispatched troops to the residence of the six kings to meet Li Jie, and moved to live in Shao Yang Yuan. From the prime minister down, all the ministers of the Middle Kingdom came to Shao Yang Yuan to meet Li Jie.

古文：癸卯，上崩于灵符殿。
现代文：癸卯，唐僖宗在灵符殿驾崩。
English: Meanwhile, Tang Yanzong passed away in the Hall of Spiritual Symbols.

古文：遗制，太弟杰更名敏，以韦昭度摄冢宰。
现代文：留下诏令，太弟李杰改名李敏，任命韦昭摄冢宰，主持后事。
English: Li Jie, the eldest brother, changed his name to Li Min and appointed Wei Zhao as the regent to preside over the succession.

古文：昭宗即位，体貌明粹，有英气，喜文学，以僖宗威令不振，朝廷日卑，有恢复前烈之志，尊礼大臣，梦想贤豪，践阼之始，中外忻忻焉。
现代文：唐昭宗李敏即位，昭宗体貌精明强干，有英武气概，喜好书文学习，因为唐僖宗时皇威法令不振作，朝廷的地位越来越低下，他便有恢复他从前功业的大志，尊重朝中大臣，渴望贤能豪杰，登基不久，朝廷内外很有些起色。
English: Li Min, the Tang Zhaozong, ascended the throne. Zhaozong was a shrewd and strong-willed man with a military bearing and a penchant for studying literature. Because the imperial decrees were not vigorous during the reign of Tang Xizong, and the status of the imperial court was declining, he had a great ambition to restore his former career, respected the ministers of the dynasty, and longed for talented heroes. Not long after he ascended the throne, there was some improvement inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：硃全忠裹粮于宋州，将讨秦宗权，会乐从训来告急，乃移军屯滑州，遣都押牙李唐宾等将步骑三万攻蔡州，遣都指挥使硃珍等分兵救乐从训。
现代文：朱全忠在宋州裹带粮食，要攻打秦宗权。恰逢乐从训前来向他求援，朱全忠于是把军队调到滑州驻扎，派遣都押牙李唐宾等人带领步兵、骑兵三万人攻打蔡州，派遣都指挥使朱珍等人分别带领军队去救援乐从训。
English: Zhu Quanzhong was packing grain in Songzhou to attack Qin Zongquan. When Le Congxun came to him for help, Zhu Quanzhong transferred the army to Slanting and stationed it there. He sent Duasiya Li Tangbin and others to lead 30,000 infantry and cavalry to attack Caizhou, and sent Duasiya commander Zhu Zhen and others to lead the army to rescue Le Congxun.

古文：自白马济河，下黎阳、临河、李固三镇，进至内黄，败魏军万馀人，获其将周儒等十人。
现代文：从白马渡过黄河，攻克黎阳、临河、李固三个镇，开进到内黄，打败魏州军队一万余人，擒获魏州军队将领周儒等十人。
English: They crossed the Yellow River from Baima, conquered the three towns of Liyang, Linhe and Ligu, and drove into Inner Yellow, defeating more than ten thousand people of the Weizhou army, and captured ten people including Zhou Ru, the general of the Weizhou army.

古文：李克用以其将康君立为南面招讨使，督李存孝、薛阿檀、史俨、安全俊、安休休五将、骑七千，助李罕之攻河阳。
现代文：李克用委任属将康君立为南面招讨使，督率李存孝、薛阿檀、史俨、安金俊、安休休五位将领和骑兵七千，前去援助李罕之攻打河阳。
English: Li Ke appointed his subordinate general Kang Junli as the southern envoy, and led five generals, Li Cunxiao, Xue Atan, Shi Yan, An Jinjun and An Xiuxu, and seven thousand cavalry to assist Li Han in the attack on Heyang.

古文：张全义婴城自守，城中食尽，求救于硃全忠，以妻子为质。
现代文：张全义据城固守，河阳城内粮食没有了，张全义向朱全忠请求救援，让妻子儿女做人质。
English: Zhang Quanzhong held fast to the city, there was no food in the city of Heyang, Zhang Quanzhong asked Zhu Quanzhong for rescue, and let his wife and children be hostages.

古文：王建攻彭州，陈敬瑄救之，乃去。
现代文：王建进攻彭州，陈敬救助彭州，王建于是离去。
English: Wang Jian attacked Pengzhou, Chen Jing saved Pengzhou, and Wang Jian then left.

古文：建大掠西川，十二州皆被其患。
现代文：王建到西川大肆抢掠，西川的十二个州都遭受蹂躏。
English: Wang Jian went to Xichuan to loot and pillage, and the twelve prefectures of Xichuan were ravaged.

古文：夏，四月，庚午，追尊上母王氏曰恭宪皇后。
现代文：夏季，四月，庚午，唐昭宗追尊生母王氏为恭宪皇后。
English: In the summer, in April, in the late afternoon, Emperor Zhaozong of Tang pursued his biological mother Wang to become the Empress of Gongxian.

古文：壬午，孙儒袭扬州，克之。杨行密出走，儒自称淮南节度使。
现代文：壬午，孙儒攻打扬州，攻克扬州城；杨行密离开扬州逃走，孙儒自称淮南节度使。
English: At noon, Sun Ru attacked Yangzhou and conquered Yangzhou City; Yang Xingmi left Yangzhou and fled, and Sun Ru called himself the envoy of Huainan Festival.

古文：行密将奔海陵，袁袭劝归庐州，再为进取之计，从之。
现代文：杨行密要投奔海陵，袁袭劝他回到庐州，再作进攻打算，杨行密听从了袁袭的意见。
English: Yang Xingmi wanted to go to Hailing. Yuan Zai advised him to return to Zhangzhou and plan another attack. Yang Xingmi listened to Yuan Zai's advice.

古文：硃全忠遣其将丁会、葛从周，牛存节将兵数万救河阳。
现代文：朱全忠派遣属下将领丁会、葛从周、牛存节带领军队几万人救援河阳。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched his subordinate generals Ding Hui, Ge Cong Zhou, and Niu Cun Si to lead tens of thousands of troops to rescue Heyang.

古文：李存孝令李罕之以步兵攻城，自帅骑兵逆战于温，河东军败，安休休惧罪，奔蔡州。
现代文：李存孝命令李罕之带领步兵攻城，自己率领骑兵在温县迎战，河东军队大败，安休休惧怕治罪，逃奔蔡州。
English: Li Cunxiao ordered Li Hanzhi to lead the infantry to attack the city, and he himself led the cavalry to fight in Wen County. The Hedong army was defeated, and Anxiu Xiu, afraid of being punished, fled to Caizhou.

古文：汴人分兵欲断太行路，康君立等惧，引兵还。
现代文：朱全忠分派汴州军队想要截断河阳以北的太行路，康君立等河东将领很恐惧，当即带领人马返回。
English: Zhu Quanzhong dispatched the Bozhou army to cut off the Taihang Road north of Heyang. The generals of Hedong, such as Kang Junli, were very afraid and immediately led the troops back.

古文：全忠表丁会为河阳留后，复以张全义为河南尹。
现代文：朱全忠进呈表章，任命丁会为河阳留后，又任命张全义为河南尹。
English: Zhu Quanzhong presented the medal, and after appointing Ding Hui to stay in Henan, he also appointed Zhang Quanzhong to stay in Henan.

古文：会，寿春人；存节，博昌人也。
现代文：丁会，是寿春人；牛存节，是博昌人。
English: Ding Hui is from Shouchun; Niu Cun Jie is from Bochang.

古文：全义德全忠出己，由是尽心附之，全忠每出战，全义主给其粮仗无乏。
现代文：张全义感激朱全忠救出自己，因此诚心实意地归附他，朱全忠每次出兵作战，张全义主持供给粮食兵器，从来没有缺乏。
English: Zhang Quanyi was grateful to Zhu Quanzhong for saving him, so he sincerely joined him. Every time Zhu Quanzhong sent troops to fight, Zhang Quanyi presided over the supply of grain weapons, and there was never a shortage.

古文：李罕之为泽州刺史，领河阳节度使。
现代文：李罕之做泽州刺史，兼任河阳节度使。
English: Li Han served as the chief historian of Zhezhou and also as the chief envoy of the Heyang Festival.

古文：罕之留其子颀事克用，身还泽州，专以寇钞为事，自怀、孟、晋、绛数百里间，州无刺史，县无令长，田无麦禾，邑无烟火者，殆将十年。
现代文：留下他的儿子李颀侍奉李克用，自己回到泽州，专门做侵扰掠夺等事，从怀州、孟州、晋州、绛州几百里的范围，州府没有刺史，县衙没有县令长官，田间见不到谷麦庄稼，落小城看不到百姓做饭的烟火，持续将近十年。
English: He left his son, Li Qian, to serve Li Ke, and returned to Zhezhou on his own, specifically to do things such as intrusion and plunder. From Waizhou, Mengzhou, Jinzhou, and Zhangzhou, there is a range of several hundred miles. The state capital does not have a history, the county government does not have a county magistrate, the fields can not see the grain and wheat crops, and the fireworks of the people cooking can not be seen in the small town. It lasted for nearly ten years.

古文：河中、绛州之间有摩云山，绝高，民保聚其上，寇盗莫能近。罕之攻拔之，时人谓之 李摩云 。
现代文：河中、绛州之间有一座摩云山，高耸入云，百姓自相保护聚集在这座山上，贼寇强盗不能接近，李罕之攻打占据了这座山，因此当时人们都叫他 李摩云 。
English: In the middle of the river and between Zhangzhou, there was a mountain called Moyun Mountain, towering into the clouds. The people gathered on this mountain to protect themselves. Thieves and robbers could not get close. Li Han's attack occupied the mountain, so people called him Li Moyun at that time.

古文：乐从训移军洹水，罗弘信遣其将程公信击从训，斩之，与父彦祯皆枭首军门。
现代文：乐从训率领军队转移到洹水，罗弘信派遣属下将领程公信攻打乐从训，将乐从训斩杀，与他的父亲乐彦祯一起在军营大门悬首示众。
English: Le Congxun led the army to Surabaya, and Luo Hongxin sent his subordinate general, Cheng Gongxin, to attack Le Congxun and kill him. He and his father, Le Hanzhong, displayed their heads together at the gate of the military camp.

古文：癸巳，遣使以厚币犒全忠军，请修好，全忠乃召军还。
现代文：癸巳，罗弘信派出使者带着十分丰厚的礼物犒劳朱全忠的军队，希望与他和好，朱全忠于是召令军队撤回。
English: At this time, Luo Hongxin sent an envoy with a very rich gift to reward Zhu Quanzhong's army, hoping to make peace with him. Zhu Quanzhong then ordered the army to withdraw.

古文：诏以罗弘信权知魏博留后。
现代文：昭宗颁布诏令，任命罗弘信暂代魏博留后。
English: Zhaozong issued a decree, appointing Luo Hongxin to temporarily replace Wei Boluo.

古文：归州刺史郭禹击荆南，逐王建肇，建肇奔黔州。
现代文：归州刺史郭禹攻打荆南，驱逐王建肇，王建肇逃奔黔州。
English: Guo Yu attacked Jingnan, expelled Wang Jian Zhao, and Wang Jian Zhao fled to Ganzhou.

古文：诏以禹为荆南留后。
现代文：昭宗颁诏任命郭禹为荆南留后。
English: After the imperial edict was issued by Emperor Zhaozong, Guo Yu was appointed as Jingnan's successor.

古文：荆南兵荒之馀，止有一十七家，禹厉精为治，抚集凋残，通商务农，晚年殆及万户。
现代文：荆南兵荒马乱之后，仅仅剩下十七家，郭禹振作精神设法治理，抚慰安定疲惫受难的人民，疏通货物买卖，注重农田耕作，到郭禹死前夕，荆南已将近一万民户。
English: After the Jingnan soldiers and horses ran amok, only 17 households remained. Guo Yu tried to control the situation, soothe the tired and suffering people, unclog the trade of goods, and pay attention to farmland cultivation. By the eve of Guo Yu's death, there were nearly 10,000 households in Jingnan.

古文：时籓镇各务兵力相残，莫以养民为事，独华州刺史韩建招抚流散，劝课农桑，数年之间，民富军赡。
现代文：那时各藩镇把招兵买马相互残杀视作要务，而不抚养人民，唯有华州刺史韩建招抚流散的百姓，勉励督促人民勤于农间耕种和栽桑养蚕，几年的时间，百姓家中富有，军队供给充裕。
English: At that time, the various provinces and towns regarded the recruitment of soldiers and horses to kill each other as an important task, but did not raise the people. Only Huazhou Zhishi Hanjian recruited the scattered people, encouraged and urged the people to be diligent in farming and planting mulberry and raising silkworms. For several years, the people's homes were rich and the army was well supplied.

古文：时人谓之北韩南郭。
现代文：当时人们称之北有韩建南有郭禹。
English: At that time, people said that the North had Han Jian and the South had Guo Yu.

古文：秦宗权别将常厚据夔州，禹与其将汝阳许存攻夺之。
现代文：秦宗权的另外一个将领常厚占据夔州，郭禹与他的手下将领汝阳人许存攻打夺占了夔州。
English: Qin Zongquan's other general, Chang Hou, occupied Zhangzhou, while Guo Yu and his subordinate general, Ruyang Ren Xu Cun, attacked and occupied Zhangzhou.

古文：久之，朝廷以禹为荆南节度使，建肇为武泰节度使。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷任命郭禹为荆南节度使，王建肇为武泰节度使。
English: After a long time, the imperial court appointed Guo Yu as the Jingnan Festival envoy, and Wang Jian Zhao as the Wu Tai Festival envoy.

古文：禹奏复姓名为成汭。
现代文：郭禹向皇帝奏请恢复他的原姓名成。
English: Guo Yu appealed to the emperor to restore his original name.

古文：加李克用兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷加封李克用兼任侍中。
English: The imperial court awarded Li Kegui the additional title of samurai and made him an aide-de-camp.

古文：五月，己亥，加硃全忠兼侍中。
现代文：五月，己亥，朝廷加封朱全忠兼任侍中。
English: In May, Ji Hai, the imperial court appointed Zhu Quanzhong as an aide-de-camp.

古文：赵德諲既失荆南，且度秦宗权必败，壬寅，举山南东道来降，且自托于硃全忠。
现代文：赵德既然失去了荆南，并且推测秦宗权一定会失败，便于壬寅，带领山南东道的全部人马来向朱中投降，并且把他自己托付给朱全忠。
English: Since Zhao De had lost Jingnan, and assumed that the Qin suzerainty would certainly fail, it was convenient for Ren Yin to lead all the men and horses of Shannan Dongdao to surrender to Zhu Zhong, and entrust himself to Zhu Quanzhong.

古文：全忠表请以德諲自副，制以山南东道为忠义军，以德諲为节度使，充蔡州四面行营副都统。
现代文：朱全忠进呈表章奏请以赵德做自己的辅佐，唐昭宗颁发诏令，命山南东道军队为忠义军，任命赵德为节度使，充任蔡州四面行营副都统。
English: Zhu Quanzhong presented a medal and asked Zhao De to be his assistant. Tang Zhaozong issued a decree, ordering the Shannan host army to be a loyalist army, appointing Zhao De as the festival envoy, and acting as the deputy governor of all four sides of Caizhou.

古文：硃全忠既得洛、孟，无西顾之忧，乃大发兵击秦宗权，大破宗权于蔡州之南，克北关门。
现代文：朱全忠既然获得了洛州、孟州，没有西面的顾虑，于是大规模发动军队攻打秦宗权，在蔡州的南部把秦宗权打得大败，攻克北关门。
English: Since Zhu Quanzhong had gained Lozhou and Mengzhou, he had no worries about the West, so he launched a large-scale army to attack Qin Zongquan, defeated Qin Zongquan in the southern part of Caizhou, and conquered Beichuanmen.

古文：宗权屯守中州，全忠分诸将为二十八寨以环之。
现代文：秦宗权驻扎固守中州，朱全忠分派各位将领设置二十八个营寨，把秦宗权围困起来。
English: Qin Zongquan garrisoned Zhongzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong dispatched generals to set up 28 encampments to besiege Qin Zongquan.

古文：加凤翔节度使李茂贞检校侍中。
现代文：朝廷加封凤翔节度使李茂贞为检校侍中。
English: The imperial court added Fengxiang's title to Li Maozhen's, making Li Maozhen a school inspector.

古文：陈敬瑄方与王建相攻，贡赋中绝。
现代文：陈敬瑄正与王建相互攻战，因而断绝了向朝廷进贡纳赋。
English: Chen Jingyao was at war with Wang Jian, so he cut off the tribute to the imperial court.

古文：建以成都尚强，退无所掠，欲罢兵，周庠、綦毋谏以为不可，庠曰： 邛州城堑完固，食支数年，可据之以为根本。 
现代文：王建因为成都的军队还很强大，后退又没有什么可抢掠的，想停战撤兵，周庠、綦毋谏认为不能这样，周庠说： 邛州城堑壕完整坚固，粮食可供给几年，应当占据这里作为立脚之地。 
English: Wang Jian, because Chengdu's army is still very strong, retreating and there is nothing to loot, wants to stop the war and withdraw troops. Zhou Ye and Zou Ye do not think this is possible. Zhou Ye said: Zhangzhou City's trenches are complete and solid, and grain can be provided for several years. It should occupy here as a foothold.

古文：建曰： 吾在军中久，观用兵者不倚天子之重，则众心易离。不若疏敬瑄之罪，表请朝廷，命大臣为帅而佐之，则功庶可成。 
现代文：王建说： 我在军营中的时间很长了，观察那些统率军队的人，如果不倚仗天子的恩威，就容易造成人心离散；我们不如东述斥责陈敬罪状，进呈表章请求朝廷，任命朝中大臣做统帅，我们来辅助他，那么大业差不多就可以成功了。 
English: Wang Jian said: I have been in the military camp for a long time. Observing those who lead the army, if they do not rely on the grace of the Son of Heaven, it is easy to cause the hearts of the people to be scattered. We should not only reprimand Chen Jie for his crimes, but also submit a petition to the imperial court, appoint the Minister of the DPRK and China as the commander, and we will assist him. Then the great cause can almost succeed.

古文：乃使庠草表，请讨敬瑄以赎罪，因求邛州。
现代文：于是，王建让周庠起草表章，向朝廷请求讨讨陈敬来赎自己的罪过，并趁便索求邛州。
English: As a result, Wang Jian asked Zhou Jun to draw up a form and ask the court to discuss Chen Jing to atone for his sins, and took the opportunity to demand Zhangzhou.

古文：顾彦朗亦表请赦建罪，移敬瑄它镇以靖两川。
现代文：顾彦朗也上表请求赦免王建的罪过，把陈敬调到其他镇所，以便安定东川、西川。
English: Gu Yanlang also publicly asked for Wang Jian's sins to be pardoned, and Chen Jing was transferred to other townships in order to stabilize the East River and West River.

古文：初，黄巢之乱，上为寿王，从僖宗幸蜀。
现代文：起初，黄巢发动叛动，昭宗身为寿王，跟随僖宗巡行蜀地。
English: At first, Huang Chao launched a rebellion, and Zhaozong, as the King of Shou, followed Shanzong on a tour of Shu.

古文：时事出仓猝，诸王多徒行至山谷中，寿王疲乏，不能前，卧磻石上。
现代文：当时事发仓猝匆忙，各王大多步行在高山深谷之中，寿王疲惫乏力，难以向前行进，躺在岩石上面休息。
English: At that time, the incident was sudden and hurried. Most of the kings were walking in the high mountains and deep valleys. Shou Wang was tired and weak, and it was difficult to move forward. He lay down on the rock and rested.

古文：田令孜自后至，趣之行，王曰： 足痛，幸军容给一马。 
现代文：田令孜从后面赶来，催促他行走，寿王说： 我脚疼，希望你给我一匹马。 
English: Tian Lingzi came from behind and urged him to walk. Shou Wang said, "My feet hurt, I hope you will give me a horse."

古文：令孜曰： 此深山，安得马！ 
现代文：田令孜说： 在这深山里，哪里有马！ 
English: Tian Lingzi said: In this deep mountain, where are the horses!

古文：以鞭抶王使前，王顾而不言，心衔之。
现代文：用鞭子抽打寿王命他起身快走，寿王回头盯着田令孜而不说话，心中十分怨恨他。
English: He whipped Shou Wang Sheng and made him get up and walk quickly. Shou Wang Sheng stared back at Tian Ling Zi without speaking, his heart was full of resentment towards him.

古文：及即位，遣人监西川军，令孜不奉诏。
现代文：等到即位，派遣他人摄理西川军队，田令孜拒不奉行诏令。
English: When he ascended the throne, he sent someone else to take charge of the Nishikawa army, but Tian Lingzi refused to follow the edict.

古文：上言愤籓镇跋扈，欲以威制之。
现代文：昭宗正在愤恨各藩镇骄横跋扈，想通过皇帝的威势制裁。
English: Zhaozong was resenting the arrogance of the various provinces and towns and wanted to use the emperor's power to impose sanctions.

古文：会得彦朗、建表，以令孜所恃者敬瑄耳，六月，以韦昭度兼中书令，充西川节度使，兼西川招抚制置等使，征敬瑄为龙武统军。
现代文：恰有顾彦朗、王建进呈表章，认为田令孜有恃无恐是因为他依靠陈敬，六月，昭宗便任命韦昭度兼任中书令，充当西川节度使，兼任两川招抚制置等使，征调陈敬为龙武统军。
English: Gu Yanlang and Wang Jianjin presented the medals, and thought that Tian Lingzhe was fearless because he relied on Chen Jing. In June, Zhaozong appointed Wei Zhaodu to also serve as the secretary of the CPC Central Committee, to serve as the envoy of the Nishikawa Festival, to also serve as the envoy of the two rivers to recruit and install, and to recruit Chen Jing as the Longwu unified army.

古文：王建军新都，时绵竹土豪何义阳、安仁费师懃等所在拥兵自保，众或万人，少者千人。建遣王宗瑶说之，皆帅众附于建，给其资粮，建军复振。
现代文：王建在新都驻扎，当时绵竹土豪何义阳、安仁人费师等人在当地拥有军队自相保护，人马多的达一万人，少的也有一千人；王建派遣王宗瑶去劝说他们，结果都率领所部人马归附王建，向王建供给资财粮食，王建的军队又振作起来。
English: Wang Jian was stationed in the new capital. At that time, Mianzhu local strongman He Yiyang, An Ren Ren Feishi and others had an army to protect each other in the local area. There were as many as ten thousand people and as few as one thousand. Wang Jian sent Wang Zongya to persuade them. As a result, they all led their subordinates to attach themselves to Wang Jian and supply Wang Jian with wealth and grain. Wang Jian's army was invigorated again.

古文：置佑国军于河南府，以张全义为节度使。
现代文：朝廷在河南府设置佑国军，任命张全义为节度使。
English: The imperial court set up the National Salvation Army in Henan Province and appointed Zhang Quanyi as the festival envoy.

古文：秋，七月，李罕之引河东兵寇河阳，丁会击却之。
现代文：秋季，七月，李罕之带领河东军队侵扰河阳，丁会将李罕之打退。
English: In the autumn, in July, Li Hanzhi led the troops from Hedong to invade Heyang. Ding He would drive Li Hanzhi back.

古文：升凤州为节度府，割兴、利州隶之，以凤州防御使满存为节度使、同平章事。
现代文：朝廷将凤州升格为节度使司，把兴州、利州划归其下，任命凤州防御使满存为节度使、同平章事。
English: The imperial court promoted Fengzhou to the post of the envoy of the festival, put Xingzhou and Lizhou under it, and appointed the defense envoy of Fengzhou to the post of the envoy of the festival and the post of the same level.

古文：以权知魏博留后罗弘信为节度使。
现代文：朝廷任命暂代魏博留后罗弘信为节度使。
English: The imperial court appointed Wei Boluo's temporary successor, Luo Hongxin, as the festival envoy.

古文：八月，戊辰，硃全忠拔蔡州南城。
现代文：八月，戊辰，朱全忠攻克蔡州的南城。
English: In August, Wu Chen, Zhu Quanzhong conquered the southern city of Caizhou.

古文：杨行密畏孙儒之逼，欲轻兵袭洪州，袁袭曰： 钟传定江西已久，兵强食足，未易图也。
现代文：杨行密担心孙懦逼近，想派轻便军队袭击洪州，袁袭说： 钟传平定江西已经很长时间，军队强大粮食充足，不容易谋取。
English: Yang Xingmi was worried that Sun Qian was approaching and wanted to send light troops to attack Hongzhou. Yuan Yuan said: It has been a long time since Zhong Chuan pacified Jiangxi. The army is strong and has plenty of grain, which is not easy to obtain.

古文：赵锽新得宣州，怙乱残暴，众心不附。
现代文：赵刚刚占据宣州，他乘乱取利凶残粗暴，手下人马心中都不归附他。
English: Zhao had just occupied Xuanzhou. He took advantage of the chaos to take advantage of the ferocity and brutality. His subordinates did not belong to him in their hearts.

古文：公宜卑辞厚币，说和州孙端、上元张雄使自采石济江侵其境，彼必来逆战，公自铜官济江会之，破锽必矣。 
现代文：你应当以十分恭谦的辞令和丰厚的礼物，劝说和州的孙瑞、上元的张雄，让他们从采石渡过长江侵入宣州境内，赵一定会前来迎战，你从铜官渡过长江与孙端、张雄会合，一定会打败赵。 
English: You should use very respectful words and rich gifts to persuade Sun Rui from Hezhou and Zhang Xiong from Shangyuan to cross the Yangtze River from quarrying to invade the territory of Xuanzhou. Zhao will definitely come to fight. If you cross the Yangtze River from Tongguan to meet with Sun Duan and Zhang Xiong, you will definitely defeat Zhao.

古文：行密从之，使蔡俦守庐州，帅诸将济自糁潭。
现代文：杨行密听从袁袭的建议，派蔡俦守卫庐州，自己率领各位将领从糁潭过江。
English: Yang Xingmi listened to Yuan Qi's suggestion and sent Cai Qi to guard Luzhou. He himself led the generals to cross the river from Shetan.

古文：孙端、张雄为赵锽所败，锽将苏塘、漆朗将兵二万屯曷山。
现代文：孙端、张雄被赵打败，赵的将领苏塘、漆朗带领二万驻扎曷山。
English: Sun Duan and Zhang Xiong were defeated by Zhao, and Zhao's generals, Sutang and Chulang, led 20,000 troops to Lushan.

古文：袁袭曰： 公引兵急趋曷山，坚壁自守，彼求战不得，谓我畏怯，因其怠，可破也。 
现代文：袁袭对杨行密说： 你率领军队立即奔赴曷山，在那儿坚守营垒，赵来挑战我们不理，他们便会认为我们畏惧胆怯，趁他们轻慢松懈，可以一举打败他们。 
English: Yuan Li said to Yang Xingmi, "If you lead the army to Lushan immediately and hold the camp there, and Zhao challenges us to ignore us, they will think that we are afraid and timid, and take advantage of their laxity to defeat them at one stroke.

古文：行密从之。
现代文：杨行密采纳袁袭的意见。
English: Yang Xingmi adopted Yuan Qi's opinion.

古文：塘等大败，遂围宣州。
现代文：结果苏塘等人的军队大败，杨行密于是围攻宣州。
English: As a result, the army of Su Tang and others was defeated, and Yang Xingmi then besieged Xuanzhou.

古文：锽兄乾之自池州帅众救宣州，行密使其将陶雅击乾之于九华，破之。
现代文：赵的哥哥赵乾之从池州率领人马来救援宣州，杨行密派令属将陶雅在九华山截击赵乾之，将他打败。
English: Zhao's brother Zhao Qianzhi from Chizhou led the Malay people to come to the rescue of Xuanzhou. Yang Xingmi sent the subordinate commander Tao Ya to intercept Zhao Qianzhi in Jiuhuashan and defeat him.

古文：乾之奔江西，以雅为池州制置使。
现代文：赵乾之奔往江西，杨行密委任陶雅为池州制置使。
English: Zhao Qianzhi rushed to Jiangxi, Yang Xingmi appointed Tao Ya as the Chizhou envoy.

古文：九月，硃全忠以馈运不继，且秦宗权残破不足忧，引兵还。
现代文：九月，朱全忠因为粮食输送跟不上，并且秦宗权的军队残败破落已不值得忧虑，便带领人马返回。
English: In September, Zhu Quanzhong could not keep up with the delivery of grain, and the defeat of the Qin Dynasty's army was no longer worth worrying about, so he led his men back.

古文：丙申，遣硃珍将兵五千送楚州刺史刘瓚之官。
现代文：丙申，派遣朱珍带领军队五千护送楚州刺史刘瓒到任所。
English: Bishen, dispatched Zhu Zhen to lead an army of five thousand to escort the Chuzhou chief Liu Wei to his post.

古文：钱镠遣其从弟銶将兵攻徐约于苏州。
现代文：钱派遣堂弟钱带领军队攻打苏州的徐约。
English: Qian dispatched his cousin Qian to lead an army to attack Xu You of Suzhou.

古文：冬，十月，徐兵邀硃珍、刘瓚不听前，珍等击之，取沛、滕二县，斩获万计。
现代文：冬季，十月，时溥的徐州军队半路拦击朱珍、刘瓒，不让他们前往楚州，朱珍等攻打徐州军队，夺取沛县、滕县，斩杀擒获一万余人。
English: In the winter, in October, the Xuzhou army of Zhisheng stopped Zhu Zhen and Liu Zhen in the middle of the road and did not let them go to Chuzhou. Zhu Zhen and others attacked the Xuzhou army, captured Peixian and Tengxian, and killed and captured more than 10,000 people.

古文：孟方立遣其将奚忠信将兵三万袭辽州，李克修邀击，大破之，擒忠信送晋阳。
现代文：孟方立派遣手下将领奚忠信带领军队三万攻打辽州，李克半路拦截，大败奚忠信的军队，抓获奚忠信送往晋阳。
English: Meng Fangli dispatched his generals to attack Liaozhou, led by Gong Zhongxin with an army of 30,000, Li Ke intercepted halfway, defeated Gong Zhongxin's army, captured Gong Zhongxin and sent him to Jinyang.

古文：辛卯，葬惠圣恭定孝皇帝于靖陵。庙号僖宗。
现代文：辛卯，在京兆奉天县的靖陵安葬惠圣恭定孝皇帝，庙号为僖宗。
English: In Xinwu, Emperor Huisheng and Emperor Dingxiao were buried in Jingling Mausoleum in Beijing's Fengtian County. The temple's name was Yuanzong.

古文：陈敬瑄、田令孜闻韦昭度将至，治兵完城以拒之。
现代文：陈敬瑄、田令孜听说韦昭度要到来，修理兵器整治城墙以便抵抗。
English: Chen Jingyao and Tian Lingzi heard that Wei Zhaodu was coming, so they repaired weapons and repaired the city wall in order to resist.

古文：十一月，时溥自将步骑七万屯吴康镇，硃珍与战，大破之。
现代文：十一月，时溥亲自率领步兵骑兵七万人驻扎吴康镇，朱珍与他交战，时溥大败。
English: In November, Shi Lang personally led 70,000 infantry and cavalry stationed in Wu Kang Town. Zhu Zhen fought with him, and Shi Lang suffered a crushing defeat.

古文：硃全忠又遣别将攻宿，刺史张友降之。
现代文：朱全忠又派遣别的将领攻打宿州，宿州刺史张友投降。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also sent other generals to attack Shuzhou, and Shuzhou assassin Zhang You surrendered.

古文：丙申，秦宗权别将攻陷许州，执忠武留后王蕴，复取许州。
现代文：丙申，秦宗权的另一将领攻克许州，抓获忠武留后王蕴，又收复了许州。
English: Bishin, another general of the Qin Dynasty, invaded Keshu, captured the loyal warrior Wang Yun, and recaptured Keshu.

古文：十二月，蔡将申丛执宗权，折其足而囚之，降于全忠，全忠表丛为蔡州留后。
现代文：十二月，蔡州军队将领申丛抓获秦宗权，砍断他的脚囚禁起来，然后向朱全忠投降，朱全忠上表以申丛为蔡州留后。
English: In December, the Caizhou army commander Shen Cong captured Qin Zongquan, cut off his foot, imprisoned him, and then surrendered to Zhu Quanzhong. Zhu Quanzhong publicly named Shen Cong as the successor of Caizhou.

古文：初，感义节度使杨晟既失兴、凤，走据文、龙、成、茂四州。
现代文：当初，感义节度使杨晟失守兴州、凤州以后，离去占据了文州、龙州、成州、茂州四个州。
English: At first, after Yang Jie lost control of Xingzhou and Fengzhou, he occupied the four provinces of Wenzhou, Longzhou, Chengzhou and Maozhou.

古文：王建攻西川，田令孜以晟己之故将，假威戎军节度使，使守彭州。
现代文：王建攻打西川，田令孜因为杨晟是自己神策军的旧将，让杨晟代理威戎军节度使，命他守卫彭州。
English: Wang Jian attacked Xichuan, and Tian Lingzi, because Yang Hui was the old general of his own military, let Yang Hui act as the commander of Wei Rong's army and ordered him to guard Pengzhou.

古文：王建攻彭州，陈建瑄眉州刺史山行章将后兵五万壁新繁以救之。
现代文：王建攻打彭州，陈敬的眉州刺史山行章带领军队五万在新繁建造营垒以便救援彭州。
English: Wang Jian attacked Pengzhou, Chen Jing's Meizhou stabbed Shishan Xingzhang led an army of fifty thousand to build a camp in Xinxiang in order to rescue Pengzhou.

古文：丁亥，以韦昭度为行营招讨使，山南西道节度使杨守亮副之，东川节度使顾彦朗为行军司马；割邛、蜀、黎、雅置永平军，以王建为节度使，治邛州，充行营诸军都指挥使。
现代文：丁亥，朝廷任命韦昭度为行营招讨使，山南西道节度使杨守亮为副，东川节度使顾彦朗为行军司马；把邛州、蜀州、黎州、雅州划归永平军，任命王建为节度使，官署设在邛州，充任行营诸军都指挥使。
English: Dinghai, the imperial court appointed Wei Zhaodu as the envoy for the campaign, Yang Shouliang as the deputy for the Shannan West Road Festival, and Gu Yanlang as the marshal for the Dongchuan Festival. He assigned Bozhou, Shuzhou, Lizhou and Yazhou to the Yongping Army, and appointed Wang Jian as the envoy for the festival. The official office was located in Bozhou, and he served as the commanding envoy for all the armies in the campaign.

古文：戊子，削陈敬瑄官爵。
现代文：戊子，削去陈敬的官职爵位。
English: As a result, Chen Jing's official title of nobility was removed.

古文：山南西道节度使杨守厚陷夔州。
现代文：山南西道节度使杨守亮攻克夔州。
English: Yang Shouhou's rebellion was defeated by Shannan Xi Dao.

