古文：◎文学下
现代文：王鼎，字虚中，涿州人。
English: Wang Ding, a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：○王鼎耶律昭刘辉耶律孟简耶律谷欲
现代文：年少时好学，在太宁山居住数年，博览并通晓经史。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn, lived in Taining Mountain for several years, and was well-read and knowledgeable about the history of scripture.

古文：王鼎，字虚中，涿州人。幼好学，居太宁山数年，博通经史。时马唐俊有文名燕、蓟间，适上巳，与同志祓禊水滨，酌酒赋诗。鼎偶造席，唐俊见鼎朴野，置下坐。
现代文：当时马唐俊在燕、蓟一带有擅长著文之名，适逢上巳节，他与志同道合的几位士子在河边举行祓禊之祭，饮酒赋诗。王鼎偶然造访赴席，唐俊见他看上去朴质无华，安排他坐于下等座位。
English: At that time, Ma Tangjun had a reputation for being good at writing in Yan and Jiu, and it coincided with the Spring Festival. He and several like-minded scholars held a purification festival by the river, drinking and writing poems. Wang Ding happened to visit the table, Tang Jun saw that he looked simple and unadorned, and arranged for him to sit in the lower seat.

古文：欲以诗困之，先出所作索赋，鼎援笔立成。
现代文：想以做诗使他困窘，先出示自己的作品请他也做一首，王鼎提起笔，立时写就。
English: Wanting to embarrass him by making a poem, he first showed his work and asked him to make one. Wang Ding raised his pen and immediately wrote it.

古文：唐俊惊其敏妙，因与定交。
现代文：唐俊惊叹于他的敏捷颖悟，便与他结拜为好友。
English: Tang Jun marvelled at his quick wit and made friends with him.

古文：清宁五年，擢进士第。
现代文：清宁五年，中进士。
English: Qingning five years, junior high school graduate.

古文：调易州观察判官，改涞水县令，累迁翰林学士。
现代文：调任易州观察判官，改涞水县令，累迁翰林学士。
English: He was transferred to Yizhou observation judge, changed to Ershui county magistrate, and successively moved to Hanlin college.

古文：当代典章多出其手。
现代文：当代的制度法令大多出自他的手笔。
English: Most of the contemporary institutional decrees come from his handwriting.

古文：上书言治道十事，帝以鼎达政体，事多咨访。
现代文：上书陈说治国之道十条事项，皇上因为王鼎通晓为政之要领，遇事经常向他咨询。
English: The imperial edict listed ten matters concerning the way of governing the country. Since Wang Ding was well versed in the essentials of politics, the emperor often consulted him in times of need.

古文：鼎正直不阿，人有过，必面诋之。
现代文：王鼎正直而不阿附，别人有过错，必定会当面指责。
English: Wang Ding is honest and not greedy. If someone else is at fault, he will certainly blame them to their face.

古文：寿隆初，升观书殿学士。
现代文：寿隆初，升观书殿学士。
English: At the beginning of the Shulong period, he graduated from the Shogunate Academy.

古文：一日宴主第，醉与客忤，怨上不知己，坐是下吏。
现代文：一日做东宴请宾客，喝醉酒后与客人斗嘴，怨恨皇上不了解自己，因此获罪受审。
English: One day, he held a banquet to invite guests, got drunk and quarreled with the guests, and resented that the emperor did not understand himself, so he was convicted and put on trial.

古文：状闻，上大怒，杖黥夺官，流镇州。
现代文：供状上达，道宗大怒，杖击黥面、削夺其官职，流放于镇州。
English: When the confession was submitted, Daozong was enraged, and he beat him with a cane, deprived him of his official position, and exiled him to Zhenzhou.

古文：居数岁，有赦，鼎独不免。
现代文：过了几年，有诏赦免罪人，只有王鼎不在释免之列。
English: A few years later, an imperial edict pardoned the guilty, but Wang Ding was not among those released.

古文：今反令臣下妄意作史，恬不经意。
现代文：适逢守臣召王鼎写贺表，王鼎顺便以诗作赠给使者，诗中有 谁知天雨露，独不到孤寒 之句。
English: When the guardian called Wang Ding to write a congratulatory letter, Wang Ding gave the messenger a poem. In the poem, "Who knows the rain and dew, but not the cold?"

古文：臣请以赵氏初起事迹，详附国史。 
现代文：皇上听说后怜悯于他，当即召回，恢复其官职。
English: Upon hearing of this, the Emperor took pity on him and immediately recalled him to resume his official duties.

古文：上嘉其言，迁礼部郎中。
现代文：乾统六年去世。王鼎担任县宰之时，在庭中休息，不一会儿刮起狂风将卧榻抬举到空中。
English: Qian Tong died six years later. When Wang Ding was the county magistrate, he was taking a rest in the courtyard, but soon a strong wind blew up and lifted his bed into the air.

古文：诏以贤良对策，辉言多中时病。
现代文：王鼎毫无惧色，只觉得枕头与床榻均在升高，便说道： 我乃朝中正直之士，邪不犯正，可缓缓放下。 
English: Wang Ding was not afraid at all, he only felt that the pillow and the bed were rising, so he said: I am an honest person in the court, I do not commit evil, I can slowly put it down.

古文：擢史馆修撰，卒。
现代文：不一会儿，床榻恢复原位，风也随即停了。
English: In a moment, the bed was back in its original position and the wind immediately stopped.

古文：耶律孟简，字复易，于越屋质之五世孙。
现代文：耶律孟简，字复易，于越屋质之五世孙。
English: Yelu Mengjian, the characters are compounded, is the fifth generation grandchild of Yu Yueya.

古文：父刘家奴，官至节度使。
现代文：父刘家奴，官至节度使。
English: His father, Liu Jia Nong, was an official of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：孟简性颖悟。
现代文：孟简生性聪慧。
English: Meng Jian is very intelligent.

古文：六岁，父晨出猎，俾赋《晓天星月诗》，孟简应声而成，父大奇之。
现代文：六岁，父亲在早晨出猎，让他赋《晓天星月诗》，孟简应声做成，父亲十分惊奇。
English: At the age of six, his father went hunting in the morning and asked him to write "Xiao Tian Xing Yue Poem," which Meng Jian agreed to write. His father was very surprised.

古文：既长，善属文。
现代文：成年后，擅长做文。
English: After he became an adult, he excelled at writing.

古文：大康初，枢密使耶律乙辛以奸险窃柄，出为中京留守，孟简与耶律庶箴表贺。
现代文：大康初，枢密使耶律乙辛因为奸诈阴险窃夺权柄，被出为中京留守，孟简与耶律庶箴上表祝贺。
English: At the beginning of the Great Prosperity, the confidential envoy, Yelu Yixin, was sent to stay in Beijing because of the treachery and insidious theft of power. Meng Jian and Yelu Shizhu congratulated each other.

古文：未几，乙辛复旧职，衔之，谪巡磁窑关。
现代文：不久，乙辛官复原职，衔恨于他，贬为磁窑关巡官。
English: Not long after, Yixin was reinstated to his post, but he was hated and demoted to the position of inspector of the magnetic kiln.

古文：时虽以谗见逐，不形辞色。
现代文：当时他虽因谗言被斥逐，但不满之意并未形于言表。
English: Although he was ousted for his remarks at the time, his dissatisfaction did not manifest itself in words.

古文：遇林泉胜地，终日忘归。
现代文：遇到林泉胜地则终日忘归。
English: When they come across a forest spring resort, they forget to return home for the rest of the day.

古文：明年，流保州。
现代文：次年，流放到保州。
English: The following year, he was exiled to Bozhou.

古文：及闻皇太子被害，不胜哀痛，以诗伤之，作《放怀诗》二十首。
现代文：及至听说皇太子被杀害，哀痛不已，以诗悼之，做《放怀诗》二十首。
English: When he heard that the crown prince had been killed, he was grief-stricken and wrote 20 poems to mourn his death.

古文：自序云： 禽兽有哀乐之声，蝼蚁有动静之形。
现代文：自序云： 禽兽有悲哀、欢乐两种声音，蝼蚁有动态、静态两种行为。
English: Self-ordering cloud: Animals have two kinds of sounds, sad and happy, and ants have two kinds of behaviors, dynamic and static.

古文：在物犹然，况于人乎？
现代文：外物如此，何况人呢？
English: What is man, that he should be thus outwardly?

古文：然贤达哀乐，不在穷通祸福之间。
现代文：然而贤达之人的悲哀与快乐，并不在于穷通或祸福之间。
English: However, the sorrows and joys of the sages do not lie in the struggle between impoverishment and prosperity.

古文：《易》曰： 乐天知命，故不忧。 
现代文：《易》曰 ：乐天知命，故不忧。 
English: "Yi" said: Rakuten knows your fate, so don't worry.

古文：是以颜渊箪瓢自得，此知命而乐者也。
现代文：所以颜渊能够一箪食一瓢饮而自得其乐，这就是知天命而能乐之人。
English: Therefore, Yan Yuan is able to enjoy himself with a bowl of food and a bowl of drink. This is a person who knows the fate of heaven and can enjoy himself.

古文：予虽流放，以道自安，又何疑耶？ 
现代文：我尽管遭到流放，然而自安于大道，又有什么值得烦恼呢？ 
English: What is there to worry about when I am at peace on the road, despite being exiled?

古文：大康中，始得归乡里。
现代文：大康年间，才得以回归乡里。
English: It was only during the prosperous years that he was able to return to the countryside.

古文：诣阙上表曰： 本朝之兴，几二百年，宜有国史以垂后世。 
现代文：到朝中上表说： 本朝之兴国，将近二百年，应该有国史以流传后世。 
English: In the middle of the dynasty, the table said: This dynasty's revival of the country, nearly two hundred years old, should have a national history to be passed down to future generations.

古文：乃编耶律曷鲁、屋质、休哥三人行事以进。
现代文：于是编撰耶律曷鲁、屋质、休哥三人之事迹呈进。
English: As a result, the stories of the three men, Yerudimaru, Yakushi, and Shugo, were compiled.

古文：上命置局编修。
现代文：皇上下令设置史局编修。
English: The Emperor issued an order to set up a historical bureau to compile and edit it.

古文：孟简谓余官曰： 史笔天下之大信，一言当否，百世从之。
现代文：孟简对史官说： 史笔乃是天下之大信用，一句话不论恰当与否，百代都遵从之。
English: Meng Jian said to the historian: The historical record is the great trust of the world. One sentence, whether appropriate or not, has been followed by hundreds of generations.

古文：苟无明识，好恶徇情，则祸不测。
现代文：假如没有高明之见识，随自己的感情好恶褒贬人事，那么就会有意想不到的祸事。
English: If you don't have a high-level insight and praise or disparage people according to your own feelings and likes and dislikes, then unexpected disasters will occur.

古文：故左氏、司马迁、班固、范晔俱罹殃祸，可不慎欤！ 
现代文：所以左丘明、司马迁、班固、范晔均遭受灾祸，我辈岂能不小心在意呢？ 
English: Therefore, Zuo Quming, Sima Qian, Bangu and Fan Ye have all suffered disasters. Can we not be careful?

古文：乾统中，迁六院部太保。
现代文：乾统年间，迁六院部太保。
English: During the reign of Emperor Qianlong, six hospitals were relocated.

古文：处事不拘文法，时多笑其迂。
现代文：处事不拘泥于法律条文，时人多嘲笑他迂腐。
English: When he did not stick to the letter of the law, many people ridiculed him for being pedantic.

古文：孟简闻之曰： 上古之时，无簿书法令而天下治。
现代文：孟简知道后说： 上古之时，没有簿书法令，而天下大治。
English: After learning this, Meng Jian said, "In ancient times, there were no book-keeping laws and regulations, but there was universal rule.

古文：盖簿书法令适足以滋奸幸，非圣人致治之本。 
现代文：大抵簿书法令，恰恰容易滋长邪恶和侥幸之心，而并非是圣人实现太平盛世之根本。 
English: Most of the time, the book-and-book laws and decrees are conducive to the growth of evil and the spirit of chance, but they are not the basis for a saint to achieve a peaceful and prosperous world.

古文：改高州观察使，修学校，招生徒。
现代文：改为高州观察使，修造学校，招收学生。
English: It was changed to Gaozhou Observer, built a school, and enrolled students.

古文：迁昭德军节度使。
现代文：迁昭德军节度使。
English: The German army's envoy to the festival has been relocated.

古文：以中京饥，诏与学士刘嗣昌减价粜粟。
现代文：因中京饥荒，皇上诏令他与学士刘嗣昌以低价出售粟米。
English: Due to the famine in central Beijing, the emperor ordered him and the bachelor Liu Shichang to sell corn at a low price.

古文：事未毕，卒。
现代文：事未毕，卒。
English: It's not over, pal.

