古文：韦应物在滁州，以酒寄全椒山中道士，作诗曰： 今朝郡斋冷，忽念山中客。
现代文：韦应物在滁州，把酒遥寄全椒山中道士，作诗道： 今朝郡斋冷，忽念山中客。
English: Wei Ying thing in Ganzhou, sent the wine to the full pepper mountain Taoist, wrote a poem: This morning, the county is cold, and I miss the mountain guests.

古文：涧底束荆薪，归来煮白石。
现代文：涧底束荆薪，归来煮白石。
English: The bottom of the bowl is covered with bundles of firewood, and then boiled with white stone.

古文：欲持一樽酒，远慰风雨夕。
现代文：欲持一樽酒，远慰风雨夕。
English: Want to hold a cask of wine, far away comfort rain or shine.

古文：落叶满空山，何处寻行迹！ 
现代文：落叶满空山，何处寻行迹！ 
English: The mountains are full of fallen leaves, where to find the trail!

古文：其为高妙超诣，固不容夸说，而结尾两句，非复语言思索可到。
现代文：诗写得高妙绝价伦、过于卓越，自不必夺拼，而结尾两句，语言情境不是众人能达到的。
English: The poem is written so exquisitely, exquisitely, too exquisitely, that there is no need to fight for it, and the last two sentences, the language situation is not something that everyone can achieve.

古文：东坡在惠州，依其韵作诗寄罗浮邓道士曰： 一杯罗浮春，远饷采薇客。
现代文：苏东坡在惠州，依照那首诗的韵律作诗寄送罗浮山邓道士： 一杯罗浮春，远饷采薇客。
English: Su Dongpo, in Huizhou, composed a poem according to the rhythm of the poem and sent it to Luo Fushan Deng Daoshi: A glass of Luo Fushun, welcome guests from afar.

古文：遥知独酌罢，醉卧松下石。
现代文：遥知独酌罢，醉卧松下石。
English: Let's have a drink by ourselves in Yuchih, and get drunk under the pine tree.

古文：幽人不可见，清啸闻月夕。
现代文：幽人不可见，清啸闻月夕。
English: You can't see the ghost, but you can smell the sunset.

古文：聊戏庵中人，空飞本无迹。 
现代文：聊戏庵中人，空飞本无迹。 
English: People in the chat play house, no trace of the sky flying book.

古文：刘梦得 山围故国周遭在，潮打空城寂寞回 之句，白乐天以为后之诗人，无复措词。坡公仿之曰： 山围故国城空在，潮打西陵意未平 。
现代文：刘禹锡 山围故国周遭在，潮打空城寂寞回 的诗句，白居易认为有了它后代诗人就无法再措词了，苏东坡模仿它写道： 山围故国城空在，潮打西陵意未平 。
English: Liu Yuxi's poem, "Surrounded by the mountains surrounding the motherland, the tidal wave strikes the empty city, the lonely city returns," Bai Juyi thought that with it, future generations of poets would no longer be able to formulate words. Su Dongpo imitated it and wrote: "The mountains surrounding the motherland are empty, the tidal wave strikes the empty city, the lonely city returns."

古文：坡公天才，出语警世，如追和陶诗，真与之齐驱，独此二者，比之韦、刘为不侔，岂非绝唱寡和，理自应尔邪！
现代文：坡公天才，出语惊人，如他追随唱和陶渊明的诗，真能与之并驾齐驱。只是此二诗却难与韦应物、刘禹锡原诗等同，难道不是千古绝唱和者必寡，道理本当如此啊！
English: Po Kung is a genius, his utterances are amazing, if he follows and sings Tao Yuanming's poem, he can really keep up with it. However, these two poems are difficult to equate with Wei Yingwen and Liu Yuxi's original poem. Isn't it true that those who sing and those who sing are few and far between? The reason is really so!

