古文：◎兵三
现代文：兵三
English: Troop three.

古文：○边防海防
现代文：边防海防
English: Border and Coast Guard

古文：元人北归，屡谋兴复。
现代文：边防海防元人返回北方，屡次图谋复兴。
English: The founders of border defense and coastal defense returned to the north and repeatedly tried to revive it.

古文：永乐迁都北平，三面近塞，正统以后，敌患日多。
现代文：永乐皇帝迁都到北平，三面靠近边塞。正统以后，敌兵入侵的祸患日益增多。
English: The Yongle Emperor moved the capital to Beiping, which is close to the border fortress on three sides. After the orthodoxy, the scourge of enemy invasion has been increasing.

古文：故终明之世，边防甚重。
现代文：所以在整个明朝，边防非常重要。
English: Therefore, border defense is very important throughout the entire morning.

古文：东起鸭绿，西抵嘉峪，绵亘万里，分地守御。
现代文：东起鸭绿江，西到嘉峪关，绵延万里，划分地域驻守防御。
English: From the Yalu River in the east to Jiayuguan in the west, it stretches for thousands of miles, dividing the region into garrisons for defense.

古文：初设辽东、宣府、大同、延绥四镇，继设宁夏、甘肃、蓟州三镇，而太原总兵治偏头，三边制府驻固原，亦称二镇，是为九边。
现代文：最初设置辽东、宣府、大同、延绥四个镇，继而设置宁夏、甘肃、蓟州三个镇，而太原总兵治所设在偏头，三边制府驻守固原，也称作二镇，这就是九个边镇，简称九边。
English: Initially, Liaodong, Xuanfu, Datong, and Yan'an were set up as four towns, followed by Ningxia, Gansu, and Zhangzhou, while the Taiyuan General Military Government was set up in Yehotou, and the Tripartite Military Government was stationed in Guyuan, also known as the two towns. These are the nine border towns, referred to as the nine sides.

古文：初，洪武六年，命大将军徐达等备山西、北平边，谕令各上方略。
现代文：当初，洪武六年，任命大将军徐达等备办山西、北平边防，诏谕令各自献上方法策略。
English: At first, in the sixth year of Hongwu, he appointed General Xu Da and others to prepare the Shanxi and Beiping border defense, and issued an edict ordering them to present their own methods and strategies.

古文：从淮安侯华云龙言，自永平、蓟州、密云迤西二千余里，关隘百二十有九，皆置戍守。
现代文：依从淮安侯华云龙的意见，从永平、蓟州、密云往西二千多里，关防隘口一百二十九个，都设置戍守卫。
English: According to the opinion of Huai'an Houhua Yunlong, from Yongping, Zhangzhou and Miyun to the west, more than two thousand miles, 129 checkpoints were set up.

古文：于紫荆关及芦花岭设千户所守御。
现代文：在紫剂关和芦花岭设置千户所镇守防御。
English: The defense of the town of Chihousho was set up in Zijiaoguan and Luhailing.

古文：又诏山西都卫于雁门关、太和岭并武、朔诸山谷间，凡七十三隘，俱设戍兵。
现代文：又诏谕山西都卫在雁门关、太和岭连同武、朔各山谷间，共七十三个隘口，全部设置守戍的军队。
English: Shanxi Duwei also decreed that there would be a total of seventy-three passes between the valleys of Yanmen Pass and Taihe Ridge, as well as between the valleys of Wu and Shuo, all of which would be guarded by troops.

古文：九年，敕燕山前、后等十一卫，分兵守古北口、居庸关、喜峰口、松亭关烽堠百九十六处，参用南北军士。
现代文：九年，敕令燕山前、后等十一卫，分兵镇守古北口、居庸关、喜峰口、松亭关的烽火台一百九十六处，参杂调用南北军士。
English: In the ninth year, the imperial command ordered the Yanshan front, rear and other eleven guards, and divided the soldiers to guard the 196 campfires of the ancient North Gate, Juyong Pass, Qifeng Pass and Songting Pass, and called up the North and South sergeants.

古文：十五年，又于北平都司所辖关隘二百，以各卫卒守戍。
现代文：十五年，又在北平都司所管辖的两百个关隘，用各卫卒守卫。
English: Fifteen years later, in the two hundred passes under the jurisdiction of the Beiping Capital, they used each guard to guard.

古文：诏诸王近塞者，每岁秋勒兵巡边。
现代文：诏谕各靠近边塞的藩王，每年秋天，部署军队巡视边防。
English: The feudal lords near the border fortress were ordered to deploy troops to patrol the border every autumn.

古文：十七年，命徐达籍上北平将校士卒。
现代文：十七年，任命徐达登记上报北平的将校士卒。
English: In the seventeenth year, Xu Da was appointed to register and report to the officer cadets in Peiping.

古文：复使将核辽东、定辽等九卫官军。
现代文：又命令将士考核辽东、定辽等九卫的官军。
English: He also ordered the official troops of the Nine Guards such as Liaodong and Dingliao to be examined.

古文：是后，每遣诸公、侯校沿边士马，以籍上。
现代文：此后，常派遣各公、侯考核沿边兵马，以此登记成册上报。
English: After that, soldiers and horses along the border were often sent to be inspected by officials and peasants, and were then registered and reported.

古文：二十年，置北平行都司于大宁。
现代文：二十年，在大宁设置北平行都司。
English: Twenty years later, the North Parallel Capital Division was set up in Danying.

古文：其地在喜峰口外，故辽西郡，辽之中京大定府也；西大同，东辽阳，南北平。
现代文：此地处于喜峰口外，以前的辽西郡，是辽的中京大定府；西面是大同，束边是辽阳，南方是北平。
English: This place is located outside the Xifengkou, the former Liaoxi County, is the Zhongjing Dadingfu of Liao; the west is Datong, the bund is Liaoyang, and the south is Beiping.

古文：冯胜之破纳哈出，还师，城之，因置都司及营州五屯卫，而封皇子权为宁王，调各卫兵往守。
现代文：冯胜攻破纳哈出时，回师，在此筑城，于是设置都司以及营州五个屯卫，而策封皇子朱权焉宁王，调各卫的军队前往镇守。
English: When Feng Sheng defeated Naha, he returned to the division and built a city here, so he set up a capital division and five garrisons in Yingzhou, and the crown prince Zhu Quan Yan Ning, transferred the troops of each guard to the town guard.

古文：先是，李文忠等取元上都，设开平卫及兴和等千户所，东西各四驿，东接大宁，西接独石。
现代文：此前，李文忠等夺取元上都，设置开平卫和兴和等千户所；东西各四个驿，柬边连接大宁，西边连接独石。
English: Previously, Li Wenzhong and others seized Yuan Shangdu and set up thousands of households such as Kaiping Wei and Xinghe; four fences each from east to west, with the Cambodian side connecting to Daning and the western side connecting to Dokseok.

古文：二十五年，又筑东胜城于河州东受降城之东，设十六卫，与大同相望。
现代文：二十五年，又在河州束受降城的东面修筑束胜城，设置十六个卫，与大同相望。
English: In the 25th year, he also built Soksheng City on the east side of Soksheng City in Hezhou, and set up 16 weirs, facing Datong.

古文：自辽以西，数千里声势联络。
现代文：从速往西，几千里遥相呼应。
English: From the speed to the west, thousands of miles away from each other.

古文：建文元年，文帝起兵，袭陷大宁，以宁王权及诸军归。
现代文：建文元年，文帝起兵，袭击攻陷大宁，带宁王朱权以及各军返回。
English: In the first year of Jianwen, Emperor Wen raised an army, attacked and conquered Danying, and returned with King Zhuquan of Ning and his army.

古文：及即位，封宁王于江西。
现代文：等到登上帝位，封宁王到江西。
English: When he ascended to the throne, King Fengning went to Jiangxi.

古文：而改北平行都司为大宁都司，徙之保定。
现代文：而把北平行都司改为大宁都司，迁到保定。
English: However, the North Parallel Capital Division was changed to the Daming Capital Division and moved to Baoding.

古文：调营州五屯卫于顺义、蓟州、平谷、香河、三河，以大宁地畀兀良哈。
现代文：调营州五个屯卫到顺义、蓟州、平谷、香河、三河，把左窒地区赐给兀良哈。
English: He transferred five military garrisons to Shunyi, Zhangzhou, Pinggu, Xianghe, and Sanhe, and gave Zuoyu District to Baoliangha.

古文：自是，辽东与宣、大声援阻绝，又以东胜孤远难守，调左卫于永平，右卫于遵化，而墟其地。
现代文：从此，辽东和宣、大的声援隔绝，又因东胜单独处于偏远之地，难以镇守，调左卫到永平，右卫到遵化，而废弃那个地方。
English: Since then, Liaodong and Xuancheng have been isolated from large-scale support, and because Dongsheng is alone in a remote place, it is difficult to defend the town, the left guard was transferred to Yongping, the right guard to Zunhua, and the place was abandoned.

古文：先是兴和亦废，开平徙于独石，宣府遂称重镇。
现代文：此前兴和也废弃，开平迁到独石，宣府于是称为重镇。
English: Prior to this, Xinghe was also abandoned, and Kaiping was moved to Dokdo, and Xuanfu was then called a major town.

古文：然帝于边备甚谨。
现代文：然而皇帝对边防非常谨慎。
English: However, the emperor was very cautious about the border defense.

古文：自宣府迤西迄山西，缘边皆峻垣深濠，烽堠相接。
现代文：从宣府向西到达山西，沿边防都是高峻的墙垣和深深的濠沟，烽火台相连接。
English: From Xuanfu in the west to Shanxi, along the border are high walls and deep ravines, connected by campfires.

古文：隘口通车骑者百户守之，通樵牧者甲士十人守之。
现代文：通行车队骑兵的隘口设百户镇守，通行樵夫、牧民的用甲士十人镇守。
English: The passage of cavalry convoys was guarded by 100 guards, and the passage of herdsmen and herdsmen was guarded by 10 guards.

古文：武安侯郑亨充总兵官，其敕书云： 各处烟墩，务增筑高厚，上贮五月粮及柴薪药弩，墩傍开井，井外围墙与墩平，外望如一。 
现代文：武安侯郑亨任总兵官，给他的敕书说： 各处烽火台，务必增筑加高加厚，在上面贮存五个月的粮食和柴薪药物弓弩，烽火台旁开掘水井，井外的围墙和烽火台齐平，从外望如同一个整体。 
English: Wu'an lord Zheng Heng, who was the chief military officer, said in his imperial edict: "In all places, it is necessary to increase the height and thickness of the campfire platform, store five months of grain and firewood medicine bow and arrow on it, excavate wells next to the campfire platform, the outer wall of the well and the campfire platform are flush, and look like a whole from the outside.

古文：重门御暴之意，常凛凛也。
现代文：重关抵御侵扰的意思，威严高耸，令人敬畏。
English: The meaning of resisting intrusion, towering in majesty, is awe-inspiring.

古文：洪熙改元，朔州军士白荣请还东胜、高山等十卫于故地。
现代文：洪熙改元之后，朔州军士白荣请求让束胜、高山等十卫返回故地。
English: After Hong Xi reformed the Yuan Dynasty, Shuozhou sergeant Bai Rong requested that Soksheng, Takayama and other Shibei return to their hometowns.

古文：兴州军士范济亦言：朔州、大同、开平、宣府大宁皆藩篱要地，其土可耕，宜遣将率兵，修城堡，广屯种。
现代文：兴州军士范济也说，朔州、大同、开平、宣府、大宁都是作屏障的重要之地，那里的土地可以耕种，应派将领率兵，修筑城堡，广开屯垦耕种。
English: Xingzhou sergeant-at-arms Fan Ji also said that Shuozhou, Datong, Kaiping, Xuanfu and Danying are all important places for barriers. The land there can be cultivated, and generals should be sent to lead soldiers to build castles and cultivate in Guangkai.

古文：皆不能用。
现代文：都不能采用。
English: None of them can be used.

古文：正统元年，给事中朱纯请修塞垣。
现代文：正统元年，给事中朱纯请求修建边塞墙垣。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, Zhu Jun requested the construction of a border wall.

古文：总兵官谭广言： 自龙门至独石及黑峪口五百五十余里，工作甚难，不若益墩台瞭守。 
现代文：总兵官谭广说： 从龙门到独石以及黑峪口五百五十多里，修筑城墙非常难，不如增加烽火台瞭望镇守。 
English: General Tan Guang said: It is more than 550 miles from Longmen to Dokseok and Heihekou, and it is very difficult to build city walls. It is better to add a campfire lookout tower to guard the town.

古文：乃增赤城等堡烟墩二十二。
现代文：于是增加赤城等城堡和烽火台二十二个。
English: As a result, twenty-two castles and campfires such as Akagi were added.

古文：宁夏总兵官史昭言： 所辖屯堡，俱在河外，自河迤东至察罕脑儿，抵绥德州，沙漠旷远，并无守备。
现代文：室夏总兵官史昭说： 所管辖的屯堡，都在黄河以外，从黄河往东到察罕脑儿，抵达绥德州，沙漠辽远，并没有守备。
English: Muromachi general officer Shi Zhao said: The military camps under his jurisdiction are all outside the Yellow River, from the Yellow River to the east to Cahanmener, arriving in Zhejiang, the desert is far away, and there is no defense.

古文：请于花马池筑哨马营。 
现代文：请求在花马池修筑探马的军营。 
English: A request was made to build a military camp for horse explorers in Hanamachi.

古文：大同总兵官方政继以马营请，欲就半岭红寺儿废营修筑。
现代文：大同总兵官方政继而请建马营，想在半岭红寺儿的废营修筑。
English: The Datong soldiers' official government then requested the construction of a horse camp, and wanted to build it in the abandoned camp of the half-ridge red temple.

古文：宣大巡抚都御史李仪以大同平衍，巡哨宜谨，请以副总兵主东路，参将主西路，而迤北则属之总兵官都指挥。
现代文：宣大巡抚都御史李仪因大同是平坦宽广之地，巡逻放哨应谨慎，请求调用副总兵主管东路，参将主管西路，而往北便交给总兵官都指挥。
English: Because Datong is a flat and wide place, Li Yi, the procurator of Xuandu, requested that the deputy general officer in charge of the east road and the general officer in charge of the west road should be called, and the general officer in charge of the north road should be given to the general officer in command.

古文：并如议行。
现代文：一并按照提议实行。
English: implemented in accordance with the proposal.

古文：后三年，诏塞紫荆关诸隘口，增守备军。
现代文：此后三年，下诏训谕边塞紫剂关各隘口，增加防守的军士。
English: Three years later, he issued an edict to increase the number of soldiers guarding the border at every pass.

古文：时瓦剌渐强，从成国公朱勇请也。
现代文：当时瓦刺逐渐强大，增加军士是依从成国公朱勇的请求。
English: At that time, Vachan gradually became strong, and the increase in the number of sergeants was in accordance with the request of Chengguogong Zhu Yong.

古文：既而也先入塞，英宗陷于土木。
现代文：随后也先闯入边塞，英宗陷在土木。
English: Subsequently, they also broke into the border fort first, and Yingzong got stuck in the earthworks.

古文：景帝即位，十余年间，边患日多，索来、毛里孩、阿罗出之属，相继入犯，无宁岁。
现代文：景帝登上帝位，十多年间，边关忧患日益增多，索来、毛里孩、阿罗出之类，相继入侵，没有安宁的年岁。
English: During the more than ten years since Emperor Jing ascended to the throne, the troubles at the border have been increasing day by day. The likes of Solai, Mauri, and Alo have invaded one after another, and there is no peace.

古文：成化元年，延绥总兵官张杰言： 延庆等境广袤千里，所辖二十五营堡，每处仅一二百人，难以应敌，宜选精锐九千为六哨，分屯府谷、神木二县，龙州、榆林二城，高家、安边二堡，庶缓急有备。 
现代文：成化元年，延绥总兵官张杰说： 延庆等边境广袤千里，管辖的二十五个营堡，每处只有一二百人，难以抗敌，应选精锐士卒九千人分作六个哨，分别屯聚在府谷、神木两个县，龙州、榆林两座城，高家、安边两座堡，差不多在情况紧急时有防备。 
English: In the first year of the 19th century, Zhang Jie, the chief military officer of Yancheng, said: Yanqing and other borders are thousands of miles wide, and the twenty-five camp forts under its jurisdiction have only one or two hundred people each, which is difficult to resist the enemy. The elite soldiers should be selected, and nine thousand people should be divided into six posts, and they should be gathered in two counties of Fugu and Shenmu, two cities of Longzhou and Yulin, and two forts of Gao Jia and Anbian, so as to be prepared in case of emergency.

古文：又请分布鄜、庆防秋军二千余人于沿边要害。
现代文：又请求分别布置墉、庆防秋的军士二干多人在滑边要害之处。
English: He also requested that two gongs be arranged separately, and that more than two gongs of celebrating the prevention of autumn be placed at the critical point of the slide.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：七年，延绥巡抚都御史余子俊大筑边城。
现代文：七年，延绥巡抚都御史余子俊大量修筑边城。
English: In the seventh year, the governor of Yancheng, Miyoshi Yuzihun, began to build a large number of border towns.

古文：先是，东胜设卫守在河外，榆林治绥德。
现代文：此前，束胜设置卫镇守在黄河外，榆林治所在绥德。
English: Previously, Soksheng had set up the Wei Town Guard outside the Yellow River, and Yulin Province was located in Shunde.

古文：后东胜内迁，失险，捐米脂、鱼河地几三百里。
现代文：此后东胜往内迁，失去险要地势，抛弃米脂、鱼河的地域近三百里。
English: After that, Dongsheng moved inland, lost its strategic location, and abandoned nearly 300 miles of rice fields and fish rivers.

古文：正统间，镇守都督王祯始筑榆林城，建缘边营堡二十四，岁调延安、绥德、庆阳三卫军分戍。
现代文：正统年间，镇守都督王祯开始修筑榆林城，修建沿边营堡二十四个，每年调延安、绥德、庆阳三处卫军分别守戍。
English: During the orthodox years, the town's governor, the governor of the town, Wang Ye, began to build Yulin City, building twenty-four camps along the border. Every year, the three guards of Yan'an, Shunde and Qingyang were transferred to guard Yulin.

古文：天顺中，阿罗出入河套驻牧，每引诸部内犯。
现代文：天顺年间，阿罗出侵入河套驻扎放牧，常率各部落入内侵犯。
English: During the Tianshun period, the Alo invaded the Hetao to stay and graze, and the tribes often invaded.

古文：至是，子俊乃徙治榆林。
现代文：到此时，余子俊纔迁治所于榆林。
English: By this time, Yu Zi Juncun had moved his government office to Yulin.

古文：由黄甫川西至定边营千二百余里，墩堡相望，横截套口，内复堑山堙谷，曰夹道，东抵偏头，西终宁、固，风土劲悍，将勇士力，北人呼为橐驼城。
现代文：从黄甫川的西面到定边营一千二百多里，烽火台城堡迁相呼应，从中截断河套口，里面又挖山填谷，称为夹道，柬面抵达偏头，西面终止于宁、固，这地方风俗强劲凶猛，将帅勇猛士卒尽力，北方人称作橐驼城。
English: From the west side of the Huangfu River to the Dingbian Camp, there are more than 1,200 miles. The relocation of the Bonfire Tower Castle echoes with each other. The river mouth is cut off from it, and the mountains are dug inside to fill the valley, which is called the intersecting road. The Cambodian side reaches the head, and the west side ends in Ning and Gou. This place has strong and fierce customs, and the brave warriors do their best. The northerners call it Camel City.

古文：十二年，兵部侍郎滕昭、英国公张懋条上边备，言： 居庸关、黄花镇、喜峰口、古北口、燕河营有团营马步军万五千人戍守，请益军五千，分驻永平、密云以策应辽东。
现代文：十二年，兵部侍郎滕昭、英国公张懋备文条呈边防情况，说： 居庸关、黄花镇、喜峰口、古北口、燕河营有团营骑兵步兵一万五千人戍守，请求增兵五千，分别驻扎永平、密云以便和辽东相呼应。
English: In the 12th year, Teng Zhao, the secretary of the military department, and Zhang Zibo, the British official, prepared a document on the border defense situation, saying: Juyongguan, Huanghua Town, Xifenggou, Gubeikou, and Yanhe Camp were guarded by 15,000 cavalry and infantry battalions, and requested an increase of 5,000 soldiers, stationed in Yongping and Miyun respectively, so as to correspond with Liaodong.

古文：凉州镇番、庄浪、贺兰山迤西，从雪山过河，南通靖虏，直至临、巩，俱敌入犯之路，请调陕西官军，益以甘、凉、临、巩、秦、平、河、洮兵，戍安定、会宁，遇警截击；以凉州锐士五千，扼要屯驻，彼此策应。 
现代文：凉州镇番、庄浪、贺兰山往西，从雪山经过黄河，向南通往靖虏，直到临、巩，都是敌人入侵的道路，请求调陕西官军，用甘、凉、临、巩、秦、平、河、洮的军队增补，戍守安定、会宁，遇有警报便横截阻击；用凉州五千精锐将士，扼守要害地势在此屯居驻扎，彼此呼应。 
English: Zhenban, Zhuanglang, and Helan Mountain of Liangzhou to the west, from the Snow Mountain through the Yellow River to the south to Jingru, until Lin and Gong, are all the enemy's invasion roads. Request the transfer of the Shaanxi government army, supplement it with the troops of Gan, Liang, Lin, Gong, Qin, Ping, He and Zou, defend stability and Huining, and intercept and block it in the event of an alarm; use the five thousand elite soldiers of Liangzhou to guard the critical situation and stay here, echoing each other.

古文：诏可。
现代文：下诏同意。
English: The royal decree was approved.

古文：二十一年，敕各边军士，每岁九月至明年三月，俱常操练，仍以操过军马及风雪免日奏报。
现代文：二十一年，敕令各边的军士，每年九月到第二年三月，都要经常操练，仍然要把操练过的军马以及有风雪停止操练的时日情况奏报。
English: In the 21st year, the Emperor ordered the soldiers on all sides to exercise regularly from September to March of the following year, and they still had to report the horses that had been exercised and the time and date when the exercise was stopped due to wind and snow.

古文：边备颇修饬。
现代文：边防多所整顿。
English: A number of border guard posts have been reorganised.

古文：弘治十四年，设固原镇。
现代文：弘治十四年，设置固原镇。
English: In the 14th year of the Koji era, Gohara Town was established.

古文：先是，固原为内地，所备惟靖虏。
现代文：此前，固原是内地，祇有靖虏有防备。
English: Previously, Gouyuan was inland, and only Jingrui had defenses.

古文：及火筛入据河套，遂为敌冲。
现代文：到火筛入侵占据河套，固原于是成为敌人入侵的冲要之地。
English: The invasion of the fire sieve occupied the river loop, and Gouyuan became the focal point of the enemy's invasion.

古文：乃改平凉之开成县为固原州，隶以四卫，设总制府，总陕西三边军务。
现代文：于是改平凉的开成县为固原州，四卫隶属于它，设置总制府，统领陕西三边的军务。
English: As a result, Kaicheng County was changed from Pingliang County to Guyuan County, and Siwei County was subordinated to it. A general establishment was set up to lead the military affairs of the three sides of Shaanxi Province.

古文：是时陕边惟甘肃稍安，而哈密屡为土鲁番所扰，乃敕修嘉峪关。
现代文：此时陕西的边境只有甘肃稍稍安宁，而哈密屡遭土鲁番侵扰，于是敕令修筑嘉峪关。
English: At this time, the border of Shaanxi was only slightly peaceful in Gansu, while Hami was repeatedly invaded by Turuban, so the imperial order to build Jiayuguan was issued.

古文：正德元年春，总制三边都御史杨一清请复守东胜： 因河为固，东接大同，西属宁夏，使河套千里沃壤，归我耕牧，则陕右犹可息肩 。
现代文：正德元年春，总制三边都御史杨一渣请求恢复镇守束胜， 凭借黄河作为险固防线，束面连接大同，西面连接宁夏，使河套千里肥沃的土壤，归我们耕种放牧，那么陕右还可以休养生息 。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Zhengde era, the general system of the three-sided capital, Shi Yang Yijian, requested the restoration of the town guard of Soksheng. With the Yellow River as a precarious defense line, Sokshen connected Datong, and the west side connected Ningxia, so that the thousands of miles of fertile soil in the riverbed belonged to us for farming and grazing, then the right side of Shaanxi could also rest and recuperate.

古文：因上修筑定边营等六事。
现代文：于是上奏修筑定边营等六件事。
English: As a result, six things, including the construction of the fixed-edge camp, were reported.

古文：帝可其奏。
现代文：皇帝同意他的奏请。
English: The patriarch approved his suggestion.

古文：旋以忤中官刘瑾罢，所筑塞垣仅四十余里而已。
现代文：不久杨一清因为触犯宦官刘瑾而被罢免。所修筑的边塞城墙仅四十多里而已。
English: Soon after, Yang Iqing was deposed for offending the eunuch Liu Ye. The border fortress wall built was only more than forty miles long.

古文：武宗好武，边将江彬等得幸，辽东、宣府、大同、延绥四镇军多内调，又以京军六千与宣府军六千春秋番换。
现代文：武宗喜好武功，边将江彬等得到宠幸，辽东、宣府、大同、延绥四个镇的军士很多往内调，又用京军六千人和宣府军六千人，春秋轮番更换。
English: Wu Zong was fond of martial arts, and his sidekick Jiang Bin and others were favored. Many soldiers from Liaodong, Xuanfu, Datong, and Yancheng were transferred to the capital, and six thousand soldiers from Beijing and six thousand soldiers from Xuanfu were replaced in the spring and autumn.

古文：十三年，颁定宣、大、延绥三镇应援节度：敌不渡河，则延绥听调于宣、大；渡河，则宣、大听调于延绥。
现代文：十三年，颁布制定宣、大、延绥三个镇接应援助的调度办法：敌军不渡黄河，则延绥听从宣、大的调遣：渡过黄河，则宣、大听从延绥的调遣。
English: In the 13th year, it promulgated and formulated the dispatching method for the three towns of Xuan, Dada and Yancheng to receive assistance: if the enemy army did not cross the Yellow River, Yancheng would listen to Xuan, and if the enemy army did not cross the Yellow River, Xuan and Dada would listen to Yancheng.

古文：从兵部尚书王琼议也。
现代文：是依从兵部尚书王琼的奏议。
English: It is in accordance with the report of the Ministry of Military Affairs Shangshu Wang Qiong.

古文：初，大宁之弃，以其地畀朵颜、福馀、泰宁三卫，盖兀良哈归附者也。
现代文：当初，大宁废弃，把那个地方赐给朵颜、福余、泰宁三卫，因为这三卫是兀良哈归顺者。
English: At first, Danying was abandoned, and the place was given to Do Yan, Fu Yu, and Taining Sanwei, because these three guards were the followers of Ailiang Ha.

古文：未几，遂不靖。
现代文：不久，便不安定。
English: Soon, it became unstable.

古文：宣宗尝因田猎，亲率师败之，自是畏服。
现代文：童塞曾藉打猎之名，亲自率军击败他们，从此他们敬畏服从。
English: In the name of hunting, Tongsai had personally led an army to defeat them, and from then on they feared and obeyed.

古文：故喜峰、密云止设都指挥镇守。
现代文：所以喜峰、密云只设立都指挥镇守。
English: Therefore, Qifeng and Miyun only set up the commanding town guards.

古文：土木之变，颇传三卫助逆，后因添设太监参将等官。
现代文：土木之变，盛传三卫帮助叛逆，后来便增设太监参将等官。
English: During the civil engineering revolution, it is said that Sanwei helped the rebels, and later, eunuchs, senior generals, and other officials were added.

古文：至是，朵颜独盛，情叵测。
现代文：到此时，朵颜单独强盛，情形不可预测。
English: At this time, Do Yan alone is strong, and the situation is unpredictable.

古文：嘉靖初，御史丘养浩请复小河等关于外地，以扼其要。
现代文：嘉靖初，御史丘养浩请求在关外之地恢复小河等关，用以扼制要害。
English: At the beginning of the Jiajing period, the Grand Historian Qiu Yanghao requested the restoration of small rivers and other passes outside the pass to contain the key.

古文：又请多铸火器，给沿边州县，募商粜粟，实各边卫所。
现代文：又请求多铸造火器，供给沿边的州县，招募商人买进粮食，充实各边卫所。
English: He also requested that more firearms be cast, that the states and counties along the border be supplied, that merchants be recruited to buy grain, and that the border guard stations be replenished.

古文：诏皆行之。
现代文：韶令都实行。
English: All the royal decrees have been implemented.

古文：初，太祖时，以边军屯田不足，召商输边粟而与之盐。
现代文：当初，在太祖时，因为边防军队屯田供给不足，召令商人运输粮食到边境而给他们盐。
English: At first, in the time of Taizu, because the border guard troops had insufficient supply of tonden, merchants were summoned to transport grain to the border and give them salt.

古文：富商大贾悉自出财力，募民垦田塞下，故边储不匮。
现代文：富商巨贾全都白出资金，招募百姓在边塞下开垦田地，因而边防储备不匮乏。
English: All the rich merchants and tycoons have spent money in vain to recruit people to cultivate fields under the border dam, so there is no shortage of border defense reserves.

古文：弘治时，户部尚书叶淇始变法，令商纳银太仓，分给各边。
现代文：弘治时期，户部尚书叶淇开始变法，命令商人向京城太仓交纳银两，分给各边境。
English: During the Hongzhi period, the head of the household, Shang Shuhe, began to change the law, ordering merchants to pay two silver coins to the Beijing Taicang and distribute them to each border.

古文：商皆撤业归，边地荒芜，米粟踊贵，边军遂日困。
现代文：商人都撤除原业回去，边地荒芜，粮食价格上涨，边防军队便日渐困窘。
English: The merchants all withdrew and went back to their original businesses, the border areas were deserted, grain prices rose, and the border troops were increasingly in a predicament.

古文：十一年，御史徐汝圭条上边防兵食，谓 延绥宜漕石州、保德之粟，自黄河而上，楚粟由郧阳，汴粟由陕、洛，沔粟由汉中，以达陕右。
现代文：嘉靖十一年，御史徐汝圭备文上奏边防士兵粮食问题，说 延绥应漕运石州、保德的粮食，从黄河向上，楚地的粮食由鄙阳，汴地的粮食由陕、洛，沔地的粮食由汉中，最终达到陕右。
English: In the eleventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, Grand Historian Xu Rugei wrote an article on the issue of grain for border soldiers, saying that Yancheng should transport grain from Shizhou and Baode from the Yellow River, grain from Chu from Danyang, grain from Shandong from Shaanxi and Luo, grain from Shandong from Hanzhong, and finally reach Shaanxi and Hebei.

古文：宣、大产二麦，宜多方收粜。
现代文：宣、大产两种麦，应多方收购。
English: Xuan, large production of two kinds of wheat, should be multi-party acquisition.

古文：紫荆、倒马、白羊等关，宜招商赁车运 。
现代文：紫荆、倒马、白羊等关口，应当招请商人租赁车辆运送 。
English: Merchants should be invited to lease vehicles to transport bauhinia, tumbling horse, white sheep and other passes.

古文：又请 以宣府游兵驻右卫怀来，以援大同。
现代文：又提出请求 以宣府无固定防地的游兵驻扎在右卫怀来，以便增援大同。
English: He also made a request to station roving soldiers from Xuanfu, which had no fixed defenses, in Uweihuai in order to reinforce Datong.

古文：选补游兵于顺圣西城为临期应援，永宁等处游兵卫宣府，备调遣。
现代文：把选补游兵安排在顺圣西城作为遇上紧急情况临时呼应增援的兵力，永宁等处的游兵守卫宣府，以备调遣。
English: The selected reserve soldiers will be arranged in Shunsan West Town as a temporary reinforcement force in the event of an emergency, and the rangers in Yongning and other places will guard Xuanfu to prepare for deployment.

古文：直隶八府召募勇敢团练，赴边关远近警急。
现代文：在直隶八府招募勇敢之士组成团练，赶赴边关应付远近的紧急情况。
English: In the eight prefectures of Zhili, brave men were recruited to form a group training, and rushed to the border to deal with emergencies near and far.

古文：榆林、山、陕游兵，于本处策应 。
现代文：榆林、山、陕的游兵，各在自己防地随时策应 。
English: The guerrillas in Yulin, Shan, and Shaanxi are ready to respond at any time in their own defense.

古文：报可，亦未能行也。
现代文：皇上答复说可以，但也未能施行。
English: The emperor replied that it was possible, but it was not implemented.

古文：十八年，移三边制府镇花马池。
现代文：嘉靖十八年，调移三边制府镇守花马池。
English: In the 18th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, he was transferred to the trilateral prefectural town of Hanamachi.

古文：是时，俺答诸部强横，屡深入大同、太原之境，晋阳南北，烟火萧然。
现代文：此时，俺答各部强大蛮横，多次深入大同、太原境内，晋阳南北人烟萧条冷落。
English: At this time, I answered that all the departments were powerful and arrogant, and I went deep into Datong and Taiyuan many times, and the people from the north and south of Jinyang were left out in the cold.

古文：巡抚都御史陈讲请 以兵六千戍老营堡东界之长峪，以山西兵守大同。
现代文：巡抚都御史陈讲请求 用六千兵戍守老营堡束界的长峪，用山西兵镇守大同。
English: The governor of the capital requested that six thousand soldiers be used to defend Chang'an in the area of the old camp, and that Shanxi soldiers be used to defend Datong.

古文：三关形势，宁武为中路，莫要于神池，偏头为西路，莫要于老营堡，皆宜改设参将。
现代文：三关的形势，宁武作中路，没有哪里比神池更险要，偏头为西路，没有哪里比老营堡更险要，都应该改设参将。
English: In the situation of the three passes, Ningwuzha is in the middle of the road, and there is no place more dangerous than Shenchi, and the turning point is the west road, and there is no place more dangerous than the old camp, and all of them should be rebuilt.

古文：雁门为东路，莫要于北楼诸口，宜增设把总、指挥。
现代文：雁门是东路，没有哪里比北楼各口更险要，应当增设把总、指挥。
English: The wild goose gate is the east road, and there is no place more dangerous than the entrances of the north building. The general and command should be added.

古文：而移神池守备于利民堡，老营堡游击于八角所，各增军设备 。
现代文：而移神池到利民堡守卫防备，老萤堡到八角所游动出击，各自增加军队设置防备 。
English: However, Yixinchi to Limin Castle guarded and prepared, and Laohuo Castle to Bajiao swam out to attack, each increasing their troops and setting up defenses.

古文：帝悉许之。
现代文：皇帝全都应允。
English: All the emperors agreed.

古文：规画虽密，然兵将率怯弱，其健者仅能自守而已。
现代文：规划得虽然严密，然而士兵将帅全都胆怯懦弱，其中强健的人仅仅能够自守而己。
English: Though well planned, the soldiers, generals, and commanders were all cowardly, and the strongest among them were only able to defend themselves.

古文：二十二年，诏宣府兵乘塞。
现代文：嘉靖二十二年，诏令宣府士兵登塞防守。
English: In the 22nd year of Jiajing, the emperor ordered the soldiers of Xuanfu to go on the defensive.

古文：旧制，总兵夏秋间分驻边堡，谓之暗伏。
现代文：旧制规定，总兵在夏秋期间分别驻守边堡，称为暗伏。
English: According to the provisions of the old system, the soldiers were stationed at the border fort separately during the summer and autumn, known as hiding.

古文：至是，有司建议，入秋悉令赴边，分地拒守，至九月中罢归，犒以帑金。
现代文：到此时，主管部门建议，进入秋季命令全部奔赴边境，分划区域拒守，到九月中回师，用国库钱币犒劳。
English: At this time, the competent departments suggested that in the autumn they should all rush to the border, refuse to defend the divided areas, and return to the division by the middle of September, and reward them with treasury coins.

古文：久之，以劳费罢。
现代文：时间久了，因为劳顿花费而废止。
English: It has been a long time since it was abolished because of the cost.

古文：二十四年，巡按山西御史陈豪言： 敌三犯山西，伤残百万，费饷银六十亿，曾无尺寸功。
现代文：二十四年，巡按山西御史陈豪说： 敌军三次侵犯山西，杀伤残害上百万人，花去军饷银两六十亿，竟然没有一点功绩。
English: In 1924, Chen Hao, the chief historian of Shanxi Province, said: The enemy invaded Shanxi Province three times, killing and injuring more than a million people, and spent 2.6 billion yuan in war booty and silver, without any achievements.

古文：请定计决战，尽复套地。 
现代文：请求定出计谋决战，把河套的土地全部收复。 
English: The request is to work out a plan for a decisive battle to recover all the land in Hetao.

古文：明年，敌犯延安，总督三边侍郎曾铣力主复套，条上十八事。
现代文：第二年，敌军侵犯延安，总督三边侍郎曾铣竭力主张收复河套，备文呈上十八件事。
English: In the second year, when the enemy invaded Yan'an, the governor of the three sides, Zeng Yao, advocated the recovery of Hetao, and submitted eighteen cases.

古文：帝嘉奖之。
现代文：皇帝赞赏褒奖他。
English: The emperor commended them.

古文：大学士严嵩窥帝意惮兵，且欲杀旧阁臣夏言，因劾铣，并言诛死，自是无敢言边事者。
现代文：大学士严嵩窥探到皇帝心意是害怕作战，并想杀旧阁臣夏言，便弹劾曾铣，与夏言一同被杀，从此没有人敢谈边防的事。
English: College student Yan Song spied that the emperor was afraid to fight and wanted to kill former cabinet minister Xia Yan, so he impeached Zeng Yao and was killed together with Xia Yan. From then on, no one dared to talk about border defense.

古文：二十九年，俺答攻古北口，从间道黄榆沟入，直薄东直门，诸将不敢战。
现代文：嘉靖二十九年，俺答攻打古北口，从小道黄榆沟侵入，径直逼近柬直门，众将不敢应战。
English: In the 29th year of Jiajing, I attacked the ancient north gate, invaded from the trail of Huangpi ditch, and directly approached the Cambodian straight gate. The generals did not dare to fight.

古文：敌退，大将军仇鸾力主贡市之议。
现代文：敌人撤退，大将军仇鸾竭力主张商议贡市。
English: When the enemy retreated, the general Qiu Jun tried his best to negotiate a tribute.

古文：明年，开马市于大同，然寇掠如故。
现代文：第二年在大同开马市，然而敌寇仍像以往一样掠夺。
English: The following year in Datong Kaima, however, the enemy raiders still plundered as before.

古文：又明年，马市罢。
现代文：又遇了一年，马市废止。
English: Another year passed, and the horse market was abolished.

古文：先是翁万达之总督宣、大也，筹边事甚悉。
现代文：此前，翁万达总督宣、大时，非常周密地筹谋边防事务。
English: Prior to that, Governor Onwanda, together with the Prime Minister, very carefully planned border defense affairs.

古文：其言曰： 山西保德州河岸，东尽老营堡，凡二百五十四里。
现代文：他说： 山西保德州的河岸，东边尽处是老萤堡，共二百五十四里。
English: He said: The riverbank of Shanxi Baodezhou, the east end is the old firefly castle, a total of 254 miles.

古文：西路丫角山迤北而来，历中北路，抵东路之东阳河镇口台，凡六百四十七里。
现代文：西路丫角山往北转向束，经过中北路，到达东路的束阳河镇口台，共六百四十七里。
English: West Ma Jiao Shan Road turns north to Sok, passes through the Middle North Road, and reaches the Sok Yanghe Town Gate of the East Road, a total of 647 miles.

古文：宣府西路，西阳河迤东，历中北路，抵东路之永宁四海冶，凡一千二十三里。
现代文：宣府西路，西阳河往东，经过中北路，到达东路的永窒迢塑冶，共一千零二十三里。
English: Xuanfu West Road, Xiyang River to the east, through the Middle North Road, to the East Road of Yongnian Road, a total of 1,023 miles.

古文：皆逼临巨寇，险在外者，所谓极边也。
现代文：都逼近强大的敌寇，险要之地在外的，称为极边。
English: All of them are approaching powerful enemy raiders, and the critical place is outside, known as the extreme edge.

古文：老营堡转南而东，历宁武、雁门、北楼至平刑关尽境，约八百里。
现代文：老营堡转南向束，经过宁武、雁门、北楼到平刑关尽头，约八百里。
English: The old camp turned south towards Sok, passing through Ningwu, Yanmen and Beilou to the end of Pingciguan, about 800 miles.

古文：又转南而东，为保定界，历龙泉、倒马、紫荆、吴王口、插箭岭、浮图峪至沿河口，约一千七十余里。
现代文：又转南向东，是保定的边界，经过龙泉、倒马、紫荆、昊王口、插箭岭、浮图峪到沿河口，约一千零七十多里。
English: Turning south to east, it is a guaranteed border, passing through Longquan, Louma, Bijing, Haowangkou, Jiejialing, and Fuduxuan to the estuary, about more than 1,070 miles.

古文：又东北为顺天界，历高崖、白羊，抵居庸关，约一百八十余里。
现代文：加上东北是顺天界，经过高崖、白羊，到达居庸关，约一百八十多里。
English: In addition, the northeast is along the celestial sphere, passing through the high cliff and Baiyang, and reaching Juyongguan, about 180 miles.

古文：皆峻岭层冈，险在内者，所谓次边也。
现代文：都是高峻的山岭层层山冈，险要之地在内的，称为次遏。
English: They are all high and steep mountains, including dangerous places, and are called secondary containment.

古文：敌犯山西必自大同，入紫荆必自宣府，未有不经外边能入内边者。 
现代文：敌人侵犯山西一定从大同，入侵紫剂一定从宣府，没有不经过外边而能进入内边的。 
English: The enemy invading Shanxi must have come from Datong, and the invading agents must have come from Xuanfu. Nothing can get inside without going through the outside.

古文：乃请修筑宣、大边墙千余里，烽堠三百六十三所。
现代文：于是请求修筑宣、大边墙一千多里，烽火台三百六十三所。
English: He then requested the construction of more than a thousand miles of propaganda and large boundary walls, and 363 bonfires.

古文：后以通市故，不复防，遂半为敌毁。
现代文：后来因为通互市的缘故，不再设防，于是一半被敌人毁坏。
English: Later, because of the connection between the two cities, it was no longer fortified, so half of it was destroyed by the enemy.

古文：至是，兵部请敕边将修补。
现代文：到此时，兵部请求敕令边防将士修补。
English: At this time, the military department requested the magistrate to order the border guards to repair.

古文：科臣又言，垣上宜筑高台，建庐以栖火器。
现代文：科臣又说，墙垣上应修筑高台，建房屋以存放火器。
English: Kotsen also said that a high platform should be built on the wall and a house should be built to store firearms.

古文：从之。
现代文：依从他的建议。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：时俺答益强，朵颜三卫为之向道，辽、蓟、宣、大连岁被兵。
现代文：当时俺答更加强盛，朵颜三卫焉他们引路，辽、蓟、童、左连年遭受兵祸。
English: At that time, I answered more vigorously, Duo Yan and San Wei Yan led the way, and Liao, Zou, Tong and Zuo Lian suffered military disasters.

古文：三十四年，总督军务兵部尚书杨博，既解大同右卫围，因筑牛心诸堡，修烽堠二千八百有奇。
现代文：三十四年，总督军务兵部尚书杨博，解除大同右卫的包围以后，便修筑牛心等堡，修建烽火台二千八百多个。
English: In the 34th year, after the encirclement of Datong Right Guard was lifted, Yang Bo Shangshu, the Governor-General of the Ministry of Military Affairs and Armaments, built Fort Niu Xin and other forts, and built more than 2,800 campfires.

古文：宣、大间稍宁息，而蓟镇之患不已。
现代文：宣、大地区稍稍安宁平息，而蓟镇的战患不停。
English: In Xuanwu and other large areas, a little bit of peace has subsided, but the war in Shanzhen has not stopped.

古文：蓟之称镇，自二十七年始。
现代文：蓟称作镇，从嘉靖二十七年开始。
English: is called a town, starting from the 27th year of Jiajing.

古文：时镇兵未练，因诏各边入卫兵往戍。
现代文：当时士兵没有操练，便诏令各边调入卫兵前往戍守。
English: At that time, the soldiers did not practice, and the emperor ordered all sides to transfer the guards to the castle.

古文：既而兵部言： 大同之三边，陕西之固原，宣府之长安岭，延绥之夹墙，皆据重险，惟蓟独无。
现代文：不久兵部说： 大同的三边，陕西的固原，宣府的长安岭，延绥的夹墙，都占据险要地势，惟独蓟没有。
English: Soon, the military department said: The three sides of Datong, Gouyuan in Shaanxi, Chang'anling in Xuanfu, and Yancheng's wall, all occupy a precarious situation, but only Yancheng does not.

古文：渤海所南，山陵东，有苏家口，至寨篱村七十里，地形平漫，宜筑墙建台，设兵守，与京军相夹制。 
现代文：渤海南面，山陵在束面，有苏家口，到寨篱村七十里，地形平坦宽广，应修筑城墙建造台堡，设兵镇守，同京军相互协助控制该地。 
English: In the south of the Bohai Sea, the mountains are on the surface of the bunch, there is a Sujiakou, and it is seventy miles to the village of the hedge, the terrain is flat and wide, the city wall should be built, the castle should be built, the soldiers should be set up to guard the town, and the Beijing army should help each other to control the place.

古文：报可。
现代文：批覆同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：时兵力孱弱，有警征召四集，而议者惟以据险为事，无敢言战者。
现代文：当时军队懦弱，有警情征召四方集聚，而议论的人只强调占据险要地势，没有敢谈出战的人。
English: At that time, the army was cowardly, and the police summoned the four sides to gather, and the people who talked only emphasized occupying the critical situation, and there was no one who dared to talk about going to war.

古文：其后蓟镇入卫兵，俱听宣、大督、抚调遣，防御益疏。朵颜遂乘虚岁入。
现代文：此后蓟镇增入卫兵，都听宣、大督、抚的调遣，防御更加松弛，朵颜便乘虚每年入侵。
English: After that, more guards were added to the town, and they were all dispatched by the proclamation, the governor, and the governor. The defense was more slack, and Doyan took advantage of the situation to invade every year.

古文：三十七年，诸镇建议，各练本镇戍卒，可省征发费十之六。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年，各镇建议，各自操练本镇戍守的军队，可以节省十分之六的征发费用。
English: In the thirty-seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, each town suggested that they should train the troops stationed in their own towns, which could save six-tenths of the conscription and dispatch costs.

古文：然戍卒选懦不任战，岁练亦费万余，而临事征发如故。
现代文：然而戍守的军士都懦弱不能胜任作战，每年操练也花费一万多，而遇事征发和以往一样。
English: However, the soldiers guarding it are too cowardly to fight competently. It costs more than 10,000 yuan to train them every year, and they are conscripted in the same way as before.

古文：隆庆间，总兵官戚继光总理蓟、辽，任练兵事，因请调浙兵三千人以倡勇敢。
现代文：隆庆年间，总兵官戚继光总理蓟、辽，担任练兵事务，于是请求调浙兵三千人来倡导勇敢。
English: During the Longqing period, the chief military officer, a relative of the Prime Minister Jiguang and Liao, was in charge of military training, so he requested the transfer of three thousand soldiers from Zhejiang to advocate bravery.

古文：及至，待命于郊，自朝至日中，天雨，军士跬步不移，边将大骇。
现代文：等到抵达，在郊外等待命令，从早晨到中午，天降雨，军士不移动半步，边防将士非常惊骇。
English: When we arrived, we waited for orders in the suburbs, from morning to noon, it rained, the sergeant did not move a half step, the border guards were very shocked.

古文：自是蓟兵以精整称。
现代文：从此蓟兵以精锐整饬着称。
English: Since then, the soldiers have been known for their elite discipline.

古文：俺答已通贡，封顺义王，其子孙袭封者累世。
现代文：俺答已经通贡，封顺义王。他的子孙世代沿袭封号。
English: I replied that the tribute had already been paid, and he was given the title of Fushun Yi Wang. His descendants inherited the title.

古文：迨万历之季，西部遂不竞，而土蛮部落虎炖兔、炒花、宰赛、爰兔辈，东西煽动，将士疲于奔命，未尝得安枕也。
现代文：到万历末年，西部渐已不强竞，而土蛮部落虎炖兔、炒花、宰赛、暖兔等，到处煽起战争，将士疲于奔命，不曾得以安枕休息。
English: By the end of the Wanli era, the West was no longer a strong competitor, and the barbarian tribes, such as the Tigress and the Rabbit, the Fried Flowers, the Zaisei, and the Warm Rabbits, instigated wars everywhere. The soldiers were exhausted from running for their lives and were unable to rest peacefully.

古文：初，太祖沿边设卫，惟土著兵及有罪谪戍者。
现代文：当初，太祖沿边境设置卫，只有土著兵以及有罪流放的人戍守。
English: At first, the ancestors set up guards along the border, and only the indigenous soldiers and the guilty exiles kept watch.

古文：遇有警，调他卫军往戍，谓之客兵。
现代文：遇有警情，便调遣其它卫军前往戍守，称之为客兵。
English: In the event of a police emergency, other guards are dispatched to the castle to guard it, and they are called guest soldiers.

古文：永乐间，始命内地军番戍，谓之边班。
现代文：永乐年间，开始命令内地军轮番戍守，称之为边班。
English: During the Yongle era, the mainland troops were ordered to take turns guarding the capital, which was called the "side shift."

古文：其后占役逃亡之数多，乃有召募，有改拨，有修守民兵、土兵，而边防日益坏。
现代文：此后逾制占用当差、逃亡的人数很多，便有招募，有更改分拨，有修整戍守的民兵、土兵，而边防日益败坏。
English: Since then, there have been a large number of people who have overstayed their duty and fled, there has been recruitment, there have been changes in allocation, there have been repairs of the militias and local soldiers, and the border defense has been deteriorating.

古文：洪武时，宣府屯守官军殆十万。
现代文：洪武时期，宣府屯守的官军将近十万。
English: During the Hongwu period, nearly one hundred thousand government troops were stationed in Xuanfu.

古文：正统、景泰间，已不及额。
现代文：正统、景泰年间，已经达不到这个数额。
English: During the orthodox and Jing Tai years, this amount has not been reached.

古文：弘治、正德以后，官军实有者仅六万六千九百有奇，而召募与士兵居其半。
现代文：弘治、正德以后，官军事实上只有六万六千九百多，而招募的和土兵占了一半。
English: After Hongzhi and Zhengde, the official army was actually only more than 66,900, and the recruited soldiers and soldiers accounted for half.

古文：他镇率视此。
现代文：其它镇大都与此相同。
English: Most of the other towns are the same.

古文：正统初，山西、河南班军守偏头、大同、宣府塞，不得代。
现代文：正统初年，山西、河南轮番戍守的军队镇守偏头、大同、宣府边塞，不能更代。
English: In the first year of orthodoxy, the troops of Shanxi and Henan took turns to guard the border fortresses of Zhentou, Datong and Xuanfu, and could not be replaced.

古文：巡抚于谦言： 每岁九月至二月，水冷草枯，敌骑出没，乘障卒宜多。
现代文：巡抚于谦说： 每年九月到二月，水冷草枯，敌方骑兵出没，守塞士卒应增多。
English: Governor Yu Qian said: Every year from September to February, the water is cold, the grass is withered, the enemy cavalry haunts, and the number of guards should be increased.

古文：若三月至八月，边守自足。
现代文：从三月到八月，边塞防守自足。
English: From March to August, the garrison is self-sufficient.

古文：乞将两班军，每岁一班，如期放遣。 
现代文：请求将两批军队，每年一批，按期调发遣送。 
English: It is requested that two batches of troops, one batch per year, be dispatched as scheduled.

古文：甘肃总兵官蒋贵又言： 沿边墩台，守了军更番有例，惟坐事谪发者不许，困苦甚。
现代文：甘肃总兵官蒋贵又说： 沿边烽火台，防守瞭望的军士轮番更代有规定，惟有因事获罪流放发配的人不允许，非常困苦。
English: Jiang Gui, the chief military officer of Gansu, also said: There are rules for the rotation of the soldiers guarding the observation towers along the border, but those who have been exiled for crimes are not allowed, which is very difficult.

古文：乞如例践更。 
现代文：请求按规定进行更代。 
English: The request is for a replacement in accordance with the regulations.

古文：并从之。
现代文：一并依从他们的建议。
English: The late emperor agreed.

古文：五年，山西总兵官李谦请偏头关守备军如大同例，半岁更番。
现代文：正统五年，山西总兵官李谦请求偏头关守卫防备的军队按大同的规定，半年更代一次。
English: In the fifth year of orthodoxy, Li Qian, Shanxi's chief military officer, requested that the troops guarding the defenses of Yehotou Pass be replaced once every six months in accordance with the provisions of Datong.

古文：部议，每番皆十月，而戍卒仍率以岁为期，有久而后遣者。
现代文：兵部商议，每次更代都在十月，而戍守的士兵仍然都以一年为期限，有很久以后纔遣送的。
English: The military department deliberated, and each change of generation was in October, but the soldiers who stayed behind still had a one-year deadline, and some were sent back after a long time.

古文：弘治中，三边总制秦纮言： 备御延绥官军，自十二月赴边，既周一岁，至次年二月始得代。
现代文：弘治年间，三边总制秦弦说： 防御延绥的官军，从十二月奔赴边境，已经过了一年，到第二年二月纔能更代。
English: During the Hongzhi era, Qin Zhen, the general secretary of the tripartite system, said: The government army defending Yancheng rushed to the border from December, and a year had passed. By February of the following year, Yancheng was replaced.

古文：在军日多，请岁一更，上下俱在三月初。 
现代文：在军队中时日已多，请求一年换一次，上下都在三月初。 
English: He has been in the army for a long time, and requests to be exchanged once a year, both at the beginning of March.

古文：边军便之。
现代文：边军以此为便利。
English: This was convenient for the border troops.

古文：嘉靖四十三年，巡抚延绥胡志夔请免戍军三年，每军征银五两四钱，为募兵用。
现代文：嘉靖四十三年，巡抚延绥胡志夔请求免除守戍军队三年，每军征收银五两四钱，用以招募士兵。
English: In the 43rd year of Jiajing, the governor of Yancheng, Ho Chi Minh, requested that the Shouyi army be exempted for three years, and that each army collect 524 silver coins to recruit soldiers.

古文：至万历初，大同督、抚方逢时等请修筑费。
现代文：到万历初年，大同督、抚方逢时等请求修筑费用。
English: In the first year of the Wanli era, the governor of Datong and the governor of Fu requested the construction cost.

古文：诏以河南应戍班军，自四年至六年概免，尽扣班价发给，谓之折班，班军遂耗。
现代文：下诏把河南应去轮番戍守的军队，从四年到六年一概免除，全部扣下轮番戍守军的费用来供给，称焉折班，轮番戍守军于是耗损。
English: The next edict exempted the troops of Henan that should go to the rotating garrison from four years to six years, deducted all the expenses of the rotating garrison to supply, and said that they would be broken, so the rotating garrison was depleted.

古文：久之，所征亦不得。
现代文：后来，征收的银两也得不到。
English: Later, the collected silver coins could not be retrieved.

古文：宁山、南阳、颍上三卫积逋延绥镇折班银至五万余两。
现代文：宁山、南阳、颖上三个卫累欠延绥镇折班银达到五万多两。
English: In Ningshan, Nanyang and Yingjiang, three towns of Weili and Yancheng, the total amount of silver reached more than 50,000 taels.

古文：是后诸边财力俱尽，敝极矣。
现代文：此后各边财力全部耗尽，极其疲困。
English: Since then, all financial resources have been exhausted on all sides, and they are extremely exhausted.

古文：初，边政严明，官军皆有定职。
现代文：当初，边防政令严明，官军都有确定的职务。
English: At first, the border defense decree was very clear, and the government troops had definite duties.

古文：总兵官总镇军为正兵，副总兵分领三千为奇兵，游击分领三千往来防御为游兵，参将分守各路东西策应为援兵。
现代文：总兵官总镇军作正兵，副总兵分头率领三千兵作奇兵，游击分头率领三干兵往来防御作巡游兵，参将分别镇守各路在东西呼应作援兵。
English: The commander-in-chief of the general garrison served as the front-line soldier, the deputy commander-in-chief of the division led three thousand soldiers as a surprise soldier, the guerrilla division leader led three soldiers to defend against each other as a patrol soldier, and the town guards of each road echoed as reinforcements in the east and west.

古文：营堡墩台分极冲、次冲，为设军多寡。
现代文：军营堡垒烽火台分成极冲、次冲，作为设军多少的标准。
English: Camps, fortresses, and campfires are divided into primary and secondary camps according to the number of troops to be raised.

古文：平时走阵、哨探、守瞭、焚荒诸事，无敢惰。
现代文：平时操练阵法、放哨探察、镇守瞭望、焚烧荒地等事，不敢懈怠。
English: In peacetime, they do not dare to slack off when it comes to practicing the formation method, sending out patrols, keeping a lookout, burning wasteland, and so on.

古文：稍违制，辄按军法。
现代文：稍微违反制度，就依照军法处置。
English: If there is a slight violation of the system, it will be dealt with according to military law.

古文：而其后皆废坏云。
现代文：而此后都废弃败坏了。
English: Since then, they have been abandoned and deteriorated.

古文：沿海之地，自乐会接安南界，五千里抵闽，又二千里抵浙，又二千里抵南直隶，又千八百里抵山东，又千二百里逾宝坻、卢龙抵辽东，又千三百余里抵鸭绿江。
现代文：沿海的地域，从广东乐会连接到安南边界，五千里抵达闽，又二千里抵达浙，又二千里抵达南直灵，又一千八百里抵达山东，又一千二百里逾越实坻、卢龙抵达辽东，又一千三百多里抵达鸭绿江。
English: In the coastal areas, from Guangdong Lekai to the Annan border, it takes 5,000 miles to arrive in Handan, another 2,000 miles to arrive in Zhejiang, another 2,000 miles to arrive in Nan Nairing, another 1,800 miles to arrive in Shandong, another 1,200 miles to pass through Shicheng, Lulong to arrive in Liaodong, and more than 1,300 miles to arrive in the Yalu River.

古文：岛寇倭夷，在在出没，故海防亦重。
现代文：岛上贼寇和倭夷，处处出役，所以海防也很重要。
English: The island's bandits and Wais were everywhere on duty, so coastal defense was also important.

古文：吴元年，用浙江行省平章李文忠言，嘉兴、海盐、海宁皆设兵戍守。
现代文：吴元年，采用浙江行省平章李文忠的建议，嘉兴、海盐、海宁都设兵戍守。
English: In the first year of the Wu Dynasty, Jiaxing, Haiyan and Haining all set up garrisons according to the suggestion of Pingzhang Li Wenzhong of Zhejiang Province.

古文：洪武四年十二月，命靖海侯吴祯籍方国珍所部温、台、庆元三府军士及兰秀山无田粮之民，凡十一万余人，隶各卫为军。
现代文：洪武四年十二月，命令靖海侯昊祯登记方国珍所属的温、台、庆元三府军士和兰秀山役有田粮的平民，共十一万多人，隶属各个卫编成军队。
English: In December of the 4th year of Hongwu, he ordered Jinghai Hou Haoqi to register the soldiers from the three provinces of Wen, Tai and Qingyuan who belonged to Fang Guozhen and the civilians who served in Lanxiu Mountain, a total of more than 110,000 people, belonging to various guards, into the army.

古文：且禁沿海民私出海。
现代文：并且禁止沿海平民私自出海。
English: Coastal civilians are also prohibited from going to sea without permission.

古文：时国珍及张士诚余众多窜岛屿间，勾倭为寇。
现代文：当时方国珍和张士诚残余敌众多逃到岛屿间，勾结倭夷作贼寇。
English: At that time, many of Fang Guozhen and Zhang Shicheng's remaining enemies fled to the islands and colluded with the Yamatoi to commit banditry.

古文：五年，命浙江、福建造海舟防倭。
现代文：五年，命令浙江、福建造海船防御倭寇。
English: Five years later, he ordered Zhejiang and Fuzhou to build naval vessels to defend against Japanese piracy.

古文：明年，从德庆侯廖永忠言，命广洋、江阴、横海、水军四卫增置多橹快船，无事则巡徼，遇寇以大船薄战，快船逐之。
现代文：第二年，依从德庆侯廖的意见，命令广洋、江阴、横海、水军四卫增设多橹的快船，没有战事时就巡逻，遇到贼寇就用大船靠近交战，用快船追逐。
English: In the second year, in accordance with the opinion of Deqing Hou Liao, he ordered Guangyang, Jiangyin, Henghai, and the four guards of the navy to add more fast boats. When there was no war, they would patrol, and when they encountered thieves and robbers, they would use big boats to approach the war and chase them with fast boats.

古文：诏祯充总兵官，领四卫兵，京卫及沿海诸卫军悉听节制。
现代文：诏令吴祯任总兵官，统领四卫兵，京卫和沿海各卫军全部听从调遣指挥。
English: The imperial edict appointed Wu Xi as the chief military officer and commander of the four guards, and the Beijing and coastal guards all obeyed the dispatched command.

古文：每春以舟师出海，分路防倭，迄秋乃还。
现代文：每年春天率水军出海，分路防御倭寇，到秋天纔回来。
English: Every spring, he leads the navy out to sea to defend against Japanese pirates, and returns in the autumn.

古文：十七年，命信国公汤和巡视海上，筑山东、江南北、浙东西沿海诸城。
现代文：十七年，命令信国公汤和巡枧海上，修筑山东、江南、江北、浙柬、浙西沿海各城。
English: In the seventeenth year, he ordered Xin Guo Gong Tang and patrols at sea to build cities along the coasts of Shandong, Jiangnan, Jiangbei, Zhejiang-Cambodia, and West Zhejiang.

古文：后三年，命江夏侯周德兴抽福建福、兴、漳、泉四府三丁之一，为沿海戍兵，得万五千人。
现代文：三年后，命令江夏侯周德兴抽调福建福、兴、漳、泉四府三分之一的壮丁，作为沿海戍守士兵，得到一万五千人。
English: Three years later, he ordered Zhou Dexing, the lord of Jiangxia, to draft one-third of the able-bodied men from the four provinces of Fujian, including Fuxing, Xing, Fen and Quan, to serve as soldiers guarding the coast, and received 15,000 men.

古文：移置卫所于要害处，筑城十六。
现代文：移置卫所到要害的地方，修筑十六座城。
English: Relocate the guard station to a critical location, and build sixteen cities.

古文：复置定海、盘石、金乡、海门四卫于浙，金山卫于松江之小官场，及青村、南汇嘴城二千户所，又置临山卫于绍兴，及三山、沥海等千户所，而宁波、温、台并海地，先已置八千户所，曰平阳、三江、龙山、霩戺、大松、钱仓、新河、松门，皆屯兵设守。
现代文：又在浙设置定海、盘石、金乡、海门四卫，金山卫在松江的小官场，以及青村、南汇嘴城二干户所，又设置临山卫于绍兴，以及三山、沥海等干户所，而宁波、温、台都是临海之地，先已设置八个千户所，称平阳、三江、龙山、霁霱、大松、钱仓、新河、松门，都屯兵设置防守。
English: In addition, four garrisons of Dinghai, Panshi, Jinxiang and Haimen were set up in Zhejiang, and two garrisons of Jinshan Garrison were set up in Songjiang, and two garrisons of Qingcun and Nanhuizui, and two garrisons of Linshan Garrison were set up in Shaoxing, and three garrisons of Sanshan and Lichai, while Ningbo, Wen and Taiwan were all coastal areas. Eight thousand garrisons were set up first, and the garrisons of Pingyang, Sanjiang, Longshan, Handan, Dasong, Qiancang, Xinhe and Songmen were all set

古文：二十一年，又命和行视闽粤，筑城增兵。
现代文：二十一年，又命令汤和巡行视察闽粤，筑城增兵。
English: In the twenty-first year, he also ordered the Tang and the patrol to inspect Shandong and Guangdong, and to build the city and increase the number of soldiers.

古文：置福建沿海指挥使司五，曰福宁、镇东、平海、永宁、镇海。
现代文：设置福建沿海指挥使司五个，叫做福宁、镇柬、平海、永宁、镇海。
English: Set up five Fujian coastal command and dispatch departments, called Funing, Zhenjiang, Pinghai, Yongning and Zhenhai.

古文：领千户所十二，曰大金、定海、梅花、万安、莆禧、崇武、福全、金门、高浦、六鳌、铜山、玄钟。
现代文：统领十二个千户所，叫做大金、定海、梅花、万安、莆禧、崇武、福全、金门、高浦、六鳖、铜山、玄锺。
English: He presided over twelve thousand households, called Dajin, Dinghai, Meihua, Wan'an, Jixi, Chongwu, Fuquan, Kinmen, Gaopu, Liuchuan, Tongshan and Xuanwu.

古文：二十三年，从卫卒陈仁言，造苏州太仓卫海舟。
现代文：二十三年，依从卫卒陈仁的意见，造苏州太仓卫海船。
English: In 233, he followed the advice of Chen Ren, a naval officer, and built the Suzhou Taicang Naval Ship.

古文：旋令滨海卫所，每百户及巡检司皆置船二，巡海上盗贼。
现代文：随即命令滨海卫所，每一百户以及巡检司都设置两艘船，巡察海上的寇贼。
English: He immediately ordered the Coast Guard, every hundred households, and the Inspection Division to set up two ships to inspect the sea for thieves.

古文：后从山东都司周彦言，建五总寨于宁海卫，与莱州卫八总寨，共辖小寨四十八。
现代文：后来依从山东都司周彦的意见，建立五个总寨在宁海卫，与莱州卫八个总寨，一共管辖四十八个小寨。
English: Later, in accordance with the opinion of Zhou Yan, the governor of Shandong Province, five general wards were established in Ninghaiwei, and eight general wards in Laizhouwei, with a total of forty-eight small wards.

古文：已，复命重臣勋戚魏国公徐辉祖等分巡沿海。
现代文：此后，又命令重臣功勋大臣外戚魏国公徐辉祖等分头巡察沿海。
English: After that, he also ordered the senior vassal, meritorious minister, maternal relative of Wei Guogong, Xu Huizu, and other subordinates to patrol the coast.

古文：帝素厌日本诡谲，绝其贡使，故终洪武、建文世不为患。
现代文：皇帝一向厌恶日本诡诈奸谲，断绝它的贡使，所以整个洪武、建文时期不受侵扰的祸患。
English: The emperor always abhorred Japan's treachery and cut off its tributary envoys, so the entire Hongwu and Jianwen period was free from the scourge.

古文：永乐六年，命丰城侯李彬等缘海捕倭，复招岛人、醿户、贾竖、渔丁为兵，防备益严。
现代文：永乐六年，命令丰城侯李彬等沿海收捕倭寇，又招募岛上的人、蛋户、商人、渔民当兵，防备更加严密。
English: In Yongle six years, he ordered Fengcheng marquis Li Bin and other coastal leaders to capture the wokou, and also recruited people on the island, egg farmers, merchants, and fishermen as soldiers, and prepared more closely.

古文：十七年，倭寇辽东，总兵官刘江歼之于望海埚。
现代文：十七年，倭寇进犯辽东，总兵官刘江在望海埚将敌兵歼灭。
English: In the seventeenth year, the wokou invaded Liaodong, and the general officer Liu Jiang annihilated the enemy soldiers in the Battle of Wanghai.

古文：自是倭大惧，百余年间，海上无大侵犯。
现代文：从此倭寇非常惊惧，一百多年间，海上没有大举侵犯。
English: From then on, the wako were very frightened, and for more than a hundred years, there was no large-scale invasion at sea.

古文：朝廷阅数岁一令大臣巡警而已。
现代文：朝廷过几年派大臣巡察一次海防情况而已。
English: A few years later, the imperial court sent a minister to inspect the coastal defense situation.

古文：至嘉靖中，倭患渐起，始设巡抚浙江兼管福建海道提督军务都御史。
现代文：到嘉靖年间，倭寇的祸患日渐兴起，开始设置巡抚浙江兼管福建海道提督军务都御史。
English: By the Jiajing period, the scourge of the wokou was on the rise, and the governor of Zhejiang and the admiral of Fujian's sea route, the Military Governor of the Capital, were established.

古文：已，改巡抚为巡视。
现代文：后来，改巡抚为巡视。
English: Later, it was changed to patrol.

古文：未几，倭寇益肆。
现代文：不久，倭寇更加放肆。
English: Soon, the wokou became even more reckless.

古文：乃增设金山参将，分守苏、松海防，寻改为副总兵，调募江南、北徐、邳官民兵充战守，而杭、嘉、湖亦增参将及兵备道。
现代文：便增设金山参将，分别镇守苏、松海防，不久改焉副总兵，调动招募江南、江北，徐、邳官军民兵充任作战镇守，而杭、嘉、湖也增加参将和兵备道。
English: He then added the Jinshan General Staff, which was responsible for the defense of the Soviet Union and Songhai Province, and was soon replaced by the Deputy General Staff. He also mobilized and recruited the militia of the Southern Jiangsu, Northern Jiangsu, Xu and Yunnan armies to serve as the combat general staff, while Hang, Jia and Hubei also increased the number of general staffs and the number of soldiers.

古文：三十三年，调拨山东民兵及青州水陆枪手千人赴淮、扬，听总督南直军务都御史张经调用。
现代文：三十三年，调动分拨山东民兵和青州水军陵军枪手一千人奔赴淮、扬，听从总督南直军务都御史张经调用。
English: In 1933, 1,000 gunners from the Shandong Militia and the Qingzhou Suigunryong Army were mobilized and sent to Huai and Yang Provinces to obey the call of the military governor of Nan Zhi, Zhang Jing.

古文：时倭纵掠杭、嘉、苏、松，踞柘林城为窟穴，大江南北皆被扰。
现代文：当时倭寇大肆掠夺杭、嘉、苏、松，盘踞柘林城为巢穴，大江南北都被侵扰。
English: At that time, the wokou plundered Hang, Jia, Su, and Song extensively, and used Huanqin Lincheng as a lair. Both the north and south of the Yangtze River were invaded.

古文：监司任环败之，经亦有王家泾之捷，乃遁出海，复犯苏州。
现代文：监司任环击败敌人，张经也有王家泾的胜利，倭寇便逃遁出海，又侵犯苏州。
English: Supervisor Ren Huan defeated the enemy, Zhang Jing also won the victory of Wang Jiaxuan, the wokou then fled to the sea and invaded Suzhou.

古文：于是南京御史屠仲律言五事。
现代文：于是南京御史屠仲律上书陈说五件事。
English: As a result, the Nanjing Imperial Historian Tu Zhongli wrote a letter to Chen saying five things.

古文：其守海口云： 守平阳港、黄花澳，据海门之险，使不得犯温、台。
现代文：其中守护海口说： 镇守平阳港、黄花澳，依靠海门的险峻地势，使敌人不能侵犯温、台。
English: Among them, the guardian of Haikou said: The town guards Pingyang Port and Huanghuaao, relying on the precipitous terrain of the sea gate to prevent the enemy from invading Wen and Tai.

古文：守宁海关、湖头湾，遏三江之口，使不得窥宁、绍。
现代文：镇守宁海关、湖头湾，遏制三江的入海口，使敌人不能窥探宁、绍。
English: The town guards the Ning Customs and Houtou Bay, and blocks the entrance to the Sanjiang River, so that the enemy cannot spy on Ning and Shao.

古文：守鳖子门、乍浦峡，使不得近杭、嘉。
现代文：镇守鳖子门、乍浦峡，使敌人不能靠近杭、嘉。
English: The town guards Zhanzi Gate and Chapu Gorge, so that the enemy cannot approach Hang and Jia.

古文：守吴淞、刘家河、七丫港，使不得掩苏、松。
现代文：镇守昊淞、刘家河、七丫港，使敌人不能侵犯苏、松。
English: The town guards Haotang, Liujiahe and Qiema Port, so that the enemy cannot invade Su and Song.

古文：且宜修饬海舟，大小相比，或百或五十联为一〈舟宗〉，募惯习水工领之，而充以原额水军，于诸海口量缓急置防。 
现代文：并且应该修整海船，大小相并，或者一百或者五十联为一船队，招募熟习水性的人率领，而用原额的水军充住，在各海口衡量缓急设防。 
English: Moreover, ships of equal size should be repaired, or a fleet of a hundred or fifty ships should be formed, and sailors should be recruited who are familiar with the nature of water and should be led by them, and the navy should be filled with the original amount, and the priority should be measured and fortified at each sea port.

古文：部是其议。
现代文：兵部依从他的提议。
English: The military followed his suggestion.

古文：未几，兵部亦言： 浙、直、通、泰间最利水战，往时多用沙船破贼，请厚赏招徕之。
现代文：不久，兵部也说： 浙、直、通、泰之问最利于水战，以前多采用沙船攻破贼寇，请求厚厚地赏赐招他们来。
English: Not long after, the military department also said: "Zhejiang, Zhizhi, Tongtong, and Taizhong are the most advantageous for naval warfare. In the past, sand boats were mostly used to break the bandits, and they asked for a generous reward to recruit them."

古文：防御之法，守海岛为上，宜以太仓、崇明、嘉定、上海沙船及福仓、东莞等船守普陀、大衢。
现代文：防御的方法，守海岛为上策，应当用太仓、崇明、嘉定、上海的沙船和福仓、东莞等船镇守普陀、大衢。
English: As a method of defense, the best strategy is to defend the islands. The sand barges of Taicang, Chongming, Jiading and Shanghai and the ships of Fukang and Dongguan should be used to defend Putuo and Dalat.

古文：陈钱山乃浙、直分路之始，狼、福二山约束首尾，交接江洋，亦要害地，宜督水师固守。 
现代文：陈钟也是浙、直分路的开始，狼、福两山连接首尾，连着江洋，也是要害的地方，应当督促水军固守。 
English: Chen Zhong is also the beginning of the direct route between Zhejiang and Fuzhou, and the two mountains of Wolf and Fu are connected end-to-end, connected by the Yangtze River. It is also a critical place, and the navy should be urged to stick to it.

古文：报可。
现代文：批覆同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：已，复令直隶吴淞江、刘家河、福山港、镇江、圌山五总添设游兵，听金山副总兵调度。
现代文：后来，又命令直隶昊淞江、刘家河、福山港、镇江、圃山五总添置游军，听从金山副总兵调度。
English: Later, he also ordered Zhi Li Hao to dispatch additional troops to Minjiang River, Liu Jiahe River, Fushan Port, Zhenjiang River and Fushan Mountain, and to obey the dispatch of Vice-Commander-in-Chief Jinshan.

古文：时胡宗宪为总督，诛海贼徐海、汪直。
现代文：当时胡宗宪任总督，诛杀海盗徐海、汪直。
English: At that time, Hu Zongxian was the governor, and he fought and killed the pirates Xu Hai and Wang Zhi.

古文：直部三千人，复勾倭入寇，闽、广益骚。
现代文：汪直部下三千人，又勾结倭寇入侵，闽、广更受骚扰。
English: Wang Zhi's three thousand subordinates also colluded with the Wokou invasion, and Yan and Guang were harassed.

古文：三十七年，都御史王询请 分福建之福、兴为一路，领以参将，驻福宁，水防自流江、烽火门、俞山、小埕至南日山，漳、泉为一路，领以参将，驻诏安，水防自南日山至浯屿、铜山、玄钟、走马溪、安边馆。
现代文：嘉靖三十七年，都御史王询请求 分福建的福、兴为一路，用参将统领，驻军福宁，水上防御从流江、烽火门、俞山、小埕到南日山；漳、泉为一路，以参将统领，驻军诏安，水上防御从南日山到浯屿、铜山、玄锺、走马溪、安边馆。
English: In the thirty-seventh year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the governor of the capital, Wang Qian, requested that the prosperity and prosperity of Fujian be divided into one road, with the general in command, the garrison of Funing, the water defense from the Lujiang River, Bonfire Gate, Lushan, Xiaojuan to Nanrishan; and the water and spring as one road, with the general in command, the garrison of Zhao'an, the water defense from Nanrishan to Lantau, Copper Mountain, Xuanwu, Houma Creek, and Anbian Pavilion.

古文：水陆兵皆听节制。
现代文：水军陆军都听从调遣。
English: The navy and army are at his beck and call.

古文：福建省城介在南北，去海仅五十里，宜更设参将，选募精税部领哨船，与主客兵相应援 。
现代文：福建省城介于南北，离海仅仅五十里，应另设参将，选择招募精锐军队率领巡逻的船只，与主兵、客兵相接应援助 。
English: Chengdu, Fujian Province, is located between the north and the south, and is only 50 miles from the sea. It is necessary to set up a separate general staff, select ships that recruit elite troops to lead patrols, and provide assistance to the main soldiers and guest soldiers.

古文：部覆从之。
现代文：兵部回复依从了他。
English: The Ministry of the Armed Forces replied in his favour.

古文：广东惠、潮亦增设参将，驻揭阳。
现代文：广东惠、潮也增设参将，驻军揭阳。
English: Guangdong Hui and Tide also increased the number of generals and stationed troops in Jieyang.

古文：福建巡抚都御史游震得言： 浙江温、处与福宁接壤，倭所出没，宜进戚继光为副总兵，守之。
现代文：福建巡抚都御史游震得说： 浙江温、处和福宁接壤，是倭寇出役的地方，应提升戚继光作副总兵，镇守其地。
English: The governor of Fujian, Miyoshi Yu, was shocked and said, "Zhejiang, which shares a border with Wenchuan and Funing, is the place where the wokou went into service. Qi Jiguang should be promoted to the position of deputy commander-in-chief and guard his land.

古文：而增设福宁守备，隶继光。
现代文：而增设福宁守备，隶属戚继光。
English: In addition, Fukuning garrison was established, belonging to Qi Jiguang.

古文：漳州之月港亦增设守备，隶总兵官俞大猷。
现代文：漳州的月港也增设守备，隶属总兵官俞大猷。
English: Luzhou's Yuegang Port has also added a garrison, which is under the command of the commander-in-chief of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：延、建、邵为八闽上游，宜募兵以备缓急。 
现代文：延、建、邵是八闽的上游，应招募兵士以防备紧急情况。 
English: Yan, Jian and Shao are upstream of Yaqi. Soldiers should be recruited to prevent emergencies.

古文：皆允行。
现代文：都允许施行。
English: All are allowed to go into effect.

古文：既而宗宪被逮，罢总督官，以浙江巡抚赵炳然兼任军事。
现代文：随后胡宗宪被逮捕，罢免总督官，令浙江巡抚趟炳然兼任军事。
English: Subsequently, Hu Zongxian was arrested, dismissed from the post of governor-general, and ordered the Zhejiang inspector-general to assume a military post.

古文：炳然因请令定海总兵属浙江，金山总兵属南直，俱兼理水陆军务，互相策应。
现代文：赵炳然便请求令定海总兵隶属浙江，金山总兵隶局南直，都兼任管理水陆的军务，互相呼应。
English: Zhao Yulan then requested that the Dinghai General Army be subordinated to Zhejiang, and the Jinshan General Army be subordinated to Nan Zhi, both of which concurrently managed the military affairs of land and sea, echoing each other.

古文：其后，莆田倭寇平，乃复五水寨旧制。
现代文：此后，莆田的倭寇平定，便恢复五个水寨的旧有制度。
English: After that, when the Japanese invaders of Putian were subdued, the old system of five water villages was restored.

古文：五寨者，福宁之烽火门，福州之小埕澳，兴化之南日山，泉州之浯屿，漳州之西门澳，亦曰铜山。景泰三年，镇守尚书薛希琏奏建者也，后废。
现代文：五寨，就是福宁的烽火门，福州的小埕澳，兴化的南日山，泉州的浯屿，漳州的西门澳，也称铜山，景泰三年，镇守尚书薛希理上奏修建，后来废弃。
English: Wuzhai is the Bonfire Gate of Funing, Xiaoqi'ao of Fuzhou, Nanzhishan of Xinghua, Lantau of Quanzhou, Xiamen'ao of Quanzhou, also known as the Copper Mountain, Jingtai three years, the town guard Shangshu Xue Xili played the role of construction, and later abandoned.

古文：至是巡抚谭纶疏言： 五寨守扼外洋，法甚周悉，宜复旧。
现代文：至此巡抚谭纶上疏说： 五寨扼守外海，方法很周全，应该恢复旧制。
English: At this point, the inspector Tan Xuan Shang Zuo said: Wuzhai closely guards the open sea, the method is very comprehensive, and the old system should be restored.

古文：以烽火门、南日、浯屿三〈舟宗〉为正兵，铜山、小埕二〈舟宗〉为游兵。
现代文：以烽火门、南日、浯屿三支船队作正兵，铜山、小埕两支船队作游军。
English: With the three fleets of Bonfire Gate, South Japan and Lantau Island as the frontline troops, and the two fleets of Tongshan and Xiaojun as the parade troops.

古文：寨设把总，分汛地，明斥堠，严会哨。
现代文：寨设置把总，划分驻防地段，派斥堠探明情况，严令相约会同巡逻。
English: The general was set up in the village, the garrison section was divided, the patrols were sent to investigate the situation, and they were strictly ordered to meet and patrol together.

古文：改三路参将为守备。
现代文：改三路参将为守备。
English: A three-way tiebreaker will be held.

古文：分新募浙兵为二班，各九千人，春秋番上。
现代文：分新招募的浙兵分为两班，各九千人，春秋轮番戍守。
English: The newly recruited Zhejiang soldiers were divided into two groups, nine thousand each, and rotated in the spring and autumn.

古文：各县民壮皆补用精悍，每府领以武职一人，兵备使者以时阅视。 
现代文：各县壮丁都补作精强勇猛的士兵，每府用一个武官统领，兵备使者按时检阅巡视。 
English: The able-bodied young men of each county are recruited as strong and brave soldiers, each prefecture is led by a military attaché, and military envoys inspect and patrol on time.

古文：帝皆是之。
现代文：皇帝都同意他。
English: The emperor agreed with him.

古文：狼山故设副总兵，至是改为镇守总兵官，兼辖大江南北。
现代文：狼山以前设副总兵，到此时改为镇守总兵官，兼管大江南北。
English: Before, the vice-commander-in-chief was set up in Wolf Mountain, but at this time it was changed to the commander-in-chief of the town guard, who was also in charge of the north and south of the Yangtze River.

古文：迨隆庆初，倭渐不为患，而诸小寇往往有之。
现代文：到隆庆初年，倭寇渐渐不再造成祸患，而各种小贼寇往往还有。
English: By the first year of the Longqing, wako gradually ceased to be a scourge, but various small bandits often still existed.

古文：万历三年，设广东南澳总兵官，以其据漳、泉要害也。
现代文：万历三年，设置广东南澳总兵官，因为此地占据漳、泉的要害地势。
English: After three years of hard work, the chief military officer of Guangdong Nanao was set up, because this place occupies the key terrain of the Yunnan and Quan.

古文：久之，倭寇朝鲜，朝廷大发兵往援，先后六年。
现代文：很久以后，倭寇侵犯朝鲜，朝廷大规模派兵前往援助，前后共六年。
English: A long time later, the Japanese invaded Korea, and the imperial court sent large-scale troops to help, for a total of six years.

古文：于是设巡抚官于天津，防畿甸。
现代文：于是在天津设置巡抚官，防卫京郊地区。
English: As a result, an inspector was set up in Tianjin to defend the suburbs of Beijing.

古文：后十余年，从南直巡按御史颜思忠言，分淮安大营兵六百守廖角嘴。
现代文：往后十多年，依从南直巡按御史颜思忠的意见，分淮安大营士兵六百人镇守廖角嘴。
English: More than ten years later, in accordance with the opinion of Nan Zhi Xuan and Yan Sizhong, six hundred soldiers from the Huai'an Battalion were assigned to guard Liaokouzui.

古文：从福建巡抚丁继嗣言，设兵自浙入闽之三江及刘澳，而易海澄团练营土著军以浙兵。
现代文：依从福建巡抚丁继嗣的意见，设置军队从浙进入闽的三江和刘澳，而用浙兵替换海澄团练营土著军。
English: In accordance with the opinion of the Fujian governor Ding Jizhe, troops were sent from Zhejiang to Sanjiang and Liu'ao in Yunnan, and Zhejiang soldiers were used to replace the indigenous troops of the Haicheng Regiment.

古文：天启中，筑城于澎湖，设游击一，把总二，统兵三千，筑炮台以守。
现代文：天启年间，在澎湖修筑城堡，设置游击一名，把总二名，率兵三干，筑炮台镇守。
English: During the year of the Apocalypse, he built a castle in Penghu, set up a guerrilla, put a total of two people, led three soldiers, and built a fortress to defend the town.

古文：先是，万历中，许孚远抚闽，奏筑福州海坛山，因及澎湖诸屿，且言浙东沿海陈钱、金塘、玉环、南麂诸山俱宜经理，遂设南麂副总兵，而澎湖不暇及。
现代文：此前，万历年间，许孚速巡抚闽，上奏修筑福州的海坛山，顺便谈及澎湖各岛屿，并说浙东沿海陈钱、金塘、玉环、南麂众山都应治理，便设南麂副总兵，而澎湖无暇顾及。
English: Previously, during the Wanli years, Xu Fuxi, the patrol leader, made a report on the construction of Fuzhou's Haitan Mountain, and in passing talked about the islands of Penghu, and said that the mountains of Chenqian, Jintang, Yuhuan, and Nanzhong along the eastern coast of Zhejiang should be governed. He then set up the Nanzhong deputy commander-in-chief, and Penghu had no time to consider it.

古文：其地遥峙海中，逶迤如修蛇，多岐港零屿，其中空间可藏巨艘。
现代文：那个地方迁迁对峙海中，如同长蛇蜿蜒曲折，有很多分岔的海港和零落的岛屿，其中空间可以藏巨舰。
English: The place moves like a snake through the sea, with many branching harbours and scattered islands, some of which have space to hide huge ships.

古文：初为红毛所据，至是因巡抚南居益言，乃夺而守之。
现代文：起初被红毛占据，到此时采用巡抚南居益的意见，便夺回并镇守。
English: At first, it was occupied by the Red Hair, but at this time, the opinion of the governor, Nan Juyi, was adopted, and it was recaptured and defended.

古文：自世宗世倭患以来，沿海大都会，各设总督、巡抚、兵备副使及总兵官、参将、游击等员，而诸所防御，于广东则分东、中、西三路，设三参将；于福建则有五水寨；于浙则有六总，一金乡、盘石二卫，一松门、海门二卫，一昌国卫及钱仓、爵溪等所，一定海卫及霩戺、大嵩等所，一观海、临山二卫，一海宁卫，分统以四参将；于南直隶则乍浦以东，金山卫设参将，黄浦以北，吴淞江口设总兵；于淮、扬则总兵驻通州，游击驻庙湾，又于扬州设陆兵游击，待调遣；于山东则登、莱、青三府设巡察海道之副使，管理民兵之参将，总督沿海兵马备倭之都指挥，于蓟、辽则大沽海口宿重兵，领以副总兵，而以密云、永平两游击为应援。
现代文：从世宗时代出现倭寇祸患以来，沿海大都会，备自设总督、巡抚、兵备副使和总兵官、参将、游击等官员，而各处防御，在广东则分束、中、西三路，设置三位参将；在福建则有五个水寨；在浙则有六总，一是金乡、盘石雨卫，一是松门、海门两卫，一是昌国卫和钱仓、爵溪等所，一是定海卫和霓霁、大嵩等所，一是观海、临山两卫，一是海宁卫，分别用四位参将统领；在南直隶则在乍浦以柬，金山卫设置参将，黄浦以北，昊淞江口设置总兵；在淮、扬则总兵驻守通州，游击驻守庙湾，又在扬州设置陆军游击，等待调遣；在山东则登、莱、青三府设置巡察海道的副使，管理民兵的参将，统领督查沿海兵马防备倭寇的都指挥；在蓟、辽则在大沽海口留守重兵，用副总兵统领，而以密云、永平两游击作接应援助。
English: Since the Wokou calamity occurred in the era of King Sejong, the coastal metropolis has set up its own governor, inspector, deputy military commander and general officer, general officer, guerrilla and other officials, while the defense has been set up everywhere. In Guangdong, there are three general officers in the Bund, Central and West; in Fujian, there are five water villages; in Zhejiang, there are six general officers, one is Jinxiang, Panshi Yuwei, one is Songmen, Haimen two guards, one is Changguo Wei and Qiancang, Jiexi and other places, one is Dinghai Wei and Zheng, Datong and other places

古文：山海关外，则广宁中、前等五所兵守各汛，以宁前参将为应援，而金、复、海、盖诸军皆任防海。三岔以东，九联城外创镇江城，设游击，统兵千七百，哨海上，北与宽奠参将陆营相接，共计凡七镇，而守备、把总、分守、巡徼会哨者不下数百员。
现代文：山海关外，则广宁中、前等五所兵防守各驻军地段，以宁前参将作接应援救，而金、复、海、盖各军都担任海防，三岔以东，九联城外创建镇江城，设游击，统领一千七百人，巡逻海上，北边同宽奠参将陆营地相接，共计有七个镇，而守备、把总、分守、巡徼相约按期巡逻的不下数百人。
English: In addition to the Shanhaiguan, the Guangning middle and front five soldiers guarded the garrison sections. The Yining front general staff was responsible for receiving and rescuing, while the Jin, Fuxing, Hai and Gai armies all served as coastal defense. To the east of Sanlu, Zhenjiang City was established outside the Jiu Lian city, set up guerrilla attacks, commanded 1,700 people, patrolled the sea, and the north side was connected to the land camp by the same wide-legged general staff. There were a total of seven towns, and no less than hundreds of people guarded, guarded, divided, and patrolled on schedule.

古文：以三、四、五月为大汛，九、十月为小汛。
现代文：以三、四、五月为大汛，九、十月为小汛。
English: With March, April and May as the big ones, and September and October as the small ones.

古文：盖遭倭甚毒，故设防亦最密云。
现代文：大致受到倭寇的严重危害，所以设防也最严密。
English: It is generally seriously endangered by wako, so it is also the most heavily fortified.

古文：日本地与闽相值，而浙之招宝关其贡道在焉，故浙、闽为最冲。
现代文：日本地理位置和闽相对，而浙的招宝关进贡所经的道路在此，所以浙、闽是首当其冲。
English: Japan's geographical location is opposite to Shandong, and the road through which Zhao Baoguan paid tribute in Zhejiang is here, so Zhejiang and Shandong are the first to bear the brunt.

古文：南寇则广东，北寇则由江犯留都、淮、扬，故防海外，防江为重。
现代文：南面的敌寇则从广东入侵，北面的敌寇则从长江侵犯留都、淮、扬，所以防卫海外，以防卫长江为重。
English: The enemy corsairs in the south invaded from Guangdong, and the enemy corsairs in the north invaded from the Yangtze River to Lutu, Huai and Yang. Therefore, the defense of overseas was focused on the defense of the Yangtze River.

古文：洪武初，于都城南新江口置水兵八千。
现代文：洪武初年，在都城南面新江口设置水兵八千人。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, eight thousand sailors were stationed at the mouth of the Xinjiang River south of the capital.

古文：已，稍置万二千，造舟四百艘。
现代文：此后，渐渐设置一万二千人，造船四百艘。
English: Since then, it has gradually set up 12,000 people and built 400 ships.

古文：又设陆兵于北岸浦子口，相掎角。
现代文：又在北岸浦子口设置陆军，相互构成掎角之势。
English: In addition, the army was set up in the north bank of the Uratsiguchi, creating a situation of mutual conflict.

古文：所辖沿江诸郡。上自九江、广济、黄梅，下抵苏、松、通、泰，中包安庆、池、和、太平，凡盗贼及贩私盐者，悉令巡捕，兼以防倭。
现代文：所管辖的沿长江各郡，上从九江、庭擅、黄梅，下到苏、松、通、泰，中间包括安庆、池、和、太平，凡是盗贼和贩卖私盐的人，都命令巡查逮捕，同时防备倭寇。
English: All counties along the Yangtze River under his jurisdiction, from Jiujiang, Tianzhang, and Huangmei upstream to Su, Song, Tong, and Tai downstream, including Anqing, Chi, He, and Taiping in the middle, have ordered the inspection and arrest of all thieves and traffickers of smuggled salt, while at the same time guarding against Japanese pirates.

古文：永乐时，特命勋臣为帅视江操，其后兼用都御史。
现代文：永乐时期，特别命令功臣为帅视察长江防军操练，此后同时任用都御史。
English: During the Yongle period, he specially ordered the meritorious person to inspect the Yangtze River Defense Force drill, and then appointed the Metropolitan Historian at the same time.

古文：成化四年，从锦衣卫佥事冯瑶言，令江兵依地设防，于瓜、仪、太平置将领镇守。
现代文：成化四年，依从锦衣卫愈事冯瑶的建言，命令长江军队依据地形设防，在爪、仪、太平设置将领镇守。
English: In the fourth year of Chenghua, he ordered the Yangtze River army to set up fortifications according to the terrain, and set up generals to guard the town in Jaw, Yi and Taiping, following the advice of Jin, Yi and Wei.

古文：后六年，守备定西侯蒋琬奏调建阳、镇江诸卫军补江兵缺伍。
现代文：后六年，守备定西侯蒋琬上奏调建阳、镇江各卫军补充长江军队空缺兵士。
English: In the last six years, the Jianyang and Zhenjiang Guards were sent to supplement the vacant soldiers of the Yangtze River Army.

古文：十三年，命择武大臣一人职江操，毋摄营务。
现代文：十三年，命令选择武大臣一人担任操江都督，不兼管军营事务。
English: In the thirteenth year, the order was given to choose one of the ministers to serve as the governor of the Yangtze River, who would not also be in charge of military affairs.

古文：又五年，从南京都御史白昂言，敕沿江守备官互相应援，并给关防。
现代文：又过五年，依从南京都御史白昂的建言，敕令沿长江守备官员互相接应援助，并且发给印信。
English: Five years later, in accordance with the suggestion of the governor of South Kyoto, Shi Baiang, the emperor ordered the defense officials along the Yangtze River to receive assistance from each other, and issued a seal letter.

古文：著为令。
现代文：写成法令著录。
English: This article shall be construed as a ritsuryo.

古文：弘治中，命新江口两班军如京营例，首班歇，即以次班操。
现代文：弘治年间，命令新江口两班军按京营条例，首班休歇，就依次轮班操练。
English: During the Hongzhi era, he ordered two squads of troops from Xinjiang Estuary to rest on the first shift and train in shifts in accordance with the regulations of the Beijing Camp.

古文：嘉靖八年，江阴贼侯仲金等作乱，给事中夏言请设镇守江、淮总兵官。
现代文：嘉靖八年，江阴贼寇侯仲金等作乱，给事中夏言请求设置镇守长江、淮河的总兵官。
English: In the 8th year of the Jiajing Dynasty, the Jiangyin thief, the robber baron, Zhongjin, and others caused a disturbance, and Nia Yan, who was in the middle of the matter, requested that the town guard of the Yangtze River and the Huaihe River be set up.

古文：已而寇平，总兵罢不设。
现代文：不久寇乱平息，总兵废除不设置。
English: Soon the riots subsided, and the abolition of conscription did not take place.

古文：十九年，沙贼黄艮等复起。
现代文：十九年，沙贼黄艮等又兴起。
English: Nineteen years later, the sand thief Huang Qi and others arose again.

古文：帝诘兵部以罢总兵之故，乃复设，给旗牌符敕，提督沿江上下。
现代文：皇帝诘问兵部废除总兵的缘故，便又设置，给予旗牌符敕令，提督沿江上下。
English: The emperor inquired of the military department about the reason for the abolition of the general army, and then set it up again, gave the flag and the order, and the admiral went up and down along the river.

古文：后复裁罢。
现代文：后来又裁减废除。
English: It was later reduced and abolished.

古文：三十二年，倭患炽，复设副总兵于金山卫，辖沿海至镇江，与狼山副总兵水陆相应。
现代文：三十二年，倭寇的祸患炽盛，又设副总兵于金山卫，管辖沿海到镇江，同狼山副总兵水陆相呼应。
English: In the 32nd year, when the calamity of the Japanese invaders was at its peak, the vice-commander-in-chief was set up in Jinshanwei, with jurisdiction over the coast to Zhenjiang, corresponding to the vice-commander-in-chief of the Wolf Mountain.

古文：时江北俱被倭，于是量调九江、安庆官军守京口、圌山等地。
现代文：当时长江北面都遭受倭寇侵犯，于是酌量调遣九江、安庆官军镇守京口、闘山等地。
English: At that time, the northern side of the Yangtze River was invaded by Japanese pirates, so Jiujiang and Anqing government troops were dispatched to defend Jingkou, Toushan and other places.

古文：久之，给事中范宗吴言： 故事，操江都御史防江，应、凤二巡抚防海。
现代文：很久之后，给事中范宗昊说： 旧例，操江都御史防御长江，应、凤雨位巡抚防御海上。
English: After a long time, Fan Zonghao said in the middle of the matter: In the old days, the defense of the Yangtze River should be carried out by the Yangtze River, and the defense of the sea should be carried out by the Phoenix Rain.

古文：后因倭警，遂以镇江而下，通常、狼、福诸处隶之操江，以故二抚臣得诿其责。操江又以向非本属兵，难遥制，亦漠然视之，非委任责成意。
现代文：后来因为倭寇侵犯警情，便从镇江以下，连接常、狼、福等处隶属操江都御史，所以两位抚臣得以推卸责任操江都御史又因先前不是本部的军队，难以远距离控制，也漠然对待，不合委任责成的意图。
English: Later, because the wokos violated the police situation, from Zhenjiang and below, the junction of Chang, Wolf, Fu and other places were subordinated to Jiangdu Imperial History, so the two courtiers were able to shirk the responsibility of Jiangdu Imperial History, and because it was not the headquarters of the army before, it was difficult to control from a distance, and it was also treated indifferently, which was not the intention of assigning responsibilities.

古文：宜以圌山、三江会口为操、抚分界。 
现代文：应该以圃山、三江会合口作为操江、安抚的分界。 
English: Fushan and the junction of the three rivers should be used as the dividing line between river control and pacification.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：其后增上下两江巡视御史，得举劾有司将领，而以南京佥都御史兼理操江，不另设。
现代文：此后增设上下雨江巡枧御史，得以检举弹劾主管将领，而以南京愈都御史兼管操江，不另外设置。
English: After that, the governor of the upstream and downstream of the Yutu River was added, so that the impeachment of the general in charge could be reported, while the governor of the south Beijing Yutu also controlled the river, and was not set up separately.

古文：先是，增募水兵六千。
现代文：此前，增加招募水兵六干人。
English: Previously, the recruitment of sailors was increased by six hundred people.

古文：隆庆初，以都御史吴时来请，留四之一，余悉罢遣，并裁中军把总等官。
现代文：隆庆初年，因为都御史昊时来请求，留下四分之一，剩下的全部罢除遣散，并且裁掉中军把总等官。
English: In the first year of Longqing, because of the request of the capital, a quarter was left, and all the rest were dismissed, and the general officer of the Chinese army was dismissed.

古文：已，复令分汛设守，而责以上下南北互相策应。
现代文：后来，又命令分地段设置守卫，而责令上下南北互相呼应。
English: Later, he also ordered guards to be set up in different parts of the lot, and ordered the north and south to respond to each other.

古文：又从都御史宋仪望言，诸军皆分驻江上，不得居城市。
现代文：又依从都御史宋仪望的意见，各军都分别驻守长江岸边，不能居住在城市。
English: Moreover, in accordance with the opinion of Song Yibang, the governor of the capital, each army was stationed separately on the banks of the Yangtze River and could not live in the city.

古文：万历二十年，以倭警，言者请复设京口总兵。
现代文：万历二十年，因倭寇入侵的警报，进言的人又请求设立京口总兵。
English: Twenty years later, due to the alarm of the Japanese invasion, the people who made the proposal requested the establishment of the Beijing-Kowloon General Army.

古文：南京兵部尚书衷贞吉等谓既有吴淞总兵，不宜两设。
现代文：南京兵部尚书衷贞吉等说已经有了昊淞总兵，不应两设。
English: Nanjing Military Department Shang Shuxin Zhengyi and others said that there was already a Haoqin general, and there should not be two.

古文：乃设兵备使者，每春汛，调备倭都督，统卫所水、陆军赴镇江。
现代文：于是设立兵备使者，每刭春天汛期到，调遣备倭都督，统领卫所水、陆军奔赴镇江。
English: As a result, an envoy was set up to prepare the troops, arriving every spring, dispatching the governor of Wa to prepare the troops, and leading the water guards and the army to rush to Zhenjiang.

古文：后七年，操江耿定力奏： 长江千余里，上江列营五，兵备臣三；下江列营五，兵备臣二。
现代文：后七年，操江都御史耿定力上奏： 长江一千多里，长江上游排列五座军营，三位兵备大臣；长江下游排列五座军营，两位兵备大臣。
English: In the last seven years, Geng Dingli, the governor of the Yangtze River, has played the following role: the Yangtze River is more than a thousand miles long, and there are five military camps and three ministers of war in the upper reaches of the Yangtze River; there are five military camps and two ministers of war in the lower reaches of the Yangtze River.

古文：宜委以简阅训练，即以精否为兵备殿最。 
现代文：应当委任他们检阅训练，就以精锐与否作为兵备政绩高低。 
English: They should be appointed to review the training, taking the elite or not as the level of military performance.

古文：部议以为然。
现代文：兵部商议认为对。
English: The discussion of the military department was right.

古文：故事，南北总哨官五日一会哨于适中地，将领官亦月两至江上会哨。
现代文：旧例，南北总哨官在适当的地方五天相会一次，将领官也每月两次到长江岸边相约巡逻。
English: In the past, the general sentries of the north and south met once every five days at an appropriate place, and the general officers also met twice a month on the banks of the Yangtze River to patrol.

古文：其后多不行。
现代文：此后大多不施行。
English: Since then, most of them have not been enforced.

古文：崇祯中，复以勋臣任操江，偷惰成习，会哨巡徼皆虚名，非有实矣。
现代文：崇祯年间，又让功臣担任操江都督，因懒惰成性，相约巡逻视察都成虚名，没有实际作用了。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, he also made a meritorious subject serve as the governor of the Yangtze River, but due to laziness, the agreed patrols and inspections became a false reputation and had no practical effect.

古文：卫所之外，郡县有民壮，边郡有土兵。
现代文：卫所之外，郡县有招募服役的壮丁，边郡有土兵。
English: In addition to the National Guard, counties recruit able-bodied men for military service, and border counties recruit local soldiers.

古文：太祖定江东，循元制，立管领民兵万户府。
现代文：太祖平定江束，因循元代制度，设立管领民兵万户府。
English: The great-great-grandfather pacified Jiangzhu and, following the Yuan Dynasty system, established the militia-led Wanyu Prefecture.

古文：后从山西行都司言，听边民自备军械，团结防边。
现代文：后来依从山西行都司的建言，让边境百姓自行备办军械，组织起来保卫边境。
English: Later, following the advice of the Shanxi Provincial Government, let the border people prepare their own military equipment and organize to defend the border.

古文：闽、浙苦倭，指挥方谦请籍民丁多者为军。
现代文：闽、浙被倭寇所苦，指挥方谦请求登记人丁多的当兵。
English: Shandong and Zhejiang suffered from the Japanese invaders, and the commanding party humbly requested the registration of Tindo as a soldier.

古文：寻以为患乡里，诏闽、浙互徙。
现代文：不久因为祸患乡里，下诏令闽、浙相互迁徙。
English: Soon, because of the calamity in the countryside, the next imperial edict ordered Min and Zhe to migrate to each other.

古文：时已用民兵，然非召募也。
现代文：当时已经用民兵，然而并非招募。
English: At that time, militias were used, but they were not recruited.

古文：正统二年，始募所在军余、民壮愿自效者，陕西得四千二百人。
现代文：正统二年，开始招募，愿意为朝廷效力的那些未取得正式军籍的军人和服役的壮丁，陕西得到四千二百人。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhengzong, Shaanxi began to recruit soldiers and able-bodied young men who had not obtained an official military record and were willing to serve the imperial court. Shaanxi received 4,200 people.

古文：人给布二匹，月粮四斗。
现代文：每人供给两匹布，每月四斗粮。
English: Each person is provided with two buckets of cloth and four buckets of grain per month.

古文：景泰初，遣使分募直隶、山东、山西、河南民壮，拨山西义勇守大同，而紫荆、倒马二关，亦用民兵防守，事平免归。
现代文：景泰初年，派使者分别招募直隶、山东、山西、河南的服役壮丁，调拨山西义勇军守大同，而紫荆、倒马两关，也用民兵防守，事情平息后罢除遣回。
English: In the first year of Jingtai, envoys were sent to recruit young men to serve in Zhili, Shandong, Shanxi and Henan. The Shanxi Volunteer Army was dispatched to defend Datong, and the Bauhinia and Hema Passes were also defended by the militia. After the situation calmed down, they were dismissed and sent back.

古文：成化二年，以边警，复二关民兵。
现代文：成化二年，因为边防紧急，恢复两关的民兵。
English: Two years later, because of the border defense emergency, the militias of the two ports were restored.

古文：敕御史往延安、庆阳选精壮编伍，得五千余人，号曰土兵。
现代文：敕令御史前去延安、庆阳挑选精壮之人编入军队，得到五千多人，称作士兵。
English: The Emperor sent his emissaries to Yan'an and Qingyang to select able-bodied men to join the army, resulting in more than five thousand men, known as soldiers.

古文：以延绥巡抚卢祥言边民骁果，可练为兵，使护田里妻子，故有是命。
现代文：因为延绥巡抚卢祥说边境人民骁勇果敢，可以训练成兵，使其保护乡里的妻子儿女，所以有这个命令。
English: This order was issued because Lu Xiang, the governor of Yancheng, said that the border people were brave and courageous and could be trained as soldiers to protect the wives and children in the countryside.

古文：弘治七年，立佥民壮法。
现代文：弘治七年，设立征集壮丁的法令。
English: In the seventh year of the Hongzhi era, a decree was issued to recruit young men.

古文：州、县七八百里以上，里佥二人，五百里三，三百里四，百里以上五。
现代文：州、县七八百里以上，每里征集两人；五百里，每里征三人；三百里，每里征四人；百里以上，每里征五人。
English: For more than seven or eight hundred miles in a state or county, two people will be recruited per mile; for five hundred miles, three people will be recruited per mile; for three hundred miles, four people will be recruited per mile; and for more than one hundred miles, five people will be recruited per mile.

古文：有司训练，遇警调发，给以行粮，而禁役占放买之弊。
现代文：由主管官吏训练，遇到紧急情况便调遣派发，供给行军粮食，而禁止役使占用放买的弊端。
English: Trained by the competent officials, in the event of an emergency, they will dispatch and distribute, supply marching grain, and prohibit the servicemen from occupying and buying.

古文：富民不愿，则上直于官，官自为募。
现代文：富民不愿意，就上交钱给官府，官府自行招募。
English: If rich people don't want to, they hand over money to the government, and the government recruits them on its own.

古文：或称机兵，在巡检司者称弓兵。
现代文：有的称为机兵，在巡检司的称为弓兵。
English: Some are called machine soldiers, while those in the patrol division are called archers.

古文：后以越境防冬非计，大同巡抚刘宇请免其班操，征银粮输大同，而以威远屯丁、舍、余补役。
现代文：后来因为越过边境防冬并非好策略，大同巡抚刘宇请求免除轮番操练，征收钱粮输入左风，而用威远屯兵、舍人、未取得正式军籍出军人补充兵役。
English: Later, because it was not a good strategy to cross the border to prevent winter, Datong District Inspector Liu Yu requested to be exempted from the rotation drill, to collect money and grain to import into the left wind, and to supplement military service with soldiers from far and wide, people who did not have formal military registration.

古文：给事中熊伟亦请编应募民于附近卫所。并从之。
现代文：给事中熊伟也请求在附近卫所编制招募民兵。
English: In the course of the matter, Xiong Wei also requested that militias be organized and recruited at nearby garrisons.

古文：十四年，以西北诸边所募士兵，多不足五千，遣使赍银二十万及太仆寺马价银四万往募。
现代文：都依从他们的意见。十四年，因为西北各边招募的土兵，大多不足五千，便派使者携带银两二十万和太仆寺的马价银四万前往招募。
English: In 1914, because the number of local soldiers recruited from all over the northwest was mostly less than five thousand, they sent an envoy with 2.2 million silver and 40,000 horse-price silver from Taipu Temple to recruit.

古文：指挥千百户以募兵多寡为差，得迁级，失官者得复职，即令统所募兵。
现代文：指挥千户、百户以招兵多少为等级，得到升级，丢失官职的人得以恢复职务，就命令他统领所招募的兵。
English: The commander of a thousand households or a hundred households is ranked according to how many soldiers are recruited, and when a person who has been promoted and lost his official position is able to resume his duties, he is ordered to command the soldiers he has recruited.

古文：既而兵部议覆侍郎李孟旸请实军伍疏，谓： 天下卫所官军原额二百七十余万，岁久逃故，尝选民壮三十余万，又核卫所舍人、余丁八十八万，西北诸边召募士兵无虑数万。
现代文：不久兵部议覆侍郎李孟旸请求充实军队的上疏，说： 全国卫所官军原来数额为二百七十多万，因年久逃亡的缘故，曾选招募的壮丁三十多万，又核实卫所舍人、余丁八十八莴，西北各边招募土兵大约敷万。
English: Soon after, Li Mengyao, the minister of the Ministry of Military Affairs, requested that the number of officers and men in the army be increased. He said: The original number of officers and men in the National Guard was more than 2.7 million. Due to the long-term escape, more than 300,000 able-bodied men were selected and recruited, and 88,000 men and boys were verified to have left the National Guard, and about 10,000 soldiers were recruited from all over the northwest.

古文：请如孟旸奏，察有司不操练民壮、私役杂差者，如役占军人罪。 
现代文：请按李孟旸的奏请，查得主管官员不操练壮丁、私自役使繁杂差派的人，按役使占用军人定罪。 
English: In accordance with the request made by Li Mengyao, please investigate and convict the officials in charge who do not train able-bodied young men, and those who send young men to work for themselves, and those who send soldiers to work for themselves.

古文：报可。
现代文：回复同意。
English: Reimbursement agreed.

古文：正德中，流贼扰山东，巡抚张凤选民兵，令自买马团操，民不胜其扰。
现代文：正德年间，流寇扰乱山东，巡抚张凤选拔民兵，命令自己买马集中操练，百姓难以忍受其纷扰。
English: During the Zhengde era, the bandits disrupted Shandong. The governor Zhang Feng selected the militia and ordered them to buy horses and train intensively. The people could not bear the disturbance.

古文：兵部侍郎杨潭以为言。
现代文：兵部侍郎杨潭将此上奏。
English: Yang Tan, the attendant of the military department, will play this.

古文：都御史宁杲所募多无赖子，为御史张璇所劾。
现代文：都御史宁呆招募的多是无赖之人，被御史张璇弹劾。
English: The governor of the capital, Shi Ningdong, recruited many scoundrels and was impeached by the governor of the capital, Zhang Ye.

古文：嘉靖二十二年增州县民壮额，大者千人，次六七百，小者五百。
现代文：嘉靖二十二年，增加州县壮丁数额，大的一千人，次一等的六七百人，小的五百人。
English: In the 22nd year of Jiajing, the number of able-bodied children in counties and prefectures was increased by 1,000 for the largest, 6,700 for the second largest, and 500 for the smallest.

古文：二十九年，京师新被寇，议募民兵，以二万为率。
现代文：二十九年，京城新遭受侵犯，商议招募民兵，以二万人为限。
English: In 1929, when the capital was newly encroached upon, they discussed the recruitment of a militia limited to 20,000 men.

古文：岁四月终，赴近京防御。
现代文：这年四月末，奔赴京城附近防御。
English: At the end of April of that year, he rushed to defend the area near Kyoto.

古文：后五年，兵部尚书杨博请汰老弱，存精锐，在外者发各道为民兵，在京者隶之巡捕参将，逃者不补。
现代文：后五年，兵部尚书杨博请求淘汰年老体弱的士兵，保留精锐的士兵，在地方的分发到各路作民兵，在京城的隶属巡捕参将，逃跑了的不补充。
English: In the last five years, Yang Bo Shangshu of the Military Department requested that old and weak soldiers be eliminated, that elite soldiers be retained, that they be distributed to various regions as militiamen, and that they be subordinated to patrol officers in Beijing, and that those who ran away not be supplemented.

古文：帝以影占数多，耗粮无用，遣官核宜罢宜还者以闻。
现代文：皇帝因为虚占的人数多，消耗粮食没有用处，派官员考核应罢免应遣还的上报。
English: The emperor, because of the large number of false occupants and the uselessness of consuming grain, sent officials to examine the report on whether they should be dismissed and repatriated.

古文：隆庆中，张居正、陈以勤复请籍畿甸民兵，谓： 直隶八府人多健悍，总按户籍，除单丁老弱者，父子三人籍一子，兄弟三人籍一弟，州与大县可得千六百人，小县可得千人。
现代文：隆庆年间，张居正、陈以勤又请求登记京城郊区的民兵，说： 直隶八府的人多强悍，全部按户登记，除去单独一个男丁的和老弱的，父子三人登记一个儿子，兄弟三人登记一个弟弟，州和大县可以得到一千六百人，小县可以得到一千人。
English: During the Longqing period, Zhang Juzheng and Chen Yiquan also requested the registration of the militia in the suburbs of Beijing, saying: The people in the eight prefectures directly under the Central Government are more powerful, and all of them should be registered according to households, except for a single male and the old and weak, three fathers and sons should register a son, three brothers should register a younger brother, the state and large counties can get sixteen hundred people, and small counties can get one thousand people.

古文：中分之为正兵、奇兵，登名尺籍，隶抚臣操练，岁无过三月，月无过三次，练毕即令归农，复其身。
现代文：其中分为正兵、奇兵，登记姓名于军籍，隶属抚臣操练，每年不超过三个月，每月不超过三次，练完就让他们回去务农，免除自身的徭役。
English: Among them, they are divided into regular soldiers and special soldiers, whose names are registered in the military register, and who are subordinate to the subordinates. They are trained for no more than three months a year and no more than three times a month. After training, they are allowed to go back to farming and are exempt from their own service.

古文：岁操外，不得别遣。 
现代文：每年除操练以外，不能另外调遣。 
English: Every year, apart from drills, they cannot be assigned to other tasks.

古文：命所司议行。
现代文：命令有关部门商议施行。
English: The relevant departments are ordered to discuss and implement.

古文：然自嘉靖后，山东、河南民兵戍蓟门者，率征银以充召募。
现代文：然而自嘉靖以后，山东、河南民兵戍守蓟门的，全都征收银两以补充招募。
English: However, after Jiajing, the militias in Shandong and Henan that guarded the capital all collected silver to supplement their recruitment.

古文：至万历初，山东征银至五万六千两，贫民大困。
现代文：到万历初年，山东征收银两到五万六千两，贫民非常困窘。
English: By the first year of Wanli, Shandong levied silver two to fifty-six thousand two, and the poor were very embarrassed.

古文：治河之役，给事中张贞观请益募士兵，捍淮、扬、徐、邳。
现代文：治河的工程，给事中张贞观请求增招士兵，捍卫淮、扬、徐、邳。
English: During the project to control the river, Zhang Zhenguan requested to recruit more soldiers to defend Huai, Yang, Xu and Handan.

古文：畿南盗起，给事中耿随龙请复民壮旧制，专捕贼盗。
现代文：鲞南强盗兴起，给事中耿随龙请求恢复壮丁的旧制度，专门追捕盗贼。
English: With the rise of banditry in southern Anhui Province, Geng Xulong requested the restoration of the old system for young men, and specifically pursued thieves.

古文：播州之乱，工部侍郎赵可怀请练土著，兵部因言： 天下之无兵者，不独蜀也。
现代文：播州动乱，工部侍郎趟可怀请求训练土著之人，兵部于是说： 全国没有兵的地方，不只是蜀。
English: During the Banzhou upheaval, the attendant of the Ministry of Industry went to ask for the training of indigenous people. The Ministry of Military Affairs then said: There are no soldiers anywhere in the country, not just in Shu.

古文：各省官军、民壮，皆宜罢老稚，易以健卒。
现代文：各省官军、壮丁，都应免除老幼，换上健壮的军士。
English: All provincial government troops and young men should be exempted from the old and young and replaced with robust sergeants.

古文：军操属印官、操官，民操属正官、捕官，郡守、监司不得牵制。
现代文：军队操练属于印官、操官，平民操练属于正官、捕官，郡守、监司不能牵制。
English: Military drills belong to officers in charge, officers in charge, civilian drills belong to officers in charge, arresting officers, county governors, and supervisors cannot be held back.

古文：立营分伍，以凭调发。 
现代文：设立军营分成队伍，凭此调遣。 
English: Set up a military camp, divide into teams, and dispatch them accordingly.

古文：先后皆议行。
现代文：先后都商议施行。
English: It has been discussed and implemented successively.

古文：末年，募兵措饷益急。
现代文：嘉靖末年，招募军人筹措银饷更紧急。
English: In the last years of the Jiajing Dynasty, it was even more urgent to recruit soldiers to raise money.

古文：南京职方郎中邹维琏陈调募之害。
现代文：南京职方郎中邹维理陈述调遣招募的危害。
English: Vice-premier Wei Li, the vice-premier of Nanjing, expounds on the harm of dispatching and recruiting.

古文：山西参政徐九翰尤极言民兵不可调。
现代文：山西参政徐九翰尤其竭力说民兵不可以调遣。
English: Xu Jiuhan, a politician in Shanxi Province, was particularly insistent that the militia should not be deployed.

古文：崇祯时，中原盗急，兵部尚书杨嗣昌议令责州县训练土著为兵。
现代文：崇祯时，中原盗患紧急，兵部尚书杨嗣昌商议命令州县训练土著居民成军人。
English: During the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, when the Central Plains were plagued by a plague of bandits, Yang Shichang of the Ministry of Military Affairs deliberated and ordered prefectures and counties to train indigenous residents to become soldiers.

古文：工部侍郎张慎言言其不便者数事，而御史米寿图又言其害有十，谓不若简练民兵，增民壮快手，备御地方为便。
现代文：工部侍郎张慎言说到它的几处不便利的地方，而御史米寿图又说到它的害处有十条，说不如挑选训练民兵，增加壮丁捕快，防御地方为好。
English: Zhang Shengyan, the secretary of the work department, said that there were several inconvenient places in it, and the map also said that there were ten harms in it. It is better to select training militias, increase the number of able-bodied men to catch fast, and defend the place.

古文：后嗣昌死，练兵亦不行。
现代文：后来杨嗣昌死，训练土兵也没有施行。
English: Later, Yang Shichang died, and the training of local soldiers was not carried out.

古文：乡兵者，随其风土所长应募，调佐军旅缓急。
现代文：乡兵，是根据本地风土所擅长响应招募，调发辅佐军队应急的士兵。
English: Rural soldiers are soldiers who are good at responding to recruitment according to local customs and are dispatched to assist the army in emergencies.

古文：其隶军籍者曰浙兵，义乌为最，处次之，台、宁又次之，善狼筅，间以叉槊。
现代文：其中隶属军籍的称浙兵，义蛊最多，处其次，台、宁又其次，善于用狼筅，问或用分叉长枪。
English: Among them, Zhe soldiers who belong to the military are said to be the most virtuous, the second most, and Taiwan and Ning are the second most. They are good at using wolf whistles, asking or using a forked long gun.

古文：戚继光制鸳鸯阵以破倭，及守蓟门，最有名。
现代文：戚继光设鸳鸯阵以击破倭寇，到镇守蓟门时，最有名声。
English: Qi Jiguang set up a camp to defeat the wokou, and when he arrived at the town gate, he was the most famous.

古文：曰川兵、曰辽兵，崇祯时，多调之剿流贼。
现代文：叫川兵、叫辽兵，崇祯时期，多调他们剿减流寇。
English: They were called "Chuanbei" and "Liaobei," and during the Song Dynasty, they were referred to variously as "Chuanbei" and "Liaobei."

古文：其不隶军籍者，所在多有。
现代文：那些不隶属军籍的，在很多地方都有。
English: Those who do not belong to the military can be found in many places.

古文：河南嵩县曰毛葫芦，习短兵，长于走山。
现代文：河南嵩县称毛葫芦，惯用短兵器，擅长爬山。
English: Song County, Henan Province, said that Mao Hulou, a short weapon, is good at climbing mountains.

古文：而嵩及卢氏、灵宝、永宁并多矿兵，曰角脑，又曰打手。
现代文：而嵩和卢氏、灵宝、永宁都多矿兵，称为角脑，又叫打手。
English: But Song, Lu, Lingbao, and Yongning were all miners, known as horn-brains, also known as beaters.

古文：山东有长竿手。
现代文：山东有长竿手。
English: Shandong has a long pole.

古文：徐州有箭手。
现代文：徐州有箭手。
English: Xuzhou has an archer.

古文：井陉有蚂螂手，善运石，远可及百步。
现代文：井陉有蚂螂手，善于扔石头，速的可以达到一百步。
English: They are good at throwing stones and can run up to a hundred paces.

古文：闽漳、泉习镖牌，水战为最。
现代文：闽漳、泉擅用镖牌，尤其擅长水战。
English: Zhai and Quan are good at playing darts, and especially good at water fights.

古文：泉州永春人善技击。
现代文：泉州永春人善于搏斗的武艺。
English: Quanzhou Yongchun people are good at martial arts.

古文：正统间，郭荣六者，破沙尤贼有功。
现代文：正统年间，有叫郭荣六的，攻破沙尤贼寇有功劳。
English: During the orthodox years, there was a man named Guo Ronglu, who was credited with defeating the Shayou bandits.

古文：商灶盐丁以私贩为业，多劲果。
现代文：商人盐丁以私下贩卖为业，多强劲果敢。
English: The merchant, Shi Ding, is a strong and courageous man who makes his living by selling privately.

古文：成化初，河东盐徒千百辈，自备火炮、强弩、车仗，杂官军逐寇。
现代文：成化初年，河东盐贩千百人，自备火炮、强弩、车仗，混杂在官军中追逐敌寇。
English: In the first year of Chenghua, hundreds of salt traders from Hedong, equipped with their own artillery, strong ploughs and chariots, mingled with the government army to chase the enemy corsairs.

古文：而松江曹泾盐徒，嘉靖中逐倭至岛上，焚其舟。
现代文：而松江曹泾的盐贩，在嘉靖年间，追逐倭寇到岛上，焚烧敌船。
English: During the Jiajing period, the salt traders of Songjiang Cao Pi chased the wokou onto the island and burned the enemy ships.

古文：后倭见民家有鹾囊，辄摇手相戒。
现代文：后来倭寇见到百姓家有鹾袋，就摇手告诫。
English: Later, when the wokou saw that people's homes had bags of straw, they waved their hands to warn them.

古文：粤东杂蛮蜑，习长牌、斫刀，而新会、东莞之产强半。
现代文：粤东杂居着蛮蛋，惯用长牌、斫刀，而新会、东莞出生的超过一半。
English: In Guangdong and Dongguan, more than half of the people were born in Dongguan.

古文：延绥、固原多边外土著，善骑射，英宗命简练以备秋防。
现代文：延绥、固原多边塞外的土著居民，善于骑马射箭，英宗命令挑选训练以备秋天防御敌人入侵。
English: The aborigines outside the Yenching and Guyuan Dynasties were good at horseback archery, and Emperor Yingzong ordered that they should be selected for training in preparation for defending against enemy invasion in the autumn.

古文：大滕峡之役，韩雍用之，以摧瑶、僮之用牌刀者。
现代文：大藤峡战役，韩雍利用这些兵，摧毁了瑶、僮用牌刀的人。
English: In the Battle of Dafuji Gorge, Han Yong used these soldiers to destroy the swordsmen.

古文：庄浪鲁家军，旧隶随驾中，洪熙初，令土指挥领之。
现代文：庄浪鲁家军，以前隶属随驾军人之中，洪熙初年，命令土指挥率领。
English: Zhuang Langlu's army, previously subordinated to the accompanying soldiers, was commanded by the local commander in the first year of Hongxi.

古文：万历间，部臣称其骁健，为敌所畏，宜鼓舞以储边用。
现代文：万历年间，部臣称赞该军骁勇强健，为敌军所畏惧，应该鼓舞以备边防调用。
English: Over the years, the minister praised the army as brave and strong, feared by the enemy, and should be encouraged to prepare for border defense.

古文：西宁马户八百，尝自备骑械赴敌，后以款贡裁之。
现代文：醛马户八百，曾经自备马骑器械奔赴杀敌，后来因为讲和进贡而裁除。
English: Aldehyde horse households eight hundred, once equipped with horse riding equipment to rush to kill the enemy, later because of the lecture and tribute.

古文：万历十九年，经略郑雒请复其故。
现代文：万历十九年，经略郑雒请求恢复旧例。
English: In the 19th year of the Wanli calendar, Zheng Yao requested the restoration of the old practice.

古文：又僧兵，有少林、伏牛、五台。
现代文：又僧兵有少林、伏牛、五台。
English: In addition, the monk soldiers included Shaolin, Fuxiu, and Wutai.

古文：倭乱，少林僧应募者四十余人，战亦多胜。
现代文：倭寇作乱，少林僧人响应招募的有四十多人，作战也大多获胜。
English: There were more than forty Shaolin monks recruited in response to the disturbance caused by the Japanese pirates, and most of them won the battle.

古文：西南边服有各土司兵。
现代文：西南边境有各土司兵。
English: On the southwestern border, there are soldiers of various ethnic groups.

古文：湖南永顺、保靖二宣慰所部，广西东兰、那地、南丹、归顺诸狼兵，四川酉阳、石砫秦氏、冉氏诸司，宣力最多。
现代文：湖南永顺、保靖两个宣慰所辖，廑西东菌、那地、南丹、盐堪等狼兵，四川酉阳、石硅秦氏、冉氏等司，出力最多。
English: Yongshun and Baojing in Hunan Province are under the jurisdiction of two brothels, Dongmyo, Nandi, Nantan and Yankan in Shaanxi Province are under the jurisdiction of wolf soldiers, and Shenyang, Shishi, Qin and Ran in Sichuan Province are under the jurisdiction of wolf soldiers, with the largest output.

古文：末年，边事急，有司专以调三省土司为长策，其利害亦恒相半云。
现代文：崇桢末年，边境事务紧急，有关部门总是以调遣三个省的土司为长久的计策，其中利弊也总是各占一半。
English: In the last years of the Song Dynasty, when border affairs were urgent, the relevant departments always dispatched three provincial governors as a long-term strategy, and the advantages and disadvantages were always divided in half.

