古文：曹操既得荆州，顺流东下，遗孙权书，言： 治水军八十万众，与将军会猎于吴。 
现代文：原文曹操取得荆州后，有了兴兵顺流而下，攻取东吴的念头，于是写了一封信给孙权，大意是自己将率领八十万水兵，约孙权在吴交战。
English: After Cao Cao captured Jingzhou, he had the idea of sailing down the river to capture East Wu, so he wrote a letter to Sun Quan, to the effect that he would lead 800,000 sailors and fight Sun Quan in Wu.

古文：张昭等曰： 长江之险，已与敌共。且众寡不敌，不如迎之。 鲁肃独不然，劝权召周瑜于鄱阳。
现代文：坐在一旁的鲁肃，却不认为归顺曹操是上策，于是向孙权建议，不如立即派人召回在鄱阳的周瑜商议大计。
English: Lu Su, who was sitting on the sidelines, did not think that surrendering to Cao Cao was the best strategy, so he suggested to Sun Quan that it would be better to immediately send someone to recall Zhou Yu in Shenyang to discuss the plan.

古文：瑜至，谓权曰： 操托名汉相，实汉贼也。
现代文：周瑜赶回后，激昂地对孙权说道： 曹操虽名为汉朝丞相，其实却是汉朝的奸贼。
English: After Zhou Yu rushed back, he said to Sun Quan enthusiastically: Although Cao Cao is called the Prime Minister of the Han Dynasty, he is actually a traitor to the Han Dynasty.

古文：将军割据江东，兵精粮足，当为汉家除残去秽。
现代文：主公据有江东，地域宽阔，兵精将广，应当为汉室除去奸贼。
English: According to the legend, the lord has the East River, a vast territory, and a vast army. He should remove the traitors for the Han family.

古文：况操自送死而可迎之耶？
现代文：再说曹操现正自掘死路，我们哪有归顺他的道理？
English: Besides, Cao Cao is now digging his own grave. How can we submit to him?

古文：请为将军筹之。今北土未平，马超、韩遂尚在关西，为操后患；而操舍鞍马，仗舟楫，与吴越争衡；又今盛寒，马无藁草；中国士众，远涉江湖之险，不习水土，必生疾病。一一此数者，用兵之患周瑜也。
现代文：请主公听我详说平曹的计划：现在北方并未完全平定，关西的马超和韩遂是曹操的后患；如今曹操竟舍弃善战的骑兵，而想与长于水战的吴兵在水上决战，岂不是自取败亡？再加上现在正值隆冬季节，马草军粮的补给都不方便；而曹军远来南方，水土不服、定会生病，这些都是曹操用兵的不利情况，所以主公想要活捉曹操，现在正是千载良机。
English: My lord, please listen to me as I explain Pin Cao's plan in detail. The north is not completely pacified now, and Ma Chao and Han in Kansai are Cao Cao's after-effects. Now that Cao Cao has abandoned the cavalry, which is good at fighting, and wants to fight the Wu soldiers, who are better at fighting on the water, is it not self-defeating? In addition, it is now the midwinter season, and it is inconvenient to supply the horse grass army with food. And Cao's army has come far to the south, is not satisfied with the water and soil, and will surely get sick.

古文：瑜请得精兵五万人，保为将军破之! 
现代文：请求主公给我精兵五万人，我保证击败曹操！ 
English: Ask the lord to give me 50,000 elite soldiers, and I promise to defeat Cao Cao!

古文：权曰： 孤与老贼誓不两立! 
现代文：孙权听了周瑜这番话后说： 我与曹操这老贼势不两立！ 
English: After listening to Zhou Yu's words, Sun Quan said: I can't stand against Cao Cao, the old thief!

古文：因拔刀砍案曰： 诸将敢复言迎操者，与此案同。 
现代文：说完抽出宝刀，一刀砍断桌子角，道： 诸位再有敢说归顺曹操的，就会和这桌子同样下场。 
English: After saying this, he took out his sword and cut off a corner of the table with it, saying, "If any of you dare to say that you are loyal to Cao Cao, you will meet the same fate as this table."

古文：竟败操于赤壁。
现代文：后来果然大败曹操于赤壁。
English: Later, Cao Cao was soundly defeated in Chibi.

古文：契丹寇澶州，边书告急，一夕五至，中外震骇。
现代文：宋真宗时，契丹人出兵攻打澶州，一时边情紧急，一夜之间竟连发五道紧急文书。
English: At the time of Song Zhenzong, the Khitan sent troops to attack Zhangzhou. At one time, the border situation was urgent, and five emergency documents were issued overnight.

古文：寇准不发，饮笑自如。
现代文：消息传到京师，朝野震惊。当时宰相寇准却不慌不忙，仿佛平常般谈笑饮酒。
English: The news spread to the capital, and Asano was shocked. At the time, the prime minister, Kojun, was unhurried, chatting and drinking as usual.

古文：真宗闻之，召准问计，准曰： 陛下欲了此，不过五日。
现代文：真宗接获军情紧急的报告，就召来寇准，与他商议大计。寇准说： 想要解除这种危急的状况，只要五天的时间就够了。
English: After receiving a report of a military emergency, Shinsong summoned Kojun to discuss a plan with him. Kojun said, "If we want to resolve this critical situation, just five days is enough time."

古文：愿驾幸澶州。 
现代文：臣恳请附下幸驾澶州。 
English: Your Excellency, please find enclosed a letter of good luck for your visit to Luzhou.

古文：帝难之，欲还内，准请毋还而行，乃召群臣议之。
现代文：真宗听了颇感为难，想直接返回京师，寇准却再三恳请，真宗一时拿不定主意，于是召集群臣商议。
English: Hearing this, Shinsong was quite perplexed. He wanted to return directly to the capital, but Kojun repeatedly implored him. For a moment, Shinsong was uncertain, so he convened a group of ministers to discuss.

古文：王钦若，临江人，请幸金陵；陈尧叟，阆州人，请幸成都。
现代文：临江人王钦若建议真宗避难金陵，阆州人陈尧叟则建议前往成都。
English: Wang Qinru, a resident of Linjiang, suggested that Jianzong take refuge in Jinling, while Chen Yao, a resident of Zhangzhou, suggested that he go to Chengdu.

古文：准曰： 陛下神武，将臣协和，若大驾亲征，敌当自遁，奈何弃庙社远幸楚、蜀？
现代文：寇准奏道： 陛下英明睿智，才使得群臣齐心效命，如果陛下能御驾亲征，敌军必会闻风丧胆，为什么要舍弃宗庙，逃往他地呢？
English: Kou Zhenxiao said, "Your Majesty's wisdom and sagacity made the ministers work together to fulfill their duties. If Your Majesty could personally lead the troops, the enemy troops would surely be discouraged. Why abandon the ancestral temple and flee to another land?

古文：所在人心崩溃，敌乘势深入，天下可复保耶？ 
现代文：陛下无论幸临金陵或成都，一则路途也太过遥远，二则将导致人心溃散，给予敌兵可乘之机，那又如何指望能保住大宋江山？ 
English: Your Majesty, whether you are lucky enough to visit Jinling or Chengdu, one path is too far away, and the other will lead to the collapse of the people's hearts and give the enemy soldiers an opportunity, so how can you expect to keep the Great Song Dynasty?

古文：帝乃决策幸澶州，准曰： 陛下若入宫，臣不得到，又不得见，则大事去矣。
现代文：真宗听了这些话，才下定决心前往澶州。寇准说： 请陛下即刻起程，不要再转回宫内，陛下若入宫，如果很长时间不出来，臣又进不去，怕误了大事。 
English: After listening to these words, Emperor Jinzong made up his mind to go to Zhangzhou. Kou Jun said, "Please, Your Majesty, leave immediately, and do not return to the palace. If Your Majesty enters the palace, if you do not come out for a long time, the minister will not be able to enter, and I am afraid that I will miss the big event."

古文：请毋还内。 
现代文：于是真宗下令立即起驾。
English: As a result, Masamune ordered an immediate retreat.

古文：驾遂发，六军、有司追而及之。
现代文：这时又有大臣阻拦，临河未渡。
English: At this time, another minister stopped them from crossing the river.

古文：临河未渡，是夕内人相泣。
现代文：这晚，嫔妃个个哭成一团。
English: That night, all the empresses cried together.

古文：上遣人瞷准。方饮酒鼾睡。
现代文：真宗又派人询问寇准意见，不料寇准因喝醉了酒，竟鼾睡不醒。
English: The True Sect also sent someone to inquire about Kou Jun's opinion. Unexpectedly, Kou Jun was so drunk that he couldn't wake up.

古文：明日又有言金陵之谋者，上意动。
现代文：第二天，又有大臣向真宗建议迁都金陵，真宗有些心动。
English: The next day, another minister proposed to move the capital to Jinling to Shinshu, and Shinshu was somewhat moved.

古文：准固请渡河，议数日不决。
现代文：所以虽然寇准一再恳求真宗渡江，但一连几天真宗仍下不了决心，做不了决定。
English: Therefore, although Kou Jun repeatedly implored Zhenzong to cross the river, Zhenzong still could not make up his mind for several days and could not make a decision.

古文：准出见高烈武王琼，谓之曰： 子为上将，视国危不一言耶？ 
现代文：一天，寇准碰到烈武王高琼，对他说： 你身为大将军，见国家的情势已到如此危急的地步，难道不会向皇上说句话吗？ 
English: One day, he met Gao Qiong, the King of Martyrs, and said to him, "You, as a great general, seeing that the situation of the country has reached such a critical point, wouldn't you say something to the emperor?"

古文：琼谢之，乃复入，请召问从官，至皆嘿然。
现代文：高琼向寇准谢罪，于是寇准又再入宫，建议真宗不妨问问其他官员的意思。
English: Gao Qiong blamed Qo Jian Xie, so Qo Jian re-entered the palace and suggested that Zhenzong might as well ask the other officials what they meant.

古文：上欲南下，准曰： 是弃中原也! 
现代文：没想到在朝的官员竟然个个哑口无言。这时真宗表示希望南下，寇准说： 这种做法简直是舍弃中原。 
English: Unexpectedly, the officials in the North were all speechless. At this time, when Zhenzong expressed his wish to go south, Kou Jun said: This approach is simply abandoning the Central Plains.

古文：又欲断桥因河而守，准曰： 是弃河北也! 
现代文：真宗又想毁坏桥梁，凭借江河天险来防守。寇准说： 这样河北一地就拱手送敌了。 
English: Shenzong also wanted to destroy the bridges, relying on the natural dangers of the rivers to defend them. Kou Jun said: In this way, Hebei was able to defeat the enemy.

古文：上摇首曰： 儒者不知兵。 
现代文：真宗不由得摇头说： 你是读书人，不懂得用兵之道。 
English: Shaking his head, he said, "You are a reader, you don't know how to use the army.

古文：准因请召诸将，琼至，曰： 蜀远，钦若之议是也，上与后宫御楼船，浮汴而下，数日可至。 
现代文：于是寇准建议真宗询问各位将军的意见。高琼却说： 我赞同王钦若的看法，蜀地远，但陛下若乘坐宫廷楼船，顺着汴江而下，几天的行程，就可抵达金陵。 
English: So Kou Jun suggested that Zhenzong ask the generals for their opinions. Gao Qiong said: I agree with Wang Qinruo's opinion, Shu is far away, but if His Majesty takes the palace ship and travels down the Li River, a journey of several days, he can reach Jinling.

古文：众皆以为然，准大惊，色脱。琼又徐进曰： 臣言亦死，不言亦死，与其事至而死，不若言而死。
现代文：在场的大臣纷纷表示赞同，寇准不由大吃一惊，只见高琼不慌不忙地接着又说： 臣直言也是死，不说也是死，与其到事情发生时丧命，不如今日直言而死。
English: The ministers present expressed their approval one after another. Kou Jun couldn't help but be taken aback, only to see Gao Qiong unhurriedly continue to say: A minister's straightforward speech is also death, and not speaking is also death. Rather than dying when things happen, it's better to die today with straightforward speech.

古文：今陛下去都城一步，则城中别有主矣，吏卒皆北人，家在都下，将归事其主，谁肯送陛下者，金陵亦不可到也。 
现代文：今天只要陛下离开京师一步，那么整个天下就要改朝换代了，士兵们都是北方人，家小都在京师附近，若京师不保，他们都会回乡保护妻小，到时有谁肯护送陛下，即使近如金陵，陛下也到不了。 
English: Today, as long as His Majesty is one step away from the Capital Division, then the whole world will have to change the dynasty. The soldiers are all northerners, and their hometowns are all near the Capital Division. If the Capital Division is not protected, they will all return to their hometowns to protect their wives and children. At that time, who will escort His Majesty? Even if it is as close as Jinling, His Majesty will not be able to get there.

古文：准又喜过望，曰： 琼知此，何不为上驾？ 
现代文：寇准听高琼如此说，顿时又面露喜色，说： 你能明白这道理，为什么不自请为皇上跟前的御前将军呢？ 
English: Hearing Gao Qiong say this, Kou Zhen suddenly showed a happy face and said: Can you understand this reason, why don't you offer yourself as the emperor's front-line general?

古文：琼乃大呼逍遥子，准掖上以升，遂渡河，幸澶渊之北门。
现代文：高琼大喊一声，要轿夫起轿，寇准立刻将真宗请入轿中，全军于是顺利渡河。
English: Gao Qiong shouted that the coachman should start the coach, and Kou Jun immediately invited Zhenzong into the coach, and the whole army then successfully crossed the river.

古文：远近望见黄盖，诸军皆踊跃呼万岁，声闻数十里。
现代文：真宗抵达澶州北门时，远近的士兵们看见皇帝的车驾，不由欢声雷动，高呼万岁，数十里外都听得到阵阵的欢呼声。
English: When Zhenzong arrived at the north gate of Zhangzhou, the soldiers near and far saw the emperor's chariot. They were moved by the thunderous cheers and shouted "long live." The cheers could be heard from dozens of miles away.

古文：帝意始坚。康伯乃劝帝亲征。是役，准先奏请，乘契丹兵未逼镇、定，先起定州军马三万南来镇州，又令河东兵出土门路会合，渐至邢、詺，使大名有恃，然后圣驾顺动。
现代文：契丹人见宋真宗御驾亲征，气势大减，等攻城时，元帅顺国王挞览又遭宋兵射杀，更是胆战心寒，于是向宋请和。这场战役，寇准事先曾奏请真宗在契丹兵马尚未逼近镇州、定州时，先征调定州三万兵马南下到镇州，又命令河东兵出土门路来会合，逐渐逼近邢州、沼州，使得大名府有所依托，然后皇帝再亲征。
English: When the Khitans saw that Song Zhenzong was leading his own troops, their strength was greatly reduced. During the siege of the city, the marshal Shun Qingshan was shot and killed by the Song soldiers. They were even more afraid and cold-hearted, so they invited Song to make peace. In advance of this battle, Qozhun had asked Zhenzong to first recruit and transfer 30,000 soldiers from Dingzhou south to Zhenzhou before the Khitan soldiers and horses approached Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. He also ordered the soldiers from the east of the river to come out of the tunnel to meet, gradually approaching Zhangzhou and Nuzhou, so that the daimy

古文：又遣将向东旁城塞牵拽，又募强壮入虏界，扰其乡村，俾虏有内顾之忧。又檄令州县坚壁，乡村入保，金币自随，谷不徙者，随在瘗藏。
现代文：同时寇准还派遣将领率兵向东牵制敌人，又招募强壮的丁兵混入契丹境内，骚扰契丹村庄，使契丹有内忧的困扰；另外寇准发文到各州县，要他们各自加强守御，各乡村民纷纷组织自卫民团，金币财物随身携带，至于无法运走的米粮则全部妥善深藏。
English: At the same time, Kojun also sent generals and soldiers to the east to contain the enemy, and recruited strong Ding soldiers to blend into the territory of Khitan, harass Khitan villages, and make Khitan have internal troubles; in addition, Kojun sent a document to each state and county, asking them to strengthen their own defense, and the villagers organized self-defense groups one after another, carrying gold coins and property with them, and all rice grains that could not be transported were properly hidden.

古文：寇至勿战，故虏虽深入而无得。方破德清一城，而得不补失，未战而困。
现代文：契丹兵至，千万不可与他们交手，如此一来，契丹人虽深入内地却毫无所获，只是攻下德清一城，而得不偿失，在未与宋兵交战前已是军需窘困。
English: As far as the Khitan soldiers are concerned, they must not fight with them. As a result, although the Khitans penetrated deep into the inland, they gained nothing. They only captured one city in Deqing, but it was not worth the loss. Before they fought with the Song soldiers, they were already in dire straits.

古文：若无许多经略，则渡河真孤注矣。
现代文：所以澶州之役宋军获胜并非侥幸，若事先没有这种种部署，那么真宗的渡河亲征，可就真的只是孤注一掷了。
English: Therefore, the victory of the Song Army in the Battle of Bozhou was not a fluke. If there was no such kind of deployment in advance, then Zhenzong's crossing of the river by himself was really just a desperate gamble.

古文：迟魏之帝者，一周瑜也；保宋之帝者，一寇准也；延宋之帝者，一陈康伯也。
现代文：周瑜拖延了曹操称帝的野心，寇准保住了真宗皇帝的帝位，陈康伯延续了宋代江山。
English: Zhou Yu delayed Cao Cao's ambition to become emperor, Qozun preserved the imperial throne of Emperor Zhenzong, and Chen Kangbo continued the Song Dynasty.

