古文：王武俊，契丹怒皆部落也。
现代文：王武俊，契丹族怒皆部落人。
English: Wang Wujun, the Khitan people are all tribesmen.

古文：祖可讷干，父路俱。
现代文：祖父可讷干，父路俱。
English: My grandfather could do it, my father couldn't.

古文：开元中，饶乐府都督李诗率其部落五千帐，与路俱南河袭冠带，有诏褒美，从居蓟。
现代文：开元年间，饶乐府都督李诗率领其部落五千帐，与路俱、南河承袭了汉人的衣冠袍带，皇上下诏褒奖表彰，因而王武俊随其父居住蓟州。
English: During the first year of the year, Li Si, the governor of Raole Prefecture, led his tribe to five thousand accounts, inherited the Han people's clothing crowns and robes from Luqiao and Nanhe, and was commended by the emperor. Therefore, Wang Wujun lived in Zhangzhou with his father.

古文：武俊初号没诺干，年十五，能骑射。
现代文：王武俊原名没诺干，十五岁便能骑马射箭。
English: Wang Wujun, whose original name was Meng Nogan, was able to ride a horse and shoot arrows at the age of 15.

古文：上元中，为史思明恆州刺史李宝臣裨将。
现代文：上元年间，任史思明属下恒州刺史李宝臣的偏将。
English: In the first year of the 21st century, he was appointed as the second-in-command of Li Baochen, a subordinate of Shi Siming in Hengzhou.

古文：宝应元年，王师入井陉。将平河朔，武俊谓宝臣曰： 以寡敌众，以曲遇直，战则离，守则溃，锐师远斗，庸可御乎？ 
现代文：宝应元年，王师进入井陉，即将平定河朔，王武俊对李宝臣说： 以寡敌众，以理曲对理直，战则离心，守则崩溃，精锐的将士远行作战，怎能抵御呢？ 
English: In the first year of the Baoying era, when Wang Shih entered Jinglu and was about to pacify Heshaku, Wang Wujun said to Li Baochen: With a small number of enemies, with reason and logic, war is centrifugal, rules collapse, elite soldiers travel far to fight, how can they resist?

古文：宝臣遂彻警备，以恆、定、深、赵、易，充本军先锋兵马使。
现代文：李宝臣便撤除了戒备，以恒、定、深、赵、易五州归顺朝廷，和官军同心协力，向东袭击残余贼寇。
English: Li Baochen then removed the alert, with Heng, Ding, Shen, Zhao and Yi five states surrendered to the imperial court, and worked together with the government army to attack the remaining bandits to the east.

古文：大历十年，田承嗣因薛嵩死，兼有相、卫、磁、邢、洺五州。
现代文：李宝臣被授予恒、定等州节度使，让王武俊做参谋，向朝廷奏请他兼任御史中丞，充任本军先锋兵马使。大历十年，田承嗣因薛嵩死去而兼有相、卫、磁、邢、氵名五州。
English: Li Baochen was awarded the post of state festival envoy for the provinces of Heng and Ding, and Wang Wujun was made a staff officer, and the imperial court was asked to invite him to also serve as the vice-chairman of history, and to serve as the vanguard envoy of the army. In the tenth year of the lunar calendar, Tian Chengzhi had the names of five provinces due to the death of Xue Song.

古文：承嗣遣将卢子期寇磁州，诏令宝臣与李正己、李勉、李承昭、田神玉、硃滔、李抱真各出兵讨之。
现代文：田承嗣派部将卢子期进犯磁州，诏令李宝臣与李正己、李勉、李承昭、田神玉、朱滔、李抱真各自出兵讨伐。
English: Tian Chengzhe dispatched troops to invade the Magnetic Province at the time of Lu Zi, and ordered Li Baochen, Li Zhengji, Li Zhengyi, Li Chengzhao, Tian Shengyu, Zhu Tao, and Li Bangzhen to send troops to fight.

古文：诸军与子期战于清水，大破之。宝臣将有节生擒子期以献。代宗嘉其功，使中贵人马承倩赍诏宣劳。
现代文：诸军与卢子期在清水交战，将他打得大败，李宝臣的部将有节生擒卢子期献上，代宗嘉奖其功劳，派宦官马承倩携带诏书前去宣旨慰劳。
English: The armies clashed with Lu Ziqi in Qingshui, and he was soundly defeated. Li Baochen's division presented the regalia to Lu Ziqi, and the daimong commended his service, and sent eunuch Ma Chengyi to carry the imperial rescript to declare the emperor's condolences.

古文：承倩将归，止传舍，宝臣亲遗百缣。
现代文：马承倩将返程，住在馆舍中，李宝臣亲往赠送细绢百匹。
English: Ma Chengyu will return and live in the mansion, and Li Baochen will personally give away hundreds of fine horses.

古文：承倩诟詈，掷出道中；宝臣顾左右有愧色。
现代文：马承倩破口大骂，将绢抛掷到路上，李宝臣环顾左右面有愧色。
English: Ma Chengyao cursed loudly and threw the crossbow onto the road. Li Baochen looked around with shame.

古文：还休府中，诸将散归，宝臣潜伺屏间，独武俊佩刀立于门下。
现代文：回到府中休息，诸将散去回营，李宝臣暗中在屏风后窥视，惟独王武俊佩刀立于门边。
English: Returning to the residence to rest, the generals dispersed back to the camp, Li Baochen peered secretly behind the screen, but Wang Wujun stood by the door with a sword.

古文：召入，解刀与语曰： 见向者顽竖乎？ 
现代文：李宝臣将他召入，解下刀来同他谈话，说： 你看见先前那个顽劣小子了吗？ 
English: Li Baochen called him in, unsheathed his sword to talk to him, and said, "Did you see that bad boy before?

古文：武俊曰： 今阁下有功尚尔，寇平后，天子以幅纸之诏召置京下，一匹夫耳，可乎？ 
现代文：王武俊道： 现在阁下有功他尚且如此，贼寇平定后，天子只需一张诏书将你召去安置在京中，就不过是个普通人了，这行吗？ 
English: Wang Wujun said: Even though he has made great contributions, after the defeat of the bandits, the Emperor only needs to issue an edict to summon you and place you in the center of Kyoto, and you will be nothing more than an ordinary person. Is that okay?

古文：宝臣曰： 为之若何？ 
现代文：李宝臣道： 那怎么办呢？ 
English: Li Baoshen said: Then what should we do?

古文：武俊曰： 不如玩养承嗣，以为己资。 
现代文：王武俊道： 不如玩弄纵容田承嗣的手腕，作为自己的资本。 
English: Wang Wujun said: It is better to play with Tian Heiji's skill as his own capital.

古文：宝臣曰： 今与承嗣有衅矣，可推腹心哉？ 
现代文：李宝臣道： 现在我已同田承嗣结了仇怨，难道还能向他推心置腹吗？ 
English: Li Baoshen said, "Now that I have a grudge against Tongtai Heir, can I still confide in him?

古文：武俊曰： 势同患均，转寇仇为父子，亥唾间。
现代文：王武俊道： 只要处境相同，利害一致，寇仇也可以变成父子一般，只是吐口唾沫间的事。
English: Wang Wujun said: As long as the situation is the same and the interests are the same, the revenge can also become a father-son relationship, just a matter of spit.

古文：若传虚言，无益也。
现代文：如果只说空话，无济于事。
English: If you just say empty words, it won't help.

古文：今中贵人刘清谭在驿，斩首送承嗣，立质妻孥矣！ 
现代文：如今宦官刘清潭在驿舍，砍下他的脑袋送交田承嗣，田承嗣就立刻会将妻儿送来做人质。 
English: Now the eunuch Liu Qingtan is in the house, cut off his head and send it to Tian Chengzhi, Tian Chengzhi will immediately send his wife and children to be hostages.

古文：宝臣曰： 恐不能如此。 
现代文：李宝臣说： 恐怕不能这样做吧。 
English: Li Baochen said: I'm afraid I can't do that.

古文：武俊曰： 硃滔为国屯兵沧州，请擒送承嗣以取信。 
现代文：王武俊说： 朱滔为朝廷驻守沧州，请让我擒获他送给田承嗣以取信。 
English: Wang Wujun said: Zhu Tao is stationed in Cangzhou for the imperial court. Please let me get a letter from him to Tian Chengzhe.

古文：许之。
现代文：李宝臣同意了。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：立选士二千，皆乘骏马，通夜驰三百里，晨至滔营，掩其不备。滔军出战，大败，擒类滔者，滔故得脱。
现代文：王武俊立即挑选精兵两千人，皆乘骏马，通夜奔驰三百里，清晨抵达朱滔军营，攻其不备，朱滔军仓猝出战，被打得大败，王武俊捉住一个长得像朱滔的，朱滔因此得以逃脱。
English: Wang Wujun immediately selected two thousand elite soldiers, all of whom rode horses through the night and traveled three hundred miles. In the morning, they arrived at Zhu Tao's military camp. They were not prepared for the attack. Zhu Tao's military camp suddenly went to war and was defeated. Wang Wujun caught a man who looked like Zhu Tao, and Zhu Tao was able to escape.

古文：自此宝臣与田承嗣、李正己更相为援，皆武俊萌之。
现代文：从此李宝臣与田承嗣、李正己相互作为后援，这都是王武俊开的头。
English: From then on, Li Baochen, Tian Chengzhi, and Li Zhengji supported each other, which was the beginning of Wang Wujun.

古文：宝臣死，其子惟岳谋袭父位。
现代文：李宝臣死后，其子李惟岳谋求承袭父位。
English: After the death of Li Baochen, his son, Li Wei Yue, tried to succeed his father.

古文：宝臣旧将易州刺史张孝忠以州顺命，遂以孝忠代宝臣。俾惟岳护丧归京，惟岳不受命。
现代文：李宝臣的旧将易州刺史张孝忠以本州顺从王命，朝廷便让张孝忠替代李宝臣，令李惟岳护送灵柩返回京师，李惟岳不受朝命。
English: Li Baochen's former commander Zhang Xiaozhong obeyed the king's order, and the imperial court asked Zhang Xiaozhong to replace Li Baochen, and ordered Li Weiyue to escort the coffin back to Beijing. Li Weiyue did not accept the imperial order.

古文：建中三年正月，诏硃滔、张孝忠合军讨之。
现代文：建中三年正月，诏令朱滔、张孝忠合兵讨伐李惟岳。
English: In the first month of the third year of the middle school, Zhu Tao and Zhang Xiaozhong were ordered to fight against Li Wei Yue.

古文：惟岳与武俊复统万余众战于束鹿。
现代文：李惟岳与王武俊合统万余兵士在束鹿迎战。
English: Li Wei Yue and Wang Wujun, together with more than 10,000 soldiers, went to fight in Sokcho.

古文：武俊率三千骑先进，为滔所败，惟岳遁走。
现代文：王武俊统领三千骑兵率先进攻，被朱滔击败，李惟岳逃走。
English: Wang Wujun led 3,000 cavalry in an advance attack, was defeated by Zhu Tao, and Li Weiyue fled.

古文：赵州刺史康日知遂以州顺命，惟岳令武俊统兵击之。日知遣人谓武俊曰： 惟岳孱微而无谋，何足同反！
现代文：赵州刺史康日知于是以本州顺从王命，李惟岳命王武俊率兵进攻他，康日知派人对王武俊说： 李惟岳懦弱无谋，怎么值得同他一起造反！
English: Zhao Zhou stabbed Kang Rongzhi, so he obeyed Wang Rongzhi's order on the basis of his own state, Li Wei Yue's order, Wang Wujun led an army to attack him, Kang Rongzhi sent a person to Wang Wujun and said: Li Wei Yue is cowardly and reckless, how is it worth rebelling with him!

古文：我城坚众一，未可以岁月下。
现代文：我的城池坚固，万众一心，不是一年半载能攻下的。
English: My city is strong and united, and cannot be conquered in a year and a half.

古文：且惟岳恃田悦为援，前岁悦之丁男甲卒涂地于邢州城下，犹不能陷，况此城乎！ 
现代文：再说李惟岳仗恃田悦作为后援，去年田悦的壮兵甲士在邢州城下战死许多，尚且不能攻陷邢州，何况我这座城呢！ 
English: Moreover, Li Wei Yue fought alongside Tian Yue as a backup. Last year, many of Tian Yue's soldiers died in the battle at the foot of Zhangzhou City, yet they were unable to capture Zhangzhou, let alone my city!

古文：复给伪手诏招武俊，信之；遂倒兵入恆州，率数百骑入衙门。使谓惟岳曰： 大夫举兵与魏、齐同恶，今田尚书已丧败，李尚书为赵州所间，军士自束鹿之役，伤痛轸心。
现代文：又拿出伪造的皇上手诏招降王武俊，王武俊相信了，便倒戈进入恒州，率领数百骑兵进入衙门，派人对李惟岳说： 您起兵同魏、齐叛贼狼狈为奸，如今田尚书已兵败命丧，李尚书被赵州康日知阻隔，士兵们经过束鹿一战，伤痕钻心。
English: He also took out a forged imperial edict to recruit Wang Wujun to surrender. Wang Wujun believed the edict, so he defected to Hengzhou, led hundreds of cavalry into the city gate, and sent Li Weiyue to say: You raised an army with Wei, Qi, and the traitors. Now Tian Shangshu has lost his life, Li Shangshu has been blocked by Zhaozhou Kangrizhi, and the soldiers have gone through a battle with a bunch of deer, with deep scars.

古文：硃仆射强兵宿境内，张尚书已授定州，三军俱惧殒首丧家。
现代文：朱仆射的强兵驻扎在境内，张尚书已授职定州，三军都惧怕殒命丧家。
English: Zhu's strong soldiers were stationed in the territory, Zhang Shangshu had been assigned to Dingzhou, and all three armies were afraid of losing their lives.

古文：闻有诏征大夫，宜亟赴命，不尔，祸在漏刻。 
现代文：听说皇上有诏征召您，应当立即前去受命，不然，转眼便有祸事。 
English: I have heard that the emperor has issued an edict summoning you. You should go immediately to receive the order, otherwise, disaster will strike at the blink of an eye.

古文：惟岳怖，遽睢盱。
现代文：李惟岳害怕得朝上瞪大了眼睛。
English: Li Wei Yue's eyes widened in fear.

古文：武俊子士真斩惟岳，持首而出。
现代文：王武俊之子王士真斩了李惟岳，提着他的首级出来。
English: Wang Wujun's son Wang Shizhen beheaded Li Wei Yue and came out with his head.

古文：武俊杀不同己者十数人，遂定。
现代文：王武俊又杀了不和自己同心的十数人，于是平定了恒州。
English: Wang Wujun also killed more than a dozen people who were not of the same mind as him, and thus pacified Hengzhou.

古文：传首上闻，授武俊检校秘书少监、兼御史大夫、恆州刺史、恆冀都团练观察使，实封五百户，以康日知为深赵团练观察使。
现代文：将惟岳的首级传送到京师禀报皇上，授王武俊检校秘书少监、兼御史大夫、恒州刺史、恒冀都团练观察使，实封食邑五百户，任命康日知为深赵团练观察使。
English: He sent the severed head of Wei Yue to the emperor in Beijing, and appointed Wang Wujun, the secretary of the inspection school, as the junior superintendent, and also as the chief historian, and Hengzhou Shishi, Hengji, and five hundred households in Zhigu County as the observation envoys, and appointed Kang Ritchie as the observation envoy of the Shen Zhao group exercise.

古文：时惟岳伪定州刺史杨政义以州顺命，深州刺史杨荣国降硃滔，分兵镇之。
现代文：当时李惟岳部下伪定州刺史杨政义以本州归顺朝命，深州刺史杨荣国归降，朱滔分兵镇守两地。
English: At that time, Li Wei Yue's subordinates, Yang Zhengyi of the pseudo-Dingzhou branch of the Shishi, ordered the surrender of Honshu to the Shun Dynasty, Yang Rongguo of the Shinshu branch of the Shishi, and Zhu Tao divided the soldiers to guard the two places.

古文：朝廷既以定州属张孝忠深州属康日知。武俊怒失赵、定二州，且名位不满其志。
现代文：朝廷既将定州授张孝忠，深州授康日知，王武俊恼怒失去赵、定二州，而且名分地位不能满足他的志向。
English: The imperial court awarded Zhang Xiaozhong with Dingzhou and Kangni Zhizhi with Shenzhou, but Wang Wujun lost Zhao and Ding two states in anger, and the title and status could not satisfy his ambition.

古文：硃滔怒失深州，因诱武俊谋反，斥言朝廷，遂连率劲兵救田悦。
现代文：朱滔恼怒失去了深州，因而诱使王武俊谋反，斥责朝廷，便同时率领强兵救援田悦。
English: Enraged, Zhu lost Shenzhou, and thus induced Wang Wujun to rebel, rebuked the imperial court, and at the same time led strong soldiers to rescue Tian Yue.

古文：时马燧、李抱真、李芃、李晟方讨田悦，败悦于洹水。后连岁暴兵，然悦势已蹙。至是武俊、硃滔复振起之。悦势益张。
现代文：那时马燧、李抱真、李秡、李晟正讨伐田悦，在洹水击败他，后来连年用兵，但田悦势力已衰弱；到这时王武俊、朱滔重新使他振作起来，田悦势力更加扩展。
English: At that time, Ma Yu, Li Po Zhen, Li Hui, and Li Hui were fighting against Tian Yue, defeating him at Surabaya. Later, they used soldiers for years, but Tian Yue's power had weakened; by this time, Wang Wujun and Zhu Tao had reinvigorated him, and Tian Yue's power had further expanded.

古文：十一月，武俊使大将张钟葵寇赵州，康日知击败之，斩首上献。
现代文：十一月，王武俊派大将张钟葵进犯赵州，康日知击败了他，斩其首级上献朝廷。
English: In November, Wang Wujun sent General Zhang Zhongkui to invade Zhaozhou. Kang Rongzhi defeated him and presented his head to the imperial court.

古文：是日，武俊僭建国，称赵王，又恆州为真定府，伪命官秩。
现代文：这天，王武俊立伪号建国，自称赵王，改恒州为真定府，非法任命官职及品级。
English: On this day, Wang Wujun set up a fake name for the founding of the country, calling himself Zhao Wang, changed Hengzhou to Zhendingfu, and illegally appointed officials and grades.

古文：硃滔、田悦、李纳一同僭号，分据所部，各遣使劝诱蔡州李希烈同僭位号。
现代文：朱滔、田悦、李纳也同时建立伪国号，分别占据所辖地域，各自派遣使者去劝诱蔡州李希烈同立伪国号。
English: Zhu Tao, Tian Yue, and Li Na also set up pseudo-country names at the same time, occupied the areas under their respective jurisdiction, and sent envoys to persuade Caizhou Li Xili to set up pseudo-country names.

古文：四年三月，希烈既为周曾谋溃其腹心，或传希烈已死，马燧等四节度军中闻之，欢声震外。
现代文：建中四年三月，李希烈被周曾谋划瓦解他的腹心部队以后，有人传说李希烈已死，马燧等四镇节度使军中闻听传言，欢声震动军营之外。
English: In March of the fourth year of Jianzhong, after Li Xilai was plotted by Zhou Zeng to disintegrate his confidant troops, some people said that Li Xilai had died. Four towns such as Ma'an heard the rumor, and the cheers shook outside the camp.

古文：六月，李抱真使辩客贾林诈降武俊。
现代文：六月，李抱真派一舌辩之士贾林诈降王武俊。
English: In June, Li Baozhen sent the one-tongue debater Jia Lin to defraud Wang Wujun.

古文：林至武俊壁曰： 是来传诏，非降也。 
现代文：贾林到了王武俊营中，说道： 这次前来是传达诏命，不是投降。 
English: When Jalin arrived at Wang Wujun's camp, he said, "This time I have come to deliver the imperial command, not to surrender.

古文：武俊色动，征其说。林曰： 天子知大夫宿诚，及登坛建国之日，抚膺顾左右曰： 我本忠义，天子不省。 
现代文：王武俊神色稍缓解，令他说明白，贾林道： 天子知道大夫您素来忠诚，及至您登坛建立国号时，抚着胸口对左右官员道： 我本忠义之人，天子不理解我。 
English: Wang Wujun's expression eased slightly, causing him to clarify, Jialin said: God knows that you have always been loyal, and when you ascended the altar to establish the national anthem, he stroked his chest and said to the officials around him: I am a loyal person, God does not understand me.

古文：是后诸军曾同表论列大夫。
现代文：此后诸军将领曾联名上表论说您的为人。
English: After that, the generals of all the armies jointly issued a statement saying that you are a person.

古文：天子览表动容，语使者曰： 朕前事误，追无及已。
现代文：天子看罢颇为感动，告诉使者说： 朕先前处事有误，追悔莫及。
English: Seeing this, the heavenly son was quite moved, and told the messenger, "I made a mistake in my previous dealings, and I am beyond repentance.

古文：朋友间失意尚可谢，朕四海主，毫芒安可复念哉！  
现代文：朋友间有了错失尚可道歉，朕为四海之主，点滴小事怎能耿耿于怀呢！  
English: If there is a mistake between friends, you can still apologize. I am the lord of the four seas. How can I be concerned about a little thing?

古文：武俊曰： 仆虏将，尚知存抚百姓，天子固不专务杀人以安天下。
现代文：王武俊道： 我是一员胡将，尚且懂得安抚百姓，天子当然不会专以杀人来安定天下。
English: Wang Wujun said, "I am a warlord, and I know how to pacify the people. Of course, the Son of Heaven will not use killing to stabilize the world.

古文：今山东大兵者五，比战胜，骨尽暴野，虽胜与谁守？
现代文：如今山东大军有五支，等到战胜他们时，百姓尽皆暴尸荒野，即使战胜了又让谁来守卫呢？
English: Nowadays, Shandong has five great armies. When they are defeated, the people will all be corpses in the wilderness. Even if they are defeated, who will be left to guard them?

古文：今不惮归国，以与诸侯盟约，虏性直，不欲曲在己。
现代文：如今我并非害怕归顺朝廷，但由于同各诸侯都订立了盟约，我们胡人性直，不愿做理亏的事。
English: Now I am not afraid to submit to the imperial court, but since we have concluded a covenant with all the lords, we are honest and do not want to do anything unreasonable.

古文：朝廷能降恩涤荡之，仆首倡归国，不从者，于以奉辞，则上不负天子，下不负朋友。
现代文：朝廷若能降下恩典为我洗清责任，我当带头倡议归顺朝廷，有不服从的，我以言辞相劝，则上不负天子，下不负朋友。
English: If the imperial court can bestow grace on me and clear my responsibility, I should take the lead in advocating submission to the imperial court. If there is disobedience, I will use words to persuade, and then I will not be a son of heaven, nor a friend.

古文：此谋既行，河朔不五旬可定。 
现代文：此计若能施行，河朔地区不用五十天即可平定。 
English: If this plan can be implemented, it will take no more than 50 days to pacify the Hexuo area.

古文：十月，泾原兵犯阙，上幸奉天。
现代文：十月，泾原叛军进犯京师，皇上临幸奉天。
English: In October, the Hahara rebels attacked the imperial army, and the emperor went to pray for good luck.

古文：京师问至，诸将退军。
现代文：京师传来消息，诸将都退兵回去。
English: News came from the capital that all the generals were withdrawing.

古文：李抱真将还潞泽，田悦说武俊与硃滔袭击之。
现代文：李抱真将返回潞州、泽州，田悦劝说王武俊和朱滔去袭击他。
English: Li Baozhen will return to Zhangzhou and Zezhou. Tian Yue persuades Wang Wujun and Zhu Tao to attack him.

古文：贾林复说武俊曰： 今退军前辎重，后锐师，人心固一，不可图也。
现代文：贾林再次游说王武俊道： 而今退兵前面是粮食辎重，后面是精锐部队，人心牢固如一人，不可以图谋呀。
English: Jialin lobbied Wang Wujun again, saying, "Nowadays, in front of the retreating soldiers, there is an abundance of grain, and behind them, there are elite troops. People's hearts are as firm as a single person. One should not scheme."

古文：且胜而得地，则利归魏博；丧师，即成德大伤。
现代文：再说打胜了得到土地，利益归魏博所有；打败了，则成德受大损失。
English: What's more, if Chengde wins and gets the land, the profits will go to Weibo; if Chengde loses, Chengde will suffer great losses.

古文：大夫本部易、定、沧、赵四州，何不先复故地？ 
现代文：大夫您的本部是易、定、沧、赵四州，为什么不先收复失地呢？ 
English: Doctor, your headquarters are the four prefectures of Yi, Ding, Cang and Zhao. Why don't you recover the lost territories first?

古文：武俊遂北马首，背田悦约。
现代文：王武俊便掉转马头，背弃了同田悦的约定。
English: Wang Wujun then turned tail and reneged on the agreement with Donda Yue.

古文：贾林复说武俊曰： 大夫冀邦豪族，不合谋据中华。
现代文：贾林进一步劝说王武俊道： 您是冀地的豪族，不应图谋占据中原。
English: Jialin further persuaded Wang Wujun: You are a powerful clan in Hebei, you should not try to occupy the Central Plains.

古文：且滔心幽险，王室强即藉大夫援之，卑即思有并吞。
现代文：朱滔心地阴险，朝廷强大他就借您的力量为后援，朝廷力弱他就想吞并您。
English: Zhu Gou is insidious at heart. If the imperial court is strong, he will use your strength as backup. If the imperial court is weak, he will try to annex you.

古文：且河朔无冀国，唯赵、魏、燕耳！
现代文：况且河朔并不包括冀州，只有赵州、魏州、燕州而已。
English: Moreover, Hebei does not include Jizhou, only Zhao, Wei and Yan.

古文：今硃滔称冀，则窥大夫冀州，其兆已形矣。
现代文：现在朱滔自称冀王，说明他在窥伺您的冀州，其征兆已暴露了。
English: Now Zhu Tao calls himself the King of Jizhou, indicating that he is spying on your Jizhou. The signs have been exposed.

古文：若滔力制山东，大夫须整臣礼；不从，即为所攻夺，此时臣滔乎？ 
现代文：假若朱滔能控制山东，您就必须准备为臣的礼数，不顺从，就会被他所攻夺，这时您想做他的臣子也不可能。 
English: If Zhu Tao can control Shandong, you must prepare to be a vassal. If you do not obey, you will be conquered by him. At this time, it is impossible for you to be his vassal.

古文：武俊投袂作色曰： 二百年宗社，我尚不能臣，谁能臣田舍汉！ 
现代文：王武俊掷袖变色道： 大唐有二百年国运，我尚且不能称臣，谁能向他这个乡下佬称臣！ 
English: Wang Wujun rolled up his sleeves and changed color: Datang has two hundred years of national prosperity, and I still can't call him a minister. Who can call him a countryman a minister?

古文：由此计定，遂南修好抱真，西连盟马燧。
现代文：从此确定方针，南面同李抱真修好，西南和马燧结盟。
English: Since then, the policy has been determined, the south side has made an agreement with Li Baozhen, and the southwest side has made an alliance with Malang.

古文：会兴元元年德宗罪己，大赦反侧。
现代文：时值兴元元年德宗下罪己诏，大赦反叛朝廷的人。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Emperor Dezong issued an edict of amnesty for those who had rebelled against the imperial court.

古文：二月，武俊集三军，削伪国号。
现代文：二月，王武俊聚集三军，废除伪国号。
English: In February, Wang Wujun gathered three armies and abolished the pseudo-country name.

古文：诏国子祭酒兼御史大夫董晋、中使王进杰，自行在至恆州宣命，授武俊检校兵部尚书、成德军节度使。
现代文：皇上诏令国子祭酒兼御史大夫董晋、宦官王进杰，从皇上行宫前往恒州宣旨，授王武俊检校兵部尚书、成德军节度使。
English: According to the imperial edict, the son of the state, Dong Jin, who was also the chief historian, and the eunuch, Wang Jinjie, went from the imperial palace to Hengzhou to issue the edict, awarding Wang Wujun the title of inspector of the school of the military department, and becoming the German military festival envoy.

古文：三月，加司空、同中书门下平章事，兼幽州、卢龙两道节度使、琅邪郡王。
现代文：三月，又加授司空、同中书门下平章事，兼幽州、卢龙两道节度使、琅笽郡王。
English: In March, he was also awarded the title of Jikang, and the title of Pingzhang, and the title of King of Yuzhou and Lulong.

古文：时硃泚伪册滔为皇太弟，滔率幽、檀劲卒，诱回纥二千骑，已围贝州数十日，将绝白马津，南盗洛都，与泚合势。
现代文：当时朱氵此发布伪命册封朱滔为皇太弟，朱滔率领幽州、檀州的强兵，诱骗回纥二千名骑兵，已包围贝州数十日，将阻断白马津，向南进犯洛都，与朱氵此成合兵之势。
English: At that time, Zhu Xi hereby issued a fake order to appoint Zhu Tao as the emperor's younger brother. Zhu Tao led the strong soldiers of Yuzhou and Danzhou, lured back two thousand cavalrymen, and has been encircling Bozhou for dozens of days. He will block Baima Jin and advance southward to attack Lodu, thus forming a joint army with Zhu Xi.

古文：时李怀光反，据河中；李希烈已陷大梁，南逼江、汉；李纳尚反于齐，田绪未为用；李晟孤军壁渭上。天子羽书所制者，天下才十二三，海内荡析，人心失归。
现代文：这时李怀光反叛占据河中，李希烈已攻陷大梁，向南逼进长江、汉水，李纳尚在齐州造反，田绪不被朝廷任用，李晟孤军驻扎在渭水边，天子敕令所能控制的地区，只有天下的十分之二三，海内动荡离析，人心不知所向。
English: At this time, Li Huaiguang rebelled and occupied the middle of the river, Li Xilai had captured the girders and pushed south into the Yangtze River and Hanshui River, Li Nashang rebelled in Qizhou, Tianxu was not appointed by the imperial court, and Li Yu's isolated army was stationed on the edge of Surabaya. Only two-thirds of the world can be controlled by the order of the Son of Heaven, and the domestic turmoil is divisive, and people do not know where to go.

古文：贾林又说武俊与抱真合军，同救魏博，为武俊陈利害曰： 硃滔此行，欲先平魏博，更逢田悦被害，人心不安。旬日不救，魏、贝必下，滔益数万。
现代文：贾林又劝说王武俊与李抱真合兵，共同救援魏博，他向王武俊陈说利害道： 朱滔此次出兵，企图先平定魏博，更赶上田悦被杀害，人心不安，只要十天不去救援，魏州、贝州必被攻下，朱滔的兵力就会增加数万。
English: Jialin also persuaded Wang Wujun and Li Bozhen to join forces and jointly rescue Weibo. He told Wang Wujun Chen the stakes: Zhu Tao sent troops this time in an attempt to first pacify Weibo. Moreover, Tian Yue was killed at the same time. People were worried. As long as they did not go to the rescue for ten days, Weizhou and Bozhou would be conquered, and Zhu Tao's troops would increase by tens of thousands.

古文：张孝忠见魏、贝已拔，必臣硃滔。
现代文：张孝忠见魏州、贝州被攻下，必定向朱滔俯首称臣。
English: When Zhang Xiaotong saw that Weizhou and Beizhou had been conquered, he must have bowed down to Zhu Tao and called him his vassal.

古文：三道连衡，兼统回纥，长驱至此，家族可得免乎？
现代文：三道连成一气，加上统率回纥兵马，长驱到此，您的家族能幸免于难吗？
English: Can your family be spared if the three roads are linked together and you lead the Hui soldiers and horses and drive them all the way here?

古文：常山不守，则昭义退保山西，河朔地尽入滔。
现代文：常山失守，李抱真就会退保山西，河朔一带就全部落入朱滔之手了。
English: If Changshan is lost, Li Bozhen will retreat to Shanxi Province, and the entire area around Hexuo will fall into Zhu Tao's hands.

古文：今乘魏、贝未下，孝忠未附，公与昭义合军破之，如掇遗耳！
现代文：现在乘着魏州、贝州未被攻下，张孝忠尚未归附朱滔，您与李抱真合兵击败他，就像拾取一件失落的东西一般容易啊！
English: Now, Wei Zhou and Bei Zhou have not been conquered, and Zhang Xiaozhong has not yet been annexed by Zhu Tao. If you and Li Bozhen defeat him together, it will be as easy as picking up a lost item!

古文：此计就，则声振关中，京邑可坐复，銮舆反正自公，则勋业无二也。 
现代文：这个计划成功，则声威震动关中，京师可坐待收复，圣驾能重返京师是靠了您的力量，这是无与伦比的勋业呀。 
English: If this plan succeeds, then the prestige of Beijing can be regained, and the Holy See can return to Beijing by relying on your strength. This is an incomparable achievement.

古文：武俊欢然许之。
现代文：王武俊欣然同意。
English: Wang Wujun readily agreed.

古文：两军议定，卜日同征。
现代文：两军议定，卜选吉日共同出征。
English: The two armies agreed to go to war together on the auspicious day.

古文：五月，武俊、抱真会军于钜鹿东。
现代文：五月，王武俊、李抱真在巨鹿之东会师。
English: In May, Wang Wujun and Li Baozhen met in the east of the Giant Deer.

古文：两军既交，滔震恐。
现代文：两军联合之后，朱滔震恐。
English: After the two armies united, Zhu Tao was terrified.

古文：抱真为方阵，武俊用奇兵，硃滔倾垒出战。武俊不擐甲而驰之。滔望风奔溃，自相蹂践，死者十四五。收其辎重、器甲、马牛不可胜计，滔夜奔还幽州。
现代文：李抱真将军队列成方阵，王武俊用奇兵出击，朱滔全部人马出营作战，王武俊未穿甲胄即挥军驰向敌营，朱滔军望风奔逃溃散，人马自相践踏，死者十之四五，缴获他的辎重、兵器、甲仗、马牛不计其数，朱滔乘着夜色逃回幽州。
English: Li Bozhen formed the army into a square formation, Wang Wujun attacked with extraordinary soldiers, Zhu Tao all the men and horses went out to fight, Wang Wujun did not wear armor and drove the army to the enemy camp, Zhu Tao's army fled to the wind and broke up, men and horses trampled each other, the dead were 45 out of ten, his baggage, weapons, armored vehicles and horses were captured, and Zhu Tao fled back to Yuzhou at night.

古文：武俊班师，表让幽州卢龙节度使，许之。
现代文：王武俊班师还镇，上表辞去幽州、卢龙节度使，皇上许诺。
English: Wang Wujun's squadron was still in the town, and the emperor promised to resign as Yuzhou and Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：乃升恆州为大都督府，以武俊为长史，加检校司徒，实封七百户，余如故。
现代文：于是将恒州升为大都督府，任命王武俊为长史，加授检校司徒，实封食邑七百户。其余照旧。
English: As a result, Hengzhou was elevated to the status of a large-scale governor's office, Wang Wujun was appointed as the long-term governor, additional inspectors were appointed, and seven hundred households in food villages were sealed. The rest remained the same.

古文：车驾还京，宠之逾厚。子尚贵主，子弟在孩稚者，皆赐官名。
现代文：圣驾回京，对王武俊的恩宠更加优厚，其子娶公主为妻，那些尚属童稚的王氏子弟，皆赐予官名。
English: After the saint's return to Beijing, the grace bestowed on Wang Wujun was even more generous. His son married a princess, and the children of the Wang clan, who were still very young, were all given official titles.

古文：寻丁母忧，起复加左金吾上将军同正；免丧，加开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久因母亲去世而停职，复职后加授左金吾上将军同正，服丧期满，加授开府仪同三司。
English: Shortly after, he was suspended due to the death of his mother. After his reinstatement, he was awarded the title of Zuo Kingu Shangzheng Tongzheng, and after the period of mourning, he was awarded the title of Kaifu Yi Tong Sanshi.

古文：十二年，上念旧勋，加检校太尉，兼中书令。
现代文：贞元十二年，皇上感念旧日勋臣，又加授王武俊检校太尉，兼中书令。
English: In the twelfth year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor was moved by the memory of the old days and awarded Wang Wujun with the additional title of lieutenant of the inspection school and the title of middle school.

古文：十七年六月卒，时年六十七，废朝五日，群臣诣延英门奉慰，如浑瑊故事。
现代文：十七年六月王武俊去世，时年六十七岁，停止上朝五日，群臣抵延英门奉慰皇上，依照对待浑王咸的旧例。
English: In June 17th, Wang Wujun died at the age of 67, five days after ascending to the throne. A group of courtiers arrived at Yan Yingmen to offer consolation to the emperor, in accordance with the old practice of treating Hun Wang Xian.

古文：承元宽惠有制，所理称治。太和七年十二月，卒于平卢，时年三十三，册赠司徒。
现代文：皇上令左庶子上公持节册命追赠王武俊为太师，赐给助丧葬之用绢三千匹、布一千端、米粟三千石。太常寺定谥号为威烈，德宗道： 王武俊竭诚尽忠国，当赐谥号为忠烈。 
English: The Emperor ordered his left-hand man to publicly hold a festival to bestow upon Wang Wujun the title of Grand Master, and to give him three thousand yakitori, one thousand pieces of cloth, and three thousand koku of rice to help with the funeral. Taizho-ji Temple's posthumous name is Wei Rong, and the German sect of Buddhism: Wang Wujun was loyal to the country, and should be given the posthumous name of Zhong Rong.

古文：王廷凑，本回鹘阿布思之种族，世隶安东都护府。
现代文：王武俊之子王士真、王士清、王士平、王士则，士真为嗣子。王廷凑，本为回鹘的阿布思族人，世代隶属安东都护府。
English: Wang Wujun's sons, Wang Shizhen, Wang Shiching, Wang Shiping, Wang Shizhen, and Wang Shizhen were his heirs. Wang Tingqian, originally from the Abusi tribe of Huizhou, belonged to the Anton Dugofu for generations.

古文：曾祖曰五哥之，事李宝臣父子。
现代文：曾祖名叫五哥之，事奉李宝臣父子。
English: Zengzu's name was Wugo Zhi, and he served Li Baochen father and son.

古文：王武俊养为假子，骁果善斗，武俊爱之。
现代文：王武俊收他为养子，因他骁勇、果敢、善斗，王武俊很看重他。
English: Wang Wujun adopted him as his son. Because he was brave, courageous and a good fighter, Wang Wujun valued him very much.

古文：以军功累授左武卫将军同正，赠越州都督。
现代文：由于积年军功被授左武卫将军同正，追赠越州都督。
English: Because of his many years of military service, he was awarded the rank of General Zuo Wuwei and the title of Governor of Yuezhou.

古文：祖末怛活，赠左散骑常侍。
现代文：祖父末怛活，追赠左散骑常侍。
English: His grandfather, the late, was posthumously awarded the title of "Left-Handed Cavalryman."

古文：父升朝，赠礼部尚书。
现代文：父升朝，追赠礼部尚书。
English: When his father ascended to the throne, he posthumously received a copy of the Book of Etiquette.

古文：皆以廷凑贵加赠典。
现代文：皆因王廷凑显贵而获得追赠典礼。
English: They all received a posthumous award ceremony because the royal court helped the dignitaries.

古文：祖父世为王氏骑将，累迁右职。
现代文：祖父和父亲两代为王氏骑将，屡屡升迁。
English: His grandfather and father were two generations of Wang horsemen, and were repeatedly promoted.

古文：廷凑沉勇寡言，雄猜有断，为王承元衙内兵马使。
现代文：王廷凑沉稳勇毅少言语，果敢而有决断，为王承元衙内兵马使。
English: The royal court is composed, steady, courageous, few words, bold and decisive, and is the king's successor.

古文：初，承元上禀朝旨，田弘正帅成德军，国家赏钱一百万贯，度支辇运不时至，军情不悦。廷凑每抉其细故，激怒众心。
现代文：当初，王承元上禀朝旨，田弘正统率成德军，国家赏钱一百万贯，度支署的运输车不按时抵达，军队情绪不满，王廷凑屡次挑出细小事故，激怒军心。
English: At the beginning, Wang Chengyuan issued the imperial edict, Tian Hongjun led the German army, the state rewarded the money with one million yuan, the transportation vehicles of the State Defense Administration did not arrive on time, the army was dissatisfied, and Wang Tingchi repeatedly picked out minor accidents to irritate the military.

古文：会弘正以魏兵二千为衙队，左右有备不能间。
现代文：恰逢田弘正以魏州兵二千人为衙门亲军，左右皆有防备无机可乘。
English: At the same time, Tian Hongzheng took two thousand Wei soldiers as the gatekeeper's troops, and both sides were prepared to take advantage of the situation.

古文：长庆元年六月，魏军还镇。
现代文：长庆元年六月，魏州军返归本镇。
English: In June of the first year of Changqing, the Weizhou army returned to the town.

古文：七月二十八日夜，廷凑乃结衙兵噪于府署；迟明，尽诛弘正与将吏家族三百余人。
现代文：七月二十八日间，王廷凑便集结衙兵在府署外呐喊鼓噪，天快亮时，将田弘正和他的将吏、家属三百余人全都杀死。
English: On the 28th of July, Wang Ting took the opportunity to gather his soldiers and shouted and drummed outside the prefectural government office. At dawn, he killed Tian Hiromasa, his officers and more than 300 family members.

古文：廷凑自称留后、知兵马使，将吏逼监军宋惟澄上章请授廷凑节钺。
现代文：王廷凑自称节度使留后、知兵马使，将吏们逼迫监军宋惟澄上表章奏请授王廷凑节钺。
English: Wang Tingchi, who claimed to be the commander of the festival, stayed behind, knowing the soldiers and horses, and forced the officials to force Song Weizhen, the supervisor of the army, to present the medal to Wang Tingchi.

古文：穆宗怒，下诏征邻道兵，仍以河东节度裴度充幽、镇两道招抚使，仍以弘正子泾原节度使布代李醖为魏博节度使，令率魏军进讨。
现代文：穆宗发怒，下诏征召邻道之军，并以河东节度使裴度充任幽、镇两道招抚使，任命田弘正之子泾原节度使田布替代李朔心为魏博节度使，命他率魏州军进讨王廷凑。
English: Enraged, Mu Zong issued an edict to conscript the troops of the neighboring provinces, and appointed Pei Du, son of Tian Hongzheng, as the commander of the troops of Hedong Province and the troops of the two provinces as the commanders of the troops of Wei Bo Province, and ordered him to lead the troops of Wei Zhou Province to attack the royal court.

古文：又以承宗故将深州刺史牛元翼为成德军节度使，下诏购诛廷凑。
现代文：又任命王承宗旧部深州刺史牛元翼为成德军节度使，下诏悬赏王廷凑首级。
English: In addition, he appointed Wang Chengzong's former department, Shenzhou Zhishi Niuyuan Ying, as the Chengde Army's festival envoy, and issued the following edict to reward Wang Ting with the first rank.

古文：是月，镇州大将王位等谋杀廷凑事泄，坐死者二千余人。
现代文：当月，镇州大将王位等人密谋诛杀王廷凑之事泄露，因此事牵连被处死的有二千余人。
English: In the same month, a plot to assassinate Wang Tingpai was leaked, implicating more than two thousand people.

古文：时硃克融囚张弘靖，廷凑杀弘正，合从构逆谋，拒王命。
现代文：当时朱克融囚禁张弘靖，王廷凑杀害田弘正，相互勾结造反，谋划抗拒王命。
English: At that time, Zhu KeRong imprisoned Zhang HongJing, and the royal court conspired to kill Tian HongZheng, conspired to rebel, and plotted to resist the king's order.

古文：两镇并力，讨除虑难应接，诏朝臣议其可否。
现代文：两镇合力反叛，若要讨伐翦除他们恐怕朝廷兵力难以接应，诏令朝臣们商议是否可行。
English: The two towns joined forces to rebel, and if they were to be fought and eliminated, it would be difficult for the imperial army to respond, so the courtiers were ordered to discuss whether it was feasible.

古文：东川节度使王涯献状曰： 幽、镇两州，悖乱天纪，迷亭育之厚德，肆狼虎之非心。
现代文：东川节度使王涯献上奏状说： 幽、镇两州，悖乱天纲，辜负了圣上培育的厚德，放纵虎狼一般的恶心。
English: The Dongchuan Festival made Wang Lai present a report saying: Yu, Zhen two states, disrupted the heavenly program, failed to live up to the virtues cultivated by the saint, and indulged the general disgust of tigers and wolves.

古文：囚絷鼎臣，戕贼戎帅，毒流州郡，衅及宾僚。
现代文：囚禁朝廷重臣，残害元戎老帅，流毒于州府郡邑，祸及于宾客僚属。
English: Imprisonment of senior imperial court officials, mutilation of veteran generals, poisoning in prefectures and counties, and the scourge of guests and colleagues.

古文：凡在有情，孰不痛愤？
现代文：凡是有情之人，谁不痛恨？
English: Who doesn't hate a compassionate person?

古文：伏以国家文德诞敷，武功继立，远无不伏，迩无不安，矧兹二方，敢逆天理。
现代文：臣以为国家依靠文德生存发展，继而建树武功，远方无不拜服，近处无不安宁，这两处地方，却敢悖逆天理。
English: The vassal thought that the country would rely on literature and virtue to survive and develop, and then build up martial arts. There was nothing to worship in the distance, and nothing to worry about in the vicinity. However, these two places dared to defy the laws of nature.

古文：臣窃料诏书朝下，诸镇夕驱，以貔貅问罪之师，当猖狂失节之寇，倾山压卵，决海灌荧，势之相悬，不是过也。
现代文：臣私下料想诏书早晨下达，诸镇之军晚上就会驱驰效命，以勇猛善战的问罪之师，对付猖狂失节的盗寇，犹如翻倒大山压碎鸟卵，倾泻海水浇灭荧火一般，双方力量悬殊，这样说毫不过分。
English: Privately, the vassal thought that if the edict was issued in the morning, the troops of the towns would rush to their deaths in the evening, and they would deal with the rampant and unruly bandits with a brave and good-natured judge of guilt, as if they had overturned a mountain and crushed a bird's egg, and poured seawater to extinguish a fluorescent fire. There was a great disparity in strength between the two sides, and it is not too much to say so.

古文：但常山、蓟郡，虞、虢相依，一时兴师，恐费财力。
现代文：但常山、蓟郡，如虞虢相依，同时兴兵，恐怕耗费财力。
English: However, if Changshan and Jixian County rely on each other and raise troops at the same time, I am afraid that it will consume financial resources.

古文：罪有轻重，事有后先，譬之攻坚，宜从易者。
现代文：罪有轻重，事有先后，譬如攻坚一样，应从容易的开始。
English: There are serious crimes, and there is a sequence of events. For example, just like attacking a stronghold, you should start with the easy part.

古文：如闻范阳肇乱，出自一时，事非宿谋，迹亦可验。镇州构祸，殊匪偶然，扇诸属城，以兵拒境。
现代文：比如听说朱克融在范阳发难，是一时所为，并非蓄谋已久，有迹象可以查验；王廷凑在镇州作乱，却完全不是偶然，他早就在辖区内煽动，驻兵边境抗拒朝廷。
English: For example, it was heard that Zhu Ke Rong's attack on Fan Yang was a one-time action, not a long-term plan, and there are signs that can be checked; Wang Ting's attempt to create a disturbance in Zhenzhou was not accidental at all, he had already instigated it in his jurisdiction and stationed soldiers at the border to resist the imperial court.

古文：如此，则幽蓟之众，可示宽刑；镇冀之戎，可资先讨。
现代文：既然如此，则幽州、蓟州的将士，可向他们表示从宽处理；镇州、冀州的军队，可对他们先行讨伐。
English: Since this is the case, the soldiers from Yuzhou and Zhangzhou can show them lenient treatment; the troops from Zhenzhou and Jizhou can go ahead of them.

古文：况廷凑阘茸，不席父祖之资；成德分离，又多迫胁之势。
现代文：何况王廷凑品行卑劣，没有承继父祖的资质；成德军同朝廷分离，又加重了胁迫的局势。
English: Not to mention the fact that the imperial court behaved despicably and did not inherit the qualities of their forefathers; the separation of the German army from the imperial court further aggravated the coercive situation.

古文：今以魏博思复仇之众，昭义愿尽敌之师，参之晋阳，辅以沧德，掎角而进，实若建瓴。
现代文：如今派遣魏博道一心想复仇的部众，昭义军希望扫尽敌寇的师旅，参以晋阳的兵卒，辅以沧德之将士，成犄角之势而推进，真如高屋建瓴一般。
English: Today, Wei Bo Dao is sending his vengeful subordinates, and the Shao Yi Army is hoping to wipe out the enemy's division and brigade, and join the soldiers of Jinyang, supplemented by the soldiers of the vicissitudes of history, and push forward into a corner, just like a high-rise building.

古文：尽屠其城，然后北首燕路，在朝廷不为失信，于军势实得机宜。臣之愚诚，切在于此。
现代文：将城中之敌杀尽，然后向北挺进燕地，就朝廷而言不为失信，对于军事形势确实是获得了机宜，臣之愚忠，尽献于此。
English: As far as the imperial court was concerned, killing all the enemies in the city and then advancing north into Yan's Land was not a breach of trust. It was indeed an opportunity gained for the military situation, and the foolish loyalty of the vassals was devoted to this.

古文：臣又闻用兵若斗，先扼其喉。
现代文：臣又闻听用兵如格斗，先扼住对方咽喉。
English: The vassal also heard that the soldiers, as if fighting, first strangled the other side.

古文：今瀛鄚、易定，两贼之咽喉也。
现代文：现在瀛莫阝、易定，正是两贼咽喉。
English: Now it is the two thieves, Mo Miao and Yiding, who are at each other's throats.

古文：诚宜假之威柄，戍以重兵，俾其死生不相知，间谍无所入；而以大军先进冀、赵，次临井陉，此一举万全之势也。 
现代文：确实应运用权威，派重兵戍守，使两贼彼此间生死不能互知，间谍无隙可入；而派遣大军先进入冀州、赵州，然后抵达井陉，这是一举成功万无一失的形势啊。 
English: It is indeed necessary to use authority and send a large number of soldiers to stand guard, so that the two thieves cannot know each other's life and death, and spies can enter without a gap; and sending a large army first into Jizhou and Zhaozhou, and then arriving at Jingyao, this is a successful and foolproof situation.

古文：于是命易定节度使开境以抗克融，诸军三面进讨。
现代文：于是命易定节度使封锁边境以抗击朱克融，诸军从三面进讨。
English: As a result, it was decided to blockade the border to resist Zhu Ke Rong, and the armies marched in from three sides.

古文：初，以沧德乌重胤独当一面，重胤宿将，知不可进，颇迟留，乃以杜叔良代重胤。
现代文：起初，命沧德乌重胤独当一面，乌重胤是一员老将，知道不可冒进，行动比较迟缓，朝廷便以杜叔良替代乌重胤。
English: At first, Wu Chung-yin, a veteran who knew better than to rush into anything, acted rather slowly, and the imperial court replaced Wu Chung-yin with Du Shuliang.

古文：叔良有中官之援，朝辞日，大言云： 贼不足破。 
现代文：杜叔良有宦官做后盾，向皇上辞行那天，口出大言说： 贼兵不值得一破。 
English: Du Shuliang had the backing of eunuchs, and on the day of his resignation to the emperor, he blurted out: "Thief soldiers are not worth breaking."

古文：时廷凑合幽蓟之兵围深州，梯冲云合，牛元翼婴城拒守。
现代文：这时王廷凑聚集幽州、蓟州的军队围攻深州，云梯冲车密集如云，牛元翼环城拒守。
English: At this time, Wang Ting gathered together the armies of Yuzhou and Ganzhou to besiege Shenzhou, the cloud ladders were crowded like clouds, and the Niuyuan wings refused to defend the city.

古文：十一月，杜叔良为贼所败，众皆陷没，仅以身免，乃以德州王日简代之。
现代文：十一月，杜叔良被贼军击败，将士全被俘获，仅他本人脱逃，于是命德州王日简代替他。
English: In November, Du Shuliang was defeated by the bandits, all his soldiers were captured, only he escaped, so he ordered Texhou Wang Rijian to replace him.

古文：裴度率众屯承天军，诸将挫败，深州危急。乃以凤翔节度使李光颜为忠武节度使，兼深冀节度，救深州，仍以中官杨永和监光颜军。
现代文：裴度率军驻扎在承天军，诸将被贼军挫败，深州危急，于是任命凤翔节度使李光颜为忠武节度使，兼深冀节度使，以救援深州，依例派宦官杨永和监督李光颜军。
English: Pei Du's army was stationed in the Chengtian army, the Zhou army was defeated by the Kuomintang army, and Shenzhou was in a critical situation. Therefore, he appointed Fengxiang commander to make Li Guangyan the commander of the Zhongwu army, and also the commander of the Shenji army to rescue Shenzhou, and sent the eunuch Yang Yonghe to supervise Li Guangyan's army.

古文：国家自宪宗诛除群盗，帑藏虚竭；穆宗即位，赏赐过当；及幽、镇共起，征发百端，财力殚竭。
现代文：国家自从宪宗剿除群盗，国库财源枯竭，穆宗即位后，对臣下的赏赐又太过分，及至幽州、镇州叛乱同时发生，又有名目繁多的征收，国家财力竭尽。
English: The state has exhausted its financial resources since the Kenzong removed the bandits, and the state treasury has been depleted. After Mu Zong ascended the throne, the rewards given to the subjects were too excessive, and when the Yuzhou and Zhenzhou rebellions occurred at the same time, and there were many famous expropriations.

古文：时诸镇兵十五万余，才出其境，便仰给度支，置南北供军院。
现代文：当时各镇军队共十五万多人，才离其辖境，便仰赖朝廷开支军饷，设置南北供军院。
English: At that time, there were a total of more than 150,000 troops in each town, and only after they left their jurisdiction did they rely on the imperial court to spend military funds and set up military academies in the north and south.

古文：既深入贼境，辇运艰阻，刍薪不继，诸军多分番樵采。
现代文：大军深入贼境后，运输艰难阻滞，粮草供应不上，诸军大多轮番砍柴。
English: After the large army penetrated deep into the enemy territory, transportation was difficult to block, grain and grass could not be supplied, and most of the armies took turns to cut firewood.

古文：俄而度支转运车六百乘，尽为廷凑邀而虏之，兵食益困。
现代文：不久度支署转运粮草的六百辆车，全部被王廷凑拦截俘获，军粮更加困难。
English: Soon, all the six hundred vehicles of the branch office transporting grain and grass were intercepted and captured by the royal court, and it was even more difficult to obtain military grain.

古文：贼围深州数重，虽光颜之善将，亦无以施其方略。
现代文：贼军围困深州数重，即使李光颜这样的杰出将领，也无法施展他的谋略。
English: The bandits besieged Shenzhou several times, and even such an outstanding general as Li Guangyan could not carry out his strategy.

古文：其供军院布帛衣赐，往往不得至院，在途为诸军强夺，而悬军深斗者，率无支给。
现代文：那些运往供军院的布帛衣服，往往还未到院里，在途中便被各军强行夺去，而孤军深入敌境作战的部队，全都没有供给。
English: The cloth and clothing sent to supply the military academy was often forcibly taken away by the various armies before it reached the academy, and the troops who fought alone deep into the enemy territory were not supplied at all.

古文：复又每军遣内官一人监军，悉选骁健者自卫，羸懦者即战，以是屡多奔北。
现代文：加上每支军队中都派有一名宦官做监军，尽挑选骁勇健壮的士兵保卫自己，瘦弱怯懦的上阵作战，因此大多奔逃败北。
English: In addition, a eunuch was assigned to each army to supervise the troops, and they selected brave and strong soldiers to defend themselves, and weak and cowardly soldiers to fight, so most of them fled to the north.

古文：而廷凑、克融之众，不过万余，而抗官军十五万者，良以统制不一，玩寇邀利故也。
现代文：而王廷凑、朱克融的军队不过一万余人，之所以能抗击十五万官军，实在是因为官军指挥不统一，轻视敌人和只图于己有利的缘故。
English: However, the army of Wang Tingchi and Zhu Kehong was only more than ten thousand people, and the reason why they were able to resist the one hundred and fifty thousand official army was really because the command of the official army was not unified, despised the enemy and only sought to benefit themselves.

古文：宰相崔祐甫不晓兵家，胶柱于常态，以至复失河朔。
现代文：宰相崔甫不懂军事，拘泥于常规而不知变通，以致使河朔再次失陷。
English: Prime Minister Cui Fu did not understand the military, adhered to the routine and did not know how to be flexible, which led to the fall of Heshaku again.

古文：既无如之何，遂议休兵而赦廷凑。
现代文：既然没有办法，便计议罢兵而赦免王廷凑。
English: Since there was nothing he could do, he considered calling off the army and pardoning the royal court.

古文：二年正月，魏府牙将史宪诚诱其军谋叛，田布不能止，其众自溃于南宫。
现代文：长庆二年正月，魏博府牙将史宪诚引诱兵卒谋反，田布不能制止，他的部属在南宫自行溃败。
English: In the first month of the second year of Changqing, Wei Bo Fuga led Shi Xiancheng to lure soldiers to rebel. Tianbu could not stop him, and his subordinates self-defeated in Nangu.

古文：二月，诏赦廷凑，仍授检校右散骑常侍、镇州大都督府长史、成德军节度、镇冀深赵等州观察等使；以牛元冀为山南东道节度使。
现代文：二月，降诏赦免王廷凑，并授以检校右散骑常侍、镇州大都督府长史、万德军节度使、镇冀深赵等州观察使等职，任命牛元翼为山南东道节度使。
English: In February, the emperor abdicated and pardoned Wang Tingqin, and awarded him the posts of the right rider of the inspection of the school, the governor of the township, the festival envoy of the World German Army, and the observer of the township, and appointed Niu Yuanyi as the host festival envoy of Shannan.

古文：遣兵部侍郎韩愈至镇州宣慰，又遣中使衔命入深州，监元翼赴镇。
现代文：派遣兵部侍郎韩愈至镇州宣旨慰问王廷凑，又派宦官携带敕令入深州，监督牛元翼赴任。
English: Han Yu, the attendant of the military department, was dispatched to Zhenzhou to issue an order of condolence to Wang Tingpiao, and a eunuch was also sent to Shenzhou to carry the order and supervise Niu Yuanyi to take office.

古文：廷凑虽受命，而深州之围不解。
现代文：王廷凑虽然受命，却不解除对深州的围困。
English: Although Wang Tingpai was ordered to do so, he did not lift the siege on Shenzhou.

古文：招抚使裴度与幽、镇书，以大义责之；硃克融解围而去，廷凑亦退舍。
现代文：招抚使裴度致书幽州、镇州，以君臣大义责备王廷凑和朱克融，朱克融解围而去，王廷凑也退了兵。
English: Zhaofu sent Pei Du to write to Yuzhou and Zhenzhou, and reproached Wang Tingpiao and Zhu Ke Rong with the dignity of a prince and a minister. Zhu Ke Rong broke the siege and left, and Wang Tingpiao also withdrew.

古文：朝廷欲其禀命，并加克融检校工部尚书。
现代文：朝廷想让他们秉承朝命，加授朱克融检校工部尚书。
English: The imperial court wanted them to adhere to the imperial order and award Zhu Ke Rong Jian School the title of Shang Shu.

古文：三月，元翼率十余骑突围出深州赴阙，深州将校臧平以城降。廷凑责其固守，杀将吏一百八十余人。
现代文：三月，牛元翼率十余名骑手从深州突围赴京师，深州将校臧平献城投降，王廷凑指责他坚守城垣，杀了将吏一百八十余人。
English: In March, Niuyuan led more than ten horsemen from Shenzhou to break through the siege and go to Beijing Division. Shenzhou officer Zou Ping surrendered the city. Wang Tingping accused him of holding on to the city wall and killed more than 180 officers.

古文：五月，遣中使杨再昌至镇州，取牛元翼家族及田弘正骸骨。廷凑曰： 弘正骸骨，不知所在；元翼家族，请至秋发遣。 
现代文：五月，皇上派宦官杨再昌到镇州，接取牛元翼家属及田弘正骸骨，王廷凑说： 田弘正的骸骨，不知在哪儿；牛元翼家属，请让我秋天再遣送。 
English: In May, the emperor sent eunuch Yang Zhaichang to Zhenzhou to pick up Niu Yuanling's family members and Tian Hongzheng's skeleton. Wang Ting said: "I don't know where Tian Hongzheng's skeleton is; Niu Yuanling's family members, please let me send them back in the fall."

古文：俄而元翼卒，廷凑乃尽屠其家，其酷毒如此。
现代文：不久牛元翼去世，王廷凑将他的家人全都杀光，其残酷毒辣到如此地步。
English: Soon after, Niu Yuan Ying died, and Wang Ting killed all of his family members, which was so cruel and vicious.

古文：自获赦宥，遂与硃克融、史宪诚连衡相应，谋拒朝廷。
现代文：自从获得宽赦之后，王廷凑便与朱克融、史宪诚彼此勾结，相互接应，图谋抗拒朝廷。
English: After being pardoned, Wang Tingpang colluded with Zhu Ke Rong and Shi Xiancheng and tried to resist the imperial court.

古文：太和初，沧州李全略死，其子同捷欲效河朔事，求代父任。
现代文：大和初年，沧州李全略死，其子李同捷企图仿效河朔李惟岳之旧例，请求替代父职。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, Cangzhou Li Quanli died, and his son Li Tongjie tried to follow the old example of Li Weiyue in Heshou and asked to replace his father.

古文：文宗授以兗海节度使；同捷不奉诏，据郡构逆，以珍玩器币妓女子弟投款于廷凑及幽州李载义。
现代文：文宗授予他兖海节度使，李同捷不奉诏命，盘据州郡策划反叛，用珍玩、宝器、钱财、妓女、子弟交结王廷凑及幽州李载义。
English: Wenzong granted him the post of Bohai Festival envoy, but Li Tongjie disobeyed the imperial order, plotted a rebellion according to the state and county, and used rare games, treasures, money, prostitutes, and his children to make Wang Tingpiao and Yuzhou Li Zaiyi.

古文：时载义初代克融，输诚效顺，尽送同捷所遣赴阙，诏征幽、魏、徐、兗之师进讨。
现代文：这时李载义刚刚替代朱克融，为了表示忠诚顺从，将李同捷所送礼物全部交给朝廷，皇上下诏征召幽、魏、徐、兖诸州军队进讨。
English: At this time, Li Zaiyi had just replaced Zhu Ke Rong. In order to show his loyalty and obedience, he handed over all the gifts sent by Li Tong Jie to the imperial court. The emperor issued an imperial edict to conscript the troops of Yuzhou, Wei, Xu and Qin.

古文：廷凑出兵挠魏北境，以援同捷。
现代文：王廷凑出兵骚扰魏州北境，以援助李同捷。
English: Wang Ting sent troops to harass the northern border of Weizhou to aid Li Tongjie.

古文：二年，下诏绝廷凑进奉。
现代文：大和二年，下诏拒绝王廷凑进奉。
English: In the 2nd year of the Yamato era, the imperial edict was issued refusing the imperial court's request to be allowed to enter the capital.

古文：既魏博将丌志治以行营兵叛，倒戈攻魏州，诸军击志治，廷凑出兵应之。
现代文：接着魏博将领丌志沼率行营兵卒叛乱，倒戈攻打魏州，诸军攻击丌志沼，王廷凑出兵接应他。
English: Then, Wei Bo's general Shishinuma led his battalion in a mutiny, defected and attacked Weizhou. The armies attacked Shishinuma, and Wang Ting gathered troops to meet him.

古文：史宪诚危急，诏义武军节度使李听击败之，志治奔于廷凑。
现代文：史宪诚危急，诏令义武军节度使李听将他击败，丌志沼便投奔王廷凑。
English: Shi Xiancheng was in a critical situation, so he ordered Li He to defeat him, and Shishinuma then joined Wang Tingchi.

古文：三年六月，诛李同捷。寻又何进滔杀史宪诚，据魏州。
现代文：大和三年六月，李同捷被诛，接着又有何进滔杀了史宪诚，占据魏州。
English: In June of the third year of the Yamato era, Li Tongjie was arrested, followed by He Jin, who killed Shi Xiancheng and occupied Weizhou.

古文：朝廷厌兵，诛之不果，遂授进滔魏博节度。
现代文：朝廷厌倦用兵，讨伐他也不能成功，于是授何进滔魏博节度使。
English: The imperial court was tired of using soldiers, and he could not succeed in his crusade, so he was awarded the Wei Bo Festival Envoy.

古文：八月，廷凑遣使诣阙请罪，朝廷因而赦之；依前检校司徒、成德军节度使。
现代文：八月，王廷凑派使者赴朝请罪，朝廷就此赦免了他，依前授予检校司徒、成德军节度使。
English: In August, the king sent an envoy to the court to plead guilty, and the court pardoned him, awarding him the post of inspector of schools and the post of German military envoy.

古文：镇冀自李宝臣已来，虽惟岳、承宗继叛，而犹亲邻畏法，期自新之路。而凶毒好乱，无君不仁，未如廷凑之甚也！
现代文：镇州、冀州自李宝臣以来，虽然李惟岳、王承宗相继叛乱，但仍然亲近邻州、畏惧王法，期望走悔过自新之路；而凶残毒辣扰乱纲纪、目无君上不讲仁义的人，没有超过王廷凑的。
English: Zhenzhou and Jizhou, since Li Baochen, although Li Weiyue and Wang Chengzong have rebelled one after another, they are still close to neighboring states, fear the king's law, and hope to repent and take a new path; and the ferocious and poisonous people who disrupt the discipline and do not talk about benevolence in the eyes of the king, do not exceed the king's court.

古文：又就加太子太傅、太原郡开国公，食邑二千户。
现代文：又就地加授王廷凑太子太傅、太原郡开国公，食邑二千户。
English: In addition, he was awarded the title of Wang Tingping, Prince Taifu, and the founding father of Taiyuan County, feeding 2,000 households.

古文：八年十一月卒，册赠太尉，累赠至太师。
现代文：大和八年十一月去世，册命追赠太尉，又多次追赠至太师。
English: He died in November of the 8th year of the Yamato era, and was posthumously awarded the title of Taijo (Lieutenant) and Taishi (Grand Master) several times.

