古文：绝嗜禁欲，所以除累。抑非损恶，所以禳过。贬酒阙色，所以无污。
现代文：杜绝不良的嗜好，禁止非分的欲望，这样可以免除各种牵累；抑制不合理的行为，减少邪恶的行径，这样可以避免过失；谢绝酒色侵扰，这样可以不受玷污；
English: Eliminate bad habits, prohibit undivided desires, so that you can get rid of all kinds of entanglement; suppress unreasonable behavior, reduce evil deeds, so that you can avoid mistakes; refuse alcoholic intrusion, so that you can not be tarnished;

古文：避嫌远疑，所以不误。
现代文：回避嫌疑，远离惑乱，这样可以不出错误。
English: Avoid suspicion, stay away from confusion, so you can not make a mistake.

古文：博学切问，所以广知。高行微言，所以修身。
现代文：广泛地学习，仔细地提出各种问题，这样可以丰富自己的知识；行为高尚，辞锋不露，这样可以修养身心、陶冶性情。
English: Study extensively, carefully raise various issues, so that you can enrich your knowledge; behave nobly, keep your mouth shut, so that you can cultivate your mind and body, and cultivate your disposition.

古文：恭俭谦约，所以自守。深计远虑，所以不穷。亲仁友直，所以扶颠。
现代文：肃敬、节俭、谦逊、简约，这样可以守身不辱；深谋远虑，这样可以不至于困危；亲近仁义之士，结交正直之人，这样可以在逆境中得到帮助。
English: Reverence, frugality, humility, simplicity, so you can protect yourself from humiliation; forethought, so you can not be in danger; close to the righteous, honest people, so you can get help in adversity.

古文：近恕笃行，所以接人。
现代文：为人尽量宽容，行为敦厚，这是待人处世之道。
English: Try to be as tolerant as possible and behave with courtesy. This is the best way to treat others.

古文：任材使能，所以济物。殚恶斥谗，所以止乱。
现代文：任才使能，使人人能尽其才，这是用人成事之要领；抑制邪恶，斥退谗佞之徒，这样可以防止动乱。
English: To enable each according to his ability, and every man according to his ability, is the secret of success; to restrain evil, and repel evil-doers, is the secret of preventing disorders.

古文：推古验今，所以不惑。先揆后度，所以应卒。设变致权，所以解结。
现代文：推求往古，验证当今，这样可以不受迷惑；了解事态，心中有数，这样可以应付仓卒事变；采用灵活手法，施展权变之术，这样可以解开纠结。
English: Seek the past, verify the present, so that you can not be confused; understand the state of affairs, have a number in mind, so that you can cope with sudden changes; adopt flexible methods, exercise the power of change, so that you can solve entanglement.

古文：括囊顺会，所以无咎。橛橛梗梗，所以立功。孜孜淑淑，所以保终。
现代文：心中有数，闭口不言，凡事能顺从时机，这样可以远怨无咎；坚定不移，正直刚强，这样才能建功立业；勤勉惕励；心地善良，这样才能善始善终。
English: If you know the answer in your heart, keep your mouth shut, and obey the timing of everything, then you can be free from blame; if you are steadfast, honest and strong, then you can make achievements; if you are diligent and motivated, and if you are kind-hearted, then you can have a good beginning and a good end.

