古文：是时既灭两粤，粤人勇之乃言： 粤人俗鬼，而其祠皆见鬼，数有效。
现代文：这时已消灭了两粤，粤人勇之便说 粤人习俗崇尚鬼神，而且他们祭祀时经常见到鬼，常有效。
English: At this time, the two Yue Dynasties had been eliminated, and the brave Yue Dynasties said that the customs of the Yue Dynasties worshiped ghosts and gods, and they often saw ghosts during sacrifices, which was often effective.

古文：昔东瓯王敬鬼，寿百六十岁。
现代文：以前束瓯王尊敬鬼神，寿命达一百六十岁。
English: In the past, the king of the Eastern Song Dynasty worshipped ghosts and lived to be 160 years old.

古文：后世怠嫚，故衰耗。 ；乃命粤巫立粤祝祠，安台无坛，亦祠天神帝百鬼，而以鸡卜。
现代文：他的后代怠慢鬼神，所以寿命就减少了。 于是就命粤巫建立粤地的祝祠，设立没有坛的台，也祭祀天神、上帝和百鬼，用鸡骨进行占卜。
English: His descendants neglected ghosts and gods, so their life expectancy decreased. Therefore, he ordered the witch to build a ceremonial shrine in Guangdong, set up a table without an altar, and also worshiped gods, gods and hundreds of ghosts, and used chicken bones for divination.

古文：上信之，粤祠鸡卜自此始用。
现代文：皇上对此感到可信，粤祠用鶸骨占卜从造时开始。
English: The emperor felt that this was credible, and the oracle of the Yue ancestral hall began with the time of construction.

古文：公孙卿曰： 仙人可见，上往常遽，以故不见。
现代文：公孙卿说： 仙人是可以见到的，皇上前往得太急迫了，因此没能见到。
English: Gongsun Ching said, "The hermit can be seen, but the emperor was in such a hurry to get there that he couldn't see him.

古文：今陛下可为馆如缑氏城，置脯枣，神人宜可致。
现代文：现在陛下可以像缑氏城一样建立馆，陈设干肉和枣子，应该可以请来神明。
English: Now His Majesty can build a hall like the one in Shushi Castle, display dried meat and dates, and should be able to invite deities.

古文：且仙人好楼居。 
现代文：而且贤人喜欢居住在阁楼。 
English: And the hermit likes to live upstairs.

古文：于是上令长安则作飞廉、桂馆，甘泉则作益寿、延寿馆，使卿持节设具而候神人。
现代文：于是天子令在长安建造飞廉、桂馆，在甘泉宫建造益寿、延寿馆，派公孙卿带着符节布置祭品去迎接神人。
English: As a result, Heaven's Son ordered the construction of the Fei-Lian and Gui-Ren Halls in Chang'an, and the Yixing and Enlonging Life Halls in Ganquan Palace, and sent Gongsun-Qing to meet the godman with offerings arranged according to the rites of the festival.

古文：乃作通天台，置祠具其下，将招来神仙之属。
现代文：建造通天台，在下面陈设祭品，以招来神仙之类。
English: Then, a roof was built, and the sacrificial tools were placed under the stage, ready to be used to summon the immortals.

古文：于是甘泉更置前殿，始广诸宫室。
现代文：于是甘泉宫再建造前殿，开始扩大各宫室。
English: At this time, the vestibule was built in Ganquan Palace, and the expansion of many palace rooms began.

古文：天子为塞河，兴通天，若有光云，乃下诏： 甘泉房中生芝九茎，赦天下，毋令复作。 其明年，伐朝鲜。
现代文：夏天，有芝草生长在甘泉宫的房中。天子因为堵黄河缺口，兴建了通天台，有神光出现，于是天子下诏大赦天下。过了一年，讨伐朝鲜。
English: In the summer, there was shibaso growing in the rooms of Ganquan Palace. The heavenly son, because of the blockage of the Yellow River gap, built a roof, and a divine light appeared, so the heavenly son issued a general amnesty to the world. A year later, he fought against North Korea.

古文：夏，旱。
现代文：夏季，出现大的干旱。
English: Summer, drought.

古文：公孙卿曰： 黄帝时，封则天旱，干封三年。 
现代文：公孙卿说： 黄帝时祭天就天旱，封土干了三年。 
English: Gongsunqing said, "When the Yellow Emperor held a festival, there was a drought, and the land was fenced off for three years.

古文：上乃下诏： 天旱，意干封乎？
现代文：皇上于是下诏： 天旱，是希望封土干燥吗？
English: The emperor then issued the following edict: Due to the drought, do you want the fief land to be dry?

古文：其令天下尊祠灵星焉。 
现代文：大概是令天下恭敬地祭祀灵星。 
English: All the people of the world are hereby commanded to venerate and worship the spirit star.

古文：明年，上郊雍五畤，通回中道，遂北出萧关，历独鹿，鸣泽，自西河归，幸河东祠后土。
现代文：又过了一年，天子郊祀雍城的五峙，打通回中的路，于是便向北出萧关，经过独鹿、鸣泽，从西河回来，到河东祭祀后土。
English: After another year, the five villages in the outskirts of Tianzi suburb, which worshiped Yongcheng, opened the way back to the middle, so they went north out of Shaoguan, passed Doklu and Mingze, came back from the West River, and went to the east of the river to worship the hinterland.

古文：明年冬，上巡南郡，至江陵而东。
现代文：第二年冬天，天子巡视南郡，到江陵后再东行。
English: In the winter of the second year, Tianzi inspected Nan County, and then went east after arriving in Jiangling.

古文：登礼灊之天柱山，号曰南岳。
现代文：登上潜地的天柱山举行祭礼，天柱山号称南岳。
English: They climbed Tianzhu Mountain in Handan County and held a festival. The mountain's name is Nangue.

古文：浮江，自浔阳出枞阳，过彭蠡，礼其名山川。
现代文：乘船沿江而下，从浔阳出了枞阳，经过彭蠡，礼祭那里的名山大川。
English: Take a boat down the river, out of Shenyang from Shenyang, through Penghu, the famous mountain river where the festival is held.

古文：北至琅邪，并海上。
现代文：向北到琅邪，沿海路而上。
English: To travel further north to Xujiahui, take the sea route.

古文：四月，至奉高修封焉。
现代文：四月，到奉高举行祭天仪式。
English: In April, a ceremony was held at Bungo High School to celebrate the day.

古文：初，天子封泰山，泰山东北止古时有明堂处，处险不敞。
现代文：起初，天子在泰山祭天时，泰山东北山脚有一处古时候的明堂，地势险要，并不宽敞。
English: At the beginning of the Tianzi Festival at Mount Tai, there was an ancient Ming Hall at the foot of the northeastern mountain of Mount Tai. The terrain was narrow and not spacious.

古文：上欲治明堂奉高旁，未晓其制度。
现代文：天子打算在奉高旁修建明堂，但不清楚建造明堂的制度。
English: The emperor wanted to build another Myeongdong next to Bonggao-eup, but he did not know what it should look like.

古文：济南人公玉带上黄帝时明堂图。
现代文：济南人公玉带献上黄帝时候的明堂图案。
English: Jinan Jin Gong Yuping presented the Ming Dynasty pattern from the time of the Yellow Emperor.

古文：明堂中有一殿，四面无壁，以茅盖。通水，水圜宫垣。为复道，上有楼，从西南入，名曰昆仑，天子从之入，以拜祀上帝焉。
现代文：明堂中有一殿堂，四周没有墙壁，用茅草盖房，殿堂与水流相通，水流环绕宫墙，建有上下两层通道，上面有楼，从西南方向进入，名叫昆仑，天子从这里进去，祭拜上天。
English: In the Ming Hall, there is a hall without walls on all sides. It is covered with thatch. The hall is connected to the water stream. The water stream surrounds the palace wall. There is a two-storey passage with a building on top. It is entered from the southwest. It is called Kunlun. The heavenly son enters from here and worships the heavens.

古文：于是上令奉高作明堂汶上，如带图。
现代文：于是皇上下令在奉高汶水上建造明堂，跟公玉带所献的图一模一样。
English: As a result, the emperor ordered Bonggao County to build Myeongdong on the hill according to the official map.

古文：及是岁修封，则祠泰一、五帝于明堂上如郊礼。毕，燎堂下。
现代文：天子从昆仑的路进去，开始用郊祭一样的礼仪在明堂祭拜。行礼完后，就在堂下烧柴燎祭。
English: The heavenly son entered from the road of Kunlun and began to worship in the Myeongdong with the same etiquette as the suburb festival. After the service, he burned firewood under the hall.

古文：而上又上泰山，自有秘祠其颠。
现代文：皇上又登上泰山，自己在山顶祭祀。
English: The emperor ascended Mount Tai again and made a sacrifice at the summit.

古文：而泰山下祠五帝，各如其方，黄帝并赤帝所，有司侍祠焉。
现代文：在泰山下面祭祀五帝，按照他们各自的方位，黄帝和赤帝并在一处，有关官员在一边侍候祭祀。
English: At the bottom of Mount Tai, the Five Emperors are sacrificed. According to their respective positions, the Yellow Emperor and the Red Emperor are in one place, and the relevant officials wait for the sacrifice.

古文：山上举火，下悉应之。
现代文：山上举起火把，山下也举火相应。
English: Bonfires were lit on the mountain, and fires were lit everywhere down the mountain.

古文：还幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：回来到达甘泉宫，郊祀泰峙。
English: Came back and arrived at Ganquan Palace, the suburbs were quiet.

古文：春幸汾阴，祠后土。
现代文：春天到汾阴，祭祀后上。
English: In the spring, they go to Suyin, and after the ritual, they go up to Mt.

古文：明年，幸泰山，以十一月甲子朔旦冬至日祀上帝于明堂，毋修封。
现代文：又过了一年，皇帝到泰山，因为十一月甲子初一冬至就在明堂祭祀上天，不进行修建封土。
English: After another year, the emperor went to Mount Tai, because the winter solstice in November at the beginning of the year was held in the Ming Hall, and the construction of the fief was not carried out.

古文：其赞飨曰： 天增援皇帝泰元神策，周而复始。
现代文：有赞辞说： 上天增授给皇帝泰元神策，周而复始。
English: There is a praise saying: Heaven has bestowed upon the emperor the divine policy of Taiyuan, and it has been repeated.

古文：皇帝敬拜泰一。 
现代文：皇帝虔诚地祭祀泰一。 
English: The emperor respectfully bowed to Hsieh.

古文：东至海上，考入海及方士求神者，莫验，然益遣，几遇之。
现代文：束到海上，考察入海的人和访求神仙的方士，都没有得到印证，但仍增派人员，希望能够遇到神仙。
English: The people who went to the sea to investigate the sea and the magicians who visited the gods did not get confirmation, but they still sent additional personnel in the hope of encountering the gods.

古文：乙酉，柏梁灾。
现代文：乙酉，柏梁发生火灾。
English: A fire broke out in the acetylene furnace.

古文：十二月甲午朔，上亲禅高里，祠后土。
现代文：十二月甲午初一，皇上亲自到高里祭土，祭祀后土。
English: On the first day of the first day of the first month of December, the emperor himself went to the Goli Zen Festival to offer sacrifices.

古文：临勃海，将以望祀蓬莱之属，几至殊庭焉。
现代文：光临勃海，将望祀蓬莱等地，希望到殊庭那裹去。
English: If you come to Bohai, you will want to visit Penglai and other places, and hope to go to Shuyuan.

古文：上还，以柏梁灾故，受计甘泉。
现代文：皇上回来后，因为柏梁遭受火灾的缘故，在甘泉宫接受郡国所上的计簿。
English: After the emperor's return, because of the fire suffered by Bai Liang, he received the county government's accounting book at Gansu Palace.

古文：公孙卿曰： 黄帝就青灵台，十二日烧，黄帝乃治明庭。
现代文：公孙卿说道： 黄帝建成青灵台后，过了十二天就被烧了，黄帝于是又建造明庭。
English: Gongsunqing said: The Yellow Emperor built the Qinglingdai, which was burned for twelve days. The Yellow Emperor also built the Mingyuan.

古文：明庭，甘泉也。 
现代文：明庭，就是甘泉宫。 
English: The Ming Court is now the Gansu Palace.

古文：方士多言古帝王有都甘泉者。
现代文：方士大多说古代帝王有建都甘泉的。
English: Most scholars say that in ancient times, emperors built their capitals in Ganquan.

古文：其后天子又朝诸侯甘泉，甘泉作诸侯邸。
现代文：至此以后天子又在甘泉接受诸侯朝见，甘泉就作为诸侯的官舍。
English: After that, the emperor received the princes in the morning at the Gansu Palace, and built the official residence of the princes at the Gansu Palace.

古文：勇之乃曰： 粤俗有火灾，复起屋，必以大，用胜服之。 
现代文：勇之便说道： 粤地风俗是遇到火灾，重新盖房子，盖的房子一定要比原来的大，这是用大的规模来制服火灾。 
English: Yong Zhi then said: The custom in Guangdong is that when there is a fire, the house must be rebuilt, and the rebuilt house must be larger than the original. This is to use a large scale to subdue the fire.

古文：于是作建章宫，度为千门万户。
现代文：于是建造建章宫，计划建成千门万户。
English: As a result, Jianzhang Palace was built, thousands of doors were designed, and the height of the vestibule exceeded that of Weiyang Palace.

古文：前殿度高未央。
现代文：前殿的高度预计高于未央宫。
English: The front hall is even taller than Miang Palace.

古文：其东则凤阙，高二十余丈。
现代文：它的束面为凤阙，有二十多丈高。
English: Its bundled surface is phoenix silk, and it is more than 20 meters high.

古文：其西则商中，数十里虎圈。
现代文：西面是商中，建了几十里的虎圈。
English: To the west is Shangzhong, a tiger enclosure that stretches for dozens of miles.

古文：其北治大池，渐台高二十余丈，名曰泰液，池中有蓬莱、方丈、瀛州、壶梁，象海中神山、龟、鱼之属。
现代文：在北面建有一个大池，渐台有二十多丈高，名叫泰液，池中建有蓬莱、方丈、瀛州、壶梁，像海中的神山龟鱼一样。
English: In the north, there is a large pond with a cascading platform more than 20 meters high, called Taiye, in which there are Penglai, Abbot, Zhangzhou, and Huliang, like the Kamiyama turtle fish in the sea.

古文：其南有玉堂璧门大鸟之属。
现代文：南面建有玉堂璧门大鸟之类。
English: To the south, there is Gyokudo Bi Gate, Big Bird, and the like.

古文：立神明台、井干楼，高五十丈，辇道相属焉。
现代文：建立神明台、井干楼，高五十丈，辇道相互连接。
English: Shenming Tower and Jinggan Tower will be built, with a height of 50 meters, and will be connected to each other by a causeway.

古文：夏，汉改历，以正月为岁首，而色上黄，官更印章以五字，因为太初元年。
现代文：夏天，汉朝修改历法，以正月作为一年的开头，颜色以黄色为贵，刻着官名的印章改为五个字，规定当年为太初元年。
English: In the summer, the Han Dynasty revised the calendar, with the first month as the beginning of the year, the color yellow as precious, and the seal engraved with the official name changed to five characters, stipulating that the year was the first year of the year.

古文：是岁，西伐大宛。蝗大起。
现代文：这一年，汉朝军队向西攻打大宛，蝗灾大规模发生。
English: In this year, the Han Dynasty army attacked Dawan to the west, and a large-scale locust plague occurred.

古文：丁夫人、雒阳虞初等以方祠诅匈奴、大宛焉。
现代文：丁夫人、雏踢的虞翅等人用方术祭祀来诅咒匈奴、大宛。
English: Mrs. Ding, Shanyang Yuchu and others used prayer to curse the Xiongnu and Dawan.

古文：明年，有司言雍五畤无牢孰具，芬芳不备。
现代文：过了一年，有关官员说雍地的五时没有烹熟的祭品，芳香不够。
English: A year later, the officials concerned said that there was no cooked offering at the five o'clock of the Yongdi, and the fragrance was not enough.

古文：乃令祠官进畤犊牢具，色食所胜，而以木寓马代驹云。
现代文：于是就令祠官发给五峙煮牺牲的器具，颜色按照五行相胜配置，而用木偶马代替驹。
English: Therefore, he ordered the ancestral hall official to give the five-faced boiled sacrificial utensils, the colors were arranged according to the five elements, and the puppet horse was used instead of the yakitori.

古文：及诸名山川用驹者，悉以木寓马代。
现代文：所有名山大川用驹的，都用木偶马代替。
English: All the statues of famous mountains and rivers have been replaced with puppet horses.

古文：独行过亲祠，乃用驹，它礼如故。
现代文：衹有皇上经过时亲自祭祀，才用驹，其他祭礼依旧。
English: Only when the emperor passed by did he personally perform the ritual, and only then was the yakitori used. The other rituals remained the same.

古文：明年，东巡海上，考神仙之属，未有验者。
现代文：又过了一年，天子向东巡视海上，考察神仙之类的人，没有得到灵验。
English: After another year, the heavenly son went to the east to inspect the sea and investigate the gods and other people, but he did not succeed.

古文：方士有言：黄帝时为五城十二楼，以候神人于执期，名曰迎年。
现代文：方士中有人说黄帝时候建造过五城十二楼，以在执期迎候神人，名叫迎年。
English: Some of the Fang scholars said that the Yellow Emperor once built the 12th floor of the Five Cities to welcome the gods and goddesses during the performance period, which was called the New Year.

古文：上许作之如方，名曰明年。
现代文：皇上同意按照所说样式建造五城十二楼，名叫明年。
English: The emperor gave his permission for the construction to go ahead as he had said, saying that it would take place the following year.

古文：上亲礼祠，上犊黄焉。
现代文：皇上亲自去祭祀，所献的小牛是黄色的。
English: The emperor himself went to the sacrifice, and the calf he offered was yellow.

古文：公玉带曰： 黄帝时虽封泰山，然风后、封巨、岐伯令黄帝封东泰山，禅凡山，合符，然后不死。 
现代文：公玉带说： 黄帝时虽然封过泰山，但风后、封钜、岐伯命黄帝到束泰山祭天，到凡山祭地，与符瑞相合，就会不死。 
English: Princess Jade Belt said: Although the Yellow Emperor once sealed Mount Tai, but the wind, the seal, and the Qibao ordered the Yellow Emperor to go to the Shoktaishan Festival, to the Fanshan Festival, and to coincide with the Fu Rui, he would not die.

古文：天子既令设祠具，至东泰山，东泰山卑小，不称其声，乃令祠官礼之而不封焉。
现代文：天子已经命令设置祭具，到束泰山，东泰山矮小，名不符实，就命祠宫祭祀，不再此筑坛。
English: The Son of Heaven has ordered the setting up of sacrificial tools, to the Shokutai Mountain, the East Mount Tai is small, the name is not true, it is ordered to sacrifice the ancestral hall, and no longer build this altar.

古文：其后令带奉祠候神物。
现代文：之后有命公玉带奉祠迎候神物。
English: Later, he ordered the imperial eunuchs to offer sacrifices there and wait for the gods to appear.

古文：复还泰山，修五年之礼如前，而加禅祠石闾。
现代文：重新回到泰山，像五年前一样行礼，增加在石间祭地。
English: Returning to Mount Tai, they bowed as they did five years ago, adding to the sacred space between the stones.

古文：石闾者，在泰山下止南方，方士言仙人闾也，故上亲禅焉。
现代文：石板，在泰山脚下南面，方士说是仙人的故居，所以皇上亲自去祭地。
English: Stone plate, at the foot of Mount Tai in the south, the monks said that it was the former residence of the immortals, so the emperor went to the festival site in person.

古文：其后五年，夏至泰山修封，还过祭恒山。
现代文：遣以后过了五年，天子重到泰山修整封土，回途中路过恒山加以祭祀。
English: Five years later, the emperor returned to Mount Tai to repair the soil, and on his way back, he passed by Mount Hengshan to offer sacrifices.

古文：自封泰山后，十三岁而周遍于五岳、四渎矣。
现代文：从在泰山祭天后，十三年五岳、四渎全都祭祀了一遍。
English: From the day after the Taishan Festival, in the 13th year, the Five Sacred Mountains and the Four Sacred Ruins were all sacrificed once.

古文：后五年，复至泰山修封。
现代文：又过了五年，重新到泰山修整封土。
English: After another five years, he returned to Mount Taishan to repair the soil.

古文：东幸琅邪，礼日成山，登之罘，浮大海，用事八神延年。
现代文：东到琅邪，在成山祭仙，登上之罘，漂浮于大海，在延年祭祀八神。
English: In the east, they go to the evil spirits, in the mountains, they worship the immortals, on the rafts, floating in the sea, and in the long years, they worship the eight gods.

古文：又祠神人于交门宫，若有乡坐拜者云。
现代文：又在交门宫祭祀神人，好像有神人向祠堂相坐而拜。
English: In addition, a godman is being worshipped in the Jiaomen Palace, as if there are godmen sitting together in the ancestral hall and worshiping.

古文：后五年，上复修封于泰山。
现代文：又过了五年，皇上重在泰山修整封土。
English: After another five years, the emperor returned to Mount Taishan to repair the fief.

古文：东游东莱，临大海。
现代文：东游东莱，到达大海边上。
English: Eastbound Donglai, arriving at the edge of the sea.

古文：是岁，雍县无云如雷者三，或如虹气苍黄，若飞鸟集木或阳宫南，声闻四百里。
现代文：造一年，雍县没有乌云但好像有三次雷声，有的像彩虹，呈苍黄色，好像飞鸟聚集在械阳宫南面，声音震动四百里开外。
English: For a whole year, there were no dark clouds in Yong County, but there seemed to be three thunderclaps, some like rainbows, pale yellow in color, as if flying birds were gathering to the south of the Jianyang Palace, the sound vibrating four hundred miles away.

古文：陨石二，黑如黳，有司有以为美祥，以荐宗庙。
现代文：有二块陨石，颜色黑如鲎，有关官员以为吉祥，就把它献给宗庙。
English: There are two pieces of meteorite, the color of which is as black as pitch. The relevant officials thought it was auspicious and dedicated it to the ancestral temple.

古文：而方士之候神入海求蓬莱者终无验，公孙卿犹以大人之迹为解。
现代文：但入海访求蓬莱和迎候神仙的方士始终没有应验，公孙卿仍然用巨人的足迹作为辞说。
English: However, the fortune-teller who went to the sea to visit Penglai and welcome the immortal has never been fulfilled, and Gongsunqing still uses the footprints of the giant as a speech.

古文：天子犹羁縻不绝，几遇其真。
现代文：天子仍不断留恋于此，希望遇到真正的神人。
English: Tenshi still yearns for this place, hoping to meet a true godman.

古文：诸所兴，如薄忌泰一及三一、冥羊、马行、赤星，五。
现代文：各种新建的祭所，都如薄忌的泰一以及三一、冥羊、马行、赤星一样，共五处。
English: There are a total of five newly built shrines, just like the temples of Taiyi and Sanyi, Hiyang, Ma Xing, and Chuxing.

古文：宽舒之祠官以岁时致礼。
现代文：宽舒的祠官，按一年四季进行祭祀。
English: The ancestral priest of Kanshu performs the ritual according to the four seasons of the year.

古文：凡六祠，皆大祝领之。
现代文：共有六座祠堂，都由大祝掌管。
English: There are a total of six ancestral halls, all of which are managed by Dai Zhu.

古文：至如八神，诸明年、凡山它名祠，行过则祠，去则已。
现代文：至于像八神，各明年、凡山等其他名祠，经过时就祭祀，离开就停止了。
English: As for other famous shrines, such as the Eight Immortals, Guzheng, and Wanshan, when they pass by, they offer sacrifices, and when they leave, they stop.

古文：方士所兴祠，各自主，其人终则已，祠官不主。
现代文：方士所建造的祠堂，由他们自己主管，人死了也就停止祭祀了，祠官不管。
English: The ancestral temples proposed by the founders are presided over by the proponents. If the person dies, the ancestral temple is abandoned, and there is no involvement of the ancestral officials.

古文：它祠皆如故。
现代文：其他的祠都同以前一样。
English: The other shrines are the same as before.

古文：甘泉泰一、汾阴后土，三年亲郊祠，而泰山五年一修封。
现代文：甘泉宫的泰一、汾阴的后土，天子三年亲自郊祭一次，而泰山每五年修整封土一次。
English: The Taizh of Ganquan Palace and the hinterland of Jinyin, the heavenly son himself holds a suburb festival once every three years, and Mount Taisun is repaired and sealed once every five years.

古文：武帝凡五修封。
现代文：武帝时一共修整封土五次。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wu, the soil of the fief was repaired a total of five times.

古文：昭帝即位，富于春秋，未尝亲巡祭云。
现代文：昭帝即帝位，尚且年轻，不曾亲自巡行祭祀。
English: Emperor Zhao was still young when he ascended the throne, and he did not personally lead the procession.

古文：宣帝即位，由武帝正统兴，故立三年，尊孝武庙为世宗，行所巡狩郡国皆立庙。
现代文：宣帝即帝位，因为是由武帝的正统继位的，所以即位三年后，就尊孝武庙为世宗，到他所巡视的郡国都建世宗庙。
English: Emperor Xuan is the imperial throne, because he is the legitimate successor of Emperor Wu. Therefore, three years after he ascended the throne, he revered Emperor Wu's temple as the world's patriarch, and built the world's patriarchal temple in every county he visited.

古文：告祠世宗庙日，有白鹤集后庭。
现代文：告祀世宗庙的那天，有白鹤集中到后庭。
English: On the day of the dedication of Sejong-ji Temple, white cranes gathered in the backyard.

古文：以立世宗庙告祠孝昭寝，有雁五色集殿前。
现代文：在建世宗庙而告祭孝昭的寝陵时，有五色雁集中在殿前。
English: Five-colored geese were concentrated in front of the hall when the mausoleum of Takaaki, the founder of the world's first temple, was dedicated.

古文：西河筑世宗庙，神光兴于殿旁，有鸟如白鹤，前赤后青。
现代文：在西河建筑世宗庙，有神光在殿旁出现，有一只像白鹤的乌，前面是赤色，后面是青色。
English: In the Sejong Temple built in the West River, a divine light appeared next to the hall. There was an owl like a white crane, red in the front and blue in the back.

古文：神光又兴于房中，如烛状。
现代文：神光又在房中出现，像烛光形状。
English: The divine light reappears in the room, in the shape of a candle.

古文：广川国世宗庙殿上有钟音，门户大开，夜有光，殿上尽明。
现代文：广川国的世宗庙殿上有钟声，门户大开，夜晚有光辉，殿上全亮堂堂的。
English: There are bells on the hall of the Sejong Temple in Guangchuan, the gate is wide open, the night is bright, and the hall is bright.

古文：上乃下诏赦天下。
现代文：天子便下韶大赦天下。
English: The Son of Heaven then bestowed a great amnesty on the world.

古文：时，大将军霍光辅政，上共己正南面，非宗庙之祀不出。
现代文：当时，大将军霍光辅佐朝政，皇上恭敬地呆坐在宝座上，不是宗庙祭祀不出去。
English: At that time, the great general Ho Kwang-soo was in charge of the government, and the emperor respectfully sat on the throne, but did not go out for the family temple's rituals.

古文：十二年，乃下诏曰： 盖闻天子尊事天地，修祀山川，古今通礼也。
现代文：十二年，便下诏说： 曾听说天子虔诚地事奉天地，祭祀山川，是古今的通礼。
English: In the twelfth year, he issued an edict saying, "I have heard that the heavenly son piously serves heaven and earth, and offers sacrifices to mountains and rivers. This is a common ritual from ancient to modern times.

古文：间者，上帝之祠阙而不亲十有余年，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：以前，不亲自祭祀上天的庙宇已十多年了，朕很害怕。
English: Before, I hadn't personally offered sacrifices to the heavenly temple for more than ten years. I was very afraid.

古文：朕亲饬躬齐戒，亲泰祀，为百姓蒙嘉气、获丰年焉。 
现代文：朕决定亲自带头斋戒，亲自去祭祀，为百姓祈求瑞气，以得到丰年。 
English: I decided to personally take the lead in fasting, personally go to the sacrificial rites, and pray for the people to have a prosperous year.

古文：明年正月，上始幸甘泉，郊见泰畤，数有美祥。
现代文：第二年正月，皇上才到甘泉宫，郊祀垄歧，几次出现吉兆。
English: In the first month of the second year, the emperor only came to Ganquan Palace, and the suburb had religious disputes, and there were several auspicious signs.

古文：修武帝故事，盛车服，敬齐祠之礼，颇作诗歌。
现代文：仿效亘适时的先例，车和章服兴盛，恭敬地行斋祠时的礼节，写了很多诗歌。
English: Imitating the time-honored precedents, chariots and uniforms flourished, the etiquette of respectfully going to the ancestral shrine, and many poems were written.

古文：其三月，幸河东，祠后土，有神爵集，改元为神爵。
现代文：这年三月，亲临迥塞，祭祀后土，有神爵聚集，便改元为塑爵。
English: In March of the same year, when a group of shinjaku gathered to make a sacrifice to the deities in the precincts of the temple, the name of the temple was changed to Shokaku.

古文：制诏太常： 夫江海，百川之大者也，今阙焉无祠。
现代文：下诏给太常说： 垦丝和大海，是百川中最大的，现在没有人去祭祀。
English: He issued the following edict to Taizang: The reed and the sea are the largest rivers in the world, and no one goes to make offerings to them now.

古文：其令祠官以礼为岁事，以四时祠江海雒水，祈为天下丰年焉。 
现代文：现令祠官把祭礼作为每年的事情，在四季祭祀长江、大海、雒水，为天下祈求丰年。 
English: The officials of the ancestral hall are now ordered to make the festival an annual event, and to offer sacrifices to the Yangtze River, the sea, and Surabaya in the four seasons, and to pray for a prosperous year for the world.

古文：自是五岳、四渎皆有常礼。
现代文：从此五岳、四渎都经常得到祭祀。
English: Since then, the Five Mountains and the Four Deities have been regularly worshipped.

古文：东岳泰山于博，中岳泰室于嵩高，南岳灊山于用腄，西岳华山于华阴，北岳常山于上曲阳，河于临晋，江于江都，淮于平氏，济于临邑界中，皆使者持节侍祠。
现代文：束岳泰山在博地祭祀，中岳泰室在嵩山祭祀，南岳滞山在潜地祭祀，西岳华山在华阴祭祀，北岳常山在上曲阳祭祀，黄河在临晋祭祀，长江在江都祭祀，淮水在平氏祭祀，济水在临邑境内祭祀，都由使者持着符节主持祭祀。
English: Mt. Sokudake Taishan is worshipped in Bochi, Mt. Nakadake Taishitsu is worshipped in Songshan, Mt. Nangakudake Yasuzan is worshipped in Shidaka, Mt. Seigakudake Hwasan is worshipped in Huayin, Mt. Beidakuchozan is worshipped in Shangchuyang, the Yellow River is worshipped in Linjin, the Yangtze River is worshipped in Jiangdu, the Huai River is worshipped in Pingshi, and the Jishui River is worshipped in Lin'e. All of these rituals are presided over by messengers holding symbols.

古文：唯泰山与河岁五祠，江水四，余皆一祷而三祠云。
现代文：衹有泰山与黄河一年五祠，江水四祠，其余都祈祷一次，祭祀三次。
English: Mount Tai and the Yellow River have five ancestral temples in a year, and the river has four ancestral temples. The rest are prayed once and sacrificed three times.

古文：时，南郡获白虎，献其皮、牙、爪，上为立祠。
现代文：当时，南郡捕获到白虎，把皮、牙、爪献给朝廷，皇上就用它们来建立祠庙。
English: At that time, Nan County captured a white tiger and presented its skin, teeth and claws to the imperial court. The emperor used them to build an ancestral temple.

古文：又以方士言，为随侯、剑宝、玉宝璧、周康宝鼎立四祠于未央宫中。
现代文：又根据方士的建议，为随侯、剑宝、玉宝璧、周康宝鼎在未央宫建立四座祠堂。
English: In addition, according to the suggestions of the priests, four ancestral halls were built in the Weiyang Palace for Zhu Hou, Jian Bao, Jade Bao Bi and Zhou Kang Baoding.

古文：又祠太室山于即墨，三户山于下密，祠天封苑火井于鸿门。
现代文：又在即墨祭太室山，在下密祭祀三户山，在鸿门祭祀天封苑火井。
English: In addition, Taimuroyama in the Jokubo Festival, Mitoyama in the Shimo-mitsu Festival, and Tenshu-en Hii in the Honmon Festival.

古文：又立岁星、辰星、太白、荧惑、南斗祠于长安城旁。
现代文：又在长安城旁建立木星、辰星、金星、火星、南斗祠。
English: In addition, the shrines of Jupiter, the Hour Star, Venus, Mars and the Southern Cross were built next to Chang'an City.

古文：又祠参山八神于曲城，蓬山石杜、石鼓于临朐，之罘山于腄，成山于不夜，莱山于黄。
现代文：又在曲城祭祀参山和八神，在临朐祭祀蓬山的石社石鼓，在肿祭祀之罘山，在不夜祭祀成山，在黄祭祀莱山。
English: In addition, Sangshan and the Eight Gods are worshipped in Qucheng, the stone drum of the stone shrine of Pengshan is worshipped in Linyi, the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone shrine of Pengshan is worshipped in Wu, the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum of the stone drum

古文：成山祠日，莱山祠月。
现代文：在成山祭曰，在莱山祭月。
English: In the Chengshan Festival, in the Lai Mountain Festival.

古文：又祠四时于琅邪，蚩尤于寿良。
现代文：又在琅邪祭祀四季，在寿良祭祀蚩尤。
English: In addition, the four seasons are worshipped in the Zhaoyuan Festival, and the four seasons are worshipped in the Shouliang Festival.

古文：京师近县，鄠则有劳谷、五床山、日、月、五帝、仙人、玉女祠；云阳有径路神祠，祭休屠王也。
现代文：京城的近县鄂，则有劳谷、五牀山、日月、五帝、价人、玉女祠。云阳有径路神祠，用来祭休屠王。
English: In the county of E, which is near the capital, there are the ancestral shrines of the Valley of Labour, Mount Wuyi, the Sun and the Moon, the Five Emperors, the Valued Person, and the Jade Maiden. Yunyang has the Pathway Shrine, which is used to worship King Xiutuo.

古文：又立五龙山仙人祠及黄帝、天神帝、原水凡四祠于肤施。
现代文：又在肤施建立五龙山的价人祠以及黄帝、天神、帝原水共四座祠庙。
English: In addition, the Guanzhenshi of Wulong Mountain and a total of four ancestral temples of Huangdi, Tenjin and Diyuanshui were built in Guanshi.

古文：或言益州有金马、碧鸡之神，可醮祭而致，于是谴谏大夫王褒使持节而求之。
现代文：有人说益州有金马、碧鸡神，可用祭祀招来，于是派遣谏大夫王裹持着符节去求神。
English: Some people said that there were golden horses and chicken gods in Yizhou that could be summoned with sacrifices, so they sent Dr. Zou Wang to go and pray to the gods while holding the talisman.

古文：大夫刘更生献淮南枕中洪宝、苑秘之方，令尚方铸作。
现代文：大夫刘更生把淮南枕中的大宝秘苑的方术献给皇上，皇上命尚方铸造。
English: Liu Zengsheng, a doctor, dedicated the Fang Art of the Great Treasure Secret Garden in Huainan Pillow to the emperor. The emperor ordered Shang Fang to cast it.

古文：事不验，更生坐论。
现代文：事情不灵验，刘更生被判刑。
English: The case did not go to trial, and Liu Gensheng was sentenced.

古文：京兆尹张敞上疏谏门： 愿明主时忘车马之好，斥远方士之虚语，游心帝王之术，太平庶几可兴也。 
现代文：京兆尹张敞上疏谏道： 希望明主时刻不要惦记车马的娱乐，排斥远方方士的不实之词，潜心于帝王的道术，太平之治差不多就能达到了。 
English: Jing Zhaoyin Zhang Zhan Shang Shuxuan Dao: I hope that the Ming master will not think about the entertainment of chariots and horses at all times, reject the untrue words of distant magicians, concentrate on the emperor's Taoism, and the rule of peace can almost be achieved.

古文：后尚方待诏皆罢。
现代文：以后尚方、待诏官都被撤销。
English: Since then, both the post of Shangfang and the post of Zhidao have been abolished.

古文：是时，美阳得鼎，献之。
现代文：这时，有人在美阳得到一只鼎，就把它献给皇上。
English: At this time, someone in Miyang got a tripod and dedicated it to the emperor.

古文：下有司议，多以为宜荐见宗庙，如元鼎时故事。
现代文：皇上就把这件事交给有关官员讨论，大多认为应把它进献到宗庙，就像元鼎时的情况一样。
English: The emperor brought the matter to the relevant officials for discussion, and most of them believed that it should be presented to the ancestral temple, as was the case in the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：张敞好古文字，桉鼎铭勒而上议曰： 臣闻周祖始乎后稷，后稷封于斄，公刘发迹于豳，大王建国于支阝、梁，文、武兴于丰、镐。
现代文：张敞喜好古文字，考察鼎上的铭刻后把自己的意见报告给皇上说： 臣听说周朝的祖先开始于后稷，后稷受封于牦，公刘在豳地创业，大王在郊梁建国，文武在酆镝兴起。
English: Zhang Zhan liked ancient characters, and after examining the inscriptions on the crown, he reported his opinion to the emperor, saying: "The minister heard that the ancestors of the Zhou Dynasty began in Houyi, Houyi was crowned in Handan, Gu Liu started a business in Handan, the Great King founded the country in the suburbs of Liang, and the rise of literature and martial arts in Handan.

古文：由此言之，则支阝、梁、丰、镐之间周旧居也，固宜有宗庙、坛场祭祀之臧。
现代文：从这方面来说，那么郊梁丰镐之间是周朝的旧居，本来应该有宗庙坛场祭祀的遗迹的。
English: From this point of view, then, the former residence of the Zhou Dynasty is between the suburbs Liang Fengyu, and there should have been the remains of the temple altar.

古文：今鼎出于支阝东，中有刻书曰：王命尸臣 官此栒邑，赐尔旂鸾、黼黻、雕戈。 
现代文：现在鼎出现在郯梁的束面，中间刻有铭文： 王命令主事的大臣： 管理枸邑，赐给你旌旗、鸾车、黼黻、雕戈。 
English: Now the crown appears on the surface of the bundle of beams, with an inscription in the middle: The king commands the minister in charge: Manage the county, give you the flag, the carriage, the shield, and the eagle.

古文：尸臣拜手稽首曰： 敢对扬天子丕显休命。 臣愚不足以迹古文，窃以传记言之，此鼎殆周之所以褒赐大臣，大臣子孙刻铭其先功，臧之于宫庙也。
现代文：主事的大臣跪拜说道： 我一定尽力为天子弘扬圣明和美善的命令。 ，臣愚昧不足以寻找古文的文迹，但衹从传记上所说的来看，这只鼎大概是周朝用来褒奖大臣，大臣的子孙在鼎上铭刻他们祖先的功绩，藏在宫庙中的。
English: The minister in charge knelt down and said, "I will do my best to promote the holy and good order of the heavenly son.", The minister's ignorance is not enough to find ancient texts, but judging from what is said in the biography, this tripod was probably used by the Zhou Dynasty to praise the minister. The minister's descendants inscribed the exploits of their ancestors on the tripod and hid it in the palace temple.

古文：昔宝鼎之出于汾脽也，河东太守以闻，诏曰： 朕巡祭后土，祈为百姓蒙丰年，今谷口兼未报，鼎焉为出哉？ 
现代文：以前实鼎出现在汾阴的山丘上，河东太守报告了天子，天子下诏说： 朕巡祭后土，为百姓祈求丰年，现在谷物不丰，没有报应，鼎的出现是为了什么呢？ 
English: In the past, the real Ding appeared on the hills of Jinyin. The governor of Hedong reported to the heavenly son. The heavenly son said, "I went to the land after the festival to pray for a prosperous year for the people. Now the grain is not abundant and there is no reward. What is the reason for Ding's appearance?

古文：博问耆老，意旧藏与，诚欲考得事实也。
现代文：广泛询问老人，是不是以前就藏在这裹呢？确实想考察它的真实情况。
English: I asked the old man if he had been hiding here before. I really wanted to see what it was like.

古文：有司验脽上非旧臧处，鼎大八尺一寸，高三尺六寸，殊异于众鼎。
现代文：有关官员检验山丘上并不是旧藏的地方，鼎大八尺一寸，高三尺六寸，同众鼎大不相同。
English: Officials inspected the hill, which is not the place of the old collection, and found that the pendant is eight feet one inch large and three feet six inches high, which is very different from other pendants.

古文：今此鼎细小，又有款识，不宜荐见于宗庙。 
现代文：现在这只鼎细小，又有刻记，不宜进献宗庙。 
English: Now, this is a small trinket, and it is inscribed, and it is not appropriate to present it to the ancestral temple.

古文：制曰： 京兆尹议是。 
现代文：皇帝批道： 京兆尹的建议是对的。 
English: The emperor criticized: Jing Zhaoyun's suggestion is right.

古文：上自幸河东之明年正月，凤凰集礻殳祤，于所集处得玉宝，起步寿宫，乃下诏赦天下。
现代文：皇上到河东的第二年正月，凤凰飞集于投栩，在它们所集中的地方得到了玉宝，建造步寿宫，于是下诏赦免天下。
English: In the first month of the second year of the emperor's stay in Hedong, the phoenixes gathered in Toutou. In the place where they gathered, they obtained precious stones and built the Buzhou Palace. Therefore, the emperor issued an edict to pardon the whole world.

古文：后间岁，凤凰、神爵、甘露降集京师，赦天下。
现代文：后来隔了一年，凤凰、神爵、甘露降集京城，又赦免天下。
English: Later, after a year had passed, Fenghuang, Jingjie, and Kanlu returned to Beijing and were pardoned.

古文：其冬，凤凰集上林，乃作凤凰殿，以答嘉瑞。
现代文：这年冬，有凤凰飞集于上林，于是建造凤皇殿，用来回应瑞兆。
English: This winter, some phoenixes gathered in Shanglin, so the phoenix emperor hall was built to respond to Ruizhao.

古文：明年正月复幸甘泉，郊泰畤，改元曰五凤。
现代文：第二年正月，重新到甘泉宫，郊祀泰峙，改元为五凤。
English: In the first month of the second year, he returned to Ganquan Palace, and the suburb was renamed Taijiao, and the original name was changed to Wufeng.

古文：明年，幸雍祠五畤。
现代文：过了一年，到雍城祭祀五峙。
English: A year later, he went to Yongcheng to perform the five-faced ritual.

古文：其明年春，幸河东，祠后土，赦天下。
现代文：第二年春天，到河东，祭祀后土，赦免天下。
English: In the spring of the following year, he went to Hedong to offer sacrifices to Hou Tu and grant amnesty to the world.

古文：后间岁，改元为甘露。
现代文：隔了一年，改元为甘露。
English: A year later, the name was changed to Kamloops.

古文：正月，上幸甘泉，郊泰畤。
现代文：正月，皇上到甘泉，郊祀泰峙。
English: In the first month of the year, the emperor went to Ganquan, and the suburb was in an uproar.

古文：其夏，黄龙见新丰。
现代文：这年夏天，有黄龙出现在新丰。
English: This summer, a yellow dragon appeared in Xinfeng.

古文：建章、未央、长乐宫钟虚铜人皆生长，长一寸所，时以为美祥。
现代文：建章、未央、长乐宫悬挂钟的木架上和铜人都长出毛，长一寸多，当时认为吉祥。
English: Jianzhang, Weiyang, the wooden frame of the clock hanging in Changle Palace and the bronze man all grew hair, more than an inch long, which was considered auspicious at the time.

古文：后间岁正月，上郊泰畤，因朝单于于甘泉宫。
现代文：后来隔了一年的正月。皇上郊祭泰时，顺便在甘泉宫接见单于的朝见。
English: A year later, in the first month of the new year, when the emperor was in the suburbs celebrating the festival of Taisho, he happened to see Shanyu's imperial audience at Gansu Palace.

古文：后间岁，改元为黄龙。
现代文：后来又隔了一年，改元为黄龙。
English: Later, after another year, the name was changed to Huanglong.

古文：正月，复幸甘泉，郊泰畤，又朝单于于甘泉宫。
现代文：正月，重新到甘泉宫，郊祀泰峙，又在甘泉宫接见单于的朝见。
English: In the first month of the year, he went to Ganquan Palace again, held a solemn meeting in the suburb, and received the morning meeting of Shan Yu in Ganquan Palace.

古文：至冬而崩。
现代文：到冬天皇上去世。
English: He died in the reign of Emperor Fuyu.

古文：凤凰下郡国凡五十余所。
现代文：凤凰降到郡国的共有五十多处。
English: There are more than fifty phoenixes in the county.

古文：元帝即位，遵旧仪，间岁正月，一幸甘泉郊泰畤，又东至河东祠后土，西至雍祠五畤。
现代文：元帝即帝位，遵照旧有的礼仪，每隔一年的正月，到甘泉宫郊祀泰峙一次，又束到河东祭祀后土，西到雍城祭祀五峙。
English: According to the ancient etiquette, Emperor Yuan, i.e. the imperial throne, went to the outskirts of Ganquan Palace once every other New Year's Day, and also went to the eastern part of Hebei Province to offer sacrifices, and to the western part of Yongcheng Province to offer sacrifices five times.

古文：凡五奉泰畤、后土之祠。
现代文：共五次供给泰时、后土的祭祀。
English: A total of five offerings were made to the deities of Taishi and Houdo.

古文：亦施恩泽，时所过毋出田租，赐百户牛、酒，或赐爵，赦罪人。
现代文：也施予恩泽，有时所经过的地方不用交纳田租，赐给一百户的牛和酒，有的赐给爵位。赦免罪人。
English: He also bestowed favors. Sometimes he did not have to pay land rent to the places he passed through. He gave cattle and wine to a hundred families, and some were given titles of nobility. He forgave sinners.

古文：元帝好儒，贡禹、韦玄成、匡衡等相继为公卿。
现代文：元帝喜欢儒术，贡禹、韦玄成、匡衡等人相继为公卿。
English: Emperor Yuan liked Confucianism, and Gong Yu, Wei Xuancheng, Kuang Heng and others successively became court nobles.

古文：禹建言汉家宗庙祭祀多不应古礼，上是其言。
现代文：贡禹建议说漠家宗庙祭祀大多与古礼不合，皇上赞成他的意见。
English: The emperor agreed with Gong Yu's suggestion that most of the rituals at the ancestral temple of the Mo family were not in accordance with the ancient rites.

古文：后韦玄成为丞相，议罢郡国庙，自太上皇、孝惠诸园寝庙皆罢。
现代文：后来韦玄成为丞相，建议撤销郡国庙，从太上皇到孝惠帝各园寝庙的祭祀都废除。
English: Later, Wei Xuan became the prime minister and proposed to abolish the county temple, and the sacrificial rites of all the garden temples from the Emperor to the Emperor Xiao Hui were abolished.

古文：后元帝寝疾，梦神灵谴罢诸庙祠，上遂复焉。
现代文：后来元帝卧病，梦见神灵来谴责他废除各祠庙的事，元帝便重新祭祀。
English: Later, Emperor Yuan fell ill and had a dream in which he saw the gods condemning him for abolishing the ancestral temples. Emperor Yuan then resumed the sacrifices.

古文：后或罢或复，至哀、平不定。
现代文：后来时废时复，到哀帝、平帝时就没有定数。
English: Later, it was changed from time to time, and there was no fixed number until the time of Emperor Ai and Emperor Ping.

古文：语在《韦玄成传》。
现代文：此事记载于《韦玄成传》。
English: This event is recorded in "Wei Xuancheng Biography."

古文：成帝初即位，丞相衡、御史大夫谭奏言： 帝王之事莫大乎承天之序，承天之序莫重于郊祀，故圣王尽心极虑以建其制。
现代文：成帝刚即帝位，丞相匡衡、御史大夫张谭上奏说道： 帝王的事没有比继承上天的序位更重大的了，而继承上天的序位没有比郊祀更重要的，所以圣王都尽心竭虑来建立郊祀的礼制。
English: When Emperor Cheng Rong ascended the throne, the Minister of Justice Kuang Heng and the Chief Historian Zhang Tan said: There is nothing more important for the emperor than inheriting the order of heaven, and there is nothing more important for inheriting the order of heaven than suburban worship. Therefore, the holy kings did their best to establish the ritual system of suburban worship.

古文：祭天于南郊，就阳之义也；瘗地于北郊，即阴之象也。
现代文：在南郊祭天，有趋向于阳的意义；在北郊祭地，是趋向于阴的象征。
English: In the Southern Suburbs Festival, it has the meaning of tending towards the sun; in the Northern Suburbs Festival, it is a symbol of tending towards the shade.

古文：天之于天子也，因其所都而各飨焉。
现代文：天对于天子，就是随着天子所定都的地方享受他们各自的祭祀。
English: Heaven, for the Son of Heaven, is to enjoy their respective sacrificial rites according to the place of the capital determined by the Son of Heaven.

古文：往者，孝武皇帝居甘泉宫，即于云阳立泰畤，祭于宫南。
现代文：以前，孝武皇帝居住在甘泉宫，就在云阳建立泰时，在宫的南面祭祀。
English: In the past, Emperor Xiaowu lived in Ganquan Palace, and when Tai was established in Yunyang, he held a religious service on the south side of the palace.

古文：今行常幸长安，郊见皇天，反北之泰阴，祠后土，反东之少阳，事与古制殊。
现代文：现在行驾常到长安，郊祭皇天反而北到太阴的地方，祭祀后土反而向东到较阳的地方，事情同古代的制度不一样。
English: Nowadays, people often drive to Chang'an, and instead of the Emperor's Day festival in the suburbs, they go north to a place that is too cloudy, and instead of the festival, they go east to a place that is too sunny. Things are different from the ancient system.

古文：又至云阳，行溪谷中，厄陕且百里，汾阴则渡大川，有风波舟楫之危，皆非圣主所宜数乘，郡、县治道共张，吏民困苦，百官烦费。
现代文：又到云阳，行走在溪谷中，道路狭窄陡峭有近百里，到汾阴就要渡大河，有风波舟楫的危险，都不是英明的君主所合适屡次进行的。郡县修治道路，供应各种器物，官民困苦，百官耗费很重。
English: He also went to Yunyang, walking in the valley, the road was narrow and steep for nearly a hundred miles, and he had to cross a large river in Jinyin, and there was a risk of storm and boat, which was not suitable for a wise monarch to do repeatedly. The counties repaired roads and supplied various utensils, the officials and the people were in trouble, and the officials were very expensive.

古文：劳所保之民，行危险之地，难以奉神灵而祈福祐，殆未合于承天子民之意。
现代文：使所保护的百姓劳苦，行走于危险的地方，难以事奉神灵而祈求福佑，大概就是没有合承受天命爱护百姓的本意。
English: If you make the people you are protecting work hard, walk in dangerous places, and find it difficult to serve the gods and pray for blessings, it is probably because you do not have the original intention of loving and protecting the people.

古文：昔者周文、武郊于丰、镐，成王郊于雒邑。
现代文：以前周文王、武王在丰鄗郊祀，成王在雒邑郊祀。
English: In the past, King Zhouwen and King Wu were enshrined in the suburbs of Fengyi, and King Chengwu was enshrined in the suburbs of Jiuyi.

古文：由此观之，天随王者所居而飨之，可见也。
现代文：从这看来，上天随着帝王所居住的地方来享受祭祀，这是显而易见的。
English: From this perspective, it is obvious that the heavens enjoy the sacrifice according to the place where the emperor lives.

古文：甘泉泰畤、河东后土之祠宜可徙置长安，合于古帝王。
现代文：甘泉的泰峙、河东的后土的祭祀应迁到长安，同古代帝王相合。
English: The sacrificial rites of Taiwei in Ganquan and Houttu in Hedong should be moved to Chang'an, to coincide with the ancient emperors.

古文：愿与群臣议定。 
现代文：希望同群臣商议确定。 
English: It is hoped that this will be determined through discussion with the ministers.

古文：奏可。
现代文：他的奏议被批准了。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：大司马车骑将军许嘉等八人以为：所以从来久远，宜如故。
现代文：大司马车骑将军许嘉等八人认为祭礼由来已久，应同原有的一样。
English: General Xu Jia, the commander of the carriage, and the other eight people thought that the festival had a long history and should be the same as the original.

古文：右将军王商、博士师丹、议郎翟方进等五十人以为：《礼记》曰 燔柴于太坛，祭天也；瘗于大折，祭地也。 
现代文：右将军王商、博士师丹、议郎翟方进等五十人认为《礼记》上说 焚柴于太坛，是祭天；埋葬缯和牲于泰折，是祭地。 
English: Fifty people, including the right general Wang Shang, the doctor Shi Dan, and the negotiator Yan Fangjin, believed that the "Rituals" said that the burning of firewood on the altar was a sacrifice to heaven, and the burial of the coffin and the animal in the mortuary was a sacred place.

古文：兆于南郊，所以定天位也。
现代文：祭坛的界域在南郊，是用来确定天位。
English: The border of the altar is in the southern suburbs and is used to determine the position of the heavens.

古文：祭地于大折，在北郊，就阴位也。
现代文：在泰折祭地，是在北郊，是靠近阴位。
English: In the Tairei Festival, it is in the northern suburbs, it is close to the Yin position.

古文：郊外各在圣王所都之南、北。
现代文：郊祀的位置各在圣王所定都城的南北面。
English: Suburban shrines are located on the north and south sides of the holy king's capital city.

古文：《书》曰： 越三日丁已，用牲于郊，牛二。 
现代文：《书》上说： 过了三天的丁巳曰，在郊外使用祭品，有二头牛。 
English: "The book" said: After three days, Ding Si said that there were two cows in the suburbs to use as sacrificial offerings.

古文：周公加牲，告徙新邑，定郊礼于雒。
现代文：周公增加祭牲，禀告迁徙到新都，在雒阳确定郊礼。
English: Zhou Gong increased the sacrificial animals, moved the obituary to the new capital, and determined the suburb ceremony in Fenyang.

古文：明王圣主，事天明，事地察。
现代文：明王圣主，事奉上天明确，事奉大地仔细。
English: Mingwang Shengyuan, serve the heavens with clarity, serve the earth with care.

古文：天地明察，神明章矣。
现代文：天地能够仔细明了地对待，神明就会得以显现。
English: If heaven and earth can be treated carefully and clearly, the gods will be able to appear.

古文：天地以王者为主，故圣王制祭天地之礼必于国郊。
现代文：天地以帝王为主导，所以圣王制定祭祀天地的礼仪一定在国都郊外。
English: Heaven and earth are dominated by the emperor, so the holy king established the ritual of sacrificing heaven and earth must be in the suburbs of the capital.

古文：长安，圣主之居，皇天所观视也。
现代文：长安，是圣王居住的地方，皇天要来进行观看视察。
English: Chang'an is the place where the holy king lives, and the emperor will come to watch and inspect.

古文：甘泉、河东之祠非神灵所飨，宜徙就正阳、大阴之处。
现代文：甘泉、河东的祭祀不是神灵所来享受的，应迁徙到靠近正阳大阴的地方。
English: The sacrifices of Ganquan and Hedong are not for the gods to enjoy. They should migrate to a place closer to the sun and the moon.

古文：违俗复古，循圣制，定天位，如礼便。
现代文：皇上应违背习俗恢复古制，遵循圣制，确定天位，遵照合适礼仪。
English: The emperor should, contrary to custom, restore the old system, follow the sacred system, determine the heavenly throne, and follow the appropriate etiquette.

古文：于是衡、谭奏议曰： 陛下圣德，明上通，承天之大典，览群下，使务悉心尽虑，议郊祀之处，天下幸甚。
现代文：于是匡衡、张谭把自己的建议上奏道： 陛下道德超凡，耳聪眼明，上达天帝，承上天的盛大，统览群下，使每个人都尽心竭虑，商议郊祀的地方，天下人很幸运。
English: Therefore, Kuang Heng and Zhang Tan recited their own suggestions: His Majesty's morality is extraordinary, his ears are sharp and his eyes are clear, he is as high as the heavenly emperor, he has inherited the grandeur of heaven, he oversees everyone, makes everyone work hard, and discusses the places of worship in the suburbs. The whole world is very lucky.

古文：臣闻广谋从众，则合于天心，故《洪范》曰 三人占，则从二人言 ，言少从多之义也。
现代文：臣听说广泛地和众人谋议，就和上天的心意相合，所以《洪范》上说 三人占卜，就听从两人所说的，是说少数服从多数的意思。
English: It is said that if a minister consults widely with many people, he will be in harmony with the will of heaven. Therefore, the saying in "Hong Fan" that if three people do divination, they will listen to what two people say, means that the minority must obey the majority.

古文：论当往古，宜于万民，则依而从之；违道寡与，则废而不行。
现代文：议论说应当回到古代，方便万民，就依从他们；违背规律，衹有少数人认可，就要废弃它而不采用。
English: If it is said that it is necessary to return to the ancient times for the convenience of the people, then it should be followed. If it is against the law and only a few people approve of it, then it should be scrapped and not adopted.

古文：今议者五十八人，其五十人言当徙之义，皆著于经传，同于上世，便于吏民；八人不案经艺考古制，而以为不宜，无法之议，难以定吉凶。
现代文：现在商议的人有五十八个，其中有五十人陈述应当迁徙的意义，都写在经传中，与上古时代相同，方便官民；八人不考察经文和艺文，考察古制，就认为不宜，没有法则的议论，难以确定吉凶。
English: At present, there are fifty-eight people deliberating. Fifty of them state that the meaning of migration should be written in the scriptures, which is the same as in ancient times, and is convenient for the government and the people. Eight people do not study scriptures and art, but study the ancient system, and think that it is not appropriate. There is no discussion of rules, and it is difficult to determine the fate.

古文：《太誓》曰： 正稽古立功立事，可以永年，丕天之大律。 
现代文：《太誓》上说： 正确地考察古道来行事，可以长久保有天下，这是事奉上天的法则。 
English: In the "Great Oath," it says, "If you correctly investigate the ancient path and act accordingly, you can keep the world for a long time. This is the law of serving God."

古文：《诗》曰 毋曰高高在上，陟降厥士，日监在兹 ，言天之日监王者之处也。
现代文：《诗》上说 不要以为上天高高在上，它能上下升降，曰监察这裹 ，是说上天每日监察帝王所在的地方。
English: In the poem, it says, "Don't think that heaven is high above, it can go up and down. To say, "Observe this," means that heaven daily monitors the place where the emperor is.

古文：又曰 乃眷西顾，此维予宅， 言天以文王之都为居也。
现代文：又说 回头西望，造就是我的地方，是说上天以文王的都城为居住点。
English: And he said, Turn thee yet to the west, and behold my place: for the heavens are the LORD'S heavens, but the earth hath he given to the children of man.

古文：宜于长安定南、北郊，为万世基。 
现代文：应在长安确定南北郊祭的地方，作为万代的基地。 
English: It should be in Chang'an to determine the place of the North-South Suburban Festival, as the base for all generations.

古文：天子从之。
现代文：天子听从了他们的建议。
English: Tenshi agreed.

古文：既定，衡言： 甘泉泰畤紫坛，八觚宣通象八方。
现代文：事情确定后，匡衡说： 甘泉泰时的紫坛，八角全部相通以象征八方。
English: After the matter was determined, Kuangheng said: The purple altar of Ganquan Taiji, the eight corners are all connected to symbolize the eight directions.

古文：五帝坛周环其下，又有群神之坛。
现代文：五帝的坛环绕在它的下面，又有群神的坛。
English: And the altar of the five gods was round about under it, and the altar of the company of the gods round about.

古文：以《尚书》禋六宗、望山川、遍群神之义，紫坛有文章、采镂、黼黻之饰及玉、女乐，石坛、仙人祠，瘗鸾路、骍驹、寓龙马，不能得其象于古。
现代文：按照《尚书》中里祭六宗、望祭山！遍祭群神的含义，紫坛要有花纹、彩雕、黼黻的装饰以及玉器、女乐、石坛、仙人祠，瘗鸾辖、驿驹、木偶龙马，不能从古制中得到它们的形状。
English: According to "Shangshu," the meaning of the Mid-Autumn Festival of the six sects, the Mountain of Hope Festival, and the Festival of the Gods, the purple altar should be decorated with patterns, carvings, and urns, as well as jade, female music, stone altar, hermit's shrine, urns, urns, and puppets, and their shapes cannot be obtained from the ancient system.

古文：臣闻郊柴飨帝之义，埽地而祭，上质也。
现代文：臣听说过郊祀焚柴享祭天帝的意义，扫地而祭，是崇尚质朴。
English: Subordinates have heard of the significance of the wood-burning festival in the suburbs, the sweeping of the ground for the festival, and the advocation of simplicity.

古文：歌大吕舞《云门》以俟天神，歌太蔟舞《咸池》以俟地祇，其牲用犊，其席槁稽，其器陶匏，皆因天地之性，贵诚上质，不敢修其文也。
现代文：歌唱大吕舞《云门》以等待天神，歌唱太蔟舞《咸池》以等待地神，祭祀用的牲是小牛，席用的是稿秸，器皿是陶匏，都是依照天地的本性，以诚为贵，以质朴为上，不敢修饰文彩。
English: Singing the Great Lu Dance "Cloud Gate" to wait for the gods, singing the Taiko Dance "Salty Pond" to wait for the gods, the sacrificial animal is a calf, the table is made of papier-mâché, and the utensils are made of pottery, all of which are in accordance with the nature of heaven and earth, with sincerity as precious, with simplicity as the top, and do not dare to decorate the culture.

古文：以为神祇功德至大，虽修精微而备庶物，犹不足以报功，唯至诚为可，故上质不饰，以章天德。
现代文：认为神的功德极大，即使修饰精微而且准备众物，也不足以报知功德，衹有至诚才行，所以崇尚质朴，不加修饰，用来彰明天德。
English: They believe that God's merits are great, and even if they are finely decorated and prepared, it is not enough to report the merits. Only sincerity can do so. Therefore, they advocate simplicity, without embellishment, and use it to highlight tomorrow's virtues.

古文：紫坛伪饰女乐、鸾路、骍驹、龙马、石坛之属，宜皆勿修。 
现代文：紫坛的人为装饰、女乐、鸾辂、辟驹、龙马、石坛之类，应都不修治。 
English: The artificial decoration of the purple altar, women's music, gongs, paddles, dragon horses, stone altars and the like should not be repaired.

古文：衡又言： 王者各以其礼制事天地，非因异世所立而继之。
现代文：匡衡又说： 帝王各自以自己的礼制事奉天地，不是按照不同时代所建立的加以继承。
English: Kuangheng also said: Emperors each serve heaven and earth with their own etiquette, rather than inheriting it according to what was established in different eras.

古文：今雍鄜、密、上、下畤，本秦侯各以其意所立，非礼之所载术也。
现代文：现在雍的鄘、密、上峙、下峙，本是秦侯各自按照他们的意念所建立的，不是礼上所载的方法。
English: Now, Yong's, 密, 上峙, 下峙, were originally established by the Qin lords according to their own ideas, not the methods contained in the ceremony.

古文：汉兴之初，仪制未及定，即且因秦故祠，复立北畤。
现代文：汉朝建立之初，仪制没有来得及确定，暂且根据秦朝旧有的祠庙，重新建立北峙。
English: At the beginning of the establishment of the Han Dynasty, the ceremony system did not have time to be determined, and for the time being, the north face was re-established according to the old ancestral temple of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：今既稽古，建定天地之大礼，郊见上帝，青、赤、白、黄、黑五方之帝皆毕陈，各有位馔，祭祀备具。
现代文：现在既然已考察古制，制定祭祀天地的大礼，郊祀上天，青、赤、白、黄、黑五方之帝全都加以陈列，各有位置供奉，祭祀的用品齐备。
English: Now that the ancient system has been examined and the grand ritual of worshipping heaven and earth has been formulated, the blue, red, white, yellow and black emperors of the five directions are all displayed, each has a place to worship, and the supplies for the ritual are ready.

古文：诸侯所妄造，王者不当长遵。
现代文：诸侯所妄自建造的，帝王不当长期遵照。
English: The emperors should not have long obeyed the arbitrary construction of the lords.

古文：及北畤，未定时所立，不宜复修。 
现代文：至于北时，没有定时去祭祀所建立的祠，不应重新修整。 
English: As for the north, if you do not go regularly to the ancestral hall built for worship, you should not re-repair it.

古文：天子皆从焉。
现代文：天子都听从。
English: All the sons of God obeyed.

古文：及陈宝祠，由是皆罢。
现代文：至于陈宝祠，从此都撤除了。
English: As for the Chen Bao Shrine, it has since been removed.

古文：明年，上始祀南郊，赦奉郊之县及中都官耐罪囚徒。
现代文：第二年，皇上开始祭祀南郊，赦免供奉郊祀的县以及京师各官府的因犯小罪被剃除鬓须的囚徒。
English: In the second year, the emperor began to offer sacrifices to the southern suburbs, and pardoned prisoners who had been shaved for minor crimes in the counties that offered sacrifices to the suburbs, as well as in various government offices in Beijing.

古文：是岁，衡、谭复条奏： 长安厨官、县官给祠，郡国候神方士使者所祠，凡六百八十三所，其二百八所应礼及疑无明文，可奉祠如故。
现代文：这一年，匡衡、张谭重新分条上奏道： 长安的厨官、县官供给郡国迎候神仙的方士、使者所祭祀的，共有六百八十三处，其中二百零八处当祭，至于怀疑没有明文的，可以跟以前一样奉祠。
English: In this year, Kuang Heng and Zhang Tan re-divided the line and said: The chefs and county officials of Chang'an provided the magicians and messengers of the county to welcome the gods, and there were a total of 683 places to be sacrificed, of which 208 were sacrificed. As for the doubts that were not clearly written, they could be offered to the shrine as before.

古文：其余四百七十五所不应礼，或复重，请皆罢。 
现代文：其余的四百七十五处不当祭，有的重复，请求全部废除。 
English: The remaining four hundred and seventy-five improper offerings, some of which are duplicates, are requested to be completely abolished.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏议被批准。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：本雍旧祠二百三所，唯山川诸星十五所为应礼云。
现代文：雍地原有旧祠二百零三处，衹有山川诸星十五处当祭。
English: There are two hundred and three old ancestral shrines in Yongdi, and there are fifteen stars in the mountains and rivers.

古文：若诸布、诸严、诸逐，皆罢。
现代文：至于诸布、诸严、诸逐，全部废除。
English: As for zhubu, zhuyan and zhuyuan, they should all be abolished.

古文：杜主有五祠，置其一。
现代文：杜主有五座祠，设置其中之一。
English: There are five shrines in the village, and this is one of them.

古文：又罢高祖所立梁、晋、秦、荆巫、九天、南山、秦中之属，及孝文渭阳、孝武薄忌泰一、三一、黄帝、冥羊、马行、泰一、皋山山君、武夷、夏后启母石、万里沙、八神、延年之属，及孝宣参山、蓬山、之罘、成山、莱山、四时、蚩尤、劳谷、五床、仙人、玉女、径路、黄帝、天神、原水之属，皆罢。
现代文：又废除高祖所建立的梁、晋、秦、荆地的巫师、九天、南山、莱中之类，以及孝文帝的渭阳：孝武帝薄忌的泰一、三一、黄帝、冥羊、马行、泰一、皋山山君、武夷、夏后启母石、万里沙、八神、延年之类，还有孝宣帝的参山、蓬山、之罘、成山、莱山、四时、蚩尤、劳谷、五牀、俪人、玉女、径路、黄帝、天神、原水之类，都废除。
English: Also abolished were the Liang, Jin, Qin, Jing, Jiu, Nanshan, and Laizhong wizards established by Gao Zu, as well as the Fenyang of Emperor Xiaowen: the Tai I, Sanyi, Huangdi, Neidang, Ma Xing, Tai I, Lushan Shanjun, Wuyi, Xiaoguo Qimoshi, Wanli Sha, Yaojin, and Yan Nian of Emperor Xiaowen; and the Sanshan, Pengshan, Zhishan, Chengshan, Lai Shan, 4 o'clock, Qiyu, Laogu, Wuzhong, Qianren,

古文：候神方士使者副佐、本草待诏七十余人皆归家。
现代文：迎候神仙的方士、使者、副佐、以方药本草待诏的七十多人都遣送回家。
English: The seventy-odd magicians, envoys, assistant magistrates, and officials who had been waiting for the divine messenger were all sent home.

古文：明年，匡衡坐事免官爵。
现代文：第二年，匡衡犯法被免除官位和爵位。
English: The following year, Kuangheng was stripped of his official position and peerage for breaking the law.

古文：众庶多言不当变动祭祀者。
现代文：众人大多说不应变动祭祀。
English: Most people say that the rituals should not be changed.

古文：又初罢甘泉泰畤作南郊日，大风坏甘泉竹宫，折拔畤中树木十围以上百余。
现代文：又当初取消在甘泉的泰峙行南郊祭祀之，大风毁坏了甘泉的竹宫，折断拔起祭场中树木有十围粗以上的百余棵。
English: At the same time, the Southern Suburbs Festival was cancelled at the beginning. High winds destroyed the bamboo palace of Ganquan, and more than a hundred trees with a circumference of more than ten meters were uprooted from the festival site.

古文：天子异之，以问刘向。
现代文：天子对此感到奇怪，询问刘向。
English: Tianzi felt strange about this and asked Liu Xiang.

古文：对曰： 家人尚不欲绝种祠，况于国之神宝旧畤！
现代文：刘向答道： 平民人家尚且不想断绝继嗣所传的祠庙，何况对于国家的神宝旧时呢！
English: Liu Xiang replied, "The common people don't want to give up the ancestral temples passed down by their heirs, let alone the national treasures of the past!

古文：且甘泉、汾阴及雍五畤始立，皆有神祇感应，然后营之，非苟而已也。
现代文：而且甘泉、汾阴以及雍城的五峙刚刚建立，都有神灵感应，然后再加以照理，不是敷衍一下就行了。
English: Moreover, the Five Faces of Ganquan, Jinyin, and Yongcheng have just been established, and they all have divine inspiration, and then they are clarified. It is not enough to perfunctorily start.

古文：武、宣之世，奉此三神，礼敬敕备，神光尤著。
现代文：武帝、宣帝的时候，供奉这三神，礼节恭敬齐备，神灵光辉尤其显著。
English: When Emperor Wu and Emperor Xuan were worshipped, the three deities were reverently and respectfully prepared, and the brilliance of the gods was especially conspicuous.

古文：祖宗所立神祇旧位，诚未易动。
现代文：祖宗所设立的神灵旧位，实在不能轻易改动。
English: The old position of deities established by our ancestors cannot be easily changed.

古文：及陈宝祠，自秦文公至今七百余岁矣，汉兴世世常来，光赤黄，长四五丈，直祠而息，音声砰隐，野鸡皆雊。
现代文：至于陈实祠，从秦文公到现在有七百多年了，汉朝建立后代代都来，光的颜色赤黄，长四五丈，直到祭祀后才停止，声音砰然作响，野鸡都呜叫。
English: As for the Chen Shi Ancestral Hall, it has been more than seven hundred years since Qin Wengong, and it was built by the Han Dynasty for future generations. The color of the light is red and yellow, and it is four or five meters long. It is not stopped until after the sacrifice. The sound is loud, and the pheasants are crying.

古文：每见雍太祝祠以太牢，遣候者乘传驰诣行在所，以为福祥。
现代文：每次见到雍城太祝用太牢祭祀，派遣迎候的人乘着一辆驿站的马车到天子所在之地报告神灵的到来，都以之为吉祥。
English: It is considered auspicious to see Yongcheng Taizhou holding a dungeon sacrifice and dispatching an attendant in a stagecoach to report the arrival of the god to the place where the god is located.

古文：高祖时五来，文帝二十六来，武帝七十五来，宣帝二十五年，初元元年以来亦二十来，此阳气旧祠也。
现代文：高祖时来了五次，文帝时来了二十六次，武帝时来了七十五次，宣帝时来了二十五次，初元元年以来也来了二十次，这些都是阳气旧祠。
English: Gao Zu came five times, Wen Di came twenty-six times, Wu Di came seventy-five times, Xuan Di came twenty-five times, and has come twenty times since the beginning of the year. These are all yang old shrines.

古文：及汉宗庙之礼，不得擅议，皆祖宗之君与贤臣所共定。
现代文：至于汉朝宗庙的礼仪，不得擅自议论，都是祖上的君主和贤臣所共同制定的。
English: As for the etiquette of the ancestral temple of the Han Dynasty, it is not allowed to discuss it without authorization. It was jointly formulated by the monarchs and wise men of the ancestors.

古文：古今异制，经无明文，至尊至重，难以疑说正也。
现代文：古今制度不同，经上没有明确记载，至尊至重的事，难以用不确定的言论来纠正。
English: Different from the ancient and modern systems, there is no clear record in the scriptures, and it is difficult to correct things that are of the utmost importance with uncertain statements.

古文：前始纳贡禹之议，后人相因，多所动援。
现代文：前不久刚采纳贡禹的建议，后来的人相互因袭，大多有所动摇。
English: Not long ago, Gong Yu's suggestion was just adopted, but later people attacked each other, and most of them wavered.

古文：《易大传》曰： 诬神者殃及三世。 
现代文：《易大传》说： 欺骗神灵的人要殃及三代。 
English: "I Ching" says: Those who deceive the gods will be cursed for three generations.

古文：恐其咎不独止禹等。 
现代文：恐怕这些过失不独衹是贡禹等人。 
English: I am afraid that Gong Yu and others are not the only ones guilty of these mistakes.

古文：上意恨之。
现代文：皇上心裹感到悔恨。
English: The Emperor was filled with remorse.

古文：后上以无继嗣故，令皇太后诏有司曰： 盖闻王者承事天地，交接泰一，尊莫著于祭祀。
现代文：后来皇上因为没有继嗣的缘故，就命皇太后下诏给有关官员说： 听说帝王事奉天地，交接泰一，尊敬神灵没有比祭祀更好的了。
English: Later, because the emperor had no heir, he ordered the empress dowager to issue an edict to the relevant officials, saying: I heard that the emperor served heaven and earth, handed over Taiyi, and respected the gods. There is nothing better than sacrifice.

古文：孝武皇帝大圣通明，始建上下之祀，营泰畤于甘泉，定后土于汾阴，而神祇安之，飨国长久，子孙蕃滋，累世遵业，福流于今。
现代文：孝武皇帝英明通达，开始建立天地的祭祀，在甘泉营造台峙，在汾阴建立后土，神灵就感到安稳，国家便长久，子孙繁衍昌盛，世代遵守祖业，福佑流传到现在。
English: Emperor Xiaowu was wise and enlightened, and began to establish the sacrificial rites of heaven and earth, building a platform in Ganquan, and establishing a foothold in Suyin. The gods felt stable, the country was long-lasting, the children and grandchildren were prosperous, the generations observed the ancestral profession, and the blessings were passed down to the present.

古文：今皇帝宽仁孝顺，奉循圣绪，靡有大愆，而久无继嗣。
现代文：现在皇帝宽厚、仁慈、孝顺，遵循帝王的统绪，没有大的过失，却很久没有继嗣。
English: Now the emperor is generous, benevolent, and dutiful, following the emperor's leadership, without any major mistakes, but he has not had a successor for a long time.

古文：思其咎职，殆在徙南、北郊，违先帝之制，改神祇旧位，失天地之心，以妨继嗣之福。
现代文：思考其主要的过失，大概在于迁徙南北郊祠，违背先帝的制度，改换神灵的旧位，失去天地的本心，以致妨碍继嗣的福分。
English: Thinking about it, his major faults probably lie in moving the ancestral shrine to the suburbs of the north and south, violating the system of the former emperor, changing the old position of the gods, losing the original intention of heaven and earth, and thus hindering the inheritance of fortune.

古文：春秋六十，未见皇孙，食不甘味，寝不安席，朕甚悼焉。
现代文：我有六十岁了，还未见有皇孙，食不甘味，寝不安席，朕感到很哀痛。
English: I am sixty years old, I have not yet seen a royal grandchild, my food is not sweet, I do not sleep well, I feel very sad.

古文：《春秋》大复古，善顺祀。
现代文：《春秋》以复古为大，以顺应祭祀为善。
English: "Spring and Autumn" is big on retro, and good at conforming to rituals.

古文：其复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土如故，及雍五畤、陈宝祠在陈仓者。 
现代文：令恢复甘泉宫的泰时、汾阴的后土跟以前一样，以及雍城的五峙、在陈仓的陈宝祠。 
English: He ordered the restoration of the Taishi of Ganquan Palace, the hinterland of Jinyin as before, as well as the Five Facing of Yongcheng and the Chenbao Shrine in Chencang.

古文：天子复亲郊礼如前。
现代文：天子重新跟以前一样亲自举行郊祭的礼仪。
English: The Son of Heaven resumed the ritual of holding the suburb festival in person as before.

古文：又复长安、雍及郡国祠著明者且半。
现代文：又恢复长安、雍城以及郡国比较著名的祠庙近一半。
English: In addition, nearly half of the more famous ancestral temples in Chang'an, Yongcheng and the county were restored.

古文：成帝末年颇好鬼神，亦以无继嗣故，多上书言祭祀方术者，皆得待诏，祠祭上林苑中长安城旁，费用甚多，然无大贵盛者。
现代文：成帝晚年相当喜欢鬼神，也因没有继嗣的缘故，许多上书谈祭祀和方术的人，都得到待诏的官职，在上林苑中长安城旁祭祀时，花费相当多，但是没有很明显的功效。
English: In his later years, Emperor Cheng was quite fond of ghosts and gods. Due to the fact that he had no heirs, many people who wrote about sacrifices and methods were given official positions. When sacrificing near Chang'an City in Shanglinyuan, it cost a lot of money, but there was no obvious effect.

古文：谷永说上曰： 臣闻：明于天地之性，不可或以神怪；知万物之情，不可罔以非类。
现代文：谷永就劝说皇上道： 臣听说要明了天地的本性，就不可被神怪迷惑；要知道万物的性情，就不可被不同的种类所蒙蔽。
English: Gu Yong then persuaded the emperor, saying, "My vassal has heard that if you want to understand the nature of heaven and earth, you must not be confused by supernatural beings; if you want to know the disposition of all things, you must not be blinded by different types.

古文：诸背仁义之正道，不遵之法言，而盛称奇怪鬼神，广崇祭祀之方，求报无福之祠，及言世有仙人，服食不终之药，遥兴轻举，登遐倒景，览观县圃，浮游蓬莱，耕耘五德，朝种暮获，与山石无极，黄冶变化，坚冰淖溺，化色五仓之术者，皆奸人惑众，挟左道，怀诈伪，以欺罔世主。
现代文：那些背弃了仁义的正道，不遵守《五经》法定的言论，却大肆称道怪异鬼神，广泛崇尚祭祀的方术，祈求没有福佑祭祀的回报，至于说世上有仙人，服下不死的药方，能轻轻一动就到了很远的地方，到很高的地方能够倒影，览观县圃，浮游蓬莱，耕耘五德，早晨播种，晚上收获，同山石一样没有穷尽，冶炼丹沙令其变化能制作黄金，可以使坚固的冰融化，能得到五色五仓的方术的人，都是欺骗众人的邪恶之徒，依靠邪门旁道，心怀虚伪，以欺诈君主。
English: Those who have abandoned the righteous path of benevolence and righteousness, and do not abide by the words of the legal provisions of the "Five Classics," but praise the strange ghosts and gods, widely advocate the methods of sacrifice, and pray for the return of sacrifices without blessing. As for those who say that there are immortals in the world, take the immortal medicine, can travel to far away places with a light movement, and can reflect to high places, view the county garden, float through the Penglai, cultivate the five virtues, sow in the morning, harvest in the evening, and are as inexhaustible as the mountain stone, smelting the Dansha so that its changes can make gold, can

古文：听其言，洋洋满耳，若将可遇；求之，荡荡如系风捕景，终不可得。
现代文：听他们谈论，滔滔不绝于耳，好像即将可以遇到仙人；去访求仙人，空洞得如同捕风捉影，始终不能求得。
English: Listening to them talk, they talk endlessly, as if they are about to meet a fairy godmother; visiting a fairy godmother is as empty as chasing the wind and chasing shadows, and they still can't get it.

古文：是以明王距而不听，圣人绝而不语。
现代文：因此英明的君主是远离他们不听他们的话的，圣人是绝弃而不谈论的。
English: Therefore wise princes are far from them, and they hearken not unto them; and the holy men turn away, and speak not unto them.

古文：昔周史苌弘欲以鬼神之术辅尊灵王会朝诸侯，而周愈微，诸侯愈叛。
现代文：以前周朝史官苌弘想用鬼神的方法来辅佐朝见的诸侯尊敬周灵王，但周室更加微弱，诸侯更加叛离。
English: In the past, Zhou dynasty historian Gong Hong wanted to use the method of ghosts and gods to assist the princes who respected Zhou Ling Wang, but the Zhou dynasty was weaker and the princes were more rebellious.

古文：楚怀王隆祭祀，事鬼神，欲以获福助，却秦师，而兵挫地削，身辱国危。
现代文：楚怀王隆重举行祭祀，事奉鬼神，打算获得神福的帮助，打退秦国军队，但军败地削，身辱国危。
English: King Chuhuai held a grand sacrifice, served ghosts and gods, and intended to obtain divine help to repel the Qin army, but the army was defeated and humiliated, and the country was in danger.

古文：秦始皇初并天下，甘心于神仙之道，遣徐福、韩终之属多赍童男童女入海求神、采药，因逃不还，天下怨恨。
现代文：秦始皇刚开始吞并天下，就沉湎于神仙的事中，派遣徐福、韩终等人带了很多童男童女到海上去寻求神仙，采取仙药，因为他们逃走后没有回来，天下就怨恨。
English: As soon as Qin Shihuang began to annex the world, he immersed himself in the matter of immortals, sending Xu Fu, Han Yan and others to take many boys and girls to the sea to seek immortals and take immortals, because they did not return after fleeing, the world resented.

古文：汉兴，新垣平、齐人少翁、公孙卿、栾大等，皆以仙人黄冶、祭祠、事鬼使物、入海求神、采药贵幸，赏赐累千金。
现代文：汉建国后，新垣平、齐国的少翁、公孙卿、乐大等人，都凭仙人、冶炼黄金、祭祀、事奉鬼神役使万物、入海求神仙、采仙药而得到宠爱富贵，赏赐达到千金。
English: After the founding of the Han Dynasty, Niigakidaira, Shao Weng of Qi, Gongsunqing, Le Dai and others were all favored and enriched with immortals, smelted gold, made sacrifices, served as ghosts and gods, made things, went to sea to seek immortals, and collected immortals' medicines, and were rewarded with thousands of gold.

古文：大尤尊盛，至妻公主，爵位重累，震动海内。
现代文：乐大尤其尊宠，以致娶公主为妻，爵位一个加一个，震动海内。
English: Le Da was especially revered, so much so that he married a princess, adding one peerage after another, which sent shockwaves across the country.

古文：元鼎、元封之际，燕、齐之间方士瞋目扼腕，言有神仙、祭。致福之术者以万数。
现代文：元鼎、元封年间，燕、齐之间的方士瞋目扼腕，说有神仙可以用祭祀招致福佑的方法的人以万计。
English: In the years of the Yuan Dynasty and the Yuan Dynasty, there were tens of thousands of people who said that there was a way to invite blessings from the gods through sacrifice.

古文：其后，平等皆以术穷诈得，诛夷伏辜。
现代文：这以后，新垣平等人都因为道术穷尽诈伪暴露，而伏罪被杀。
English: After this, all of Arakaki's peers were killed for the crime of treachery because of the exhaustion of the art and the exposure of fraud.

古文：至初无中，有天渊玉女、巨鹿神人、轑阳侯师张宗之奸，纷纷复起。
现代文：到初元年间，有天渊玉女、钜鹿神人、撩阳侯的老师张宗的奸诈，纷纷重新兴起。
English: By the beginning of the first year of the year, there were Tianyuan Jade Woman, Elk Godman, and the treachery of Zhang Zong, the teacher of the Prince of Shenyang, have re-emerged one after another.

古文：夫周、秦之末，三五之隆，已尝专意散财，厚爵禄，竦精神，举天下以求之矣。
现代文：周、秦的末期，三皇五帝兴盛的时候，就曾专门花费财物，增加爵禄，打起精神，全天下人来求取它们。
English: At the end of the Zhou and Qin dynasties, when the three emperors and five emperors were flourishing, they devoted themselves to spending their wealth, increasing their peerage, and raising their spirits. People from all over the world came to seek them.

古文：旷日经年，靡有毫厘之验，足以揆今。
现代文：费了许多年日，没有丝毫应验，足以作为今天的借鉴。
English: It took many years and did not come to fruition in the slightest, which is enough to serve as a reference for today.

古文：《经》曰： 享多仪，仪不及物，惟曰不享。 《论语》说曰： 子不语怪神。 唯陛下距绝此类，毋令奸人有以窥朝者。 
现代文：经书上说： 祭祀有多种礼仪，而不涉及礼物，祇当没有被神所享受一样，《论语》说： 王迂不谈怪异和神仙，希望陛下远离弃绝这些事情，不要让邪恶的人有可以窥伺朝廷的空隙。 
English: The scriptures say: Sacrifices have many kinds of rituals, but they do not involve gifts, only if they are not enjoyed by the gods. "The Analects" says: The king does not talk about strange things and gods, and hopes that his majesty will stay away from these things, and not let evil people have a gap where they can spy on the court.

古文：上善其言。
现代文：皇上认为谷永说的有理。
English: The emperor thought that what Tanaga said was reasonable.

古文：后成都侯王商为大司马卫将军辅政，杜鄴说商曰： 东邻杀牛，不如西邻之瀹祭 ，言奉天之道，贵以诚质大得民心也。
现代文：后来成都侯王商任大司马卫将军辅助政事，杜邺劝说王商道：  东邻杀牛祭祀，不如西邻用汤煮菜来祭祀，是说奉事上天的方法，是以诚实质朴大得民心为贵。
English: Later, General Ma Wei, the grand secretary of the Chengdu marquis Wang Shang, assisted the political affairs, and Du Xi persuaded Wang Shang: the sacrifice of killing cattle by the eastern neighbors is not as good as the sacrifice of cooking vegetables with soup by the western neighbors. It is said to be a method of serving the heavens, and it is precious to have the sincerity, substance and simplicity to win the hearts of the people.

古文：行秽祀丰，犹不蒙祐；德修荐薄，吉必大来。
现代文：行为不正，即使祭祀丰富，仍得不到福佑；德行高尚，即使荐献单薄，吉祥一定大规模地到来。
English: If one's behavior is improper, even if there are a lot of sacrifices, one will still not receive blessings; if one's virtue is noble, even if the recommended offering is thin, the auspicious will surely come on a large scale.

古文：古者坛场有常处，燎禋有常用，赞见有常礼；牺牲玉帛虽备而财不匮，车舆臣役虽动而用不劳。
现代文：古代坛场有固定的地方，焚柴里祭有固定的物用，赞见有固定的礼仪；牺牲玉帛即使全都齐备，但国家财产不匮乏，车马大臣的使用即使动用也不会劳累。
English: In ancient times, there was a fixed place for the altar, a fixed material for the wood-burning ceremony, and a fixed etiquette for approving; even if the sacrificial jade bowl was all ready, there was no shortage of state property, and the use of the chariot and horse minister would not be tiring even if it was used.

古文：是故每举其礼，助者欢说，大路所历，黎元不知。
现代文：因此每次举行祭礼，助祭的人感到快乐，天子祭天所乘的车经过的地方，百姓不知道。
English: As a result, every time a festival is held, the celebrants feel happy, and the people do not know where the chariot of the Son of Heaven passes.

古文：今甘泉、河东天地郊祀、咸失方位，违阴阳之宜。
现代文：现在甘泉、河东天地的郊祀，都失去了方位，违背了阴阳的和谐。
English: Now Ganquan, the suburb of Hedong Heaven and Earth, has lost its bearings, violating the harmony of yin and yang.

古文：及雍五畤皆旷远，奉尊之役，休而复起，缮治共张，无解已时，皇天著象，殆可略知。
现代文：还有雍城的五时都空旷辽远，奉事神尊的劳役停止后重又兴起，修整供给各种器物没有止境，皇天明显的形状大致可略微知晓。
English: Also, the five time zones of Yongcheng are vast and far away. After the labor of serving the deities has stopped, it will rise again. There is no end to the repair and supply of various utensils. The obvious shape of the emperor can be slightly known.

古文：前上甘泉，先驱失道；礼月之夕，奉引复迷。
现代文：前不久到甘泉，前面开路的入迷失了道路；祭祀月亮的傍晚，前面导引车马的人重又迷路。
English: Not long ago, when we went to Ganquan, the road ahead of us was lost. On the evening of the Moon Festival, the person leading the horse and carriage in front of us got lost again.

古文：祠后土还，临河当渡，疾风起波，船不可御。
现代文：祭祀后土回来的路上，到黄河边上应当渡河的时候，大风涌起波浪，船无法行走。
English: On the way back after the ritual, when it was time to cross the Yellow River, the wind was so strong that the boat could not sail.

古文：又雍大雨，坏平阳宫垣。
现代文：又在雍城遭到大雨，毁坏了平阳宫的城垣。
English: In addition, heavy rain in Yongcheng destroyed the city walls of Pingyang Palace.

古文：乃三月甲子，震电灾林光宫门。
现代文：于是三月甲子曰，雷电使林光宫的门遭受火灾。
English: As a result, in the words of Mizu Kako, lightning caused the gate of the Lin Guang Palace to catch fire.

古文：祥瑞未著，咎征仍臻。
现代文：吉祥的瑞兆没有显现，过失的征兆就到了。
English: If the auspicious omen does not appear, the ominous omen arrives.

古文：迹三郡所奏，皆有变故。
现代文：考察三郡所上奏的，都有变故。
English: The results of the inspection of the three counties have all changed.

古文：不答不飨，何以甚比！
现代文：不合天意，不为上天所飨，有什么比这更过甚的呢！
English: What could be more contrary to the will of God, more contrary to the will of Heaven?

古文：《诗》曰 率由旧章 。
现代文：《诗》上说： 遵循旧有的典章 。
English: "Follow the old rules," the poem says.

古文：旧章，先王法度，文王以之，交神于祀，子孙千亿。
现代文：旧有典章，是先王的法度，文王用它来祭祀神灵，子孙达千亿。
English: The old ordinance is the former king's law. King Wen used it to offer sacrifices to the gods, and his descendants reached one hundred billion.

古文：宜如异时公卿之议，复还长安南、北郊。 
现代文：应跟旧时公卿所议的一样，重到长安南北郊祭祀。 
English: As discussed by the court nobles in the old days, it is necessary to focus on the sacrificial rites in the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：后数年，成帝崩，皇太后诏有司曰： 皇帝即位，思顺天心，遵经义，定郊礼，天下说憙。
现代文：后来过了几年，成帝去世，皇太后下韶给有关官员道： 皇帝即位，想顺从天意，遵从经义，确定郊礼，天下欢心。
English: A few years later, Emperor Cheng died, and the empress dowager sent a message to the relevant officials: The emperor ascended the throne, wanted to obey the will of heaven, follow the precepts, determine the suburb rite, and the whole world was pleased.

古文：惧未有皇孙，故复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土，庶几获福。
现代文：担心没有皇孙，因此恢复甘泉的泰时、汾阴的后上，差不多获得了报。
English: He was worried that he would not have a grandchild, so he almost succeeded in restoring Taishi to Ganquan and Houjo to Suyin.

古文：皇帝恨难之，卒未得其祐。
现代文：皇帝悔恨祭祀太艰难了，终于没有得到福佑。
English: The emperor's repentance ritual was too difficult, and finally he did not receive the blessing.

古文：其复南、北郊长安如故，以顺皇帝之意也。 
现代文：命恢复长安南北郊祀，跟以前一样，以顺应皇帝的心意。 
English: He ordered that the temples in the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an be restored, as before, in accordance with the emperor's wishes.

古文：哀帝即位，寝疾，博征方术士，京师诸县皆有侍祠使者，尽复前世所常兴诸神祠官，凡七百余所，一岁三万七千祠云。
现代文：哀帝即位，卧病，广泛征求方术方士，京师各县都有侍候祭祀的使者，全面恢复前代所常祭祀各神的祠官，共七百多所，一年有三万七千次祭祀。
English: The emperor came to the throne in mourning, he was bedridden, there was an extensive search for sorcerers, there were emissaries to attend the sacrifices in all counties of Beijing, and the ancestral halls where the gods were regularly sacrificed in the previous generation were fully restored, a total of more than seven hundred, with thirty-seven thousand sacrifices a year.

古文：明年，夏令太皇太后诏有司曰： 皇帝孝顺，奉承圣业，靡有解怠，而久疾未瘳。
现代文：第二年，重新令太皇太后下诏给有关官员道： 皇帝孝顺，禀承圣人业绩，没有懈怠，但久病不愈。
English: The following year, the empress dowager issued a new edict to the relevant officials, saying: The emperor is filial, inherits the achievements of the saints, does not slack off, but has been ill for a long time.

古文：夙夜唯思，殆继体之君不宜改作。
现代文：早晚忧思，大概是继承体制的君主不适合改造建作。
English: Sooner or later, it is thought that the monarch, who inherits the system, is not suitable for remodeling.

古文：其复甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土祠如故。 
现代文：令恢复甘泉的泰时、汾阴的后土祠到以前的样子。 
English: It restored the Taishi of Ganquan and the Houduan of Jinyin to their previous appearance.

古文：上亦不能亲至，遣有司行事而礼祠焉。
现代文：皇上也不能亲自前去，就派遣有关官员去行礼祭祀。
English: The emperor could not go in person, so he sent officials to perform the rites and rituals.

古文：后三年，哀帝崩。
现代文：三年后，哀帝崩。
English: Three years later, Emperor Ai passed away.

古文：平帝元始五年，大司马王莽奏言： 王者父事天，故爵称天子。
现代文：平帝元始五年，大司马王莽上奏说道： 帝王像事奉父亲一样事奉天帝，所以帝王的爵号称天子。
English: In the first five years of the Ping Dynasty, the grand steward Ma Wang Mang said in a speech: The emperor served the heavenly emperor like he served his father, so the emperor's title was called the heavenly son.

古文：孔子曰： 人之行莫大于孝，孝莫大于严父，严父莫大于配天。 
现代文：孔子说： 人的行为没有比孝更大的，孝中没有比尊敬父亲更大的，尊敬父亲没有比祭天时以祖先配享更大的。 
English: Confucius said: "There is no greater deed than filial piety. There is no greater filial piety than honoring one's father. There is no greater respect for one's father than sharing one's wealth with one's ancestors during the Festival of the Heavens.

古文：王者尊其考，欲以配天，缘考之意，欲尊祖，推而上之，遂及始祖。
现代文：帝王尊崇他的祖先，打算德配于天，攀缘祖先的本意，是想尊崇祖先，向上推衍，便触及始祖。
English: The emperor revered his ancestors, intending to be worthy of heaven, the original intention of climbing the ancestors, is to respect the ancestors, the upward extension, then touched the ancestors.

古文：是以周公郊祀后稷以配天，宗祀文王于明堂以配上帝。
现代文：因此周公郊祀后稷来德配于天，在明堂祭祀文王来德配于上天。
English: Therefore, Zhou Gongju worshiped Hou Xilai as being worthy of heaven, and the Ming Hall worshiped Wen Wang as being worthy of heaven.

古文：《礼记》：天子祭天地及山川，岁遍。
现代文：《搜记》上记载天子祭祀天地和山川，一年祭祀一遍。
English: It is recorded in the "Collection of Records" that the heavenly son sacrifices heaven and earth as well as mountains and rivers, and sacrifices once a year.

古文：《春秋穀梁传》以十二月下辛卜。正月上辛郊。
现代文：《春秋谷梁传》在十二月下辛预先占卜郊祀的日子，在正月上辛曰预卜郊祀的子。
English: "Chunqiu Valley Liangzhuan" starts with the day of divination in December, and ends with the day of divination in the first month.

古文：高皇帝受命，因雍四畤起北畤，而备五帝。未共天地之祀。
现代文：高皇帝承受天命，依照雍城的四峙建造了北时，从而配备全了五帝，未恭敬地对待天地的祭祀。
English: Emperor Gao received the mandate of heaven and built the Northern Palace in accordance with the four faces of Yongcheng, thus equipping it with all five emperors. He did not respect the sacrificial rituals of heaven and earth.

古文：孝文十六年用新垣平初起渭阳五帝庙，祭泰一、地祇，以太祖高皇帝配。
现代文：孝文帝十六年使用新垣平，刚开始建造渭阳的五帝庙，祭祀泰一、地神，用太祖高皇帝来配享。
English: Emperor Xiaowen used Aragakidaira in the 16th year of his reign, and had just begun to build the Five Emperors' Temple in Fenyang. The temple was dedicated to Taiyi, the god of the earth, and Emperor Taizu Gao was used as an attendant.

古文：日冬至祠泰一，夏至祠地祇，皆并祠五帝，而共一牲，上亲郊拜。
现代文：太阳冬至的时候祭祀泰一，夏至时祭祀地神，都一同祭祀五帝，共用一牲，皇上亲自郊祀拜礼。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, the sun is sacrificed to Tai I, and at the time of the summer solstice, the earth god is sacrificed. All five emperors are sacrificed together, sharing one sacrifice, and the emperor himself worships in the suburbs.

古文：后平伏诛，乃不复自亲，而使有司行事。
现代文：后来新垣平被诛杀，皇上才不再亲自前去，而派有关官员去办理事情。
English: Later, Arakakidaira was killed in a fight, and the emperor stopped going in person and sent officials to deal with the situation.

古文：孝武皇帝祠雍，曰： 今上帝朕亲郊，而后土无祠，则礼不答也。 于是元鼎四年十一月甲子始立后土祠于汾阴。
现代文：孝武皇帝祭祀雍地，说： 现在上天朕亲自去郊祀，但后土却没有祭祀，这样是不符合礼的，于是元鼎四年十一月甲子开始在汾阴建立后土祠。
English: Emperor Xiaowu offered sacrifices to the Yangtze, saying, "Now that I have ascended to heaven, I will personally go to the suburbs to offer sacrifices, but there are no sacrifices to the hinterland. This is not in accordance with the etiquette. Therefore, in November of the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Jia Zi began to build a hinterland shrine in Suyin.

古文：或曰，五帝，泰一之佐，宜立泰一。
现代文：有人说，五帝是泰一的辅佐之臣，宜建泰一祠。
English: Some people said that the Five Emperors were the subordinates of Taiyi, and it was appropriate to build a temple for Taiyi.

古文：五年十一月癸未始立泰一祠于甘泉，二岁一郊，与雍更祠，亦以高祖配，不岁事天，皆未应古制。
现代文：五年十一月癸未开始在甘泉建立泰一祠，二年郊祭一次，和雍城交替祭祀，也用高祖来配享，不是每年都祭祀上天，这都没有同古代礼制相应。
English: In November of the fifth year, they did not begin to build the Taiyi Ancestral Hall in Ganquan. In the second year, the suburb festival was held once, and the Yongcheng alternated sacrifices. They also used the Gaozu to share. They did not offer sacrifices to heaven every year, which did not correspond to the ancient ritual system.

古文：建始元年，徙甘泉泰畤、河东后土于长安南北郊。
现代文：建始元年，迁移甘泉的泰时、河东的后上到长安的南北郊。
English: In the first year of construction, Taishi in Ganquan and Houyang in Hedong were relocated to the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：永始元年三月，以未有皇孙，复甘泉、河东祠。
现代文：永始元年三月，因未有皇孙，又行甘泉、河东之祭。
English: In March of the first year of the Yongshi era, because there was no imperial grandchild, the Gansu and Hedong festivals were held again.

古文：绥和二年，以卒不获祐，复长安南、北郊。
现代文：绥和二年，因最终未获福佑，又行长安南北郊祭。
English: In the 2nd year of the Heian period, because it was not blessed in the end, the festival was held again in the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an.

古文：建平三年，惧孝哀皇帝之疾未瘳，复甘泉、汾阴祠，竟复无福。
现代文：建平三年，担心孝哀皇帝的病不愈，恢复了甘泉、汾阴的祠庙，但全部恢复后仍没福报。
English: In the third year of Jianping, fearing that Emperor Xiao's illness would not be cured, the ancestral temples of Ganquan and Jinyin were restored, but there was still no blessing after all the restoration.

古文：臣谨与太师孔光、长乐少府平晏、大司农左咸、中垒校尉刘歆、太中大夫朱阳、博士薛顺、议郎国由等六十七人议，皆曰宜如建始时丞相衡等议，复长安南、北郊如故。 
现代文：臣同太师孔光、长乐少府平晏、大司农左咸、中垒校尉刘歆、太中大夫朱阳、博士薛顺、议郎国由等共六十七人谨慎地商议，都认为应遵照建始时丞相匡衡等人的建议，把长安南北郊恢复到以前的样子。 
English: A total of sixty-seven people carefully deliberated with Grand Master Kong Guang, Changle Minor Prefect Ping Jun, Senior Secretary Nong Zuo Xian, Middle School Lieutenant Liu Jun, Grand Middle School Doctor Zhu Yang, Doctor Xue Shun, and Counselor Guo Yu, and all agreed that the northern and southern suburbs of Chang'an should be restored to their previous appearance in accordance with the recommendations of Jianzhi Prime Minister Kuang Heng and others.

古文：莽又颇改其祭礼，曰： 《周官》天地之祀，乐有别有合。
现代文：王莽又改动了相当多的祭祀礼仪，他说： 《周官》上说天地的祭祀，音乐有区别也有配合。
English: Wang Mang also changed a considerable number of sacrificial rituals, he said: "Zhou Guan" said that the sacrifices of heaven and earth, music has differences and cooperation.

古文：其合乐曰 以六律、六钟、五声、八音、六舞大合乐 ，祀天神，祭地祇；祀四望，祭山川，享先妣先祖。
现代文：其中配合的音乐是 用六律、六钟、五声、八音、六舞来大规模地配合祭乐 ，祀天神，祭地神，祀四望，祭山，使先妣先祖享受祭祀。
English: The accompanying music is composed of six rhythms, six bells, five voices, eight tones, and six dances, which are used on a large scale to accompany the sacrificial music, to worship the gods of heaven and earth, to worship the four directions, and to worship the mountains, so that the ancestors can enjoy the sacrificial music.

古文：凡六乐，奏六歌，而天地神祇之物皆至。
现代文：共有六种音乐，演奏六首歌，那么天地神灵都会到来。
English: A total of six kinds of music, playing six songs, then heaven and earth gods will come.

古文：四望，盖谓日、月、星、海也。
现代文：四望，大概就是曰、月、星、海。
English: Looking around, it's probably the sun, the moon, the stars and the sea.

古文：三光高而不可得亲，海广大无限界，故其乐同。
现代文：曰、月、星三光高远，因此不能亲自去祭祀，海广阔没有界限，所以它的音乐相同。
English: It is said that the moon and stars are too far away, so it is not possible to go to the sacrifice in person, and the vastness of the sea has no boundaries, so its music is the same.

古文：祀天则天文从，祭地则地理从。
现代文：祭祀天那么天文就相随，祭祀地那么地理就相随。
English: If you worship the heavens, then astronomy will follow, and if you worship the earth, then geography will follow.

古文：三光，天文也；山川，地理也。
现代文：三光，就是天文。山川，就是地理。
English: Sanko means astronomy, and Yamakawa means geography.

古文：天地合祭，先祖配天，先妣配地，其谊一也。
现代文：天地一同祭祀，就用先祖来配享上天，用先妣来配享大地，其意义都是一样。
English: When heaven and earth offer sacrifices together, the ancestors are used to share the blessings of heaven and the ancestors are used to share the blessings of the earth. The meaning is the same.

古文：天地合精，夫妇判合。
现代文：天地合二为一，夫妇就相配合。
English: When heaven and earth become one, the couple will cooperate.

古文：祭天南郊，则以地配，一体之谊也。
现代文：在南郊祭天，就用地来配享，是一个含义。
English: In the Southern Suburbs Festival, the use of land to share is one meaning.

古文：天地位皆南乡，同席，地在东，共牢而食。
现代文：天地的位置都是向南，同在一席上，地在东面，共同享有祭品而食。
English: The position of heaven and earth is to the south, at the same table, and the earth is in the east, enjoying the offerings and food together.

古文：高帝、高后配于坛上，西乡，后在北，亦同席共牢。
现代文：高帝、高后在坛上配祭，向西，高后在北面，也是同一席共享祭品。
English: Emperor Gao and Empress Gao placed offerings on the altar, facing west and Empress Gao facing north. They also shared the offerings at the same table.

古文：牲用茧栗，玄酒陶匏。
现代文：祭牲用小牛。用陶匏盛着玄酒。
English: A calf is used as a sacrificial animal, and wine is served in a ceramic urn.

古文：《礼记》曰天子籍田千亩以事天地，繇是言之，宜有黍、稷。
现代文：《礼记》上说天子以千亩籍田来事奉天地，从这方面来说，应有黍稷。
English: "Li Ji" said that the Son of Heaven came to serve heaven and earth with a thousand mu of farmland. In this respect, there should be a difference.

古文：天地用牲一，燔燎，瘗薶用牲一，高帝、高后用牲一。
现代文：天地用一头祭牲，焚柴瘗缯埋牲祭地用一头祭牲，高帝、高后用一头祭牲。
English: Heaven and earth used one sacrificial animal, burning wood and burying animals used one sacrificial animal, and Emperor Gao and Empress Gao used one sacrificial animal.

古文：天用牲左，及黍、稷燔燎南郊；地用牲右，及黍、稷瘗于北郊。
现代文：天享用祭牲的左面，以及黍稷并在南郊焚柴；地享用祭牲的右面，以及黍稷并瘗缯在北郊。
English: The sky enjoys the left side of the sacrificial animal, and the earthworm burns firewood in the southern suburb; the earth enjoys the right side of the sacrificial animal, and the earthworm and worms in the northern suburb.

古文：其旦，东乡再拜朝日；其夕，西乡再拜夕月。
现代文：早晨，向东拜祭两次朝阳；晚上，向西拜祭两次晚月。
English: In the morning, the morning sun is worshipped twice in the east; in the evening, the evening moon is worshipped twice in the west.

古文：然后孝弟之道备，而神祇嘉享，万福降辑。
现代文：这样之后，孝悌的道德就具备了，那神灵就会很好地享受，万福就会降临。
English: After this, the morality of filial piety will be in place, the gods will have a good time, and good fortune will come.

古文：此天地合祀，以祖、妣配者也。
现代文：造就是天地一同祭祀，用祖妣来配享的方式。
English: Making is a way for heaven and earth to worship together and share with the ancestors.

古文：其别乐曰 冬日至，于地上之圜丘奏乐六变，则天神皆降；夏日至，于泽中之方丘奏乐八变，则地祇皆出。 天地有常位，不得常合，此其各特祀者也。
现代文：其中相区别的音乐是 冬天来了，就在地上的圆丘演奏六种变化的音乐，那么天神都降临了；夏天来了，在湖中的方丘上演奏八种变化的音乐，那么地神都会出现，天地有固定的位置，不经常能会合一处，这是它们各自需要特别祭祀的地方。
English: Among the different types of music are: when winter comes, the cranes play six types of music on the round mound on the ground, and then the gods descend; when summer comes, eight types of music are played on the square mound in the lake, and then the gods will appear. Heaven and earth have a fixed position, and they do not often meet in one place. This is where they each need special sacrifices.

古文：阴阳之别于日冬、夏至；其会也，以孟春正月上辛若丁，天子亲合祀天地于南郊，以高帝、高后配。
现代文：阴阳的分别在于太阳的冬至、夏至，它们的相会在孟春正月上辛若丁。天子亲自合祀天地于南郊，用高帝、高后配享。
English: The yin and yang are separated by the winter and summer solstices of the sun, and they meet on the first day of the first month of the lunar new year. The Son of Heaven himself enshrined heaven and earth together in the southern suburbs, sharing with Emperor Gao and Empress Gao.

古文：阴阳有离合，《易》曰 分阴分阳，迭用柔刚 。
现代文：阴阳有离有合，《易》上说 阴阳相分，柔刚就互用 。
English: Yin and yang are separated and combined, and Yi said that yin and yang are separated, and soft and hard are used interchangeably.

古文：以日冬至使有司奉祠南郊，高帝配而望群阳；日夏至使有司奉祭北郊，高后配而望群阳。皆以助致微气，通道幽弱。
现代文：在太阳冬至时派有关官员到南郊奉祠，用高帝配享并望祭群阳，太阳夏至时派有关官员 ，郊奉祭，用高后配享并望祭群阴，都用来帮助招致精妙之气，导通幽弱。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, relevant officials were sent to the southern suburb to worship the shrine, and they used the Gao Emperor to enjoy and look forward to the sun. At the time of the summer solstice, relevant officials were sent to the suburb to worship the sun, and they used the Gao Emperor to enjoy and look forward to the sun, and they used the high priest to enjoy and look forward to the sun.

古文：当此之时，后不省方，故天子不亲而遣有司，所以正承天顺地，复圣王之制，显太祖之功也。
现代文：在这样的时候，君主都不理常务，所以天子不亲自前去而派有关官员办理，这是用来承天顺地，恢复圣王的制度，尊显太祖的功劳。
English: At such a time, the monarch would not attend to his duties, so the emperor did not go in person, but sent the relevant officials to deal with the matter. This was done to follow the will of heaven, restore the holy king system, and honor the great-grandfather's merits.

古文：渭阳祠勿复修。
现代文：渭阳祠不要重修。
English: Don't rebuild Fenyang Temple.

古文：群望未悉定，定复奏。 
现代文：各望祭没有完全确定，确定后再奏。 
English: Each festival is not fully determined, and will be played later.

古文：奏可。
现代文：奏议得到许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：三十余年间，天地之祠五徙焉。
现代文：三十多年间，天地的祠庙五次迁徙。
English: In more than 30 years, the ancestral temples of heaven and earth have migrated five times.

古文：后莽又奏言： 《书》曰 类于上帝，禋于六宗 。
现代文：后来王莽又上奏道： 《书》上说 类祭上天，里祀六宗 。
English: Later, Wang Mang also recited: "The Book says that six kinds of festivals are enshrined in heaven.

古文：欧阳、大、小夏侯三家说六宗，皆曰上不及天，下不及地，旁不及四方，在六者之间，助阴阳变化，实一而名六，名实不相应。
现代文：欧阳、大小夏侯三家解说六宗，都说上不及天，下不及地，旁不及四方，在这六方之间，辅助阴阳变化，实际上是一宗而名称上是六宗，名和实不相应。
English: Ouyang, Xiao and Xiao, the three schools of interpretation of the six schools, all say that the top is less than the sky, the bottom is less than the ground, and the sides are less than the four directions. Between these six directions, the auxiliary yin and yang changes are actually one and the name is six, and the name and reality do not correspond.

古文：《礼记》祀典，功施于民则祀之。
现代文：《礼记》上祀典，是功劳施于百姓那么就祭祀它。
English: According to the Book of Rites, it is a merit bestowed on the people, so it should be worshipped.

古文：天文：日、月、星、辰，所昭仰也；地理：山、川、海、泽，所生殖也。
现代文：天文的曰月星辰，是用来照明；地理的山川海河，是用来滋生繁殖的。
English: The astronomical sun, moon, and stars are used for illumination; the geographical mountains, rivers, and seas are used for breeding.

古文：《易》有八卦， 乾 、 坤 六子，水火不相逮，雷风不相誖，山泽通气，然后能变化，既成万物也。
现代文：《易》有八卦，《干》《坤》六子中，水火不相及，雷风不相悖，山河气息相通，这样才能进行变化，全面形成万物。
English: "Yi" has eight trigrams, "Gan" and "Kun" have six, water and fire do not meet, thunder and wind do not oppose each other, and mountains and rivers share the same breath, so that changes can be made and all things can be fully formed.

古文：臣前奏徙甘泉泰畤、汾阴后土皆复于南、北郊。
现代文：臣前不久上奏迁徙甘泉宫的泰峙、汾阴的后土都已在南北郊恢复。
English: The northern and southern suburbs have been restored to their former glory, while the northern and southern suburbs have been restored to their former glory.

古文：谨案《周官》 兆五帝于四郊 ，山川各因其方，今五帝兆居在雍五畤，不合于古。
现代文：谨据《周官》 建立五帝的祭坛于四郊 的教导，山各自根据它们的方向，现在五帝的祭坛在雍城的五峙，不符合古制。
English: According to the Zhou Guan, the altar of the Five Emperors should be built in the four suburbs, and the mountains should be aligned according to their directions. Now the altar of the Five Emperors is in the five stands of Yongcheng, which does not conform to the ancient system.

古文：又日、月、雷、风、山、泽，《易》卦六子之尊气，所谓六宗也。
现代文：又有日月雷风山河，《易》卦六子的高贵之气，就是所说的六宗。
English: There are also the sun, the moon, the thunder, the wind, the mountains and rivers, and the nobility of the six sons of Yi and Gua, that is, the six schools.

古文：星、辰、水、火、沟、渎，皆六完之属也。今或未特祀，或无兆居。
现代文：星辰水火沟渠，都是六宗的一部分。现在它们有的没有特别加以祭祀，有的没有祭坛可居。
English: Stars, water and fire ditches are all part of the six sects. Now some of them are not specially worshiped, and some do not have altars to live in.

古文：谨与太师光、大司徒宫、羲和歆等八十九人议，皆曰：天子父事天，母事地。今称天神曰皇天上帝，泰一兆曰泰畤，而称地祇曰后土，与中央黄灵同，又兆北郊，未有尊称。
现代文：臣谨慎地同太师孔光、大司徒宫、羲和刘歆等八十九人商议，都说天子像事奉父亲一样事奉天，像事奉母亲一样事奉地，如今称呼天神叫皇天上天，泰一的祭坛为泰峙，而称地神为后土，与中央的黄灵相同，另外建立北郊的祭坛没有尊称。
English: The minister cautiously discussed with the eighty-nine people including the Grand Master Kong Guang, the Grand Master Thu Gong, the Grand Priests Wu and Liu Xi, and they all said that the Heavenly Son would serve heaven like a father and earth like a mother. Nowadays, the altar of the Emperor is called the Heavenly God, the altar of Tai I is called the Heavenly God, and the altar of the Earthly God is called the Back Earth, which is the same as the Yellow Spirit in the center. In addition, the altar built in the northern suburb has no honorary name.

古文：宜令地祇称皇地后祇，兆曰广畤。
现代文：应令地神称为皇坠后衹，祭坛叫广时。
English: The deity is called the Empress Dowager, and the altar is called the Great Altar.

古文：《易》曰 方以类聚，物以群分 。
现代文：《易》上说 同类事物相聚一处，不同事物按群体相分别 。
English: Yi said that similar things should be gathered in one place, and different things should be separated by groups.

古文：分群神以类相从为五部，兆天地之别神：中央帝黄灵后土畤及日庙、北辰、北斗、填星、中宿中宫于长安城之未地兆；东方帝太昊青灵勾芒畤及雷公、风伯庙、岁星、东宿东宫于东郊兆；南方炎帝赤灵祝融畤及荧惑星、南宿南宫于南郊兆；西方帝少皞白灵蓐收畤及太白星、西宿西宫于西郊兆；北方帝颛顼黑灵玄冥畤及月庙、雨师庙、辰星、北宿北宫于北郊兆。 
现代文：把群神按同类相从地分，可划分为五部，为天地以外的神建造祭坛：中央是帝黄灵后土时以及曰庙、北辰、北斗、土星、中宿中宫，在长安城的未地建立祭坛；东方是帝太吴青灵勾芒峙以及雷公、风伯庙、木星、束宿束宫，在束郊建立祭坛；南方是炎帝赤灵祝融峙以及火星、南宿南宫，在南郊建立祭坛；西方是帝少嗥白灵蓐收峙以及金星、西宿西宫，在西郊建立祭坛；北方是帝颛顼黑灵玄冥峙以及月庙、雨师庙、辰星、北宿北宫，在北郊建立祭坛。 
English: Dividing the group of gods according to their similarity from the ground, it can be divided into five parts to build altars for gods outside heaven and earth: in the center is the Emperor Huang Ling Houcun and the Day Temple, the North Star, the Big Dipper, Saturn, and the Middle Palace of the Middle Palace, and the altar is built in the outskirts of Chang'an City; in the east is the Emperor Wu Qingling and the Thunder King, the Wind Uncle Temple, Jupiter, and the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the Palace of the

古文：奏可，于是长安旁诸庙兆畤甚盛矣。
现代文：奏议得到许可。于是长安城边的各庙的祭坛和峙都相当兴盛。
English: The proposal was approved. As a result, the altars and altars of the temples on the edge of Chang'an City are quite prosperous.

古文：莽又言： 帝王建立社稷，百王不易。
现代文：王莽又说： 帝王建立社稷，百王不变更。
English: Wang Mang also said: Emperors establish social rules, and the hundred emperors do not change.

古文：社者，土也。
现代文：社，是土地神。
English: Society is the god of the land.

古文：宗庙，王者所居。
现代文：宗庙，是帝王居住的地方。
English: The ancestral temple is the place where the emperor lived.

古文：稷者，百谷之主，所以奉宗庙，共粢盛，人所食以生活也。
现代文：稷，是百谷的主神，用它来奉事宗庙，供给祭品，入食用来维持生活。
English: , is the main god of the Hundred Valleys. It is used to serve the ancestral temple, to provide sacrifices, and to eat to sustain life.

古文：王者莫不尊重亲祭，自为之主，礼如宗庙。
现代文：帝王没有不尊敬重视而亲自加以祭祀的，亲自为祭祀的主持，礼仪同祭祀宗庙一样。
English: If the emperor did not disrespectfully attach importance to it and personally performed the sacrifice, he personally presided over the sacrifice, and the etiquette was the same as that of the sacrificial ancestral temple.

古文：《诗》曰 乃立冢土 。
现代文：《诗》上说 于是建立大社 。
English: According to the poem, this led to the establishment of the grand shrine.

古文：又曰 以御田祖，以祈甘雨 。
现代文：又说 侍奉稷神，来祈求甘雨 。
English: He also said, "Serve the god of thunder, and pray for rain."

古文：《礼记》曰 唯祭宗庙社稷，为越绋而行事 。
现代文：《礼记》上说 衹有祭祀宗庙社稷，称为越绋而行事 。
English: "Li Ji" said that "there is a sacrificial ritual of the patriarchal temple and shrine, which is called "going beyond the limits."

古文：圣汉兴，礼仪稍定，已有官社，未立官稷。 
现代文：圣汉建立，礼仪逐渐确定，已有官社，还没有官稷。 
English: The Holy Han Dynasty was established, and the etiquette was gradually established. There was already an official society, but no official gong.

古文：遂于官社后立官稷，以夏禹配食官社，后稷配食官稷。
现代文：于是在官社后建立官稷，用夏禹来配食官社，后稷来配享官稷。
English: Therefore, the official post was established after the official shrine, and Xia Yu was used to distribute food to the official shrine, and Hou Yi was used to distribute official post.

古文：稷种穀树。
现代文：在稷地种谷树。
English: Planting corn trees in the alfalfa fields.

古文：徐州牧岁贡五色土各一斗。
现代文：徐州的牧守一年进贡五色土各一斗。
English: The herdsman of Xuzhou pays a tribute of one bucket of five-colored soil every year.

古文：莽篡位二年，兴神仙事，以方士苏乐言，起八风台于宫中。
现代文：王莽篡位第二年，兴起神仙的事，根据方士苏乐的建议，在宫中建造八风台。
English: In the second year of Wang Mang's usurpation, the matter of immortals arose, and according to the suggestion of the abbot Su Le, eight wind towers were built in the palace.

古文：台成万金，作乐其上，顺风作液汤。
现代文：台的建成花费了一万金，在上面奏乐，顺着风向建造了液汤。
English: The construction of the platform cost ten thousand gold, played music on it, and built a liquid soup along the wind direction.

古文：又种五梁禾于殿中，各顺色置其方面，先煮鹤髓、毒冒、犀玉二十余物渍种，计粟斛成一金，言此黄帝谷仙之术也。
现代文：又在殿中种植五粱禾，各自按照自己的颜色放到它所应在的方位，先煮鹤髓、玳瑁、犀玉等二十多种物质来泡种子，计一斛粟成一金，说这是黄帝谷仙的方法。
English: They also planted five kinds of poppies in the hall, each according to their own color, and placed it in the position it should be. First, they boiled more than 20 kinds of substances such as crane pith, ginger, and rhino horn to soak the seeds, and calculated that one poppy would turn into one gold, saying that this was the method of the Yellow Emperor Valley Immortal.

古文：以乐为黄门郎，令主之。
现代文：任苏乐为黄门郎，命他来主持这件事。
English: Ren Su Le is Huang Men Lang, he was ordered to preside over this matter.

古文：莽遂崇鬼神淫祀，至其末年，自天地六宗以下至诸小鬼神，凡千七百所，用三牲鸟兽三千余种。
现代文：王莽于是崇敬鬼神，过多地进行祭祀，到王莽的末年，从天地六宗以下到各小鬼神，共一千七百所，用三牲乌兽三千多种。
English: Therefore, Wang Mang revered ghosts and gods and performed too many sacrifices. By the end of Wang Mang's life, there were a total of 1,700 ghosts and deities, from the six major deities of heaven and earth to minor ones, and more than 3,000 kinds of animals and beasts.

古文：后不能备，乃以鸡当鹜雁，犬当麋鹿。
现代文：后来不能备齐，就用鶸来当骛雁，狗当麋鹿。
English: Later, when they couldn't find a match, they used a quail as a goose and a dog as a deer.

古文：数下诏自以当仙，语在其《传》。
现代文：几次下韶认为自己应当成为神仙，语记在他的传裹。
English: Several times, he thought that he should become a god, and his words are recorded in his biography.

古文：赞曰：汉兴之初，庶事草创，唯一叔孙生略定朝廷之仪。
现代文：赞曰：汉朝建立的初期，众事都处在草创阶段，衹有叔孙生简略地制定了朝廷的礼仪。
English: Zang said: In the early days of the establishment of the Han Dynasty, everything was in the initial stage, and many uncles and grandchildren briefly formulated the etiquette of the imperial court.

古文：若乃正朔、服色、郊望之事，数世犹未章焉。
现代文：至于像正朔、服色、郊望等事，经过几代还没有明确。
English: As for such things as Zhengshuo, clothing color, and suburban view, it has not been clear after several generations.

古文：至于孝文，始以夏郊，而张仓据水德，公孙臣、贾谊更以为土德，卒不能明。
现代文：到了孝文帝的时候，开始在夏天郊祭，但张仓是根据水德，公孙臣、贾谊认为应改为土德，终不能明了。
English: By the time of Emperor Xiaowen, the suburb festival began in the summer, but Zhang Cang believed that it should be changed to the local virtue according to the water virtue, Gongsun Zhen and Jia Yi, but it was not clear in the end.

古文：孝武之世，文章为盛，太初改制，而宽、司马迁等犹从臣、谊之言，服色数度，遂顺黄德。
现代文：孝武帝时代，礼乐法度兴盛，太初时改革礼制，而倪宽、司马迁等人仍依从公孙臣、买谊所说的，服色制度便依顺黄德。
English: In the era of Emperor Xiaowu, the etiquette of music flourished, and the etiquette system was reformed at the beginning of the century. However, Ni Kuan, Sima Qian and others still followed what Gongsun Zhen and Buyi said, and the dress code system followed Huang De.

古文：彼以五德之传，从所不胜，秦在水德，故谓汉据土而克之。
现代文：他们根据五德的传递依从所不能战胜的原理，认为秦在水德，所以说汉朝依据土德来胜克它。
English: According to the principle that the transmission of the Five Virtues should be based on the principle of invincibility, they believed that Qin was in the water virtue, so they said that the Han Dynasty was based on the soil virtue to win it.

古文：刘向父子以为帝出于《震》，故包羲氏始受木德，其后以母传子，终而复始，自神农、黄帝下历唐、虞三代而汉得火焉。
现代文：刘向父子认为帝出于《震》，所以包羲氏开始接受木德，这以后由母亲来传给儿子，终而复始，从神农、黄帝以下经过唐、虞、三代而到汉朝，就得到火德。
English: Liu Xiang and his son believed that the emperor came from the "earthquake," so the Baojun clan began to accept the wood virtue, which was later passed down from mother to son, and eventually resumed, from Shennong and the Yellow Emperor through the Tang, Yu and three generations to the Han Dynasty, they got the fire virtue.

古文：故高祖始起，神母夜号，著赤帝之符，旗章遂赤，自得天统矣。
现代文：所以高祖开始兴起时，神母夜晚哭号，表明赤帝的瑞符，旗帜的色彩便是赤色，自然而得天统。
English: Therefore, when Gaozu began to rise, the goddess wailed in the night, indicating the red emperor's lucky charm, and the color of the flag was red, which naturally came from heaven.

古文：昔共工氏以水德间于木、火，与秦同运，非其次序，故皆不永。
现代文：以前共工氏用水德间隔在木火之间，同秦朝同一命运，不是它们的次序，因此都不能长久。
English: In the past, the Kuo-Gong and the Sui-Dao were separated by wood and fire, and shared the same fate as the Qin Dynasty. They were not in the same order, so they could not last long.

古文：由是言之，祖宗之制盖有自然之应，顺时宜矣。
现代文：从这来说，祖宗的制度大致有自然的对应，顺应时宜。
English: From this point of view, the ancestral system has a natural correspondence and is in line with the times.

古文：究观方士祠官之变，谷永之言，不亦正乎！
现代文：探究观察方士、祠官的变化，谷永的言论，不也很正确吗！
English: Exploring and observing the changes of priests and ancestral officials, Gu Yong's speech, is not it also very correct?

古文：不亦正乎！
现代文：不也很正确吗！
English: Isn't that exactly right!

