古文：万章问曰： 象日以杀舜为事，立为天子，则放之，何也？ 
现代文：万章问： 象每天把杀害舜作为事务，舜被拥立为天子后只是将他流放，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked, "Why is it that you treat the killing of Zhai as a daily affair, but only banish him after he was enthroned as the Son of Heaven?

古文：孟子曰： 封之也，或曰放焉。 
现代文：孟子说： 实际是封了他做诸侯，但也有人说是流放他。 
English: Mencius said, "Actually, he was made a vassal, but some people say he was exiled.

古文：万章曰： 舜流共工于幽州，放驩兜于崇山，杀三苗于三危，殛鲧于羽山，四罪而天下咸服，诛不仁也。
现代文：万章说： 舜将共工流放到幽州，发驩兜流放到崇山，把三苗的国君流放到三危，诛杀鲧于羽山。惩处这四个罪犯而天下归服，这是惩办不仁之人的缘故。
English: Wanzhang said, "He exiled the four co-workers to Yuzhou, the hairpins to Chongshan, the three seedlings to Sanxia, and the three kings to Sanxia. He killed the four kings on Mount Heshan. Punishing these four criminals, the whole world submitted to him. This is the result of punishing those who are not kind.

古文：象至不仁，封之有庳。有庳之人奚罪焉？
现代文：象是个很不仁的人，却将他封在有庳国，有庳国的人又有什么罪过？
English: It's like a very unkind person, but he is sealed in a foreign country. What is the fault of the foreign country?

古文：仁人固如是乎？
现代文：仁人做事难道就这样吗？
English: Is this the way a humane person does things?

古文：在他人则诛之，在弟则封之。 
现代文：他人有罪就惩罚，弟弟有罪就封他为诸侯？ 
English: If someone else is guilty, he is punished; if his brother is guilty, he is made a vassal?

古文：曰： 仁人之于弟也，不藏怒焉，不宿怨焉，亲爱之而已矣。
现代文：孟子说： 仁人对于弟弟，不隐藏心中的愤怒，也不留下怨恨，只是亲他爱他而已。
English: Mencius said: A benevolent person does not hide his anger from his brother, nor does he hold grudges, but only loves him.

古文：亲之欲其贵也，爱之欲其富也。
现代文：亲近他，是想要他尊贵；爱护他，是想要他富裕。
English: To be close to him is to want him to be noble; to love him is to want him to be rich.

古文：封之有庳，富贵之也。
现代文：封他到有庳国，正是要使他尊贵和富裕。
English: It was to make him noble and rich that he was sent to Yuxiang.

古文：身为天子，弟为匹夫，可谓亲爱之乎？ 
现代文：本身是天子，弟弟却是平民，能够称之为亲近和爱护吗？ 
English: He is the Son of God, but his brother is a commoner. Can we call this closeness and love?

古文： 敢问或曰放者，何谓也？ 
现代文：万章说： 那又冒昧地请问，有人说这是流放，这是指什么呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said, "Then I would like to ask you, what does it mean when someone says it's exile?

古文：曰： 象不得有为于其国，天子使吏治其国，而纳其贡税焉，故谓之放，岂得暴彼民哉？
现代文：孟子说： 虽然把象封在有庳，但象不能够直接管理国家，舜派官员管理国家而把收的税给象使用，所以称之为流放。怎么能让他残暴地对待老百姓呢？
English: Mencius said: Although the elephant is chained in a yoke, it cannot directly manage the country. The yoke sends officials to manage the country and uses the collected taxes for the elephant, so it is called banishment. How can he be allowed to treat the people cruelly?

古文：虽然，欲常常而见之，故源源而来。 不及贡，以政接于有庳 ，此之谓也。 
现代文：尽管如此，舜还是想常常见到他，所以让他不断来朝见。所谓 不一定要等到朝贡，就因政务需要而加强与有庳国的联系。 
English: In spite of this, Shun still wanted to see him often, so he kept him coming to the Imperial Court. The so-called "don't have to wait for tribute" meant strengthening ties with Shun's country due to the needs of government affairs.

