古文：俱名国释玄照王景融凌波女陶岘齐浣沙州黑河兴庆池龙井龙旃然龙门
现代文：俱名国释玄照王景融凌波女陶岘齐浣沙州黑河兴庆池龙井龙旃然龙门
English: Longjing, Longjing, Longjing, Longjing, Longjing, Longjing, Longjing, Longjing

古文：俱名国
现代文：俱名国
English: the club's home country

古文：僧祗律云，佛住舍卫城南方。
现代文：和尚祗律说，佛住在舍卫城的南方。
English: According to the monk, the Buddha lived in the south of Shwedagon.

古文：有邑名大林，时有商人驱八牛到北方俱名国。
现代文：有一个叫 大林 的都城，当时有一个商人赶着八头牛到北方的俱名国去。
English: There was a capital city called Dalin. At that time, a merchant was driving eight cows to Kunming in the north.

古文：有一商人在泽中牧牛。
现代文：有一个商人在水洼地里牧牛。
English: A businessman was herding cattle in the swamps.

古文：时有离车捕龙食之，捕得一龙，离车穿鼻牵行。
现代文：那时有一个叫离车的人扑龙杀肉吃。离车捕到一条龙，就穿着龙鼻子牵着走。
English: At that time, a man who had left the car was told to kill a dragon and eat the meat. When he caught a dragon from the car, he wore a dragon's nose and led it away.

古文：商人问离车： 今汝牵此龙何用？ 
现代文：商人问离车； 现在你牵着这条龙有什么用？ 
English: The merchant asked the driver, "What's the use of you leading this dragon now?"

古文：云： 我将杀而为啖。 
现代文：离车说： 我要杀了吃。 
English: He got out of the car and said, "I'm going to kill a toad."

古文：商人欲以一牛易之，捕者邀至八牛，方许。
现代文：商人想用一头牛交换那条龙。离车要商人交出八头牛才肯交换。
English: The merchant wants to exchange one cow for the dragon. When he leaves the car, the merchant has to hand over eight cows before he is willing to exchange.

古文：商人即放龙令去。
现代文：商人就把龙放了，让它离去。
English: The merchant released the dragon and let it go.

古文：既而复虑离车追逐，复捕取放别池中。
现代文：然后又想到离车会来追赶，就把龙又捕来放到另外的池子之中。
English: Then, thinking that the car would chase after it, he caught the dragon and put it in another pool.

古文：龙忽变为人，语谓商人曰： 君施我命，今欲报恩，可共入宫，当报大德。 
现代文：龙忽然变成了人，对商人说： 你救了我一命，现在想要报恩。你可以和我一起入宫，报达你的大恩大德。 
English: The dragon suddenly turned into a man and said to the merchant: "You saved my life, now you want to repay the favor. You can enter the palace with me and repay your great kindness."

古文：商人答言： 龙性率暴，嗔恚无常，或能杀我。 
现代文：商人回答说： 龙的脾气又直爽又暴躁，喜怒无常，也许能杀害我。 
English: The merchant replied, "The dragon's temper is direct, hot-tempered, and temperamental, and it may kill me.

古文：答云： 不尔。
现代文：龙回答说： 不会的。
English: The dragon replied, "No."

古文：前人系我，我力能杀彼人。但以我受菩萨法，都无杀心。何况君今施我寿命，顾当加害。
现代文：前边那个人拴我，我的力气完全可以杀死那个人，但是我受菩萨规范，完全没有杀心，何况你现在救了我的性命，怎么能加害？
English: The person in front of me punched me, my strength is fully capable of killing that person, but I am regulated by the bodhisattva and have absolutely no desire to kill. Besides, you have now saved my life, how can you cause harm?

古文：若不去者，少住此中。我先往扫除。 
现代文：如果你不去，请在这里少住，我先去扫除。 
English: If you don't go, please stay here for a short time. I'll clean up first.

古文：商人后入宫内，见龙门边，二龙系在一处。因问汝为何被系。
现代文：商人后到龙宫，见龙门旁边，两条龙被绑在一处，于是就问： 你们为什么被绑呢？ 
English: Later, the merchant went to the Dragon Palace and saw two dragons tied together next to the Dragon Gate. He asked, "Why are you tied together?"

古文：答言： 此龙女半月中，三日受斋法。我兄弟守护此龙女，不为坚固，为离车所捕。以是被系。 
现代文：两条龙回答说： 这里的龙女半月之中，有三天受斋法，我们兄弟两个守护此龙女，守护得不够牢固，被离车捉了去，因此我们被绑了起来。 
English: The two dragons replied, "Among the half-moon dragons here, there is one who fasts for three days. Two of our brothers were guarding her, but they were not strong enough. They were caught by the car, so we were tied up.

古文：龙女俄出，呼商人入宫坐宝床上。
现代文：不一会儿龙女出来了，迎商人入宫坐到宝床上。
English: After a while, the dragon maiden came out, welcomed the merchant into the palace and sat on the treasure bed.

古文：龙女言： 龙中有食，能尽寿而消者，有二十年消者。有七年消者，有阎浮提人食者。
现代文：龙女说： 龙中有一种能使寿命达到极点而消化的食物。有二十年消化的，有七年消化的，有阎浮提人吃的。
English: The dragon maiden said, "There is a kind of food in the dragon that can be digested to the end of its lifespan. It can be digested for twenty years, seven years, and eaten by humans.

古文：未知君欲何食。 
现代文：不知你想要什么样的食物？ 
English: Not sure what kind of food you want?

古文：答言： 须欲阎浮提食。 
现代文：商人说他要阎浮提人吃的食物。
English: The merchant said that he wanted to buy food that people would eat.

古文：即时种种饮食俱备。
现代文：当时种种饮食全都具备。
English: At that time, all kinds of food were available.

古文：商人问龙女： 此龙何故被系？ 
现代文：商人问龙女： 这两条龙为什么被绑？ 
English: The merchant asked the dragon lady: Why are the two dragons tied?

古文：龙女言： 此有过，我欲杀之。 
现代文：龙女说： 这两条龙有过错。我想杀他们。 
English: The dragon girl said: These two dragons are at fault. I want to kill them.

古文：商人言： 汝莫杀。 
现代文：商人说： 你不要杀他们。 
English: The merchant said, "Don't kill them.

古文： 乃言不尔，要当杀之。 商人言： 汝放彼者，我当食耳。 
现代文：龙女说不行，应该杀。商人说： 你放了他们，我才能吃饭。 
English: The dragon lady said no, they should be killed. The merchant said, "If you let them go, then I can eat."

古文：复言曰： 不得直放之，当罚六月，摈置人间。 
现代文：又说道： 不能直接放，应当罚六个月，扔到人间去。 
English: He also said: You can't release them directly, they should be punished for six months and thrown into the world.

古文：商人见龙宫中，宝物庄严饰宫殿，即问： 汝有如是庄严，因受菩萨何为？ 
现代文：商人见龙宫中，宫殿很庄严，用宝物装饰着，就问： 你有如此庄严的龙宫，为什么还要接受菩萨的约束呢？ 
English: When the merchant saw that the palace in the Dragon Palace was very grand and decorated with treasures, he asked, "You have such a grand Dragon Palace, why do you need to be bound by a Bodhisattva?"

古文：答言： 我龙法有五事苦。
现代文：回答说： 我们龙的规矩中，有五种情况最苦。
English: He answered, "In our dragon's code, there are five most difficult situations.

古文：何等为五？
现代文：哪五种情况呢？
English: What are the five situations?

古文：谓生时、眠时、淫时、嗔时、死时。
现代文：是出生的时候、睡眠的时候、淫雨的时候、嗔怒的时候、死亡的时候。
English: Birth, sleep, rain, anger, death.

古文：一日之中，三过皮肉落地，热沙簇身。 
现代文：一天当中，要三次通过皮肉落地，热沙簇身。 
English: During the day, it is necessary to pass through the skin three times and fall to the ground.

古文：商言： 汝欲何求耶？ 
现代文：商人说： 你想要追求什么呢？ 
English: The businessman said, "What do you want to pursue?"

古文：答言： 人道中生，为畜生苦不知法，故欲就如来出家。 
现代文：龙女回答说： 我想到人道中生存，因为畜生苦于不知道法度，所以我想跟着如来出家。 
English: The dragon maiden replied, "I want to live among human beings, because animals suffer from not knowing the Law, so I want to follow the Buddha and become a nun."

古文：龙女即与八饼金，言此金足汝父母眷属终身用之不尽。
现代文：龙女当时给了商人八饼金，说这些金子足够你父母眷属终身用之不尽的了。
English: At that time, the dragon maiden gave the merchant eight pieces of gold, saying that this gold was enough for your parents and relatives to use for life.

古文：复言汝合眼。
现代文：还让他闭上眼睛，用神变之法把他送回本国。
English: He also told him to close his eyes and sent him back to his home country using the method of transmutation.

古文：即以神变持着本国，以八饼金与父母。
现代文：商人把八饼金交给父母，说： 这是龙金。 
English: The merchant gave the eight-cake gold to his parents and said, "This is dragon gold.

古文：曰： 此是龙金。 
现代文：说自己再活一辈子也用不完。
English: Saying that you will live another lifetime is not enough.

古文：说己更生尽寿用之不可尽。时思念仁慈不得不行，暂救龙女，恩报弥重；况持大斋，受福宁小？
现代文：他当时想到不能不做善事，暂时救了龙女，报恩还如此之重，何况久持大斋，受福难道会小吗？
English: At that time, he thought that he couldn't help but do good deeds. He temporarily saved the dragon maiden, and the reward was so heavy. What's more, he had been fasting for a long time. Would he be less blessed?

古文：释玄照
现代文：释玄照
English: Shokugenzo

古文：释玄照修道于嵩山白鹊谷，操行精悫，冠于缁流。
现代文：玄照和尚在嵩山白鹊谷修道，操行精到谨慎，在出家人中推为首位。
English: Xuanzhao Monk is a monk in Songshan Bailu Valley. He is prudent and prudent, and he is the first among the monks.

古文：常愿讲《法华经》千遍，以利于人。
现代文：他常常愿意讲授一千遍《法华经》，以利于他人。
English: He is often willing to recite the Lotus Sutra a thousand times for the benefit of others.

古文：既讲于山中，虽冱寒酷热，山林险邃，而来者恒满讲席焉。
现代文：在山中开讲之后，虽然寒暑无常，山路险恶，但是来听讲的总是坐无虚席。
English: After the lecture in the mountains, although the weather is changeable and the mountain roads are treacherous, there are always plenty of seats for those who come to listen.

古文：时有三叟，眉须皓白，容状瑰异，虔心谛听。
现代文：当时有三个老头，眉毛胡须全白，相貌与众不同，在那虔诚地听讲。
English: There were three old men, with white eyebrows and whiskers, very different in appearance, who were devoutly listening to the lecture.

古文：如此累日。玄照异之。
现代文：如此听了多日，玄照感到奇怪。
English: After listening to this for several days, Xuanzhao felt strange.

古文：忽一旦，晨谒玄照曰： 弟子龙也，各有所任，亦颇劳苦，已历数千百年矣。
现代文：忽然有一天，三个老头一大早就来拜谒玄照。他们说： 我们三个弟子，是龙，各有自己的职务，也很劳苦，已经好几千年了。
English: Suddenly one day, three old men came early in the morning to pay homage to Zou Xuanzhao. They said: "We three disciples are dragons, each with our own duties, and we also work very hard. It has been several thousand years.

古文：得闻法力，无以为报，或长老指使，愿效微力。 
现代文：能听到您的法力，没有什么报答的，也许您有什么事情需要我们去做，我们愿意效微薄之力。 
English: Can hear your mana, there is nothing to repay, maybe you have something we need to do, we are willing to do a little.

古文：玄照曰： 今愆阳经时，国内荒馑，可致甘泽，以救生灵。
现代文：玄照说： 现在阴阳失调，干旱少雨，国内闹饥荒，你们可以下些雨来拯救天下百姓。
English: Xuanzhao said, "Nowadays, the yin and yang are out of balance, there is drought and little rain, and there is famine in the country. You can send some rain to save the people of the world."

古文：即贫道所愿也。 
现代文：这就是贫道的愿望。 
English: This is the aspiration of the impoverished.

古文：三叟曰： 召云致雨，固是细事。
现代文：三个老头说： 聚云下雨，本来是一桩小事。
English: The three old men said, "It is a small matter for clouds to gather and rain.

古文：但雨禁绝重，不奉命擅行，诛责非细，身首为忧也。
现代文：只是关于下雨的禁令绝对严重，不奉上天之命擅自行雨，杀头之罪不是小事，有掉脑袋的危险呢！
English: However, the ban on rain is very serious. If it does not rain according to God's order, it will rain by itself. The crime of beheading is not a small matter. There is a risk of losing one's head!

古文：试说一计，庶几可矣。长老能行之乎？ 
现代文：我们试说一个办法，差不多可以成功，不知长老能不能去做？ 
English: Let's try to talk about a way that can almost succeed, I don't know if the elders can do it?

古文：玄照曰： 愿闻其说。 
现代文：玄照说： 那就说给我听听吧！ 
English: Xuan Zhao said: Then tell me and let me hear it!

古文：三叟曰： 少室山孙思邈处士道高德重，必能脱弟子之祸，则雨可立致矣。 
现代文：三个老头说： 少室山的孙思邈处士道高德重，一定能使弟子的灾祸解脱。那就可以马上下雨了。 
English: The three old men said, "Sun Shih-tao of Mt. Shoshimuro, a highly moral official, will surely be able to liberate his disciple from the calamity. Then it will rain immediately."

古文：玄照曰： 贫道知孙处士之在山也，而不知其所行，又何若此邪？ 
现代文：玄照说： 贫道知道孙处士在山中，但是不知道他的道行，又怎么能如此呢？ 
English: Xuanzhao said, "The poor people know that Sun Jingshi is in the mountains, but they don't know his deeds. How can they do this?

古文：三叟曰： 孙公之仁，不可诊度，着千金翼方，惠利济于万代，名已籍于帝宫，诚为贵真也。
现代文：三个老头说： 孙公的仁义，不可估量。仁义之心附着于济世的药方，造福于万代。他的名望已经在天宫里登记入册，实在是个世外高人。
English: The three old men said, "Sun Gong's benevolence is immeasurable. His benevolent heart is attached to the recipe of benefiting the world and benefiting all generations. His fame has been registered in the Heavenly Palace. He is truly a world-class person."

古文：如一言救庇，当保无恙。
现代文：如果他能说话相救，保证没有问题。
English: If he can talk his way out of it, I'm sure there's no problem.

古文：但长老先与之约，如其许诺，即便奉依。 
现代文：只要长老先与他约好，如果他答应了，立即就依你的话去做。 
English: As long as the elder makes an appointment with him first, if he agrees, immediately do as you say.

古文：即以拯护之方，授于玄照。
现代文：于是他们就把救护的办法告诉了玄照。
English: So they told Xuan Zhao about the rescue plan.

古文：玄照诣思邈所居，恳诚祗谒，情礼甚谨。坐定久之，乃曰： 处士以贤哲之度，济拔为心，今者亢阳，寸苗不植，嗷嗷百姓，焦枯若此，仁哲之用，固在于今。
现代文：玄照到孙思邈的住处去，诚恳地拜谒，人情礼数特别谨慎，坐定许久才说： 孙处士以贤德明哲的气度，把济助于苍生为己任，现在极旱，寸苗不长，百姓叫苦不迭，焦渴干枯如此，施用仁哲的时候到了。
English: Xuan Zhao went to Sun Siyi's residence and sincerely bowed to him. He was very careful about the number of humanities and etiquette, and only after sitting for a long time did he say: "Sun Siyi, with his wise and virtuous demeanor, took it upon himself to help the living. Now it is extremely dry, the seedlings are not long, the people are crying incessantly, and they are parched with thirst. The time has come to apply benevolence.

古文：幸一开恩，以救危歉。 
现代文：希望你开恩，救一救天下百姓。 
English: I hope you will be gracious and save the people of the world.

古文：思邈曰： 仆之无堪，遁弃山野，以何功力，济于人也？
现代文：孙思邈说： 我没能耐才遁入山野，凭什么功力有助于人呢？
English: Sun Siyu said: I didn't have the stamina to break into the mountains and fields, by what power can I help people?

古文：苟有可施，固无所吝。 
现代文：如果有什么可以施与百姓，保证不能吝惜。 
English: If there is anything that can be given to the people, it must not be withheld.

古文：玄照曰： 贫道昨遇三龙，令其致雨。皆云，不奉上帝之命，擅行雨者，诛罪非轻。唯处士德尊功大，救之则免。
现代文：玄照说： 贫道昨天遇到三条龙，让他们下点雨，他们都说，不奉上天的命令擅自行雨，杀头之罪不轻，只有孙处士德高功大，能把他们救下来。
English: Xuan Zhao said: "Yesterday, the impoverished road encountered three dragons, let them rain a little, they all said that they would not rain without the order of heaven, the crime of killing the head is not light, only Sun Wenzhid is highly meritorious and can save them.

古文：特布腹心，仰希裁度。 
现代文：我特意来表示心愿，请处士斟酌。 
English: I specifically came to express my wishes and ask the clerk to consider them.

古文：思逊曰： 但可施设，仆无所惜。 
现代文：孙思邈说： 只要可以办到，我没什么顾惜的。 
English: Sun Siyu said: As long as I can do it, I have nothing to regret.

古文：玄照曰： 既雨之后，三龙避罪，投处士后沼中以隐。
现代文：玄照说： 下雨之后，三条龙逃避罪责，投到处士居所后边的池子里隐蔽。
English: After it rained, the three dragons evaded responsibility and hid in a pond behind the residence of the local magistrate.

古文：当有异人捕之，处士喻而遣之，必得释罪矣。 
现代文：当有异人来捕捉他们的时候，处士向来人说明白，把他打发走，三条龙就会免罪。 
English: When a stranger came to capture them, the magistrate always explained to the man, sent him away, and the three dragons would be exonerated.

古文：思邈许之。
现代文：孙思邈答应下来。
English: Sun Siyu agreed.

古文：玄照归，见三叟于道左，玄照以思邈之旨示之。
现代文：玄照回山，在路上遇到三个老头，玄照就把孙思邈的意思告诉了他们。
English: When Xuan Zhao returned to the mountain, he met three old men on the road. Xuan Zhao told them what Sun Siyu meant.

古文：三叟约一日一夜，千里雨足，于是如期泛洒，泽甚广被。
现代文：他们约好一天一夜，如期下雨，淋淋洒洒，滋润千里。
English: They made an appointment for one day and one night, and it rained as scheduled, drenching and moisturizing thousands of miles.

古文：翌日，玄照来谒思邈。对语之际，有一人骨状殊异，径往后沼之畔，喑哑叱咤。斯须，水结为冰。俄有三獭，二苍一白，自池而出。
现代文：第二天玄照来谒见孙思邈，说话之间，有一个样子奇特的人，直接来到后边的池畔，嘟嘟囔囔地念起咒语，一会儿，池水结为冰，立刻有二苍一白三只水獭从池中出来。
English: The next day, Xuan Zhao came to see Sun Siyu. While he was talking, a strange-looking man came directly to the back of the pool and recited a spell. For a moment, the pool water froze, and immediately two pale and three white otters came out of the pool.

古文：此人以赤索系之，将欲挈去。
现代文：那人就用赤色绳索把三只水獭捆绑起来，要带走。
English: The man tied the three otters up with red ropes and took them away.

古文：思邈召而谓曰： 三物之罪，死无以赎。
现代文：孙思邈上前打招呼说： 这三个东西的罪，就是处死也是应该的。
English: Sun Siyu stepped forward and said, "The punishment for the crime of these three things should be death."

古文：然昨者擅命，是鄙夫之意也，幸望脱之。兼以此诚上达，恕其重责也。 
现代文：但是他们昨天擅自下雨，是我让他们干的，希望饶过他们，并请代我向上天请求，不要责罚他们了。 
English: But yesterday they let it rain without permission, I made them do it, I hope they will be spared, and I ask you to ask the heavens not to punish them.

古文：此人受教，登时便解而释之，携索而去。
现代文：那人听了这些话，立刻便解开绳索把他们放了，自己提着绳索离去。
English: When the man heard this, he immediately untied the ropes and let them go, carrying the ropes himself.

古文：有顷，三叟致谢思邈，愿有所酬。
现代文：过了一会儿，三个老头向孙思邈致谢，想要酬谢他。
English: After a while, the three old men thanked Sun Siyuan and wanted to reward him.

古文：孙曰： 吾山谷之中，无所用者，不须为报。 
现代文：孙思邈说： 我住在山谷之中，用不着什么东西，不需要报答。 
English: Sun Siyu said: I live in the middle of a valley, I don't need anything, I don't need to be rewarded.

古文：回诣玄照，愿陈力致效。
现代文：三个老头回身又拜见玄照，要为他效力。
English: The three old men turned around and saw Xuan Zhao again, and they wanted to work for him.

古文：玄照曰： 山中一食一衲，此外无阙，不须酬也。 
现代文：玄照说： 住在山中，一个是吃，一个是穿，此外什么也不需要，不用什么报酬。 
English: Xuanzhao said, "Living in the mountains, one is to eat, one is to wear, and nothing else is needed, and there is no reward.

古文：三叟再为请。玄照因言，前山当路，不便往来，却之可否？
现代文：三个老头再三要求，玄照便说： 前山挡路，来往很不方便，你们可以把它搬走吗？ 
English: The three old men asked again and again, and then Xuan Zhao said, "The Qianshan is blocking the road, and it's very inconvenient to come and go. Can you move it away?"

古文：三叟曰： 固是小事耳。但勿以风雷为责，即可为之。 
现代文：三个老头说： 这是一件小事，只要别怪怨风雷太大就行，马上就可以办。
English: The three old men said, "This is a small matter, as long as you don't make a big fuss, it can be done right away."

古文：是夕，雷霆震击。
现代文：这天晚上，雷霆大作，狂风四起，到了早晨才风停雨住。
English: On this night, there was a lot of thunder and wind, and it only stopped raining in the morning.

古文：及晓开霁，寺前豁然，数里如掌。
现代文：寺前的土山没了，豁然开朗，平坦如掌。
English: The mounds of earth in front of the temple disappeared, suddenly cheerful, flat as a pancake.

古文：三叟复来，告谢而去。
现代文：三个老头又来，叩谢而去。
English: The three old men came again, clapped their hands and left.

古文：思邈至道，不求其报，尤为奇特矣。
现代文：孙思邈的道行最高，不图他们报答，尤其令人敬佩。
English: Sun Siyu's practice is the best, and he does not try to repay them, which is especially admirable.

古文：王景融
现代文：王景融
English: Wang Jingrong

古文：唐前侍御史王景融，瀛州平舒人也。
现代文：唐朝前侍御史王景融，是瀛州平舒人。
English: Wang Jing Rong, a former attendant of the Tang Dynasty, was from Bozhou Ping Shuren.

古文：迁父灵柩就洛州，於埏道掘着龙窟，大如瓮口。
现代文：他迁移父亲的灵柩到洛州，在墓道里挖到一个龙窟，龙窟像瓮口那么粗。
English: He moved his father's coffin to Lozhou and dug a dragon grotto in the graveyard. The dragon grotto was as thick as a mineshaft.

古文：景融俯而观之，有气如烟直上，冲其目，遂失明。
现代文：王景融俯身往下观看，有一股烟气从洞里冲上来，冲了他的眼睛，他就失明了。
English: Wang Jingrong bent down to look. A puff of smoke came up from the cave and hit his eyes, blinding him.

古文：旬日而卒。
现代文：十天后他死了。
English: Ten days later he was dead.

古文：凌波女
现代文：凌波女
English: Lingbo female chorus

古文：玄宗在东都，昼寝于殿，梦一女子容色浓艳，梳交心髻，大帔广裳，拜于床下。上曰： 汝是何人？ 
现代文：唐玄宗在东都洛阳，白天在殿中睡觉，梦见一个女子跪拜于床下。那女子容色浓艳，头梳交心髻，身披大帔广裳。玄宗问她： 你是何人？ 
English: Tang Xuan Zong was in Luoyang, the eastern capital, sleeping in the palace during the day. He dreamed of a woman kneeling at the foot of the bed. The woman had a rich complexion, a beautiful hairdo, and was dressed in a flowing robe. Xuan Zong asked her: "Who are you?"

古文：曰： 妾是陛下凌波池中龙女，卫宫护驾，妾实有功。
现代文：她说： 我是陛下凌波池中的龙女，保卫皇宫，保护圣驾，我实在是有功的。
English: She said, "I am the dragon maiden of His Majesty's wave pool. I guard the palace and protect His Holiness. I am truly meritorious."

古文：今陛下洞晓钧天之音，乞赐一曲，以光族类。 
现代文：现在陛下洞晓天上的音乐，请陛下赐给我一曲，以光耀我的族类。 
English: Now that Your Majesty knows the music of the heavens, please give me a song to glorify my race.

古文：上于梦中为鼓胡琴，拾新旧之声为《凌波曲》。
现代文：皇上在梦中为她拉起胡琴，拾取新旧之声为她奏了一曲《凌波曲》。
English: In the dream, the emperor pulled up the huqin for her, picked up the old and new voices and played a song "Lingbo" for her.

古文：龙女再拜而去。
现代文：龙女向玄宗拜了两拜而去。
English: The dragon maiden bowed twice to Xuanzong and left.

古文：及觉，尽记之。
现代文：等到醒来，都还记着呢。
English: I still remember it when I wake up.

古文：因命禁乐。
现代文：于是就命令宫中当日禁乐。
English: As a result, the court ordered a ban on music on that day.

古文：自与琵琶，习而翻之。
现代文：皇上亲执琵琶反复演练推敲，以符合原曲。
English: The emperor's relatives rehearsed and refined the lute repeatedly to match the original melody.

古文：遂宴从官于凌波宫，临池奏新曲。
现代文：于是就在凌波宫宴请百官，临池演奏新曲。
English: So he invited hundreds of officials to a banquet at Lingbo Palace and played a new piece of music.

古文：池中波涛涌起复定，有神女出于波心，乃昨夜之女子也。
现代文：池中的波涛涌起而又平定，有一位神女出现在水面上，正是前些天梦中见到的那女子。
English: The waves in the pool rise and then calm down, and a goddess appears on the surface of the water. It is the woman I saw in my dream the other day.

古文：良久方没。
现代文：那女子在水面上听了很久才沉下去。
English: The woman listened at the surface for a long time before sinking.

古文：因遣置庙于池上，每岁祀之。
现代文：于是皇上令人在凌波池上建了庙，每年都祭祀她。
English: As a result, the emperor had a temple built on the Lingbo Pool, where she was worshipped every year.

古文：陶岘
现代文：陶岘
English: Pottery wheel

古文：陶岘者，彭泽令孙也。
现代文：陶岘，是彭泽令陶渊明的孙子。
English: Tao Zhe, is the grandson of Tao Yuanming of Pengze Ling.

古文：开元中，家于昆山。
现代文：开元年间他家住昆山。
English: During the first year of the year, his family lived in Kunshan.

古文：富有田业。
现代文：家里有丰厚的田产。
English: The family has a rich farmland.

古文：择家人不欺能守事者，悉付之家事。身则泛游于江湖，遍行天下。
现代文：他选择一个诚实可靠能守事业的家人，把家事全交付给这人，自己则泛游于江河湖海，遍行天下。
English: He chooses an honest and reliable family member who can protect his career, and entrusts all the household chores to this person, while he travels the rivers and lakes and travels all over the world.

古文：往往数载不归。见其子孙成人，皆不辩其名字也。
现代文：往往几年不回家，见到他的子孙长成大人，他全分辨不清他们的名字。
English: He often does not return home for several years, seeing his children and grandchildren grow into adults, and he cannot distinguish their names.

古文：岘之文学，可以经济。
现代文：陶岘的文学，可以经世济民，治理国家。
English: The literature of Tao Xuan can help people in the world and govern the country.

古文：自谓疏脱，不谋仕宦。
现代文：但他自命 疏脱 ，不谋仕宦。
English: But he distanced himself and did not run for office.

古文：有知生者通于八音，命陶人为甓，潜记岁时，取其声，不失其验。
现代文：有一个了解他的人精通音乐，让制陶工人做砖，他偷偷地记住这些砖的制成年月日时，取它们的声音为乐曲，很有效果。
English: A man of his acquaintance, who was a good musician, had a potter make bricks, and when he secretly remembered the year and date of their making, he set their sound to music, with great effect.

古文：尝撰《集乐》录八音，以定音之得失。
现代文：陶岘曾经撰写《集乐》，记录八音，以审定音乐的得失成败。
English: Tao Jun once wrote "Collection of Music" and recorded eight tones to determine the success or failure of music.

古文：自制三舟，备极空巧。
现代文：他制了三条船。做得极其精巧。
English: He made three boats. They were extremely well made.

古文：一舟自载，一舟置宾，一舟贮饮馔。
现代文：一只船由他自己乘坐，一只船让宾客乘坐，另一只用来装载饮食用品。
English: One boat is for himself, one boat is for guests, and one boat is for food and drink.

古文：客有前进士孟彦深、进士孟云卿、布衣焦遂，各置仆妾共载。
现代文：宾客中有前进士孟彦深、进士孟云卿、布衣百姓焦遂。每人都带仆妾一块乘载。
English: Among the guests were the vanguardist Meng Yanshen, the vanguardist Meng Yunqing, and the clothed commoners Jia Sui. Each of them carried a servant and a concubine.

古文：而岘有夕乐一部，常奏清商曲。
现代文：陶岘的船上，有一部夕乐，常常演奏《清商曲》。
English: On the ship of Tao Xuan, there is an evening music, often playing "Qing Shangquan."

古文：逢其山泉，则穷其境物，乘兴春行。
现代文：遇到山泉，就尽其所兴，一游到底，历览全部景物。
English: If you come across a mountain spring, do what you like, take a tour to the end, and survey all the scenery.

古文：岘且名闻朝廷，又值天下无事，经过郡邑，无不招延。岘拒之曰： 某麋鹿闲人，非王公上客。 
现代文：陶岘在朝廷里也有名，又时逢天下太平无事，一路过郡邑，没有不欢迎宴请他的，陶岘总是拒绝说： 我是一个行踪不定的闲人，不是王公的上客。 
English: Tao Xuan was also famous in the imperial court, and in times of peace and tranquility, all the way through the county town, there was no unwelcome banquet for him, Tao Xuan always refused to say: I am a wandering idler, not the prince's guest.

古文：亦有未招而诣者。
现代文：也有不打招呼就到他这来的。
English: There are also people who come to him without saying hello.

古文：系水仙之为人，江山之可驻耳。吴越之土，号为水仙。
现代文：他的为人就像水仙那样高洁，像江山一样能容人。吴越一带，称他为 水仙 。
English: He is as noble and pure as Narcissus, and can accommodate people like a country mountain. Around Wuyue, he is called Narcissus.

古文：曾有亲戚为南海守，因访韶石而往省焉。郡守喜其远来，赠钱百万。
现代文：他有个亲戚是南海郡守，因为他去游访韶石就顺便去看望这位太守，太守因为他从远道而来，特别高兴，赠给他一百万钱。
English: He had a relative who was the governor of Nanhai County, and when he went to visit Shanshi, he stopped by to see the governor. The governor was especially happy because he had come all the way from far away, and gave him a million dollars.

古文：及遇古剑，长二尺许，又玉环，径四寸，及海船昆仑奴名摩诃，善游水而勇捷，遂悉以钱而贯之。曰： 吾家至宝也。 
现代文：等到遇上一把二尺来长的古剑，一个径长四寸左右的玉环，以及一个善于游水，勇猛迅捷，名叫摩诃的一条海船上的昆仑奴隶，他就全用钱把一人二物买了下来，说： 这是我家的至宝。 
English: When he came across an ancient sword with a length of two feet, a jade ring with a diameter of about four inches, and a Kunlun slave on a seagoing ship named the Capricorn, who was good at swimming and was brave and swift, he bought one person and two things with all his money, saying, "This is my family's most precious treasure."

古文：乃回棹，下白芷，入湘江。
现代文：于是就回舟返乡，下白芷，入湘江。
English: So he returned home by boat, went down the Chalk River, and entered the Hunan River.

古文：每遇水色可爱，则遗剑环于水，命摩诃取之，以为戏乐。
现代文：每次遇到水色可爱的地方，他就把古剑和玉环扔下水去，让摩诃下水捞上来，以此为游戏取乐。
English: Every time he comes across a water-colored lovely place, he throws the ancient sword and jade ring into the water and lets the capuchin fish out of the water to have fun with the game.

古文：如是数岁。
现代文：如此过了几年。
English: This went on for a few years.

古文：因渡巢湖，亦投剑环，而令取之。
现代文：有一次渡巢湖，也把古剑和玉环扔到水底，也让摩诃下去捞取。
English: Once, when crossing the lake, he also threw the ancient sword and the jade ring to the bottom of the water, and also let the cormorant go down to retrieve them.

古文：摩诃才入，获剑环而便出曰： 为毒蛇所啮。 
现代文：摩诃刚下水，找到古剑和玉环便出水说，被毒蛇咬了，就把那个被咬的手指剁掉了。
English: As soon as Capricorn went into the water, he found an ancient sword and a jade ring and came out of the water saying that he had been bitten by a poisonous snake. He then chopped off the bitten finger.

古文：遽刃去一指，乃能得免。焦遂曰： 摩诃所伤，得非阴灵怒乎？
现代文：这样才能不被毒死。焦遂说： 摩诃受伤，也许是阴灵发怒吧？
English: This is the only way to avoid being poisoned to death. Jiaozuo then said, "The Capricorn is injured, maybe the evil spirit is angry?"

古文：盖水府不欲人窥也。 
现代文：大概水府不想让人看见。 
English: Presumably, Suifu doesn't want people to see it.

古文：岘曰： 敬奉喻。
现代文：陶岘说： 谢谢你提醒。
English: Tao Jun said: Thank you for reminding me.

古文：然某常慕谢康乐之为人。
现代文：不过我平常仰慕谢灵运的为人。
English: But I usually admire Xie Lingyun as a person.

古文：云终当乐死山水，但狥所好，莫知其他。
现代文：他说终当乐死于山水，只知顺从自己的所好，不知道别的。
English: He said that Dangle eventually died in the mountains and rivers, only knowing how to follow his own desires and not knowing anything else.

古文：且栖迟逆旅之中，载于大块之上，居布素之贱，擅贵游之欢，浪迹怡情仅三十载，固亦分也。
现代文：况且停留居住在逆旅之中，立身于大地之上，处于一般百姓的地位，拥有游览名山大川的欢乐，浪迹天涯纵情玩乐将近三十年，这也本来是一种职分。
English: Moreover, staying and living in the midst of a reverse journey, standing on the earth, in the position of ordinary people, having the joy of visiting famous mountains and rivers, wandering the world for nearly thirty years, this is also originally a job.

古文：不得升玉墀见天子，施功惠养，逞志平生，亦其分也。 
现代文：不能上玉阶见天子，不能受到皇帝的施功惠养，不能逞志平生，也是职分。 
English: It is also a duty not to be able to ascend to the throne and see the Son of Heaven, not to be able to benefit from the emperor's efforts, and not to be able to have a strong will throughout life.

古文：乃命移舟曰： 要须一到襄阳山，便归吴郡也。 
现代文：于是他就下令开船，说一到了襄阳山，就回吴郡去。
English: So he ordered the boat to set sail, saying that as soon as they reached Xiangyang Mountain, they would return to Wuxian.

古文：行次西塞山，维舟吉祥佛舍。见江水黑而不流，曰： 此必有怪物。 
现代文：走到西塞山，把船停在古祥佛舍，见江水乌黑而且不流动，便说： 这里边一定有怪物！ 
English: When he got to Mount Xisei, he anchored his boat at the Guxiang Buddha House. Seeing that the river was black and did not flow, he said, "There must be a monster around here!"

古文：乃投剑环，命摩诃下取，见汩没波际，久而方出，气力危绝，殆不任持。曰： 剑环不可取也。有龙高二丈许，而剑环置前，某引手将取，龙辄怒目。 
现代文：于是他就把古剑和玉环扔下去，让摩诃下去取。摩诃下水老半天才出来，气力微弱，几乎不能支持，上气不接下气地说： 古剑和玉环不能取了，有一条两丈来长的龙在那里，我一伸手去取剑和环，它就怒目看我。 
English: So he threw down the ancient sword and the jade ring, and let the seagulls go down to retrieve them. The water under the seagulls only came up after half a day, and they were so weak that they could hardly support themselves. He said breathlessly, "I can't retrieve the ancient sword and the jade ring. There's a two-feet-tall dragon down there. As soon as I reached out to retrieve the sword and the ring, it glared at me.

古文：岘曰： 汝与剑环，吾之三宝。
现代文：陶岘说： 你和古剑、玉环，是我的三样宝物。
English: Tao Yan said: You, the ancient sword and the jade ring are my three treasures.

古文：今者二物既亡，尔将安用？
现代文：现在那两样没有了，你将有什么用呢？
English: Now that those two things are gone, what use will you be?

古文：必须为吾力争之也。 
现代文：你必须力争为我把两样宝物取上来！ 
English: You must strive to retrieve the two treasures for me!

古文：摩诃不得已，被发大呼，目眦流血，穷泉一入，不复还也。
现代文：摩诃不得已，披散着头发大喊一声，眼角都流出血来，拼命住水里一跳，不再上来。
English: As a last resort, Capricorn cried out with his hair falling out, his eyes were bleeding, and he desperately dived into the water and did not come up again.

古文：久之，见摩诃支体磔裂，污于水上。如有示于岘也。
现代文：过了好长一阵儿，见摩诃的肢体像祭祀的牛羊那样被扯裂了，污浮在水上，好像特意给陶岘看的，陶岘站在那里流泪。
English: After a long time, I saw that the limbs of the capuchin monkey were torn like sacrificial cattle and sheep, floating on the water, as if specially for Tao Yan. Tao Yan stood there and shed tears.

古文：岘流涕水滨，乃命回棹。因赋诗自叙，不复议游江湖矣。
现代文：于是令开船回乡。于是赋诗自叙其事，不再提遍游江湖的事了。
English: As a result, he was ordered to sail back to his hometown. As a result, he wrote a poem to tell his own story, and no longer mentioned traveling all over the country.

古文：诗曰： 匡庐旧业自有主，吴越新居安此生。
现代文：诗是这样的： 匡庐旧业自有主，吴越新居安此生。
English: The poem is as follows: Kuangtao is the owner of the old business, and Wu Yuexin lives a peaceful life.

古文：白发数茎归未得，青山一望计还程。
现代文：白发数茎归未得，青山一望计还程。
English: A few stems of white hair have not yet returned, and the prospect of a green hill has not been achieved.

古文：鹤翻枫叶夕阳动，鹭立芦花秋水明。
现代文：鹤翻枫叶夕阳动，鹭立芦花秋水明。
English: The cranes turn over the maple leaves as the sun sets, and the reed flowers stand out against the autumn light.

古文：从此舍舟何所诣，酒旗歌扇正相迎。 
现代文：从此舍舟何所诣，酒旗歌扇正相迎。 
English: Since then, no matter where the boat is, the wine flag and song fans are welcoming each other.

古文：齐浣
现代文：齐浣
English: Qiqiao

古文：唐开元中，河南采访使汴州刺使齐浣以徐城险急，奏开十八里河，达于青水，平长淮之险。
现代文：唐开元年间，河南采访使汴州刺史齐浣，因为徐城水情险急，奏请朝庭同意掘开十八里河，将河水引入青水，平定长淮一带的水险。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the interview with Henan made the water situation in Xuzhou precarious, so he asked the court to agree to excavate the Eighteen-River, introduce the river water into the blue water, and settle the water risk in the Changhuai area.

古文：其河随州县分掘。
现代文：那河随着州县分工开掘。
English: That river was excavated according to the state and county division of labor.

古文：亳州真源县丞崔延祎纠其县徒，开数千步，中得龙堂。
现代文：亳州真源县县令崔延祎集合县府人等，掘开几千步，挖到一个龙堂。
English: County magistrate Cui Yanqi of Zhangzhou Zhenyuan County gathered the prefectural people and others, dug several thousand steps, and excavated a dragon hall.

古文：初开谓是古墓，然状如新筑净洁。
现代文：刚挖开的时候说是古墓，但是样子很像新建的，里面很洁净。
English: When it was first excavated, it was said to be an ancient tomb, but it looked very much like a newly built one, and it was very clean inside.

古文：周视，北壁下有五色蛰龙长丈余，头边鲤鱼五六枚，各长尺余。
现代文：往四处一看，此壁下有一条五色的龙蛰伏在那里，一丈多长，头边有五六条鲤鱼，鱼各一尺多长。
English: Looking around, there is a five-colored dragonfly under this wall, which is more than a foot long, and there are five or six eels on the head, each fish is more than a foot long.

古文：又有灵龟两头，长一尺二寸，眸长九分，如常龟。
现代文：还有两只灵龟，各长一尺二寸，眼长九分，像平常的龟。
English: There are also two spirit turtles, each one foot two inches long, with eyes nine minutes long, like ordinary turtles.

古文：祎以白开河御史邬元昌，状上齐浣。
现代文：崔延祎把这事向开河御史邬元昌报告了，邬元昌又报告给齐浣。
English: Cui Yanxuan told this matter to the Grand Historian of Kaihe, Qi Yuanchang, and also wrote a public document to report to Qi Yu.

古文：浣命移龙入淮，取龟入汴。
现代文：齐浣命他们把龙移入淮水，把龟放入汴水。
English: They moved the dragon into the Huai River and the turtle into the Bohai River.

古文：祎移龙及鱼二百余里，至淮岸，白鱼数百万跳跃赴龙，水为之沸。
现代文：崔延祎把龙和鱼运出二百多里，到了淮水岸边，河里的几百万条白龟跳跃着向龙奔来，水都沸腾了。
English: Cui Yanjun transported the dragon and the fish more than two hundred miles to the bank of Huai Shui. Millions of white turtles in the river were jumping towards the dragon, and the water was boiling.

古文：龙入淮喷水，云雾杳冥，遂不复见。
现代文：龙进入淮水之后往上喷水，云雾朦胧昏暗，就看不见它了。
English: The dragon entered the Huai River and spouted water vapor, making the surrounding clouds and fog dark, and the dragon could not be seen.

古文：初将移之也，御史员锡拔其一须。
现代文：起初要转运这条龙的时候，御史员锡拔了它一根须子。
English: At the very beginning, when preparing to move the dragon, the historian pulled out a dragon's whisker.

古文：元昌差网送龟至宋，遇水泊，大龟屡引颈向水。网户怜之，暂放水中。
现代文：邬元昌派人用网把龟送到宋地，路上遇到水泊，大龟屡次伸着脖子向着水，那人可怜它，就把它暂时放到水里。
English: Yu Yuanchang sent someone to send the turtle to Songdi with a net. On the way, they encountered a pond. The turtle repeatedly stretched its neck towards the water. The man took pity on it and temporarily put it in the water.

古文：水阔数尺，深不过五寸，遂失大龟所在。
现代文：水面只几尺宽，深不过五寸，但是大龟不知怎么就不见了。
English: The surface of the water is only a few feet wide and only five inches deep, but the big turtle somehow disappeared.

古文：涸水求之，亦不获。
现代文：把水淘干了找它，也没有找到，白送了一趟龟。
English: After searching for it, they did not find it and sent the turtle away for nothing.

古文：空致龟焉。沙州黑河
现代文：沙州黑河
English: Heihe, Shazhou

古文：北庭西北沙州有黑河。
现代文：北庭西北的沙州，有一条河叫黑河。
English: In Shazhou, northwest of Beiting, there is a river called Heihe.

古文：深可驾舟，其水往往泛滥，荡室庐，潴原野。
现代文：这河深可以摆船，河水常泛滥，冲毁房舍，淹没原野。
English: The river is deep enough for boats, and it often floods, washing away houses and inundating fields.

古文：由是西北之禾稼尽去，地荒而不可治，居人亦远徙，用逃垫溺之患。
现代文：因此西北的庄稼全都没了，田地荒废，不能耕种。当地的居民也都远走他乡，以逃避被淹的祸患。
English: As a result, all the crops in the northwest have been lost, the fields are deserted and cannot be cultivated, and the local residents have also gone far away from their hometowns to escape the flood disaster.

古文：其吏于北庭沙洲者，皆先备牲酎，望祀于河浒，然后敢视政。
现代文：那些在北庭沙州做官的，都要先准备供品，到河边认真祭祀祷告一番，然后才能审理政事。
English: Those who work as officials in Beiting Shazhou must first prepare offerings and go to the riverside to earnestly worship and pray before they can deal with political affairs.

古文：否即淫雨连月，或大水激射，圮城邑，则里中民尽鱼其族也。
现代文：不然就会淫雨连连，一下就是几个月，或者大水猛涨，冲淹城邑，那么广大百姓就要喂鱼了。
English: Otherwise, there will be torrential rain for months at a time, or the water will rise sharply and flood the cities, so the general public will have to feed the fish.

古文：唐开元中，南阳张嵩奉诏都护于北庭，挈符印至境上，且召郊迎吏讯其事。
现代文：唐开元年中，南阳张嵩奉诏到北庭做都护。他拿着符印来到北庭境内，并且召集到郊外迎接他的官吏们询问此事。
English: In the middle of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, Zhang Song of Nanyang went to Beiting to guard the capital. He came to the territory of Beiting with a seal, and summoned officials to meet him in the suburbs to inquire about the matter.

古文：或曰： 黑河中有巨龙，嗜羔特犬彘，故往往漂浪腾水，以凯郡人望祀河浒。
现代文：有的说： 黑河里有一条大龙，专爱吃羊、牛、狗、猪什么的，所以它往往兴风作浪漂在水上，眼睁睁地看着人们是怎样在河边祭祀。
English: Some said: There is a big dragon in the Heihe River, which likes to eat sheep, cattle, dogs, pigs, etc. Therefore, it often floats on the water, watching how people make sacrifices by the river.

古文：我知之久矣。 
现代文：我知道已经很久了。 
English: I know it's been a long time.

古文：即命致牢醴，布筵席，密召左右，执弓矢以俟于侧。
现代文：张嵩于是就命令准备祭祀用的牛羊猪狗及甘甜的饮料，在河边布置宴席，秘密召集左右人等，手执弓箭埋伏在两侧。
English: Zhang Song then ordered the preparation of sacrificial cattle, sheep, pigs, dogs and sweet drinks, arranged a banquet by the river, secretly summoned people on both sides, and ambushed them on both sides with bows and arrows.

古文：嵩率僚吏，班于河上，峨冠敛板，罄折肃躬。
现代文：张嵩率领着僚属们排列在河岸上，恭恭敬敬，严肃认真地等着。
English: Zhang Song led his colleagues and subordinates to line up on the riverbank, respectfully and seriously waiting.

古文：俄顷，有龙长百尺自波中跃而出。
现代文：不多时，有一条一百尺左右的龙从水中跃出水面，又迅速地来到河岸上。
English: Not infrequently, a dragon about a hundred feet long leaps out of the water and quickly makes its way to the riverbank.

古文：俄然升岸，目有火光射人。
现代文：它的目光像火，射向岸上的人们。
English: Its eyes, like fire, shoot out at the people on the shore.

古文：离人约有数十步，嵩即命彀矢引满以伺焉。
现代文：离人还有大约几十步远的时候，张嵩就命令弓箭手们把弓拉满等候在那里。
English: When he was still a few dozen paces away, Zhang Song ordered the archers to draw their bows and wait there.

古文：既而果及于几筵，身渐短而长数尺。
现代文：然后，那龙果然来到宴席前，它的身体渐渐变短，身长只有几尺。
English: Then, the dragon really came to the front of the banquet, and its body gradually became short, only a few feet long.

古文：方将食，未及，而嵩发矢。
现代文：它正要吃还未来得及吃的时候，张嵩命令开弓放箭。
English: When it was about to eat and there was no time to eat, Zhang Song ordered to open the bow and let go of the arrow.

古文：一时众矢共发，而龙势不能施而摧。
现代文：一时间万箭齐发，而龙无法抵御，中箭而死。
English: All at once, thousands of arrows were shot, and the dragon could not resist and was killed by the arrows.

古文：龙既死，里中俱来观之，哗然若市。
现代文：龙死后，里中人都来观看，哗然若市。
English: After the dragon's death, everyone in the village came to watch, in an uproar.

古文：嵩喜已除民害，遂以献上。
现代文：张嵩为自己为民除害而高兴，就把死龙献给了皇上。
English: Zhang Song was glad that he had been able to help the people, so he presented the dead dragon to the emperor.

古文：上壮其果断，诏断其舌，函以赐嵩。
现代文：皇上表扬他做事果断，让人把龙的舌头割下来，装进小匣子里，赐给他。
English: The emperor praised him for his decisiveness, and had the dragon's tongue cut out, put in a small box, and given to him.

古文：且子孙承袭在沙州为刺史，至今号为龙舌张氏。
现代文：而且，他的子孙世袭为沙州的刺史，至今被称为 龙舌张氏 。
English: Moreover, his descendants have inherited the history of Shazhou, and are still known as the Longtong Zhang clan.

古文：兴庆池龙
现代文：兴庆池龙
English: Xingqing Pond Dragon

古文：唐玄宗尝潜龙于兴庆宫。
现代文：唐玄宗曾经在兴庆宫的池中放养了一条龙。
English: Emperor Xuanzong of Tang Dynasty once kept a dragon in the pond of Xingqing Palace.

古文：及即位，其兴庆池尝有一小龙出游宫外御沟水中。
现代文：等到他即位，兴庆宫池中有一条小龙游到宫外的御沟水中，腾跃奔驰。
English: When he ascended the throne, there was a small dragon in the Xingqing Palace Pool that swam into the water of the ditch outside the palace and pranced around.

古文：奇状蜿蜒，负腾逸之状。宫嫔内竖，靡不具瞻。
现代文：蜿蜒多姿，宫中的男男女女，没有不出来看的。
English: The men and women in the palace are sinuous and multi-faceted, and you can't help but look at them.

古文：后玄宗幸蜀，銮舆将发，前一夕，其龙自池中御素云，跃然亘空，望西南而去。
现代文：后来唐玄宗幸游西蜀，出发前夕，那条龙从池中驾着白云，跃然升空，横亘千里，朝西南方向飞去。
English: Later, Tang Xuan Zong traveled to Xishu. On the eve of his departure, the dragon rose from the pond with a white cloud, soared into the sky, stretched for thousands of miles and flew to the southwest.

古文：环列之士，率共观之。
现代文：周围的文臣武士，大都看到了。
English: Most of the surrounding civil servants and samurai saw it.

古文：及上行至嘉陵江，乘舟将渡，见小龙翼舟而进。侍臣咸睹之。
现代文：等到皇上走到嘉陵江，登上船将要过江的时候，看见那条小龙紧靠在船的一侧前进，侍臣们全都看到了。
English: When the emperor walked to the Jialing River and boarded the boat to cross the river, he saw the small dragon clinging to the side of the boat and moving forward. The courtiers all saw it.

古文：上泫然泣下，顾谓左右曰： 此吾兴庆池中龙也。 
现代文：皇上感动得落下热泪，看着左右的侍臣们说： 这是我兴庆池里的那条龙啊！ 
English: The emperor was moved to tears, looked at the attendants on his right and left, and said, "This is the dragon in the Xingqing Pool!"

古文：命以酒沃酹，上亲自祝之，龙乃自水中振鬣而去。
现代文：他命人把酒浇洒到江中，自己亲自祷告，龙才从水中奋鳞振鬣而去。
English: He ordered someone to pour the wine into the river, and he himself prayed, and the dragon only swam away from the water.

古文：井龙
现代文：井龙
English: Jinglong

古文：开元末，西国献狮子，至安西道中，系于驿树。
现代文：开元年末，西域有一个国家向朝廷进献一头狮子，走在安西的道上，有一天把狮子拴到驿站的一棵树上。
English: At the end of the first year of the year, a country in the western region presented a lion to the imperial court. Walking on the road to Anxi, one day he chained the lion to a tree in the station.

古文：近井，狮子吼，若不自安。
现代文：这棵树离井很近。狮子发出吼声，好像恐惧不安。
English: The tree is very close to the well, and the lion roars as if in fear.

古文：俄顷，风雷大至，有龙出井而去。
现代文：不一会儿，风雷大作，一条龙从井里钻出来向空中飞去。
English: A moment later, with great fanfare, a dragon emerged from the well and flew into the air.

古文：旃然
现代文：旃然
English: Stunned

古文：玄宗将封泰山。进次荥阳旃然河，上见黑龙，命弓矢。亲射之。
现代文：唐玄宗将要上泰山去祭天，走到荥阳旃然河的时候，皇上看到河里有一条黑龙，就让人拿来弓和箭，亲自射它。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong of Tang was about to go to Mount Tai to offer sacrifices to the heavens, and when he came to the Poyang Yulan River, the emperor saw a black dragon in the river, so he asked someone to bring a bow and arrow and shoot it himself.

古文：矢发龙灭。
现代文：箭刚发出那龙就消失了。
English: As soon as the arrow went out, the dragon disappeared.

古文：自尔旃然伏流，于今百余年矣。
现代文：从此，旃然河水安稳地流淌，到现在一百多年了。
English: Since then, the Yulan River has been flowing steadily for more than a hundred years.

古文：按旃然即济水也。
现代文：旃然河就是济水。
English: The Hunan River is the source of Jishui.

古文：济水溢而为荥，遂名旃然。
现代文：济水溢出来形成荥水，于是就叫旃然河。
English: Feeding water overflowed to form salty water, so it was called the Yulan River.

古文：《左传》云 楚师济于旃然 是也。
现代文：《左传》上说的 楚师济于旃然 里的 旃然 就是这条河。
English: This is the river that Chu Shishi mentioned in "Zhuan."

