古文：凡与敌战，若我胜彼负，不可骄惰，当日夜严备以待之。敌人虽来，有备无害。
现代文：凡是对敌作战，如果我军取得胜利而敌人遭到失败了，不能因此就骄傲起来并且麻痹情绪，要时刻加强警戒防备敌人。这样，等敌人来犯的时候，我军因有准备不会有什么危害。
English: In any war against the enemy, if our army is victorious and the enemy is defeated, we must not be proud and paralyzed. We must always strengthen our vigilance against the enemy. In this way, when the enemy attacks, our army will not be harmed because it is prepared.

古文：法曰： 既胜若否。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 打了胜仗的时候，要像没有打胜仗那样时刻戒备。 
English: As it is said in the art of war, when the battle is won, one should always be on the alert as if the battle had not been won.

古文：秦二世时，项梁使沛公、项羽别攻城阳，屠之。
现代文：秦二世时期，项羽、刘邦率兵从另一路攻打城阳，城破后血洗了全城。
English: During the Qin II period, Xiang Yu and Liu Bang led troops to attack Chengyang from the other side, and after the city was broken, the whole city was washed in blood.

古文：西破秦军濮阳东，秦收兵入濮阳。
现代文：而后，率军西进，又于濮阳东大破秦军，秦兵收缩退入濮阳城。
English: Later, he led the army westward and defeated the Qin army in the east of Fenyang. The Qin soldiers retreated to Fenyang City.

古文：沛公、项羽乃攻定陶，因西略地至雍丘，大破秦军，斩李由，还攻外黄。
现代文：这时，刘邦、项羽便转兵进攻定陶，继而向西攻占地盘而抵达雍丘，再次大破秦军，击斩了秦朝三川郡守李由，回兵途中又攻下了外黄。
English: At this time, Liu Bang and Xiang Yu turned to attack Ding Tao, and then attacked the west to occupy the site and arrived at Yongqiu, once again defeated the Qin Army, defeated Li Yu, the Qin Dynasty governor of Mikawa County, and captured Waiguang on the way back.

古文：项梁益轻秦，有骄色。
现代文：义军接连打了几次胜仗之后，项梁便滋长了轻视秦军的思想，骄傲情绪溢于言表。
English: After the rebel army won several victories in a row, Xiang Liang nurtured the idea of despising the Qin army, and pride overflowed.

古文：宋义进谏于梁曰： 战胜而将骄卒惰者败。
现代文：令尹宋义见此而规劝项梁说： 如果取得一定胜利将领就骄傲起来，必使士兵轻敌松懈，必败无疑。
English: Seeing this, Yin Songyi advised Xiang Liang: "If you achieve a certain victory, the generals will become proud, and the soldiers will be lax, and there is no doubt that you will be defeated."

古文：今兵少惰矣，而秦兵日益，臣为君畏之。 
现代文：现在我军士卒已初显怠惰之情了，而秦军兵力却在不断增强，这深为将军感到担心。 
English: Now our sergeants and soldiers have begun to show a sense of laziness, while the Qin Army's strength is constantly increasing, which is deeply worrying for the general.

古文：梁弗听。而使宋义于齐。
现代文：项梁对此根本听不进去，竟派遣宋义出使齐国。
English: Cao Liang did not listen to this at all, and sent Song Yi as an envoy to Qi.

古文：道遇齐使者高陵君显，曰： 公将见武信君乎？ 
现代文：宋义赴齐途中遇到了齐国使者高陵君显，问显道： 您是去拜见武信君项梁吗？ 
English: On the way, he met Gao Ling Junxuan, the envoy of the State of Qi, and asked him: Are you going to see Wu Xinjun?

古文：曰： 然。 
现代文：回答说： 是的。 
English: Ying Hou replied: Yes.

古文：曰： 今武信君必败，公徐行即免死，疾行则及祸。 
现代文：宋义劝他说： 现在我认为武信君必定会打败仗，你可行动迟缓些以免遭杀身之祸，如果快了就会遭受祸害连累。 
English: Song Yi advised him, "Now I think that Wu Xinjun will definitely lose the battle. You can act slowly to avoid being killed. If you act quickly, you will suffer the consequences.

古文：秦果悉兵益章邯击楚军，大败之，项梁死。
现代文：秦朝果然调集全部兵马增援章邯攻打楚军，并且大败楚军，项梁兵败身死。
English: The Qin dynasty successfully mobilized all the soldiers and horses to reinforce Zhangye to attack the Chu army, and defeated the Chu army, and Xiang Liang's soldiers were killed.

