古文：淑字阳源，少有风气。
现代文：○袁淑袁淑字阳源，少年时期就很有风度。
English: ○ Yuan Shuxu Yuan Shuxu, also known as Yang Yuan, was very personable as a young boy.

古文：年数岁，伯父湛谓人曰： 此非凡儿。 
现代文：年龄数岁时，他的伯父袁湛对别人说： 这不是一个平凡的孩子。 
English: When he was a few years old, his uncle Yuan Zhan said to others: This is not an ordinary child.

古文：至十馀岁，爲姑夫王弘所赏，博涉多通，不爲章句学。
现代文：到了十几岁，被姑父王弘所欣赏，他广博涉猎，通晓许多东西，不钻研章句的学问。
English: When he was in his teens, he was admired by his uncle Wang Hong, who was well-versed in many things and did not delve into the study of chapters and sentences.

古文：文采遒艳，从横有才辩。
现代文：文采美艳有力，议论纵横，富有辩才。
English: The writing is beautiful and powerful, the discussion is long and wide-ranging, and it is full of arguments.

古文：彭城王义康命爲司徒祭酒。
现代文：彭城王刘义康任命他为司徒祭酒。
English: Liu Yikang, the king of Pengcheng, appointed him as the priest of the sacrificial wine.

古文：义康不好文学，虽外相礼接，意好甚疏。
现代文：刘义康不喜欢文学，虽然外表上以礼相待，而内心里却比较疏远。
English: Liu Yikang does not like literature. Although outwardly they treat each other with courtesy, inwardly they are rather distant.

古文：从母兄刘湛欲其附己，而淑不爲改意，由是大相乖失。
现代文：堂兄刘湛想让他归附自己，而袁淑不为他而改变旨趣，因而彼此大不相合。
English: Cousin Liu Zhan wanted him to adhere to himself, while Yuan Shu did not change the essence for him, so they were very incompatible with each other.

古文：淑乃赋诗曰： 种兰忌当门，怀璧莫向楚。
现代文：袁淑便写诗说： 种兰忌当门，怀璧莫向楚。
English: Yuan Shuxu then wrote a poem saying: "When it comes to planting orchids, there is no better way.

古文：楚少别玉人，门非植兰所。 
现代文：楚少别玉人，门非植兰所。 
English: Chu Shaobie Jade People, the door is not a plant nursery.

古文：寻以久疾免官。
现代文：不久因病而免官。
English: He was soon relieved of his duties due to illness.

古文：元嘉二十六年，累迁尚书吏部郎。
现代文：元嘉二十六年，逐步升迁为尚书吏部郎。
English: In the 26th year of Yuan Jia, he was gradually promoted to Shang Shuliriburo.

古文：其秋大举北侵，从容曰： 今当席卷赵、魏，检玉岱宗，愿上封禅书一篇。 
现代文：这年秋季大举北侵，他从容地说： 这次一定会席卷赵、魏，捡玉于泰山，愿意献上《封禅书》一篇。 
English: This autumn, the northern invasion began in earnest, he said calmly: This time, it will surely sweep through Zhao and Wei, and pick up jade on Mount Tai. He is willing to present an article of "Fu Zenshu."

古文：文帝曰： 盛德之事，我何足以当之。 
现代文：文帝说： 这是盛德之事，我哪里可以担当？ 
English: Wen Di said: This is Sheng De's business, where can I be in charge?

古文：出爲始兴王浚征北长史、南东海太守。
现代文：后来出京做始兴王刘浚的征北长史、南东海太守。
English: Later, he went to Beijing to serve as the governor of the South East China Sea, following the example of King Liu Jun.

古文：淑始到府，浚引见谓曰： 不意舅遂垂屈佐？ 
现代文：袁淑刚到府中，刘浚召见他的时候说： 没想到大夫屈尊来担任佐官！ 
English: Yuan Shuk had just arrived at the palace when Liu Jun summoned him to meet him and said, "I didn't expect the doctor to deign to serve as an adjutant!

古文：淑答曰： 朝廷遣下官，本以光公府望也。 
现代文：袁淑回答说： 朝廷派遣我来，本是为你府门的声望增光的。 
English: Yuan Shu replied: The Imperial Court sent me here to enhance the prestige of your court.

古文：还爲御史中丞。
现代文：回京后担任御史中丞。
English: After returning to Kyoto, he served as Goshi chujo.

古文：时魏军南伐至瓜步，文帝使百官议防御之术，淑上议，其言甚诞。
现代文：当时魏军南伐到达瓜步，文帝让百官讨论防御的办法，袁淑提出建议，他的言论十分荒诞。
English: At that time, the southward march of the Wei army was at its peak, and Emperor Wen asked hundreds of officials to discuss defensive measures, and Yuan Shu made suggestions. His remarks were quite absurd.

古文：淑喜夸，每爲时人所嘲。
现代文：袁淑喜欢夸张，常常被当时的人所嘲笑。
English: Yuan Shu liked to exaggerate and was often ridiculed by people at the time.

古文：始兴王浚尝送钱三万饷淑，一宿复遣人追取，谓爲使人谬误，欲以戏淑，淑与浚书曰： 闻之前志曰， 七年之中，一与一夺，义士犹或非之 。况密迩旬次，何其裒益之亟也。
现代文：始兴王刘浚曾经送钱三万赠给袁淑，过了一夜又派人追取，说是送钱人的谬误，想用这种办法戏弄袁淑，袁淑给刘浚的信中说： 我从以前的史志中听说， 七年当中，一次送给，一次又把它夺回去，即便是义士，也会有人非议 ，况且是在短暂的一旬当中，增减得多么急速啊！
English: Liu Jun, the king of Shixing, once sent Yuan Shu a gift of thirty thousand yuan, and then sent someone to track him down after one night, saying that it was the giver's mistake, and that he wanted to use this method to tease Yuan Shu. Yuan Shu said in a letter to Liu Jun: I heard from the previous history that in seven years, once given, once taken back, even a righteous person will be criticized, and moreover, in a short period of time, how rapid the increase and decrease is!

古文：窃恐二三诸候有以观大国之政。 
现代文：我恐怕各位诸侯会由此来观察大国的政事。 
English: I am afraid that your lords will observe the political affairs of a great power from this.

古文：迁太子左卫率。
现代文：调任太子左卫率。
English: He was promoted to the position of crown prince left guard.

古文：元凶将爲逆，其夜淑在直，呼淑及萧斌等，流涕告以 明旦当行大事，望相与戮力 。
现代文：元凶劭将要叛乱，那天夜里袁淑在值勤，刘劭叫来袁淑和萧斌等人，流着眼泪告诉他们 明天早晨要有重大行动，希望共同努力 。
English: Yuan Shu was on duty that night, and Liu Wei called Yuan Shu and Xiao Bin and others, and told them with tears that there would be a major action tomorrow morning, hoping to work together.

古文：淑、斌并曰： 自古无此，愿加善思。 
现代文：袁淑、萧斌都说： 自古以来也没有这样的事情，希望您再好好想想。 
English: Yuan Shuk and Xiao Bin both said: There has never been anything like this since ancient times. I hope you will think about it.

古文：劭怒，斌惧曰： 谨奉令。 
现代文：刘劭很恼怒，萧斌恐惧地说： 愿意听候命令。 
English: Liu Ye was very angry, and Xiao Bin said fearfully: I am willing to obey orders.

古文：淑叱之曰： 卿便谓殿下真有是邪？
现代文：袁淑呵叱他说： 你当是殿下真的有这种事吗？
English: Yuan Shuko scolded him, "You're supposed to be His Highness, is this really happening?

古文：殿下幼时尝患风，或是疾动耳。 
现代文：殿下幼年的时候曾经患过疯病，很可能是病发了。 
English: When he was a child, His Royal Highness once suffered from a mental illness, which is likely to have been a relapse.

古文：劭愈怒，因问曰： 事当克不？ 
现代文：刘劭更加恼怒了，于是问道： 事情能成功不？ 
English: Liu Yao became even more angry and asked, "Can this succeed?

古文：淑曰： 居不疑之地，何患不克；但既克之后，爲天地所不容，大祸亦旋至耳。 
现代文：袁淑说： 处在无疑的地方，怎么还用担心不成功；但是成功以后，为天地所不容，大祸也就会立即来到。 
English: Yuan Shu said: "When you are in a doubtful place, how can you still worry about not succeeding; but after success, it is unacceptable to heaven and earth, and a great disaster will come immediately.

古文：劭左右引淑衣曰： 此是何事，而可言罢。 
现代文：刘劭身边的人拉着袁淑的衣服说： 这是什么事情，竟可以说不做。 
English: People around Liu Wei pulled Yuan Shu's clothes and said, "What kind of thing is this? It can be said but not done."

古文：劭因起,赐淑等裤褶，又就主衣取锦，裁三尺爲一段，又中裂之，分斌与淑及左右，使以缚裤褶。
现代文：刘劭于是起来，赐给袁淑等人裤褶，又从主衣那里取来锦缎，每三尺裁为一段，又从中间撕开，分给萧斌和袁淑及身边的人，让他们用来捆裤褶。
English: So Liu Ye got up, gave Yuan Shu and the others the crotches of his trousers, and took the brocade from his coat. He cut it into three-foot sections, and tore them in the middle, and gave them to Xiao Bin, Yuan Shu, and the people around them to tie up the crotches of their trousers.

古文：淑出还省，绕床至四更乃寝。
现代文：袁淑出来回到省台，绕着床转到了四更才睡下。
English: Yuan Shu came out and went back to the governor's office. She walked around the bed until she reached the fourth floor before falling asleep.

古文：劭将出，已与萧斌同载，呼淑甚急，淑眠终不起。
现代文：刘劭将要出去，已经和萧斌坐在同一辆车上，叫袁淑叫得很急，袁淑睡着，终不起来。
English: Liu Wei was about to go out and was already sitting in the same car as Xiao Bin. He called Yuan Shu and shouted very urgently. Yuan Shu fell asleep and could not get up.

古文：劭停车奉化门，催之相续。
现代文：刘劭停车在奉化门，催他赶快跟上。
English: Liu Yao parked his car at Fenghua Gate, urging him to quickly catch up.

古文：徐起至车后，劭使登车，辞不上。
现代文：他慢慢起来走到车后面，刘劭让他登车，他推辞不上。
English: He slowly got up and walked to the back of the car. Liu Ye let him board the car, but he couldn't refuse.

古文：劭命左右杀之于奉化门外槐树下。
现代文：刘劭命令左右的人把他杀死在奉化门外槐树的下面。
English: Liu Yao ordered the people around him to kill him under the eucalyptus tree outside the Fenghua Gate.

古文：劭即位，追赠太常。
现代文：刘劭即位，追赠为太常。
English: Liu Bei ascends to the throne and is posthumously crowned emperor.

古文：孝武即位，赠侍中、太尉，諡曰忠宪公。
现代文：孝武帝即位，赠为侍中、太尉，谥号为忠宪公。
English: Emperor Xiaowu ascended the throne, bestowing upon him the titles of Chamberlain and Second Lieutenant, and the posthumous title of Prince Loyal to the Constitution.

古文：又诏淑及徐湛之、江湛、王僧绰、卜天与四家长给禀。
现代文：又诏令对袁淑和徐湛之、江湛、王僧绰、卜天兴四家长期供给粮谷。
English: It was also ordered to supply grain and grain to Yuan Shu, Xu Zhanzhi, Jiang Zhan, Wang Soqiao and Bu Tianxing for a long time.

古文：寻阳败，伏诛。
现代文：袁淑的文集传于后世。
English: Yuan Shu's literary works have been passed down to future generations.

古文：粲字景倩，洵弟子也。
现代文：几个儿子都是早死。○袁粲袁粲字景倩，是袁洵弟弟的儿子。
English: Several of his sons died at an early age. ○ Yuan Zhi Yuan Zi Jing Zi is the son of Yuan Zhi's younger brother.

古文：父濯，扬州秀才，早卒。
现代文：父亲袁濯，是扬州秀才，早死。
English: His father, Yuan Maid, was a Yangzhou scholar who died young.

古文：粲幼孤，祖哀之，名之曰湣孙。
现代文：袁粲幼年是孤儿，祖父可怜他，给他起名叫愍孙。
English: Yuan Qi was an orphan when he was young. His grandfather took pity on him and named him as his grandson.

古文：伯叔并当世荣显，而湣孙饥寒不足。
现代文：伯伯叔叔都是当世的显要人物，而愍孙则饥寒贫困。
English: Uncles and uncles are all prominent figures of the present world, while their grandchildren are hungry and poor.

古文：母琅邪王氏，太尉长史诞之女也。躬事绩纺，以供朝夕。
现代文：母亲为琅笽王氏，是太尉长史王诞的女儿，从事纺织，来供给每天的花销。
English: His mother was a member of the Shao Wang clan, the daughter of Captain Changshi Wangzhao, who was engaged in weaving to provide daily expenses.

古文：湣孙少好学，有清才，随伯父洵爲吴郡，拥弊衣读书，足不踰户。
现代文：袁愍孙少年好学，有清妙的才能，伯父袁洵为吴郡太守，他跟随到吴郡，裹着破衣服读书，脚不出门户。
English: Yuan Shisun was a studious boy with a fine talent. His uncle Yuan Jun was the governor of Wuxi County. He followed him to Wuxi County, wrapped in rags to study, his feet never leaving the door.

古文：其从兄顗出游，要湣孙，湣孙辄称疾不动。
现代文：他的堂兄袁靑出游，邀请他同去，他说是有病不去。
English: His cousin Yuan Qi was traveling and invited him to go with him. He said he was too sick to go.

古文：叔父淑雅重之，语子弟曰： 我门不乏贤，湣孙必当复爲三公。 
现代文：叔父袁淑很推重他，告诉子弟说： 我们家族不乏贤人，愍孙必定会又成为三公。 
English: Uncle Yuan Shu gave him a lot of encouragement and told his son, "Our family is not short of sages. Your grandson will certainly become the third generation of emperors."

古文：或有欲与顗婚，顗父洵曰： 顗不堪，政可与湣孙婚耳。 
现代文：有的人家想和袁靑结婚，袁靑的父亲袁洵说： 袁靑的条件不好，正可以和愍孙结婚哩。 
English: Some people wanted to marry Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao's father Yuan Shao said, "Yuan Shao's condition is not good. He can just marry his grandson."

古文：湣孙在坐，流涕起出。
现代文：袁愍孙在座，流着眼泪起身出去了。
English: Yuan Shisun, who was present, got up in tears and left.

古文：早以操行见知，宋孝武即位，稍迁尚书吏部郎，太子右卫率，侍中。
现代文：他很早就以操行高尚被赏识，宋孝武帝即位，渐渐升为尚书吏部郎、太子右卫率、侍中。
English: He was recognized early on for his noble conduct, and when Emperor Song Xiaowu ascended to the throne, he gradually rose to the position of secretary, prince's bodyguard, and chamberlain.

古文：孝建元年，文帝讳日，群臣并于中兴寺八关斋，中食竟，湣孙别与黄门郎张淹更进鱼肉食。
现代文：孝建元年，文帝去世的纪念日，群臣都在中兴寺八关斋，吃过中饭，袁愍孙另外与黄门郎张淹又去吃鱼和肉。
English: In the first year of Xiao Jian, on the anniversary of the death of Emperor Wen, the ministers all had lunch at Zhongxing Temple, and Yuan Shisun and Huangmen Lang Zhang Dun also went to eat fish and meat.

古文：尚书令何尚之奉法素谨，密以白孝武，孝武使御史中丞王谦之纠奏，并免官。
现代文：尚书令何尚之一向守法谨严，秘密地告诉了孝武帝，孝武帝让御史中丞王谦之上表弹劾，两人都被免官。
English: Shang Shu ordered one of his ministers to be more careful in observing the law and told Emperor Xiaowu in secret. Emperor Xiaowu had the Grand Historian Wang Qian impeached, and both were removed from office.

古文：大明元年，复爲侍中，领射声校尉，封兴平县子。
现代文：大明元年，重新做了侍中，兼射声校尉，封为兴平县子。
English: In the first year of the Daming Dynasty, he was again made a chamberlain, and also a captain of the firing squad, and was named the son of Xingping County.

古文：三年，坐纳山阴人丁承文货，举爲会稽郡孝廉，免官。
现代文：三年，因为受了山阴人丁承文的贿赂，把他举为会稽郡孝廉，而被免官。
English: Three years later, he was dismissed from his post because he accepted a bribe from Ding Chengwen, a member of the Shan people, to promote him to the position of county auditor.

古文：五年，爲左卫将军，加给事中。
现代文：五年，封为左卫将军，担任给事中。
English: Five years later, he was given the title of General of the Left Division and served in the middle of things.

古文：七年，转吏部尚书，左卫如故。
现代文：七年，转为吏部尚书，左卫将军依旧。
English: Seven years later, he was transferred to the cadre department of Shangshu, but General Zuo was still there.

古文：其年，皇太子冠，上临宴东宫，与顔师伯、柳元景、沈庆之等并摴蒱，湣孙劝师伯酒，师伯不饮，湣孙因相裁辱曰： 不能与佞人周旋。 
现代文：这一年，皇太子加冠，皇上到东宫赴宴，与颜师伯、柳元景、沈庆之等一齐掷色子，袁愍孙劝颜师伯饮酒，颜师伯不饮，袁愍孙于是侮辱他说： 不能和佞人周旋。 
English: In this year, the crown prince was crowned, the emperor went to the East Palace for a banquet, and Yan, Liu Yuanjing, Shen Qingzhuang and others threw dice together. Yuan Shisun persuaded Yan to drink, Yan did not drink, and Yuan Shisun insulted him and said, "You can't negotiate with a drunkard."

古文：师伯见宠于上，上常嫌湣孙以寒素陵之，因此发怒曰： 袁濯儿不逢朕，员外郎未可得也,而敢以寒士遇物！ 
现代文：颜师伯被皇上所宠爱，皇上常常讨厌袁愍孙以寒素出身而欺凌他，因此发怒说： 袁濯的儿子要不是遇上朕，连员外郎也当不上，却敢以寒士来傲视别人！ 
English: Yan Shibao was favored by the emperor, and the emperor often hated Yuan Shisun for bullying him because he was a cold-blooded person. Therefore, he became angry and said, "If Yuan Shiu's son had not met me, he would not even have been a foreign guest, but he dared to look down on others as a cold-blooded person!

古文：将手刃之，命引下席。
现代文：要亲手把他杀死，命令把他拉下宴席。
English: They wanted to kill him with their own hands and ordered him to be pulled down from the banquet.

古文：湣孙色不变，沈、柳并起谢，久之得释。
现代文：袁愍孙脸色不变，沈、柳一同起身劝阻，过了好久才平静下来。
English: Yuan Yinsun's face remained unchanged. Shen and Liu got up together to dissuade him, and it took a long time for him to calm down.

古文：出爲海陵太守。
现代文：结果让他出京去当海陵太守。
English: As a result, he was sent to Kyoto to serve as the governor of Hailing.

古文：废帝即位，湣孙在郡，梦日堕其胸上，因惊。
现代文：废帝即位，袁愍孙在郡上，梦见太阳落在了他胸上，很吃惊。
English: When the former emperor ascended to the throne, Yuan Shisun was in the county, and he dreamed that the sun fell on his chest. He was very surprised.

古文：寻被征管机密，历吏部尚书，侍中，骁卫将军。
现代文：不久被征调管理机密，历任吏部尚书、侍中、骁卫将军。
English: He was soon transferred to the management of confidential information, and successively held the positions of secretary, chamberlain, and general of the imperial guard.

古文：湣孙峻于仪范，废帝裸之迫使走，湣孙雅步如常，顾而言曰： 风雨如晦，鸡鸣不已。 
现代文：袁愍孙严格遵守礼仪规范，废帝让他赤裸着身体，迫使他走路，袁愍孙像平常那样迈着文雅的步子，回过头来说： 风雨如晦，鸡鸣不已。 
English: Yuan Shisun strictly abided by the etiquette norms. The deposed emperor stripped him naked and forced him to walk. Yuan Shisun walked with an elegant stride as usual. He turned around and said, "The weather is cloudy and the chickens are chirping incessantly."

古文：明帝泰始元年，爲司徒左长史、南东海太守。
现代文：明帝泰始元年，他担任司徒左长史、南东海太守。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Ming Dynasty, he served as the governor of the Southern East China Sea.

古文：湣孙清整有风操，自遇甚高，尝着妙德先生传以续嵇康高士传后以自况曰： 有妙德先生，陈国人也。
现代文：袁愍孙清高严谨很有风节，自视甚高，曾经著有《妙德先生传》，接续在嵇康的《高士传》后面来自比，说： 有一个妙德先生，是陈国人。
English: Yuan Shisun, the son of Qing Gao, was very strict and self-righteous. He had a very high opinion of himself. He once wrote "The Biography of Mr. Myaode" and compared himself to the author of "The Biography of Gao Shi," saying: "There was a Mr. Myaode who was from Chen Guozhong.

古文：气志深虚，姿神清映，性孝履顺，栖冲业简，有舜之遗风。
现代文：气概志向深邃博大，姿态神情清澈照人，性格孝敬，行为温顺，生活素淡，家业简朴，有虞舜的遗风。
English: His moral aspirations are profound and broad, his demeanor is clear and shining, his character is filial and respectful, his behavior is meek, his life is simple, his family business is simple, and there is a legacy of yakitori.

古文：先生幼夙多疾，性疏懒，无所营尚；然九流百氏之言，雕龙谈天之艺，皆泛识其大归，而不以成名。
现代文：先生自幼年起平时多病，性格懒惰，无所经营；然而对于九流百家的言论，雕龙谈天的艺术，都基本懂得它们的大致，却不以此成名。
English: Ever since he was a child, he was usually sickly, lazy, and had nothing to do; however, he basically understood the general outlines of the sayings of the nine hundred schools of thought and the art of carving dragons and talking about the heavens, but he did not become famous for this.

古文：家贫尝仕，非其好也。
现代文：家中贫寒，出来做官不是他的爱好。
English: His family was poor, and running for office was not his hobby.

古文：混其声迹，晦其心用，席门常掩，三径裁通。
现代文：遮掩他的声迹，隐藏他的用心，席门常常关闭，家园刚刚可通。
English: Hiding his voice, hiding his intentions, the gate is often closed, the home is barely passable.

古文：虽扬子寂漠，严叟沈冥，不是过也。
现代文：即使是扬雄的寂寞，严光的沉隐，也不超过这里。
English: Even the loneliness of Yangxiong, the gloom of the stern light, does not exceed here.

古文：修道遂志，终无得而称焉。 
现代文：修道遂心，终于也没有什么值得称道的。 
English: In the end, there is nothing praiseworthy about cult success.

古文：又尝谓周旋人曰： 昔有一国，国中一水号曰狂泉，国人饮此水无不狂，唯国君穿井而汲，独得无恙。
现代文：又曾经对和打交道的人说： 从前有一个国家，国中有一片水叫做狂泉，国人喝了这里的水无不发狂，只有国君打有一口井，从里面打水喝，独自能够无事。
English: He also used to say to people he dealt with: Once upon a time, there was a country. In the country, there was a piece of water called the Mad Spring. When the people of the country drank the water from here, they all went mad. Only the sovereign had a well, and he could draw water from it to drink, and he could do nothing on his own.

古文：国人既并狂，反谓国主之不狂爲狂，于是聚谋共执国主，疗其狂疾。
现代文：国人既然都发了狂，反而说国主的不狂为狂，于是相聚在一起谋划共同捉住国主，治疗他的狂病。
English: Since the people of the country had all gone mad, they instead said that the sovereign was not mad, but mad, so they gathered together to plan to catch the sovereign together and treat his madness.

古文：火艾针药，莫不必具，国主不任其苦，于是到泉所酌水饮之，饮毕便狂，君臣大小其狂若一，衆乃欢然。
现代文：火艾针药，无不使用，国主受不了那些痛苦，于是到了泉水那里去舀水喝，喝罢便狂了，君臣大小其狂如一，众人才高兴了。
English: The Emperor could not bear the pain, so he went to the spring to draw water and drink. After drinking, he went mad. Monarchs and ministers were as mad as each other, and everyone was happy.

古文：我既不狂，难以独立，比亦欲试饮此水矣。 
现代文：我既然不狂，难以独自支持，近来也想试着去喝这种泉水了。 
English: Since I'm not crazy and it's hard to support myself, I've recently wanted to try drinking this spring water.

古文：幼慕荀奉倩爲人，孝武时求改名粲，不许，至明帝立，乃请改爲粲，字景倩。
现代文：他幼年羡慕荀奉倩的为人，孝武帝时请求改名为袁粲，没有获准许，到了明帝登基，才请求改成了袁粲，字景倩。
English: When he was a child, he was envious of Emperor Xiaowu and requested to change his name to Yuan Xuan. However, he was not allowed to do so. When Emperor Ming ascended to the throne, he requested to change his name to Yuan Xuan.

古文：其外孙王筠又云： 明帝多忌讳，反语袁湣爲 殒门 ，帝意恶之，乃令改焉。 
现代文：他的外孙王筠又说： 明帝有很多忌讳，反语袁愍为 殒门 ，明帝很厌恶，便命令他改掉。 
English: His grandchild Wang Yao also said: Emperor Ming had a lot of taboos, and the antonym Yuan Qi was the gatekeeper. Emperor Ming was disgusted and ordered him to change it.

古文：二年，迁领军将军，仗士三十人入六门。
现代文：泰始二年，调任领军将军，卫士三十人可以进入六门。
English: In the second year of Taizhi, he was transferred to the leading general, and thirty guardsmen could enter the six gates.

古文：其年，徙中书令，领太子詹事。
现代文：当年，调为中书令，兼太子詹事。
English: In that year, he was transferred to the position of Chushiro, and also became Prince Zhanji.

古文：三年，转尚书仆射，寻领吏部。
现代文：三年，转为尚书仆射，不久兼掌吏部。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to Shang Shufu, and soon he was also in charge of the administrative department.

古文：五年，加中书令，又领丹阳尹。
现代文：五年，担任中书令，又兼丹阳尹。
English: For five years, he held the post of Chushiro, and also served as Danyang Yin.

古文：粲负才尚气，爱好虚远，虽位任隆重，不以事务经怀。
现代文：袁粲自负才能，意气很盛，爱好虚远，虽然职位隆重，却不把政务放在心里。
English: Yuan Shao is conceited, high-spirited and vain. Although he holds a high-ranking position, he does not care about government affairs.

古文：独步园林，诗酒自适。
现代文：他独自在园林中散步，吟诗饮酒。自得安闲。
English: He walks alone in the garden, sings and drinks, and enjoys himself.

古文：家居负郭，每杖策逍遥，当其意得，悠然忘反。
现代文：他的家靠近城边，常常扶着手杖逍遥行走，当他高兴的时候，就悠然忘记回返。
English: His home is close to the edge of the city, and he often walks freely with a cane, and when he is happy, he easily forgets to return.

古文：郡南一家颇有竹石，粲率尔步往，亦不通主人，直造竹所，啸咏自得。
现代文：郡南有一家有很多竹子和石头，袁粲便随意地步行前往，也不通告主人，径直走到竹子那里去，啸咏自得。
English: There was a family in the southern part of the county that had a lot of bamboo and stones. Yuan Li casually went there on foot, without notifying the owner. He went straight to the bamboo and enjoyed himself.

古文：主人出，语笑款然。
现代文：主人出来，说笑诚恳。
English: The host came out and spoke with sincerity.

古文：俄而车骑羽仪并至门，方知是袁尹。
现代文：不大一会儿，车骑仪仗一齐到了门前，才知道是袁尹。
English: After a short while, they all arrived in front of the door, only to find out that it was Yuan Yin.

古文：又尝步屧白杨郊野间，道遇一士大夫，便呼与酣饮，明日此人谓被知顾，到门求进。
现代文：又曾经步行在种有白杨树的郊野当中，路上遇到了一个士大夫，便叫住和他一起尽情饮酒，第二天这个人认为是被赏识，便到他的门上去请求提升。
English: Once, on foot in the middle of the countryside planted with poplar trees, he met a magistrate on the road and stopped to drink with him to his heart's content. The next day, the man thought he was appreciated and went to his door to ask for a promotion.

古文：粲曰： 昨饮酒无偶，聊相要耳。 
现代文：袁粲说： 昨天饮酒没有伙伴，不过是姑且相邀罢了。 
English: Yuan Qi said, "I didn't have a drinking partner yesterday, but I was invited.

古文：竟不与相见。
现代文：结果没有与他相见。
English: He has always refused to meet her.

古文：尝作五言诗，言 访迹虽中宇，循寄乃沧洲 。
现代文：他曾经作了一首五言诗，说 访迹虽中宇，循寄乃沧洲 。
English: He once wrote a five-syllable poem, saying that although the visit is in the middle of the world, it is in the vicissitudes of the world.

古文：盖其志也。
现代文：大概这就是他的志趣。
English: That's probably what he's interested in.

古文：七年，爲尚书令。
现代文：泰始七年，他担任尚书令。
English: In the first seven years of the Taisho era, he served as Shang Shuling.

古文：初，粲忤于孝武，其母候乘舆出，负砖叩头流血，砖碎伤目。
现代文：起初，袁粲触犯了孝武帝，他的母亲等待皇帝的车驾出行的时候，身背砖块，磕头流血，砖碎扎伤了眼睛。
English: At first, Yuan Xuan offended Emperor Xiaowu. While his mother was waiting for the emperor's chauffeur to leave, bricks were thrown at her back, her head was bleeding, and the bricks injured her eyes.

古文：自此后，粲与人语，有误道眇目者，辄涕泣弥日。
现代文：从此以后，袁粲和别人说话，有人不小心误说了瞎眼的，他就哭泣半天。
English: From then on, when Yuan Qi spoke to others, and someone accidentally mispronounced blind, he cried for half a day.

古文：尝疾，母忧念，昼寝，梦见父容色如平生，与母语曰： 湣孙无忧，将爲国家器，不患沈没。
现代文：他曾经生病，母亲心里挂念，白天睡觉，梦见了袁粲的父亲，面容和生前一样，对她说： 愍孙不用发愁，将成为国家的栋梁，不担心沉沦。
English: He used to be ill, he was worried about his mother, he slept during the day, he dreamed of Yuan Qi's father, his face was the same as when he was alive, he said to her: "Don't worry about your grandson, he will become the pillar of the country, don't worry about sinking.

古文：但恐富贵，终当倾灭耳。 
现代文：但是恐怕富贵后，终于还会破灭的。 
English: But I'm afraid that after becoming rich and famous, it will finally come to an end.

古文：母未尝言及。
现代文：他母亲不曾说起这事。
English: His mother never spoke of it.

古文：粲贵重，恒惧倾灭，乃以告之，粲故自挹损。
现代文：袁粲显贵以后，她总是害怕破灭，便把这事告诉了儿子，袁粲所以注意约束自己。
English: After Yuan Shikai's rise to prominence, she was always afraid of being ruined, so she told this to her son. Therefore, Yuan Shikai was careful to discipline herself.

古文：明帝临崩，粲与褚彦回、刘勉并受顾命，加班剑二十人，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：明帝临死时，袁粲与褚彦回、刘面力一起受到托付，赠给仪仗二十人，配给乐队一支。
English: When the Ming Emperor was about to die, Yuan Shao, together with Yan Yanfu and Liu Mengli, were entrusted with the gift of twenty honor guards and one band.

古文：后废帝即位，加兵五百人。
现代文：后废帝即位，拨给兵士五百人。
English: After the deposed emperor ascended the throne, five hundred soldiers were assigned to him.

古文：元徽元年，丁母忧，葬竟，摄令亲职，加卫将军，不受。
现代文：元徽元年，遭到了母亲的丧事，埋葬以后，召他到职工作，封为卫将军，没有接受。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, after his mother's funeral and burial, he was summoned to work and appointed as a guard general, but he did not accept.

古文：性至孝，居丧毁甚，祖日及祥，诏卫军断客。
现代文：他性格极为孝顺，守丧十分哀伤，祭祖神的日子呈现吉祥，诏令为卫将军，断绝客人来访。
English: His character was extremely filial, his mourning was very sad, the day of the ancestor's sacrifice was auspicious, he was ordered to be a general of the guards, and he cut off the guests from visiting.

古文：二年，桂阳王休范爲逆，粲扶曳入殿，诏加兵自随，府置佐吏。
现代文：元徽二年，桂阳王刘休范叛乱，袁粲由人搀扶入殿，诏令增加兵士随从，府中设置佐官。
English: In the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, King Liu Xuan of Guiyang rebelled. Yuan Shun was helped into the palace by a crowd of people, and the imperial edict was issued to increase the number of soldiers to accompany him, and an adjutant was set up in the palace.

古文：时兵难危急，贼已至南掖门，诸将意沮，咸莫能奋。
现代文：当时兵难危急，贼军已经到了南掖门，诸将意志沮丧，都不敢奋起迎战。
English: At that time, the soldiers were in a critical situation, the thief army had already arrived at the South Gate, and the generals were frustrated and did not dare to rise up to fight.

古文：粲慷慨谓诸将帅曰： 寇贼已逼，而衆情离阻，孤子受先帝顾托，本以死报，今日当与褚护军同死社稷。 
现代文：袁粲慷慨激昂地对各位将帅说： 贼寇已经逼来，而大家情绪涣散，我受先帝的顾托，本应当以死相报，今日一定要与褚护军一同为国家而死。 
English: Yuan Xuan impetuously said to the generals: "Thieves and robbers have forced their way in, and everyone is in a bad mood. I was entrusted by the former emperor, and I should have died for the country. Today, I must die for the country together with my bodyguards."

古文：因命左右被马，辞色哀壮。
现代文：随即命令身边的人备马，神情哀壮。
English: He then ordered the people around him to get their horses ready, looking sad.

古文：于是陈显达等感激出战，贼即平殄。
现代文：于是陈显达等人感激出战，贼军被平灭。
English: As a result, Chen Xianda and others gratefully went to war, and the bandit army was wiped out.

古文：事宁，授中书监，即本号开府仪同三司，领司徒。
现代文：事情安定下来，授职为中书监，以本官号开府仪同三司，兼任司徒。
English: When things settled down, he was given the post of middle school librarian, and with his official title, he opened the office and the three departments, and also served as a scholar.

古文：以扬州解爲府，固不肯移。
现代文：以扬州分解为府，他坚持不肯迁移。
English: Based in Yangzhou, he refused to move.

古文：三年，徙尚书令，卫军、开府如故，并固辞，服终乃受命。
现代文：元徽三年，调任尚书令，卫军、开府依旧不变，他全都坚持推辞，服丧期满，才接受命令。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Shang Shuling was transferred, the guards and the capital remained unchanged, he insisted on resigning, and only accepted the order after the mourning period was over.

古文：加侍中，进爵爲侯，又不受。
现代文：担任侍中，晋升爵位为侯，又不接受。
English: He served as a chamberlain and was promoted to the peerage as a marquess, which he did not accept.

古文：时粲与齐高帝、褚彦回、刘彦节递日入直，平决万机。
现代文：当时袁粲与齐高帝、褚彦回、刘彦节轮流入朝值班，平均地决断各种国家事务。
English: At that time, Yuan Shikai, Qi Gao Di, Zhi Yan Hui, and Liu Yan Jie rotated into the duty of the North, and decided various national affairs on average.

古文：粲闲默寡言，不肯当事，主书每往谘决，或高咏对之。
现代文：袁粲沉默寡言，不肯担当大事，主书常常前往请示工作，他有时便高咏诗歌来作回答。
English: Yuan Xuan was taciturn and did not want to be in charge of important matters. The chief scribe often went to work to ask for instructions, and sometimes he would recite poetry to answer.

古文：时立一意，则衆莫能改。
现代文：有时打定了一个主意，则众人都不能改变。
English: Sometimes an idea is set in stone and no one can change it.

古文：素寡往来，门无杂宾，闲居高卧，一无所接。
现代文：他平素很少和人往来，门上没有闲杂宾客，闲居高卧，一无所接。
English: He rarely interacts with people, there are no idle guests at the door, lounges high, receives nothing.

古文：谈客文士，所见不过一两人。
现代文：谈话的文士，所见到的不过一两个人。
English: The scribes of conversation saw but one or two.

古文：顺帝即位，迁中书监，司徙、侍中如故。
现代文：顺帝即位，调任中书监，司徒、侍中职位依旧。
English: Emperor Shun ascended to the throne, and the posts of middle librarian, scholar, and chamberlain remained unchanged.

古文：齐高帝既居东府，故使粲镇石头。
现代文：齐高帝已经住在东府，所以让袁粲镇守石头城。
English: Emperor Qigong was already living in Dongfu, so he let Yuan Shizhen guard Stone Town.

古文：粲素静退，每有朝命，逼切不得已，然后方就。
现代文：袁粲平素清静退让，每当有朝庭任命，都是迫不得已，然后才去就职。
English: Yuan Bingping always quietly conceded. Whenever he was appointed by the imperial court, he had no choice but to accept the post.

古文：及诏移石头，即便顺旨。
现代文：等诏令让他转移石头城，当即就顺承了圣旨。
English: When the imperial edict ordered him to move the stone city, he immediately obeyed the edict.

古文：有周旋人解望气，谓粲曰： 石头气甚凶，往必有祸。 
现代文：有和他打交道的人懂得望气，对袁粲说： 石头城的气很不吉祥，前往必定会有祸患。 
English: Some people who had dealings with him knew how to be optimistic, and said to Yuan Qi: The atmosphere of Stone Town is very inauspicious, and there will definitely be disasters when you go there.

古文：粲不答。
现代文：袁粲并不回答。
English: Yuan Qi did not answer.

古文：又给油络通幰车，仗士五十人入殿。
现代文：又配给他油络通阛车，可以带卫士五十人入殿。
English: He was also provided with an oil tanker and allowed to bring fifty guards into the temple.

古文：时齐高帝方革命，粲自以身受顾托，不欲事二姓，密有异图。
现代文：当时齐高帝正在准备改朝，袁粲自以为身受宋朝皇帝顾托，不愿意侍奉二姓皇帝，秘密地别有图谋。
English: At that time, Emperor Qigong was preparing to change the dynasty. Yuan Shun thought that he was under the patronage of the Emperor of the Song Dynasty. He did not want to serve the second emperor and secretly had other plans.

古文：刘彦节宋氏宗室，前湘州刺史王蕴太后兄子，素好武事，并虑不见容于齐高帝，皆与粲结，诸将帅黄回、任候伯、孙昙瓘、王宜兴、彭文之、卜伯兴等并与粲合。
现代文：刘彦节是宋氏宗室、前湘州刺史王蕴是太后哥哥的儿子，平素喜欢武事，都担忧会不被齐高帝所宽容，都与袁粲结合起来，军队将帅黄回、任候伯、孙昙馞、王宜兴、彭文之、卜伯兴等都与袁粲结合。
English: Liu Yan Jie was the ancestor of the Song Dynasty, and Wang Yun, the former prince of Xiangzhou, was the son of the empress dowager's elder brother. They both liked martial arts and were worried that they would not be tolerated by Emperor Qigong. They were all combined with Yuan Shao. The army generals Shuai Huang Hui, Ren Hou Bo, Sun Ying, Wang Yixing, Peng Wenzhi, and Bu Bo Xing were all combined with Yuan Shao.

古文：升明元年，荆州刺史沈攸之举兵反，齐高帝自诣粲，粲称疾不见。
现代文：升明元年，荆州刺史沈攸之起兵反叛，齐高帝亲自去找袁粲，袁粲声称有病不见。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, when Jing Province rebelled against Emperor Qigong, Emperor Qigong personally went to find Yuan Qi, but Yuan Qi claimed to be ill and disappeared.

古文：粲宗人袁达以爲不宜示异同。
现代文：袁粲宗族的人袁达认为不应该表示出意见不同。
English: Yuan Da, a member of Yuan Hui's clan, believes that it is not appropriate to express dissenting opinions.

古文：粲曰： 彼若劫我入台，便无辞以拒，一如此，不复得出矣。 
现代文：袁粲说： 他如果强拉我入阁，便没有话拒绝，一旦这样，就无法再退出了。 
English: Yuan Qi said, "If he forces me to join the cabinet, I won't have the words to refuse. Once this happens, I won't be able to withdraw.

古文：时齐高帝入屯朝堂，彦节从父弟领军将军韫入直门下省，卜伯兴爲直合，黄回诸将皆率军出新亭。
现代文：当时齐高帝把军队屯驻在朝堂，刘彦节的堂弟领军将军刘韫进入门下省值勤，卜伯兴为直阁，黄回诸将都率军前往新亭。
English: At that time, Emperor Qigong stationed his army in the imperial hall, Liu Yanqing's cousin and leading general Liu Ye entered the provincial duty, Bu Boxing was the direct cabinet, and Huang Hui led the army to Xingting.

古文：粲克日谋矫太后令，使韫、伯兴率宿卫兵攻齐高帝于朝堂，回率军来应，彦节、候伯等并赴石头。
现代文：袁粲打算到时候假借太后的命令，让刘韫、卜伯兴率领宿卫兵在朝堂攻击齐高帝，黄回率领军队前来接应，刘彦节、任候伯等都去石头城。
English: At that time, Yuan Shao planned to borrow the empress dowager's order and have Liu Xi and Bu Boxing lead the guards to attack Emperor Qigong in the imperial hall, Huang Hui led the army to come to meet him, and Liu Hanzi and Ren Xubo all went to Stone City.

古文：事泄。
现代文：事情泄露。
English: The affair leaked out.

古文：先是，齐高帝遣将薛深、苏烈、王天生等领兵戍石头，云以助粲，实御之也。
现代文：在这以前，齐高帝派遣将领薛深、苏烈、王天生等领兵守卫石头城，说是来帮助袁粲，实际上是防御他。
English: Prior to this, Emperor Qigong sent generals Xue Sheng, Su Li, Wang Tian Sheng and other leading soldiers to guard the Stone City, saying that they would help Yuan Shao, but actually defending him.

古文：又令腹心王敬则爲直合，与伯兴共总禁兵。
现代文：又让心腹王敬则为直阁，与卜伯兴共同总领禁兵。
English: He also allowed his confidant Wang Jing to become Zhiakou, and jointly led the forbidden soldiers with Bu Bo Xing.

古文：王蕴闻彦节已奔，叹曰： 今年事败矣。 
现代文：王蕴听说刘彦节已经开往石头城，叹息说： 今年的事情要失败了。 
English: When Wang Yun heard that the Liu Yan Festival had left for Stone Town, he sighed and said, "This year's event will be a failure.

古文：乃狼狈率部曲向石头，薛深等据门射之。
现代文：于是只好窘迫地率领部下赶往石头城，薛深等人在城门上向他们射箭。
English: As a result, he had no choice but to lead his men in desperation to Stone Town, where Xue Shen and others shot arrows at them at the city gate.

古文：蕴谓粲已败，乃便散走。
现代文：王蕴认为袁粲已经失败，于是便分散逃走。
English: Wang Yun thought that Yuan Shao had failed, so he scattered and fled.

古文：齐高帝以报敬则，敬则诛韫并伯兴，又遣军主戴僧静向石头助薛深自仓门入。
现代文：齐高帝把消息告诉了王敬则，王敬则杀死了刘韫和卜伯兴，又派军主戴僧静开往石头城帮助薛深从仓门进入。
English: Qigong Emperor told the news to Wang Jingzhe. Wang Jingzhe killed Liu Zhen and Bu Boxing, and sent the commander Dai Sengjing to Stone Town to help Xue Sheng enter through the warehouse door.

古文：时粲与彦节等列兵登东门，僧静分兵攻府西门，彦节与儿踰城出。
现代文：当时袁粲与刘彦节等列兵登东门，戴僧静分兵进攻府西门，刘彦节与儿子从城墙上跳了出去。
English: At that time, Yuan Qi and Liu Yanshi and other soldiers went to the East Gate, Dai Sojing's soldiers attacked the West Gate, and Liu Yanshi and his son jumped out of the city wall.

古文：粲还坐，列烛自照，谓其子最曰： 本知一木不能止大厦之崩，但以名义至此耳。 
现代文：袁粲回来坐下，点燃蜡烛照着自己，对他的儿子袁最说： 本来就知道一根木头不能阻止大厦的崩溃，只是因为名义而到这一地步。 
English: Yuan Zheng came back, sat down, lit a candle and shined it on himself. He said to his son Yuan Zheng: I knew that a piece of wood could not prevent the collapse of the building, but I only got to this point because of the name.

古文：僧静挺身暗往，奋刀直前欲斩之。
现代文：戴僧静挺身暗自前往，挥刀直前要把他杀死。
English: Dai So Ching braced herself and secretly went there, intending to kill him just before she swung the sword.

古文：子最觉有异，大叫抱父乞先死，兵士人人莫不陨涕。
现代文：他儿子袁最觉得情况异常，大声叫喊抱着父亲乞求让自己先死，兵士们无不落下眼泪。
English: His son, Yuan, was the one who found the situation most unusual. He cried loudly, hugged his father and begged to die first. The soldiers were all in tears.

古文：粲曰： 我不失忠臣，汝不失孝子。 
现代文：袁粲说： 我不失为忠臣，你不失为孝子。 
English: Yuan Shao said: I am a loyal subject, and you are a filial son.

古文：仍求笔作啓云： 臣义奉大宋，策名两毕，今便归魂坟垄，永就山丘。 
现代文：便求拿笔来写道： 臣效忠大宋，计策声名都已完毕，现在就魂归于坟墓，永远地安葬在山丘。 
English: Then he asked for a pen to write: "The vassals are loyal to the Great Song Dynasty, the strategy and fame are over, and now the soul will return to the grave and be buried forever in the hills."

古文：僧静乃并斩之。
现代文：戴僧静于是把他们一并杀死。
English: Dai Sonjing then killed them all.

古文：初，粲大明中与萧惠开、周朗同车行，逢大珩开驻车，惠开自照镜曰： 无年可仕。 
现代文：起初，袁粲在大明年间与萧惠开、周朗同车行走，遇到一条方形大船开动而把车停下，萧惠开自己照镜子说： 不用一两年就可以做官。 
English: At first, Yuan Wei was driving with Xiao Huikai and Zhou Lang during the Spring Festival. When he encountered a large square ship, he stopped the car. Xiao Huikai looked at himself in the mirror and said, "I can become an official in just one or two years."

古文：朗执镜良久曰： 视死如归。 
现代文：周朗拿着镜子过了好久说： 视死如归。 
English: After holding the mirror for a long time, Zhou Lang said, "I feel like I'm going to die."

古文：粲最后曰： 当至三公而不终。 
现代文：袁粲最后说： 应当是位至三公而不能到头。 
English: Yuan Shao finally said: It should be from the first to the third, but not to the end.

古文：至是如言。
现代文：到现在都正如所说的那样。
English: So far, so good.

古文：最字文高，时年十七，既父子俱殒，左右分散，任候伯等其夜并自新亭赴石头，其后皆诛。
现代文：袁最字文高，当时年龄十七岁，既然父子都死了，左右的人也都分散了，任候伯等人那天夜里都从新亭赶赴石头城，后来都被处死。
English: Yuan was seventeen years old at the time, and since his father and son were both dead, the people around him were also scattered. Ren Houbo and others rushed from Xinting to Stone Town that night, and were later executed.

古文：粲小儿数岁，乳母将投粲门生狄灵庆。
现代文：袁粲的小儿子才几岁，乳母抱着他投到了袁粲的门生狄灵庆那里。
English: Yuan Xuan's youngest son was just a few years old when his nanny took him to Yuan Xuan's protégé, Di Lingqing.

古文：灵庆曰： 吾闻出郎君者有厚赏，今袁氏已灭，汝匿之尚谁爲乎？ 
现代文：狄灵庆说： 我听说交出这孩子的有厚赏，现在袁氏已经被灭，你藏他是为了谁呢？ 
English: Di Lingqing said: I heard that there is a high reward for handing over this child. Now that the Yuan clan has been wiped out, who are you hiding him for?

古文：遂抱以首。
现代文：于是抱着他出去告发。
English: So she hugged him and went out to denounce him.

古文：乳母号泣呼天曰： 公昔于汝有恩，故冒难归汝，奈何欲杀郎君以求小利。
现代文：乳母大哭呼天说： 袁公以前对你有恩，所以冒险送到你这里来，怎么却要杀死郎君来求小利。
English: The wet nurse cried loudly and shouted to the heavens, "Yuan Gong was kind to you before, so he risked his life to bring you here, but how could he kill his son-in-law to ask for a small profit?

古文：若天地鬼神有知，我见汝灭门。 
现代文：如果天地鬼神有知，我将见到你家门破灭。 
English: If heaven and earth have any knowledge, I will see your house destroyed.

古文：此儿死后，灵庆常见儿骑大宁毛狗戏如平常，经年馀，斗场忽见一狗走入其家，遇灵庆于庭噬杀之，少时妻子皆没。
现代文：这孩子死后，狄灵庆常常看见这孩子骑着个多毛狗像平常一样玩游戏，经过了一年多，在斗场忽然看见有一只狗跑到他家，在庭院里遇到了狄灵庆把他咬死了，不久，他的妻子孩子都死去了。
English: After the child's death, Dillingqing often saw the child riding a shaggy dog and playing games as usual. After more than a year, he suddenly saw a dog running to his house in the battleground. He met Dillingqing in the courtyard and bit him to death. Soon, his wife and child both died.

古文：此狗即袁郎所常骑者也。
现代文：这条狗就是袁郎经常骑的那一只。
English: This dog is the one Yuan Lang often rides.

古文：齐永明元年，武帝诏曰： 袁粲、刘彦节并与先朝同奖宋室，沈攸之于景和之世特有乃心，虽末节不终，而始诚可录。
现代文：齐朝永明元年，武帝下诏说： 袁粲、刘彦节都在前朝共同辅助宋皇室，沈攸之在景和年间也特别有此心，虽然最后气节不终，而开始的忠诚值得记载。
English: In the first year of the Yongming Dynasty of the Qi Dynasty, Emperor Wu issued an edict saying: Yuan Shao and Liu Yan Jie both assisted the Song royal family in the previous dynasty. Shen Youzhi was also particularly committed to this during his reign and years. Although the last Qi Jie did not end, the loyalty at the beginning is worth recording.

古文：岁月弥往，宜沾优隆。 
现代文：岁月越来越久，应该加以优待。 
English: As the years go by, they should be given preferential treatment.

古文：于是并命改葬。
现代文：于是下令都给予改葬。
English: As a result, it was ordered that they all be reburied.

古文：粲省事莫嗣祖，粲常所委信，与刘彦节等宣密谋。
现代文：袁粲的手下官员莫嗣祖，袁粲经常加以委托信任，与刘彦节等人共同密谋。
English: Yuan Shao's subordinate official Mo Shizu, whom Yuan Shao often entrusted and trusted, conspired with Liu Yanshi and others.

古文：至是齐高帝问曰： 汝知袁粲谋逆，何不啓？ 
现代文：到现在齐武帝问他说： 你知道袁粲谋划叛乱，为什么不报告？ 
English: To this day, Emperor Qiwu asks him: "You knew that Yuan Shao was plotting a rebellion, why didn't you report it?"

古文：嗣祖曰： 小人无识，曲蒙袁公厚恩，实不仰负，今日就死分甘。
现代文：莫嗣祖说： 小人没有见识，却蒙受了袁公的厚恩，实在不能辜负了他，今日被处死也心甘。
English: Mochizucho said, "The villain has no insight, but he has received the kindness of Yuan Gong. He really can't live up to him, and he is willing to be executed today."

古文：官若赐性命,亦不忍背粲而独生也。 
现代文：长官如果赏赐我性命，也不忍心背弃袁粲而独自生存。 
English: If the chief rewarded me with my life, I would not have the heart to turn my back on Yuan Shao and live alone.

古文：戴僧静劝杀之。
现代文：戴僧静劝武帝杀掉他。
English: Dai Sangjing advised Emperor Wu to kill him.

古文：帝曰： 彼各爲其主。 
现代文：武帝说： 他们是各为其主。 
English: Emperor Wu said: They are each their own masters.

古文：遂赦焉，用爲省事。
现代文：于是赦免了他，任用他做内阁中的办事官员。
English: He then pardoned him and appointed him as a clerk in the cabinet.

古文：历朝所赏。
现代文：历朝都对他加以奖赏。
English: All dynasties have rewarded him.

古文：梁豫章王直新出合，中旨用嗣祖爲师。
现代文：梁朝的豫章王正值新出京任职，按皇帝的意旨聘用莫嗣祖为师傅。
English: Yu Zhang Wang of the Liang Dynasty was newly appointed to Beijing, and according to the emperor's will, he hired Mo Shizuo as a master.

古文：彖字伟才，顗弟觊之子也。
现代文：○袁彖袁彖字伟才，是袁靑的弟弟袁觊的儿子。
English: ○ Yuan Shao Yuan Shao Zi Wei Cai is the son of Yuan Shao's brother, Yuan Shao Long.

古文：觊好学美才，早有清誉，仕宋位武陵内史。
现代文：袁觊好学，有很好的才能，很早就有清雅的声誉，在宋做官为武陵内史。
English: Yuan Qi was a good student, had great talent, and had a reputation for elegance very early on. In the Song Dynasty, he was an official in charge of the internal history of Wuling.

古文：彖少有风气，善属文及谈玄，举秀才，历诸王府参军，不就。
现代文：袁彖少年时期就很有风度，善于写文章和谈玄，被举为秀才，历经诸王府参军，没有就任。
English: As a young boy, Yuan Shao was very personable, good at writing articles and discussing the occult. He was praised as an outstanding talent, and after joining the army from various royal courts, he did not take office.

古文：觊临终与兄顗书曰： 史公才识可喜，足懋先基矣。 
现代文：袁觊临终给哥哥袁靑的信中说： 史公的才能学识可喜，足以光大先祖的基业了。 
English: In his last letter to his brother, Yuan Shao, Yuan Shao said: Shiguo's talent and knowledge are gratifying, and are enough to glorify the great ancestor's foundation.

古文：史公，彖小字也。
现代文：史公，是袁彖的小字。
English: Shi Gong is a diminutive of Yuan Qi.

古文：及顗见诛，宋明帝投尸江中，不许敛葬。
现代文：后来袁靑被杀，宋明帝把他的尸体投到了长江中，不许收葬。
English: Later, Yuan Shao was killed, and Emperor Song Ming threw his body into the Yangtze River and did not allow it to be buried.

古文：彖与旧奴一人，微服求尸，四十馀日乃得，密瘗石头后冈，身自负土。
现代文：袁彖和旧时的奴仆一人，化装去找尸体，四十多天才找到，秘密地埋在了石头城后面的冈子上，是靠自己背土埋的。
English: Yuan Xuan and one of his former slaves disguised themselves to find the body, which took more than forty days to find, and secretly buried it on a ledge behind the stone city. They buried it on their own.

古文：怀其文集，未尝离身。
现代文：他一直在怀里放着他的文集，不曾离开过自己的身体。
English: He always carried his collection in his arms and never left his body.

古文：明帝崩后，乃改葬顗。
现代文：明帝死后，才改葬了袁靑。
English: It was only after the death of Emperor Ming that Yuan Shikang was reburied.

古文：从叔司徒粲、祖舅征西将军蔡兴宗并器之。
现代文：堂叔司徒袁粲、祖舅征西将军蔡兴宗都很器重他。
English: His great-uncle, the scholar Yuan Qi, and his great-uncle, the general Cai Xingzong, both held him in high esteem.

古文：仕宋爲齐高帝太傅相国主簿，秘书丞。
现代文：在宋朝做官担任齐高帝太傅相国主簿、秘书丞。
English: In the Song Dynasty, he served as the chief accountant and secretary to Emperor Qi Gao.

古文：仕齐爲中书郎，兼太子中庶子。
现代文：在齐国做官担任中书郎，兼太子中庶子。
English: He served as a middle school teacher and an illegitimate child of the crown prince while working as an official in Qi.

古文：又以中书郎兼御史中丞。
现代文：又以中书郎而兼御史中丞。
English: He was also appointed chushiro and also goshi chujo.

古文：坐弹谢超宗简奏依违，免官。
现代文：因为弹劾谢超宗写奏表迟疑不决，免官。
English: Because of the impeachment, Xie Chao Zong hesitated to write a report and was dismissed.

古文：后拜庐陵王谘议。
现代文：后来任命为庐陵王咨议。
English: Later, he was appointed as the adviser to the king of Fuling.

古文：时南郡江陵县人苟蒋之弟胡之妇爲曾口寺沙门所淫，夜入苟家，蒋之杀沙门，爲官司所检，蒋之列家门秽行，欲告则耻，欲忍则不可，实己所杀，胡之列又如此，兄弟争死。
现代文：当时南郡江陵县人苟蒋之的弟弟苟胡之的媳妇，被曾口寺的和尚所奸淫，和尚夜里进入苟家，苟蒋之杀死了他，被官府所审查，苟蒋之叙述了家门的丑行，说是想告状害怕羞耻，想忍下又不能够，确实是自己杀死了他，苟胡之叙述的也是这样，兄弟争死。
English: At that time, the daughter-in-law of Guo Hu, the younger brother of Guo Jiangzhi of Nan County, Jiangling County, was raped by a monk of Zengkou Temple. The monk entered Guo's house at night, Guo Jiangzhi killed him, and was examined by the government. Guo Jiangzhi described the family's misdeeds, saying that he wanted to sue, was afraid of shame, and could not bear it, and indeed killed him himself. This is also what Guo Hu described. Brothers fight to the death.

古文：江陵令宗躬啓州，荆州刺史庐江王求博议。
现代文：江陵令宗躬报告给州里，荆州刺史庐江王请求多方讨论。
English: Jiangling Ling Zongwu reported to Zhuli, Jingzhou Zhishi to the King of the Yangtze River and requested multi-party discussions.

古文：彖曰： 夫迅寒急节，乃见松筠之操，危机迥构，方识贞孤之风。
现代文：袁彖说： 严寒季节，才看出青松翠竹的节操，危机出现，才见到坚贞独具的风采。
English: Yuan Qi said: It is only in the severe cold season that we can see the austerity of the green pine and the green bamboo. It is only when there is a crisis that we can see the unique style of steadfastness.

古文：窃以蒋之、胡之杀人，原心非暴，辩谳之日，友于让生，事怜左右，义哀行路。
现代文：我认为苟蒋之、苟胡之杀人，本心并非要做出暴行，论罪的时候，兄弟互让生存，事情让左右的人怜悯，义气令行路的人悲哀。
English: I think that the murder of Gou Chiang and Gou Hu did not mean to commit violence. When discussing the crime, the brothers let each other live. The matter made people on both sides feel pity, and the spirit of righteousness made people on the road sad.

古文：昔文举引谤，获漏疏网，蒋之心迹，同符古人，若陷以深刑，实伤爲善。 
现代文：从前孔融自引罪名，结果漏过了粗疏的法网，蒋之的心迹，正和古人相符合，如果用重刑治罪，实在是伤害了为善的人们。 
English: In the past, Kong Rong self-incriminated himself, and as a result, he missed the coarse legal net. Jiang Zi's thoughts are in line with the ancients. If the crime is punished with a heavy sentence, it will really hurt the people who are good.

古文：由是蒋之兄弟免死。
现代文：因此苟蒋之兄弟免去了死罪。
English: As a result, Gong Chiang's brother was spared the death penalty.

古文：累迁太子中庶子，出爲冠军将军，监吴兴郡事。
现代文：他逐步升迁为太子中庶子，调出京城做了冠军将军，监管吴兴郡的事务。
English: He was gradually promoted to the prince's middle son, transferred out of Beijing and made a champion general, supervising the affairs of Wuxing County.

古文：彖性刚固以微言忤武帝，又薄王晏爲人，晏请交不答。
现代文：袁彖性格刚强，因为一些委婉的话触犯了武帝，又鄙薄王晏的为人，王晏请求结交而不予答理。
English: Yuan Xuan's character was strong, because he offended Emperor Wu with some euphemistic words, and he despised Wang Xuan. Wang Xuan asked him to make friends, but he did not reply.

古文：武帝在便殿用金柄刀子翦瓜，晏在侧曰： 外闻有金刀之言，恐不宜用此物。 
现代文：武帝在便殿用金柄刀子切瓜，王晏在旁边说： 在外面听到有关于金刀的议论，恐怕不应该使用这东西。 
English: Emperor Wu used a gold-handled knife to cut melons in the toilet hall. Wang Yao said next to him: "I've heard people talking about gold knives outside, so I'm afraid I shouldn't use this thing."

古文：帝穷问所以，晏曰： 袁彖爲臣说之。 
现代文：武帝追根溯源地追问究竟是为什么，王晏说： 这是袁彖对我说的。 
English: Emperor Wu traced back to the source and asked why exactly, Wang Yao said: This is what Yuan Yao told me.

古文：上衔怒良久。
现代文：皇上恼恨了很久。
English: The Emperor was angry for a long time.

古文：彖到郡，坐过用禄钱，免官付东冶。
现代文：袁彖到了郡上任职，因为多用了俸禄，被免官交付东冶。
English: Yuan Wei took up a post in the county government, but because he spent too much of his salary, he was dismissed and handed over to Dongye.

古文：彖妹爲竟陵王子良妃，子良世子昭胄时年八岁，见武帝而形容惨悴，帝问其故，昭胄流涕曰： 臣舅负罪，今在尚方，臣母悲泣不食已积日，臣所以不宁。 
现代文：袁彖的妹妹是竟陵王萧子良的妃子，萧子良的世子萧昭胄当时年龄八岁，见了武帝而面容憔悴，武帝问是什么缘故，萧昭胄流着眼泪说： 我的舅舅犯了罪，现在还在尚方，我母亲悲痛哭泣，不吃饭已经有很多日子，我所以不能安宁。 
English: Yuan Xuan's sister was actually the concubine of the mausoleum king Xiao Ziliang. Xiao Zhaohui, the son of Xiao Ziliang, was eight years old at the time. When he saw Emperor Wu, his face was sad. Emperor Wu asked what was the reason. Xiao Zhaohui said with tears: My uncle has committed a crime and is still in Shangfang. My mother is crying with grief. I have not eaten for many days, so I can't be calm.

古文：诸子累表陈奏，诏不许，諡曰穆正公。有集二十卷。
现代文：武帝说： 特地为孩儿赦免他。 稍后武帝游览孙陵，远望东冶，说： 冶中有一个高贵的囚徒。 
English: Emperor Wu said, "I am pardoning him especially for the sake of the child." Later, Emperor Wu toured the Sun Mausoleum, looked at Dongye from afar, and said, "There is a noble prisoner in Ye."

古文：初，昂之归梁，有马仙琕者亦以义烈称。
现代文：过了几天，与朝臣一起视察东冶，步行走到仓库，于是举行宴饮，赐给囚徒酒肉，下令会见袁彖，和他说话，第二天就把他释放了。
English: A few days later, together with courtiers, he inspected Dongye, walked to the warehouse, then held a banquet, gave the prisoners wine and meat, ordered to meet with Yuan Qi, talked to him, and released him the next day.

古文：仙琕字灵馥，扶风郿人。
现代文：○马仙鴘马仙鴘字灵馥，扶风县人。
English: ○ Ma Xianqiao Ma Xianqiao Zi Lingqiao, from Fu Feng County.

古文：父伯鸾，宋冠军司马。
现代文：父亲马伯鸾，是宋朝的冠军司马。
English: His father's name was Bo Xuan, and he was Liu Song's champion Sima.

古文：仙琕少以果敢闻，父忧毁瘠过礼，负土成坟，手植松柏。
现代文：马仙鴘少年时期以果敢闻名，父亲去世，他哀伤瘦损超过礼仪，自己背土成坟，亲手种上松柏。
English: When he was a boy, Ma Xianqian was famous for his courage. When his father died, his grief and loss of weight exceeded etiquette. He turned his back to the grave and planted conifers with his own hands.

古文：仕齐位豫州刺史。
现代文：在齐朝做官位至豫州刺史。
English: He served as an official in the Qi Dynasty and became a historian in Yuzhou.

古文：梁武起兵，使其故人姚仲宾说之，仙琕先爲设酒，乃斩于军门以徇。
现代文：梁武帝起兵，让他的旧友姚仲宾去劝说他归降，马仙鴘先为他设了酒宴，然后就在军门把他斩首以殉其职。
English: Emperor Liangwu raised an army and sent his old friend Yao Zhongbin to persuade him to surrender. Ma Xianlong first held a banquet for him, and then beheaded him at the military gate to die in the line of duty.

古文：帝又遣其族叔怀远说之，仙琕曰： 大义灭亲。 
现代文：武帝又派他的族叔马怀远去劝说他，马仙鴘说： 大义灭亲。 
English: Emperor Wu also sent his uncle Ma Huaiyuan to persuade him. Ma Xianyao said: "It is a great act of justice to exterminate relatives."

古文：又命斩之。
现代文：又下令把他斩首。
English: He also ordered him to be beheaded.

古文：怀远号泣，军中爲请乃免。
现代文：马怀远大声哭喊，军中众人为他请求才得以赦免。
English: Ma Huaiyuan cried loudly, and everyone in the army pleaded for him to be pardoned.

古文：武帝至新林，仙琕犹于江西日抄运漕。
现代文：武帝到了新林，马仙鴘还在江西每天抄录水路运粮情况。
English: When Emperor Wu arrived in Xinlin, Ma Xianqi was still in Jiangxi copying the situation of grain transportation by water every day.

古文：建康城平，仙琕举哀谓衆曰： 我受人任寄，义不容降，今衆寡不侔，势必屠灭。
现代文：建康城被平定，马仙鴘举行哀悼对众人说： 我受别人的信任委托，道义不容投降，现在众寡不敌，其形势必然被屠杀灭绝。
English: Jiankang City was pacified, Ma Xianqi held a mourning ceremony and said to the people: I am entrusted with the trust of others, and it is morally unacceptable to surrender. Now there are too few enemies, and the situation will inevitably be exterminated by slaughter.

古文：公等虽无二心，其如亲老何。
现代文：各位虽然没有二心，可是对父母老人怎么办呢？
English: Although you have no second thoughts, what about your elderly parents?

古文：我爲忠臣，君爲孝子，各尽其道，不亦可乎。 
现代文：我为忠臣，君为孝子，各尽其道，不是也可以的吗？ 
English: I am a loyal subject, you are a filial son, each of us should do his best, isn't it possible?

古文：于是悉遣城内兵出降，余壮士数十，闭门独守。
现代文：于是把城内的兵士全部遣送出城去投降，余下壮士数十人，闭门独自守卫。
English: As a result, all the soldiers in the city were sent out of the city to surrender, leaving dozens of strong men to guard alone behind closed doors.

古文：俄而兵入，围之数十重。
现代文：很快敌兵就进来了，把他们包围了几十层。
English: Soon the enemy soldiers came in and surrounded them for dozens of floors.

古文：仙琕令士皆持满，兵不敢近。
现代文：马仙鴘让士兵都把弓拉满，敌兵不敢接近。
English: Ma Xianqian asked the soldiers to draw their bows full, so that the enemy soldiers would not dare to approach.

古文：日晚乃投弓曰： 诸君但来见取，我义不降。 
现代文：天晚的时候才把弓扔在地上说： 诸君只管来抓，我义不投降。 
English: It was only late in the day that he threw his bow to the ground and said: "All of you just come and catch me, I will not surrender."

古文：乃槛送建康，至石头而脱之。
现代文：于是便用囚车把他送往建康，到了石头城而从车中放出来。
English: So they sent him to Jiankang in a prison van, and released him from the van when they reached Stone Town.

古文：帝使待袁昂至俱入，曰： 使天下见二义士。 
现代文：武帝让等袁昂到了一起进城，说： 让天下人见见这两位义士。 
English: Emperor Wu let Yuan Ang and others enter the city together and said: Let the world see these two righteous men.

古文：帝劳之曰： 射鈎斩驱，昔人弗忌，卿勿以戮使断运苟自嫌绝也。 
现代文：武帝慰劳他说： 射中衣勾、斩断袖口的旧怨，古人就不忌讳，卿不要因为杀死使者、抗拒天命的事而记着旧怨，不肯和解。 
English: Emperor Wu consoled him, saying, "The ancients did not shun the old grudge of shooting a person in the crotch or cutting off a cuff. Sir, do not remember the old grudge and refuse to reconcile because you killed the messenger and resisted the fate of heaven.

古文：谢曰： 小人如失主犬，后主饲之，便复爲用。 
现代文：他感谢道： 小人像失去主人的犬，后来的主人饲养，便又为所用。 
English: He thanked: "Little people are like dogs that have lost their owners, but are later raised by their owners and used again.

古文：帝笑而美之。
现代文：武帝笑着加以称赞。
English: Emperor Wu laughed and praised it.

古文：俄而母卒，帝知其贫，赙给甚厚。
现代文：不久他母亲去世，武帝知道他很贫穷，赠送了很多东西。
English: Soon after his mother died, Emperor Wu knew that he was very poor and gave him many things.

古文：仙琕号泣谓弟仲艾曰： 蒙大造之恩，未获上报，今复荷殊泽，当与尔以心力自效耳。 
现代文：马仙鴘大哭着对弟弟马仲艾说： 承蒙再生的大恩，还没有报答，现在又受到了特殊的恩惠，应当和你以忠心和全力好好效劳。 
English: Ma Xianjun cried loudly and said to his younger brother Ma Zhongai: I have received the great grace of rebirth, which has not yet been repaid, and now I have received a special favor. I should serve you well with loyalty and all my strength.

古文：天监四年，师侵魏，仙琕每战，恒冠三军，与诸将论议，口未尝言功。
现代文：天监四年，出师侵伐魏国。马仙鴘每次作战，总是勇冠三军，和诸将议论，口中不曾谈起自己的功劳。
English: In the fourth year of the Heaven's Inspector, Ma Xianjun sent out a division to invade Wei. In every battle, Ma Xianjun always won the three armies, and discussed with the generals, but never talked about his own merits.

古文：人问其故，仙琕曰： 大丈夫爲时所知，当进不求名，退不逃罪，乃平生愿也，何功可论？ 
现代文：别人问是什么缘故，他说： 大丈夫为时代所知晓，应当进不求名，退不逃罪，这就是平生的志愿，有什么功可论呢？ 
English: When others asked what was the reason, he said: It is well known to the times that a good husband should not seek fame, nor should he turn back and run away. This is a lifelong commitment. What merit can there be?

古文：爲南义阳太守，累破山蛮，郡境清谧。
现代文：他做南义阳太守，屡次打败山蛮，本郡境内秩序清平。
English: As the governor of South Yiyang, he repeatedly defeated the mountain barbarians and kept order in the county.

古文：以功封浛洭县伯。
现代文：因功封为氵含县伯。
English: He was awarded the title of Shanyang County magistrate.

古文：迁司州刺史，进号贞威将军。
现代文：升任司州刺史，晋升封号为贞威将军。
English: He was promoted to the post of Sizhou chief historian and given the title of General Zhenwei.

古文：魏豫州人白早生使以悬瓠来降，武帝使仙琕赴之，又遣直合将军武会超、马广率衆爲援。
现代文：魏国的豫州人白早生派人送上悬瓠这个地方来投降。武帝派马仙鴘前往接收，又派直阁将军武会超、马广率军援助。
English: Emperor Wu sent Ma Xianqi to receive them, and also sent Zhougu Generals Wu Huichao and Ma Guang to lead the army to help.

古文：仙琕进顿楚王城，遣副将齐苟儿助守悬瓠。
现代文：马仙鴘进驻楚王城，派副将齐苟儿帮助守卫悬瓠。
English: Ma Xianqi was stationed in King Chu's City, and he sent Vice Admiral Qi Guor to help guard the suspension bridge.

古文：魏中山王英攻悬瓠，执齐苟儿，进禽马广送洛阳，仙琕不能救。
现代文：魏国的中山王元英攻悬砖瓠，捉住了齐苟儿，又进军擒了马广送往洛阳，马仙鴘无力救他。
English: Wang Yuanying of Zhongshan in Wei attacked the Hanging Bricks, captured Qigong, and then marched into and captured Ma Guang and sent him to Luoyang. Ma Xianqian was powerless to save him.

古文：会超等亦相次退散，魏军进据三关，仙琕坐征还爲云骑将军。
现代文：武会超等人也相继退散，魏军进占了三关，马仙鴘因此而被征调回去担任云骑将军。
English: Wu Huichao and others also retreated one after another, the Wei army occupied three passes, and Ma Xianyao was therefore conscripted back to serve as the general of the Cloud Cavalry.

古文：十年，朐山人杀琅邪太守刘晰，以城降魏，诏假仙琕节讨之。
现代文：天监十年，朐山人杀死了琅笽太守刘晰，带着县城投降了魏国，诏令授予马仙鴘节杖前往讨伐。
English: Ten years after the establishment of Heaven's Guardianship, the people of Lushan killed Liu Qiao, the grand vizier of the State of Wei, took the county seat and surrendered to the State of Wei. The imperial edict awarded Ma Xian the scepter to go to the crusade.

古文：魏徐州刺史卢昶以衆十余万赴焉，仙琕累战破走之。
现代文：魏国的徐州刺史卢昶率领军队十几万开往那里，马仙鴘多次作战把他打败赶走。
English: The Xuzhou vassal of Wei, Shi Lu, led an army of more than a hundred thousand to go there. Ma Xianjun defeated and drove him away many times.

古文：进爵爲侯，迁豫州刺史，加都督。
现代文：受封晋升爵位为侯，调为豫州刺史，加任都督。
English: He was awarded the title of marquis, promoted to the title of prince, transferred to the post of governor of Yuzhou, and appointed as the governor of the capital.

古文：仙琕自爲将及居州郡，能与士卒同劳逸，身衣不过布帛，所居无帏幕衾屏，行则饮食与冢养最下者同。
现代文：马仙鴘自从当了将军和做了州郡长官，能和士卒同劳共逸，身上穿的不过是布帛衣服，所住的地方没有帷幕屏障，行动饮食和最下等的杂役相同。
English: Since he became a general and a county magistrate, Ma Xianyao has been able to work and live with the soldiers. He only wears cloth clothes, lives in a place without a curtain barrier, and eats and drinks the same as the lowest servants.

古文：其在边境，常单身潜入敌境，伺知壁垒村落险要处所，攻战多克捷，士卒亦甘心爲用，帝雅爱仗之。
现代文：他在边境上，常常单身潜入敌境，侦察掌握壁垒村落的险要处所，攻击战斗多能打胜，士卒也甘心为他所用，武帝对他十分喜爱和依赖。
English: On the border, he often sneaked into the enemy territory single-handedly, scouting the dangerous places of the villages, attacking and winning battles. The soldiers were also willing to be used by him. Emperor Wu was very fond of and dependent on him.

古文：卒于州，赠左卫将军，諡曰刚。
现代文：他死在豫州，追赠为左卫将军，谥号为刚。
English: He died in Yuzhou and was posthumously awarded the title of General of the Left Division, and his nickname was Gang.

古文：初，仙琕幼名仙婢，及长以婢名不典，乃以玉代女云。
现代文：起初，仙鴘幼名叫仙婢，长大后认为婢的名字不典雅，便以玉字旁代替了女字旁。
English: At first, Senju's name was Senbi when she was a child. When she grew up, she thought her maiden name was not elegant, so she changed it to Tamajibai.

古文：子岩夫嗣。
现代文：他的儿子马岩夫承袭了爵位。
English: He was succeeded by his son, Don.

古文：昂子君正字世忠，少聪敏。
现代文：后来，他做了侍中。袁彖肥胖异常，常常随从到郊野去射野鸡，几个人推扶着他，才能徒步走路。
English: Later, he became a waiter. Yuan Xuan was extremely obese and often went to the countryside to shoot pheasants. Several people had to help him to walk.

古文：年数岁，父疾，昼夜不眠，专侍左右。家人劝令暂卧，答曰： 官既未差，眠亦不安。 
现代文：他幼年的时候，母亲就死了，养在伯母王氏那里，袁彖像对待亲生母亲一样侍奉她，在家中尽孝。隆昌元年，袁彖去世，谥号靖子。
English: When he was a child, his mother died, and he was raised by his aunt Wang Rong. Yuan Qi served her as if she were his own mother, and he was filial to her at home. In the first year of the Longchang era, Yuan Qi died, and his posthumous name was Yasuko.

