古文：心之合脉也，其荣色也，其主肾也。
现代文：心脏与脉相应，它的荣华表现在面色上，肾水可以制约心火。
English: The heart corresponds to the pulse, and its glory is expressed in the complexion. Kidney water can restrain the heart.

古文：肺之合皮也，其荣毛也，其主心也。
现代文：肺脏与皮肤相应，它的荣华表现在毫毛上，心火制约肺金。
English: The lung corresponds to the skin, its glory is manifested in the hairs, the heart regulates the lung.

古文：肝之合筋也，其荣爪也，其主肺也。
现代文：肝脏与筋相应，它的荣华表现在爪甲上，肺金制约肝木。
English: The liver corresponds to the sinews, its glory is manifested in the nail plate, and the pulmonary artery controls the hepatic tree.

古文：脾之合肉也，其荣唇也，其主肝也。
现代文：脾脏与肌肉相应，它的荣华表现在口唇上，肝木制约脾土。
English: The spleen corresponds to the muscles, its glory is expressed on the lips, and the liver regulates the spleen.

古文：肾之合骨也，其荣发也，其主脾也。
现代文：肾与骨骼相应，它的荣华表现在头发上，脾土制约肾水。
English: The kidney corresponds to the bones, its glory is manifested in the hair, and the spleen controls the kidney fluid.

古文：是故多食咸，则脉凝泣而变色；多食苦，则皮槁而毛拔；多食辛，则筋急而爪枯；多食酸，则肉胝而唇揭；多食甘，则骨痛而发落，此五味之所伤也。
现代文：正因为如此，所以过食咸味，则使血脉凝塞不畅，而颜面色泽发生变化。
English: Because of this, so overeating salty, then the blood clotting is not smooth, and the complexion changes.

古文：故心欲苦，肺欲辛，肝欲酸，脾欲甘，肾欲咸，此五味之所合也。
现代文：所以心欲得苦味，肺欲得辛味，肝欲得酸味，脾欲得甘味，肾欲得咸味，这是五味分别与五脏之气相合的对应关系。
English: Therefore, the heart desires bitterness, the lungs desire spiciness, the liver desires sourness, the spleen desires sweetness, and the kidneys desire saltiness. This is the corresponding relationship between the five tastes and the five viscera.

古文：五脏之气，故色见青如草兹者死，黄如枳实者死，黑如者死，赤如衃血者死，白如枯骨者死，此五色之见死也。
现代文：面色出现青如死草，枯暗无华的，为死症。出现黄如枳实的，为死症；出现黑如烟灰的，为死症；出现红如凝血的，为死症；出现白如枯骨的，为死症；这是五色中表现为死症的情况。
English: If the complexion is blue, it is a dead grass; if it is dull and lifeless, it is a dead disease; if it is yellow, it is a dead disease; if it is black, it is a dead disease; if it is red, it is a dead disease; if it is white, it is a dead disease; this is a condition that is a dead disease among the five colors.

古文：青如翠羽者生，赤如鸡冠者生，黄如蟹腹者生，白如豕膏者生，黑如乌羽者生，此五色之见生也。
现代文：面色青如翠鸟的羽毛，主生；红如鸡冠的，主生；黄如蟹腹的，主生；白如猪脂的，主生；黑如乌鸦毛的，主生。
English: Blue as a kingfisher's feather, chief; red as a rooster's crown, chief; yellow as a crab's belly, chief; white as lard, chief; black as a raven's feather, chief.

古文：生于心，如以缟裹朱。生于肺，如以缟裹红。
现代文：这是五色中表现有生机而预后良好的情况。
English: This is a case in which the five colors are vivid and the prognosis is good.

古文：生于肝，如以缟裹绀。生于脾，如以缟裹括楼实。生于肾，如以缟裹紫。
现代文：心有生机，面色就象细白的薄绢裹着朱砂；肺有生机，面色就象细白的薄绢裹着粉红色的丝绸；肝有生机面色就象细白的薄绢裹着天青色的丝绸；脾有生机，面色就象细白的薄绢裹着栝蒌实；肾有生机，面色就象细白的薄绢裹着天紫色的丝绸。
English: The heart has vitality, and the complexion is like a thin white cocoon wrapped in cinnabar; the lungs have vitality, and the complexion is like a thin white cocoon wrapped in pink silk; the liver has vitality, and the complexion is like a thin white cocoon wrapped in azure silk; the spleen has vitality, and the complexion is like a thin white cocoon wrapped in ramie; the kidney has vitality, and the complexion is like a thin white cocoon wrapped in azure silk.

古文：此五脏所生之外荣也。
现代文：这些都是五脏的生机显露于外的荣华。
English: These are the glory of the vitality of the internal organs.

古文：色味当五脏，白当肺、辛，赤当心、苦，青当肝、酸，黄当脾、甘，黑当肾、咸。
现代文：色、味与五脏相应：白色和辛味应于肺，赤色和苦味应于心，青色和酸味应于肝，黄色和甘味应于脾，黑色和咸味应于肾。
English: Color and taste correspond to the five viscera: white and pungent correspond to the lungs, red and bitter to the heart, blue and sour to the liver, yellow and sweet to the spleen, and black and salty to the kidneys.

古文：故白当皮，赤当脉，青当筋，黄当肉，黑当骨。
现代文：因五脏外合五体，所以白色应于皮，赤色应于脉，青色应于筋，黄色应于肉，黑色应于骨。
English: Because the five viscera are composed of five bodies, white should be on the skin, red should be on the veins, blue should be on the sinews, yellow should be on the flesh, and black should be on the bones.

古文：诸脉者，皆属于目；诸髓者，皆属于脑；诸筋者，皆属于节；诸血者，皆属于心；诸气者，皆属于肺，此四肢八溪之朝夕也。
现代文：各条脉络，都属于目，而诸髓都属于脑，诸筋都属于骨节，诸血都属于心，诸气都属于肺。同时，气血的运行则朝夕来往，不离于四肢八溪的部位。
English: All the veins belong to the eyes, all the marrow belongs to the brain, all the sinews belong to the bones, all the blood belongs to the heart, and all the qi belongs to the lungs. At the same time, the movement of qi and blood goes from morning to evening, not leaving the parts of the limbs.

古文：故人卧血归于肝，肝受血而能视，足受血而能步，掌受血而能握，指受血而能摄。
现代文：所以当人睡眠时，血归藏于肝，肝得血而濡养于目，则能视物；足得血之濡养，就能行走；手掌得血之濡，就能握物；手指得血之濡养就能拿取。
English: Therefore, when a person is asleep, blood is stored in the liver. When the liver is wet with blood and nourished by the eyes, it can see things; when the feet are wet with blood, they can walk; when the palms are wet with blood, they can hold things; when the fingers are wet with blood, they can take things.

古文：卧出而风吹之，血凝于肤者为痹，凝于脉者为泣，凝于足者为厥。
现代文：如果刚刚睡醒就外出受风，血液的循环就要凝滞，凝于肌肤的，发生痹证；凝于经脉的，发生气血运行的滞涩；凝于足部的，该部发生厥冷。
English: If you just wake up and go out to take the wind, the blood circulation will be stagnant. If it is congealed on the skin, it will cause paralysis; if it is congealed on the meridians, it will cause stagnation of qi and blood flow; if it is congealed on the foot, it will cause frostbite.

古文：此三者，血行而不得反其空，故为痹厥也。
现代文：这三种情况，都是由于气血运行的不能返回组织间隙的孔穴之处，所以造成痹厥等症。
English: These three cases are all due to the inability of qi and blood to return to the pores in the tissue gap, resulting in paralysis and other symptoms.

古文：人有大谷十二分，小溪三百五十四名，少十二俞，此皆卫气所留止，邪气之所客也，针石缘而去之。
现代文：全身有大谷十二处，小溪三百五十四处，这里面减除了十二脏腑各自的逾穴数目。这些都是卫气留止的地方，也是邪气客居之所。治病时，可循着这些部位施以针石，以祛除邪气。
English: There are 12 valleys and 354 streams in the whole body, and the number of holes in each of the 12 organs and glands has been reduced. These are the places where the sacred air stays, and also the place where the evil air stays. When treating a disease, you can apply a needle stone along these parts to remove the evil air.

古文：诊病之始，五决为纪。
现代文：诊病的根本，要以五决为纲纪。
English: The basis of diagnosing diseases should be based on the Five Resolutions.

古文：欲知其始，先建其母。
现代文：想要了解疾病的要关键，必先确定病变的原因。
English: Determining the cause of the lesion is the key to understanding the disease.

古文：所谓五决者，五脉也。
现代文：所谓五决，就是五脏之脉，以此诊病，即可决断病本的所在。
English: The so-called "five resolves" are the veins of the five viscera, which can be used to diagnose the disease and determine the location of the disease.

古文：是以头痛巅疾，下虚上实，过在足少阴巨阳，甚则入肾。
现代文：比如头痛等巅顶部位的疾患，属于下虚上实的，病变在足少阴和足太阳经，病甚的，可内传于肾。
English: For example, headaches and other diseases of the apical region belong to the lower imaginary and upper real, the lesions are in the foot and foot meridians, and if they are very sick, they can be transmitted to the kidney.

古文：徇蒙招尤，目冥耳聋，下实上虚，过在足少阳厥阴，甚则入肝。
现代文：头晕眼花，身体摇动，目暗耳聋，属下实上虚的，病变在足少阳和足厥阴经，病甚的，可内传于肝。
English: Dizziness, dizziness, body shaking, dizziness and deafness, the following are real and imaginary, the lesions are in the feet and feet, and the disease can be transmitted to the liver.

古文：腹满胀，支膈胠胁、下厥上冒，过在足太阴阳明。
现代文：腹满瞋胀，支持胸膈协助，属于下部逆气上犯的，病变在足太阴和足阳明经。
English: Abdomen is full and bloated, supporting the pectoral girdle, belonging to the lower part of the inverse gas, the lesion is in the foot yin and foot yang.

古文：咳嗽上气，厥在胸中，过在手阳明太阴。
现代文：咳嗽气喘，气机逆乱于胸中，病变在手阳明和手太阴经。
English: Cough and asthma, airway disorder in the chest, lesions in the palms and soles of the feet.

古文：心烦头痛，病在膈中，过在手巨阳少阴。
现代文：心烦头痛，胸膈不适的，病变在手太阳和手少阴经。
English: Distress headache, chest discomfort, lesions in the hands of the sun and hands less menstrual.

古文：夫脉之小大，滑涩浮沉，可以指别。五脏之象，可以类推。五脏相音，可以意识。五色微诊，可以目察。
现代文：脉象的小、大、滑、浮、沉等，可以通过医生的手指加以鉴别；五脏功能表现于外，可以通过相类事物的比象，加以推测；五脏各自的声音，可以凭意会而识别，五色的微小变化，可以用眼睛来观察。
English: The small, large, slippery, floating, sinking, etc. of the pulse can be identified by the doctor's fingers; the functions of the five organs are manifested externally and can be inferred by comparing similar things; the voices of the five organs can be identified by instinct, and the slight changes in the five colors can be observed with the eyes.

古文：能合脉色，可以万全。
现代文：诊病时，如能将色、脉两者合在一起进行分析，就可以万无一失了。
English: When diagnosing a disease, if the color and pulse can be analyzed together, it can be foolproof.

古文：赤脉之至也，喘而坚。诊曰：有积气在中，时害于食名曰心痹。
现代文：外现赤色，脉来急疾而坚实的，可诊为邪气积聚于中脘，常表现为妨害饮食，病名叫做心痹。
English: The appearance is red, the pulse is acute and solid, and it can be diagnosed as the accumulation of evil gas in the middle palate. It is often manifested as a disturbance of diet, and the name of the disease is heart paralysis.

古文：得之外疾，思虑而心虚，故邪从之。
现代文：这种病得之于外邪的侵袭，是由于思虑过度以至心气虚弱，邪气才随之而入的。
English: This kind of disease is caused by the invasion of external evil, and it is due to excessive thinking that the spirit is weak, and the evil spirit comes in with it.

古文：白脉之至也，喘而浮。上虚下实，惊，有积气在胸中，喘而虚。名曰肺痹。寒热，得之醉而使内也。
现代文：外现白色，脉来急疾而浮，这是上虚下实，故常出现惊骇，病邪积聚于胸中，迫肺而作喘，但肺气本身是虚弱的，这种病的病名叫做肺痹，它有时发寒热，常因醉后行房而诱发。
English: Appears white on the outside, the pulse comes from acute diseases and floats, this is the top of the false and the bottom of the real, so there is often shock, the disease accumulates in the chest, forcing the lungs to pant, but the lung itself is weak, the name of this disease is pneumonia, it sometimes has cold and fever, often caused by drunkenness.

古文：青脉之至也。长而左右弹。有积气在心下，肢胠。名曰肝痹。得之寒湿，与疝同法。腰痛足清头痛。
现代文：青色外现，脉来长而左右搏击手指，这是病邪积聚于心下，支撑协助，这种病的病名叫做肝痹，多因受寒湿而得，与疝的病理相同，它的症状有腰痛、足冷、头痛等。
English: The bluish color appears externally, the pulse is long and the fingers are beating left and right. This is the accumulation of the disease under the heart, support and assistance. The name of this disease is liver palsy, which is mostly caused by cold and dampness. It is the same as the pathology of ringworm. Its symptoms include low back pain, cold feet, headache, etc.

古文：黄脉之至也，大而虚。有积气在腹中，有厥气，名曰厥疝。女子同法，得之疾使四肢，汗出当风。
现代文：外现黄色，而脉来虚大的，这是病邪积聚在腹中，有逆气产生，病名叫做厥疝，女子也有这种情况，多由四肢剧烈的活动，汗出当风所诱发。
English: The appearance is yellow, and the veins are large, which is caused by the accumulation of the disease in the abdomen and the production of negative air. The name of the disease is puerperal pleurisy. Women also have this condition, which is mostly caused by the strenuous activity of the limbs and sweating when the wind blows.

古文：黑脉之至也，上坚而大。有积气在小腹与阴，名曰肾痹。得之沐浴，清水而卧。
现代文：外现黑色，脉象尺上坚实而大，这是病邪积聚在小腹与前阴，病名叫做肾痹，多因冷水沐浴后睡卧受凉所引起。
English: The appearance is black, the pulse is solid and large on the ruler, which is the accumulation of the disease in the lower abdomen and anterior pharynx. The name of the disease is nephritis, mostly caused by cold after sleeping after a cold water bath.

古文：凡相五色之奇脉，面黄目青，面黄目赤，面黄目白，面黄目黑者，皆不死也。
现代文：大凡观察五色，面黄目青、面黄目赤、面黄目白、面黄目黑的、皆为不死，因面带黄色，是尚有土气。
English: It is common to observe the five colors, yellow-eyed blue, yellow-eyed red, yellow-eyed white, yellow-eyed black, are all immortal, because the face is yellow, it is still rustic.

古文：面青目赤，面赤目白，面青目黑，面黑目白，面赤目青，皆死也。
现代文：如见面青目赤、面赤目白、面青目黑、面黑目白、面赤目青的，皆为死亡之征象，因面无黄色，是土气以败。
English: If you meet blue-eyed red, face-red-eyed white, face-blue-eyed black, face-black-eyed white, face-red-eyed blue, they are all signs of death, because the face is not yellow, it is earthy.

