古文：王安石，字介甫，抚州临川人。
现代文：王安石，字介甫，抚州临川人。
English: Wang Anshi, alias Kaifu, from Linchuan, Fuzhou.

古文：父益，都官员外郎。
现代文：父王益，任都官员外郎。
English: His father, Wang Yi, was the second son of a government official.

古文：安石少好读书，一过目终身不忘。
现代文：王安石少年时喜好读书，一经过目终身不忘。
English: Wang Anshi liked to read when he was a boy, and he would never forget it.

古文：其属文动笔如飞，初若不经意，既成，见者皆服其精妙。
现代文：他写文章落笔如飞，初看好像漫不经心，完成后，见到的人都佩服他的文章精彩奇妙。
English: He writes articles at lightning speed. At first glance, it looks like he's careless. After he's finished, everyone he meets admires how wonderful his articles are.

古文：友生曾巩携以示欧阳修，修为之延誉。
现代文：朋友曾巩把他的文章带给欧阳修看，欧阳修为他播扬美誉。
English: His friend Zeng Gong brought his article to Ouyang Xiu, and Ouyang Xiu spread his reputation.

古文：擢进士上第，签书淮南判官。
现代文：王安石考中进士，名列上等，任签书淮南判官。
English: Wang An was a top-ranked student in the stone examination, and was appointed judge of Huainan.

古文：旧制，秩满许献文求试馆职，安石独否。
现代文：以前的制度规定，任职期满，准许呈献文章要求考试馆阁职务，唯独王安石没有这样做。
English: The previous system stipulated that upon the expiration of his term of office, he was allowed to submit an article to request the examination hall cabinet position, but Wang Anshi did not do so.

古文：再调知鄞县，起堤堰，决陂塘，为水陆之利；贷谷与民，出息以偿，俾新陈相易，邑人便之。
现代文：再调任鄞县知县，他在鄞县修筑堤堰，浚治陂塘，使水陆交通得到方便，把官谷借贷给百姓，秋后百姓加些利息偿还，使官仓中的陈谷能够换新粮，鄞县的百姓也感到方便。
English: He was then transferred to Zhixian County of Jixian County. In Jixian County, he built a dike and dredged a pond to make land and water transportation convenient. He lent the official grain to the people, and the people repaid it with some interest after the autumn, so that the old grain in the official warehouse could be exchanged for new grain, and the people of Jixian County also felt convenient.

古文：通判舒州。
现代文：再任舒州通判。
English: Reappointed as Shuzhou magistrate.

古文：文彦博为相，荐安石恬退，乞不次进用，以激奔竞之风。
现代文：文彦博做宰相，向皇帝推荐王安石，说他淡于名利，请求越级提拔，想以此来遏止为名利而奔走竞争的风气。
English: Wen Yanbo became the prime minister and recommended Wang Anshi to the emperor, saying that he was inferior to fame and fortune, and asked for a promotion beyond his grade. He wanted to stop the culture of competing for fame and fortune.

古文：寻召试馆职，不就。
现代文：不久，朝廷召他考试馆职，他不肯参加。
English: Soon after, the court called him to serve as an examiner, but he refused to take part.

古文：修荐为谏官，以祖母年高辞。
现代文：欧阳修推荐他任谏官，他以祖母年事已高辞谢。
English: Ouyang Xiu recommended him for the post of eunuch, and he thanked his grandmother for her age.

古文：修以其须禄养言于朝，用为群牧判管，请知常州。
现代文：欧阳修对朝廷说王安石须用俸禄养家，因此任命他为群牧判官，他请求担任常州知州。
English: Ouyang Xiu told the imperial court that Wang Anshi had to use his salary to support his family, so he appointed him as the judge of herdsmen. He requested to serve as the chizhou of Changzhou.

古文：移提点江东刑狱，入为度支判官，时嘉祐三年也。
现代文：调任提点江东刑狱，入京任度支判官，当时是仁宗嘉三年。
English: At that time, it had been three years since Ren Zongjia was transferred to the Jiangdong Penitentiary and appointed to the Beijing Judicial Subdivision Judge.

古文：安石议论高奇，能以辨博济其说，果于自用，慨然有矫世变俗之志。
现代文：王安石的议论高深新奇，善于用辩论驳难和旁征博引来维护自己的学说，敢于按照自己的意见办事，满怀激情地立下矫正世事、改变传统风俗的志向。
English: Wang Anshi's arguments are profound and novel, and he is good at using debate to refute difficulties and side-by-side soliciting and attracting scholars to defend his doctrine. He dares to act according to his own opinions and passionately sets out to rectify the world and change traditional customs.

古文：于是上万言书，以为： 今天下之财力日以困穷，风俗日以衰坏，患在不知法度，不法先王之政故也。
现代文：于是他向仁宗上万言书，认为： 如今天下的财力一天比一天困难穷乏，风俗一天比一天衰落败坏，症结在于不知道规律，不效法先王政令的缘故。
English: Therefore, he wrote a thousand-word letter to Emperor Jinzong, saying, "If today's financial resources are becoming more and more difficult and poor, and customs are deteriorating day by day, the crux of the matter lies in not knowing the rules and not following the previous king's decrees.

古文：法先王之政者，法其意而已。
现代文：效法先王政令，在于效法先王政令的精神。
English: To follow the previous royal decree is to follow the spirit of the previous royal decree.

古文：法其意，则吾所改易更革，不至乎倾骇天下之耳目，嚣天下之口，而固已合先王之政矣。
现代文：只要效法先王政令的精神，我们所实行的更改变革，既不至于惊扰天下人的视听，也不至于引起天下人的喧哗，也就必然合乎先王的政令了。
English: As long as we follow the spirit of the former king's decree, the changes we implement will not disturb the world's audio-visual, nor will they cause the world's noise, and will inevitably comply with the former king's decree.

古文：因天下之力以生天下之财，取天下之财以供天下之费，自古治世，未尝以财不足为公患也，患在治财无其道尔。
现代文：依靠天下的人力物力来生产天下的财富，征收天下的财富来供给天下的费用，自古代以来的太平治世，不曾因为财富不足而造成国家的忧患，忧患在于治理财政没有符合它的规律。
English: Relying on the world's human and material resources to produce the world's wealth, and collecting the world's wealth to supply the world's expenses, the peaceful reign since ancient times has never caused the country's sorrow due to lack of wealth. The sorrow lies in the fact that the governance of finance does not conform to its laws.

古文：在位之人才既不足，而闾巷草野之间亦少可用之才，社稷之托，封疆之守，陛下其能久以天幸为常，而无一旦之忧乎？
现代文：居官任职的人才既然不足，城乡又缺少可供使用的人才，国家的重托，疆域的保持，陛下能够以长久依靠天幸为常法，而没有一旦发生忧患的考虑吗？
English: Since there is a shortage of resident officials, and there is a shortage of available talent in urban and rural areas, the country's heavy trust, and the maintenance of the territory, can His Majesty rely on God's blessing for a long time as a common law, without considering once the sorrow occurs?

古文：愿监苟且因循之弊，明诏大臣，为之以渐，期合于当世之变。
现代文：我希望陛下能明察朝中苟且因循的弊病，明文诏令大臣，逐渐革除这些弊病，以期符合当前世事的变化。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will look into the ills that the government has been following, and order the ministers to gradually eliminate these ills in order to meet the current changes in the world.

古文：臣之所称，流俗之所不讲，而议者以为迂阔而熟烂者也。 后安石当国，其所注措，大抵皆祖此书。
现代文：我所说的，流于颓废风俗的人是不讲的，而议论国家大事的人又认为这是不近事理的陈词滥调。 后来王安石执政时，他所施行的政策措施，大多是根据这份万言书而来的。
English: As I said, people who are steeped in decadent customs do not talk about it, while people who discuss national affairs think that this is an unreasonable cliché.Later, when Wang Anshi was in power, most of the policy measures he implemented were based on this book.

古文：俄直集贤院。
现代文：不久王安石任直集贤院。
English: Soon after, Wang Anshi was appointed to Zizhi Xianyin.

古文：先是，馆阁之命屡下，安石屡辞；士大夫谓其无意于世，恨不识其面，朝廷每欲俾以美官，惟患其不就也。
现代文：在此之前，朝廷多次下达委任他担任馆阁职务的命令，他都辞谢了；士大夫们认为他是无意显赫于世以求仕途畅达，都恨自己不能结识他，朝廷多次打算委派他担任名利优厚的美官，只是怕他不就任。
English: Prior to this, the imperial court had repeatedly issued orders to appoint him to the cabinet post, but he had declined; the officials thought that he had no intention of being prominent in the world in order to achieve a smooth career, and they all hated that they could not get to know him. The imperial court had repeatedly planned to appoint him as a famous and wealthy American official, but they were afraid that he would not take office.

古文：明年，同修起居注，辞之累日。
现代文：第二年，任命他同修起居注，他推辞了好多天。
English: The following year, he was appointed as a lay practitioner, but he refused for many days.

古文：阁门吏赍敕就付之，拒不受；吏随而拜之，则避于厕；吏置敕于案而去，又追还之；上章至八九，乃受。
现代文：门吏拿着委任敕命到他府上交给他，他拒不接受；门吏随即下拜，他却躲避到厕所里去；门吏把委任敕命放在桌上离去，王安石又追上去把委任敕命交还给门吏；他上章辞谢了八九次，才接受了同修起居注的任命。
English: The doorkeeper took the commission to his house and handed it to him, but he refused to accept it; the doorkeeper then bowed down, but he hid in the toilet; the doorkeeper put the commission on the table and left, and Wang Anshi chased after him and handed the commission back to the doorkeeper; he resigned and thanked the chapter eighty-nine times before accepting the appointment of a fellow practitioner.

古文：遂知制诰，纠察在京刑狱，自是不复辞官矣。
现代文：于是任知制诰，纠察在京刑狱，从此他不再辞官了。
English: As a result, he resigned from his post and picketed at the Beijing Detention Center. Since then, he has not resigned from his post.

古文：有少年得斗鹑，其侪求之不与，恃与之昵辄持去，少年追杀之。
现代文：有位少年得到一只善斗的鹌鹑，朋友向他讨取，他不给，朋友仗着与少年平时关系亲昵就拿走了鹌鹑，少年追上去把朋友杀了。
English: A young boy got a pugnacious badger, his friend asked him for it and he wouldn't give it to him, the friend took the badger on the basis of his usual relationship with the boy, and the boy chased after him and killed his friend.

古文：开封当此人死，安石驳曰： 按律，公取、窃取皆为盗。
现代文：开封府判决这位少年当处死刑，王安石反驳说： 按照法律，公开的夺取、偷窃都是盗窃行为。
English: The juvenile was sentenced to death by the Kaifeng government. Wang Anshi retorted: According to the law, open seizure and theft are all theft.

古文：此不与而彼携以去，是盗也；追而杀之，是捕盗也，虽死当勿论。 遂劾府司失入。
现代文：少年不肯把鹌鹑送给他，而他拿了就走，这是盗窃的行为。少年追上去把他杀死，是追捕盗贼，虽然杀了人，也不应当加以追究。 
English: If the boy refuses to give him the pickaxe, and he takes it and leaves, this is theft. If the boy chases him and kills him, he is pursuing a thief, and although he has killed someone, he should not be prosecuted.

古文：府官不伏，事下审刑、大理，皆以府断为是。
现代文：于是弹劾开封府审判机构将不该判刑的反而判了重刑，犯了错误。
English: As a result, the impeachment of the Kaifeng prefectural court did not impose the sentence, but instead imposed a heavy sentence, making a mistake.

古文：诏放安石罪，当诣阁门谢。安石言： 我无罪。 不肯谢。
现代文：开封府的官吏不服，皇帝把这件事交给审刑院、大理寺再审，审刑院、大理寺一致认为开封府的判决是正确的。皇帝下诏免于追究王安石这次弹劾错误，他应当到门前谢罪。王安石说 ：我没有罪。 不肯谢罪。
English: The officials of the Kaifeng government were not satisfied, and the emperor sent the matter to the Sentencing Court and Dali Temple for retrial. The Sentencing Court and Dali Temple unanimously agreed that the decision of the Kaifeng government was correct. The emperor issued a decree to exempt Wang Anshi from being investigated for this impeachment mistake, and he should come to the door to apologize. Wang Anshi said, "I am not guilty. I refuse to apologize."

古文：御史举奏之，置不问。
现代文：御史全都上奏皇帝，皇帝置之不问。
English: All imperial histories are submitted to the emperor, and the emperor does not question them.

古文：时有诏舍人院无得申请除改文字，安石争之曰： 审如是，则舍人不得复行其职，而一听大臣所为，自非大臣欲倾侧而为私，则立法不当如此。
现代文：当时有诏令规定舍人院不得申请删改皇帝诏书文字，王安石争辩说： 确实如诏令所说，那么舍人就再不能履行他们的职责，而听任大臣为所欲为，这虽不是大臣为了私利而侵夺舍人职权，不过立法也不应该如此。
English: At that time, there was a royal edict stipulating that the Imperial Household Agency should not apply to delete or alter the text of the imperial edict. Wang Anshi argued: Indeed, as the royal edict said, then the Imperial Household Agency would no longer be able to perform their duties, and let the minister do whatever he wants. Although this is not a minister seizing the powers of the Imperial Household Agency for personal gain, it should not be the case in legislation.

古文：今大臣之弱者不敢为陛下守法；而强者则挟上旨以造令，谏官、御史无敢逆其意者，臣实惧焉。 语皆侵执政，由是益与之忤。
现代文：今天大臣中软弱的人不敢为陛下执法守纪，而刚强的人则假借陛下的旨意来制造命令，谏官、御史都不敢违背他的旨意，我实在感到害怕。 王安石的这些话侵犯了执政大臣，从此更加与执政大臣相抵触。
English: Today, weak ministers do not dare to enforce laws and maintain discipline for His Majesty, while strong ones fabricate orders under the guise of His Majesty's will, and neither eunuchs nor ministers dare to go against His will. I am truly afraid. These words of Wang Anshi violated the ruling minister, and from now on, they are even more in conflict with the ruling minister.

古文：以母忧去，终英宗世，召不起。
现代文：王安石因母亲去世离任，一直到英宗朝结束，朝廷多次召他，他都不肯起复任职。
English: Due to his mother's death, Wang Anshi left his post until the end of the Yingzong Dynasty. The imperial court summoned him many times, but he refused to resume his post.

古文：安石本楚士，未知名于中朝，以韩、吕二族为巨室，欲借以取重。
现代文：王安石本是楚人，在朝中并不知名，因为韩、吕二族是世家大族，想借助韩、吕来取得别人对自己的尊重。
English: Wang Anshi is originally from Chu and is not well-known in the DPRK, because the Han and Lvii ethnic groups are large families, and he wants to use Han and Lvii to gain others' respect for himself.

古文：乃深与韩绛、绛弟维及吕公著交，三人更称扬之，名始盛。
现代文：于是就和韩绛、韩绛弟韩维以及吕公著深交，这三人更加对人称道赞扬王安石，王安石的声望才开始显著。
English: As a result, he became close friends with Han Zheng, Han Zheng's younger brother Han Wei, and Lü Gong. These three praised Wang Anshi even more, and Wang Anshi's reputation began to become prominent.

古文：神宗在藩邸，维为记室，每讲说见称，维曰： 此非维之说，维之友王安石之说也。 及为太子庶子，又荐自代。
现代文：神宗在颍王府时，韩维任记室，每当他的谈话得到神宗称赞时，就说： 这不是我的说法，是我朋友王安石说的。 当他升任太子庶子时，又推荐王安石代替自己任记室之职。
English: When Emperor Shenzong was in Shao Wangfu, Han Wei was in charge of the secretary's office. Whenever his conversation was praised by Emperor Shenzong, Han Wei would say, "This is not what I said, this is what my friend Wang Anshi said." When he was promoted to the position of the prince's illegitimate son, Han Wei recommended Wang Anshi to be in charge of the secretary's office instead of him.

古文：帝由是想见其人，甫即位，命知江宁府。
现代文：神宗因此很想见到王安石，刚一即位当皇帝，就委任他为江宁府知府。
English: Therefore, Shenzong was very eager to see Wang Anshi. As soon as he became emperor, he appointed him as the governor of Jiangning.

古文：数月，召为翰林学士兼侍讲。
现代文：几个月后，召入朝廷任翰林学士兼侍讲。
English: A few months later, he was called to the imperial court to serve as a Hanlin scholar and assistant lecturer.

古文：熙宁元年四月，始造朝。
现代文：熙宁元年四月，王安石才到朝廷。
English: In April of the first year of the Xining Dynasty, Wang Anshi came to the imperial court.

古文：入对，帝问为治所先，对曰： 择术为先。 帝曰： 唐太宗何如？ 曰： 陛下当法尧、舜，何以太宗为哉？
现代文：他进宫答对神宗询问时，神宗问治理国家应当首先做什么事？他回答说 ：首先要选择推行政策的方法。 神宗问道 ：唐太宗怎么样？ 他答道 ：陛下应当效法尧、舜，何必要效法唐太宗呢？
English: When he went to the palace to answer Shentong's inquiry, Shentong asked Shentong what should be the first thing to do in governing the country? He answered: First of all, we must choose the method of implementing the policy. Shentong asked: What about Tang Taizong? He answered: Your Majesty should follow the example of,, why do you need to follow the example of Tang Taizong?

古文：尧、舜之道，至简而不烦，至要而不迂，至易而不难。
现代文：尧、舜之道，极其简明而不烦杂，扼要而不迂阔，容易而不繁难。
English: The way of doing things is extremely concise but not complicated, concise but not circuitous, and easy but not difficult.

古文：但末世学者不能通知，以为高不可及尔。 帝曰： 卿可谓责难于君，朕自视眇躬，恐无以副卿此意。
现代文：但是后世学者不能晓，才以为高不可及。 神宗说： 你这可说是以难为之事要求我了，我自顾微末之身，恐怕无法与你的这番好意相称。
English: But later generations of scholars couldn't know that, so they thought it was unattainable.Shenzong said, "You're asking me to do something difficult, I'm afraid I can't live up to your good intentions.

古文：可悉意辅朕，庶同济此道。 
现代文：你可以尽心尽意地辅助我，希望共同成就这一目标。 
English: You can assist me with all your heart and hope to achieve this goal together.

古文：一日讲席，群臣退，帝留安石坐，曰： 有欲与卿从容论议者。 因言： 唐太宗必得魏征，刘备必得诸葛亮，然后可以有为，二子诚不世出之人也。 安石曰： 陛下诚能为尧，舜，则必有皋、夔、稷、禼；诚能为高宗，则必有傅说。
现代文：一天讲学，大臣们都退朝了，皇上让王安石留坐，说： 我有一些事情想和你慢慢讨论。 因此说 ：唐太宗必须得到魏征，刘备必须得到诸葛亮，然后可以有所作为，这二人确实不是代代都有的杰出人物。 王安石回答说： 陛下果真能为尧、舜，那必然会有皋陶、后夔、后稷？果真能为高宗，那必然会有傅说。
English: On the day of the lecture, the ministers had all retired, and the emperor asked Wang Anshi to stay, saying, "I have some things I would like to discuss with you slowly." Therefore, he said, "Tang Taizong must get Wei Zheng, Liu Bei must get Zhuge Liang, and then they can make a difference, and these two are really not outstanding figures from generation to generation." Wang Anshi replied, "If your majesty can really do,, then there must be,,? If you can really do Gaozong, then there must be Fu said."

古文：彼二子皆有道者所羞，何足道哉？
现代文：魏征、诸葛亮两人都是有识之士所不耻的，有什么值得称道的呢？
English: Wei Zheng and Zhuge Liang are both shameless men of insight. What is there to commend?

古文：以天下之大，人民之众，百年承平，学者不为不多。
现代文：以天下之大，人民之多，百年治平相承，学者不能说不多。
English: Given the size of the country, the number of people, and the century-long tradition of pacifism, scholars cannot say much.

古文：然常患无人可以助治者，以陛下择术未明，推诚未至，虽有皋、夔、稷、禼、傅说之贤，亦将为小人所蔽，卷怀而去尔。 帝曰： 何世无小人，虽尧、舜之时，不能无四凶。 安石曰： 惟能辨四凶而诛之，此其所以为尧、舜也。
现代文：王安石回答说： 只有能够辨别四凶而惩处他们，这才所以成为尧、舜。
English: Wang Anshi replied, "Only by being able to distinguish between the four evils and punish them, can one become a yakitori chef."

古文：若使四凶得肆其谗慝，则皋、夔、稷、禼亦安肯苟食其禄以终身乎？ 
现代文：假使让四凶任意谗害忠良，妄为邪恶，那么皋陶、后夔、后稷、难道也肯得过且过地拿着俸禄而虚度一生吗？ 
English: If the four villains are allowed to arbitrarily harm the faithful and good, and commit evil, then will Zang Tao, Hou Yi, and Hou Yi be willing to take the salary and waste their lives?

古文：登州妇人恶其夫寝陋，夜以刃斮之，伤而不死。
现代文：登州有名妇女厌恶自己丈夫相貌丑陋，夜里用刀砍杀丈夫，伤重没有死。
English: A famous woman in Danzhou detested her ugly-looking husband and killed him with a knife in the night, but she did not die from her injuries.

古文：狱上，朝议皆当之死，安石独援律辨证之，为合从谋杀伤，减二等论。
现代文：这件案子上报朝廷后，朝中讨论一致认为这名妇女应判死刑，独有王安石引用法律辩驳证明，适合从谋杀伤律条，减死刑二等论处。
English: After the case was reported to the imperial court, the discussion between the DPRK and China was unanimous that the woman should be sentenced to death, and Wang Anshi was the only one to cite legal arguments to prove that it was appropriate to reduce the death penalty from murder to second-class punishment.

古文：帝从安石说，且著为令。
现代文：神宗同意王安石的意见，并且把它定为法律。
English: Shenzong agreed with Wang Anshi's opinion and passed it into law.

古文：二年二月，拜参知政事。
现代文：熙宁二年二月，王安石被任命为参知政事。
English: In February of the second year of Xianning, Wang Anshi was appointed to the post of councillor.

古文：上谓曰： 人皆不能知卿，以为卿但知经术，不晓世务。 安石对曰： 经术正所以经世务，但后世所谓儒者，大抵皆庸人，故世俗皆以为经术不可施于世务尔。 上问： 然则卿所施设以何先？ 安石曰： 变风俗，立法度，正方今之所急也。 上以为然。
现代文：神宗对王安石说 ：人们不能了解你，以为你只知道经学，不明白世上的事务。 王安石回答说 ：经学正可以用来治理世上的事务，但是后世所谓学习经学的读书人，大都是些庸人，所以世俗就认为经学不可以施行于世务了。 神宗又问 ：那么你首先要施行设置的是什么呢？ 王安石说： 改变风俗，建立法度，为今天当务之急。 神宗认为很对。
English: Shenzong said to Wang Anshi, "People can't understand you, they think you only know the classics and don't understand the affairs of the world." Wang Anshi replied, "The classics can be used to govern the affairs of the world, but the so-called readers who study the classics in future generations are mostly mediocrities, so the world thinks that the classics can't be applied to the affairs of the world." Shenzong also asked, "So what is the first thing you want to implement?" Wang Anshi said, "Changing customs and establishing laws is the most urgent task today." Shenzong was right.

古文：于是设制置三司条例司，令判知枢密院事陈升之同领之。
现代文：于是设立制置三司条例司，任命王安石和知枢密院事陈升之共同掌管。
English: As a result, the Department of Regulations of the Three Departments was established, and Wang Anshi and Chen Sheng, Secretary of the Privy Council, were appointed to jointly manage it.

古文：安石令其党吕惠卿预其事。
现代文：王安石令他的同党吕惠卿承担条例司的日常事务。
English: Wang Anshi ordered his party colleague Lü Huiqing to take charge of the daily affairs of the Department of Regulations.

古文：而农田水利、青苗、均输、保甲、免役、市易、保马、方田诸役相继并兴，号为新法，遣提举官四十余辈，颁行天下。
现代文：从此农田水利、青苗、均输、保甲、免役、市易、保马、方田等法相继问世，称为新法，并派遣提举官四十多人，颁行新法于天下。
English: Since then, the farmland water conservancy, young seedlings, uniform transport, guarantee, exemption, market, horse protection, square field and other laws have successively come out, known as the new law, and more than forty officials have been dispatched to promulgate the new law in the world.

古文：青苗法者，以常平籴本作青苗钱，散与人户，令出息二分，春散秋敛。
现代文：青苗法，是把籴买常平粮的本钱作为青苗钱，散给百姓，要他们出二分的利息，春天散出秋天收回。
English: The young seedlings method is to take the capital of straw to buy common grain as young seedlings money, distribute it to the people, ask them to pay two-point interest, and collect it in the spring.

古文：均输法者，以发运之职改为均输，假以钱货，凡上供之物，皆得徙贵就贱，用近易远，预知在京仓库所当办者，得以便宜蓄买。
现代文：均输法，是把发运的职能改为均输，朝廷给予钱币和米粮，凡是上供朝廷的物品，都必须离开价钱高的地区而在价钱便宜的地区购买，以路程近的地区代替路程远的地区，预先报告京城仓库需要购买的物品，以便能在价钱便宜时购买贮存。
English: The equal delivery method is to change the function of shipping to equal delivery, the imperial court will give coins and rice grains. All items for the imperial court must leave the high-priced areas and purchase in the low-priced areas, replace the distant areas with the near-distance areas, and report the items that need to be purchased to the Beijing warehouse in advance, so that they can be purchased and stored when the price is cheap.

古文：保甲之法，籍乡村之民，二丁取一，十家为保，保丁皆授以弓弩，教之战阵。
现代文：保甲法，乡村人口编入户籍簿，两名男丁取一人，十家为一保，保丁都发给弓弩，教他们战斗阵法。
English: Armor protection law, the rural population was compiled into the household registration book, two men took one person, ten families took one person, and bodyguards were issued to the bowmen to teach them the battle formation law.

古文：免役之法，据家赀高下，各令出钱雇人充役，下至单丁、女户，本来无役者，亦一概输钱，谓之助役钱。
现代文：免役法，根据百姓家庭财产多少，分别令他们出钱雇人充役，下至单丁户、女户，本来不要服役的家庭，也一概出钱，叫助役钱。
English: According to the exemption law, according to the amount of people's family property, they were ordered to pay money to hire people to perform military service, and down to single households, female households, and families who did not want to serve, they all paid money, called service money.

古文：市易之法，听人赊贷县官财货，以田宅或金帛为抵当，出息十分之二，过期不输，息外每月更加罚钱百分之二。
现代文：市易法，允许私人向官府赊购或借贷货物钱款，以自己的田地、住宅或金帛作为抵押，出息十分之二，超过期限没有交纳的，利息之外每月另加罚金百分之二。
English: The Municipal Exchange Law allows private individuals to borrow money from the government to purchase or borrow goods, using their own fields, houses or gold ingots as collateral. The interest rate is two-tenths of a percent, and if it is not paid within the time limit, a monthly fine of two percent will be added in addition to the interest.

古文：保马之法，凡五路义保愿养马者，户一匹，以监牧见马给之，或官与其直，使自市，岁一阅其肥瘠，死病者补偿。
现代文：保马法，凡是五路义勇保甲愿意养马的，每户养一匹，用牧马监现有的马给他们喂养，或是官府给买马的钱，让他们自行购买，每年检查一次马的肥瘦程度，死亡或生病的要补偿。
English: According to the law on horse care, if any five-way volunteers are willing to raise a horse, each household should raise one horse, and feed them with the existing horses of the herdsmen, or the money given by the government to buy horses, let them buy their own, check the fatness of the horse once a year, and compensate for death or illness.

古文：方田之法，以东、西、南、北各千步，当四十一顷六十六亩一百六十步为一方，岁以九月，令、佐分地计量，验地土肥瘠，定其色号，分为五等，以地之等，均定税数。
现代文：方田法，把东、西、南、北各千步，相当于四十一顷六十六亩一百六十步作为一方，每年九月，县令、县佐分地丈量计算，检验土地肥瘠，确定这些土地的成色，分为五个等级，按照土地的等级，均定赋税数额。
English: According to the Fangda method, taking the east, west, south and north as one thousand paces each, equivalent to forty-one hectares, sixty-six mu and one hundred and sixty paces, every September, the county government and the county subdivision are measured and calculated, the land fertility is inspected, the quality of these lands is determined, and they are divided into five grades, and according to the grade of the land, the amount of tax is evenly determined.

古文：又有免行钱者，约京师百物诸行利入厚薄，皆令纳钱，与免行户祗应。
现代文：还有免行钱，规定京城各行各业根据获利多少，都必须交纳免行钱，给予免除行户当差。
English: There is also free travel money, which stipulates that all walks of life in Beijing must pay free travel money according to how much profit they make, and give exemptions to travelers.

古文：自是四方争言农田水利，古陂废堰，悉务兴复。
现代文：自从这些法令推行以后，全国各地争言农田水利，古代的陂塘和废弃的堤堰，都必须兴建修复。
English: Since the implementation of these decrees, there have been disputes all over the country about farmland water conservancy, and ancient Qutang and abandoned dykes and weirs must be built and repaired.

古文：又令民封状增价以买坊场，又增茶监之额，又设措置河北籴便司，广积粮谷于临流州县，以备馈运。
现代文：又下令平民百姓可以投递密封状，增加价钱购买坊场，又增加茶、盐的税收数额，又设置河北籴便司，在临近河流的州县广积粮食，以备粮饷运输。
English: He also ordered that the common people could submit sealed letters, increased the price of purchasing goods, increased the amount of tax on tea and salt, and set up a Hebei grain transportation company to accumulate grain in counties and prefectures near the river to prepare grain for transportation.

古文：由是赋敛愈重，而天下骚然矣。
现代文：从此赋税聚敛越来越重，而天下骚动不安了。
English: Since then, tax collection has become more and more heavy, and the world is in turmoil.

古文：御史中丞吕诲论安石过失十事，帝为出诲，安石荐吕公著代之。
现代文：御史中丞吕诲说王安石有十大过失，神宗为此派吕诲去做地方官，王安石推荐吕公著代替吕诲任御史中丞。
English: Wang Anshi was said to have made ten major mistakes, so Shenzong sent him to be a local official, and Wang Anshi recommended Lu Gong's book to be appointed as Wang Anshi's vice-chancellor.

古文：韩琦谏疏至，帝感悟，欲从之，安石求去。
现代文：韩琦规劝神宗停止实行青苗法的奏疏送到朝廷，神宗感到醒悟，打算同意韩琦的意见，王安石立即要求辞职离去。
English: Han Zheng advised Shenzong to stop practicing the Young Seedlings Law and sent him to the imperial court. Shenzong felt enlightened and intended to agree with Han Zheng's opinion. Wang Anshi immediately asked to resign and leave.

古文：司马光答诏，有 士夫沸腾，黎民骚动 之语，安石怒，抗章自辨，帝为巽辞谢，令吕惠卿谕旨，韩绛又劝帝留之。
现代文：司马光为神宗起草批答诏书，其中有 士大夫沸腾，百姓骚动 的话，王安石大怒，上章为自己辩护，神宗用恭敬的言语表示歉意，派吕惠卿传达旨意，韩绛又劝神宗留下王安石。
English: Sima Guang drafted a reply edict for Shenzong, in which the scholar-officials were seething, the people were agitated, Wang Anshi was furious, the last chapter defended himself, Shenzong apologized with respectful words, sent Lü Hui to convey the will, and Han Zheng advised Shenzong to leave Wang Anshi.

古文：安石入谢，因为上言中外大臣、从官、台谏、朝士朋比之情，且曰： 陛下欲以先王之正道胜天下流俗，故与天下流俗相为重轻。
现代文：王安石入朝谢恩，因而对神宗说了朝廷内外大臣、从官、台谏官、朝士互相依附勾结的情况，并且说： 陛下想用先王的正道战胜天下流于颓靡风俗的人，所以是与天下流俗相互较量轻重。
English: Wang Anshi entered the imperial court to express his gratitude, and thus told Shenzong about the situation of mutual dependence and collusion between the ministers of internal and external affairs of the imperial court, officials, Taiwan eunuchs, and imperial courtiers, and said: Your Majesty wants to use the righteous path of the former king to defeat those who are popular with the world, so it is important to compete with the world's customs.

古文：流俗权重，则天下之人归流俗；陛下权重，则天下之人归陛下。
现代文：流俗的这个秤锤重了，那么天下的人们就都归向流俗；陛下的这个秤锤重了，那么天下的人们就都归向陛下。
English: If the scale of the vulgar becomes heavy, then all the people in the world will turn to the vulgar; if His Majesty's scale becomes heavy, then all the people in the world will turn to His Majesty.

古文：权者与物相为重轻，虽千钧之物，所加损不过铢两而移。
现代文：秤锤与物体较量轻重的时候，虽然是重达千钧的物体，增加或减少秤锤一铢一两的重量就会使准确性发生改变。
English: When a scale and a hammer weigh an object, even though the object weighs thousands of pounds, adding or subtracting a pound or two from the weight of the scale and hammer will change the accuracy.

古文：今奸人欲败先王之正道，以沮陛下之所为。
现代文：今天奸邪之人想败坏先王的正道，以此阻止陛下所做的改革。
English: Today, evil-doers want to corrupt the righteous path of the former king in order to block the reforms made by His Majesty.

古文：于是陛下与流俗之权适争轻重之时，加铢两之力，则用力至微，而天下之权，已归于流俗矣，此所以纷纷也。 上以为然。
现代文：现在正是陛下和流俗的秤锤较量轻重的时候，流俗增加铢两的重量，虽然极其微小，但是天下这一秤锤，已归属于流俗了，这就是天下议论纷纷的缘故。 神宗认为是这样。
English: Now is precisely the time for His Majesty to compete with the weight of the conventional balance hammer. The conventional increase in the weight of the yoke, although extremely small, but the world's balance hammer, has been attributed to the conventional, which is the reason for the world's discussion. Shenzong believes that this is so.

古文：安石乃视事，琦说不得行。
现代文：于是王安石重新任职治事，韩琦的意见没有得到采纳。
English: As a result, Wang Anshi was reappointed to govern, and Han Zheng's opinion was not adopted.

古文：安石与光素厚，光援朋友责善之义，三诒书反覆劝之，安石不乐。
现代文：王安石与司马光一直相交甚厚，司马光根据朋友之间互相督促行善的道理，三次写信给王安石反复劝说，王安石很不高兴。
English: Wang Anshi and Sima Guang have always had a very close relationship. According to the principle that friends should urge each other to do good deeds, Sima Guang wrote to Wang Anshi three times to persuade him repeatedly. Wang Anshi was very unhappy.

古文：帝用光副枢密，光辞未拜而安石出，命遂寝。
现代文：神宗欲起用司马光任枢密副使，司马光还没有任职时，而王安石执政，于是这项任命就中止执行了。
English: Emperor Jinzong wanted to appoint Sima Guangru as a Privy Vice-Envoy. When Sima Guangru was not yet in office and Wang Anshi was in power, the appointment was suspended.

古文：公著虽为所引，亦以请罢新法出颍州。
现代文：虽然吕公著是王安石推荐的，也因为请求罢除新法而被派出任颍州知州。
English: Although Lyu Gong's book was recommended by Wang Anshi, he was also sent to Zhangzhou Chizhou because of his request to repeal the new law.

古文：御史刘述、刘琦、钱顗、孙昌龄、王子韶、程颢、张戩、陈襄、陈荐、谢景温、杨绘、刘挚，谏官范纯仁、李常、孙觉、胡宗愈皆不得其言，相继去。
现代文：御史刘述、刘琦、钱岂页、孙昌龄、王子韶、程颢、张戬、陈襄、陈荐、谢景温、杨绘、刘挚，谏官范纯仁、李常、孙觉、胡宗愈都因为与王安石意见不合，相继离开朝廷。
English: Grand Historian Liu Shu, Liu Zhi, Qian Zhaozhe, Sun Changling, Wang Zhe, Cheng Zhe, Zhang Zhe, Chen Xiang, Chen Tongren, Xie Jingwen, Yang Pu, Liu Zhi, eunuch Fan Chunren, Li Chang, Sun Jue, and Hu Zongyu all left the imperial court one after another because of disagreements with Wang Anshi.

古文：骤用秀州推官李定为御史，知制诰宋敏求、李大临、苏颂封还词头，御史林旦、薛昌朝、范育论定不孝，皆罢逐。
现代文：王安石很快提升秀州推官李定任御史，知制诰宋敏求、李大临、苏颂封还任命诏令，御史林旦、薛昌朝、范育弹劾李定违背孝道，都被罢免并逐出朝廷。
English: Wang Anshi quickly promoted Li Dingren, the governor of Xiuzhou, to the position of imperial historian, the imperial governors Song Minqiu, Li Dalin, and Su Songfeng also appointed imperial decrees, and the imperial governors Lin Dan, Xue Chang Dynasty, and Fan Yu impeached Li Ding for violating filial piety, and were all dismissed and expelled from the imperial court.

古文：翰林学士范镇三疏言青苗，夺职致仕。
现代文：翰林学士范镇三次上疏议论青苗法，被罢免职务而退休。
English: Hanlin Scholar Fan Zhen was removed from his post and retired after he discussed the Youth Law three times.

古文：惠卿遭丧去，安石未知所托，得曾布，信任之，亚于惠卿。
现代文：吕惠卿因父亲去世离开朝廷，王安石不知道把吕惠卿离开后的空缺委任给什么人时，得到了曾布，很信任他，信任的程度仅次于吕惠卿。
English: When Lord Lü Hui left the imperial court after his father's death, Wang Anshi did not know whom to appoint to fill the vacancy left by Lord Lü Hui, but he got Zeng Bu, whom he trusted very much. The degree of trust was second only to Lord Lü Hui.

古文：三年十二月，拜同中书门下平章事。
现代文：熙宁三年十二月，王安石任同中书门下平章事。
English: In December of the third year of Xi'ning, Wang Anshi was appointed as the second secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：明年春，京东、河北有烈风之异，民大恐。
现代文：第二年春天，京东路、河北路发生暴风的异常现象，百姓十分恐慌。
English: In the spring of the following year, the unusual phenomenon of a storm occurred in Jingdong Road and Hebei Road, and the people were very panicked.

古文：帝批付中书，令省事安静以应天变，放遣两路募夫，责有司、郡守不以上闻者。
现代文：神宗批示中书省，令省事安静以应付天变，放还这两路应募的农夫，责罚不如实反映汇报情况的监司、郡守。
English: Shenzong ordered the Ministry of Education and Culture to keep things quiet in order to cope with the change of the weather, to return the two farmers who applied for recruitment, and to punish the supervisors and county governors who did not accurately reflect the reporting situation.

古文：安石执不下。
现代文：王安石扣住而不下达这道诏令。
English: Wang Anshi held back from issuing the edict.

古文：开封民避保甲，有截指断腕者，知府韩维言之，帝问安石，安石曰： 此固未可知，就令有之，亦不足怪。
现代文：开封百姓为逃避保甲，有切掉自己手指、砍断自己手腕的人，知府韩维报告朝廷，神宗问王安石，王安石回答说 ：这些事我固然还没有知道，即使有这种情况，也不足为怪。
English: The people of Kaifeng cut off their fingers and wrists in order to escape the armour. Governor Han Wei reported this to the imperial court. Emperor Shenzong asked Wang Anshi, and Wang Anshi replied, "Of course, I still don't know about these things. Even if there is such a situation, it's not surprising."

古文：今士大夫睹新政，尚或纷然惊异；况于二十万户百姓，固有蠢愚为人所惑动者，岂应为此遂不敢一有所为邪？ 帝曰： 民言合而听之则胜，亦不可不畏也。 
现代文：今天士大夫对于新政，尚且吵吵嚷嚷感到惊异；何况二十万户百姓，必然会有由于愚蠢而受到别人蛊惑煽动的人，怎能因为这种人而不敢有所作为？ 神宗说 ：听取百姓的各种意见就能取得成功，百姓的意见也不能不畏惧。 
English: Today, Shidafu is surprised that the New Deal is still noisy and noisy; moreover, there are two hundred thousand households of the people, and there will inevitably be people who are incited by others due to stupidity. How can they not dare to do something because of such people? Shintsong said: Listening to the various opinions of the people can achieve success, and the opinions of the people can not be feared.

古文：东明民或遮宰相马诉助役钱，安石白帝曰： 知县贾蕃乃范仲淹之婿，好附流俗，致民如是。 又曰： 治民当知其情伪利病，不可示姑息。
现代文：东明县百姓有人拦住宰相的马头控诉助役钱，王安石对神宗说： 知县贾蕃是范仲淹的女婿，喜好附和流俗，导致百姓做了这种事。 又说 ：治理百姓应当知道他们的真假利弊，不可以向他们表示无原则的姑息宽容。
English: Wang Anshi said to Shenzong: Zhixian Jiaqi is the son-in-law of Fan Zhongyan, who likes to conform to popular customs, which led the people to do such a thing. He also said: The people should know their true and false advantages and disadvantages, and they should not be shown unprincipled tolerance.

古文：若纵之使妄经省台，鸣鼓邀驾，恃众侥幸，则非所以为政。 其强辩背理率类此。
现代文：如果放纵他们使之妄经中书省、御史台等中枢机构，击鼓拦驾，凭借人多以图侥幸，这不是治理国家的办法。 王安石强词夺理，违背常理，都像这样。
English: If they are allowed to run roughshod over central institutions such as the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology and the National History Channel, beating drums and blocking the way, and relying on many people to try their luck, this is not the way to govern the country. Wang Anshi's strong words are unreasonable and contrary to common sense.

古文：帝用韩维为中丞，安石憾曩言，指为善附流俗以非上所建立，因维辞而止。
现代文：皇帝起用韩维为御史中丞，王安石怀恨韩维以往的言论，指责韩维善于附和流俗以此否定神宗所建立的新法，这次任用因韩维的辞谢而结束。
English: The emperor appointed Han Wei as the imperial historian. Wang Anshi held a grudge against Han Wei's previous remarks, accusing Han Wei of being good at conforming to customs and thus denying the new law established by Shenzong. This appointment ended with Han Wei's resignation.

古文：欧阳修乞致仕，冯京请留之，安石曰： 修附丽韩琦，以琦为社稷臣。
现代文：欧阳修请求退休，冯京要求朝廷挽留他，王安石说 ：欧阳修依附韩琦，推崇韩琦是关系国家安危的大臣。
English: Ouyang Xiu asked to retire, Feng Jing asked the court to retain him, Wang Anshi said: Ouyang Xiu is attached to Han Zheng, and Han Zheng is a minister who is concerned about the safety of the country.

古文：如此人，在一郡则坏一郡，在朝廷则坏朝廷，留之安用？ 乃听之。
现代文：这样的人，在一郡就败坏一郡，在朝廷就败坏朝廷，留下他有什么用呢？ 
English: Such a person can corrupt a county in one county, and the imperial court in the imperial court. What is the use of keeping him?

古文：富弼以格青苗解使相，安石谓不足以阻奸，至比之共、鲧。
现代文：于是神宗同意欧阳修退休。富弼因为阻挠施行青苗法被解除了宰相职务，王安石说这不足以阻止奸邪小人，甚至把富弼比作为共工、鲧。
English: As a result, Shenzong agreed to retire Ouyang Xiu. Fuxiao was relieved of his position as prime minister for obstructing the implementation of the Law on Young Seedlings. Wang Anshi said that this was not enough to stop the evil villain, and even compared Fuxiao to a co-worker and a puppet.

古文：灵台郎尤瑛言天久阴，星失度，宜退安石，即黥隶英州。
现代文：灵台郎尤瑛说天气阴了很长时间，星辰失去了正常运行，应该黜退王安石，朝廷立即把尤瑛刺面发配到英州。
English: Lingtailang You Ying said that the weather had been cloudy for a long time, the star lost its normal operation, Wang Anshi should be withdrawn, and the court immediately distributed You Ying sashimi to Yingzhou.

古文：唐坰本以安石引荐为谏官，因请对极论其罪，谪死。
现代文：唐穅本是因王安石的推荐而担任了谏官，只因他借请求奏对的机会极力论说了王安石的罪过，结果被贬谪而死。
English: Tang Xi served as eunuch because of Wang Anshi's recommendation, but because he took the opportunity to criticize Wang Anshi's sins, he was demoted and died.

古文：文彦博言市易与下争利，致华岳山崩。
现代文：文彦博说市易法是与百姓争利，致使华山崩塌。
English: Fumihiko Hiroshi said that the city's e-commerce law was competing with the people for profits, resulting in the collapse of Huashan.

古文：安石曰： 华山之变，殆天意为小人发。
现代文：王安石说： 华山的变化，仅是天意为小人而发作的。
English: Wang Anshi said, "The changes of Huashan Mountain are only caused by the will of Heaven for the villains.

古文：市易之起，自为细民久困，以抑兼并尔，于官何利焉。 阏其奏，出彦博守魏。
现代文：市易法的起用，是由于平民长久穷困，用它来抑制兼并，对官府有什么利益呢？ 压下了文彦博的奏章，把他派出去任魏地留守。
English: The use of the Municipal Exchange Law was due to the long-term poverty of the common people, and the use of it to suppress the annexation was of no benefit to the government. The government suppressed the petition of Wen Yanbo and sent him out to stay in Wei.

古文：于是吕公著、韩维，安石藉以立声誉者也；欧阳修、文彦博，荐己者也；富弼、韩琦，用为侍从者也；司马光、范镇，交友之善者也：悉排斥不遗力。
现代文：吕公著、韩维，是王安石凭借他们树立自己声誉的人；欧阳修、文彦博，是推荐王安石的人；富弼、韩琦，王安石曾追随二人；司马光、范镇，是与自己友情甚厚的人，王安石都不遗余力地加以排斥。
English: Lyu Gong and Han Wei are the people with whom Wang Anshi established his reputation; Ouyang Xiu and Wen Yanbo are the people who recommended Wang Anshi; Fuxi and Han Zheng are the two people Wang Anshi once followed; Sima Guang and Fan Zhen are the people with whom he has a strong friendship, and Wang Anshi spares no effort to exclude them.

古文：礼官议正太庙太祖东向之位，安石独定议还僖祖于祧庙，议者合争之，弗得。
现代文：礼官讨论确立太庙中太祖神主牌位东向的位置，王安石独自决定把僖祖的神主牌位奉入祧庙，参加讨论的官员联合起来与王安石争论，没能改变他的决定。
English: The etiquette officials discussed establishing the eastward position of the Great Ancestor God's main tablet in the Great Temple. Wang Anshi alone decided to enshrine the god's main tablet of the ancestor into the Great Temple. The officials who participated in the discussion united to argue with Wang Anshi and failed to change his decision.

古文：上元夕，从驾乘马入宣德门，卫士诃止之，策其马。
现代文：上元节的傍晚，王安石跟随圣驾骑马进入宣德门，守门卫士大声呵叱阻止，并鞭打王安石骑的马匹。
English: On the evening of the Lantern Festival, Wang Anshi rode into the Xuande Gate with the saint, and the gatekeepers loudly scolded him and whipped the horses Wang Anshi was riding.

古文：安石怒，上章请逮治。
现代文：王安石发怒，上章要求逮捕惩办这些卫士。
English: Wang Anshi was furious and demanded that the guards be arrested and punished.

古文：御史蔡确言： 宿卫之士，拱扈至尊而已，宰相下马非其处，所应诃止。 帝卒为杖卫士，斥内侍，安石犹不平。
现代文：御史蔡确说 ：宫廷中值宿的卫士，保卫皇帝而已，宰相不在他应该下马的地方下马，卫士理所应当加以呵叱制止。 皇帝终于还是杖打卫士，斥责内侍，王安石还是愤愤不平。
English: "The guards on duty at the palace only protect the emperor, the prime minister did not dismount where he should have dismounted, and the guards should have been reprimanded to stop it," said Cai Jizhi. "In the end, the emperor still beat the guards with a cane and reprimanded the chambermaids, and Wang Anshi was still angry.

古文：王韶开熙河奏功，帝以安石主议，解所服玉带赐之。
现代文：王韶开拓熙河成功向朝廷报告功绩，神宗因为这是王安石的建议，解下自己身佩的玉带赐给王安石。
English: Wang Xi successfully explored the Heihe River and reported his achievements to the imperial court. Because this was Wang Anshi's suggestion, Shenzong untied the jade belt he was wearing and gave it to Wang Anshi.

古文：七年春，天下久旱，饥民流离，帝忧形于色，对朝嗟叹，欲尽罢法度之不善者。
现代文：熙宁七年春天，全国一直干旱，饥民流离失所，皇帝忧容满面，上朝时感叹不已，想要罢除全部不好的法度。
English: In the spring of the seventh year of Xining, the whole country was in drought, the hungry were displaced, the emperor was full of sorrow, and when he ascended to the throne, he was full of remorse and wanted to abolish all bad laws.

古文：安石曰：  水旱常数，尧、汤所不免，此不足招圣虑，但当修人事以应之。 帝曰： 此岂细事，朕所以恐惧者，正为人事之未修尔。
现代文：王安石说 ：水旱灾害是常会发生的事，尧、汤时代也不能避免，这事不足以使陛下忧虑，不过应当治理好人为之事来应付天灾。 神宗说 ：这怎么是小事，我所以感到恐惧，正是因为没能做好人为之事。
English: Wang Anshi said, "Floods and droughts are common occurrences, and cannot be avoided in times of droughts and floods. This is not enough to worry His Majesty, but man-made things should be well managed to cope with natural disasters." Shenzong said, "This is such a small matter, so I feel fear, precisely because I failed to do a good job of man-made things."

古文：今取免行钱太重，人情咨怨，至出不逊语。
现代文：现在收取免行钱太重，人们怨叹，甚至有人说出对朝廷不恭顺的话来。
English: Now the toll-free toll is too heavy, people complain, and some even say that they are not obedient to the imperial court.

古文：自近臣以至后族，无不言其害。
现代文：自亲近大臣到皇后家族，没有不说免行钱有害的。
English: From being close to ministers to the queen's family, there is nothing inherently harmful about money.

古文：两宫泣下，忧京师乱起，以为天旱，更失人心。 安石曰： 近臣不知为谁，若两宫有言，乃向经、曹佾所为尔。 冯京曰： 臣亦闻之。 安石曰： 士大夫不逞者以京为归，故京独闻其言，臣未之闻也。 监安上门郑侠上疏，绘所见流民扶老携幼困苦之状，为图以献，曰： 旱由安石所致。
现代文：两宫太后声泪俱下，担忧京城里会发生动乱，认为天旱更加失去了人心。 王安石说 ：亲近大臣不知是谁，如果两宫有这种话，那一定是向经、曹佾所干的。 冯京说 ：我也听说了。 王安石说 ：士大夫中不如意不得志的人都归附冯京，所以只有冯京听到这些话，我是没有听说。 监安上门郑侠上疏，把所见到的流民扶老携幼的困苦情状，画成图进献神宗，说： 旱灾是由王安石招致来的。
English: The empress dowager of the two palaces was in tears, worried that there would be turmoil in the capital, and thought that the drought had further lost the hearts of the people. Wang Anshi said: I don't know who is close to the minister, if the two palaces have such a word, it must have been done by Xiang Jing and Cao Yao. Feng Jing said: I also heard about it. Wang Anshi said: Among the scholars who are not as good as they want to be, they all belong to Feng Jing, so only Feng Jing heard these words, I didn't hear about it. Zheng Xiao Shangzo, the supervisor of the door, drew a picture

古文：去安石，天必雨。 侠又坐窜岭南。
现代文：罢免王安石，上天一定会下雨。 郑侠又因为这事被放逐到岭南。
English: If Wang Anshi is removed from office, it will surely rain. Zheng Xiao was exiled to Lingnan because of this.

古文：慈圣、宣仁二太后流涕谓帝曰： 安石乱天下。 帝亦疑之，遂罢为观文殿大学士、知江宁府，自礼部侍郎超九转为吏部尚书。
现代文：慈圣、宣仁两位太后痛哭流涕地对神宗说： 王安石扰乱了天下。 神宗也怀疑王安石，于是罢免了他的宰相职务，任命为观文殿大学士、知江宁府，从礼部侍郎超九转而为吏部尚书。
English: The two empresses, Tzu Sheng and Xuan Ren, wept bitterly and said to Shentong: Wang Anshi has disturbed the world. Shentong also doubted Wang Anshi, so he dismissed him from the prime minister's post and appointed him as a scholar of the Guanwen Temple and the Chijiang Ningfu, and he was transferred from the ceremonial attendant to the clerk.

古文：吕惠卿服阕，安石朝夕汲引之，至是，白为参知政事，又乞召韩绛代己。
现代文：吕惠卿服丧期满时，王安石早晚不停地推荐他，这时，王安石奏请皇帝让吕惠卿任参知政事，又要求召韩绛代替自己。
English: When Lord Lyu Hui's term of mourning was over, Wang Anshi kept recommending him sooner or later. At this time, Wang Anshi asked the emperor to let Lord Lyu Hui serve as a co-premier, and also asked to call Han Zheng to replace him.

古文：二人守其成谟，不少失，时号绛为 传法沙门 ，惠卿为 护法善神 。
现代文：二人坚持王安石制定的成法，没有丝毫改变，当时韩绛的绰号是 传法沙门 ，吕惠卿的绰号是 护法善神 。
English: The two adhered to the law formulated by Wang Anshi and did not change it in the slightest. At that time, Han Zheng's nickname was "Preaching the Fa" and Lu Huiqing's nickname was "Guardian of the Fa."

古文：而惠卿实欲自得政，忌安石复来，因郑侠狱陷其弟安国，又起李士宁狱以倾安石。
现代文：然而吕惠卿实际上是想自己掌握大权，害怕王安石重新回来当政，就乘办理郑侠案件的机会陷害王安石弟弟王安国，又兴起李士宁案件来倾覆王安石。
English: However, Lu Huixing actually wanted to seize power for himself and was afraid of Wang Anshi returning to power, so he took the opportunity of handling the Zheng Xiao case to frame Wang Anshi's younger brother Wang Anguo, and also raised the Li Shining case to overthrow Wang Anshi.

古文：绛觉其意，密白帝请召之。
现代文：韩绛觉察到吕惠卿的用意，秘密奏知皇帝请求召回王安石。
English: Han Yan sensed Lü Hui's intention and secretly informed the emperor of his request to recall Wang Anshi.

古文：八年二月，复拜相，安石承命，即倍道来。
现代文：熙宁八年二月，王安石再次被委任为宰相，他接到诏令后，立即兼程赴京。
English: In February of the eighth year of Xining, Wang Anshi was reappointed as prime minister. After receiving the imperial edict, he immediately left for Beijing.

古文：《三经义》成，加尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎，以子雱为龙图阁直学士。
现代文：《三经义》写成，王安石加官为尚书左仆射兼门下侍郎。任命他的儿子王蚞为龙图阁直学士。
English: After the "Three Classics" was written, Wang Anshi was promoted to Shang Shuxu's left-hand man and servant, and appointed his son, Wang Qi, as the direct scholar of Longtu Ge.

古文：雱辞，惠卿劝帝允其请，由是嫌隙愈著。
现代文：王蚞推辞不就，吕惠卿劝说皇帝接受他的请求，因此王、吕间猜疑成仇更加明显。
English: Wang Xuan's refusal was not enough, and Lord Lyu Hui persuaded the emperor to accept his request. Therefore, the suspicion and enmity between Wang and Lyu became more obvious.

古文：惠卿为蔡承禧所击，居家俟命。
现代文：吕惠卿被蔡承禧弹劾，在家等待皇帝的处理诏令。
English: Lyu Huicheng was impeached by Cai Chengxi and waited at home for the emperor's decree.

古文：雱风御史中丞邓绾，复弹惠卿与知华亭县张若济为奸利事，置狱鞫之，惠卿出守陈。
现代文：王蚞暗示御史中丞邓绾再次弹劾吕惠卿和华亭县知县张若济共同犯法谋利事，立案审查他们，吕惠卿被派出任陈州知州。
English: Wang Yao hinted to the Grand Historian, Vice President Deng Yao to impeach Lyu Huiqing and Zhang Ruoji of Zhixian County, Huating County, for jointly breaking the law and seeking profits. A case was filed to examine them, and Lyu Huiqing was sent to Chenzhou Zhizhou.

古文：十月，彗出东方，诏求直言，及询政事之未协于民者。
现代文：十月，彗星出现在东方，神宗下诏征求直言得失，以及询问政事之中不能与百姓相和谐的方面。
English: In October, a comet appeared in the east, and Emperor Shenzong issued an edict to solicit the pros and cons of outspokenness, as well as to inquire into the aspects of government affairs that are not in harmony with the people.

古文：安石率同列疏言： 晋武帝五年，彗出轸；十年，又有孛。
现代文：王安石带领同朝大臣们上疏说： 晋武帝五年，彗星出现在轸宿；十年，又有孛星出现。
English: Wang Anshi led the ministers of the same dynasty to Shangshu and said: In the fifth year of Emperor Jinwu, a comet appeared in Poyang; in the tenth year, a shooting star appeared.

古文：而其在位二十八年，与《乙巳占》所期不合。
现代文：然而晋武帝在位二十八年，与《乙巳占》所预言的日期不符合。
English: However, the 28th year of Emperor Jinwu's reign does not match the date predicted in the Book of Changes.

古文：盖天道远，先王虽有官占，而所信者人事而已。
现代文：这是因为天道遥远，先王虽然有官方占卜的预言，但他所相信的仍是人为之事。
English: This is because the heavenly way is far away, and although the former king had an official divination prophecy, what he believed was still a man-made thing.

古文：天文之变无穷，上下傅会，岂无偶合。
现代文：天文的变化无穷无尽，上下牵强附会，难道就没有偶然的巧合？
English: The changes in astronomy are endless, the ups and downs are far-fetched, is there no chance coincidence?

古文：周公、召公，岂欺成王哉。
现代文：周公、召公，怎么会欺骗成王。
English: How could Zhou Gong and Zhao Gong deceive Cheng Wang?

古文：其言中宗享国日久，则曰 严恭寅畏，天命自度，治民不敢荒宁 。
现代文：他们说到中宗在位的时间很长，就说 中宗谦虚谨慎，兢兢业业，用天命约束自己，勤于治民不敢荒废政事 。
English: When they said that Zhongzong had reigned for a long time, they said that Zhongzong was modest and prudent, conscientious and industrious, restrained himself with the mandate of heaven, diligently governed the people and did not dare to waste political affairs.

古文：其言夏、商多历年所，亦曰 德 而已。
现代文：他们说夏、商两朝维持很长时间时，也说是由于 施行德政 而已。
English: They said that when the Xia and Shang dynasties lasted for a long time, it was also said to be due to the implementation of German politics.

古文：裨灶言火而验，欲禳之，国侨不听，则曰 不用吾言，郑又将火 。
现代文：裨灶预言火灾能够应验，想用祭祀求免灾祸，国侨不听他的意见，裨灶就说 ：不采纳我的意见，郑国又将会发生火灾。 
English: He predicted that the fire would be able to be fulfilled. He wanted to use the ritual to avoid the disaster. The overseas Chinese did not listen to his advice, so he said: If you do not accept my opinion, there will be another fire in Zhengguo.

古文：侨终不听，郑亦不火。
现代文：国侨没有听他的意见，郑国也没有发生火灾。
English: The overseas Chinese did not listen to his advice, and there was no fire in Zhengguo.

古文：有如裨灶，未免妄诞，况今星工哉？
现代文：有像裨灶这样的人，未免荒诞，何况今天的占卜星象之人呢？
English: It is absurd that there are people like Dobroch, let alone today's soothsayers?

古文：所传占书，又世所禁，〈月誊〉写伪误，尤不可知。
现代文：现在流传的占书，又是历代所禁止的，誊写讹误尤其不知道有多少。
English: The divination books that are now in circulation were forbidden in previous generations. In particular, it is not known how many copying mistakes there were.

古文：窃闻两宫以此为忧，望以臣等所言，力行开慰。 帝曰： 闻民间殊苦新法。 安石曰： 祁寒暑雨，民犹怨咨，此无庸恤。 帝曰： 岂若并祁寒暑雨之怨亦无邪？ 安石不悦，退而属疾卧，帝慰勉起之。
现代文：陛下的品德至善至美，不仅比商中宗更加贤能，而且周公、召公所说的话早已全部看过了，哪里需要蠢人、盲人再有什么陈述。我听说两宫太后因为这件事而担忧，希望陛下用我们所说的这些道理，尽力地开导劝慰。 神宗说 ：听说民间极苦于新法。 王安石回答说 ：冬天严寒，夏天暴雨，百姓尚且怨恨，这不用抚恤。 神宗说： 不能使冬天严寒夏天暴雨这种怨恨也没有吗？ 王安石听后很不高兴，回家托病卧床，神宗安慰劝勉，王安石才上朝治理政事。
English: I heard that the empress dowager of the two palaces was worried because of this matter, and hoped that Your Majesty would do your best to enlighten and comfort her with these truths that we have shared. Shenzong said, "I heard that the people are very distressed by the new law." Wang Anshi replied, "It is cold in winter, and there are heavy rains in summer, and the people are still resentful, so there is no need to be compassionate." Shenzong said, "Can't we make it cold in winter and heavy rains in summer, so that there is no such resentment?" Wang Anshi was very unhappy after hearing this, and went home to bed sick. Sh

古文：其党谋曰： 今不取上素所不喜者暴进用之，则权轻，将有窥人间隙者。 安石是其策。
现代文：他的同党出计谋说 ：现在不要选取皇上历来不喜欢的人迅速提拔重用，那会使自己变轻，这时就将有窥伺君臣间隙的人。 王安石同意这个谋略。
English: His co-partisans came up with a plan and said, "Don't choose someone the emperor doesn't like and promote him to a higher position right now. That will make him lighter, and then there will be someone to spy on the gap between the emperor and his ministers." Wang Anshi agreed to this plan.

古文：帝喜其出，悉从之。
现代文：皇帝高兴王安石出来执政，听从他的一切意见。
English: The emperor was pleased that Wang Anshi came to power, and he listened to all his opinions.

古文：时出师安南，谍得其露布，言： 中国作青苗、助役之法，穷困生民。
现代文：当时军队出征安南，密探得到安南的露布，说： 中国推行青苗、助役法，使平民百姓十分贫困。
English: At that time, the army went to Annan, and the spies got Annan's bluff, saying: China's implementation of the young seedlings and auxiliary service law has made the civilians very poor.

古文：我今出兵，欲相拯济。 安石怒，自草敕榜诋之。
现代文：我国今天出兵，是要帮助拯救那里的百姓。 王安石恼怒，自己起草敕牍诋毁安南。
English: Our country sent troops today to help save the people there. Wang Anshi was so angry that he drafted his own letter to denigrate Annan.

古文：华亭狱久不成，雱以属门下客吕嘉问、练亨甫共议，取邓绾所列惠卿事，杂他书下制狱，安石不知也。
现代文：华亭案久久未能成立，王蚞把它交给门客吕嘉问、练亨甫共同商议，他们取来邓绾所列举的吕惠卿的事项，夹杂在其他的皇帝下达的文书中，王安石不知道这件事。
English: The Huating case could not be established for a long time. Wang Yao handed it over to his protégé Lyu Jiahu and Lian Hengfu to jointly discuss. The matters of Lyu Huiqing listed by Deng Yao were included in other documents issued by the emperor. Wang Anshi did not know about this matter.

古文：省吏告惠卿于陈，惠卿以状闻，且讼安石曰： 安石尽弃所学，隆尚纵横之末数，方命矫令，罔上要君。
现代文：省吏到陈州把这件事告诉了吕惠卿，吕惠卿报告给皇帝，并控告王安石说 ：王安石完全抛弃了自己所学的先儒教诲，崇尚纵横家的末流方法，违背君命假传号令，欺骗皇上，要挟君主。
English: The provincial official went to Chenzhou and reported the matter to Lord Lyu Hui. Lord Lyu Hui reported the matter to the emperor and sued Wang Anshi, saying: Wang Anshi completely abandoned the teachings of the early Confucians that he had learned, advocated the methods of the last generation of schemers, disobeyed the royal command, deceived the emperor, and blackmailed the monarch.

古文：此数恶力行于年岁之间，虽古之失志倒行而逆施者，殆不如此。 又发安石私书曰： 无使上知 者。
现代文：一年之间极力干了许多恶事，纵然是古代丧失志行而倒行逆施的人，恐怕都没有这样的。 又揭发王安石在私人书信中写有 不要让皇上知道 的话。
English: Wang Anshi was exposed as having written in a private letter, "Don't let the emperor know about this," and he was forced to resign from his post.

古文：帝以示安石，安石谢无有，归以问雱，雱言其情，安石咎之。
现代文：神宗把这些材料给王安石看，王安石谢辞说没有这些事，回家问王蚞，王蚞说出这些事的情况，王安石责备了他。
English: Shenzong showed these materials to Wang Anshi. Wang Anshi thanked him and said that there were no such things. He went home and asked Wang Yao. Wang Yao told him about these things, and Wang Anshi rebuked him.

古文：雱愤恚，疽发背死。
现代文：王蚞愤怒怨恨，背上的痈疽发作而死。
English: Wang Yao became angry and resentful, and died from a gangrene attack on his back.

古文：安石暴绾罪，去 为臣子弟求官及荐臣婿蔡卞 ，遂与亨甫皆得罪。
现代文：王安石公开宣布邓绾的罪过，说： 邓绾为我的子弟求取官职及举荐我的女婿蔡卞。 于是邓绾和练亨甫都获罪。
English: Wang Anshi publicly announced Deng Yao's crime, saying: "Deng Yao solicited an official position for my son and recommended my son-in-law Cai Yao.

古文：绾始以附安石居言职，及安石与吕惠卿相倾，绾极力助攻惠卿。
现代文：邓绾开始是以依附王安石而做到谏官的，到王安石和吕惠卿互相倾轧时，邓绾极力帮助王安石攻击吕惠卿。
English: At first, Deng Xuan relied on Wang Anshi to become a eunuch. When Wang Anshi and Lü Hui were at each other's throats, Deng Xuan tried his best to help Wang Anshi attack Lü Hui.

古文：上颇厌安石所为，绾惧失势，屡留之于上，其言无所顾忌；亨甫险薄，谄事雱以进，至是皆斥。
现代文：神宗很厌恶王安石的所作所为，邓绾惧怕失势，多次留在皇上身边，说话无所顾忌；练亨甫邪恶不厚道，巴结奉承王蚞得到进用，这时他俩都被贬斥了。
English: Shenzong was very disgusted by Wang Anshi's behavior. Deng Yao was afraid of losing power, so he stayed by the emperor's side many times, speaking without any scruples. It was not good manners to practice evil and flatter Wang Yao to get promoted. At this time, they were both rebuked.

古文：安石之再相也，屡谢病求去，及子雱死，尤悲伤不堪，力请解几务。
现代文：王安石再次任宰相后，多次托病请求离职，到儿子王蚞死去，更是悲伤得不堪承受，极力请求解除枢要职务。
English: After Wang Anshi was reappointed as prime minister, he repeatedly requested to resign from his post, and when his son Wang Yao died, he was even more unbearably sad and strongly requested to be relieved of his important duties.

古文：上益厌之，罢为镇南军节度使、同平章事、判江宁府。
现代文：神宗愈加厌恶他，罢免了他的宰相职务，任命他为镇南军节度使、同平章事、判江宁府。
English: Shenzong became more and more disgusted with him, removed him from the post of prime minister, appointed him as the festival envoy of the Zhennan Army, Tongping Zhangji, and sentenced Jiangningfu.

古文：明年，改集禧观使，封舒国公。
现代文：第二年，改任集禧观使，封舒国公。
English: In the second year, he was appointed as the envoy of the Jubilee, and given the title of Shuguo.

古文：屡乞还将相印。
现代文：王安石多次乞求把自己的将相大印交还朝廷。
English: Wang Anshi repeatedly begged to return his Great Seal to the imperial court.

古文：元丰二年，复拜左仆射、观文殿大学士。
现代文：元丰二年，再次被任命为左仆射、观文殿大学士。
English: In the second year of Yuanfeng, he was reappointed as Zuopuzha and Guanwenden University Scholar.

古文：换特进，改封荆。
现代文：换官特进，改封荆国公。
English: He was promoted to special officer and given the title of Jing Guogong.

古文：哲宗立，加司空。
现代文：哲宗即位，加封司空。
English: Tetsuzo ascended to the throne, and Jofuku Siku was added.

古文：元祐元年，卒，年六十六，赠太傅。
现代文：元元年，王安石去世，终年六十六岁，追赠他为太傅。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Anshi died at the age of 66, and he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：绍圣中，谥曰文，配享神宗庙庭。
现代文：绍圣年间，赐谥为 文 ，配享神宗庙庭。
English: During the reign of Emperor Shoshen, he was granted the right to enjoy the garden of the Shinshu Temple.

古文：崇宁三年，又配食文宣王庙，列于颜、孟之次，追封舒王。
现代文：徽宗崇宁三年，又配享文宣王庙，位次排在颜回、孟子之后，追封为舒王。
English: Huizong Chongning for three years, and was also awarded the King Wenxuan Temple, ranked after Yan Hui and Mencius, and was awarded the title of King Shu.

古文：钦宗时，杨时以为言，诏停之。
现代文：钦宗时，杨时有议论，皇帝下诏停止王安石在文宣王庙配享。
English: During the reign of Qin Zong and Yang Zong, there was a discussion, and the emperor issued an edict to stop Wang Anshi from sharing the throne in the King Wenxuan Temple.

古文：高宗用赵鼎、吕聪问言，停宗庙配享，削其王封。
现代文：高宗采纳赵鼎、吕聪问的意见，停止王安石在宗庙配享，并削去他的王位封号。
English: Gao Zong adopted the opinions of Zhao Ding and Lu Congqian, stopped Wang Anshi from sharing in the ancestral temple, and cut off his throne seal.

古文：初，安石训释《诗》、《书》、《周礼》，既成，颁之学官，天下号曰 新义 。
现代文：早先，王安石诠释《诗》、《书》、《周礼》，写成后，颁布到学舍，天下称为《新义》。
English: Earlier, Wang Anshi interpreted "Poetry," "Book" and "Weekly Ritual," and after it was written, it was promulgated to the schoolhouse, known as "New Meaning."

古文：晚居金陵，又作《字说》，多穿凿傅会。
现代文：晚年居住在金陵，又撰写《字说》，书中多有穿凿附会之处。
English: In his later years, he lived in Jinling, and also wrote "The Story of Words," in which there are a number of appendices.

古文：其流入于佛、老。
现代文：他的学说混合入佛经、老庄的思想。
English: His teachings were mixed with Buddhist scriptures and Lao Zhuang's thought.

古文：一时学者，无敢不传习，主司纯用以取士，士莫得自名一说，先儒传注，一切废不用。
现代文：当时学习的人，没有人敢于不传授学习他的《新义》和《字说》的，主考官只用它为标准来录取考生，士人不得自立新说，先儒解释经书的著作，一切废除不用。
English: At that time, no one who studied dared not to teach and study his "Xinyi" and "Zi Xiao," the chief examiner only used it as a standard to admit candidates, and scholars were not allowed to stand up for themselves, and all the works of the early Confucian interpretation of scriptures were abolished.

古文：黜《春秋》之书，不使列于学官，至戏目为 断烂朝报 。
现代文：废黜《春秋》这部书，不把它列在学舍里，甚至戏弄地看作是 断简残篇的朝廷公报 。
English: The book "Spring and Autumn" was dethroned, it was not listed in the schoolhouse, and it was even teasingly regarded as a fragmentary imperial gazette.

古文：安石未贵时，名震京师，性不好华腴，自奉至俭，或衣垢不浣，面垢不洗，世多称其贤。
现代文：王安石还没有显贵时就已经名震京师。他不好奢华，自称是最为节俭，有时衣服脏了也不换，脸上脏了也不洗，人们都认为他这样很贤达。
English: When Wang Anshi was not yet a prominent person, he was already famous as a Beijing scholar. He did not like luxury, claimed to be the most frugal, and sometimes did not change his dirty clothes or wash his dirty face. People thought he was very wise.

古文：蜀人苏洵独曰： 是不近人情者，鲜不为大奸慝。 作《辩奸论》以刺之，谓王衍、卢杞合为一人。
现代文：蜀人苏洵则说： 这是不近人情的做法。
English: Su Wei, a resident of Shu, said: This is an inhumane practice.

古文：安石性强忮，遇事无可否，自信所见，执意不回。
现代文：像这种人很少有不奸慝大恶的。 并作了《辨奸论》文以讥刺他，说他和王衍、卢杞是一类人。王安石性格倔犟，遇事不论对错，非常自信，他决定了的事就从不改变。
English: It is rare to find such a person who is not treacherous and evil, and Wang Anshi wrote "Theory of Discerning Treachery" to ridicule him, saying that he was the same type of person as Wang Yan and Lu Yao. Wang Anshi is a very confident person, no matter whether he is right or wrong, he is very confident, and he will never change what he has decided.

古文：至议变法，而在廷交执不可，安石傅经义，出己意，辩论辄数百言，众不能诎。
现代文：至如讨论变法之事，王安石与朝中大臣争辩得不可开交。他引经据典，大发议论，动辄数百言，大家都驳不倒他。
English: For example, when discussing the issue of changing the law, Wang Anshi argued with the ministers of the DPRK and China. He quoted scriptures, made a lot of arguments, and spoke hundreds of words at a time, and everyone could not refute him.

古文：甚者谓 天命不足畏，祖宗不足法，人言不足恤。 罢黜中外老成人几尽，多用门下儇慧少年。
现代文：他甚至说 ：天变不足畏，祖宗不可学，人言不可怕。 他执政期间，几乎把内外老臣都罢免完了，而大多提拔一些轻浮的有点小聪明的年轻人。
English: He even said: "Changes in nature are not to be feared, ancestors are not to be learned from, and people's words are not to be feared." During his reign, he almost completely dismissed the old ministers both at home and abroad, and mostly promoted some frivolous and slightly clever young people.

古文：久之，以旱引去，洎复相，岁馀罢，终神宗世不复召，凡八年。
现代文：很久以后，因全国发生大旱灾而被罢黜，自第二次复出为相后一年多又被罢免，此后，终神宗之世再没有被召用，他执政共长达八年之久。
English: After a long time, he was ousted due to a severe drought across the country. More than a year after his second comeback, he was ousted again. After that, he was never called again. He ruled for a total of eight years.

古文：子雱。
现代文：其子王蚞。
English: His son, Wang Yao, succeeds him.

古文：雱字元泽。
现代文：王安礼字和甫，是王安石的弟弟。
English: Wang Anli, also known as He Fu, is the younger brother of Wang Anshi.

古文：为人慓悍阴刻，无所顾忌。
现代文：很年轻的时候即中进士，受到河东唐介的征召。
English: When he was very young, he was called up by Tang Jinshi of Hedong Province.

古文：性敏甚，未冠，已著书数万言。年十三，得秦卒言洮、河事，叹曰： 此可抚而有也。
现代文：熙宁年间，延路修筑口罗兀城，河东路派四万民工运粮饷，宣抚使韩绛要求让这些人去助战，将领吕公弼也准备听从安排。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xining, Yanlu Road was used to build the city of Luoyang, and the city of Hedong Road was used to send 40,000 migrant workers to transport grain. Han Zheng, the imperial envoy, demanded that these people be allowed to help in the war, and the general Lv Gongtao was also ready to obey the arrangement.

古文：使西夏得之，则吾敌强而边患博矣。 其后王韶开熙河，安石力主其议，盖兆于此。
现代文：王安礼则反对这样做，他说 ：这些民工都不懂打仗，如果强迫他们去，那么他们不被敌人杀死，也要被冻死、饿死，因此得赶快停止这种举动。 
English: Wang Anli opposed this, saying, "These migrant workers do not know how to fight. If they are forced to go, then they will not be killed by the enemy, but will also freeze to death and starve to death. Therefore, we must quickly stop this action."

古文：举进士，调旌德尉。雱气豪，睥睨一世，不能作小官。
现代文：吕公弼听从了王安礼的话，将民工都带了回来，而其他各路助战的民工都全军覆没了。吕公弼握着王安礼的手说 ：四万民工得以安全返回，这决不是偶然的。
English: Lv Gongyao obeyed Wang Anli's words and brought all the migrant workers back, while all the other migrant workers who helped the war effort were wiped out. Lv Gongyao shook Wang Anli's hand and said, "It is no accident that forty thousand migrant workers were able to return safely.

古文：作策二十余篇，极论天下事，又作《老子训传》及《佛书义解》，亦数万言。
现代文：如果真有什么阴德，那一定有你一份功劳啊。 开始，韩绛想垄断封赏，他所上报的立功行赏情况大多失实，吕公弼向皇上奏报了此事。
English: In the beginning, Han Xuan wanted to monopolize the awarding of rewards, and most of the reward-awarding situations he reported were untrue. Lü Gongyuan reported this to the emperor.

古文：时安石执政，所用多少年，雱亦欲预选，乃与父谋曰： 执政子虽不可预事，而经筵可处。 安石欲上知而自用，乃以雱所作策及注《道德经》镂板鬻于市，遂传达于上。邓绾、曾布又力荐之，召见，除太子中允、崇政殿说书。
现代文：皇上诏令就在河东路讨论立功行赏之事，吕公弼接受这件事。王安礼说 ：宣抚使是以宰相身份节制各道的，允许他便宜行事，他如果封赏有什么不妥的话，人们是会非难他的。你是一名地方官员，怎么能够超出职权范围越级上报论功状呢？ 吕公弼听后遂推却了这桩事。吕公弼向朝廷推荐王安礼，神宗召王安礼应对后，想马上任用他。这时是王安石执政，他即推辞了，被任为著作郎、崇文院校书。
English: The Emperor's edict discussed the matter of rewarding meritorious deeds on Hedong Road, and Lv Gongtao accepted the matter. Wang Anli said, "The envoy is a prime minister who controls all avenues and allows him to act cheaply. If there is anything wrong with the award, people will criticize him. You are a local official, how can you go beyond the scope of your duties to report on meritorious deeds? Lv Gongtao finally dismissed the matter after listening. Lv Gongtao recommended Wang Anli to the imperial court, and after Shensong called Wang Anli to respond, he wanted to appoint him immediately. At this time, Wang Anshi was in

古文：神宗数留与语，受诏注《诗》、《书》义，擢天章阁待制兼侍讲。
现代文：有一天神宗遇见他，命他坐下，有关官员说八品官没有赐座的，皇上即特别地赐给他座。
English: One day, Shenzong met him and ordered him to sit down. The relevant officials said that if the eighth-ranked official was not given a seat, the emperor would specially give him a seat.

古文：书成，迁龙图阁直学士，以病辞不拜。
现代文：迁任直集贤院，出任知润州、湖州，又召回任开封府判官。
English: He was transferred to Jishixianin, served as the magistrate of Zhirong Prefecture and Huzhou, and was recalled to serve as the magistrate of Kaifeng Prefecture.

古文：安石更张政事，雱实导之。常称商鞅为豪杰之士，言不诛异议者法不行。
现代文：曾与开封府尹一起向皇上奏事，奏事完后，皇上单独留下王安礼，向他询问一些国家大事，对他的意见，皇上很赏识，并加以采纳。入直舍人院、同修起居注。
English: He once made a report to the emperor together with Kaifeng Fufu Yin. After the report was completed, the emperor left Wang Anli alone and asked him about some national events. The emperor appreciated his opinion and adopted it. He was admitted to the Zhizhong People's Hospital and began to live with a practitioner.

古文：安石与程颢语，雱囚首跣足，携妇人冠以出，问父所言何事。
现代文：苏轼因作诗讽刺新法下御史狱，情势很危急，没有人敢救他。王安礼则坦然地说 ：自古以来胸怀大度的君主，是不会因别人的言语有什么不当而治他的罪的。
English: Su Shi, imprisoned for writing a poem satirizing the new law, is in a critical situation, and no one dares to save him. Wang Anli said calmly: Since ancient times, a magnanimous monarch would not punish his sin because of someone else's words.

古文：曰： 以新法数为人所阻，故与程君议。 雱大言曰： 枭韩琦、富弼之头于市，则法行矣。 安石遽曰： 儿误矣。 卒时才三十三，特赠左谏议大夫。唐坰者，以父任得官。
现代文：苏轼以他的才干自发奋起，认为爵位可以很快得到，而现在却仍然这样碌碌无为，他的心中不能没有抱怨。今天如果按理治他的罪，我担心以后人们会说陛下不能容纳人哪。 
English: Su Shi used his talent to rise up spontaneously, thinking that a knighthood could be obtained quickly, but now he is still so idle, his heart can't help but complain. If he is punished for his crime today, I'm afraid that people will say in the future that His Majesty can't accommodate people.

古文：熙宁初，上书云： 秦二世制于赵高，乃失之弱，非失之强。 神宗悦其言。
现代文：神宗说 ：我本来就不会深责他，现在既然你为他求情，我就宽赦他。你出去之后，不要把这事说出去了，苏轼刚引起众人的怨恨，我恐怕有人会拿这件事来害你。 
English: Shenzong said, "I would not have blamed him, but now that you have interceded for him, I will forgive him. After you go out, do not talk about this matter. Su Shi has just aroused the resentment of many people. I am afraid that someone will use this matter to harm you."

古文：又云： 青苗法不行，宜斩大臣异议如韩琦者数人。 安石尤喜之，荐使对，赐进士出身，为崇文校书。上薄其人，除知钱塘县。
现代文：李定、张都要王安礼不要解救苏轼，王安礼没有答应，因此苏轼只受到轻微的处罚。王安礼进升知制诰。天上彗星出现，皇上下诏征求大家直言政事之得失。王安礼上疏说： 人间有失误，天象就会相应地反映出来。
English: Both Li Ding and Zhang asked Wang Anli not to rescue Su Shi, but Wang Anli did not agree, so Su Shi only received a light punishment. Wang Anli was promoted to the imperial court. When a comet appeared in the sky, the emperor issued an imperial edict asking everyone to speak frankly about the merits and demerits of politics. Wang Anli said: If there are mistakes in the human world, the celestial will be reflected accordingly.

古文：安石欲留之，乃令邓绾荐为御史，遂除太子中允。
现代文：陛下有仁爱之心，但下面的人并不太清楚。之所以会这样，我想主要是您左右的大臣没有能够尽忠尽责，甚至有奸邪小人。
English: Your Majesty has a benevolent heart, but the people below don't quite know it. I think the reason for this is that the ministers around you have not been able to fulfill their duties faithfully, and there are even traitors.

古文：数月，将用为谏官，安石疑其轻脱，将背己立名，不除职，以本官同知谏院，非故事也。
现代文：您所认为是忠臣的人实际上不忠，认为是不贤良的人却是贤臣，乘机谋利的都殚精竭力去谋取私利了，这样就足以破坏天地之阴阳而引起星象的变化。
English: The person you think is a loyal subject is actually disloyal, the person you think is not virtuous is actually a wise subject, and the Tudor who took advantage of the opportunity to seek profit has made every effort to seek personal gain. This is enough to destroy the yin and yang of heaven and earth and cause changes in the stars.

古文：坰果怒安石易己，凡奏二十疏，论时事，皆留中不出。
现代文：望陛下好好地考察一下身边亲近的人，堵塞奸邪小人投机钻营的路。
English: I hope His Majesty will take a good look at the people close to him and block the path of the villain's speculation.

古文：乃因百官起居日，扣陛请对，上令谕以他日，坰伏地不起，遂召升殿。
现代文：至于用祭祀、祈祷上天，或者改革变更一下过去的政策措施等办法，恐怕是无法应付上天的。 皇上看完他的奏疏后连连赞叹，对他说： 王王圭想要你一一陈述上来，我也曾认为不应当阻隔人们的言论，而使自己蒙蔽自己。
English: As for the methods of offering sacrifices, praying to the heavens, or reforming and changing the past policies and measures, I am afraid it is impossible to cope with the heavens. After the emperor watched his recitation, he repeatedly praised and said to him: Wang Wang Gui wants you to come up one by one. I also thought that we should not block people's speech, but let ourselves be blinded.

古文：坰至御坐前，进曰： 臣所言，皆大臣不法，请对陛下一一陈之。 乃措笏展疏，目安石曰： 王安石近御坐，听札子。 安石迟迟，坰诃曰： 陛下前犹敢如此，在外可知！ 安石悚然而进。
现代文：现在我仍然犯了一叶障目，不见泰山的错误，你在我身边，我却没有发现你，就是这样的。
English: Now I still make the mistake of not seeing Tarzan. You are beside me, but I don't see you. That's how it is.

古文：坰大声宣读，凡六十条，大略以 安石专作威福，曾布等表里擅权，天下但知惮安石威权，不复知有陛下。
现代文：从后你应当主动地多多进言。 以翰林学士身份知开封府，在职位上，他雷厉风行，只要有事他马上处理，从不拖拉。
English: From now on, you should take the initiative to make more and more suggestions.With the status of Hanlin Scholar, he knows how to open the Fufu, in the position, he is vigorous, as long as there is something he will deal with immediately, never delay.

古文：文彦博、冯京知而不敢言。
现代文：他的前任审理得不十分妥当的案子，以及立案后没有处理的案子很多，牵涉到几万人。
English: There are many cases that were not properly tried by his predecessor, as well as cases that were not dealt with after they were filed, involving tens of thousands of people.

古文：王珪曲事安石，无异厮仆。 且读且目珪，珪惭惧俯首。 元绛、薛向、陈绎，安石颐指气使，无异家奴。
现代文：王安礼接手处理，不到三个月，三狱院以及畿、赤县十九个邑的囚室都空了。审理案件的情况公布于府衙门前，辽的使者从府衙前经过看到了，对王安礼夸奖不已。
English: Wang Anli took over the handling, and in less than three months, the three prisons and the cells of nineteen towns in Gili and Aka counties were empty. The status of the trial of the case was announced in front of the government office. Liao's envoy saw it from the front of the government office and praised Wang Anli.

古文：张琥、李定为安石爪牙，台官张商英乃安石鹰犬。
现代文：皇上听后高兴地说道 ：春秋时秦国的内史廖从容地祭祀，破坏了由余的阴谋。现在安礼勤勉治政，使邻国震动，这与古人相比都毫不逊色。 
English: After listening, the emperor said happily, "During the Spring and Autumn Periods of the Qin Dynasty, Inner Historian Liao calmly performed sacrifices and destroyed Yu Yu's plot. Now, Anli diligently administers the government and makes the neighboring countries shake, which is no less than the ancients.

古文：逆意者虽贤为不肖，附己者虽不肖为贤。 至诋为李林甫、卢杞。
现代文：于是特别提升了王安礼一级。皇上多次死去皇子，太史说民间墓地隔京城太近了，所以不利于皇朝的后代，诏令他们将墓地都改迁，计有数十万座，群情汹汹，对此很不满。
English: As a result, Wang Anli was specially upgraded to the first level. The emperor died many times, and the emperor said that the folk cemetery was too close to the capital, so it was not conducive to the descendants of the imperial dynasty. He ordered them to relocate the cemeteries, totaling hundreds of thousands. The crowd was fierce, and they were very dissatisfied with this.

古文：上屡止之，坰慷慨自若，略不退慑。读已，下殿再拜而退。
现代文：王安礼上奏说 ：文王占卜说要传世三十年，他治政首先就是掩埋路边的尸骨，而没有听说他为了利其后代而要迁移百姓墓地的事。 
English: Wang Anli said at the beginning of the speech: King Wen's divination said that he would live for thirty years. The first thing he did when he governed was to bury the bones on the roadside, but he did not hear that he wanted to move the people's cemetery in order to benefit his descendants.

古文：侍臣卫士，相顾失色，安石为之请去。
现代文：皇上即诏令停止搬迁。巡视的人接连收到几封状告有人图谋不轨的匿名信，牵涉到一百多家。
English: The emperor immediately issued an edict to stop the relocation. The inspectors received several anonymous letters in quick succession, accusing someone of plotting a crime, implicating more than a hundred people.

古文：阁门纠其渎乱朝仪，贬潮州别驾。
现代文：皇上将匿名信交给王安礼去办理，说： 尽快处理这件事。 
English: The emperor gave the anonymous letter to Wang Anli to handle, saying: Deal with this matter as soon as possible.

古文：邓绾申救之，且自劾缪举。
现代文：王安礼对照那些信，发现它们所指的都大致相同，只有最后一封信加了三个人，其中有一个姓薛的。
English: Wang Anli compared those letters and found that they all referred to roughly the same thing, only the last letter added three people, one of whom was surnamed Xue.

古文：安石曰： 此素狂，不足责。 改监广州军资库，后徙吉州酒税，卒官。
现代文：看到这里，他笑道： 我清楚了。 王安礼把姓薛的召来问道 ：难道有人对你很不满吗？ 那人回答说： 有人拿笔来要我买，我拒绝了。
English: When he saw this, he smiled and said, "I understand." Wang Anli summoned a man named Xue and asked, "Is there someone who is very dissatisfied with you?" The man replied, "Someone brought me a pen and asked me to buy it, but I refused."

古文：论曰：朱熹尝论安石 以文章节行高一世，而尤以道德经济为己任。被遇神宗，致位宰相，世方仰其有为，庶几复见二帝三王之盛。
现代文：他去的时候很不高兴，好像是怀恨在心的样子。 王安礼下令逮捕了这个人，经审问后知道果然是他写的匿名信，于是将他斩首示众，而没有抓一个他所告发的人。此事之后，京师的人都认为王安礼非常神明。
English: When he went, he was very unhappy, as if he had a grudge. Wang Anli ordered the arrest of this person, and after interrogation, he found out that it was indeed an anonymous letter he had written, so he beheaded him in public, but did not catch a person he had denounced. After this incident, people in Beijing thought that Wang Anli was very divine.

古文：而安石乃汲汲以财利兵革为先务，引用凶邪，排摈忠直，躁迫强戾，使天下之人，嚣然丧其乐生之心。卒之群奸嗣虐，流毒四海，至于崇宁、宣和之际，而祸乱极矣 。
现代文：皇族有一个叫令马非的人，用数十万钱买了一个妾，过了很久又把那个妾赶回去了，并要官府帮他追回原来的钱。王安礼审视了那个妾，发现她的面部被火烧伤了，于是上奏说： 这个妾之所以值数十万钱，是因为她当初很有姿色。
English: A member of the imperial family named Ling Mafei bought a concubine with hundreds of thousands of money. After a long time, he drove the concubine back and asked the government to help him recover the original money. Wang Anli examined the concubine and found that her face was burned by fire, so he said: The reason why this concubine is worth hundreds of thousands of money is because she was very attractive at first.

古文：此天下之公言也。昔神宗欲命相，问韩琦曰： 安石何如？ 对曰： 安石为翰林学士则有余，处辅弼之地则不可。 神宗不听，遂相安石。
现代文：现在她被火烧伤了，就再也卖不出去了，这与施行炮烙的刑法有什么分别。现在不仅不能帮令马非追回原来的钱，反而还要加罚他，作为对他的警戒。 皇上诏令按他的意思办，扣掉令马非的俸禄。
English: Now that she has been burned by the fire, she can no longer sell it, which is different from the criminal law of branding. Now, not only can we not help Ma Fei recover the original money, but we also have to punish him as a warning to him. The emperor decreed to do as he wanted and deduct Ma Fei's salary.

古文：呜呼！此虽宋氏之不幸，亦安石之不幸也。
现代文：后宫所用的油帘子，在当初与作坊主谈好要管三年，三年内如果损坏了就要还钱。
English: The oil curtains used in the harem were originally negotiated with the craftsmen to be managed for three years, and if they were damaged within three years, they would have to pay back the money.

古文：王安礼，字和甫，安石之弟也。
现代文：结果这些油帘子才用了一年就坏了。
English: As a result, these oil curtains were only used for a year before they broke.

古文：早登科，从河东唐介辟。
现代文：宫中宦官拿着这些帘子到官府，要官府督促作坊主履行原来的诺言，语气非常傲慢。
English: The eunuch of the palace took these curtains to the government office to urge the craftsman to fulfill his original promise. The tone was very arrogant.

古文：熙宁中，鄜延路城啰兀，河东发民四万负饷，宣抚使韩绛檄使佐役，后帅吕公弼将从之。
现代文：王安礼说 ：难道这些油帘子不是用得不是地方，而被风雨搞坏了的吗？如果都这样，那造油帘子的人再也收不到钱了。你们原来的契约不能再用了。 
English: Wang Anli said, "Weren't these oil curtains used in the wrong place, and were destroyed by the wind and rain? If this is the case, the person who made the oil curtains will no longer receive any money. Your original contract can no longer be used."

古文：安礼争曰： 民兵不习武事，今驱之深入，此不为寇所乘，则冻饿而死尔，宜亟罢遣。 公弼用其言，民得归，而他路遇敌者，全军皆覆。
现代文：最后王安礼硬是没有帮他们追还油帘子的钱。
English: In the end, Wang Anli did not help them recover the money.

古文：公弼执安礼手言曰： 四万之众，岂偶然哉。
现代文：从此宗室、宫中的人都很忌惮他了。元丰四年，分建三省，设立执政，王安礼被拜为中大夫、尚书右丞。
English: In the fourth year of Yuanfeng, when the three provinces were separated and the government was established, Wang Anli was worshipped as Zhongdafu and Shangshuyujo.

古文：果有阴德，相与共之。 
现代文：后转为左丞。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Sojo.

古文：初，绛专爵赏，既上最，多失实，公弼以状闻。
现代文：宋朝兴兵讨伐夏国，泾原承受梁同上奏 ：转运使叶康直所运送的粮饷已经腐坏了，不能吃。 
English: The Song Dynasty's Xinghe soldiers fought against the Xia Kingdom, and Huan Yuan suffered the same fate as Liang: the grain sacks transported by Ye Kangzhong were rotten and could not be eaten.

古文：诏即河东议功，公弼将受之。安礼曰： 宣抚使以宰相节制诸道，且许便宜，封授一有不韪，人犹得非之。
现代文：皇上大怒，说： 高价买入粮食，还要花钱运那么远，却完全腐坏不能吃，这是白白浪费民力，叶康直应当斩首。 王安礼说 ：这都只是梁同一个人的话，我怀疑未必是真的，应当仔细调查一下。 
English: The emperor was furious and said, "It is a waste of people's energy to buy grain at a high price and transport it so far at great expense, only to find that it is completely rotten and cannot be eaten. Ye Kangzhi should be beheaded." Wang Anli said, "These are just the words of Liang and the same person. I suspect that they may not be true, and a careful investigation should be made."

古文：公藩臣，乃欲隃进功状于非其任邪？ 公弼遽辞。遂荐安礼于朝，神宗召对，欲骤用之。
现代文：于是派判官张大宁与梁同检查所运到的粮饷，同时把叶康直抓起来等待检查的结果。最后，经过检查发现可以食用的米有十之八九，皇上这才释怀，赦免了叶康直。这时，朝廷军队讨伐夏国不顺利，李宪想再举兵攻打。
English: So he sent the judge Zhang Daining and Liang Tong to inspect the grain sacks that had been transported, and at the same time arrested Ye Kang Zhi to await the results of the inspection. Finally, after the inspection, it was found that there was 89% of rice that could be eaten, and the emperor was relieved and pardoned Ye Kang Zhi. At this time, the imperial army's crusade against Xia Guo was not successful, and Li Xian wanted to raise an army to attack again.

古文：安石当国，辞，以为著作佐郎、崇文院校书。
现代文：神宗就此事征求大臣的意见，王王圭说： 过去之所以失败是因为军用不够，朝廷现在拿出五百万缗钱钞以供应军队，这完全够了。 
English: Shenzong sought the minister's opinion on this matter, and Wang Wanggui said: The reason for the failure in the past was because of insufficient military forces. The imperial court has now come up with five million baht banknotes to supply the army, which is completely enough.

古文：他日得见，命之坐，有司言八品官无赐坐者，特命之。
现代文：王安礼说： 纸钞不能吃，必须把它换成铁钱，铁钱又必须换成粮食才能吃。
English: Wang Anli said: Paper money cannot be eaten, it must be exchanged for iron money, and iron money must be exchanged for grain before it can be eaten.

古文：迁直集贤院，出知润州、湖州，召为开封府判官。
现代文：从现在到出征的日期只有两个月，这怎么来得及呢。 神宗说 ：李宪说这都准备好了，他们宦官都能办到，你们难道不能吗？
English: There are only two months between now and the date of the expedition, so how can it be too late?Shenzong said, "Li Xian said that everything is ready, and their eunuchs can do it, but can't you?

古文：尝偕尹奏事，既退，独留访以天下事，帝甚乡纳。
现代文：唐朝平定淮蔡时，只有裴度的意见与皇上一样。
English: When the Tang Dynasty subdued Huai Cai, only Pei Du's opinion was the same as the emperor's.

古文：直舍人院、同修起居注。
现代文：现在这些主张不出自于你们这些大臣，而出自于宦官，我真为你们感到羞耻。 
English: Now these claims do not come from you ministers, they come from eunuchs, and I am truly ashamed of you.

古文：苏轼下御史狱，势危甚，无敢救者。
现代文：王安礼说： 唐代之淮西只是三个州，平定时有裴度出谋划策，李光颜、李訫带兵，而还要招集全国的兵力，历经数年才平定。
English: Wang Anli said: Huaxi and Xi'an in the Tang Dynasty were only three provinces. During the pacification, Pei Du made a plan and Li Guangyan and Li Xi led the troops. However, it took several years to pacify Huaxi and Xi'an.

古文：安礼从容言： 自古大度之主，不以言语罪人。轼以才自奋，谓爵位可立取，顾录录如此，其心不能无觖望。
现代文：现在夏国疆域之大不是淮蔡可以比的，李宪的才干不能和裴度比，带兵的将领也没有李光颜、李訫那样的干将，如果硬是要发兵去打的话，恐怕不会完全如您的愿。 
English: At present, the size of Xia's territory is not comparable to that of Huai Cai, Li Xian's talent is not comparable to that of Pei Du, and the generals leading the troops are not as capable as Li Guangyan and Li Jun. If you insist on sending troops to fight, I'm afraid it won't be exactly as you wish.

古文：今一旦致于理，恐后世谓陛下不能容才。
现代文：听了王安礼的话后，神宗才醒悟过来，停止了举兵。
English: After listening to Wang Anli's words, Shenzong came to his senses and stopped raising troops.

古文：帝曰： 朕固不深谴也，行为卿贳之。卿第去，勿漏言，轼方贾怨于众，恐言者缘以害卿也。 李定、张璪皆擿使勿救，安礼不答，轼以故得轻比。
现代文：后来皇上想任李宪为节度使，王安礼又认为不行。御史中丞舒上奏诋毁执政，并说： 尚书省没有建立好文件档案，应当治有关官吏的罪。 
English: Later, the emperor wanted to appoint Li Xian as the festival envoy, but Wang Anli thought it was not possible. Gishi Chujo Shu Shangso slandered the government and said: Shangshu did not establish a good document archive, and the relevant officials should be punished.

古文：后欲除宪节度使，安礼又以为不可。御史中丞舒亶上章诋执政，且言： 尚书不置录目，有旨按吏罪。 安礼请取台录以为式，乃与省中同，遂并列亶他事，亶坐废。徐禧计议边事，安礼曰： 禧志大才疏，必误国。 及永乐败书闻，帝曰： 安礼每劝朕勿用兵，少置狱，盖为是也。 
现代文：王安礼以御史台的文件档案为准，对照检查尚书省的，结果两者相同，于是将舒这次妄上奏章的事以及其他的事一并列举弹劾，舒被罢官。徐禧计议边防之事，王安礼说： 徐禧志大才疏，以后一定会误国。 等到徐禧在永乐城战败的消息传到宫中后，皇上说： 王安礼常常劝我不要用兵，少置监狱，大多都是对的。 
English: Wang Anli took the documents and archives of the Imperial Historical Records Office as the standard, and compared and examined those of Shang Shuxuan, and the results of both were the same. Therefore, he listed the impeachment of Shu for this time and other things, and Shu was dismissed. Xu Xiyi planned the border defense, Wang Anli said: Xu Xiyi is a great talent, and he will definitely mislead the country in the future. When the news of Xu Xiyi's defeat in Yongle City reached the palace, the emperor said: Wang Anli often advised me not to use soldiers, and to have fewer prisons, and most of them were right.

古文：久之，御史张汝贤论其过，以端明殿学士知江宁府，汝贤亦罢。
现代文：过了很久，御史张汝贤上书弹劾王安礼，王安礼被贬出，以端明殿学士身份知江宁府，张汝贤也被罢免。
English: After a long time, the historian Zhang Ruxian wrote a letter to impeach Wang Anli. Wang Anli was ousted and sent to Jiangning Prefecture as a Duanming Palace scholar. Zhang Ruxian was also dismissed.

古文：元祐中，加资政殿学士，历扬、青、蔡三州。
现代文：元年间，加王安礼资政殿学士衔，历知扬、青、蔡三州。
English: In the first year of the year, Wang Anli was awarded the bachelor's degree of Zhengden, and Zhi Yang, Qing and Cai Sanzhou were awarded the bachelor's degree.

古文：又为御史言，失学士，移舒州。
现代文：又被御史弹劾，失掉学士衔，移任知舒州。
English: He was also impeached by the Imperial Historian, lost his bachelor's degree, and transferred to Chishuzhou.

古文：绍圣初，还职，知永兴军。
现代文：绍圣初年，恢复原职，知永兴军。
English: In the first year of Shaosheng, he resumed his original position and became the commander of the Yongxing Army.

古文：二年，知太原府。
现代文：绍圣二年，知太原府。
English: In the second year of Shoshen, Chitahara-fu.

古文：苦风痹，卧帐中决事，下不敢欺。
现代文：得风寒病，四肢麻木不能行走，只得卧床办公，但下面的人都不敢欺瞒他。
English: He had cold and wind, his limbs were numb and he couldn't walk, so he had to stay in bed and work, but no one below him dared to lie to him.

古文：卒，年六十二，赠右银青光禄大夫。
现代文：去世时，六十二岁。赠他为右银青光禄大夫。
English: At the time of his death, he was sixty-two years old. He presented him with the title of "Ugyin Seiko Roku Dokufu."

古文：安礼伟风仪，论议明辨，常以经纶自任，而阔略细谨，以故数诒口语云。
现代文：王安礼仪表不凡，很有气度，议事辩论，常以儒家正统自居，却又有不切实际和保守之处，所以多次受到别人的指责。
English: Wang Anli's manners are extraordinary, he is very dignified, he is good at deliberation and debate, and he often claims to be a Confucian orthodox, but he is also unrealistic and conservative, so he has been criticized by others many times.

古文：王安国，字平甫，安礼之弟也。
现代文：王安国，字平甫，是王安礼的弟弟。
English: Wang An Guo, also known as Ping Fu, was the younger brother of Wang Anli.

古文：幼敏悟，未尝从学，而文词天成。
现代文：幼小时即非常聪明，悟性极高，没有上过学，而作文赋词自然天成。
English: At a young age, they are very smart and highly intelligent. They haven't been to school, and writing words comes naturally.

古文：年十二，出所为诗、铭、论、赋数十篇示人，语皆警拔，遂以文章闻于世，士大夫交口誉之。
现代文：十二岁时，将他所作的诗、铭文、文论、词赋数十篇拿给别人看，多为警世拔俗之语，于是以善写文章著称于世，士大夫们都对他交口称赞。
English: At the age of twelve, he showed dozens of his poems, inscriptions, literary theories, and prose to others, mostly as a warning to the world, so he was famous in the world for his ability to write articles, and the scholars all praised him.

古文：于书无所不通，数举进士，又举茂材异等，有司考其所献序言为第一，以母丧不试，庐于墓三年。
现代文：对于书他无所不通，多次赴考进士，又赴考茂才，有关官员考察他所写的文章后把他列为第一名，因母亲去世，没有任用。
English: He knew everything about books. He repeatedly took the entrance examination for Shinshi and the entrance examination for Maocai. After the relevant officials examined the articles he had written, they ranked him first. Due to his mother's death, he was not appointed.

古文：熙宁初，韩绛荐其材行，召试，赐及第，除西京国子教授。
现代文：此后他在母亲墓旁结庐服丧三年。熙宁初年，韩绛看中他的才华而举荐他，赐进士及第，任命他为西京国子教授。
English: After that, he was buried next to his mother's grave for three years. In the first year of Xining, Han Zheng took a fancy to his talent and recommended him, gave him a scholarship and a rank, and appointed him as a professor of West Beijing.

古文：官满，至京师，上以安石故，赐对。
现代文：任期满，回到京师，皇上因王安石的缘故，特赐王安国对答。
English: At the end of his term of office, he returned to the Beijing division, and the emperor gave Wang An Guo a special reply because of Wang Anshi.

古文：帝曰： 卿学问通古今，以汉文帝为何如主？ 对曰： 三代以后未有也。 帝曰： 但恨其才不能立法更制尔。 对曰： 文帝自代来，入未央宫，定变故俄顷呼吸间，恐无才者不能。
现代文：皇上说 ：不过遗憾的是他的才能不能立法改制啊。 王安国回答说 ：汉文帝自以代王身份入主未央宫以来，呼吸之间就将判乱平定，恐怕没有才能的人是无法做到这一点的。
English: The emperor said, "But it's a pity that his talent can't legislatively reform the system." Wang Anguo replied, "Since Emperor Hanwen entered the Weiyang Palace as the acting king, he has been able to calm down the chaos between breaths. I'm afraid that people without talent can't do this."

古文：至用贾谊言，待群臣有节，专务以德化民，海内兴于礼义，几致刑措，则文帝加有才一等矣。 帝曰： 王猛佐苻坚，以蕞尔国而令必行，今朕以天下之大，不能使人，何也？ 曰： 猛教坚以峻刑法杀人，致秦祚不传世，今刻薄小人，必有以是误陛下者。
现代文：至于采纳贾谊的意见，礼节地对待群臣，专门以德教化民众，国家因礼义而振兴，几乎使刑法废置不用，则文帝的才能又高人一等了。 皇上问： 王猛辅佐苻坚，凭区区小国而能令行禁止，现在我凭如此广阔的天下，却没有人真正供我使用，这是什么原因呢？ 王安国回答说 ：王猛教给苻坚用严刑峻法来统治国家，大肆杀戮，致使前秦的统治不能长久，现在一定也有奸诈、刻薄的小人以此来误导陛下。
English: As for adopting the opinion of the courtier, treating the courtiers with courtesy, educating the people with virtue, revitalizing the country with courtesy and righteousness, and almost abolishing the use of criminal law, the talent of Emperor Wen is second to none.The emperor asked: Wang Mengshuo, the assistant of Qian Jian, was able to impose a ban on the basis of a small country, but now I have such a vast world, but no one is really available for my use, what is the reason? Wang Anguo replied: Wang Mengjia gave Qian Jian the use of severe punishment to rule the country, killing indiscriminately, so that the former Qin

古文：愿颛以尧、舜、三代为法，则下岂有不从者乎。 又问： 卿兄秉政，外论谓何？ 曰： 恨知人不明，聚敛太急尔。 帝默然不悦，由是别无恩命，止授崇文院校书，后改秘阁校理。
现代文：如果陛下能效法尧、舜、三代，那谁不拥护呢？ 皇上又问： 你的兄长执政，外面的看法怎么样？ 王安国说 ：认为不能知人善任，聚敛太急了。 皇上听后沉默不语，很不高兴，从此对王安国没有再恩加提拔，只是授任崇文院校书，后改任秘阁校理。
English: If His Majesty can follow the example of the three generations, then who would not support it? The emperor also asked: Your brother is in power, what is the outside opinion? Wang Anguo said: I think it is impossible to know who is good at what, it is too urgent to gather. The emperor was silent after listening and was very unhappy. From then on, there was no further promotion for Wang Anguo, but he was only awarded the title of Chongwen College Professor, and later he was reassigned as Privy Councilor.

古文：屡以新法力谏安石，又质责曾布误其兄，深恶吕惠卿之奸。
现代文：王安国曾就新法之事劝谏王安石，又指责曾布误了他的哥哥，也非常讨厌吕惠卿的奸诈。
English: Wang An Guo had advised Wang Anshi on the matter of the new law, and accused Wang Anshi of having misled his brother. Wang An Guo also hated Lu Huiqing's treachery.

古文：先是，安国教授西京，颇溺于声色，安石在相位，以书戒之曰： 宜放郑声。 安国复书曰 亦愿兄远佞人。 惠卿衔之。
现代文：以前，王安国任教西京时，沉溺于声色之中。
English: In the past, when Wang Anguo was teaching in Xijing, he indulged in the color of his voice.

古文：及安石罢相，惠卿遂因郑侠事陷安国，坐夺官，放归田里。
现代文：等到王安石被罢免宰相，吕惠卿即借郑侠之事陷害王安国，罢免了他的官职，并把他放归家乡。
English: When Wang Anshi was dismissed as prime minister, Lu Huiqing took advantage of the Zhengxia incident to frame Wang Anguo, dismissed him from his post, and sent him back to his hometown.

古文：诏以谕安石，安石对使者泣下。
现代文：皇上下诏谕示王安石，王安石面对使者怆然泪下。
English: The imperial edict was sent to Wang Anshi, and Wang Anshi burst into tears in front of the messenger.

古文：既而复其官，命下而安国卒，年四十七。
现代文：不久恢复了王安国的官职，然而诏令下达时王安国已死了。当时他年仅四十七岁。
English: Wang Ankuo was soon reinstated, but he was dead by the time the edict was issued, aged just 47.

