古文：李奴马拯张升杨真王居贞归生郑思远李琢谯本
现代文：李奴马拯张升杨真王居贞归生郑思远李琢谯本
English: Li Numa rescues Zhang Sheng, Yang Zhen, Wang Ju Zhen is reborn, Zheng Siyuan, Li Tuo Rongpeng

古文：李奴
现代文：李奴
English: Li Nu

古文：词举人姓李不得名，寄居宣州山中。
现代文：有一个举人姓李，不知他叫什么名字，寄居在宣州山中。
English: There was a man surnamed Li, I don't know what his name was, who lived in the mountains of Xuanzhou.

古文：常使一奴。
现代文：他平常使用一位奴仆。
English: He usually employs a manservant.

古文：奴颇慵惰，李数鞭笞。
现代文：这位奴仆很懒惰，李举人多次鞭打他。
English: The manservant was lazy, and Li Huan repeatedly whipped him.

古文：多有忿恨。
现代文：他心里十分愤恨。
English: He was filled with rage.

古文：唐元和九年，李与二友人会于别墅，时呼奴，奴已睡。
现代文：唐朝元和九年，李举人与两位友人在别墅会聚，当时呼唤奴仆。奴仆已经睡了。
English: In the 9th year of the 1st month of the 1st year of the 1st month of the 9th year of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：李大怒，鞭之数十。
现代文：李举人很生气，打了奴仆几十鞭子。
English: Li Fuxiong was very angry and beat his servant with dozens of whips.

古文：奴怀恚恨，出谓同侪曰： 今是闰年，人传多虎，何不食我？ 
现代文：奴仆心怀愤怒，出来对同伴们讲： 今年是闰年，人家都传说今年多虎，为什么不让我遇上虎，把我吃了！ 
English: With anger in his heart, the slave came out and said to his companions: This year is a leap year. People say that there will be many tigers this year. Why not let me meet a tiger and let it eat me!

古文：言讫，出门。
现代文：说完出门，忽然听到他大叫一声。
English: After he finished speaking, he went out and was suddenly heard shouting.

古文：忽闻叫声，奴辈寻逐，无所见。
现代文：奴仆们寻声跑出来，什么也没看见。
English: The servants ran out at the sound and saw nothing.

古文：循虎迹，十余里溪边，奴已食讫一半。
现代文：循着虎的踪迹，找到十多里外的溪边，见那奴仆已被虎吃掉一半了。
English: He followed the tiger's trail and found a stream more than ten miles away. He saw that the servant had been half eaten by the tiger.

古文：其衣服及巾鞋，皆叠摺置于草上。
现代文：他的衣报和巾鞋，全都叠得整整齐齐的放在草地上。
English: His clothes and shoes were all neatly stacked on the grass.

古文：盖虎能役使所杀者魂神所为也。马拯
现代文：大概是老虎役使被吃的人的魂干的。马拯
English: It was probably the tiger that caused the soul of the person to be eaten.

古文：唐长庆中，有处士马拯性冲淡，好寻山水，不择险峭，尽能跻攀。
现代文：唐朝长庆年间，有一位处士名叫马拯。他性情冲淡，喜欢游览山水，无论无何险峻，他都可以登攀。
English: During the Changqing period of the Tang Dynasty, there was a clerk named Ma Zheng. He had a light temperament and liked to explore the landscape. No matter how steep it was, he could climb it.

古文：一日居湘中，因之衡山祝融峰，诣伏虎师。
现代文：有一天他住在湘中，于是就到了衡山祝融峰，到一位伏虎师那里去拜访。
English: One day he lived in Hunan, so he went to Hengshan Zhurongfeng to visit a tiger trainer.

古文：佛室内道场严洁，果食馨香，兼列白金皿于佛榻上。
现代文：佛室内道场庄严整洁，水果食品散发出馨香，又在佛床上陈列着一些白金器皿。
English: The dojo inside the Buddhist temple is stately and tidy, the fruit food emits a sweet fragrance, and some platinum utensils are displayed on the Buddha bed.

古文：见一老僧眉毫雪色，朴野魁梧。
现代文：他看见一位眉毛雪一样白的老和尚。 
English: He saw an old monk with snow-white eyebrows.

古文：甚喜拯来，使仆挈囊。
现代文：这老和尚身材魁梧，朴素粗放，很高兴他的到来。他让仆人拿着行囊。
English: The old monk, a burly, austere figure, was delighted to see him, and sent a servant to carry his bags.

古文：僧曰： 假君仆使，近县市少盐酪。 
现代文：老和尚说： 求您的仆人到县买一点盐酪可以吗？ 
English: The old monk said, "May I ask your servant to go to the county to buy some salted cheese?"

古文：拯许之。
现代文：他答应了，仆人就拿着钱下山去了。
English: He agreed, and the servant went down the mountain with the money.

古文：仆乃挈金下山去，僧亦不知去向。
现代文：老和尚也不知去向。
English: The old monk did not know where he was going.

古文：俄有一马沼山人亦独登此来，见拯，甚相慰悦。乃告拯曰： 适来道中，遇一虎食一人，不知谁氏之子。 
现代文：不多时有一个名叫马沼的山人也独自走上山来。山人见了马拯非常高兴，就告诉马拯说： 刚才在来路上，遇上一只老虎吃一个人，也不知道吃的是谁家的孩子。 
English: Not infrequently, a mountain man named Manuma would also come up the mountain alone. The mountain man was very happy to see Ma Zheng, and told Ma Zheng: "Just now, on my way here, I met a tiger eating a person, and I don't know whose child it was.

古文：说其服饰，乃拯仆夫也。
现代文：山人说了一下被害者的服饰，原来是马拯的仆人。
English: The mountain man said something about the victim's clothing, but it turned out to be Ma Zheng's servant.

古文：拯大骇。
现代文：马拯大吃一惊。
English: Ma Zheng was taken aback.

古文：沼又云： 遥见虎食人尽，乃脱皮，改服禅衣，为一老僧也。 
现代文：山人又说： 我远远地望见，老虎吃完了人，就脱掉虎皮，改穿禅衣，变成一个老和尚。
English: The mountain man also said, "I saw from a distance that when the tiger had finished eating the man, he took off his tiger skin, put on a Zen robe, and turned into an old monk.

古文：拯甚怖惧，及沼见僧曰： 只此是也。 
现代文：马拯非常恐惧。等到山人马沼看到老和尚，就告诉马拯说： 就是他！ 
English: Ma Zheng was very frightened. When the mountain man Manuma saw the old monk, he told Ma Zheng and said, "That's him!

古文：拯白僧曰： 马山人来云，某仆使至半山路，已被虎伤，奈何？ 
现代文：马拯对老和尚说： 马山人上来说，我的仆人走到半路上，已被虎害了，怎么办？ 
English: Ma Zheng said to the old monk: When the Masan people came up, they said that my servant had walked halfway and had been killed by a tiger. What should I do?

古文：僧怒曰： 贫道此境，山无虎狼，草无毒螫，路绝蛇虺，林绝鸱鸮。
现代文：老和尚生气地说： 贫僧这个地方，山上没有虎狼，草里没有毒虫，路旁没有蛇蝎，林中没有凶恶的鸟。
English: The old monk said angrily, "Poor monk, in this place, there are no tigers and wolves on the mountain, no poisonous insects in the grass, no snakes and scorpions by the roadside, and no vicious birds in the forest.

古文：无信妄语耳。 
现代文：你不要听信这类虚妄的话。 
English: Don't listen to such nonsense.

古文：拯细窥僧吻，犹带殷血。
现代文：马拯细看老和尚的嘴唇，还带有殷红的血痕。
English: Ma Zheng took a closer look at the old monk's lips, which were still stained with blood.

古文：向夜，二人宿其食堂，牢扃其户，明烛伺之。
现代文：将近黑夜马拯和马沼二人宿在老和尚的食堂里。他们牢牢地关闭了门窗，点亮了蜡烛等待着。
English: Around midnight, Ma Zheng and Manuma stayed in the old monk's dining hall. They firmly closed the doors and windows, lit candles and waited.

古文：夜已深，闻庭中有虎，怒首触其扉者三四，赖户壮而不隳。
现代文：夜深时，他们听到院子里有虎。老虎愤怒地用头撞了三四次门窗，全靠门窗结实没被撞坏。
English: In the middle of the night, they heard a tiger in the courtyard. The tiger angrily head-butted the doors and windows three or four times, and only the doors and windows remained intact.

古文：二子惧而焚香，虔诚叩首于堂内土偶宾头卢者。良久，闻土偶吟诗曰： 寅人但溺栏中水，午子须分艮畔金。
现代文：两个人害怕，就烧香，在一个叫宾头卢的泥像前虔诚地叩头。好久，听到泥像吟诗，说： 寅人但溺栏中水，午子须分艮畔金。
English: Afraid, the two men burned incense and prostrated themselves reverently in front of a mud statue called Bin Tou Lu. For a long time, they heard the mud statue chanting, saying: "Tibetans are drowning in water, but we must share the gold."

古文：若教特进重张弩，过去将军必损心。 
现代文：若教特进重张弩，过去将军必损心。 
English: If the Special Education Minister repeats Zhang Ye, the former general will be heartbroken.

古文：二子聆之而解其意，曰： 寅人虎也。栏中即井。午子即我耳。艮畔金即银皿耳。 
现代文：两个人听了理解了其中的意思，说：  寅人 就是虎； 栏中水 就是井； 午子 就是我； 艮畔金 就是银制器皿。 
English: The two men listened and understood the meaning, and said: the tiger is the tiger; the water in the column is the well; the fish is me; the gold on the bank of the river is the silverware.

古文：其下两句未能解。
现代文：那后两句没能理解。
English: I couldn't understand the last two sentences.

古文：及明，僧叩门曰： 郎君起来食粥。
现代文：到了天亮老和尚敲门说： 二位先生，请起来吃早饭啦！ 
English: When morning came, the old monk knocked at the door and said, "Gentlemen, please get up for breakfast!"

古文：二子方敢启关。
现代文：两个人这才敢打开门。
English: It took two people to open the door.

古文：食粥毕，二子计之曰： 此僧且在，我等何由下山？ 
现代文：吃完早饭，二人核计说： 这个老和尚还在这里，我们怎么下得了山？ 
English: After breakfast, the two of them checked and said, "This old monk is still here. How did we get down the mountain?"

古文：遂诈僧云： 井中有异。 
现代文：于是二人欺骗和尚说井里有异常的声音，让老和尚去看看是怎么回事。
English: So the two of them tricked the monk, saying that there was an unusual sound in the well, and asked the old monk to go and see what was going on.

古文：使窥之。细窥次，二子推僧堕井，其僧即时化为虎，二子以巨石镇之而毙矣。
现代文：见老和尚来到井边，他们就把老和尚推下井去。
English: When they saw the old monk coming to the well, they pushed him down the well.

古文：二子遂取银皿下山。
现代文：老和尚立即就变成老虎。
English: The old monk immediately turned into a tiger.

古文：近昏黑，而遇一猎人，于道旁张弓，树上为棚而居。
现代文：两个人用大石头把老虎打死了。于是他们俩就取了银制器皿下山。将近黄昏，他们遇上一个猎人。猎人在道旁张开弓弩，设下暗箭，在树上搭了一个棚子，住在上面。
English: Two men killed the tiger with a big rock, so they both took silver utensils and went down the mountain. Near dusk, they met a hunter. The hunter opened his bow and arrow beside the road, set a hidden arrow, built a shed on the tree and lived on it.

古文：语二子曰： 无触我机。 
现代文：猎人对他们两个人说： 不要触动我埋伏的机关。 
English: The hunter said to the two of them: Don't touch my ambush.

古文：兼谓二子曰： 去山下犹远，诸虎方暴，何不且上棚来？ 
现代文：又对二人说： 离山下还有挺远，老虎们正凶残，何不暂时到棚子上来避一避？ 
English: He also said to the two, "It is still quite far from the foot of the mountain, and the tigers are ferocious. Why don't you go to the shed for a while to avoid them?"

古文：二子悸怖，遂攀缘而上。
现代文：两个人一听说老虎就害怕，于是就爬了上去。
English: As soon as the two men heard about the tiger, they were scared and climbed up.

古文：将欲人定，忽三五十人过，或僧，或道，或丈夫，或妇女，歌吟者，戏舞者，前至弓所。
现代文：将要安定下来的时候，忽然有三五十人打此路过，有的是和尚，有的是道士，有的是男子，有的是妇女，唱歌吟诗的，玩笑起舞的，吵吵嚷嚷来到猎人张弓的地方。
English: When they were about to settle down, suddenly thirty or fifty people passed by, some monks, some Taoists, some men, some women, singing and chanting, joking and dancing, and noisily came to the place where the hunter had drawn his bow.

古文：众怒曰： 朝来被二贼杀我禅和，方今追捕之，又敢有人张我将军。 
现代文：这些人一齐生气地说： 早晨被两个贼小子杀了我们的禅和，现在正追捕他们，还有人敢张弓杀我们的将军？ 
English: These people all said angrily: In the morning, two young thieves killed our Zenwa, and now they are hunting them down. Would anyone else dare to kill our general with a bow?

古文：遂发其机而去。
现代文：于是他们触发了机关，把箭发出去。
English: So they triggered the mechanism and sent the arrow out.

古文：二子并闻其说，遂诘猎者。
现代文：继续往前走了。两个人都听到这些话，就问猎人是怎么回事。
English: They both heard these words and asked what had happened to the hunter.

古文：曰： 此是伥鬼，被虎所食之人也，为虎前呵道耳。 
现代文：猎人说： 这些都是为虎作伥的鬼，是被老虎吃了的人。他们这是在前边为老虎开道。 
English: The hunter said, "These are the ghosts who worked for the tiger, the ones who were eaten by the tiger. They are the ones who opened the way for the tiger.

古文：二子因徵猎者之姓氏。
现代文：两个人于是就问猎人的姓名。
English: The two men then asked for the hunter's name.

古文：曰： 名进，姓牛。 
现代文：猎人说他姓牛名进。
English: The hunter said his surname was Niu Mingjin.

古文：二子大喜曰： 土偶诗下句有验矣，特进乃牛进也，将军即此虎也。 
现代文：两个人高兴地说： 泥像诗的下两句有应验了， 特进 就是牛进， 将军 就是这个老虎！ 
English: The two people said happily: The next two sentences of the mud-like poem have been fulfilled, the special advance is the bull advance, and the general is this tiger!

古文：遂劝猎者重张其箭，猎者然之。
现代文：于是二人劝猎人重新张弓搭箭。猎人这样做了。
English: The two then urged the hunter to raise his bow and arrows again, which he did.

古文：张毕登棚，果有一虎哮吼而至，前足触机，箭乃中其三班，贯心而踣，逡巡。
现代文：做完又登上棚来。果然有一只老虎吼叫着来了，它前爪触到机关上，箭就正中它的心窝，它便倒下了。
English: When he had finished, he climbed back onto the shelf. Sure enough, a tiger came roaring, its front paws touched the mechanism, the arrow hit its heart, and it fell down.

古文：诸伥奔走却回，伏其虎，哭甚哀曰： 谁人又杀我将军？ 
现代文：很快，那些伥鬼一齐跑回来，趴到虎身上，哭得很是伤心，说： 是谁又杀了我们的将军？ 
English: Soon all the ruffians came running back, threw themselves on the tiger, wept bitterly, and said, "Who killed our general again?"

古文：二子怒而叱之曰： 汝辈无知下鬼，遭虎齿死。吾今为汝报仇，不能报谢，犹敢恸哭。
现代文：二人怒斥道： 你们这些无知的下贱鬼，让虎咬死了，我们为你们报了仇，你们不回报不感谢，还敢恸哭？
English: The two men angrily rebuked: "You ignorant lowlifes, let the tiger bite you to death, we have avenged you. If you do not reciprocate or thank us, how dare you cry?

古文：岂有为鬼，不灵如是？ 
现代文：哪有做鬼象你们这样不懂事理的！ 
English: Who the hell is as unreasonable as you!

古文：遂悄然。
现代文：于是一片悄悄然。
English: Then it all went quiet.

古文：忽有一鬼答曰： 都不知将军乃虎也，聆郎君之说，方大醒悟。 
现代文：忽然有一个鬼答应说： 我们全都不知道将军就是老虎，聆听了先生的话才恍然大悟。 
English: Suddenly, a ghost agreed and said, "We all didn't know that the general was a tiger. It was only after listening to the teacher's words that we suddenly realized."

古文：就其虎而骂之，感谢而去。
现代文：于是他们又在死虎跟前把虎好一顿骂，向二人及猎人表示感谢之后才离去。
English: So they scolded the tiger in front of the dead tiger and thanked the two people and the hunters before leaving.

古文：及明，二子分银与猎者而归耳。
现代文：等到天明，二人分一些银子给猎人，一块回去了。
English: When daylight came, the two of them gave some money to the hunter and went back together.

古文：张升
现代文：张升
English: Zhang Sheng

古文：唐故吏部员外张升随僖宗幸蜀，以年少未举，遂就摄涪州衙推。
现代文：唐朝吏部员外张升还没有做吏部员外的时候，曾经跟随僖宗皇帝幸蜀。因为他年少没有举进士第，就让他代理涪州的衙推。
English: When Zhang Sheng, an official of the Tang Dynasty, was not yet an official of the Tang Dynasty, he used to follow Emperor Xuanzong. Since he did not receive the title of a scholar when he was young, he was asked to represent Zhangzhou.

古文：州司差里正游章当直。
现代文：州司派里正游章值班。
English: The prefect of the prefecture is on duty.

古文：他日，遂告辞。问何往，章不答，但云： 有老母及妻男，乞时为存问。 
现代文：另外一天，游章就说要走，问他要到哪儿去，他不说，只是说他有老母亲和妻子儿子，要求时常地照顾他们。
English: On another day, when asked where he wanted to go, he did not say, only that he had an old mother, a wife and a son, and asked to take care of them from time to time.

古文：言讫而去。
现代文：说完他就走了。
English: After Bao Jiu's daughter finished speaking, Saburo left.

古文：所居近邻，夜闻章家大哭。
现代文：他家的近邻，夜里听到他们家大哭。
English: His next-door neighbours heard the family crying in the night.

古文：翌日，使问其由，言章夜辞其家，入山变为虎矣。
现代文：第二天让人一问，说游章夜里离开家了，进到山里变成了一只老虎。
English: The next day, when people asked about it, they said that the pilgrim left home at night and went into the mountains to become a tiger.

古文：二三日，又闻章家大惊叫。翼日，又问其故。曰： 章昨夜思家而归，自上半身已变，而尚能语。 
现代文：两三天之后，邻居又听到他们家大声地惊叫，第二天一问，说游章昨夜想家回来了，上半身已经变成虎，但是还能讲话。
English: Two or three days later, a neighbor heard the family screaming loudly again. The next day, he asked, "Didn't you come home last night feeling homesick? Your upper body has turned into a tiger, but you can still talk?"

古文：杨真
现代文：杨真
English: Yang Zhen

古文：邺中居人杨真者家富。
现代文：邺中有个叫杨真的居民，家里挺富。
English: There is a resident named Yang Zhen in Handan. His family is quite rich.

古文：平生癖好画虎，家由甚多画虎。每坐卧，必欲见之。
现代文：他平生酷爱画虎。因此他家里画的虎特别多，不管是躺着还是坐着，一定能看到。
English: He has always loved drawing tigers, so there are a lot of tigers in his family. Whether he is lying down or sitting up, he can always see them.

古文：后至老年，尽令家人毁去所画之虎。
现代文：后来他到了老年，让家人把家里所画的虎全都毁掉。
English: Later, in his old age, he asked his family to destroy all the tigers painted at home.

古文：至年九十忽卧疾，召儿孙谓之曰： 我平生不合癖好画虎，我好之时，见画虎则喜，不见则不乐。
现代文：到他九十岁的时候，他突然病倒了。他把儿孙们找到跟前说： 我平生不应该那么喜欢画虎。我那时候见了画虎就高兴，不见就不高兴。
English: When he was ninety years old, he suddenly fell ill. He called his children and grandchildren to him and said: I should never have liked drawing tigers so much. At that time, I was happy when I saw a drawing tiger, and unhappy when I didn't.

古文：我每梦中多与群虎游。我不欲言于儿孙辈。
现代文：我常常在梦里和一群老虎游玩，我不想对儿孙们讲。
English: I often play with a group of tigers in my dreams. I don't want to tell my children and grandchildren.

古文：至晚年尤甚。至于纵步游赏之处，往往见虎。
现代文：到了晚年就更厉害，一到任意游赏的时候就能看见老虎。
English: In his later years, he was even more powerful, and he could see tigers whenever he went on a tour.

古文：及问同游人。
现代文：等到我问同游的人，人家还没看见。
English: When I asked my travel companions, they hadn't seen it yet.

古文：寻乃尽毁去所画之虎。
现代文：这才害怕。不久我就把画的虎都毁了。
English: That's what scared me. I soon destroyed all my tigers.

古文：今卧疾后，又梦化身为虎儿。又梦觉既久，而方复人身。
现代文：这回病倒以后，又梦见我自己变成一只虎，梦醒之后老半天，才恢复人的身形。
English: After I fell ill this time, I had another dream that I had turned into a tiger. It took me half a day to wake up and regain my human form.

古文：我死之后，恐必化为虎，儿孙辈遇虎，慎勿杀之。 
现代文：我死之后，恐怕一定要变成老虎。儿孙们遇上老虎，可千万不要打死它。 
English: After I die, I'm afraid I'll have to turn into a tiger. If your children and grandchildren encounter a tiger, don't kill it.

古文：其夕卒，家方谋葬，其尸忽化为虎，跳跃而出。
现代文：那天晚上，老杨真就死了，家里正为他张罗葬礼，他的尸体忽然变成一只老虎，跳跃着跑出去。
English: That night, old Yang Zhen died. The family was planning a funeral for him, but his corpse suddenly turned into a tiger and leapt out.

古文：其一子逐出观之，其虎回赶其子，食之而去。
现代文：他的一个儿子窜出去看，他回来把儿子吃了才离去。
English: One of his sons took him out to look, and he came back and ate his son before leaving.

古文：数日，忽家人夜梦真归谓家人曰： 我已为虎，甚是安健。但离家时，便得一人食之，至今犹不饥。 
现代文：几天之后，家人忽然梦见杨真回来对家人说： 我已经变成老虎，身体很安康，只是在离家的时候吃了一个人，便直到现在也没饿。 
English: A few days later, the family suddenly dreamed that Yang Zhen came back and said to the family: I have turned into a tiger, my body is very healthy, I just ate a person when I left home, so I haven't been hungry until now.

古文：至曙，家之人疑不识其子而食之，述于邻里。有识者曰： 今为人，即识人之父子。既化虎，又何记为人之父也。
现代文：到天亮，家里人怀疑杨真是因为变成老虎以后不认识儿子了才把儿子吃了，就向邻人说了这件事，一个有知识的人说： 现在的人，即使是认识自己的儿子，已经变成了老虎，又怎么能记得自己是谁的父亲呢？
English: By dawn, the family suspected that Yang Zhen had eaten his son because he did not know his son after he had turned into a tiger, so he told the neighbors about it. A knowledgeable person said: Nowadays, even if a person knows his son has turned into a tiger, how can he remember whose father he is?

古文：夫人与兽，岂不殊耶？
现代文：人和兽不是有不同么？
English: Isn't there a difference between man and beast?

古文：若为虎尚记前生之事，人奚必记前生之事也。
现代文：如果做老虎还能记得前生的事，那么人也一定能记得前生的事。
English: If a tiger can remember things from a previous life, then a human being can certainly remember things from a previous life.

古文：人尚不记前生，足知兽不灵于人也。 
现代文：人尚且不能记得前生，可想而知，兽的灵性还不如人呢！ 
English: People can't even remember their previous lives, so you can imagine that the spirituality of animals is not as good as that of humans!

古文：王居贞
现代文：王居贞
English: Wang Juzhen

古文：明经王居贞者下第，归洛之颍阳。
现代文：王居贞考明经科未中，从京城回归洛州的颍阳。
English: Wang Juzhen, a junior high school student majoring in classics, returned to Luoyang from Beijing.

古文：出京，与一道士同行。
现代文：出京之后，和一位道士同行。
English: After leaving for Beijing, I went with a Taoist monk.

古文：道士尽日不食。云： 我咽气术也。 
现代文：道士整天不吃饭，他说： 我这是咽气术。 
English: The Taoist didn't eat all day. He said, "I'm practicing pharyngeal breathing."

古文：每至居贞睡后，灯灭，即开一布囊，取一皮披之而去，五更复来。
现代文：每当王居贞睡了之后，熄了灯，道士就打开一个布口袋，从里边取出一张皮来披到身上，然后出去，五更天再回来。
English: Whenever Wang Ju Zhen fell asleep and turned off the light, the Taoist would open a cloth bag, take out a piece of skin from the inside to put on his body, then go out and come back five days later.

古文：他日，居贞佯寝，急夺其囊，道士叩头乞。居贞曰： 言之即还汝。 
现代文：后来的一天晚上，王居贞假装睡着了，当道士取出布口袋的时候，王居贞一下子就夺了过来。
English: Later, one evening, Wang Juzhen pretended to be asleep. When the Taoist monk took out his cloth bag, Wang Juzhen snatched it right away.

古文：遂言吾非人，衣者虎皮也，夜即求食于村鄙中，衣其皮，即夜可驰五百里。
现代文：道士又叩头又作揖地往回要。王居贞说： 你对我说实话我就还给你。 于是道士说道： 我不是人，每天夜里偷偷穿上的是虎皮，穿上它到村边上找东西吃。穿上这张虎皮，一夜可以跑五百里。 
English: Wang Juzhen said, "If you tell me the truth, I will give it back to you." So the Taoist said, "I am not a human, every night I secretly put on a tiger skin, put it on and go to the edge of the village to find something to eat. Wearing this tiger skin, I can run five hundred miles a night."

古文：居贞以离家多时，甚思归。曰： 吾可披乎？ 
现代文：王居贞因为离开家很长时间了，特别想家，就问道： 我可以借披一下吗？ 
English: Wang Ju Zhen, who had been away from home for a long time and was particularly homesick, asked: Can I borrow a shawl?

古文：曰： 可也。 
现代文：道士说可以。
English: The Taoist priest said yes.

古文：居真去家犹百余里，遂披之暂归。
现代文：王居贞家离此还有一百多里，就披上这张虎皮暂时跑回去看看。
English: Wang Ju Zhen's home is still more than a hundred miles away from here, so he put on this tiger skin and ran back to take a look.

古文：夜深，不可入其门，乃见一猪立于门外，擒而食之。
现代文：夜里回到家里，不能进门，就把立在门外的一头猪逮住吃了。
English: When he got home at night and couldn't get in, he caught and ate a pig that was standing outside the door.

古文：逡巡回，乃还道士皮。
现代文：很快又返回来，把虎皮还给道士。
English: He soon returned and gave the tiger skin back to the Taoist.

古文：及至家，云，居贞之次子夜出，为虎所食。
现代文：等到回到家里，家人说，王居贞的二儿子夜间出门，被虎吃了。
English: When they returned home, the family members said that Wang Juzhen's second son went out at night and was eaten by a tiger.

古文：问其日，乃居贞回日。
现代文：他问是哪一天，恰恰是他披着虎皮回家的那天。
English: He asked what day it was, and it was the day he came home in his tiger skin.

古文：自后一两日甚饱，并不食他物。
现代文：此后的一两天内他一直感到很饱，不吃任何东西。
English: For the next day or two he felt very full and did not eat anything.

古文：归生
现代文：归生
English: Homecoming

古文：弘文学士归生，乱后家寓巴州。
现代文：弘文学士归生，战乱之后家住巴州。
English: He was born with a bachelor's degree in humanities, and after the war, he lived in Bashu.

古文：遣使入蜀，早行，遇虎于道。遂升木以避。
现代文：他被派到蜀地去，早晨上路，在道上遇到老虎，他就爬到树上去躲避。
English: He was sent to Shudi and went on the road in the morning. When he met a tiger on the road, he climbed up a tree to escape.

古文：数虎迭来攫跃，取之不及。
现代文：几只老虎反复在树上跳跃抓取，抓不到他。
English: Several tigers can't catch him as they repeatedly jump up the tree to catch him.

古文：虎相谓曰： 无过巴西县黄二郎也。 
现代文：虎互相说： 可没谁比巴西县黄二郎跳得更高。 
English: The tigers said to each other: But no one can jump higher than Huang Jiro from Brazil.

古文：一虎乃去。
现代文：一只虎就离去了。
English: One tiger has already left.

古文：俄有白狸者至，视其人而哮吼攫跃，使人升木愈高。
现代文：不一会儿来了一只白色的野猫，望着树上的人又是吼叫又是蹦高抓拿。那人爬得更高，全都够不着他。
English: Soon a white wildcat came, looking at the man in the tree and howling and jumping up to catch him. The man climbed higher, and it was all out of his reach.

古文：既皆不得，环而守之。
现代文：它们就围在周围守着。
English: They just surround it and guard it.

古文：移时，有群骡撼铃声，遂各散。
现代文：过了一会儿，一群骡子路过，铃声很响，把老虎吓跑。
English: After a while, a group of mules passed by, ringing their bells loudly to scare the tiger away.

古文：使人至巴西，果有黄二郎者乃巴西吏人，为虎所食也。
现代文：这个人到了巴西县之后，果然听说有一个叫黄二郎的巴西县官吏被虎吃了。
English: After this person arrived in Brazil County, he heard that a Brazil County official named Huang Jiro had been eaten by a tiger.

古文：郑思远
现代文：郑思远
English: Zheng Siyuan

古文：虎交而月晕。
现代文：月晕时是老虎交配的时候。
English: When the moon is waning, it is the time for tigers to mate.

古文：仙人郑思远尝骑虎，故人许隐齿痛求治。郑曰： 唯得虎须，及热插齿间即愈。 
现代文：仙人郑思远曾经骑着一只老虎。老朋友许隐牙疼求他医治，他说： 只能用虎须，趁热插到牙缝里就好了。 
English: Zheng Siyuan, a hermit, once rode a tiger. An old friend, Xu Ying, had a toothache and begged him to cure it. He said, "You can only use tiger whiskers. It's better to insert them into the gap between your teeth while it's hot."

古文：乃拔数茎与之。
现代文：于是就拔了几根虎须给许隐。
English: So he pulled out a few tiger whiskers to give to Xu Yin.

古文：因知虎须治齿也。
现代文：于是就知道虎须可以治牙疼。
English: So I knew that tiger whiskers can cure toothache.

古文：虎杀人，能令尸起自解衣，方食之。
现代文：老虎咬死人，能让死尸起来自己脱衣服，脱了之后才吃。
English: When a tiger bites a dead person, it can make the corpse get up and undress itself before eating it.

古文：虎威如 一 字。
现代文：虎威象个 一 字，一寸来长，在胸部的两侧，尾巴尖儿上没有。
English: Huwei is like a character, one inch long, on both sides of the chest, not on the tip of the tail.

古文：长一寸，在胁两傍皮内，尾端无之，佩之者临官佳；无官，人所憎疾。
现代文：佩戴虎威的人，做官的好，不做官的让人憎恶。老虎夜间看东西，一只眼放光，一只眼看东西。
English: A man who wears a tiger's robe is a good official, but a man who does not wear a tiger's robe is detestable. A tiger looks at things at night, one eye shines, one eye looks at things.

古文：虎夜视，一目放光，一目看物。猎人候而射之，光坠入地成白石。主小儿惊。
现代文：猎人守候在那里射死它，那掉到地上的发光的眼睛变成一种白石头，主治小儿惊吓。
English: Hunters wait there to shoot it dead, and the glowing eyes that fall to the ground turn into a kind of white stone that terrifies children.

古文：李琢
现代文：李琢
English: Li Taku

古文：许州西三四十里有雌虎暴，损人不一。
现代文：许州西三四十里的地方有一只母老虎行凶，害人不少。
English: Thirty or forty miles west of Xuzhou, a tigress went on a killing spree, causing a lot of damage.

古文：统军李琢闻之惊怪，其视事日，厉声曰： 忠武军十万，岂无勇士？ 
现代文：统军李琢听说之后很惊异，他处理事务的那天，大声对兵士们讲： 我们有十万忠武大军，难道就没有一个勇士吗？ 
English: Li Tuo of the United Front Army was very surprised when he heard about this. On the day he was in charge of affairs, he said loudly to the soldiers: We have a hundred thousand loyal soldiers, is there not a single warrior?

古文：有壮夫跳跃曰： 某能除。 
现代文：有一位壮汉跳出来说他能除掉老虎。
English: A big man jumped out and said he could get rid of the tiger.

古文：琢壮其言，给利器。
现代文：李琢认为这人说得很豪迈，就发给他利器。
English: Li Taku thought the man was very brave, so he gave him a sharp weapon.

古文：壮夫请不用弓刀，只要一大白棒。
现代文：壮汉说不用弓和刀之类的东西，只要一根白色的大棍子就行。
English: The strong man said that he didn't need anything like a bow or a sword, just a big white stick.

古文：壮夫径诣榛坞寻之，果得其穴也。
现代文：壮汉径直到山窝榛莽中寻找，果然找到了虎穴。
English: Zhuanghan followed the path until he found a tiger's den in a mountain cave.

古文：其虎已出，唯三子，眼欲开。
现代文：那老虎已经出去了，穴中只有三个小虎崽，小虎崽的眼快要睁开了。
English: The tiger had already left, and there were only three little tigresses in the den. The eyes of the little tigresses were about to open.

古文：壮夫初不见其母，欲回，度琢必不信，遂抱持三子，至其家藏之。
现代文：壮汉一开始因为不见大虎想要回来，考虑到李琢可能不信，就把三只虎崽儿抱回来藏到自己家里。
English: At first, the strong man wanted to come back because he couldn't see the big tiger. Considering that Li Tuo might not believe him, he took the three tiger cubs back and hid them in his home.

古文：入白于琢，琢见空手来，讶之。
现代文：他向李琢去禀报情况，李琢见他空着手回来，很惊讶。
English: He went to report the situation to Li Taku, who was surprised to see him come back empty-handed.

古文：曰： 已取得伊三儿。 
现代文：他说： 我已经抓到了三只小虎崽儿。 
English: He said: "I've already caught three baby tiger cubs.

古文：琢闻惊异，果取到，大赏赉之，给廪帛，加军职。
现代文：李琢听了更加惊异。让他回去取虎崽儿，果然取到。李琢重重赏赐他，给米给帛，还加了军职。
English: Li Taku was even more surprised. He asked him to go back and get the vise, and he did. Li Taku rewarded him, gave him rice, and added a military post.

古文：曰： 尝闻不探虎穴，焉得虎子，此夫是也。
现代文：李琢说： 曾听说 不入虎穴，焉得虎子 ，说的就是这位壮汉啊！ 
English: Li Taku said, "I once heard that if you can't get into the tiger's den, you can't get a tiger's cub. That's what this strong man was talking about!

古文：壮夫竟除其巨者，不复更有虎暴。
现代文：那壮汉到底把大虎也除掉了，不再有虎暴发生。
English: In the end, the strong man got rid of the big tiger, and there were no more tiger riots.

古文：谯本
现代文：谯本
English: 本

古文：伪蜀建武四五年间，有百姓谯本者，兜率人也。
现代文：伪蜀建武四五年间，有一个叫谯本的百姓，是一个很凶暴的人。
English: During the forty-five years of the pseudo-Shu Jianwu, there was a commoner named Yimoto, who was a very violent person.

古文：不孝不义，邻里众皆恶之。
现代文：他不孝不义，邻居们都很讨厌他。
English: He's unfilial and the neighbours hate him.

古文：少无父，常毁骂母，母每含忍。
现代文：他从小没父亲，经常谩骂他的母亲。母亲总是忍耐。
English: He grew up without a father and often berated his mother, who was always patient.

古文：一旦，归自晚，其母倚门而迎。本遥见，便骂。
现代文：有一天，他回来晚了，他母亲靠着门等着迎他，他远远地看到了，就又骂。
English: One day he came home late and his mother was waiting by the door to greet him. He saw her from a distance and cursed again.

古文：母曰： 我只有汝一人，忧汝归夜，汝反骂我也。 
现代文：他母亲说： 我只有你这么一个儿子，担心你回来晚了，你反而骂我？ 
English: His mother said, "You are the only son I have. I was worried that you came back late, but instead you scolded me?"

古文：遂抚膺大哭，且叹且怨。
现代文：于是就摸着胸口大哭起来，又叹又怨。
English: So he felt his chest and burst into tears, sighing and complaining.

古文：本在城巷住，此时便出门，近城沿路上坐。忽大叫一声，脱其衣，变为一赤虎，直上城去。
现代文：谯本住在城里的巷子里，这时候他便走出门去，在靠近城墙的路上坐下，忽然大叫一声，脱去衣服，变成一只红色大老虎，直跑到城墙上去。
English: Xie Ben lived in a lane in the city. At that time, he went out of the door and sat down on the road near the city wall. Suddenly, he shouted, took off his clothes, turned into a big red tiger, and ran straight up to the city wall.

古文：至来日，犹在城上。
现代文：到了第二天，他还在城墙上。
English: The next day he was still on the wall.

古文：蜀主命赵庭隐射之，一发正中其口。
现代文：蜀主让赵庭隐用箭射他，正好射中他的口。
English: Shu asked Zhao Tingyin to shoot him with an arrow, which hit him right in the mouth.

古文：众分而食之。
现代文：大家把他分着吃了。
English: They all ate him separately.

古文：蜀主初霸一方，天雨毛，人变虎，地震者耳。
现代文：蜀主初霸一方，天上往下下毛，人变成虎，地震等现象一再发生。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Shu, the sky was covered with hair, people turned into tigers, earthquakes and other phenomena occurred repeatedly.

