古文：汤鼐，字用之，寿州人。
现代文：汤鼐，字用之，寿州人。
English: Tonglu, the Chinese character for soup, comes from Shoushu.

古文：成化十一年进士。
现代文：成化十一年，考中进士。
English: He was eleven years old when he passed the junior high school entrance examination.

古文：授行人，擢御史。
现代文：授行人职，又提升为御史。
English: He was promoted to the rank of goshi.

古文：孝宗嗣位，首劾大学士万安罔上误国。
现代文：明孝宗继位，汤鼐首先弹劾大学士万安欺君误国。
English: Ming Xiaozong succeeded to the throne, and Tang Jun first impeached the university scholar Wan An for defrauding the country.

古文：明日，宣至左顺门。中官森列，令跪。鼐曰： 令鼐跪者，旨耶，抑太监意耶？ 
现代文：第二天，诏令他到左顺门，宦官排列森严，并命令汤鼐跪下，汤鼐说 ：令汤鼐下跪的，是皇上的圣旨，还是太监的意思呢？ 
English: The next day, the emperor ordered him to the Zuo Shun Gate, where eunuchs were lined up, and ordered Tang Xuan to kneel. Tang Xuan said, "Was it the emperor's edict that made Tang Xuan kneel, or did the eunuch mean it?"

古文：曰： 有旨。 
现代文：宦官说 ：有圣旨。 
English: The eunuch said, "It is the will of God."

古文：鼐始跪。及宣旨，言疏已留中。
现代文：汤鼐大声说： 臣所说的是有关国家大事，为什么留在宫中不发下来呢？ 
English: Tang Xuan said loudly, "What the minister said is related to national affairs. Why did he stay in the palace and not release it?

古文：鼐大言： 臣所言国家大事，奈何留中？ 
现代文：不久万安被赶出内阁，汤鼐也到京郊掌管登记清理皇家马匹事务。
English: Soon after, Wan'an was ousted from the cabinet, and Tang Jun also went to the outskirts of Beijing to take charge of the registration and clean up of royal horse affairs.

古文：已而安斥，鼐亦出畿辅印马，驰疏言： 陛下视朝之余，宜御便殿，择侍臣端方谨厚若刘健、谢迁、程敏政、吴宽者，日与讲学论道，以为出治之本。
现代文：汤鼐在畿辅以快递的形式上奏说： 陛下处理朝政之余，应该选择正直、谨慎、敦厚的像刘健、谢迁、程敏政、吴宽这样的大臣，每天和他们在便殿讲学论道，以为治政的根本。
English: Tang Jun made a report in the form of a courier in Kifu, saying, "In addition to handling the affairs of the imperial court, His Majesty should choose honest, prudent, and dignified ministers like Liu Jian, Xie Qian, Cheng Min Zheng, and Wu Kuan, and lecture and discuss with them every day in the hall, as the foundation of governance.

古文：至如内阁尹直、尚书李裕、都御史刘敷、侍郎黄景，奸邪无耻，或夤缘中官进用，或依附佞幸行私。
现代文：至于内阁尹直、尚书李裕、都御史刘敷、侍郎黄景，都是奸诈邪恶的无耻之徒，有的靠巴结宦官得到晋升，有的依靠谄媚而得宠幸。
English: As for the cabinet of Yin Zhi, Shang Shu Li Yu, the governor of the capital Liu Shiki, and the steward Huang Jing, they were all treacherous and evil shameless people. Some relied on eunuchs to be promoted, and some relied on flattery to be favored.

古文：不早驱斥，必累圣明。
现代文：如果不及早驱逐，必定蒙蔽皇上。
English: If we don't expel them soon, they will surely deceive the emperor.

古文：司礼中官李荣、萧敬曩为言官劾罢，寻夤缘复入。遂摭言官过，贬窜殆尽，致士气委靡。
现代文：司礼宦官李荣、萧敬先前被言官弹劾罢免官职，不久靠巴结又进入宫中，就专门挑言官的过失，几乎尽将言官贬出朝廷。致使士气萎靡不振。
English: The eunuchs of etiquette, Li Rong and Xiao Jing, were previously impeached and removed from office by the speaker, and soon entered the palace again by means of patronage. They specifically challenged the speaker's fault, and almost all the speakers were expelled from the imperial court. This led to low morale.

古文：宜亟正典刑，勿为姑息。
现代文：对他们应该按律判罪，不能姑息。
English: They should be tried according to the law and not tolerated.

古文：诸传奉得官者，请悉编置瘴乡，示天下戒。
现代文：对那些靠攀附巴结得官的，请全部将他们安置在有瘴气的边远地区，以此警戒天下。
English: As for those who have made it to high office by clinging and groveling, please place them all in remote areas where there is bad air, so as to alert the world.

古文：且召致仕尚书王恕、王竑，都御史彭韶，佥事章懋等，而还建言得罪诸臣，以厉风节。 
现代文：并且召回辞官回乡的尚书王恕、王、都御史彭韶、佥事章懋等，以及召还因进言而被贬斥的诸位廷臣，以鼓励风骨、气节。 
English: In addition, the dictionaries Shangshu Wangshu, Wang, Dugongshi Penghu, and Anjie Zhanghu, who had returned to their hometowns, were recalled, as well as the courtiers who had been reprimanded for speaking out, in order to encourage their spirit and stamina.

古文：报闻。
现代文：奏疏送上，皇帝说知道了。
English: The emperor said he understood.

古文：弘治元年正月，鼐又劾礼部尚书周洪谟，侍郎倪岳、张悦，南京兵部尚书马文升，因言： 少傅刘吉，与万安、尹直奸贪等耳。安、直斥，而吉独进官，不以为耻。
现代文：弘治元年正月，汤鼐又弹劾礼部尚书周洪谟，侍郎倪岳、张悦、南京兵部尚书马文升也说： 少傅刘吉同万安、尹直一样奸诈贪婪，万安和尹直受到斥责，而刘吉却升官，不以为耻辱。
English: In the first month of the first year of the Hongzhi era, Tang Yu also impeached the ceremonial secretary Zhou Hongmu, and the attendants Ni Yue, Zhang Yue, and the Nanjing military secretary Ma Wensheng also said: the young master Liu Ji was as treacherous and greedy as Wan'an and Yin Zhi, Wan'an and Yin Zhi were reprimanded, but Liu Ji was promoted and did not think it was a disgrace.

古文：请大申黜陟，明示劝惩。 
现代文：请求重新申明升降的原则，以明确奖惩。 
English: Request to restate the principle of promotion and relegation to make clear the rewards and punishments.

古文：又劾李荣、萧敬，而荐谪降进士李文祥为台谏。
现代文：又弹劾李荣、萧敬，而举荐因罪降级的进士李文祥为台谏。
English: He also impeached Li Rong and Xiao Jing, and promoted Li Wenxiang, who had been demoted for a crime, to the position of Taiwanese consul.

古文：尚书王恕以盛暑请辍经筵，鼐极言不可，语侵恕。
现代文：尚书王恕因为盛夏天气炎热请求暂停御前讲席，汤鼐极力阻止，言语得罪了王恕。
English: Because of the hot weather in midsummer, Wang Shuxu requested to suspend the lecture in front of the throne. Tang Jun tried his best to stop this, but Wang Shuxu was offended by his words.

古文：当是时，帝更新庶政，言路大开。
现代文：此时，孝宗更新朝政，广开言路。
English: At this time, Emperor Xiaozong renewed the imperial policy and opened a wide path for speech.

古文：新进者争，欲以功名自见。
现代文：新任官员纷纷想建立功绩来自我表现。
English: New officials are scrambling to establish merit and self-performance.

古文：封章旁午，颇伤激讦，鼐意气尤锐。
现代文：机密奏章不断地呈献在皇帝面前，其中颇有些激烈的攻讦之词，汤鼐的态度尤其坚决。
English: The confidential music score was constantly presented to the emperor, some of which were quite fierce attacks, and Tang Xuan's attitude was particularly resolute.

古文：其所抨击，间及海内人望，以故大臣多畏之，而吉尤不能堪。
现代文：他所抨击的有时还包括天下有声望的人物，因此大臣大都很害怕，而刘吉更是不能忍受。
English: His attacks sometimes include world-renowned figures, so the ministers are very afraid, and Liu Ji can't stand it.

古文：使人啖御史魏璋曰： 君能去鼐，行佥院事矣。 
现代文：派人去诱惑御史魏璋，说 ：如果你能除掉汤鼐，让你负责都察院事。 
English: He sent someone to tempt Goshi Weiqi, saying, "If you can get rid of Tang Qi, let you be in charge of the investigation of the Imperial Academy."

古文：璋欣然，日夜伺鼐短。
现代文：魏璋很高兴，他日夜寻找汤鼐的过失。
English: Wei Yao was very happy. He searched for Tang Yao's fault day and night.

古文：未几，而吉人之狱起。
现代文：不久，发生了吉人案件。
English: Soon after, the Yoshihito case occurred.

古文：吉人者，长安人。成化末进士，为中书舍人。
现代文：吉人是长安人，成化末年考中进士，任中书舍人。
English: Yoshihito is a native of Chang'an. He was selected as a junior high school student in the final year of the Chenghua High School Examination, and was appointed as a junior high school student.

古文：四川饥，帝遣郎中江汉往振。
现代文：四川发生饥荒，皇帝派遣郎中江汉前去救济灾民。
English: When a famine occurred in Sichuan, the emperor sent Langzhongjianghan to help the victims.

古文：人言汉不胜任，宜遣四使分道振，且择才能御史为巡按，庶荒政有裨。
现代文：吉人说江汉不能胜任救灾工作，应该派遣四位使臣分道救济，并且挑选有能力的御史作为巡按，这样才能对救灾事宜有利。
English: Ji said that the Jianghan was not competent in disaster relief work, and that four envoys should be dispatched to provide relief, and that a competent imperial historian should be selected as the inspector, so that it would be beneficial to disaster relief.

古文：因荐给事中宋琮、陈璚、韩鼎，御史曹璘，郎中王沂、洪钟，员外郎东思诚，评事王寅，理刑知县韩福及寿州知州刘概可使，而巡按则鼐足任之。
现代文：于是推荐给事中宋琮、陈、韩鼎，御史曹瞞，郎中王沂、洪钟，员外郎东思诚，评事王寅，理刑知县韩福以及寿州知州刘概可以作为使臣的人选，而巡按之职则汤鼐足以充任。
English: Therefore, it was recommended that Song Xi, Chen, Han Ding, Mi Shi Cao Xie, Lang Zhong Wang Xie, Hong Zhong, Member of the Foreign Affairs Committee Lang Dong Shicheng, Commentator Wang Yin, Secretary of Justice Han Fu of Zhoushi County and Liu You of Zhoushi County could be candidates for envoys, while the post of inspector was enough for Tang Xi.

古文：璋遂草疏，伪署御史陈景隆等名，言吉人抵抗成命，私立朋党。
现代文：魏璋就起草奏疏，在未获本人同意情况下署上御史陈景隆等的名字，疏中称吉人违抗皇帝旨意，私下结成朋党。
English: Wei Wei drafted a report and signed the names of the imperial historian Chen Jinglong and others without his consent. In the report, he said that the nobles defied the emperor's will and secretly formed a fraternal party.

古文：帝怒，下人诏狱，令自引其党。
现代文：孝宗发怒，将吉人逮捕关进皇家监狱，命令吉人供出其党名字。
English: Takamune was furious, arrested Yoshihito and put him in the imperial prison, and ordered Yoshihito to provide the name of his party.

古文：人以鼐、璘、思诚、概、福对。
现代文：吉人回答有汤鼐、曹瞞、东思诚、刘概、韩福。
English: The lucky ones were Tang Jun, Cao Zhe, Dong Shicheng, Liu Guo and Han Fu.

古文：璋又嗾御史陈璧等言： 璘、福、思诚非其党，其党则鼐、概及主事李文祥、庶吉士邹智、知州董傑是也。
现代文：魏璋又怂恿御史陈璧等说 ：曹瞞、韩福、东思诚不是吉人同党，其党是汤鼐、刘概以及主事李文祥、庶吉士邹智、知州董杰等。
English: Wei Wei also said: Cao Zhe, Han Fu, and Dong Shicheng are not the same party as the auspicious people, but their party is Tang Jun, Liu Gui, and the leader Li Wenxiang, the second-in-command auspicious person Zou Zhi, and Chizhou Dong Jie.

古文：概尝馈鼐白金，贻之书，谓夜梦一人骑牛几堕，鼐手挽之得不仆，又见鼐手执五色石引牛就道。
现代文：刘概曾送汤鼐白金，并写信给汤，信中说晚上梦见一个人骑牛差一点摔下去，汤鼐用手拉住才没倒，又梦见汤鼐手拿五色石将牛引上道路。
English: Liu You once sent Tang Junlong platinum and wrote a letter to Tang, saying that in the evening he dreamed of a man riding a bull and almost falling down. Tang Junlong held on with his hand and did not fall down. He also dreamed of Tang Junlong holding a five-colored stone and leading a cow onto the road.

古文：因解之曰： 人骑牛谓朱，乃国姓。意者国将倾，赖鼐扶之，而引君当道也。 
现代文：并且解说梦境，说： 人骑牛就是朱字，这是国姓，意思是说国家将倾覆，全靠汤鼐扶助，并且引导君王执政。 
English: And he explained the dream, saying: "A man riding a bull is a red character, which is the country's surname, meaning that the country will be overthrown, all with the help of the soup ladle, and guide the king to rule.

古文：鼐、概等自相标榜，诋毁时政，请并文祥、智、傑逮治。 
现代文：汤鼐、刘概等互相标榜，诋毁时政，请求连同李文祥、邹智、董杰逮捕治罪。 
English: Tang Yao, Liu Zhou and others advertised each other, slandered the current government, and requested the arrest and punishment of Li Wenxiang, Hao Zhi and Dong Jie.

古文：疏上，吉从中主之，悉下诏狱，欲尽置之死。
现代文：疏呈上，刘吉从中操纵，全部捕入皇家诏狱，意欲将他们全都置于死地。
English: According to the complaint, Liu Ji manipulated the situation and had them all arrested to the Imperial Imperial Prison, intending to put them all to death.

古文：刑部尚书何乔新、侍郎彭韶等持之，外议亦汹汹不平。
现代文：刑部尚书何乔新、侍郎彭韶等持反对意见，朝廷外边的舆论也愤愤不平。
English: The head of the Department of Criminal Law, He Qiaoxin, and the chamberlain, Peng Yao, held opposing views, and public opinion outside the imperial court was also outraged.

古文：乃坐概妖言律斩；鼐受贿，戍肃州；人欺罔，削籍；智、文祥、傑皆谪官。
现代文：于是将刘概以散布妖言罪处以斩刑，汤鼐受贿，贬戍肃州；吉人欺君罔上，削去官籍；邹智、李文祥、董杰都被贬职。
English: As a result, Liu Zhou was sentenced to beheading for the crime of spreading demonic sayings, Tang Yao was punished for accepting bribes and demoted to Suzhou, Ji Ren was punished for cheating the emperor and stripped of his official registration, and Zou Zhi, Li Wenxiang, and Dong Jie were all demoted.

古文：吏部尚书王恕奏曰： 律重妖言，谓造作符谶类耳。
现代文：吏部尚书王恕奏道： 律令重判妖言，是指的制造符图谶之类。
English: Shangshu Wang, an official of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, said, "The ritsuryo heavy sentence refers to the manufacturing of charms and charms.

古文：概书词虽妄，良以鼐数言事不避利害，因推诩之。
现代文：刘概信中言词虽然荒谬，的确是由于汤鼐多次论及事情时不考虑自身利害，而推崇汤鼐。
English: Although the words in Liu Youxin's letter are absurd, it is indeed due to the fact that Tang Jun did not consider his own interests when he discussed the matter many times, but respected Tang Jun.

古文：今当以妖言，设有如造亡秦谶者，更何以罪之？ 
现代文：现在判为妖言，假若有制造如亡秦谶言的，那再判什么罪？ 
English: Now it is judged to be gossips. If there were someone who fabricated such gossip, then what crime would be judged?

古文：帝得疏意动，命姑系狱。既而热审，乔新等言： 概本不应妖言律。且概五岁而孤，无兄弟，母孙氏守节三十年，曾被旌，老病且贫。
现代文：皇帝见到王恕奏疏有些心动，下令暂且关进牢狱，不久在夏季的重新审理中，何乔新等说： 刘概本不应按妖言定罪，况且他五岁失去父亲，没有兄弟，母亲孙氏守寡三十年，曾受到表彰，她年老有病并且贫穷。
English: The emperor was moved to see Wang Shuxaoso and ordered him to be temporarily imprisoned. Soon after, during the summer retrial, He Qiaoxin said: Liu You should not have been convicted according to the oracle. Moreover, he lost his father at the age of five and had no brothers. His mother, Sun Ji, had been widowed for 30 years and had been commended. She was old, sick and poor.

古文：概死，母必不全，祈圣恩矜恤。 
现代文：刘概死了，母亲必然活不下去，祈求陛下怜悯。 
English: Liu Kai died, and his mother could not go on living, and she begged for His Majesty's mercy.

古文：乃减概死，戍海州。
现代文：孝宗最后免刘概死罪，谪戍海州。
English: Xiaozong was finally pardoned from the death penalty by Liu Kai, Bohai Province.

古文：济宁人。成化二十年进士。
现代文：汤鼐被罚守边，因无人援救，很久才释放回来。徐溥，字时用，宜兴人。
English: Tang Yao was punished to guard the border, and because there was no one to rescue him, it took a long time for him to be released. Xu Yao, the characters are used, is from Yixing.

古文：除寿州知州，毁境内淫祠几尽，三年教化大行。
现代文：祖父徐鉴曾任琼州知府，对民众多有恩惠。徐溥于景泰五年考中进士，授编修职。
English: His grandfather, Xu Jian, was once the governor of Qiongzhou and had many favors for the people. Xu Jun was promoted to a scholar in the Jingtai five-year examination, and was awarded the post of editor.

古文：弘治初上言： 刑赏予夺，人主大柄，后世乃有为女子、小人、强臣、外戚所攘窃者，由此辈心险术巧，人主稍加亲信，辄堕计中。
现代文：宪宗初年，提升为左庶子，又调升为太常卿兼学士。成化十五年，授礼部右侍郎职，不久转为礼部左侍郎，一段时间后改在吏部任职。孝宗继位，徐溥兼任文渊阁大学士，参预机要事务，不久晋升礼部尚书。弘治五年，刘吉被罢免官职，徐溥任首辅，累次加封为少傅、太子太傅。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xianzong's reign, Emperor Xiaozong's son-in-law was promoted to the position of the left illegitimate son, and he was also promoted to the position of the grand secretary and bachelor. In the fifteenth year of Emperor Chenghua's reign, Emperor Xiaozong's son-in-law was promoted to the position of the right attendant of the ceremonial department, and soon he was transferred to the left attendant of the ceremonial department, and after a period of time he was transferred to the position of the secretary. Emperor Xiaozong's son-in-law was also promoted to the position of the scholar of the University of

古文：爱者，乘君之喜而游言以扬之；恶者，乘君之怒而微言以中之，使贤人君子卒受暧昧而去。
现代文：刘吉治政狂妄凶暴，徐溥接替刘吉以后，以安定平静为宗旨，务守成规，与同事刘健、李东阳、谢迁等同心协力辅助治理朝政，每当遇到不可行的事，总是一起争辩。
English: Liu Jie ruled the government with arrogance and ferocity. After Xu Rong succeeded Liu Jie, he took stability and calmness as the purpose and adhered to the rules. He and his colleagues Liu Jian, Li Dongyang, Xie Qian and others worked together to help govern the government. Whenever they encountered unfeasible things, they always argued together.

古文：卿相缺人，则迁延饵引，待有交通请属软美易制之人，然后荐用。
现代文：钦天监中被革职的监正李华为昌国公张峦选择墓地，宫中降旨恢复他的官职。徐溥等上言道： 陛下登基以来，未曾有过宫中降旨事，恐怕权贵亲幸之门一开，不良之徒无所顾忌，臣等不敢接受这一诏令。 
English: The overseer Li Huai Chang Guo Gong Zhang Ye, who was dismissed from his post in Qin Tianjun, chose a cemetery, and the imperial edict was issued to restore his official position. Xu Ye and others said: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, there has never been an imperial edict. I am afraid that once the door of power and nobility is opened, the bad guys will have no scruples, and the vassals will not dare to accept this edict.

古文：其刚正不阿者，辄媒孽而放弃之，俟其气衰虑易，不至大立异同，乃更收录。
现代文：八年，太皇太后召崇王进宫朝见，徐溥等与尚书倪岳进行劝谏，明孝宗亲自劝说太皇太后，此事才得以停止。占城奏报安南入境侵犯骚扰，孝宗准备派大臣前往调解，徐溥等说： 外国之间发生侵略现象，有关部门发道檄文告诫就行了，不需派遣使臣。
English: In the eighth year, the great empress dowager summoned Chong Wang to the palace for a morning meeting, Xu Xi and others consulted with Shang Shu Ni Yue, and Ming Xiaozong personally persuaded the great empress dowager to stop the matter. Zhancheng reported Annan's entry violation and harassment, Xiaozong prepared to send a minister to mediate, and Xu Xi and others said: If there is a phenomenon of aggression between foreign countries, the relevant departments only need to issue a warning, and there is no need to send an envoy.

古文：巧计既行，刑赏予夺虽名人主独操，实一出于其所簸弄。
现代文：万一安南不听使臣命令，则有损国威，再去兴师问罪，后患越来越大。 
English: In the unlikely event that Annan did not listen to the envoy's order, it would damage the country's prestige, and he would have to go back to the emperor to ask for forgiveness. The consequences would be more and more serious.

古文：迨党立势成，复恐一旦败露，则又极意以排谏诤之士。
现代文：就未派遣大臣。这年十二月，孝宗下诏要撰三清乐章。徐溥等说 ：天，至高无上，没有谁能匹配。
English: He did not send a minister. In December of that year, Emperor Xiaozong issued an edict to compile the Three Clear Music Chapters. Xu Xi et al. said, "Heavenly, supreme, no one can match it."

古文：务使其君孤立于上，耳无闻，目无见，以图便其私，不至其身与国俱败不止。
现代文：汉代祭祀五帝，儒者尚且认为不对。
English: The Han Dynasty worshiped five emperors, which the Confucians thought was wrong.

古文：故夫刑赏予夺，必由大臣奏请、台谏集议而后可行。
现代文：况且三清是道家荒谬之说。一天之上，岂得有三大帝。
English: Moreover, Sanqing is a Taoist absurdity. How can there be three emperors in one day?

古文：或有矫诬，穷治不轻贷，则谗佞莫能间，而权不下移矣。 
现代文：并且以周代柱下史李耳充其中一帝，将人鬼列为天神，荒诞至极。
English: And with Shi Li Er from the Zhou Dynasty as one of the emperors, the ghosts and goblins are listed as gods and goddesses, which is the height of absurdity.

古文：考绩赴都，遂遇祸，竟卒于戍所。
现代文：郊祀乐章都是太祖亲自创作，现在以写作的时俗词曲祭祀神明，亵渎更甚。
English: The suburban worship music was composed by Taizu himself. Nowadays, they worship the gods with contemporary folk songs, which is even more blasphemous.

古文：鼐既戍，无援之者，久之始释归。
现代文：臣等熟读儒家书籍，对邪说俚曲向来不在意，不敢用旁门左道侍奉陛下。
English: His courtiers are well-versed in Confucian books, and have never paid attention to heresies. They do not dare to serve His Majesty in the wrong way.

古文：董傑，泾县人。成化末进士。鼐之论暑月辍讲也，傑方谒选，亦抗疏争，由是知名。
现代文：国家设置文渊阁，命令学士在此任职，的确是想让学士为国家谋划政事，讲经论史，培养治政的根本，纠正过失，并非要其阿谀奉承，唯命是从。
English: The country set up the Academy of Letters and Humanities and ordered the baccalaureate to serve there. It is indeed to let the baccalaureate plan political affairs for the country, lecture on history, cultivate the fundamentals of governance, and correct mistakes. It is not to flatter him, but to obey his orders.

古文：授沔阳知州，甫数月，逮系诏狱，谪四川行都司知事，历迁河南左布政使。
现代文：现在御前讲席早已停止，讲官入侍讲读很久没有进行，异端邪说乘隙而入。这些都是因为臣等侍奉不当，不能够启发陛下之心，保持陛下初登位时治政的良好势头。
English: Presently, lectures in front of the throne have long since stopped, lectures by lecturers have not been held for a long time, and heresies have taken advantage of the gap. All of this is due to the fact that courtiers and others have served improperly and have not been able to enlighten His Majesty's heart and maintain the good momentum of governance when His Majesty first ascended the throne.

古文：所在尽职业，为民所怀。
现代文：我们万分忧心与惭愧，无地自容。
English: We are extremely worried and ashamed, and have no room for complacency.

古文：正德六年，江西盗起，巡抚王哲兵败召还，擢杰右副都御史代之。
现代文：数月以来，对宫中降旨中处理政事不当的，我们将其封还宫中，并再三向皇上奏明我们的看法。
English: Over the past few months, we have returned to the Imperial Palace the decrees of the Imperial Court concerning the improper handling of political affairs, and have repeatedly made our views known to the Emperor.

古文：未几卒。璋既为吉心腹，果擢大理寺丞。坐事下狱，黜为九江同知，悒悒死。
现代文：希望陛下曲身听从，使臣等竭尽拙笨之力稍稍有所帮助，不仅仅只指乐章一事。 奏章呈送孝宗，孝宗很赞赏，接纳了他们的劝谏。
English: I hope that His Majesty will listen attentively and that the envoys and others will do their best to be of some help, and not just in the matter of the movement.The movement was presented to Takamune, who was very appreciative and accepted their advice.

古文：姜绾，字玉卿。
现代文：孝宗自弘治八年后，上朝时间渐晚，徐溥等屡次上言劝谏。
English: Eight years after the enthronement of Emperor Hongzhi, it was getting late for Emperor Xiaozong to ascend to the throne, and Xu Xi and others repeatedly appealed to Emperor Hongzong for advice.

古文：弋阳人。成化十四年进士。
现代文：宦官李广借炼丹、设斋坛得到皇帝宠幸。
English: The eunuch Li Guang was favored by the emperor for his use of refined dan and the establishment of a sacrificial altar.

古文：由景陵知县擢南京御史。弘治初，陈治道十事。
现代文：十年二月，徐溥等上疏深切地论述说： 旧制，内殿每日两次奏事，事项多的可以随时上奏，皇帝又常常召见儒臣，咨询政事。
English: In February of the tenth year, Xu Rong et al. elaborated on the following: In the old system, the Inner Court reported twice a day, and many matters could be reported at any time. The emperor also often summoned Confucian scholars to consult on political affairs.

古文：又言午朝宜论大政，毋泛陈细故，皆报闻。
现代文：现在奏事每天只有一次，除上朝之外，再见不到陛下。
English: Now, there is only one report per day, and apart from the morning of the previous day, I never see His Majesty again.

古文：二年二月，南京守备中官蒋琮以芦场事下绾覆按，琮嘱绾求右己。
现代文：奏章、奏议与批答不准时断决，有的滞留好几个月，有的竟然不施行。事情大多堆集在一起，妨碍政体。
English: Most of the petitions, motions and replies are not timely resolved, some are delayed for several months, and some are not implemented at all. Things are mostly piled up together, hindering the political system.

古文：绾疏言： 琮以守备重臣与小民争利，假公事以适私情。
现代文：御前讲席每年只开几天，疏远正直人士，邪说得以流行。近来听说有借斋坛炼丹之说得到重用的。宋徽宗崇尚道教，科条仪式符最盛行，以致颠沛流离于道路。
English: The imperial lecture hall is only open for a few days each year, alienating honest people and allowing evil theories to become popular. Recently, I heard that the idea of using a Buddhist altar to purify one's soul has been put to good use. The Song and Hui Dynasties advocated Taoism, and the ritual symbols of disciplines were the most popular, so that many people were forced to live on the road.

古文：用揭帖而抗诏旨，扬言阴中，胁以必从。
现代文：金石之药，性能多是酷烈的。唐宪宗相信柳泌以致殒命，此祸可作借鉴。
English: The medicinal properties of gems and stones are often very strong. Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty believed in the secretion of willows, which could lead to death. This disaster can be used as a reference.

古文：其他变乱成法，厥罪有十。以内官侵言官职，罪一。
现代文：现在龙虎山的上清宫、神乐观、祖师殿以及内府番经厂都被焚毁，它们如有神灵，为什么连自身也保不住？
English: Now, the Shangqing Palace, the God of Optimism, the Ancestor's Hall, and the Neifu Banjing Factory in Longhu Mountain have all been burned. If they have gods, why can't they even save themselves?

古文：妒害大臣，妄论都御史秦纮，罪二。
现代文：上天讨厌这些污秽行为，已是很明白的了。
English: Heaven abhors these foul deeds, that much is clear.

古文：怒河闸官失迎候，欲奏罢之，罪三。
现代文：陛下如果亲近儒臣，懂得正道，施行仁政，那么福兆祥瑞，以及许多值得庆贺的好事就会不招自来，何须借助妖妄之说呢？
English: If your majesty is close to Confucianism, knows the right way, and practices benevolent government, then good fortune, auspiciousness, and many good things worthy of celebration will come uninvited. Why do you need to resort to delusion?

古文：受民词不由通政，罪四。分遣腹心，侵渔国课，罪五。
现代文：自古以来奸人要蛊惑君王动心，必定先说太平无事。
English: Since ancient times, if a con man wants to seduce a monarch, he must first say that there is nothing to worry about.

古文：按季收班匠工银，罪六。擅收用罢闲都事，罪七。
现代文：唐朝大臣李绛曾说过 ：忧心于事行之前，可以免除担忧。事情干完了再担忧，于事无益。 
English: Li Xi, a minister of the Tang Dynasty, once said: "If you worry before doing something, you can get rid of your worries. If you worry after doing something, it is useless."

古文：官僚忤意，辄肆中伤，罪八。
现代文：现在太平日子很长，沉溺于安逸。
English: Now Taiping days are long and indulge in ease.

古文：妄奏主事周琦罪，欺罔朝廷，罪九。保举罢斥内臣，窃天子威柄，罪十。 
现代文：就目前来看，虽然好像无事，然而工役频繁兴起，苛捐杂税百出，人马疲惫不堪，民间穷困，人民愁苦的叹息声影响着上天的和顺之气以致造成火星失去常规，太阳无光，天鸣地震，草木成为妖孽，四方奏报这些情况的几乎每月都有，将来的后患灼然使人担忧。
English: For the time being, although it seems to be nothing, but the frequent rise of laborers, heavy taxes, exhaustion of men and horses, poverty of the people, and the sighs of the people affect the harmony of heaven, causing Mars to lose its regularity, the sun to lose its light, the sky to ring with earthquakes, and the plants to become witches. These situations are reported by the four parties almost every month, and the future after-effects make people worry.

古文：事下南京三法司。
现代文：陛下高居深宫，言官都害怕引祸上身缄口沉默。
English: His Majesty is high and deep in the palace, and the gossips are afraid of causing trouble, so they keep their mouths shut.

古文：既，复特遣官覆治以奏。
现代文：臣等假如再不说，谁又肯为陛下说。 
English: If we don't say it, who will say it for His Majesty?

古文：先是，御史余濬劾中官陈祖生违制垦后湖田，湖为之淤。奏下南京主事卢锦勘报。锦故与祖生有隙。
现代文：孝宗被徐溥的话所感动。三月二十七日，孝宗在文华殿召见徐溥以及刘健、李东阳、谢迁，把各部门的奏疏交给他们说 ：与先生辈商议。 
English: Xiaozong was moved by Xu Xi's words. On March 27, Xiaozong summoned Xu Xi, Liu Jian, Li Dongyang, and Xie Qian to Wenhua Hall, and handed them the records of each department, saying, "Consult with the masters."

古文：而给事中方向尝率同官缪樗等劾祖生及文武大臣不职状，又因雷震孝陵柏，劾大学士刘吉等十一人，而诋祖生益力。祖生衔向切骨。
现代文：徐溥等起草诏令呈上，孝宗就手批改。
English: Xu Xi and others drafted the edict and submitted it, but Xiaozong immediately criticized and amended it.

古文：时向方监后湖黄册，祖生遂揭向、锦实侵湖田。
现代文：事端多的，刘健请求拿出去详细阅读，孝宗说 ：何不就此地面议。 
English: There were a lot of things, Liu Jian asked to take it out and read it in detail, and Xiaozong said: Why not discuss it on the ground.

古文：诏下法司勘。
现代文：事完之后，赐徐溥等饮茶方退。
English: After the matter was over, he asked Xu Yao and other tea drinkers to leave.

古文：勘未上，而琮为绾所劾。
现代文：自从成化年间，宪宗召彭时、商辂对答以后，至此时才开始再次出现，举朝夸耀为盛事。
English: Since the year of Chenghua, when Peng Xi was summoned by Emperor Xianzong and the discussion was held, it has only begun to reappear at this time, and it has been praised as a grand event.

古文：于是琮、祖生及吉合谋削锦籍，谪向官，复逮绾及同官孙纮、刘逊、金章、纪杰、曹玉、谭肃、徐礼、余濬，给事中缪樗，赴京论鞫，皆谪为州判官。
现代文：然而在徐溥整个任职期间，也只有这么一次受到皇帝召见。不久，由于灾害，异常现象发生，朝廷广开言路，朝廷大臣所上的密封的奏章，过了一个月还不回答，而且言官因议论救助何鼎违背皇帝旨意等待被治罪已有很长时间，徐溥等都将这些情况向孝宗进言。于是搁置的奏章全部批发下来，并且免言官的罪。
English: However, during the entire tenure of Xu Jun, he was summoned by the emperor only once. Soon, due to disasters, abnormal phenomena occurred, the imperial court opened a wide path of speech, the sealed record on the imperial minister did not answer after a month, and the speaker had been waiting for a long time to be punished for discussing the rescue of He Ding against the emperor's will. Xu Jun and others brought these circumstances to the attention of Xiaozong. Therefore, the shelved records were all sold wholesale, and the crime of the speaker was forgiven.

古文：绾谪判桂阳，量移宁国同知，迁庆远知府。
现代文：徐溥这时七十岁，以年老请求退休，孝宗不批准，下诏让他在风雨寒暑天免去朝见。十一年，皇太子离开东宫，加封徐溥太子太师，升为华盖殿大学士。
English: At that time, Xu Xi was seventy years old. He asked to retire due to old age, but Xiaozong did not approve, and issued an edict to exempt him from attending the imperial court on rainy, cold and hot days. In the eleventh year, the crown prince left the East Palace, and Xu Xi was given the title of prince's daishi and promoted to a scholar of Huagai Palace University.

古文：斩剧贼韦七旋、韦万妙。
现代文：因为眼病请求返乡。孝宗舍不得放他走，很久才同意他的返乡，给徐溥很多赏赐。
English: Because of his eye disease, he asked to return home. Xiaozong was reluctant to let him go, and it was a long time before he agreed to his return home, giving Xu Xi a lot of rewards.

古文：其党纠贼数万攻城，绾坚守，檄民兵夹击，破走之。
现代文：过了一年徐溥去世，追赠太师，赐谥号文靖。徐溥生性庄重，举止有法度，在内阁十二年，从容辅助劝导。
English: One year later, Xu Xi passed away and was posthumously awarded the title of Grand Master and given the title of Wenjing. Xu Xi was dignified and had a dignified demeanor. During his 12 years in the cabinet, he calmly assisted in persuasion.

古文：东兰诸州蛮悉归侵地。总督刘大夏奇其材，荐为右江兵备副使。
现代文：遇到有人犯有过失，总是为其掩盖，他说 ：天生人才很不容易，我不忍心人才因小过错被抛弃。 
English: When someone makes a mistake, he always covers it up. He said: "It's not easy to be born with talent. I can't bear to see talent discarded for a small mistake."

古文：思恩知府岑濬逐田州知府岑猛，绾献策总督潘蕃。
现代文：屡次遇到大狱案，以及逮捕言官，他都要从中委婉调停。
English: He repeatedly encountered major prison cases, as well as arresting officers, from which he had to tactfully mediate.

古文：蕃令与都指挥金堂合诸路兵大破贼，思恩平。
现代文：孝宗仁慈淳厚，对徐溥等所提的意见大都接受，天下暗暗地受到他的庇护。徐溥曾说 ：祖宗法度在恩惠百姓的事方面已经完备，所担心的是不能守住。 
English: Xiaozong was benevolent and kindhearted, and accepted most of the opinions proposed by Xu Xi and others, and the whole world was secretly protected by him. Xu Xi once said: the Ancestor's Code has been completed in terms of benefiting the people, and what I am worried about is that it cannot be kept.

古文：绾条二府形势，请改设流官，比中土，廷议从之。
现代文：因此，他对祖宗成法无所变更。徐溥对父母极为孝顺，曾经两次在父母墓旁小房居住。
English: Therefore, he did not change anything about his ancestral law. Xu Xi was extremely filial to his parents and lived in a small room next to his parents' grave twice.

古文：绾引疾还。
现代文：对自己的生活要求则很低，好施舍别人。
English: They have very low expectations of their own lives and are good at giving to others.

古文：俄起河南按察使，寻复以疾归，卒于家。
现代文：购置义田八百亩赡养宗族族人，并请官府为之登记于册以求永久保存，孝宗为此免除徐溥家的徭役。
English: He purchased 800 mu of Yoshida to support the clan members, and asked the government to register it in order to preserve it forever. As a result, the Xiaozong family was exempted from the duty of supporting the Xu Ye family.

