古文：独孤穆华州参军赵叔牙周济川
现代文：独孤穆华州参军赵叔牙周济川
English: Zhao Shiga Zhou Jichuan, a lone soldier from Muhua County, joins the army

古文：独孤穆
现代文：独孤穆
English: Alone in the dark

古文：唐贞元中，河南独孤穆者，客淮南。
现代文：唐朝贞元年间，河南独孤穆，客居淮南。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhenyuan of the Tang Dynasty, Henan was isolated and isolated, and Huainan was a guest.

古文：夜投大仪县宿，未至十里余，见一青衣乘马，颜色颇丽。
现代文：夜晚到大义县住宿，未到十里余，看见侍女乘马，姿色很美丽。
English: In the evening, I went to stay in Dayi County, and before reaching more than ten miles, I saw a maid riding a horse, her appearance was very beautiful.

古文：穆微以词调之，青衣对答甚有风格。
现代文：穆稍稍用话调弄她。侍女回答很有风格。
English: Mu slightly teased her with words. The maid replied with style.

古文：俄有车路北下道者，引之而去。
现代文：一会儿有一辆车从路北下到道上，带领她离去。
English: A short time later, a car pulled onto the road from the north of the road and led her away.

古文：穆遂谓曰：向者粗承颜色，谓可以终接周旋，何乃顿相捨乎？
现代文：穆于是对她说：先前粗略地看到你的姿色，认为终究可以接应交往，为什么立刻要离去呢？
English: Mu then said to her: "I saw your appearance roughly before, and thought that I could eventually meet you. Why do you want to leave immediately?

古文：青衣笑曰：愧耻之意，诚亦不足。但娘子少年独居，性甚严整，难以相许耳。
现代文：侍女笑着说：羞愧的想法，实在也不过分，只是娘子少年独居，性情很严正，难以答应。
English: The maid smiled and said, "The thought of being ashamed is really not too much, it's just that girls and boys live alone, they have a very strict temperament, and it's hard to say yes."

古文：穆因问娘子姓氏及中外亲族，青衣曰：姓杨第六。
现代文：穆于是问娘子姓氏和家庭内外亲属。侍女说：姓杨排行第六。
English: Mu then asked her daughter's surname and relatives inside and outside the family. The maid said: "The surname Yang ranks sixth."

古文：不答其他。
现代文：不回答其他事情。
English: Don't answer anything else.

古文：既而不觉行数里。俄至一处，门馆甚肃。
现代文：不一会就不知不觉走了好几里，旋即到一个处所，门馆很庄严。
English: After a while, I unknowingly walked several miles and arrived at a place. The gatehouse was very solemn.

古文：青衣下马入，久之乃出，延客就馆曰：自绝宾客，已数年矣。
现代文：侍女下马入内，很久才出来，请客人入馆说：自从谢绝宾客，已好多年了。
English: The lady-in-waiting dismounted from her horse, went inside, came out after a long time, invited the guests to enter the museum and said: "It's been years since I turned down a guest.

古文：娘子以上客至，无所为辞。勿嫌疏漏也。
现代文：娘子认为是贵客到来，没有什么可推辞的，不要嫌恶不周到之处。
English: If your daughter thinks that a distinguished guest has arrived, there is nothing to refuse, and you should not dislike anything that is not well thought out.

古文：於是秉烛陈榻，衾褥备具。
现代文：于是拿着蜡烛布置床铺，被褥备办齐全。
English: So he took a candle and arranged the bed, and the bedding was ready.

古文：有顷，青衣出谓穆曰：君非隋将独孤盛之后乎？
现代文：不久，侍女出来对穆说：你莫非是隋将独孤盛的后代吗？
English: Soon, the maid came out and said to Mu, "Aren't you the descendant of Sui Zheng?

古文：穆乃自陈，是盛八代孙。
现代文：穆就自我陈述，是盛的第八代孙子。
English: Mu is self-declared as the eighth-generation grandson of Sheng.

古文：青衣曰：果如是，娘子与郎君乃有旧。
现代文：侍女说：果然是这样，娘子与你有旧交。
English: The maid said, "That's right, my daughter has an old friendship with you.

古文：穆询其故，青衣曰：某贱人也，不知其由，娘子即当自出申达。
现代文：穆问那原因，侍女说：我是地位低下的人，不知道那缘由，娘子自然会自己说明。
English: Mu asked the reason, the maid said: I am a low-ranking person, I do not know the reason, the girl will naturally explain herself.

古文：须臾设食，水陆必备。
现代文：片刻摆上饭食，山珍海味都很齐备。
English: A moment later, the food is set out, and the mountain delicacies and seafood are all ready.

古文：食讫，青衣数十人前导曰：县主至。
现代文：吃完饭，侍女几十人在前引导说：县主到。
English: After the meal, the maidservants led dozens of people in front and said: "The head of the county has arrived."

古文：见一女，年可十三四，姿色绝代。
现代文：看见一女子，年龄能有十三四岁，姿色可谓绝代佳人。
English: I saw a girl, maybe 13 or 14 years old, with the appearance of a once-in-a-lifetime beauty.

古文：拜跪讫，就坐，谓穆曰：庄居寂寞，久绝宾客，不意君子惠顾。然而与君有旧，不敢使婢仆言之，幸勿为笑。
现代文：拜跪完，就坐，对穆说：在山庄里居住很寂寞，好久谢绝宾客，没想到你光临，然而与你有旧交，不敢让婢仆说明，希望不被你见笑。
English: After kneeling, he sat down and said to Mu: "Living in the mountain village is very lonely. I have been thanking the guests for a long time. I didn't expect you to come, but I have an old friendship with you. I don't dare to let the servant explain, I hope you won't laugh at me."

古文：穆曰：羁旅之人，馆縠是惠，岂意特赐相见，兼许叙故。且穆平生未离京洛，是以江淮亲故，多不相识，幸尽言也。
现代文：穆说：作客他乡的人，供给食宿这就够优惠的，哪里想到特意相见，又答应叙谈故旧，再说我平生没离过京洛，因此江淮的亲戚故交，大多不相识，希望详尽说明。
English: Mu said: "As a guest from another village, it is quite advantageous to provide accommodation and meals. Whenever I want to meet someone, I agree to talk about the old days. Moreover, I have never left Jingluo in my life. Therefore, most of the relatives and friends of Jianghuai do not know each other. I hope to explain in detail.

古文：县主曰：欲自陈叙，窃恐惊动长者。
现代文：县主说：想要详细说明，我怕惊吓着你。
English: The head of the prefecture said: I want to explain in detail, I'm afraid I'll scare you.

古文：妾离人间，已二百年矣。
现代文：我离开人间，已经二百年了。
English: It's been two hundred years since I left this world.

古文：穆曰：穆之先祖，为隋室将军。县主必以穆忝有祖风，欲相顾托，乃平生之乐闻也。有何疑焉？
现代文：你从哪能认识我呢？开始穆听说姓杨，自称是县主，心里已经怀疑她，到问了些话，就知道是鬼，也无所畏惧。县主说：因为你是独孤将军的后代，想要托付于你，是我平生的乐事，有什么疑虑吗？
English: Where did you get to know me? At first, Mu heard that her surname was Yang and that she claimed to be the head of the county, and she was already suspicious in her heart. After asking some questions, she knew that she was a ghost, and she was not afraid. The head of the county said: Because you are the descendant of the lonely general, I want to entrust you with my life's work. Do you have any doubts?

古文：县主曰：欲自宣泄，实增悲感。妾父齐王，隋帝第二子。
现代文：县主又说：想要发泄心中的积郁，实在是增加悲哀和伤感，我父是齐王，隋帝的二儿子。
English: The head of the county also said, "If you want to vent the depression in your heart, it will really increase the sadness and sadness. My father is King Qi, the second son of Emperor Sui.

古文：隋室倾覆，妾之君父，同时遇害。
现代文：隋朝灭亡，我的父亲同时遇害。
English: The Sui Dynasty fell, and my father was killed at the same time.

古文：大臣宿将，无不从逆。唯君先将军，力拒逆党。
现代文：大臣宿将，没有不顺从逆党的，只有你的父亲独孤将军，奋力抵抗逆党。
English: There is no disobedience to the adverse party, only your father, the lone general, struggles to resist the adverse party.

古文：妾时年幼，常在左右，具见始末。
现代文：我当时年幼，常常在他身边，完全看见了事情的始末。
English: I was young, I was around him a lot, I saw the whole thing.

古文：及乱兵入宫，贼党有欲相逼者，妾因辱骂之，遂为所害。
现代文：到叛军进入宫中，贼党有的要逼迫我。我便辱骂他们，于是被杀害。
English: When the rebels entered the palace, some of the bandits tried to chase me, but I insulted them and was killed.

古文：因悲不自胜。
现代文：因而不胜悲痛。
English: It's heartbreaking.

古文：穆因问其当时人物及大业末事，大约多同隋史。
现代文：穆于是问她当时的人物和大业灭亡的事情，大致和隋史记载的相同。
English: Mu then asked her about the characters at that time and the demise of the great cause, which was roughly the same as that recorded in Sui history.

古文：久之，命酒对饮。
现代文：过了很久，命令摆酒对饮。
English: After a long time, he ordered the wine to be served.

古文：言多悲咽，为诗以赠穆曰：江都昔丧乱，阙下多构兵。
现代文：谈话中悲伤哭泣，作诗而赠给穆道：江都昔丧乱，阙下多构兵。
English: Weeping with sadness during the conversation, he wrote a poem and presented it to Mu Dao: Jiangdu was once in turmoil, and there were many soldiers under his command.

古文：豺虎恣吞噬，戈干日纵横。
现代文：豺虎恣吞噬，戈干日纵横。
English: Gog and Magog devour at will, Gog and Magog are rampant.

古文：逆徒自外至，半夜开重城。
现代文：逆徒自外至，半夜开重城。
English: The rebels came from outside and attacked the city in the middle of the night.

古文：膏血浸宫殿，刀枪倚檐楹。
现代文：膏血浸宫殿，刀枪倚檐楹。
English: The blood-soaked palace, the swords and guns.

古文：今知从逆者，乃是公与卿。
现代文：今知从逆者，乃是公与卿。
English: Those who now know and follow the contrarian are public and noble.

古文：白刃污黄屋，邦家遂因倾。
现代文：白刃污黄屋，邦家遂因倾。
English: A white-washed, filthy yellow house, and the state-owned companies are now reluctant to invest.

古文：疾风知劲草，世乱识忠臣。
现代文：疾风知劲草，世乱识忠臣。
English: The whirlwind knows the vigorous grass, the world knows the loyal vassal.

古文：哀哀独孤公，临死乃结缨。
现代文：哀哀独孤公，临死乃结缨。
English: Sorrow for the lonely, dying is a scab.

古文：天地既板荡，云雷时未亨。
现代文：天地既板荡，云雷时未亨。
English: Heaven and earth are already shaking, but the clouds and thunderstorms have not yet arrived.

古文：今者二百载，幽怀犹未平，山河风月古，陵寝露烟青。
现代文：今者二百载，幽怀犹未平。山河风月古，陵寝露烟青。
English: Two hundred years have passed since then, but the memories are still vivid. The mountains and rivers are ancient, and the mausoleum is smoke-stained.

古文：君子乘祖德，方垂忠烈名。
现代文：君子乘祖德，方垂忠烈名。
English: Nobles follow their forefathers, and nobles are loyal to their ancestors.

古文：华轩一会顾，土室以为荣。
现代文：华轩一会顾，土室以为荣。
English: As soon as Hua Xuan came to visit, Tsuchimuro was proud.

古文：丈夫立志操，存没感其情。
现代文：丈夫立志操，存没感其情。
English: My husband is determined to do it, whether he feels like it or not.

古文：求义若可托，谁能抱幽贞。
现代文：求义若可托，谁能抱幽贞。
English: If one can ask for righteousness, who can ask for chastity?

古文：穆深嗟叹，以为班婕妤所不及也。
现代文：穆深深叹息，认为班婕妤也赶不上她，就问她平生的制作。
English: Mu sighed deeply, thinking that even BenQ couldn't keep up with her, and asked her about her life's work.

古文：因问其平生制作，对曰：妾本无才，但好读古集。常见谢家姊妹及鲍氏诸女皆善属文，私怀景慕。
现代文：回答说：我本来没有才能，只是喜欢读些古集，常看见谢氏姐妹和鲍氏诸女都善于写文章，我心里景仰羡慕。
English: He replied, "Originally, I had no talent, but I liked to read some ancient anthologies. I often saw that the Xie sisters and the Bao sisters were good at writing articles. I admired and envied them.

古文：帝亦雅好文学，时时被命。
现代文：皇帝也喜好文学，常常受命。
English: The emperor was also fond of literature and was often ordered to read.

古文：当时薛道衡名高海内，妾每见其文，心颇鄙之。
现代文：当时薛道衡名扬天下，我每每看见她的文章，心里很鄙视她。
English: At that time, Xue Daoheng was famous all over the world. Whenever I saw her articles, I despised her.

古文：向者情发於中，但直叙事耳，何足称赞？
现代文：前者情发于中，可是只是平铺直叙事物罢了，哪里值得称赞。
English: The former is sentimental, but it's just a straightforward description of things, which is commendable.

古文：穆曰：县主才自天授，乃邺中七子之流。道衡安足比拟？
现代文：穆说：县主的才能是天授给的，是邺中七子之流的，道衡怎么能和你比拟。
English: Mu said, "The talent of the county head is given by heaven. He is one of the seven sons in the middle of the clan. How can Dao Heng be compared to you?"

古文：穆遂赋诗以答之曰：皇天昔降祸，隋室若缀旒。
现代文：穆于是赋诗而答谢她道：皇天昔降祸，隋室若缀旒。
English: Mu then wrote a poem to thank her, saying: "The emperor has brought misfortune in the past, and the Sui family is not happy.

古文：患难在双阙，干戈连九州。
现代文：患难在双阙，干戈连九州。
English: Trouble is brewing in Shuangliu and Gangoren in Kyushu.

古文：出门皆凶竖，所向多逆谋。
现代文：出门皆凶竖，所向多逆谋。
English: All of them are fierce when they go out, and most of them plot against each other.

古文：白日忽然暮，颓波不可收。
现代文：白日忽然暮，颓波不可收。
English: The day is suddenly over, and the ripples are unbearable.

古文：望夷既结衅，宗社亦贻羞。
现代文：望夷既结衅，宗社亦贻羞。
English: Bongyi is defiant, Soshe is ashamed.

古文：温室兵始合，宫闱血已流。
现代文：温室兵始合，宫闱血已流。
English: The greenhouse soldiers have begun to unite, and the blood of the imperial concubine has flowed.

古文：悯哉吹萧子，悲啼下凤楼。
现代文：悯哉吹萧子，悲啼下凤楼。
English: Pity blows Xiao Zi, and sorrow goes down the phoenix tower.

古文：霜刃徒见逼，玉笄不可求。
现代文：霜刃徒见逼，玉笄不可求。
English: The frost blade is hard to see, and the jade bead is impossible to obtain.

古文：罗襦遗侍者，粉黛成仇雠。
现代文：罗襦遗侍者，粉黛成仇仇。
English: The waiter of Luo Yao's widow, Fan Dai becomes an enemy.

古文：邦国已沧覆，余生誓不留。
现代文：邦国已沦覆，余生誓不留。
English: The state has been overthrown, and I swear that I will not leave it for the rest of my life.

古文：英英将军祖，独以社禝忧。
现代文：英英将军祖，独以社禝忧。
English: Ying Ying, the founder of the Chinese nation, is the only one who is worried about the society.

古文：丹血溅黼扆，丰肌染戈矛。
现代文：丹血溅黼扆，丰肌染戈矛。
English: Dan's blood is spattered with pus, his plump skin stained with lice.

古文：今来见禾黍，尽日悲宗周。
现代文：今来见禾黍，尽日悲宗周。
English: Now I come to see the grass wither, and the days of mourning begin.

古文：玉树已寂寞，泉台千万秋。
现代文：王树已寂寞，泉台千万秋。
English: The king tree is lonely, the fountainhead is fading.

古文：感兹一顾重，愿以死节酬。
现代文：感兹一顾重，愿以死节酬。
English: I'm willing to die for it.

古文：幽显傥不昧，中焉契绸缪。
现代文：幽显傥不昧，中焉契绸缪。
English: Subtle, subtle, subtle, subtle, subtle, subtle.

古文：县主吟讽数四，悲不自堪者久之。
现代文：县主吟诵多遍，悲痛得不能忍受了很久。
English: The county head chanted many times, and the grief was unbearable for a long time.

古文：逡巡，青衣数人皆持乐器，而有一人前白县主曰：言及旧事，但恐使人悲感，且独郎新至，岂可终夜啼泪相对乎？
现代文：徘徊一阵，侍女多人都拿着乐器，有一人上前告诉县主说：说起旧事，只怕使人感到悲伤，况且独郎新到，怎么能整夜啼哭洒泪相对呢？
English: After wandering around for a while, many of the maids were carrying musical instruments. One of them came forward to tell the prefectural lord: "Talking about old things is only likely to make people feel sad. Besides, since the new arrival, how can you cry and shed tears all night long?

古文：某请充使，召来家娘子相伴。
现代文：我愿充当使者，召来家娘子相伴。
English: I would like to act as an emissary and call my daughter to accompany me.

古文：县主许之。
现代文：县主答应了她。
English: The prefectural governor agreed to her request.

古文：既而谓穆曰：此大将军来护儿歌人，亦当时遇害。近在於此？
现代文：不久之后对穆说：这人是大将军来护儿的歌人，也是当时遇害，就在附近。
English: Soon after, he said to Mu, "This is the singer whom the general came to protect, who was also killed at that time, and he is nearby."

古文：俄顷即至，甚有姿色，善言笑。
现代文：一会就到了，很有姿色，善于说笑。
English: He was there in no time, very personable and good at telling jokes.

古文：因作乐，纵饮甚欢。
现代文：于是奏乐唱曲，纵情饮酒非常欢乐。
English: So there was a lot of singing, a lot of drinking, a lot of fun.

古文：来氏歌数曲，穆唯记其一曰：平阳县中树，久作广陵尘。
现代文：来氏唱了几支曲子，穆只记住其中一曲道：平阳县中树，久作广陵尘。
English: Mr. Lai sang several pieces, but Mu only remembered one of them: Zhongshu, Pingyang County, and Guangling dust.

古文：不意阿郎至，黄泉重见春。
现代文：不意阿郎至，黄泉重见春。
English: Unexpectedly, Aro arrives, and the dead spring back to life.

古文：良久曰：妾与县主居此二百余年，岂期今日忽有佳礼？
现代文：过了很久说：我和县主在这住了二百多年，哪里想到今天忽然有佳期大礼。
English: After a long time, he said, "I have lived here for more than two hundred years with the head of the county, but I suddenly remembered that today is a great festival.

古文：县主曰：本以独孤公忠烈之家，愿一相见，欲豁幽愤耳。岂可以尘土之质，厚诬君子。
现代文：县主说：本来因为独孤公是忠烈之家，愿意与他相见，要疏散一下幽怨愤恨之事，怎能以卑贱之躯，厚损于君子呢。
English: The lord of the county said: Originally, because the lonely lord is the home of the faithful, I am willing to meet with him to dispel the resentment, how can I use my humble body to harm the gentleman?

古文：穆因吟县主诗落句云：求义若可托，谁能抱幽贞。
现代文：穆于是吟咏县主末尾两句诗道：求义若可托，谁能抱幽贞。
English: Mu then recited the last two lines of a poem by the lord of Jingya County: "If you can only seek righteousness, who can embrace chastity?"

古文：县主微笑曰：亦大强记。
现代文：县主微笑道：真是太好的记忆力。
English: The head of the prefecture smiled and said, "You have a really good memory."

古文：穆因以歌讽之曰：金闺久无主，罗袂坐生尘。
现代文：穆于是用诗歌暗示道：金闺久无主，罗袂坐生尘。
English: Mu then hinted with a poem: The golden girl has been without a master for a long time, and Luo Yao is sitting in the dust.

古文：愿作吹萧伴，同为骑凤人。
现代文：愿作吹萧伴，同为骑凤人。
English: I would like to be a partner of the wind ensemble and a phoenix rider.

古文：县主亦以歌答曰：朱轩下长路，青草启孤坟。
现代文：县主也用诗歌答道：朱轩下长路，青草启孤坟。
English: The head of the county also replied with a poem: Zhu Xuan has a long way to go, and the grass is the beginning of a lonely grave.

古文：犹胜阳台上，空看朝暮云。
现代文：犹胜阳台上，空看朝暮云。
English: On the balcony in Yusheng, the morning and evening clouds can be seen in the sky.

古文：来氏曰：曩日萧皇后欲以县主配后兄子，正见江都之乱，其事遂寝。
现代文：来氏说：从前萧皇后想把县主许配给皇后哥哥的儿子，正好遇上江都的叛乱，那事就完了。
English: Mr. Lai said: Once upon a time, Empress Xiao wanted to marry off the county head to the son of the Empress's brother, but just happened to encounter a rebellion in Jiangdu, and that was the end of it.

古文：独狐冠冕盛族，忠烈之家。今日相对，正为佳耦。
现代文：独孤是仕宦盛族，忠烈人家，今天相遇，可算是佳偶。
English: You are the only one who is from a high-ranking family, a family of loyal people. If you meet them today, you can consider them to be a good match.

古文：穆问县主所封何邑，县主云：儿以仁寿四年生於京师，时驾幸仁寿宫，因名寿儿。
现代文：穆问县所封何地。县主说：我于仁寿四年生于京城，当时皇帝到仁寿宫，因此叫寿儿。
English: Mu asked where the county was located. The head of the county said, "I was born in the fourth year of Jinshou in Beijing. At that time, the emperor went to the Jinshou Palace. That's why I'm called Shouer."

古文：明年，太子即位，封清河县主。
现代文：第二年，太子即位，封为清河县主。
English: The following year, the crown prince ascended to the throne and became the lord of Qinghe County.

古文：上幸江都宫，徙封临淄县主。
现代文：皇上到江都宫，改封临淄县主。
English: The emperor went to the Jiangdu Palace and changed his title to the head of Linyi County.

古文：特为皇后所爱，常在宫内。
现代文：只因被皇后喜爱，常在宫内。
English: Only because he was loved by the queen, he was often in the palace.

古文：来曰：夜已深矣，独孤郎宜且成礼。某当奉候於东阁，伺晓拜贺。
现代文：来氏说：夜已深了，独孤郎应该姑且完成婚礼，我在东阁等候，到天亮再朝拜祝贺。
English: Mr. Lai said, "It's already late at night. I should let the bachelor complete the wedding ceremony. I'll wait in the east pavilion and congratulate the bride and groom at dawn."

古文：於是群婢戏谑，皆若人间之仪。
现代文：于是众奴婢逗趣开玩笑，都象人间的礼仪。
English: So all the slaves and maidservants joked and joked, just like human etiquette.

古文：既入卧内，但觉其气奄然。其身颇冷。
现代文：进入卧室后，只觉得她的精神振奋，她的身体很凉。
English: After entering the bedroom, I only felt that her spirit was uplifted and her body was very cool.

古文：顷之，泣谓穆曰：殂谢之人，久为尘灰。幸将奉事巾栉，死且不朽。
现代文：一会儿，哭着对穆说：死亡的人，时间久了就变成尘灰，幸亏事奉的人擦洗梳理，死而没有腐朽。
English: After a while, she cried and said to Mu, "Those who die turn into dust after a long time. Fortunately, those who serve scrub and comb, and die without decay.

古文：於是复召来氏，饮宴如初。
现代文：便又召来氏，饮宴如初。
English: He then summoned Mr. Shi again, and the banquet continued as before.

古文：因问穆曰：承君今适江都，何日当回？
现代文：于是问穆说：承蒙你今天到江都去，什么时候回来？
English: So he asked Mu, "Thank you for going to Jiangdu today, when will you be back?

古文：有以奉托可乎？
现代文：有件事拜托你可以吗？
English: Can you do one thing, please?

古文：穆曰：死且不顾。其他有何不可乎？
现代文：穆说：死都不顾惜，其他的事有什么不可以的呢！
English: Mu said, "I don't care about death, what other things are not allowed!"

古文：县主曰：帝既改葬，妾独居此。今为恶王墓所扰，欲聘妾为姬。
现代文：县主说：皇帝已改葬，我单独住在这，现在被恶王墓所骚扰，想娶我做姬妾。
English: The county head said, "The emperor has been reburied, I live here alone, and now I am being harassed by the tomb of the evil king, who wants to marry me as his concubine."

古文：妾以帝王之家，义不为凶鬼所辱。
现代文：我凭着帝王之家，决不被凶鬼所侮辱。
English: By virtue of the Imperial House, I will never be insulted by evil spirits.

古文：本愿相见，正为此耳。
现代文：本来与你相见，还是为了这件事。
English: I was supposed to meet with you, but it's because of this.

古文：君将适江都，路出其墓下，以妾之故，必为其所困。
现代文：你将要到江都去，路过他的墓下，因为我的原因，一定被他所困扰。
English: You will go to Jiangdu, pass by his grave, because of me, you must be troubled by him.

古文：道士王善交书符於淮南市，能制鬼神。
现代文：道士王善交在淮南市写符，能制止鬼神。
English: Taoist priest Wang Shanjiao writes symbols in Huainan City, which can stop ghosts and gods.

古文：君若求之，即免矣。
现代文：你如果求他，就可免祸。
English: If you ask him, you will be spared.

古文：又曰：妾居此亦终不安。君江南回日，能挈我俱去，葬我洛阳北坡上，得与君相近。永有依托，生成之惠也。
现代文：又说；我住在这里也是终究不安心，你从江南回来的时候，能够带我一起离去，把我葬在洛阳的北坡上，能和你接近，永远有个依靠，是给我最大的恩惠。
English: When you come back from the south of the Yangtze River, you can take me away with you and bury me on the north slope of Luoyang. Being able to be close to you and always have someone to rely on is the greatest blessing for me.

古文：穆皆许诺，曰：迁葬之礼，乃穆家事矣。
现代文：穆都答应了。说：迁葬的礼事，是我家的事。
English: Mu Du agreed, saying, "The funeral ceremony is my family's business.

古文：酒酣，倚穆而歌曰：露草芊芊，颓荣未迁。
现代文：酒酣，靠着穆而歌道：露草芊芊，颓荣未迁。
English: Sake lees, leaning on Mu and singing: Dew grass lees, the glory has not moved.

古文：自我居此，於今几年。
现代文：自我居此，於今几年。
English: I've been living here for a few years now.

古文：与君先祖，畴昔恩波。
现代文：与君先祖，畴昔恩波。
English: With your ancestors, go back to the old Enpo.

古文：死生契阔，忽此相过。
现代文：死生契阔，忽此相过。
English: Life and death are intertwined.

古文：谁谓佳期，寻当别离。
现代文：谁谓佳期，寻当别离。
English: It's the perfect time to say goodbye.

古文：俟君之北，携手同归。
现代文：俟君之北，携手同归。
English: To the north of Shikun, let's go back together.

古文：因下泪沾巾，来氏亦泣语穆曰：独孤郎勿负县主厚意。
现代文：于是滴下泪水沾湿了手巾。来氏也哭着告诉穆说：独孤郎不要辜负了县主的深情厚意。
English: As a result, drops of tears soaked his hand towel. Mr. Lai also cried and told Mr. Mu, "Don't let Dokuro fall short of the affectionate kindness of the county head."

古文：穆因以歌答曰：伊彼谁阳，在天一方。
现代文：穆于是用诗歌回答说：伊彼谁阳，在天一方。
English: Mu then replied with a poem: "Yi, he, who, yang, is on the other side of the sky."

古文：驱马悠悠，忽来异乡。
现代文：驱马悠悠，忽来异乡。
English: You drive your horse for a long time, and suddenly you are in a foreign country.

古文：情通幽显，获此相见。
现代文：情通幽显，获此相见。
English: They are clearly in love, and they get to see each other.

古文：义感畴昔，言存缱绻。
现代文：义感畴昔，言存缱绻。
English: A sense of meaning from the past lingers.

古文：清江桂州，可以遨游。
现代文：清江桂州，可以遨游。
English: Qingjiang, Guizhou, you can travel.

古文：惟子之故，不遑淹流。
现代文：惟子之故，不遑淹流。
English: However, due to the death of his son, he was not able to swim in the river.

古文：县主泣谢穆曰：一辰佳贶，永以为好。
现代文：县主哭着谢别穆说：承蒙你的恩赐，永远把它做为友好。
English: The chief of the county wept and thanked Beimo, saying, "I have received your gift, and I will always regard it as friendship.

古文：须臾，天将明，县主涕泣，穆亦相对而泣。
现代文：片刻，天将要亮。县主哭泣，穆也相对哭泣。
English: In a moment, the sky will be bright. The head of the county is crying, and Mu is also crying.

古文：凡在坐者，穆皆与辞诀。
现代文：所有在坐的，穆都和他们道别。
English: Everyone who was sitting had to say goodbye to them.

古文：既出门，回顾无所见。地平坦，亦无坟墓之象。
现代文：出门后，回头看什么也没看到，地势平坦，也没有坟墓的迹象。
English: After leaving the house, I looked back and saw nothing. The terrain was flat and there was no sign of a grave.

古文：穆意恍惚，良久乃定，因徙柳树一株以志之。
现代文：穆精神恍惚，过了很久才定神，于是走到一柳树下做下标记。
English: Mu was in a trance, and it took him a long time to calm down, so he went to a willow tree to make a mark.

古文：家人索穆颇甚，忽复数日，穆乃入淮南市果遇王善交於市，遂获一符。
现代文：家里人寻找穆很着急。过了几天，穆到淮南市，果然在市上遇见王善交。于是得到一个符。
English: The family members were very anxious to find Mu. A few days later, Mu arrived in Huainan City and met Wang Shengjiao in the market. So he got a badge.

古文：时年正月，自江南回，发其地数尺，得骸骨一具。以衣衾敛之。
现代文：他到了恶王墓下，被旋风所扑三四次。穆就拿出符让他看，才停止原先穆很不信鬼神之事，听到县主说的，没有不明白的。这年正月，从江南回来，挖地数尺，挖得骸骨一具，用衣被盛敛它。
English: When he reached the grave of the evil king, he was pelted three or four times by the whirlwind. Mu took out a symbol and showed it to him, only then did he stop believing in ghosts and gods. When he heard what the county head said, there was nothing he didn't understand. In the first month of this year, after returning from the south of the Yangtze River, he dug a few feet into the ground, dug up a skeleton, and covered it with clothes.

古文：穆以其死时草草，葬必有阙，既至洛阳，大具威仪，亲为祝文以祭之，葬于安善门外。
现代文：穆认为她死的时候草率了事，安葬时一定不足。到了洛阳后，大肆备完了礼仪，亲自写祝文以祭祀她，安葬在安善门外。
English: Mu thought that she was hasty when she died, and her burial must have been inadequate. After arriving in Luoyang, she completed the etiquette, personally wrote a congratulatory message to worship her, and was buried outside the Anshan Gate.

古文：其夜，独宿于村墅，县主复至，谓穆曰：迁神之德，万古不忘。幽滞之人，分不及此者久矣。
现代文：那天夜里，独自住在村庄别墅。县主又来了，对穆说：迁神的恩德，万古不忘，阴间滞留的人，料想不能到这地步已很久了。
English: That night, living alone in a villa in the village, the chief of the county came again and said to Mu, "God's kindness will never be forgotten, and those who remain in the netherworld have long suspected that they would not be able to reach this point.

古文：幸君惠存旧好，使我永得安宅。
现代文：幸亏你没忘旧好，使我永远得到安全的住宅。
English: Thanks to you for not forgetting the good old days, I will always have a safe home.

古文：道途之间，所不奉见者，以君见我腐秽，恐致嫌恶耳。
现代文：道途之间，所不能相见的，以为你看我腐烂秽气，怕招致嫌弃厌恶。
English: Between the paths, what cannot be seen, think you see me rotting filth, afraid to cause disgust.

古文：穆睹其车舆导从，悉光赫於当时。
现代文：穆看她的车和引导随从，都光彩显赫于当时。
English: Mu looked at her car and guided the entourage, both resplendent at the time.

古文：县主亦指之曰：皆君之赐也。岁至己卯，当遂相见。
现代文：县主就指着那些说：都是你赐给的，到了巳卯年，就是我们相见的时候。
English: The head of the county then pointed to those who said, "You gave it all to us. In the year of the snake, that's when we'll meet."

古文：其夕因宿穆所，至明乃去。
现代文：那天晚上就住在穆的处所，到天明才离开。
English: That night, he stayed at Mu's place and did not leave until dawn.

古文：穆既为数千里迁葬，复倡言其事，凡穆之故旧亲戚无不毕知。
现代文：穆已经为她到几千里外迁葬，又说明了那些事情，凡是穆的朋友亲戚没有不知道的。
English: Mu has moved thousands of miles away to bury her, and has explained those things that none of Mu's friends and relatives did not know.

古文：贞元十五年，岁在己卯，穆晨起将出，忽见数车至其家，谓穆曰：县主有命。
现代文：贞元十五年，正是巳卯年，穆早晨起来将要外出，忽然看见几辆车到了他家。对穆说：县主有命。
English: In the 15th year of the Zhengyuan era, the year of the Snake, Mu got up in the morning and was about to go out. Suddenly, he saw several cars arrive at his house. He said to Mu: "The county head is still alive."

古文：穆曰：相见之期至乎？
现代文：穆说：相见的日期到了。
English: Mu said: "The date of our meeting has come.

古文：其夕暴亡，遂合葬于杨氏。
现代文：那天早晨暴病身亡，于是同杨氏合葬。
English: He died of a violent illness that morning, and was buried together with Mr. Yang.

古文：华州参军
现代文：华州参军
English: Huazhou joins the army

古文：华州柳参军，名族之子。寡欲早孤，无兄弟。
现代文：华州的柳参军，是名门望族的后代，少欲望而早年丧父，没有哥哥弟弟。
English: Liu, who joined the army in Huazhou, is a descendant of a prestigious family. He lost his father at an early age due to lack of desire, and has no brothers.

古文：罢官，於长安闲游。
现代文：罢官后，在长安闲游。
English: After his dismissal, he went for a leisurely stroll in Chang'an.

古文：上巳日，曲江见一车子，饰以金碧，半立浅水之中。后帘徐褰，见掺手如玉，指画令摘芙蕖。
现代文：三月三日，在曲江看见一辆车子，用金碧装饰，半停在浅水里，后帘慢慢地揭开，露出一只纤美的手象白玉，指点筹划让摘芙蕖。
English: On March 3rd, in Qujiang, I saw a car, decorated with gold and blue, half-parked in shallow water, the back curtain slowly opened, revealing a delicate hand like a white jade, pointing out the plan to pick the jade.

古文：女之容色绝代，斜睨柳生良久。
现代文：女人的容貌是绝代佳人，斜眼看柳生很久。
English: The woman's appearance is the epitome of beauty. She looks at Yagyuu with slanted eyes for a long time.

古文：柳生鞭马从之，即见车子入永崇里。
现代文：柳生策马跟随她，就看见车子进入永崇里。
English: Yagyu Zema followed her and saw the car enter Yongzhongli.

古文：柳生访其姓崔氏，女亦有母。有青衣，字轻红。
现代文：柳生打听她姓崔，她还有母亲，有婢女，名字叫轻红。
English: Liu Sheng inquired about her surname, Cui. She also had a mother and a maid, whose name was Qianhong.

古文：柳生不甚贫，多方略轻红，竟不之受。
现代文：柳生不很穷，多方贿赂轻红，竟然不接受他。
English: Yagyu is not very poor. He was bribed by many people to not accept him.

古文：他日，崔氏女有疾，其舅执金吾王，因候其妹，且告之，请为子纳焉。
现代文：另一天，崔氏有病，她的舅舅做执金吾官，于是问候她的妹妹，并且告诉她，要求为自己的儿子娶崔氏。
English: On another day, when Ms. Cui was ill, her uncle, who was the official in charge of handling the money, greeted her sister and told her that he wanted Ms. Cui to marry his son.

古文：崔氏不乐，其母不敢违兄之命。
现代文：崔氏不高兴，她的母亲不敢违背哥哥的命令。
English: Ms. Cui was not happy. Her mother did not dare to disobey her brother's orders.

古文：女曰：愿嫁得前时柳生足矣。必不允，某与外兄终恐不生全。
现代文：女儿说：能够嫁给前时见到的柳生就满足了，坚决不答应，我与表兄终究恐怕不能保全生命。
English: My daughter said that she would be satisfied if she could marry the Liu Sheng whom she had seen before, but she resolutely refused to do so. After all, I was afraid that my cousin and I would not be able to save our lives.

古文：其母念女之深，乃命轻红於荐福寺僧道省院达意。
现代文：她的母亲深深地惦念着女儿，就让轻红到荐福寺僧道省院传达意思。
English: Her mother deeply pined for her daughter, so she asked Qianhong to convey her wishes to the Provincial Institute of Buddhist Studies at Ruifu Temple.

古文：柳生为轻红所诱，又悦轻红，轻红大怒曰：君性正粗，奈何小娘子如此侍於君？
现代文：柳生被轻红诱惑，又取悦轻红。轻红大怒道：你的性情确实粗俗，小娘子如此对待你怎么办？
English: Yuesheng was seduced by and pleased with Xiaohong. Xiaohong said angrily, "Your disposition is indeed vulgar. How can a little girl treat you like this?"

古文：某一微贱，便忘前好，欲保岁寒，其可得乎？
现代文：我是一个微贱的人，就忘了前好，要保往岁寒，那是可能的吗？
English: I am a lowly person, so I forget the good times and want to preserve the bad times. Is that possible?

古文：某且以足下事白小娘子。
现代文：我将把你的事告诉小娘子。
English: I'll tell the little girl about you.

古文：柳生再拜，谢不敏然。
现代文：柳生拜了又拜，谢罪认识到自己糊涂。
English: Liu Sheng bowed again and again, and Xie Sin realized that he was confused.

古文：始曰：夫人惜小娘子情切，今小娘子不乐适王家，夫人是以偷成婚约。君可三两日内就礼事。
现代文：才说：夫人怜异小娘子情真意切，现在小娘子不愿意嫁王家，夫人因此要偷偷地完成婚约，你可在三两日内完成婚礼。
English: Then he said, "My wife loves the little girl with all her heart. Now the little girl doesn't want to marry into the royal family, so my wife wants to secretly complete the marriage contract. You can complete the wedding in three or two days.

古文：柳生极喜，自备数百千财礼，期内结婚。
现代文：柳生非常高兴，自己准备了几百千的彩礼，在约定的时间里结婚。
English: Yoo Seung was very happy. He prepared several hundred thousand in bride price and got married at the agreed time.

古文：后五日，柳挈妻与轻红於金城里居。
现代文：结婚后五天，柳生携带妻子和轻红到金城里居住。
English: Five days after the wedding, Yoo Seung took his wife and Gyeonghong to live in Kinseong.

古文：及旬月外，金吾到永崇，其母王氏泣云：某夫亡，子女孤独，被侄不待礼会，强窃女去矣。兄岂无教训之道？
现代文：到了一个月后，金吾到永崇里。她的母亲王氏哭着说：我夫死去，子女孤单，遭受侄儿的无礼相待，强行窃取女儿离去，哥哥难道没有教训他的方法？
English: A month later, Kingo went to Yongzhongli. Her mother, Wang, cried and said, "My husband died, my children are alone, I have been treated rudely by my nephew, and he forcibly stole my daughter away. Doesn't my brother have a way to teach him a lesson?"

古文：金吾大怒，归笞其子数十。
现代文：金吾大怒，回去鞭打他的儿子几十下。
English: Kingo flew into a rage and went back to whip his son dozens of times.

古文：密令捕访，弥年无获。
现代文：密令追捕查访，一年也没有捕获。
English: A secret order was issued to track down and investigate, but no arrests were made for a year.

古文：无何，王氏殂，柳生挈妻与轻红自金城赴丧。金吾之子既见，遂告父，父擒柳生。
现代文：不久，王氏死。柳生携带妻子和轻红到金城里奔丧，金吾的儿子看见了，于是告诉他的父亲。
English: Soon after, Mr. Wang died. Willow took his wife and Light Red to Jincheng to mourn. Kingu's son saw this and told his father.

古文：生云：某於外姑王氏处纳采娶妻，非越礼私诱也。家人大小皆熟知之。
现代文：他父擒住柳生，柳生说：我在岳母王氏处纳采娶妻，不是越礼私自诱骗，家里人老少都熟知此事。
English: His father hugged Liu Sheng, and Liu Sheng said, "I married my wife at my mother-in-law Wang's house, it was not a trick. Everyone in my family, young and old, knew about it.

古文：王氏既殁，无所明，遂讼於官。公断王家先下财礼，合归王家。
现代文：王氏已死，无人证明。于是诉讼到官府，公家断定王家先下财礼，应归王家。
English: The Wang family was dead, and no one could prove it. So the lawsuit went to the government, and the officials concluded that the Wang family had paid the bribe first, and the money should go to the royal family.

古文：金吾子常悦表妹，亦不怨前横也。
现代文：金吾的儿子曾经喜欢仰慕表妹，也不怨恨先前发生的事。
English: Kingo's son used to admire his cousin and did not resent what had happened.

古文：经数年，轻红竟洁己处焉。
现代文：经过几年，轻红竟保持自己的纯洁相处在那里。
English: After a few years, Xiaohong actually managed to maintain her purity while living there.

古文：金吾又亡，移其宅於崇义里。
现代文：金吾又死了，搬家到崇义里。
English: Kingo died again and moved to Chongyili.

古文：崔氏不乐事外兄，乃使轻红访柳生所在，时柳生尚居金城里。
现代文：崔氏不乐意侍奉表兄，就让轻红巡访柳生的住所，这时柳生还住在金城里。
English: Mr. Cui was not happy to serve his cousin, so he asked Ms. Qianhong to visit Mr. Liuxiang's residence. At that time, Mr. Liuxiang still lived in Jincheng.

古文：崔氏又使轻红与柳生为期，兼赍看圃竖，令积粪堆与宅垣齐，崔氏女遂与轻红蹑之，同诣柳生。
现代文：崔氏又让轻红和柳生约定时间。同时赏赐看园子的童仆，让他积粪堆与院墙一齐高。崔氏女就和轻红踏着粪堆离去，一同到柳生处。
English: Cui also asked Qiao Hong and Liu Sheng to agree on a time. At the same time, he rewarded the child servant who watched the garden and let him pile up the dung heap as high as the courtyard wall. Cui's daughter and Qiao Hong stepped on the dung heap and left to go to Liu Sheng's place.

古文：柳生惊喜，又不出城，只迁群贤里。
现代文：柳生又惊又喜，又不用出城，只是搬迁到群贤里。
English: Surprised and delighted, Yagyu did not have to leave the city, but just moved to Gunzenri.

古文：后本夫终寻崔氏女，知群贤里住，复与讼夺之。
现代文：后来本夫终于寻到崔氏女，知道在群贤里住，又告状夺回来。
English: Later, this husband finally found Cui's daughter, knew that she lived in the group of sages, and sued to win her back.

古文：王生情深，崔氏万途求免，讬以体孕，又不责而纳焉。
现代文：王生一往情深，崔氏多方要求免除，以身体怀孕进行推托。王生又不责备而宽容了她。
English: Wang Sheng was deeply in love with her. Ms. Cui made many requests to be exempted, and used her physical pregnancy as an excuse. Wang Sheng did not blame her and tolerated her.

古文：柳生长流江陵。
现代文：柳生顺江到江陵。
English: Yagyu Shunjiang to Gangneung.

古文：二年，崔氏女与轻红相继而殁，王生送丧，哀恸之礼至矣。
现代文：过了二年，崔氏女和轻红相继死去，王生送葬，哀伤恸哭达到极点。
English: After two years, Cui's daughter and Guan Hong died one after another, Wang Sheng attended the funeral, and the grief and weeping reached an extreme.

古文：轻红亦葬於崔氏坟侧。
现代文：轻红也葬在崔氏坟边上。
English: Guan Hong was also buried on the edge of Cui's grave.

古文：柳生江南闲居，春二月，繁花满庭，追念崔氏女，凝想形影，且不知存亡。
现代文：柳生在江陵闲住，春天二月，繁花满院。追想思念崔氏女，凝思苦想她的形态身影，又不知道她生死存亡。
English: Yoo Seung lived in Gangneung, and in spring and February, the garden was full of flowers. He thought about Choi's daughter, puzzled over her appearance, and didn't know if she was alive or dead.

古文：忽闻扣门甚急，俄见轻红抱妆奁而进，乃曰：小娘子且至。
现代文：忽然听到很急的扣门声，一会儿看见轻红抱着妆奁进来，还说：小娘子将要到了。
English: Suddenly she heard the door slam shut very quickly, and a moment later she saw Xiaohong come in with her makeup bag, saying, "The little maiden is about to arrive."

古文：闻似车马之声，比崔氏女入门，更无他见。
现代文：所到象有车马的声音，等到崔氏女进门，再没有见到别人。
English: There was the sound of horses and chariots everywhere, and when Cui's daughter entered the door, she didn't see anyone else.

古文：柳生与崔氏女契阔，悲欢之甚。
现代文：柳生和崔氏女叙谈阔别之情，悲伤欢乐达到极点。
English: Yoo Seung and Choi's daughter talk about their feelings of separation, and the sadness and joy reach their peak.

古文：问其由，则曰：某已与王氏诀，自此可以同穴矣。人生意专，必果夙愿。
现代文：问她缘由，就说：我已与王生诀别，从此可以同葬一穴了，人生心专一，夙愿一定能产现。
English: When I asked her why, she said: I have said goodbye to Wang Sheng, and from now on, we can be buried together. I am single-minded in life, and my wish will surely come true.

古文：因言曰：某少习乐，箜篌中颇有功。
现代文：于是又说道：我年少就学习乐器，对箜筱很有功夫。
English: Then he added: "I started learning musical instruments at a young age, and I'm very good at the gong.

古文：柳生即时买箜篌，调弄绝妙。
现代文：柳生立刻买了箜筱。抚弄乐器绝妙。
English: Yagyu immediately bought a cymbal. He plays the instrument brilliantly.

古文：二年间，可谓尽平生矣。
现代文：二年间，可以称得上尽了平生的欢乐。
English: In two years, I can say that I have had the time of my life.

古文：无何，王生旧使苍头过柳生之门，见轻红，惊不知其然。又疑人有相似者，未敢遽言。
现代文：不久，王生过去使唤的家奴路过柳生家门，看见轻红很吃惊，不知那原因，又怀疑人有相似的，未敢立刻说。
English: Not long after, the family slave whom Wang Sheng had summoned in the past passed by the door of Liu Sheng's house. He was very surprised to see Xiaohong. He did not know the reason, and suspected that there was someone similar. He did not dare to say anything immediately.

古文：问闾里，又云流人柳参军。
现代文：打听闾里，又说有个外来人柳参军，很怪。
English: It's very strange to inquire in the village and be told that an outsider will join the army.

古文：弥怪，更伺之，轻红亦知是王生家人，因具言於柳生，匿之。
现代文：再去探察。轻红也知道是王生家人，于是全都告诉了柳生，藏起来。
English: Light red also knew that they were Wang Sheng's family, so they all told Liu Sheng and hid.

古文：王生苍头却还城，具以其事言於王生。
现代文：王生的家奴回到城里，把这事全都告诉了王生。
English: When Wang Sheng's manservant returned to the city, he told Wang Sheng everything.

古文：王生闻之，命驾千里而来。
现代文：王生听了，命令驾车千里而来。
English: Wang Sheng listened and ordered him to drive thousands of miles to come.

古文：既至柳生家门，於隙窥之，正见柳生坦腹於临轩榻上，崔氏女新妆，轻红捧镜於其侧，崔氏匀铜黄未竟。
现代文：到了柳生门前，从缝隙往里窥视，正看见柳生坦腹在临轩榻上，崔氏女正着新妆，轻红捧镜在她身边，崔氏匀抹铅黄未完。
English: When she arrived in front of Yoo Sang's door, she peeked in through a crack and saw Yoo Sang with a flat stomach on a tatami mat, Choi's daughter wearing new makeup, holding a light red mirror next to her, and Choi's makeup still being applied.

古文：王生门外极叫，轻红镜坠地，有声如磬，崔氏与王生无憾。遂入，柳生惊，亦待如宾礼。俄又失崔氏所在。
现代文：王生在门外极力喊叫，轻红手中镜子掉到地上，声音象击磬。崔氏与王生没有恨怨，于是进入，柳生吃惊，以宾礼相待，一会儿崔氏不见了。
English: Wang Sheng shouted loudly outside the door, the mirror fell to the ground in the light red hands, the sound was like a hammering. Cui and Wang Sheng did not hate each other, so they entered, Liu Sheng was surprised, treated each other with courtesy, and Cui disappeared for a while.

古文：柳生与王生从容言事，二人相看不喻，大异之。
现代文：柳生与王生舒缓地谈这件事，二人相看不能明白，非常奇怪。
English: Liu Sheng and Wang Sheng talk about this matter in a relaxed manner. The two cannot understand each other, which is very strange.

古文：相与造长安，发崔氏所葬验之，即江陵所施铅黄如新，衣服肌肉，且无损败，轻红亦然。
现代文：一起到长安，挖掘崔氏墓葬验证它，那在江陵所施用的铅黄如新。衣服肌肉，尚无损坏腐败，轻红也是这样。
English: As far as Chang'an, the excavation of Cui's tomb to verify it, the lead yellow used in Gangneung is as good as new. The clothing muscles have not been damaged and corrupted, and the light red is also the same.

古文：柳与王相誓，却葬之。
现代文：柳与王互相发誓，再埋葬了她。
English: Liu and Wang swore to each other and then buried her.

古文：二人入终南山访道，遂不返焉。
现代文：二人进入终南山访道求仙，就再也没有返回来。
English: The two went into the final Nanshan Road to seek immortality, and never came back.

古文：赵叔牙
现代文：赵叔牙
English: Zhao Shuga

古文：贞元十四年戊寅夏五月旱，徐州散将赵叔牙移入新宅。
现代文：贞元十四年戊寅夏五月天大旱，徐州散将赵叔牙搬入新的住宅。
English: In the 14th year of Zhengyuan, there was a severe drought in May, and Xuzhou moved Zhao Shouya into a new house.

古文：夜中，有物窗外动摇窗纸声，问之，其物是鬼，吴时刘得言，窟宅在公床下，往来稍难。公为我移出，城南台雨山下有双大树，是我妻墓，墓东埋之。
现代文：夜里，听到有东西在窗外动摇窗纸的声音。问他，那物说：我是鬼，是吴时的刘得言，穴窟在你的床下，出入很困难，你把我移出来，城南台雨山下有两棵大树，是我妻子的坟墓，在墓东埋我。
English: In the night, he heard the sound of something shaking the window paper outside the window. When he asked, the thing said: "I am a ghost, it is Wu Shi's Liu Deryan, the cave is under your bed, it is difficult to get in and out, you move me out, there are two big trees under Chengnan Dayu Mountain, it is my wife's grave, bury me in the east of the grave.

古文：后必相报。
现代文：以后一定报答你。
English: I'll repay you later.

古文：叔牙明旦出城，视之信。
现代文：叔牙第二天出城，看了确实那样。
English: My uncle went out of town the next day and saw exactly that.

古文：即日掘床下，深三尺，得骸骨，如其言葬之。
现代文：当天挖掘床下，挖了三尺深。挖得骸骨，按着他的说埋葬了。
English: On the same day, he dug under the bed, digging three feet deep. He dug up the skeleton and buried it according to his instructions.

古文：其夜，鬼来言谢，曰：今时旱，不出三日有雨。公且告长史。
现代文：那天夜里，鬼来道谢，说：现时大旱，不出三天就有雨，你可以告诉长史。
English: That night, the ghost came to thank him and said, "Currently, there is a severe drought. In three days, there will be rain. You can tell the long history."

古文：叔牙至明通状，请祈雨，期三日雨足。
现代文：叔牙到天明向上通报，请求祈雨，约定三天期限雨下足。
English: Uncle Fang reported up to the sky at dawn, asked to pray for rain, and agreed on a three-day deadline for rain.

古文：节度使司空张建封许之，给其所须，叔牙於石佛山设坛。
现代文：节度使司空张建封答应他，给他所必要的东西。叔牙在石佛山设祭坛。
English: The festival made the governor Zhang Jianfeng promise him and give him what he needed. The uncle set up an altar in Shifoshan.

古文：至三日，且无雨，当截耳。
现代文：到了三天，还没下雨。到了截止时间，城里观看的有几千人。
English: After three days, it still hadn't rained. By the deadline, there were several thousand people watching in the city.

古文：城中观者数千人，时与寇邻，建封以为诈妄有谋，晚衙杖杀之。
现代文：当时与盗寇邻近，建封认为是欺骗虚妄另有图谋。晚上在衙门用杖打死了他。
English: At that time, he was close to the robbers, and Jianfeng thought that it was deception, falsehood and other schemes. In the evening, he was beaten to death with a cane at the gate.

古文：昏时大雨，即令致祭，补男为散骑。
现代文：天黑时下了大雨，就让给他祭奠，补他儿子做散骑。
English: When it rained heavily in the dark, he was allowed to ride his horse to make up for his son's errant riding.

古文：时人以为事君当诚实，今赵叔牙隐鬼所报雨至之期，故自当死耳。
现代文：当时人认为事奉君上应当诚实，现在赵叔牙隐瞒鬼所报雨的时间，所以自己应该死去。
English: At that time, people believed that those who served the emperor should be honest. Now, Zhao Shuya hides the time when the ghost announces the rain, so he should die.

古文：周济川
现代文：周济川
English: Zhouji River

古文：周济川，汝南人，有别墅在杨州之西。
现代文：周济川是汝南人，有别墅在杨州的西边。
English: Zhou Jichuan is from the south of the country and has a villa in the west of Yangzhou.

古文：兄弟四人俱好学，尝一夜讲授罢，可三更，各就榻将寐。忽闻窗外有格格之声，久而不已。
现代文：兄弟几人都好学。曾有一天晚听完讲授，大约三更天，各自躺在床将要睡觉，忽然听到窗外有格格的声音，很久不停。
English: One evening, after listening to a lecture, about three days later, each of them was lying in bed about to go to sleep, when they suddenly heard a rattling sound outside the window, which continued for a long time.

古文：济川於窗间窥之，乃一白骨小儿也，於庭中东西南北趋走。始则叉手，俄而摆臂。格格者，骨节相磨之声也。
现代文：济川从窗缝往外看，是一个白骨小孩，在院子里东西南北奔跑，开始叉手，一会儿又摆臂，格格是骨节相磨擦的声音。
English: Looking out from the window, Jichuan is a white-boned child, running north-south and east-west in the yard, starting with his forked hand, and then swinging his arm. The sound is the sound of bones rubbing against each other.

古文：良久，其弟巨川厉声呵之，一声小儿跳上阶，再声入门，三声即欲上床。
现代文：济川招呼兄弟一起看，过了很久，他的弟弟巨川厉声呵斥他。第一声小孩跳上台阶，第二声进了门，第三声就要上床。
English: Jichuan invited his brother to watch it with him. After a long time, his brother Juchuan yelled at him. At the first sound, the child jumped onto the steps, at the second, he entered the door, and at the third, he was about to go to bed.

古文：巨川元呵骂转急。小儿曰：阿母与儿乳。
现代文：巨川原先的呵骂变快，小孩说：阿母给我奶吃。
English: Kogawa's original scolding quickened, and the child said, "Grandma, give me some milk to eat."

古文：巨川以掌击之，随掌堕地，举即在床矣，腾趠之捷若猿玃。
现代文：巨川用掌打他，随着掌落掉到地上，抬起掌就在床上，跳跃敏捷象猿猴。
English: Kogawa slapped him, and as his hand fell to the ground, he raised his hand and lay down on the bed, jumping like a monkey.

古文：家人闻之，这意有非，遂持刀棒而至。
现代文：家人听说认为非同小可，于是拿着刀棒而来。
English: I heard that the family thought it was not the same child, so they came with a knife and stick.

古文：小儿又曰：阿母与儿乳。
现代文：小孩又说：阿母给我奶吃。
English: The child also said, "Mother, give me some milk to eat."

古文：家人以棒击之，其中也，小儿节节解散如星，而复聚者数四。
现代文：家人用棒打他，那打中的，小孩的骨头一节一节地散开象流星，接着又聚集起来多次。
English: The family beat him with a stick, and in the middle of the beating, the child's bones scattered like shooting stars, one by one, and then gathered again and again.

古文：又曰：阿母与儿乳。
现代文：还说：阿母给我奶吃。
English: He also said, "Mother, give me milk to eat."

古文：家人以布囊盛之，提出，远犹求乳。出郭四五里，掷一枯井。
现代文：家人用布袋装上他，提出很远时他还要奶，出城四五里，投到一个枯井里。
English: His family put him in a cloth bag, and when he was far away, he still wanted milk. They took him four or five miles out of the city and threw him into a dry well.

古文：明夜又至，手擎布囊，抛掷跳跃自得。
现代文：第二天夜里又来了，手擎着布袋，抛掷跳跃自觉得意。
English: The next night he came again, carrying a cloth bag in his hand, and felt like throwing and jumping.

古文：家人辈拥得，又以布囊，如前法盛之，以索括囊，悬巨石而沉诸河，欲负趋出，於囊中仍云：还同昨夜客耳。
现代文：家人们抓住他，又用布袋，象先前的办法装上他，用绳子束紧袋口，挂上大石头沉他到河里。要背他走时，在袋中仍然说：还同昨夜一样来作客。
English: The family seized him, put him in a cloth bag again, as they had done before, tied a rope around the mouth of the bag, hung a large stone on it and sank it into the river. When they wanted to take him away, they still said in the bag: "I'm coming as a guest, just like last night."

古文：余日又来，左手携囊，右手执断索，趋驰戏弄如前。
现代文：余日又来，左手拿着口袋，右手拿着断绳，奔跑戏弄象从前一样。
English: The rest of the day came again, with the bag in his left hand and the broken rope in his right hand, running and teasing as before.

古文：家人先备大木，凿空其中，如鼓扑，拥小儿於内，以大铁叶，冒其两端而钉之，然后锁一铁，悬巨石，流之大江。
现代文：家人先前准备的大木头，其中凿空，象个鼓扑，把小孩装在里面，用大铁片，覆盖两头又用钉子钉上，然后用一把铁锁锁上，挂上大石头，放到大江里。
English: The family had previously prepared a large piece of wood, hollowed it out like a drum, put the child inside, covered it with large pieces of iron, nailed it on both ends, then locked it with an iron lock, hung a large stone, and placed it in the big river.

古文：负欲趋出，云：谢以棺槨相送。
现代文：背着要走的时候，说：感谢用棺槨相送。
English: When he was about to leave, he said: "Thank you for sending me away in a coffin."

古文：自是更不复来，时贞元十七年。
现代文：从此再没有回来，时间是贞元十七年。
English: He never returned, and the time was the seventeenth year of the Zhengyuan era.

