古文：龚遂为渤海大守，宣帝召之，议曹王生愿从，遂不忍逆。
现代文：龚遂做渤海太守时，汉宣帝召见他，议曹王生希望跟他一起去，龚遂不忍心不同意。
English: Therefore, when he became the chief abbot of Bohai, Emperor Xuan of Han summoned him and said that Cao Wangsheng hoped to go with him. Therefore, he could not bear to disagree.

古文：及引入宫，王生随后呼曰： 天子即问君何以治渤海，宜曰：皆圣主之德，非小臣之力也。  
现代文：等带进宫后，王生跟在后面大声说： 天子如果问您怎样治理渤海郡的，您应该说： 这都是靠圣明君主的恩德，不是靠小臣的能力。  
English: After the queen was brought into the palace, Wang Sheng followed behind and said in a loud voice: "Son of Heaven, if you are asked how to govern Bohai County, you should say: This is all thanks to the benevolence of the Holy Emperor, not the ability of the ministers.

古文：遂受其言。
现代文：袭遂接受了他的建议。
English: The attack then accepted his suggestion.

古文：上果问以治状，遂对如王生言。
现代文：皇上果然问到治理的情状，龚遂按王生的话回答了。
English: The emperor indeed asked about the situation of governance, and finally answered according to Wang Sheng's words.

古文：天子悦其有让，笑曰： 君安得长者之言而称之？ 
现代文：皇上对他的谦让感到欣悦，笑着说： 您从哪儿听到谦谨自尊的人说的话而且引用它呢？ 
English: The emperor was pleased with his humility and said with a smile: "Where did you hear the words of a humble and self-respecting person and quote it?

古文：遂曰： 乃臣议曹教戒臣也。 
现代文：龚遂说： 那是我的议曹教使并劝戒我的。 
English: And he said, These are my words which thou hast commanded, and they are truth.

古文：上拜遂水衡都尉，以王生为丞。
现代文：皇上就授予龚遂水衡都尉，让王生作为丞。
English: The emperor awarded Sui Shui Heng with the rank of captain, and Wang Sheng with the rank of vice-commander.

古文：予谓遂之治郡，攻效著明，宣帝不以为赏，而顾悦其佞词乎！
现代文：我认为龚遂治理州郡，功绩成效卓著显明，汉宣帝不以此进行奖赏，却反而对他的巧侈言词感到欣悦！
English: In my opinion, Han Xuandi did not reward him for his success in governing the state and county, but was pleased with his clever words!

古文：宜其起王成、胶东之伪也。
现代文：难怪这引起了王成和胶东王假报政绩呢！
English: No wonder this caused Wang Cheng and Jiaodong Wang to falsely report their political achievements!

古文：褚先生于《史记》中又载武帝时，召北海太守，有文学卒史王先生自请与太守俱。太守入宫，王先生曰： 天子即问君何以治北海令无盗贼，君对曰何哉？ 
现代文：褚少孙先生在补写的《史记》中又载录了汉武帝时，武帝召见北海太守，有个文学卒史王先生请求和太守一起去，太守进宫时，王先生说： 皇上要是问您怎么洽理北海使得没有盗贼的，您怎么回答呢？ 
English: When Emperor Wu summoned the governor of the North Sea, Mr. Shi Wang, a literature graduate, asked to go with the governor. When the governor entered the palace, Mr. Wang said: "If the emperor asks you how to manage the North Sea so that there are no thieves, how would you answer?"

古文：守曰： 选择贤材，各任之以其能，赏异等，罚不肖。 
现代文：太守说： 选择优秀人才，根据他们的能力委任他们，奖赏特别出众的，惩罚不正派的。 
English: He said: "Choose excellent talents, appoint them according to their abilities, reward those who are particularly outstanding, and punish those who are not."

古文：王先生曰： 是自誉自伐功，不可也。
现代文：王先生说： 这就成了自我称誉表功了，不能这样。
English: Mr Wang said: "This has become a form of self-congratulation and cannot be allowed.

古文：愿君对言： 非臣之力，尽陛下神灵威武所变化也。  
现代文：希望您回答说： 这不是靠我的能力，都是皇上的神德威武所造成的变化。 
English: I hope you will reply, "This is not due to my ability, it is all due to the changes brought about by the Emperor's God Deweiwu."

古文：太守如其言。
现代文：太守按他的话做了。
English: The daimyō did as he said.

古文：武帝大笑曰： 安得长者之言而称之，安所受之？ 
现代文：汉武帝大笑，说道： 你从哪儿听到谦谨有德的人说的话而引用它的，在什么地方学到这些话的？ 
English: Emperor Han Wudi laughed loudly and said: Where did you hear the words of a modest and virtuous person and quote it, where did you learn these words?

古文：对曰： 受之文学卒史。 
现代文：太守回答说： 从文学卒史那儿学到这些的。 
English: The Empress Dowager replied: I was taught by a literature and history graduate.

古文：于是以太守为水衡都尉，王先生为丞。
现代文：于是让太守当了水衡都尉，王先生当了丞。
English: As a result, the daimyō became the captain of the water balance, and Mr. Wang became the chancellor.

古文：二事不应相类如此，疑即龚遂，而褚误书也。
现代文：这两件事不应该这样相类似，我怀疑太守就是龚遂，而褚少孙写错了。
English: These two things should not be so similar. I suspect that Taishou is Shusui, and Shosun is wrong.

