古文：王绩，字无功，绛州龙门人。
现代文：王绩字无功，绛州龙门人。
English: Wang is a man of little merit, but a member of the Longmen of Zhangzhou.

古文：性简放，不喜拜揖。
现代文：性格高傲放任，不喜欢拜揖之礼。
English: Arrogant and self-indulgent, he dislikes obeisance.

古文：兄通，隋末大儒也，聚徒河、汾间，仿古作《六经》，又为《中说》以拟《论语》。不为诸儒称道，故书不显，惟《中说》独传。
现代文：兄王通，乃隋朝末年的大儒学家，收徒讲学于河、汾间，模仿古人著作《六经》，又著《中说》，以仿效《论语》；但都不为其他学者称道，所以书并不出名，只有《中说》能够传世。
English: Wang Tong, the elder brother, was a great Confucianist at the end of the Sui Dynasty. He taught his students in He and Shun, imitating the ancient works "The Six Classics," and also "Saying" to imitate "The Analects." However, they are not praised by other scholars, so the book is not famous. Only "Saying" can be passed down.

古文：通知绩诞纵，不婴以家事，乡族庆吊冠昏，不与也。
现代文：王通知道王绩放任不羁，就不以家事委托他，乡里族人中的婚丧喜庆男儿冠礼等，都不参加。
English: Wang Tong, knowing that Wang Qian would not be restrained, did not entrust him with household chores, and did not participate in weddings, funerals, men's crown ceremonies, etc. among the villagers.

古文：与李播、吕才善。
现代文：与李播、吕才是好友。
English: He is good friends with Li Banning and Lv Zhen.

古文：大业中，举孝悌廉洁，授秘书省正字。
现代文：隋大业年间，王绩被举荐为 孝悌廉洁科 ，任命为秘书省正字。
English: During the Sui Dynasty, Wang Jie was recommended as a filial piety and integrity, and was appointed as the secretary of the provincial government.

古文：不乐在朝，求为六合丞，以嗜酒不任事，时天下亦乱，因劾，遂解去。
现代文：他不乐意在朝中任职，要求出京为六合县丞，喜饮酒而不理事，这时天下已乱，遭到弹劾，就解职而去。
English: He was not happy to serve in the government and asked to be sent to Beijing to serve as the Rikugo County magistrate. He liked to drink alcohol and did not want to be a director. By this time, the country was in chaos. He was impeached and dismissed.

古文：叹曰： 网罗在天，吾且安之！ 
现代文：叹息说： 一切自有天意，我就心安理得吧！ 
English: He sighed and said, "Everything has its own providence, I can handle it with peace of mind!"

古文：乃还乡里。
现代文：于是返回故里。
English: So he returned to his hometown.

古文：有田十六顷在河渚间。
现代文：有田十六顷在河中小洲上。
English: Arita is a 16-hectare farm on a small island in the middle of a river.

古文：仲长子光者，亦隐者也，无妻子，结庐北渚，凡三十年，非其力不食。
现代文：仲长子光也是一位隐士，没有妻儿，在北边小洲上盖房居住，已有三十年，不是自己劳动所获就不吃。
English: Naka's eldest son, Hikaru, is also a recluse. He has no wife or children. He has been living in a house on a small island in the north for the past thirty years. He will not eat anything that he has not earned through his own labor.

古文：绩爱其真，徙与相近。
现代文：王绩爱他性情真率，迁居与其邻近。
English: Wang Jie loved him for his sincerity and moved close to him.

古文：子光喑，未尝交语，与对酌酒欢甚。
现代文：仲长子光患哑疾，两人从未交谈，相对饮酒十分欢洽。
English: The second eldest son suffers from a mute disease, the two have never talked, and they are very happy to drink alcohol.

古文：绩有奴婢数人，种黍，春秋酿酒，养凫雁，莳药草自供。
现代文：王绩有奴婢数人，种黍，春秋两季自己酿酒饲养野鸭大雁，栽种药草自用。
English: Wang Jie has several slaves and maidservants, grows lettuce, brews his own wine in spring and autumn, raises wild ducks and geese, and grows herbs for his own use.

古文：以《周易》、《老子》、《庄子》置床头，他书罕读也。
现代文：以《周易》、《老子》、《庄子》放置床头，其他的书很少读。
English: "Zhou Yi," "Lao Zi" and "Zhuang Zi" are placed at the head of the bed, and other books are rarely read.

古文：欲见兄弟，辄度河还家。
现代文：想见兄弟时，就过河回家。
English: When he wants to see his brother, he crosses the river to go home.

古文：游北山东皋，著书自号东皋子。
现代文：游览过北山东皋，著书时自己署名为东皋子。
English: He has visited the East Hanzi of the North Mountain and signed his name as Dong Hanzi when writing the book.

古文：乘牛经酒肆，留或数日。
现代文：骑牛经过酒店时，有时一留就是几天。
English: When bull riders pass by the hotel, they sometimes stay for a few days.

古文：高祖武德初，以前官待诏门下省。
现代文：高祖武德初年，因为王绩以前做过官，在门下省待诏。
English: In the first year of Gao Zuwude, because Wang Qi had previously served as an official, he waited for the imperial edict under his tutelage.

古文：故事，官给酒日三升，或问： 待诏何乐邪？ 
现代文：按惯例，每天给官员发酒三升，有人问： 待诏有什么乐趣呢？ 
English: According to the usual practice, three liters of wine are given to officials every day. Someone asked: What is the fun of waiting for the edict?

古文：答曰： 良酝可恋耳！ 
现代文：王绩回答说 ：美酒值得留恋！ 
English: Wang Bin replied, "Beautiful wine is worth cherishing!"

古文：侍中陈叔达闻之，日给一斗，时称 斗酒学士 。
现代文：侍中陈叔达得知此话，就每天发给他一斗酒，时人称之为 斗酒学士 。
English: When waiter Chen Shuda learned of this, he gave him a barrel of wine every day, which was called the "Bachelor of Wine."

古文：贞观初，以疾罢。
现代文：贞观初年，因病罢官。
English: In the first year of Zhenguan, he was dismissed due to illness.

古文：复调有司，时太乐署史焦革家善酿，绩求为丞，吏部以非流不许，绩固请曰： 有深意。 
现代文：后又调吏部待命，此时太乐署史焦革家善于酿酒，王绩要求担任太乐丞，吏部以非所长而不许，王绩坚持要求说 ：这里有深刻寓意。 
English: Later, the clerk's department was put on standby. At this time, the historian of the Taile Department, Jiao Ge, was good at brewing wine. Wang Ji asked to serve as the Taile President. The clerk's department was not allowed to be the director. Wang Ji insisted on the request, saying: "There is a deep meaning here."

古文：竟除之。
现代文：吏部终于任命了他。
English: The ministry finally appointed him.

古文：革死，妻送酒不绝，岁余，又死。
现代文：焦革死，其妻不断地给王绩送酒，一年多后，焦革之妻又死。
English: After Jiao Ge's death, his wife kept sending wine to Wang Cixi. More than a year later, Jiao Ge's wife died again.

古文：绩曰： 天不使我酣美酒邪？ 
现代文：王绩说： 老天不让我尽情享受美酒吗？ 
English: Wang Jie said, "Will God not let me enjoy wine to my heart's content?

古文：弃官去。
现代文：弃官而去。
English: He resigned from his post.

古文：自是太乐丞为清职。
现代文：从此，太乐丞成为闲职。
English: From then on, Tai Le Zheng became a sinecure.

古文：追述革酒法为经，又采杜康、仪狄以来善酒者为谱。
现代文：王绩追述焦革酿酒法为酒经，又采集杜康、仪狄以来善酿酒者的方法为酒谱。
English: Wang Rong described the coke-leather brewing method as the wine sutra, and collected the methods of good brewers since Du Kang and Yi Di as the wine spectrum.

古文：李淳风曰： 君，酒家南、董也。 
现代文：李淳风说： 您，真是酒家的忠实史官啊。 
English: Li Chunfeng said, "You are truly a loyal historian of sake.

古文：所居东南有盘石，立杜康祠祭之，尊为师，以革配。
现代文：王绩居处的东南有巨石，他在上面建杜康祠祭祀，尊杜康为师，以焦革陪享受祭。
English: There is a huge rock to the southeast of Wang Rong's residence. He built the Du Kang Ancestral Hall on top of it. He revered Du Kang as his teacher and accompanied the festival with a piece of charcoal.

古文：著《醉乡记》以次刘伶《酒德颂》。
现代文：著作《酒乡记》作为刘伶《酒德颂》的续篇。
English: He wrote "Shuxiang Ji" as a sequel to Liu Ye's "Song of Wine and Virtue."

古文：其饮至五斗不乱，人有以酒邀者，无贵贱辄往，著《五斗先生传》。刺史崔喜悦之，请相见，答曰： 奈何坐召严君平邪？ 
现代文：他喝酒可以五斗不醉，有人备酒邀他的，不论其人贵贱都去，写有《五斗先生传》，刺史崔喜喜欢他，请他相见，他回答说 ：怎能坐在那儿召见像严君平那样的高人雅士呢？ 
English: He can drink wine without getting drunk. Someone prepared wine and invited him. No matter how high or low they are, everyone went. "The Biography of Mr. Wudu" was written about him. Streisand liked him and asked to meet him. He replied, "How can I sit there and meet a distinguished gentleman like Yan Junping?"

古文：卒不诣。
现代文：最后还是不去。
English: In the end, I decided not to go.

古文：杜之松，故人也，为刺史，请绩讲礼，答曰： 吾不能揖让邦君门，谈糟粕，弃醇醪也。 
现代文：杜之松，是王绩的老友，任刺史，请王绩讲礼，王绩回答说 ：我不能到地方官那里行繁琐的礼节，谈无用的糟粕，丢掉醇厚的美酒。 
English: Du Zhimong, an old friend of Wang Qian, asked Wang Qian to give a speech. Wang Qian replied, "I can't go to the local officials to perform complicated etiquette, talk about useless rubbish, and throw away mellow wine."

古文：之松岁时赠以酒脯。
现代文：杜子松逢年过节送给酒肉。
English: Dumplings and pine nuts are given to sake brewers for the New Year's holiday.

古文：初，兄凝为隋著作郎，撰《隋书》未成，死，绩续余功，亦不能成。
现代文：当初，其兄王凝担任隋朝著作郎，撰写隋书未成而死，王绩接着撰写，也没写成。
English: At first, his brother Wang Jian served as the Sui Dynasty's scribe, and died before writing the Sui Dynasty's book. Wang Jian then wrote it, but it was never finished.

古文：豫知终日，命薄葬，自志其墓。
现代文：他预先知道自己的死期，嘱家人节俭治丧，自己撰写墓志铭。
English: He knew his own death date in advance, ordered his family to be frugal in their mourning, and wrote his own epitaph.

古文：绩之仕，以醉失职，乡人靳之，托无心子以见趣曰： 无心子居越，越王不知其大人也，拘之仕，无喜色。
现代文：王绩做官，因醉失职，家乡人嘲笑他，他就假托 无心子 的故事来表白自己的志趣，说： 无心子住在越国，越王不知道他是德行高操的人，强迫他做官，他并不显得高兴。
English: Wang Yi was an official who lost his position due to drunkenness, and the people in his hometown laughed at him. He pretended to use the story of Wu Xin Zi to show his ambition, saying: Wu Xin Zi lived in Yue Guo, and Yue Wang did not know that he was a person of high moral conduct. He was forced to become an official, and he did not appear to be happy.

古文：越国法曰： 秽行者不齿。 
现代文：越国的法规是 ：有丑行的人不予录用。 
English: The rule in Vietnam is: if you're a bad actor, you don't get hired.

古文：俄而无心子以秽行闻，王黜之，无愠色。
现代文：不久，无心子就以有丑行而传闻，越王罢黜了他，他也无怨怒之色。
English: Soon, there were rumors that Wu Xin Zi had committed a scandal, and King Yue deposed him. He did not show any signs of resentment.

古文：退而适茫荡之野，过动之邑而见机士，机士抚髀曰： 嘻！
现代文：退而归于茫茫的山野，经过动城时去见机士，机士摸着大腿说： 咦！
English: He retreated to the boundless mountains, and when he passed through the city of movement, he went to see the pilot. The pilot touched his thigh and said, "Wow!

古文：子贤者而以罪废邪？ 
现代文：你是一个有德有才的人，怎么会因罪而被免职呢？ 
English: You are a man of virtue and talent. How can you be removed from office for a crime?

古文：无心子不应。
现代文：无心子不答应。
English: I didn't want to say yes.

古文：机士曰： 愿见教。 
现代文：机士说 ：希望得到指教。 
English: The pilot said: "I'd like some advice."

古文：曰： 子闻蜚廉氏马乎？
现代文：无心子说 ：您听说过蜚廉氏的马吗？
English: Wistfully, he said, "Have you heard of Mr. Yan Lian's horse?"

古文：将行，赐隐居服，官营草堂，恩礼殊渥。鸿到山中，广学庐，聚徒至五百人。
现代文：一匹是红鬃白毛，有龙的骨骼、凤的仪态，奔驰起来像舞蹈，整天被役使而热死；另一匹则是大头翘尾，颈似驼、膝如貉，踢咬尥蹶子，被丢弃在野外，全年都长得肥壮。
English: One is a red-bearded white-haired horse, with the bones of a dragon and the manners of a phoenix, galloping like a dance, being worked all day and dying of heat; the other is a large head and tail, neck like a camel, knees like a donkey, kicking and biting lice, abandoned in the wild, growing fat all year round.

古文：及卒，帝赐万钱。鸿所居室，自号宁极云。
现代文：凤不厌恶在山中栖息，龙不羞于在泥淖中盘曲，君子不能仅为求洁而遭祸患，不以躲避污秽来保持纯洁。  这就是王绩自处的态度。
English: The phoenix is not averse to roosting in the mountains, the dragon is not ashamed to roll in the mud, the gentleman cannot only seek purity and suffer misfortune, and does not avoid filth to maintain purity.

古文：吴筠，字贞节，华州华阴人。
现代文：吴筠字贞节，华州华阴县人。
English: Wu Gan Zhenjie, a native of Huayin County, Huazhou.

古文：通经谊，美文辞，举进士不中。
现代文：精通经义，文辞华美，考进士不中。
English: Mastering the meaning of the sutras and having a beautiful diction are not enough to pass the entrance examination.

古文：性高鲠，不耐沈浮于时，去居南阳倚帝山。
现代文：性情高傲耿直，不愿与世俗共沉浮，往居南阳倚帝山。
English: He is proud and upright, unwilling to sink or swim with the world, and prefers to live in the south or in the mountains.

古文：天宝初，召至京师，请隶道士籍，乃入嵩山依潘师正，究其术。
现代文：天宝初年，被召到京城，请求入籍为道士，于是进嵩山投靠潘师正，研究他的道术。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, he was summoned to Beijing and asked to be naturalized as a Taoist, so he went to Songshan to rely on Pan Shizheng and study his Taoism.

古文：南游天台，观沧海，与有名士相娱乐，文辞传京师。
现代文：后又到南方游天台山，观东海，和当地名士交游娱乐，所写文章被传诵到京城。
English: Later, he went to the south to tour Mount Tiantai, view the East China Sea, and entertain local celebrities. The articles he wrote were read to the capital.

古文：玄宗遣使召见大同殿，与语甚悦，敕待诏翰林，献《玄纲》三篇。
现代文：玄宗遣使臣召见吴筠于大同殿，谈得很高兴，下旨任命为翰林院待诏，吴筠向玄宗献《玄纲》三篇。
English: Xuanzong sent an envoy to summon Wu Gan at Datong Hall, and the discussion was very happy. The result was that he was appointed as Hanlinin to receive the edict, and Wu Gan presented Xuanzong with three copies of "Xuan Gang."

古文：帝尝问道，对曰： 深于道者，无如《老子》五千文，其余徒丧纸札耳。 
现代文：玄宗曾向他问道术，筠答说： 道家学问最精深的，莫过于五千字的《老子》，其余的只是浪费纸张而已。 
English: Xuanzong once asked him about the art, and Zou replied, "The most profound Taoist knowledge is the five-thousand-character "Lao Zi," and the rest is just a waste of paper."

古文：复问神仙治炼法，对曰： 此野人事，积岁月求之，非人主宜留意。 
现代文：玄宗又问神仙冶炼法，吴筠答道 ：这是山野之人干的事，是长年累月的修炼去祈求的，不是皇上所应关心的。 
English: Xuanzong also asked about the method of smelting the immortals, and Wu Xi replied, "This is something that people in the mountains and the countryside do. It is a long-term cultivation to pray for, not something that the emperor should be concerned about."

古文：筠每开陈，皆名教世务，以微言讽天子，天子重之。
现代文：吴筠每次向皇上进言，都是讲礼教时务，用精言暗喻劝告皇上，皇上很器重他。
English: Every time Wu Gan gave advice to the emperor, he spoke of etiquette and current affairs, and advised the emperor with fine words and metaphors. The emperor held him in high regard.

古文：群沙门嫉其见遇，而高力士素事浮屠，共短筠于帝，筠亦知天下将乱，恳求还嵩山。
现代文：一群佛教徒妒忌他得到皇上的赏识，而高力士素来信佛，就都在皇上面前说吴筠的坏话，吴筠也知天下将乱，恳求回嵩山。
English: A group of Buddhists envied him for receiving the emperor's appreciation, and since Goryeo had always believed in Buddhism, they all spoke ill of Wu Gan in front of the emperor. Wu Gan also knew that the world would be in turmoil and begged to return to Songshan.

古文：诏为立道馆。
现代文：玄宗下令为他建道馆。
English: Xuanzong ordered a dojo to be built for him.

古文：安禄山欲称兵，乃还茅山。
现代文：安禄山准备起兵叛变，吴筠就回到茅山。
English: When Anlu Mountain prepared to raise an army for a mutiny, Wu Gan returned to Mao Mountain.

古文：而两京陷，江、淮盗贼起，因东入会稽剡中。
现代文：后洛阳、长安两京陷落，江淮间盗贼蜂起，因而东行至会稽郡剡县。
English: After the fall of Luoyang and Chang'an and the uprising of the thieves in the Huai River, he traveled east to the county of Huiqi and the county of Jixian.

古文：其后东度秣陵，年八十余卒。
现代文：大历十三年去世，弟子们尊称为宗元先生。
English: He died in the thirteenth year of the lunar calendar, and his disciples respectfully called him Mr. Sogen.

古文：南安人思之，为立于亭，号其山为高士峰云。
现代文：当初，吴筠为高力士厌恶而受排斥，所以在文章中痛斥佛家学说。
English: At first, Wu Gan was repelled by his dislike of Gao Lixi, so he denounced the Buddhist doctrine in his article.

古文：张志和，字子同，婺州金华人。
现代文：吴筠的好朋友孔巢父、李白，诗歌水平大致相当。张志和字子同，婺州金华人。
English: Wu Yao's good friend Kong Xue's father, Li Bai, has a poetry level roughly equivalent to his. Zhang Zhi and Zizi are the same, and both are from Jinhua, Zhangzhou.

古文：始名龟龄。
现代文：原先名龟龄。
English: Formerly known as Kamei.

古文：父游朝，通庄、列二子书，为《象罔》、《白马证》诸篇佐其说。
现代文：父张游朝，精通庄、列二子著作，做《象罔》、《白马证》诸篇来辅助推广他们的学说。
English: His father, Zhang Youchao, was well versed in the writings of Zhuang and Li, and wrote "The Elephant and the Horse" and "The White Horse" to help promote their teachings.

古文：母梦枫生腹上而产志和。
现代文：其母梦见枫树生于腹上而生下志和。
English: His mother dreamed that a maple tree was born on her stomach and gave birth to Shihwa.

古文：十六擢明经，以策干肃宗，特见赏重，命待诏翰林，授左金吾卫录事参军，因赐名。
现代文：十六岁即登明经榜，以策论上肃宗，特别受到赏识器重，命为翰林待诏，并授予左金吾卫录事参军职务，因而赐名为志和。
English: At the age of sixteen, he was listed in the Ming Dynasty's sutra list. He excelled in the policy of asceticism and was especially appreciated. He was ordered to wait for the edict of Hanlin, and was awarded the military post of Zuo Jingu Wei Lu, and thus was given the name of Zhihe.

古文：后坐事贬南浦尉，会赦还，以亲既丧，不复仕，居江湖，自称烟波钓徒。
现代文：后来因事获罪贬降为南浦县尉，遇赦而回，以父母去世，不再做官，居江湖间，自号为 烟波钓徒 。
English: Later, he was demoted to the rank of Nampo County lieutenant due to his crime, but he was pardoned and returned home. With the death of his parents, he no longer worked as an official, lived between rivers and lakes, and called himself a "smoke wave fisherman."

古文：著《玄真子》，亦以自号。
现代文：著《玄真子》，也以书名为自己的别号。
English: He is the author of "Xuan Zhen Zi" and also uses his pen name as his alias.

古文：有韦诣者，为撰《内解》。
现代文：有一个叫韦诣的人，为他撰写了《内解》。
English: There was a man named Wei Wei, for whom the "Inner Solution" was written.

古文：志和又著《太易》十五篇，其卦三百六十五。
现代文：志和又著《太易》十五篇，有三百六十五卦。
English: Zhihe also wrote 15 chapters of "Taiyi" with 365 stories.

古文：兄鹤龄恐其遁世不还，为筑室越州东郭，茨以生草，椽栋不施斤斧。
现代文：志和之兄鹤龄恐怕他隐逸逃世而不回家，替他在越州东郭内修建居室，用新割的青草盖顶，椽栋都是未经砍削的原木。
English: Zhihe's older brother Zhering, fearing that he had secretly escaped death and would not return home, built a room for him in the East Guo of Yuezhou, with a roof made of freshly cut grass and a roof made of unhewn logs.

古文：豹席棕，每垂钓不设饵，志不在鱼也。
现代文：志和以豹皮为席，棕草为履，钓时不用鱼饵，其意并不在于钓到鱼。
English: Shiwa uses leopard skin for seats and palm grass for shoes, and does not use bait when fishing. The idea is not to catch fish.

古文：县令使浚渠，执畚无忤色。
现代文：县令让他疏浚渠道，他手执畚箕而无抵触表情。
English: The prefectural order asked him to dredge the channels, and he did so with a nonchalant expression.

古文：尝欲以大布制裘，嫂为躬绩织，及成，衣之，虽暑不解。
现代文：志和曾想用粗布制皮衣，嫂嫂亲自为他纺织缝制，做好后穿上，虽暑热天也不脱。
English: Zhihe once wanted to make a fur coat from coarse cloth, but his sister-in-law sewed the fabric for him herself. Once it was ready, he put it on and didn't take it off even though it was a hot day.

古文：观察使陈少游往见，为终日留，表其居曰玄真坊。
现代文：观察使陈少游访问他，停留了一整天，名其居处为玄真坊。
English: Observation made Chen Shaoyou visit him and stayed for a whole day. The name of his residence is Xuan Zhenfang.

古文：以门隘，为买地大其闳，号回轩巷。
现代文：以其门狭窄，为他买地扩大门楣，名为回轩巷。
English: Due to its narrow gate, he bought land to expand the gate, named Huixuan Lane.

古文：先是门阻流水，无梁，少游为构之，人号大夫桥。
现代文：以往门前为流水所阻，无桥，陈少游为他建桥，人称大夫桥。
English: In the past, the front of the door was blocked by flowing water, and there was no bridge. Chen Shaoyou built a bridge for him, known as the doctor's bridge.

古文：帝尝赐奴婢各一，志和配为夫妇，号渔童、樵青。
现代文：皇上曾赐给他一奴一婢，志和将他们配为夫妇，一名渔童、一名樵青。
English: The emperor had given him a slave and a maid, and Shihe matched them as a couple, a fisherman and an indigo.

古文：陆羽常问： 孰为往来者？ 
现代文：陆羽问他 ：谁与你相互往来？ 
English: Lu Yu asked him, "Who does business with you?"

古文：对曰： 太虚为室，明月为烛，与四海诸公共处，未尝少别也，何有往来？ 
现代文：志和答说 ：天空为房屋，明月为蜡烛，与四海诸公共处一室，未曾稍有别离，哪能谈到什么往来？ 
English: Zhihe replied: The sky is a house, the bright moon is a candle, and the four seas are all public places in one room, there has never been a slight separation, which can talk about what kind of dealings?

古文：颜真卿为湖州刺史值志和来谒，真卿以舟敝漏，请更之，志和曰： 愿为浮家泛宅，往来苕、霅间。 
现代文：颜真卿为湖州刺史，志和来拜见，颜真卿看到他的船破旧，要给他换一条，张志和说： 愿以此舟为活动的水上之家，往来于苕溪、較溪之间。 
English: Yan Zhenqing was a historian of Huzhou, and Zhihe came to visit him. Yan Zhenqing saw that his boat was worn out and wanted to replace it. Zhang Zhihe said: May this boat be a home on the water, traveling between Lixi Creek and Lijiang Creek.

古文：辩捷类如此。
现代文：他口才之敏捷就像这类言辞。
English: His verbal dexterity is like this kind of rhetoric.

古文：善图山水，酒酣，或击鼓吹笛，舐笔辄成。
现代文：志和善画山水，饮酒高兴时，有人击鼓吹笛，他舔笔作画，须臾便成。
English: Zhihe is good at painting landscapes and waterscapes. When he is happy to drink, someone beats a drum and plays a flute. He licks a pen to paint, and then it is done.

古文：尝撰《渔歌》，宪宗图真求其歌，不能致。
现代文：曾撰写《渔歌》，宪宗在自己的画像上求其歌词，没能得到。
English: He once wrote "Fishing Song," but he couldn't get the lyrics from his own picture.

古文：卒，年三十九，赠工部侍郎。陆羽，字鸿渐，一名疾，字季疵，复州竟陵人。
现代文：李德裕说张志和是 隐逸而扬名，出仕而无功，既不穷困，又非显达，是严光一类人物 云云。陆羽字鸿渐，又名疾，字季疵，复州竟陵人。
English: Li Deyu said that Zhang Zhihe was a reclusive and well-known person, a person who was appointed to a post but did nothing, a person who was neither destitute nor prominent, and a person of the strict light type. Lu Yu's name is Hong Chen, also known as a disease, a word defect, and a person from Fuzhou who is a mausoleum.

古文：不知所生，或言有僧得诸水滨，畜之。
现代文：不知生在何处，有人说他是一个和尚在河边拣来养的。
English: I don't know where he was born, but some people say that he was raised by a monk who found him by the river.

古文：既长，以《易》自筮，得《蹇》之《渐》，曰： 鸿渐于陆，其羽可用为仪。 
现代文：长大后，用《易》自我占卜，得《蹇》之 渐 ，其辞为： 鸿渐于陆，其羽可用为仪。 
English: After he grew up, he used "Yi" for self-divination and obtained "Zi" for crescendo, which means: "The crescendo is on the ground, and its feathers can be used as instruments."

古文：乃以陆为氏，名而字之。
现代文：于是以 陆 为姓，并依之取名和字。
English: As a result, he took Lu as his surname, and his first name and Chinese character were derived from it.

古文：幼时，其师教以旁行书，答曰： 终鲜兄弟，而绝后嗣，得为孝乎？ 
现代文：小时候，老师教他学写横行的文字，他说 ：这种不分上下的字，就像既没有兄弟，又没有后代，能效法它吗？ 
English: When he was a child, his teacher taught him to learn to write the rampant characters. He said, "This word, which is not divided into upper and lower, is like having neither brothers nor descendants. Can you imitate it?"

古文：师怒，使执粪除圬塓以苦之，又使牧牛三十，羽潜以竹画牛背为字。
现代文：师怒，惩罚他做清扫抹墙的工作，又要他放牛三十头。羽暗中在牛背上用竹枝画字。
English: Enraged, his teacher punished him to do the work of sweeping and plastering the walls, and asked him to herd thirty cows. In the darkness, he drew letters with bamboo branches on the backs of the cows.

古文：得张衡《南都赋》，不能读，危坐效群儿嗫嚅若成诵状，师拘之，令薙草莽。
现代文：一次他得到张衡的《南都赋》，不会读，但仍正襟危坐，仿效学童的样子口中念念有词。老师把他留下，罚他割草。
English: Once he got Zhang Heng's "Nandu Fu" and couldn't read it, but he was still in a crisis, mimicking the appearance of a schoolchild and reciting words. The teacher left him and punished him for cutting grass.

古文：当其记文字，懵懵若有遗，过日不作，主者鞭苦，因叹曰： 岁月往矣，奈何不知书！ 
现代文：当他在记忆文字时，呆呆地像忘了什么，一天都不动弹。
English: When he was memorizing the words, he froze, as if he had forgotten something, and didn't move for a day.

古文：呜咽不自胜，因亡去，匿为优人，作诙谐数千言。
现代文：主事人狠狠地打他。他叹气说 ：时间过去了，怎么就读不会书呢。 因之而哭泣不止。于是逃走，偷着做戏子，创作了幽默有趣的戏谑作品数千字。
English: The headmaster beat him severely. He sighed and said: Time has passed, how can I not read books? Because of this, he cried more and more. So he ran away, stole to be an actor, and created thousands of words of humorous and amusing banter.

古文：天宝中，州人酺，吏署羽伶师，太守李齐物见，异之，授以书，遂庐火门山。
现代文：天宝年间，州中人请客，州吏安排羽参加演出队。太守李齐物看见他，觉得他不一般，就教他读书，于是就在火门山住下。
English: During the Tenpo era, the middle-class people in the state invited guests, and the state officials arranged for Yu to participate in the performance team. The eunuch Li Qiming saw him, felt that he was not ordinary, taught him to read, and then lived in Humen Mountain.

古文：貌侻陋，口吃而辩。
现代文：羽其貌不扬，口吃却有辩才。
English: Feather's appearance is unimpressive, but he stutters and has a talent for debate.

古文：闻人善，若在己，见有过者，规切至忤人。
现代文：听说谁有什么优点，就像是自己的一样高兴；见人有了过失，就去恳切规劝，甚至触犯人家。
English: When he hears of someone's merits, he is as pleased as if it were his own; when he sees someone's faults, he earnestly tries to persuade him, even going as far as to touch the prisoner's house.

古文：朋友燕处，意有所行辄去，人疑其多嗔。
现代文：朋友们在一起欢聚，他心里想到了什么，起身就走，以致人家怀疑他好生气。
English: Friends get together for a get-together, he thinks of something, gets up and leaves, leading to suspicion that he's angry.

古文：与人期，雨雪虎狼不避也。
现代文：与人家有约定，即使下雨下雪，有虎有狼也一定赴约。
English: There is an agreement with others, even if it rains and snows, there will be tigers and wolves.

古文：上元初，更隐苕溪，自称桑苎翁，阖门著书。
现代文：上元初年，隐居苕溪，自称桑苎翁，闭门著书。
English: In the first year of Shangyuan, he lived in seclusion in Luoxi, calling himself Sangyeong and writing books behind closed doors.

古文：或独行野中，诵诗击木，裴回不得意，或恸哭而归，故时谓今接舆也。
现代文：有时独行野外，一面诵诗一面敲击木板。徘徊不称心，有时又大哭而归。所以人们称他是当今的狂人接舆。
English: Sometimes he walks alone in the open air, sometimes he chants poetry and beats on a wooden board, sometimes he wanders aimlessly and sometimes he runs away crying. That's why people call him today's madman.

古文：久之，诏拜羽太子文学，徙太常寺太祝，不就职。
现代文：后来，皇帝任他为太子文学，调任太常寺太祝。不就职。
English: Later, the emperor appointed him as the prince of literature and transferred him to the Daijo-ji Temple. He did not take up the post.

古文：贞元末，卒。
现代文：贞元末年去世。
English: Sadamoto died at the end of the year.

古文：羽嗜茶，著经三篇，言茶之原、之法、之具尤备，天下益知饮茶矣。
现代文：羽爱好喝茶，写了茶经三篇，谈茶原、沏法、茶具，极为详备。天下由此更懂饮茶了。
English: Feather likes to drink tea, wrote three tea scriptures, talk about tea, brewing method, tea set, very detailed. The world knows more about drinking tea.

古文：时鬻茶者，至陶羽形置炀突间，祀为茶神。
现代文：当时卖茶的人，把制成陆羽陶像放在烘炉烟囱之间，尊他为茶神。
English: At that time, tea sellers placed the terra-cotta statue made of feathers between the chimneys of the kiln and revered him as the god of tea.

古文：有常伯熊者，因羽论复广著茶之功。
现代文：有个叫常伯熊的人，以羽的论述为基础进一步阐发茶的功效。
English: A man named Changbo Xiong further explained the efficacy of tea based on the discussion of feathers.

古文：御史大夫李季卿宣慰江南，次临淮，知伯熊善煮茶，召之，伯熊执器前，季卿为再举杯。
现代文：御史大夫李季卿宣尉江南，到达临淮，得知伯熊善于煮茶，召他，伯熊拿着茶具上前，季卿为之一再举杯表示敬意。
English: Li Jieqing, the chief historian of the south of the Yangtze River, arrived in Linhuai and learned that Bozhong was good at making tea. He summoned him. Bozhong came forward with a tea set, and Jieqing was one of those who raised a glass to show their respect.

古文：文宗时，左补厥王直方，其里中人也，上书论事，见便殿，访遗逸，直方荐觐高行，诏以起居郎召，辞疾不至。
现代文：季卿到江南，有人推荐陆羽，召他，陆羽穿着乡人的衣服，拿着茶具进来，李季卿没向他行礼，陆羽引以为耻，再著《毁茶论》。其后，社会上崇尚饮茶成风。
English: When Jiqing went to the south of the Yangtze River, someone recommended Lu Yu and summoned him. Lu Yu came in wearing a countryman's clothes and carrying a tea set. Li Jiqing did not bow to him. Lu Yu was ashamed and wrote "The Destruction of Tea." After that, drinking tea became a social custom.

古文：陆龟蒙，字鲁望，元方七世孙也。
现代文：当时回纥人入朝，就是驾马买茶。陆龟蒙字鲁望，是陆元方的第七代孙。
English: At that time, if an Uighur entered the imperial court, it was by riding a horse to buy tea. Lu Mengzhuang, the seventh-generation grandson of Lu Yuanfang, was a tortoise.

古文：父宾虞，以文历侍御史。
现代文：父陆宾虞，以擅文任侍御史。
English: His father, Lu Bingyu, was appointed as an attendant to the Emperor.

古文：龟蒙少高放，通《六经》大义，尤明《春秋》。
现代文：龟蒙少年清高豪放，通晓《六经》要旨，尤其精通《春秋》。
English: Kame Meng, a boy of Qing Gao, is familiar with the essence of the "Six Classics" and is especially proficient in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：举进士，一不中，往从湖州刺史张抟游，抟历湖、苏二州，辟以自佐。
现代文：考进士，一试不中，便去投湖州刺史张抟与其交游，张抟历任湖州、苏州刺史，聘陆龟蒙为自己的副手。
English: When he failed the entrance examination, he went to Huzhou to mingle with Zhang Xi, who had served as governor of Huzhou and Suzhou, and hired Lu Kame Meng as his deputy.

古文：尝至饶州，三日无所诣。刺史蔡京率官属就见之，龟蒙不乐，拂衣去。
现代文：曾到饶州，三天哪儿也不去拜访，刺史蔡京率官吏登门来见，龟蒙不高兴，拂袖而去。
English: I once went to Raozhou and did not visit anywhere for three days. When the chief secretary Cai Jing and his officials came to see me, I was not happy and left.

古文：居松江甫里，多所论撰，虽幽忧疾痛，赀无十日计，不少辍也。
现代文：他居住在松江甫里，写了不少著作，虽深愁身有病痛，囊中无十日积蓄，写作也没稍加停顿。
English: He lived in Fuli, Matsue, and wrote many books. Although he was deeply saddened by his illness and had no ten-day savings in his pocket, he did not stop writing.

古文：文成，窜稿箧中，或历年不省，为好事者盗去。
现代文：文章写成，便置稿于书箧中，终年不整理，被好事者偷走。
English: After the article was written, the manuscript was placed in a bookcase and left unorganized for the rest of the year. It was stolen by a nefarious person.

古文：得书熟诵乃录，雠比勤勤，硃黄不去手，所藏虽少，其精皆可传。
现代文：得到书籍熟读后再抄录，在书海中勤于勘校，朱笔黄纸不离手，藏书虽少，其精华程度都可传世。
English: After getting familiar with the books, he copied them, and diligently surveyed the books in the sea of books. The red pen and yellow paper never left his hands. Although the collection of books is small, its essence can be passed down to the next generation.

古文：借人书，篇帙坏舛，必为辑褫刊正。
现代文：借人家书籍，如发现篇目内容有误，一定为之整理勘误。
English: If you borrow someone else's book and find that there is a mistake in the content of the chapter, you must sort it out.

古文：乐闻人学，讲论不倦。
现代文：喜欢听别人的学术见解，探讨议论不知疲倦。
English: I like to listen to other people's academic opinions and discuss them tirelessly.

古文：有田数百亩，屋三十楹，田苦下，雨潦则与江通，故常苦饥。
现代文：他有田数百亩，屋三十间，其田地势低下，雨季积水，便与江水连成一片，常因歉收而食不果腹。
English: He has hundreds of mu of fields and 30 houses, but his fields are in poor condition and water accumulates in the rainy season, so they are connected to the river. He is often hungry due to poor harvests.

古文：身畚锸，茠刺无休时，或讥其劳，答曰： 尧、舜霉瘠，禹胼胝。
现代文：身负小筐铁锨，耕耘劳作非常辛苦，有人讥笑他太劳累了，他回答说： 尧舜因辛劳而又黑又瘦，禹手足都磨出了老茧。
English: Some people mocked him for being too tired. He replied, "Because of my hard work, I am black and thin. My hands and feet have become callused.

古文：彼圣人也，吾一褐衣，敢不勤乎？ 
现代文：他们都是圣人，我只是一个普通人，敢不勤劳吗？ 
English: They are all saints. I am just an ordinary person. How dare I not work hard?

古文：嗜茶，置园顾渚山下，岁取租茶，自判品第。
现代文：嗜好饮茶，在顾渚山下开辟了茶园，每年取采集之茶，自己品尝评定茶的等级。
English: He is fond of drinking tea and has opened a tea garden at the foot of Guzhu Mountain. Every year, he takes the collected tea and tastes it himself to assess the grade of the tea.

古文：张又新为《水说》七种，其二慧山泉，三虎丘井，六松江。
现代文：张又新作《水说》七种，第二种是慧山泉，第三种是虎丘井，第六是松江水。
English: In Zhang's new work, "The Story of Water," there are seven kinds, the second is Huishan Spring, the third is Huqiu Well, and the sixth is Songjiang Water.

古文：人助其好者，虽百里为致之。
现代文：人们帮助他得到喜欢饮用的水，虽远距百里也为他弄来。
English: People have helped him get the water he likes to drink, even from hundreds of miles away.

古文：初，病酒，再期乃已，其后客至，挈壶置杯不复饮。
现代文：从前，他曾醉酒，两昼夜方醒。以后客人来了，收拾起酒壶酒杯不再饮酒。
English: Once upon a time, he was so drunk that he was awake for two days and nights. Later, when guests came, he put away his wine jug and glasses and stopped drinking.

古文：不喜与流俗交，虽造门不肯见。
现代文：他不喜欢与庸俗之辈交往，虽登门拜访也不肯相见。
English: He did not like to associate with vulgar people, and would not meet them even if they came to visit him.

古文：不乘马，升舟设蓬席，赍束书、茶灶、笔床、钓具往来。
现代文：不骑马，爱登上设有船篷垫席的船，携带书籍、茶灶、笔架、钓具在水上往来。
English: He does not ride a horse, but likes to board a boat with a canopy cushion seat, carrying books, a tea stove, a pen holder, and fishing gear on the water.

古文：时谓江湖散人，或号天随子、甫里先生，自比涪翁、渔父、江上丈人。
现代文：当时人称 江湖散人 ，或者叫 天随子 、 甫里先生 ，自比 涪翁 、 渔父 、 江上丈人 。
English: At that time, people were called "Jianghu Sanren," or "Tian Sui Zi," "Mr. Fuli," "self-comparison," "fisherman's father" and "river father-in-law."

古文：宽以高士召，不至。
现代文：后来由于以高士闻名而被朝廷召见，他不去。
English: Later, he was summoned by the imperial court because he was famous for being a high-ranking official, but he did not go.

古文：李蔚、卢携素与善，及当国，召拜左拾遗。
现代文：李蔚、卢携很早就是他的好友，等到他们当政时，任命陆龟蒙为左拾遗。
English: Li Wei and Lu Tzu were his friends from very early on. When they came to power, they appointed Tortoise Meng as the leftover.

古文：诏方下，龟蒙卒。
现代文：诏书刚下，龟蒙便逝世了。
English: Just after the imperial edict was issued, Kame Meng Rong passed away.

古文：光化中，韦庄表龟蒙及孟郊等十人，皆赠右补阙。
现代文：光化年间，韦庄表奏陆龟蒙及孟郊等十人，都追赠为右补阙。
English: During the Gwanghwamun era, ten people, including Weizhuang's famous tortoise Meng and Meng Jiao, were posthumously awarded the Right Complementary Medal.

古文：陆氏在姑苏，其门有巨石。远祖绩尝事吴为郁林太守，罢归无装，舟轻不可越海，取石为重，人称其廉，号 郁林石 ，世保其居云。
现代文：陆家住姑苏城，门口有大石，远祖陆绩曾任吴国的郁林太守，罢官回家时没什么行装，船轻不能渡海，用大石压船，人们赞美他的廉洁，称这方巨石为 郁林石 ，历代后裔都保有它。
English: The Lu family lived in the city of Suzhou. There was a large stone at the entrance. Their distant ancestor, Lu Jian, had been the governor of Yulin in the State of Wu. When he returned home, he had nothing to pack, the boat was too light to cross the sea, and he used the large stone to weigh down the boat. People praised his honesty and called this huge stone Yulin Stone. His descendants throughout the ages have kept it.

