古文：杨云翼，字之美，其先赞皇檀山人，六代祖忠，客平定之乐平县，遂家焉。
现代文：杨云翼，字之美，他的祖先是赞皇檀山人，六代祖杨忠客居平定的乐平县，于是就将家安在那里。
English: Yang Yunyi, whose name means "beautiful," is the descendant of a man from Danzan who praised the emperor. His six-generation ancestor Yang Zhong lived in peaceful Leping County, so he made his home there.

古文：曾祖青、祖郁、考恒，皆赠官于朝。
现代文：他的曾祖杨青、祖父杨郁、父亲杨恒都被朝廷任用为官。
English: His great-grandfather Yang Qing, grandfather Yang Yu and father Yang Heng were all appointed by the imperial court.

古文：云翼天资颖悟，初学语辄画地作字，日诵数千言。
现代文：杨云翼天资聪明，刚开始学说话便在地上划字，每天能背诵几千字的文章。
English: Yang Yunye has a natural talent for cleverness. As soon as he began to learn to speak, he began to scribble on the ground. He can recite several thousand words of articles every day.

古文：登明昌五年进士第一，词赋亦中乙科，特授承务郎、应奉翰林文字。
现代文：明昌五年，杨云翼考进士得了第一，词赋也中了乙科，被特授承务郎、应奉翰林文字。
English: In the fifth year of the Ming and Chang dynasties, Yang Yunyi won the first place in the entrance examination. He also won the Eighth Grade in the word endowment, and was specially awarded the words of Chengyong and Yingbonghanlin.

古文：承安四年，出为陕西东路兵马都总管判官。
现代文：承安四年，他出任陕西东路兵马都总管判官。
English: In the fourth year of Cheng'an, he served as the judge of the Shaanxi East Road Terracotta Warriors and Horses.

古文：泰和元年，召为太学博士，迁太常寺丞，兼翰林修撰。
现代文：泰和元年，召为太学博士，并升迁为太常寺丞，兼翰林修撰。
English: In the first year of the Taihei era, he was called to become a doctor of Taihaku, and was promoted to the post of Taijo-ji chojo, as well as the post of Hanlin Shushin.

古文：七年，签上京、东京等路按察司事，因召见，章宗咨以当世之务，称旨。
现代文：泰和七年，任签上京、东京等路按察司事，因此被召见。章宗问他有关朝政事务，他回答得很合皇帝的心意。
English: In the seventh year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, he was appointed inspector of roads leading to Beijing and Tokyo, and was therefore summoned to the court. Zhang Zong asked him about the affairs of the imperial court, and his answer was very much in line with the emperor's wishes.

古文：大安元年，翰林承旨张行简荐其材，且精术数，召授提点司天台，兼翰林修撰，俄兼礼部郎中。
现代文：大安元年，翰林承旨张行简推荐说他有才干，而且精通术数，因此杨云翼被召回任提点司天台，兼翰林修撰，不久又兼礼部郎中。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, Zhang Xingjian, a disciple of Hanlin, recommended that he had talent and was proficient in mathematics. Therefore, Yang Yunyi was recalled to be appointed as the Tiantai of the Pointing Division, and also as a disciple of Hanlin, and soon also as a disciple of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：崇庆元年，以病归。
现代文：崇庆元年，杨云翼因病辞官回家。
English: In the first year of Chongqing, Yang Yunyi returned home due to illness.

古文：贞祐二年，有司上官簿，宣宗阅之，记其姓名，起授前职，兼吏部郎中。
现代文：贞祐二年，有关机构给皇帝奏上官员簿籍，宣宗看后，记起杨云翼的名字，起用他担任以前的职务，兼任吏部郎中。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Zhenyu, the relevant organization reported the official book to the emperor. After reading the book, Emperor Xuanzong remembered Yang Yunyi's name and appointed him to his previous position, concurrently serving as the vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：三年，转礼部侍郎，兼提点司天台。
现代文：三年，他转任礼部侍郎，兼提点司天台。
English: Three years later, he was transferred to the position of a chamberlain of the ceremonial department, and he also served as the steward of the rooftop.

古文：四年，大元及西夏兵入鄜延，潼关失守，朝议以兵部尚书蒲察阿里不孙为副元帅以御之。云翼言其人言浮于实，必误大事。不听，后果败。
现代文：贞祐四年，元和西夏进兵延，潼关失守，朝廷商议由兵部尚书蒲察阿里不孙任副元帅进行抵御，杨云翼说蒲察阿里不孙这个人言过其实，一定会误大事，朝廷不听他的意见，后来果然战败了。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Zhenyu, Yuan and Western Xia invaded Yan, Shiguan was lost, and the Imperial Court was advised to resist by the vice-marshal of the military department, Shangshu Pucha Ali Fusun. Yang Yunyi said that Pucha Ali Fusun was exaggerating and would certainly make a big mistake. The Imperial Court did not listen to his opinion, and later he was defeated.

古文：兴定元年六月，迁翰林侍讲学士，兼修国史，知集贤院事，兼前职，诏曰： 官制入三品者例外除，以卿遇事敢言，议论忠谠，故特留之。 
现代文：兴定元年六月，杨云翼迁任翰林侍讲学士，兼修国史，知集贤院事并兼前职，皇上下诏说： 官制入三品的人，按例应到外面任职，因为你遇事敢言，议论国事忠诚正直，所以特意留在朝中。 
English: In June of the first year of Xingding, Yang Yunyi was transferred to the post of Hanlin Attendant Lecturer Bachelor, concurrently studying national history, wisdom collection and wisdom academy and concurrently holding a former position. The emperor issued an imperial edict saying: Those who enter the three official ranks should, as a rule, work outside, because you dare to speak in times of trouble, discuss national affairs with loyalty and honesty, so you deliberately stay in the middle of the court.

古文：时右丞相高琪当国，人有请榷油者，高琪主之甚力，诏集百官议，户部尚书高夔等二十六人同声曰： 可。 
现代文：当时右丞相高琪执掌朝政，有人请求实行油料专卖，高琪竭力赞同，召集百官商议此事，户部尚书高夔等二十六人同声说 ：可以。 
English: At that time, the Minister of the Right, Gao Qi, was in charge of the imperial government. Someone requested the implementation of an oil monopoly. Gao Qi strenuously agreed and convened a hundred officials to discuss the matter. Twenty-six people, including the head of the household, Shangshu Gaoqi, said in unison: "Yes."

古文：云翼独与赵秉文、时戩等数人以为不可，议遂格。高琪后以事谴之，云翼不恤也。
现代文：只有杨云翼和赵秉文、时戬等几个人认为不行，这一建议才被搁置下来，高琪后来找事责备他，云翼也不在乎。
English: Only Yang Yunyi, Zhao Bingwen, Shiyan and a few others thought it was not possible, and this suggestion was shelved. Gao Qi later found something to blame him for, and Yunyi did not care.

古文：二年，拜礼部尚书，兼职如故。
现代文：兴定二年，杨云翼任礼部尚书，兼职和过去相同。
English: In the second year of Xingding, Yang Yunyi was appointed as the secretary of the etiquette department, with the same part-time job as in the past.

古文：三年，筑京师子城，役兵民数万，夏秋之交病者相籍，云翼提举医药，躬自调护，多所全济。
现代文：兴定三年，在京师修筑子城，服劳役的士兵、百姓有好几万人。夏秋之交的季节，生病的人接连不断，杨云翼拿着药品，亲自给病人医治，救治了许多人。
English: During the three years of Xingding, tens of thousands of soldiers and common people served as forced laborers in the construction of the city of Qingshi in Beijing. During the summer and autumn, there were many sick people. Yang Yunyi took medicine and personally treated the sick, saving many lives.

古文：四年，改吏部尚书。
现代文：兴定四年，他改任吏部尚书。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Xingding, he was transferred to the post of secretary.

古文：凡军兴以来，入粟补官及以战功迁授者，事定之后，有司苛为程式，或小有不合辄罢去，云翼奏曰： 赏罚国之大信，此辈宜从宽录，以劝将来。 
现代文：自从战争发生以来，一些人因交纳粮食而得补官或者因战功而升迁，可是，在事成以后，有关机构设了许多繁琐苛刻的程式，只要小有不合，就会被罢去。杨云翼上奏说： 赏罚是有关国家信誉的大事，对这些人应该从宽录用，以勉励后者。 
English: Since the outbreak of the war, some people have been promoted due to the payment of grain or promoted due to the merits of the war, but after the event, the relevant institutions have set up many cumbersome and demanding procedures. As long as there is a small discrepancy, they will be dismissed. Yang Yunyi said: Rewards and punishments are important for the credibility of the country concerned. These people should be recruited from a wide range to encourage the latter.

古文：是年九月，上召云翼及户部尚书夔、翰林学士秉文于内殿，皆赐坐，问以讲和之策，或以力战为言，上俯首不乐，云翼徐以《孟子》事大、事小之说解之，且曰： 今日奚计哉，使生灵息肩，则社稷之福也。 
现代文：这年九月，皇帝在内殿召见杨云翼及户部尚书高夔、翰林学士赵秉文，都赐坐。皇帝问他们有关讲和的策略，有的人力主作战，皇帝就低着头很不高兴，杨云翼缓缓地用《孟子》中的事大、事小的说法来解释此事，并且说： 现在应计划如何使百姓能得到生息，这就是社稷之福。 
English: In September of that year, the emperor summoned Yang Yunyi to the inner hall, where he was seated with the head of the household, Shangshu Gaoqi, and the scholar of Hanlin, Zhao Bingwen. The emperor asked them about the strategy of making peace, and some of them said that manpower should be used for war. The emperor bowed his head and was very unhappy. Yang Yunyi slowly explained the matter in terms of big and small things in "Mencius," and said: Now it is time to plan how to make the people earn a living, which is the blessing of society.

古文：上色乃和。
现代文：皇帝的脸色这才变得温和一些。
English: This softened the Emperor's face.

古文：十一月，改御史中丞。
现代文：十一月，杨云翼改任御史中丞。
English: In November, Yang Yunyi was transferred to the post of Vice-Minister of History.

古文：宗室承立权参知政事，行尚书省事于京兆，大臣言其不法，诏云翼就鞫之，狱成，廷奏曰： 承立所坐皆细事，不足问。
现代文：宗室承立为代理参知政事，在京兆行尚书省事，大臣们都说他不遵法令。皇上下诏让云翼审问他，罪状成立后，杨云翼在朝廷上奏： 承立现在所犯的都是小事，不值得审。
English: Soshitsu Joryu was acting as a councillor of the government. He was in charge of administrative affairs in Beijing. The ministers all said that he did not follow the law. The emperor ordered Yun Ying to interrogate him. After the crime was established, Yang Ying Ying made a speech at the imperial court: What Joryu is committing now are minor matters, not worthy of trial.

古文：向大兵掠平凉以西，数州皆破，承立坐拥强兵，瞻望不进。
现代文：过去元兵入侵平凉以西，几个州都被攻破，承立拥有强兵却坐守不动，远远观望而不进兵。
English: In the past, Yuan soldiers invaded the west of Pingliang, several states were breached, Chengli had strong soldiers but sat still, watching from afar without entering the army.

古文：鄜延帅臣完颜合达以孤城当兵冲，屡立战绩。其功如此，而承立之罪如彼，愿陛下明其功罪以诛赏之，则天下知所劝惩矣。
现代文：延统帅完颜合达据守孤城抵挡大兵的进攻，多次立战功，他的功绩是这样大，而承立的罪责又是那样大，愿陛下明确他们的功罪加以赏罚，那么天下人就知道鼓励的和惩罚的是什么了。
English: General Yan Guanzhengda defended the lonely city against the attack of the soldiers and made war achievements many times. His achievements are so great, and the responsibility he bears is so great. May His Majesty clarify their merits and demerits and reward and punish them. Then the world will know what encouragement and punishment are.

古文：自余小失，何足追咎。 
现代文：剩下的那些小过失，有什么值得追究的呢？ 
English: What are the remaining minor faults that are worth pursuing?

古文：承立由是免官，合达遂掌机务。
现代文：承立因此被免官，完颜合达便掌管了机要大事。
English: As a result, Cheng Li was removed from his post, and Yan Gangda took charge of the important matter.

古文：哀宗即位，首命云翼摄太常卿，寻拜翰林学士。
现代文：金哀宗即位，先任命杨云翼主管太常卿事，不久拜为翰林学士。
English: When Jin Aizong ascended to the throne, he first appointed Yang Yunyi as the head of the Tai Changqing Office, and soon became the Hanlin Scholar.

古文：正大二年二月，复为礼部尚书，兼侍读。
现代文：正大二年二月，再任礼部尚书兼侍读。
English: In February of his second year at the university, he was reappointed as a member of the etiquette club and a chaperone.

古文：诏集百官议省费，云翼曰： 省费事小，户部司农足以办之。
现代文：皇帝下诏召集百官商议尚书省费用之事，杨云翼说： 省部费用事小，户部司农足可以办理。
English: The emperor issued an edict to convene a hundred officials to discuss the matter of the provincial expenses of Shang Shu. Yang Yunyi said: The provincial expenses are small, and the household department of the Ministry of Agriculture can handle them.

古文：枢密专制军政，蔑视尚书。
现代文：枢密院专制军事要务，蔑视尚书省。
English: The Privy Council's autocratic military priorities, contemptuous of the Ministry of Education.

古文：尚书出政之地，政无大小，皆当总领。
现代文：尚书省是主持政务的地方，政事不管大小都应是总领。
English: Shangshu Province is the place to preside over government affairs. Regardless of the size of the government affairs, it should be the leader.

古文：今军旅大事，社稷系焉，宰相乃不得预闻，欲使利病两不相蔽得乎。 
现代文：现在军队的大事关系着国家社稷，宰相却不能参预，要想做到利弊两方面都清楚能行吗？ 
English: At present, the important affairs of the military are related to the national society, but the prime minister cannot participate in advance. Is it possible to make both the advantages and disadvantages clear?

古文：上嘉纳之。
现代文：皇帝赞赏他的看法并加以采纳。
English: The Emperor approved and adopted his opinion.

古文：明年，设益政院，云翼为选首，每召见赐坐而不名。
现代文：第二年，设立了益政院，以杨云翼为首，每次皇上召见不必唱名而赐坐。
English: The next year, the Yizheng Academy was established, with Yang Yunyi as the head, and every time the emperor was summoned, he was given a seat without having to chant his name.

古文：时讲《尚书》，云翼为言帝王之学不必如经生分章析句，但知为国大纲足矣。
现代文：当时讲解《尚书》，杨云翼说帝王学习不必像读经的学生那样分析章句，只要知道治国的大纲就足够了。
English: At that time, when explaining the "Shangshu," Yang Yunyi said that the emperor did not have to analyze the chapters and sentences like the students who read the Bible. It was enough to know the outline of governing the country.

古文：因举 任贤  去邪 、 与治同道  与乱同事 、 有言逆于汝心  有言逊于汝志 等数条，一皆本于正心诚意，敷绎详明。
现代文：因而举出 任贤 、 去邪 、 与治同道 、 与乱同事 、 有言逆于汝心 、 有言逊于汝志 等几条，全都本于正心诚意，解释得非常详细明了。
English: Therefore, several articles such as "Ren Xian" (任贤), "Going against evil" (去邪), "Walking the same path as the government" (與治同道), "Working with chaotic colleagues" (与乱同事), "Speaking against your heart" (有言逆于汝心), "Speaking inferior to your will" (有言逊於汝志) were all based on sincerity and sincerity, and were explained in great detail.

古文：上听忘倦。
现代文：皇帝听讲时忘记了疲倦。
English: The emperor forgot his tiredness as he listened to the lecture.

古文：寻进《龟鉴万年录》、《圣学》、《圣孝》之类凡二十篇。
现代文：不久，杨云翼向皇帝进上《龟鉴万年录》、《圣学》、《圣孝》之类共二十篇文章。
English: Soon, Yang Yunyi submitted a total of twenty articles to the emperor, such as "The Tortoise's Yearbook," "Holy Science" and "Holy Filial Piety."

古文：当时朝士，廷议之际多不尽言，顾望依违，浸以成俗。
现代文：当时的朝臣在朝廷商议大事时大多不能畅所欲言，他们前顾后瞻，迟疑不决，逐渐成了习惯。
English: At that time, most of the courtiers in the imperial court could not speak freely when discussing major events. They looked forward and backward, hesitated and hesitated, and gradually became a habit.

古文：一日，经筵毕，因言： 人臣有事君之礼，有事君之义。
现代文：一天，经筵过后，杨云翼乘机说： 人臣有事君王之礼，有事君王之义。
English: One day, after the eulogy, Yang Yunyi took the opportunity to say: "Ministers have the king's respect and the king's righteousness.

古文：礼，不敢齿君之路马，蹴其刍者有罚，入君门则趋，见君之几杖则起，君命召不俟驾而行，受命不宿于家，是皆事君之礼，人臣所当尽者也。
现代文：礼，不敢触犯国君车驾的马匹，践踏花草的就受责罚，进入君王的门要小步趋行，见了君王的几案手杖就要肃立，国君有诏令不等车驾立即起程，接受命令时不在家里住宿，这都是事君之礼，人臣应当尽力去做。
English: If you do not dare to offend the horses driven by the sovereign, you will be punished if you trample on the flowers and plants. If you enter the monarch's door, you should walk in small steps. If you see the monarch's cane, you should stand up. If the sovereign has a royal decree, do not wait for the car to drive immediately, and do not stay at home when receiving orders. These are all things for the sovereign, and the ministers should do their best.

古文：然国家之利害，生民之休戚，一一陈之，则向所谓礼者特虚器耳。
现代文：然而关系到国家的利益，民众的祸福的事情，都要一一陈述意见，这时，以上所说的礼就是空虚的。
English: However, when it comes to the interests of the country and the people's well-being, it is necessary to present opinions one by one. In this case, the above-mentioned courtesy is empty.

古文：君曰可，而有否者献其否；君曰否，而有可者献其可。
现代文：君王说某些事可以办，而有反对意见的人就要说出不可以的道理。
English: The monarch says that certain things can be done, and those who have objections must say the reason why they cannot.

古文：言有不从，虽引裾、折槛、断鞅、轫轮有不恤焉者。
现代文：君王说不可以办，而有认为可以的人就应说出可行的道理。进言之后，君王不肯听从，有人即使拉住衣袖，折断门槛，扯断马鞍，阻止车轮前进也不顾惜。
English: The king said it could not be done, and those who thought it could should come up with a feasible reason. After the speech, the king refused to listen, and some people did not hesitate to pull the sleeves, break the threshold, break the saddle, and stop the wheel from moving forward.

古文：当是时也，姑徇事君之虚礼，而不知事君之大义，国家何赖焉。 
现代文：那时如果只遵循事君之礼，而不知事君的大义，国家还依靠什么呢？ 
English: At that time, if you only follow the king's gift, but not the king's great righteousness, what will the country still rely on?

古文：上变色曰： 非卿，朕不闻此言。 
现代文：皇帝听后，脸色一变，说 ：如果不是你，我就听不到这样的话。 
English: When the emperor heard this, his face changed, and he said, "If it were not for you, I would not have heard these words."

古文：云翼尝患风痹，至是稍愈，上亲问愈之之方，对曰： 但治心耳。
现代文：杨云翼曾患风痹病，后来稍好了些，皇帝亲自问他治病的方法，杨云翼回答说 ：只是治心罢了，心和，那么邪气就不能干扰。
English: Yang Yunyi once suffered from rheumatism, but later became a little better. The emperor himself asked him how to cure the disease, and Yang Yunyi replied: "Just cure the mind. If the mind is at peace, then the evil spirit cannot interfere."

古文：心和则邪气不干，治国亦然，人君先正其心，则朝廷百官莫不一于正矣。 上矍然，知其为医谏也。
现代文：治国也是这样，人君先正其心，那么朝廷百官无不尽归于正了。 皇帝听后感到震惊，知道他用医道进谏。
English: It is the same with governing a country. The ruler must first rectify his heart, and then all the officials of the imperial court will be rectified. The emperor was shocked to hear that he had used medicine to cure his illness.

古文：夏人既通好，遣其徽猷阁学士李弁来议互市，往返不能决，朝廷以云翼往议乃定。
现代文：西夏人已与金通好，派来他们的徽猷阁学士李弁来商议两国的贸易之事，你来我往不能议定，朝廷派杨云翼去，一商议就谈定了。
English: The Xixia people were already on good terms with Jintong, and sent their Huizhong scholar Li Ben to discuss the trade between the two countries. You can't come and negotiate with me, but the imperial court sent Yang Yunyi, and the matter was settled after one discussion.

古文：五年卒，年五十有九，谥文献。
现代文：正大五年，杨云翼去世，享年五十九岁，谥号为文献。
English: Five years after his graduation, Yang Yunyi passed away at the age of fifty-nine. His nickname was Literature.

古文：云翼天性雅重，自律甚严，其待人则宽，与人交分一定，死生祸福不少变。
现代文：杨云翼天性高雅自重，律己很严，待人却很宽厚，与人若有一定的交情，死生祸福都不会有一点改变。
English: Yang Yunyi is naturally elegant and self-respecting. He is very strict with himself, but very generous with others. If he has a certain friendship with others, there will be no change in life and death.

古文：其于国家之事，知无不言。
现代文：对于国家大事，知无不言。
English: When it comes to national affairs, nothing is secret.

古文：贞祐中，主兵者不能外御而欲取偿于宋，故频岁南伐。
现代文：贞祐年间，掌管兵权的人不能抵抗外来侵略而要想从南宋得到补偿，所以连年攻打南方。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhenyu, those in charge of the military could not resist foreign aggression and wanted to get compensation from the Southern Song Dynasty, so they attacked the south for years.

古文：有言之者，不谓之与宋为地，则疑与之有谋。
现代文：谁议论这件事，不是说他替宋人争地，就是怀疑他与宋人有阴谋。
English: Whoever talks about this, either he is competing for land for the Song people, or he is suspected of conspiring with the Song people.

古文：至于宰执，他事无不言者，独南伐则一语不敢及。
现代文：至于宰执大臣，对别的事没有不说的，只有南伐一事一句话也不敢说起。
English: As for the minister-in-charge, he did not avoid talking about other things, but he did not dare to say a word about the Southern Expedition.

古文：云翼乃建言曰： 国家之虑，不在于未得淮南之前，而在城既得淮南之后。
现代文：杨云翼就建议说： 国家的忧虑，不在未得淮南之前，而在得到淮南之后。
English: Yang Yunyi suggested that: The country's concern is not before obtaining Huainan, but after obtaining Huainan.

古文：盖淮南平则江之北尽为战地，进而争利于舟楫之间，恐劲弓良马有不得骋者矣。
现代文：淮南平定，长江以北都成为战场，进而在水上船舶之中争利，恐怕强弓良马不能有用武之地。
English: Huainan has been pacified, and the north of the Yangtze River has become a battlefield, and then there is a struggle for profits among water vessels. I am afraid that strong bows and good horses cannot be used.

古文：彼若扼江为屯，潜师于淮以断饷道，或决水以潴淮南之地，则我军何以善其后乎。 
现代文：敌方如扼住长江屯兵，暗派军队到淮河以切断粮道，或者决开淮河淹没淮南的土地，那么我军如何处理后事呢？ 
English: If the enemy strangles the Yangtze River garrison, secretly sends troops to the Huaihe River to cut off the grain route, or breaks the Huaihe River to flood the land of Huainan, then how will our army deal with the aftermath?

古文：及时全倡议南伐，宣宗以问朝臣，云翼曰： 朝臣率皆谀辞，天下有治有乱，国势有弱有强，今但言治而不言乱，言强而不言弱，言胜而不言负，此议论所以偏也。
现代文：时全倡议南伐时，宣宗同朝臣商议此事，杨云翼说： 朝臣都说些阿谀之辞，天下有治有乱，国势有强有弱，现在只说治不说乱，只说强不说弱，只说胜不说败，所以说这些议论是片面的。
English: When the Southern Expedition was proposed by Jichuan, Xuan Zong discussed the matter with the courtiers, and Yang Yunyi said: The courtiers all say some flattering words. The world has rule and disorder, and the country is strong and weak. Now, they only talk about rule and disorder, strong and weak, and victory and defeat. Therefore, these discussions are one-sided.

古文：臣请两言之。
现代文：请让我谈谈两方面的情况。
English: Let me talk about two aspects of the situation.

古文：夫将有事于宋者，非贪其土地也，第恐西北有警而南又缀之，则我三面受敌矣，故欲我师乘势先动，以阻其进。
现代文：想攻打宋，并不是贪宋的土地，而是怕西北方有危难而南面又接连出事，将使我们三面受敌，所以想让我军乘势先动，以阻止宋的进攻。
English: If we want to attack the Song Dynasty, it is not because we covet the land of the Song Dynasty, but because we are afraid that there will be a crisis in the northwest and a series of accidents in the south, which will make us suffer from the enemy on three sides. Therefore, we want our army to take advantage of the situation and move first to stop the Song Dynasty's attack.

古文：借使宋人失淮，且不敢来，此战胜之利也。
现代文：假如宋人失去淮河，而且不敢再来，这场战争我们就胜了。
English: If the Song people lose the Huaihe River and do not dare to come back, we will win this war.

古文：就如所料，其利犹未可必然。
现代文：即使如所料那样，也不是一定得利。
English: Even if, as expected, it is not necessarily profitable.

古文：彼江之南其地尚广，虽无淮南岂不能集数万之众，伺我有警而出师耶。
现代文：宋在长江以南土地广阔，即使没有淮南，难道不能集中几万人，等到北方有急乘机出兵吗？
English: The Song Dynasty had a vast territory south of the Yangtze River. Even without Huainan, couldn't they have concentrated tens of thousands of people and waited until there was an urgent opportunity to send troops to the north?

古文：战而胜且如此，如不胜害将若何。
现代文：胜了尚且如此，如果不能战胜对方将会有什么样的坏处呢？
English: Even so, if you win, if you can't beat the other side, what kind of harm will it do?

古文：且我以骑当彼之步，理宜万全，臣犹恐其有不敢恃者。
现代文：况且我们以骑兵抵挡他们的步兵，按理说是应该万无一失，但我还担心得不到保证。
English: Besides, our cavalry against their infantry is supposed to be foolproof, but I'm afraid it's not foolproof.

古文：盖今之事势与泰和不同。泰和以冬征，今我以夏往，此天时之不同也。
现代文：现在的情况和泰和年间不同，泰和年间作战是冬天出征，现在我们是在夏天前往，这是天时的不同。
English: The current situation is different from that in Thailand and Vietnam. In Thailand and Vietnam, we went to war in the winter, but now we are going in the summer. This is a time difference.

古文：冬则水涸而陆多，夏则水潦而涂淖，此地利之不同也。
现代文：冬天水干涸，陆地多，夏天却水漫而多泥淖，这是地利的不同。
English: In winter the water dries up and there is more land, but in summer it is full of water and muddy. This is due to the difference in location.

古文：泰和举天下全力，驱飐军以为前锋，今能之乎？
现代文：泰和年间是用天下全力，让勇武的军队当先锋，现在能做到吗？
English: During the Thai-Japanese War, we used all the power in the world to let the brave army be the vanguard. Can we do it now?

古文：此人事之不同也。
现代文：这是人事的不同。
English: It's a personnel difference.

古文：议者徒见泰和之易，而不知今日之难。
现代文：议论此事的人只见泰和取胜容易，而不知道今天的困难。
English: People who talk about it only see Thailand and how easy it is to win, but they don't know about today's difficulties.

古文：请以夏人观之，向日弓箭手之在西边者，一遇敌则搏而战、袒而射，彼已奔北之不暇，今乃陷吾城而虏守臣，败吾军而禽主将。
现代文：请再来看看夏人，过去我们在西部边境的弓箭手，一遇到敌人就搏斗作战，袒露身子射箭，对方奔逃都来不及。而现在他们攻陷我们的城池，俘虏守臣，打败我军并抓获了主将。
English: Please take another look at the summer people. In the past, our archers on the western border fought and fought as soon as they encountered the enemy, shooting arrows in the open, and the other side was too late to escape. But now they have attacked our castle, captured our retainers, defeated our army and captured the captain.

古文：曩则畏我如彼，今则侮我如此。
现代文：过去是那样怕我们，现在却这样欺负我们。
English: They used to be so afraid of us, but now they bully us like this.

古文：夫以夏人既非前日，奈何以宋人独如前日哉。
现代文：夏人已与过去不同了，宋人怎么会和以前相同呢？
English: The Xia people are already different from the past, how can the Song people be the same as before?

古文：愿陛下思其胜之之利，又思败之之害，无悦甘言，无贻后悔。 
现代文：愿陛下考虑胜利的好处和失败的害处，不要喜欢听甜言蜜语，不要招致今后的悔恨。 
English: May His Majesty consider the advantages of victory and the disadvantages of defeat, and not like to listen to sweet talk, and not incur future remorse.

古文：章奏不报。
现代文：上奏后没有回报。
English: There was no return after the overture.

古文：时全果大败于淮上，一军全没。
现代文：时全果然在淮上大败，全军覆没。
English: The whole army was annihilated in the great defeat at Huai.

古文：宣宗责诸将曰： 当使我何面目见杨云翼耶？ 
现代文：宣宗责备诸将说： 让我用什么脸面去见杨云翼呀！ 
English: Xuan Zong rebuked the generals and said, "What face should I use to meet Yang Yun Ying?"

古文：河朔民十有一人为游骑所迫，泅河而南，有司论罪当死，云翼曰： 法所重私渡者，防奸伪也。今平民为兵所迫，奔入于河，为逭死之计耳。今使不死于敌而死于法，后惟从敌而已。 
现代文：河朔的百姓有十分之一被元人骑兵所迫，渡河而到河南面来，有关部门按罪判处死刑。杨云翼说 ：法律所重判的是私渡者，是为了防止奸伪之徒，现在平民被兵所迫，逃到黄河，是逃避死亡的办法，现在这样做是使他们不死于敌兵而死于法，以后他们只好跟从敌兵了。 
English: One-tenth of the people in Hexuo were forced by the Yuan cavalry to cross the river and come to the south of Henan, and the relevant departments sentenced them to death for the crime. Yang Yunyi said: The law heavily sentenced the smugglers in order to prevent the traitors. Now the civilians are forced by the soldiers to escape to the Yellow River, which is a way to escape death. Now this is done so that they do not die of the enemy soldiers but die of the law, and later they have to follow the enemy soldiers.

古文：宣宗悟，尽释之。
现代文：宣宗明白了道理，把渡河而来的人都释放了。
English: Xuan Zong understood the reason and released the people who came across the river.

古文：哀宗以河南旱，诏遣官理冤狱，而不及陕西，云翼言： 天地人通为一体，今人一支受病则四体为之不宁，岂可专治受病之处而置其余哉。 
现代文：因河南遇旱，哀宗下诏派官员去审理冤狱，而没派人去陕西，杨云翼说 ：天地人合为一体，现在的人肢体得病，全身都不舒服，怎么能专治受病的地方而不管其他地方呢？ 
English: Because of the drought in Henan Province, Emperor Yaozong sent officials to investigate the unjust imprisonment, but did not send anyone to Shaanxi Province. Yang Yunyi said, "Heaven and earth are one. Nowadays, people's limbs get sick and their whole body is uncomfortable. How can we specifically treat the place where the disease is suffered, regardless of other places?

古文：朝廷是之。
现代文：朝廷认为他说得对。
English: The court thought he was right.

古文：司天有以《太乙新历》上进者，尚书省檄云翼参订，摘其不合者二十余条，历家称焉。
现代文：司天监有人进上了《太乙新历》，尚书省交杨云翼参订，云翼摘出了其中二十多处错误，得到了历法家的称赞。
English: Someone from the Department of Celestial Supervision entered the "Tai Yi New Calendar," and the Ministry of Education and Culture sent Yang Yunyi to participate in the subscription. Yunyi picked out more than twenty mistakes and was praised by the calendar makers.

古文：所著文集若干卷，校《大金礼仪》若干卷，《续通鉴》若干卷，《周礼辨》一篇，《左氏》、《庄》、《列赋》各一篇，《五星聚井辨》一篇，《县象赋》一篇，《勾股机要》、《象数杂说》等著藏于家。
现代文：杨云翼所著文集若干卷，校订《大金礼仪》若干卷，《续通鉴》若干卷，《周礼辨》一篇，《左氏传》、《庄子》、《列赋》各一篇，《五星聚井辨》一篇，《县象赋》一篇，《勾股机要》、《象数杂说》等著作，都藏在家中。
English: Several volumes of the collection of works written by Yang Yunyi, several volumes of the revision of the "Big Gold Etiquette," several volumes of the "Continuation Guide," one volume of the "Zhou Li Bian," one each of the "Zou Shi Zhuan," "Zhuang Zi" and "Li Fu," one volume of the "Five-star Gathering of Wells," one volume of the "County Elephant Fu," one volume of the "Hooking Machine" and "The Miscellaneous Story of the Elephant" are all hidden in the home.

古文：赵秉文，字周臣，磁州滏阳人也。
现代文：赵秉文，字周臣，磁州滏阳人。
English: Zhao Bingwen, also known as Zhou Zhen, was born in Shiyang, Gansu Province.

古文：幼颖悟，读书若夙习。
现代文：他从小聪明、悟性强，读起书来就像早已学过一般。
English: He has been smart and intelligent since childhood, and reads books as if he has already learned.

古文：登大定二十五年进士第，调安塞簿，以课最迁邯郸令，再迁唐山。
现代文：大定二十五年中进士，调任安塞主簿，因为赋税收得最多而升迁为邯郸令，又调任唐山令。
English: In the 25th year of Dading's reign, he was promoted to the position of the chief accountant of Ansai Province. He was promoted to the position of the magistrate because he collected the most taxes. He was also promoted to the position of the Tangshan magistrate.

古文：丁父忧，用荐者起复南京路转运司都勾判官。
现代文：守父丧以后，又被推荐任南京路转运司都勾判官。
English: After his father's death, he was recommended to be the judge of the Nanjing Road Transportation Division.

古文：明昌六年，入为应奉翰林文字，同知制诰。
现代文：明昌六年，赵秉文入朝任应奉翰林文字，同知制诰。
English: In the sixth year of the Ming Dynasty, Zhao Bingwen was appointed to the imperial court.

古文：上书论宰相胥持国当罢，宗室守贞可大用。
现代文：他上书议论宰相胥持国应当罢免，宗室守贞可以重用。
English: He wrote a letter arguing that Prime Minister Tsuchimoto should be removed from office, and that Soshitsu Morizane could be reappointed.

古文：章宗召问，言颇差异，于是命知大兴府事内族膏等鞫之。
现代文：章宗召见他询问，见他说话前后不一致，于是命令知大兴府事内族完颜礸等审问他。
English: Zhang Zong summoned him for questioning and found that his speech was inconsistent, so he ordered Zhida Xingfu to interrogate him.

古文：秉文初不肯言，诘其仆，历数交游者，秉文乃曰： 初欲上言，尝与修撰王庭筠、御史周昂、省令史潘豹、郑赞道、高坦等私议。 
现代文：赵秉文开始不敢说，便追问他的仆人，仆人便说出了和他们交往的一些人，赵秉文这才说： 起初打算上书皇帝时，曾与修撰王庭筠，御史周昂，省令史潘豹、郑赞道、高坦等私下议论过。 
English: At first, Zhao Bingwen did not dare to say anything, so he asked his servants. The servants then revealed some of the people they had been in contact with. Zhao Bingwen then said: At the beginning, when it was planned to submit the letter to the emperor, I had a private discussion with the scribes Wang Tingtao, Gu Shi Zhouang, and the provincial governors Spangbao, Zheng Zan Dao, Gaotan, and so on.

古文：庭筠等皆下狱，决罚有差。
现代文：王庭筠等都被捕入狱，每人受到的判决和处罚有所差别。
English: Wang Tingyao and others were all arrested and imprisoned, and the sentences and punishments received by each person differed.

古文：有司论秉文上书狂妄，法当追解，上不欲以言罪人，遂特免焉。
现代文：有关部门认为赵秉文上书狂妄，依法应当追查罪责，押送监狱。章宗不想因人进言而判罪，所以就特别免去了对他的处罚。
English: The relevant departments believed that Zhao Bingwen was too arrogant to write the letter, and should be prosecuted according to law and sent to prison. Zhangzong did not want to be convicted because of someone's advice, so he was specifically exempted from punishment.

古文：当时为之语曰： 古有朱云，今有秉文，朱云攀槛，秉文攀人。 
现代文：当时人为此而编话说： 古有朱云，今有秉文，朱云攀槛，秉文攀人。 
English: At that time, people made up words for this: In ancient times, there was Zhuyun, now there is Bingwen, Zhuyun climbed the threshold, Bingwen climbed the people.

古文：士大夫莫不耻之。
现代文：士大夫无不耻笑他。
English: The magistrate laughed at him.

古文：坐是久废，后起为同知岢岚军州事，转北京路转运司支度判官。
现代文：他因此久被废黜。后来被起用为同知岢岚军州事，又转为北京路转运司支度判官。
English: As a result, he was dethroned for a long time. Later, he was appointed as the provincial secretary of Tongzhi County Military Region, and then he was transferred to the judge of the Beijing Road Transportation Division.

古文：承安五年冬十月，阴晦连日，宰相张万公入对，上顾谓万公曰： 卿言天日晦冥，亦犹人君用人邪正不分，极有理。
现代文：承安五年冬十月，连日阴天，宰相张万公上朝和皇帝谈论，皇上对张万公说： 你说白天阴暗，也像君王用人邪正不分一样，这很有道理。
English: In October of the winter of the fifth year of Cheng'an, when it was cloudy for days on end, the prime minister Zhang Wankong talked with the emperor. The emperor said to Zhang Wankong: "You say that the day is gloomy, just as the king employs people regardless of whether they are good or evil. This makes a lot of sense."

古文：若赵秉文曩以言事降授，闻其人有才藻，工书翰，又且敢言，朕非弃不用，以北边军事方兴，姑试之耳。 
现代文：就如赵秉文过去因奏事降职，但听说这人有才华，善于写文书，又敢说话，我不是放弃他不用，因为北方边境战争刚起，所以先试用一下。 
English: Just as Zhao Bingwen was demoted in the past due to a report, but I heard that this person has talent, is good at writing documents, and dares to speak, I am not giving up on him, because the northern border war has just begun, so try it first.

古文：泰和二年，召为户部主事，迁翰林修撰。
现代文：泰和二年，赵秉文被召回任户部主事，升为翰林修撰。
English: In the second year of the Taihe era, Zhao Bingwen was recalled to be the head of the household department and promoted to the post of Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：十月，出为宁边州刺史。
现代文：十月，出任为宁边州刺史。
English: In October, he was appointed as the governor of Yongbyon Province.

古文：三年，改平定州。前政苛于用刑，每闻赦将至，先掊贼死乃拜赦，而盗愈繁。
现代文：三年，改任平定州刺史，前任刺史为政苛刻，好用刑，每次听说大赦将到，就先杀了犯人然后再接受大赦的旨令，这样盗贼越来越多。
English: Three years later, he was reassigned as the governor of Pingding County. The previous governor was a harsh politician, who liked to use punishment. Every time he heard that an amnesty was coming, he would first kill the prisoner and then accept the amnesty decree. As a result, there were more and more thieves.

古文：秉文为政，一从宽简，旬月盗悉屏迹。
现代文：赵秉文为政一切从宽从简，一两月后，盗贼全都不再出没。
English: Zhao Bingwen did everything from the broad to the simple, and after a month or two, the thieves no longer haunted.

古文：岁饥，出禄粟倡豪民以赈，全活者甚众。
现代文：遇上饥年，他拿出自己的俸禄和所得的粮食，并倡导有钱人赈济穷人，这样，救活了许多人。
English: In a time of famine, he gave away his salary and the food he had earned, and advocated that the rich should feed the poor. In this way, he saved many lives.

古文：大安初，北兵南向，召秉文与待制赵资道论备边策，秉文言： 今我军聚于宣德，城小，列营其外，涉暑雨，器械弛败，人且病，俟秋敌至将不利矣。
现代文：大安初年，北方敌军南下，皇上召赵秉文与待制赵资道论备边策略，赵秉文说： 现在我军聚集在宣德，宣德城小，军队只好布置在城外，经过夏天雨淋，器械会被损坏，人也会得病，等秋天敌兵来到，就对我方不利了。
English: In the first year of the Taian era, when the enemy army from the north marched south, the emperor summoned Zhao Bingwen and Zhao Zhidao, who was on standby, to discuss the preparation strategy. Zhao Bingwen said: Now our army is gathered in Xuande. Xuande is a small city. The army had to be deployed outside the city. After the summer rain, the equipment will be damaged and people will get sick. When the enemy soldiers come in the fall, it will be unfavorable to our side.

古文：可遣临潢一军捣其虚，则山西之围可解，兵法所谓 出其不意、攻其必救 者也。 
现代文：现在可派临潢一支军队攻打敌军虚处，这样便可解山西之围，这就是兵法上所说的 出其不意，攻其不备 。 
English: Now, Linyi can send an army to attack the enemy at the wrong place, so that the siege of Shanxi can be lifted. This is what is called surprise attack in the art of war.

古文：卫王不能用，其秋宣德果以败闻。
现代文：卫王不用赵秉文的计策，到秋天宣德果然战败。
English: Wei Wang did not use Zhao Bingwen's strategy, and Xuan De was defeated in the autumn.

古文：寻为兵部郎中，兼翰林修撰，俄转翰林直学士。
现代文：不久赵秉文任兵部郎中，兼翰林修撰，不久又转翰林直学士。
English: Soon after, Zhao Bingwen was appointed as a junior member of the military department, and also a scholar of Hanlin, and soon became a direct scholar of Hanlin.

古文：贞祐初，建言时事可行者三：一迁都，二导河，三封建。朝廷略施行之。
现代文：贞祐初年，他提出可实行的三条建议：一是迁都，二是导河，三是实行封建，朝廷大略加以施行。
English: In the first year of Zhenyu, he put forward three proposals that could be implemented: one was to move the capital, the second was to guide the river, and the third was to implement feudalism, which the court roughly implemented.

古文：明年，上书愿为国家守残破一州，以宣布朝廷恤民之意，且曰： 陛下勿谓书生不知兵，颜真卿、张巡、许远辈以身许国，亦书生也。 
现代文：第二年，赵秉文上书表示愿意为国家守卫残破的一州，以宣布朝廷体恤百姓的愿望。他说 ：陛下不要认为书生不知兵，颜真卿、张巡、许远等人都以身殉国，他们都是书生。 
English: The following year, Zhao Bingwen wrote a letter expressing his willingness to serve as a national guard for the devastated Yizhou, in order to announce the desire of the imperial court to sympathize with the people. He said: Your Majesty should not think that the students do not know the soldiers, Yan Zhenqing, Zhang Jun, Xu Yuan and others all died for the country, they are all students.

古文：又曰： 使臣死而有益于国，犹胜坐糜廪禄为无用之人。 
现代文：又说 ：假如我的死有益于国家，胜过做个坐吃俸禄的无用之人。 
English: He also said: "If my death is beneficial to the country, it is better than being a useless person on a salary."

古文：上曰： 秉文志固可尚，然方今翰苑尤难其人，卿宿儒，当在左右。 
现代文：皇帝说 ：秉文的精神固然可敬，然而现在翰林苑特别难找适当的人，你身为宿儒，应当在我身边。 
English: The emperor said, "Bingwen's spirit is certainly worthy of respect, however, it is particularly difficult to find the right person for Hanlin Court right now. As a resident scholar, you should be by my side.

古文：不许。
现代文：因此没有答应。
English: The Emperor does not allow it.

古文：四年，拜翰林侍讲学士，言： 宝券滞塞，盖朝廷初议更张，市肆已妄传其不用，因之抑遏，渐至废绝。
现代文：贞祐四年，赵秉文拜翰林侍讲学士，他说： 宝券流通不畅，是因为朝廷原先商议要改变办法，集市上已传言它不再使用了，因而流通受到制约，渐渐就要废绝了。
English: In the fourth year of Zhengyu, Zhao Bingwen Baihanlin attended the lecture of the bachelor, he said: The circulation of the treasure ticket is not smooth, because the imperial court originally discussed to change the method, the market has been rumored that it is no longer used, so the circulation is restricted, and it will gradually be abolished.

古文：臣愚以为宜立回易务，令近上职官通市道者掌之，给以银钞粟麦缣帛之类，权其低昂而出纳。 
现代文：我认为应当立即回收交换，派皇上的近臣到通街大市上掌管这件事，换给银钞、粟麦、缣帛之类的东西，暂按其价格高低而出入。 
English: In my opinion, it should be immediately recovered and exchanged, and the emperor's close advisers should be sent to the Tongjie Market to take charge of this matter, and exchange it for things such as silver bills, corn, and cocoons, and temporarily enter and exit according to their price.

古文：诏有司议行之。
现代文：皇帝诏令有关方面商议实行。
English: The Emperor's edict shall be implemented after consultation with the relevant parties.

古文：兴定元年，转侍读学士。
现代文：兴定元年，赵秉文转为侍读学士。
English: In the first year of Xingding, Zhao Bingwen became an attendant bachelor.

古文：拜礼部尚书，兼侍读学士，同修国史，知集贤院事。
现代文：拜任礼部尚书，兼侍读学士，参与修撰国史，知集贤院事。
English: He was appointed to the Ministry of Rites and Literature, and also attended the bachelor's degree, participated in the compilation of national history, and was a scholar and academician.

古文：又明年，知贡举，坐取进士卢亚重用韵，削两阶，因请致仕。
现代文：过了一年，知贡举，因录取的进士卢元用韵重复，被降两级官职，他因此请求辞官。
English: A year later, he was demoted two levels of official posts due to his repeated use of rhymes during the tribute ceremony. He therefore asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：金自泰和、大安以来，科举之文其弊益甚。盖有司惟守格法，所取之文卑陋陈腐，苟合程度而已，稍涉奇峭，即遭绌落，于是文风大衰。
现代文：金朝自泰和、大安以来，科举文章弊病更大，有关官员只会墨守成规，所取文章卑陋陈腐，仅仅是合乎教条化的格式而已，文章稍有奇峭，便遭黜落，于是文风大大衰败。
English: Since the Taiping and Taian dynasties of the Kim dynasty, the writing style of the imperial examinations has deteriorated greatly. The relevant officials will only stick to the rules, the articles are vulgar and old-fashioned, and only conform to the dogmatic format. If the articles are a little bizarre, they will be ridiculed.

古文：贞祐初，秉文为省试，得李献能赋，虽格律稍疏而词藻颇丽，擢为第一。举人遂大喧噪，诉於台省，以为赵公大坏文格，且作诗谤之，久之方息。
现代文：贞祐初年，赵秉文主持省试，见李献能写的赋，虽然格律稍有粗疏，但词藻华丽，他便将李献能拔擢为第一，参加科举的人大吵大闹，告到台省，认为赵秉文破坏了文章的格律，而且做诗诽谤他。过了很久，这件事才平息。
English: In the first year of Zhengyu, Zhao Bingwen presided over the provincial examination. He saw that Li Xianneng had written a fu. Although the grammar was a little rough, the words were gorgeous. He then promoted Li Xianneng to the first place. The participants in the imperial examination made a big fuss and reported to Taiwan Province that Zhao Bingwen had destroyed the grammar of the article and slandered him by making a poem. It took a long time for the matter to subside.

古文：俄而献能复中宏词，入翰林，而秉文竟以是得罪。
现代文：不久，李献能又中宏词科，入翰林，而赵秉文竟然因这方面的事情而获罪。
English: Soon after, Li Xianneng became a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, and Zhao Bingwen was even found guilty of this.

古文：五年，复为礼部尚书，入谢，上曰： 卿春秋高，以文章故须复用卿。 
现代文：五年，赵秉文又复任礼部尚书，入朝谢恩时，皇上说： 你的年岁大了，因为文章的原因所以再次起用你。 
English: Five years later, Zhao Bingwen was reinstated as the Minister of Rites and Ceremonies. When he entered the imperial court, the emperor said: "You are old, so I am reappointing you because of the article.

古文：秉文以身受厚恩，无以自效，愿开忠言、广圣虑，每进见从容为上言，人主当俭勤、慎兵刑，所以祈天永命者，上嘉纳焉。
现代文：赵秉文认为自己身受重恩，无以报效，希望大开忠言，使皇上集思广议，每次进见便从容地对皇帝进言说，君王应当俭朴勤政，用兵用刑要谨慎，这样才能使国家长久。
English: Zhao Bingwen thought that he had received a great favor and could not repay it. He hoped that his loyal advice would be widely disseminated so that the emperor could think about it. Every time he saw the emperor, he would calmly advise the emperor that the monarch should be frugal and diligent in politics, and should be cautious in the use of soldiers and punishment, so that the country could be long-lasting.

古文：哀宗即位，再乞致仕，不许。
现代文：皇帝赞许并采纳了他的意见。哀宗即位，赵秉文再次请求辞官，但未获准。
English: The emperor approved and adopted his opinion. Aizong ascended to the throne, and Zhao Bingwen once again requested to resign, but was not allowed.

古文：改翰林学士，同修国史，兼益政院说书官。
现代文：后来他改任翰林学士，参与修国史，兼益政院说书官，他认为皇帝初即位，应当天天阅读经史，以求有所补益。
English: Later, he was appointed as a scholar of Hanlin, participated in the study of national history, and also served as a storyteller of the State Council. He believed that the emperor should read history every day when he first ascended the throne in order to supplement his knowledge.

古文：以上嗣德在初，当日亲经史以自裨益，进《无逸直解》、《贞观政要》、《申鉴》各一通。
现代文：于是他便献上《无逸直解》、《贞观政要》、《申鉴》各一部。
English: As a result, he presented a part each of "Mujie Zhizhe," "Zhenguan Zhengyao" and "Shen Jian."

古文：正大九年正月，汴京戒严，上命秉文为赦文，以布宣悔悟哀痛之意。
现代文：正大九年正月，汴京戒严，皇上命赵秉文撰写赦文，以表达自己悔悟哀伤的心情。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Zhengda, when Beijing was under martial law, the emperor ordered Zhao Bingwen to write a letter of pardon to express his remorse and sorrow.

古文：秉文指事陈义，辞情俱尽。
现代文：赵秉文指事陈义，文辞情采都很完美。
English: Zhao Bingwen's instructions are clear, and his words are perfect.

古文：及兵退，大臣欲称贺，且命为表，秉文曰： 《春秋》 新宫火，三日哭 。今园陵如此，酌之以礼，当慰不当贺。 
现代文：到敌兵退后，大臣们都要来表示祝贺，让赵秉文写贺表。赵秉文说 ：《春秋》上说 新宫火，三日哭 ，现在园陵这个样子，以礼而论，应当安慰而不应当祝贺。 
English: When the enemy soldiers retreated, the ministers all came to express their congratulations and asked Zhao Bingwen to write a congratulatory letter. Zhao Bingwen said: "In Spring and Autumn, it was said that the new palace was on fire and people cried for three days. Now, the garden and the mausoleum look like this. In terms of etiquette, it should be comforting and not congratulatory.

古文：遂已。
现代文：于是就停止了。
English: And then it stopped.

古文：时年已老，日以时事为忧，虽食息顷不能忘。
现代文：这时赵秉文年纪已老，天天对时事感到忧愁，无论是吃饭还是休息都不能忘。
English: At this time, Zhao Bingwen was already old and felt sad about current affairs every day. He could not forget to eat or rest.

古文：每闻一事可便民，一士可擢用，大则拜章，小则为当路者言，殷勤郑重，不能自已。
现代文：每听到一件事对百姓有好处，一个人可提拔使用，大则给皇帝上奏章，小则给主管官员去说，殷勤郑重，不能自制。
English: Every time he hears that something is good for the people and that a person can be promoted and used, he will write a report to the emperor if it is big and to the competent officials if it is small. He is diligent and serious and cannot control himself.

古文：三月，草《开兴改元诏》，闾巷间皆能传诵，洛阳人拜诏毕，举城痛哭，其感人如此。
现代文：三月，起草《开兴改元诏》，街巷中人都能传诵。洛阳人拜读了诏书后，全城人痛哭，其感人到如此程度。
English: In March, the "Imperial Edict on the Opening and Reform of the Yuan Dynasty" was drafted, and everyone in the streets could recite it. After the Luoyang people read the imperial edict, the whole city cried bitterly, it was so touching.

古文：是年五月壬辰，卒，年七十四，积官至资善大夫、上护军、天水郡侯。
现代文：这年五月壬辰日，赵秉文去世，享年七十四岁，累官至资善大夫、上护军、天水郡侯。
English: In May of this year, Zhao Bingwen passed away at the age of seventy-four. He had been promoted to the positions of Suisen doctor, Shanggongjun, and Tianshui county magistrate.

古文：正大间，同杨云翼作《龟鉴万年录》上之。又因进讲，与云翼共集自古治术，号《君臣政要》为一编以进焉。
现代文：正大年间，他和杨云翼写了《龟鉴万年录》给皇上，又入宫侍讲，与杨云翼一起收集了自古治国之术，名为《君臣政要》合为一编送进朝廷。
English: During his time at Zhengda University, he and Yang Yunyi wrote "The Tortoise's Yearbook" for the emperor, and also entered the palace to attend lectures. Together with Yang Yunyi, they collected the art of governing the country since ancient times, called "Sovereigns, Subjects and Politicians" and sent it to the imperial court as a single volume.

古文：秉文自幼至老未尝一日废书，著《易丛说》十卷，《中庸说》一卷，《扬子发微》一卷，《太玄笺赞》六卷，《文中子类说》一卷，《南华略释》一卷，《列子补注》一卷，删集《论语》、《孟子解》各一十卷，《资暇录》一十五卷，所著文章号《滏水集》者三十卷。
现代文：赵秉文从小到老没有一天放弃读书，著有《易丛说》十卷，《中庸说》一卷，《扬子发微》一卷，《太玄笺赞》六卷，《文中子类说》一卷，《南华略释》一卷，《列子补注》一卷，删集了《论语》、《孟子解》各十卷，《资暇录》十五卷，所著文章收在《滏水集》共三十卷。
English: From childhood to old age, Zhao Bingwen never gave up reading for a single day. He is the author of "I Congsa" ten volumes, "Zhongyongsa" one volume, "Yangzi Fahui" one volume, "Ta Xuan Zhan" six volumes, "Wen Zhongzi Lu" one volume, "Nanhua Xiao Xie" one volume, "Liezi Supplement" one volume. He edited ten volumes of "Analects" and "Mencius's Solution" and fifteen volumes of "Sources and Time Record." The articles he wrote were collected in "Shui Shu" for a total of thirty volumes.

古文：秉文之文长于辨析，极所欲言而止，不以绳墨自拘。
现代文：赵秉文的文章擅长于辨析，畅所欲言，言尽便止，不受规矩的约束。
English: Zhao Bingwen's articles are good at analysis, speak freely, speak freely, and are not bound by rules.

古文：七言长诗笔势纵放，不拘一律，律诗壮丽，小诗精绝，多以近体为之，至五言古诗则沉郁顿挫。
现代文：七言长诗笔势纵放，不拘一格，律诗壮丽，小诗精绝，多为近体诗，而五言古诗则沉郁顿挫。
English: The seven-character long poem is free-flowing and eclectic, the rhythmic poem is magnificent, the short poem is exquisite, and most of them are proximal poems, while the five-character ancient poem is gloomy.

古文：字画则草书尤遒劲。
现代文：他的字画中，草书特别遒劲。
English: In his calligraphy, the cursive script is particularly vigorous.

古文：藏其父临终时手书云： 此去冥路，吾心皓然，刚直之气，必不下沉。
现代文：朝廷的使者从河、湟一带回来，常说夏人问起赵秉文及王庭筠的生活情况，可见各地人对他的尊重程度。赵秉文为人真诚平易，和人交往不摆架子，从不以名人自居。他历官五朝，官至六卿，自己的生活却如同贫寒的书生。
English: When the emissaries of the imperial court returned from the Hebei and Fujian regions, they often said that the summer people asked about the living conditions of Zhao Bingwen and Wang Tingtao, which shows the level of respect for him by people around the world. Zhao Bingwen was a sincere and easygoing person, he did not put on airs and never pretended to be a celebrity. He had been an official for five dynasties and six dynasties, but his life was like that of a poor student.

古文：儿可无虑。世乱时艰，努力自护，幽明虽异，宁不见尔。 
现代文：杨云翼曾与赵秉文一起代掌文柄，当时人称他们为杨赵。
English: Yang Yunyi and Zhao Bingwen used to be in charge of the literary work together. At that time, they were called Yang Zhao.

古文：读者恻然。冯璧，字叔献，真定县人。
现代文：然而他晚年颇爱用禅语，因而玷污了自己的名声，人们认为这是赵秉文的遗憾之处。
English: However, in his later years, he was fond of using Zen, thus tarnishing his reputation, which is considered to be Zhao Bingwen's regret.

古文：幼颖悟不凡，弱冠补太学生。
现代文：冯璧，字叔献，真定县人，他从小异常聪明，二十岁便补太学生。
English: Feng Bi, also known as Uncle Xian, is from Jinding County. He has been unusually intelligent since childhood, and became a student at the age of twenty.

古文：承安二年经义进士，制策复优等，调莒州军事判官，宰相奏留校秘书。
现代文：承安二年考中经义进士，考制策时又评为优等，调任莒州军事判官，宰相奏留朝廷任校秘书。
English: In the second year of the Cheng'an Middle School Examination, he was ranked as a scholar of righteousness, and he was also rated as a superior when considering the preparation of policies. He was transferred to the Zhangzhou Military Judge, and the Prime Minister stayed at the Imperial Court as a school secretary.

古文：未几，调辽滨主簿。
现代文：不久，调任辽滨主簿。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to Liaoban as chief accountant.

古文：县有和籴粟未给价者余十万斛，散贮民居，以富人掌之，有腐败则责偿于民，民殊苦之。
现代文：当时县中有向百姓购买的十多万斛军粮而没有付款，分散贮藏于百姓家中，由富人掌管，如有粮食腐败变质，便由百姓承担责任而赔偿，老百姓为此十分苦恼。
English: At that time, there were more than 100,000 baht of military food purchased from the people in the county without payment. It was scattered and stored in the homes of the people, controlled by the rich. If there was food spoilage, the people would bear the responsibility and compensate. The people were very distressed.

古文：璧白漕司，即日罢之，民大悦。
现代文：冯璧将此事上告漕司，立即停止了这种做法，百姓们十分高兴。
English: Feng Bi reported the matter to the overseer and immediately stopped the practice. The people were very happy.

古文：泰和四年，调鄜州录事。
现代文：泰和四年，冯璧调州任录事。
English: In the fourth year of the Taihe era, Feng Bi transferred to the State Council.

古文：明年，伐蜀，行部檄充军前检察，帅府以书檄委之。
现代文：第二年，攻打蜀地，行部调他任军前检察，帅府将写文书的事交给他。
English: In the second year, after the attack on Shu, he was transferred to the line ministry to serve as a former military inspector, and the general's office handed over the matter of writing documents to him.

古文：章宗欲招降吴曦，诏先以文告晓之，然后用兵。
现代文：章宗想招降吴曦，下诏先用文书晓谕他们，然后才用兵。
English: Zhang Zong wanted to invite the surrender of Wu Xi, and the next edict was to first tell them in writing, and only then use the army.

古文：蜀人守散关不下，金兵杀获甚众，璧言： 彼军拒守而并祸其民，无乃与诏旨相戾乎？ 
现代文：蜀人坚守散关，打不下来，金兵杀了许多人。冯璧说 ：他们的军队拒守而祸害了百姓，这不是与诏书的旨意相违背吗？ 
English: The Shu people held fast to Sankuan and could not beat them down, and the Jin soldiers killed many of them. Feng Bi said, "Isn't it against the will of the edict for their army to refuse to defend and thus bring disaster to the people?"

古文：主帅憾之，以璧招两当溃卒，璧即日率风州已降官属淡刚、李果偕行。
现代文：主帅被他的话感动了，让冯璧招降两当退下的败兵。冯璧当天便率领凤州已投降的官吏淡刚、李果同行。
English: The head coach was moved by his words and asked Feng Bi to recruit two defeated soldiers who had retreated. On the same day, Feng Bi led the officials who had surrendered in Fengzhou, including Tan Gang and Li Guo.

古文：道逢军士所得子女金帛牛马皆夺付刚，使归其家，军士则以违制决遣之。
现代文：在路上，遇到军士夺得的子女、金帛、牛马，都截下来交给淡刚，让他们回家去，对军士则以违反规定遣散他们。
English: On the way, when they encountered the children, gold ingots, cattle and horses seized by the sergeant, they were all cut down and handed over to Tamgang, so that they could go home. The sergeant dismissed them for violating regulations.

古文：比到两当，军民三万余众鼓舞迎劳，璧以朝旨慰遣之。
现代文：等到了两当，三万多军民都敲锣打鼓前来迎接他们。冯璧传达了朝廷的旨意，并安慰他们，然后让他们回去。
English: When the time came, more than 30,000 soldiers and civilians came to meet them, beating gongs and drums. Feng Bi conveyed the will of the imperial court, consoled them, and then let them go back.

古文：及还，主帅嘉其能，奏迁一官。
现代文：他回到军中，主帅赞扬他的能力，上奏给他升官一级。
English: When he returned to the army, the commander praised his ability and promoted him to the first grade.

古文：五年，自东阿丞召补尚书省令史，用宗室承晖荐授应奉翰林文字，兼韩王府记室参军。
现代文：五年，冯璧从东阿丞召补尚书省令史，因宗室承晖的推荐授为应奉翰林文字，并兼任韩王府记事参军。
English: In the fifth year, Feng Bi was summoned from Dong'ajo to supplement the history of Shang Shushu, and was recommended by his father-in-law to be awarded the title of Bong Hanlin, and also served as a recorder of the Han royal court and joined the army.

古文：俄转太学博士。
现代文：不久他又转为太学博士。
English: He was soon promoted to Doctor of Science.

古文：至宁初，忽沙虎弑逆，遂去官。
现代文：至宁初年，忽沙虎弑君谋逆，他便去官离职。
English: In the first year of Zhi Ning, Hu Sha Huan Jun plotted a rebellion, and he left his post.

古文：宣宗南迁，璧时避兵东方，由单父渡河诣汴梁，时相奏复前职。
现代文：宣宗南迁时，冯璧正在东方避兵乱，他由单父渡过黄河到达汴梁，宰相上奏恢复了冯璧以前的官职。
English: When Xuanzong moved to the south, Feng Bi was in the east to avoid the war. He crossed the Yellow River from his single father to Jialiang, and the prime minister restored Feng Bi's previous official position.

古文：贞祐三年，迁翰林修撰。
现代文：贞祐三年，冯璧升迁为翰林修撰。
English: In the third year of Zhengyu, Feng Bi was promoted to Hanlin Shuxian.

古文：时山东、河朔军六十余万口，仰给县官，率不逞辈窜名其间。
现代文：当时山东、河朔军中有六十多万口，依靠县里供给，有许多不法之徒假造名字在军中冒领军饷。
English: At that time, there were more than 600,000 troops in the Shandong and Hexuo armies, relying on the supply from the county. There were many criminals who forged names and pretended to lead the army in the army.

古文：诏璧摄监察御史，汰逐之。
现代文：皇帝下诏让冯璧代任监察御史，淘汰并赶走那些人。
English: The emperor issued a decree to let Feng Bi take the place of supervising the imperial history, eliminating and driving away those people.

古文：总领撒合问冒券四百余口，劾案以闻，诏杖杀之，故所至争自首，减几及于半。
现代文：总领撒合问冒领了四百多口，冯璧上奏弹劾他，皇帝下诏杖杀了撒合问。因此冯璧所到之处，一些人争着自首，军人的数字减少了一半。
English: The commander-in-chief, Sahaipian, took more than four hundred prisoners, and Feng Bi went to the emperor to impeach him, and the emperor sent the imperial scepter to kill Sahaipian. Therefore, wherever Feng Bi went, some people fought to surrender, and the number of soldiers was reduced by half.

古文：复进一官。
现代文：冯璧的官职又升一级。
English: Feng Bi's official position has been upgraded to the next level.

古文：初，监察御史本温被命汰宗室从坦军于孟州，军士欲谋变，本温惧不知所为。
现代文：起初，监察御史本温被命令到孟州淘汰宗室从坦的军队，军士策谋叛变，本温很害怕，不知怎么办。
English: At first, Inspector-General Ben-Wen was ordered to Mengzhou to weed out Tan's army from Tan's army, and the sergeant plotted a mutiny. Ben-Wen was very scared and didn't know what to do.

古文：寻有旨，北军沈思忠以下四将屯卫州，余众果叛入太行。
现代文：当时有旨，让北军沈思忠等四将守卫卫州，其他的军队果然叛逃入太行山。
English: At that time, there was an intention to let the four generals of the Northern Army, including Shen Sizhong, guard Weizhou, and the other armies actually defected to Taihang Mountain.

古文：于是，密院奏以璧代本温竟其事。
现代文：于是枢密院上奏由冯璧代替本温来处理这件事。
English: As a result, the Privy Council summoned Feng Bi to replace Benwen to deal with the matter.

古文：璧驰至卫，召四将喻以上意。思忠等挟叛者请还奏之，璧责以大义，将士惭服，不日就汰者三千人。
现代文：冯璧驰往卫州，召集四将，将皇上的旨意告诉他们，沈思忠等以起初的叛逃者来要挟，让他向朝廷回奏，冯璧以大道理来责问他们，将士们感到惭愧而信服，很快就淘汰了三千人。
English: Feng Biqi went to Weizhou, summoned the four generals and told them the emperor's will. Shen Sizhong and others threatened them with the original defector, asking him to report back to the imperial court. Feng Biqi scolded them with great reason. The generals were ashamed but convinced, and soon eliminated three thousand people.

古文：六月，改大理丞，与台官行关中，劾奏奸脏之尤者商州防御使宗室重福等十数人，自是权贵侧目。
现代文：这年六月，冯璧改任大理丞，与台官出行关中，他弹劾了贪赃枉法尤其严重的商州防御使宗室重福等十几个人，从此权贵们对他侧目而视。
English: In June of that year, Feng Bi was promoted to the post of grand secretary, and in the middle of a trip with Taiwanese officials, he impeached more than a dozen people, including the defense minister of Shangzhou, who was particularly serious about corruption. Since then, dignitaries have looked sideways at him.

古文：兴定四年，以宋人拒使者于淮上，遣兵南伐，诏京东总帅纥石烈牙吾塔攻盱眙，牙吾塔不从命，乃率精骑由滁州略宣化，纵兵大掠。
现代文：兴定四年，因宋人在淮河上阻止使者南下，朝廷派兵南伐，诏令京东总帅纥石烈牙吾塔攻打盱眙，牙吾塔不听从命令，率领精锐骑兵从滁州攻打宣化，放纵士兵大肆抢掠。
English: In the fourth year of Xingding, because the Song people on the Huaihe River prevented the envoy from going south, the imperial court sent soldiers to the south, and ordered the Beijing-Eastern commander-in-chief Zou Shi Rongya to attack, but Zou did not obey the order, led the elite cavalry from Zhangzhou to attack and propagandize, and indulged the soldiers to plunder.

古文：故兵所至原野萧条，绝无所资，宋人坚壁不战，乃无功而归。
现代文：所以军队所到之地田野萧条，什么东西都没有了。宋人躲着不出来作战，因此牙吾塔无功而回。
English: Therefore, the land where the army arrived was barren and there was nothing left. The Song people could not come out to fight, so the tower of teeth returned without any results.

古文：行省奏牙吾塔故违节制，诏璧佩金符鞫之。
现代文：行省上奏说：牙吾塔故意违反制度。皇上下诏让冯璧佩带令符审问他。
English: The provincial envoy said: Yaguta deliberately violated the system. The emperor ordered Feng Bi to wear a warrant to interrogate him.

古文：璧驰入牙吾塔军，夺其金符，易以他帅摄。
现代文：冯璧驰往牙吾塔的军队，夺了他的金符，让其他将帅代管军队，将牙吾塔逮捕入狱。
English: Feng Bitchi went to Yaguta's army, took his gold medal, let other generals take charge of the army, and arrested and imprisoned Yaguta.

古文：牙吾塔入狱，兵士哗噪，以吾帅无罪为言，璧怒责牙吾塔曰： 元帅欲以兵抗制使耶？
现代文：士兵们都喧哗起来，说： 我们元帅无罪。 冯璧怒责牙吾塔说 ：元帅想用军队来对抗朝廷任命的使者吗？
English: The soldiers were all in an uproar, saying, "We, the marshal, are not guilty." Feng Bi angrily scolded Zaguta, saying, "Does the marshal want to use the army to oppose the envoy appointed by the imperial court?

古文：待罪之礼恐不如此，使者还奏，狱能竟乎。 
现代文：你是受处分的人，恐怕不应该这样吧？皇上使者回奏的案子还能了结吗？ 
English: You are the one to be punished, I'm afraid it shouldn't be like this, should it? Can the case of the Emperor's messenger be closed?

古文：牙吾塔伏地请死，璧曰： 兵法，进退自专，有失机会以致覆败者斩。 
现代文：牙吾塔伏在地请死，冯璧说： 兵法，进退自作主张，失去作战机会而导致失败者斩。 
English: When Fang Wuta prostrated himself on the ground and asked for death, Feng Bi said, "Military tactics, advancing and retreating on one's own initiative, losing the opportunity to fight and causing the loser to be beheaded.

古文：即拟以闻，时议壮之。
现代文：他立即拟好奏章上报，当时人都认为他很有胆量。
English: He immediately prepared the score for publication, and people thought he was very courageous at the time.

古文：十月，改礼部员外郎，权右司谏、治书侍御史。
现代文：十月，冯璧改任礼部员外郎，代理右司谏、治书侍御史。
English: In October, Feng Bi was reappointed as a member of the etiquette club, acting as the right secretary and secretary of history.

古文：诏问时务所当先者，璧上六事，大略言减冗食，备选锋，缓疑似以慎刑，择公廉以检吏，屯戍革朘削之弊，权贵严请托之科。
现代文：皇上下诏问当前所应当先办的事情，冯璧上书讲了六件事，大致是：减少官府中的多余人员；在士卒中选拔精兵锐卒；对有疑问的案子要慢慢处理，慎于用刑；用公正廉洁的人并以此检查官吏；在屯戍的地方革除剥削士兵的弊病；制定严禁权贵们托人说情的法令。
English: When asked by the emperor what should be done first, Feng Bi wrote down six things, which were roughly: reduce the number of superfluous personnel in the government; select the best soldiers from among the soldiers; slowly deal with doubtful cases, and be careful not to use punishment; use fair and honest people and use them to inspect officials; eliminate the ills of exploiting soldiers in remote areas; and formulate a decree that strictly prohibits the powerful from seeking sympathy.

古文：又条自治之策四，谓别贤佞，信赏罚，听览以通下情，贬损以谨天戒。
现代文：又上了四项自治的条款，就是区别贤人和奸佞，赏与罚必须说到做到，亲自倾听和观察以了解下情，自我贬损来谨守上天的警戒。
English: There are also four self-governing clauses, that is, the distinction between wise men and traitors, reward and punishment must be said and done, personally listen and observe to understand the situation, and self-deprecating to keep heaven's vigilance.

古文：诏以东方饥馑，盗贼并起，以御史中丞完颜伯嘉为宣慰使，监察御史道远从行。
现代文：皇帝下诏，因东方发生饥荒，偷盗众多，派御史中丞完颜伯嘉任宣慰使，监察御史道远从行。
English: The emperor decreed that, due to the famine in the East and the numerous thefts, he would send the Imperial Historian, Guan Yan Bo Jia, to serve as a consolation envoy to supervise the Imperial Historian.

古文：道远发永城令簿奸赃，伯嘉与令有违，付令有司，释簿不问，燕语之际，又许参佐克忠等台职。
现代文：道远告发永城县令主簿贪赃枉法，完颜伯嘉和县令有过矛盾，将永城令交给有关部门，而放了主簿不予问罪。
English: Doyuan reported that the Yongcheng County's order book was corrupt, and after Yan Bo Jia had a conflict with the county's order, he handed over the Yongcheng County's order book to the relevant departments, and released the order book without being charged.

古文：璧皆劾之，伯嘉竟得罪去。
现代文：在私下交谈时，伯嘉答应让参佐克忠等人担任省台职务，冯璧将这些情况弹劾问罪，完颜伯嘉得罪而去职。
English: In a private conversation, Bo Jia agreed to let people such as Zok Chung and others hold provincial and Taiwanese positions. Feng Bi impeached and questioned these circumstances, and finally Bo Jia was offended and left the post.

古文：初，谍者告归德行枢密院言，河朔叛军有窃谋南渡者，行院事胡土门、都水监使毛花辇易其人，不为备。
现代文：起初，有间谍报告了归德的行枢密院说，河朔的叛军有人在暗中谋划南渡，行院事胡土门、都水监使毛花辇把这个人撤换了但不做准备。
English: At first, a spy reported to the Privy Council that someone from the rebels in Hexuo was secretly plotting to cross the river to the south. The governor of the court, Hutu Men, and the water inspector of the capital, Mao Huayu, replaced this person, but did not make any preparations.

古文：一日，红衲数百联筏南渡，残下邑而去。
现代文：一天，红衲军用几百只木筏连接在一起南渡，破坏了下邑以后才离去。
English: One day, several hundred wooden rafts were tied together by Red Kite soldiers in Nandu, destroying the lower town before leaving.

古文：命璧鞫之。
现代文：冯璧受命审问此事。
English: Feng Bi was ordered to investigate the matter.

古文：璧以二将托疾营私，闻寇弛备，且来不战、去不追，在法皆当斩。
现代文：冯璧认为二将托病，营私舞弊，听到盗寇的消息却放松防备，而且敌人来时不迎战，退去不追杀，依法当斩。
English: Feng Bi believed that the two generals would feign illness, engage in personal malpractice, relax their defenses when they heard the news of robbers, and not fight the enemy when they came, not chase them when they retreated, and behead them according to law.

古文：或以为言： 二将皆宠臣，而都水者赀累巨万，若求援禁近，必从轻典。君徒结怨权贵，果何益耶？ 
现代文：有人为他们说话 ：二将都是宠臣，而且都水使者家有巨万家财，如果向宫中近臣求援，必定从轻处理，你这样只是和权贵结怨，有什么好处呢？ 
English: Someone spoke up for them: the two generals are both favorites, and the family of the Imperial Messenger of Water has a huge fortune. If you ask for help from the palace courtiers, you will certainly be treated with leniency. You are only feuding with the powerful, what is the benefit?

古文：璧叹曰： 睢阳行阙，东藩重兵所宿，门廷之寇且不能御，有大于此者，复何望乎！ 
现代文：冯璧叹息着说： 睢阳的行宫，是东藩带着重兵宿卫，而门前的贼寇却都无法防御，比这个更加严重的情况发生时，还有什么指望呢？ 
English: Feng Bi sighed and said, "The Eastern Clan with its heavy guard marched to the palace in Fenyang, but the thieves and robbers in front of the gate were unable to defend themselves. When a more serious situation occurs, what hope is there?

古文：即具所拟闻。
现代文：他立即将详情报告朝廷。
English: He immediately reported the details to the imperial court.

古文：四年，迁刑部郎中。
现代文：四年，冯璧升迁为刑部郎中。
English: In four years, Feng Bi was promoted to be a junior member of the criminal investigation department.

古文：关中旱，诏璧与吏部侍郎畏忻审理冤狱。
现代文：关中大旱，皇帝下诏命冯璧与吏部侍郎畏忻审理冤狱。
English: Due to the severe drought in Guanzhong, the emperor issued an edict ordering Feng Bi and the clerk of the Ministry of Justice, Ji Yao, to hold a trial of unjust imprisonment.

古文：时河中帅阿虎带及僚属十数人皆以弃城罪当死，系同州狱待报。
现代文：当时河中统帅阿虎带和他的僚属十多人都以弃城罪判处死刑，关在同州狱中等待上报。
English: At that time, the commander of the middle of the river, Ahotao, and more than ten of his subordinates were sentenced to death for abandoning the city, and were detained in the same state prison waiting for the report.

古文：同州官僚承望风旨，问璧何以处之，璧曰： 河中今日重地，朝议拟为驻跸之所，若失此则河南、陕西有唇亡之忧。以彼宗室勋贵故使镇之，平居无事竭民膏血为浚筑计，一旦有警乃遽焚荡而去，此而不诛，三尺法无用矣。 
现代文：同州官僚都看上面的旨意办事，问冯璧怎样处置阿虎带等人。冯璧说： 河中是当今重地，朝议时打算把它作为皇上出行时停留的地方，如失去此城，河南、陕西就有亡唇之忧，因为他是皇室宗亲又有功劳，地位高贵，所以派他镇守，太平时搜刮百姓膏血挖河筑城，一旦有了军情便急忙烧光逃去，这样的人不杀，法律便失去作用了。 
English: He asked Feng Bi how to deal with the Aghu Belt and others. Feng Bi said: The middle of the river is the most important place today. When the imperial court was deliberating, it was planned to use it as a place for the emperor to stay when traveling. If this city was lost, Henan and Shaanxi would be worried about death. Because he was a royal relative with merit and noble status, he was sent to guard the town. In times of peace, he would search for the blood of the people and dig the river to build the city. Once he had military intelligence, he would quickly burn everything and flee. If he did not kill such a person, the law would lose its effect.

古文：竟以无冤上之。
现代文：终于以没有冤情向朝廷报告。
English: Finally, he reported to the imperial court that he had no grievances.

古文：冬十月，出为归德治中。未几，改同知保静军节度使。又改同知集庆军节度使，到官即上章乞骸骨，进一官致仕。
现代文：冬十月，冯璧出任归德治中，不久，改任同知保静军节度使，又改任同知集庆军节度使，上任后就上书请求退休，皇帝加封他一级官，然后辞职。
English: In the winter of October, Feng Bi took up the post of Gui Dezhong. Soon, he was reassigned to Tongzhi Bao Jingjun Festival Envoy, and also reassigned to Tongzhi Jiqingjun Festival Envoy. After taking office, he submitted a letter requesting retirement. The emperor added him to the first-level official, and then resigned.

古文：正大九年，河南破，北归，又数年卒，年七十有九。
现代文：正大九年，元军攻破河南，冯璧北归，又过了几年去世，享年七十九岁。
English: In the ninth year of Zhengda, the Yuan army broke through Henan, Feng Bi returned to the north, and died a few years later at the age of seventy-nine.

古文：李献甫，字钦用，献能从弟也。
现代文：李献甫，字钦用，李献能的堂弟。
English: Li Xianfu, a cousin of Li Xian Neng.

古文：博通书传，尤精《左氏》及地理学。
现代文：他博通经史，特别精通《左氏春秋》和地理学。
English: He is well versed in the history of literature, especially in "The Spring and Autumn of Zuo" and geography.

古文：为人有干局，心所到则绝人远甚，故时人称其精神满腹。
现代文：李献甫为人干练而有心计，他所想到的比别人深远得多，所以当时人称赞他学识满腹。
English: Li Xianfu was a capable and resourceful person, and his thoughts were far more profound than others, so people praised his knowledge at the time.

古文：兴定五年登进士第，历咸阳簿，辟行台令史。
现代文：兴定五年，李献甫中进士，历任咸阳主簿、行台令史。
English: In the fifth year of Xingding, Li Xianfu was promoted to junior middle school teacher, and successively served as Xianyang's chief secretary and Gangdai's commanding officer.

古文：正大初，夏使来请和，朝廷以翰林待制冯延登往议，时献甫为书表官，从行。
现代文：正大初年，夏国派使者来讲和，朝廷派翰林待制冯延登前去谈判，当时李献甫是书表官，跟随冯延登前往。
English: In the first year of Zhengda, Xia Guo sent an envoy to make peace, and the imperial court sent Hanlin to wait for Feng Yanden to negotiate. At that time, Li Xianfu was a book and watch officer and followed Feng Yanden.

古文：夏使有口辩，延登不能折，往复数日不定，至以岁币为言，献甫不能平，从旁进曰： 夏国与我和好百年，今虽易君臣之名为兄弟之国，使兄输币，宁有据耶？ 
现代文：夏国的使者很有口才，冯延登不能说服对方，谈了好几天还不能谈定。当讲到要金国每年进贡时，李献甫忍不住了，在旁插话说： 夏国与我国和好百年，现在虽改君臣之名为兄弟之国，哪有让哥哥进贡的道理？ 
English: Xia's envoy was very eloquent, Feng Yenden could not convince the other side, and after several days of discussion, they could not come to an agreement. When it came to demanding annual tribute from Jin, Li Xianfu could not help but interject: Xia and our country have been reconciled for hundreds of years, but now they have changed the name of the ruler and the subject to a brotherly country. Is there any reason for the brother to pay tribute?

古文：使者曰： 兄弟且不论。
现代文：使者说： 且不说兄弟关系。
English: The messenger said, "Not to mention the brotherhood."

古文：宋岁输吾国币二十五万疋，典故具在，君独不知耶？
现代文：宋每年送我国帛二十五万匹，旧例具在，难道您不知道吗？
English: Song Dynasty sent 250,000 yakitori to China every year. Don't you know that the old yakitori is still there?

古文：金朝必欲修旧好，非此例不可。 
现代文：金朝要想恢复友好关系，也非这样办不可。 
English: If the Kim dynasty wants to restore friendly relations, it must do so.

古文：献甫作色曰： 使者尚忍言耶？
现代文：李献甫正言厉色地说 ：使者还好意思说吗？
English: Li Xianfu said sternly, "Is the messenger still too embarrassed to say it?"

古文：宋以岁币饵君家而赐之姓，岸然以君父自居，夏国君臣无一悟者，诚谓使者当以为讳，乃今公言之。
现代文：宋每年给你家币帛而赐姓给你们，俨然以君父自居，但夏国的君臣却没有一个人明白这一点。就是使者也应当加以隐讳，但你现在却公开说出。
English: Every year, Song would give you family money and give you surnames, pretending to be your father, but none of Xia's courtiers understood this. Even the envoy should have concealed it, but now you are saying it openly.

古文：使者果能主此议，以从赐姓之例，弊邑虽岁捐五十万，献甫请以身任之。 
现代文：使者当真能做主和议，那么也要按宋赐姓的规矩，敝国每年送给你们帛五十万匹，献甫也能以身自任，保证办到。 
English: If the envoy can really be the master of the peace talks, then we should also follow the rule of giving surnames to the Song Dynasty, and the country will give you 500 thousand yakitori each year, and the offering can also be done by yourself to ensure that it is done.

古文：夏使语塞，和议乃定。
现代文：夏国使者说不出话来，和议便定了下来。
English: The Chinese envoy was speechless, and the peace was concluded.

古文：后朝廷录其功，授庆阳总帅府经历官。
现代文：后来朝廷给他记功，任命他为庆阳总帅府经历官。
English: Later, the imperial court gave him a commendation and appointed him as the Qingyang General Superintendent's Experience Officer.

古文：寻辟长安令。
现代文：不久，李献甫被任命为长安县令。
English: Soon after, Li Xianfu was appointed as the magistrate of Chang'an County.

古文：入为尚书省令史。天兴元年，充行六部员外郎，守备之策时相倚任之。以功迁镇南军节度副使，兼右警巡使，死于蔡州之难，年四十。
现代文：长安是京兆行台所在地，供给任务十分繁重，李献甫处理得常常像是还有宽余，县里的百姓依赖他安居乐业。后来他入朝任尚书省令史。天兴元年任六部员外郎，朝中有关防卫的策略常靠李献甫提出，他又因功升迁为镇南军节度副使兼右警巡使。李献甫死于蔡州之难，年仅四十岁。
English: Chang'an is the location of Jingzhao Xingtai, and the supply task is very arduous. Li Xianfu often handles it as if there is more than enough room, and the people in the county rely on him to live and work safely. Later, he joined the imperial court as the governor of Shangshu Province. In the first year of Tianxing, he was the foreign minister of the six departments, and Li Xianfu often proposed the defense strategy of the imperial court. He was promoted to the vice-minister of defense and the right police inspector of the Zhennan Army. Li Xianfu died in the disaster in Caizhou, only forty years old.

古文：所著文章号《天倪集》，留汴京。
现代文：李献甫所著的文章名为《天倪集》，留在汴京。
English: The article written by Li Xianfu, titled "Tian Ni Shu," remained in Beijing.

古文：献甫死，其家亦破，同年华阴王元礼购得之，传于世。
现代文：李献甫死后，他的家也破亡。同年，华阳人王元礼买到了《天倪集》，使这本书能流传于世。
English: After Li Xianfu's death, his family also perished. In the same year, Wang Yuanli, a Huayang man, bought "Tian Ni Shu" so that this book could be passed down to the world.

