古文：二十五日平明起饭，陆氏子仍为肩囊送行。
现代文：二十五日天大亮起床吃饭，陆家的儿子依然为我肩扛行李送行。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, I got up at dawn to eat, and Lu's son still carried my luggage for me.

古文：先隔晚，望其北山，有岩洞剨然上下层叠。
现代文：先前，隔着夜色望这里的北山，见有岩洞豁然分为上下两层叠在一起。
English: Earlier, looking across the night to the north mountain here, I saw a rock cave suddenly divided into two layers stacked on top of each other.

古文：余晚浴后欲独往一探，而稻畦水溢，不便于行，及是导者欲取径道行，路出于其下，余乃从田间水道越畦而登之。
现代文：我晚上洗澡后想独自前去探察一下，可稻田中的水满溢出来，不便走路；到此时向导想选直路走，路经过它下方，我便从田间浸在水中的小道穿越稻田登上岩洞。
English: I wanted to explore on my own after taking a bath in the evening, but the water in the paddy field was overflowing and it was inconvenient to walk; at this time, the guide wanted to take a straight path, the path passed under it, and I crossed the paddy field from the water-soaked path through the paddy field to climb the cave.

古文：岩有二门，俱南向。东西并列，相去数丈，土人名为读学岩。
现代文：岩洞有两个洞口，都朝南，东西并列，相距数丈，当地人起名叫读学岩。
English: The cave has two openings, both facing south, east and west side by side, a few meters apart. The locals call it Yodogaku Rock.

古文：外幛骈崖，中通横穴，轩爽玲珑，可庐可憩，不以隘迫为病也。其西又有小石峰特起田间。
现代文：洞外有并立的山崖作为屏障，洞中通着横向的洞穴，好似众层通道行走在高空，如海市屋楼，里面明朗，悬垂的莲花倒立的石柱似钩子状连接着，四旁掩映，高大明亮，玲珑精巧，可以居住可以歇息，不因为狭窄而成为它的缺点。
English: Outside the cave, there is a parallel cliff as a barrier. Inside the cave, there is a horizontal cave, like a multi-layered passage walking in the sky, such as a sea market building. Inside, it is clear. The overhanging lotus upside-down stone pillars are connected like a hook. It is hidden on all sides. It is tall, bright, exquisite, and can be lived in and rested. It is not a disadvantage because of its narrowness.

古文：旁无延附，亦有门东向，遂并越水畦入之。
现代文：它西面又有小石峰独耸在田间，四旁无延伸的山，也有个洞口向东，便一并穿过水田进入洞中。
English: To the west of it, there are small rocky peaks that stand out in the fields. There are no mountains extending on all sides. There is also a cave entrance to the east, and they both pass through the paddy fields into the cave.

古文：初入觉峡逼无奇，穿门西进，罅迸 十 字，西既透明，南北俱裂窍，土人架木窍间，若欲为悬阁以居者，但宛转轩迥，不若前岩之远可舒眺而近可退藏也。
现代文：起初进去觉得狭窄没有奇特之处，穿过洞口向西进去，石缝迸裂成 十 字形，西面既透入亮光，南北又都裂成石窍，当地人在石窍中架了木头，好像打算建成悬空的楼阁以便居住的样子，只是弯弯转转又高又深，不如前边那个岩洞那样，远处可以纵目眺望而近处能够退隐藏身。
English: At first, there was nothing unusual about the narrowness of the entrance. Entering through the hole to the west, the stone crevices split into a ten-figure shape. The west side was penetrated by light, and the north and south were cracked into stone nooks. The locals erected wood in the stone nooks, as if they intended to build a hanging mansion for living. However, the bends and turns were high and deep, not as good as the rock cave in front. You can look around in the distance, but you can retreat and hide in the vicinity.

古文：甫出洞，导者言： 西去一二里，有赤龙岩奇甚，胜当与老君洞等，惜无知者，君好奇，何不迓道观之！ 
现代文：刚走出洞，向导说： 往西去一二里路，有个赤龙岩非常奇特，优美之处应当与老君洞相等，可惜没有人知道，先生好奇，为何不绕道去观览它！ 
English: Just out of the cave, the guide said: Go west for a mile or two, there is a very strange red dragon rock, the beauty should be equal to that of Laojun Cave, but unfortunately no one knows, Mr. Curious, why not take a detour to see it!

古文：余昨从和睦墟即屡问融中奇胜，自老君洞外更有何景，导者与诸土人俱云无有，盖彼皆以庵栖为胜，而不复知有山石之异也。
现代文：我昨天从和睦墟起就屡次打听融县境内的奇异胜景，除老君洞外还有什么胜景，向导和许多当地人都说没有，大概是他们都把寺庵所在之处作为胜景，却不再知道有山石的奇妙了。
English: Yesterday, I repeatedly inquired about the strange scenic spots in Rong County since the Reconciliation Ruins. What other scenic spots are there besides Laojun Cave? The guide and many local people said no. They probably all regarded the location of the temple and hermitage as a scenic spot, but they no longer knew the wonder of mountains and rocks.

古文：至是，其人见余所好在此，始以其说进。
现代文：到了这里，那人见我喜爱山水，这才把他的建议献出来。
English: When I got here, the man saw that I liked the landscape, so he offered his advice.

古文：余奖劳之，令即趋赤龙。
现代文：我奖励慰劳了他，命令立即赶去赤龙岩。
English: I rewarded and comforted him and ordered him to rush to the Red Dragon Rock immediately.

古文：于是不北向山坳，而西循溪塍，里余遂抵岩下。
现代文：于是不向北边山坳走，而往西沿着小溪的土埂走，一里多就到了岩洞下。
English: So he did not go to the north side of the mountain, but to the west along the mound of the stream, more than a mile to the bottom of the cave.

古文：其岩北向，高穹山半，所倚之山，即陆氏所居之后岭，自西横列至此，而东下陆村者也。
现代文：这个岩洞向北，高高隆起在半山腰，背靠的山，就是陆家居住之处后面的山岭，是从西面横列到此，而后向东下延到陆村的山。
English: This cave faces north and rises high in the middle of the mountainside. The mountain behind it is the mountain range behind where the Lu family lives. It stretches from the west to here, and then down to the east to the mountain of Lu village.

古文：洞前北突两峰，若龙虎然，而洞当其中，高旷宏远，底平而上穹，门之中有石台两重界其间，洞后列柱分楞，别成圭门璇室。
现代文：洞前北边突起两座山峰，好似龙虎一样，而洞正当两峰之中，高大空旷宏伟深远，底部平坦而上面弯隆，洞口的中央有两层石台隔在当中，洞后面分别排列碧吃柱和石楼条，另外形成下丰样的门洞和美玉装饰的石室。
English: In front of the cave, there are two peaks on the north side, like dragons and tigers, and the cave is right in the middle of the two peaks. It is tall, empty, magnificent and far-reaching. The bottom is flat and the top is curved. In the center of the cave entrance, there are two layers of stone platforms separated in the middle. Behind the cave, there are columns and stone floors. In addition, there is a rich doorway and a stone room decorated with precious stones.

古文：洞中直入数丈，脊稍隆起，遂成仙田每每，中贮水焉。
现代文：洞甲一直进去数丈，石脊稍稍隆起，便成了肥美的仙田，田中贮着水。
English: The cave entrance is several meters high, the stone ridge is slightly raised, and it becomes a fertile field, with water stored in the middle of the field.

古文：更入则渐洼渐黑，导者云： 其内门束如窦，只平身入，既入乃复廓然透别窍焉。 
现代文：再深入进去就逐渐下洼渐渐黑下来，向导说： 那里边的洞口束拢来如像一个孔洞，只能躺平身子进去，进去后便又空阔起来通到别的洞穴中去了。 
English: The guide said, "The mouth of the cave on the other side is closed like a hole, so you can only lie down and go in. After you go in, it opens up again and you can go into another cave."

古文：恨不从家携炬，得一穷其奥也。
现代文：悔恨没从家中带来火把，得以一气穷究它的幽深之处了。
English: Regret did not bring torches from home and was able to plumb its depths.

古文：山前有溪自西来，分两派，而东萦陆氏之居，又东抵东梁，而北汇安灵潭，为灵寿溪之上流云。
现代文：山前有溪水自西流来，分为两条支流，而后往东萦绕陆家的居住地，又向东流抵东梁，而后向北汇入安灵潭，是灵寿溪的上游。
English: In front of the mountain, there is a stream coming from the west, which is divided into two tributaries, and then flows eastward around the residence of Lu Jia, and then flows eastward to Dongliang, and then flows northward into Anlingtan, which is the upper reaches of Lingshou Creek.

古文：下山，越溪而北向，望北山有洞剨然骈列。
现代文：下山，越过溪流向北走，望见北山有洞豁然并列。
English: Going down the mountain, crossing the stream to the north, I could see the caves of the North Mountain suddenly side by side.

古文：涉水蛙而攀其上，其洞门南向，虽高穹侧裂，而中乃下旋如坠螺。
现代文：涉过水田攀上岩洞，这个洞口向南，虽然高大弯隆斜着裂开，可洞口却向下旋绕如同下坠的螺蜘。
English: After wading through paddy fields and climbing into a rock cave, the mouth of the cave opens to the south. Although the tall slope is inclined to crack, the mouth of the cave swirls downward like a falling screwdriver.

古文：由门外右跻，复飞嵌悬崖，凭踞则有余，深栖则不足，乃下。
现代文：由洞口外向右上登，又有飞嵌的悬崖，靠着观赏还可以，长久停留在此就没有必要，于是下来。
English: Climbing up from the outside of the cave to the right, there are also flying cliffs. You can still enjoy the view, there is no need to stay here for a long time, so come down.

古文：盖此山正与赤龙岩南北相向，其与读学岩则东西肩列者也。
现代文：大体上此山正与赤龙岩南北相对，它与读学岩却是东西并肩排列的。
English: In general, this mountain is opposite the north and south of the Red Dragon Rock, but it is side by side with the Reading School Rock.

古文：此山之东隅，复开两岩，其门皆东向，名钟洞岩：在北者，其岩不深峻，若竖钟而剖其半，中列神像；在南者，峡门甚高，层窦叠见，而内入不深，上透无级。
现代文：向北抄近路，正经由这座山和读学岩两峰之中。此山的东隅，又张开两个岩洞，洞口都向东，名叫钟洞岩：在北面的，那岩洞不深峻，如竖立的铜钟却剖掉了一半，里边排列着神像；在南边的，峡谷样的洞口十分高，现出层层叠叠的石窦，可进入洞内不深，上方穿通着没有台阶。
English: Take a shortcut to the north, passing through the middle of the two peaks of this mountain and the Yodogaku Rock. In the eastern corner of this mountain, there are also two caves, the entrances are to the east, called the Bell Cave Rock: in the north, the cave is not deep, but it is cut in half like an erected copper bell, and there are statues of gods inside; in the south, the canyon-like cave entrance is very high, and there are layers of overlapping stone sinuses. It is not deep enough to enter the cave, and there are no steps above.

古文：所入下层之洞，当门即巨柱中悬，环转而出，无余地矣。
现代文：我进入的下层之洞，正对洞口就有巨大的石柱悬在中央，环绕着转出来，没有空余的地方了。
English: The lower cave I entered had a huge stone pillar hanging in the middle of it, right in front of the entrance. It swirled around and out, leaving no room for anything else.

古文：乃下，直北趋，共二里，越一脊。
现代文：于是下山，一直向北赶，共走二里，翻越一条山脊。
English: So I went down the mountain and kept heading north, walking a total of two miles and climbing over a ridge.

古文：脊之北为百步塘，四面尖峰环列，中开平壑一围，广漠低洼，下有溺水。
现代文：山脊的北面是百步塘，四面尖峰环列，中间环绕成一个开阔平坦的壑谷，广漠低洼，下边淹着水。
English: To the north of the ridge is Hyakubutang, a ring of peaks on all four sides, surrounded in the middle by an open, flat valley, low-lying, and flooded with water.

古文：塘之西北为古鼎，东北为羊膈山，东南为东梁，西南为此脊。
现代文：水塘的西北是古鼎，东北是羊隔山，东南是东梁，西南是这条山脊。
English: The northwest of the pond is Gu Ding, the northeast is Sheep Separation Mountain, the southeast is Dong Liang, and the southwest is this ridge.

古文：越脊，循岩转又一里，其山分突三峰，北向百步而列。
现代文：越过山脊，沿着高峻的山崖又转了一里，此山分别突起三座山峰，向着北面的百步塘排列。
English: After crossing the ridge, I walked along the steep cliff for another mile. This mountain has three peaks protruding separately, which are lined up with Hyakubutang to the north.

古文：西一峰，山半洞门西向，有牧者憩歌于中，余不及登；中与东二峰前抱中环，有陆氏冢焉，北向古鼎以为案者也。
现代文：西边的一座山峰，半山腰有洞口向西，有牧人在洞中歇息唱歌，我来不及登；中间与东边的两座山峰向前环抱中间呈环形，有陆家的坟地在那里，是北边向着古鼎把它作为案山的地方。
English: A mountain peak on the west, halfway up the mountain there is a cave opening to the west, there are shepherds resting and singing in the cave, I can't climb it; the two peaks in the middle and the east are surrounded by a ring in the middle, there is the cemetery of Lu Jia, and it is the place where the north faces the ancient Ding and uses it as a mountain.

古文：中峰有洞东向，洞门层倚若重楼；东峰有洞西向，岩石下插如象鼻。
现代文：中峰有洞向东，洞口层层相依好似重叠的高楼；东峰有洞向西，岩石下插如象鼻。
English: In the middle peak, there is a cave to the east, and the openings of the caves are like overlapping high-rise buildings. In the east peak, there is a cave to the west, and the rock is inserted like an elephant's trunk.

古文：余先登东峰西向之洞。
现代文：我先登上东峰向西的洞。
English: I first climbed the west-facing cave on the east peak.

古文：其洞北迸横峡，南骞斜窦，而有石上自山巅，下嵌峡底，四面可绕而出，所云象鼻者也。
现代文：此洞北面迸裂成横向的峡谷，南面高挂着斜斜的洞穴，并有岩石上边起自山顶，往下嵌入峡底，四面可以绕着出去，就是所说的如象鼻的地方了。
English: On the north side of the cave, it splits into a horizontal canyon. On the south side, there is a high-hanging sloping cave, and there is a rock that rises from the top of the mountain and is embedded in the bottom of the canyon. You can go around it on all sides. This is the so-called elephant's nose.

古文：但其内浅而不深，不堪为栖托之所。
现代文：但它里边浅而不深，不能作为居住寄身的场所。
English: However, it is shallow inside and not deep, so it cannot be used as a place to live.

古文：次登中峰东向之洞。
现代文：接着上登中峰向东的洞。
English: Then climb up the middle peak to the east of the cave.

古文：其洞北窍下裂，南牖上悬，有石飞架其间，外若垂楞，中可透扃，上牖有石台前突，憩卧甚适，唯峻不如象鼻，而夹曲过之，所恨者亦不深广耳。
现代文：此洞北面有石窍下裂，南边有石窗上悬，有岩石飞架其间，外看好似下垂的窗权，中间可像门扇一样穿过，上面的石窗处有石台向前突出去，躺下休息十分舒服，唯有陡峻不如象鼻，可狭窄曲折却超过它，所遗憾的也是不深广罢了。
English: On the north side of this cave, there is a cleft in the rock, on the south side, there is a ridge hanging over the stone window, and there is a rock flying frame in between. From the outside, it looks like the right side of a drooping window. In the middle, it can be passed through like a door. At the upper stone window, there is a stone platform protruding forward. It is very comfortable to lie down and rest. Only the steepness is not as good as the elephant's nose, but the narrow twists exceed it. What is regrettable is that it is not deep and wide.

古文：既下，乃直北径百步塘。
现代文：下山后，就一直往北边的小路经过百步塘。
English: After descending the mountain, the path to the north passes through Hyakubutang.

古文：二里越塘之北，先有一小溪自西而北，横涉而过；又有一大溪自南而北，二水合而北行，有石梁横渡，于是东西俱骈峰成峡，溪流其中，是为灵寿溪。
现代文：二里，穿越到水塘的北边，先有一条小溪自西往北流，从古鼎流来，横向涉水过去；又有一条大溪自南流向北，就是赤龙岩山前的溪水，向东流过东梁来到此地。两条溪水合流后往北流去，有座石桥横渡过去，到这里东西都是并列的山峰夹成峡谷，溪水流经峡中，这是灵寿溪。
English: After two miles, crossing to the north of the reservoir, there is a small stream flowing from west to north, flowing from Gu Ding, and wading across; there is also a large stream flowing from south to north, that is, the stream in front of the Red Dragon Rock Mountain, flowing eastward through Dong Liang to this place. After the two streams converge, they flow northward, and a stone bridge crosses over. Here, everything is a parallel mountain peak sandwiched into a canyon, and the stream flows through the canyon. This is Lingshou Creek.

古文：又北一里，溪汇为潭，是为安灵潭，神龙之所窟也。
现代文：又向北一里，溪水汇成水潭，这查安灵潭，是神龙的窟穴。
English: Another mile to the north, the streams converge into a pool. This Cha'an Lingtan is the cave of the divine dragon.

古文：又北一里，当面有山横列，峰半剨然开张洞门，余以为真仙岩矣。
现代文：又向北一里，迎面有山横列，山峰半腰豁然张开洞口，我以为是真仙岩了。
English: Another mile to the north, there were mountains in a row in front of me, and the mountain suddenly opened its mouth. I thought it was Zhenxian Rock.

古文：至则路转西麓，遂东行环绕其北，则此山之后复有洞焉，不知与南向开张者中通否也？
现代文：走到后路却转向西麓，就向东走环绕到山北，就见此山的后面又有个洞，不知与向南张开的洞中间是否相通呢？
English: When you come to the back road, you turn to the western foot, then walk east to circle around to the north of the mountain, and you see another hole behind this mountain. I don't know if it is connected to the middle of the hole that opens to the south.

古文：时望真仙岩之山尚在其北，遂竭蹶东循其麓，姑留此洞以俟后探焉。
现代文：此时远望真仙岩所在的山还在它的北面，北面就是安灵溪水流入真仙岩后洞的地方。
English: At this time, the mountain where the distant view of Zhenxian Rock is located is still on its north side. The north side is where the water of Anling Creek flows into the back hole of Zhenxian Rock.

古文：东出山，又北转一里，则与东梁之大道会。
现代文：于是尽力跌跌绊绊向东沿着山麓走，姑且留下此洞等以后来探察了。向东走出山，又往北转一里，就与东梁来的大道会合。
English: So I tried my best to stumble along the foot of the mountain to the east, leaving this cave to explore later. I walked out of the mountain to the east, turned north for one mile, and met the highway coming from Dongliang.

古文：峰转溪回，始见真仙洞门，穹然东北高悬，溪流从中北出，前有大石梁二道骈圈溪上。
现代文：峰转溪回，这才见到真仙岩的洞口，在东北方弯然高悬，溪流从洞中向北流出，洞前有两座大石桥双双围在溪上。
English: The peak turned back to the stream, and that's when I saw the mouth of the cave in Shinsen Rock. It hangs high and crooked in the northeast, and the stream flows out of the cave to the north. In front of the cave, there are two large stone bridges both encircling the stream.

古文：越梁而西，乃南向入洞焉。
现代文：越过桥往西走，就向南进了洞。
English: After crossing the bridge to the west, I walked south into the cave.

古文：洞门圆迥，如半月高穹，中剜一山之半。
现代文：洞口浑圆，如半个月亮高高隆起，在当中刻去整座山的一半。
English: The mouth of the cave is round, like a half-moon rising high, with half of the entire mountain carved in the middle.

古文：其内水陆平分，北半高崖平敞，南半回流中贯。
现代文：洞内水陆平均分为两半，北半边是高出水面的石崖平坦宽敞，南半边是回旋的流水流贯洞中。
English: The water and land inside the cave are equally divided into two halves. The northern half is a flat and spacious rock cliff high above the water surface, and the southern half is a circulating current running through the cave.

古文：由北畔陆崖入数丈，崖叠而起，中壁横拓，复分二道。
现代文：经由北岸陆路石崖走进去几丈，石崖叠垒而起，中央的石壁横向拓展开来，又分为两条路。
English: After passing through the north shore of the overland stone cliff, the stone cliff is piled up, the central stone wall is expanded horizontally, and it is divided into two roads.

古文：壁之西有窍南入，而僧栖倚之；壁之东南，溯溪岸入其奥扃，则巨柱中悬，上缀珠旒宝络，下环白象、青牛，稍后则老君危然，须眉皓洁，晏坐而对之，皆玉乳之所融结，而洞之所以得名也。
现代文：石壁的西侧有洞穴向南深入，而僧房在这里；石壁的东南侧，溯溪岸进入洞中幽深锁闭之处，就见巨大的石柱悬在当中，上边的如连缀着玉珠串和宝石缨络，下边的如环列着白象、青牛，稍后些的如老君端坐着，胡须眉毛皎洁，安然坐着面对石柱，都是白玉样的钟乳石溶解凝结成的，而且是岩洞之所以得名的原因了。
English: On the west side of the stone wall, there is a cave to the south, and the monk's house is here; on the southeast side of the stone wall, where the river bank enters the cave and is deeply locked, you can see the huge stone pillar hanging in the middle. The upper side is like a string of jade beads and a gemstone network, the lower side is like a ring of white elephants and young cows, and the later ones are like an old man sitting, with clean whiskers and eyebrows, sitting peacefully facing the stone pillar. They are all white jade-like stalactites dissolved and condensed, and are the reason why the cave got its name.

古文：其后则堂皇忽嫱，曲户旋分，千门万牖，乳态愈极缤纷，以无炬未及入。
现代文：它的下边溪水汇成深渊，向前奔流到峡壁，冲激着岩石发出轰雷般的响声。
English: Its lower stream merges into the abyss, rushing forward to the canyon wall, impelling the rock to emit a thunderous sound.

古文：其下则溪汇为渊，前趋峡壁，激石轰雷。后覆重崖，穿云逗日，疑其内别有天地。
现代文：那隔着溪流东面的石崖上，南面与老君相对之处，溪上平平地耸成平台，后边紧靠危壁，是下层；北面与僧房相对的地方，层层楼阁高悬，外边透进淡淡的亮光，是上层，但没有鹊桥是不能过去的。后面下覆着重重石崖，穿破云天逗弄红日，怀疑那里面别有天地。
English: On the stone cliff across the stream to the east, the place opposite Laojun on the south side, where the stream rises flatly into a platform, with the back side close to the dangerous wall, is the lower level; the place opposite the monk's house on the north side, with high-rise buildings and light light outside, is the upper level, but it is impossible to pass without a bridge. The back is covered with heavy stone cliffs, teasing the red sun through the clouds, and it is suspected that there is no heaven and earth there.

古文：方徘徊延伫，而僧栖中有二客见余独入而久不出，同僧参慧入而问焉。
现代文：正在徘徊翘首伫立之时，而僧房中有二位客人见我独自一人入洞却长久不见出去，同僧人参慧一起进来探问。
English: While I was wandering around with my head cocked, two guests in the monk's room saw me enter the cave alone but did not go out for a long time, and came in with the monk Sanghui to investigate.

古文：遂出憩其栖，将已过午，参慧以饭饷余及陆。
现代文：于是出来在僧房中歇息，将已过中午，参慧拿饭来给我和姓陆的吃了。
English: So I came out and rested in the monk's room. It was already past noon, and Sang-Hui brought me some rice to eat with Lu.

古文：既而二客与陆俱别去，参慧亦欲入市，余乃随之。
现代文：不久二位客人与姓陆的都辞别离开了，参慧也打算去市中，我就随他一起去。
English: Soon after, the two guests with the surname Lu said goodbye and left. Sanhui also planned to go to the city, so I went with him.

古文：北一里，过下廓，少憩广化寺。
现代文：向北走一里，路过下廓，在广化寺稍作休息。
English: Walk north for one mile, pass through the lower gorge, and take a short break at Guanghua Temple.

古文：寺古而半圮。
现代文：寺院古旧有一半倒塌了。
English: Half of the ancient temple has collapsed.

古文：又北，则大江在东，自北而南，小江在西，自西而东，二水交流下廓两旁，道当其中。
现代文：又往北行，就见大江在东方，自北流向南，就是潭江，是从北方自怀远、大融往南流来的；一条小江在西面，自西流向东，就是菜琶江，从西方自丹江桥绕过老人岩，至此向东流入潭江，两条江水交叉在下廓两旁流过，道路正当两江之中。
English: Going north again, we saw the big river in the east, flowing from north to south, that is, the Tan River, flowing from the north to the south; a small river in the west, flowing from west to east, that is, the Rapa River, flowing from the west from the Danjiang Bridge around the old man's rock, and then flowing east into the Tan River. The two rivers crossed and flowed on both sides of the gorge, and the road was right in the middle of the two rivers.

古文：又一里，渡菜邕桥，又北半里，入融之南关焉。
现代文：又一里，过了菜琶桥，又向北半里，进入融县的南关。
English: Another mile, past the rapeseed bridge, and another half mile to the north, into the southern pass of Rong County.

古文：南关之外，与下廓犹居市相望，而城以内则寥落转甚。
现代文：南关之外，与下廓仍居室街市相望，可城墙以内却转而十分冷落。
English: Outside the south gate, the lower gate still faces the residential street market, but inside the city wall, it is very cold.

古文：大江北来，绕城东而南，至下廓遂东南去。
现代文：大江自北而来，绕过城东往南去，流至下廓便向东南流去。
English: The big river comes from the north, goes around the east of the city to the south, and flows to the lower curve to the southeast.

古文：其水不回拱，所以萧条日甚邯？
现代文：莫非是江水没有环绕，所以此城就萧条日甚一日吗？
English: Is it because the city is not surrounded by river water that it is becoming more and more depressed day by day?

古文：既问老人岩道，复从下廓之北，循小江西南行。
现代文：打听了去老人岩的路后，再从下廓的北边，顺着小江往西南行。
English: After inquiring about the way to the old man's rock, then from the north side of the lower arch, follow the creek to the southwest.

古文：既西抵一峰，见其石势叠耸，遂披棘登之。
现代文：向西抵达一座山峰后，见此峰石势层叠高耸，便分开荆棘登上去。
English: After reaching a mountain peak to the west, he saw the towering cascade of boulders on this peak, and climbed up through the thorns.

古文：至石崖下，乃回削千仞，无池旁窦，乃下。
现代文：来到石崖下，就见曲折陡削有千初之高，无其他旁洞，只好下来。
English: When I came to the bottom of the cliff, I saw that the twists and turns were the highest in thousands of years. There were no other side holes, so I had to go down.

古文：路当北溯溪岸，余误而南入山峡，其峡乃老人岩之南枝，又与南山夹而成者。
现代文：路应当向北溯溪岸走，我误往南走入山峡，此峡是老人岩南面的支脉，又与南山相夹而成的。
English: The road should have gone north to the bank of the Funnel Creek, but I mistakenly went south into the canyon. This canyon is a tributary of the southern face of the Old Man Rock, and is sandwiched between it and the Nanshan Mountain.

古文：南山北麓，有石磴盘山而上。
现代文：南山的北麓，有石瞪绕着山往上去。
English: At the northern foot of Nanshan Mountain, there are rocks surrounding the mountain.

古文：其下有石窦一圆，潴水泓然，有僧方汲。
现代文：山下有一个圆形石穴，积了水又深又广，有和尚正在汲水。
English: At the foot of the mountain there is a round stone cave, the accumulated water is deep and wide, and a monk is drawing water.

古文：急趋而问之，始知其上为独胜岩，而非老人岩也，去下廓西南一里矣。
现代文：急忙赶过去问他，这才知道山上是独胜岩，而不是老人岩，距下廓西南方有一里了。
English: He hurried over to ask him, only to find out that the mountain is not Old Man's Rock, but Duksheng Rock, which is a mile to the southwest of the lower ridge.

古文：余始上探独胜。
现代文：我这才上山去探独胜岩。
English: I just went up the mountain to explore the rock.

古文：其岩北向，高缀峰头，僧庐塞其门，入其下，不知为岩也。
现代文：这个岩洞向北，高高缀在峰头，僧房堵塞了洞口，走入洞下，不知是岩洞了。
English: This cave is to the north, high up on the peak. The monk's house blocked the mouth of the cave and went under the cave. I don't know if it's a cave.

古文：时暑气如灼，有三士人避暑其间，留余少憩。
现代文：此时暑气如火灼，有三个读书人在洞中避暑，挽留我稍微休息一下。
English: At this time, the heat is scorching, there are three readers summering in the cave, holding me back a little rest.

古文：觇其庐后有小穴焉，因穿穴入。
现代文：偷偷观察到僧房后有个小洞穴，于是穿过洞穴进去。
English: After surreptitiously observing the monk's house, there was a small cave, so he went through the cave.

古文：其内复开窍一龛，稍洼而下，外列垂幛，亦有裂隙成楞者，但为僧庐掩映，不得明光耳。
现代文：那里边又裂成一个石完样的石窍，略微洼下去，外边排列着下垂的筛慢，也有裂缝裂成窗户样的地方，只是被僧房挡住了光照，得不到明亮的光线而已。
English: There it split again into a rock-perfect stone nook, slightly sunken, with a row of sagging sieves on the outside. There are also places where the cracks look like windows, but the light is blocked by the monk's house, so you don't get any bright light.

古文：下山，日色犹未薄崦嵫，乃复东北一里，出下廓，又西北溯小溪一里，抵老人岩山下。
现代文：下了山，太阳还没有逼近西山，便再往东北行一里，来到下廓，又向西北溯小溪行一里，抵达老人岩山下。
English: After descending the mountain, the sun had not yet approached the west mountain, so I went one mile northeast to the lower ridge, and another mile northwest to the creek, arriving at the foot of the old man's rock.

古文：其下有洞东向，余急于上跻，姑置之。
现代文：山下有个洞向东，我急于上登，暂且放过它。
English: At the bottom of the mountain there is a cave to the east. I'm anxious to get up there, so I'll let it go for now.

古文：遂西向拾级上，两崖对束，磴悬其间，取道甚胜。
现代文：于是向西沿石级上走，两侧的山崖相对束拢来，石瞪悬在两面山崖之间，道路经过这样的地方十分优美。
English: So I walked west along the stone steps, the cliffs on both sides were relatively close together, and the rocks hung between the cliffs on both sides. The road passed through such a beautiful place.

古文：已透入一隘门，上镌 寿星岩 三字，甚古。
现代文：不久钻入一个隘口，上面刻着 寿星岩 三个字，十分古奥。
English: Soon, they drilled into a hole with the words "Shou Xingyan" inscribed on it, which is very ancient.

古文：门之上，转而北上，则岩之前门也，盖其岩一洞两门，前门东南向，下瞰下廓，后门东北向，下瞰融城，乃石崖高跨而东突，洞透其下，前后相去不遥，亦穿岩之类，而前后俱置佛龛障之，遂令空明顿失。
现代文：隘口之上，转向北上去，就是岩洞的前洞口了。原来这个岩洞一个洞有两个洞口，前洞口朝向东南，下瞰下廓，后洞口朝向东北，下瞰融县县城，而石崖高跨向东突出去，洞穿透石崖之下，前后相距不远，也是穿岩之类，可前后都设置了佛完遮住了洞口，竟使通明透亮的景致顿时丧失了。
English: Above the pass, turning north, is the front entrance of the cave. Originally, this cave has two openings in one hole. The front entrance faces southeast, overlooking the lower profile, and the back entrance faces northeast, overlooking the county seat of Rong County. The stone cliff high-span protrudes to the east. The hole penetrates under the stone cliff, and the front and back are not far apart, and it is also a kind of rock-piercing. However, the Buddha was set up in front and back to cover the hole, and the clear and bright scenery was suddenly lost.

古文：时前发僧方剖瓜，遂以相饷。
现代文：此时前洞的僧人正在剖西瓜，便拿来送给我吃。
English: At this time, the monk in the front cave was cutting up watermelons and brought them to me to eat.

古文：急从庐侧转入后岩，始仰见盘空之顶，而后岩僧方樵而未返，门闭无由入。
现代文：急忙从僧房侧边转入后洞，这才抬头见到盘结在空中的山顶，但后洞的僧人正去打柴还未返回，门关着无从进去。
English: He hurriedly turned from the side of the monk's house into the back cave, and only then did he look up to see the top of the mountain coiled in the air. However, the monk in the back cave had gone to collect firewood and had not yet returned. The door was closed and he could not get in.

古文：时日暮雷殷，姑与前岩僧期为后游，遂下山；则后岩僧亦归，余不能复上矣。
现代文：此时天色已晚雷声隆隆，姑且与前洞的僧人约定日后来游览，便下了山；就见后洞的僧人也归来了，我不能再上去了。
English: At this time, it was getting late and there was a rumble of thunder. I agreed with the monks in the front cave to visit later, and went down the mountain. I saw that the monks in the back cave had also returned, so I couldn't go back up.

古文：指小径，仍从独胜东峰披蔓草行，二里乃幕，抵真仙。
现代文：朝着小径，仍从独胜岩的东峰拨开蔓生的草丛走，二里路天就黑下来，到达真仙岩。
English: Heading towards the trail, I continued to walk away from the eastern peak of Dokseng Rock, pushing aside the tangled grass. After two miles, the sky turned black and I reached Zhenxian Rock.

古文：夜雨适来，参慧为炊粥以供。
现代文：夜雨恰好来临，参慧为我煮了粥来吃。
English: The night rain just happened to come, and Sanhui cooked porridge for me to eat.

古文：宿岩中，蚊聚如雷，与溪声同彻夜焉。
现代文：住宿在岩洞中，蚊子群聚声音如雷，与溪水声一同响了个通宵。
English: We stayed in a cave, and the mosquitoes swarmed like thunder, along with the sound of the stream, all night long.

古文：二十六日憩息真汕洞中者竟日。
现代文：二十六日整天在真仙洞中休息。
English: On the 26th, I rested all day in Zhenxian Cave.

古文：参慧出市中。
现代文：参慧出洞去市中。
English: Sanhui went out of the cave to the market.

古文：余拂岩中题识读之，为录其一二可备考者。
现代文：我拂拭洞中的题辞阅读，因而抄录了其中的一二段可备参考的。
English: I brushed the inscription in the hole and read it, so I copied one or two paragraphs of it for reference.

古文：《真仙岩记游》嘉熙戊戌正月二十有三日，零陵唐容约延平黄宜卿、建安田传震等数人，早自平寨门出行。
现代文：《真仙岩记游》嘉熙戊戌年正月二十三日，零陵唐容邀约延平人黄宜卿、建安人田传震等几人，清早自平寨门出游。
English: "Jingxian Yanshi Yu" begins on the 23rd day of the first month of the year of Jia Xi Wu Yi. On the morning of the 23rd day of the first month of the year of Jia Xi Wu Yi, Ziling Tang Rong invited Yanping people Huang Yixing, Jianan people Tian Chuan Zhen and several others to travel from Pingzhaimen.

古文：群山杳蔼间，夹道梅花盛开，清香袭人。
现代文：在群山杳渺烟霭之间，夹道梅花盛开，清香袭人。
English: Between the mountains and the misty clouds, the plum blossoms are in full bloom, and the fragrance is overwhelming.

古文：二里许，至玉华岩。
现代文：约二里路，来到玉华岩。
English: After about two miles, we came to the Jade Dragon Rock.

古文：岩纵可十丈，横半之，无他奇瑰，而明洁可爱。
现代文：岩洞纵深约有十丈，横处有一半，没有别的奇异瑰丽之处，但明洁可爱。
English: The depth of the cave is about ten meters, and half of it is horizontal. There is no other strange or magnificent place, but it is clear and lovely.

古文：东南诸峰当其前，间见层出，不移席而可以远眺望。
现代文：东南方诸峰正当洞前，断断续续层层叠叠地展现出来，不必移动座位就可以向远处眺望。
English: In front of the cave, the southeastern peaks are intermittently displayed in layers, and you can look into the distance without moving your seat.

古文：乃具饭。
现代文：于是准备了饭食。
English: So the meal was prepared.

古文：饭已，循旧径过香山，历老人岩下。
现代文：吃完饭，顺着原路经过香山，历经老人岩下。
English: After the meal, we walked along the original road, passing through Xiangshan and under the old man's rock.

古文：稍折而西，渡舟江桥，顷之至弹子岩。
现代文：略折向西，越过舟江桥，顷刻来到弹子岩。
English: Slightly turn to the west, cross the bridge over the Zhou River, and suddenly come to the marbles rock.

古文：洞口平夷，坐百客不啻。
现代文：洞口平坦，不止可坐成百的游客。
English: The mouth of the cave is flat and can accommodate hundreds of tourists.

古文：少憩，酒三行，始秉炬以进，过若堂殿者三四。
现代文：稍作歇息，轮流斟了三遍酒，这才举着火把进去，走过好像殿堂的地方有三四处。
English: After taking a short break, they took turns pouring the wine three times before entering with torches, passing through three or four places that looked like temples.

古文：火所照耀，上下四方，皆滴乳流注，千奇万怪，恫心骇目，不可正视。
现代文：火光照耀之处，上下四方，都是下滴的石乳四处流淌，千奇百怪，惊心骇目，不可正视。
English: Where the firelight shines, up and down in all directions, are drops of stone milk flowing everywhere, all kinds of strange, shocking, impossible to face.

古文：有如人立，如兽蹲，如蛟蛇结蟠，如波涛汹涌，又有如仙佛之端严，鬼神之狞恶，如柱，如剑，如棋局，如钟鼓铃铎，考击之有声。
现代文：有的如人站立，如野兽蹲踞，如蛟龙蟒蛇扭结成盘，如波涛汹涌，又有的如仙佛一样端庄威严，似鬼神样狰狞凶恶，如柱子，如长剑，如棋盘，如钟鼓铃铎，敲击它们铿锵有声。
English: Some stand like men, some crouch like beasts, some twist themselves into coils like dragons and serpents, some are like turbulent waves, some are as dignified and majestic as gods and goddesses, some are as ferocious as ghosts and gods, some are like pillars, some are like long swords, some are like chessboards, some are like bells and drums, and when they are struck they make a sound.

古文：布地皆小石，正圆如弹丸，此岩之所以得名也。
现代文：遍地都是小石子，正圆如同弹丸，这就是岩洞之所以得名的原因了。
English: There are small pebbles all over the place, round like marbles, which is why the cave got its name.

古文：其间玲珑穿穴，大率全山皆空，不可穷极，相与惊叹，得未曾有。
现代文：其间玲珑剔透四处有洞穴，大略整座山都是空的，不可穷尽，我们相互惊叹这些未曾见过的景象。
English: There are caves everywhere, and the whole mountain is empty, inexhaustible, and we marvel at these never-before-seen sights.

古文：遂出至西峰岩，所见比弹子同，尤加奇而岩稍窄。
现代文：于是出洞来到西峰岩，见到的东西与弹子岩相同，更加奇异而岩洞稍窄些。
English: So I came out of the cave to Xifeng Rock, and what I saw was the same as the marbles, more bizarre and the cave was slightly narrower.

古文：盘薄久之，乃转而东南，驰至真仙岩而体焉。
现代文：盘桓了很久，这才转向东南，疾行到真仙岩去休息。
English: After circling for a long time, we turned to the southeast and sped to Zhenxian Rock to rest.

古文：仰瞻苍崖，上与云气接，划热天开，高朗轩豁，溪流贯其间，潺潺有声，东西石壁峭拔，广袤数十亩，弹子、西峰所见，往往皆具。
现代文：仰望苍翠的山崖，上面与云气相接，天空划然分开，高大明朗，轩敞开阔，溪水流贯洞中，潺潺有声，东西石壁陡峭挺拔，长宽有数十亩，在弹子岩、西峰岩所见的景致，这里种种都具备。
English: Looking up at the verdant cliffs, above the clouds, the sky is clearly separated, tall and clear, wide and open, the stream flows through the cave, there is a sound, the stone walls are steep and upright, the length and width are dozens of acres, the scenery seen in the Pelican Rock and the West Peak Rock, all kinds are available here.

古文：老君晏坐其奥，须眉皓洁，如塑如画，迨造物者之所设施，岂偶然也耶！
现代文：老君安然坐在洞中深处，胡须眉毛皎洁，如雕塑似画像，大概是造物主的创造物，难道是偶然的吗！
English: Is it a coincidence that the old man sits safely deep in the cave, his whiskers and eyebrows neat and clean, like a sculpture, probably a creation of the Creator!

古文：回视先所夸诩说大话者，恍然自失矣。
现代文：回头看先前所夸耀的话，恍然大悟是自己失言了。
English: Looking back on his earlier boast, he suddenly realized that he had made a mistake.

古文：正如初入富商巨贾之家，珠玑宝贝，充栋盈室，把玩恋嫪，殆不能去。
现代文：正如最初进入富商巨贾的家里，珠巩宝贝，充斥屋宇堆满家室，握住玩赏留恋不舍，几乎不能离去。
English: Just as when he first entered the home of the wealthy merchant, Zhu Gong's baby, he filled the house with his family, and he was so attached to playing and admiring that he could hardly leave.

古文：而忽登王公大人之居，宫室广大，位置森然，而珍台异馆，洞房曲户，百好备足，而富商巨贾之所有。固亦在其间也。
现代文：可忽然登上王公大人的居室，宫室广大，地位森严显赫，而且珍奇的楼台奇异的馆阁，幽室深户，千百种美好之处都齐备充足，而富商巨贾所拥有的东西，固然也就在其中了。
English: You can suddenly ascend to the living room of the prince, the palace is vast, the status of the forest is strict and prominent, and the rare building platform, the strange pavilion, the secluded room, the deep house, the thousands of beautiful places are all well-equipped, and the things owned by the rich merchant, of course, are also among them.

古文：人之言曰： 观于海者难为水。 
现代文：人们有句话说： 观于海者难为水。 
English: People have a saying: Watching the sea is difficult for water.

古文：予亦曰： 游于真仙者难为岩。 
现代文：我也说： 游于真仙岩者难为岩。 
English: I also said, "If you swim in Zhenxian Rock, it's hard to be a rock."

古文：于是书于岩口，以识兹游之盛。
现代文：于是写在岩洞口，用来记载这次出游的盛况。
English: So I wrote it at the mouth of the cave to record the grandeur of this trip.

古文：洞间勒记甚多，而此文纪诸胜为详，录之。
现代文：洞中雕刻的碑记非常多，但这篇文章记载各处胜境较为详细，抄录了它。
English: There are many inscriptions carved in the cave, but this article records the various places of interest in more detail and copied it.

古文：宋绍兴丁巳年融守胡邦用《真仙岩诗叙》
现代文：宋绍兴丁巳年融州知州胡邦用《真仙岩诗叙》
English: Song Shaoxing, Ding Xiannian, Yongzhou, Zhizhou, and Hu Bang used "The True Fairy Rock Poem"

古文：融州真仙岩，耆旧相传，老君南游至融岭，语人曰： 此洞天之绝胜也。
现代文：融州真仙岩，年高德重的人相传。老君南游到融岭，对人说： 这是洞天之中绝顶优美之处。
English: Rongzhou Shensian Rock has been passed down from generation to generation. Lao Jun swam south to Rongling and told people: This is the most beautiful place in Dongtian.

古文：山石藿珮，溪流清邃，不复西度流沙，我当隐焉。 
现代文：山石巍峨，溪流清幽，不再往西涉过沙漠，我将隐居在这里。 
English: No more westward wandering through deserts, no more towering mountains and streams, I will live here in seclusion.

古文：匪垩匪艧不刷泥土，不施彩饰，太素形成天然素质著焉。
现代文：一天夜里身体变成石头，不用雕不用凿，构成万物的本体完备了。不必粉饰不必彩绘，形成天地的素质显露了。
English: One night, the body turns into stone. There is no need to carve or chisel, the body that constitutes all things is complete. There is no need to whitewash or paint, and the qualities that form heaven and earth are revealed.

古文：丹灶履迹，炳然十分显著在焉。
现代文：炼丹灶鞋子印，十分显著地留在那里。
English: The shoe print, quite noticeably, remained there.

古文：霓旌云幢，交相映焉。
现代文：彩虹般的族旗云彩状的旗帜，在这里交相辉映。
English: The rainbow-like national flag and the cloud-like national flag reflect each other here.

古文：有泉湍激，空山尝以金丹投于其中，使饮之者咸得延寿，故号寿溪。
现代文：有湍急的泉水，穿空山腹曾经把金丹投入溪中，使饮水的人都得以延寿，所以称作寿溪。
English: There is a fast-flowing spring, which used to run through the empty mountainside to pour aquamarine into the stream, so that people who drink the water can prolong their lives, so it is called Shouxi.

古文：东流十余里，入一村曰灵寿，其民皆享高年，间有三见甲子活岁者。
现代文：往东流去十多里，流入一个村庄叫灵寿村，村民都高寿，间或有见到三轮甲子的人。
English: It flows eastward for more than ten miles and flows into a village called Lingshou village. The villagers all have a high longevity, and sometimes there are people who have seen three rounds of jiaozi.

古文：余被命出守，穷文考古，询访土俗，遂得仙迹之详，皆非图经所载，故作诗以纪之，书其始末，勒石以示来者。
现代文：我肩负使命出京镇守，探究文物考察古迹，询间查访当地风俗，终于得到了神仙遗迹的详情，都不是图书经典上记载的内容，故而作诗来纪念它，写了它的始末，刻在石碑上以便给后人观看。
English: I shouldered the mission to go out to the Beijing town guard, explore cultural relics, inspect monuments, and visit local customs during inquiries. Finally, I got the details of the immortal relics, which are not the contents recorded in books and classics. Therefore, I wrote a poem to commemorate it, wrote its beginning and end, and engraved it on the stone monument for future generations to see.

古文：诗曰：岭南地势富山川，不似应改 谁似 。
现代文：诗云：岭南的地势富山川，不似真仙岩胜景全；璞石浑然而成世外像，寿溪径直贯通洞中天。
English: Shiyun: the terrain of the south of Lingnan, the Toyama River, does not resemble the scenic beauty of Shinsen Rock; the vermiculite is muddy, but it looks like the outside world, and the Shuxi Path runs straight through the middle of the cave.

古文：仙岩胜概全，石璞浑成尘外像，寿溪直彻洞中天，醮坛僧道为祛除灾祸而设的道场风细迎秋月，丹灶云轻压瘴烟；散步使人名利泯，欲求微妙养三田丹田。
现代文：祭坛风细迎秋月，丹灶云轻压瘴烟；闭步使人名利灭，想求微妙养三田。
English: The wind of the altar gently welcomes the autumn moon, and the light pressure of the danzao cloud smokes; the closed step makes people famous and profitable, and they want to subtly raise Mita.

古文：荆南龚大器《春题真仙洞八景》
现代文：荆南龚大器《春题真仙洞八景》
English: Jing Nanzhao's Large Vase, "Spring Theme: Eight Views of Shensendong"

古文：天柱石星嵯峨盘地轴，错落布琼玖；风吹紫霞散，荧荧灿星斗。
现代文：天柱石星巍峨盘绕着地轴，错落散布着美玉；风吹紫色云霞散，荧荧闪光星斗灿。
English: The celestial pillar stone star is coiled around the axis of the earth, and the beauty beads are scattered at random; the wind blows the purple clouds away, and the fluorescent flashing stars are dazzling.

古文：龙泉珠月冰轮碾碧天，流光下丹井；惊起骊龙眼，腾骧弄塞影。
现代文：龙泉珠月冰轮碾过碧蓝天，流光下坠炼丹井；惊起黑龙千年眠，骏马奔腾戏月影。
English: The Dragon Spring Pearl Moon Ice Wheel rolls across the blue sky and falls into the well under the streaming light; the black dragon awakens from a thousand-year sleep, and the horse gallops to play the moon shadow.

古文：塞影。鹤岩旭日仙人跨白鹤，飘飖下九垓；矫羽扶桑上，万里日边来。
现代文：鹤岩旭日仙人胯下乘白鹤，飘飘摇摇下九州；举翅飞上扶桑树，万里之外日边来。
English: The crane rock, the rising sun, the white cranes under the eaves of the hermit, the lower Kyushu swaying and swaying; the wings flying up the Fusang tree, the sun coming from a million miles away.

古文：牛渚暝烟朝发函关道，暮入湘水边；一声铁笛起，吹落万峰烟。
现代文：牛诸嗅烟清晨出了函关道，日暮已到湘江边；一声铁笛鸣响起，吹落万峰云和烟。
English: In the early morning, Niu Zhu Sniffing Smoke went out of the Hanzhong Pass, and by nightfall, he had reached the edge of the Hunan River. An iron flute sounded, blowing down clouds and smoke.

古文：寒淙飞玉悬崖三千尺，寒泉漱玉飞；奔流下沧海，群山断翠微。
现代文：寒涂飞玉悬崖高挂三千尺，寒泉飞漱溅白玉；奔流直下入沧海，群山斩断隔葱翠。
English: The cold-coated flying jade cliff hangs three thousand feet high, the cold spring flies and splashes white jade; the rushing stream goes straight down into the sea of vicissitudes, and the mountains cut off the greenery.

古文：碧洞流虹丹洞连海门，流水数千里；石梁卧波心，隐隐螮蝀ìō虹起。
现代文：碧洞流虹丹洞潜通连海口，流水奔泻数千里；石桥横跨卧波心，隐隐看似彩虹起。
English: The Bi-dong Stream and the Hongdan Cave Submerge connect Haikou, and the flowing water rushes for thousands of miles; the stone bridge spans the lying wave center, vaguely looking like a rainbow.

古文：群峰来秀青山望不极，白云渺何处；郁郁秀色来，遥看峰头树。
现代文：群峰来秀远望青山不到头，悠悠白云飘何处；郁郁秀色奔眼底，遥看青青峰头树。
English: The peaks come into view, the distant view of the green mountains is not the top, and the white clouds are drifting where; the rich and beautiful color rushes to the bottom of the eye, and the distant view of the green peak tree.

古文：万象朝真真象两无言，物情如影响；回看大始前，无真亦无象。
现代文：万象朝真真象两者皆无言，万物人情如影响；回头去看大始前，既无真来也无象。
English: Vientiane morning truth truth, both are speechless, all things human feelings such as the impact; look back to the beginning, neither the truth nor the image.

古文：二十七日憩息真仙洞中。
现代文：二十七日歇息在真仙洞中。
English: On the 27th day, they rested in the True Immortal Cave.

古文：有拓碑者，以司道命来拓《党籍碑》。
现代文：有来拓碑的人，是奉司道的命令来拓《党籍碑》。
English: Those who have come to dig up the monument are following the order of Sidao to dig up the "Party Monument."

古文：午有邑佐同其乡人来宴。
现代文：中午有县里的属吏同他的同乡前来宴饮。
English: At noon, a county official and his compatriots came to the banquet.

古文：余摩拭诸碑不辄，得韩忠献王所书《画鹘行》，并黄山谷书二方，皆其后人室此而勒之者。
现代文：我谨慎小心地擦拭各处的碑文，找到韩忠献王所写的《画鹊行》，以及黄山谷写的两块碑，都是他们的子孙在此地当官而把它们刻在这里的。
English: I carefully wiped the inscriptions everywhere, and found the "Painting Journey" written by Han Zhong Xianwang, as well as two inscriptions written by Huangshan Valley, which were engraved by their descendants who were officials in the area.

