古文：《易》曰： 自天佑之，吉无不利。 
现代文：《易经》大有上九爻辞言： 从上天获得祐助，完全吉而无不利。 
English: "I Ching" has more than nine syllables: Getting help from heaven is completely auspicious and has no disadvantage.

古文：子曰： 佑者，助也。天之所助者，顺也；人之所助者，信也。
现代文：孔子说： 祐是扶助的意思，上天所扶助的是能顺大道的规范的人。
English: Confucius said: "Yu" means "support." Heaven supports those who can follow the right path.

古文：履信思乎顺，又以尚贤也。是以也。 子曰： 书不尽言，言不尽意。 然则圣人之意，其不可见乎？
现代文：孔子说： 书是不能完全表达作者是要讲的话的，言语是不能表达我们的心意的，那么圣人的心意，难道就不能被了解了吗？ 
English: Confucius said: A book cannot fully express what the author wants to say, and words cannot express our thoughts, so can the thoughts of a sage not be understood?

古文：子曰： 圣人立象以尽意，设卦以尽情伪，系辞焉以尽其言。变而通之以尽利，鼓之舞之以尽神。 
现代文：孔子说： 圣人树立象数的规范，以竭尽未能完全表达的心意，使人因象以悟其心意，设置六十四卦以竭尽宇宙万事万物的情态，复系之以文辞，以尽其所未能表达的言语，又变而通之，以尽其利，鼓励之，激扬之，以尽神奇奥妙的能事。 
English: Confucius said: The sages set up the standard of the number of images to exhaust the mind that could not be fully expressed, and made people understand their minds through images, set up the sixty-four sagas to exhaust the universe of all things and all things, and complexed them with words to exhaust the words that they could not express, and changed them to make them clear, to make the best use of them, to encourage them, to excite them, and to do magical and mysterious things.

古文：乾坤，其《易》之蕴邪？乾坤成列，而《易》立乎其中矣。
现代文：乾坤也就是天地，它是《易经》的精蕴呀，乾坤既成列于上下，《易经》的道理也就肇定于其中了。
English: The universe is heaven and earth. It is the essence of the I Ching. Since the universe is arranged from top to bottom, the truth of the I Ching is also determined in it.

古文：乾坤毁，则无以见《易》。《易》不可见，则乾坤或几乎息矣。
现代文：如果乾坤毁灭的话，则没有办法见到《易经》的道理了，《易经》的道理不可被知解的话，则天地乾坤之道也几乎要息灭了。
English: If the universe were to be destroyed, there would be no way to see the truth of the I Ching, and if the truth of the I Ching could not be understood, then the universe and the way of the universe would almost be extinguished.

古文：是故形而上者谓之道，形而下者谓之器。化而裁之谓之变，推而行之谓之通，举而错之天下之民谓之事业。
现代文：所以在形器之上，无形体度量，抽象不可形而为万物，所共由者，就叫做 道 ；在形体之下，有形体可寻，是具体之物，就叫做 器 ；将形上之道、形下之器，变化而裁制之以致用，就叫做 变 ；推而发挥之，扩充之以实行于天下，谓之 通 ；举而设施安置于天下的百姓，就叫做 事业 。
English: Therefore, on top of the form, the formless body measure, the abstract formless and become all things, the common cause, is called the way; under the form, the tangible body can be found, it is a concrete thing, it is called the vessel; the way above the form, the vessel under the form, the change and the use, it is called the change; and then the play, the expansion to implement in the world, it is called the pass; and the people who place the facilities in the world, it is called the cause.

古文：是故夫象，圣人有以见天下之赜，而拟诸其形容，像其物宜，是故谓之象。
现代文：所以《易经》所谓象，乃因圣人见天下万事万物的繁杂，而拟测其形态的种类，象征其物象的适宜，因此谓之 象 。
English: Therefore, the so-called "image" in the I Ching is because the sage saw the complexity of everything in the world, and intended to measure the type of its form, symbolizing the appropriateness of its object, hence the term "image."

古文：圣人有以见天下之动，而观其会通，以行其典礼，系辞焉以断其吉凶，是故谓之爻。
现代文：圣人见天下一切动作营为的众多，而观察它可以会而通之之道，以制定其经常的规范，订成三百八十四种动态的指规，又系以文辞，以断定它的吉凶，所以谓之 爻 。
English: The sage sees the multitude of all actions and deeds in the world, and observes the ways in which it can be carried out, in order to formulate its regular norms, set up three hundred and eighty-four dynamic rules, and use words to determine its good or bad, so it is called.

古文：极天下之赜者存乎卦，鼓天下之动者存乎辞；化而裁之存乎变；推而行之存乎通；神而明之存乎其人；默而成之，不言而信，存乎德行。
现代文：极尽天下繁杂的物象的，在于 六十四卦 ；鼓动天下的动作营为的，在乎 爻辞 ；变化而裁制之，在乎 变 ；发挥而推行之，在于 通 ；明其神奇奥妙之道，在乎其人的运用；默默的而成就其事业，不形之以言，而天下皆能相信，则在于德行的深厚。
English: Completing the world's complex images lies in the "Sixty-Four Divisions of Confucianism"; encouraging the world's movement and action, it is concerned with rhetoric; changing and regulating, it is concerned with change; exerting and promoting, it is concerned with communication; revealing its magical and mysterious way, it is concerned with its people's use; silently and accomplishing its cause, it is not in words, and the world can believe, it is in the depth of virtue.

