古文：徐浩，字季海，越州人。
现代文：徐浩的字叫季海，是越州人。
English: Xu Hao's Chinese name is Ji Hai. He is from Yuezhou.

古文：父峤，官至洛州刺史。
现代文：父亲是徐峤，官当到洛州刺史。
English: His father is Xu Ying, a bureaucrat who came to Los Angeles to make history.

古文：浩少举明经，工草隶，以文学为张说所器重，调授鲁山主簿。
现代文：徐浩年少时考中了明经科，擅长草书和隶书，因文章和学识被张说看重，调任鲁山县主簿。
English: When he was young, Xu Hao passed the examination of Ming classics, and he was good at cursive and cursive writing. Zhang said that he was valued for his articles and knowledge, and he was transferred to be the chief accountant of Lushan County.

古文：说荐为丽正殿校理，三迁右拾遗，仍为校理。
现代文：张说又推荐他任丽正殿校理官，三次升任右拾遗，后还是任校理官。
English: Zhang said that he also recommended him to be the auditor of the Lisheng Hall, and he was promoted three times to the right to collect relics, and then he was still the auditor.

古文：幽州节度使张守珪奏在幕府，改监察御史。
现代文：幽州节度使张守王圭把他调到自己手下，改任为监察御史。
English: The Yuzhou Festival made Zhang Shou Wang Gui transfer him to his own staff, and he was reappointed as Supervisor of History.

古文：丁父忧，服除，授京兆司录，以母忧去职。
现代文：后因父亲去世服丧离职，守丧期满，被任命为京兆府司录官，后又因母亲去世服丧离职。
English: After that, he left the post due to the death of his father, and was appointed as the Keicho prefectural registrar when the mourning period expired. Later, he left the post due to the death of his mother.

古文：数年，调授河南司录，历河阳令，以善政称。
现代文：几年后调任河南道司录官，又担任河阳县令，以治理得好有名。
English: A few years later, he was transferred to the post of Henan Provincial Registrar, and also served as the Heyang County Governor, and was famous for his good governance.

古文：拜太子司议郎，迁金部员外郎，历宪部郎中。
现代文：后任太子司议郎，升任金部员外郎，又任宪部郎中。
English: He later served as the Prince's Councilor, was promoted to the Minister of Finance, and also served as the Vice-Minister of the Constitution.

古文：安禄山反，出为襄阳太守、本郡防御使，赐以金紫之服。
现代文：安禄山反叛，他被调出京城任襄阳太守、本郡防御使，赐给他金鱼袋和紫衣。
English: When Anlu Mountain rebelled, he was transferred out of Beijing to serve as the governor of Xiangyang and the county defense envoy. He was given a goldfish bag and a purple robe.

古文：肃宗即位，召拜中书舍人，时天下事殷，诏令多出于浩。
现代文：唐肃宗登基，召他进京城任中书舍人，当时国家政事多，皇帝诏令多由徐浩写成。
English: When Emperor Su Zong of Tang ascended to the throne, he was called to Beijing to serve as the chief scribe. At that time, most of the state affairs and imperial edicts were written by Xu Hao.

古文：浩属词赡给，又工楷隶，肃宗悦其能，加兼尚书左丞。
现代文：徐浩写文章博雅敏捷，又擅长写隶书，唐肃宗欣赏他的才能，加官兼任尚书右丞。
English: Xu Hao wrote articles with elegance and agility, and was also good at writing letters, Tang Su Zong appreciated his talent, and he was also appointed as Shang Shu Yu Rong.

古文：玄宗传位诰册，皆浩为之，参两宫文翰，宠遇罕与为比。
现代文：唐玄宗传位的册命，也是他写的。他为太上皇和皇帝写作文书，受宠很少有人比得上。
English: He also wrote the imperial edict of Emperor Xuanzong's enthronement. He wrote documents for the emperor and emperors, and was favored by very few people.

古文：除国子祭酒，坐事贬庐州长史。
现代文：后被任命为国子祭酒，因罪贬为庐州长史。
English: Later, he was appointed as the son of the country's sacrificial wine, and was demoted to the rank of governor for his crime.

古文：代宗征拜中书舍人、集贤殿学士，寻迁工部侍郎、岭南节度观察使、兼御史大夫，又为吏部侍郎、集贤殿学士。
现代文：唐代宗征召任命为中书舍人、集贤殿学士，不久升任工部侍郎、岭南节度观察使、兼任御史大夫，又担任吏部侍郎、集贤殿学士。
English: In the Tang Dynasty, he was recruited and appointed as a member of the Chinese Academy of Letters and a scholar of the Jixian Palace, and soon he was promoted to a chamberlain of the Ministry of Works, an observer of the Lingnan Festival, and concurrently a goshi taifu, and also served as a chamberlain of the Ministry of Personnel and a scholar of the Jixian Palace.

古文：坐以妾弟冒选，托侍郎薛邕注授京尉，为御史大夫李栖筠所弹，坐贬明州别驾。
现代文：因将小妾的弟弟冒充入选，又托侍郎薛邕注明任命为京兆府尉官，被御史大夫李栖筠弹劾，判罪贬为明州别驾。
English: For impersonating a concubine's younger brother into the election, and entrusting the waiter, Xue Qi, to be appointed as a lieutenant of the Jingzhao prefecture, he was impeached by the Imperial Historian, Li Qisheng, and was sentenced to be banished to Mingzhou.

古文：德宗即位，征拜彭王傅。
现代文：唐德宗登基，把他召来任彭王的师傅。
English: Tang Dezong ascended to the throne and called him to serve as the master of King Peng.

古文：建中三年，以疾卒，年八十，赠太子少师。
现代文：建中三年，他因病去世，享年八十岁，赠官太子少师。
English: In the third year of middle school, he died of illness at the age of eighty, and was given the title of crown prince and junior teacher.

古文：云逵元和元年拜右金吾卫大将军，岁中改京兆尹。
现代文：当初，徐浩以文才和高雅出名；到任官广州、掌管吏部，积聚了很多钱财，又宠爱他的妾侯莫陈氏，她常干预政事，被当时的舆论谴责。
English: At first, Xu Hao was famous for his literary talent and elegance; when he was appointed to Guangzhou, he was in charge of the personnel department, accumulated a lot of money, and loved his concubine Hou Mo Chen. She often intervened in political affairs and was condemned by the public opinion at the time.

古文：五年五月卒。李益，肃宗朝宰相揆之族子。
现代文：李益是唐肃宗朝中宰相李揆同族兄弟的儿子。
English: Li Yi was the son of a brother of the prime minister of the Tang Dynasty Su Zong Dynasty, Li Yu.

古文：登进士第，长为歌诗。
现代文：科举进士及第，擅长写诗。
English: He got a first and a second in the science examination, and is good at writing poems.

古文：贞元末，与宗人李贺齐名。
现代文：贞元末年，和皇族子弟李贺的名声差不多。
English: At the end of the Zhenyuan era, his reputation was almost the same as that of Li He, the younger son of the imperial family.

古文：每作一篇，为教坊乐人以赂求取。唱为供奉歌词。
现代文：每写一首诗，都被宫廷乐师用财物换去，创作成供皇帝听的歌曲。
English: Every time he wrote a poem, the court musicians exchanged it for money and created a song for the emperor to listen to.

古文：其《征人歌》、《早行篇》，好事者画为屏障； 回乐峰前沙似雪，受降城外月如霜 之句，天下以为歌词。
现代文：他的诗《征人歌》、《早行篇》，有心人画成画屏； 回乐峰前沙似雪，受降城外月如霜 的句子，全国人都谱成歌唱。
English: His poems "Song of Recruiting People" and "Early March" have been painted onto the screen by those who have the heart to do so; the sentences "The sand in front of Huileu Peak is like snow, and the moon outside the city is like frost" have been composed into songs by people all over the country.

古文：然少有痴病，而多猜忌，防闲妻妾，过为苛酷，而有散灰扃户之谭闻于时，故时谓妒痴为 李益疾 ；以是久之不调，而流辈皆居显位。
现代文：但他小时候有痴呆病，并且喜欢猜疑，防范妻子和妾，太过分了。有撒灰锁门的说法在当时流传，因此当时人称妒忌妻妾和痴呆叫 李益病 ；他因为这长期没有升官，而同年进士及第的都当了大官。
English: But when he was a child, he had dementia, and he liked to be suspicious and guarded against his wife and concubine, which was too much. There was a saying about locking the door with ashes at that time, so at that time people called jealousy of his wife and concubine and dementia called Li Yi disease; because of this, he did not get promoted for a long time, and in the same year, both the junior and the senior became high officials.

古文：益不得意，北游河朔，幽州刘济辟为从事，常与济诗而有 不上望京楼 之句。
现代文：李益不得志，就到黄河以北去游玩，幽州节度使刘济推荐他任从事，他写给刘济的诗曾经有 不登望京楼 的句子。
English: Li Yi was discouraged, so he went to the north of the Yellow River to play. The Yuzhou Festival made Liu Ji recommend him to engage in it. The poem he wrote to Liu Ji once had the sentence "Do not climb the Beijing Tower."

古文：宪宗雅闻其名，自河北召还，用为秘书少监、集贤殿学士。
现代文：唐宪宗听说了他的名字，把他从河北召回来，任命为秘书少监、集贤殿学士。
English: When Tang Xianzong heard his name, he called him back from Hebei Province and appointed him as the secretary of the junior superintendent and the scholar of the palace of scholars.

古文：自负才地，多所凌忽，为众不容，谏官举其幽州诗句，降居散秩。
现代文：他自恃才能和门第，凌辱得罪了很多人，众人容不得他，谏官检举他在幽州写的诗句，被降职为闲官。
English: He prided himself on his talent and pedigree. He offended many people with his insults. People could not tolerate him. A eunuch denounced a poem he had written in Yuzhou and was demoted to the position of a lay official.

古文：俄复用为秘书监，迁太子宾客、集贤学士判院事，转右散骑常侍。
现代文：不久又任命为秘书监。升任太子宾客、集贤学士判院事，后移任右散骑常侍。
English: Soon after, he was appointed supervisor of secretaries. He was promoted to guest of the Crown Prince, member of the Academy of the Judges of Virtue, and later transferred to the post of the right rider.

古文：太和初，以礼部尚书致仕，卒。
现代文：大和初年，在礼部尚书任上辞官，后去世了。
English: In the first year of the Yamato era, he resigned from his post at the Ministry of Ceremonies, and later died.

古文：李贺，字长吉，宗室郑王之后。
现代文：李贺，字长吉，是皇族郑王的后代。
English: Li He, a.k.a. Changji, is a descendant of the royal family Zheng Wang.

古文：父名晋肃，以是不应进士，韩愈为之作《讳辨》，贺竟不就试。
现代文：他父亲叫李晋肃，他因为音讳不去应进士考试，韩愈为这写了《讳辨》，但他终于没去应考。
English: His father's name is Li Jinshu. Because of his shyness, he didn't take the entrance exam. Han Yu wrote a book about this, "The Shyness Test," but in the end, he didn't take the exam.

古文：手笔敏捷，尤长于歌篇。
现代文：他才思灵敏快速，尤其擅长写诗歌。
English: He has a quick mind and is particularly good at writing poetry.

古文：其文思体势，如崇岩峭壁，万仞崛起，当时文士从而效之，无能仿佛者。
现代文：他的构思风格像高山陡崖，千丈耸立，当时文人追随效法他，没有能近似的。
English: His style of conception was like a high mountain cliff, towering high. At that time, the literati followed his example, and there was no way to approximate it.

古文：其乐府词数十篇，至于云韶乐工，无不讽诵。
现代文：他填写的乐府歌词有几十篇，直到宋代黄门云韶部的乐师，没有不背诵的。
English: He filled out dozens of music lyrics, and until the Song Dynasty, Huangmen Yunzhibe's musicians did not have to recite them.

古文：补太常寺协律郎，卒，时年二十四。
现代文：他被任命为太常寺协律郎，去世时年仅二十四岁。
English: He was appointed as the assistant abbot of Taiji Temple and died at the age of twenty-four.

