古文：陈规，字元则，密州安丘人。
现代文：陈规字元则，密州安丘人。
English: According to the traditional characters, he was from Anqiu, Mizhou.

古文：中明法科。
现代文：考中明法科。
English: Passed the middle school entrance examination in law.

古文：靖康末，金人入侵，杀镇海军节度使刘延庆，其徒祝进、王在去为盗，犯随、郢、复等州。
现代文：靖康末年，金军入侵，杀死镇海军节度使刘延庆，其部下祝进、王在逃散作贼，侵犯随、郢、复等州。
English: In the last years of Jingkang, the Chinese invaded and killed the naval commander of the town, Liu Yanqing, and his subordinates Zhujin and Wang Jiexuan, and invaded Su, Handan and Fuzhou.

古文：规为安陆令，以勤王兵赴汴，至蔡州，道梗而还。
现代文：陈规任安陆县令，率勤王兵奔赴汴京救援，到蔡州，因道路阻隔而返回。
English: Chen Jian served as the Anlu County commander, and led the diligent Wang Bing to rush to the rescue in Beijing, to Caizhou, and returned because of the road blockage.

古文：会祝进攻德安府，守弃城遁，父老请规摄守事。
现代文：恰逢祝进进攻德安府，知府弃城逃走，当地父老百姓请求陈规暂摄守城事。
English: At the time of Zhu Jin's attack on De'an Prefecture, the prefect abandoned the city and fled, and the local people asked Chen Gui to temporarily guard the city.

古文：规遣射士张立率兵讨进，却之。
现代文：陈规派遣射士张立率兵征讨祝进，将他击退。
English: Chen Gui dispatched the archer Zhang Li to lead the soldiers to recruit and advance, and repelled him.

古文：既而在复与进合，以炮石鹅车攻城东，规连战败之，二人惧，引众去。
现代文：不久王在又与祝进会合，用炮石鹅车进攻城东门，陈规连续将他们击败，两人害怕，率众逃走。
English: Not long after, Wang met with Zhu Jin again and attacked the east gate of the city with a cannon stone goose cart. Chen Gu continuously defeated them. The two were afraid and led the crowd to flee.

古文：建炎元年，除直龙图阁、知德安府。
现代文：建炎元年，陈规任直龙图阁、知德安府。
English: In the first year of Jianyan, Chen Gui was appointed to Zhaolong Mansion and Chidean Mansion.

古文：李孝义、张世以步骑数万薄城，阳称受诏招，规登城视其营垒，曰： 此诈也。 亟为备。
现代文：李孝义、张世率步骑兵数万人逼近城池，诈称受诏接受招安，陈规登上城墙观察他们的营垒说： 这是欺骗我。 
English: Li Xiaoyi and Zhang Shiyi led tens of thousands of infantry and cavalry to approach the city, falsely claiming that they had received an imperial edict to accept conscription, and Chen Gui climbed the city wall to observe their camp and said: This is deceiving me.

古文：夜半，孝义兵围城，遂大败之。
现代文：急忙布置防备。半夜时分，李孝义军队围城，于是被陈规击败。
English: In the middle of the night, Li Xiaoyi's army besieged the city and was defeated by Chen Gui.

古文：与群盗杨进相持十八日，进技穷，以百人自卫，抵濠上求和。
现代文：同群盗杨进相持十八天，杨进无计可施，用一百人自卫，抵达城濠求和。
English: After eighteen days of fighting with Yang Jin's bandits, Yang Jin had no choice but to defend himself with a hundred men and arrived at the city gate to sue for peace.

古文：规出城与交臂语，进感之，折箭为誓而去。
现代文：陈规出城同他握手而谈，杨进深受感动，折箭立誓而去。
English: Chen Gui went out of the city to shake hands and talk with him. Yang Jin was deeply moved and vowed to leave.

古文：董平引众窥城，遣其党李居正、黄进入城求犒，规斩进，授居正兵为前锋，大破之。
现代文：董平率众窥视城池，派其党羽李居正、黄进入城求粮，陈规斩杀黄进，以李居正兵为前锋，大破董平。
English: Dong Ping led the crowd to spy on the city, sent his followers Li Juzheng and Huang into the city to ask for grain, and Chen Gui killed Huang Jin, with Li Juzheng as the forward, and defeated Dong Ping.

古文：升秘阁修撰。寻除德安府、复州、汉阳军镇抚使，赐三品服，俄升徽猷阁待制。
现代文：升任秘阁修撰，不久任德安府、复州、汉阳军镇抚使，赐给三品官服，不久升为徽猷阁待制。
English: He was promoted to Shuxian of the Secret Cabinet, and was soon appointed as the military governor of De'an, Fuzhou, and Hanyang. He was given three official uniforms, and was soon promoted to Huiyuan of the Secret Cabinet.

古文：时桑仲剽略襄、汉间，其副霍明屯兵郢上，规请于朝，就以明守郢。
现代文：当时桑仲在襄、汉之间剽掠民财，其副手霍明屯兵郢州，陈规请求朝廷，命令霍明守卫郢州。
English: At that time, Sangzhong plundered the people's wealth between the Xiang and Han dynasties, and his deputy, Homing, stationed soldiers in Zhangzhou. Chen Gu requested the imperial court to order Homing to guard Zhangzhou.

古文：张浚都督行蜀道，仲引兵窥之，为王彦所败。
现代文：张浚都督行视四川，桑仲率兵窥伺，被王彦击败。
English: Zhang Jun, the governor of the capital, watched Sichuan, Kuanzhong led soldiers to spy, and was defeated by Wang Yan.

古文：仲怒，从数百骑来谯明，明杀之，奔刘豫，以书招规，规械其使以闻。
现代文：桑仲大怒，率领数百骑前来责备霍明，霍明击杀他们，投奔刘豫，用书信招降陈规，陈规囚禁使者上报。
English: Sang Zhong flew into a rage, led hundreds of horsemen to come and blame Homing, Homing killed them, ran to Liu Yu, used letters to persuade Chen Gui to surrender, and Chen Gui imprisoned the messenger to report.

古文：李横围城，造天桥，填濠，鼓噪临城。
现代文：李横包围城池，制造天桥，填塞城濠，鼓噪攻城。
English: Li Heng encircled the city, built a flyover, blocked the city gate, and attacked the city.

古文：规帅军民御之，炮伤足，神色不变，围急粮尽，出家财劳军，士气益振。
现代文：陈规率领军民抵御，炮石伤足，神色不变，围急粮尽，陈规拿出自己家财慰劳军队，士气更加振奋。
English: Chen Gui led the army and people to resist, his feet hurt from the rocks, his face unchanged, the siege ran out of food, Chen Gui took out his family's wealth to comfort the laboring army, and morale was more uplifting.

古文：横遣人来，愿得妓女罢军，规不许。
现代文：李横派人前来，希望得到妓女便撤军不攻，陈规没有答应。
English: Li Heng sent someone to come, hoping to get a prostitute and then withdraw without attacking, but Chen Bi did not agree.

古文：诸将曰： 围城七十日矣，以一妇活一城，不亦可乎。 规竟不予。
现代文：众将说 ：城池被围已七十天了。用一妇女换取一城人的生命，不也可以吗？ 陈规最终没有答应。
English: The generals said: The city has been besieged for seventy days. Would it not be possible to exchange a woman for the life of a citizen? Chen Bi did not agree in the end.

古文：会濠桥陷，规以六十人持火枪自西门出，焚天桥，以火牛助之，须臾皆尽，横拔砦去。
现代文：恰巧濠桥失陷，陈规派六十人持火枪从西门出，焚毁天桥，并用火牛协助，片刻之间被烧成灰烬，李横拔营离去。
English: It just so happened that the Yingqiao Bridge fell, and Chen Gui sent sixty men armed with muskets out of the West Gate to burn the flyover, and used fire oxen to assist. Within a few moments, the bridge was burned to ashes, and Li Heng pulled out of the camp.

古文：升徽猷阁直学士，诏赴行在，改显谟阁直学士，徙知池州、沿江安抚使。
现代文：朝廷升陈规为徽猷阁直学士，诏他到朝廷，改为显谟阁直学士，移知池州、沿江安抚使。
English: The imperial court promoted Chen Jie to the direct bachelor of Huiyang Pavilion, and sent him to the imperial court to be changed to the direct bachelor of Xianmu Pavilion, and transferred to Chizhou and along the Yangtze River as a pacifying envoy.

古文：入对，首言： 镇抚使当罢，诸将跋扈，请用偏裨以分其势。 上皆纳之。
现代文：入朝对答，首先说： 镇抚使应当废罢，众将跋扈难制，请用偏将以分散他们的势力。 
English: When he entered the imperial court, he first said, "The role of the commander-in-chief should be abolished. The masses will be difficult to control. Please use your power to disperse them."

古文：迁龙图阁直学士，改知庐州，寻又召赴行在，以疾辞，提举江州太平观。
现代文：高宗都采纳了他的意见。迁任龙图阁直学士，改知庐州，不久又诏他到朝廷，陈规因病推辞，提举江州太平观。
English: Gao Zongdu accepted his opinion. He was transferred to Longtu Pavilion as a direct bachelor, changed his hometown to Zhangzhou, and soon he was sent to the imperial court. Chen Bi resigned due to illness, and Jiangzhou Taiping Guan was promoted.

古文：复起知德安府，坐失察吏职，镌两官。
现代文：又起知德安府，由于受吏职失察牵连，被贬两官。
English: It was also learned that two officials in the De'an Prefecture were demoted because they were implicated in official misconduct.

古文：金人归河南地，改知顺昌府，葺城壁，招流亡，立保伍。
现代文：金朝归还河南地区，陈规改知顺昌府，修缮城墙，招集流亡，建立保伍制度。
English: The Jin Dynasty returned the Henan region, changed the old rules to Shunchang Prefecture, repaired the city wall, summoned exiles, and established a troop protection system.

古文：会刘锜领兵赴京留守过郡境，规出迎，坐未定，传金人已入京城，即告锜城中有粟数万斛，勉同为死守计。
现代文：恰逢刘钅奇率兵赴东京留守任经过顺昌境内，陈规出迎，坐没安定，传说金军已进入东京，即告诉刘钅奇城中有粮数万斛，勉励一同做死守顺昌的打算。
English: At the same time, Liu Beiqi led his troops to stay in Tokyo and passed through the territory of Shunchang. Chen Gui came to meet him, but there was no stability. Legend has it that when the Golden Army entered Tokyo, he told Liu Beiqi that there were tens of thousands of baht of grain in the city, and encouraged him to make a plan to defend Shunchang together.

古文：相与登城区画，分命诸将守四门，且明斥候，募土人乡导间谍。
现代文：两人一同登城布置，分别命众将守卫四门，并明确侦察，召募当地人为向导间谍。
English: The two of them went to the city together to lay out the layout, separately ordered the people to guard the four doors, and made a clear reconnaissance, recruiting local people as guide spies.

古文：布设粗毕，金游骑已薄城矣。
现代文：布置大体完毕，金军游骑已逼近顺昌。
English: The layout is almost complete, and the cavalry of the Golden Army is approaching Shunchang.

古文：既至，金龙虎大王者提重兵踵至，规躬擐甲胄，与锜巡城督战，用神臂弓射之，稍引退，复以步兵邀击，溺于河者甚众。
现代文：接着，金龙虎大王又率重兵跟着来到，陈规身穿甲胄，同刘钅奇一起巡城督战，用神臂弓射击金军，金军稍稍后退，又用步兵邀击，金军落于河中溺死的很多。
English: Next, the King of the Golden Dragon and Tiger arrived with a heavy army. Chen Gui, wearing armor, and Liu Bingqi went on a patrol to supervise the battle. They shot the Golden Army with the divine arm bow, the Golden Army retreated a little, and invited the infantry to attack. Many of the Golden Army fell into the river and drowned.

古文：规曰： 敌志屡挫，必思出奇困我，不若潜兵斫营，使彼昼夜不得休，可养吾锐也。 锜然之，果劫中其砦，歼其兵甚众。
现代文：陈规说 ：敌人几次受挫，必然想方设法围困我们，不如派兵潜出攻击敌营，使敌人昼夜不得安宁，可以养我锐气。 刘钅奇派兵出击，果然劫中敌营，歼灭敌兵甚多。
English: Chen Gui said, "The enemy has suffered several setbacks and will inevitably try every means to besiege us. It is better to send troops to attack the enemy camp secretly, so that the enemy will not have peace and quiet day and night, which can raise my morale. Liu Beiqi sent troops to attack, and the enemy camp was successfully destroyed, and a large number of enemy soldiers were destroyed.

古文：金人告急于兀术。
现代文：金军向兀告急。
English: The Chinese army sent an urgent message to him.

古文：规大飨将士，酒半问曰： 兀术拥精兵且至，策将安出？ 诸将或谓今已累捷，宜乘势全师而归。
现代文：陈规设宴犒劳将士，酒喝到一半时问道 ：兀率领精兵将至，准备用什么计策对付他呢？ 众将有的人说现在已多次获胜，应乘势保全军队撤归。
English: Chen Gui set up a banquet for the hard-working generals, and when he was halfway through drinking, he asked: "The leader of the elite soldiers is coming, what strategy are you going to use to deal with him? Many will say that they have won many times now, and they should take advantage of the situation to secure the withdrawal of the army."

古文：规曰： 朝廷养兵十五年，正欲为缓急用，况屡挫其锋，军声稍振。
现代文：陈规说 ：朝廷养兵十五年，正是为了紧急时使用，况且多次挫败敌人锋芒，军威稍振。
English: Chen Gui said: The imperial court has been raising soldiers for fifteen years, precisely for emergency use. Moreover, it has repeatedly thwarted the enemy's edge and slightly boosted its military power.

古文：规已分一死，进亦死，退亦死，不如进为忠也。 锜叱诸将曰： 府公文人犹誓死守，况汝曹耶！
现代文：我自忖自有一死，前进也是死，后退也是死，不如前进为国家尽忠。 刘钅奇叱责众将说： 府公本是文人还誓死守卫，更何况你们这些武将呢！
English: I told myself that I would die if I moved forward, and I would die if I moved backward, so it was better to move forward and be loyal to the country.Liu Bingqi scolded the generals, saying, "The prefectural government is made up of literati who have sworn to defend it to the death, let alone you generals!

古文：兼金营近三十里，兀术来援，我军一动，金人追及，老幼先乱，必至狼狈，不独废前功，致两淮侵扰，江、浙震惊。
现代文：加上金营近在三十里，兀赶来增援，我军一动，金军追上，老幼先乱，必致全军狼狈逃窜，不仅尽弃前功，还会导致两淮被侵扰，江、浙震惊。
English: In addition, the gold camp is nearly 30 miles away, the dragonflies are coming to reinforce, our army is moving, the gold army is catching up, the old and the young are the first to be disrupted, which will inevitably lead to the whole army fleeing in disarray, not only abandoning the previous achievements, but also leading to the two Huai being intruded, and Jiang and Zhejiang are shocked.

古文：平生报君，反成误国，不如背城一战，死中求生可也。 
现代文：平生为了报答皇上，反成误国之罪，不如背城一战，才能死中求生。 
English: In order to repay the emperor in one's lifetime, it is better to commit the crime of betraying one's country than to fight a war against the city in order to survive in death.

古文：已而兀术至，亲循城，责诸酋用兵之失，众跪曰： 南兵非昔比。 兀术下令晨饭府庭，且折箭为誓，并兵十余万攻城，自将铁浮屠军三千游击。
现代文：不久兀赶到，亲自巡城，责备诸将用兵失利，众人跪着说： 南方军队今非昔比。 兀下令部队攻下顺昌府后再吃早饭，并且折箭立誓，集中兵力十万人攻城，自率铁浮屠军三千游击。
English: Soon after, Yao arrived and personally patrolled the city, reproaching the generals for their failure in using troops, and everyone kneeled and said, "The southern army is not the same as it used to be." Yao ordered the troops to have breakfast after capturing Shunchangfu, and vowed to concentrate 100,000 troops to attack the city, and lead 3,000 guerrillas.

古文：规与锜行城，勉激诸将，流矢及衣无惧色，军殊死斗。
现代文：陈规同刘钅奇在城上巡视，勉励鼓舞众将，流矢击中衣服而没有惧色，士众殊死搏斗。
English: Chen Gui and Liu Bingqi toured the city, encouraged and inspired the generals, the arrow hit the clothes without fear, and the soldiers fought to the death.

古文：时方剧暑，规谓锜毋多出军，第更队易器，以逸制劳，蔑不胜矣。
现代文：当时正是酷暑季节，陈规劝刘钅奇不要多派军队，只是轮番上阵更换武器，以逸待劳，没有不胜的。
English: At that time, it was the hot season. Chen Ji advised Liu Rongqi not to send more troops, but to take turns to go into battle and replace weapons. There was no way to win.

古文：每清晨辄坚壁不出，伺金兵暴烈日中，至未申，气力疲，则城中兵争奋，斩获无算，兀术宵遁。
现代文：每天早晨坚壁不出，让金军在太阳下暴晒，至中午，气力疲惫时，城中守兵争相奋击，兀连夜逃走。
English: Every morning, the strong wall did not appear, leaving the gold army exposed under the sun. By noon, when they were exhausted, the guards in the city fought with each other and fled in the night.

古文：锜奏功，诏褒谕之，迁枢密直学士。
现代文：刘钅奇上奏报功，高宗下诏奖赏，升陈规为枢密直学士。
English: Liu Rongqi was awarded the honorary degree, Gao Zong was awarded the imperial edict, and Chen Gui was promoted to the rank of privy scholar.

古文：规至顺昌，即广籴粟麦实仓廪。
现代文：陈规就任顺昌知府后，便广籴粟麦充实仓库。
English: After Chen Bi assumed the post of Shunchang governor, he enriched the poppy and wheat warehouse.

古文：会计议司移粟赴河上，规请以金帛代输，至是得其用，成锜功者，食足故也。
现代文：计议司要将粮食转迁到河上，陈规请求用金帛代替交纳，到这时得到使用，成就刘钅奇功业，是粮饷充足的原故。
English: The reason for the abundance of grain was that the Planning and Proposals Department wanted to transfer the grain to the river, and the old regulations requested that gold ingots be used instead of payment. At this time, it was used, and Liu Xunqi's accomplishment was achieved.

古文：移知庐州兼淮西安抚，既至，疾作。
现代文：移知庐州兼淮西安抚使，到任后，生病。
English: After taking up the post, Zeng Zhizhou, conciliator of Huaixi Province, fell ill.

古文：有旨修郡城，规在告，吏抱文书入卧内，规力疾起曰： 帅事，机宜董之；郡城，通判董之。 语毕而卒，年七十。
现代文：有旨令修缮郡城，陈规抱病在床，官吏抱着文书进入卧室，陈规吃力地支撑起身体说 ：军事上的事，由机宜负责；郡城中的事，由通判负责。 说完去世，时年七十岁。
English: There was an order to repair the county seat, Chen Gui was sick in bed, the officials entered the bedroom holding the documents, Chen Gui struggled to support his body and said, "Military affairs are the responsibility of opportunists; affairs in the county seat are the responsibility of judges." After saying this, he died at the age of seventy.

古文：赠右正议大夫。
现代文：赠右正议大夫。
English: Presented to the Right Honourable Dr.

古文：有《攻守方略》传于世。
现代文：著有《攻守方略》流传于世。
English: He is the author of "Strategy of Attack and Defense," which has been passed down to the world.

古文：初，规守德安时，尝条上营屯田事宜，欲仿古屯田之制，合射士民兵，分地耕垦。
现代文：当初，陈规守卫德安时，曾条上营屯田事宜，想仿效古代屯田制度，集中射士民兵，分地耕垦。
English: At first, when Chen Gui was guarding De'an, he wanted to emulate the ancient military garrison system by concentrating militia shooters and working in different areas.

古文：军士所屯之田，皆相险隘立堡砦，寇至则堡聚捍御，无事则乘时田作，射士皆分半以耕屯田。
现代文：军士所屯的田地，都在险隘处建立堡寨，敌人来到时便集结到堡寨抵御，没事时就按农时耕作，射士都以一半人耕种屯田。
English: The fields where the soldiers were encamped were all built as fortifications in dangerous places. When the enemy came, they gathered to defend the fortifications. When there was no trouble, they cultivated according to the agricultural time. The archers all cultivated the fortified fields with half of their men.

古文：民户所营之田，水田亩赋粳米一斗，陆田赋麦豆各五升。
现代文：民户营田，水田每亩交纳赋税米一斗，陆地每亩交纳麦豆各五升。
English: Residential households are required to pay a tax of one bucket of rice per mu of farmland and rice paddies, and five liters of barley per mu of land.

古文：满三年无逋输，给为永业。
现代文：满三年没有拖欠赋税，田地永归民户所有。
English: If there are no tax arrears after three years, the fields will be permanently owned by private households.

古文：流民自归者以田还之。
现代文：流民归来的将田地交还给他。
English: When the exiles returned, they gave the fields back to him.

古文：凡屯田事，营田司兼行，营田事，府县官兼行，皆不更置官吏，条列以闻，诏嘉奖之，仍下其法于诸镇。
现代文：凡是屯田事务，由营田司兼管，营田事务，由府县官兼管，都不另设官吏，条例上报，诏令嘉奖他，并将他的办法下发到各镇。
English: For all the affairs of the cantonment, the cantonment manager is also in charge, and for the affairs of the cantonment, the prefectural and county officials are also in charge, there is no need to set up a separate official, report the regulations, praise him with a decree, and send his measures to every town.

古文：自绍兴以来，文臣镇抚使有威声者，惟规而已。
现代文：自从绍兴以来，文臣担任镇抚使有威望名声的，只有陈规一个人。
English: Since Shaoxing, there is only one person, Chen Gui, who has the prestige and reputation to serve as the tutor of Wencheng.

古文：规端毅寡言笑，然待人和易。
现代文：陈规端庄深沉少于言笑，但待人平易和蔼。
English: The stereotype of the demure and deep is less than the words and laughter, but it is easy to treat people kindly.

古文：以忠义自许，尤好振施，家无赢财。
现代文：以忠义自许，尤其爱好赈济贫穷，家无余财。
English: He prides himself on his loyalty and is especially fond of helping the poor. His family has no spare money.

古文：帝手诏诘问，法原自辩甚力，上颇不直之，忧恚，卒于军。
现代文：曾为女儿求一侍婢，得到一位妇女十分闲雅，陈规感到奇怪询问她，原来是云梦张贡士的女儿，因战乱离散丈夫去世无所寄托，卖身求活，陈规即代为置办嫁妆让她出嫁，听说的人都感动泪下。
English: He had asked for a maid for his daughter and received a very elegant woman. Chen Gui felt strange and asked her. It turned out to be the daughter of Yunmeng Zhang Gongshi, who had been separated from her husband due to the war and had nothing to rely on. She sold herself to survive. Chen Gui then arranged a dowry for her to get married. Everyone who heard about it was moved to tears.

古文：始，法原为川、陕宣抚使，上从容谓知原曰： 朕方以川、陕付法原。 盖兄弟皆以材见称于世，故并用之也。
现代文：陈规功名同众将相等，但没有得到相同的地位，时人都为此惋惜。乾道八年，诏令刻印陈规《德安守城录》颁行天下让诸将守城时效法。在德安立庙，赐额 贤守 ，追封他为忠利侯，后又加封智敏侯。
English: In the eight years of the Heian period, the imperial edict engraved the standard "De'an City Defense Record" and issued it for the world to follow. At the De'an Temple, he was given the title of "Kenju," and he was posthumously awarded the title of "Chulihou" (忠利侯), and later the title of "Chimin Hou" (智敏侯).

古文：陈桷，字季壬，温州平阳人。
现代文：陈桷字季壬，温州平阳人。
English: Chen Yao, surnamed Ji Ren, is from Pingyang, Wenzhou.

古文：以上舍贡辟雍。
现代文：以上舍贡辟雍。
English: That's all for now.

古文：政和二年，廷对第三，授文林郎、冀州兵曹参军，累迁尚书虞部员外郎。
现代文：政和二年，获廷对第三名，被授予文林郎、冀州兵曹参军，历任尚书虞部员外郎。
English: In the second year of Zheng He, he was awarded the third place by the court, and was awarded Wenlin Lang, Jizhou Petty Officer to join the army, and Gairo, a member of the Ministry of Education and Culture.

古文：宣和七年，提点福建路刑狱。
现代文：宣和七年，提点福建路刑狱。
English: Seven years after the proclamation of peace, the Fujian Road Penal Prison came into being.

古文：福州调发防秋兵，资粮不满望，杀帅臣，变生仓卒，吏民奔溃，阖城震骇。
现代文：福州调发防秋兵，钱粮没有满足要求，士兵杀死将领，事变发生突然，吏民奔溃，全城震骇。
English: Fuzhou dispatched soldiers to guard against the autumn, money and grain did not meet the requirements, soldiers killed generals, the incident occurred suddenly, officials and people rushed, and the whole city was shocked.

古文：桷入乱兵中，谕以祸福，贼气沮，邀桷奏帅臣自毙，桷诡从其请，间道驰奏，以前奏不实待罪，朝廷以桷知变，释之。
现代文：陈桷进入乱兵之中，向他们讲明祸福道理，乱兵沮丧气馁，要求陈桷上奏将领是自毙而死，陈桷装作听从他们的请求，派人从小路急奏朝廷，并以前面的奏章不实请求处分，朝廷因陈桷应变有方，不予追究。
English: Chen Xi entered among the rioting soldiers and explained to them the principles of misfortune and good fortune. The rioting soldiers, frustrated and discouraged, demanded that Chen Xi, the commander-in-chief, should commit suicide. Chen Xi pretended to listen to their request and sent someone to report to the imperial court from a side road. He also falsely requested punishment for the previous report. The imperial court did not investigate because Chen Xi was resourceful.

古文：叛兵既调行，乃道追杀首恶二十余人，一方以安。
现代文：叛兵征调上路后，陈桷在途中追杀首恶二十多人，一方得以安定。
English: After the rebel soldiers were transferred to the road, Chen Xi chased and killed more than 20 people on the way, and the situation was stabilized.

古文：建炎四年五月，复除福建路提刑，寻以疾乞祠，主管江州太平观。
现代文：建炎四年五月，又任福建路提刑，不久因病请求奉祠，主管江州太平观。
English: In May of the fourth year of Jianyan, he was also appointed as the Fujian Road Executioner. Soon, due to illness, he requested to serve as an ancestral shrine, and was in charge of the Jiangzhou Taiping Grand View.

古文：绍兴三年，召为金部员外郎，升郎中。
现代文：绍兴三年，陈桷被任命为金部员外郎，升为郎中。
English: In the third year of Shaoxing, Chen Hao was appointed as the second son of a member of the Ministry of Finance, and was promoted to the second son.

古文：时言事者率毛举细务，略大利害。
现代文：当时言事的人都列举细小事务，而忽略重大利害问题。
English: At that time, people in charge of affairs listed minor matters, while ignoring major harm issues.

古文：桷抗言： 今当专讲治道之本，修政事以攘敌国，不当以细故勤圣虑如平时也。 又言： 刺史县令满天下，不能皆得人，乞选监司，重其权，久其任。 除太常少卿。
现代文：陈桷上奏说： 如今应当专讲治道的根本，修明政事以抵御敌国，不应当像平时那样用烦杂细务干扰皇上。 又说 ：刺史县令布满天下，不可能都任用得人，请选拔监司官员，使他权重任久。 朝廷任命他为太常少卿。
English: Chen Xi said, "Nowadays, we should concentrate on the fundamentals of governance, clarify government affairs to resist the enemy country, and should not interfere with the emperor with tedious details as usual." He also said, "It is impossible to appoint everyone, so please select the supervising officer and make him hold the position for a long time. The imperial court appointed him as a permanent junior minister."

古文：又陈攻守二策，在于得人心，修军政。
现代文：又陈述攻守两策，认为关键在于得到民心，修明军政。
English: He also stated two strategies, offensive and defensive, and believed that the key was to win the hearts and minds of the people and clarify the military and political situation.

古文：五年，除直龙图阁、知泉州。
现代文：绍兴五年，陈桷任直龙图阁、知泉州。
English: After five years in Shaoxing, Chen Rong was assigned to Zhaolong and Quanzhou.

古文：明年，改两浙西路提刑。
现代文：次年，改任两浙西路提刑。
English: The following year, he was transferred to the West Zhejiang Road Detention Center.

古文：乞置乡县三老以厚风俗，凡宫室、车马、衣服、器械定为差等，重侈靡之禁。
现代文：请求设立县乡三老以端正风俗，凡是宫室、车马、衣服、器械都制定等级标准，重视侈靡禁令。
English: It is requested to establish the County and Township Three Elders to rectify the customs, and set the grade standards for the palace, chariots, horses, clothes, and instruments, and attach importance to the luxury ban.

古文：八年，迁福建路转运副使。
现代文：绍兴八年，升任福建路转运副使。
English: After eight years in Shaoxing, he was promoted to deputy envoy of Fujian Road Transportation.

古文：十年，复召为太常少卿。
现代文：绍兴十年，又被任命为太常少卿。
English: After ten years in Shaoxing, he was appointed to the position of Taizhang Shaoqing.

古文：适编类徽宗御书成，诏藏敷文阁，桷以为： 旧制自龙图至徽猷皆设学士、待制，杂压著令，龙图在朝请大夫之上，至徽猷在承议郎之上，每阁相去稍远，议者疑其不伦。
现代文：恰逢分类编辑徽宗御书完成，诏令收藏敷文阁，陈桷认为： 原来的制度自龙图至徽猷阁都设学士、待制，杂压著令，龙图位在朝请大夫之上，至徽猷位在承议郎之上，每阁之间相差太远，议者怀疑这样不伦不类。
English: Just as the classification editor Huizong's book was completed and the edict was issued to collect the books, Chen Yu thought: The original system, from the dragon chart to the Huizong chart, all had a bachelor's degree, a pending system, and a misprinting order. The dragon chart ranked higher than the doctor invited in the morning, and the Huizong chart ranked higher than the negotiator. The difference between each chart was too far, and the negotiator suspected that this was not consistent.

古文：直敷文阁者缀徽猷则与诸阁小异，除之则班列太卑，欲参酌取中，并为一列，不必相远，庶几名位有伦，仰称陛下严奉祖宗谟训之意。 又言： 祫祭用太牢，此祀典之常。
现代文：直敷文阁的直到徽猷阁与诸阁大同小异，降低班次就会太卑下，应参酌取中，并为一列，不必相差太远，这样才能使名位有序，仰称陛下严格遵守祖宗谟训之意。 又说 ：袷祭祖宗用太牢之礼，这是祀典的常例。
English: He said that up until the time of the imperial edict, the imperial edict and the imperial edict were the same, and that it would be too mean to lower the order, so it should be in the middle, and it should be in a row, and it should not be too far apart, so that the names could be in order. He said that His Majesty strictly abided by the meaning of the teachings of the ancestors. He also said that the imperial edict and the imperial edict of the ancestors were too strong, which was the usual practice of the ritual.

古文：驻跸之初，未能备礼，止用一羊，乞检会绍兴六年诏旨，复用太牢。 
现代文：皇上即位之初，没能具备礼仪，只用一羊，请求参照绍兴六年诏旨，恢复使用太牢。 
English: At the beginning of the Emperor's accession

古文：十一年，除权礼部侍郎，赐三品服。
现代文：绍兴十一年，任权礼部侍郎，赐给三品官服。
English: In the eleventh year of Shaoxing, he was appointed as a waiter of the etiquette department, and was given three official uniforms.

古文：普安郡王出阁，奉诏与吏部、太常寺讨论典故。
现代文：普安郡王出，奉诏与吏部、太常寺讨论以往的事例。
English: Wang from Pu'an County went to discuss past cases with the cadres and the Taiji Temple after receiving the edict.

古文：桷等议以国本未立，宜厚其礼以系天下望，乃以《皇子出阁礼例》上之，或以为太重。
现代文：陈桷等认为太子没立，应该崇高礼仪以维系天下民望，于是以《皇子出礼例》上报，有人以为太隆重。
English: Chen Yao and others thought that the crown prince had not been established, and that lofty etiquette should prevail in order to maintain the world's popularity. Therefore, they reported on the "Examples of the Prince's Etiquette," which some people thought was too grand.

古文：诏以不详具典故，专任己意，怀奸附丽，与吏部尚书吴表臣、礼部尚书苏符、郎官方云翼丁仲宁、太常属王普苏籍并罢。
现代文：诏令以不详具典故、专任己意、怀奸附丽等理由，将陈桷和吏部尚书吴表臣，礼部尚书苏符，郎官方云翼、丁仲宁，太常官员王普、苏籍等一起罢免。
English: The imperial edict dismissed Chen Xuan together with the officials Shangshu Wu, Shangshu Su Fu, Shangshu Yunyi, and Ding Zhongning, as well as the permanent officials Wang Pu and Su Qi, on the grounds that they did not have detailed references, were full of their own ideas, and were traitors.

古文：寻以桷提举江州太平观。
现代文：不久又命陈桷提举江州太平观。
English: Not long after, he ordered Chen Qi to raise the Jiangzhou Taiping concept to the top.

古文：十五年，知襄阳府，充京西南路安抚使。
现代文：绍兴十五年，陈桷知襄阳府，充任京西南路安抚使。
English: In the 15th year of Shaoxing, Chen Shizhi moved to Xiangyang Prefecture and served as the Beijing Southwest Road Peace Envoy.

古文：襄、汉兵火之余，民物凋瘵，桷请于朝，以今之户数视承平时才二十之一，而赋须尚多，乞重行蠲减。
现代文：襄、汉地区遭受兵火之灾后，民物凋敝，陈桷请示朝廷，以当今的户数才是太平时的二十分之一，而赋税比那时还多，请求给予减免。
English: After the Xiang and Han regions were devastated by war, and people's belongings were destroyed, Chen Xi petitioned the imperial court, saying that the number of households today was only one-twentieth of that in peacetime, and taxes were higher than at that time, requesting relief.

古文：明年，金、户兵叛，桷遣将平之而后以闻。
现代文：次年，金、房州士兵发生叛乱，陈桷派遣士兵平定后上报。
English: The following year, soldiers from Jin and Fangzhou rebelled, and Chen Xi sent soldiers to quell the rebellion and report it.

古文：汉水决溢，漂荡庐舍，躬率兵民捍筑堤岸，赖以无虞。
现代文：汉水决堤泛滥，冲毁居民房屋，陈桷亲自率领军民修筑堤岸，民众赖以平安。
English: The Han River broke through the dike and flooded, destroying the houses of residents. Chen Wei personally led the army and the people to build the dike, and the people relied on peace.

古文：以疾乞祠，除秘阁修撰、提举江州太平兴国宫。
现代文：因病请求奉祠，朝廷任命他为秘阁修撰、提举江州太平兴国宫。
English: Due to illness, he requested to be given a small shrine, and the imperial court appointed him to compile and promote the Jiangzhou Taiping Xingguo Palace.

古文：二十四年，改知广州，充广南东路经略安抚使，未至而卒，年六十四。
现代文：绍兴二十四年，改知广州，充任广南东路经略安抚使，没到任而去世，时年六十四岁。
English: He was 24 years old when he moved from Shaoxing to Guangzhou. He served as the pacifying envoy of the Guangdong East Road Economic Corridor, but died before taking office, at the age of 64.

古文：桷宽洪酝籍，以诚接物，而恬于荣利。
现代文：陈桷为人宽宏含蓄，以诚待人，淡泊名利。
English: Chen Xi is a magnanimous and reserved person, treats others with sincerity, and is indifferent to fame and fortune.

古文：当秦桧用事，以永嘉为寓里，士之夤缘攀附者，无不躐登显要。
现代文：秦桧当政时，以永嘉为寓里，士大夫攀缘依附的，无一不位登显要。
English: When Qin Hui was in power, he took Yongjia as his fiefdom, and every scholar and scholar who was attached to him was promoted to a prominent position.

古文：桷以立螭之旧，为人主所知，出入顿挫，晚由奉常少卿擢权小宗伯，复以议礼不阿忤意，遽罢，其节有足称。
现代文：陈桷因立螭故旧，被皇上所知，出入顿挫，晚年由奉常少卿擢为权小宗伯，又以议礼不合忤逆皇上被罢免，其节操有足以称赞的地方。
English: Chen Qi was known to the emperor for his old-fashioned etiquette, but he had many ups and downs. In his later years, he was promoted by Feng Chang Shaoqing to the position of Quan Xiao Zongbo, and he was removed from his post for disobeying the emperor by arguing that the etiquette was not in line with the emperor's etiquette. His self-restraint is commendable.

古文：自号 无相居士 。
现代文：自称为 无相居士 。
English: He describes himself as a householder without a partner.

古文：有文集十六卷。
现代文：著有文集十六卷。
English: He is the author of sixteen volumes of anthologies.

