古文：屠维作噩，一年。
现代文：屠维作噩，一年。
English: Tu Wei works hard, one year.

古文：中大通元己酉，公元五二九年
现代文：梁武帝中大通元年
English: Emperor Liangwu in the first year of middle school

古文：春，正月，甲寅，魏于晖所部都督彭乐师二千馀骑叛，奔韩楼，晖引还。
现代文：春季，正月甲寅，北魏于晖的部下、都督彭乐率二千余骑兵反叛，投奔了韩楼，于晖只好回师。
English: In the spring, in the first month of the year of Jia Yin, more than two thousand cavalry rebelled led by the Northern Wei governor Peng Le, a subordinate of Yu Xi, and went to Han Lou. Yu Xi had to return to his division.

古文：辛酉，上祀南郊，大赦。
现代文：辛酉，梁武帝在南郊祭天，大赦天下。
English: According to legend, Emperor Liangwu went to the southern suburb to worship Heaven and pardon the world.

古文：甲子，魏汝南王悦求还国，许之。
现代文：甲子，原北魏汝南王元悦请求梁武帝允许他回到北魏，梁武帝答应了他的请求。
English: A son, Yuan Yue, the former Northern Wei King of Southern Ru, asked Emperor Liangwu to allow him to return to Northern Wei, and Emperor Liangwu agreed to his request.

古文：辛巳，上祀明堂。
现代文：辛巳，梁武帝在明堂祭祀。
English: Soon after, Emperor Liangwu held a religious service in the Ming Hall.

古文：二月，甲午，魏主尊彭城武宣王为文穆皇帝，庙号肃祖；母李妃为文穆皇后。
现代文：二月甲午，北魏国主孝庄帝尊彭城武宣王为文穆皇帝，庙号为肃祖；尊自己的母亲李妃为文穆皇后。
English: On the afternoon of February 1st, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty honored King Pengcheng Wuxuan as the Emperor of Wenmu, with the temple name Suzu; he also honored his mother Li Fei as the Empress of Wenmu.

古文：将迁神主于太庙，以高祖为伯考，大司马兼录尚书临淮王彧表谏，以为： 汉高祖立太上皇庙于香街，光武祀南顿君于舂陵。
现代文：他打算将父母的牌位迁到太庙，尊奉孝文帝为伯考，大司马兼录尚书、临淮王元上表劝谏，认为： 汉高祖将太上皇庙立在香街，汉光武帝将南顿君庙立在舂陵。
English: He planned to move his parents' place of worship to the Great Temple. He revered Emperor Xiaowen as Berkao, and his superiors Ma Jianluo Shangshu and Lin Huai Wangyuan advised him to do so. He believed that: Emperor Gaozhu of the Han Dynasty built the Great Imperial Temple in Xiangjie, and Emperor Guangwu of the Han Dynasty built the Nantongjun Temple in Fuling.

古文：元帝之于光武，已疏绝服，犹身奉子道，入继大宗。
现代文：汉元帝跟汉光武帝的关系早已超出了五服，汉光武帝却仍奉行后代子孙之道，入继大宗。
English: The relationship between Emperor Han Yuan and Emperor Han Guangwu has already exceeded five years, but Emperor Han Guangwu still pursues the path of descendants and successors.

古文：高祖德洽寰中，道超无外，肃祖虽勋格宇宙，犹北面为臣。
现代文：孝文帝德满天下，道充环宇，肃祖虽然功盖宇宙，但终究是臣子。
English: Although Emperor Xiaowen is revered throughout the world, and revered all over the world, Emperor Su's achievements cover the universe, he is, after all, a courtier.

古文：又，二后皆将配享，乃是君臣并筵，嫂叔同室，窃谓不可。 
现代文：再者，两位皇后也都要享有这种祭祀的礼遇，这就如同君臣共筵，叔嫂同室，我私下以为不可这样做。 
English: Furthermore, both queens should also enjoy the courtesy of this kind of sacrifice, which is like a monarch and a minister living together, an uncle and a sister living in the same house. I personally think that this should not be done.

古文：吏部尚书李神俊亦谏，不听，彧又请去 帝 著 皇 ，亦不听。
现代文：吏部尚书李神俊也上表劝谏，但孝庄帝均未采纳他们的谏议。元又请求去掉 帝 而保留 皇 ，也未被接受。
English: Li Shenjun, the secretary of the General Staff, also went to the table to persuade him, but Emperor Xiaozhuang did not accept their suggestion. Yuan also requested to remove the emperor and retain the emperor, which was also not accepted.

古文：诏更定二百四十号将军为四十四班。
现代文：梁武帝下诏将二百四十种称号的将军重新确定为四十四班。
English: Emperor Liangwu issued an edict to redefine the 240 titles of generals into 44 classes.

古文：壬寅，魏诏济阴王晖业兼行台尚书，都督丘大千等镇梁国。
现代文：壬寅，北魏孝庄帝下诏令，任命济阴王元晖业兼任行台尚书，统领丘大千等人镇守梁国。
English: Emperor Jinshin of the Northern Wei Dynasty and Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued a decree, appointing Jixin King Yuan Shunye to concurrently serve as Shangshu of Xingtai, and to lead the town guards of Liang Province such as Qiu Daqian.

古文：晖业，小新成之曾孙也。
现代文：元晖业是拓跋小新成的曾孙。
English: Yuan Junye is the great-grandson of Tuoba Xiaoxincheng.

古文：三月，壬戌，魏诏上党王天穆讨邢杲，以费穆为前锋大都督。
现代文：三月壬戌，北魏孝庄帝诏令上党王元天穆讨伐邢杲，任命费穆为前锋大都督。
English: In March, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty issued an edict to the party king, Yuan Tianmu, to fight against the rebels and appointed Fei Mu as the vanguard grand governor.

古文：夏，四月，癸未，魏迁肃祖及文穆皇后神主于太庙，又追尊彭城王劭为孝宣皇帝。
现代文：夏季，四月癸未，北魏孝庄帝将肃祖元勰及文穆皇后的神位迁至太庙，又追谥彭城王元劭为孝宣皇帝。
English: In the summer, in late April, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty moved the deities of Emperor Su and Empress Wenmu to the Great Temple, and also crowned King Yuan of Pengcheng as Emperor Xiaoxuan.

古文：临淮王彧谏曰： 兹事古所未有，陛下作而不法，后世何观！ 
现代文：临淮王元劝谏道： 这种事自古从未有过，陛下您这样做不合法度，后世之人会怎么想呢？ 
English: Lin Huai Wang Yuan advised him, "This kind of thing has never happened since ancient times. Your majesty, it is illegal for you to do this. What will future generations think?

古文：弗听。
现代文：孝庄帝未听他的谏言。
English: He did not listen to the words of the crown prince.

古文：魏元天穆将击邢杲，以北海王颢方入寇，集文武议之，众皆曰： 杲众强盛，宜以为先。 
现代文：北魏元天穆将要攻打邢杲，由于北海王元颢正在进犯北魏，于是召集文武官员商议此事。众人都认为： 邢杲军力强盛，应该先讨伐邢杲。 
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Yuan Tianmu was about to attack Han, and since the North Sea King Yuan Shao was invading the Northern Wei Dynasty, civil and military officials were convened to discuss the matter. Everyone agreed: Han's military strength was strong, and Han should be fought first.

古文：行台尚书薛琡曰： 邢杲兵众虽多，鼠窃狗偷，非有远志。
现代文：行台尚书薛却认为： 邢杲的军队数量虽多，但都是些偷鸡摸狗之徒，并没有什么远大抱负。
English: However, Xue Shangshuxue, a guild official, believed that although there were a large number of Shao's troops, they were all petty thieves and had no lofty ambitions.

古文：颢帝室近亲，来称义举，其势难测，宜先去之。 
现代文：元颢是皇室的近亲，此番前来号称义举，其势难以推测，应该首先消灭他。 
English: Yuan Shao was a close relative of the imperial family, and he came this time claiming to do a good deed. It is difficult to predict his potential. He should be eliminated first.

古文：天穆以诸将多欲击杲，又魏朝亦以颢为孤弱，不足虑，命天穆等先定齐地，还师击颢，遂引兵东出。
现代文：元天穆因为将领们大多都希望先讨代邢杲，加之北魏朝廷也认为元颢势力孤单，力量微弱，不足为虑，命令元天穆等人先平定齐地邢杲的叛乱，崐再回师攻打元颢，于是元天穆率军东进。
English: Because most of the generals wanted to discuss the Yuan Dynasty first, and the Northern Wei Dynasty also thought that the Yuan Dynasty was alone and weak, they ordered Yuan Tianmu and others to first quell the rebellion of the Yuan Dynasty, and then return to the division to attack the Yuan Dynasty, so Yuan Tianmu led the army eastward.

古文：颢与陈庆之乘虚自铚城进拔荥城，遂至梁国；魏丘大千有众七万，分筑九城以拒之。
现代文：元颢与陈庆之乘北魏空虚之际，从城进发，率军攻占了荥城，随后便打到了梁国城。北魏守将丘大千有军队七万人，分别构筑了九座城堡以抵抗元颢军队。
English: When Yuan Shao and Chen Qingzhi took advantage of the emptiness of the Northern Wei Dynasty, they marched from the city and led the army to capture the city of Yancheng, and then fought to the city of Liangguo. The Northern Wei Governor Dazhongyue had an army of seventy thousand people and separately built nine castles to resist the Yuan Shao army.

古文：庆之攻之，自旦至申，拔其三垒，大千请降。
现代文：陈庆之率兵攻打梁国城，从早晨直至下午申时，攻下了守军的三个堡垒，丘大千只好请求投降。
English: Chen Qingzhi and his soldiers attacked Liangguocheng. From the morning until the afternoon, they captured the three fortresses of the defenders. Qiu Dashen had to ask for surrender.

古文：颢登坛燔燎，即帝位于睢阳城南，改元孝基。
现代文：元颢登坛烧柴祷告，在睢阳城南登基即位，改年号为 孝基 。
English: Yuan Di ascended the altar to burn firewood and pray, and ascended the throne in the south of Shenyang City, changing his name to Xiaoji.

古文：济阴王晖业帅羽林兵二万军考城，庆之攻拔其城，擒晖业。
现代文：北魏济阴王元晖业率领的二万羽林军驻扎在考城，陈庆之率军攻取考城，活捉了元晖业。
English: In Northern Wei, the 20,000-feather Lin Army led by the King of Jilin, Yuan Shunye, was stationed in Khao Shing. The army led by Chen Qing captured Khao Shing and captured Yuan Shunye alive.

古文：辛丑，魏上党王天穆及尔硃兆破邢杲于济南，杲降，送洛阳，斩之。
现代文：辛丑，北魏上党王元天穆和尔朱兆在济南打败了邢杲，邢杲投降，被押送至洛阳，斩了首。
English: Xinxiu, Northern Wei's top party king Yuan Tianmu and Er Zhu Zhao defeated Zou in Jinan, Zou surrendered, was escorted to Luoyang, and beheaded.

古文：兆，荣之从子也。
现代文：尔朱兆是尔朱荣的侄子。
English: Lzhu Zhao is Lzhu Rong's nephew.

古文：五月，丁巳，魏以东南道大都督杨昱镇荥阳，尚书仆射尔硃世隆镇虎牢，侍中尔硃世承镇崿岅。
现代文：五月丁巳，北魏命东南道大都督杨昱镇守荥阳，命尚书仆射尔朱世隆镇守虎牢，命侍中尔朱世承镇守。
English: In May of the same year, the Northern Wei Dynasty ordered the governor of Southeast Province, Yang Xi, to guard Fenyang, ordered his servant, Shaer Zhu Shilong, to guard the Tiger's Stronghold, and ordered his servant, Zhonger Zhu Shicheng, to guard the town.

古文：乙丑，内外戒严。
现代文：乙丑，北魏朝廷内外实行戒严。
English: Second, martial law was imposed inside and outside the Northern Wei court.

古文：戊辰，北海王颢克梁国。
现代文：戊辰，北海王元颢攻克梁国城。
English: In the Boshin War, the Northern Sea King Yuan Shao conquered Liangguo City.

古文：颢以陈庆之为卫将军，徐州刺史，引兵而西。
现代文：元颢任命陈庆之为卫将军、徐州刺史，率军西进，直指洛阳。
English: Yuan Shao appointed Chen Qing to be the general of Wei and the governor of Xuzhou, and led the army westward, straight to Luoyang.

古文：杨昱拥众七万，据荥阳。庆之攻之，未拔。
现代文：杨昱拥有七万大军，据守着荥阳城，陈庆之去攻打未能攻克。
English: Yang Hui had seventy thousand soldiers, and he guarded the city of Fenyang. Chen Qingzhi went to attack and failed to conquer.

古文：颢遣人说昱使降，昱不从。
现代文：元颢派人劝杨昱投降，杨昱没有答应。
English: Yuan Shao sent someone to persuade Yang Hui to surrender, but Yang Hui did not agree.

古文：元天穆与骠骑将军尔硃吐没儿将大军前后继至，梁士卒皆恐。
现代文：元天穆和骠骑大将军尔朱吐没儿率大军前后相继来到荥阳。
English: Yuan Tianmu and his cavalry general, Lzhu Tu Miao, led a large army to Luoyang one after another.

古文：庆之解鞍秣马，谕将士曰： 吾至此以来，屠城略地，实为不少；君等杀人父兄、掠人子女，亦无算矣。天穆之众，皆是仇雠。
现代文：梁军士卒都很恐惧，陈庆之解下马鞍边喂马边告谕将士们说： 我们到这里以来，屠城夺地，确实已经不少；你们大家杀戮人家的父兄、掠取人家的子女，也不计其数了，元天穆的部下，都是我们的仇敌。
English: Liang's officers and men were terrified. Chen Qingzhi dismounted from his saddle to feed the horses and told the officers: "Since we came here, we have indeed conquered a lot of land. All of you have killed other people's fathers and brothers, plundered other people's children, and there are countless of you. Yuan Tianmu's subordinates are all our enemies.

古文：我辈众才七千，虏众三十馀万，今日之事，唯有必死乃可得生耳！
现代文：我军才七千人，而敌军则有三十余万之多，所以眼下之事，大家只有抱着必死之心才有可能免遭杀戮。
English: Our army is only seven thousand, while the enemy's army is more than three hundred thousand, so at the moment, we can only avoid being killed if we have a desperate heart.

古文：虏骑多，不可与之野战，当及其未尽至，急攻取其城而据之。
现代文：敌人的骑兵很多，我们不能同他们在野外作战，应当乘他们还没全部到来之时，急速攻下荥阳城而作为据守之处。
English: There are many enemy cavalrymen, we cannot fight with them in the field. We should take advantage of the fact that they have not all arrived, quickly capture the city of Shenyang and use it as a stronghold.

古文：诸君勿或狐疑，自取屠脍！ 
现代文：各位不要再有什么疑虑了，否则就是选择了任人宰割的道路。 
English: Ladies and gentlemen, do not have any more doubts, otherwise you will have chosen the path of allowing others to slaughter you.

古文：乃鼓之，使登城。将士即相帅蚁附而入，癸酉，拔荥阳，执杨昱。
现代文：于是擂鼓助战，命将士登城攻坚，将士们当即蜂拥着攻入城中，癸酉，攻下了荥阳，抓住了杨昱。
English: As a result, the gongs and drums helped in the battle, and the soldiers were ordered to attack the city. The soldiers immediately swarmed into the city, captured Shenyang, and captured Yang Di.

古文：诸将三百馀人伏颢帐前请曰： 陛下渡江三千里，无遗镞之费，昨荥阳城下一朝杀伤五百馀人，愿乞杨昱以快众意！ 
现代文：元颢的部将三百余人俯伏在元颢账前请求道： 陛下渡江北进三千里，连一枝箭的损耗都不曾有，而昨日荥阳城下一战，我军便伤亡五百余人，我们希望您把杨昱交给我们处置，以解大家的心头之恨！ 
English: More than three hundred Yuan Shao's subordinates prostrated themselves in front of the Yuan Shao's account and pleaded: "Your Majesty has crossed three thousand miles north of the river without losing a single arrow, and yesterday, in the battle of Shenyang City, our army suffered more than five hundred casualties. We hope that you will put Yang Shao at our disposal to solve the hatred in everyone's hearts!"

古文：颢曰： 我在江东闻梁主言，初举兵下都，袁昂为吴郡不降，每称其忠节。
现代文：元颢说： 我在江东时听梁朝国主讲，他当初举兵南下，到达建康时，吴郡太守袁昂便曾据城不降，梁朝国主常常称赞袁昂这种忠贞气节。
English: Yuan Xuan said: When I was in the east of the Yangtze River, I listened to Liang Chao's speech. He had originally raised an army to go south. When he arrived in Jiankang, Yuan Ang, the governor of Wuxi County, had not surrendered the city. Liang Chao often praised Yuan Ang's loyalty.

古文：杨昱忠臣，奈何杀之！
现代文：杨昱是一位忠臣，为什么要杀掉他呢！
English: Yang Mi is a loyal subject, why kill him!

古文：此外唯卿等所取。 
现代文：除杨昱之外，其他人任你们处置。 
English: Apart from Yang Mi, the others are at your disposal.

古文：于是斩昱所部统帅三十七人，皆刳心而食之。
现代文：于是斩杀了杨昱部将三十七人，这些人都被挖出心来吃掉了。
English: So he killed thirty-seven of Yang Xibe's generals, and they were all eaten with their hearts ripped out.

古文：俄而天穆等引兵围城，庆之帅骑三千背城力战，大破之，天穆、吐没儿皆走。
现代文：很快，元天穆等人率军包围了荥阳城，陈庆之率三千骑兵背靠荥阳城，奋勇拼搏，大败元天穆军，元天穆、尔朱吐没儿都落荒而逃。
English: Soon, Yuan Tianmu and others led an army to encircle the city of Shenyang, and Chen Qingzhi led three thousand cavalry to back the city of Shenyang, fought bravely, defeated Yuan Tianmu's army, and Yuan Tianmu and Lzhu Tu disappeared and fled.

古文：庆之进击虎牢，尔硃世隆弃城走，获魏东中郎将辛纂。
现代文：随即，陈庆之又进击虎牢城，尔朱世隆弃城逃走，陈庆之军抓获了北魏东中郎将辛纂。
English: Immediately afterwards, Chen Qingzhi attacked the Tiger's Stronghold again, while Zhu Shilong abandoned the city and fled. Chen Qingzhi's army captured the Northern Wei Dongzhulang general Xin Cao.

古文：魏主将出避颢，未知所之，或劝之长安，中书舍人高道穆曰： 关中荒残，何可复往！
现代文：北魏孝庄帝打算离开京城躲避元颢的大军，但不知该去哪里好。有人劝他到长安去，中书舍人高道穆说道： 关中地区荒凉残破，怎么能再到那里去呢？
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty planned to leave Beijing to escape Yuan Shao's large army, but he didn't know where to go. Someone advised him to go to Chang'an. Gao Daumu, a Chinese scholar, said: Guanzhong area is desolate and ruined, how can I go there again?

古文：颢士众不多，乘虚深入，由将帅不得其人，故能至此。
现代文：元颢的军队不多，却乘虚而入，这是由于我们选用将帅不当，所以才能攻到这里。
English: The Yuan Shao's army was not large, but it took advantage of a loophole. This was because we chose the wrong general, so we were able to attack here.

古文：陛下若亲帅宿卫，高募重赏，背城一战，臣等竭其死力，破颢孤军必矣。
现代文：陛下若能亲自率领禁卫军，以重金招募士兵，多加奖赏，背城与敌决一死战，我等竭尽全力，就一定能够打败元颢的这支孤军的。
English: If His Majesty can personally lead the Imperial Guard, recruit soldiers with heavy money, increase rewards, and fight a deadly battle with the enemy behind the city, we will do our best to defeat this lone army of the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：或恐胜负难期，则车贺不若渡河，征大将军天穆、大丞相荣各使引兵来会，犄角进讨，旬月之间，必见成功。此万全之策也。 
现代文：若您还担心胜负难以预料的话，那么您不如渡过黄河，命大将军元天穆、大丞相尔朱荣各自率军前来会合，构成犄角之势，进讨元颢的军队，一月之内，一定会取得胜利，这是万全之策。 
English: If you are still worried that victory or defeat is difficult to predict, then you might as well cross the Yellow River. Commanders-in-Chief General Yuan Tianmu and Senior General Zhu Rong led their respective armies to come to the meeting, forming the momentum of the battle, and advancing the army of Yuan Shao. Within one month, they will surely achieve victory. This is a perfect solution.

古文：魏主从之。
现代文：孝庄帝采纳了高道穆的意见。
English: Tuobao adopted Cui Hao's opinion.

古文：甲戌，魏主北行，夜，至河内郡北，命高道穆于烛下作诏书数十纸，布告远近。于是四方始知魏主所在。
现代文：甲戌，孝庄帝一行向北进发，夜间，来到了河内郡郡城的北边。孝庄帝命令高道穆在烛光下起草了几十张诏书，公告天下，于是四方才知道皇帝在哪儿。
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor ordered Gao Daomu to draft dozens of decrees under candlelight and announce them to the world, so the four sides knew where the emperor was.

古文：乙亥，魏主入河内。
现代文：乙亥，孝庄帝一行进入河内郡。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang and his entourage entered Hanoi County.

古文：临淮王彧、安丰王延明，帅百僚，封府库，备法驾迎颢。
现代文：临淮王元和安丰王元延明，带领文武百官，封存府库，备好法驾迎接元颢。
English: Linhuai Wangyuan and Anfeng Wangyuan went to Yanming, led by hundreds of civil and military officials, sealed the government treasury, and prepared to welcome the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：丙子，颢入洛阳宫，改元建武，大赦。
现代文：丙子，元颢进入洛阳宫，改年号为建武，大赦天下。
English: Cixi and Yuan Shao entered Luoyang Palace, changed the year name to Jianwu, and amnestied the world.

古文：以陈庆之为侍中、车骑大将军，增邑万户。
现代文：元颢任命陈庆之为侍中、车骑大将军，增加封邑一万户。
English: Yuan Shao appointed Chen Qing Tong as a general of the cavalry and cavalry, and increased the number of fiefs by 10,000.

古文：杨椿在洛阳，椿弟顺为冀州刺史，兄子侃为北中郎将，从魏主在河北。
现代文：杨椿当时在洛阳，他的弟弟杨顺是冀州刺史。侄子杨侃为北中郎将，正跟随北魏孝庄帝在河北。
English: At that time, Yang Chin was in Luoyang, his brother Yang Shun was the governor of Jizhou, and his nephew Yang Kan was the general of the Northern Middle Kingdom and was following the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang in Hebei.

古文：颢意忌椿，而以其家世显重，恐失人望，未敢诛也。
现代文：元颢心里很忌恨杨椿，但由于杨椿家世显赫，担心失去众望，所以没有敢杀掉杨椿。
English: In his heart, Yuan Xuan hated Yang Tsvang very much, but he did not dare to kill Yang Tsvang because he was a prominent member of Yang Tsvang's family and feared losing the public's trust.

古文：或劝椿出亡，椿曰： 吾内外百口，何所逃匿！
现代文：有人劝说杨椿离开洛阳逃走，杨椿说： 我家老小上百口，能逃到哪儿去呢？
English: Someone persuaded Yang Cam to leave Luoyang and flee. Yang Cam said, "There are hundreds of children in my family. Where can I flee to?

古文：正当坐待天命耳。 
现代文：只有听天由命罢了。 
English: You just have to go with the flow.

古文：颢后军都督侯暄守睢阳，为后援。魏行台崔孝芬、大都督刁宣驰往围暄，昼夜急攻，戊寅，暄突走，擒斩之。
现代文：元颢的后军都督侯暄镇守睢阳作为后援，北魏行台崔孝芬、大都督刁宣率军急速前往睢阳包围了侯暄，昼夜猛攻睢阳城，戊寅，侯暄突围逃走，被北魏军抓住杀掉了。
English: Yuan Shun's rearguard, led by the governor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Choi Hsiao-fen, and the great governor of the Northern Wei Dynasty, Huan Xuan, rushed to Poyang and besieged Hou, storming Poyang City day and night. Wu Yin and Hou Hsiao-chu fled and were caught and killed by the Northern Wei Army.

古文：上党王天穆等帅众四万攻拔大梁，分遣费穆将兵二万攻虎牢，颢使陈庆之击之。
现代文：上党王元天穆等率四万军队攻下了大梁，又分派费穆带二万人攻打虎牢城，元颢派陈庆之攻击费穆。
English: The upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, and others led 40,000 troops to capture the girders, and sent Feimu with 20,000 people to attack the tiger prison city, and Yuan Shao sent Chen Qingzhi to attack Feimu.

古文：天穆畏颢，将北渡河，谓行台郎中济阴温子升曰： 卿欲向洛，为随我北渡？ 
现代文：元天穆畏惧元颢，打算北渡黄河，便对行台郎中、济阴人温子说： 你想去洛阳，还是想随我北渡流黄河？ 
English: Yuan Tianmu was afraid of Yuan Shao and planned to cross the Yellow River to the north, so he said to Atsuko, who was from Gyotai and Jilin, "Do you want to go to Luoyang, or do you want to follow me to cross the Yellow River to the north?"

古文：子升曰： 主上以虎牢失守，致此狼狈。
现代文：温子说： 国主因虎牢失守，才弄得如此窘迫。
English: Atsuko said, "The sovereign was in such a predicament because he lost his grip on defense.

古文：元颢新入，人情未安，今往击之，无不克者。
现代文：元颢新来，民心还未安定，现在您如果前去攻击他，一定会成功。
English: Yuan Xuan is a newcomer, and the people's minds are not yet stable. If you attack him now, you will surely succeed.

古文：大王平定京邑，奉迎大驾，此恒、文之举也。
现代文：大王您平定了京邑后，再奉迎皇帝大驾，这乃是齐桓公、晋文公才有过的举动啊！
English: Great King, after you have pacified the capital city, you will welcome the emperor with great pomp. This is the kind of action that Lord Qi Huan and Lord Jinwen have never done before!

古文：舍此北渡，窃为大王惜之。 
现代文：现在您舍此而不为，却要北渡黄河，我私下里真为您感到惋惜。 
English: Now you are not willing to do this, but want to cross the Yellow River to the north. I really feel sorry for you in private.

古文：天穆善之而不能用，遂引兵渡河。
现代文：元天穆觉得温子的意见很好，但却不能采纳，于是率军渡过了黄河。
English: Yuan Tianmu thought that Wen Zi's advice was good, but it could not be adopted, so he led the army across the Yellow River.

古文：费穆攻虎牢，将拔，闻天穆北渡，自以无后继，遂降于庆之。
现代文：费穆攻打虎牢城，眼看就要攻取了，听说元天穆向北渡过了黄河，认为这样一来自己便没有了后继援兵，于是便投降了陈庆之。
English: Fei Mu attacked the Tiger's Stronghold and was on the verge of capturing it. Hearing that Yuan Tianmu had crossed the Yellow River to the north, he thought that he would not have any reinforcements, so he surrendered to Chen Qingzhi.

古文：庆之进击大梁、梁国，皆下之。
现代文：陈庆之率军进击大梁、梁国两城，群攻下了。
English: Chen Qingzhi led the army to attack the two cities of Daliang and Lianggu, and the army was defeated.

古文：庆之以数千之众，自发铚县至洛阳，凡取三十二城，四十七战，所向皆克。
现代文：陈庆之凭数千之众，从城出发至洛阳，共攻占了三十二座城池，大小四十七战，所向无敌。
English: Chen Qingzhi, with the help of thousands of people, set out from the city to Luoyang, and captured a total of thirty-two cities, forty-seven battles, and was invincible.

古文：颢使黄门郎祖莹作书遗魏主曰： 朕泣请梁朝，誓在复耻，正欲问罪于尔硃，出卿于桎梏。
现代文：元颢命黄门郎祖莹起草了一封信给北魏孝庄帝，信中写道： 朕哭泣恳请梁朝发兵，誓在报仇雪耻，正是要向尔朱荣问罪，解救你于桎梏之中。
English: Huangmen Lang Zu Ying drafted a letter to the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang, in which he wrote: I weep and implore Liang Chao to send troops, vowing to avenge the disgrace, it is to ask Zhu Rong to save you from the shackles.

古文：卿托命豺狼，委身虎口，假获民地，本是荣物，固非卿有。
现代文：你现在托命于豺狼，委身于虎口，我就是获取了一些百姓、土地，也本来是尔朱荣的东西，本来就不属于你所有。
English: You are now entrusting your mission to the jackal, committing yourself to the tiger's mouth, I just acquired some people and land, which were originally Zhu Rong's things, and originally did not belong to you.

古文：今国家隆替，在卿与我。
现代文：当今国家的兴隆废替，全在于你我二人。
English: The prosperity of today's country depends entirely on you and me.

古文：若天道助顺，则皇魏再兴；脱或不然，在荣为福，于卿为祸。
现代文：如果上天助我成功，那么大魏又可再次中兴；若不能这样的话，那么对于尔朱荣来说便是福，而对于你则是祸。
English: If heaven helps me succeed, then the Great Wei can once again ZTE; if this is not the case, then it is a blessing for Lzhu Rong, but it is a disaster for you.

古文：卿宜三复，富贵可保。 
现代文：你应该反复好好想想，荣华富贵方可保住。 
English: You should think over and over again that glory and wealth can be preserved.

古文：颢既入洛，自河以南州郡多附之。
现代文：元颢进入洛阳后，黄河以南的州郡大多归附了他。
English: After Yuan Shao entered Luoyang, most of the prefectures and counties south of the Yellow River were annexed to him.

古文：齐州刺史沛郡王欣集文武议所从，曰： 北海、长乐，俱帝室近亲，今宗祏不移，我欲受赦，诸君意何如？ 
现代文：齐州刺史、沛郡王元欣召集文武官员商议何去何从，元欣说： 北海王和长乐王，都是皇室近亲，现在皇位并未落入外人之手，我打算接受元颢的赦免，诸位认为如何？ 
English: Wang Yuanxin, the chief historian of Qizhou and Pei County, called together civil and military officials to discuss where to go from here. Yuanxin said: The North Sea King and the Chungle King are both close relatives of the royal family. Now the throne has not fallen into the hands of outsiders. I plan to accept the pardon of the Yuan Dynasty. What do you think?

古文：在坐莫不失色。
现代文：在座的文武官员莫不大惊失色。
English: The military and civilian officials present were stunned.

古文：军司崔光韶独抗言曰： 元颢受制于梁，引寇仇之兵以覆宗国，此魏之贼臣乱子也。
现代文：只有军司崔光韶高声反对，他说： 元颢受梁朝节制，勾结仇敌之兵来颠覆自己的国家，他是大魏朝的乱臣贼子。
English: Only the army chief, Cui Guangyao, loudly objected, saying: "Yuan Yao was restrained by the Liang Dynasty and colluded with enemy soldiers to subvert his own country. He was a ruffian thief of the Great Wei Dynasty.

古文：岂唯大王家事所宜切齿，下官等皆荷朝眷，未敢仰从！ 
现代文：难道仅是因为大王您一家的事情而对他切齿痛恨，我等下官均受朝廷的恩典，所以不敢听从您的意见！ 
English: Is it only because of the affairs of your family that the great king hates him with a vengeance? We subordinates are all favored by the imperial court, so we dare not listen to your opinion!

古文：长史崔景茂等皆曰： 军司议是。 
现代文：长史崔景茂等人都说： 军司说的很对。 
English: Cui Jingmao, the Chief of the General Staff, and others all said, "The military commander is quite right.

古文：欣乃斩颢使。
现代文：元欣便杀了元颢派来的使者。
English: Yuan Xin then killed the envoy sent by Yuan Shao.

古文：光韶，亮之从父弟也。
现代文：崔光韶是崔亮的堂弟。
English: Cui Guangyao is Cui Liang's cousin.

古文：于是襄州刺史贾思同、广州刺史郑先护、南兗州刺史元暹亦不受颢命。
现代文：于是这样一来，襄州刺史贾思同、广州刺史郑先护、南兖州刺史元暹等，也都不承认元颢的政权。
English: As a result, Jia Sithong of Xiangzhou, Zheng Xian Guo of Guangzhou, and Yuan Sie of Nanzhou did not recognize Yuan Shao's regime.

古文：思同，思伯之弟也。
现代文：贾思同是贾思伯的弟弟。
English: Justin is Justin's younger brother.

古文：颢以冀州刺史元孚为东道行台、彭城郡王，孚封送其书于魏主。
现代文：元颢封冀州刺史元孚为东道行台、彭城郡王，元孚将元颢的委任书封好，派人送给了孝庄帝。
English: Yuan Fu, the governor of Jizhou Province, sent his envoy to Emperor Xiaozhuang to seal the letter of appointment of Yuan Fu as the host and the king of Pengcheng County.

古文：平阳王敬先起兵于河桥以讨颢，不克而死。
现代文：平阳王元敬先在河桥起兵讨伐元颢，未能成功而死。
English: Wang Yuanjing of Pingyang first raised an army in Hechiao to fight against the Yuan Dynasty, but he was unsuccessful and died.

古文：魏以侍中、车骑将军、尚书右仆射尔硃世隆为使持节、行台仆射、大将军、相州刺史，镇鄴城。
现代文：北魏加封侍中、车骑将军、尚书右仆射尔朱世隆为使持节、行台仆射、大将军、相州刺史，镇守邺城。
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, Zhu Shilong, a middle-ranking attendant of the Northern Wei Dynasty, a chariot and cavalry general, a right-hand servant of Shang Shu and a sharpshooter, was the envoy of the festival, a go-between and a sharpshooter, a great general, a statesman of Xiangzhou, and a town guard of Shicheng.

古文：魏主之出也，单骑而去，侍卫后宫皆案堵如故。
现代文：北魏孝庄帝出奔时，只是单骑而去，宫廷侍卫及后宫嫔妃都依旧留在京城。
English: When Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty fled, he only rode away alone. The palace attendants and the concubines remained in the capital.

古文：颢一旦得之，号令己出，四方人情想其风政。而颢自谓天授，遽有骄怠之志。
现代文：元颢一旦取得了政权，各种号令全由他自己发出，四方百姓都希望他励精图治，但元颢自以为天授皇位，很快便产生了骄傲怠惰之心。
English: Once Yuan Shao gained power, all kinds of orders were issued by himself. People in all directions hoped that he would work hard to rule. However, Yuan Shao thought that the throne was given to him by heaven, and soon developed a proud and lazy heart.

古文：宿昔宾客近习，咸见宠待，干扰政事，日夜纵酒，不恤军国，所从南兵，陵暴市里，朝野失望。
现代文：他过去的宾朋老友、亲近之人，都受到了他的宠爱、厚待，这些人干扰政事，日夜纵酒为乐，毫不体恤军国大事，而元颢从南朝带来的梁兵，更在城中欺凌百姓，因而使得朝野上下对他大失所望。
English: His past friends, old friends, and people close to him were all favored and treated well by him. These people interfered with political affairs, enjoyed drinking day and night, and had no regard for the military and national affairs. On the other hand, the Liang soldiers brought by the Yuan Dynasty from the Southern Dynasty bullied the people in the city, which made the government and the people greatly disappointed in him.

古文：高道穆兄子儒自洛阳出从魏主，魏主问洛中事，子儒曰： 颢败在旦夕，不足忧也。 
现代文：高道穆的哥哥高子儒从洛阳逃出追随孝庄帝，孝庄帝问他洛阳城中之事，高子儒说： 元颢很快就会失败，您不用担忧。 
English: Gao Daumu's brother Gao Ziru escaped from Luoyang to follow Emperor Xiaozhuang. Emperor Xiaozhuang asked him about the situation in Luoyang. Gao Ziru said: Yuancheng will soon fail, don't worry.

古文：尔硃荣闻魏主北出，即时驰传见魏主于长子，行，且部分。
现代文：尔朱荣听说孝庄帝向北方出逃了，立即飞马前往长子去会见他，一路上边走边布置部队。
English: When Le Zhu Rong heard that Emperor Xiaozhuang had fled to the north, he immediately set out on a flying horse to meet with his eldest son, arranging troops as he went.

古文：魏主即日南还，荣为前驱。
现代文：孝庄帝当天便开始南还，尔朱荣做前锋。
English: On the same day, Xiaozhuangdi began to return south, and Le Zhu Rong became a striker.

古文：旬日之间，兵众大集，资粮器仗，相继而至。
现代文：十天之内，北魏军队便大批集结起来，粮食兵器等物资也陆续运到了。
English: Within ten days, the Northern Wei army was massed in large numbers, and grain, weapons, and other supplies arrived one after another.

古文：六月，壬午，魏大赦。
现代文：六月，壬午，北魏大赦天下。
English: In June, at noon, the Northern Wei Dynasty granted amnesty to the whole country.

古文：荣既南下，并、肆不安，乃以尔硃天光为并、肆等九州行台，仍行并州事。
现代文：尔朱荣南下之后，并州、肆州便又会不安定了，于是便任命尔朱天光为并、肆等九州行台，仍负责并州的事务。
English: After Er Zhu Rong went to the south, the unification of the prefecture and the county would be unstable again, so he appointed Er Zhu Tianguang as the leader of the unification of the prefecture and the county in Kyushu, and was still responsible for the affairs of the unification.

古文：天光至晋阳，部分约勒，所部皆安。
现代文：尔朱天光到晋阳后，安排布置，并制定约束措施，所属辖地都很稳定。
English: After Zhu Tianguang arrived in Jinyang, he arranged the layout and formulated restrictive measures, and the jurisdiction was very stable.

古文：己丑，费穆至洛阳，颢引入，责以河阴之事而杀之。
现代文：乙丑，费穆来到洛阳，元颢将他带到朝中，以河阴杀害文武百官之事怪罪于他，因此而杀了他。
English: Second ugly, Feimu came to Luoyang, Yuan Zang took him to the court, blamed him for the killing of 100 officers and men by He Yin, and killed him for this reason.

古文：颢使都督宗正珍孙与河内太守元袭据河内；尔硃荣攻之，上党王天穆引兵会之，壬寅，拔其城，斩珍孙及袭。
现代文：元颢派都督宗正珍孙和河内太守元袭据守河内；尔朱荣率军攻打河内，上党王元天穆率兵与尔朱荣会合，壬寅，攻取河内城，杀了宗正珍孙和元袭。
English: Yuan Shao sent the governor of the capital, Zong Zheng Jinsun, and the governor of Hanoi, Yuan Qi, to attack and defend Hanoi; Er Zhu Rong led the army to attack Hanoi, and the upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, led the army to meet with Er Zhu Rong. Ren Yin captured Hanoi City and killed Zong Zheng Jinsun and Yuan Qi.

古文：辛亥，魏淮阴太守晋鸿以湖阳来降。
现代文：辛亥，北魏淮阴太守晋鸿献出湖阳城投降梁朝。
English: In Xinhai, the Northern Wei Huaiyin governor Jin Hong surrendered Hoyang City to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：闰月，己未，南康简王绩卒。
现代文：闰月，己未，梁朝南康简王萧绩去世。
English: In the intercalary month, Liang Dynasty's Southern Kangjian King Xiaojing passed away.

古文：魏北海王颢既得志，密与临淮王彧、安丰王延明谋叛梁；以事难未平，藉陈庆之兵力，故外同内异，言多猜忌。
现代文：北魏北海王元颢既已夺取了政权，便秘密跟临淮王元、安丰王元延明谋划反叛梁朝。由于混乱局面尚未平定，还需借助陈庆之的兵力，所以表面很团结，但实际上已经同床异梦，言语之间多所猜忌。
English: In Northern Wei, the Beihai King Yuan Shao had already seized power, so he secretly plotted with the Linhuai King Yuan and the Anfeng King Yuan Yanming to rebel against the Liang Dynasty. Since the chaotic situation had not yet been settled, it was necessary to use Chen Qingzhi's troops, so they were united on the surface, but in reality they were already in bed with each other, and there was a lot of suspicion between their words.

古文：庆之亦密为之备，说颢曰： 今远来至此，未服者尚多，彼若知吾虚实，连兵四合，将何以御之！
现代文：陈庆之也暗中做了防备，他劝说元颢： 现在我们远道而至于此，不服的人还很多，他们如果知道了我们的虚实，联合兵力，四面包围，我们将如何抵御呢？
English: Chen Qingzhi also secretly made preparations. He persuaded Yuan Shao: "Now that we have come this far, there are still many people who are not convinced. If they knew the truth about us, our combined forces, and our encirclement, how would we be able to resist?

古文：宜启天子，更请精兵，并敕诸州，有南人没此者悉须部送。 
现代文：我们应上启梁朝天子，请求再增精兵，同时敕令各州，如果有梁朝人陷没在该地必须全部送到我们这里来。 
English: We should appeal to Emperor Liang and ask him to increase the number of soldiers. At the same time, we should order all the states to send us all Liang's soldiers if they are trapped there.

古文：颢欲从之，延明曰： 庆之兵不出数千，已自难制；今更增其众，宁肯复为人用乎！
现代文：元颢打算采纳他的建议，元延明却对元颢说： 陈庆之兵不过数千，您就已经很难驾驭了，现在再增加他的兵力，他还怎会肯听您的命令呢？
English: Yuan Shao planned to accept his suggestion, but Yuan Yanming said to Yuan Shao: Chen Qing's soldiers are only a few thousand, you are already difficult to control, now increase his troops, how will he be willing to listen to your orders?

古文：大权一去，动息由人，魏之宗庙，于斯坠矣。 
现代文：您的大权一旦失去，一举一动就都要由别人决定，这样大魏朝的宗庙从此也就要覆亡了。 
English: Once you lose your power, every move will be decided by others, so that the ancestral temple of the Great Wei Dynasty will also perish from now on.

古文：颢乃不用庆之言。
现代文：元颢于是便没有采纳陈庆之的意见。
English: Yuan Shao therefore did not adopt Chen Qingzhi's opinion.

古文：又虑庆之密启，乃表于上曰： 今河北、河南一时克定，唯尔硃荣尚敢跋扈，臣与庆之自能擒讨。
现代文：元颢又担心陈庆之暗中向梁武帝上表汇报情况，便自己给梁武帝写了一封表文，说： 现在河北、河南全部平定了，只有尔朱荣尚敢顽抗，我与陈庆之便能擒获他。
English: Yuan Shao was also worried that Chen Qingzhi would secretly report the situation to Emperor Liang Wudi, so he wrote a letter to Emperor Liang Wudi himself, saying: Now Hebei and Henan have all been pacified, only Er Zhu Rong still dares to resist, and Chen Qingzhi and I will be able to capture him.

古文：州郡新服，正须绥抚，不宜更复加兵，摇动百姓。 
现代文：目前各州郡刚刚归服，正需要安抚，不宜再增加兵力，使百姓惶恐不安。 
English: At present, the states and counties have just surrendered and are in need of appeasement. It is not appropriate to increase the number of troops and make the people panic.

古文：上乃诏诸军继进者皆停于境上。
现代文：梁武帝便诏令正在进军的各部队都停在边境上，不再前进。
English: Emperor Liangwu then ordered all the troops that were advancing to stop at the border and not advance any further.

古文：洛中南兵不满一万，而羌、胡之众十倍，军副马佛念为庆之曰： 将军威行河、洛，声震中原，功高势重，为魏所疑，一旦变生不测，可无虑乎！
现代文：洛阳城中的梁朝军队不满一万，而羌族、胡族的军队十倍于梁军，军副马佛念为陈庆之出谋划策说： 将军您威扬河、洛，声震中原，功高势强，被元颢所猜疑，一旦发生不测，能不担心吗？
English: The Liang Dynasty army in Luoyang city is less than ten thousand, while the Yi and Hu armies are ten times the size of the Liang army. The vice-commander of the army, Ma Fofang, thought of a plan for Chen Qingzhi to come out and said: General, you Wei Yanghe, Luo, the epicenter of the earthquake, you have great achievements and potential, you are suspected by the Yuan Dynasty, in the event of an accident, can you not worry?

古文：不若乘其无备，杀颢据洛，此千载一时也。 
现代文：您不如乘元颢还没有防备之际，杀掉元颢，占据洛阳，这是千载难逢的机会呀。 
English: You might as well kill Yuan Xuan and occupy Luoyang while he is still unprepared. This is a once in a lifetime opportunity.

古文：庆之不从。
现代文：陈庆之没有采纳他的意见。
English: Keizhi did not listen.

古文：颢先以庆之为徐州刺史，因固求之镇，颢心惮之，不遣，曰： 主上以洛阳之地全相任委，忽闻舍此朝寄，欲往彭城，谓君遽取富贵，不为国计，非徒有损于君，恐仆并受其责。 
现代文：元颢先任命陈庆之为徐州刺史，于是陈庆之坚决要前往彭城，元颢心里很害怕，没有敢让他去，对他说： 圣上将洛阳全都委托给您负责，如果忽然听说您要离开作为魏朝之寄托的洛阳，而去徐州的话，便会认为您是想很快求取功名富贵，而不为国家考虑的。这不仅有损于您，恐怕我也会一起受到圣上的责难。 
English: Yuan Shao first appointed Chen Qingzhi as the governor of Xuzhou, so Chen Qingzhi was determined to go to Pengcheng. Yuan Shao was very scared and did not dare to let him go. He said to him: The Holy Admiral entrusted Luoyang to you. If you suddenly heard that you wanted to leave Luoyang, which was entrusted to the Wei Dynasty, and go to Xuzhou, you would think that you wanted to quickly seek fame and fortune, without considering the country. This is not only detrimental to you, I am afraid that I will also be blamed by the Holy Admiral.

古文：庆之不敢复言。
现代文：因此，陈庆之便不敢再说什么了。
English: Qingzhi didn't dare to say more.

古文：尔硃荣与颢相持于河上。
现代文：尔硃荣与元颢的军队相持于黄河之上。
English: Er Biao Rong and Yuan Shao's army stand face to face on the Yellow River.

古文：庆之守北中城，颢自据南岸；庆之三日十一战，杀伤甚众。
现代文：陈庆之镇守北中城，元颢亲自据守河桥南岸。陈庆之三天之中打了十一仗，杀伤很多敌人。
English: Chen Qingzhi's town guarded the north-central city, while Yuan Shao personally guarded the south bank of the river bridge. Chen Qingzhi fought eleven battles in three days, killing and wounding many enemies.

古文：有夏州义士为颢守河中渚，阴与荣通谋，求破桥立效，荣引兵赴之。
现代文：有一位夏州义士为元颢镇守河中渚，他暗中与尔朱荣串通好，请求为尔朱荣破桥立功。
English: There was a loyalist from Xiazhou who guarded the middle of the river for the town of Yuancheng. He secretly colluded with Lzhu Rong and asked Lzhu Rong to break the bridge.

古文：及桥破，荣应接不逮，颢悉屠之，荣怅然失望。
现代文：尔朱荣率兵赶到河桥，等到桥破之后，尔朱荣的部队没有接应上，元颢将通敌的士兵全都杀了，尔朱荣怅然若失，非常失望。
English: Le Zhu Rong led the troops to the bridge. After the bridge was broken, Le Zhu Rong's troops did not respond. Yuan Xuan killed all the soldiers who had collaborated with the enemy. Le Zhu Rong was stunned and disappointed.

古文：又以安丰王延明缘河固守，而北军无船可渡，议欲还北，更图后举。
现代文：元颢又派安丰王元延明沿黄河固守，北魏军无船渡河，便商议打算回师北方，以后再想办法攻打元颢。
English: Yuan Shao also sent Anfeng King Yuan Yanming to hold fast along the Yellow River. The Northern Wei Army did not have a boat to cross the river, so they discussed the plan to return to the north, and then find a way to attack Yuan Shao.

古文：黄门郎杨侃曰： 大王发并州之日，已知夏州义士之谋指来应之邪？
现代文：黄门郎杨侃对尔朱荣说： 大王您从并州发兵的时候，是已经知道夏州义士会来给您做内应所以才来的呢？
English: Huangmen Lang Yang Kan said to Le Zhu Rong: Great King, when you sent troops from the annexed states, did you already know that the loyalists from Xiazhou would come to do you a favor? Is that why you came?

古文：为欲广施经略匡复帝室乎？
现代文：还是想广泛施展您的雄才大略匡复帝室才来的呢？
English: Or do you want to make extensive use of your great talent to restore the imperial family?

古文：夫用兵者，何尝不散而更合，疮愈更战；况今未有所损，岂可以一事不谐而众谋顿废乎！
现代文：用兵之事，谁不是打散了再聚集起来，伤好了再继续战斗，何况现在我们并没有受到损失，怎么能由于这一件事没成功，便将所有的计划就都废弃了呢？
English: When it comes to the use of troops, who wouldn't disperse and then regroup, heal wounds and then continue the fight, and what's more, now that we haven't suffered any losses, how can all the plans be scrapped because this thing didn't work out?

古文：今四方颙颙，视公此举；若未有所成，遽复引归，民情失望，各怀去就，胜负所在，未可知也。
现代文：当今天下百姓望眼欲穿，就看您这一次举动了。如果没有取得什么收获，您便很快又回师的话，那么就会使得百姓大失所望，各自考虑何去何从，谁胜谁负也就难说了。
English: When today the people are eager to see you, it is up to you to act this time. If you do not get any harvest, you will soon return to the teacher, then it will make the people very disappointed, each considering where to go, and it is hard to say who will win.

古文：不若征发民材，多为桴筏，间以舟楫，缘河布列，数百里中，皆为渡势，首尾既远，使颢不知所防，一旦得渡，必立大功。 
现代文：所以不如征调百姓的木材，多做一些木筏，间杂一些舟船，沿黄河排列开来，数百里中，都做出渡河的架势，首尾既然相距很远，这样就使得元颢不知道该防哪里为好，一旦我军渡过黄河，一定立下大功。 
English: Therefore, it is better to conscript the timber of the people, make more wooden rafts, mix some boats, and arrange them along the Yellow River. In the hundreds of miles, they all make a crossing of the river. Since they are far apart, this makes the Yuan Dynasty not know where to defend. Once our army crosses the Yellow River, it will definitely make a great contribution.

古文：高道穆曰： 今乘舆飘荡，主忧臣辱。
现代文：高道穆对尔朱荣说： 当今圣驾被迫外出，皇上忧虑，臣下应当感到羞辱。
English: Gao Daomu said to Er Zhu Rong: Today, the sacred driver is forced to go out, the emperor is worried, and the vassals should feel humiliated.

古文：大王拥百万之众，辅天子而令诸侯，若分兵造筏，所在散渡，指掌可克；奈何舍之北归，使颢复得完聚，征兵天下！
现代文：大王您拥有百万大军，辅天子而令诸侯，如果分兵制造木筏，各个分散渡河的话，破元颢的军队易如反掌，为何却舍此而北归，使元颢又得以修治城池，整治兵器，在四方征集兵员呢？
English: Great King, you have a million-strong army, supported by the sons of heaven and the princes. If the detachment of soldiers made rafts and each dispersed to cross the river, it would be easy to break the army of Yuan Shao. Why did you abandon this and return to the north, so that Yuan Shao could repair the city, repair weapons, and recruit soldiers in the four directions?

古文：此所谓养虺成蛇，悔无及矣。 
现代文：这真是如同养虺成蛇，后悔不及啊！ 
English: It's like raising a snake into a tadpole. I can't help but regret it!

古文：荣曰： 杨黄门已陈此策，当相与议之。 
现代文：尔朱荣说道： 黄门郎杨侃已经谈了这一计策，我要跟大家商议一下。 
English: Le Zhu Rong said: Huangmen Lang Yang Kan has already talked about this strategy, I want to discuss it with you.

古文：刘灵助言于荣曰： 不出十日，河南必平。 
现代文：刘灵助对尔朱荣说： 不出十天，黄河以南一定会平定。 
English: Liu Lingsuke said to Le Zhurong: In less than ten days, the south of the Yellow River will definitely be pacified.

古文：伏波将军正平杨忄剽与其族居马渚，自言有小船数艘，求为乡导。
现代文：伏波将军、正平郡人杨跟他的族人住在马渚，他自动说家里有几艘小船，请求作向导。
English: General Fubo Yang, a native of Zhengping County, lived in Mazhu with his relatives. He volunteered that he had several small boats at home and asked to be a guide.

古文：戊辰，荣命车骑将军尔硃兆与大都督贺拔胜缚材为筏，自马渚西硖石夜渡，袭击颢子领军将军冠受，擒之；安丰王延明之众闻之，大溃。
现代文：戊辰，尔朱荣命令车骑大将军尔朱兆和大都督贺拔胜率军捆绑木材做木筏，从马渚西边的硖石这个地方夜渡黄河，袭击了元颢的儿子领军将军元冠受的部队，并抓获了元冠受，安丰王元延明的士卒们知道了这一情况之后，便纷纷溃散奔逃。
English: Wuchen, Er Zhu Rong ordered the cavalry general Er Zhu Zhao and the grand governor He Baxing to lead the army to bundle wood to make rafts, cross the Yellow River at night from the Zhi Shi area west of Mazhu, attacked the troops of the son of the leader of the army, General Yuan Guanzhu, and captured Yuan Guanzhu. After the soldiers of the Anfeng Wang Yuan Yanming knew this situation, they broke up and fled.

古文：颢失据，帅麾下数百骑南走，陈庆之收步骑数千，结陈东还，颢所得诸城，一时复降于魏。
现代文：元颢失去了依据，只好率部下数百名骑兵向南逃走，陈庆之收拢步兵、骑兵共几千人，结队向东逃归。元颢原先攻取的那些城池，全都又投降了北魏。
English: Yuan Shao lost his base, so he had no choice but to lead hundreds of cavalrymen to flee south. Chen Qingzhi gathered several thousand infantrymen and cavalrymen and fled east. All the cities that Yuan Shao had originally captured surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：尔硃荣自追陈庆之，会嵩高水涨，庆之军士死散略尽，乃削须发为沙门，间行出汝阴，还建康，犹以功除右卫将军，封永兴县侯。
现代文：尔朱荣亲自率军追击陈庆之，正赶上嵩高河发大水，陈庆之的队伍死的死、逃的逃，差不多全没了，陈庆之于是剃光头发、胡须，打扮成一个和尚，从小路逃出汝阴，回到了建康，梁朝任仍按功授他为右卫将军，封永兴县侯。
English: Le Zhurong personally led the army to chase Chen Qingzhi, and just as they caught up with him, the Songgao River flooded, and Chen Qingzhi's team was almost completely wiped out. Chen Qingzhi then shaved his hair and beard, dressed up as a monk, escaped from Ruyin by a small road, and returned to Jiankang. The Liang Dynasty still awarded him the title of Right Guard General and the title of Yongxing County Governor.

古文：中军大都督兼领军大将军杨津入宿殿中，扫洒宫庭，封闭府库，出迎魏主于北邙，流涕谢罪，帝慰劳之。
现代文：中军大都督兼领军大将军杨津率军入宿于皇宫中，洒扫宫庭院落，封闭朝廷府库，至北邙迎请孝庄帝，痛哭流涕地向孝庄帝谢罪，孝庄帝安慰犒赏了他。
English: Yang Jin, the Grand Governor of the Chinese army and the leading general of the army, led the army to lodge in the imperial palace, swept the palace courtyard, closed the imperial treasury, and welcomed Emperor Xiaozhuang to Beilun. He thanked Emperor Xiaozhuang with tears, and Emperor Xiaozhuang consoled and rewarded him.

古文：庚午，帝入居华林园，大赦。
现代文：庚午，北魏孝庄帝入居华林园，大赦天下。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang entered the Hualing Garden and pardoned the world.

古文：以尔硃兆为车骑大将军、仪同三司，北来军士及随贺文武诸立义者加五级，河北报事之官及河南立义者加二级。
现代文：朝廷任命尔朱兆为车骑大将军、仪同三司，随同孝庄帝从北方来的将士以及随侍皇帝的文武百官和那些未降元颢的加官五级，河北向朝廷报告敌情的官员和河南坚决未降元颢的官员加官二级。
English: The imperial court appointed Er Zhuzhao as the general of cavalry and cavalry, the three divisions of etiquette and etiquette, the soldiers from the north who accompanied Emperor Xiaozhuang, as well as the hundreds of military and civilian officials who accompanied the emperor and those officials who had not been demoted to the fifth level, the officials from Hebei who reported the hostile situation to the imperial court and the officials from Henan who had resolutely not been demoted to the second level.

古文：壬申，加大丞相荣天柱大将军，增封通前二十万户。
现代文：壬申，又加封大丞相尔朱荣为天柱大将军，并增加封户，加上以前的封户，共二十万户。
English: In Jinshin, Zhu Rong, the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary of the grand secretary

古文：北海王颢自轘辕南出至临颍，从骑分散，临颍县卒江丰斩之；癸酉，傅首洛阳。
现代文：北海王元颢从辕向南逃至临颖，随从骑兵各自逃散，临颖县吏卒江丰杀掉了元颢，癸酉，将元颢的首级送到了洛阳。
English: The King of the North Sea, Yuan Shao, fled south from Shao to Linying, and his cavalry dispersed. The official of Linying County, Zhu Jiangfeng, killed Yuan Shao and Shao and sent Yuan Shao's head to Luoyang.

古文：临淮王彧复自归于魏主，安丰王延明携妻子来奔。
现代文：临淮王元又归附了孝庄帝，安丰王元延明携带妻子儿女前来投奔梁朝。
English: Linhuai Wangyuan was also annexed by Xiaozhuang Emperor, while Anfeng Wangyuan Yanming came to the Liang Dynasty with his wife and children.

古文：陈庆之之入洛也，萧赞送启求还。
现代文：陈庆之攻入洛阳之时，萧赞向梁武帝上书，请求允许回到梁朝。
English: When Chen Qingzhi invaded Luoyang, Xiaozan sent a letter to Emperor Liangwu, requesting permission to return to the Liang Dynasty.

古文：时吴淑媛尚在，上使以赞幼时衣寄之，信未达而庆之败。
现代文：当时吴淑媛还在，梁武帝让吴淑媛将萧赞幼时穿的衣服给萧赞送去，书信等还未传到，陈庆之便失败了。
English: At that time, Wu Shuyuan was still alive. Emperor Liangwu asked Wu Shuyuan to send Xiao Zhan the clothes he wore when he was a child. However, the letters had not yet arrived, so Chen Qingzhi failed.

古文：庆之自魏还，特重北人，硃异怪而问之，庆之曰： 吾始以为大江以北皆戎狄之乡，比至洛阳，乃知衣冠人物尽在中原，非江东所及也，奈何轻之？ 
现代文：陈庆之从北魏回到梁朝后，特别看重北方人，朱异对此感到很奇怪，便问陈庆之为什么这样，陈庆之说道： 我当初认为长江以北地区都是戎狄之乡，等到了洛阳之后，才知道礼仪人物都在中原地区，不是江东所能企及的，我们有什么理由轻视北方人呢？ 
English: After Chen Qingzhi returned to the Liang Dynasty from the Northern Wei Dynasty, he paid special attention to the northerners. Zhu Rong felt very strange about this, so he asked Chen Qingzhi why this was so. Chen Qingzhi said: I initially thought that the areas north of the Yangtze River were all the townships of the Yongdi Dynasty. It was only after I arrived in Luoyang that I learned that the ceremonial figures were all in the Central Plains, not in the East River. What reason do we have to despise the northerners?

古文：甲戌，魏以上党王天穆为太宰，城阳王徽为大司马兼太尉。
现代文：甲戌，北魏朝廷任命上党王元天穆为太宰、城阳王元徽为大司马兼太尉。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty court appointed the upper party king, Yuan Tianmu, as Dazai, and King Yuan Hui of Chengyang as Daishi Ma and Taifu.

古文：乙亥，魏主宴劳尔硃荣、上党王天穆及北来督将于都亭，出宫人三百，缯锦杂彩数万匹，班赐有差，凡受元颢爵赏阶复者，悉追夺之。
现代文：乙亥，北魏孝庄帝在都亭设宴慰劳尔朱荣、上党王元天穆以及从北方来洛阳救援的将领们，孝庄帝以宫女三百人、绫罗锦缎几万匹，按功劳大小分别给予不同的赏赐。凡是受过元颢的爵位、奖赏、官职和免除赋役的人，对其所得全部追了回来。
English: In Yihai, the Northern Wei Emperor Xiaozhuang held a banquet at the Du Pavilion to console Raul Zhu Rong, the Shang Dynasty King Yuan Tianmu, and the generals who came from the north to Luoyang for rescue. Emperor Xiaozhuang gave three hundred concubines and tens of thousands of horses to Luo, and gave different rewards according to the size of the merit. All those who received the title, reward, official position and exemption from military service of the Yuan Dynasty recovered all of their income.

古文：秋，七月，辛巳，魏主始入宫。
现代文：秋季七月，辛巳，北魏孝庄帝开始进入宫中。
English: In the autumn of July, Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty began to enter the palace.

古文：以高道穆为御史中尉。
现代文：北魏任命高道穆为御史中尉。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Gao Daomu as a lieutenant of the imperial history.

古文：帝姊寿阳公主行犯清路，赤棒卒呵之，不止，道穆令卒击破其车。
现代文：北魏孝庄帝的姐姐寿阳公主在路上妨碍了高道穆清路开道的士卒们执行公务，这些手持赤棒的清路卒对寿阳公主大声呵斥，寿阳公主置之不理，高道穆命士卒打破了寿阳公主的车子。
English: Princess Shouyang, the sister of Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty, on the road hindered the officers of the high road Mu Qing Road from carrying out their duties. These officers, armed with red sticks, shouted at Princess Shouyang. Princess Shouyang ignored them, and the high road Mu Mu broke Princess Shouyang's car.

古文：公主泣诉于帝，帝曰： 高中尉清直之士，彼所行者公事，岂可以私责之也！ 
现代文：寿阳公主向孝庄帝哭诉了这件事，孝庄帝说道： 高道穆是一位清直之人，他所干的是公事，我怎么能由于私情而责怪他呢！ 
English: Princess Shouyang cried to Emperor Xiaozhuang about this matter, and Emperor Xiaozhuang said: Gao Daomu is a clean and upright person, what he did was a business, how can I blame him for personal feelings!

古文：道穆见帝，帝曰： 家姊行路相犯，极以为愧。 
现代文：高道穆见到孝庄帝，孝庄帝对他说： 我姐姐在路上触犯了你，我对此深感惭愧。 
English: Gao Daomu met Emperor Xiaozhuang, and Emperor Xiaozhuang said to him: My sister offended you on the road, and I am deeply ashamed of this.

古文：道穆免冠谢，帝曰： 朕以愧卿，卿何谢也！ 
现代文：高道穆摘下帽子向孝庄帝谢罪，孝庄帝说道： 朕因此事而感到有愧于你，你何必要向我谢罪呢。 
English: Gao Daomu took off his hat to thank Xiaozhuangdi for his sin. Xiaozhuangdi said: I feel ashamed of you because of this. Why do you need to thank me for my sin?

古文：于是魏多细钱，米斗几直一千，高道穆上表，以为： 在市铜价，八十一钱得铜一斤，私造薄钱，斤赢二百。
现代文：这时候，北魏份量不足的薄钱很多，一斗米几乎值一千钱。高道穆向朝廷上表，认为： 现在市场上的铜价是八十一钱买一斤铜，私人铸造薄铜钱，每斤铜便能铸造出二百多个钱。
English: At this time, the Northern Wei Dynasty had a lot of thin money that was underweight, and a barrel of rice was worth almost a thousand yuan. Gao Daomu made a report to the imperial court, saying: The current market price of copper is eighty-one yuan to buy one kilogram of copper. If private individuals minted thin copper money, they could mint more than two hundred yuan per kilogram of copper.

古文：既示之以深利，又随之以重刑，抵罪虽多，奸铸弥众。
现代文：朝廷一方面向人们展示了私铸钱币的丰厚利润，随后又对私铸钱币的人施以重刑，这样有罪之人虽然很多，但是私下偷铸钱币的人却越来越多。
English: On the one hand, the imperial court showed the people the rich profits of privately minted coins, and then imposed heavy sentences on the private minters. Although there are many such guilty people, there are more and more people who secretly mint coins.

古文：今钱徒有五铢之文，而无二铢之实，置之水上，殆欲不沉。
现代文：现在的五铢钱徒有其名，实际上连二铢的重量都不够，如果将其放在水上，恐怕都不会沉下水。
English: The current five-baht coin has its name, but in fact it is not even heavy enough to weigh two baht. If it is placed on water, it will probably not sink.

古文：此乃因循有渐，科防不切，朝廷失之，彼复何罪！
现代文：这种情况的出现乃是由于日积月累，纠察、督禁不够严厉，朝廷失职而造成的，那些私铸钱币之人又何罪之有！
English: The emergence of this situation is due to the accumulation of time, insufficiently strict picketing and supervision, and the court's dereliction of duty. Those who secretly minted coins are guilty of nothing!

古文：宜改铸大钱，文载年号，以记其始，则一斤所成止七十钱，计私铸所不能自润，直置无利，自应息心，况复严刑广设也！ 
现代文：朝廷应该改铸大钱，在钱币上刻上皇帝的年号，以记录开始使用这种钱币的时间，如此则一斤铜只能铸七十钱，这样一来，私人铸钱的费用连成本尚不能赚取，也就更不会有什么利润可言了，自然就不会再私铸钱币，更何况朝廷还有严峻的刑罚呢！ 
English: The imperial court should change to minting large coins, engraving the emperor's year number on the coins to record the time when the use of such coins began. In this case, one kilogram of copper can only mint seventy coins. In this way, the cost of private coinage can not even earn the cost, and there will be no profit to speak of. Naturally, there will be no more private coinage, let alone the court has a severe penalty!

古文：金紫光禄大夫杨侃亦奏乞听民与官并铸五铢钱，使民乐为而弊自改。
现代文：金紫光禄大夫杨侃也奏请朝廷允许百姓与官方都铸五铢钱，使百姓愿意这样做，原先的弊端自然也就改正了。
English: Jin Zi Guanglu's doctor Yang Kan also appealed to the imperial court to allow both the people and the government to mint 50 yuan coins, so that the people would be willing to do so, and the original drawbacks would naturally be corrected.

古文：魏主从之，始铸永安五铢钱。
现代文：北魏孝庄帝采纳了他们的建议，从此开始铸 永安 五铢钱。
English: Emperor Xiaozhuang of the Northern Wei Dynasty adopted their suggestion and began to mint Yong'an 50 yuan coins.

古文：辛卯，魏以车骑将军杨津为司空。
现代文：辛卯，北魏任命车骑将军杨津为司空。
English: Xinwu, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the cavalry general Yang Jin as the deputy commander.

古文：初，魏以梁、益二州境土荒远，更立巴州以统诸獠，凡二十馀万户，以巴酋严始欣为刺史。又立隆城镇，以始欣族子恺为镇将。
现代文：当初，北魏因梁、益两州疆域太荒僻辽远，另行设置巴州以统领獠人，共二十余万户，任命巴州当地的酋长严始欣为刺史；又设置了隆城镇，任命严始欣的同族侄子严恺为镇将。
English: At first, the Northern Wei Dynasty, because the territory of Liang and Yixian was too remote and far away, set up a separate Bazhou to govern the Xiong people, a total of more than 200,000 households, and appointed the local chief of Bazhou, Yan Shixin, as the chief historian; it also set up Long Town and appointed Yan Shixin's nephew of the same ethnicity, Yan Xiong, as the town marshal.

古文：始欣贪暴，孝昌初，诸獠反，围州城，行台魏子建抚谕之，乃散。
现代文：严始欣贪婪残暴，孝昌初年，獠人反叛，包围了巴州城，行台魏子建招抚晓谕叛军，这才解了围。
English: At first, Yan Xin was greedy and cruel. In the first year of Xiaochang, the Xiong people rebelled and besieged the city of Bazhou. Xing Tai Wei Zijian recruited and instructed the rebel army, which only relieved the siege.

古文：始欣恐获罪，阴来请降，帝遣使以诏书、铁券、衣冠等赐之，为恺所获，以送子建。
现代文：严始欣担心获罪，便暗中前来梁朝请求投降，梁武帝派使者带着诏书、铁券、衣冠等赐予严始欣，结果使者被严恺所截获，将其送到魏子建处。
English: Yan Shixin was worried about being found guilty, so he secretly came to the Liang Dynasty to request surrender. Emperor Liangwu sent an envoy with an edict, iron coupons, crowns, etc. to give Yan Shixin. As a result, the envoy was intercepted by Yan Xuan and sent to Wei Zi's construction site.

古文：子建奏以隆城镇为南梁州，用恺为刺史，囚始欣于南郑。
现代文：魏子建奏请孝庄帝将隆城镇改为南梁州，任命严恺为刺史，将严始囚禁于南郑城。
English: Wei Zi Jianso asked Emperor Xiaozhuang to change the name of Long Town to Nan Liang Prefecture, to appoint Yan Xuan as the chief historian, and to imprison Yan Xi in Nan Zheng City.

古文：魏以唐永为东益州刺史代子建，以梁州刺史傅竖眼为行台。
现代文：北魏任命唐永为东益州刺史以取代魏子建，任命梁州刺史傅竖眼为行台。
English: Northern Wei appointed Tang Yong as the East Yizhou chief historian to replace Wei Zijian, and appointed Liangzhou chief historian Fu Xieyan as the acting chief historian.

古文：子建去东益而氐、蜀寻反，唐永弃城走，东益州遂没。
现代文：魏子建离开东益州后，氐人和蜀人很快便反叛了，唐永弃城而逃，东益州便陷落了。
English: After Wei Zijian left East Yizhou, the Shan and Shu people quickly rebelled, the Tang abandoned the city and fled, and East Yizhou fell.

古文：傅竖眼之初至梁州也，州人相贺。既而久病，不能亲政事。
现代文：傅竖眼最初到梁州时，梁州人纷纷庆贺，不久，傅竖眼便长时间患病，不能亲自处理政事。
English: When Fu Xieyan first came to Liangzhou, the people of Liangzhou celebrated. Soon, Fu Xieyan fell ill for a long time and was unable to personally handle political affairs.

古文：其子敬绍，奢淫贪暴，州人患之。
现代文：傅竖眼的儿子傅敬绍，骄奢淫佚，贪婪残暴，梁州人深以为患。
English: Fu Jing Shao, the son of Fu Xieyan, was arrogant, lascivious, greedy and cruel. Liangzhou people were deeply troubled by this.

古文：严始欣重赂敬绍，得还巴州，遂举兵击严恺，灭之。以巴州来降，帝遣将军萧玩等将兵援之。
现代文：严始欣重金贿赂傅敬绍，才得以回到巴州，他回到巴州后便举兵攻击严恺，消灭了严恺，率巴州民众来降梁朝，梁武帝派遣将军萧玩等接应援助严始欣。
English: Yan Shixin bribed Fu Jing Shao with a large sum of money before he could return to Bazhou. After he returned to Bazhou, he raised an army to attack Yan Xuan and eliminated Yan Xuan. He led the people of Bazhou to surrender to the Liang Dynasty. Emperor Liang Wudi sent General Xiao Jian and others to assist Yan Shixin.

古文：傅敬绍见魏室方乱，阴有保据南郑之志，使其妻兄唐昆仑于外扇诱山民相聚围城，欲为内应。
现代文：傅敬绍看到北魏朝廷正混乱不堪，暗中便有了据守南郑的打算，派他的妻子的哥哥唐昆仑在城外面煽动诱惑那些山民一起前来包围梁州城，傅敬绍打算做内应。
English: When Fu Jingshao saw that the Northern Wei Dynasty was in chaos, he secretly had a plan to protect Nan Zheng. He sent his wife's brother, Tang Kunlun, outside the city to incite and entice those mountain people to come and encircle Liangzhou City. Fu Jingshao planned to respond.

古文：围合而谋泄，城中将士共执敬绍，以白竖眼而杀之，竖眼耻恚而卒。
现代文：梁州城被包围起来后，傅敬绍的计划泄露，于是梁州城中的将士们一起抓住了傅敬绍，将傅敬绍的阴谋告知了傅竖眼并杀掉了傅敬绍，傅竖眼因感到耻辱和恼恨而去世。
English: After Liangzhou City was surrounded, Fu Jingshao's plan was leaked, so the soldiers in Liangzhou City caught Fu Jingshao together, told Fu Jingshao's plot to Fu Zhizhen and killed Fu Jingshao. Fu Zhizhen died of shame and anger.

古文：八月，己未，魏以太傅李延寔为司徒。
现代文：八月，己未，北魏任命太傅李延为司徒。
English: In August, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Tai Fu Li Yan as a disciple.

古文：甲戌，侍中、太保杨椿致仕。
现代文：甲戌，侍中、太保杨椿退休。
English: Armor bearer, chamberlain, and eunuch Yang Tsubaki retired.

古文：九月，癸巳，上幸同泰寺，设四部无遮大会。
现代文：九月，癸巳，梁武帝亲临同泰寺，设置四部无遮大会。
English: In September, Emperor Liangwu paid a personal visit to Dongtai Temple and set up a four-part open-air assembly.

古文：上释御服，持法衣，行清净大舍，以便省为房，素床瓦器，乘小车，私人执役。
现代文：梁武帝脱下御服，换上法衣，行清净大舍，以同泰寺中的便省室为居所，室内设素床瓦器，乘小车，以私人为执役。
English: Emperor Liangwu took off his imperial robes, put on his robes, and went to a large, clean house. He lived in a simple room in the Tongtai Temple. The room was furnished with a plain bed and tiles. He rode in a small carriage and performed his duties as a private citizen.

古文：甲子，升讲堂法座，为四部大众开《涅槃经》题。
现代文：甲子，梁武帝升讲堂法座，为四部大众开讲《涅经》。
English: Emperor Liangwu ascended to the throne of the lecture hall and began to speak about the "Nirvana Sutra" for the four sections of the public.

古文：癸卯，群臣以钱一亿万祈白三宝，奉赎皇帝菩萨，僧众默许。
现代文：癸卯，梁朝群臣百官用一亿万钱向佛、法、僧三宝祈求，以赎皇帝菩萨，僧众们默许了。
English: At that time, the Liang dynasty's group of ministers and officials spent 100 million yuan to pray to the Buddha, Dharma, and the Three Jewels to redeem the Emperor Bodhisattva, and the monks acquiesced.

古文：乙巳，百辟诣寺东门，奉表请还临宸极，三请，乃许。
现代文：乙巳，百官来到同泰寺东门，上表请梁武帝回到皇宫，请了三次，皇帝才同意。
English: Suddenly, hundreds of officials came to the east gate of the Dongtai Temple. The table invited Emperor Liangwu to return to the palace. It took three times for the emperor to agree.

古文：上三答书，前后并称 顿首 。
现代文：梁武帝三次都复了信，这几封信都用 顿首 一词。
English: Emperor Liangwu replied to the letter three times, and all of these letters used the word "Dunshou."

古文：魏尔硃荣使大都督尖山侯渊讨韩楼于蓟，配卒甚少，骑止七百。或以为言，荣曰： 侯渊临机设变，是其所长；若总大众，未必能用。
现代文：北魏尔朱荣派大都督、尖山县人侯渊到蓟州讨伐韩楼。尔朱荣给他的兵力很少，骑兵只有七百，有人为侯渊说话请求多派兵，尔朱荣却说道： 侯渊善于临机应变，这是他的长处；如果让他统帅很多军队，反而未必能指挥调度。
English: Zhu Rong, the great governor of Northern Wei, sent Hou Yuan, a native of Jianshan County, to Bozhou to fight Han Lou. Zhu Rong gave him very few troops, only seven hundred cavalry. Some people spoke for Hou Yuan and asked him to send more soldiers, but Zhu Rong said: Hou Yuan is good at adapting to the situation, this is his strength; if he is allowed to command many troops, he may not be able to command the scheduling.

古文：今以此众击此贼，必能取之。 
现代文：现在让侯渊率领这些军队讨伐韩楼这叛贼，一定能取得胜利。 
English: Now let Hou Yuan lead these troops to fight against Han Lou, the traitor, and they will surely win.

古文：渊遂广张军声，多设供具，亲帅数百骑深入楼境。
现代文：侯渊于是大张旗鼓、多多增设器具，亲自率几百名骑兵深入韩楼的境地。
English: Houyuan then made a big fanfare, added more and more equipment, and personally led several hundred cavalrymen deep into the Hanlu situation.

古文：去蓟百馀里，值贼帅陈周马步万馀，渊潜伏以乘其背，大破之，虏其卒五千馀人。
现代文：在离蓟州一百余里的地方，正遇上贼将陈周的一万余骑兵和步兵，侯渊潜伏下来从背后出击，大破崐陈周的人马，俘获五千余人。
English: At a place more than a hundred miles away from Zhangzhou, he was encountering a bandit who was leading Chen Zhou's more than ten thousand cavalry and infantry. Hou Yuan sneaked down and attacked from behind, destroying Chen Zhou's men and horses and capturing more than five thousand people.

古文：寻还其马仗，纵令入城，左右谏曰： 既获贼众，何为复资遣之？ 
现代文：之后又很快归还了这些人的战马和兵器，放他们回蓟州城中，侯渊的左右劝谏道： 我们既然已经俘获了贼军，为什么却又资助他们仍让他们回去呢？ 
English: After that, they quickly returned these people's horses and weapons, and let them go back to the city of Zhangzhou. Houyuan's right and left exhorted: Since we have captured the thief army, why do we finance them and still let them go back?

古文：渊曰： 我兵既少，不可力战，须为奇计以离间之，乃可克也。 
现代文：侯渊说道： 我军兵力很少，不能力战死拼，必须设奇计以离间敌人，才能够打败敌人。 
English: Houyuan said, "Our army's strength is very small, and we are unable to fight to the death. We must devise a plan to separate the enemy in order to defeat the enemy.

古文：渊度其已至，遂帅骑夜进，昧旦，叩其城门。
现代文：侯渊估计那些被放还的敌兵已经到了蓟州城，便率骑兵连夜前进，于天亮之时，到达蓟州城下，击打城门。
English: Houyuan estimated that those enemy soldiers who had been released had already arrived at Zhangzhou City, so he led the cavalry to advance overnight. At dawn, he arrived at the foot of Zhangzhou City and hit the city gate.

古文：韩楼果疑降卒为渊内应，遂走；追擒之，幽州平。
现代文：韩楼果然怀疑那些被放还的降卒要作侯渊的内应，于是便弃城而逃，侯渊追上并抓获了韩楼，幽州便平定了。
English: Han Lou really suspected that those who had been released would be Houyuan's accomplices, so he abandoned the city and fled. Houyuan caught up with and captured Han Lou, and Yuzhou was pacified.

古文：以渊为平州刺史，镇范阳。
现代文：北魏就任命侯渊为平州刺史，镇守州治范阳。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Hou Yuan as the governor of Pingzhou and the governor of Fanyang.

古文：先是，魏使征东将军刘灵助兼尚书仆射，慰劳幽州流民于濮阳顿丘，因帅流民北还，与侯渊共灭韩楼；仍以灵助行幽州事，加车骑将军，又为幽、平、营、安四州行台。
现代文：当初，北魏任命征东将军刘灵助兼尚书左仆射，派他到濮阳的顿丘去慰劳幽州的流民，刘灵助趁势率流民们回归北魏，与侯渊一道共同消灭韩楼，北魏于是命刘灵助负责管理幽州的事务，加封他为车骑将军，同时又任幽、平、营、安四州的行台。
English: At first, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed Liu Lingzu, a general of the Eastern Expeditionary Force and Shang Shuxi's right-hand man, and sent him to Dongqiu in Poyang to comfort the displaced people of Yuzhou. Liu Lingzu took advantage of the situation to lead the displaced people back to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and worked with Houyuan to destroy Hanlu. The Northern Wei Dynasty then ordered Liu Lingzu to be responsible for managing the affairs of Yuzhou, and he was appointed as the general of chariot and cavalry. At the same time, he also served as the governor of Yuzhou, Ping, Ying and Anshizhou.

古文：万俟丑奴攻魏东秦州，拔之，杀刺史高子朗。
现代文：万俟奴攻击北魏的东秦州，攻取下来后，杀掉了东秦州刺史高子朗。
English: Wan Xunnu attacked the Eastern Qin State of the Northern Wei Dynasty. After capturing it, he killed the Eastern Qin State assassin Gao Zi Lang.

古文：冬，十月，己酉，上又设四部无遮大会，道、俗五万馀人。
现代文：冬季十月，己酉，梁武帝又设四部无遮大会。参加的僧、俗之人有五万多人。
English: In October of the winter, Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty held four more open-door conferences, in which more than fifty thousand people, both monks and laymen, participated.

古文：会毕，上御金略还宫，御太极殿，大赦，改元。
现代文：大会之后，梁武帝乘金辂车回到皇宫中，幸临太极殿，大赦天下，改年号为 中大通 。
English: After the conference, Emperor Liangwu took the golden carriage back to the imperial palace. He was fortunate enough to visit the Taiji Hall, where he granted amnesty to the world and changed the year name to Zhongdazhong.

古文：魏以前司空萧赞为司徒。
现代文：北魏任命原先的司空萧赞为司徒。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the former Secretary of the Air Force, Xiao Zan, as the Secretary of the Air Force.

古文：十一月，己卯，就德兴请降于魏，营州平。
现代文：十一月，己卯，就德兴向北魏请降，营州平定。
English: In November, Jiwu asked the Northern Wei Dynasty for the surrender of Dexing, and Yingzhou was pacified.

古文：丙午，魏以城阳王徽为太保，丹杨王萧赞为太尉，雍州刺史长孙稚为司徒。
现代文：丙午，北魏任命城阳王元徽为太保，丹扬王萧赞为太尉，雍州刺史长孙稚为司徒。
English: In the afternoon of the 4th day of the 4th month, the Northern Wei Dynasty appointed King Yuanhui of Chengyang as Taibo, King Xiaozan of Danyang as Taifu, and Sun Wuchang of Yongzhou as Shishi.

古文：十二月，辛亥，兗州刺史张景邕、荆州刺史李灵起、雄信将军萧进明叛，降魏。
现代文：十二月，辛亥，兖州刺史张景邕、荆州刺史李灵起、雄信将军萧进明反叛梁朝，投降了北魏。
English: In December, Xinhai, Zhang Jingyao, Li Lingqi and Xiao Jinming rebelled against the Liang Dynasty and surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：以陈庆之为北兗州刺史。
现代文：梁朝任命陈庆之为兖州刺史。
English: The Liang Dynasty appointed Chen Qing Tong as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：有妖贼僧强，自称天子，土豪蔡伯龙起兵应之，众起三万，攻陷北徐州；庆之讨斩之。
现代文：有一妖贼名叫僧强，自称天子，土豪蔡伯龙起兵响应他，士卒达三万人，攻陷了徐州，陈庆之率兵前往征讨，斩杀了僧强、蔡伯龙等。
English: There was a demon thief named Monk Qiang, who claimed to be the son of heaven, and the local strongman Cai Bolong raised an army in response to him, with 30,000 soldiers, and invaded Xuzhou. Chen Qingzhi led the army to go and fight, and killed Monk Qiang, Cai Bolong and others.

古文：魏以岐州刺史王罴行南秦州事。罴诱捕州境群盗，悉诛之。
现代文：北魏委任岐州刺史王罴代理南秦州的军政事务，王罴诱捕南秦州境内的群盗，全部杀掉了他们。
English: The Northern Wei Dynasty appointed the Qizhou assassin Wang Qian as the agent of military and political affairs in Southern Qin State. Wang Qian trapped the bandits in Southern Qin State and killed them all.

