古文：杜瑛，字文玉，其先霸州信安人。父时升，《金史》有传。
现代文：杜瑛字文玉，祖籍霸州信安。父时日升，《金史》中有传。
English: Du Ying Zi Wenyu, ancestral home of Bazhou Xin'an. His father, Shi Rissheng, is mentioned in the "Golden History."

古文：瑛长七尺，美须髯，气貌魁伟。
现代文：金末兵乱，瑛避居于河南缑氏山中。
English: At the end of the Jin Rebellion, Ying Yu lived in the mountains of Shanshi, Henan Province.

古文：金将亡，士犹以文辞规进取，瑛独避地河南缑氏山中。
现代文：当时一般读书人仍以文章辞藻来谋求上进，唯瑛在此文物凋丧之时，搜集群书，精读牢记，努力探求书中深刻含义。
English: At that time, ordinary readers were still seeking advancement with the help of words and phrases in articles. At the time of the decline of this cultural relic, Wei Ying collected books, read them carefully and diligently, and tried to explore the profound meaning in the book.

古文：时兵后，文物凋丧，瑛搜访诸书，尽读之，读辄不忘，而究其指趣，古今得失如指诸掌。
现代文：对古今得失，了如指掌。
English: He knows everything about the past and present.

古文：间关转徙，教授汾、晋间。
现代文：为了教书，他历尽艰险，辗转于晋、汾之间。
English: In order to teach, he went through all kinds of hardships and dangers, and moved back and forth between Jin and Yao.

古文：中书粘合珪开府于相，瑛赴其聘，遂家焉。与良田千亩，辞不受。
现代文：中书粘合王圭开府于相德，瑛接受了他的聘请，在彰德安家，但拒不接受他赐与的千亩良田。
English: Wang Gui, the Chinese writer and forger, set up his residence in Xiangde. Ying accepted his invitation and settled down in Zhangde, but refused to accept the thousand mu of good farmland he offered.

古文：术者言其所居下有藏金，家人欲发视，辄止之。
现代文：有人说瑛邸宅下有藏金，家人想发掘出来，瑛屡加制止。
English: Some people said that there was hidden gold under Ying's residence, and the family members wanted to dig it out, but Ying repeatedly put a stop to it.

古文：后来居者果得黄金百斤，其不苟取如此。
现代文：后居此宅者果然挖到黄金百两，这也说明瑛不贪非分之财。
English: The person who lived in this house later dug up a hundred and two ounces of gold, which also shows that Ying is not greedy.

古文：岁己未，世祖南伐至相，召见问计，瑛从容对曰： 汉、唐以还，人君所恃以为国者，法与兵、食三事而已。
现代文：宪宗九年，元世祖忽必烈南征至彰德，召瑛问计。瑛说： 汉唐以来，人君能赖以立国的，就是法、兵、食三件事而已。
English: In the ninth year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the founder of the Yuan Dynasty, Kublai Khan, went on a southern expedition to Changde and summoned Ying to ask for advice. Ying said: Since the Han and Tang Dynasties, there are only three things that people can rely on to establish a country: law, soldiers, and food.

古文：国无法不立，人无食不生，乱无兵不守。
现代文：国无法不立，人无食不生，乱无兵不守。
English: The country cannot but stand, people cannot live without food, chaos cannot exist without soldiers.

古文：今宋皆蔑之，殆将亡矣，兴之在圣主。
现代文：现在宋朝不重视此三事，大概将要灭亡了。能振兴此三事的，大概就是您吧。
English: Now the Song Dynasty does not attach importance to these three things, and will probably perish. It is probably you who can revitalize these three things.

古文：若控襄樊之师，委戈下流，以捣其背，大业可定矣。 
现代文：您若遣荆襄之师，南下以捣其背，帝业便可定了。 
English: If you send Jing Xiang's teacher to the south and stab him in the back, the empire will be won.

古文：帝悦，曰： 儒者中乃有此人乎！ 
现代文：世祖听后高兴地说： 想不到儒生中居然有这样见地的人。 
English: Upon hearing this, the founder of Confucianism said happily, "I had no idea that there were people with such insight among Confucianists."

古文：瑛复劝帝数事，以谓事不如此，后当如彼。帝纳之，心贤瑛，谓可大用，命从行，以疾弗果。
现代文：后来，瑛又举数事晓以利害，世祖都采纳了，并认为瑛贤能可用，命瑛随行，但瑛因病而未从。
English: Later, Ying also mentioned several things that were known to be of interest, and the patriarchs all adopted them, and believed that Ying Xian could be used, and Ying accompanied him, but Ying did not follow due to illness.

古文：中统初，诏征瑛。时王文统方用事，辞不就。
现代文：中统初年，忽必烈下诏书欲起用瑛，瑛以当时王文统当权，辞不应诏。
English: In the first year of China's unification, Emperor Kublai Khan issued an edict to use the word 瑛, which meant that Wang Wenzong was in power at the time, and the word should not be changed to 诏.

古文：左丞张文谦宣抚河北，奏为怀孟、彰德、大名等路提举学校官，又辞，遗执政书，其略曰： 先王之道不明，异端邪说害之也，横流奔放，天理不绝如线。
现代文：左丞张文谦巡视河北时，上书皇上，建议任命瑛为怀孟、彰德、大名等路提举学校官，瑛又推辞，并致书执政说 ：先王之道不明，是由于异端邪说为害。异说虽然泛滥，但天理不绝如线。
English: When Zuo Zheng Zhang Wenqian was on a tour of Hebei, he sent a letter to the emperor, suggesting that Ying be appointed as a school official to be promoted by the way of Huai Meng, Zhang De and daimyo. Ying also declined, and sent a letter to the government saying: The former king's way is unclear, due to the harm of heresy. Although the heresy is rampant, the heavenly principle is not without a line.

古文：今天子神圣，俊乂辐辏，言纳计用，先王之礼乐教化，兴明修复，维其时矣。
现代文：现在天子贤明，又能听取意见，故贤能之士多来会聚。复兴先王的礼乐教化，正在此时。
English: Now that the Son of Heaven is wise and able to listen to opinions, many wise and able people have come to gather. It is at this time that the revival of the King's music education is taking place.

古文：若夫簿书期会，文法末节，汉、唐犹不屑也，执事者因陋就简，此焉是务，良可惜哉！
现代文：至于您以官府文书约我相会，想任命我做些寻章摘句的小事，在汉唐时也是人们不屑于做的。现在您因陋就简，只想这些小事，实在可惜。
English: As for your appointment to meet me with an official document, you want to appoint me to do some small things of finding chapters and excerpts, which people did not disdain to do in the Han and Tang Dynasties. It is a pity that you only want to do these small things now.

古文：夫善始者未必善终，今不能溯流求源，明法正俗，育材兴化，以拯数百千年之祸，仆恐后日之弊，将有不可胜言者矣。 
现代文：凡是善始的人不一定能善终，今日执政者不能溯流求源，不去力行先王之道，不明德正俗、育材兴化以解除数百千年之祸，恐怕日后之弊将会是说也说不完的。 
English: Anyone who has a good beginning will not necessarily have a good ending. Today's rulers cannot trace the flow back to the source, do not try to do the way of the previous king, do not know the morality and morality, and do not nurture the material to solve the scourge of hundreds of thousands of years. I am afraid that the future drawbacks will be indescribable.

古文：人或勉之仕，则曰： 后世去古虽远，而先王之所设施，本末先后，犹可考见，故为政者莫先于复古。
现代文：当时有人鼓励他出来做官，瑛说： 后世离开古代虽远，但先王的政策措施犹可供参。做官的人，首先应该复古。
English: At that time, some people encouraged him to become an official, and Ying said: Although future generations are far away from ancient times, the policies and measures of the former king can still be used.

古文：苟因习旧弊，以求合乎先王之意，不亦难乎！
现代文：假如因袭旧弊，妄想以此来适应先王之意，岂非难事？
English: Would it not be a difficult matter if, because of the old defects, he tried to adapt to the will of the former king?

古文：吾又不能随时俯仰以赴机会，将焉用仕！ 
现代文：我又不是一个见风使舵的人，怎能做官。 
English: I'm not one to follow the wind. How can I be an official?

古文：于是杜门著书，一不以穷通得丧动其志，优游道艺，以终其身。
现代文：于是，闭门著书，潜心研究道艺，不管处境顺利还是不顺利，也不论得失，其志丝毫也不动摇，终身如此。
English: As a result, he wrote books behind closed doors and devoted himself to the study of Taoism. Regardless of whether the situation was smooth or not, and regardless of gains and losses, his will did not waver at all, and remained so for the rest of his life.

古文：年七十，遗命其子处立、处愿曰： 吾即死，当表吾墓曰 缑山杜处士 。
现代文：年七十时，嘱子处立、处愿，死后要在自己墓前立文为 缑山杜处士 的墓碑。
English: When he was 70 years old, he made a wish that after his death, he would write an inscription in front of his grave to be the tombstone of the Shaoshan Du official.

古文：天历中，赠资德大夫、翰林学士、上护军，追封魏郡公，谥文献。
现代文：天历年间，赠资德大夫、翰林学士、上护军，追封魏郡公，赐谥文献。
English: During the calendar year, he gave money to Dr. De, Hanlin Baccalaureate, Shanggongjun, and was awarded the title of Wei County, and bestowed the title of literature.

古文：又分卦配之纪年，金之大定庚寅，交小过之初六；国朝之甲寅三月二十有三日寅时，交小过之九四。
现代文：所著书有《春秋地理原委》十卷、《语孟旁通》八卷、《皇极引用》八卷、《皇极疑事》四卷、《极学》十卷、《律吕律历礼乐杂志》三十卷、文集十卷等。
English: He is the author of ten volumes of "Spring and Autumn Geography Original Committee," eight volumes of "Language Meng Bypass," eight volumes of "Imperial Quotations," four volumes of "Imperial Doubts," ten volumes of "Extreme Science," thirty volumes of "Law Lyu Lyu Calendar and Music Magazine" and ten volumes of anthologies.

古文：多先儒所未发，掇其要著于篇云。张特立，字文举，东明人。
现代文：瑛在声律与历法方面，多有先儒所未及者。张特立字文举，东明人。
English: In terms of vocal rhythms and calendars, there are many predecessors of Confucius who have never been surpassed.

古文：初名永，避金卫绍王讳，易今名。
现代文：原名张永，因避金国卫绍王讳，才改此名。
English: His original name was Zhang Yong, but he changed it due to the shunning of money by the State of Wei and Shao.

古文：中泰和进士，为偃师主簿。改宣德州司候。
现代文：金朝泰和年间进士，任偃师主簿，后改任宣德州司候。
English: He was promoted to the rank of scholar during the reign of Emperor Taizong of the Jin Dynasty, and was appointed as the chief bookkeeper of the Imperial Academy of Sciences. Later, he was appointed as the secretary of the State Council of the Republic of China.

古文：州多金国戚，号难治，特立至官，俱往谒之。
现代文：此地多国戚，人皆说是难治之州。特立到任后，一一前往拜望。
English: There are people from many countries living here, and everyone says it is a difficult state to cure. After Terui took office, he went to visit them one by one.

古文：有五将军率家奴劫民群羊，特立命大索闾里，遂过将军家，温言诱之曰： 将军宅宁有盗羊者邪，聊视之以杜众口。 
现代文：当时有五将军率家奴抢劫民家羊群，特立下令在乡里普遍搜索。及到将军家，他态度温和地诱骗将军： 您家难道还会有盗羊的人吗？我来搜一下，主要免得旁人有议论。 
English: At that time, there were five generals and their slaves robbing the flocks of the villagers. Teli ordered a general search in the countryside. When he arrived at the general's house, he gently deceived the general: Will there still be someone who steals sheep in your house? Let me search, mainly to avoid discussion by others.

古文：潜使人索其后庭，得羊数十。
现代文：这样当然易于获得将军入宅搜查的允诺，实则早已暗中使人深入到将军后院，搜出羊数十头。
English: In this way, of course, it is easy to obtain the general's promise to search the house, but in fact, people have already secretly penetrated into the general's backyard and found dozens of sheep.

古文：遂缚其奴系狱，其子匿他舍，捕得之，以近族得减死论。
现代文：有了赃物，特立便态度强硬了，先缚其奴下狱，再捕其已藏匿起来的儿子。只是因为他是皇族，才得以减死论罪。
English: With the stolen goods, Mertli hardened his attitude, first tying his slave to prison, and then arresting his son, who had gone into hiding. It was only because he was a member of the royal family that he was able to reduce the death sentence.

古文：豪贵由是遵法，民赖以全。
现代文：从此，豪贵因惧而遵法，百姓得以安生。
English: From then on, the nobles obeyed the law out of fear, and the people were able to live in peace.

古文：正大初，迁洛阳令。
现代文：金正大初年，调任洛阳县令。
English: In the first year of Kim Jong-un University, he was transferred to Luoyang County.

古文：时军旅数起，郡县窘迫，东帅纥石烈牙兀又侮慢儒士。会移镇陕右，道经洛阳，见特立淳古，不礼之，遽责令治糗具，期三日足，后期如军法。
现代文：时军事行动多，郡县穷于供给。东帅纥石烈牙兀对儒生傲慢，恰巧他又将带兵到陕右，路经洛阳，当他见特立朴质古板，不以礼对待，立即责令在三日内备好干粮，如逾期不交，就要军法从事。
English: At that time, there were many military operations, and counties and counties were short of supplies. Dongshuai Zhisheng was arrogant towards Confucianism. Coincidentally, he was going to lead his troops to Shaanxi and right through Luoyang. When he saw Teli, who was simple and old-fashioned, and did not treat him with courtesy, he immediately ordered him to prepare dry grain within three days. If he did not hand it over by the deadline, he would be subject to military law.

古文：县民素贤特立，争输于庭，帅大奇之。
现代文：县民素知特立贤能，为民做主，担心特立为难，便争纳干粮，以免东帅找到惩治特立的借口，东帅对此大为惊奇。
English: The people of the county were well aware of Teli's virtues and ability to make decisions for the people. Fearing that Teli would be in trouble, they scrambled to get dry rations so that the East Marshal would not find an excuse to punish Teli. The East Marshal was very surprised by this.

古文：既而拜监察御史，首言世宗诸孙不宜幽囚；尚书右丞颜盏石鲁与细民争田，参知政事徒单兀典谄事近习，皆当罢黜。
现代文：接着特立又升任监察御史，上任第一件事是提出不应把金世宗的后人幽禁起来。他揭发尚书右丞颜盏石鲁与小民争田，参知政事徒单兀典对帝王亲信勾结拉拢，都不是好官，都应罢黜。
English: Next, Teli was promoted to the position of inspector of imperial history. The first thing he did upon taking office was to propose that the descendants of Kim Sejong should not be imprisoned. He revealed that Shangshu Yu-jong, Kanjin Shilu and Xiaomin Sheng Tian, and Sangchong Sejongji, Duxan Xuanpeng and others were colluding with the emperor's close confidants. They were not good officials and should be dismissed.

古文：执政者忌之。
现代文：这些话都是当权者所不愿听的。
English: These are words that those in power do not want to hear.

古文：会平章政事白撒犒军陕西，特立又劾其掾不法。
现代文：恰好这时平章政事白撒来陕西犒赏军队时，特立又检举他的部属不法。
English: Just at this time, when Pingzhang Bai Sarai came to Shaanxi to reward the army, Teli also accused his subordinates of illegality.

古文：白撒诉于世宗，言特立所言事失实，世宗宥之，遂归田里。特立通程氏《易》，晚教授诸生，东平严实每加礼焉。
现代文：白撒不服，便向哀宗申诉，说特立的这些话不实际。大概哀宗也不满特立的直言不讳，便借白撒的上诉撤了特立的职，虽然没有重罚他，但还是让他回家退休。
English: Baisa was not satisfied and complained to Aizong, saying that these words of Teli were not practical. Probably, Aizong was also dissatisfied with Teli's outspokenness, and withdrew Teli's position through Baisa's appeal. Although he was not heavily punished, he was allowed to go home and retire.

古文：岁丙午，世祖在潜邸受王印，首传旨谕特立曰： 前监察御史张特立，养素丘园，易代如一，今年几七十，研究圣经，宜锡嘉名，以光潜德，可特赐号曰中庸先生。 
现代文：特立精通程颢、程颐的著作。晚年教书，很受东平严实的尊重。元定宗元年，忽必烈在登位的住所接受王印时，便首次带信给特立说： 前监察御史张特立，修身养性于田园，即使改朝换代，也不改变自己主张。今年快七十了，研究圣经，宜赐一相应的好名字，以便发扬光大其德行，因此，特赐号为 中庸先生 。 
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, when Kublai Khan received the imperial seal at the residence where he ascended to the throne, he first sent a letter to Teli saying: "Former Inspector of History Zhang Teli, cultivates himself in the countryside, and does not change his views even if the dynasty changes. This year is almost seventy years old, and it is appropriate to give a corresponding good name to study the Bible in order to carry forward his great virtues. Therefore, the special name is Mr. Zhong Yong."

古文：癸丑，特立卒，年七十五。中统二年，诏曰： 中庸先生学有渊源，行无瑕玷，虽经丧乱，不改故常，未遂丘园之贲，俄兴窀穸之悲。
现代文：又对特立说： 先生年老眼睛不好，不能来京，故令赵保臣转达我的意见，您的读书之堂，可取名 丽泽 。 宪宗二年，朝廷又降诏给特立说： 先生白首穷经，诲人不倦。守中庸之道，为学者宗师，过去已赐嘉名，今再表示朝廷嘉奖之意。 
English: He also said to Terri: "My old eyesight is not good, I cannot come to Beijing, so I asked Zhao Baochen to convey my opinion that your reading hall can be named Liza." In the second year of the reign of Emperor Xianzong, the imperial court also issued an edict to Terri, saying: "Teacher Bai Shou is poor in learning, and tireless in teaching. He adheres to the Middle Way, and is a scholar and teacher. He has been honored in the past, and now he expresses the intention of being honored by the imperial court.

古文：可复赐前号，以彰宠数。 特立所著书有《易集说》、《历年系事记》。
现代文：宪宗三年去世，终年七十五岁。特立著书，有《易集说》、《历年系事记》。
English: Gensong died three years later, at the age of seventy-five. He was a prolific writer, authoring "Easy Collection" and "Chronological Record."

古文：杜本，字伯原，其先居京兆，后徙天台，又徙临江之清江，今为清江人。
现代文：杜本字伯原，祖先居京兆，后徙天台，又徙临江之清江，今为清江人。
English: Duben's family name is Bohara. His ancestors lived in Beijing and later moved to Tiantai, and then to Qingjiang, which is next to the river. He is now a native of Qingjiang.

古文：本博学，善属文。江浙行省丞相忽剌术得其所上《救荒策》，大奇之，及入为御史大夫，力荐于武宗。
现代文：杜本博学能文，江浙行省丞相忽剌得到他递交的建议书《救荒策》，很赏识他的见解。及忽剌进京任御史大夫，便向武宗力荐杜本。
English: Du Pont was a learned man, and his opinion was highly appreciated by Jiangsu and Zhejiang's provincial chancellor, Qu Rong, who received his proposal for a "waste-relief policy." When Qu Rong entered Beijing to serve as imperial historian, he strongly recommended Du Pont to Emperor Wu.

古文：尝被召至京师，未几归隐武夷山中。
现代文：杜本被武宗召至京师。但不久，便回武夷山过隐居生活。
English: Dubon was summoned to Beijing by Emperor Wuzong, but he soon returned to live in seclusion in Wuyishan.

古文：文宗在江南时，闻其名，及即位，以币征之，不起。
现代文：文宗在江南时，便听说此人的情况。及即帝位后，给杜本送礼品，并想起用他，他不出山。
English: When Wenzong was in the south of the Yangtze River, he heard about this man's situation. And immediately after his accession to the throne, he sent gifts to Du Pont, and remembered to use him, he would not go out of the mountains.

古文：至正三年，右丞相脱脱以隐士荐，诏遣使赐以金织文币、上尊酒，召为翰林待制、奉议大夫，兼国史院编修官。
现代文：到至正三年，右丞相脱脱把他作为隐士，再次向惠宗推荐，惠宗也赠以厚礼，召为翰林待制、奉议大夫兼国史院编修官。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Taizong, the Minister of the Right removed him as a recluse and recommended him to Huizong again. Huizong also presented him with a gift and called him to be a Hanlin waiter, a doctor of recommendation and an editor of the Academy of National History.

古文：使者致君、相意，趣之行。
现代文：使者转达惠宗与丞相邀他出山的诚意，催他启程。
English: The messenger conveyed the sincerity of Huizong and Zheng to invite him out of the mountain and urged him to leave.

古文：至杭州，称疾固辞，而致书于丞相曰： 以万事合为一理，以万民合为一心，以千载合为一日，以四海合为一家，则可言制礼作乐，而跻五帝三王之盛矣。 
现代文：但他至杭州后，却称病固辞，并写信给丞相说： 以万事合为一理、以万民合为一心、以千载合为一日、以四海合为一家，才可谈得上制礼作乐，而达到五帝三王的盛世。 
English: However, after he arrived in Hangzhou, he announced that he was terminally ill and wrote a letter to the prime minister saying, "Only when all things are one, when all the people are one, when a thousand years are one day, and when the four seas are one family, can we talk about the establishment of etiquette and music, and achieve the prosperity of the five emperors and three kings."

古文：平居书册未尝释手。天文、地理、律历、度数，靡不通究，尤工于篆隶。
现代文：平时手不释卷，对天文、地理、律历、度数，无不通究，对篆隶等书法尤其在行。
English: In ordinary times, he is a tireless student of astronomy, geography, the Gregorian calendar, and degrees. He is especially proficient in calligraphy, such as 隶.

古文：所著有《四经表义》、《六书通编》、《十原》等书，学者称为清碧先生。
现代文：著述有《四经表义》、《六书通编》、《十原》等书，学者称他为清碧先生。
English: He has written books such as "The Four Classics of Confucianism," "The Six Books of Confucianism," and "The Ten Classics of Confucianism," and scholars call him Mr. Qingbi.

古文：至正十年卒，年七十有五。
现代文：至正十年卒，享年七十五岁。
English: He was seventy-five years old at the time of his death.

古文：时有张枢子长者，婺之金华人，亦屡征不起。
现代文：当时还有张枢，字子长，婺州金华人。也是一位朝廷屡次邀请仍不出山的隐士。
English: At that time, there was also Zhang Zu, also known as Zhang Zichang, a native of Jinhua in Zhangzhou. He was also a hermit who was repeatedly invited by the imperial court but still did not leave the mountains.

古文：枢幼聪慧，外家潘氏蓄书数万卷，枢尽取而读之，过目辄不忘。
现代文：枢年幼时聪慧，外婆家藏书数万卷，枢尽取来阅读，过目不忘。
English: Zhou was clever when he was young. His grandmother had a collection of tens of thousands of books. Zhou read everything he could get his hands on and never forgot a thing.

古文：既长，肆笔成章，顷刻数千言。
现代文：及长，落笔成文，顷刻数千言。
English: And long, write down, thousands of words at a time.

古文：有问以古今沿革、政治得失、宇宙之分合、礼乐之废兴，以至帝号官名、岁月先后，历历如指诸掌。
现代文：有人问他古今沿革、政治得失、宇宙的分合、礼乐的兴废，以至皇帝年号、官名、年月的先后，他都历历了如指掌。
English: Someone asked him about the ancient and modern history, political gains and losses, the division and integration of the universe, the rise and fall of ceremonial music, and even the succession of the emperor's year, official name, and month. He knew everything.

古文：其为文，务推明经史，以扶翼教道，尤长于叙事。
现代文：其文章，力求明经史，辅助教化，尤长于叙事。
English: Its articles, which strive to clarify the history of the scriptures and assist in enlightenment, are particularly good at narration.

古文：尝取三国时事撰《汉本纪列传》，附以《魏吴载记》，为《续后汉书》七十三卷。
现代文：曾取三国时事撰《汉本纪列传》，附以《魏吴载记》，合为《续后汉书》七十三卷。
English: He once took the current affairs of the three countries to compile the "Hanbon Chronicle" and attached the "Wei Wu Record," which was combined into the "Continuation of the Han Dynasty" seventy-three volumes.

古文：临川危素称其立义精密，可备劝讲，朝廷取其书置宣文阁。
现代文：临川的危素，称其立义精密，可备为给皇上侍讲时用的书。朝廷取其书陈列于宣文阁。
English: The dangerous element of Linchuan, which is said to be precise and precise, can be prepared as a book for the emperor's attendant to read. The imperial court took its book and displayed it in the Xuanwen Pavilion.

古文：浙东部使者交荐之，前后章凡九上。
现代文：浙东部使者争相上章推荐，前后共九次。
English: Envoys from eastern Zhejiang rushed to recommend the last chapter, a total of nine times.

古文：至正三年，命儒臣纂修辽、金、宋三史，右丞相脱脱以监修国史领都总裁，辟枢本府长史，力辞不拜。
现代文：至正三年，命文臣纂修辽金宋三史，右丞相脱脱以监修国史领都总裁，举张枢为本府长史，枢不接受。
English: In the third year of the Taisho period, he ordered the scholar to compile the three histories of the Liao, Jin and Song dynasties, and the minister of the right to supervise the supervision of the president of the national history. Zhang Zu was appointed as the chief historian of this prefecture, but he did not accept it.

古文：七年，申命史臣纂修本朝后妃、功臣传，复以翰林修撰、儒林郎、同知制诰兼国史院编修官召枢，俾与讨论，复避不就。
现代文：七年，一再令史臣修本朝后妃、功臣传，又以翰林修撰、儒林郎、同知制诰兼国史编修官等官职起用张枢，枢又避而不就。
English: In the seventh year, he repeatedly ordered Shisen Shoshu, the empress dowager of the Imperial Court, and Gosen Shonin, and appointed him to the posts of Hanlin Shoshu, Julin Lang, Tongzhi Shijie and National History Editor-in-Chief, but he did not do so.

古文：使者强之行，至杭州，固辞而归。
现代文：后来使者只好强制他启程，但到杭州后，仍固辞而归。
English: Later, the envoy had to force him to leave, but after arriving in Hangzhou, he still refused to return.

古文：尝著《春秋三传归一义》三十卷，《刊定三国志》六十五卷，《林下窃议》、《曲江张公年谱》各一卷，《敝帚编》若干卷。
现代文：枢曾著《春秋三传归一义》三十卷、《刊定三国志》六十五卷、《林下窃议》及《曲江张公年谱》各一卷、《弊帚编》若干卷。
English: Zu has written 30 volumes of "Three Classics of Spring and Autumn Become One," 65 volumes of "Three National Histories to Be Published," one volume each of "Under the Forest" and "Qujiang Zhang Gong's Chronology," and several volumes of "Weaknesses."

古文：比长，学行纯笃，事母甚孝。家居教授，门庭萧然，而考德问业者日盛。
现代文：至正八年卒，年五十七岁。孙辙字履常，祖先自金陵迁至临川，幼年失父，由母亲教养成人，学行纯笃，事母至孝。在家教蒙馆，学生不多，但来做学术访问的人日众。
English: He was fifty-seven years old at the end of the eighth year of his life. His ancestors moved from Jinling to Linchuan, he lost his father when he was young, he was raised by his mother, he studied hard, and he was very filial to his mother. He taught at Mengguan at home, and there were not many students, but those who came for academic visits were numerous.

古文：郡中俊彦有声者皆出其门。
现代文：郡中有点名望的英俊之士，多出自他的门下。
English: Most of the handsome men of some repute in the county are descended from him.

古文：辙与人言，一以孝弟忠信为本，辞温气和，闻者莫不油然感悟。
现代文：孙辙和人说话，总是以孝悌忠信为本，词温气和，听的人莫不油然感悟。
English: When talking to people, Sun Rong always takes filial piety and loyalty as the basis. His words are warm and kind, and those who listen will be deeply impressed.

古文：待亲戚乡里礼意周洽，言论间未尝几微及人过失长短。
现代文：他对待亲戚乡里，礼周意恰，言谈间从不稍涉及人家的过失短长的话。
English: He treats his relatives in his hometown with courtesy and politeness, and never talks about other people's faults and shortcomings.

古文：士子至郡者必来见，部使者长吏以下仁且贤者，必造焉。
现代文：来郡的读书人必来拜见他，部使者、长吏以下的贤仁者他必定去拜访。
English: Readers who come to the county will surely come to see him, and he will certainly visit the emissaries, the wise and the benevolent below the officials.

古文：辙乐易庄敬，接之以礼，言不及官府。
现代文：辙和乐平易，端庄稳重，待人以礼，但从不谈官府之事。
English: He is easy-going, dignified and steady, treats people with courtesy, but never talks about government affairs.

古文：宪司屡辟，皆不就。江西行省特以遗逸举辙一人。
现代文：地方官一再推举，江西行省特别以 遗逸 的名义举辙一人，皆不就。
English: Local officials have repeatedly proposed that Jiangxi Province, in particular, nominate one person in the name of "heresy," but no one has done so.

古文：元统二年，年七十有三，卒于家。
现代文：辙的文章写得好，吴澄曾为其文集作序。元统二年，七十三岁卒于家中。
English: His essays were well written, and Wu Cheng once wrote a preface for his anthology. He died at home in the second year of the Yuan Dynasty, at the age of 73.

古文：同郡吴定翁字仲谷，其先当宋初自金陵来徙。
现代文：与孙辙同郡人中，有吴定翁，字仲谷，其先人宋初自金陵迁来临川。
English: Among the county people who are the same as Sun Ruts, there are Wu Ding Weng, Zha Zhong Gu, whose ancestors moved from Jinling to Xiacheng in the early Song Dynasty.

古文：定翁幼岁俨如成人，寒暑衣冠不少懈，清修文雅，与孙辙齐名。
现代文：定翁小时就俨如大人，无论寒暑，衣冠都很整洁，从不马虎，清修文雅，和孙辙同样有好名声。
English: Dingweng behaves like an adult from an early age. No matter whether it is cold or hot, his clothes are neat, never sloppy, clean and refined, and he has the same good reputation as Sun Rong.

古文：而最善为诗，揭傒斯称其幽茂疏淡，可比卢挚。
现代文：他最善作诗，揭亻奚斯称其幽雅清澹，可比元文学家卢挚。
English: He's the best at writing poetry, and critics say his poetry is elegant and clear, comparable to that of the former writer Lu Xizhi.

古文：御史及江西之方伯牧守部使者，辟荐相望，终身不为动。
现代文：御史及江西各级地方官争相推荐，但终身不为所动。
English: The Imperial Historian and local officials at all levels in Jiangxi competed to recommend him, but he remained unimpressed for life.

古文：程钜夫尝贻书曰： 临川士友及门者，踵相接也，何相望足下耿耿如玉人，而不可得见乎！ 
现代文：程钜夫曾给他写信说 ：临川士友登门的人，一个接着一个，为什么都望着您光亮如玉人而不可得见呢？ 
English: Cheng Yu's husband once wrote to him, "People who come to the door of Linchuan Shiyou, one after another, why do they all look at you as bright as a jade person and cannot see you?

古文：定翁尝曰： 士无求用于世，惟求无愧于世。 
现代文：定翁曾说 ：一个好的读书人，不求有用于世，但求无愧于世。 
English: Sadao once said, "A good reader does not seek to be of use to the world, but to be worthy of the world."

古文：人以为名言。
现代文：人们都认为这是一句名言。
English: People think it's a famous quote.

古文：何中，字太虚，抚之乐安人。
现代文：何中字太虚，抚州之乐安人。
English: Why are the Chinese characters too weak? The people of Fuzhou are happy.

古文：少颖拔，以古学自任，家有藏书万卷，手自校雠。
现代文：小时聪明，出类拔萃，以学好古学为己任。家中藏书万卷，能自己校勘。
English: He is very clever, outstanding, and it is his duty to learn ancient studies well. He has a collection of thousands of books at home, and he can do his own proofreading.

古文：其学弘深该博，广平程钜夫，清河元明善，柳城姚燧，东平王构，同郡吴澄、揭傒斯，皆推服之。
现代文：其学识之渊博，连广平的程钜夫、清河的元明善、柳城的姚燧、东平的王构，还有临川的吴徵、揭亻奚斯，都是很推崇佩服他的。
English: With his profound knowledge, even Cheng Shufu of Guangping, Yuan Mingshan of Qinghe, Yao Zheng of Liucheng, Wang Jie of Dongping, and Wu Zheng and Jie Jies of Linchuan all admired and respected him.

古文：至顺二年，江西行省平章全岳柱聘为龙兴郡学师。
现代文：至顺二年，江西行省平章全岳柱聘何中为龙兴郡学师。
English: By the second year of Shun, he became a scholar of Longxing County in Pingzhang Quengyue Zhuling He Middle School, Jiangxi Province.

古文：明年六月，以疾卒。
现代文：第二年六月，病逝。
English: He died of illness in June of the following year.

古文：所著有《易类象》二卷、《书传补遗》十卷、《通鉴纲目测海》三卷、《知非堂稿》十七卷。
现代文：所著有《易类象》二卷、《书传补遗》十卷、《通鉴纲目测海》三卷、《知非堂藁》十七卷。
English: He is the author of two volumes of "Easy Species," ten volumes of "Book Collection Supplement," three volumes of "Comprehensive Appraisal of the Sea," and seventeen volumes of "Knowing and Not Knowing."

古文：同郡危复之，字见心。
现代文：同郡的还有危复之，字见心。
English: In the same county, there is also a danger of recurrence, the word is heartfelt.

古文：宋末为太学生，师事汤汉，博览群书，好读《易》，尤工于诗。
现代文：宋末为太学生，拜汤汉为师，博览群书，好读《易经》，尤工于作诗。
English: At the end of the Song Dynasty, he was a great student. He followed Tang Han as his teacher, read a lot of books, was good at reading the "I Ching," and was especially good at writing poetry.

古文：至元初，元帅郭昂屡荐为儒学官，不就。
现代文：至元初年，元帅郭昂一再推荐其为儒学官，没有接受。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Marshal Guo Ang repeatedly recommended him as a Confucian official, but he was not accepted.

古文：至元中，朝廷累遣奉御察罕及翰林应奉詹玉以币征之，皆弗起。
现代文：至元中期，朝廷屡次遣奉御察罕及翰林应奉詹玉带礼品请其就任，危隐居于紫霞山中，不出仕。
English: By the middle of the Yuan Dynasty, the imperial court repeatedly sent officials to invite him to take office, and he lived in seclusion in the mountains of Zixia without serving.

古文：隐于紫霞山中，士友私谥曰贞白先生。
现代文：士友私赞为 贞白先生 。
English: My scholar friends praise me as Mr. Zhenbai.

古文：武恪，字伯威，宣德府人。
现代文：武恪字伯威，宣德府人。
English: Wu Ke is a native of Xuan Defu.

古文：初以神童游学江南，吴澄为江西儒学副提举，荐入国学肄业。
现代文：初以神童游学江南，吴澄为江西儒学副提举，推荐恪入国学读书。
English: At first, he was a prodigy traveling to the south of the Yangtze River to study, and Wu Cheng was promoted to the vice-chairman of Jiangxi Confucianism and recommended to enter the study of Chinese classics.

古文：明宗在潜邸，选恪为说书秀才，及出镇云南，恪在行。
现代文：明宗在当太子时便选恪为说书秀才。及太子出镇云南，恪也同行。
English: When Emperor Mingzong was crown prince, he chose Kaku as a talented storyteller. When the prince went to Yunnan, Kaku accompanied him.

古文：明宗欲起兵陕西，恪谏曰： 太子北行，于国有君命，于家有叔父之命，今若向京师发一箭，史官必书太子反。 
现代文：太子欲起兵陕西，恪谏道 ：太子往北行动，从国来说，要有君命；从家庭来说，要有叔父之命。今两种命令都没有，若向京师发一箭，史官必写 太子造反 。 
English: The prince wanted to raise an army in Shaanxi, and Guan Yu said, "For the prince to move northward, from the country's point of view, he must have the prince's life; from the family's point of view, he must have the uncle's life. At present, there are no two orders. If an arrow is sent to the Beijing division, the historian must write that the prince rebelled."

古文：左右恶恪言，乃曰： 武秀才有母在京，合遣其回。 
现代文：太子左右对恪的话很反感，乃对太子说： 武秀才有母有妻，理应让他回京。 
English: The princes were disgusted by Takeshi's words, but they said to the prince: Takehide only has a mother and a wife, so he should be allowed to return to Kyoto.

古文：恪遂还京师，居陋巷，教训子弟。
现代文：恪于是便离开太子回京，居于陋巷，教孩子读书。
English: Accordingly, Kaku left the crown prince and returned to Kyoto, where he lived in a back alley and taught his children to read.

古文：文宗知其名，除秘书监典簿。
现代文：文宗知道武恪其人，任他为秘书监典簿。
English: Wenzong knew that Wu Ke was his man and appointed him as his secretary to supervise the register.

古文：秩满，丁内艰，再除中瑞司典簿，改汾西县尹，皆不起。
现代文：及任期满，适逢母丧，朝廷再授中瑞司典簿，又改任汾西县知县，皆不到任。
English: At the end of his term of office, coinciding with his mother's death, the imperial court re-awarded the Sino-Swedish Book of Records, and he was reappointed as the prefect of Shaanxi County. All of them did not take office.

古文：人或劝之仕，恪曰： 向为亲屈，今亲已死，不复仕矣。 
现代文：有人劝他上任，他说： 过去为了母亲，委屈自己去做官。现在母亲已逝，我不再做官了。 
English: Someone advised him to take office, and he said: "In the past, for the sake of my mother, I wronged myself to become an official. Now my mother has passed away, I am no longer an official.

古文：居数岁，会朝廷选守令，泰不华举恪为平阳沁水县尹，亦不赴。
现代文：闲居几年，遇上朝廷又选地方官，泰不华便推举恪为平阳泌水县知县，也不到任。
English: After several years of idleness, when the imperial court elected local officials, Tai Buhua was elected to be the top magistrate of Pingyang Xingshui County, but he did not take office.

古文：近臣又荐为授经郎，恪遂阳为喑哑，不就。
现代文：皇帝近臣又推举他为授经郎。恪便假装自己喑不能言，没有去上任。
English: The emperor's close vassals also nominated him as the sutra-dispensing priest, but he pretended that he was unable to speak and did not take up the post.

古文：恪好读《周易》，每日坚坐。或问之曰： 先生之学，以何为本？ 
现代文：恪好读《周易》，每日长坐，或问他说 ：先生之学以何为本？ 
English: Read "Zhou Yi" diligently, sit for a long time every day, or ask him: What is the basis of the teacher's learning?

古文：恪曰： 以敬为本。 
现代文：恪答道 ：以敬为本。 
English: He replied emphatically, "Let's be respectful."

古文：所著有《水云集》若干卷。
现代文：所著有《水云集》若干卷。
English: He is the author of several volumes of "Water Clouds."

古文：其从之学者多有所成，佛家奴为太尉，完者不花佥枢密院事，皆有贤名。
现代文：向他求学的人，多有所成。如佛家奴为太尉，完者不花佥枢密院事，皆有贤名。
English: Many of those who studied under him achieved great success. For example, the son of a Buddhist family became a captain, and those who completed the course did not have to spend time in the Privy Council, and all of them had a reputation for excellence.

