古文：黄帝问于少俞曰：有人于此，并行并立，其年之长少等也，衣之厚薄均也，卒然遇烈风暴雨，或病或不病，或皆病，或皆不病，其故何也？
现代文：黄帝问少俞道：假如有这样一些人，他们的行为举止一样，共同行走或是站立，年龄大小一致，穿着衣服的厚薄也相同。可是，突然遇到狂风暴雨等异常气候变化，有人生病，有人不生病，有时都发病，有时都不发病，这是为什么呢？
English: Huang Di asked Shao Xuan: If there are such people, their behaviors are the same, they walk or stand together, their ages are the same, and they wear the same thickness of clothes. However, when they suddenly encounter abnormal climate changes such as violent storms and rains, some people get sick, some people don't get sick, sometimes they get sick, sometimes they don't get sick, why is this?

古文：少俞曰：帝问何急？
现代文：少俞回答说：您想先了解哪方面的情况呢？黄帝说：所有的问题我都想知道。
English: Shao Wei replied: Which aspect of the situation would you like to know first? Huang Di said: I want to know all the questions.

古文：黄帝曰：愿尽闻之。少俞曰：春青风，夏阳风，秋凉风，冬寒风。
现代文：少俞说：春季吹的是暖风，夏季是热风，秋季是凉风，冬季是寒风。
English: Shao Wei said: The warm wind blows in spring, the hot wind blows in summer, the cool wind blows in autumn and the cold wind blows in winter.

古文：凡此四时之风者，其所病各不同形。
现代文：因为在四季分别感受不同风邪，所以发生疾病时就会有不同的证候。
English: Because different colds are felt separately in the four seasons, there will be different symptoms when the disease occurs.

古文：黄帝曰：四时之风，病人如何？
现代文：黄帝问：四季不同的风邪分别侵袭人体，病人感受风邪会有什么区别呢？
English: Huang Di asked: Four seasons of different colds invade the human body separately, what is the difference between patients feeling colds?

古文：少俞曰：黄色薄皮弱肉者，不胜春之虚风。白色薄皮弱肉者，不胜夏之虚风。青色薄皮弱肉，不胜秋之虚风。赤色薄皮弱肉，不胜冬之虚风也。
现代文：少俞回答说：面色黄、皮肤薄、肌肉柔弱的人，脾气不足，经受不住春季虚邪贼风的侵袭；面色白、皮肤薄、肌肉柔弱的人，肺气不足，经受不住夏季虚邪贼风的侵袭；面色青、皮肤薄，肌肉柔弱的人，肝气不足，经受不住秋季虚邪贼风的侵袭；面色赤、皮肤薄、肌肉柔弱的人，心气不足，经受不住冬季虚邪贼风的侵袭。
English: "Yellow-faced, thin-skinned, and weak-muscled people are short-tempered and can't withstand the attack of the spring evil wind; white-skinned, thin-skinned, and weak-muscled people are short-winded and can't withstand the attack of the summer evil wind; blue-skinned, thin-skinned, and weak-muscled people are short-winded and can't withstand the attack of the autumn evil wind; red-skinned, thin-skinned, and weak-muscled people are short-tempered and can't withstand the attack of the winter evil wind."

古文：黄帝曰：黑色不病乎？
现代文：黄帝问：面色黑的人，就不会感受风邪而发生疾病吗？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "If a person has a dark complexion, won't they catch a cold and get sick?"

古文：少俞曰：黑色而皮厚肉坚，固不伤于四时之风。
现代文：少俞答：面色黑而皮肤厚、肌肉坚实的人，肾气充盛，当然不会遭受风邪的侵袭。
English: Answer: People with dark complexion, thick skin, and solid muscles, with abundant kidney qi, will of course not be attacked by colds.

古文：其皮薄而肉不坚，色不一者，长夏至而有虚风者，病矣；其皮厚而肌肉坚者，长夏至而有虚风，不病矣。
现代文：如果皮肤薄、肌肉不坚实、面色又不是始终保持黑色的人，到了长夏而感受虚邪贼风就会发生疾病。如果面色黑、皮肤厚、肌肉坚实者，即使在长夏遇到虚邪贼风，也不会发生疾病。
English: If the skin is thin, the muscles are not firm, and the complexion does not always remain black, people who feel the wind of the evil thief in the long summer will get sick. If the skin is dark, the skin is thick, and the muscles are solid, even if they encounter the wind of the evil thief in the long summer, they will not get sick.

古文：其皮厚而肌肉坚者，必重感于寒，外内皆然，乃病。
现代文：面色黑、皮肤厚、肌肉坚实的人一定是寒邪已侵入体内，又感受风邪，外邪与内邪相结合才会生病。
English: People with dark complexion, thick skin and firm muscles must have cold evil invade the body and feel cold, and external evil and internal evil will be combined to get sick.

古文：黄帝曰：善。
现代文：黄帝说：讲得很好。
English: Huang Di said, "That was well said."

古文：黄帝曰：夫人之忍痛与不忍痛，非勇怯之分也。
现代文：黄帝问道：一个人能否忍受疼痛，并不是区分勇敢还是胆怯的依据。
English: Huang Di asked: Whether a person can endure pain is not the basis for distinguishing between bravery and cowardice.

古文：夫勇士之不忍痛者，见难则前，见痛则止；夫怯士之忍痛者，闻难则恐，遇痛不动。
现代文：有的勇士遇到危难可以勇往直前，但却不能忍受疼痛，遇到疼痛就会畏缩不前；有的怯懦的人，听到危难就会恐惧，但却能忍受疼痛，遇到疼痛却能岿然不动。
English: There are brave people who can move forward in the face of danger, but can't bear the pain, and shrink back in the face of pain; and there are cowardly people who are afraid when they hear of danger, but can bear the pain, and can't move when they are in pain.

古文：夫勇士之忍痛者，见难不恐，遇痛不动；夫怯士之不忍痛者，见难与痛，目转面盻，恐不能言，失气惊，颜色变化，乍死乍生。
现代文：有的勇士遇到危难不惊恐，遇到身体疼痛也毫不畏惧动摇；有的怯懦的人，遇到危难和身体疼痛，就会头昏目眩，恐惧得说不出话来，惊悸失气，脸色大变，吓得死去活来。
English: There are brave men who do not panic in the face of danger and are not afraid to be shaken in the face of physical pain; and there are cowardly men who, in the face of danger and physical pain, become dizzy, speechless with fear, panic-stricken, pale-faced, and scared to death.

古文：余见其然也，不知其何由，愿闻其故。
现代文：我见到过这种情况，但不知这是什么原因导致的，我想了解其中的道理。
English: I've seen this happen, but I don't know what causes it, and I want to understand why.

古文：少俞曰：夫忍痛与不忍痛者，皮肤之薄厚，肌肉之坚脆、缓急之分也，非勇怯之谓也。
现代文：少俞回答说：能否忍耐疼痛，是根据皮肤的厚与薄，肌肉的坚实与脆弱，以及纵缓与紧密的不同，不是根据性格的勇敢和怯懦来区分。
English: Shao Wei replied, "The ability to endure pain is based on the thickness and thinness of the skin, the solidity and fragility of the muscles, and the difference between the longitudinal and the tight, not on the courage and cowardice of the character.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻勇怯之所由然。
现代文：黄帝问：我想了解人体性格的勇敢和怯懦，是从哪些形式表现出来的。
English: Huang Di asked: I want to know the forms of bravery and cowardice in human character.

古文：少俞曰：勇士者，目深以固，长冲直扬，三焦理横，其心端直，其肝大以坚，其胆满以傍，怒则气盛而胸张，肝举而胆横，眦裂而目扬，毛起而面苍，此勇士之由然者也。
现代文：少俞回答说：勇士，两目深邃而目光坚定，眉毛长直而上扬，皮肤肌肉的纹理是横向的，心脏端正而向下垂直，肝脏大而坚实，胆囊大而胆汁充盈。发怒时，怒气充满胸中而胸廓张大，肝气上升而胆气横溢，眼睛瞪得很大，目光逼人，毛发竖起，面色铁青等，这就是勇士之所以成为勇士的原因。
English: Shao Xuan replied: "A warrior, his eyes are deep and his gaze is firm, his eyebrows are long and straight and rise up, the texture of the skin muscles is transverse, the heart is upright and downwards perpendicular, the liver is large and solid, the gallbladder is large and full of bile. When angry, the anger fills the chest and the chest is large, the liver rises and the bile overflows, the eyes are wide, the eyes are compelling, the hair stands up, the face is livid, etc. This is why a warrior becomes a warrior.

古文：黄帝曰：愿闻怯士之所由然。
现代文：黄帝又问：性格怯懦的人有什么样的表现呢？
English: Yellow Emperor also asked: What kind of performance does a person with a cowardly personality have?

古文：少俞曰：怯士者，目大而不减，阴阳相失，其焦理纵，𩩲骬短而小，肝系缓，其胆不满而纵，肠胃挺，胁下空，虽方大怒，气不能满其胸，肝肺虽举，气衰复下，故不能久怒，此怯士之所由然者也。
现代文：少俞回答说：怯懦的人，眼睛虽然很大却眼神不坚定，阴阳气血不协调，皮肤肌肉的纹理是竖向的，胸骨剑突短小，肝脏薄弱而软，胆汁不满胆囊松弛，肠胃僵硬而少弯，胁下空虚，即使发怒时，怒气也不能充满胸中，肝肺虽然因怒气而暂时上举，但是随着怒气的衰减，肝肺又重新下降，所以不能长时间地发怒，这就是怯懦人的怯懦的原因。
English: Shao Qi replied: Cowardly people, although their eyes are large, their eyes are not firm, yin and yang are not in harmony, the texture of the skin muscles is vertical, the sternum is short and small, the liver is weak and soft, the gallbladder is loose, the stomach is rigid and less curved, and it is empty under duress. Even when angry, the anger cannot fill the chest. Although the liver and lungs are temporarily raised due to anger, as the anger wanes, the liver and lungs fall again, so they cannot be angry for a long time. This is the reason for the coward's cowardice.

古文：黄帝曰：怯士之得酒，怒不避勇士者，何脏使然？
现代文：黄帝问：怯懦的人喝了酒以后发怒时与勇敢的人相似，是哪些脏腑发挥作用使他这样呢？
English: The Yellow Emperor asked, "When a cowardly person drinks wine and gets angry, he is similar to a brave person. Which organs are involved in making him like this?"

古文：少俞曰：酒者，水谷之精，熟谷之液也，其气慓悍，其入于胃中，则胃胀，气上逆，满于胸中，肝浮胆横，当是之时，固比于勇士，气衰则悔。
现代文：少俞回答说：酒是水谷的精华，由谷类酿造而成的液体，性质迅猛滑利。酒入胃后使胃胀大，气机上逆，壅滞胸中，使肝气上升，胆汁横逆。饮酒后，他的行为当然与勇敢的人相同，但是等到酒醒气衰以后，自己就会感到懊悔。
English: Shao Wei replied: "Wine is the essence of Mizutani. It is a liquid brewed from cereals, and its nature is swift and smooth. After the wine enters the stomach, it causes the stomach to swell, the gas machine to reverse, the stagnation in the chest, the liver gas to rise, and the bile to reverse. After drinking, of course, his behavior is the same as that of a brave person, but when the wine is exhausted, he will feel remorse.

古文：与勇士同类，不知避之，名曰酒悖也。
现代文：这种人的表现虽然与勇敢的人非常相似，但并不是有意识地按照勇敢人的行为去做，是酒在体内所起的作用，所以称为 酒悖 。
English: Although the performance of such people is very similar to that of brave people, they do not consciously follow the behavior of brave people. It is the role of alcohol in the body, so it is called drunkenness.

