古文：李泌
现代文：李泌
English: Li Jie

古文：李泌字长源，赵郡中山人也。
现代文：李泌，字长源，赵郡中山人。
English: Li Jie, surnamed Changyuan, from Zhongshan, Zhao County.

古文：六代祖弼，唐太师。
现代文：他的上六辈的祖父李弼，是唐朝的太师。
English: His sixth-generation grandfather, Li Xi, was a grandmaster of the Tang Dynasty.

古文：父承休，唐吴房令。
现代文：他的父亲李承休，是唐朝吴房县的县令。
English: His father, Li Chengxiu, was the county magistrate of Wufang County in the Tang Dynasty.

古文：休娶汝南周氏。
现代文：李承休娶汝南周氏为妻。
English: Li Chengxu married Runan Zhou.

古文：初，周氏尚幼，有异僧僧伽泗上来，见而奇之。且曰： 此女后当归李氏，而生三子，其最小者，慎勿以紫衣衣之，当起家金紫，为帝王师。 
现代文：当初，周氏还小，有一位名叫僧伽从泗水来的怪和尚见了她感到奇怪，并且说： 这女孩儿以后得嫁给姓李的，能生三个儿子，那个最小的千万不要给他穿紫色衣服。这个孩子由金印紫绶起家，作帝王的老师。 
English: At first, when Zhou was still a child, a strange monk named Sangha from Surabaya was surprised to see her and said: "This girl will have to marry someone with the surname Li in the future. If she can have three sons, the youngest one must not wear purple clothes. This child started from Jin Ying Zijuan and became the emperor's teacher.

古文：及周氏既娠泌，凡三周年，方寤而生。
现代文：等到周氏怀了李泌之后，怀胎三年，他才生了下来。
English: He was born three years after Zhou became pregnant with Li Jing.

古文：泌生而发至于眉。
现代文：李泌生下来头发就长到眼眉。
English: The hair grows down to the eyebrows after menses.

古文：先是周每产，必累日困惫，唯娩泌独无恙，由是小字为顺。
现代文：在这以前，周氏每次生孩子，必定一连多日困乏疲惫，只有这次生李泌没有毛病，因此他的小名叫 顺 。
English: Before this, every time Zhou gave birth to a child, he must have been exhausted for many days in a row. Only this time, Li Xiu was born without any problems, so his nickname was Shun.

古文：泌幼而聪敏，书一览必能诵，六七岁学属文。
现代文：李泌从小就聪敏，书只看一遍就必定能背下来。他六七岁就学习写文章。
English: Li Jie has been smart since he was a child. He can recite a book after reading it only once. He learned to write articles at the age of six or seven.

古文：开元十六年，玄宗御楼大酺，夜于楼下置高坐，召三教讲论。
现代文：开元十六年，唐玄宗在御楼上大设酒宴，夜里在楼下放了一个高高的座位，叫来三教九流登台讲演论辩。
English: In the 16th year of the first century, Emperor Tang Xuan Zong held a grand banquet on the upper floor of the palace. At night, he placed a high seat downstairs and invited the nine schools of the three religions to stage a speech and debate.

古文：泌姑子员俶，年九岁，潜求姑备儒服，夜升高坐，词辨锋起，谭者皆屈。
现代文：李泌姑母的儿子员俶，那年九岁，偷偷求母亲准备了儒生的衣服，趁夜登上高座，词辩非常锋利，演讲的人都理屈词穷。
English: The nine-year-old son of Li Jing's aunt secretly begged his mother to prepare Confucian clothes for him, and took advantage of the night to ascend to the high seat. The debate was very sharp, and the speakers were poor in logic.

古文：玄宗奇之，召入楼中，问姓名。乃曰： 半千之孙，宜其若是。 
现代文：唐玄宗认为他不一般，把他召入楼中，问清他的姓名之后便说： 原来是半千岁的孙子，应该如此。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong thought he was unusual and called him into the building. After asking his name, he said: "It turns out he is a half-thousand-year-old grandson, that's how it should be."

古文：因问外更有奇童如儿者乎。对曰： 舅子顺，年七岁，能赋敏捷。 
现代文：于是唐玄宗就问宫外还有没有象他这样的奇童子，他回答说： 我舅舅的儿子李顺，今年七岁，能赋诗，非常聪明。 
English: So Tang Xuan Zong asked if there were any other prodigies like him outside the palace. He replied, "My uncle's son, Li Shun, is seven years old. He can compose poems and is very clever.

古文：问其宅居所在，命中人潜伺于门，抱之以入，戒勿令其家知。
现代文：唐玄宗问清李顺家的住处，派宦官偷偷等候在门外，把他抱进宫来，警告说不要让他家知道。
English: Tang Xuan Zong asked Li Shun's family where they lived, sent a eunuch to secretly wait outside the door, took him into the palace, and warned him not to let his family know.

古文：玄宗方与张说观棋，中人抱泌至。俶与刘晏，偕在帝侧。
现代文：唐玄宗正在和张说下围棋。宦官抱着李泌来到，员俶和刘宴都在皇帝身边。
English: Tang Xuan Zong is playing a game of Go with Zhang. The eunuch arrives with Li Xiu in his arms, and the eunuch and Liu Yan are at the emperor's side.

古文：及玄宗见泌，谓说曰： 后来者与前儿绝殊，仪状真国器也。 
现代文：等到唐玄宗见到李泌，对张说说： 后来这个小孩与前边那个绝对不一样，从他的仪表相貌看，可真是国家的栋梁之材啊！ 
English: When Tang Xuan Zong saw Li Xuru, he said to Zhang: Later, this child is absolutely different from the one in front of him. Judging from his appearance, he is truly a pillar of the country!

古文：说曰： 诚然。 
现代文：张说说： 确实是这样。 
English: Zhang said, "It's really true.

古文：遂命说试为诗。
现代文：于是唐玄宗就让张说试一下他作诗的程度如何。
English: So Tang Xuan Zong asked Zhang to test the level of his poetry.

古文：即令詠方圆动静。
现代文：张说让他咏方、圆、动、静。
English: Zhang said that he should make it square, round, moving and still.

古文：泌曰。愿闻其状。
现代文：李泌说： 请告诉我各是什么样子。 
English: Li Jie said: Please tell me what each one looks like.

古文：说应曰： 方如棋局，圆如棋子，动如棋生，静如棋死。 
现代文：张说说： 方就是棋盘，圆就象棋子，动就象棋活了，静就象棋死了。 
English: Zhang said: "The square is a chessboard, the circle is like a chess piece, the movement is like a chess game alive, and the stillness is like a chess game dead.

古文：说以其幼，仍教之曰： 但可以意虚作，不得更实道棋字。 
现代文：张说因为李泌年幼，就教他说： 只能按意思虚作，不能再实说出 棋 字来。 
English: Zhang said that because Li Xiu was young, he taught him to say: "You can only fake what you want, you can't really say the word 'chess' anymore."

古文：泌曰： 随意即甚易耳。 
现代文：李泌说： 随意作就太容易了。 
English: Li Jie said: It's too easy to do whatever you want.

古文：玄宗笑曰： 精神全大于身。 
现代文：唐玄宗笑道： 这孩子的聪明才智大于他的实际年龄。 
English: Tang Xuan Zong laughed: This child's intelligence is greater than his actual age.

古文：泌乃言曰： 方如行义，圆如用智，动如逞才，静如遂意。 
现代文：李泌就说道： 方就象行义，圆就象用智，动就象逞才，静就象遂意。 
English: Li Xiu said: "The square is like the practice of righteousness, the circle is like the use of wisdom, the movement is like courage, and the stillness is like accomplishment."

古文：说因贺曰： 圣代嘉瑞也。 
现代文：张说于是向唐玄宗祝贺说： 这是太平盛世的祥瑞之事啊！ 
English: Zhang said, and then congratulated Tang Xuanzong, saying, "This is the auspicious event of a peaceful and prosperous world!

古文：玄宗大悦，抱于怀，抚其头，命果饵啗之。
现代文：唐玄宗非常高兴，把李泌抱在怀里，摸着他的头，让人拿果品给他吃。
English: Tang Xuan Zong was very happy. He hugged Li Xuan in his arms, stroked his head, and asked someone to bring him some fruit to eat.

古文：遂送忠王院，两月方归。仍赐衣物及綵数十。且谕其家曰： 年小，恐于儿有损，未能与官。
现代文：于是就把他送到忠王院，两个月以后才让他回家，还送给他衣物和几十匹彩丝织品，并且告诉他家说： 孩子太小，怕有害于孩子，所以没封他官。
English: So they sent him to Zhongwang Academy, and only after two months did they let him go home. They also gave him clothes and dozens of pieces of colorful silk fabric, and told his family: "The child is too small, I'm afraid it will be harmful to the child, so I didn't have him arrested."

古文：当善视之，乃国器也。 
现代文：应该好好看待他，这是国家的栋梁之材。 
English: He should be treated well, he is the backbone of the country.

古文：由是张说邀至其宅，命其子均、垍，相与若师友，情义甚狎。
现代文：从此，张说把李泌请到自己家里，让儿子张均、张和他在一起，就象师友那样，孩子们相处得非常亲近。
English: From then on, Zhang said that he invited Li Xuru to his home, and let his sons Zhang Jun and Zhang stay with him. Just like teachers and friends, the children get along very closely.

古文：张九龄、贺知章、张庭珪、韦虚心，一见皆倾心爱重。
现代文：张九龄、贺知章、张庭珪、韦虚心等人，一见了李泌也都非常喜欢器重他。
English: Zhang Jiuling, He Zhizhang, Zhang Tingtao, Wei Xuxin and others, when they saw Li Xiu, they also liked him very much.

古文：贺知章尝曰： 此捀子目如秋水，必当拜卿相。 
现代文：贺知章曾经说： 这小子目如秋水，将来一定能做卿相。 
English: He Zhizhang once said: This young man is like the autumn water, he will surely be able to be the prime minister in the future.

古文：张说曰： 昨者上欲官之。
现代文：张说说： 昨天皇上想封他官，我说不行。
English: Zhang said, "Yesterday, the emperor wanted to appoint him as an official, but I couldn't do it.

古文：某言未可。
现代文：这是爱护他，等他成器罢了。 
English: It's a case of nurturing him and waiting for him to mature.

古文：盖惜之，待其成器耳。 当其为儿童时，身轻，能于屏风上立，薰笼上行。道者云： 年十五必白日升天。 
现代文：当初他是儿童的时候，身体很轻，能在屏风上站立，能在薰笼上行走。一个有道术的人说： 这孩子十五岁一定会大白天升天做神仙。 
English: When he was a child, his body was so light that he could stand on a screen and walk on a cage. A man of the Daoist sect said, "At the age of fifteen, this child will surely ascend to heaven in broad daylight to become a god."

古文：父母保惜，亲族怜爱，闻之，皆若有甚厄也。
现代文：父母保护他、喜爱他。
English: His parents protect him and love him.

古文：一旦空中有异香之气，及音乐之声，李公之血属，必迎骂之。
现代文：亲族喜欢他，听说这样都象对他有很大的危险，互相约定，如果有一天空中真出现奇异的香味和音乐声，李泌的近亲，一定要迎上去大骂一顿。
English: His relatives liked him, and they heard that this was a great danger to him, and they mutually agreed that if one day a strange scent and music really appeared in the air, Li Xiu's close relatives would definitely come to scold him.

古文：至其年八月十五日，笙歌在室，时有彩云挂于庭树。
现代文：到了李泌十五岁那年的八月十五日，果然有笙歌响在室内，时时有彩云挂在院子里的树上。
English: On the fifteenth day of August, the fifteenth year of Li Xiu's age, there was indeed the sound of Yingge in the room, and there were always colorful clouds hanging on the trees in the courtyard.

古文：李公之亲爱，乃多捣蒜韭，至数斛，伺其异音奇香至，潜令人登屋，以巨杓飏浓蒜泼之，香乐遂散，自此更不复至。
现代文：李泌的亲朋，就一齐捣蒜泥，捣了几大桶，等到异音和奇香来到，暗中让人登上屋顶，用大勺子扬洒蒜泥泼向那异音和奇香的来处，音乐和香味就散去。从此就不再来了。
English: Li Xiu's relatives and friends all pounded garlic mud together, pounded several large barrels, and waited until the strange sound and strange smell came, secretly let people get on the roof, sprinkled garlic mud with a large spoon to the place where the strange sound and strange smell came from, and the music and fragrance dispersed. From then on, they stopped coming.

古文：后二年，赋长歌行曰： 天覆吾，地载吾，天地生吾有意无。
现代文：二年以后，李泌赋《长歌行》一首，说道： 天覆吾，地载吾，天地生吾有意无？
English: Two years later, Li Xiufu composed a song "Long Song" and said: "Heaven overthrows me, earth carries me, heaven and earth give birth to me, is it intentional or not?

古文：不然绝粒升天衢，不然鸣珂游帝都。
现代文：不然绝粒升天衢，不然鸣柯游帝都。
English: Otherwise, he will never be able to ascend to heaven. Otherwise, he will never be able to visit the capital.

古文：焉能不贵复不去，空作昂藏一丈夫。
现代文：焉能不贵复不去，空作昂藏一丈夫。
English: It's all up to you, you can't go back to being a husband.

古文：一丈夫兮一丈夫，平生志气是良图。
现代文：一丈夫兮一丈夫，平生志气是良图。
English: One husband, one husband, lifelong ambition is a good picture.

古文：请君看取百年事，业就扁舟泛五湖。 
现代文：请君看取百年事，业就扁舟泛五湖。 
English: I would like you to look at the centenary, and the industry will be a flat boat across the five lakes.

古文：诗成，传写之者莫不称赏。
现代文：诗写成之后，传抄的人没有不称赏的。
English: After a poem is written, the person who transcribes it has nothing but praise for it.

古文：张九龄见，独诫之曰： 早得美名，必有所折。宜自韬晦，斯尽善矣。
现代文：只有张九龄见了之后警告他说： 过早有了好名声，一定会带来损失，你应该自己注意隐藏才能，这才能尽善尽美。
English: Only Zhang Jiuling warned him after seeing him: "Having a good reputation too early will definitely bring losses. You should pay attention to your hidden talents, which can be perfected.

古文：藏器于身，古人所重，况童子耶！
现代文：把本领隐藏起来，是古人很重视的，何况你还是个小孩子呢！
English: The ancients attached great importance to hiding one's abilities, and what's more, you're still a child!

古文：但当为诗以赏风景，詠古贤，勿自扬己为妙。 
现代文：你只应该作诗赞赏风景，咏叹古贤，不要自己表现自己才好。 
English: You should only write poetry to appreciate the scenery and praise the sages, not to express yourself.

古文：泌泣谢之。
现代文：李泌感动得流泪表示感谢。
English: Li Jie was moved to tears and expressed his gratitude.

古文：尔后为文，不复自言。
现代文：后来再写的文章，不再言及自己。
English: He later rewrote the article, removing the reference to himself.

古文：九龄尤喜其有心，言前途不可量也。
现代文：张九龄尤其喜欢李泌有心计，说他前途不可估量。
English: Zhang Jiuling especially likes that Li Xiu has a plan, saying that his future is immeasurable.

古文：又尝以直言矰讽九龄。
现代文：他还曾经用忠直的话语规劝过张九龄。
English: He also used to persuade Zhang Jiuling with sincere words.

古文：九龄感之。遂呼为小友。
现代文：张九龄很感激他，于是就叫他是 小友 。
English: Zhang Jiuling was very grateful to him, so he called him Xiao You.

古文：九龄出荆州，邀至郡经年，就于东都肄业。
现代文：张九龄出任荆州的时候，把他请到郡里住了一年多。
English: When Zhang Jiuling took office in Jingzhou, he invited him to live in the county for more than a year.

古文：遂游衡山、嵩山。因遇神仙桓真人、羡门子、安期先生降之。
现代文：他在东都学习的时候，游历了衡山和嵩山，于是遇见神仙桓真人、羡门子、安期先生降临。
English: When he was studying in Dongdu, he traveled through Hengshan and Songshan, whereupon he met the gods Kuan Zhenren, Enmenzi, and Anji.

古文：羽车幢节，流云神光，照灼山谷，将曙乃去，仍授以长生羽化服饵之道。
现代文：羽毛制成的车帘和旌旗，流动的云朵和神奇的光彩，照耀着山谷，天将亮的时候才散去。
English: Curtains and pennants made of feathers, flowing clouds and magical splendour, light up the valley and only disperse when it's getting light.

古文：且戒之曰： 太上有命，以国祚中危，朝廷多难，宜以文武之道，佐佑人主，功及生灵，然后可登真脱屣耳。 
现代文：神仙们还教给他通过服用药物而长生成仙的道术，并且警告他说： 太上有命令，因为国家有危险，朝廷多难，你应该以文武之道辅佐皇帝，让你的功德遍及天下民众，然后就可以得道成仙了。 
English: The immortals also taught him the Taoist art of growing into immortality by taking medicine, and warned him: "The emperor has ordered you, because the country is in danger and the court is difficult, you should support the emperor with the way of literature and martial arts, let your merits spread to the people of the world, and then you can become immortal.

古文：自是多绝粒咽气，修黄光谷神之要。
现代文：从此，他经常只呼吸不吃粮食，修习黄光谷神的旨要。
English: Since then, he often only breathes and does not eat food, and practices the will of Huangguang Valley God.

古文：及归京师，宁王延于第。玉真公主以弟呼之，特加敬异。
现代文：等到他回到京城，宁王把他迎接到王府，玉真公主叫他弟弟，对他格外敬重。
English: When he returned to the capital, King Ning welcomed him to the royal palace. Princess Yuzhen called him her younger brother and held him in high esteem.

古文：常赋诗，必播于王公乐章。
现代文：他平常赋的诗，一定会被王公们配上乐章传播。
English: The poems he usually composed would certainly be set to music and spread by the princes.

古文：及丁父忧，绝食柴毁。
现代文：父亲死了，他为父亲守孝，不吃食物骨瘦如柴。
English: His father died, he was a filial son to his father, he didn't eat food and was skinny as a rail.

古文：服阕，复游嵩华终南，不顾名禄。
现代文：他守孝期满就脱了孝服，又去嵩山、华山、终南山游历，根本不顾名声和利禄。
English: At the end of his term of filial piety, he took off his filial piety robe and traveled to Songshan, Huashan and Nanshan, completely disregarding his reputation and reward.

古文：天宝十载，玄宗访召入内，献《明堂九鼎》议。应制作《皇唐圣祚》文，多讲道谈经。
现代文：天宝十年，唐玄宗把他寻访到召入宫中，他献上了《明堂九鼎》的奏议，应制作了《皇唐圣祚》的文章，经常讲道谈经。
English: In the tenth year of Tianbao, Emperor Xuanzong of the Tang Dynasty called him to the palace. He presented a report on "Mingtang Jiuding," produced an article on "Emperor Tang Sheng Yao," and often preached and talked about the scriptures.

古文：肃宗为太子，敕与太子诸王为布衣交，为杨国忠所忌，以其所作感遇诗，谤议时政，构而陷之，诏于蕲春郡安置。
现代文：唐肃宗是太子的时候，皇上诏令李泌和太子及王子们是布衣之交，被杨国忠忌恨，以他所作的《感遇》诗是诽谤时政为名设计陷害他，皇上诏令把他安置在蕲春郡。
English: When Emperor Suizong of Tang was the crown prince, the emperor issued an imperial edict that Li Xiurong was a close friend of the crown prince and the princes. He was hated by Yang Guozhong, who planned to frame Li Xiurong in the name of slandering the current government with his poem "Impression." The imperial edict placed Li Xiurong in Hunchun County.

古文：天宝十二载，母周亡，归家，太子诸王皆使吊祭。
现代文：天宝十二年，他母亲周氏死了，他回到家里，太子和王子们都派人去吊祭。
English: In the twelfth year of Tianbao, his mother Zhou died, he returned home, the prince and princes all sent people to the hanging ceremony.

古文：寻禄山陷潼关，玄宗肃宗分道巡狩，泌尝窃赋诗，有匡复意。
现代文：不久安禄山攻破潼关，玄宗和肃宗分道出走，李泌曾经偷偷地作诗，有匡复国家的意思。
English: Soon after, Anlu Mountain broke through the pass, and Xuanzong and Su Zong went their separate ways. Li Xiu once secretly wrote a poem, with the intention of restoring the country.

古文：虢王巨为河洛节度使，使人求泌于嵩少间。会肃宗手札至，虢王备车马送至灵武。
现代文：虢王李巨是河洛节度使，他派人在嵩山少室找到李泌，赶上唐肃宗的手札送到，虢王备车马把李泌送到灵武。
English: Li Jiu, the king of Qin, was the emissary of the Helo Festival. He sent someone to the Songshan Minor's House to find Li Xiu, catch up with the Tang Su Zong's hand card and deliver it. The king of Qin prepared a carriage and horse to send Li Xiu to Lingwu.

古文：肃宗延于卧内，动静顾问，规画大计，遂复两都。
现代文：唐肃宗把李泌迎到卧室内，向他询问行止动静，和他共同商讨大计。于是收复了两都。
English: Tang Su Zong welcomed Li Xiu into his bedroom, asked him about the status of the situation, and discussed the grand plan with him. Thus, the two capitals were recovered.

古文：泌与上寝则对榻，出则联镳。
现代文：李泌与皇上，睡觉则床对床，出门则马头并着马头。
English: Li Xuan and the emperor slept on opposite sides of the bed, and when they went out, they walked side by side.

古文：代宗时为广平王，领天下兵马元帅，诏授侍谋军国天下兵马元帅府行军长史、判行军事，仍于禁中安置。
现代文：代宗时，封李泌为广平王，任天下兵马元帅，并且授给他侍谋军国天下兵马元帅府行军长史的头衔，让他决定军事，仍然把他安置在宫中。
English: At the time of enthronement, Li Xiu was appointed as the King of Guangping and the Field Marshal of the World, and he was given the title of the General of the Field Marshal of the World, and he was allowed to decide on military affairs, and he was still placed in the palace.

古文：崔圆、房琯自蜀至，册肃宗为皇帝，并赐泌手诏衣马枕被等。
现代文：崔圆、房琯从蜀地回来，传达玄宗旨意册立肃宗当皇帝，玄宗并把手诏、衣服、马、枕、被等东西赐给李泌。
English: Cui Yuan and Fang Yao returned from Shu and conveyed Xuanzong's intention to make Xuanzong the emperor. Xuanzong also gave Li Xiu a handshake, clothes, a horse, a pillow, a quilt and other things.

古文：既立大功，而幸臣李辅国害其能，将不利之。因表乞游衡岳。
现代文：李泌确实立了大功，但觉察到宠臣李辅国忌妒他的才能，觉得将要对己不利，就上表请求到衡山游历。
English: Li Xiu really made a great achievement, but he realized that his favorite, Li Yuquan, was jealous of his talent and felt that he would be unfavorable to himself, so he asked the table to travel to Hengshan.

古文：优诏许之，给以三品禄俸。
现代文：皇上优先下诏批准了，给他三品官的俸禄。
English: The emperor gave priority to the imperial edict and approved it, giving him the salary of a three-ranked official.

古文：山居累年，夜为寇所害，投之深谷中。
现代文：他在山里居住了好几年。一天夜里，他被贼寇加害，把他扔到深谷中。
English: He lived in the mountains for several years. One night, he was attacked by a bandit and thrown into a deep ravine.

古文：及明，乃攀缘他径而出。
现代文：等到天亮，他就攀援别的路径走出来了。
English: By dawn, he had scrambled out on another route.

古文：为槁叶所藉，略无所损。
现代文：他被枯叶垫着，没受一点伤。
English: He was cushioned by dead leaves and did not suffer any injuries.

古文：初，肃宗之在灵武也，常忧诸将李郭等，皆已为三公宰相，崇重既极，虑收复后无以复为赏也。
现代文：当初，肃宗在灵武的时候，曾经担忧李郭等将军们，他们都已经是三公宰相，已经尊崇敬重到了极点，担心收复失地之后再没有什么高官可以给奖赏他们了。
English: At the beginning, when Su Zong was in Lingwu, he was worried that Li Guo and other generals, who were already the three princes and prime ministers, had already been respected to the extreme, and he was worried that there would be no high-ranking officials to reward them after regaining the lost land.

古文：泌对曰： 前代爵以报功，官以任能。
现代文：李泌回答说： 以前的朝代，用封爵来表扬有功的人，用封官来任用有能的人。
English: Li Xiu replied: In the previous dynasties, people used knighthoods to praise meritorious people, and officials to appoint capable people.

古文：自尧舜以至三代，皆所不易。
现代文：从尧舜到夏商周三代，都是这样做的。
English: This is how it was done from Shun to the third generation of Xia merchants.

古文：今收复后，若赏以茅土，不过二三百户一小州，岂难制乎？ 
现代文：如果收复失地，可以赏给他们土地，也不过二三百户的一个小州，难道这还不能控制吗？ 
English: If we recover the lost land, we can give them land, but only a small state of two or three hundred households. Is this not controllable?

古文：肃宗曰： 甚善。 
现代文：肃宗说： 很好。 
English: Suson said, "That's good."

古文：因曰： 若臣之所愿，则特与他人异。 肃宗曰： 何也？ 
现代文：于是李泌说： 至于我所希望的，就和别人不一样。 肃宗说： 为什么呢？ 
English: Then Li Xiu said, "As for what I hope for, it is different from others." Su Zong said, "Why?"

古文：泌曰： 臣绝粒无家，禄位与茅土，皆非所欲。
现代文：李泌说： 我不吃粮食没有家，对禄位和土地都没有欲望。
English: Li Zuo said: I don't eat food, I don't have a home, and I have no desire for a position or land.

古文：为陛下帷幄运筹，收京师后，但枕天子膝睡一觉，使有司奏客星犯帝座，一动天文足矣。 
现代文：我为陛下运筹帷幄，收复京城以后，只要能枕在天子的膝上睡一觉，让钦天监来奏报客星侵犯帝座，能动一动天上星宿就满足了。 
English: I made plans for His Majesty's operation. After the recovery of the capital, as long as I could sleep on the knees of the Son of Heaven, let the Guardian of Heaven come to invade the imperial throne, and move the stars in the sky, I would be satisfied.

古文：肃宗大笑。
现代文：肃宗大笑。
English: Suson laughed loudly.

古文：及南幸扶风，每顿，必令泌领元帅兵先发清行宫，收管钥，奏报，然后肃宗至。
现代文：等到皇帝向南进入扶风，每次停顿，皇帝一定让李泌率领部队先出发。由李泌清理行宫，收拾管键钥匙，奏报之后，肃宗才到。
English: When the emperor went south into Fu Feng, every time there was a pause, the emperor would definitely let Li Xiu lead the troops to set off first. Li Xiu would clean up the palace, collect the pipe and key, and deliver the report, after which Su Zong would arrive.

古文：至保定郡，泌稍懈，先于本院寐。肃宗来入院，不令人惊之，登床，捧泌首置于膝。
现代文：走到保定郡，李泌稍有懈怠，事先在院子里睡着了，肃宗来到，走进院子，不让人惊动李泌。皇帝上床，把李泌的头捧到自己膝上。
English: When he came to Baoding County, Li Xuan was a bit sluggish. He had fallen asleep in the courtyard beforehand. Su Zong came and walked into the courtyard, not letting anyone disturb Li Xuan. The emperor went to bed and held Li Xuan's head in his lap.

古文：良久方觉。
现代文：好长时间李泌才醒。
English: It took a long time for Li Xiu to wake up.

古文：上曰： 天子膝已枕矣，克复之期，当在何时？
现代文：皇上说： 天子的膝你已经枕了，攻克敌营收复失地的日子在什么时候？
English: The emperor said, "The knee of the Son of Heaven is already on the pillow. When will be the day to conquer the enemy and recover the lost land?"

古文：可促偿之。 
现代文：可以缩短时间酬报我。 
English: You can reward me by shortening the time.

古文：泌遽起谢恩。
现代文：李泌急忙起来谢恩。
English: Li Jing hurried up and thanked him.

古文：肃宗持之不许。
现代文：肃宗把着他，不让他起来。
English: Su Zong held him down and wouldn't let him get up.

古文：因对曰： 是行也，以臣观之，假九庙之灵，乘一人之威，当如郡名，必保定矣。 
现代文：于是李泌回答说： 这次行动，在我看来，凭借着九庙的神灵，乘着陛下的威严，应该象这个郡的名称，一定是保定了。 
English: Then Li Xiu replied: "This operation, in my opinion, by virtue of the spirits of the nine temples, by virtue of the majesty of His Majesty, should be like the name of this county, it must be guaranteed.

古文：既达扶风，旬日而西域河陇之师皆会，江淮庸调亦相继而至，肃宗大悦。
现代文：到达扶风之后，十天之中，西域河陇的军队都会齐了，在江淮一带征调的人马物品也都送到了，肃宗很高兴。
English: After arriving in Fufeng, within ten days, the troops of the Western Hebei Province were all in place, and the people and goods conscripted in the Jianghuai area were also sent, Su Zong was very happy.

古文：又肃宗尝夜坐，召颖王等三弟，同于地炉罽毯上食，以泌多绝粒，肃宗每自为烧二梨以赐泌，时颖王持恩固求，肃宗不与，曰： 汝饱食肉，先生绝粒，何乃争此耶！ 
现代文：另外，肃宗曾经在一个夜晚，叫来颖王等三个弟弟，一同在地炉地毯上进食。因为李泌经常不吃粮食，肃宗常常亲自烧两个梨送给他。当时颖王依仗皇上对他好，硬要要那梨，肃宗不给，说： 你吃了一肚子肉，李先生不吃粮食，为什么争这点东西？ 
English: In addition, Su Zong once called Ying Wang and his three younger brothers to eat together on the hearth rug on a night. Because Li Xiu often did not eat grain, Su Zong often personally baked two pears to give to him. At that time, Ying Wang, relying on the emperor's kindness to him, insisted on the pear, Su Zong would not give it, saying: You have eaten a belly of meat, Mr. Li does not eat grain, why fight this thing?

古文：颖王曰： 臣等试大家心，何乃偏耶！
现代文：颖王说： 我们试一试皇上的心，为什么偏向他？
English: Ying Wang said: Let's test the emperor's heart. Why do you favor him?

古文：不然，三弟共乞一颗。 
现代文：不然，我们三个共要一个梨也行。 
English: Otherwise, all three of us can have one pear.

古文：肃宗亦不许，别命他果以赐之。
现代文：肃宗也不答应，另外让人拿来别的果品送给他们。
English: Su Zong did not agree, and asked someone else to bring other fruit to give to them.

古文：王等又曰： 臣等以大家自烧故乞，他果何用？ 
现代文：三个弟弟又说： 我们因为那梨是皇上亲自烧的所以才要，别的果品有什么用？ 
English: The three brothers also said, "We only want the pear because the emperor himself roasted it. What use is there for any other fruit?"

古文：因曰： 先生恩渥如此，臣等请联句，以为他年故事。 
现代文：接着又说： 李先生受到如此恩宠，请允许我们联句，作为以后的故事。 
English: Then he added: Mr. Li was so favored, please allow us to make a couplet as a future story.

古文：颖王曰： 先生年几许，颜色似童儿。 
现代文：颖王说： 先生年几许，颜色似童儿。 
English: Ying Wang said: The teacher is a few years old, and the color is like a child.

古文：其次信王曰： 夜抱九仙骨，朝披一品衣。 
现代文：其次信王说： 夜抱九仙骨，朝披一品衣。 
English: Secondly, Xin Wang said, "Hug the Nine Immortals at night, and wear a dress in the morning.

古文：其次益王曰： 不食千钟粟，唯餐两颗梨。 
现代文：再次益王说： 不食千钟粟，唯餐两颗梨。 
English: Once again, the king said, "If you don't eat a thousand gourds, just eat two pears."

古文：既而三王请成之。
现代文：然后三个王子请皇上完成此诗。
English: Then the three princes asked the emperor to complete the poem.

古文：肃宗因曰： 天生此间气，助我化无为。 
现代文：肃宗便说： 天生此间气，助我化无为。 
English: Su Zong then said, "I was born with this kind of spirit, and there is nothing you can do to help me.

古文：泌起谢。
现代文：李泌站起来致谢。
English: Li Jie stood up to express his thanks.

古文：肃宗又不许曰：汝之居山也，栖遁幽林，不交人事；居内也，密谋匡救，动合玄机，社稷之镇也。
现代文：肃宗又不让，说： 你住在山上，隐居在幽林之中，不参与人间的事；你住在宫内，秘密地谋划救国大计，把握神妙的机宜，你是镇守社稷的人。 
English: Su Zong did not let him, saying, "You live on the mountain, secluded in the forest, and do not participate in human affairs; you live in the palace, secretly plan the salvation of the country, grasp the miraculous opportunity, and you are the guardian of the shrine.

古文：泌恩渥隆异，故元载、辅国之辈，嫉之若仇。
现代文：李泌受到的恩宠非常显著，所以元载、李辅国等人嫉妒他就象仇恨敌人。
English: The grace that Li Xuan received was very remarkable, so that the people of Yuan Zhao, Li Yu and others envied him as if they were hating an enemy.

古文：代宗即位，累有颁钖，中使旁午于道，别号天柱峰中岳先生，赐朝天玉简。
现代文：唐代宗即位之后，对李泌也经常有赏赐，宫中派出的宦官在通向李泌家的道上，交错纷繁地往来，另外称他为 天柱峰中岳先生 ，赐给他朝见天子的玉简。
English: After the enthronement of the Tang Dynasty, rewards were often bestowed on Li Xiu. Eunuchs sent from the palace would make their way to Li Xiu's home, and they would also call him Mr. Tianzhu Feng Zhongyue, and give him the Jade Tablet of the Son of Heaven.

古文：已而征入翰林。
现代文：然后又把他征入翰林院。
English: He was then conscripted into the Hanlin Academy.

古文：元载奏以朝散大夫检校秘书少监，为江西观察判官。
现代文：元载上奏，贬谪他为朝散大夫检校秘书少监，做江西观察判官。
English: Yuan Zang played up, belittling him as a junior superintendent of the school inspection secretary of the morning sun doctor, and as a judge of the Jiangxi observation.

古文：载伏诛，追复京师，又为常衮所嫉，除楚州刺史。未行，改丰、朗二州团练使，兼御史中丞，又改授杭州，所至称理。
现代文：元载被处死之后，李泌又被调回京城。后来他又受到常衮的嫉妒，任楚州剌史，还没有出发，改任丰朗二州的团练使，兼任御史中丞。后来他又调到杭州做剌史。
English: After the execution of Yuan Zhao, Li Xiu was transferred back to Beijing. Later, he was envied by Chang Zi, and he was assigned to Chuzhou, and before he left, he was reassigned to the group training envoy of the two states of Fenglang, and also served as the vice-president of the history. Later, he was transferred to Hangzhou to do the history.

古文：兴元初，征赴行在，迁左散骑常侍，寻除陕府长史，充陕虢防御使。
现代文：他无论到哪里为官，政治都很清明。兴元初年，调他回京到天子身傍任左散骑常侍，不久又被任命为陕府长史，充任陕虢防御史。
English: No matter where he served, his politics were very clear. In the first year of the Heian period, he was transferred back to Beijing to serve as an attendant of the Emperor, and soon he was appointed as the chief historian of Shaanxi Province, and served as the defense historian of Shaanxi and Fujian.

古文：陈许戍卒三千，自京西逃归，至陕州界，泌潜师险隘，尽破之。
现代文：陈、许的三千名戍卒从京西逃回，逃到陕州地界，李泌在险要处埋伏军队，把他们全都打败。
English: Chen and Xu's three thousand henchmen fled back from the west of Beijing and fled to the border of Shaanxi Province. Li Xiu ambushed the army at a critical point and defeated them all.

古文：又开三门陆运一十八里，漕米无砥柱之患，大济京师。
现代文：他又开设了三门峡十八里陆地运输路线，使征运官粮的事船不再有碰上礁石的忧患，极大地有利于京城。
English: He also opened the Sanmenxia eighteen-mile land transport route, so that the ship transporting the official grain no longer had to worry about hitting the reef, greatly benefiting the capital.

古文：二年六月。就拜中书侍郎平章事，加崇文馆大学士，修国史，封邺侯。
现代文：兴元二年六月，他被任命为中书传郎平章事，加封崇文馆大学士，编修国史，封为邺候。
English: In June of the second year of the Xingyuan era, he was appointed as the Chinese scholar Lang Ping Zhangji, and he was also appointed as a scholar of the Chongwen Academy, compiler of national history, and was awarded the posthumous title.

古文：时顺宗在春宫，妃萧氏母郜国公主，交通于外，上疑其有他志，连坐贬黜者数人，皇储危惧，泌周旋陈奏，德宗意乃解，颇有谠正之风。
现代文：当时顺宗住在春宫，皇妃萧氏的母亲郜国公主和外官交往，皇上怀疑她有不轨的企图，受她株连被罢官的好几个人。皇太子也受到危机，十分害怕。李泌经过一番周旋，向皇上陈述利害，皇上才打消废太子的念头。
English: At that time, he was living in the Spring Palace. The Empress Xiao's mother, Princess Yan Guo Rong, was in contact with a foreign official. The Emperor suspected that she had nefarious intentions, and several people were dismissed by her. The Crown Prince was also in crisis and very afraid. Li Xiu went through a lot of manoeuvring to present his interests to the Emperor, and only then did the Emperor give up the idea of abolishing the crown prince.

