古文：万章曰： 敢问不见诸侯，何义也？ 
现代文：万章问： 冒昧地请问，不去见诸侯，是什么什么道理呢？ 
English: Wan Zhang asked: May I be so bold as to ask, what is the reason for not going to see the princes?

古文：孟子曰： 在国曰市井之臣，在野曰草莽之臣，皆谓庶人。
现代文：孟子说： 住在城中的叫市井臣民，住在乡下的叫草野臣民，都称为庶人。
English: Mencius said: Those who live in the city are called citizens of the city, and those who live in the country are called citizens of the country. Both are called commoners.

古文：庶人不传质为臣，不敢见于诸侯，礼也。 
现代文：庶人没有传送见面礼而为臣属，不敢谒见诸侯，这是合乎礼的。 
English: It is proper for a commoner, who is a subject and has not sent a greeting, not to dare to meet a prince.

古文：万章曰： 庶人，召之役，则往役；君欲见之，召之，则不往见之，何也？ 
现代文：万章说： 作为庶人，要他去服役，他就去服役；君主想见他，就召他，而他却不去见，这是为什么呢？ 
English: Wanzhang said: As a commoner, if he is asked to serve, he will serve; if the monarch wants to see him, he will call him, but he will not see him, why is that?

古文：曰： 往役，义也；往见，不义也。
现代文：孟子说： 去服役，合乎义；去见，不合乎义。
English: Mencius said, "It is right to go and serve; it is not right to go and see."

古文：且君之欲见之也，何为也哉？ 
现代文：况且君主之所以想见到这个人，为的是什么呢？ 
English: Besides, for what reason did the sovereign want to see this man?

古文：曰： 为其多闻也，为其贤也。 
现代文：万章说： 是因为这个人见多识广，是因为这个人贤能。 
English: Wanzhang said, "It's because this person is knowledgeable, it's because this person is capable.

古文：曰： 为其多闻也，则天子不召师，而况诸侯乎？
现代文：孟子说： 就因为见多识广而召见？那么天子都不召见自己的老师，何况诸侯们呢？
English: Mencius said, "Just because you are well-informed and have been summoned? Then even the sons of heaven do not summon their own teachers, let alone princes?

古文：为其贤也，则吾未闻欲见贤而召之也。
现代文：如果是因为贤能而召见，那么我从来没有听说过想见贤人而召他来见的。
English: If he is called because he is wise, I have never heard of anyone being called to see a wise man because he wanted to see him.

古文：缪公亟见于子思，曰： 古千乘之国以友士，何如？ 
现代文：鲁缪公多次见子思，说： 以古代千乘之国互助合作的方式来对待读书人，你觉得怎么样？ 
English: Prince Rumi repeatedly met with Zi Si and said: How do you feel about treating readers in the way of mutual assistance and cooperation of the ancient countries of the Thousand-Mile Journey?

古文：子思不悦，曰： 古之人有言：曰事之云乎，岂曰友之云乎？ 
现代文：子思很不高兴地说： 古代人是这样说的：侍奉就是侍奉，怎么能说是互助合作呢？ 
English: Zisi said with displeasure, "The ancients said this: to serve is to serve, how can it be said to be mutual assistance and cooperation?

古文：子思之不悦也，岂不曰： 以位，则子，君也；我，臣也。何敢与君友也？
现代文：子思的不高兴，岂不是等于说以地位而言，你是君主，我是臣子，怎么敢与君主互助合作？
English: Isn't Zisi's displeasure tantamount to saying that in terms of status, you are the monarch, I am a vassal, how dare you cooperate with the monarch?

古文：以德，则子事我者也。奚可以与我友？ 
现代文：论品德，那是你求教于我；怎么可以说得上互助合作？
English: As for morality, that is what you are asking me to teach you; how can it be said to be mutual assistance and cooperation?

古文：千乘之君求与之友，而不可得也，而况可召与？
现代文：有千辆兵车的国君，想与他谈互助合作都不可能，更何况是召见呢？
English: If you want to talk about mutual assistance and cooperation with the ruler of a country with a thousand chariots, it's impossible, let alone summon him for a meeting.

古文：齐景公田，招虞人以旌，不至，将杀之。志士不忘在沟壑，勇士不忘丧其元。
现代文：从前齐景公田猎时，用旌旗召唤管理园林的官吏而召唤不来，就想杀掉他。 有志之士不会忘记自己身处沟壑的处境，有勇之士不会忘记抛头颅洒热血。 
English: Once upon a time, when Qi Jing Gong Tian was hunting, he used a banner to summon the official who managed the garden, and when he did not come, he wanted to kill him. People with ambition will not forget their situation in the gully, and people with courage will not forget to throw their heads and sprinkle hot blood.

古文：孔子奚取焉？
现代文：孔子会取哪一种呢？
English: Which one would Confucius choose?

古文：取非其招不往也。 
现代文：取不召唤就不去的那种。 
English: The kind that won't go if you don't call them.

古文：曰： 敢问招虞人何以？ 曰： 以皮冠。
现代文：万章说： 冒昧地请问召唤管理园林的官吏要用什么方式呢？ 孟子说： 用皮帽子。
English: Wanzhang said, "May I be so bold as to ask you what method should be used to summon the officials who manage the gardens?" Mencius said, "Use a fur hat."

古文：庶人以旃，士以旗，大夫以旌。
现代文：召唤百姓用锦旗，召唤读书人用上绘交龙并有铃铛的旗子，召唤大夫用牦牛尾或兼五采羽毛饰竿头的旗子。
English: Summon the people with a brocade banner, summon the readers with a banner painted with a dragon and a bell, summon the doctors with a banner decorated with a cow's tail or five feathers.

古文：以大夫之招招虞人，虞人死不敢往。以士之招招庶人，庶人岂敢往哉。
现代文：用招唤大夫的方法招唤管理园林的官吏，管理园林的官吏死也是不敢去的；以招唤读书人的方法招唤百姓，百姓怎么敢前去呢？
English: Invite officials to manage the garden by inviting doctors, and the officials who manage the garden will not dare to go even if they die; invite the people by inviting readers, and how dare the people go?

古文：况乎以不贤人之招招贤人乎？
现代文：更何况用招唤不贤能的人的方法招唤贤人呢？
English: Moreover, how can a wise man be summoned in the same way as an unwise man?

古文：欲见贤人而不以其道，犹欲其入而闭之门也。
现代文：想要见贤能的人而不遵守一定的道路，就好比要人家进来却紧闭着大门一样。
English: Wanting to see a virtuous person without following a certain path is like wanting someone to come in but closing the door tightly.

古文：夫义，路也；礼，门也。
现代文：所谓行为方式，是路；所谓行为规范，是门。
English: The so-called behavior mode is the road; the so-called behavior norm is the gate.

古文：惟君子能由是路，出入是门也。
现代文：惟有君子能走这条路，能出入这扇门。
English: Only a gentleman can go this way, can enter and leave this door.

古文：诗云： 周道如底，其直如矢；君子所履，小人所视。  
现代文：《诗经》上说： 周朝所推行的道路如有基础，其笔直就象箭杆，君子所走的这条道路，是小人所必须效法的。  
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "If the road promoted by the Zhou Dynasty had a foundation, it would be as straight as an arrow. This road taken by a gentleman must be followed by a villain."

古文：万章曰： 孔子，君命召，不俟驾而行。然则孔子非与？ 
现代文：万章说： 孔子，闻君主召唤，不等马车驾好就先出发了，那孔子错了吗？ 
English: Wan Zhang said: Confucius, hearing the monarch's summons, did not wait for the carriage to drive well before setting off. Was Confucius wrong?

古文：曰： 孔子当仕有官职，而以其官召之也。 
现代文：孟子说： 孔子当时正在做官，有官职在身，国君是以他的职务召唤他。 
English: Mencius said, "At that time, Confucius was working as an official, he had an official position, and the sovereign summoned him according to his position.

