古文：孝元王皇后，成帝母也。
现代文：孝元帝的王皇后，是成帝的母亲。
English: Empress Wang of Emperor Xiaoyuan was the mother of Emperor Cheng.

古文：家凡十侯，五大司马，外戚莫盛焉。
现代文：王氏家族一共封了十名列侯，五个大司马，外戚中没有比他们家再兴旺的了。
English: The Wang family had a total of ten feudal lords and five grand steeds. No other family was more prosperous than theirs.

古文：自有传。
现代文：王皇后的外戚单独有自己的列传。
English: The Queen's maternal relatives alone have their own lineage.

古文：孝成许皇后，大司马车骑将军平恩侯嘉女也。
现代文：孝成帝的许皇后，是大司马车骑将军平恩侯许嘉的女儿。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng's Empress Xu was the daughter of the great chariot-riding general Ping En Hou Xu Jia.

古文：元帝悼伤母恭哀后居位日浅而遭霍氏之辜，故选嘉女以配皇太子。
现代文：元帝悼念母亲恭哀皇后在位时间很短便惨遭霍氏的毒手，特意挑选了许嘉的女儿许配给皇太子。
English: Yuan Di mourned for his mother and paid tribute to the empress, who had a very short reign and was cruelly abused by Huo. He specially selected Xu Jia's daughter to marry the crown prince.

古文：初入太了家，上令中常侍黄门亲近者侍送，还白太子欢说状，元帝喜谓左右： 酌酒贺我！ 
现代文：许氏刚进太子宫中时，皇上派中常侍和黄门中那些亲信的人前去侍奉，这些人回来后讲述了太子欢喜的样子，元帝心中大喜，对左右说： 斟酒来为我祝贺！ 
English: When Xu had just entered the prince's womb, the emperor sent the middle-ranking attendants and those close confidants from the Yellow Gate to serve. After returning, these people described the prince's joyful appearance. The emperor was overjoyed and said to the left and right: "Pour wine to congratulate me!"

古文：左右皆称万岁。
现代文：左右都山呼万岁。
English: After listening to both sides, Du Shan shouted "long live."

古文：久之，有一男，失之。
现代文：遇了很久，许妃生下一个儿子，夭折了。
English: After a long courtship, Xu Hui gave birth to a son, who died young.

古文：乃成帝即位，立许妃为皇后，复生一女，失之。
现代文：等到成帝即位以后，册立许妃为皇后，许皇后又生下一个女儿，也夭折了。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Cheng, Emperor Zong appointed Empress Xu as empress. Empress Xu gave birth to another daughter, who also died young.

古文：初，后父嘉自元帝时为大司马车骑将军辅政，已八九年矣。
现代文：起初皇后的父亲许嘉从元帝时就被任命为大司马车骑将军辅佐朝政，已经有八九年了。
English: At first, the empress's father, Xu Jia, was appointed as the grand cavalry general to assist the imperial government from the time of Emperor Yuan. It has been 89 years.

古文：及成帝立，复以元舅阳平侯王凤为大司马、大将军，与嘉并。
现代文：等到成帝即位后，又封舅舅阳平侯王凤为大司马大将军，和许嘉并立。
English: After Emperor Cheng came to the throne, he also appointed his uncle Yang Ping Hou Wang Feng as the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master of the Grand Master.

古文：杜钦以为故事后父重于帝舅，乃说凤曰： 车骑将军至贵，将军宜尊之敬之，无失其意。
现代文：杜钦认为按照旧例皇后的父亲地位应比皇帝的舅舅尊贵，就劝王凤说： 车骑将军地位极其显贵，将军您应当敬重他，不要违背他的意愿。
English: Duchin thought that, according to the old custom, the father of the queen should be more important than the uncle of the emperor, so he advised Wang Feng to say: The position of the cavalry general is extremely important. General, you should respect him and not go against his wishes.

古文：盖轻细微眇之渐，必生乖忤之患，不可不慎。
现代文：哪怕是细小的过节，也会导致相敌对的大祸，不能不小心。
English: Even if it is a small transgression, it will lead to a great disaster of hostility, and we must not be careless.

古文：卫将军之日盛于盖侯，近世之事，语尚在于长老之耳，唯将军察焉。 
现代文：当年卫将军的荣耀胜过盖侯，近代的事，年长的人还经常议论纷纷，希望将军好好考虑。 
English: In those days, the glory of General Wei outweighed that of Ga Hou. In modern times, older people still often discuss the matter, hoping that the general will consider it well.

古文：久之，上欲专委任凤，乃策嘉曰： 将军家重身尊，不宜以吏职自累。
现代文：后来，皇上打算衹任用王凤一人，就赐许嘉文书说： 将军身份尊贵，不应被官位所累。
English: Later, when the emperor planned to appoint only Wang Feng, he gave Xu Jia a letter saying, "A general's status is honorable, and he should not be burdened by his official position.

古文：赐黄金二百斤，以特进侯就朝位。 
现代文：赏赐黄金二百斤，以特进的职位立于朝廷。 
English: He was rewarded with 200 kilos of gold and was appointed to a special position in the imperial court.

古文：后岁余薨，谥曰恭侯。
现代文：又过了一年多，许嘉薨，谧号为恭侯。
English: More than a year later, Xu Jiayu, nicknamed Gonghou, was born.

古文：后聪慧，善史书，自为妃至即位，常宠于上，后宫希得进见。
现代文：许皇后生性聪慧，擅长于写隶书，自从做了太子妃到册立为皇后，常得成帝宠幸，后宫女子很少能被皇上召见。
English: Empress Xu was very intelligent and good at writing official documents. Since she became the crown princess and was enthroned as empress, she was often favored by the emperor. It was rare for a harem maiden to be summoned by the emperor.

古文：皇太后及帝诸舅忧上无继嗣，时又数有灾异，刘向、谷永等皆陈其咎在于后宫。
现代文：皇太后和皇帝的那些舅舅们担心成帝没有后嗣，这时又屡次发生灾异，刘向、谷永等人都上奏说过错出在后宫。
English: The empress dowager and those uncles of the emperor were worried that Emperor Chengdu had no heir. At this time, disasters occurred repeatedly. Liu Xiang, Gu Yong and others all said that they were in the harem by mistake.

古文：上然其言，于是省减椒房掖廷用度。
现代文：皇上认为他们说的有道理。因此减省了皇后寝宫和掖庭的开支。
English: The Emperor thought that what they said made sense, so he cut back on the expenses for the Empress's bedchamber and court.

古文：皇后及上疏曰：
现代文：皇后就上疏说：
English: The empress said to Shang Zuo:

古文：妾夸布服粝粮，加以幼稚愚惑，不明义理，幸得免离茅屋之下，备后宫扫除。
现代文：我出身于布衣粗食的贫贱之家，而且年幼无知，不懂道理，有幸能够离开平民之家，在后宫裹执埽洒扫以侍奉陛下。
English: I come from a poor family of cloth-wearing, rough-eating peasants, and I was young, ignorant, and unreasonable. I was fortunate to be able to leave a commoner's home and serve His Majesty in the harem.

古文：蒙过误之宠，居非命所当托，污秽不修，旷职尸官，数逆至法，逾越制度，当伏放流之诛，不足以塞责。
现代文：承蒙陛下错爱，身居本不该得的皇后之位，我却不能洁身白好，不能恪尽职守，尸位素餐，屡次违背法规，破坏制度，以至于虽被处以流放的刑罚，也不足以当其罪。
English: Thanks to His Majesty's mistaken love, I live in the position of an undeserved empress, but I can't be clean, I can't fulfill my duties, I don't eat, I repeatedly violate laws and regulations, and destroy the system, so that although I was sentenced to exile, it is not enough to be a crime.

古文：乃壬寅日大长秋受诏： 椒房仪法，御服舆驾，所发诸官署，及所造作，遗赐外家群臣妾，皆如竟宁以前故事。 
现代文：于是在壬寅大长秋宣读诏书： 皇后应遵循礼法，服饰车马，取于官署的财物，以及制作应用物品，对外戚家族进行赏赐，都要按照孝元皇帝以前的旧例。 
English: Therefore, the imperial edict was read out at the Jinyin Grand Senior High School: The empress should follow the etiquette, clothing, chariots and horses, the property taken from the government office, as well as the production of applied items, and reward the relatives of the relatives, all in accordance with the old example before Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：妾伏自念，入椒房以来，遗赐外家未尝逾故事，每辄决上，可复问也。
现代文：我心中暗自思忖，自从做皇后以来，赏赐家人从未超过制度，每次都和陛下商讨决定，造件事陛下可以查证。
English: I thought to myself, since I became queen, I have never rewarded my family members beyond the system, and I have discussed the decision with Your Majesty every time. Your Majesty can verify everything.

古文：今诚时世异制，长短相补，不出汉制而已，纤微之间，未必可同。
现代文：如今时世不同，制度也会发生变化，有增有减正好互相补充，衹要不超过汉家定制就可以了，在细节问题上，很难做到完全一致。
English: Nowadays, the times are different, and the system will also change. There are increases and decreases that complement each other. It is enough to have no more than Han customization. In terms of details, it is difficult to achieve complete consistency.

古文：若竟宁前与黄龙前，岂相放哉？
现代文：孝元皇帝和孝宣皇帝，能够事事相同吗？
English: Can Emperor Xiaoyuan and Emperor Xiaoxuan be the same?

古文：家吏不晓，今一受诏如此，且使妾摇手不得。
现代文：官吏们不懂得这些道理，现在一旦得到了这样的诏书，就会使得我动不动便出现过错。
English: Officials do not understand these principles, and now once I get such a decree, it will cause me to constantly make mistakes.

古文：今言无得发取诸官，殆谓未央官不属妾，不宜独取也。
现代文：如今宣布不能从官署拿取财物，大概是指未央宫乃陛下所居之处，不属于我所有，所以我不能取其财物。
English: Now they have announced that I cannot take property from the government office, which probably means that I cannot take property from the palace because it is His Majesty's residence and does not belong to me.

古文：言妾家府亦不当得，妾窃惑焉。
现代文：但若说就连私府也不能从其中取得财物，我就不理解了。
English: But I don't understand if you say that even the private sector can't get wealth from it.

古文：幸得赐汤沐邑以自奉养，亦小发取其中，何害于谊而不可哉？
现代文：既然我有幸被赏赐了封邑以自养，也就是从中稍稍得到了一些财物，在情理上又有什么不可以的呢？
English: Since I was fortunate enough to be awarded a fief to support myself, that is, I got a little bit of wealth from it, what is unreasonable?

古文：又诏书言服御所造，皆如竟宁前，吏诚不能揆其意，即且令妾被服所为不得不如前。
现代文：韶书中还说，制造一切应用物品，其奢俭程度应与孝元皇帝以前相合，但官吏们一定不会明白这层意思，就衹是让我制作东西时完全与旧时相同。
English: The book also said that the manufacturing of all applied items should be as extravagant as the Emperor Xiaoyuan used to be, but the officials would not understand this meaning. They just wanted me to make things exactly the same as before.

古文：设妾欲作某屏风张于某所，曰故事无有，或不能得，则必绳妾以诏书矣。
现代文：假如我打算打造某种屏风想放在某处，或者旧例裹不允许，或者根本就没有先例可寻，官吏们就一定会拿韶书上的词句来约束我。
English: If I want to build a screen of some kind and want to put it somewhere, or the old rules do not allow it, or there is no precedent to be found, the officials will certainly use the words in the book to restrain me.

古文：此二事诚不可行，唯陛下省察。
现代文：这两件事确实是不可行的，希望陛下明察。
English: These two things are really unfeasible, and I hope His Majesty will see that.

古文：宦吏忮佷，必欲自胜。
现代文：官吏们妒嫉狠毒，必然要突出表现自己。
English: The officials are jealous and vicious, and they are bound to make a show of themselves.

古文：幸妾尚贵时，犹以不急事操人，况今日日益侵，又获此诏，其操约人，岂有所诉？
现代文：我那时处在尊贵的地位上，他们还拿着不要紧的事来控制别人，何况现在他们越发过分，又有了这样的韶书，一旦挟制起我等，如何诉说其中的委曲？
English: At that time, I was in a high-ranking position, and they were still using trivial matters to control others. What's more, now that they have become more and more excessive and have such an edict, once they have us in their clutches, how can we tell them what's going on?

古文：陛下见妾在椒房，终不肯给妾纤微内邪？
现代文：陛下见我身为皇后，就始终不肯给我丝毫补给。
English: Your Majesty, seeing me as the Queen, has always refused to give me any supplies.

古文：若不私府小取，将安所仰乎？
现代文：如果不在私府中稍微获得些财物，那么我还能仰仗什么？
English: If I don't acquire a little wealth in my private life, what can I rely on?

古文：旧故，中官乃私夺左右之贱缯，乃发乘舆服缯，言为待诏补，已而贸易其中。
现代文：旧时，皇后常私下裹强取侍者的布帛，以及车马服饰，声称拿给待诏修补，然后收归已有。
English: In the old days, empresses used to secretly take the servants' cloths by force, as well as the chariot and horse costumes, claiming that they were to be repaired, and then returned.

古文：左右多窃怨者，甚耻为之。
现代文：宫人们都心中暗自怨恨，我也耻于去做造等事。
English: The palace people all harbor resentment in their hearts, and I am ashamed to do things like construction.

古文：又故事以特牛祠大父母，戴侯、敬侯皆得蒙恩以太牢祠，今当率如故事，唯陛下哀之！
现代文：旧例又有用公牛祭祀祖父母的事，戴侯、敬侯都承蒙圣恩得以用太牢礼祭祀，现在也应当按照旧制，愿陛下能够可怜我家！
English: The old custom of sacrificing a bull to the grandparents was also useful. The Daihō and the Kōhō both received the grace of the gods to be able to use the Taihō ceremony for their sacrifices. Now it should also be done according to the old system. May His Majesty have mercy on my family!

古文：今吏甫受诏读记，直豫言使后知之，非可复若私府有所取也。
现代文：现在官吏刚刚接到诏书，就扬言一定要让皇后知道这些，不能再像往日那样从私府中拿取财物了。
English: Now, officials have just received the imperial edict, and they are threatening to let the empress know about this, so that they can no longer take property from private households as they did in the past.

古文：其萌牙所以约制妾者，恐失人理。
现代文：他们一开始就要控制我，恐怕是不合入之常情了。
English: They wanted to control me from the start, and I'm afraid it's normal for me not to fit in.

古文：今但损车驾，及毋若未央官有所发，遗赐衣服如故事，则可矣。
现代文：如今若是衹减少车马用度，以及不在未央宫拿取财物，按照旧例赏赐外家，也就可以了。
English: Nowadays, if you reduce the use of chariots and horses, and do not take property from the Weiyang Palace, and reward foreign families according to the old example, it will be fine.

古文：其余诚太迫急，奈何？
现代文：其余的规定则逼迫太急，怎么办呢？
English: The rest of the regulations are too urgent to enforce, so what should we do?

古文：妾薄命，端遇竟宁前，竟宁前于今世而比之，岂可邪？
现代文：我的命不好，偏偏正赶上依照孝元皇帝前的旧例。那时与现在相比，不尽相同。
English: My life is not good, but it is just catching up with the old example before Emperor Xiaoyuan. At that time, compared to now, it was different.

古文：故时酒肉有所赐外家，辄上表乃决。
现代文：旧时赏赐给外家酒肉，需卜表奏请才能决定。
English: In the old days, meat and wine from outside the family were given as a reward, and it was decided by playing a dice game.

古文：又故杜陵梁美人岁时遗酒一石，肉百斤耳。妾甚少之，遗田八子诚不可若是。
现代文：还有，原来每年赏赐杜陵梁美人家一石酒、一百斤肉，我觉得太少，赏赐田八子时应比梁美人多。
English: Also, the reward of one stone of wine and one hundred catties of meat given to Du Ling Liangmei's family every year is too little, I think. When awarding Tian Ya Zi, it should be more than Liangmei's.

古文：事率众多，不可胜以文陈。
现代文：这样的事还有很多，无法一一列举出来。
English: There are many such things, too many to list.

古文：俟自见，索言之，唯陛下深察焉！
现代文：希望能得到皇上召见，把这些事详详细细地全部讲出来，请陛下明察！
English: I hope to be summoned by the Emperor to tell him all these things in detail. Please, Your Majesty, take a good look!

古文：上于是采刘向、谷永之言以报曰：
现代文：成帝就按照刘向、谷永的话回答皇后说：
English: In accordance with Liu Xiang and Gu Yong's words, Emperor Cheng replied to the empress:

古文：皇帝向皇后，所言事闻之。
现代文：皇帝安慰皇后，你所说的事情我都听说了。
English: The emperor consoled the empress. I heard everything you said.

古文：夫日者众阳之宗，天光之贵，王者之象，人君之位也。
现代文：太阳是天地间阳气的根源，是天上之光中最可宝贵者，有王者的气象，就是君主的尊位。
English: The sun is the source of the yang energy between heaven and earth. It is the most precious light in the sky. The king's weather is the monarch's dignity.

古文：夫以阴而侵阳，亏其正体，是非下陵上，妻乘夫，贱逾贵之变与？
现代文：若是阴气侵入阳气，亏损了体内的正气，这不就会出现以下犯上，妻子控制丈夫，卑贱者凌驾于尊贵者之上一类的灾变吗？
English: If the yin spirit invades the yang spirit and the righteous spirit in the body is lost, won't the following catastrophes occur: the wife controls the husband, and the lowly is superior to the honorable?

古文：春秋二百四十二年，变异为众，莫若日蚀大。
现代文：春秋时代二百四十二年中，出现最多的灾异就是日食。
English: In the 242 years of the Spring and Autumn Period, the most disastrous phenomenon was the solar eclipse.

古文：自汉兴，日蚀亦为吕、霍之属见。
现代文：自从汉朝兴起以后，日食也在吕氏、霍氏那些外戚掌权时发生过。
English: Since the rise of the Han Dynasty, solar eclipses have also occurred when the Lu and Huo dynasties were in power.

古文：以今揆之，岂有此等之效与？
现代文：拿现在的情况加以推测，难道也是这种原因造成的吗？
English: Assuming the current situation, is this also the cause?

古文：诸侯拘迫汉制，牧相执持之也，又安获齐、赵七国之难？
现代文：诸侯被汉家的制度约束，又有国相加以控制，怎么会再有齐、赵七国那样的叛乱？
English: How could there be another rebellion like that of Qi and Zhao in the Seven Kingdoms, when the princes were constrained by the Han system and controlled by the ministers of state?

古文：将相大臣怀诚秉忠，唯义是从，又恶有上官、博陆、宣成之谋？
现代文：大臣们忠贞不二，坚守仁义，又如何会发生上官氏父子、博陆侯、宣成君那样的谋反？
English: The ministers are loyal and stick to benevolence and righteousness, so how could there be a rebellion like Shangguan, Boluo, and Xuancheng?

古文：若乃徒步豪桀，非有陈胜、项梁之群也；匈奴、夷狄，非有冒顿、郅支之伦也。
现代文：至于平民百姓中的豪杰人物，再不是陈胜、项梁那类的人；匈奴、夷狄，也已不是冒顿单于和郅支单于之辈了。
English: As for the heroic figures among the common people, they are no longer people like Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang; the Xiongnu and Yidi are no longer the generation of those who dared to stand alone in the world.

古文：方外内乡，百蛮宾服，殊俗慕义，八州怀德，虽使其怀挟邪意，狄不足忧，又况其无乎？
现代文：边远部族一向追慕中央政权，少数民族尽数臣服天朝，异邦向往仁义之道，天下百姓心怀恩德，即使让他们心术不正，也并不足以担忧，更何况根本就没有呢？
English: Outlying tribes have always admired the central government, ethnic minorities try their best to submit to the heavenly government, foreign countries yearn for the way of benevolence and righteousness, and the hearts of the people of the world yearn for benevolence. Even if their hearts are not right, it is not enough to worry about, let alone there is nothing at all?

古文：求于夷狄无有，求于臣下无有，微后官也当，何以塞之？
现代文：从夷狄那裹找不到原因，从臣下那裹也找不到原因，不把后宫拿来挡罪，又如何去应付呢？
English: I can't find a reason from the Empress Dowager, and I can't find a reason from the vassal. If I don't use the harem to fend off the crime, how can I deal with it?

古文：日者，建始元年正月，白气出于营室。
现代文：往日，在建始元年正月，有白气出于营室。
English: In the past, in the first month of the first year of construction, there was white gas coming from the camp.

古文：营室者，天子之后官也。
现代文：营室，就是天子的后宫。
English: The camp room is the harem of the heavenly son.

古文：正月于《尚书》为皇极。
现代文：正月在《尚书》裹称为皇极。
English: The first month of the year is referred to as the Emperor's New Year in "Shoshu."

古文：皇极者，王气之极也。
现代文：皇极，就是帝王之气的准则。
English: The imperial standard is the standard of the emperor's spirit.

古文：白者西方之气，其于春当废。
现代文：白气属于西方之气，在春季应当衰败。
English: Bai qi belongs to the western qi and should decay in the spring.

古文：今正于皇极之月，兴废气于后宫，视后妾无能怀任保全者，以著继嗣之微，贱人将起也。
现代文：现在正赶上在皇极之月，后宫出现这种衰败之气，看来皇后姬妾没有能够怀孕而得以保全胎儿的，以明示皇室后继无人，卑贱之人将要兴起。
English: Now, in the waning months of the emperor's reign, the harem is showing signs of decay. It seems that the empress and her concubines have not been able to conceive and preserve the fetus, indicating that there is no successor to the imperial family, and low-class people will rise.

古文：至其九月，流星如瓜，出于文昌，贯紫宫，尾委曲如龙，临于钩陈，此又章显前尤，著在内也。
现代文：到了九月，有一颗瓜样的流星从文昌六星处出来，穿过紫宫，尾部弯曲成龙的形状，陨落在钩陈，这又说明先前的那些过失，显然出在后宫。
English: In September, a melon-shaped meteor came out of the Wenchang Six-pointed Star, passed through the Purple Palace, and the tail was bent into the shape of a dragon and fell on the hook Chen, which also showed that the previous mistakes were clearly in the harem.

古文：其后则有北宫井溢，南流逆理，数郡水出，流杀人民。
现代文：后来又有北宫的井水溢出，违背常理水向南流，有好几个郡发了洪水，淹死许多百姓。
English: Later, the well water of Beigu Palace overflowed, and contrary to common sense, the water flowed southward, causing floods in several counties and drowning many people.

古文：后则讹言传相惊震，女童入殿，咸莫觉知。
现代文：后来又谣言四起，令人震惊，说有一名小姑娘上了大殿，却没有人发觉。
English: Then, shockingly, rumours began to circulate that a little girl had got into the main hall without anyone noticing.

古文：夫河者水阴，四渎之长，今乃大决，没漂陵邑，斯昭阴盛盈溢，违经绝纪之应也。
现代文：黄河之水属阴，又是四渎之首，现在决口成灾，淹没了许多郡县，更加证明了阴气太盛，是违背经典、败坏纲纪的应兆。
English: The water of the Yellow River is yin, and it is also the first of the four corruptions. Now it has become a disaster, flooding many counties and counties. It has further proved that the yin is too strong, and it is a sign of violating the classics and corrupting the discipline.

古文：乃昔之月，鼠巢于树，野鹊变色。
现代文：前几个月，老鼠在树上做窝，野鹊改变了毛色。
English: In the past few months, mice have made nests in the trees, and the wild lynx has changed its coat color.

古文：五月庚子，鸟焚其巢太山之域。《易》曰： 鸟焚其巢，旅人先笑后号啕。
现代文：五月庚子，泰山一带的鸟烧掉了自己的巢穴，《易》上说： 鸟焚烧自己的巢穴，旅人先笑然后号眺大哭。
English: In May, Geng Zi, a bird in the vicinity of Mount Tai burned its nest, "Yi" said: A bird burns its nest, a traveler first laughs and then cries.

古文：丧牛于易，凶。 
现代文：丧牛于易，是凶兆。 
English: The death of a cow in Yi is a bad omen.

古文：言王者处民上，如鸟之处巢也，不顾恤百姓，百姓畔而去之，若鸟之自焚也，虽先快意说笑，其后必号而无及也。
现代文：是说君王身居百姓之上，就像鸟处于巢中，若不体恤百姓，百姓就会背叛并且离开他，正如鸟儿自焚其巢，虽然开始时畅快高兴，后来一定会连哭都来不及了。
English: It means that the king is above the people, like a bird in the nest, if he does not show mercy to the people, the people will betray and leave him, just as a bird self-immolates its nest, although it is joyful and happy at the beginning, later it will be too late to even cry.

古文：百姓丧其君，若牛亡其毛也，故称凶。
现代文：百姓失去了君主，就像牛没有了毛，所以称之为凶。
English: When the people lose their ruler, they are like a cow without hair, so they are called fierce.

古文：泰山，王者易姓告代之处，今正于岱宗之山，甚可惧也。
现代文：泰山，本是王朝易代告天的地方，现在这些灾异现象发生在那裹，非常可怕。
English: Mount Tai was the place where the Yi Dynasty proclaimed the end of the world, and now these catastrophic phenomena are happening there. It's very scary.

古文：三月癸未，大风自西摇祖宗寝庙，扬裂帷席，折拔树木，顿僵车辇，毁坏槛屋，灾及宗庙，足为寒心！
现代文：三月癸未，由西方刮来的大风吹动了祖宗寝庙，撕裂了帷席，刮断了树木，车驾无法行走，房屋遭到毁坏，这些灾异竟然殃及宗庙，实在令人胆战心惊。
English: In late March, a strong wind blowing from the west shook the ancestral sleeping temple, tore the curtains, scraped the trees, the car could not be driven, the house was destroyed, and these disasters actually affected the ancestral temple, which was really frightening.

古文：四月己亥，日蚀东井，转旅且索，与既无异。
现代文：四月己亥，在束井宿位置发生日食，须臾之间太阳便消失了，和没有太阳毫无区别。
English: In April, when a solar eclipse occurred at the location of the Sokai Inn, the sun disappeared between the whiskers, and there was no difference from the absence of the sun.

古文：己犹戊也，亥复水也，明阴盛，咎在内。
现代文：己和戊属中宫，为君，亥为水，属阴，又可说明阴气太盛，责任在于后宫。
English: Jihewu belongs to the middle palace, for you, Hai for water, is Yin, and can also explain that Yin is too strong, the responsibility lies in the harem.

古文：于戊己，亏君体，著绝世于皇极，显祸败及京都。
现代文：对于戊己来说，则是亏损了君主之体，昭示皇室将断绝后嗣，大祸甚至影响到京城。
English: For Wuji, it is the loss of the monarch's body, indicating that the royal family will cut off the heir, and the disaster will even affect the capital.

古文：于东井，变怪众备，末重益大，来数益甚。
现代文：对于束井来说，集中了众多的灾变，规模越来越大，次数越来越频繁。
English: For Sokai, a large number of disasters have been concentrated, the scale has become larger and larger, and the frequency has become more and more frequent.

古文：成形之祸月以迫切，不救之患日寝屡深，咎败灼灼若此，岂可以忽哉！
现代文：祸患成形，无以救治，所以急迫，危害深远，这样的过错已经很明显了，怎么能够忽视呢？
English: The scourge is taking shape, there is no cure, so it is urgent, the harm is far-reaching, such a fault is already obvious, how can it be ignored?

古文：《书》云： 高宗肜日，粤有雊雉。
现代文：《尚书》上说 高宗举行肜祭时，有雉鸡呜叫。
English: "Shangshu" said that when Gao Zong held the wreath-laying ceremony, there was a crowing rooster.

古文：祖己曰： 惟先假王正厥事。  又曰： 虽休勿休，惟敬五刑，以成三德。 
现代文：祖己说： 君王衹有先端正自身，才能做好遣件事。 ，又说 认为好的不一定好，祇有敬重五刑之法，以成就三德。 
English: The ancestor said, "The king can only do a good job of dispatching things if he has the ability to lead himself well." He also said, "Thinking that what is good is not necessarily good, there is only the method of respecting the five punishments to achieve the three virtues."

古文：即饬椒房及掖庭耳。
现代文：说的就是要整顿宫廷和掖庭。
English: The point is to rectify the palace and the imperial court.

古文：今皇后有所疑，便不便，其条刺，使大长秋来白之。
现代文：现在皇后有不明白的地方，分析其中的不利，按条写在刺板上，派大长秋来禀告我。
English: Now the Empress has something she doesn't understand. She analyzes the disadvantages, writes them down on a piece of plywood, and sends the Great Elder to come and denounce me.

古文：吏拘于法，亦安足过？
现代文：官吏拘泥于法令，又有什么过错呢？
English: What's wrong with officials sticking to the law?

古文：盖矫枉者过直，古今同之。
现代文：矫枉遇正，自古以来都是这样。
English: This has been the case since time immemorial.

古文：且财币之省，特牛之祠，其于皇后，所以扶助德美，为华宠也。
现代文：况且减省费用，改用公牛祭祀，对于皇后而言，是帮助你成就美好的品德，获得荣宠。
English: Moreover, for the empress, reducing the cost and switching to bull sacrifice is to help you achieve a good moral character and gain favor.

古文：咎根不除，灾变相袭，祖宗且不血食，何戴侯也！
现代文：不除掉祸根，灾异一个接着一个，祖宗不能享用祭品，更何况戴侯呢？
English: Without eliminating the root of the evil, disasters will follow one after another, and the ancestors will not be able to enjoy the sacrificial offerings, not to mention the long-suffering?

古文：传不云乎！ 以纳失之者鲜。 
现代文：传上不是说过吗？ 能节俭者其过少。 
English: Isn't it said in the legend? Those who can be frugal are too few.

古文：审皇后欲从其奢与？
现代文：难道皇后要去学奢侈的行为吗？
English: Is the Queen about to take lessons in extravagant behaviour?

古文：朕亦当法孝武皇帝也，如此则甘泉、建章可复兴矣。
现代文：朕也应当效法孝武皇帝，那么甘泉宫、建章宫可以重新兴建了。
English: I should also follow the example of Emperor Xiaowu, then Ganquan Palace and Jianzhang Palace can be rebuilt.

古文：世俗岁殊，时变日化，遭事制宜，因时而移，旧之非者，何可放焉！
现代文：风气年年不同，与时俱变，凡事应当因时制宜，与时俱进，往日不正确的地方，如何能仿效呢？
English: The culture is different from year to year and changes with the times. Everything should be in accordance with the times and advance with the times. Where the past is not correct, how can it be emulated?

古文：郡子之道，乐因循而重改作。
现代文：君子的为人之道，喜欢因循旧制而不轻易改变。
English: The gentleman's way of being likes to follow the old system and not change it easily.

古文：昔鲁人为长府，闵子骞曰： 仍旧贯如之何？何必改作！ 
现代文：当初鲁国某人管理长府，闵子骞说： 因循旧事就可以了，何必要改变呢？ 
English: At that time, someone from the State of Lu was in charge of the prefectural government, and Zou Zixuan said, "It's okay to follow the old way, why should we change it?

古文：盖恶之也。
现代文：大概就是厌恶改变吧。
English: It's probably an aversion to change.

古文：《诗》云： 虽无老成人，尚有典刑，曾是莫听，大命以倾。 
现代文：《诗》裹说： 虽然没有了旧故之臣，还有旧时的法度，不遵循旧法，以至于国家倾危。 
English: "Poetry" says: Although there are no old retainers, there are still old laws, and the old laws are not followed, so that the country is in danger.

古文：孝文皇帝，朕之师也。
现代文：孝文皇帝，是朕学习的榜样。
English: Emperor Xiaowen is my role model.

古文：皇太后，皇后成法也。
现代文：皇太后，是皇后遵守的尺度。
English: The empress dowager is the standard for the empress to follow.

古文：假使太后在彼时不如职，今见亲厚，又恶可以逾乎！
现代文：即使太后在过去因不得其志，未依常理，而如今皇后得到太后的厚待，又怎么能逾越太后的制度呢！
English: Even if the empress dowager did not follow the common sense in the past because she did not want to, and now the empress is treated well by the empress dowager, how can she surpass the system of the empress dowager!

古文：皇后其刻心秉德，毋违先后之制度，力谊勉行，称顺妇道，减省群事，谦约为右，其孝东宫，毋厥朔望，推诚永究，爰何不臧！
现代文：皇后应当尽心修德，不要违反了前代皇后们的制度，勉力而行，谨守妇道，减省用度，以谦让节约为先。孝顺皇太后，朔日、望日的朝见之礼不能废，如果这样做下去，还能出现什么不善之事呢！
English: Empresses should do their best to cultivate virtue, not to violate the system of previous empresses, to work hard, to keep the women's way, to reduce the cost, to be modest about the first. Filial piety to the Empress Dowager, the New Year's Day, the morning greeting can not be discarded, if this continues, what bad things can happen!

古文：养名显行，以息众讠雚，垂则列妾，使有法焉。
现代文：形成好的名声，显扬美的德行，以平息天下人的纷纷议论，垂法于后宫，使姬妾们遵法而行。
English: To form a good reputation, to show the virtue of beauty, to calm the world's people's discussion, to hang the law in the harem, to make the concubines obey the law.

古文：皇后深惟毋忽！
现代文：请皇后一定深思，不要轻视这些。
English: I would ask the Queen to reflect on this and not to take it lightly.

古文：是时，大将军凤用事，威权尤盛。
现代文：当时，正是大将军王凤掌管朝政，威势权力最大。
English: At that time, it was the great general Wang Feng who was in charge of the imperial government and wielded the greatest power.

古文：其后，比三年日蚀，言事者颇归咎于凤矣。
现代文：后来，连续三年出现食，进谏的人多把罪过推到王凤身上。
English: Later, when there was a famine for three years in a row, most of the people who went to prison blamed Wang Fengru.

古文：而谷永等遂著之许氏，许氏自知为凤所不佑。
现代文：但谷永等人认为是许皇后的过失。许皇后心里清楚王凤不会帮助自己。
English: But Gu Yong and others thought it was the fault of Empress Xu, who knew in her heart that Wang Feng would not help herself.

古文：久之，皇后宠亦益衰，而后宫多新爱。
现代文：过了一段时间，成帝对皇后的宠爱与曰俱减，后宫有许多人得到宠幸。
English: After a period of time, Emperor Cheng's fondness for the empress decreased with each passing day, and many people in the harem were favored.

古文：后姊平安刚侯夫人谒等为媚道祝诅后宫有身者王美人及凤等，事发觉，太后大怒，下吏考问，谒等诛死，许后坐废处昭台宫，亲属皆归故郡山阳，后弟子平恩侯旦就国。
现代文：皇后的姐姐平安刚侯夫人许谒等人行妇人媚道诅咒后宫怀有身孕的王美人和王凤等人，事情败露，太后大怒，将这些人投入监狱严刑拷问，许谒等人被处死，许皇后也因此获罪被废，退处昭台宫，许氏亲族都被迁回原籍山阳，皇后弟弟的儿子平恩侯许旦前往封地。
English: The empress dowager was furious when the affair was revealed, and threw Wang Mei and Wang Feng, who were pregnant, into prison, where they were severely tortured and interrogated. Xu Yao and others were executed, and Queen Xu was also convicted and deposed, and banished to Zhaotai Palace. The relatives of the Xu clan were all moved back to their native Shanyang, and the son of the queen's younger brother, Ping En Hou Xu Dan, went to the fief.

古文：凡立十四年而废，在昭台岁余，还徙长定宫。
现代文：许后一共在位十四年而被废掉，在昭台宫住了一年多，又迁到长定宫。
English: After a total of fourteen years on the throne, she was deposed, lived in the Shodai Palace for more than a year, and then moved to the Nagasada Palace.

古文：后九年，上怜许氏，下诏曰： 盖闻仁不遗远，谊不忘亲。
现代文：九年以后，成帝怜悯许氏，颁下诏书说： 听说仁爱不遗漏远方之人，行义不忘记亲戚族属。
English: Nine years later, Emperor Cheng took pity on Mr. Xu and issued an edict saying, "It is said that benevolence does not omit those who are far away, and righteousness does not forget relatives.

古文：前平安刚侯夫人谒坐大逆罪，家属幸蒙赦令，归故郡。
现代文：先前平安刚侯夫人许谒犯下大逆不道之罪，家人有幸蒙受赦令，回到原籍。
English: Previously, the wife of Prince Heian, Xu Yao, committed the crime of high treason, and her family was fortunate enough to receive a pardon and return to their hometown.

古文：朕惟平恩戴侯，先帝外祖，魂神废弃，莫奉祭祀，念之未尝忘于心。
现代文：朕想平恩戴侯，乃是先帝的外祖父，灵魂无处存身，没有人为他守灵和祭祀，朕一直将这件事记在心裹，念念不忘。
English: I think that Ping Ndai Hou was the grandfather of the former emperor. His soul was nowhere to be found, and there was no one to keep vigil and offer sacrifices for him. I have always kept this in my heart and will never forget it.

古文：其还平恩侯旦及亲属在山阳郡者。 是岁，废后败。
现代文：令平恩侯许旦和许氏在山阳郡的亲属回到京城。 
English: Emperor Ping's son Xu Dan and Xu's relatives in Sanyang County returned to Beijing.

古文：先是，废后姊孊寡居，与定陵侯淳于长私通，因为之小妻。
现代文：这一年，许废后去世。当初，许废后的姐姐许蠊守寡独居，和定陵侯淳于长私通，就给他做了妾。
English: In this year, Xu Huai died. At the beginning, Xu Huai's sister, Xu Xuzhuang, lived alone and had a private relationship with Dingling Hou Chun in Changshi, so she became his concubine.

古文：长绐之曰： 我能白东宫，复立许后为左皇后。 
现代文：淳于长骗她说： 我能禀告太后，重新立许后为左皇后。 
English: Jun Yuchang lied to her and said, "I can denounce the Empress Dowager and reinstate her as the Left Empress."

古文：废后因孊私赂遗长，数通书记相报谢。
现代文：许废后就通过许婶暗地裹贿赂淳于长，屡次通信互相答谢。
English: After Xu's retirement, he secretly bribed Jun Yuchang through Xu's aunt, and they repeatedly corresponded to thank each other.

古文：长书有悖谩，发觉，天子使廷尉孔光持节赐废后药，自杀，葬延陵交道厩西。
现代文：淳于长在信裹出言不逊，被人告发，成帝派廷尉孔光拿着符节赐给许废后毒药，她只好自杀了，被埋葬在延陵交道厩的西面。
English: Chun Yuchang made an insolent remark in a letter and was denounced by someone. Emperor Cheng sent court lieutenant Kong Guang to give poison to Xu Wula after holding a rune. She had no choice but to commit suicide and was buried in the west side of the Yanling Junction Mews.

古文：孝成班婕妤。帝初即位选入后宫。
现代文：孝成帝的班债仔，在成帝刚刚即位的时候就被选入后宫。
English: Xiao Chengdi's class moneylender was elected to the harem when Emperor Chengdi had just ascended the throne.

古文：始为少使，蛾而大幸，为婕妤，居增成舍，再就馆，有男，数月失之。
现代文：开始是做少使，很快就深得成帝宠爱，封为健伃，居住在增成舍，曾两次在外舍生产，生了男孩，几个月后便夭折了。
English: At first, he was a junior envoy, but soon he was deeply loved by Emperor Zengzong, was given the title of Jianye, and lived in Zengzong House. He gave birth twice in the outside house, had a boy, and died a few months later.

古文：成帝游于后庭，尝欲与婕妤同辇载，婕妤辞曰： 观古图画，贤圣之君皆有名臣在侧，三代末主乃有嬖女，今欲同辇，得无近似之乎？ 
现代文：成帝在后宫游玩，曾经打算和班使伃一同乘坐辇，班徒仔推辞说： 看自古以来的图画，圣明的君主身旁坐的是有名的大臣，三代时的亡国之君才会有宠幸的女子，现在陛下若是与我同乘辇车，不就和那些亡国的君主相类似了吗？ 
English: Emperor Cheng played in the harem. He had planned to ride in a carriage with the envoy, but the envoy declined, saying, "Look at the pictures from ancient times. The saintly monarch is seated next to a famous minister. It takes three generations of dead monarchs to have a favorite woman. If Your Majesty were to ride in a carriage with me now, wouldn't it be similar to those dead monarchs?"

古文：上善其言而止。
现代文：成帝认为她说的很有道理，于是作罢。
English: Emperor Cheng thought that what she said made a lot of sense, so he gave up.

古文：太后闻之，喜曰： 古有樊姬，今有班婕妤。 
现代文：太后听说了这件事，高兴地说： 古时候有樊姬，现在又有了班使伃。 
English: When the empress dowager heard about this, she said happily, "In ancient times, there was Shiji, and now there is Banji.

古文：婕妤诵《诗》及《窃窕》、《德象》、《女师》之篇。
现代文：班健伃诵读《诗经》和《窈窕》、《德象》、《女师》等文章。
English: Ban Jiankun recited "Song of Songs" and "Song of Songs," "German Elephant," "Female Teacher" and other articles.

古文：每进见上疏，依则古礼。
现代文：每次被成帝召见或是上疏言事，都要依照古礼行事。
English: Every time you are summoned to see the emperor or speak to him, you must act in accordance with the ancient rites.

古文：自鸿嘉后，上稍隆于内宠。
现代文：自从鸿嘉年间以后，成帝宠爱的姬妾逐渐增多。
English: Since the Hongjia era, Emperor Chengdu's favorite concubines have gradually increased.

古文：婕妤进侍者李平，平得幸，立为婕妤。
现代文：班侄伃将自己的侍女李平进献给成帝，李平得到宠幸，被封为婕妤。
English: Ban Xiuqi dedicated his maid Li Pingjin to Emperor Cheng. Li Ping was favored and given the title of empress.

古文：上曰： 始卫皇后亦从微起。 
现代文：成帝说： 过去卫皇后也是出身微贱。 
English: Emperor Cheng said: In the past, Empress Wei was also from a humble background.

古文：乃赐平姓曰卫，所谓卫婕妤也。
现代文：就赐李平姓卫也就是所谓的卫使仔。
English: Li Ping was given the surname Wei, the so-called Wei Enzhi.

古文：其后，赵飞燕姊弟亦从自微贱兴，逾越礼制，浸盛于前。
现代文：后来，赵飞燕姐妹也从微贱的地位发迹，逾越礼制，程度超过了以前。
English: Later, Zhao Feiyan's sisters also made a fortune from a lowly position, surpassing the etiquette system to a greater extent than before.

古文：班婕妤及许皇后皆失宠，稀复进见。
现代文：班健仔和许皇后都失去宠幸，很少被成帝召见。
English: Both Ban Jian Zai and Empress Xu lost their favors and were rarely summoned to see the emperor.

古文：鸿嘉三年，赵飞燕谮告许皇后、班婕妤挟媚道，祝诅后宫，詈及主上。
现代文：鸿嘉三年，赵飞燕诬陷许皇后、班健仔行妇人媚道，诅咒后宫，甚馒骂皇上。
English: In the third year of Hongjia, Zhao Feiyan slandered Empress Xu and Ban Jianzai for their womanizing ways, cursed the harem, and even cursed the emperor.

古文：许皇后坐废。
现代文：许皇后得罪被废。
English: Empress Xu was disgraced and deposed.

古文：孝问班婕妤，婕妤对曰： 妾闻 死生有命，富贵在天。 修正尚未蒙福，为邪欲以何望？
现代文：审问班健仔时，她回答说： 我听说 死生有命，富贵在天，善良正直尚且没能得到福分，做这些邪僻之事又想得到什么呢？
English: During the interrogation of Ben Kenji, she replied: I heard that life and death are intertwined, wealth is in the sky, and goodness and honesty have not yet been blessed. What do you want to gain by doing these wicked things?

古文：使鬼神有知，不受不臣之诉；如其无知，诉之何益？故不为也。 
现代文：假如鬼神有知，不会接受这种丧失为臣之礼的祷告；假如鬼神无知，向它们祷告也没有用，所以我不做这种事。 
English: If the gods and spirits are wise, they will not accept such a prayer of loss of allegiance; if the gods and spirits are ignorant, it is useless to pray to them, so I do not do such things.

古文：上善其对，怜悯之，赐黄金百斤。
现代文：成帝认为她说的有理，很怜悯她，就赏赐她黄金一百斤。
English: Emperor Cheng thought that what she said was reasonable and felt very sorry for her, so he rewarded her with one hundred jin of gold.

古文：赵氏姊弟骄妒，婕妤恐久见危，求共养太后长信宫，上许焉。
现代文：赵氏姐妹骄横嫉妒，班健伃怕时间长了会被她们所害，就请求到长信宫去侍奉太后，成帝同意了。
English: The Zhao sisters were arrogant and jealous, and Ban Jianxuan was afraid that he would be harmed by them if he took too long. He asked to go to Changxin Palace to serve the empress dowager, and Emperor Cheng agreed.

古文：婕妤退处东宫，作赋自伤悼，其辞曰：
现代文：班健伃退居柬宫，作赋感叹哀伤自己的命运，其词说：
English: Pan Jianlian retreated to the Cambodian palace, lamented his fate, and said:

古文：承祖考之遗德兮，何性命之淑灵，登薄躯于宫阙兮，充下陈于后庭。
现代文：承祖先之遣德啊，我的品格端正善良，微薄之躯得以进入皇宫啊，我在后宫忝居下列。
English: O inheritor of my ancestors' virtues, my character is upright and virtuous. My meager body was able to enter the imperial palace, and I was relegated to a lower position in the harem.

古文：蒙圣皇之渥惠兮，当日月之盛明，扬光烈之翕赫兮，奉隆宠于增成。
现代文：承蒙圣上的厚爱啊，如曰月明光照耀我身，皇恩何等隆盛啊，我在增成舍得到宠幸。
English: Thanks to the great love of the Holy One, the moon shines brightly on my body. How prosperous the royal grace is. I have been favored in the house of Zengcheng.

古文：既过幸于非位兮，窃庶几乎嘉时，每寤寐而累息兮，申佩离以自思，陈女图以镜监兮，顾女史而问诗。
现代文：既蒙厚爱身处高位啊，当然是赶上了好时光，常从梦中惊起而叹息啊，抚摸着离带我陷入沉思，陈烈女图以自警戒啊，拜访女史我学诗。
English: Since I have been loved deeply and am in a high position, of course, I have caught up with the good times. I often wake up from a dream and sigh. I am stroked and carried away into contemplation. I am alerted by Chen Rongfu. I learn poetry when I visit her.

古文：悲晨妇之作戒兮，哀褒、阎之为邮；美皇、英之女虞兮，荣任、姒之母周。
现代文：感慨妇人祸国引以为鉴啊，哀叹裹姒、阎妻罪孽深重；赞美娥皇、女英为虞舜之妻啊，称颂太任、太姒母仪宗周。
English: Lament the woes of women as a lesson for the country, lament the sins of the wife; praise the empress and the empress for being the wife of the emperor, praise the mother of the emperor and the mother of the emperor.

古文：虽愚陋其靡及兮，敢舍心而忘兹？
现代文：虽然资质愚陋难以与之相，我又何尝放弃勤勉自修？
English: Although the qualification of stupidity is hard to match, how can I give up diligent self-cultivation?

古文：历年岁而悼惧兮，闵蕃华之不滋。
现代文：岁月流逝无奈伤怀啊，可怜繁花凋零不再。
English: The years have passed helplessly and sadly, the poor flowers are no longer withered.

古文：痛阳禄与柘馆兮，仍襁褓而离灾，岂妾人之殃咎兮？
现代文：那阳禄和柘馆令我悲痛欲绝啊，可怜娇儿襁褓中身遭不幸，难道是我命中注定要遭此祸殃吗？
English: That Yang Lu and the Summer Palace make me grief-stricken Ah, poor Jiao Er, I suffered misfortune in the Summer Palace, is it my fate to suffer this calamity?

古文：将天命之不可求。
现代文：衹叹天命不可强求。
English: You can't force fate.

古文：白日忽已移光兮，遂暗莫而昧幽，犹被覆载之厚德兮，不废捐于罪邮。
现代文：太阳已然消失了光芒啊，人世昏昏晦暗幽昧，依然蒙受天地的恩德啊，有罪之身未遭废弃。
English: The sun is no longer shining, the world is dim and gloomy, but the blessings of heaven and earth are still with us, and the body of sin has not been abandoned.

古文：奉共养于东宫兮，托长信之末流，共洒扫于帷幄兮，永终死以为期。
现代文：侍奉太后恭敬谨慎啊，身居长信宫之末，曰日夜夜洒扫庭院啊，心无他念衹待死期。
English: Serving the empress dowager respectfully and prudently, living at the end of the Choshin Palace, sweeping the courtyard day and night, there is nothing else to think about while waiting for death.

古文：愿归骨于山足兮，依松柏之余休。
现代文：但愿埋葬于山脚下啊，依倚着松柏的浓荫。
English: I wish to be buried at the foot of the mountain, leaning against the thick shade of pine and cypress.

古文：重曰： 潜玄官兮幽以清，应门闭兮禁闼扃。
现代文：再次抒发情志又说：寂寞深宫啊幽暗清冷，大门紧闭啊禁闺关锁。
English: Once again, he expressed his sentiments and said, "Lonely, deep palace, dark and cold, closed gates, forbidden maidservants."

古文：华殿尘兮玉阶菭，中庭萋兮绿草生。
现代文：宫室蒙尘啊玉阶生苔，庭院荒废啊绿草丛生。
English: The palace is covered in dust and the steps are covered in moss. The courtyard is deserted and overgrown with green grass.

古文：广室阴兮帷幄暗，房栊虚兮风泠泠。
现代文：居处阴晦啊昏暗不明，凉风习习啊穿透窗牖。
English: The dwelling is gloomy, dim and unknown, the cool breeze penetrates through the curtains.

古文：感帷裳兮发红罗，纷綷縩兮纨素声。
现代文：衣衫随风啊罗绮轻扬，纨素有声啊如诉我心。
English: Clothes with the wind, the wind is light, the wind has a voice, it speaks to my heart.

古文：神眇眇兮密靓处，君不御兮谁为荣？
现代文：静僻之所啊凝神远望，君驾不至啊无以为荣。
English: A secluded place to gaze into the distance, nothing to be proud of if you don't get there.

古文：俯视兮丹墀，思君兮履綦。
现代文：俯身下视啊丹墀如昔，履迹宛在啊思念君王。
English: Bending over, looking down, ah, Danyang is as it used to be, the tracks are destined, ah, miss the king.

古文：仰视兮云屋，双涕兮横流。
现代文：仰面观云啊天际昏黑，涕泪交流啊我心伤悲。
English: Looking up at the clouds, the sky is dark, tears are exchanged, my heart is sad.

古文：顾左右兮和颜，酌羽觞兮销忧。
现代文：四下环顾啊强颜为欢，羽觞酌酒啊藉以解忧。
English: Looking around, enjoying the strong look, drinking wine with feathers to relieve their worries.

古文：惟人生兮一世，忽一过兮若浮。
现代文：人生在世啊仅此一回，却如浮萍啊转瞬即逝。
English: Life is alive only this once, but it is fleeting like duckweed.

古文：已独享兮高明，处生民兮极休。勉虞精兮极乐，与福禄兮无期。《绿衣》兮《白华》，自古兮有之。
现代文：富贵尊宠啊亦曾得之，岂若百姓啊其乐融融。强作精神啊勉为其乐，今生若此啊何求福禄。妾僭嫡位啊无时不有，《绿衣》《白华》啊从古至今。
English: Riches and honours and favours have been bestowed on them, but what if the people are not happy with their lot? The spirit of hard work is not happy with its lot, and if this is the case in this life, how can one ask for good fortune? Concubines and heiresses are not to be found at all times, and "green clothes" and "white flowers" have existed from ancient times to the present.

古文：至成帝崩，婕妤充奉园陵，薨，因葬园中。
现代文：成帝去世以后，班健仔被派去奉守陵园，她死后就埋葬在那裹。
English: After the death of Emperor Chengdu, Ban Jianzai was sent to guard the cemetery, where she was buried after her death.

古文：孝成赵皇后，本长安宫人。
现代文：孝成帝的赵皇后，原本是长安的宫人。
English: Empress Zhao of Emperor Xiaocheng was originally from Chang'an.

古文：初生时，父母不举，三日不死，乃收养之。
现代文：她刚出世的时候，父母不想养活她，但扔掉了三天她还没死，于是又抱回家抚养。
English: When she was first born, her parents didn't want to feed her, but they threw her away for three days before she died, so they took her home to raise her.

古文：及壮，属阳阿主家，学歌舞，号曰飞燕。
现代文：长大以后，她到阳阿公主家学习歌舞，被称为飞燕。
English: When she grew up, she went to Princess Yang Ah's home to learn singing and dancing, and was known as Fei Yan.

古文：成帝尝微行出。
现代文：成帝曾经微服出宫，拜访阳阿公主，公主令人为之歌舞。
English: Emperor Cheng Rong once went out of the palace to visit Princess Yang Ah, and the princess made people sing and dance.

古文：过阳阿主，作乐，上见飞燕而说之，召入宫，大幸。
现代文：成帝见到赵飞燕，非常喜欢，就召她进宫，极受宠爱。
English: When Emperor Cheng saw Zhao Feiyan, he liked her very much and invited her to the palace. She was greatly loved.

古文：有女弟复召入，俱为婕妤，贵倾后宫。
现代文：飞燕有个妹妹也被召进宫来，姐妹二人都被封为徒仔，其贵幸超过整个后宫。
English: Fei Yan had a younger sister who was also summoned to the palace. Both sisters were given the title of apprentice, which was more valuable than the entire harem.

古文：许后之废也，上欲立赵婕妤。
现代文：许皇后被废以后，皇上打算册立赵徒伃为皇后。
English: After the dethronement of Empress Xu, the emperor planned to crown Zhao Tuxuan as empress.

古文：皇太后嫌其所出微甚，难之。
现代文：皇太后嫌她出身低贱，不答应。
English: The Empress Dowager disliked her humble origins and did not agree.

古文：太后姊子淳于长为侍中，数往来传语，得太后指，上立封赵婕妤父临为成阳侯。
现代文：太后姐姐的儿子淳于长做诗中，屡次来往传话，成帝明白了太后的心思，就封赵侄伃的父亲赵临为成阳侯。
English: When the son of the empress dowager's sister, Jun Yuchang, wrote a poem, he sent messages back and forth many times. Emperor Cheng understood the thoughts of the empress dowager, and appointed Zhao's father, Zhao Lin, as the Prince of Chengyang.

古文：后月余，乃立婕妤为皇后。
现代文：一个多月后，就册立赵徒伃为皇后。
English: A little more than a month later, Zhao Tuxuan was crowned empress.

古文：追以长前白罢昌陵功，封为定陵侯。
现代文：又追念淳于长先前奏禀停止营造昌陵的功劳，封为定陵侯。
English: He also paid tribute to the efforts of Jun Yu Chang in stopping the construction of Changling Mausoleum, and was awarded the title of Dingling Mayor.

古文：皇后既立，后宽少衰，而弟绝幸，为昭仪。
现代文：赵飞燕被册立为皇后之后，后来不再那么受宠，而她的妹妹最受宠爱，封为昭仪。
English: After Zhao Feiyan was enthroned as empress, she was no longer so favored, and her sister was the most favored, named Zhao Yi.

古文：居昭阳舍，其中庭彤朱，而殿上髤漆，切皆铜沓黄金涂，白玉阶，壁带往往为黄金釭，函蓝田璧，明珠、翠羽饰之，自后宫未尝有焉。
现代文：住在昭阳舍，庭院饰以红色，殿上刷了两层漆，台阶都是用铜做成，涂上一层黄金，用汉白玉做成阶梯，壁带之中，往往用黄金做成釭，装饰上蓝田玉、明珠、翠羽，整个后宫从没有这样奢华的。
English: Living in Zhaoyang House, the courtyard is decorated with red, the hall is painted with two layers of paint, the steps are made of copper and coated with a layer of gold, the steps are made of Chinese white jade, the wall strips are often made of gold, and the whole harem has never been so luxurious.

古文：姊弟颛宠十余年，卒皆无子。
现代文：赵氏姐妹专宠十几年，始终都没有生育。
English: The Zhao sisters have been the family's favorites for more than a decade, but they have never given birth.

古文：末年，定陶王来朝，王祖母傅太后私赂遗赵皇后、昭仪，定陶王竟为太子。
现代文：成帝末年，定陶王前来朝见，定陶王的祖母傅太后暗地裹贿赂赵皇后和赵昭仪，定陶王终于被册立为太子。
English: At the end of the reign of Emperor Cheng, King Ding Tao came to see the emperor. King Ding Tao's grandmother, the Empress Dowager Fu, secretly bribed Empress Zhao and Zhao Zhaoyi, and King Ding Tao was finally registered as the crown prince.

古文：明年春，成帝崩。
现代文：第二年春天，成帝去世。
English: In the spring of the following year, Emperor Chengxing died.

古文：帝素强，无疾病。
现代文：成帝平时身体很好，没有什么病。
English: Emperor Cheng is usually in good health and does not have any illnesses.

古文：是时，楚思王衍、梁王立来朝，明旦当辞去，上宿供张白虎殿。
现代文：这时候楚思王刘衍、梁王刘立前来朝见，第二天一早就要告辞回去，成帝就摆设帷帐住在白虎殿。
English: At this time, Chu Si Wang Liu Yan and Liang Wang Liu Li came to see the emperor, and the next morning they had to leave for home. Emperor Cheng set up the curtains and stayed at the White Tiger Hall.

古文：又欲拜左将军孔光为丞相，已刻侯印书赞。
现代文：他又打算封左将军孔光为丞相，官印和封官的文告都已经做好了。
English: He also planned to appoint the left-wing general Kong Guang as chancellor. The official seal and the announcement of the appointment have already been prepared.

古文：昏夜平善，乡晨，傅裤袜欲起，因失衣，不能言，昼漏上十刻而崩。
现代文：一夜无事，早晨醒来，穿裤袜，想坐起来，就一下子掉了衣服，说不出话来，昼漏十刻时分，成帝去世。
English: Nothing happened overnight, woke up in the morning, put on pants and socks, wanted to sit up, suddenly lost his clothes, couldn't speak, at 10 o'clock in the afternoon, Cheng Di died.

古文：民间归罪赵昭仪，皇太后诏大司马莽、丞相大司空曰： 皇帝暴崩，群众讠雚哗怪之。
现代文：老百姓认为赵昭仪负有罪责，皇太后下诏给大司马王莽、丞相大司空说： 皇帝暴崩，人们议论纷纷，不明就里。
English: The common people thought that Zhao Zhaoyi was to blame. The empress dowager issued an edict to the grand secretary Ma Wang Mang and the grand secretary Kuang saying: "The emperor has died suddenly. People are talking about it, but it's not clear."

古文：掖庭令辅等在后庭左右，侍燕迫近，杂与御史、丞相、廷尉治问皇帝起居发病状。 
现代文：掖庭令辅等人就在后宫附近侍候皇帝的起居，让他们和御史、丞相、廷尉一起察问皇帝平时的起居和发病的情况。 
English: Yu Ting Ling Fu and others were waiting for the emperor to get up near the harem, and let them investigate the emperor's usual living and the condition of the disease together with the historian, the chancellor, and the courtier.

古文：赵昭仪自杀。
现代文：赵昭仪自杀了。
English: Zhao Zhaoyi committed suicide.

古文：哀帝既立，尊赵皇后为皇太后，封太后弟侍中驸马都尉钦为新成侯。
现代文：哀帝即位以后，尊奉赵皇后为皇太后，封太后的弟弟侍中驸马都尉赵钦为新成侯。
English: After Emperor Ai ascended the throne, Emperor Zhao honored Empress Zhao as empress dowager, and appointed her younger brother, Zhao Qin, an aide-de-camp to the emperor, as the new crown prince.

古文：赵氏侯者凡二人。
现代文：赵氏家族中一共有两人封侯。
English: A total of two members of the Zhao family were ennobled.

古文：后数月，司隶解光奏言：
现代文：又过了几个月，司隶解光上奏说：
English: After a few more months, Sijijie Geguang said:

古文：臣闻许美人及故中宫史曹宫皆御幸孝成皇帝，产子，子隐不见。
现代文：我听说许美人和原来的中宫史曹宫都曾被孝成皇帝御幸，生下儿子，孩子却都不见了。
English: I heard that both Xu Bimei and the original second consort Shi Cao Gong were once blessed by Emperor Xiaocheng and gave birth to sons, but the children are gone.

古文：臣遣从事掾业、史望验问知状者掖庭狱丞籍武，故中黄门王舜、吴恭、靳严，官婢曹晓、道房、张弃，故赵昭仪御者于客子、王偏、臧兼等，皆曰宫即晓子女，前属中宫，为学事史，通《诗》，授皇后。
现代文：我派从事掾业、史望察问知道内情的掖庭狱丞籍武，原中黄门王舜、吴恭、靳严，官婢曹晓、道房、张弃，原赵昭仪的侍者于客子、王偏、臧兼等人，都说曹宫是曹晓的女儿，原来属于中宫，学习旧史掌故，又精通《诗经》，负责教皇后。
English: Gongting Jiaojong, who was sent by me to be engaged in the study and investigation of history, and who knew the inside story, was named Wu; the former middle-ranked Huangmen Wang Qian, Wu Qiong, and Xuan Yan; the officials and servants Cao Xiao, Daofang, and Zhang Qian; and the former Zhao Zhaoyi's attendants Yu Kezi, Wang Qian, and Jia Jian, and others, all said that Cao Gong was Cao Xiao's daughter, originally belonged to the middle-ranked palace, studied the old history, and was proficient in the "Book of Songs," and was responsible for

古文：房与宫对食，元延元年中宫语房曰： 陛下幸宫。 
现代文：元延元年中，曹宫和道房面对面地坐在一起吃饭，就对道房说： 陛下御幸于我。 
English: In the middle of the first year of the Yuan extension, Cao Gong and Daofang sat face to face to eat together, and said to Daofang: Your Majesty is lucky to have me.

古文：后数月，晓入殿中，见宫腹大，问宫。
现代文：几个月后，曹晓到殿中去，看到曹宫肚子大了，就询问她。
English: A few months later, Cao Xiao went to the palace, saw that Cao Gong had a big belly, and questioned her.

古文：宫曰： 御幸有身。 
现代文：曹宫说： 得到御幸，怀了身孕。 
English: Cao Gong said, "I was blessed to become pregnant.

古文：其十月中，宫乳掖庭牛官令舍，有婢六人，中黄门田客持诏记，盛绿绨方底，封御史中丞印，予武曰： 取牛官令舍妇人新产儿，婢六人，尽置暴室狱，毋问儿男女，谁儿也！ 
现代文：那年十月，曹宫在掖庭牛官令舍生下一个男孩，派六名婢女服侍。中黄门田客拿着一道诏令，放在一个绿色的丝帛书囊裹，用御史中丞的大印封好，交给籍武说： 把牛官令舍裹那个妇人刚生下来的孩子，连同六名婢女，统统关进暴室，不要问孩子是男是女，也不要问是谁的孩子。 
English: In October of that year, Cao Gong gave birth to a boy in the Yingting Cowherd's house, and sent six maidservants to serve him. Zhonghuang Mende Tianke took a decree, wrapped it in a green silk satchel, sealed it with the great seal of the Grand Historian, and handed it to Qi Wu, saying: "Wrap the Cowherd's house around the woman's newborn child, together with the six maidservants, and put them all in the torture room. Don't ask if the child is a boy or a girl, and don't ask whose child it is.

古文：武迎置狱，宫曰： 善臧我儿胞，丞知是何等儿也！ 
现代文：籍武就把她们关进暴室。曹宫说： 您要好好收藏我儿子的胞衣，您知道他是什么样的孩子吗！ 
English: Cao Gong said, "You should carefully collect my son's pajamas. Do you know what kind of child he is?"

古文：后三日，客持诏记与武，问： 儿死未？
现代文：三天后，田客拿诏令给籍武，问道： 孩子死了没有？
English: Three days later, Tian Ge took the imperial edict to register Wu and asked: Did the child die?

古文：手书对牍背。 
现代文：写在木牍背面。 
English: Written on the back of the raft.

古文：武即书对： 儿见在，未死。 
现代文：籍武就写道： 孩子现在还活着，没有死。 
English: Kimitake wrote: The child is still alive, he is not dead.

古文：有顷，客出曰： 上与昭仪大怒，奈何不杀？ 
现代文：一会儿，田客出来说： 皇上和赵昭仪大怒，怎么不杀掉他呢？ 
English: After a while, Tianke came out and said, "The emperor is furious with Zhao Zhaoyi. Why not kill him?"

古文：武叩头啼曰： 不杀儿，自知当死；杀之，亦死！ 
现代文：籍武一边叩头一边哭着说： 不杀这孩子，知道应当是死罪；杀了他，也衹是一死！ 
English: He bowed his head and wept, saying, "If you do not kill this child, you should know that it is a capital crime; if you kill him, you will die!"

古文：即因客奏封事，曰： 陛下未有继嗣，子无贵贱，唯留意！ 
现代文：就通过田客上奏皇上，说： 陛下没有后嗣，儿子无论出身贵贱，希望您还是留着吧！ 
English: He appealed to the emperor through Tianke, saying, "Your majesty has no heir. Regardless of whether your son is of noble or humble birth, I hope you will still keep him!

古文：奏入，客复持诏记予武曰： 今夜漏上五刻，持儿与舜，会东交掖门。 
现代文：田客进去禀奏，又拿诏令给籍武，说： 今晚夜漏上五刻时，把孩子交给王舜，在东交掖门见面。 
English: "Tonight, at five o'clock in the evening, hand over the child to Wang Yao and meet him at the East Jiaotong Gate.

古文：武因问客： 陛下得武书，意何如？ 
现代文：籍武就问田客： 陛下看到我的奏文，有什么反应？ 
English: Takeshi asked Tian Ke: Your Majesty, when you saw my petition, what was your reaction?

古文：曰： 瞠也。 
现代文：田客回答说： 呆呆地发愣。 
English: Tian Ke replied: "Stunned.

古文：武以儿付舜。
现代文：籍武把孩子交给王舜。
English: Kebutake handed the child over to Wang Yao.

古文：舜受诏，内儿殿中，为择乳母，告 善养儿，且有赏。
现代文：王舜领了韶命，把孩子接进殿中，给他挑选奶妈，并且告诉她说 好好看护孩子，将会得到赏赐。
English: Wang Yao took the plunge, took the child into the hall, selected a wet nurse for him, and told her that if she took good care of the child, she would be rewarded.

古文：毋令漏泄！ 
现代文：不要把这件事泄露出去！ 
English: Don't let this get out!

古文：舜择弃为乳母，时儿生八九日。
现代文：王舜选择张弃做奶妈，这时孩子才生下来八九天。
English: Wang Yao chose Zhang Qian as a wet nurse, when the child was only born for eight or nine days.

古文：后三日，客复持诏记，封如前予武，中有封小绿箧，记曰： 告武以箧中物书予狱中妇人，武自临饮之。 
现代文：三天后，田客又拿来诏令，像以前那样封好，交给了籍武，裹面有个小绿筐，诏令上说： 籍武把筐裹的东西和信交给狱裹的妇人，籍武亲自前往给她吃下去。 
English: Three days later, the farmer again brought the edict, sealed it as before, and handed it to Keng Wu, who was wrapped in a small green basket. The edict said: Keng Wu should give the basket and the letter to the woman in prison, and Keng Wu himself should go and give it to her.

古文：武发箧中有裹药二枚，赫蹄书，曰： 告伟能：努力饮此药，不可复入。
现代文：籍武打开小筐，裹面有两枚药丸，一张很薄的小黄纸片，上面写着： 伟能：努力吃下这药丸，不要再进来了。
English: Keng Wu opened the small basket. From the wrapping there were two pills, a very thin piece of small yellow paper, on which was written: Wei Neng: Try to eat this pill, don't come in again.

古文：女自知之！ 
现代文：你自己心裹明白。 
English: You know it in your heart.

古文：伟能即宫。
现代文：伟能就是曹宫。
English: Wei Neng is Cao Gong.

古文：宫读书已，曰： 果也，欲姊弟擅天下！
现代文：曹宫读完这封信，说： 果然如此，她们姐妹要控制天下！
English: After reading the letter, Cao Gong said, "That's right, their sisters want to control the world!"

古文：我儿男也，额上有壮发，类孝元皇帝。
现代文：我的孩子是个男孩，前额下生头发，像孝元皇帝。
English: My child is a boy, with hair under his forehead, like Emperor Xiaoyuan.

古文：今儿安在？
现代文：现在孩子哪裹去了？
English: Where is the child now?

古文：危杀之矣！
现代文：已被她们害死了吧！
English: have been killed by them!

古文：奈何令长信得闻之？
现代文：怎么才能让太后知道造件事呢？ 
English: How can you let the Queen know you're having an affair?

古文：宫饮药死。
现代文：曹宫吃药丸而死。
English: Cao Gong took a pill and died.

古文：后宫婢六人召入，出语武曰： 昭仪言 女无过。
现代文：后来曹宫的六名婢女也被召进宫去，出来时告诉籍武说： 昭仪说 你们没有罪过。
English: Later, six maidservants of Cao Gong were also summoned to the palace, and when they came out, they told Zekiwu that: Zhaoyi said that you did not commit any crime.

古文：宁自杀邪，若外家也？ 
现代文：是愿意自杀呢，还是去到外舍而死？ 
English: Do you want to commit suicide, or go to a nursing home and die?

古文：我曹言愿自杀。 
现代文：我们说愿意自杀。 
English: We said we were willing to commit suicide.

古文：即自缪死。
现代文：就自缢而死。
English: He hanged himself and died.

古文：武皆表奏状。
现代文：籍武全部将这些情况一一上表奏明。
English: All members of the armed forces have reported these situations one by one.

古文：弃所养儿十一日，宫长李南以诏书取儿去，不知所置。
现代文：张弃喂养了这个孩子十一天，宫长李南持诏书把孩子抱走，不知安置在什么地方。
English: Zhang Guo fed the child for eleven days. The palace governor, Li Nan, took the child away with an edict and placed him somewhere.

古文：许美人前在上林涿沐馆，数召入饰室中若舍，一岁再三召，留数月或半岁御幸。
现代文：许美人原来在上林涿沐馆，曾屡次被皇帝召到饰室中若舍，一年之中召见了好几次，或留住几个月或者半年，受到皇帝御幸。
English: Originally, Xu Bijin lived in the Shanglin Imperial Mummification Museum, and was repeatedly summoned by the emperor to the decoration room. She was summoned several times a year, or stayed for a few months or half a year, and was blessed by the emperor.

古文：元延二年怀子，其十一月乳。
现代文：元延二年怀孕，十一月生下孩子。
English: Yuan Yan was pregnant for two years and gave birth to a child in November.

古文：诏使严持乳医及五种和药丸三，送美人所。
现代文：成帝下诏让靳严带着妇产医生和三枚用五种药和成的药丸，送到许美人的住处。
English: Emperor Cheng decreed that Yan Yan take the obstetrician and gynecologist and three pills mixed with five kinds of medicine to Xu Meiren's residence.

古文：后客子、偏、兼闻昭仪谓成帝曰： 常给我言从中宫来，即从中宫来，许美人儿何从生中？
现代文：后来于客子、王偏、臧兼听到昭仪对成帝说： 常常骗我说你从中宫来，若是从中宫来，许美入的孩子是从哪裹来的？
English: Later, at the guest's son, Wang Yang, and Zou Jian, they heard Zhao Yi say to Cheng Di: "You often lied to me that you came from the Middle Palace. If you came from the Middle Palace, where did Xu Meirong's child come from?

古文：许氏竟当复立邪！ 
现代文：许氏居然又要兴起了！ 
English: Mr. Xu is actually on the rise again!

古文：怼，以手自捣，以头击壁户柱，从床上自投地，啼泣不肯食，曰： 今当安置我，欲归耳！ 
现代文：她非常愤怒，用手捶打着自己，用头撞墙和柱子，又从床上跳到地下，哭哭啼啼地不肯吃东西，说： 皇帝现在该安排我的事了，我要回去！ 
English: She was very angry, beat herself with handcuffs, banged her head against the wall and pillars, jumped from the bed to the ground, and sobbingly refused to eat, saying: The emperor should arrange my affairs now, I want to go back!

古文：帝曰： 今故告之，反怒为！
现代文：成帝说： 我特意告诉你，你反而大怒。
English: Cheng Di said: I specifically told you that you would be furious.

古文：殊不可晓也。 
现代文：真不该告诉你。 
English: I really shouldn't have told you.

古文：帝亦不食。
现代文：成帝也不肯吃饭。
English: Emperor Cheng also refused to eat.

古文：昭仪曰： 陛下自知是，不食为何？
现代文：昭仪说： 陛下自己认为没做错什么，那为什么不吃饭呢？
English: Zhao Yi said, "Your Majesty thinks that you have done nothing wrong, so why don't you eat?

古文：陛下常自言 约不负女 ，今美人有子，竟负约，谓何？ 
现代文：陛下常说 发誓不辜负你，现在美人生了儿子，你还是背弃了誓言，有什么好说？ 
English: Your Majesty used to say, "I swore to live up to you." Now that Beauty has given birth to a son, you have broken your oath. What can I say?

古文：帝曰： 约以赵氏，故不立许氏。
现代文：成帝说： 我发誓册立赵氏，所以废掉了许氏。
English: Emperor Cheng said: I swore to establish the Zhao clan, so I abolished the Xu clan.

古文：使天下无出赵氏上者，毋忧也！ 
现代文：使天下没有地位高过赵氏的人，这些你都不必担忧。 
English: There is no one in the world with a higher status than the Zhao family, and you don't have to worry about any of this.

古文：后诏使严持绿囊书予许美人，告严曰： 美人当有以予女，受来，置饰室中帘南。 
现代文：后来成帝下诏让靳严用绿书囊装上诏令拿给许美入，又告诉靳严说： 美人一定会有东西交给你，你拿回来，放在饰室门帘的南面。 
English: Later, Emperor Chengzong issued an edict for Yan Yan to use a green book bag to carry the edict to Xu Meiying, and told Yan Yan: "Beauty will definitely have something to give you, you take it back and put it on the south side of the door curtain of the decoration room.

古文：美人以苇箧一合盛所生儿，缄封，及绿囊报书予严。
现代文：美人用一个草筐盛着孩子，用绳子捆好，连同装着回信的绿书囊一同交给靳严。
English: Beauty put the child in a straw basket, tied it with a rope, and handed it over to Yan Yan, together with the green book bag containing the reply.

古文：严持箧书，置饰室帘南去。
现代文：靳严带着草筐和书信，到饰室门帘的南面放下。
English: Yan Yan took the straw basket and the letter and put it on the south side of the door curtain of the decoration room.

古文：帝与昭仪坐，使客子解箧缄。
现代文：成帝和昭仪坐在那裹，叫于客子去解筐上的绳子。
English: Emperor Cheng and Empress Zhaoyi sat there wrapped up and asked the guest to untie the rope on the basket.

古文：未已，帝使客子、偏、兼皆出，自闭户，独与昭仪在。
现代文：还没解完，成帝让于客子、王偏、臧兼都出去，自己关上房门，单独和昭仪待在裹面。
English: Before it was all over, Cheng Di let his guests, Wang Chuan, and Zou Can all go out, closed the door himself, and stayed alone with Zhao Yi.

古文：须臾开户，呼客子、偏、兼，使缄封箧及绿绨方底，推置屏风东。
现代文：过了片刻打开门，呼唤于客子、王偏、臧兼，让他们用绳子捆好草筐和书囊，放在屏风东面。
English: After a while, he opened the door and called out to his guests, Wang Chieng and Xuan Keng, asking them to tie up their straw baskets and book bags with ropes and place them on the east side of the screen.

古文：恭受诏，持箧方底予武，皆封以御史中丞印，曰： 告武：箧中有死儿，埋屏处，勿令人知。 
现代文：吴恭领受韶令，拿着草筐和书囊给籍武，上面都用御史中丞的大印封好，说： 籍武：草筐裹有个死掉的孩子，埋在僻静的地方，不要让别人知道。 
English: Wu Qiong received the imperial order and took a straw basket and a book bag to Zekiwu, sealing them with the great seal of the Grand Historian, saying: Zekiwu: There is a dead child wrapped in a straw basket, buried in a secluded place, do not let others know.

古文：武穿狱楼垣下为坎，埋其中。
现代文：籍武就在狱楼墙的下面挖了一个坑，把那些东西埋在裹面。
English: Keng Wu dug a hole under the wall of the cell block and buried those things in the shroud.

古文：故长定许贵人及故成都、平阿侯家婢王业、任孋、公孙习前免为庶人，诏召入，属昭仪为私婢。
现代文：原长定许贵人和原成都侯、平阿侯家的婢女王业、任欐、公孙习先前被罢废为庶人，有韶书将她们召进宫去，给昭仪做了私人婢女。
English: The former chancellor, Ding Xu, and the former Chengdu lord, Ping Ahong's maidservants, Ye, Ren Xi, and Gongsun Xi, had previously been dismissed as commoners, and there was a letter calling them into the palace to become personal maidservants for Zhaoyi.

古文：成帝崩，未幸梓宫，仓卒悲哀之时，昭仪自知罪恶大，知业等故许氏、王氏婢，恐事泄，而以大婢羊子等赐予业等各且十人，以尉其意，属 无道我家过失。 
现代文：成帝去世，还没有入殓，在这事情突变举国哀痛的时候，昭仪自己知道罪大恶极，又知道王业等人原来是许氏、王氏家的婢女，害怕事情泄露出去，就把大丫头羊子等人分别赐给王业她们，每人十名，以抚慰她们，叮嘱她们不要讲出自己的过失。
English: Emperor Cheng died before he was enthroned, and when this matter suddenly caused nationwide grief, Zhao Yi herself knew that the crime was extremely evil, and also knew that Wang Ye and others were originally the maidservants of the Xu and Wang families. Afraid of the matter leaking out, she separately gave the maidservants Yang Zi and others to Wang Ye and others, ten each, to comfort them, and told them not to tell their faults.

古文：元延二年五月，故掖庭令吾丘遵谓武曰： 掖庭丞吏以下皆与昭仪合通，无可与语者，独欲与武有所言。
现代文：元延二年五月，原掖庭令吾丘遵对籍武说： 掖庭自丞吏以下的官吏都和昭仪勾结在一起，我无法跟她们说，衹能和你说些心裹话。
English: In May of the 2nd year of the Yuan Yan, the original court ordered Iku Zun to say to Kebutsu: The officials from the court to the junior officials are colluding with Zhaoyi, I can't say to them, I can't say anything to you.

古文：我无子，武有子，是家轻族人，得无不敢乎？
现代文：我没有子女，你有子女，担心大祸殃及全家，恐怕不敢说什么吧？
English: I don't have children, but you do, and I'm afraid you don't dare say anything for fear of bringing disaster on the whole family, do you?

古文：掖庭中御幸生子者辄死，又饮药伤堕者无数，欲与武共言之大臣，票骑将军贪耆钱，不足计事，奈何令长信得闻之？ 
现代文：掖庭裹得到皇上御幸生下儿子的人都得死，还有许多人吃药堕胎，我想和你一起向大臣们讲明这些事，骠骑将军贪财，不能同他商量事情，衹是如何能让太后知道呢？ 
English: The people who gave birth to the Emperor's son had to die, and many others took pills to abort. I want to clarify these things with you to the ministers. The general is greedy and cannot discuss things with him. How can I let the Empress know?

古文：遵后病困，谓武： 今我已死，前所语事，武不能独为也，慎语！ 
现代文：吾丘遵后来病重，就对籍武说： 现在我要死了，先前说的那些事，你自己难以办成，千万不要泄露出去。 
English: When Ioka Shun fell seriously ill, he said to Shikibu, "Now I'm going to die. It's difficult for you to do the things you said before. Don't let it out.

古文：皆在今年四月丙辰赦令前。
现代文：这些事都发生在今年四月丙辰颁布赦令之前。
English: All of this happened before the pardon was issued by Xi Jinping in April this year.

古文：臣谨案永光三年男子忠等发长陵傅夫人冢。
现代文：我认真地考察，永光三年男子忠等发掘长陵傅夫人的坟墓。
English: I seriously investigated, and Yongguang three-year-old male Zhong and others excavated the tomb of Lady Changling Fu.

古文：事更大赦，孝元皇帝下诏曰： 此朕不当所得赦也。 
现代文：正好赶上大赦天下，孝元皇帝颁布韶书说： 这件事我不能赦免。 
English: Just in time for the general amnesty, Emperor Xiaoyuan issued an imperial edict saying: I cannot pardon this matter.

古文：穷治，尽伏辜，天下以为当。
现代文：于是一再追究，那些人全都伏法，天下人都认为这样做是对的。
English: As a result, repeated investigations revealed that all of those people had broken the law, and everyone in the world thought that this was the right thing to do.

古文：鲁严公夫人杀世子，齐桓召而诛焉，《春秋》予之。
现代文：鲁严公夫人杀害鲁国世子，齐桓公就召她前来杀掉了她，《春秋》赞同这种行为。
English: Lu Yan Gong's wife killed Lu Guozhi, Qi Kuan Gong called her to come and kill her, "Spring and Autumn" approves of this behavior.

古文：赵昭仪倾乱圣朝，亲灭继嗣，家属当伏天诛。
现代文：赵昭仪祸乱朝廷，杀害皇子，她的家人也应当受到严厉惩罚。
English: Zhao Zhaoyi caused havoc in the imperial court and killed the prince. Her family should also be severely punished.

古文：前平安刚侯夫人谒坐大逆，同产当坐，以蒙赦令，归故郡。
现代文：先前平安刚侯夫人许谒犯下大逆不道之罪。家族也应予以治罪，因为赶上大赦，得以回归原籍。
English: Previously, the wife of Prince Heian, Hsu Ye, had committed the crime of high treason. The family should also be punished, because they were able to return to their home country in time for the amnesty.

古文：今昭仪所犯尤悖逆，罪重于谒，而同产亲属皆在尊贵之位，迫近帏幄，群下寒心，非所以惩恶崇谊示四方也。
现代文：现在昭仪犯下了更大的罪，超过了许谒，但她的亲族都身处尊贵的地位，在皇上周围，令我们这些臣子为之寒心，这样不能惩治罪恶推崇礼义以昭示四方。
English: Now, Zhao Yi has committed a greater crime than Xu Xi, but her relatives are all in an honorable position, around the emperor, which makes us courtiers feel cold, so we can't punish the evil, promote propriety and justice, and show the four directions.

古文：请事穷竟，丞相以下议正法。
现代文：请求陛下对这件事追察到底，让丞相以下的官员议论决断以正法制。
English: I request Your Majesty to investigate this matter to the end, and let the officials below the prime minister discuss and decide in accordance with the legal system.

古文：哀帝于是免新成侯赵钦、钦兄子成阳侯，皆为庶人，将家属徙辽西郡。
现代文：哀帝就罢免了新成侯赵钦、赵钦哥哥的儿子成阳侯赵欣的侯爵，把他们贬为庶人，家属迁到辽西郡。
English: Emperor Ai dismissed the new marquis of Chengyang, Zhao Qin, the son of Zhao Qin's brother, the marquis of Chengyang, Zhao Xin, and reduced them to commoners, and their families moved to Liaoxi County.

古文：时议郎耿育上疏言：
现代文：这时议郎耿育上疏说：
English: At this time, the speaker, Geng Yu, said:

古文：臣闻继嗣失统，废適立庶，圣人法禁，古今至戒。
现代文：我听说传宗接代失去纲领，就会废嫡立庶，圣人一向禁止这样做，古往今来引以为戒。
English: I heard that if the line of succession loses its program, it will be abolished. The sages have always prohibited this, and it has been a warning from ancient times to the present.

古文：然大怕见历知適，逡循固让，委身吴粤，权变所设，不计常法，致位王季，以崇圣嗣，卒有天下，子孙承业，七八百载，功冠三王，道德最备，是以尊号追及大王。
现代文：但是大伯知道其父古公卖父意在传位给其弟季历。就一再退让，而后远走吴粤，这是随机应变所致，不拘泥于常法，把王位让给王季，以推重圣明的后嗣，终于得到了天下，子子孙孙继承大业，延续了七八百年，功绩超过三王，道德最为高尚，因此给大伯追加尊号为大王。
English: However, the great-uncle knew that his father, Gu Gong Rong, intended to pass the throne to his younger brother, Ji Lian. He repeatedly conceded, and then went far away to Wu Yue. This was caused by random contingency. He did not stick to the common law, but gave the throne to Wang Ji, and with the emphasis on the sacred heirs, he finally gained the world. His children and grandchildren inherited the great cause. It lasted for seven or eight hundred years. His achievements exceeded the three kings, and his morality was the most noble. Therefore, he gave the great-uncle the additional honorific title of the great king.

古文：故世必有非常之变，然后乃有非常之谋。
现代文：所以人世间一定会有非同寻常的变故，然后才有非同寻常的谋略。
English: Therefore, there must be extraordinary changes in the world, and then there is an extraordinary strategy.

古文：孝成皇帝自知继嗣不以时立，念虽末有皇子，万岁之后未能持国，权柄之重，制于女主，女主骄盛则耆欲无极，少主幼弱则大臣不使，世无周公抱负之辅，恐危社稷，倾乱天下。
现代文：孝成皇帝自己知道不能在适宜的时候立下后嗣，又考虑到即使是晚年有了皇子，自己去世以后他也不能执掌朝政，国家大权将会控制在女主手中，女主骄横妄为就会无所不为，年少的君主幼小软弱大臣们就不会听命于他，当世没有像周公那样的抱负来辅佐成王之人，恐怕会危害国家，祸乱天下。
English: Emperor Xiaocheng himself knew that he would not be able to appoint an heir at the right time, and he also considered that even if he had a prince in his later years, he would not be able to take charge of the imperial government after his death. The power of the state would be controlled in the hands of the empress. If the empress was arrogant, she would do everything. Young monarchs, small and weak ministers would not obey his orders. People who did not have the same ambition as Zhou Gong to assist King Cheng would probably harm the country and bring disaster to the world.

古文：知陛下有贤圣通明之德，仁孝子爱之恩，怀独见之明，内断于身，故废后宫就馆之渐，绝微嗣祸乱之根，乃欲致位陛下以安宗庙。
现代文：知道陛下具有贤明圣通的美德，仁孝博爱的恩情，心怀独见之明察，能决断大事，因此防止后宫当政的苗头，杜绝没有后嗣而引起祸乱的根源，就打算传位给陛下以安定天下。
English: Knowing that His Majesty possesses the virtue of wisdom, benevolence, filial piety, and generosity, and is able to make decisions with his unique insight, he intends to pass the throne to His Majesty in order to stabilize the world by preventing the harem from taking power and eliminating the root cause of disasters caused by the absence of heirs.

古文：愚臣既不能深援安危，定金匮之计，又不知推演圣德，述先帝之志，乃反覆校省内，暴露私燕，诬污先帝倾惑之过，成结宠妾妒媚之诛，甚失贤圣远见之明，逆负先帝忧国之意。
现代文：愚昧的臣下既不能看清安危，提出长久之策，又不知道发扬陛下的德政，表述先帝的心意，却不停地拷问内廷，将皇室的宴饮私事暴露于天下，诬蠛先帝为女色所迷惑，编造宠妾妒嫉行媚之事，完全违背了先帝的圣贤先见之明，辜负了先帝忧国忧民的本意。
English: The foolish vassals could neither see the danger clearly nor come up with a long-term strategy, nor did they know how to promote His Majesty's good governance and express the Emperor's will, but they kept torturing the inner court, exposing the private affairs of the royal banquet to the world, falsely accusing the Emperor of being infatuated with women, and fabricating the affair of jealousy of his favorite concubine, which completely violated the Emperor's sagacity and foresight, and failed to live up to the Emperor's intention of worrying about the country and the people.

古文：夫论大德不拘俗，立大功不合众，此乃孝成皇帝至思所以万万于众臣，陛下圣德盛茂所以符合于皇天也，岂当世庸庸斗筲之臣所能及哉！
现代文：讲究大德者不必拘泥于世俗之见，立大功者必然自有主张，造就是孝成皇帝的思虑远远胜过诸大臣的原因，是陛下圣德与上天相符合的原因，哪裹是当世这些庸庸碌碌、目光短浅的大臣们所能理解的呢！
English: Those who pay attention to great virtue do not have to stick to the secular view, and those who have made great contributions must have their own opinions. This is the reason why Emperor Xiaocheng's thoughts are far superior to those of ministers, and the reason why His Majesty's holiness is in line with heaven. How can these mediocre, short-sighted ministers of today understand this?

古文：且褒广将顺君父之美，匡救销灭既往之过，古今通义也。
现代文：况且对于君父的美德应当褒扬推广，以往的过失则加以补救消解，这是古往今来的通则。
English: Moreover, it has been a general rule since ancient times that the virtues of the monarch should be praised and promoted, while past faults should be remedied.

古文：事不当时固争，防祸于未然，各随指阿从，以求容媚，晏驾之后，尊号已定，万事已讫，乃探追不及之事，讦扬幽昧之过，此臣所深痛也！
现代文：遇到事情不能在当时据理力争，防患于未然，而是阿谀旨意惟恐违逆，奉承谄媚以求欢心，先帝去世以后，尊号已经确定，所有的事务都已完成，才又追究那些不可知的旧事，追寻那些隐蔽难明的过失，这正是我最为深恶痛绝的行为。
English: In the event of an incident, it is not possible to argue rationally at the time and prevent the problem in advance, but to fearfully violate the will of the grandma, flatter and flatter in order to seek happiness. After the death of the former emperor, the honorary title has been determined and all affairs have been completed, only to investigate those unknowable old things and pursue those hidden and difficult mistakes. This is exactly the behavior I hate the most.

古文：愿下有司议，即如臣言，宜宣布天下，使咸哓知先帝圣意所起。
现代文：希望把这些话拿到有司议论，若是同意我的看法，就应当公布于天下，使人们都了解先帝的良苦用心。
English: I hope that these words will be brought to the discussion, and if they agree with my opinion, they should be published to the world, so that people can understand the good intentions of the former emperor.

古文：不然，空使谤议上及山陵，下流后世，远闻百蛮，近布海内，甚非先帝托后之意也。
现代文：否则，就会任凭那些诽谤之言牵连到皇上，而且流传到后世，远及百蛮，近及国内，无人不知，无人不晓，完全背离了先帝托付后事的原意。
English: Otherwise, those slanderous words would be allowed to implicate the emperor and spread to future generations, far and wide, near and far, no one knows, no one knows, completely deviating from the original intention of the former emperor's entrustment.

古文：盖孝子善述父之志，善成人之事，唯陛下省察！
现代文：孝子善于追述父亲的心志，善于成就别人的事业，希望陛下明察！
English: A filial son is good at recounting his father's aspirations and accomplishing other people's undertakings. I hope His Majesty sees this!

古文：哀帝为太子，亦颇得赵太后力，遂不竟其事。
现代文：哀帝被册立为太子，赵太后也出过很多力，哀帝就不再追究这件事。
English: Emperor Aye was enthroned as crown prince, and Empress Dowager Zhao also exerted a lot of effort, so Emperor Aye no longer pursued the matter.

古文：傅太后恩赵太后，赵太后亦归心，故成帝母及王氏皆怨之。
现代文：傅太后感激赵太后的恩情，赵太后也从心裹感激她，所以成帝的母亲和王氏家族都非常怨恨。
English: Empress Dowager Fu was grateful for Empress Dowager Zhao's kindness, and Empress Dowager Zhao was also grateful to her from the bottom of her heart, so Emperor Chengdi's mother and the Wang family were very resentful.

古文：哀帝崩，王莽白太后诏有司曰： 前皇太后与昭仪俱侍帷幄，姊弟专宠锢寝，执贼乱之谋，残灭继嗣以危宗庙，悖天犯祖，无为天下母之义。
现代文：哀帝驾崩后，王莽禀告太后下韶给有司说： 先前皇太后和昭仪一同侍奉皇帝，姐妹二人专房擅宠，使用毒辣的阴谋，残杀皇子，危害宗庙社稷，违逆天命，有背先帝，不足以为 天下之母 。
English: After the Emperor's death, Wang Mang reported to the Empress Dowager Jiaozuo to Yushi, saying: The former Empress Dowager and Zhaoyi served the emperor together, the two sisters were especially favored, used poisonous plots, killed the prince, endangered the family temple, violated the fate of heaven, betrayed the previous emperor, and were not enough to be the mother of the world.

古文：贬皇太后为孝成皇后，徙居北宫。 
现代文：贬皇太后为孝成皇后，迁住北宫。 
English: The Empress Dowager was demoted to the position of Empress Xiaocheng and moved to the North Palace.

古文：后月余，复下诏曰： 皇后自知罪恶深大，朝请希阔，失妇道，无共养之礼，而有狼虎之毒，宗室所怨，海内之仇也，而尚在小君之位，诚非皇天之心。
现代文：一个多月后，又下韶说： 皇后知道自己罪大恶极，很少朝拜太后，有失妇道，毫无供奉侍养的礼义，却有虎狼一般的狠毒，被宗室怨恨，是国人的仇敌，却还居于皇帝之妻的地位上，这确实不合上天的本意。
English: More than a month later, he issued another edict: "The empress knows that she has committed the most heinous of sins. She rarely pays homage to the empress dowager. She has lost the virtue of womanhood. She has no sense of propriety, but she is as vicious as a tiger or a wolf. She is resented by her family and is an enemy of the people, yet she still occupies the position of the emperor's wife. This is indeed not in accordance with God's original intention.

古文：夫小不忍乱大谋，恩之所不能已者义之所割也。今废皇后为庶人，就其园。 
现代文：小不忍则乱大谋，不能忘记恩情，就以大义了断私恩，现在将皇后废为庶人，到她的陵园中居住。 
English: If you can't bear the small things, you can't bear the big things. If you can't forget the favor, you will break the private favor with the great justice. Now, you will abolish the empress as a commoner and live in her cemetery.

古文：是日自杀。
现代文：当天，孝成皇后就自杀了。
English: On the same day, Empress Xiaocheng committed suicide.

古文：立十六年而诛。
现代文：她一共在位十六年。
English: She reigned a total of sixteen years.

古文：先是，有童谣曰： 燕燕，尾涏々，张公子，时相见。
现代文：起初有童谣说： 燕儿燕儿，尾巴光光，张公子啊，时常相见。
English: At the beginning, there was a nursery rhyme that said: "Yan'er Yan'er, tail shiny, Zhang Gongzi, I see you often."

古文：木门仓琅根，燕飞来，啄皇孙。
现代文：宫门森严，琯琅铿锵，燕儿飞来，啄杀皇孙。
English: The gates of the palace are strictly guarded, and the doves and swallows come to kill the grandson of the emperor.

古文：皇孙死，燕啄矢。 
现代文：皇孙已死，燕儿啄矢。 
English: The Emperor's grandson is dead, and the birds are chirping.

古文：成帝每微行出，常与张放俱，而称富平侯家，故曰张公子。
现代文：成帝每次微服出宫，常和张放一起，自称来自富平侯家，所以说张公子。
English: Every time Emperor Chengzong went out of the palace, he often went out with Zhang Fang. He claimed to be from the Fuping family, so he was called Zhang Gongzi.

古文：仓琅根，宫门铜鍰也。
现代文：沧琅根，就是宫门的铜环。
English: The root of the cascade is the copper ring of the palace gate.

古文：孝元傅昭仪，哀帝祖母也。
现代文：孝元帝的傅昭仪，是哀帝的祖母。
English: Fu Zhaoyi, the mother of Emperor Xiaoyuan, is the grandmother of Emperor Pai.

古文：父河内温人，蚤卒，母更嫁为魏郡郑翁妻，生男惲。
现代文：她的父亲是河内温人，很早就死了，母亲改嫁为魏郡郑翁的妻子，生下儿子郑惮。
English: Her father, a native of Hanoi, died early, and her mother married the wife of Zheng Weng of Wei County and gave birth to a son, Zheng Shuo.

古文：昭仪少为上官太后才人，自元帝为太子，得进幸。
现代文：昭仪年轻的时候，是上官太后的才人，自从元帝册立为太子，得到进幸。
English: When Zhaoyi was young, she was a talented person of the Shangguan Empress Dowager. Since the former emperor was appointed as the prince, she has been fortunate.

古文：元帝即位，立为婕妤，甚有宠。
现代文：元帝即位后，册立她为健伃，非常得宠。
English: After the enthronement of the Yuan Emperor, she was listed as Jianye, and was very popular.

古文：为人有材略，善事人，下至宫人左右，饮酒酹地，皆祝延之。
现代文：傅昭仪为人有才能和谋略，善于和别人相处，即使是对身边的宫人，每逢喝酒时，她也能以酒洒地，为他们祈求长寿。
English: Fu Zhaoyi has talent and strategy, and is good at getting along with others. Even for the palace people around her, whenever she drinks, she can sprinkle wine on the ground to pray for their longevity.

古文：产一男一女，女为平都公主，男为定陶恭王。
现代文：她生下一儿一女，女儿封为平都公主，儿子封为定陶恭王。
English: She gave birth to a son and a daughter. The daughter was given the title of Pingdu Princess, and the son was given the title of Dingtao King.

古文：恭王有材艺，尤爱于上。
现代文：恭王多才多艺，特别受元帝喜爱。
English: King Gong is a versatile actor, especially loved by Emperor Yuan.

古文：元帝既重傅婕妤，及冯婕妤亦幸，生中山孝王，上欲殊之于后宫，以二人皆有子为王，上尚在，未得称太后，乃更号曰昭仪，赐以印绶，在婕妤上。
现代文：元帝看重傅健仔，等到冯侄伃也得到宠幸，生下中山孝王，元帝打算让她们在后宫地位特殊，因为她们二人都有儿子被封为王，但皇上还在，不能称为太后，元帝就增设了昭仪的封号，赏赐印绶，地位在健仔之上。
English: Emperor Yuan valued Fu Jian Zi, and when Feng Jian Zi was also fortunate enough to give birth to Zhongshan Xiao Wang, Emperor Yuan planned to give them a special status in the harem, because both of them had sons who were crowned kings, but the emperor was still alive and could not be called the empress dowager. Emperor Yuan added the title of Zhaoyi, awarded the seal, and the status was above that of Jian Zi.

古文：昭其仪，尊之也。
现代文：昭其仪，就是表示对她们的尊重。
English: Zhao Qi Yi, that is, to show respect for them.

古文：至成、哀时，赵昭仪、董昭仪皆无子，犹称焉。
现代文：到成帝、哀帝的时候，赵昭仪、董昭仪都没有儿子，也得到了这个封号。
English: By the time of Emperor Chengdu and Emperor Puyi, Zhao Zhaoyi and Dong Zhaoyi did not have a son, and they also got this seal number.

古文：元帝崩，傅昭仪随王归国，称定陶太后。
现代文：元帝去世以后，傅昭仪跟随定陶恭王前往封国，称为定陶太后。
English: After the death of the Yuan Emperor, Fu Zhaoyi followed King Ding Tao Gong to the fiefdom and was known as the Empress Dowager of Ding Tao.

古文：后十年，恭王薨，子代为王。
现代文：十年后，恭王去世，儿子继承王位。
English: Ten years later, King Gong died, and his son succeeded to the throne.

古文：王母曰丁姬。
现代文：继位定陶王的母亲叫丁姬。
English: The mother of the heir to the throne, King Ding Tao, is called Ding Ji.

古文：傅太后躬自养视，既壮大，成帝无继嗣。
现代文：傅太后亲自抚养这个孙子，等到长大之后，成帝没有后嗣。
English: Empress Dowager Fu personally raised this grandchild, and when he grew up, Emperor Cheng had no heir.

古文：时中山孝王在。
现代文：当时中山孝王还在世。
English: At that time, Nakayama Takao was still alive.

古文：元延四年，孝王及定陶王皆入朝。
现代文：元延四年，中山孝王和定陶王都前去朝见成帝。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, King Zhongshan Xiaowang and King Dingtao both went to the court to see Emperor Cheng.

古文：傅太后多以珍宝赂遗赵昭仪及帝舅票骑将军王根，阴为王求汉嗣。
现代文：傅太后花了许多珍宝贿赂赵昭仪和皇上的舅舅骠骑将军王根，暗地裹为定陶王谋求太子之位。
English: Empress Dowager Fu spent a lot of precious treasures to bribe Zhao Zhaoyi and the emperor's uncle, General Wang Gen, to secretly seek the position of prince for King Ding Tao.

古文：昭仪及根皆见上无子，欲豫自结为久长计，更称誉定陶王。
现代文：而赵昭仪和王根等人见皇上没有后嗣，也正想勾结起来作长久之计，就越发地称赞定陶王。
English: But Zhao Zhaoyi and Wang Gen and others, seeing that the emperor had no heir, were also thinking of colluding to make a long-term plan, and praised King Ding Tao all the more.

古文：上亦自器之，明年，遂征定陶王立为太子，语在《哀纪》。
现代文：成帝也很器重他，第二年，就召定陶王进京立为太子，这件事记载在《哀帝纪》。
English: Emperor Cheng also held him in high regard. In the following year, he appointed Tao Wang to enter Beijing and become the crown prince. This event is recorded in the "Lamentation of the Emperors."

古文：月余，天子立楚孝王孙景为定陶王，奉恭王后。
现代文：一个多月后，成帝封楚孝王的孙子刘景为定陶王，奉守恭王之后。
English: A little more than a month later, Liu Jing, the grandson of Emperor Chengfu and King Chu Xiao, became King Ding Tao, after King Bongshu and King Gong.

古文：太子议欲谢，少傅阎崇以为： 《春秋》不以父命废王父命，为人后之礼不得顾私亲，不当谢。 
现代文：太子与手下人商议，打算上表致谢，少傅阎崇认为 《春秋》不因为父亲的命令废弃祖父的命令，既然当了别人的后嗣就不应再顾念私人的亲情，不应当致谢。 
English: The prince discussed with his subordinates and planned to express his thanks on the table. Shao Fu Yan Chong believed that "Spring and Autumn" would not abandon his grandfather's order because of his father's order. Since he was someone else's heir, he should no longer think about private family love and should not express his thanks.

古文：太傅赵玄以为当谢，太子从之。
现代文：太傅赵玄认为应当致谢，太子听了他的话。
English: Grandfather Zhao Xuan thought that he should express his thanks, and the prince listened to him.

古文：诏问所以谢状，尚书劾奏玄，左迁少府，以光禄勋师丹为太傅。
现代文：于是有韶书质问太子致谢的原因，尚书弹劾赵玄的罪责，赵玄被贬为少府，而任命光禄勋师丹为太傅。
English: As a result, there was a petition to question the reason for the prince's gratitude, and a petition to impeach Zhao Xuan's guilt. Zhao Xuan was relegated to a minor prefect, and the Guanglu Honored Teacher, Dan, was appointed as Taifu.

古文：诏傅太后与太子母丁姬自居定陶国邸，下有司议皇太子得与傅太后、丁姬相见不，有司秦议不得相见。
现代文：又下韶令傅太后和太子的母亲丁姬居住在定陶国的府邸，并让有关部门议论皇太子能不能和傅太后、丁姬相见，有关部门讨论说不能相见。
English: He also ordered the Empress Dowager Fu and the prince's mother Ding Ji to live in a mansion in Dingtao Province, and let the relevant departments discuss whether the crown prince could meet with Empress Dowager Fu and Ding Ji, and the relevant departments discussed that they could not meet.

古文：顷之，成帝母王太后欲令傅太后、丁姬十日一至太子家，成帝曰： 太子丞正统，当共养陛下，不得复顾私亲。 
现代文：不久，成帝的母亲王太后打算让傅太后、丁姬每隔十天来一次太子家，成帝说： 太子已经继承了大统，应当在宫中养育，不能再顾念自己的亲属。 
English: Soon, Emperor Chengdi's mother, Empress Dowager Wang, planned to have Empress Dowager Fu and Empress Dowager Ding Ji come to the prince's home every ten days. Emperor Chengdi said, "The prince has inherited the throne and should be raised in the palace. He can no longer think about his relatives."

古文：王太后曰： 太子小，而傅太后抱养之。今至太子家，以乳母恩耳，不足有所妨。 
现代文：王太后说： 太子小的时候，是傅太后将他抚育成人的，现在到太子家，也就是念在乳母的恩情，没有什么妨碍。 
English: The Empress Dowager said, "When the prince was small, it was Empress Fu who raised him. Now, there is nothing to prevent her from coming to the prince's home, that is, she is grateful to the nanny.

古文：于是令傅太后得至太子家。丁姬以不安养太子，独不得。
现代文：因此下令傅太后可以到太子家去，而丁姬因为没有从小养育太子，则不能相见。
English: Therefore, Fu ordered that Empress Dowager Fu could go to the prince's home, while Ding Ji could not meet because she had not raised the prince since childhood.

古文：成帝崩，哀帝即位。
现代文：成帝去世，哀帝即位。
English: Emperor Cheng died and Emperor Paidei ascended to the throne.

古文：王太后诏令傅太后、丁姬十日一至未央宫。
现代文：王太后下韶让傅太后、丁姬十天去未央宫一次。
English: The empress dowager ordered the empress dowager Fu and Ding Ji to go to Weiyang Palace once every ten days.

古文：高昌侯董宏希指，上书言宜立丁姬为帝太后。
现代文：高昌侯董宏迎合太后的旨意，就上书提议封丁姬为太后。
English: In response to the empress dowager's will, Gaochang Hou Donghong proposed to crown Ding Ji as empress dowager.

古文：师丹劾奏： 宏怀邪误朝，不道。 
现代文：师丹弹劾董宏，上奏说： 董宏心术不正，危害朝廷，实属大逆不道。 
English: Shidan impeached Donghong, and the report said: Donghong's mind tricks are dishonest, endangering the imperial court, and are actually acts of high treason.

古文：上初即位，谦让，从师丹言止。
现代文：哀帝刚刚即位，遇事谦逊，听了师丹的话也就作罢了。
English: Emperor Ai had just ascended to the throne and was humble in the face of adversity. After listening to Shi Dan's words, he gave up.

古文：后乃白令王太后下诏，尊定陶恭王为恭皇。
现代文：后来就禀告王太后，让她下诏尊奉定陶恭王为恭皇。
English: Later, he sent an obituary to the empress dowager, asking her to issue an imperial edict to designate Tao Qiong Wang as the next Qiong Wang.

古文：哀帝因是曰： 《春秋》 母以子贵 ，尊傅太后为恭皇太后，丁姬为恭皇后，各置左右詹事，食邑如长信宫、中宫。
现代文：哀帝因此说： 《春秋》之义是 母以子贵，应尊奉傅太后为恭皇太后，丁姬为恭皇后，各设置左右詹事，封赏食邑按照皇太后、皇后的制度。
English: Aidi therefore said: "The meaning of "Spring and Autumn" is that mother and child are the most valuable, and it should be honored to honor Fu the Empress Dowager as the Empress Dowager, and Ding Ji as the Empress Dowager, and each setting should be left and right, and the awarding of food villages should be in accordance with the system of the Empress Dowager and Empress Dowager.

古文：追尊恭皇太后父为崇祖侯，恭皇后父为褒德侯。 
现代文：又追尊恭皇太后的父亲为崇祖侯，恭皇后的父亲为褒德侯。 
English: In addition, the father of Empress Dowager Zong Rong and the father of Empress Dowager Zong Rong were both revered as Chong Zuo, and the father of Empress Dowager Zong Rong was Bo De.

古文：后岁余，遂下诏曰： 汉家之制，推亲亲以显尊尊，定陶恭皇之号不宜复称定陶。
现代文：过了一年多，又下诏说： 按汉家的制度，当亲其所亲，尊其所尊，定陶恭皇的尊号不应再加定陶二字。
English: After more than a year, he issued another edict: "According to the Han system, one should be close to one's relatives and respect one's elders. The honorific title of Emperor Ding Tao should no longer include the word "Ding Tao."

古文：其尊恭皇太后为帝太太后，丁后为帝太后。 
现代文：应称恭皇太后为帝太太后，丁后为帝太后。 
English: The Empress Dowager Gong should be called the Empress Dowager, and the Empress Dowager Ding should be called the Empress Dowager.

古文：后又更号帝太太后为皇太太后，称永信宫，帝太后称中安宫，而成帝母太皇太后本称长信宫，成帝赵后为皇太后，并四太后，各置少府、太仆，秩皆中二千石。
现代文：后来又将帝太太后的尊号改为皇太太后，称作永信宫，帝太后称作中安宫，而成帝的母亲太皇太后本来称作长信宫，成帝的赵皇后为皇太后，一共四位太后并立，各自设有少府、太仆，秩禄都是中二千石。
English: Later, the honorific title of the emperor's wife was changed to the empress's wife, called Yongxin Palace, and the empress dowager was called Zhongan Palace, while the emperor's mother, the empress dowager, was originally called Changxin Palace. Emperor Zhao's empress dowager was the empress dowager. A total of four empress dowagers stood side by side, each with a minor palace and servants, and their ranks were in the middle two thousand koku.

古文：为恭皇立寝庙于京师，比宣帝父悼皇考制度，序昭穆于前殿。
现代文：又在京城给恭皇修建寝庙，按照宣帝的父亲悼皇考的制度，在前殿排列昭穆的次序。
English: In addition, a sleeping temple was built for Emperor Gong in the capital, and in accordance with the system of Emperor Xuan's father mourning the imperial examination, the order of Shomu was arranged in the vestibule.

古文：傅太后父同产弟四人，曰子孟、中叔、子元、幼君。
现代文：傅太后同父所生的弟弟有四名，叫做子孟、中叔、子元、幼君。
English: The Empress Dowager Fu had four younger brothers by the same father, named Zi Meng, Zhong Shou, Zi Yuan and Yu Jun.

古文：子孟子喜至大司马，封高武侯。
现代文：子孟的儿子傅喜官至大司马，封为高武侯。
English: The son of Meng's son, Fu Qian, rose to the rank of grand steward and was given the title of Gaowu.

古文：中叔子晏亦大司马，封孔乡侯。
现代文：中叔的儿子傅晏也做了大司马，封为孔乡侯。
English: The middle uncle's son Fu Yao also became the grand steward and was given the title of Kongxiangwu.

古文：幼君子商封汝昌侯，为太后父崇祖侯后，更号崇祖曰汝昌哀侯。
现代文：幼君的儿子傅商封为汝昌侯，奉守太后的父亲崇祖侯之后，将崇祖侯的封号改为汝昌哀侯。
English: The young prince's son, Fu Shangfu, was given the title of Ruchang Hou, and after paying homage to the empress dowager's father, Chongzu Hou, the title of Chongzu Hou was changed to Ruchang Hou.

古文：太后同母弟郑惲前死，以惲子业为阳信侯，追尊惲为阳信节侯。
现代文：太后同母所生的弟弟郑惮已经死了，就封郑惮的儿子郑业为阳信侯，追尊郑惮为阳信节侯。
English: Zheng Shuo, the younger brother born to the same mother as the empress dowager, had already died, so Zheng Shuo's son Zheng Ye was named Yang Xin Hou, and Zheng Shuo was named Yang Xin Jie Hou.

古文：郑氏、傅氏侯者凡六人，大司马二人，九卿二千石六人，侍中诸曹十余人。
现代文：郑氏、傅氏家族中一共有六人封侯，两人任大司马，六人做到九卿二千石，还有十几个人做了侍中一类的官。
English: A total of six members of the Zheng and Fu families were vassals, two served as grand stewards, six became nine lords of 2,000 koku, and more than a dozen people became officials such as chamberlains.

古文：傅太后既尊，后尤骄，与成帝母语，至谓之妪。
现代文：傅太后地位既然尊贵了，便更为骄横，和成帝的母亲说话，甚至称呼她为老太婆。
English: Since Empress Dowager Fu's status had been elevated, she became even more arrogant. She spoke to Emperor Chengdi's mother and even called her an old woman.

古文：与中山孝王母冯太后并事元帝，追怨之，陷以祝诅罪，令自杀。
现代文：傅太后曾经舆中山孝王的母亲冯太后一同侍奉元帝，追想往事，心中怨恨，就用诅咒的罪名诬陷冯太后，命她自杀。
English: Empress Dowager Fu, who had once served Emperor Yuan together with Empress Dowager Feng, the mother of Emperor Zhongshan Xiao Lu, was haunted by the past and harbored resentment, so she framed Empress Dowager Feng with the accusation of cursing and ordered her to commit suicide.

古文：元寿元年崩，合葬渭陵，称孝元傅皇后云。
现代文：元寿元年，傅太后去世，与元帝合葬在渭陵，称为孝元傅皇后。
English: In the first year of Yuan Shou's life, Empress Dowager Fu died and was buried together with Emperor Yuan in Fuling Mausoleum. She was known as Empress Xiao Yuan Fu.

古文：定陶丁姬，哀帝母也，《易》祖师丁将军之玄孙。
现代文：定陶王的丁姬，是哀帝的母亲，是传授《易》的祖师丁将军的玄孙女。
English: Ding Ji of King Ding Tao is the mother of Emperor Ai, and the great-great-granddaughter of General Ding, the forefather who taught "Yi."

古文：家在山阳瑕丘，父至庐江太守。
现代文：丁姬原籍山阳瑕丘，父亲官至庐江太守。
English: Ding Ji was born in Sanyangkeqiu, and her father was the governor of the Li River.

古文：始，定陶恭王先为山阳王，而丁氏内其女为姬。
现代文：开始定陶恭王先被封为山阳王，丁氏便将其女送去给他做姬妾。
English: At the beginning, King Ding Tao Gong was first crowned as the king of Sanyang, and the Ding family sent their daughter to him to be his concubine.

古文：王后姓张氏，其母郑礼，即傅太后同母弟也。
现代文：定陶王的王后姓张，母亲叫郑礼，是傅太后的同母妹妹。
English: King Ding Tao's queen was surnamed Zhang, and her mother was called Zheng Li. She was the maternal sister of Empress Dowager Fu.

古文：太后以亲戚故，欲其有子，然终无有。
现代文：太后因为亲戚的缘故，希望王后生个儿子，却始终没有。
English: The Queen Mother, for the sake of her relatives, hoped that the Queen would have a son, but she never did.

古文：唯丁姬河平四年生哀帝。
现代文：祇有丁姬在河平四年生下哀帝。
English: Only Ding Ji, who was four years old at the time, mourned the emperor.

古文：丁姬为帝太后，两兄忠、明。
现代文：丁姬被尊封为帝太后，有两个哥哥丁忠、丁明。
English: Ding Ji was given the title of empress dowager and had two brothers, Ding Zhong and Ding Ming.

古文：明以帝舅封阳安侯。
现代文：丁明以皇帝舅舅的身份封为阳安侯。
English: Ding Ming was given the title of Yang An Hou as the uncle of the emperor.

古文：忠蚤死，封忠子满为平周侯。
现代文：丁忠死得早，就封他的儿子丁满为平周侯。
English: Ding Zhong died early, so he appointed his son Ding Man as the Prince of Ping Zhou.

古文：太后叔父宪、望，望为左将军，宪为太仆。
现代文：太后有两位叔父丁宪、丁望。丁望封为左将军，丁宪封为太仆。
English: The empress dowager had two uncles, Ding Xian and Ding Wang. Ding Wangfu was the left general, and Ding Xianfu was the eunuch.

古文：明为大司马票骑将军，辅政。
现代文：丁明任大司马骠骑将军，辅佐朝政。
English: Ding Ming served as the grand secretary of the Horse Cavalry General, and assisted the imperial government.

古文：丁氏侯者凡二人，大司马一人，将军、九卿、二千石六人，侍中、诸曹亦十余人。
现代文：丁氏家族一共有两人封侯，一人为大司马，将军、九卿、二千石共六人，任侍中等官职的也有十几个人。
English: There are a total of two feudal lords in the Ding family, one of whom is the grand steward, six generals, nine lords, and 2,000 koku, and more than a dozen attendants and middle-ranking officials.

古文：丁、傅以一二年间暴兴尤盛。
现代文：丁氏、傅氏两家在一二年裹骤然兴盛起来。
English: The Ding and Fu families suddenly flourished in the past 12 years.

古文：然哀帝不甚假以权势，权势不如王氏在成帝世也。
现代文：但哀帝并不给他们很多权力，他们的权势比不上成帝在位时的王氏家族。
English: However, Emperor Ai did not give them much power, and their power was not comparable to that of the Wang family when Emperor Cheng was on the throne.

古文：建平二年，丁太后崩。
现代文：建平二年，丁太后去世。
English: In the second year of Jianping, Empress Dowager Ding passed away.

古文：上曰： 《诗》云 谷则异室，死则同穴 。
现代文：哀帝说： 《诗经》裹说 生不同室，死则同穴 。
English: Lai Di said: "The Book of Songs says that people are born in different rooms, but die in the same hole.

古文：昔季武子成寝，杜氏之墓在西阶下，请合葬而许之。
现代文：昔日季武子建造寝陵，杜氏的坟墓恰好在西阶下，杜氏请求合葬，季武子同意了。
English: Once upon a time, Ji Takeshi built a mausoleum, and To's grave happened to be under the west steps. To's request to be buried together was accepted by Ji Takeshi.

古文：附葬之礼，自周兴焉。
现代文：拊葬的礼法，从周代就已实行了。
English: The funeral etiquette has been practiced since the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：孝子事亡如事存，帝太后宜起陵恭皇之园。 
现代文：孝子侍奉死者如同侍奉生者，帝太后应当在恭皇的陵园修建陵墓。 
English: Filial sons and daughters should serve the dead as if they were serving the living, and the empress dowager should build a mausoleum in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：遣大司马票骑将军明，东送葬于定陶，贵震山东。
现代文：就派大司马骠骑将军丁明东行送葬，前往定陶，丁氏的显贵轰动了山东。
English: He sent the grand secretary Ma Xun to ride east to Ding Ming's funeral and went to Dingtao. Ding's eminence caused a sensation in Shandong.

古文：哀帝崩，王莽秉政，使有司举奏丁、傅罪恶。
现代文：哀帝去世后，王莽执掌朝政，指使有关官员举报丁氏、傅氏家族的罪行。
English: After the death of Emperor Ai, Wang Mang took charge of the imperial government and ordered relevant officials to report the crimes of the Ding and Fu families.

古文：莽以太皇太后诏皆免官爵，丁氏徙归故郡。
现代文：王莽用太皇太后的诏书将他们全部罢官，丁氏一族被赶回原籍。
English: Wang Mang dismissed them all from their posts with the Imperial Edict of the Grand Empress Dowager, and the Ding clan was forced to return to their place of origin.

古文：莽奏贬傅太后号为定陶共王母，丁太后号曰丁姬。
现代文：王莽奏请贬傅太后的尊号为定陶共王母，丁太后称为丁姬。
English: Wang Mangso asked that the honorary title of the Dowager Empress be Ding Tao and the Queen Mother, and the Dowager Empress Ding was called Ding Ji.

古文：元始五年，莽复言： 共王母、丁姬前不臣妾，至葬渭陵，冢高与元帝山齐，怀帝太后、皇太太后玺绶以葬，不应礼。
现代文：元始五年，王莽又说 共王母、丁姬先前不遵臣妾之道，甚至埋葬在渭陵，坟冢和元帝一样高，怀抱帝太后、皇太太后的玺绶下葬，不合礼法。
English: In the first five years of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Mang also said that the common queen mother and Ding Ji had previously disobeyed the way of the vassal and concubine, and even buried in the tomb, the tomb was as high as the Yuan Emperor, and buried under the arms of the empress dowager and the empress dowager, which was not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：礼有改葬，请发共王母及丁姬冢，取其玺绶消灭，徙共王母及丁姬归定陶，葬共王冢次，而葬丁姬复其故。 
现代文：按礼法应当改葬，请求掘开共王母和丁姬的坟墓，取出玺绶销毁，把共王母和丁姬迁回定陶，埋葬在共王附近，而按照原来的形式埋葬丁姬。 
English: According to the etiquette, the burial should be changed, and the request was made to dig up the graves of the Queen Mother and Ding Ji, remove the urns and destroy them, move the Queen Mother and Ding Ji back to Ding Tao, bury them near the King, and bury Ding Ji in the original form.

古文：太后以为既已之事，不须复发。
现代文：太后认为这些事都已经过去了，不必再发掘坟墓。
English: The Empress Dowager thought that all these things had passed, and there was no need to excavate the tomb.

古文：莽固争之，太后诏曰： 因故棺为致椁作冢，祠以太牢。 
现代文：王莽坚持这样做，太后就下诏说： 在旧棺再做一层椁，另外修坟，用太牢祭祀。 
English: Wang Mang insisted on doing this, and the empress dowager issued an edict saying: Make another layer of coffin in the old coffin, repair the grave in addition, and use the coffin for the sacrifice.

古文：谒者护既发傅太后冢，崩压杀数百人；开丁姬椁户，火出炎四五丈，吏卒以水沃灭乃得入，烧燔椁中器物。
现代文：谒者护发掘傅太后的坟墓，坟冢崩塌压死了几百人；打开丁姬的椁木，冒出火来，火焰高达四五丈，吏卒们用水把火浇灭才得以进去，大火烧掉了椁裹的器物。
English: Excavating the tomb of Empress Dowager Fu, the tomb collapsed and crushed hundreds of people; opening Ding Ji's beech tree, a fire broke out, the flame was as high as four or five meters, the officials doused the fire with water before they could enter, and the fire burned the wrapped objects.

古文：莽复奏言： 前共王母生，僣居桂宫，皇天震怒，灾其正殿；丁姬死，葬逾制度，今火焚其椁，此天见变以告，当改如媵妾也。
现代文：王莽又上奏说： 先前共王母擅自居住在桂宫，上天震怒，烧掉了正殿；丁姬死后，葬仪不合礼制，以致大火烧掉了椁木。这是上天告诉我们，应当按照媵妾的待遇给她们重新埋葬。
English: Wang Mang also reported: Previously, the Queen Mother lived in Guigong Palace without permission, and Heaven was so angry that it burned down the main hall; after Ding Ji died, the funeral ceremony was not in accordance with the etiquette, so the fire burned down the oak tree. This is Heaven telling us that they should be reburied according to the treatment of concubines.

古文：臣前奏请葬丁姬复故，非是。
现代文：我上次奏请按原来的形式改葬丁姬，仍然过于优待。
English: The last time I made a request to change Ding Ji's funeral to the original form, I was still treated too favorably.

古文：共王母及丁姬棺皆名梓宫，珠玉之衣非藩妾服，请更以木棺代，去珠玉衣，葬丁姬媵妾之次。 
现代文：共王母和丁姬的棺木都用了衹有帝后才能使用的梓宫，而珠玉之衣也不是藩王姬妾应当穿的，请求改为木棺，去掉珠玉衣，按媵妾的身份埋葬丁姬。 奏请被许可了。
English: The coffins of both the Queen Mother and Ding Ji both used the Azusa Palace, which can only be used by empresses, and the jeweled dress was not what the concubine of the Wang Ji should wear. The request was changed to a wooden coffin, the jeweled dress was removed, and Ding Ji was buried according to the identity of the concubine. The request was approved.

古文：奏可。既开傅太后棺，臭闻数里。
现代文：打开傅太后的棺木后，臭气几里之内都能闻到。
English: After the coffin of the Empress Dowager Fu was opened, the stench could be smelled for several miles.

古文：公卿在位皆阿莽指，入钱帛，遣子弟及诸生四夷，凡十余万人，操持作具，助将作掘平共王母、丁姬故冢，二旬间皆平。
现代文：在朝的大臣们都迎合王莽的心思，交纳钱帛，派遣家人和四方子弟共十余万人，拿着工具，帮助掘平共王母和丁姬原来的坟冢，费时二十天都掘平了。
English: The ministers in the imperial court catered to Wang Mang's thoughts, paid the money, and sent more than 100,000 family members and children from all over the country, with tools, to help dig out the original graves of the Queen Mother and Ding Ji. It took 20 days to dig them out.

古文：莽又周棘其处以为世戒云。
现代文：王莽又在那片地方围上一周荆棘，作为后世的警戒。
English: Wang Mang also surrounded that area with thorns for a week, as a warning to future generations.

古文：时有群燕数千，衔土投丁姬穿中。
现代文：当时有一群燕子大约几千只，衔土投到丁姬的空穴中。
English: At that time, there was a flock of swallows, about several thousand in number, that swarmed into Ding Ji's hole.

古文：丁、傅既败，孔乡侯晏将家属徙合浦，宗族皆归故郡。
现代文：丁氏、傅氏家族败落以后，孔乡侯傅晏将家属迁到合浦，族人都回到原籍。
English: After the fall of the Ding and Fu families, Kongxiang Hou Fuyao moved his family to Hapu, and all the ethnic groups returned to their original homes.

古文：唯高武侯喜得全，自有传。
现代文：衹有高武侯傅喜保全了自己，另有其列传。
English: Only Gaowu Hou Fu Xi preserved himself, and he is also listed in the annals.

古文：孝哀傅皇后，定陶太后从弟子也。
现代文：孝哀帝的傅皇后，是定陶太后堂弟的女儿。
English: Empress Fu of the Emperor Xiao Ai was the daughter of a cousin of Empress Dowager Ding Tao.

古文：哀帝为定陶王时，傅太后欲重亲，取以配王。
现代文：哀帝做定陶王的时候，傅太后打算亲上加亲，就将傅氏女许配于哀帝。
English: When Emperor Ai became the King of Dingtao, Empress Dowager Fu wanted to be closer to him, so she married Fu's daughter to Emperor Ai.

古文：王入为汉太子，傅氏女为妃。
现代文：哀帝入京立为太子，傅氏女做了太子妃。
English: Emperor Aye entered the capital as crown prince, and Fu's daughter became crown princess.

古文：哀帝即位，成帝大行尚在前殿，而傅太后封傅妃父晏为孔乡侯，与帝舅阳安侯丁明同日俱封。
现代文：哀帝即位后，成帝的棺木还在前殿，傅太后就封傅妃的父亲傅晏为孔乡侯，和哀帝的舅舅阳安侯丁明同一天受封。
English: After Emperor Ming's enthronement, Emperor Cheng's coffin was still in the vestibule, and Empress Dowager Fu had Fu Fei's father, Fu Xi, named as Kong Xianghou, and Emperor Ming's uncle, Yang Anhou Dingming, was given the title on the same day.

古文：时师丹谏，以为： 天下自王者所有，亲戚何患不富贵？
现代文：当时师丹进谏，认为 天下都为君主一人所有，亲戚还担心得不到富贵吗？
English: At that time, Shidan Jinjun believed that the whole world was owned by one monarch. Were his relatives still worried about getting rich?

古文：而仓卒若是，其不久长矣！ 
现代文：像这样仓促的行事，恐怕不能长久啊！ 
English: I'm afraid I can't go on like this for long!

古文：晏封后月余，傅妃立为皇后。
现代文：傅晏封侯后一个多月，傅妃被册立为皇后。
English: More than a month after Fu Rong was enthroned as marquess, Fu Fei was crowned empress.

古文：傅氏既盛，晏最尊重。
现代文：傅氏家族兴盛起来，傅晏的地位最为显贵。
English: Fu's family prospered, and Fu Yao became the most prominent.

古文：哀帝崩，王莽白太皇太后下诏曰： 定陶共王太后与孔乡侯晏同心合谋，背恩忘本，专恣不轨，与至尊同称号，终没，至乃配食于左坐，悖逆无道。
现代文：哀帝去世，王莽禀告太皇太后下韶说： 定陶共王太后和孔乡侯傅晏一同合谋，背弃恩德，忘记根本，恣意妄为，行不轨之事，甚至和皇帝用同一称号，死后，竟然又配祭宗庙，坐于左侧，狂妄无礼，大逆不道。
English: After the death of the emperor, Wang Mang reported to the empress dowager: "The empress dowager of Dingtao and the empress dowager of Confucianism conspired together with Kongxiang Hou Fu Xi, betrayed the benevolence, forgot the fundamentals, acted arbitrarily, and did improper things, and even used the same title as the emperor. After his death, he was even appointed to the ancestral temple and sat on the left side, which was arrogant, rude, and unethical.

古文：今令孝哀皇后退就桂宫。 
现代文：现在命令孝哀皇后退居桂宫。 
English: Now order the Empress Xiao Ai to retire to the Gui Palace.

古文：后月余，复与孝成赵皇后俱废为庶人，就其园自杀。
现代文：又过了一：个多月，傅皇后又和孝成赵皇后一起被废为庶人，随之她在陵园中自杀了。
English: More than a month later, Empress Fu and Empress Xiaocheng Zhao were also abolished as commoners, after which she committed suicide in the cemetery.

古文：孝元冯昭仪，平帝祖母也。
现代文：孝元帝的冯昭仪，是平帝的祖母。
English: Feng Zhaoyi of Emperor Xiaoyuan is the grandmother of Emperor Ping.

古文：元帝即位二年，以选入后宫。
现代文：元帝即位的第二年，冯昭仪被选入后宫。
English: In the second year of the enthronement of Emperor Yuan, Feng Zhaoyi was selected into the harem.

古文：时父奉世为执金吾。
现代文：当时她的父亲冯奉世任执金吾。
English: At that time, her father, Feng Fengshi, was the leader of Kingu.

古文：昭仪始为长使，数月至美人，后五年就馆生男，拜为婕妤。
现代文：昭仪开始是长使，几个月后升为美人，五年后到外舍生下一个儿子，被封为健仔。
English: At first, Zhao Yi was a chief envoy, but after a few months, she was promoted to a beauty, and five years later, she gave birth to a son, who was named Jian Zi.

古文：时父奉世为右将军光禄勋，奉世长男野王为左冯翊，父子并居朝廷，议者以为器能当其位，非用女宠故也。
现代文：当时她的父亲冯奉世是右将军光禄勋，冯奉世的长子冯野于是左冯翊，父子一同在朝廷做官，人们认为他们的才能和官位相符，并非足由于女儿受皇帝宠爱的缘故。
English: At that time, her father, Feng Feng Shih, was the Right General Guang Luk Hun, Feng Feng Shih's eldest son, Feng Ye, was the Left Feng Ye, and father and son worked together in the imperial court. It was believed that their talents and official positions were consistent, not only because of the daughter's favor with the emperor.

古文：而冯婕妤内宠与傅昭仪等。
现代文：而冯侄仔得到的宠幸和傅昭仪不相一下。
English: But Feng Neizi's pet and Fu Zhaoyi are not the same.

古文：建昭中，上幸虎圈斗兽，后宫皆坐。
现代文：建昭年间，元帝到虎圈观看斗兽，后宫都坐在一旁。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jian Zhao, Emperor Yuan went to the tiger enclosure to watch a fight, while the imperial court sat on the sidelines.

古文：熊佚出圈，攀槛欲上殿。
现代文：一头熊逃出虎圈，攀上槛栏要跑到殿上来。
English: A bear escaped from the tiger enclosure and climbed the threshold to run up to the palace.

古文：左右贵人傅昭仪等皆惊走，冯婕妤直前当熊而立，左右格杀熊。
现代文：左右的贵人像傅昭仪等都吓跑了，冯使伃却径直走上前去，挡住了熊，站在那儿，左右侍卫杀掉了熊。
English: The dignitaries on both sides like Fu Zhaoyi and others were scared away, but Feng Zhiyao walked straight forward, blocked the bear, stood there, and the guards on both sides killed the bear.

古文：上问： 人情惊惧，何故前当熊？ 
现代文：元帝问道： 人们都又惊又怕，你为什么上前挡住熊？ 
English: Yuan Di asked, "People are shocked and afraid. Why did you go forward to block the bear?"

古文：婕妤对曰： 猛兽得人而止，妾恐熊至御坐，故以身当之。 
现代文：健仔回答说： 猛兽抓到人后就会停下来，我怕熊走到陛下那裹，所以用身体挡住了它。 
English: Kenji replied, "The ferocious beast will stop when it catches someone. I was afraid that the bear would walk up to His Majesty, so I blocked it with my body.

古文：元帝嗟叹，以此倍敬重焉。傅昭仪等皆惭。
现代文：元帝非常感慨，因此对冯健仔倍加敬重，而傅昭仪等人很是惭愧。
English: Emperor Yuan was very moved, so he was doubly respectful of Feng Jianzai, while Fu Zhaoyi and others were very ashamed.

古文：明年夏，冯婕妤男立为信都王，尊婕妤为昭仪。
现代文：第二年夏，冯健伃的儿子封为信都王，使伃被尊封为昭仪。
English: In the summer of the second year, Feng Jianyao's son was named the king of Xindu, and his son was honored with the title of Zhaoyi.

古文：元帝崩，为信都太后，与王俱居储元宫。
现代文：元帝去世后，冯昭仪称为信都太后，和信都王一同住在储元宫。
English: After the death of Emperor Yuan, Feng Zhaoyi was known as the Empress Dowager of Xindu, and lived in the Yuan Palace with the King of Xindu.

古文：河平中，随王之国。
现代文：河平年间，跟随儿子去了封国。
English: During the Heping era, he followed his son to Fuzhou.

古文：后徙中山，是为孝王。
现代文：信都王后来迁到中山，就是中山孝王。
English: Later, the king of Xindu moved to Zhongshan, that is, the king of Zhongshan Xiao Wu.

古文：后征定陶王为太子，封中山王舅参为宜乡侯。
现代文：后来，成帝召定陶王入京册立为太子，又封中山王的舅舅冯参为宜乡侯。
English: Later, Emperor Cheng decreed that Tao Wang would be enthroned in Beijing as the crown prince, and also made Zhongshan Wang's uncle Feng San the prince of Yixiang.

古文：参，冯太后少弟也。
现代文：冯参，是冯太后的小弟弟。
English: Feng San is the younger brother of Empress Feng.

古文：是岁，孝王薨，有一男，嗣为王，时未满岁，有眚病，太后自养视，数祷祠解。
现代文：这一年，中山孝王去世，有一个儿子，继承王位，当时还不满周岁，得了眚病，太后亲自抚养，屡次祈神求福。
English: In the same year, King Zhongshan died. He had a son, who succeeded to the throne. He was not yet a year old at the time, and he got rickets. The empress dowager personally raised him and repeatedly prayed to God for blessings.

古文：哀帝即位，遣中郎谒者张由将医治中山小王。
现代文：哀帝即位后，派中郎谒者张由带着医生去给中山小王治病。
English: After Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, he sent Zhang Yu, a middle-ranking eunuch, with a doctor to treat Zhongshan Xiaowang.

古文：由素有狂易病，病发怒去，西归长安。
现代文：张由平时有狂病，发病时一怒之下就离开中山，回到长安。
English: Zhang Yu is usually mad, and when he fell ill, he left Zhongshan in a rage and returned to Chang'an.

古文：尚书簿责擅去状，由恐，因诬言中山太后祝诅上及太后。
现代文：尚书行文斥责张由擅自离开的罪责，张由很害怕，就诬告中山太后诅咒皇上和太后。
English: Shang Shujing reprimanded Zhang Yu for leaving without permission. Zhang Yu was very afraid and falsely accused the Empress Dowager Zhongshan of cursing the emperor and the empress dowager.

古文：太后即傅昭仪也，素常怨冯太后，因是遣御史丁玄案验，尽收御者官吏及冯氏昆弟在国者百余人，分系雒阳、魏郡、巨鹿。
现代文：太后就是傅昭仪，平时常常怨恨冯太后，因此派御史丁玄审理此事，把中山国的侍者、官吏以及冯氏兄弟一百多人全部收监，分别关押在洛阳、魏郡、钜鹿。
English: The empress dowager was Fu Zhaoyi, who often resented Empress Dowager Feng in peacetime. Therefore, she sent the Grand Empress Dowager Shi Dingxuan to investigate the matter, and imprisoned all the waiters and officials from Zhongshan Province, as well as more than a hundred of the Feng brothers, in Luoyang, Wei County, and Menglu.

古文：数十日无所得，更使中谒者令史立与丞相长史、大鸿胪丞杂治。
现代文：几十天来毫无收获，又派中谒者令史立和丞相长史大鸿胪丞一同审理。
English: For dozens of days, there was nothing to be gained, and the magistrate ordered Shi Lihe, the minister, and Shi Dahong, the chief, to be tried together.

古文：立受傅太后指，几得封侯，治冯太后女弟习及寡弟妇君之，死者数十人。
现代文：史立迎合傅太后的旨意，希望得以封侯，审问冯太后的妹妹冯习和守寡的弟媳君之，死了几十人。
English: Shi Li pandered to the will of Empress Dowager Fu, hoping to be made a vassal, and interrogated Empress Dowager Feng's sister, Feng Xi, and her widowed brother-in-law. Dozens of people died.

古文：巫刘吾服祝诅。医徐遂成言习、君之曰： 武帝时医修氏剌治武帝得二千万耳，今愈上，不得封侯，不如杀上，令中山王代，可得封。 
现代文：巫师刘吾招认了诅咒之事，医生徐遂成说冯习、君之曾经说 武帝时医生修氏治好武帝的病，赏钱二千万，现在治好了皇上，却不能封侯，不如杀掉皇上，让中山王代替他，就能够封侯了。 
English: The sorcerer Liu Wu confessed to the curse, the doctor Xu Suicheng said Feng Xi, and the prince once said that when Emperor Wu was ill, the doctor Shuji cured Emperor Wu's illness and rewarded him with 20 million. Now he has cured the emperor, but he can't be put under house arrest. It's better to kill the emperor and let Zhongshan Wang replace him, then he can be put under house arrest.

古文：立等劾奏祝诅谋反，大逆。
现代文：史立等人上奏冯太后等行诅咒之术，要谋反，实属大逆不道。
English: Shi Li and others played the curse of the Empress Dowager Feng and others, and they wanted to rebel, which was really a great treason.

古文：责问冯太后，无服辞。
现代文：他们责问冯太后，太后不肯招。
English: They questioned Empress Dowager Feng, but she refused to be persuaded.

古文：立曰： 熊之上殿何其勇，今何怯也！ 
现代文：史立说： 熊跑到殿上的时候多么勇敢啊，现在怎么害怕了！ 
English: Shi Li said, "How brave the bear was when he ran to the palace, and how scared he is now!

古文：太后还谓左右： 此乃中语，前世事，吏何用知之？
现代文：太后回来后对左右侍者说； 这是宫中的话，前朝的旧事，官吏们如何能知道？
English: When the empress dowager returned, she said to the waiters on her right and left, "This is a palace matter, an old matter from the previous dynasty. How can the officials know about it?"

古文：是欲陷我效也！ 
现代文：这是要陷害我的明证。 
English: This is a clear attempt to frame me.

古文：乃饮药自杀。
现代文：就服毒自杀了。
English: He took poison and committed suicide.

古文：先未死，有司请诛之，上不忍致法，废为庶人，徙云阳宫。
现代文：太后没死之前，有司奏请诛杀太后，哀帝不忍心这样做，就下令将太后废为庶人，迁居云阳宫。
English: Before the empress dowager died, there was a call for the empress dowager to be assassinated. The emperor could not bear to do this, so he ordered that the empress dowager be abolished as a commoner and moved to the Yunyang Palace.

古文：既死，有司复奏： 太后死在未废前。 
现代文：太后死后，有司又上奏 太后死在下韶废掉之前。 
English: After the death of the empress dowager, Yushi played again before the death of the empress dowager.

古文：有诏以诸侯王太后仪葬之。
现代文：遂下韶书按诸侯王太后的礼仪下。
English: Finally, the imperial edict was issued according to the etiquette of the empress dowager.

古文：宜乡侯参、君之、习夫及子当相坐者，或自杀，或伏法。
现代文：宜乡侯冯参、君之、冯习的丈夫和儿子等那些被牵连的人，有的自杀，有的被处以死刑。
English: Some of those who were implicated, such as Yixiang Hou Feng San, Jun Zhi, Feng Xi's husband and son, committed suicide, and some were sentenced to death.

古文：参女弁为孝王后，有两女，有司奏免为庶人，与冯氏宗族徙归故郡。
现代文：冯参的女儿冯弁是中山孝王的王后，生了两个女儿，有司奏请将她废为庶人，和冯氏家族一起迁回原籍。
English: Feng San's daughter, Feng Ben, was the queen of Zhongshan Xiaowang, and gave birth to two daughters. U Siso requested that she be abolished as a commoner and moved back to her hometown with the Feng family.

古文：张由以先告赐爵关内侯，史立迁中太仆。
现代文：张由凭着首先告发此事被赐予关内侯的爵位，史立升为中太仆。
English: Zhang Yu, by virtue of being the first to report the matter, was given the title of Marquis of Guanzhong, and Shi Lixing was promoted to the position of Grand Steward.

古文：哀帝崩，大司徒孔光奏 由前诬告骨肉，立陷人入大辟，为国家结怨于天下，以取秩迁，获爵邑，幸蒙赦令，请免为庶人，徒合浦 云。
现代文：哀帝去世后，大司徒孔光上奏说 张由先前诬告皇族，史立将人置于死地，使朝廷与天下人结下怨恨，以求升官加禄，获得爵邑，幸而赶上大赦天下，请求将他们罢免为庶人，流放到合浦。 
English: After the death of Emperor Yei, the chief disciple Kong Guang wrote that Zhang Yu had previously falsely accused the imperial family, Shi Li had put people to death, so that the imperial court and the people of the world had a grudge, in order to be promoted to a higher position, to obtain a peerage, and fortunately to catch up with the general amnesty, requesting that they be dismissed as commoners and exiled to Hapu.

古文：中山卫姬，平帝母也。
现代文：中山王的卫姬，是平帝的母亲。
English: Emperor Zhongshan's consort Wei Ji was the mother of Emperor Ping.

古文：父子豪，中山卢奴人，官至卫尉。
现代文：卫姬的父亲卫子豪，是中山卢奴人，官至卫尉。
English: Wei Ji's father, Wei Zi Hao, was from Zhongshan Lunu and was an officer of the Imperial Guards.

古文：子豪女弟为宣帝婕妤，生楚孝王；长女又为元帝婕妤，生平阳公主。
现代文：卫子豪的妹妹是宣帝的便伃，生下楚孝王；他的大女儿又是元帝的健仔，生了平阳公主。
English: The younger sister of Emperor Wei Zihao was Emperor Xuan's concubine, who gave birth to King Chu Xiao; his eldest daughter was Emperor Yuan's concubine, who gave birth to Princess Pingyang.

古文：成帝时，中山孝王无子，上以卫氏吉祥，以子豪少女配孝王。
现代文：成帝时，中山孝王没有儿子，皇上认为卫氏的女子都很吉祥，就把卫子豪的小女儿许配给孝王。
English: At the time of his accession to the throne, Zhongshan Takao Wang had no son. The emperor thought that all of Wei's women were auspicious, so he betrothed the youngest daughter of Wei Zihao to Takao Wang.

古文：元延四年，生平帝。
现代文：元延四年，卫姬生下平帝。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wei Ji was born as Emperor Ping.

古文：平帝年二岁，孝王薨，代为王。
现代文：平帝两岁的时候，孝王去世，平帝继承王位。
English: When Emperor Ping was two years old, Emperor Xiaowang died, and Emperor Ping succeeded to the throne.

古文：哀帝崩，无嗣。太皇太后与新都侯莽迎中山王立为帝。
现代文：哀帝去世，没有后嗣，太皇太后和新都侯王莽迎中山王立为皇帝。
English: Emperor A died without an heir, and the grand empress dowager and the new capital lord Wang Mang ushered in Zhongshan Wang as emperor.

古文：莽欲颛国权，惩丁、傅行事，以帝为成帝后，母卫姬及外家不当得至京师。
现代文：王莽打算独掌国政，鉴于丁氏、傅氏的教训，让平帝作为成帝的后嗣，平帝的母亲卫姬和外祖父家不到京城来。
English: Wang Mang planned to take sole control of state affairs, and in light of the lessons learned from the Ding and Fu dynasties, he asked Emperor Ping to be Emperor Cheng's heir. Emperor Ping's mother Wei Ji and maternal grandfather's family did not come to Beijing.

古文：乃更立宗室桃乡侯子成都为中山王，奉孝王后，遣少傅左将军甄丰赐卫姬玺绶，即拜为中山孝王后，以苦陉县为汤沐邑。
现代文：于是又立宗室桃乡侯的儿子刘成都为中山王，奉守中山孝王之后，派少傅左将军甄丰赐给卫姬玺绶，拜她为中山孝王后，把苦陉县作为她的封邑。
English: Therefore, he also set up Liu Chengdu, the son of the ancestral house of Taoxiang, as the King of Zhongshan. After obeying the King of Zhongshan, he sent the Shao Fuzha General Zhenfeng to Wei Jian, worshiped her as the Queen of Zhongshan, and made Kuqi County as her fief.

古文：又赐帝舅卫宝、宝弟玄爵关内侯。
现代文：又赏赐平帝的舅舅卫宝、卫宝的弟弟卫玄关内侯的爵位。
English: He also awarded the peerage of Wei Bao, the uncle of Emperor Ping, and Wei Bao's younger brother Wei Xuan, the Marquis of Guanzhong.

古文：赐帝三妹，谒臣号修义君，哉皮为承礼君，鬲子为尊德君，食邑各二千户。
现代文：赐封平帝的三个妹妹，谒臣号为修义君，哉皮号为承礼君，鬲子号为尊德君，食邑每人二千户。
English: Emperor Ping's three younger sisters, whose posthumous names were Xiu Yi Jun, Ya Pi Jun, and Zangzi Jun, each had 2,000 households.

古文：莽长子宇非莽隔绝卫氏，恐久后受祸，即私与卫宝通书记，教卫后上书谢恩，因陈丁、傅旧恶，几得至京师。
现代文：王莽的大儿子王宇反对父亲排斥卫氏，恐怕以后将会大祸临头，就暗中和卫宝书信往来，教卫姬上书谢恩，顺便上陈丁氏、傅氏旧曰的罪行，希望能到京师来。
English: Wang Mang's eldest son, Wang Yu, opposed his father's exclusion of Wei, fearing that a great calamity would befall him in the future. He secretly exchanged letters with Wei Bao, teaching Wei Ji to write a letter of thanks, mentioning the old crimes of Chen Ding and Fu, and hoping to come to Beijing.

古文：莽白太皇太后诏有司曰： 中山孝王后深分明为人后之义，条陈故定陶傅太后、丁姬悖天逆理，上僣位号，徙定陶王于信都，为共王立庙于京师，如天子制，不畏天命，侮圣人言，坏乱法度，居非其制，称非其号。
现代文：王莽禀告太皇太后，下诏给有司说： 中山孝王后深明大义，上奏故定陶傅太后、丁姬违背天理，妄加尊号之罪，把定陶王迁到信都，又在京师为共王立庙，如同对待天子一样，她们不服从天命，轻慢圣人的至言，破坏法度，地位与称号都超越了尺度。
English: Wang Mang denounced the great empress dowager, and issued the following edict to Yu Si: The queen of Zhongshan, Xiao Wang, is well aware of the great justice, and the queen dowager of Ding Ji, Ding Tao, violated the principles of heaven, and committed the crime of arrogating the title of honor. They moved Ding Tao Wang to Xindu, and built a temple for the co-princes in Beijing. As if they were the sons of heaven, they disobeyed the fate of heaven, despised the sacred words of saints, and broke the law. Their status and title exceeded the standard.

古文：是以皇天震怒，火烧其殿，六年之间大命不遂，祸殃仍重，竟令孝哀帝受其余灾，大失天心，夭命暴崩，又令共王祭祀绝废，精魂无所依归。
现代文：因此上天震怒，放火烧毁了她们的宫殿，六年之内，灾祸接二连三，终于使孝哀帝深受其害，不合天意，短命暴亡，又使共王的祭祀断绝，灵魂无处存身。
English: As a result, Heaven was outraged and set fire to their palace. Within six years, the calamities came one after another, and finally, Emperor Xiao Ai was deeply harmed. This was not in accordance with Heaven's will, and his short life was a violent death. Moreover, the sacrificial rites of the co-kings were cut off, and there was nowhere for his soul to reside.

古文：朕惟孝王后深说经义，明镜圣法，惧古人之祸败，近事之咎殃，畏天命，奉圣言，是乃久保一国，长获天禄，而令孝王永享无疆之祀，福祥之大者也。
现代文：朕希望孝王后深求经书大义，谨遵圣人教诲，有鉴于古人之祸乱，近世的灾殃，顺应天命，谨奉圣人之言，从而永远保全王国，获取上天的赐福，使中山孝王的祭祀永世不绝。造就是最大的福瑞吉祥。朕非常赞许。
English: I hope that the queen of filial piety will deeply seek the great principles of the scriptures, faithfully follow the teachings of the saints, consider the evils of the ancients and the plagues of the modern world, comply with the heavenly mandate, and faithfully follow the words of the saints, so as to preserve the kingdom forever, obtain the blessings of heaven, and make the sacrifice of King Zhongshan eternal. This is the greatest blessing. I highly commend it.

古文：朕甚嘉之。夫褒义赏善，圣王之制，其以中山故安户七千益中山后汤沐邑，加赐及中山王黄金各百斤，增傅相以下秩。 
现代文：褒扬并赏赐仁义良善，是圣王之举，将中山故安的七千户人家赏给为中山后的封邑，加赐王后和中山王每人黄金一百斤，增加傅相以下官吏的秩禄。 
English: To praise and reward the benevolence, righteousness and goodness, it was the move of the holy king to award the seven thousand households of Zhongshan Guoan to the fiefdoms of Zhongshan Guoan, plus give the queen and Zhongshan King one hundred catties of gold each, and increase the rank of officials below Fu Xiang.

古文：卫后日夜啼泣，思见帝，而但益户邑。
现代文：卫姬终日啼哭，希望见到平帝，却只是增加了封邑。
English: Wei Ji cried all day long, hoping to see Emperor Ping, but only increased the fief.

古文：宇复教令上书求至京师。
现代文：王宇又教她上书请求来京师。
English: Wang Yu also taught her to write a letter requesting to come to Beijing to study.

古文：会事发觉，莽杀宇，尽诛卫氏支属。
现代文：正赶上事情败露，王莽杀掉王宇，将卫氏宗族全部诛灭。
English: Just in time for the affair to be exposed, Wang Mang killed Wang Yu and wiped out the entire Wei clan.

古文：卫宝女为中山王后，免后，徙合浦。
现代文：卫实的女儿是中山王后，被废掉皇后的封号，流放到合浦。
English: The daughter of the Emperor was the Queen of Zhongshan, but her title was revoked and she was exiled to Hapu.

古文：唯卫后在，王莽篡国，废为家人，后岁余卒，葬孝王旁。
现代文：衹留下卫后，王莽篡国以后，将她废为家人，一年多后去世，埋葬在中山孝王陵旁。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the country, he abandoned her as a member of his family. She died more than a year later and was buried next to the tomb of King Zhongshan Xiao Rong.

古文：孝平王皇后，安汉公太傅大司马莽女也。
现代文：孝平帝的王皇后，是宣堡公太傅大司马王菱的女儿。
English: The queen consort of Emperor Xiaoping was the daughter of Ma Wangling, the grand steward of Xuanbao.

古文：平帝即位，年九岁，成帝母太皇太后称制，而莽秉政。
现代文：芒童即位时衹有九岁，由盛童的母亲太皇太后行使皇帝的权力，而王差主持政事。
English: When Meng Tong ascended the throne at the age of nine, Sheng Tong's mother, the Grand Empress Dowager, exercised the power of the emperor, while Wang Chao presided over the affairs of state.

古文：莽欲依霍光故事，以女配帝，太后意不欲也。
现代文：王差打算按照霍光的先例，把女儿许配给卫童，但太后不想这样做。
English: Wang Zha planned to follow Huo Guang's example and betroth his daughter to Wei Tong, but the empress dowager did not want to do so.

古文：莽设变诈，令女必入，因以自重，事在《莽传》。
现代文：王莽就使用欺诈的手段，使女儿终于能够进宫，藉此提高自己的地位，这件事记载在王莽的本传里。
English: Wang Mang used deceitful means so that his daughter could finally enter the palace, thereby improving his status, which is recorded in Wang Mang's biography.

古文：太后不得已而许之，遣长乐少府夏侯藩、宗正刘宏、少府宗伯凤、尚书令平晏纳采、太师光、大司徒马宫、大司空甄丰、左将军孙建、执金吾尹赏、行太常事太中大夫刘歆及太卜、太史令以下四十九人赐皮弁素绩，以礼杂卜筮，太牢祠宗庙，待吉月日。
现代文：太后没有办法，就只好同意了，派长乐少府夏侯藩、宗正刘宏、少府宗伯凤、尚书令平晏下聘礼，又赐给太师孔光、大司徒马宫、大司空甄丰、左将军孙建、执金吾尹赏、行太常事太中大夫刘歆以及太卜、太史令以下四十九名官员皮冠素服，用来进行祭神和占卜，以太牢礼祭祀宗庙，挑选吉利的月份和日期。
English: The empress dowager had no choice but to agree, and sent forty-nine officials, including the chief priest Le Shoufu Xia Hou Han, the chief priest Liu Hong, the chief priest Zong Bo Feng, and the chief priest Shang Shuling Ping, as well as forty-nine officials, including the chief priest Le Shoufu Xia Hou Han, the chief priest Zong Zheng Liu Hong, the chief priest Zong Bo Feng, the chief priest Shang Shuling Ping, the chief priest Kong Guang, the chief priest Tu Ma Gong, the chief priest Ku Zhenfeng, the left general Sun Jian, the chief priest Jin Wu Yin, the chief priest Zong Zheng,

古文：明年春，遣大司徒宫、大司空丰、左将军建、右将军甄邯、光禄大夫歆奉乘舆法驾，迎皇后于安汉公第。
现代文：第二年春，派大司徒马宫、大司空甄丰、左将军孙建、右将军甄邯、光禄大夫刘歆带着车驾到安汉公的府第去迎娶皇后。
English: In the spring of the second year, he sent the Grand Master Tu Ma Gong, the Grand Master Ku Zhenfeng, the Left General Sun Jian, the Right General Zhen Qi, and the Guanglu Doctor Liu Qi to drive to the Anhan Municipal Government to marry the queen.

古文：宫、丰、歆授皇后玺绂，登车称警跸，便时上林延寿门，入未央宫前殿。
现代文：马宫、甄丰、刘歆将玺绶授与皇后，皇后登上车辇，沿途设置侍卫警戒，清扫道路，在吉利的时曰经过上林延寿门，进入未央宫前殿。
English: Ma Gong, Zhenfeng, and Liu Yi awarded the gong to the empress, the empress boarded the carriage, set up guards along the way, swept the road, and in good luck, passed through the Shanglin Yanshou Gate and entered the front hall of the Weiyang Palace.

古文：群臣就位行礼，大赦天下。
现代文：大臣们站在规定的位置上，向帝后行大礼，又宣布大赦天下。
English: The ministers stood in the prescribed position, bowed to the emperor, and declared a general amnesty.

古文：益封父安汉公地满百里，赐迎皇后及行礼者，自三公以下至驺宰执事长乐、未央宫、安汉公第者，皆增秩，赐金、帛各有差。
现代文：加封皇后的父亲安汉公方圆百里的封邑，赏赐迎娶皇后和完成婚姻大礼的人，从三公以下以至于管理长乐宫、未央宫和安汉公府第的绉宰，都增加了秩禄，有差别地赏赐了黄金和布帛。
English: Emperor Anhan, the father of Empress Dowager Anhan, increased the fiefs of fiefs with a radius of 100 kilometers, and rewarded those who married the empress and completed the marriage ceremony. From the three princes and below to the administrators of Changle Palace, Weiyang Palace and Anhan Municipal Government, they all increased their ranks and were rewarded with gold and cloth in different ways.

古文：皇后立三月，以礼见高庙。
现代文：皇后被册立的第三个月，按照礼法去参拜高祖的寝庙。
English: In the third month after the empress was enthroned, she went to visit Gaozu's mausoleum in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：尊父安汉公号曰宰衡，位在诸侯王上。
现代文：封其父亲安漠公的尊号为宰衡，地位在诸侯王之上。
English: He was given the honorific title of Zaiheng (宰衡) by his father, Prince Anmu, and his status was higher than that of princes.

古文：赐公夫人号曰功显君，食邑。
现代文：赐给安汉公夫人的封号为功显君，并赐给食邑。
English: Anhan's wife was given the title of Gongxianjun (功显君) and Shuxi Town (食邑).

古文：封公子安为褒新侯，临为赏都侯。
现代文：封安汉公的儿子王安为褒新侯，王临为赏都侯。
English: Wang An, the son of Emperor Anhan, was awarded the title of Hou Xin Hou, and Wang Lin was awarded the title of Dou Hou.

古文：后立岁余，平帝崩。
现代文：皇后在位一年多，平帝逝世。
English: The empress had been on the throne for more than a year when Emperor Ping died.

古文：莽立孝宣帝玄孙婴为孺子，莽摄帝位，尊皇后为皇太后。
现代文：王莽立孝宣皇帝的玄孙刘婴为孺子，自己代理皇帝的职位，尊奉皇后为皇太后。
English: Wang Mang Li Xiaoxuan, the emperor's great-great-grandson, Liu Ying, was the son-in-law of the emperor, acting as the emperor's position, and honoring the empress as the empress dowager.

古文：三年，莽即真，以婴为定安公，改皇太后号为定安公太后。
现代文：过了三年，王莽即皇帝位，封刘婴为定安公，将皇太后的封号改为定安公太后。
English: Three years later, when Wang Mang became emperor, Liu Ying was given the title of Dingan Gong, and the title of the empress dowager was changed to Dingan Gongdowager.

古文：太后时年十八矣，为人婉瘱有节操。
现代文：太后当时衹有十八岁，为人温顺贞静，有节操。
English: The empress dowager was only eighteen years old at the time, and she was a meek and chaste person with self-restraint.

古文：自刘氏废，常称疾不朝会。
现代文：自从刘氏被废，经常称病不去朝见。
English: Since Mr Liu was ousted, he has often called in sick to avoid going to see the emperor.

古文：莽敬惮伤哀，欲嫁之，乃更号为黄皇室主，令立国将军成新公孙建世子礻象饰将医往问疾。
现代文：王莽对她又敬重又忌惮又怜惜，想再把她嫁出去，就改封她为黄皇室主，让立国将军成新公孙建的世子盛装，带着医生前去探病。
English: Wang Mang respected, feared, and pitied her. If he wanted to marry her off again, he would change her title to the head of the Huang royal family, have the founding general dress up as the son of the new prince Sun Jian, and take a doctor to see her.

古文：后大怒，笞鞭其旁侍御。
现代文：太后大怒，鞭打她身旁的侍者。
English: The empress dowager was furious and whipped the waiter next to her.

古文：因发病，不肯起，莽遂不复强也。
现代文：从此得了病，便不肯起来，王莽也就不再勉强她了。
English: From then on, when she fell ill, she refused to get up, and Wang Mang no longer forced her.

古文：及汉兵诛莽，燔烧未央宫，后曰： 何面目以见汉家！ 
现代文：等到汉军诛灭王莽，火烧了未央宫，太后说： 还有什么脸面再去见汉家的人呢！ 
English: When the Han army had annihilated Wang Mang and set fire to the Weiyang Palace, the empress dowager said: "Who would want to meet Han people again?"

古文：自投火中而死。
现代文：就跳进火裹自杀了。
English: He jumped into the fire and killed himself.

古文：赞曰：《易》著吉凶而言谦盈之效，天地鬼神至于人道靡不同之。
现代文：赞曰：《易经》在论及吉凶时讲了损盈而益谦的道理，天地鬼神以至人间无不如此。
English: Zang said: "The I Ching" talks about the principle of loss and gain while being humble when discussing good and evil, and this is true of heaven and earth, ghosts and gods, and even the human world.

古文：夫女宠之兴，由至微而体至尊，穷富贵而不以功，此固道家所畏，祸福之宗也。
现代文：而由受宠爱的女子的发迹，可以由最低微一跃而成为皇后，没有立过功劳却家富人显，这本来就是为道家所畏惧的，是灾祸的根源。
English: But the rise of a beloved woman, who can rise from the lowest rung to become empress, without having done anything to merit it, is what Taoists are afraid of, and is the root of the disaster.

古文：序自汉兴，终于孝平，外戚后庭色宠著闻二十有余人，然其保位全家者，唯文、景、武帝太后及邛成后四人而已。
现代文：从汉朝兴起一直到孝子帝，外戚裹凭着美色擅宠后宫而闻名的有二十多人，但能够保全自己的地位和家族的，衹有文帝、景帝、武帝的太后和邛成太后四个人。
English: From the rise of the Han Dynasty all the way up to Emperor Xiaozhi, there were more than twenty people who were famous for their beautiful harem, but only four were able to preserve their status and family: the empress dowager of Emperor Wen, Emperor Jing, Emperor Wu, and Empress Dowager of Hancheng.

古文：至如史良娣、王悼后、许恭哀后身皆夭折不辜，而家依托旧恩，不敢纵恣，是以能全。
现代文：至于像史良娣、王悼后、许恭哀后她们，虽然自己都无辜被害，但家族承蒙旧曰的恩德，不敢放肆妄为，因此得以保全。
English: As for women like Shi Liangyao, Wang Weiping and Xu Qun Weiping, although they were all innocent victims, their families inherited the old-fashioned benevolence and did not dare to act recklessly, so they were preserved.

古文：其余大者夷灭，小者放流，呜呼！
现代文：其余的人重则灭族，轻则被流放，唉！
English: The rest of the people were exterminated rather than exiled, alas!

古文：鉴兹行事，变亦备矣。
现代文：为人处事以此为借鉴，也就可以应付各种变化了。
English: If we use this as a reference for dealing with people, we will be able to cope with various changes.

