古文：戊寅十月初一月凌晨起，晴爽殊甚。
现代文：戊寅年十月初一日凌晨起床，天气特别晴朗。
English: I got up early in the morning on the first day of October in the year of Wu Yin, and the weather was particularly fine.

古文：从三家村啜粥启行，即西由峡中，已乃与溪别。
现代文：喝了昨天剩的稀饭后从三家村启程，即往西从峡谷中走，不久与溪水分道扬镰。
English: After drinking yesterday's leftover porridge, I set off from Sanya village, that is, I walked west from the canyon, and soon parted ways with the stream water.

古文：复西逾岭，共三里，人报恩寺。
现代文：又往西翻越山岭，一共三里路，到报恩寺。
English: Then we went west across the mountains, a total of three miles, to the Bo'en Temple.

古文：仍转东，二里，过松花坝桥。
现代文：然后转向东走，二里，过松花坝桥。
English: Then turn to the east, walk two miles and cross the Songhua Dam Bridge.

古文：又循五龙山而南三十里，循省城东北隅南行。
现代文：又顺着五龙山往南走三十里，沿着省城东北边往南走。
English: He also walked 30 miles south along the Wulong Mountain, and walked south along the northeast side of the provincial capital.

古文：已乃转西度大桥，则大溪之水自桥而南，经演武场而出火烧铺桥，下南坝矣。
现代文：不久转向西越过大桥，于是大溪的水从桥下往南流，经过演武场后流出火烧铺桥，再到南坝。
English: Soon, they turned west and crossed the bridge, so the water of the big stream flowed south from under the bridge, passed through the martial arts arena, and then flowed out of the fire-burning bridge to the south dam.

古文：从桥西入省城东门，饭于肆。
现代文：从桥西进入省城的东门，在饭店吃饭。
English: Enter the east gate of the provincial capital from the west of the bridge and eat at the restaurant.

古文：出南门，抵向所居停处，则吴方生方出游归化寺未返，余坐待之。
现代文：从南门出城，去到原来寄居的地方，而吴方生正好外出游览归化寺还没回来，我坐着等他。
English: I went out of the city from the South Gate to the place where I used to live, and Wu Fang Sheng just happened to go out for a tour of the Naturalization Temple and has not yet returned. I sat and waited for him.

古文：抵暮握手，喜可知也。
现代文：直到傍晚才与吴方生握手相见，喜悦的心情可想而知。
English: It was not until the evening that he shook hands with Wu Fangsheng, and the joyous mood could be imagined.

古文：见有晋宁歌童王可程，以就医随吴来，始知方生在唐守处过中秋，甚洽也。初二日余欲西行，往期阮仁吾所倩担夫，遇其侄阮玉湾、阮穆声，询候甚笃。下午，阮仁吾至寓，以担夫杨秀雇约至。
现代文：初二日我准备出发去滇西，去和阮仁吾为我雇的担夫约定行期，遇到阮仁吾的侄儿阮玉湾、阮穆声，他们对我的问候非常真诚。下午，阮仁吾来到我的住所，把担夫杨秀的雇用合同拿来了。
English: On the second day of the first month, I was about to leave for Shaanxi to make an appointment with the porter hired by Nguyn Nhu. I met Nguyn Nhu's nephews, Nguyn Ngc Văn and Nguyn Mc Sn, who greeted me very sincerely. In the afternoon, Nguyn Nhu came to my residence and brought the employment contract of the porter, Yang Xiu.

古文：余期以五日后再往晋宁，还即启行。
现代文：我和他约定五日后再去晋宁州，从晋宁州返回来就启程出发。
English: I made an appointment with him to go to Jinning five days later, and upon returning from Jinning, we would set off.

古文：仁吾赆以番帨ｓｈｕì国外来的佩巾香扇。
现代文：阮仁吾把外国的佩巾、香扇送给我作为临别赠礼。
English: As a parting gift, Ruan Rengo gave me a foreign scarf and incense fan.

古文：初三日余欲往晋宁，与唐元鹤州守、大来隐君作别。
现代文：初三日我打算前往晋宁州，和知州唐元鹤、隐士唐大来告别。
English: On the third day of the first month, I plan to go to Jinning Prefecture to bid farewell to Chizhou's Tang Yuanhe and the hermit Tang Da.

古文：方生言： 二君日日念君。
现代文：吴方生说： 他们二位天天挂念您。
English: Wu Fangsheng said: They both miss you every day.

古文：今日按君还省，二君必至省谒见，毋中途相左也。
现代文：今日按察使返回省城，他们二位一定要来省城拜见他，你们不要在途中错过了。
English: Today, after the inspector returned to the provincial capital, the two of them must come to the provincial capital to visit him. Don't miss it on the way.

古文：盍少待之？ 
现代文：何不稍微等他们一阵呢？ 
English: Why not wait for them for a while?

古文：乃人叩玉湾，并叩杨胜寰，知丽江守相望已久。
现代文：我于是进城去拜访阮玉湾，并拜访杨胜寰，得知丽江府知府盼望我去已很长时间了。
English: I then went to the city to visit Nguyen Ngoc Van and Yang Shengkun, and learned that the governor of Lijiang had been looking forward to my visit for a long time.

古文：既而玉湾来顾寓中，知按君调兵欲征阿迷，然兵未发而路人皆知之，贼党益猖狂于江川、澂江之境矣。
现代文：不一会阮玉湾来我的住处看我，才知道按察使调动军队准备征讨阿迷州，然而军队还没出发就连过路人都知道了这一计划，江川县、微江府境内乱党更加猖狂了。
English: It didn't take long for Nguyn Ngc Văn to come to see me at my place of residence before he learned that the inspectors had mobilized the army to prepare for the conquest of Aman. However, even passers-by knew about this plan before the army set out. The disorderly party in Quc Giang County and Wc Giang Prefecture became even more rampant.

古文：玉湾谓余： 海口有石城妙高，相近有别墅，已买山欲营构为胜地。
现代文：阮玉湾对我说： 海口有石城非常奇妙，石城附近有别墅，已经把那里买下准备建造名胜风景区。
English: Ruan Yuwan said to me: "Haikou's Shicheng is very wonderful. There is a villa near Shicheng, and they have bought it to build a scenic spot.

古文：请备车马，同行一观。 
现代文：请让我备好车马，一同前去游览观光。 
English: Please let me prepare a horse and carriage and go sightseeing together.

古文：余辞以晋宁之行不容迟，因在迤西羁停留久也。
现代文：我用晋宁州之行不能推迟为由辞谢了他的邀请，因为在滇西要停留很久。
English: I declined his invitation on the grounds that I could not postpone my trip to Jining, as I would have to stay in Shaanxi for a long time.

古文：又云： 缅甸不可不一游。
现代文：阮玉湾又说： 缅甸不可以不去游览一次。
English: Nguyen Ngoc Van also said: "It is impossible not to visit Myanmar at least once.

古文：请以腾越庄人为导。 
现代文：请让腾越庄园的人作你的向导。 
English: Please let the people from Tengyue Manor be your guide.

古文：余颔之。
现代文：我点头同意。
English: I nodded in agreement.

古文：初四日余束装欲早往晋宁，主人言薄暮舟乃发，不若再饭而行。
现代文：初四日我捆行李准备乘早前往晋宁州，主人说要将近傍晚时船才出发，不如吃过两顿饭再走。
English: On the fourth day of the first lunar month, I packed my luggage and prepared to take an early flight to Jinning Prefecture. The owner said that the boat would not leave until the late afternoon, so it would be better to eat two meals before leaving.

古文：已而阮玉湾馈榼酒，与吴君分饷之。
现代文：不一会阮玉湾送来一坛酒，我和吴方生分享了它。
English: Not long after, Nguyen Ngoc Van delivered a jar of wine, which I shared with Wu Fang Sheng.

古文：下午，由羊市直南六里，抵南坝，下渡舟，既暮乃行。
现代文：下午，从羊市一直往南走六里，来到南坝，上了渡船，太阳落山后才出发。
English: In the afternoon, I walked six miles south from Yangshi, came to Nanba, got on the ferry, and set off after the sun had set.

古文：是晚西南斗风，舟行三十里，至海夹口泊。
现代文：这天夜晚刮西南风，船走了三十里，到海夹口停泊。
English: On this night, a southwesterly wind blew, and the ship traveled thirty miles to anchor at the mouth of the sea.

古文：三鼓乃发棹，昧爽抵湖南涯北圩口，乃观音山之东南濒海处。
现代文：三更时就启航，天亮时抵达滇池南岸的北好口，北好口是观音山东南部濒临滇池之处。
English: The ship set sail at 3:00 a.m. and arrived at the northern mouth of the southern shore of Dianchi Lake at dawn. The northern mouth of the southern shore of the southern shore of Dianchi Lake is located in the southeast of Guanyinshan Mountain.

古文：其涯有温泉焉。舟人有登浴者，余畏风寒，不及沐也。
现代文：其岸边有温泉，船上有人上岸沐浴，我怕风寒，没有和他们同去。
English: There are hot springs on the shore, and some people on the boat went ashore to bathe. I was afraid of the wind and cold, so I didn't go with them.

古文：于是挂帆向东南行，二十里至安江村，梳栉于饭肆。
现代文：从北好口船挂起帆来向东南航行，二十里抵达安江村，下船到饭馆里梳理。
English: The boat set sail from Beikhoekou and sailed southeast. Twenty miles later, it arrived at Anjiang Village, where it disembarked to freshen up in a restaurant.

古文：仍南四里，过一小桥，即西村四通桥分注之水，为归化、晋宁分界处。
现代文：仍然往南走，四里，经过一座小桥，桥下水从西边村子四通桥下分流过来，是归化县、晋宁州的分界处。
English: Still going south, four miles, passing a small bridge, the water under the bridge branches off from the west village under the four-way bridge, which is the demarcation point between Naturalization County and Jinning State.

古文：又南四里，入晋宁州北门，皆昔来暗中所行道也，至是始见田畴广辟，城楼雄壮焉。
现代文：又往南走四里，从晋宁州城北门进城。这些都是夜间黑暗中所走的路，至此才看见四周田地宽阔，城楼雄伟壮观。
English: I walked another four miles to the south and entered the city from the north gate of the city of Jinningzhou. These were all roads taken in the darkness of the night, and only then did I see the wide fields around and the magnificent city tower.

古文：入门，门禁过往者不得入城，盖防阿迷不靖也。
现代文：进城门，守门的拦住过往的行人，不允许进城，大概是因阿迷州还没平定而进行防范。
English: Entering the city gate, the gatekeeper stopped the passing pedestrians and did not allow them to enter the city, presumably because Amanzhou had not yet been pacified.

古文：既见大来，各道相思甚急。
现代文：和唐大来相见后，各人十分迫切地诉说互相的思念。
English: After meeting with Tang Da, everyone was very eager to tell each other about their thoughts.

古文：饭而入叩州尊，如慰饥渴，遂留欢晏。
现代文：吃饭后进州署去拜望知州，有如饥渴的人得到了安慰，于是留在那里欢宴。
English: After the meal, they went into the state office to pay homage to Wangchizhou. As if the hungry and thirsty people were comforted, they stayed there to feast.

古文：夜寝于下道，供帐极鲜整。
现代文：夜晚在下道住，所供的帷帐极其新洁、整齐。
English: We stayed in the lower road at night, and the curtains provided were extremely clean and tidy.

古文：初五至初七日日日手谈下棋内署，候张调治。
现代文：初五至初七日连日来在州署里下围棋，等候张调治。
English: From the fifth day of the first month to the seventh day of the first month, he came to play Go in the state office day after day, waiting for Zhang Zhenzhi.

古文：黄从月、黄沂水禹甸与唐君大来，更次相陪，夜宴必尽醉乃已。
现代文：黄从月、黄沂水禹甸和唐大来诸君，轮换着前来相陪，夜晚一定饮宴到全醉才罢休。
English: Huang Zizhong, Huang Qishui, Yudian and Tang Dada came to accompany you, taking turns to come. At night, they would drink until they were completely drunk.

古文：初八日饮后，与黄沂水出西门，稍北过阳城堡，即所谓古土城也。
现代文：初八日喝酒后，和黄沂水从西门出城，稍稍往北就经过阳城堡，就是所说的古土城。
English: After drinking on the eighth day of the first lunar month, he and Huang Xinshui went out of the city from the west gate, and passed the Yang Castle a little north, which is the so-called ancient earth city.

古文：其西北为明惠夫人庙，庙祀晋宁州刺史李毅女。
现代文：古土城西北面是明惠夫人庙，庙里祭祀晋宁州刺史李毅的女儿。
English: To the northwest of the ancient earth city is the Lady Minghui Temple, which is dedicated to the daughter of Li Yi, the first emperor of the Jinling State.

古文：夫人功见《一统志》。
现代文：夫人的功绩记载在《一统志》中。
English: His wife's exploits are recorded in the "History."

古文：有元碑，首句云： 夫人姓杨氏，名秀娘，李毅之女也。 
现代文：庙里有元代的碑刻，碑文第一句是： 夫人姓杨氏，名叫秀娘，是李毅的女儿。 
English: There is a Yuan Dynasty stele in the temple. The first sentence of the inscription is: Mrs. surnamed Yang, named Xiu Niang, is the daughter of Li Yi.

古文：既曰 李女 ，又曰 姓杨 ，何谬之甚耶？
现代文：既然是 李毅的女儿 ，又说 姓杨 ，为什么这样地荒谬透顶呢？
English: Since she is Li Yi's daughter, and her surname is Yang, why is this so absurd?

古文：岂夫人之夫乃姓杨耶？
现代文：难道是夫人的丈夫姓杨吗？
English: Could it be that the husband's surname is Yang?

古文：然辞不达甚矣。
现代文：即便这样，也实在是辞不达意。
English: Even so, it's a bit of an understatement.

古文：人传其内犹存肉身，外加髤ｘｉē赤黑色漆焉，故大倍于人。
现代文：人们传说夫人的塑像中还保存着她的尸体，是在尸体上加赤黑色的漆涂饰而成，所以塑像比真人大一倍。
English: It is said that her corpse is preserved in the statue of her husband, which is made by adding red and black paint to the corpse, so the statue is twice as large as the real person.

古文：余不信。
现代文：我不相信这种传说。
English: I don't believe it.

古文：沂水云： 昔年鼠伤其足，露骨焉。
现代文：黄沂水说： 从前老鼠咬伤塑像的脚，露出骨头来了。
English: Huang Xinshui said: A mouse once bit the statue's foot, exposing the bone.

古文：不妄也。 
现代文：不是乱说的。 
English: I'm not making this up.

古文：是日，州幕傅良友来拜，且馈榼醴。
现代文：这天，知州的幕僚傅良友前来拜访，而且馈赠一坛甜酒。
English: On this day, Chizhou staff member Fu Liangyou came to visit, and presented a jar of sweet wine.

古文：傅，江西德化人。初九日余病嗽，欲发汗，遂卧下道。
现代文：初九日我生病咳嗽，想让身体出汗，于是在下道卧床休息。
English: On the ninth day of the first month, I was sick with a cough and wanted to make my body sweat, so I went to bed to rest.

古文：初十日嗽不止，仍卧下道。
现代文：初十日不停地咳嗽，仍然在下道卧床休息。
English: Coughing non-stop for the first ten days, still on bed rest.

古文：唐君晨夕至榻前，邀诸友来看，极殷绻情意深长。
现代文：唐元鹤君早晨、晚上都来床前问候，邀约众位朋友前来看望，情意极为深厚。
English: In the morning and in the evening, Tang Yuanhe came to greet him before going to bed, and invited many friends to come and visit him. He was very affectionate.

古文：十一日余起，复入内署。盖州治无事，自清晨邀以入，深暮而出，复如前焉。
现代文：十一日我起床后，又去州署内，大概州里没有事情，所以知州清晨就邀请我去，很晚才出来，又像前几天那样。
English: After I got up on the 11th day, I went to the state office again. There was probably nothing going on in the state, so Chizhou invited me early in the morning, and I didn't come out until late, just like the previous few days.

古文：是日，傅幕复送礼。
现代文：这一天，傅良友又送来礼物。
English: On this day, Fu Liangyou sent another gift.

古文：余受其鸡肉，转寄大来处。
现代文：我收下他送的鸡肉，寄放到唐大来那里。
English: I accepted the chicken he sent and sent it to Tang Da Lai.

古文：下午，傅幕之亲姜廷材来拜。
现代文：下午，傅良友的亲戚姜廷材来拜访。
English: In the afternoon, Fu Liangyou's relative Jiang Tingzai came to visit.

古文：姜，金溪人。十二日唐州尊馈新制长褶棉被。余入谢，并往拜姜于傅署，遇学师赵，相见蔼蔼ｉ人数众多。及往拜赵于学斋，遇杨学师，交相拜焉。
现代文：十二日唐元鹤知州赠送我新制的长夹衣、棉被，我去州署致谢，并且到傅良友的官署拜访姜廷材，遇到赵学师，还见到很多人。等到去学斋拜访赵学师时，遇见杨学师，互相行礼。
English: On the 12th day of the Tang and Yuan Dynasties, Hechizhou presented me with a new-made long jacket and cotton quilt. I went to the prefectural government office to express my thanks, and visited Jiang Tingzai at Fu Liangyou's government office. I met Zhao Xueli, and saw many people. When I went to visit Zhao Xueli, I met Yang Xueli, and they bowed to each other.

古文：赵，陆凉人，故询之。
现代文：我问赵学师道： 陆凉州有没有叫何巢阿的人？ 
English: I asked Zhao Xueshi: Are there any people in Liangzhou called He Xue A?

古文：赵言： 陆凉无之。当是浪穹人。
现代文：赵学师说： 陆凉州没有此人，他应是浪弯县人。
English: Zhao Xueliang said: There is no such person in Liangzhou. He should be from Langyan County.

古文：然同宦于浙中，相善。 
现代文：而且我们一同在浙江省里做过官，互相处得好。 
English: Moreover, we both worked as officials in Zhejiang Province and get along well with each other.

古文：赵君升任于此，过池州，问六安何州君，已丁艰父母死为丁艰去矣。
现代文：赵君被提升到这里任职，经过池州时，询问六安州何知州，何知州因为父母去世已经离任服丧去了。
English: Zhao Jun was promoted to the post here. When passing through Chizhou, he inquired about He Zhizhou of Lu'an Province. He Zhizhou had already left the post due to the death of his parents.

古文：四月初至镇远，其所主居停之家，即何所先主者，是其归已的。
现代文：四月初赵君到达镇远府，他所居停的人家，就是何巢阿在前居停过的人家。
English: At the beginning of April, Zhao Jun arrived in Zhenyuanfu. The person's home where he stayed was the same person's home where He Xiua had stayed before.

古文：但余前闻一僧言，贵州水发时，城中被难者，有一浙江盐官，扛二十余，俱遭漂没，但不知其姓。
现代文：这样看来，何巢阿已经回家了。我前不久听一位僧人说，贵州省发生水灾时，城中遇难的人有一个是浙江盐官，二十多担行李都被水漂走了，只是不知道浙江盐官的姓。
English: I recently heard a monk say that when the floods occurred in Guizhou Province, one of the people who died in the city was a Zhejiang salt official, and more than twenty loads of luggage were carried away by the water, but I do not know the surname of the Zhejiang salt official.

古文：若果尔，何遇之奇也！十三日州尊赴杨贡生酌。
现代文：根据赵君先前到镇远府居停的时间计算，似乎何巢阿发生水灾时正在贵州省，我心里十分不安，就不再深问了。十三日知州唐元鹤去赴杨贡生的酒宴。
English: According to the time calculation of Zhao Jun's previous stay in Zhenyuanfu, it seems that He Niao was in Guizhou Province when the flood occurred. I was very uneasy and stopped asking. On the 13th, Zhizhou Tang Yuanhe went to Yang Gongsheng's wine banquet.

古文：张调治以骑邀游金沙寺，以有庄田在其西麓也。
现代文：张调治邀请我骑马游览金沙寺，因为他有田庄在金沙寺西边的山脚。
English: Zhang Zhezhi invited me to visit the Jinsha Temple on horseback, because he has a farm at the foot of the mountain west of the Jinsha Temple.

古文：出西门，见门内有新润之房颇丽，问之，即调治之兄也。
现代文：从西门出发，看见门内有崭新的富家房屋，很华丽，询问房子的主人，就是张调治的哥哥。
English: Starting from the west gate, he saw a brand-new rich house inside the gate, very gorgeous, and inquired about the owner of the house, which was Zhang Zhezhi's brother.

古文：名，以乡荐任常州判，甫自今春抵家。
现代文：从西门出城后，就一直顺着田埂往西行，路很平坦。
English: After leaving the city from the West Gate, I kept driving west along Tianyu Road. The road was very flat.

古文：以谗与调治不睦。出西门，直西行田塍中，路甚坦。其坞即南自河涧铺直北而出者，至此乃大开洋，北极于滇池焉。
现代文：这就是南部从河涧铺起、一直往北延伸出来的山坞，山坞延伸到这里才十分开阔壮观，再往北延伸到滇池结束。
English: This is the dockyard in the south that extends from Kawayu-pabu all the way to the north. It is only when the dockyard extends to this point that it is quite open and spectacular, and then it extends north to the end of Tsugaike.

古文：西界山东突濒坞者，为牧羊山；北突而最高者，为望鹤山，其北走之余脉为天城；又西为金沙，则散而濒海者也。
现代文：西部往东突立在山坞边的是牧羊山，往北突起、而且最高的是望鹤山，望鹤山往北走向的余脉是天城门；又往西延伸为金沙山，是分散开来濒临滇池的山脉。
English: To the east in the west, standing on the edge of the dock, is the Muyang Mountain. To the north, and the highest, is the Wanghe Mountain. To the north of the Wanghe Mountain is the Tiancheng Gate; and to the west is the Jinsha Mountain, which is a scattered mountain range bordering the Dianchi Lake.

古文：东界山西突而屏诚南者，为玉案山；北峙而最高者，为盘龙山；其环北之正脊，为罗藏山，则结顶而中峙者也。
现代文：东部向西耸立、而且作为晋宁州城南边屏障的是玉案山；耸立在北部、而且最高的是盘龙山；其绕向北边的中脊，为罗藏山，是山顶相连而正中高耸起来的山。
English: In the east, rising to the west, and acting as a barrier to the southern edge of the city of Jinning, is the Jade Mountain; rising in the north, and the highest, is the Panlong Mountain; its central ridge to the north is the Lozang Mountain, a mountain that is connected at the top and rises high in the middle.

古文：州治倚东界之麓。大堡、河涧合流于西界之麓，北出四通桥，分为两流：一直北下滇海；一东绕州北入归化界，由安江村人滇海。
现代文：晋宁州治紧靠在东部山麓，大堡、河涧的水顺西部山麓合流，往北流过四通桥，又分为两派：一股一直往北注入滇海；一股往东绕过州治，往北流到归化县界内，流经安江村后进入滇海。
English: The Shuzhi of Jinning is close to the eastern foot of the mountain, and the confluence of the Shushun of the western foot of the western foot of the castle and the water of the river, flowing northward across the four-way bridge, is also divided into two groups: one has been flowing north into the Bohai Sea; one has bypassed the Shuzhi to the east, flowing north to the naturalization county boundary, flowing through the village of Anjiang and then into the Bohai Sea.

古文：经坞西行三里，上溪堤，有大石梁跨溪上，是为四通桥。
现代文：穿过山坞往西三里，走到河堤上，有座大石桥横架在河上，这是四通桥。
English: Cross the dock to the west three miles, walk to the embankment, there is a large stone bridge across the river, this is a four-way bridge.

古文：由桥西直上坡，为昆阳道。
现代文：从桥西边一直上坡，是去昆阳州的路。
English: From the west side of the bridge all the way uphill is the road to Kunyang.

古文：西北由岐一里半，为天女城，上有天城门遗址，古石两叠，如雕刻亭檐状。
现代文：往西北边顺岔路走一里半，到天女城，其上有天城门遗址，两层古石，形状如同雕刻的亭檐。
English: Walk a mile and a half along Shunyi Road to the northwest, and you will reach Tianniancheng, where there is the Tiancheng Gate site, two layers of ancient stone, shaped like a carved pavilion.

古文：昔李毅之女秀，代父领镇时，筑城于此，故名。
现代文：从前李毅的女儿李秀，代替父亲统领镇守晋宁州时，在这里修筑城池，所以取名天女城。
English: Once upon a time, Li Yi's daughter, Li Xiu, built a castle here when she was in charge of the town of Jinning in place of her father, which is why it was named Tianniancheng.

古文：城阜断而复起，西北濒湖者，其山长绕。为黄洞山；西南并天城而圆耸夹峙者，为金沙山。
现代文：城所在土山断绝后又耸起来，西北濒临滇海边，黄洞山沿滇海盘绕；西南和天城门相连、而圆峰耸起和黄洞山对峙的山，是金沙山。
English: After the city was cut off by the Tsuchiyama, it rose again. In the northwest, it borders the Bohai Sea, and Huangdong Mountain coils along the Bohai Sea. In the southwest, it is connected to Tiancheng Gate, and the mountain where the round peak rises and confronts Huangdong Mountain is Jinsha Mountain.

古文：此皆土山断续，南附于大山者也。
现代文：这些都是时起时伏，往南附着于大山的土山。
English: These are the earthen mounds that rise and fall from time to time, clinging to the mountains to the south.

古文：金沙之西，则滇海南漱而入，直逼大山；金沙之南，则望鹤山高拥而北瞰，为西界大山北隅之最。
现代文：金沙山的西部，则滇海向南面冲刷，直逼大山；金沙山的南部，则望鹤山高高耸立朝北俯视，是山坞西部大山北端的最高处。
English: In the western part of the Jinsha Mountain, the Bohai Sea washes up to the south, approaching the mountain; in the southern part of the Jinsha Mountain, Mount Wanghe stands tall and overlooks the north, and is the highest point of the northern end of the mountain in the western part of the mountain.

古文：其西则将军山耸崖突立，与望鹤骈峙而出，第望鹤则北临金沙，天城、将军则北临滇海耳。
现代文：其西边则将军山高耸的山崖突起，和望鹤山并排屹立，只是望鹤山北临金沙山，天城门、将军山则是北临滇海而已。
English: To its west, the towering cliffs of General Zhengshan rise up, standing side by side with Mount Bokhe. However, Mount Bokhe is north of Jinsha Mountain, while Tianchengmen and General Zhengshan are north of the Bohai Sea.

古文：黄洞山之西，有洲西横海中，居庐环集其上，是为河泊所，乃海子中之蜗居也；今已无河泊官，而海子中渡船犹泊焉。
现代文：黄洞山的西边，有片陆地往西横插滇海中，民房环绕着聚集在上面，名河泊所，是滇海中窄小的居住地；如今河泊所已经没有官员，但滇海中的渡船还在这里停泊。
English: On the west side of Huangdong Mountain, there is a piece of land extending westward into the Bohai Sea, with residences clustered around it. Meihe Berth is a narrow residential area in the Bohai Sea. Today, the Berth no longer has any officials, but ferries in the Bohai Sea still dock here.

古文：其处正西与昆阳对，截湖西渡，止二十里；陆从将军山绕湖之南，其路倍之。
现代文：其处正西方和昆阳州相对，往西横渡滇海，只有二十里；陆路从将军山往南绕着滇海走，路程是水路的一倍。
English: It is located directly west of Kunyang Prefecture, and it is only twenty miles to the west across the Bohai Sea; the land route from General Shan to the south around the Bohai Sea is twice as long as the water route.

古文：由天女城盘金沙山北夹，又一里半而入金沙寺。
现代文：从天女城绕到金沙山北侧，又走一里半就到了金沙寺。
English: From Tiannucheng, walk around to the north side of Jinsha Mountain, and walk another mile and a half to Jinsha Temple.

古文：寺门北向，盘龙莲峰师所建也，寺颇寂寞。
现代文：金沙寺门朝北，是盘龙莲峰师所修建的，寺里很清静。
English: The north-facing door of the Jinsha Temple was built by Panlong Lianfeng, and the temple is very quiet.

古文：由寺后拾级而上，为玉皇阁，又上为真武殿，俱轩敞，而北向瞻湖，得海天空阔之势。
现代文：从寺背后沿着石阶上去，是玉皇阁，再往上是真武殿，两处都建得高大宽敞，而且朝北眺望滇海，拥有海天空阔的地势。
English: From the back of the temple, along the stone steps, is the Jade Emperor Pavilion, and further up is the True Martial Arts Hall. Both are built tall and spacious, and look north to the Bohai Sea, with a vast sea and sky.

古文：山之西麓，则连村倚曲，民居聚焉。
现代文：金沙山西麓，则村庄顺着弯曲的岸边连绵不断，百姓聚集。
English: At the western foot of the Jinsha Mountain, villages stretch along the curved shore, and people gather there.

古文：入调治山楼，饭而登出，凭眺寺中。
现代文：到张调治的山楼，吃过饭后登山，在金沙寺中凭栏远眺。
English: To the mountain tower of Zhang Zhezhi, climb the mountain after having a meal, and look far and wide with a railing in the Jinsha Temple.

古文：下步田畦水曲，观调治家人筑场收谷。
现代文：下山漫步于田畦、水沟边，观看张调治家的人修筑晒场、收谷子。
English: After descending the mountain, I walked around the fields and ditches and watched the people from the Zhang family building a sunbathing area and harvesting grain.

古文：戴月入城，皎洁如昼，而寒悄逼人。
现代文：晚上顶着月亮回城，皎洁的月光照得地面如同白昼一样，但寒冷逼人。
English: Heading back to the city at night with the moon, the bright moonlight shines on the ground as if it were daytime, but the cold is oppressive.

古文：还饭下道，不候唐君而卧。
现代文：回到下道吃过饭，没有等候唐元鹤君来就睡了。
English: After returning to the lower road, I had dinner and went to sleep without waiting for Tang Yuanhe to come.

古文：唐君夜半乃归，使人相问，余已在梦魂中矣。十四日在署中。
现代文：十四日在州署中。
English: 14 at the sheriff's department.

古文：十五日在州署。
现代文：十五日在州署里。
English: 15th at the statehouse.

古文：夜酌而散，复出访黄沂水。
现代文：饮完夜酒而散，我又外出拜访黄沂水。
English: After drinking the night wine and dispersing, I went out again to visit Huang Xinshui.

古文：其家寂然，花阴历乱，惟闻犬声。
现代文：黄家一片寂静，月光下花影凌乱，只听到狗叫声。
English: The Huang family was silent. The moonlight made the flowers and shadows look messy. Only the dog's barking could be heard.

古文：还步街中，恰遇黄，黄乃呼酒踞下道门，当月而酌。
现代文：返回时漫步街头，恰巧遇到黄沂水，他于是叫送酒到下道门，对着明月而饮。
English: When he returned, he was strolling along the street and happened to come across the yellow water, so he ordered the wine to be delivered to the next door and drank it in front of the moon.

古文：中夜乃散。
现代文：半夜才散。
English: They don't leave until midnight.

古文：十六日余欲别而行，唐君谓： 连日因歌童就医未归，不能畅饮。
现代文：十六日我准备告别启程，唐元鹤君对我说： 这几天因歌童去看病还没回来，不能痛快地饮酒。
English: On the 16th, when I was about to say goodbye and leave, Mr. Tang Yuanhe said to me, "I haven't been back for a few days because the singer went to see a doctor, so I can't enjoy drinking.

古文：使人往省召之，为君送别，必少待之。 余不能却。
现代文：我派人去省城叫他来为您送别，您一定要稍稍等候。 我不能推辞。
English: I sent someone to the provincial capital to ask him to come to see you off, you must wait a little, I cannot refuse.

古文：十七、十八日皆在州署。
现代文：十七日、十八日两天都在州署里。
English: On the 17th and 18th, they were both at the state police station.

古文：十九日在州署。
现代文：十九日在州署中。
English: 19 at the sheriff's department.

古文：夜月皎而早阴霾。
现代文：夜里月色皎洁而早晨天气阴沉。
English: The moon is bright at night and the weather is gloomy in the morning.

古文：二十日、二十一日在州署。
现代文：二十日、二十一日在州署中。
English: On the 20th and 21st, he was in the state police station.

古文：两日皆倏雨倏霁忽雨忽晴。
现代文：这两日天气都是忽晴忽雨。
English: On both days, the weather was alternately sunny and rainy.

古文：二十二日唐君为余作《瘗ｙì掩埋静闻骨记》，三易稿而后成。
现代文：二十二日唐元鹤君为我写作《瘫静闻骨记》，三次修改之后才完成。
English: On the 22nd, Mr. Tang Yuanhe wrote "Paralyzed Listening to the Bones" for me. It was completed after three revisions.

古文：已乃具酌演优演出效舞，并候杨、赵二学师及唐大来、黄沂水昆仲，为同宴以饯。
现代文：然后准备好酒宴和舞乐戏曲，并前往邀请杨学师、赵学师以及唐大来、黄沂水兄弟，一同宴饮为我饯行。
English: After that, they prepared a wine banquet and dance music, and invited Yang and Zhao, as well as Tang Dalao and Huang Xinshui, to have a banquet together.

古文：二十三日唐君又馈棉袄、夹裤，具厚赆焉。
现代文：二十三日唐元鹤君又馈赠我棉袄、夹裤，备办了丰厚的临别礼物。
English: On the 23rd, Tang Yuanhe also presented me with a pair of cotton socks and a pair of trousers, and prepared a rich parting gift.

古文：唐大来为余作书文甚多，且寄闪次公书，亦以青蚨赆。
现代文：唐大来为我写了很多书信，而且寄信给闪次公，也赠送我钱财作路费。
English: Tang Dailai wrote many letters for me, and sent letters to Xian Zi Gong, and also gave me money for travel expenses.

古文：乃人谢唐君，为明日早行计。
现代文：于是到州署向唐君致谢，为明日一早出发作准备。
English: So I went to the prefectural office to thank Mr. Tang and prepare for tomorrow morning's departure.

古文：晋宁乃滇池南一坞稍开，其界西至金沙山，沿将军山抵三尖村，与昆阳界，不过二十里；东至盘龙山顶，与澂江界，不过十里；北至分水河桥，与归化界，不过五里；南入山坞，与澂江界，不过十里。
现代文：晋宁州位于滇池南岸一片比较开阔的山坞中，州境西边到金沙山，沿着将军山抵达三尖村，和昆阳州界的距离，不超过二十里；东边到盘龙山顶，和微江府界的距离，不超过十里；北边到分水河桥，与归化县界的距离，不超过五里；南边伸进山坞，与微江府界的距离，不超过十里。
English: Jinning Prefecture is located in a relatively open mountain dock on the south shore of Dianchi Lake. The distance from the west of the province to Jinsha Mountain, along General Mountain to Sanjian Village, and the state border of Kunyang, does not exceed twenty miles; the distance from the east to the top of Panlong Mountain, and the border of Weijiang Prefecture, does not exceed ten miles; the distance from the north to the water diversion bridge, and the naturalization county border, does not exceed five miles; the south extends into the dock, and the distance from the border of Weijiang Prefecture, does not exceed ten miles.

古文：总计南北不过十五里，东西不过三十里，不及诸蛮酋山徼一曲也。
现代文：总计南北不超过十五里，东西不超过三十里，比不上以山为界的各土司领地的一个角落。
English: A total of no more than fifteen miles from north to south, and no more than thirty miles from east to west, is not comparable to a corner of each local government territory bounded by mountains.

古文：晋宁之水，惟四通桥为大。
现代文：晋宁州的河流，只有四通桥下的最大。
English: It is the largest river in Jinning Prefecture with only four bridges crossing it.

古文：其内有二溪，俱会于牧羊山下石壁村。
现代文：这条河接纳了两条溪流，二条溪流都在牧羊山下的石壁村汇合。
English: The river receives two streams, both of which converge in the village of Shiwaki below Mount Muyang.

古文：一为大坝河，即河涧铺之流，出自关索岭者，余昔往江川由之；一为大甫河，出自铁炉关者，与新兴分水之岭界。
现代文：一条是大坝河，是从河涧铺流来，发源于关索岭，我从前去江川县时顺着大坝河走；一条是大甫河，发源于铁炉关，与新兴州分水岭交界。
English: One is the Daba River, which flows from Hefei and originates in Guansoling, and I walked along the Daba River when I went to Jiangchuan County; the other is the Daba River, which originates in Tie Rongguan, and is at the border with the emerging state watershed.

古文：二水合而出四通桥，又分其半，东灌州北之田。
现代文：两条河汇合后流过四通桥，又分出一半往东流去，灌溉晋宁州北部的土地。
English: After the confluence of the two rivers, it flows through the four-way bridge, and the separated half flows eastward to irrigate the land in the northern part of Jining Province.

古文：至州东北，又有盘龙山涧之水，自州城东南隅，循城北流，引为城濠，而下合于四通东灌之水，遂北为归化县分界，而出安江村。
现代文：流到晋宁州东北，又有盘龙山涧中的水，从州城的东南边顺着城墙往北流，被引为护城河，然后流下去，和四通桥下往东灌溉土地之水汇合，于是往北流，成为晋宁州与归化县的分界线，然后从安江村流出去。
English: It flows to the northeast of Jinning Prefecture, and there is water in the middle of the Panlong Mountains. It flows northward from the southeastern edge of the state capital along the city wall, is diverted into a moat, and then flows down, and merges with the water of the irrigation land under the four bridges to the east, and then flows northward, becoming the dividing line between Jinning Prefecture and Naturalization County, and then flows out of Anjiang Village.

古文：其河乃唐公新浚者。
现代文：这条河是知州唐公新近开通的。
English: This river was newly opened by Chizhou Tang Gong.

古文：晋宁二属邑俱在州东北境，亦镇海东南之余坞也。
现代文：晋宁州的两个属县都位于州境东北部，也在滇海东南岸的其余山坞中。
English: The two subordinate counties of Jinning Prefecture are both located in the northeastern part of the state, and are also among the remaining docks on the southeastern coast of the Bohai Sea.

古文：归化在州北二十里，呈贡又在归化北四十里。
现代文：归化县位于州城北面二十里处，呈贡县又位于归化县北面四十里处。
English: Naturalization County is located 20 miles north of Suzhou, and Chenggong County is located 40 miles north of Naturalization County.

古文：呈贡北即昆明县界，东北即板桥路，东即宜良界，东南即罗藏山，阳宗界。
现代文：呈贡县北面就是昆明县的辖境，东北面是通往板桥的道路，东面是宜良县的辖境，东南面是罗藏山，是阳宗县的辖境。
English: The north side of Chenggong County is the jurisdiction of Kunming County, the northeast side is the road leading to Banqiao, the east side is the jurisdiction of Yiliang County, and the southeast side is the jurisdiction of Luozang Mountain and Yangzong County.

古文：归化北五里有莲花洞山，一名龙洞，有水出其间。
现代文：归化县北部五里处有莲花洞山，又叫龙洞，有股水从其间流出。
English: Five miles to the north of Naturalization County is Lotus Cave Mountain, also known as Dragon Cave, from which water flows.

古文：罗藏山在归化东十里，盘龙山东北之主峰也，东南距澂江府四十里。
现代文：罗藏山在归化县东部十里处，是盘龙山东北部的主峰，东南面距离激江府四十里。
English: Mount Rozang is located ten miles to the east of Guihua County. It is the main peak in the northeast of Mount Panlong, and it is forty miles to the southeast of Geumgang Prefecture.

古文：其山高耸，总挈众山，与邵甸之梁王山对，亦谓之梁王山，以元梁王结寨其上也。
现代文：罗藏山高高耸起，总领裤山，与邵甸的梁王山相对，也被称为梁王山，因为元朝时梁王在这座山上安营扎寨。
English: Rozang Mountain rises high, the general collar pants mountain, opposite the Liang Wang Mountain in Shao Dian, also known as Liang Wang Mountain, because Liang Wang camped on this mountain during the Yuan Dynasty.

古文：西北麓为滇池，东南麓为明湖、抚仙湖。
现代文：其西北麓是滇池，东南麓是明湖、抚仙湖。
English: Its northwest foot is Dianchi Lake, and its southeast foot is Ming Lake and Fuxian Lake.

古文：水之两分其归者，以此山为界；水之三汇其壑者，亦以此山为环。
现代文：水分成两边各流各的，以这座山为分水岭；水分三派流入其沟壑，也是随着这座山绕流。
English: The water is divided into two streams on each side, with this mountain as the watershed; the three streams of water flow into its gully, and also flow around the mountain.

古文：然则比邵甸梁王，此更磅礡矣。
现代文：这样说来，那么和邵甸的梁王山相比，罗藏山的气势更加磅礴了。
English: In this way, compared with the Liangwang Mountain in Shaodian, the momentum of Mount Lozang is even more magnificent.

古文：其脉自铁炉关东度为关索岭，又东为江川北屈颡巅山，遂北走为此山；又东至宜良县西境，又北度杨林西岭，又北过兔儿关，又北结为邵甸梁王山，而为果马、月狐之脊焉。
现代文：其脉从铁炉关开始，往东延伸成为关索岭，又往东延伸到江川县北部，成为屈颗巅山，于是往北延伸为罗藏山；再往东延伸到宜良县西部境内，又往北越过杨林所西岭，再往北越过兔儿关，又往北聚结为邵甸梁王山，从而成为果马山、月狐山的山梁。
English: Its vein starts from Tiehuoguan and extends eastward to Guansoling, and then extends eastward to the northern part of Jiangchuan County to become the highest mountain, and then extends northward to Lozang Mountain; then extends eastward to the western part of Yiliang County, and then northward across the West Ridge of Yanglin, and then northward across Tuxiguan, and then northward into Shoudian Liangwang Mountain, thus becoming the mountain beams of Goma Mountain and Yuefuxian Mountain.

古文：晋宁四门，昔皆倾记。
现代文：晋宁州城的四道城门，从前都倒塌毁坏。
English: The four gates of Jinningzhou City have all collapsed and been destroyed.

古文：唐元鹤莅任，即修城建楼，极其壮丽。
现代文：唐元鹤就任知州，修建城楼，建得极其壮丽。
English: Tang Yuanhe was appointed to Chizhou and built the castle, which was extremely magnificent.

古文：晋宁东至澂江六十里，西至昆阳四十里，南至江川七十里，北至省会一百里，东南至路南州一百五十里，东北至宜良一百六十里，西南至新兴州一百二十里，西北至安宁州一百二十里。
现代文：晋宁州往东到微江府有六十里，往西到昆阳州有四十里，往南到江川县有七十里，往北到省会昆明有一百里，东南距离路南州一百五十里，东北距离宜良县一百六十里，西南距离新兴州一百二十里，西北距离安宁州一百二十里。
English: It is sixty miles to the east of Weijiang Prefecture, forty miles to the west of Kunyang Prefecture, seventy miles to the south of Jiangchuan County, one hundred miles to the north of the provincial capital Kunming, one hundred and fifty miles to the southeast of Lunan County, one hundred and sixty miles to the northeast of Yiliang County, one hundred and twenty miles to the southwest of Xinxing County, and one hundred and twenty miles to the northwest of Anning County.

古文：唐晋宁初授陕西三水令，以御流寇功，即升本州知州，以忧归，补任于此。
现代文：唐元鹤知州最初被任命为陕西省三水县知县，因为抵御流寇有功，就被提升为管辖三水县的邺州知州，因父母去世而离职服丧，之后到晋宁州补职。
English: Tang Yuan He Zhizhou was initially appointed as the highest-ranking Zhizhou of Sanshui County, Shaanxi Province. Because of his achievements in resisting the Mongol invasion, he was promoted to the jurisdiction of Zhizhou Zhizhou of Sanshui County. Due to the death of his parents, he left the post to attend a funeral, and then went to Jining State to fill in.

古文：乃郎年十五岁，文学甚优，落笔有惊人语。
现代文：他的长子年纪十五岁，文学特别优秀，写文章有惊人之语。
English: His eldest son, who is fifteen years old, is particularly good at literature and writes amazing articles.

古文：余三子俱幼。
现代文：其余的三个孩子都年幼。
English: The other three children are very young.

古文：唐大来名泰选贡，以养母缴引辞不受选，诗画书俱得董玄宰即董其昌三昧。
现代文：唐大来入选贡生，以赡养母亲为由而推辞受选。唐大来的诗文、画画、书法都得董其昌三昧。
English: Tang Dailai was selected as a tribute student, but withdrew from the selection on the grounds of supporting his mother. Tang Dailai's poetry, painting, and calligraphy were all excellent.

古文：余在家时，陈眉公即先寄以书云： 良友徐霞客，足迹遍天下，今来访鸡足并大来先生。
现代文：我在家乡时，陈眉公就先寄信给他说： 我的好友徐霞客，足迹走遍天下，现在要来探访鸡足山以及大来先生。
English: When I was in my hometown, Chen Meigong first sent a letter to him saying: My good friend Xu Xiake, who has traveled all over the world, is now coming to visit Jiu Jiao Mountain and Mr. Big.

古文：此无求于平原君者，幸善视之。 
现代文：他此行不同于那些有求于平原君的食客，望好好待他。 
English: His trip is different from that of diners who want to please Hirahara-kun and treat him well.

古文：比至滇，余囊已罄，道路不前，初不知有唐大来可告语也。
现代文：等来到云南省城时，我口袋中已空无一文，不能再往前走，当初我不知道有唐大来其人可以求告。
English: When I came to the city of Yunnan Province, I had no money in my pocket and couldn't go any further. At first, I didn't know that anyone from Tang University could sue me.

古文：忽一日遇张石夫谓余曰： 此间名士唐大来，不可不一晤。 
现代文：忽然有一天遇到张石夫，他对我说： 这里的名士唐大来，不能不和他会一次面。 
English: One day, I suddenly met Zhang Shifu. He said to me, "The famous Tang Dynasty scholar has come here. I have to meet him at least once."

古文：余游高峣时，闻其在傅玄献别墅，往觅之，不值。
现代文：我游览高跷时，听说唐大来住在傅元献的别墅，前去寻访，没有遇到。
English: When I visited Gaochun, I heard that Tang Dada had come to live in Fu Yuanxian's villa. I went to look for him, but I didn't meet him.

古文：还省，忽有揖余者曰： 君岂徐霞客耶？
现代文：返回省城，忽然有人向我拱手行礼说： 您不就是徐霞客吗？
English: Returning to the provincial capital, someone suddenly bowed to me and said: Aren't you Xu Xiake?

古文：唐君待先生久矣！ 
现代文：唐大来君等候先生很久了！ 
English: It's been a long time since you've been waiting for Mr. Tang!

古文：其人即周恭先也。
现代文：这人是周恭先。
English: This person is Zhou Jiaozuo.

古文：周与张石夫善，与张先晤唐，唐即以眉公书诵之，周又为余诵之。
现代文：他和张石夫友善，和张石夫一起先见到唐大来，唐大来就把陈眉公的信读给他们听，周恭先又向我诵读此信。
English: He and Zhang Shifu were friendly. Together with Zhang Shifu, they first saw Tang Dali. Tang Dali read Chen Meigong's letter to them, and Zhou Jiong first read this letter to me.

古文：始知眉公用情周挚，非世谊所及矣。
现代文：我才知道陈眉公用心周到、情谊真挚，不是世人的友谊所比得上的。
English: I just knew that Chen Meigong's thoughtful intentions and sincere feelings were not comparable to the friendship of the world.

古文：大来虽贫，能不负眉公厚意，因友及友。
现代文：唐大来虽然贫穷，却能不辜负陈眉公的深厚情意，因和陈眉公是朋友，而把陈眉公的朋友也当做自己的朋友。
English: Although Tang Dailai is poor, it can live up to the deep feelings of Chen Meigong. Because he is a friend of Chen Meigong, he also regards Chen Meigong's friends as his own friends.

古文：余之穷而获济，出于望外如此。
现代文：我在穷困时而得到救济，是如此地出于意料之外。
English: The relief I received in my time of need was so unexpected.

古文：唐大来，其先浙之淳安籍，国初从戎于此。
现代文：唐大来，其祖先是浙江省淳安县籍，明朝初年随军队来到云南省。
English: Tang Dalai, whose ancestor was from Chun'an County, Zhejiang Province, came to Yunnan Province with the army in the first year of the Ming Dynasty.

古文：曾祖金，嘉靖戊子乡荐，任邵武同知，从祀名宦。
现代文：曾祖唐金，于嘉靖戊子年通过乡荐，出任福建省邵武府同知，去世后得以随同入祀名宦祠。
English: Zengzu Tangjin, in the year of Jiajing Wuzi, passed the township recommendation and served as a Tongzhi of Shaowu Prefecture, Fujian Province. After his death, he was able to be enshrined in the Meilun Shrine.

古文：祖尧官，嘉靖辛酉解元。
现代文：祖父唐尧官，子嘉靖辛酉年中解元。
English: His grandfather was a Tang eunuch, and his son, Jiajing Xinqian, was a middle-aged scholar.

古文：父懋德，辛卯乡荐，临洮同知。
现代文：父亲唐您德，于辛卯年通过乡荐，出任甘肃省临挑府同知。
English: His father, Tang Youde, was recommended by his hometown in Xinwu Year and became a Tongzhi of Linqi Prefecture, Gansu Province.

古文：皆有集，唐君合刻之，名《绍箕堂集》，李本宁先生为作序，甚佳。
现代文：都有文集，唐大来将他们的文集合起来刊刻，取名为《绍箕堂集，李本宁先生为文集作了序，序文写得很好。
English: All of them had collections of essays, and Tang Dala came to collect and engrave their essays, and named it "The Shaoxing Hall Collection." Mr. Li Benning made the preface for the collection of essays, and the preface was well written.

古文：大来言历数先世，皆一仕一隐，数传不更，故其祖虽发解，竟不仕而年甚长。
现代文：大来依次说起他的前辈，都是一代做官、一代隐居，传了数代而不改变，所以其祖父虽然中举，始终没有做官而且寿命很长。
English: Dalai said that his predecessors, one generation of officials, one generation of seclusion, were passed down for several generations without changing, so although his grandfather was promoted, he never became an official and lived a long life.

古文：今大来虽未发解，而诗翰为滇南一人，真不忝不愧厥祖也。
现代文：如今大来虽然没有中举，但作诗的文笔是滇南第一，真是无愧于他的祖父。
English: Although he is not in the middle of the list, he is currently the number one poet in southern Anhui Province, which is truly worthy of his grandfather.

古文：但其胤嗣未耀，二女俱寡，而又旁无昆季，后之显者，将何待乎？
现代文：只是他的后代子孙不旺盛，两个女儿都守寡，而且又没有弟兄，大来以后的传扬之人，将等待谁呢？
English: But his descendants and descendants are not vigorous, two daughters are widowed, and there are no brothers, who will wait for the propagandist to come?

古文：大来之岳为黄麟趾，字伯仁，以乡荐任山东嘉祥令，转四川顺庆府县令，卒于任，即黄沂水禹甸之父、从月之兄也。其祖名明良，嘉靖乙酉乡荐，仕至毕节兵宪，有《牧羊山人集》。
现代文：大来的岳父是黄麟趾，字伯仁，通过乡荐出任山东省嘉祥县知县，后调任四川省顺庆府口口县知县，死于任上。黄麟趾是黄沂水禹甸的父亲，黄从月的哥哥其祖父叫黄明良，于嘉靖乙酉年通过乡荐，官至贵州省毕节卫兵备道道员，著有《牧羊山人集》
English: Dairi's father-in-law was Huang Linzi, surnamed Bo Ren, who was recommended by his hometown to serve in Zhixian County, Jiaxiang County, Shandong Province, and was later transferred to Zhixian County, Shunqing Fuchou County, Sichuan Province, where he died in office. Huang Linzi was the father of Huang Shishui Yudian, the brother of Huang Congzhi, and his grandfather was Huang Mingliang, who was recommended by his hometown in the year of Jiajing Yixian, and was sent to Bijie Guards to prepare Taoists in Guizhou Province. He was the author of "Shepherds

古文：大来昔从广南出粤西，抵吾地，亦以粤西山水之胜也。
现代文：大来从前往广南府出去到广西省，到过我的家乡，也认为广西省的山水是名胜景观。
English: I have been to Guangxi Province many times since I went to Guangnan Province, and when I visited my hometown, I also thought that the landscape of Guangxi Province was a scenic spot.

