古文：◎神宗二
现代文：神宗二
English: Shinsoji Temple

古文：二十五年春正月丙辰，朝鲜使来请援。
现代文：万历二十五年春正月二十六日，朝鲜使者请求救援。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of the 25th year of Wanli, the North Korean envoy requested rescue.

古文：二月丙寅，复议征倭。
现代文：二月初五，再次商议讨伐倭寇。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, they once again discussed how to fight wako.

古文：丙子，前都督同知麻贵为备倭总兵官，统南北诸军。
现代文：十五日，原都督同知麻贵担任防倭总兵官，统率南北各路兵马。
English: On the 15th, the former governor of the capital, Tong Zhimagui, assumed the post of chief military officer for the defense of Japan, commanding soldiers and horses from the north and south.

古文：三月乙巳，山东右参政杨镐为佥都御史，经略朝鲜军务。
现代文：三月十五日，山东右参政杨镐担任佥都御史，经略朝鲜军务。
English: On March 15th, Yang Jie, a right-wing politician from Shandong Province, assumed the post of the governor-general of Shandong Province and oversaw the military affairs of North Korea.

古文：己未，兵部侍郎邢玠为尚书，总督蓟、辽、保定军务，经略御倭。
现代文：三十日，兵部侍郎邢担任尚书，总督蓟、辽、保定军务，经略防倭事宜。
English: On the 30th, the secretary of the military department, Shang Shu, served as Shang Shu, and the governors, Zou, Liao, and Baoding, were in charge of military affairs, and were in charge of matters concerning the defense against Japan.

古文：夏六月戊寅，皇极、中极、建极三殿灾。
现代文：夏六月十九日，皇极、中极、建极三殿发生火灾。
English: On the 19th day of the 6th month of the summer, a fire broke out in the Imperial Palace, the Central Palace, and the Jianji Palace.

古文：癸未，罢修国史。
现代文：二十四日，终止编修国史。
English: On the 24th, the compilation of national history was terminated.

古文：秋七月癸巳，诫谕群臣。
现代文：秋七月初四，诫谕群臣。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the commandment of the ministers began.

古文：丁酉，诏赦天下。
现代文：初八，诏令大赦天下。
English: On the 8th day of the first month, the Emperor issued a decree to grant amnesty to the whole country.

古文：是月，杨应龙叛，掠合江、綦江。
现代文：当月，杨应龙反叛，攻占合江、綦江。
English: That month, Yang Yinglong rebelled and occupied Hejiang and Minjiang.

古文：八月丁丑，倭破朝鲜闲山，遂薄南原，副总兵杨元弃城走，倭逼王京。
现代文：八月十九日，倭寇攻破朝鲜闲山，于是逼近南原，副总兵杨元弃城逃走，倭兵逼近王京。
English: On August 19th, the wako broke through the Korean idle mountain, so they approached Nanwon, vice-general Yang Yuan abandoned the city and fled, and the wako approached Wangjing.

古文：甲申，京师地震。
现代文：二十六日，京师地震。
English: On the 14th, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：九月壬辰，逮前兵部尚书石星下狱，论死。
现代文：九月初四，逮捕原兵部尚书石星，将其投进监狱，判为死罪。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the former military commander Shang Shuxi arrested Shi Xing, threw him into prison, and sentenced him to death.

古文：冬十月甲戌，安南黎惟潭篡立，款关请罪，诏授安南都统使。
现代文：冬十月十七日，安南黎惟潭篡位自立，并前来请罪，诏令授予其安南都统使。
English: In the winter of October 17th, Annan Liewetan usurped the throne, and came to plead guilty. The imperial edict awarded him the post of Annan Tongtong envoy.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。二十六年春正月，官军攻倭于蔚山，不克，杨镐、麻贵奔王京。
现代文：万历二十六年春正月，官军攻击蔚山倭寇，未克，杨镐、麻贵逃奔王京。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 26th year of Wanli, the government army attacked the Ulsan wokou, and Wike, Yang Hui, and Magui fled to Wangjing.

古文：三月癸卯，赐赵秉忠等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐赵秉忠等人以进士及第以及其他不同的出身。
English: On March 18th, Zhao Bingzhong and others were awarded the title of "Chamberlain" and "Chamberlain" as well as other different origins.

古文：壬子，群臣诣文华门疏请皇长子冠婚，不允。
现代文：二十七日，群臣前往文华门疏请皇长子成年完婚，未得允许。
English: On the 27th, a group of courtiers went to the Wenhua Gate to ask the eldest son of the emperor to marry, but they were not allowed.

古文：夏四月丁卯，辽东总兵官李如松出塞，遇伏战死。
现代文：夏四月十三日，辽东总兵官李如松出塞，遇伏战死。
English: On the 13th day of the 4th month of the summer, the general officer of Liaodong, Li Ruzong, left the camp and was ambushed and killed.

古文：壬申，京师旱，敕修省。
现代文：十八日，京师大旱，朱翊钧令群臣修身反省。
English: On the 18th day of the month, there was a great drought in Beijing, and Zhu Xi ordered his ministers to self-reflect.

古文：六月丁巳，杨镐罢。
现代文：六月初四，杨镐被免职。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of June, Yang Hui was removed from office.

古文：戊午，中官李敬采珠广东。
现代文：初五，中官李敬在广东开采珍珠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Lieutenant-General Li Jing began to mine pearls in Guangdong.

古文：丙寅，张位罢。
现代文：十三日，张位被免职。
English: On the 13th, Zhang Yi was removed from office.

古文：丙子，巡抚天津佥都御史万世德经略朝鲜。
现代文：二十三日，巡抚天津的佥都御史万世德经略朝鲜。
English: On the 23rd, the procurator of Tianjin, Wang Shih, left for Korea.

古文：秋七月丙戌，中官鲁保鬻两淮余盐。
现代文：秋七月初三，中官鲁保专卖两淮的余盐。
English: On the 3rd day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhongguan Lu Bao sells the surplus salt of two Huai.

古文：八月丁丑，京师地震。
现代文：八月二十四日，京师地震。
English: August 24th, Beijing earthquake.

古文：九月壬辰，免浙江被灾田租。
现代文：九月初十，免除浙江遭灾地区的田租。
English: On the 10th day of the 9th month, the field rent in the disaster-stricken areas of Zhejiang was exempted.

古文：冬十月乙卯，总兵官刘綎、麻贵分道击倭，败之。
现代文：冬十月初三，总兵官刘纟廷、麻贵分兵攻击倭寇，将其击败。
English: At the beginning of the third day of October in winter, the general officer Liu Yingting and the troops of Magui attacked the wokou and defeated it.

古文：董一元攻倭新寨，败绩。
现代文：董一元攻击新寨倭寇，战败。
English: Dong Yiyuan attacked Xinzhai Wokor and was defeated.

古文：十一月戊戌，倭弃蔚山遁，官军分道进击。
现代文：十一月十七日，倭兵放弃蔚山逃遁，官军分兵追击。
English: On November 17th, the Wa soldiers abandoned Ulsan and fled, and the government troops pursued them.

古文：十二月，总兵官陈璘破倭于乙山，朝鲜平。
现代文：十二月，总兵官陈瞞在乙山打败倭寇，于是朝鲜被平定。
English: In December, the commander-in-chief, Chen Xie, defeated the Japanese invaders at Mount E. As a result, Korea was pacified.

古文：是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年，有乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: This year, Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：二十七年春二月壬子，分遣中官领浙江、福建、广东市舶司。
现代文：万历二十七年春二月初二，分别派中官统领浙江、福建、广东市舶司。
English: On the second day of the second month of the second month of the 27th year of Wanli in the spring of the year, the vice-governors were sent to lead the shipping departments of Zhejiang, Fujian and Guangdong respectively.

古文：是月，贵州巡抚江东之遣兵讨杨应龙，败绩。
现代文：当月，贵州巡抚江东之派兵讨伐杨应龙。战败。
English: In the same month, Guizhou's governor Jiang Dongzhi sent troops to fight Yang Yinglong. They were defeated.

古文：三月己亥，前兵部侍郎李化龙总督川、湖、贵州军务，讨杨应龙。
现代文：三月二十日，原兵部侍郎李化龙总督川、湖、贵州军务，讨伐杨应龙。
English: On March 20th, Li Huilong, the General Governor of the River, Lake and Guizhou Military Affairs, the former attendant of the Military Department, led a crusade against Yang Yinglong.

古文：夏四月甲戌，御午门，受倭俘。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，朱翊钧驾临午门，接受倭寇俘虏。
English: On the 25th day of the 4th month of summer, Zhu Xi drove to the noon gate to accept the wokou captives.

古文：是月，临清民变，焚税使马堂暑，杀其参随三十四人。
现代文：当月，临清百姓叛乱，焚烧税使马堂官署，杀其随从三十四人。
English: In the same month, the people of Linqing rebelled and burned the tax collector's office, killing thirty-four of his followers.

古文：闰月丙戌，以倭平，诏天下，除东征加派田赋。
现代文：闰月初八，诏示天下倭寇被平定，免除加派的东征赋税。
English: On the eighth day of the leap month, the emperor decreed that the world's wokou had been pacified, and the additional troops were exempted from the East Levy Tax.

古文：己丑，久旱，敕修省。
现代文：十二日，因久旱不雨而令群臣修身反省。
English: On the twelfth day, because of the long drought and no rain, the ministers were forced to repent.

古文：丙申，以诸皇子婚，诏取太仓银二千四百万两。
现代文：十九日，因各位皇子结婚而令从太仓取银二千四百万两。
English: On the 19th, due to the marriage of the princes, 24 million taels of silver were ordered to be taken from Taicang.

古文：户部告匮，命严核天下积储。
现代文：户部匮乏，令从严核实各地积蓄储备。
English: Due to the shortage of households, it was ordered to strictly verify the savings and reserves of various regions.

古文：六月己亥，杨应龙陷綦江，参将房嘉宠、游击张良贤战死。
现代文：六月二十三日，杨应龙攻陷綦江，参将房嘉宠、游击张良贤战死。
English: On June 23rd, Yang Yinglong invaded the Minjiang River, and Zhang Liangxian, a guerrilla fighter and a favorite of General Fang Jia, died in the battle.

古文：秋八月甲午，陕西狄道县山崩。
现代文：秋八月十八日，陕西狄道县发生山崩。
English: On August 18, a landslide occurred in Dido County, Shaanxi Province.

古文：九月，土蛮犯锦州。
现代文：九月，土蛮进犯锦州。
English: In September, the barbarians invaded Jinzhou.

古文：冬十月壬午，振京城饥民。
现代文：冬十月初六，赈济京城饥民。
English: On the 6th day of the 10th month of winter, the starving people in Beijing were fed.

古文：丙戌，以播州用兵，加四川、湖广田赋。
现代文：初十，由于播州用兵，加派四川、湖广地区的田赋。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, due to the use of soldiers in Banzhou, Tianfu in Sichuan and Hukang regions was added.

古文：戊子，贵州宣慰使安疆臣有罪，诏讨贼自赎。
现代文：十二日，贵州宣慰使安疆臣犯罪，诏令他讨伐贼寇以赎罪。
English: On the 12th, Guizhou Xuancheng made An Jiangsen commit a crime and ordered him to fight against thieves and robbers to atone for his sins.

古文：十一月己酉，免河南被灾田租。
现代文：十一月初四，免除河南受灾地区的田租。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, the field rent in the affected areas of Henan was exempted.

古文：癸酉，振畿辅及凤阳等处饥。
现代文：二十八日，赈济畿辅及凤阳等地饥荒。
English: On the 28th, famine broke out in Kiji and Fengyang.

古文：十二月丁丑，武昌、汉阳民变，击伤税使陈奉。
现代文：十二月初二，武昌、汉阳百姓叛乱，打伤税使陈奉。
English: On the second day of December, the people of Wuchang and Hanyang rebelled, injuring the tax inspector Chen Bong.

古文：戊子，振京师就食流民。
现代文：十三日，赈济京师流民。
English: On the thirteenth day of the month, Zhangjiakou arrived in Beijing to teach the exiles.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：二十八年春二月戊寅，京师地震。
现代文：万历二十八年春二月初四，京师地震。
English: On the 4th day of the 2nd month of the 28th year of Wanli, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：丙戌，李化龙帅师分八路进讨播州。
现代文：十二日，李化龙率师分八路进军讨伐播州。
English: On the 12th, Li Hualong and his division marched into Banzhou in eight directions.

古文：夏六月丁丑，克海龙囤，杨应龙自缢死，播州平。
现代文：夏六月初六，攻克海龙囤，杨应龙自缢而死，播州平定。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the summer, Yang Yinglong defeated Hai Long Tuo, Yang Yinglong committed suicide, and Banshu was pacified.

古文：秋七月辛亥，旱，敕修省。
现代文：秋七月初十，天大旱，朱翊钧又令群臣修身反省。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, when there was a severe drought, Zhu Xi again ordered the ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：八月辛未，慈庆宫成。
现代文：八月初一，建成慈庆宫。
English: On the first day of August, Cixing Palace was completed.

古文：丙子，罢朝鲜戍兵。
现代文：初六，撤除朝鲜守兵。
English: On the sixth day of the new year, the North Korean guards were removed.

古文：九月甲寅，停刑。
现代文：九月十四日，中止行刑。
English: On September 14, the execution was suspended.

古文：是秋，炒花犯辽东，副总兵解生等败没。
现代文：同年秋天，炒花进犯辽东，副总兵解生等人战败死去。
English: In the autumn of the same year, the scrambled flowers invaded Liaodong, and the deputy commander-in-chief soldiers were defeated and died.

古文：冬十月辛未，贵州皮林苗叛，总兵官陈璘讨之。
现代文：冬十月初一，贵州皮林苗叛乱，总兵官陈瞞率兵讨伐。
English: On the first day of October in winter, there was a rebellion in Pirinmiao, Guizhou, and General Chen Zhe led the troops in a crusade.

古文：丙子，云南税监杨荣开采阿瓦、孟密宝井。
现代文：初六，云南税监杨荣开采阿瓦、孟密宝井。
English: On the sixth day of junior high school, Yang Rong, a tax inspector from Yunnan, started mining Awa and Mengmi treasure wells.

古文：十二月乙未，御午门，受播州俘。
现代文：十二月二十六日，朱翊钧驾临午门，察看播州战俘。
English: On December 26, Zhu Xi drove to the noon gate to inspect the Banzhou prisoners of war.

古文：是年，两畿各省灾伤，民饥盗起，内外群臣交章请罢矿税诸监，皆不听。
现代文：这一年，两畿各省灾伤频繁，民饥盗起，内外群臣上奏请求将矿税监官免职，朱翊钧全不采纳。
English: In that year, disasters and injuries were frequent in the provinces of the two provinces, people were starving and robberies were on the rise, and a group of domestic and foreign ministers submitted a request to remove the mining tax inspector from his post, but Zhu Xi did not accept it.

古文：大西洋利玛窦进方物。
现代文：大西洋人利玛窦进献地方特产。
English: The Atlantic man, Ricciardo, presented local special products.

古文：二十九年春正月壬子，以播州平，诏天下，蠲四川、贵州、湖广、云南加派田租逋赋，除官民诖误罪。
现代文：万历二十九年春正月十三日，诏告天下：由于平定了播州，免除四川、贵州、湖广、云南加派的田租赋税，同时免除官民牵连之罪。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the 29th year of the Wanli calendar, the emperor announced to the world: Since Banzhou was pacified, Sichuan, Guizhou, Hukang, and Yunnan were exempted from paying land rent tax, and at the same time were exempted from the crime of public and private involvement.

古文：是月，皮林苗贼平。
现代文：当月，皮林苗贼被平定。
English: That month, the Pirin seedlings thieves were subdued.

古文：二月甲戌，振大同、宣府饥。
现代文：二月初五，赈济大同、宣府饥荒。
English: On the 5th day of the 2nd month of the year, there was a famine in Datong and Xuanfu.

古文：三月乙卯，赐张以诚等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十七日，赐封张以诚等人以进士及第和其他不同的出身。
English: On March 17th, he awarded Zhang Yicheng and others with the title of Jin Shi He and other different origins.

古文：是月，武昌民变，杀税监陈奉参随六人，焚巡抚公署。
现代文：当月，武昌发生民变，杀掉税监陈奉随从六人，焚毁巡抚公署。
English: In the same month, there was a popular uprising in Wuchang, in which six members of the tax inspector Chen Feng's entourage were killed and the inspector's office was burned down.

古文：夏四月乙酉，征陈奉还，以守备承天中官杜茂代之。
现代文：夏四月十八日，召回陈奉，派守备承天的中官杜茂替代。
English: On the 18th day of the 4th month of the summer, Chen Bong was recalled, and Du Mao, the vice-commander of the garrison, was sent to replace him.

古文：五月，苏州民变，杀织造中官孙隆参随数人。
现代文：五月，苏州民变，杀掉织造中官孙隆随从数人。
English: In May, the people of Suzhou revolted and killed several followers of Sun Long, the vice-governor of Weizhou.

古文：六月，京师自去年六月不雨，至是月乙亥始雨。
现代文：六月，京师已一年未降雨，直到当月初九才开始下雨。
English: In June, it hadn't rained in the capital for a year, and it didn't start raining until the ninth day of the month.

古文：山东、山西、河南皆大旱。
现代文：山东、山西、河南普遍大旱。
English: Shandong, Shanxi and Henan are experiencing widespread drought.

古文：丁亥，法司请热审，不报。
现代文：二十二日，法官奏请热审，朱翊钧未予答复。
English: On the 22nd, the judge made a request for a heated trial, but Zhu Xi did not reply.

古文：是夏，振畿内饥。
现代文：这年夏天，赈济畿内饥荒。
English: In the summer of that year, famine broke out in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：秋九月壬寅，河决开封、归德。
现代文：秋九月初八，黄河在开封、归德决堤。
English: On the 8th day of the 9th month of autumn, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Kaifeng.

古文：丁未，赵志皋卒。
现代文：十三日，赵志皋死去。
English: On the 13th, Zhao Zhisheng passed away.

古文：癸丑，振贵州饥。
现代文：十九日，赈济贵州饥荒。
English: On the 19th, the famine in Guizhou was relieved.

古文：戊午，前礼部尚书沈鲤、朱赓并兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：二十四日，原礼部尚书沈鲤、朱赓同时兼任东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On the 24th, the former vice-ministers of the Ministry of Ceremonies, Shangshu Shen and Zhu Xi, concurrently served as Donggak University scholars to participate in important affairs.

古文：冬十月己卯，立皇长子常洛为皇太子，封诸子常洵福王，常浩瑞王，常润惠王，常瀛桂王。
现代文：冬十月十五日，册立皇长子朱常洛为皇太子，册封其他各位皇子常洵为福王、常浩为瑞王、常润为惠王、常瀛为桂王。
English: On the 15th day of October in winter, Zhu Changluo, the eldest son of the emperor, was enthroned as the crown prince, and the other princes were enthroned as King Fu, King Rui, King Hui, and King Gui.

古文：诏赦天下。
现代文：并下诏大赦天下。
English: He also announced a general amnesty.

古文：壬辰，加上慈圣皇太后尊号。
现代文：二十八日，加上慈圣皇太后尊号。
English: On the 28th, she was given the honorary title of Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：十二月辛未，诏复朵颜马市。
现代文：十二月初八，诏令恢复朵颜马市。
English: On the eighth day of the twelfth month of the twelfth month, the imperial edict restored Do Yanma City.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。三十年春正月己未，以四方灾异敕修省。
现代文：万历三十年春正月二十六日，以四方灾害频繁为由令群臣修身反省。
English: On the 26th day of the first month of spring in the 30th year of Wanli, on the grounds of frequent disasters in the four directions, he ordered the ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：二月己卯，不豫，召大学士沈一贯于启祥宫，命罢矿税，停织造，释逮击，复建言诸臣职。
现代文：二月十六日，朱翊钧身体不适，召大学士沈一贯至启祥宫，诏谕免除矿税，停止织造，释放囚犯，恢复进谏的各位大臣职务。
English: On February 16th, Zhu Xi became unwell and summoned the great scholar Shen Gang to Qixiang Palace to issue an edict to exempt the mining tax, stop weaving, release prisoners, and resume the duties of the ministers who had been promoted.

古文：翼日，疾瘳，寝前诏。
现代文：次日，病愈，搁置前诏。
English: The next day, after recovering from his illness, he put the former edict on hold.

古文：甲申，重建乾清、坤宁宫。
现代文：二十一日，重建乾清、坤宁二宫。
English: On the 21st, the Second Palace of the Qianqing and Kunning Dynasties was rebuilt.

古文：闰月丙申，复河套诸部贡市。
现代文：闰月初三，恢复河套各部贡市。
English: On the third day of the leap month, the tribute market in all parts of Heta was resumed.

古文：戊午，河州黄河竭。
现代文：十五日，河州黄河干涸。
English: On the 15th, the Yellow River in Hezhou dried up.

古文：三月甲申，腾越民变，杀税监委官。
现代文：三月二十二日，腾越民变，杀掉税监所委派的官员。
English: On March 22nd, Tengyue people revolted and killed the officials appointed by the Tax Inspection Bureau.

古文：夏四月辛丑，振顺天、永平饥。
现代文：夏四月初十，赈济顺天、永平饥荒。
English: On the tenth day of the fourth month of the summer, Qizhi Shuntian, Yongping famine.

古文：五月乙亥，法司请热审，不报。
现代文：五月十四日，法官奏请热审，未允许。
English: On May 14, the judge made a request for a heated trial, which was not allowed.

古文：秋七月辛巳，边饷缺，命严催积逋。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，边饷匮乏，命从严从快催交拖欠赋税。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, when there was a shortage of money, it was ordered that the tax arrears should be paid as soon as possible.

古文：是月，缅贼陷蛮莫宣抚司，宣抚思正奔腾越，贼追至，有司杀正以谢贼，始解。
现代文：当月，缅贼攻陷蛮莫宣抚司，宣抚司思正跑回腾越，贼兵追至，官吏杀掉思正进献贼兵，才得解围。
English: In that month, the Burmese bandits attacked and besieged Xuan Fu Si, Xuan Fu Si was running back to Tengyue, the bandits chased him, and the officials killed Xian Fu Si before they could break the siege.

古文：冬十月戊戌，振江北灾。
现代文：冬十月初十，赈济江北灾害。
English: On the tenth day of winter and the first day of October, disaster struck the northern part of the Minjiang River.

古文：丙辰，停刑。
现代文：二十八日，中止行刑。
English: On the 28th, the execution was suspended.

古文：是年，琉球、哈密入贡。
现代文：这一年有琉球、哈密前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu and Hami came to pay tribute.

古文：三十一年春三月戊午，吏部奏天下郡守阙员，不报。
现代文：万历三十一年春三月初二，吏部奏告天下郡守阙员，没作答复。
English: On the second day of March in the spring of the 31st year of the lunar calendar, the cadre department reported to the county magistrate, but there was no reply.

古文：是月，播州余贼吴洪等作乱，有司讨平之。
现代文：当月，播州余贼吴洪等人作乱，有关官吏讨伐并予以平定。
English: In the same month, Banzhou's remaining thief Wu Hong and others rioted, and the relevant officials came to fight and subdue them.

古文：夏四月丁亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: Summer The first day of April, a solar eclipse.

古文：五月丙辰，阁臣请热审，不报。
现代文：五月初一，阁臣奏请热审，未予回复。
English: On the first day of May, the cabinet minister made a request for a hot trial, but there was no reply.

古文：戊寅，京师地震。
现代文：二十三日，京师地震。
English: On the day of Wu Yin, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：凤阳大雨雹，毁皇陵殿脊。
现代文：凤阳天降大雨和冰雹，砸毁皇陵殿脊梁。
English: Fengyang heavy rain and hail fell from the sky, destroying the backbone of the Imperial mausoleum.

古文：是夏，河决苏家庄，北浸丰、沛、鱼台、单县。
现代文：当年夏天，黄河在苏家庄决堤，淹没江北丰、沛、鱼台、单县。
English: In the summer of that year, the Yellow River broke through the dike in Sujiazhuang, flooding Feng, Pei, Yutai and Shan counties in the north of the river.

古文：秋九月甲子，江北盗起。
现代文：秋九月十一日，江北发生盗贼。
English: On the 11th day of the 9th month of autumn, a theft occurred in Jiangbei.

古文：冬十月甲申，停刑。
现代文：冬十月初二，中止行刑。
English: In the winter, on October 24th, the execution was suspended.

古文：丙申，睢州贼杨思敬作乱，有司讨擒之。
现代文：十四日，睢州贼杨思敬作乱，被有司讨伐擒获。
English: On the 14th, Yang Sijian, a thief from Zhangzhou, caused a disturbance and was captured by officers.

古文：十一月甲子，获妖书，言帝欲易太子，诏五城大索。
现代文：十一月十二日，得到一本妖书，传说皇帝要改立太子，诏令到处严加搜索。
English: On November 12th, he got hold of a book of spells. The legend said that the emperor was going to reinstate the crown prince, so he ordered a strict search everywhere.

古文：十二月丙戌，召见皇太子于启祥宫，赐手敕慰谕。
现代文：十二月初五，朱翊钧召见皇太子于启祥宫，赐给皇太子手令给予安慰。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of December, Zhu Xi summoned the crown prince to meet him at the Qixiang Palace and gave him the order to comfort him.

古文：三十二年春二月壬寅，阁臣请补司道郡守及遣巡方御史，不报。
现代文：万历三十二年春二月二十一日，阁臣奏请补充司、道、郡、守及派遣巡视各地的御史，未予答复。
English: On the 21st day of February in the spring of 32nd year of the lunar calendar, the cabinet minister made a request to supplement the history of the division, province, county, and province, and dispatched inspection tours to various regions, but there was no reply.

古文：三月甲子，乾清宫成。
现代文：三月十四日，建成乾清宫。
English: On March 14th, the Qianqing Palace was completed.

古文：乙丑，赐杨守勤等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十五日，赐封杨守勤等人以进士及第和其他不同的出身。
English: On the fifteenth day, Yang Shouqin and others were awarded the title of "Chamberlain" and other different origins.

古文：夏四月辛巳朔，日有食之。
现代文：夏四月初一，日食。
English: Summer The first day of April, a solar eclipse.

古文：是月，浚泇河工成。
现代文：当月，完成疏通氵加河的工程。
English: In the same month, the dredging of the Hakka River was completed.

古文：五月癸酉，雷火焚长陵明楼。
现代文：五月二十三日，雷火焚烧了长陵明楼。
English: On May 23rd, a thunderstorm set fire to the Changling Ming Lou.

古文：六月丙戌，以陵灾，命补阙官恤刑狱。
现代文：六月初七，以长陵发生灾害为由，命补阙官抚恤带刑在狱囚犯。
English: On the 7th day of the 6th month of the year, on the grounds that a disaster had occurred in Changling, the eunuchs were ordered to compensate the prisoners.

古文：丁酉，昌平大水，坏长、泰、康、昭四陵石梁。
现代文：二十日，昌平发生水灾，毁坏长、泰、康、昭四陵石梁。
English: On the 20th, a flood occurred in Changping, destroying the stone beams of the four mausoleums of Chang, Tai, Kang and Zhao.

古文：秋七月庚戌，京师大雨，坏城垣。
现代文：秋七月初一，京师大雨，毁坏一些城墙。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, heavy rain fell in Beijing, destroying some city walls.

古文：辛酉，振被水居民。
现代文：十二日，赈济遭受水灾之居民。
English: On the 12th, residents of flood-affected areas in Shaanxi Province were evacuated.

古文：八月辛丑，群臣伏文华门，疏请修举实政，降旨切责。
现代文：八月二十三日，群臣跪伏文华门，上疏请求提倡修举实政，降旨督促。
English: On August 23rd, a group of ministers kneeled at the Wenhua Gate, requesting that Shangsu advocate the reform of real politics, and urging the reduction of the order.

古文：丙午，分水河工成。
现代文：二十八日，完成黄河分水工程。
English: On the 28th, the Yellow River diversion project was completed.

古文：九月戊申，振畿南六府饥。
现代文：九月初一，赈济畿南六府饥荒。
English: On the first day of September, famine struck six prefectures in South Gyeongsang Province.

古文：闰月辛丑，武昌宗人蕴鉁等作乱，杀巡抚都御史赵可怀。
现代文：闰月二十四日，武昌宗人蕴轸等人作乱，杀掉巡抚都御史赵可怀。
English: On the 24th day of the intercalary month, Wuchang's patriarch, Yunyun, and others rioted and killed the governor of the capital, Zhao Kehai.

古文：冬十月甲寅，始叙平播州功。
现代文：冬十月初八，开始对平定播州的官兵论功。
English: On the eighth day of the tenth month of winter, he began to praise the officers and soldiers who had conquered Banzhou.

古文：是年，琉球、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年有琉球、乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu and Ussuri came to pay tribute.

古文：三十三年春正月，重修京师外城。
现代文：万历三十三年春正月，重新修复京师外城。
English: In the first month of the spring of the 33rd year of Wanli, the outer city of Beijing was restored.

古文：庚辰，银定、歹成犯镇番，总兵官达云击败之。
现代文：初五，银定、歹成进犯镇番，总兵官达云将其击败。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Yin Ding and Weixing attacked the town guards, and the chief military officer Dawun defeated them.

古文：夏四月辛亥，蕴鉁等伏诛。
现代文：夏四月初七，蕴轸等被杀。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Yun Yao and others were killed.

古文：五月丙申，凤阳大风雨，毁陵殿神座。
现代文：五月二十四日，凤阳遭受大风大雨，毁坏陵殿神座。
English: On May 24th, Fengyang was hit by heavy winds and rain, destroying the mausoleum.

古文：庚子，雷击圜丘望灯高杆。
现代文：二十八日，雷击圜丘望灯高杆。
English: On the 28th, lightning struck a tall pole on the lookout tower.

古文：六月乙巳，以雷警，敕修省。
现代文：六月初二，以雷击为由令群臣修身反省。
English: On the second day of the first month of June, he ordered his ministers to reflect on their actions, citing a lightning strike as the reason.

古文：秋八月己巳，停刑。
现代文：秋八月二十八日，中止行刑。
English: On the 28th day of the 8th month of autumn, the execution was suspended.

古文：九月甲午，昭和殿灾。
现代文：九月二十四日，昭和殿发生火灾。
English: On September 24th, a fire broke out in Showa-den.

古文：丙申，京师地震。
现代文：二十六日，京师地震。
English: On the 11th day of the month, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：冬十一月辛巳，免淮阳被灾田租。
现代文：冬十一月十一日，免除淮阳遭灾地区的田租。
English: In winter, on November 11, the field rent in the disaster-stricken areas of Huaiyang was exempted.

古文：十二月壬寅，诏罢天下开矿。
现代文：十二月初二，诏令天下各地停止开矿。
English: On the second day of December, the Emperor ordered all parts of the country to stop mining.

古文：以税务归有司，岁输所入之半于内府，半户、工二部。
现代文：又将税务事宜交还有司，将每年收入的一半交至内府，另一半交至户、工二部。
English: In addition, tax matters will be handed over to the Internal Affairs Division, and half of the annual income will be handed over to the Ministry of the Interior, while the other half will be handed over to the Ministry of the Interior and Industry.

古文：丙午，免河南被灾田租。
现代文：初六，免去河南遭灾地区的田租。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the new year, the rice field rent in the disaster-stricken areas of Henan Province will be exempted.

古文：乙卯，以皇长孙生，诏赦天下。
现代文：十五日，以皇长孙出生为由而诏令大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day, on the grounds that the emperor's eldest grandson had been born, he issued a decree to grant amnesty to the whole world.

古文：开宗室科举入仕例。
现代文：开宗室科举入仕之先例。
English: A precedent was set with the promotion of the founder of the school, Shuko, to the position of secretary.

古文：罢采广东珠池、云南宝井。
现代文：停止开采广东珠池和云南宝井。
English: Stop mining Guangdong Zhuqi and Yunnan Baojing.

古文：三十四年春二月庚戌，加上皇太后徽号。
现代文：万历三十四年春二月十一日，加上皇太后徽号。
English: On the 11th day of the 2nd month in the spring of the 34th year of the lunar calendar, the Empress Dowager's emblem was added.

古文：辛亥，大学士沈鲤、朱赓请补六部大僚，不报。
现代文：十二日，大学士沈鲤、朱赓奏请皇帝补齐六部主要官员，未得到答复。
English: On the 12th, the university scholars Shen Yi and Zhu Xiuxiao asked the emperor to fill in the six major officials, but did not receive a reply.

古文：三月己卯，云南人杀税监杨荣，焚其尸。
现代文：三月十一日，云南百姓杀死税监杨荣，焚烧其尸体。
English: On March 11, people in Yunnan killed Yang Rong, a tax inspector, and burned his body.

古文：丁酉，真定、顺德、广平、大名灾，蠲振有差。
现代文：三十日，真定、顺德、广平、大名等地遭灾，朝廷分别给予减免赋税和赈济。
English: On the 30th, the imperial court gave tax reductions and reliefs to the disaster-stricken areas of Jinding, Shunde, Guangping, and Daming.

古文：夏四月癸亥，浚朱旺口河工成。
现代文：夏四月二十五日，完成朱旺口黄河疏通工程。
English: On April 25th, the Zhuwangkou Yellow River Dredging Project was completed.

古文：五月癸酉，河套部犯延绥，官军击走之。
现代文：五月初六，河套部进犯延绥，官军将其击溃。
English: On the sixth day of the fifth lunar month, the Hetaibu attacked Yancheng, and the government army defeated them.

古文：六月癸卯，缅甸陷木邦。
现代文：六月初六，缅甸攻陷木邦。
English: On the 6th day of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the 6th month of the year.

古文：是月，畿内大蝗。
现代文：同月，畿内蝗灾大起。
English: In the same month, the locust plague in the Kinai region began in earnest.

古文：秋七月癸未，沈一贯、沈鲤致仕。
现代文：秋七月十六日，沈一贯、沈鲤辞官。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Shen Zhengyong and Shen Yaojian resigned from their posts.

古文：九月甲午，诏陕西严敕边备。
现代文：九月二十九日，朱翊钧要陕西边防严加防患。
English: On September 29th, Zhu Rong ordered the Shaanxi border guards to strictly prevent problems.

古文：冬十月丙申，停刑。
现代文：冬十月初一，中止行刑。
English: In winter, on the first day of October, executions are suspended.

古文：十一月己巳，朵颜入犯，总兵官姜显谟御却之。
现代文：十一月初四，朵颜来犯，总兵官姜显谟领兵将敌击退。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of November, Do Yan came to attack, and the general officer Jiang Xianmo led the troops to repel the enemy.

古文：十二月壬子，南京妖贼刘天绪谋反，事觉伏诛。
现代文：十二月十八日，南京妖贼刘天绪谋反，事情败露伏诛。
English: On December 18th, Liu Tianxu, the traitor of Nanjing, plotted a rebellion, but the plot was exposed.

古文：是年，安南、琉球入贡。
现代文：这一年，有安南、琉球前来朝贡。
English: This year, Annan and Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：蒙古喀尔喀诸部悉归我大清。
现代文：蒙古喀尔喀各部归顺大清。
English: All parts of the Mongolian Karka ceded to the Shun and Qing dynasties.

古文：三十五年春正月辛未，给事中翁宪祥言，抚、按官解任宜候命，不宜听其自去，不报。
现代文：万历三十五年春正月初七，给事中翁宪祥进言：抚、按官员解任后应该随时候命，不应听其自流。
English: On the 7th day of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1st month of the 1

古文：二月戊戌，安南贼武德成犯云南，总兵官沐睿御却之。
现代文：未得到批复。二月初五，安南贼人武德成进犯云南，总兵官沐睿又将敌击退。
English: On the fifth day of the second month of the year, Annan's thief Wu Decheng invaded Yunnan, and the chief military officer Mu Rui repulsed the enemy.

古文：三月辛巳，赐黄士俊等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十八日，赐封黄士俊等人为进士及第以及其他不同的出身。
English: On March 18th, Huang Shijun and others were awarded the title of Jin Shi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：夏四月戊戌，银定、歹成犯凉州，副总兵柴国柱击走之。
现代文：夏四月初六，银定、歹成进犯凉州，副总兵柴国柱将其击退。
English: On the 6th day of the 4th month of summer, Yin Ding and Gancheng invaded Liangzhou. Deputy Commander-in-Chief Chai Guozhu repulsed them.

古文：壬子，顺义王撦力克卒。
现代文：二十日，顺义王扌奢力克死去。
English: On the 20th day of the month, Shunyi Wang Shuling died.

古文：五月戊子，前礼部尚书于慎行及礼部侍郎李廷机、南京吏部侍郎叶向高并礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：五月二十七日，原礼部尚书于慎行及礼部侍郎李廷机、南京吏部侍郎叶向高一同担任礼部尚书兼任东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On May 27th, the former ceremonial secretary Yu Sheng Xing, the ceremonial secretary Li Tingji, and the secretary Ye Xianggao of the Nanjing cadre department jointly served as the ceremonial secretary and the Dongge University scholar, and participated in important affairs.

古文：六月，湖广及徽、宁、太平、严州大水。
现代文：六月，湖广及徽、宁、太平、严州发生水灾。
English: In June, floods occurred in Hukang, Hui, Ning, Taiping and Yanzhou.

古文：闰月辛巳，复河套诸部贡市。
现代文：闰月二十日，恢复河套各部的贡市。
English: On the 20th day of the leap month, the tribute market in all parts of Hetao was resumed.

古文：秋七月庚子，京师久雨。
现代文：秋七月初十，京师连年阴雨。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of autumn, it rained for the 10th consecutive year in Beijing.

古文：刑部请发热审疏，不报。
现代文：刑部奏请皇帝批发关于热审的奏章，未予答复。
English: The Criminal Investigation Department asked the emperor to wholesale the report on the heated trial, but there was no reply.

古文：八月丙寅，振畿内饥。
现代文：八月初六，赈济畿内饥荒。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, famine broke out in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：九月甲午，停刑。
现代文：九月初四，中止行刑。
English: On the 4th of September, the execution was suspended.

古文：冬十月癸酉，山东旱饥，蠲振有差。
现代文：冬十月十四日，山东大旱，饥荒严重，朝廷分别给予赈济。
English: In the winter of October 14th, Shandong suffered from a severe drought and famine, and the imperial court provided relief separately.

古文：十一月壬子，于慎行卒。
现代文：十一月二十五日，于慎行死去。
English: On November 25, Yu Shengxing passed away.

古文：十二月，金沙江蛮阿克叛，陷武定，攻围云南，别陷嵩明、禄丰。
现代文：十二月，金沙江蛮阿克反叛，攻陷武定，围攻云南，攻占嵩明、禄丰。
English: In December, Ake rebelled in the Jinsha River, invaded Wuding, besieged Yunnan, and occupied Songming and Lufeng.

古文：安南贼犯钦州。
现代文：安南贼兵进犯钦州。
English: Annan's thieving soldiers invaded Chin State.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这一年，琉球前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三十六年春正月，河南、江北饥。
现代文：万历三十六年春正月，河南、江北发生饥荒。
English: In the first month of the 36th year of Wanli, famine broke out in Henan and Jiangbei.

古文：二月戊辰，京师地震。
现代文：二月十一日，京师地震。
English: On February 11th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：夏六月己卯，南畿大水。
现代文：夏六月二十五日，南畿发生大水。
English: On the 25th day of the 6th month of summer, floods occurred in Nanki.

古文：秋七月丁酉，京师地震。
现代文：秋七月十三日，京师地震。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：郴州矿贼起。
现代文：郴州矿贼大起。
English: Miners in Zhangzhou are on the rise.

古文：八月癸亥，治云南失事诸臣罪，巡抚都御史陈用宾、总兵官沐睿下狱，论死。
现代文：八月初九，惩治云南失事有罪之臣，巡抚都御史陈用宾、总兵官沐睿又被逮捕入狱，论为死罪。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month, the governor of Yunnan, Chen Yibin, and the commander-in-chief, Mu Rui, were arrested and sentenced to death.

古文：庚辰，振南畿及嘉兴、湖州饥。
现代文：二十七日，赈南畿和嘉兴、湖州饥荒。
English: On the 27th, famine broke out in Southern Gyeongsang Province, Jiaxing Province and Huzhou Province.

古文：九月甲午，四川巡抚都御史乔璧星奏擒阿克于东川，贼平。
现代文：九月初十，四川巡抚都御史乔璧星在东川擒获阿克，贼寇被平定。
English: At the beginning of September 10th, the Sichuan governor, Shi Qiao Bixing, captured Ake in the East River, and the bandits were subdued.

古文：冬十一月壬子，朱赓卒。
现代文：冬十一月三十日，朱赓死去。
English: In winter, on November 30, Zhu Xi died.

古文：十二月戊午，再振南畿，免税粮。
现代文：十二月初五，再次赈济南畿，免除其税粮。
English: On the 5th day of the 12th month of the lunar calendar, Jin again visited Nangui and exempted its tax grain.

古文：是年，琉球入贡。
现代文：这一年，有琉球前来朝贡。
English: This year, Ryukyu came to pay tribute.

古文：三十七年春三月辛卯，拱兔陷大胜堡，游击于守志战于小凌河，败绩。
现代文：万历三十七年春三月初十，拱兔攻陷大胜堡，游击于守志在小凌河被战败。
English: In the spring of the 37th year of Wanli, on the 10th day of the 3rd month, the arch-rabbit attacked and captured the Dasheng Fort, and the guerrilla in Shushi was defeated in the Xiaoling River.

古文：己酉，大学士叶向高请发群臣相攻诸疏，公论是非，以肃人心，不报。
现代文：二十九日，大学士叶向高奏请皇帝公布群臣互相攻击的奏文，以论断是非、整肃人心，未予答复。
English: On the 29th, Daigaku Daishi Ye sent a letter to Gao So to ask the emperor to publish the letters of the ministers attacking each other, in order to judge the rights and wrongs and rectify the hearts of the people, but no reply was given.

古文：夏四月，倭寇温州。
现代文：夏四月，倭贼侵犯温州。
English: In the summer of April, the Japanese invaded Wenzhou.

古文：秋九月癸卯，左都御史詹沂封印自去。
现代文：秋九月二十五日，左都御史詹沂封印私自离去。
English: On the 25th day of the 9th month of the autumn, the governor of the Left Capital, Zhan Xi, left the capital.

古文：丁未，停刑。
现代文：二十九日，中止行刑。
English: On the 29th, the execution was suspended.

古文：是秋，福建、浙江、江西大水。
现代文：当年秋季，福建、浙江、江西发生大水灾。
English: In the autumn of that year, major floods occurred in Fujian, Zhejiang and Jiangxi.

古文：湖广、四川、河南、陕西、山西旱。畿内、山东、徐州蝗。
现代文：湖广、四川、河南、陕西、山西大旱，畿内、山东、徐州大闹蝗灾。
English: Huguang, Sichuan, Henan, Shaanxi and Shanxi are suffering from severe droughts, while the Kinai, Shandong and Xuzhou regions are experiencing massive locust infestations.

古文：冬十二月己巳，留畿内、山东诸省税银三分之一振饥民。
现代文：冬十二月二十二日，朝廷将畿内、山东诸省所收税收的三分之一用作赈济饥民费用。
English: On December 22 in winter, the imperial court used one-third of the taxes collected in the Kinai region and Shandong provinces to help the starving.

古文：徐州贼杀如皋知县张藩。是年，日本入琉球，执其国王尚宁。
现代文：这一年，日本侵入琉球，抓住其国王尚宁。哈密入朝进贡。
English: In the same year, Japan invaded Ryukyu and captured its king, Shonin. Hami went to pay tribute to the emperor.

古文：哈密入贡。三十八年春三月癸巳，赐韩敬等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：万历三十八年春三月十七日，赐封韩敬等人为进士及第以及其他不同的出身。
English: On March 17th, the spring of the 38th year of the Wanli calendar, Han Jing and others were awarded titles and ranks as well as other different origins.

古文：夏四月丁丑，正阳门楼灾。
现代文：夏四月初二，正阳门楼遭火灾。
English: On the second day of the fourth month of summer, the Zhengyang Gatehouse was destroyed by fire.

古文：辛卯，以旱灾异常，谕群臣各修职业，勿彼此攻讦。
现代文：十六日，以旱灾异常为由，要群臣完成自己份内职责，不准互相攻击。
English: On the 16th, on the grounds that the drought was abnormal, the ministers were required to fulfill their duties and were not allowed to attack each other.

古文：辛丑，振畿内、山东、山西、河南、陕西、福建、四川饥。
现代文：二十六日，赈济畿内、山东、山西、河南、陕西、福建、四川饥民。
English: On the 26th, starving people in Gyeonggi Province, Shandong Province, Shanxi Province, Henan Province, Shaanxi Province, Fujian Province and Sichuan Province were evacuated.

古文：五月，河南贼陈自管等作乱，有司讨擒之。
现代文：五月，河南贼人陈自管等人作乱，被官吏擒获。
English: In May, Chen Zhigang, a thief from Henan Province, and others caused a disturbance and were caught by officials.

古文：冬十月辛丑，停刑。
现代文：冬十月辛丑日，中止行刑。
English: The execution was suspended on the day of the Mid-Autumn Festival in October.

古文：十一月壬寅朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of November, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：丁卯，以军乏饷，谕廷臣陈足国长策，不得请发内帑。
现代文：二十七日，以缺乏军饷为由，要廷臣陈述充仓足库之策，而且不得从宫内拨出金帛。
English: On the 27th, on the grounds of a lack of military pay, the courtiers were asked to present a strategy for replenishing the treasury, and they were not allowed to allocate gold bullion from the palace.

古文：是年，乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年，乌斯藏入朝进贡。
English: This year, Wuxi paid tribute to the imperial court.

古文：三十九年春二月庚子，河套部敌犯甘州之红崖、青湖，官军御却之。
现代文：万历三十九年春二月庚子日，河套部敌军进犯甘州的红崖、青湖，被官军击退。
English: In the spring and February of the 39th year of Wanli, on the day of Geng Zi, the enemy army of Hetao attacked the Red Cliff and Qing Lake in Ganzhou, and was repulsed by the government army.

古文：夏四月，京师旱。
现代文：夏四月，京师大旱。
English: In the summer of April, there was a drought in Kyoto.

古文：戊子，怡神殿灾。
现代文：十九日，怡神殿发生火灾。
English: On the 19th, a fire broke out in the Yi Temple.

古文：丙申，设边镇常平仓。
现代文：二十七日，设置边镇常平仓。
English: On the 27th, the border town of Changping was set up.

古文：五月壬寅，御史徐兆魁疏劾东林讲学诸人阴持计典，自是诸臣益相攻击。
现代文：五月初三，御史徐兆魁上奏皇帝，指责东林讲学诸人暗中支持制定不同的礼典、制度，致使诸臣互相攻击。
English: On the third day of the fifth lunar month, Grand Historian Xu Zhaokui made a report to the emperor, accusing the Donglin Lectures of secretly supporting the establishment of different ceremonies and systems, which caused the vassals to attack each other.

古文：广西、广东大水。
现代文：广西、广东发生大水灾。
English: Major flooding occurred in Guangxi and Guangdong.

古文：六月，自徐州北至京师大水。
现代文：六月，从徐州到北京普遍发生大水灾。
English: In June, widespread flooding occurred from Xuzhou to Beijing.

古文：是夏，停热审。
现代文：当年夏天，停止热审。
English: In the summer of that year, the trial was suspended.

古文：冬十月丁卯，户部尚书赵世卿拜疏自去。
现代文：冬十月初一，户部尚书赵世卿上书离去。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the head of the household, Zhao Shijing, left.

古文：甲申，停刑。
现代文：十八日，中止行刑。
English: On the 18th, the execution was suspended.

古文：阁臣请释轻犯，不报。
现代文：内阁大臣请求释放轻罪犯人，未予答复。
English: There was no response to the Cabinet Minister's request for the release of the petty criminal.

古文：是年，暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年，暹罗前来朝贡。
English: This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

古文：四十年春二月癸未，吏部尚书孙丕扬拜疏自去。
现代文：万历四十年春二月十九日，吏部尚书孙丕扬上书自去官职回乡。
English: On February 19th, in the spring of the 40th year of the Wanli calendar, the head of the personnel department, Shang Shushu and Sun Jianyang, submitted a letter to leave the post and return to their hometown.

古文：三月丙午，振京师流民。
现代文：三月十二日，赈济京师流民。
English: On March 12th, the displaced people from Beijing arrived in Shaanxi.

古文：夏四月丙寅，南京各道御史言： 台省空虚，诸务废堕，上深居二十余年，未尝一接见大臣，天下将有陆沈之忧。 
现代文：夏四月初二，南京各道御史进言： 官衙空缺，各方面事务废堕，皇上深居宫中二十余年，未接见过大臣，天下将有失去的危险。 
English: On the 2nd day of the 4th month of the summer, the imperial historian of each province in Nanjing said: The government posts are vacant, all aspects of affairs have been abolished, the emperor has been living in the palace for more than 20 years, and has not met with the minister, the world will be in danger of losing.

古文：不报。
现代文：仍然未予答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：五月甲午朔，日有食之。秋八月，河决徐州。
现代文：五月初一，日食。秋八月，黄河在徐州决口。
English: On the first day of May, there was a solar eclipse. In autumn and August, the Yellow River burst its banks in Xuzhou.

古文：九月庚戌，李廷机拜疏自去。
现代文：九月十九日，李廷机自动离职。
English: On September 19, Li Tingji left the company automatically.

古文：冬十月甲申，停刑。
现代文：冬十月二十四日，中止行刑。
English: In the winter, on October 24th, the execution was suspended.

古文：是年，琉球中山王尚宁遣使报归国。
现代文：这一年，琉球中山王尚宁派人奏请归附。
English: This year, Ryukyu's king of the mountains, Shang Ning, sent musicians to perform.

古文：四十一年春正月庚申，谕朝鲜练兵防倭。
现代文：万历四十一年春正月初二，诏谕朝鲜练兵以防止倭寇。
English: On the second day of the first month of the 41st year of the lunar calendar, North Korea was ordered to train soldiers to prevent Japanese piracy.

古文：三月癸酉，赐周延儒等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：三月十五日，赐封周延儒等人为进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: On March 15th, Zhou Yanru and other people were conferred the title of Jin Shi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：夏五月己巳，谕吏部都察院： 年来议论混淆，朝廷优容不问，遂益妄言排陷，致大臣疑畏，皆欲求去，甚伤国体。
现代文：夏五月十二日，朱翊钧诏谕吏部都察院 ：几年来议论纷纷，混淆视听，朝廷宽容不予追查，致使攻击诬陷愈来愈甚，朝廷大臣犹疑畏惧，都想辞官回乡，严重损害了国体。
English: On the 12th day of the 5th month of the summer, Zhu Rongfa issued an order to the cadre department of the Duka Academy: Over the past few years, there have been discussions and confusion, and the imperial court has been tolerant and did not investigate, resulting in more and more attacks and frame-ups. The ministers of the imperial court were hesitant and afraid, and all wanted to resign and return to their hometowns, seriously damaging the national body.

古文：自今仍有结党乱政者，罪不宥。 
现代文：自今以后，仍有结党乱政者，定罪绝不饶恕。 
English: From now on, there are still those who have formed a party to disrupt the government, and their convictions will never be pardoned.

古文：六月乙未，卜失兔袭封顺义王。
现代文：六月初八，卜失兔世袭顺义王封号。
English: On the 8th day of the 6th month of the year, the hereditary title of Shunyi Wang was conferred on Bu Kuo.

古文：秋七月甲子，兵部尚书掌都察院事孙玮拜疏自去。
现代文：秋七月初八，兵部尚书掌管都察院事务的孙玮辞职回乡。
English: On the 8th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Sun Yat-sen, who was in charge of the affairs of the Military Academy, resigned and returned to his hometown.

古文：九月壬申，吏部左侍郎方从哲、前吏部左侍郎吴道南并礼部尚书兼东阁大学士，预机务。
现代文：九月十七日，吏部左侍郎方从哲、原吏部左侍郎吴道南和礼部尚书兼任东阁大学士，参与机要事务。
English: On September 17th, Fang Congzhe, the Left Attendant of the General Staff Department, Wu Daonan, the original Left Attendant of the General Staff Department, and Shang Shu, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, concurrently served as Donggak University Scholars, participating in important affairs.

古文：庚辰，吏部尚书赵焕拜疏自去。
现代文：二十五日，吏部尚书赵焕自动离职。
English: On the 25th, the head of the personnel department, Shangshu Zhao Huan, resigned automatically.

古文：是年，两畿、山东、江西、河南、广西、湖广、辽东大水。
现代文：当年，两畿、山东、江西、河南、广西、湖广、辽东发生水灾。
English: In that year, floods occurred in the two Kis, Shandong, Jiangxi, Henan, Guangxi, Hunan, and Liaodong provinces.

古文：乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: Ussuri came to pay tribute.

古文：四十二年春正月乙丑，总兵官刘綎讨建昌叛蛮，平之。
现代文：万历四十二年春正月十二日，总兵官刘纟廷率兵讨伐建昌叛蛮，将其平定。
English: On the twelfth day of the first month of the spring of the 42nd year of the Wanli calendar, the commander-in-chief Liu Yueting led the troops to fight against Jianchang's rebellion and subdue it.

古文：二月辛卯，慈圣皇太后崩。
现代文：二月初九，慈圣皇太后驾崩。
English: On February 9, Empress Dowager Cixi passed away.

古文：己酉，振畿内饥。
现代文：二十七日，赈济畿内饥荒。
English: On the 27th, famine broke out in Gyeonggi Province.

古文：三月丙子，福王之国。
现代文：三月二十四日，福王来到都城。
English: On March 24th, King Fook came to the capital.

古文：夏四月丙戌，以皇太后遗命赦天下。
现代文：夏四月初四，以皇太后遗命为由大赦天下。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 4th month of the 4th month of the 5th month of the 5th month of the 6th month of the 6

古文：六月甲午，葬孝定皇后。
现代文：六月十三日，安葬孝定皇后。
English: On June 13th, the funeral of Empress Takasada took place.

古文：秋八月甲午，礼部右侍郎孙慎行拜疏自去。
现代文：秋八月十四日，礼部右侍郎孙慎行上疏自动去职。
English: On the 14th day of the 8th month of autumn, Sun Shengying, the right-hand man of the Ministry of Ceremonies, resigned from his post.

古文：癸卯，叶向高致仕。
现代文：二十三日，叶向高辞官。
English: On the 23rd, Ye Xianggao resigned.

古文：是年，安南、土鲁番入贡。
现代文：这一年有安南、土鲁番前来朝贡。
English: This year, Annan and Turuban came to pay tribute.

古文：四十三年春正月乙丑，徐州决河工成。
现代文：万历四十三年春正月十八日，完成了徐州黄河决口的筑堤工程。
English: On the 18th day of the first month of spring in the 43rd year of Wanli, the embankment construction project at the mouth of the Yellow River in Xuzhou was completed.

古文：三月丁未朔，日有食之。
现代文：三月初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of March, there is a solar eclipse.

古文：夏五月己酉，蓟州男子张差持梃入慈庆宫，击伤守门内侍，下狱。
现代文：夏五月初四，蓟州一男子张差手持木棒闯入慈庆宫，打伤守门的侍卫，被抓进监狱。
English: On the 4th day of the 5th month of the summer, Zhang Chao, a man from Zhangzhou, broke into the Cixing Palace with a wooden stick and injured the guards guarding the gate. He was arrested and sent to prison.

古文：丁巳，刑部提牢主事王之寀揭言张差狱情，梃击之案自是起。
现代文：十二日，刑部提牢主事王之肕弄清其情况，这就是后来所说的木廷击案。
English: On the 12th, the Criminal Investigation Department brought in Wang Zhixuan, the head of the detention center, to clarify the situation. This was later referred to as the Muting Incident.

古文：己巳，严皇城门禁。
现代文：二十五日，对皇城门禁严加戒备。
English: On the 25th, the Imperial City was put on high alert.

古文：癸酉，召见廷臣于慈宁宫。御史刘光复下狱。
现代文：二十九日，在慈庆宫召见廷臣。御史刘光复被抓进监狱。
English: On the 29th, he summoned courtiers to meet him at Cixing Palace. The imperial historian Liu Guangfu was arrested and taken to prison.

古文：甲戌，张差伏诛。
现代文：三十日，张差伏诛。
English: On the 30th, Zhang Shifu died.

古文：六月戊寅，久旱，敕修省。
现代文：六月初三，由于久旱不雨，朱翊钧命群臣修身反省。
English: On the third day of June, due to the long drought, Zhu Xi ordered his ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：秋七月己酉，振畿内饥。
现代文：秋七月初四，赈济畿内饥荒。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, famine broke out in the Kinai region.

古文：甲戌，停刑。
现代文：二十九日，中止行刑。
English: On the 29th, the execution was suspended.

古文：闰八月庚戌，重建三殿。
现代文：闰八月初六，重建三殿。
English: On the 6th day of the 8th month, the third hall was rebuilt.

古文：丁巳，山东大旱，诏留税银振之。
现代文：十三日，山东大旱，朱翊钧下诏将税银留下进行赈济。
English: On the 13th, Shandong was in a severe drought, and Zhu Xi issued an edict to save tax money for relief.

古文：丁卯，河套诸部犯延绥，官军御之，败绩，副将孙弘谟被执。
现代文：二十三日，河套诸部进犯延绥，官军战败，副将孙弘谟被抓获。
English: On the 23rd, the various departments of Hetao invaded Yancheng, the government army was defeated, and Vice-General Sun Hongmu was captured.

古文：冬十月辛酉，京师地震。
现代文：冬十月十八日，京师地震。
English: In the winter of October 18th, there was an earthquake in Beijing.

古文：十一月戊寅，振京师饥民。
现代文：十一月初六，赈济京师饥民。
English: On the 6th day of the 11th month of the lunar calendar, the starving people of Beijing were fed.

古文：四十四年春三月辛未朔，日有食之。
现代文：万历四十四年春三月初一，有日食。
English: On the first day of March in the spring of the 44th year of Wanli, there will be a solar eclipse.

古文：乙酉，赐钱上升等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十五日，赐封钱士升等人进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: On the fifteenth day, he bestowed the title of Qian Shi Sheng and other titles such as Jin Shi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：是春，畿内、山东、河南、淮、徐大饥，蠲振有差。
现代文：当年春天，畿内、山东、河南、淮、徐发生大饥荒，朝廷分别给以赈济和减免田赋。
English: In the spring of that year, a great famine occurred in Kinai, Shandong, Henan, Huai and Xu, and the imperial court gave subsidies and land grants respectively.

古文：夏四月戊午，河南盗起，谕有司抚剿。
现代文：夏四月十九日，河南出现盗贼，朝廷命官吏进行安抚和围剿。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of summer, thieves appeared in Henan, and the imperial court ordered officials to pacify and surround them.

古文：六月壬寅，河套诸部犯延绥，总兵官杜文焕御却之。
现代文：六月初三，河套各部落进犯延绥，总兵官杜文焕将其击退。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, the various tribes of Hetao invaded Yancheng, and the commander-in-chief, Du Wenhuan, repulsed them.

古文：丁卯，河决祥符朱家口，浸陈、杞、睢、柘诸州县。
现代文：二十九日，黄河在祥符朱家口决堤，淹没陈、杞、睢、柘各州县。
English: On the 29th, the Yellow River broke through the dike at Zhujiakou in Xiangfu, flooding the counties of Chen, Handan, Handan and Handan.

古文：秋七月乙未，河套部长吉能犯高家堡，参将王国兴败没。
现代文：秋七月二十八日，河套部落首领吉能率兵进犯高家堡，参将王国兴战败。
English: On the 28th day of the 7th month of autumn, the leader of the Hetao tribe, Yoshino, led an army to attack Taka Castle, and defeated the general Kingdom Xing.

古文：是月，陕西旱，江西、广东水，河南、淮、扬、常、镇蝗，山东盗贼大起。
现代文：当月，陕西大旱，江西、广东发生水灾，河南、淮、扬、常、镇大闹蝗灾，山东盗贼大起。
English: In the same month, there was a drought in Shaanxi, floods in Jiangxi and Guangdong, locust plagues in Henan, Huai, Yang, Chang and Zhen provinces, and large-scale theft in Shandong.

古文：冬十月丁未，停刑。
现代文：冬十月初十，中止行刑。
English: On the tenth day of the tenth month of the tenth month, the execution is suspended.

古文：十一月己巳，隆德殿灾。
现代文：十一月初二，隆德殿发生火灾。
English: On the second day of November, a fire broke out in the Lund Palace.

古文：四十五年春二月戊午，以去冬无雪，入春不雨，敕修省。
现代文：万历四十五年春二月二十三日，由于前一年冬季无雪，入春以后又没有下雨，朱翊钧要群臣修身反省。
English: On the 23rd day of February in the spring of the 45th year of Wanli, since there was no snow in the winter of the previous year and no rain after the beginning of spring, Zhu Xi asked his ministers to self-reflect.

古文：三月辛未，镇抚司缺官，狱囚久系多死，大学士方从哲等以请，不报。
现代文：三月初六，镇抚司缺乏官吏，狱中很多囚犯因关押太久而死亡，大学士方从哲据此上奏，未得到答复。
English: On the 6th day of the 3rd month of the year, the Zhenfu Division was short of officials, and many prisoners died in prison because they had been held for too long. The university officials appealed to the Zhenfu Division on this basis, but received no reply.

古文：乙亥，振江西饥。
现代文：初十，赈济江西饥荒。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, there was a famine in Jiangxi Province.

古文：夏五月丙子，久旱，再谕修省。
现代文：夏五月十三日，久旱不雨，朱翊钧又命群臣修身反省。
English: On the thirteenth day of the fifth month of the summer, after a long drought, Zhu Xi again ordered his ministers to reflect on their lives.

古文：六月丙申，畿南大饥，有司请振，不报。
现代文：六月初三，畿南大闹饥荒，当地官吏请求赈济，未得到及时答复。
English: On the third day of the first month of June, famine broke out in the southern part of Gyeonggi Province. Local officials appealed for aid, but did not receive a timely response.

古文：是月，阁臣法司请热审，不报。
现代文：当月，阁臣法官奏请热审，未得答复。
English: In the same month, Judge Katsuchika requested a retrial, but received no response.

古文：秋七月癸亥朔，日有食之。
现代文：秋七月初一，日食。
English: Autumn, the first day of July, a solar eclipse.

古文：丁卯，吴道南以忧去。
现代文：初五，吴道南因丁服父母丧事离职。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, Wu Daonan resigned from his position due to attending his parents' funeral.

古文：是年，两畿、河南、山东、山西、陕西、江西、湖广、福建、广东灾。
现代文：这一年，两畿、河南、山东、山西、陕西、江西、湖广、福建、广东遭灾。
English: This year, the two Kis, Henan, Shandong, Shanxi, Shaanxi, Jiangxi, Hubei, Fujian and Guangdong provinces were hit by natural disasters.

古文：暹罗、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：暹罗、乌斯藏曾来朝进贡。
English: Siam and Wuzang once came to pay tribute.

古文：四十六年春二月乙巳，振广东饥。
现代文：万历四十六年春二月十五日，赈济广东饥荒。
English: On the 15th day of February in the spring of the 46th year of Wanli, the famine in Guangdong began.

古文：夏四月甲辰，大清兵克抚顺城，千总王命印死之。
现代文：夏四月十五日，大清军队攻克抚顺，千总王命印战死。
English: On the 15th day of the 4th month of the summer, the Qing army conquered Fushun, and the general of the thousand, King Muyin, died in battle.

古文：庚戌，总兵官张承胤帅师援抚顺，败没。
现代文：二十日，总兵官张承胤领兵救援抚顺，也全军覆没。
English: On the 20th, General Zhang Chengyan led the troops to rescue Fushun, and the entire army was wiped out.

古文：闰月庚申，杨镐为兵部左侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略辽东。
现代文：闰月初二，杨镐担任兵部左侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略辽东。
English: On the second day of the leap month, Yang Hui served as the left attendant of the military department and the right attendant of the capital, overseeing Liaodong.

古文：六月壬午，京师地震。
现代文：六月二十六日，京师地震。
English: On June 26th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：是夏，有司请热审，不报。
现代文：这年夏天，官吏奏请热审，未得到答复。
English: In the summer of that year, the officials petitioned the Supreme People's Court, but received no reply.

古文：秋七月丙午，大清兵克清河堡，守将邹储贤、张旆死之。
现代文：秋七月二十日，大清军队攻占清河堡，守将邹储贤、张旆战死。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, the Qing Dynasty army captured the Qinghe Fort, and the guards, Zou Shuxian and Zhang Ye, died in the battle.

古文：八月壬申，海运饷辽东。
现代文：八月十六日，朝廷将军饷海运到辽东。
English: On August 16th, the general of the imperial court, Erhai, was transported to Liaodong.

古文：庚辰，乃蛮等七部款塞。
现代文：二十四日，乃蛮等七部落请求与朝廷相通。
English: On the 24th, seven tribes including Naomaru requested to communicate with the Imperial Court.

古文：辛巳，停刑。
现代文：二十五日中止行刑。
English: The execution was suspended on the 25th.

古文：九月壬辰，辽师乏饷，有司请发各省税银，不报。
现代文：九月初七，守辽军队缺乏粮饷，有关官员奏请拨用各省税银，未得到及时答复。
English: On the 7th day of the 9th month of the year, the Liao army was short of food, and the relevant officials requested the allocation of taxes and fees from the provinces, but did not receive a timely reply.

古文：辛亥，加天下田赋。
现代文：二十六日，加派天下田赋。
English: On the 26th, Tian Tian Fu was added.

古文：乙卯，京师地震。
现代文：三十日，京师发生地震。
English: Suddenly, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto.

古文：冬十一月甲午，以灾异敕修省。
现代文：冬十一月初九，因灾异频繁而令群臣修身反省。
English: On the 9th day of the 11th month of winter, frequent disasters caused the ministers to reflect on themselves.

古文：十二月丁巳，河套部长猛克什力来降。
现代文：十二月初二，河套部落首领猛克什力前来投降。
English: On the second day of December, the leader of the Hetao tribe, Meng Keshli, came to surrender.

古文：是年，土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密、乌斯藏入贡。
现代文：这一年有土鲁番、天方、撒马儿罕、鲁迷、哈密、乌斯藏前来朝贡。
English: In that year, Turuban, Tenpo, Samarkand, Rumi, Hami, and Utsang came to pay tribute.

古文：四十七年春二月乙丑，经略杨镐誓师于辽阳，总兵官李如柏、杜松、刘綎、马林分道出塞。
现代文：万历四十七年春二月十一日，经略杨镐在辽阳誓师，总兵官李如柏、杜松、刘纟廷、马林分道出塞。
English: On February 11, the spring of the 47th year of the Wanli calendar, General Yang Zhe swore in Liaoyang, and General Li Rubei, General Jun Song, General Liu Bingting, and General Marin departed from Liaoyang.

古文：三月甲早，杜松遇大清兵于吉林崖，战死。
现代文：三月初一，杜松在吉林崖遭遇大清军队，战死。
English: On the first day of March, Juniper encountered the Qing army in the cliffs of Jilin and died in battle.

古文：乙酉，马林兵败于飞芬山，兵备佥事潘宗颜战死。
现代文：初二，马林在飞芬山战败，兵备佥事潘宗颜战死。
English: On the second day of junior high school, Marin was defeated at Feifen Mountain, and Pan Zongyan died in battle.

古文：庚寅，刘綎兵深入阿布达里冈，战死。
现代文：初七，刘纟廷率军深入阿布达里冈，战死。
English: On the seventh day of the first month of the year, Liu Bingding led the army deep into Abudari Gang and died in battle.

古文：辛丑，赐庄际昌等进士及第、出身有差。
现代文：十八日，赐庄际昌等人为进士及第以及其他不同出身。
English: On the 18th, Zhuang Jichang and others were given the honor of being promoted to Shishi and Dai, as well as other different origins.

古文：夏四月癸酉，盔甲厂灾。
现代文：夏四月二十日，盔甲厂发生火灾。
English: On the 20th of April, a fire broke out in an armour factory.

古文：六月丁卯，大清兵克开原，马林败没。
现代文：六月十六日，大清军队攻克开原，马林全军覆没。
English: On June 16th, the Qing Dynasty army conquered Kaiyuan, and the entire Marin army was wiped out.

古文：癸酉，大理寺丞熊廷弼为兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略辽东。
现代文：二十二日，大理寺丞熊廷弼担任兵部右侍郎兼右佥都御史，经略辽东。
English: On the 22nd, Kum Tingyu, the Dairi-ji Temple chancellor, served as the right hand man of the military department and the right hand man of the capital's governor, overseeing Liaodong.

古文：甲戌，廷臣伏文华门，请发章奏及增兵发饷，不报。
现代文：二十三日，朝廷大臣聚于文华门，奏请皇帝批复奏章以及增派援军和分发粮饷，未得到答复。
English: On the 23rd, the ministers of the imperial court gathered at the Wenhua Gate and petitioned the emperor to approve the restoration of the imperial seal, as well as the dispatch of reinforcements and the distribution of grain, but received no response.

古文：秋八月乙卯，山东蝗。
现代文：秋八月初五，山东蝗灾。
English: On the fifth day of the fifth lunar month in autumn and August, the locust plague in Shandong began.

古文：癸亥，逮杨镐。
现代文：十三日，逮捕杨镐。
English: On the 13th, Yang Qi was arrested.

古文：九月庚辰，停刑。
现代文：九月初一，中止行刑。
English: On the first day of September, the execution was suspended.

古文：戊子，百官伏阙，请视朝行政，不报。
现代文：初九，百官跪伏于宫殿阶下，奏请朱翊钧上朝处理政事，未得到答复。
English: On the ninth day of the first lunar month, a hundred officials knelt at the foot of the palace steps and petitioned Emperor Zhu Rong to deal with political affairs, but received no reply.

古文：冬十月丁巳，振京师饥民。
现代文：冬十月初八，赈济京师饥民。
English: On the 8th day of the 10th month of winter, the starving people in Beijing were fed.

古文：十二月，再加天下田赋。
现代文：十二月，又加派全国田租赋税。
English: In December, the national land rent tax was also increased.

古文：辛未，镇江、宽奠、叆阳新募援兵溃。
现代文：二十二日，镇江、宽奠、云爰阳新募援兵被击溃。
English: On the 22nd, the newly recruited reinforcements from Zhenjiang, Kuan Dian and Yunnan were defeated.

古文：是年，暹罗入贡。
现代文：这一年有暹罗前来朝贡。
English: This year, Siam came to pay tribute.

