古文：王镕，其先回鹘部人也。
现代文：王镕，祖先是回鹘部族人。
English: Wang Yao, whose ancestors were Uighur tribesmen.

古文：远祖没诺干，唐至德中，事镇州节度使王武俊为骑将。
现代文：远祖没诺干，唐朝至德年间，在镇州节度使王武俊手下为骑兵将领。
English: During the Tang Dynasty to the German era, Wang Wujun was made a cavalry general under the command of Wang Wujun during the Zhenzhou Festival.

古文：武俊嘉其勇干，畜为假子，号王五哥，其后子孙以王为氏。
现代文：王武俊喜欢他勇敢能干，收为义子，称王五哥，他的后代子孙便以王为姓。
English: Wang Wujun liked him because he was brave and capable. He adopted him as his son-in-law and called him Wang Wugong. His descendants and grandchildren took Wang as their surname.

古文：四代祖廷凑，事镇帅王承宗为牙将。
现代文：四代祖王廷凑，在镇州统帅王承宗手下为牙将。
English: The fourth-generation ancestor, Wang Tingqip, was a dental officer under the Zhenzhou commander-in-chief, Wang Chengzong.

古文：长庆初，承宗卒，穆宗命田宏正为成德军节度使。
现代文：长庆初年，王承宗去世，穆宗任命田弘正为成德军节度使。
English: In the first year of Changqing, Wang Chengzong died, and Mu Zong appointed Tian Hongzheng as the festival envoy of the Chengde Army.

古文：既而镇人杀宏正，推廷凑为留后，朝廷不能制，因以旄钺授之。
现代文：不久镇州人杀死田弘正，推举王廷凑为留后，朝廷不能控制，因而授以节旄斧钺。
English: Not long after the people of Zhenzhou killed Tian Hongzheng and elected Wang Tingpai to stay, the imperial court could not control him, so he was awarded the title of Jie Zhenxing.

古文：廷凑卒，子元逵尚文宗女寿安公主。
现代文：王廷凑死，其子王元逵娶文宗之女寿安公主。
English: Wang Tingping died, and his son Wang Yuanzhang married Princess Shouan, the daughter of Emperor Wenzong.

古文：元逵卒，子绍鼎立。
现代文：王元逵死，其子王绍鼎接任。
English: Wang Yuanxuan died, and his son Wang Shao Ding took over.

古文：绍鼎卒，子景崇立。
现代文：王绍鼎死，其子王景崇接任。
English: Wang Shao Ding died, and his son Wang Jing Chong took over.

古文：皆世袭镇州节度使，并前史有传。
现代文：都世袭镇州节度使。
English: All of them are hereditary Zhenzhou Sect Emissaries.

古文：景崇位至太尉、中书令，封常山王，中和二年卒。
现代文：王景崇官位至太尉、中书令，封为常山王，中和二年去世。
English: Wang Jingsong was promoted to the rank of Taiyi and Chushirei, and was given the title of King of Changshan. He died in the second year of the Middle Ages.

古文：镕即景崇之子也，年十岁，三军推袭父位。
现代文：王镕是王景崇的儿子，十岁时，三军推举他接父亲职位。
English: Wang Qi is the son of Wang Jingsong. At the age of ten, he was selected by the three armies to succeed his father.

古文：及方立平，晋将李存孝侵镕于南部，镕求援于幽州。
现代文：大顺年中，武皇的将军李存孝平定邢州、氵名州后，向武皇献策，想兼并镇州、定州，于是连年发兵扰乱镇州的属邑。王镕深受其苦，派使者向幽州求救。
English: After Emperor Wu's general, Li Cunxiao, had subdued Zhangzhou and Annam prefecture in the year of the Great Spring Festival, he proposed to Emperor Wu to annex Zhenzhou and Dingzhou. As a result, he sent troops to disturb Zhenzhou's subordinate towns year after year. Wang Hui was deeply distressed by this and sent an envoy to Yuzhou for help.

古文：自是燕帅李匡威频岁出军，以为镕援。
现代文：从此燕帅李匡威连年出动军队，来救援王镕。
English: From then on, Yan Shuai Li Kuangwei sent troops year after year to rescue Wang Yao.

古文：时匡威兵势方盛，以镕冲弱，将有窥图之志。
现代文：此时李匡威兵势正强盛，因王镕年幼弱小，心有窥视图谋之志。
English: At this time, Li Kuangwei's army was in full strength, and because Wang Yao was young and weak, he had the ambition to spy on the plot.

古文：景福二年春，匡威率精骑数万，再来赴援，会匡威弟匡俦夺据兄位，匡威退无归路，镕乃延入府第，馆于宝寿佛寺。
现代文：景福二年春，李匡威率领数万精锐骑兵，再来救援，这时李匡威弟李匡俦夺取了他哥哥的职位，李匡威没有退路，王镕于是把他请进自己府第，住在宝寿佛寺。
English: In the spring of the second year of Jingfu, Li Kuangwei led tens of thousands of elite cavalrymen to come to the rescue. At this time, Li Kuangwei's younger brother Li Kuangyao seized his brother's position. Li Kuangwei had no way out, so Wang Yao invited him to his home and lived in Baoshu Buddhist Temple.

古文：镕以匡威因己而失国，又感其援助之力，事之如父。
现代文：王镕觉得李匡威因为自己而失去国家，又感谢他多次援助，对他像父亲般尊重。
English: Wang Yao felt that Li Kuangwei lost the country because of himself, and thanked him for his many times of assistance, and respected him like a father.

古文：五月，镕谒匡威于其馆，匡威阴遣部下伏甲劫镕，抱持之。
现代文：五月，王镕到住所拜见李匡威，李匡威暗地派部下埋伏劫持王镕，抱住他。
English: In May, Wang Yao visited Li Kuangwei at his residence. Li Kuangwei secretly sent his subordinates to ambush and kidnap Wang Yao and hugged him.

古文：镕曰： 公戒部人勿造次。
现代文：王镕说 ：您告诫部下不要乱来。
English: Wang Yao said: You warned your subordinates not to come in disorderly.

古文：吾国为晋人所侵，垂将覆灭，赖公济援之力，幸而获存。
现代文：我国被晋人侵犯，即将覆灭，依靠你们救援，幸而生存下来。
English: Our country was invaded by the Jin people and was about to be destroyed. It was lucky to survive thanks to your rescue.

古文：今日之事，本所甘心。 
现代文：今天的事，也是甘心情愿的。 
English: Today's event is also willingly desired.

古文：即并辔归府舍。镕军拒之，竟杀匡威。
现代文：随即两人并排骑马回府第，王镕军队最后杀了李匡威。
English: Then the two men rode back to the capital side by side, and Wang Hui's army finally killed Li Kuangwei.

古文：镕本疏瘦，时年始十七，当与匡威并辔之时，电雨骤作，屋瓦皆飞。
现代文：王镕本来长得清瘦，这时才十七岁，和李匡威并排走的时候，突然闪电下雨，屋上瓦片乱飞。
English: Wang Yao, who was originally very thin, was only 17 years old at the time. When he and Li Kuangwei were walking side by side, it suddenly rained lightning and tiles flew all over the roof.

古文：有一人于缺垣中望见镕，镕就之，遽挟于马上，肩之而去。
现代文：有一人在断墙中看见王镕，王镕靠近他，他迅速挟在马上，扛着王镕而去。
English: One person saw Wang Yao in the broken wall. Wang Yao approached him. He quickly grabbed his horse and carried Wang Yao away.

古文：洎梁祖兼有山东，虎视天下，镕卑辞厚礼，以通和好。
现代文：第二天，王镕只觉得脖子痛头偏斜，是因为被那位有力气的人挟住他，而非常疼痛的缘故。随即查访，是叫墨君和的一个屠户，于是给重赏。
English: The next day, Wang Yao only felt a pain in his neck and his head was lopsided, because he was pinched by the powerful man, and it was very painful. He immediately visited a butcher named Mo Junhe, and gave him a reward.

古文：《新唐书》：罗绍威讽镕绝太原，共尊全忠，镕依违，全忠不悦。光化三年秋，梁祖将吞河朔，乃亲征镇、定，纵其军燔镇之关城。
现代文：王镕失去燕军的援助，此时武皇李克用发兵逼近真定，王镕派使者请罪，献出绢布二十万匹，又供给牛酒犒劳军队，从此与王镕和好如初。当时梁太祖兼有山东，虎视天下，王镕用卑微言词厚重礼品与之交好。光化三年秋，梁太祖将吞并河朔，于是亲自征讨真、定二州，放纵军队焚烧镇州关城。
English: Wang Hui lost the support of Yan's army. At this time, Emperor Li Ke of Wu sent troops to approach Zhending. Wang Hui sent an envoy to plead guilty, offered two hundred thousand yakitori, and supplied cattle and wine to the army. Since then, Wang Hui has been at peace with Wang Hui. At that time, Liang Taizu owned both Shandong and Tibet, and Wang Hui used humble words and heavy gifts to make friends with him. In the autumn of the third year of the Guanghua era, Liang Taizu would annex Heshaku, so he personally recruited Zhen and Ding two states, and indulged the army to burn Zhen

古文：镕谓宾佐曰： 事急矣，谋其所向。 
现代文：王镕对辅佐他的人说： 事情紧急，该谋划一下怎么办。 
English: Wang Yao said to his aides: "The matter is urgent, what should we do?

古文：况继奉天子诏和解，能无一番纸坠北路乎？
现代文：判官周式，有辩论口才，出城求见梁祖。梁祖盛怒，面对周式说： 王令公依附并州、汾州，违反盟约失信用，我的兵马已到这里，不想放弃什么！ 
English: The judge, Zhou Shih, who was an eloquent debater, went out of the city to see Liang Zu. Liang Zu was furious and said to Zhou Shih: "Wang Ling Gong has adhered to the annexation of Zhou and Zhangzhou, violated the covenant and lost credibility. My soldiers have arrived here and do not want to give up anything!"

古文：太原与赵本无恩，嗣昭庸肯入耶！ 梁祖喜，引式袂而慰之曰： 前言戏之耳！ 
现代文：周式说： 您是唐王朝的齐桓公、晋文公一类人物，应当凭据礼义而成霸业，但您反而要穷兵黩武，天下将会怎么谈论你呢？ 梁祖听了高兴，牵着周式的衣服安慰他说： 刚才的话是说着玩的。 
English: Zhou Shi said: You are a kind of figure of Qi Huan Gong and Jin Wengu of the Tang Dynasty, and you should become a hegemon by virtue of etiquette and righteousness, but instead you want to be a soldier, how will the world talk about you? Liang Zu was pleased to hear this and took Zhou Shi's clothes to comfort him and said: What you just said was said in fun.

古文：即送牛酒货币以犒军。
现代文：随即送牛酒货币犒劳军队。
English: He then sent cow wine and money to reward the hard-working troops.

古文：式请镕子昭祚及大将梁公儒、李宏规子各一人往质于汴。
现代文：周式请派王镕的儿子王昭祚和大将梁公儒、李弘规每人的一个儿子到汴州做人质。
English: Zhou Shikai asked Wang Zhaojun's son Wang Zhaojun and generals Liang Gongru and Li Hongbai to each send one of their sons to Zhangzhou as a hostage.

古文：梁祖以女妻昭祚。
现代文：梁祖把女儿嫁给王昭祚。
English: Liang Zu married his daughter to Wang Zhaohui.

古文：及梁祖称帝，镕不得已，行其正朔。
现代文：到梁祖称帝时，王镕不得已奉行梁朝正朔。
English: By the time Liang Zu was proclaimed emperor, Wang Xi had no choice but to follow the Liang Dynasty.

古文：其后梁祖常虑河朔悠久难制，会罗绍威卒，因欲除移镇、定。
现代文：以后梁祖常忧虑河朔隔得远难以控制，适逢罗绍威死，因而想占领镇、定二州。
English: After that, Liang Zu often worried that the river was far away and difficult to control, coincided with the death of Rossowei, and therefore wanted to occupy the town, Ding Erzhou.

古文：先遣亲军三千，分据镕深、冀二郡，以镇守为名。
现代文：先派三千亲军，分据王镕的深、冀二郡，以镇守为名。
English: First, he sent three thousand troops, divided into two counties of Wangye's Sheng and Ji, with the town's governor as the name.

古文：又遣大将王景仁、李思安率师七万，营于柏乡。
现代文：又派大将王景仁、李思安率七万大军，在柏乡扎营。
English: He also sent generals Wang Jingren and Li Sian to lead 70,000 troops to set up camp in Baoxiang.

古文：镕遣使告急庄宗，庄宗命周德威率兵应之；镕复奉唐朝正朔，称天祐七年。
现代文：王镕派使者向庄宗告急，庄宗命周德威率兵接应，王镕重新奉唐朝正朔，称天七年。
English: Wang Hui sent an envoy to Zhuang Zong to express his concern. Zhuang Zong ordered Zhou Dewi to lead an army to meet the envoy. Wang Hui renewed his allegiance to the Tang Dynasty at the beginning of the new year, calling it the seventh year of heaven.

古文：及破梁军于高邑，我军大振，自是遣大将王德明率三十七都从庄宗征伐，收燕降魏，皆预其功，然镕未尝亲军远出。
现代文：待到在高邑攻破梁军，唐军大振，从此派大将王德明率三十七都跟随庄宗征伐，收复燕、魏，都参预了战事，然而王镕未曾亲自率军远征。
English: When Liang's army was defeated in Gaoyu, the Tang army was greatly shaken. From then on, General Wang Deming and 37 generals followed Zhuo Zong to conquer and recover Yan and Wei. They all participated in the pre-war affairs. However, Wang Xi did not personally lead the expedition.

古文：八年七月，镕至承天军，与庄宗合宴同盟，奉觞献寿，以申感概。
现代文：天八年七月，王镕到承天军，与庄宗宴会结盟，捧酒祝寿，以抒发感慨。
English: In July of the eighth year of heaven, Wang Xi went to the army of Cheng Tian, allied with the banquet of Zhuang Zong, and celebrated his birthday with wine to express his feelings.

古文：庄宗以镕父友，曲加敬异，为之声歌，镕亦报之，谓庄宗为四十六舅。
现代文：庄宗与王镕父亲是朋友，所以对王镕更加敬重，为他唱歌，王镕也予以回报，称庄宗为四十六舅。
English: Zhuang Zong and Wang Xi's father were friends, so he respected Wang Xi more and sang for him. Wang Xi also reciprocated, calling Zhuang Zong the 46th uncle.

古文：中饮，庄宗抽佩刀断衿为盟，许女妻镕子昭诲。因兹坚附于庄宗矣。
现代文：酒宴中间，庄宗抽出佩刀截断衣带作为盟誓，把女儿嫁给王镕的儿子王昭诲，因此王镕更加依附于庄宗了。
English: In the middle of the wine banquet, Zhuangzong took out his sword and cut off his belt as an oath to marry his daughter to Wang Yao's son, Wang Zhaoyi. As a result, Wang Yao became even more attached to Zhuangzong.

古文：镕自幼聪悟，然仁而不武，征伐出于下，特以作籓数世。专制四州，高屏尘务，不亲军政，多以阉人秉权，出纳决断，悉听所为。
现代文：王镕从小聪明，然而讲仁义不习武，征伐之事由手下人干，所以几代为藩镇，治理四州远离世俗事务，不亲自处理军政，多以宦官掌权，往来决策命令全听他们所为。
English: Wang Qian was clever from childhood, but he was not good at martial arts, and the conquest was done by his subordinates. Therefore, he was a hanzhong for several generations, the governance of the four states was far from worldly affairs, he did not personally deal with military affairs, and eunuchs held power, and the decision-making orders were all obeyed by them.

古文：皆雕靡第舍，崇饰园池，植奇花异木，递相夸尚。
现代文：却修建豪华府舍，装饰花园池台，种植奇花异草，互相竞比。
English: However, they compete with each other by building luxurious residences, decorating garden pools, and planting exotic flowers and plants.

古文：人士皆裒衣博带，高车大盖，以事嬉游，籓府之中，当时为盛。镕宴安既久，惑于左道，专求长生之要，常聚缁黄，合炼仙丹，或讲说佛经，亲受符箓。
现代文：官员士人都宽衣博带，高车大盖，游戏取乐，藩府之中，盛行一时，王镕享受安乐已久，又被左道邪术惑乱，专求长生之术，经常召来和尚道士，合炼仙丹，或是讲说佛经，亲受符。
English: Officials and scholars were all wearing wide clothes, high-heeled shoes, and playing games for fun. Among the lords of the domain, it was popular for a while. Wang Yao had enjoyed peace and quiet for a long time. He was also bewitched by left-hand magic and specialized in the art of longevity. He often summoned monks and Taoists to concoct fairy tales, or to recite Buddhist scriptures and personally receive charms.

古文：西山多佛寺，又有王母观，镕增置馆宇，雕饰土木。
现代文：西山有很多佛寺，又有王母观，王镕增设馆舍，大兴土木。
English: There are many Buddhist temples in the West Mountain, and Wang Mu Guan and Wang Yao have added buildings and carried out extensive civil engineering.

古文：道士王若讷者，诱镕登山临水，访求仙迹，每一出，数月方归，百姓劳弊。
现代文：道士王若讷引诱王镕登山临水，访求仙迹。每次出去，几个月才回，弄得百姓劳苦困敝。
English: The Taoist Wang Rana lured Wang Yao to climb Mount Lingshui and visit the wonders. Every time he went out, he only came back for a few months, causing the people to work hard.

古文：王母观石路既峻，不通舆马，每登行，命仆妾数下人维锦绣牵持而上。
现代文：王母观石路险峻，车马不通，每次登行，命仆妾数十人拉着锦绣牵持而上。
English: Wang Mu Guan Shishi Road is steep, cars and horses do not pass, every time they ascend, dozens of servants and concubines pull the brocade and hold it up.

古文：有阉人石希蒙者，奸宠用事，为镕所嬖，恆与之卧起。
现代文：太监石希蒙靠奸诈行事，受王镕宠信，常常与他一起起居。
English: The eunuch Shishimeng acted by treachery, was favored by Wang Yao, and often lived with him.

古文：天祐八年冬十二月，镕自西山回，宿于鹘营庄，将归府第，希蒙劝之他所。
现代文：天祐八年十二月，王镕从西山回来，在鹘营庄过夜，将回府第，石希蒙劝王镕再到别的地方去。
English: In December of the eighth year of the Heian period, Wang Yao returned from the West Mountain and spent the night in Yuyingzhuang. He was going back to his hometown. Shi Ximeng advised Wang Yao to go somewhere else.

古文：宦者李宏规谓镕曰： 方今晋王亲当矢石，栉沐风雨，王殚供军之租赋，为不急之游盘，世道未夷，人心多梗，久虚府第，远出游从，如乐祸之徒，翻然起变，拒门不纳，则王欲何归！ 
现代文：宦官李弘规对王镕说 ：现在晋王亲自上阵冲锋，顶风冒雨，王却用尽军队使用的租赋，从事不急需的旅游，世道还没太平，人心多有不安，府第常常没人，远出游玩，如果有生事兴祸之徒，突然作乱，把住门不让进，王将回到哪里呢？ 
English: The eunuch Li Hongzhi said to Wang Hui: Now Jin Wang has personally stormed the front, braving the wind and rain, but Wang has exhausted the rent used by the army, engaged in unnecessary travel, the world is not peaceful, many people are uneasy, there is often no one in the capital, go out to play, if there are troublemakers, suddenly make trouble, keep the door closed, where will Wang return?

古文：镕惧，促归。
现代文：王镕害怕，催促回去。
English: Wang Yao was scared and urged them to go back.

古文：希蒙谮宏规专作威福，多蓄猜防，镕由是复无归志。
现代文：石希蒙诽谤李弘规作威作福，总是蓄意猜测防备他人，王镕因此又没回家的打算。
English: Shi Ximeng slandered Li Hongzhi as a bully, always deliberately guessing to prevent others, so Wang Yao had no intention of going home.

古文：宏规闻之怒，使亲事偏将苏汉衡率兵擐甲遽至镕前，露刃谓镕曰： 军人在外已久，愿从王归。 
现代文：李弘规听了发怒，派亲事偏将苏汉衡率兵穿甲衣突然来到王镕跟前，抽戈拔刀对王镕说： 军人在外很久，愿随王回家。 
English: Li Hongzhi was furious when he heard this, and sent his relative Su Hanheng to lead the soldiers to wear armor and suddenly came to Wang Yao. He drew his sword and said to Wang Yao: "The soldiers have been away for a long time, I would like to go home with Wang Yao."

古文：宏规进曰： 石希蒙说王游从，劳弊士庶，又结构阴邪，将为大逆。
现代文：李弘规进言说 ：石希蒙诱说王游玩，使官民劳敝，又交结阴邪之徒，将为大逆不道。
English: Li Hongzhi said: Shi Ximeng lured Wang Yu to play, made the officials and the people work hard, and made friends with the evil doers, which would be a great treason.

古文：臣已侦视情状不虚，请王杀之，以除祸本。 
现代文：我已侦察到确实情况，请王杀掉他，以除祸根。 
English: Now that I have learned the truth, please let the king put him to death and remove this evil from among us.

古文：镕不听。
现代文：王镕不听。
English: Wang Yao didn't listen.

古文：宏规因命军士聚噪，斩希蒙首抵于前。
现代文：李弘规因而命军士聚众起哄，斩下石希蒙的头送到王镕跟前。
English: As a result, Li Hongbai ordered the soldiers to gather and cut off the head of Shi Ximeng and bring it to Wang Yao.

古文：镕大恐，遂归。
现代文：王镕大为恐惧，于是回到府第。
English: Wang Yao was very scared, so he went back to the capital.

古文：是日，令其子昭祚与张文礼以兵围李宏规及行军司马李蔼宅，并族诛之，诖误者凡数十家。
现代文：这一天，令他儿子昭祚与张文礼领兵包围李弘规和行军司马李蔼的住宅，杀掉全族人，误杀的有几十家。
English: On this day, he ordered his son, Zhaohui, and Zhang Wenli to lead the soldiers to surround the homes of Li Honggui and the marching sergeant, Ma Li'an, and kill the entire clan, killing dozens of families by mistake.

古文：又杀苏汉衡，收部下偏将下狱，穷其反状，亲军皆恐，复不时给赐，众益惧。
现代文：又杀死苏汉衡，收捕部下偏将下狱，追究谋反罪状，亲军都大为恐慌，又时常赐东西，大家更害怕。
English: He also killed Su Hanheng, arrested some of his subordinates and sent them to prison, and investigated the crime of plotting to rebel. The pro-army troops were greatly alarmed, and he often gave them things. Everyone was even more afraid.

古文：文礼因其反侧，密谕之曰； 王将坑尔曹，宜自图之。 
现代文：张文礼趁此混乱对他们秘密地说 ：王今晚将活埋你们，你们自己想办法。 
English: Zhang Wenli took advantage of the confusion to say to them secretly: "The king will bury you alive tonight, you can do it yourself."

古文：众皆掩泣相谓曰： 王待我如是，我等焉能效忠？ 
现代文：大家相互哭着说 ：王这样对我们，我们怎么还能效忠。 
English: Everyone cried and said to each other: "How can we still be loyal to the king when he treats us like this?"

古文：是夜，亲事军十余人，自子城西门逾垣而入，镕方焚香受箓，军士二人突入，断其首，袖之而出，遂焚其府第，烟焰亘天，兵士大乱。
现代文：这晚，亲事军十几人，从子城西门翻墙而入，王镕正在烧香受，两位军士突然冲进来，砍断他的头放在衣袖中带出来，于是烧掉府第，火焰冲天，兵士大乱。
English: On this night, more than a dozen relatives and relatives of the army climbed over the wall from the west gate of Zicheng. Wang Yao was burning incense. Two sergeants suddenly rushed in, cut off his head and put it in his sleeve. Then they burned the palace, the flames soared into the sky, and the soldiers were in chaos.

古文：镕姬妾数百，皆赴水投火而死。
现代文：王镕姬妾数百，都投水火而死。
English: Hundreds of Wang Bingji's concubines were drowned and burned to death.

古文：军校有张友顺者，率军人至张文礼之第，请为留后。遂尽杀王氏之族。
现代文：军校张友顺率领军人到张文礼家里，请他做留后，于是杀尽王氏一族人。
English: Military school Zhang Youshun led soldiers to Zhang Wenli's home, asked him to stay, and then killed the Wang clan.

古文：镕于昭宗朝赐号敦睦保定久大功臣，位至成德军节度使、守太师、中书令、赵王，梁祖加尚书令。
现代文：王镕在昭宗朝被赐号为敦睦保定久大功臣，位至成德军节度使、守太师、中书令、赵王，梁祖加尚书令。
English: During the reign of Emperor Zhaozong, Wang Yao was given the title of Dunmu Bao Dingjiu, a great meritorious subject, and was promoted to the ranks of the German military commander, the military governor, the commander of the Chinese army, the king of Zhao, and the commander of the Liang Zu and Shang armies.

古文：初，镕之遇害，不获其尸，及庄宗攻下镇州，镕之旧人于所焚府第灰间方得镕之残骸。
现代文：起初，王镕遇害时，找不到他的尸体，到庄宗攻下镇州时，王镕以前的部下在烧掉的府第灰烬里找到王镕的残骸。
English: At first, when Wang Qian was killed, his body could not be found. When Zhuang Zong conquered Zhenzhou, Wang Qian's former subordinates found Wang Qian's remains in the ashes of the burned-out palace.

古文：庄宗命幕客致祭，葬于王氏故茔。
现代文：庄宗命幕客为他致祭，葬在王氏故茔。
English: Zhuangzong's guests made a sacrifice for him and he was buried in Wang's tomb.

古文：镕长子昭祚，乱之翼日，张文礼索之，斩于军门。
现代文：王镕的长子王昭祚，在变乱第二天被张文礼搜索抓住，斩于军门。
English: Wang Zhaohui's eldest son, Wang Zhaohui, was caught by Zhang Wenli's search on the second day of the turmoil and was beheaded at the military gate.

古文：次子昭诲。当镕被祸之夕，昭诲为军人携出府第，置之地穴十余日，乃髡其发，被以僧衣。
现代文：次子王昭诲，当王镕遇害那晚，被军人带出府第，藏在地洞十几天，剃掉头发，穿上和尚衣服。
English: The second son, Wang Zhaoyi, was taken out of the capital by soldiers on the night of Wang Hui's murder, hidden in a cave for ten days, his hair shaved off, and dressed in monk's clothes.

古文：属湖南纲官李震南还，军士以昭诲托于震，震置之茶褚中。
现代文：这时湖南运输官李震回南方，军士把王昭诲托付给他，李震把王昭诲藏在茶叶袋中。
English: At this time, the Hunan transport officer Li Zhen returned to the south, the sergeant entrusted Wang Zhaoyao to him, and Li Zhen hid Wang Zhaoyao in a tea bag.

古文：既至湖湘，乃令依南岳寺僧习业，岁给其费。
现代文：到湖湘后，就让他到南岳寺学习为僧，每年供给费用。
English: After he arrived in Hunan, he was allowed to study at Nangue Temple as a monk, and he was provided with an annual stipend.

古文：昭诲年长思归，震即赍送而还。
现代文：王昭诲长大后想回家，李震便送他回去。
English: When Wang Zhaoying grew up and wanted to go home, Li Zhen sent him back.

古文：时镕故将符习为汴州节度使，会昭诲来投，即表其事曰： 故赵王王镕小男昭诲，年十余岁遇祸，为人所匿免，今尚为僧，名崇隐，谨令赴阙。 
现代文：这时王镕故将符习任汴州节度使，王昭诲来投奔他。他上表章说 ：已故赵王王镕小儿子王昭诲，十多岁时遭祸被人藏起免难，现在仍是和尚，法名叫崇隐，谨令到宫里朝见。 
English: At this time, Wang Zhaojun appointed Fu Xi as the envoy of the Zhangzhou Festival, and Wang Zhaoyun came to him. He said on the tablet: Wang Zhaoyun, the youngest son of the late Zhao Wang Zhaojun, was more than ten years old when he suffered a misfortune and was hidden to avoid trouble. Now he is still a monk, his Buddhist name is Chongyin, and I have the honor to go to the palace to meet the emperor.

古文：明宗赐衣一袭，令脱僧服。
现代文：明宗赐给衣服一套，令脱去僧服。
English: Emperor Mingzong gave him a set of clothes and ordered him to take off his monk's robes.

古文：顷之，昭诲称前成德军中军使、检校太傅，诣中书陈状，特授朝议大夫、检校考功郎中、司农少卿，赐金紫。
现代文：不久，称王昭诲为前成德军中军使、检校太傅，到中书陈状，特授朝议大夫、检校考功郎中、司农少卿，赐与金紫。
English: Not long after, Wang Zhaoyan was awarded the title of "foreign envoy of the Central Military Commission of the German-Japanese War" and "school inspection dean" and was awarded the title of "Doctor of the Council of State," "school inspection meritorious junior high school student" and "Minor Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs" as well as the title of "Golden Purple."

古文：符习因以女妻之。
现代文：符习将女儿嫁给他。
English: Fu Xi married his daughter to him.

古文：其后，累历少列，周显德中，迁少府监。
现代文：以后，多次任官，周显德年间，迁任少府监。
English: After that, he was appointed many times, and during the Zhou Xiande years, he was transferred to the post of junior prefectural inspector.

