古文：孙膑胜庞涓之事，兵家以为奇谋，予独有疑焉，云： 齐军入魏地为十万灶，明日为五万灶，又明日为二万灶。 
现代文：孙膑战胜庞涓这件事，军事家们都认为是出奇制胜的计谋，我偏偏对此有些疑问。史书记载： 齐军开进魏国领土挖了十万个炉灶，第二天五万个，第三天两万个。 
English: The matter of Sun Yat-sen's victory over Pang Xuan is considered by military experts to be a stratagem of surprising victory, but I have some doubts about this. History records: The Qi army entered the territory of Wei and dug up 100,000 stoves, 50,000 the next day, and 20,000 the third day.

古文：方师行逐利，每夕而兴此役，不知以几何人给之，又必人人各一灶乎？
现代文：军队正在进发争夺有利条件，每晚上去干这些事，不知道要费多少人工，同时难道非得是每个人一口灶吗？
English: Troops are moving in and out to compete for advantage, to do this every night, with who knows how much manpower, and does everyone have to be a cook?

古文：庞涓行三日而大喜曰： 齐士卒亡者过半。 
现代文：庞涓走了三天，大为高兴，说： 齐国的士兵逃亡的过了半数。 
English: Pang Yao walked for three days and was very happy, saying: More than half of the soldiers of Qi fled.

古文：则是所过之处必使人枚数之矣，是岂救急赴敌之师乎？
现代文：这就是说，所过之处必定派人一个个清查炉灶数目，这难道还像是急救危难而奔赴敌人的军队吗？
English: That is to say, people must be sent to check the number of stoves one by one wherever they pass. Is this like rushing to the enemy's army in an emergency?

古文：又云： 度其暮当至马陵，乃斫大树，白而书之，曰： 庞涓死于此树之下。 
现代文：史书又说： 估计庞涓应当天黑时赶到马陵，于是砍削大树，削掉树皮在上面写道： 庞涓死于此树之下。 
English: The history book also said: It is estimated that Pang Xuan should have arrived at the mausoleum when it was dark, so he chopped down a large tree and cut off the bark to write on it: Pang Xuan died under this tree.

古文：遂伏万驽，期日暮见火举而俱发。
现代文：接着埋伏下一万弓弩手，约定天黑时看见火光同时发射。
English: Next, ten thousand archers were ambushed, and it was agreed that when it was dark, they would see the light of a fire and simultaneously fire.

古文：涓果夜至，斫木下，见白书，钻火烛之。
现代文：庞涓果然入夜时来到削了皮的树下，看见树干上写的字，取火照亮。
English: When night fell, Pang Yao came to the tree with the peeled bark and saw the words written on the trunk. He lit a fire to illuminate it.

古文：读未毕。万驽俱发。 
现代文：没等读完，万张弓弩一起发射。 
English: Without waiting for the reading to finish, ten thousand bows and arrows were launched together.

古文：夫军行迟速，既非他人所料，安能必其以暮至，不差晷刻乎？
现代文：行军速度根本不是别人所能预料的，怎能料定人家定在日暮时到达，不差分秒呢？
English: The speed of the march is not at all predictable by others, how can one predict that one will arrive at dusk, within a few seconds?

古文：古人坐于车中，既云暮矣，安知树间之有白书？且必举火读之乎？
现代文：古人坐在车中，既然说是天黑了，怎么知道树干上有写的字，而且还非得取火读它呢？
English: The ancients sat in the car, and since they said it was dark, how did they know that there was writing on the trunk of the tree, and they had to light a fire to read it?

古文：齐驽尚能俱发，而涓读八字未毕。
现代文：齐军弓弩还能同时发射，而且庞涓连八个字都没有读完。
English: The Qi army's bow and arrow can also be fired at the same time, and Pang Jun did not even finish reading eight words.

古文：皆深不可信。
现代文：都是十分不可相信的。
English: It's all completely unbelievable.

古文：殆好事者为之，而不精考耳。
现代文：恐怕是好事的人编造的。而且人们不曾作精密考证罢了。
English: I'm afraid it was made up by good-hearted people, and they didn't do any detailed research.

