古文：子曰： 孝子之丧亲也，哭不偯，礼无容，言不文，服美不安，闻乐不乐，食旨不甘，此哀戚之情也。三日而食，教民无以死伤生。
现代文：孔子说： 孝子丧失了父母亲，要哭得声嘶力竭，发不出悠长的哭腔；举止行为失去了平时的端正礼仪，言语没有了条理文采，穿上华美的衣服就心中不安，听到美妙的音乐也不快乐，吃美味的食物不觉得好吃，这是做子女的因失去亲人而悲伤忧愁的表现。
English: Confucius said, "When a filial son loses his parents, he cries until he is hoarse and cannot utter a long wail; his manners and behavior lose their usual proper etiquette, his speech is not well-organized, he feels uneasy when he puts on beautiful clothes, he is not happy when he hears beautiful music, and he does not feel good when he eats delicious food. This is a manifestation of the grief and sorrow of being a child due to the loss of relatives.

古文：毁不灭性，此圣人之政也。丧不过三年，示民有终也。
现代文：父母之丧，三天之后就要吃东西，这是教导人民不要因失去亲人的悲哀而损伤生者的身体，不要因过度的哀毁而灭绝人生的天性，这是圣贤君子的为政之道。
English: To eat three days after the death of one's parents is to teach the people not to damage the bodies of the living due to the grief of losing relatives, and not to destroy the nature of life due to excessive grief. This is the way of politics of the saints and sages.

古文：为之棺椁衣衾而举之，陈其簠簋而哀戚之；擗踊哭泣，哀以送之；卜其宅兆，而安措之；为之宗庙，以鬼享之；春秋祭祀，以时思之。
现代文：为亲人守丧不超过年，是告诉人们居丧是有其终止期限的。办丧事的时候，要为去世的父母准备好棺材、外棺、穿戴的衣饰和铺盖的被子等，妥善地安置进棺内，陈列摆设上、簋类祭奠器具，以寄托生者的哀痛和悲伤。出殡的时候，捶胸顿足，嚎啕大哭地哀痛出送。
English: When holding a funeral, it is necessary to prepare a coffin, an outer coffin, clothing and a quilt for the deceased parents, properly place them in the coffin, display and decorate the coffin, and use the coffin as a place to express the grief and sorrow of the living. When leaving the funeral, they should beat their chests and weep bitterly.

古文：生事爱敬，死事哀戚，生民之本尽矣，死生之义备矣，孝子之事亲终矣。 
现代文：占卜墓穴吉地以安葬。兴建起祭祀用的庙宇，使亡灵有所归依并享受生者的祭祀。在春秋两季举行祭祀，以表示生者无时不思念亡故的亲人。在父母亲在世时以爱和敬来奉事他们，在他们去世后，则怀看悲哀之情料理丧事，如此尽到了人生在世应尽的本分和义务。
English: A divinatory tomb is a good place to be buried. A temple is built for sacrifices, so that the dead can be converted and enjoy the sacrifices of the living. Sacrifices are held in spring and autumn to show that the living always miss their deceased relatives. When their parents were alive, they served them with love and respect, and after their death, they prepared the funeral with sadness, thus fulfilling the duty and obligation of life in the world.

