古文：尹洙，字师鲁，河南人。
现代文：尹洙，字师鲁，河南人。
English: Yin Lu, a calligrapher from Henan Province.

古文：少与兄源俱以儒学知名。
现代文：年轻时与哥哥尹源都以儒学出名。
English: When he was young, he and his brother Yin Yuan were both famous for their Confucianism.

古文：举进士，调正平县主簿。
现代文：考取进士，调任正平县主簿。
English: He passed the entrance examination and was transferred to the position of the chief accountant of Zhengping County.

古文：历河南府户曹参军、安国军节度推官、知光泽县。
现代文：历任河南府户曹参军、安国军节度推官、光泽知县。
English: Successive Henan prefectural heads of the Cao family joined the army, served as the Anguo Army's commander-in-chief, and were stationed in Guangze County.

古文：举书判拔萃，改山南东道节度掌书记、知伊阳县，有能名。
现代文：考试书判成绩优秀，改任山南东道节度掌书记、伊阳知县，有能干的名声。
English: He got excellent grades in the examination, and was appointed as the secretary of the Shannan Host Festival, Iyang County, with a reputation for ability.

古文：用大臣荐，召试，为馆阁校勘，迁太子中允。
现代文：因为大臣的推荐，被召回朝考核，任馆阁校勘，升太子中允。
English: Because of the minister's recommendation, he was recalled to the morning examination, appointed to the cabinet school, and promoted to the crown prince.

古文：会范仲淹贬，敕榜朝堂，戒百官为朋党。
现代文：正好范仲淹被贬官，皇帝在朝堂中宣读诏谕，警诫各级官吏不要结党营帮。
English: Just as Fan Zhongran was demoted, the emperor read out an edict in the imperial hall, warning officials at all levels not to form a party.

古文：洙上奏曰： 仲淹忠亮有素，臣与之义兼师友，则是仲淹之党也。
现代文：尹洙上奏说 ：范仲淹素来赤胆忠心光明磊落，臣与他是师生兼朋友的关系，也就是范仲淹的党羽。
English: Yin Zhen said: Fan Zhongran has always been loyal and honest, and the relationship between the minister and him is that of teacher and student and friend, that is, Fan Zhongran's party.

古文：今仲淹以朋党被罪，臣不可苟免。 宰相怒，落校勘，复为掌书记、监唐州酒税。
现代文：如今范仲淹因为结党营帮被治罪，臣也不能苟且免罪。 宰相发怒，革了他馆阁校勘的职，再去任掌书记、唐州酒税监。
English: Now that Fan Zhongyun has been punished for helping to form a political party, the minister cannot be absolved of his crime. The prime minister became angry and dismissed him from the post of cabinet and school inspector, and he went on to serve as chief secretary and Tangzhou liquor tax inspector.

古文：西北久安，洙作《叙燕》、《息戍》二篇，以为武备不可弛。
现代文：西北地区长期平安无事，尹洙做了《叙燕》、《息戍》两篇文章，认为战备不可松弛。
English: The northwest region has been safe and sound for a long time, and Yin Xi has written two articles, "Su Yan" and "Shu Xi," and believes that the military preparedness should not be relaxed.

古文：《叙燕》曰：
现代文：《叙燕》说：
English: "Shu Yan" said:

古文：战国世，燕最弱。
现代文：战国时代，燕国最弱。
English: During the Warring States period, Yan was the weakest.

古文：二汉叛臣，持燕挟虏，蔑能自固，以公孙伯珪之强，卒制于袁氏。独慕容乘石虎乱，乃并赵。
现代文：两汉的叛将，占领燕地借助外邦，也不能守住自己，以东汉末年公孙瓒那么强大的势力，最后仍被袁绍制服，唯独慕容氏乘石虎叛乱，才兼并了赵国。
English: The traitors of the two Han dynasties, who occupied Yan's land with the help of foreign countries, could not hold on to themselves. With the powerful forces of Gongsun Qian at the end of the Eastern Han Dynasty, they were finally subdued by Yuan Shao. Only the Murong clan took advantage of the stone tiger rebellion to annex Zhao.

古文：虽胜败异术，大概论其强弱，燕不能加赵。
现代文：虽胜败的战术不同，但大概地论说强弱，燕地不如赵地。
English: Although the tactics of victory and defeat are different, but roughly speaking, the strong and weak are the same, and Yan's land is not as good as Zhao's land.

古文：赵、魏一，则燕固不敌。
现代文：赵、魏统一，那么燕就更加不能抵挡。
English: If Zhao and Wei are unified, then Yan will be even more unable to resist.

古文：唐三盗连衡百余年，虏未尝越燕侵赵、魏，是燕独能支虏也。
现代文：唐朝三大强盗连续作乱长达一百多年，但外敌不曾越过燕地侵犯赵、魏，可见燕地能独立应付外敌。
English: The three great robbers of the Tang Dynasty continuously wreaked havoc for more than a hundred years, but foreign enemies never crossed Yan's territory to invade Zhao and Wei. It can be seen that Yan's territory can independently deal with foreign enemies.

古文：自燕入于契丹，势日炽大。
现代文：自燕地落入契丹之手，契丹的势力日益强大。
English: Since Yanzhili fell into the hands of the Khitan, the Khitan forces have become increasingly powerful.

古文：显德世，虽复三关，尚未尽燕南地。
现代文：显德时期，虽收复了三关，但尚未全部收复燕南土地。
English: During the Xiande period, although the three passes were recovered, the Yan'nan land had not yet been fully recovered.

古文：国初，始与并合，势益张，然止命偏师备御。
现代文：本朝初期，燕州开始与并州联合，势力更盛，然而朝廷只派了些次要部队防御。
English: In the early days of this dynasty, Yan Province began to unite with the annexed provinces and became more powerful. However, the imperial court only sent some minor troops for defense.

古文：王师伐蜀伐吴，泰然不以两河为顾，是赵、魏足以制之明矣。
现代文：我军征伐蜀国和吴国，泰然不顾两河地区，这很明显是因为赵、魏两地足以制约它。
English: Our army conquered Shu and Wu, and calmly ignored the Two Rivers region, which is obviously because Zhao and Wei are enough to control it.

古文：并寇既平，悉天下锐专力契丹，不能攘尺寸地。顷尝以百万众驻赵、魏，讫敌退莫敢抗，世多咎其不战。
现代文：并州的敌寇被扫平后，将全国精锐部队全部用来专门对付契丹，也不能夺取尺寸的土地，不久曾用百万之众驻扎在赵、魏一带，但到敌人撤退时却不敢抗击，世人多怪罪他们不出战。
English: After the enemy raiders in Yingzhou were wiped out, all the elite troops in the country were used exclusively to deal with the Khitan. They could not seize the size of the land. Soon, they were stationed in the Zhao and Wei areas with a million people, but they did not dare to resist when the enemy retreated. The world blamed them for not fighting.

古文：然我众负城，有内顾心，战不必胜，不胜则事亟矣，故不战未尝咎也。
现代文：但我军负守城之责，有内顾之心，打起仗来不一定会胜，如果不胜的话就非常危险，所以干脆不出战未尝是错。
English: However, our army is responsible for the defense of the city, and they are cautious. If they fight, they will not necessarily win, and if they do not win, it will be very dangerous. Therefore, it is not a mistake to simply not fight.

古文：原其弊，在兵不分。
现代文：分析当时的弊病，在于兵力没有分开。
English: Analysis of the ills of the time, is that the forces are not separated.

古文：设兵为三，壁于争地，掎角以疑其势，设覆以待其进。
现代文：设若将兵分为三路，在必争之地扎营，分出一部分兵力迷惑敌人，设下圈套以等待敌人进入。
English: The idea is to divide the soldiers into three groups, camp in the contested area, separate a part of the troops to confuse the enemy, and set traps to wait for the enemy to enter.

古文：边垒素固，驱民以守之，俾其兵顿坚城之下，乘间夹击，无不胜矣。
现代文：边境堡垒向来坚固，派民众守住，使敌军顿驻在坚固的城堡之下，再乘机前后夹击，就没有不会打胜的了。
English: The border fortress has always been strong. If the people are sent to guard it, and the enemy troops are stationed under the strong castle, and then take advantage of the opportunity to fight back and forth, there is no one who will not win.

古文：盖兵不分有六弊：使敌蓄勇以待战，无他枝梧，一也；我众则士怠，二也；前世善将兵者必问几何，今以中才尽主之，三也；大众傥北，彼遂长驱无复顾忌，四也；重兵一属，根本虚弱，纤人易以干说，五也；虽委大柄，不无疑贰，复命贵臣监督，进退皆由中御，失于应变，六也。
现代文：大概我军兵力不分开会有六大弊病：一是假如敌人蓄足勇气来对待战争，我方便没有其他的抵抗阻击了；二是我军人多就会士兵散漫；三是前代善于统兵的将帅必须问士兵的多少，而今派一个中等才能的人就可全部统率他们；四是倘若大军失败，敌人就会长驱直入而没有其他顾忌；五是一旦委托重兵给边疆，朝廷根本就会虚弱，小人就容易乱说；六是虽将军事大权委托给守将，但又不无怀疑，于是再命显贵大臣监督，大军的进退都由两人商量决策，这样我军就不能灵机应变。
English: There are probably six major drawbacks of not separating our military forces: First, if the enemy gathers enough courage to treat the war, I will conveniently have no other resistance to block; second, if there are more of my soldiers, the soldiers will be scattered; third, the generals who were good at commanding soldiers in the previous generation must ask how many soldiers, but now they can send a person of average talent to command them all; fourth, if the large army fails, the enemy will drive straight in without any other scruples; fifth, once the heavy troops are entrusted to the frontier, the court will be weak at all, and the villain will easily say anything; sixth, although the military power is

古文：兵分则尽易其弊，是有六利也。
现代文：如果我军兵力分散开来就能将弊端全部改掉，这就会有六大好处。
English: If we can get rid of all the drawbacks by dispersing our military forces, there will be six major benefits.

古文：胜败兵家常势。
现代文：胜败是兵家常有的结果。
English: Victory or defeat is a common result for soldiers.

古文：悉内以击外，失则举所有以弃之，苻坚淝水、哥舒翰潼关是也。
现代文：倾尽国内的力量来攻击外国，一旦失败就会把所有的东西都丢掉，苻坚的淝水之战、哥舒翰的潼关之战就是这样。
English: If you use all your domestic strength to attack a foreign country, you will lose everything if you fail. This was the case in the Battle of Surabaya in Shujian and the Battle of Shaoguan in Goshukhan.

古文：是则制敌在谋不在众。
现代文：可见制服敌人关键在智谋而不在人多。
English: It can be seen that the key to subduing the enemy lies in wit and not in the number of people.

古文：以赵、魏、燕南，益以山西，民足以守，兵足以战。
现代文：将赵、魏和燕南，加上山西，那人民的力量就足以守卫，军队的力量也足够打仗。
English: If you add Zhao, Wei and Yan'nan to Shanxi, the strength of the people is enough to guard, and the strength of the army is enough to fight.

古文：分而帅之，将得专制，就使偏师挫衄，他众尚奋，讵能系国安危哉？
现代文：如果分别派人统帅一方，将领能够独立决断，那么即使一方军队失败，其他部队还在奋战，哪里会危及国家的安全呢？
English: If the commanders of one side are sent separately, and the generals can make independent decisions, then even if one side's army fails, the other forces are still fighting, where will it endanger the country's security?

古文：故师覆于外而本根不摇者，善败也。
现代文：所以军队虽在外失败而国内根本没有动摇，这是好的失败。
English: Therefore, although the army has failed abroad, it has not wavered at all at home. This is a good failure.

古文：昔者六国各有地千里，师败于秦，散而复振，几百战犹未及其都，守国之固也。
现代文：从前六国各自有地几千里，军队在秦国失败，可散去后又再振作，打了几百仗还没打到自己首都，这是对国家最坚固的守卫。
English: In the past, each of the six countries had several thousand miles of land. The army failed in Qin, but after dispersing, it rebounded and fought hundreds of battles before reaching its own capital. This is the most solid defense of the country.

古文：陈胜、项梁举关东之众，朝败而夕灭，新造之势也。
现代文：陈胜、项梁率领关东民众，早晨失败晚上便灭亡，这是因为他的势力是刚形成的。
English: Chen Sheng and Xiang Liang led the people of Guandong, but failed in the morning and died in the evening, because his power was just formed.

古文：以天下之广谋其国，不若千里之固，而袭新造之势，侥幸于一战，庸非惑哉？
现代文：以全天下的广大来谋自己国家的利益，不如坚守自己千里国土，而利用刚形成的力量，侥幸一次战争的胜利，难道不令人疑惑吗？
English: Isn't it questionable to seek the interests of one's own country with the vastness of the whole world, rather than adhering to one's own thousands of miles of land, and using the newly formed power to win a war?

古文：兵既久弭，士大夫诵习，谓百世不复用，非甚妄者不谈。
现代文：战争消弭已很久了，士大夫读书学习，说百世都不会再使用战争，不是极荒诞的人不会再谈起战争。
English: It's been a long time since war was eliminated. Scholars have read and studied, saying that war will never be used again, and people who are not extremely absurd will not talk about war again.

古文：然兵果废则已，傥后世复用之，鉴此少以悟世主，故迹其胜败云。《息戍》曰：
现代文：然而战争果被废除则已，倘若后世又使用战争，那么借鉴古人能多少使后世君主明白些，所以我特记载了他们的胜败。《息戍》说：
English: However, the results of the war have been abolished, and if future generations use war again, then the ancients can be used as a reference to make future monarchs more clear, so I specifically recorded their victory and defeat.

古文：国家割弃朔方，西师不出三十年，而亭徼千里，环重兵以戍之。
现代文：国家放弃朔方，西边军队不出兵已三十年，但仍在千里边境设亭障，派驻重兵守戍。
English: The country has given up the New Year's Eve party, and the western army has not sent troops for thirty years, but it is still setting up pavilions and barriers along the thousand-mile border, and has stationed heavy troops to guard it.

古文：虽种落屡扰，即时辑定，然屯戍之费，亦已甚矣。
现代文：虽有些外族部落屡次侵扰，但立即被平定，然而国家屯兵戍守的费用，也已很多了。
English: Although some foreign tribes have repeatedly invaded, they were immediately subdued, but the cost of the national garrison has also increased a lot.

古文：西戎为寇，远自周世，西汉先零，东汉烧当，晋氐、羌，唐秃发，历朝侵轶，为国剧患。
现代文：西戎侵犯，远从周朝就开始了，西汉的先零，东汉的烧当，晋代的氐、羌，唐代的秃发，历代都侵犯我国，是国家的大患。
English: Xi Rong's encroachment began as far back as the Zhou Dynasty. The Western Han Dynasty's Zi Zi, the Eastern Han Dynasty's Ya Dang, the Jin Dynasty's Yao and Yao, and the Tang Dynasty's Gao Hao have all encroached on our country throughout the ages, and are a great national danger.

古文：兴师定律，皆有成功，而劳弊中国，东汉尤甚，费用常以亿计。
现代文：各朝兴师平寇，都有成功，但因战争把中国拖累得疲惫不堪的，要以东汉一朝为最，当时费用常以亿为单位来计算。
English: All the dynasties had success in reviving the art of pingko, but the East Han Dynasty was the most exhausted by the war. At that time, the cost was often calculated in units of hundreds of millions.

古文：孝安世，羌叛十四年，用二百四十亿。
现代文：汉孝安帝时期，羌人反叛达十四年，中国的费用达二百四十亿。
English: During the reign of Emperor Xiao'an of the Han Dynasty, the Han people rebelled for 14 years, at a cost to China of 24 billion yuan.

古文：永和末，复经七年，用八十余亿。
现代文：永和末年，又经历了七年对羌人的战争，费用达八十多亿。
English: At the end of the Yonghe era, it went through another seven years of war against the Xiongnu, at a cost of more than eight billion yuan.

古文：及段纪明，用裁五十四亿，而剪灭殆尽。
现代文：而到段纪明，一年用去五十四亿，才基本上将反叛的羌人剪灭干净。
English: But to Duan Jimei, it took 5.4 billion yuan a year to basically wipe out the rebels.

古文：今西北泾原、邠宁、秦凤、鄜延四帅，戍卒十余万。
现代文：如今西北泾原、宁、秦凤、延四军的统帅，拥有守戍的兵卒十多万。
English: Now he is the commander of the four armies of Northwest Qin, Ning, Qinfeng and Yan, and has more than one hundred thousand soldiers guarding Yunnan.

古文：一卒岁给，无虑二万，骑卒与冗卒，较其中者，总廪给之数，恩赏不在焉，以十万较之，岁用二十亿。
现代文：一个兵每年的供给费用，不下二万，骑兵与杂兵，按中等计算，只总计供给费用，赏赐不包括在内，以每人十万计算，每年费用为二十亿。
English: The annual supply cost of a soldier is not less than twenty thousand, that of a cavalryman and a common soldier, according to the average calculation, only the total supply cost, excluding rewards, is calculated at one hundred thousand per person, and the annual cost is two billion.

古文：白灵武罢兵，计费六百余亿，方前世数倍矣。
现代文：自灵武停战撤兵以来，共计费用六百多亿，是以前朝代的几倍了。
English: Since the Armistice of Lingwu and the withdrawal of troops, the total cost has been more than sixty billion yuan, which is several times that of the previous dynasties.

古文：平世屯戍，且犹若是，后虽有他警，不可一日辍去，是十万众，有增而无损期也。
现代文：和平时期的屯兵守卫，尚且还如此，以后即使有其他地方的警报，西北的守军也一天都不能撤去，这十万军队，只有增加而没有减少的时候。
English: The peace-time garrison is still on guard, and even if there is a warning elsewhere, the northwest garrison will not be able to withdraw for a day. These hundred thousand troops can only increase, not decrease.

古文：国家厚利募商入粟，倾四方之货，然无水漕之运，所挽致亦不过被边数郡尔。
现代文：国家用高利润来召募商人买进粟米，倾尽四方的物资，但无水漕的运输，靠人力拉运来的粮食物资，也不过能供应边陲几个郡的守军罢了。
English: The state used high profits to recruit merchants to buy corn and exhausted supplies from all over the country, but transportation without water tanks, and grain and foodstuffs transported by human power, could only supply the defenders of several counties in the borderlands.

古文：岁不常登，廪有常给，顷年亦尝稍匮矣。
现代文：年成并不常是丰收的，而国家对边防军的供给是经常、固定的，近年也曾稍有匮缺。
English: It is not often that there is a bumper harvest in a year, but the state's supply to the border guards is regular and fixed, and in recent years there has been a slight shortage.

古文：傥其乘我荐饥，我必济师，馈饟当出于关中，则未战而西垂已困，可不虑哉？
现代文：倘若外敌乘我国饥荒，我国必须接济军队，而这些军粮给饷应当由关中地区提供，这样我们还没交战西部边陲就已困难危急了，这不值得考虑吗？
English: If the foreign enemy takes advantage of the famine in our country and our country has to subsidize the army, and these military rations should be provided by the Guanzhong region, so that we have not yet engaged in the war on the western border and are already in a critical situation, is this not worth considering?

古文：按唐府兵，上府千二百人，中府千人，下府八百人。
现代文：考察唐代的府兵，上等的州一千二百人，中等州一千人，下等州八百人。
English: The study of the Tang Dynasty's soldiers included 1,200 from the highest-ranking prefectures, 1,000 from the middle-ranking prefectures, and 800 from the lowest-ranking prefectures.

古文：为今之计，莫若籍丁民为兵，拟唐置府，颇损其数。
现代文：当今为计，不如征募壮年百姓当兵，依照唐代设置州府，就会大大减少军队数量。
English: Nowadays, it is better to conscript people of prime age to serve as soldiers and set up state capitals in accordance with the Tang Dynasty, which will greatly reduce the number of troops.

古文：又今边鄙虽有乡兵之制，然止极塞数郡，民籍寡少，不足备敌。
现代文：而今日边境地区虽有乡兵制度，但只在极边远的几个郡施行，那里百姓户籍很少，不足以防备外敌。
English: Today, although the border areas have the village guard system, it is only implemented in a few very remote counties, where there are few people with household registration, which is not enough to guard against foreign enemies.

古文：料京兆西北数郡，上户可十余万，中家半之，当得兵六七万。
现代文：估计京兆西北的几个郡，大郡户籍可能有十多万户，按中等家庭出半个人当兵计算，应可得到六七万兵卒。
English: It is estimated that there may be more than one hundred thousand households registered in several counties in the northwest of Beijing, and according to the calculation of half a person from a medium-sized family serving as a soldier, it should be possible to obtain six or seven hundred thousand soldiers.

古文：质其赋无他易，赋以帛名者不易以五谷，畜马者又蠲其杂徭。
现代文：征收他们各种实物赋税而不要改用其他东西来代替，如赋名叫帛赋的就不改收五谷，畜养马的人又可免去他的杂徭役。
English: Collect their various taxes in kind and do not replace them with other things. For example, those who are called endowments will not receive grain, and those who keep horses can be exempted from his chowder service.

古文：民幸于庇宗，乐然隶籍。
现代文：人民以受到宗族的庇护为荣幸，会乐意登记户籍。
English: The people are honored to be sheltered by the clan and will be happy to register their household registration.

古文：农隙讲事，登材武者为什长、队正，盛秋旬阅，常若寇至。
现代文：农闲时讲习军事，推举有武艺者做什长、队正，盛秋时候按时检阅，经常演习就像敌人来了一样。
English: During the farmer's leisure time, military drills are held, and martial artists are selected to be drill sergeants and team leaders. In the autumn, they are inspected on time, and they are often drilled as if the enemy were coming.

古文：以关内、河东劲兵傅之，尽罢京师禁旅，慎简守帅，分其统，专其任。
现代文：用关内、河东的优秀士兵教练他们，全部撤消京师的禁卫军，严格选择守将，分开他们所统领的地区范围，让他们有独立决策的权力。
English: Train them with outstanding soldiers from Guanzhong and Hedong, completely abolish the imperial guards of the Beijing Division, strictly select the guards, separate the areas they command, and let them have the power of independent decision-making.

古文：分统则兵不重，专任则将益励，坚其守备，习其形势，积粟多，教士锐，使虏众无隙可窥，不战而慑。
现代文：让他们分别统领一部分军队就不会使军权太大，而让他们有专制独立的决策权就会使将帅们更加勉励奋战，加强守备，熟悉形势，储备的粮食多，教练的士兵精锐，使外敌无机可乘，不战而惧。
English: Allowing them to separately command a part of the army will not make the military power too great, and allowing them to have the autocratic independent decision-making power will make the generals more enthusiastic, strengthen the defense, familiar with the situation, have more grain reserves, and train elite soldiers, so that the foreign enemy has no opportunity to take advantage of, and is afraid without fighting.

古文：《兵志》所谓 无恃其不来，恃吾有以待之 ，其庙胜之策乎？
现代文：《兵志》所说的 不靠他们不来，靠我有了准备 ，这便是国家取胜的方法吧？
English: As "Heishi" said, "It's not up to them to come, it's up to me to be prepared," this is the way for the country to win, right?

古文：又为《述享》、《审断》、《原刑》、《敦学》、《矫察》、《考绩》、《广谏》，凡《杂议》共九篇上之。
现代文：尹洙又写了《述享》、《审断》、《原刑》、《敦学》、《矫察》、《考绩》、《广谏》，与上两篇合成《杂议》共计九篇奏上给朝廷。
English: Yin Xi also wrote "Discussion," "Judgment," "Original Punishment," "Dun Xue," "Correction," "Performance Appraisal," "Wide View," and a total of nine pieces of "Miscellaneous Discussion" combined with the previous two were submitted to the imperial court.

古文：赵元昊反，大将葛怀敏辟为经略判官。
现代文：赵元昊反叛，大将葛怀敏征用尹洙任经略判官。
English: Zhao Yuanhao rebelled, and General Ge Huimin requisitioned Yin Qi to serve as magistrate.

古文：洙虽用怀敏辟，尤为韩琦所深知。
现代文：尹洙虽是由葛怀敏征辟，但更被韩琦赏识。
English: Although Yin Qi was recruited by Ge Huimin, he was more appreciated by Han Qi.

古文：顷之，刘平、石元孙战败，朝廷以夏竦为经略、安抚使，范仲淹、韩琦副之，复以洙为判官。
现代文：不久，刘平、石元孙战败，朝廷用夏竦做经略、安抚使，范仲淹、韩琦任副职，仍用尹洙做经略判官。
English: Soon after, Liu Ping and Shi Yuansun were defeated, and the imperial court used Xia Xi as a strategist and pacifier, Fan Zhongyun and Han Qi as deputies, and still used Yin Qi as a strategist and judge.

古文：洙数上疏论兵，请便殿召对二府大臣议边事，及讲求开宝以前用兵故实，特出睿断，以重边计。
现代文：尹洙几次上疏论述战争，请求皇帝在便殿召见二府的大臣商议边疆大事，并讲求本朝开宝以前用兵作战的历史经验，特别作出英明的决策，来加强对边疆的谋划。
English: On several occasions, Yin Zang discussed the war in detail, and asked the emperor to summon the ministers of the two prefectures to discuss the frontier affairs in the hall of the emperor. He also asked the emperor to explain the historical experience of using soldiers to fight before the founding of the dynasty, and especially to make wise decisions to strengthen the planning of the frontier.

古文：又请减并栅垒，召募土兵，省骑军，增步卒。
现代文：又请求裁并国内的栅亭堡垒，招募士兵，减少骑兵，增加步兵。
English: He also requested the annexation of the Zatei Fortress in the country, the recruitment of soldiers, the reduction of cavalry, and the increase of infantry.

古文：又上鬻爵令。
现代文：又上奏卖爵的令文。
English: A writ for the sale of the title was also issued.

古文：时诏问攻守之计，竦具二策，令琦与洙诣阙奏之。
现代文：当时皇帝下诏询问攻守的计策，夏竦提出了两条计策，命韩琦同尹洙上京奏给皇帝。
English: At that time, the emperor issued an edict to inquire about the strategy of attack and defense, and Xia Yao proposed two strategies, ordering Han Xuan and Yin Yao to go to Beijing to play for the emperor.

古文：帝取攻策，以洙为集贤校理。
现代文：皇帝采取了夏竦进攻的计策，任命尹洙为集贤校理。
English: The emperor adopted Xia Yao's offensive strategy and appointed Yin Yao as the leader of the scholars.

古文：洙遂趋延州谋出兵，而仲淹持不可。
现代文：尹洙于是赶赴延州谋划出兵，但范仲淹持不同意见。
English: As a result, Yin Xi rushed to Yanzhou to plan the dispatch of troops, but Fan Zhong held different opinions.

古文：还至庆州，会任福败于好水川，因发庆州部将刘政锐卒数千，趋镇戎军赴救，未至，贼引去。
现代文：回到庆州，正遇上任福在好水川战败，尹洙因此派出庆州部将刘政的精锐部队几千人，赶赴镇戎军救援，还未到，敌人已撤走。
English: When he returned to Gyeongju, he was confronted with the defeat of the newly appointed Fu in the Battle of Hosui River. As a result, Yin Xi sent several thousand of Liu Zheng's elite troops from the Gyeongju Department to rush to the rescue of the town's army. However, before they arrived, the enemy had already withdrawn.

古文：夏竦奏洙擅发兵，降通判濠州。
现代文：夏竦上奏弹劾尹洙擅自发兵，尹洙被降职做濠州通判。
English: Xia Yao raised an impeachment against Yin Yao for sending troops without authorization, and Yin Yao was demoted to serve as the chief judge of Zhangzhou.

古文：当时言者谓福之败，由参军耿傅督战太急。
现代文：当时舆论说任福的失败，是由于参军耿傅督战太急躁。
English: At that time, the public opinion said that Renfu's failure was due to Geng Fu Du's impatience to join the army.

古文：后得傅书，乃戒福使持重，毋轻进。
现代文：后得了耿傅的信，内容是告诫任福，叫他保持镇定，不要冒险轻进。
English: Later, I received a letter from Geng Fu, the content of which was to admonish Ren Fu, telling him to remain calm and not to take risks.

古文：洙以傅文吏，无军责而死于行阵，又为时所诬，遂作《悯忠》、《辨诬》二篇。
现代文：尹洙因为耿傅是一个文官，没有军事责任而死在战场上，又被当时人冤枉，于是写了《悯忠》、《辨诬》两篇文章。
English: Because Geng Fu was a civilian official, he had no military responsibility and died on the battlefield. He was also wronged by the people at the time, so he wrote two articles, "Compassionate Loyalty" and "Distinguishing Liars."

古文：未几，韩琦知秦州，辟洙通判州事，加直集贤院。
现代文：不久，韩琦任秦州知州，征用尹洙任秦州通判，尹洙后又加级为直集贤院。
English: Soon after, Han Kui was appointed to Qinzhou Zhizhou, and Yin Kui was appointed to Qinzhou Tongzhan by requisition. After Yin Kui, it was upgraded to Jishixian Academy.

古文：上奏曰：
现代文：他上奏说：
English: He began:

古文：汉文帝盛德之主，贾谊论当时事势，犹云可为恸哭。
现代文： 汉文帝是个品德盛美的君主，但贾谊议论当时的事情形势，还说可为此恸哭。
English: Emperor Hanwen was a virtuous and beautiful monarch, but Jia Yi talked about the situation at that time, and said that he could cry for it.

古文：孝武帝外制四夷，以强主威，徐乐、严安尚以陈胜亡秦、六卿篡晋为戒。
现代文：汉武帝在外制服四方夷狄，加强君主威严，但徐乐、严安还用陈胜灭秦国、六大臣篡夺晋王主权作为他的告诫。
English: Emperor Hanwu subdued the barbarians in all directions and strengthened the majesty of the monarchy, but Xu Le and Yan An also used Chen Sheng's destruction of Qin and the usurpation of Jin sovereignty by the Six Ministers as his warning.

古文：二帝不以危乱灭亡为讳，故子孙保有天下者十余世。
现代文：这两个皇帝不讳言国家危乱灭亡，所以子孙能保有天下做皇帝十多代。
English: The two emperors did not hide the fact that the country was in danger of collapse, so their descendants could keep the world as emperors for more than ten generations.

古文：秦二世时，关东盗起。
现代文：秦二世时，关东强盗兴起。
English: During the reign of Qin II, the Bandits of Guandong emerged.

古文：或以反者闻，二世怒，下吏；或曰逐捕今尽，不足忧，乃悦。
现代文：有人告诉他人民正在造反，秦二世大怒，将报告者交给官吏处治；有人说现在已将造反的人驱逐逮捕尽了，不必担忧，秦二世才高兴。
English: Someone told him that the people were rebelling, and Qin II flew into a rage, handing the reporter over to officials for punishment; someone said that now the rebels had been expelled and arrested, there was no need to worry, Qin II was just happy.

古文：隋炀帝时，四方兵起，左右近臣皆隐贼数，不以实闻，或言贼多者，辄被诘。
现代文：隋炀帝时，四方军队都起来叛乱，他周边亲近的大臣都隐瞒盗贼的数目，不将实情报告给他，有说盗贼很多的人，都受到诘难。
English: When Sui and Yan were emperors, the armies in all four directions revolted. The ministers close to him concealed the number of thieves and did not report the truth to him. Those who said there were many thieves were persecuted.

古文：二帝以危乱灭亡为讳，故秦、隋宗社数年为丘墟。
现代文：这两位皇帝讳言国家危乱灭亡，所以秦朝、隋朝的宗庙社稷没几年就成为废墟。
English: These two emperors kept silent about the country's perilous demise, so the patriarchal temples and shrines of the Qin and Sui dynasties fell into ruins within a few years.

古文：陛下视今日天下之治，孰与汉文？
现代文：陛下看今天国家的政治，与汉文帝时期比如何？
English: Your Majesty, how do the politics of the country today compare to the Han Dynasty?

古文：威制四夷，孰与汉武？
现代文：在军事武力制服四方夷狄方面，与汉武帝相比如何？
English: How do you compare with Emperor Han Wudi in terms of using military force to subdue the barbarians in all directions?

古文：国家基本仁德，陛下慈孝爱民，诚万万于秦、隋矣。
现代文：我国的根本是仁义道德，陛下的仁慈友孝和爱民，诚然是秦、隋的万万倍。
English: The foundation of our country is benevolence, righteousness and morality. His Majesty's benevolence, filial piety and love for the people are indeed ten thousand times better than those of the Qin and Sui Dynasties.

古文：至于西有不臣之虏，北有强大之邻，非特闾巷盗贼之势也。
现代文：然而今日西有不臣服的外族，北有强大的邻国，并不只是平日街巷中小盗贼的形势。
English: However, today, the West has an insubordinate alien race, and the North has a powerful neighbor. This is not just a situation of petty thieves in the streets.

古文：自西夏叛命四年，并塞苦数扰，内地疲远输。
现代文： 自西夏反叛朝廷命令四年以来，边塞苦于频繁的骚扰，内地疲于远距离输送军粮。
English: In the four years since the Western Xia rebelled against the imperial order, the border fortress has suffered from frequent harassment, and the mainland has been exhausted from transporting military grain over long distances.

古文：兵久于外而休息无期，卒有乘弊而起。
现代文：军队长久在外而得不到休息，最终会有人乘军队疲累时起来作乱。
English: If the army is away for a long time without rest, someone will eventually take advantage of the tiredness of the army and start a riot.

古文：《兵法》所谓 虽有智者，不能善其后 。
现代文：这就是《兵法》上所说的 虽有智者，不能善其后 。
English: This is what is said in the "Law of War" that although there are wise men, they cannot be followed.

古文：当此之时，陛下宜夙夜忧惧，所以虑事变而塞祸源也。
现代文：当这个时候，陛下应当夙夜不停地担忧警惕，以便防备事变和堵塞祸源。
English: At this time, His Majesty should be on the alert day and night in order to prevent incidents and block the source of trouble.

古文：陛下延访边事，容纳直言，前世人主。勤劳宽大，未有能远过者。
现代文：陛下向臣下请教咨询边疆的事，又能容纳直言，前朝的君主，在勤劳宽大方面，没有谁能超过陛下。
English: His Majesty consults with his subjects on matters of the frontier, and can tolerate blunt talk. No previous monarch surpassed his Majesty in diligence and magnanimity.

古文：然未闻以宗庙为忧，危亡为惧，此贱臣所以感愤于邑而不已也。
现代文：然而没听说您为社稷宗庙担忧，为国家危亡恐惧，这就是贱臣感到愤慨和愁闷不已的原因。
English: However, I haven't heard that you are worried about the Sheshan ancestral temple and fear for the country's peril, which is why the untouchables feel indignant and depressed.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：今命令数更，恩宠过滥，赐与不节。
现代文：因为如今命令经常更改，恩宠太滥，赏赐也没有节制。
English: For the commandment is exceedingly broad, and the commandment exceeding broad, so that there is no limit to the matter of giving.

古文：此三者，戒之慎之，在陛下所行尔，非有难动之势也。
现代文：对这三点，应小心警惕，事情都在于陛下的行动，并非有难以改变的情势。
English: With regard to these three points, we should be careful and vigilant. It all depends on His Majesty's actions, and there is no situation that is difficult to change.

古文：而因循不革，弊坏日甚。
现代文：然而因循不改革，那形势就会日益变坏。
English: However, without reform, the situation will get worse and worse.

古文：臣谓陛下不以宗庙为忧、危亡为惧者，以此。
现代文：臣说陛下不为社稷宗庙担忧、不为国家危亡恐惧，就是因为这个。
English: It is because of this that the vassal said that His Majesty is not worried about the Shifang ancestral temple, and is not afraid of the country's peril.

古文：未命令者，人主所以取信于下也。
现代文： 命令，是君主用来取得下属信任的东西。
English: An order is what a sovereign uses to gain the confidence of his subjects.

古文：异时民间，朝廷降一命令，皆竦视之；今则不然，相与窃语，以为不久当更，既而信然，此命令日轻于下也。
现代文：从前在民间，朝廷降下一道命令，都会肃敬地看阅；如今则不是这样，而是互相私下议论，以为不久就会更改，后来果然如此，这就使命令日益被下面人民轻视。
English: In the past, among the common people, when the imperial court issued an order, everyone would read it with reverence; nowadays, this is not the case, but they discuss it with each other in private, thinking that it will soon be changed, and later it was, which made the order increasingly despised by the people below.

古文：命令轻，则朝廷不尊矣。
现代文：命令被轻视，那朝廷就没人尊重了。
English: When orders are flouted, no one respects the imperial court.

古文：又闻群臣有献忠谋者，陛下始甚听之，年复一人沮之，则意移矣。
现代文：又听说群臣中有人进献忠心的谋划，陛下开始很听信；后又有一人阻扰，便改变了主意。
English: His Majesty began to listen attentively when he heard that some of his courtiers were devising a loyal plan, but he changed his mind when another person interfered.

古文：忠言者以信之不能终，颇自诎其谋，以为无益，此命令数更之弊也。
现代文：忠心说话的人认为皇上的信任不能有始有终，便很怀疑、否定自己的计谋，以为它没有益处，这就是命令多次更改的弊病、坏处。
English: Those who speak loyally think that the emperor's trust cannot have a beginning and an end, so they are very suspicious and deny their own strategy, thinking that it is not beneficial. This is the evil and disadvantage of changing orders many times.

古文：夫爵赏，陛下所持之柄也。
现代文： 爵禄的赏赐，是陛下所拥有的权柄。
English: The award of a peerage is a prerogative that only His Majesty has.

古文：近时外戚、内臣以及士人，或因缘以求恩泽，从中而下谓之 内降 。
现代文：近来外戚、大臣以及读书士子，有人利用谒见的机会来谋求皇上的恩泽，这种从宫中直接向下施予爵禄恩泽叫作 内降 。
English: Recently, maternal relatives, ministers, and scholars have used the opportunity of an audience to seek the emperor's favor. This kind of favor, which is given directly from the palace, is called "domestic abdication."

古文：臣闻唐氏政衰，或母后专制，或妃主擅朝，树恩私党，名为 斜封 。
现代文：臣听说唐朝政治衰落时，有时母后专制，有时后妃把持朝政，建树恩惠私植党羽，名叫 斜封 。
English: The minister heard that during the political decline of the Tang Dynasty, sometimes the mother-in-law was despotic, and sometimes the queen-in-law took control of the imperial government, and built up favors and planted party wings, which was called oblique sealing.

古文：今陛下威柄自出，外戚、内臣贤而才者，当与大臣公议而进之，何必袭 斜封 之弊哉。
现代文：如今陛下威严的权柄来自自身，有才德的外戚、内臣，应当与大臣们正式讨论然后提拔，何必要承袭唐朝 斜封 的弊病呢？
English: Nowadays, His Majesty's majestic authority comes from himself. Talented relatives and courtiers should be formally discussed with ministers and then promoted. Why is it necessary to inherit the ills of the Tang Dynasty's oblique seal?

古文：且使大臣从之，则坏陛下纲纪；不从，则沮陛下德音。
现代文：而且如果大臣们顺从这种现象，就会败坏陛下的纲纪；如果不顺从，就又会阻塞陛下仁德的声音。
English: Moreover, if the ministers obey this phenomenon, it will corrupt His Majesty's discipline; if they do not obey, it will block His Majesty's benevolent voice.

古文：坏纲纪，忠臣所不忍为；沮德音，则威柄轻于上。
现代文：败坏纲纪，是忠臣不忍做的；阻塞皇上的声音，则又使威严的权柄被上级大臣轻视。
English: It is intolerable for a loyal subject to corrupt discipline; to obstruct the voice of the emperor, and the authority of majesty is despised by the superior minister.

古文：且尽公不阿，朝廷所以责大臣。
现代文：而且公正不阿地为国尽力，是朝廷对大臣的要求。
English: Moreover, it is the requirement of the Imperial Court for ministers to do their best for the country in a fair and impartial manner.

古文：今乃自以私昵挠之，而欲责大臣之不私，难矣。
现代文：如今皇上自己因私情阻挠他们，而又要求大臣不徇私情，难啊。
English: Now the Emperor himself is obstructing them because of his personal feelings, and he is demanding that the ministers not indulge in personal feelings.

古文：此恩宠过滥之弊也。
现代文：这就是恩宠太滥的弊病。
English: This is the disease of too much grace.

古文：夫赐予者，国家所以勤功也。
现代文： 赐予，是国家用来奖励功臣的手段。
English: The bestowal is a means used by the state to reward meritorious people.

古文：比年以来，嫔御及伶官、太医之属，赐予过厚。
现代文：近年来，对妃嫔、伶官、太医之类，赐予过于丰厚。
English: In recent years, too much wealth has been bestowed on concubines, eunuchs, and great physicians.

古文：民间传言，内帑金帛，皆祖宗累朝积聚。陛下用之，不甚爱惜，今之所存无几。
现代文：民间传言，国库中的金银玉帛，都是祖宗一代代积累聚成的，陛下使用它，不很爱惜，如今所存无几了。
English: According to folk legend, the gold, silver and jade treasures in the national treasury were accumulated by the ancestors from generation to generation. His Majesty used it and did not spare it much, and now there are only a few left.

古文：疏远之人，诚不能知内府丰匮之数，但见取于民者日烦，即知畜于公帑者不厚。
现代文：离宫廷遥远的人，诚然不会知道国库丰盈或匮缺的数量，只看到向民间索取的日益繁多，就知道国库的储蓄不丰厚。
English: It is true that those who are far from the court do not know the amount of the treasury's abundance or shortage. They only see the increasing demand from the people and know that the treasury's savings are not abundant.

古文：臣亦知国家自西方宿兵，用度浸广，帑藏之积，未必悉为赐予所费，然下民不可家至而户晓，独见陛下行事感动尔。
现代文：臣也知道自从派军队守卫西疆，国家开支费用逐渐增加，国库的积蓄，未必都被赐予占用，然而下层民众不能一家一户地被晓谕，他们只会看着陛下的行为处事而被感召行动罢了。
English: The minister also knew that since the army was sent to guard Western Xinjiang, the national expenditure and expenses have gradually increased, and the savings of the treasury may not all be occupied. However, the lower-class people cannot be told one by one, they can only watch His Majesty's behavior and be inspired to act.

古文：往岁闻边将王珪，以力战赐金，则无不悦服；或见优人所得过厚，则往往愤叹。
现代文：往年听说边疆将领王王圭，因奋力打仗被赏赐黄金，民众就无不高兴服从；有时看见唱戏跳舞的人得到的赏赐太丰厚，就往往会愤恨叹惜。
English: In previous years, when they heard that the frontier general Wang Wanggui was rewarded with gold for his hard work in the war, the people were happy to obey; sometimes, when they saw that the singers and dancers were rewarded too richly, they would often be angry and regretful.

古文：人情不可不察，此赐予不节之弊也。
现代文：人民的情感不可不考察。这就是赐予不加节制的弊病。
English: The feelings of the people must be considered. This is the evil of giving unrestrained power.

古文：臣所论三事，皆人人所共知，近臣从谀而不言，以至今日。
现代文： 臣所论述的三件事，都是人人共知的，但皇上的心腹大臣只知阿谀奉承而不讲这些，一直拖到今日。
English: The three matters discussed by the vassal were well known to everyone, but the minister, the emperor's confidant, only knew how to flatter and did not talk about them, and has been dragging it out to this day.

古文：方今非独四夷之为患，朝政日弊而陛下不寤，人心日危而陛下不知。
现代文：当今不独四方外国为患，而且朝政日益腐败但陛下不能觉察，人心日益危急但陛下不知道。
English: Today, it is not only the four directions that are affected by foreign countries, but the government is increasingly corrupt but His Majesty cannot notice it, and the people's hearts are increasingly in danger but His Majesty does not know it.

古文：故臣愿先正于内，以正于外。
现代文：所以臣希望先改正朝廷内部，再去改正外面边疆。
English: Therefore, the minister hoped to first correct the inner court, and then to correct the outer border.

古文：然后忠谋渐进，纪纲渐举，国用渐足，士心渐奋。
现代文：然后忠心的计谋就会逐渐被进献，纲纪渐渐树立，国家费用逐渐充足，战士的心就会逐渐奋起。
English: Then the loyal stratagem will gradually be promoted, the discipline will gradually be established, the national expenses will gradually be sufficient, and the heart of the warrior will gradually rise.

古文：边境之患，庶乎息矣。
现代文：边境的祸患，大概也就平息了。
English: The scourge of the border, too, has probably subsided.

古文：惟深察秦、隋恶闻忠言所以亡，远法汉王不讳危乱所以存，日亲盛德，与民更始，则天下幸甚。
现代文：只有深刻地考察秦、隋厌恶听忠言所以灭亡的教训，从远古学习汉代君主不忌讳讲国家危亡因此维持统治的经验，日益革新盛美的品德，让民众改变当初的看法，那么全天下就幸福极了。 
English: Only by deeply examining the lessons of the Qin and Sui dynasties, who hated to listen to loyal advice and thus perished, learning from the ancients the experience of the Han dynasty monarchs, who did not hesitate to speak of the country's peril and thus maintain their rule, and increasingly innovating the noble and beautiful character, so that the people can change their original view, then the whole world will be extremely happy.

古文：仁宗嘉纳之。
现代文：宋仁宗赞许而采纳了他的意见。
English: Song Renzong approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：改太常丞、知泾州。
现代文：尹洙改任太常丞、泾州知州。
English: Yin Qi was reappointed as Tai Changzheng and Quzhou Chizhou.

古文：以右司谏、知渭州兼领泾原路经略公事。
现代文：以右司谏、渭州知州身份兼领泾原路经略公事。
English: He was appointed as the Right Secretary of the State Council and the Secretary of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China.

古文：会郑戩为陕西四路都总管，遣刘沪、董士廉城水洛，以通秦、渭援兵。
现代文：正遇上郑戬任陕西四路都总管，派遣刘沪、董士廉营建水洛城，以连通秦、渭一带的援兵。
English: Just then, Zheng Rong was appointed as the general manager of the four capital cities in Shaanxi Province. He dispatched Liu Hau and Dong Shiliang to build Shuiluo City to connect with the reinforcements from Qin and Qi regions.

古文：洙以为前此屡困于贼者，正由城砦多而兵势分也。
现代文：尹洙认为以前我军屡次被敌人困住，正是由于城寨太多而兵力分散。
English: Yin Qi believed that our army had been trapped by the enemy many times before, and it was precisely because there were too many castles that the troops were scattered.

古文：今又益城，不可，奏罢之。
现代文：如今又增建城寨，这样不行，于是上奏请停建。
English: Now they are building another castle, which is not acceptable, so I would like to ask them to stop.

古文：时戩已解四路。而奏沪等督役如故。
现代文：当时郑戬已解除四路都总管职务，却上奏请求让刘沪仍旧督修水洛城。
English: At that time, Zheng Rong had already been relieved of his duties as the general manager of the four capital cities, but he appealed to Liu Hu to continue to supervise the construction of Shuilao City.

古文：洙不平，遣人再召沪，不至；命张忠往代之，又不受。
现代文：尹洙感到不平，派人再召刘沪，刘沪不来；又命张忠前往代替他的职务，刘沪也不接受。
English: Yin Yu felt uneasy and sent someone to summon Liu Hu again, but Liu Hu did not come. He also ordered Zhang Zhong to go to replace him, but Liu Hu did not accept.

古文：于是谕狄青械沪、士廉下吏。
现代文：于是下令要狄青将刘沪、董士廉逮捕交给官吏治罪。
English: He then ordered Di Qing to arrest Liu Hu and Dong Shiliang and hand them over to officials to be punished.

古文：戩论奏不已，卒徙洙庆州而城水洛。
现代文：郑戬不断上奏请求治他的罪，朝廷最终将尹洙调到庆州并建了水洛城。
English: Zheng Yao kept appealing for punishment for his crime, and the imperial court eventually transferred Yin Yao to Gyeongju and built Shuilocheng.

古文：又徙晋州，迁起居舍人、直龙图阁、知潞州。
现代文：后又调任晋州知州，升任起居舍人、直龙图阁、潞州知府。
English: Later, he was transferred to Jinzhou Chizhou, and was promoted to the posts of the governor of Jilin Province, the governor of Zhulong Province, and the governor of Zhangzhou Province.

古文：会士廉诣阙上书讼洙，诏遣御史刘湜就鞫，不得他罪。
现代文：遇上董士廉上京上书控告尹洙，皇帝下诏派御史刘前往审讯，没有发现其他罪错。
English: When Dong Shiliang went to Beijing to lodge a complaint against Yin Qi, the emperor sent the imperial official Liu to the trial, and no other crimes were found.

古文：而洙以部将孙用由军校补边，自京师贷息钱到官，亡以偿。
现代文：但尹洙因为手下将领孙用由军校补任边塞将官，从京城借高利贷作路费来上任，没有钱还债。
English: However, because the generals and grandsons of his subordinates used the military school to fill the post of frontier fortress general, and borrowed usury loans from Beijing for travel expenses to take office, he had no money to repay the debt.

古文：洙惜其才可用，恐以犯法罢去，尝假公使钱为偿之，又以为尝自贷，坐贬崇信军节度副使，天下莫不以为湜文致之也。
现代文：尹洙爱惜他是个有用的人才，担心他会因犯法而撤职调走，曾借公费为他还债，结果又被认为是尹洙自己借去，被治罪贬官，降为崇信军节度副使，全天下人都认为是刘的奏文害了他。
English: Yin Xi cherished him as a useful talent, worried that he would be removed from his post and transferred away for violating the law. He once borrowed public funds to pay off his debts, and as a result, it was thought that Yin Xi had borrowed the money himself. He was punished and demoted to the position of deputy festival envoy of the Chongxin Army. The whole world believed that Liu's letter had harmed him.

古文：徙监均州酒税，感疾，沿牒至南阳访医，卒，年四十七。
现代文：调任均州酒税监官，感染疾病，沿着送公文的路到南阳访求医生，后去世，年仅四十七岁。
English: He was transferred to the post of Junzhou liquor tax inspector, contracted a disease, went to Nanyang to visit a doctor along the way of sending official documents, and then died, only forty-seven years old.

古文：嘉祐中，宰相韩琦为洙言，乃追复故官，及官其子构。
现代文：嘉年间，宰相韩琦为尹洙讲话，于是朝廷追认恢复他的旧官，并将他的儿子尹构录用做官。
English: During the Jia years, Prime Minister Han Zheng spoke for Yin Zheng, so the imperial court recognized the restoration of his old post and appointed his son Yin Jiao as an official.

古文：洙内刚外和，博学有识度，尤深于《春秋》。
现代文：尹洙为人内刚外和，博学有才，尤其精通《春秋》。
English: Yin Qi is a person of inner and outer harmony, erudite and talented, especially proficient in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：自唐末历五代，文格卑弱。
现代文：自唐末经过五代，文风柔弱。
English: Since the end of the Tang Dynasty, after five generations, the style of writing has become soft and weak.

古文：至宋初，柳开始为古文，洙与穆修复振起之。
现代文：到宋初，柳开开始做古文，尹洙与穆修再发展这一文风。
English: At the beginning of the Song Dynasty, Liu Kai began to write ancient literature, and Yin Qi and Mu Xiu further developed this literary style.

古文：其为文简而有法，有集二十七卷。
现代文：他的文章简练而有法度，著有文集二十七卷。
English: His articles are concise and legalistic, and he is the author of 27 volumes of anthologies.

古文：自元昊不庭，洙未尝不在兵间，故于西事尤练习。
现代文：自从赵元昊叛乱，尹洙无时不在军队中，所以对于西疆的事最熟悉。
English: Since Zhao Yuanhao's rebellion, Yin Qi has not been in the army at any time, so he is most familiar with the affairs of Western Xinjiang.

古文：其为兵制之说，述战守胜败，尽当时利害。
现代文：他的兵制学说，阐述作战防守的胜败，全面论述了当时边疆战争的利与害。
English: His military doctrine, expounding on the victory and defeat of combat defense, comprehensively discussed the benefits and harms of the frontier war at that time.

古文：又欲训土兵代戍卒，以减边费，为御戎长久之策，皆未及施为。而元昊臣，洙亦去而得罪矣。
现代文：他又想训练当地民兵代替守军，以减少边疆军费，作为抵御外敌的长期政策，但都来不及实施，赵元昊就已臣服，尹洙也被调离并且被治罪了。
English: He also wanted to train local militias to replace the defending army, in order to reduce the military expenditure of the frontier, as a long-term policy to resist foreign enemies, but it was too late to implement. Zhao Yuanhao had already surrendered, and Yin Qi had also been transferred and punished.

古文：孙甫字之翰，许州阳翟人。
现代文：孙甫，字之翰，许州阳翟人。
English: Sun Fu, Zhi Han, Xu Zhou's impotent man.

古文：少好学，日诵数千言，慕孙何为古文章。
现代文：少年时好学，每天诵读几千字的文章，仰慕学习孙何写古奥文章。
English: When he was young, he was eager to learn, reading several thousand words of articles every day, and admiring Sun He's learning to write ancient and modern articles.

古文：初举进士，得同学究出身，为蔡州汝阳县主簿。
现代文：初次参加进士考试，被授同学究出身，任蔡州汝阳县主簿。
English: He participated in the entrance examination for the first time, was awarded a scholarship, and was appointed as the chief accountant of Ruyang County, Caizhou.

古文：再举进士及第，为华州推官。
现代文：再次参加取士考试及格，任华州推官。
English: Once again, he passed the entrance examination and was appointed as an assessor for the State of Washington.

古文：转运使李纮荐其材，迁大理寺丞、知绛州翼城县。
现代文：转运使李推荐他的才华，他升任大理寺丞、绛州翼城知县。
English: The transfer caused Li to recommend his talent, and he was promoted to the posts of Daliji, and Zhangzhou Yingcheng County.

古文：杜衍辟为永兴司录，凡吏职，纤末皆倚办甫。
现代文：杜衍聘请他做永兴司录，凡有公务职事，大小都全部交给孙甫办理。
English: Du Yan hired him to be Yongxing's secretary. Any official duties, big or small, were all handed over to Sun Fu.

古文：甫曰： 待我以此，可以去矣。 衍闻之，不复以小事属甫。
现代文：孙甫说： 待我这样，我应该离去。 杜衍听了，不再将细小琐事交给他办。
English: Sun Fu said, "If you treat me like this, I should leave." Du Yan listened and stopped entrusting him with minor tasks.

古文：衍与宴语，甫必引经以对，言天下贤俊，历评其才性所长。
现代文：杜衍与他饮酒交谈，孙甫都一定要引经据典地回答，谈论天下的贤才俊杰，一个个品评他们的才能、性格上的特点长处。
English: When Du Yan and Sun Fu had a drinking conversation, Sun Fu always made sure to answer by quoting scriptures, talk about the world's talented people, and evaluate their talents and character traits one by one.

古文：衍曰： 吾辟属官，得益友。 诸生亦多从甫学问。
现代文：杜衍说： 我征聘下属官吏，却得到一位益友。 书生们也大多到孙甫这里请教学问。
English: Du Yan said: I recruited subordinate officials, but got a good friend. Most of the students also came to Sun Fu to ask questions.

古文：徙知永昌县，监益州交子务，再迁太常博士。
现代文：调任永昌知县，后任监益州交子务，再升太常博士。
English: He was transferred to Yongchangchixian County, and later became the supervisor of Yixian County's child delivery service. He was then promoted to the position of deputy chief doctor.

古文：蜀用铁钱，民苦转贸重，故设书纸代钱，以便市易。
现代文：蜀地使用铁质钱，人民苦于带着很重的铁钱辗转贸易，所以设想出个书写纸条代替铁钱的办法，以方便经商贸易。
English: As iron money was used in Shu, the people suffered from carrying heavy iron money for trade, so they thought of a way to write a note instead of iron money to facilitate business and trade.

古文：转运使以伪造交子多犯法，欲废不用。
现代文：转运使认为很多人伪造交子犯法，想废除交子不用。
English: Transshipment agents believe that many people are breaking the law by forging bills of exchange and want to abolish the use of bills of exchange.

古文：甫曰： 交子可以伪造，钱亦可以私铸，私铸有犯，钱可废乎？
现代文：孙甫说： 交子可以伪造，钱也可以私人铸造，难道因为有人敢犯法私铸铁币，就可以将钱币废除吗？
English: Sun Fu said, "Coins can be forged, money can also be privately minted. Is it possible to abolish coins just because someone dares to break the law and mint coins privately?

古文：但严治之，不当以小仁废大利。 后卒不能废。
现代文：只须严厉惩治伪造者，不应因为小人犯法就废除大有利的事。 后来交子终于没被废除。
English: It is only necessary to severely punish counterfeiters, and should not abolish a very beneficial thing because a villain breaks the law.

古文：衍为枢密副使，荐于朝，授秘阁校理。
现代文：杜衍做枢密副使，推荐孙甫给朝廷，授任他为秘阁校理。
English: Du Yan became a privy vice-envoy, recommended Sun Fu to the imperial court, and appointed him as a secret cabinet secretary.

古文：是岁，诏三馆臣僚言事。
现代文：这年，皇上下诏史馆、昭文馆、集贤院三馆官员提建议。
English: This year, officials from the three museums of Imperial Rescript History Museum, Zhaowen Museum and Shixian Academy made suggestions.

古文：甫进十二事，按祖宗故实，校当世之治有所不逮者，论述以为讽谏，名《三圣政范》。
现代文：孙甫进献十二条意见，考察祖宗上代的历史事实，来比较当代的政治，看有哪些缺失，再加论述，用来讽谏皇上，名叫《三圣政范》。
English: Sun Fu put forward twelve opinions, examined the historical facts of the previous generation of ancestors, to compare contemporary politics, to see what are the shortcomings, plus the discussion, used to ridicule the emperor, called "Three Holy Politics."

古文：改右正言。
现代文：此后孙甫改任右正言。
English: After that, Sun Fu was appointed to the post of U Zhenggen.

古文：时河北降赤雪，河东地震五六年不止，甫推《洪范五行传》及前代变验，上疏曰： 赤雪者，赤眚也，人君舒缓之应。
现代文：当时河北降赤雪，河东地震了五六年还不停止，孙甫推究《洪范五行传》以及前代灾变应验的历史，上疏说 ：赤雪，就是赤灾，是君主做事舒缓的自然感应。
English: At that time, red snow fell in Hebei, and the earthquake in Hedong did not stop for five or six years. Sun Fu studied the "Hong Fan Wuxing Biography" and the history of the previous generation's disaster fulfillment, and said: Red snow, that is, red disaster, is the natural response of the monarch to do things slowly.

古文：舒缓则政事弛，赏罚差，百官废职，所以召乱也。
现代文：君主做事舒缓，就会使政事松弛懈怠，赏罚不能及时，各部门官员失职，这就会招来大乱。
English: If the monarch does things slowly, it will make government affairs slack and sluggish, rewards and punishments will not be timely, and officials in various departments will fail to perform their duties, which will lead to chaos.

古文：晋太康中，河阴降赤雪。
现代文：西晋太康年间，河阳降赤雪。
English: During the Taikang period of the Western Jin Dynasty, red snow fell in Hebei.

古文：时武帝怠于政事，荒宴后宫。
现代文：当时晋武帝怠慢政事，在后宫荒淫酒色。
English: At the time, Emperor Jinmu was neglecting political affairs and drinking heavily in his harem.

古文：每见臣下，多道常事，不及经国远图，故招赤眚之怪，终致晋乱。
现代文：每接见臣下，多只讲些常见的小事，不谈治国的远大谋划，所以招来上天赤灾的怪异，最终导致晋朝大乱。
English: Whenever he met with his vassals, he would only talk about some common trifles, not about the grand plan of governing the country, so he brought about strange disasters, which eventually led to the turmoil of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：地震者，阴之盛也。
现代文：地震，是阴气旺盛的表现。
English: An earthquake is a manifestation of a gloomy atmosphere.

古文：阴之象，臣也，后宫也，四夷也。
现代文：阴气代表的是臣下，是后宫，是四方夷蛮。
English: Yin qi represents the vassals, the harem, and the barbarians in all directions.

古文：三者不可过盛，过盛则阴为变而动矣。
现代文：这三种人不能太强盛，过于强盛就会暗中生变而发生动乱。
English: These three kinds of people should not be too powerful, and if they are too powerful, they will secretly change and cause turmoil.

古文：忻州赵分，地震六年。
现代文：忻州是赵国的分野，地震震了连续六年。
English: Ganzhou is a province of Zhao Guo, and has been hit by earthquakes for six consecutive years.

古文：每震，则有声如雷，前代地震，未有如此之久者。
现代文：每次地震，就有声音像打雷一样，前代发地震，没有这么长久的。
English: Every time there's an earthquake, there's a sound like thunder. Previous earthquakes didn't last this long.

古文：惟唐高宗本封于晋，及即位，晋州经岁地震。
现代文：只有唐高宗原来受封在晋地，到他即位，晋州连年地震。
English: Only Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty was originally enthroned in Jin. When he ascended to the throne, Jinzhou was hit by earthquakes year after year.

古文：宰相张行成言，恐女谒用事，大臣阴谋，宜制于未萌。
现代文：宰相张行成说，恐怕是女人请求干政，大臣有阴谋，应在没萌芽时就制住。
English: Prime Minister Zhang Xingcheng said that it was probably a woman who requested to participate in politics, and that the minister had a plot and should stop it before it sprouted.

古文：其后武昭仪专恣，几移唐祚。
现代文：后来武昭仪专权放肆，几乎篡夺了唐朝的江山。
English: Later, Wu Zhaoyi's autocratic arrogance almost usurped the Tang Dynasty.

古文：天地灾变，固不虚应，陛下救纾缓之失，莫若自主威福，时出英断，以慑奸邪，以肃天下。
现代文：天地发生灾变，固然不是虚假感应，陛下挽救舒缓的过失，最好的办法是自己掌握威严祸福，经常做出英明的决断，来威慑邪恶，整肃全国。
English: When disasters occur in heaven and on earth, it is certainly not a false induction. The best way for His Majesty to save us from our mistakes is to master the majesty of misfortune and good fortune, and constantly make wise decisions to deter evil and clean up the whole country.

古文：救阴盛之变，莫若外谨戎备，内制后宫。
现代文：救治阴气旺盛产生的自然灾变，最好的办法是对外严防敌人，对内控制后宫。
English: The best way to cure the natural disasters caused by the strong negative energy is to strictly prevent the enemy from the outside and control the harem from the inside.

古文：谨戎备，则切责大臣，使之预图兵防，熟计成败；制后宫，则凡掖庭非典掌御幸者，尽出之，且裁节其恩，使无过分，此应天之实也。 时契丹、西夏稍强，后宫张修媛宠幸，大臣专政，甫以此谏焉。
现代文：谨防外敌，就应责成大臣，使他们预先图谋战争防备，精细地分析成败得失；严控后宫，就应将所有宫女妃嫔，除负责服侍皇上者外，全部驱逐出宫，而且要裁减对她们恩惠，使之不过分，这才是应付自然灾变的实在办法。 当时契丹、西夏开始强盛，后宫张修媛被宠幸，大臣专政，孙甫因此进谏。
English: To beware of foreign enemies, the ministers should be instructed to plan and prepare for war in advance, and carefully analyze the gains and losses; to strictly control the harem, all the concubines should be expelled from the palace, except for those who are responsible for serving the emperor, and the favors should be reduced so that they are not excessive. This is the real way to cope with natural disasters. At that time, Qidan and Xixia began to flourish, the harem Zhang Xiuyuan was favored, the minister was a dictatorship, and Sun Fu was promoted.

古文：又言： 修媛宠恣市恩，祸渐已萌。
现代文：又说 ：修媛恃宠放肆，施恩讨好，祸患已渐渐萌生。
English: He also said: "Shiuyuan has been indulging in arrogance and favoritism, and disasters have gradually sprung up.

古文：夫后者，正嫡也，其余皆婢妾尔。
现代文：皇后，是正嫡妻子，其余都是婢妾罢了。
English: The empress is the legitimate wife, the rest are nothing more than concubines.

古文：贵贱有等，用物不宜过僣。
现代文：贵贱有等级，任用、选择不应超越等级。
English: There is a rank for nobility and lowliness. Appointment and selection should not exceed the rank.

古文：自古宠女色，初不制而后不能制者，其祸不可悔。 帝曰： 用物在有司，朕恨不知尔。 甫曰： 世谓谏臣耳目官，所以达不知也。
现代文：自古以来宠爱女色，当初不加控制后来不能控制的人，其灾祸悔不可及。 皇帝说： 任用、物色都在有关部门，朕恨不知情。 孙甫说： 世人都说谏臣是耳目官，是用来沟通皇上不知道的信息的。
English: Since ancient times, women have been favored, and those who did not control themselves at the beginning and later could not control themselves can not regret their misfortune.The emperor said: Appointment and search are all in the relevant departments, I hate not knowing.Sun Fu said: The world says that courtiers are ears and eyes, and are used to communicate information that the emperor does not know.

古文：若所谓前世女祸者，载在书史，陛下可自知也。 
现代文：如我所讲的前朝女祸，都记载在史书上，陛下是可以自己去了解的。 
English: As I said, the female scandals of the former dynasty are recorded in the history books, and Your Majesty can find out for herself.

古文：夏国乞盟，甫上一利、曰害曰： 宿兵以来，国用空耗。
现代文：西夏请求结盟，孙甫上奏论述结盟的一利与四害说： 派兵驻守以来，国用空虚。
English: Western Xia requested an alliance, and Sun Fu's report on the alliance's one benefit and four harms said: Since the troops were stationed, the country has been empty.

古文：今若与之约和，则边兵可减，科敛可省。
现代文：今天若能与西夏结盟讲和，则边疆守军可以减少，对百姓的征敛也可减轻。
English: Today, if we can make peace with the Western Xia, the border guards can be reduced, and the restraint on the people can be alleviated.

古文：其为利一也。
现代文：这是结盟的一大好处。
English: This is one of the great benefits of the alliance.

古文：始，契丹声言，尝遣使谕西人使臣中国。
现代文：起初，契丹声称，它曾派使者劝告西夏人叫他们臣服中国。
English: At first, the Khitan claimed that it had sent emissaries to advise the Xixia people to make them submit to China.

古文：今和议既成，必恃其功。
现代文：如今和议既已结成，契丹必仗恃它的功劳。
English: Now that the peace talks have been concluded, the Khitan must take the credit for it.

古文：去岁有割地之请，朝廷已增岁赂，若更有求，将安拒之？
现代文：去年它就有割地的请求，朝廷已增加每年赔给契丹的钱财，如果它又有新的要求，我们将怎样拒绝呢？
English: Last year it had a request to cut land, and the court has increased the amount of money paid to the Khitan each year. If it has a new request, how can we refuse it?

古文：其为害一也。
现代文：这是结盟的一大害处。
English: This is one of the major drawbacks of the alliance.

古文：自承平四十年，武事不饬，及边鄙有警，而用不习之将，不练之兵，故久无成功。
现代文：自国家承平四十年来，军事得不到整治，到边境有警报时，任用不熟悉军事的将领，没有训练过的士兵，因此长久没有成绩。
English: Since the country has been at peace for 40 years, the military has not been rectified. When there is an alarm at the border, generals who are not familiar with the military and soldiers who have not been trained are appointed, so there is no achievement for a long time.

古文：然比来边臣中材谋勇健者，往往复出，方在讲训不懈，以张中国之威。
现代文：然而近来边疆官员中有才能、智谋和勇敢雄健的人，往往又涌现出来，正在不懈地讲解军事，训练士兵，以增强中国的威严。
English: Lately, however, talented, resourceful and courageous frontier officials have often reappeared, tirelessly lecturing on military affairs and training soldiers to bolster China's prestige.

古文：一旦因议和弛备，复如曩日，缓急必不可用。
现代文：一旦因为议和而松懈战备，他们又会像从前一样，在危急时必定不能任用。
English: If, as a result of the peace negotiations, war preparations slacken, they will again, as in the past, be unable to be employed in a crisis.

古文：其为害二也。
现代文：这是结盟的第二大害处。
English: This is the second most harmful effect of the alliance.

古文：自元昊拒命，终不敢深入关中者，以唃厮啰等族不附，虑为后患也。
现代文：自赵元昊拒不服从朝廷命令，他始终不敢深入关中，就是因为西夏的口角厮口罗等部落没依附他，他担心他们会成为后患。
English: Since Zhao Yuanhao refused to obey the order of the imperial court, he always dared not go deep into the Guanzhong, because the tribes such as Xixia's quarrels and disputes did not adhere to him, and he feared that they would become a hindrance.

古文：今中国与之和，获岁遗之厚，彼必专力以制二蕃，强大之势，自兹为始。
现代文：如今中国与赵元昊讲和，他每年获得丰厚的赔偿，必定会全力来制服这两个部落，西夏强大之势，从此开始。
English: Now that China has made peace with Zhao Yuanhao, who receives rich compensation every year, he will certainly do his best to subdue the two tribes. The strong trend of Western Xia begins from here.

古文：其为害三也。
现代文：这是第三大害处。
English: This is the third greatest harm.

古文：且朝廷恃久安之势，法令纪纲，弛而不葺。
现代文：而且朝廷自恃有长久安定的形势，法令纲纪，都松弛不加整顿。
English: Moreover, the imperial court prided itself on having a long-term stable situation, and the laws and regulations were slack without being rectified.

古文：及西戎累败，王师始议更张，以救前弊。
现代文：等到在西方战事接连失败，我军才开始讨论改弦更张，以便挽救从前的弊病。
English: It was only after successive defeats in the West that our army began to discuss a change of policy in order to save the previous ills.

古文：今见戎人请和，苟贪无事，他时之患，不可救矣。
现代文：如今见西夏人请求议和，苟且贪求平安无事，他日的祸患，就不可救了。
English: Nowadays, seeing the Xixia people asking for peace talks, and eagerly seeking peace and tranquility, the evil of the other day cannot be saved.

古文：其为害四也。
现代文：这是第四大害处。
English: This is the fourth greatest harm.

古文：凡利害之机，愿陛下熟图之。 
现代文：所有这些利害的关键，希望陛下仔细考虑它们。 
English: All of these are vital interests, and I hope His Majesty will consider them carefully.

古文：又言： 张子奭使夏州回，元昊复称臣，然乞岁卖青盐十万石，兼欲就京师互市诸物，仍求增岁给之数。
现代文：又说： 张子出使夏州归来，赵元昊又向我朝称臣，然而乞求每年卖给我们青盐十万石，并要在京城买卖贸易各种东西，还要求增加每年送给他们钱财的数量。
English: He also said: Zhang Zi sent an envoy to Xiazhou to return, Zhao Yuanhao again praised me as a courtier, but begged to sell us 100,000 kilos of blue salt every year, and to buy and sell various things in Beijing, and also asked to increase the amount of money and wealth sent to them every year.

古文：臣以谓西盐数万石，其直不下钱十余万缗。
现代文：臣认为西夏盐十万石，价钱不下十多万缗。
English: The minister thought that Xixia salt was 100,000 koku, and the price was more than 100,000 baht.

古文：况朝廷已许岁赐二十五万，若又许其卖盐，则与遗契丹物数相当。
现代文：何况朝廷已许诺每年赐给他们二十五万，如又允许他们卖盐，那么与送给契丹的物资数量相同。
English: Moreover, the court has promised to give them 250,000 rupees a year, and if they are allowed to sell salt, then the same amount of goods will be given to Khitan.

古文：使契丹闻之，则贪得之心生矣。
现代文：让契丹听到这一消息，那他们的贪婪之心又会产生了。
English: Let the Khitans hear this news, and their greed will be born again.

古文：况自德明之时，累乞放行青盐，先帝以其乱法，不听。
现代文：况且自从西夏首领德明的时候，就多次乞求给他们出卖青盐放行，先皇帝以为他们乱了法制，不听从。
English: Moreover, since the time of the Western Xia leader Deming, he repeatedly begged them to sell the green salt and let them go. The first emperor thought that they had disrupted the legal system and did not obey.

古文：及请之不已，追德明弟入质而许之，是则以彼难从之事，杜其意也。
现代文：等他们不停地请求，先皇要将德明的弟弟留作人质然后才许可他们，这是用他们难以同意的事，来杜绝他们的念头。
English: They kept asking the emperor to let them keep Deming's younger brother as a hostage before he would give them permission, which was a difficult thing for them to agree to, to put an end to their idea.

古文：盖盐，中国之大利，又西戎之盐，味胜解池所出，而出产无穷。
现代文：大概盐是中国最大的利润，而西夏的盐，味道又超过我国解池出产的盐，并且出产无穷无尽。
English: Probably salt is China's biggest profit, and the taste of salt from Western Xia is superior to the salt produced by China's digester, and the production is endless.

古文：既开其禁，则流于民间，无以堤防矣。
现代文：开了西夏卖盐的禁，这些盐就会大量流到我国民间，无法阻止。
English: If the ban on the sale of salt in Western Xia is lifted, these salts will flow in large quantities to our people and cannot be stopped.

古文：兼闻张子奭言，元昊自拒命以来，收结人心，钞掠所得，旋给其众，兵力虽胜，用度随窘。
现代文：并且听张子讲，赵元昊自拒绝听命以来，便收结人心，每次掠夺所得东西，随即分给下属，这样他的兵力虽然强盛，但费用也随即窘迫。
English: And according to Zhang Zi, ever since Zhao Yuanhao refused to obey orders, he has been tightening his grip on people's hearts. Each time he plundered something, he immediately distributed it to his subordinates, so that although his army was strong, his expenses were also in dire straits.

古文：当此之时，尤宜以计困之，安得汲汲与和，曲徇其请乎？ 
现代文：当这个时候，最适宜用计困住他，怎么可急不可待地与他讲和，屈从他的请求呢？ 
English: At this time, when it is most appropriate to trap him with a trick, how can you make peace with him without delay and give in to his request?

古文：时陕西经略招讨副使韩琦、判官尹洙还朝，甫建议请诏琦等，条四路将官能否，为上、中、下三等，黜其最下者。
现代文：当时陕西经略招讨副使韩琦、判官尹洙回朝，孙甫建议皇上下诏令韩琦等人，评判陕西四路将领的才能，分为上、中、下三等，罢黜其中最差的。
English: At that time, after Shaanxi sent the deputy envoy Han Qi and the judge Yin Qi back to the DPRK, Sun Fu suggested that the emperor should issue a decree to Han Qi and others to judge the talents of the four generals in Shaanxi, divided into upper, middle and lower three grades, and remove the worst among them.

古文：保州兵变前，有告者，大臣不时发之。
现代文：保州兵变前，有人告发，大臣没有及时揭露他们。
English: Before the Bozhou mutiny, some people complained that the minister did not expose them in time.

古文：甫因言枢密使副当得罪，使，乃杜衍也。
现代文：孙甫因此说枢密院正副使应当有罪，枢密使就是杜衍。
English: Therefore, Sun Fu said that the vice-minister of the Privy Council should be guilty, and the envoy was Du Yan.

古文：边将刘沪城水洛于渭州，总管尹洙以沪违节度，将斩之。
现代文：守边将领刘沪在渭州营建水洛城，总管尹洙因为刘沪不听指挥，将要斩他。
English: Liu Hu, the garrison commander, was building Shuiluo City in Zhangzhou. Because Liu Hu did not listen to the command, the commander-in-chief, Yin Xi, was going to behead him.

古文：大臣稍主洙议，甫以谓： 水洛通秦、渭，于国家为利，沪不可罪。 由是罢洙而释沪。
现代文：大臣中稍微偏向尹洙的意见，孙甫说： 水洛城勾通秦、渭两州，对国家有利，刘沪不该治罪。 因此朝廷罢免尹洙而释免了刘沪。
English: Sun Fu, one of the ministers, was slightly more in favor of Yin Xi's opinion. Sun Fu said: It is good for the country that the city of Shuilao connects the two states of Qin and Qi, and Liu Huh should not be punished. Therefore, the court dismissed Yin Xi and released Liu Huh.

古文：衍屡荐甫，洙与甫素善者，而甫不少假借，其鲠亮不私如此。
现代文：杜衍屡次推荐孙甫，尹洙是与孙甫素来友善的朋友，而孙甫却没留一点情面，他的鲠直光明、公正不阿就是这样。
English: Du Yan repeatedly recommended Sun Fu. Yin Qi had been a friendly friend of Sun Fu, but Sun Fu did not show any affection. His uprightness, brightness and fairness were not like that.

古文：甫尝言参知政事陈执中不学亡术，不可用。
现代文：孙甫曾说参知政事陈执中不学无术，不可重用。
English: Sun Fu once said that there is no learning without practice in the practice of political affairs, and it should not be reused.

古文：帝难之，由是求补外，不许。
现代文：皇帝责怪他，他因此请求调出朝廷到外地任职，皇帝不许。
English: The emperor blamed him, and he therefore requested to be transferred out of the imperial court to serve in a foreign country, but the emperor would not allow it.

古文：其后奏丁度因对求进用，帝曰： 度未尝请也。 度乞与甫辩，且指甫为宰相杜衍门人。
现代文：后来又上奏说丁度借面见皇上之机请求升职重用，皇帝说： 丁度未曾向我请求。 丁度则请求与孙甫辩论，并指责孙甫是宰相杜衍的门人。
English: Later, it was reported that he had just taken advantage of the opportunity to see the emperor to request a promotion. The emperor said: I just did not ask me. I just asked to debate with Sun Fu, and accused Sun Fu of being a disciple of Prime Minister Duyan.

古文：乃以右司谏出知邓州，徙安州，历江东、两浙转运使。
现代文：孙甫于是以右司谏身份出任邓州知府，后调到安州，历任江东、两浙两处转运使。
English: Sun Fu then assumed the post of Dengzhou prefectural governor as the right secretary, and was later transferred to Anzhou, and successively served as the transfer envoy to the Jiangdong and the two Zhejiang provinces.

古文：范仲淹知杭州，多以便宜从事。
现代文：范仲淹任杭州知州时，许多事不经请示便自行处置。
English: When Fan Zhongran was in charge of Hangzhou and Zhizhou, he handled many things on his own without any instructions.

古文：甫曰： 范公，大臣也。
现代文：孙甫说： 范公是大臣。
English: Sun Fu said: Fan Gong is a minister.

古文：吾屈于此，则不得伸于彼矣。 一切绳之以法，然退未尝不称其贤。
现代文：但我在这里屈理循情，就不能在别处申张法律。 因此对范仲淹的一切都绳之以法，但退后却称赞他的贤能。
English: But if I apply reason and common sense here, I can't assert the law elsewhere. Therefore, I brought everything to justice for Fan Zhongyan, but stepped back and praised his virtue.

古文：再迁尚书兵部员外郎，改直史馆、知陕州，徙晋州。
现代文：后再升职任兵部员外郎，又改做直史馆、陕州知州，调任晋州知州。
English: Later, he was promoted to the post of Foreigner of the Military Department, and he was changed to the Direct History Museum, Shaanxi Chizhou, and transferred to Jinzhou Chizhou.

古文：为河东转运使、三司度支副使，迁刑部郎中、天章阁待制、河北都转运使，留为侍读。
现代文：又升河东转运使、三司度支副使，再升刑部郎中、天章阁待制、河北都转运使，留京任侍读。
English: He was also promoted to the East Hebei Transfer Envoy, the Vice-Envoy of the Third Division of the State Council, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice, and the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Justice.

古文：卒，特赠右谏议大夫。
现代文：不久去世，特追赠为右谏议大夫。
English: He died soon after and was posthumously awarded the title of Doctor of Right Speech.

古文：甫性劲果，善持论，有文集七卷，著《唐史记》七十五卷。
现代文：孙甫性格刚直果断，善于提出自己的见解，著有文集七卷、《唐史记》七十五卷。
English: Sun Fu was a forthright and decisive character, good at putting forward his own opinions. He was the author of seven volumes of anthologies and seventy-five volumes of "Tang Shi Ji."

古文：每言唐君臣行事，以推见当时治乱，若身履其间，而听者晓然，如目见之。
现代文：常讲唐朝君臣的事情，来推见当时的治乱，就如身历其境，而听的人也清楚明了，就如亲眼目睹。
English: He often talked about the things of the princes and ministers of the Tang Dynasty, to see the chaos at that time, it was as if he had experienced it, and the listener was also clear, as if he had witnessed it.

古文：时人言： 终日读史，不如一日听孙论也。 《唐史》藏秘阁。
现代文：时人说： 每天读史书，不如一天听孙甫讲述。 《唐史》被国家档案馆收藏。
English: At that time, people said: "It is better to read a history book every day than to listen to Sun Fu's story one day." "Tang History" was collected by the National Archives.

古文：谢绛，字希深，其先阳夏人。
现代文：谢绛，字希深，他的祖先是阳夏人。
English: Xie Yao, the character Xishen, his ancestor is Yang Xia Ren.

古文：祖懿文，为杭州盐官县令，葬富阳，遂为富阳人。
现代文：到他的祖父谢懿文，做杭州盐官县令，葬在富阳，于是后裔成为富阳人。
English: His grandfather, Xie Yuwen, was the governor of Hangzhou Yanquan County and was buried in Fuyang, so his descendants became the people of Fuyang.

古文：父涛，以文行称，进士起家，为梓州榷盐院判官。
现代文：他的父亲谢涛，以文学、品行著称，从进士起家，做梓州榷盐院判官。
English: His father, Xie Tao, was famous for his literature and moral conduct. He was a judge of the Zizhou Jinshan Court from the time he entered the priesthood.

古文：李顺反成都，攻陷州县，涛尝画守御之计。
现代文：李顺在成都造反，攻陷州县，谢涛曾筹划守御的计策。
English: Li Shun rebelled in Chengdu and attacked Zhoushan County. Xie Tao had planned a strategy to defend it.

古文：贼平，以功迁观察推官，权知华阳县。
现代文：叛军被平息后，他因功升观察推官，后任权知华阳县。
English: After the rebels were subdued, he was promoted to the post of inspector-general, and later to the post of governor of Huayang County.

古文：乱亡之后，田庐荒废，诏有能占田而倍入租者与之，于是腴田悉为豪右所占，流民至无所归。
现代文：叛乱被镇压之后，田园庐舍荒废，皇帝下诏将土地给予那些能占有田土而又上交两倍田租的人，于是肥沃的田土全被豪强大族占领，流民回来却无处可归。
English: After the rebellion was suppressed, the rural outhouses were abandoned, and the emperor decreed that the land would be given to those who could occupy the land and pay twice the rent. As a result, the fertile land was completely occupied by powerful powerful families, and the exiles returned but had nowhere to return.

古文：涛收诏书，悉以田还主。
现代文：谢涛收藏起诏书，全部将田还给旧主。
English: Xie Tao collected the edict and returned all the fields to the former owner.

古文：改秘书省著作佐郎、知兴国军。
现代文：改任秘书省著作佐郎、知兴国军。
English: He was reappointed as secretary of the provincial works of Saro, Chixing and Guojun.

古文：还，以治行召对长春殿，命试学士院。
现代文：回京后，因治理有功被皇上召到长春殿谈话，并命他参加学士院考试。
English: After returning to Beijing, he was summoned by the emperor to the Changchun Palace for a talk due to his contribution to governance, and he was ordered to take the academy exam.

古文：会契丹入寇，真宗议亲征，时曹、濮多盗，而契丹声言趋齐、郓，以涛知曹州。
现代文：正遇上契丹入侵，宋真宗考虑亲征，当时曹州、濮州多强盗，而契丹扬言要进攻齐州、郓州，皇帝派谢涛任曹州知州。
English: In the face of the Khitan invasion, Song Zhenzong considered personally recruiting, at that time Caozhou and Zhangzhou were mostly robbers, and the Khitan threatened to attack Qizhou and Zhangzhou. The emperor sent Xie Tao to serve as Caozhou Zhizhou.

古文：属县赋税多输睢阳助兵食，是岁霖潦，百姓苦于转送，涛悉留不遣。
现代文：所属各县的赋税大多输送到睢阳补充军队的粮食，这一年大雨成灾，百姓苦于转送粮食，谢涛于是将赋税全部留下不遣送。
English: Most of the taxes from the counties he belonged to were sent to Shenyang to replenish the army's grain. This year, heavy rains caused a disaster, and the people struggled to transfer the grain. Xie Tao therefore left all the taxes behind and did not send them.

古文：奏曰： 江、淮漕运，日过睢阳，可取以饷军。
现代文：他上奏说： 江、淮一带漕运，每天经过睢阳，国家可以取漕粮给军队作粮饷。
English: He said at the beginning of his speech, "Railway transportation in the Jiangsu and Huai'an regions passes through Fenyang every day, and the country can take grain from the railway to provide grain for the army.

古文：愿留曹赋繇广济河以馈京师。 转运使论以为不可，诏从涛奏。
现代文：希望将曹州的赋粮留下，再由广济河供给京城。 转运使议论说不行，皇上下诏听从谢涛的奏议。
English: It was hoped that the grain from Caozhou would be left behind and then supplied to Beijing from the Guangji River. It was not possible to discuss the transfer, and the emperors had to listen to Xie Tao's report.

古文：尝使蜀还，举所部官三十余人。
现代文：曾出使蜀郡回朝，推举部下三十多人。
English: He once sent an envoy from Shu County to return to the imperial court and promoted more than thirty of his subordinates.

古文：宰相疑以为多，涛曰： 有罪，愿连坐之。 奉使举官连坐，自涛始。
现代文：宰相怀疑人太多了，谢涛说： 如他们有罪，我愿意受连坐。 奉使推举官吏而实行连坐，自谢涛开始。
English: The prime minister suspected that there were too many people, and Xie Tao said: "If they are guilty, I am willing to accept the joint sitting.

古文：久之，用冯拯荐，复召试，以尚书兵部员外郎直史馆，遂兼侍御史知杂事。
现代文：很久以后，因冯拯的推荐，谢涛再被召去接受考核，随后以尚书兵部员外郎身份任直史馆的职务，于是又兼任侍御史知杂事。
English: After a long time, due to Feng Zheng's recommendation, Xie Tao was called again to accept the assessment, and then he was appointed to the post of the direct history museum as a member of the military department, and then he also served as the attendant of the historian.

古文：真宗山陵灵驾所经道路，有司请悉坏城门、庐舍，以过车舆象物。
现代文：真宗去世后灵车所经过的道路，有关官员请求全都毁坏城门、房屋，以便经过车舆和明器物件。
English: The officials concerned requested that all city gates and houses be destroyed along the route taken by the hearse after the death of Emperor Jinzong, so that the hearse and the artifacts could pass through.

古文：涛言： 先帝车驾封祀，仪物大备，犹不闻有所毁撤，且遗诏从俭薄。
现代文：谢涛说 ：先帝生前乘车封禅祭山时，准备了那么多的祭仪物品，还没听说经过一地时有东西被毁坏撤除，而且又遗诏葬礼时节俭薄葬。
English: Xie Tao said: When the former emperor took the car to seal the Zen Festival Mountain in his lifetime, he prepared so many ceremonial items. I have never heard of anything being destroyed and removed when passing through a place, and he also decreed that the funeral would be sparingly buried.

古文：今有司治明器侈大，以劳州县，非先帝意，愿下少府裁损之。 进直昭文馆，累官至太子宾客。
现代文：如今有关官员制作明器奢侈过度，以致烦劳各州县，这并非先帝的意思，希望下交少府裁减葬礼所用。 进升直昭文馆，累官做到太子宾客。
English: Nowadays, the officials concerned are making the luxury of the casket so extravagant that they are bothering every prefecture and county, which is not the meaning of the former emperor, hoping to submit to the government to reduce the use of the funeral.

古文：绛以父任试秘书省校书郎，举进士中甲科，授太常寺奉礼郎、知汝阴县。
现代文：谢绛因父亲的关系任秘书省校书郎，参加科举考试中进士甲科，授任太常寺奉礼郎、汝阴知县。
English: Because of his father's relationship, Xie Jun served as secretary of the provincial school scribe, participated in the imperial examinations, and was awarded the title of Taizhong Temple Burel, Ruyin County.

古文：善议论，喜谈时事，尝论四民失业，累数千言。
现代文：善于议论，喜谈时事，曾上疏论说四民失业的事，洋洋数千言。
English: He is good at talking and enjoys discussing current affairs. He once made a rambling speech about the unemployment of four million people, which went on for thousands of words.

古文：天禧中，上疏谓宋当以土德王天下。
现代文：天禧中，上疏说宋朝应当以五行中的土德来统治天下。
English: During the heavenly jubilee, Shang Zhao said that the Song Dynasty should rule the world with the local virtues of the Five Elements.

古文：时大理寺丞董行父，请用天为统，以金为德。
现代文：当时大理寺丞董行父请求以天为统，以金作为宋朝的品德象征。
English: At that time, Father Dong Xing, the abbot of Dali Temple, requested that the heavens be the standard and gold be used as the symbol of the Song Dynasty.

古文：诏两制议，皆言： 用土德，则当越唐上承于隋；用金德，则当越五代绍唐。
现代文：皇上下诏两院讨论，两制院都说： 用土德，则我朝应越过唐朝继承隋朝，用金德，则应越过五代继承唐朝。
English: When the Emperor's edict and edict were discussed by the two courts, both courts said, "If we use the principle of soil and virtue, then our dynasty should succeed the Sui dynasty over the Tang dynasty, and if we use the principle of wealth and virtue, then we should succeed the Tang dynasty over five generations."

古文：而太祖实受终周室，岂可弗遵传继之序？ 绛、行父议皆黜不用。
现代文：而太祖实际上是承受后周的政权，怎么可以不遵循传继的顺序呢？ 谢绛、董行父的建议都被废黜不采用。
English: But the great-grandfather actually inherited the power of the next generation, so how could he not follow the order of succession? The suggestions of Xie Jun and Dong Xingfa were both dismissed and not adopted.

古文：杨亿荐绛文章，召试，擢秘阁校理、同判太常礼院。
现代文：杨亿推荐谢绛的文章，谢绛被召去接受考核，随后升任秘阁校理、同判太常礼院。
English: Yang Yili recommended Xie Yao's article. Xie Yao was summoned to be evaluated, and then promoted to the position of secret cabinet proofreader and judge of the same court.

古文：丁母忧，服除，仁宗即位，迁太常博士。
现代文：遇上母亲去世离职，服丧完毕，宋仁宗即位，升他为太常博士。
English: When his mother passed away, Song Renzong resigned from his post, and after the funeral, he ascended to the throne and was promoted to the position of Grand Doctor.

古文：用郑氏《经》、唐故事议宣祖非受命祖，不宜配享感生帝，请以真宗配之。
现代文：他根据郑玄注的《礼经》和唐代旧例认为宣祖皇帝不是受命正式做过皇帝的祖先，不适宜与感生帝一起受祭祀，请求用真宗皇帝来配它。
English: According to Zheng Xuan's commentary on the "Book of Rites" and the old Tang dynasty precedent, he believed that Emperor Xuanzu was not officially ordered to be the emperor's ancestor, and that it was not appropriate to be sacrificed together with Emperor Kang Sheng. He requested that the Emperor of the True Sect be used to match it.

古文：翰林学士承旨李维以为不可。
现代文：翰林学士承旨李维认为他的建议是错的。
English: Hanlin Scholar Zongzhi Liwei thinks his suggestion is wrong.

古文：寻出通判常州。
现代文：不久他就被调出朝廷，降为常州通判。
English: He was soon transferred out of the imperial court and demoted to the position of Changzhou magistrate.

古文：天圣中，天下水旱、蝗起，河决滑州，绛上疏曰：
现代文：天圣年间，全国水灾、旱灾、蝗灾不断发生，黄河在滑州决口，谢绛上疏说：
English: During the Holy Year, floods, droughts, and locust plagues continued to occur throughout the country. The Yellow River began to rise at the mouth of the Leshou River, Xie Zang said:

古文：去年京师大水，败民庐舍，河渠暴溢，几冒城郭；今年苦旱，百姓疫死，田谷焦槁，秋成绝望：此皆大异也。
现代文：去年京师发大水，毁坏民房，河水暴涨，几乎淹没城市；今年又受旱灾之苦，百姓因瘟疫病死，田中稻谷焦枯，秋收无望：这都是大灾异。
English: Last year, Beijing was flooded, destroying houses, and the river rose sharply, almost drowning the city; this year, it suffered from drought, the people died of plague, the rice paddies in the rice paddies were scorched, and the autumn harvest was hopeless: these are all great disasters.

古文：按《洪范》、京房《易传》皆以为简祭祀，逆天时，则水不顺下；政令逆时，水失其性，则坏国邑，伤稼穑；颛事者知，诛罚绝理，则大水杀人；欲德不用，兹谓张，厥灾荒；上下皆蔽，兹谓隔，其咎旱：天道指类示戒，大要如此。
现代文：按《洪范》、京房《易传》都认为怠慢祭祀，违背天时，就会水不畅流；政令违犯时节，水性被人破坏，就会毁坏都市，损坏庄稼；掌权管事的人太聪明，诛杀刑罚不合道理，就会发大水杀人；要得到有品德的人却又不重用，这叫作张，张的灾难是饥荒；上下都被蒙蔽，这就叫隔，隔的惩罚是旱灾；上天降下相应的灾难以显示警告，大概就是这样。
English: According to "Hong Fan" and "I Chuan" of the Beijing House, it is believed that if one neglects the sacrificial rites and violates the time of day, the water will not flow smoothly; if the government order violates the season and the water quality is destroyed, the city will be destroyed and the crops will be damaged; if the person in charge is too clever and the punishment is unreasonable, the water will be killed; if you want to get a person with moral character but do not reuse it, it is called Zhang, and the disaster of Zhang is famine; if both sides are blinded, it is called gap, and the punishment of gap is drought; if the corresponding disaster descends from heaven,

古文：陛下夙夜勤苦，思有以上塞时变，固宜策告殃咎，变更理化，下罪己之诏，修顺时之令，宣群言以导壅，斥近幸以损阴。
现代文：陛下日夜勤苦，思考杜绝阻止时下灾变的对策，固然应该公布灾情，改变、理顺政策，下自我检讨的诏书，制订顺应时宜的法令，疏通各方面的意见来打开原来的壅塞现象，排斥奸臣以便减少阴暗力量。
English: His Majesty has been working hard day and night, thinking about the countermeasures to prevent the current disaster. Of course, it is necessary to announce the disaster situation, change and rationalize the policies, issue a self-review edict, formulate timely laws and regulations, clear up the opinions of all aspects to open the original procrastination phenomenon, and expel the treacherous ministers in order to reduce the dark forces.

古文：而圣心优柔，重在改作，号令所发，未闻有以当天心者。
现代文：皇上圣心优柔寡断，因而重要的是改变、振作，号令发下去，没听说有敢阻挡天子心意的人。
English: The Emperor's Sacred Heart is indecisive, so it is important to change, cheer up, and issue orders. I have not heard of anyone who dares to block the will of the Son of Heaven.

古文：夫风雨、寒暑之于天时，为大信也；信不及于物，泽不究于下，则水旱为沴。
现代文：风雨、寒暑在天时上，是最大的信使；这种信使不来到事物上，上天的恩泽没有到达下面百姓，就有水旱灾害发生。
English: Wind, rain, cold and heat are the greatest messengers in the sky. If these messengers do not come to things, and if the blessings of heaven do not reach the people below, there will be floods and droughts.

古文：近日制命，有信宿辄改，适行遽止，而欲风雨以信，其可得乎？
现代文：近来制定命令，有的刚被人们信任就又改变，正在执行又突然下令停止，却要求风雨也定期及时有信，这可能么？
English: Recently, orders have been formulated, some have just been trusted by people and then changed, they are being implemented and suddenly ordered to stop, but they require the wind and rain to have letters regularly and timely, is this possible?

古文：天下之广，万几之众，不出房闼，岂能尽知？
现代文：天下这么广，人民这么多，不走出房门，怎能尽知呢？
English: The world is so vast, there are so many people, how can you know everything without going out the door?

古文：而在廷之臣，未闻被数刻之召，吐片言之善，朝夕左右，非恩泽即佞幸，上下皆蔽，其应不虚。
现代文：而朝廷大臣，没听说受到过几刻钟的召见，倾吐过只言片语的好建议，皇上周围，从早到晚不是些受宠幸的就是些奸佞的人，上下级都被蒙蔽，那上天报应就会爽验不虚。
English: But the ministers of the imperial court, who had not heard that they had been summoned for a few quarters of an hour, poured out only a few words of good advice. Around the emperor, from morning to night, were either favored or treacherous people. The lower and upper levels were blinded. That heavenly retribution would not be false.

古文：昔两汉日食、地震、水旱之变，则策免三公，以示戒惧。
现代文：从前两汉的日食、地震、水旱灾变发生时，皇上就会宣布罢免三公大臣，以求警戒恐惧。
English: In the past two Han dynasties, when a solar eclipse, earthquake, flood or drought disaster occurred, the emperor would announce the dismissal of the three ministers in order to warn and frighten.

古文：陛下进用丞弼，极一时之选，而政道未茂，天时未顺，岂大臣辅佐不明邪？
现代文：陛下提升任用宰相辅弼大臣，都是从全国精心挑选，然而国家政治道德并不昌盛，天时也不顺利，难道是大臣辅佐不英明吗？
English: His Majesty's promotion and appointment of the prime minister and assistant ministers are carefully selected from all over the country. However, the country's political morality is not prosperous, and the weather is not smooth. Is it not wise to be an assistant minister?

古文：陛下信任不笃邪？
现代文：还是陛下的信任不笃诚？
English: Or is Your Majesty's trust misplaced?

古文：必若使之，宜推心责成，以极其效；谓之不然，则更选贤者。
现代文：如果一定要使用某人，就应推心责成，以便彻底发挥他的才能作用；如果说他不行，就应更选贤良的人。
English: If you must use someone, you should try your best to make full use of his talents; if you can't, you should choose a good person.

古文：比来奸邪者易进，守道者数穷，政出多门，俗喜由径。
现代文：近来奸邪的人易得进升，守正道的人常常困穷，政出多门，习俗喜欢走捷径。
English: In recent times, those who commit evil are promoted easily, those who keep to the right path are often poor, there are many political upheavals, and customs like to take shortcuts.

古文：圣心固欲尽得天下之贤能，分职受业；而宰相方考贤进吏，无敢建白。
现代文：圣上的心本要尽得天下的贤能，分别授官任职；而宰相却正在根据资历提拔官吏，没有人提意见、告诉皇上。
English: The sacred heart of the emperor wanted to make the best of the world's wisdom and ability, and to appoint officials separately; but the prime minister was promoting officials according to their seniority, and no one raised an opinion or told the emperor.

古文：欲德不用之应，又可验矣。
现代文：想要求得到贤德的人而不能重用所引起的报应，又可应验了。
English: If you want to ask for the retribution caused by the person who obtained the virtue and cannot reuse it, it can be fulfilled again.

古文：今阳骄莫解，虫孽渐炽，河水妄行。
现代文：如今太阳骄强不减，虫孽渐渐猖炽，黄河肆虐。
English: Nowadays, the sun is as strong as ever, pests are rampant, and the Yellow River is raging.

古文：循故道之迹，行寻常之政，臣恐不足回灵意、塞至戒。
现代文：如果仍循规蹈矩，施行寻常的政策，臣担心不足以换回上天的灵意、回应至高无上的警告。
English: If you still follow the rules and implement the usual policies, the minister is worried that it is not enough to exchange the wisdom of heaven and respond to the supreme warning.

古文：古者，谷不登则亏膳，灾屡至则降服，凶年不涂塈。
现代文：古代，谷不丰收就降低膳食标准，灾祸屡次来临就降低衣服标准，危难的年头，不准涂漆屋顶。
English: In ancient times, if there was a poor harvest, the standard of food would be lowered, if there were repeated disasters, the standard of clothing would be lowered, and in times of danger, it was not allowed to paint the roof.

古文：愿下诏引咎，损太官之膳，避路寝之朝，许士大夫斥讳上闻，讥切时病。
现代文：希望陛下下诏引咎自责，裁减太官的膳食、回避在寝宫中的朝见，允许士大夫斥责皇上、说皇上忌讳听的话，讥讽批评时病。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will issue an edict of self-condemnation, reduce the diet of the eunuchs, avoid the imperial audience in the sleeping palace, allow the scholar-officials to rebuke the emperor, say the words that the emperor is forbidden to hear, and ridicule and criticize the illness.

古文：罢不急之役，省无名之敛，勿崇私恩，更进直道，宣德流化，以休息天下。
现代文：停止不急需的工程，省去无名目的征收，不私施恩泽，改提拔正直有道的人，宣扬道德、教化人民，让天下休养生息。
English: Stop projects that are not urgently needed, eliminate the collection of money for no apparent purpose, give out favors selflessly, promote honest and virtuous people instead, promote morality and educate the people, and let the world rest and recuperate.

古文：至诚动乎上，大惠浃于下，岂有时泽之艰哉！
现代文：皇上动了至诚之心，博大的恩惠流泽到下层百姓，怎会有时运雨泽方面的艰难呢！
English: The emperor moved his sincere heart, and the vast bounty flowed to the lower-class people. How can it be that there are sometimes difficulties in the rain and rain!

古文：仁宗嘉纳之。
现代文：宋仁宗赞许并采纳了他的建议。
English: Song Renzong approved and adopted his suggestion.

古文：会修国史，以绛为编修官，史成，迁祠部员外郎、直集贤院。
现代文：恰好编修国史，朝廷用谢绛做编修官，史书修成，他升祠部员外郎、直集贤院。
English: He happened to be in charge of compiling the national history, and the imperial court used Xie Jun as a compiler and editor, the history book was completed, and he was promoted to the member of the ancestral hall, and then to the Jiji Xianin.

古文：时涛官西京，且老矣，因请便养，通判河南府。
现代文：当时他父亲谢涛在西京做官，且已老了，他因此请求就便奉养，被调任河南府通判。
English: At that time, his father Xie Tao was an official in Xijing, and he was already old, so he asked to be supported and was transferred to the Henan Provincial Intermediate Court.

古文：又论： 唐室丽正、史官之局，并在大明、华清宫内。
现代文：又上疏论述说： 唐朝丽正、史官的机构，都设在大明、华清宫中。
English: It is also mentioned that the offices of the Tang Dynasty's regent and historian were both located in the Daming Palace and the Huaqing Palace.

古文：太宗皇帝肇修三馆，更立秘阁于升龙门左，亲为飞白书额，作赞刻石阁下。
现代文：太宗皇帝始修造三馆，另在升龙门左边建立秘阁，亲自为它用飞白体书写匾额，又写作赞文刻在秘阁下的石上。
English: Emperor Taizong began the construction of the three pavilions, and also built a secret pavilion on the left side of the Ascending Dragon Gate. He personally wrote a plaque for it in flying white, and wrote a praise on the stone under the secret pavilion.

古文：景德中，图书浸广，真宗皇帝益以内帑四库。
现代文：景德年间，图书渐渐增多，真宗皇帝便将国库中的四间库房增加做图书室。
English: During the reign of King Jingde, the number of books gradually increased, and Emperor Zhenzong added four storehouses in the national treasury to make a library.

古文：二圣数尝临幸，亲加劳问，递宿广内者，有不时之召。
现代文：这两位圣君曾多次光临，亲加慰问，不时召见守卫国家藏书馆的人。
English: The two saints have visited many times, offering their condolences and from time to time summoning the guards of the National Library.

古文：人人力道术、究艺文，知天子尊礼甚勤，而名臣高位，繇此其选也。
现代文：当时人人努力学习道术，研究艺文，知道天子非常勤勉地尊崇礼制，而名臣高职，都根据这些来选择。
English: At that time, everyone was diligently studying Taoism, studying art and literature, knowing that the Son of Heaven was very diligent in respecting the etiquette, and the famous ministers and high-ranking officials were selected according to these.

古文：往者遭遘延燔，未遑中葺，或引两省故事，别建外馆，直舍卑喧，民櫩丛接。
现代文：以前它们遭到焚毁，没来得及修葺，有人援引两省的先例，另建外馆，但宿舍又低卑又喧哗，与民房混杂连接。
English: In the past, they were burned down before they could be repaired, and some people cited the precedent of the two provinces to build another foreign hall, but the dormitories are low and noisy, and they are mixed with private houses.

古文：大官卫尉，供拟滋削，亏体伤风，莫兹为甚。
现代文：而大官卫尉，供给却拟定增长，亏待国体、伤坏风俗，没有比这更严重的。
English: However, there is nothing more serious than a high-ranking official or an officer of the National Guard who plans to increase the supply but treats the national body unkindly and corrupts customs.

古文：陛下未尝迂翠华、降玉趾，寥寥册府，不闻舆马之音，旷有日矣。
现代文：陛下不曾把华丽的车子绕到这里，将美丽的圣足降临，这空荡荡的册府，已有很长时期，没有听到过车马到来的声音了。
English: It has been a long time since His Majesty drove his magnificent chariot around here and set his beautiful holy feet. This empty palace has not heard the sound of chariots and horses coming.

古文：议者以谓慕道不笃于古，待士少损于前。
现代文：舆论认为皇上对道德的倾慕不及古代笃诚，对待士子书生也比从前要差。
English: Public opinion believes that the emperor's admiration for morality is not as sincere as in ancient times, and his treatment of scholars and students is also worse than before.

古文：士无延访之勤，而因循相尚，不自激策，文雅渐弊，窃为圣朝惜之。
现代文：士子们没有受到皇上的勤勉的邀请和访问，所以崇尚因循守旧，不激励自己，文化雅士阶层渐渐生出弊病，臣私下为圣朝感到可惜。
English: The scholars did not receive the diligent invitation and visit from the emperor, so they advocated the old-fashioned way and did not motivate themselves. The cultured elite class gradually developed maladies, and the vassal privately felt sorry for the Holy Temple.

古文：愿辟内馆，以恢景德之制。 诏可。
现代文：希望能开辟内馆，恢复景德以前的旧制度。 皇上下诏认可。
English: It was hoped that a national museum could be opened, and the old system before the reign of King Jingde restored.

古文：绛虽在外，犹数论事。
现代文：谢绛虽在京城以外做官，仍多次议论国事。
English: Even though Xie Jun was working as an official outside of Beijing, he still discussed state affairs many times.

古文：奏言： 近岁不逞之徒，托言数术，以先生、处士自名，秃巾短褐，内结权幸，外走州邑，甚者矫诬诏书，傲忽官吏。请严禁止。尝以墨敕赐封号者，追还之。 
现代文：他上奏说： 近年有些不逞之徒，假托术数，以先生、处士自命，身着短褐头戴秃巾，在朝中勾结权贵亻幸臣，在朝外奔走州县，甚至伪造诏书，傲慢轻视地方官吏，请求皇上严令禁止，把曾经以亲笔手令赏赐给术士们的封号，撤销收回。 
English: He said in his report: In recent years, there have been some unscrupulous people who have falsely claimed to be teachers and clerks, wearing short brown hair and bald scarves, colluding with powerful and honorable emperors in the imperial court, running around prefectures and counties outside the imperial court, even forging imperial decrees, arrogantly despising local officials, requesting the emperor to strictly prohibit them, and revoking the seal names that were once awarded to magicians with their own handwritten orders.

古文：还权开封府判官，言：
现代文：回朝后任权开封府判官，又说：
English: After returning to the imperial court, he was given the power to appoint magistrates in Kaifeng. He also said:

古文：蝗亘田野，坌人郛郭，跳掷官寺，井郾皆满。
现代文：蝗虫遍野，涌入城市，跳到官府寺庙，井里沟中，到处都是。
English: Locusts are everywhere, pouring into the city, jumping to government offices and temples, in wells and ditches, and everywhere.

古文：鲁三书螟，《谷梁》以为哀公用田赋虐取于民。
现代文：《春秋》上三次记载鲁国的螟灾，《谷梁传》认为是因为鲁哀公用田赋名目残酷剥削人民所致。
English: "Spring and Autumn" recorded the devastation of Lu three times, and "Guliang Biography" believed that it was caused by the brutal exploitation of the people in the name of public land allocation in Lu'ai.

古文：朝廷敛弛之法，近于廉平，以臣愚所闻，似吏不甚称而召其变。
现代文：朝廷征敛的法律，基本上轻廉公平，据臣所知，似乎是官吏们不很称职才招来灾害。
English: The laws collected by the imperial court are basically light, cheap and fair. As far as the courtier knows, it seems that the officials are not very competent to cause disasters.

古文：凡今典城牧民，有颛方面之执：才者掠功取名，以严急为术，或辩伪无实，数蒙奖录；愚者期会簿书，畏首与尾。
现代文：凡今日掌管城市和百姓的人，都有专制一方面的权势：有才的掠取功名，用严急作为治理方法，有的仅凭口说，虚伪无实绩，却多次蒙受奖励、任用；愚蠢的只知到期统计簿书，畏首畏尾。
English: All the people in charge of the city and the people today have the power of despotism: the talented ones plunder the merits and use urgency as a governance method; some are only by word of mouth, hypocrisy without actual performance, but have been awarded and appointed many times; the stupid ones only know the due statistics book, and are afraid of the end.

古文：二者政殊，而同归于弊。
现代文：这两种人的政治虽殊，然而却同样有害。
English: The politics of these two men, though different, are equally pernicious.

古文：夫为国在养民，养民在择吏，吏循则民安，气和而灾息。
现代文：治国重要的在养民，养民关键在选官，官吏守法，人民就安定；气氛和谐，灾难就息灭。
English: The important thing in governing the country is to feed the people. The key to feeding the people is to elect officials. If the officials abide by the law, the people will be stable; if the atmosphere is harmonious, the disaster will be extinguished.

古文：愿先取大州邑数十百，诏公卿以下，举任州守者，使得自辟属县令长，务求术略，不限资考。
现代文：希望先挑选几十个大州县，下诏公卿以下，被推举任知州太守的人，可以自己征聘所属县的县令和下属官吏，务求有治理才能的人，不要受资格限制。
English: It is hoped that dozens of prefectures of large prefectures will be selected first, and those who are nominated to serve as prefectural governors of prefectures below the rank of grand duke will be able to recruit their own prefectural governors and subordinate officials. In order to ensure that those who have the ability to govern are not subject to qualification restrictions.

古文：然后宽以约束，许便宜从事。
现代文：然后放松约束，允许他们因宜独自决策。
English: Then loosen the constraints and allow them to make their own decisions as appropriate.

古文：期年条上理状，或徙或留，必有功化风迹，异乎有司以资而任之者焉。
现代文：以一年为期上报治理状况，再依此决定是留任还是撤去，必定会有改变风气、与官方按资历任职不同的效果。
English: A one-year period for reporting on the status of governance, and then deciding whether to stay or leave based on this, will certainly change the culture and have a different effect from the official appointment based on seniority.

古文：汉时，诏问京房灾异可息之术，房对以考功课吏。
现代文：汉代时，皇上下诏向京房询问使灾异平息的方法，京房用考核官吏的功绩作为对策来回答。
English: During the Han Dynasty, emperors inquired of Emperor Jingfang about how to quell the calamity, and Emperor Jingfang responded by evaluating the merits of officials.

古文：臣愿陛下博访理官，除烦苛之命；申敕计臣，损聚敛之役。
现代文：臣希望陛下广泛询访司法官，废除烦杂苛细的命令；申令财政统计官，减轻聚敛的徭役。
English: I hope that His Majesty will consult widely with judicial officials to abolish cumbersome and burdensome orders, and instruct financial statisticians to lighten the burden of collection.

古文：勿起大狱，勿用躁人，务静安，守渊默。
现代文：不要兴起大的罪案讼事，不重用急躁的人，务求清静安宁，保持深沉静默。
English: Let there be no tumult or tumultuous tumult, let there be no tumult or tumultuous tumult, let there be no tumult or tumult.

古文：《传》曰： 大侵之礼，百官备而不制。
现代文：《传》说： 大灾年的礼节，百官都设置但不治事。
English: "Biography" said: The etiquette of the year of the great disaster, all officials are set up but do not handle affairs.

古文：言省事也。 如此而沴气不弭，嘉休不至，是灵意讠谰，而圣言罔惑欤。
现代文：是讲要省事。 当今灾气像这样肆虐不止，美好的时刻总不来，这是皇上的灵意被歪曲，皇上的圣言被篡改。
English: Today's calamities continue to rage like this, and better times will never come. This is the Emperor's spiritual intention being distorted and the Emperor's sacred word being tampered with.

古文：会郭皇后废，绛陈《诗白华》，引申后、褒姒事以讽，辞甚切至。
现代文：这时正好郭皇后被废，谢绛陈说《诗经？白华》，引申后、褒女以的故事来讽谏，言辞非常恳切。
English: At this time, Empress Guo happened to be deposed, and Xie Yuchen said, "Poetry? Baihua," and after it was extended, praised her with a story to make fun of her, and her words were very sincere.

古文：徙三司度支判官，再迁兵部员外郎。
现代文：调任三司度支判官，再升兵部员外郎。
English: He was transferred to be a judge of the Third Division of the Court of Appeals, and then promoted to be a member of the War Department.

古文：上言： 迩来用物滋侈，赐予过制，禁中须索，去年计为缗钱四十五万。
现代文：上奏说 ：近来用东西越来越奢侈，赏赐过度，宫中需要的费用，去年共计是四十五万缗钱。
English: He said, "Recently, the use of things has become more and more extravagant, the rewards are excessive, and the expenses required by the palace last year totaled 450,000 baht.

古文：自今春至四月，已及二十余万。
现代文：自今春到四月，则已有二十余万。
English: From this spring to April, there have been more than two hundred thousand.

古文：比诏裁节费用，而有司移文，但求咸平、景德簿书。
现代文：早先下诏裁减节省费用，但官吏传达文书，只是去寻找咸平、景德时期的账簿。
English: Earlier, an edict was issued to reduce and save expenses, but the officials only conveyed the documents to find the account books from the period of Xianping and Jingde.

古文：簿书不存，则无所措置。
现代文：账簿没有保存下来，就不知怎么办。
English: If the account books are not preserved, I don't know what to do.

古文：臣以谓不若推近及远，递考岁用而裁节之，不必咸平、景德为准也。 
现代文：臣以为不如推近及远，逐年考察每年的费用来进行裁减，不一定要以咸平、景德年间的数字做标准。 
English: The minister thought that it would be better to push it closer and further, and examine the annual expenses year by year to reduce them. It is not necessary to use the figures from the years of Xianping and Jingde as a standard.

古文：初，诏罢织密花透背，禁人服用，且云自掖庭始。
现代文：当初，皇上下诏停止纺织细密的花纹和在衣服背部刺绣，禁止人们穿用这样的衣服，并且说要从宫中开始实行。
English: At first, the Emperor issued an edict to stop weaving fine patterns and embroidering on the back of clothes, prohibiting people from wearing such clothes, and said that it should be implemented from the palace.

古文：既而内人赐衣，复取于有司。
现代文：可不久给宫女们赏赐衣服时，却又向官府索取。
English: However, when the clothes were given to the ladies-in-waiting, they asked the government for them again.

古文：又后苑作制玳瑁器，索龟筒于市。
现代文：又后苑制作玳瑁器，曾到市上索求龟筒。
English: In addition, Houyuan made crockery, and once went to the market to ask for a crankshaft.

古文：龟筒，禁物也，民间不得有，而索不已。
现代文：龟筒是禁物，民间不准拥有，可宫中索求不已。
English: The tortoise shell is a forbidden object, and people are not allowed to own it, but the palace is constantly asking for it.

古文：绛皆论罢之。
现代文：谢绛都建议废除。
English: Xie Bingdu suggested abolishing it.

古文：又言： 号令数变则亏国体，利害偏听则惑聪明。
现代文：他又说 ：号令多次改变就会伤害国体，是利是害如果偏听一方就会迷惑。
English: He also said: if the order is changed many times, it will hurt the national body, whether it is beneficial or harmful, if one side is biased, it will be confusing.

古文：请者务欲各行，而守者患于不一。
现代文：请求的人务求各自的建议都能施行，而守管地方的人又深受意见不一的苦。
English: Petitioners want their proposals to be implemented, and local officials are torn by disagreements.

古文：请罢内降，凡诏令皆由中书、枢密，然后施行。 因进《圣治箴》五篇。
现代文：请废除从内宫降旨的做法，所有诏令都由中书、枢密通过，然后才施行。 因此又奏上《圣治箴》五篇。
English: Please abolish the practice of decrees being issued from the Imperial Palace. All imperial decrees must be approved by the Central Committee and the Privy Council before they can be implemented. Therefore, five articles of the "Shenzhi Zhen" were also issued.

古文：以父忧去，服除，擢知制诰，判吏部流内铨、太常礼院。
现代文：因父亲去世辞职，服丧完毕，进升为知制诰，后任判吏部流内铨、太常礼院。
English: Due to his father's death, he resigned, and after the funeral, he was promoted to Chisei Shogun, and later he was appointed to the Inner Shogun of the Ministry of Justice and the Taijō Ryoin.

古文：吏部拟官，旧视职田有无，不问多寡，以是不均。
现代文：吏部考测官员，过去只看有无职田，而不问多少，因此不公平。
English: In the past, the examination officials of the cadre department only looked at whether there were job fields, but did not ask how many, so it was unfair.

古文：绛为核其实，以多寡为差，其有名而无实者皆不用，人以为便。
现代文：谢绛考查他们取田的实数，以多少做等级，那些有名无实的人都不用，人们认为这样方便。
English: Xie Yao checked the actual number of fields they had taken, and how much they were graded. Those who were just names were not needed. People thought it was convenient.

古文：初改判礼院为知礼仪事，自张绛建请。
现代文：最初将判礼院的官员改叫知礼仪事，是从谢绛建议、请求后才开始的。
English: At first, it was only after Xie Jun's suggestion and request that the officials of the Court of Final Appeal were renamed as those in charge of ceremonial affairs.

古文：使契丹，还，请知邓州。
现代文：出使契丹，回朝后，请求任邓州知州。
English: After returning to the DPRK, Khitan sent an envoy to request the appointment of Dengzhou Zhizhou.

古文：距州百二十里，有美阳堰，引湍水溉公田。
现代文：离州城一百二十里，有个美阳堰，引湍水灌溉官田。
English: One hundred and twenty miles from the state capital, there is a Miyang weir, diverting water to irrigate government land.

古文：水来远而少，利不及民；滨堰筑新土为防，俗谓之墩者，大小又十数，岁数坏，辄调民增筑。
现代文：水来得远，水量又小，百姓沾不到利；在堰边筑新土做防堤，俗称为墩，大小墩又有几十个，一年坏多次，每次墩坏总要调百姓筑。
English: The water comes from far away, the amount of water is small, and the people cannot benefit from it; new soil is built on the edge of the weir to make a breakwater, commonly known as a dike. There are dozens of large and small dikes, and they are damaged many times a year. Every time the dike is damaged, the people must be mobilized to build it.

古文：奸人蓄薪茭，以时其急，往往盗决堰墩，百姓苦之。
现代文：奸人储蓄有筑墩用的柴草，为了人为制造急用柴草的时机，往往偷决河堰堤墩，百姓深受其苦。
English: Traitors save firewood for building rafts. In order to artificially create the opportunity for urgent use of firewood, they often break through the river barrier, and the people suffer from it.

古文：绛按召信臣六门堰故迹，距城三里，壅水注钳庐陂，溉田至三万顷。
现代文：谢绛考查出历史上召信臣所建六门堰的遗迹，在距城三里的地方，它曾堵蓄河水注入钳庐陂，灌溉粮田多达三万顷。
English: Xie Bingcao found out the remains of the six-gate weir built by Zhao Xinyuan in history. At a place three miles away from the city, it once blocked the river water and injected straw, irrigating up to 30,000 hectares of grain fields.

古文：请复修之，可罢州人岁役，以水与民，未就而卒，年四十六。
现代文：谢绛上奏请求批准重新修复此工程，说它可以免除州内人民每年的徭役，将水给予百姓，但未修成他就去世，年仅四十六岁。
English: He died at the age of 46 before the project was completed. He had petitioned for permission to rehabilitate the project, saying it would free the people of the state from the annual corvee and give water to the people.

古文：绛以文学知名一时，为人修洁酝藉，所至大兴学舍，尝请诸郡立学。
现代文：谢绛因文学著名一时，他为人有修养、廉洁、宽和有涵容，所到之处，大兴学校，曾奏请在各郡建立学校。
English: Xie Jun was famous for literature for a while. He was cultured, honest, broad-minded and tolerant. Wherever he went, Daxing School, he asked to build schools in all counties.

古文：在河南修国子学，教诸生，自远淀而至者数百人。
现代文：在河南修建国子学，教授学生，自远而来就学的有几百人。
English: In Henan, hundreds of people have come from far and wide to build schools and teach students.

古文：好施宗族，喜宾客，以故，卒之日，家无余赀。
现代文：好接济族人，喜欢宾客，因此，死的时候，家无余财。
English: He was a generous host and loved guests, so when he died, the family had no money left.

古文：有文集五十卷。
现代文：著有文集五十卷。
English: He is the author of fifty volumes of anthologies.

古文：子景初、景温、景平、景回。
现代文：他的儿子有谢景初、谢景温、谢景平、谢景回。
English: His sons include Xie Jinghu, Xie Jingwen, Xie Jingping and Xie Jingwu.

古文：景平好学，著诗书传说数十篇，终秘书丞。
现代文：谢景平好学，著有诗书传说数十篇，最后官任秘书丞。
English: Xie Jingping was eager to learn, authored dozens of poems, books and legends, and was eventually appointed secretary.

古文：景回早卒。
现代文：谢景回死得很早。
English: Xie Jinghui died very early.

