古文：张文礼，燕人也。
现代文：张文礼，燕地人。
English: Zhang Wenli, a native of Yan.

古文：初为刘仁恭裨将，性凶险，多奸谋，辞气庸下，与人交言，癖于不逊，自少及长，专蓄异谋。
现代文：开始时任刘仁恭偏将，性格凶险，颇多奸谋，言行庸俗卑下，和人交谈言语不逊，从少年到成年，专门心怀阴谋诡计。
English: At the beginning, Liu Renyong was a general, with a dangerous personality, quite a lot of treachery, vulgar and despicable words and deeds, and insolent words in conversation. From a young boy to an adult, he was dedicated to conspiracy and trickery.

古文：及从刘守文之沧州，委将偏师。
现代文：到跟随刘守文到沧州时，任偏师将军。
English: When he followed Liu Shouwen to Cangzhou, he was appointed as a general.

古文：守文省父燕蓟，据城为乱。及败，奔于王镕。
现代文：当刘守文到燕蓟探视父亲时，张文礼便据城反叛，失败后，投奔王。
English: When Liu Shouwen went to Yancheng to visit his father, Zhang Wenli rebelled against the city. After the defeat, he ran to Wang Rong.

古文：察镕不亲政事，遂曲事当权者，以求衒达。
现代文：看到王不理政事，便百般迎奉当权者，以求往上爬。
English: Seeing that Wang did not care about politics, he welcomed those in power in every possible way in order to climb up.

古文：每对镕自言有将才，孙、吴、韩、白，莫己若也。
现代文：常常对王说自己有将才，孙子、吴起、韩信、白起，都不如自己。
English: He often told Wang that he was a great player, but that Sun Tzu, Wu Qi, Han Xin and Bai Qi were not as good as him.

古文：镕赏其言，给遗甚厚，因录为义男，赐姓，名德明，由是每令将兵。
现代文：王赞赏他的话，赏赐很优厚，还收为义子，赐姓王，取名叫德明，从此常要他带兵。
English: The king appreciated his words and rewarded him very generously. He also adopted him as his son-in-law, gave him the surname Wang, and named him Deming. From then on, he often asked him to lead soldiers.

古文：自柏乡战胜之后，常从庄宗行营。
现代文：自柏乡战胜之后，常随从庄宗行军宿营。
English: After the victory of Baixiang, he often accompanied Zhuozong to the camp.

古文：素不知书，亦无方略，惟于懦兵之中萋菲上将，言甲不知进退，乙不识军机，以此军人推为良将。
现代文：从来不看书，也没有方略，只不过是懦弱士兵中一个稍微出众的上将，说这个不懂战争的进退，说那个不识军机谋略，因此军人们便认为他是一位良将。
English: He had never read a book and had no strategy, he was just a slightly superior general among cowardly soldiers, he did not understand the advance and retreat of war, he did not know military strategy, so the soldiers thought he was a good general.

古文：初，梁将杨师厚在魏州，文礼领赵兵三万夜掠经、宗，因侵贝郡。
现代文：起初，梁将杨师厚在魏州，张文礼带三万赵兵夜里抢掠经、宗二地，又侵入贝郡。
English: At first, Liang sent Yang Shihou to Weizhou, while Zhang Wenli led 30,000 Zhao soldiers to loot Jing in the night, lived in two places, and invaded Bei County.

古文：师厚先率步骑数千人，设伏于唐店。
现代文：杨师厚先率步兵骑兵数千人，在唐店设下埋伏。
English: Yang Shihou led an advance of several thousand infantry and cavalry and set up an ambush at the Tang shop.

古文：文礼大掠而旋，士皆卷甲束兵，夜凯歌，行至唐店，师厚伏兵四面围合，杀戮殆尽，文礼单骑仅免。
现代文：张文礼大掠而返，士兵都收起甲胄武器，夜里唱着凯歌，走到唐店，杨师厚的伏兵四面合围，几乎杀尽赵兵，张文礼仅一人幸免。
English: Zhang Wenli returned from the raid, the soldiers all put away their armor and weapons, and at night they sang the famous song and went to the Tang shop. Yang Shih-chuo's ambush surrounded them on all sides, almost killing Zhao Bei. Only Zhang Wenli was spared.

古文：自尔犹对诸将大言，或让之曰： 唐店之功，不须多伐。 
现代文：然而张文礼还对各位将军说大话，有人责备他说： 唐店之功，不须过于自夸。 
English: However, Zhang Wenli also said big words to the generals. Some people reproached him saying, "Don't be too boastful about the merits of the Tang dynasty."

古文：文礼大惭。
现代文：张文礼大为惭愧。
English: Zhang Wenli is very ashamed.

古文：在镇州既久，见其政荒人僻，常蓄异图；酒酣之后，对左右每泄恶言，闻者莫不寒心。
现代文：在镇州时间长了，见这里政治混乱，人心乖僻，因而常常心怀异志，酒酣之后，对身边人常发泄恶言，听的人无不寒心。
English: After spending a long time in Zhenzhou, seeing the political turmoil here and the eccentricity of the people, I often harbored a different ambition. After drinking, I often vented my vile words on the people around me, and those who listened were chilled to the bone.

古文：惟王镕略无猜间，渐为腹心，乃以符习代其行营，以文礼为防城使，自此专伺间隙。
现代文：只有王一点都不猜疑他，渐渐成为心腹，王任符习代替自己主管行营，任张文礼为防城使，张文礼自此专门窥伺寻找机会。
English: Only the king did not suspect him at all, and gradually became his confidant. The king appointed Fuxi to be in charge of the campaign instead of himself, and appointed Zhang Wenli as the city defense envoy. Since then, Zhang Wenli has been spying and looking for opportunities.

古文：及镕杀李宏规，委政于其子昭祚。
现代文：当王杀李弘规后，把政事交给自己的儿子王昭祚。
English: When Wang killed Li Hongzhi, he handed over the government to his son, Wang Zhaojun.

古文：昭祚性逼戾，未识人间情伪，素养名持重，坐作贵人，既事权在手，朝夕欲代其父，向来附势之徒，无不族灭。
现代文：王昭祚性格偏狭乖戾，不识人情真伪，一贯养名持重，安然成为贵人，一旦权力在手，天天想取代自己的父亲，以前趋附王的人，无不遭到灭族的惩罚。
English: Wang Zhaohui's character is narrow-minded and obstinate, he does not know the true and false of human feelings, he has always held his name in high esteem, and he has become a noble man. Once power is in his hands, he wants to replace his father every day. Those who previously adhered to the king will all be punished by extermination.

古文：初，李宏规、李蔼持权用事，树立亲旧，分董要职，故奸宄之心不能摇动，文礼颇深畏惮。
现代文：起初，李弘规、李蔼掌权管事，提拔亲朋故友，分别担任要职，所以奸邪之徒不能动摇政权，张文礼很有些畏惧。
English: At first, Li Honggui and Li Yan were in charge of power and promoted relatives, friends and old friends to hold important positions, so the traitors could not shake the regime, and Zhang Wenli was a little afraid.

古文：及宏规见杀，其部下五百人惧罪，将欲奔窜，聚泣偶语，未有所之。
现代文：到李弘规被杀后，李弘规部下五百人害怕受牵连，将要逃散，聚在一起哭泣交谈，没有逃奔的地方。
English: After Li Honggui was killed, the five hundred people under Li Honggui were afraid of being implicated, they were going to run away, they gathered together to cry and talk, there was no place to escape.

古文：文礼因其离心，密以奸辞激之曰： 令公命我尽坑尔曹，我念尔十余年荷戈随我，为家为国，我若不即杀尔，则得罪于令公；我若不言，又负尔辈。 
现代文：张文礼趁他们与王离心之机，暗地用奸诈的话激发他们说： 主公命令我把你们都活埋掉，我念你们十多年来手拿武器跟随我，为家为国南征北战，我若不立即杀你们，就得罪了主公，我如不说出来而杀了你们，又对不住你们。 
English: Zhang Wenli took the opportunity of their estrangement from the king to secretly inspire them with treacherous words: "The Lord has ordered me to bury you all alive. I have been praying for more than ten years for you to follow me with weapons in your hands and fight for your family and country. If I do not kill you immediately, I will offend the Lord. If I do not speak out and kill you, I will not be able to forgive you.

古文：众军皆泣。
现代文：众军都哭了。
English: The whole army burst into tears.

古文：是夜作乱，杀王镕父子，举族灰灭，惟留王昭祚妻硃氏通梁人；寻间道告于梁曰： 王氏丧于乱军，普宁公主无恙。 
现代文：这天夜里张文礼领着他们作乱，杀死王父子，灭掉全族，只留下王昭祚的妻子朱氏与梁人打交道，旋即派人从小道秘密告诉梁朝说： 王氏死于乱军之中，普宁公主没出事。 
English: That night, Zhang Wenli led them to make a riot, killed Wang and his son, and wiped out the whole family, leaving only Wang Zhaojun's wife, Zhu, to deal with the Liang people. He immediately sent someone to secretly tell the Liang dynasty from the trail: Wang died in the rebel army, Princess Puning did not have an accident.

古文：文礼徇贼帅张友顺所请，因为留后，于潭城视事。
现代文：张文礼应乱军主帅张友顺的要求成为镇州留后，到潭城上任管事。
English: Zhang Wenli was asked by Zhang Youshun, the commander of the rebel army, to stay in Zhenzhou and then go to Tancheng to take up the post of steward.

古文：以事上闻，兼要节旄，寻亦奉笺劝进，庄宗姑示含容，乃可其请。
现代文：把这事告诉朝廷，并要求给予节旄，接着又写信劝唐庄宗当皇帝，庄宗姑且表示宽容，答应他做节度使的要求。
English: He told this to the imperial court and asked to be given the title of imperial envoy, and then wrote a letter to Tang Zhuangzong to persuade him to become the emperor. Zhuangzong showed tolerance and agreed to his request to be the imperial envoy.

古文：文礼比厮役小人，骤居人上，行步动息，皆不自安。
现代文：张文礼从一个仆役小人的地位，骤然居于众人之上，走路起居，都觉得很不安全。
English: Zhang Wenli has risen from the status of a servant to a villain, suddenly living above everyone, walking and living, and feeling very unsafe.

古文：出则千余人露刃相随，日杀不辜，道路以目，常虑我师问罪，奸心百端。
现代文：出来时一千多人带刀跟从，每天都要杀死无辜的人，路上行人怒目而视。张文礼总担心朝廷问罪，因而生出各种奸邪之心。
English: When he came out, more than a thousand people followed him with swords, killing innocent people every day. Pedestrians on the road glared at him. Zhang Wenli was always worried about being accused by the imperial court, which gave rise to all kinds of evil intentions.

古文：南通硃氏，北结契丹，往往擒获其使，庄宗遣人送还，文礼由是愈恐。
现代文：南边与朱氏通好，北边与契丹交结，常常抓获契丹人的使者，庄宗又派人送回，张文礼于是更加恐慌。
English: The south side was friendly with the Zhu clan, while the north side was allied with the Khitan. The Khitan envoys were often captured, and Zhuang Zong sent someone back, which made Zhang Wenli even more panicked.

古文：是岁八月，庄宗遣阎宝、史建瑭及赵将符习等率王镕本军进讨。
现代文：这一年八月，庄宗派阎宝、史建瑭以及赵将符习等人率王原来的军队征讨张文礼。
English: In August of that year, Zhuang Zong sent Yan Bao, Shi Jianqi and Zhao Zhe Fuxi to lead Wang's original army to recruit Zhang Wenli.

古文：师兴，文礼病疽腹，及闻史建瑭攻下赵州，惊悸而卒。
现代文：发兵时，张文礼腹部发疽，听说史建瑭攻下赵州，受惊吓而死。
English: At the time of sending troops, Zhang Wenli had gangrene in his abdomen. He heard that Shi Jiankun had conquered Zhaozhou, and was so frightened that he died.

古文：其子处瑾、处球秘不发丧，军府内外，皆不知之，每日于寝宫问安。
现代文：他的儿子张处瑾、张处球秘不发丧，军府内外都不知道，每天到寝宫来问安。
English: His sons Zhang Duanqian and Zhang Duanqian secretly did not mourn, and they did not know inside and outside the military headquarters. They came to the sleeping palace every day to ask for good luck.

古文：处瑾与其腹心韩正时参决大事，同谋奸恶。
现代文：张处瑾与心腹韩正时主持决定大事，同谋奸恶。
English: Zhang Shucheng and his confidant Han Zhengxing presided over major decisions and were complicit in evil.

古文：初，文礼疽未发时，举家咸见鬼物，昏瞑之后或歌或哭，又野河色变如血，游鱼多死，浮于水上，识者知其必败。
现代文：起初，张文礼还没发疽时，全家都看见有鬼物，在夜晚昏暗以后，时歌时哭，又有野河的颜色变如血色，水中游鱼死了很多，浮在水面上，识天象的人知道他一定会败亡。
English: At first, when Zhang Wenli did not have gangrene, the whole family saw ghosts. After the night was dark, they cried when they sang, and the color of the wild river turned blood-colored. Many fish died in the water and floated on the surface. Those who knew the celestial elephant knew that he would surely perish.

古文：十九年三月，阎宝为处瑾所败，庄宗以李嗣昭代之。
现代文：天祐十九年三月，阎宝被张处瑾打败，庄宗用李嗣昭代替他。
English: In March of the 19th year of Tianyu, Yan Bao was defeated by Zhang Shujie, and Zhuo Zong replaced him with Li Shizhao.

古文：四月，嗣昭为流矢所中，寻卒于师，命李存进继之。
现代文：四月，李嗣昭被流矢射中，死在军中，又命李存进继任。
English: In April, Li Shizhao was shot by a stray arrow, died in the army, and was succeeded by Li Cunjin.

古文：存进亦以战殁，乃以符存审为北面招讨使，攻镇州。
现代文：李存进也战死，便以李存审为北面招讨使，攻打镇州。
English: Li Cunxin also died in the battle, so Li Cunxin was appointed as the envoy of the north side to attack Zhenzhou.

古文：是时，处瑾危蹙日甚。昭义军节度判官任圜驰至城下，谕以祸福，处瑾登陴以诚告，乃遣牙将张彭送款于行台。
现代文：这时，张处瑾一日比一日危急，昭义军节度判官任圜赶到城下，对他指明前途祸福，张处瑾登上矮城墙诚心相告，派牙将张彭到行台求和。
English: At this time, Zhang's situation became more and more critical day by day. Ren Zheng, the judge of the Shouyi Army Festival, rushed to the city and pointed out the future misfortune and good fortune to him. Zhang Zhengzhang climbed the low city wall and sincerely announced to Zhang Peng that he would send Zhang Peng to Xingtai to sue for peace.

古文：俄而符存审师至城下。
现代文：不久李存审兵临城下。
English: Soon, Li Cunxin and his soldiers arrived at the outskirts of the city.

古文：是夜，赵将李再丰之子冲投缒以接王师，故诸军登城，迟明毕入，获处瑾、处球、处琪，并其母及同恶人等，皆折足送行台，镇人请醢而食之。
现代文：当晚，赵将李再丰的儿子李冲从城墙上丢下绳索接应朝廷军队，所以城外各军登城，天亮时全部进入镇州城，抓获张处瑾、张处球、张处琪，还有他们的母亲以及一同作恶的人，都弄断脚送到行台，镇州百姓请求把他们斩成肉酱吃掉。
English: That night, Zhao threw a rope from the city wall to Li Chong, the son of Li Zhaifeng, to connect him to the imperial army. Therefore, all the armies outside the city went to the city, and at dawn they all entered the city of Zhenzhou. They captured Zhang Duan, Zhang Duanqiu, Zhang Duanqi, and their mother, as well as those who committed evil together. They all had their feet broken and were sent to Xingtai. The people of Zhenzhou requested that they be cut into meat sauce and eaten.

古文：又发文礼之尸，磔之于市。
现代文：又挖出张文礼的尸体，在街头剁碎。
English: They also dug up Zhang Wenli's body and chopped it up in the street.

古文：董璋，本梁之骁将也。
现代文：董璋，原是梁朝的骁将。
English: Dong Hao, was originally a general in the Liang Dynasty.

古文：幼与高季兴、孔循俱事豪士李七郎为童仆。
现代文：年幼时和高季兴、孔循一起在豪士李七郎那里当童仆。
English: When he was young, Gao Jixing and Kong Cui worked together as servants for the great man Li Shichiro.

古文：李初名让，常以厚贿奉梁祖，梁祖宠之，因畜为假子，赐姓硃，名友让。
现代文：李七郎原名叫李让，曾以厚礼贿赂梁太祖，梁太祖宠爱他，因而收为义子，赐姓朱，名友让。
English: Li Shichiro's original name was Li Zhan. He had bribed Liang Taizu with a generous gift. Liang Taizu loved him, so he adopted him as his son-in-law, gave him the surname Zhu, and gave him the name Meiyu Zhan.

古文：璋既壮，得隶于梁祖帐下，后以军功迁为列校。
现代文：董璋长大后，得以在梁太祖帐下做事，后以军功升为列校。
English: After he grew up, he was able to work under Liang Taizu. Later, he was promoted to the rank of lieutenant colonel for his military service.

古文：梁龙德末，潞州李继韬送款于梁。
现代文：梁龙德末年，潞州李继韬与梁朝结交。
English: At the end of Liang Longde's life, Li Jizhe of Zhangzhou made friends with Liang Zhaozong.

古文：时潞将裴约方领兵戍泽州，不徇继韬之命，据城以自固。
现代文：这时潞州将领裴约正带兵守泽州，不听李继韬的命令，据城固守。
English: At this time, the Zhangzhou general Pei Yao was leading troops to guard Zhezhou. He did not listen to Li Jizhe's order and remained in the city.

古文：梁末帝遣璋攻陷泽州，遂授泽州刺史。
现代文：梁末帝派董璋攻陷泽州，便授任泽州刺史。
English: Emperor Liang Mucu sent Dong Xuan to invade Zezhou, and he was awarded the title of the history of Zezhou.

古文：是岁，庄宗入汴，璋来朝，庄宗素闻其名，优以待之。寻令却赴旧任，岁余代归。
现代文：这一年，庄宗进入汴州，董璋前来朝见，庄宗素来听说他的名声，待他很优厚，不久令他仍赴任以前官职，一年后被替代而归。
English: That year, Zhuangzong entered Zhangzhou, and Dong Xuan came to see the emperor. Zhuangzong had heard of his reputation and treated him very generously. He soon made him return to his previous post, but he was replaced a year later.

古文：时郭崇韬当国，待璋尤厚。
现代文：这时郭崇韬当权，对待董璋尤其优厚。
English: At this time, Guo Chongya was in power, and treated Dong Bao especially well.

古文：同光三年夏，命为邠州留后，三年秋，正授旄钺。
现代文：同光三年夏天，任命为州留后，三年秋天，正式授予旄钺任州节度使。
English: In the summer of the same year, he was appointed to stay in the state, and in the autumn of the same year, he was officially awarded the post of state festival envoy.

古文：九月，大举伐蜀，以璋为行营右厢马步都虞候。
现代文：九月，庄宗大举发兵讨伐蜀国，以董璋为行营右厢马军步军都虞候。
English: In September, Zhuangzong sent a large number of troops to fight against Shu, with Dong Xuan as the right flank of the cavalry army.

古文：时郭崇韬为招讨使，凡有军机，皆召璋参决。
现代文：这时郭崇韬任招讨使，凡有军机大事，都要召董璋参议决定。
English: At this time, Guo Chongyao was appointed as the envoy to invite and discuss, and whenever there was a military event, he would call on Dongyao to make a decision.

古文：是冬，蜀平，以璋为剑南东川节度副大使，知节度事。
现代文：这年冬天，蜀国平定，任董璋为剑南东川节度副大使，知节度事。
English: In the winter of that year, when Shu Province was pacified, he was appointed deputy ambassador of the Jianan Dongchuan Festival, and was in charge of the festival.

古文：天成初，加检校太傅。
现代文：天成初年，加任检校太傅。
English: In the first year of Tiancheng, he was appointed as the inspector of the school.

古文：二年，加同平章事。
现代文：二年，加同平章事。
English: Two years, plus the same punishment.

古文：是时安重诲当国，采人邪谋，言孟知祥必不为国家使，惟董璋性忠义，可特宠任，令图知祥。
现代文：这时安重诲当权治国，采纳奸邪的计谋，说孟知祥一定不会为国家所使用，只有董璋生性忠义，可以特别予以宠任，命令他去谋取孟知祥。
English: At this time, An Chong, who was in charge of governing the country, adopted a treacherous strategy, saying that Meng Zhixiang would definitely not be used by the country, and only Dong Xinsheng's loyalty could be specially favored, and ordered him to seek Meng Zhixiang.

古文：又璋之子光业为宫苑使，在朝结托势援，争言璋之善，知祥之恶。
现代文：加上董璋的儿子董光业任宫苑使，在朝廷勾结势力，大力宣扬董璋的好处、孟知祥的坏处。
English: In addition, Dong Quan's son, Dong Guangye, was appointed as a palace envoy, colluding with forces in the imperial court to vigorously promote the benefits of Dong Quan and the disadvantages of Meng Zhixiang.

古文：恩宠既优，故璋益恣其暴戾。
现代文：恩宠如此优厚，所以董璋更加放纵他的暴虐。
English: The grace was so generous that Dong Xuan indulged his tyranny even more.

古文：初，奉使东川者，皆言璋不恭于朝廷。
现代文：起初，奉使到东川的人，都说董璋对朝廷不恭敬。
English: At first, everyone who was sent to Dongchuan said that Dong Xuan was disrespectful to the imperial court.

古文：四年夏，时明宗将议郊天，遣客省使李仁矩赍诏示谕两川，又遣安重诲驰书于璋，以征贡奉，约以五十万为数。既而璋诉以地狭民贫，许贡十万而已。
现代文：四年夏天，明宗商议祭天的事，派客省使李仁矩带诏书告诉两川，又派安重诲写信给董璋，征收进贡物品，约好以五十万为数目，不久董璋申诉说地方狭小、百姓贫穷，只答应进贡十万而已。
English: In the summer of the fourth year, the Ming Dynasty discussed the matter of the festival of heaven, and sent the guest province to send Li Renzhang to bring the edict to tell the two rivers, and also sent An Chongyun to write to Dong Hui to collect the tribute items, and agreed on a number of five hundred thousand. Soon, Dong Hui complained that the place was small and the people were poor, and only promised a tribute of one hundred thousand.

古文：翌日，璋于衙署设宴以召仁矩，日既中而不至，璋使人侦之，仁矩方拥倡妇与宾友酣饮于驿亭。
现代文：第二天，董璋在衙署设宴招待李仁矩，到了中午李仁矩还没来，董璋派人打听，李仁矩正搂着娼妇和朋友在驿亭喝酒。
English: The next day, Dong Hao hosted a banquet for Li Renkang at the Ying Department. At noon, Li Renkang had not yet arrived, and Dong Hao sent someone to inquire. Li Renkang was drinking with a prostitute and a friend at the Ying Pavilion.

古文：璋大怒，遽领数百人，执持戈戟，骤入驿中，令洞开其门。仁矩惶骇，走入阁中，良久引出。
现代文：董璋大怒，立即带数百人，拿着兵器，突然闯入驿中，令打开大门，李仁矩惶恐害怕，走进阁中，很久才被带出来。
English: Dong Yu was furious. He immediately took hundreds of people with weapons and suddenly broke into the cocoon and ordered the door to be opened. Li Ren Rong was terrified and walked into the cocoon. It took a long time for him to be brought out.

古文：璋坐，立仁矩于阶下，戟手骂曰： 当我作魏博都监，尔为通引小将，其时去就，已有等威。今日我为籓侯，尔衔君命，宿张筵席，比为使臣，保敢至午不来，自共风尘耽酗，岂于王事如此不恭！
现代文：董璋坐着，要李仁矩站在台阶下，手指着他骂道 ：我当魏博都监时，你只不过是一个通风报信的小将，现在我是藩镇诸侯，你接受君王使命，我摆设宴席迎接你这使臣，怎么敢到中午还不来，自己在这里狎妓胡闹，岂不是对国事太不恭敬了！
English: Dong Hao sat down and asked Li Rincang to stand at the bottom of the steps. Pointing his finger at him, he scolded: "When I was the governor of Wei Bo, you were nothing more than a flamboyant messenger boy. Now I am the vassal of the princes, you accept the mission of the king, and I set up a banquet to welcome you, this envoy. How dare you not come until noon, and play around with prostitutes here? Isn't that too disrespectful to state affairs?"

古文：只如西川解斩客省使李严，谓我不能斩公耶！ 
现代文：西川能杀了客省使李严，难道我就不能杀了你吗？ 
English: If Nishikawa can kill the guest minister Li Yan, can't I kill you?

古文：因目肘腋，欲令执拽仁矩，仁矩涕泪拜告，仅而获免。
现代文：于是用目光向身边人示意，让他们抓住李仁矩捆起来，李仁矩流泪拜告才免于一死。
English: So he signaled to the people around him with his eyes, asking them to catch and tie up Li Rincang. Li Rincang was only saved from death when he broke down in tears.

古文：璋乃驰骑入衙，竟彻馔而不召。洎仁矩复命，益言璋不法。
现代文：董璋骑马回到衙署，撤掉宴席不招待他了，李仁矩回朝廷复命，更是说董璋横行不法。
English: Dong Hao rode back to the Imperial Household Agency, removed the banquet and did not invite him, Li Ren returned to the imperial court to resume his life, and said that Dong Hao was rampant and illegal.

古文：未几，重诲奏以仁矩为阆州团练使，寻升为节镇。
现代文：没多久，安重诲上奏任李仁矩为阆州团练使，不久又升为节度使。
English: Not long after, Li Rincang was appointed as the training envoy for the Bozhou group, and was soon promoted to the chief envoy of the festival.

古文：长兴元年夏，明宗以郊禋礼毕，加璋检校太尉。
现代文：长兴元年夏天，明宗祭天典礼结束后，加封董璋为检校太尉。
English: In the summer of the first year of the Changxing era, after the conclusion of the Mingsong Festival, he was promoted to the rank of inspecting officer.

古文：时两川刺史尝以兵为牙军，小郡不下五百人，璋已疑间，及闻除仁矩镇阆州，璋由是谋反乃决。
现代文：这时两川刺史曾以士兵做牙军，小郡不止五百人，董璋已有点怀疑，等到听说任命李仁矩镇守阆州，董璋因此决定谋反。
English: At this time, the history of the two rivers had made soldiers into a tooth army, with more than five hundred people from small counties. Dong Yao was already a little suspicious. When he heard that Li Renki was appointed to guard Zhangzhou, Dong Yao therefore decided to rebel.

古文：仍先与其子光业书曰： 朝廷割吾支郡为节制，屯兵三千，是杀我必矣。
现代文：又先写信给儿子董光业说 ：朝廷划割我的属郡另设节度使管理，驻兵三千，一定要杀我了。
English: He first wrote to his son, Dong Guangye, saying: "The imperial court has divided my county, set up a separate administration, and stationed three thousand soldiers. They must kill me."

古文：尔见枢要道吾言，如朝廷更发一骑入斜谷，则吾必反，与汝决矣！ 
现代文：你找朝中大员传我的话，如果朝廷再发一兵进入斜谷，我就一定造反，和你告别了。 
English: If the imperial court sends one more soldier into the valley, I will definitely rebel and bid you farewell.

古文：光业以书呈枢密承旨李虔徽。
现代文：董光业把信给枢密承旨李虔徽看。
English: Dong Guangye showed the letter to the Privy Councilor Li Qianhui.

古文：会朝廷再发中使荀咸乂将兵赴阆州，光业谓虔徽曰： 咸乂未至，吾父必反。
现代文：碰上朝廷又派朝中使者荀咸繧带兵去阆州，董光业对李虔徽说： 荀咸繧还没到，我父亲一定已经反了。
English: Encountering the imperial court and sending the North Korean and Chinese envoy, Han Xianqi, to lead the troops to Ganzhou, Dong Guangye said to Li Qianhui: "Han Xianqi hasn't arrived yet, my father must have turned back.

古文：吾身不足惜，虑劳朝廷征发。
现代文：我自己没什么可惜的，担心的是烦劳朝廷去征讨。
English: I myself have nothing to regret, but I am worried about having to go to the trouble of collecting money from the court.

古文：请停咸乂之行，吾父必保常日。 
现代文：请停止荀咸繧之行，我父亲必定会像平常一样。 
English: Please stop your insolence, my father will surely return as usual.

古文：重诲不从，咸乂未至，璋已擅追绵州刺史武虔裕，囚于衙署。
现代文：安重诲没同意。荀咸繧没到阆州，董璋就已擅自追捕绵州刺史武虔裕，关在衙署。
English: An Chongyun did not agree. When Yan Xianyun did not arrive in Ganzhou, Dong Jun had already arbitrarily hunted down the Mianzhou assassin, Shi Wuqianyu, and locked him up in the Ganzhou police station.

古文：虔裕，安重诲之心腹也，故先囚之。
现代文：武虔裕是安重诲的心腹，所以先关起来。
English: Wu Qianyu is the heart and soul of An Chongyuan, so lock him up first.

古文：五月，璋传檄于利、阆、遂等州，责以间谍朝廷。
现代文：五月，董璋把檄文传送到利、阆、遂州，责备他们在朝廷离间。
English: In May, Dong Hao transmitted the letter to Li, Yao, and Suizhou, blaming them for causing discord in the imperial court.

古文：寻率其兵陷阆州，擒节度使李仁矩、军校姚洪等害之。
现代文：接着带兵攻陷阆州，抓获节度使李仁矩、军校姚洪等杀掉。
English: Next, he led the troops to invade Zhangzhou, and killed Li Rincang, Yao Hong of the military school, and others.

古文：先是，璋欲谋叛，先遣使持厚币于孟知祥，求为婚家。
现代文：在这之前，董璋想谋反，先派使者带厚礼给孟知祥，请求结为亲家。
English: Prior to this, Dong Xuan wanted to rebel and first sent an emissary with a gift to Meng Zhixiang, asking him to marry into his family.

古文：且言为朝廷猜忌，将有替移，去则丧家，住亦致讨，地狭兵少，独力不任，愿以小兒结婚爱女。
现代文：并且说受朝廷猜忌，将被替下，离开这里就会丧家，留下又会招来讨伐，地方小兵力少，独自承受不了，愿以小儿子娶对方女儿。
English: He also said that he was suspected by the imperial court and would be replaced, that he would lose his home if he left, and that he would invite a crusade if he stayed, that there were few soldiers in the area and he could not bear it alone, and that he would like to marry his daughter to his younger son.

古文：时知祥亦贰于朝廷，因许以为援。
现代文：这时孟知祥也对朝廷有二心，因而答应援助他。
English: At this time, Meng Zhixiang was also ambivalent about the imperial court, so he promised to help him.

古文：既而知祥出师以围遂州，故璋攻阆州得恣其毒焉。
现代文：不久孟知祥出兵包围遂州，所以董璋攻打阆州才可以恣意而为。
English: Soon after, Meng Zhixiang sent troops to encircle Suizhou, so it was only after Dong Jun attacked Zhangzhou that he could act arbitrarily.

古文：其年秋，诏削夺璋在身官爵，命天雄军节度使石敬瑭为东川行营招讨使，率师以讨之。
现代文：这年秋天，朝廷下诏削夺董璋现任官爵，命天雄军节度使石敬瑭为东川行营招讨使，率兵讨伐。
English: In the autumn of that year, the imperial court stripped Dong Xuan, the current official, of his title, and ordered the Tianxiong Army Festival to make Shi Jingyuan a recruiting envoy for the Dongchuan Campaign, leading the army to fight.

古文：璋之子宫苑使光业并其族，并斩于洛阳。
现代文：董璋的儿子宫苑使董光业以及一族人被一起在洛阳杀掉。
English: Dong Quan's son Gong Yuan had Dong Guangye and his family killed together in Luoyang.

古文：及石敬瑭率师进讨，以粮运不接，班师。
现代文：石敬瑭率师进讨时，因粮草运输跟不上，回师。
English: When Shi Jingyao led the division into the discussion, he could not keep up with the grain and grass transportation and returned to the division.

古文：明宗方务怀柔，乃放西川进奏官苏愿、东川军将刘澄各归本道，别无诏旨，只云 两务求安 。
现代文：明宗正采取怀柔政策，便放西川进奏官苏愿、东川军将领刘澄各回本道，没有另外的诏旨，只说 ：两地务必求得安定。 
English: Mingzong was adopting a policy of appeasement, so he sent the Nishikawa inquisitor, Su Wanyi, and the Dongchuan army general, Liu Cheng, back to their homelands. There was no other edict, only: the two regions must seek stability.

古文：时孟知祥其骨肉在京师者俱无恙焉，因遣使报璋，欲连表称谢。
现代文：这时孟知祥的亲属在首都的都没出事，便派使者告诉董璋，想联名上表称谢。
English: At this time, Meng Zhixiang's relatives in the capital did not have an accident, so they sent an envoy to tell Dong Qi that they wanted to jointly express their gratitude.

古文：璋怒曰： 西川存得弟侄，遂欲再通朝廷，璋之兒孙已入黄泉，何谢之有！ 
现代文：董璋怒道： 西川保存了弟侄，便想再和朝廷通好，我的子孙已死了，还有什么称谢的！ 
English: Dong Rong angrily said, "Nishikawa saved my nephew, so he wants to be friendly with the imperial court again. My grandchild is dead, what else is there to be grateful for!"

古文：自是璋疑知祥背己，始构隙矣。
现代文：从此董璋疑心孟知祥背叛自己，开始有隔阂了。
English: From then on, Dong Ye suspected Meng Zhixiang of betraying him, and the estrangement began.

古文：廷隐伪遁，璋逐之，知祥与张公铎继进，璋军乱不成列，廷隐整阵，与知祥合击之，璋军大败。
现代文：长兴三年四月，董璋率一万多人袭击孟知祥，孟知祥和各位将军带兵抵抗，在汉州的弥牟镇交战。董璋大败，只剩几十人又逃奔回东川。
English: In April of the third year of Changxing, Dong Hui led more than ten thousand people to attack Meng Zhixiang. Meng Zhixiang and other generals led the resistance and fought in the town of Yimou in Hanzhou. Dong Hui was defeated, and only a few dozen people fled back to Dongchuan.

古文：先是，前陵州刺史王晖为璋所邀，寓于东川，至是因璋之败，率众以害之，传其首于西川。
现代文：起先，前西川陵州刺史王晖受董璋邀请，住在东川。到这时因董璋失败，带众人杀了他，把他的首级送到西川。
English: At first, Wang Yao, the former governor of Xichuanling County, was invited by Dong Yao to live in Dongchuan. At this time, because of Dong Yao's failure, he took everyone to kill him and sent his head to Xichuan.

