古文：温皇甫二李姜崔温大雅，字彦弘，并州祁人。
现代文：温大雅字彦弘，并州祁县人。
English: He is a mild-mannered person with the name of Hikohiro, and a native of Shoushan County.

古文：父君攸，北齐文林馆学士，入隋为泗州司马，见朝政不纲，谢病归。
现代文：父亲温君攸，是北齐文林馆学士，入隋后任泗州司马，因见隋朝政令不行，请病假告归。
English: His father, Wen Junyou, was a scholar at the North Qibun Forest Museum. After entering the Sui Dynasty, he served as the Sima of Zhangzhou. Seeing that the Sui Dynasty's political order was not good, he asked for sick leave and returned home.

古文：大雅性至孝，与弟彦博、大有皆知名，薛道衡见之，叹曰： 三人者，皆卿相才也。 
现代文：大雅性情极孝，与其弟彦博、大有都很知名。薛道衡见了他们，感叹地说： 兄弟三人都是卿相之才呀。 
English: Da Ya is very filial, and he and his younger brother, Yan Bo, are well-known. When Xue Daoheng saw them, he said with admiration, "All three brothers are very talented.

古文：初为东宫学士、长安尉，以父丧解，会天下乱，不复仕。
现代文：初任东宫学士、长安县尉，因父亲去世解职，时逢天下大乱，便不再出任官职。
English: At the beginning, he was a graduate of Donggong University and a lieutenant of Chang'an County. However, he was dismissed due to his father's death, and when the world was in turmoil, he no longer held an official position.

古文：高祖镇太原，厚礼之。
现代文：高祖镇守太原时，以厚礼相待。
English: When Gaozouzhen was in charge of Taiyuan, they treated each other with courtesy.

古文：兵兴，引为大将军府记室参军，主文檄。
现代文：起兵后，授职为大将军府记室参军，主掌文书。
English: After being drafted, he joined the army and was assigned to the General Staff Records Office, where he was in charge of paperwork.

古文：帝受禅，与窦威、陈叔达讨定仪典，迁黄门侍郎，而彦博亦为中书侍郎，对管华近。
现代文：高祖受禅后，大雅与窦威、陈叔达一道议定礼仪，后迁任黄门侍郎，当时彦博也任职为中书侍郎，对居近密。
English: After Gao Zu accepted Zen, Daya, Dou Wei and Chen Shuda agreed on the etiquette together. Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter. At that time, Hikobo also served as the Chinese calligraphy waiter, and they were close to each other.

古文：帝尝从容谓曰： 我起晋阳，为卿一门耳。 
现代文：高祖曾从容对他说： 我起兵于晋阳，就是因为您一家的缘故。 
English: Gaozu calmly said to him, "I raised an army in Jinyang because of your family.

古文：进工部侍郎、陕东道大行台尚书。
现代文：不久升任工部侍郎、陕东道大行台尚书。
English: He was soon promoted to the position of a chamberlain in the engineering department, and became the host of the Shaanxi Grand Marching Band.

古文：隐太子图乱，秦王表大雅镇洛阳须变，数陈秘画，多所嘉纳。
现代文：隐太子图谋作乱之时，秦王上表派温大雅镇守洛阳以待变化，大雅多次陈献密策，多受秦王嘉赏。
English: When Prince Yin was plotting to start a riot, King Qin sent the gentle and elegant Zhengu to Luoyang to wait for a change. The elegant Zhengu repeatedly presented secret strategies, which were mostly appreciated by King Qin.

古文：王即位，转礼部，封黎国公。
现代文：秦王即位后，转任礼部尚书，封为黎国公。
English: After the enthronement of King Qin, he was transferred to the Ministry of Rites and Literature and named the Prince of Li Province.

古文：改葬其祖，卜人占其地，曰： 弟则吉，不利于君，若何？ 
现代文：大雅改葬其祖父，卜筮者占其墓地说 ：对弟弟吉利，而不利于您，怎么办？ 
English: Daya reburied her grandfather, and soothsayers occupied his grave and said, "What if it is good for your brother, but bad for you?"

古文：大雅曰： 如子言，我含笑入地矣。 
现代文：大雅说 ：如真像您说的那样，我将含笑入地了。 
English: Daya said, "If it is as you say, I will be smiling from ear to ear."

古文：岁余卒，谥曰孝。
现代文：一年后去世，谥号为孝。
English: He died a year later, and his nickname was Takashi.

古文：永徽五年，赠尚书右仆射。
现代文：永徽五年，赠予尚书右仆射。
English: In the fifth year of the Yonghui era, it was given to Shang Shuxu Rongjiao.

古文：彦博字大临，通书记，警悟而辩。
现代文：温彦博字大临，通习书籍杂记，性警悟而有辩才。
English: Atsuhiko Hirohito, a great scholar, is familiar with books and miscellaneous notes. He is alert and has the ability to debate.

古文：开皇末，对策高策，授文林郎，直内史省。
现代文：开皇末年，对策为高第，授职为文林郎，轮值于内史省。
English: At the end of the first emperor's reign, the countermeasure was to promote Gao Di, and Wen Lin Lang was appointed to the post, rotating at the Ministry of Internal Affairs.

古文：隋乱，幽州总管罗艺引为司马。
现代文：隋末大乱，幽州总管罗艺引用为司马。
English: In the chaos at the end of the Sui Dynasty, Luo Yi, the governor of Yuzhou, was referred to as Sima.

古文：艺以州降，彦博与有谋，授总管府长史，封西河郡公。
现代文：罗艺举州归降，彦博参与其谋议，授职总管府长史，封为西河郡公。
English: Luo Yi returned to Juzhou, and Yanbo participated in his deliberation, and was awarded the post of chief administrator of the prefectural governor, and was named the governor of Xihe County.

古文：召入为中书舍人，迁侍郎。
现代文：不久征召入京任职为中书舍人，随即升任中书侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was called to Beijing to serve as the secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters, and was immediately promoted to the position of secretary of the Chinese Academy of Letters.

古文：高丽贡方物，高祖欲让而不臣，彦博执不可，曰： 辽东本周箕子国，汉玄菟郡，不使北面，则四夷何所瞻仰？ 
现代文：高丽使进贡该国物产，高祖想谦让而不使其国臣服，彦博执意不从，并说 ：高丽本是周代箕子的封国，汉代为玄菟郡，不使北面称臣，那么四夷将如何观瞻天颜？ 
English: The Goryeo envoys paid tribute to the country's products. Gaozu wanted to make concessions without making his country a subject, but Yanbo was adamant that he would not comply, and said: Goryeo was originally a fief of the Zhou Dynasty, the Han Dynasty was Xuanwu County, and did not make the north side a subject, so how will the four Yi look at the face of heaven?

古文：帝纳而止。
现代文：高祖接受这个意见而不与其使抗礼相见。
English: Gaozu accepted this opinion without protest.

古文：突厥入寇，彦博以并州道行军长史战太谷，王师败绩，被执。
现代文：突厥率兵进犯，彦博以并州道行军长史身份与虏寇战于太谷，王师战败，彦博被擒。
English: The Turks led an army to attack, and Hikobo, as the commander of the combined state road march, fought against the Mongol invaders in Taiyuan. Wang Shi was defeated, and Hikobo was captured.

古文：突厥知近臣，数问唐兵多少及国虚实，彦博不肯对，囚阴山苦寒地。
现代文：突厥闻知他是唐帝近臣，多次讯问唐兵多少及国家虚实情况，彦博不愿告诉他们，被他们囚禁于阴山苦寒之地。
English: Knowing that he was a close retainer of the Tang Emperor, the Turks repeatedly interrogated him about the number of Tang soldiers and the true and false situation of the country. Yanbo did not want to tell them that he was imprisoned by them in a cold place.

古文：太宗立，突厥归款，得还。
现代文：太宗即位后，突厥遣使交好，彦博得以返回。
English: After Taizong ascended the throne, the Turks sent envoys to make friends, and Yanbo was able to return.

古文：授雍州治中，寻检校吏部侍郎。
现代文：授职雍州治中，不久迁任检校吏部侍郎。
English: He was awarded the post of Yongzhou Junior High School, and was soon transferred to the post of attendant of the school inspection department.

古文：彦博欲汰择士类，寡术不能厌众，讼牒满廷，时讥其烦碎。
现代文：彦博淘汰选任士人，因缺乏方法不能服众，争讼盈庭，时人讥讽他为政烦琐。
English: Hikobo eliminated the election of judges, because of the lack of methods, he could not serve the public, the disputes were numerous, and people ridiculed him for being too cumbersome.

古文：复为中书侍郎，迁御史大夫，检校中书侍郎事。
现代文：后来重任中书侍郎，迁任御史大夫，检校中书侍郎事。
English: Later, he was given the important position of junior high school secretary, transferred to the position of vice principal, and became the junior high school secretary for school inspection.

古文：贞观四年，迁中书令，封虞国公。
现代文：贞观四年，升任中书令，封为虞国公。
English: In the fourth year of Zhenguan, he was promoted to the position of Zhongshirong and was given the title of Yu Guogong.

古文：突厥降，诏议所以安边者，彦博请如汉置降匈奴五原塞，以为捍蔽，与魏徵廷争，徵不胜其辩，天子卒从之。
现代文：突厥归降后，下诏商议安定边防的办法。彦博奏请像汉代安置归降匈奴族人于五原塞那样，用他们守边作为国家的屏障，与魏征当廷争辩，魏征争辩不胜，天子最终接受了彦博的提议。
English: After the surrender of the Turks, the imperial edict was issued to discuss the means of stabilizing the border defense. Yan Bo-so requested that the Han Dynasty resettle the surrendered Huns in Wuhansi, use them to defend the border as a national barrier, and argue with Wei Zheng at the court. Wei Zheng did not win the argument, and Tianzi finally accepted Yan Bo's proposal.

古文：其后突利可汗弟结社谋反，帝始悔云。
现代文：其后突利可汗之弟结社率谋反作乱，太宗才感到后悔。
English: Later, the younger brother of the Turi Khan organized a group and plotted a rebellion, which Taizong regretted.

古文：彦博善辞令，每问四方风俗，胪布诰命，若成诵然；进止详华，人皆拭目观。
现代文：彦博善于辞令，每逢问及四方风俗，宣布诰命，就像事先会背诵一样；进止雍容不迫，人们都拭目以观。
English: Yanbo is good at rhetoric. Whenever he is asked about the customs of the four directions, he announces his death, as if he could recite it in advance. He is easy-going, and people look at him.

古文：高祖尝宴近臣，遣秦王谕旨，既而顾左右曰： 何如温彦博？ 
现代文：高祖曾宴飨近臣，派遣秦王宣谕旨意，过后回顾左右说： 比起温彦博来如何？ 
English: Gao Zu once gave a banquet for his close vassals and sent the Qin King to proclaim his will. Looking back, he said, "Compared to Wen Yanbo, how is he?

古文：十年，迁尚书右仆射，明年卒，年六十三。
现代文：贞观十年，迁任尚书右仆射，第二年去世，时年六十三岁。
English: In the tenth year of Zhenguan, he was transferred to the post of Shangshu Yuhudu, and died the following year, at the age of 63.

古文：彦博性周慎，既掌机务，谢宾客不通，进见必陈政事利害。
现代文：彦博性情周密谨慎，既已掌管国家机务，便谢绝宾客不与往来，进见皇上必定陈说政事利害。
English: Yanbo had a meticulous and prudent disposition. Since he was already in charge of the state machinery, he declined to have any dealings with the guests. If he saw the emperor, he would certainly say that he had political interests.

古文：卒后，帝叹曰： 彦博以忧国故，耗思殚神，我见其不逮再期矣，恨不许少闲以究其寿。 
现代文：去世之后，太宗感叹地说 ：彦博因忧国的缘故，耗尽心力，我见其精神不济已有两年，恨不让他稍有空闲以延其寿。 
English: After his death, Emperor Taizong said with regret: "Hikobo has exhausted his energy because he was worried about the country. I have seen that his spirit has not been good for two years. I wish he could have some leisure time to prolong his life."

古文：家贫无正寝，殡别室，帝命有司为构寝。
现代文：其家贫乏而无正寝，故停殡于别室，太宗下令有关官员为他营造正堂。
English: His family was poor and did not have a main hall, so the funeral was held in another room. Taizong ordered the relevant officials to build a main hall for him.

古文：赠特进，谥曰恭，陪葬昭陵。
现代文：赠予特进，谥号为恭，陪葬于昭陵。
English: He was given the posthumous name Kyong and was buried in the Shoryo Mausoleum.

古文：子振、挺。
现代文：其子有温振、温挺。
English: His son has a temperature oscillation and a temperature resistance.

古文：振历太子舍人，居丧以毁卒。
现代文：温振历任太子舍人，居丧时因哀毁去世。
English: Wen Zhen, who had been the prince's concubine, died of grief at the time of his death.

古文：彦博裔孙廷筠，少敏悟，工为辞章，与李商隐皆有名，号 温李 。
现代文：温挺娶千金公主为妻，任官至延州刺史。彦博曾孙温曦，娶凉国长公主为妻。温彦博的后世子孙温廷筠，少时聪慧灵敏，善为辞章，与李商隐都很知名，号为 温李 。
English: Wen Ting married Princess Qianjin and was appointed as an official to Yanzhou. Yan Bo's great-grandson, Wen Xi, married Princess Liangguo. Wen Tingyao, a descendant of Wen Yingbo, was clever and eloquent when he was young, and was good at writing slogans. He and Li Shangyin are both well-known, and his name is Wen Li.

古文：然薄于行，无检幅。
现代文：然而行为有失检点，不修边幅。
English: However, there is a point of misconduct in the behavior, and there is a lack of grooming.

古文：又多作侧辞艳曲，与贵胄裴諴、令狐滈等蒲饮狎昵。
现代文：又多创作邪词艳曲，与贵族子弟裴讠咸、令狐氵高等人赌博饮酒戏耍。
English: In addition, he often composed obscene songs, and gambled and drank with aristocrats such as Pei Shuxian and Ling Fuxian.

古文：数举进士不中第。
现代文：多次参加进士考试而不中第。
English: He took the entrance examination several times, but did not pass.

古文：思神速，多为人作文。
现代文：行文构思神速，常为别人做文章。
English: He is a fast writer and often writes articles for others.

古文：大中末，试有司，廉视尤谨，廷筠不乐，上书千余言，然私占授者已八人，执政鄙其为，授方山尉。
现代文：大中末年，受试于有关衙门，当时检视品行尤其谨慎，廷筠不高兴，便上书千余字以求中试，考官私自占授者已有八人，执政大臣鄙视其品行，授予廷筠官职为方山县尉。
English: At the end of junior high school, he was tested in the relevant entrance exam. At that time, the examination of character was particularly cautious. The imperial eunuch was not happy, so he wrote more than a thousand words in order to pass the mid-term exam. There were already eight examiners who were self-appointed. The ruling minister despised his behavior and awarded the imperial eunuch the official post of Fangshan County Lieutenant.

古文：徐商镇襄阳，署巡官，不得志，去归江东。
现代文：徐商镇守襄阳，委任巡查官吏，廷筠不得其志，离职返归江东。
English: Xu Shangzhen guarded Xiangyang and appointed inspecting officers, while Ting Yao had no choice but to leave the post and return to Jiangdong.

古文：令狐綯方镇淮南，廷筠怨居中时不为助力，过府不肯谒。
现代文：令狐当时镇守淮南，廷筠埋怨他身居朝中时不助一臂之力，过其府第时不愿拜见他。
English: At that time, Lingfuxu was in charge of Huainan, and Tingtao complained that he did not help him when he was in the middle of the court, and did not want to visit him when he was in the capital.

古文：丐钱扬子院，夜醉，为逻卒击折其齿，诉于綯。
现代文：廷筠借钱于扬子院，夜里醉酒被巡逻士卒打落牙齿，告于令狐处。
English: Ting Tao borrowed money from Yang Zi Yuan, got drunk in the night, had his teeth knocked out by a patrol officer, and reported to Ling Fu's place.

古文：綯为劾吏，吏具道其汙行，綯两置之。
现代文：令狐为此弹劾官吏，官吏揭露其不良行为，令狐对双方都置之不问。
English: Linghu impeached officials for this, officials revealed their bad behavior, and Linghu did not question both sides.

古文：武德二年，始许终丧，然犹时以权迫不能免，如房玄龄、褚遂良者众矣。
现代文：此事闻于京师，廷筠遍拜公卿大臣，申诉被官吏诬陷。不久徐商执掌大权，颇为佑护，想告白朝廷任用廷筠。但不久徐商罢免，杨收嫉其为人，于是废弃于家直至去世。廷筠本名岐，字飞卿。
English: The matter was reported to the Grand Master of the Capital, and Ting Zheng repeatedly paid homage to court nobles and ministers, and the complaint was framed by officials. Soon after, Xu Shang took over the power and was quite protective, and wanted to confess that the imperial court had appointed Ting Zheng. However, soon after, Xu Shang dismissed him, and Yang became jealous of him, so he abandoned him at home until his death. Ting Zheng was a famous person, and his name was Fei Jing.

古文：李嗣真，字承胄，赵州柏人人。
现代文：李嗣真字承胄，赵州柏县人。
English: Li Shizhen is a native of Bai County, Zhaozhou.

古文：多艺数，举明经，中之，累调许州司功参军。
现代文：博通技艺术数，应举明经科，中第，累迁至许州司功参军。
English: A number of well-rounded technical and artistic talents, including Ming Jingke and Zhongde, have moved to Xuzhou to join the army.

古文：贺兰敏之修撰东台，表嗣真直弘文馆，与学士刘献臣、徐昭皆少有名，号 三少 。
现代文：贺兰敏之担任东台修撰之职，表奏李嗣真入直弘文馆，嗣真与学士刘献臣、徐昭都是少年出名，时人称他们为 三少 。
English: Helan Minzhi held the post of East Taiwan editor-in-chief, Li Shizhen entered the Naohiro Museum, and Shizhen and the bachelor Liu Xiancheng and Xu Zhao were all famous as teenagers. At that time, they were called the Three Minorities.

古文：高宗东封还，诏赠孔子太师，命有司为祝，司文郎中雷少颍文不称旨，更命嗣真，成不淹顷，帝览称善，诏加两阶。
现代文：高宗东封泰山返回，下诏封赠孔子太师之衔，命令有关官员准备祝祭，司文郎中雷少颖撰文不合旨意，改命嗣真撰文，顷刻而成，高宗阅后称善，下诏加官两阶。
English: Gao Zong returned to the eastern fief of Mount Tai, gave Confucius the title of grandmaster under the imperial seal, and ordered the relevant officials to prepare for the celebration. Sifeng Langzhonglei Shaoying wrote an article that was not in accordance with the will, and changed his name to Shizhen to write an article, which was done in an instant. Gao Zong was commended after reading, and was promoted to two levels under the imperial seal.

古文：敏之等倚恩自如，嗣真不喜，求补义乌令。
现代文：贺兰敏之等人倚仗恩宠随意行事，嗣真对此不满，要求补任为义乌县令。
English: He Lan Minzhi and others relied on the grace to act at will. Shizhen was dissatisfied with this and demanded to be appointed as the Yiwu County magistrate.

古文：敏之败，学士多连坐，嗣真独免。
现代文：敏之败后，学士往往牵连坐罪，惟独嗣真脱免。
English: After the defeat of Min, the scholars were often implicated in the crime of sedition, but the true heirs were exempted.

古文：调露中，为始平令，风化大行。
现代文：调露年间，任职为始平县令，教化大行。
English: During the Tang Dynasty, he served as the county magistrate of Shihping County and was a great reformer.

古文：时章怀太子作《宝庆曲》，阅于太清观，嗣真谓道人刘概、辅俨曰： 宫不召商，君臣乖也；角与徵戾，父子疑也。
现代文：当时章怀太子制作《宝庆曲》，演奏于太清观。嗣真对道士刘概、辅俨说： 宫声与商声不相应和，含有君臣乖隔之意；角声与徵声相违，含有父子相疑的意思。
English: At that time, Prince Zhang Huai composed the "Baoqingqu" and performed it at the Taiching Court. Zizhen said to the Taoist priests Liu Zhou and Fu Ying: "The sound of the palace does not correspond to the sound of the merchant, which implies the separation of the prince and the vassal; the sound of the horn is contrary to the call, which implies the doubt of the father and the son."

古文：死声多且哀，若国家无事，太子任其咎。 
现代文：死声既多且含哀声，如果国家平安无事，太子就会遭殃。 
English: If the country is safe and sound, the crown prince will suffer.

古文：俄而太子废，概等奏其言，擢太常丞，知五礼仪，封常山县子。
现代文：不久太子果然被废黜，刘概等人将他的话上奏朝廷，由此提升为太常丞，掌管五类礼仪，封为常山县子。
English: Soon after, the crown prince was indeed deposed, and Liu Zhi and others reported his words to the imperial court. As a result, he was promoted to Tai Changzheng, in charge of the five types of etiquette, and named the son of Changshan County.

古文：嗣真常曰： 隋乐府有《堂堂曲》，明唐再受命，比日有 侧堂堂，桡堂堂 之谣，侧，不正也，桡，危也。
现代文：嗣真常说： 隋时乐府有《堂堂曲》，表明唐天子再度受命，近来有 侧堂堂，桡堂堂 的歌谣。侧，是不正的意思；桡，有危险的意思。
English: Zizhen often said: In the Sui Dynasty, the palace of music had the "Chamber Music," indicating that Tang Tianzi had been ordered again. Recently, there have been songs of "Side Hall" and "Chamber Music." "Side" means improper; "Chamber Music" means dangerous.

古文：皇帝病日侵，事皆决中宫，持权与人，收之不易。
现代文：皇帝病热日渐加重，国事全由中宫裁决，将权柄授予他人，要想收回就不容易。
English: The emperor's fever is getting worse day by day. All state affairs are decided by the Imperial Court. It is not easy to take back the power given to others.

古文：宗室虽众，居中制外，势且不敌。
现代文：宗室成员虽多，但皇后居中以制外，其势不相敌。
English: Although there are many members of the family, the empress is in the middle and out of the system.

古文：诸王殆为后所蹂践，吾见难作不久矣。 
现代文：宗室诸王即将被皇后所残害，我见祸乱之起为时不久了。 
English: The kings of the family are about to be killed by the queen, and I see that it will not be long before the calamity begins.

古文：太常缺黄钟，铸不能成，嗣真居崇业里，疑土中有之，弗得其所。
现代文：太常寺缺乏黄钟宫调的乐器，铸造也未成功，嗣真居住崇业里，怀疑土中藏有其钟，但不知其确切处所。
English: Taizho-ji Temple lacks musical instruments in the Yellow Bell Palace tuning, and the casting has not been successful. Tsuchizane lives in Sungye-ri, and suspects that there is a bell hidden in the soil, but does not know its exact location.

古文：道上逢一车，有鐸声甚厉，嗣真曰： 宫声也。 
现代文：他在路上遇到一辆车，其铎铃非常响亮，嗣真说 ：这就是宫声啊！ 
English: On the way, he met a car with a very loud bell, and he said, "This is the sound of the palace!"

古文：市以归，振于空地，若有应者，掘之得钟，众乐遂和。
现代文：买下铎铃归家，在空地之上摇动，似乎有其回应之声，掘其处果然得到乐钟，众乐方才得以和谐。
English: He bought a cymbal and returned home. Shaking it over the open space, it seemed to have its own response. When he dug it up, he finally found the bell, and the people were able to be in harmony.

古文：尝引工展器于廷，后奇其风度应对，召相王府参军阎玄静图之，吏部郎中杨志诚为赞，秘书郎殷仲容书，时以为宠。
现代文：嗣真曾带领乐工展示乐器于朝廷，武后赞赏他的风度及应答，征召相王府参军阎玄静画其图像，吏部郎中杨志诚撰写赞文，秘羽郎殷仲容书写其上，时人认为他很受恩宠。
English: Tsuchizane once led the musicians to display musical instruments at the imperial court. Empress Wu appreciated his demeanor and response. Yan Xuan, who was called up to join the imperial army, quietly painted his image. Yang Zhicheng, a member of the Ministry of Civil Affairs, wrote a praise, and Yin Zhongyong, a member of the Imperial Household Agency, wrote on it. At the time, people thought he was very favored.

古文：永昌初，以右御史中丞知大夫事，请周、汉为二王后，诏可。
现代文：永昌初年，任职为右御史中丞知大夫事，奏请以周、汉为二王之后，下诏批准。
English: In the first year of Yongchang, he was appointed to the post of Uguoshi Chujo Chidaifu, and after requesting that Zhou and Han be the two kings, the imperial edict was approved.

古文：命巡抚河东，荐宋温瑾、袁嘉祚、李日知，拔州县职，皆至显官。
现代文：不久受命巡抚河东，推荐宋温瑾、袁嘉祚、李日知，从州县之职提拔上来，全都达到朝廷显官之位。
English: He was soon appointed as the governor of Hedong, recommending Song Wenjun, Yuan Jiayun, and Li Rizhi, who were promoted from the posts of prefectures and counties, and all of them reached the position of eminent officials of the imperial court.

古文：来俊臣狱方炽，嗣真上书谏，以为 昔陈平事汉祖，谋疏楚君臣，行反间，项羽遂亡。
现代文：来俊臣大兴冤狱时，嗣真上书劝谏，认为 从前陈平侍奉汉高祖时，用计疏远楚霸王君臣关系，反间大行，项羽随即灭亡。
English: When Zhu Jun's vassal, Daxing, was unjustly imprisoned, Zizhen sent a letter to persuade him, saying that when Chen Ping served the Han Emperor Gao, he used a strategy to alienate the relationship between the ruler of Chu and his vassal, and there was a great conflict, and Xiang Yu immediately died.

古文：今殆有如平者谋陛下君臣，恐为社稷祸 。
现代文：如今大约也有类似陈平的人正在离间陛下君臣，恐怕会给国家带来祸患 。
English: Nowadays, there are probably also people similar to Chen Ping who are driving a wedge between His Majesty the Emperor and his ministers, and I'm afraid they will bring disaster to the country.

古文：不纳。
现代文：武后不接受他的意见。
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：出为潞州刺史。
现代文：后来出任为潞州刺史。
English: Later, he served as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：俊臣诬以反，流藤州，久得还。
现代文：来俊臣诬陷他谋反，于是被流放到藤州，久后才得以返还。
English: Lai Shunchen framed him for plotting a rebellion, so he was exiled to Fujishu, only to be returned a long time later.

古文：自筮死日，豫具棺敛，如言卒桂阳。
现代文：嗣真自己占筮出去世的日期，预先准备好棺材等物，后来果如其言死于桂阳。
English: Shizhen himself predicted the date of his death, prepared the coffin and other things in advance, and later died in Guiyang as he had said.

古文：有诏州县护丧还乡里，赠济州刺史，谥曰昭。
现代文：有诏书命州县护丧返回乡里，赠予济州刺史，谥为昭。
English: An imperial edict ordered the county's mourners to return to their hometowns and presented them with a copy of Jeju's history, which is now in tatters.

古文：武后尝问嗣真储贰事，对曰： 程婴、杵臼存赵氏孤，古人嘉之。 
现代文：武后曾问嗣真储君之事，嗣真回答说 ：程婴、公孙杵臼保存赵氏孤儿，古人赞美其行为。 
English: Empress Wu once asked Heir Zhen about saving you, and Heir Zhen replied, "Cheng Yingying and his grandson Jiusu saved the orphans of the Zhao clan, and the ancients praised their actions.

古文：后悟，中宗乃安。
现代文：武后明白过来，中宗才得以安稳其位。
English: Empress Wu came to understand this, and it was only then that Zhongzong was able to secure his position.

古文：神龙初，赠御史大夫。
现代文：神龙初年，赠予御史大夫。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, it was given to Dr. Goshi.

古文：所撰述尤多。
现代文：嗣真所撰述之作极多。
English: There are many works written by Tsuchizane.

古文：时雍州人裴知古亦善乐律，长安中，为太乐令。
现代文：当时雍州人裴知古也精通乐律，长安年间，任职为太乐令。
English: At that time, Pei Zhigu, a native of Yongzhou, was also proficient in music theory. During the Chang'an era, he served as a music director.

古文：神龙元年正月，享太庙，乐作，知古密语万年令元行冲曰： 金石谐婉，将有大庆，在唐室子孙乎！ 
现代文：神龙元年，正月，享祭于太庙，音乐奏起时，知古悄悄地对万年县令元行冲说 ：金石之音谐和婉扬，将有大喜之事，定会应在唐室子孙身上！ 
English: In the first month of the first year of the Dragon God, when the festival was held in the Great Temple, and the music began to play, Zhi Gu quietly said to the County Magistrate Yuan Xing: The harmony and elegance of the gold and stone will be a great joy, and it will surely be in the descendants of the Tang Dynasty!

古文：是月，中宗复位。
现代文：这个月，中宗恢复帝位。
English: This month, Emperor Zhongzong was restored to the throne.

古文：人有乘马者，知古闻其嘶，乃曰： 马鸣哀，主必坠死。 
现代文：有人乘马经过，知古闻其马鸣之声，便说 ：马鸣之声含有哀音，主人必定坠地而死。 
English: Someone passing by on horseback, having heard the sound of the horse's neighing, said: "The sound of the horse's neighing contains a lamentation, the owner must have fallen to the ground and died."

古文：见新婚者，闻佩声，曰： 终必离。 
现代文：路见新婚之人，听其环佩之声，说 ：最后必会分离。 
English: If you meet a newlywed on the street and listen to their rapturous applause, you will say, "They will eventually separate."

古文：访之，皆然。
现代文：访其人寻问结果，果然尽应其言。
English: As a result of the inquiries made by the people who visited him, he did as he said.

