古文：青州。
现代文：青州。
English: Qingzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》为海岱之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》记载为束海与泰山之间的地域，爱建置十二牧，青州是其一。
English: According to "Yugong," the region between the Sokha Sea and Mount Tai, there are twelve pastures, and Qingzhou is one of them.

古文：舜以青州越海，又分为营州，则辽东本为青州矣。
现代文：舜因青州跨越大海，故又分置营州，遣么说来辽东原本是青蛆。
English: Because Qingzhou crosses the sea, it was separated into Yingzhou. According to legend, Liaodong was originally Qingzhou.

古文：《周礼》： 正东曰青州。 
现代文：《周礼》： 正东日青州。 
English: "Weekly": Zhengdong Daily, Qingzhou.

古文：盖取土居少阳，其色为青，故以名也。《春秋元命包》云： 虚危流为青州。 
现代文：取其地处东方极地，色为青而命名。《春秋元命包》中说： 虚宿危宿的对应是青州。 
English: It was named after the fact that it is located in the eastern polar region and its color is blue. "Spring and Autumn Vitality Package" says: The corresponding place of the imaginary and dangerous place is Qingzhou.

古文：汉武帝置十三州，因旧名，历后汉至晋不改。
现代文：汉武帝设置十三州，青州沿用旧名，经历后汉至晋而不改。
English: Emperor Hanwu set up thirteen prefectures, and Qingzhou continued to use its old name, and did not change after the Han Dynasty.

古文：州统郡国六，县三十七，户五万三千。
现代文：全州统管六个郡国，三十七县，五万三千户。
English: The whole state is in charge of six counties, thirty-seven counties and fifty-three thousand households.

古文：齐国秦置郡，汉以为国。
现代文：齐国秦置为郡，汉置为国。
English: Qin State of Qi was divided into counties, and Han State was divided into countries.

古文：统县五，户一万四千。
现代文：统管五县，一万四千户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 14,000 households.

古文：临淄西安有棘里亭。
现代文：临淄西安有棘里亭皇。
English: Linyi Xi'an is home to the Spindletree Imperial Palace.

古文：东安平汝水出东北。
现代文：东安平汝水出东北部。
English: Dong'an Pingru Shui originates in the northeast.

古文：广饶昌国乐毅所封。
现代文：广饶昌国乐毅封地。
English: Guangrao Changguo Leyi Fief.

古文：济南郡汉置。
现代文：北海郡景帝立为北海郡。
English: Beihai County Jingdi County was established as Beihai County.

古文：统县五，户五千。
现代文：王壹古国。塞回封于此地。
English: King of an ancient country. Restored to this place.

古文：或云魏平蜀，徙其豪将家于济河北，故改为济岷郡。而《太康地理志》无此郡名，未之详。平寿古国。
现代文：工壁有三石祠。胶束侯国。
English: The construction wall has a three-stone shrine.

古文：寒浞封此。
现代文：即墨有天山祠。
English: Namely, there is Tianshan Temple.

古文：下密有三石祠。
现代文：济南郡坠设置。
English: It is located in Jinan County.

古文：胶东侯国。
现代文：统管五县，五千户。
English: It oversees five counties and 5,000 households.

古文：即墨有天山祠。祝阿
现代文：一说魏平定蜀之后，把蜀的豪将之家迁徙到辽回以北，因而改名为渣虫匡墨。
English: It is said that after Wei Pingding settled Shu, he moved the home of Shu's great generals to the north of Liao Hui, and thus changed his name to Zhanzhu Kuangmo.

古文：乐安国汉置。
现代文：乐安国还设置。
English: Le An Guo was also established.

古文：统县八，户一万一千。
现代文：统管八县，一万一千户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with eleven thousand households.

古文：高苑临济有蚩尤祠。
现代文：高苑临济有蚩尤祠。
English: Gaoyuan Linji has a Shanyu ancestral hall.

古文：博昌有薄姑祠。
现代文：博昌有薄姑祠。
English: Bochang has a Bo Gu Shrine.

古文：利益侯相。
现代文：型益侯相。
English: Kataeki Hossho (Minister of the Crown Prince).

古文：蓼城侯国。
现代文：曲侯国。
English: Qu Hou Province.

古文：邹寿光古斟灌氏所封国。
现代文：邹寿光古斟灌氏的封国。
English: It was a fiefdom of the Shuguanggu Guan clan.

古文：东朝阳
现代文：东朝阳
English: East Chaoyang

古文：城阳郡汉置，属北海，自魏至晋，分北海而立焉。
现代文：城阳郡坠设置，属于北海。自魏至晋，分割北海继而设此郡。
English: Located at the bottom of Seongyang County, it belongs to the North Sea. From the Wei Dynasty to the Jin Dynasty, the North Sea was divided and this county was established.

古文：郡统县十，户一万二千。
现代文：全郡统管十县，一万二千户。
English: The whole county is under the unified administration of ten counties, with twelve thousand households.

古文：莒故莒子国。
现代文：莒原莒子国。
English: Sakakibara Shoshi Province.

古文：姑幕古薄姑氏国。诸淳于故淳于公国。
现代文：站台古巡国。诸淳于故淳于公国。
English: Station ancient tour of the country. Zhu Jun in the late Jun in the principality.

古文：东武高密汉改为郡。
现代文：东武高密濩时改为郡。
English: At the time of the Tobu high-density settlement, it was changed to a county.

古文：壮武黔陬平昌昌安
现代文：壮武黔陬平昌昌安
English: PyeongChangChangan

古文：东莱国汉置郡。
现代文：东莱国遵置为郡。
English: It was made a county of Donglai Province.

古文：统县六，户六千五百。
现代文：统管六县，六千五百户。
English: It oversees six counties and 6,500 households.

古文：掖侯相。
现代文：掖侯相。
English: He was a vassal of the emperor.

古文：当利侯国。
现代文：当利侯国。
English: It became a vassal state.

古文：庐乡曲城黄有莱山、松林莱君祠弦侯国。
现代文：卢乡曲城黄有莱山、松林莱君祠。慨侯国。
English: Lu Township, Qu City, Huangyulai Mountain, Pine Forest, Lai Jun Ancestral Temple.

古文：有百支莱祠。
现代文：有百支莱王祠。
English: There is the Baekje Royal Shrine.

古文：长广郡咸宁三年置。
现代文：长广郡咸宁三年设置。
English: Xianning, Changguang County, has been set up for three years.

古文：统县三，户四千五百。
现代文：统管三县，四千五百户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 4,500 households.

古文：不其侯国。
现代文：不其侯国。
English: Not his home country.

古文：长广挺
现代文：长广挺
English: Chang Guang Ting

古文：惠帝元康十年，又置平昌郡。
现代文：惠帝元康十年，又置平昌郡。
English: In the tenth year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, he was also placed in Pyeongchang County.

古文：又分城阳之黔陬、壮武、淳于、昌安、高密、平昌、营陵、安丘、大、剧、临朐十一县为高密国。
现代文：另分城阳的黔陬、壮武、淳于、昌安、高密、平昌县为高密国。自永嘉之乱后，青州沦于石氏。
English: In addition, Joyang's Min, Zhuangwu, Chunyu, Chang'an, Gaomi, and Pyeongchang counties are Gaomi country. Since the Yongjia Rebellion, Qingzhou has fallen to the Shishi.

古文：东莱人曹嶷为刺史。造广固城，后为石季龙所灭。
现代文：东莱人曹嶷任刺史，筑广固城，后被石季龙消灭。
English: The Donglai people, Cao Xuan Ren, made history by building Guanggu City, which was later destroyed by Shi Jilong.

古文：季龙末，辽西段龛自号齐王，据青州。
现代文：石季龙末年，辽西人段宠自称齐王，占据青州。
English: At the end of his life, Shi Jilong, the favorite of the western part of Liaoning Province, claimed to be the king of Qi and occupied Qingzhou.

古文：慕容恪灭赵，克青州。
现代文：慕容恪减赵，攻克青州。
English: Murong reduced Zhao and conquered Qingzhou.

古文：苻氏平燕，尽有其地。
现代文：苻氏平燕，占有了全部地域。
English: The Jiu clan, the Pingyan, occupied the entire region.

古文：及苻氏败后，刺史苻朗以州降。
现代文：苻氏失败后，刺史苻朗以全州投降。
English: After the defeat of the Shih clan, Shih Shih Lang surrendered with the whole state.

古文：朝廷置幽州，以别驾辟闾浑为刺史，镇广固。
现代文：朝廷设置幽州，任别驾辟闾浑为刺史，镇守广固。
English: The imperial court set up Yuzhou, and allowed Zhuge Liang to become a history, and the town guard was Guanggu.

古文：隆安四年，为慕容德所灭，遂都之，是为南燕，复改为青州。
现代文：隆安四年，被慕容德打败，接着便定都在此，造就是南燕，又改为青州。
English: In the fourth year of Longan, it was defeated by Murongde, and then it was always here. It was made by Nanyan and changed to Qingzhou.

古文：德以并州牧镇阴平，幽州刺史镇发干，徐州刺史镇莒城，青州刺史镇东莱，兗州刺史镇梁父。
现代文：慕容德派遣并州牧镇守阴平，幽州刺史镇守发干，徐州刺史镇守莒城，青州刺史镇守束莱，兖州刺史镇守梁父。
English: Murongde dispatched and Zhumu Town to guard Yinping, Yuzhou Town to guard Fanggan, Xuzhou Town to guard Shicheng, Qingzhou Town to guard Soklai, and Zhangzhou Town to guard Liangfu.

古文：慕容超移青州于东莱郡，后为刘裕所灭，留长史羊穆之为青州刺史，筑东阳城而居之。
现代文：慕容超把青州移镇东莱郡，后来被刘裕消灭，留长史羊穆之任青州刺史，筑起东阳城而为治所。
English: Murong Chao moved Qingzhou to Donglai County, which was later wiped out by Liu Yu. He left the governor Shi Yang Mu as the governor of Qingzhou, and built Dongyang City as the capital.

古文：自元帝渡江，于广陵侨置青州。
现代文：从元帝南渡长江后，在广陵侨立青州。
English: After crossing the Yangtze River from the south of the Yuan Dynasty, Qingzhou was established in Guangling.

古文：至是始置北青州，镇东阳城，以侨立州为南青州。
现代文：至此初次设北青州，镇守束阳城，以侨立州为南青州。
English: At this time, North Qingzhou was set up for the first time, and the town guard of Sokyang City was set up, and the overseas Chinese state was set up as South Qingzhou.

古文：而后省南青州，而北青州直曰青州。
现代文：后来又取消南青州，而北青州直接称作青州。
English: Later, South Qingzhou was abolished, and North Qingzhou was directly called Qingzhou.

古文：徐州。
现代文：徐州。
English: Xuzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》海岱及淮之地，舜十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：案《禹贡》中记载为塞擅、童山间和进地，爱建十二牧，涂业是其一。
English: In the case of "Yugong," it is recorded that he is good at blocking, climbing and entering, loves to build twelve pastures, and is one of the best at painting.

古文：于周入青州之域。
现代文：在飓目时并入直地域。
English: At the time of the hurricane, it merged into the direct region.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 天氐流为徐州。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 氐宿星对应是涂州。 
English: "Spring and Autumn Elemental Life Package" says: The corresponding Pleiades star is Tu Zhou.

古文：盖取舒缓之义，或云因徐丘以立名。
现代文：大概取舒缓的意思，一说因逝而立州名。
English: It probably means "relaxed" and refers to the name of the state established after his death.

古文：秦兼天下，以置泗水、薛、琅邪三郡。
现代文：台兼并天下，在这裹置眯、蓝、王困三郡。
English: Taiwan annexes the whole country and wraps the three counties of Handan, Lan and Wangsui in it.

古文：楚汉之际，分置东阳郡。
现代文：楚漠相争之际，又分置东阳郡。
English: At the time of the conflict between Chu and Mu, Dongyang County was also separated.

古文：汉又分置东海郡，改泗水为沛，改薛为鲁，分沛置楚国，以东阳属吴国。
现代文：汉朝又分置束海郡，改泅水为沛，改薛为鲁，分沛郡设楚国，把柬阳郡划入吴国。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Sokhaig County was also divided and changed from Shanshui to Yuanshui, from Xue to Lu, from Yuanshui County to Chu, and from Qianyang County to Wu.

古文：景帝改吴为江都，武帝分沛、东阳置临淮郡，改江都为广陵。
现代文：景帝改吴为江都，武帝划分出沛郡、束阳郡的一部分置临淮郡，改江都为广陵。
English: Emperor Jing changed Wu to Jiangdu, Emperor Wu divided Pei County and part of Sokyang County into Linhuai County, and changed Jiangdu to Guangling.

古文：及置十三州，以其地为徐州，统楚国及东海、琅邪、临淮、广陵四郡。
现代文：设置十三州的时候，把遣地域设为徐州，统辖楚国和东海、琅邪、临淮、广陵四郡。
English: When the thirteen prefectures were set up, the dispatching area was set as Xuzhou, with jurisdiction over the four counties of Chugoku and the East China Sea, Yuya, Linhuai and Guangling.

古文：宣帝改楚为彭城郡，后汉改为彭城国，以沛郡之广戚县来属，改临淮为下邳国。
现代文：宣帝改楚为彭城郡，后漠又改为彭城国，把沛郡的广戚县划入彭城国范围，改临淮为下邳国。
English: Emperor Xuanzong changed Chu County to Pengcheng County, Houmai County to Pengcheng Province, Guangqi County of Pei County to Pengcheng Province, and Linhuai County to Xiamen Province.

古文：及太康元年，复分下邳属县在淮南者置临淮郡，分琅邪置东莞郡。
现代文：到太康元年，又分出在淮南的下邳国属县设临淮郡，分划琅邪置东莞郡。
English: In the first year of Taikang, Linhuai County was set up in Huainan's Heshan Nationality County, and Dongguan County was set up in Heshan.

古文：州凡领郡国七，县六十一，户八万一千二十一。
现代文：全州共管辖七个郡国，六十一县，八万一千零二十一户。
English: A total of seven counties, 61 counties, and 81,021 households are under the jurisdiction of the whole state.

古文：彭城国汉以为郡。
现代文：彭城国选作为郡。
English: Pengcheng was selected as the county.

古文：统县七，户四千一百二十一。
现代文：统管七县，四千一百二十一户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 4,121 households.

古文：彭城故殷伯太彭国。
现代文：彭城原殷伯太彭国。
English: Pengcheng was formerly known as Yinbo and Tai Peng.

古文：留张良所封。
现代文：张良封地。
English: Zhang Liang's fief.

古文：广戚傅阳武原吕梧
现代文：广戚傅阳武原吕梧
English: Guangqi Fuyang Wuyuan Lv Wu

古文：下邳国汉置为临淮郡。
现代文：下邳国汉置为临淮。
English: The Han Dynasty of the Lower Han Dynasty was located in Linhuai.

古文：统县七，户七千五百。
现代文：统管七县，七千五百户。
English: It oversees seven counties with 7,500 households.

古文：下邳葛峄山在西，古峄阳也。
现代文：王巫墓坚山在其西，即古峄阳。
English: Wang Wu's tomb Jianshan is in its west, that is, ancient Liyang.

古文：韩信为楚王，都之。
现代文：韩信为楚王时以遣裹为都城。
English: When Han Xin was the king of Chu, it was the capital city.

古文：凌良城侯相。
现代文：凌良城侯相。
English: He was the lord chamberlain of Lingliang.

古文：睢陵夏丘取虑僮
现代文：睢陵夏丘取虑僮
English: 陵夏丘取虑

古文：东海郡汉置。
现代文：东海郡汉设置。
English: Tokaigunhan was established.

古文：统县十二，户一万一千一百。
现代文：统管十二县，一万一千一百户。
English: In charge of 12 counties, with 11,100 households.

古文：郯故郯子国。
现代文：郯原郯子国。
English: Sakakibara Shoshi Province.

古文：祝其羽山在县之西。
现代文：担其羽山在县西。
English: Tanchihayama is in the west of the prefecture.

古文：朐襄贲利城赣榆厚丘兰陵承昌虑合乡戚
现代文：朐襄贲利城赣榆厚丘兰陵承昌虑合乡戚
English: Xiangfan Licheng is surrounded by thick hills and fields.

古文：琅邪国秦置郡。
现代文：琅邪国画置郡。
English: 邪国画置郡.

古文：统县九，户二万九千五百。
现代文：统管九县，二万九千五百户。
English: In charge of nine counties, with 29,500 households.

古文：开阳侯相。
现代文：开阳侯相。
English: Koyang Hou Xiang.

古文：临沂阳都缯即丘华费鲁季氏邑。
现代文：堕近巨眯临沂阳都缯即丘华费鲁季氏邑。
English: The fallen giant dragon is close to the capital city of Linyang, that is, Qiuhuafei Rujie.

古文：东安蒙阴山在西南。
现代文：越东安蒙阴山在其西南。
English: The Mengyin Mountains in Yuedong'an rise in the southwest.

古文：东莞郡太康中置。
现代文：东莞郡左廛年间设置。
English: Dongguan County Zuoying years set up.

古文：统县八，户一万。
现代文：统管八县，一万户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with ten thousand households.

古文：东莞故鲁郓邑。
现代文：东莞原鲁郓邑。
English: Dongguan, formerly Lujiazui.

古文：硃虚营陵尚父吕望所封。
现代文：硃虚营陵尚父吕望封地。
English: The tomb of Emperor Xiaoying, the tomb of Emperor Shangfu, and the fiefdom of Luwang.

古文：安丘故莒渠丘父封邑。
现代文：安丘原莒渠丘封邑。
English: Anchiwara Nuketsuoka Fong-eup.

古文：盖临朐有海水祠。
现代文：盖临朐有海水祠。
English: There is a seawater shrine at the end of the street.

古文：剧广
现代文：剧广
English: Dramatic Opera

古文：广陵郡汉置。
现代文：广陵郡迈设置。
English: It is located in Mai, Guangling County.

古文：统县八，户八千八百。
现代文：统管八县，八千八百户。
English: It oversees eight counties and 8,800 households.

古文：淮阴射阳舆海陵有江海会祠。
现代文：淮阴射阳舆海陵有江海会祠。
English: The Huaiyin Yingyang Mausoleum has the Jianghai Shrine.

古文：广陵盐渎淮浦江都有江水祠。
现代文：卢堡盐渎淮浦江都有江水祠。
English: All the riverside shrines along the Huaipu River in Lubo County are salt-polluted.

古文：临淮郡汉置，章帝以合下邳，太康元年复立。
现代文：临淮郡逻设置，童童将其合并于工巫，左尘元年重新立郡。
English: Linhuai County was set up, Tong Tong merged it with Gongwu, and Zuo Jian was re-established in the first year of the year.

古文：统县十，户一万。
现代文：统管十县，一万户。
English: In charge of ten counties, with ten thousand households.

古文：盱眙东阳高山赘其潘旌高邮淮陵司吾下相徐
现代文：盱眙东阳高山赘其潘旌高邮淮陵司吾下相徐
English: Dongyang, Gaoshan, Pan, Gaopo, Huai Ling, Xiangxu

古文：太康十年，以青州城阳郡之莒、姑幕、诸、东武四县属东莞。
现代文：太康十年，把青州城阳郡的莒、姑幕、诸、束武四县属东莞。
English: In the 10th year of Taikang, the four counties of Qingzhou Chengyang County, namely, Shao, Gumiao, Zhu and Sokwu, were transferred to Dongguan.

古文：元康元年，分东海置兰陵郡。
现代文：元康元年，分划束海郡置兰陵郡。
English: In the first year of the Yuan and Kang dynasties, Zokhai County was divided into Lanling County.

古文：七年，又分东莞置东安郡，分临淮置淮陵郡，以堂邑置堂邑郡。
现代文：七年，又分划东莞郡置束安郡，分划临淮置淮陵郡，在堂邑置堂邑郡。
English: In seven years, Dongguan County was subdivided into Zukaan County, Linhuai County was subdivided into Huairing County, and Dongyi County was subdivided into Dongyi County.

古文：永嘉之乱，临淮、淮陵并沦没石氏。
现代文：永嘉之乱时，临淮、淮陵都沦陷于石氏。
English: During the Yongjia Rebellion, both Linhuai and Huairing fell to the Shishi.

古文：元帝渡江之后，徐州所得惟半，乃侨置淮阳、阳平、济阴、北济阴四郡。
现代文：元帝渡江之后，徐州的地域仅得到一半，就侨立淮阳、阳平、济阴、北济阴四郡。
English: After the Yuan Emperor crossed the Yangtze River, only half of the territory of Xuzhou was given to the overseas Chinese, leaving only four counties: Huaiyang, Yangping, Jiyin, and North Jiyin.

古文：又琅邪国人随帝过江者，遂置怀德县及琅邪郡以统之。
现代文：另有跟随元帝渡江的琅邪国人，设置了怀德县及琅邪郡统辖。
English: In addition, the people of Yuyao, who followed the Yuan Emperor to cross the Yangtze River, set up the counties of Huai De and Yuyao.

古文：是时，幽、冀、青、并、兗五州及徐州之淮北流人相帅过江淮，帝并侨立郡县以司牧之。
现代文：当时，幽、冀、青、并、兖五州以及徐州淮河以北的百姓相随着渡过长江、淮河，元帝都侨立郡县来管理。
English: At that time, the people of the five prefectures of Yuzhou, Hebei, Qingdao, Nanning and Shandong, as well as the people north of the Huaihe River in Xuzhou, crossed the Yangtze River and Huaihe River together, and the Yuan Emperor set up counties and counties to manage them.

古文：割吴郡之海虞北境，立郯、朐、利城、祝其、厚丘、西隰、襄贲七县，寄居曲阿，以江乘置南东海、南琅邪、南东平、南兰陵等郡，分武进立临淮、淮陵、南彭城等郡，属南徐州，又置顿丘郡属北徐州。
现代文：分割出吴郡的海虞北部，设郯、朐、利城、祝其、厚丘、西隰、襄贲七县，寄居于曲阿，在江乘置南束海、南琅邪、南东平、南兰陵等郡，分划武进立临淮、淮陵、南彭城等郡，属于南徐州，又设顿丘郡属于北徐州。
English: The northern part of Haiyu in Wuxi County was divided into seven counties, namely, Fengtai, Fengtai, Licheng, Zhuqi, Houqiu, Xidi, and Xiangyuan. They resided in Qu'a County, Nanzukai, Nanluoyan, Nandongping, and Nanlanling counties in Jiangren County, and Wujinli Linhuai, Huairing, and Nanpengcheng counties in Wuxi County. They belonged to South Xuzhou, and Dongqiu County belonged to North Xuzhou.

古文：明帝又立南沛、南清河、南下邳、南东莞、南平昌、南济阴、南濮阳、南太平、南泰山、南济阳、南鲁等郡，以属徐、兗二州，初或居江南，或居江北，或以兗州领州。
现代文：明帝又设南沛、南清河、南下邳、南东莞、南平昌、南渣阴、南濮阳、南庐平、南泰山、南济阳、南鲁等郡属于徐、兖二州，最初有的郡地处长江以南，有的地处长江以北，有的为兖州兼管之州。
English: Emperor Ming also established Nanpei, Nanqinghe, Nanxiaoju, Nandongguan, Nanpingchang, Nanjieyin, Nanpoyang, Nanqiping, Nantaishan, Nanjiyang, Nanlu and other counties as belonging to the two prefectures of Xu and Min. Initially, some counties were located south of the Yangtze River, some were located north of the Yangtze River, and some were also administered by Zhangzhou.

古文：郗鉴都督青兗二州诸军事、兗州刺史，加领徐州刺史，镇广陵。
现代文：郗鉴都督青、兖二州诸军事、兖州刺史，并兼徐州刺史，镇守广陵。
English: He was the governor of Qing Dynasty, the military commander of the two states of Yunnan and Shandong, the governor of Xuzhou, and the governor of Guangling.

古文：苏峻平后，自广陵还镇京口。
现代文：苏峻平定之后，从广陵返还镇守京口。
English: After the subjugation of Su Jun, the town guard of Jingkou was returned from Guangling.

古文：又于汉故九江郡界置钟离郡，属南徐州，江北又侨立幽、冀、青、并四州。
现代文：又在汉朝原九江郡界内置钟离郡，属于南徐州，长江以北又侨立幽、冀、青、并四州。
English: In addition, Zhongli County was set up within the boundaries of the original Jiujiang County in the Han Dynasty. It belonged to South Xuzhou, and to the north of the Yangtze River, the overseas Chinese settled in Yu, Hebei, Qing and Shizhou.

古文：穆帝时，移南东海七县出居京口。
现代文：穆帝时，将南东海七县归属京口。
English: At the time of Mu Di, seven counties in the South East China Sea were assigned to Beijing.

古文：义熙七年，始分淮北为北徐州，淮南但为徐州，统彭城、沛、下邳、兰陵、东莞、东安、琅邪、淮阳、阳平、济阴、北济阴十一郡，以盱眙立盱眙郡，统考城、直渎、阳城三县，又分广陵界置海陵、山阳二郡。
现代文：义熙七年，初次区分淮北为北徐州，淮南衹称徐州，统管彭城、沛、下邳、兰陵、东莞、束安、琅邪、淮阳、阳平、济阴、北济阴十一郡，在盱眙设盱眙郡，统管考城、直渎、阳城三县，又分划广陵置海陵、山阳二郡。
English: In the seventh year of Yixi, Huaibei was first divided into North Xuzhou, and South Huaibei was called Xuzhou. It administered eleven counties including Pengcheng, Pei, Xuancheng, Lanling, Dongguan, Sokouan, Shujiang, Huaiyang, Yangping, Jiyin, and North Jiyin, and set up Jiyun County in Fuxi, administered three counties including Kaocheng, Zhouzhu, and Yangcheng, and divided Guangling into Hailing and Shanyang into two counties.

古文：后又以幽冀合徐州，青并合兗州。
现代文：后来又把幽、冀并入徐州，青、并二州合为兖州。
English: Later, Yu and Jie were merged into Xuzhou, and Qing and the two states were merged into Ganzhou.

古文：荆州。
现代文：荆州。
English: Jingzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》荆及衡阳之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。
现代文：《禹贡》记载为荆和衡阳地域，舜建置十二牧，荆州是其一。
English: "Yugong" records that in the Jing and Hengyang regions, there were twelve pastures built, of which Jingzhou was the first.

古文：《周礼》： 正南曰荆州。 
现代文：《周礼》： 正南日荆州。 
English: "Zhou Li": It is the southernmost day of Jingzhou.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 轸星散为荆州。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 轸星散对应荆州。 
English: "Spring, Autumn and New Year's Life Package" says: "Jingxingshan corresponds to Jingzhou.

古文：荆，强也，言其气躁强。
现代文：荆，强也，指荆州之气争强。
English: "Jing" and "strong" also refer to the competitive strength of Jingzhou.

古文：亦曰警也，言南蛮数为寇逆，其人有道后服，无道先强，常警备也。
现代文：也有警的意思，是说南蛮屡屡侵掠，荆州之人有道而顺服，无道而先强，常警备。
English: There is also the meaning of police, which is to say that Nanban repeatedly invaded and plundered, Jingzhou people have a way and obey, no way but strong first, always on guard.

古文：又云取名于荆山。
现代文：又一说取名于荆山。
English: Another says that it was named after Mount Jing.

古文：六国时，其地为楚。
现代文：六国时，这裹是楚国的地域。
English: At the time of the Six Kingdoms, this was the area of Chu.

古文：及秦，取楚鄢郢为南郡，又取巫中地为黔中郡，以楚之汉北立南阳郡，灭楚之后，分黔中为长沙郡。
现代文：到了秦朝，以楚国鄢郢作为南郡，又以巫中地域为黔中郡，在楚汉水以北的设南阳郡，减楚之后，分割黔中为长沙郡。
English: In the Qin Dynasty, Nanyang County was set up in the north of Chu-Hanshui Province, and Changsha County was set up in the middle of Wuzhong region. After Chu was reduced, the middle of Wuzhong was divided.

古文：汉高祖分长沙为桂阳郡，改黔中为武陵郡，分南郡为江夏郡。
现代文：汉高祖划分长沙为桂阳郡，改黔中为武陵郡，划分南郡为江夏郡。
English: Henkel's ancestor divided Changsha into Guiyang County, Zhengzhou into Wuling County, and Nan County into Jiangxia County.

古文：武帝又分长沙为零陵郡。
现代文：武帝又划分长沙为零陵郡。
English: Emperor Wu also divided Changsha into Ziling County.

古文：及置十三州，因旧名为荆州，统南郡、南阳、零陵、桂阳、武陵、长沙、江夏七郡。
现代文：设置十三州时，沿用旧名称为荆州，统辖南郡、南阳、零陵、桂阳、武陵、长沙、江夏七郡。
English: When the thirteen prefectures were set up, the old name of Jingzhou was used, and the seven prefectures of Nanshan, Nanyang, Luling, Guiyang, Wuling, Changsha and Jiangxia were under its jurisdiction.

古文：后汉献帝建安十三年，魏武尽得荆州之地，分南郡以北立襄阳郡，又分南阳西界立南乡郡，分枝江以西立临江郡。
现代文：后汉献帝建安十三年，魏武帝得到荆州的全部土地，划分南郡以北设襄阳郡，又划分南阳西部设南乡郡，划分枝江以西设临江郡。
English: In the thirteenth year after the Han Dynasty dedicated to Emperor Jianan, Emperor Wei Wu obtained all the land in Jingzhou, dividing Nan County to the north to set up Xiangyang County, dividing Nanyang to the west to set up Nanxiang County, and dividing Zhijiang to the west to set up Linjiang County.

古文：及败于赤壁，南郡以南属吴，吴后遂与蜀分荆州。
现代文：到魏战败于赤壁，南郡以南属于吴，吴与蜀瓜分荆州。
English: By the Wei Dynasty, it was defeated in Chibi, and the south of Nan County belonged to Wu, and Wu and Shu Gua were divided into Jingzhou.

古文：于是南郡、零陵、武陵以西为蜀，江夏、桂阳、长沙三郡为吴，南阳、襄阳、南乡三郡为魏。
现代文：那时南郡、零陵、武陵以西是蜀的地域，江夏、桂阳、长沙三郡是吴的地域，南阳、襄阳、南乡三郡是魏的地域。
English: At that time, Nan County, Jiling, and the west of Wuling were the regions of Shu, Jiangxia, Guiyang, and Changsha were the regions of Wu, and Nanyang, Yangyang, and Nanxiang were the regions of Wei.

古文：而荆州之名，南北双立。
现代文：荆州有南北两名称。
English: Jingzhou has two names, North and South.

古文：蜀分南郡，立宜都郡，刘备没后，宜都、武陵、零陵、南郡四郡之地悉复属吴。
现代文：蜀划分南郡，设宜都郡，刘备去世后，宜都、武陵、零陵、南郡四郡的土地全部重属于吴。
English: Shu divided Nan County and set up Yidu County. After Liu Bei's death, the land of the four counties of Yidu, Wuling, Luling and Nan County all belonged to Wu.

古文：魏文帝以汉中遗黎立魏兴、新城二郡，明帝分新城立上庸郡。
现代文：魏文帝以汉中遣民设魏兴、新城二郡。明帝划分新城设上庸郡。
English: Emperor Wei Wen established Wei Xing and Xincheng counties by sending people from the Han Dynasty. Emperor Ming divided Xincheng and set up Shangyong county.

古文：孙权分江夏立武昌郡，又分苍梧立临贺郡，分长沙立衡阳、湘东二郡。
现代文：孙权划分江夏设武昌郡，又划分苍梧设临贺郡，划分长沙设衡阳、湘束二郡。
English: Sun Quan divided Jiangxia into Wuchang County, divided Cangwu into Linhe County, and divided Changsha into Hengyang and Xiangsu County.

古文：孙休分武陵立天门郡，分宜都立建平郡。
现代文：孙休划分武陵设天门郡，划分宣都设建平郡。
English: Sun Xiu divided Wuling into Tianmen County, and divided Xuanwu into Jianping County.

古文：孙皓分零陵立始安郡，分桂阳立始兴郡，又分零陵立邵陵郡，分长沙立安成郡。
现代文：孙皓划分零陵设始安郡，划分挂屋设垣曼塑，又一次划分茎建设迎医塑，划分长沙设安成郡。
English: Sun Yat-sen subdivided Jilin into Shi'an County, subdivided Hanging House into Gao Man Plastic, subdivided Stem Construction into Ying Yi Plastic, and subdivided Changsha into Ancheng County.

古文：荆州统南郡、武昌、武陵、宜都、建平、天门、长沙、零陵、桂阳、衡阳、湘东、邵陵、临贺、始兴、始安十五郡，其南阳、江夏、襄阳、南乡、魏兴、新城、上庸七郡属魏之荆州。
现代文：荆州统管南郡、武昌、武陵、宜都、建平、天门、长沙、零陵、桂阳、衡阳、湘束、邵陵、临贺、始兴、始安十五郡，南阳、江夏、襄阳、南乡、魏兴、新城、上庸七郡属魏的荆州。
English: South County, Wuchang, Wuling, Yidu, Jianping, Tianmen, Changsha, Ziling, Guiyang, Hengyang, Hunan, Shaoling, Linhe, Shixing, Shi'an, Nanyang, Jiangxia, Yangyang, Nanxiang, Weixing, Xincheng and Shangyong are the seven counties of Wei's Jingzhou.

古文：及武帝平吴，分南郡为南平郡，分南阳立义阳郡，改南乡顺阳郡，又以始兴、始安、临贺三郡属广州，以扬州之安成郡来属。
现代文：到晋武帝平吴，划分南郡为南平郡，划分南阳立义阳郡，改南乡为顺阳郡，又把始兴、始安、临贺三郡归属广州，把扬州的安成郡入属荆州。
English: To Emperor Jinwu of Pingwu, Nan County was divided into Nanping County, Nanyang County was divided into Nanyang County, and Nanyang Township was changed into Shunyang County. In addition, the three counties of Shixing, Shi'an, and Linhe belonged to Guangzhou, and Ancheng County in Yangzhou belonged to Jingzhou.

古文：州统郡二十二，县一百六十九，户三十五万七千五百四十八。
现代文：全州统管二十二郡，一百六十九县，三十五万七千五百四十八户。
English: In total, 22 counties, 169 counties, and 357,548 households are under the unified administration of the whole state.

古文：江夏郡汉置。
现代文：江夏郡汉设置。
English: Jiangxia County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县七，户二万四千。
现代文：统管七县，二莴四千户。
English: It oversees seven counties with 24,000 households.

古文：安陆横尾山在东北，古之陪尾山。
现代文：安陆横尾山在其东北，即古时陪尾山。
English: Mt. Anlu Yokoo is in the northeast, which was Mt. Bao in ancient times.

古文：云杜故云子国。
现代文：云杜旧云子国。
English: Yundu is the former Yunci Province.

古文：曲陵平春邑阝竟陵章山在东北，古之方山。
现代文：曲陵平春郾竟陵章山在其东北，即古时的内方山。
English: Quling Pingchun and Quling Zhangshan are located in the northeast, which is the ancient Neifang Mountain.

古文：南新市
现代文：南新市
English: Nanxin City

古文：南郡汉置。
现代文：南郡汉设置。
English: South County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县十一，户五万五千。
现代文：统管十一县，五万五千户。
English: It oversees 11 counties and 55,000 households.

古文：江陵故楚都。
现代文：江陵原楚都。
English: It is the original capital of Gangneung.

古文：编有云梦官。
现代文：编有云梦官。
English: Edited by Yun Mengguan.

古文：当阳华容鄀故鄀子国。
现代文：当阳华容都原都子国。
English: Dangyang Huayong Duyuan Duzi Province.

古文：枝江故罗国。
现代文：枝江原罗国。
English: It is the beginning of the Edo period.

古文：旌阳州陵楚嬖人州侯所邑。
现代文：旌阳州陵楚宠臣州侯封邑。
English: Poyang Chuzhou Mausoleum is located in Houfeng, Zhenzhou.

古文：监利松滋石首
现代文：监利松滋石首
English: Supervisor Li Songzhi Shishou

古文：襄阳郡魏置。
现代文：裹阳郡龚设置。
English: Suiyang County was set up.

古文：中庐临沮荆山在东北。
现代文：统管八县，二万二干七百户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 22,000 to 700 households.

古文：巳阝襄阳侯相。
现代文：宜城原鄢地。中庐塞屋侯相。
English: Yicheng's original farmland. In the middle of the farmland is a farmer's house.

古文：山都邓城
现代文：尘整塑继临沮荆山在其东北。
English: The Dust and Plastic Rectification Project succeeds the Mount Diaojing Project in its northeastern part.

古文：南阳国秦置郡。
现代文：邵邮南阳国秦置郡。
English: Shao Po Nanyang Qin Ji County.

古文：统县十四，户二万四千四百。
现代文：统管十四县，二万四千四百户。
English: It oversees 14 counties and 24,400 households.

古文：宛西鄂侯相。
现代文：宛西鄂侯相。
English: Wanxi E Hou Xiang.

古文：雉鲁阳公国相。
现代文：雉鲁阳公国相。
English: Minister of the Principality of Luyang.

古文：犨淯阳公国相。
现代文：犨淯阳公国相。
English: He became the Minister of Shenyang Principality.

古文：博望公国相。
现代文：博望公国相。
English: Minister of the Duchy of Bohang.

古文：堵阳叶侯相。
现代文：堵阳叶侯侯相。
English: Tooyang Ye Hou Hou Xiang.

古文：有长城山，号曰方城。舞阴公国相。比阳公国相。
现代文：有长城山，称曰方。舞阴公国相。比阳公国相。
English: There is the Great Wall Mountain, called "Fang," "Wuyin Duchy" and "Biyang Duchy."

古文：涅阳冠军郦顺阳郡太康中置。
现代文：逞涅阳，冠军，郦，顺阳郡太康年间设置。
English: Gangneung, champion, Shun, Shunyang County Taikang set up in the years.

古文：统八县，户二万一百。
现代文：统管八县，二万零一百户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 20,100 households.

古文：酂顺阳南乡丹水武当侯相。
现代文：酂顺阳南乡丹水武当侯相。
English: Shunyang South Township, Danshuiwu was the vassal.

古文：阴筑阳析
现代文：阴筑阳析
English: Yin and yang analysis

古文：义阳郡太康中置。
现代文：义阳郡主尘年间设置。
English: It was set up during the reign of Princess Yiyang.

古文：统县十二，户一万九千。
现代文：统管十二县，一万九千户。
English: In charge of 12 counties with 19,000 households.

古文：新野侯相。
现代文：新野侯相。
English: Nino Hosso is gone.

古文：穰邓故邓侯国。
现代文：穰邓原邓侯国。
English: Deng Yuan, Deng Hou Guo.

古文：蔡阳随故随国。
现代文：蔡阳随原随国。
English: Cai Yang follows the original and follows the country.

古文：安昌棘阳厥西平氏桐柏山在南。
现代文：安昌棘阳厥西平氏桐柏山在其南部。
English: Anchang, Yangjue, Xiping and Tongba Mountains are in the south.

古文：义阳平林朝阳
现代文：义阳平林朝阳
English: Yiyang morning sun rising from the flat forest

古文：新城郡魏置。
现代文：新城郡垫置。
English: Set up in Sincheng County.

古文：统县四，户一万五千二百。
现代文：统管四县，一万五千二百户。
English: In charge of four counties, with 15,200 households.

古文：房陵绥阳昌魏沶乡
现代文：房陵绥阳昌魏沶乡
English: Fangling, Liyang, Changzhou, Weifang Township

古文：魏兴郡魏置。
现代文：魏兴郡瑟置。
English: Weixing County, Suji.

古文：统县六，户一万二千。
现代文：统管六县，一万二千户。
English: It oversees six counties with 12,000 households.

古文：晋兴安康西城锡长利洵阳
现代文：兴晋安康西城锡长利洵阳
English: Xingjin Ankang West City Xichang Liyang

古文：上庸郡魏置。
现代文：上庸郡魏置。
English: Weiji, Shangyong County.

古文：统县六，户一万一千四百四十八。
现代文：统管六县，一万一千四百四十八户。
English: In charge of six counties, with 11,448 households.

古文：上庸侯相。
现代文：上卢侯相。
English: Shangluo Hossang.

古文：安富北巫武陵上廉微阳
现代文：安富北巫武陵上廉微阳
English: Wumu Mausoleum in Anfu North, Shanglian Weiyang

古文：建平郡吴、晋各有建平郡，太康元年合。
现代文：建平郡吴、晋各有建平郡，太康元年合为一郡。
English: Jianping County Wu and Jin each have a Jianping County, and Taikang was merged into one county in the first year of the year.

古文：统县八，户一万三千二百。
现代文：统管八县，一万三千二百户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 13,200 households.

古文：巫北井秦昌信陵兴山建始秭归故楚子国。
现代文：巫北井秦昌信陵兴山建始秭归原楚子国。
English: Wubei Beijing Qin Changxin Mausoleum, the first to be built in Xingshan, returned to the original Chu Zi country.

古文：沙渠
现代文：沙渠
English: Sand canals

古文：宜都郡吴置。
现代文：宜都郡吴置。
English: Wu Jie, Yidu County.

古文：统县三，户八千七百。
现代文：统管三县，八干七百户。
English: It oversees three counties with 800 to 700 households.

古文：夷陵夷道佷山
现代文：夷陵夷道恨山
English: Yilingyi Road, Henshan

古文：南平郡吴置，以为南郡，太康元年改曰南平。
现代文：南平郡吴置，称为南郡，太康元年改称南干。
English: Wu Jie of Nanping County, known as Nan County, was renamed Nan Gan in the first year of Taikang.

古文：统县四，户七千。
现代文：统管四县，七千户。
English: It oversees four counties and has 7,000 households.

古文：作唐孱陵南安江安
现代文：作唐孱陵南安江安
English: From the Tang Dynasty Mausoleum of Nan'an to Jiang'an

古文：武陵郡汉置。统县十，户一万四千。
现代文：武陵郡漠设置统管十县，一万四千户。
English: Wuling County has been put in charge of 10 counties, with a total of 14,000 households.

古文：临沅龙阳汉寿沅陵黚阳酉阳镡城沅南迁陵舞阳
现代文：临沅龙阳汉寿沅陵驸阳酉阳坛城沅南迁陵舞阳
English: Linyi Yongyang Han Shou Mausoleum Linyi Yongyang Mausoleum South Linyi South Linyi South Linyi

古文：天门郡吴置。
现代文：天门郡吴置。
English: Wu Jie, Tianmen County.

古文：统县五，户三千一百。
现代文：统管五县，三千一百户。
English: In charge of five counties, 3,100 households.

古文：零阳溇中衮临澧澧阳
现代文：零阳澳中充临澧澧阳
English: Ziyangao Junior High School in Linyang

古文：长沙郡汉置。
现代文：长沙郡汉设置。
English: Changsha County Han Dynasty set up.

古文：统县十，户三万三千。
现代文：统管十县，三万三千户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 33,000 households.

古文：临湘攸下隽醴陵刘阳建宁吴昌罗蒲沂巴陵
现代文：临湘攸下隽醴陵刘阳建宁吴昌罗蒲沂巴陵
English: Liu Yang Jianning Wuchang Luo Puhongba Mausoleum

古文：衡阳郡吴置，故属长沙。
现代文：衡阳郡吴置，原属长沙郡。
English: Wu Jie, Hengyang County, formerly part of Changsha County.

古文：统县九，户二万三千。
现代文：统管九县，二万三千户。
English: It oversees nine counties with 23,000 households.

古文：湘乡重安湘南湘西烝阳衡山连道新康益阳
现代文：湘乡重安湘南湘西燕阳衡山连道新康益阳
English: Hunan Township, Chong'an, Southern Hunan, Western Hunan, Yanyang, Hengshan Lian Road, Xinkang Yiyang

古文：湘东郡吴置，故属长沙。
现代文：湘柬郡吴置，原属长沙郡。
English: Wu Jie, Xiangkham County, formerly part of Changsha County.

古文：统县七，户一万九千五百。
现代文：统管七县，一万九千五百户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 19,500 households.

古文：酃茶陵临烝利阳阴山新平新宁
现代文：酃茶陵临燕利阳阴山新干新宁
English: Yan Li Yang Yin Shan Xin Gan Xin Ning

古文：零陵郡汉置。
现代文：零陵郡汉设置。
English: Zerling County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县十一，户二万五千一百。
现代文：统管十一县，二万五千一百户。
English: In charge of 11 counties, with 25,100 households.

古文：泉陵有香茅，云古贡之以缩酒。
现代文：泉陵有香茅，据说古时进贡用于祭祀。
English: There is a fragrant maple tree in the spring mausoleum. It is said that in ancient times, tributes were used for sacrifices.

古文：祁阳零陵营浦洮阳永昌观阳营道春陵泠道应阳东界有鼻墟，云象所封。
现代文：祁阳零陵营浦洮阳永昌观阳营道春陵泠道应阳东界东部地界有垦擅，传说为叁封地。
English: The eastern land boundary of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory of the eastern territory

古文：邵陵郡吴置。
现代文：邵陵郡呈置。
English: Shaoling County presented.

古文：统县六。户一万二千。
现代文：统管六县，一万二千户。
English: It oversees six counties with 12,000 households.

古文：邵陵都梁夫夷建兴邵阳高平
现代文：邵陵都梁夫夷建兴邵阳高平
English: Shaoling Capital Liangfuyi Building Xing Shaoyang Gaoping

古文：桂阳郡汉置。
现代文：桂阳郡坠设置。
English: Guiyang County is set to fall.

古文：统县六，户一万一千三百。
现代文：统管六县，一万一千三百户。
English: In charge of six counties, 11,300 households.

古文：郴项羽义帝之邑。
现代文：郴项羽封给义帝的采邑。
English: The imperial seal was given to Emperor Yixing.

古文：耒阳便临武晋宁南平
现代文：耒阳便临武晋南平
English: Fenyang is next to Wujin Nanping

古文：武昌郡吴置。
现代文：武昌郡吴置。
English: Wu Jie, Wuchang County.

古文：有湓口关。
现代文：柴桑有湓口关。
English: Chaisang has a gate.

古文：阳新沙羡有夏口，对沔口，有津。
现代文：阳新沙羡有夏口。对岸是沔口，有渡口。
English: There is a summer port on the Yangxin Peninsula. On the opposite bank, there is a pier and a ferry port.

古文：沙阳鄂有新兴、马头铁官官陵
现代文：沙阳、鄂有新兴、马头铁官官陵。
English: Shayang, E Youxing, Ma Tou iron official official mausoleum.

古文：安成郡吴置。
现代文：安成郡吴置。
English: Wujie, Ancheng County.

古文：统县七，户三千。
现代文：统管七县，三千户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 3,000 households.

古文：平都宜春新谕永新安复萍乡广兴
现代文：平都宜春新谕永新安复萍乡广兴
English: Yichun New Capital, Yongxin An, Pingxing Township, Guangxing

古文：惠帝分桂阳、武昌、安成三郡立江州，以新城、魏兴、上庸三郡属梁州，又分义阳立随郡，分南阳立新野郡，分江夏立竟陵郡。
现代文：惠帝划分桂阳、武昌、安成三郡设江州，把新城、魏兴、上庸三郡归属梁州，又划分义阳设随郡，划分南阳设新野郡，划分江夏设竟陵郡。
English: Hui Di divided Guiyang, Wuchang and Ancheng into three counties and set up Jiangzhou, and made Xincheng, Weixing and Shangyong into three counties belonging to Liangzhou. He also divided Yiyang into Zui County, divided Nanyang into Shinniu County, and divided Jiangxia into Qingling County.

古文：怀帝又分长沙、衡阳、湘东、零陵、邵陵、桂阳及广州之始安、始兴、临贺九郡置湘州。
现代文：怀帝又划分长沙、衡阳、湘东、零陵、邵陵、桂阳以及广州的始安、始兴、临贺九郡设置湘州。
English: Emperor Huai also divided Changsha, Hengyang, Xiangdong, Ziling, Shaoling, Guiyang, and the nine counties of Shi'an, Shixing and Linhe in Guangzhou to establish Xiangzhou.

古文：时蜀乱，又割南郡之华容、州陵、监利三县别立丰都，合四县置成都郡，为成都王颖国，居华容县。
现代文：当时蜀国内乱，怀帝又分割南郡的华容、州陵、监利三县另立丰都，并且合四县设成都郡，为成都王司马颖的封国，居所在华容县。
English: At the time of the civil war in Shu, Emperor Huai divided the three counties of Huarong, Zhuling and Guanli in South County to establish a separate Fengdu, and combined the four counties to establish Chengdu County, which was the fief of Chengdu Wang Sima Ying, whose residence was in Huarong County.

古文：愍帝建兴中，并还南郡，亦并丰都于监利。
现代文：愍帝建兴年间，把成都郡合并回南郡，同时把丰都并入监利。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianxing, Chengdu County was merged back into Nan County, while Fengdu was merged into Jianli.

古文：元帝渡江，又侨立新兴、南河东二郡。
现代文：元帝渡过长江，又侨立新兴、南河东二郡。
English: Emperor Yuan crossed the Yangtze River, and the two counties east of the South River were newly established by overseas Chinese.

古文：穆帝时，又分零陵立营阳郡，以义阳流人在南郡者立为义阳郡。
现代文：穆帝时，又划分零陵设营阳郡，为流落在南郡的义彊人设义阳郡。
English: During the reign of Emperor Mu, the county of Yingyang was set up for the Ziling people, and the county of Yiyang was set up for the Yixing people who had been exiled to Nan County.

古文：又以广州之临贺、始兴、始安三郡及江州之桂阳，益州之巴东，合五郡来属，以长沙、衡阳、湘东、零陵、邵陵、营阳六郡属湘州。
现代文：又把卢州的临贺、始兴、始安三郡和江州的桂阳，益州的巴束，共五郡属荆州，把长沙、衡阳、湘东、零陵、邵陵、营阳六郡属湘州。
English: In addition, the three counties of Linhe, Shixing, and Shian in Luzhou, Guiyang in Jiangsu, and Bazooka in Yizhou, a total of five counties belong to Jingzhou, and the six counties of Changsha, Hengyang, Shandong, Ziling, Shaoling, and Yingyang belong to Hunan.

古文：桓温又分南郡立武宁郡。
现代文：桓玄又分划南郡设武宁郡。
English: Kangen also subdivided Minami-gun to create Muning-gun.

古文：安帝又侨立南义阳、东义阳、长宁三郡。
现代文：安帝又侨立南义阳、东义阳、长宁三郡。
English: Emperor An also set up overseas Chinese settlements in three counties of South Yiyang, East Yiyang and Changning.

古文：义熙十三年，省湘州，长沙、衡阳、湘东、零陵、邵陵、营阳还入荆州。
现代文：义熙十三年，取消湘州，长沙、衡阳、湘束、零陵、邵陵、营阳归属荆州。
English: In the 13th year of Yixi, Xiangzhou was abolished, and Changsha, Hengyang, Xiangzhu, Ziling, Shaoling and Yingyang belonged to Jingzhou.

古文：扬州。
现代文：扬州。
English: Yangzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》淮海之地，舜置十二牧，则其一也。《周礼》： 东南曰扬州。 
现代文：《禹贡》记载为进海地域，忧建十二牧，挝业是其一。《周礼》： 东南曰还业。 
English: "Yugong" records that it is a region entering the sea, and it is worried about building twelve pastures, and Lao industry is the first. "Zhou Li": Southeast is said to be still in the industry.

古文：《春秋元命包》云： 牵牛流为扬州，分为越国。 
现代文：《春秋元命包》中说： 牵牛星是扬州的分野，对应越国。 
English: "Spring, Autumn and New Year's Life Package" says: Altair is Yangzhou's field, corresponding to Yue.

古文：以为江南之气躁劲，厥性轻扬。
现代文：认为江南之气躁动强劲，性情轻扬。
English: He thought Jiangnan's spirit was restless and strong, and his disposition was light.

古文：亦曰，州界多水，水波扬也。
现代文：另说扬州地域内多水，水波扬。
English: It is also said that there is a lot of water in the Yangzhou region, and the water is undulating.

古文：于古则荒服之国，战国时其地为楚分。
现代文：上古为五服中离王畿最为遥远的荒服之国，战国时被楚国分占。
English: In ancient times, it was the furthest country from Wangji in the Five Provinces, and was occupied by Chu during the Warring States period.

古文：秦始皇并天下，以置鄣、会稽、九江三郡。
现代文：秦始皇统一天下，置鄣、会稽、九江三郡。
English: Qin Shihuang unified the country in one day, and set up three counties of Qi, Hui, and Jiujiang.

古文：项羽封英布为九江王，尽有其地。
现代文：项羽封英布为九江王，占有全部地域。
English: Xiang Yu Feng Ying Bu is the king of Jiujiang, occupying the entire region.

古文：汉改九江曰淮南，即封布为淮南王。
现代文：汉朝改称九江为淮南，封英布为淮南王。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Jiujiang was renamed Huainan, and Feng Yingbu became King of Huainan.

古文：六年，分淮南置豫章郡。
现代文：六年，划分淮南置豫章郡。
English: In six years, Huainan was divided into Yuanzhang County.

古文：十一年，布诛，立皇子长为淮南王，封刘濞为吴王，二国尽得扬州之地。
现代文：十一年，英布被杀，立皇子刘长为淮南王，封刘濞为吴王，二封国占有扬州的全部地域。
English: In the eleventh year, Yingbu was killed, and the prince Liu Chang was made the king of Huainan, Liu Ye was made the king of Wu, and the two fiefdoms occupied all the regions of Yangzhou.

古文：文帝十六年，分淮南立庐江、衡山二郡。
现代文：文帝十六年，划分淮南设庐江、衡山二郡。
English: In the 16th year of Emperor Wen, Huainan was divided into two counties: Minjiang and Hengshan.

古文：景帝四年，封皇子非为江都王，并得鄣、会稽郡，而不得豫章。
现代文：景帝四年，封皇子刘非为江都王，鄣、会稽郡归江都王所有，但他没有得到豫章。
English: In the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jing, the crown prince Liu Fei became the king of Jiangdu, and the fief and the county of Heji belonged to the king of Jiangdu, but he did not receive the Yuanzhang.

古文：武帝改江都曰广陵，封皇子胥为王而以属徐州。
现代文：武帝改称江都为广陵，封皇子刘胥为广陵王而属于徐州。
English: Emperor Wu changed the name of Jiangdu to Guangling, and the crown prince Liu Bei became Guangling Wang and belonged to Xuzhou.

古文：元封二年，改鄣曰丹杨，改淮南复为九江。
现代文：元封二年，改称鄣为丹杨，淮南重新称为九江。
English: In the second year of Yuanfeng, it was renamed as Danyang, and Huainan was renamed as Jiujiang.

古文：后汉顺帝分会稽立吴郡，扬州统会稽、丹杨、吴、豫章、九江、庐江六郡，省六安并庐江郡。
现代文：后漠顺帝划分会稽设吴郡，扬州统辖会稽、丹杨、吴、豫章、九江、庐江六郡，取消六安并入庐江郡。
English: Wu County was set up by the Houchu Shunde Division Committee, and Yangzhou controlled the six counties of Cui, Danyang, Wu, Yuzhang, Jiujiang and Minjiang, and cancelled the merger of Lu'an into Minjiang County.

古文：献帝兴平中，孙策分豫章立庐陵郡。
现代文：献帝兴平年间，孙策划分豫章设庐陵郡。
English: During the years of Emperor Xingping's dedication, Sun Zetong divided Yu County and established Fuling County.

古文：孙权又分豫章立鄱阳郡，分丹杨立新都郡。
现代文：孙权又划分豫章设鄱阳郡，划分丹杨设新都郡。
English: Sun Quan also divided Yuzhang to set up Fenyang County, and divided Danyang to set up Xindu County.

古文：孙亮又分豫章立临川郡，分会稽立临海郡。
现代文：孙亮又划分豫章设临川郡，划分会稽设临海郡。
English: Sun Liang also divided Yuzhang to set up Linchuan County, and the division committee set up Linhai County.

古文：孙休又分会稽立建安郡。
现代文：孙休又划分会稽设建安郡。
English: Sun Hui also set up Jian'an County.

古文：孙皓分会稽立东阳郡，分吴立吴兴郡，分豫章、庐陵、长沙立安成郡，分庐陵立庐陵南部都尉，扬州统丹杨、吴、会稽、吴兴、新都、东阳、临海、建安、豫章、鄱阳、临川、安成、庐陵南部十四郡。
现代文：孙皓划分会稽设东阳郡，划分吴设吴兴郡，划分豫章、庐陵、长沙设安成郡，划分庐陵设庐陵南部都尉，扬州统辖丹杨、昱、盒稽、县兴、新都、塞腥、区迤、谴、逸章、鄱阳、临川、安成、庐陵南部十四郡。
English: The Sun Yat-sen Division set up Dongyang County, the Wu Division set up Wuxing County, the Yuzhang, Fuling, and Changsha Divisions set up Ancheng County, the Fuling Division set up the Southern Capital of Fuling, and the Yangzhou Division oversaw Danyang, Handan, Huancheng, Xing County, Xindu, Saihong, Guanqian, Guanqian, Yizhang, Handan, Linchuan, Ancheng, and the Southern 14 Counties of Fuling.

古文：江西庐江、九江之地，自合肥之北至寿春悉属魏。
现代文：江西庐江、九江的地域，自合肥以北至寿春全都属于魏。
English: Jiangxi's Minjiang and Jiujiang regions, from Hefei in the north to Shuchun in the south, all belong to Wei.

古文：及晋平吴，以安成属荆州，分丹杨之宣城、宛陵、陵阳、安吴、泾、广德、宁国、怀安、石城、临城、春谷十一县立宣城郡，理宛陵，改新都曰新安郡，改庐陵南部为南康郡，分建安立晋安郡，又分丹杨立毗陵郡。
现代文：到晋平定吴之后，把安成属于荆州，划分丹杨的宣城、宛陵、陵阳、安吴、泾、广德、宁国、怀安、石城、临城、春谷十一县设宣城郡，兼管宛陵邓，改称新都为新安郡，改称庐陵南部为南康郡，划分建安设晋安郡，又划分丹杨设毗陵郡。
English: After the Jin Dynasty conquered and settled Wu, Ancheng belonged to Jing Province, divided Xuancheng, Wanling, Lingyang, An Wu, Handan, Guangde, Ningguo, Huai'an, Shicheng, Lincheng, and Spring Valley into eleven counties, and set up Xuancheng County, which was also in charge of Wanling Deng, renamed Xindu to Xin'an County, renamed the southern part of Fuling to Nankang County, divided Jian'an to Jin'an County, and divided Danyang to Binling County.

古文：扬州合统郡十八，县一百七十三，户三十一万一千四百。
现代文：扬州共统管十八郡，一百七十三县，三十一万一千四百户。
English: Yangzhou has 18 counties and 173 counties, with a total of 3,111,400 households.

古文：丹阳郡汉置。
现代文：丹阳郡设置。
English: Located in Danyang County.

古文：统县十一，户五万一千五百。
现代文：统管十一县，五万一千五百户。
English: In charge of 11 counties, with 51,500 households.

古文：建鄴本秣陵，孙氏改为建业。
现代文：建鄴本秣陵，孙氏改称建业。
English: Jian Ye's original tomb was renamed Jian Ye by Sun.

古文：武帝平吴，以为秣陵。
现代文：置武帝平吴，称为秣陵。
English: Emperor Wu of Pingwu, known as Gongling.

古文：太康三年，分秣陵北为建鄴，改业为鄴。
现代文：太康三年，划分秣陵北部为建鄴，改 业 为 鄴 。
English: Three years after Taikang, the northern part of Fuling was divided into Jianye and Guye.

古文：江宁太康二年，分建鄴置。
现代文：江宁太康二年，从建鄴分出而置。
English: In the second year of Jiangning Taikang, it was separated from Jianye.

古文：丹杨丹杨山多赤柳，在西也。
现代文：丹杨丹杨山多赤柳，在其西部。
English: Danyang Danyang Mountain has many red willows in its western part.

古文：于湖芜湖永世溧阳溧水所出。
现代文：于湖芜湖永世溧阳溧水发源于此。
English: It is from here that the waters of Lake Yongshou and Lake Yangshuo originated.

古文：江乘句容有茅山。
现代文：江乘句容有茅山。
English: The phrase "riding the river" contains maya.

古文：湖熟秣陵
现代文：湖熟秣陵
English: Hujiaobing Mausoleum

古文：宣城郡太康二年置。
现代文：宣城郡左尘二年设置。
English: Xuancheng County Zuoqin two years set up.

古文：统县十一，户二万三千五百。
现代文：统管十一县，二万三千五百产。
English: It oversees 11 counties and 23,500 farms.

古文：宛陵侯相。
现代文：宛陵侯相。
English: Wanling Hossang.

古文：彭泽聚在西南。
现代文：彭泽聚在其西南。
English: Pengze cluster in its southwest.

古文：宣城陵阳淮水出东北入江。
现代文：宣城陵阳淮水其东北部注入江。
English: The Yanghuai River flows into the river in the northeast of Xuancheng.

古文：仙人陵阳子明所居。
现代文：仙人陵阳子明居住的地方。
English: Immortal's mausoleum where Yang Ziming lived.

古文：安吴临城石城泾春谷孝武改春为阳。
现代文：安吴临城石城泾春谷孝武改 春 为 阳 。
English: An Wu Lincheng ShichengChun Valley Xiaowu changes the spring into the sun.

古文：广德宁国怀安
现代文：广德宁国怀安
English: Huai'an, Guangdeng County

古文：淮南郡秦置九江郡。
现代文：淮南郡秦置九江郡。
English: Huainan County Qin Jiujiang County.

古文：汉以为淮南国，汉武帝置为九江郡。
现代文：漠设为淮南国，汉武帝置为九江郡。
English: The desert was set as Huainan Province, and Emperor Hanwu was set as Jiujiang County.

古文：武帝改为淮南郡。
现代文：晋武帝改为淮南郡。
English: Emperor Jinwu changed it to Huainan County.

古文：统县十六，户三万三千四百。
现代文：统管十六县，三万三千四百户。
English: In charge of 16 counties, with 33,400 households.

古文：寿春成德下蔡义城西曲阳平阿有涂山。
现代文：寿春成德下蔡义城西曲阳平阿有涂山。
English: Shoushun Chengde descends from Caiyi City, west of Quyangping and Mount Ayu Tu.

古文：历阳全椒阜陵汉明帝时沦为麻湖。
现代文：历阳全椒阜陵漠明帝时沦为麻湖。
English: At the time of Emperor Ming, Liyang Jianjiao Fu Ling was reduced to a muddy lake.

古文：钟离故州来邑。
现代文：钟离旧州塞邑。
English: It's a stone's throw away from Sai-eup, Gyeongju.

古文：合肥逡遒阴陵当涂古涂山国。
现代文：合肥逡遒阴陵当涂古涂山国。
English: Hefei Gongyin Mausoleum is surrounded by ancient mountains.

古文：东城乌江
现代文：束城乌江
English: Sokcho Wujiang

古文：庐江郡汉置。
现代文：庐江郡汉设置。
English: The Minjiang County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县十，户四千二百。
现代文：统管十县，四千二百户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 4,200 households.

古文：阳泉舒故国，有桐乡。
现代文：阳泉舒故国，有桐乡。
English: Yang Quanshu's home country, Tongxiang.

古文：灊天柱山在南，有祠。
现代文：滞天柱山在其南，有祠。
English: To its south is Mount Jianzhanzhushan, with an ancestral hall.

古文：皖寻阳居巢桀死于此。
现代文：堕寻阳居巢桀死在这裹。
English: The sun-seeking, sun-dweller died here.

古文：临湖襄安龙舒六故六国。
现代文：临湖襄安龙舒六原六国。
English: Linhu, Xiang'an, Longshu, and the Six Provinces.

古文：毗陵郡吴分会稽无锡已西为屯田，置典农校尉。
现代文：毗陵郡吴划分会稽、无锡以西的土地作为屯田，设典农校尉。
English: Wu Division of Wuling County, the land to the west of Wuxi was used as a military cantonment, and an agricultural school was established.

古文：太康二年，省校尉为毗陵郡。统县七，户一万二千。
现代文：塞康二年，取消校尉改为毗陵郡统管七县，一万二千户。
English: In the second year of Sekang, the post of captain was abolished and replaced with the unified administration of seven counties in Viling County, with 12,000 households.

古文：丹徒故硃方。
现代文：丹徒旧朱方。
English: Danto the old red square.

古文：曲阿故云阳。
现代文：曲阿旧云阳。
English: Qua old Yunyang.

古文：武进延陵毗陵既阳无锡有磨山、春申君祠。
现代文：武进延陵毗陵既阳无锡有历山、春申君祠。
English: Wujin's Yanling Mausoleum and Binling Mausoleum are both in Wuxi, as well as Leshan and Chunshenjun's Ancestral Hall.

古文：吴郡汉置。
现代文：吴郡汉设置。
English: Wu County Han Dynasty was established.

古文：统县十一，户二万五千。
现代文：统管十一县，二万五千户。
English: In charge of eleven counties, with twenty-five thousand households.

古文：吴故国。
现代文：吴故国。
English: Wu's home country.

古文：具区在西。
现代文：具区在其西。
English: Gou District is in the west.

古文：嘉兴海盐盐官钱唐武林山、武林水所出。
现代文：嘉兴海盐盐官钱赓达垫业，是武也匡的发源地。
English: Jiaxing Haiyan Qianyuda Cushion Industry is the birthplace of Wuyakong.

古文：富阳桐庐建德寿昌海庐娄吴兴郡吴置。统县十，户二万四千。
现代文：宣昼面瞳曲寿昌海虞娄吴兴郡吴置。统管十县，二万四千户。
English: Xuan Rongming, Hitomi Qu, Shuchang Haiyu, Wuxing County, Wujing. In charge of ten counties, twenty-four thousand households.

古文：乌程临安余杭武康。故防风氏国。
现代文：乌程临安余杭武康旧防风氏国。
English: Wucheng, Lin'an, Hangzhou and Wukan are the old windbreak provinces.

古文：东迁于潜有潜水。
现代文：束迁于潜有潜水。
English: Relocated to a potential dive site.

古文：故鄣安吉原乡长城
现代文：故鄣安吉原乡长城
English: The Great Wall of Anjiyuan Township

古文：会稽郡秦置。
现代文：会稽郡壶设置。
English: The county kettles are set up.

古文：统县十，户三万。
现代文：统管十县，三万户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 30,000 households.

古文：山阴会稽山在南，上有禹冢。
现代文：山阴会稽山在南，山上有区的墓冢。
English: In the south of the mountain, there is a graveyard on the mountain.

古文：上虞有仇亭，舜避丹硃于此地。
现代文：上虞有仇亭，舜在这裹躲避丹硃。
English: Shangyu has the Hutong Pavilion, where the dragonfly hides from the dragonfly.

古文：余姚有句余山在南。
现代文：余姚说余山在其南。
English: Yu Yao said that Yu Mountain is in the south.

古文：句章鄞有鲒埼亭。
现代文：句章鄞有鲒埼亭。
English: Every sentence ends with 埼亭.

古文：鄮始宁剡永兴诸暨
现代文：鄮始宁剡永兴诸暨
English: From the beginning, Ningbo Yongxing Zhuji

古文：东阳郡吴置。
现代文：东阳郡吴置。
English: Wu Jie, Dongyang County.

古文：统县九，户一万二千。
现代文：统管九县，一万二千产。
English: In charge of nine counties, with 12,000 products.

古文：长山有赤松子庙。
现代文：长山有赤松子庙。
English: Changshan has the Red Pine Temple.

古文：永康乌伤吴宁太末信安丰安定阳遂昌
现代文：永康乌伤吴宁太末信安丰安定阳遂昌
English: Yongkang darkened Wu Ning Taimatsu believed in security, abundance, stability, and success

古文：新安郡吴置。
现代文：新安郡星置。
English: Xingji, Xin'an County.

古文：统县六，户五千。
现代文：统管六县，五千户。
English: In charge of six counties, with 5,000 households.

古文：始新遂安黝歙海宁黎阳
现代文：始新遂安黟歙海宁黎阳
English: Shishin Su'an, Ninghai, Liyang lead

古文：临海郡吴置。
现代文：临海郡吴置。
English: Wujing, Linhai County.

古文：统县八，户一万八千。
现代文：统管八县，一万八千户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 18,000 households.

古文：章安临海始丰永宁宁海松阳安固横阳
现代文：章安临海始丰永宁宁海松阳安固横阳
English: Zhang'an, Linhai, Shifeng, Yongning, Ninghai, Songyang, Anggu, Yangyang

古文：建安郡故秦闽中郡，汉高帝五年以立闽越王。
现代文：建安郡原秦闽中郡，汉高帝五年曾立闽越王。
English: Jian'an County, formerly Qinhuanzhong County, was ruled by Emperor Gao for five years.

古文：及武帝灭之，徙其人，名为东冶，又更名东城。
现代文：武帝时消灭闽越王，把百姓迁徙到此，称为东冶，又改名为东城。
English: Emperor Wu annihilated King Gong Yue and moved the people here, calling it Dongye and changing its name to Dongcheng.

古文：后汉改为候官都尉，及吴置建安郡。
现代文：后汉改为候官都尉，吴时置建安郡。
English: Later Han was changed to Captain-in-waiting, and Wu Jianan County was established.

古文：统县七，户四千三百。
现代文：统管七县，四千三百户。
English: It oversees seven counties and 4,300 households.

古文：建安吴兴东平建阳将乐邵武延平
现代文：建安吴兴柬平建阳将乐邵武延平
English: Jian'an, Wu, Xing, Kam, Ping, Jianyang, General Le, Shao, Wu, Yanping

古文：晋安郡太康三年置。
现代文：晋安郡太康三年设置。
English: Jinan County Taikang three-year set up.

古文：统县八，户四千三百。
现代文：统管八县，四千三百户。
English: It oversees eight counties and 4,300 households.

古文：原丰新罗宛平同安候官罗江晋安温麻
现代文：原丰新罗宛平同安候官罗江晋安温麻
English: Former Fengxin Luo Wanping and Luo Jiang Jinan Wenma

古文：豫章郡汉置。
现代文：豫章郡塑设置。
English: Yuanzhang County Plastic set up.

古文：统县十六，户三万五千。
现代文：统管十六县，三万五千户。
English: It oversees 16 counties and 35,000 households.

古文：南昌海昏新淦建城望蔡永修建昌吴平豫章彭泽艾康乐丰城新吴宜丰钟陵
现代文：南昌海昏新淦建城望蔡永修建昌吴平豫章彭泽艾康乐丰城新吴宜丰钟陵
English: Nanchang, the sea is dim, a new city is being built, Wang Caiyong is being built, Chang Wuping is being built, Yu Zhang Pengze is being built, Ai Kang Lefeng City is being built, New Wu Yifeng Bell Mausoleum is being built

古文：临川郡吴置。
现代文：临川郡吴置。
English: Wujing, Linchuan County.

古文：统县十，户八千五百。
现代文：统管十县，八千五百户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 8,500 households.

古文：临汝西丰南城东兴南丰永成宜黄安浦西宁新建
现代文：临汝西丰南城束兴南丰宜黄安浦西宁新建鄱阳郡吴置。
English: Linru Xifeng Nancheng Sokxing Nanfengyi Huanganpu Xining Xinzhuangyang Wu Jie.

古文：鄱阳郡吴置。统县八，户六千一百。
现代文：统管八县，六千一百户。
English: It oversees eight counties and has 6,100 households.

古文：广晋鄱阳乐安余汗鄡阳历陵葛阳晋兴
现代文：广晋鄱阳乐安余汗鄡阳历陵葛阳晋兴
English: Guangjin, Jinyang, Le'an, Yuhang, Jinyang, Liling, Geyang, Jinxing

古文：庐陵郡吴置。
现代文：庐陵郡吴置。
English: Wujing, Fuling County.

古文：统县十，户一万二千二百。
现代文：统管十县，一万二千二百户。
English: In charge of 10 counties, with 12,200 households.

古文：西昌高昌石阳巴丘南野东昌遂兴吉阳兴平阳丰
现代文：西昌高昌石阳巴丘南野东昌遂兴吉阳兴平阳丰
English: Xichang Gaochang Shiyang Bachu Nanye Dongchang Suixing Jiyang Xingping Yangfeng

古文：南康郡太康三年置。
现代文：南康郡太康三年设置。
English: Nankang County Taikang three-year set up.

古文：统县五，户一千四百。
现代文：统管五县，一千四百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 1,400 households.

古文：赣雩都平固南康揭阳
现代文：赣雩都平固南康揭阳
English: 都平固南康揭阳

古文：惠帝元康元年，有司奏，荆、揭二州疆土广远，统理尤难，于是割扬州之豫章、鄱阳、庐陵、临川、南康、建安、晋安、荆州之武昌、桂阳、安成，合十郡，因江水之名而置江州。
现代文：惠帝元康元年，有关部门上奏，荆、揭疆域广阔，管理非常困难，于是划分出扬州的豫章、鄱阳、庐陵、临川、南康、建安、晋安、荆州的武昌、桂阳、安成，共十郡，江水的名称而设置江州。
English: In the first year of Hui Di Yuan Kang, the relevant departments reported, Jing and Jie territory is vast, management is very difficult, so they divided Yangzhou into Yuzhang, Fenyang, Fuling, Linchuan, Nankang, Jian'an, Jin'an, Wuchang, Guiyang and Ancheng in Jingzhou, a total of ten counties, the name of the river and set up Jiangzhou.

古文：永兴元年，分庐江之寻阳、武昌之柴桑二县置寻阳郡，属江州，分淮南之乌江、历阳二县置历阳郡。
现代文：永兴元年，划分出庐红的寻阳、武昌的柴桑二县置寻阳郡，属于江州，划分出淮南的乌江、历阳二县置历阳郡。
English: In the first year of Yongxing, the two counties of Xuanyang in Xinhong and Chaisang in Wuchang were divided into Xuanyang County, which belonged to Jiangzhou, and the two counties of Wujiang and Liyang in Huainan were divided into Liyang County.

古文：又以周创义讨石冰，割吴兴之阳羡并长城县之北乡置义乡、国山、临津并阳羡四县，又分丹阳之永世置平陵及永世，凡六县，立义兴郡，以表纪之功，并属扬州。
现代文：又因周创先提出征讨石冰，划分出县兴的阳羡和长城县的北乡设置了义乡、国山、临津以及阳羡四县，又划分丹阳的永世置平陵以及永世，总共六个县，置义兴郡，用以表彰旦旦的功劳，这些郡县都属于扬州。
English: In addition, because Zhou Bingchuang first proposed to collect stone ice, Yangxing County of Xing and Beixiang County of Great Wall County were divided into four counties of Yixiang, Guoshan, Linjin and Yangxing, and Yongshi County of Danyang was divided into Yongshi County of Pingling and Yongshi County, a total of six counties, and Yixing County was set up to commend the merits of Dandan. These counties all belong to Yangzhou.

古文：又以毗陵郡封东海王世子毗，避毗讳，改为晋陵。
现代文：又将毗陵郡封给东海王世子毗，因避司马毗讳而改为晋陵。
English: In addition, the county of Viling was given to the East Sea king's son, Viling, but it was changed to Jinling due to his avoidance of Sima Viling.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年，又以豫章之彭泽县属寻阳郡。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年，又把豫章的彭泽县属于寻阳郡。
English: In the first year of Huai Di Yongjia, Pengze County, which was ruled by Emperor Yuanzhang, belonged to Xiangyang County.

古文：愍帝立，避帝讳改建鄴为建康。
现代文：愍帝即位，避帝讳改称建鄴为建康。
English: Emperor Qian ascended to the throne, and he changed his name from Jiankui to Jiankang.

古文：元帝渡江，建都扬州，改丹阳太守为尹，江州又置新蔡郡。
现代文：元帝渡江，建都于扬州，改丹阳太守为旦握尹，江州又设置新蔡郡。
English: The Yuan Emperor crossed the Yangtze River, built the capital in Yangzhou, changed the governor of Danyang to Tan Ji Yin, and set up a new Cai County in Jiangzhou.

古文：寻阳郡又置九江、上甲二县，寻又省九江县入寻阳。
现代文：寻阳郡又设立九江、上甲二县，接着又撤销九江县并入寻阳。
English: In addition, Jiujiang and Shangjia 2 counties were established in Xuanyang County, and then the merger of Jiujiang County into Xuanyang was revoked.

古文：是时司、冀、雍、凉、青、并、兗、豫、幽、平诸州皆沦没，江南所得但有扬、荆、湘、江、梁、益、交、广，其徐州则有过半，豫州惟得谯城而已。
现代文：当时司、冀、雍、凉、青、并、兗、豫、幽、平各州都沦陷，所得到的地域在长江以南仅有扬、型、捆、红、梁、益、奎、庐诸州，其余的地方途业据有一半以上，豫州衹是据有谯城。
English: At that time, the provinces of Si, Hebei, Yong, Liang, Qing, Bin, Min, Yu, Yu and Ping had all fallen, and the areas gained south of the Yangtze River were only the provinces of Yang, Ji, Bundi, Hong, Liang, Yi, Gui and Min. More than half of the remaining places were occupied, and Mincheng was occupied by Yuzhou.

古文：明帝太宁元年，分临海立永嘉郡，流永宁、安固、松阳、横阳等四县，而扬州统丹阳、吴郡、吴兴、新安、东阳、临海、永嘉、宣城、义兴、晋陵十一郡。
现代文：明帝主空元年，划分监连设永嘉郡，统管永宁、安固、松阳、横阳等四县，而扬州管辖丹阳、吴郡、吴兴、新安、东阳、临海、永嘉、宣城、义兴、晋陵十一郡。
English: In the first year of the Ming Emperor's reign, the Divisional Supervision Company was set up in Yongjia County to supervise four counties including Yongning, Angu, Songyang and Hengyang, while Yangzhou was in charge of eleven counties including Danyang, Wu County, Wuxing, Xin'an, Dongyang, Linhai, Yongjia, Xuancheng, Yixing and Jinling.

古文：自中原乱离，遗黎南渡，并侨置牧司在广陵，丹徒南城，非旧土也。
现代文：自中原战乱分裂以来，遣民南渡长江，并且在庐陆侨立，且楚南城，不是原来的地域。
English: Since the Sino-Japanese War and the division of the Central Plains, immigrants have been sent south to the Yangtze River, and overseas Chinese have settled in the Mainland, and Chunan City is not the original area.

古文：及胡寇南侵，淮南百姓皆渡江。
现代文：到胡寇向南侵犯时，淮南百姓都渡过长江。
English: When the Huko invaded the south, the people of Huainan had all crossed the Yangtze River.

古文：成帝初，苏峻、祖约为乱于江淮，胡寇又大至，百姓南渡者转多，乃于江南侨立淮南郡及诸县，又于寻阳侨置松滋郡，遥隶扬州。
现代文：成帝初年，麸些、担鲍在辽、进一带作乱，胡寇又大批而至，南渡的百姓越来越多，就在长江以南侨立进卢塑以及诸县，又在寻阳侨立松滋郡，遥属扬业。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Chengdu, some Han and Bao made trouble in the areas of Liao and Jin, and the Huko came in large numbers again. More and more people from Nantou came to the south of the Yangtze River to settle in Lushuo and other counties, and to settle in Songzhi County in the south of the Yangtze River.

古文：咸康四年，侨置魏郡、广川、高阳、堂邑等诸郡，并所统县并寄居京邑，改陵阳为广阳。
现代文：盛尘四年，侨立魏郡、广、高阳、堂邑等各郡，与所统管的县都寄居于京邑，改称陵阳为广阳。
English: In the four years of prosperity, the overseas Chinese established Wei County, Guang, Gaoyang, Dongyue and other counties, and the counties under their overall control all resided in Beijing, and changed the name of Lingyang to Guangyang.

古文：孝武宁康二年，又分永嘉郡之永宁县置乐成县。
现代文：孝武宁康二年，又划分永嘉郡的永宁县设乐成县。
English: In the second year of Xiaowu Ningkang, Yongning County of Yongjia County was divided into Lecheng County.

古文：是时上党百姓南渡，侨立上党郡为四县，寄居芜湖。
现代文：当时上党百姓渡过长江，侨立由四个县组成的上党郡，寄居在芜湖。
English: At that time, Shangtang people crossed the Yangtze River, and the overseas Chinese settled in Shangtang County, which consisted of four counties, and lived in Wuhu.

古文：寻又省上党郡为县，又罢襄城郡为繁昌县，并以属淮南。
现代文：不久又取消上党郡为上党县，取消襄城郡为繁昌县，这两个县都属于淮南郡。
English: Soon after, Shangdang County was abolished as Shangdang County, and Xiangcheng County was abolished as Fanchang County. Both counties belong to Huainan County.

古文：安帝义熙八年，省寻阳县入柴桑县，柴桑仍为郡，后又省上甲县入彭泽县。
现代文：安帝义熙八年，撤销寻阳县划入柴桑县，柴桑仍旧是郡，后又取消上甲县归于彭泽县。
English: In the eighth year of Emperor Andei, the revocation of Huanyang County was transferred to Chaisang County, Chaisang was still a county, and later the cancellation of Shangjia County was transferred to Pengze County.

古文：旧江州督荆州之竟陵郡，及何无忌为刺史，表以竟陵去州辽远，去江陵三百里，荆州所立绥安郡人户入境，欲资此郡助江滨戍防，以竟陵郡还荆州。
现代文：旧江州督管荆州的竟陵郡，何无忌任刺史时，上表说：由于竞陵离州府所在地遥远，距离江陵三百里，荆州所设的绥安郡人户迁入境内，想依竟陵郡帮助江滨的防戍，所以把竟陵郡归还荆州。
English: When the former governor of Jiangzhou, Jingling County of Jingzhou, had no hesitation in making history, the above table said: Since Jingling is far away from the seat of the state capital and is three hundred miles away from Jiangling, the people of Ya'an County, which was established by Jingzhou, moved into the territory and wanted to follow Jingling County to help the flood control of the river, so they returned Jingling County to Jingzhou.

古文：又司州之弘农、扬州之松滋二郡寄在寻阳，人户难居，并宜建督。
现代文：又有司州的弘农、扬州的松滋二郡寄居在寻阳，人户杂居，都应该建督。
English: In addition, Hongnong from Sizhou and Songzhi from Yangzhou both live in Xuanyang County, and both are mixed households. Both of them should become governors.

古文：安帝从之。
现代文：安帝同意了何无忌的建议。
English: Andi agreed to the suggestion out of the blue.

古文：后又省松滋郡为松滋县，弘农郡为弘农县，并属寻阳郡。
现代文：后来又取消松滋郡而成为松滋县，弘农郡成为弘农县，都属于寻阳郡。
English: Later, Songzhi County was abolished and became Songzhi County, and Hongnong County became Hongnong County, both of which belong to Xuanyang County.

古文：交州。
现代文：交州。
English: Gwangju.

古文：案《禹贡》扬州之域，是为南越之土。
现代文：《禹贡》记载为扬州地域，即是南越的土地。
English: "Yu Gong" records the Yangzhou region, that is, the land of South Vietnam.

古文：秦始皇即略定扬越，以谪戍卒五十万人守五岭。
现代文：秦始皇攻占平定了扬越之后，用受贬谪的边防守卒五十万人把守五岭。
English: After Qin Shihuang conquered and leveled Yang Yue, he used half a million soldiers to defend the Wuling Mountains.

古文：自北徂南，入越之道，必由岭峤，时有五处，故曰五岭。
现代文：自北至南，进入越地的道路，必须经过峻峭的山峰，当时有五处这样的山峰，所以称作五岭。
English: From north to south, the road into Yueji must pass through steep peaks. At that time, there were five such peaks, so it was called Wuling.

古文：后使任嚣、赵他攻越，略取陆梁地，遂定南越，以为桂林、南海、象等三郡，非三十六郡之限，乃置南海尉以典之，所谓东南一尉也。
现代文：后来派任嚣、趟他攻越，夺取了陆梁，于是平定了南越，设桂林、南海、象等三郡，不在三十六郡之内，设南海尉掌管三郡，即所谓东南一尉。
English: Later, he sent Ren Ren, Watan He to invade and conquer Lu Liang, and thus pacified South Vietnam, and set up three counties including Guilin, Nanhai, and Xiang, which were not included in the 36 counties, and set up the South Sea Lieutenant to be in charge of the three counties, that is, the so-called Southeast First Lieutenant.

古文：汉初，以岭南三郡及长沙、豫章封吴芮为长沙王。
现代文：汉初，把岭南三郡以及长沙、豫章封给吴芮，封为长沙王。
English: At the beginning of the Han Dynasty, the three counties of Lingnan, as well as Changsha and Yuzhang, were given to Wu Xi, and he was named the King of Changsha.

古文：十一年，以南武侯织为南海王。
现代文：十一年，任南武侯织为南海王。
English: In the eleventh year of his reign, he was crowned King of the South Seas.

古文：陆贾使还，拜赵他为南越王，割长沙之南三郡以封之。
现代文：陆买出使南越回到中原，任赵他为南越王，分割长沙以南的三郡封给他。
English: Lu bought out and sent South Vietnam back to the Central Plains, appointed Zhao as the king of South Vietnam, and divided the three counties south of Changsha to him.

古文：武帝元鼎六年，讨平吕嘉，以其地为南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、日南、九真、交趾七郡，盖秦时三郡之地。
现代文：汉武帝元鼎六年，讨伐平定了吕嘉，把他的领地设为南海、苍梧、郁林、合浦、日南、九真、交耻七郡，是秦时岭南三郡之地。
English: Six years after Emperor Hanwu ascended to the throne in the Yuan Dynasty, he crushed Lujiazui in a crusade and set up his territory as Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin, Hapu, Nichinan, Jiuzhen and Jiaxian seven counties, which is the land of the southern three counties of Qin Dynasty.

古文：元封中，又置儋耳、珠崖二郡，置交趾刺史以督之。
现代文：元封年间，又设置了儋耳、珠崖二郡，置交吐刺史来督管。
English: During the Yuan Dynasty, the two counties of Kunlun and Zhuya were also set up, and Tujishi was put in charge.

古文：昭帝始元五年，罢儋耳并珠崖。
现代文：昭帝始元五年，取消儋耳并入珠崖。
English: In the fifth year of the reign of Emperor Zhao, the merger of Kunlun into Zhuyao was cancelled.

古文：元帝初元三年，又罢珠崖郡。
现代文：元帝扭元三年，又撤销了珠崖郡。
English: In the third year of the Yuan Dynasty, Zhuya County was abolished.

古文：后汉马援平定交部，始调立城郭置井邑。
现代文：鳖选区遥平定交部，开始为当地调整城郭设置井邑。
English: The Yaoping fixed traffic section of the Xuancheng electoral district began to adjust the local castle and set up a well.

古文：顺帝永和九年，交趾太守周敞求立为州，朝议不许，即拜敞为交趾刺史。
现代文：顺帝永和六年，交吐太守周敞请求立郡为州，经朝廷评议没有应许，随即任周敞为交耻刺史。
English: In the sixth year of Emperor Shun's reign, Zhou Chang, the vicar-general of Tibet, requested that the county be made into a prefecture. After the imperial court's review, there was no promise, and the immediate appointment of Zhou Chang was a shameful history.

古文：桓帝分立高兴郡，灵帝改曰高凉。
现代文：桓帝分立成高兴郡，灵帝改为高凉郡。
English: Kantei was divided into Shoko-gun, and Lingdi was changed to Takahara-gun.

古文：建安八年，张津为刺史，土燮交趾太守，共表立为州，乃拜津为交州牧。
现代文：建安八年，张津任刺史，士燮任交耻太守，共同上表要求立郡为州，于是任命张津任交州牧。
English: In the eighth year of Jian'an, Zhang Tzin was appointed to be the chief historian, and Shijun was appointed to be the governor of Jiaoxi, and they jointly requested that the county be established as a prefecture, and Zhang Tzin was appointed to be the governor of Jiaoxi.

古文：十五年，移居番禺，诏以边州使持节，郡给鼓吹，以重城镇，加以九锡六佾之舞。
现代文：十五年，州治移居番墨，朝廷诏令赐予边远州的刺史使持节，郡赐予鼓吹之乐，以重视城镇，加赐九锡六佾之舞。
English: In the fifteenth year, the prefectural government moved to Panmo, and the imperial edict gave the outlying prefectures the "Storytelling Festival," the counties the "Music of Preaching," the towns the "Attention to Towns," and Jiuxi the "Dance of Six Drums."

古文：吴黄武五年，割南海、苍梧、郁林三郡立广州，交趾、日南、九真、合浦四郡为交州。
现代文：吴董茎五年，划分出卢复、董垣、郁挞、直凿四郡置庐业，以蛮皿、旦直、立甚、合适四郡为交州。
English: In the fifth year of Wu Dongzhu, he divided the four counties of Lu Fu, Donggaki, Yucao, and Zhizhi into four counties, and the four counties of Hanzhong, Danzhong, Zhizhong, and Zhizhong were divided into four counties.

古文：戴良为刺史，值乱不得入，吕岱击平之，复还并交部。
现代文：数良任刺史，逢战乱而不能入境，吕岱进击平息了战乱，又还归奎垫。
English: A number of eminent persons in history were unable to enter the country because of the war, but Lv Ying's invasion put an end to the war and they were allowed to return to Qui Mat.

古文：赤乌五年，复置珠崖部。
现代文：壶乌五年，重置速崖娶。
English: Jug Wu five years, reset speed cliff to marry.

古文：永安七年，复以前三郡立广州。
现代文：丞室七年，又以前三郡设广州。
English: It has been seven years since the establishment of the imperial court, and Guangzhou was previously located in three counties.

古文：及孙皓，又立新昌、武平、九德三郡。蜀以李恢为建宁太守，遥领交州刺史。晋平蜀，以蜀建宁太守霍弋遥领交州，得以便宜选用长吏。
现代文：到孙皓时，又设缒、钮、妪三郡。蜀任塑为盘太守，遥领奎业刺史。置平定蜀后，任蜀建宁太守霍弋遥领交州，能先自选长吏，以后上报。
English: At the time of Sun Yat-sen, there were three counties, namely, Shun, Niu and Jiu. Shu was appointed as the Pan Dazhou, with Yao as the leader and Quye as the historian. After Shu was pacified, Shu was appointed as the Jianning Dazhou, with Ho as the leader and Yao as the statesman. He could choose his own leaders first and report to the emperor later.

古文：平吴后，省珠崖入合浦。
现代文：晋平县之后，取消夏瞳并入合适。
English: After Jinping County, it is appropriate to cancel Xia Hitomi's merger.

古文：交州统郡七，县五十三，户二万五千六百。
现代文：变业统管七郡，五十三县，二万五千六百户。
English: Seven counties, 53 counties, and 25,600 households will be under the unified management of business transformation.

古文：合浦郡汉置。
现代文：合浦郡设置。
English: It is located in Hepu County.

古文：统县六，户二千。
现代文：统管六县，二千户。
English: In charge of six counties, with 2,000 households.

古文：合浦南平荡昌徐闻毒质珠官
现代文：合浦南平荡昌徐闻毒质珠官
English: Hepu South Pinglangchang Xu smell poisonous bead official

古文：交趾郡汉置。
现代文：交趾郡选设置。
English: Koji-gun election is set up.

古文：统县十四，户一万二千。
现代文：统管十四县，一万二千户。
English: It oversees 14 counties and 12,000 households.

古文：龙编苟漏望海娄西于武宁硃鸢曲易
现代文：龙编苟漏望海娄西于武宁硃鸢曲易
English: The Long March of the Dragon to the West of the Sea of Reeds in Wu Ning and Qu Yi

古文：交兴北带稽徐安定南定海平
现代文：交兴北带稽徐安定南定海平垩
English: North of Jiaxing, the situation is gradually stabilizing, and South of Dinghai, the situation is stable.

古文：新昌郡吴置。
现代文：新昌郡星置。
English: Xingji, Xinchang County.

古文：统县六，户三千。
现代文：统管六县。
English: He is in charge of six counties.

古文：麋泠妇人征侧为主处，马援平之。
现代文：麋泠妇人征讨掌权的地方，平定此地。
English: The women will gather the places where they hold power, and pacify this place.

古文：嘉宁吴定封山临西西道
现代文：嘉宁吴定封山临西西道
English: Wudingfeng Mountain, West Road, Jianning

古文：武平郡吴置。
现代文：武平郡星置。
English: Xingji, Wuping County.

古文：统县七，户五千。
现代文：统管七县，五千户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 5,000 households.

古文：武宁武兴进山根宁安武扶安封溪
现代文：武宁武兴进山根宁安武扶安封溪
English: Wu Ning Wu Xing into the mountain roots Ning An Wu Fu Anfeng Creek

古文：九真郡汉置。
现代文：九真郡运设置。
English: The Jiu Zhen County Movement was established.

古文：统县七，户三千。
现代文：统管七县，三千户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 3,000 households.

古文：胥浦移风津梧建初常乐扶乐松原
现代文：胥浦移风津梧建初常乐扶乐松原
English: The wind shifted from Minpo to Matsubara

古文：九德郡吴置，周时越常氏地。
现代文：九德郡置，周时越常氏之地。
English: It is located in Jiude County, the hometown of Zhou Shih Yue Chang.

古文：统县八，无户。
现代文：统管八县，没有所辖户。
English: It oversees eight counties, but does not have its own jurisdiction.

古文：九德咸驩南陵阳遂扶苓曲胥浦阳都洨
现代文：九德咸驩南陵阳遂扶苓曲胥浦阳都洨
English: Jiudeh hamlet, Nanyingyang sub-district, Fuye sub-district, Poyang sub-district

古文：日南郡秦置象郡，汉武帝改名焉。
现代文：日南郡台设置象郡，汉武帝改为此名。
English: Nichinan County was set up as Xiang County, and Emperor Hanwu changed it to this name.

古文：统县五，户六百。
现代文：统管五县，六百户。
English: It oversees five counties and 600 households.

古文：象林自此南有四国，其人皆云汉人子孙，今有铜柱，亦是汉置此为界。
现代文：象林从此地往南有四国，那裹的百姓都自称迁人子孙。今有铜柱，也是选立在遣裹作为地界。
English: From here, the elephant forest stretches south to Shikoku, and the people of that area all claim to be descendants of the migrants. Today, there is a bronze pillar, which was also chosen to stand at the boundary.

古文：贡金供税也。
现代文：纳金供税。
English: Fees are subject to tax.

古文：卢容象郡所居。
现代文：卢容象郡治所。
English: Lu Rongxiang County Government.

古文：硃吾西卷比景
现代文：朱吾西卷比景
English: Zhuwuxi Scroll Comparison

古文：广州。
现代文：广州。
English: Guangzhou.

古文：案《禹贡》扬州之域，秦末赵他所据之地。
现代文：《禹贡》记载为扬州地域，秦朝末年赵他所占据之地。
English: "Yugong" records the Yangzhou region, the place occupied by Zhao He at the end of the Qin Dynasty.

古文：及汉武帝，以其地为交址郡。
现代文：到汉武帝时，把造裹作为交吐郡。
English: When it came to Emperor Hanwu, Zouwu was used as a transfer county.

古文：至吴黄武五年，分交州之南海、苍梧、郁林、高梁四郡立为广州，俄复旧。
现代文：到吴黄武五年，分划出交州的南海、苍梧、郁林、高梁四郡设广州，不久又恢复如旧。
English: In the fifth year of Wu Huangwu, the four counties of Nanhai, Cangwu, Yulin and Gaoliang were separated from Jiaozhou and set up in Guangzhou. They were soon restored as before.

古文：永安六年，复分交州置广州，分合浦立合浦北部，以都尉领之。
现代文：永安六年，再一次划分交州设广州，将合浦郡分出设合浦北部，派都尉兼管它。
English: In the sixth year of Yongan, Jiaozhou was once again divided to establish Guangzhou, and Hepu County was separated to establish the northern part of Hepu, and the captain was also put in charge of it.

古文：孙皓分郁林立桂林郡。
现代文：孙皓分划郁林设桂林郡。
English: Sun Yat-sen divided Yulin into Guilin County.

古文：及太康中，吴平，遂以荆州始安、始兴、临贺三郡来属。
现代文：太康年间，吴被平定，便将荆州的始安、始兴、临贺三郡归属于广州。
English: During the Taikang period, when Wu was subdued, the three counties of Xi'an, Xi'xing and Linhe in Jingzhou were assigned to Guangzhou.

古文：合统郡十，县六十八，户四万三千一百二十。
现代文：共统管十郡，六十八县，四万三千一百二十户。
English: Ten counties and sixty-eight counties are under the control of the Communist Party, with a total of 43,120 households.

古文：南海郡秦置。
现代文：南海郡秦设置。
English: It is located in Qin, Nanhai County.

古文：统县六，户九千五百。
现代文：统管六县，九千五百户。
English: It oversees six counties and 9,500 households.

古文：番禺四会增城博罗龙川平夷
现代文：番禺四会增城博罗龙川平夷
English: Panyu Fourth Association Zengcheng Borolongchuan Pingyi

古文：临贺郡吴置。
现代文：临贺郡吴置。
English: Wujing, Linhe County.

古文：统县六，户二千五百。
现代文：统管六县，二千五百户。
English: It oversees six counties and 2,500 households.

古文：临贺谢沐冯乘封阳兴安富川
现代文：临贺谢沐冯乘封阳兴安富川
English: Lin He, Xie Mu, Feng Rong, Feng Yang and Xing Anfu River

古文：始安郡吴置。
现代文：始安郡星置。
English: Xingji, Shi'an County.

古文：统县七，户六千。
现代文：统管七县，六千户。
English: It oversees seven counties and 6,000 households.

古文：始安始阳平乐荔浦常安熙平永丰始兴郡吴置。
现代文：始安始阳干乐荔浦常安熙干永始兴郡县置。
English: Shi'an, Shiyang, Ganle, Lippu, Chang'an, Xi'an, Yong'an, Shixing counties and counties.

古文：统县七，户五千。
现代文：统管七县，五千户。
English: In charge of seven counties, with 5,000 households.

古文：曲江桂阳始兴含洭浈阳中宿阳山苍梧郡汉置。
现代文：曲江桂阳始兴含沤演阳中宿阳苍梧郡汉设置。
English: Qujiang River, Guiyang, began to flourish, including the 演阳, and the 宿阳苍梧郡汉 was set up.

古文：统县十二，户七千七百。
现代文：统管十二县，七干七百户。
English: It oversees 12 counties and 700 households.

古文：广信端溪高要建陵新宁猛陵鄣平农城元谿临允都罗武城
现代文：广信端溪高要建陵新宁猛陵鄣平农城元谿临允都罗武城
English: Guangxin Duanxi High School wants to build a mausoleum, Xinning Mengling Mausoleum, Fenping Farm Town, Yuanjing Linyun Capital, Luowu City

古文：郁林郡秦置桂林郡，武帝更名。
现代文：郁林郡秦设桂林郡，漠武帝改名。
English: Qin set up Guilin County in Yulin County, and Emperor Mo changed his name.

古文：统县九，户六千。
现代文：统管九县，六千户。
English: It oversees nine counties and 6,000 households.

古文：布山阿林新邑晋平始建郁平领方武熙安广
现代文：布山阿林新邑晋平始建郁平领方武熙安广
English: Jinping, a new town in Busan's Alingshin-eup, started to be built by the leader of Yuping County, Wu Xi'an Guang

古文：桂林郡吴置。
现代文：桂林郡置。
English: Guilin County.

古文：统县八，户二千。
现代文：统管八县，二千户。
English: In charge of eight counties, with 2,000 households.

古文：潭中武丰粟平羊平龙刚夹阳武城军腾
现代文：潭中武丰粟平羊平龙刚夹阳武城军腾
English: In the middle of the lake, Wu Feng, Mok Ping, Yang Ping, Long Gang, and Yang Wucheng's army were advancing.

古文：高凉郡吴置。
现代文：高凉郡吴置。
English: Wu Jie, Gaoliang County.

古文：统县三，户二千。
现代文：统管三县，二千户。
English: In charge of three counties, with 2,000 households.

古文：安宁高凉思平
现代文：安宁高凉思平
English: Anning Gao Liang Siping

古文：高兴郡吴置。
现代文：高兴郡吴置。
English: Wujie, Gaoxing County.

古文：统县五，户一千二百。
现代文：统管五县，一千二百户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 1,200 households.

古文：广化海安化平黄阳西平
现代文：广化海安化干莫阳西平
English: Guanghua Hai'an Huajian Moyang Xiping

古文：宁浦郡吴置。
现代文：宁浦郡吴置。
English: Wu Jie, Ningpu County.

古文：统县五，户一千二百二十。
现代文：统管五县，一千二百二十户。
English: In charge of five counties, with 1,220 households.

古文：宁浦连道吴安昌平平山
现代文：宁浦连道吴安平山
English: Wu Anping Mountain, Ningpu Lian Road

古文：武帝后省高兴郡。
现代文：武帝以后取消高兴郡。
English: Emperor Wu later abolished Heping County.

古文：怀帝永嘉元年，又以临贺、始兴、始安三郡凡二十县为湘州。
现代文：怀帝永嘉元年，又把临贺、始兴、始安三郡共二十县设为湘州。
English: In the first year of Huai Di Yongjia, the three counties of Linhe, Shixing and Shi'an, a total of 20 counties, were designated as Hunan.

古文：元帝分郁林立晋兴郡。
现代文：元帝划分郁林设晋兴郡。
English: Emperor Yuan divided Yulin into Jinxing County.

古文：成帝分南海立东官郡，以始兴、临贺二郡还蜀荆州。
现代文：成帝划分南海设束官郡，把始兴、临贺二郡归荆州。
English: Emperor Cheng divided the South China Sea into Shokuan County and made Shixing County and Linhe County part of Jingzhou.

古文：穆帝分苍梧立晋康、新宁、永平三郡。
现代文：穆帝划分苍梧设晋康、新宁、永乎三郡。
English: Mu Di divided Cangwu into three counties: Jinkang, Xinning and Yonghu.

古文：哀帝太和中置新安郡，安帝分东官立义安郡，恭帝分南海立新会郡。
现代文：哀帝太和年间置新安郡，安帝划分东官设义安郡，恭帝划分南海设新会郡。
English: Emperor Ya and Empress Dowager Cixi set up Xin'an County, Emperor An divided Dongguan and set up Yi'an County, and Emperor Gong divided Nanhai and set up Xinhui County.

