古文：惟是有三祀，王在管，管叔自作殷之监，东隅之侯咸受赐于王，王乃旅之，以上东隅。
现代文：十一年，武王在管城。管叔鲜和蔡叔度自愿作殷人的监国。东方诸侯也都受到武王的赏赐。武王还接见他们，让他们各自陈述政事。
English: In the eleventh year, King Wu was in charge of the city. Guan Shuxiang and Cai Shudu volunteered to be the overseers of the Yin people. The Eastern princes were also rewarded by King Wu. King Wu also received them and let them present their political affairs.

古文：用大匡，顺九则、八宅、六位。
现代文：武王训导管叔、蔡叔要用大匡、顺九则、口八宅、口六位。
English: Wu Wangxun's guidance uncle and Cai Shu should use Dajuang, Shun Jiu Zi, Kucha Yatake, and Kucha Six.

古文：宽俭恭敬，夙夜有严。
现代文：武王说：宽缓廉洁，恭敬有礼，早晚都显得威严。
English: King Wu said: lenient and incorruptible, respectful and courteous, sooner or later appear dignified.

古文：昭质非朴，朴有不明，明执于私，私回不中，中忠于欲，思慧丑诈。
现代文：倡导质朴而不主过分，过分朴实则不显明；昭明质朴于口，思慕口口憎恶口口。倡导忠诚而不私交，私交则奸邪不正；端正忠诚于物欲，思慕聪慧憎恶伪诈。
English: Advocate simplicity without being overbearing, and excessive simplicity without being obvious; clarify simplicity in the mouth, think about the mouth and hate the mouth; advocate loyalty without personal friendship, and personal friendship is evil and dishonest; correct loyalty to material desires, think about cleverness and hate fraud.

古文：昭信非展，展尽不伊，伊言于允，思复丑谮。
现代文：倡导伸展而不展尽，展尽就不能回屈；回屈伸展得恰当，思慕回复憎恶过僭。
English: Advocate extension but not exhaustion, exhaustion can not backbend; backbend stretch properly, yearn for reply hate overbend.

古文：昭让非背，背党雍德，德让于敬，思贤丑争。
现代文：倡导推让而不背离，背离众人必蔽塞道德；道德推让在于礼敬，思慕贤才憎恶争斗。
English: Advocating concession without deviation, deviating from the masses will block morality; moral concession lies in courtesy, yearning for talent and abhorring struggle.

古文：昭位非忿，忿非□直，直立于众，思直丑比。
现代文：倡导直立而不忿恚，忿恚则不正直；正直立身于众人，思慕正直憎恶勾结。
English: Advocate uprightness without anger, anger is not honest; honesty stands up for everyone, thinks about honesty and abhors collusion.

古文：昭政非闲，闲非远节，节政于进，思止丑残。
现代文：倡导节制而不限制，限制则远离节度；节度只达于节制，思慕节制憎恶毁伤。
English: Advocating moderation without restriction, restriction is far from moderation; moderation only achieves moderation, thinking about moderation is hateful and destructive.

古文：昭静非穷，穷居非意，意动于行，思静丑躁。
现代文：倡导清静而不穷居，穷居则非本意；心意活动于行为，思慕清静憎恶急躁。
English: Advocating tranquility without poverty, poverty is not intentional; the mind is active in behavior, yearning for tranquility and hating impatience.

古文：昭洁非为，为穷非涓，涓洁于利，思义丑贪。
现代文：倡导清洁丽不造作，造作则不干净；干净清洁于财利，思慕合宜憎恶贪心。
English: We advocate that cleanliness is beautiful, not artificiality, and artificiality is not clean; cleanliness is clean for financial gain, and it is appropriate to hate greed.

古文：昭因非疾疾非不贞，贞固于事，思任丑诞。
现代文：倡导坚固而不疾速，疾速则不贞定，贞定坚固于行事，思慕任事憎恶虚华。
English: Advocate firmness and not haste, haste is not chaste, chastity is firm in action, think and do things, and abhor vanity.

古文：昭明九则，九丑自齐，齐则曰知，悖则死勇。
现代文：昭明了九则，九丑自会得以纠正。正丑就叫做智，违背九则就必死于勇力。
English: Clarify the nine principles and the nine evils will be corrected. Correct the nine evils is called wisdom. Violate the nine principles and you will die of courage.

古文：勇如害上，则不登于明堂。
现代文：死勇如果威害国君，使国君不能登上明堂。
English: If you are brave enough to threaten the sovereign, you will prevent the sovereign from ascending to the Ming Hall.

古文：明堂所以明道，明道惟法。
现代文：明堂，是用以明道的地方。
English: Myeongdong, is the place used for Myeongdong.

古文：法人惟重老，重老惟宝。
现代文：明道只有效法，知效法才是正人，人必重视老人，重老人是国家之宝。
English: It is clear that only by following the law can one be a righteous person. People must pay attention to the elderly. The elderly are a national treasure.

古文：呜呼在昔，文考战战惟时，祗祗汝其。
现代文：从前先父文王，谨谨慎慎，唯此为敬。
English: In the past, my father, King Wen, was cautious and prudent, but this was respected.

古文：此有夺误夙夜济济，无竞惟人，惟允惟让，不远群正，不迩谗邪。
现代文：你们要早晚恭敬，与人无争，做到公允做到谦让，不远离正人，不接近小人。
English: Sooner or later, you must be respectful, not quarrel with others, be fair, be humble, not be far from the righteous, and not be close to the villain.

古文：入汝不时，行汝害于士，士惟都人，孝悌子孙。
现代文：你们不做到这些，必有害贤士。贤士就是都邑中人士的孝悌子孙。
English: If you do not do these things, you will offend the Magi, who are the sons and daughters of everyone in the city.

古文：不官则不长，官戒有敬。
现代文：不任用官吏则无首领，为官教戒必敬上。
English: If officials are not appointed, there will be no leader, and officials must be respected.

古文：官□朝道，舍宾祭器，曰八宅。
现代文：居官、为民、在朝、在野、居家、为宾、居祭、居丧，叫八宅。
English: They are called the eight houses. They are for officials, for the people, in the morning, in the field, at home, for guests, for festivals, and for funerals.

古文：绥比新、故、外、内、贵、贱曰六位。
现代文：安抚协调新旧、内外、贵贱，叫六位。
English: To appease and coordinate the old and the new, the inside and the outside, the high and the low, is called the six ranks.

古文：大官作为武，小官承长。
现代文：大官备威武，小官从其上。
English: A high-ranking official prepares a mighty army, and a low-ranking official rises above it.

古文：大匡封摄，外用和大。中匡用均，劳故礼心。小匡用惠，施舍静众。
现代文：大安用和法，分封摄持于畿外；中安于均法，赏劳旧臣礼遇新臣；小安用恩惠，施舍以安定民众。
English: Da'an used the law of harmony to divide and control the provinces outside the Kinai region; Chu'an used the law of equality to reward the old and treat the new with courtesy; and Ko'an used favors and gave alms to stabilize the people.

古文：禁请无愿，顺生分杀，不忘不惮。
现代文：禁其所请不使有怨，顺其生理昭明刑杀。牢记而不畏惧，使顺九则。
English: Forbid him to do what he likes without any grudge, and kill him according to his nature. Remember and do not be afraid, there are nine rules for making Shun.

古文：俾若九则，生敬在国，国咸顺，顺维敬，敬维让，让维礼。
现代文：使全国上下产生恭敬，全国都会和顺。要和顺只有恭敬，要恭敬只有谦让，要谦让只有知礼。
English: To make the whole country have respect, the whole country will be harmonious. To be harmonious, there is only respect. To be respectful, there is only humility. To be humble, there is only courtesy.

古文：辟不及宽，有永假。
现代文：君王如果做不到，就难有长久之福。
English: If a king cannot do this, it is difficult for him to have lasting happiness.

