古文：凡阵有十：有方阵，有圆阵，有疏阵，有数阵，有锥行之阵，有雁行之阵，有钩行之阵，有玄襄之阵，有火阵，有水阵。此皆有所利。方阵者，所以也。
现代文：兵阵的阵式一共分为十种：有方阵、圆阵、疏阵、数阵、锥形阵、雁形阵、钩形阵、玄襄阵、火阵和水阵。这些兵阵各有各的长处，各有各的用处。
English: There are a total of ten types of phalanx formations: square, round, spaced, several, cone, goose, hook, hexagon, fire and water. Each of these formations has its own advantages and uses.

古文：圆阵者，所以也。
现代文：方阵用来截击敌军。
English: The phalanx is used to intercept the enemy.

古文：疏阵者，所以也。
现代文：圆阵用以集中兵力防守。
English: The round formation is used to concentrate the troops for defense.

古文：数阵者，为不可掇。
现代文：疏阵用以制造声势。
English: The sparse array is used to create a sonic boom.

古文：锥行之阵者，所以决绝也。
现代文：数阵的作用是使放军不能分割消灭本方军队。锥形阵用来突破敌军阵地并切断其相互联系。
English: The function of several lines is to make it impossible for the advancing army to divide and destroy its own army. The cone-shaped line is used to break through the enemy's position and cut off its mutual connection.

古文：雁行之阵者，所以接射也。
现代文：雁形阵用来进行弓弩战。钩形阵在情况发生变化而改变作战计划时使用。
English: The goose-shaped formation is used for bow and arrow combat. The hook-shaped formation is used when the situation changes and the battle plan changes.

古文：钩行之阵者，所以变质易虑也。
现代文：玄襄阵用来迷惑敌军，使其难以实现既定意图。
English: The Xuanxiang formation was used to confuse the enemy, making it difficult for them to carry out their stated intentions.

古文：玄襄之阵者，所以疑众难故也。
现代文：火阵用来攻拔敌军营寨。水阵用来加强防守。
English: The fire phalanx is used to attack the enemy camp. The water phalanx is used to strengthen the defense.

古文：火阵者，所以拔也。水阵者，所以伥固也。方阵之法，必薄中厚方，居阵在后。
现代文：方阵布列的方法是：中心的兵力少，而四周的兵力则必须多而强，将领的指挥位置靠后。
English: The method of square array is: the center has fewer troops, while the surrounding troops must be more and stronger, and the commander's command position is at the back.

古文：中之薄也，将以也。
现代文：中间布兵少是为了便于发号施令。
English: There are fewer troops in the middle to make it easier to give orders.

古文：重□其□，将以也。
现代文：四周兵力多而强，是为了便于截击敌军。
English: There are more and stronger troops around, in order to make it easier to intercept the enemy.

古文：居阵在后，所以，其甲寡而人之少也，是故坚之。
现代文：指挥位置靠后。是为了圆阵之法疏阵的布列方法是在士兵铠甲不足而兵力又少时用来加强阵势的。
English: The commanding position is at the back. The method of spreading out the phalanx for the sake of the method of the phalanx is used to strengthen the position when the soldiers have insufficient armor and the number of troops is small.

古文：武者在旌旗，是人者在兵。
现代文：要多设旗帜显示威武，多置兵器显示兵多。
English: It is necessary to set up more flags to show military might, and more weapons to show more soldiers.

古文：故必疏矩间，多其旌旗羽旄，砥刃以为旁。
现代文：因此，布阵时必须加大军兵的行距间隔，在其间多设旗帜羽旄，要把锋利的兵器布置在外侧。
English: Therefore, when deploying troops, it is necessary to increase the distance between troops, set up more flags and feathers between them, and place sharp weapons on the outside.

古文：疏而不可蹙，数而不可军者，在于慎。
现代文：要注意疏密适当，既不致于受敌军的威逼，更不致于被敌军包围、做好这一点的关键在于深思熟虑，谨慎施行。
English: It is necessary to pay attention to the appropriate density, not to be intimidated by the enemy army, and even less to be surrounded by the enemy army. The key to doing this well is to deliberate and implement cautiously.

古文：车毋驰，徒人毋趋。
现代文：战车不能急驶，步兵不要急行。
English: The chariot cannot rush, and the infantry should not rush.

古文：凡疏阵之法，在为数丑，或进或退，或击或，或与之征，或要其衰。然则疏可以取锐矣。
现代文：疏阵使用的要旨在于，把士兵分编为若干个战斗群，既可前进也可后退，既可进攻也可防守，可以和敌军对战，也可以截击疲弱的敌军。疏阵用得好，可以战胜精锐的敌军。
English: The main purpose of using the detached formation is to divide the soldiers into several battle groups, which can advance or retreat, attack or defend, fight with the enemy army, or intercept the weak enemy army. The detached formation is well used and can defeat the elite enemy army.

古文：数阵之法，毋疏矩间，戚而行首，积刃而信之，前后相保，变□□□，甲恐则坐，以声坐□，往者弗送。
现代文：数阵的布列方法是：不必加大行距间隔，行列要相互靠近，排列有序，兵器要密集而又便于施展，前后要互相保护。
English: The layout method of several rows is: it is not necessary to increase the row spacing, the rows should be close to each other and arranged in an orderly manner, the weapons should be dense and easy to use, and the front and back should protect each other.

古文：来者弗止，或击其迂，或辱其锐，笲之而无间，山而退。然则数不可掇也。
现代文：当本方士兵有恐慌情绪时，要停止行动，保持稳定，当敌军退走时，不要追击；敌军来犯时，不要堵截，可以选择敌军的弱点加以攻击，或挫敌军锋锐，要计算周详，不给敌军任何可乘之机，让敌军在阵前如遇大山一般，只好退走。这样，数阵就坚不可破了。
English: When our soldiers are panicking, they should stop moving and remain stable. When the enemy retreats, they should not pursue. When the enemy invades, they should not intercept. They can choose to attack the enemy's weak points, or frustrate the enemy's sharpness. They should calculate thoroughly, not give the enemy any opportunity, and let the enemy retreat like a mountain before the battle. In this way, several lines will be unbreakable.

古文：锥行之阵，卑之若剑，末不锐则不入，刃不薄则不，本不厚则不可以列阵。
现代文：锥形阵的布列，要使它像利剑一般。其前锋如不锐利，就不能攻入敌阵；其两翼如不锋利，就不能截断敌军；其主体如不雄厚，就不能布成锥形阵。
English: The layout of a conical formation should be like a sharp sword. If its front is not sharp, it cannot break into the enemy's formation; if its two wings are not sharp, it cannot cut off the enemy's army; if its main body is not strong, it cannot form a conical formation.

古文：是故末必锐，刃必薄，本必鸿。
现代文：因此，锥形阵的前锋必须锐利，两翼必须轻灵锋利，主体必须兵力雄厚。
English: Therefore, the forwards of the conical formation must be sharp, the two wings must be light and sharp, and the main body must be strong.

古文：然则锥行之阵可以决绝矣，中，此谓雁阵之任。
现代文：这样的锥形阵就可以突破敌阵，截断敌军了。
English: Such a cone-shaped formation can break through the enemy formation and cut off the enemy.

古文：前列若，后列若狸，三阙罗而自存。
现代文：雁形阵的布列，这就是雁形阵的作用。
English: The formation of a goose-shaped formation, this is the role of the goose-shaped formation.

古文：此之谓雁阵之任。钩行之阵，前列必方，左右之和必钩。
现代文：雁形阵前面排列要像一样，而后面排列则要像善伏的狸猫一样。
English: The front of the goose-shaped formation should be arranged like a crocodile, while the rear should be arranged like a good-natured civet cat.

古文：三声既全，五采必具，辨吾号声，知五旗。
现代文：这就是雁形阵的作用。钩形阵的布列，前面必须排成方形，左右两翼相对应必须布成钩形。
English: This is the function of the goose-shaped array. For the layout of the hook-shaped array, the front must be arranged in a square shape, and the left and right wings must be arranged in a hook shape.

古文：无前无后，无玄襄之阵，必多旌旗羽旄，鼓庄，甲乱则坐，车乱则行，已治者□，榼榼啐啐，若从天下，若从地出，徒来而不屈，终日不拙。
现代文：指挥用的金、鼓、角三种发声器要齐全，五种颜色的旗帜必须齐备，要让自己的士兵能辨别本军指挥的声响号令和指挥旗帜。布列玄襄阵，必须多设各种旗帜，鼓声要密集而雄壮，士兵要表面散乱而实际稳定，战车表面杂乱而实际上排列有序，让士兵像在茶楼酒馆一样，喧闹杂乱，如同从天而降，从地里冒出来一样，走来走去，络绎不绝，整日不断。
English: The three kinds of sounders for commanding gold, drums and horns should be complete, the five colors of flags must be complete, so that their soldiers can distinguish the sound of the command of the army and the command flag. In the battle of Bregenz, various flags must be set up, the drums should be dense and majestic, the soldiers should be scattered on the surface but actually stable, the chariots should be disorderly on the surface but actually arranged in an orderly manner, so that the soldiers are noisy and chaotic like in a teahouse tavern, as if they were falling from the sky and emerging from the ground, walking around, ceaselessly, all day long.

古文：此之谓玄襄之阵。
现代文：这就是玄襄阵的摆法。
English: This is the way of arranging the Xuan Xiang array.

古文：火战之法，沟垒已成，重为沟堑，五步积薪，必均疏数，从役有数，令人为属枇，必轻必利，风辟火既自覆，与之战弗克，坐行而北。
现代文：用火阵的战法是，在沟垒之外，再修筑堑壕，每隔五步堆积柴草，要疏密均匀，分派好点火的士兵，让他们准备好点火用的火把，点火时动作要轻灵利落，如果火烧向本方，那和敌军交战是不能取胜的，必须立即停止行动，向后撤退。
English: The tactics of using a line of fire is to build a trench outside the ditch, pile up firewood and grass every five paces, make it dense and uniform, assign soldiers who are good at lighting fires, and have them prepare torches for lighting. When lighting a fire, the action should be light and neat. If the fire is burning in the direction of the enemy, then the battle with the enemy cannot be won. You must immediately stop the action and retreat backwards.

古文：火战之法，下而衍以，三军之士无所出泄。
现代文：用火战的条件是，敌军的位置在下风头，敌军的阵地地势低平，野草丛生，敌军在被烧时无处可逃。
English: The conditions for the use of fire fighting are that the enemy's position is in the lower limelight, the enemy's position is low and flat, the weeds are thick, and the enemy has nowhere to escape when it is burned.

古文：若此，则可火也。陵猋蒋，薪荛既积，营窟未谨。如此者，可火也。
现代文：具备这些条件时才可用火攻，遇上大风天气，敌军阵地又是野草丛生，柴草堆积，营地戒备又不严密时，也可以用火攻。
English: Only when these conditions are met can fire be used to attack. In windy weather, when the enemy's position is overgrown with weeds and firewood is piled up, and when the camp is not well guarded, fire can also be used to attack.

古文：以火乱之，以矢雨之，鼓噪敦兵，以势助之。
现代文：这时，用火攻造成敌军混乱，再用如雨一样密集的箭射杀敌军，并擂鼓呐喊，督促士兵攻击，以兵势辅助火攻。
English: At this time, the fire attack was used to cause chaos in the enemy army, and then the enemy army was shot with arrows as dense as rain, and the drums were shouted to urge the soldiers to attack, and the troops were used to assist the fire attack.

古文：火战之法。
现代文：这就是火战的方法。
English: That's the way to fight fire with fire.

古文：水战之法，必众其徒而寡其车，令之为钩楷苁柤贰辑□绛皆具。
现代文：用水战的方法是，多用步兵而少用战车，要让部下准备好捞钩、缆绳等器具和船只用具。
English: The way to use water combat is to make more use of infantry and less use of chariots, and to have subordinates prepare fishing hooks, cables and other equipment and ship equipment.

古文：进则必遂，退则不蹙，方蹙从流，以敌之人为招。
现代文：前进时要前后相随，后退时不可拥挤，要适时收缩队形顺流而下，以敌军为射杀目标。
English: When advancing, it is necessary to follow each other, when retreating, it should not be crowded, it is necessary to contract the formation down the stream in a timely manner, with the enemy as the target.

古文：水战之法，便舟以为旗，驰舟以为使，敌往则遂，敌来则蹙，推攘因慎而饬之，移而革之，阵而□之，规而离之。
现代文：水战的要旨在于，用轻便船只作指挥船，用快船作联络船，敌军后退时就追击，敌军进攻时就收缩队形迎战，要根据形势变化而谨慎指挥进退应敌，敌军移动就加以钳制，敌军结阵就敌军密集就分割。
English: In naval warfare, it is important to use light vessels as command vessels and fast vessels as liaison vessels, to pursue the enemy when the enemy retreats, to meet the enemy in a tight formation when the enemy attacks, to carefully command the enemy's advance and retreat according to the changes in the situation, to control the enemy's movement, and to divide the enemy army when the enemy is concentrated.

古文：故兵有误车有御徒，必察其众少，击舟津，示民徒来。
现代文：敌军中常有隐蔽的战车和步兵，一定要察清有多少，在攻击敌军船只，控制渡口时，还要调动步兵在陆路配合作战。
English: There are often hidden chariots and infantry in the enemy army. It is necessary to find out how many there are. When attacking enemy ships and controlling ferry ports, it is also necessary to mobilize infantry to fight on land.

古文：水战之法也。
现代文：这就是水战的作战方法。
English: This is how naval warfare is fought.

