古文：陆倕，字佐公，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆棰字佐公，是吴郡吴县人。
English: Lu Hao, surnamed Zagong, is a native of Wu County, Wuxi.

古文：晋太尉玩六世孙。
现代文：是晋朝太尉陆玩的六世孙。
English: He is the sixth-generation grandson of the Jin Dynasty's first lieutenant Lu Yu.

古文：祖子真，宋东阳太守。
现代文：祖父子真，是宋朝东阳太守。
English: His grandfather, Zizhen, was the ruler of Dongyang during the Song Dynasty.

古文：父慧晓，齐太常卿。
现代文：父亲慧晓，是齐朝太常卿。
English: His father, Huixiao, was the First Secretary of the Qi Dynasty.

古文：倕少勤学，善属文。
现代文：陆棰年轻时勤奋学习，善于写文章。
English: When he was young, Lu Wei studied hard and was good at writing articles.

古文：于宅内起两间茅屋，杜绝往来，昼夜读书，如此者数载。
现代文：在住宅内建造两问茅草房，断绝交往，日夜读书，这样持续了几年。
English: They built two thatched houses in the house, cut off communication, and read day and night. This went on for several years.

古文：所读一遍，必诵于口。
现代文：读过一遍，必定能口中背诵。
English: Once you have read it, you will be able to recite it by heart.

古文：尝借人《汉书》，失《五行志》四卷，乃暗写还之，略无遗脱。
现代文：曾经借阅别人的《汉书》，遣失《五行志》四卷，于是默写后还给别人，没有一点遣漏。
English: He once borrowed someone else's "Chinese Classics" and lost four volumes of "Five Elements," so he silently wrote it down and returned it to someone else, without missing a single point.

古文：幼为外祖张岱所异，岱常谓诸子曰： 此儿汝家之阳元也。 
现代文：幼年为外祖父彊岱所另眼相看，张岱常对几个儿子说： 遣孩子是你们家的阳元。 
English: When he was a child, his grandfather Zhang Ye often said to several of his sons: "Sending children is the yang yuan of your family."

古文：年十七，举本州秀才。
现代文：十七岁时，被推举为本州秀才。
English: At the age of seventeen, he was selected as a top talent in Honshu.

古文：刺史竟陵王子良开西邸延英俊，倕亦预焉。
现代文：刺史竟陵王子良设西邸引进才智出众的人物，陆任也列在其中。
English: The Western-style residence of Prince Yang, who was buried in the historical mausoleum, introduced outstanding talents, and Lu Ren is also listed among them.

古文：辟议曹从事参军、庐陵王法曹行参军。
现代文：征用为议曹从事参军、庐陵王法曹行参军。
English: He was requisitioned as a councillor to join the army, and as a legal officer to join the army.

古文：天监初，为右军安成王外兵参军，转主簿。
现代文：天监初年，担任右军安成王外兵参军，改任主簿。
English: In the first year of the Heaven's Supervisor, he served as the right wing of the Ancheng Wang foreign soldiers to join the army, and was reassigned as the main book.

古文：倕与乐安任昉友善，为《感知己赋》以赠昉，昉因此名以报之曰： 信伟人之世笃，本侯服于陆乡。
现代文：陆棰和乐安人任防友好，写《感知己赋》来赠给任防，任防用这个篇名来回报陆锤说： 确是伟人的世代笃厚，本生于侯服地区的陆乡。
English: Lu Wei and Le'an people were friendly with Renfen, and wrote "Perception of Self-Giving" as a gift to Renfen. Renfen used this title to repay Lu Hammer, saying: It is indeed a generation of great people, originally born in the Lu Township of Houfu District.

古文：缅风流与道素，袭衮衣与绣裳。
现代文：缅怀功勋和道德，继承绣龙的上衣和下裳。
English: Remembering the merits and morality, inheriting the embroidered dragon's coat and petticoat.

古文：还伊人而世载，并三骏而龙光。
现代文：到逭人而世代相传，三马并驰而得恩宠荣光。
English: Passed down from generation to generation, the three horses ran side by side and won the grace and glory.

古文：过龙津而一息，望凤条而曾翔。
现代文：过龙门而停息，望着梧枝而飞翔。
English: Passing through the gantry, he paused, looked at the branches and flew.

古文：彼白玉之虽洁，此幽兰之信芳。
现代文：那白玉虽然纯洁，遣兰花确实芬芳。
English: Although the white jade is pure, the orchid is really fragrant.

古文：思在物而取譬，非斗斛之能量。
现代文：思虑用物做比喻，不是斗斛所能量。
English: Thought is a metaphor for matter, not energy.

古文：匹耸峙于东岳，比凝厉于秋霜。
现代文：匹配耸峙在束岳，可比凝结于秋霜。
English: Matching towering in Sokudake, comparable to condensation in autumn frost.

古文：不一饭以妄过，每三钱以投渭。
现代文：不漏一顿饭而随意经过，常将三文钱投入渭河。
English: Without missing a meal, he would casually pass by and often throw a few coins into the Wei River.

古文：匪蒙袂之敢嗟，岂沟壑之能衣。
现代文：不是蒙上衣袖敢嗟叹，哪是沟壑之中能穿衣。
English: It is not daring to put on the sleeves, but daring to put on clothes in the middle of the ravine.

古文：既蕴藉其有余，又淡然而无味。
现代文：积蓄收藏有多余，又淡然而无味。
English: The savings collection is superfluous, bland and tasteless.

古文：得意同乎卷怀，违方似乎仗气。
现代文：得其意旨如同在心中，违背义理则好似要主持正义。
English: Obtaining its intention is as if in the heart, violating the principle of justice is as if to preside over justice.

古文：类平叔而靡雕，似子云之不朴。
现代文：类似何平叔而不雕饰，好比扬子云的不俭朴。
English: Like He Pingxiu without carving, like Yang Ziyun without frugality.

古文：冠众善而贻操，综群言而名学。
现代文：聚合各种善行而留下节操，综贯各种言论而构成学术。
English: Aggregate all kinds of good deeds and leave discipline, integrate all kinds of speech and form academic.

古文：折高、戴于后台，异邹、颜乎董幄。
现代文：在后台折服高氏、戴氏，在董氏篷帐驳难邹氏、颜氏。
English: In the background, Mr. Gao and Mr. Dai are folding clothes, while Mr. Dong is in a tent with Mr. Nanzhao and Mr. Yan.

古文：采三《诗》于河间，访九师于淮曲。
现代文：在河间采集三家《诗经》，在淮水曲折处访问学者。
English: Collected three "Poetic Classics" in Kawama, and visited scholars at Huai Shui Meandering.

古文：术兼口传之书，艺广铿锵之乐。
现代文：学术兼具口耳相传的书籍，技艺包括铿锵的音乐。
English: The academic side is made up of books passed down by word of mouth, while the technical side includes the music of the gongs.

古文：时坐睡而梁悬，裁枝梧而锥握。
现代文：时而坐着入睡而头发拴在屋梁上，刚刚闲谈而铁锥在握。
English: Sometimes I fall asleep sitting up with my hair in the rafters, or I'm just chatting while holding a shovel.

古文：既文过而意深，又理胜而辞缛。
现代文：文章超越他人而意义深长，道理精深而文辞繁密。
English: The article surpasses others and has a deep meaning, the reason is profound and the wording is complex.

古文：咨余生之荏苒，迫岁暮而伤情。
现代文：感叹我生命的推移，接近岁末而伤心。
English: Lamenting the course of my life, sad as I approach the end of the year.

古文：测徂阴于堂下，听鸣钟于洛城。
现代文：在房屋下测量光照，在洛城听钟声敲响。
English: Measuring light under a house, listening to the chimes of a clock in Los Angeles.

古文：唯忘年之陆子，定一遇于班荆。
现代文：惟有不拘年岁的陆子，在铺荆之地一遇而订交。
English: However, Lu Zi, who is of any age, signed a contract at the first opportunity in the land of spreading thorns and thistles.

古文：余获田苏之价，尔得海上之名。
现代文：我获得田苏的价值，你得到天下的名声。
English: I get the value of Tian Su, you get the reputation of the world.

古文：信落魄而无产，终长对于短生。
现代文：的确是穷困失意而无家产，终将长期面对短暂的生命。
English: It is true that they are destitute and homeless, and will eventually face a short life for a long time.

古文：饥虚表于徐步，逃责显于疾行。
现代文：饥饿虚弱表现在慢慢踱步，逃避责任显示于快步行走。
English: Hunger and weakness are manifested by slow pacing, and evasion of responsibility is shown by fast walking.

古文：子比我于叔则，又方余于耀卿。
现代文：你把我比作裴叔则，又把我比为袁耀卿。
English: You compare me to Uncle Pei, and you compare me to Yuan Yaoqing.

古文：心照情交，流言靡惑。
现代文：肝胆相照情谊相交，传言不能迷惑。
English: Liver and gallbladder are in line with each other, friendship is intertwined, and rumors cannot be confused.

古文：万类暗求，千里悬得。
现代文：万物中暗暗求索，千里外而远远获得。
English: All things secretly seek the search, thousands of miles away and far away to obtain.

古文：言象可废，蹄筌自默。
现代文：言论形象可以废弃，辅助工具自然收藏。
English: The image of speech can be discarded, and auxiliary tools are naturally collected.

古文：居非连栋，行则同车。
现代文：居住不是房舍相连，出行则同乘一车。
English: They do not live in the same building, but travel together in the same car.

古文：冬日不足，夏日靡余。
现代文：冬天时间不足，夏天时间没有多余。
English: There is not enough time in winter, and there is no extra time in summer.

古文：肴核非饵，丝竹岂娱。
现代文：肉类果品不是樵饼，音乐哪能娱乐。
English: Meat and fruit are not dainty, and music is not a means of entertainment.

古文：我未舍驾，子已回舆。
现代文：我还没走下车，你的车辆已回转。
English: I hadn't even gotten out of the car when your vehicle turned around.

古文：中饭相顾，怅然动色。
现代文：吃饭时互相观望，惆怅迷惘而变色。
English: They look at each other while eating, and their eyes change color.

古文：邦壤既殊，离会莫测。
现代文：邦国已有异样，分离相会不能推测。
English: The two countries have diverged so far that it is impossible to predict when they will separate.

古文：存异山阳之居，没非要离之侧。
现代文：在世不同于山盐的居处，死后不在要盘的旁边。
English: In life, it is different from the residence of mountain salt. After death, it is not next to the dish.

古文：似胶投漆中，离娄岂能识。 
现代文：好比胶投进油漆中，离娄哪能分辨。 
English: It's like putting glue into paint and not being able to tell the difference.

古文：其为士友所重如此。
现代文：陆僵就是如此为士人朋友所推重。
English: This is why the land gridlock is so important to our scholar-friends.

古文：迁骠骑临川王东曹掾。
现代文：调任骠骑临川王东曹掾。
English: He was assigned to ride the horse of the King of Linchuan, Cao Cao.

古文：是时礼乐制度，多所创革，高祖雅爱倕才，乃敕撰《新漏刻铭》，其文甚美。
现代文：时礼乐制度，创造改革很多，高祖很喜爱陆佳的才华，于是下令撰写《新漏刻铭》，文辞十分华美。
English: There were many creative reforms in the ritual music system. Gaozu was very fond of Lu Jia's talent, so he ordered the writing of the "New Leak Inscription." The words are very beautiful.

古文：迁太子中舍人，管东宫书记。
现代文：调任太子中舍人，掌管束宫文书记录。
English: He was transferred to the position of the prince's junior attendant and was put in charge of the palace's official records.

古文：又诏为《石阙铭记》。奏之。
现代文：又韶令陆便撰写《石阙铭记》，陆便上奏呈献。
English: In addition, he ordered Lu to write "Remembering Shijiazhuang," and Lu presented it to the emperor.

古文：敕曰： 太子中舍人陆倕所制《石阙铭》，辞义典雅，足为佳作。
现代文：高祖下令说： 太子中舍人堕堡所撰的《石阙铭》，文辞意义高雅优美，足以成为佳作。
English: Gao Zu ordered: "Shishuiming," which was written by the prince's middle son, Shiren Kuibao, has an elegant and beautiful meaning, which is enough to make it an excellent work.

古文：昔虞丘辨物，邯郸献赋，赏以金帛，前史美谈，可赐绢三十匹。 
现代文：从前虞丘氏辨明事物，邯竖旦献上诗赋，获赐金帛，成为从前史书中的美谈。对陆棰可赐绢三十匹。 
English: Once upon a time, the Yuqiu clan was able to discern things, and the cormorant presented a poem endowment and was given a golden cormorant, which became a beautiful story in the history book. Thirty cormorants could be given to the land cormorant.

古文：迁太子庶子、国子博士，母忧去职。
现代文：调任太子庶子、国子博士，因母亲去世离职。
English: He was transferred to the position of the Prince's illegitimate son, Dr. Kuniko, but left the position due to his mother's death.

古文：服阕，为中书侍郎，给事黄门侍郎，扬州别驾从事史，以疾陈解。迁鸿胪卿，入为吏部郎，参选事。
现代文：服丧期满，担任中书侍郎，给事黄门侍郎，扬州别驾从事史，因疾病请求解除职务，调任鸿胪卿，入尚书省为吏部郎，参与选拔事务。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he served as the secretary of the Central Library, the secretary of the Yellow Gate, and the secretary of the Yangzhou Gate, and was engaged in history. Due to illness, he requested to be relieved of his duties and was transferred to Hongyuqing. He entered the Ministry of Education as a secretary and participated in the selection process.

古文：出为云麾晋安王长史、寻阳太守、行江州府州事。
现代文：外出任云麾晋安王长史、寻盐太守、行辽业府州事。
English: He served as the governor of Yunnan, the prince of Jinan, the governor of Jinshan, and the governor of Liaoye Prefecture.

古文：以公事免，左迁中书侍郎、司徒司马、太子中庶子、廷尉卿。
现代文：因公事免职，贬降为中书侍郎，司徒司马，太子中庶子，廷尉卿。
English: Dismissed from his post for official business, he was demoted to the position of Chusho-sajiro (chancellor's secretary), Sito-sima, the prince's illegitimate son, and Tingyeokyo.

古文：又为中庶子，加给事中、扬州大中正。
现代文：又担任中庶子，加授给事中，扬州大中正。
English: He also served as a junior high school illegitimate child, an additional award to a junior high school, and a senior high school student at Yangzhou University.

古文：复除国子博士、中庶子、中正并如故。
现代文：又授任国子博士，中庶子、中正职位都照旧。
English: He was also awarded the title of Kuniko hakase, and the positions of junior illegitimate son and vice president remained the same.

古文：守太常卿，中正如故。
现代文：试任太常卿，中正照旧。
English: He was appointed to the position of Grand Councilor on a trial basis, and remained in the same position as before.

古文：普通七年，卒，年五十七。
现代文：萱逼七年，去世，这年五十七岁。
English: He died seven years later at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：文集二十卷，行于世。
现代文：有文集二十卷，流行于世间。
English: There are 20 volumes of anthologies, which are popular in the world.

古文：第四子缵，早慧，十岁通经，为童子奉车郎，卒。
现代文：第四个儿子陆缵，早年聪明，十岁通晓经书，担任童子奉车郎，去世。
English: The fourth son, Lu Yao, who was clever at an early age, and learned the scriptures at the age of ten, and served as a boy chariot driver, passed away.

古文：到洽，字茂氵公，彭城武原人也。
现代文：到洽字茂讼，是彭城武原人。
English: It was Pengcheng Wuyuan who came to negotiate with Zhaomao.

古文：宋骠骑将军彦之曾孙。
现代文：是宋朝骠骑将军彦之的曾孙。
English: He was the great-grandson of Song Dynasty general and cavalry commander Yan Zi.

古文：祖仲度，骠骑江夏王从事中郎。
现代文：祖父仲度，是骠骑江夏王从事中郎。
English: His grandfather, Zhongdu, was a middle-aged man who rode the Xiawang River.

古文：父坦，齐中书郎。
现代文：父亲到坦，是齐朝中书郎。
English: His father went to Tang and became the Qi Dynasty's second-in-command.

古文：洽年十八，为南徐州迎西曹行事。
现代文：到洽十八岁，担任南徐州迎西曹行事。
English: At the age of eighteen, he arrived in Cangzhou and served as the Southern Xuzhou Yingxi Cao.

古文：洽少知名，清警有才学士行。
现代文：到洽年轻时知名，清高机警有才学品行。
English: He was well-known when he was young. He is a bright and alert policeman with talent and integrity.

古文：谢朓文章盛于一时，见洽深相赏好，日引与谈论。
现代文：谢跳的文章在当时很著名，见到到洽很相赏识友好，每天招他一起谈论。
English: Xie Zhan's article was very famous at that time. I saw that he was very appreciative and friendly, and invited him to talk about it every day.

古文：每谓洽曰： 君非直名人，乃亦兼资文武。 
现代文：经常对到洽说： 你不仅仅是名人，也兼备文武才能。 
English: He often said to Cangda: You are not only a celebrity, but also a man of letters and martial arts.

古文：朓后为吏部，洽去职，朓欲荐之，洽睹世方乱，深相拒绝。
现代文：谢跳后来担任吏部郎，到洽离职，谢朋想举荐他，到洽观察世道将混乱，深加拒绝。
English: Xie Jie later served as a bureaucrat, went to negotiate his resignation, Xie Peng wanted to recommend him, went to negotiate to observe the chaos of the world, and deeply refused.

古文：除晋安王国左常侍，不就。遂筑室岩阿，幽居者积岁。
现代文：被授任为晋安王国左常侍，不就任，于是在山岩边建房舍，隐居了几年。
English: He was appointed as the left attendant of the Jinan Kingdom, but did not take office, so he built a house on the edge of the mountain rock and lived in seclusion for several years.

古文：乐安任昉有知人之鉴，与洽兄沼、溉并善。
现代文：乐安人任防有了解他人的鉴别力，和到洽的哥哥到沼、到溉都友好。
English: Le An people have the discernment to understand others, and they are friendly with their brothers who come to the marsh and irrigation.

古文：尝访洽于田舍，见之叹曰： 此子日下无双。 
现代文：曾经在田间房舍拜访到洽，见到他后赞叹说： 这人天下无双。 
English: I once visited Ciao in a field house, and after seeing him, I was full of admiration and said: This man is second to none.

古文：遂申拜亲之礼。
现代文：于是使用拜见朋友父母的礼节。
English: So he used the etiquette of visiting a friend's parents.

古文：天监初，沼、溉俱蒙擢用，洽尤见知赏，从弟沆亦相与齐名。
现代文：天监初年，到沼、到溉都受到提拔，到洽格外被知遇赏识，堂弟到沆也舆他名声相等。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, he was promoted to the swamp and irrigation, and he was especially known and appreciated in Chaozhou, and his cousin was equally famous in Shantou.

古文：高祖问待诏丘迟曰： 到洽何如沆、溉？ 
现代文：高祖询问待诏丘迟说： 到洽与到沆、到溉相比怎么样? 
English: Gaozu inquired about the waiting time and said, "How does it compare to the time it takes to go to the market and the time it takes to irrigate?

古文：迟对曰： 正清过于沆，文章不减溉；加以清言，殆将难及。 
现代文：丘迟回答说： 正直清廉超过到沆，文章不差于到溉；加上能清谈，二人恐怕难以比得上到洽。 
English: Yau Chi replied, "Honesty and integrity are superior to arrogance, and writing is not inferior to irrigation; together with the ability to have a clear conversation, I'm afraid the two are hard to match.

古文：即召为太子舍人。
现代文：当即征召到洽为太子舍人。
English: He was immediately summoned to Chaozhou to serve as the crown prince.

古文：御华光殿，诏洽及沆、萧琛、任昉侍宴，赋二十韵诗，以洽辞为工，赐绢二十匹。
现代文：高祖到华光殿，韶令到洽和到沆、萧琛、任防侍奉饮宴，赋二十韵诗篇，以到洽的文辞最为工巧，赐绢二十匹。
English: Gao Zu went to the Huaguang Palace, and ordered Decha, Decha, Xiao Yu and Ren Fang to serve the banquet. He gave them twenty rhyme poems, of which Decha's was the most skillful, and gave them twenty horses.

古文：高祖谓昉曰： 诸到可谓才子。 
现代文：高祖对任防说： 到氏兄弟可以称为才子。 
English: Gao Zu said to Ren Bao: To's brothers can be called talented.

古文：昉对曰： 臣常窃议，宋得其武，梁得其文。 
现代文：任防回答说： 臣下时常私下议论，宋得到武将，梁得到文人。 
English: Ren Bao replied, "Vassals often discuss things in private. Song got military commanders, and Liang got literati.

古文：二年，迁司徒主簿，直待诏省，敕使抄甲部书。
现代文：二年，调任司徒主簿，在待韶省值勤，韶令派他抄写经部书籍。
English: Two years later, he was transferred to be the chief scribe and was on duty in the province of Zhili. He was ordered by the emperor to copy the books of the Ministry of Culture.

古文：五年，迁尚书殿中郎。
现代文：五年，调任尚书殿中郎。
English: Five years later, he was transferred to Shoshidono churo.

古文：洽兄弟群从，递居此职，时人荣之。
现代文：到洽的叔伯兄弟，接连居于这个职位，当时人觉得他们很荣耀。
English: The uncles who arrived, one after the other, lived in this position, which at the time was considered a great honor.

古文：七年，迁太子中舍人，与庶子陆倕对掌东宫管记。
现代文：七年，调任太子中舍人，和庶子陆棰分别掌管东宫文书记载。
English: In the seventh year, Shoren, the middle son of the crown prince, and his son-in-law, Lu Wei, were appointed to be in charge of the East Palace, according to documents.

古文：俄为侍读，侍读省仍置学士二人，洽复充其选。
现代文：不久担任侍读，侍读省不久设置学士二人，到洽又充任人选。
English: He was soon appointed as an attendant, and the Ministry of Attendant Education soon set up two bachelors, and he was appointed as a candidate.

古文：九年，迁国子博士，奉敕撰《太学碑》。
现代文：九年，调任国子博士，奉命撰写《太学碑》。
English: Nine years later, he was transferred to the post of Dr. Kuniko Nagara, and was ordered to write "Taigaku Monuments."

古文：十二年，出为临川内史，在郡称职。
现代文：十二年，外出任临川内史，在郡中称职。
English: Twelve years later, he was appointed to the post of Linchuan Inner Historian and served in the county.

古文：十四年，入为太子家令，迁给事黄门侍郎，兼国子博士。
现代文：十四年，入京任太子家令，调任给事黄门侍郎，兼国子博士。
English: Fourteen years later, he entered the capital as a member of the prince's household, and was transferred to the position of Huangmen chamberlain and Kuniko doctor.

古文：十六年，行太子中庶子。
现代文：十六年，调任太子中庶子。
English: Sixteen years later, he was transferred to the position of crown prince's younger illegitimate son.

古文：普通元年，以本官领博士。
现代文：普通元年，以本身官职兼任博士。
English: In the first year of the common era, he became a doctor concurrently with his official position.

古文：顷之，入为尚书吏部郎，请托一无所行。
现代文：不久，入尚书省担任吏部郎时，请托在他那裹全部行不通。
English: Soon after, when he joined the Ministry of Education and Culture as a bureaucrat, it was impossible to entrust everything to him.

古文：俄迁员外散骑常侍，复领博士，母忧去职。
现代文：不久调任员外散骑常侍，又兼任博士，因母亲去世而离职。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of non-commissioned officer, and also concurrently held the position of doctor, but left the position due to the death of his mother.

古文：五年，复为太子中庶子，领步兵校尉，未拜，仍迁给事黄门侍郎，领尚书左丞。准绳不避贵戚，尚书省贿赂莫敢通。
现代文：五年，又担任太子中庶子，兼任步兵校尉，未就任，随之调任给事黄门侍郎，兼任尚书左丞，纠举从不避开贵戚，对尚书省施贿赂也行不通。
English: For five years, he also served as the middle child of the prince, and concurrently served as an infantry lieutenant, but did not take office, and was subsequently transferred to the Yellow Gate Chamberlain, and concurrently served as the Senior Secretary of the Ministry of Education. He never avoided the promotion of his relatives, and it was not possible to bribe the Ministry of Education.

古文：时銮舆欲亲戎，军国容礼，多自洽出。
现代文：当时皇帝想要亲自出征，军队国家的礼仪，多由到洽制定。
English: At that time, the emperor wanted to go to war in person, and the etiquette of the military state was mostly developed by negotiation.

古文：六年，迁御史中丞，弹纠无所顾望，号为劲直，当时肃清。
现代文：六年，调任御史中丞，弹劾纠察无所顾忌，有强劲正直之称，当时为之整肃。
English: Six years later, he was transferred to the post of Imperial Historian Junior Middle Officer. He had no scruples about impeachment and picketing, and was known for his strong integrity. At that time, he was purged.

古文：以公事左降，犹居职。
现代文：因公事贬级，仍然处于职位上。
English: He was demoted because of his work, but he is still in his position.

古文：旧制，中丞不得入尚书下舍，洽兄溉为左民尚书，洽引服亲不应有碍，刺省详决。
现代文：按旧制度，中丞不能进入尚书下舍，到洽的哥哥到溉担任左民尚书，到洽援引亲属不应有妨碍的条款，送尚书省详细决断。
English: According to the old system, the middle son could not enter the lower house of Shangshu, the elder brother who came to Shangshu came to irrigate and serve as the left people's Shangshu, came to Shangshu to invoke the clause that relatives should not be hindered, and sent it to Shangshu to make a detailed decision.

古文：左丞萧子云议许入溉省，亦以其兄弟素笃，不能相别也。
现代文：左丞萧子云建议准许进入到溉的官署，也是因为他们兄弟一向忠厚，不相区别的缘故。
English: Zu Rong Xiao Ziyun suggested that they be allowed to enter the government office of irrigation, also because their brothers have always been loyal and do not discriminate.

古文：七年，出为贞威将军、云麾长史、寻阳太守。
现代文：七年，外出任贞威将军、云麾长史、寻阳太守。
English: In seven years, he was appointed as General Zhen Wei, Yunnan Changshi, and Huanyang Taishu.

古文：大通元年，卒于郡，时年五十一。
现代文：大通元年，在郡中去世，时年五十一岁。
English: He died in Datong County in the first year of the year, at the age of 51.

古文：赠侍中。
现代文：追赠侍中。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：谥曰理子。
现代文：谧号为理子。
English: Her nickname is Riko.

古文：昭明太子与晋安王纲令曰： 明北兗、到长史遂相系凋落，伤怛悲惋，不能已已。
现代文：昭明太子给晋安王萧纲下令说： 明北兖、到长史相继逝世，悲伤惋惜，不能平息。
English: Prince Zhao Ming gave an order to King Xiao Gang of Jin'an, saying, "The deaths of the Ming and Northern Dynasties and the Changshi Dynasty are sad and regrettable, and cannot be calmed down.

古文：去岁陆太常殂殁，今兹二贤长谢。
现代文：去年陆太常亡故，现在二位贤人长辞。
English: Last year, Lu Taizhang passed away, and now the two sages are no longer together.

古文：陆生资忠履贞，冰清玉洁，文该四始，学遍九流，高情胜气，贞然直上。
现代文：陆生秉持忠心行事坚贞，像冰那样清明像玉那样洁净，文才具备《诗经》的四个部分，学问遍及九个学派，高尚的情操优胜的气质，坚守正道直上云霄。
English: The earthling upholds loyalty, acts with steadfastness, is as clear as ice and as pure as jade. Only the literati have the four parts of the "Book of Songs," the knowledge of nine schools, the noble sentiments and the superior temperament, and adhere to the right path straight up to the sky.

古文：明公儒学稽古，淳厚笃诚，立身行道，始终如一，傥值夫子，必升孔堂。
现代文：明公博通儒学考察古事，淳朴厚重笃实诚挚，立身处世推行道义，始终如一，倘若遇上夫子，必定升上孔氏殿堂。
English: Ming Gong was broad-minded, learned Confucianism and studied ancient history. He was simple, dignified and sincere. He always stood up for morality in his life. If he met his teacher, he would surely rise to the top of the Confucius Hall of Fame.

古文：到子风神开爽，文义可观，当官莅事，介然无私。
现代文：到子风度开放爽朗，文采章法都可作为榜样，处于职位而理事，耿介没有私心。
English: Geng Zi's demeanor is open and cheerful, and his writing style can be used as an example. Although he is a director, Geng Zi has no selfishness.

古文：皆海内之俊乂，东序之秘宝。
现代文：都是海内的英才，国学中的珍秘实器。
English: All of them are outstanding talents at home and abroad, and are real treasures in the study of Chinese language.

古文：此之嗟惜，更复何论。
现代文：这样的嗟叹惋惜，还有什么可谈论的。
English: Such a pity, what else is there to talk about.

古文：但游处周旋，并淹岁序，造膝忠规，岂可胜说，幸免祇悔，实二三子之力也。
现代文：衹是来往交游，都经历岁月，促膝忠心规劝，哪可详尽陈说，有幸免除后悔，实是这几人的力量。
English: It is the power of these few people to travel back and forth, to go through the years, to exhort loyalty, which can be described in detail, and to have the privilege of avoiding regret.

古文：谈对如昨，音言在耳，零落相仍，皆成异物，每一念至，何时可言。
现代文：交谈如同在昨天，声音言语还在耳边，相继辞世，都成阴间之人，每当思念到这裹，何时可以谈论。
English: Conversation as if it were yesterday, voices and words still ringing in one's ears, people passing away one after another, all of them descending into the underworld. Whenever I think about this, I wonder when we can talk about it.

古文：天下之宝，理当恻怆。
现代文：天下的实器，按理应当悲怆。
English: The real instruments of the world should be pitied.

古文：近张新安又致故，其人文笔弘雅，亦足嗟惜，随弟府朝，东西日久，尤当伤怀也。
现代文：近时张新安又亡故，遣人文笔豪放典雅，也足以嗟叹惋惜，跟随弟弟的官府，分别在东西时间长久，尤其应当伤心。
English: Recently, Zhang Xin'an passed away. He was a talented and elegant writer. It is also enough to lament and regret. Following his brother's government, he spent a long time in the East and West, which is especially sad.

古文：比人物零落，特可伤惋，属有今信，乃复及之。 
现代文：近来人物凋零，特别值得伤心惋惜，遇上现在的使者，于是又谈起。 
English: Recently, the characters have withered, which is particularly sad and regrettable. Encountering the current emissary, he began to speak again.

古文：洽文集行于世。
现代文：到洽的文集流行于世间。
English: Appropriate anthologies are popular in the world.

古文：子伯淮、仲举。
现代文：儿子名叫伯淮、仲举。
English: His son's names are Bo Huai and Zhongji.

古文：明山宾，字孝若，平原鬲人也。
现代文：明山宾字孝若，是平原鬲人人。
English: Mingshan Binzha Xiaoju, is a plain renren.

古文：父僧绍，隐居不仕，宋末国子博士征，不就。
现代文：父亲僧韶，隐居不出仕，宋末被征为国子博士，不就任。
English: His father, a monk, lived in seclusion and did not serve. At the end of the Song Dynasty, he was conscripted as a provincial doctor, but did not take up the post.

古文：山宾七岁能言名理，十三博通经传，居丧尽礼。
现代文：山宾七岁时能谈事物的是非道理，十三岁时博通经书传注，服丧恪尽礼节。
English: At the age of seven, Shanbin was able to talk about things. At the age of thirteen, he was fluent in the transmission of scriptures, and he was very polite in mourning.

古文：服阕，州辟从事史。
现代文：服丧期满，州中征用为从事史。
English: At the end of the mourning period, the state middle school was requisitioned for engaging in history.

古文：起家奉朝请。
现代文：出仕为奉朝请。
English: If you'd like to serve the Emperor, go ahead.

古文：兄仲璋婴痼疾，家道屡空，山宾乃行干禄。
现代文：哥哥仲璋患难治的病，家中空虚，山宾于是求取官职。
English: His brother, Zhongyao, was suffering from an incurable disease, the family home was empty, and Shanbin therefore applied for a government post.

古文：齐始安王萧遥光引为抚军行参军，后为广阳令，顷之去官。
现代文：齐朝始室王萧遥光召为抚军行参军，后来担任广阳令，不久离职。
English: At the beginning of the Qi Dynasty, the king's wife, Xiao Yaoguang, was summoned to join the army to support the army, and later served as the Guangyang order, and soon left the post.

古文：义师至，高祖引为相府田曹参军。
现代文：起义军队到来，高祖延聘为相府田曹参军。
English: When the insurgent army arrived, Gaozu Yanping was recruited to join the army as the councillor Tian Cao.

古文：梁台建，为尚书驾部郎，迁治书侍御史，右军记室参军，掌治吉礼。
现代文：梁朝台阁建立，山宾担任尚书驾部郎，调任治书侍御史，右军记室参军，掌管修订吉礼。
English: Liang Chao-tai Pavilion was established, and Shanbin served as the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary of the secretary.

古文：时初置《五经》博士，山宾首膺其选。
现代文：当时开始设置《五经》博士，山宾最先接受这一职位。
English: At that time, the position of "Five Classics" doctor began to be set up, and Shanbin was the first to accept this position.

古文：迁北中郎谘议参军，侍皇太子读。
现代文：调任北中郎谘议参军，侍奉皇太子读书。
English: Transferred to Kitanakuro to advise on joining the army, and served the crown prince as a student.

古文：累迁中书侍郎、国子博士、太子率更令、中庶子，博士如故。
现代文：屡经升迁任中书侍郎，国子博士，太子率更令，中庶子，博士职衔照旧。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to the position of junior secretary, Kuniko doctor, prince, junior illegitimate child, and doctor as before.

古文：天监十五年，出为持节、督缘淮诸军事、征远将军、北兗州刺史。
现代文：天监十五年，外出任持节、督缘淮诸军事、征远将军、北兖州刺史。
English: In the 15th year of Tianjun, he went abroad to hold festivals, to be a military governor, to be a conquering general, and to write a history of North Luzhou.

古文：普通二年，征为太子右卫率，加给事中，迁御史中丞。
现代文：普通二年，征入任太子右卫率，加授给事中，调任御史中丞。
English: Two years later, he was conscripted as a member of the Prince's Right Guard, promoted to a middle-ranking officer, and transferred to a middle-ranking officer.

古文：以公事左迁黄门侍郎、司农卿。
现代文：因公事贬降为黄门侍郎、司农卿。
English: Because of his official duties, he was demoted to the position of Huangmen Zhi Rong and Sino-nongqing.

古文：四年，迁散骑常侍，领青、冀二州大中正。
现代文：四年，调任散骑常侍，兼青、冀二州大中正。
English: In four years, he was transferred to the position of straggler's equerry, and also served as a high school student and a junior high school student at Jizhou Second University.

古文：东宫新置学士，又以山宾居之，俄以本官兼国子祭酒。
现代文：束宫新设学士，又委任山宾担当，不久以本身职位兼任国子祭酒。
English: Sokugyo newly established a bachelor, and also appointed mountain guest in charge, soon with his own position concurrently serving as Kuniko Matsuri sake.

古文：初，山宾在州，所部平陆县不稔，启出仓米以赡人。后刺史检州曹，失簿书，以山宾为耗阙，有司追责，籍其宅入官，山宾默不自理，更市地造宅。
现代文：当初，山宾在州中，所管辖的平陆县歉收，业宾启奏放出仓中粮食来赈济民众，后任刺史检查州中官署，丢失了账簿，以为是山宾损耗缺略，有关部门追究责任，没收山宾的住宅入官府，山宾沉默不为自己申诉，另外买地建住宅。
English: At the beginning, Shanbin was in the middle of the state, and Pinglu County, under its jurisdiction, had a poor harvest. The guest of honor initiated the release of grain from the warehouse to help the people. Later, the State Central Government's Bureau of History Inspection lost the account book, thinking that it was the guest of honor's loss and shortcoming. The relevant departments investigated the responsibility, confiscated the guest of honor's house and entered the government office. The guest of honor was silent and did not complain for himself, and bought land to build a house.

古文：昭明太子闻筑室不就，有令曰： 明祭酒虽出抚大籓，拥旄推毂，珥金拖紫，而恒事屡空。
现代文：昭明太子听说山宾建房不能完工，下令说： 明祭酒虽然外出镇抚大州，手握大权助人成事，插金质饰品拖紫色丝带，而总是手中空空。
English: Hearing that the construction of the mountain guest house could not be completed, Prince Zhao Ming ordered: Although the Ming Festival liquor went out to pacify Dazhou, holding great power to help people accomplish things, inserting gold ornaments and dragging purple ribbons, but his hands were always empty.

古文：闻构宇未成，今送薄助。 
现代文：听说建房没完工，现送上微薄的资助。 
English: I heard that the construction of the house was not completed, and now they are sending me a meager grant.

古文：并贻诗曰： 平仲古称奇，夷吾昔檀美。
现代文：并且赠诗说： 平仲自古称奇特，夷吾昔日擅美名。
English: He also gave a poem saying, "Heizhong has been called peculiar since ancient times, and I used to be good at beauty.

古文：令则挺伊贤，东秦固多士。
现代文：美好法则立贤明，东秦本来多士人。
English: It is wise to establish good rules. In the East Qin Dynasty, there were many scholars.

古文：筑室非道傍，置宅归仁里。
现代文：建房不在道路旁，安置住宅归仁里。
English: The houses will not be built next to the road, and the resettlement houses will be built in Guiren.

古文：庚桑方有系，原生今易拟。
现代文：庚桑正有后继者，原生今日易比拟。
English: Gengsang Zheng has a successor, the original today is easy to compare.

古文：必来三径人，将招《五经》士。 
现代文：必来隐居乡里人，将要招致《五经》士。 
English: Those who live in seclusion in the countryside will inevitably invite the "Five Classics" scholars.

古文：山宾性笃实，家中尝乏用，货所乘牛。
现代文：山宾性情忠厚老实，家中曾经缺乏资金，卖出所骑的牛。
English: Mountaineers are loyal and honest. Their family once lacked funds and had to sell the cattle they rode.

古文：既售受钱，乃谓买主曰： 此牛经患漏蹄，治差已久，恐后脱发，无容不相语。 
现代文：售后取钱，就对买主说： 逭头牛曾经患过漏蹄，治疗后已痊愈很久，恐怕今后万一复发，不得不相告。 
English: After collecting the money after the sale, he said to the buyer: Shantou cattle once suffered from leaking hooves, and have been cured for a long time after treatment. I am afraid that in the event of a recurrence in the future, I will have to report it.

古文：买主遽追取钱。
现代文：买主马上追回山宾取走的钱。
English: The buyer immediately recovered the money taken by the mountaineer.

古文：处士阮孝绪闻之，叹曰： 此言足使还淳反朴，激薄停浇矣。 
现代文：隐士阮孝绪听说后，感叹说： 这段话足以使人回归淳朴，遏制浮薄的风气。 
English: After hearing this, the hermit Nguyn Ho Hu lamented: "This passage is enough to make people return to simplicity and curb the superficial culture.

古文：五年，又为国子博士，常侍、中正如故。
现代文：五年，又担任国子博士，常侍、中正照旧。
English: For five years, he also served as Kuniko hakase, regular attendant, and chujo as before.

古文：其年以本官假节，权摄北兗州事。
现代文：逭年以本身职任被授任假节，暂且代理北兖州事务。
English: In 2000, he was granted a leave of absence in his own capacity, and temporarily acted as an agent for North Luzhou affairs.

古文：大通元年，卒，时年八十五。
现代文：拉大通元年，去世，遣年八十五岁。
English: La Datong died in the first year of the year, at the age of eighty-five.

古文：诏赠侍中、信威将军。
现代文：韶令追赠侍中、信威将军。
English: The imperial edict posthumously awarded the title of samurai to General Shinwayo.

古文：谥曰质子。
现代文：谧号为质子。
English: Its nickname is the proton.

古文：昭明太子为举哀，赙钱十万，布百匹，并使舍人王颙监护丧事。
现代文：昭明太子为他举办丧事，赠钱十万，布一百匹，并派舍人王颐督促料理丧事。
English: Prince Shouming held a funeral for him, gave him 100,000 yuan and 100 pieces of cloth, and sent a courier, Wang Xuan, to urge him to prepare for the funeral.

古文：又与前司徒左长史殷芸令曰： 北兗信至，明常侍遂至殒逝，闻之伤怛。
现代文：又给前司徒左长史殷芸下令说： 北兖州使者到来，塱鲎壁突然逝世，听说后心中悲伤。
English: He also ordered the former head of the Sidu Zuo, Shi Yin Yi, to say: "When the envoys from North Luzhou arrived, Zoubi died suddenly. After hearing this, my heart was saddened.

古文：此贤儒术该通，志用稽古，温厚淳和，伦雅弘笃。
现代文：这位贤人贯通儒学，立志考察古事，温顺忠厚淳朴平和，高雅博大。
English: This wise man is well-versed in Confucianism, determined to study ancient history, meek, loyal, simple and peaceful, and highly refined.

古文：授经以来，迄今二纪。
现代文：自他传授经书以来，到现在已二十多年。
English: It has now been more than twenty years since he began to teach the scriptures.

古文：若其上交不谄，造膝忠规，非显外迹，得之胸怀者，盖亦积矣。
现代文：至于他同上位的人交往不谄媚，促膝忠心规劝，不显露外表迹象，出自于心中，大概也是底蕴深厚吧。
English: As for his dealings with high-ranking people not being flattering, urging loyalty and persuasion, not showing outward signs, coming from the heart, it is probably also deep-rooted.

古文：摄官连率，行当言归，不谓长往，眇成畴日。
现代文：代掌刺史之任，行为得当言论有主旨，没想到他长辞，已远同往昔。
English: He was entrusted with the task of writing history, he behaved appropriately, and his speech had a theme. I didn't expect him to resign, but he is already far away from the past.

古文：追忆谈绪，皆为悲端，往矣如何！
现代文：追忆他的谈吐，都成为悲伤的端绪，如何能够平息!
English: Recalling his words and deeds has become the beginning of sadness, how can it be calmed down!

古文：昔经联事，理当酸怆也。 
现代文：昔事联系，按理应当酸楚悲怆。 
English: The connection to the past is, by all rights, bittersweet.

古文：山宾累居学官，甚有训导之益，然性颇疏通，接于诸生，多所狎比，人皆爱之。
现代文：业宣长久处于学官，很有教导的补益，然而性格通达，接待学生，多加以亲近，人人都喜爱他。
English: Ye Xuan had been a scholar for a long time. He was very helpful in teaching. However, he was an open-minded person. He received students and became close to them. Everyone loved him.

古文：所著《吉礼仪注》二百二十四卷，《礼仪》二十卷，《孝经丧礼服义》十五卷。
现代文：所撰写的有《吉礼仪注》二百二十四卷，《礼仪》二十卷，《孝经丧礼服义》十五卷。
English: He wrote 224 volumes of "Kichirei Riki Note," 20 volumes of "Riki" and 15 volumes of "Kokyo-kyo Shosei Fuki-gi."

古文：子震，字兴道，亦传父业。
现代文：儿子震，字兴道，也继承父亲的学业。
English: Zhen's son, Zi Xingdao, also inherited his father's studies.

古文：历官太学博士，太子舍人，尚书祠部郎，余姚令。
现代文：历任太学博士，太子舍人，尚书祠部郎，余姚令。
English: Successive Taigaku hakase, crown prince, Shangshu minstrel, Yuyao ling.

古文：殷钧，字季和，陈郡长平人也。
现代文：殷钧字季和，是陈郡长平人。
English: Yin Yao, also known as Ji He, is the mayor of Chen County.

古文：晋太常融八世孙。
现代文：是晋翘太常尘猎的八世孙。
English: He is the eighth-generation descendant of Jingaotai Jiancheng.

古文：父睿，有才辩，知名齐世，历官司徒从事中郎。
现代文：父亲殷壑，有才华而善辩，在齐世闻名，历任司徒从事中郎。
English: His father was ingratiating, talented and eloquent. He was famous in the Qi Dynasty, and successive governors were engaged in Zhongro.

古文：睿妻王奂女。
现代文：殷数娶王奂的女儿为妻。
English: Yin Zu married Wang Yao's daughter.

古文：奂为雍州刺史、镇北将军，乃言于朝，以睿为镇北长史、河南太守。
现代文：王垒担任壅刺史、镇北将军，于是上奏朝廷，委任昼邀为镇北长史、河南太守。
English: Wang Rong served as Zhenbei general and Zhenbei chancellor, and then appealed to the imperial court to appoint him as Zhenbei chancellor and Henan governor-general.

古文：奂诛，睿并见害。
现代文：王奂被杀，屋邀一同遇害。
English: Wang Yao was killed, and his house guests were also killed.

古文：钧时年九岁，以孝闻。
现代文：屋蛮当时九岁，以孝顺闻名。
English: Yamanaru was nine years old at the time and was known for his filial piety.

古文：及长，恬静简交游，好学有思理。
现代文：等到长大，淡泊闲适少交游，喜好学习有思想意趣。
English: When they grow up, they will be more casual and less social, and they will be more interested in learning.

古文：善隶书，为当时楷法，南乡范云、乐安任昉，并称赏之。
现代文：擅长隶书，成为当时的楷模，南乡人范垩、銮董人缠都称赞赏识他。
English: He was good at handwriting and became a model at that time. The people of Nanxiang, such as Fan Xuan and Xuan Dong, praised and recognized him.

古文：高祖与睿少旧故，以女妻钧，即永兴公主也。
现代文：高祖和殷觳年轻时是朋友，把女儿嫁给殷钩，就是永兴公主。
English: Gaozu and Yin Hui were friends when they were young, and he married his daughter to Yin Hui, that is, Princess Yongxing.

古文：天监初，拜驸马都尉，起家秘书郎、太子舍人、司徒主簿、秘书丞。
现代文：天监初年，被任命为驸马都尉，出仕为秘书郎，太子舍人，司徒主簿，秘书丞。
English: In the first year of the celestial supervisor, he was appointed as the captain of the horse, the secretary of the secretary, the prince of the prince, the main book of the scholar, and the secretary.

古文：钧在职，启校定秘阁四部书，更为目录。
现代文：殷钩在任，启奏校定秘阁四部图书，另编目录。
English: During his term of office, Yin Hook initiated the proofreading of four secret books and compiled another catalogue.

古文：又受诏料检西省法书古迹，别为品目。
现代文：又受韶检索西省书法古迹，另编品级细目。
English: It is also encouraged to search for calligraphy monuments in Western Province, and to compile product-level details.

古文：迁骠骑从事中郎，中书郎、太子家令、掌东宫书记。
现代文：调任骠骑从事中郎，中书郎，太子家令，掌管束宫文书记录。
English: He was transferred to the post of equerry and engaged in churo, chushiro, and the prince's household, and was in charge of document records of the Sokoku Palace.

古文：顷之，迁给事黄门侍郎、中庶子、尚书吏部郎、司徒左长史，侍中。
现代文：不久，调任给事黄门侍郎，中庶子，尚书吏部郎，司徒左长史，侍中。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter, middle child, Shangshu official, and Szuzu Changshi, waiter.

古文：东宫置学士，复以钧为之。
现代文：东宫设置学士，又以殷钩充任。
English: Donggong set up a bachelor's degree, and also appointed Yin Hook.

古文：公事免。
现代文：因公事免职。
English: He was removed from his post for misconduct in office.

古文：复为中庶子，领国子博士、左骁骑将军，博士如故。
现代文：又担任中庶子，兼国子博士、左骁骑将军，博士的职衔照旧。
English: In addition, he served as the middle child, concurrently Dr. Kuniko, General of the Left Horsemen, and the title of doctor remained the same.

古文：出为明威将军、临川内史。
现代文：外出任明威将军、临川内史。
English: Outside, General Mingwei and Lin Chuanai are in charge.

古文：钧体羸多疾，闭阁卧治，而百姓化其德，劫盗皆奔出境。
现代文：殷钩体弱多病，关起门来卧而治之，而百姓为他的德行感化，盗贼都逃出境外。
English: Yinhuak was frail and sickly, and he would lie in bed with the door closed to cure himself. The people were impressed by his virtue, and the thieves fled abroad.

古文：尝禽劫帅，不加考掠，但和言诮责。
现代文：曾经擒获劫掠的头目，殷钩不加以拷打，衹是和言悦色地责备他。
English: Once he caught the leader of the robbery, he did not torture him, but gently scolded him.

古文：劫帅稽颡乞改过，钧便命遣之，后遂为善人。
现代文：劫掠头目叩头请求改过，殷钩便下令放了他，后来那人就变成了好人。
English: After the leader of the robbery begged for forgiveness, Yin Huo ordered him to be released, and later the man became a good person.

古文：郡旧多山疟，更暑必动，自钧在任，郡境无复疟疾。
现代文：郡内旧日多有疟疾，到了夏天必定发作，自从殷钧到任，郡中不再有疟疾。
English: In the old days, there was a lot of malaria in the county, but in the summer there was bound to be an outbreak. Since Yin Xi took office, there has been no more malaria in the county.

古文：母忧去职，居丧过礼，昭明太子忧之，手书诫喻曰： 知比诸德，哀顿为过，又所进殆无一溢，甚以酸耿。
现代文：因母亲去世离职，服丧超过礼仪，担忧他，亲手写信告诫开导他： 得知你近日的德行，哀伤困顿超过礼仪，又进食差不多没有一升，十分酸楚。
English: After his mother's death, he resigned from his job, went beyond the etiquette of mourning, worried about him, and wrote a letter with his own hand to warn and enlighten him: Knowing your recent virtue, sorrow and hardship exceed the etiquette, and eating almost one liter, it is very sour.

古文：迥然一身，宗奠是寄，毁而灭性，圣教所不许。
现代文：你独自一人，是宗族的寄托，过度悲伤而危及生命，是儒教所不容许的。
English: You are alone, you are the trust of the clan, and excessive sadness endangers your life, which is not allowed by Confucianism.

古文：宜微自遣割，俯存礼制，穀粥果蔬，少加勉强。
现代文：应该稍加自行割舍，保存礼制，米粥瓜果蔬菜，略为勉强增加。
English: It is necessary to add a little self-sacrifice, preservation of etiquette, rice porridge, fruits and vegetables, and a slight increase.

古文：忧怀既深，指故有及，并令缪道臻口具。 
现代文：我心中忧虑深，意旨有所涉及，一并命令垄道蓬口头详述。 
English: With deep concern in my heart, the intention was involved, and I ordered Reng Daopeng to verbally elaborate.

古文：钧答曰： 奉赐手令，并缪道臻宣旨，伏读感咽，肝心涂地。
现代文：屋蛮回答说： 接受所赐亲笔令文，以及缪道臻所宣旨意，伏地拜读感慨哽咽，悲伤到肝血脑浆流至地上。
English: Yamanari replied, "Accepting the command given by my own handwriting, as well as the command given by Mu Daozhen, I bowed my head in worship, choked with emotion, and was so sad that my blood and brain matter flowed to the ground.

古文：小人无情，动不及礼，但禀生霡劣，假推年岁，罪戾所钟，复加横疾。
现代文：小人没有性情，行动达不到礼仪，不过天生孱弱，随年岁推移，罪遇聚集，又横增疾病。
English: The villain has no temperament, and his actions fall short of etiquette. However, he is weak by nature, and as the years go by, his crimes are accumulating, and his illnesses are increasing.

古文：顷者绵微，守尽晷漏，目乱玄黄，心迷哀乐，惟救危苦，未能以远理自制。
现代文：近来病重，整日守丧，头昏目眩，心中沉湎于哀乐，祇想要治丧，不能以高远的道理控制自己。
English: Lately, I have been seriously ill. I have been mourning all day, my head is dizzy, my heart is immersed in mourning, I just want to cure my grief, and I can't control myself with lofty principles.

古文：姜桂之滋，实闻前典，不避粱肉，复忝今慈，臣亦何人，降此忧愍。
现代文：调味品的润泽，实出自于从前典籍，不避开美食佳肴，又愧受当今仁慈者的教诲，臣是什么人，受到这种哀怜同情。
English: The moistness of the condiments actually comes from the ancient classics, do not avoid food and delicacies, and are humbled by the teachings of today's benevolent people, what kind of person is the subject of this pity and sympathy.

古文：谨当循复圣言，思自补续，如脱申延，实由亭造。 
现代文：应该恭谨遵循圣人之言，思量自己补养延寿，如果得以延长，实是由于殿下的培育。 
English: You should respectfully follow the words of the sage and consider supplementing yourself to prolong your life. If you are able to prolong your life, it is actually due to the nurturing of His Imperial Highness.

古文：服阕，迁五兵尚书，犹以顿瘵经时，不堪拜受，乃更授散骑常侍、领步兵校尉，侍东宫。
现代文：服丧期满，调任五兵尚书，还因为病情拖延多时，承受不了职责，于是另外授任散骑常侍，兼步兵校尉，在东宫侍奉。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was transferred to the five soldiers Shangshu, but because of the long delay due to illness, he could not bear the duties, so he was additionally appointed as a straggler, and an infantry captain, serving in the East Palace.

古文：寻改领中庶子。
现代文：不久改兼中庶子。
English: He soon became the middle child of an illegitimate child.

古文：昭明太子薨，官属罢，又领右游击，除国子祭酒，常侍如故。
现代文：堕盟友王逝世，官属罢除，星邀又兼右游击将军，授任国子祭酒，常侍照旧。
English: The fallen ally Wang passed away, officials and subordinates were dismissed, the star guest was also the right-wing guerrilla general, he was awarded the national son's sacrificial wine, and the regular attendants remained the same.

古文：中大通四年，卒，时年四十九。
现代文：土拉垂四年，去世，造年四十九岁。
English: He died four years later at the age of forty-nine.

古文：谥曰贞子。
现代文：谧号为贞王。
English: Her nickname is Sadako.

古文：二子：构，渥。
现代文：有两个儿子：屋递，越。
English: They have two sons: Yashiro and Koshiro.

古文：陆襄，字师卿，吴郡吴人也。
现代文：陆襄字师卿，吴郡吴县人。
English: Lu Xiangzha Shixing, a native of Wu County, Wuxi County.

古文：父闲，齐始安王遥光扬州治中。永元末，遥光据东府作乱，或劝闲去之。
现代文：父亲陆闲，担任齐朝始安王遥光扬州治中，永元末年，遥光占据东府作乱，有人劝陆闲离开他。
English: Lu Xizhi's father, Lu Xizhi, served as the King of An in the beginning of the Qi Dynasty, and in the middle of the reign of Yang Zhou, at the end of the Yong Yuan Dynasty, Lu Xizhi occupied the eastern capital and caused turmoil. Some people advised Lu Xizhi to leave him.

古文：闲曰： 吾为人吏，何所逃死。 
现代文：陆闲说： 我是人家的属吏，为什么要逃避死亡? 
English: Lu Xun said, "I am a subordinate official, why should I run away from death?

古文：台军攻陷城，闲见执，将刑，第二子绛求代死，不获，遂以身蔽刃，刑者俱害之。
现代文：朝廷军队攻下城池，陆闲被捉住，将施刑，第二个儿子陆绛请求代替陆闲去死，没获准许，就用身体挡住刀刃，施刑者都加以杀害。
English: The imperial army captured the castle, Lu Xun was caught and was about to be executed. Lu Yao, the second son, asked to die in place of Lu Xun. Without permission, he used his body to block the blade, and the executioners killed him.

古文：襄痛父兄之酷，丧过于礼，服释后犹若居忧。
现代文：陆襄哀痛父兄的惨死，丧事超过礼仪，丧期结束后还如同在服丧时期。
English: Lu Xiang mourned the tragic death of his father and brother, the funeral exceeded the etiquette, and after the funeral period, it was still like in the mourning period.

古文：天监三年，都官尚书范岫表荐襄，起家擢拜著作佐郎，除永宁令。
现代文：天监三年，都官尚书范岫上奏表推荐陆襄，陆襄起之于家超授著作佐郎，授任永宁令。
English: In the third year of the Heaven's Supervisor, Lu Xiang was recommended by the city official Shang Shuxin Fan  inscribed on the record sheet, and Lu Xiang was awarded the title of Yongning by the family superintendent.

古文：秩满，累迁司空临川王法曹，外兵，轻车庐陵王记室参军。
现代文：任职期满，屡经升迁任司空临川王法曹，外兵参军，轻车庐陵王记室参军。
English: After the expiration of his term of office, he was repeatedly promoted to the position of the legal assistant of the Air Vice-Marshal Linchuan Wang, the foreign soldiers joined the army, and the light-vehicle brigade joined the army.

古文：昭明太子闻襄业行，启高祖引与游处，除太子洗马，迁中舍人，并掌管记。
现代文：昭明太子听到陆襄的学业品行，启奏高祖召他一起游居处，授任太子洗马，调任中舍人，并掌管文书记载。
English: When Prince Zhaoming heard of Lu Xiang's academic performance, he summoned him to his residence together with Gao Zu, appointed him as the prince to wash horses, transferred him as the middle-ranking official, and took charge of document records.

古文：出为扬州治中，襄父终此官，固辞职，高祖不许，听与府司马换廨居之。
现代文：外出任扬州治中，陆襄的父亲在这一职位上去世，他坚决推辞，高祖不准许，允许府司马对换官舍居住。
English: Lu Xiang's father died in this position while serving as Yangzhou's vice-governor. He firmly declined, Gao Zu did not allow it, and allowed the prefectural governor to live in the official residence instead.

古文：昭明太子敬耆老，襄母年将八十，与萧琛、傅昭、陆杲每月常遣存问，加赐珍羞衣服。
现代文：昭明太子敬重老人，陆襄的母亲年近八十岁，和萧琛、傅昭、陆呆每月派人慰问，加赐佳肴衣服。
English: Prince Zhaoming respected the elderly, and Lu Xiang's mother was nearly eighty years old. He, Xiao Jun, Fu Zhao, and Lu Di sent condolences every month, and gave them delicious food and clothes.

古文：襄母尝卒患心痛，医方须三升粟浆，是时冬月，日又逼暮，求索无所。忽有老人诣门货浆，量如方剂，始欲酬直，无何失之，时以襄孝感所致也。
现代文：陆塞的母亲曾经突然患心绞痛，处方需要三升粟浆，这时是冬月，时辰又接近黄昏，求索没有地方，忽然有个老人到门前卖粟浆，数量如处方剂量，刚要付钱，那人不知哪裹去了，当时以为是陆塞的孝道感动上天所导致。
English: Once upon a time, Lu Xie's mother suddenly suffered from angina pectoris. The prescription required three liters of millet syrup. At that time, it was the winter month, and it was close to dusk. There was no place to look for it. Suddenly, an old man came to the front door to sell millet syrup. The amount was like the prescription dose. He was just about to pay. The man didn't know where he had gone. At the time, he thought it was because Lu Xie's filial piety had been moved by God.

古文：累迁国子博士，太子家令，复掌管记，母忧去职。
现代文：屡经升迁任国子博士，太子家令，又掌管文书记载，因母亲去世离职。
English: He was repeatedly promoted to Dr. Kuniko, Prince's Household Order, and in charge of document records, but left office due to his mother's death.

古文：襄年已五十，毁顿过礼，太子忧之，日遣使诫喻。
现代文：陆襄年纪已经五十岁，哀伤消瘦超过礼仪，太子担忧他，每天派使者告诫开导。
English: Lu Xiang was already fifty years old, and his grief and emaciation exceeded the etiquette. The prince was worried about him, and sent an emissary every day to warn and enlighten him.

古文：服阕，除太子中庶子，复掌管记。
现代文：服丧期满，授任太子中庶子，又掌管文书记载。
English: At the end of the mourning period, he was appointed as the Prince's illegitimate son, and was also in charge of document records.

古文：中大通三年，昭明太子薨，官属罢，妃蔡氏别居金华宫，以襄为中散大夫、领步兵校尉、金华宫家令、知金华宫事。
现代文：中大通三年，昭明太子逝世，官属罢除，妃子蔡氏另外居住在金华宫，任命陆襄为中散大夫、兼步兵校尉、金华宫家令、知金华宫事。
English: In the third year of Zhongdazhong, Prince Zhaoming died, the officials were dismissed, the concubine Cai also lived in the Jinhua Palace, and Lu Xiang was appointed as the Zhongshan doctor, the infantry lieutenant, the Jinhua Palace housekeeper, and the official of the Jinhua Palace.

古文：七年，出为鄱阳内史。
现代文：六年，外出任鄱阳内史。
English: For six years, he served as the chief historian of Shenyang.

古文：先是，郡民鲜于琛服食修道法，尝入山采药，拾得五色幡眊，又于地中得石玺，窃怪之。
现代文：在这以前，郡中百姓鲜于琛服用丹药而修道，曾经入山采药，拾到五种颜色的旗帜，又在地中得到石玺，私下感到奇怪。
English: Prior to this, the people in the county had rarely practiced the Dharma by taking herbs. They had once gone into the mountains to collect herbs, picked up five-colored flags, and obtained stalagmites in the ground. Privately, they felt strange.

古文：琛先与妻别室，望琛所处，常有异气，益以为神。
现代文：鲜于琛原先和妻子不在一室住，望鲜于琛所住的地方，时常有异样的气象，更加以为神妙。
English: He and his wife did not live in the same room before, and the place where he lived often had unusual weather, which made him think it was even more magical.

古文：大同元年，遂结其门徒，杀广晋令王筠，号上愿元年，署置官属。其党转相诳惑，有众万余人。
现代文：大同元年，于是集结门徒，杀死广晋令王筠，自称改年号上愿元年，设置官属，党羽转相诳骗诱惑，拥有部众一万多人。
English: In the first year of Datong, he gathered his disciples, killed Wang Qian, the leader of the Guangjin faction, declared that he would change the name of the year to the first year of the year, set up subordinates, and had more than ten thousand followers.

古文：将出攻郡，襄先已帅民吏修城隍，为备御，及贼至，连战破之，生获琛，余众逃散。
现代文：将要出兵攻打郡城，陆襄先已率领民众官吏修筑城池，做好防备，等贼军到达，接连作战打败他们，生擒鲜于茎，其余的人逃跑溃散。
English: They were going to attack the county seat. Lu Xiangxian had already led the people and officials to build the city and prepare for defense. When the thief army arrived, they fought and defeated them one after another. The rust was fresh from the stalk, and the rest of the people fled and dispersed.

古文：时邻郡豫章、安成等守宰，案治党与，因求贿货，皆不得其实，或有善人尽室离祸，惟襄郡部枉直无滥。
现代文：当时邻郡豫章、安成等郡守县令，讯问收治鲜于琛的党羽，利用时机求取财货，都不能得到实情，有的好人全家遇祸，惟独陆襄所在郡正直的人没有无辜受害的。
English: At that time, the county magistrates of neighboring counties such as Yuzhang and Ancheng could not get the truth by interrogating and punishing the party members who were new to the county and taking advantage of the opportunity to seek money and goods. Some good people's whole families were in trouble, but there were no innocent victims among the honest people in Lu Xiang's county.

古文：民作歌曰： 鲜于平后善恶分，民无枉死，赖有陆君。 
现代文：民众创作歌谣说： 鲜于平定之后善恶分明，民众没人冤枉死，全靠有陆君。 
English: The people created songs saying: After the suppression, good and evil are clear, the people did not die unjustly, all thanks to Lu Jun.

古文：又有彭李二家，先因忿争，遂相诬告，襄引入内室，不加责诮，但和言解喻之，二人感恩，深自咎悔。乃为设酒食，令其尽欢，酒罢，同载而还，因相亲厚。
现代文：又有彭氏、李氏二家，先前因为气愤争斗，于是互相诬告，陆襄把他们召进内室，不加以责备，祇是好言好语地劝解开导他们，二人感激恩德，深深地认错后悔，陆襄于是为他们设酒席，使他们尽情酣饮，酒席结束，二人同车返回，便互相亲近厚待。
English: There were also two families, the Pengs and the Li, who had previously falsely accused each other because of angry fights. Lu Xiang called them into the inner room and did not blame them, but only kindly advised and enlightened them. The two were grateful and deeply regretted their mistakes. Lu Xiang then set up a banquet for them, so that they could drink to their heart's content. After the banquet was over, the two returned together in the same car, and they treated each other kindly.

古文：民又歌曰： 陆君政，无怨家，斗既罢，仇共车。 
现代文：民众又作歌谣说： 堕星政策，没有怨家，争斗已罢，仇人同车。 
English: The people also made a song saying: the fallen star policy, no grudge, the fight is over, the enemies are on the same train.

古文：在政六年，郡中大治，民李睍等四百二十人诣阙拜表，陈襄德化，求于郡立碑，降敕许之。
现代文：在位六年，郡中得到大治，民众李睨等四百二十人前往朝廷上奏表，陈述陆襄的仁德教化，请求在郡中立碑，高祖下令准许。
English: During the six years of his reign, the county was greatly improved, and 420 people, including Li Glare, went to the imperial court to submit a petition, stating Lu Xiang's benevolence and enlightenment, requesting a neutral monument in the county, and Gaozu ordered permission.

古文：又表乞留襄，襄固求还，征为吏部郎，迁秘书监，领扬州大中正。
现代文：又上奏表请求留下陆襄，陆襄坚决请求返回，征入任吏部郎，调任秘书监，兼扬州大中正。
English: Lu Xiang also submitted a request to stay, and Lu Xiang firmly requested to return. He was recruited as a secretary, transferred to the post of secretary, and became the vice-president of Yangzhou University.

古文：太清元年，迁度支尚书，中正如故。
现代文：太清元年，调任度支尚书，中正职衔照旧。
English: In the first year of the Taiqing Dynasty, the transfer degree was confirmed, and the title of Vice-premier remained the same.

古文：二年，侯景举兵围宫城，以襄直侍中省。
现代文：二年，侯景起兵包围宫城，高祖任用陆襄在侍中省值勤。
English: In the second year, Hou Jing raised an army to encircle Miyagi, and Gao Zu appointed Lu Xiang to be on duty in the Ministry of Attendance.

古文：三年三月，城陷，襄逃还吴。
现代文：三年三月，城池陷落，陆襄逃回吴壁。
English: In March of the third year, the city fell, and Lu Xiang fled back to Wuxi.

古文：贼寻寇东境，没吴郡。
现代文：贼军不久侵犯束部疆域，攻下吴郡。
English: The bandit army soon invaded the territory of Sokube and captured Wuzhong County.

古文：景将宋子仙进攻钱塘，会海盐人陆黯举义，有众数千人，夜出袭郡，杀伪太守苏单于，推襄行郡事。
现代文：侯景的将领宋子仙进军攻打鱼擅，遇遵堕入幽章发起义军，有部众几千人，夜晚出动袭击郡城，杀死伪太守苏单于，推举陆塞代理郡中事务。
English: Song Zixian, the warlord of Houjing, marched into the county to attack and defeat Yuxuan. When Zun fell into Yuzhang, he launched a rebel army, consisting of several thousand people, which attacked the county seat at night, killed the pseudo-emperor Su Shan Yu, and promoted Lu Sai to be the deputy of county affairs.

古文：时淮南太守文成侯萧宁逃贼入吴，襄遣迎宁为盟主，遣黯及兄子映公帅众拒子仙。
现代文：当时淮南太守塞盛堡芦空逃避贼人进入吴郡，陆襄派人迎接芦窒为盟主，派遣圈章和哥哥的儿子旦蚣率领部众抵御王仙。
English: At that time, Lu Xiang, the de facto governor of Huanan, entered Wuxian County to escape the bandits. Lu Xiang sent people to welcome Lu Xiang as his ally, and dispatched Huazhang and his brother's son, Danzhang, to lead the troops to resist Wang Xian.

古文：子仙闻兵起，乃退还，与黯等战于松江，黯败走，吴下军闻之，亦各奔散。
现代文：王仙听说义兵兴起，于是退回，在整逛和坠壁等人交战，堕壁战败逃走，呈工军队听说后，也各自逃散。
English: Wang Xian heard about the rise of the volunteer soldiers, so he retreated. He went around and fought with the people who fell off the wall. The fallen wall was defeated and fled. After hearing about the construction army, they also fled separately.

古文：襄匿于墓下，一夜忧愤卒，时年七十。
现代文：陆襄躲藏在坟墓下，一天夜晚因忧愁气愤而去世，遣年七十岁。
English: Lu Xiang hid under a grave and died one night of grief and anger, at the age of seventy.

古文：襄弱冠遭家祸，终身蔬食布衣，不听音乐，口不言杀害五十许年。
现代文：陆襄成年后遭遇家中祸殃，终生粗食布衣。不听音乐，口中不谈杀害之类的事有五十来年。
English: After Lu Xiang became an adult, he suffered a misfortune in his family, and he spent the rest of his life eating coarse food and wearing rags. He did not listen to music, and he did not talk about killing for the next fifty years.

古文：侯景平，世祖追赠侍中、云麾将军。
现代文：堡量被子定后，世担追赠堕塞为侍中、云麾将军。
English: After the size of the castle was determined, Shitan was posthumously demoted to the position of chamberlain and General Yun Qi.

古文：以建义功，追封余干县侯，邑五百户。
现代文：因兴起义兵的攻劳，追封为签王叠堡，食邑五百户。
English: As a result of the efforts of the rising volunteer soldiers, the castle was chased and sealed, and 500 households in the food village were uprooted.

古文：陈吏部尚书姚察曰：陆倕博涉文理，到洽匪躬贞劲，明山宾儒雅笃实，殷钧静素恬和，陆襄淳深孝性，虽任遇有异，皆列于名臣矣。
现代文：陈史吏部尚书姚察说：陆倕博涉猎文史事理，洽匪忠贞强劲，明山宾儒雅忠厚，殷钧恬静平和，陆襄淳朴有孝心，虽然职位待遇有差别，都列在名臣中。
English: Chen Shizhu Yao of the History Department said: Lu Xunbo is involved in hunting, literary and historical affairs, is loyal to bandits and strong, Mingshan Binruya is loyal, Yin Xun is quiet and peaceful, Lu Xiang is simple and filial, and although there are differences in the treatment of positions, they are all listed among the famous ministers.

