古文：凡与敌战，山川之夷险，道路之迂直，必用乡人引而导之，乃知其利，而战则胜。
现代文：凡是与敌人作战，对于山川的平坦或险要，道路的曲折或直捷，一定要使用熟悉当地情况人士作为向导，才能掌握有利地形，这样，打起仗来，就能取得胜利。
English: In all battles with the enemy, whether the mountains and rivers are flat or dangerous, and whether the roads are tortuous or straight, it is necessary to use people who are familiar with the local conditions as guides in order to master the favorable terrain. In this way, when fighting, victory can be achieved.

古文：法曰： 用乡导者，不能得地利。 
现代文：诚如兵法所说： 作战中不使用乡导的，就不能获得地利之助。 
English: As it is said in the Art of War: If you don't use a local guide in battle, you can't get local help.

古文：汉武帝时，匈奴比岁入寇，所杀掠甚众。
现代文：汉武帝时，匈奴连年入侵内地，杀人抢掠，有增无已。
English: During the reign of Emperor Hanwu, the Huns invaded the mainland year after year, killing and plundering more and more people.

古文：元朔五年春，今卫青将三万骑出塞，匈奴右贤王以为汉兵不能至此，遂醉卧帐中。
现代文：元朔五年春天，武帝命令卫青率领三万骑兵北出边塞，对匈奴实施反击。时匈奴右贤王认为汉军到达不了他的军营、于是醉酒而安卧于军帐之中。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of the Yuan Shao, Emperor Wu ordered Wei Qing to lead 30,000 cavalry north out of the border fortress to counterattack the Huns. At that time, the Hun king Uxian thought that the Chinese army could not reach his military camp, so he was drunk and lay down in the military camp.

古文：汉兵夜至，围，右贤王遂大惊，独与其爱妾一人、骑兵数百，溃围夜逃北去。
现代文：汉军乘夜抵达这里，迅速包围了匈奴军营，右贤王大惊失色，独自和爱妾一人，在数百骑兵的护卫下，突出重围连夜向北逃走。
English: The Han army arrived here at night and quickly surrounded the Hun army camp. King Ugyen panicked and fled north overnight, alone with his beloved concubine, escorted by hundreds of cavalry.

古文：汉遣轻骑校尉郭成等追四百里，弗及，得虏裨王十余人，男女万五千余口，畜马数百万。
现代文：汉军派轻骑校尉郭成等将随后追击四百里，没有追上右贤王，但俘获其偏将十余人、男女一万五千余人，缴获其牲畜数百万头。
English: The Chinese army sent light cavalry lieutenant Guo Cheng and others to chase after him for four hundred miles. They did not catch up with Uxian Wang, but captured more than ten of his commanders, more than fifteen thousand men and women, and millions of his livestock.

古文：于是，青率兵而还。至塞，天子使使者持大将军印，即军中拜青为大将军，诸将皆以兵属，立号而归。
现代文：于是，卫青率兵凯旋而归，到达边境时，汉武帝所派使者手捧大将军印，就在军营中授任卫青为大将，其余诸将都以其所部统归卫青指挥，并给以封号而回。
English: As a result, Wei Qing led his troops to a triumphant return. When they reached the border, the emissary sent by Han Wudi held the general's seal in his hand and appointed Wei Qing as the general in the military camp. The remaining generals all returned to Wei Qing's command with their headquarters, and returned with a seal.

古文：皆用校尉。张骞以尝使大夏，留匈奴久，导军，善知水草处，大军得以无饥渴之患焉。
现代文：张骞曾经几次出使大夏，在匈奴的时间长了，做为向导，因为他们熟悉水草地形，所以大军往返从未遇到缺水断粮的困难。
English: Zhang Qian had been sent to Baxia several times, and had spent a long time in the Xiongnu as a guide, because they were familiar with the aquatic terrain, so the large army never encountered the difficulties of water shortage and grain shortage.

