古文：《齐民要术》稻无所缘，唯岁易为良。
现代文：《齐民要术》：水稻对土地的要求并不严格，只要每年更换一次稻田便好。
English: "Qi Min Yaoshu": The requirements of rice on land are not strict, as long as the paddy field is replaced once a year.

古文：选地欲近上流。地无良薄，水清则稻美也。
现代文：选择稻田，要靠近流水的上游，不论土地好坏，只要水清，便能长出好的稻谷。
English: When choosing a paddy field, it is necessary to be close to the upper reaches of flowing water. Regardless of whether the land is good or bad, as long as the water is clear, good rice can grow.

古文：三月种者为上时，四月上旬为中时，中旬为下时。
现代文：三月种稻是最上等的农时，四月上旬是中等农时，四月下旬是下等农时。
English: March is the best time to plant rice, early April is the middle time, and late April is the low time.

古文：先放水，十日后，曳辘轴十遍。遍数唯多为良。
现代文：先将田水放掉，等过了十天以后，拽拉着辘轴轧碾十遍，遍数越多越好。
English: First, the field water is released, and after ten days, the roller is dragged and rolled ten times. The more times, the better.

古文：地既熟，净淘种子，浮者不去，秋则生稗。
现代文：地熟草净以后，开始淘净稻种，水面上的浮秕不去掉，秋天便会生稗子。
English: After the ground is cleared of weeds, the rice seeds are cleared. If the floating rafts on the water surface are not removed, there will be lice in the fall.

古文：渍经三宿，漉出，内草篙市专反，判竹，圜以盛谷。
现代文：浸渍过三夜，将水漉出，放入草篙中，趁潮湿盖好。
English: Soak for three nights, wring out the water, put it in a straw and cover with a damp cloth.

古文：中裛之。复经三宿，芽长二分，一亩三斗掷。
现代文：三夜过后，便可以长出二分长的芽，一亩田撒播三斗。
English: After three nights, they can grow two-quarter-length buds, one mu of field sowing three buckets.

古文：三日之中，令人驱鸟。
现代文：播种后三天内，要有人驱赶鸟雀。
English: Within three days after sowing, someone should drive away birds and finches.

古文：稻苗长七八寸，陈草复起，以镰侵水芟之，草悉脓死。
现代文：稻苗七八寸高时，原来已被消灭的杂草，会再次生长起来，只要用镰刀在水面以下将它刈倒，草便全部被泡烂死掉。
English: When the rice seedlings are seven or eight inches tall, the weeds that have been eliminated will grow again. As long as it is cut down below the water surface with a scythe, the grass will all be dead.

古文：稻苗渐长，复须薅。拔草曰 薅 。
现代文：稻苗渐渐地长大以后，还应当再一次地薅草，拔草叫 薅 。
English: After the rice seedlings have gradually grown up, they should be weeded again, and the weeding should be called weeding.

古文：虎高反。薅讫，决去水，曝根令坚。
现代文：薅过草，把水放干，让太阳晒稻根，使稻站立坚牢。
English: Rinse the grass, let the water dry, let the sun shine on the rice roots, and make the rice stand firm.

古文：量时水旱而溉之。
现代文：再后，只需依据天时雨水多少，进行适当地灌溉便行了。
English: After that, it is enough to carry out appropriate irrigation according to the amount of rain during the day.

古文：将熟，又去水。
现代文：稻子快熟时，再一次将水放掉。
English: When the rice is ready, drain again.

古文：霜降获之。
现代文：霜降节到即可收刈。
English: Harvesting can begin as soon as the frost sets in.

古文：早刈，米青而不坚；晚刈，零落而损收。
现代文：刈早了，米色青，不坚实；刈晚了，会落粒使收获减少。
English: If you cut early, it will be beige and blue, not solid; if you cut late, the harvest will be reduced by falling grains.

古文：北土高原，本无陂泽，随逐隈曲而田者，二月冰解，地干，烧而耕之，仍即下水。
现代文：北方高原地方，本来没有蓄水的陂池和薮泽，只有在流水的弯曲水漫处，方可作稻田。二月间，地冻消释，待地面干了，将杂草烧掉后进行翻耕，耕毕，随即放水入田。
English: In the northern highlands, where there are no water reservoirs such as Tsugaike and Shibusawa, rice paddies can only be made in places where the curved water of flowing water is full. In February, when the ground frost has subsided and the ground is dry, the weeds are burned off and the fields are ploughed, ploughed, and then water is put into the fields.

古文：十日，块既散液，持木斫平之。
现代文：十天以后，土块都已经被水泡散，便可以用木斫将田平整好。
English: Ten days later, the clods have all been washed away and the fields can be levelled with wooden ploughs.

古文：纳种如前法。
现代文：下种的方法与上面说的一样。
English: The next method is the same as above.

古文：既生七八寸，拔而栽之。
现代文：稻苗生长七八寸高时，拔下来重行栽过。
English: When the rice seedlings grow seven or eight inches high, they are pulled down and replanted.

古文：既非岁易，草稗俱生。芟亦不死，故须栽而薅之。
现代文：因为不是每年更换稻田，所以杂草稗子特别多，刈了还会再发，只有重行栽过，再来彻底除草。
English: Because rice paddies are not replaced every year, there is a particularly large number of weeds. Once they have been cut, they will be replanted, and only after they have been replanted will the weeds be completely removed.

古文：溉灌、收刈，一如前法。畦嚼音劣，堤厓也。
现代文：灌溉和收刈的方法，完全同上面一样。畦嚼音劣，堤压。
English: Irrigation and harvesting methods, exactly the same as above.

古文：大小无定，须量地宜，取水均而已。
现代文：大小，并无一定的规格，须酌量地势是不是适宜，以及水的深浅是不是均匀来决定。
English: The size does not have a certain specification, and it is necessary to consider whether the terrain is suitable, and whether the water depth is uniform.

古文：藏稻必须用箪。
现代文：贮藏稻谷，必须用箪。
English: When storing rice, it is necessary to use straw.

古文：此既水谷，窖埋得地气，则烂败也。
现代文：稻，本来是水谷，假如采用窖藏的方法，受了地下湿气，一定会霉烂腐败。
English: Rice is originally a water valley. If the method of cellaring is used, it will be affected by underground moisture, and will surely rot and rot.

古文：舂稻：必须冬时，积日燥曝，一夜置霜露中，即舂。
现代文：舂稻谷，必须在冬日，连续曝晒若干日，让它极为干燥，然后放置在露天处在霜露侵袭下经过一夜，马上去舂。
English: The glutinous rice must be exposed to the sun for several consecutive days in winter, so that it is extremely dry, and then it is placed in the open air under the attack of frost and dew, and after one night, it is immediately dried.

古文：若冬舂不干，即米青赤脉起；不经霜，不燥曝，则米碎矣。
现代文：假如冬舂的稻谷不干，舂出来的米便会生出青色红色的纹脉。不经霜、不燥曝，舂出的米必然破碎。
English: If the winter-thawed rice does not dry, the harvested rice will sprout bluish-red veins. If it is not exposed to frost and dryness, the harvested rice will inevitably break.

古文：秫稻法，一切同。
现代文：种植糯稻的方法完全相同。
English: The method of growing indica rice is exactly the same.

古文：《周官》曰：稻人，掌稼下地。
现代文：《周官》说：稻人，掌管下湿地的稼穑工作。
English: "Zhou Guan" said: "The rice growers are in charge of the work of earning money in the wetlands.

古文：以水泽之地种谷也。谓之 稼 者，有似嫁女相生。
现代文：指在低洼多水地种稻。称为 稼 ，是说像嫁女那样，可以孳生繁殖。
English: It refers to the cultivation of rice in low-lying, waterlogged land. It is called 稼, which means that, like a bride, it can reproduce in pairs.

古文：以潴畜水，以防止水，以沟荡水，以遂均水，以列舍水，以浍写水。
现代文：他的方法是：利用偃潴蓄水，利用堤防防止偃潴的水外流，利用沟引水，利用地头小遂沟让水均匀地流入田中，利用列停水，利用排水的浍沟将水泻去。
English: His methods are: using dikes to store water, using dikes to prevent the outflow of water from dikes, using ditches to divert water, using small ditches on the ground to allow water to flow evenly into the field, using queues to stop water, and using drainage ditches to drain water away.

古文：以涉扬其芟，作田。
现代文：蹚着水到田中，将刈倒的杂草丢掉，治田种稻。
English: They carry water to the middle of the field, throw away the cut weeds, and cultivate the rice.

古文：郑司农说 潴 、 防 以《春秋传》曰： 町原防，规偃潴。 
现代文：郑玄注说：郑众用《春秋左氏传》 町原防，规偃潴 来解释 潴 和 防 。
English: Zheng Xuan said: Zheng Zong used the "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" to explain the town's original defense and defense.

古文： 以列舍水  列者，非一道以去水也。 
现代文：将 以列舍水 的 列 字，说成是许多排水的水道。
English: The words "streams of water" are said to refer to the many drainage channels.

古文： 以涉扬其芟 ：以其水写，故得行其田中，举其芟钩也。
现代文：将 以涉扬其芟 ，解释作：因为水已泻去，所以可在田行走和芟草。
English: He explained, "Because the water has receded, we can walk in the fields and pull up weeds."

古文：杜子春读 荡 为 和 ， 荡 谓以沟行水也。
现代文：杜子春注将 荡 字读作 和 音，说荡是用沟引水的意思。
English: Duzi Shunju read the word "Wang" as "wa" and "sound," and said that "Wang" means to divert water with a ditch.

古文：玄谓 偃潴 者，畜流水之陂也。 防 ，潴旁堤也。 遂 ，田首受水小沟也。 列 ，田之畦嚼也。 浍 ，田尾去水大沟。 作 ，犹治也。
现代文：郑玄本人说： 偃潴 ，指蓄水的陂池； 防 ，指偃潴四旁的堤防； 遂 ，指回头承受行水沟洫来水的小沟； 列 ，指稻田的田丘； 浍 ，指稻田后面的排水的大沟。 作 ，是治理的意思。
English: Zheng Xuan himself said:, refers to the reservoir; 防, refers to the embankment on all sides of the embankment; 遂, refers to the small ditch that bears the running water; 列, refers to the paddy field;, refers to the drainage ditch behind the paddy field. 作, means governance.

古文：开遂，舍水于列中，因涉之，扬去前年所芟之草，而治田种稻。
现代文：上面说将水通过小遂沟，引入稻田田丘中，故需要涉水，扬弃掉前年芟倒的杂草，方可整治田地，用来种稻。
English: It says above that water is introduced into the paddy field mound through a small ditch, so it is necessary to wade through the water and remove the weeds that fell the previous year in order to prepare the field and use it to grow rice.

古文：凡稼泽，夏以水殄草，而芟夷之。
现代文：种植水田，应当在夏天让水把杂草殄灭绝，然后将它们芟夷掉。
English: When planting paddy fields, water should be used to kill weeds in the summer, and then they should be cleared away.

古文：殄，病也，绝也。
现代文：殄，是病死、灭绝的意思。
English: , is the meaning of death from disease and extinction.

古文：郑司农说： 芟夷 以《春秋传》曰 芟夷蕴崇之 。
现代文：郑司农用《春秋左氏传》 芟夷蕴崇之 来解释 芟夷 。
English: Zheng Shihong used "The Spring and Autumn Legend of the Zuo Family" to explain the Yi.

古文：今时谓禾下麦，为 夷下麦 ，言芟刈其禾，於下种麦也。
现代文：以为今时称 禾下麦 为 夷下麦 ，即是说芟刈掉禾稻，于下种麦。
English: It is thought that the present-day term "hereshita-mugi" means "erishita-mugi," which means that the plough cuts the rice and sows the wheat.

古文：玄谓将以泽地为稼者，必于夏六月之时，大雨时行，以水病绝草之后生者，至秋，水涸芟之，明年乃稼。
现代文：郑玄认为，想在沼泽地种庄稼的人，必须趁夏季六月，常下大雨的天气，用水将新生长起来的杂草淹死，秋天地里的水干涸时，芟刈倒，明年便可种庄稼。
English: Zheng Xuan believes that people who want to grow crops in the marshland must take advantage of the summer in June, when it often rains heavily, to use water to drown the newly grown weeds. When the water in the autumn dries up, the reeds are cut down and the crops can be planted next year.

古文：泽草所生，种之 芒种 。
现代文：凡是生长水草的沼泽地，皆可种植有芒的谷物。
English: Any marshland where aquatic plants grow can be used to grow grain with mildew.

古文：郑司农云： 泽草之所生，其地可种芒种。 
现代文：郑司农说： 凡可生长水草的沼泽地，皆可种带芒的谷种。 
English: Zheng Sihong said: Any marshland that can grow aquatic plants can grow cereals with mildew.

古文： 芒种 ，稻、麦也。
现代文：有芒的谷种，是指稻和麦。
English: Grains with awns are rice and wheat.

古文：《氾胜之书》曰：种稻，春冻解，耕反其土。
现代文：《氾胜之书》说：种稻，必须在春天土地解冻之后，先翻耕土地。
English: "The Book of Flood Victory" says: to grow rice, the land must first be plowed after the land thaws in the spring.

古文：种稻区不欲大，大则水深浅不适。
现代文：种稻的田块不需要大，大了，水的深浅便不容易调节合适。
English: Rice paddies do not need to be large. If they are large, it is not easy to adjust the depth of the water.

古文：冬至后一百一十日，可种稻。
现代文：冬至后一百一十天，可开始种稻。
English: One hundred and ten days after the winter solstice, rice planting can begin.

古文：始种，稻欲温；温者，缺其塍，食陵反；畦畔也。令水道相直。夏至后，大热，令水道错。
现代文：稻在苗期，水温要高，田埂上的水道口，应该对直，可以保温；夏至后，天气炎热，应使水道口交错开。
English: When rice is in the seedling stage, the water temperature should be high. The water outlets on the paddy field should be straight and can be kept warm. After the summer solstice, when the weather is hot, the water outlets should be staggered.

古文：崔寔曰：三月可种粳稻。
现代文：崔寔说：三月可以种粳稻。
English: Cui Wei said: It is possible to grow indica rice in March.

古文：稻，美田欲稀；溥田欲稠。
现代文：肥沃的天地，稻子应该种得稀疏一些；贫瘠的田地，稻子应该种得密一些。
English: In a fertile land, rice should be planted sparsely; in a barren land, rice should be planted more densely.

