古文：兵者，凶器也；争者，逆德也。
现代文：兵器，是杀人的工具。战争，是违反道德的行为。
English: Weapons are instruments of murder, and war is an immoral act.

古文：事必有本，故王者伐暴乱，本仁义焉。
现代文：掠夺，是卑鄙的手段。所以王者讨伐暴乱，是为了申张仁义的。
English: Plunder is a despicable means. Therefore, the king combats riots in order to assert benevolence.

古文：战国则以立威抗敌相图，而不能废兵也。
现代文：战国诸侯为了树立自己的权威，抵抗外敌侵略，互相图霸称雄，因而战争。
English: In order to establish their authority, resist foreign aggression, and dominate each other, the warlords of the Warring States went to war.

古文：兵者，以武为植，以文为种。
现代文：战争这个问题，军事是手段，政治是目的。
English: On the question of war, the military is the means and politics is the end.

古文：武为表，文为里。
现代文：军事是现像，政治是本质。
English: Military is the appearance, politics is the essence.

古文：能审此二者，知胜败矣。
现代文：能弄清这二者的关系，就懂得胜败的道理了。
English: If you can figure out the relationship between the two, you will understand the reason for victory or defeat.

古文：文所以视利害、辨安危；武所以犯强敌、力攻守也。
现代文：政治是用来明察利害，辨别安危的。军事是用来战胜强敌，保卫国家的。
English: Politics is used to discern interests and distinguish between safety and danger. Military is used to defeat strong enemies and defend the country.

古文：专一则胜，离散则败。
现代文：意志统一就能胜利，离心离德就会失败。
English: Unity of will can lead to victory, while separation of mind and spirit will lead to defeat.

古文：陈以密则固，锋以疏则达。
现代文：布阵队形密集有利于巩固，行列疏散则便于使用兵器。
English: The dense formation of the formation is conducive to consolidation, and the evacuation of the ranks is convenient for the use of weapons.

古文：卒畏将甚于敌者胜，卒畏敌甚于将者败。所以知胜败者，称将于敌也。敌与将，犹权衡焉。
现代文：士卒畏惧将帅超过畏惧敌人的就能胜利，士卒畏惧敌人超过畏惧将帅的就会失败，所以要预知胜败，就可以比较士卒畏敌还是畏将，用这个比较来预见胜败，就像用秤称物一样准确。
English: A soldier who fears the general more than he fears the enemy will be victorious; a soldier who fears the enemy more than he fears the general will be defeated. Therefore, in order to predict victory or defeat, it is possible to compare soldiers who fear the enemy with those who fear the general. Using this comparison to predict victory or defeat is as accurate as weighing things on a scale.

古文：安静则治，暴疾则乱。
现代文：将帅沉着，军队就会严整，将帅急躁，军队就会混乱。
English: If the commander-in-chief is calm, the army will be well-organized; if the commander-in-chief is impetuous, the army will be chaotic.

古文：出卒陈兵有常令，行伍疏数有常法，先后之次有适宜。
现代文：出兵列阵有一般的法则，队形疏密有一定的标本，先后次序有适当的规定。
English: There is a general rule for the formation of troops, a certain sample for the formation of a dense formation, and an appropriate regulation for the order of precedence.

古文：常令者，非追北袭邑攸用也。
现代文：这里所说的一般法则，不是用于追击和奔袭城邑的。
English: The general rule here stated is not for the pursuit and storming of towns.

古文：前后不次，则失也。
现代文：前后次序紊乱了就会战败，所以对扰乱次序的人要处死。
English: If the order is disrupted, the battle will be lost, so the person who disrupts the order must be executed.

古文：乱先后，斩之。常陈皆向敌，有内向，有外向，有立陈，有坐陈。
现代文：布阵通常是面向敌人的，但根据情况也有向内的，也有向外的，有立阵，也有坐阵。
English: The formation is usually facing the enemy, but depending on the situation, it can be inward or outward, standing or sitting.

古文：夫内向，所以顾中也；外向，所以备外也。立陈，所以行也；坐陈，所以止也。
现代文：向内是为了保卫中军的安全，向外是为了防备敌人的袭击，立阵是准备进攻的，坐阵是用于驻止和防守的。
English: To the inside is to protect the safety of the Chinese army, to the outside is to prevent the enemy's attack, the formation is to prepare for the attack, and the formation is to stop and defend.

古文：立坐之陈，相参进止，将在其中。
现代文：采取立阵还是坐阵，应该根据军队的进止来决定，将帅总是居中指挥。
English: Whether to take a standing or a sitting position should be decided according to the advance and retreat of the army. The commander-in-chief should always be in the middle.

古文：坐之兵剑斧，立之兵戟弩，将亦居中。
现代文：坐阵的兵器主要使用剑斧。立阵的兵器主要使用戟弩，将帅也是居中指挥。
English: The weapons of the sitting formation mainly use swords and axes. The weapons of the standing formation mainly use crossbows, and the commander is also the middle commander.

古文：善御敌者，正兵先合，而后扼之，此必胜之术也。
现代文：善于抵御敌人的，通常先以正面兵力与敌作战，然始以机动兵力乘机打击它，这是必胜的方法。
English: Those who are good at resisting the enemy usually fight the enemy with frontal forces first, and then attack it with mobile forces. This is a surefire way to win.

古文：陈之斧钺，饰之旗章，有功必赏，犯令必死。
现代文：战斗时还要陈列斧钺，设置旗章，有功必赏，犯令必杀。
English: When fighting, it is also necessary to display axes and maces, set up banners, reward merit, and punish wrongdoing.

古文：存亡死生，在桴之端。
现代文：国家的存亡，官兵的生死，全都系于将帅的指挥。
English: The survival of the country, the life and death of officers and soldiers, all depend on the command of the general.

古文：虽天下有善兵者，莫能御此矣。
现代文：纵然天下有善于用兵的人，也是不能抗拒他的。
English: Even if there are people in the world who are good at using soldiers, they can't resist him.

古文：矢射未交，长刃未接，前噪者谓之虚，后噪者谓之实，不噪者谓之秘。
现代文：在敌我双方还没有交锋的时候，如果敌人前军呼噪是它兵力虚弱的表现，后军呼噪是它兵力充实的表现，前后都不呼噪的是有秘密的企图。
English: When there is no confrontation between the enemy and us, if the noise of the enemy's front army is a manifestation of its weak strength, and the noise of the rear army is a manifestation of its full strength, it is a secret intention not to make noise.

古文：虚、实、者，兵之体也。
现代文：虚、实、秘三者都是作战的形态。
English: Deception, truth, and secrecy are all forms of warfare.

