古文：孟春之月，日在营室，昏参中，旦尾中。
现代文：孟春正月，太阳的位置在营室宿。初昏时刻，参宿出现在南方中天。
English: Early spring and the first month of the year: the position of the sun's movement is in the camp room; at dusk, the star is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the tail star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日甲乙，其帝太昊，其神句芒，其虫鳞，其音角，律中太簇，其数八，其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：拂晓时刻，尾宿出现在南方中天。孟春在天干中属甲乙，它的主宰之帝是太皞，佐帝之神是句芒，它的应时的动物是龙鱼之类的鳞族，声音是中和的角音，音律与太簇相应。这月的数字是八，味道是酸味，气味是膻气，要举行的祭祀是户祭，祭祀时，祭品以脾脏为尊。
English: At the time of dawn, the tail lodge appears in the southern sky. Mengchun belongs to A and B in the heavenly stem. Its ruling emperor is Taishang, the god of Zedi is Jumang, and its corresponding animal is a dragon fish. The sound is a neutral horn sound, and the melody corresponds to Taizu. The number of this month is eight, the taste is sour, and the smell is salty. The sacrifice to be held is a household sacrifice. During the sacrifice, the sacrifice is made of the spleen.

古文：东风解冻，蛰虫始振，鱼上冰，獭祭鱼，候雁北。
现代文：春风吹融了冰雪，蛰伏的动物开始苏醒活动。鱼儿从深水向上游到冰层下，水獭捕到鱼，把它摆在岸边。候鸟火雁从南往北飞行。
English: The spring wind melts the ice and snow, and the animals that have been lying dormant begin to wake up. Fish swim up from deep water to under the ice, otters catch fish and put them on the shore. Migratory birds and geese fly from south to north.

古文：天子居青阳左个，乘鸾辂，驾苍龙，载青畤。义青衣，服青玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：天子居住在东向明堂的左侧室，乘坐饰有用青凤命名的响铃的车子，车前驾着青色的马，车上插着绘有龙纹的青色的旗帜，天子穿着青色的衣服，佩戴着青色的饰玉，吃的食物是麦子和羊，使用的器物纹理空疏而通达。
English: Tianzi lives in the left room of Dongxiangming Hall. He rides in a car with a bell decorated with the name of Qingfeng. He drives a blue horse in front of the car, and a blue flag with a dragon pattern is placed on the car. Tianzi wears blue clothes and wears blue decorative beads. He eats wheat and sheep. The utensils he uses have a clear and transparent texture.

古文：是月也，以立春。
现代文：这个月有立春的节气。
English: This month's solar term is the first day of spring.

古文：先立春三日，太史谒之天子，曰：某日立春，盛德在木。
现代文：在立春前三天，太史向天子禀告说： 某日立春，大德在子木。 
English: Three days before the first day of spring, Emperor Taishi announced to the Son of Heaven, "A certain day, the first day of spring, great virtue is in the root of the tree.

古文：天子乃齐立春之日，天子亲率三公九卿诸侯大夫以迎春于东郊，还乃赏公卿诸侯大夫于朝。命相布德、和令、行庆、施惠，下及兆民，庆赐遂行，无有不当。
现代文：天子于是斋戒，准备迎春。立春那天，天子亲自率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫到东挪去迎接春的降临。迎春礼毕归来，就在朝中赏赐卿，诸侯、大夫，并命令相国宣布教化，发布禁令，实行褒奖，瞻济不足，一直施及所有百姓。褒奖赏赐之事，要通达施行，不要有不当之处。
English: On the day of the first day of spring, the heavenly son himself led the three princes, nine lords, lords and doctors to the east to welcome the arrival of spring. After returning from the spring festival, he rewarded the lords, lords and doctors in the center of the court, and ordered the neighboring countries to announce the enlightenment, issue the ban, implement the reward, and provide insufficient aid, all the time to all the people. The reward and reward should be carried out and there should be nothing improper.

古文：乃命太史守典奉法，司天日月星辰之行，宿离不忒，无失经纪以初为常。
现代文：于是命令太史遵奉六典八法，主管推算丑月星辰运行的工作。太阳所在的位置、月亮所经过的地方，从及日月星辰运行的度数和轨迹，要计算得没有一点差错和失误，制定历法仍以冬至点在牵牛初度为准则。
English: Therefore, he ordered the Grand Historian to follow the six-script and eight-method, and supervise the work of calculating the movement of the ugly moon and stars. The position of the sun, the place where the moon passes, and the frequency and trajectory of the movement of the sun, moon and stars should be calculated without any errors and mistakes. The formulation of the calendar is still based on the winter solstice at the beginning of the year.

古文：是月也，天子乃以元日祈谷于上帝，乃择元辰，天子亲载耒耜，措之参于保介之御间。率三公九卿诸侯大夫躬耕，帝藉田。
现代文：这个月，天子在吉日向上天祈求五谷丰登，并选择好的时辰，亲自用车装载着耒耜，放在参乘一一车右和御者中问，率领三公、九卿、诸侯、大夫，到帝籍田亲自耕作。
English: This month, on the auspicious day, the heavenly son prayed to the heavens for the abundance of grain, and chose a good time, personally loaded the plow with the car, placed it in the right and driver of the participating car, and led the three princes, nine lords, lords, and doctors to personally cultivate the imperial field.

古文：天子三推，三公五推，卿诸侯大夫九推。
现代文：推耒耜人土，天子推三下，三公推五下，卿、诸侯大夫推九下。
English: Pushing the human soil, the heavenly son pushes three times, the three princes push five times, and the lord and the vassal push nine times.

古文：反执爵于太寝，三公九卿诸侯大夫皆御，命曰劳酒。
现代文：礼毕返回，天子在祖庙举行宴饮，慰劳群臣，三公、九卿、谱侯。大夫都去侍酒。这次宴饮命名叫 劳酒 。
English: After returning from the ritual, the heavenly son held a banquet in the ancestral temple, consoling the laboring ministers, the three princes, the nine nobles, and the great nobles. The doctors all went to serve wine. The name of this banquet was "labor wine."

古文：是月也，天气下降，地气上腾，天地和同，草木繁动。
现代文：这个月，上天之气下降，地中之气上升，天地之气混同一体，草木普遍萌发。
English: In this month, the qi of heaven falls, the qi of the earth rises, the qi of heaven and earth are mixed together, and plants and trees generally sprout.

古文：王布农事，命田舍东郊，皆修封疆，审端经术，善相丘陵阪险原隰，土地所宜，五谷所殖，以教道民，必躬亲之。
现代文：国君宣布农功之事，命令农官住在东郊，监督农民整治耕地的疆界，审视并端正田间的小路；很好地考察丘陵、山地、平原，洼地等各种地形，什么土地适宜种什么备物，什么谷物应在什么地方种植，要用达些教诲引导农民，而且务必亲自去做。
English: The king announced the agricultural work, ordered the agricultural officials to live in the eastern suburbs, supervised the farmers to rectify the boundaries of the cultivated land, inspected and straightened the paths between the fields; well examined the hills, mountains, plains, depressions and other landforms, what land is suitable for planting what kind of equipment, what grain should be planted in what place, to guide the farmers with some teachings, and be sure to do it yourself.

古文：田事既饬，先定准直，农乃不惑。
现代文：农功之事布置完毕，先确定田地的界限。路径的宽窄，农民才没有疑惑。
English: The fields have been properly prepared, and due to the standards set in advance, the farming can be carried out in an orderly manner.

古文：是月也，命乐正入学习舞，乃修祭典。
现代文：这个月，命令乐官进入太学教国子练习舞蹈。
English: This month, music officials were ordered into Taigaku to teach Kuniko how to dance.

古文：命祀山林川泽，牺牲无用牝，禁止伐木，无覆巢，无杀孩虫胎夭飞鸟，无麛无卵，无聚大众，无置城郭。掩骼霾髊。
现代文：同时修订祭祀的典则，命令祭祀山林河流不用母牲做祭品。禁止砍伐树术，不许捣翻鸟巢，不许杀害幼小的禽兽，不许捕捉小兽和掏取鸟卵，不得聚集民众，不得建立城郭，要掩埋枯骨尸骸。
English: At the same time, the code of sacrificial rites was revised, and it was ordered that the sacrificial rites of mountains, forests and rivers should not use the mother animal as a sacrifice. It was forbidden to cut down trees, not to knock down birds' nests, not to kill small animals, not to catch small animals and take out birds' eggs, not to gather people, not to build castles, and to bury dead bones.

古文：是月也，不可以称兵，称兵必有天殃。
现代文：这个月，不可以举兵征伐，举兵必定遭判天灾。
English: This month, it is not allowed to raise an army for a military campaign. Raising an army is doomed to be a natural disaster.

古文：兵戎不起，不可以从我始，无变天之道，无绝地之理，无乱人之纪。
现代文：在不能兴兵征伐的时节。兵戎之事不可以从我开始。发布政令不要违背自然的规律，不要无视土地的条件，不要扰乱礼义的纲纪。
English: At a time when it is not possible to raise an army. I cannot start the military affairs. Do not violate the laws of nature, do not ignore the conditions of the land, and do not disturb the etiquette.

古文：孟春行夏令，则风雨不时，草木旱槁，国乃有恐。
现代文：孟春正月如果发布应在夏天发布的政令，那么，风雨就不能正常来去，草木就会过早地千枯，人民就会感到惶恐。
English: If Meng Chunzheng issues a decree that should be issued in the summer, then the wind and rain will not come and go normally, the plants will wither prematurely, and the people will be frightened.

古文：行秋令则民大疫，疾风暴雨数至，藜莠蓬蒿并兴。
现代文：如果发布布在秋天发布的政夸，那么，百姓就会遭受痘痘，狂风暴雨就会多次袭来，野草就会蓬生。
English: If the proclamation is issued in the autumn, then the people will suffer from smallpox, the storm will come several times, and the weeds will grow.

古文：行冬令则水潦为败，霜雪大挚，首种不入。
现代文：如果发布应在冬天发布的政令，那么，大水就会毁害生物，霜雪就会严重地伤害庄稼，麦子就不能生成收获。
English: If a decree is issued that should be issued in the winter, then the flood will destroy the living beings, the frost and snow will seriously damage the crops, and the wheat will not produce a harvest.

古文：仲春之月，日在奎，昏弧中，旦建星中，其人甲乙，其帝太昊，其神句芒，其虫鳞，其音角，律中夹锺，其数八，其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：仲春二月，太阳的位置在奎宿。
English: In mid-spring in February, the position of the sun is at Kuei.

古文：始雨水，桃李华，苍庚鸣，鹰化为鸠。
现代文：初昏时刻，弧矢星座出现在南方中天。
English: This month, it began to rain, peach and plum trees began to bloom, the yellow dragonfly began to sing, and the eagle in the sky gradually replaced the cuckoo.

古文：天子居青阳左个太庙，乘鸾辂，驾苍龙载青畤，衣青衣，服青玉，食麦与羊，其器疏以达。
现代文：拂晓时刻，建星出现在南方中天。这个月在天干中属甲乙，它的主宰之帝是太皞，佐帝之神是旬芒，它的应时的动物是龙鱼之粪的鳞族，声音是中和的角音，音律与夹钟相应。这个月的数字是八，味道是酸味，气味是膻气，要举行的祭祀是户祭，祭祀时，祭品以脾脏为尊。
English: At the time of dawn, Jian Xing appeared in the south central sky. This month belongs to Jia Yi in the celestial stem. Its ruling emperor is Taifu, the god of Zotei is Shun Meng, and its corresponding animal is the dragonfish dung scale, the sound is a neutral horn sound, and the rhythm corresponds to the bell. The number of this month is eight, the taste is sour, the smell is salty, and the sacrifice to be held is the house sacrifice. During the sacrifice, the sacrifice is the spleen.

古文：是月也，安萌牙，养幼少，存诸孤。
现代文：这个月开始下雨，桃李开始开花，黄鹂开始鸣叫，天空中的鹰逐渐为布谷乌取代。
English: This month, it began to rain, peach and plum trees began to bloom, the yellow dragonfly began to sing, and the eagle in the sky gradually replaced the cuckoo.

古文：择元日，命民社。命有司省囹圄，去桎梏，无肆掠，止狱讼。是月也，玄鸟至。
现代文：天子居住在东向明堂的正室，乘坐饰有用青凤命名的响铃的车子，车前驾着青色的马，车上插着绘有龙纹的青色的旗帜。天子穿着青色的衣服，佩戴着青色的饰玉，吃的食物是麦子和羊，使用的器物的纹理空疏而通达。这个月，要保护植物的萌芽，养育儿童和少年，抚恤众多的孤儿。
English: The celestial son lives in the main room of Dongxiangming Hall. He rides in a car with a bell decorated with the name of a blue phoenix. A blue horse is driven in front of the car, and a blue flag with a dragon pattern is placed on the car. The celestial son wears blue clothes, wears blue decorative beads, eats wheat and sheep, and the texture of the utensils used is sparse and transparent. This month, it is necessary to protect the germination of plants, raise children and young people, and support many orphans.

古文：至之日，以太牢祀于高禖。天子亲往，后妃率九嫔御，乃礼天子所御，带以弓韣，授以弓矢于高禖之前。
现代文：天子亲自前往，后妃率领宫中所有女眷陪从，在高神前为天子所御幸而有孕的女眷举行礼仪，给地带上弓套，井授给她弓和箭。这个月，日夜平分，开始打雷，打闪。
English: The Son of Heaven himself went there, accompanied by the empress leading all the female relatives in the palace, and held a ceremony in front of the high god for the female relatives who were blessed by the Son of Heaven and were pregnant. They put a bow cover on the belt and gave her a bow and arrow. This month, the day and night were equally divided, and thunder and lightning began to strike.

古文：是月也，日夜分，雷乃发声，始电。
现代文：蛰伏的动物都苏醒了，开始从洞穴中钻出来。
English: The hibernating animals woke up and began to crawl out of their burrows.

古文：蛰虫咸动，启户始出。没雷三日，奋铎一令于兆民，曰：雷且发声，有不戒其容止者，生子不被。
现代文：打雷的前三天，振动木铎向老百姓发布命令说； 凡是不警戒房中之事，在响雷时交台的，他生下的孩子必有先天残疾，而自己也必有凶险和灾祸。 
English: Three days before the thunder, the vibrating raft issued an order to the common people: Anyone who is not alert to the things in the room and turns the table when the thunder is heard, his child will have a congenital disability, and he will also have danger and disaster.

古文：必有凶灾，日夜分则同度量钧衡石角斗桶，正权概。
现代文：日夜平分，所以要统一和校正各种度量衡器具。这个月，耕作的农夫稍事休息。
English: The day and night are equally divided, so it is necessary to unify and calibrate all kinds of measuring instruments. This month, farmers working on the farm will take a short break.

古文：是月也，耕者少舍，乃修阖扇，寝庙必备。
现代文：整治一下门户。祭祀先祖的寝庙一定要完整齐备而投有毁坏。
English: Let's rectify the portal. The sleeping temple for worshiping ancestors must be fully prepared and not destroyed.

古文：无作大事，以妨农功。
现代文：不要兴兵征伐，以免妨害农事。
English: Don't raise an army to fight, so as not to interfere with farming.

古文：是月也，无竭川泽，无漉陂池，无焚山林。
现代文：这个月，不要弄干河川沼泽及蓄水的池塘，不要焚烧山林。
English: This month, do not dry up rivers, swamps and reservoirs, and do not burn mountain forests.

古文：天子乃献羔，开冰，先荐寝庙。
现代文：天子向司寒之神献上羔羊，打开冰窖，然后把冰先献给祖先。
English: The heavenly son offered a lamb to the god of cold, opened the ice cellar, and then offered the ice first to the ancestors.

古文：上丁，命乐正入舞舍采。
现代文：上旬的丁日，命令乐正进入国学教练舞蹈，把彩帛放在前边行祭祀先师的礼节。
English: In the early part of the day of Ding, the commander Le was entering the dance of the Chinese coach, and he was performing the etiquette of the sacrificial master by placing the palanquin in front of him.

古文：天子乃率三公九卿诸侯大夫亲往视之。
现代文：天子率领三公、九卿、诸侯亲自去观看。
English: The heavenly son led the three princes, nine nobles, and lords to go and see for themselves.

古文：中丁，又命乐正入学习乐。
现代文：中旬的丁日，又命令乐正进入国学教练音乐。
English: In the middle of the day, he also ordered Le Zheng to enter the music of the Chinese coach.

古文：是月也，祀不用牺牲，用圭璧，更皮币。
现代文：这个月，一般的祭祀不用牲畜作祭品，而用玉圭、玉壁，或者用皮毛束帛来代替。
English: This month, instead of using livestock as a sacrificial offering, people usually use cow hide.

古文：仲春行秋令，则其国大水，寒气匆至，寇戎了征。
现代文：仲春二月如果发布应在秋天发布的政令，国家就会洪水泛滥，寒气就会突然到来，敌寇就舍来侵犯。
English: If a government order that should be issued in autumn is issued in mid-spring and February, the country will be flooded, cold weather will suddenly arrive, and invaders will not hesitate to invade.

古文：行冬令，则阳气不胜，麦乃不熟，民多相掠。
现代文：如果发布应在冬天发布的政令，阳气就经受不住，麦子就不能成熟，人民中间就会频繁出现劫掠之事。
English: If the winter decree is implemented this month, it will lead to yang qi not being able to withstand the attack of yin qi, wheat not being able to mature, and frequent looting among the people.

古文：行夏令则国乃大旱，暖气早来，虫螟为害。
现代文：如果发布应在夏天发布的政令。国家就会出现干旱，热气过早来到，庄稼就会遭到虫害。
English: If a decree is issued that should have been issued in the summer, the country will experience drought, the heat will come too early, and the crops will be attacked by insects.

古文：季春之曰，日在胃，昏七星中，旦牵牛中，其日甲乙，其帝太昊，其神句芒，其虫鳞，其音角，律中姑洗，其数八，其味酸，其臭膻，其祀户，祭先脾。
现代文：季春三月，太阳的位置程胃宿。
English: In March of the spring season, the sun's position is in the stomach.

古文：桐始华，田鼠化为鴽，虹始见，萍始生。
现代文：初昏时刻，星宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，牛宿出现在南方中天。
English: Wotan began to bloom, voles changed into small birds like cranes, a rainbow began to appear in the sky, and duckweed began to grow in the water.

古文：天子居青阳右个，乘鸾辂，驾苍龙，载青畤，衣青衣，服青玉，食麦与羊。
现代文：季春于天干属甲乙，它的主宰之帝是太皞，佐帝之神是句芒，应时的动物是龙鱼之粪的鳞族，声音是中和的角音，音律与姑洗相应。
English: Qichun belongs to A and B in the heavenly stem. Its ruling emperor is Taishan, the god of Zedi is Jumang, the corresponding animal is the dragonfish dung scale, the sound is the neutralized horn sound, and the melody corresponds to Gubao.

古文：其器疏以达。是月也，天子乃荐鞠衣于先帝，命舟牧覆舟，五覆五反，乃告舟备，具于天子焉。
现代文：这个月的数字是八，味道是酸味，气昧是膻气，要举行的祭祀是户祭，祭祀时，祭品以脾脏为尊。
English: The number of this month is eight, the taste is sour, the foulness is bad breath, the sacrifice to be held is the house festival, and when the sacrifice is held, the sacrifice is the spleen.

古文：天子焉始乘舟，荐鲔于寝庙。
现代文：这个月，春天的生养之气正盛，阳气向外发散，植物的萌芽部长出来了。
English: This month, the vitality of spring is in full bloom, the yang is spreading outward, and the sprouting of plants has begun.

古文：乃为麦祈实。
现代文：这个时候，不能收纳财货。
English: At this time, it is not possible to store goods.

古文：是月也，生气方盛，阳气发泄，牙者毕出，萌者尽达，不可以内，天子布德行惠，命有司发仓窌，赐贫穷，振乏绝，开府库，出币帛，周天下，勉诸侯，聘名士，礼贤者。
现代文：天子要施德行惠，命令主管官吏打开粮仓地窖，赐与贫困没有依靠的人，赈救缺乏资用衣食的人，又打开储藏财物的仓库，拿出钱财，赈济天下；鼓励诸侯聘用名士，对贤人以礼相待。
English: In order to bestow virtue and benefit, the Son of Heaven ordered the officials in charge to open the granaries and cellars, to give to the poor who had no means of support, and to rescue those who lacked money, clothing, and food. He also opened the storehouses where the wealth was stored, and took out the money and wealth to help the world. He encouraged the lords to employ celebrities, and treated the wise with courtesy.

古文：是月也，命司空曰：时雨将降，下水上腾，循行国邑，周视原野，修利堤防，道达沟渎，开通道路，无有障塞。
现代文：这个月，天子命令司空说：应时的雨水将要降落，地下水也将向上翻涌，应该巡视国都和城邑，普遍地视察原野，整修堤防，疏通沟渠，开通道路，使之役有障碍壅塞。
English: This month, the Son of Heaven ordered Sifu to say: the timely rainwater will fall, and the groundwater will also surge upward. It is necessary to inspect the capital and cities, generally inspect the fields, repair the dikes, clear the ditches, and open the roads to make them useful.

古文：田猎罒毕弋，罝罘罗网、兽之药，无出九门。
现代文：打猎所需要的各种网具和毒药不能带出城去。
English: All kinds of nets and poisons needed for hunting cannot be taken out of the city.

古文：是月也，命野虞无伐桑枳。
现代文：这个月，命令主管山林的官吏禁止人们砍伐桑树、柘树。
English: This month, officials in charge of mountain forests were ordered to prohibit people from cutting down mulberry and eucalyptus trees.

古文：鸣鸠拂其羽，戴任降于桑。
现代文：此时，鸣鸠振翅高飞，戴任落在桑间。
English: At this time, the chirping cormorants were flying high, and Dai Ren fell among the mulberry trees.

古文：具挟曲蒙筐。
现代文：人们准备蚕薄，放蚕薄的支架以及各种采桑的筐篮。
English: People are preparing silkworm cocoons, silkworm cocoons and various baskets for harvesting mulberry.

古文：后妃齐戒，亲东乡，躬桑。
现代文：王后王妃斋戒身心，面向东方亲自采摘桑叶。
English: The empress dowager fasted mentally and physically, facing the east to personally pick mulberry leaves.

古文：禁妇女无观省，妇使劝蚕事。
现代文：这时要禁止妇女去游玩观赏，同时减少她们的杂役，鼓励她们采桑养蚕。
English: At this time, women should be prohibited from playing and watching, while reducing their chores and encouraging them to collect mulberry and raise silkworms.

古文：蚕事既登，分茧称丝，效其功。以其郊庙之服，无有敢堕。
现代文：蚕事已经完成，把蚕茧分给妇女，要她们缫丝，然后称量每人所缫之丝的轻重，考核她们的功效，用这些蚕丝来供给祭天祭祖所用祭服的需要，不许有人懈怠。
English: The silkworm business has been completed. The silkworm cocoons are divided among the women, and they are asked to spin the silk. Then, the weight of the silk cocooned by each person is weighed, and their effectiveness is assessed. These silk cocoons are used to supply the needs of the sacrificial clothing used by the ancestors of the Tian Festival. No one is allowed to slack off.

古文：是月也，命工师令百工审五库之量，金铁皮革筋角齿羽箭干脂胶丹漆，无或不良。
现代文：这个月，命令主管百工的官吏让百工仔细检查各种库房中器材的数量和质量，金铁、皮革兽筋兽角兽齿，羽毛箭秆、油脂粘胶丹砂油漆，不得质地不好。
English: This month, the officials in charge of the hundred craftsmen were ordered to let the hundred craftsmen carefully check the quantity and quality of the equipment in various warehouses. Gold and iron, leather, sinew, horns and teeth, feathers and arrowheads, grease and sticky sand paint must not be of poor quality.

古文：百工咸理，监工日号，无悖于时，无或作为淫巧以荡上心。
现代文：各种工匠都从事自己的工作，监督百工的官员每日发布号令，使所制器物不违背时宜，不得制作过分奇巧的器物来勾动在上位者的奢望。
English: All kinds of craftsmen are engaged in their own work, and the officials who supervise the hundreds of craftsmen issue daily orders to ensure that the products made do not go against the times, and must not make excessively ingenious products to lure the extravagant expectations of those in power.

古文：是月之末，择吉日，大合乐，天子乃率三公九卿诸侯大夫，亲往视之。
现代文：这个月的月末，选择吉日，大规模地鞋行音乐舞蹈合演，天子亲自率领三公九卿诸侯大夫前去观看。
English: At the end of this month, the auspicious day was chosen for a large-scale shoe-making, music and dance performance. The emperor himself led the three princes and nine noblemen to watch.

古文：是月也，乃合缧牛腾马，游牝于牧。
现代文：这个月，使公牛公马与母牛母马在放牧中交配，把选作祭品的牲畜和马驹牛犊，都记下它们的头数。
English: This month let the male ox and the female cow and the male horse be mated in the open pasture, and let the number of the head of the beast and of the he-goat, which are to be offered as a sacrifice, be recorded.

古文：牺牲驹犊，举书其数，命国傩九门，磔禳于毕春气。
现代文：国人举行驱逐灾疫的傩祭，在九门宰割牲畜攘除邪恶，以此来结束春气。
English: The Chinese people held a holocaust to drive out the plague and slaughtered livestock in Jiumen to drive out the evil, thus ending the Spring Festival.

古文：行之是令而甘雨至三旬。
现代文：推行与逸个月的时夸相应的政令，及时雨就会降落，三旬降落三次。
English: The implementation of the government decree corresponding to the time scale of the leap month, the rain will fall in time, and the rain will fall three times in the third quarter.

古文：季春行冬令，则寒气时发，草木皆肃，国有大恐。行夏令，则民多疾疫，时雨不降，山陵不收。
现代文：季春实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，寒气就会时时发生，草木就会枝叶萧球，人民就会惶恐不安；如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，人民中间就会流行瘟疫，应时之雨就不能按时降落，山陵上的庄稼就不能成熟收获。
English: If the government order that should be implemented in winter is implemented in the spring, then the cold weather will occur all the time, the plants will die, and the people will be anxious; if the government order that should be implemented in summer is implemented, then the plague will be prevalent among the people, the timely rain will not fall on time, and the crops in the mountains will not be ripe for harvest.

古文：行秋令，则天多沈阴，淫雨早降，兵革并起。
现代文：如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，天气就会经常阴晦，淫雨就会过早降落，战事就会到处发生。
English: If the decrees for the autumn are carried out, the weather will often be gloomy, the rain will fall prematurely, and there will be war everywhere.

古文：孟夏之月，日在毕，昏翼中，旦婺女中。
现代文：孟夏四月，太阳的位置在毕宿，黄昏时刻，翼宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刘，女宿出现在南方中天。
English: Mengxia In April, the position of the sun's movement is at the end of the night; at dusk, the pterodactyl is in the middle of the southern sky; at dawn, the baby star is in the middle of the southern sky.

古文：其日丙丁，其帝炎帝，其神祝融，其虫羽，其音徵，律中仲吕，其数七，其性礼，其事视，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀灶，祭先肺。蝼蝈鸣，丘蚓出，王瓜生，苦菜秀。
现代文：孟夏于天干属丙丁，它的主宰之帝是炎帝，佐帝之神是祝融，应时的动物是凤鸟之类的羽族，相配的声音是徵音，音律与仲吕相应。这个月的数字是七，情性是礼，修养身心应作的事是视，味道是苦味，气味是焦气，要举行的祭祀是灶祭，祭祀时祭品以肺脏为尊，这个月，蛤蟆开始鸣叫，虹蚓从土里钻出来，栝楼长出来了，苦菜开花了。
English: Mengxia in Tiangan belongs to Pan Ding, its ruling emperor is Yan Di, the god of Zi Di is Zhu Rong, the animal at the time is a feather family such as a phoenix, the matching voice is a call, and the melody is corresponding to Zhong Lu. This month's number is seven, the emotion is courtesy, the cultivation of the body and mind is to see, the taste is bitterness, the smell is burning, the sacrifice to be held is the stove sacrifice, and the sacrifice is honored with the lungs. This month, the crickets began to chirp, the rainbow trout emerged from the soil, the mirage grew out, and the bitter

古文：天子居明堂左个，乘硃辂，驾赤■，载赤畤，衣赤衣，服赤玉，余菽与鸡，其器高以粗。
现代文：夭子住在南向明堂的左侧室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤红色的马，车上捕着赤色的绘有龙致的旗帜，天子聋着赤色的衣服，佩戴着赤色的饰玉，吃的食物是豆子和鸡，用的器物高而且大。
English: Xiao Zi lived in the left room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rode in a vermilion-colored car with a crimson-colored horse in front of the car. The car had a red flag with a dragon on it. Tian Zi wore red clothes and red ornaments. He ate beans and chicken. The utensils he used were tall and large.

古文：是月也，以立夏。
现代文：这个月有立夏的节气。
English: This month marks the beginning of the summer season.

古文：先立夏三日，太史谒之天子，曰：某日立夏，盛德在火，天子乃齐。
现代文：立夏前三天，太史向天子禀告说； 某日立夏，大德在于火。 天子于是斋戒，准备迎夏。
English: Three days before the summer solstice, Emperor Taishi announced to the heavenly son that a certain summer solstice, great virtue lies in fire. The heavenly son then fasted and prepared for the summer.

古文：立夏之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫，以迎夏于南郊。
现代文：立夏那天，天子亲自率领三公九卿大夫到南郊迎接夏的降临。
English: On the day of the beginning of summer, the heavenly son personally led the three princes and nine noble doctors to the southern suburbs to welcome the arrival of summer.

古文：还乃行赏，封侯庆赐，无不欣说。
现代文：礼毕归来，于是赏赐功臣，分封爵位和土地，群臣无不欣喜快乐。
English: After returning from the ceremony, he rewarded the meritorious vassals with titles and lands. The vassals were delighted and happy.

古文：乃命乐师习礼乐，命司马赞杰隽，遂贤良，举长大。
现代文：命令乐师练习合演礼、乐。命令太尉向天子禀报才能出众的人，举荐德行超群的人，形体高大的人。
English: He ordered the musicians to practice the joint performance and music. He ordered the captain to recommend to the emperor those with outstanding talent, those with superior virtue, and those with tall stature.

古文：行爵出禄，必当其位。
现代文：封爵位，给予俸禄，一定要与他们的地位相当。
English: The knighthoods and salaries must be commensurate with their status.

古文：是月也，继长增高，无有坏堕，无起土功，无发大众，无伐大树。
现代文：这个月，万物都在生长壮大，不要使它们有所毁坏。不许兴动土木工程，不许征发百姓，不许砍伐大树。
English: This month, all things are growing and growing, do not let them be destroyed. Do not engage in civil engineering, do not recruit people, do not cut down large trees.

古文：是月也，天子始絺，命野虞出行田原，劳农劝民，无或失时。
现代文：这个月，天子开始穿细葛的衣服。命令主管山林田野的官吏出去视察田地原野，鼓励百姓努力耕作，不要失掉农时。
English: This month, the Son of Heaven began to wear clothes made of fine silk. He ordered the officials in charge of the mountains, forests and fields to go out and inspect the fields and fields, and encouraged the people to work hard and not to lose their farming time.

古文：命司徒循行县鄙，命农勉作，无伏于都。
现代文：命令主管教化民事的官吏巡视天子领地内的各个县邑，命令农夫努力耕作，不要藏伏在国都之中。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of civil affairs to inspect all counties and towns within the territory of the emperor, and ordered the farmers to work hard and not to hide in the capital.

古文：是月也，驱兽无害五谷，无大田猎，农乃升麦。
现代文：这个月，要驱逐野兽，使它们不要伤害五谷。不要大规模进行狩猎。
English: This month, it is necessary to drive away wild beasts so that they do not harm crops. Do not carry out large-scale hunting.

古文：天子乃以彘尝麦，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，农民献上新麦，天子于是就着猪肉品尝麦子，在品尝之前先进献给祖庙。
English: This month, the farmers presented new wheat, so the heavenly son tasted the wheat with the pork, and first presented it to the ancestral temple before tasting.

古文：是月也，聚蓄百药，靡草死麦，秋至断薄刑，决次罪，出轻系。
现代文：这个月，要积聚蓄藏各种草药。葶苈之类的草药枯死了，麦子成熟的季节来到了。
English: This month, it is necessary to accumulate and store all kinds of herbs. Herbs such as alfalfa have withered, and the season of wheat ripening has come.

古文：蚕事既毕，后妃献茧，乃收茧税，以桑为均，贵贱少长如一，以给郊庙之祭服。
现代文：对轻刑和罪小的犯人进行判决，释放不够判刑的犯人。蚕桑之事已经结束，后妃向天子献上蚕茧，于是向养蚕的人收取茧税，税按照桑树的多少来均分，贵贱长幼一视同仁，用这些税收来供给祭天祭祖时所用的祭服。
English: The matter of the silkworms and mulberry trees was over. The empress dowager presented the silkworm cocoons to the heavenly son, and then collected the tax from the people who raised the silkworms. The tax was divided equally according to the number of mulberry trees. The rich and the poor, old and young alike, used these taxes to supply the sacrificial clothing used in the sacrifice to the ancestors.

古文：是月也，天子饮酎，用礼乐，行之是令，而甘雨至三旬。
现代文：这个月，天子欢宴群臣，饮用酎酒，观看礼乐表演。实行与这个月的时令相应的政令，及时雨就会十天一至。
English: This month, the emperor will feast with his ministers, drink liquor, and watch a musical performance. If the government decrees corresponding to the season of this month are implemented, timely rain will come every ten days.

古文：孟夏行秋令，则苦雨数来，五谷不滋。四鄙入保；行冬令，则草木早枯，后乃大水，败其城郭。
现代文：孟夏实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，伤害庄稼的苦雨就会频繁降落，各种谷物就不能生长，四处边境的百姓就会因敌寇侵扰而躲进城堡。如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，草木就会过早地干枯，然后就有大水毁坏城郭。
English: If Mengxia implements the decree that should be implemented in autumn, then the bitter rain that harms crops will fall frequently, all kinds of cereals cannot grow, and the people around the border will hide in the castle due to enemy intrusion. If the decree that should be implemented in winter is implemented, then the plants will dry out prematurely, and then there will be heavy water to destroy the castle.

古文：行春令则虫蝗为败，暴风来格，秀草不实。
现代文：如果实行应在春天实行的改令，那么，虫螟就会成灾，疾风就舍袭来，草术就会只开花不结实。
English: If the revised order that should be implemented in the spring is implemented, then the insects will be a disaster, the gale will strike, and the grass will only bloom and not be strong.

古文：仲夏之月，日在东井，昏亢中，旦危中，其日丙丁，其帝炎帝，其神祝融，其虫羽，其音徵，率中蕤宾，其数七，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀灶，祭先肺。
现代文：仲夏五月，太阳的位置在井宿。初昏时刻，亢宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，危宿出现在南方中天。仲夏于天干属丙丁它的主宰之帝是炎帝，佐帝之神是祝融，应时的动物是凤鸟一类的羽族，相配的声音是徵音，音律与蕤宾相应。这个月的数字是七，味道是苦昧，气味是焦气，要举行的祭祀是灶祭，祭祀时祭品以肺脏为尊。
English: Mid-summer in May, the sun's position is in the well. At the time of twilight, the roost appears in the south-central sky, and at the time of dawn, the dangerous lodge appears in the south-central sky. Mid-summer in Tiangan belongs to Pingting, its ruling emperor is Yan Di, the god of Zi Di is Zhu Rong, the animal at the time is a feather family such as a phoenix bird, the matching sound is a call, and the rhythm corresponds to Zhibin. The number of this month is seven, the taste is bitter, the smell is burnt, the sacrifice to be held is a stove sacrifice, and the

古文：小暑至，螳螂生，臭始鸣，反舌无声。
现代文：这个月，小暑来到了，螳螂出现了，伯劳鸟开始鸣啭百舌鸟寂然无声。
English: This month, the summer heat has arrived, the cockroaches have appeared, the shrimps have begun to sing, and the peregrine falcons are silent.

古文：天子居明堂太庙，乘硃辂，驾赤■，载赤畤，衣赤衣，服赤玉，食菽与鸡，其器高以粗，养壮狡。是月也，命乐师修鞀鞞鼓，均琴瑟管箫，执干戚戈羽，调竽笙埙篪，饬锺磬柷敔，命有司为民气祀山川百原，大雩。
现代文：这个月，天子就着雏鸡品尝黍子，连同樱桃一起，先敬献于祖庙。帝令百姓不要制刈蓝草来染东西，不要烧木炭，不要晒布匹，城门和闾门不要关闭，关日和集市不要征税，宽缓重刑的囚犯，增加他们的饮食。
English: This month, the Emperor ordered the people not to cut bluegrass to dye things, not to burn charcoal, not to dry cloths, not to close the city gates and gates, not to collect taxes on holidays and fairs, to pardon prisoners with heavy sentences, and to increase their diet.

古文：帝用盛乐，乃命百县雩祭祀，百辟卿士有益于民者，以祈谷实。
现代文：放牧时，把怀孕的母马与其他马群分开，要拴住公马，免得他们踢伤母马。
English: When grazing, pregnant mares should be separated from the rest of the herd. Male horses should be tethered to prevent them from kicking and injuring the mare.

古文：是月也，农乃登黍，天子以雏尚黍，羞以含桃，先荐寝庙，令民无刈蓝以染，无烧炭，无暴布，门闾无闭，关市无索，挺重囚，益其食，游牝别其群，则絷腾驹，班马正。
现代文：要颁布有关养马的政令。
English: A decree on horse breeding is to be issued.

古文：是月也，日长至，阴阳争，死生分，君子齐戒，处必掩身，欲静无躁，止声色，无或进薄，滋味无致，和退嗜欲，定心志，百官静事无刑，以定晏阴之所成。
现代文：这个月，夏至到来，阴阳相争，死生相别。君子整洁身心。居处必深邃，身体要安静禁止女色，不许嫔妃进御，减少羹味，不要使它齐和，去掉一切嗜欲，安定心气，各种器官安静无为，作事不要盲动，以待确定阴阳的成败。
English: This month, the summer solstice arrives, yin and yang compete with each other, and death and life are separated. A gentleman is neat and clean in mind and body. The residence must be deep, the body must be quiet, prohibit women, do not allow concubines to enter, reduce the taste of soup, do not make it harmonious, remove all desires, stabilize the spirit, various organs are quiet and inactive, do not do things blindly, wait to determine the success or failure of yin and yang.

古文：鹿角解，蝉始鸣，半夏生，木槿荣。
现代文：这个月，鹿角脱落了，知丁开始呜叫，半夏长出苗，术槿开了花。
English: This month, the antlers fell off, the chinchillas began to howl, seedlings sprouted in mid-summer, and the chrysanthemums bloomed.

古文：是月也，无用火。南方可以居高明，可以远眺望，可以登山陵，可以处台榭。
现代文：这个月，不要在南方用火，可以住在楼阁，可以眺望远方，可以登上山陵，可以呆在台榭。
English: This month, do not use fire in the south, you can live in a mansion, you can look into the distance, you can climb a mountain, you can stay in a pavilion.

古文：仲夏行冬令，则雹霰伤谷，道路不通，暴兵来至。行春令，则五谷晚熟，百滕时起，其国乃饥。行秋令，则草木零落，果实早成，民殃于疫。
现代文：仲夏如果实行应茌冬天实行的政令，那么，雹霰就会伤害五谷，道路就会毁坏不通，贼兵就会到来；如果实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，五谷就会晚熟，虫害就会时时发生，国家就会遇到饥荒，如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，草木就会零落，果实就会过早成熟，百姓就会因疫病流行而遭受灾祸。
English: In mid-summer, if the government order to be implemented in winter is carried out, then the locusts will harm the crops, the roads will be destroyed and impassable, and the robber soldiers will arrive; if the government order to be implemented in spring is implemented, then the crops will ripen late, insect pests will occur from time to time, and the country will encounter famine; if the government order to be implemented in autumn is implemented, then the plants will fall apart, the fruits will mature prematurely, and the people will suffer disasters due to the epidemic.

古文：季夏之月，日在柳，昏心中，但奎中，其日丙丁，其帝炎帝，其神祝融，其虫羽，其音徵，律中林锺，其数七，其味苦，其臭焦，其祀灶，祭先肺。
现代文：季夏六月，太阳的位置在柳宿。黄昏时刻，心宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，奎宿出现在南方中天。季夏于天干属丙丁，它的主宰之帝是炎帝，佐帝之神是祝融，应时的动物是凤鸟之类的羽族，相配的声音是徵音，音律与林钟相应。这个月的数字是七，味道是苦昧，气昧是焦气，要举行的条祀是灶祭，祭祀时祭品以肺脏为尊。
English: Qixia in June, the sun's position is in the willow lodge. At dusk, the heart lodge appears in the southern mid-heaven, and at dawn, the Kui lodge appears in the southern mid-heaven. Qixia in Tiangan belongs to Heding, its ruling emperor is Yan Di, the god of Zhodi is Zhu Rong, the animal at the time is a feather family such as a phoenix bird, the matching sound is a call, and the melody corresponds to the forest clock. The number of this month is seven, the taste is bitter, the sourness is hot, the ritual to be held is the stove sacrifice, and the sacrificial

古文：凉风始至，蟋蟀居，宇鹰乃学习，腐草化为萤■。
现代文：这个月，凉风开始来到，蟋蟀住在屋檐下，鹰于是学习飞翔搏击，腐草化作萤火虫。
English: This month, the cool breeze began to arrive, the crickets lived under the eaves, the eagle learned to fly and fight, and the weeds turned into fireflies.

古文：天子居明堂右个，乘硃辂，驾赤■，载赤畤，衣硃衣，服赤玉，食菽与鸡，其器高以牴。
现代文：天子住在南向明堂的右侧室，乘坐朱红色的车子，车前驾着赤红色的马，车上插着赤色的绘有龙纹的旗帜；天子穿着赤色的衣服，佩戴着赤色的饰玉，吃的食物是豆类和鸡，用的器物高而且大。
English: Tianzi lived in the right side room of Nanxiangming Hall. He rode in a vermilion-colored carriage with a crimson-colored horse in the front, and a red dragon-patterned flag was attached to the carriage. Tianzi wore red clothes and red ornaments, and ate beans and chicken. The utensils he used were tall and large.

古文：是月也，命渔师伐蛟，取■升龟取鼋。
现代文：这个月，命令管渔业的官吏，斩蛟取鼍，献龟取鼋。
English: This month, officials in charge of fisheries were ordered to chop off cormorants to get cormorants, and to sacrifice turtles to get turtles.

古文：乃命虞人入材苇。
现代文：命令掌管池泽的官吏收纳用来制作器物的芦苇。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of the pond to collect the reeds used to make the utensils.

古文：是月也，命四监大夫合百县之秩刍，以养牺牲。
现代文：这个月，命争监管四郡的县大夫聚集各县按常规交纳的刍草，以此来饲养供祭祀用的牲畜。
English: This month, the prefectural doctors of four prefectures, who are fighting for their lives, gathered the ephedra that each prefecture normally pays to raise livestock for sacrificial purposes.

古文：令民无不咸出其力，以供皇天上帝名山大川四方之神，以祀宗庙社稷之灵，为民所福。
现代文：命令百姓都尽力收割聚集，以供给祭祀皇天上帝，名山大川、四方神祗，宗庙社稷之用，为百姓祈求幸福。
English: He ordered the people to harvest and gather as much as possible to provide offerings for the worship of the Emperor God, famous mountains and rivers, the gods of the four directions, ancestral temples and shrines, and to pray for the happiness of the people.

古文：是月也，命妇官染采，黼黻文章必以法，故无或差忒。
现代文：这个月，命令掌管布帛的女官负责印染彩色，各种图案的颜色搭配，一定要按照法规和习惯，不要有一点差错。
English: This month, the female official in charge of cloth was ordered to be responsible for printing and dyeing color, and the color matching of various patterns must be in accordance with laws and customs, and there must be no mistake.

古文：黑黄苍赤，莫不质良，勿敢位诈，以给郊庙祭祀之服，以为旗章，以别贵贱等级之度。
现代文：黑黄苍赤各种颜色择样都鲜艳良好，不许有一点欺诈。用这些布帛供制作祭天祭祖时所穿的礼服之用，并用它们制作旌旗标志，以此来区分贵贱等级。
English: Black, yellow, pale red, all the colors are bright and well-chosen, and there is no room for fraud. Use these cloths to make the gowns worn during the Festival of the Ancestors, and use them to make the flag mark to distinguish the noble and inferior grades.

古文：是月也，树木方盛，乃命虞人入山，行木，无或斩伐，不可以兴土功，不可以合诸侯，不可以起兵动众，无举大事，以摇荡于气。
现代文：这个月，树木生长正茂盛，于是命令掌管山林的官吏到山里去巡视树木，不许人们砍伐。这个月，不可以兴工建筑，不可以会合诸侯，不可以兴师动众，不要有大的举动来摇动土气。
English: This month, the trees are growing luxuriantly, so the officials in charge of the mountains and forests are ordered to go to the mountains to inspect the trees and not allow people to cut them down. This month, it is not possible to start construction, it is not possible to meet the princes, it is not possible to motivate the masses, and there should be no big moves to shake the local spirit.

古文：无发令而干时，以妨神农之事。
现代文：不要发布侵扰农时的命令而损害农耕之事。
English: Don't damage farming by issuing orders that interfere with farming hours.

古文：水潦盛昌，命神农将巡功，举大事则有天殃。
现代文：达个月雨水正多，命令农官巡视田亩修治的情况。
English: There has been a lot of rain in the past month, and the agricultural officials have been ordered to inspect the situation of field management.

古文：是月也，土润溽暑，大雨时，行烧剃，行水利，以杀草，如以热汤，可以粪田畴，又美图疆，行之是令。是月，甘雨三至，三旬二日。
现代文：有违背农时的大的举动，就会遭到天灾。这个月，土地湿润，天气潮热，大雨常常降落，烧掉割下晒干的野草，灌上雨水，太阳一晒，就象用开水煮一样，这样有利于杀死野草。而且可以用它们肥田，改良土壤。实行这些政令，这个月就会下及时雨，除去晦朔，三月中可以有两天降雨。
English: This month, the land is moist, the weather is hot, heavy rain often falls, burning the cut and dried weeds, pouring rainwater, and the sun is like boiling with boiling water, which is good for killing weeds. And they can be used to fertilize fields and improve the soil. Implementing these decrees, it will rain in time this month, except for the new year, there can be two days of rainfall in March.

古文：季夏行春令，则谷实解落，国多风咳，民乃迁徙。
现代文：夏季实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，谷物的籽实就会散落，百姓就会伤风咳嗽，迁移搬家。
English: If the government decree that should be implemented in the spring is implemented in the summer, then the seeds of grain will be scattered, the people will have colds and coughs, and they will migrate and move.

古文：行秋令，则丘隰水潦，禾稼不熟，乃多女灾。
现代文：如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，高地洼地都会出现太水，庄稼就不能成熟，妇女也多有不能生育之灾。
English: If the autumn decree is implemented, floods will occur in all highland depressions, crops will not ripen, and pregnant women will easily miscarry.

古文：行冬令，则寒气不时，鹰隼早鸷，四鄙入保。
现代文：如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，寒冷之气就会不合时地来到，鹰隼等猛禽就会过早地去击杀飞鸟，四方边邑的百姓就会为躲避敌寇而逃入城堡。
English: If the government decree that should be implemented in winter is implemented, then the cold air will come at an inopportune time, eagles and other birds of prey will prematurely kill flying birds, and the people of the four border towns will flee into the castle to avoid the enemy.

古文：中央土黄，其日戊己，其帝黄帝，其神后土，其虫倮，其音宫，律中黄锺之宫，其数五，其味甘，其臭香，其祀中霤祭先心，天子居太庙太室，乘大辂，驾黄■，载黄畤，衣黄衣，服黄玉，食稷与牛，其气圜以掩。
现代文：中央于五行属土，于天干属戊己，它的主宰之帝是黄帝，佐帝之神是后土，应时的动物是麒麟之类的裸族，相配的声音是宫音，音律与黄钟之宫相应。它的数字是五，味道是甜味，气味是香气，要举行的祭祀是中霤之祀，祭祀时祭品以心脏为尊。天子住在中央明堂的正室，乘坐木质大车，车前驾着黄色的马，车上插着黄色的绘有龙纹的旗帜，天子穿着黄色的衣服，佩戴着黄色的佩玉，吃的食物是稷和牛，用的器物中间宽大而口敛缩。
English: In the center, the five elements belong to the earth, and the heavenly stem belongs to Wuji. Its ruling emperor is Huangdi, and the god of Zedi is Houchi. The animal of the time is a naked tribe such as Kirin. The matching sound is the palace sound, and the rhythm corresponds to the palace of the yellow bell. Its number is five, the taste is sweetness, the smell is aroma, and the sacrifice to be held is the sacrifice of Zhongyi, and the sacrificial offering is the heart. Tianzi lives in the main room of the Central Ming Hall, riding a wooden cart, driving a yellow horse in front of the car, with a yellow flag with a dragon pattern on it

古文：孟秋之月，日在翼，昏斗中，旦毕中，其日庚辛，其帝少昊，其神蓐收，其虫毛，其音商，律中夷则，其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其祀门，祭先肝，凉风至，白露降，寒蝉鸣，鹰乃祭鸟，始用行戮。
现代文：孟秋七月，太阳的位置在翼宿。初昏时捌，斗宿出现在南方中天；拂晓时刻，毕宿出现在南方中天。孟秋于天干属庚辛，它的主宰之帝是少嗥，佐帝之神是蓐收，应时的动物是老虎之类的毛族，相配的声音是商音，音律与夷则相应。这个月的数字是九，味道是辣味，气味是腥气，要举行的祭祀是门祭，祭祀时祭品以肝脏为尊。这个月，凉风来到了，自露降落了，寒蝉鸣叫了，鹰于是把捕杀的飞鸟四面摆开，象祭祀时陈列祭品一样。
English: In July, the sun's position is in the pterodactyl. At dusk, the pterodactyl appears in the south-central sky; at dawn, the pterodactyl appears in the south-central sky. The pterodactyl in Tiangan belongs to Genghis Khan, its ruling emperor is Shao Zang, the god of Zhodi is Jie Hui, the animal of the time is the tiger-like Mao people, the matching sound is commercial sound, and the melody is corresponding to Yi. The number of this month is nine, the taste is spicy, the smell is stench, the sacrifice to be held is the door sacrifice,

古文：天子居总章左个，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白畤，衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：这个月开始使用刑罚和杀戮。天子住在西向明堂的左恻室，乘坐白色的兵车，车前驾着白色的马，车上插着白色的绘有龙纹的旗帜。天子穿着自色的衣服，佩戴着白色的饰玉。吃的食物是麻子和狗肉，用的器物锐利而深邃。
English: This month, punishments and killings began to be used. Tianzi lived in the left anteroom of Xixiangming Hall. He rode in a white chariot with a white horse in front and a white dragon-patterned flag on the chariot. Tianzi wore self-colored clothes and white ornaments. The food he ate was pox and dog meat. The utensils he used were sharp and deep.

古文：是月也，以立秋。先立秋三日，太史谒之天子，曰：某日立秋，盛德在金，天子乃齐。
现代文：这个月有立秋的节气，在立秋前三天，太史向天子禀告说： 某日立秋，大德在于金。 于是天子斋戒，准备迎秋。
English: This month has the solar term of the beginning of autumn. Three days before the beginning of autumn, Taishi announced to the heavenly son: One day, the beginning of autumn, great virtue lies in gold. Therefore, the heavenly son fasted and prepared for the autumn.

古文：立秋之日，天子亲率三公九卿诸侯大夫以迎秋于西郊，还，乃赏军，率武人于朝，天子乃命将帅，选士厉兵，简练杰隽，专任有功，以征不义，诘诛暴慢，以明好恶，巡彼远方。
现代文：立秋那天，天子亲自率领三公九卿诸侯大夫，到西郊去迎接秋的降临。
English: On the day of the beginning of autumn, the heavenly son himself led the three princes and nine lords and doctors to the western suburbs to welcome the autumn.

古文：是月也，命有司修法制，缮囹圄，具桎梏，禁止奸，慎罪邪，务搏执，命理瞻伤察创，视折审断。
现代文：迎秋归来，于是在朝廷赏赐将军和勇武之士。天子命令将帅挑选兵士，磨砺武器，精选并训练杰出的人材，专一委任有功的将士，去征讨不义之人，追究诛伐凶恶怠慢的人，以表明爱憎，使天下人都来归顺。这个月，命令主管官吏加强禁令，修缮牢狱，准备刑具，禁止奸邪之事，警戒有罪邪恶之人，务必捉拿拘捕他们。
English: When he returned in the autumn, he rewarded the generals and brave warriors at the imperial court. The Son of Heaven ordered the general to select soldiers, sharpen weapons, select and train outstanding personnel, and specifically appoint meritorious soldiers to fight the unjust, investigate and defeat the vicious and negligent, to show love and hatred, and to make the world submit. This month, he ordered the officials in charge to strengthen the ban, repair the prison, prepare the torture tools, prohibit adultery, and warn the guilty evil people, and be sure to catch and arrest them.

古文：决狱讼必正平，戮有罪，严断刑。
现代文：命令负责诉讼的官吏探视察看身体有创伤毁折的囚犯。判决诉讼，必须公正。系戮有罪，从严断刑。
English: Order the officials in charge of the proceedings to visit and inspect the prisoners with physical trauma and fractures. The judgment of the proceedings must be fair. The guilty must be convicted, and the punishment must be severe.

古文：天地始肃，不可以赢。
现代文：这个月，天地开始有肃杀之气，不可以盛气骄盈。
English: Between heaven and earth, there began to be a spirit of sternness, which could not be indulged.

古文：是月也，农乃升谷，天子尚新，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这个月，农民开始进献五谷。天子尝食新收获的谷物，首先要奉献给祖庙。
English: This month, farmers began to donate grain. The newly harvested grain should first be dedicated to the ancestral temple.

古文：命百官始收敛完堤防，谨壅塞，以并未水潦，修宫室，坿墙垣，补城郭。
现代文：选个月，命令百官要百姓收敛谷物，修缮堤坝，仔细检查水道有无堵塞，以防备水大为害，还要修葺富室，堵高墙垣，修补城郭。
English: In the selected month, the officials ordered the people to collect grain, repair the dam, carefully check whether the waterway was blocked to prevent water damage, and also repair the rich room, block the high wall, and repair the castle.

古文：是月也，无以封诸侯、立大官，无割土地、行重币、出大使。
现代文：这个月，不要分封诸侯，不要设置高官，不要赐人土地，不要请进金帛之类的重礼，不要派出负有特殊使命的使节。
English: In this month, don't separate princes, don't set up high officials, don't give land, don't invite heavy gifts such as gold ingots, and don't send envoys with special missions.

古文：行之是令。而凉风至三旬。
现代文：实行这些政令，凉风就会到来，三旬每旬来一次。
English: With the implementation of these decrees, the cool breeze will come, and the trimester will come once every trimester.

古文：孟秋秋行冬令，则阴气大胜，介虫败谷，戎兵乃来。
现代文：孟秋实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，阴气就过于浓盛，有甲壳的动物就会毁害谷物，敌军就会来侵扰。
English: If Mengqiu implemented the decree that should be implemented in winter, then the gloom would be too thick, crustaceans would destroy the grain, and the enemy army would come to intrude.

古文：行春令，则其国乃旱，阳气复还，五谷不实。
现代文：如果实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，国家就会出现干旱，阳气就会重新回来，五谷就不能结实。
English: If the government decree that should be implemented in the spring is implemented, then the country will have a drought, the yang will come back, and the grain will not be solid.

古文：行夏令，则国多火灾，寒热不节，民多疟疾。
现代文：如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，火灾就会频频发生，寒热就会失去节度，百姓中就会流行疟疾。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to frequent fires in the country, cold and heat are not common, and people suffer from malaria.

古文：仲秋之月，日在角，昏牵牛中，旦觜■崔瞆中。
现代文：仲秋八月，太阳的位置在角宿，初昏时刘，牵牛星宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，觜巂星宿出现在南方中天。
English: In mid-autumn and August, the sun's position is in the cusp, and in the early twilight, the morning star, the morning star appears in the southern sky, and at dawn, the evening star appears in the southern sky.

古文：其日庚辛，其帝少昊，其神蓐收，其虫买，其音商，律中南吕，其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其祀门，祭先肝。
现代文：仲秋于夭千属庚辛，它的主宰之帝是少皞，佐帝之神是蓐收。应时的动物是老虎一类前毛族，相配的声音是商音，音律与南吕相应。这个月的数字是九，味道是辣味，气味是腥气，要举行的祭祀是门祭，祭祀时祭品以肝脏为尊。
English: The Mid-Autumn Festival falls in the year of the Rooster, and belongs to the Genghis Khan. Its ruling emperor is Shao Zang, and the god of the Eastern Emperor is Reunification. The animal of the season is a tiger, a kind of pre-Mao tribe. The matching sound is Shangyin, and the rhythm corresponds to Nanlu. The number of this month is nine, the taste is spicy, and the smell is stale. The sacrifice to be held is the door sacrifice, and the sacrificial offering is the liver.

古文：盲风至，候雁来，玄鸟归，群鸟养羞。
现代文：这个月凉风发生，候雁从北来，燕子向南归，各类鸟儿都养护增生它们的羽毛来御寒。
English: This month, cool winds occur, geese come from the north, swallows return to the south, and all kinds of birds conserve and increase their feathers to keep out the cold.

古文：天子居总章太庙，乘戎路，驾白辂，载白畤衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：天子住在西向明堂的中央正室，乘坐白色的兵车，车前驾着白色的马，车上插着白色的绘有龙纹的旗帜，天子穿着白色的衣服，佩戴着白色的饰玉，吃的食物是麻耔和狗肉，甩的器物锐利而深邃。
English: Tianzi lived in the central main room of Xixiangming Hall. He rode in a white chariot with a white horse in front of it. A white dragon-patterned flag was attached to the chariot. Tianzi wore white clothes and white ornaments. He ate mochi and dog meat. The objects he threw were sharp and deep.

古文：是月也，养衰老，授几杖，行麋粥饮食。
现代文：这个月，要赡养衰老的人，授予他们几案和手杖，施与他们稀粥饮食。
English: This month, the elderly should be supported, they should be given a few cases and canes, and they should be given a gruel diet.

古文：乃命司服具饬衣裳，文绣有恆，制有小大，度有短长，衣服有量，必循其故，冠带有常。
现代文：命令主管服制的官吏，准备并整饬衣裳，祭服的文饰有固定的规格，大小长短有一定的制度，祭服之外的服装也有一定的尺寸，必须依照旧有的规定。
English: The officials in charge of the dress code were ordered to prepare and tidy up the clothes. The decoration of the sacrificial clothing has fixed specifications, the size and length have a certain system, and the clothing other than the sacrificial clothing also has a certain size and must be in accordance with the old regulations.

古文：乃命有司，申严百刑，斩杀必当，无或枉桡；不当，反受其殃。
现代文：随着服制的不同，冠带也有相应的固定规格。命令司法官重申严明各种刑罚斩杀罪犯一定要恰当，不要曲法冤枉人。
English: The judicial officers were ordered to reiterate that all kinds of punishments for criminals must be appropriate and should not be bent to wrongdoers.

古文：是月也，乃命宰巡行牺牲，视全具，案刍豢，朝肥瘠，察物色，必比类，量小大，视长短，皆中度，五者备当，上帝其享。
现代文：如果有曲挂冤枉人的事，执法者会遭受灾祸。这个月，命令主管牺牲和祭祀的官吏巡视将用来祭祀的牺牲，看看形体是否完整，喂养的情况如何，是肥是瘦，毛色是否纯一，这些一定要符合旧例；再量量它们的大小，看看长短，送些也都要符合要求。形体、肥瘦、毛色、大小、长短都完全适当，上帝就享用这些祭品。
English: This month, the officials in charge of sacrifices and sacrifices are ordered to inspect the sacrificial offerings to see if they are complete, how they are fed, whether they are fat or thin, and whether the color of the hair is pure, which must be consistent with the old regulations; then measure their size, look at the length, and send some to meet the requirements. The shape, fat, thin, hair color, size, and length are all completely appropriate, and God will enjoy these offerings.

古文：天子乃傩，御佐疾，以通秋气。
现代文：天子于是举行傩祭，御止遂除疫疠，以通达金秋之气。
English: As a result, the heavenly son held a hail sacrifice, which was successful in eliminating the plague and bringing the atmosphere of the golden autumn.

古文：以犬尝麻，先祭寝庙。
现代文：这个月，可以修筑城鄣，建置都邑挖掘地窖，修葺仓虞。
English: As a result, the heavenly son held a hail sacrifice, which was successful in eliminating the plague and bringing the atmosphere of the golden autumn.

古文：是月也，可以筑城郭，建都邑，穿窦窌，修■仓。乃命有司趣民收敛，务蓄菜，多积聚，乃劝种麦，若或失时，行罪无疑。
现代文：命令主管官吏督促百姓收敛谷物，努力储藏过冬的干菜，多多积聚柴草。要鼓励百姓及时种麦，不要错过农时，如果错过农时，一定要给以处罚。
English: The officials in charge were ordered to urge the people to collect the grain, store the dried vegetables for the winter, and accumulate firewood. The people should be encouraged to plant wheat in time, not to miss the farming time, and if they miss the farming time, they must be punished.

古文：是月也，日夜分雷，乃始收声，蛰虫俯户，杀气浸盛，阳气日衰，水始涸，日夜分，则，则一度量，平权衡，正钧石，齐斗桶。
现代文：这个月，日夜的时刻相等，雷声渐渐消逝。
English: This month, the time of day and night are equal, and the thunder gradually fades away.

古文：是月也，易关市，来商旅，入货贿，以便民事。
现代文：日夜时刻相等，要在此时统一和校正各度量衡器具。这个月，要减轻关市的税收，招徕各地的商旅，收纳财物，以利于百姓的生产和生话。
English: This month, it is necessary to reduce the taxes of Guan, attract business travel from all over the country, and collect property to benefit the production and livelihood of the people.

古文：四方来杂，远乡皆至，则财务不匮。
现代文：四方之人前来聚集，连偏远乡邑也全都到来。
English: People from all over came to gather, even from remote villages.

古文：上无乏用，百事乃遂。
现代文：这样，财物就不缺乏，国家用费就充足，各种事情就都能成功。
English: In this way, there will be no shortage of property, the state expenditure will be sufficient, and all kinds of things can be successful.

古文：凡举事，无逆天数，必顺其时，乃因其类，行之是令。白露降三旬。
现代文：作各种事精不要违背自然规律，一定要顺应天时，按照事情的类别，什么时侯该作什么就作什么。实行这个月的政令，白露降落，每旬一次。
English: In doing all kinds of things, we should not violate the laws of nature, we must conform to the time of day, according to the category of things, and do what should be done at any time. Implement the decree of this month, white dew landing, once every ten days.

古文：仲秋行春令，则秋雨不降，草木生溶剂，国乃有恐。
现代文：仲秋实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，秋雨就会停而不降，草木就会重新开花，国家就会有大的恐慌。
English: If the government order that should be implemented in the spring is implemented in the middle of autumn, then the autumn rain will stop without falling, the plants will bloom again, and the country will have a big panic.

古文：行夏令，则其国乃旱，蛰虫不藏，五谷复生。
现代文：如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，国家就会出现干旱，蛰伏的动物就不再藏伏，五谷就重新萌发生长。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to drought in his country, the aphids will not enter the cave to hide, and all kinds of crops will grow again.

古文：行冬令则风灾数起，收雷先行，草木早死。
现代文：如果实行应在冬天实行的政令，那么，风灾就会屡屡发生，雷声就会提前收敛，草木就会过早死亡。
English: If the government order that should be implemented in winter is implemented, then wind disasters will occur repeatedly, thunder will converge ahead of time, and plants will die prematurely.

古文：季秋之月，日在房，昏虚中，旦柳中，其日庚辛，其神少昊，其神蓐收，其虫毛，其音商，律中无射，其数九，其味辛，其臭腥，其祀门，祭先肝。候雁来宾，爵入大水为蛤，菊有黄华，豺则祭兽戮禽。
现代文：这个月的数字是九，味道是辣味，气味是腥气，要举行的祭祀是门祭，祭祀时祭品以肝脏为尊。这个月，候鸟从北方飞来，栖息于屋宇的雀鸟钻进大海变成了蛤蜊。秋菊开了黄花。豺把捕到的野兽四面摆开，象祭祀一样，开始杀戮禽兽。
English: The number of this month is nine, the taste is spicy, the smell is pungent, the sacrifice to be held is the door sacrifice, and the sacrificial offering is the liver. This month, migratory birds fly from the north, and the birds that live in the house have drilled into the sea and become maggots. Autumn chrysanthemums have opened yellow flowers. The maggots spread the captured beasts on all sides, like a sacrifice, and began to kill animals.

古文：天子居总章右个，乘戎路，驾白骆，载白畤，衣白衣，服白玉，食麻与犬，其器廉以深。
现代文：天子住在西向明堂的右侧室，乘坐白色的兵车，车前驾着白色的马，车上插着白色的绘有龙纹的旗帜。天子穿着白色的衣服，佩戴着白色的饰玉，吃的食物是麻籽和狗肉，用的器物锐利而深邃。
English: Tianzi lived in the right side room of Xixiangming Hall. He rode in a white chariot with a white horse in front and a white dragon-patterned flag on the chariot. Tianzi wore white clothes and white ornaments. He ate hemp seeds and dog meat. The utensils he used were sharp and deep.

古文：是月也，申严号令，命百官贵贱无不务入，以会天地之藏，无有宣出。
现代文：这个月，要重申严明各种号令。命令百官贵贱人等无不从事收敛的工作。来应合天地收藏的时气，不得有宜泄散出。
English: This month, it is necessary to reiterate the strictness of various orders, and order all officials, nobles and commoners to engage in the work of convergence. In order to meet the trend of world collection, it is necessary to let go and disperse.

古文：乃命冢宰，农事备收，举五种之要，藏帝籍之收于神仓，祗敬比饬。
现代文：命令太宰，在农作物全部收成之后，建立登记五谷的帐簿，把天子籍田中收获的谷物藏入专门储藏供祭祀上帝神祗所用谷物的谷仓，必须恭敬严正。
English: He ordered the dazai, after all the crops had been harvested, to establish an account book for registering grain, and to hide the grain harvested in the fields of the sons of heaven into a grain barn specially stored for the purpose of sacrificing to the gods.

古文：是月也，霜始降，则百工休。
现代文：这个月，霜开始降落，各种工匠不再制作器物。
English: This month, when it started to frost, all kinds of craftsmen stopped working and rested.

古文：乃命有司曰，寒气总至，民力不堪，其皆入室。
现代文：同时命令司徒说： 寒气突然来到，百姓经受不起，让他们都进屋准备过冬。 
English: At the same time, he ordered the bishop to say: The cold weather has come suddenly, the people can't stand it, let them all go into the house to prepare for the winter.

古文：上丁，命乐正入学习吹。
现代文：这个月上旬的丁日，进入太学练习吹笙竽，演习礼乐。
English: In the early afternoon of the third day, the command music is coming to the coach of Taigaku to play wind music.

古文：是月也，大飨于帝，尝牺牲，告备于天子，合诸侯，制百县。
现代文：这个月，天子要遍祭五帝，并命夸主管官吏用牺牲祭祀群神。事毕，向天子禀告祭祀已经齐备。
English: This month, the Son of Heaven wanted to sacrifice the Five Immortals everywhere, and ordered the officials in charge to use sacrifices to worship the gods. After all, the offerings to the Son of Heaven were ready.

古文：为来岁受朔日，与诸侯所税于民轻重之法，数以远近土地所宜为度。
现代文：天子要聚会诸侯，百县大夫，向他们颁授来年的朔日，以及诸侯向百姓收税轻重的法规，诸侯向天子缴纳贡赋的多少，抽税轻重、纳贡多少都以远近和土地出产的情况为依据。
English: The Son of Heaven wants to gather the lords, the doctors of a hundred counties, and give them the New Year's Day of the coming year, as well as the laws and regulations of the lords to collect taxes from the people, the amount of tribute paid by the lords to the Son of Heaven, the amount of tax and the amount of tribute are based on the distance and the land production.

古文：以给郊庙之事，无有所私。
现代文：这些东西供祭天祭祖之用，没有属于私有的。
English: These things are for the purpose of offering sacrifices to the ancestors, and do not belong to private ownership.

古文：是月也，天子乃教于田猎，以习五戎獀马，命仆及七驺，咸驾载旍■，舆受车，以纪整设于屏外，司徒缙扑北向以誓之，命主祠祭禽于四方。
现代文：这个月，天子借打猎教练治兵之法，熟悉各种兵器，选择良马。命令田仆和管套车卸马的吏役都来驾车，车上插着各种旗帜，参加田措的人按照等级授予车辆，并按次序整齐地摆在屏垣之外。司徒把教刑用具插在带间，向北面告诫众人。
English: This month, Heavenly Son used the method of a hunting instructor to manage soldiers, familiarized himself with all kinds of weapons, and selected good horses. He ordered the field servants and the officials who unloaded the horses from the cart to drive, with all kinds of flags on the car. The participants of the field inspection awarded the vehicles according to their rank, and they were neatly placed outside the screen wall in order. Stu put the disciplinary equipment between the belts and warned everyone to the north.

古文：是月也，草木黄落，乃伐薪为炭，蛰虫咸俯在穴，皆其户。
现代文：夭子穿着威武的戎装，佩戴着刀剑等饰物，拿着弓箭来射措。
English: The child was dressed in a formidable military uniform, wearing a sword and other ornaments, holding a bow and arrow to shoot.

古文：乃趣狱刑，无留有罪，收禄秩之不当者，共养之不宜者。是月也，天子乃以犬尝稻，先荐寝庙。
现代文：命令主管祭祀的官吏用猎获的鸟兽祭祀四方之神。这个月，草木黄落了，可以砍伐山柴烧制木炭。
English: The officials in charge of the rituals were ordered to use the animals and birds they had hunted to offer sacrifices to the gods of the four directions. This month, the grass and trees turned yellow, and it was possible to cut down firewood to make charcoal.

古文：季秋行夏令，则其国大水，冬藏殃败，民多鼻九窒。行冬令则国多盗贼，边境不宁，土地分裂。行春令,则暖风来至，民气解堕，师旅必兴。孟冬之月，日在尾，昏危中，旦七星中，其日壬癸，其帝颛顼，其神玄冥，其虫介，其音羽，律中应锺，其数六，其味咸，其臭朽，其祀行，祭先肾。
现代文：初昏时刘，危宿出现在南方中天。拂晓时刻，星宿出现在南方中天。孟冬于天干属壬癸，它的主宰之帝是颛顼，佐帝之神是玄冥，应时的动物是龟鳖之类的甲族，相配的声音是羽音，音律与应钟相应。这个月的数字是六，味道是咸味，气味是朽气，要举行的条祀是行祭，祭祀时祭品以肾脏为尊。
English: At dawn, the stars appear in the southern sky. Mengdong in the celestial stem belongs to Rinchen, its ruling emperor is the Dragonfly, the god of Sati is the Underworld, the animal of the time is the turtle, the corresponding sound is the feather sound, the rhythm corresponds to the bell. The number of this month is six, the taste is salty, the smell is rotten gas, the ritual to be held is the sacrifice, and the sacrificial offering is the kidney.

古文：水始冰，地始冻，雉入大水为蜃，虹藏不见。
现代文：这个月水开始结冰，地开始封冻，雉钻起家淮水变成了蛤蜊，彩虹消失不再出现。
English: This month, the moon's water began to freeze, the ground began to freeze, the water drilled into the house turned into ice, and the rainbow disappeared and no longer appeared.

古文：天子居玄堂左个，乘玄辂，驾铁骊，载玄畤，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘。
现代文：天子住在北向明堂的左侧室，乘坐黑色的车，车前驾着黑色的马，车上插着黑色的绘有龙皱的旗帜，天子穿着黑色的衣服，佩带着黑色的饰玉。
English: Tianzi lives in the left room of the North-facing Ming Hall, riding in a black car, driving a black horse in front of the car, with a black flag painted with dragon wrinkles on the car, Tianzi wearing black clothes, wearing black decorative beads.

古文：其器宏以■。
现代文：吃的食物是黍米和猪肉，使用的器物宏大而敛口。
English: The food is glutinous rice and pork, and the utensils used are large and narrow-mouthed.

古文：是月也，以立冬。先立冬三日，太史谒之天子，曰：某日立冬，盛德在水。
现代文：这个月有立冬的节气，立冬前三天，太史向天子禀告说； 某天立冬，大德在于水。 
English: This month has the winter solstice. Three days before the winter solstice, Taishi announced to Tianzi that; One day, the winter solstice, great virtue lies in water.

古文：天子乃齐。
现代文：于是天子斋戒，准备迎冬。
English: The son of heaven then fasted.

古文：立冬之日，天子亲率三公九卿大夫以迎冬于北郊，还，乃赏死事，恤孤寡。
现代文：立冬那天，天子亲自率领三公九卿大夫，到北郊去迎接冬的降临。迎冬回来，赏赐为国捐躯的大臣的子孙，抚恤救挤这些大臣遗留韵孤儿寡妇。
English: On the day of the winter solstice, the Son of Heaven personally led the three princes and nine noble doctors to the northern suburbs to welcome the coming of winter. He returned to welcome the winter, to reward the descendants of the ministers who died for the country, and to support and save the orphans and widows left behind by these ministers.

古文：是月也，命太卜祷祠，龟策占兆，审卦吉凶。
现代文：这个月，命令掌管卜筮的太卜，祈祷于龟策，看兆象，算卦数，来考察吉凶。
English: This month, the goddess in charge of Buju was ordered to pray at the gyratory, watch the omens, count the numbers, and investigate the auspicious and inauspicious.

古文：于是察阿上乱法者，则罪之，无有掩蔽。
现代文：这时候，要察访那些曲意逢碰上司而扰乱法制的人，判他们的罪，不得有所隐藏。
English: At this time, it is necessary to investigate and convict those who disturb the rule of law by offending their superiors, and nothing must be hidden.

古文：是月也，天子始裘，命有司曰：天子天气上腾，地气下降，天地不通，闭塞而成冬。
现代文：这个月，天子开始穿皮农。命令主管官吏说。 天气上腾，地气下降，天地之间不再相通，封闭而形成冬天。 
English: This month, the Son of Heaven began to wear the pinon, the commanding officer said. The weather rose, the earth's atmosphere fell, and there was no longer a connection between heaven and earth, which closed and formed winter.

古文：命百官谨盖藏，命司徒循行积聚，无有不敛，坿城郭，戒门闾，修楗闭，慎关钥，固封玺，备边境，备要塞，谨关梁，塞蹊径，饬丧纪，办衣裳，审棺椁之厚薄，营丘垄之小大高卑薄厚之度，贵贱之等级。
现代文：命令司徒击各地巡视积聚的情况，不得有没积聚的谷物。要加高加固城墙，警戒城门里门，维修门栓门鼻，小心钥匙锁头，加圈印封，守备边境，修葺要塞，谨慎关卡桥粱，堵塞田间小路，饬正丧事的规格，分别随葬的衣服，营建坟墓的大小，高低、厚薄的标准，都要按照贵贱的等级。
English: He ordered the magistrates to inspect the situation of grain accumulation in all parts of the country, and there must not be any grain that has not been accumulated. It is necessary to increase the height of the reinforced city wall, guard the inner door of the city gate, repair the door bolt nose, be careful with the key lock head, add a circle seal, guard the border, repair the fortress, be careful with the checkpoints and bridges, block the field paths, and check the specifications of the funeral, the clothes to be buried separately, the size of the grave to be built, and the standards of height and thickness, all according to the noble and low level.

古文：是月也，工师效功，陈祭器，案度程，无或作为淫巧，以荡上心，必功致为上，物勒工名，以考其诚，工有不当，必行其罪，以穷其情。
现代文：这个月，俞夸工师献上百工制作的器物，考核工效，摆出他们制作的祭器，看是否依照法度程式。不得制作过于奇巧的器物来摇动在上位者的奢侈之心，一定要以精密为佳。器物要刻上工匠的名字，以此来考察他们是否信诚。如果有不精细之处，一定要给予处罚，来追究他们的诈巧之情。
English: This month, the Zoukua craftsmen presented the objects made by a hundred craftsmen, assessed the work efficiency, and displayed the sacrificial vessels they made to see if they were in accordance with the legal procedures. It is not allowed to make too fanciful objects to shake the extravagant hearts of the superiors, and precision is the best. The objects should be engraved with the names of the craftsmen to examine whether they are faithful. If there are any imperfections, they must be punished to investigate their deception.

古文：是月也，大饮蒸，天子乃祈来年于天宗，大割祠于公社，及门闾，飨先祖五祀，劳农夫以休息之。
现代文：这个月，天子诸侯与群臣在蒸祭之后，举行盛大的宴饮，排列次序。天子向包月星辰等在天之神祈求明年五谷丰登。大杀牺牲，在官社及门闾祈祷，然后飨先祖，五祀，慰劳农夫，使他们好好休息。
English: This month, after the steaming ceremony, the sons of heaven, the princes and the courtiers held a grand banquet and arranged the order. The sons of heaven prayed to the gods of the moon and stars in the sky to pray for a rich harvest next year. They sacrificed a lot, prayed at the official shrine and the gate, and then prayed for the ancestors, the five worshipers, and the hard-working farmers, so that they could rest well.

古文：天子乃命将率讲武，肄射御角力。
现代文：天子命令将帅讲习武事，教军士练习射箭、驾车，比试体力。
English: Heaven's Son ordered the commander to teach martial arts, the sergeant to practice archery, the driver to practice driving, and the soldiers to test their physical strength.

古文：是月也，乃命水虞渔师收水泉池泽之赋，无或敢侵削众庶兆民，以为天子取怨于下，其有若此者，行罪无赦。
现代文：这个月，命令掌管水利水产的官吏向百姓收缴水泉池泽的赋税，但不得擅自加税来侵犯百姓的利益，给天子在百姓中结下怨恨。敢这样做的人，一定要处罚而不得宽赦。
English: This month, the officials in charge of water conservancy and fishery were ordered to collect the tax on water springs and ponds from the people, but they were not allowed to raise taxes without authorization to infringe on the interests of the people and create resentment among the people. Those who dare to do so must be punished and must not be pardoned.

古文：孟冬行春令，则冻闭不密，地气发泄，民多流亡。
现代文：孟冬实行应在春天发布的政令，那幺，冰封地冻就不牢固，地气就会宣泄散发，百姓就会多所流亡。
English: Meng Dong implemented a decree that should be issued in the spring, then the frozen ground would not be solid, the earth's gas would be released, and the people would be more exiled.

古文：行夏令，则国多暴风，方冬不寒，蛰虫复出，行秋令则雪霜不时，小兵时起，土地侵削。
现代文：如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，国家就会多暴风，正处冬天而不冷，蛰伏的动物就会重新出来。如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，霜雪就不能按时气而来，小的战争就会不断发拄生，外寇就会侵扰边境。
English: If the decrees to be carried out in the summer are carried out, the country will be more stormy, the winter will not be cold, and the animals will come out again. If the decrees to be carried out in the autumn are carried out, the frost and snow will not come in time, small wars will continue to occur, and foreign invaders will invade the border.

古文：仲冬之月，日在斗，昏东壁中，旦轸中，其日壬癸，其帝颛顼，其神玄冥，其虫介，其音羽，律中黄锺，其数六，其味咸，其臭朽，其祀行，祭先肾，冰益壮，地始坼，鹖鴠不鸣，虎始交。
现代文：仲冬之月，太阳的位置在斗宿。黄昏时刻，壁宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，轸宿出现在南方中天。仲冬于天干属壬癸，它的主宰之帝是颛顼，佐帝之神是玄冥，应时的动物是龟鳖之类的甲族，相配的声音是羽音，音律与黄钟相应。这个月的数字是六，味道是咸昧，气味是朽气，要举行的祭祀是行祭，祭祀时祭品以肾脏为尊。这个月，冰冻得越发坚实，地表开始冻出裂缝。鹖鴠不叫了，老虎开始交配。
English: In the midwinter month, the sun's position is in the fighting lodge. At dusk, the wall lodge appears in the southern midheaven, and at dawn, the roosting lodge appears in the southern midheaven. Midwinter in the heavenly stem belongs to Rinchen, its ruling emperor is the dragonfly, the god of the Zodiac is the dark, the animals at the time are the A group such as the turtle, the corresponding sound is the feather sound, and the melody corresponds to the yellow bell. This month's number is six, the taste is salty, the smell is rotten gas, the sacrifice to be held is the sacrifice, and the sacrifice is

古文：天子居玄堂太庙，乘玄辂，驾铁骊，载玄畤，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘，其器宏以■。
现代文：天子住在北向明堂的中央正室，乘坐黑色的车，车前驾着黑色的马，车上插着黑色绘有龙牧的旗帜，天子穿着黑色的衣服，佩戴着黑色的饰玉。吃的食物是黍米和猪肉，使用的器物宏大而口敛。
English: Tianzi lives in the central main room of Beichuanming Hall. He rides in a black car, with a black horse in front of the car, and a black flag with a dragon herd painted on it. Tianzi wears black clothes and black ornaments. The food he eats is glutinous rice and pork, and the utensils he uses are large and mouth-watering.

古文：饬死事，命有司曰：土事无作，无发盖藏，无起大众，以固而闭。
现代文：命令司徒官说： 不要兴动土木工程，不要打开遮盖掩藏东西的仓廪府库，不要发动众多百姓，以此顺应时气的封固和闭藏。 
English: The magistrate ordered: Don't start any civil engineering projects, don't open the Canggu prefectural repository that covers and hides things, and don't mobilize a large number of people to comply with the current trend of sealing and closing.

古文：发盖藏，起大众，地气且泄，是谓发天地之房，诸蛰则死，民多疾疫，又随以丧。
现代文：打开盖藏之物，发动众多百姓，地气就会宣泄，这叫做开启天地用来闭藏万物的房舍。这样一来，蛰伏的动物都会死去，百姓中会流行疫病，并随着丧亡。
English: If you open the things that are covered and mobilize a large number of people, the earth's air will be released. This is called opening the heavens and the earth to close the house of all things. In this way, the animals that are lying dormant will die, and the people will be plagued by epidemics and die.

古文：命之曰没暢月。
现代文：这个月，命名叫做 畅月 。
English: This month, the name is called "Changyue."

古文：是月也，命阉尹深宫令，审门闾可，谨房室，必重闭。
现代文：这个月，命令官官的首领申明宫中的禁令，严加注意宫廷和房室的门户，一定要层层紧闭。
English: This month, the heads of the officials were ordered to affirm the ban in the palace, pay close attention to the doors of the court and the room, and must be closed tightly.

古文：省妇事，无得淫。虽有贵戚近习，无有不察。
现代文：要减少妇女的工作，不许她们制作过分奢华巧饰的东西，即使是尊贵的亲戚和宠幸的人，也没有不禁止的。
English: Women's work should be reduced, and they should not be allowed to make things that are excessively luxurious and ornate, even for distinguished relatives and favored people.

古文：乃命大酋，秫稻必齐，麹蘖必时，湛饎必洁，水泉必香，陶气必良，火齐必得，兼用六物，大酋监之，无有差忒。
现代文：命令酒官之长监制酿酒，选用的高粱稻米必须纯净，制作酒麴酒蘖必须适时，浸渍炊煮米麴必须清洁，所用的井水泉水必须甘美，使用的陶器必须良好，酿制的火侯必埂适中。这六件事要处处兼顾，酒官之长监督它，不得有一点差错。
English: He ordered the chief brewer to supervise the brewing of wine, the sorghum rice used must be pure, the sake lees must be made in a timely manner, the soaked and boiled rice lees must be clean, the well and spring water used must be sweet, the pottery used must be good, and the brewing temperature must be moderate. These six things must be taken into account everywhere, and the chief brewer supervises it without a single mistake.

古文：天子乃命有司祈祀四海大川名原渊泽井泉。
现代文：天子命令主管官吏祭祀四海、大河，水源、深渊、大译及井泉的水神。
English: The Son of Heaven ordered the officials in charge to offer sacrifices to the water gods of the four seas, great rivers, water sources, abysses, great rivers and springs.

古文：是月也，农有不收藏积聚者，牛马畜首有放佚者，取之不诘。
现代文：这个月，农民尚未收藏积聚的谷物、放牧在外的牛马，若被他人取用，不必责问。
English: This month, farmers have not yet collected the accumulated grain, cattle and horses grazing outside. If they are used by others, there is no need to ask.

古文：山林薮泽有能取疏食田猎禽兽者，野虞教导之。其有相侵，夺者罪之不赦。
现代文：农民有能在山林水泽中采取榛粟菱芡，捕猎禽兽的，主管山泽的官吏要教导并鼓励他们，若有人侵犯夺取他们的成果，一定要处罚，决不宽赦。
English: Peasants who are able to take poppy seeds in the mountains, forests and streams, and officials in charge of the mountains and streams who hunt animals should teach and encourage them. If someone encroaches on their achievements, they must be punished and never pardoned.

古文：是月也，日短至，阴阳争。诸生荡。
现代文：这个月，冬至到来，阴阳相争，各种生物都开始萌动。
English: This month, the winter solstice arrives, yin and yang compete, and all kinds of creatures begin to sprout.

古文：君子齐戒，处必掩，身欲宁，去声色，禁嗜欲，安形性，事欲静，以待阴阳之所定，芸始生，荔挺出，蚯蚓结，麋角解，水泉动。
现代文：君子整洁身心，居处一定深邃，身心要宁静，屏除声色，禁绝嗜欲，保养身体和性情，对各种事情都不要急噪，而要静观，以等待阴阳消长的结果。这个月，芸草开始萌生，荔蒲挺挺而出，蚯蚓屈曲面动，麇鹿犄角坠落，水泉开始涌动。
English: A gentleman should be neat and clean in mind and body, his residence should be deep, his mind and body should be quiet, the sound and color should be screened, the desire should be prohibited, the body and temperament should be maintained, and all kinds of things should not be noisy, but should be quietly observed to wait for the results of the waxing and waning of the yin and yang. This month, the grass began to germinate, the linden came forward, the elm bent and moved, the elm's horn fell, and the spring began to gush.

古文：日短至，则伐林木，取竹箭。
现代文：冬至的时候，可以砍伐林木，割取竹子。
English: At the time of the winter solstice, trees can be felled and bamboo can be cut.

古文：是月也，可以罢官之无事者，去器之无用者，途阙庭门闾，筑囹圄，此所以助天地之闭藏也。
现代文：这个月，可以罢免无事可作的官吏，可以除去没有用处的器物。涂塞宫廷的门户，修筑牢狱，这些都是帮助上天闭藏的措施。
English: This month, officials who have nothing to do can be dismissed, useless utensils can be removed, the gates of the court can be blocked, and prisons can be built, all of which are measures to help the heavens close.

古文：仲冬行夏令，则其国乃旱，氛雾冥冥，雷乃发声。
现代文：仲冬实行应在夏天实行的政令，那幺，国家就会出现干旱，雾气就会弥漫，雷声就会震动。
English: In the middle of winter in November, if the summer decree is implemented, it will lead to droughts in the country, fog, and thunderstorms in winter.

古文：行秋令，则天时雨汁，瓜瓠不成，国有大兵。行春令，则虫螟为败，水泉减竭，民多疾疠。
现代文：如果实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，雨雪就会时时相杂而落，瓜果就不能成熟，国家就有大兵侵扰；如果实行应在春天实行的政令，耶么，虫螟就会成灾，水泉就会衰减枯竭，百姓中就会流行疫病。
English: If the government decree to be implemented in the autumn is implemented, then rain and snow will fall intermittently, melons and fruits will not ripen, and the country will be invaded by soldiers; if the government decree to be implemented in the spring is implemented, then insects will become a disaster, water springs will decline and dry up, and epidemics will spread among the people.

古文：季冬之月，日在婺内，昏娄中，旦氐中，其日壬癸，日其间颛顼，其神玄冥，其虫介，其音羽，律中大吕，其数六，其味咸，其臭朽，其祀行，祭先胜。
现代文：季冬之月，太阳的位置在婺女宿，黄昏时刻，娄宿出现在南方中天，拂晓时刻，氐宿出现在南方中天。季冬于天干属壬癸，它的主宰之帝是颛顼，佐帝之神是玄冥，应时的动物是龟鳖之娄的甲族，相配的声音是羽音，音律与大吕相应。这个月的数字是六，味道是咸味，气味是朽味，要举行的祭祀是行祭，祭袒时祭品以肾肚为尊。
English: In the winter season, the sun's position is in 女宿, at dusk, 宿 appears in the south-central sky, and at dawn, 宿 appears in the south-central sky. The winter season in Tiangan belongs to 壬, its ruling emperor is, the god of Sodei is 玄冥, the animal of the season is 龟 of 甲族, the corresponding sound is 羽音, and the rhythm corresponds to 大吕. The number of this month is six, the taste is salty, the smell is rotten, and the sacrifice to be held is the sacrifice, and the sacrifice is the kidney.

古文：雁北乡，鹊始巢，雊鸡乳。
现代文：这个月，大雁将要北来，喜鹊开始搭窝，山鸡鸣叫，家鸡孵卵。
English: This month, wild geese will come north, magpies will begin to build nests, mountain chickens will sing, and chickens will hatch eggs.

古文：天子居玄堂右个，成玄辂，驾铁骊，载玄畤，衣黑衣，服玄玉，食黍与彘，其器宏，以掩命。
现代文：天子住在北向明堂的右侧室，乘坐黑色的车，车前驾着黑色的马，车上插着黑色的绘有龙纹的旗帜，天子穿着黑色的衣服，佩戴着黑色的饰玉，吃的食物是黍米和猪肉，使用的器物宏大而口敛。
English: Tianzi lives in the right-hand room of the North-facing Ming Hall. He rides in a black car with a black horse in front of the car. A black dragon-patterned flag is attached to the car. Tianzi wears black clothes and black ornaments. He eats glutinous rice and pork. The utensils he uses are large and mouth-watering.

古文：有司大傩，旁磔出土牛，以宋寒气，征鸟厉疾，乃毕行山川之祀，及帝之大臣天地之神祗。是月也，命渔师始渔，天子亲往，乃尝鱼，先荐寝庙。
现代文：这时候，冰冻得正结实，积水的池泽层层冻结。于是命令凿取冰块。冰块藏入冰窖之后，命令有司告诉百姓从谷仓中拿出五谷，选择种子。
English: At this time, the ice was solid and the pond with standing water was frozen layer by layer. Therefore, an order was given to dig out the ice. After the ice was hidden in the ice cellar, an order was given to the steward to tell the people to take out the grain from the barn and select the seeds.

古文：冰方盛，水泽腹坚，命取冰，冰已入，令告民出五种，命司农计耦耕事，修耒耜，具田器。命乐师大合吹而罢。
现代文：命令负责农业的官吏，谋划耕作的事情，修缮犁铧，准备耕田的农具。命令乐官举行吹奏乐的大合奏，结束一年的训练。
English: He ordered the officials in charge of agriculture to plan farming, repair ploughs, and prepare farm tools for farming. He ordered the musicians to hold a large ensemble of wind music to end a year of training.

古文：乃命四检收秩薪柴，以供寝庙及百祀之薪燎。
现代文：命令王畿内的郡县大夫收缴按常规应该交纳的木柴，来供给祖庙及各种祭祀举行燔燎之用。
English: ordered the county and prefectural doctors in Wangji to collect the firewood that should be paid according to the rules, to supply the ancestral temple and various rituals for the use of firewood.

古文：是月也，日穷于次，月穷于纪，星回于天，数将几终，岁将更始，专于农民，无有所使。
现代文：这个月，日月星辰绕天一周，又都回到原来的位置，一年的天数接近终了，新的一年将要重新开始。要让农民专心筹备农事，不要差遣他们干别的劳役。
English: This month, the sun, the moon and the stars revolve around the sky, and all return to their original positions. The days of the year are nearing the end, and the new year will begin anew. Let farmers concentrate on preparing agricultural affairs, and do not send them to do other labor.

古文：天子乃与公顷大夫饬国典，困时令以待来岁之宜。
现代文：无子与公卿大夫整饬国家的法典，讨论接季节月份制定的政令，以此来准备明年应作之事。
English: Muzo and Kugyo Doku tidy up the country's legal code and discuss the ordinances made in the following months to prepare for what needs to be done next year.

古文：乃命大事次诸侯之列赋之牺牲，以供皇天上帝社稷之享，乃元同姓之邦，供寝庙之刍豢。
现代文：命令太史排列各异姓诸侯的次序，使他们按国家大小贡赋牺牲，以供给对上天及社稷之神的禁祀。命令同姓诸侯供给祭祖祖庙所用的牛羊犬冢。
English: He ordered Taishi to arrange the princes with different surnames in order, and make them sacrifice according to the size of the country, in order to supply the forbidden worship of the gods of heaven and society. He ordered the princes with the same surname to supply the cattle, sheep and dogs used for the temple of the ancestors.

古文：命宰历卿大夫至于庶民土田之数，而赋之牺牲，以供山林名川之祀。
现代文：命令小宰依次列出从卿大夫到一般老百姓所有土地的数目，使他们贡赋牺牲，以供给条祀山林河流之神使用。
English: He ordered Kozai to list the number of lands owned by everyone from high-ranking doctors to ordinary people in order to make them pay tribute and sacrifice to supply strips to be used by the gods of mountains, forests and rivers.

古文：凡在天下九州之民者，无不咸献其力，以供皇天上帝社稷寝庙山林名川之祀。
现代文：凡是在天下九州的老百姓，必须全部献出他们的力量，以供给对皇天上帝，社稷之神、先祖神主以及山林河流之神的祭祀。
English: All the people in Kyushu, all over the world, must devote all their strength to offer sacrifices to the God of the Emperor, the God of the Society, the God of the Ancestors, and the God of the Mountains, Forests and Rivers.

古文：行之是令。
现代文：实行这些政令，这述就算一年终了了。
English: If these decrees are implemented, this will be over in a year.

古文：此谓一终，三旬二日。
现代文：在三旬中有二日。
English: There are two days in Lent.

古文：季冬行秋令，则白露蚤降，介虫为妖，四邻入保。
现代文：季冬实行应在秋天实行的政令，那么，白露就会过早降落，有甲壳的动物就会成灾，四方边邑的百姓就会为躲避来犯之敌而藏入城堡。
English: If the government decrees that autumn should be implemented in the winter, then the white dew will fall prematurely, crustaceans will be plagued, and the people of the four corners will hide in the castle to avoid the invaders.

古文：行春令，则胎夭多伤，国多固疾，命之曰逆。
现代文：如果实行应在春天实行的政令，那么，幼小的动物就会遭到损伤，国家就会流行久治不愈的疾病，给这种情况命名叫做 逆 。
English: If the spring decree is implemented, it will lead to unborn and newly born small animals being injured, and Chinese people are prone to incurable diseases. This phenomenon is called abnormality.

古文：行夏令，则水潦败国，时雪不降，冰冻消释。
现代文：如果实行应在夏天实行的政令，那么，大水将为害国家，冬雪将不能按时降落，冰珠将会融化。
English: If the summer decree is implemented, it will cause floods to harm the country. When it snows, however, it does not fall, and the ice melts.

