古文：王睿，字洛诚，自云太原晋阳人也。
现代文：王睿，字洛城，自称是太原晋阳人。
English: Wang Rui, alias Luo Cheng, claimed to be from Taiyuan and Jinyang.

古文：六世祖横，张轨参军。
现代文：六世祖王横，系张轨的参军。
English: Zou Wangyong, the sixth generation, was the first to join the army.

古文：晋乱，子孙因居于武威姑臧。
现代文：东晋动乱之时，其子孙就居住在武威的姑臧。
English: During the Great Turmoil of the Jin Dynasty, the descendants lived in Wuwei Gushan.

古文：父桥，字法生，解天文卜筮。
现代文：父亲王桥，字法生，懂得天文卜筮。
English: His father, Wang Qiao, was a student of calligraphy and knew astronomy.

古文：凉州平，入京，家贫，以术自给。
现代文：凉州平定后，移居京城，家中贫穷，靠天文历法之术维持生活。
English: After the subjugation of Liangzhou, he moved to Beijing. His family was poor, and he had to rely on the astronomical calendar to make ends meet.

古文：历仕终于侍御中散。
现代文：历任官职，终为侍御中散。
English: He held various government posts and was eventually dismissed from the position of chamberlain.

古文：天安初卒，赠平远将军、凉州刺史、显美侯，谥曰敬。
现代文：天安初年去世，被追赠为平远将军、凉州刺史、显美侯，谥号为敬。
English: He died in the first year of Tian'an, and was posthumously given the titles of General Pingyuan, Liangzhou Jishi, Xian Mei Hou, and his nickname was Jing Yu.

古文：睿少传父业，而姿貌伟丽。
现代文：王睿年少时继承父业，但身姿像貌伟丽。
English: When Wang Rui was young, he inherited his father's business, but his body resembled that of Wang Wei Li.

古文：恭宗之在东宫，见而奇之。
现代文：恭宗在东宫时，见到他而感到十分奇异。
English: When he was in the East Palace, it was very strange to see him.

古文：兴安初，擢为太卜中散，稍迁为令，领太史。
现代文：兴安初年，王睿升为太卜中散，不久又升为令，领太史之职。
English: In the first year of the Heian period, Wang Rui was promoted to the position of Taibu Chusan, and soon he was promoted to the position of Dai, leading the position of Taishi.

古文：承明元年，文明太后临朝，睿因缘见幸，超迁给事中。
现代文：承明元年，文明太后临朝听政，王睿因善于攀缘而受到宠幸，越级升为给事中。
English: In the first year of the Ming Dynasty, Wang Rui was favored by the Empress Dowager Lintong, who was listening to the government, because he was good at climbing, and he was promoted to the middle ranks.

古文：俄而为散骑常侍、侍中、吏部尚书，赐爵太原公。
现代文：不久又任散骑常侍、侍中、吏部尚书等职，赐爵太原公。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the posts of Sanzhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhizhiz

古文：于是内参机密，外豫政事，爱宠日隆，朝士慑惮焉。
现代文：于是他在内参与机密，在外参加政事，受到的宠爱日益深厚，朝中官员都惧怕他。
English: Therefore, it is important to prepare confidential matters for internal participation, participate in government affairs externally, and be favored day by day.

古文：太和二年，高祖及文明太后，率百僚与诸方客临虎圈，有逸虎登门阁道，几至御座。
现代文：太和二年，高祖和文明太后率百官与诸宾客到虎圈观虎，有一只老虎逃出虎圈，登上楼阁之间的通道，几乎跑到御座之上。
English: In the 2nd year of the Taihe era, Emperor Gaozu and Empress Dowager Fuxing led hundreds of officials and guests to the tiger enclosure to watch the tigers. One tiger escaped from the tiger enclosure, climbed onto the passage between the pavilions, and almost ran onto the throne.

古文：左右侍御皆惊靡，睿独执戟御之，虎乃退去，故亲任转重。
现代文：当时左右侍御都惊恐无策，王睿独自一人执戟抵御，老虎才退去，因此受到皇上亲近信任而升迁要职。
English: At that time, the attendants on both sides were terrified and helpless. Wang Rui was the only one to resist the tiger, and the tiger only retreated. As a result, he was trusted by the emperor and promoted to an important position.

古文：三年春，诏睿与东阳王丕同入八议，永受复除。
现代文：太和三年春，皇帝诏令王睿与东阳王元丕一同获得犯罪能减免刑罚的特权，并永远免除徭役。
English: In the spring of the third year of the Taihe era, Wang Rui and Dongyang Wang Yao were ordered to enjoy the eight conditions of reduction and remission of punishment at the same time, and were permanently exempted from labor service.

古文：四年，迁尚书令，封爵中山王，加镇东大将军。
现代文：太和四年，升尚书令，封爵中山王，加封镇东大将军。
English: In the fourth year of the Taihe era, he was promoted to Shang Shuling, knighted as Zhongshan Wang, and given the title of Zhen Dongda General.

古文：置王官二十二人，中书侍郎郑羲为傅，郎中令以下皆当时名士。
现代文：设置王官二十二人，中书侍郎郑义为辅佐，郎中令以下官员都是当时的名士。
English: Twenty-two royal officials were set up, with Zheng Yi, the chancellor's equerry, as an assistant, and the officials below the chancellor were all famous people at the time.

古文：又拜睿妻丁氏为妃。
现代文：皇帝又授王睿之妻丁氏为王妃。
English: He also made Wang Rui's wife, Ding Shi Lang, his wife.

古文：及沙门法秀谋逆，事发，多所牵引。
现代文：后来，沙门法秀图谋叛逆朝廷，事发之后，受到牵连的人很多。
English: Later, Shamen Fashuo plotted to rebel against the imperial court, and after the incident, many people were implicated.

古文：睿曰： 与其杀不辜，宁赦有罪。
现代文：王睿向皇帝进言说： 与其杀无辜之人，宁可赦免有罪之人。
English: Wang Rui said to the emperor, "Instead of killing the innocent, it is better to pardon the guilty."

古文：宜枭斩首恶，余从疑赦，不亦善乎？ 
现代文：应当只斩首恶者，其余随从者和嫌疑者都予赦免，不是很好吗？ 
English: Isn't it good that only the wicked should be beheaded, and the rest of the followers and suspects should be pardoned?

古文：高祖从之，得免者千余人。
现代文：高祖采纳了他的意见，得到免罪的人有一千多。
English: Gaozu adopted his opinion, and more than a thousand people were exonerated.

古文：睿出入帷幄，太后密赐珍玩赠彩，人莫能知，率常以夜帷车载往，阉官防致，前后巨万，不可胜数，加以田园、奴婢、牛马、杂畜，并尽良美。
现代文：王睿经常出入内宫，文明太后暗地里赐给他许多珍宝玩好、绫罗绸缎，没有人能知道，通常都是在夜晚用有帷幕的车载着，由宦官护送到家，前后上万，不可胜数，而且又广有田园、奴婢、牛马、杂畜，全都是最好的。
English: Wang Rui often went in and out of the Inner Palace. The Empress Dowager secretly gave him many precious treasures to play with, including silk and silk brocade, which no one could know. They were usually carried in a curtain-draped car at night and escorted home by eunuchs. There were tens of thousands of them, countless in number, and there was also a wide range of pastures, slaves, oxen and horses, and livestock, all of which were the best.

古文：大臣及左右因是以受赍锡，外示不私，所费又以万计。
现代文：朝中大臣和左右都由此而受到他的赏赉，他就是以此显示自己的不偏私，所费钱财又以万计。
English: The ministers of the two Koreas and the left and right were all rewarded by him. This was how he showed his impartiality, and the money he spent was in the tens of thousands.

古文：及疾病，高祖、太后每亲视疾，侍官省问，相望于道。
现代文：及至王睿患病，高祖和太后常亲往探视，侍官们也前来看望，络绎不绝。
English: When Wang Rui fell ill, Gao Zu and the empress dowager often went to visit, and the attendants also came to visit.

古文：及疾笃，上疏曰：
现代文：王睿病重之时，向皇帝上疏说：
English: When Wang Rui was seriously ill, he said to the emperor Shangzhu:

古文：臣闻忠于事君者，节义著于临终；孝于奉亲者，淳诚表于垂没。
现代文： 臣闻对皇帝尽忠的人，在临终时往往更显出自己的节义；对双亲尽孝的人，在临死之前表现出纯真的孝心。
English: It is said that those who are loyal to the emperor are more likely to show their loyalty at the end of their lives; those who are filial to their parents show pure filial piety before they die.

古文：故孔明卒军，不忘全蜀之计；曾参疾甚，情存善言之益。
现代文：所以孔明死于军中，不忘辅助刘蜀的计划；曾参病重的时候，留下情感深挚的良言。
English: Therefore, Kongming died in the army, not forgetting to assist Liu Shu's plan; when he was seriously ill, he left a deep emotional speech.

古文：虽则庸昧，敢忘景行。
现代文：我虽平庸愚昧，不敢忘却高尚的德行。
English: Although I am mediocre and stupid, I dare not forget my noble virtue.

古文：臣荷天地覆载之恩，蒙大造生成之德，渐风训于华年，服道教于弱冠。
现代文：我承受着天地覆载之恩，蒙受造物生成之德，少年之时逐渐受到教化，成年以后又受大道沐浴。
English: I have received the blessing of being covered by heaven and earth, and the virtue of being created. When I was a boy, I was gradually educated, and after I became an adult, I was bathed in the streets.

古文：濯缨清朝，垂周三纪，受先帝非分之眷，叨陛下殊常之宠。遂乃齐迹功旧，内侍帏幄，爵列诸王，位班上等，从容闻道，与知国政。
现代文：我朝清明高洁，流传延续了三纪，我受到先帝过分的眷爱，又得到陛下特殊的宠幸，于是得以齐迹功归，在内廷侍奉陛下，爵位与诸王相等，职位居于上等，从容闻道，参与主持国政。
English: My dynasty was pure and noble, and the tradition continued for three generations. I was loved excessively by the former emperor, and received His Majesty's special favor, so I was able to return the favor, serve His Majesty at the Inner Court, with a peerage equal to that of kings, and a position at the highest level, and participate in presiding over state affairs.

古文：诚思竭尽力命，以报所受，不谓事与心违，忽婴重疾。每屈舆驾亲临问之，荣洽生平，惠流身后，犬马之诚，衔佩罔极。
现代文：实在想竭尽全力来报答所受到的恩宠，不想事与愿违，忽然染上重病，常让陛下屈驾亲临探问，这种殊荣浸润我的一生，所得恩惠流传我的后世，我只有效犬马之诚，衔佩以报无穷之恩。
English: I really want to do my best to repay the grace I have received. I don't want to go against my wishes and suddenly contract a serious illness. I often ask His Majesty to come and inquire in person. This great honor has permeated my entire life. The favors I have received will be passed down to my future generations. I only have the sincerity of a dog and a horse. I am honored to repay the infinite grace.

古文：今所病遂笃，虑必不起，延首阙庭，鲠恋终日。
现代文：现在我的病已经非常沉重，考虑到必定不能治好，只得翘首以望朝廷宫阙，终日哽咽依恋不已。
English: Now that my illness has become very serious, considering that it cannot be cured, I have to look forward to the Imperial Palace, and cling to it all day long.

古文：仰恃皇造宿眷之隆，敢陈愚昧管窥之见。
现代文：依恃着皇上旧日眷爱的深重，大胆陈述自己愚昧的管窥之见。
English: Clinging to the weight of the emperor's old-fashioned affection, he boldly stated his own ignorant views.

古文：臣闻为治之要，其略有五：一者慎刑罚，二者任贤能，三者亲忠信，四者远谗佞，五者行黜陟。
现代文： 我听说治理朝政的关键，大致有五个方面：一是慎用刑罚，二是任用贤能，三是亲近忠信，四是疏远谗佞，五是实行黜陟。
English: I have heard that there are roughly five aspects that are the key to governing the imperial government: one is to use punishment prudently, the second is to appoint talent, the third is to be close and loyal, the fourth is to alienate enemies, and the fifth is to enforce discipline.

古文：夫刑罚明则奸宄息，贤能用则功绩，著亲忠信则视听审，远谗佞则疑间绝，黜陟行则贪叨改。
现代文：刑罚分明，奸邪盗贼就会止息；贤能者得到任用，功勋业绩就能昭著；亲近忠信，就会耳聪目明；疏远谗佞，惑乱离间的事就能绝迹；对官员有升有降，就能使贪婪之心得到改正。
English: If the punishment is clear, the treachery and theft will stop; if the virtuous person is appointed, the meritorious performance will be obvious; if the person is close and loyal, the ears will be bright; if the person is estranged, the confusion and discord will be eliminated; if there is promotion and demotion for officials, the greedy heart will be corrected.

古文：是以钦恤惟刑，载在《唐典》；知人则哲，唯帝所难。
现代文：这是因为，慎重地使用刑罚在唐典中早有记载；知人善任就显得聪明有才能，这是帝王所不容易做到的。
English: This is because the prudent use of punishment has long been recorded in the Tang Dynasty; acquaintance with a virtuous person makes one appear clever and talented, which is not easy for an emperor to achieve.

古文：《周书》垂好德之文，汉史列防奸之论，考省幽明，先王大典。
现代文：周书传下好德的文章，汉史陈列防奸的议论，考察昏暗与明白，见之于先王大典。
English: Zhou Shu passed down virtuous articles, Han history exhibited anti-corruption discussions, examined the dark and the clear, and found it in the Ancestor's Canon.

古文：又八表既广，远近事殊，抚荒裔宜待之以宽信，绥华甸宜惠之以明简。
现代文：八方之外地域广阔，远近的事各不相同，安抚边远的地方应该以宽厚有信对待它，安抚京师地区则应当明显地给它以好处。
English: The region beyond the eight directions is vast, and matters near and far are all different. To pacify the outlying areas, it should be treated with generosity and trust, and to pacify the Beijing-Shi'an region, it should be given obvious benefits.

古文：哀恤孤独，赈施困穷，录功旧，赦小罪，轻徭役，薄赋敛，修福业，禁淫祀。
现代文：应该怜恤孤独的人，救济穷困的人，任用有功的人，赦免犯了小罪的人，减轻徭役，薄取赋敛，广修福利事业，禁止不合礼制的祭祀。
English: It is necessary to show mercy to the lonely, relieve the poor, appoint meritorious people, pardon those who have committed minor crimes, lighten the yakitori, take from the poor and give to the rich, extensively improve the welfare system, and prohibit sacrificial rites that are not in accordance with the etiquette.

古文：愿听政余暇，赐垂览察。
现代文：愿陛下在听政的余暇，能亲自审阅我所奏之事。
English: I hope that Your Majesty will be able to review my report in person in your spare time when you are not listening to politics.

古文：使子囊之诚，重申于当世；将坠之志，获用于明时。
现代文：使春秋时楚国子囊的一片忠诚之心，得以重申于当世；让微臣将要失去的志向，得以用于清明之时。 
English: So that a piece of loyalty in the spring and autumn of Chu Guozizibagou can be reaffirmed in the present world; so that the ambition that Weixin will lose can be used in the time of clarity.

古文：寻薨，时年四十八。
现代文：王睿不久去世，时年四十八岁。
English: Wang Rui died soon after, at the age of forty-eight.

古文：高祖、文明太后亲临哀恸，赐温明秘器，宕昌公王遇监护丧事。
现代文：高祖与文明太后亲临致哀，赐给棺木葬器，令岩昌公王遇监理丧事。
English: Gao Zu and the Empress Dowager Wenming came in person to offer their condolences, gave the coffin a wooden coffin, and allowed Prince Iwachang to supervise the funeral.

古文：赠卫大将军、太宰、并州牧，谥曰宣王。
现代文：封赠王睿为卫大将军、太宰、并州牧，规定谥号为宣王。
English: He was posthumously awarded the titles of general, grand vizier, and provincial governor, and was nicknamed King Xuanwang.

古文：内侍长董丑奴营坟墓，将葬于城东，高祖登城楼以望之。
现代文：内侍长董丑奴负责营造坟墓，准备葬于京城之东，高祖登上城楼远望凭吊。
English: The chief chamberlain, Dong Qiu Nong, was responsible for building the tomb, preparing to be buried in the east of the capital. Gao Zu ascended the castle tower and was hanged.

古文：京都文士为作哀诗及诔者百余人。
现代文：京都有一百多名文士给他作哀诗写诔文。
English: More than a hundred Kyoto writers have written poems of condolence and eulogies for him.

古文：乃诏为睿立祀于都南二十里大道右，起庙以时祭荐，并立碑铭，置守祀五家。
现代文：皇帝又诏令在京都南边二十里大道旁替王睿建立祭祀之所，修造宗庙以便按时祭奠，并且树立碑铭，设置守护宗庙管理祭事的人五家。
English: The emperor also issued a decree to build a place of worship for Wang Rui on the south side of Kyoto, next to Nijiri-dori Avenue, to build a family temple so that it could be dedicated on time, and to erect a monument and set up five families to guard the family temple and manage the festival.

古文：又诏褒睿，图其捍虎状于诸殿，命高允为之赞。
现代文：又诏令褒扬王睿，把他当年驱赶老虎保卫皇帝的情形在各官殿里绘成图画，命高允为画像写赞。
English: In addition, Wang Rui was praised by the imperial edict, and the situation in which he drove away the tigers to defend the emperor that year was drawn into a picture in each official's palace, and Mu Gaoyun wrote praise for the picture.

古文：京都士女謟称睿美，造新声而弦歌之，名曰《中山王乐》。
现代文：京都的男女奉承称赞王睿的美貌，作新曲用来演唱，曲名叫《中山王乐》。
English: The men and women of Kyoto compliment Wang Rui's beauty with flattery and make a new song for him to sing, called "Nakayama Wangle."

古文：诏班乐府，合乐奏之。
现代文：皇帝还下诏颁布乐府，令其用各种乐器合奏这支曲子。
English: The edict was sent to the Music Office, and the soundtrack was played.

古文：初睿女妻李冲兄子延宾，次子又适赵国李恢之华。
现代文：当初，王睿的女儿嫁给李冲的侄儿李延宾，次女又嫁赵国李恢之子李华。
English: At first, Wang Rui's daughter married Li Chong's nephew Li Yanbin, and his second daughter married Li Hua, the son of Zhao Guo Li Wei.

古文：女之将行也，先入宫中，其礼略如公主、王女之仪。
现代文：女儿出嫁的时候，先到宫中，行礼大致像公主、王女的礼仪。
English: When a daughter is getting married, she goes to the palace first, and the ceremony is roughly similar to that of a princess.

古文：太后亲御太华殿，寝其女于别帐，睿与张祐侍坐，睿所亲及两李家丈夫妇人列于东西廊下。
现代文：文明太后亲临太华殿，让其女在另一张床上寝卧，王睿与张在旁侍坐，他的亲眷和两个李家的男子、妇人都排列于东西廊下。
English: The empress dowager of civilization herself came to the Taihua Hall and let her daughter sleep on another bed. Wang Rui and Zhang were sitting next to her. His relatives and the two men and women of the Li family were all lined up under the east and west corridors.

古文：及车引，太后送过中路。
现代文：到了彩车出发时，太后亲自送过中路。
English: When it came time for the floats to set off, the Empress herself escorted them through the middle of the road.

古文：时人窃谓天子、太后嫁女。
现代文：当时人们都私下里说这是天子、太后嫁女。
English: At that time, people privately called him the son of heaven, and the empress dowager called him her daughter.

古文：出入禁中，无所拘忌。自以上谷寇氏，得补燕州大中正，而不能甄别士庶也。
现代文：王睿殡葬之时，亲眷朋友穿戴丧服送丧的人有一千多，都大声哭泣以博取荣利，当时说这就是孝义。
English: At the time of Wang Rui's funeral, there were more than a thousand relatives and friends wearing mourning clothes to attend the funeral, all crying loudly to win glory and profit, saying at the time that this was filial piety.

古文：家渐富侈，宅宇高华，妾隶充溢。
现代文：王睿已经显贵时，才说他祖籍本是太原晋阳，于是就迁徙其亲属，所以他的兄弟封爵迁到并州郡县。
English: When Wang Rui was already distinguished, he said that his ancestral home was originally Taiyuan and Jinyang, so he moved his relatives, so his brother moved to the county and county.

古文：微荣弟侄，然不及茹皓、仲兴也。卒，赠平北将军、燕州刺史。
现代文：王睿死后，朝廷重新追赠他的父亲王桥为侍中、征西将军、左光禄大夫、仪同三司、武威王，定谥号为定，追策王睿之母贾氏为妃，立碑于墓左。
English: After Wang Rui's death, the imperial court again posthumously awarded his father, Wang Qiao, the titles of Chamberlain, General of the Western Expedition, Doctor of the Western Light, Third Secretary of the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies, and King of Wuwei. Wang Rui's mother, Jia, was his wife, and a monument was erected on the left side of the tomb.

古文：赵修，字景业，赵郡房子人。父惠安，后名谧，都曹史，积劳补阳武令。
现代文：王睿父子同葬于京城之东，两下相距一里多远，迁都洛阳之后，又迁移葬于太原晋阳。赵修，字景业，赵郡房子人。父亲赵惠安，后取名为谧，任都曹史，因有功补阳武令。
English: Wang Rui and his son were buried together in the east of Beijing. The distance between the two was more than a mile. After the capital was moved to Luoyang, they were also moved and buried in Taiyuan Jinyang. Zhao Xiu, surnamed Jingye, lived in a house in Zhao County. His father, Zhao Huian, was later given the name Zou and was appointed the capital of Cao Shi. He was awarded the Military Order of Yang for his service.

古文：修贵，追赠威烈将军、本郡太守，及葬，复赠龙骧将军、定州刺史。
现代文：赵修显贵之后，追赠他为威烈将军、本郡太守，到他殡葬时，又赠龙骧将军、定州刺史。
English: After Zhao Xiu Xianggui, he posthumously presented him as General Weli, the governor of this county, and at his funeral, he also presented General Longyu and Dingzhou Zhishi.

古文：修本给事东宫，为白衣左右，颇有膂力。
现代文：赵修本来在东宫任事，为白衣左右，颇有膂力。
English: Zhao Xiu used to work in the East Palace. He was a white-coated person, and he was quite powerful.

古文：世宗践阼，仍充禁侍，爱遇日隆。
现代文：世宗登位后，他仍旧充当禁侍，而皇帝对他的宠爱日益加深。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, he continued to serve as an attendant, and the emperor's affection for him deepened.

古文：然天性暗塞，不闲书疏，是故不参文墨。
现代文：但是赵修天性愚笨，不熟悉表章奏疏之类的写作，因此不能参与文墨之事。
English: However, Zhao Xiu is stupid by nature, and is not familiar with writing such as table, chapter and verse, so he cannot participate in the matter of writing and ink.

古文：世宗亲政，旬月之间，频有转授，历员外通直散骑常侍、镇东将军、光禄卿。
现代文：世宗亲政之后，旬月之间频频授予赵修各种官职，历任员外通直散骑常侍、镇东将军、光禄卿。
English: After the personal rule of King Sejong, Zhao Xiu was frequently awarded various official positions in the course of a month or two. Successive members of the imperial family were given various official positions, such as non-commissioned officer, non-commissioned officer, Zhendong general, and Guangluqing.

古文：每受除设宴，世宗亲幸其宅，诸王公卿士百僚悉从，世宗亲见其母。
现代文：每次升官设宴庆贺，世宗都亲自到他家里赴宴，朝廷王公卿士文武百官都跟随而往，世宗还要亲自看望赵修的母亲。
English: Every time he held a banquet to celebrate his promotion, Shizong would personally go to his home to attend the banquet. Hundreds of imperial princes, nobles, and military officials would follow him. Shizong would also personally visit Zhao Xiu's mother.

古文：修能剧饮，至于逼劝觞爵，虽北海王详、广阳王嘉等皆亦不免，必致困乱。
现代文：赵修酒量极大，每逢饮宴都要逼劝他人饮酒，即使是北海王元详、广阳王元嘉这样的王公权贵也不放过，一定要让他们大醉方休。
English: Zhao Xiu drank an enormous amount of alcohol, and he would force others to drink alcohol at every banquet. Even princes and magnates such as Beihai Wang Yuanzhao and Guangyang Wang Yuanjia would not be spared, and he would make sure that they were very drunk.

古文：每适郊庙。修常骖陪。
现代文：每逢郊庙祭祀，赵修都乘车在皇帝旁边相陪。
English: Whenever there was a suburb temple ritual, Zhao Xiu would accompany the emperor by car.

古文：出入华林，恆乘马至于禁内。
现代文：出入皇家宫苑，常常骑马径直进入禁苑之内。
English: Entering the Royal Palace, he often rode straight into the Forbidden City.

古文：咸阳王禧诛，其家财货多赐高肇及修。
现代文：咸阳王元禧被杀以后，他家的财物大多赐给了高肇和赵修。
English: After Xianyang King Yuanxi was killed, most of his family's property was given to Gao Zhao and Zhao Xiu.

古文：修之葬父也，百僚自王公以下无不吊祭，酒犊祭奠之具，填塞门街。
现代文：赵修为他父亲办理丧事时，自王公以下的文武百官没有不来吊祭的，用来盛酒犊等祭奠品的器具之多，可以填塞门街。
English: When Zhao Xiu was in charge of his father's funeral, there was not a single civil or military official below the rank of prince who did not come to offer a hanging sacrifice. The number of utensils used to hold libations, such as wine goblets, could fill the street of the gate.

古文：于京师为制碑铭，石兽、石柱皆发民车牛，传致本县。
现代文：在京师为父亲墓地制作碑铭，石兽、石柱等，都征用民间的车牛，运送到本县。
English: In Beijing, he made a monument for his father's cemetery. Stone animals, stone pillars, etc. were all transported to this county by requisitioning people's ox carts.

古文：财用之费，悉自公家。
现代文：殡葬所花费的钱财，全都出自公家。
English: All the money spent by the funeral home comes from the public purse.

古文：凶吉车乘将百两，道路供给，亦皆出官。
现代文：丧事所用的车子近百辆，沿途所需之费用也全都出自官府。
English: Nearly a hundred cars were used for the funeral, and all the expenses along the way came from the government.

古文：时将马射，世宗留修过之。
现代文：当时朝廷将举行武艺演习，世宗留下赵修要他一同前往。
English: At that time, the imperial court would be holding martial arts exercises, and Shizong left Zhao Xiu to go with him.

古文：帝如射宫，修又骖乘，略辂旒竿触东门而折。
现代文：皇帝前往行大射礼的地方，赵修又坐车陪乘，车上的横木和旗竿，在过东门时都被碰断了。
English: The emperor went to the place where the grand salute was performed, and Zhao Xiu accompanied him by car. The crossbeam and flagpole on the car were broken when passing through the east gate.

古文：修恐不逮葬日，驿赴窆期，左右求从及特遣者数十人。
现代文：赵修惟恐误了葬，便乘马赶赴下葬之处，左右随从和特使几十人。
English: Afraid of missing the funeral, Zhao Xiuwei rushed to the place of burial on horseback, accompanied by dozens of followers and envoys.

古文：修道路嬉戏，殆无戚容，或与宾客奸掠妇女裸观，从者噂沓喧哗，诟詈无节，莫不畏而恶之。
现代文：赵修一路上嬉戏玩耍，一点悲戚的样子也没有，有时还与宾客一道抢掠妇女，让她们赤身裸体供其观赏淫乱，随从的人都议论纷纷，背地里骂他毫无节操，一个个对他又怕又恨。
English: Zhao Xiu played and frolicked all the way. He did not look sad at all. Sometimes, together with his guests, he robbed women, leaving them naked for him to watch the debauchery. His followers argued with each other, calling him unprincipled behind his back, fearing and hating him one by one.

古文：是年，又为修广增宅舍，多所并兼，洞门高堂，房庑周博，崇丽拟于诸王。
现代文：这一年，赵修又扩建房宅，兼并他人许多土地，屋门深幽，厅堂高大，房宇宽广，长廊曲折，其高贵华丽可与诸王相比。
English: In the same year, Zhao Xiu also expanded his residence and annexed many other people's lands. The door of the house is deep and quiet, the hall is tall, the room is wide, the corridor is tortuous, and its noble and gorgeous can be compared with the kings.

古文：其四面邻居，赂入其地者侯天盛兄弟，越次出补长史、大郡。
现代文：他的四面邻居如侯天盛兄弟，由于以宅地贿赂赵修而得以越出官制补任长史、大郡之职。
English: His four-faced neighbors, such as the brothers Hou Tiansheng, were able to bypass the official system to fill the posts of Changshi and Daegun by bribing Zhao Xiu with houses and land.

古文：修起自贱伍，暴致富贵，奢傲无礼，物情所疾。
现代文：赵修出身于地位低贱之辈，终于暴发而成富贵之人，十分傲慢无礼，为众人所痛恨。
English: Zhao Xiu was born in a low-ranking generation, and finally broke out and became a rich man. He was very arrogant and rude, and was hated by many people.

古文：因其在外，左右或讽纠其罪。
现代文：因他在外，朝廷左右的人有的以婉言向皇帝举发他的罪行。
English: Because he was out of the country, some people in and around the imperial court accused the emperor of his crimes in a polite manner.

古文：自其葬父还也，旧宠小薄。
现代文：自从他埋葬父亲回来之后，皇帝对他的宠幸稍有减弱。
English: Since he came back from burying his father, the emperor's favor toward him has waned a bit.

古文：初，王显祗附于修，后因忿阋，密伺其过，规陷戮之，而修过短，都不悛防。
现代文：起初，王显恭顺地依附于赵修，后来因私忿而产生矛盾，暗中窥视其过失，谋划陷害杀戮他，而赵修对于自己的过失错误，却从不加以注意和改悔。
English: At first, Wang Xian obediently adhered to Zhao Xiu, but later conflicts arose due to personal grudges, secretly peering into his mistakes and plotting to frame and kill him, while Zhao Xiu never paid attention to or repented of his mistakes.

古文：显积前后愆咎，列修葬父时路中淫乱不轨，女云与长安人赵僧扌剽谋匿玉印事。
现代文：王显则收集他前前后后的一切过失，列举他回家葬父时途中淫乱不轨的行为，又掌握了他与长安人赵僧修图谋藏匿玉印之事。
English: Wang Xian, on the other hand, collected all his faults before and after, enumerated his adulterous and improper behavior on the way home to bury his father, and grasped the fact that he and Zhao Sangxiu, a Chang'an man, were plotting to hide the jade seal.

古文：高肇、甄琛等构成其罪，乃密以闻。
现代文：高肇、甄琛等人罗织赵修的罪状，秘密报告皇上。
English: Gao Zhao, Zhen Qi and others fabricated Zhao Xiu's crimes and secretly reported to the emperor.

古文：始琛及李冯等曲事于修，无所不至，惧相连及，争共纠摘，助攻治之。
现代文：原先甄琛和李凭等人极力迎合赵修，无所不至，现在害怕受到牵连，就争相举发指斥，帮助皇帝来抨击惩治赵修。
English: Originally, Zhen Rong and Li Biao and others tried their best to cater to Zhao Xiu and did everything possible. Now, they are afraid of being implicated, and they are competing to criticize and help the emperor to criticize and punish Zhao Xiu.

古文：遂乃诏曰： 小人难育、朽棘不雕，长恶不悛，岂容抚养。
现代文：于是，皇帝就下诏书说： 小人难抚养，朽木不可雕，犯下种种罪恶又不思悔改，岂容爱抚教养。
English: As a result, the emperor issued an edict saying: "It is difficult to bring up a small person, and it is impossible to carve a rotten tree. If you commit all kinds of sins and do not think about repentance, how can you love to bring up and educate?"

古文：散骑常侍、镇东将军、领扈左右赵修，昔在东朝，选充台皁，幼所经见，长难遗之。
现代文：散骑常侍、镇东将军、领扈左右赵修，昔日在东宫办事，充当差役，我自幼同他相处，长久难于抛弃。
English: Zhao Xiu Rong, the knight-errant, the general of the town of Dong, the leader of the eunuchs and so on, used to work in the East Palace and act as an attendant. I have been with him since I was a child, and it is difficult to abandon him for a long time.

古文：故纂业之初，仍引西禁。
现代文：所以在登基之初，仍让他在西宫充当禁侍。
English: Therefore, at the beginning of his accession to the throne, he was still allowed to serve as an attendant at the Western Palace.

古文：虽地微器陋，非所宜采；然识早念生，遂升名级。
现代文：虽然他地位低微，才识浅陋，并不适合选用，但出于与他早识的念头，就将他连连升官。
English: Although his status was low, his talent was shallow, and he was not suitable for selection, he was promoted one after another because of his foresight.

古文：自蒙洗濯，凶昏日甚，骤佞荐憍，恩加轻慢。
现代文：他自从蒙受恩遇，越来越凶顽昏乱，很快就变得谄媚而又骄横，恩宠加之于他而更轻慢无礼。
English: Since he had been favored, he had become more and more violent and confused, and soon became charming and arrogant, and the grace given to him was more disrespectful.

古文：不识人伦之体，不悟深浅之方，陵猎王侯，轻触卿相，门宾巷士，拜叩不接，嚣气豪心，仍怀鄙塞。
现代文：不识人伦的根本，不悟深浅的方向，轻侮王侯，冒犯卿相，门前宾客和巷里士人前来拜叩，也不接待，气势嚣张，心性豪横，胸怀鄙陋。
English: They do not know the fundamentals of human relations, do not understand the direction of depth and shallowness, despise princes, offend noblemen, guests in front of the door and people in the alley come to worship, but do not receive, arrogant, arrogant, and despicable.

古文：比听葬父，侈暴继闻。
现代文：至于他回乡葬父，奢侈挥霍也有所闻。
English: As for his return to his hometown to bury his father, extravagant spending is not unheard of.

古文：居京造宅，残虐徒旅。
现代文：在京城大造宅院，残暴虐待服劳役的人。
English: In the large residential complex in the capital city of Beijing, people in forced labor are brutally mistreated.

古文：又张形势，妄生矫托，与雍州人赵僧檦等阴相传纳，许受玉印。
现代文：又为扩张自己的势力，违法假托，与雍州人赵僧等勾结，暗中谋划，接受玉印。
English: In addition, in order to expand his own power, he colluded with Zhao Zang, a Yongzhou native, to secretly plan and accept the jade seal.

古文：不轨不物，日月滋甚。
现代文：行为不轨，不合法度，一天比一天厉害。
English: The misconduct and illegality are increasing day by day.

古文：朕犹愍其宿隶，每加覆护，而擅威弄势，侏张不已。
现代文：我还怜惜他是旧日的吏卒，每每加以遮掩保护，然而他擅权仗势，嚣张不已。
English: I also pitied him for being an old-time bureaucrat, always shielding and protecting him, yet he was arrogant and overbearing.

古文：法家耳目，并求宪网，虽欲舍之，辟实难爽。
现代文：遵守法度、辅佐朝廷的世臣，一致要求对他进行制裁，我虽然想将此事搁置不管，但法律实在难以违背。
English: Although I would like to put this matter aside, it is really difficult to violate the law.

古文：然楚履既坠，江君俳徊；钟牛一声，东向改衅。
现代文：然而楚履既坠，江君徘徊；钟牛一声，东向改衅。
English: However, when Chu Lu fell, Jiang Jun lingered; when Zhong Niu shouted, Dong Xiang rebelled.

古文：修虽小人，承侍在昔，极辟之奏，欲加未忍。
现代文：赵修虽是小人，但念及昔日在身边侍奉，关于处以极刑的奏请，我想加之却又不忍。
English: Although Zhao Xiu is a villain, I can't help but think of the old days when he served alongside me, and I would like to add a request for capital punishment.

古文：可鞭之一百，徙敦煌为兵。
现代文：可将他鞭打一百，发配到敦煌充军。
English: He could be flogged a hundred times and sent to Dunhuang to join the army.

古文：其家宅作徒即仰停罢。
现代文：其修建家宅的役徒望立即停止修造。
English: The construction of his house was immediately stopped by the supervisors.

古文：所亲在内者悉令出禁，朕昧于处物，育兹豺虎，顾寻往谬，有愧臣民，便可时敕申没，以谢朝野。 
现代文：其亲信在宫廷内任职者一律逐出宫门之外。我由于观察处置不明，抚养了这样的豺虎，回顾过去的谬误，实有愧于臣民，但可以时时告诫自己，以谢朝野。 
English: I raised such a ferocious tiger because of my unclear observation and disposition. Looking back on the past mistakes, I am truly worthy of being a subject, but I can always admonish myself and thank the court.

古文：是日修诣领军于劲第，与之樗蒲，筹未及毕，而羽林数人相续而至，称诏呼之。
现代文：这一天，赵修到领军于劲府第同他赌博，筹码还没有赌完，几个羽林军相继而至，说皇帝有诏召他前去。
English: On this day, Zhao Xiu arrived at the leader of the army in Jianfuda and gambled with him. The chips had not yet been gambled, and several Ulin soldiers came one after another, saying that the emperor had ordered him to go.

古文：修惊起随出，路中执引修马诣领军府。
现代文：赵修大惊，起身随他们出门，一路上羽林军牵着赵修所骑的马直达领军府。
English: Surprised, Zhao Xiu got up and followed them out of the door. Along the way, the Ulin Army led Zhao Xiu's horse straight to the leading military office.

古文：琛与显监决其罚，先具问事有力者五人更迭鞭之，占令必死。
现代文：甄琛与王显监督对赵修执行刑罚，事先准备好五个有力气的人轮流鞭打，预谋这样可将他置于死地。
English: Zhenyao and Wang Xian supervised the execution of Zhao Xiu's sentence, and prepared in advance five powerful people to take turns whipping him, with the intention of putting him to death.

古文：旨决百鞭，其实三百。
现代文：圣旨决断打一百鞭，实际上打了三百。
English: The decree decreed a hundred lashes, but in fact there were three hundred.

古文：修素肥壮，腰背博硕，堪忍楚毒，了不转动。
现代文：赵修一向身体肥壮，腰背阔大，能够忍受鞭打的痛楚，受刑时连身子都不转动。
English: Zhao Xiu has always been a fat man with a large waist. He can endure the pain of whipping, and does not even turn his body when he is punished.

古文：鞭讫，即召驿马，促之令发。
现代文：鞭打完毕，甄琛等人立即召来驿马，催促他出发。
English: After the whipping was over, Zhen Rong and the others immediately summoned the horse and urged him to set out.

古文：出城西门，不自胜举，缚置鞍中，急驱驰之。
现代文：出了城西门，赵修已不能直起身子，就将他捆绑在马鞍上，赶着马急速奔驰。
English: After leaving the west gate of the city, Zhao Xiu could no longer stand up straight, so he tied him to the saddle and drove the horse at a fast pace.

古文：其母妻追随，不得与语。
现代文：赵修的母亲妻子在后追随，不能同他说话。
English: Zhao Xiu's mother and wife followed, unable to speak to him.

古文：行八十里乃死。
现代文：就这样行走八十里，赵修便一命呜呼。
English: After walking eighty miles in this way, Zhao Xiu lost his life.

古文：初于后之入，修之力也。
现代文：当初于氏之入宫立为皇后，是仰仗赵修之力。
English: At first, she was supported by Zhao Xiu's strength when she entered the palace and became the empress.

古文：修死后，领军于劲犹追感旧意，经恤其家，自余朝士昔相宗承者，悉弃绝之，示己之疏远焉。
现代文：赵修死后，领军于劲还感念旧恩，对他家中经常周济，其余朝廷官吏中过去尊崇奉承赵修的人，全都同他家断绝往来，以表示自己同他的疏远。
English: After Zhao Xiu's death, the leader of the army, Yu Jin, still pined for the old favor, and often gave money to his family. The rest of the imperial officials, who had respected and flattered Zhao Xiu in the past, all cut off contact with his family to show their estrangement from him.

古文：茹皓，字禽奇，旧吴人也。
现代文：茹皓，字禽奇，是旧时吴地人。
English: Zhu Xi, the character of the bird strange, is the old Wu people.

古文：父让之，本名要，随刘骏巴陵王休若为将，至彭城。
现代文：父亲茹让之，本名为要，随从刘骏属下巴陵王休若为部将，到达彭城。
English: His father, Ru Janzhi, whose real name was Yao, followed Liu Ye's subordinate, Baling Wang Xiu Ruo, as a general and arrived in Pengcheng.

古文：是时南土饥乱，遂寓居淮阳上党。
现代文：当时南方闹饥荒动乱，就客居在淮阳上党。
English: At that time, famine and turmoil were raging in the south, so he stayed in Huaiyang to join the party.

古文：皓年十五六，为县金曹吏，有姿貌，谨惠。
现代文：茹皓十五六岁的时候，任县金曹吏，颇有姿色容貌，性情谨慎柔顺。
English: When Zhu Xi was 15 or 16 years old, he was appointed as the county's financial officer. He had a handsome appearance and a prudent and gentle disposition.

古文：南徐州刺史沈陵见而善之，自随入洛阳，举充高祖白衣左右。
现代文：南徐州刺史沈陵见了他非常喜爱，他就随沈陵来到了洛阳，被推荐充当高祖的白衣随从。
English: He was very fond of Shenling, a famous poet in southern Xuzhou. He came to Luoyang with Shenling and was recommended as a white-clad follower of Gao Zu.

古文：世宗践祚，皓侍直禁中，稍被宠接。
现代文：世宗即位以后，茹皓在宫中充当近侍，渐受世宗的宠爱。
English: After the enthronement of King Sejong, Rong served as an attendant in the palace, and gradually became the favorite of King Sejong.

古文：世宗尝拜山陵，路中欲引与同车，皓奋衣将升，黄门侍郎元匡切谏乃止。
现代文：世宗有一次前往朝拜先帝的陵墓，半路上想叫茹皓与自己同坐一车，茹皓扯起衣服就要登车，黄门侍郎元匡极力劝阻，世宗才罢休。
English: On one occasion, Sejong was on his way to pay homage to the former emperor's mausoleum. Halfway there, he wanted to invite Rui to ride in the car with him. Rui tugged at his clothes to get on the car. Huangmen's steward, Yuan Kuang, tried his best to dissuade him, but Sejong finally relented.

古文：及世宗亲政，皓眷赉日隆。
现代文：到了世宗亲临朝政的时候，茹皓受到皇帝的宠爱和赏赐日益增多。
English: By the time that Shizong personally came to the imperial government, Zhu Xi was increasingly favored and rewarded by the emperor.

古文：又以马圈之劳，当拟补员外将军。
现代文：又凭着他有马圈之劳，朝廷准备补任他为员外将军。
English: In addition, thanks to the efforts of his equerry, the imperial court was preparing to appoint him as an outside general.

古文：时赵修亦被幸，妒害之，求出皓为外守。
现代文：当时赵也被皇帝宠幸，他对茹皓非常嫉妒，就请求皇帝把茹皓调出京都到外郡出任太守。
English: At that time, Zhao was also favored by the emperor. He was very jealous of Ruyi and asked the emperor to transfer Ruyi from Kyoto to the outer counties to serve as the governor.

古文：皓亦虑见危祸，不乐内官，遂超授濮阳太守，加厉威将军。
现代文：茹皓也考虑到可能会受到陷害招致危险，不愿意充任内官，于是他被越级授任为濮阳太守，加封厉威将军。
English: Zhu Xi also considered that he might be framed and incur danger, and did not want to serve as an internal affairs officer. Therefore, he was appointed as the governor of Shenyang and given the title of General Li Wei.

古文：其父因皓讼理旧勋，先除兗州阳平太守，赐以子爵。
现代文：茹皓的父亲因为茹皓替他争辩理论旧日的功劳，在此之前就被授任兖州阳平太守，并赐给爵位为子。
English: Prior to this, Ru Ru's father was awarded the title of Yangping Governor of Zhangzhou and given a peerage because of Ru Ru's old-fashioned contribution to arguing theory for him.

古文：父子剖符名邦，郡境相接，皓忻然于去内，不以疏外为戚。
现代文：这时，父子两人都被朝廷委任分封，所任的州郡紧紧相邻，茹皓就很高兴地离开宫廷，并不因为自己被外放而感到愁苦。
English: At this time, both father and son were appointed by the imperial court, and their provinces and counties were close to each other. Zhu Xi was happy to leave the court, and did not feel sad because he was released.

古文：及赵修等败，竟获全免。
现代文：到了赵等人事败受到惩处，茹皓竟然得以完全免受牵连。
English: When Zhao and other officials were punished, Zhu Xi was able to completely avoid being implicated.

古文：虽起微细，为守乃清简寡事。
现代文：茹皓虽然出身低微，当太守时却清廉俭朴，很少生事。
English: Although Zhu Xi was from a lowly background, when he was crown prince, he was frugal and frugal, and rarely caused trouble.

古文：世宗幸鄴讲武，皓启求朝趋，解郡，授左中郎将，领直阁。
现代文：有一次世宗到邺城进行讲武演练，茹皓趁机启奏皇帝请求让自己回朝趋奉，于是皇帝免去他的郡守之职，授任他为左中郎将，兼任直。
English: On one occasion, Shizong went to Lucheng to give a lecture on martial arts, and Zhu Xi took the opportunity to appeal to the emperor to allow him to return to the imperial court. As a result, the emperor relieved him of his duties as county governor and appointed him as the left middle officer, concurrently serving as the first lieutenant.

古文：宠待如前。
现代文：他得到世宗的宠幸一如从前。
English: He is as favored by the Sejong as he ever was.

古文：皓既宦达，自云本出雁门，雁门人谄附者乃因荐皓于司徒，请为肆州大中正。
现代文：茹皓已经官位显达。自称家世本出于雁门，朝中善于谄媚攀附的雁门人就在司徒面前极力举荐如皓，请授为肆州大中正。
English: Ru Ru has already reached a high official position. The people of the Wild Goose Gate, who claim to be descended from the Wild Goose Gate, and who are good at charming and clinging to the Emperor, strongly recommended Ru Ru Ru in front of Stow, and asked him to be awarded the title of Vice President of Wuzhou University.

古文：府、省以闻，诏特依许。
现代文：有关府、省将此事奏知皇帝，皇帝诏令特予依许。
English: Relevant prefectures and provinces reported the matter to the emperor, and the emperor's edict was specifically complied with.

古文：迁骠骑将军，领华林诸作。
现代文：茹皓升任骠骑将军，总领华林园的建造工作。
English: Zhu Rong was promoted to the general of the cavalry, leading the construction work of the Chinese Forest Garden.

古文：皓性微工巧，多所兴立。
现代文：茹皓生性精明灵巧，在园林中兴建许多景点。
English: With his natural shrewdness and dexterity, he built many scenic spots in the garden.

古文：为山于天渊池西，采掘北邙及南山佳石。
现代文：在天渊池的西边垒起一座小山，用的是从北邙和南山采挖的佳美石头。
English: A hill was built on the west side of Tianyuan Pond, using gemstones mined from Beilun and Nanshan.

古文：徙竹汝颍，罗莳其间；经构楼馆，列于上下。
现代文：从汝颍移来竹子，排列栽种在其间；又建构许多楼阁亭馆，陈列于园林上下。
English: Bamboo was brought from Rugao and planted in rows. Many pavilions were built and displayed in the gardens.

古文：树草栽木，颇有野致。
现代文：栽种各种花草树木，很有一番野致。
English: planted a variety of flowers and trees, very wild.

古文：世宗心悦之，以时临幸。
现代文：世宗对此非常喜爱，经常来这里游玩。
English: Sejong is very fond of this and often comes here to play.

古文：迁冠军将军、仍骁骑将军。
现代文：茹皓又迁任冠军将军，仍保留骁骑将军。
English: Zhu Xi was transferred to the post of champion general, but still retained the post of riding general.

古文：皓贵宠日升，关与政事。
现代文：茹皓所受显贵的宠幸与日俱增，乃至参与朝廷政事。
English: Zhu Xi's favors from dignitaries increased day by day, and he even participated in the government affairs of the imperial court.

古文：太傅、北海王详以下咸祗惮附之。
现代文：从太傅、北海王元详以下群臣都对他恭敬畏惧而尽力巴结攀附。
English: The ministers from Taifu to Beihai Wang Yuanzai were all in awe of him and tried their best to curry favor with him.

古文：皓弟年尚二十，擢补员外郎。
现代文：茹皓的弟弟才只二十岁，就被擢任为员外郎。
English: Zhu Xi's younger brother was only 20 years old when he was promoted to the post of deputy foreign minister.

古文：皓娶仆射高肇从妹，于世宗为从母。
现代文：茹皓娶了仆射高肇的堂妹为妻，她对世宗来说是姨母的身份。
English: Zhu Xi married a cousin of Zhu Yao Gao Zhao, who was an aunt to Shizong.

古文：迎纳之日，详亲诣之，礼以马物。
现代文：迎娶高氏那一天，北海王元详亲自前往祝贺，并且送了马匹等礼物。
English: On the day of Gao's wedding, the North Sea King Yuan Zhe went to congratulate him in person, and sent horses and other gifts.

古文：皓又为弟聘安丰王延明妹，延明耻非旧流，不许。
现代文：茹皓又替他的弟弟聘娶安丰王元延明的妹妹，延明以他不是出于官宦世家为耻，不肯答应。
English: Zhu Xi also hired Wang Yuan Yanming's younger sister to marry Anfeng Wang Yuan on behalf of his younger brother. Yanming was ashamed that he was not from an official family and refused to agree.

古文：详劝强之云： 欲觅官职，如何不与茹皓婚姻也？ 
现代文：北海王元详劝他应允，说： 要想觅得官职，为何不与茹皓联姻呢？ 
English: Wang Yuan of the North Sea advised him in detail to agree, saying: If you want to find an official position, why not marry Ru Yi?

古文：延明乃从焉。
现代文：延明这才同意了。
English: Only then did Yanming agree.

古文：皓颇敏慧，折节下人。
现代文：茹皓比较机敏聪慧，能够谦让屈己，甘居人下。
English: Zhu Xi is more astute and intelligent, can be humble and yield to others, and is willing to live under others.

古文：而潜自经营，阴有纳受，货产盈积。
现代文：但他暗地里营求私利，接受别人的馈赠贿赂，因而金钱财物积聚甚多。
English: However, he secretly sought personal gain, accepted gifts and bribes from others, and thus accumulated a great deal of money and property.

古文：起宅宫西，朝贵弗之及也。
现代文：他在宫廷西边起盖房屋，朝中权贵没有人能赶上他的。
English: He built a house on the west side of the palace, and no one in the court could catch up with him.

古文：是时世宗虽亲万务，皓率常居内，留宿不还，传可门下奏事。
现代文：当时世宗虽然亲自处理朝廷各种事务，而茹皓经常在宫内居住，晚上也不回家，说是这样可在门下省奏陈国事。
English: At that time, although Shizong personally handled all kinds of affairs of the imperial court, Ruyi often lived in the palace and did not go home at night, saying that he could manage state affairs under his tutelage.

古文：未几，转光禄少卿，意殊不已，方欲陈马圈从先帝之劳，更希进举。
现代文：没有过多久，茹皓转任光禄少卿，但他还觉得自己心意很不满足，想向皇帝陈述自己在马圈随从先帝的功劳，希望得到更大的升进。
English: It didn't take long for Zhu Xi to be transferred to the position of Guanglu Shaoqing, but he still felt very dissatisfied and wanted to tell the emperor about his merits in following the former emperor at the stables, hoping to get a bigger promotion.

古文：初，脩、皓之宠，北海王详皆附纳之。
现代文：起初，赵、茹皓受到皇帝极大宠幸，北海王元详这些人都依附于他们。
English: At first, Zhao and Ruyi were greatly favored by the emperor, and the Northern Sea King, Yuan Zhao, was attached to them.

古文：又直阖将军刘胄本为详所荐，常感详恩，密相承望，并共来往。
现代文：又有直将军刘胄本来是由北海王元详所举荐的，常常感激北海王对他的恩遇，就对他殷情地承奉，与他们这些人共相往来。
English: There was also General Liu Bei, who was originally recommended by the King of the North Sea, Yuan Du. He was often grateful to the King of the North Sea for his kindness, so he followed him ardently and interacted with them.

古文：高肇素疾诸王，常规陷害，既知详与皓等交关相昵，乃构之世宗，云皓等将有异谋。
现代文：高肇一向嫉恨诸王，常常图谋对他们进行陷害，他既然知道了北海王元详与茹皓等人往来密切，交接亲昵，就罗织他们的罪名向世宗告发，说茹皓等人一起图谋叛逆作乱。
English: Gao Zhao had always been jealous of the kings and often plotted to frame them. Since he knew that the King of the North Sea, Yuan Zhao, had a close and intimate relationship with Zhu Xi and others, he fabricated their crimes and reported them to Shizong, saying that Zhu Xi and others were plotting together to rebel and create turmoil.

古文：世宗乃如中尉崔亮令奏皓、胄、常季贤、陈扫静四人擅势纳贿及私乱诸事，即日执皓等皆诣南台。
现代文：于是，世宗就召中尉崔亮入宫，令他启奏茹皓、刘胄、常季贤、陈扫静四个人擅权倚势，受纳贿赂以及图谋逆乱各种罪名，即日捉拿茹皓等人，全部押往南台。
English: As a result, King Sejong summoned Lieutenant Choe Ryong to the palace and ordered him to arrest four people, Ru Ye, Liu Ye, Chang Ji Hyun, and Chen So Ching, on charges of abuse of power, accepting bribes, and plotting insurrection. On the same day, all of them were taken to Nantai.

古文：翌日，奏处罪，其晚就家杀之。
现代文：第二天，又奏请皇帝处以罪罚，当天夜晚就令茹皓在自己家中自尽。
English: The next day, he also petitioned the emperor to punish the crime, and that night he ordered Zhu Xi to commit suicide in his own home.

古文：皓妻被发出堂，哭而迎皓。
现代文：茹皓的妻子披头散发走出厅堂，痛哭流涕迎接茹皓。
English: Ru Ru's wife walked out of the hall with her head bowed, weeping bitterly as she greeted Ru Ru.

古文：自理经年，临淮王彧时为廷尉，久不断决。
现代文：茹皓径直走进室内同妻子大哭诀别，服毒药身亡。茹皓之子怀朗，官至南青州刺史。兴和初年，因犯罪被皇帝赐死，他的子侄全都被迁徙到边地。
English: Ru Yi walked straight into the room to say a tearful goodbye to his wife and took poison to his death. Ru Yi's son, Huailang, became the official historian of South Qingzhou. In the first year of Xinghe, he was sentenced to death by the emperor for a crime, and all of his nephews and nieces were moved to outlying areas.

古文：孝昌初卒。侯刚，字乾之，河南洛阳人，其先代人也。
现代文：侯刚，字乾之，河南洛阳人，他的祖先是代国人。
English: Hou Gang, also known as Qian Zhi, is from Luoyang, Henan Province. His ancestors were Chinese immigrants.

古文：本出寒微，少以善于鼎俎，进饪出入。
现代文：侯刚本来出身贫寒微贱，年轻时擅长于烹调，在宫中从事烹饪工作。
English: Originally from a poor and humble background, Hou Gang was good at cooking when he was young and engaged in culinary work in the palace.

古文：久之，拜中散，累迁冗从仆射、尝食典御。
现代文：久后，被授予中散之职，接连升任冗从仆射、尝食典御等官。
English: After a long time, he was awarded the position of Zhongsan, and was successively promoted to the positions of Zojubei, Hubei, and Zushi.

古文：世宗以其质直，赐名刚焉。
现代文：世宗因为他性格质朴刚直，给他赐名为刚。
English: Sejong gave him the name Gang because of his simple and straightforward personality.

古文：稍迁奉车都尉、右中郎将、领刀剑左右，加游击将军、城门校尉。
现代文：不久又迁升为奉车都尉、右中郎将、领刀剑左右，加封游击将军、城门校尉。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to lieutenant of the imperial carriage, captain of the right middle rank, captain of the left and right sides of the sword, captain of the guerrilla general, and captain of the castle gate.

古文：迁武卫将军，仍领典御，又加通直散骑常侍。
现代文：又迁升为武卫将军，仍兼任典御之职，加授为通直散骑常侍。
English: He was also promoted to the rank of General of the Imperial Guards, still holding the post of Grand Master, and was additionally awarded the title of General of the Horse.

古文：诏曰： 太和之季，蚁寇侵疆，先皇于不豫之中，命师出讨。
现代文：世宗下诏说： 太和末年，蚁寇贼侵犯边境，先皇在生病的情况下，下令出兵征讨。
English: Emperor Sejong issued the following edict: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Taizu, ant-thieves invaded the border, and Emperor Sejong, who was ill, ordered troops to be sent to investigate.

古文：抚戎暴露，触御乖和，朕属当监国，弗获随侍，而左右服事，唯藉忠勤。
现代文：边地戎人显露凶相，冒犯朝廷，违背和议，我那时被委托代理国政，不能得到随侍之人，但左右之臣用心侍奉，都凭着自己的忠诚勤勉。
English: At that time, I was entrusted to represent state affairs, and I could not get an attendant, but the courtiers around me served diligently, all with their own loyalty.

古文：刚于违和之中，辛勤行饪。
现代文：侯刚在我患病之时，辛苦勤劳地烹调饮食。
English: At the time of my illness, Hou Gang was hard at work preparing meals.

古文：追远录诚，宜先推叙。
现代文：追忆他过去的功劳，记述他的忠诚之心，应当优行推举，对他叙位授官。
English: Recall his past achievements, record his loyalty, and give him a promotion to the highest rank.

古文：其以刚为右卫大将军。 
现代文：特授侯刚为右卫大将军。 
English: Special Professor Hou Gang is the General of the Right Division of Inner Palace Guards.

古文：后领太子中庶子。
现代文：后来侯刚又任太子中庶子。
English: Later, Hou Gang was also appointed as the prince's middle son.

古文：世宗崩，刚与侍中崔光迎肃宗于东宫。
现代文：世宗驾崩，侯刚与侍中崔光在东宫迎接肃宗即位。
English: After the death of King Sejong, Hou Gang and Choe Kwang, an aide-de-camp, went to the East Palace to welcome the enthronement of King Sojong.

古文：寻除卫尉卿，封武阳县开国侯，邑千二百户。
现代文：不久被授予卫尉卿之职，封为武阳县开国侯，食邑一千二百户。
English: He was soon awarded the post of Lieutenant of the Guards, and was named the founding lord of Wuyang County, with 1,200 households.

古文：俄为侍中、抚军将军、恆州大中正。
现代文：侯刚很快又晋升为侍中、抚军将军、恒州大中正。
English: Hou Gang was soon promoted to the rank of chamberlain, general of the army, and vice-president of Hengzhou University.

古文：迁卫将军，表让侍中，诏不许。
现代文：又升为卫将军，他上表辞让侍中之职，皇帝未予准许。
English: He was also promoted to Wei general, but the emperor did not allow him to resign from the position of chamberlain.

古文：进爵为公，以给侍之劳，加赏散伯。
现代文：又进升爵位为公，因为侍奉皇帝有功，加封散伯。
English: He was also promoted to the peerage as a public servant, because he had served the emperor with merit, and was awarded the rank of sambo.

古文：熙平初，除左卫将军，余官如故。
现代文：熙平初年，授予左卫将军，其余官职照旧不变。
English: In the first year of Heiping, he was awarded the title of General of the Left Division, and the rest of his official positions remained unchanged.

古文：侍中游肇出为相州。
现代文：侍中游肇出任为相州刺史。
English: The samurai Nakayu Hajime was appointed as Soshu sashimi.

古文：刚言于灵太后曰： 昔高氏擅权，游肇抗衡不屈，先帝所知，四海同见，而出牧一籓，未尽其美，宜还引入，以辅圣主。 
现代文：侯刚就对灵太后说： 昔日高氏擅权，游肇曾经与之对抗而不屈服，这是先帝所知道的，全国有目共睹的，而现在让他任一个藩地的州牧，此事未必尽善尽美，最好还是把他召回京都，以便让他在朝廷辅佐圣明之主。 
English: Hou Gang said to the Dowager Empress: In the past, the Gao clan had arrogated power, and You Zhao had fought against it without giving in. This was known to the former emperor and was obvious to the whole country. But now he has appointed him as a prefect of a domain. This may not be perfect. It is better to call him back to Kyoto so that he can assist the Lord of Sacred Light in the imperial court.

古文：太后善之。
现代文：太后认为这个意见很好。
English: The Queen Mother thought it was very good.

古文：刚宠任既隆，江阳王继、尚书长孙徐皆以女妻其子。
现代文：侯刚受到朝廷如此厚重的宠爱和信任，江阳王元继、尚书长孙稚都把自己的女儿嫁给了他的儿子。
English: Hou Gang was so favored and trusted by the imperial court that Jiangyang Wang Yuanji and Shang Shuchang's eldest grandson both married their daughters to his son.

古文：司空、任城王澄以其起田膳，宰颇窃侮之，云： 此近为我举食。 
现代文：司空、任城王元澄因为侯刚是由做朝廷的膳食官起家的，私下里对他多有侮慢轻视，曾在一次宴席上对他说： 你走近前来给我举食。 
English: Siku, the current king of the city, Motosumi, because Hou Gang started his career as a catering officer of the imperial court, secretly had a lot of insults and contempt for him. At a banquet, he said to him: You come closer and bring me food.

古文：然公坐对集，敬遇不亏。
现代文：然而侯刚却和顺地面对他坐着，恭敬相待，并不有亏于礼节。
English: However, Hou Gang sat obediently facing him and treated each other with respect, which was not a breach of etiquette.

古文：后刚坐掠杀试射羽林，为御史中尉元匡所弹，廷尉处刚大辟。
现代文：后来，侯刚由于拷打一名羽林军致死而获罪，被御史中尉元匡所弹劾，廷尉对侯刚处以死刑。
English: Later, Hou Gang was found guilty of torturing a member of the Yulin Army to death, and was impeached by Imperial Lieutenant Yuan Kuang. The imperial lieutenant sentenced Hou Gang to death.

古文：尚书令、任城王澄为之言于灵太后，侯刚历仕前朝，事有可取，纤芥之疵，未宜便致于法。
现代文：尚书令、任城王元澄替他在灵太后面前求情，说侯刚历任前朝重要官职，办事卓有成效，现在有了这点微小疵瑕，不应当使他受如此重的刑罚。
English: According to the letter, Rencheng Wang Yuancheng interceded for him in front of the Empress Dowager, saying that Hou Gang had successively served as an important official in the previous dynasty, and his work was very effective. Now, with this tiny flaw, he should not be subjected to such a heavy punishment.

古文：灵太后乃引见廷尉卿裴延俊、少卿袁翻于宣光殿，问曰： 刚因公事掠人，邂逅致死，律文不坐。
现代文：灵太后就在宣光殿召见廷尉卿裴延隽、少卿袁翻，问他们说： 侯刚因公事拷问人，不期误伤人命，按照法律条文不应定罪。
English: The Dowager Empress summoned Lieutenant General Pei Yanjun and Junior Secretary Yuan Fu to the Xuan Guang Palace and asked them: "Hou Gang tortured people for official business and accidentally injured people's lives. According to the provisions of the law, he should not be convicted.

古文：卿处其大辟，竟何所依？ 
现代文：你们处以他死刑，究竟有什么依据？ 
English: On what basis did you sentence him to death?

古文：鄱对曰： 案律邂逅不坐者，谓情理已露，而隐避不引，必须棰挞，取其款言，谓挝挞以理之类。
现代文：袁翻回答太后说： 按照法律的规定，不期而误伤人命不予问死罪的情况，是说被拷问的人所犯的过失于情于理都很明显，但他却隐瞒遮避而不肯承认，必须使用杖刑加以鞭挞，以便让他招出真情，是说依一定道理而施以笞挞这一类的情况。
English: Yuan Fu replied to the empress dowager, "According to the provisions of the law, the circumstances in which the death penalty is not imposed for accidentally injuring a person's life are that the tortures committed by the tortured person are very obvious to reason, but he conceals and avoids and refuses to admit. It is necessary to use the cane punishment to whip him in order to let him bring out the truth. It is said that the use of the cane according to a certain reason is such a situation.

古文：至于此人，问则具首。正宜依犯结案，不应横加棰朴。
现代文：至于这个被拷打致死的人，刚刚施以拷问就全都坦白自首，正应当依他所犯的过失了结此案，不应对他横加鞭笞。
English: As for the man who was tortured to death, he confessed to everything as soon as he was tortured, and the case should be settled according to the fault he committed, and he should not be whipped.

古文：兼刚口唱打杀，挝筑非理，本有杀心，事非邂逅。
现代文：更何况侯刚当时口里大叫打死，毫无道理地对那人大加杖击鞭打，本来就存有杀人的动机，绝不是偶然误伤人命。
English: What's more, Hou had just shouted at the time, "Beat him to death," and unjustifiably beat and whipped the man with a cane. There was already a motive to kill, and it was by no means an accidental injury to human life.

古文：处之大辟，未乖宪典。 
现代文：对侯刚处以死刑，并不违背法律的规定。 
English: Sentencing Hou Gang to death is not against the law.

古文：太后曰： 卿等且还，当别有判。 
现代文：太后说： 你们暂且回去，我当另有判处。 
English: The empress dowager said, "Let you go back for the time being, I shall give you a different sentence."

古文：于是令曰： 廷尉执处侯刚，于法如猛。
现代文：于是下达诏令说： 廷尉对侯刚执行的处置，对于法律来说或许过于苛严。
English: Therefore, an imperial edict was issued, saying: The imperial lieutenant's treatment of Hou Gang may be too harsh for the law.

古文：刚既意在为公，未宜便依所执。
现代文：侯刚既然本意在于为公，不应当就依照廷尉所持的主张进行处置。
English: Since Hou Gang's intention was to serve the public, he should not be dealt with according to the opinion held by the courtier.

古文：但轻剿民命，理无全舍，可削封三百户，解尝衣典御。 
现代文：但侯刚轻率地加害人命，在道理上不能完全没有责任，可以削去他受封的食邑三百户，罢除他的尝食典御之职。 
English: However, since Hou Gang recklessly caused the loss of human life, he should not be completely free from responsibility. He should be stripped of the 300 households of food villages he was awarded and removed from his position as a food taster.

古文：刚于是颇为失意。
现代文：侯刚从此以后就颇为失意。
English: Since then, Hou Gang has been quite disappointed.

古文：刚自太和进食，遂为典御，历两都、三帝、二太后，将三十年，至此始解。
现代文：侯刚自从太和年间为皇帝进奉饮食以来，任典御之职，经历了朝廷两都、三位皇帝、两位太后执政，将近三十年，到这时才予以罢免。
English: Since serving as the emperor's butler during the reign of Empress Dowager Cixi, Hou Gang has held the post of the Emperor's butler. He has experienced the reigns of two capitals, three emperors, and two empresses, and has been in power for nearly thirty years. He was only dismissed at this time.

古文：未几，加散骑常侍。
现代文：没过多久，加封侯刚为散骑常侍。
English: It didn't take long for Jafeng Hougang to become a horseback riding attendant.

古文：御史中尉元匡之废也，太后访代匡者，刚为太傅、清河王怿所举，遂除车骑将军，领御史中尉，常侍、卫尉如故。
现代文：后来御史中尉元匡遭到罢黜，太后访选取代元匡职务的人，侯刚被太傅、清河王元怿所举荐，于是升任他为车骑将军，兼任御史中尉，常侍、卫尉等官职依然照旧。
English: Later, the lieutenant of imperial history, Yuan Kuang, was ousted, and the person who was elected to replace Yuan Kuang by the empress dowager, Hou Gang, was recommended by the Taifu, King Yuan of Qinghe, and he was promoted to be the general of chariot and cavalry, concurrently serving as the lieutenant of imperial history, and the official positions such as the attendant and the guard were still the same.

古文：及领军元叉执政擅权，树结亲党，刚长子，叉之妹夫，乃引刚为侍中、左卫将军，还领尚食典御，以为枝援。
现代文：到后来元叉擅权执政，擅威弄权，侯刚的长子是元叉的妹夫，元叉就召侯刚为侍中、左卫将军，仍旧兼任尚食御典，以他作为亲党。
English: Later, Yuan Shikai ruled with arbitrary power and used intimidation to gain power. The eldest son of Hou Gang was Yuan Shikai's brother-in-law, and Yuan Shikai called Hou Gang to be the Vice Admiral and General of the Left Division of the Imperial Guard. He still concurrently served as Shang Shikai's regent, using him as a parent of the party.

古文：俄加车骑大将军、领左右，复前削之封。
现代文：不久又加授车骑大将军、领左右，并恢复他前次被削减的封地。
English: He was soon promoted to the rank of general of cavalry, commander of the left and right, and his fiefdom, which had previously been reduced, was restored.

古文：寻加仪同，复领御史中尉。
现代文：过不久又加授仪同三司之职，再次兼任御史中尉。
English: Soon after, he was given the additional post of the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Ceremonies, and again concurrently served as a lieutenant of the Ministry of History.

古文：刚启军旅稍兴，国用不足，求以封邑俸粟赈给征人，肃宗许之。
现代文：侯刚上表启奏，因战争不断兴起，国家财用不足，请求把自己的封邑和俸粟拿来赈济出征的士卒，肃宗准许了他的请求。
English: At the opening of the table, Hou Gang, due to the continuous rise of the war and the shortage of national financial resources, requested that his fiefs and salaries be used to support the soldiers who went to war. Su Zong granted his request.

古文：孝昌元年，除领军，余官如故。
现代文：孝昌元年，侯刚被授予领军之职，其余官职照旧。
English: In the first year of Xiaochang, Hou Gang was awarded the position of leading the army, and the rest of the official positions remained unchanged.

古文：初元叉之解领军也，灵太后以叉腹心尚多，恐难卒制，故权以刚代之，示安其意。
现代文：当初元叉被解除领军的职务以后，灵太后认为元叉的心腹还有不少，恐怕难以很快制服他们，所以权且用侯刚来取代领军之职，以表示让他安心的意思。
English: At first, after Yuan Zha was relieved of his duties as the leader of the army, Empress Dowager Cang thought that there were still many of Yuan Zha's confidants, and it would be difficult to subdue them quickly. Therefore, she decided to replace his position as the leader of the army with Hou Gang to express her intention to reassure him.

古文：寻出为散骑常侍、冀州刺史、将军、仪同三司，刚行在道，诏曰： 刚因缘时会，恩隆自久。擢于凡品，越升显爵。
现代文：不久又授予他散骑常侍、冀州刺史、将军、仪同三司等职。侯刚前往赴任走到半路，皇帝下达诏令说： 侯刚碰上好的因缘机遇，长久蒙受朝廷深厚的恩宠，出身于平凡低微的等级，越级升进为显赫的官爵。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the posts of strolling equerry, Jizhou chief historian, general, and secretary of the Third Division of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office of the General Office.

古文：往以微勤，赏同利建，宠灵之极，超绝夷等。
现代文：过去以他以微薄的辛劳，受到与有功勋建树者同等的赏赐，对他的恩宠已经达到极点，极大地超越了与他同辈的人。
English: In the past, with his meager toil, he received the same reward as the meritorious builders, and his grace has reached the extreme, greatly surpassing those of his peers.

古文：曾无犬马识主之诚，方怀枭镜返噬之志。
现代文：但他并无犬马识主的忠诚之心，却怀有枭獍反食父母之志。
English: However, he does not have the loyalty of a dog or a horse to know the Lord, but has the aspiration of being a good parent.

古文：与权臣元叉婚姻朋党，亏违典制，长直禁中，一出一入，迭为奸防。
现代文：侯刚与权臣元叉系婚姻朋党，亏负违背朝廷的典章制度，长久径直出入宫禁，内外勾结，勾搭成奸。
English: Hou Gang and the powerful vassal Yuan Zhao were married to each other and were party cronies. They violated the imperial court's rules and regulations system, went straight into and out of the palace for a long time, colluded inside and outside, and hooked up to commit treason.

古文：又与刘腾共为心膂，间隔二宫，逼胁内外。
现代文：又与刘腾互为心膂，阻隔东西二宫，胁迫朝廷内外。
English: He and Liu Teng were at each other's throats, blocking the East-West Second Court and coercing both inside and outside the court.

古文：且位居绳宪，纠察是司，宜立格言，势同鹰隼。
现代文：而且他位居御史之职，执掌纠察官吏之责，应当自立办事准则，威势如同鹰隼。
English: Moreover, he is in the position of imperial historian, holding the responsibility of picketing officials, and should be self-reliant. He is as powerful as an eagle's beak.

古文：方严楚挞，枉服贞良，专任凶威，以直为曲。
现代文：但他却恃威滥施挞伐，枉屈贞忠善良之人，专任凶威，以直为曲。
English: On the other hand, he is a bully, a tyrant, a tyrant, a tyrant, a tyrant, a tyrant.

古文：不忠不道，深暴民听；附下罔上，事彰幽显。
现代文：不忠不道，深有损于民之所望；欺下罔上，事实昭著明显。
English: Being disloyal and unfaithful is deeply detrimental to the people's expectations; being deceitful, the facts are obvious.

古文：莫大之罪，难从宥原，封爵之科，理宜贬夺。
现代文：所犯下莫大之罪，实难于宽宥原谅，所封的官职爵位，按理应当贬谪罢除。
English: It is really difficult to forgive the enormous sins committed, and the official titles and ranks should be demoted and removed.

古文：可征虏将军，余悉削黜。
现代文：可保留他的征虏将军之职，其余职位全部予以削除罢黜。 
English: He can retain his post of conscript general, and all other posts will be removed.

古文：刚终于家。
现代文：侯刚最终死于家中。
English: Hou Gang eventually died at home.

古文：永安中，赠司徒公。
现代文：永安年间，追赠他为司徒公。
English: During the Yongan era, he was posthumously awarded the title of Stogong.

古文：刚长子详，自奉朝请，稍迁通直散骑侍郎、冠军将军、主衣都统。
现代文：侯刚的长子侯详，奉朝请为官渐渐升任通直散骑侍郎、冠军将军、主衣都统。
English: Hou Gang's eldest son, Hou Jie, gradually rose through the ranks to become a straight horseman, champion general, and master of the imperial court.

古文：刚以上谷先有侯氏，于是始家焉。
现代文：侯刚因为在上谷这个地方早有侯氏宗族，所以就在此地家居。
English: Hou Gang lived in this area because there was already a Hou clan in this part of Shangguan.

古文：正光中，又请以详为燕州刺史，将军如故，欲为家世之基。
现代文：正光年间，又请求授予侯详为燕州刺史，将军之职照旧，想要以此作为家族世系的基础。
English: During the Zhengguang years, he also requested to be awarded the title of "Hou Zhao" for the history of Yanzhou, and the post of general as before, hoping to use this as the basis for the family lineage.

古文：寻进后将军。
现代文：不久进升为后将军。
English: He was soon promoted to rear admiral.

古文：五年，拜司徒左长史，领尝药典御、燕州大中正。
现代文：正光五年，侯详被授阳司徒左长史之职，任尝药典御、燕州大中正。
English: In the fifth year of Zheng Guang, Hou Zhe was awarded the post of Yang Shitu Zuo Changshi, and was appointed as the Pharmacist and the Vice President of Yanzhou University.

古文：兴和中，骠骑将军、殷州刺史。
现代文：兴和年间，任骠骑将军、殷州刺史。
English: During the Heian and Qing dynasties, he held the posts of General of Horse and General of Cavalry, and Governor of Yinzhou.

古文：还朝，久而卒。
现代文：后来回到朝廷，过了一段时间才去世。
English: He later returned to the imperial court and died some time later.

