古文：起上章摄提格，尽玄黓执徐六月，凡二年有奇。
现代文：起上章摄提格，尽玄黓执徐六月，凡二年有奇。
English: From the last chapter of the film, it is strange that every two years there is a strange June.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝中之下长兴元年春，正月，董璋遣兵筑七寨于剑门。
现代文：后唐明宗长兴元年春季正月，东川节度使董璋派兵在剑门修筑七座营寨。
English: In the first month of the spring of the first year of the post-Tangming sect Changxing, the Dongchuan Festival made Dong Hao send soldiers to build seven camps in Jianmen.

古文：辛巳，孟知祥遣赵季良如梓州修好。
现代文：辛巳，西川节度使孟知祥派其副使赵季良到梓州来与董璋修好，以相结纳。
English: Soon after, the Saikawa shogunate ordered Meng Zhixiang to send his deputy envoy Zhao Jiliang to Zizhou to make peace with Dong Xuan and make a deal.

古文：鸿胪少卿郭在徽奏请铸当五千、三千、一千大钱；朝廷以其指虚为实，无识妄言，左迁卫尉少卿、同正。
现代文：鸿胪少卿郭在徽奏请铸造当五千、三千、一千使用的大钱，后唐朝廷以为这种指虚为实的主张，是没有见识的胡说，把他贬降为卫尉少卿，比同正员。
English: Hongtao Shaoqing Guo requested to mint large coins of 5,000, 3,000, and 1,000 yuan in Huisong. Later, the Tang court thought that this kind of false claim was nonsense, and demoted him to the rank of Lieutenant Shaoqing, and compared him to a regular member.

古文：吴徙平原王澈为德化王。
现代文：吴国调迁平原王杨澈为德化王。
English: Yang Che, the king of the plain, was transferred by the State of Wu to become the king of virtue.

古文：二月，乙未朔，赵季良还成都，谓孟知祥曰： 董公贪残好胜，志大谋短，终为西川之患。 
现代文：二月，乙未朔，赵季良从梓州返回成都，对孟知祥说： 董璋这个人贪残好胜，野心大，谋略短，终究是我们西川的祸害。 
English: In February, Zhao Jiliang returned to Chengdu from Zizhou and said to Meng Zhixiang: "This person, Dong Xuan, is greedy, ambitious, and short-sighted. After all, he is the scourge of our West River.

古文：都指挥使李仁罕、张业欲置宴召知祥；先二日，有尼告二将谋以宴日害知祥；知祥诘之，无状，丁酉，推始言者军校都延昌、王行本，腰斩之。
现代文：孟知祥的部属都指挥使李仁罕、张业打算设酒席宴请他，此前二日，有尼姑密告说，这两个属将阴谋在宴请时谋害孟知祥；孟知祥严加查究，没有获得证据。丁酉，归罪于最先传言此事的军校都延昌和王行本，把二人处以腰斩。
English: Meng Zhixiang's subordinates all ordered Li Renhan and Zhang Ye to plan a banquet to invite him. Two days before, a nun had tipped them off that the two subordinates would plot to kill Meng Zhixiang during the banquet. Meng Zhixiang was strictly investigated and no evidence was obtained. Ding Yao blamed Yanchang and Wang Xingben, the military school that first rumored the matter, and beheaded them both.

古文：戊戌，就宴，尽去左右，独诣仁罕第；仁罕叩头流涕曰： 老兵惟尽死以报德。 
现代文：戊戌，孟知祥去参加宴会，把随从人员都打发开，独自到李仁罕的住宅；李仁罕叩头流涕地说： 我是你的老部下，今后只有尽死命来报答你的恩德。 
English: Wuzhen, Meng Zhixiang went to the banquet, sent all the attendants away, and went to Li Renhan's house alone; Li Renhan bowed and said: I am your old subordinate, and in the future, I can only repay your kindness with my life.

古文：由是诸将皆亲附而服之。
现代文：从此，孟知祥所部诸将都心悦诚服地亲近和依附于他。
English: From then on, all the generals in Meng Zhixiang's headquarters were sincerely close to and attached to him.

古文：壬子，孟知祥、董璋同上表言： 两川闻朝廷于阆中建节，绵、遂益兵，无不忧恐。 
现代文：壬子，孟知祥与董璋共同向后唐明宗上表称： 东川、西川听说朝廷在阆中建立节度使，在绵州、遂州增加兵力，无不感到担忧和恐惧。 
English: Jinzi, Meng Zhixiang and Dong Xi jointly moved backward to the Tang and Ming Dynasties. Dongchuan and Xichuan heard that the imperial court had established a special envoy in Shanzhong and increased troops in Mengzhou and Suizhou, and they all felt worried and afraid.

古文：上以诏书慰谕之。
现代文：后唐明宗下诏书慰抚劝导他们。
English: Later, Emperor Mingzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to comfort and advise them.

古文：乙卯，上祀圆丘，大赦，改元。
现代文：乙卯，明宗在圜丘祭天，实行大赦，把年号改为长兴。
English: Second, the Ming Dynasty held a day of worship at Mengqiu, implemented an amnesty, and changed the era name to Changxing.

古文：凤翔节度使兼中书令李从严入朝陪祀，三月，壬申，制徙从严为宣武节度使。
现代文：凤翔节度使兼中书令李从入朝陪祭，三月，壬申，明宗下令把李从调迁为宣武节度使。
English: In March, Emperor Mingzong of Jinshin ordered Li Zong to be transferred to be the envoy of the Xuanwu Festival.

古文：癸酉，吴主立江都王琏为太子。
现代文：癸酉，吴国君主杨溥立江都王杨琏为太子。
English: At that time, Yang Xuan, the ruler of the State of Wu, made Yang Xuan, the king of the capital city, the crown prince.

古文：丙子，以宣徽使硃弘照为凤翔节度使。
现代文：丙子，后唐任命宣徽使朱弘昭为凤翔节度使。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Zhu Hongzhao was appointed by Emperor Xuanzong to be Fengxiang's regent.

古文：康福奏克保静镇，斩李匡宾。
现代文：朔方节度使康福报奏：攻克了保静镇，杀死了叛军首领李匡宾。
English: Shuo Fang's victory made Kangfu report: he conquered the town of Bao Jing and killed the rebel leader Li Kuangbin.

古文：复以安义为昭义军。
现代文：后唐恢复安义军的旧名，仍称昭义军。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, the old name of the Anyi Army was restored, and it was still called the Zhaoyi Army.

古文：帝将立曹淑妃为后，淑妃谓王德妃曰： 吾素病中烦，倦于接对，妹代我为之。 
现代文：后唐明宗将要立曹淑妃为皇后，淑妃对王德妃说： 我平素胸中烦热有病，厌倦那些接待应对的事，请你代替我去应承。 
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Mingzong was going to make Cao Shufei the empress. Shufei said to Wang Defei, "I'm sick and tired of receiving and responding to things. I'd like you to do it for me."

古文：德妃曰： 中宫敌偶至尊，谁敢干之！ 
现代文：德妃说： 入中宫做皇后可以同天子匹偶，平起平坐，谁敢去干预！ 
English: Princess Tokuhi said, "When you enter the Middle Palace and become the empress, you can be the equal of the emperor. Who would dare to interfere?

古文：庚寅，立淑妃为皇后。
现代文：庚寅，立淑妃为皇后。
English: Emperor Go-In made Princess Sukhei his empress.

古文：德妃事后恭谨，后亦怜之。
现代文：德妃对待皇后恭顺谨慎，皇后也怜爱她。
English: Princess Tokuhi treated the empress with deference and caution, and the empress also pitied her.

古文：初，王德妃因安重诲得进，常德之。
现代文：起初，王德妃是由于枢密权臣安重诲的关系才得以入宫的，经常感念安重诲。
English: At the beginning, Wang Defei was only able to enter the palace due to the relationship between the security and protection of the privy council, and she often thought about the security and protection.

古文：帝性俭约，及在位久，宫中用度稍侈，重诲每规谏。
现代文：明宗本来习性俭朴，在位既久，宫内的费用也逐渐奢侈，安重诲时常规劝他。
English: Emperor Ming's original habits were frugal, and as he had been on the throne for a long time, the expenses in the imperial court had gradually become extravagant.

古文：妃取外库锦造地衣，重诲切谏，引刘后为戒；妃由是怨之。
现代文：德妃调取外库的锦帛做地毯，安重诲极力谏阻，并引用前朝庄宗时刘皇后的事例以为戒鉴；德妃从此嫌怨安重诲。
English: Tefui brought in brocade from an outside warehouse to make carpets, but An Chongyun tried her best to resist, and cited the example of Empress Liu during the reign of Zhuang Zong as a warning; Tefui now resented An Chongyun.

古文：高从诲遣使奉表诣吴，告以坟墓在中国，恐为唐所讨，吴兵援之不及，谢绝之。吴遣兵击之，不克。
现代文：荆南高从诲派使者奉呈表章来到吴国，表示高氏祖坟在北方，害怕被后唐朝廷所讨伐，那时吴兵会来不及援助他，因此，谢绝了吴国对他的笼络。
English: Jing Nanggao sent an envoy from Zhaozhou to Wuzhong with a formal seal, saying that Gao's ancestral tomb was in the north, and that he was afraid of being attacked by the post-Tang court. At that time, the Wuzhong would not be able to help him, so he refused to be enticed by Wuzhong.

古文：董璋恐绵州刺史武虔裕窥其所为，夏，四月，甲午朔，表兼行军司马，囚之府廷。
现代文：吴国便派兵进攻荆南，没有能攻下来。董璋害怕绵州使武虔裕窥探他的行动，夏季，四月，甲午朔，上表推荐他兼任行军司马，把他诱至梓州，囚押在东川府廷。
English: Wu then sent troops to attack Jingnan, but failed to take it. Dong Xuan was afraid that Mianzhou would spy on his actions. In the summer, in April, in the morning of the first day of the second month, the table above recommended that he also serve as a marching steed, lured him to Zizhou, and imprisoned him in the Dongchuan Palace.

古文：宣武节度使符习，自恃宿将，论议多抗安重诲，重诲求其过失，奏之，丁酉，诏习以太子太师致仕。
现代文：宣武节度使符习，自恃是后唐宿将，论事议政常常与枢密使安重诲对抗，重诲寻找他的过错，奏告明宗；丁酉，下诏命令符习以太子太师的荣誉名衔告老去官。
English: The proclamation of the festival of arms caused Fu Xi, who believed himself to be the post-Tang shogun, to argue and discuss politics, often confronting the privy councilor An Chongchu, who was looking for his fault, to report to Mingzong; Ding Xi, ordered Fu Xi to retire from the honorary title of the Grandmaster of the Etheric Son.

古文：戊戌，加孟知祥兼中书令，夏鲁奇同平章事。
现代文：戊戌，加封孟知祥兼任中书令，夏鲁奇任同平章事。
English: Wuzhen, Meng Zhixiang concurrently held the post of middle secretary, and Xialuqi held the post of co-equal secretary.

古文：初，帝在真定，李从珂与安重诲饮酒争言，从珂殴重诲，重诲走免；既醒，悔谢，重诲终衔之。
现代文：起初，后唐明宗镇守真定时，其养子李从珂与安重诲曾在饮酒时争吵，李从珂殴打安重诲，安重诲躲避，才得以免遭殴打；酒醒以后，李从珂悔悟道歉，安重诲始终记恨他。
English: At first, after the Tang and Ming Dynasties, Li Congke, the adopted son of Li Congke, and An Chongchu had a quarrel while drinking. Li Congke beat An Chongchu, and An Chongchu dodged, and was able to avoid being beaten. After sobering up, Li Congke repented and apologized, and An Chongchu always remembered him.

古文：至是，重诲用事，自皇子从荣、从厚皆敬事不暇。
现代文：到此时，安重诲掌权用事，皇子李从荣、李从厚都尊敬他不敢怠慢。
English: By this time, An Chongzhen was in power, and the prince Li Congrong and Li Conghou both respected him and dared not neglect him.

古文：时从珂为河中节度使、同平章事，重诲屡短之于帝，帝不听。
现代文：当时李从珂任河中节度使、同平章事，安重诲多次在明宗面前说他的坏话，明宗不听。
English: At that time, Li went from serving as Ke Renhe's ceremonial envoy to Tong Ping Zhang, and An Chong repeatedly spoke ill of him in front of Mingzong. Mingzong did not listen.

古文：重诲乃矫以帝命谕河东牙内指挥使杨彦温使逐之。
现代文：安重诲便假造明宗意旨，谕令河中牙内指挥使杨彦温驱逐他。
English: An Chongyun fabricated the intention of the Ming Dynasty and ordered the commander of the Inner Court of the Middle Dynasties to order Yang Yanwen to expel him.

古文：是日，从珂出城阅马，彦温勒兵闭门拒之，从珂使人扣门诘之曰： 吾将汝厚，何为如是？ 
现代文：这一天，李从珂出城检阅战马，杨彦温领兵关了城门，拒绝让他进城。李从珂命人扣门，质问他说： 我待你很厚重，你怎么能这样做？ 
English: On this day, Li left Ke for the city to inspect the horses. Yang Yanwen, the leader of the soldiers, closed the city gate and refused to let him enter the city. Li closed the door and asked him, "I have treated you very harshly. How could you do this?"

古文：对曰： 彦温非敢负恩，受枢密院宣耳。请公入朝。 
现代文：杨彦温回答说： 我彦温不敢对您负恩，我是受枢密院的宣示，请您入朝。 
English: Yang Yanwen replied, "I, Yanwen, dare not be ungrateful to you. I was asked by the Privy Council to invite you to the Imperial Court.

古文：从珂止于虞乡，遣使以状闻。
现代文：李从珂暂驻扎在虞乡，派使者把情况向朝廷报告。
English: Li Congke temporarily stationed in Yu Township and sent an envoy to report the situation to the imperial court.

古文：使者至，壬寅，帝问重诲曰： 彦温安得此言？ 
现代文：使者到了以后，壬寅，明宗问安重诲说： 杨彦温怎么能这么说呢？ 
English: After the messenger arrived, Ren Yin, Ming Zong asked An Chongyun: "How can Yang Yanwen say such a thing?

古文：对曰： 此奸人妄言耳，宜速讨之。 
现代文：安重诲回答说： 这是坏人杨彦温的胡说，应该赶快派兵征讨他。 
English: An Chongyun replied: This is the nonsense of the villain Yang Yanwen, we should quickly send troops to recruit him.

古文：帝疑之，欲诱致彦温讯其事，除彦温绛州刺史。
现代文：明宗怀疑此事，想把杨彦温引诱来讯问情况，便调杨彦温为绛州刺史。
English: Mingzong suspected the matter and wanted to lure Yang Yanwen to interrogate the situation, so he transferred Yang Yanwen to Zhangzhou.

古文：重诲固请发兵击之，乃命西都留守索自通、步军都指挥使药彦稠将兵讨之。
现代文：安重诲坚持请求派兵攻打杨彦温，朝廷便命令西都留守索自通、步军都指挥使药彦稠统兵讨伐他。
English: When An Chongyun insisted on sending troops to attack Yang Yanwen, the imperial court ordered Xi Du to stay behind in Suo Zhitong, and ordered the infantry to lead the troops led by Yakuhiko to fight against him.

古文：帝令彦稠必生致彦温，吾欲面讯之。
现代文：明宗指令药彦稠： 务必把杨彦温活着抓回来，我要当面讯问他。 
English: Myongjong ordered Yakuhiko: Make sure you bring Yang Yanwen back alive. I want to interrogate him face to face.

古文：召从珂诣洛阳。
现代文：又召唤李从珂到京城洛阳来。
English: He also summoned Li to come from Ka to the capital Luoyang.

古文：从珂知为重诲所构，驰入自明。
现代文：李从珂知道是被安重诲所陷害，赶快入朝自己进行表白。
English: Li Zongke knew that he had been framed by An Chongyu, so he hurried to the North to confess.

古文：加安重诲兼中书令。
现代文：后唐加安重诲兼任中书令。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Jia'an was re-appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：李从珂至洛阳，上责之使归第，绝朝请。
现代文：李从珂来到洛阳，明宗责令他回自己的府第，断绝入朝请见。
English: When Li came to Luoyang from Ka, Mingzong ordered him to return to his capital and not to enter the imperial court.

古文：辛亥，索自通等拔河中，斩杨彦温，癸丑，传首来献。
现代文：辛亥，索自通等攻下河中，斩杀了杨彦温，癸丑，把他的首级传送到洛阳来献报朝廷。
English: Xinhai, Suo Zhitong and others attacked the middle of the river, killed Yang Yanwen, and sent his head to Luoyang to present it to the imperial court.

古文：上怒药彦稠不生致，深责之。
现代文：明宗恼怒药彦稠不把他活着送来，严厉地责备药彦稠。
English: Ming Zong was angry with Yao Yanyang for not bringing him back alive and severely reprimanded Yao Yanyang.

古文：安重诲讽冯道、赵凤奏从珂失守，宜加罪。
现代文：安重诲指使冯道、杨凤表奏李从珂失于职守，应该加罪。
English: An Chongyuan instructing Feng Dao and Yang Feng to play Li Zong is dereliction of duty and should be punished.

古文：上曰： 吾儿为奸党所倾，未明曲直，公辈何为发此言，意不欲置之人间邪？此皆非公辈之意也。 
现代文：明宗说： 我儿被奸党所倾害，是非曲直还未弄明白。你们二位为什么说这样的话，是不是想不让他活在人间，这些都不是你们二位的意思哟。 
English: Myongjong said, "My son was victimized by a traitor, and I still don't understand the rights and wrongs. Why did you two say such a thing? Did you want to prevent him from living on earth? None of this is what you two meant."

古文：二人惶恐而退。
现代文：冯、杨二人吓得惶恐而退。
English: Feng and Yang were so scared that they retreated.

古文：它日，赵凤又言之，上不应。
现代文：过些天，赵凤又奏谈此事，明宗不表态。
English: A few days later, Zhao Feng talked about the matter again, but Mingzong did not make a statement.

古文：明日，重诲自言之，上曰： 朕昔为小校，家贫，赖此小儿拾马粪自赡，以至今日为天子，曾不能庇之邪！
现代文：第二天，安重诲自己奏言其事，明宗说： 我从前当小校，家里贫穷，依赖这个孩子拣拾马粪养家，到了今天我当了皇帝，就不能庇护他吗？
English: The next day, An Chong reminded himself to report the matter, and Mingsong said: I used to be a schoolboy, my family was poor, and I relied on this child to pick up horse manure to feed the family. Today, I am an emperor, can't I protect him?

古文：卿欲如何处之于卿为便？ 重诲曰： 陛下父子之间，臣何敢言！
现代文：你想怎样处置他对你才合适？ 安重诲说： 陛下父子之间的事，为臣何敢乱说！
English: What do you want to do with him that is right for you? Angrily admonish him: Your Majesty, how dare you say anything about a matter between father and son!

古文：惟陛下裁之！ 
现代文：只能听凭陛下裁夺！ 
English: It is up to His Majesty to decide!

古文：上曰： 使闲居私第亦可矣，何复言！ 
现代文：明宗说： 让他闲居在自己家里也就可以了，何必再多谈此事！ 
English: Mingzong said, "It's fine to let him stay idle in his own home, why talk about it any more!"

古文：丙辰，以索自通为河中节度使。
现代文：丙辰，任命索自通为河中节度使。
English: Bichen, appointed So Zhitong as the envoy of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China.

古文：自通至镇，承重诲旨，籍军府甲仗数上之，以为从珂私造，赖王德妃居中保护，从珂由是得免。
现代文：索自通到了镇所，秉承安重诲的意旨，登记点收军库中铠甲兵器数字向朝廷报告，说成是李从珂私自制造；仰仗王德妃在内部保护，李从珂才得以免罪。
English: Suo Zizhong went to the town hall and, adhering to the intention of restoring peace, reported to the imperial court the number of armored weapons in the arsenal to the registration point. It was said that Li Congke made it himself. Thanks to Wang Defei's internal protection, Li Congke was exonerated.

古文：士大夫不敢与从珂往来；惟礼部郎中史馆修撰吕琦居相近，时往见之，从珂每月奏请，皆咨琦而后行。
现代文：士大夫不敢与李从珂往来，只有礼部郎中、史馆修撰吕琦和他居住相近，有时去看他，李从珂遇到有事奏请时，都是问了吕琦之后才办。
English: The scholar-officials did not dare to come in contact with Li Congke. Only the Vice-Minister of the Ministry of Ceremonies and the Historian Lv Ying, who lived near him, sometimes went to see him. When Li Congke had something to do, he would ask Lv Ying before doing it.

古文：戊午，帝加尊号曰圣明神武文德恭孝皇帝。
现代文：戊午，明宗加尊号为圣明神武文德恭孝皇帝。
English: At noon, Emperor Mingzong of the Ming Dynasty was given the honorary title of the Holy Ming God Emperor Wu, Wen, De and Xiao.

古文：安重诲言昭义节度使王建立过魏州有摇众之语，五月，丙寅，制以太傅致仕。
现代文：安重诲奏言昭义节度使王建立经过魏州时有动摇人心之语，五月，丙寅，命令他以太傅职称去官退休。
English: In May, Hsin Ying ordered Wang Jian to retire from his post with the title of eifu.

古文：董璋阅集民兵，皆剪发黥面，复于剑门北置永定关，布列烽火。
现代文：董璋检阅召集来的民兵，都给他们剪发黥面，又在剑门之北设置永定关，布列烽火。
English: When Dong Xuan inspected the assembled militiamen, he gave them all haircuts. He also set up a permanent checkpoint north of the Jianmen Gate and lit a bonfire.

古文：孟知祥累表请割云安等十三盐监隶西川，以盐直赡宁江屯兵，辛卯，许之。
现代文：孟知祥多次上表请求割划云安等十三个盐务监所隶属西川，用买卖的钱来供给宁江的屯兵，辛卯，得到准许。
English: Meng Zhixiang repeatedly asked the table to allocate 13 salt monitoring stations such as Yun'an to Xichuan, and used the money from the sale to supply the Ningjiang garrison, which was approved.

古文：六月，癸已朔，日有食之。
现代文：六月，癸巳朔，出现日食。
English: In June, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：辛亥，敕防御、团练使、刺史、行军司马、节度副使，自今皆自朝廷除之，诸道无得奏荐。
现代文：辛亥，敕命：防御使、团练使、刺史、行军司马、节度副使，今后都由朝廷任命，各节度使不得奏荐。
English: Xinhai, Xingmei: defense envoy, regimental training envoy, stabbing history, marching Sima, festival deputy envoy, all will be appointed by the imperial court in the future, and each festival envoy may not be recommended.

古文：董璋遣兵掠遂、阆镇戍，秋，七月，戊辰，两川以朝廷继遣兵屯遂、阆，复有论奏，自是东北商旅少敢入蜀。
现代文：董璋派兵劫掠守卫在遂州、阆州的官军，秋季，七月，戊辰，两川因为朝廷继续派兵屯戍遂州、阆州，又有奏章议论此事，从此东北方向的商旅，很少敢于入蜀。
English: In the autumn, in July, in the spring, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the spring, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in the spring, in the autumn, in

古文：八月，乙未，捧圣军使李行德、十将张俭引告密人边彦温告 安重诲发兵，云欲自讨淮南；又引占相者问命。 
现代文：八月，乙未，捧圣军使李行德、十将张俭引领告密人边彦温奏告：安重诲起兵，说要自己去讨伐淮南；又召引占相者为自己算命。
English: In August, the eighteenth day of the month, Li Xingde, commander of the Sacred Army, and Zhang Jian, commander of the Tenth Army, led by the informant Bian Yanwen, reported that An Chong had raised an army and said that he would go to fight against Huainan; he also summoned the fortune-teller for fortune-telling.

古文：帝以问侍卫都指挥使安从进、药彦稠，二人曰： 此奸人欲离间陛下勋旧耳。
现代文：明宗为此咨询于侍卫都指挥使安从进、药彦稠，二人说： 这是奸人要离间对陛下有功勋的旧臣。
English: To this end, Mingzong consulted with the commander of the palace guards, An Zongjin and Yakehiko Tsuyoshi, and the two said: This is an old minister who has meritorious service to His Majesty.

古文：重诲事陛下三十年，幸而富贵，何苦谋反！
现代文：安重诲给陛下做事三十年，有幸得到富贵，何苦要谋反！
English: After working for His Majesty for thirty years, and having the good fortune to become rich and famous, how hard it is to rebel!

古文：臣等请以宗族保之。 
现代文：我们请求用自己的家族性命担保他。 
English: We ask that the lives of our family members be used to guarantee his safety.

古文：帝乃斩彦温，召重诲慰抚之，君臣相泣。
现代文：明宗便把边彦温杀了，并召见安重诲慰抚，君臣相对而哭泣。
English: Emperor Mingzong then killed Yan Yanwen, and summoned An Chongyun to comfort him, while the monarch and his ministers wept.

古文：以前忠武节度使张延朗行工部尚书，充三司使。
现代文：任用前忠武节度使张延朗担任工部尚书，充当主管盐铁、户部、度支的三司使。
English: Before the appointment of Zhongwu Jie, Zhang Yanlang was appointed as the secretary of the Ministry of Industry, and served as the three messengers in charge of the Salt and Iron Industry, the Household Department, and the Department of Finance.

古文：三司使之名自此始。
现代文：三司使的职名是从这时开始的。
English: It was at this time that the post of the Third Divisional Envoy began.

古文：吴徐知诰以海州都指挥使王传拯有威名，得士心，值团练使陈宣罢归，知诰许以传拯代之；既而复遣宣还海州，征传拯还江都。
现代文：吴国中书令徐知诰因为海州都指挥使王传拯有威名，得人心，正赶上团练使陈宣罢官归家，徐知诰许诺由王传拯代替他；接着又把陈宣派遣回海州，而征召王传拯还归江都。
English: In the middle of the State of Wu, Xu Zhisheng ordered Xu Zhisheng to send Wang Chuan Zheng, the commanding officer of Haizhou, because Wang Chuan Zheng was prestigious and popular. He was just in time for the regimental drill to send Chen Xuan back home. Xu Zhisheng promised to replace him with Wang Chuan Zheng. He then sent Chen Xuan back to Haizhou, and conscripted Wang Chuan Zheng back to Jiangdu.

古文：传拯怒，以为宣毁之，己亥，帅麾下入辞宣。因斩宣，焚掠城郭，帅其众五千来奔。
现代文：王传拯发怒，以为是陈宣诋毁他所致。己亥，率领部属到陈宣处辞行，借机杀了陈宣，焚烧抢掠城郭，带领步众五千人投奔后唐。
English: Wang Chuan Zheng was enraged, thinking that Chen Xuan had slandered him. Ji Hai, leading his subordinates to Chen Xuan's office to resign, took the opportunity to kill Chen Xuan, burn and loot the castle, and led five thousand people to rush to Hou Tang.

古文：知诰曰： 是吾过也。 
现代文：徐知诰说： 这是我的过错。 
English: Xu Zhisheng said: This is my fault.

古文：免其妻子。
现代文：免加王传拯的妻子的罪。
English: Exonerate Wang Chuan Zheng's wife.

古文：涟水制置使王岩将兵入海州，以岩为威卫大将军，知海州。
现代文：涟水制置使王岩领兵进入海州，便任用王岩为威卫大将军，主持海州政事。
English: The establishment of Surabaya system made Wang Yan lead the troops into Haizhou, and then appointed Wang Yan as Wei Wei general to preside over the affairs of Haizhou.

古文：传拯，绾之子也，其季父舆为光州刺史。
现代文：王传拯是王绾的儿子，他的叔叔王舆为光州刺史。
English: Wang Chuan Zheng is the son of Wang Yao. His uncle, Wang Ying, was the founder of Gwangju.

古文：传拯遣间使持书至光州，舆执之以闻，因求罢归；知诰以舆为控鹤都虞候。
现代文：传拯派人拿着他的信秘密来到光州找王舆，王舆拘留来使，上报吴主，并因此要求罢官还家，徐知诰任用王舆为控鹤都虞候。
English: Chuan Zheng sent a person with his letter to secretly come to Gwangju to find Wang Ying, Wang Ying detained the envoy, reported to the Lord of Wu, and therefore requested to dismiss the official and return home. Xu Zhisheng appointed Wang Ying as the controller of the capital.

古文：时政在徐氏，典兵宿卫者尤难其人，知诰以舆重厚慎密，故用之。
现代文：当时吴国政权掌握在徐氏手中，领兵宿卫者尤其难得，徐知诰因为王舆为人厚重慎密，所以用他。
English: At that time, the political power of the State of Wu was in the hands of the Xu family. It was especially rare to find a person to lead the troops and serve as a bodyguard. Xu Zhixuan used him because Wang Yu was a prudent person.

古文：壬寅，赵凤奏： 切闻近有奸人，诬陷大臣，摇国柱石，行之未尽。 
现代文：壬寅，后唐赵凤奏称： 听说近来有奸人诬陷大臣，动摇国家的柱石，还没有完全诛尽。 
English: Ren Yin, the successor of Tang Zhao Fengso, said: I heard that recently there was a traitor who framed the minister, the pillar of the country, has not been completely exhausted.

古文：帝乃收李行德、张俭，皆族之。
现代文：明宗便下令收捕李行德、张俭，把二人的家族都诛杀了。
English: Mingzong then ordered the arrest of Li Xingde and Zhang Jian and killed their families.

古文：立皇子从荣为秦王；丙辰，立从厚为宋王。
现代文：立皇子李从荣为秦王；丙辰，立李从厚为宋王。
English: The crown prince Li Zongrong became the king of Qin; the crown prince Binchen became the king of Song; the crown prince Li Conghou became the king of Song.

古文：董璋之子光业为宫苑使，在洛阳，璋与书曰： 朝廷割吾支郡为节镇，屯兵三千，是杀我必矣。
现代文：董璋之子董光业任宫苑使，在洛阳，董璋给他写信说： 朝廷把我管辖的梓州以外各州划出另设节镇，屯兵在三川，这是一定要把我置于死地。
English: Dong Quan's son, Dong Guangye, served as an envoy to the imperial court. In Luoyang, Dong Quan wrote to him, "The imperial court has divided all the states except Zizhou, which is under my jurisdiction, to set up another festival town, and the soldiers are stationed in Sanchuan. This is sure to put me to death."

古文：汝见枢要为吾言：如朝廷更发一骑入斜谷，吾必反！与汝诀矣。 
现代文：你见到枢密要员替我传言：如果朝廷再多派一个人马进入斜谷，我就必定造反，和你诀别了。 
English: You have seen the confidential dignitaries spread rumours on my behalf: if the court sends one more person into the valley, I will certainly rebel and say goodbye to you.

古文：光业以书示枢密承旨李虔徽。
现代文：董光业把信给枢密承旨李虔徽看了。
English: Dong Guangye showed the letter to the Privy Councilor Li Qianhui.

古文：未几，朝廷又遣别将荀咸乂将兵戍阆州，光业谓虔徽曰： 此兵未至，吾父必反。
现代文：没有多久，后唐朝廷又派别将荀咸率兵戍守阆州，董光业对李虔徽说： 不等这一支兵马到达，我父亲必然造反。
English: It didn't take long for the Tang Dynasty to send troops to defend Ganzhou, and Dong Guangye said to Li Qianhui: "If this troop doesn't arrive, my father will definitely rebel."

古文：吾不敢自爱，恐烦朝廷调发，愿止此兵，吾父保无他。 
现代文：我不敢爱惜自己的生命，恐怕让朝廷调发人马招惹麻烦，希望能够停止派遣这支人马，我父亲保证没有别的举动。 
English: I dare not spare my own life. I'm afraid I'll get into trouble if I let the imperial court send people and horses. I hope to be able to stop sending these people and horses. My father assures me that there is no other course of action.

古文：虔徽以告安重诲，重诲不从。
现代文：李虔徽把董光业意见报告安重诲，安重诲没有答应。
English: Li Qianhui sent Dong Guangye's opinion report to An Chongyun, but An Chongyun did not agree.

古文：璋闻之，遂反。
现代文：董璋听说后，马上造反。
English: After hearing this, Dong Xuan immediately rebelled.

古文：利、阆、遂三镇以闻，且言已聚兵将攻三镇。
现代文：利州、阆州、遂州三镇向朝廷报告，并说董璋已经聚集兵马将要进攻三镇。
English: The three towns of Lizhou, Zhangzhou and Suizhou reported to the imperial court and said that Dong Xuan had gathered soldiers and horses and would attack the three towns.

古文：重诲曰： 臣久知其如此，陛下含容不讨耳。 
现代文：安重诲说： 我早就知道董璋要这样，陛下太容忍他，不肯讨伐啊。 
English: An Chongzhen said: "I already knew that Dong Xuan wanted to do this. Your Majesty is too tolerant of him and is not willing to fight.

古文：帝曰： 我不负人，人负我则讨之！ 
现代文：明宗说： 我不亏负于人，人亏负于我便要讨伐他。 
English: Mingzong said, "I do not harm people, but if people harm me, I will fight against them."

古文：九月，癸亥，西川进奏官苏愿白孟知祥云： 朝廷欲大发兵讨两川。 
现代文：九月，癸亥，西川进奏官苏愿向孟知祥禀告： 朝廷要派大军讨伐两川。 
English: In September of the year of the Rooster, Su, the Saikawa Incoming Officer, announced to Meng Zhixiang that the Imperial Court was going to send a large army to fight against the two rivers.

古文：知祥谋于副使赵季良，季良请以东川兵先取遂、阆，然后并兵守剑门，则大军虽来，吾无内顾之忧矣。
现代文：孟知祥和节度副使赵季良谋议对策，赵季良建议让东川兵马先占领遂州、阆州，然后西川同东川合兵扼守剑门，这样，即使朝廷大军来了，我们两川也没有后顾之忧了。
English: Meng Zhi Xiang and Zhao Jiliang, the deputy envoy of the festival, discussed countermeasures. Zhao Jiliang suggested that the Dongchuan soldiers and horses first occupy Suizhou and Zhangzhou, and then the West River and the East River join forces to guard the Jianmen. In this way, even if the imperial army comes, we have no worries about the two rivers.

古文：知祥从之，遣使约董璋同举兵。
现代文：孟知祥听从了赵季良的意见，派使者邀约董璋共同起兵。
English: Meng Zhixiang listened to Zhao Jiliang's opinion and sent an envoy to invite Dong Jun to jointly raise an army.

古文：璋移缴利、阆、遂三镇，数其离间朝廷，引兵击阆州。
现代文：董璋便向利州、阆州、遂州三镇送发檄文，责备他们离间朝廷与东川的关系，发兵进攻阆州。
English: Dong Xuan then sent a letter to the three towns of Lizhou, Zhangzhou and Suizhou, reproaching them for severing the relationship between the imperial court and Dongchuan and sending troops to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：庚午，知祥以都指挥使李仁罕为行营都部署，汉州刺史赵廷隐副之，简州刺史张业为先锋指挥使，将兵三万攻遂州；别将牙内都指挥使侯弘实、先登指挥使孟思恭将兵四千会璋攻阆州。
现代文：庚午，孟知祥任用都指挥使李仁罕为行营都部署，汉州刺史赵廷隐做他的副手，简州刺史张业为先锋指挥使，率领三万士兵进攻遂州，又派牙内都指挥使侯弘实、先登指挥使孟思恭领兵四千会合董璋进攻阆州。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th, Meng Zhixiang appointed Li Renhan as the commander of the capital and ordered him to deploy the capital for the campaign, Zhao Tingyin, the secretary of Hanzhou, to be his deputy, Zhang Ye, the secretary of Jianzhou, to be the vanguard commander and lead thirty thousand soldiers to attack Suizhou, and sent Hou Hongshi, the director of the capital, and Meng Siyong, the advance commander, to lead four thousand soldiers to join Dong Xuan to attack Zhangzhou.

古文：安重诲久专大权，中外恶之者众；王德妃及武德使孟汉琼浸用事，数短重诲于上。
现代文：安重诲长期掌握大权，内外怨恨他的人很多；王德妃和武德使孟汉琼渐渐握有势力，几次在明宗面前说他的坏话。
English: An Chongzhen held power for a long time, and there were many people who resented him both at home and abroad. Wang Defei and Wu De gradually made Meng Hanqiong hold power, and several times spoke ill of him in front of Mingzong.

古文：重诲内忧惧，表解机务，上曰： 朕无间于卿，诬罔者朕既诛之矣，卿何为尔？ 
现代文：安重诲心里担忧害怕，上表要求解除他的枢密机要任务，明宗对他说： 朕和你之间没有隔阂。造谣诬陷你的人，朕已经把他们诛杀了，你还要干什么呢？ 
English: With anxiety and fear in his heart, he asked the emperor to relieve him of his secret mission. Emperor Mingzong said to him, "There is no estrangement between you and me. I have killed those who fabricated rumors and framed you, what more do you want?

古文：甲戌，重诲复面奏曰： 臣以寒贱，致位至此，忽为人诬以反，非陛下至明，臣无种矣。
现代文：甲戌，安重诲又面奏明宗说： 我出身贫寒卑贱，得到如此高位，现在被人诬告说我要谋反，假若不是陛下极度圣明，我就灭门无后了。
English: "I was born poor and lowly, I was given such a high position, and now I am being falsely accused of plotting a rebellion. If it weren't for Your Majesty's extreme holiness, I would have been exterminated," said the armor-plated, armor-plated, armor-plated, armor-plated and armor-plated Mingzong.

古文：由臣才薄任重，恐终不能镇浮言，愿赐一镇以全馀生。 
现代文：由于我才能小责任重，恐怕终究不能压制住流言蜚语，请求陛下赐给我一个外镇使命以保全余生。 
English: Due to my small talent and heavy responsibility, I am afraid that I will not be able to suppress the gossip after all, and ask His Majesty to give me a mission outside the town to save the rest of my life.

古文：上不许；重诲求之不已，上怒曰： 听卿去，朕不患无人！ 
现代文：明宗没有答应他的请求，安重诲没完没了地反复请求，明宗发怒说： 听凭你去吧，朕不愁没有人接替你。 
English: Mingzong did not agree to his request, but An Chongzhu repeated his request endlessly. Mingzong said angrily, "You can go ahead. I am not worried that there is no one to replace you."

古文：前成德节度使范延光劝上留重诲，且曰： 重诲去，谁能代之？ 
现代文：从前成德节度使范延光劝奏明宗留用安重诲，并且说： 重诲如果走了，有谁能代替他？ 
English: Once upon a time, the Chengde Festival asked Fan Yanguang to persuade the Song and Ming Dynasties to retain An Chongzhen, and said: If An Chongzhen leaves, who can replace him?

古文：上曰： 卿岂不可？ 
现代文：明宗说： 你难道不可以吗？ 
English: Mingzong said, "Can't you just get up?"

古文：延光曰： 臣受驱策日浅，且才不逮重诲，何敢当此？ 
现代文：范延光说： 我受陛下驱使的时间还短，而且才干不及重诲，怎么敢当此重任！ 
English: Fan Yanguang said, "I have only been driven by Your Majesty for a short period of time, and I am not competent enough to do it again. How dare I take on such an important task!"

古文：上遣孟汉琼诣中书议重诲事，冯道曰： 诸公果爱安令，宜解其枢务为便。 
现代文：明宗派孟汉琼到中书省讨论安重诲的问题，冯道说： 诸位果真正爱惜安令公，解除他的枢要任务为宜。 
English: The Ming sect sent Meng Hanqiong to the Ministry of Education and Culture to discuss the issue of An Rongxiao. Feng Dao said, "Since you all truly cherish An Ronggong, it is appropriate to relieve him of his important duties.

古文：赵凤曰： 公失言。 
现代文：赵凤说： 您失言了！ 
English: Zhao Feng said: You have made a mistake!

古文：乃奏大臣不可轻动。
现代文：于是回奏认为大臣不可轻易变动。
English: As a result, the response was that the minister should not be changed easily.

古文：东川兵至阆州，诸将皆曰： 重璋久蓄反谋，以金帛啖其士卒，锐气不可当，宜深沟高垒以挫之，不过旬日，大军至，贼自走矣。 
现代文：东川的兵马进到阆州，戍守的诸将都说： 董璋早就蓄谋造反，用金帛财物收买他的士兵，锐气不可阻挡，应该挖筑深沟高垒来挫败他，不用十天，朝廷大军到来，贼兵自己就会退走的。 
English: When Dongchuan's soldiers and horses entered Zhangzhou, the generals of the garrison all said: "Dong Li has long been plotting to rebel, bribing his soldiers with gold and money. His spirit is unstoppable. It is necessary to dig a deep ditch and high fortifications to defeat him. It will not take ten days for the imperial army to arrive, and the robber soldiers themselves will retreat."

古文：李仁矩曰： 蜀兵懦弱，安能当我精卒！ 
现代文：阆州主帅李仁矩说： 蜀兵懦弱没有战斗力，怎能抵挡我军的精兵强卒！ 
English: Zhangzhou coach Li Ren Rui said: Shu soldiers are weak and have no fighting power, how can they resist our army's elite soldiers!

古文：遂出战，兵未交而溃归。
现代文：于是便出域迎战，还没有交锋就溃败回来。
English: As a result, they went out to meet the battle, and came back defeated before the battle.

古文：董璋昼夜攻之，庚辰，城陷，杀仁矩，灭其族。
现代文：董璋令军队不分昼夜攻击，庚辰，城池被攻陷，杀了李仁矩，诛灭了他的家族。
English: Dong Xuan ordered the army to attack day and night, and in Geng Chen, the castle was captured, Li Rincang was killed, and his family was wiped out.

古文：初，璋为梁将，指挥使姚洪尝隶麾下，至是，将兵千人戍阆州；璋密以书诱之，洪投诸厕。
现代文：过去，董璋在后梁为将时，指挥使姚洪曾经隶属于他的部下，此时正领兵千人戍守阆州；董璋暗地给他写信诱降，姚洪把信丢入厕所。
English: In the past, when Dong Hui was the general of Houliang, the commanding officer Yao Hong was once subordinate to his subordinates, at this time he was leading thousands of soldiers to defend Zhangzhou; Dong Hui secretly wrote to him to induce him to surrender, Yao Hong threw the letter into the toilet.

古文：城陷，璋执洪而让之曰： 吾自行间奖拔汝，今日何相负？ 
现代文：城陷后，董璋抓住姚洪，责备他说： 我自行伍间提拔你，今天你为何相负于我？ 
English: After the fall of the city, Dong Xuan grabbed Yao Hong and scolded him, saying, "I promoted you myself, why do you owe me today?

古文：洪曰： 老贼！
现代文：姚洪说： 老贼！
English: Yao Hong said: Thief!

古文：汝昔为李氏奴，扫马粪，得脔炙，感恩无穷。
现代文：你从前在李姓富人家当奴仆，扫马粪，得点烤肉片就感恩不尽。
English: You used to work as a slave in the home of a rich man surnamed Li, sweeping horse manure, and you can't thank him enough for getting some grilled meat.

古文：今天子用汝为节度使，何负于汝而反邪？
现代文：现在皇上用你当节度使，有什么亏负于你而造反呀？
English: Now that the emperor is using you as a moderating influence, what harm is there in rebelling against you?

古文：汝犹负天子，吾受汝何恩，而云相负哉！
现代文：你尚且负心于天子，我受你什么恩典了，你竟说起什么相负啊！
English: Even though you have been unfaithful to the Son of Heaven, what grace have I received from you, and how dare you say such a thing!

古文：汝奴材，固无耻；吾义士，岂忍为汝所为乎！
现代文：你是个奴才，本来就无耻；我是义士，岂能干你所干的事呢！
English: For you are a servant, and not innocent; for I am innocent, and I have done what you have done.

古文：吾宁为天子死，不能与人奴并生！ 
现代文：我宁可为天子死，不能同人奴共生！ 
English: I would rather die for the Son of God than live with a human slave!

古文：璋怒，然镬于前，令壮士十人刲其肉自啖之，洪至死骂不绝声。
现代文：董璋大怒，在他的面前烧起大锅，叫十个壮汉割他的肉自己煮来吃，姚洪至死骂声不绝。
English: Dong Yu was so angry that he lit a cauldron in front of him and ordered ten strong men to cut up his flesh and cook it themselves. Yao Hong was cursed to death.

古文：帝置洪二子于近卫，厚给其家。
现代文：明宗把姚洪的两个儿子安置在侍卫中，优厚地抚恤他的家属。
English: Mingzong placed Yao Hong's two sons among the bodyguards and generously supported his family.

古文：甲申，以范延光为枢密使，安重诲如故。
现代文：甲申，任命范延光为枢密使，安重诲任职如故。
English: Ka-shin, appointed Fan Yan-guang as a Privy Councilor, and continued to serve as such.

古文：丙戌，下制削董璋官爵，兴兵讨之。
现代文：丙戌，下命令削去董璋的官爵，兴兵讨伐他。
English: He ordered that the official title of Dong Xuan be abolished and that troops be raised to fight against him.

古文：丁亥，以孟知祥兼西南面供馈使。
现代文：丁亥，任用孟知祥兼职西南供馈使。
English: Dinghai, appointed Meng Zhixiang as a part-time Southwest Feeding Envoy.

古文：以天雄节度石敬瑭为东川行营都招讨使，以夏鲁奇为之副。
现代文：任用天雄节度使石敬瑭为东川行营都招讨使，夏鲁奇为他的副手。
English: The appointment of Tianxiong Jiedu led to the appointment of Shi Jingyu as the envoy to the Dongchuan Campaign, and Xialuqi as his deputy.

古文：璋使孟思恭分兵攻集州，思恭轻进，败归；璋怒，遣还成都，知祥免其官。
现代文：董璋让孟思恭分兵攻打集州，孟思恭轻率进兵，打了败仗回来；董璋发怒，把他遣回成都，孟知祥免了他的官职。
English: Dong Xuan let Meng Sikyong's detachment attack Jizhou, Meng Sikyong rashly marched into the army, fought a losing battle and returned; Dong Xuan was angry and sent him back to Chengdu, Meng Zhixiang relieved him of his official post.

古文：戊子，以石敬瑭权知东川事。
现代文：戊子，任命石敬瑭暂时主持东川的事务。
English: Boshi, appointed Shi Jingyao to temporarily preside over the affairs of Dongchuan.

古文：庚寅，以右武卫上将军王思同为西都留守兼行营马步都虞候，为伐蜀前锋。
现代文：庚寅，任用右武卫上将军王思同为西都留守兼行营马步都虞候，做伐蜀的前锋。
English: Goyang appointed Wang Sitong, the commander of the Right Division of the Imperial Guard, to stay in Xidu and to make camp in Maobudu, to be the vanguard of the attack on Shu.

古文：汉主遣其将梁克贞、李守鄜攻交州，拔之，执静海节度使曲承美以归，以其将李进守交州。
现代文：南汉主遣派他的大将梁克贞、李守攻打交州，攻了下来，抓获静海节度使曲承美而归，任用他的将领李进戍守交州。
English: The master of the Southern Han Dynasty sent his generals Liang Kezhen and Li Shou to attack Jiaozhou, but they were defeated. Jinghai Jiedu was captured, forcing Qu Chengmei to return, and his general Li Jinjun was appointed to guard Jiaozhou.

古文：冬，十月，癸巳，李仁罕围遂州，夏鲁奇婴城固守；孟知祥命都押牙高敬柔帅资州义军二万人筑长城环之。
现代文：冬季，十月，癸巳，李仁罕包围遂州，夏鲁奇依城抵御固守；孟知祥军都押牙高敬柔率领资州义军二万人筑起一道很长的围墙环绕包围遂州。
English: In the winter, in October, Jinshi and Li Renhan besieged Suizhou, and Shailuqi defended the city against the siege; Meng Zhixiang's army was led by Gao Jianju, who led 20,000 Guizhou rebels to build a long wall to surround and besiege Suizhou.

古文：鲁奇遣马军都指挥使康文通出战，文通闻阆州陷，遂以其众降于仁罕。
现代文：夏鲁奇派马军都指挥使康文通出战，康文通听说阆州已被董璋攻陷，便带领他的部众投降了李仁罕。
English: Sharucci sent the horse army to command Kang Wentong to go to war. When Kang Wentong heard that Zhangzhou had been conquered by Dong Quan, he led his subordinates to surrender to Li Renhan.

古文：戊戌，董璋引兵趣利州，遇雨，粮运不继，还阆州。
现代文：戊戌，董璋带领人马攻向利州，途中遇到大雨，粮秣运输跟不上，又回阆州。
English: Wuzhong, Donglu led the troops and horses to attack Lizhou, encountered heavy rain on the way, grain and straw transportation could not keep up, and returned to Zhangzhou.

古文：知祥闻之，惊曰： 比破阆中，正欲径取利州，其帅不武，必望风遁去。
现代文：孟知祥听到这件事后，吃惊地说： 刚刚攻破阆州，正要挥军直下攻取利州，其主帅不敢抵抗，必然望风逃遁。
English: After hearing this, Meng Zhixiang was surprised and said: "Meng Zhixiang had just conquered Zhangzhou and was about to attack Lizhou with his army. His commander did not dare to resist and had to flee.

古文：吾获其仓廪，据漫天之险，北军终不能西救武信。
现代文：我军便可缴获他的粮食仓储，占据漫天寨的险要，北方来的朝廷军队最终也一定不能西救遂州。
English: Our army would then be able to seize his grain storage and occupy the perilous points of the vast country, and the imperial army from the north would ultimately not be able to save Suizhou in the west.

古文：今董公僻处阆州，远弃剑阁，非计也。 
现代文：现在董公偏僻地留处阆州，远离剑阁，不是上策。 
English: Now, it is not the best policy for Dong Gong to stay in a remote place in Zhangzhou, far away from Jiange.

古文：欲遣兵三千助守剑门；璋固辞曰： 此已有备。 
现代文：准备派兵三千帮助守卫剑门；董璋坚决拒辞说： 此事已经有了准备。 
English: Prepared to send three thousand soldiers to help guard the Jianmen Gate; Dong Ye resolutely refused to resign, saying: This matter has already been prepared.

古文：钱镠因朝廷册闽王使都裴羽还，附表引咎；其子传瓘及将佐屡为镠上表自诉。
现代文：吴越王钱乘着后唐朝廷册立闽王的使者裴羽回朝之便，附送表章表示自己有过失；他的儿子钱传和将佐也屡次为钱上表作自我表白。
English: Qian, the king of Wuyue, took the opportunity to return to the Tang Dynasty with Pei Yu, the envoy of the late Tang Dynasty's crown prince, and sent a seal to show that he was at fault; his sons Qian Chuan and Zhe Zuo also repeatedly confessed themselves for Qian Shang table.

古文：癸卯，敕听两浙纲使自便。
现代文：癸卯，明宗下敕文，让释放两浙纲使，听其自便。
English: Therefore, Emperor Mingzong decreed that the two envoys should be released at their own convenience.

古文：以宣徽北院使冯赟为左卫上将军、北都留守。
现代文：后唐任用宣徽北院使冯为左卫上将军、北都留守。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, the Northern Court of the State Council of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China appointed Feng as the General of the Left Division of the Middle Palace Guards, and he stayed in the Northern Capital.

古文：丁未，族诛董光业。
现代文：丁未，诛杀了董光业全族。
English: Ding Wei killed the whole family of Dong Guangye.

古文：楚王殷寝疾，遣使诣阙，请传位于其子希声。
现代文：楚王马殷病危，派使者进诣朝廷，请求把职位传给其子马希声。
English: King Ma Yin of Chu was critically ill and sent an envoy to the imperial court to request that the position be passed on to his son Ma Xisheng.

古文：朝廷疑殷已死，辛亥，以希声为起复武安节度使兼侍中。
现代文：朝廷怀疑马殷已死，辛亥，便把马希声起用复职为武安节度使兼侍中。
English: The imperial court suspected that Ma Yin had died, and Emperor Xinhai reinstated Ma Xisheng as the Wu'an Festival envoy and chamberlain.

古文：孟知祥以故蜀镇江节度使张武为峡路行营招收讨伐使，将水军趣夔州，以左飞棹指挥使袁彦超副之。
现代文：孟知祥任用前蜀镇江节度使张武为峡路行营招收讨伐使，带领水军直夔州，任用左飞棹指挥使袁彦超为他的副手。
English: Meng Zhixiang appointed the former Shu Zhen Jiang Jiedu to make Zhang Wu the leader of the campaign to recruit the crusading envoy for the gorge road, led the navy to Zhishu, and appointed the left flying eagle commander to make Yuan Yanchao his deputy.

古文：癸丑，东川兵陷征、合、巴、蓬、果五州。
现代文：癸丑，东川兵攻陷徵、合、巴、蓬、果五州。
English: At the same time, the Dongchuan soldiers invaded and occupied the five prefectures of Zhi, He, Ba, Peng and Gu.

古文：丙辰，吴左仆射、同平章事严可求卒。
现代文：丙辰，吴国左仆射、同平章事严可求去世。
English: Hsin Chen, Wu Guozhong Zuofu, and Tongping Zhang all died.

古文：徐知诰以其长子大将军景通为兵部尚书、参政事，知诰将出镇金陵故也。
现代文：徐知诰任用他的长子大将军徐景通为兵部尚书、参政事，是因为徐知诰将要出镇金陵的缘故。
English: Xu Zhisheng appointed his eldest son, General Xu Jingtong, to be the military secretary and a member of the government, because Xu Zhisheng was going to leave Jinling.

古文：汉将梁克贞入占城，取其宝货以归。
现代文：南汉大将梁克贞攻入占城，掠取了占城的财宝货物而归。
English: Southern Han general Liang Kezhen entered the besieged city, plundered the treasure and goods of the besieged city, and returned home.

古文：十一月，戊辰，张武至渝州，刺史张环降之，遂取泸州，遣先锋将硃偓分兵趣黔、涪。
现代文：十一月，戊辰，张武进到达渝州，刺史张环向他投降，于是进而占领了泸州，又派先锋将朱分兵向黔州和涪州进军。
English: In November, Wu Chen, Zhang Wujin arrived in Yuzhou, and Zhang Huan surrendered to him, and then occupied Zhangzhou, and sent the vanguard to march the Zhu soldiers to Zhangzhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：己巳，楚王殷卒，遗命诸子，兄弟相继；置剑于祠堂，曰； 违吾命者戮之！ 
现代文：己巳，楚王马殷去世，遗命给几个儿子，要兄死弟续；放置一把宝剑在祠堂内，并说： 谁要是违背我的遗命，就杀了他！ 
English: Now that King Ma Yin of Chu has passed away, he has given his last order to several sons to be followed by their brothers; he placed a sword in the ancestral hall and said, "If anyone disobeys my last order, kill him!"

古文：诸将议遣兵守四境，然后发丧，兵部侍郎黄损曰： 吾丧君有君，何备之有！
现代文：他部下的诸将讨论，主张先派兵防守四面边境，然后再发布丧讯，兵部侍郎黄损说： 我们丧失了君主还有君主，有什么要防备的？
English: The generals under his command discussed and advocated that the troops should first be sent to defend the four-sided border, and then the funeral notice should be issued. Huang Qi, the commander of the military department, said: We have lost the monarch and the monarch, what should we be prepared for?

古文：宜遣使诣邻道告终称嗣而已。 
现代文：应该派遣使者到各个邻郡去说明先君去世、后君嗣位就行了。 
English: It would be enough to send emissaries to all the neighboring counties to explain that the former emperor had died and the latter emperor had succeeded to the throne.

古文：石敬瑭入散关，阶州刺史王经贽、泸州刺史冯晖与前锋马步都虞候王思同、步军都指挥使赵在礼引兵出人头山后，过剑门之南，还袭剑门，壬申，克之，杀东川兵三千人，获都指挥使齐彦温，据而守之。
现代文：后唐石敬瑭进入散关，阶州刺史王弘贽、泸州刺史冯晖与前锋马步都虞候王思同、步兵都指挥使赵在礼带领军队出人头山之后，绕至剑门之南，回过头来袭击剑门，壬申攻了下来，杀死东川兵三千人，擒获都指挥使齐彦温，占据了剑门险隘而加以防守。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Shi Jianqian entered Sankuan. Zhouzhou Jishi Wang Hongyao, Zhangzhou Jishi Fengyao and the forward Ma Bu Dugu Wang Sitong, and the infantry commander made Zhao lead the army to the south of the Jianmen after the ceremony, and attacked the Jianmen. Jinshin attacked and killed three thousand Dongchuan soldiers, captured the commander of the capital, Qi Yanwen, occupied the Jianmen and defended it.

古文：晖，魏州人也。
现代文：冯晖是魏州人。
English: Yin Qi is a native of Weizhou.

古文：甲戌，弘贽等破剑州，而大军不继，乃焚其庐舍，取其资粮，还保剑门。
现代文：甲戌，王弘贽等攻破剑州，而大部队未能跟着上来，便烧了剑州守军的房舍，掠取了物资粮食，回军保卫剑门。
English: Kuching, Wang Hongtao and others broke through Jianzhou, but the main force failed to follow up, so they burned the buildings of the Jianzhou defenders, plundered the materials and grain, and returned to defend Jianmen.

古文：乙亥，诏削孟知祥官爵。
现代文：乙亥，明宗下诏书，削去孟知祥的官爵。
English: Yi Hai, the Ming Dynasty issued an edict, removing Meng Zhixiang's official title.

古文：己卯，董璋遣使至成都告急。
现代文：己卯，董璋派使者到成都告急。
English: At the same time, Dong Xi sent an envoy to Chengdu in a hurry.

古文：知祥闻剑门失守，大惧，曰： 董公果误我！ 
现代文：孟知祥听说剑门失守，大为恐惧，并说： 董璋果然贻误于我！ 
English: When Meng Zhixiang heard that Jianmen had been defeated, he was very afraid and said, "Dong Yao has indeed deceived me!

古文：庚辰，遣牙内都指挥使李肇将兵五千赴之，戒之曰： 尔倍道兼行，先据剑州，北军无能为也。 
现代文：庚辰，派牙内都指挥使李肇领兵五千去救援，并告诫他说： 你加倍赶路，先去占据剑州、北方来的军队就没有办法了。 
English: Geng Chen sent Ga Nai Du to command Li Zhaozhou to lead five thousand soldiers to rescue, and warned him: "You should double your speed. If you occupy Jianzhou first, there will be no way for the army coming from the north."

古文：又遣使诣遂州，令赵廷隐将万人会屯剑州。
现代文：又派使者到遂州，命令赵廷隐带领万人会师驻扎剑州。
English: He also sent an envoy to Suizhou and ordered Zhao Tingyin to lead the People's Association Division to be stationed in Jianzhou.

古文：又遣故蜀永平节度使李筠将兵四千趣龙州，守要害。
现代文：又派遣原来前蜀永平节度使李筠领兵四千奔赴龙州，把守要害。
English: He also dispatched the former Shu Yongping Sect to make Li Xi lead four thousand soldiers to Longzhou to guard the key.

古文：时天寒，士卒恐惧，观望不进，廷隐流涕谕之曰： 今北军势盛，汝曹不力战却敌，则妻子皆为人有矣。 
现代文：当时，天气寒冷，士兵恐惧，观望不肯前进，赵廷隐流着眼泪劝告大家说： 现在北军气势强盛，你们如不竭尽全力去抵挡敌军，那样，老婆孩子就都要为别人所有了！ 
English: At that time, the weather was cold, the soldiers were afraid, and they did not want to move forward, Zhao Tingyin advised everyone with tears: Now the Northern Army is strong, if you do not do your best to resist the enemy army, then the wife and children will be owned by others!

古文：众心乃奋。
现代文：兵众的心情才激奋起来。
English: Only then did the mood of the soldiers become excited.

古文：董璋自阆州将两川兵屯木马寨。
现代文：董璋从阆州率领两川的兵马驻扎在木马寨。
English: The soldiers and horses of the two rivers led by Dong Xuan from Zhangzhou were stationed in Muma Village.

古文：先是，西川牙内指挥使太谷庞福诚、昭信指挥使谢锽屯来苏村，闻剑门失守，相谓曰： 使北军更得剑州，则二蜀势危矣。 
现代文：起先，西川牙内指挥使太谷人庞福诚、昭信指挥使谢屯驻来苏村，听到剑门失守，相互言说： 如果北军进一步取得剑州，那么，二蜀的局势就危险了。 
English: At first, Pang Fucheng from Taiyuan and Xie Tun from Su village, who were sent by Nishikawa Ganei commander and Shoshin commander respectively, came to Su village. When they heard that Jianmen was lost, they said to each other, "If the Northern Army further captures Jianzhou, then the situation in Ershu will be dangerous."

古文：遽引部兵千馀人间道趣剑州。
现代文：便立即率领所部兵卒千余人从小道急奔剑州。
English: He immediately led more than a thousand soldiers from the headquarters to rush to Jianzhou from the minor road.

古文：始至，官军万馀人自北山大下，会日暮，二人谋曰： 众寡不敌，逮明则吾属无遗矣。 
现代文：刚刚到达，一万多官军从北山大量涌下，此时正好太阳快落山，二人商议说： 我们寡不敌众，要是等到天明，我们的人就没有存活的了。 
English: Just arrived, more than ten thousand government troops poured down from the North Mountain, at this time the sun was about to set, the two men discussed: We are outnumbered, if we wait until dawn, our people will not survive.

古文：福诚夜引兵数百升北山，大噪于官军营后，锽帅馀众操短兵自其前急击之；官军大惊，空营遁去，复保剑门，十馀日不出。
现代文：于是庞福诚乘夜晚率领兵丁数百人登上北山，在官军营寨之后大声喊叫，谢率领余下的人手持短兵器从其前面进行攻击；官军大为惊恐，倾营逃遁而去，还兵守卫剑门，十多天不出来。
English: Therefore, Pang Fucheng took advantage of the night to lead hundreds of soldiers up the North Mountain, shouted loudly after the government army camp, and Xie led the remaining people to attack from the front with hand-held short weapons; the government army was greatly alarmed, fled the camp, and the soldiers guarded the Jianmen, and did not come out for more than ten days.

古文：孟知祥闻之，喜曰： 吾始谓弘贽等克剑门，径据剑州，坚守其城，或引兵直趣梓州，董公必弃阆州奔还；我军失援，亦须解遂州之围。
现代文：孟知祥听说后，高兴地说道： 开始我以为李弘贽等攻下剑门，直取剑州，坚守其城，或者引兵直向梓州，董璋必定舍弃阆州跑回去；我军失去援兵，也就需要解除对遂州的围困。
English: After hearing this, Meng Zhixiang said happily: At first, I thought that if Li Hongzhu and others captured Jianmen, took Jianzhou directly, and held on to its city, or led the troops straight to Zizhou, Dong Jun would surely abandon Zhangzhou and run back; if our army lost reinforcements, it would also need to lift the siege of Suizhou.

古文：如此则内外受敌，两川震动，势可忧危；今乃焚毁剑州，运粮东归剑门，顿兵不进，吾事济矣。 
现代文：如果这样，就要内外受敌，两川震动、形势可谓忧患危急；现在，他们焚毁了剑州，掠运粮食东归剑门，屯扎兵马不再前进，我的事情就好办了。 
English: If this were the case, we would have to face enemies both at home and abroad, the two rivers would be shaken, and the situation would be described as distressed and critical. Now that they have burned down Jianzhou, carried away grain to the east and returned to Jianmen, and the troops and horses are no longer advancing, my business is easy to handle.

古文：官军分道趣文州，将袭龙州，为西川定远指挥使潘福超、义胜都头太原沙延祚所败。
现代文：官军分道直奔文州，准备袭击龙州，被西川定远指挥使潘福超、义胜都头太原的沙延祚所击败。
English: The government army made a detour straight to Wenzhou, preparing to attack Longzhou. They were defeated by Saikawa Dingyuan's commander Pan Fuchao and the Yixing capital Taiyuan's Shayan Zhao.

古文：甲申，张武卒于渝州；知祥命袁彦超代将其兵。
现代文：甲申，张武在渝州去世；孟知祥命令袁彦超代替他统率他的军队。
English: Gao Shen, Zhang Wu died in Yuzhou; Meng Zhixiang ordered Yuan Yanchao to lead his army in his place.

古文：硃偓将至涪州，武泰节度使杨汉宾弃黔南，奔忠州；偓追至丰都，还取涪州。
现代文：朱将要到达涪州，武泰节度使杨汉宾放弃黔南，奔向忠州；朱追赶他到丰都，又回军占领涪州。
English: Zhu was about to reach Bozhou, and Wu Tai's edict made Yang Hanbin abandon southern Bozhou and run to Zhongzhou; Zhu chased him to Fengdu, and returned to occupy Bozhou.

古文：知祥以成都支使崔善权武泰留后。
现代文：孟知祥命成都支使崔善暂为武泰留后。
English: After Meng Zhixiang's death, the Chengdu envoy Cui Zhen temporarily stayed in Wu Tai.

古文：董璋遣前陵州刺史王晖将兵三千会李肇等分屯剑州南山。
现代文：董璋派前陵州刺史王晖领兵三千会合李肇等分别屯驻剑州南山。
English: Dong Hao sent Li Zhao and others of the former Lingzhou Zhishi Wang Hao leader of the Three Thousand Association to be stationed in Nanshan, Jianzhou.

古文：丙戌，马希声袭位，称遗命去建国之制，复籓镇之旧。
现代文：丙戌，马希声继承了马殷的职位，声称奉马殷的遗命，除去建立楚国的规制，恢复节度使藩镇的旧制。
English: On the other hand, Ma Xisheng inherited Ma Yin's position and claimed that he would honor Ma Yin's last will and remove the regulation of establishing the State of Chu and restore the old system of Han and town.

古文：契丹东丹王突欲自以失职，帅部曲四十人越海自登州来奔。
现代文：契丹族的东丹王突欲自以为失去职位，率领他的家仆四十人越过渤海湾，从登州来投奔后唐。
English: King Dongdan of the Khitan ethnic group suddenly thought that he had lost his position, and led forty of his servants across the Bohai Bay from Dengzhou to enter the Later Tang.

古文：十二月，壬辰，石敬瑭至剑门。乙未，进屯剑州北山；赵廷隐陈于牙城后山，李肇、王晖陈于河桥。
现代文：十二月，壬辰，石敬瑭率军到剑门，乙未，进军屯驻剑州北山；赵廷隐陈兵在牙城后山，李肇、王晖陈兵于河桥。
English: In December, in Renchen, Shi Jingyao led the army to Jianmen, in Biwei, the army was stationed in the Beishan of Jianzhou; Zhao Tingyin Chen Bing was in the mountains behind Jiancheng, and Li Zhao and Wang Xi Chen Bing were in Heqiao.

古文：敬瑭引步兵进击廷隐，廷隐择善射者五百人伏敬瑭归路，按甲待之，矛稍欲相及，乃扬旗鼓噪击之，北军退走，颠坠下山，俘斩百馀人。
现代文：石敬瑭引步兵进击赵廷隐，赵廷隐选择善于射箭的士卒五百人埋伏在石敬瑭的归路上，等待他的兵来临。等到枪刀可以相接时，才扬旗击鼓呐喊出击，北军遭到伏击退走，颠扑坠落地逃下山，被俘斩了百余人。
English: Shi Jinglian led the infantry to attack Zhao Tingyin. Zhao Tingyin chose five hundred soldiers who were good at archery to lie in ambush on Shi Jinglian's way back, waiting for his soldiers to arrive. When the guns and swords could meet, they raised flags, beat drums and shouted to attack. The Northern Army was ambushed and retreated, fled down the mountain, and more than a hundred people were captured and beheaded.

古文：敬瑭又使骑兵冲河桥，李肇以强弩射之，骑兵不能进。
现代文：石敬瑭又派骑兵冲击河桥，李肇用强弩射击，骑兵不能前进。
English: Shi Jingyao also sent cavalry to attack the river bridge, Li Zhao fired with a strong crossbow, and the cavalry could not advance.

古文：薄暮，敬瑭引去，廷隐引兵蹑之，与伏兵合击，败之。敬瑭还屯剑门。
现代文：傍晚，石敬瑭引兵退去，赵廷隐领兵潜随其后，与伏兵联合进击，打败石敬瑭的兵众。石敬瑭还军屯扎于剑门。
English: In the evening, Shi Jinglian led the troops to retreat, and Zhao Tingyin led the troops to follow, and jointly attacked with the ambush troops to defeat Shi Jinglian's troops. Shi Jinglian's troops retreated to Jianmen.

古文：癸卯，夔州奏复取开州。
现代文：癸卯，夔州官军上奏收复了开州。
English: At the same time, the Zhangzhou government army successfully recovered Kaizhou.

古文：庚戌，以武安节度使马希声为武安、静江节度使，加兼中书令。
现代文：庚戌，后唐明宗任命武安节度使马希声为武安、静江节度使，加官兼任中书令。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Emperor Mingzong appointed Wu'an Jiedu to make Ma Xisheng the Jiedu envoy to Wu'an and Jingjiang, and he was also appointed to the post of Zhongshirong.

古文：石敬瑭征蜀未有功，使者自军前来，多言道险狭，进兵甚难，关右之人疲于转饷，往往窜匿山谷，聚为盗贼。
现代文：石敬瑭征蜀未能取得功效，使者从前线来到朝廷，大多诉说道路艰险狭窄，进兵极为困难，函谷关以西的人由于为军队转运粮饷，搞得很疲惫，往往逃窜躲藏到山谷中，聚合当盗贼。
English: The envoys from the front came to the imperial court, and most of them said that the road was difficult and narrow, and it was extremely difficult to recruit soldiers. The people west of the Hakodate Pass were very tired because they were transporting grain for the army, and they often fled and hid in the valley, gathering to be thieves.

古文：上忧之，壬子，谓近臣曰： 谁能办吾事者！吾当自行耳。 
现代文：明宗很忧虑，壬子，对亲近的大臣说： 有谁能替我办理朝中事务，我要亲自去征伐蜀地。 
English: Mingzong was very worried, Ren Zi, and said to a close minister: Who can handle the affairs of the North and the Middle Kingdom for me, I will personally go to conquer Shu.

古文：安重诲曰： 臣职忝机密，军威不振，臣之罪也，臣请自往督战。 
现代文：安重诲说： 我承蒙重用，任职于机密要位，现在军威不能振兴，是我的过失，请求让我去亲自督战。 
English: An Chongzhen said: I have been reused, serving in a confidential important position, now the military prestige can not be revitalized, it is my fault, ask me to personally supervise the war.

古文：上许之。
现代文：明宗准许了他。
English: Emperor Jing agreed with this opinion.

古文：重诲即拜辞，癸丑，遂行，日驰数百里。
现代文：安重诲立即拜辞朝廷，癸丑，便上路了，每天奔驰数百里。
English: An Chongyuan immediately resigned from the imperial court and went on the road, driving hundreds of miles every day.

古文：西方籓镇闻之，无不惶骇。
现代文：西方的藩镇闻讯，没有不惊惶骇惧的。
English: When the western provinces and towns heard the news, they were shocked and horrified.

古文：钱帛、刍粮昼夜辇运赴利州，人畜毙踣于山谷者不可胜纪。
现代文：钱币、布匹、军草、粮食等等，昼夜用车运送到利州，人畜颠跌毙死于山谷的不可计数。
English: Coins, cloth, military grass, grain, etc. were transported to Lizhou by car day and night, and countless people and animals died in the valley.

古文：西川兵先戍夔州者千五百人，上悉纵归。
现代文：当时，明宗已经疏远安重诲，石敬瑭本来就不愿西征，等到安重诲离开君主身边后，于是才敢多次上表奏论，认为对蜀地不可征伐，明宗很以为然。
English: At that time, Mingzong had already distanced itself from An Chongyun. Shi Jingyun did not want to go on the Western Expedition in the first place. It was only after An Chongyun had left the monarch's side that he dared to repeatedly express the opinion that Shu could not be conquered. Mingzong was very much of the opinion.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝中之下长兴二年
现代文：西川兵士早先戍守在夔州的人有一千五百，明宗全部释放他们归家。长兴二年
English: There were 1,500 Nishikawa soldiers who had previously stayed in Chenzhou, and Mingzong released all of them to return home.

古文：春，正月，壬戌，孟知祥奉表谢。
现代文：春季正月，壬戌，孟知祥上表感谢朝廷遣还戍兵。
English: In the first month of spring, Meng Zhixiang thanked the imperial court for the repatriation of Han soldiers.

古文：庚午，李仁罕陷遂州，夏鲁奇自杀。
现代文：庚午，川军李仁罕攻陷遂州，官军守将夏鲁奇自杀。
English: In the afternoon of the 7th day of the 7th month, Li Renhan of the Sichuan army invaded and occupied Suizhou, and the commander of the government army, Xialuqi, committed suicide.

古文：癸酉，石敬瑭复引兵至剑州，屯于北山。
现代文：癸酉，石敬瑭再次引兵到剑州，屯驻在北山。
English: At the same time, Shi Jingyao once again brought troops to Jianzhou and stationed them in Beishan.

古文：孟知祥枭夏鲁奇首以示之。
现代文：孟知祥砍了夏鲁奇的人头示众。
English: Meng Zhixiang cut off the head of Xialuqi to demonstrate to the public.

古文：鲁奇二子从敬瑭在军中，泣请往取其首葬之，敬瑭曰： 知祥长者，必葬而父，岂不逾于身首异处乎！ 
现代文：夏鲁奇的两个儿子跟随石敬瑭在军队中，哭泣着请求往敌阵取回夏鲁奇的头来安葬，石敬瑭说： 孟知祥是厚道的长者，必然会安葬你们的父亲，那样岂不比把你父亲身体和首级分为两处更好些吗！ 
English: The two sons of Xialuqi followed Shi Jingyao in the army, crying and begging to go to the enemy front to retrieve Xialuqi's head for burial. Shi Jingyao said: Meng Zhixiang is a virtuous elder, he will surely bury your father. Wouldn't that be better than dividing your father's body and head into two parts?

古文：既而知祥果收葬之。
现代文：过后孟知祥果然把夏鲁奇收葬了。
English: Afterward, Meng Zhixiang did indeed bury Xialuqi.

古文：敬瑭与赵廷隐战不利，复还剑门。
现代文：石敬瑭同赵廷隐交战不能取得胜利，又还军于剑门。
English: Shi Jingyao and Zhao Tingyin could not win the battle, and returned to Jianmen.

古文：丙戌，加高从诲兼中书令。
现代文：丙戌，加封高从诲兼任中书令。
English: He was also awarded the title of Gao Congchi and concurrently held the title of Zhongshu Ling.

古文：东川归合州于武信军。
现代文：东川把原先占领的合州归还给其旧统辖的武信军。
English: Dongchuan returned Hezhou, which it had previously occupied, to its former subordinate, the Wuxin Army.

古文：初，凤翔节度使硃弘昭谄事安重诲，连得大镇。
现代文：起初，凤翔节度使朱弘昭讨好安重诲，连连得以领治大的节镇。
English: At first, the Fengxiang Festival made Zhu Hongzhao feel at ease, and he was able to lead a large festival town.

古文：重诲过凤翔，弘昭迎拜马首，馆于府舍，延入寝室，妻子罗拜，奉进酒食，礼甚谨。
现代文：安重诲经过凤翔时，朱弘昭在马前迎接拜礼，让安重诲下榻在他的官舍内，并且延请到内室，叫出妻子罗列参拜，亲自上菜进酒，礼节极为恭敬。
English: When An Chongyi passed Fengxiang, Zhu Hongzhao greeted the worship in front of the horse, let An Chongyi stay in his official residence, and invited him to the inner room, called out his wife to attend the worship, personally served dishes and drank wine, the etiquette was extremely respectful.

古文：重诲为弘昭泣言： 谗人交构，几不免，赖主上明察，得保宗族。 
现代文：安重诲对朱弘昭哭着说： 小人用谗言构陷于我，几乎得罪不能免死，幸亏仰赖君主洞察明透，才得以保全我的宗族。 
English: An Chongyuan said to Zhu Hongzhao in tears, "The villain framed me with slander, and I was almost offended and could not avoid death. Fortunately, I was able to preserve my clan by relying on the monarch's clear insight.

古文：重诲既去，弘昭即奏 重诲怨望，有恶言，不可令至行营，恐夺石敬瑭兵柄。 
现代文：安重诲走了以后，朱弘昭立即上奏： 安重诲埋怨朝廷，并说了朝廷的坏话，不可让他到达行营，恐怕他要夺取石敬瑭的兵权。 
English: After An Chongyi left, Zhu Hongzhao immediately began to play: An Chongyi complained about the imperial court, and said bad words about the imperial court. He should not be allowed to arrive at the camp, for fear that he would seize the military power of Shijiazhuang.

古文：又遗敬瑭书，言 重诲举措孟浪，若至军前，恐将士疑骇，不战自溃，宜逆止之。 
现代文：朱弘昭又写信给石敬瑭，说： 安重诲行动鲁莽，他若到了军队中，恐怕将士都要怀疑恐惧，不战自溃，应该阻挡他前去。 
English: Zhu Hongzhao also wrote to Shi Jingyao, saying: An Chongyi's actions are reckless. If he gets into the army, I'm afraid the soldiers will all be suspicious and afraid, and will self-destruct without a fight. They should stop him from going forward.

古文：敬瑭大惧，即上言：重诲至，恐人情有变，宜急征还。 
现代文：石敬瑭非常害怕，立即上表奏称： 安重诲如果来到军前，恐怕人心有变，要赶快把他调回。 
English: Shi Jingyao was very afraid, and immediately went to the table and said: If An Rongyao comes to the front, I am afraid that his heart will change, and he should be quickly transferred back.

古文：宣徽使孟汉琼自西方还，亦言重诲过恶，有诏召重诲还。
现代文：此时，宣徽使孟汉琼从西面前线回朝，也奏说安重诲的过失和罪行，于是，明宗下诏召唤安重诲还京。
English: At this time, Emperor Xuanzong ordered Meng Hanzhong to return to the imperial court from the Western Front, and also denounced An Chongyong's faults and crimes. Therefore, Emperor Mingzong issued an edict summoning An Chongyong to return to Beijing.

古文：二月，己丑朔，石敬瑭以遂、阆既陷，粮运不继，烧营北归。
现代文：二月，己丑朔，石敬瑭由于遂州、阆州已经陷落，粮秣运输接应不上，烧了营寨北归。
English: In February, the situation was grim. Since Suizhou and Zhangzhou had already fallen, Shijingshan could not receive grain and straw transportation, and burned the Beigui encampment.

古文：军前以告孟知祥，知祥匿其书，谓赵季良曰： 北军渐进，奈何？ 
现代文：前锋把情况报告孟知祥，孟知祥藏起了报告信，对赵季良说： 北军渐渐向前推进，该怎么办？ 
English: The forward reported the situation to Meng Zhixiang, Meng Zhixiang hid the report letter and said to Zhao Jiliang: The Northern Army is gradually advancing, what should we do?

古文：季良曰： 不过绵州，必遁。 
现代文：赵季良说： 他们到不了绵州，必然要退回去。 
English: Zhao Jiliang said: They can't get to Mianzhou, so they have to go back.

古文：知祥问其故，曰： 我逸彼劳，彼悬军千里，粮尽，能无遁乎！ 
现代文：孟知祥问是什么原因，赵季良说： 我逸彼劳，他们把军队远远派遣在千里之外，粮食吃完了，能不走吗？ 
English: Meng Zhixiang asked what the reason was, and Zhao Jiliang said: I'll do my best, they've sent their army thousands of miles away, they've run out of food, can't they just leave?

古文：知祥大笑，以书示之。
现代文：孟知祥大笑，才把报告信拿给他看。
English: Meng Zhixiang laughed loudly before showing him the report letter.

古文：安重诲至三泉，得诏亟归；过凤翔，硃弘昭不内，重诲惧，驰骑而东。
现代文：安重诲到达三泉后，得到明宗诏书，急忙回朝，再过凤翔时，朱弘昭不接纳。安重诲害怕，快马驰奔向东续进。
English: After An Chongyi arrived at Sanquan, he obtained the Ming Emperor's edict and hurried back to the morning, and when he passed Fengxiang, Zhu Hongzhao did not accept him. An Chongyi was afraid and continued to drive eastward at a fast pace.

古文：两川兵追石敬瑭至利州，壬辰，昭武节度使李彦琦弃城走；甲午，两川兵入利州。
现代文：两川兵马追赶石敬瑭到利州，壬辰，昭武节度使李彦琦放弃城池逃走；甲午，两川兵进入利州。
English: The soldiers and horses of the two rivers chased Shi Jingyao to Lizhou, Imjin, and Shouwu Jiedu forced Li Yanyao to abandon the city and flee; in the afternoon of the first day of the second month, the soldiers of the two rivers entered Lizhou.

古文：孟知祥以赵廷隐为昭武留后，廷隐遣使密言于知祥曰： 董璋多诈，可与同忧，不可与共乐，他日必为公患。
现代文：孟知祥用赵廷隐为昭武留后，赵廷隐派使者秘密对孟知祥说： 董璋为人多诈变，可以和他同忧患，不可和他共安乐，这个人以后必然是您的祸患。
English: After Meng Zhixiang had used Zhao Tingyin as a scapegoat, Zhao Tingyin sent an envoy to secretly say to Meng Zhixiang: "Dong Yao is a man of many treacheries. You can share his sorrows, but not his happiness. This man will certainly be your scourge in the future."

古文：因其至剑州劳军，请图之，并两川之众，可以得志于天下。 
现代文：乘他到剑州慰劳军队，请您谋取他。并吞两川之众，可以得志于天下。 
English: Take him to the Jianzhou comfort labor army, please seek him. And absorb the people of the two rivers, you can win the world.

古文：知祥不许。
现代文：孟知祥不答应。
English: Meng Zhixiang did not agree.

古文：璋入廷隐营，留宿而去。
现代文：董璋来到赵廷隐的军营，留住一夜而去。
English: Dong Hao came to Zhao Tingyin's military camp, stayed one night and left.

古文：廷隐叹曰： 不从吾谋，祸难未已！ 
现代文：赵廷隐叹息说： 不依我的计谋，祸害难于制止了。 
English: Zhao Tingyin sighed and said, "Without my strategy, the scourge is difficult to stop.

古文：庚子，孟知祥以武信留后李仁罕为峡路行营招讨使，使将水军东略地。
现代文：庚子，孟知祥任用武信留后李仁罕为峡路行营招讨使，让他带领水军向东略取地盘。
English: After Geng Zi and Meng Zhixiang appointed Wu Xin to stay, Li Renhan became the envoy for the campaign in the gorge, and let him lead the navy to the east to snatch land.

古文：辛丑，以枢密使兼中书令安重诲为护国节度使。
现代文：辛丑任用枢密使兼中书令安重诲为护国节度使。
English: Xin Xi was appointed as the Privy Envoy and the Envoy to the National Defense Festival.

古文：赵凤言于上曰： 重诲陛下家臣，其心终不叛主，但以不能周防，为人所谗；陛下不察其心，重诲死无日矣。 
现代文：赵凤对后唐明宗说： 安重诲是陛下的家臣，他的心绝不会背叛主人，但因为他能周密地防备，被人所谗毁；如陛下不明察他的心迹，他就会不知哪天到死于非命了。 
English: Zhao Feng said to Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty: An Chongzhuang was a vassal of His Majesty. His heart would never betray his master, but because he was able to carefully guard himself, he was destroyed by people. If His Majesty did not inspect his heart, he would have died an untimely death.

古文：上以为朋党，不悦。
现代文：明宗认为赵凤与安重诲结为朋党，不高兴。
English: Mingzong is not happy that Zhao Feng and An Chongyu have become friends.

古文：乙巳，赵廷隐、李肇自剑州引还，留兵五千戍利州。
现代文：乙巳，赵廷隐、李肇从剑州引兵回到成都，留下五千兵马戍守利州。
English: At this time, Zhao Tingyin and Li Zhaozhou led troops from Jianzhou back to Chengdu, leaving behind five thousand soldiers and horses to defend Lishu.

古文：丙午，董璋亦还东川，留兵三千戍果、阆。
现代文：丙午，董璋也回到东川，留三千兵马戍果州、阆州。
English: In the afternoon of the third day, Dong Xuan also returned to the East River, leaving three thousand soldiers and horses to march to Gozhou and Zhangzhou.

古文：丁巳，李仁罕陷忠州。
现代文：丁巳，李仁罕攻陷忠州。
English: Soon after, Li Renhan invaded Chungju.

古文：吴徐知诰欲以中书侍郎、内枢使宋齐丘为相，齐丘自以资望素浅，欲以退让为高，谒归洪州葬父，因入九华山，止于应天寺，启求隐居；吴主下诏征之，知诰亦以书招之，皆不至。
现代文：吴国徐知诰打算让中书侍郎、内枢使宋齐丘任宰相，宋齐丘以为自己资望素来浅薄，想用退让表示高尚，回故乡洪州安葬父亲，借机进入九华山，留在应天寺，启奏请求隐居；吴国君主下诏征调他回朝，徐知诰也写信招他回来，宋齐丘都不来。
English: Xu Zhisheng of the State of Wu planned to appoint Song Qiqiu, the attendant of the Chinese book and the inner envoy, as the prime minister. Song Qiqiu thought that his reputation had always been shallow, and wanted to use concession to express nobility. He returned to his hometown of Hongzhou to bury his father, took the opportunity to enter Mount Jiuhua, stayed at the Temple of Heaven, and requested to live in seclusion. The monarch of the State of Wu issued an edict to transfer him back to the North. Xu Zhisheng also wrote a letter to invite him back, but Song Qiqiu did not come.

古文：知诰遣其子景通自入山敦谕，齐丘始还朝，除右仆射致仕，更命应天寺曰征贤寺。
现代文：徐知诰派其子徐景通亲自入山敦促劝说，宋齐丘才回朝，封为右仆射，让他告老退休，把应天寺改名为 征贤寺 。
English: Xu Zhisheng sent his son Xu Jingtong to the mountain to urge and persuade, and Song Qiqiu returned to the imperial court as the right-hand man, let him retire, and changed the name of Yingtian Temple to Zhengxian Temple.

古文：三月，己未朔，李仁罕陷万州；庚申，陷云安监。
现代文：三月，己未朔，李仁罕攻陷万州；庚申，攻陷云安监。
English: In March, before the new year, Li Renhan invaded Wanzhou; Goshun invaded Yunnan.

古文：辛酉，赐契丹东丹王突欲姓东丹，名慕华，以为怀化节度使，瑞、慎等州观察使；其部曲及先所俘契丹将惕隐等，皆赐姓名。
现代文：辛酉，后唐明宗赐契丹的东丹王突欲姓东丹，名叫慕华，任用他为怀化节度使及瑞、慎等州的观察使；他的家兵和以前俘获的契丹酋长惕隐等人都赐姓名。
English: Hsin-tao, the King of Dong-tan, who was given the name Dong-tan by the Later Tang and Ming dynasties, was named Mu-hua. He was appointed as an envoy to the Huaihua Festival and an observation envoy to the states of Rui and Shen; his family soldiers and the previously captured Khitan chieftain Ti-yin and others were all given names.

古文：惕隐姓狄，名怀惠。
现代文：惕隐姓狄，名怀忠。
English: Be discreet, go incognito, be loyal.

古文：李仁罕至夔州，宁江节度使安崇阮弃镇，与杨汉宾自均、房逃归；壬戌，仁罕陷夔州。
现代文：李仁罕到达夔州，宁江节度使安崇阮放弃镇所，与杨汉宾从均州、房州逃归；壬戌，李仁罕攻陷夔州。
English: Li Renhan arrived in Bozhou, the Ningjiang Festival made An Chong Ruan abandon the town, and he and Yang Hanbin fled from Junzhou and Fangzhou; after that, Li Renhan invaded Bozhou.

古文：帝既解安重诲枢务，乃召李从珂，泣谓曰： 如重诲意，汝安得复见吾！ 
现代文：明宗既已解除了安重诲的枢要职务，便把义子李从珂召回来，流着眼泪对他说： 如果按照安重诲的意思，你哪还能够见到我！ 
English: As soon as Mingzong had relieved An Chong Yu of his key duties, he called his son Li back from Ke and said to him with tears streaming down his face: "If it's what An Chong Yu wanted, how can you still see me!

古文：丙寅，以从珂为左卫大将军。
现代文：丙寅，任命李从珂为左卫大将军。
English: Cui Yin, appointed Li Congke as the General of the Left Division.

古文：壬申，横海节度使、同平章事孔循卒。
现代文：壬申，横海节度使、同平章事孔循去世。
English: Jinshin, the envoy of the Henghai Festival, Tongping Zhang Zhixing passed away.

古文：乙酉，复以钱镠为天下兵马都元帅、尚父、吴越国王，遣监门上将军张篯往谕旨，以曏日致仕，安重诲矫制也。
现代文：乙酉，后唐朝廷重新任命钱为天下兵马都元帅、尚父、吴越国王，派监门上将军张前往宣谕圣旨，因为以前让钱告老退休，是安重诲假托诏命所为。
English: After the Tang Dynasty, Qian Qian was re-appointed as the Marshal of the Terracotta Warriors and Horses of the World, the Father of Shang Dynasty, and the King of Wuyue, and sent the Warden General Zhang to proclaim the sacred edict, because previously, Qian Qian was retired because of the order of Anshu Qian.

古文：丁亥，以太常卿李愚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：丁亥，任用太常卿李愚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Ding Hai appointed Li Gu, the First Secretary of the Central Committee, as the Secretary of the Central Committee and the Secretary of Tongping.

古文：夏，四月，辛卯，以王德妃为淑妃。
现代文：夏季四月，辛卯，把王德妃升为淑妃。
English: In the summer of April, Xin Wu promoted Wang Defei to Shu Fei.

古文：闽奉国节度使兼中书令王延禀闻闽王延钧有疾，以次子继升知建州留后，帅建州刺史继雄将水军袭福州。
现代文：闽国奉国节度使兼中书令王延禀听说闽王王延钧有病，他的次子王继升为建州留后，自己带领建州刺史王继雄统率水军进袭福州。
English: Wang Yanzhong, the envoy of the Jian Guo and the Chinese envoy, heard that Wang Yanzhong was ill. After his second son Wang Jisheng stayed in Jianzhou, he led the Jianzhou sailor Wang Jio and led the navy to attack Fuzhou.

古文：癸卯，延禀攻西门，继雄攻东门；延钧遣楼船指挥使王仁达将水军拒之。
现代文：癸卯，王延禀攻西门，王继雄攻东门；王延钧派楼船指挥使王仁达统领水军抵抗。
English: At the same time, Wang Yanqi attacked the west gate, and Wang Jixiong attacked the east gate. Wang Yanqi sent the commander of the ro-ro ship to Wang Rinda to lead the navy to resist.

古文：仁达伏甲舟中，伪立白帜请降，继雄喜，屏左右，登仁达舟慰抚之；仁达斩继雄，枭首于西门。
现代文：王仁达在舟中埋伏了甲兵，假树白旗请求投降，王继雄很高兴，于是屏退左右，登上王仁达的船来慰抚他；王仁达杀了王继雄，砍了头悬挂在西门。
English: Wang Renda ambushed the armored soldiers in the boat, the fake tree white flag requested surrender, Wang Jixiong was very happy, so he retreated around the screen and boarded Wang Renda's boat to comfort him; Wang Renda killed Wang Jixiong, cut off his head and hung it on the west gate.

古文：延禀方纵火攻城，见之，恸哭，仁达因纵兵击之，众溃，左右以斛舁延禀而走，甲辰，追擒之。
现代文：王延禀正在放火攻城，看见之后，哀痛大哭，王仁达因此纵兵攻击他，其众溃散，左右的人用巨斛抬着王延禀奔逃。甲辰，追上抓获了他。
English: Wang Yanqi was setting fire to the city, and when he saw it, he burst into tears of grief. As a result, Wang Renda attacked him with his soldiers, and the crowd scattered. The people around him carried Wang Yanqi with a huge crossbow and ran away. Jiachen caught up with him and captured him.

古文：延钧见之曰： 果烦老史再下！ 
现代文：王延钧见到他说： 果然麻烦你老兄再下福州了！ 
English: When Wang Yanqi saw him, he said, "I'm really sorry to trouble you, but you have to go to Fuzhou again!"

古文：延禀惭不能对。
现代文：王延禀惭愧得不能回对。
English: Wang Yanqi was too ashamed to reply.

古文：延钧囚于别室，遣使者如建州招抚其党；其党杀使者，奉继升及弟继伦奔吴越。
现代文：王延钧把他囚押在别室，派使者到建州招抚他的党羽；王延禀的党羽杀死使者，保护着王继升和他的弟弟王继伦投奔吴越国。
English: Wang Yansheng imprisoned him in another room and sent an envoy to Jianzhou to appease his party; Wang Yansheng's party killed the envoy and protected Wang Jisheng and his brother Wang Jilun to go to Wuyue.

古文：仁达，延钧从子也。
现代文：王仁达是王延钧的侄儿。
English: Wang Renda is the nephew of Wang Yanjun.

古文：以宣徽北院使赵延寿为枢密使。
现代文：任用宣徽北院使赵延寿为枢密使。
English: The Northern Yuan of Xuanhui appointed Zhao Yanshou as a privy envoy.

古文：己酉，天雄节度使、同平章事石敬瑭兼六军诸卫副使。
现代文：己酉，委任天雄节度使、同平章事石敬瑭兼任六军诸卫副使。
English: He appointed Tianxiong Jiedu Envoy, and Tongping Zhang Jishi Jingyong as deputy envoy of the Six Armies.

古文：辛亥，以硃弘照为宣徽南院使。
现代文：辛亥，任用朱弘昭为宣徽南院使。
English: Xinhai appointed Zhu Hongzhao as the envoy of the Southern Yuan Dynasty.

古文：五月，闽王延钧斩王延禀于市，复其姓名曰周彦琛，遣其弟都教练使延政如建州抚慰吏民。
现代文：五月，闽王王延钧斩杀了其异姓兄弟王延禀，恢复其姓名为周彦琛，派遣他的弟弟都教练使王延政到建州抚慰官吏和民众。
English: In May, Wang Yancheng, the king of Qi, killed his brother Wang Yancheng with a different surname, restored his surname to Zhou Yancheng, and sent his younger brother Du Coach to send Wang Yanzheng to Jianzhou to comfort officials and the public.

古文：丁卯，罢亩税麹钱，城中官造麹减旧半价，乡村听百姓自造；民甚便之。
现代文：丁卯，停止计亩收酒税钱，城内官造按旧价减半，乡村听由百姓自己制造；民众很称方便。
English: Dingwu, stop collecting liquor tax per mu, halve the old price of government-made liquor in the city, and let the people make their own liquor in the countryside; the people are very convenient.

古文：己卯，以孟汉琼知内侍省事，充宣徽北院使。
现代文：己卯，任命孟汉琼为知内侍省事，充任宣徽北院使。
English: At the same time, Meng Hanqiong was appointed as the provincial secretary of the Inner Court and the envoy of the Northern Court of the State Council.

古文：汉琼，本赵王镕奴也。
现代文：孟汉琼本来是赵王王熔的家奴。
English: Meng Hanqiong was originally Zhao Wangwangluo's manservant.

古文：时范延光、赵延寿虽为枢密使，惩安重悔以刚愎得罪，每于政事不敢可否；独汉琼与王淑妃居中用事，人皆惮之。
现代文：当时，范延光、赵延寿虽然身为枢秘使，但是以安重诲刚愎用事获罪为戒，往往对政事不敢表示可否；独有孟汉琼与王淑妃在内宫弄权，人们都惧怕他们。
English: At that time, although Fan Yanguang and Zhao Yanshou were the top secret envoys, they often did not dare to express whether or not they were willing to participate in government affairs, as they were cautioned not to do anything that might cause trouble. Meng Hanqiong and Wang Shufei were the only ones who tried to wield power in the inner palace, and people were afraid of them.

古文：先是，宫中须索稍逾常度，重诲辄执奏，由是非分之求殆绝。
现代文：起初，宫中需要和索取稍有超越正常用度，安重诲常常抓住上奏后唐明宗，因此非份的求取几乎断绝了。
English: At first, the needs and requests of the imperial court slightly exceeded the normal usage, and An Chongyi often seized the post-playing Tang Ming Dynasty, so the request for non-parts was almost cut off.

古文：至是，汉琼直以中宫之命取府库物，不复关由枢密院及三司，亦无语文书，所取不可胜纪。
现代文：到这时，孟汉琼径直用中宫的命令调取府库中的器物，不再通知枢密院和三司，也没有文书凭据，所取之物不可胜计。
English: At this time, Meng Han Qiong directly used the order of the Middle Court to obtain the goods in the treasury, no longer notified the Privy Council and the three departments, and there was no documentary evidence, and the items taken were incalculable.

古文：辛巳，以相州刺史孟鹄为左骁卫大将军，充三司使。
现代文：辛巳，任用相州刺史孟鹄为左骁卫大将军，充任三司使。
English: Soon after, he appointed Meng Xi, the governor of Gansu Province, as the General of the Left Division of the National Guard, and he served as the Third Divisional Envoy.

古文：昭武留后赵廷隐自成都赴利州，逾月，请兵进取兴元及秦、凤；孟知祥以兵疲民困，不许。
现代文：昭武留后赵廷隐从成都赴利州，过了一个月，请派兵进取兴元及秦州、凤州；孟知祥因为兵疲民困，没有答应赵廷隐的请求。
English: After Zhaowu left, Zhao Tingyin went from Chengdu to Lizhou. A month later, he asked Meng Zhixiang to send troops to invade Xingyuan, Qinzhou and Fengzhou. Meng Zhixiang did not agree to Zhao Tingyin's request because the soldiers were exhausted and the people were in need.

古文：护国节度使兼中书令安重诲内不自安，表请致仕；闰月，庚寅，制以太子太师致仕。
现代文：护国节度使兼中书令安重诲内心感到不能自安，上表请求退休；闰五月，庚寅，后唐明宗下诏让他以太子太师衔告老退休。
English: The National Day of Protection of the Country made the concurrently Chinese and Korean emperors feel that they could not be self-assured, and the above table requested retirement; in leap May, Gyeongin, the late Tang and Ming dynasties issued an edict to let him retire with the title of grandmaster.

古文：是日，其子崇赞、崇绪逃奔河中。
现代文：就在这一天，他的儿子安崇赞、安崇绪逃奔到河中。
English: On this very day, his sons, An Chongzan and An Chongxu, ran away into the river.

古文：壬辰，以保义节度使李从璋为护国节度使；甲午，遣步军指挥使药彦稠将兵趣河中。
现代文：壬辰，任命保义节度使李从璋为护国节度使。甲午，派遣步军指挥使药彦稠领兵进军河中。
English: In the morning of the same day, Li Conglu was appointed as the envoy of the Guoying Festival, and Li Conglu was appointed as the envoy of the National Defense Festival. In the afternoon of the same day, the commander of the infantry was dispatched to lead the troops into the middle of the river.

古文：安崇赞等至河中，重诲惊曰： 汝安得来？ 
现代文：安崇赞等到了河中，安重诲吃惊说 你们为什么来这里？ 
English: An Chongzan waited in the river, and An Chongzhen said in surprise, "Why did you come here?"

古文：既而曰： 吾知之矣，此非渠意，为人所使耳。
现代文：接着又说： 我明白了，这不是你们的意思，是被人所利用啊。
English: Then he added: I understand, that's not what you meant, you're being used.

古文：吾以死徇国，夫复何言！ 
现代文：我要以死殉国，还有什么再说的？ 
English: I want to die a martyr, what else can I say?

古文：乃执二子表送诣阙。
现代文：于是，捉拿了二子上表押送到朝廷。
English: As a result, the two were arrested and escorted to the imperial court.

古文：明日，有中使至，见重诲，恸哭久之；重诲问其故，中使曰： 人言令公有异志，朝廷已遣药彦稠将兵至矣。 
现代文：第二天，有内廷使者到来，见到安重诲，悲痛涕哭不止；安重诲问他为什么这样悲痛，内使说： 人们传说您要谋反，朝廷已派遣药彦稠领兵过来了。 
English: The next day, an emissary from the Inner Court arrived. Seeing An Chongzhen, he wept with grief. When An Chongzhen asked him why he was so sad, the emissary said, "People say that you are plotting a rebellion. The Imperial Court has sent Yan Yan Cong to lead the troops here."

古文：重诲曰： 吾受国怨，死不足报，敢有异志，更烦国家发兵，贻主上之忧，罪益重矣。 
现代文：安重诲说： 我受国家重恩，死也不足报答，怎敢有异志，来烦扰国家发兵，招致主上的忧虑，那就罪过更重了。 
English: I have been greatly blessed by the state, and death is not enough to repay it. How dare I have the ambition to disturb the state's dispatch of troops and cause the Lord's anxiety? That would be an even greater sin.

古文：崇赞等至陕，有诏系狱。
现代文：安崇赞等到了陕州，诏令把他们囚系狱中。
English: When An Chongzan arrived in Shaanxi, the imperial edict put them in prison.

古文：皇城使翟光鄴素恶重诲，帝遣诣河中察之，曰： 重诲果有异志则诛之。 
现代文：皇城使崔光邺向来厌恶安重诲，后唐明宗派他到河中去察看情况，并说： 安重诲如果真有异志就杀了他。 
English: The imperial city had always made Cui Guangya loathe An Chongyao. After the Tang and Ming Dynasties, he sent him to the river to inspect the situation and said: If An Chongyao really has a different will, then kill him.

古文：光鄴至河中，李从璋以甲士围其第，自入见重诲，拜于庭下。
现代文：崔光邺到了河中，李从璋派带甲的士兵包围安重诲的府第，自己进入见安重诲，拜于庭下。
English: Cui Guangyao went to the river, Li Congyao sent soldiers with armour to surround the palace of An Chongyao, and he went in to see An Chongyao and bowed to the court.

古文：重诲惊，降阶答拜，从璋奋挝击其首；妻张氏惊救，亦挝杀之。
现代文：安重诲大惊，走下台阶答拜，李从璋猛然奋起以锤挝击过他的头部；安妻张氏惊慌援救，也被击毙。
English: An was so shocked that he stepped down from the steps to answer the prayer. Li Zongyi suddenly stood up and hit him on the head with a hammer. An's wife Zhang panicked and came to his rescue, but she was also killed.

古文：奏至，己亥，下诏，以重诲离间孟知祥、董璋、钱镠为重诲罪，又诬其欲自击淮南以图兵柄，遣元随窃二子归本道；并二子诛之。
现代文：奏章到了朝廷，己亥，明宗下诏书，把安重诲离间孟知祥、董璋、钱与朝廷的关系作为安重诲的罪行，又诬说他想自己出击淮南以夺取兵权，派遣元随暗中带安崇赞、安崇绪二子归还本道；并将二人诛杀。
English: When the imperial rescript arrived at the imperial court, Ji Hai, the emperor of Ming Dynasty, issued an edict, making it a crime to disturb the relationship between Meng Zhixiang, Dong Xuan, and Qian and the imperial court. He also falsely said that he wanted to attack Huainan to seize military power, and send Yuan secretly with An Chongzan and An Chongxu's two sons to return to the original way; and killed them both.

古文：丙午，帝遣西川进奏官苏愿、东川军将刘澄各还本道，谕以安重诲专命，兴兵致讨，今已伏辜。
现代文：丙午，后唐明宗派西川进奏官苏愿、东川军将领刘澄各自回到本军镇所，传达：因安重诲专权，朝廷对他兴兵讨伐，现在安重诲已经伏罪死亡。
English: In the afternoon of the 3rd day of the 4th month, Su Wanying, the Western Sichuan envoy of the post-Tangming sect, and Liu Cheng, the general of the Eastern Sichuan army, each returned to their own army town, and conveyed: Due to An Chongyuan's exclusive power, the imperial court raised an army to fight against him, and now An Chongyuan has died in an ambush.

古文：六月，乙丑，复以李从珂同平章事，充西都留守。
现代文：六月，乙丑，重新任用李从珂为同平章事，充任西都留守。
English: In June, the second month of the year, Li Congke was reappointed as Tongping chapter, and stayed in Xidu.

古文：丙子，命诸道均民田税。
现代文：丙子，后唐朝廷命令所辖诸道均衡民众的田税。
English: Cixi, after the Tang Dynasty, the court ordered the provinces to balance the people's field tax.

古文：闽王延钧好神仙之术，道士陈守元、巫者徐彦、兴盛韬共诱之作宝皇宫，极土木之盛，以守元为宫主。
现代文：闽王王延钧喜好神仙不死之术，道士陈守元、巫师徐彦林与盛韬共同诱使他兴建宝皇宫道观，土木工程极为豪华，就以陈守元为宫主。
English: King Yan Xuan liked the immortality of the immortals. Taoist Chen Shouyuan, sorcerer Xu Yanlin and Sheng Yao jointly induced him to build the treasure palace of Taoism. The civil engineering project was extremely luxurious, with Chen Shouyuan as the master of the palace.

古文：秋，九月，己亥，更赐东凡慕华姓名曰李赞华。
现代文：秋季九月，己亥，重新赐予东丹慕华的姓名叫李赞华。
English: In the autumn of September, Ji Hai, Dongdan Muhua was given a new name, Li Zanhua.

古文：吴镇南节度使、同平章事徐知谏卒；以诸道副都统、镇海节度使、守中收令徐知询代之，赐爵东海郡王。
现代文：吴国镇南节度使、同平章事徐知谏去世；任用诸道副都统、镇海节度使、守中书令徐知询代替他，赐爵东海郡王。
English: Xu Zhisheng, the envoy of the Southern Festival of Wuzhen and Tongping, passed away; Xu Zhisheng, the envoy of the Southern Festival of Zhenhai, was appointed to replace him, and he was awarded the title of the King of Donghai County.

古文：徐知诰之召知询入朝也，知谏豫其谋。
现代文：天成四年时，徐知诰利用权柄召调徐知询入吴国朝廷，徐知谏参与了策划。
English: When Tiancheng was four years old, Xu Zhisheng used his authority to transfer Xu Zhisheng to the imperial court of Wu, and Xu Zhisheng participated in the planning.

古文：知询遇其丧于涂，抚棺泣曰： 弟用心如此，我亦无憾，然何面见先王于地下乎！ 
现代文：此次，徐知询往洪州赴任，路上遇到徐知谏的灵柩，徐知询抚摸着棺材哭泣说： 老弟对我如此用心，我也不怨恨你，然而你有何面目见先王于地下呢？ 
English: This time, Xu Zhiyuan went to Hongzhou to take office. On the way, he encountered the coffin of Xu Zhiyuan. Xu Zhiyuan stroked the coffin and cried and said: My brother is so attentive to me, I do not resent you, but what kind of face do you see the first king in the underground?

古文：辛丑，加枢密使范延光同平章事。
现代文：辛丑，封枢密使范延光为同平章事。
English: It was a serious matter to seal the imperial envoy Fan Yanguang as a peer.

古文：辛亥，敕解纵五坊鹰隼，内外无得更进。
现代文：辛亥，后唐明宗敕令把内廷五坊豢养的鹰隼都放回山林，以后朝廷内外都不得再进献。
English: In Xinhai, the late Tang and Ming dynasties ordered that the eagle owls raised in the five courtyards of the Inner Court be returned to the mountains and forests. From then on, they were no longer allowed to be presented inside and outside the Imperial Court.

古文：冯道曰： 陛下可谓仁及禽兽。 
现代文：冯道说： 陛下可称仁爱及于禽兽了。 
English: Feng Dao said: Your Majesty can be called benevolent to animals.

古文：上曰： 不然。
现代文：明宗说： 不是这样。
English: The emperor said, "That is not so."

古文：朕昔尝从武皇猎，时秋稼方熟，有兽逸入田中，遣骑取之，比及得兽，馀稼无几。
现代文：朕从前曾经随从武皇帝打猎，当时正当秋季，禾稼刚成熟，有的野兽逃入田中，派人骑着马去猎取，等到抓住野兽，禾稼已经剩余没有多少了。
English: In the past, I used to go hunting with Emperor Wu. At that time, it was autumn and the crops were just ripe. Some wild animals escaped into the fields, so I sent someone on horseback to hunt them. By the time the wild animals were caught, there was not much grain left.

古文：以是思之，猎有损无益，故不为耳。 
现代文：因此想到，纵放鹰犬去打猎有损无益，所以我不干那种事情啊。 
English: So I thought, well, it's no good sending a beagle out to hunt, so I'm not going to do that.

古文：冬，十月，丁卯，洋州指挥使李进唐攻通州，拔之。
现代文：冬季十月，丁卯，洋州指挥使李进唐攻打蜀地通州，予以攻克。
English: In the winter of October, Dingwu, the commander of Yangzhou, ordered Li Jin Tang to attack Tongzhou in Shoudi and conquer it.

古文：壬午，以王延政为建州刺史。
现代文：壬午，后唐任用王延政为建州刺史。
English: In Renpo, the Later Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Yanzheng as the founder of Jianzhou.

古文：十一月，甲申朔，日有食之。
现代文：十一月，甲申朔，出现日食。
English: A solar eclipse occurred in Jiaxing in November.

古文：癸巳，苏愿至成都，孟知祥闻甥妷在朝廷者皆无恙，遣使告董璋，欲与之俱上表谢罪。
现代文：癸巳，苏愿到达成都，孟知祥听说他的亲戚在后唐朝廷做官的都安然无事，就派使者去告诉董璋，想要和董璋一同上表谢罪。
English: As soon as Meng Zhixiang heard that his relatives who had served as officials in the post-Tang Dynasty were safe and sound, he sent an envoy to tell Dong Jun that he wanted to join Dong Jun in expressing his gratitude.

古文：璋怒曰： 孟公亲戚皆完，固宜归附；璋已族灭，尚何谢为！
现代文：董璋发怒说： 孟公亲戚都完好，当然应该归附朝廷；我的宗族已经杀灭，还有什么可谢的！
English: Dong Qi said angrily: Meng Gong's relatives are all intact, of course they should be returned to the imperial court; my family has been exterminated, what else is there to be grateful for!

古文：诏书皆在苏愿腹中，刘澄安得豫闻，璋岂不知邪！ 
现代文：朝廷下的诏书都在苏愿的肚子里，刘澄哪得预问，我董璋难道不知道吗！ 
English: The imperial edicts issued by the imperial court are all in Su Zheng's stomach. Liu Cheng doesn't have to ask in advance, I don't know what I'm doing!

古文：由是复为怨敌。
现代文：从此，又成为怨敌。
English: Since then, they have become bitter enemies again.

古文：乙未，李仁罕自夔州引兵还成都。
现代文：乙未，李仁罕从夔州领兵返还成都。
English: Two days later, Li Renhan returned to Chengdu after leading the troops from Zhangzhou.

古文：吴中书令徐知诰表称辅政岁久，请归老金陵；乃以知诰为镇海、宁国节度使，镇金陵，馀官如故，总录朝政如徐温故事。
现代文：吴国中书令徐知诰向吴主上表说，自己辅政时间长了，请求告老回金陵；吴主便任命知诰为镇海、宁国节度使，镇守金陵，其余官职如旧，总管朝政像他的父亲徐温一样。
English: Xu Zhisheng, the second-in-command of the State of Wu, wrote to the Lord of the State of Wu, saying that his time as an assistant governor was too long, and requested to return to Jinling. The Lord of the State of Wu then appointed Zhisheng as the deputy governor of Zhenhai, the deputy governor of Ningguo, the governor of Jinling, and the rest of the official positions were the same as before. He was in charge of the administration of the State of Wu, just like his father Xu Wen.

古文：以其子兵部尚书、参政事景通为司徒、同平章事，知中外左右诸军事，留江都辅政；以内枢使、同平章事王令谋为右仆射，兼门下侍郎；以宋齐丘为右仆射，兼中书侍郎。并同平章事，兼内枢使，以佐景通。
现代文：又任用徐知诰的儿子兵部尚书、参政事徐景通为司徒、同平章事，主管中外左右诸军事务，留在江都辅政；还用内枢使、同平章事王令谋为左仆射，兼门下侍郎，用宋齐丘为右仆射，兼中书侍郎，二人并同平章事，兼内枢使，以协助徐景通。
English: He also appointed Xu Zhisheng's sons, Hyobu Shangshu and Councillor of State Xu Jingtong, as assistants, and Tongping Zhangjie, in charge of the affairs of the armies of the left and right at home and abroad, to remain in Jiangdu to assist the government. He also used the inner messenger, Tongping Zhangjie Wang Lingmou, as the left servant, and the servant of the door, and used Song Qiqiu as the right servant, and the servant of the middle book, and the two of them together with Tongping Zhangjie, and the inner messenger, to assist Xu Jingtong.

古文：赐德胜节度使张崇爵清河王。
现代文：赐德胜节度使张崇进爵清河王。
English: Zhang Chong was given the title of Qinghe King by virtue of his victory.

古文：崇在庐州贪暴，州人苦之，屡尝入朝，厚以货结权要，由是常得还镇，为庐州患者二十馀年。
现代文：张崇在庐州贪婪暴虐，百姓叫苦。他曾经屡次入朝，用大量财勾结朝中有权有势的高官，因此常常能够返还原镇，成为庐州的祸害达二十多年。
English: Zhang Chong was greedy and tyrannical in Zhangzhou, and the people cried bitterly. He had repeatedly entered the imperial court and used a large amount of wealth to collude with powerful and influential high-ranking officials in the imperial court, so he was often able to return to the original town, becoming a scourge of Zhangzhou for more than 20 years.

古文：十二月，甲寅朔，初听百姓自铸农器并杂铁器，每田二亩，夏秋输农具三钱。
现代文：十二月，甲寅朔，开始听任百姓自己铸造农具和杂铁器，每有田二亩，夏秋季纳农具税三线。
English: In December, Jia Yinshuo, began to allow the people to cast their own agricultural tools and sundry ironware, with two mu per field, and the third line of agricultural tool tax in summer and autumn.

古文：武安、静江节度使马希声闻梁太祖嗜食鸡，慕之，既袭位，日杀五十鸡为膳；居丧无戚容。
现代文：武安、静江节度使马希声听说后梁太祖朱温嗜好吃鸡，很羡慕，待到他继承楚王位以后，每天杀五十只鸡供膳食之用，他正居于服丧之期，也没有悲伤的样子。
English: The Wu'an and Jingjiang festivals made Ma Xisheng hear that the late Liang Taizu Zhu Wen had a penchant for eating chicken, and he was very envious. After he inherited the throne of Chu, he killed fifty chickens every day for meals. He was in the period of mourning, and he did not look sad.

古文：庚申，葬武穆王于衡阳，将发引，顿食鸡隺数盘，前吏部侍郎潘起讥之曰： 昔阮籍居丧食蒸豚；何代无贤！ 
现代文：庚申，在衡阳埋葬他的父亲武穆王马殷，将要发丧，顿时吃了数盘鸡汤，前吏部侍郎潘起讥讽他说： 从前阮籍居丧吃蒸小猪；哪一代没有 贤人 啊！ 
English: Gao Sheng, whose father King Wumu Ma Yin was buried in Hengyang, was about to go into mourning. He immediately ate several plates of chicken soup. Pan Qi, the former attendant of the cadre department, mocked him and said: "In the past, Ruan Jiuzhuang ate steamed piglets; what generation does not have a wise man!

古文：癸亥，徐知诰至金陵。
现代文：癸亥，徐知诰到达金陵。
English: Yan Hai and Xu Zhisheng arrived in Jinling.

古文：昭武留后赵廷隐白孟知祥以利州城堑已完，顷在剑州与牙内都指挥使李肇同功，愿以昭武让肇，知祥褒谕，不许；延隐三让，癸酉，知祥召廷隐还成都，以肇代之。
现代文：昭武留后赵廷隐上表禀告孟知祥，利州修整城堑已经完成，前此在守卫剑州时，牙内都指挥使李肇与他有同样的功劳，愿意把昭武军镇让给李肇，孟知祥称赞了他，但是没有准许；赵廷隐三次表示让位，癸酉，孟知祥把赵廷隐召回成都，让李肇去代替他。
English: After Zhaowu left, Zhao Tingyin told Meng Zhixiang on the table that Lizhou's repair of the city wall had been completed. Previously, when guarding Jianzhou, the commander had ordered Li Zhao to have the same merit as him. He was willing to give Zhaowu's military town to Li Zhao. Meng Zhixiang praised him, but did not give permission. Zhao Tingyin three times expressed his resignation. Meng Zhixiang recalled Zhao Tingyin to Chengdu and asked Li Zhao to replace him.

古文：闽陈守元等称宝皇之命，谓闽王延钧曰： 苟能避位受道，当为天子六十年。 
现代文：闽国陈守元等声称，奉宝皇之命，对闽王王延钧说： 如果您能避开王位，接受道，可以做天子六十年。 
English: Chen Shouyuan and others from the State of Min claimed that, on the orders of Emperor Bao, they said to King Yan of the State of Min: "If you can avoid the throne and accept the Tao, you can be the Son of Heaven for sixty years."

古文：延钧信之，丙子，命其子节度使使继鹏权军府事。
现代文：王延钧相信了这个话，丙子，命他的儿子节度副使王继鹏暂管军府之事。
English: Wang Yanxuan believed this, and ordered his son Wang Jipeng, the vice-envoy of Jiedu, to take temporary charge of the military government.

古文：延钧避位受箓，道名玄锡。
现代文：王延钧避位接受道家符，取道名玄锡。
English: Wang Yanqi abdicated and accepted the Taoist family crest, taking the Taoist name Xuanzi.

古文：爱州将杨廷艺养假子三千人，图复交州；汉交州守将李进知之，受其赂，不以闻。
现代文：爱州将官杨廷艺养义子三千人，企图复取交州；南汉守将李进知道此事，由于受到杨廷艺的贿赂，不向南汉国主刘龚报告。
English: Yang Tingyi, the general of Aizhou, raised 3,000 sons and daughters in an attempt to recapture Jiaozhou; Li Jin, the governor of Southern Han, knew about this, but because he was bribed by Yang Tingyi, he did not report it to Liu Bei, the ruler of Southern Han.

古文：是岁，廷艺举兵围交州，汉主遣承旨程宝将兵救之，未至，城陷。
现代文：这一年，杨廷艺发兵围攻交州，南汉国主派承旨程宝去救援，兵未到而城已陷。
English: In this year, Yang Tingyi sent troops to besiege Jiaozhou, and the Southern Han sovereign sent Cheng Bao to rescue, but the soldiers did not arrive and the city had fallen.

古文：进逃归，汉主杀之。
现代文：李进逃归，南汉主把他杀了。
English: Li Jin fled, and the Southern Han killed him.

古文：宝围交州，廷艺出战，宝败死。
现代文：程宝围攻交州，杨廷艺出城迎战，程宝战败而死。
English: Cheng Bao besieged Jiaozhou, Yang Tingyi went out to fight, Cheng Bao was defeated and died.

古文：明宗圣德和武钦孝皇帝中之下长兴三年
现代文：长兴三年
English: Three years of Changxing

古文：春，正月，枢密使范延光言： 自灵州至邠州方渠镇，使臣及外国入贡者多为党项所掠，请发兵击之。 
现代文：春季正月，枢密使范延光上奏： 从灵州至州方渠镇，使臣及外国入朝廷来进贡的人，很多被党项所劫掠，请朝廷派兵去攻打他们。 
English: In the first month of spring, the confidential envoy Fan Yanguang played: From Lingzhou to the town of Fangqu Town, the envoys and foreigners who came to the imperial court to pay tribute, many of whom were plundered by the party, asked the imperial court to send troops to attack them.

古文：己丑，遣静难节度使药彦稠、前朔方节度使康福将步骑七千讨党项。
现代文：己丑，后唐朝廷派静难节度使药彦稠、前朔方节度使康福统领步兵和骑兵七人讨伐党项。
English: However, the post-Tang Dynasty sent seven infantry and cavalry soldiers under the leadership of Kangfu to fight against the Party.

古文：乙未，孟知祥妻福庆长公主卒。
现代文：乙未，孟知祥妻福庆长公主去世。
English: Two days later, Meng Zhixiang's wife, Princess Fuqing, passed away.

古文：孟知祥以朝廷恩意优厚，而董璋塞绵州路，不听遣使入谢，与节度副使赵季良等谋，欲发使自峡江上表，掌书记李昊曰： 公不与东川谋而独遣使，则异日负约之责在我矣。 
现代文：孟知祥因为朝廷对他恩宠优厚，而董璋挡住绵州的道路，不让他派使者入朝致谢，便同节度副使赵季良等谋议，准备派遣使者从峡江出川上表，掌书记李昊说： 您不同东川商量而独自派出使者，那么将来不守协约的责任就落在我们头上了。 
English: Meng Zhixiang, because the imperial court had been gracious to him, and Dong Xuan blocked the road of Mianzhou and did not allow him to send an envoy to the DPRK to express his gratitude, consulted with Zhao Jiliang, the deputy envoy of the State Council, and others to prepare to send an envoy from the canyon to the table. Li Hao, the chief secretary, said: If you do not discuss the East River and send an envoy alone, then the responsibility of not abiding by the agreement in the future will fall on our heads.

古文：乃复遣使语之，璋不从。
现代文：因而又派人告诉董璋，董璋不听他的。
English: Therefore, he sent someone to tell Dong Xuan that Dong Xuan did not listen to him.

古文：二月，赵季良与诸将议遣昭武都监太原高彦俦将兵攻取壁州，以绝山南兵转入山后诸州者；孟知祥谋于僚佐，李昊曰： 朝廷遣苏愿等西归，未尝报谢，今遣兵侵轶，公若不顾坟墓、甥妷，则不若传檄举兵直取梁、洋，安用壁州乎！ 
现代文：二月，赵季良与诸将计议派昭武都监太原人高彦俦领兵攻取壁州，来断绝秦岭以南的兵卒转奔山后诸州的人；孟知祥和自己的僚属商议，李昊说： 朝廷把苏愿等派回来，还没有向朝廷报谢，现在反派兵侵袭，您如果不顾自家的祖坟和亲戚，就不如发出战报直取梁州、洋州，哪用得着攻打壁州啊！ 
English: In February, Zhao Qiliang and other generals discussed sending Zhaowu, the provincial governor of Taiyuan, Gao Yanqian, to lead the troops to conquer Bishu, to cut off the soldiers from the south of Qinling and the people from Bishu who had fled to the mountains; Meng Zhixiang and his colleagues discussed, Li Hao said: The court sent back the Soviet soldiers and has not thanked the court, and now the enemy soldiers are invading. If you do not care about your family's ancestral graves and relatives, you might as well issue a battle report to directly take Liangzhou and Yangzhou. What is the use of attacking B

古文：知祥乃止。
现代文：孟知祥便停止攻取壁州。
English: Meng Zhixiang then stopped attacking Bishu.

古文：季良由是恶昊。
现代文：赵季良从此厌恶李昊。
English: Zhao Jiliang has loathed Li Hao ever since.

古文：辛未，初令国子监校定《九经》，雕印卖之。
现代文：辛未，后唐朝廷初次下令国子监校定《九经》，雕版印制出售。
English: Soon after, the court of the later Tang Dynasty ordered for the first time that the son-in-law of the state should proofread the "Nine Classics" and print them on engraved plates for sale.

古文：药彦稠等奏破党项十九族，俘二千七百人。
现代文：药彦稠等奏报攻破党项十九个部族，俘虏二千七百人。
English: Yakuhiko Choshi and others reported that they had defeated nineteen tribes and captured twenty-seven hundred prisoners.

古文：赐高从诲爵勃海王。
现代文：赐授高从诲进爵勃海王。
English: Awarded the title of Knight of the Order of the Rising Sun.

古文：吴徐知诰作礼贤院于府舍，聚图书，延士大夫，与孙晟及海陵陈觉谈议时事。
现代文：吴国徐知诰在金陵府舍作礼贤院，聚集图书，延揽士大夫，与孙晟及海陵陈觉议论时事。
English: Wu Guo Xu Zhisheng built the Lixian Academy in Jinling Prefecture, collected books, recruited scholars and doctors, and discussed current affairs with Sun Yat-sen and Hailing Chen Jue.

古文：孟知祥三遣使说董璋，以主上加礼于两川，苟不奉表谢罪，恐复致讨；璋不从。
现代文：孟知祥三次派使者劝说董璋，因主上对两川优礼有加，如不上表谢罪，恐怕还要派兵来讨伐，董璋不听。
English: Meng Zhixiang sent envoys three times to persuade Dong Xuan that, since the Lord had shown great courtesy to the two rivers, if he did not express his gratitude, he would probably have to send soldiers to fight, but Dong Xuan would not listen.

古文：三月，辛丑，遣李昊诣梓州，极论利害，璋见昊，诟怒，不许。
现代文：三月，辛丑，又派李昊到梓州拜见董璋，极力论述利害。董璋见到李昊，怒骂不已，仍不同意。
English: In March, Xin Qiu also sent Li Hao to Zizhou to meet with Dong Quan to discuss the interests. When Dong Quan saw Li Hao, he was furious and still did not agree.

古文：昊还，言于知祥曰： 璋不通谋议，且有窥西川之志，公宜备之。 
现代文：李昊回来，对孟知祥说： 董璋不容商量，而且有袭取西川的意图，您可要戒备他。 
English: Li Hao came back and said to Meng Zhixiang: "Dong Yao is not negotiable, and he has the intention of attacking Xichuan. You should be on your guard against him."

古文：甲辰，闽王延钧复位。
现代文：甲辰，闽王王延钧复位。
English: Jia Chen, the king of the king of the king of the king of the king of the restoration.

古文：吴越武肃王钱镠疾，谓将吏曰： 吾疾必不起，诸儿皆愚懦，谁可为帅者？ 
现代文：吴越武肃王钱患病，对所属文官武将说： 我这次患病必然不能再愈。我的几个儿子都愚蠢懦弱，谁可以做统帅呢？ 
English: When King Qian of Wuyue Wushu fell ill, he said to the civilian general to whom he belonged, "This time my illness will definitely not get better. Several of my sons are stupid and cowardly. Who can be commander-in-chief?"

古文：众泣曰： 两镇令公仁孝有功，孰不爱戴！ 
现代文：众人涕泣地说： 镇海节度使钱传仁孝有功，谁不爱戴！ 
English: Everyone said with tears in their eyes, "The Zhenhai Festival has made the transmission of money, benevolence and filial piety fruitful. Who wouldn't love it!"

古文：镠乃悉出印钥授传瓘，曰： 将吏推尔，宜善守之。 
现代文：钱便把吴越的印信、锁钥全部取出授与钱传，并说： 众位将吏推举你，你要妥善守护住。 
English: Qian then took out all of Wu Yue's sealed letters and keys and gave them to Qian Chuan, saying, "All the generals have recommended you, you should properly guard them."

古文：又曰： 子孙善事中国，勿以易姓废事大之礼。 
现代文：又说： 今后，子孙们要亲善地对待中原，不要因为中原统治者易姓而放弃侍奉大国之礼。 
English: He also said, "In the future, our children and grandchildren should treat the Central Plains kindly, and should not give up the honor of serving the great country because the ruler of the Central Plains changed his surname."

古文：庚戌卒，年八十一。
现代文：庚戌去世，终年八十一岁。
English: Geng Yao died at the age of 81.

古文：传瓘与兄弟同幄行丧，内牙指挥使击仁章曰： 令公嗣先王霸业，将吏旦幕趋谒，当与诸公子异处。 
现代文：钱传与兄弟们共同在一个帐幄内守丧，内牙指挥使陆仁章说： 令公继承先王的霸业，将吏们早晚要进见，应当与诸位公子分开住。 
English: Qian Chuan and his brothers mourned together in a tent. Lu Renzhang, the commander of the Inner Teeth, said: "Since the prince inherits the tyranny of the former king, the officials will sooner or later have to advance, and they should live separately from you gentlemen."

古文：乃命主者更设一幄，扶传瓘居之，告将吏曰： 自今惟谒令公，禁诸公子从者无得妄入。 
现代文：便命令主事的人另设一帐，扶着钱传住进去，并向将吏宣告： 从今以后，这里只能谒见令公，禁止诸公子的随从未经允许随便进入。 
English: Then he ordered the person in charge to set up a separate account, transfer the money and live in it, and declare to the officials: From now on, only the emperor can be seen here, and the entourage of nobles is prohibited from entering without permission.

古文：昼夜警卫，未尝休息。
现代文：于是，昼夜警卫，未尝休息。
English: As a result, guards are on duty day and night, without a break.

古文：镠末年左右皆附传瓘，独仁章数以事犯之。
现代文：钱末年，侍奉在左右的人都依附讨好于钱传，唯独陆仁章几次因为一些事情触犯他。
English: In Qian's later years, the attendants on his right and left were all attached to pleasing Qian Chuan, except for Lu Renzhang, who offended him several times because of some things.

古文：至是，传瓘劳之，仁章曰： 先王在位，仁章不知事令公，今日尽节，犹事先王也。 
现代文：到此时，钱传慰劳他，陆仁章说： 先王在位时，仁章不知侍奉令公，现在为您尽力，犹如侍奉先王呵。 
English: At this time, Qian Chuan consoled him, and Lu Renzhang said: When the former king was on the throne, Renzhang did not know how to serve the king, and now he is doing his best for you, just as if he were serving the former king.

古文：传瓘嘉叹久之。
现代文：钱传很嘉许他，称叹不已。
English: Qian Chuan praised him very much and was overwhelmed with admiration.

古文：传瓘既袭位，更名元瓘，兄弟名 传 者皆更为 元 。
现代文：钱传继承王位以后，改名元，兄弟们名字中的 传 字都改为 元 字。
English: After Qian Chuan succeeded to the throne, he changed his name to Yuan, and the "传" in the brothers' names were changed to "元."

古文：以遗命去国仪，用籓镇法；除民田荒绝者租税。
现代文：因钱的遗命去掉称为国家的典仪，而用藩镇法制；免除民田荒芜无收者的租税。
English: As a result of Qian's will, the ceremony known as the state was removed, and the legal system of the domain and town was used; tax was exempted from those who had no income from deserted fields.

古文：命处州刺史曹仲达权知政事。
现代文：任命处州刺史曹仲达暂为知政事。
English: The appointment of the governor of the state, Cao Zhongda, as the governor.

古文：置择能院，掌选举殿最，以浙西营田副使沈崧领之。
现代文：设置择能院，掌管选拔评定优劣之事，派浙西营田副使沈崧领导此事。
English: Set up a talent selection institute, in charge of the selection and evaluation of merits and demerits, and sent the deputy envoy of Zhejiang West Yingtan, Shen Qi, to lead the matter.

古文：内牙指挥使富阳刘仁巳及陆仁章久事，仁章性刚，仁巳好毁短人，皆为众所恶。
现代文：内牙指挥使富阳人刘仁杞及陆仁章长时间当权，陆仁章性刚直，刘仁杞喜欢贬低人，二人都被众人所厌恶。
English: The commander of the Inner Fang made the Fuyang people Liu Renzhang and Lu Renzhang stay in power for a long time, Lu Renzhang is rigid, Liu Renzhang likes to belittle people, and both of them are hated by everyone.

古文：一日，诸将共诣府门请诛之；元瓘使从子仁俊谕之曰： 二将事先王久，吾方图其功，汝曹乃欲逞私憾而杀之，可乎，吾为汝王，汝当禀吾命；不然，吾当归临安以避贤路！ 
现代文：一天，诸将一起来到府门请求除掉他们；钱元命他的侄子钱仁俊宣告众人说： 这二位将军侍奉先王很久了，我正要表彰他们的功劳，你们竟然要为遂私人嫌怨而诛杀他们，怎么可以呢？我现在是你们的王，你们应当听从我的命令；如若不然，我就应当归返临安以避让贤路！ 
English: One day, the generals came to the gate of the palace together to ask for their removal. Qian Yuan ordered his nephew Qian Renjun to announce to the people: "These two generals have served the former king for a long time. I am about to commend their services. How can you want to kill them because of personal grudges? I am now your king, you should follow my orders. If not, I should return to Lian'an to avoid the path of wisdom!"

古文：众惧而退。
现代文：众人惶惧而退去。
English: Everyone panicked and ran away.

古文：乃以仁章为衢州刺史，仁巳为湖州刺史。
现代文：于是，便任用陆仁章为衢州刺史。刘仁杞为湖州刺史。
English: As a result, Lu Renzhang was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and Liu Renyi as the chief historian of Huzhou.

古文：中外有上书告讦者，元瓘皆置不问，由是将吏辑睦。
现代文：内外有上书进行私人攻讦的，钱元都搁置不理，因此将吏和睦。
English: There are internal and external petitioners for private attacks, but the money is ignored, so the officials are reconciled.

古文：初，契丹舍利荝剌与惕隐皆为赵德钧所擒，契丹屡遣使请之。
现代文：起先，契丹舍利刺与惕隐都被赵德钧所擒获、契丹屡次派人请求放还他们。
English: At first, Zhao Deyu captured both Khitan Sheli Thorn and Thi Yin, and Khitan repeatedly sent people to request their release.

古文：上谋于群臣，德钧等皆曰： 契丹所以数年不犯边，数求和者，以此辈在南故也，纵之则边患复生。 
现代文：明宗与群臣讨论，赵德钧等都说： 契丹所以几年不来侵犯边境，而且多次来求和，就是由于这些人被系押在南朝的缘故，放了他们，那就要边患再生。 
English: Mingzong discussed with his courtiers, and Zhao Dejun and others all said: The reason why the Khitan did not invade the border for several years, and repeatedly came to sue for peace, is because these people were held in the Southern Dynasty. If they were released, they would have to be reincarnated.

古文：上以问冀州刺史杨檀，对曰： 荝剌，契丹之骁将，曏助王都谋危社稷，幸而擒之，陛下免其死，为赐已多。
现代文：明宗把此事咨询冀州刺史杨檀，杨檀回答说： 刺是契丹的勇将，过去帮助王都阴谋危害社稷，幸而擒住了他，陛下免了他一死，赐给他的恩惠已经很多。
English: Mingzong consulted the Jizhou assassin, Shi Yangtang, about the matter. Yangtang replied: "The assassin is a brave general of the Khitan. In the past, he helped Wangdu plot to harm the community. Fortunately, he was caught. His Majesty spared his life and has given him many favors.

古文：契丹失之如丧手足。
现代文：契丹丢掉了他如同断了手足。
English: When the Khitans lost him, it was like losing a limb.

古文：彼在朝廷数年，知中国虚实，若得归，为患必深，彼才出塞，则南向发矢矣，恐悔之无及。 
现代文：他在朝廷留居数年，了解中国的虚实，如果获得放归，必然要深深为患。才放他出了塞北，就会向南放射弓箭，那时，恐怕后悔也来不及了。 
English: He stayed at the imperial court for several years, learned the truth about China, and if he were to be released, he would inevitably suffer deeply. Only after he was released from the north of Tibet, he would send his bow and arrow to the south. At that time, I'm afraid it would be too late to regret.

古文：上乃止。
现代文：明宗便停止释放他们。
English: The Emperor finally stopped.

古文：檀，沙陀人也。
现代文：杨檀是沙陀人。
English: Yangdang is from Satou.

古文：上欲授李赞华以河南籓镇，群臣皆以为不可，上曰： 吾与其父约为昆弟，故赞华归我。
现代文：明宗要授予李赞华河南藩镇，群臣都认为不可，后唐明宗说： 我和他父亲盟约为兄弟，所以赞华才归顺于我。
English: Mingzong wanted to grant Li Zhanhua the Henan Fanzhen, but all the ministers thought it was impossible. Later, Tang Mingzong said: I and his father were brothers by alliance, so Zhanhua submitted to me.

古文：吾老矣，后世继体之君，虽欲招之，其可致乎！ 
现代文：现在我老了，后来的继承大统之君，虽然想招他来，能办得到吗？ 
English: Now that I am old, the future successor to the supreme leader, even though I want to recruit him, can I do it?

古文：夏，四月，癸亥，以赞华为义成节度使，为选朝士为僚属辅之。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸亥，任命李赞华为义成节度使，并且为他选拔朝士做僚属以辅助他。
English: In the summer, in April, in the middle of winter, Li Zanghua was appointed as the envoy to the Yicheng Festival, and the morning watchman was selected as his subordinate to assist him.

古文：赞华但优游自奉，不豫政事；上嘉之，虽时有不法亦不问，以庄宗后宫夏氏妻之。
现代文：李赞华只顾优游享受，不预闻政事；明宗赞许他，虽然时常有不法行为也不过问，还把庄宗后宫宫人夏氏做他的妻子。
English: Li Zanhua only cared about the enjoyment of fine travel and did not anticipate political affairs; Mingzong praised him, although he often committed illegal acts, and also made Xia, the concubine of Zhuangzong's harem, his wife.

古文：赞华好饮人血，姬妾多刺臂以吮之；婢仆小过，或抉目，或刀刲火灼；夏氏不忍其残，奏离婚为尼。
现代文：李赞华喜欢喝人血，姬妾们常常刺破手臂流血让他吸吮；婢仆者有些小过失，或者挖目，或者刀割、火灼；夏氏无法忍受他的残酷，奏请离婚去当尼姑。
English: Li Zhanhua liked to drink human blood. His concubines often pricked their arms to make them bleed so that he could suck them; his maidservants committed some minor faults, or gouged their eyes, or cut them with a knife, or burned them; Mr. Xia could not bear his cruelty, so he asked for a divorce and went to work as a nun.

古文：乙丑，加宋王从厚兼中书令。
现代文：乙丑，加封宋王李从厚兼任中书令。
English: Second Ugly, Song Wang Li Conghou was also appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：东川节度使董璋会诸将谋袭成都，皆曰必克；前陵州刺史王晖曰： 剑南万里，成都为大，时方盛夏，师出无名，必无成功。 
现代文：东川节度使董璋聚会众将谋议袭击成都，众将都说一定能够攻克；前陵州刺史王晖说： 剑南万里地方，以成都为大郡，现在又正当盛夏，师出无名，一定不能成功。 
English: The Dongchuan Festival made Dong Xuan gather the generals to plan an attack on Chengdu, and the generals all said that they would definitely be able to conquer; the former Lingzhou assassin Wang Xuan said: In the southern part of Jianan, with Chengdu as a large county, it is now midsummer, and the division is unknown, it must not succeed.

古文：璋不从。孟知祥闻之，遣马军都指挥使潘仁嗣将三千人诣汉州诇之。
现代文：孟知祥听说董璋来袭，派马军都指挥使潘仁嗣统领三千人马到汉州侦察。
English: Meng Zhixiang heard that Dong Xuan was coming to attack, so he sent the horse army to command and send Pan Renshi to lead three thousand horses to reconnaissance in Hanzhou.

古文：璋入境，破白杨林镇，执戍将武弘礼，声势甚盛，知祥忧之。赵季良曰： 璋为人勇而无恩，士卒不附，城守则难克，野战则成擒矣。
现代文：董璋进入西川境内，攻破白杨林镇，抓住守将武弘礼，声势很盛，孟知祥担忧，赵季良说： 董璋为人勇猛而没有恩德，士兵心中不依附他，如果他据城固守，就难以攻克，如果进行野战，就容易擒获他了。
English: Dong Xuan entered the territory of Xichuan, broke through the town of Poplar Forest, and seized the guard general, Wu Hongli. He was very popular. Meng Zhixiang was worried. Zhao Jiliang said: Dong Xuan is a brave man but has no virtue. The soldiers do not attach to him in their hearts. If he sticks to the city, it will be difficult to defeat him. If he fights in the field, it will be easy to capture him.

古文：今不过巢穴，公之利也。
现代文：现在，他不守自己的巢穴，对您是有利的。
English: Now it is to your advantage that he does not guard his own nest.

古文：璋用兵精锐皆在前锋，公宜以赢兵诱之，以劲兵待之，始虽小衄，后必大捷。
现代文：董璋用兵，精锐都放在前锋，您应用弱兵引诱他，用强兵等待他，开始虽然要有小挫折，最后必然取得大胜利。
English: Dong Xuan uses soldiers, the elite are placed at the front, you use weak soldiers to lure him, use strong soldiers to wait for him, although there will be small setbacks at the beginning, in the end you will inevitably achieve great victory.

古文：璋素有威名，今举兵暴至，人心危惧。公当自出御之，以强众心。 
现代文：董璋素来以威武扬名，现在他兴兵骤至，人心害怕，您应当亲自出战去抗御他，来加强兵众的斗志。 
English: Dong Xuan used to be famous for his military prowess. Now that he has suddenly raised an army, people are afraid. You should personally go out to fight against him to strengthen the morale of the soldiers.

古文：赵廷隐以季良言为然，曰： 璋轻而无谋，举兵必败，当为公擒之。 
现代文：赵廷隐认为赵季良的话说得对，也说： 董璋轻率而没有谋略，他举兵必然要失败，我应当为您把他捉住。 
English: Zhao Tingyin thought that Zhao Jiliang's words were right, and also said: "Dong Xi is reckless and has no strategy. His raising of troops is bound to fail. I should capture him for you."

古文：辛巳，以廷隐为行营马步军都部署，将三万人拒之。
现代文：辛巳，任赵廷隐为行营马步军都部署，统领三万人抗拒董璋。
English: Soon after, Zhao Tingyin was deployed as the marching horse and foot soldiers, leading 30,000 people to resist Dong Xuan.

古文：五月，壬午朔，廷隐入辞。
现代文：五月，壬午朔，赵廷隐来辞别孟知祥。
English: In May, at dawn, Zhao Tingyin came to bid farewell to Meng Zhixiang.

古文：董璋檄书至，又有遗季良、廷隐及李肇书，诬之云，季良、廷隐与己通谋，召己令来。
现代文：董璋的兴兵文书送到成都，还有给赵季良、赵廷隐及李肇的信，信中造谣说，赵季良、赵廷隐和他自己通同设谋，招唤他来攻西川。
English: Dong Xuan's document for raising an army was sent to Chengdu, and there was also a letter to Zhao Jiliang, Zhao Tingyin and Li Zhao, in which rumors were spread that Zhao Jiliang, Zhao Tingyin and himself had conspired together to invite him to attack West River.

古文：知祥以书授廷隐，廷隐不视，投之于地，曰： 不过为反间，欲令公杀副使与廷隐耳。 
现代文：孟知祥把来信交给赵廷隐，赵廷隐根本不看，投掷于地，说道： 不过是施行反间之计，要使令公杀节度副使和廷隐而已。 
English: Meng Zhixiang handed the letter to Zhao Tingyin. Zhao Tingyin did not look at it at all, threw it on the ground, and said, "It is just a countermeasure to kill the deputy envoy and Tingyin."

古文：再拜而行。
现代文：便向孟知祥郑重地道别登程了。
English: So he made a solemn farewell to Meng Zhixiang.

古文：知祥曰： 事必济矣。 
现代文：孟知祥说： 事情一定能够成功。 
English: Meng Zhixiang said: Things will definitely be successful.

古文：肇素不知书，视之，曰： 璋教我反耳。 
现代文：李肇素来不认识字，一看来信，便说： 董璋教我反叛哟。 
English: Li Zhaozhou had never been able to read. As soon as he saw the letter, he said: "Dong Li taught me to rebel."

古文：囚其使者，然亦拥众为自全计。
现代文：把董璋派里的使者囚禁起来，然而也调集兵马做了自我保全的准备。
English: He imprisoned the envoys sent by Dong Xuan, but also mobilized soldiers and horses to prepare for self-preservation.

古文：璋兵至汉州，潘仁嗣与战于赤水，大败，为璋所擒，璋遂克汉州。
现代文：董璋的兵马到了汉州，潘仁嗣和他在赤水开战，打得大败，被董璋擒获，董璋便占领汉州。
English: Dong Xuan's soldiers and horses arrived in Hanzhou. Pan Renshi and he went to war in Chishui. They were soundly defeated and captured by Dong Xuan. Dong Xuan then occupied Hanzhou.

古文：癸未，知祥留赵季良、高敬柔守成都，自将兵八千趣汉州，至弥牟镇，赵廷隐陈于镇北。
现代文：癸未，孟知祥留下赵季良、高敬柔守卫成都，自己带领八千兵马奔向汉州。到达弥牟镇，赵廷隐陈兵于镇北。
English: In the meantime, Meng Zhixiang left Zhao Jiliang and Gao Jingrou to guard Chengdu, and led eight thousand soldiers and horses to Hanzhou. Arriving in Yimou Town, Zhao Tingyin led the troops to the north of the town.

古文：甲申，迟明，廷隐陈于鸡踪桥，义胜定元都知兵马使张公鐸陈于其后。
现代文：甲申，天刚亮，赵廷隐在鸡桥摆开阵势，义胜定远都知兵马使张公铎在他的后面布开阵势。
English: In Jiaxing, just after dawn, Zhao Tingyin set up a position at the chicken bridge, and Yixing Dingyuan knew the soldiers and horses to make Zhang Gongyao set up a position behind him.

古文：俄而璋望西川兵盛，退陈于武侯庙下，璋帐下骁卒大噪曰： 日中曝我辈何为，何不速战！ 
现代文：过了一些时候，董璋望见西川兵势盛大，自己把阵线退到武侯庙下。董璋帐下的骁勇的兵卒大事鼓噪说： 太阳正当午，把我们大家曝晒在烈日之下要干什么！ 
English: After some time, Dong Xuan saw the large number of soldiers in the West River and retreated to the front line under the Wuhou Temple. The brave soldiers under the leadership of Dong Xuan made a big noise and said: The sun is at noon, what do you want to do with all of us exposed to the hot sun!

古文：璋乃上马。
现代文：董璋这才上马向前进军。
English: It was only then that Dong Xuan mounted his horse and rode towards the advancing army.

古文：前锋始交，东川右厢马步都指挥使张守进降于知祥，言 璋兵尽此，无复后继，当急击之。 
现代文：前锋刚刚交战，东川右厢马步都指挥使张守进向孟知祥投降，并说： 董璋的兵马全部在这里，再没有后继部队，应该快速出击。 
English: The front line had just been engaged, and the commander of the right wing of the Dongchuan ordered Zhang Shoujin to surrender to Meng Zhixiang, saying: "All of Dong Xuan's soldiers and horses are here, and there are no follow-up troops, so we should attack quickly."

古文：知祥登高冢督战，左明义指挥使毛重威、左冲山指挥使李瑭守鸡踪桥，皆为东川兵所杀。赵廷隐三战不利，牙内都指挥副使侯弘实兵亦却，知祥惧，以马棰指后陈。
现代文：孟知祥登上高坟头督战，左明义指挥使毛重威、左冲山指挥使李瑭把守鸡桥，都被东川兵所杀；赵廷隐三次交战都失利，牙内都指挥副使侯弘实的兵也退却下来，孟知祥害怕，用马鞭指挥后阵。
English: Meng Zhixiang ascended to Gaogotou to supervise the battle, the left Mingyi commander sent Mao Chongwei, the left Chongshan commander sent Li Xuan to guard the chicken bridge, and they were all killed by the Dongchuan soldiers; Zhao Tingyin lost all three battles, and the soldiers of the deputy envoy Hou Hongsheng, who commanded the inner city, also retreated. Meng Zhixiang was afraid and used a horse whip to command the rear.

古文：张公鐸帅众大呼而进，东川兵大败，死者数千人，擒东川中都指挥使元璝、牙内副指挥使董光演等八十馀人。
现代文：张公铎率领众兵大喊着进军向前，东川兵大败，死亡数千人，擒获东川中都指挥使元、牙内副指挥使董光演等八十余人。
English: Zhang Gongyao led the soldiers shouting and marching forward. Dongchuan soldiers were defeated, thousands of people died, and more than 80 people were captured, including Dongchuan Zhongdu Commanding Envoy Yuan, and Yanai Deputy Commanding Envoy Dong Guangyuan.

古文：璋拊膺曰： 亲兵皆尽，吾何依乎！ 
现代文：董璋捶打着胸脯说： 亲近兵士都丧失了，我还依靠谁啊！ 
English: Dong Hao beat his chest and said: I have lost all my close soldiers, who can I still rely on?

古文：与数骑遁去，馀众七千人降，复得潘仁嗣。
现代文：只同几个骑兵逃遁而去，其余兵众七千多人投降了，把潘仁嗣也拯救回来。
English: He fled with only a few cavalrymen. The rest of the soldiers, more than seven thousand, surrendered and rescued Pan Renzhi.

古文：知祥引兵追璋至五侯津，东川马步都指挥使元瑰降。
现代文：孟知祥领兵追赶董璋到五侯津，东川马步都指挥使元投降。
English: Meng Zhixiang led the troops to chase Dong Xuan to Wuhoujin, and Dongchuan Ma Bu commanded the envoy to surrender.

古文：西川兵入汉州府第，求璋不得，士卒争璋军资，故璋走得免。
现代文：西川兵攻入汉州府第，寻找不见董璋。当时，士兵争着劫掠董璋的军事物资，所以董璋得以走脱。
English: Nishikawa soldiers invaded Hanzhou Prefecture, looking for missing Dong Hao. At that time, soldiers were competing to loot Dong Hao's military supplies, so Dong Hao was able to escape.

古文：赵廷隐追至赤水，又降其卒三千人。
现代文：赵廷隐追赶到赤水，又迫降其士卒三千人。
English: Zhao Tingyin chased them to Chashui, and forced 3,000 of his soldiers to retreat.

古文：是夕，知祥宿雒县，命李昊草榜谕东川吏民，及草书劳问璋，且言将如梓州询负约之由，请见伐之罪。
现代文：这一晚，孟知祥留宿在雒县。命李昊璋草拟文榜告谕东川吏民。又起草书信慰劳问候董璋，并且说要到梓州去询问董张为什么不守协约，质问他兴兵见伐的罪名。
English: That night, Meng Zhixiang stayed in Jixian County. He ordered Li Haojun to draft a letter to the officials and people of Dongchuan. He also drafted a letter of condolence and greetings to Dong Jun, and said that he would go to Zizhou to ask Dong Zhang why he did not keep the treaty, and question him about the crime of encouraging soldiers to fight.

古文：乙酉，知祥会廷隐于赤水，遂西还，命廷隐将兵攻梓州。
现代文：乙酉，孟知祥与赵廷隐在赤水会师，便西还成都，命令赵廷隐统兵进攻梓州。
English: Acetylene, Meng Zhixiang and Zhao Tingyin met at Chishui Division, and ordered Zhao Tingyin to attack Zizhou.

古文：璋至梓州，肩舆而入，王晖迎问曰： 太尉全军出征，今还者无十人，何也？ 
现代文：董璋退至梓州，坐着肩舆回来，王晖迎接时问道： 太尉全军出征西川，现在回来的不到十人，是怎么回事？ 
English: When Wang Xi greeted him, he asked: "Captain, the whole army has left for the West River, and now less than ten people have returned. What's going on?"

古文：璋涕泣不能对。
现代文：董璋哭着不能答对。
English: Dong Yao couldn't answer correctly because she was crying.

古文：至府第，方食，晖与璋从子牙内都虞侯延浩帅兵三百大嗓而入。
现代文：到了自家府第，正在吃饭，王晖与董璋的侄子牙内都虞候董延浩带领兵丁三百人大声呼喊着进来。
English: When they arrived at their own residence, they were having dinner. Wang Yao and Dong Yao's nephew, Dang Nai Dugu, waited for Dong Yanhao to lead the 300 soldiers to come in, shouting loudly.

古文：璋引妻子登城，子光嗣自杀。
现代文：董璋拉着妻子登上城垣，他的儿子董光嗣自杀。
English: Dong Hui took his wife to climb the city wall, and his son Dong Guangzi committed suicide.

古文：璋至北门楼，呼指挥使潘稠使讨乱兵，稠引十卒登城，斩璋首，乃取光嗣首以授王晖，晖举城迎降。
现代文：董璋跑到北门城楼，呼唤指挥使潘稠让他镇压乱兵，潘稠带着十个兵丁登上城，斩了董璋的头，又取下董光嗣的头，一起交给王晖，王晖便开城迎入西川兵而投降了。
English: Dong Xuan ran to the north gate of the castle and called for the commander to send Pan Congyou to suppress the disorderly soldiers. Pan Congyou went up to the castle with ten soldiers, cut off Dong Xuan's head, took down Dong Guangzi's head, and handed it to Wang Xuan. Wang Xuan then opened the castle to welcome the soldiers from the West River and surrendered.

古文：赵廷隐入梓州，封府库以待知祥。
现代文：赵廷隐进入梓州，封闭了府库财物以等待孟知祥到来。
English: Zhao Tingyin entered Zizhou and sealed the government treasury to await Meng Zhixiang's arrival.

古文：李肇闻璋败，始斩其使以闻。
现代文：李肇听说董璋失败，才把原来囚禁的董璋派来的使者杀了，并报告孟知祥。
English: When Li Zhaozhou heard that Dong Xuan had failed, he killed the envoy sent by Dong Xuan, who was originally imprisoned, and reported to Meng Zhixiang.

古文：丙戌，知祥入成都，丁亥，复将兵八千如梓州，至新都。
现代文：丙戌，孟知祥返回成都，丁亥，又率兵八千人赴梓州。
English: Hun Sen, Meng Zhixiang returned to Chengdu, Ding Hai, and led eight thousand soldiers to Zizhou.

古文：赵廷隐献董璋首。
现代文：到新都时，赵廷隐向他呈献董璋的人头。
English: When he arrived in the new capital, Zhao Tingyin presented him with the severed head of Dong Xuan.

古文：己丑，发玄武，赵廷隐帅东川将吏来迎。
现代文：己丑，从玄武出发，赵廷隐带领着东川的将吏来迎接。
English: After leaving Xuanwu, Zhao Tingyin led the generals from Dongchuan to meet him.

古文：康福奏党项钞盗者已伏诛，馀皆降附。
现代文：朔方节度使康福向后唐朝廷奏报，党项掠劫者已经伏诛，其余都已降附。
English: According to the report sent to the Tang court by the Shuo side, the looters of the party had already been arrested, and the rest had surrendered.

古文：壬辰，孟知祥有疾，癸巳，疾甚，中门副使王处回侍左右，庖人进食，必空器而出，以安众心。
现代文：壬辰，孟知祥患病，癸巳，病加剧，中门副使王处回侍奉在左右，厨师送食物进来，必然空着食器送出，用以安定众人之心。
English: At that time, Meng Zhixiang was ill, and his illness worsened. The middle gate deputy sent the king back to serve on the right and left. The chef brought food in and sent it out with empty tableware to stabilize the hearts of everyone.

古文：李仁罕自遂州来，赵廷隐迎于板桥；仁罕不称东川之功，侵侮廷隐，廷隐大怒。
现代文：李仁罕从遂州来，赵廷隐在板桥迎接他；李仁罕不称道攻取东川的功劳，侮谩赵廷隐，赵廷隐很是恼怒。
English: Li Renhan came from Suizhou, and Zhao Tingyin met him in Banqiao; Li Renhan did not praise the achievement of capturing Dongchuan, and insulted Zhao Tingyin. Zhao Tingyin was very angry.

古文：乙未，知祥疾瘳；丁酉，入梓州。
现代文：乙未，孟知祥病好了；丁酉，进入梓州。
English: B Wei, Meng Zhixiang recovered from illness; Ding Yao, entered Zizhou.

古文：戊戌，犒赏将士，既罢，知祥谓李仁罕、赵廷隐曰： 二将谁当镇此？ 
现代文：戊戌，犒赏战士，饮宴之后，孟知祥对李仁罕、赵廷隐说： 二位将军谁应当镇戍在这里？ 
English: After the banquet, Meng Zhixiang said to Li Renhan and Zhao Tingyin: Two generals, who should be here?

古文：仁罕曰： 令公再与蜀州，亦行耳。 
现代文：李仁罕说： 令公如果再把蜀州交给我领管，我也可以去。 
English: Li Renhan said: "If the emperor gives me the leadership of Shuzhou again, I can also go.

古文：廷隐不对。
现代文：赵廷隐不说话。
English: Zhao Tingyin did not speak.

古文：知祥愕然，退，命李昊草牒，俟二将有所推则命一人为留后，昊曰： 昔梁祖、庄宗皆兼领四镇，今二将不让，惟公自领之为便耳。
现代文：孟知祥觉着为难，回来之后，让李昊起草公文，等二将有所推让便任用一个为留后，李昊说： 以前梁朝太祖、我朝庄宗都一身而兼领四镇，现在二将不肯相让，只有令公自己领管为宜。
English: Meng Zhixiang felt embarrassed. After returning, he asked Li Hao to draft a document. When the two would make some concessions, he would appoint one to stay. Li Hao said: In the past, Liang Chao Taizu and I Chao Zhuang Zong were both in charge of the four towns, but now the two will not give in. It is only appropriate to let the duke himself take charge.

古文：公宜亟还府，更与赵仆射议之。 
现代文：您最好赶快回成都，同赵季良仆射商量。 
English: You'd better hurry back to Chengdu and discuss with Zhao Jiliang.

古文：己亥，契丹使者迭罗卿辞归国，上曰： 朕志在安边，不可不少副其求。 
现代文：己亥，契丹使者迭罗卿辞别朝廷归国，后唐明宗说： 朕的意愿是要使边境安宁，不可不稍微符合他们的要求。 
English: After Emperor Ji Hai and the Khitan envoy Dai Luo resigned from the imperial court and returned to China, Emperor Mingzong of the Later Tang Dynasty said: My intention is to make the border peaceful, and I must meet their demands to some extent.

古文：乃遣荝骨舍利与之俱归。
现代文：便把骨舍利遣返，与使者同归。
English: So he sent the bones back with the envoy.

古文：契丹以不得荝剌，自是数寇云州及振武。
现代文：契丹因为刺没有遣回，从此屡次侵犯云州及振武。
English: Since he was not sent back because of the stabbing, Khitan has repeatedly invaded Yunnan and Zhenwu.

古文：孟知祥命李仁罕归遂州，留赵廷隐东川巡检，以李昊行梓州军府事。
现代文：孟知祥命令李仁罕返回遂州，留下赵廷隐为东川巡检，任用李昊行使梓州军府的管理事务。
English: Meng Zhixiang ordered Li Renhan to return to Suizhou, leaving Zhao Tingyin as the Dongchuan inspector, and appointed Li Hao to carry out the management affairs of the Zizhou Military Government.

古文：昊曰： 二虎方争，仆不敢受命，愿从公还。 
现代文：李昊说： 两只老虎正争斗得凶，我不敢接受这个命令，愿意跟随您回成都。 
English: Li Hao said: Two tigers are fighting fiercely, I dare not accept this order, I am willing to follow you back to Chengdu.

古文：乃以都押牙王彦铢为东川监押。
现代文：于是，便用都押牙王彦铢为东川监押。
English: As a result, Toa Wang Yanbo was used as the prison warden for Higashikawa.

古文：癸卯，知祥至成都，赵廷隐寻亦引兵西还。
现代文：癸卯，孟知祥到达成都，赵廷隐不久也领兵向西还军。
English: However, Meng Zhixiang reached the capital, and Zhao Tingyin soon led the troops back to the west.

古文：知祥谓李昊曰： 吾得东川，为患益深。 
现代文：孟知祥对李昊说： 我取得东川，忧虑更多了。 
English: Meng Zhixiang said to Li Hao: I have obtained Dongchuan, I am more worried.

古文：昊请其故，知祥曰： 自吾发梓州，得仁罕七状，皆云 公宜自领东川，不然诸将不服。 
现代文：李昊问其缘故，孟知祥说： 自从我离开梓州，收到李仁罕七次表文，都说 您应该亲自领镇东川，不然诸将会不心服。 
English: When Li Hao asked the reason, Meng Zhixiang said: Since I left Zizhou, I have received seven letters from Li Renhan, all saying that you should personally lead the town of Dongchuan, otherwise you will not be satisfied.

古文：廷隐言 本不敢当东川，因仁罕不让，遂有争心耳。 
现代文：赵廷隐则说 本来不敢领镇东川，因李仁罕不相让，才有了与他争任之心。 
English: Zhao Tingyin said that originally he did not dare to lead the town of Dongchuan, because Li Renhan did not concede, he only had the heart to compete with him.

古文：君为我晓廷隐，复以阆州为保宁军，益以果、蓬、渠、开四州，往镇之。
现代文：请你替我晓谕赵廷隐，我去恢复阆州为保宁军，加上果、蓬、渠、开四州，请他去镇守。
English: Please tell Zhao Tingyin for me. I will go to restore Zhangzhou to the Boryeong Army, and add Gou, Peng, Qu, and Kai to the four prefectures, and ask him to go to the town guard.

古文：吾自领东川，以绝仁罕之望。 
现代文：我自己兼领东川，以断绝李仁罕的企望。 
English: I myself also led the East River to break the hope of Li Renhan.

古文：廷隐犹不平，请与仁罕斗，胜者为东川；昊深解之，乃受命。
现代文：赵廷隐听了还是恨恨不平，要求与李仁罕比武，谁胜谁领东川；李昊一再劝解他，他才接受了孟知祥的命令。
English: Zhao Tingyin listened to Meng Zhixiang's order and demanded to compete with Li Renhan, and whoever won would lead the East River. Li Hao repeatedly persuaded him, and he accepted Meng Zhixiang's order.

古文：六月，以廷隐为保宁留后。
现代文：六月，任用赵廷隐为保宁留后。
English: In June, Zhao Tingyin was appointed to stay in Boryeong.

古文：戊午，赵季良帅将吏请知祥兼镇东川，许之。
现代文：戊午，赵季良带领将吏请求孟知祥兼镇东川，孟知祥答应了。
English: In the afternoon, Zhao Jiliang led the generals to request Meng Zhixiang and Zhen Dongchuan, and Meng Zhixiang agreed.

古文：季良等又请知祥称王，权行制书，赏功臣，不许。
现代文：赵季良等又请求孟知祥称王，发布命令暂称制书，赏赐功臣，孟知祥不准。
English: Zhao Jiliang and others also requested Meng Zhixiang to proclaim himself king, issue an order to temporarily call it a book, and reward meritorious vassals. Meng Zhixiang was not allowed to do so.

古文：董璋之起兵攻知祥也，山南西道节度使王思同以闻，范延光言于上曰： 若两川并于一贼，抚众守险，则取之益难，宜及其交争，早图之。 
现代文：董璋攻打孟知祥的时候，山南西道节度使王思同向后唐朝廷作了报告，范延光对明宗上言： 如果两川合并于一个盗贼掌握，安抚民众，守卫险要，那就更难于攻取了，最好在他们交争之中，早日收服他。 
English: When Dong Xuan attacked Meng Zhixiang, the Shannan West Road Festival made Wang Sitong report to the post-Tang court, and Fan Yanguang said to Mingzong: If the two rivers are merged into a thief to control, pacify the people, and guard the danger, it will be more difficult to capture, and it is best to win him over as soon as possible in their conflict.

古文：上命思同以兴元之兵密规进取。
现代文：明宗命王思同用兴元之兵暗中规划准备进取西蜀。
English: King Si Tong of the Ming Dynasty secretly planned and prepared to invade Western Shu with the soldiers of the Xingyuan Dynasty.

古文：未几，闻璋败死，延光曰： 知祥虽据全蜀，然士卒皆东方人，知祥恐其思归为变，亦欲倚朝廷之重以威其众。陛下不屈意抚之，彼则无从自新。 
现代文：没有多久，听到董璋败死，范延光又说： 孟知祥虽已据有全蜀，然而他的士兵都是东边的人，孟知祥怕他们思归致变，也想依赖朝廷的重望以震摄他的兵众，陛下如果不屈意委婉地安抚他，他就无从改过自新。 
English: Not long after hearing of the death of Dong Xuan, Fan Yanguang also said: Although Meng Zhixiang already had the whole of Shu, his soldiers were all from the east. Meng Zhixiang was afraid that they would change their minds and wanted to rely on the high hopes of the imperial court to shock his soldiers. If His Majesty did not give in to appease him gently, he would not be able to reform.

古文：上曰： 知祥吾故人，为人离间至此，何屈意之有！ 
现代文：明宗说： 孟知祥是我的故旧相好，是被人离间才干出抗拒朝廷的事情，有什么 屈意 可说的！ 
English: Mingzong said, "Meng Zhixiang is my old friend. He was able to resist the imperial court because he was estranged from others. What can I say?

古文：乃遣供奉官李存瑰赐知祥诏曰： 董璋狐狼，自贻族灭。
现代文：于是，派遣供奉官李存赐给孟知祥以诏书说： 董璋是狐狼之辈，自找族灭全家。
English: As a result, Li Cunxu, the official in charge of sending offerings, sent a message to Meng Zhixiang saying: "Dong Yao is a generation of foxes and wolves, and he will seek out his own people to exterminate the whole family.

古文：卿丘园亲戚皆保安全，所宜成家世之美名，守君臣之大节。 
现代文：爱卿的祖宗墓园和亲戚都保障了安全，你应该保全家世的美名，遵守君臣的大节。 
English: Aicheng's ancestral cemetery and relatives are safe. You should preserve the reputation of your family and observe the great festival of kings and ministers.

古文：存瑰，克宁之子，知祥之甥也。
现代文：李存是李克宁的儿子，孟知祥的外甥。
English: Li Cun is the son of Li Kening and the nephew of Meng Zhixiang.

古文：闽王廷钧谓陈守元曰： 为我问宝皇：既为六十年天子，后当何如？ 
现代文：闽王王延钧对陈守元说： 你为我问问宝皇：既然能当天子六十年，以后又将怎么样。 
English: King Yan Xuan said to Chen Shouyuan, "Ask Emperor Bao for me: since it has been sixty years since I was born, what will happen in the future?"

古文：明日，守元入曰： 昨夕奏章，得宝皇旨，当为大罗仙主。 
现代文：第二天，陈守元进府说： 昨夜向天宫进奏章请示，得到宝皇降旨，您后来要当大罗仙主。 
English: The next day, Chen Shouyuan entered the palace and said: Last night, I went to the Heavenly Palace to ask for instructions, and received the Emperor's order. You will later become the Great Luo Immortal.

古文：徐彦等亦曰： 北庙崇顺王尝见宝皇，其言与守元同。 
现代文：徐彦林等人也说： 北庙崇顺王曾经见到宝皇，所讲的话与陈守元说的一样。 
English: Xu Yanlin and others also said: North Temple King Chongshun once saw Emperor Bao, and what he said was the same as what Chen Shouyuan said.

古文：延钧益自负，始谋称帝。
现代文：王延钧更加自命不凡，开始谋求称帝。
English: Wang Yanxuan became even more arrogant and began to seek to become emperor.

古文：表朝廷云： 钱镠卒，请以臣为吴越王；马殷卒，请以臣为尚书令。 
现代文：上表给朝廷说： 钱死了，请朝廷任我为吴越王；马殷死了，请朝廷任我为尚书令。 
English: The above table said to the court: Qian is dead, please ask the court to appoint me as Wu Yue King; Ma Yin is dead, please ask the court to appoint me as Shang Shuling.

古文：朝廷不报，自是职贡遂绝。
现代文：后唐朝廷不理他，他从此便断绝了朝贡。
English: After the Tang court ignored him, he cut off the tribute.

