古文：偏枯，身偏不用而痛，言不变，志不乱，病在分腠之间，巨针取之，益其不足，损其有余，乃可复也。
现代文：偏枯病，表现为半身不遂而疼痛，如果病人言语如常，神志清楚，表明病邪尚在分肉腠理之间，并未入里。治疗时用九针中的大针治疗，补益其不足，泻其有余，就可以康复了。
English: If the patient's speech is normal and his mind is clear, it indicates that the disease is still in the process of dividing the body and has not entered the body. When treating, use the large needle of the nine needles to treat, supplement its deficiency, and laxity its surplus, then you can recover.

古文：痱之为病也，身无痛者，四肢不收；智乱不甚，其言微知，可治；甚则不能言，不可治也。
现代文：风痱病的症状，身上没有疼痛的感觉，四肢弛缓，不能屈伸，神志有些混乱，但不严重，语言虽然模糊，但可辨人，属病情较轻，尚可以治疗；如果病情严重，已经不能言语的，就难以治疗了。
English: The symptoms of rheumatism, there is no pain on the body, the limbs are relaxed and can not be flexed and stretched, the mind is somewhat confused, but not serious, the language is vague, but it can be distinguished, the condition is mild and can still be treated; if the condition is serious and can not speak, it is difficult to treat.

古文：病先起于阳，复入于阴者，先取其阳，后取其阴，浮而取之。
现代文：如果风痱病先起于阳分，而后深入阴分，治疗时应该先取阳经，后取阴经，对于风痱病的治疗，针刺的程度应该比较浮浅。
English: If the rheumatism starts from the yang point, and then goes deep into the yin point, the yang meridian should be taken first, and then the yin meridian. For the treatment of rheumatism, the degree of acupuncture should be shallow.

古文：热病三日，而气口静、人迎躁者，取之诸阳，五十九刺，以泻其热，而出其汗，实其阴，以补其不足者。
现代文：热病的第三天，如果气口的脉象平稳，而人迎部的脉象躁动，这是邪在表而未入里，治疗可选阳经上治疗热病的五十九个腧穴进行针刺，以达到祛除在表之热邪，使邪气随汗而解的作用，用补法充实阴经来补三阴的不足。
English: On the third day of heat illness, if the pulse of the trachea is stable, but the pulse of the welcoming part is agitated, this is the evil on the surface and not inside. The treatment can be selected on the yang qing to treat the heat illness of the fifty-nine acupuncture points to achieve the effect of eliminating the heat evil on the surface and dissolving the evil gas with sweat, and supplementing the yin qing to make up for the deficiency of the three yin.

古文：身热甚，阴阳皆静者，勿刺也；其可刺者，急取之，不汗出则泄。
现代文：发热很严重的病人，气口和人迎的脉象都显得很沉静，此为阳病见阴证，一般不允许针刺；如果还有针刺的可能性，应尽快取穴针刺，虽不能达到出汗的效果，但依然可泻出热邪。
English: In patients with severe fever, the airway and the pulse of the person are very quiet. This is proof that the yang and the yang are different. Generally, acupuncture is not allowed; if there is still the possibility of acupuncture, it should be done as soon as possible. Although it can not achieve the effect of sweating, it can still produce fever.

古文：所谓勿刺者，有死征也。
现代文：所谓不能针刺，是由于脉、证不符，这是死亡的征象。
English: The so-called inability to receive acupuncture is due to the fact that the pulse and vital signs do not match, which is a sign of death.

古文：热病七日八日，脉口动，喘而短者，急刺之，汗且自出，浅刺手大指间。
现代文：热病已经七、八日，气口的脉象躁动，病人气喘而头晕眩的，应马上针刺治疗，使汗出热散，应浅刺手大指间的穴位。
English: The fever has been seven or eight days, the pulse of the trachea is agitated, the patient is asthmatic and dizzy, should immediately be treated with acupuncture, the sweat should be dissipated, and the point between the thumbs should be lightly pricked.

古文：热病七日八日，脉微小，病者溲血，口中干，一日半而死；脉代者，一日死。
现代文：热病已经七、八天，若是脉象微小，是正气不足的表现，病人尿血，口中干燥，是阳盛阴竭，一天半即将死亡；若是见到代脉，是脏气已衰，一日就会死亡。
English: The fever has been going on for seven or eight days. If the pulse is small, it is a sign of insufficient qi, the patient urinates blood, the mouth is dry, the yang is strong and the yin is exhausted, and it will take a day and a half to die; if the pulse is seen, it is dirty and has faded, and it will die within a day.

古文：热病已得汗出，而脉尚躁，喘且复热，勿刺肤；喘甚者死。
现代文：热病已经出汗，可是脉象还是躁而不静，气喘，并且不久热势又起的，不可针刺；若是气喘加剧，就会死亡。
English: The fever has been sweating, but the pulse is still restless and not quiet, asthma, and soon the fever rises again, do not need to be pricked; if the asthma is aggravated, it will die.

古文：热病七日八日，脉不躁，躁不散，数，后看中有汗；三日不汗，四日死。
现代文：热病已经七、八天，脉象已经不躁，或是有躁象但不散，脉象数，是邪气犹在，在后面的三天之中，能发汗的，邪气随汗而解；若是三天后仍未汗出，是正气已衰，到第四日死亡。
English: If the fever has lasted for seven or eight days, and the pulse is not irritable, or if it is irritable but does not dissipate, and the number of pulses is the same, the evil spirit is still there. If the fever persists for the next three days, the evil spirit will dissipate with perspiration. If the fever still persists after three days, then the righteous spirit has waned, and the patient will die on the fourth day.

古文：未曾汗者，勿腠刺之。
现代文：从患热病起没有出汗的病人，不能用针刺治疗。
English: Patients who have not perspired since the onset of fever cannot be treated with acupuncture.

古文：热病，先肤痛、窒鼻、充面，取之皮，以第一针，五十九；苛轸鼻，索皮于肺；不得，索之火，火者，心也。
现代文：热病，先有皮肤痛、鼻塞、面部浮肿等症状，是热伤皮毛的症候，治疗的时候应该浅刺各经的皮部，由九针中的第一种针在热病的五十九腧穴中选穴针刺；若是鼻生小疹，也是邪在皮毛的表现，因肺合皮毛，因此治疗要从肺经入手。
English: Fever, with symptoms such as skin pain, nasal congestion, and facial edema, is a symptom of heat-damaged fur. When treating, the skin of each meridian should be lightly pricked, and the first needle of the nine needles should be pricked in the fifty-nine acupoints of the fever; if it is a nasal rash, it is also a manifestation of the evil in the fur, because the lungs are connected to the fur, so the treatment should start from the pulmonary meridian.

古文：热病，先身涩、倚而热、烦俛、干唇口溢，取之皮，以第一针，五十九；肤胀、口干、寒汗出，索脉于心；不得，索之水，水者，肾也。
现代文：如治疗无效，应从属火的心经腧穴入手治疗，因为火热属心，心火克制肺金。热病，先感到皮肤燥涩不爽、身体无力且发热、烦闷、唇燥咽干等症状，应当刺其血脉，用九针中的第一种针，在热病五十九腧穴中选穴施针。若是出现腹胀、口中干、出冷汗等症状，是邪在血脉，因心主血脉，因此当治疗心经的腧穴。
English: If the treatment is not effective, it should be started from the heart of the fire through the fistula, because the heat is the heart, and the heart of the fire restrains the lung. Fever, first feel the symptoms of dry and uncomfortable skin, body weakness and fever, boredom, dry lips and throat, should prick the blood vessel, use the first needle of the nine needles, select the needle in the fifty-nine fistula of the fever. If symptoms such as bloating, dry mouth, and cold sweat appear, it is evil in the blood, due to the main blood vessel of the heart, so treat the fistula of the heart.

古文：热病，溢干多饮、善惊、卧不能起，取之肤肉，以第六针，五十九；目眦青，索肉于脾；不得，索之木，木者，肝也。
现代文：如治疗无效，应从属水的肾经腧穴入手，因为肾水能克心火。热病，表现为咽中干、口渴喜饮、易受惊吓、不能安卧等症状，是邪客肌肉的病变，治疗时应用九针中的第六种针针刺热病五十九腧穴中的穴位。若眼角色青，属于脾经的病变，脾主肉，所以治疗时应当针刺至肌肉，从脾经入手。
English: If the treatment is not effective, it should be started from the watery kidney through the fistula, because the kidney water can suppress the heart. Fever, manifested by symptoms such as dry throat, thirst, easy to be frightened, and inability to lie down, is a lesion of the muscle, and the sixth needle of the nine needles is used for treatment. If the eye is blue, it is a lesion of the spleen, the main body of the spleen, so the treatment should be acupuncture to the muscle, starting from the spleen.

古文：热病，面青、脑痛、手足躁，取之筋间，以第四针于四逆；筋躄、目浸，索筋于肝；不得，索之金，金者，肺也。
现代文：如治疗无效，应从属木的肝经腧穴入手，因为肝木能克脾土。热病，表现为面色青、头脑中痛、手足躁动等症状，是邪客于筋的病变，治疗时应当针刺至筋，当用九针中的第四种针，在手足四肢不利的地方施针。若出现足不能行、泪出而不止等症状，属于肝经的病患，肝主筋，所以刺至筋，也就是从肝论治。
English: If the treatment is not effective, it should be started from the liver of the tree, because the liver can suppress the spleen. Fever, which is manifested by symptoms such as blue face, headache, and restlessness of hands and feet, is a pathological lesion of the muscle. When treating, it should be needled to the muscle. When using the fourth needle of the nine needles, apply the needle in the unfavorable place of the hands and feet. If symptoms such as inability to walk and tears occur, it is a patient of hepatic meridian, the main muscle of the liver, so it is stabbed to the muscle, that is, it is treated from the liver.

古文：热病，数惊，瘈瘲而狂，取之脉，以第四针，急泻有余者。
现代文：如无效，应从肺金论治，因为肺金克肝木。热病，表现为屡发惊悸、手足抽搐、精神狂乱等症状，是邪热入心，治疗时应该深刺直至血络，用九针中的第四种针，迅速泻其有余的邪热。
English: If it is not effective, it should be treated from the lung gold, because the lung gold is different from the liver wood. Fever, manifested by symptoms such as repeated convulsions, hand and foot convulsions, and mental derangement, is evil heat into the heart. When treating, it should be deeply stabbed until the bloodstream. Use the fourth needle out of nine needles to quickly relieve the excess evil heat.

古文：癫疾、毛发去，索血于心；不得，索之水，水者，肾也。
现代文：若是出现时发癫病、毛发脱落等症状，属于心经的病患，应治心所主之血脉。
English: If symptoms such as epilepsy and hair loss occur at the same time, it is a cardiomyopathy and should be treated by the cardiologist.

古文：热病，身重、骨痛、耳聋而好瞑，取之骨，以第四针，五十九。
现代文：如无效，则应从肾水论治，因为肾水克制心火。热病，表现为身体沉重、周身骨节疼痛、耳聋、嗜睡等症状，是邪热入肾，应刺深至骨，用九针中的第四种针，在热病五十九腧穴中选穴施针。
English: If it is not effective, it should be treated from the kidney water, because the kidney water restrains the heart. Fever, which is manifested by symptoms such as heavy body, pain in the bones around the body, deafness, and lethargy, is an evil heat into the kidney, and should be stabbed deep into the bone. Use the fourth needle of the nine needles to select a needle in the fifty-nine acupoints of fever.

古文：刺骨病不食、啮齿、耳青，索骨于肾；不得，索之土，土者，脾也。
现代文：针刺治疗骨病，若有不能食、牙齿相磨、双耳色青等症状，应当深刺至骨，属于肾经的病患。如无效，则应从脾土论治，因为脾土克肾水。
English: Acupuncture treatment of bone disease, if there are symptoms such as inability to eat, teeth grinding, and blue ears, it should be deep to the bone, belonging to patients with renal disease. If it is not effective, it should be treated from the spleen, because the spleen contains kidney water.

古文：热病，不知所痛，耳聋、不能自收、口干，阳热甚，阴颇有寒者，热在髓，死不可治。
现代文：热病，表现为不知在哪儿疼痛、耳聋、四肢不能灵活收放、口干，阳气偏盛的时候发热，阴气偏盛的时候发冷，这是邪热深入骨髓的症候，是死证，无可救治。
English: Fever, which manifests itself as pain in unknown places, deafness, limbs that cannot be flexibly retracted, dry mouth, fever when yang is at its peak, and chills when yin is at its peak, is a symptom of the evil fever penetrating the bone marrow. It is a death certificate and cannot be cured.

古文：热病，头痛，颞颥、目瘈脉痛，善衄，厥热病也，取之以第三针，视有余不足。
现代文：热病，表现为头痛，头部两侧和眼睛周围的筋脉抽搐作痛，易出鼻血，这是厥热病，是热邪逆于上的病症，治疗时应用九针当中的第三种针，根据其病情的虚实，以泻其有余，补其不足。
English: Fever, manifested as headache, myofascial spasms on both sides of the head and around the eyes are painful, and nosebleeds are easy to occur. This is a fever, a disease of fever. The third needle of the nine needles is used for treatment, according to the truth of the disease, to relieve its surplus and make up for its deficiency.

古文：寒热痔。热病，体重、肠中热，取之以第四针，于其俞及下诸趾间，索气于胃胳，得气也。
现代文：热厥病当中还应该注意，常会有寒热痔疮的发生。热病，表现为身体沉重，胃肠灼热的，为邪热在脾胃所致，可以用九针中的第四种针，刺脾胃二经的腧穴，并取在下部的各足趾间的穴位；同时还可以针刺胃经的络脉，得气为佳。
English: Fever, manifested as a heavy body, gastrointestinal burning, caused by malignant fever in the spleen and stomach, can use the fourth needle of the nine needles to prick the splenic and gastric epiphyses and take the acupoints between the toes in the lower part; at the same time, you can also prick the vas deferens of the gastric epiphyses, which is better.

古文：热病挟脐急痛，胸胁满，取之涌泉与阴陵泉，取以第四针，针嗌里。
现代文：热病，表现为脐周围突然疼痛，胸胁满胀，是邪在足少阴、太阴二经的表现，治疗时应用九针中的第四种针刺涌泉穴与阴陵泉穴，因肾、脾二经均上络于咽喉部位，故又可针刺舌下的廉泉穴。
English: Fever, manifested as sudden pain around the navel, chest full of swelling, is the manifestation of evil in the foot Shaoyin, Taiyin Erjing. In the treatment, the fourth needle of the nine needles is used to prick the gushing spring hole and the yinling spring hole. Because the kidney and spleen are both upstream in the throat, it can also prick the lianquan hole under the tongue.

古文：热病，而汗且出，及脉顺可汗者，取之鱼际、太渊、大都、太白，泻之则热去，补之则汗出；汗出太甚，取内踝上横脉以止之。
现代文：热病，出汗后脉象表现为安静的，是脉象、病症相合的顺证，可以继续用发汗的治法，针刺手太阴肺经的鱼际、太渊、大都、太白穴，用泻法刺之则热去，若是用补法就可以继续发汗；如果汗出太过的，可以针刺内踝上的三阴交穴止汗。
English: Fever, after sweating, the pulse is quiet, which is a sign that the pulse and the disease are compatible. You can continue to use the method of sweating treatment. Pinch the fish, too deep, too large, too white hole that the hand is too deep and the lung is too deep. Pinch it with the laxative method to get rid of the heat. If you use the supplement method, you can continue to sweat. If you sweat too much, you can prick the ankle to stop sweating.

古文：热病，已得汗而脉尚躁盛，此阴脉之极也，死；其得汗而脉静者，生。
现代文：热病，虽然出了汗，但是脉象仍然躁盛的，这是阴气欲绝，孤阳不敛，为死证；出汗之后脉象即平静安顺的，是顺证，预后良好。
English: Fever, although sweating, but the pulse is still manic, this is the yin and yang, for the death certificate; after sweating, the pulse is calm and peaceful, it is a coincidence, the prognosis is good.

古文：热病者，脉尚盛躁而不得汗者，此阳脉之极也，死；脉盛躁得汗静者，生。
现代文：热病脉象躁盛，但是已不能出汗的，这是阳气欲绝的死证；脉象躁盛，但发汗之后脉象马上表现为平静的，预后良好。
English: The hot pulse is like a manic high, but can no longer sweat, which is the death certificate of yang qi; the pulse is like a manic high, but after sweating, the pulse immediately appears to be calm, and the prognosis is good.

古文：热病不可刺者有九：一曰汗不出，大颧发赤，哕者死；二曰泄而腹满甚者死；三曰目不明，热不已者死；四曰老人婴儿热而腹满者死；五曰汗不出，呕下血者死；六曰舌本烂，热不已者死；七曰咳而衄，汗不出，出不至足者死；八曰髓热者死；九曰热而痉者死。腰折，瘈瘲，齿噤齘也。
现代文：热病有九种情况禁用针刺疗法：第一，不出汗，两颧发红、呃逆，是虚阳上越的死证；第二，泄泻、腹中胀满严重的，为脾气败绝的死证；第三，双目视物不清、发热不退，是精气衰竭的死证；第四，老人和婴儿，发热而腹中满胀，这是邪热伤脾的死证；第五，不出汗，呕血、下血，为阴血耗伤的死证；第六，舌根已烂，热仍不止，为阴气大伤的死证；第七，咳血衄血，不出汗，即使是出汗，也达不到足部的，为真阴耗竭的死证；第八，热邪已入骨髓，是肾阴衰竭的死证；第九，发热而出现痉病，是耗伤阴血，热极生风的死证，发热而出现痉病时，会出现腰背角弓反张、抽搐、口噤不开和牙齿切磨的表现。
English: There are nine kinds of cases in which acupuncture therapy is prohibited for fever: First, do not sweat, red cheeks, and hiccups, which is the death certificate of the rising sun; Second, diarrhea, severe abdominal distension, which is the death certificate of losing temper; Third, double vision is unclear, fever does not return, which is the death certificate of exhaustion; Fourth, the elderly and infants, fever and abdominal distension, which is the death certificate of malignant fever; Fifth, do not sweat, vomit and bleed, which is the death certificate of consuming yin blood; Sixth, the root of the tongue is rotten, the heat is not stopped, which is the death

古文：凡此九者，不可刺也。
现代文：上述几种情况，都是热邪过盛、真阴耗竭的死证，故不可施针。
English: In the above-mentioned cases, it is a death certificate of excessive heat and depletion of yin and yang, so it is not possible to apply needles.

古文：所谓五十九刺者，两手外内侧各三，凡十二痏。五指间各一，凡八痏，足亦如是。头入发一寸旁三分各三，凡六痏。更入发三寸边五，凡十痏。耳前后口下者各一，项中一，凡六痏。巅上一，聪会一，发际一，廉泉一，风池二，天柱二。
现代文：所说的热病针刺常用的五十九个腧穴是指：两手指端外侧各三穴，内侧亦各三穴，左右共十二穴；在五指之间各有一穴，双手共为八穴，双足亦是如此；头部入发际一寸处两旁开各三穴，共六穴，在入发际三寸处的两旁各五穴，双侧共十穴；耳前后各一穴，口下一穴，项中一穴，共为六穴；巅顶一穴，囟会一穴，前后发际各一穴，廉泉一穴，左右风池共二穴，左右天柱共二穴，共计九穴。
English: The fifty-nine acupoints commonly used in acupuncture for fever are: three on each side of the end of the two fingers, three on the inner side, and twelve on the left and right; one on each of the five fingers, a total of eight on both hands, and the same on both feet; three on each side of the head at one inch into the hairline, a total of six; five on each side at three inches into the hairline, a total of ten on both sides; one on each side of the ear, one on each side of the mouth, and one on each side of the cheek, a total of six; one on the top of the head, one on

古文：气满，胸中喘息，取足太阴大趾之端，去爪甲如薤叶，寒则留之，热则疾之，气下乃止。
现代文：上述各部位的穴位合起来一共是五十九穴。胸中气满，喘息急促，治疗时应取足太阴大趾之端的穴位，位置在距爪甲角如韭菜叶宽的地方，若是寒证。就用留针的方法治疗；若是热证，就用疾刺法治疗，直到上逆之气下降，喘息停止为止。
English: There are a total of fifty-nine acupoints in the above-mentioned parts. The chest is full of gas, and the wheezing is rapid. When treating, the acupoint at the end of the big toe of the foot should be taken. The location is at a place as wide as a leek leaf from the toenail angle. If it is a cold case, it is treated by the method of retaining the needle; if it is a heat case, it is treated by the prickling method until the upper air pressure drops and the wheezing stops.

古文：心疝，暴痛，取足太阴、厥阴，尽刺去其血络。
现代文：心疝病，表现为腹中突然剧痛的，应针刺足太阴经和足厥阴经，使用放血的疗法，尽数祛除其经脉上的血络，以泻其邪。
English: For palpitations, which are characterized by a sudden sharp pain in the abdomen, acupuncture should be used to remove the blood flow on the meridians to relieve the symptoms.

古文：喉痹，舌卷，口中干，烦心，心痛，臂内廉痛，不可及头，取手小指次指爪甲下，去端如韭叶。
现代文：喉痹，舌卷曲不伸，口干，心烦、心痛，手臂内侧疼痛，不能上举到头部，治疗可针刺手无名指小指侧的指端穴位，据爪甲约有韭菜叶宽的位置上。
English: Laryngeal paralysis, tongue curling but not extending, dry mouth, upset, heartache, pain on the inside of the arm, can't lift it to the head, can be treated by pinching the finger tip on the side of the little finger of the ring finger of the hand, according to the nail plate about the width of a leek leaf.

古文：目中赤痛，从内眦始，取之阴蹻。
现代文：双目红赤疼痛，从内眼角起，内眼角是阴阳跷脉会合之处，治疗时可以取用阴跷脉的起点照海穴施针。
English: Binocular red-red pain, from the inner corner of the eye, the inner corner of the eye is the meeting place of the yin and yang carotid arteries. When treating, you can use the starting point of the carotid artery to apply the needle.

古文：风痉，身反折，先取足太阳及腘中及血络出血；中有寒，取三里。
现代文：风痉出现颈项强直，角弓反张等症状，应该先取足太阳经脉及腘窝中的委中穴施针，并在浅表的络脉上刺血络出血。内有寒的，应取足阳明经的足三里穴。
English: If symptoms such as neck stiffness and arch dorsiflexion occur, you should first take the foot of the solar meridian and the middle hole in the armpit for injection, and prick the superficial vas deferens for hemorrhage. If there is cold inside, you should take the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot of the foot.

古文：癃，取之阴蹻及三毛上及血络出血。
现代文：癃闭，治疗时可以取用阴跷脉的起点照海穴，和足厥阴经位于足大趾外侧三毛上的大敦穴，并在表浅的血络上放血以泻邪气。
English: In the treatment, the starting point of the pudendal vein can be used to treat the pudendal vein, and the pudendal vein is located on the outside of the big toe on the big toe, and blood is shed on the superficial bloodstream to relieve evil.

古文：男子如蛊，女子如怚，身体腰脊如解，不欲饮食，先取涌泉见血，视跗上盛者，尽见血也。
现代文：男子患了像疝瘕一样的气鼓病，女子患了月经阻隔的病，表现为腰脊如同要分解开一样疼痛，不思饮食，治疗时应先点刺涌泉穴出血，观察足背上有血络盛满的地方，也要全部点刺出血，以泻邪气。
English: The man suffered from a cramp-like gas-drum disease, and the woman suffered from a menstrual blockage disease, which manifested as pain in the lumbar spine as if it were to be dissolved, and did not think about diet. When treating, it is necessary to first pinpoint the bleeding of the gushing spring, observe the place where the blood circulation is full on the instep, and also all the pinpoint bleeding, so as to relieve the evil gas.

