古文：九年春，纪季姜归于京师。
现代文：九年春天，纪国的季姜出嫁到京师
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Ji Jiang from Ji Guo married a teacher from Beijing.

古文：夏四月。
现代文：夏季四月，无事。
English: In the summer, in April, nothing.

古文：秋七月。
现代文：秋季七月，无事。
English: Autumn in July.

古文：冬，曹伯使其世子射姑来朝。
现代文：冬季，曹国派遣太子射姑来鲁国朝见。
English: In the winter, Cao sent Prince Shotoku to visit the Imperial Court in Lu.

古文：九年春，纪季姜归于京师。
现代文：九年春季，纪国的季姜出嫁到京师。
English: In the spring of the ninth year, Ji Jiang from Ji Guo married a teacher from Beijing.

古文：凡诸侯之女行，唯王后书。
现代文：凡是诸侯的女儿出嫁，只有出嫁做王后才加以记载。
English: Whenever a daughter of a vassal marries, it is recorded only if she marries a queen.

古文：巴子使韩服告于楚，请与邓为好。
现代文：巴子派遣韩服向楚国报告，请求和邓国友好。
English: Bazi sent Hanfu to report to Chu and request friendship with Deng.

古文：楚子使道朔将巴客以聘于邓。
现代文：楚武王派遣道朔带领巴国的使者到邓国聘问。
English: King Chuwu sent Daoshuo to lead the envoys of Pak to Deng for an interview.

古文：邓南鄙鄾人攻而夺之币。杀道朔及巴行人。
现代文：邓国南部边境的鄾地人攻击他们，并掠夺财礼，杀死了道朔和巴国的使者。
English: The Qiang people on the southern border of Deng attacked them and plundered the gifts, killing Daoshuo and the envoys of the State of Pakistan.

古文：楚子使薳章让于邓，邓人弗受。
现代文：楚武王派遣薳章责备邓国，邓国人拒不接受。
English: King Chuwu sent the imperial seal to reprimand Deng Guo, but Deng Guo refused to accept it.

古文：夏，楚使鬥廉帅师及巴师围鄾。
现代文：夏季，楚国派遣鬬廉率领楚军和巴军包围鄾地。
English: In the summer, the State of Chu dispatched Qilian to lead the Chu army and the Pakistani army to encircle Yandi.

古文：邓养甥、聃甥帅师救鄾。
现代文：邓国的养甥、聃甥率领邓军救援鄾地。
English: Deng Guo's adopted nephew and great-nephew led Deng's army to rescue Shunde.

古文：三逐巴师，不克。
现代文：邓军三次向巴军发起冲锋，不能得胜。
English: Deng's army launched a charge against the Pakistani army three times, but could not win.

古文：鬥廉衡陈其师于巴师之中以战，而北。
现代文：鬬廉率军在巴军之中列为横阵，当与邓军交战时，假装败逃。
English: The army led by Zou Lian was listed as a horizontal line among the Pakistani army, and when fighting with Deng's army, it pretended to be defeated and fled.

古文：邓人逐之，背巴师。
现代文：邓军追逐楚军，巴军就处于他们背后。
English: Deng's army chased the Chu army, and the Pakistani army was right behind them.

古文：而夹攻之，邓师大败，鄾人宵溃。
现代文：楚、巴两军夹攻邓军，邓军大败。鄾地人黄昏后就溃散了。
English: Chu and Ba's two armies attacked Deng's army in a pincer movement, and Deng's army was soundly defeated. After dusk, the Loudi people dispersed.

古文：秋，虢仲、芮伯、梁伯、荀侯、贾伯伐曲沃。
现代文：秋季，虢仲、芮伯、梁伯、荀侯、贾伯，共同出兵讨伐曲沃。
English: In autumn, Yu Zhong, Yu Bo, Liang Bo, Yu Hou and Jia Bo jointly sent troops to fight against Quwo.

古文：冬，曹大子来朝，宾之以上卿，礼也。
现代文：冬季，曹国的太子来鲁国朝见。用上卿之礼接待他，这是合于礼的。
English: In winter, the prince of Cao came to see the imperial court of Lu. It was proper to receive him with the courtier's salute.

古文：享曹大子，初献，乐奏而叹。
现代文：设享礼招待曹太子。首先献酒，接着奏乐，曹太子就叹气。
English: Prince Cao was invited to a banquet. First, wine was offered, then music was played, and Prince Cao sighed.

古文：施父曰： 曹大子其有忧乎，非叹所也。 
现代文：施父说： 曹太子恐怕会有什么忧心事吧？
English: Shifu said, "I'm afraid Prince Cao will have something to worry about.

