古文：契丹者，古匈奴之种也。
现代文：契丹，是古代匈奴人的后代。
English: Khitan are the descendants of the ancient Huns.

古文：代居辽泽之中，潢水南岸，南距榆关一千一百里，榆关南距幽州七百里，本鲜卑之旧地也。
现代文：世代居住在辽泽之中，潢水南岸，南距榆关一千一百里，榆关南距幽州七百里，契丹所居之地本是鲜卑人的故地。
English: He has lived in Liaoze for generations, on the south coast of Surabaya, 1,100 miles south of Shaoguan, and 700 miles south of Yuzhou. The place where Qidan lived was originally the hometown of the Xianbei people.

古文：其风土人物，世代君长，前史载之详矣。
现代文：那里的风土人物，世代君长，前代的史籍中已记载得很详细了。
English: The cultural figures there, the generations of monarchs, have been recorded in great detail in the historical records of previous generations.

古文：唐咸通末，其王曰锡里济，疆土稍大，累来朝贡。
现代文：唐朝懿宗咸通末年，契丹王叫习尔之，疆土稍有扩大，不断来唐朝朝贡。
English: In the last years of the Tang Dynasty, Xi Zong Hamdong, King of Khitan called Xi Erzhi, slightly expanded the territory, and constantly paid tribute to the Tang Dynasty.

古文：光启中，其王沁丹者，乘中原多故，北边无备，遂蚕食诸郡，达靼、奚、室韦之属，咸被驱役，族帐浸盛，有时入寇。
现代文：唐僖宗光启年间，契丹王叫钦德，乘中原多有变乱、北部没有防备之机，于是蚕食唐朝各边郡，鞑靼、奚人、室韦之类部族，全被契丹驱赶役使，契丹人的帐篷逐渐繁盛，时或入寇。
English: During the reign of Emperor Guangqi of the Tang Dynasty, the Khitan king was called Qinde. There were many upheavals in the Central Plains, and there was no defense in the north. As a result, tribes such as the Tartars, Qiang people, and Shumway, who had encroached on all the counties of the Tang Dynasty, were all driven out by the Khitan. The tents of the Khitan people gradually flourished, and sometimes they were invaded by invaders.

古文：刘仁恭镇幽州，素知契丹军情伪，选将练兵，乘秋深入，逾摘星岭讨之，霜降秋暮，即燔塞下野草以困之，马多饥死，即以良马赂仁恭，以市牧地。
现代文：刘仁恭镇守幽州，一向熟知契丹人的真假虚实，便挑选将领训练士兵，乘着秋天的季节深入契丹属地，翻越摘星岭讨伐他们，到深秋霜降时，就焚烧塞下野草以困乏契丹人，契丹人的马匹多被饿死，于是用良马来贿赂刘仁恭，以购买放牧的草地。
English: Liu Rengong, who had always been familiar with the truth and falsehood of the Khitan people, chose generals to train soldiers, took advantage of the autumn season to go deep into the territory of the Khitan people, climbed over the Star Mountains to fight them, and when the late autumn frost fell, he burned the weeds to starve the Khitan people. The horses of the Khitan people were mostly starved to death, so he used good horses to bribe Liu Rengong to buy grazing meadows.

古文：仁恭季年荒恣，出居大安山，契丹背盟，数来寇钞。
现代文：刘仁恭晚年荒淫恣肆，离开幽州城住到大安山上，契丹人便违背盟约，屡次前来侵犯抢掠。
English: In his later years, Liu Renkong became wild and reckless. He left Yuzhou City to live on Mount Da'an. The Khitan then violated the treaty and repeatedly came to invade and plunder.

古文：时刘守光戍平州，契丹实里王子率万骑攻之，守光伪与之和，张幄幕于城外以享之，部族就席，伏甲起，擒实里王子入城。
现代文：这时刘守光戍守平州，契丹舍利王子率领万名骑兵进攻他。刘守光假装与他讲和，在平州城外张设帷帐设置酒宴招待他们，等契丹首领们就席后，埋伏的甲士们奋起，活捉了舍利王子入城。
English: At this time, Liu Shuguang was guarding Pingzhou, and Prince Sheri of Khitan led 10,000 cavalry to attack him. Liu Shuguang pretended to make peace with him, and set up a curtain outside the city of Pingzhou to set up a banquet to entertain them. After the Khitan leaders were seated, the ambushed soldiers rose up and captured Prince Sheri alive and entered the city.

古文：部族聚哭，请纳马五千以赎之，不许，沁丹乞盟纳赂以求之，自是十余年不能犯塞。
现代文：契丹族人相聚痛哭，请求用五千匹马以赎回舍利王子，刘守光不答应，契丹王钦德乞求与刘守光结盟并赠送财物以求放回舍利王子，从此契丹人十多年不敢进犯边塞。
English: The Khitan people gathered together and cried bitterly, asking for five thousand horses to ransom Prince Sheri, but Liu Shouguang did not agree. King Qinde of the Khitan people begged for an alliance with Liu Shouguang and gave gifts of wealth in order to release Prince Sheri. Since then, the Khitan people have not dared to invade the border fortress for more than ten years.

古文：及沁丹政衰，有别部长耶律安巴坚，最推雄劲，族帐渐盛，遂代沁丹为主。
现代文：钦德政权衰落后，另有名叫耶律阿保机的部族首领，最为雄健有势，帐篷更加繁盛，于是取代钦德而为契丹主。
English: After the decline of the Chinde regime, another famous tribal leader named Yerut Abochi, the most powerful and influential, made tents more prosperous, and replaced Chinde as the head of the Khitan.

古文：先是，契丹之先大贺氏有胜兵四万，分为八部，每部皆号大人，内推一人为主，建旗鼓以尊之，每三年第其名以代之。
现代文：在这以前，契丹的先人大贺氏拥有强兵四万，分为八部，每部首领皆叫大人，从大人中推举一人为主，建旗设鼓以尊崇他，每隔三年按次序轮流做主。
English: Prior to this, the ancestors of the Khitan, the Ohga clan, had a strong army of forty thousand, divided into eight parts. The leaders of each part were called adults. From the adults, one person was selected as the leader, a flag was set up and a drum was set up to honor him, and every three years, the leader took turns in order.

古文：及安巴坚为主，乃怙强恃勇，不受诸族之代，遂自称国主。
现代文：到阿保机为契丹主时，却怙强恃勇，不接受其他诸部族首领的替代，自称为契丹国王。
English: When Ahokji became the ruler of the Khitans, he was stubborn and did not accept to be replaced by other tribal leaders. He called himself the king of the Khitans.

古文：天祐四年，大寇云中，后唐武皇遣使连和，因与之面会于云中东城，大具享礼，延入帐中，约为兄弟，谓之曰： 唐室为贼所篡，吾欲今冬大举，弟可以精骑二万，同收汴、洛。 
现代文：天祐四年，契丹人大举进犯云中郡，后唐武皇派遣使者与契丹人议和，因而在云中东城与契丹王阿保机会面，大摆宴席，请入帐中，结为兄弟，武皇对契丹国王说： 唐室被贼人篡夺，我想在今年冬天大举发兵，老弟可领精锐骑兵二万，与我共同收复汴京、洛阳。 
English: In the 4th year of Tianyu, the Khitans invaded Yunnan County on a large scale. Later, Emperor Wu of the Tang Dynasty sent an envoy to negotiate peace with the Khitans. Therefore, he met with King Abao of the Khitans in the Middle Eastern city of Yunnan and held a grand banquet. Please enter the account and become brothers. Emperor Wu said to the King of the Khitans: The Tang Dynasty was usurped by thieves. I want to send troops on a large scale this winter. My brother can lead 20,000 elite cavalrymen to jointly recover Beijing and Luoyang with me.

古文：安巴坚许之，赐与甚厚，留马三千匹以答贶。
现代文：阿保机答应了，武皇赐给他非常优厚的礼物，阿保机留下三千匹马以作答礼。
English: Ah Bao Ji agreed, and Emperor Wu gave him a very generous gift. Ah Bao Ji left three thousand horses as a gift in return.

古文：左右咸劝武皇可乘间掳之，武皇曰： 逆贼未殄，不可失信于部落，自亡之道也。 
现代文：武皇身旁的人都劝武皇可乘机活捉阿保机，武皇说 ：中原逆贼尚未消灭，不能失信于边塞部落，那是自取灭亡的做法啊！ 
English: The people around Emperor Wu advised him to seize the opportunity to capture Ah Bao alive. Emperor Wu said, "The Central Plains rebels have not yet been eliminated, and we must not betray the trust of the border fortress tribes. That is a self-defeating approach!"

古文：乃尽礼遣之。
现代文：于是竭尽礼仪送走了阿保机。
English: Therefore, he sent away Ah Bao Ji with the utmost etiquette.

古文：及梁祖建号，安巴坚亦遣使送名马、女口、貂皮等求封册。
现代文：到梁太祖建立国号后，阿保机也派遣使者送来名马、女乐、貂皮等以求册封官爵。
English: After Liang Taizu founded the country, Abochi also sent emissaries to bring famous horses, women's music, mink fur, etc. to seek the official seal.

古文：梁祖与之书曰： 朕今天下皆平，唯有太原未服，卿能长驱精甲，径至新庄，为我翦彼寇雠，与尔便行封册。 
现代文：梁太祖送给阿保机书信说： 朕现在天下都已平定，只有太原尚未被制伏，您如能长驱精壮骑士，直赴新庄，为我铲除那里的贼寇仇敌，我就册封你官位爵号。 
English: Liang Taizu sent a letter to Ah Baoqi, saying: The whole world has been pacified now, only Taiyuan has not yet been conquered. If you can drive out the strong knights, go straight to Xinzhuang, and eradicate the enemy of thieves and robbers there for me, I will record your official title.

古文：庄宗初嗣世，亦遣使告哀，赂以金缯，求骑军以救潞州，答其使曰： 我与先王为兄弟，兒即吾兒也，宁有父不助子耶！ 
现代文：后唐庄宗刚即位，也派遣使者向阿保机报告父丧哀闻，用黄金缯帛贿赂他，请求派骑兵以救援潞州，阿保机回答唐庄宗的使者说： 我与先王武皇结为兄弟，武皇的儿子就是我的儿子，哪有父亲不帮助儿子的道理！ 
English: After Tangzhuangzong had just ascended the throne, he also sent an envoy to Ah Baoji to report the sad news of his father's death, bribed him with gold ingots, and requested that cavalry be sent to rescue Zhangzhou. Ah Baoji replied to Tangzhuangzong's envoy, saying: I am a brother of the former King Wuhuang, the son of King Wuhuang is my son, there is no reason for a father not to help his son!

古文：许出师，会潞平而止。
现代文：答应出兵，遇上潞州已被平定才作罢。
English: They promised to send troops, but only gave up when Bozhou was already pacified.

古文：刘守光末年苛惨，军士亡叛皆入契丹。
现代文：刘守光晚年苛刻残暴，军士们背叛他都逃往契丹。
English: Liu Shouguang was harsh and cruel in his later years, and the soldiers who betrayed him all fled to Khitan.

古文：洎周德威攻围幽州。燕之军民多为所寇掠，既尽得燕中人士，教之文法，由是渐盛。
现代文：到周德威进攻包围幽州时，燕地的军民大多被贼寇抢掠，周德威在全部得到燕地人民后，便教他们文章礼法，礼教由此逐渐隆盛。
English: When Zhou Dewei attacked and encircled Yuzhou, most of the soldiers and civilians in Yanji were robbed by bandits. After Zhou Dewei got all the people of Yanji, he taught them the etiquette, and the etiquette gradually flourished.

古文：十三年八月，安巴坚率诸部号称百万，自麟、胜陷振武，长驱云、朔，北边大扰。庄宗赴援于代，敌众方退。
现代文：十三年八月，阿保机率领各部号称百万大军，从麟州、胜州攻陷振武，长驱直入云州、朔州，北部边境大受惊扰，庄宗从代州奔赴支援，敌众才退。
English: In August of the 13th year, Ah Bao Ji led a million-strong army from various departments to invade Zhenwu from Linzhou and Shenzhou, and drove straight into Yunnan and Shuozhou. The northern border was greatly disturbed. Zhuang Zong rushed from Daizhou to support, and the enemy retreated.

古文：十四年，新州大将卢文进为众所迫，杀新州团练使李存矩于祁沟关，返攻新、武。
现代文：十四年，新州大将卢文进被部众胁迫，在祁沟关杀死新州团练使李存矩，返攻新州、武州。
English: In the 14th year, Xinzhou General Lu Wenjin was coerced by his subordinates to kill the Xinzhou regimental drill leader Li Cunmeng in Gongdouguan, and to counterattack Xinzhou and Wuzhou.

古文：周德威以众击之，文进不利，乃奔于契丹，引其众陷新州。
现代文：周德威率领部众攻击他，卢文进作战不利，于是逃奔契丹，引来契丹部队攻陷新州。
English: Zhou Dewei led the crowd to attack him, Lu Wenjin was not good at fighting, so he fled to the Khitan, attracting the Khitan troops to invade Xinzhou.

古文：周德威率兵三万以讨之，北骑援新州，德威为其所败，杀伤殆尽，契丹乘胜攻幽州。
现代文：周德威率领三万士兵来讨伐他，敌方骑兵支援新州，周德威被打败，部下士兵几乎全被杀光，契丹军队乘胜进攻幽州。
English: Zhou Dewei led 30,000 soldiers to fight against him, the enemy cavalry supported Xinzhou, Zhou Dewei was defeated, his soldiers were almost all killed, and the Khitan army took advantage of the victory to attack Yuzhou.

古文：是时，或言契丹三十万，或言五十万，幽蓟之北，所在北骑皆满。
现代文：这时，有人说契丹兵马有三十万，有人说有五十万，幽州、蓟州的北面，到处都布满了敌人的骑兵。
English: At this time, some people said that there were 300,000 Khitan soldiers and horses, others said that there were 500,000; the north of Yuzhou and Ganzhou was full of enemy cavalry.

古文：庄宗遣明宗与李存审、阎宝将兵救幽州，遂解其围，语在《庄宗纪》中。
现代文：庄宗派明宗与李存审、阎宝领兵援救幽州，才得以解除包围，这件事记载在《庄宗纪》中。
English: Zhuangzong sent Mingzong and Li Cunxuan, and Yan Bao led the troops to rescue Yuzhou, only to be able to lift the siege, which was recorded in the "Zhuangzong History."

古文：十八年十月，镇州大将张文礼弑其帅王镕，庄宗讨之，时定州王处直与文礼合谋，遣威塞军使王郁复引契丹为援。
现代文：天祐十八年十月，镇州大将张文礼杀害他的主帅王钅容，庄宗讨伐张文礼，这时定州王处直与张文礼合谋，派威塞军使者王郁又引来契丹人为救援。
English: In October of the 18th year of Tianyu, Zhang Wenli, the general of Zhenzhou, killed his commander Wang Yirong, and Zhuangzong fought against Zhang Wenli. At that time, Wang Shanzhong of Dingzhou conspired with Zhang Wenli and sent the emissary of the Wessi Army, Wang Yu, to bring the Khitan to the rescue.

古文：十二月，安巴坚倾塞入寇，攻围幽州，李绍宏以兵城守。
现代文：十二月，阿保机调集全部边塞部队入境侵犯，进攻包围幽州，李绍宏领兵守卫幽州城，契丹军队长驱攻陷涿郡，抓获涿郡刺史李嗣弼。
English: In December, A Baoji mobilized all the border fortress troops to invade and encircle Yuzhou. Li Shaohong led the troops to guard Yuzhou City, and the Qidan army commander drove the troops to invade and capture Li County, and captured Li Shizhen, the governor of Yuzhou County.

古文：契丹长驱陷涿郡，执刺史李嗣弼，进攻易、定，至新乐，渡沙河，王都遣使告急。时庄宗在镇州行营，闻前锋报 契丹渡沙河 ，军中咸恐，议者请权释镇州之围以避之。
现代文：进攻易州、定州，直到新乐，渡过沙河，王都派使者向庄宗告急。这时庄宗在镇州行营，听到前锋报告说 敌军已经渡过了沙河 ，军中全都惊恐不安，有人建议请暂时解除对镇州的包围以回避劲敌。
English: After attacking Yizhou and Dingzhou until Xinle and crossing the Shahe River, the king sent an envoy to Zhuang Zong to express his urgency. At this time, Zhuang Zong was camping in Zhenzhou and heard the forward report that the enemy army had crossed the Shahe River. The army was all frightened and uneasy. Some people suggested that the siege of Zhenzhou should be temporarily lifted to avoid the strong enemy.

古文：庄宗曰： 霸王举事，自有天道，契丹其如我何！
现代文：庄宗说： 霸王举事，自有上天安排，契丹人又能把我怎样！
English: Zhuangzong said, "When the overlord raises an army, it is God's arrangement. What can the Khitan do to me?

古文：国初，突厥入寇，至于渭北，高祖欲弃长安，迁都樊、邓，太守曰： 猃狁孔炽，自古有之，未闻迁移都邑。
现代文：大唐初年，突厥入边寇犯，直到渭水北岸，唐高祖想放弃长安，迁都于樊、邓，唐太宗说 ：猃狁虽然十分嚣张，自古就有这种事，但没听说过迁移都城。
English: In the first year of the Great Tang Dynasty, the Turks invaded the border and committed robberies as far as the northern shore of Surabaya. Emperor Gaozhu of the Tang Dynasty wanted to abandon Chang'an and move the capital to Handan and Deng. Emperor Taizong of the Tang Dynasty said: "Although Handan is very arrogant, there have been such things since ancient times, but I have never heard of moving the capital.

古文：霍去病，汉廷将帅，犹且志灭匈奴，况帝王应运，而欲移都避寇哉！ 
现代文：霍去病是汉朝的将帅，尚且志在消灭匈奴，何况帝王顺应天命，哪有迁都回避敌寇之理！ 
English: Huo Dexia was the general of the Han Dynasty, yet he also aspired to exterminate the Xiongnu, not to mention that the emperor obeyed the fate of heaven and avoided the enemy's invasion at all costs!

古文：文皇雄武，不数年俘二突厥为卫士。
现代文：文皇英雄武猛，不几年就俘获二突厥为卫士。
English: The hero of Emperor Wen, Wu Wu, captured two Turks as guards in just a few years.

古文：今吾以数万之众安集山东，王德明厮养小人，安巴坚生长边地，岂有退避之理，吾何面视苍生哉！
现代文：现在我统领数万部队安然屯聚崤山之东，王德明不过一奴婢养的小人，阿保机生长在边僻之地，我岂有退避他们的道理！要那样的话我有什么脸面见天下苍生啊！
English: Now that I am in command of tens of thousands of troops safely gathered in the east of Lushan, and Wang Deming is nothing more than a slave-raised dwarf, and Ah Bao Ji grew up in a remote place, do I have any reason to avoid them? If so, what kind of face do I have to show to the world?

古文：尔曹但驾马同行，看吾破之。 
现代文：你们只管驾着车马一同跟我出征，看我破敌。 
English: All you have to do is ride out with me in my chariot and horse and see me defeat the enemy.

古文：庄宗亲御铁骑五千，至新城北，遇契丹前锋万骑，庄宗精甲自桑林突出，光明照日，诸部愕然缓退，庄宗分二广以乘之，北骑散退。
现代文：庄宗于是亲自率领五千铁骑，到新城北面，遭遇契丹前锋一万骑兵，庄宗的精锐披甲骑兵从桑树林中突然杀出，刀剑之光映日，契丹各部愕然，慢慢后退，庄宗分出三十辆兵车以乘势攻击，敌骑兵溃散后退。
English: Zhuangzong then personally led five thousand cavalrymen to the north of the new city and encountered ten thousand cavalrymen of the Khitan front. Zhuangzong's elite armored cavalrymen suddenly came out of the mulberry grove. The light of the sword was shining. The Khitan departments were stunned and slowly retreated. Zhuangzong detached thirty chariots to attack and the enemy cavalry dispersed and retreated.

古文：时沙河微冰，其马多陷，安巴坚退保望都。
现代文：这时沙河结了一层薄冰，敌骑马匹大都陷入水中，阿保机撤退坚守望都。
English: At this time, there was a layer of thin ice on the Sand River, and most of the enemy's horses fell into the water. Ah Bao retreated and held on to Wangdu.

古文：是夜，庄宗次定州，翌日出战，遇奚长托诺五千骑，庄宗亲军千骑与之斗，为其所围，外救不及，庄宗挺马奋跃，出入数四，酣战不解。
现代文：这夜，庄宗驻扎定州，第二天出战，遭遇奚人首领秃馁的五千骑兵，庄宗的亲信骑兵千人与他们战斗，被敌骑包围，外面来不及救援，庄宗跃马而出，数次冲进敌阵，酣战不解。
English: That night, Zhuangzong was stationed in Dingzhou. The next day, he went out to fight. He encountered five thousand cavalrymen led by the leader of the Xiongnu, the Vulture. A thousand of Zhuangzong's trusted cavalrymen fought with them. They were surrounded by enemy cavalry. The outside world was too late to come to the rescue. Zhuangzong jumped out of his horse and rushed into the enemy lines several times. He was puzzled by the fierce battle.

古文：李嗣昭闻其急也，洒泣而往，攻破其阵，掖庄宗而归。
现代文：李嗣昭听到庄宗危急，挥泪前往，攻破敌阵，挟着庄宗而回。
English: When Li Shizhao heard that Zhuangzong was in danger, he went there in tears, broke through the enemy lines, and returned with Zhuangzong in his arms.

古文：时契丹值大雪，野无所掠，马无刍草，冻死者相望于路。安巴坚召卢文进，以手指天谓之曰： 天未令我到此。 
现代文：这时契丹正逢上下大雪，田野无处可掠夺，马匹没有草料，冻死的人马不绝于路，阿保机召来卢文进，用手指着天对他说： 是上天不让我来到这里。 
English: At this time, there was a heavy snowfall in Khitan, the fields had nowhere to be plundered, the horses had no fodder, and people and horses who had frozen to death were constantly on the road. Aboji called Lu Wenjin and pointed to the sky with his finger and said to him, "Heaven did not allow me to come here."

古文：乃引众北去。
现代文：于是领着部众向北归去。
English: So he led his followers back north.

古文：庄宗率精兵骑蹑其后，每经安巴坚野宿之所，布秸在地，方而环之，虽去，无一茎乱者，庄宗谓左右曰： 蕃人法令如是，岂中国所及！ 
现代文：庄宗率领精锐骑兵跟踪在他们后面，每次经过阿保机野营住宿的地方，看见在地下铺有秸秆，布成方形围着，人马虽已离开，而无一根茎杆杂乱，庄宗对身边的人说： 蕃人的法令如此严明，哪是中原能赶得上的！ 
English: Zhuang Zong led the elite cavalry to follow behind them. Every time he passed the place where the Aboji camp was staying, he saw that the ground was covered with straw and the cloth was surrounded in a square shape. Although the people and horses had left, there was not a single stalk cluttered. Zhuang Zong said to the people around him: "The law on beating people is so strict, how can the Central Plains catch up!

古文：庄宗至幽州，发二百骑侦之，皆为契丹所获，庄宗乃还。
现代文：庄宗到幽州，派出二百骑兵侦察契丹行踪，都被契丹抓获，庄宗于是回师。
English: Zhuang Zong went to Yuzhou and sent out two hundred cavalry to reconnoiter the Qidan's whereabouts. They were all captured by the Qidan, and Zhuang Zong then returned to his division.

古文：天祐末，安巴坚乃自称皇帝，署中国官号。
现代文：天祐末年，阿保机乃自称皇帝，授署中原官爵名号。
English: In the last years of Tenyu's reign, Ahoki proclaimed himself emperor and was given the title of Nakahara Kanshaku.

古文：其俗旧随畜牧，素无邑屋，得燕人所教，乃为城郭宫室之制于漠北，距幽州三千里，名其邑曰西楼邑，屋门皆东向，如车帐之法。
现代文：那里旧时风俗是随牲畜游牧，一向没有城邑房屋，在得到燕地人的教化后，才在漠北修起城廓宫室，距离幽州三千里，命名他们的城邑叫西楼邑，房屋的门都朝东向，像车帐的法制。
English: In the old days, the custom there was to follow the herds of nomads, and there were never any houses in the town. It was only after the Yan people had been educated that they built a castle and palace in the north of the desert, three thousand miles away from Yuzhou. They named their town Xiluo Town. The doors of the houses all face east, like the legal system of a bill of lading.

古文：城南别作一城，以实汉人，名曰汉城，城中有佛寺三，僧尼千人。
现代文：在西楼邑南边另造一城，以安置汉族人，名叫汉城，城中有三座佛城，一千僧人尼姑。
English: In the south of Xilou, another city was built to accommodate the Han people, called Seoul. There are three Buddhist cities and a thousand monks and nuns in the city.

古文：其国人号安巴坚为天皇王。
现代文：契丹国人称阿保机为天皇王。
English: The people of Khitan called Ahoji the Emperor King.

古文：同光中，安巴坚深著辟地之志，欲收兵大举，虑渤海踵其后。
现代文：同光年间，阿保机深怀扩土开疆之志，想收聚兵马大举出兵，又担心渤海攻他背后。
English: During the same period of time, Ah Bao Ji deeply cherished the dream of expanding the land and opening up the country, wanted to gather soldiers and horses and send out soldiers, and was worried that the Bohai Sea would attack his back.

古文：三年，举其众讨渤海之辽东，令托诺、卢文进据营、平等州，扰我燕蓟。
现代文：三年，出动他的部众讨伐渤海的辽东，令秃馁、卢文进占据营、平等州，扰乱中原燕地、蓟州。
English: In the third year, he dispatched his subordinates to fight against Liaodong in the Bohai Sea, ordered the vultures and Lu Wenjin to occupy the camp and the equality state, and disturbed the Central Plains Yangtze and the Bozhou.

古文：明宗初纂嗣，遣供奉官姚坤告哀，至西楼邑，属安巴坚在渤海，又径至慎州，崎岖万里。
现代文：明宗刚即位，派供奉官姚坤奉书讣告哀闻，至西楼邑，正逢阿保机在渤海，姚坤又直接到慎州，崎岖万里。
English: As soon as Emperor Mingzong ascended to the throne, he sent the tributary official Yao Kun to Xi Rongyue to offer a condolence letter. Yao Kun went directly to Shenzhou, a long way from Xi Rongyue, just as Ah Bao's plane was in Bohai.

古文：既至，谒见安巴坚，延入穹庐，安巴坚身长九尺，被锦袍，大带垂后，与妻对榻引见坤。
现代文：到达后，谒见阿保机，被带进穹庐之中，阿保机身高九尺，披着锦袍，宽大的飘带垂落在背后。与妻子在座榻相对接见姚坤。
English: After arriving, he met with Ah Bao, who was nine feet tall, dressed in a gold robe, with a large ribbon hanging down behind him, and was taken into the vault. He met with Yao Kun with his wife on the opposite side of the couch.

古文：坤未致命，安巴坚先问曰： 闻尔汉土河南、河北各有一天子，信乎？ 
现代文：姚坤还没表达使命，阿保机就先问道： 听说你们中原河南、河北各有一位天子，是真的吗？ 
English: Before Yao Kun expressed his mission, Ah Baoqi first asked: I heard that each of you in Central Plains, Henan Province and Hebei Province has a heavenly son. Is it true?

古文：坤曰： 河南天子，今年四月一日洛阳军变，今凶问至矣。
现代文：姚坤说： 河南的天子，遭遇今年四月一日的洛阳军队变乱，现在我就是来讣告哀闻。
English: Yao Kun said: Son of Heaven of Henan Province, when the Luoyang army mutinied on April 1 this year, I just came here to report the sad news.

古文：河北总管令公，比为魏州军乱，先帝诏令除讨，既闻内难，军众离心，及京城无主，上下坚册令公，请主社稷，今已顺人望登帝位矣。 
现代文：河北总管令公，在魏州发动兵变时，先帝诏令他去讨灭，而现在河南内乱，军士离心，京城无主，上下坚持册封令公，请他主持国家大政，现河北令公已顺应人望登上帝位了。 
English: When the commander-in-chief of Hebei launched a mutiny in Weizhou, the emperor sent an imperial edict to him to put an end to it. But now, Henan is in a state of civil strife, the military is divided, and the capital is without an owner. People all over the country are insisting on the appointment of the commander-in-chief and asking him to preside over the national government. Now, the commander-in-chief of Hebei has complied with people's wishes to ascend to the throne of God.

古文：安巴坚号咷，声泪俱发，曰： 我与河东先世约为兄弟，河南天子吾兒也。
现代文：阿保机放声大哭，哭声眼泪一齐发作，说 ：我与河东先世结为兄弟，河南天子就是我儿子啊！
English: Ah Baoqi burst into tears and said, "I am a brother of the past generations in Hedong, and Henan Tianzi is my son!"

古文：近闻汉地兵乱，点得甲马五万骑，比欲自往洛阳救助我兒，又缘渤海未下，我兒果致如此，冤哉！ 
现代文：近来听到中原兵乱，我收得披甲战马五万骑，正想亲自前往洛阳救助我儿子，又因渤海没有攻下，我儿竟然如此下场，冤枉啊！ 
English: Recently, I heard about the Central Plains War, and I collected 50,000 armored horses. I wanted to personally go to Luoyang to rescue my son, but because the Bohai Sea was not captured, my son ended up like this. I was wrong!

古文：泣下不能已。
现代文：哭泣流泪不能自已。
English: I can't stop crying.

古文：又谓坤曰： 今汉土天子，初闻洛阳有难，不急救，致令及此。 
现代文：又对姚坤说 ：中原天子当初听到洛阳有难，不去急救，以致如此。 
English: He also said to Yao Kun: Nakahara Tenshi initially heard that Luoyang was in trouble and did not go for first aid, which led to this.

古文：坤曰： 非不急切，地远阻隔不及也。 
现代文：姚坤说： 不是大王不急切，是地域遥远阻隔而来不及。 
English: Yao Kun said: It's not that the king is not eager, it's that the region is too far away to come.

古文：又曰： 我兒既殂，当合取我商量，安得自便！ 
现代文：阿保机又说 ：我儿既死，应当与我商量，你们河北令公怎能擅自即位！ 
English: Ah Baoqi also said, "Now that my son is dead, you should consult with me. How can you, the ruler of Hebei, ascend the throne without permission?"

古文：坤曰： 吾皇将兵二十年，位至大总管，所部精兵三十万，众口一心，圣坚推戴，违之则立见祸生，非不知禀天皇王意旨，无奈人心何。 
现代文：姚坤说 ：我朝新皇领兵二十年，位至大总管，所辖精兵三十万，万众一心，坚决推戴他，不答应就立即产生祸难，不是不知要秉承您天皇王的意旨，只是拿民心没有办法。 
English: Yao Kun said, "I have been leading soldiers for twenty years under the new emperor, and I have risen to the position of the supreme commander-in-chief. I have 300,000 elite soldiers under my command, and all of them are of one mind. I resolutely support him. If I do not agree, disaster will immediately occur. It is not that I do not know how to uphold the will of your emperor and king, but there is no way to win the hearts of the people.

古文：其子托云在侧，谓坤曰： 汉使勿多谈。 
现代文：阿保机的儿子突欲在旁边，对姚坤说： 中原使者不要多谈。 
English: A Baoji's son suddenly wanted to be by his side and said to Yao Kun: "Envoy of the Central Plains, don't talk too much.

古文：因引左氏牵牛蹊田之说以折坤，坤曰： 应天顺人，不同匹夫之义，只如天皇王初领国事，岂是强取之耶！ 
现代文：因而引用左丘明牵牛踏人田的说法驳斥姚坤，姚坤说： 顺应天意合乎人心，不同于匹夫的道义，就如天皇王当初掌领国事，难道是强行夺取的吗？ 
English: Therefore, he refuted Yao Kun by quoting Zuo Quming's saying of leading a cow to trample on a field of people. Yao Kun said: Conforming to the will of heaven is in line with the hearts of the people, and is different from the morality of the people. Just as the emperor was in charge of state affairs at the beginning, is it forcibly seized?

古文：安巴坚因曰： 理当如此，我汉国兒子致有此难，我知之矣。
现代文：阿保机说： 理当如此，我河南的儿子致有这种祸难，我早就料到了。
English: Ah Baoqi said, "It was only natural. I had long anticipated that my son from Henan Province would be afflicted with such a calamity.

古文：闻此兒有宫婢二千，乐官千人，终日放鹰走狗，耽酒嗜色，不惜人民，任使不肖，致得天下皆怒。
现代文：听说这儿子有宫女二千，乐官一千，整天放逐猎鹰驱赶猎狗，沉溺美酒，嗜好女色，不爱惜人民，放任他们变坏，致使天下人都气愤。
English: It was said that this son had two thousand concubines and a thousand musicians, that he spent his days chasing hunting dogs with falcons, that he was addicted to wine, that he had a penchant for women, that he did not care about the people, and that he allowed them to deteriorate, all of which enraged the people of the world.

古文：我自闻如斯，常忧倾覆，一月前已有人来报，知我兒有事，我便举家断酒，解放鹰犬，休罢乐官。
现代文：我自从听到他这样，常担心他将倾倒覆灭，一个月以前已经有人来报告，就知我儿将有祸事，我便全家断酒，放了猎鹰猎犬，停罢了乐官。
English: Ever since I heard about him, I've been worried that he's going to be ruined. A month ago, someone came to tell me, and I knew that something bad was going to happen to my son. My whole family stopped drinking, we released the falcon and the hound, and we stopped playing music.

古文：我亦有诸部家乐千人，非公宴未尝妄举。
现代文：我也有各部家乐一千人，不是公宴就不曾随便使用。
English: I also have a thousand people in various departments of home entertainment, and I have never used it casually unless it was a public banquet.

古文：我若所为似我兒，亦应不能持久矣，自此愿以为戒。 
现代文：我的作为如果像我儿子，也应当不会持久在位了，希望以此作为警戒。 
English: If my actions are like those of my son, I should not be able to stay on the throne for long. I hope this serves as a warning.

古文：又曰： 汉国兒与我虽父子，亦曾彼此雠敌，俱有恶心，与尔今天子无恶，足得欢好。
现代文：又说 ：江南天子与我虽为父子，但曾经彼此互为仇敌，都有仇恨之心，我与你们现在的天子没有过仇怨，足以结为欢好。
English: He also said, "Although Jiangnan Tianzi and I are father and son, we were once each other's enemies and had hatred in our hearts. I have never had any grudge with your current Tianzi, which is enough for us to get along well.

古文：尔先复命，我续将马万骑至幽、镇以南，与尔家天子面为盟约，我要幽州，令汉兒把捉，更不复侵入汉界。 
现代文：你先回去报告使命，我接着率领战马万骑到幽州镇州以南，与你们天子当面结成盟约，我只要幽州，令汉儿守护，此外不再侵入中原边界。 
English: You go back first to report the mission, I will then lead the war horse Wan ride to the south of Yuzhou Zhenzhou, and make a covenant with your heavenly son in person, I only need Yuzhou, let Han'er guard, in addition, I will no longer invade the Central Plains border.

古文：又问： 汉收得西川，信不？ 
现代文：又问 ：中原收取了西川，是真的吗？ 
English: Another question: Is it true that Nakahara charged Saikawa?

古文：坤曰： 去年九月出兵，十一月十六日收下东、西川，得兵马二十万，金帛无算。
现代文：姚坤说： 去年九月出兵，十一月十六日攻下东、西两川，得到兵马二十万，金银布帛无数。
English: Yao Kun said: Last September, troops were dispatched, and on November 16th, the East and West Two Rivers were conquered, gaining 200,000 soldiers and horses, and countless gold and silver cloth.

古文：皇帝初即位，未办送来，续当遣使至矣。 
现代文：皇帝刚刚即位，来不及具办礼物送来，不久将派使者送来了。 
English: The emperor has just ascended the throne, and it is too late to send a gift. An envoy will be sent soon.

古文：安巴坚忻然曰： 闻西有剑阁，兵马从何过得？ 
现代文：阿保机高兴地说 ：听说西川有剑阁，兵马从何处能过去？ 
English: Ahoji said happily, "I heard that there is a castle of swords in Saikawa. Where can the soldiers and horses go?"

古文：坤曰： 川路虽险，然先朝收复河南，有精兵四十万，良马十万骑，但通人行处，便能去得，视剑阁如平地耳。 
现代文：姚坤说： 川路虽然险阻，但先朝收复黄河以南，有精兵四十万，良马十万骑，只要是能通人的地方，就能过去，视剑阁就如平地而已。 
English: Yao Kun said: Although the river road is a dangerous obstacle, the south of the Yellow River was recovered by the first dynasty. There are 400,000 elite soldiers and 100,000 good horses. As long as it is a place that can pass through people, it can be passed. Jiange is just like flat land.

古文：安巴坚善汉语，谓坤曰： 吾解汉语，历口不敢言，惧部人效我，令兵士怯弱故也。 
现代文：阿保机精通汉语，对姚坤说： 我懂汉语，不敢经常说汉语，怕部族人效法我，使兵士胆怯懦弱。 
English: Ah Bao Ji, who is fluent in Chinese, said to Yao Kun, "I understand Chinese, but I don't dare to speak Chinese often, for fear that the tribesmen will imitate me and make the soldiers cowardly.

古文：坤至止三日，安巴坚病伤寒。
现代文：姚坤到后仅三天，阿保机得了伤寒病。
English: Just three days after Yao Kun's arrival, Ah Bao Ji fell ill with typhoid fever.

古文：一夕，大星殒于其帐前，俄而卒于扶余城，时天成元年七月二十七日也。
现代文：一天晚上，一颗大星陨落在阿保机的帐篷前面，不久阿保机就在扶余城去世，这时是天成元年七月十二日。
English: One night, a big star fell in front of Ah Bao Ji's tent, and soon Ah Bao Ji passed away in Fuyu City. It was July 12th, the first year of Tiancheng.

古文：其妻舒噜氏自率众护其丧归西楼，坤亦从行，得报而还。
现代文：他的妻子述律氏亲自率领部众护送阿保机尸体回归西楼邑，姚坤也跟随而行，得到回报后才回到中原。
English: His wife, Su Lu, personally led the crowd to escort the body of Ah Bao to return to Xilou, Yao Kun also followed, and only returned to the Central Plains after being rewarded.

古文：既而舒噜氏立其次子德光为渠帅，以总国事，寻遣使告哀，明宗为之辍朝。
现代文：接着述律氏立二儿子德光为契丹统帅，以总理国事，旋即派遣使者讣告哀闻，唐明宗为之停止上朝。
English: Next, it is said that the second son of the Ritsu clan, Deguang, was appointed as the commander of the Khitan, and as the prime minister of state affairs, he immediately sent an envoy to report the sad news, and Tang Mingzong stopped going to the court.

古文：明年正月，葬安巴坚于木叶山，伪谥曰 大圣皇帝 。
现代文：第二年正月，葬阿保机在木叶山，伪谥为 大圣皇帝 。
English: In the first month of the second year, the funeral of Ah Bao Ji took place in Mubei Mountain, and he was falsely proclaimed to be the Great Holy Emperor.

古文：安巴坚凡三子，长曰人皇王托云，即东丹王也；次曰元帅太子，即德光也；幼曰阿敦少君。
现代文：阿保机共有三个儿子，都雄健伟岸。大儿子叫人皇王突欲，就是东丹王；二儿子叫元帅太子，就是德光；小儿子叫安端少君。
English: Ah Bao Ji had three sons, all of whom were strong and powerful. The eldest son was named Ren Wang Tu Zi, which means the King of East Dan; the second son was named Marshal Prince, which means De Guang; and the youngest son was named Andouan Shoujun.

古文：德光本名耀库济，后慕中华文字，遂改焉。
现代文：德光本名叫耀屈之，后来敬慕中原文字，于是改为今名。
English: Toko's original name was Yaokujo, but he later admired the Chinese characters and changed it to his current name.

古文：唐天成初，安巴坚死，其母令德光权主牙帐，令少子阿敦少君往渤海国代托云。
现代文：后唐天成年间，阿保机去世，他的母亲让德光临时主持牙帐，让小儿子安端少君前往渤海国取代突欲。
English: After Tang Tian became an adult, Ah Bao Ji died, his mother let De Guang temporarily preside over the dental records, and let the youngest son, Anduan Shao Jun, go to Erhai Province to replace the sudden desire.

古文：托云将立，而德光素为部族所伏，又其母亦常钟爱，故因而立之。
现代文：突欲将要即位，而德光一向受部族拥戴服从，加上他的母亲也总是钟爱他，所以因而拥立了他。
English: Sudden Desire will ascend to the throne, and De Guang has always been loved and obeyed by the tribe, and his mother has always loved him, so she has embraced him.

古文：明宗时，德光遣使摩琳等三十余人来修好，又遣使为父求碑石，明宗许之，赐与甚厚，并赐其母璎珞锦彩。
现代文：明宗时，德光派遣梅老等三十多人前来中原修好，又派使者为父亲搜求碑石，明宗答应了他，赐给他优厚的礼物，并赐给他母亲璎珞锦彩。
English: At the time of Mingzong, De Guang sent more than thirty people including Mei Lao to Zhongyuan to repair the ruins, and also sent an envoy to search for a monument for his father. Mingzong agreed, gave him a generous gift, and gave his mother a brocade.

古文：自是山北安静，蕃汉不相侵扰。
现代文：从此燕山以北平安，蕃汉不相侵扰。
English: Since then, there has been peace to the north of Yanshan, and the Han Chinese have not intruded on each other.

古文：三年，德光伪改为天显元年。
现代文：天成三年，德光改元为伪元显元年。
English: In the third year of Tiancheng, Deguang changed its name to Pseudo Yuan Xuan Yuan.

古文：是岁，定州王都作乱，求援于契丹，德光陷平州，遣托诺以骑五千援都于中山，招讨使王晏球破之于曲阳，托诺走保贼城。
现代文：这一年，定州王都挑起祸乱，向契丹求援，德光于是攻陷平州，派秃馁领五千骑兵到中山援助王都，招讨使王晏球在曲阳打败了他们，秃馁逃走固守贼城。
English: That year, Dingzhou Wangdu provoked a calamity and appealed to the Khitan for help. De Guang then invaded Pingzhou, sent vultures to lead five thousand cavalry to Zhongshan to help Wangdu, and recruited Wang Yingqiu to defeat them in Quyang. The vultures fled and held on to the Thief City.

古文：其年七月，又遣特哩衮率七千骑救定州，王晏球逆战于唐河北，大破之。
现代文：那年七月，又派遣惕隐率领七千骑兵援救定州，王晏球到唐河以北迎战，大败他们。
English: In July of the same year, Titiyin was dispatched with 7,000 cavalrymen to rescue Dingzhou. Wang Yingqiu went to the north of the Tang River to fight and defeated them.

古文：幽州赵德钧以生兵接于要路，生擒特哩衮等首领五十余人献阙下。
现代文：幽州赵德钧率领精兵在要害路口拦截敌军，活捉惕隐等首领五十多人，献于宫门前面。
English: Yuzhou Zhao Dejun led the elite soldiers to intercept the enemy army at the critical junction, captured more than fifty leaders such as Ti Yin alive, and presented them in front of the palace gate.

古文：明年，王都平，擒托诺及余众，斩之。
现代文：第二年，王都被平定，擒获了秃馁以及残余贼众，杀了他们。
English: In the second year, the kings were subdued, the vultures and the remaining thieves were captured and killed.

古文：自是契丹大挫，数年不敢窥边。
现代文：从此契丹势力大受挫折，多年不敢窥视中原边境。
English: Since then, the Khitan forces have suffered great setbacks and have not dared to look over the Central Plains border for many years.

古文：尝遣纽赫美陵来求托诺骸骨，明宗怒其诈，斩之。
现代文：曾经派遣捺括梅里来唐朝乞求秃馁骸骨，唐明宗怒其奸诈虚伪，杀了他。
English: He once sent his servant Meili to the Tang Dynasty to beg for the vulture's skeleton, but the Tang Emperor Mingzong was angry at his treachery and hypocrisy and killed him.

古文：长兴二年，东丹王托云在阙下，其母继发使申报，朝廷亦优容之。
现代文：长兴二年，东丹王突欲来到宫门前，他母亲接着派遣使者申报，朝廷也优厚地接纳了他。
English: In the second year of Changxing, Dongdan Wang suddenly came to the front of the palace, his mother then sent an envoy to declare, and the court also graciously accepted him.

古文：长兴末，契丹迫云州，明宗命晋高祖为河东节度使兼北面蕃汉总管。
现代文：长兴末年，契丹迫近云州，明宗命晋高祖担任河东节度使兼北面蕃汉总管。
English: At the end of the Changxing era, when Khitan was approaching Yunnan, Mingzong Mu Jingao Zu served as the Hedong Jiedu Envoy and the head of the Northern Han Dynasty.

古文：清泰三年，晋高祖为张敬达等攻围甚急，遣指挥使何福赍表乞师，愿为臣子。
现代文：清泰三年，晋高祖被张敬达等进攻包围很急，派指挥使何福带着书表向契丹请求救兵，愿意做契丹的臣子。
English: In the third year of the Qing and Tai Dynasties, Jin Gaozu was surrounded by Zhang Jingda and other attacks, and he was in a hurry. He sent a commander to ask He Fu to take a book to the Khitan to rescue the soldiers, and he was willing to be the Khitan's vassal.

古文：德光白其母曰： 兒昨梦太原石郎发使到国，今果至矣，事符天意，必须赴之。 
现代文：契丹王德光对他母亲说 ：儿昨夜晚上做梦看见太原石郎派使者来到我国，今天果然来到了，事情合符天意，必须派兵救援他。 
English: King Deguang of Khitan told his mother: "My son had a dream last night and saw that Taiyuan Shirow had sent an envoy to our country. Today, the envoy has arrived. This is in accordance with God's will. We must send soldiers to rescue him."

古文：德光乃自率五万骑由雁门至晋阳，即日大破敬达之众于城下，寻册晋高祖为大晋皇帝，约为父子之国，割幽州管内及新、武、云、应、朔州之地以赂之，仍每岁许输帛三十万。
现代文：德光于是亲自率领五万骑兵由雁门来到晋阳，当天就在城下大破张敬达的部队。接着册立晋高祖为大晋皇帝，相约结为父子之国，晋高祖割让幽州境内及新、武、云、应、朔州之地以报答契丹，又每年送给布帛三十万。
English: Deguang then personally led fifty thousand cavalry from the Wild Goose Gate to Jinyang, and on the same day, he defeated Zhang Jingda's troops under the city. Then, he proclaimed Jinguo Zu as the Emperor of Jinguo, and agreed to be the father and son's country. Jinguo Zu ceded the territory of Yuzhou and the land of Xin, Wu, Yun, Ying and Shuozhou to repay the Khitan, and also sent three hundred thousand to Buyeo every year.

古文：时幽州赵德钧屯兵于团柏谷，遣使至幕帐，求立己为帝，以石氏世袭太原，德光对使指帐前一石曰： 我已许石郎为父子之盟，石烂可改矣。 
现代文：这时幽州赵德钧屯兵于团柏谷，派遣使者到契丹帐幕，请求封立自己做皇帝，以石氏世袭太原爵号，德光对着使者指着帐前一块大石说 ：我已答应与石郎结为父子之盟，石头烂了才可改变盟誓。 
English: At this time, Yuzhou Zhao Deyu sent an envoy to the Khitan tent, requesting to be made emperor, with the Shi clan's hereditary title of Taiyuan. Deguang pointed to a large stone in front of the tent and said to the envoy: "I have promised to make a father-son alliance with Shi Lang. Only when the stone is rotten can I change my oath."

古文：杨光远等杀张敬达降于契丹，德光戏谓光远等曰： 尔辈大是恶汉兒，不用盐酪，食却一万匹战马。 
现代文：杨光远等人杀死张敬达向契丹投降，德光开玩笑对杨光远等人说 ：你们这帮人大都是恶毒的汉人，不用盐和奶酪，吃掉了一万匹战马。 
English: Yang Guangyuan and others killed Zhang Jingda and surrendered to the Khitan. Deguang jokingly said to Yang Guangyuan and others: "Most of you are vicious Han people, without salt and cheese, you have eaten ten thousand horses."

古文：光远等大惭。
现代文：杨光远等人非常惭愧。
English: Yang Guangyuan and others are very ashamed.

古文：晋高祖南行，德光自送至潞州。
现代文：晋高祖南往，德光亲自送到潞州。
English: The ancestors of Jin Gao went to the south, and De Guang personally sent them to Zhangzhou.

古文：时赵德钧、赵延寿自潞州出降于契丹，德光锁之，令随牙帐。
现代文：这时赵德钧、赵延寿在潞州出城向契丹投降，德光封锁了城门，让他们跟随自己牙帐。
English: At this time, Zhao Deyu and Zhao Yanshou went out of the city to surrender to the Khitan in Ganzhou. Deguang sealed the city gate and let them leave with their baggage.

古文：晋高祖入洛，寻遣宰相赵莹致谢于契丹。
现代文：晋高祖进入洛阳，旋即派宰相赵莹向契丹国王致谢。
English: When Jin Gaozu entered Luoyang, he immediately sent Prime Minister Zhao Ying to thank King Qidan.

古文：天福三年，又遣宰臣冯道、左仆射刘昫等持节册德光及其母氏徽号，赍卤簿、仪伏、法服、车辂于本国行礼。
现代文：天福三年，又派遣宰相冯道、左仆射刘日句等人持节册封德光及他母亲徽号，带来卤簿、仪仗、法服、车辂在契丹国举行册封典礼。
English: In the third year of Tianfu, he also sent the prime minister Feng Dao, the left-hand man Liu Rongfu, and others to hold the festival book of the enthronement of De Guang and his mother's emblem, bringing the halo book, the ceremonial battle, the legal clothing, and the chariot to hold the enthronement ceremony in Qidan.

古文：德光大悦，寻遣使奉晋高祖为英武明义皇帝。
现代文：德光大为高兴，旋即派遣使者奉立晋高祖为英武明义皇帝。
English: Deguang was very pleased and immediately sent an envoy to have Jinguo's ancestor installed as Emperor Yingwu Mingyi.

古文：是岁，契丹改天显十一年为会同元年，以赵延寿为枢密使，升幽州为南京，以赵思温为南京留守，既而德光请晋高祖不称臣，不上表，来往缄题止用家人礼，但云 兒皇帝 ，晋祖厚赍金帛以谢之。
现代文：这一年，契丹改天显十一年为会同元年，以赵延寿为枢密使，升幽州为南京，以赵思温为南京留守。不久德光请晋高祖不需称臣子，不上奏表，来往书信开头只用家人礼节称呼，只称 儿皇帝 。晋高祖厚送黄金布帛以感谢德光。
English: In the same year, the Khitan Emperor changed Tian Xian XI Year to Hui Tong Yuan Year, with Zhao Yan Shou as the envoy, Sheng Yuzhou as Nanjing, and Zhao Si Wen as Nanjing. Soon, De Guang asked Jinguo Zu not to call him a vassal, not to put him on the report form, and to use only the family etiquette to call him at the beginning of the letters, only to call him a child emperor. Jinguo Zu generously sent gold cloth to thank De Guang.

古文：晋祖奉契丹甚至，岁时问遗，庆吊之礼，必令优厚。
现代文：晋高祖奉侍契丹国王非常周到，庆贺和吊慰的礼节，必定使之优厚。
English: The etiquette of congratulating and consoling the King of Khitan, who was served by Jingao Zu, was very thoughtful, which must have made it excellent.

古文：每北使至，即于别殿致敬。
现代文：每逢对方使者来到，就在别殿向对方致敬。
English: Whenever the other side's emissaries come, they pay homage to the other side in the annex.

古文：德光每有邀请，小不如意，则来谴责，晋祖每屈己以奉之，终晋祖世，略无衅隙。
现代文：德光每有邀请，小不如意，就来谴责，晋高祖总是屈己以奉侍他，在晋高祖整个一生中，与契丹没有一点裂痕矛盾。
English: Every time Deguang received an invitation, he would come to denounce the invitation. Jin Gaozu always bowed down to serve him. In Jin Gaozu's entire life, there was no rift or contradiction with Khitan.

古文：及少帝嗣位，遣使入契丹，德光以少帝不先承禀，擅即尊位，所赍文字，略去臣礼，大怒，形于责让，朝廷使去，即加谴辱。
现代文：到晋少帝即位后，派遣使者到契丹，德光因为少帝不先禀告他，就擅自继承帝位，所送来的文书，又略去臣子的礼节，于是大怒，加以指责，当朝廷使者离去，就加以谴责辱骂。
English: After the accession of Emperor Jin to the throne, he sent an emissary to Khitan. De Guang was furious because the young emperor did not inform him first, he inherited the imperial throne without authorization. The document he sent also omitted the etiquette of a courtier, and he criticized it. When the imperial emissary left, he condemned and insulted him.

古文：会契丹回图使乔荣北归，侍卫亲军都指挥使景延广谓荣曰： 先朝是契丹所立，嗣君乃中国自册，称孙可矣，称臣未可。
现代文：正逢契丹回图使乔荣要回北方去，晋朝侍卫亲军都指挥使景延广对乔荣说 ：晋朝先帝是契丹所立，新帝是中原自己册封，对契丹称孙就可以了，称臣则不可。
English: At the time of Khitan's return, Qiao Rong wanted to go back to the north. Jing Yanguang, the commander of the imperial guards of the Jin Dynasty, said to Qiao Rong: The first emperor of the Jin Dynasty was established by Khitan, and the new emperor was crowned by Zhongyuan himself. It is okay to call Qidan a grandson, but it is not acceptable to call him a minister.

古文：中国自有十万口横磨剑，要战即来！ 
现代文：中原自有十万口横磨剑，要想打仗就来吧！ 
English: Nakahara has 100,000 sharpened swords of its own. If you want to fight, come!

古文：荣至本国，具言其事，德光大怒，会青州杨光远叛，遣使构之。
现代文：乔荣回到契丹后，详细地汇报这事，德光大怒，遇上青州杨光远叛变晋朝，契丹便派使者勾结他。
English: After Qiaorong returned to Khitan, he reported the matter in detail. Deguang was furious. When he met Yang Guangyuan of Qingzhou, who had rebelled against the Jin Dynasty, Khitan sent an envoy to collude with him.

古文：明年冬，德光率诸部南下，开运元年春，陷祁州，直抵大河，少帝幸澶州以御之。
现代文：第二年冬天，德光率领各部南下征伐。开运元年春天，攻陷祁州，直抵大河，少帝亲临澶州以抵御契丹。
English: In the winter of the second year, Deguang led all the departments to march southward. In the spring of the first year of the year, the campaign began, attacking and capturing Bozhou and reaching Dahe. The young emperor personally visited Bozhou to resist the Khitan.

古文：其年三月，德光败于阳城，弃其车帐，乘一橐驼奔至幽州。
现代文：那年三月，德光在阳城被打败，丢弃了自己的车马，乘一匹骆驼逃到幽州。
English: In March of that year, De Guang was defeated in Yangcheng, abandoned his chariot and horse, and fled to Youzhou on a camel.

古文：因怒其失律，自大首领已下各杖数百，唯赵延寿免焉。
现代文：于是愤怒契丹自己失去律令，从大首领以下官员各打数百棍，只有赵延寿得以免打。
English: As a result, the angry Khitan himself lost the ritsuryo, and officials from the grand chief downwards were each beaten with hundreds of sticks. Only Zhao Yanshou was spared.

古文：是时，契丹连岁入寇，晋氏疲于奔命，边民被苦，几无宁日，晋相桑维翰劝少帝求和于契丹，以纾国难，少帝许之，乃遣使奉表称臣，卑辞首过。
现代文：这时，契丹连年入境寇犯，晋朝疲于奔命，边境人民深受苦难，几乎没有安宁的日子。晋朝宰相桑维翰劝少帝向契丹求和，以解除国家的苦难，少帝同意了，于是派使者奉表向契丹称臣，用谦卑的言辞承认自己的罪过。
English: At this time, the Khitan had been invading the country for years with bandits, the Jin dynasty was exhausted from running for their lives, the people on the border were suffering greatly, and there were hardly any days of peace. The prime minister of the Jin dynasty, San Weihan, advised the young emperor to sue for peace with the Khitan in order to relieve the suffering of the country. The young emperor agreed, so he sent an envoy with a letter to the Khitan, confessing his sins with humble words.

古文：使回，德光报曰： 但使桑维翰、景延广自来，并割镇、镇与我，则可通和也。 
现代文：使者回来前，德光告诉他说： 要让桑维翰、景延广亲自前来，并割让镇州、定州给我，才可以通和。 
English: Before the envoy returned, De Guang told him, "If you want to make peace, you must let Sang Wichan and Jing Yanquan come in person, and cede Zhenzhou and Dingzhou to me."

古文：朝廷知其不可，乃止。
现代文：朝廷知道讲和已不可能了，就作罢。
English: The imperial court knew that it was no longer possible to make peace, so they gave up.

古文：时契丹诸部频年出征，其国君臣稍厌兵革，德光母尝谓蕃汉臣僚曰： 南朝汉兒争得一向卧耶！
现代文：这时契丹各部连年出征，蕃国的君臣逐渐厌烦打仗，德光的母亲曾经对蕃汉臣僚说： 南朝汉儿怎就一向高枕无忧呢？
English: At this time, the various departments of the Khitan Empire were going to war year after year, and the princes and ministers of the Han state were gradually tired of fighting. De Guang's mother once said to the Han Han ministers: How is it that the Southern Han Dynasty has always had peace of mind?

古文：自古及今，惟闻汉来和蕃，不闻蕃去和汉，待伊汉兒的当回心，则我亦不惜通好也。 
现代文：从古到今，只听说汉人来和蕃，没听说蕃人去和汉，等那汉儿的确回心转意，那么我也不惜与他通好。 
English: From ancient times to the present, I have only heard of Han people coming to make peace with Han, and I have not heard of Han people going to make peace with Han. If that Han person does change his mind, then I will not hesitate to make peace with him.

古文：三年，乐寿监军王峦继有密奏，苦言瀛、鄚可取之状。
现代文：晋少帝开运三年，乐寿监军王峦接连有密奏，苦言瀛州、莫阝州可以夺取的情状。
English: Three years after the Young Emperor Jin began his reign, the military overseer of music and longevity, Wang Xi, had a succession of secret recitals, complaining bitterly about the situation in which Zhangzhou and Mogao could be seized.

古文：十月，少帝遣杜重威、李守贞等率兵经略。
现代文：十月，少帝派杜重威、李守贞等领兵进行攻夺。
English: In October, the young emperor sent Du Chongwei, Li Shouzhen and other leaders to attack.

古文：十一月，蕃将高牟翰败晋师于瀛州之北，梁汉璋死之。
现代文：十一月，蕃将高牟翰在瀛州北面打败了晋军，梁汉璋战死。
English: In November, Gong general Gao Mouhan defeated the Jin army in the north of Ganzhou, and Liang Hanzhong died in battle.

古文：契丹主闻晋既出师，自率诸部由易、定抵镇州，杜重威等自瀛州西趋常山，至中渡桥，敌已至矣，两军隔滹水而寨焉。
现代文：契丹国主听到晋朝已经出兵，便亲自率领各部由易州、定州到达镇州。晋帅杜重威等从瀛州西部奔向常山，到中渡桥时，敌军已经来到了，两军隔着滹水而扎寨。
English: When the Khitan sovereign heard that the Jin dynasty had dispatched troops, he personally led the various departments from Yizhou and Dingzhou to Zhenzhou. Jin field marshal Du Chongwei and others rushed from the west of Zhangzhou to Changshan. By the time they reached Zhongdu Bridge, the enemy army had already arrived, and the two armies were camped across Surabaya.

古文：十二月十日，杜重威率诸军降于契丹，语在《晋少帝纪》中。
现代文：十二月十日，杜重威率领各军投降了契丹，这件事记载在《晋少帝纪》中。
English: On December 10, Du Chongwei led the army to surrender to the Khitan, which was recorded in the "History of the Young Emperor Jin."

古文：十二日，德光入镇州，大犒将士。
现代文：十二月，德光进入镇州，大肆犒劳将士。
English: In December, Deguang entered Zhenzhou and lavishly rewarded the laborers.

古文：十四日，自镇州南行，中渡降军所释甲仗百万计，并令于镇州收贮，战马数万匹，长驱而北。
现代文：十四日，从镇州向南行，中渡桥投降的晋军所放下的战甲兵仗数以百万计，德光命令全收存在镇州，战马数万匹，都驱赶到北方去。
English: On the 14th, heading south from Zhenzhou, the Jin army that had surrendered at Zhongdu Bridge left behind millions of armored soldiers. De Guang ordered that they all be kept in Zhenzhou, and tens of thousands of horses were driven to the north.

古文：命张彦泽领二千骑先趋东京，遣重威部辖降兵取邢、相路前进。
现代文：命张彦泽领二千骑兵先奔向东京，派杜重威统辖投降士卒夺取邢州、相州道路前进。
English: He ordered Zhang Hikozawa to lead 2,000 cavalrymen to rush to Tokyo first, and sent Du Chongwei to lead the surrendering soldiers to seize the Bozhou and Sangzhou roads.

古文：晋少帝遣子延煦、延宝奉降表于契丹，并传国宝一纽至牙帐。
现代文：晋少帝派儿子石延煦、石延宝向契丹奉上降表，并将一枚传国宝送到契丹牙帐。
English: Emperor Jinzhao sent his sons, Shi Yanjun and Shi Yanbao, to present Qidan with a certificate of elevation and demotion, and sent a piece of national treasure to Qidan's dental bill.

古文：明年春正月朔日，德光至汴北，文武百官迎于路。
现代文：第二年春天正月一日，德光到达汴京北面，晋朝文武百官在道路两旁迎接。
English: On the first day of the first month of the second year of spring, Deguang arrived in the north of Handan, and was greeted by hundreds of Jin dynasty officials on both sides of the road.

古文：是日入宫，至昏复出，次于赤岗。
现代文：这天德光进入汴京皇宫，到夜晚又出来，驻扎在赤冈。
English: On this day, Deguang entered the Beijing Imperial Palace, and came out again at night, stationed in Akaoka.

古文：五日，宣制降晋少帝为负义侯，于黄龙府安置。
现代文：五日，德光诏令贬晋少帝为负义侯，安置在黄龙府。
English: On the fifth day, De Guangzhao decreed that the Young Emperor of Jin was a negative vassal and was placed in Huanglongfu.

古文：七日，德光复自赤岗入居于大内，分命使臣于京城及往诸道括借钱帛。
现代文：七日，德光又从赤冈进入皇宫居住，分别命令使臣在京城及各地搜括钱财。
English: On the seventh day, Toko came from Akaoka to live in the Imperial Palace, and ordered the envoys to collect money in the capital and around the country.

古文：遂命以李崧为西枢密使，以冯道为太傅，以左仆射和凝及北来翰林学士承旨张砺为宰相。
现代文：任命李崧为西厅枢密使，以冯道为太傅，以左仆射和凝及从北方来的翰林学士承旨张砺为宰相。
English: He appointed Li Qian as the Privy Envoy of the West Office, Feng Dao as Taifu, Zuofu Jia and Jing, and Hanlin Scholar from the North, Zheng Zhi as the Prime Minister.

古文：二月朔日，德光服汉法服，坐崇元殿受蕃汉朝贺，宣制大赦天下，改晋国为大辽国。
现代文：二月一日，德光穿着汉人礼服，坐在崇元殿上接受蕃汉臣僚的朝贺，发布诏令大赦天下，改晋国为大辽国。
English: On February 1, Deguang, wearing a Han Chinese ceremonial dress, sat on the throne of the Chongyuan Palace to receive the morning greetings of the Han ministers, and issued a decree of amnesty to the whole world, changing the country to the Great Liao.

古文：以赵延寿为大丞相，兼政事令，充枢密使兼中京留守。
现代文：以赵延寿为大丞相，兼政事令，充当枢密使兼中京留守。
English: With Zhao Yanshou as grand minister of war, he was also in charge of political affairs, acting as a confidential envoy and staying in Beijing.

古文：降东京为防御州，寻复为宣武军。
现代文：贬东京汴州为防御州，接着又恢复为宣武军。
English: He relegated Tokyo Bozhou to a defensive province, and then restored it to a military province.

古文：十五日，汉高祖建号于晋阳，德光闻之，削夺汉祖官爵。
现代文：十五日，后汉高祖刘知远在晋阳建立帝号，德光听到后，削夺了汉高祖的官位爵号。
English: On the fifteenth day, Liu Zhiyuan, the founder of the Han Dynasty, established the imperial title in Jinyang. After hearing this, Deguang took away the official title of the founder of the Han Dynasty.

古文：是月，晋州、潞州并归河东。
现代文：这一月，晋州、潞州全归于河东。
English: This month, Jinzhou and Zhangzhou were all returned to Hedong.

古文：时盗贼所在群起，攻劫州郡，断澶州浮梁。
现代文：这时盗贼到处蜂拥而起，攻打抢劫州郡。切断澶州浮桥。
English: At this time, the thieves swarmed everywhere, attacking and robbing the county, cutting off the Luzhou floating bridge.

古文：契丹大恐，沿河诸籓镇并以腹心镇之。
现代文：契丹人大为惊恐，沿黄河各蕃镇都派心腹将领镇压他们。
English: The Khitans were greatly alarmed, and all the towns along the Yellow River sent their subordinate generals to suppress them.

古文：三月朔日，德光坐崇元殿，行入阁之礼，睹汉家仪法之盛，大悦。
现代文：三月一日，德光御崇元殿，举行入阁之礼，看到汉人礼仪法式的隆盛，大为高兴。
English: On the first day of March, Deguang Gongsongyuan held the ceremony of entering the cabinet, and was very pleased to see the flourishing of the Chinese etiquette ceremony.

古文：以其大将萧翰为汴州节度使。
现代文：以蕃族大将萧翰为汴州节度使。
English: with the general of the Yi nationality, Xiao Han, as the envoy of the Zhangzhou Festival.

古文：十七日，德光北还。
现代文：十七日，德光回归北方。
English: On the 17th, Deguang returned to the north.

古文：发离东京，宿于赤冈，有大声如雷，起于牙帐之下，契丹自黎阳济河，次汤阴县界，有一冈，土人谓之愁死冈，德光憩于其上，谓宣徽使高勋曰： 我在上国，以打围食肉为乐，自及汉地，每每不快，我若得归本土，死亦无恨。 
现代文：刚离开东京时，住宿在赤冈，有大如巨雷的响声起于德光牙帐之下。契丹从黎阳渡过黄河，到达汤阴县界，有一土岗，当地人叫它愁死岗。德光休息在岗上，对宣徽使高勋说： 我在北方上国，以围猎食肉为乐，自从到了汉人境地，常常不甚快意，我如能回到本国土地，就是死了也无遗憾。 
English: When he had just left Tokyo, he was staying in Akaoka, and a loud noise like thunder started under Deguang's braces. The Khitan crossed the Yellow River from Liyang and reached the border of Tangyin County. There was a hillock, and the locals called it the hillock of sorrow. Deguang rested on the hillock and said to Gao Xun, the envoy of Xuan Hui: "I went to the north of the country and enjoyed hunting for meat. Since I came to the Han people, I have often been unhappy. If I could return to my native land, I would have no regrets even if I died.

古文：勋退而谓人曰： 其语偷，殆将死矣。 
现代文：高勋退下后对别人说： 大王的言语悲观，大概将要去世了。 
English: Gao Xun retreated and said to others: The great king's words are pessimistic, he will probably die.

古文：时贼帅梁晖据相州，德光亲率诸部以攻之。
现代文：这时贼寇梁晖盘踞相州，德光亲自率领各部攻击他。
English: At this time, De Guang personally led the various departments to attack him.

古文：四月四日，屠其城而去。
现代文：四月四日，屠戮相州城后离去。
English: On April 4, he left after the massacre in Sangju.

古文：德光闻河阳军乱，谓蕃汉臣僚曰： 我有三失：杀上国兵士，打草谷，一失也；天下括钱，二失也；不寻遣节度使归籓，三失也。 
现代文：德光听到河阳军士叛乱，对蕃汉臣僚说： 我有三处过失：诛杀上国兵士，打草谷，这是一失；在天下搜括钱财，这是二失；不立即派遣节度使回归藩镇，这是三失。 
English: Hearing the rebellion of Sergeant Heyang, De Guang said to the ministers of the Han Dynasty: I have three faults: killing the soldiers of Shangguo and attacking Caozhou Valley, this is a mistake; collecting money from all over the world, this is a second mistake; and not immediately sending a detachment to return to the town, this is a third mistake.

古文：十六日，次于栾城县杀虎林之侧，时德光已得寒热疾数日矣，命部人赍酒脯，祷于得疾之地。
现代文：十六日，驻扎在栾城县杀胡林的旁边，这时德光已得寒热病几天了，命令胡人带着酒和肉，在得病的地方祈祷。
English: On the 16th, he was stationed next to Zhu Hulin in Lucheng County. At this time, Deguang had been suffering from cold and fever for several days. He ordered the Hu people to bring wine and meat and pray in the place where they were ill.

古文：十八日晡时，有大星落于穹庐之前，若迸火而散，德光见之，西望而唾，连呼曰： 刘知远灭，刘知远灭！ 
现代文：十八日晚饭时分，有大星陨落在帐篷前面，像迸发的火花一样消散。德光看到，向西望着吐口水，连声高叫道： 刘知远死，刘知远死！ 
English: At dinnertime on the 18th, a large star fell in front of the tent and dissipated like a spark. De Guang saw it, looked westward, spat, and shouted loudly: Liu Zhiyuan is dead, Liu Zhiyuan is dead!

古文：是月二十一日卒，时年四十六，主契丹凡二十二年。
现代文：这月二十一日德光去世，时年四十六岁，主持契丹国政共二十二年。
English: On the 21st of this month, Deguang died at the age of 46, having presided over the Qidan government for a total of 22 years.

古文：契丹人破其尸，摘去肠胃，以盐沃之，载而北去，汉人目之为 帝羓 焉。
现代文：契丹人剖开他的腹部，挖去肠胃，用盐腌着尸体，用车子运回北方，汉人把他的尸体叫作 帝羊巴 。
English: The Khitans cut open his abdomen, removed his intestines and stomach, covered his body with salt, and transported it back to the north by car. The Chinese called his corpse "Emperor Yangba."

