古文：晋荡公护字萨保，太祖之兄邵惠公颢少子也。
现代文：晋荡公宇文护字萨保，是太祖的哥哥邵惠公宇文颢的小儿子。
English: Jinguang Gongwu Wenyu, also known as Sa Bao, was the youngest son of Shao Hui's older brother, Gongwu Wenyu.

古文：幼方正有志度，特为德皇帝所爱，异与诸兄。
现代文：他年幼时正直有气度，特别受到德皇帝的喜爱，不同于各位兄长。
English: When he was young, he had an honest demeanor and was especially loved by the German emperor, unlike his brothers.

古文：年十一，惠公薨，隋诸父在葛荣军中。
现代文：十一岁时邵惠公去世，他随各位叔伯父在葛荣的军队中。
English: At the age of eleven, Shao Huigong died, and he followed his uncles in Ge Rong's army.

古文：容败，迁晋阳。
现代文：葛荣战败后，他迁到晋阳。
English: After Ge Rong's defeat, he moved to Jinyang.

古文：太祖之入关也，护以年小不从。
现代文：太祖进入关中时，宇文护因为年幼没有跟随。
English: When the great-grandfather entered Guanzhong, Umengong didn't follow because he was too young.

古文：普泰初，自晋阳至平凉，时年十七。
现代文：普泰初年，他从晋阳来到平凉，当时十七岁。
English: In the first year of Putai, he came from Jinyang to Pingliang at the age of seventeen.

古文：太祖诸子并幼，遂委护以家务，内外不严而肃。
现代文：太祖的几位儿子都年幼，于是就将家中的事务交给宇文护管理，全家上下不需严格整治就庄敬和睦。
English: Several of the great-grandfather's sons were young, so he handed over the affairs of the family to the management of Uwen, and the whole family was dignified and harmonious without strict rectification.

古文：太祖尝叹曰： 此儿志度类我。 
现代文：太祖曾感叹说： 这个孩子的志量像我。 
English: The great-grandfather once lamented, "This child's ambition is just like mine.

古文：及出临夏州，留护事贺拔岳。岳之被害，太祖至平凉，以护为都督。
现代文：到太祖出征夏州时，留下宇文护效力于贺拔压贺拔岳被害后，太祖到平凉，任命宇文护为都督。
English: When the great-great-grandfather went to fight in Xiazhou, he left Uwenguo to be effective in He Badu and after He Badu was damaged, the great-great-grandfather went to Pingliang and appointed Uwenguo as the governor.

古文：从征侯莫陈悦，破之。
现代文：跟随太祖征讨侯莫陈悦，击败了他。
English: He defeated Hou Mo Chen Yue by following the Great Ancestor's conquest.

古文：后以迎魏帝功，封水池县伯，邑五百户。
现代文：后来因为迎奉魏帝的功劳，被封为水池县伯，食邑五百户。
English: Later, because of the merit of welcoming Emperor Wei, it was awarded the title of Shui Chi County, with 500 households.

古文：大统初，加通直散骑常侍、征虏将军。
现代文：大统初年，加授通直散骑常侍、征虏将军。
English: In the first year of the Great Reunification, he was awarded the title of "General of Conscripts" and became a regular attendant.

古文：以预定乐勋，进爵为公，增邑通前一千户。
现代文：因从前立下的功勋，升爵位为公，增加的食邑加上原先的食邑共一千户。
English: Due to the merits established in the past, the promotion to knighthood is public, and the increase in food villages plus the original food villages totaled one thousand households.

古文：从太祖擒窦泰，复弘农，破沙苑，战河桥，并有功。
现代文：他跟随太祖擒获窦泰，收复弘农，攻破沙苑，作战河桥，都立下了战功。
English: He followed his great-great-grandfather in conquering Dou Tai, recovering Hong Nong, conquering Sha Yuan, and fighting River Bridge, all of which made great contributions to the war.

古文：迁镇东将军、大都督。
现代文：升任镇束将军、大都督。
English: Promoted to general of the town of Zenzaku and grand governor of the capital.

古文：八年，进车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：大统八年，升为车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: In the eighth year of the Great Reunification, he was promoted to General of Chariot and Cavalry and the Third Division of Ceremonial Affairs.

古文：邙山之役，护率众先锋，为敌人所围，都督侯伏侯龙恩挺身扞御，方得免。
现代文：在亡口山战役中，宇文护率领军队作为先锋，被敌军围困，都督侯伏侯龙恩挺身抵御，这才得以逃脱。
English: In the Battle of Mount Ubukuchiyama, Umenomori led the army as the vanguard and was besieged by the enemy army. It was only after the viceroy, Lord Fuhōron, defended himself that he was able to escape.

古文：是时，赵贵等军亦退，太祖遂班师。
现代文：当时赵贵等人的军队也后退，太祖于是撤回大军。
English: At that time, the army of Zhao Gui and others also retreated, so Taizu withdrew his large army.

古文：护坐免官，寻复本位。
现代文：宇文护因罪免除官职，不久又恢复了原来的官位。
English: As a result of his crime, Uwen Rong was relieved of his official duties, but he was soon reinstated to his former position.

古文：十二年，加骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进封中山公，增邑四百户。
现代文：大统十二年，加授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司，进拜为中山公，增加采邑四百户。
English: In the 12th year of the Great Reunification, he was awarded the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of Kaifu and the title of Sanji, and the title of Zhongshan was conferred on him, increasing the number of counties by 400.

古文：十五年，出镇河东，迁大将军。
现代文：大统十五年，外出镇守河塞，升任大将军。
English: In the fifteenth year of unification, he went out to guard the river dam and was promoted to general.

古文：与于谨征江陵，护率轻骑为先锋，昼夜兼行，乃遣裨将攻梁临边城镇，并拔之。
现代文：同工崖一起出征辽陆，室塞护率领轻装骑兵为先锋，昼夜不停地前进，派裨将进攻梁周边城镇，全都攻下。
English: Together with Gongya, they set out for Liaolou. Shuxie Guo led the light cavalry as the vanguard, advancing day and night. The troops would attack the towns around Liang and capture them all.

古文：并擒其候骑，进兵径至江陵城下。
现代文：并擒获了江陵派出的侦察骑兵，进军直达江陵城下。
English: and captured the reconnaissance cavalry sent from Gangneung and marched straight to the town of Gangneung.

古文：城中不意兵至，惶窘失图。
现代文：江陵城中没有料到大军已到，惊慌失措。
English: Gangneung City did not expect the arrival of a large army and panicked.

古文：护又遣骑二千断江津，收舟舰以待。
现代文：宇文护又派二千骑兵切断长江渡口，收缴舟船等待大军。
English: Uwen Rong also sent two thousand cavalry to cut off the Yangtze River ferry and seize the boats waiting for the army.

古文：大军之至，围而克之。
现代文：大军到达后，包围并攻克了江陵城。
English: After the large army arrived, it surrounded and conquered Jiangling City.

古文：以功封子会为江陵公。
现代文：因为宇文护的功劳他的儿子宇文会被封为江陵公。
English: Because of the merits of Uwen Guo, his son Uwen would be named the Duke of Gangneung.

古文：初，襄阳蛮帅向天保等万有余落，恃险作梗。
现代文：当初，襄阳蛮族首领向天保等人有一万多个部落，他们凭藉险要的地势干扰大军。
English: At first, Xiangyang barbarian leader Xiang Tianbao and others had more than 10,000 tribes, and they used the precarious terrain to interfere with the large army.

古文：及师还，护率军讨平之。
现代文：等到大军回师时，宇文护率领军队讨伐平定了他们。
English: When the large army returned to the division, Uwen Rong led the army to fight and leveled them.

古文：初行六官，拜小司空。
现代文：朝廷开始实行六卿官制，宇文护被任为小司空。
English: The Imperial Court began to implement the six-kings system of government, and Umenomori was appointed as a petty officer.

古文：太祖西巡至牵屯山，遇疾，驰驿召护。
现代文：太祖西巡到牵屯山，生了疾病，通过驿站急召字文护。
English: The great-great-grandfather went on a tour to Tutun Mountain, got sick, and was urgently summoned to Wenbao through the post station.

古文：护至泾州见太祖，而太祖疾已绵笃。
现代文：宇文护到泾州会见太祖时，太祖的病情已经危急。
English: When Uwenguo went to Zhangzhou to meet the great-grandfather, the great-grandfather's condition was already critical.

古文：谓护曰： 吾形容若此，必是不济。
现代文：太祖对宇文护说： 我的身体已到这种地步，肯定是不行了。
English: My great-grandfather said to Umenosuke, "My body has reached this stage, I definitely can't do it anymore.

古文：诸子幼小，寇贼未宁，天下之事，属之于汝，宜勉力以成吾志。 护涕泣奉命。
现代文：我的儿子们年纪幼小，寇贼没有被平息，天下的大事，托付给你，你要努力完成我的志愿。 宇文护哭泣着接受了太祖的遣命。
English: My sons are young, the bandits have not been subdued, the world's great affairs have been entrusted to you, you must work hard to fulfill my will.Uwen You wept and accepted the death of his great-grandfather.

古文：行至云阳而太祖崩。
现代文：走到云阳时太祖去世。
English: When he reached Yunyang, his great-grandfather passed away.

古文：护秘之，至长安乃发丧。
现代文：宇文护隐瞒了太祖去世的消息，到达长安后才发布太祖的死讯。
English: Uwen Guo concealed the news of the death of his great-grandfather and only released the news of his great-grandfather's death after arriving in Chang'an.

古文：时嗣子冲弱，强寇在近，人情不安。
现代文：当时太祖的嫡长子年幼，强敌就在附近，人心不安。
English: At that time, the great-grandfather's eldest son was young, a strong enemy was nearby, and his heart was uneasy.

古文：护纲纪内外，抚循文武，于是众心乃定。
现代文：宇文护执领内外大政，抚慰文武官吏，于是人心才安定下来。
English: It was only after Uwenroo presided over major domestic and foreign policies and comforted civil and military officials that the people's hearts settled down.

古文：先是，太祖常云 我得胡力 。
现代文：此前，太祖经常说 我有胡人相助 。
English: Previously, the great-grandfather often said that I had the help of others.

古文：当时莫晓其旨，至是，人以护字当之。
现代文：当时没有人能明白这句话的意思，到这时，人们以宇文护的字来解释它。
English: At that time, no one could understand the meaning of this sentence. At this time, people explained it with the word of Yuwenguo.

古文：寻拜柱国。太祖山陵毕，护以天命有归，遣人讽魏帝，遂行禅代之事。
现代文：不久宇文护被任为柱国太祖下葬后，宇文护认为天命有了归依，派人讽谕魏帝，于是发生了惮让的事情。
English: Soon after being appointed to bury the great-grandfather of Zhu Guo, Uwenguo thought it was his destiny to convert, so he sent someone to ridicule Emperor Wei, which led to the abdication.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，拜大司马，封晋国公，邑一万户。
现代文：孝闵帝即位后，室塞谨拜任为大司马，封置凰公，食邑一万户。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaojun, Murosai was appointed as the grand steward, sealed Hoo Gong, and fed ten thousand households.

古文：赵贵、独孤信等谋袭护，护因贵入朝，遂执之，党与皆伏诛。
现代文：叠遗、周皿值等人谋划袭击室塞芦，室塞谨趁赵岂入朝时，逮捕了趟贵，他的党羽也都被诛杀。
English: Juye, Zhou, and others plotted to attack Zhaozhe. Zhaozhe took advantage of Zhao's accession to the imperial court to arrest Zhi Gui, and all of his followers were killed.

古文：拜大冢宰。
现代文：宇文护被拜任为大冢宰。
English: The imperial court made him the grand secretary.

古文：时司会李植、军司马孙恒等，在太祖之朝，久居权要。
现代文：当时司会李植、军司马孙恒等人，在太祖时，就长久地位居要职。
English: At that time, Secretary Li Zhi, Military Secretary Ma Sunheng and others held important positions for a long time in the time of the great-grandfather.

古文：见护执政，恐不见容。
现代文：他们见宇文护执掌朝政，担心主塞墨容不下他们。
English: They saw that Uwenho was in charge of the imperial government, and they were worried that the emperor would not tolerate them.

古文：乃密要宫伯乙弗凤、张光洛、贺拔提、元进等为腹心，说帝曰： 护诛贵以来，威权日盛，谋臣宿将，争往附之，大小政事，皆决于护。
现代文：就在暗中结交宫伯乙弗凤、张光洛、贺龌、五进等人作为心腹，他们劝孝闵帝说： 圭塞盏自从杀掉盘遗以来，威望和权力日益盛大，出谋划策的文官和久经沙场的武将，都争先恐后地依附他，大大小小的政事，都由宇文护来决定。
English: He secretly made friends with court noble Yifu Feng, Zhang Guangluo, He Tong, Wujin and others as confidants, and they advised Emperor Xiao Rong to say: Since Guise Zhan killed Pan Yi, his prestige and power have become increasingly grand. Civil servants who have made plans and generals who have been through the battlefield are all scrambling to follow him. All political affairs, big and small, are decided by Uwen Guo.

古文：以臣观之，将不守臣节，恐其滋蔓，愿早图之。 
现代文：根据我们的观察，他迟早不会遵守作为臣下应有的节操，恐怕这种情况还会滋长蔓延，希望早点想办法对付他。 孝闵童认为他们的话很对。
English: According to our observation, sooner or later he will not abide by the discipline as a vassal, I am afraid that this situation will continue to grow and spread, I hope to find a way to deal with him as soon as possible.

古文：帝然其言。凤等又曰： 以先王之圣明，犹委植、恒以朝政，今若左提右挈，何向不成。
现代文：乙弗凤等人又说： 凭先帝的圣明，尚且把朝政委交给李植、孙恒，如今若是提挈他们二人，有什么事办不成。
English: Yifu Feng and others also said, "According to the wisdom of the previous emperor, even though he handed over the Political Commissariat to Li Zhi and Sun Heng, if he were to hand them over now, nothing would be accomplished.

古文：且晋公常云我今夹辅陛下，欲行周公之事。
现代文：而且晋公还经常说我现在辅佐陛下，想效仿周公行事。
English: Moreover, Shingong also often said that I am now assisting His Majesty and want to follow Zhou Gong's example.

古文：臣闻周公摄政七年，然后复子明辟，陛下今日，岂能七年若此乎。
现代文：我们听说周公代理政事七年，然后才将朝政交还给盛王，陛下现在怎么能在七年内像这样呢。
English: We have heard that Zhou Gong acted as regent for seven years before returning the imperial government to King Sheng. How can His Majesty act like this for seven years?

古文：深愿不疑。 帝愈信之。
现代文：殷切地希望你不要犹豫。 孝闵帝更加信任他们。
English: I fervently hope that you will not hesitate, and that the emperor will have more confidence in them.

古文：数将武士于后园讲习，为执缚之势。
现代文：多次带着武士在皇宫后花园中练兵习武，操练捉人捆人的动作。
English: Many times he took samurai with him to practice martial arts in the back garden of the Imperial Palace, practicing the action of catching and tying people.

古文：护微知之，乃出植为梁州刺史，恒为潼州刺史，欲遏其谋。
现代文：宇文护在暗中察觉到了造件事，于是让李植离开京城担任梁州刺史，孙恒去担任潼州刺史，想以此阻止他们的阴谋。
English: Yu Wengu secretly noticed the plot, so he let Li Zhi leave Beijing to serve as Liangzhou magistrate, and Sun Heng to serve as Zhangzhou magistrate, hoping to stop their plot.

古文：后帝思植等，每欲召之。
现代文：后来孝闵帝思念李植等人，经常想召见他们。
English: Later, Emperor Xiaojun missed Li Zhi and others, and often wanted to see them.

古文：护谏曰： 天下至亲，不过兄弟。
现代文：宇文护规劝说： 天下最亲的人，不会超过兄弟。
English: Uwen Zhou persuaded: The closest person in the world will not exceed his brother.

古文：若兄弟自构嫌隙，他人何易可亲。
现代文：如果兄弟之间还互相猜疑，其他的人又怎么能容易轻信呢。
English: If brothers are still suspicious of each other, how can others be so gullible?

古文：太祖以陛下富于春秋，顾命托臣以后事。
现代文：太祖因为陛下年幼，遣命把后事托付给我。
English: My great-grandfather, because His Majesty was young, entrusted me with the succession.

古文：臣既情兼家国，寔愿竭其股肱。
现代文：我对你既然同时具备有私家的亲情和国家的深情，实在愿意竭尽全力辅佐你。
English: Since I have both a personal affinity for you and a deep affection for the country, I am really willing to do my best to assist you.

古文：若使陛下亲览万机，威加四海，臣死之日，犹生之年。
现代文：如果能使陛下亲自主持繁多的军国大事，威望施加于海内，我即使死了，也还好像活着。
English: If I can make Your Majesty personally preside over numerous military and national events, and exert prestige at sea, even if I die, I will still seem to be alive.

古文：但恐除臣之后，奸回得逞其欲，非唯不利陛下，亦恐社稷危亡。
现代文：衹担心把我除掉以后，奸诈的小人可以逞行他们的私欲，不仅对陛下没有好处，而且国家恐怕也会危亡。
English: I am afraid that if I am removed, treacherous villains will be able to pursue their selfish desires, which will not only be of no benefit to His Majesty, but will also endanger the country.

古文：臣所以勤勤恳恳，干触天威者，但不负太祖之顾托，保安国家之鼎祚耳。
现代文：我之所以要勤勤恳恳，冒犯陛下的天威，衹是为了不辜负太祖的重托，保全国家的政权而已。
English: The reason why I have to be diligent and earnest and offend His Majesty's divine power is to live up to my great-grandfather's trust and preserve the country's political power.

古文：不意陛下不照愚臣款诚，忽生疑阻。
现代文：没想到陛下不明白我的一片诚心，突然产生了怀疑隔阂。
English: I didn't expect that His Majesty didn't understand my sincerity, and suddenly there was suspicion and estrangement.

古文：且臣既为天子兄，复为国家宰辅，知更何求而怀冀望。
现代文：况且我既然是天子的哥哥，又是国家的宰相，还有什么贪求和奢望呢。
English: Moreover, since I am the elder brother of the Son of Heaven and the prime minister of the country, what other desires and longings do I have?

古文：伏愿陛下有以明臣，无惑谗人之口。 因泣涕，久之乃止。
现代文：我深切希望陛下了解我，不要被谗臣的话所迷惑。 说完流着眼泪哭泣，很长时间才停止。
English: I sincerely hope that His Majesty will understand me and not be confused by the words of a vassal. After I finished speaking, I shed tears and wept for a long time.

古文：帝犹猜之。
现代文：孝闵帝仍然怀疑他。
English: Emperor Xiaozhun still suspected him.

古文：凤等益惧，密谋滋甚。
现代文：乙弗凤等人更加害怕，他们的密谋也加紧进行。
English: Yifu Feng and the others were even more afraid, and their plotting intensified.

古文：遂克日将召群公入燕，执护诛之。
现代文：终于约定时间打算召集各位大臣入宫饮宴，趁机逮捕杀掉室塞厘。
English: Finally, they planned to convene the ministers for a banquet in the palace at an agreed time, and take advantage of the opportunity to arrest and kill Muroseli.

古文：光洛具以其前后谋告护，护乃召柱国贺兰祥、小司马尉迟纲等，以凤谋告之。
现代文：退旦巳络将他们前后的密谋告诉了宇文护，圭塞羞于是召集柱国贺兰祥、小司马尉迟纲等人，将乙弗凤等人的密谋告诉他们。
English: Returning to the capital, he told Uwen Rong about their conspiracy, and Guisei then called up Zhuo Guo, Helan Xiang, Xiao Sima, Chi Gang, and others to tell them about the conspiracy of Yifu Feng and others.

古文：祥等并劝护废帝。
现代文：贺菌搓等人都劝主塞护废掉茎盟童。
English: He Myobing and others all advised the principal to discard the child.

古文：时纲总领禁兵，护乃遣纲入宫，召凤等议事，及出，以次执送护第。
现代文：当时尉辎统领着禁军，圭塞盏就派慰迟翅进入宫中，召集乙弗凤等商议国事，等他们出宫时，依次将他们抓送到宇文护的府第。
English: At that time, Gu Xizhen led the forbidden army, and Gu Xizhen sent the consolers to enter the palace, and summoned Yifu Feng and others to discuss state affairs. When they left the palace, they were arrested one by one and sent to the palace of Yuwen Guo.

古文：因罢散宿卫兵，遣祥逼帝，幽于旧邸。
现代文：还趁机遣散了宫中值宿的卫兵，派贺兰祥逼迫孝闵帝退位，将他幽禁在即位前居住的府第中。
English: He disbanded the guards and sent Horan Xiang to force Emperor Xuan to abdicate, imprisoning him in his former residence.

古文：于是召诸公卿毕集，护流涕谓曰： 先王起自布衣，躬亲行阵，勤劳王业，三十余年。
现代文：于是宇文护把各位王公全部召集起来，流着泪对他们说： 先帝从布衣起家，亲自率军征战，为帝王的大业勤劳，前后三十多年。
English: Therefore, Umengong gathered all the princes together and said to them with tears streaming down his face, "The former emperor started from cloth, led the army to war, and worked diligently for the great cause of the emperor for more than thirty years.

古文：寇贼未平，奄弃万国。
现代文：寇贼没有平定，就忽然去世。
English: The robber was not subdued and died suddenly.

古文：寡人地则犹子，亲受顾命。
现代文：寡人的身份是太祖的亲侄子，亲自领受他的临终遣命。
English: One of them was the great-grandfather's nephew, who received his last rites in person.

古文：以略阳公既居正嫡，与公等立而奉之，革魏兴周，为四海主。
现代文：因为略阳公身居嫡长子之位，我与你们一起奉立他，巾除西魏建立北周，成为四海的君主。
English: Because Prince Liangyang is the eldest legitimate son, I, together with you, have appointed him to establish the Northern Zhou Dynasty in addition to the Western Wei Dynasty and become the ruler of the four seas.

古文：自即位以来，荒淫无度，昵近群小，疏忌骨肉，大臣重将，咸欲诛夷。
现代文：自从他即位以来，荒淫无度，亲近小人，疏远忌恨骨肉至亲，对大臣重将，都想杀掉。
English: Since he ascended to the throne, he has been excessively debauched, close to villains, estranged from and hated his closest relatives, and has wanted to kill important ministers.

古文：若此谋遂行，社稷必致倾覆。
现代文：如果他这个圆谋最终实现，国家必定会导致灭亡。
English: If this plot succeeds, the country will inevitably be overthrown.

古文：寡人若死，将何面目以见先王。
现代文：寡人如果死去，将有什么面目去见先帝。
English: If you die, you will have no face to face with the former emperor.

古文：今日宁负略阳，不负社稷尔。
现代文：今天宁可对不住略阳公，也不能对不起国家了。
English: Today, it is better to feel sorry for Yang Gong than to feel sorry for the country.

古文：宁都公年德兼茂，仁孝圣慈，四海归心，万方注意。
现代文：宁都公年轻德盛，仁孝圣慈，天下的百姓对他心悦诚服，万方的人民对他倾心向往。
English: Ningdu Gong is young, virtuous, benevolent, filial and holy. People all over the world are pleased with him, and people from all over the world are yearning for him.

古文：今欲废昏立明，公等以为如何？ 群臣咸曰： 此公之家事，敢不惟命是听。 于是斩凤等于门外，并诛植、恒等。
现代文：现在我想废黜昏君奉立明主，你们认为如何? 公卿大臣们都说： 这是您的家事，怎敢不听从您的命令。 于是将乙弗凤等人斩杀在宫，并诛杀了李植、孙恒等人。
English: Now I want to dethrone the dim-witted emperor and install a bright master, what do you think? All the ministers said, "This is your family business, how dare you disobey your orders," so they killed Yifu Feng and others in the palace, and killed Li Zhi, Sun Heng and others.

古文：寻亦弒帝。
现代文：不久也杀死了孝闵帝。
English: Soon after, he also killed Emperor Gaozong.

古文：迎世宗于岐州而立之。
现代文：从岐州迎来世宗立他为皇帝。
English: From Qizhou, Shizong ushered him in as emperor.

古文：二年，拜太师，赐辂车冕服。
现代文：明帝二年，任命宇文护为太师，赐给他辂车冕服。
English: In the second year of the Ming Dynasty, he appointed Uwen Guo as Grand Master and gave him the crowned chariot robe.

古文：封子至为崇业郡公。
现代文：封他的儿子字文至为崇业郡公。
English: His son, Zhiwen, became the county magistrate of Chongye County.

古文：初改雍州刺史为牧，以护为之，并赐金石之乐。
现代文：开始将雍州刺史改为雍州牧，任命宇文护担任雍州牧，并赐给他钟磬类的乐器。
English: He began to change the title of Yongzhou chief historian to Yongzhou magistrate, appointed Yu Wenguo as Yongzhou magistrate, and gave him a bell-like musical instrument.

古文：武成元年，护上表归政，帝许之。
现代文：武成元年，宇文护上表归还政权，明帝答应了他。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Wucheng, Emperor Uwen protected him and returned him to power. Emperor Ming agreed to this.

古文：军国大事尚委于护。
现代文：但军国大事仍然交给宇文护统管。
English: However, military affairs were still handed over to Umenomori.

古文：帝性聪睿，有识量，护深惮之。
现代文：明帝聪明机敏，有见识度量，宇文护很怕他。
English: Emperor Ming was intelligent, wise, insightful, and prudent. Wu Wenguang was very afraid of him.

古文：有李安者，本以鼎俎得宠于护，稍被升擢，位至膳部下大夫。
现代文：有位叫李安的人，原本因烹调受到字文护的宠幸，逐渐被提升，担任了膳部下大夫的官职。
English: A man named Li An, who was originally favored by the guardian of the Chinese characters for his cooking, was gradually promoted and served as the official post of the doctor under the Ministry of Food.

古文：至是，护乃密令安因进食于帝，加以毒药。
现代文：到此时，宇文护就在暗中命令李安趁送食给明帝的机会，在裹面加入毒药。
English: At this time, Yu Wenzhou secretly ordered Li An to take advantage of the opportunity to send food to Emperor Ming to add poison to the wrapped noodles.

古文：帝遂寝疾而崩。
现代文：明帝于是病倒去世。
English: Emperor Ming fell ill and died.

古文：护立高祖，百官总己以听于护。
现代文：字文护立高祖为皇帝，百官各统己职听命于宇文护。
English: Zhiwenguo made Gao Zu the emperor, and all the officials obeyed the orders of Uwenguo.

古文：自太祖为丞相，立左右十二军，总属相府。
现代文：从太祖担任丞相开始，就设立了左右十二军，全部隶属于相府。
English: From the time that Taizu served as chancellor, the Left and Right Twelfth Armies were established, all of which were subordinate to the shofu.

古文：太祖崩后，皆受护处分，凡所征发，非护书不行。
现代文：太祖死后，十二军都受宇塞护统领，凡是征集调遣，不是室塞护的手令就不能施行。
English: After the death of the great-grandfather, the 12 armies were all under the command of Uze no kami. If any troops were mobilized, they could not be carried out unless ordered by Uze no kami.

古文：护第屯兵禁卫，盛于宫阙。
现代文：宇文护府第驻守的禁卫部队，多过了宫中。
English: The number of guards stationed in the palace of Umeno-no-mikoto exceeded that of the palace.

古文：事无巨细，皆先断后闻。保定元年，以护为都督中外诸军事，令五府总于天官。
现代文：事情不论大小，都由宇文护先决定后再奏闻皇上保定元年，任命宇文护为都督中外诸军事，命令五府全都隶属于天官府。
English: In the first year of Emperor Baoding's reign, he appointed Umenomori as the military governor of the five provinces, and ordered that all five provinces should be subordinated to the imperial government.

古文：或有希护旨，云周公德重，鲁立文王之庙，以护功比周公，宜用此礼。
现代文：有人迎合宇文护的旨意，说周公德高望重，在鲁国建立文王的祭庙，认为字文护的功绩与周公相等齐，也应该采用这种礼仪。
English: Some people cater to the will of King Wen, saying that Zhou Gong's virtue is highly respected, and build a temple for King Wen in Lu. They believe that the merits of King Wen and Zhou Gong are equal, and this etiquette should also be adopted.

古文：于是诏于同州晋国第，立德皇帝别庙，使护祭焉。
现代文：于是武帝下令在同州晋国的府第，设立德皇帝的别庙，让宇文护在那裹祭祀。
English: Therefore, Emperor Wu ordered the establishment of a separate temple for the German Emperor in the capital of Jin Province in the same province, where Umengo would be enshrined.

古文：三年，诏曰： 大冢宰晋国公，智周万物，道济天下，所以克成我帝业，安养我苍生。
现代文：保定三年，武帝下韶说： 大冢宰晋国公，智谋周遍万物，道德接济天下，所以能完成我大周的帝王之业，安定抚养我大周的苍生。
English: In the third year of Baoding, Emperor Wu made a speech and said: "Since I am the King of Jin, and since wisdom pervades all things and morality sustains the world, I am able to complete my great-grandfather's imperial career and bring up my great-grandfather's children in a stable manner.

古文：况亲则懿昆，任当元辅，而可同班群品，齐位众臣！
现代文：况且从亲属关系上讲他是我的哥哥，从职位上讲他是朝廷的重臣，怎么可以与各位官员的品级相同，同众位大臣的地位相等!
English: Moreover, from the point of view of kinship, he is my elder brother, and from the point of view of his position, he is the chief minister of the imperial court, how can he have the same rank as the officials and the same status as the ministers!

古文：自今诏诰及百司文书，并不得称公名，以彰殊礼。 护抗表固让。
现代文：从今以后凡是诏令诰书及所有官署的文书中，都不能直呼晋国公的名字，以此显示对他特殊的礼节。 宇文护上抗表坚决推辞。
English: From now on, the name of the Duke of Jin could no longer be used in all official documents, including the imperial edict and all official documents, in order to show special courtesy to him.

古文：初，太祖创业，即与突厥和亲，谋为掎角，共图高氏。
现代文：当初，太祖开创基业，就与突厥和睦亲善，打算同突厥互为支援，共同对付高氏。
English: At the beginning, when the great-grandfather founded the foundation, he made peace and friendship with the Turks, intending to support each other with the Turks and jointly deal with the Gao clan.

古文：是年，乃遣柱国杨忠与突厥东伐。
现代文：在这一年，派柱国杨忠与突厥一同东伐。
English: In this year, Yang Zhong, a pillar country, went to the East together with the Turks.

古文：破齐长城，至并州而还。
现代文：攻破了齐国的长城，到并州后返回。
English: He broke through the Great Wall of Qi, and returned to the state after annexation.

古文：期后年更举，南北相应。
现代文：同突厥约定在第二年再度举兵，南北相互呼应。
English: It was agreed with the Turks to raise the troops again in the following year, and the North and South responded to each other.

古文：齐主大惧。
现代文：齐主大为恐惧。
English: Beiqi Tianzi was very scared.

古文：先是，护母阎姬与皇第四姑及诸戚属，并没在齐，皆被幽絷。
现代文：在此前，宇文护的母亲阎姬与皇第四姑及亲属，都沦落在北齐，全部被幽禁着。
English: Prior to this, Yan Ji, the mother of Uwen Rong, and the emperor's fourth aunt and relatives had all fallen into Northern Qi and were all imprisoned.

古文：护居宰相之后，每遣间使寻求，莫知音息。
现代文：宇文护当上宰相后，常常派密使寻找，但探听不到他们的音讯。
English: After Umengo became prime minister, he often sent emissaries to look for them, but they were never heard from.

古文：至是，并许还朝，且请和好。
现代文：到这个时候，齐国答应将他们全都送回，并请求双方和睦友好。
English: At this time, the Northern Qi allowed them to return to the North, thereby requesting the two countries to be on good terms.

古文：四年，皇姑先至。
现代文：保定四年，皇姑先行回到京城。
English: After four years of Baoding, the Empress Dowager came back first.

古文：齐主以护既当权重，乃留其母，以为后图。
现代文：齐主因为宇文护既是执政的权臣，就留住他的母亲，以便为以后作打算。
English: The lord of Qi kept his mother to plan for the future, since Uwenguo was the ruling vassal.

古文：仍令人为阎作书报护曰：
现代文：并派人替阎姬写信给宇文护说：
English: And sent someone to write a letter to Yu Wenzhou on behalf of Yan Ji, saying:

古文：天地隔塞，子母异所，三十余年，存亡断绝，肝肠之痛，不能自胜。
现代文：天地阻塞，我们母子身处在不同的地方，已有三十多年，存亡的消息相互断绝，心中万分痛苦，无法忍受。
English: Heaven and earth are blocked, our mother and son have been in different places for more than thirty years, the news of our existence and death have been cut off from each other, and our hearts are in great pain, which is unbearable.

古文：想汝悲思之怀，复何可处。
现代文：想象你悲痛思念的心情，又怎么能够安定。
English: Imagine your grief and longing mood, how can you be stable.

古文：吾自念十九入汝家，今已八十矣。
现代文：我自思十九岁时进入你家，现在已经八十岁了。
English: I remember coming to your house when I was nineteen, and I am now eighty years old.

古文：既逢丧乱，备尝艰阻。恒冀汝等长成，得见一日安乐。
现代文：正好遇上动乱的年代，尝尽艰难险阻，一直希望你们长大成人，能够看到一天的安乐。
English: It just so happens that we are living in turbulent times, and we have been experiencing all kinds of hardships and obstacles. I have always hoped that you would grow up and see a day of peace and happiness.

古文：何期罪衅深重，存没分离。
现代文：怎能料到因为罪恶深重，我们生死分离。
English: How can we expect that because of our serious sins, we will be separated from life and death.

古文：吾凡生汝辈三男三女，今日目下，不睹一人。
现代文：我一共生下你们三男三女，现在在我眼前，却看不到一人。
English: I have borne you three sons and three daughters; and yet there is not one of you that I do not see before my eyes.

古文：兴言及此，悲缠肌骨。
现代文：我讲到此处，悲痛切肤入髓。
English: I've said this before, and it's heartbreaking.

古文：赖皇齐恩恤，差安衰暮。
现代文：仰仗齐主的悯惜，稍稍可以安度晚年。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the benevolent care of the emperor, it is still possible to spend the twilight years in peace.

古文：又得汝杨氏姑及汝叔母纥干、汝嫂刘新妇等同居，颇亦自适。
现代文：又得以同你的杨氏姑母及你的叔母纥干、你的嫂嫂刘儿媳一起居住，也还感到比较安适。
English: I was also able to live with your Aunt Yang and your Aunt Jiangan, your sister-in-law Liu daughter-in-law, and I also felt relatively comfortable.

古文：但为微有耳疾，大语方闻。
现代文：但是耳朵稍微有些毛病，要大声说话才能听得到。
English: But I have a slight problem with my ears, so I have to speak loudly to be heard.

古文：行动饮食，幸无多恙。
现代文：行动饮食方面，幸好没有
English: In terms of action diet, fortunately, there is no

古文：今大齐圣德远被，特降鸿慈，既许归吾于汝，又听先致音耗。
现代文：太多的不方便。如今大齐的恩德施及远方，特地降下大大的慈悲，既同意了将我送回到你那裹，又允许先给你通报讯息。
English: Too much inconvenience. Now the Great Benefactor has come from afar, and has specially bestowed great mercy, and has agreed to send me back to you, and has allowed me to give you a message first.

古文：积稔长悲，豁然获展。
现代文：长期积累的悲痛，得以豁然舒展。
English: The grief that had been accumulating for a long time was suddenly able to expand.

古文：此乃仁侔造化，将何报德！
现代文：这种仁德与天地化育万物的功德相等齐，我们将怎样来报答这种大德啊!
English: This kind of benevolence is equal to the merit of creating heaven and earth and nurturing all things. How will we repay this great virtue?

古文：汝与吾别之时，年尚幼小，以前家事，或不委曲。
现代文：你同我分别的时候，年龄还很幼小，以前的家事，有的还不是很了解底细。
English: When you and I separated, you were still young. Maybe you don't know what happened at home before.

古文：昔在武川镇生汝兄弟，大者属鼠，次者属兔，汝身属蛇。
现代文：从前在武川镇生下你们兄弟，老大属鼠，老二属兔，你属蛇。
English: Once upon a time, your brothers were born in the town of Takekawa. The eldest is a rat, the second is a rabbit, and you are a snake.

古文：鲜于修礼起日，吾之阖家大小，先在博陵郡住。
现代文：鲜于修礼兴起的时候，我们全家大小，先在博陵郡居住。
English: Our whole family lived in Gowa, Boling-gun, just before the rise of religious observance.

古文：相将欲向左人城，行至唐河之北，被定州官军打败。
现代文：相随大军准备去左人城，走到唐河北面时，被定州的官军打败。
English: The army was preparing to go to Zuorencheng, and when they reached the north side of the Tang River, they were defeated by the government army of Dingzhou.

古文：汝祖及二叔，时俱战亡。
现代文：你的祖父及两个叔父，当时都阵亡了。
English: Your grandfather and two uncles were killed in action.

古文：汝叔母贺拔及儿元宝，汝叔母纥干及儿菩提，并吾与汝六人，同被擒捉入定州城。
现代文：你的叔母贺拔及她儿子元宝、你叔母纥干及她儿子菩提，加上我和你共六人被捉入定州城中。
English: Your aunt, He Ba, and her son, Yuan Bao, your aunt, Xuan Gan, and her son, Bodhi, plus me and you, all six of us, were captured in the city of Dingzhou.

古文：未几间，将吾及汝送与元宝掌。贺拔、纥干，各别分散。
现代文：不久，将我和你送给元宝掌。贺拔、纥干等，也各自分散。
English: Soon, you and I will be sent to the Yuanpo Palm. He Ba, Yan Gan, etc. will also be separated.

古文：宝掌见汝云： 我识其祖翁，形状相似。 时宝掌营在唐城内。
现代文：元宝掌见到你说： 我认识你的祖父，你们俩人的相貌很相像。 当时元宝掌的军营在唐城内。
English: When Yuan Bophu saw you, he said, "I know your grandfather, you two look alike." At that time, Yuan Bophu's military camp was in Tangcheng.

古文：经停三日，宝掌所掠得男夫、妇女，可六七十人，悉送向京。
现代文：遇了三天，元宝掌所抓获到的男人、妇女，大约有六七十人，全部送往京城。
English: In three days, about sixty or seventy men and women captured by the Yuan Baoshu, were all sent to Beijing.

古文：吾时与汝同被送限。
现代文：我当时和你一起被遣送。
English: You and I are among those being escorted out.

古文：至定州城南，夜宿同乡人姬库根家。
现代文：到定州城南，夜裹住在同乡人姬库担家中。
English: When I arrived in the south of Dingzhou, I stayed at the home of a fellow villager, Ji Kugen, in the evening.

古文：茹茹奴望见鲜于修礼营火，语吾云： 我今走向本军。 
现代文：蕴苞奴看到鲜于修礼军营中的灯火，对我说： 我现在逃往我们的军中。 
English: Seeing the lights of the newly-consecrated army camp, he said to me, "I am now escaping to our army."

古文：既至营，遂告吾辈在此。
现代文：他到达鲜王修礼的军营后，就报告了我们在这裹。
English: I went back to the barracks and told them we were all here.

古文：明旦日出，汝叔将兵邀截，吾及汝等，还得向营。
现代文：第二天早晨，你的叔父率兵阻截，我和你们才得以回到营中。
English: The next morning, your uncle led the troops to intercept, and I and you were able to return to the camp.

古文：汝时年十二，共吾并乘马随军，可不记此事缘由也？
现代文：你当时是十二岁，和我同乘一匹马跟随着大军，你能不记得这件事情的由来吗?
English: When you were twelve years old, you rode with me on a horse and followed the army. Can't you remember how it all started?

古文：于后，吾共汝在受阳住。
现代文：之后，我与你同在受阳居住。
English: After that, I will live with you under the sun.

古文：时元宝、菩提及汝姑儿贺兰盛洛，并汝身四人同学。
现代文：当时元宝、菩提及你姑母的儿子贺兰盛渔，加上你共四个人一起读书。
English: At that time, Yuanbao and Bodhi mentioned your aunt's son, Horan Shengyu, and you four were studying together.

古文：博士姓成，为人严恶，等四人谋欲加害。吾共汝叔母等闻之，各捉其儿打之。
现代文：教你们的博士姓盛，他为人严厉苛刻，你们四人计划想加害他，我和你的叔母等知道后，各自抓住儿子殴打。
English: The doctor who taught you was surnamed Sheng, he was strict and harsh. The four of you planned to harm him. When your aunt and I found out, we each grabbed our son and beat him.

古文：唯盛洛无母，独不被打。
现代文：衹有贺兰盛洛没有母亲，惟独他没有被殴打。
English: However, Horan Shengluo did not have a mother, so he was not beaten.

古文：其后尔朱天柱亡岁，贺拔阿斗泥在关西，遣人迎家累。
现代文：后来在尔朱天柱死去的那一年，贺拔阿斗泥在闱西，派人来迎接家眷。
English: Later, in the year of the death of Erzhu Tianzhu, He Baadoudi sent someone to welcome the family in Shaanxi.

古文：时汝叔亦遣奴来富迎汝及盛洛等。
现代文：当时你的叔父也派下人塞宫来迎接你和贺蓝盛造等人。
English: At that time, your uncle also sent a messenger to the palace to welcome you and He Lan Sheng Zou and others.

古文：汝时着绯绫袍、银装带，盛洛着紫织成缬通身袍、黄绫里，并乘骡同去。
现代文：你当时穿戴的是红色丝袍、银装带，贺兰盛洛穿的是紫花色的丝织通身袍、黄色丝织内衣，共乘骡车一起离开的。
English: At that time, you were wearing a red silk robe and a silver sash, while Helan Shengluo was wearing a purple silk body-covering robe and yellow silk underwear. They left together in a carriage.

古文：盛洛小于汝，汝等三人并呼吾作 阿摩敦 。
现代文：登菌盛渔比你小，你们三人都称呼我为 阿摩敦 。
English: Dengye Shengyu is smaller than you, and all three of you call me Amodong.

古文：如此之事，当分明记之耳。
现代文：这些事情，你应当是很清楚地记得的。
English: You should remember these things very clearly.

古文：今又寄汝小时所着锦袍表一领，至宜检看，知吾含悲戚多历年祀。
现代文：现在我又寄给你小时候所穿的锦袍外衣一件，你当好好地察看，知道我多年来悲戚的心情。
English: Now I am sending you a piece of the brocade coat that I wore when I was a child. You should take a good look at it and know that I have been grieving for many years.

古文：属千载之运，逢大齐之德，矜老开恩，许得相见。
现代文：现在正值千年难逢的良机，又遇上大齐的仁德，怜悯我年老施予恩惠，同意我们相见。
English: Now is the golden opportunity of a thousand years, and I am met with the same benevolence, pity my old age, grant me grace, and agree to meet us.

古文：一闻此言，死犹不朽，况如今者，势必聚集。
现代文：当听到造句话时，就是死了也像是永生，何况现在，我们定能相聚。
English: When you hear those words, even death feels like eternal life, and now we're going to be together.

古文：禽兽草木，母子相依，吾有何罪，与汝分离，今复何福，还望见汝。
现代文：即使是禽兽草木，母子还能相依，我有什么罪过，竟和你分离，现在又有什么福分，还能够见到你。
English: Even if it is animals and plants, mother and child can still rely on each other. What is my sin that I was separated from you, and what is my blessing now that I can still see you?

古文：言此悲喜，死而更苏。
现代文：讲起这种悲伤和喜悦，就好像是死去了又重新复苏。
English: To speak of this sadness and joy is to die and be born again.

古文：世间所有，求皆可得，母子异国，何处可求。
现代文：人世间所有的东西，都能求得到，母子处在不同的国家，又到哪裹去寻找。
English: Mother and son are in different countries, and where should they go to find each other?

古文：假汝贵极王公，富过山海；有一老母，八十之年，飘然千里，死亡旦夕，不得一朝蹔见，不得一日同处，寒不得汝衣，饥不得汝食，汝虽穷荣极盛，光耀世间，汝何用为？
现代文：即使你有王公的尊贵，比高山大海还要富有；但是你的母亲，八十岁了。还漂泊在千里之外，死亡在旦夕之间，却不能有一刻的相见，不能有一天的共处，寒冷时得不到你的衣服，饥饿时得不到你的饭食，你虽然极为荣华富足，光彩荣耀于人世，你又有什么用处?
English: Even if you have the dignity of a prince and are richer than the mountains and the sea, but your mother, eighty years old, is still adrift thousands of miles away, death is between the sun and the moon, but you can't meet for a moment, you can't live together for a day, you can't get your clothes when you are cold, you can't get your food when you are hungry, although you are extremely prosperous, glorious and glorious in the world, what use are you?

古文：于吾何益？
现代文：对于我又有什么好处?
English: What's in it for me?

古文：吾今日之前，汝既不得申其供养，事往何论。
现代文：我在今天之前，你既然不能供养，过去了的事情没有什么好说的。
English: Before today, I couldn't get your support. It's over, there's no need to talk about it.

古文：今日以后，吾之残命，唯系于汝，尔戴天履地，中有鬼神，勿云冥昧而可欺负。
现代文：但在今后，我的余生，衹有寄望于你，你头顶上天脚踏大地，中间有鬼神，不要以为它们暗昧无知就可以欺负。
English: But in the future, for the rest of my life, I have no hope in you, you have the sky above your head and the earth under your feet, and there are ghosts and gods in the middle. Don't think that they can bully you because they are obscure and ignorant.

古文：汝杨氏姑，今虽炎暑，犹能先发。
现代文：你的杨氏姑母，现在虽然炎热，仍能先行出发。
English: Your Aunt Yang, although it's hot now, can still go first.

古文：关河阻远，隔绝多年，书依常体，虑汝致惑，是以每存款质，兼亦载吾姓名。
现代文：由于我们受到关山河流阻塞，相距很远，隔绝多年，因此书信按照普通的体例，担，你会产生疑惑，所以都保留有款识证物，加上也记载有我的姓名。
English: Since we are blocked by the Guanshan River, very far apart, and have been isolated for many years, the letters are in accordance with the usual style, but you will have doubts, so they all retain a certificate, plus my name is also recorded.

古文：当识此理，不以为怪。
现代文：你应当明白这个道理，不要因此而感到奇怪。
English: You should understand this and not be surprised by it.

古文：护性至孝，得书，悲不自胜，左右莫能仰视。
现代文：主塞谨极为孝顺，收到书信后，悲痛不已，身边的人都不敢仰视他。
English: After receiving the letter, he was so grief-stricken that no one around him dared to look up to him.

古文：报书曰：区宇分崩，遭遇灾祸，违离膝下，三十五年。
现代文：字文护回信说：天下分崩离析，遭遇到天灾人祸，我离开母亲大人膝下，已有三十五年。
English: "The world is falling apart, I have encountered natural and man-made disasters, and it has been 35 years since I left my mother's lap," the letter said.

古文：受形禀气，皆知母子，谁同萨保，如此不孝！
现代文：凡是禀受天地之气的有形之物，都知道母子之情，谁像我萨保，这样不孝!
English: All tangible things that have received the breath of heaven and earth know the feelings of mother and child. Who is so unfilial as I, Sabo?

古文：宿殃积戾，唯应赐钟，岂悟网罗，上婴慈母。
现代文：往日的灾难和积久的罪过，衹是回报给我高位厚爵，怎能想到牢狱之祸却连累到了慈母的身上。
English: The calamities of the past and the sins accumulated over a long period of time were nothing more than a reward for giving me a high rank and a noble title. How can I think of the calamity of prison when it has burdened my loving mother?

古文：但立身立行，不负一物，明神有识，宜见哀怜。
现代文：但我树立己身及所作所为，没有亏负一人，圣明的神灵若是有知，也应当为我感到哀怜。
English: But I have set myself and my ways so that no one is put to shame, and the holy spirits, if they are wise, will have pity on me.

古文：而子为公侯，母为俘隶，热不见母热，寒不见母寒，衣不知有无，食不知饥饱，泯如天地之外，无由暂闻。
现代文：儿子贵为公侯，母亲却是俘虏家奴，天热时不知道母亲的炎热，天寒时不知道母亲的寒冷，衣服不知道有没有，饭食不知道能不能吃饱，好像是消失在天地之外，无法听到任何消息。
English: My son is a prince, but my mother is a prisoner. When it's hot, I can't see my mother in the heat. When it's cold, I can't see my mother in the cold. I don't know if I have clothes or not. I don't know if I can eat my fill. The news is vague. It's as if I can't hear your news outside of heaven and earth.

古文：昼夜悲号，继之以血，分怀冤酷，终此一生，死若有知，冀奉见于泉下尔。
现代文：我日夜痛哭，都流出了血泪，我心怀怨恨酷痛，度过一生，死后若是有知，希望在九泉下奉养母亲。
English: I cried bitterly day and night, and shed tears of blood. My heart was filled with resentment and pain. I spent my whole life hoping that, if I knew when I died, I would be able to take care of my mother.

古文：不谓齐朝解网，惠以德音，摩敦、四姑，并许矜放。
现代文：没有想到齐朝解除禁网，赐与佳音，将母亲、四姑都同意予以怜悯释放。
English: It did not occur to him that the Qing Dynasty would lift the ban on the net, bestow good news, and release his mother and four aunts with the consent of the emperor.

古文：初闻此旨，魂爽飞越，号天叩地，不能自胜。
现代文：我 听到这个消息时，魂魄飞越，喊天谢地，无法控制。
English: As soon as I heard the will of the Lord of Qi, my soul was refreshed, as if I wanted to fly out of my body, and I couldn't control myself.

古文：四姑即蒙礼送，平安入境，以今月十八日于河东拜见。
现代文：四姑已经受到礼遇送回，平安地进入境内，我已于这个月的十八日在河东拜见到她。
English: The fourth aunt has been escorted by the courtesy of Mengqi country and returned safely. I visited her in Hedong on the 18th day of this month.

古文：遥奉颜色，崩动肝肠。
现代文：远远地奉望母亲的容貌，我肝肠俱断。
English: Looking up to my mother's looks from afar, I'm heartbroken.

古文：但离绝多年，存亡阻隔，相见之始，口未忍言，唯叙齐朝宽弘，每存大德。
现代文：但是由于离别多年，生死相隔，在刚刚相见时，无法多叙，衹是讲述齐朝的宽容，常常施予大德。
English: However, due to the separation of many years and the separation of life and death, when they just met, they could not say more, but it was about the tolerance of the Qi Dynasty, and they often gave great virtue.

古文：云与摩敦虽处宫禁，常蒙优礼，今者来邺，恩遇弥隆。
现代文：四姑讲到母亲虽然受到幽禁，但经常受到优厚的礼遇，现在来到邺城，恩惠知遇更加隆厚。
English: The fourth aunt said that although her mother was under confinement, she was often treated with great courtesy. Now that she has come to Handan, she has been treated with even greater courtesy.

古文：矜哀听许摩敦垂敕，曲尽悲酷，备述家事。
现代文：怜悯地允许母亲垂示告诫，曲诉悲痛，捆说家事。
English: Compassionately allow the mother to issue admonitions, lamentations, and chores.

古文：伏读未周，五情屠割。
现代文：我还没有读完，就心如刀割。
English: I haven't finished reading it yet, and my bowels feel like they've been cut with a knife.

古文：书中所道，无事敢忘。
现代文：您信中所说的，没有一件事情我敢忘记。
English: There is not one thing in your letter that I would dare to forget.

古文：摩敦年尊，又加忧苦，常谓寝膳贬损，或多遗漏；伏奉论述，次第分明。
现代文：母亲年老，又加上忧伤痛苦，常说寝食减少了，有的事情多有遣漏；我拜读您的论述，见到叙述的次序很清楚。
English: In my mother's old age, coupled with sadness and pain, it is often said that sleep and food have decreased, and some things have more omissions; I read your essay and see the order of the narrative is very clear.

古文：一则以悲，一则以喜。
现代文：心中一方面悲伤，一方面又高兴。
English: After I finished reading, I sang one song in sorrow and one in joy.

古文：当乡里破败之日，萨保年已十余岁，邻曲旧事，犹自记忆；况家门祸难，亲戚流离，奉辞时节，先后慈训，刻肌刻骨，常缠心腑。
现代文：当家乡破败的时候，萨保已经有十多岁，邻里的往事，还能记得住；何况家中遭受祸难，亲戚们流亡离散，与您在一起和同您分离的时候，您前后的教诲，我都刻骨铭心，时常萦绕在心中。
English: When my hometown was ruined, Sabo was already more than ten years old, and I can still remember the past of my neighborhood; not to mention the misfortunes suffered at home, the relatives exiled and separated, when I was with you and separated from you, your teachings before and after, I have engraved my heart, often lingering in my heart.

古文：天长丧乱，四海横流。
现代文：天下长期丧乱，四海动荡不安。
English: The world has been in turmoil for a long time, and the four seas are in turmoil.

古文：太祖乘时，齐朝抚运，两河、三辅，各值神机。
现代文：太祖藉助天时，齐朝顺应气运，在两河、三辅各自施展神妙的计谋。
English: When the great-grandfather was assisted by heaven, the Qi Dynasty followed the wind and carried out miraculous strategies in the two rivers and the three auxiliary rivers.

古文：原其事迹，非相负背。
现代文：推究事迹的根源。二者并不相互违背。
English: The two do not contradict each other.

古文：太祖升遐，未定天保，萨保属当犹子之长，亲受顾命。
现代文：太祖去世时，还没有确立国运，萨保是侄辈中年龄最大的，亲自接受了他的遣命。
English: At the time of his great-grandfather's death, the National Movement had not yet been established. Sabo was the oldest of his nephews and accepted his mission in person.

古文：虽身居重任，职当忧责，至于岁时称庆，子孙在庭，顾视悲摧，心情断绝，胡颜履戴，负媿神明。
现代文：虽然我身肩重任，担负着忧念国事的职责，到了除岁庆贺时，子孙都在家中，我顾念哀伤，悲痛欲绝，有何面目活在人世，愧对神灵。
English: Although I have a heavy responsibility on my shoulders, shouldering the responsibility of worrying about national affairs, when it comes to the New Year celebration, my children and grandchildren are at home, I am saddened by sorrow, grief-stricken, what kind of face to live in the world, and ashamed of the gods.

古文：霈然之恩，既以沾洽，爱敬之至，施及傍人。
现代文：齐国深厚的恩泽，既然已像春雨一样降下，爱敬之心到了极点，就会施及旁人。
English: Since the profound grace of Qi has fallen like a spring rain, and the heart of love and respect has reached its peak, it will be given to others.

古文：草木有心，禽鱼感泽，况在人伦，而不铭戴。
现代文：即使是草木都有感情，禽兽鱼类都会感恩，何况我身为人类，哪能不铭记母亲的恩情。
English: Even if plants and trees have feelings, animals and fish will be grateful. What's more, as a human, I can't help but remember my mother's kindness.

古文：有家有国，信义为本，伏度来期，已应有日。
现代文：家长国君，都应以信义作为根本，我暗中计算母亲的归期，已当确定时曰。
English: Parents and sovereigns should take faith and righteousness as the foundation. I secretly calculated my mother's return date and said that it was time to make a decision.

古文：一得奉见慈颜，永毕生愿。
现代文：衹求早曰见到母亲的尊容，便永远完成了我此生的心愿。
English: At that time, I will be able to see your kind face, which is my lifelong wish.

古文：生死肉骨，岂过今恩，负山戴岳，未足胜荷。
现代文：即使是使死者复生使白骨长肉，又怎么能超过这次的大恩，我即使有负山背岳的力量，也难以承受齐国赐给的大德。
English: How can the separation of life and death between bones and flesh exceed today's benefit? Even if the mountain is loaded, it is difficult to load it.

古文：二国分隔，理无书信，主上以彼朝不绝子母之恩，亦赐许奉答。
现代文：周、齐两国阻隔，按常理是没有书信往来的，但皇上因为齐朝不隔绝母子的恩情，也同意我写书信回答。
English: Zhou and Qi countries are separated, and it is common sense that there is no correspondence between them, but the emperor also agreed to write a letter to answer me because Qi Dynasty does not cut off the mother and son's kindness.

古文：不期今日，得通家问，伏纸呜咽，言不宣心。
现代文：没有预料到在今天，还能通家书问候，我手抚信纸哭泣，言语未能表达我的内心。
English: Unexpectedly, we were able to exchange messages today. I picked up my pen and wept on the paper. No words can express how much I miss my mother.

古文：蒙寄萨保别时所留锦袍表，年岁虽久，宛然犹识，抱此悲泣。
现代文：承蒙你寄来萨保在分别时所留下的锦袍外衣，时间虽然久远，但仍然能依稀认识，我抱着这件锦袍悲痛地哭泣。
English: Thank you for sending me the brocade coat that Sabo left behind when they separated. Although it's been a long time, I can still vaguely recognize it. I hold this brocade and weep with sorrow.

古文：至于拜见，事归忍死，知复何心！
现代文：至于拜见您的事，我殷切地期待着，到那时又怎知我是如何激动的心情!
English: As for meeting you, I am eagerly looking forward to it, and how will I know how excited I am by then!

古文：齐朝不即发遣，更令与护书，要护重报，往返再三，而母竟不至。
现代文：齐朝没有立即送遣，再次让宇文护的母亲给宇文护写信，要宇文护重重地报答，双方书信来回多次，而宇文护的母亲仍然没有送来。
English: Qi Dynasty did not send the letter immediately, and once again asked the mother of Uwen Zhou to write to Uwen Zhou, asking Uwen Zhou to repay the favor. The two sides wrote back and forth many times, but Uwen Zhou's mother still did not send the letter.

古文：朝议以其失信，令有司移齐曰：夫有义则存，无信不立，山岳犹轻，兵食非重。
现代文：朝廷议论齐朝丧失了信用，命令有关官吏移送文书给齐朝说：有仁义就能存在，没有信用就无法立身，高山大岳比信义还要轻，军队粮食都比不上信义重要。
English: The imperial court argued that the Qi dynasty had lost its credibility, and ordered the relevant officials to transfer the document to the Qi dynasty, saying: with benevolence and righteousness, it can exist; without trust, it cannot stand on its own feet; Gaoshan Yue is even lighter than good faith; army grain is not as important as good faith.

古文：故言誓弗违，重耳所以享国；祝史无媿，随会所以为盟。
现代文：所以不违背自己的誓言，因此重耳就能在位为君；祝史没有惭愧之心，随会才会结盟。
English: Therefore, they do not violate their oaths, so they can reign as kings; Zhu Xi does not have a sense of shame, and will only ally with the club.

古文：未有司牧生民，君临有国，可以忘义而多食言者也。
现代文：从来没有管理人民，统治天下的人，可以忘掉信义而经常背弃诺言的。
English: There has never been anyone to govern the people and rule the world who can forget his faith and constantly break his promises.

古文：自数属屯夷，时钟圮隔，皇家亲戚，沦陷三纪。
现代文：自从时运艰难，天下阻塞。皇家的亲戚，沦陷了三十多年。
English: It's been more than 30 years since the royal family, a relative of the emperor, fell on hard times.

古文：仁姑、世母，望绝生还。
现代文：朕的仁姑、伯母，断绝了活着回来的希望。
English: My aunt and sister-in-law have given up hope of coming back alive.

古文：彼朝以去夏之初，德音爰发，已送仁姑，许归世母。
现代文：你们国家在去年初夏时，就发出了美好的音讯，并已将朕的仁姑送来，也答应了将朕的伯母送回。
English: In the early summer of last year, your country sent me the wonderful news that you had sent my aunt and agreed to send my aunt back.

古文：乃称烦暑，指克来秋。
现代文：但又称天气闷热，指望要到秋天来后才送来。
English: But it is also said that the weather is sultry, and it is expected to be sent after the autumn comes.

古文：谓其信必由衷，嘉言无爽。
现代文：朕以为信用必须发自内心，美好的言辞不能失约。
English: I think that trust must come from the heart, and good words cannot be broken.

古文：今落木戒候，冰霜行及，方为世母虚设诡词，未议言归，更征酬答。
现代文：现在草木零落告知节候，冰霜已经到来，还在为朕的伯母假造诡辩的话，没有提到将她送回，反而要求酬谢报答。
English: Now the plants and trees are falling to announce the season, the frost has arrived, and they are still faking sophistry for my aunt, not mentioning sending her back, but demanding rewards and rewards.

古文：子女玉帛，既非所须，保境宁民，又云匪报。
现代文：美女和玉帛，不是你们所需要的，保卫边境安宁百姓，又说不是报答。
English: Beautiful women and jade figurines are not what you need. Defending the border and keeping the people calm is not a reward.

古文：详观此意，全乖本图。
现代文：仔细地审察你们的意思，全都违背了本来的意图。
English: On closer inspection, they are all contrary to the original intention.

古文：爱人以礼，岂为姑息。
现代文：以礼爱人，怎么能算得上是无原则的宽容。
English: How can loving someone with courtesy be regarded as unprincipled tolerance?

古文：要子责诚，质亲求报，实伤和气，有悖天经。
现代文：要挟儿子来索取诚心，扣押亲人来要求回报，实在是伤害了和睦的气氛，违背了天理常道。
English: To coerce one's son to seek sincerity, and to detain one's relatives to demand a return, is really hurting the atmosphere of harmony, and is against the laws of nature.

古文：我之周室，太祖之天下也，焉可捐国顾家，殉名亏实！
现代文：我们周室，是太祖的天下，怎么能够抛弃国家而顾念家庭，追求名声而亏损实利!
English: We, the Zhou family, are the world of our ancestors, how can we abandon the country and think of the family, pursue fame and lose real profits!

古文：不害所养，斯曰仁人。
现代文：不伤害他人的父母，这才称得上是仁爱的人。
English: Parents who do not harm others can only be called benevolent.

古文：卧鼓潜锋，孰非深计。
现代文：偃息战鼓潜藏兵锋，谁能说不是深远的良计。
English: Who can say that it is not a far-reaching good plan to hush the war drums of the latent Tibetan soldiers.

古文：若令迭争尺寸，两竞锥刀，瓦震长平，则赵分为二；兵出函谷，则韩裂为三。
现代文：如果是不断地争夺尺土寸地，双方刀枪相争，激战长平，则趟国分裂为两部分；大军开出函谷关，则韩国分裂为三部分。
English: If there is a constant struggle for land, and the two sides fight with swords and guns, then the country is divided into two parts; if a large army drives out of Hangeul, then Korea is divided into three parts.

古文：安得犹全，谓无损益。
现代文：怎么能够保全自己，说是没有损失。
English: How can you protect yourself and say there is no loss.

古文：大冢宰位隆将相，情兼家国，衔悲茹血，分毕冤魂，岂意噬指可寻，倚门应至。
现代文：大冢宰身居将相的高位，兼有家庭和国家的感情，饱含悲伤痛苦，冤魂离散，哪能想到母子之情可以重温，他倚门迎接母亲的到来。
English: The grand vizier was a high-ranking military commander. He had feelings for both his family and his country. He was full of sorrow and pain. He was separated from his family. He couldn't imagine reliving the feelings of his mother and son. He leaned on the door to welcome his mother.

古文：徒闻善始，卒无令终，百辟震惊，三军愤惋。
现代文：但是仅仅听到了好的开头，最后却没有好的结果，这使得百官震惊，三军愤慨。
English: But only heard a good beginning, but in the end there was no good result, which made the officials shocked and the three armies indignant.

古文：不为孝子，当作忠臣。
现代文：不能成为孝子，就应当做个忠臣。
English: If you cannot be a filial son, you should be a loyal subject.

古文：去岁北军深入，数俘城下。
现代文：去年我军南下深入，多次攻到你们的城下。
English: Last year, our army went deep into the south and repeatedly attacked your city.

古文：虽曰班师，余功未遂。
现代文：虽说是撤回了大军，但剩余的功业还没有完成。
English: Although the great army has been withdrawn, the remaining work has not yet been completed.

古文：今兹马首南向，更期重入。
现代文：现在我军作好了南下的准备，再次等待着深入南下。
English: Now our army has made preparations to go south, and is once again waiting to go further south.

古文：晋人角之，我之职矣。
现代文：像晋人抓住鹿角那样同突厥一起攻击你们，是我们的职责。
English: It is our duty to attack you together with the Turks, just as the Jin seized the antlers of the deer.

古文：闻诸道路，早已戒严，非直北拒，又将南略。
现代文：听说你们的各条道路，早就已经戒严了，这并不仅仅是为了抵御北方，也是为了将要向南侵略。
English: I've heard that your roads have been under martial law for a long time. This is not just to defend against the north, but also because of the impending invasion to the south.

古文：傥欲自送，此之愿也。
现代文：倘若你们想自投罗网，这正是我们所希望的。
English: That's what we're hoping for, if you'd like to throw yourself into the net.

古文：如或婴城，未能求敌，诘朝请见，与君周旋。
现代文：如果你们要是环城固守，使我们无法求战，就请马上相见，与你们决战。
English: If you encircle the city and hold fast to it, so that we cannot go to war, then I beg you to meet me at once for a decisive battle.

古文：为惠不终，祇增深怨。
现代文：善事不做到底，衹会加深怨恨。
English: If the good deed is not done to the end, it will deepen the resentment.

古文：爱亲无慢，垂训尼父；矜恤穷老，贻则周文。
现代文：敬爱亲人不要怠慢，这是孔子留给后人的训诫；悯恤老人，这是周文王传给后人的榜样。
English: Don't neglect to love your relatives, this is the admonition left by Confucius for future generations; have compassion for the elderly, this is the example passed down by King Zhou Wen to future generations.

古文：环玦之义，事不由此，自应内省，岂宜有间。
现代文：取舍去就，不按这样的道理来决定，你们应当在内心好好地省察自己，难道还有什么疑问。
English: If you have to make a choice, don't make it according to this principle. You should carefully examine yourselves in your hearts to see if there is any doubt.

古文：移书未送而母至。
现代文：文书还没有送走而字文护的母亲就送回来了。
English: Before the document was sent away, the mother of the guardian of the letter sent it back.

古文：举朝庆悦，大赦天下。
现代文：朝廷内外无不欢庆喜悦，高祖也因此大赦天下。
English: North Zhou held a morning celebration, and the imperial court granted amnesty to the whole world for this.

古文：护与母睽隔多年，一旦聚集，凡所资奉，穷极华盛。
现代文：宇文护和母亲分隔多年，一旦相聚，对母亲所有的供给侍候，都极为豪华丰盛。
English: Uwenguo and her mother have been separated for many years. Once they are together, all the provisions for her mother are extremely luxurious and plentiful.

古文：每四时伏腊，高祖率诸亲戚，行家人之礼，称觞上寿。
现代文：每逢四季的伏祭和腊祭，高祖都要率领皇亲国戚，向字文护的母亲行家人的礼节，敬酒祝寿。
English: Every four seasons of the Fushi Festival and the Wax Festival, Gao Zu should lead the relatives of the imperial family and the relatives of the country, to the mother of the guardian of the characters to practice the etiquette of the family, to toast.

古文：荣贵之极，振古未闻。
现代文：荣华尊贵之极，自古以来都没有听说遇。
English: Ronghua is the ultimate in nobility, and has not been heard of since ancient times.

古文：是年也，突厥复率众赴期。
现代文：在这一年，突厥又率领军队前来赴约。
English: In the same year, the Turks again led an army to the treaty.

古文：护以齐氏初送国亲，未欲即事征讨，复虑失信蕃夷，更生边患。
现代文：宇文护因为齐氏刚刚送回母亲，并不打算马上对齐国进行征讨，可是又担心失信于突厥，重新产生边患。
English: Because the Qi clan had just sent her back to her mother, Uwenguo did not immediately plan to carry out the requisition of the Qi country, but she was worried about the loss of trust in Turkey and the re-emergence of border troubles.

古文：不得已，遂请东征。
现代文：迫不得已，就请求束征。
English: As a last resort, he asked to be conscripted.

古文：九月，诏曰： 神若轩皇，尚云三战；圣如姬武，且曰一戎。
现代文：九月，高祖下韶说： 即使像黄帝那样的神圣，尚且要经过多次战斗才打败了炎帝；就是像周武王那样的圣明，还要全力一战，才能灭掉殷商。
English: In September, Gao Zu said: "Even if you are as holy as the Yellow Emperor, you still have to go through many battles to defeat the Burning Emperor; even if you are as holy as King Zhouwu, you still have to fight with all your might to eliminate the Yin merchants."

古文：弧矢之威，干戈之用，帝王大器，谁能去兵。
现代文：弓矢的威力，干戈的作用，是帝王的实器，有谁能够除去战争。
English: The power of the bow and arrow, the role of the sword, is the emperor's real tool, who can remove the war.

古文：太祖丕受天明，造我周室，日月所照，罔不率从。
现代文：太祖接受天命，缔造我周室，凡是月所照到的地方，没有不遵从的。
English: My great-grandfather accepted the Mandate of Heaven and built my ancestral house. Wherever the moon shines, there is no one who does not obey.

古文：高氏乘衅跋扈，窃有并、冀，世济其恶，腥秽彰闻。
现代文：高氏趁混乱之机骄横强暴，非法占据了并州、冀州，乱世助长了他的邪恶，他污秽的行为天下俱知。
English: Mr. Gao took advantage of the chaos to be arrogant and violent, and illegally occupied Anhui Province and Jizhou Province. The chaotic world promoted his evil, and his filthy behavior is known to all.

古文：皇天震怒，假手突厥，驱略汾晋，扫地无遗。
现代文：皇天震怒，藉突厥之手，驱兵攻掠汾晋，要将高氏彻底扫除干净。
English: Enraged by this, the emperor, with the help of the Turks, drove his troops to attack and plunder Bijin in order to completely wipe out the Gao clan.

古文：季孟势穷，伯珪日蹙，坐待灭亡，鉴之愚智。
现代文：就像季孟那样困窘，像伯珪一样艰难，高氏已是坐以待毙，这种形势无论是愚人智者都很清楚。
English: As embarrassing as Ji Meng, as difficult as Bo Xuan, Gao has been waiting to die, and this situation is well known to both the foolish and the wise.

古文：故突厥班师，仍屯彼境，更集诸部，倾国齐至，星流电击，数道俱进，期在仲冬，同会并、邺。
现代文：原先突厥军队虽已撤退，但仍驻扎在齐国境内，重新聚集各部落兵马，调动了全国的兵力一齐来到，飞速行军，从几路一同推进，相约在仲冬，会师于并州、邺城。
English: Although the original Turkic army had withdrawn, it was still stationed in the territory of Qi. The tribal soldiers and horses were re-gathered, and the troops of the whole country were mobilized to come together, march at high speed, advance together from several roads, and meet in the middle of winter to join the army in Bianzhou and Lucheng.

古文：大冢宰晋公，朕之懿昆，任隆伊、吕，平一宇宙，惟公是属。
现代文：大冢宰晋国公，是朕的亲兄，身居伊尹、吕尚般的高位，统一天下，非他莫属。
English: Dajie Zai Jin Guogong is my elder brother. He holds a high position like Yin and Lushang, and he is the only one who can unify the country.

古文：朕当亲执斧钺，庙庭祗受。
现代文：朕当亲自手执斧钹，在宗庙的大庭敬授给他。
English: I should personally hold the axe and give it to him in the courtyard of the ancestral temple.

古文：有司宜勒众军，量程赴集。
现代文：有关官员要下令各军，迅速赶来集结。
English: The officials concerned should order all the troops to quickly come and assemble.

古文：进止迟速，委公处分。 于是征二十四军及左右厢散隶、及秦陇巴蜀之兵、诸蕃国之众二十万人。
现代文：进退快慢，交给晋公部署调遣。 于是宇文护征调二十四军及左右两厢禁卫军、秦陇巴蜀的军队、各蕃国的部队共二十万人。
English: Therefore, Uwen Rong transferred a total of 200,000 troops from the 24th Army and the left and right wing imperial guards, the army of Qin and Bashu, and the troops of various states.

古文：十月，帝于庙庭授护斧钺。
现代文：十月，高祖在宗庙大庭授予宇文护斧铁。
English: In October, Gao Zu awarded Yu Wen with an axe guard in the main courtyard of the ancestral temple.

古文：出军至潼关，乃遣柱国尉迟迥率精兵十万为前锋，大将军权景宣率山南之兵出豫州，少师杨摽出轵关。
现代文：宇文护出兵抵达潼关。派柱国尉迟迥率十万精兵为前锋，大将军权景宣率山南的部队出兵豫州，少师杨尉出兵轵关。
English: The soldiers dispatched by Uwenguo arrived at Shaoguan. He sent a column of 100,000 elite soldiers led by Lieutenant Chi Xi to be the vanguard, the troops of Shannan led by General Guan Jingxuan to be dispatched to Yuzhou, and the junior division Yang Li to be dispatched to Shaoguan.

古文：护连营渐进，屯军弘农。
现代文：宇文护沿途筑营慢慢推进，将军队屯驻弘农。
English: Uwengu linked the encampment, gradually pushed forward, and stationed in Hongnong.

古文：迥攻围洛阳。
现代文：尉迟迥围攻盗腿。
English: The lieutenant was late to encircle and attack the robbers.

古文：柱国齐公宪、郑国公达奚武等营于邙山。
现代文：柱国查公宇文宪、塑凰公达墨武等驻守坐山。
English: The pillar states Chagong Uwen Xian, Shougong Da Mowu, etc. were stationed in Zhishan.

古文：护性无戎略，且此行也，又非其本心。
现代文：宇文护本来就没有军事才能，而且这次束征，又不是他的本意。
English: Umenomiya originally had no military talent, and this conscription was not his intention.

古文：故师出虽久，无所克获。
现代文：所以出兵虽然很长时间，但没有取得什么战绩。
English: Therefore, although the troop deployment lasted a long time, it did not achieve any results.

古文：护本令堑断河阳之路，遏其救兵，然后同攻洛阳，使其内外隔绝。
现代文：宇文护本来命令切断河阳通往洛阳的道路，阻止北齐的救兵，然后合力攻打洛阳，使得洛阳内外隔绝。
English: Uwen originally ordered to cut off the road from Hebei to Luoyang, prevent the rescue of Beiqi, and then jointly attack Luoyang, making Luoyang isolated inside and outside.

古文：诸将以为齐兵必不敢出，唯斥候而已。
现代文：各位将领认为北齐军队一定不敢出战，所以衹是派出斥候侦察而已。
English: The generals thought that the North Qi army would not dare to go to war, so they only sent scouts to investigate.

古文：值连日阴雾，齐骑直前，围洛之军，一时溃散。
现代文：当时正好遇上连日大雾，北齐骑兵径直前来，围攻洛阳的军队霎时间纷纷逃散。
English: At that time, it happened to be foggy for days on end, and the Beiqi cavalry came straight ahead, and the troops besieging Luoyang fled in no time at all.

古文：唯尉迟迥率数十骑扞敌，齐公宪又督邙山诸将拒之，乃得全军而返。
现代文：衹有尉迟迥率几十名骑兵抵御敌军，齐公宇文宪又督率各位邙山将领抵抗，这才得以保全大军撤回。
English: It was only after several dozen cavalrymen under the command of Lieutenant Zou Zhizhong resisted the enemy army, and General Qi Gongwu Wenxian led the resistance of the Shaoshan generals, that the army was able to withdraw safely.

古文：权景宣攻克豫州，寻以洛阳围解，亦引军退。
现代文：权景宣攻克了豫州，不久因为洛阳的包围解除，也率军撤退。
English: After conquering Yuzhou, Quan Jingxuan soon withdrew with his army as the siege of Luoyang was lifted.

古文：杨摽于轵关战没。
现代文：杨尉在软关战死。
English: Lieutenant Yang lost in the soft pass.

古文：护于是班师。
现代文：宇文护于足班师。
English: Uwen Ke is in the foot class.

古文：以无功，与诸将稽首请罪，帝弗之责也。
现代文：因为没有功绩，宇文护和各位将领向高祖叩头请罪，高祖没有降罪给他。
English: Because there was no merit, Uwen Rong and the other generals bowed to Gao Zu and pleaded guilty, but Gao Zu did not give in to him.

古文：天和二年，护母薨，寻有诏起令视事。
现代文：天和二年，宇文护的母亲去世，不久高祖下诏命宇文护重新处理政事。
English: In 1902, Umenosuke's mother died, and soon after, Emperor Gaozu ordered Umenosuke to resume his political duties.

古文：四年，护巡历北边城镇，至灵州而还。
现代文：天和四年，宇文护巡视北方边境城镇，到灵州后返回。
English: For four years, Uwen patrols the northern border towns and returns to Lingzhou.

古文：五年，又诏曰： 光宅曲阜，鲁用郊天之乐；地处参墟，晋有大搜之礼。
现代文：天和五年，高祖又下诏说： 建都曲阜，鲁国就使用在郊外祭天的音乐；地处参宿的分野，晋国就有五年一次的军队大检阅的礼仪。
English: In the 5th year of Tianhe, Gao Zu also issued an edict saying: Since the capital was built in Qufu, Lu Province has been using music to celebrate Tianhe in the suburbs; and Jin Province, which is located in the area of Samjuku, has a five-year military inspection ceremony.

古文：所以言时计功，昭德纪行。
现代文：因此议论时享计算功绩，是为了彰显仁德记述行事。
English: Therefore, when talking about calculating merit, it is to highlight benevolence and record actions.

古文：使持节、太师、都督中外诸军事、柱国大将军、大冢宰晋国公，体道居贞，含和诞德，地居戚右，才表栋隆。
现代文：使持节、太师、都督中外诸军事、柱国大将军、大冢宰晋国公，躬行正道，胸怀大德，身居皇戚的尊位，才能高大。
English: It is only by following the righteous path, cherishing virtue, and living in the dignity of an imperial relative that one can be great, such as the Emperor Jochi, the Grand Master, the governors-general of various military forces at home and abroad, the great generals of the pillar states, and the grand vizier of Jin.

古文：国步艰难，寄深夷险，皇纲缔构，事均休戚。
现代文：国家时运艰难，天下的平治险恶都深深依赖他，国家纲纪的构造，都与他息息相关。
English: The country is in a difficult time, the world's peace and evil are deeply dependent on him, and the structure of the national discipline is closely related to him.

古文：故以迹冥殆庶，理契如仁。
现代文：所以他的业迹近似圣人，修养品性符合仁爱之心。
English: Therefore, his deeds are close to those of a saint, and his cultivated character is in line with the heart of benevolence.

古文：今文轨尚隔，方隅犹阻，典策未备，声名多阙，宜赐轩悬之乐，六佾之舞。 
现代文：如今文教流通的渠道仍被隔绝，边境四隘依然阻塞，典章制度没有齐备，声威名望多有欠缺。应当赐给他轩悬的乐器，和六佾的乐舞。 
English: Nowadays, the channels for the circulation of literature and education are still cut off, the four borders are still blocked, the award system is not complete, and the prestige and reputation are mostly lacking. He should be given a high-profile musical instrument and a six-stringed music and dance.

古文：护性甚宽和，然暗于大体。
现代文：宇文护性情非常宽厚温和，但不明大体。
English: Uwen Guo is a very generous and peaceful person, however, he is not very clear on big issues.

古文：自恃建立之功，久当权轴。
现代文：他自恃有建国立邦的功勋，长期担任宰相的职位。
English: He prided himself on his achievements in building a national state, and held the post of prime minister for a long time.

古文：凡所委任，皆非其人。
现代文：凡是他委派任用的人，都不称职。
English: Everyone he appoints is incompetent.

古文：兼诸子贪残，僚属纵逸，恃护威势，莫不蠹政害民。
现代文：加上他的儿子们贪婪残暴，部属骄纵横逸，仗恃宇文护的威力权势，没有谁不是败坏政治残害百姓的。
English: Coupled with the greed and brutality of his sons, the arrogance and evasiveness of his subordinates, and the power and influence of the Universal Guardian, there is no one who does not corrupt politics and brutalize the people.

古文：上下相蒙，曾无疑虑。
现代文：上下相互欺蒙，毫无疑虑。
English: Up and down cheated on each other, no qualms.

古文：高祖以其暴慢，密与卫王直图之。
现代文：高祖因为宇文护极为凶暴傲慢，就在暗中和卫王宇文直策划除掉他。
English: Gaozu secretly plotted with Wei Wang Uwenzhong to get rid of him, because Uwenguo was extremely violent and arrogant.

古文：七年三月十八日，护自同州还。
现代文：丢勉七年三月十八日，宇文护从同州返回京师。
English: On the 18th day of March in the 7th year of Dui Mian, Uwen Mu returned to Beijing Division from Tongzhou.

古文：帝御文安殿，见护讫，引护入含仁殿朝皇太后。
现代文：直担亲临塞室殿，接见空塞谨完毕，直担引导宇文护到含仁殿朝见皇太后。
English: Directly took charge of visiting the Empress Dowager's room, and after the meeting with the Empress Dowager was over, directly took charge of guiding Umenosuke to see the Empress Dowager in the morning at Hannin-den.

古文：先是帝于禁中见护，常行家人之礼。
现代文：此前高祖在皇宫接见室塞谨时，常常使用家庭的礼节。
English: Previously, Gaozu often used the etiquette of the family when receiving Shusetsugu at the Imperial Palace.

古文：护谒太后，太后必赐之坐，帝立侍焉。
现代文：室塞馑拜见太后，太后一定会命宇文护落座，高祖则站在旁边侍候。
English: Murosei bowed to see the empress dowager, and the empress dowager must have ordered Uwenho to sit down, while Gaozu stood by and waited.

古文：至是护将入，帝谓之曰： 太后春秋既尊，颇好饮酒。
现代文：此时宇文护将要入宫，高祖对他说： 太后年纪大了，却很喜欢饮酒。
English: At this time, Uwenho was about to enter the palace. Gaozhu said to him, "The empress dowager is old, but she likes to drink.

古文：不亲朝谒，或废引进。
现代文：她不亲自接受朝拜，有时还不让别人入宫晋见。
English: She does not personally receive the morning worship, and sometimes does not allow others to enter the palace to see her.

古文：喜怒之间，时有乖爽。
现代文：喜怒哀乐，常有违背常理的地方。
English: Emotions, emotions, emotions, there is often a place that goes against common sense.

古文：比虽犯颜屡谏，未蒙垂纳。
现代文：近来我虽多次规劝，但都没有被采纳。
English: I've tried to persuade him many times recently, but he won't listen.

古文：兄今既朝拜，愿更启请。 因出怀中酒诰以授护曰： 以此谏太后。 
现代文：兄长今天既然去参拜，希望你再劝劝她。 说着从怀中拿出《酒诰》交给宇文护说： 用这去规劝太后。 
English: Since her elder brother is visiting today, I hope you can persuade her again. Saying this, she took out "Sake Lees" from her bosom and handed it to Uwen Guo, saying, "Use this to persuade the Empress Dowager."

古文：护既入，如帝所戒，读示太后。
现代文：宇文护进入含仁殿后，按高祖的告诫，向太后宣读《酒诰》。
English: After entering the Hanren Hall, Uwunko read "The Tale of the Sake Cup" to the empress dowager, as Gao Zu had warned.

古文：未讫，帝以玉珽自后击之，护踣于地。
现代文：还没读完。高祖从宇文护的背后用玉埏打他，宇文护跌倒在地。
English: He hadn't finished reading it yet. Gaozu hit him from behind with a jade hammer, and Uwumori fell to the ground.

古文：又令宦者何泉以御刀斫之。
现代文：高祖又命宦官何泉用御刀砍他。
English: Gao Zu also ordered the eunuch He Quan to cut him with his sword.

古文：泉惶惧，斫不能伤。
现代文：何泉因惶恐畏惧，没有砍伤他。
English: Hequan did not cut him because he was afraid.

古文：时卫王直先匿于户内，乃出斩之。
现代文：当时卫王宇文直事先已藏在室内，就跳出来斩杀了宇文护。
English: At that time, Wei Wang Yuwen was hiding in the hall beforehand, and jumped out to kill him.

古文：初，帝欲图护，王轨、宇文神举、宇文孝伯颇豫其谋。
现代文：当初，高祖想策划除掉宇文护，王轨、宇文神举、宇文孝伯常参预谋划。
English: At first, Gao Zu wanted to plan to get rid of Uwen Ke, and Wang Lu, Uwen Shenhu, and Uwen Xiao Bo were often involved in the planning.

古文：是日，轨等并在外，更无知者。
现代文：这一天，王轨等人都在宫外，再没有其他的人知道。
English: On this day, Wang Luo and others were outside, and no one knew about it.

古文：杀护讫，乃召宫伯长孙览等告之，即令收护子柱国谭国公会、大将军莒国公至、崇业公静、正平公干嘉，及干基、干光、干蔚、干祖、干威等，并柱国侯伏侯龙恩、龙恩弟大将军万寿、大将军刘勇、中外府司录尹公正、袁杰、膳部下大夫李安等，于殿中杀之。
现代文：杀掉宇文护后，高祖就召见了宫伯长孙览等人将此事告诉了他们，马上命令逮捕宇文护的儿子柱国谭国公宇文会、大将军莒国公宇文至、崇业公宇文静、正平公宇文干嘉，以及宇文干基、宇文干光、宇文干蔚、宇文干祖、宇文干威等人，和柱国侯伏侯龙恩、侯伏侯龙恩的弟弟大将军侯伏侯万寿、大将军刘勇、中外府司录尹公正、袁杰、膳部下大夫李安等人，在殿中把他们杀死。
English: After killing Uwenguo, Gaozu summoned the chief of the imperial court, Sun Zhan, and others to inform them of the matter, and immediately ordered the arrest of Uwenguo's son, Zhu Guo Tan Guo Gong Uwun Hui, the great generals, Guo Guo Gong Uwun Zi, Chongye Gong Uwun Jing, Zhengping Gong Uwun Gan Jia, as well as Uwun Gan Ji, Uwun Gan Guang, Uwun Gan Wei, Uwun Gan Zu, Uwun Gan Wei, and others, and the prince of Zhu Guo, Fu Hou Long En, the younger brother of Hou Fu Hou

古文：齐王宪白帝曰： 李安出自皂隶，所典唯庖厨而已。
现代文：齐王宇文宪对高祖说： 李安出身奴隶，他所掌管的衹是庖厨而已。
English: The king of Qi, Yu Wenxian, said to Gao Zu: Li An was born a slave, and the yakitori he was in charge of was just yakitori.

古文：既不预时政，未足加戮。 高祖曰： 公不知耳，世宗之崩，安所为也。 
现代文：既然没有参预时政，不足以杀死他。 高祖说： 你有所不知，世宗的去世，就是李安干的。 十九日，高祖下诏说：
English: Since he did not participate in politics, it was not enough to kill him.Gao Zu said: You do not know something, it was Li An who did the death of Shizong.On the 19th, Gao Zu issued an edict saying:

古文：十九日，诏曰：君亲无将，将而必诛。
现代文：皇亲不得逆乱，逆乱就一定要诛杀掉。
English: Imperial relatives are not allowed to rebel, and if they do, they must be killed.

古文：太师、大冢宰、晋公护，地寔宗亲，义兼家国。
现代文：太师、大冢宰、晋国公宇文护，身为皇家同宗亲属，在道义上兼有家族国家双重责任。
English: The Grand Master, the Grand Empress Dowager, and Jin Guo Gongwu Wenzhou, as royal relatives of the same family, have the dual responsibility of the family and the country.

古文：爰初草创，同济艰难，遂任总朝权，寄深国命。
现代文：在国家草创的初期，他能共度艰难，于是身任总理朝廷大权的职务，国家的命运深深寄托在他身上。
English: In the early days of the country's founding, he was able to work through difficulties, so he assumed the position of prime minister and imperial power, and the fate of the country was deeply entrusted to him.

古文：不能竭其诚效，罄以心力，尽事君之节，申送往之情。
现代文：但是他不能竭尽诚效，尽心尽力，竭力保全奉事君主的操节，伸张送往之情。
English: But he can't do his best, do his best, do his best to preserve the discipline of serving the monarch, and to extend the sentimental feeling.

古文：朕兄故略阳公，英风秀远，神机颖悟，地居圣胤，礼归当璧。
现代文：朕兄原略阳公，英俊的风姿清秀挺拔，神奇的心智聪慧超人，他身居皇嗣之位，按礼继位为国君。
English: My brother was originally a minor Yang Gong, a handsome, clean-cut and upright person with a magical mind and superhuman wisdom. He was the heir to the throne and succeeded to the throne as the country's ruler.

古文：遗训在耳，忍害先加。永寻摧割，贯切骨髓。
现代文：太祖的遣训还留在耳中，宇文护却残忍地先将他杀害，永怀悲哀，刻骨痛心。
English: The great-grandfather's conscription remains in the ear, but Umengo brutally killed him first, forever saddened and heartbroken.

古文：世宗明皇帝聪明神武，藏智。
现代文：世宗明皇帝聪明神武，胸藏大智。
English: Emperor Zongming of the world was clever and powerful, with great wisdom in his heart.

古文：护内怀凶悖，外托尊崇。
现代文：宇文护内怀凶恶叛逆之心，外托尊贵崇高的地位。
English: Uwenroo harbored a ferocious and rebellious heart, and was entrusted with a noble and lofty position.

古文：凡厥臣民，谁亡怨愤。
现代文：所有的臣民，有谁没有怨恨。
English: There is no resentment among all the subjects.

古文：朕纂承洪基，十有三载，委政师辅，责成宰司。
现代文：朕继承大业，已有十三年，将政事委交给太师，督责宰辅处理。
English: It has been thirteen years since I inherited the great cause and handed over the Political Affairs Committee to the Grand Master, supervising and handling it.

古文：护志在无君，义违臣节。
现代文：宇文护心中没有君主，违背作为臣子的操节。
English: Umengo did not have a monarch in his heart, violating his duty as a vassal.

古文：怀兹虿毒，逞彼狼心，任情诛暴，肆行威福，朋党相扇，贿货公行，所好加羽毛，所恶生疮痏。
现代文：胸怀毒恶，放纵他的豺狼之心，任情地诛杀暴虐，肆意地作威作福，广结朋党，公开地贿赂财物，为他喜爱的人增加荣耀，对他憎恨的予以迫害。
English: With malice in his heart and a wolf's heart at his command, he kills and tortures at will, he exalts himself, he makes many friends, he openly bribes with money and goods, he honors those he loves and persecutes those he hates.

古文：朕约己菲躬，情存庶政。
现代文：朕自身节俭省约，专心政务。
English: I myself am frugal and thrifty, concentrating on government affairs.

古文：每思施宽惠下，辄抑而不行。
现代文：每当朕想要施予恩惠给臣民，但立即就被压制住不能施行。
English: Whenever I want to grant a favour to a subject, it is immediately suppressed and cannot be done.

古文：遂使户口凋残，征赋劳剧，家无日给，民不聊生。
现代文：于是使得国内人口凋零，劳役赋税繁重，家中没有一日的供给，百姓无法生存。
English: As a result, the domestic population withered, labor taxes were onerous, there was not a day's supply at home, and the people could not survive.

古文：且三方未定，边隅尚阻，疆埸待戎旗之备，武夫资扞城之力。
现代文：而且三方尚未平定，边境四隘，依然阻塞，疆界上战旗等待备用，武士储积守城的力量。
English: Moreover, the three sides have not yet been pacified, the border is narrow and still blocked, the battle flag on the border is waiting for backup, and the samurai reserve the strength to defend the city.

古文：侯伏龙恩、万寿、刘勇等，未效庸勋，先居上将，高门峻宇，甲第雕墙，寔繁有徒，同恶相济。
现代文：侯伏侯龙恩、侯伏侯万寿、刘勇等人，没有建立功勋，却先居上将之位，高大的房屋，雕饰的宅第，像这样的人很多，他们狼狈为奸。
English: Hou Fuhou Long En, Hou Fuhou Wan Shou, Liu Yong and others did not establish merit, but ranked first in the rank of general, tall houses, carved houses, there are many people like this, they are traitors.

古文：民不见德，唯利是视。
现代文：人民看不到仁德，衹看到追求利益。
English: People do not see benevolence, but the pursuit of profit.

古文：百姓嗷嗷，道路以目；含生业业，相顾钳口。
现代文：百姓愁怨的声音嗷嗷不绝，在道路上以目示意；人们惶恐畏惧，相互之间不敢开口说话。
English: The voices of the people's grievances are incessant, and they signal with their eyes on the road; people are afraid and afraid, and they dare not speak to each other.

古文：常恐七百之基，忽焉颠坠，亿兆之命，一旦阽危，上累祖宗之灵，下负苍生之责。
现代文：朕常常担心七百年的基业，会忽然倒毁，亿万百姓的生命，会突然面临危险，在上有损于祖宗的神灵，在下辜负了苍生的重托。
English: I often worry that the seven-hundred-year-old foundation will suddenly be destroyed, and the lives of hundreds of millions of people will suddenly be in danger. On the one hand, it will harm the gods of our ancestors, and on the other hand, it will fail to live up to the heavy trust of life.

古文：今肃正典刑，护已即罪，其余凶党，咸亦伏诛。
现代文：现在严正刑法，宇文护已经服罪，其余凶恶的党羽，也都被诛杀。
English: Now, the criminal law is strictly enforced, and Uwen Rong has already served his sentence, and the rest of the vicious party members have also been killed.

古文：氛雾既清，遐迩同庆。
现代文：凶气已经澄清，远近共同欢庆。
English: The evil spirit has been cleared up, and people from near and far are celebrating together.

古文：朝政惟新，兆民更始。
现代文：朝廷的政治焕然更新，百姓重新开始生活。
English: The politics of the imperial court was renewed, and the people began to live again.

古文：可大赦天下，改天和七年为建德元年。
现代文：可以大赦天下，将天和七年改为建德元年。
English: It is possible to grant amnesty to the world and change the days and seven years to the first year of the founding of Germany.

古文：护世子训为蒲州刺史。
现代文：宇文护的世子宇文训是蒲州刺史。
English: Uwenshu, the descendant of Uwenshu, was a member of the Shishi clan.

古文：其夜，遣柱国、越国公盛乘传往蒲州，征训赴京师，至同州赐死。
现代文：当天夜晚，高祖派柱国、越国公宇文盛乘坐驿车前往渣州，征召宇文训前来京师，走到回业时被赐死。
English: On the evening of the same day, Gao Zu dispatched Zhu Guo and Yue Guo Gong to Uwen Sheng, who rode a carriage to Jiezhou and summoned Uwen Xun to come to Beijing for training. When he went back to the capital, he was sentenced to death.

古文：护长史代郡叱罗协、司录弘农冯迁及所亲任者，皆除名。
现代文：宇文护的长史代郡人叱罗协、司绿弘农人冯迁以及主立护所亲信的人，都被免职。
English: The long-serving deputy of the county, who was in charge of the protection of Wuwen, and the farmer Feng Qian, who was in charge of the protection of Shi Luo, as well as the trusted person of the main protection station, were all dismissed.

古文：护子昌城公深使突厥，遣开府宇文德赍玺书就杀之。
现代文：宇文护的儿子昌城公宇文深正在出使突厥，高祖派开府字文德携带皇帝加有玺印的文书前往突厥就地杀死了他。
English: Uwenshu's son, Changcheng Gong Uwenshu, was on a mission to Turkey. Gao Zu sent Kaifu Zhiwende to Turkey with a document stamped by the emperor and killed him on the spot.

古文：三年，诏复护及诸子先封，谥护曰荡，并改葬之。
现代文：建擅三年，直担下诏恢复圭塞谨以及他的各位儿子原先的封号，赐给宇文护谧号为荡，并将他改葬。
English: After three years of construction, under the direct supervision of the emperor, the original seal names of Guisei and his sons were restored, and the patronymic name of Uwen was given to him, and he was reburied.

古文：叱罗协本名与高祖讳同，后改焉。
现代文：叱罗协的原名和高祖的名讳相同，后来更改了名字。
English: The original name of the Zhao Luo Xie was the same as the name of Gaozu, and later the name was changed.

古文：少寒微，尝为州小吏，以恭谨见知。
现代文：他年少贫困低微，曾经当过州中小吏，以恭敬谨慎著称。
English: He grew up in poverty and was once a state official, and is known for being respectful and discreet.

古文：恒州刺史杨钧擢为从事。
现代文：恒州刺史杨钧提升他为从事。
English: He was promoted by Yang Jie, the chief of the Hengzhou Provincial History Museum.

古文：及魏末，六镇搔扰，客于冀州。
现代文：到北魏末年，六镇骚乱，他客住在冀州。
English: Towards the end of the Northern Wei Dynasty, there were riots in six towns, and he stayed in Jizhou.

古文：冀州为葛荣所围，刺史以协为统军，委以守御。
现代文：冀州被葛荣围困时，刺史任命叱罗协为统军，委派他守卫冀州城。
English: When Jizhou was besieged by Ge Rong, Zhishi appointed Zhao Luo Xie as the unified army and assigned him to guard the city of Jizhou.

古文：俄而城陷，协没于荣。
现代文：不久冀州城被攻陷，叱罗协被葛荣俘获。
English: Soon after, Jizhou City was captured, and Guo Luo Xie was captured by Ge Rong.

古文：荣败，事汾州刺史尔朱兆，颇被亲遇，补录事参军。
现代文：葛荣失败后，叱罗协在汾州刺史尔朱兆手下效力，深受尔朱兆的信任厚待，补任录事参军。
English: After the defeat of Ge Rong, Zhao Luo Xie served under Zhu Zhao in Zhangzhou. He was highly trusted by Zhu Zhao and joined the army.

古文：兆为天柱大将军，转司马。
现代文：尔朱兆任天柱大将军，叱罗协又改任司马。
English: Er Zhu Zhao was appointed Tianzhu Grand General, and Zhe Luo Jie was appointed Sima.

古文：兆与齐神武初战不利，还上党，令协在建州督军粮。
现代文：尔朱兆同齐神武初战失利，回到上党，命叱罗协在建州督管军粮。
English: Zhu Zhaotong lost the first battle with Qi Shenwu, returned to the upper party, and ordered Luo Xie to supervise the military grain in Jianzhou.

古文：后使协至洛阳，与其诸叔计事，谋讨齐神武。
现代文：后来派叱罗协到洛阳，与尔朱兆的各位叔叔谋划，商议讨伐齐神武。
English: Later, he sent Zhao Luo Xie to Luoyang to plan and discuss with all the uncles of Er Zhu Zhao to fight against Qi Shenwu.

古文：兆等军败，还并州，令协治肆州刺史。
现代文：尔朱兆等人战败，回到并州，命叱罗协任肆州刺史。
English: After the defeat of Lzhu Zhao and others, they returned to Anhui Province and ordered Luo Jian to write the history of Anhui Province.

古文：兆死，遂事窦泰，泰甚礼之。
现代文：尔朱兆死后，他又奉事窦泰，窦泰非常礼遇他。
English: After the death of Er Zhu Zhao, he served Dou Tai again, and Dou Tai treated him very politely.

古文：泰为御史中尉，以协为治书侍御史。
现代文：窦泰任御史中尉后，任命叱罗协为治书侍御史。
English: After Dou Tai was appointed Lieutenant of the Imperial Historian, he appointed Zhao Luo Xie as the Secretary of the Imperial Historian.

古文：泰向潼关，协为监军。
现代文：窦泰出兵潼关，叱罗协任监军。
English: Dou Tai dispatched troops to Shaoguan, and Zhao Luo was appointed to supervise the troops.

古文：泰死，协亦见获。
现代文：宝泰死后，叱罗协也被俘获。
English: After Bao Tai's death, Zhe Luo Xie was also captured.

古文：太祖以其在关岁久，授大丞相府东合祭酒、抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，转录事参军，迁主簿，加通直散骑常侍，摄大行台郎中，累迁相府属从事中郎。
现代文：太祖因为他在潼关的时间很长，任命他为大丞相府东合祭酒、抚军将军、银青光禄大夫，后改任绿事参军，升任主簿，加授通直散骑常侍，代理大行台郎中，多次升任为相府属从事中郎。
English: The great-grandfather, because of his long time in Shaoguan, appointed him as the grand chancellor of the East Awa Festival, the general of the army, and the doctor of the silver Qingguanglu, and later he was transferred to the army of the Green Affairs, promoted to the chief bookkeeper, awarded the honor of the direct horseback rider, the acting dajongdaero, and was promoted several times to the chancellor's subordinate engaged in the middle.

古文：协历仕二京，详练故事。又深自克励，太祖颇委任之。
现代文：叱罗协分别在二京任职多年，熟悉从前的典章制度，又非常约束自己努力奉公，太祖十分重用他。
English: Zhao Luo Jie had served in Beijing for many years, was familiar with the previous award system, and was very disciplined in his efforts to serve the public. The great-grandfather highly valued him.

古文：然犹以其家属在东，疑其有恋本之望。
现代文：但仍因他的家属在束面的齐国，怀疑他有眷恋故土的，愿。
English: But still, because of his family members in Sokumen's Qi Province, it is doubtful that he is attached to his homeland.

古文：及河桥战不利，协随军而还。
现代文：到河桥之战失利后，叱罗协跟随军队返回。
English: After the defeat in the Battle of the River Bridge, Zhao Luo Xie followed the army to return.

古文：太祖知协不贰，封冠军县男，邑二百户。
现代文：太祖知道叱罗协并没有二心，封他为冠军县男，食邑二百户。
English: The great-grandfather knew that there was no ambiguity in the mind of the Zhaoluo Association, and he was named the champion of the county, with 200 households in the county.

古文：寻加车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
现代文：不久又加授车骑将军、左光禄大夫。
English: Soon after, he was also given the title of chariot and cavalry general, and the title of doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：九年，除直合将军、恒州大中正，加都督，进爵为伯，增邑八百户。
现代文：九年，授任直合将军、恒州大中正，加授都督，进爵为伯爵，增加食邑八百户。
English: In the ninth year, he was awarded the title of Zhihe General, the title of Hengzhou Senior Middle School, the additional title of Governor, the title of Count, and the increase of 800 households.

古文：寻迁大都督、仪同三司。
现代文：不久又升任大都督、仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was promoted to Grand Governor and Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies.

古文：初，太祖欲经略汉中，令协行南岐州刺史，并节度东益州戎马事。
现代文：当初，太祖打算经营汉中，命叱罗协兼任南蛙州刺史，和节度束益州戎马事。
English: At first, the great-grandfather planned to run Hanzhong, and ordered Luo Xie to also serve as the governor of Nanfuozhou, and the governor of Sokouyishu to be in charge of horses.

古文：魏废帝元年，即授南岐州刺史。
现代文：魏废壹元年，就任南岐州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Wei Dynasty, he was appointed as the governor of South Qizhou.

古文：时东益州刺史杨辟邪据州反。
现代文：当时东益州刺史杨辟邪占据州城反叛。
English: At that time, the East Iksu stabber Yang Bibi occupied the state capital and rebelled.

古文：二年，协率所部兵讨之，军次涪水。
现代文：二年，叱罗协率领他所属军队征讨杨辟邪，他的军队停驻在涪水。
English: In the second year, Zhao Luo Xie led his army to conquer Yang Biya, and his army was stationed in Surabaya.

古文：会有氐贼一千人断道破桥。
现代文：遇上一千氐族盗贼切断道路毁坏桥梁。
English: In the face of a thousand Yi thieves, they cut off roads and destroyed bridges.

古文：协遣仪同仇买等行前击之，贼开路，协乃领所部渐进。
现代文：叱罗协派仪同仇买等人前往攻击，盗贼让开了道路，叱罗协就率军逐渐推进。
English: Zhao Luo Xie sent Yi and others to attack, the thieves gave way, and Zhao Luo Xie led the army to gradually advance.

古文：又有氐贼一千人邀协，协乃将兵四百人守硖道，与贼短兵接战，贼乃退避。
现代文：又有一千氐族盗贼阻击叱罗协，叱罗协就率四百兵士守住峡道，与盗贼短兵交战，贼兵退避。
English: Another thousand thieves of the Yi nationality blocked the attack of the Liao and Luo Alliance, and the Liao and Luo Alliance led four hundred soldiers to defend the gorge, fought with the short soldiers of the thieves, and the short soldiers of the thieves retreated.

古文：辟邪弃城走，协追斩之，群氐皆伏。
现代文：杨辟邪弃城逃走，叱罗协追上斩杀了他，氐人也都降伏。
English: Yang Pi abandoned the city and ran away. Zhao Luo Xie caught up with him and killed him. The Xiong people also surrendered.

古文：以功授开府。
现代文：叱罗协因功授任开府。
English: Sheng Luo Jie was awarded the post of governor for his merits.

古文：仍为大将军尉迟迥长史，率兵伐蜀。
现代文：仍担任大将军尉迟迥的长史，率兵讨伐蜀。
English: He was still a lieutenant general with a long history of tardiness, leading troops to fight against Shu.

古文：既入剑阁，迥令协行潼州事。
现代文：进入韧阁后，尉迟迥命叱罗协代理潼州事务。
English: After he entered Jiange, he worked tirelessly to promote Luo Jie as the representative of Zhangzhou affairs.

古文：时有五城郡氐酋赵雄杰等扇动新、潼、始三州民反叛，聚结二万余人，在州南三里，隔涪水，据槐林山，置栅拒守。
现代文：当时有五城郡氐族首领趟雄杰等人煽动新、潼、始三州百姓反叛，聚结了两万多人，在州城南面三里远的地方，隔着涪水，占据槐林山，设置营栅拒守。
English: At that time, Wucheng County Yao leader Wuta Xiongjie and others incited the people of Xinjiang, Fujian and Shandong to rebel, gathering more than 20,000 people to occupy Yulin Mountain, three miles south of Zhucheng, across the Yulin River, and set up camp fences to refuse to defend.

古文：梓潼郡民邓朏、王令公等招诱乡邑万余人，复在州东十里，涪水北，置栅以应之。同逼州城。
现代文：梓潼郡的百姓邓肭、王令公等诱招乡里一万多人，也在州城束面十里远，涪水北岸，设置木栅与氐人呼应一起进逼州城。
English: The people of Zizhi County, such as Deng Qian and Wang Ling Gong, lured more than ten thousand people in the countryside, and also set up a wooden grate on the north shore of Surabaya, ten miles away from Suzhou City, in order to force people to enter Suzhou City.

古文：城中粮少，军人乏食。
现代文：城中粮食少，军人百姓缺少吃的。
English: There was little food in the city, and the soldiers and civilians were short of food.

古文：协抚安内外，咸无异心。
现代文：叱罗协安抚内外，城裹的人都没有异心。
English: The appeal and cooperation have pacified people at home and abroad, and no one in the city is hostile.

古文：遣仪同伊娄训、大都督司马裔等将步骑千余人，夜渡涪水击雄杰，一战破之。
现代文：叱罗协派仪同伊娄训、大都督司马裔等人率步骑一千多人，在夜裹渡过涪水袭击赵雄杰，一举击败了他。
English: Zhao Luo, together with Yixun Xun, the Grand Governor Sima Zi and others, led more than a thousand people on foot and horseback to attack Zhao Xiongjie in the night across Surabaya and defeated him in one fell swoop.

古文：令公以雄杰败，亦弃栅走还本郡。
现代文：王令公因为趟雄杰战败，也丢下栅寨逃回本郡。
English: Wang Ling Gong also left the stockade and fled back to the county because of the defeat of the hero.

古文：复与邓朏等更率万余人，于郡东南隔水置栅，断绝驿路。
现代文：又舆邓肋等人再次率领一万多人，在郡城东南面隔水设置栅栏，断绝驿道。
English: In addition, Miao Dengli and others once again led more than 10,000 people to set up a fence across the water in the southeast of the county seat to cut off the causeway.

古文：协遣仪同杨长乐，与司马裔等率师讨之；复遣大都督裴孟尝领百姓继进，为其声势。
现代文：叱罗协派仪同杨长乐，和司马裔等人一起率兵讨伐；又派大都督裴孟尝带领百姓跟随前进，为他们扩张声势。
English: Zhao Luo sent Yi to lead the crusade together with Yang Changle, Sima and others; he also sent the great governor Pei Mengqi to lead the people forward and expand the momentum for them.

古文：孟尝既至梓潼，值水涨不得即渡。
现代文：裴孟尝到达梓潼，遇到河水上涨不能渡过。
English: When Pei Meng reached Zizhi, the rising water made it impossible for him to cross.

古文：而王令公、邓朏见孟尝骑少，乃将三千余人围之数重。
现代文：而王令公、邓肋见裴孟尝的骑兵很少，就率领三千多人将他们重重围住。
English: When Wang Ling Gong and Deng Li saw that Pei Meng Tha's cavalry was few, they led more than three thousand people to encircle them.

古文：孟尝以众寡不敌，各弃马短兵接战。
现代文：裴孟尝因为寡不敌众，就各自下马同敌人短兵交战。
English: Pei Meng, feeling outnumbered, dismounted from his horse and engaged the enemy soldiers.

古文：从辰至午，于阵斩令公及朏等。
现代文：从辰时一直激战到午时，在阵中斩杀了王令公和邓肭等人。
English: The fierce battle lasted from the morning until the afternoon, and Wang Linggong and Deng Yao were killed in the battle.

古文：贼徒既失渠帅，遂即散走。
现代文：贼众失去了首领，就立即溃散逃走。
English: Having lost their leader, the thieves immediately scattered and fled.

古文：其徒党仍据旧栅。
现代文：王令公、邓肋的徒众仍然占据原先的栅营。
English: The followers of Wang Ling Gong and Deng Li still occupy the original camp.

古文：而孟尝方得渡水与长乐合。
现代文：而裴孟尝这才得以渡过涪水和杨长乐会合。
English: It was only then that Pei Mengniu was able to pass through Surabaya and Yang Changle.

古文：即勒兵攻栅，经三日，贼乃请降。
现代文：马上率军进攻栅营，经过三天，贼兵才请求投降。
English: He immediately led the army to attack the gate camp, and it took three days for the bandits to ask for surrender.

古文：此后数有反叛，协辄遣兵讨平之。
现代文：此后有多次反叛，叱罗协都立即派兵征讨平定。
English: Since then, there have been multiple rebellions, and the SPC immediately dispatched troops to quell them.

古文：魏恭帝三年，太祖征协入朝，论蜀中事，乃赐姓宇文氏，增邑通前一千五百户。
现代文：魏恭帝三年，太祖征召叱罗协入朝，商讨蜀中事务，于是赐姓宇文氏，增加的食邑加上原有的共一千五百户。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, the great-grandfather conscripted the preceptor Luo He into the court to discuss the affairs of Shu, so he gave the surname Uwen, the increased food villages and the original total of 1,500 households.

古文：晋公护既杀孙恒、李植等，欲委腹心于司会柳庆、司宪令狐整等。
现代文：晋公宇文护杀掉孙恒、李植等人后，想将司会柳庆、司宪令狐整等人委任为心腹。
English: After Jin Gong Uwen killed Sun Heng, Li Zhi and others, he wanted to appoint Secretary Liu Qing, Secretary Xianling and others as confidants.

古文：庆、整并辞不堪，俱荐协。
现代文：柳庆、令狐整等人都推辞说无力胜任，都推荐叱罗协。
English: Liu Qing, Ling Fuzhei and others all declined to say that they were not competent, and all recommended the appointment of Luo Xie.

古文：语在庆、整传。
现代文：此事记载在堑瞳、令皿整传中。
English: This event is recorded in the "Ryo Hitomi" and "Ryo Sarei" biographies.

古文：护遂征协入朝。
现代文：室塞遥于是征召生罗挝入朝。
English: Muroseya then conscripted Lao students into the imperial court.

古文：既至，护引与同宿，深寄托之。
现代文：吐历趋到后，吏塞护让他同自己睡在一起，深深地委托他。
English: After he arrived, the police sergeant let him sleep with him and trusted him deeply.

古文：协欣然承奉，誓以躯命自效。护大悦，以为得协之晚。
现代文：叱罗协高兴地接受了宇文护的委托，发誓要以死效命。宇文护十分高兴，认为得到叱罗协太晚了。
English: Luo Xie happily accepted the commission from Yuwen Guo and vowed to live by the sword. Yuwen Guo was very happy and thought that it was too late to get Luo Xie.

古文：即授军司马，委以兵事。
现代文：当即就任命他为军司马，将军事交给他掌管。
English: He immediately appointed him as the Secretary of War and put him in charge of the military.

古文：寻转治御正，又授护府长史，进爵为公，增邑一千户。
现代文：不久改任治御正，又任命他为宇文护相府长史，进封公爵，增加食邑一千户。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of Imperial Regent, and he was also appointed to the post of Governor-General, Minister of Defense, and Duke of Jinfeng, increasing the number of households in the province by a thousand.

古文：常在护侧，陈说时事，多被纳用。
现代文：叱罗协经常在宇文护身边，向他陈说时事，大多被采纳使用。
English: Zhao Luo Xie was often around Yu Wenzhou, telling him about current affairs, and most of them were adopted and used.

古文：世宗知其材识庸浅，每折之。
现代文：世宗知道他的才识平庸短浅，常常挫辱他。
English: The world knew that his talent was mediocre and shallow, and often humiliated him.

古文：数谓之曰： 汝何知也！ 
现代文：多次对他说： 你懂什么! 
English: I repeatedly said to him: "What do you know!

古文：犹以护所亲任，难即屏黜，每含容之。
现代文：但仍因为他受到字文护的亲近信用，难以立即将他罢黜，常常容忍他。
English: But still, because he was close to and trusted by the defenders of the characters, it was difficult to oust him immediately, and he was often tolerated.

古文：及世宗崩，便授协司会中大夫、中外府长史。
现代文：到世宗去世后，便任命叱罗协为司会中大夫、中外府长史。
English: After Shizong's death, he appointed Zhaoluo Xie as the secretary, the middle doctor, and the prefectural governor.

古文：协形貌瘦小，举措褊急。
现代文：叱罗协体形瘦小，行为褊急。
English: Xiao Luo and his companion are small and thin, and their actions are hasty.

古文：既以得志，每自矜高。
现代文：得志之后，常常高傲自大。
English: After winning, they often become arrogant and conceited.

古文：朝士有来请事者，辄云 汝不解，吾今教汝 ，及其所言，多乖事衷。
现代文：有朝中的官员前来请示时，他常说 你不明白，我来教你 ，等他说出后，大多违背事理。
English: When an official from the Central Government came to ask for instructions, he would often say, "You don't understand, I'll teach you," and when he did say it, it was mostly against reason.

古文：当时莫不笑之。
现代文：当时人没有不笑他的。
English: At the time, people laughed at him.

古文：保定二年，追论平蜀功，别封一子县侯。
现代文：保定二年，追叙他平定蜀地的功劳，另封他的一个儿子为县侯。
English: In the second year of Baoding, he was posthumously awarded for his contribution to the pacification of Shu, and one of his sons was awarded the title of county magistrate.

古文：又于蜀中食邑一千户，入其租赋之半。
现代文：又在蜀中食邑一千户，交纳一半的租赋。
English: In addition, one thousand households in Shuzhong food village will pay half of the rent.

古文：晋公护以协竭忠于己，每提奖之，频考上中，赏以粟帛。
现代文：晋公宇文护因为叱罗协对自己竭尽忠诚，常常提升奖励他，多次考核为上中等，赏赐给他粟米布帛。
English: Because Jin Gongyu Wenwu was loyal to himself, he was often promoted and rewarded. He was repeatedly assessed as upper-middle-class, and he was awarded a corn cloth.

古文：迁少保，转少傅，进位大将军，爵南阳郡公，兼营作副监。
现代文：升任少保，后又改任少傅，升任大将军，封爵为南阳郡公，兼任营作副监。
English: He was promoted to Shao Bao, and later he was promoted to Shao Fu, promoted to general, knighted as Nanyang County official, and also served as deputy superintendent of the battalion.

古文：宫室既成，以功赐爵洛邑县公，回授一子。
现代文：宫室建成后，因功赐爵为洛邑县公，转授给他的一个儿子。
English: After the palace was completed, he was given the title of Lord of Luoyang County for his services, and this was passed on to one of his sons.

古文：协既受护重委，冀得婚连帝室，乃求复旧姓叱罗氏。
现代文：叱罗协既已受到宇文护的重任，希望能同皇室联姻，就请求恢复他原来的姓叱罗氏。
English: Since Zhe Luo Xie had already been entrusted with the important task of protecting Yuwen and hoped to marry into the royal family, he requested to restore his original surname Zhe Luo.

古文：护为奏请，高祖许之。
现代文：字文护为他上奏请求，高祖答应了他。
English: When Kibunko asked him to play it for him, Gozo agreed.

古文：又进位柱国。
现代文：又升任柱国。
English: It was also promoted to a pillar country.

古文：护以协年老，许其致仕，而协贪荣，未肯告退。
现代文：宇文护因为叱罗协年老，同意他辞官回家，而叱罗协贪恋荣华，不肯告退。
English: Because of the old age of Luo Xie, Yu Wengu agreed to his resignation to go home, but Luo Xie was greedy for Ronghua and refused to resign.

古文：护诛，协除名。
现代文：宇文护被诛杀后，叱罗协被除去名籍，取消原有身份。
English: After Umenomori was killed, Shorokyo was removed from the family register and his original status was cancelled.

古文：建德三年，高祖以协宿齿，授仪同三司，赐爵南阳郡公，时与论说旧事。
现代文：建德三年，高祖因为叱罗协是朝廷老臣，任命他为仪同三司，赐爵位为南阳郡公，经常同他一起谈论往事。
English: In the third year of Jiande, Gao Zu appointed him as the Third Secretary of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Sports, and gave him the title of Nanyang County Governor, because he was an old court official. Gao Zu often talked about the past with him.

古文：是岁卒，年七十六。
现代文：叱罗协在这一年死去，终年七十六岁。
English: He died that year, at the age of seventy-six.

古文：子金嗣。
现代文：他的儿子叱罗金承袭了他的爵位。
English: His son, Shirokin, succeeded to his title.

古文：冯迁字羽化。
现代文：冯迁字羽化。
English: Feng Qian became feathered.

古文：父漳，州从事。
现代文：父亲冯漳曾任州从事。
English: His father, Feng Yao, was once a state-level official engaged in mining.

古文：及迁官达，追赠仪同三司、陕州刺史。
现代文：到冯迁官职显赫后，冯漳被追赠为仪同三司、陕州刺史。
English: After Feng Qian became a prominent official, Feng Yu was posthumously awarded the titles of the Third Division of the General Office of the CPC and the Third Division of the General Office of the CPC.

古文：迁少修谨，有干能，州辟从事。
现代文：冯迁年少时为人很谨慎，有才干，州府征辟他为从事。
English: When Feng Qian was young, he was very prudent and talented, and the state government recruited him to be engaged.

古文：魏神龟中，刺史杨钧引为中兵参军事，转定襄令，寻为并州水曹参军。
现代文：魏神龟年间，刺史杨钩推荐他为中兵参军事，后改任为定襄县令，不久又任并州水曹参军。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wei, Zhang Shi Yanghuang recommended him to join the Chinese army. Later, he was appointed as the county magistrate of Dingxiang County, and soon after, he was appointed to join the state army of Shuizao.

古文：所历之职，咸以勤恪著称。
现代文：在他所任官职期间，都以勤恳恭谨着称。
English: During his time in office, he was known for his diligence and courtesy.

古文：及魏孝武西迁，乃弃官，与直合将军冯灵豫入关。
现代文：到魏孝武帝西迁时；鼹辞掉官职，与直合将军冯灵豫进入关中。
English: When Emperor Xiaowu of the Wei Dynasty moved to the west, Zhai resigned from his official post and entered Guanzhong with Zhaohe General Feng Lingyu.

古文：即从魏孝武复潼关，定回洛，除给事中。
现代文：跟随魏孝武帝收复潼关，平定回洛，任给事中。
English: Following Emperor Wei Xiaowu, he recovered Shaoguan, pacified and returned to Luo, and was assigned to the middle of things.

古文：后从太祖擒窦泰，复弘农，战沙苑，皆有功。
现代文：后来跟随太祖擒获窦泰，收复弘农，征战沙苑，都有功绩。
English: Later, he won Dou Tai, recovered Hong Nong, and fought in Sha Yuan, all of which were meritorious.

古文：授都督、龙骧将军、羽林监，封独显县伯，邑六百户。
现代文：授任都督、龙骧将军、羽林监，封为独显县伯，食邑六百户。
English: He was appointed as the governor of the capital, the general of Longyu, and the supervisor of the Ural forest, and he was appointed as the governor of Duxian County, with 600 households in the food village.

古文：及洛阳之战，迁先登陷阵，遂中重疮，仅得不死。
现代文：在洛阳之战时，冯迁率先冲入阵中，身受重伤，仅仅是没有死去。
English: During the Battle of Luoyang, Feng Qian was the first to rush into the fray. He was seriously injured, but he did not die.

古文：以功加辅国将军、军师都督，进爵为侯。
现代文：因功加授辅国将军、军师都督，升爵位为侯。
English: For his achievements, he was awarded the title of vice-governor, military governor, and was promoted to marquis.

古文：久之，出为广汉郡守。
现代文：很长时间后，出任广漠郡郡守。
English: After a long time, he became the governor of Guangmo County.

古文：时蜀土初平，人情扰动，迁政存简恕，夷俗颇安之。
现代文：当时蜀地刚刚平定，人心骚动，冯迁为政简约宽恕，夷人很安定。
English: At that time, Shu had just been pacified, the people were agitated, Feng Qian was a simple and forgiving politician, and the people were very stable.

古文：魏恭帝二年，就加车骑将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍，镇樊城。
现代文：魏恭帝二年，就任车骑将军、大都督、通直散骑常侍，镇守樊城。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Wei Gong, he was appointed chariot and cavalry general, grand governor, and general cavalry officer, and was in charge of the defense of Lucheng.

古文：寻拜汉东郡守。
现代文：不久拜任汉束郡郡守。
English: He was soon appointed governor of Hanzuka County.

古文：孝闵帝践阼，入为晋公护府掾，加车骑大将军、仪同三司，进爵临高县公。
现代文：孝闵帝即位后，冯迁被召入任晋公宇文护相府府掾，加授车骑大将军、仪同三司，升爵为临高县公。
English: After the enthronement of Emperor Xiaojun, Feng Qian was called into the prefectural government of Jin Gongyu, Minister of Education and Cultural Protection, and was awarded the title of General of Cavalry and Cavalry, the title of the Third Division of the Ministry of Ceremonies, and was promoted to the rank of Lin Gao County official.

古文：寻迁护府司录，进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：不久升任宇文护府司录，进授骠骑大将军、开府仪同三司。
English: He was soon promoted to the secretary of Uwen Nursing Home, and promoted to the general of cavalry, and to the secretary of the three departments of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：迁性质直，小心畏慎，虽居枢要，不以势位加人。
现代文：冯迁性情正直，小心谨慎，虽然身居要职，但不以权势地位欺凌他人。
English: Feng Qian is honest and cautious. Although he holds an important position, he does not use his position of power to bully others.

古文：兼明练时事，善于断决。
现代文：加上他熟悉时事，善于判断是非。
English: In addition, he is familiar with current affairs and good at judging right and wrong.

古文：每校阅文簿，孜孜不倦，从辰逮夕，未尝休止。
现代文：常常查阅文书，孜孜不倦，从早到晚，从不停止。
English: He often checks his paperwork, tirelessly, from morning to night, never stopping.

古文：以此甚为护所委任。
现代文：因此很受宇文护的信任重用。
English: Therefore, it is highly trusted and reused by Uwenguo.

古文：后以其朝之旧齿，欲以衣锦荣之，乃授陕州刺史，进爵隆山郡公，增邑并前二千户。
现代文：后来因为他是朝中的老臣，想使他富贵荣显，就授任他为陕州刺史，升爵为隆山郡公，增加食邑加上从前的共二千户。
English: Later, because he was an old courtier of the imperial court and they wanted to make him rich and famous, they appointed him as the governor of Shaanxi Province, promoted him to be the governor of Longshan County, and increased the number of food villages to the previous total of two thousand.

古文：迁本寒微，不为时辈所重，一旦刺举本州，唯以谦恭接待乡邑，人无怨者。
现代文：冯迁本来出身寒微，不被当时的人所看重，当他担任了本州刺史后，衹是以谦逊恭谨的态度接待乡里，没有人怨恨他。
English: Feng Qian was originally from a humble background and was not valued by the people at that time. When he served as the chief historian of Honshu, Zou received the villagers with a humble and respectful attitude. No one resented him.

古文：复入为司录，转工部中大夫，历军司马，迁小司空。
现代文：他又重新被召入任司录。改任工部中大夫，历任军司马，升任小司空。
English: He was again called to serve as a registrar. He was reappointed as a junior doctor of the engineering department, successively as a military secretary, and promoted to a junior secretary.

古文：自天和已后，迁以年老，委任稍衰。
现代文：从天和年间以后，冯迁因为年老，受到的重用稍稍减退。
English: From the days and years after, Feng Qian, because of old age, suffered from heavy use and slightly declined.

古文：及护诛，犹除名。
现代文：宇文护被诛杀时他被除去名籍，取消原有身份。
English: When Uwenshu was beaten to death, he was stripped of his family name and status.

古文：建德末，卒于家，时年七十八。
现代文：建德末年，死在家中，当时他七十八岁。
English: He died at home in the last years of his life, at the age of 78.

古文：子恕，位至仪同三司、伏夷镇将、平寇县伯。
现代文：他的儿子冯恕，官至仪同三司、伏夷镇将、平寇县伯。
English: His son, Feng Shou, was an official of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division of the Third Division.

古文：护所委信者，又有朔方边平，位至大将军、军司马、护府司马。
现代文：宇文护所信任重用的人，还有朔方人边平，官至大将军、军司马、宇文护府司马。
English: People who are trusted and reused by the Uwen Nursing Home, as well as Shuo Fang, Bianping, the highest-ranking general, the military secretary, and the secretary of the Uwen Nursing Home.

古文：护败，亦除名。
现代文：宇文护败亡后，也被除名。
English: After the defeat and death of Umenomori, he was also removed from the list.

古文：史臣曰：仲尼有言： 可与适道，未可与权。 夫道者，率礼之谓也；权者，反经之谓也。
现代文：史臣曰：仲尼说过： 可以同他一起按照正道取得成就的人，未必可以同他一起权宜通变。 所谓正道，就是遵循礼制；权变，就是违反常道。
English: Shichen said: Zhongni said: Those who can achieve success with him according to the right path may not be able to change with him. The so-called right path is to follow the etiquette; the change is to violate the common way.

古文：率礼由乎正理，易以成佐世之功；反经系乎非常，难以定匡时之业。
现代文：遵循礼制就是遵循正理，容易成就辅佐帝王的功绩；违反常道就是不合常规，难以建立匡扶时世的大业。
English: To follow the etiquette is to follow the truth, and it is easy to achieve the merit of assisting the emperor; to violate the common way is to be unconventional, and it is difficult to establish the great cause of supporting the times.

古文：故得其人则治，伊尹放太甲，周旦相孺子是也；不得其人则乱，新都迁汉鼎，晋氏倾魏族是也。
现代文：所以得到了贤能的人天下就能安定，伊尹流放太甲，周公辅佐幼君就是这样；不能得到贤能的人天下就会混乱，王莽篡夺汉政权，司马氏倾覆魏室就是这样。
English: Therefore, the world can be stable if one obtains virtuous people. This was the case with the exile of Yi Yin to Taiga and Zhou Gongfu Suo Youjun. If one cannot obtain virtuous people, the world will be chaotic. This was the case with Wang Mang's usurpation of the Han regime and the overthrow of the Wei dynasty by the Sima clan.

古文：是以先王明上下之序，圣人重君臣之分。
现代文：所以先王明确上下的秩序，圣人重视君臣的名分。
English: Therefore, the former king clearly defined the order of ascending and descending, and the saints attached importance to the title of prince and vassal.

古文：委质同于股肱，受爵均其休戚。
现代文：奉事君主要和辅臣一样，接受爵位是为了与君主分享哀乐。
English: Servants of the sovereign, as well as vassals, accept a title of nobility in order to share the joys and sorrows of the monarch.

古文：当其亲受顾托，位居宰衡，虽复承利剑，临沸鼎，不足以詟其虑；据帝图，君海内，不足以回其心。
现代文：当亲自接受了先王的遣托，身居宰辅之位后，即使是头悬利剑，面对沸鼎，也不能使他畏惧；拥有帝业，君临天下，不足以改变他的心意。
English: When he personally accepted the entrustment of the former king, after living in the position of deputy, even if he hung a sharp sword on his head, he could not be afraid of it; having an empire and ruling the world was not enough to change his mind.

古文：若斯人者，固以功与山岳争其高，名与穹壤齐其久矣。
现代文：像这样的人，本来就可以使功业与山岳争高低，名誉同天地一样长久。
English: A man like this would have been able to make his achievements compete with the mountains, and his reputation would have lasted as long as heaven and earth.

古文：有周受命之始，宇文护寔预艰难。
现代文：在北周刚刚接受天命的时候，宇文护实在是经历了艰难。
English: At a time when the Northern Zhou Dynasty had just accepted the Mandate of Heaven, Wu Wenguo really went through hardships.

古文：及太祖崩殂，诸子冲幼，群公怀等夷之志，天下有去就之心。
现代文：到太祖去世时，他的儿子们年幼，王公们怀有取代的志向，天下的人有背离的心意。
English: When the great-grandfather died, his sons were young, the princes harbored the ambition to replace him, and the people of the world had the intention to depart.

古文：卒能变魏为周，俾危获乂者，护之力也。
现代文：最终能够将魏变为周，使危难转化为平安，这是宇文护的功劳。
English: In the end, he was able to turn Wei into Zhou and turn danger into peace, which is a credit to Yu Wenzhou.

古文：向使加之以礼让，继之以忠贞，桐宫有悔过之期，未央终天年之数，则前史所载，焉足以道哉。
现代文：假如他能再加上以礼谦让，同时保持对君主的忠诚坚贞，太甲有悔过的时候，西汉也能保全自然的寿数，那么从前史书上所记载的，又有什么值得称道的呢。
English: If he can add to this his courtesy and humility, and at the same time maintain his loyalty and steadfastness to the monarch, and if Western Han can also preserve the natural life expectancy when Taiga repents, then what has been recorded in the ancient history book is worthy of praise.

古文：然护寡于学术，昵近群小，威福在己，征伐自出。
现代文：然而宇文护缺少学问，亲近小人，作威作福，专权独断。
English: However, Uwenguo lacked knowledge, was close to villains, used arrogance for personal gain, and exercised arbitrary power.

古文：有人臣无君之心，为人主不堪之事。
现代文：有作为人臣而目无君主的心，做出君主无法忍受的事情。
English: He has the heart of a vassal without the eyes of a monarch, and does things that a monarch cannot tolerate.

古文：忠孝大节也，违之而不疑；废弒至逆也，行之而无悔。
现代文：忠孝是最高尚的操节，他却毫不犹豫地违背它；废弑君主是最大的叛逆，他却毫不后悔地去做。
English: Loyalty and filial piety is the noblest discipline, but he does not hesitate to violate it; dethroning the monarch is the greatest rebellion, but he does it without regret.

古文：终于身首横分，妻孥为戮，不亦宜乎。
现代文：最终自己身首异处，妻子儿女被杀，不也是应该的吗。
English: In the end, his head was in a different place, his wife and children were killed, isn't that how it should be?

