古文：杨时硃孙杨行密，字化源，庐州合淝人。
现代文：杨行密的字叫化源，庐州合淝县人。
English: Yang Xingmi's character is called Kagen, and he is from Ganzhou and Handan counties.

古文：少孤，与群儿戏，常为旗帜战阵状。年二十，亡入盗中，刺史郑綮捕得，异其貌，曰： 而且富贵，何为作贼？ 
现代文：他小时候是孤儿，和小孩游戏时，常拿旗帜像打仗的样子，他二十岁时，逃到强盗里去了，刺史郑綮抓住了他，看了他的相貌感到吃惊，说： 你将要富贵了，为什么做强盗？ 
English: When he was a child, he was an orphan. When he played with other children, he often carried a flag as if he were fighting a war. When he was twenty years old, he ran away to become a bandit. The assassin Zheng Yao caught him, was surprised by his appearance, and said, "You're going to be rich, why be a bandit?"

古文：纵之。
现代文：就把他放了。
English: They let him go.

古文：与里人田頵、陶雅、刘威善。
现代文：他和街坊田君页、陶雅、刘威要好。
English: He is better than his neighbors Tian Junshi, Tao Ya and Liu Wei.

古文：僖宗在蜀，刺史遣通章行在，日走三百里，如约而还。
现代文：唐僖宗在蜀地时，刺史派他到皇帝驻地送奏章，他每天跑三百里路，按期回来了。
English: When Tang Xizong was in Shu Di, Zishi sent him to the emperor's residence to deliver the music chapter. He ran three hundred miles a day and returned on schedule.

古文：秦宗权寇庐、寿间，刺史募杀贼，差首级为赏，行密以功补队长。
现代文：秦宗权进犯庐州、寿州一带，刺史召募人杀敌，按杀敌数奖赏，他因功劳升任队长。
English: Qin Zongquan invaded the areas around Luzhou and Shoushou, summoned and recruited people to kill the enemy, and rewarded them according to the number of enemies killed. He was promoted to captain for his merits.

古文：都将忌之，俾出戍。
现代文：都将忌妒他，派他外出驻守。
English: They will all be jealous of him and send him out to guard.

古文：将行，都将问所乏，对曰： 我须公头！ 
现代文：快到行期了，都将问他缺什么，他回答说： 我需要你的头！ 
English: When it was almost time to leave, they asked him what was missing, and he replied: "I need your head!"

古文：即斩之，自为八营都知兵马使。
现代文：就把都将杀了，自封为八营都知兵马使。
English: He killed them all and proclaimed himself the commander of the eight battalions of the Imperial Japanese Army.

古文：刺史走，淮南节度使高骈因表为庐州刺史。
现代文：刺史逃跑了，淮南节度使高骈就任命他为庐州刺史。
English: Zhi Shi ran away, and the Huainan Festival made Gao Yao appoint him as the new Zhi Shi of Zhangzhou.

古文：乃以田頵为八营都将，陶雅为左冲山将，讨定乡盗。
现代文：他任命田君页为八营都将，陶雅为左冲山将，讨平了当地的强盗。
English: He appointed Tian Junshi as the commander of the eight battalions and Tao Ya as the commander of the left charge, and leveled the local bandits.

古文：骈将吕用之恐行密不可制，遣俞公楚以兵五千屯合淝，名讨黄巢而阴图之。
现代文：高骈的将领吕用之怕他难以制服，派俞公楚率五千兵驻扎在合肥，假托讨黄巢实际算计他。
English: The high-ranking general Lv Ying, fearing that he would be difficult to subdue, sent Yu Gongzhu and five thousand soldiers to be stationed in Hefei, pretending to support Huang Chao, but actually calculating him.

古文：行密击杀公楚。
现代文：他把俞公楚杀死了。
English: He killed Zou Gongchu.

古文：秦宗权遣弟度淮取舒城，行密破走之。
现代文：秦宗权派弟弟渡过淮河进攻舒城，杨行密打败并赶走了他。
English: Qin Zongquan sent his younger brother across the Huai River to attack Shucheng, Yang Xingmi defeated and drove him away.

古文：时张敖据寿州，许勍据滁州，与行密挐战。
现代文：当时张敖占据寿州，许京力占据滁州，和杨行密争斗。
English: At that time, Zhang Ye occupied Shoushou, Xu Jingli occupied Zhangzhou, and Yang Xingming fought.

古文：又舒人陈儒攻刺史高澞，澞来告难，行密未能定。
现代文：舒州人陈儒进攻刺史高氵虞、高氵虞来告急，杨行密没能取胜。
English: Chen Ru, a resident of Shuzhou, attacked and stabbed Gao Zhiguo, and Gao Zhiguo panicked, and Yang Xingmi failed to win.

古文：贼吴回、李本逐澞，据其城，行密虏之，取舒州，为勍所夺。
现代文：盗贼吴、李本赶走了高氵虞，占据了州城，杨行密抓住了他们，占领了舒州，又被许京力夺去。
English: Thieves Wu and Li Ben drove away Gao Xingyu and occupied the state capital, Yang Xingmi caught them, occupied Shuzhou, and was taken away by Xu Jingli.

古文：光启二年，张敖遣将魏虔攻庐州，大将李神福、田頵破之楮城。
现代文：光启二年，张敖派将领魏虔进攻庐州，杨行密的大将李神福、田君页在楮城打败了他。
English: In the second year of the Guangqi era, Zhang Xuan's general Wei Qian led an attack on Zhangzhou, and Yang Xingmi's generals Li Shenfu and Tian Junshi defeated him in Zhangcheng.

古文：毕师鐸、秦彦攻高骈，吕用之以骈命署行密行军司马，督其兵进援。
现代文：毕师铎、秦彦进攻高骈，吕用之传高骈的命令任命杨行密为行军司马，催促他派兵增援。
English: Bi Shizhao and Qin Yan attacked Gaozhou. Lyu Yingzhi appointed Yang Xingmi as the commander of the army and urged him to send reinforcements.

古文：客袁袭说行密曰： 高公耄昏，妖人用权，彦乃以逆除暴，炽其乱。
现代文：他的门客袁袭劝他说 ：高骈年老糊涂，道人掌权，秦彦用叛乱来驱除暴虐，助长了他造成的混乱。
English: His protégé, Yuan Qi, advised him: "Gao Yao is old and stupid, Taoists are in power, Qin Yan used rebellion to drive out tyranny, and contributed to the chaos he caused.

古文：公亟应，必得其地。 
现代文：您赶快响应，一定能得到他的地盘。 
English: If you respond quickly, you are sure to get his site.

古文：行密乃檄部州，裒兵而东，次天长，而扬州陷。
现代文：杨行密就向所辖州发文，集中军队东征，走到天长，扬州被攻陷了。
English: Yang Xingmi issued a document to the states under his jurisdiction, concentrated the army to march eastward, went to Tianchang, and Yangzhou was conquered.

古文：行密薄城而屯，用之以兵属之。
现代文：他逼近扬州驻扎，吕用之率军从属于他。
English: He was stationed near Yangzhou, and the army led by Lü Yingzhi was subordinate to him.

古文：彦以骑兵背城战，行密卧帐中，令曰： 贼近，报我。 
现代文：秦彦派骑兵依托城墙进攻，他睡在军营里，说： 敌人逼近了，就报告我。 
English: Qin Yan sent his cavalry to attack against the city wall. He slept in the camp and said, "When the enemy approaches, report to me."

古文：俄而陷一屯，别将李宗礼入曰： 兵相迫，战且不利，请坚壁，徐引归可也。 
现代文：不久被攻占了一个军营，偏将李宗礼进营帐说： 兵力悬殊，作战将不会有利，请求坚守军营，可慢慢退兵。 
English: Soon after, a military camp was occupied. General Li Zongli entered the camp and said, "There is a huge disparity in troop strength, so the battle will not be advantageous. I request you to hold on to the military camp and slowly withdraw the troops."

古文：李涛怒曰： 以顺去逆，何众寡为！
现代文：李涛发怒说： 用正义讨伐叛逆，哪管兵多少！
English: Li Tao said angrily, "Using justice to fight against treason, who is in charge of how many soldiers!

古文：今尚何归，愿以所部前死。 
现代文：现在还回哪里去，愿率部下前去死战。 
English: I don't know where to go now, but I am willing to lead my men forward to fight to the death.

古文：行密喜，益甲出战，俘杀如藉，彦军不出。
现代文：杨行密高兴了，增派军队出营作战，俘虏杀死了很多敌兵，秦彦的军队不出城了。
English: Yang Xingmi was delighted, and sent more troops to fight in the camp. The captives killed many enemy soldiers, and Qin Yan's army left the city.

古文：会骈死，袭劝行密举军缟素，大临三日。
现代文：高骈去世了，袁袭劝杨行密命全军戴孝，举行了三天大型吊唁。
English: Gao Yao passed away, Yuan Hui advised Yang Xing to secretly order the whole army to pay tribute to him, and held three days of large-scale condolences.

古文：进攻城，未能下。
现代文：再进兵攻城，还没能攻下。
English: Then they marched in to attack the city, but they haven't been able to take it yet.

古文：用之将张审晟诡伏西壕，杀阍者，启外兵，彦军疲，守逻皆溃去，行密入据扬州。
现代文：吕用之的将领张审晟偷偷埋伏在西边护城河里，杀死守门士兵，给城外军队打开了城门，秦彦的军队疲劳了，守城、巡逻的兵都溃逃了，杨行密占领了扬州。
English: Lu's general Zhang Xunyang secretly lay in wait in the west moat, killed the soldiers guarding the gate, and opened the gate to the troops outside the city. Qin Yan's army was tired, and the soldiers guarding the city and patrolling the city fled. Yang Xingmi occupied Yangzhou.

古文：未阅月，孙儒奄至，兵锐甚。
现代文：不到一个月，孙儒突然来了，军队很精锐。
English: Less than a month later, Sun Ru suddenly arrived, and the army was very elite.

古文：袭见行密曰： 公之入，以少击众，室家未完。若外被重围，情见势殆，不如避之。 
现代文：袁袭求见杨行密说 ：您攻进扬州，是以少胜多，住处还没修好；如果外面被层层包围，按情理就危险了，不如避开他。 
English: Yuan Sui asked to see Yang Xingmi and said, "If you invade Yangzhou, it is better to use less than more. Your residence is not yet repaired. If you are surrounded from the outside, it will be dangerous, so it is better to avoid him."

古文：行密执海陵镇遏使高霸杀之，并其众，辇所收财归于庐。
现代文：杨行密抓住并杀死了海陵镇遏使高霸。兼并了他的军队，将搜罗的财物用车子装着回到庐州。
English: Yang Xingmi captured and killed the commander of Hailing Town, Gao Ba, annexed his army, and took the collected property back to Zhangzhou by car.

古文：于是，硃全忠自为淮南节度使，遣将张廷范致命，而授行密副使，以行军司马李璠知留后。
现代文：这时，朱全忠自任淮南节度使，派将领张廷范传令，任命杨行密为副使，行军司马李任留后。
English: At this time, Zhu Quanzhong appointed himself as the envoy of Huainan Festival, sent the general Zhang Tingfan to convey the order, appointed Yang Xingmi as the deputy envoy, and left the marching secretary Ma Liren.

古文：行密大怒，廷范、璠不敢入。
现代文：杨行密很生气，张廷范、李不敢进城。
English: Yang Xingmi was very angry, Zhang Tingfan and Li did not dare to enter the city.

古文：全忠更请以行密知观察留后。
现代文：朱全忠又请杨行密任观察留后。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also asked Yang Xing to stay behind as an observer.

古文：当此时，孙儒强，赫然有吞吴、越意。
现代文：那时候，孙儒兵力强，显然有吞并吴、越的意图。
English: At that time, Sun Ru had a strong military force and obviously had the intention of annexing Wu and Yue.

古文：行密欲遁保海陵，袭劝还庐州，治兵为后计，行密乃还。
现代文：杨行密想退守海陵，袁袭劝他回庐州，整顿军队做下一步打算，他就退兵了。
English: Yang Xingmi wanted to retreat to Hailing, Yuan Qi advised him to return to Zhangzhou, reorganize the army and plan the next step, and he withdrew.

古文：既又谋趋洪州，袭不可，曰： 钟传新兴，兵附食多，未易图也。
现代文：后来他又想进军洪州，袁袭不赞成，说： 钟传刚兴起，军队亲附，粮食又多，不容易消灭。
English: Later, he also wanted to invade Hongzhou, but Yuan Wei did not approve, saying: Zhong Chuan has just arisen, the army is closely attached, there is a lot of food, and it is not easy to eliminate.

古文：孙端据和州，赵晖屯上元，结此二人以图宣州，我绰绰有余力矣。 
现代文：孙端占据和州，赵晖驻军上元，和这两人联合进攻宣州，我们的力量绰绰有余。 他听从了。
English: Sun Duan occupied He Prefecture, and Zhao Jun garrisoned Shangyuan, and the two of them jointly attacked Xuanzhou. Our strength was more than enough. He obeyed.

古文：行密从之。端、晖次采石，行密自糁潭济，端等战不胜。
现代文：孙端、赵晖驻军采石，他从糁潭渡江，孙端等作战没取胜。
English: Sun Duan and Zhao Hong garrisoned a quarry, he crossed the river from Shitan, and Sun Duan and others fought without victory.

古文：袭劝行密 速趋曷山，坚壁以须。
现代文：袁袭劝他 赶快进军曷山，筑坚固营垒等待。
English: Yuan Qi advised him to march into Shaoshan as soon as possible, build a strong camp and wait.

古文：宣人求战，示以弱，待其怠，一举可禽 。
现代文：宣州军队来挑战，让他们觉得我军弱，等他们松懈了，一次战斗就可取胜 。
English: The Xuanzhou army challenged them, making them feel that our army was weak, and that if they relaxed, they could win in a single battle.

古文：宣将苏瑭兵二万对屯，行密不战，分奇兵伐木开道四出，瑭惊北，遂围宣州。
现代文：宣州将领苏瑭率军两万驻扎在他对面，他不出战，出奇兵砍树开辟道路四面出击，苏瑭受惊逃走了，他于是包围了宣州。
English: Su Shi, the general of Xuanzhou, led an army of twenty thousand stationed opposite him. He did not go out to fight. Surprisingly, the soldiers cut down trees to open up a road to attack in all directions. Su Shi was frightened and fled. He then surrounded Xuanzhou.

古文：刺史赵锽粮尽，亲将多出降。
现代文：宣州刺史赵粮食吃完了，亲兵将领多数出城投降了。
English: After Xuanzhou general Zhao Shishi finished eating the grain, most of his generals left the city and surrendered.

古文：初，行密有锐士五千，衣以黑缯黑甲，号 黑云都 。
现代文：此前，他有精兵五千名，穿着黑色的衣裳铠甲，号称 黑云都 。
English: Previously, he had five thousand elite soldiers, dressed in black clothes and armor, known as the Black Cloud.

古文：又并盱眙、曲溪二屯，籍其士为 黄头军 ，以李神福为左右黄头都尉，兵锐甚。
现代文：又合并盱眙、曲溪两军，称他们为 黄头军 ，命李神福任左右黄头都尉，军队非常精锐。
English: He also merged the two armies of Zou and Quxi, calling them the Yellow Head Army, and ordered Li Shenfu to be the captain of the left and right Yellow Heads. The army was very elite.

古文：曲溪将刘金策锽必遁，绐曰： 将军若出，愿自吾垒而偕。 
现代文：曲溪将领刘金判断赵必定逃跑，骗他说： 您如果出城，希望来我的军营一起走。 
English: Liu Jin, the general of Quxi, judged that Zhao must have fled, and lied to him, saying, "If you go out of the city, I hope you will come to my military camp and walk with me."

古文：锽喜，多遗之金，许妻以女。明日，噪城上曰： 刘郎不为尔婿！ 
现代文：赵高兴了，送给他很多钱，答应把女儿嫁给他。第二天，他派人对城上喊道： 刘将军不做你的女婿！ 
English: Zhao was delighted, gave him a lot of money and promised to marry his daughter to him. The next day, he sent someone to the city to shout: General Liu will not be your son-in-law!

古文：锽宵遁，获之。
现代文：赵夜晚逃跑，被抓住了。
English: Zhao fled in the night and was caught.

古文：锽，全忠故人也，发使求之。
现代文：赵是朱全忠的好友，朱全忠派使者来要他。
English: Zhao was a good friend of Zhu Quanzhong, and Zhu Quanzhong sent an envoy to him.

古文：袭曰： 斩首送之，无后虑。 
现代文：袁袭说 ：把头砍下来送给他，就没有后患了。 
English: Yuan Wei said, "If you cut off his head and give it to him, there will be no regrets."

古文：乃归锽首于汴。
现代文：于是把赵的头送到汴州。
English: So Zhao's head was sent to Ganzhou.

古文：昭宗诏行密检校司徒、宣歙池观察使。
现代文：唐昭宗下诏任命他为检校司徒，宣、歙、池州观察使。
English: Under Emperor Zhaozong of Tang Dynasty, he was appointed as the inspector of schools, and the inspector of Xuan, Yao and Chizhou.

古文：时韩守威以功拜池州刺史，行密表徙湖州，以兵护送。
现代文：当时韩守威因功被任命为池州刺史，杨行密上奏把他调到湖州，派兵护送。
English: At that time, Han Shouwei was appointed as the chief historian of Chizhou, and Yang Xingmi transferred him to Huzhou and sent soldiers to escort him.

古文：而李师悦在湖州，与杭州刺史钱镠战不解。
现代文：李师悦在湖州，和杭州刺史钱打得不可开交。
English: In Huzhou, Li Shiyue had a hard time dealing with Hangzhou's Zhang Shicheng.

古文：苏、湖、常、润乱甚。
现代文：苏、湖、常、润州乱得很。
English: Su, Huh, Chang and Renzhou are very chaotic.

古文：行密虽得宣州，而蔡俦为孙儒所破，以庐州降。
现代文：杨行密虽然得到了宣州，但蔡俦被孙儒打败，率庐州投降了。
English: Although Yang Xingmi gained Xuanzhou, Cai Qi was defeated by Sun Ru and led Xuanzhou to surrender.

古文：儒进攻行密，行密复入扬州，北结时溥扞儒。
现代文：孙儒进军攻打杨行密，杨行密又攻进扬州，和北边时溥联合抵抗孙儒。
English: Sun Ju marched to attack Yang Xingmi, Yang Xingmi also attacked Yangzhou, and the north side of the time of the joint resistance to Sun Ju.

古文：全忠遣庞师古将兵十万，自颍度淮助行密，败于高邮。
现代文：朱全忠派庞师古率军十万，从颍州渡过淮河来帮助杨行密，在高邮被打败了。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Pang Shigu with an army of 100,000 to cross the Huai River from Zhangzhou to help Yang Xingmi, and was defeated at Gaoyou.

古文：行密惧，退还宣州，遣安仁义袭成及，取润州，自将三万屯丹阳。
现代文：杨行密害怕了，退回了宣州，派安仁义袭击成及，占领了润州，自己率领三万军队驻扎在丹阳。
English: Yang Xingmi got scared, returned to Xuanzhou, sent An Renyi to attack Chengji, occupied Runzhou, and stationed himself in Danyang with 30,000 troops.

古文：仁义又取常州，杀钱镠将杜棱。
现代文：安仁义又攻占了常州，杀死了钱的将领杜眣。
English: An Renyi also captured Changzhou and killed the Qian general Du Zuo.

古文：儒亦使刘建锋夺润、常。
现代文：孙儒又派刘建锋夺取了润州、常州。
English: Sun Ju also sent Liu Jianfeng to seize Runzhou and Changzhou.

古文：帝以杭州为防御使，授镠；以宣州号宁国军，授行密节度使。
现代文：皇帝在杭州设防御使任命了钱；称宣州为宁国军，任命杨行密为节度使。
English: The emperor appointed Qian to set up a defense force in Hangzhou; declared Xuanzhou to be Ning's national army, and appointed Yang Xingmi to be the military envoy.

古文：大顺二年，儒屯溧水，循山构壁。
现代文：大顺二年，孙儒驻扎在溧水，靠着山筑营垒。
English: In the second year of Dashun, Sun Ru was stationed in Surabaya, building a camp against the mountains.

古文：行密遣李神福屯广德，计曰： 兵倍不战，当避其锐，骄之。 
现代文：杨行密派李神福驻扎在广德，定计道： 我们军队多但不求战，以躲避他们的锐气，使他们骄傲。 
English: Yang Xingmi sent Li Shenfu to be stationed in Guangde. He said, "We have more troops, but we don't want to fight. We want to avoid their spirit and make them proud."

古文：乃退舍。儒众以为怯，守者懈，神福夜袭走之。
现代文：就退后三十里扎营，孙儒的军队认为他们胆小，守卫的松懈了，李神福夜晚袭击赶跑了他们。
English: They retreated thirty li to set up camp. Sun Ru's army thought they were cowardly, and the guards were slack. Li Shenfu attacked them at night and drove them away.

古文：儒将康旺取和州，安景思取滁州。
现代文：孙儒的将领康旺攻占了和州，安景思攻占了滁州。
English: Sun Ru's general Kang Wang conquered He Prefecture, and An Jingsi conquered Quzhou.

古文：神福击降旺，逐景思，攻腰山屯，破之，禽儒将李弘章。
现代文：李神福进攻收降了康旺，赶走了安景思，又进攻腰山屯，攻下来了，活捉了孙儒的将领李弘章。
English: Li Shenfu attacked and subdued Kangwang, drove away An Jingsi, and attacked and captured the general Li Hongzhang of Sun Ru.

古文：俄而田頵、刘威为儒所败。
现代文：不久田君页、刘威被孙儒打败。
English: Soon after, Tian Junzhe and Liu Wei were defeated by Sun Ru.

古文：行密欲守铜官，神福曰： 儒扫境以来，利速战，宜坚壁老其师，则我无敌矣。
现代文：杨行密想防守铜官，李神福说： 孙儒集中兵力前来，有利的是速决战，应坚守拖垮他的军队，我们就不可战胜了。
English: Yang Xingxing secretly wanted to defend the bronze officer, Li Shenfu said: Sun Ru concentrated the troops to come, the advantage is the quick-decision battle, we should persist in dragging down his army, we will be invincible.

古文：又出轻骑绝贼粮道，使前不得战，退无仰储，不亡何待？ 
现代文：还可派轻装骑兵切断敌军的运粮路线，使他们前面不能决战，后面没有供应，怎么会不失败呢？ 
English: They could also send light cavalry to cut off the enemy's grain transportation route, so that they could not fight a decisive battle in front, and there was no supply behind. How could they not fail?

古文：于是，行密以神福为宣池都游奕使。
现代文：这样，杨行密任命李神福为宣池都游弈使。
English: Thus, Yang Xingmi appointed Li Shenfu as the envoy of Xuanchi.

古文：儒始乏食。
现代文：孙儒的军队开始缺粮了。
English: Sun Ju's army began to run short of food.

古文：常熟名贼陈可儿间儒、行密之斗，窃入常州，自称制置使。
现代文：常熟大盗陈可儿看到孙儒、杨行密在争斗，偷偷进入常州，自封制置使。
English: When Chen Ker, the great thief of Changshu, saw Sun Ru and Yang Xingmi fighting, he secretly entered Changzhou and set up an envoy.

古文：行密遣陶雅守润州，张训入扬州，因执楚州刺史，以轻兵袭常州，斩可儿。
现代文：杨行密派陶雅据守润州，张训进占扬州，抓住了楚州刺史，派轻装士兵袭击常州，处死了陈可儿。
English: Yang Xingmi sent Tao Ya to defend Runzhou, Zhang Xunjin occupied Yangzhou, caught the Chuzhou assassin, sent light-armed soldiers to attack Changzhou, and executed Chen Ker.

古文：孙儒围行密宣州，凡五月不解。台濛作鲁阳五堰，拕轻舸馈粮，故行密军不困，卒破儒。
现代文：孙儒把杨行密包围在宣州，共五个月未解围，台氵蒙修建了鲁阳五堰，拖小船运粮，因此杨行密的军队不缺粮，终于打败了孙儒。
English: Sun Ru encircled Yang Xingmi in Xuanzhou for a total of five months before the siege was lifted. The Taiwanese built five weirs in Luyang and towed small boats to transport grain. As a result, Yang Xingmi's army did not lack grain and finally defeated Sun Ru.

古文：即表田頵守宣城，长驱入扬州。
现代文：杨行密任命田君页守卫宣城，长途奔袭攻进扬州。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Tian Junshi to guard Xuancheng and made a long-distance raid into Yangzhou.

古文：战凡七年，定八州，生人将尽，行密劳隐休息，其下遂安。
现代文：战争共打了七年，他占领了八个州，人民都快死光了，他慰问隐藏的人让他们安居，他的部下就安心了。
English: The war had been going on for seven years, he had occupied eight states, the people were dying out, he consoled the hidden people to let them live in peace, and his men were at ease.

古文：议出盐茗畀民输帛，幕府高勖曰： 疮破之余，不可以加敛。
现代文：有人提议用盐和茶向人民换丝绸，幕僚高勖说： 战乱之后，不能增加负担。
English: When it was suggested that salt and tea should be given to the people in exchange for silk, Gao Yao, an aide, said: "After the war, we cannot increase the burden.

古文：且帑赀何患不足？若悉我所有，易四邻所无，不积日，财有余矣。 
现代文：不用担心钱财不够，如果用我们境内出产的，交换四面邻近地区我们没有的东西，要不了多久，钱财就有多的了。 
English: Don't worry about not having enough money. If we use what we produce in our country to exchange for what we don't have in the surrounding areas, it won't be long before we have more money.

古文：行密纳之，始选吏绥劝所部。
现代文：杨行密采纳了这意见，开始挑选官吏安抚、劝勉人民。
English: Yang Xingmi accepted this opinion and began to select officials to pacify and exhort the people.

古文：蔡俦以庐州叛附硃全忠，纳孙儒将张颢，而倪章据舒州，与俦连和。
现代文：蔡俦率庐州叛变投靠朱全忠，接纳了孙儒的将领张颢，倪章占据了舒州，和他联合起来。
English: Cai Jun led the Bozhou mutiny and sided with Zhu Quanzhong, and accepted Sun Ru's general Zhang Jun. Ni Zhang occupied Shuzhou and united with him.

古文：行密遣李神福攻俦，破其将，俦坚壁不出。
现代文：杨行密派李神福进攻蔡俦，打败了他的将领。
English: Yang Xingmi sent Li Shenfu to attack Cai Yong and defeated his generals.

古文：颢超堞降，行密以隶袁积军，积请戮之，行密爱其勇，更置于亲军。未几，俦自杀。
现代文：他坚守不出战，张颢翻过城墙投降了，杨行密命他隶属袁积，袁积请求杀了他。杨行密喜欢他勇敢，又安排到亲军中，不久蔡俦自杀了。
English: He insisted on not going to war, Zhang Ye climbed over the city wall and surrendered, Yang Xingma secretly ordered him to be subordinate to Yuan Qi, and Yuan Qi asked to kill him. Yang Xingma liked him for his bravery, and arranged for him to join the pro-government army, and soon Cai Ye committed suicide.

古文：行密先冢皆为俦发掘，吏请夷发俦世墓，不许。
现代文：杨行密祖宗的坟墓都被蔡俦挖开了，官吏请求挖蔡俦祖宗的坟墓，他不同意。
English: The tombs of Yang Xingmi's ancestors were all dug up by Cai Xuan. The officials requested to dig up Cai Xing's ancestor's grave, but he did not agree.

古文：表刘威为刺史。
现代文：他任命刘威为刺史。
English: He appointed Liu Wei as his successor.

古文：遣田頵攻歙州。于是，刺史裴枢有美政，民爱之，为拒战，頵兵数却。
现代文：派田君页进攻歙州，当时，歙州刺史裴枢治理得好，人民热爱他，为他抵抗，田君页的军队多次退却。
English: He sent Tian Junzhe to attack Zhangzhou. At that time, Zhangzhou was well governed, the people loved him and resisted for him. Tian Junzhe's army retreated many times.

古文：枢，朝廷所命者，食尽欲降，遗行密书，请还京师。
现代文：裴枢是皇帝任命的，粮食吃完了想投降，送信给杨行密，请求回京城。
English: Baizhu was appointed by the emperor. When he finished eating the grain, he wanted to surrender and sent a letter to Yang Xingmi, asking him to return to the capital.

古文：行密以鲁郃代枢，州人不肯下，请陶雅代。
现代文：杨行密任命鲁取代裴枢，歙州人不肯投降，请求任命陶雅。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Lu to replace Pei Zu, and the people of Zhangzhou refused to surrender and requested the appointment of Tao Ya.

古文：雅于诸将最宽厚，以礼归枢于朝。
现代文：陶雅在众将中最宽厚，按礼节把裴枢送回了朝廷。
English: Tao Ya was the most generous of the generals and sent Pei Zu back to the imperial court according to etiquette.

古文：是岁，李神福拔舒州，倪章亡，以神福为舒州刺史。
现代文：这年，李神福攻占了舒州，倪章死了，杨行密任命李神福为舒州刺史。
English: In this year, Li Shenfu conquered Shuzhou, Ni Zhang died, Yang Xingmi appointed Li Shenfu as the leader of Shuzhou.

古文：乾宁二年，行密袭濠州。李简重甲绝水缒而入，执刺史张璲，以刘金守之，进取寿州。
现代文：乾宁二年，杨行密袭击濠州，李简穿着重铠甲游过护城河拉绳子爬进城墙，抓住了刺史张王遂，命刘金防守，进兵攻占了寿州。
English: In the second year of Qianning, Yang Xingmi attacked Zhangzhou. Li Jian, wearing heavy armor, swam across the moat, pulled a rope and climbed into the city wall. He caught Zhang Wangsui, a thorn, ordered Liu Jin to defend, and marched into Shoushou.

古文：汴将刘知俊储谷石砀，将南袭。
现代文：汴州将领刘知俊在石砀储蓄粮草，想向南袭击。
English: Liu Zhijun, the general of Zhangzhou, was saving grain and grass in Shijiazhuang and wanted to attack southward.

古文：张训屯涟水，遣兵浮海掩得其廥。
现代文：张训驻扎在涟水，派兵从海上乘船袭击夺取了他的粮草。
English: Zhang Hun, stationed in Surabaya, sent soldiers to attack and seize his grain and grass from the sea.

古文：知俊战不胜，因攻涟水，大败，身仅免。
现代文：刘知俊与他会战没取胜，就进攻涟水，被打得大败，仅仅自己逃脱了。
English: Liu Zhijun did not win the battle with him, he attacked Surabaya, was defeated, and only he escaped.

古文：诏拜行密淮南节度副大使，知节度事，检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，封弘农郡王。
现代文：皇帝下诏任命杨行密为淮南节度副大使、知节度事、检校太傅、同中书门下平章事，封爵弘农郡王。
English: Under the emperor's edict, Yang Xingmi was appointed deputy ambassador of Huainan Festival, scholar of the festival, inspector of the school, scholar of the middle school, and the king of Hongnong County.

古文：董昌为钱镠所攻，来告穷。
现代文：董昌遭钱进攻，来告急。
English: Dong Chang was attacked by Qian and came to seek help.

古文：行密遣台濛攻苏州，安仁义、田頵攻杭州，身督战。
现代文：杨行密派台氵蒙进攻苏州，安仁义、田君页进攻杭州，并亲自督战。
English: Yang Xingmi sent Taisheng Meng to attack Suzhou, An Renyi and Tian Junshi to attack Hangzhou, and personally supervised the battle.

古文：别将张崇为镠执，行密欲嫁其妻，答曰： 崇不负公，愿少待。 
现代文：偏将张崇被钱抓住了，杨行密想把他妻子嫁出去，她回答说 ：张崇不会背叛您，希望等一下。 
English: Yang Xing secretly wanted to marry off his wife. She replied: "Zhang Chong will not betray you. I hope you will wait."

古文：俄而还，自是行密终身倚爱。
现代文：不久他回来了，从此杨行密一直看重并喜爱他。
English: He soon returned, and since then, Yang Xingmi has always valued and loved him.

古文：明年五月，破苏州，执镠将成及，以硃党守之。
现代文：第二年五月，杨行密攻占了苏州，抓住了钱的将领成及，命朱党镇守苏州。
English: In May of the following year, Yang Xing secretly occupied Suzhou, captured Qian's general Cheng Yi, and ordered Zhu's party to defend Suzhou.

古文：硃延寿拔蕲、光二州，行密以霍丘当南北走集，以邑豪硃景为镇将。
现代文：朱延寿攻占了蕲、光两州，杨行密认为霍丘是南北枢纽，命当地豪杰朱景任将领。
English: Zhu Yanshou conquered the two states of Qi and Guang, Yang Xingmi believed that Huoqiu was the north-south hub, and ordered the local hero Zhu Jing to be the general.

古文：景骁毅绝人，诸盗莫敢犯。
现代文：朱景非常勇敢，坚毅，众强盗都不敢触犯他。
English: Zhu Jing was very brave and steadfast, and all the robbers did not dare to touch him.

古文：汴将寇彦卿以骑三千袭之，致全忠厚意，景不许，苦战，彦卿败而去。
现代文：汴州将领寇彦卿率三千骑兵袭击他，转达朱全忠对他的好感，他不理会，坚持作战，寇彦卿败逃了。
English: Zhangzhou's general Qiao Yanqing led three thousand cavalry to attack him, conveying Zhu Quanzhong's good feelings towards him. He ignored them and insisted on fighting. Qiao Yanqing was defeated and fled.

古文：田頵、魏约、张宣共围嘉兴，镠大将顾全武救之，执宣、约，逐頵驿亭埭。
现代文：田君页、魏约、张宣一起包围了嘉兴，钱霮的大将顾全武来救援，抓住了张宣、魏约，把田君页赶到驿亭埭。
English: Tian Junzhe, Wei You and Zhang Xuan surrounded Jiaxing together. Qian Ye's general Gu Quanwu came to the rescue, captured Zhang Xuan and Wei You, and drove Tian Junzhe to Shanting.

古文：未几，泰宁节度使硃瑾率部将侯瓚来归，太原将李承嗣、史俨、史建章亦来奔。
现代文：不久，泰宁节度使朱瑾率将领侯瓒来投靠，太原将领李承嗣、史俨、史建章也来投奔。
English: Soon after, the Taining Festival made Zhu Xi and his generals, including Hou Yu, come to take refuge, and the Taiyuan generals, Li Chengzhi, Shi Yu, and Shi Jianzhang, also came to take refuge.

古文：行密推赤心不疑，皆以为将。
现代文：杨行密推心置腹不疑心，都任命为将领。
English: Yang Xingmi pushed his heart and mind to be confident, and they were all appointed as generals.

古文：于是，兵锐甚，强天下。
现代文：这样，军队很精锐了，成了国内强大的力量。
English: In this way, the army is very elite and has become a powerful force in the country.

古文：帝恶武昌节度使杜洪与全忠合，手诏授行密江南诸道行营都统，讨洪。
现代文：皇帝讨厌武昌节度使杜洪和朱全忠联合，亲笔写诏书任命杨行密为江南各道行营都统，讨伐杜洪。
English: The emperor hated the Wuchang Festival, so he made Du Hong and Zhu Quanzhong unite, and personally wrote an edict to appoint Yang Xingmi as the commander-in-chief of all provinces in the south of the Yangtze River to fight against Du Hong.

古文：汴将硃友恭、聂金率骑兵万人与张崇战泗州，金败。瞿章守黄州，闻友恭至，南走武昌栅，行密遣将马珣以楼船精兵助章守。
现代文：汴州将领朱友恭、聂金率一万名骑兵和张崇在泗州会战，聂金战败了，瞿章守卫黄州，听说朱友恭来了，向南逃到武昌栅，杨行密派将领马繤率大战船和精兵帮瞿章防守。
English: Zhangzhou general Zhu Youqiong, Zhang Jin with 10,000 cavalry and Zhang Chong fought in the Battle of Zhangzhou. Zhang Jin was defeated, and Zhang Zhang guarded Huangzhou. Hearing that Zhu Youqiong was coming, he fled south to Wuchangza. Yang Xingmi sent general Ma Jin with a large warship and elite soldiers to help Zhang Zhang defend.

古文：友恭次樊港，章据险，不得前，友恭凿崖开道，以强弩丛射，杀章别将，遂围武昌。章率军薄战，不胜。
现代文：朱友恭进驻樊港，瞿章占据了险要地形，他不能进军，就凿穿岩石开辟道路，用劲弩齐射，杀死了瞿章的偏将，于是包围了武昌，瞿章领兵逼近作战，没取胜。
English: Zhu Yougong entered the port of Da Nang, and Hezhang occupied the critical terrain. He could not advance, so he cut through the rock to open a road, and fired a powerful salvo to kill Hezhang's second-in-command. He then encircled Wuchang, and the leader of Hezhang's army approached the battle, but did not win.

古文：友恭斩章，拔其壁。
现代文：朱友恭杀死了瞿章，攻下他的军营。
English: Zhu Youqiong killed Zou Zhang and captured his camp.

古文：全忠率葛从周万骑攻光州，柴再用遣小校王稔以轻骑觇贼，汴兵围之。
现代文：朱全忠率领葛从周的一万名骑兵进攻光州，柴再用派小校王稔率轻装骑兵侦察敌军，汴州军队包围了他。
English: Zhu Quanzhong led Ge Zhou's 10,000 cavalry to attack Gwangju, and Chai Zhaoyong sent the schoolboy Wang Xuan and his light cavalry to scout the enemy army. The Zhangzhou army surrounded him.

古文：候者请救，再用曰： 稔必杀贼，第无往。 
现代文：观察情况的人请求援救，柴再用说： 王稔一定能杀退敌军，只管不去救。 
English: Observers of the situation asked for help, and Chai Zai said: Wang Yao will certainly be able to repel the enemy army, but he will not help.

古文：稔解鞍自如，暮依樾步战，杀伤多，汴兵乃解。
现代文：王稔解下马鞍不在乎，晚上依托树林徒步作战，杀死杀伤很多敌兵，敌兵才解除了包围。
English: Wang Yao did not care about dismounting from the saddle, and fought on foot at night, relying on the woods, killing and wounding many enemy soldiers. Only then did the enemy soldiers lift the siege.

古文：时亡马法峻，稔追汴军，得马乃还。
现代文：当时丢失马匹的惩罚很严厉，他追击敌军，缴获了马匹才回来。
English: At that time, the punishment for losing a horse was very severe. He chased the enemy, captured the horse and returned.

古文：从周涉淮围寿州，而庞师古、聂金以众七万壁清口。
现代文：葛从周渡过淮河包围了寿州，庞师古、聂金率七万军队在清口驻扎。
English: Ge from Zhou crossed the Huai River and encircled Shoushou. A huge army of seventy thousand troops stationed in Qingkou.

古文：硃延寿击从周军，败之。
现代文：朱延寿进攻葛从周的军队，打败了他。
English: Zhu Yanshou attacked Ge from Zhou's army and defeated him.

古文：行密欲汴围解，乃击师古。
现代文：杨行密想解除汴州军队的包围，就进攻庞师古。
English: Yang Xingxing secretly wanted to lift the siege of the Zhangzhou army, so he attacked Pangshigu.

古文：李承嗣曰： 公能潜师趋清口，破其众，则从周不击而溃。 
现代文：李承嗣说： 您如果能派兵悄悄杀奔清口，打败那里的敌军，葛从周不打就会败逃。 
English: Li Chengzhi said, "If you can send soldiers to Qianlingkou quietly and defeat the enemy army there, Ge will be defeated and flee if he does not fight from Zhou."

古文：行密出车西门，由北门去，以锐士万二千龁雪驰，迫清口，不进，壅淮上流灌师古军。
现代文：杨行密从西门出兵，向北边走，率领一万二千名精兵吃雪代水飞奔，逼近清口后，不进军了，堵住淮河上游用水淹庞师古的军队。
English: Yang Xingmi dispatched troops from the West Gate, headed north, and led twelve thousand elite soldiers to eat snow instead of water. After approaching the clearing, he did not march in, blocking the upper reaches of the Huai River and flooding Pangshigu's army with water.

古文：张训自涟水来，行密使将羸兵千人为前锋。
现代文：张训从涟水来了，杨行密命他率一千名弱兵做先锋。
English: Zhang Xun came from Surabaya, and Yang Xing secretly ordered him to lead a thousand weak soldiers to be the vanguard.

古文：师古易之，方围棋军中，不顾。
现代文：庞师古轻视他，在军营里下围棋，不予理睬。
English: Pang Shigu despised him and ignored him as he played Go in the military camp.

古文：硃瑾、侯瓚以百骑持汴旌帜，直入师古垒，舞槊而驰。
现代文：朱瑾、侯瓒率领一百多名骑兵举着汴州军队的旗帜，直接进入庞师古的军营，挥舞长矛冲杀。
English: Zhu Rong and Hou Rong led more than a hundred cavalrymen holding the banner of the Zhangzhou army and directly entered the military camp of Pangshigu, waving spears and rushing to kill.

古文：训亦登岸，超其栅。
现代文：张训也上了岸，攻进了庞师古的军营。
English: Zhang Xun also went ashore and broke into Pang Shigu's camp.

古文：汴军大嚣，即斩师古，士死十八。
现代文：汴州军队大乱，他们当天杀死了庞师古，汴州士兵死了十分之八。
English: The Bozhou army rioted. They killed Pang Shigu that day. Eight out of ten Bozhou soldiers died.

古文：全忠闻之，与从周皆遁走，追及寿阳，大破之。
现代文：朱全忠听说了，和葛从周一起逃跑，杨行密在寿阳追上了他们，把他们打得大败。
English: Zhu Quanzhong heard of this and ran away with Ge from Zhou. Yang Xingmi caught up with them in Shouyang and defeated them.

古文：叩淠水，方涉，为瑾所乘，溺死万余。瑾徙屯安丰，汴将牛全节苦斗，后军乃得度。
现代文：走到淠水边，正在渡河，被朱瑾乘机进攻，淹死了一万多人，朱瑾迁到安丰驻扎，汴州将领牛全节坚持作战，后面的军队才得以渡河。
English: He walked to the water's edge of Surabaya and was crossing the river. He was attacked by Zhu Xi, who took the opportunity to drown more than 10,000 people. Zhu Xi moved to Anfeng and stationed there. Zhangzhou General Niu insisted on fighting for the whole section, and the army behind him was able to cross the river.

古文：会大雪，士多冻死。
现代文：遇上下大雪，兵将冻死了很多。
English: In the heavy snow, many soldiers froze to death.

古文：颍州刺史王敬尧燎薪属道，汴军免者数千人。
现代文：颍州刺史王敬荛在沿路用柴草烧火，汴州军队逃回来仅几千人。
English: Only a few thousand of the Bozhou army escaped and returned to their homes.

古文：未几，复围寿州，七日走。
现代文：不久他们又包围了寿州，七天后逃走了。
English: They soon encircled Shoushu and fled seven days later.

古文：马珣收散卒三百，自黄州间道趋分宁，绝山谷，袭抚州。
现代文：马繤召集逃散的三百士兵，从黄州抄小路奔向分宁，越过山岭河谷，袭击抚州。
English: Ma Jun gathered the 300 soldiers who had fled and ran from Huangzhou to Banning, crossing the mountains and valleys to attack Fuzhou.

古文：镠将危全讽列四壁，皆万人。
现代文：钱的将领危全讽建了四座军营，每营都有一万名士兵。
English: Qian's generals risked everything to build four military camps, each with ten thousand soldiers.

古文：珣谓诸将曰： 为诸君击中壁，食其谷以归。 
现代文：马繤对众将说： 我给各位进攻中间的军营，在里面吃了饭再回来。 
English: The horse-dealer said to the generals: I will let you attack the camp in the middle, eat inside and then come back.

古文：乃夜击之，全讽走。
现代文：于是夜晚袭击军营，危全讽逃跑了。
English: So they attacked the camp at night and fled.

古文：明日，珣高会，广旗帜，伐鼓循山而下，连营溃。
现代文：第二天，马繤与众将聚会，打着很多旗帜，敲着鼓从山上下来，几个军营都溃散了。
English: The next day, the horse and rider gathered with the generals and came down from the mountain with many flags and drums, and several military camps were broken up.

古文：既还，行密骂曰： 竖子，不遂据其城邪！ 
现代文：他回来后杨行密骂他说 ：混小子，为什么不占领他们的州城呢？ 
English: When he came back, Yang Xingxian scolded him and said, "Son of a bitch, why don't you occupy their provincial capital?"

古文：光化元年，秦裴取镠昆山镇，顾全武围之。
现代文：光化元年，秦裴攻占了钱的昆山镇，顾全武包围了他。
English: In the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, Qin Pei captured Qian's Kunshan Town, and Gu Quanwu encircled him.

古文：行密诸将数败，全武遂围苏州，台濛固守，镠自以舟师至。
现代文：杨行密的将领们多次战败，顾全武于是包围了苏州，台氵蒙牢固防守，钱亲自率领水军去了。
English: Yang Xingmi's generals were defeated many times. Gu Quanwu then surrounded Suzhou, Taibei was firmly defended, and Qian himself led the navy.

古文：濛食尽，行密遣李简、蒋勋迎之，败全武兵，濛得还。
现代文：台氵蒙的粮食吃完了，杨行密派李简、蒋勋接应他，打败了顾全武的军队，台氵蒙才得以撤回。
English: When the food of the Taichung Mongols was finished, Yang Xingmi sent Li Jian and Jiang Xun to meet him, and they defeated the army of Gu Quanwu, and the Taichung Mongols were able to withdraw.

古文：后军溃，裴援绝，全武劝其降。
现代文：后面的军队溃败了，秦裴的救兵没有了，顾全武劝他投降。
English: The army in the rear was routed, and Qin Pei's rescuers were gone. Gu Quanwu persuaded him to surrender.

古文：决水灌城，城坏，裴乃降。
现代文：又挖开河堤用水淹城，城墙垮了，秦裴才投降了。
English: They also dug up the embankment and flooded the city with water. The city wall collapsed, and Qin Pei finally surrendered.

古文：镠喜，具千人食以待。
现代文：钱高兴了，准备了一千人的饭等待他们。
English: Qian was delighted and prepared a thousand people's meal to wait for them.

古文：既至，士不及百。
现代文：他们来了，士兵不到一百人。
English: They came, less than a hundred soldiers.

古文：镠曰： 军寡，何拒之久？ 
现代文：钱说： 军队少，怎么还抵抗这么久？ 
English: Qian said: With a small army, how did they resist for so long?

古文：裴曰： 粮尽归死，非仆素也。 
现代文：秦裴说： 粮食吃完了来接受死刑，这不是我的本心。 
English: Qin Pei said, "It is not my true intention to accept the death penalty after eating all the grain.

古文：初，成及之执，行密阅其室，唯图书药剂，将辟为行军司马，固辞，引刀欲自刺，行密乃止，厚礼而归之。
现代文：当初，成及被抓住了，杨行密察看他的住处，只有书籍和医药，想任命他为行军司马，他坚决推辞，拿着刀要自杀，杨行密就不提了，用很隆重的礼节送他回去。
English: At first, Cheng Ji was caught, Yang Xingmi inspected his residence, only books and medicine, and wanted to appoint him as a marching steed. He firmly refused, holding a knife to commit suicide. Yang Xingmi did not mention it, and sent him back with great etiquette.

古文：镠亦遣魏约等还。
现代文：钱也把魏约等人送回来了。
English: The money was also sent back to Wei Yao and the others.

古文：全忠攻蔡州，奉国节度使崔洪来丐师。
现代文：朱全忠进攻蔡州，奉国节度使崔洪来求救兵。
English: Zhu Quanzhong attacked Caizhou, and sent Cui Hong to ask for help.

古文：明年，遣硃瑾率兵万人攻徐州，屯吕梁，洪遂来奔。
现代文：第二年，杨行密派朱瑾率一万军队进攻徐州，驻扎在吕梁，崔洪就来投奔。
English: In the second year, Yang Xingmi sent Zhu Xi to attack Xuzhou with ten thousand troops, stationed in Luliang, and Cui Hong came to join him.

古文：会雨霖，瑾引还。
现代文：遇上连续下雨，朱瑾退兵了。
English: In the face of continuous rain, Zhu Xi retreated.

古文：行密攻徐州，汴将李礼壁宿州以援，全忠自将次辉州。
现代文：杨行密进攻徐州，汴州将领李礼在宿州筑营垒增援，朱全忠亲自率军驻扎在辉州。
English: Yang Xingmi attacked Xuzhou, Li Li, the general of Bozhou, built reinforcements in Suzhou, and Zhu Quanzhong personally led the army stationed in Huizhou.

古文：行密战不胜，乃解。
现代文：杨行密作战没取胜，就解除了包围。
English: If Yang Xingmi did not win the battle, he would lift the siege.

古文：青州将陈汉宾拥兵送款行密，王绾、张训、周本率兵迎之，汉宾中悔，绾、训入见汉宾，约麾下： 飨我不过日中，若不至，可攻城。 
现代文：青州将领陈汉宾率军归顺杨行密，王绾、张训、周本率军去迎接他，陈汉宾中途反悔，王绾、张训进城去见他，与部下约定： 等我们参加宴会不超过中午，如果没回来，就可以攻城了。 
English: The Qingzhou general Chen Hanbin led the army to surrender to Yang Xingmi, Wang Hui, Zhang Xun and Zhou Ben led the army to meet him, Chen Hanbin repented halfway, Wang Hui and Zhang Xun went to the city to meet him, and agreed with their subordinates: Wait until we attend the banquet no later than noon, if we do not return, we can attack the city.

古文：汉宾释甲听命。
现代文：陈汉宾放下武器归顺了。
English: Chen Hanbin laid down his weapons and surrendered.

古文：光州叛，行密自攻之，汴将硃友裕来救，撤围还。
现代文：光州反叛了，杨行密亲自去进攻，汴州将领朱友裕来救援，他解除包围退兵了。
English: Gwangju rebelled, Yang Xingmi personally went to attack, Zhangzhou General Zhu Youyu came to the rescue, he lifted the siege and withdrew.

古文：全忠谕马殷、成汭、雷满合兵攻行密，汭、满犹豫，汭恶殷事全忠，掠其境，满来结好。
现代文：朱全忠命马殷、成、雷满集中军队进攻杨行密，成、雷满犹豫不决，成讨厌马殷听从朱全忠，掳掠他的辖区，雷满到杨行密这里来缔结友好关系。
English: Zhu Quanzhong ordered Ma Yin, Cheng and Lei Man to concentrate their forces to attack Yang Xingmi. Cheng and Lei Man hesitated. Cheng disliked that Ma Yin obeyed Zhu Quanzhong and plundered his jurisdiction. Lei Man came to Yang Xingmi to establish friendly relations.

古文：行密壁黄、鄂间，杜洪寘鸩于酒、于井，弃城去，行密知，不入。
现代文：杨行密在黄州、鄂州间扎营，杜洪在酒和井中放毒后，放弃州城离开了，杨行密知道了，不进州城。
English: Yang Xingmi set up camp between Huangzhou and Ezhou. Du Hong gave up the state capital and left after poisoning the wine and wells. Yang Xingmi knew this and did not enter the state capital.

古文：全忠又遣使者督殷、汭、满连兵解围，行密还。
现代文：朱全忠又派使者督促马殷、成、雷满联合军队去解除包围，杨行密退兵了。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also sent an envoy to urge the joint army of Ma Yin, Cheng and Lei Man to lift the siege, and Yang Xingmi withdrew.

古文：诏加检校太尉、兼侍中。
现代文：皇帝下诏提升他为检校太尉，兼任侍中。
English: The emperor issued an edict to promote him to the rank of lieutenant inspector, and he also served as an aide-de-camp.

古文：天复元年，传言盗杀钱镠，李神福急攻临安，顾全武列八壁相望，神福伏军青山，伪若引去，谍奔告，全武悉众蹑之。
现代文：天复元年，传说强盗杀死了钱，李神福急忙进攻临安，顾全武筑了互相能看到的八座营垒，李神福把军队埋伏在青山，假装退兵了，探子报告了，顾全武率所有军队追击他。
English: In the first year of the Restoration of Heaven, according to legend, the robber killed Qian, Li Shenfu led a hasty attack on Lin'an, Gu Quanwu built eight camps that could see each other, Li Shenfu ambushed the army in Qingshan, pretended to withdraw, the scout reported, Gu Quanwu led all the troops to chase him.

古文：神福返斗，与伏夹攻，斩首五千级，执全武。
现代文：李神福掉转头，和伏兵两面夹击，砍头五千颗，抓住了顾全武。
English: Li Shenfu turned his head, clamped down on both sides of the ambush, cut off five thousand heads, and caught Gu Quanwu.

古文：明日，遂围临安，镠将秦昶以步兵三千降。
现代文：第二天，就包围了临安，钱的将领秦昶率三千名步兵投降了。
English: The next day, Lin'an was besieged, and Qin's general Qin Hui led 3,000 infantrymen to surrender.

古文：神福乃令军中护镠先墓，禁樵采，镠遣使者厚谢。
现代文：李福神命令军队保护钱祖先的坟墓。禁止砍伐墓地树木，钱派使者深深感谢。
English: Li Fuxin ordered the army to protect the graves of Qian's ancestors, forbade the felling of cemetery trees, and Qian sent an emissary to express his deep gratitude.

古文：神福以镠不死，临安未可下，纳犒而还。
现代文：李神福因钱没有死，临安攻不下来，接受犒赏后班师了。
English: Li Shenfu didn't die because of money, couldn't attack Lin'an, and accepted the reward.

古文：明年，大将刘存率兵二万、战舻七百伐湖南。
现代文：第二年，杨行密的大将刘存率军两万、战船七百艘进攻湖南。
English: The following year, Yang Xingmi's general Liu Cun led an army of twenty thousand and seven hundred warships to attack Hunan.

古文：殷伏军长碛洲，以楼艓据上流，乘风飏沙，强弩射之，存军濩。
现代文：马殷在长碛洲埋伏军队，用楼船占据上游，顺风扬起灰沙，用劲弩射来，刘存的军队被歼灭了。
English: Ma Yin ambushed the army in Changluozhou, occupied the upstream with the building ship, raised the gray sand with the wind, and shot hard. Liu Cun's army was annihilated.

古文：行密归顾全武于镠，镠亦释秦裴以报。
现代文：杨行密将顾全武送还钱，钱也释放了秦裴作为报答。
English: Yang Xingmi returned the money to Gu Quanwu, and the money also released Qin Pei as a reward.

古文：帝在凤翔，以左金吾大将军李俨为江淮宣谕使，授行密东面诸道行营都统、检校太师、守中书令，封吴王，承制封拜，且告难。
现代文：皇帝逃到凤翔，命左金吾大将军李俨任江淮宣谕使，任命杨行密为东面诸道行营都统、检校太师、中书令，封爵吴王，按皇帝命令封官晋爵后，又告诉他国家的灾难。
English: The emperor fled to Fengxiang, and ordered the general of the Left Jingu, Li Qian, to be appointed as the envoy of the proclamation of the Jianghuai, and appointed Yang Xingmi as the commander of the eastern provinces, the inspector of schools, the editor of the Chinese book, and the knight of King Wu. After the knight was knighted according to the emperor's order, he also told him about the country's disaster.

古文：时已削夺全忠封爵，诏西川、河东、忠义、幽州、保大、横海、义武、大同八道攻之。
现代文：当时已经免去了朱全忠的官爵，下诏命西川、河东、忠义、幽州、保大、横海、义武、大同八处进攻他。
English: At that time, Zhu Quanzhong had already been relieved of his official title and was ordered to attack him in eight places, including Xichuan, Hedong, Zhongyi, Yuzhou, Baoda, Henghai, Yiwu and Datong.

古文：诏硃瑾为平卢节度使，繇海州取青、齐；冯弘鐸为感化节度使，出涟水，攻徐、宿；使硃延寿围蔡州；田頵捍钱勖；行密讨杜洪、马殷，以分全忠势。
现代文：有诏命朱瑾任感化节度使，从涟水出兵，进攻徐、宿；命朱延寿包围蔡州；命田君页抵御钱；命杨行密讨伐杜洪、马殷，来分散朱全忠的兵力。
English: The imperial edict ordered Zhu Xi to send troops from Surabaya to attack Xu and Shuku; ordered Zhu Yanshou to encircle Caizhou; ordered Tian Junshi to resist Qian; and ordered Yang Xingmei to fight Duhong and Ma Yin to disperse Zhu Quanzhong's troops.

古文：行密乃以李神福为鄂岳招讨使，刘存副之，遣冷业攻马殷。
现代文：杨行密就命李神福任鄂岳招讨使，刘存做副手，派泠业进攻马殷。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Li Shenfu as the recruiting envoy of Etu, Liu Cun as the deputy, and sent Xingye to attack Ma Yin.

古文：杜洪战屡败，婴城，请救于全忠。
现代文：杜洪多次战败，进城防守，向朱全忠求救。
English: Du Hong was defeated many times, went into the city to defend, and appealed to Zhu Quanzhong for help.

古文：全忠使韩勍率步兵万人屯滠口，荆南节度使成汭亦悉众救洪。
现代文：朱全忠派韩京力率一万名步兵驻扎在滠口，荆南节度使成也率全部军队援救杜洪。
English: Zhu Quanzhong sent Han Jing to lead ten thousand infantrymen stationed in Hekou, and Jing Nanzhidu led the entire army to rescue Du Hong.

古文：神福逆战，败之，汭溺死，勍引众走。
现代文：李神福迎战，打败了他们，成淹死了，韩京力率兵逃跑了。
English: Li Shenfu challenged them, defeated them, Cheng drowned, Han Jingli led the soldiers to escape.

古文：冷业屯平江，为三壁。
现代文：泠业驻扎在平江，建立了三座营垒。
English: Gongye was stationed in Pingjiang and built three barracks.

古文：殷将许德勋以锐卒号 定南刀 夜袭业，击三壁皆破，禽业，掠上高、唐年而去。
现代文：马殷的将领许德勋率号称 定南刀 的精兵夜晚袭击泠业，把三座营垒都攻破了，俘获了泠业，掳掠上高、唐年后离去了。
English: Ma Yin's general Xu Deshun led the elite soldiers known as Ding Nanzhang to attack Suye at night, broke through the three camps, captured Suye, captured Gao, and left after the Tang Dynasty.

古文：是时，杜洪困甚，且禽；会田頵、安仁义绝行密，行密召神福、存还计事，洪复振。
现代文：这时，杜洪的处境极艰难，快被抓住了。遇上田君页、安仁义和杨行密决裂了，杨行密召李神福、刘存回去商量事情，杜洪又振作起来。
English: At this time, Du Hong was in a very difficult situation and was about to be caught. When Tian Junzhi, An Renyi and Yang Xingmi broke up, Yang Xingmi called Li Shenfu and Liu Cun back to discuss the matter, and Du Hong cheered up again.

古文：頵之败，更以台濛为宣州观察使，复遣神福、存攻鄂州。
现代文：田君页被打败后，改命台氵蒙任宣州观察使，又派李神福、刘存进攻鄂州。
English: After Tian Junzhe was defeated, he changed his name to Taimong and appointed him as the Xuanzhou observation envoy. He also sent Li Shenfu and Liu Cunming to attack Ezhou.

古文：顺义军使汪武与頵连和，歙州刺史陶雅攻钟传，兵过武所，迎谒，缚武于军。
现代文：顺义军使汪武和田君页联合，歙州刺史陶雅进攻钟传，军队经过汪武的驻地，汪武前去迎接拜见，陶雅把汪武抓到了军中。
English: The Shunyi Army sent Wang Wu and Tian Junzhe to unite, Zhangzhou stabbed Tao Ya to attack Zhong Chuan, the army passed through Wang Wu's residence, Wang Wu went to meet and greet, Tao Ya caught Wang Wu in the army.

古文：无锡当浙冲，行密使票将张可悰守之。
现代文：无锡地处浙地要道，杨行密派骁将张可驻守。
English: Wuxi is located on the main road of Zhejiang Province. Yang Xingmi dispatched Zhang Ke to be stationed there.

古文：镠劲兵三千夜袭城，可悰以百骑击走之，吏皆贺，答曰： 未也，方劳诸军一战。 
现代文：钱的三千精兵夜晚袭击该城，张可率一百名骑兵把他们赶跑了，官吏们都来道贺。他回答说： 还没完，还要有劳各军打一仗。 
English: Qian's three thousand elite soldiers attacked the city at night. Zhang Kegui led a hundred cavalrymen to drive them away, and the officials all came to congratulate. He replied: It's not over yet, there's still work for each army to fight a battle.

古文：乃蔽火敛旗以须。
现代文：于是遮住灯光、藏起旗帜等待。
English: So they covered the lights, hid the flags and waited.

古文：觇者以告，镠兵复至，可悰大破之。
现代文：探子报告了，钱的军队又来了，张可把他们打得大败。
English: The scout reported that Qian's army had come again, and Zhang was able to beat them soundly.

古文：台濛卒，行密以子渥为宣州观察使。
现代文：台氵蒙去世了，杨行密命儿子杨渥任宣州观察使。
English: Tai Yimeng passed away, and Yang Wou, the son of Yang Xingmi, was appointed as the Xuanzhou observation envoy.

古文：天祐二年，王茂章、李德诚拔润州，杀安仁义。
现代文：天二年，王茂章、李德诚攻下了润州，杀死了安仁义。
English: Two years ago, Wang Maozhang and Li Decheng conquered Runzhou and killed An Renyi.

古文：以王茂章为润州团练使。
现代文：杨行密任命王茂章任润州团练使。
English: Yang Xingmi appointed Wang Maozhang as the Rongzhou group training envoy.

古文：聂彦章等率舟师复伐殷，攻岳州。
现代文：聂彦章等人率水军再次讨伐马殷，进攻岳州。
English: Yan Yan Zhang and others led the navy to fight against Ma Yin again and attack Yuezhou.

古文：许德勋、詹佶以舟千二百柁入蛤子湖弃山之南，为木龙锁舟，夜徙三百舸断杨林岸。
现代文：许德勋、詹佶将一千二百艘战船驶到蛤子湖王弃山的南边，做木龙锁住船，夜晚调三百艘船隔断杨林岸。
English: Xu Dexun and Zhan Jun sailed twelve hundred warships to the south side of the abandoned mountain of Lazy Lake Wang, locked the ships as wooden dragons, and moved three hundred ships to cut off the Yanglin shore at night.

古文：彦章入荆江，将趋江陵。
现代文：聂彦章进入荆江，想到江陵去。
English: When Yan Yanzhang entered the Jing River, he wanted to go to Jiangling.

古文：佶蹑之，德勋以梅花海鹘迅舸进，断木龙，舟蔽江，车弩乱发，执彦章，溺死万人。
现代文：詹佶尾随他，许德勋率梅花海鹘快船进兵，放开木龙，战船遮住了江面，机弩乱射，抓住了聂彦章，他的军队淹死了一万多人。
English: Zhan Yu followed him, Xu Dezhun led the plum blossom seagull clipper into the army, let go of the wooden dragon, the warship covered the river, shot wildly, caught Yan Yanzhang, and his army drowned more than 10,000 people.

古文：殷释彦章还，德勋谓曰： 为我谢吴王，仆等数人在，湖、湘不可冀也。 
现代文：马殷把聂彦章放回去，许德勋对他说： 替我们向吴王道歉，我们几个人活着，洞庭湖、湘江就不能打主意。 
English: Ma Yin put Yu Yanzhang back and Xu Deshun said to him: "Apologize to King Wu for us. With only a few of us alive, we can't make up our minds about Dongting Lake and the Hunan River."

古文：行密宽易，善遇下，能得士死力。
现代文：杨行密宽大随便，善于驾御部下，能够让人为他效命。
English: Yang Xingmi is easy-going, good at leading his subordinates, and can make people work for him.

古文：每宴，使人负剑侍。
现代文：每次宴会，他都派人带着剑侍卫。
English: At every banquet, he sent someone with a sword to stand guard.

古文：陈人张洪因以剑击行密，不中，近将李龙禽斩之。
现代文：陈州人张洪乘机用剑刺他，没刺中，近侍将领李友抓住并处死了张洪。
English: Zhang Hong, a native of Chenzhou, took the opportunity to stab him with a sword. When he failed to do so, his aide-de-camp, General Li You, caught and executed Zhang Hong.

古文：佗日，侍剑如故。
现代文：后来，还是有人像过去一样带着剑侍卫。
English: Later, there were still guards with swords, as in the past.

古文：行密蚤出，有盗断马鞅，不之问，以故人人怀恩。
现代文：他有次早晨出去，有强盗砍断了他的马身上套车的皮套，他不追问这事，因此每个人都感激他。
English: He went out one morning and a robber had cut off the holster of his horse-drawn cart, and he didn't ask about it, so everyone was grateful to him.

古文：始，乘孙儒乱，府库殚空，能约己省费，不三年而军富雄。
现代文：当初，孙儒作乱之后，仓库都空了，他能带头节俭，不到三年军队就富足强大了。
English: In the beginning, after Sun Ju caused chaos, the warehouses were all empty. He was able to take the lead in frugality, and the army became rich and powerful in less than three years.

古文：尝过楚州，台濛盛供帐待之，行密一夕去，遗衣卧内，皆经补浣。
现代文：他曾路过楚州，台氵蒙用很好的陈设接待他，他睡了一晚上就走了，把衣裳留在卧床上，都是补、洗过的。
English: He had passed through Chuzhou, and Taisheng Meng received him in a well-furnished room. He slept for one night and then left, leaving his clothes on the bed, all of which had been mended and washed.

古文：濛还之，行密曰： 吾兴细微，不敢忘本，君笑我邪？ 
现代文：台氵蒙还给他，他说： 我出身微贱，不敢忘记根本，你会笑我吧？ 
English: He said: "I come from a humble background and I dare not forget it. Would you laugh at me?

古文：濛大惭。
现代文：台氵蒙很惭愧。
English: Taiwanese people are very ashamed.

古文：登城，见王茂章营第，曰： 天下未定，而茂章居寝郁然，渠肯为我忘身乎？ 
现代文：他有次登上城墙，看见王茂章在建宅院，说道： 国家没平定，但王茂章做这么漂亮的宅院，怎么肯为我拼命呢？ 
English: He once climbed onto the city wall and saw Wang Maozhang building a house, saying: The country is not pacified, but how could Wang Maozhang build such a beautiful house for me?

古文：茂章遽毁损。
现代文：王茂章马上改建了。
English: Wang Maozhang immediately changed his mind.

古文：方帝困凤翔，再遣使督兵，以为行密可亢全忠者，然兵至宿州，绐言粮尽，乃还。
现代文：当时皇帝困在凤翔，两次派使者督促进兵，认为杨行密可以和朱全忠对抗，但他的军队到了宿州，假托粮食完了，就回去了。
English: At that time, the emperor was stuck in Fengxiang, and twice sent an envoy to supervise the promotion of soldiers, believing that Yang Xingmi could confront Zhu Quanzhong, but his army arrived in Suzhou, and when the food supply was over, they went back.

古文：全忠胁帝东迁，行密耻愤被病。
现代文：朱全忠胁迫皇帝迁到东边去了，杨行密感到羞耻愤怒而生了病。
English: Zhu Quanzhong forced the emperor to move to the east, and Yang Xingmi felt ashamed and angry and fell ill.

古文：全忠亦知天子倚行密为重，乃弑帝以绝人望。
现代文：朱全忠也知道皇帝寄希望于杨行密，就杀死了皇帝来断绝人们的希望。
English: Zhu Quanzhong also knew that the emperor pinned his hopes on Yang Xingmi, so he killed the emperor to cut off people's hopes.

古文：行密闻之，发丧，不视事三日，因是病笃，召将吏付家事，问嗣于其佐。
现代文：杨行密知道了这事，为皇帝去世发了公告，三天不办公事，从此病重了，他把将领、官吏们召来托付家庭和事务，问将领让谁继任。
English: Yang Xingmi learned of this and made an announcement about the emperor's death. He did not work for three days and became seriously ill. He summoned the generals and officials to entrust their families and affairs, and asked the generals who should succeed him.

古文：周隐对曰： 宣州司徒易而信谗，唯淫酗是好，不可以嗣，不如择贤者。 
现代文：周隐回答说： 杨渥随便又听信谗言，只喜欢玩女人、喝酒，不能要他继任，不如另选贤人。 
English: Zhou Yin replied, "Yang Wo is careless and listens to others. He only likes to play with women and drink. We can't ask him to succeed. It's better to choose another wise man."

古文：时刘威以宿将有威名，隐意属威，行密不答。
现代文：当时刘威因为是老将又有威望，周隐拥戴他。杨行密没有回答。
English: At that time, because Liu Wei was a veteran and had prestige, Zhou Yin embraced him. Yang Xingmi did not answer.

古文：因以王茂章代渥，使亟还。
现代文：派王茂章取代杨渥，命杨渥快点回来。
English: Send Wang Maozhang to replace Yang Wou, tell Yang Wou to hurry back.

古文：行密召所亲严求曰： 我使周隐召吾儿而不至，奈何？ 
现代文：杨行密把亲信严求召去说 ：我叫周隐叫我儿子却没有来，怎么办？ 
English: Yang Xingmi summoned his close confidants and said, "What should I do if I called Zhou Yin to summon my son but he didn't come?"

古文：求往见隐，召檄仍在几。
现代文：严求去见周隐，召唤杨渥的命令还在几案上。
English: Yan asked to see Zhou Ying, and the order to summon Yang Wou is still in several cases.

古文：始，渥守宣州，押牙徐温、王令谋约渥曰： 王且疾，而君出外，此殆奸人计。他日有召，非我二人勿应也。 
现代文：当初杨渥去守宣州时，押衙官徐温、王令谋和杨渥约定说 ：吴王快病重了，您却被派到外地去，这大概是坏人的计谋，以后有人召你来，不是我们两人你不要理睬。 
English: At the beginning, when Yang Wou went to guard Xuanzhou, the escort officers Xu Wen, Wang Lingmou and Yang Wou agreed to say: "Wu Wang is about to fall seriously ill, but you have been sent to another place. This is probably a bad man's scheme. Someone will call you later, not the two of us. Don't pay attention to it."

古文：及是，二人以符召渥。
现代文：到这时，他们两人盖印召唤杨渥。
English: At this time, the two of them stamped to summon Yang Wou.

古文：渥至，行密承制授检校太尉、同中书门下平章事、淮南节度使留后。
现代文：杨渥来了，杨行密传皇帝命令任命他为检校太尉、同中书门下平章事、淮南节度留后。
English: When Yang Wou arrived, Yang Xingzhu passed on the emperor's order to appoint him as the inspector of the school, the secretary of the middle school, and the secretary of the Huainan Festival.

古文：行密谂渥曰： 左衙都将张颢、王茂章、李遇皆怙乱，不得为儿除之。 
现代文：他告诉杨渥说 ：左衙都将张颢、王茂章、李遇都想乘机得好处，我没来得及给你除掉他们。 
English: He told Yang Wou, "The left-handers, Zhang Ye, Wang Maozhang, and Li Yun, are all trying to take advantage of the opportunity. I didn't have time to get rid of them for you."

古文：卒，年五十四。
现代文：后来他去世了，享年五十四岁。
English: He later died at the age of 54.

古文：遗令谷葛为衣，桐瓦为棺。
现代文：留下遗嘱命用谷地的葛布做寿衣，做成梧桐木和陶质的棺材。
English: He left a will ordering that the valley's geotextile be used to make a shroud and a coffin made of sycamore wood and ceramics.

古文：夜葬山谷，人不知所在。
现代文：夜晚埋到山谷中，人们都不知道埋在哪里。
English: Buried in the valley at night, people do not know where they are buried.

古文：诸将谥曰武忠。
现代文：众将领给他定谥号叫武忠。
English: The generals gave him the nickname "Buchu" (武忠).

古文：张颢议归都统印于宣谕使李俨，行节度事。
现代文：张颢提议把都统的印章上交给宣谕使李俨，只称节度使。
English: Zhang Ye proposed to hand over the seal of Tudong to the envoy Li Ye, known only as the envoy of the festival.

古文：诸将畏颢，无敢对，渥流涕。
现代文：众将怕他，没人敢说话。杨渥流下了眼泪。
English: Everyone was afraid of him, and no one dared to speak. Yang Wo shed tears.

古文：骑军都尉李涛曰： 都统印，先帝所以赐王父子，安得授人？ 
现代文：骑军都尉李涛说 ：都统印是故世皇帝赏给大王父子的，怎能给别人？ 
English: Cavalry captain Li Tao said: the prefectural seal was awarded by the late emperor to the great prince and his son, how can it be given to others?

古文：诸将唯唯。
现代文：众将都附和。
English: All the generals joined in.

古文：颢投袂去，乃共请于俨，承制授渥兼侍中、淮南节度副大使、东面诸道行营都统，封弘农郡王。
现代文：张颢气得一甩袖子走了，大家于是一起对李俨请求，按皇帝的命令任命杨渥兼任侍中、淮南节度副大使、东面诸道行营都统，封爵弘农郡王。
English: Zhang Xuan was so enraged that he flung up his sleeves and walked away. Everyone then made a joint request to Li Jun and, according to the emperor's order, Yang Wo was appointed as an aide-de-camp, vice-ambassador of the Huainan Festival, commander-in-chief of the eastern provinces, and knighted as the king of Hongnong County.

古文：渥好骑射。
现代文：杨渥喜欢骑马射箭。
English: Yang Wo likes horseback riding and archery.

古文：初与许玄膺为刎颈交，及嗣位，事皆决之，诸将莫敢忤。
现代文：当初和许玄膺结成生死交情的朋友，到继任后，事务都由他决定，众将都不敢违抗。
English: At first, he and Xu Xuanyao were friends for life and death. After he took over, he decided everything, and the generals did not dare to defy him.

古文：渥求王茂章亲兵不得，及去宣，辇帷帟以行，茂章嫚骂不与。
现代文：杨渥曾向王茂章要求带走亲兵，但王茂章不让。杨渥离开宣州时，要求坐有帷幕的车走，他辱骂不给。
English: Yang Wo once asked Wang Maozhang to take away his soldiers, but Wang Maozhang refused. When Yang Wo left Xuanzhou, he asked to take a car with a curtain, and he insulted him.

古文：逾年，遣兵五千袭之，茂章奔杭州。秦裴执钟匡时，渥授以江西制置使。
现代文：过了一年，杨渥派五千军队去袭击他，他投奔了杭州，秦裴抓住了钟匡时，杨渥任命他为江西制置使。
English: A year later, Yang Wou sent five thousand troops to attack him, and he fled to Hangzhou. When Qin Pei captured Zhong Kuang, Yang Wou appointed him as the envoy to Jiangxi Province.

古文：硃思勍、范师从、陈鐇以兵戍洪州，渥为张颢所制，三人者，渥腹心也。
现代文：朱思京力、范师从、陈钅番率兵驻守洪州，当时杨渥被张颢控制了，这三个人是杨渥的亲信。
English: Zhu Sijingli, Fan Shizhong and Chen Yifan were stationed in Hongzhou at the time when Yang Wou was controlled by Zhang Ye. These three men were Yang Wou's close confidants.

古文：颢胁以为有异谋，遣陈祐疾驰，怀短兵，微服入秦裴帐中，裴大惊，命饮，召三将入，皆色动，酒行，祐数其罪，皆斩之。
现代文：张颢害怕认为他们有密谋，派陈飞马跑去，身上藏着短刀，换了衣服混进秦裴的营帐里，秦裴非常吃惊，命令把三位将领召来，他们都吓坏了。喝了一会儿酒，陈列举他们的罪状，把他们都杀了。
English: Fearing that they were plotting, Zhang Ye sent Chen Feima to run away with a dagger hidden on his body, changing his clothes and sneaking into Qin Pei's camp. Qin Pei was very surprised and ordered the three generals to be summoned. They were all terrified. They drank wine for a while, listed their crimes, and killed them all.

古文：渥召周隐曰： 君尝以孤为不可嗣，何也？ 
现代文：杨渥把周隐召去说 ：你曾说我不能即位，是为什么？ 
English: Yang Wo called Zhou Yin to him and said, "You once said I couldn't ascend the throne, why?

古文：隐不对，遂杀之。
现代文：他不回答，杨渥就把他杀了。
English: When he didn't answer, Yang Wo killed him.

古文：赞曰：行密兴贱微，及得志，仁恕善御众，治身节俭，无大过失，可谓贤矣。
现代文：赞词说： 杨行密从卑贱的人中发迹，到有成就后，讲仁德、恕道，善于驾御部下，自己节约俭朴，没有大的过错和失误，可称得上贤才了。
English: The praise said: Yang Xingmi made a fortune from the lowly people, and after achieving success, he preached benevolence and tolerance, was good at leading his subordinates, was frugal and frugal himself, and had no major faults and mistakes. He could be called a genius.

古文：然所据淮、楚，士气剽而不刚。行密无霸材，不能提兵为四方倡，以兴王室，熟视硃温劫天子而东，谋穷意沮，愤死牖下，可为长太息矣！
现代文：他占据的淮河、楚地一带，士兵敏捷但不刚强，他没有辅佐皇帝的才能，不能率军做各地的表率，复兴唐王朝，看着朱温把皇帝劫持到东边去，没有计谋和信念，死在家中，真是令人惋惜呀！
English: He occupied the Huaihe River and the Chu region, the soldiers were agile but not strong, he did not have the ability to assist the emperor, he could not lead the army to set an example for the revival of the Tang Dynasty, watching Zhu Wen hijack the emperor to the east, without strategy and belief, he died at home, it was really regrettable!

