古文：十有八年春，王二月丁丑，公薨于台下。
现代文：十八年春季，周历二月丁丑日，鲁文公去世。
English: In the spring of the 18th year, on the day of Ding Jiu in February of the lunar calendar, Lu Wengong passed away.

古文：秦伯荦卒。
现代文：秦伯荦去世。
English: Qin Bohai passed away.

古文：夏五月戊戌，齐人弑其君商人。
现代文：夏季五月戊戌日，齐国人杀死了齐懿公。
English: In the summer of May, the people of Qi killed Qi Yonggong.

古文：六月癸酉，葬我君文公。
现代文：六月癸酉日，安葬我国君主文公。
English: On the third day of June, China's monarch, King Wen, was laid to rest.

古文：秋，公子遂、叔孙得臣如齐。
现代文：秋季，公子遂、叔孙得臣到齐国。
English: In the autumn, the prince and his uncles and grandsons came to Qi.

古文：冬十月，子卒。
现代文：冬季十月，襄仲杀死了太子恶。
English: In the winter of October, Xiang Zhong killed the evil prince.

古文：夫人姜氏归于齐。
现代文：鲁文公夫人姜氏回到齐国。
English: Lady Jiang of Luwen returned to Qi.

古文：季孙行父如齐。
现代文：季孙行父去到齐国。
English: Ji Sun Xingfu went to Qi Province.

古文：莒弑其君庶其。
现代文：莒国人杀掉了他们的君主庶其。
English: The Minoans killed their second-in-line to the throne.

古文：十八年春，齐侯戒师期而有疾，医曰： 不及秋，将死。 
现代文：十八年春季，齐懿公下达了出兵日期，不久就得了病。医生说： 过不了秋天就会死去。 
English: In the spring of the 18th year, Prince Qizong set the date for the dispatch of troops, but soon fell ill. The doctor said: "He will die before the autumn is over."

古文：公闻之，卜曰： 尚无及期。 
现代文：鲁文公听说以后，占了个卜，说： 希望他不到发兵日期就死！ 
English: After hearing this, Lu Wen Gong made a prediction and said, "I hope he will die before the date of sending troops!"

古文：惠伯令龟，卜楚丘占之曰： 齐侯不及期，非疾也。君亦不闻。
现代文：惠伯在占卜前把所要占卜的事情致告龟甲，卜楚丘占了个卜说： 齐懿公不到期而死，但不是由于生病；国君也听不到这件事了。
English: Before divination, Hui Bo announced the matter to be divined to the tortoise. Bu Chu Qiu divined the matter and said: Prince Qi Qian died prematurely, but not due to illness; the sovereign could not hear the matter.

古文：令龟有咎。 
现代文：致告龟甲的人有灾祸。 
English: Woe to those who accuse the tortoise.

古文：二月丁丑，公薨。
现代文：二月二十三日，鲁文公逝世。
English: On February 23rd, Prince Reuben passed away.

古文：齐懿公之为公子也，与邴歜之父争田，弗胜。
现代文：齐懿公在做公子的时候，和邴歜的父亲争夺田地，没有得胜。
English: When he was a young man, Prince Qizong competed with his father for land, but did not win.

古文：及即位，乃掘而刖之，而使歜仆。
现代文：等到即位以后，就掘出尸体而砍去他的脚，但又让邴歜为他驾车。
English: After the enthronement, he dug up the corpse and chopped off his feet, but let the donkey drive the car for him.

古文：纳阎职之妻，而使职骖乘。
现代文：夺取了阎职的妻子而又让阎职作他的骖乘。
English: He took away Yan Rong's wife and made Yan Rong his concubine.

古文：夏五月，公游于申池。
现代文：夏季，五月，齐懿公在申池游玩。
English: In the summer, in May, Qi Ying Gong went to play in Shenchi Pond.

古文：二人浴于池，歜以扑抶职。
现代文：邴歜、阎职两个人在池子里洗澡，邴歜用马鞭打阎职。
English: Two people, Zou and Yan Rong, were bathing in a pool. Zou whipped Yan Rong with a horse.

古文：职怒。
现代文：阎职发怒。
English: Yan Rong became angry.

古文：歜曰： 人夺女妻而不怒，一抶女庸何伤！ 
现代文：邴歜说： 别人夺了你的妻子你不生气，打你一下，有什么妨碍？ 
English: Zou said, "You don't get angry when someone steals your wife. If they beat you, what's the harm?

古文：职曰： 与刖其父而弗能病者何如？ 
现代文：阎职说： 比砍了他父亲的脚而不敢怨恨的人怎么样？ 
English: Yan Rong said: What is more detestable than a man who cuts off his father's foot?

古文：乃谋弑懿公，纳诸竹中。
现代文：于是二人就一起策划，杀死了齐懿公，把尸体放在竹林里。
English: So the two of them plotted together, killed Lord Qi and placed his body in the bamboo grove.

古文：归，舍爵而行。齐人立公子元。
现代文：回去，在宗庙里祭祀，摆好酒杯然后公然出走。齐国人立了公子元为国君。
English: He went back, held a religious service in the ancestral temple, set up a wine cup and then openly left. The people of Qi established Kuchimoto as the ruler of the country.

古文：秋，襄仲、庄叔如齐，惠公立故，且拜葬也。
现代文：秋季，襄仲、庄叔去齐国，这是由于齐惠公即位，同时拜谢齐国前来参加葬礼。
English: In autumn, Xiang Zhong and Zhuang Shu went to Qi Province. This was due to the enthronement of Prince Qi Hui, and at the same time, they came to Qi Province to attend the funeral.

古文：文公二妃敬嬴生宣公。
现代文：鲁文公的第二个妃子敬嬴生了宣公。
English: Lu Wenjun's second concubine, Jing Xuan, was born.

古文：敬嬴嬖而私事襄仲。
现代文：敬嬴受到宠爱，而私下结交襄仲。
English: Keiho was loved, and they became friends in private.

古文：宣公长而属诸襄仲，襄仲欲立之，叔仲不可。
现代文：宣公年长，敬嬴把他嘱托给襄仲。襄仲要立他为国君，仲叔不同意，襄仲进见齐惠公。
English: Xuan Gong was old, and Jing Yi entrusted him to Xiang Zhong. Xiang Zhong wanted to make him the sovereign, but Uncle Xuan disagreed, so Xiang Zhong went to see Qi Hui.

古文：仲见于齐侯而请之。齐侯新立而欲亲鲁，许之。
现代文：请求要立宣公为国君。齐惠公新即位，想要亲近鲁国，同意了襄仲的请求。
English: Qi Huigong, newly ascended to the throne, wanted to be closer to the State of Lu, and agreed to Xiang Zhong's request.

古文：冬十月，仲杀恶及视而立宣公。
现代文：冬季，十月，襄仲杀死了太子恶和他的弟弟视，拥立宣公为国君。
English: In the winter, in October, Xiangzhong killed the evil prince and his brother Ting, and installed Xuanguo as the sovereign.

古文：书曰 子卒 ，讳之也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 子卒 ，这是为了隐讳真象。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Zi Zhuo, this is to hide the truth.

古文：仲以君命召惠伯。其宰公冉务人止之，曰： 入必死。 
现代文：襄仲用国君的名义召见叔仲惠伯，惠伯的家臣头子公冉务人劝止他，说： 进去必定死。 
English: Xiang Zhong summoned his uncle Zhong Huibo in the name of the sovereign. Huibo's vassal chief Guan Ranbo persuaded him, saying: "If you go in, you will surely die."

古文：叔仲曰： 死君命可也。 
现代文：叔仲说： 死于国君的命令是可以的。 
English: Uncle Chung said, "It's okay to die on the order of the sovereign."

古文：公冉务人曰： 若君命可死，非君命何听？ 
现代文：公冉务人说： 如果是国君的命令，可以死；不是国君的命令，为什么听从？ 
English: The official said: If it is the order of the sovereign, you can die; if it is not the order of the sovereign, why should you obey?

古文：弗听，乃入，杀而埋之马矢之中。
现代文：叔仲不听，就进去了，襄仲把他杀死了而埋在马粪中间。
English: Xiang Zhong killed him and buried him in the horse manure.

古文：公冉务人奉其帑以奔蔡，既而复叔仲氏。
现代文：公冉务人事奉叔仲的妻子儿女逃亡到蔡国，不久以后重新立了叔仲氏。
English: Public affairs personnel fled to Cai Guo on behalf of Shuzhong's wife and children, and the Shuzhong clan was reestablished soon after.

古文：夫人姜氏归于齐，大归也。
现代文：鲁文公夫人姜氏回到齐国，这是回娘家而不再回来了。
English: Lu Wen Gong's wife, Jiang, returned to Qi Province. This was to return to her daughter's home, but she never came back.

古文：将行，哭而过市曰： 天乎，仲为不道，杀適立庶。 
现代文：她将要离开的时候，哭着经过集市，说： 天哪！襄仲无道，杀死了嫡子立庶子。 
English: When she was about to leave, she wept as she passed through the market and said, "Oh my God! Xiang Zhong lost his way and killed his legitimate son and his illegitimate son."

古文：市人皆哭，鲁人谓之哀姜。
现代文：集市上的人都随着她哭泣，鲁国人称她为哀姜。
English: People in the market cry with her, and the people of Lu call her "Mourning Ginger."

古文：莒纪公生大子仆，又生季佗，爱季佗而黜仆，且多行无礼于国。
现代文：莒纪公生了太子仆，又生了季佗，喜爱季佗而废黜太子仆，而且在国内办了许多不合礼仪的事情。
English: Zou Ji Gong gave birth to a prince's servant, and another prince was born, and he loved Zou Ji Gong and deposed the prince's servant, and he did many things that were not in accordance with etiquette in the country.

古文：仆因国人以弑纪公，以其宝玉来奔，纳诸宣公。
现代文：太子仆依靠国内人们的力量杀了纪公，拿了他的宝玉逃亡前来，送给鲁宣公。
English: Relying on the strength of the people in the country, the prince's servant killed Ji Gong, took his precious stone and fled, and gave it to Lu Xuan Gong.

古文：公命与之邑，曰： 今日必授。 
现代文：宣公命令给他城邑，说： 今天一定得给。 
English: And the decree went out to all his cities, saying, This day shall be a feast to the LORD.

古文：季文子使司寇出诸竟，曰： 今日必达。 
现代文：季文子让司寇把他赶出国境，说： 今天一定得彻底执行。 
English: Ji Wenzi asked Scor to drive him out of the country, saying, "Today, we must carry out the order thoroughly."

古文：公问其故。
现代文：鲁宣公询问这样做的缘故。
English: Lu Xuanguo questioned the reason for doing so.

古文：季文子使大史克对曰： 先大夫臧文仲教行父事君之礼，行父奉以周旋，弗敢失队。
现代文：季文子让太史克回答说：先大夫臧文仲教导行父事奉国君的礼仪，行父根据它而应酬对答，不敢丢失。
English: Ji Wenzi asked Taishuke to reply, "The previous doctor, Zou Wenzhong, taught my father the etiquette of serving the sovereign, and my father responded according to it. I dare not lose it."

古文：曰： 见有礼于其君者，事之如孝子之养父母也。见无礼于其君者，诛之如鹰鹯之逐鸟雀也。 
现代文：先大夫说： 见到对他的国君有礼的，事奉他，如同孝子奉养父母一样；见到对他的国君无礼的，诛戮他，如同鹰鹯追逐鸟雀一样。 
English: The former doctor said, "If you see someone who is polite to his sovereign, serve him, just as a filial son serves his parents; if you see someone who is rude to his sovereign, kill him, just as an eagle chases a sparrow."

古文：先君周公制《周礼》曰： 则以观德，德以处事，事以度功，功以食民。 
现代文：先君周公制作《周礼》说： 礼仪用来观察德行，德行用来处置事情，事情用来衡量功劳，功劳用来取食于民。 
English: Zhou Gong, the founder of "Zhouli," said: "Etiquette is used to observe virtue, virtue is used to deal with things, things are used to measure merit, and merit is used to feed on the people.

古文：作誓命曰： 毁则为贼，掩贼为藏，窃贼为盗，盗器为奸。
现代文：又制作《誓命》说： 毁弃礼仪就是贼，窝藏贼人就是赃，偷窃财物就是盗，偷盗宝器就是奸。
English: The makers of "Oath of Allegiance" also say: Destroying and abandoning etiquette is theft, harboring thieves is treason, stealing property is theft, and stealing treasure is treason.

古文：主藏之名，赖奸之用，为大凶德，有常无赦，在《九刑》不忘。 
现代文：有窝赃的名声，利用奸人的宝器，这是很大的凶德，国家对此有规定的刑罚，不能赦免，记载在《九刑》之中，不能忘记。 
English: It is a great evil to have a bad reputation and to use the treasured tools of traitors. The state has prescribed punishments for this, which cannot be pardoned. It is recorded in the Nine Punishments and cannot be forgotten.

古文：行父还观莒仆，莫可则也。
现代文：行父仔细观察莒仆，没有可以效法的。
English: The father-in-law carefully observed his son-in-law and there was nothing he could do.

古文：孝敬忠信为吉德，盗贼藏奸为凶德。
现代文：孝敬、忠信是吉德，盗贼、赃奸，是凶德。
English: Filial piety and loyalty are virtues, while theft and treachery are vices.

古文：夫莒仆，则其孝敬，则弑君父矣，则其忠信，则窃宝玉矣。
现代文：这个莒仆，如果取法他的孝敬吧，那么他是杀了国君父亲的；取法他的忠信吧，那么他是偷窃了宝玉的。
English: If we judge this servant by his filial piety, then he killed the sovereign's father; if we judge by his loyalty, then he stole the jewels.

古文：其人则盗贼也，其器则奸兆也，保而利之则主藏也。
现代文：他这个人，就是盗贼；他的器物，就是赃证。如果保护这个人而用他的器物，那就是窝赃。
English: He, the man, is the thief; his goods are the evidence. If you protect this man and use his goods, it is a snare.

古文：以训则昏，民无则焉。
现代文：以此来教育百姓，百姓就昏乱无所取法了。
English: By educating the people in this way, the people are confused and have no recourse.

古文：不度于善，而皆在于凶德，是以去之。
现代文：莒仆的这些表现都不能算好事，而都属于凶德，所以才把他赶走。
English: These actions of the eunuch were not good, but evil, and that is why he was driven away.

古文： 昔高阳氏有才子八人：苍舒、隤岂、梼戭、大临、尨降、庭坚、仲容、叔达，齐圣广渊，明允笃诚，天下之民谓之 八恺 。
现代文：从前高阳氏有才能强的子孙八位：苍舒、隤岂、梼戭、大临、尨降、庭坚、仲容、叔达，他们中正、通达、宽宏、深远、明智、守信、厚道、诚实，天下的百姓称之为八恺。
English: Once upon a time, there were eight talented descendants of the Goyang clan: Cangshu, Xingtao, Yao, Dajin, Yaobang, Tujian, Zhongrong and Shuda. They were moderate, intelligent, broad-minded, far-sighted, wise, trustworthy, virtuous and honest. People all over the world called them Yao.

古文：高辛氏有才子八人：伯奋、仲堪、叔献、季仲、伯虎、仲熊、叔豹、季狸，忠肃共懿，宣慈惠和，天下之民谓之 八元 。
现代文：高辛氏有才能强的子孙八位：伯奋、仲堪、叔献、季仲、伯虎、仲熊、叔豹、季狸，他们忠诚、恭敬、勤谨、端美、周密、慈祥、仁爱、宽和，天下的百姓称之为八元。
English: There are eight talented descendants of Gao Xin: Bo Fen, Zhong Kan, Shujian, Qizhong, Bo Hu, Zhong Xiong, Shulang, and Qizhu. They are loyal, respectful, diligent, beautiful, meticulous, kind, benevolent, and broad-minded. People all over the world call them eight yuan.

古文：此十六族也，世济其美，不陨其名，以至于尧，尧不能举。
现代文：这十六个家族，世世代代继承他们的美德，没有丧失前世的声名，一直到尧的时代，但是尧没有能举拔他们。
English: These sixteen families, inheriting their virtues from generation to generation, did not lose the reputation of the previous life, until the time of Yao, but Yao could not elevate them.

古文：舜臣尧，举八恺，使主后土，以揆百事，莫不时序，地平天成；举八元，使布五教于四方，父义、母慈、兄友、弟共、子孝，内平外成。
现代文：舜做了尧的臣下以后，举拔八恺，让他们担任管理土地的官职，处理各种事务，没有不顺当的，地上和天上都平和无事。又举拔八元，让他们在四方之国宣扬五种教化，父亲讲道义，母亲慈爱，哥哥友爱，弟弟恭敬，儿子孝顺，里里外外都平安无事。
English: After they became his vassals, they raised eight yuan to let them assume the official position of land management and deal with all kinds of affairs. There was nothing improper, and there was peace and tranquility on earth and in heaven. They also raised eight yuan to let them preach the five kinds of enlightenment in the country of Shifang, the father preached morality, the mother was loving, the brother was friendly, the brother was respectful, and the son was filial, and there was peace and tranquility inside and outside.

古文：昔帝鸿氏有不才子，掩义隐贼，好行凶德，丑类恶物，顽嚚不友，是与比周，天下之民谓之 浑敦 。
现代文：从前帝鸿氏有一个没有才能的儿子，掩蔽道义，包庇奸贼，喜欢办那些属于凶德的事情，把坏东西引为同类，那些愚昧奸诈的人，和他混在一起，天下的百姓称他为浑敦。
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Hongzhi had a talentless son. He covered up morality, protected traitors, and liked to do things that were evil. He brought bad things into the same category, and those who were stupid and treacherous mixed with him. People all over the world called him Hun-tun.

古文：少皞氏有不才子，毁信废忠，崇饰恶言，靖谮庸回，服谗蒐慝，以诬盛德，天下之民谓之 穷奇 。
现代文：少皞氏有一个没有才能的儿子，毁坏信义，废弃忠诚，花言巧语，惯听谗言，任用奸邪，造谣中伤，掩盖罪恶，诬陷盛德的人，天下的百姓称他为穷奇。
English: The Shao Yan clan had a talentless son, a man who destroyed faith and justice, abandoned loyalty, used rhetoric, listened to insults, employed treachery, slandered, covered up sins, and framed Shengde. The people of the world called him a poor man.

古文：颛顼氏有不才子，不可教训，不知话言，告之则顽，舍之则嚚，傲很明德，以乱天常，天下之民谓之 梼杌 。
现代文：颛顼氏有一个没有才能的儿子，没办法教训，不知道好话，他愚顽不灵，丢开他，他又刁恶奸诈，鄙视美德，搅乱上天的常道，天下的百姓称他为梼杌。
English: Mr. Xing had a son without talent. He was unable to teach and did not know how to speak well. He was stubborn and lazy. He abandoned him. He was also malicious and treacherous, despised virtue, and disturbed the normal course of heaven. People all over the world called him Xing.

古文：此三族也，世济其凶，增其恶名，以至于尧，尧不能去。
现代文：这三个家族，世世代代继承他们的凶恶，加重了他们的坏名声，一直到尧的时代，但是尧没有能赶走他们。
English: These three families continued to perpetuate their wickedness and add to their infamy until the time of Toad, but Toad was unable to drive them out.

古文：缙云氏有不才子，贪于饮食，冒于货贿，侵欲崇侈，不可盈厌，聚敛积实，不知纪极，不分孤寡，不恤穷匮，天下之民以比三凶，谓之 饕餮 。
现代文：缙云氏有一个没有才能的儿子，追求吃喝，贪图财货，任性奢侈，不能满足，聚财积谷，没有限度，不分给孤儿寡妇，不周济穷人，天下的百姓把他和三凶相比，称他为饕餮。
English: The Jinyun clan has a talentless son who pursues food and drink, covets wealth and goods, is headstrong and extravagant, cannot be satisfied, accumulates wealth without limit, does not distribute to orphans and widows, and does not give to the poor. The people of the world compare him to the three evils and call him a scoundrel.

古文：舜臣尧，宾于四门，流四凶族浑敦、穷奇、梼杌、饕餮，投诸四裔，以御魑魅。
现代文：舜做了尧的臣下以后，开辟四方的城门，流放四个凶恶的家族，把浑敦、穷奇、梼杌、饕餮赶到四边荒远的地方，让他们去抵御妖怪。
English: After Yao became Yao's vassal, he opened the city gates on all four sides, exiled four evil families, and drove Hunten, Qunqi, Yao, and Yao to the four corners of the wilderness, so that they could resist the monsters.

古文：是以尧崩而天下如一，同心戴舜以为天子，以其举十六相，去四凶也。
现代文：由于这样，尧死后而天下就像一个人一样，同心拥戴舜做天子，因为他举拔了十六相而去掉了四凶的缘故。
English: As a result of this, after the death of the dragonfly, the whole world, like a person, unanimously supported the dragonfly as the son of heaven, because he lifted up the sixteen aspects and removed the four evils.

古文：故《虞书》数舜之功曰 慎徽五典，五典克从 ，无违教也；曰 纳于百揆，百揆时序 ，无废事也；曰 宾于四门，四门穆穆 ，无凶人也。
现代文：所以《虞书》举出舜的功业，说 谨慎地发扬五典，五典就能服从他 ，这是说没有错误的教导。说 放在许多事务之中，事务都能顺利 ，这是说没有荒废的事务。说 开辟四方的城门，从远方来的宾客都恭敬肃穆 ，这是说没有凶顽的人物。
English: Therefore, "The Book of the Goat" mentioned the exploits of Yao, saying, "If you carefully carry out the Five Classics, the Five Classics will be able to obey him," which means that there is no wrong teaching; "If you put it among many affairs, affairs can go smoothly," which means that there are no wasted affairs; "If you open the four-sided city gate, guests from far away will respect solemnity," which means that there are no fierce characters.

古文：舜有大功二十而为天子。
现代文：舜建立了二十种大功才成为天子，现在行父没有得到一个好人，但已经赶走一个凶顽的人了。
English: He had to perform twenty great feats to become the Son of Heaven. Now, he did not get a good person, but he has driven away a vicious person.

古文：今行父虽未获一吉人，去一凶矣，于舜之功，二十之一也，庶几免于戾乎！ 宋武氏之族道昭公子，将奉司城须以作乱。
现代文：与舜的功业相比，已是二十分之一，差不多可以免于罪过了吧！宋国武氏的族人领着昭公的儿子，准备事奉司城须来发动叛乱。
English: Compared with the exploits of Shun, it is already one-twentieth, so you can almost get away with it! Song Guowu clan members led the son of Zhaogong to prepare to serve Shicheng to launch a rebellion.

古文：十二月，宋公杀母弟须及昭公子，使戴、庄、桓之族攻武氏于司马子伯之馆。
现代文：十二月，宋文公杀死了同胞兄弟须和昭公的儿子，让戴公、庄公、桓公的族人在司马子伯的宾馆里攻打武氏，于是就把武公、穆公的族人驱逐出境，派遣公孙师做司城。
English: In December, Song Wengong killed the sons of his fellow brothers, Su and Zhaogong, and ordered the clansmen of Dai, Zhuang, and Huan to attack the Wu clan in Sima Zibo's guesthouse. Therefore, he expelled the clansmen of Wugong and Mu from the country and sent Gongsun Shi to be the capital.

古文：遂出武、穆之族，使公孙师为司城，公子朝卒，使乐吕为司寇，以靖国人。
现代文：公子朝去世，派了乐吕做司寇，来安定国内的人心。
English: After the death of Prince Zichao, Le Lyu was sent as a scout to stabilize the hearts of the people in the country.

