古文：二十有五年春，叔孙婼如宋。
现代文：二十五年春季，叔孙婼去到宋国。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, Uncle Sun Yat went to Song.

古文：夏，叔诣会晋赵鞅、宋乐大心、卫北宫喜、郑游吉、曹人、邾人、滕人、薛人、小邾人于黄父。
现代文：夏季，叔诣与晋国的赵鞅、宋国的乐大心、卫国的北宫喜、郑国的游吉、曹国人、邾国人、滕国人、薛国人、小邾人在黄父会见。
English: In the summer, Zhu Xi met with Zhao Qi of Jin, Le Daxin of Song, Bei Gongxi of Wei, You Ji of Zheng, the people of Cao, the people of Ya, the people of Teng, the people of Xue, and the people of Xiao Ya in Huangdi.

古文：有鸲鹆来巢。
现代文：有鸲鹆来到鲁国筑巢。
English: Some storks come to Russia to build their nests.

古文：秋七月上辛，大雩；季辛，又雩。
现代文：秋季七月上辛日，举行大的秋雨祭祀活动；季辛日，又举行秋雨祭祀。
English: In autumn, on the first day of the Chinese New Year in July, a large autumn rain ritual is held; on the second day of the Chinese New Year, an autumn rain ritual is also held.

古文：九月己亥，公孙于齐，次于阳州，齐侯唁公于野井。
现代文：九月己亥日，公孙逃到齐国，暂住在阳州，齐侯知道后到井野来慰问。
English: In September, on the day of Ji Hai, Gongsun fled to Qi Province and temporarily lived in Yangzhou. Qi Hou came to Ino to offer condolences after learning of this.

古文：冬十月戊辰，叔孙婼卒。
现代文：冬季十月戊辰日，叔孙婼去世。
English: In the winter of October on the day of Pentecost, Uncle Sun Yat-sen passed away.

古文：十有一月己亥，宋公佐卒于曲棘。
现代文：十一月己亥日，宋公佐在曲棘去世。
English: On November 6, Song Gongsa passed away in Quchang.

古文：十有二月，齐侯取郓。
现代文：十二月，齐侯攻占了郓地。
English: In December, the Qihou captured the Fengtian.

古文：二十五年春，叔孙婼聘于宋。
现代文：二十五年春季，叔孙婼到宋国聘问。
English: In the spring of the 25th year, Uncle Sun Rong went to Song to ask for a job.

古文：桐门右师见之，语卑宋大夫，而贱司城氏。
现代文：桐门右师接见他，谈话，右师看不起宋国的大夫，并且轻视司城氏。
English: Tongmen's right-hand man received him and talked with him. The right-hand man looked down on Song doctors and despised the Shicheng clan.

古文：昭子告其人曰： 右师其亡乎！
现代文：叔孙婼告诉他的手下人说： 右师恐怕要逃亡吧！
English: Uncle Sun Yat-sen told his men, "I'm afraid the right division will have to flee!"

古文：君子贵其身而后能及人，是以有礼。
现代文：君子尊重他自己，然后能及于别人，因此有礼。
English: A gentleman respects himself before he respects others, and is therefore courteous.

古文：今夫子卑其大夫而贱其宗，是贱其身也。能有礼乎？
现代文：现在这个人对他们的大夫和宗族都不加尊重，这是轻视他自己，能够有礼吗？
English: Now this man has no respect for their doctor or their tribe. He's disrespecting himself. Can he be polite?

古文：无礼必亡。 
现代文：无礼必定逃亡。 
English: If you're rude, you'll get run over.

古文：宋公享昭子，赋《新宫》。昭子赋《车辖》。
现代文：宋元公设享礼招待叔孙婼，赋《新宫》这首诗，叔孙婼赋《车辖》这首诗。
English: The Song and Yuan Dynasties set up a banquet to invite uncle Sun Yat, who wrote the poem "The New Palace," and uncle Sun Yat, who wrote the poem "The Chariot."

古文：明日，宴，饮酒乐。宋公使昭子右坐，语相泣也。
现代文：第二天设宴，喝酒，很高兴，宋元公让昭子坐在右边，说着话就相对掉下了眼泪。
English: The next day, they held a banquet, drank wine, and were very happy. Song Yuan Gong let Akiko sit on his right side, and as he spoke, he shed tears.

古文：乐祁佐，退而告人曰： 今兹君与叔孙，其皆死乎？
现代文：乐祁帮着主持宴会，退下去告诉别人说： 今年国君和叔孙恐怕都要死了吧！
English: Le Yao helped to preside over the banquet, then retreated to tell others: "I'm afraid that this year the sovereign and his grandchildren will all die!"

古文：吾闻之，哀乐而乐哀，皆丧心也。
现代文：我听说： 该高兴的时候悲哀，而该悲哀的时候高兴，这都是心意丧失。 
English: I have heard it said: To be sad when one should be happy, and to be happy when one should be sad, is to lose heart.

古文：心之精爽，是谓魂魄。魂魄去之，何以能久？ 
现代文：心的精华神明，这就叫魂魄，魂魄离去了，怎么能活得久长？ 
English: The essence of the heart is the spirit, which is called the soul. If the soul is gone, how can one live long?

古文：季公若之姊为小邾夫人，生宋元夫人，生子以妻季平子。昭子如宋聘，且逆之。
现代文：季公若的姐姐是小邾君夫人，生了宋元公夫人，宋元公夫人生了个女儿，嫁给季平子，叔孙婼到宋国行聘，并且迎亲。
English: Ji Gongru's sister was the wife of Xiao Yaojun, and she gave birth to the wife of Song Yuangong. Song Yuangong's wife gave birth to a daughter, who married Ji Pingzi. Ji Gongru's uncle and grandson went to Songguo for employment, and they were married.

古文：公若从，谓曹氏勿与，曹将逐之。
现代文：季公若跟随前去，告诉宋元公夫人让她不要答应亲事，因为鲁国正在准备赶走季平子。
English: If Ji Gong were to follow, he would tell Lady Song Yuan not to let her agree to the marriage, because Lu was preparing to drive Ji Ping Zi away.

古文：曹氏告公，公告乐祁。乐祁曰： 与之。
现代文：宋元公夫人告诉宋元公，宋元公告诉乐祁，乐祁说： 给他。
English: Song Yuan Gong's wife told Song Yuan Gong, Song Yuan Gong told Le Yao, Le Yao said: Give it to him.

古文：如是，鲁君必出。
现代文：如果像所说的那样，鲁国国君一定要逃往国外。
English: If, as has been said, Lu Guo Guo Jun must flee abroad.

古文：政在季氏三世矣，鲁君丧政四公矣。
现代文：政权掌握在季氏手中已经三代了，鲁国国君丧失政权已经四代了。
English: The power has been in the hands of the Ji family for three generations, and it has been four generations since Lu Guo Guojun lost power.

古文：无民而能逞其志者，未之有也。
现代文：失掉民心而能满足他愿望的，还没有过。
English: There has never been a leader who has lost the people's hearts and satisfied their wishes.

古文：国君是以镇抚其民。
现代文：国君因此才镇抚他的百姓。
English: That's why the sovereign had to pacify his people.

古文：《诗》曰： 人之云亡，心之忧矣。 
现代文：《诗》说： 人才的丧失，就是心头的忧虑。 
English: "Poetry" said: The loss of talent is the worry of the heart.

古文：鲁君失民矣，焉得逞其志？
现代文：鲁国国君已经失去了民心，哪里能实现他的愿望？
English: Lu Guo Guo Jun has lost the hearts of the people, where can his wish be fulfilled?

古文：靖以待命犹可，动必忧。 
现代文：安静地等待天命还可以，有所举动必定造成忧患。 
English: It's okay to wait quietly for fate, but any action is bound to cause trouble.

古文：夏，会于黄父，谋王室也。赵简子令诸侯之大夫，输王粟，具戍人，曰： 明年将纳王。 
现代文：夏季，鲁国子太叔和晋国赵鞅、宋国乐大心、卫国北宫喜、郑国游吉、曹人、邾人、滕人、薛人、小邾人在黄父会见，这是为了商量安定王室。赵鞅命令诸侯的大夫向周敬王输送粮食、准备戍守的将士，说： 明年将要送天子回去。 
English: In the summer, Lu Guo Zi's great-uncle met with Zhao Zi of Jin, Song Guo Le Da Xin of Song, Bei Gong Xi of Wei, You Ji of Zheng, Cao Ren, Xuan Ren, Teng Ren, Xue Ren, and Xiao Xuan Ren of Cao to discuss the stability of the royal family. Zhao Zi ordered the doctors of the princes to send grain to King Zhou Jian and the soldiers who were preparing to stay, saying: "We will send Tian Zi back next year."

古文：子大叔见赵简子，简子问揖让周旋之礼焉。
现代文：子太叔进见赵简子，赵简子向他询问揖让、周旋的礼节。
English: The great-uncle came to see Zhao Jianzi, and Zhao Jianzi asked him about the etiquette of concession and negotiation.

古文：对曰： 是仪也，非礼也。 
现代文：子太叔回答说： 这是仪，不是礼。 
English: His great-uncle replied, "This is a ceremony, not a salute.

古文：简子曰： 敢问何谓礼？ 
现代文：赵简子说： 谨敢请问什么叫礼？ 
English: Zhao Jianzi said, "May I ask you, what is the meaning of courtesy?

古文：对曰： 吉也闻诸先大夫子产曰： 夫礼，天之经也，地之义也，民之行也。
现代文：子太叔回答说： 吉曾经听到先大夫子产说： 礼，是上天的规范，大地的准则，百姓行动的依据。 
English: The great-uncle replied: Ji once heard the former doctor Zi Yuan say: "Ritual is the norm of heaven, the standard of the earth, and the basis for the actions of the people.

古文：天地之经，而民实则之。则天之明，因地之性，生其六气，用其五行。
现代文：天地的规范，百姓就加以效法，效法上天的英明，依据大地的本性，产生了上天的六气，使用大地的五行。
English: According to the norms of heaven and earth, the people imitate them, imitate the wisdom of heaven, and according to the nature of the earth, produce the six airs of heaven and use the five elements of the earth.

古文：气为五味，发为五色，章为五声，淫则昏乱，民失其性。是故为礼以奉之。为六畜、五牲、三牺，以奉五味。
现代文：气是五种味道，表现为五种颜色，显示为五种声音，过了头就昏乱，百姓就失掉本性，因此制作了礼用来使它有所遵循：制定了六畜、五牲、三牺，以使五味有所遵循。
English: Qi is five flavors, five colors, and five sounds. Overdoing it will lead to confusion, and people will lose their nature. Therefore, the ritual was made to make it follow: Six animals, five animals, and three sacrifices were made to make the five flavors follow.

古文：为九文、六采、五章，以奉五色。
现代文：制定九文、六采、五章，以使五色有所遵循。
English: Nine articles, six collections, and five chapters were formulated so that the five colors would be followed.

古文：为九歌、八风、七音、六律，以奉五声。
现代文：制定九歌、八风、七音、六律，以使五声有所遵循。
English: Nine songs, eight winds, seven tones and six rhythms were formulated so that the five tones could be followed.

古文：为君臣、上下，以则地义。
现代文：制定君臣上下的关系，以效法大地的准则。
English: To establish the relationship between the ruler and the people, so as to follow the principles of the land.

古文：为夫妇、外内，以经二物。
现代文：制定夫妇内外的关系，以规范两种事物。
English: The internal and external relations of the couple are established in order to regulate these two things.

古文：为父子、兄弟、姑姊、甥舅、昏媾、姻亚，以象天明。
现代文：制定父子、兄弟、姑姊、甥舅、翁婿、连襟的关系，以象征上天的英明。
English: Establish father-son, brother-brother, sister-sister, nephew-uncle, son-in-law, and brother-in-law relationships to symbolize God's wisdom.

古文：为政事、庸力、行务，以从四时。
现代文：制定政策政令、农工管理、行动措施，以随顺四时。
English: Formulate policies, decrees, agricultural and industrial management, and action measures to follow the four o'clock.

古文：为刑罚、威狱，使民畏忌，以类其震曜杀戮。
现代文：制定刑罚、牢狱让百姓害怕，以模仿雷电的杀伤。
English: Enact punishments and prisons to make the people afraid, in order to imitate the damage caused by lightning.

古文：为温慈、惠和，以效天之生殖长育。
现代文：制定温和慈祥的措施，以效法上天的生长万物。
English: To devise gentle and benevolent measures, in imitation of the heavenly growth of all things.

古文：民有好、恶、喜、怒、哀、乐，生于六气。是故审则宜类，以制六志。
现代文：百姓有好恶、喜怒、哀乐，它们以六气派生，所以要审慎地效法，适当地模仿，以制约六志。
English: People have likes and dislikes, emotions, and sorrows, which are derived from the six qi, so we should carefully follow the example and imitate appropriately to control the six qi.

古文：哀有哭泣，乐有歌舞，喜有施舍，怒有战斗。
现代文：哀痛有哭泣，欢乐有歌舞，高兴有施舍，愤怒有战斗。
English: Sorrow has its weeping, joy its dancing, gladness its almsgiving, anger its battle.

古文：喜生于好，怒生于恶。
现代文：高兴从爱好而来，愤怒从讨厌而来。
English: Pleasure comes from liking, anger from disliking.

古文：是故审行信令，祸福赏罚，以制死生。
现代文：所以要使行动审慎、使命令有信用，用祸福赏罚，来制约死生。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to make actions prudent, make orders credible, and reward and punish with misfortune and fortune to control life and death.

古文：生，好物也。
现代文：生，是人们喜好的事情。
English: Life is a matter of people's preferences.

古文：死，恶物也。
现代文：死，是人们讨厌的事物。
English: Death is something that people hate.

古文：好物，乐也。
现代文：喜好的事物，是欢乐。
English: My favourite thing is to have fun.

古文：恶物，哀也。
现代文：讨厌的事物，是哀伤。
English: Sadness is a loathsome thing.

古文：哀乐不失，乃能协于天地之性，是以长久  简子曰： 甚哉，礼之大也。 
现代文：欢乐不失于礼，就能协调天地的本性，因此能够长久。  赵简子说： 礼的伟大达到极点！ 
English: Joy is not inferior to courtesy, it can coordinate the nature of heaven and earth, so it can last for a long time.Zhao Jianzi said: The greatness of courtesy has reached the extreme!

古文：对曰： 礼，上下之纪，天地之经纬也，民之所以生也，是以先王尚之。故人之能自曲直以赴礼者，谓之成人。
现代文：子太叔回答说： 礼，是上下的纲纪，天地的准则，百姓所生存的依据，因此先王尊崇它，所以人们能够从不同的天性经过自我修养改造或者直接达到礼的，就叫做完美无缺的人。
English: The uncle replied, "Ritual is the upper and lower disciplines, the standard of heaven and earth, and the basis for the people's survival. Therefore, the first king revered it. Therefore, people who can cultivate and transform themselves from different natures or directly achieve ritual are called perfect people.

古文：大，不亦宜乎？ 
现代文：它的伟大，不也是适宜的吗？ 
English: Isn't its greatness also its appropriateness?

古文：简子曰： 鞅也请终身守此言也。 
现代文：赵简子说： 我赵鞅啊，请求一辈子遵循这些话。 
English: Zhao Jianzi said: I, Zhao Yao, ask you to follow these words for the rest of your life.

古文：宋乐大心曰： 我不输粟，我于周为客，若之何使客？ 
现代文：宋国的乐大心说： 我们不给天子送粮食，我们对周朝来说是客人，为什么要指使客人送粮食？ 
English: Song Guo's Le Daxin said: We don't send grain to Tianzi, we are guests of Zhou Dynasty, why should we order guests to send grain?

古文：晋士伯曰： 自践土以来，宋何役之不会，而何盟之不同？
现代文：晋国的士伯说： 从践土结盟以来，宋国有哪一次战役不参加，又有哪一次结盟不在一起？
English: Shi Bo of Jin said: Since the alliance of the soil, which battle of the Song Dynasty did not participate, and which alliance did not come together?

古文：曰同恤王室，子焉得辟之？
现代文：盟辞说 一起为王室操心 ，您哪里能躲开？
English: In the words of the pledge, "Let's worry about the royal family together," where can you hide?

古文：子奉君命，以会大事，而宋背盟，无乃不可乎！ 
现代文：您奉了君王的命令，来参加这重大的事件，而宋国倒违背盟约，恐怕不可以吧！ 
English: You have been ordered by the king to attend this important event, but Song has reneged on the treaty. I'm afraid you can't!

古文：右师不敢对，受牒而退。
现代文：乐大心不敢回答，接受了简札退出去。
English: Le Daxin did not dare to answer, and accepted the brief to withdraw.

古文：士伯告简子曰： 宋右师必亡。
现代文：士伯告诉赵简子说： 宋国的右师必然逃亡。
English: Shi Bo told Zhao Jianzi that: Song's right-hand man would inevitably flee.

古文：奉君命以使，而欲背盟以干盟主，无不祥大焉。 
现代文：奉了国君的命令出使，而想要背弃盟约以触犯盟主，没有比这再大的不吉祥了。 
English: There is no greater misfortune than to be sent by order of the sovereign and to break the covenant and offend the Lord of the covenant.

古文：有鸲鹆来巢，书所无也。
现代文： 有鸜鹆来巢 ，这是过去所没有记载的事情。
English: There are dragonflies coming to the nest, which is something that has not been recorded before.

古文：师己曰： 异哉！
现代文：师己说： 怪呀！
English: The master said, "How strange!

古文：吾闻文、成之世，童谣有之，曰： 之鹆之，公出辱之。
现代文：我听说文王、成王的时代，童谣有这样的话说： 鸜啊鹆啊，国君出国受到羞辱。
English: I heard that in the era of King Wen and King Cheng, there was a nursery rhyme that said, "Oh, oh, oh, the king went abroad and was humiliated."

古文：鸲鹆之羽，公在外野，往馈之马。
现代文：鸜鹆的羽毛，国君住在远郊，臣下去把马匹送到。
English: feather of a dragonfly, the sovereign lives in the suburbs, and the vassals go down to bring the horses to him.

古文：鸲鹆跦跦，公在乾侯，征褰与襦。
现代文：鸜鹆蹦蹦跳跳，国君住在乾侯，向人要裤子短袄。
English: The toad hops and skips, the sovereign lives in a dry town and asks people to wear short trousers.

古文：鸲鹆之巢，远哉遥遥。稠父丧劳，宋父以骄。鸲鹆鸲鹆，往歌来哭。 
现代文：鸜鹆的老巢，路远遥遥，稠父死于辛劳，宋父代立而骄，鸜鹆鸜鹆，去的时候唱歌，回来的时候号哭。 
English: Toad's old home is far away, his father died from hard work, Song's father stood up and was proud, Toad sang when he went, and cried when he came back.

古文：童谣有是，今鸲鹆来巢，其将及乎？ 
现代文：童谣有这个。现在鸜鹆前来筑巢，恐怕将要发生祸难了吧！ 
English: The nursery rhyme goes like this: Now that the storks have come to build their nests, I'm afraid there's going to be trouble!

古文：秋，书再雩，旱甚也。
现代文：秋季，《春秋》记载两次大的雩祭，这是由于旱灾严重。
English: In the autumn, "Spring and Autumn" recorded two large burnt offerings, which was due to a severe drought.

古文：初，季公鸟娶妻于齐鲍文子，生甲。
现代文：当初，季公鸟在齐国鲍文子家娶了妻子，生了某甲。
English: At first, Ji Gongjie married a wife in the Bao Wenzi family in Qi Province and gave birth to a certain A.

古文：公鸟死，季公亥与公思展与公鸟之臣申夜姑相其室。
现代文：季公鸟死，季公亥、公思展和季公鸟的家臣申夜姑管理他的家务。
English: After the death of Kingfisher, Kingfisher's sons, Kingfisher, Kingfisher and Kingfisher's daughter-in-law, Queenfisher's daughter-in-law, manage his household affairs.

古文：及季姒与饔人檀通，而惧，乃使其妾抶己，以示秦遄之妻曰： 公若欲使余，余不可而抶余。 
现代文：等到季姒和管伙食的檀私通，季姒感到害怕，就让她的侍女打了自己一顿，跑去给秦遄的妻子看，说： 公若要让我陪他睡觉，我不答应，就打了我。 
English: When Ji Yao's affair with the headwaiter came to an end, Ji Yao felt scared, so she had her maid beat herself up, ran to show it to Qin Yao's wife, and said: "If the prince wants me to sleep with him, I won't agree, so he beat me."

古文：又诉于公甫曰： 展与夜姑将要余。 
现代文：又向公甫诉苦，说： 展和夜姑准备要挟我。 
English: She also complained to the priest, saying: "Chan and the night nurse are preparing to blackmail me.

古文：秦姬以告公之，公之与公甫告平子。平子拘展于卞而执夜姑，将杀之。
现代文：秦遄的妻子把话告诉公之。公之和公甫告诉了平子，平子把公思展拘留在卞地，抓了夜姑准备杀他。
English: Qin Yao's wife told the story to Gongzhi. Gongzhi and Gongfu told it to Pingzi. Pingzi detained Gongsizhan in Shunde and arrested the night watchman to prepare to kill him.

古文：公若泣而哀之曰： 杀是，是杀余也。 
现代文：季公亥哭泣着哀求说： 杀了这个人，就是杀了我。 
English: Ji Gonghai cried and pleaded: "If you kill this man, you kill me."

古文：将为之请。
现代文：准备为他请求。
English: Prepare to plead for him.

古文：平子使竖勿内，日中不得请。
现代文：平子让小仆役不让他进来，太阳到中午没有能得到请求。
English: Hirako asked the little servant not to let him in, and the sun did not get the request until noon.

古文：有司逆命，公之使速杀之。故公若怨平子。
现代文：官吏去接受处理夜姑的命令，公之要他快点杀了夜姑，所以季公亥怨恨平子。
English: The official went to accept the order to deal with the nightingale, and publicly asked him to quickly kill the nightingale, so Ji Gonghai resented Ping Zi.

古文：季、郈之鸡斗。
现代文：季氏、郈氏斗鸡。
English: The Ji clan and the Shih clan have a cockfight.

古文：季氏介其鸡，郈氏为之金距。
现代文：季氏给鸡套上皮甲，郈氏给鸡安上金属爪子。
English: Mr. Ji put leather armor on the chicken, and Mr. Zou put metal claws on the chicken.

古文：平子怒，益宫于郈氏，且让之。
现代文：季氏的鸡斗败，季平子发怒，在郈氏那里扩建自己的住宅，并且责备他们。
English: When the Ji clan lost the chicken fight, Ji Ping Zi became angry and expanded his residence at the Shun clan's place and blamed them.

古文：故郈昭伯亦怨平子。
现代文：所以郈昭伯也怨恨季平子。
English: Therefore, Zou Zhao Bo also resented Ji Ping Zi.

古文：臧昭伯之从弟会，为谗于臧氏，而逃于季氏，臧氏执旃。
现代文：臧昭伯的叔伯兄弟臧会在臧氏那里诬陷别人，逃到季氏那里，臧氏扣押了他。
English: Zhai Zhao Bo's uncle and brother Zhai Zhou would frame someone else at Zhai's place and escape to Ji's place, where Zhai Zhou detained him.

古文：平子怒，拘臧氏老。
现代文：季平子发怒，拘留了臧氏的家臣。
English: Enraged, Ji Ping Zi detained Yu's vassal.

古文：将禘于襄公，万者二人，其众万于季氏。
现代文：将要在襄公庙里举行祭祀，跳万舞的只有两个人，多数人到季氏那里跳万舞去了。
English: A religious service was to be held at the Xianggong Temple, and only two people danced the wan dan. Most people went to Mr. Ji's place to dance the wan dan.

古文：臧孙曰： 此之谓不能庸先君之庙。 
现代文：臧昭伯说： 这叫做不能在先君的宗庙里酬谢先君的功劳。 
English: Zou Zhao Bo said: This is called not being able to reward the merits of the forefather in his ancestral temple.

古文：大夫遂怨平子。
现代文：大夫们于是也就怨恨季平子。
English: As a result, doctors came to resent Ji Ping Zi.

古文：公若献弓于公为，且与之出射于外，而谋去季氏。
现代文：季公亥向公为献弓，并且和他外出射箭，谋划去掉季氏。
English: Ji Gonghai presented a bow to Gong, and went out with him to shoot arrows, plotting to get rid of Ji.

古文：公为告公果、公贲。
现代文：公为告诉了公果、公贲。
English: Publicly told the public result, public opinion.

古文：公果、公贲使侍人僚柤告公。
现代文：公果、公贲派随从僚柤报告昭公。
English: Gongguo and Gongye faction followed the report of their colleague, Zhao Zhao.

古文：公寝，将以戈击之，乃走。公曰： 执之。 
现代文：昭公已经睡了，要拿起戈来打僚柤，僚柤就跑了，昭公说： 逮住他！ 
English: Zhaogong was already asleep. He wanted to pick up a club to hit his brother-in-law, but the brother-in-law ran away. Zhaogong said, "Catch him!"

古文：亦无命也。
现代文：但也没有正式下命令。
English: But no formal order was given.

古文：惧而不出，数月不见，公不怒。
现代文：僚柤恐惧不敢出门，几个月不去朝见昭公。昭公并不发怒。
English: His colleagues were afraid to go out, and for months they did not go to see Akihito. Akihito did not get angry.

古文：又使言，公执戈以惧之，乃走。
现代文：后来又派僚柤去报告昭公，昭公拿起戈来吓唬他，他就跑了。
English: Later, he sent a colleague to report to Shao Gong. Shao Gong picked up a crowbar to scare him, and he ran away.

古文：又使言，公曰： 非小人之所及也。 
现代文：又派僚柤去说，昭公说： 这不是小人管得着的。 
English: He also sent a colleague to say, Zhaogong said: This is not something that can be managed by a small person.

古文：公果自言，公以告臧孙，臧孙以难。
现代文：公果自己去说了，昭公把话告诉臧孙。臧孙认为难办。
English: When Gonggu went to say it himself, Zhao Gong told his grandson what he had said. The grandson thought it was difficult to do.

古文：告郈孙，郈孙以可，劝。
现代文：告诉了郈昭伯，郈昭伯认为可行，劝昭公干。
English: He told Zou Zhao Bo that Zou Zhao Bo thought it was feasible and advised Zou Zhao to do it.

古文：告子家懿伯，懿伯曰： 谗人以君徼幸，事若不克，君受其名，不可为也。
现代文：昭公告诉子家懿伯。懿伯说： 坏人们让君王侥幸行事，事情如果不成功，君王蒙受坏名声，这是不能做的。
English: Zhao Gong told his son Zibo. Zibo said: Bad people let the king act by chance. If things don't work out, the king will get a bad reputation. This can't be done.

古文：舍民数世以求克，事不可必也。
现代文：丢掉百姓已经几代了，以此要求事情成功，这是没有把握的事。
English: It's been generations of throwing away the people in order to make things work, and it's not a sure thing.

古文：且政在焉，其难图也。 
现代文：而且政权在人家手里，恐怕是很难算计他的。 
English: Moreover, the power is in someone else's hands, so it's hard to count him out.

古文：公退之。辞曰： 臣与闻命矣，言若洩，臣不获死。 
现代文：昭公让懿伯下去，懿伯回答说： 下臣已经听到您的命令了，话如果泄漏，下臣会不得好死的。 
English: Zou Bo replied, "The vassal has already heard your order. If the word leaks out, the vassal will die a miserable death."

古文：乃馆于公。
现代文：于是就住在公宫里。
English: So he lived in the court palace.

古文：叔孙昭子如阚，公居于长府。
现代文：叔孙昭子到阚地去，昭公住在长府里。
English: Uncles and grandsons Akiko went to Shunde, and Akigimi lived in Nagafu.

古文：九月戊戌，伐季氏，杀公之于门，遂入之。
现代文：九月十一日，攻打季氏，在大门口杀死公之，就攻了进去。
English: On September 11, they attacked Ji, killed Gongzhi at the gate, and then entered.

古文：平子登台而请曰： 君不察臣之罪，使有司讨臣以干戈，臣请待于沂上以察罪。 
现代文：季平子登台请求说： 君上没有调查下臣的罪过，派官吏使用武力讨伐下臣，下臣请求待在沂水边上让君王审查。 
English: Ji Pingzi took the stage to make a request, saying: Your Majesty did not investigate the crimes of your subordinates, and sent officials to use force to fight your subordinates. Your subordinates asked to stay on the edge of Surabaya for the monarch to examine.

古文：弗许。
现代文：昭公不答应。
English: Yan Le still did not agree.

古文：请囚于费，弗许。
现代文：请求囚禁在费地，昭公也不答应。
English: He asked to be imprisoned in Feidi, but the prince did not agree.

古文：请以五乘亡，弗许。
现代文：请求带着五辆车子逃亡，昭公也不答应。
English: He again requested that he be allowed to flee with five cars, but Akio still did not allow it.

古文：子家子曰： 君其许之！
现代文：子家子说： 君王还是答应他吧！
English: And his son said, Let the king consent.

古文：政自之出久矣，隐民多取食焉。为之徒者众矣，日入慝作，弗可知也。
现代文：政令从他那里发出已经很久了，贫困的百姓大都靠他吃饭，做他一党的人也很多了，太阳下山以后，坏人是否冒出来，还不知道呢。
English: It has been a long time since he issued a decree, most of the poor people rely on him for food, and there are many people who are his party. It is not yet known whether bad people will emerge after the sun goes down.

古文：众怒不可蓄也。蓄而弗治，将蕰。
现代文：众人的怒气不能让它积聚，积聚起来而不妥善处理，怒气会越来越大。
English: You can't let people's anger build up. If you let it build up and don't deal with it properly, the anger will get bigger and bigger.

古文：蕰畜，民将生心；生心，同求将合。君必悔之。 
现代文：越来越大的怒气积聚起来，百姓将会产生叛变之心，生背叛之心，和有同样要求的人会纠合一起，君王必然要后悔的！ 
English: As more and more anger builds up, the people will have a rebellious heart, a rebellious heart, and those who have the same demands will be entangled together, and the king will certainly regret it!

古文：弗听。郈孙曰： 必杀之。 
现代文：昭公不听从他的意见，郈昭伯说： 一定要杀了他。 
English: When Zhao Gong did not listen to his advice, Zou Zhao Bo said, "We must kill him."

古文：公使郈孙逆孟懿子。叔孙氏之司马鬷戾言于其众曰： 若之何？ 
现代文：昭公派郈昭伯迎接孟懿子，叔孙氏的司马鬷戾问他的手下人说： 怎么办？ 
English: Zhao Gong sent Zou Zhao Bo to meet Meng Zi. Sima Yao, the uncle and grandson of Zhao Gong, asked his subordinates, "What should we do?

古文：莫对。
现代文：没有人回答。
English: No one answered.

古文：又曰： 我，家臣也，不敢知国。凡有季氏与无，于我孰利？ 
现代文：又说： 我是家臣，不敢考虑国家大事，有季氏和没有季氏，哪一种情况对于我有利？ 
English: He also said: I am a vassal, I dare not think about national affairs, with or without the Ji clan, which situation is advantageous to me?

古文：皆曰： 无季氏，是无叔孙氏也。 
现代文：大家都说： 没有季氏，就是没有叔孙氏。 
English: Everyone said: "If there is no Ji clan, there is no uncle and grandson clan."

古文：鬷戾曰： 然则救诸。 
现代文：鬷戾说： 那么就去救援他吧！ 
English: Zou said, "Then go and rescue him!"

古文：帅徒以往，陷西北隅以入。
现代文：率领手下人前去，攻破西北角进去。
English: He led his men forward and broke through the northwest corner.

古文：公徒释甲，执冰而踞。遂逐之。孟氏使登西北隅，以望季氏。
现代文：昭公的亲兵正脱去皮甲拿着箭筒蹲着，鬷戾就把他们赶走了，孟氏派人登上西北角，瞭望季氏。
English: Akihiro's own soldiers were stripping off their armor and squatting with quivers in their hands, so the dragon drove them away. Meng sent someone to the northwest corner to look out for Ji.

古文：见叔孙氏之旌，以告。
现代文：瞭望的人看到叔孙氏的旗子，把情况报告孟氏。
English: The lookout saw the uncle's flag and reported the situation to Meng.

古文：孟氏执郈昭伯，杀之于南门之西，遂伐公徒。子家子曰： 诸臣伪劫君者，而负罪以出，君止。意如之事君也，不敢不改。 
现代文：孟氏逮捕了郈昭伯，把他在南门的西边杀死了他，就乘势攻打昭公的亲兵，子家子说： 臣下们假装是劫持君王的人，背着罪名出国，君王留下来，意如事奉君王，就不敢不改变态度。 
English: Meng arrested Zhai Zhao Bo, killed him on the west side of the south gate, and took advantage of the situation to attack Zhao Zhao's own soldiers. Zi Jia Zi said: "If the vassals pretend to be the person who kidnapped the king and go abroad with the accusation behind their backs, and the king stays behind, pretending to serve the king, they would not dare not to change their attitude.

古文：公曰： 余不忍也。 
现代文：昭公说： 我不能忍受。 
English: Akimoto said, "I can't stand it.

古文：与臧孙如墓谋，遂行。
现代文：就和臧昭伯去祖坟上辞别祖宗，并且谋划逃亡的事，动身走了。
English: He and Zou Zhao Bo went to the ancestral grave to bid farewell to the ancestors, and planned to escape, and set off.

古文：己亥，公孙于齐，次于阳州。
现代文：十一月十三日，昭公逃亡到齐国，住在阳州。
English: On November 13, Zhaogong fled to Qi Province and lived in Yangzhou.

古文：齐侯将唁公于平阴，公先至于野井。
现代文：齐景公准备在平阴慰问昭公，昭公先到达野井。
English: Lord Qi Jing is preparing to offer condolences to Lord Zhao in the evening. Lord Zhao arrives in Noi first.

古文：齐侯曰： 寡人之罪也。 
现代文：齐景公说： 这是寡人的罪过。 
English: Lord Qi Jing said: This is the fault of many people.

古文：使有司待于平阴，为近故也。
现代文：让官吏在平阴等待，是为了就近的缘故。
English: It is for the sake of proximity that officials are kept waiting in the shade.

古文：书曰： 公孙于齐，次于阳州，齐侯唁公于野井。 礼也。
现代文：《春秋》记载说 公孙于齐，次于阳州，齐侯唁公于野井 ，这是合于礼的。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Gongsun was born in Qi, second only to Yangzhou, and Qihong was born in Noi, which is proper.

古文：将求于人，则先下之，礼之善物也。
现代文：将要有求于人，就要先居于人下，这是合于礼的好事。
English: If you want to be in demand, you must first live below people, which is a good thing to do.

古文：齐侯曰： 自莒疆以西，请致千社，以待君命。寡人将帅敝赋以从执事，唯命是听。
现代文：齐景公说： 从莒国的国境以西，请奉送君王二万五千户，以等待君王的命令，寡人将要率领敝邑的军队以跟从执事，唯命是听。
English: Qi Jing Gong said: From the west of the border of the country, please send the king's twenty-five thousand households to wait for the king's order. Some people will lead the army of the county to follow the deacon. Please listen to the order.

古文：君之忧，寡人之忧也。 
现代文：君王的忧虑，就是我的忧虑。 
English: The king's concern is my concern.

古文：公喜。子家子曰： 天禄不再，天若胙君，不过周公，以鲁足矣。
现代文：昭公很高兴，子家子说： 上天所赐的爵禄不再降给君王了，上天如果保佑君王，也不能超过周公。给君王鲁国就足够了。
English: Akihiro was very happy, and his son said, "The peerage given by heaven will no longer be given to the king. If heaven blesses the king, it cannot exceed Zhou Gong. It is enough to give the king the kingdom of Lu."

古文：失鲁，而以千社为臣，谁与之立？
现代文：失去鲁国而带着二万五千户做臣下，谁还为君王复位？
English: Who restored the king after losing the kingdom of Lu and taking twenty-five thousand households as vassals?

古文：且齐君无信，不如早之晋。 
现代文：况且齐国的国君不讲信用，不如早点到晋国去。 
English: Besides, the sovereign of Qi did not believe in trust, so it was better to go to Jin earlier.

古文：弗从。
现代文：昭公不听从他的意见。
English: Akihiro didn't listen.

古文：臧昭伯率从者将盟，载书曰： 戮力壹心，好恶同之。信罪之有无，缱绻从公，无通外内。 
现代文：臧昭伯率领跟随昭公的人将要结盟，盟书说： 合力同心，好恶一致，明确有罪无罪，坚决跟从国君，不要内外沟通。 
English: Zhai Zhaobo led the people who followed Zhaogong to form an alliance. The alliance said: work together as one, have the same likes and dislikes, have a clear understanding of guilt and innocence, resolutely follow the sovereign, and do not communicate internally or externally.

古文：以公命示子家子。子家子曰： 如此，吾不可以盟。羁也不佞，不能与二三子同心，而以为皆有罪。或欲通外内，且欲去君。
现代文：用昭公的名义给子家子看，子家子说： 像这样，我不能盟誓，羁没有才能，不能和您几位合力同心，而是认为都有罪，我也可能与国外交谈，并且想要离开国君为国君奔走四方。
English: Using the name of Zhao Gong, he showed it to his son, and his son said, "I can't swear like this, I have no talent, I can't join forces with you, but I think we are all guilty. I may also talk to foreign countries, and I want to run away from the king for the king."

古文：二三子好亡而恶定，焉可同也？
现代文：您几位喜欢逃亡而不想安定君位，我哪里能和您几位好恶一致？
English: Some of you like to run away and do not want to stabilize the monarchy, where can I agree with your likes and dislikes?

古文：陷君于难，罪孰大焉？
现代文：陷国君于危难之中，还有比这再大的罪过吗？
English: Is there a greater crime than putting the sovereign in danger?

古文：通外内而去君，君将速入，弗通何为？
现代文：为了里外通气而离开国君，国君就能快一点回国，不通消息做什么？
English: If you leave the sovereign for the sake of venting at home and abroad, the sovereign will be able to return home a little faster. What are you doing without information?

古文：而何守焉？ 
现代文：又能死守在哪里？ 
English: Where can they hold out?

古文：乃不与盟。
现代文：于是就不参加结盟。
English: As a result, it will not join the alliance.

古文：昭子自阚归，见平子。平子稽颡曰： 子若我何？ 
现代文：昭子从阚地回国，进见季平子，平子叩头，说： 您要我怎么办？ 
English: When Akiko came back to Japan from Shikoku, she met with Kihirako, bowed to her and said, "What do you want me to do?

古文：昭子曰： 人谁不死？
现代文：昭子说： 人有谁不死？
English: Akiko said, "Is there anyone who will not die?"

古文：子以逐君成名，子孙不忘，不亦伤乎！
现代文：您由于驱逐国君成了名，子子孙孙不忘记，不也可悲吗？
English: You have become famous for expelling the sovereign, and your children and grandchildren will not forget it. Isn't that sad?

古文：将若子何？ 
现代文：我能把您怎么办？ 
English: What can I do for you?

古文：平子曰： 苟使意如得改事君，所谓生死而肉骨也。 
现代文：季平子说： 如果让我能改变态度事奉国君，就是所谓让死人再生、白骨长肉的事情了。 
English: Kihirako said, "If I can change my attitude to serve the sovereign, it would be like bringing the dead back to life.

古文：昭子从公于齐，与公言。子家子命適公馆者执之。公与昭子言于幄内，曰： 将安众而纳公。 
现代文：昭子到齐国去跟随昭公，向昭公报告，子家子命令把凡是到昭公宾馆去的人都抓起来，昭公和昭子在帐幕里说话，昭子说： 将要安定大众而接纳您。 
English: Akiko went to Qi Province to follow Akimoto, and reported to Akimoto. His son ordered to arrest everyone who went to Akimoto's hotel. Akimoto and Akiko talked in the tent. Akiko said, "I will accept you to stabilize the public."

古文：公徒将杀昭子，伏诸道。
现代文：昭公的亲兵准备杀死昭子，埋伏在路边。
English: Akihiko's own soldiers are preparing to kill Akiko and are lying in wait on the side of the road.

古文：左师展告公，公使昭子自铸归。
现代文：左师展报告昭公，昭公让昭子取道从铸地回国。
English: Zuo Shizhen reported to Zhao Gong, and Zhao Gong let Zhao Gong take the way back from the foundry.

古文：平子有异志。
现代文：这时季平子有了别的想法。
English: At this time, Ji Heiko had another idea.

古文：冬十月辛酉，昭子齊于其寝，使祝宗祈死，戊辰，卒。
现代文：冬季，十月初四日，昭子在正寝中斋戒，让祝宗为他求死。十一日，死去。
English: In the winter, on the 4th day of October, Akiko fasted while sleeping, and asked Zhuzong to pray for his death. On the 11th day, he died.

古文：左师展将以公乘马而归，公徒执之。
现代文：左师展准备带着昭公坐一辆车回国，昭公的亲兵逮捕了他。
English: Zuo Shizhen was preparing to return to China with Akogun in a car, but Akogun's own soldiers arrested him.

古文：壬申，尹文公涉于巩，焚东訾，弗克。
现代文：十月十五日，尹文公领兵徒步渡过洛水，放火烧了东訾，没有战胜。
English: On October 15th, Yin Wenjun led the soldiers to cross Luoshui on foot and set fire to Donglu, but failed to win.

古文：十一月，宋元公将为公故如晋。梦大子栾即位于庙，己与平公服而相之。
现代文：十一月，宋元公准备为鲁昭公的缘故到晋国去，梦见太子栾在宗庙中即位，自己和宋平公穿着朝服辅助他。
English: In November, Song Yuan Gong was preparing to go to Jin Province for the sake of Lu Zhaogong. He had a dream that the crown prince Shun was enthroned in the ancestral temple, and he and Song Ping Gong were wearing imperial robes to assist him.

古文：旦召六卿。公曰： 寡人不佞，不能事父兄，以为二三子忧，寡人之罪也。
现代文：早晨，召见六卿，宋元公说： 寡人没有才能，不能事奉父辈兄辈，成为您几位的忧虑，这是寡人的罪过。
English: In the morning, the Six Lords were summoned, and Song Yuan Gong said, "Many people have no talent, and cannot serve their fathers and brothers. This has become a concern for several of you. This is the fault of many people."

古文：若以群子之灵，获保首领以没，唯是楄柎所以藉幹者，请无及先君。 
现代文：如果托诸位的福气，能够保全脑袋而善终，那些用来装载我的骸骨的棺木，请不要超过先君的体制。 
English: If, with your blessings, I am able to die with my head intact, the coffins that will be used to carry my bones should not exceed my predecessor's system.

古文：仲幾对曰： 君若以社稷之故，私降昵宴，群臣弗敢知。
现代文：仲几回答说： 君王如果由于国家的缘故，自己减损饮宴声色的供奉，下臣们不敢与闻。
English: Zhongkai replied, "If the sovereign, for the sake of the state, himself detracts from the offering of the banquet, the subordinates would not dare to interfere.

古文：若夫宋国之法，死生之度，先君有命矣。群臣以死守之，弗敢失队。
现代文：至于宋国的法度，出生和下葬的礼制，先君早已经有了成文规定了，下臣们用生命来维护它，不敢违背。
English: As for the laws of the Song Dynasty, the etiquette of birth and burial, the former emperor had already stipulated it in writing, and his subordinates used their lives to uphold it and did not dare to violate it.

古文：臣之失职，常刑不赦。
现代文：下臣失职，法律是不能赦免的。
English: The law cannot pardon a subordinate for dereliction of duty.

古文：臣不忍其死，君命祇辱。 
现代文：下臣不愿这样地死去，只能不听君王的命令。 
English: The vassal did not want to die like this, so he had no choice but to disobey the king's order.

古文：宋公遂行。
现代文：宋元公就动身了。
English: Song Yuan Gong set off.

古文：己亥，卒于曲棘。
现代文：十三日，死在曲棘。
English: On the thirteenth day, he died in Quzhou.

古文：十二月庚辰，齐侯围郓。
现代文：十二月十四日，齐景公包围了郓地。
English: On December 14th, Qi Jing Gong surrounded Handan.

古文：初，臧昭伯如晋，臧会窃其宝龟偻句。以卜为信与僭，僭吉。
现代文：当初，臧昭伯去到晋国，臧会偷了他的宝龟偻句，臧会用来占卜应该诚实还是不诚实，结果是不诚实吉利。
English: At first, Zou Zhao Bo went to Jin Province. Zou would steal his "treasured turtle" haiku. Zou would use it to divinize whether he should be honest or dishonest. The result was dishonest and lucky.

古文：臧氏老将如晋问，会请往。
现代文：臧氏的家臣将要到晋国问候臧昭伯，臧会请求派他前去。
English: Min's vassals will go to Jin to greet Zou Zhao Bo, and Zou will request Zou to send him there.

古文：昭伯问家故，尽对。
现代文：昭伯问起家里的事，臧会全都回答了。
English: When Zhao Bo asked about things at home, they all answered.

古文：及内子与母弟叔孙，则不对。
现代文：昭伯问到妻子和同母弟叔孙，就不回答。
English: When asked about his wife and his half-brother, half-brother, and half-brother's grandchildren, Zhao Bo did not answer.

古文：再三问，不对。
现代文：再三问他，还是不回答。
English: Ask him again and again, and he still won't answer.

古文：归及郊，会逆，问，又如初。
现代文：等到昭伯回国到达郊外，臧会前去迎接。问起那件事，还像从前那样不回答。
English: When Zhao Bo returned to China and arrived in the suburbs, Zou would go to meet him. When asked about it, he did not answer as before.

古文：至，次于外而察之，皆无之。
现代文：昭伯抵达国都，先住在城外而查问妻子兄弟，都没有问出什么事。
English: When Zhao Bo arrived in the capital, he first lived outside the city, and when he asked his wife and brothers, they didn't find anything.

古文：执而戮之，逸奔郈。郈鲂假使为贾正焉。
现代文：昭伯就抓了臧会要杀他，臧会逃走，逃亡到郈地，郈鲂假让他做了贾正。
English: Zhao Bo caught him and tried to kill him, but he escaped and fled to Shantian, where he pretended to be Jia Zheng.

古文：计于季氏。臧氏使五人以戈楯伏诸桐汝之闾。
现代文：一次臧会到季氏那里去送帐本，臧氏派五个人带着戈和楯埋伏在桐汝的里门里。
English: On one occasion, Gong would go to Ji's house to deliver account books, and Gong sent five men to lie in ambush at Tong Ru's inner gate, bringing with them a goat and a donkey.

古文：会出，逐之。反奔，执诸季氏中门之外。平子怒曰： 何故以兵入吾门？ 
现代文：臧会出来，就赶上去，臧会转身逃走，在季氏的中门之外被抓住，季氏发怒，说： 为什么带武器进我的家门？ 
English: The badger would come out and catch up with him, the badger would turn around and run away, and was caught outside Ji's middle door. Ji became angry and said, "Why did you bring weapons into my home?"

古文：拘臧氏老。
现代文：拘留了臧氏的家臣。
English: Min's retainers were detained.

古文：季、臧有恶。及昭伯从公，平子立臧会。
现代文：季氏、臧氏因此互相有了恶感，等到昭伯随从昭公，季氏立了臧会做臧氏的继承人。
English: As a result, the Ji clan and the Zou clan developed ill feelings towards each other. When Zhao Bo followed Zhao Gong, the Ji clan established the Zou clan as the successor of the Zou clan.

古文：会曰： 偻句不余欺也。 
现代文：臧会说： 偻句没有欺骗我呀。 
English: The baboon will say: "You didn't deceive me."

古文：楚子使薳射城州屈，复茄人焉。
现代文：楚平王派薳射在州屈筑城，让茄地人回去居住。
English: King Chuping sent a messenger to Quzhu City in Zhuzhou Province, asking local people to go back and live there.

古文：城丘皇，迁訾人焉。使熊相禖郭巢，季然郭卷。
现代文：在丘皇筑城，让訾地人迁去居住，派熊相禖在巢地筑外城，派季然在卷地筑外城。
English: In Qiuhuangzhu City, let the people from Shantou move to live there, send Xiong Zang to build the outer city in the nest area, and send Ji Ran to build the outer city in the winding area.

古文：子大叔闻之曰： 楚王将死矣，使民不安其土，民必忧。忧将及王，弗能久矣。 
现代文：子太叔听到了这件事，说： 楚平王快要死了。让百姓不能安居在原来的土地上，百姓必然忧愁，忧愁将要延及到君王的身上，君王不能活长久了。 
English: When the great-uncle heard about this, he said: King Chuping is about to die. If the people are not allowed to live peacefully on their original land, the people will inevitably be sad, and the sadness will spread to the king. The king cannot live long.

