古文：张升字彦真，陈留尉氏人，富平侯放之孙也。
现代文：◆张升传，张升字彦真，陈留尉氏人，富平侯张放的孙子。
English: ◆Zhang Sheng Chuan, Zhang Sheng Zi Yan Zhen, a member of the Chen Liuyi clan, was the grandson of Fuping marquis Zhang Fang.

古文：升少好学，多关览，而任情不羁。
现代文：张升年轻时涉览群书，任性而行，不可羁束。
English: When Zhang Sheng was young, he read a lot of books. He was headstrong and could not be restrained.

古文：其意相合者，则倾身交结，不问穷贱；如乖真志好者，虽王公大人，终不屈从。
现代文：意见与他相合的，就全心交结，不分贵贱；如果志气不与他相合的，即使是王公大人，也不与他来往。
English: If one's opinion coincides with his, he will wholeheartedly associate with him, regardless of rank. If one's aspiration does not coincide with his, even a prince will not associate with him.

古文：常叹曰： 死生有命，富贵在天。
现代文：曾经叹息道： 死生有命，富贵在天。
English: He once sighed, "Life and death are intertwined, and wealth is in the sky."

古文：其有知我，虽胡越可亲；苟不相识，从物何益？ 
现代文：真正知我的，虽然是胡、越，也是可以成为朋友，如果不彼此相知，往来有什么意思呢？ 
English: Those who truly know me, even though they are Hu and Yue, can also become friends. If they don't know each other, what's the point of this exchange?

古文：仕郡为纲纪，以能出守外黄令。
现代文：出仕郡为纲纪，因有干才，代理黄令。
English: It was Gang Ji who served the county, and Huang Rong was appointed as his deputy due to his ability.

古文：吏有受赇者，即论杀之。
现代文：吏有接受贿赂的，马上处以死刑。
English: Officials who have accepted bribes shall be immediately sentenced to death.

古文：或讥： 升守领一时，何足趋明威戮乎？ 
现代文：有人讥刺张升代理还不久，为什么急急忙忙行威杀戮呢？
English: Some people scoffed at Zhang Sheng's acting not long ago, why did he hurry to kill?

古文：对曰： 昔仲尼暂相，诛齐之侏儒，手足异门而出，故能威震强国，反其侵地。
现代文：张升回答说 ：从前仲尼暂时为鲁相，诛杀齐国的侏儒，手足分离，所以能够威震齐国，归还鲁国的侵地。
English: Zhang Sheng replied: In the past, Zhongni was temporarily a Rusan, and he fought and killed the dwarfs of Qi, and his hands and feet were separated, so he was able to intimidate Qi and return the invaded lands of Lu.

古文：君子仕不为己，职思其忧，岂以久近而异其度哉？ 
现代文：君子出仕，不是为了自己，当思尽忠，难道可以因时间长久短暂改变自己的操守吗？ 
English: A gentleman serves not for his own sake, but for the sake of loyalty. Is it possible to change one's ethics because of the passage of time?

古文：遇党锢去官，后竟见诛，年四十九。
现代文：遇党锢去言，后来居然被杀。年四十九。
English: He was silenced by the Party and later killed. He was 49.

古文：著贼、诔、颂、碑、书，凡六十篇。
现代文：著赋、诔、颂、碑、书，共六十篇。
English: There are a total of sixty essays, poems, eulogies, monuments, and books.

古文：赵壹字元叔，汉阳西县人也。
现代文：◆赵壹传，赵壹字元叔，汉阳西县人。
English: ◆Zhao Yizhuan, Zhao Yizhuan Uncle, from West Hanyang County.

古文：体貌魁梧，身长九尺，美须豪眉，望之甚伟。
现代文：体貌壮大，身长九尺，须美眉粗，魁梧奇伟。
English: He was a large man, nine feet tall, with a thick mustache and thick eyebrows.

古文：而恃才倨傲，为乡党所摈，乃作《解摈》。
现代文：但他恃自己有才华，倨傲而盛气凌人，为乡党所摈斥，于是作《解摈》。
English: However, he thought he was talented, arrogant and domineering, and was rebuked by the township party, so he wrote "Solving the Riddle."

古文：贤者虽独悟，所困在群愚。
现代文：后来多次犯罪，几乎被处死，友人解救，得以不死。
English: Later, he committed several crimes and was almost executed, but a friend rescued him and he was able to live.

古文：且各守尔分，勿复空驰驱。哀哉复哀哉，此是命矣夫！
现代文：赵壹写信谢恩： 使干皮再含血，枯骨又生肉，真是遭仁遇神，应当为你宣传、表扬。我怕犯禁，不敢明说，作《穷鸟赋》一篇。 
English: Zhao Yi wrote a letter of thanks: To make the dried skin contain blood again, and the dead bones raw meat, is truly a mercy from God, and should be publicized and praised for you. I am afraid of violating the ban, and dare not say it, to make a "Poor Bird Fu."

古文：光和元年，举郡上计，到京师。
现代文：又作《刺世疾邪赋》，发抒他的怨愤。光和元年，举郡上计去京师。
English: He also wrote "Shichiseizai yakufu" to express his resentment. In the first year of the Heian period, he went to study in Kyoto.

古文：是时，司徒袁逢受计，计吏数百人，皆拜伏庭中，莫敢仰视。壹独长揖而已。逢望而异之，令左右往让之，曰： 下郡计吏而揖三公，何也？ 
现代文：这时司徒袁逢受计，计吏数百人都拜伏道中，不敢抬头，赵壹独长揖而已，袁逢望见，非常奇怪，命令左右的人去责问他，说： 下郡计吏却揖朝廷的三公，为什么？ 
English: At this time, the magistrate, Yuan Feng, was taken in by the plot. Hundreds of officials were bowing down in the middle of the road, not daring to raise their heads. Zhao was the only one with a long beard. Yuan Feng saw this and, very strangely, ordered those around him to rebuke him, saying: Why is it that the lower-ranking officials have the beard of the three princes of the imperial court?

古文：对曰： 昔郦食其长揖汉王，今揖三公，何遽怪哉？ 
现代文：赵壹回答道： 从前郦食其长揖汉王，现在长揖三公，为什么这样奇怪呀？ 
English: Zhao Yi replied, "Once upon a time, it was the Han king who ate his father, but now it is the three princes. Why is this so strange?

古文：逢则敛衽下堂，执其手，延置上坐，因问西方事，大悦，顾谓坐中曰： 此人汉阳赵元叔也。
现代文：袁逢就整衣下堂，握着赵壹的手，延至上座，问西方的事，大为欢喜，回顾坐中人道 ：这人就是汉阳赵元叔啊。
English: Yuan Feng got dressed and went down the hall. Holding Zhao Yi's hand, he extended it to the upper seat and asked about the West. He was overjoyed. He recalled to the audience: "This man is Uncle Hanyang Zhao Yuan."

古文：朝臣莫有过之者，吾请为诸君分坐。 
现代文：朝廷的臣子，才学没有超过他的，我请为各位别坐。 
English: A courtier of the Imperial Court, whose learning has not surpassed his, I beg you not to sit down.

古文：坐者皆属观。
现代文：在坐的人，都看着他。
English: Everyone who was sitting there was looking at him.

古文：既出，往造河南尹羊陟，不得见。
现代文：出朝以后，赵壹往访河南尹羊陟，不得见。
English: After leaving the country, Zhao Yi went to Henan to visit Yin Yangjun, but did not see him.

古文：壹以公卿中非陟无足以托名者，乃日往到门，陟自强许通，尚卧未起。壹径入上堂，遂前临之，曰： 窃伏西州，承高风旧矣。乃今方遇而忽然，奈何命也！ 
现代文：赵壹认为公卿中不是羊陟不足以托名，于是天天去叩门，羊陟勉强许通，但是还没起床，赵壹径直走入上堂，走到床前，说 ：敬佩西州，承望高风已经很久很久了，今天方幸见面，忽然逝世，我的命呀！ 
English: Zhao Yi thought that among the court nobles, it was not enough for Yang Xuan to have an alias, so he went to knock on the door every day. Yang Xuan reluctantly allowed him to pass, but before getting up, Zhao Yi walked straight into the hall, walked to the bed, and said: "I admire Xizhou, I have been looking forward to the high wind for a long time, I am lucky to meet today, I died suddenly, my life!"

古文：因举声哭，门下惊，皆奔入满侧。
现代文：因放声大哭，门下的人大惊，不知出了什么事，都纷纷奔入，挤了一房子的人。
English: Because of the loud crying, the people under the door were shocked. I don't know what happened, they all rushed in, crowding the people in one house.

古文：陟知其非常人，乃起，延与语，大奇之。
现代文：羊陟知道赵壹是个非常人，于是起床，与他谈话，大加赞赏。
English: Knowing that Zhao Yi was a very special person, the shepherd got up, talked to him, and greatly appreciated him.

古文：谓曰： 子出矣。 
现代文：对他说 ：您暂时出去吧！ 
English: Say to him: Get out for the time being!

古文：陟明旦大从车骑，奉谒造壹。
现代文：羊陟第二天一早，从车骑拜谒赵壹。
English: In the morning of the next day, Yang Qi rode from the car to pay homage to Zhao Yi.

古文：时，诸计吏多盛饬车马帷幕，而壹独柴车草屏，露宿其傍，延陟前坐于车下，左右莫不叹愕。
现代文：当时诸计吏的车马帷幕，大都装饰得极华丽，赵壹独柴车草棚露宿在旁，引羊陟前坐车下，左右的没有不叹息惊怪的。
English: At that time, the chariot and horse curtains of all the officials were mostly decorated with great splendor. Zhao Yiducai lived in the grass shed next to the chariot and sat under the chariot in front of the shepherd's hut. No one was surprised.

古文：陟遂与言谈，至熏夕，极欢而去，执其手曰： 良璞不剖，必有泣血以相明者矣！ 
现代文：羊陟因与赵壹谈话，一直谈到夕阳下山，尽欢而去，握着赵壹的手道： 良璞不剖，一定会有泣血的人为它宣传的啊。 
English: Because of his conversation with Zhao Yi, Yang Qi had been talking about the setting sun descending the mountain, and went away happily, holding Zhao Yi's hand: "If you don't dissect a good yakitori, there will definitely be people who will shed blood to promote it."

古文：陟乃与袁逢共称荐之。名动京师，士大夫想望其风采。
现代文：羊陟与袁逢共同荐举赵壹，名声震动京师，士大夫都想瞻望他的风采。
English: Yang Wei and Yuan Feng jointly recommended the nomination of Zhao Yi, whose fame has shaken the Beijing division, and the senior scholars all want to see his style.

古文：及西还，道经弘农，过侯太守皇甫规，门者不即通，壹遂遁去。
现代文：西还时，道经弘农，去看望太守皇甫规。守门的人不为他通告，赵壹头也不回地跑了。
English: When he was still in the west, he passed through Hongnong on his way to visit the eunuch Emperor Fuxi. The gatekeeper did not inform him, and Zhao immediately ran away.

古文：门吏惧，以白之，规闻壹名大惊，乃追书谢曰： 蹉跌不面，企德怀风，虚心委质，为日久矣。
现代文：门吏害怕，告诉了皇甫规，规听说是赵壹，大惊，写了信谢罪说 ：阴差阳错，不得见面，企望风德，虚心相待，已经好多天了！
English: The doorkeeper was afraid and told the emperor that it was Zhao Yi. He was shocked to hear that it was Zhao Yi. He wrote a letter of thanks and said, "It's been many days since we've seen each other, it's wrong, it's wrong, it's wrong, it's wrong, it's wrong!"

古文：侧闻仁者愍其区区，冀承清诲，以释遥悚。
现代文：听说您不遗鄙陋，想得到您的教诲，以释遥悚。
English: I've heard that you don't spare the vile, and I'd like to learn from you, so that I can let go of the horror.

古文：今旦，外白有一尉两计吏，不道屈尊门下，更启乃知已去。
现代文：今天早晨外面报告有一尉两吏不意屈尊来到门下，再问，才知已经走了。
English: This morning, there was a report from outside that a lieutenant and two officers had unexpectedly condescended to come to the door and inquire again, only to find that they had already left.

古文：如印绶可投，夜岂待旦。
现代文：如果印绶可丢的话，不会等到天亮，就要会去赶您回来的。
English: If the seal can be lost, it will not wait until dawn, it will go to catch you back.

古文：惟君明睿，平其夙心。
现代文：希望您宽怀大度，原谅我。
English: I hope you will have the grace to forgive me.

古文：宁当慢慠，加于所天。
现代文：岂可如此慢傲，对待先生？
English: How can you be so proud to treat your master like this?

古文：事在悖惑，不足具责。
现代文：事情实在悖惑，不足具责。
English: Things are really confusing, inadequate and irresponsible.

古文：倘可原察，追修前好，则何福如之！
现代文：如果可以原宥，重修前好，有什么福能与它相比呢！
English: If it can be restored to its former glory, what blessing can compare with it!

古文：谨遣主簿奉书。
现代文：谨派主簿奉书前去。
English: I'd like to send the chief clerk to deliver the letter.

古文：下笔气结，汗流竟趾。 
现代文：下笔气结，汗流直到脚趾。 
English: The next stroke is out of breath, and I'm sweating down to my toes.

古文：壹报曰： 君学成师范，缙绅归慕，仰高希骥，历年滋多。
现代文：赵壹回信说： 您学成师范，士大夫敬慕，高山仰止，一年一年人越来越多。
English: Zhao wrote back: You have become a teacher, respected by scholars and scholars, admired by mountains, and more and more people every year.

古文：旋辕兼道，渴于言侍，沐浴晨兴，昧旦守门，实望仁君，昭其悬迟。以贵下贱，握发垂接。高可敷玩坟典，起发圣意；下则抗论当世，消弭时灾。
现代文：我自西归来，兼道而行，非常想同您谈谈，所以很早就起床，天未亮就去了您那里，实想看看您，畅叙仰慕之情，以贵待贱，握发相接，论大道，上可以敷玩三坟五典，发明圣人之意；论经济，下可以抗论当世事务，消止时灾。
English: When I came back from the west, I wanted to talk to you very much, so I got up very early and went to your place before dawn. I really wanted to see you. I spoke with admiration, treated you with respect, and shook hands with you. On the highway, I could play with the three graves and five scriptures and invent the meaning of the saint; on the economy, I could discuss the current affairs of the world and eliminate the time disaster.

古文：岂悟君子，自生怠倦，失恂恂善诱之德，同亡国骄惰之志！
现代文：哪里想到您自生怠倦，失去了循循善诱之德，有亡国骄惰之情！
English: Where did you get the idea that you are lazy, have lost the virtue of following the rules, and are proud of ruining the country!

古文：盖见机而作，不俟终日，是以夙退自引，畏使君劳。
现代文：大抵见机而作，一天也不能等待，所以赶快引退，怕使您劳累。
English: Most of the time, I do it when I see an opportunity, I can't wait a day, so I'll retire as soon as possible, for fear of making you tired.

古文：昔人或历说而不遇，或思士而无从，皆归之于天，不尤于物。
现代文：古人有的历说君主，不遇知音，有的君主想得贤士，却无从得到，都是归之于天命，不怨于物。
English: The ancients said that some monarchs did not meet a familiar, and some monarchs wanted to get a sage, but could not get it. They all attributed it to the fate of heaven, and did not complain about things.

古文：今壹自谴而已，岂敢有猜！
现代文：现在我赵壹只能自己谴责自己，难道还敢有什么想法！
English: Now I can only condemn myself, how dare I have any thoughts!

古文：仁君忽一匹夫，于德何损？而远辱手笔，追路相寻，诚足愧也。
现代文：仁君怠忽一个普通人，不能说有损于德，却远远地写信，着人追送，真使我惭愧啊。
English: Renjun neglected an ordinary person, which cannot be said to be detrimental to virtue, but he wrote a letter from far away and sent someone to follow him, which really made me feel ashamed.

古文：壹之区区，曷云量己？其嗟可去，谢也可食，诚则顽薄，实识其趣。
现代文：赵壹区区此心，不自量力而至您门下， 嗟也可去，谢也可食 ，我虽顽薄，这个道理是懂得的。
English: Zhao Yibao, this heart, without self-measurement, comes to your door, you can go, you can eat, although I am stubborn, I understand this truth.

古文：但关节騊动，膝炙坏溃，请俟他日，乃奉其情。辄诵来贶，永以自慰。 
现代文：但关节疼痛，膝炙坏溃，实不能任事，请待他日，或者可以奉请，常读手书，永以自慰。 
English: But joint pain, knee pain, really can't do anything, please wait another day, or you can be invited, often read handwriting, always masturbate.

古文：遂去不顾。
现代文：不顾而去。
English: Ignore it and go.

古文：州郡争致礼命，十辟公府，并不就，终于家。
现代文：州郡争致礼命，公府十次征召，都不就，死在家里。
English: He was called up by the government ten times, but none of them were good enough. He died at home.

古文：初袁逢使善相者相壹，云 仕不过郡吏 ，竟如其言。
现代文：起先，袁逢使善相命的相赵壹，相者说： 官不过郡吏。 终于如相者所说。
English: At first, Yuan Feng made the good matchmaker Zhao Yi, the matchmaker said: The official is just a county official. Finally, as the matchmaker said.

古文：著赋、颂、箴、诔、书、论及杂文十六篇。
现代文：著赋、颂、箴、诔、书、论及杂文十六篇。
English: There are 16 essays on Fu, ode, prose, poem, book, essay and miscellaneous articles.

古文：刘梁字曼山，一名岑，东平宁阳人也。
现代文：◆刘梁传，刘梁字曼山，一名岑，东平宁阳人。
English: ◆ Liu Liang Chuan, Liu Liang Zi Manshan, a native of Dongping, Ningyang.

古文：梁宗室子孙，而少孤贫，卖书于市以自资。
现代文：梁是刘氏宗室子孙，年少失父，贫困，卖书以维持生活。
English: Liang is a descendant of the Liu family, who lost his father at a young age, is poor, and sells books to make ends meet.

古文：《礼记》曰： 爱而知其恶，憎而知其善。 考义之谓也。
现代文：常常痛恨社会上多为势利朋友，以奸邪胡作非为结成党羽，于是写了一篇《破群论》，当时看了的，认为： 仲尼作《春秋》，乱臣知道害怕，现在这篇《群论》之作，世俗之士，难道不惭愧吗？ 
English: He often hated the snobbish friends in the society, who formed a faction by means of treachery and wickedness, so he wrote a "Group-Breaking Discourse." When he read it, he thought: Zhong Ni wrote "Spring and Autumn," and the ruffian knew to be afraid, and now this "Group-Breaking Discourse" work, a worldly man, isn't he ashamed?

古文：桓帝时，举孝廉，除北新城长。
现代文：这篇文章可惜失传了。又著《辩和同之论》。桓帝时举孝廉，授北新城长。
English: Unfortunately, this article has been lost. He also wrote "Dispute and the same." Emperor Kante promoted Xiaolian to the post of the new mayor of Beibei.

古文：告县人曰： 昔文翁在蜀，道著巴汉；庚桑琐隶，风移碨磥。
现代文：告诉县人说 ：从前文翁在蜀，他的道德教化，著名巴汉，庚桑楚是个小小的役夫，改变了石畏石累的风俗。
English: He told the prefectural people, "Once upon a time, Weng Weng was in Shuxu, and his moral enlightenment, the famous Baha'i scholar, Geng San Chu, was a small eunuch who changed the rigid customs.

古文：吾虽小宰，犹有社稷，苟赴期会，理文墨，岂本志乎！ 
现代文：我虽然是一小小的县宰，还有国家的理想，苟且赴期会，理文牍，难道是我的本志吗？ 
English: Although I am a small county magistrate, and the country's ideal, just go to the meeting, Li Wenjuan, is it my book?

古文：乃更大作讲舍，延聚生徙数百人，朝夕自往劝诫，身执经卷，试策殿最，儒化大行。
现代文：于是大起讲舍，聚集生徒几百人，早晨夜晚亲自去劝诫，手执经卷，考试优劣，儒家的教化大行。
English: As a result, a lecture hall was set up, several hundred students were gathered, and in the morning and evening they personally went to exhort, hand-hold the scriptures, examine the merits and demerits, and carry out a Confucian enlightenment campaign.

古文：此邑至后犹称其教焉。特召入拜尚书郎。
现代文：这个县到后来还称道他。特召入朝，授尚书郎，多次升迁。
English: This prefecture later praised him. He was specially summoned to the court, awarded the title of Shuro, and promoted several times.

古文：累迁，后为野王令，未行。光和中，病卒。
现代文：后任野王令，未去。光和中，病死。
English: His successor, Field King Ling, did not go. Light and middle, died of illness.

古文：孙桢，亦以文才知名。
现代文：孙子刘桢，也以文才著名。
English: His grandson, Liu Ye, is also famous for his literary talent.

古文：边让字文礼，除留浚仪人也。
现代文：◆边让传，边让字文礼，陈留浚仪人。
English: ◆ Let's pass on, let's pass on, let's pass on, let's pass on, let's pass on, let's pass on.

古文：致虔报于鬼神，尽肃恭乎上京。
现代文：年轻时，博学多闻，善辩论，长于写作。
English: When he was young, he was erudite and well-informed, good at debating, and good at writing.

古文：驰淳化于黎元，永历世而太平。
现代文：作《章华赋》，虽多华丽的辞句，但最终归于正，也像司马相如的《上林赋》一样，有讽劝的思想。
English: In "Zhang Hua Fu," although there are many gorgeous words and phrases, they are eventually reduced to the positive, and like Sima Xiangru's "Shanglin Fu," there is a thought of ironic persuasion.

古文：大将军何进闻让才名，欲辟命之。恐不至，诡以军事征召。
现代文：大将军何进知道边让有才华，想征召他，怕他不去，假称军事征召。
English: General He Jin knew that Bian Let was talented and wanted to conscript him, but he was afraid that he would not go, so he pretended to be a military conscript.

古文：既到，署令史，进以礼见之。
现代文：到了之后，代理令史，何进以礼相见。
English: After arriving, the agent ordered history, and Ho Jin met him with courtesy.

古文：让善占射，能辞对。时，宾客满堂，莫不羡其风。
现代文：边让擅长占射，对答如流，当时宾客满堂，没有不羡慕他的风采的。
English: At that time, the hall was full of guests, and there was no one who did not envy his style.

古文：府掾孔融、王朗并修刺候焉。
现代文：府掾孔融、王朗都来拜访他。
English: Kong Rong and Wang Lang both came to visit him.

古文：议郎蔡邕深敬之，以为让宜处高任，乃荐于何进曰：伏惟幕府初开，博选清英，华发旧德，并为元鬼。
现代文：议郎蔡邕最敬重他，认为边让应该担任重要的职务，处高位，于是荐于何进 ：我想幕府初开，广选精英，白头旧德，都是上等人才。
English: He was held in the highest esteem by the councilor Cai Wei, who believed that the retainers should hold important positions and hold high positions, so he recommended him to He Jin: I think that the first shogunate, the general election elite, and the white-headed old virtue are all high-class talents.

古文：虽振鹭之集西雍，济济之在周庭，无以或加。
现代文：虽如振鹭集西雍济济多士的在周庭，也不能更好。
English: Although it is not better than Zhenya's gathering of Xi'an's rich people in Zhou's court.

古文：窃见令史陈留边让，天授逸才，聪明贤智。
现代文：令史陈留边让，天给他盖世的奇才，聪明贤哲。
English: Let Chen stay on the sidelines of history, and heaven will give him a world-beating genius, a clever sage.

古文：髫夙孤，不尽家训。
现代文：小时早孤，没有受到家训。
English: He was orphaned at an early age and was not disciplined at home.

古文：及就学庐，便受大典。
现代文：一旦上学，便受大典。
English: As soon as they go to school, they are punished.

古文：初涉诸经，见本知义。授者不能对其问，章句不能逮其意。
现代文：开始接受诸经，见本知义，老师不能回答他所提出的问题，章句不能满足他的意思。
English: When he began to study the sutras, he found that the teacher couldn't answer his questions, and the passages didn't satisfy him.

古文：心通性达，口辩辞长。
现代文：心通性达，口辩词长。
English: They have a good rapport and their oral arguments are long.

古文：非礼不动，非法不言。
现代文：非礼不动，非法不说。
English: Don't do anything impolite, but don't say anything illegal.

古文：若处狐疑之论，定嫌审之分，经典交至，捡括参合，众夫寂焉，莫之能夺也。
现代文：若是遇了狐疑的言论，断定是非的时候，经书典籍，不断引来，概括综合，众人闭口，没有能折服他的。
English: In the case of doubtful speech, when it is time to determine right and wrong, the classics are constantly brought in, summarized and synthesized, and everyone is silent, and no one can convince him.

古文：使让生在唐、虞，则元、凯之次，运值仲尼，则颜、冉之亚，岂徒俗之凡偶近器而已者哉！
现代文：假使边让生在唐、虞之世，那是元、凯一流，运适仲尼，即是颜回、冉有之辈，难道是世俗的凡偶近器吗？
English: If you were born in the Tang and Yu dynasties, would you be a Yuan, Kai first-class, Yun Shih Zhong Ni, that is, a generation of Yan Hui and Ran Yu, or would you be a worldly commoner?

古文：阶级名位，亦宜超然。
现代文：阶级名位，也应升迁。
English: They should also be promoted according to their class.

古文：若复随辈而进，非所以章瑰伟之高价，昭知人之绝明也。
现代文：如果还随辈而进，不足显露伟的高价，昭著知人的大明。
English: If you are still following in the footsteps of your peers, the lack of a great high price will be revealed, and your acquaintance's daiming will be known.

古文：传曰： 函牛之鼎以亨鸡，多汁则淡而不可食，少计则熬而不可熟。 
现代文：传曰 ：函牛之鼎用来烹鸡，多汁就淡不可食，少汁，就熬煮不熟。 
English: There is a legend that says, "Hako beef tripe is used to cook chicken, and if it is too juicy, it is inedible, and if it is not juicy, it is not cooked properly."

古文：此言大器之于小用，固有所不宜也。邕窃邑，怪此宝鼎未受牺牛大羹之和，久在煎熬脔割之间。愿明将军回谋垂虑，裁加少纳，贡之机密，展之力用。
现代文：这是说大器小用是不合适的。我担心，此宝鼎没有受牲牛大羹之和，久在煎熬脔割之间。希望将军考虑，采纳我的意见，把边让用之机密，发挥他的才能。
English: This is to say that it is not appropriate to use a large tool. I am worried that this Baoding has not been subjected to the sum of cattle and cattle, and has long been in the process of gelding. I hope that the general will consider, adopt my opinion, let the side use the secret, and give play to his talent.

古文：若以年齿为嫌，则颜回不得贯德行之首，子奇终无理阿之功。
现代文：如果认为年龄不合适，那么，颜回不得贯德行之首，子奇终无理阿的功绩。
English: If you think that the age is not appropriate, then, Yan Hui must not be the first to practice virtue, and Zi Qi must not be the first to achieve merit.

古文：苟堪其事，古今一也。
现代文：假使胜任，年龄是至关紧要的，古今都是一样。 
English: Age is of the essence, both ancient and modern, provided one is competent.

古文：让后以高才擢进，屡迁，出为九江太守，不以为能也。
现代文：边让后来以高才提拔，多次升迁，出为九江太守，没有显出他的才能来。
English: Later, Bian Zhan was promoted with high talent, promoted many times, and became the governor of Jiujiang, but he did not show his talent.

古文：初平中，王室大乱，让去官还家。
现代文：初平中，王室大乱，边让辞官回家。
English: At the beginning of the Heian period, the royal family was in turmoil, and the courtier was allowed to return home.

古文：恃才气，不屈曹操，多轻侮之言。
现代文：恃才气，不为曹操所屈，说了不少轻慢欺侮的话。
English: Because of his talent, he did not give in to Cao Cao, and said a lot of insolent and bullying words.

古文：建安中，其乡人有构让于操，操告郡就杀之。
现代文：建安中，他的同乡有人在曹操那里构陷边让，曹操告诉郡里把他杀了。
English: In Jian'an, one of his countrymen set up a trap for Cao Cao, and Cao Cao told the county to kill him.

古文：文多遗失。
现代文：文多遗失。
English: A lot of information was lost.

古文：郦炎字文胜，范阳人，郦食其之后也。
现代文：◆郦炎传，郦炎字文胜，范阳人，郦食其的后代。
English: ◆炎传,炎字文胜,范阳人,食其后代.

古文：抱玉乘龙骥，不逢乐与和。
现代文：郦炎有文才，懂音乐，言论敏捷，人家佩服他的才能。
English: Zou Yan has literary talent, understands music, speaks quickly, and people admire his talent.

古文：安得孔仲尼，为世陈四科。
现代文：灵帝时，州郡征召任命，都不就，有志气，作了二首诗。
English: When Lingdi was conscripted and appointed by the state and county, he was ambitious and composed two poems.

古文：炎后风病慌忽。
现代文：郦炎后患疯病，神经失常。
English: After suppuration, he suffered from madness and nervous disorders.

古文：性至孝，遭母忧，病甚发动。
现代文：性最孝，遭母丧，病大发作。
English: The filial son, bereaved of his mother, fell seriously ill.

古文：妻始产而惊死，妻家讼之，收系狱。
现代文：妻刚生小孩，被他惊吓而死，妻家告到官里，逮捕入狱。
English: His wife had just given birth to a child and was scared to death by him. Her family was reported to the authorities, arrested and imprisoned.

古文：炎病不能理对，嘉平六年，遂死狱中，时年二十八。尚书卢植为之诔赞，以昭其懿德。
现代文：郦炎病不能申诉，熹平六年，死在狱中。时年二十八岁，尚书卢植为他作诔词，以显他的美德。
English: He died in prison six years later, at the age of twenty-eight, after being sentenced to death by hanging for his virtue.

古文：侯瑾字子瑜，敦煌人也。
现代文：◆侯瑾传，侯瑾字子瑜，敦煌人。
English: ◆Hou Yu Chuan, Hou Yu Zi Yu, Dunhuang people.

古文：少孤贫，依宗人居。
现代文：少年失父，孤苦贫困，依他的族人居在一块。
English: The boy lost his father, was destitute, and according to his ethnicity, lived in a slum.

古文：性笃学，恒佣作为资，暮还辄燃柴以读书。
现代文：爱学习，经常为人作雇工生活，晚上回到家里，烧柴读书。
English: Loves to study, often works as a hired hand, comes home at night, burns wood and reads.

古文：常以礼自牧，独处一房，如对严宾焉。
现代文：常常以礼约束自己，独居一间房子里，好像对着尊敬的宾客，不随便一点。
English: He often restrained himself with etiquette, living alone in a house, as if he were a respected guest, not at all casual.

古文：州郡累召，公车有道征，并称疾不到。
现代文：州郡多次召他，公车以有道征召，都托病不到。
English: The state and county have summoned him many times, and the bus has been summoned in a certain way, but he can't get sick leave.

古文：作《矫世论》以讥切当时，而徙入山中，覃思著述。
现代文：作《矫世论》讥刺当世。迁入山中，静心著述。
English: He satirized the contemporary world in "The Theory of the Just World." He moved to the mountains and wrote meditatively.

古文：以莫知于世，故作《应宾难》以自寄。
现代文：因为不被世人知晓，作《应宾难》以自寄意。
English: Because he is not known to the world, he made "Difficult to Please" with his own will.

古文：又案《汉记》撰中兴以后行事，为《皇德传》三十篇，行于世。
现代文：又根据《汉记》撰写中兴以后行事，为《皇德传》三十篇，行于世。
English: It is also based on "Hanki," which was written after the founding of ZTE, and is one of the 30 chapters of "Kingdom of Germany," which has been practiced in the world.

古文：余所作杂文数十篇，多亡失。
现代文：其余所作杂文数十篇，多数散失了。
English: He wrote dozens of other essays, most of which have been lost.

古文：河西人敬其才而不敢名之，皆称为侯君云。
现代文：河西人敬重他的才华，不敢呼他的名字，都称他为 侯君 。
English: The people of Hexi respect his talent and dare not call him by his name. They all call him "Houjun."

古文：高彪字义方，吴郡无锡人也。
现代文：◆高彪传，高彪字义方，吴郡无锡人。
English: ◆ Gao Biao Chuan, Gao Biao Zi Yifang, Wuxi County Wuxi people.

古文：家本单寒，至彪为诸生，游太学。
现代文：家境原极寒酸，到高彪为诸生，游太学。
English: His family background was extremely poor, and he went to Gao Biao to live and study.

古文：有雅才而讷于言。
现代文：高彪有才华，但说话结结巴巴，不善于言词。
English: Gao Biao is talented, but he stutters and is not good at words.

古文：尝从马融欲访大义，融疾，不获见，乃复剌遗融书曰： 承服风问，从来有年，故不待介者而谒大君子之门，冀一见龙光，以叙腹心之愿。
现代文：曾经想向马融问大义，马融病了，没有见到，于是复刺写信给马融： 佩仰您的大名，有好几年了，所以不用人为的介绍，直去大君子之门，希望一见光采，畅叙心腹，不料您抱病，闭门不见。
English: I once wanted to ask Ma Rong about the Great Righteousness. Ma Rong was ill and I didn't see him, so I wrote to Ma Rong: I have admired your daimyo for several years, so I don't need an artificial introduction. I went straight to the door of the great gentleman, hoping to see the glory at a glance and express my heart and soul. Unfortunately, you are ill and I can't see you behind closed doors.

古文：不图遭疾，幽闭莫启。昔周公旦父文兄武，九命作伯，以尹华夏，犹挥沐吐餐，垂接白屋，故周道以隆，天下归德。
现代文：从前周公旦的父亲是文王，哥哥是武王，九命作伯，以治理华夏，还一饭三吐饣甫，一沐三握发，接见匹夫，所以周道因之隆高，天下的人都归德于周。
English: Once upon a time, Zhou Gongdan's father was King Wen, his brother was King Wu, and he devoted his life to governing China. He also ate three meals a day, washed his hair three times a day, shaved his head three times a day, and received guests. Because of Zhou Dao's grandeur, people all over the world were drawn to Zhou.

古文：公今养疴傲士，故其宜也。 
现代文：您现在养病傲士，那是理所当然的。 
English: You are now a health-conscious person, which is only natural.

古文：融省书惭，追谢还之，彪逝而不顾。
现代文：马融看了高彪的信，大为惭愧，追赶请罪，求他返还，高彪不顾而去。
English: Ma Rong read Gao Biao's letter and was very ashamed. He chased after Gao Biao, pleaded guilty and asked him to return the letter. Gao Biao ignored him and left.

古文：后郡举孝廉，试经第一。
现代文：后来郡举孝廉，试经术第一。
English: Later, the county promoted Xiaolian to be the first in the examination of the Bible.

古文：除郎中，校书东观。数奏赋、颂、奇文，因事讽谏，灵帝异之。
现代文：授郎中，校书东观，多次上奏赋、颂、奇文，借事讽谏，得到灵帝的赞赏。
English: In the awarding ceremony, the school's book, Dongguan, repeatedly played fu, ode, strange text, borrowed irony, and received the appreciation of Lingdi.

古文：时，京兆第五永为督军御史，使督幽州。百官大会，祖饯于长乐观。
现代文：这时京兆第五永为督军御史，使督幽州，百官大会，在长乐观设酒送别。
English: At this time, Jing Zhao V Yong was the governor of the army, the governor of Yuzhou, the general assembly of a hundred officials, and the long-term optimism set up a farewell drink.

古文：议郎葵邑等皆赋诗，彪乃独作箴曰： 文武将坠，乃俾俊臣。
现代文：议郎蔡邕等人都赋诗，高彪独作箴曰： 文武将坠，乃使俊臣。
English: Councilor Cai Ye and others all wrote poems, and Gao Biao wrote his own motto: "Writing and martial arts will lead to a fall, but they will make a good minister."

古文：整我皇纲，董此不虔。
现代文：整我皇纲，董此不虔。
English: It is impious of you to treat me like a king.

古文：古之君子，即戎忘身。
现代文：古之君子，即戎忘身。
English: The gentleman of old, he forgets himself.

古文：明其果毅，尚其桓桓。
现代文：明其果毅，尚其桓桓。
English: The more resolute he is, the more powerful he is.

古文：吕尚七十，气冠三军，诗人作歌，如鹰如鹯。
现代文：吕尚七十，气冠三军，诗人作歌，如鹰如鸟。
English: Lushang is 70 years old, the three armies are full of energy, and the poet is making songs, like an eagle and a bird.

古文：天有太一，五将三门；地有九变，丘陵山川；人有计策，六奇五间。
现代文：天有太一，五将三门；地有九变，丘陵山川；人有计策，六奇五间。
English: Heaven has Taichi, five generals have three gates; the earth has nine transformations, hills, mountains and rivers; people have stratagems, six strange five.

古文：总兹三事，谋则咨询。
现代文：总兹三事，谋则咨询。
English: In summary, there are three things to consider when consulting.

古文：无曰己能，务在求贤，淮阴之勇，广野是尊。
现代文：无曰己能，务在求贤，淮阴之勇，广野是尊。
English: There is no such thing as one's own ability, we must seek virtue, courage of Huaiyin, and honor Hirono.

古文：周公大圣，石碏纯臣，以威克爱，以义灭亲。
现代文：周公大圣，石石昔纯臣，以威克爱，以义灭亲。
English: Zhou Gong the Great Saint, Shi Shi the once-pure vassal, loved by Wei Ke and killed his relatives with righteousness.

古文：勿谓时险，不正其身。
现代文：勿谓时险，不正其身。
English: It's not worth the risk, it's not worth it.

古文：勿谓无人，莫识己真。
现代文：勿谓无人，莫识己真。
English: It's not that no one knows, it's just that no one knows.

古文：忘富遗贵，福禄乃存。枉道依合，复无所观。
现代文：忘富遗贵，福禄乃存，枉道依合，复无所观。
English: Forget the rich and the precious, the blessing is to exist, the wrong way to rely on, and there is nothing to see.

古文：先公高节，越可永遵。佩藏斯戒，以厉终身。 
现代文：先公高节，越可永遵，佩藏斯戒，以厉终身。 
English: The earlier the public high school day, the more you can abide by the rules, keep the precepts, and work hard for life.

古文：邕等甚美其文，以为莫尚也。
现代文：蔡邕等人赞美这篇文章，认为他们做不出来。
English: Cai Wei and others praised this article, saying that they could not do it.

古文：后迁外黄令，帝敕同僚临送，祖于上东门，诏东观画彪像以劝学者。彪到官，有德政，上书荐县人申徒蟠等。病卒于官，文章多亡。
现代文：后来升外黄令，灵帝令同僚去送别，设酒于上东门，诏令东观画高彪像以劝勉学者，高彪到任，有德政，上书推荐县人申徒蟠等人，因病死在任上，文章大多散失了。
English: Later, Huang Rongling was promoted, Ling Di ordered his colleagues to go to see him off, set up a liquor store at Shangdong Gate, ordered Dongguan to paint Gao Biao's portrait to encourage scholars, Gao Biao took office, and there was a letter of recommendation from the prefectural people, Shentong, and others, who died of illness while in office, and most of the articles were lost.

古文：子岱，亦知名。
现代文：高彪的儿子高岱，也有名。
English: Gao Biao's son, Gao Yao, is also famous.

古文：张超字子并，河间鄚人也，留侯良之后也。
现代文：◆张超传，张超字子并，河间郡莫阝县人，留侯张良的后代。
English: ◆Zhang Chao Chuan, also known as Zhang Chao Zi Nian, was born in Mogi County, Kawama County, and was a descendant of Zhang Liang.

古文：有文才。
现代文：有文才。
English: You have literary talent.

古文：灵帝时，从车骑将军朱鯭征黄巾，为别部司马。
现代文：灵帝时，从车骑将军朱鯭征讨黄巾，任别部司马。
English: During the reign of Emperor Lingdi, Zhu Xi, the general of chariot and cavalry, was appointed to collect the yellow scarf.

古文：著赋、颂、碑文、荐、檄、笺、书、谒文、嘲，凡十九篇。
现代文：著赋、颂、碑文、荐、檄、片戋、书、谒文、嘲，共十九篇。
English: In total, there are nineteen articles, including writings, eulogies, inscriptions, recommendations, eulogies, film eulogies, books, eulogies, and mockery.

古文：超又善于草书，妙绝时人，世共传之。
现代文：张超又长于写草书，妙绝时人，都在社会上广泛流传。
English: Zhang Chao is also good at writing cursive, which is widely spread in the society.

古文：祢衡字正平，平原般人也。
现代文：◆祢衡传，祢衡字正平，平原郡般县人。
English: ◆ You Heng Chuan, You Heng Zi Zhengping, Plains County Han County people.

古文：少有才辩，而尚气刚傲，好矫时慢物。
现代文：年轻时就善于辩论，尚气，刚正不阿，不肯下人，喜欢违时傲物。
English: When he was young, he was good at debating, he was ambitious, he was upright, he did not want to be subordinate, and he liked things that went against the times.

古文：兴平中，避难荆州。
现代文：兴平中，避难到荆州。
English: In Xingping, he took refuge in Jingzhou.

古文：建安初，来游许下。始达颍川，乃阴怀一剌，既而无所之适，至于刺字漫灭。
现代文：建安初，来游许昌，初到颍川，暗暗地胸怀一张名片，准备谒见他所想见的人。
English: At the beginning of Jian'an, Xu Chang came to visit, and when he first arrived in Luochuan, he secretly carried a business card in his heart, ready to meet the people he wanted to see.

古文：是时，许都新建，贤士大夫，四方来集。
现代文：到后来终于没有适当的人可见，以至名片上的字也磨灭了。这时许昌新建，贤士大夫从四面八方来到这里。
English: Eventually, there was no suitable person to be seen, so much so that the words on the business card faded away. At this time, Xu Chang was newly built, and doctors from all over the world came here.

古文：或问衡曰： 盍从陈长文、司马伯达乎？ 
现代文：有人问祢衡道： 何不去看看陈长文、司马伯达呢？ 
English: Someone asked You Heng: Why don't you go and see Chen Changwen and Sima Boda?

古文：对曰： 吾焉能从屠沽兒耶！ 
现代文：祢衡回答说 ：我哪里能去从屠沽儿呢！ 
English: Youheng replied, "Where can I go to get away from Tu Er?"

古文：又问： 荀文若、赵稚长云何？ 
现代文：又问： 荀文若、赵稚长如何？ 
English: Another question: What about Gong Wenruo and Zhao Wuchang?

古文：衡曰： 文若可借面吊丧，稚长可使监厨请客。 
现代文：祢衡说 ：文若长相好，可以借面吊丧，稚长腹大，会吃肉，可使监厨请客。 
English: Nehei said, "If Monro is good-looking, he can be invited to a funeral, if he is young and has a big belly, he can eat meat, and he can make the chef invite guests."

古文：唯善鲁国孔融及弘农杨脩。
现代文：只认为鲁国孔融及弘农杨修是人才。
English: Only think that Lu Kong Rong and Hong Nong Yang Xiu are talents.

古文：惟岳降神，异人并出。
现代文：常说 ：大儿孔文举，小儿杨德祖。
English: It is often said that the eldest son, Kong Wenzhu, and the youngest son, Yang Dezu, are the greatest.

古文：窃见处士平原祢衡，年二十四，字正平，淑质贞亮，英才卓砾。
现代文：余子碌碌无才，不算什么。 孔融也十分爱惜祢衡的才华。祢衡才二十岁，孔融已四十岁，与他交为朋友。上书荐祢衡道 ：处士平原祢衡，年二十四，字正平，天质贞忠，英才卓荦。
English: Confucius was also very fond of Youheng's talent. Youheng was only twenty years old, and Confucius was already forty years old, and he became friends with him. The letter recommended Youheng's way: Officer Pingyuan Youheng, twenty-four years old, character upright, natural chastity, outstanding talent.

古文：初涉艺文，升堂睹奥。目所一见，辄诵于口；耳所瞥闻，不忘于心。
现代文：初涉艺文，升堂入奥，目所一见，就能背诵，耳所一闻，不忘于心。
English: When you first get involved in art, when you go to college, when you go to university, when you see something, you can recite it, and when you hear something, you don't forget it.

古文：性与道合，思若有神。
现代文：天性与大道相合，思想似乎有神，敏捷非常。
English: His nature is in harmony with the road, his thoughts seem to have spirit, and he is very agile.

古文：弘羊潜计，安世默识，以衡准之，诚不足怪。
现代文：桑弘羊的心计，张安世的默记，拿祢衡来比比，那真不足为奇。
English: It's no wonder that Kuang Hongyang's mental strategy, Zhang Anshi's silent memory, and the comparison with You Hee.

古文：忠果正直，志怀霜雪。见善若惊，疾恶若仇。
现代文：忠果正直，胸怀坦白，看了善事，惊喜若狂，见了恶事，痛恨如仇。
English: Loyal and honest, with a sincere heart, he saw good things, was surprised, saw bad things, and hated them with a vengeance.

古文：任座抗行，史鱼厉节，殆无以过也。
现代文：任座抗君，史鱼厉节，大概也不能超过他呢。
English: As a staunch anti-imperialist, Shi Rongjie probably can't surpass him.

古文：鸷鸟累伯，不如一鹗。
现代文：鸷鸟成百，不如一鹗。
English: A hundred ostriches are not as good as one cormorant.

古文：使衡立朝，必有可观。
现代文：如果让祢衡在朝廷做事，一定会做出一番事业来的。
English: If you let Nehei work at the imperial court, he will surely do a great job.

古文：飞辩骋辞，溢气坌涌，解疑释结，临敌有余。
现代文：论辩骋辞，溢气涌出，解疑释惑，当敌有余。
English: Arguments and arguments, gushing out, solving doubts and explanations, there are more than enough enemies.

古文：昔贾谊求试属国，诡系单于；终军欲以长缨，牵致劲越。弱冠慷慨，前世美之。
现代文：从前贾谊求试属国，说必系单于之颈而制其心；终军想用长缨捉南越王而致阙下，弱冠慷慨气昂，前代都以为是美事。
English: In the past, if a country wanted to win the friendship of another country, it was said that it had to win the heart of the other country; the last army wanted to capture the king of South Vietnam with a long hook, and the weak crown was generous, and the previous generation thought it was a beautiful thing.

古文：近日路粹、严象，亦用异才，擢拜台郎，衡宜与为比。
现代文：近日路粹、严象，也因才能特出，提拔为台郎，祢衡应当同他们一样。
English: Recently, Lu Qi and Yan Zi, also outstanding for their talents, were promoted to Tai Lang, and You Hei should be the same as them.

古文：如得龙跃天衢，振翼云汉，扬声紫微，垂光虹蜺，足以昭近署之多士，增四门之穆穆。
现代文：如果祢衡能像龙跃天衢，振翅高飞，扬声紫微，垂光虹譑，完全可以标明天子近署的多士，四门和穆。
English: If You Heng can be like a dragon leaping through the heavens, flapping its wings high and flying, raising its voice faintly purple, and shining brightly like a rainbow, it can completely mark the many men, four gates, and mu of the near future.

古文：钧天广乐，必有奇丽之观；帝室皇居，必蓄非常之宝。
现代文：钧天广乐，一定有奇丽的妙音，帝室皇居，一定有非常之宝。
English: There must be a wonderful melody in the heavenly music, and there must be a precious treasure in the imperial palace.

古文：若衡等辈，不可多得。
现代文：如祢衡这样的人，真不可多得。
English: People like Nehei are hard to come by.

古文：《激楚》、《杨阿》，至妙之容，台牧者之所贪；飞兔、騕褭，绝足奔放，良、乐之所急。臣等区区，敢不以闻。
现代文：《激楚》、《杨阿》，至妙之音，是台牧者之所求，飞兔、马要袤，绝足奔放，是王良、伯乐所急需的，我等区区之意，岂敢不奏明皇上。 
English: "Fierce Chu" and "Yang Ah," the most wonderful sound, is what Taiwanese shepherds are looking for, flying rabbits and horses want to fly, absolutely unrestrained, is urgently needed by Wang Liang and Bo Le, and we dare not fail to convey the meaning to the emperor.

古文：融既爱衡才，数称述于曹操。
现代文：孔融赞赏祢衡的才华，多次在曹操面前说祢衡如何如何好。
English: Kong Rong appreciated Neheng's talent and repeatedly said in front of Cao Cao how good Neheng was.

古文：操欲见之，而衡素相轻疾，自称狂病，不肯往，而数有恣言。
现代文：曹操因而想见见祢衡。但祢衡平日看不起并讨嫌曹操，自称有狂病，不肯去，又累有妄语。
English: Cao Cao therefore wanted to see You Heng, but You Heng despised and detested Cao Cao on an ordinary day, claiming to be mad, refusing to go, and full of nonsense.

古文：操怀忿，而以其才名，不欲杀之。
现代文：曹操怀恨在心，因祢衡有才名，不想杀他。
English: Cao Cao harbored hatred in his heart, and did not want to kill him because of You Heng's reputation.

古文：闻衡善击鼓，乃召为鼓史，因大会宾客，阅试音节。
现代文：听说祢衡善于击鼓，于是召他任鼓史，就大会宾客，检阅音节。
English: Hearing that Neheng was good at drumming, he invited him to review the syllables as a drum historian and a guest at the conference.

古文：诸史过者，皆令脱其故衣，更着岑牟、单绞之服。
现代文：各鼓史经过曹操面前，都命令脱去原来的衣服，改着一岑，一单绞及小衤军。
English: As each drum major passed in front of Cao Cao, they were ordered to take off their original clothes and put on a pair of loincloths, a pair of handkerchiefs and a pair of small loincloths.

古文：次至衡，衡方为《渔阳》参挝，蹀蹋而前，容态有异，声节悲壮，听者莫不慷慨。
现代文：轮到祢衡，衡正在击《渔阳》参挝，慢慢前行，态度不正常，声节悲壮，听了的没有不气昂慷慨的。
English: It's your turn Heng, Heng is playing "Yuyang" in Laos, slowly moving forward, the attitude is not normal, the vocal cords are tragic, and there is no angry and generous listener.

古文：衡进至操前而止，吏呵之曰： 鼓史何不改装，而轻敢进乎？ 衡曰： 诺。 
现代文：祢衡进至曹操面前停了脚步，吏呵斥他道 ：鼓史为什么不改装？敢于这样随便进来吗？ 祢衡道： 对。 
English: You Hengjin paused in front of Cao Cao, and the officials shouted at him, "Why isn't the drum history renovated? How dare you come in here like this?" You Heng said, "That's right."

古文：于是先解衵衣，次释余服，裸身而立，徐取岑牟、单绞而着之，毕，复参挝而去，颜色不怍。
现代文：于是先解贴身衣，再解余下的衣服，裸着身子站立，然后慢慢地取岑草、单绞穿起来，穿好之后，再参挝而去，一点也无羞愧的颜色。
English: So he first unzipped his clothes, then unzipped the rest of his clothes, stood naked, and then slowly picked up the weeds and strung them up. After he was dressed, he went to Laos. He was not ashamed at all.

古文：操笑曰： 本欲辱衡，衡反辱孤。 
现代文：曹操笑道： 我本想侮辱祢衡一下，不意反为他所辱。 
English: Cao Cao laughed and said, "I originally wanted to humiliate You, but he humiliated me instead."

古文：孔融退而数之曰： 正平大雅，固当尔邪？ 
现代文：孔融出来责备祢衡道 ：正平是大雅君子，难道应当这样吗？ 
English: The hole melts and blames You, saying: Zhenping is an elegant gentleman, is this how it should be?

古文：因宣操区区之意。
现代文：就说曹操对他不错之意。
English: Just say that Cao Cao is nice to him.

古文：衡许往。
现代文：祢衡答应去看曹操。
English: Neheng agreed to see Cao Cao perform.

古文：融复见操，说衡狂疾，今求得自谢。操喜，敕门者有客便通，待之极晏。
现代文：孔融再去见曹操，说祢衡有神经病，现在请去见曹操谢罪，曹操高兴了，令守门的人，有客来就通告他。
English: Kong Rong went to see Cao Cao again and said that You Heng had a mental illness. Now, please go to see Cao Cao to apologize. Cao Cao was pleased and told the gatekeeper to inform him if any guests came.

古文：衡乃着布单衣、疏巾，手持三尺棁杖，坐大营门，以杖捶地大骂。
现代文：等了好久，祢衡才着布单衣，疏巾，手持三尺木兑杖，坐在大营门，用杖击地大骂。
English: After waiting for a long time, Nehei, wearing a cloth singlet and a loose scarf and holding a three-foot wooden cane, sat at the gate of the camp and cursed loudly with his cane.

古文：吏曰： 外有狂生，坐于营门，言语悖逆，请收案罪。 
现代文：吏告诉曹操，外面有个狂人，坐在营门，言语反动，请收捕治罪。
English: The officials told Cao Cao that there was a madman outside, sitting at the gate of the camp, and his words were reactionary. Please arrest and punish him.

古文：操怒，谓融曰： 祢衡竖子，孤杀之犹雀鼠耳。
现代文：曹操发怒，对孔融道： 祢衡这小子，我杀了他，不过等于杀一只麻雀老鼠罢了。
English: Cao Cao was furious and said to Kong Rong, "Don't weigh this boy down. I killed him, but it was just like killing a sparrow and a mouse.

古文：顾此人素有虚名，远近将谓孤不能容之，今送与刘表，视当何如。 
现代文：但这个人平常有点虚名，杀了他，不知道的说我不能容人，现在送给刘表，你看怎么样？ 
English: But this person usually has a bit of a false name, killed him, and unknowingly said that I can't tolerate people, and now I'm giving Liu a watch. What do you think?

古文：于是遣人骑送之。
现代文：于是派人送祢衡去。
English: So they sent someone to weigh you.

古文：临发，众人为之祖道，先供设于城南，乃更相戒曰： 祢衡勃虐无礼，今因其后到，咸当以不起折之也。 
现代文：临走，大家为他送行，先设酒席于城南，互相说定： 祢衡横蛮无礼，现在就因为他的迟到，大家不要起身以折服他。 
English: Before leaving, everyone saw him off, first setting up a banquet in the south of the city, saying to each other: You Heng is rude, now because of his late arrival, everyone should not get up to accommodate him.

古文：及衡至，众人莫肯兴，衡坐而大号。
现代文：祢衡到达，大家不起身，祢衡坐下大声号哭。
English: When Nehei arrived, everyone stood up. Nehei sat down and cried loudly.

古文：众问其故，衡曰： 坐者为冢，卧者为尸。尸冢之间，能不悲乎！ 
现代文：大家问他这是为什么？祢衡说： 坐的是坟墓，卧的是尸体，尸体坟墓之间，能够不悲痛吗？ 
English: Everyone asked him why? Neheng said: Sitting is a grave, lying is a corpse, between the corpse and the grave, can you not grieve?

古文：刘表及荆州士大夫，先服其才名，甚宾礼之，文章言议，非衡不定。
现代文：刘表和荆州士大夫开始都佩服祢衡的才名，对他很客气，文章言论，不是祢衡，谁也不能定稿。
English: Liu table and Jingzhou magistrate all admired Nehei's talent from the beginning, and were very polite to him. No one can finish the article speech, not Nehei.

古文：表尝与诸文人共草章奏，并极其才思。时衡出，还见之，开省未周，因毁以抵地。
现代文：刘表曾经与各位文人共同草拟章奏，用尽了各人的才思，这时祢衡出去在外，回来看了，还未看完，就撕毁扔在地上。
English: Liu table had drafted the chapter and verse together with the literati, exhausting everyone's talent. At this time, Youheng went out, came back and read it. Before he finished reading it, he tore it up and threw it on the ground.

古文：表怃然为骇。
现代文：刘表大为惊怪。
English: Liu Biao was very surprised.

古文：衡乃从求笔札，须臾立成，辞义可观。
现代文：祢衡向刘表求笔墨，一会儿就写成了，词藻意思都很好。
English: Youheng asked Liu Biao for a pen and ink, and finished writing in a short time. The words and meaning were all very good.

古文：表大悦，益重之。
现代文：刘表大为高兴，更加器重他。
English: Liu Biao was very pleased and gave him more respect.

古文：后复侮慢于表，表耻，不能容，以江夏太守黄祖性急，故送衡与之，祖亦善待焉。
现代文：后来又侮慢刘表，刘表认为可耻，不能容忍。认为江夏太守黄祖性急，因送祢衡给他，黄祖对他也好。
English: Later, he also insulted Liu Biao, Liu Biao thought that it was shameful and intolerable. He thought that Jiangxia Taishu Huang Zu was impatient, because he sent Youheng to him, Huang Zu was good to him.

古文：衡为作书记，轻重疏密，各得体宜。
现代文：祢衡为他作书记，轻重疏密，各得体宜。
English: As his secretary, you should be careful not to overdo things, but to do things in an appropriate manner.

古文：祖持其手曰： 处士，此正得祖意，如祖腹中之所欲言也。 
现代文：黄祖握着祢衡的手道 ：处士，这正合我心，好像是我肚中所想的话。 
English: Huang Zu grasped the weight of Your hand and said, "Teacher, this is exactly what my heart is longing for. It's like the words are in my stomach.

古文：祖长子射，为章陵太守，尤善于衡。
现代文：黄祖的大儿子黄射，任章陵太守，更与祢衡相好。
English: Huang Zu's eldest son, Huang Zha, was appointed the governor of Zhangling, and was even more friendly with You Heng.

古文：尝与衡俱游，共读蔡邕所作碑文，射爱其辞，还恨不缮写。
现代文：曾经与祢衡一同去游，共读蔡邕所作碑文，黄射喜爱碑文，可惜自己没记下来。
English: He once went on a trip with Neheng and read the inscription made by Cai Xuan together. Huang Ya liked the inscription, but unfortunately he did not write it down.

古文：衡曰： 吾虽一览，犹能识之，唯其中石缺二字，为不明耳。 
现代文：祢衡说： 我虽然只看一遍，还能记得，只是碑石上缺了两个字不知道罢了。
English: Neheng said, "Even though I only read it once, I can still remember it. I just don't know why there are two words missing on the stone."

古文：因书出之，躬驰使写碑，还校，如衡所书，莫不叹伏。
现代文：就写出来了。黄射派人抄写碑文回来校对，完全如祢衡所写，没有不叹服的。
English: Huang Ya sent someone to copy the inscription and come back to proofread it. It was exactly as You Heng had written, and I was completely impressed.

古文：射时大会宾客，人有献鹦鹉者，射举卮于衡曰： 愿先生赋之，以娱嘉宾。 
现代文：黄射这时大会宾客，有人献鹦鹉给黄射，射举杯向祢衡说： 请先生作赋，使众宾客娱乐。 
English: At this time, Huang Ya was a guest at the conference. Someone offered a parrot to Huang Ya. He raised his cup to You Heng and said, "Please make a gift to entertain all the guests."

古文：衡揽笔而作，文无加点，辞采甚丽。
现代文：祢衡操笔而作，文无删削，辞采华丽。
English: Written by You Hee, the text is not abridged, and the words are gorgeous.

古文：后黄祖在蒙冲船上，大会宾客，而衡言不逊顺，祖惭，乃呵之。衡更熟视曰： 死公！
现代文：后来黄祖在蒙冲船上，大会宾客，祢衡出言不敬，黄祖感到惭愧，于是呵斥他，祢衡怒视他，说： 死家伙，你为什么不早说呢？ 
English: Later, Huang Zu was on the Mengchong ship, a guest of the general assembly. You Heng spoke disrespectfully. Huang Zu felt ashamed, so he rebuked him. You Heng glared at him and said: "Dead guy, why didn't you say something earlier?

古文：云等道？ 祖大怒，令五百将出，欲加。衡方大骂，祖恚，遂令杀之。
现代文：黄祖大怒，令人拖出，想用瞂刑，还在大骂，黄祖愤怒，因命令把他杀了。
English: The Yellow Ancestor was furious, wanted to drag him out, wanted to use flogging, and was still cursing. The Yellow Ancestor was furious and killed him because of the order.

古文：祖主簿素疾衡，即时杀焉。
现代文：黄祖的主簿平日妒忌祢衡，因此很快就把他杀了。
English: Huang Zu's master was jealous of Ne He, so he killed him quickly.

古文：射徒跣来救，不及。
现代文：黄射徒步来救，已经晚了。
English: Huang Ya came to the rescue on foot, but it was too late.

古文：祖亦悔之，乃厚加棺敛。
现代文：黄祖也后悔不该杀他，于是厚加棺殓。
English: Huang Zu also regretted that he should not have killed him, so he added a thick coffin.

古文：衡时年二十六，其文章多亡云。
现代文：祢衡这时二十六岁，他的文章大多散失了。
English: Neheng was 26 years old at the time, and most of his articles have been lost.

