古文：封人掌设王之社壝。为畿，封而树之。
现代文：封人掌管修建王的社稷的壝坛，在王畿周围修筑疆界并在界上种树。
English: The vassal was in charge of building the altar of the king's shrine, building a boundary around the king's shrine and planting trees on the boundary.

古文：凡封国，设其社稷之壝，封其四疆。
现代文：凡分封诸侯国，修建该国社稷的壝坛，在该国的四周修筑疆界。
English: It is best to subdivide a vassal state, build up the social capital of the country, and build a border around the country.

古文：造都邑之封域者，亦如之。令社稷之职。
现代文：建造都邑的疆界，也这样做，命令对于祭祀社稷负有职责的人。
English: Build the boundaries of the capital, and do the same, ordered the person in charge of the sacrificial community.

古文：凡祭祀。饰其牛牲，设其福衡置其絼，共其水稾，歌舞牲及毛炮之豚。
现代文：凡将举行祭祀，洗刷用于祭祀的牛牲，给牛设福衡，栓上牵牛绳，供给所需用的水和麦秸，要为牲歌唱舞蹈，以及负责除去猪毛而后加以炮制。
English: Whoever is to hold the sacrifice should wash the oxen and cattle used for the sacrifice, set a scale for the oxen, tie a rope for the oxen, provide the necessary water and straw, sing and dance for the animals, and be responsible for removing the pig's hair and then cooking it.

古文：凡丧纪、宾客、军旅、大盟，则饰其牛牲。
现代文：凡举行丧事、款待宾客、军队出征、大会盟，就洗刷所用的牛牲。
English: Whenever a funeral is held, or guests are entertained, or troops are sent out on a campaign, or a great league is held, the cattle used are washed.

古文：鼓人掌教六鼓、四金之音声。以节声乐，以和军旅，以正田役，教为鼓而辨其声用。
现代文：鼓人掌管教授六种鼓和四种金属敲击乐器以使五声和合发出乐音，用以节制音乐，协调军队，指挥田猎。教击鼓而分辨鼓的声音和用途。
English: The drummer is in charge of teaching six kinds of drums and four kinds of metal percussion instruments to make the five-part harmony sound, to control music, coordinate the army, and direct the hunting. Teach drumming to distinguish the sound and use of the drum.

古文：以雷鼓鼓神祀，以灵鼓鼓社祭，以路鼓鼓鬼享，以鼖鼓鼓军事，以鼛鼓鼓役事，以晋鼓鼓金奏。
现代文：祭祀天神时击雷鼓，祭祀地神时击灵鼓，祭祀宗庙时击路鼓，军事行动击鼗鼓，兴起役事击馨鼓，敲击钟、铸等乐器时击晋鼓。
English: The thunder drum is beaten during the worship of the gods, the spirit drum is beaten during the worship of the gods of the earth, the road drum is beaten during the worship of the ancestral temple, the gong drum is beaten during military operations, the heart drum is beaten during the rise of the government, and the Jin drum is beaten during the striking of bells, casting and other musical instruments.

古文：以金錞和鼓，以金镯节鼓，以金饶止鼓，以金铎通鼓。
现代文：用金錞调和鼓声，用金镯节制鼓声，用金铙停止鼓声，用金铎军鼓齐作。
English: Use the golden gong to tune the drum sound, use the golden gong to control the drum sound, use the golden gong to stop the drum sound, and use the golden gong to make the drum sound.

古文：凡祭祀百物之神，鼓兵舞、帗舞者。
现代文：凡祭祀各种小神，击鼓作为兵舞、帗舞的节奏。
English: They all worship various small gods, and drumming is used as the rhythm of military dance and breakdancing.

古文：帅而舞山川之祭祀，教帗舞；帅而舞社稷之祭祀，教羽舞；帅而舞四方之祭祀，教皇舞；帅而舞旱叹之事，凡野舞，则皆教之。
现代文：凡出征，夜里敲击鼜鼓。军队将冲锋陷阵，就击鼓鼓舞士气。发起徒役田猎时，也这样击鼓鼓舞士气。解救日食、月食，就告知王击鼓。有大丧，就告知大仆击鼓。舞师掌管教习兵舞，祭祀山川之神时率舞队前往而舞。教习帗舞，祭祀社稷之神时率舞队前往而舞。教习羽舞，祭祀四方名山大川时率舞队前往而舞。教习皇舞，为解除旱灾而举行雩祭时率舞队前往而舞。凡民众想学习舞蹈的，就都教他们。
English: Whenever there is a military expedition, the gongs and drums are beaten at night. When the army is about to charge into battle, the drums are beaten to encourage morale. When there is a volunteer hunting expedition, the drums are also beaten to encourage morale. When there is a solar eclipse or a lunar eclipse, the king is told to beat the drums. When there is a great mourning, the servants are told to beat the drums. The dancer is in charge of teaching the military dance, and when there is a sacrifice to the god of mountains and rivers, the dance team goes to dance. When there is a teaching dance, and when there is a sacrifice to the god of society, the dance team goes to

古文：凡小祭祀，则不兴舞。
现代文：凡是小祭祀，就不起舞了。
English: If it's a small religious service, there will be no dancing.

古文：牧人掌牧六牲而阜蕃其物，以共祭祀之牲牷。
现代文：牧人掌管牧养六牲，而使六牲繁殖，供应祭祀所用完好而纯色的牲。
English: The herdsman is in charge of shepherding the six animals, and the six animals are bred to supply the well-used and pure-colored animals for the sacrifice.

古文：凡阳祀，用骍牲毛之；阴祀，用黝牲毛之。望祀，各以其方之色牲，毛之。
现代文：凡祭祀天或宗庙，用毛色纯赤的牲；祭祀地和社稷，用毛色纯黑的牲；祭祀名山大川，各用代表各方颜色的纯毛的牲。
English: For the worship of heaven or the ancestral temple, a pure red animal is used; for the worship of the earth and the shrine, a pure black animal is used; for the worship of famous mountains and rivers, a pure animal representing each color is used.

古文：凡时祀之牲，必用牷物。
现代文：凡四季定期举行的祭祀所用牲，一定要用毛色纯一的。
English: All the animals used in the rituals held regularly throughout the four seasons must be of the same color.

古文：凡外祭，毁事，用尨可也。
现代文：凡举行外祭或毁折牲体之祭，可以用杂色的牲。
English: If there is to be a sacrifice or a burnt offering, it must be an animal of mixed color.

古文：凡祭祀，共其牺牲，以授充人系之。
现代文：凡祭祀供应所需的牺牲，交给充人另加系养。
English: All the sacrifices needed for the supply of the sacrificial rites should be handed over to the person in charge, and the lineage should be maintained.

古文：凡牲不系者，共奉之。
现代文：凡所用牲无须系养的，也供应。
English: Any livestock that does not require rearing is also supplied.

古文：牛人掌养国之公牛，以待国之政令。
现代文：牛人掌管饲养国中公家的牛，以待国家的命令而供应。
English: Cattlemen are in charge of raising cattle for the country's middle-ranking officials, which are supplied by order of the state.

古文：凡祭祀，共其享牛、求牛，以授职人而刍之。
现代文：凡祭祀供给所需的享牛和求牛，交给职人系养。
English: The cattle for feasting and cattle for begging, which are necessary for the supply of the sacrificial rites, shall be raised by the officials.

古文：凡宾客之事，共其牢礼、积膳之牛。
现代文：凡招待宾客的事，供给为宾客设便宴或馈饔饩、赠送道路之资以及宴请宾客所需的牛。
English: In the matter of inviting guests, it is necessary to provide guests with a banquet or a gift, a gift of money for the road, and cattle needed for the banquet.

古文：飨食、宾射，共其膳羞之牛。
现代文：举行飨礼、食礼或宾射礼，都供给进献膳食所需的牛。
English: Cows are provided for the sacrificial meal, the meal offering or the shooting ceremony.

古文：军事，共其槁牛。
现代文：有军事行动，供给犒劳将士所需的牛。
English: There was a military operation to supply the overworked soldiers with the cattle they needed.

古文：丧事，共其奠牛。
现代文：有丧事，供给奠祭死者所需的牛。
English: There are funerals, and oxen are needed to provide a libation for the dead.

古文：凡会同、军旅、行役，共其兵车之牛与其牵彷，以载公任器。
现代文：凡与诸侯会同、出兵征伐、巡守，供给驾兵车所需的牛，并在辕外帮助牵牛，以运载公用器物。
English: All of them, in cooperation with the lords, sent out troops to conquer and patrol, supplied the cattle needed to drive the troop cars, and helped to lead the cattle outside the city to carry the public goods.

古文：凡祭祀，共其牛牲之互与其盆簝，以待事。
现代文：凡祭祀，供给悬挂牛牲肉所需的架子，以及的盆和的笼，以待祭事。
English: For all the sacrifices, the racks needed for hanging the meat of cattle and animals, as well as the pots and cages, were provided for the sacrifices.

古文：充人掌系祭祀之牲牷。
现代文：充人掌管系养祭祀所用的完好而纯色的牲。
English: Fuchin is in charge of raising the perfect and pure-colored animals used in the ritual.

古文：祀五帝，则系于牢，刍之三月。
现代文：祭祀五帝，就拴系在栏圈中，喂养三个月。
English: Five emperors were sacrificed, and the yakitori was placed in a railing and fed for three months.

古文：享先王，亦如之。
现代文：祭祀先王也这样做。
English: The previous sacrificial king did the same.

古文：凡散祭祀之牲，系于国门，使养之、展牲，则告牷；硕牲，则赞。
现代文：凡散祭祀所需用的牲，拴系到国都城门的司门官那里，使负责喂养。省视牲，就报告牲体完好毛色纯。
English: All the animals needed for the sacrificial rites were brought to the gatekeeper of the capital city gate, who was responsible for feeding them. Depending on the animal, the province reported that the animal was in good condition and the fur was pure.

古文：载师掌任土之法。
现代文：牲体肥硕时，就帮助。
English: When the animals are fat, you help them.

古文：以物地事，授地职，而待其政令。
现代文：载师掌管使用土地的法则，以分辨不同土地的功用，授给不同职业的人，以待完成国家征收赋税的命令。
English: The instructor is in charge of the rules of land use, to distinguish the functions of different lands, to grant people of different professions, to complete the state's tax collection order.

古文：以廛里任国中之地，以场圃任园地，以宅田、士田、贾田任近郊之地，以官田、牛田、赏田、牧田任远郊之地，以公邑之田任甸地，以家邑之田任稍地，以小都之田任县地，以大都之田任畺地。
现代文：用国都中的土地作居宅，用城郭间的空地作场圃，用近郊的土地作宅田、士田、贾田，用远郊的土地作官田、牛田、赏田、牧田，用甸地中作公邑，用稍地作家邑之田，用县地作小都之田，用疆地作大都之田。
English: Use the land in the national capital as a residence, use the open space between the castle walls as a playground, use the land in the suburbs as a homestead, a priest's field, a judge's field, use the land in the suburbs as a government field, a cow field, a reward field, a pasture field, use the middle of the field as a public village, use the field of a writer's village, use the county land as a small city field, and use the territory as a large city field.

古文：凡任地。国宅无征，园廛二十而一，近郊十一，远郊二十而三，甸稍县都皆无过十二，唯其漆林之征，二十而五。
现代文：凡用地，官宅不征税，园圃和民宅的税率是二十分取一，近郊的税率是十分取一，远郊的税率是二十分取三，甸、稍、县、都的税率都不超过十分取二，只有对漆树林的征税率是二十而取五。
English: Government residences are not taxed for any land use. For gardens and private residences, the tax rate is one-tenth out of twenty. For suburbs, the tax rate is one-tenth out of twenty. For outlying suburbs, the tax rate is three-tenths out of twenty. For townships, villages, counties, and capitals, the tax rate does not exceed two-tenths out of twenty. Only for sumac forests, the tax rate is five-tenths out of twenty.

古文：凡宅不毛者，有里布。凡田不耕者，出屋粟。凡民无职事者，出夫家之征，以时征其赋。
现代文：凡田宅不种桑麻的，罚出居宅税钱；凡田地不耕种的，罚出屋粟；凡民无职业而又无所事事的，罚他照样出夫税、家税。按时征收各种赋税。
English: All who do not grow mulberry in their fields and houses will be fined the residence tax; all who do not cultivate fields will be fined the house poppy; all people who have no occupation and do nothing will be fined the husband tax and the family tax. All kinds of taxes will be levied on time.

古文：闾师掌国中及四郊之人民、六畜之数，以任其力，以待其政令，以时征其赋。
现代文：闾师掌管国都中及四郊的人民、六畜的数目，以任用他们的劳动力，以等待国家的命令，而按时向他们征收赋贡。
English: The magistrate controls the number of people and six animals in the capital and four suburbs to employ their labor force, to wait for the order of the state, and to collect tribute from them on time.

古文：凡任民，任农以耕事，贡九谷；任圃以树事，贡草木；任工以饬材事，贡器物；任商以市事，贡货贿；任牧以畜事，贡鸟兽；任嫔以女事，贡布帛；任衡以山事，贡其物；任虞以泽事，贡其物；凡无职者出夫布。
现代文：凡任用人民：用农民从事耕种的事，贡纳各种谷物；用圃人从事种植的事，贡纳蔬菜瓜果；用工匠从事制作的事，贡纳器物；用商贾从事贸易的事，贡纳财物；用牧民从事畜牧的事，贡纳鸟兽；用妇女从事女工的事，贡纳布帛；用山民从事山林生产的事，贡纳山林的出产物；用川泽之民从事川泽生产的事，贡纳川泽的出产物。
English: Whoever employs people: employs farmers to engage in farming, shall be rewarded with various grains; employs gardeners to engage in planting, shall be rewarded with vegetables and fruits; employs craftsmen to engage in production, shall be rewarded with utensils; employs merchants to engage in trade, shall be rewarded with property; employs herdsmen to engage in animal husbandry, shall be rewarded with birds and beasts; employs women to engage in female labor, shall be rewarded with cloth; employs mountain people to engage in mountain forest production, shall be rewarded with mountain forest products; employs Kawazawa people to engage in Kawazawa production, shall be rewarded with Kawazawa products.

古文：凡庶民不畜者，祭无牲；不耕者，祭无盛；不树者，无椁；不蚕者，不帛；不绩者，不衰。
现代文：没有固定职业的人，出一人的人头税。凡民众不饲养牲畜的，祭祀不得用牲；不耕种的，不得用谷物；不种树的，无椁；不养蚕的，不得穿丝绸；不纺织的，不得缀衰。
English: People who do not have a fixed occupation must pay a head tax of one person. If the people do not raise livestock, they must not use livestock for sacrifices; if they do not farm, they must not use grain; if they do not plant trees, they must not have a plow; if they do not raise silkworms, they must not wear silk; if they do not weave, they must not embroider.

古文：县师掌邦国、都鄙、稍甸、郊里之地域，而辨其夫家人民、田莱之数，及其六畜、车辇之稽。
现代文：县师掌管外到诸侯国、内自郊里，这当中除了采邑以外的、稍、甸地区，而负责查明其间的男女民众、耕地和休耕地，及其六畜、车辆。
English: The county division is in charge of the outlying provinces, the inner provinces, and the suburbs, among which, in addition to the townships, it is responsible for identifying the male and female people, cultivated land and fallow land, and their livestock and vehicles.

古文：三年大比，则以考群吏而以诏废置。
现代文：三年大校比，就考察官吏们而报告上级加以罢免或提升。
English: According to the three-year college-to-university ratio, on the inspection of officials, they reported to their superiors to be dismissed or promoted.

古文：若将有军旅、会同、田役之戒，则受法于司马，以作其众庶及马牛、车辇，会其车人之卒伍，使皆备旗鼓兵器，以帅而至。
现代文：如果有将要出征、会同、田猎或劳役的戒令，就到大司马那里接受指示，以征调民众和马牛车辆，把车和人按军事编制加以组合，使他们都备足旗鼓、武器和器械，而率领他们到达。
English: If there is an order to go to war, to join the army, to go hunting in the fields, or to do labor service, they should go to the commander and receive instructions to conscript the people and horses and cattle vehicles, combine the vehicles and people according to the military structure, so that they are all equipped with drums, weapons and equipment, and lead them to arrive.

古文：凡造都邑，量其地，辨其物，而制其域，以岁时征野之赋贡。
现代文：凡建造采邑，测量它的土地，辨别该地所有的人民和物产，而划定它的地域。每年按季征收野地的赋贡。
English: If a man build a city, and survey the land, and take account of all the persons, and of all the goods of the city, and set a limit for the land, he shall pay the tax of the field according to the seasons of the year.

古文：遗人掌邦之委积，以待施惠。
现代文：遗人掌管王国的委积，以待施恩惠。
English: The widow was put in charge of the kingdom's treasury, and favours awaited her.

古文：乡里之委积，以恤民之阨；门关之委积，以养老孤；郊里之委积，以待宾客；野鄙之委积，以待羁旅；县都之委积，以待凶荒。
现代文：乡里的委积，用以救济乡民中饥饿困乏的人；门关的委积，用以抚养父母和孩子，郊里的委积，用以供给宾客；野鄙的委积，用以供应寄居的旅客；县都的委积，用以防备灾荒。
English: Commissariat in the countryside is used to relieve the hungry and needy among the villagers; commissariat at the gate is used to support parents and children; commissariat in the suburbs is used to supply guests; wild commissariat is used to supply sojourners; commissariat in the county capital is used to prevent and prepare for disasters.

古文：凡宾客、会同、师役，掌其道路之委积。
现代文：凡有接待宾客、会同、征伐、劳役等事，掌管道路所需的委积。
English: There are all the necessary committees for the reception of guests, the association, the conquest, the labor service, and the control of the road.

古文：凡国野之道，十里有庐，庐有饮食；三十里有宿，宿有路室，路室有委；五十里有市，市有候馆，候馆有积。
现代文：凡国都中和野外的道路，每十里设有庐，庐中备有饮食；每三十里设有宿，宿处有路室，路室有委；每五十里有集市，集市有候馆，候馆有积。
English: In all countries, there are roads in and out of the countryside, and every ten miles there is a post, and in the post there is food and drink; every thirty miles there is an inn, and in the inn there is a roadhouse, and in the roadhouse there is a committee; every fifty miles there is a market, and in the market there is a waiting hall, and in the waiting hall there is storage.

古文：凡委积之事，巡而比之，以时颁之。
现代文：凡有关委积的事，加以巡视查核，按时颁布有关委积的政令。
English: All matters related to the allocation of quotas shall be inspected and verified, and relevant decrees on quotas shall be promulgated in a timely manner.

古文：均人掌均地政，均地守，均地职，均人民、牛马、车辇之力政。
现代文：均人掌管使地税合理，使山林川泽之税合理，使各种从业税合理，使对于人民、牛马、车辇的力役征调合理。
English: The average person is in charge of making the land tax reasonable, making the tax on mountains, forests, rivers and lakes reasonable, making various employment taxes reasonable, and making the tax on the people, cattle, horses and carriages reasonable.

古文：凡均力政，以岁上下。丰年，则公旬用三日焉；中年，则公旬用二日焉；无年，则公旬用一日焉。
现代文：凡力役的征调，依照年成的好坏：丰年公事平均征用三天，中等年成公事平均征用二天，歉收年成平均征用一天。
English: The requisition of ordinary laborers is made according to the good or bad harvest of the year: the average requisition of public works in a good year is three days, the average requisition of public works in a medium year is two days, and the average requisition of public works in a bad year is one day.

古文：凶札，则无力政，无财赋，不收地守地职，不均地政。
现代文：发生饥馑疫病就免除力役，免除赋税，不征收山林川泽税和各种从业税，因而也无须做使地税合理的工作。
English: In the event of famine and epidemic, they will be exempted from forced labor, exempted from taxation, and will not be subject to mountain, forest and river taxes and various employment taxes. Therefore, there is no need to do the work of making land tax reasonable.

古文：三年大比，则大均。
现代文：三年大校比时，就作一次大的合理调整。
English: When the three-year high school graduation rate is high, it is time to make a large and reasonable adjustment.

