古文：九代之文，富矣盛矣；其辞令华采，可略而详也。
现代文：九代的文章作品，真是丰富繁盛。它们的语言文采，可以总括起来仔细谈谈。
English: The essay works of the nine generations are really rich and prosperous. Their language and literature can be summarized and discussed in detail.

古文：虞、夏文章，则有皋陶六德，夔序八音，益则有赞，五子作歌，辞义温雅，万代之仪表也。
现代文：虞夏时代的文章，有皋陶谈论治理国家的六德，夔主管的八音，伯益赞扬禹的赞辞，五子讽刺夏太康的《五子之歌》。
English: In Yu Xia's era, there are articles about the six virtues of governing the country, the eight tones of the chief of the eunuch, the praise of Yu praised by Bo Yi, and the "Song of the Five Sons" satirized by Xia Taikang.

古文：商周之世，则仲虺垂诰，伊尹敷训，吉甫之徒，并述《诗》、《颂》，义固为经，文亦足师矣。
现代文：这些作品，文辞温和，意义端正，可以说是万代后世学习的标准。商周时代，仲虺留下告诫箴言，伊尹陈述教训义词，尹吉甫这类人，都通过作诗来歌功颂德。虽然从意义上讲，这些作品已成为经书，但在文辞用法上也值得效法。
English: These works, with gentle words and correct meanings, can be said to be the standard of learning for generations to come. In the Shang and Zhou Dynasties, Zhongyi left admonitory proverbs, Yin Yin stated the meaning of the lessons, and people like Yin Jifu sang the praises of virtue by writing poems. Although in terms of meaning, these works have become scriptures, they are also worth emulating in the use of words.

古文：及乎春秋大夫，则修辞聘会，磊落如琅玕之圃，焜耀似缛锦之肆，薳敖择楚国之令典，随会讲晋国之礼法，赵衰以文胜从飨，国侨以修辞扌干郑，子太叔美秀而文，公孙挥善于辞令，皆文名之标者也。
现代文：春秋时代的士大夫，参加聘问集会时，其修饰文辞丰富得像美玉宝库，光彩照耀得像秀锦店铺。薳敖编选了楚国法令典章，随会修订晋国礼仪法规，赵衰因为熟悉礼仪跟着公子重耳赴约秦穆公的邀宴，子产因善措辞而捍卫了郑国利益，此外，郑国的子太叔文章风姿秀美，极富文采，公孙挥善于外交辞令。这些人都以文采专长而著名。
English: When the scholar-bureaucrats of the Spring and Autumn Period attended the recruitment meeting, their decorative words were as rich as a treasure trove of gems, and their brilliance shone like a brocade shop. Zou compiled the laws and regulations of Chu, and revised the etiquette and regulations of Jin. Zhao Zhen, because he was familiar with the etiquette, followed his son to the invitation banquet of Qin Mu, and his son-in-law defended the interests of Zheng due to his good wording. In addition, Zheng's son-in-law's uncle's article had a beautiful style and was very rich in literature, and his

古文：战代任武，而文士不绝。
现代文：战国时代，人们尚任武力，但文学之士却也不断涌现。
English: In the Warring States period, people were still armed, but literary figures were constantly emerging.

古文：诸子以道术取资，屈宋以《楚辞》发采。
现代文：诸子百家不同学说供人们选择采纳，屈原、宋玉用《楚辞》发扬文采光辉。
English: There are hundreds of different doctrines for people to choose from, and Qu Yuan and Song Yu used "Chu Ci" to carry forward the glory of literature.

古文：乐毅报书辨而义，范雎上书密而至，苏秦历说壮而中，李斯自奏丽而动。
现代文：乐毅《报燕惠王书》写得明辨是非而入情合义，范雎《上秦昭王书》写得措辞含蓄而用意深刻，苏秦游历的说辞则是刚正有力且符合情势，李斯《谏逐客书》辞藻华丽而又屈婉动人。
English: Le Yi's "Reporting Yan Hui Wang's Book" is written to distinguish between right and wrong and is full of emotion and meaning, Fan Yu's "Upper Qin Zhao Wang's Book" is written with subtle wording and profound intention, Su Qin's travel narrative is upright and powerful and fits the situation, and Li Si's "Guest Book" is gorgeous and humorous.

古文：若在文世，则扬班俦矣。
现代文：要是在崇尚文学的时代，他们就是类似扬雄、班固这样的作家了。
English: If they were in the era of advocating literature, they would be writers like Yang Xiong and Bangu.

古文：荀况学宗，而象物名赋，文质相称，固巨儒之情也。
现代文：荀子是学术界的宗领，而他却写了一些取象事物描写命名的赋，文采内容很相称，的确表达出儒学家的情思。
English: Xun Zi is a leading figure in the academic world, and yet he has written a number of works that take the form of descriptions and names of things. The literary content is very appropriate, and indeed expresses the sentiments of Confucianists.

古文：汉室陆贾，首发奇采，赋《孟春》而进《新语》，其辩之富矣。
现代文：汉朝陆贾，首先发出了不一般的文学光彩，他作赋写早春，又给刘邦讲《新语》，他辩论的话语很丰富。
English: Lu Jia, the leader of the Han Dynasty, was the first to shine with unusual literary brilliance. He wrote "Early Spring" and lectured "New Language" to Liu Bang. His discourse was very rich.

古文：贾谊才颖，陵轶飞兔，议惬而赋清，岂虚至哉！
现代文：贾谊脱颖而出的文才，超过了千里马，他的议论恰当切合，辞赋清新雅致，难道这是凭空造成的吗？
English: The literary talent that emerged from Jia's friendship is more than a milestone. His arguments are appropriate, and his words are fresh and elegant. Was this created out of thin air?

古文：枚乘之《七发》，邹阳之《上书》，膏润于笔，气形于言矣。
现代文：枚乘的《七发赋》，邹阳的《狱中上书》，都是笔酣墨饱，内容气势盛旺，作者思想情感都生动地表现在了言辞上。
English: "Seven Fa Fu" by Meitai, and "Jail Letter" by Shenyang, are both full of pen and ink, the content is vigorous, and the author's thoughts and feelings are vividly expressed in the rhetoric.

古文：仲舒专儒，子长纯史，而丽缛成文，亦诗人之告哀焉。
现代文：董仲舒是专业儒学家，司马迁是纯粹历史学家，却都能写出繁复文章，也属于诗人哀愁风格的一类。
English: Dong Zhongshu is a professional Confucianist, Sima Qian is a pure historian, but both can write complex articles, and also belong to the category of the poet's melancholy style.

古文：相如好书，师范屈宋，洞入夸艳，致名辞宗。
现代文：司马相如爱好读书，深入学习屈原宋玉的辞赋，充分了解掌握夸饰艳丽文辞的写作方法，因此成为辞赋写作中的领袖级人物。
English: Sima Xiangru was fond of reading, studied Qu Yuan Songyu's dictations in depth, and fully understood the writing method of mastering ornate and beautiful words. As a result, he became a leader in dictation writing.

古文：然核取精意，理不胜辞，故扬子以为 文丽用寡者长卿 ，诚哉是言也！
现代文：然而细细考核司马相如作品中的精义，发现其情理胜不过辞采魅力，所以扬雄认为 辞藻艳丽却无实用的要数司马相如的作品了 ，这句话确实说得没错！
English: However, after carefully examining the essence of Sima Xiangru's works, he found that the essence of the works was nothing more than the charm of the words, so Yang Xiong believed that Sima Xiangru's works should be counted, because the words were beautiful but not practical. He was indeed right!

古文：王褒构采，以密巧为致，附声测貌，泠然可观。
现代文：王褒的文章，讲究结构工整、文采别致，以细腻精巧为特点，描写形貌绘注声音，都是轻巧绝妙耐看。
English: Wang Bao's articles, which pay attention to structural workmanship and unique style of writing, are characterized by delicacy and finesse, describing the shape, drawing and noting the sound, are all light and durable.

古文：子云属意，辞义最深，观其涯度幽远，搜选诡丽，而竭才以钻思，故能理赡而辞坚矣。
现代文：扬雄以命意写文章，内涵最深刻，看他的作品会发现内容深广，用词绮丽，竭尽才智思考问题，因此他的文章义理丰富兼言辞确切。
English: Yang Xiong writes articles with a sense of destiny, the connotation is the most profound. Looking at his works, you will find that the content is profound, the words are beautiful, and he tries his best to think about problems. Therefore, his articles are rich in meaning and precise.

古文：桓谭著论，富号猗顿，宋弘称荐，爰比相如，而《集灵》诸赋，偏浅无才，故知长于讽谕，不及丽文也。
现代文：后汉桓谭的著作论述，多得如同富翁猗顿的财富一样繁多，宋弘在光武帝面前推荐他，还把他比作司马相如。但是他写的那些集灵宫的赋，内容浅薄狭隘没有才华可言，所以我们知道桓谭擅长写讽谏和议论的文章，而不善于作辞藻华丽的歌赋。
English: In the later Han Dynasty, the writings and commentaries of Kuan Tan were as numerous as the wealth of the rich man Sui Tong. Song Hong recommended him to Emperor Guangwu and compared him to Sima Xiangru. However, the Fu he wrote about the Jiringu Palace were shallow, narrow, and lacked talent. Therefore, we know that Kuan Tan was good at writing satirical and polemical articles, but was not good at writing ornate song Fu.

古文：敬通雅好辞说，而坎壈盛世，《显志》自序，亦蚌病成珠矣。
现代文：冯衍向来爱好文辞游说，可是他在盛明时代很不得志，因此，他将生平经历自述写成了《显志赋》，就像蚌蛤得病才孕长出珍珠一样。
English: Feng Yan has always been fond of literary lobbying, but he was very disheartened in the Shengming era. Therefore, he wrote a self-description of his life experience into "Xian Zhi Fu," just like pearls only grow out of illness.

古文：二班两刘，弈叶继采，旧说以为固文优彪，歆学精向，然《王命》清辩，《新序》该练，璿璧产于昆冈，亦难得而逾本矣。
现代文：东汉的班彪、班固，西汉的刘向、刘歆，都是父子两代文采先后相继承接，以前人们认为班固的文章胜过父亲班彪，刘歆的学问超过父亲刘向，然而班彪的《王命论》用词清新内容辨理透彻，刘向的《新序》内容丰富而言辞精练扼要，美玉既然产自昆仑山，其他的即使再好也难超过出产地的。
English: The Eastern Han Dynasty's Ban Biao and Ban Gu, and the Western Han Dynasty's Liu Xiang and Liu Yao, were both father-son literary successions. Previously, people believed that Ban Gu's articles were better than his father's Ban Biao, and Liu Yao's knowledge was superior to his father's Liu Xiang. However, Ban Biao's "The Theory of the King's Life" was clear and precise in its use of words, and Liu Xiang's "New Order" was concise and concise in terms of its rich content. Since the gems were produced in Mount Kunlun, the others, even if they were better, could not

古文：傅毅、崔骃，光采比肩，瑗寔踵武，能世厥风者矣。
现代文：傅毅和崔骃的文章，才华有如肩挨着肩，难分上下；崔瑗和崔寔跟随着他们的足迹进行创作，因此他们的文风才能世代相传。
English: Fu Yi's and Cui Yao's writing talent is like shoulder to shoulder, inseparable; Cui Yao and Cui Yao followed in their footsteps, so their writing style can be passed down from generation to generation.

古文：杜笃、贾逵，亦有声于文，迹其为才，崔、傅之末流也。
现代文：杜笃和贾逵，在文章写作方面也很有声望，考查他们的文学才能，应该排在崔傅两家的后面。
English: Du Du and Jia Ye, who are also famous for writing articles, should be ranked behind the two Cui Fu families in terms of their literary talent.

古文：李尤赋铭，志慕鸿裁，而才力沉膇，垂翼不飞。
现代文：李尤的辞赋和铭文，志向追求更鸿大的体裁空间，可惜他才智钝滞，耷拉着翅膀飞不到高空去。
English: Li You's words and inscriptions aspire to pursue a larger genre space. Unfortunately, his talent is dull, and he can't fly high with his wings.

古文：马融鸿儒，思洽识高，吐纳经范，华实相扶。
现代文：马融是一代大儒，文思通达广博，见解高超独到，发言常能成为规范，文采内容互相搭配。
English: Ma Rong is a great Confucian scholar. He is well-versed in literature and thought, his opinions are highly original, his speeches can often become the norm, and his literary works are well-matched with each other.

古文：王逸博识有功，而绚采无力。
现代文：王逸在学问认知上都很有成就，可是在运用绚丽的文采方面却稍显才力不足。
English: Wang Yiyu is very accomplished in terms of cultural cognition, but he is slightly lacking in talent in the use of brilliant literature.

古文：延寿继志，瑰颖独标，其善图物写貌，岂枚乘之遗术欤！
现代文：王延寿继承父志，才华卓越写出的文章独特出彩，他善于图绘事物形态，描写声貌，难道这是遗传了枚乘的技巧吗？
English: Wang Yanshou inherited his father's will, and the articles written by his outstanding talent are unique and colorful. He is good at drawing the shape of things and describing the voice. Is this inherited the skill of multiplication?

古文：张衡通赡，蔡邕精雅，文史彬彬，隔世相望。
现代文：张衡的学识精通，文思丰富，蔡邕学识精纯，文辞雅正，文学和史书都很有文采美感，两人隔代并称。
English: Zhang Heng is well-versed in knowledge and has a wealth of literary thoughts, while Cai Xuan is well-versed in knowledge and has a refined and elegant vocabulary. Both literature and history books have a great sense of literary beauty, and the two are known as the same generation.

古文：是则竹柏异心而同贞，金玉殊质而皆宝也。
现代文：这就是竹子和柏树性质虽然不同，但同样耐寒；金子和玉石虽然质地不同，却一样是宝物。
English: This means that bamboo and cypress trees, although different in nature, are equally cold-resistant; gold and jade, although different in texture, are the same treasure.

古文：刘向之奏议，旨切而调缓；赵壹之辞赋，意繁而体疏；孔融气盛于为笔，祢衡思锐于为文，有偏美焉。
现代文：刘向的奏书，用意切合恰当，语调轻柔舒缓；赵壹的辞赋，辞意叠复，体裁疏阔；孔融的章奏文书，气势昂扬；祢衡的歌作赋，文思敏锐，他们各有某一方面的优点。
English: Liu Xiang's performance of the book, the intention is appropriate, the intonation is soft and soothing; Zhao Yi's speech, the overlapping of speech, the genre is broad; Kong Rong's chapter performance of the instrument, the momentum is high; You Heng's song writing, the wit is keen, they each have certain advantages.

古文：潘勖凭经以骋才，故绝群于锡命；王朗发愤以托志，亦致美于序铭。
现代文：潘勖凭借经典来驰骋展示文才，所以他的《策魏公九锡文》成为当时超群绝出的好作品；王朗发愤著作用文学作品来寄托志向，也在序和铭文的写作上具有优势。
English: Pan Xuan relied on the classics to demonstrate his literary talent, so his "Zhe Wei Gong Jiu Xi Wen" became an outstanding good work at that time; Wang Lang angrily acted as a literary work to place his aspirations, and also had an advantage in the writing of prefaces and inscriptions.

古文：然自卿、渊已前，多役才而不课学；雄向以后，颇引书以助文，此取与之大际，其分不可乱者也。
现代文：然而总观汉代的文人，从司马相如和王褒以前，多数人依凭自己的才华却不注重考求学问；扬雄和刘向以后，则颇注意引用经典书句来写文章。这是取舍的大概，它的分别不能混淆。
English: However, the general view of Han Dynasty writers is that, from Sima Xiangru and Wang Bo before, most people relied on their own talents but did not pay attention to learning; Yang Xiong and Liu Xiang later, they paid attention to quoting classic sentences to write articles. This is the general choice, and its difference cannot be confused.

古文：魏文之才，洋洋清绮。
现代文：魏文帝曹丕的文才，旺盛而清丽，过去的评论贬低他，认为比曹植相差千里。
English: Wei Emperor Cao Pi's literary talent, exuberant and beautiful, past comments belittled him, saying that he was a thousand miles away from Cao Zhi.

古文：旧谈抑之，谓去植千里，然子建思捷而才俊，诗丽而表逸；子桓虑详而力缓，故不竞于先鸣。
现代文：但曹植是文思敏捷而才气俊秀，诗歌华丽而章表卓越；曹丕则思考周详而才力迟缓，因此他的名声不大。
English: However, Cao Zhi is quick-witted and talented, and his poetry is gorgeous and his chapter list is outstanding; Cao Pi is thoughtful and talented, so his reputation is not great.

古文：而乐府清越，《典论》辩要，迭用短长，亦无懵焉。
现代文：可是曹丕的乐府诗清新激越，《典论·论文》辩明扼要：注意到他们各有长短，也就可以做正确的评价了。
English: However, Cao Yu's Lefu poems are fresh and exciting, and the "Classical Theory · Thesis" is clear and concise: if you notice that they have their own strengths and weaknesses, you can also make a correct evaluation.

古文：但俗情抑扬，雷同一响，遂令文帝以位尊减才，思王以势窘益价，未为笃论也。
现代文：但世俗之情对人的或抑或扬，往往是随声附和，于是使曹丕因身为帝王而降低了文才，曹植因处境困难而增加其价值，这并不是准确的论断。
English: However, it is not an accurate assessment to say that the worldly affections tend to follow people's ups and downs. As a result, Cao Pi reduced his literary talent due to being an emperor, while Cao Zhi increased his value due to his difficult situation.

古文：仲宣溢才，捷而能密，文多兼善，辞少瑕累，摘其诗赋，则七子之冠冕乎！
现代文：王粲的才力充沛，写作敏捷而精密，诗赋论铭样样都写得好，文辞也很少病累：取其优秀的诗赋，就是 建安七子 中成就最大的作家吧！
English: Wang Yao's talent is abundant, his writing is agile and precise, his poems are well written, and his words are rarely tired: taking his excellent poetic talent, he is the most accomplished writer among the seven sons of Jian'an!

古文：琳禹以符檄擅声；徐干以赋论标美，刘桢情高以会采，应瑒学优以得文；路粹、杨修，颇怀笔记之工；丁仪、邯郸，亦含论述之美，有足算焉。
现代文：陈琳和阮瑀，以擅长章表檄移称著，徐幹以辞赋和论著显示其优美，刘桢以高尚的情操和辞采相结合，应玚才学优秀而在诗赋创作上有所收获。路粹和杨修，在笔札书记方面颇为精工，丁仪和邯郸淳，他们的《刑礼论》、《受命述》也还写得不错：这些作家都有值得称道的。
English: Chen Lin and Nguyn Th are famous for their ability to read and write Chinese characters, Xu Gan is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to write and write about Chinese characters, and Liu Hui is famous for his ability to

古文：刘劭《赵都》，能攀于前修；何晏《景福》，克光于后进；休琏风情，则《百壹》标其志；吉甫文理，则《临丹》成其采；嵇康师心以遣论，阮籍使气以命诗，殊声而合响，异翮而同飞。
现代文：刘劭的《赵都赋》，能够追赶前代优秀的作家；何晏的《景福殿赋》，则可光照后世的作者。应璩深怀意趣，用《百壹诗》显示他的情志：应贞掌握写作的道理，用《临丹赋》组成其文采。嵇康独出心裁来写论文，阮籍任其志气以写诗歌：他们通过不同的形式发出共同的心声，用不同的翅膀朝着同一方向奋飞。
English: Liu Yao's "Zhao Du Fu" can catch up with the outstanding writers of the previous generation; He Yao's "Gingfu Denshu" can illuminate the authors of the future. Ying Yao is deeply interested, and uses "One Hundred Poems" to show his passion: Ying Zhen grasps the principle of writing, and uses "Lintan Fu" to compose his poetry. Yu Kang is unique in writing essays, and Ruan Qu is ambitious in writing poems: they send out a common heartbeat through different forms, and fly in the same direction with different wings.

古文：张华短章，奕奕清畅，其《鹪鹩》寓意，即韩非之《说难》也。
现代文：张华的小赋，写得很美而清新流畅，其《鹪鹩赋》的寓意，就是韩非所写《说难》的意思。
English: Zhang Hua's Xiaofu is beautifully written and fresh and fluent. The meaning of "Gift" is the meaning of "Difficult to Say" written by Han Fei.

古文：左思奇才，业深覃思，尽锐于《三都》，拔萃于《咏史》，无遗力矣。
现代文：左思有出奇的文才，擅长于深入地思考；但他写《三都赋》用尽了锐气，写《咏史诗》表现了才华的卓越，就再没有写其他作品的精力了。
English: Zuo Si had an extraordinary literary talent and was good at in-depth thinking; however, he ran out of energy to write "Three Cities" and wrote "The Epic of Zou," which showed the excellence of his talent, and he no longer had the energy to write other works.

古文：潘岳敏给，辞自和畅，锺美于《西征》，贾馀于哀诔，非自外也。
现代文：潘岳的文思敏捷，文辞畅达，意义和谐；他的才气积聚在《西征赋》中，更充分体现于哀诔之作，这是他内在的情感所决定的。
English: Pan Yue's literary thoughts are quick, his words are fluent, and his meaning is harmonious; his talent is accumulated in the "Western Expedition," and is more fully reflected in the work of mourning, which is determined by his inner emotions.

古文：陆机才欲窥深，辞务索广，故思能入巧而不制繁。
现代文：陆机的才力要求深入探讨，辞藻力求繁富：所以他的文思虽很工巧，却不能约束繁杂。
English: The talent of the land machine requires in-depth discussion, and the words strive for prosperity: so his thoughts, although very skillful, cannot restrict complexity.

古文：士龙朗练，以识检乱，故能布采鲜净，敏于短篇。
现代文：陆云爱好明朗简练，由于他懂得控制繁多，所以运用文采鲜明省净，善于写短小的篇章。
English: Lu Yun likes to be clear and concise. Since he knows how to control a lot, he uses clear and concise writing and is good at writing short chapters.

古文：孙楚缀思，每直置以疏通；挚虞述怀，必循规以温雅；其品藻 流别 ，有条理焉。
现代文：孙楚构思作文，往往是质直陈述而文辞通畅。挚虞抒发胸怀之作，总是遵循天命而辞义温雅；他在《文章流别论》中叙述各种文体的源流并加以品评，写得颇有条理。
English: When Sun Chu conceives a composition, it is often a straightforward statement and the words are fluent. A work that expresses his heart's desire, he always follows the destiny and is gentle; he describes the source of various styles and evaluates them in "An Essay on Parting" and writes quite systematically.

古文：傅玄篇章，义多规镜；长虞笔奏，世执刚中；并桢干之实才，非群华之韡萼也。
现代文：傅玄的作品，内容大都是规劝鉴戒；傅咸的奏议，能继承其父的刚劲正直：他们父子都是堪当重任的栋梁之材，而不是各种花朵的美丽花托。
English: Fu Xuan's works are mostly about exhortation and admonition; Fu Xian's appeals can inherit his father's stamina and honesty: their father and son are pillars worthy of heavy responsibilities, rather than beautiful flowerpots of various flowers.

古文：成公子安，选赋而时美，夏侯孝若，具体而皆微，曹摅清靡于长篇，季鹰辨切于短韵，各其善也。
现代文：成公绥的赋大都写得不错；夏侯湛的作品，虽具有《尚书》、《诗经》的形式，但成就都很微小。曹摅的长诗写得比较清丽，张翰的小诗写得明辨而切实：这是他们各不相同的优点。
English: Most of Cheng Gongyi's fu are well written; Xia Houchan's works, although they have the form of "Shangshu" and "Shijing," but the achievements are very small. Cao Wei's long poem is written more beautifully, Zhang Han's small poem is written clearly and effectively: these are their different advantages.

古文：孟阳、景阳，才绮而相埒，可谓鲁卫之政，兄弟之文也。
现代文：张载、张协兄弟，才华秀丽而不相上下，正像鲁国和卫国的兄弟之政，他俩的文学成就也在兄弟之间。
English: Brothers Zhang Zhao and Zhang Xie are talented and beautiful, but they are not on a par. Just like the brotherly politics of Lu Guo and Wei Guo, their literary achievements are also between brothers.

古文：刘琨雅壮而多风，卢谌情发而理昭，亦遇之于时势也。
现代文：刘琨的作品雅正雄壮而富有风力，卢谌的作品情志明显而道理清晰：这都是由当时的政治形势造成的。
English: Liu Wei's works are majestic and full of wind, Lu Wei's works have obvious sentiments and clear reason: these are all caused by the political situation at that time.

古文：景纯艳逸，足冠中兴，《郊赋》既穆穆以大观，《仙诗》亦飘飘而凌云矣。
现代文：郭璞的诗赋华艳俊逸，可称东晋之冠；他的《南郊赋》既是庄严美好的大手笔，《游仙诗》也能使读者有如飘浮在云端。
English: Guo Qi's poems are gorgeous and handsome, and can be called the crown of the Eastern Jin Dynasty; his "Southern Suburbs" is both a solemn and beautiful masterpiece, and "Traveling Immortals" can also make readers feel like floating on the clouds.

古文：庾元规之表奏，靡密以闲畅；温太真之笔记，循理而清通，亦笔端之良工也。
现代文：庾亮的章表，写得细密而闲熟畅通；温峤的笔札书记，遵循事理而清新通达：他们也是笔札方面的高手了。
English: Brilliant chapter lists, written in a meticulous yet leisurely manner; warm-hearted pen-and-paper clerks, who follow the facts and are fresh and knowledgeable: they are also masters of pen-and-paper.

古文：孙盛、干宝，文胜为史，准的所拟，志乎典训，户牖虽异，而笔彩略同。
现代文：孙盛和干宝，都长于文辞而成为史学家，他们学习的标准，是《尚书》中的《典》、《训》：两人的途径虽然不同，但文笔辞采是相近的。
English: Sun Sheng and Gan Bao both excelled in literature and became historians. Their standard of study was the "Dictionary" and "Teaching" in the "Shang Shu": although the two men's paths were different, their writing style was similar.

古文：袁宏发轸以高骧，故卓出而多偏；孙绰规旋以矩步，故伦序而寡状。
现代文：袁宏写文章立意甚高，所以虽卓越出众却常有偏差；孙绰的诗赋过分拘守玄理，所以虽有条理却缺乏形象。
English: Yuan Hong's writing has a very high intention, so although it is excellent, there are often deviations; Sun Cao's poetry is too strict with the metaphysics, so although it is organized, it lacks image.

古文：殷仲文之孤兴，谢叔源之闲情，并解散辞体，缥渺浮音，虽滔滔风流，而大浇文意。
现代文：殷仲文的咏孤兴，谢叔源的写闲情，都有解脱文辞的体质，把骈体文写成诗行，成为虚无缥缈的浮泛声音。虽是滔滔清淡，却是大大浮浅单薄了。
English: Yin Zhongwen's "孤兴" and Xie Shuyuan's "写闲情" both have the constitution of liberation literature, and write the "" body of the text into lines of poetry, becoming a floating sound of nothingness. Although it is voluminous and light, it is very shallow and thin.

古文：宋代逸才，辞翰鳞萃，世近易明，无劳甄序。
现代文：宋代人才卓越出众，作品多得像鱼鳞片一般密集。这些文人离现在很近，我们容易明白，不须烦劳再加以论述了。
English: The talent of the Song Dynasty is outstanding, and the works are as numerous as fish scales. These literati are very close to the present, we can easily understand, and do not need to bother to discuss them.

古文：观夫后汉才林，可参西京；晋世文苑，足俪鄴都。
现代文：查看东汉的作家，和西汉作家也相差无几；晋代的文坛，几乎可以和建安文学媲美。
English: If you look at the writers of the Eastern Han Dynasty, they are almost the same as those of the Western Han Dynasty; the literary world of the Jin Dynasty is almost comparable to that of Jianan Literature.

古文：然而魏时话言，必以元封为称首；宋来美谈，亦以建安为口实。
现代文：但曹魏时期的议论，必然以汉武帝时期为最高理想；刘宋以后的高论，又总是以建安时期为话题。
English: However, the discussion of the Cao Wei period inevitably takes the Han Emperor period as the highest ideal; the high discussion after Liu Song always takes the Jianan period as the topic.

古文：何也？
现代文：这是为什么呢？
English: What is it for?

古文：岂非崇文之盛世，招才之嘉会哉？
现代文：岂不是因为这两个时期是崇尚文学的盛世，广招才士的最好时机。唉！
English: Isn't it because these two periods were the heyday of literature and the best time to recruit talent. Alas!

古文：嗟夫！此古人所以贵乎时也。
现代文：这就是古人不能不重视时机的原因了。总结：
English: This is why the ancients couldn't ignore the importance of timing.

古文：赞曰∶才难然乎！性各异禀。
现代文：人才难得，确是如此；每个人的禀性是各不相同的。
English: Talent is hard to come by, it's true; everyone's resilience is different.

古文：一朝综文，千年凝锦。
现代文：一旦写成文章，就凝结成千古不朽的锦绣。
English: Once an article is written, it condenses into an immortal brocade.

古文：馀采徘徊，遗风籍甚。
现代文：丰富的文采长期流传，良好的风尚更加盛大。
English: Rich literature has been passed down for a long time, and the good style is more grand.

古文：无曰纷杂，皎然可品。
现代文：不要说九代的作家作品纷杂，仍可清清楚楚地予以品评。
English: Not to mention that the works of nine generations of artists are mixed, but they can still be clearly evaluated.

