古文：张立道，字显卿。其先陈留人，后徙大名。
现代文：张立道字显卿，其祖先陈留人，后迁居大名。
English: Zhang Lido, also known as Xianqing, and his ancestor Chen Ruijin, later became daimyo.

古文：父善，登金进土第。
现代文：父张善，金朝进士。
English: His father, Zhang Zhen, was a member of the Kim dynasty.

古文：岁壬辰，国兵下河南，善以策干太第拖雷，命为必阇赤。
现代文：太宗四年，蒙古大军下河南，善向太宗弟拖雷献策，因而任命他为必赤。
English: In the fourth year of Taizong, the Mongolian army went to Henan, and he was kind enough to offer his advice to Taizong's younger brother on mine-sweeping, thus appointing him as the leader of the Red Guards.

古文：立道年十七，以父任备宿卫。
现代文：立道十七岁入宫充宿卫。
English: At the age of seventeen, Rikudo entered the Imperial Palace as a full-fledged retainer.

古文：世祖即位，立道从北征，未尝去左右。
现代文：世祖即位，立道扈驾北征，不离左右。
English: The ancestor ascended the throne, set out on the Northern Expedition, and did not leave the right and left.

古文：至元四年，命立道使西夏，给所部军储，以干敏称。
现代文：至元四年，命立道出使西夏，以干练、敏捷著称。
English: In the fourth year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was sent to Western Xia, known for its ability and agility.

古文：皇子忽哥赤封云南王，往镇其地，诏以立道为王府文学。
现代文：皇子忽哥赤封云南王，诏令立道为王府文学。
English: Emperor Wu Ge, the king of Yunnan, issued an edict to establish a royal literature.

古文：立道劝王务农以厚民，即署立道大理等处劝农官，兼领屯田事，佩银符。
现代文：立道劝王重视农业，使百姓衣食不愁。王即任立道为大理劝农官，兼领屯田事，佩银符。
English: He advised the king to attach importance to agriculture, so that the people would not have to worry about food and clothing. The king appointed him as Dali to advise the agricultural officials, and he was also responsible for the settlement of fields and wore a silver badge.

古文：寻与侍郎宁端甫使安南，定岁贡之礼。
现代文：不久与侍郎宁端甫出使安南，与安南国王议定每年入贡。
English: Soon after, he and his aide-de-camp Ning Duanfu sent an envoy to Annan, and they agreed with the king of Annan to pay tribute every year.

古文：云南三十七部都元帅宝合丁专制岁久，有窃据之志，忌忽哥赤来为王，设宴置毒酒中，且赂王相府官无泄其事。
现代文：云南三十七部都元帅宝合丁统治年久，有占据云南自谋独立的意图，因而怕忽哥赤来为王，计划借设宴以毒酒害死忽哥赤，且收买王相府官员，不泄露其阴谋。
English: Yunnan's thirty-seventh capital marshal Bao Haoding ruled for a long time. He had the intention of occupying Yunnan and seeking independence. Therefore, he was afraid that Huk Go Chak would become king. He planned to kill Huk Go Chak with poisoned wine at a banquet, and bribed officials of the Prime Minister's Office not to reveal his plot.

古文：立道闻之，趋入见，守门者拒之，立道怒与争。
现代文：立道知道后，忙直奔帅府求见。守门卫士阻止，立道与他们争执不休。
English: After he found out, he rushed straight to Shuaifu to see them. The gatekeepers stopped him, and he argued with them endlessly.

古文：王闻其声，使人召立道，乃得入，为王言之。
现代文：王闻声，使人召立道进府。
English: The king heard the voice of the people calling for the establishment of a road to the capital.

古文：王引其手，使探口中，肉已腐矣。
现代文：立道把宝合丁的阴谋告诉了忽哥赤王，但王已饮毒酒，晚间就去世了。
English: Lidao told Huko the Red King about the plot of Bao Haoding, but the king had already drunk the poisoned wine and died in the evening.

古文：是夕，王薨。宝合丁遂据王座，使人讽王妃索王印。立道潜结义士，得十三人，约共讨贼，刺臂血和金屑饮之，推一人走京师告变。
现代文：宝合丁占据王位，劝王妃交出王印，立道暗中交结义士十三人，约定共同讨贼，且刺血饮酒盟誓，推一人入京师报告云南发生政变的事情。
English: Bao Haoding seized the throne, persuaded the empress to hand over the royal seal, set up a secret meeting of thirteen loyalists, agreed to jointly hunt down thieves, and swore to drink blood to push one person into Beijing to report the coup in Yunnan.

古文：事颇露，宝合丁乃囚立道，将杀之。
现代文：他们的计划不幸暴露了，宝合丁把立道囚禁起来，即将处死。
English: Unfortunately, their plan was exposed, and Bao Haoding imprisoned Li Dao, who was about to be executed.

古文：人匠提举张忠者，燕人也，于立道为族兄，结壮士夜劫诸狱，出之，共亡至土蕃界，遇帝所遣御史大夫博罗欢、王傅别怗与告变人俱来。
现代文：工匠提举张忠，燕人，与立道是族兄弟，联络一些壮士将立道从狱中劫夺出来，一起逃到吐蕃。在那里遇帝所派来的御史大夫博罗欢、王傅别与派去向朝廷报告的人。
English: The craftsman mentioned Zhang Zhong, a Yan people, who was a tribal brother of Lidao, and contacted some strong men to snatch Lidao from prison and escape to Tubo together. There, he met the imperial inspectors sent by the emperor, Borohuan and Wang Fu, who were sent to report to the court.

古文：二人者遂与立道俱还，按宝合丁及王府官尝受赂者，皆伏诛。
现代文：博罗欢、别与立道一起回到云南，审讯宝合丁及王府那些曾受贿的官吏，一律处死。
English: Borohuan, Nie and Lidao returned to Yunnan together to interrogate Bao Haoding and the officials of the royal court who had accepted bribes, and all of them were executed.

古文：有旨召立道等入朝，问王薨时状。
现代文：立道奉旨入朝，向世祖陈述宝合丁毒死忽哥赤王的事实，帝听后泪下，哀叹不已，对立道说： 你为我家事十分劳苦。
English: Upon the emperor's order, Lidao went to the imperial court and reported to the patriarch the fact that Bao Haoding had poisoned and killed the Red King, the emperor shed tears and lamented, saying to Lidao, "You have worked very hard for my family."

古文：帝闻立道言，泣数行下，歔欷久之，曰： 汝等为我家事甚劳苦，今欲事朕乎，事太子乎，事安西王乎？
现代文：今后你是侍奉朕或是侍奉太子还是去侍奉安西王，由你自己决定。 立道等表示愿留下来侍奉皇上。
English: In the future, it is up to you to decide whether you want to serve me, the crown prince, or King Anxi.

古文：惟妆意所向。 立道等奏愿留事陛下，于是赐立道金五十两，以旌其忠，张忠等亦皆授官有差。
现代文：于是赐立道金五十两以表彰其忠心。张忠等皆授官爵。
English: In recognition of his loyalty, he was awarded fifty taels of gold. Zhang Zhong and the others were all given official titles.

古文：八年，复使安南，宣建国号诏。
现代文：至元八年，立道再次出使安南，宣布建立大元国号的诏书。
English: In the eighth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Lidao sent Annan again to announce the establishment of the Great Yuan Dynasty.

古文：立道并黑水，跨云南，以至其国，岁贡之礼遂定。
现代文：立道渡过黑水，越过云南，到达安南，与国王约定每年朝贡。
English: Li Du crossed the Black Water, crossed Yunnan, and reached Annan, and agreed with the king to pay tribute every year.

古文：十年三月，领大司农事，中书以立道熟于云南，奏授大理等处巡行劝农使，佩金符。
现代文：十年三月，管领大司农事。中书省因立道熟悉云南，奏请授为大理巡行劝农使，佩金符。
English: In March of the 10th year, he was put in charge of the Agricultural Affairs Division. The Chinese Ministry of Education and Culture was familiar with Yunnan due to the way it was established. He was awarded the Pei Jinfu for the Dali parade to persuade the agricultural envoys.

古文：其地有昆明池，介碧鸡、金马之间，环五百余里，夏潦暴至，必冒城郭。
现代文：该地有昆明池，位于碧鸡、金马之间，周围五百余里，夏季暴雨洪水，淹没城郭。
English: There is Kunming Pond in this area, located between the Blue Chicken and the Golden Horse, with a circumference of more than five hundred miles. In the summer, torrential rains and floods submerge the city.

古文：立道求泉源所自出，役丁夫二千人治之，泄其水，得坏地万余顷，皆为良田。爨、僰之人虽知蚕桑，而未得其法，立道始教之饲养，收利十倍于旧，云南之人由是益富庶。
现代文：立道考察出水源，征调民工二千人治理，排泄其水，得良田万顷。爨、族虽知种桑养蚕，但不得其法，立道教导他们，蚕桑收入比过去增利十倍，云南人由此更加富裕。
English: Lidao investigated the source of the water, recruited and dispatched 2,000 migrant workers to treat and drain the water, and obtained 10,000 hectares of good farmland. Although the Xiong and Zong people knew how to grow mulberry and raise silkworms, they did not know how to do it. Lidao taught them that the income of silkworms and mulberry increased tenfold compared to the past, and Yunnan people became more affluent as a result.

古文：罗罗诸山蛮慕之，相率来降，收其地悉为郡县。
现代文：山中彝族人民十分羡慕，相继来归附，立道把他们的地方改立郡县。
English: The Yao people in the mountains were so envious that they successively annexed and established their own counties.

古文：十五年，除中庆路总管，佩虎符。
现代文：至元十五年，授中庆路总管，佩虎符。
English: In the 15th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was awarded the title of general manager of Zhongqing Road, wearing a tiger emblem.

古文：先是云南未知尊孔子，祀王逸少为先师。
现代文：从前，云南人不知尊敬孔子，祀王逸少为先师。
English: Once upon a time, the people of Yunnan revered Confucius and worshipped Wang Yishao as their forerunner.

古文：立道首建孔子庙，置学舍，劝士人子弟以学，择蜀士之贤者，迎以为弟子师，岁时率诸生行释菜礼，人习礼让，风俗稍变矣。
现代文：立道首先在这里建孔子庙，设置学堂，劝士人子弟上学，择四川士人之贤者，聘为老师，每年在一定时候率诸生去行祭孔礼，使人人都讲礼让，风俗逐渐改变。
English: Li Dao first built a Confucius temple here, set up a school, persuaded the sons and daughters of the scholars to go to school, selected the sages of the Sichuan scholars, hired them as teachers, and led the people to perform the Confucius ritual at a certain time every year, so that everyone would be polite and courteous, and the customs would gradually change.

古文：行省平章赛典赤表言于朝，有旨进官以褒之。
现代文：行省平章赛典赤将立道在云南的政绩上报朝廷，朝廷传旨加官褒奖。
English: The Red General Lidao, who was awarded the Provincial Medal of Honor, reported his achievements in Yunnan to the imperial court, which sent him an official commendation.

古文：十七年，入朝，力请于帝以云南王子也先帖木儿袭王爵，帝从之。
现代文：十七年入朝，极力奏请世祖以云南王子也先帖木儿承袭王爵。
English: In the seventeenth year of his accession to the throne, he tried his best to persuade his ancestor to name the prince of Yunnan, Timur, as heir to the throne.

古文：遂命立道为临安广西道宣抚使，兼管军招讨使，仍佩虎符，陛辞，赐以弓矢、衣服、鞍马。
现代文：世祖同意，命立道为临安广西道宣抚使，兼管军招讨使，仍佩虎符。辞行时，帝赐他弓箭、衣服、鞍马。
English: The ancestor agreed that he would be appointed as the envoy of Lin'an and Guangxi provinces and the envoy of army recruitment. He still wore a tiger emblem. When he left, the emperor gave him a bow and arrow, clothes, and a pommel horse.

古文：始赴任，会禾泥路大首领必思反，扇动诸蛮夷。
现代文：刚到任就遇上禾泥路大首领必思反叛，并且煽动各少数民族。
English: As soon as he took office, he was confronted with the grass-and-mud-road leader, Bisi, who rebelled and incited the various ethnic minorities.

古文：及发兵讨之，拔其城邑，鼓行而前，徇金齿甸七十城，越麻甸，抵可蒲，皆下之。
现代文：立道立即发兵征讨，攻克其城，乘胜而西，攻取金齿甸七十城，越过麻甸，直抵可蒲。
English: Li Dao immediately sent out troops to recruit, conquered the city, took advantage of the victory and went west, conquered the 70 cities of Jinjiedian, crossed Amdian, and reached Kepu.

古文：有遗以驯象、金凤异物者，悉献诸朝。
现代文：他将送给他的驯象、金凤等珍奇异物，都献于朝廷。
English: He dedicated to the imperial court all the rare and exotic objects, such as the tamed elephant and the golden phoenix, which he had given to him.

古文：二十二年，又籍两江侬士贵、岑从毅、李维屏所部户二十五万有奇，以其籍归有司。
现代文：二十二年，又收编两江之侬士贵、岑从毅、李维屏等所部二十五万户，将其户籍交给当地官府。
English: In 2022, another 250,000 households in the districts of Nong Shigui, Nong Cong Yi and Li Weiping in Liangjiang were compiled, and their household registrations were handed over to the local government.

古文：迁临安广西道军民宣抚使。复创庙学于建水路，书清白之训于公廨，以警贪墨，风化大行。
现代文：后调任临安广西道军民宣抚使，又在建水创立孔庙、学堂，在衙门内写上为官清廉的训词，警告贪官污吏。
English: Later, he was transferred to Lin'an, Guangxi Province, as the military and people's propaganda envoy. He also founded a Confucian temple and a school in Jianshui, and wrote a precept for officials to be clean and honest in the gate to warn corrupt officials.

古文：入朝，值权臣用事，遂退居散地。条陈十二策，皆切当之务，帝嘉纳焉。
现代文：回朝，正是权臣当道，他只任不重要的闲散官职，条陈十二条，都是当时急于要办的政务，帝很称赞并加采纳。
English: Returning to the imperial court, it was the vassals of power who were in charge. He only held unimportant, idle official positions. Article Chen and Article 12 were government affairs that were urgently needed at the time. The emperor highly praised them and adopted them.

古文：二十七年，北京地陷，人民震惊，命立道为本路总管。
现代文：二十七年，北京地震，人民惊恐万状，命立道为本路总管。
English: In the 27th year, the Beijing earthquake, the people were terrified, and the road was designated as the main road.

古文：未行，安南世子陈日燇遣其臣严仲维、陈子良等诣京师告袭爵。
现代文：还未上任，安南王嫡长子陈日火尊，遣其臣严仲维、陈子良等到京师报告他承袭爵位。
English: Before he took office, Chen Riguo, the eldest legitimate son of King Annan, sent his vassals Yan Zhongwei and Chen Ziliang to Beijing to report that he would inherit the title.

古文：先是，其国主陈日烜累召不至，权遣其族父遗爱入贡，朝廷因封为安南王。
现代文：此前，安南国王陈日累召不至，只派其族父遗爱入贡，朝廷封为安南王。
English: Previously, the king of Annan, Chen Ri, could not be summoned, so he only sent the last love of his father to pay tribute, and the court named him King of Annan.

古文：遗爱还，日烜阴害之。
现代文：遗爱回国为日所暗害。
English: He was assassinated by the Japanese when he returned to Japan.

古文：遣使问罪，日烜拒使者不受命，遂遣将讨之，失利而还。帝怒，欲再发兵，丞相完泽、平章不忽木言： 蛮夷小邦，不足以劳中国。
现代文：朝廷遣使问罪，日不服，便派兵征讨，失败而还。世祖大怒，要再发兵，丞相完泽、平章不忽木建议 ：蛮夷小国，不足以劳中国兴兵。
English: The imperial court sent an envoy to inquire about the crime, but he was not satisfied with the answer, so he sent an army to investigate, but it failed and returned. The ancestor was furious and wanted to send another army, so the prime minister, Kanazawa, and the minister of justice, Taira no Shoki, suggested that a small barbarian country would not be able to raise an army in China.

古文：张立道尝再使安南有功，今复使往，宜无不奉命。 
现代文：张立道曾出使安南有功，现在再派他去，安南不会不听命。 
English: Zhang Lido once sent Annan on a successful mission. If he sends him now, Annan will not disobey his orders.

古文：帝招至香殿，谕之曰： 小国不恭，今遣汝往谕朕意，宜尽乃心。 
现代文：帝召立道至香殿告谕说 ：小国不恭顺我天朝，现派你去宣告朕的旨意，你要尽心尽力。 
English: The emperor summoned Li Dao to the Incense Hall and told him, "Small countries do not obey my heavenly court. I am sending you to proclaim my will. You must do your best."

古文：立道对曰： 君父之命，虽蹈水火不敢辞，臣愚恐不足专任，乞重臣一人与俱，臣为之副。 
现代文：立道说： 君父之命，虽赴汤蹈火也在所不辞。只恐愚臣一人不足以完成使命，请派一重臣同往，他为主，臣为副。 
English: Li Dao said: Although it is the king's father's order, it is also necessary to go through the fire. I am afraid that one foolish vassal is not enough to complete the mission, please send a senior vassal with you, he is the master, and the vassal is the deputy.

古文：帝曰： 卿朕腹心臣，使一人居卿上，必败卿谋。 
现代文：世祖说： 卿为朕腹心之臣，若一人居卿之上，必破坏卿的谋略。 
English: The ancestor said, "The lord is my trusted vassal. If only one person sits above the lord, the lord's strategy will be ruined."

古文：遂授礼部尚书，佩三珠虎符，赐衣段、金鞍、弓矢以行。
现代文：授他为礼部尚书，佩三珠虎符，赐衣服、金鞍、弓箭等物。
English: He was given a book on etiquette, the Three Pearl Tiger Emblem, clothes, a gold saddle, a bow and arrow, and other items.

古文：至安南界，谓郊劳者曰： 语尔世子，当出郭迎诏。 
现代文：立道至安南，对来城外迎接的人说： 去告诉你们王子，他应当出城迎奉圣旨。 
English: He set out for Annam and said to those who had come to meet him outside the city: "Go and tell your prince that he should leave the city to meet the sacred decree."

古文：日燇乃率其属，焚香伏谒道左。
现代文：王子日火尊便率其官吏，出城在道旁焚香迎接。
English: Prince Nikko Takeru then led his officials out of the city to burn incense on the roadside to welcome them.

古文：既抵府，日燇拜跪，听诏如礼。
现代文：到了王府，日火尊跪拜听立道宣读圣旨。
English: When he arrived at the royal palace, Nichibunken knelt down to listen to the sermon and read the holy will.

古文：立道传上命，数其罪，为书晓之。
现代文：立道指出他们不服从元朝的罪行。
English: Lidao pointed out that their disobedience to the Yuan Dynasty was a crime.

古文：日燇曰： 比三世辱公使，公大国之卿，小国之师也，何以教我？ 
现代文：日火尊问道： 近年来，我国三代国王侮辱了天朝的使臣，公是大国的重臣，也是我们小国之师，将如何教导我？ 
English: "In recent years, three generations of our kings have insulted the envoys of the heavenly court. The prince is the chief minister of a big country, but also the teacher of our small country. How will he teach me?

古文：立道曰： 昔镇南王奉词致讨，汝非能胜之也，由其不用向导，率众深入，不见一人，迟疑而还，曾未出险，风雨骤至，弓矢尽坏，众不战而自溃，天子亦既知之。
现代文：立道说 ：过去镇南王奉诏来讨伐，并非你们有能胜的力量，而是我们不用向导，率众深入，不见一人，迟疑而还。还未脱险，突然遇到急风暴雨，弓箭尽坏，军士不战自溃，天子也知其事。
English: Li Dao said: In the past, Zhenan Wang sent an edict to wage a crusade, it was not that you had the power to win, but that we did not need a guide, led the crowd deep, did not see anyone, hesitated and returned. Before escaping danger, we suddenly encountered a sudden storm, the bow and arrow broke, the sergeant self-destructed without a fight, and heaven knows what happened.

古文：汝所恃者，山海之险、瘴疠之恶耳。
现代文：你们所依恃的是山海之险、瘴气弥漫之地。
English: What you are clinging to is a perilous land of mountains and seas, a land full of miasma.

古文：且云南与岭南之人，习俗同，技力等，今发而用之，继以北方之劲卒，汝复能抗哉？
现代文：我云南与你安南之人，习俗相同，武艺相等，令征发为兵，以北方之劲卒为后盾，你们能抵抗吗？
English: I am from Yunnan and you are from Annan. Our customs are the same, our martial arts are the same, we conscript soldiers, and we are backed by the strength of the north. Can you resist?

古文：汝战不利，不过遁入海中，岛夷乘衅，必来寇抄汝，汝食少不能支，必为彼屈，汝为其臣，孰若为天子臣乎？
现代文：你们战争失败，只能逃入海中，海岛之人乘机向你们进攻，你们粮少不能支持，必然屈服。到那时，是为他们之臣的好，还是为大元天子之臣的好？
English: If you lose the war, you can only flee into the sea. The people on the islands will take the opportunity to attack you. With less food, you will not be able to support yourselves and will inevitably succumb. At that time, will it be better for their vassals or for the vassals of the Great Emperor?

古文：今海上诸夷，岁贡于汝者，亦畏我大国之尔与也。圣天子有德于汝甚厚。
现代文：今海上诸夷，其所以每年向你们纳贡，也是因为怕我们大国。我圣明天子对你们恩德甚厚。
English: This is why I pay tribute to you every year, because I am afraid of our great power. I, the Son of Heaven, am very grateful to you.

古文：前年之师，殊非上意，边将谗汝尔。
现代文：前年出师征伐你们，完全不是圣上本意，而是边将谗言所致。
English: Last year's dispatch of a division to invade you was not at all the Lord's original intention, but the result of the commander's insults.

古文：汝曾不悟，不能遣一介之使，谢罪请命，辄称兵抗拒，逐我使人，以怒我大国之师，今祸且至矣，惟世子计之。 
现代文：你们不明白，未派使臣来谢罪请命，而举兵对抗，驱我国使臣，激怒了我大国军队。今大祸将至，王子自己考虑对待吧！ 
English: Don't you understand that instead of sending an envoy to apologize and beg for his life, he raised an army to fight, drove out our envoy, and enraged our great country's army. Now a great disaster is coming, prince, think about how to deal with it!

古文：日燇拜，且泣涕而言曰： 公之言良是也，为我计者，皆不知出此。
现代文：日火尊跪拜于地，泪流满面地说道： 公说得极是，国中为我出谋划策的人，都不知应像你所说的那样去做。
English: Nikkotsun bowed to the ground and said with tears streaming down his face, "It's a well-known fact that the people in my country who make plans for me don't know if they should do as you say.

古文：前日之战，救死而已，宁不知惧！
现代文：前日之战只是为自救而已。岂能不知怕天子使臣！
English: The previous day's battle was only for self-rescue. How could he not be afraid of the envoy of the Son of Heaven!

古文：天子使公来，必能活我。 
现代文：今公来必能救我。 
English: Now the prince will be able to save me.

古文：北面再拜，誓死不敢忘天子之德。
现代文：向北方再拜，表示誓死不忘天子之恩德。
English: He bowed again to the north, saying that he would never forget the grace of God.

古文：遂迎立道入，出奇宝为贿，立道一无所受，但要日燇入朝。日燇曰： 贪生畏死，人之常情，诚有诏贷以不死，臣将何辞。 
现代文：将奇宝赠与立道，立道一物不受，只要日火尊入朝。日火尊说： 贪生怕死，人之常情，如果朝廷有诏来赦我死罪，臣决不拒绝入朝。 
English: As long as Nichibaken enters the Imperial Court, he will not be able to refuse the gift of a rare treasure to the Imperial Court. Nichibaken said, "It is human nature to be greedy for life and afraid of death. If the Imperial Court issues an edict to pardon my capital crime, I will never refuse to enter the Imperial Court."

古文：乃先遣其臣阮代之、何惟岩等随立道上表谢罪，修岁贡之礼如初，且言所以愿朝之意。
现代文：于是先派其臣阮代之、何惟岩等随立道奉表入朝谢罪，每年纳贡，还表示他自愿入朝的本意。
English: Therefore, he first sent his vassals Nguyn Đi and H Văn Đình to accompany Lý Tông to be presented with a certificate for the crime of thanking the emperor and to pay an annual tribute, and also expressed his intention to voluntarily enter the imperial court.

古文：廷臣有害其功者，以为必先朝而后赦。
现代文：廷臣中有人妒忌立道的这次功劳一定要安南先朝后赦。
English: Some courtiers are envious of the fact that Annan must be pardoned for this achievement.

古文：日燇惧，卒不敢至，议者惜之。
现代文：日火尊害怕，始终不敢入朝。
English: He was afraid of the sun and never dared to enter the imperial court.

古文：二十八年，遣立道奉使按行两浙，寻以为四川南道宣慰使，迁陕西汉中道肃政廉访使。
现代文：二十八年，遣立道巡视两浙，不久授任为四川南道宣慰使，又调任陕西汉中道肃政廉访使。
English: In the 28th year, he was sent to inspect the two Zhejiang Provinces, and soon he was appointed as the propaganda and consolation envoy of the South Sichuan Province, and he was also transferred to the visiting envoy of the Central Hanzhong Province of Shaanxi Province.

古文：三十年，皇曾孙松山封梁王，出镇云南。
现代文：三十年，皇曾孙松山封为梁王，出京镇守云南。
English: Thirty years later, the emperor's great-grandson Matsuyama was crowned King of Liang and went to Beijing to defend Yunnan.

古文：大德二年，廷议求旧臣可为梁王辅行者，立道遂以陕西行台侍御史拜云南行省参政。视事期月，卒于官。
现代文：大德二年，朝廷找一位旧臣作为梁王的辅助，立道从陕西行台御史之职调为云南行省参政，只视事一月便去世了。
English: In the second year of the reign of Emperor Dezong, the imperial court found an old vassal to serve as an assistant to King Liang, and he was transferred from the position of the governor of Shaanxi Province to the position of the governor of Yunnan Province to participate in politics. However, he passed away in January.

古文：立道凡三使安南，官云南最久，颇得土人之心，为之立祠于鄯善城西。
现代文：立道曾三度出使安南，在云南为官最久，深得人心，为他立祠于善阝善城西。
English: Lidao was sent to Annan three times, and he was the longest-serving official in Yunnan. He was deeply loved by the people, and a shrine was built for him in the west of Shancheng.

古文：立道所著诗文，有《效古集》、《平蜀总论》、《安南录》、《云南风土记》、《六昭通说》若干卷。
现代文：立道所著诗文有《效古集》、《平蜀总论》、《安南录》、《云南风土纪》、《六诏通说》若干卷。
English: There are several volumes of poetry and prose written by Li Daosheng, including "Ancient Collection," "General History of Pingshu," "Record of Annan," "Folklore of Yunnan" and "Six Precepts."

古文：张庭珍张庭珍，字国宝，临潢全州人。
现代文：张庭珍、张庭瑞兄弟二人，临潢全州人。
English: Zhang Tingzhen and Zhang Tingrui are two brothers from Linyi and Quanzhou.

古文：父楫，金商州南仓使。
现代文：其父张楫，曾任金朝商州南仓使。
English: His father, Zhang Jie, was the South Cang envoy to Shangzhou of the Kim dynasty.

古文：岁壬辰，籍其民数千来降，太宗命监榷北京等路赋课，俄改北京都转运使，因家北京。
现代文：太宗四年，归降蒙古，太宗命他监收北京路赋税，后任命为北京都转运使，因此安家于北京。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Taizong's reign, he returned to Mongolia. Emperor Taizong ordered him to supervise the collection of taxes on the Beijing Road. Later, he was appointed as the transfer envoy to Beijing. Therefore, Emperor Taizong settled in Beijing.

古文：岁辛亥，宪宗即位，以庭珍为必阇赤。
现代文：庭珍字国宝，宪宗即位，任命他为必赤。
English: Niizan Zi, a national treasure, was enthroned by Emperor Gensong, who appointed him as the heir to the throne.

古文：高丽不请命，擅徙居海中江华岛，遣庭珍往问之。其王言： 臣事本朝未尝不谨，而大军岁入侵掠，避而走险，不得已也。 
现代文：高丽不请示朝廷，擅将居民迁于江华岛。宪宗遣庭珍去质问，高丽王说： 臣事奉天朝不曾有不谨慎之处，然而天朝大军每年入侵劫掠，我百姓逃避海岛，是不得已而为之。 
English: Goryeo moved its residents to Ganghwa Island without asking permission from the imperial court. When the Constitutionalist Church sent Jin to the court for questioning, King Goryeo said, "There is nothing imprudent about a subject serving the Heavenly Court. However, the Heavenly Court's army invades and plunders the island every year, and our people have to flee the island out of necessity.

古文：且赂庭珍金银数千两。庭珍却之而归，以状闻。
现代文：且送给庭珍金银数千两，庭珍完全拒收，归国奏报高丽王所讲的事实。
English: and sent thousands of taejins of gold and silver to Tingzhen, but Tingzhen completely refused to accept them and returned to the country to report the facts told by the King of Goryeo.

古文：帝为禁戍兵无擅入其地，高丽以安。
现代文：宪宗下令，禁止戍边兵将擅入高丽，高丽得以安宁。
English: Kenzong issued an order prohibiting the border troops from entering Goryeo without permission, and Goryeo was left in peace.

古文：帝伐宋，至阆州，授安抚使。
现代文：宪宗伐宋，至阆州，授庭珍为安抚使。
English: Jianzong, the founder of the Song Dynasty, went to Bozhou, where he was appointed as a pacifying envoy.

古文：世祖即位，自将北伐，以庭珍熟知西京入漠南路，遣立沙井诸驿，兼给粮运，俄授同佥土蕃经略使。
现代文：世祖即位，御驾北伐，因庭珍熟悉西京入漠南的道路，派他去建立沙井地方的驿站，兼供运军粮，不久授同佥吐蕃经略使。
English: When the founder ascended to the throne, he went on the Northern Expedition. As Tingzhen was familiar with the route from West Beijing to the desert south, he sent him to establish a post in Shajing, which was also used to transport grain for the army. Soon, he was awarded the title of "Minister Delegate of Tujing and Tujing."

古文：至元六年，安南入贡不时，以庭珍为朝列大夫、安南国达鲁花赤，佩金符，由吐蕃、大理诸蛮至于安南。世子光昞立受昭，庭珍责之曰： 皇帝不欲以汝土地为郡县，而听汝称藩，遣使喻旨，德至厚也。
现代文：至元六年，安南未按时入朝纳贡，任庭珍为朝列大夫、安南国达鲁花赤，佩金符，取道吐蕃，经大理到达安南，对安南王子陈光日丙说： 皇帝不愿把你们的土地划为郡县，而听你们自为藩属，遣使宣旨，恩德至厚。
English: In the sixth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Annan did not pay tribute to the imperial court on time. Ting Zhen was appointed as the doctor of the imperial court, and Annan's country was Daruhana, Baekinpu, and took the road to Tubo, and arrived in Annan through Dali. He said to Annan's prince Chen Guang Rong: The emperor does not want to divide your land into counties, but listens to you as a clan member, sends a decree, and is very grateful.

古文：王犹与宋为唇齿，妄自尊大。
现代文：而你国王却与宋朝结为唇齿关系，妄自尊大。
English: Your king, however, has a close relationship with the Song Dynasty and is arrogant.

古文：今百万之师围襄阳，拔在旦夕，席卷渡江，则宋亡矣，王将何恃？
现代文：今天朝百万之师围攻襄阳，旦夕即下，然后大军渡江，宋将灭亡，你们倚靠谁？
English: Today, a million division besieged Xiangyang in the morning, and it fell immediately in the evening, and then a large army crossed the river, the Song Dynasty will perish, who do you rely on?

古文：且云南之兵不两月可至汝境，覆汝宗祀有不难者，其审谋之。 
现代文：而且云南我军不到两月便可入你们境内，要灭亡你们是不难的，你们仔细考虑吧！ 
English: Moreover, our Yunnan army can enter your territory in less than two months. It is not difficult to destroy you. Think about it carefully!

古文：光昞惶恐，下拜受诏，既而语庭珍曰： 圣天子怜我，而使者来多无礼，汝官朝列，我王也，相与抗礼，古有之乎？ 
现代文：光日丙诚惶诚恐，下拜接诏，对庭珍说 ：圣明天子怜悯我，而使者来多无礼。你是朝列大夫，我是王，彼此只以平等礼节对待，自古有这样的事否？ 
English: Gwangri-pyeong panicked and panicked, bowed down to receive the edict, and said to Tingzhen, "Holy Son of Heaven, have mercy on me, and how rude of the messenger to come. You are the doctor of the Imperial Court, I am the king, and we only treat each other with equal courtesy. Has there been such a thing since ancient times?

古文：庭珍曰： 有之。
现代文：庭珍说 ：有。
English: Niizhen said, "Yes."

古文：王人虽微，序于诸侯之上。 
现代文：而你虽为小国国王想位于诸侯之上吗？ 
English: And you, the king of a small country, want to be above the princes?

古文：光昞曰： 汝过益州，见云南王拜否？ 
现代文：光日丙问 ：你过益州时，见云南王下拜否？ 
English: Guang Rihong asked: When you passed Yizhou, did you see the king of Yunnan bow down to you?

古文：庭珍曰： 云南王，天子之子，汝蛮夷小邦，特假以王号，岂得比云南王？
现代文：庭珍说 ：云南王是天子之子，你这蛮夷小邦，特给你以王的称号，哪比得云南王。
English: Ting Zhen said, "The king of Yunnan is the son of the Son of Heaven. You barbarian petty state, I specially give you the title of king. What can compare to the king of Yunnan?"

古文：况天子命我为安南之长，位居汝上耶！ 
现代文：何况天子命我为安南之最高长官，位居汝之上。 
English: Moreover, by God's will, I am the highest official of Annam, and I am above you.

古文：光昞曰： 既称大国，何索吾犀象？ 
现代文：光日丙又问： 既称大国，为何向我们要犀象？ 
English: Guang Rong Rong also asked: Since we are a big country, why do we want a rhinoceros?

古文：庭珍曰： 贡献方物，藩臣职也。 
现代文：庭珍说： 贡献方物，是你做藩臣的职责。 
English: Niizhen said, "It is your duty as a vassal to contribute.

古文：光昞无以对，益惭愤，使卫兵露刃环立以恐庭珍。
现代文：光日丙无言答对，又羞又愤，令卫兵刀出鞘立于庭珍周围，企图恐吓他。
English: Without a word of reply, ashamed and angry, Guang Rongqin made the guards brandish their swords and stand around Ting Zhen in an attempt to intimidate him.

古文：庭珍解所佩弓刀，坦卧室中曰： 听汝何为！ 
现代文：庭珍解所佩弯刀，躺卧于室中，厉声道 ：听你们处置！ 
English: Ting Zhen Rong, who was wearing a machete, lay down in the middle of the room and snapped, "I'll do as you say!"

古文：光昞及群下皆服。
现代文：光日丙及下属官吏皆敬服。
English: Guang Rong Rong and subordinate officials all respectfully obeyed.

古文：明年，遣使随庭珍入贡。
现代文：第二年，遣使随庭珍入朝进贡。
English: In the second year, he sent an envoy to the court to collect tribute.

古文：庭珍见帝，以所对光昞之言闻，帝大悦，命付翰林承旨王磐纪之。
现代文：庭珍见帝，将他与光日丙对答的话一一报告，帝大喜，命交翰林承旨王磐记载下来。
English: Ting Zhen met the emperor, and recorded the words and answers between him and Guang Rixi, the emperor was overjoyed, and he gave his life to Hanlin Zhengzhi Wang Pan.

古文：授襄阳行省郎中。与阿里海牙从数骑抵襄阳南门，呼宋将吕文焕语曰： 我师所攻，无不取者，汝孤城路绝，外无一兵之援，而欲以死守求空名，如阖郡之人何！
现代文：授庭珍为襄阳行省郎中，与阿里海牙带数骑至襄阳南方，呼宋守将吕文焕答话 ：我军攻无不取，襄阳已是一座孤城，外无一兵援救，你却要死守以图空名，置全郡百姓于何地？
English: The court awarded Zhen to be the governor of Xiangyang, and he rode to the south of Xiangyang with Ali Haiga. He called for the Song governor, Lu Wenhuan, and replied: Our army has attacked everything, Xiangyang is already a lonely city, and there is no soldier to rescue, but you have to defend it with an empty name. Where are the people of the whole county?

古文：汝宜早图之。 
现代文：愿你早做打算。 
English: I wish you had planned ahead.

古文：文焕帐前将田世英、曹彪执其总管武荣来降，文焕益孤，明日，遣黑杨都统来议纳款。
现代文：文焕帐前部将田世英、曹彪捉住其总管武荣来降，文焕更加势孤，第二天派黑杨都统来商议投降事宜。
English: At the front of the Wenhuan ledger, Tian Shiying and Cao Biao captured Wu Rong, the general manager, and brought him down. Wenhuan was even more powerless. The next day, he sent He Yang to negotiate the surrender.

古文：将遣之还报，庭珍曰： 彼来，或以计觇我，未能必其果降。
现代文：正要送他回城去，庭珍忙止住说： 他来，可能是来探听虚实的，未必真的投降。
English: Just as she was about to send him back to the city, Ting Zhen paused and said, "He may have come to investigate the truth, but he may not really surrender."

古文：此人吕氏腹心，不如留之，以伐其谋。 
现代文：此人是吕文焕的心腹，不如扣留以打破他们的策划。 
English: This person is a confidant of Lu Wenhuan. It is better to detain him in order to break their plot.

古文：元帅阿术然之，乃留不遣。又明日，文焕举城降。
现代文：元帅阿术同意，把黑杨都统扣留下来，第三天文焕果然开门投降。
English: Marshal Ah Xiu agreed to keep all the poplars, and the third astronomer opened the door and surrendered.

古文：以功迁中顺大夫、遥授知归德府行枢密院经历。
现代文：庭珍因功升中顺大夫，授知归德府行枢密院经历。
English: Ting Zhen was promoted to Zhong Shun doctor for his merits, and he was awarded the title of German prefecture by the Privy Council.

古文：诸军南渡，复为行省郎中，俄授金虎符、襄阳总管，兼府尹，改郢、复二州达鲁花赤。
现代文：大军南渡，庭珍又为行省郎中，不久授金虎符、襄阳总管兼府尹，后改为郢、复二州达鲁花赤。
English: The great army went to the south, and Ting Zhen was the second son of Xing Shou, and soon he was awarded the Golden Tiger Badge, the general manager of Xiangyang and the prefectural governor of Yin, and later he was changed to Zheng and Fuzhou Daluhua Red.

古文：宋平，迁平江路达鲁花赤，改同知浙东宣慰使司事。
现代文：灭宋后，调庭珍为平江路达鲁花赤，又改为同知浙东宣慰使司事。
English: After the destruction of the Song Dynasty, he was transferred to the Pingjiang Road, and became the secretary of the Tongzhi East Zhejiang Xuanyuan Envoy.

古文：未行，拜大司农卿。
现代文：尚未启程，又拜大司农卿。
English: He has not yet set off, but he has already paid his respects to the Chief Secretary for Agriculture.

古文：连居亲忧，起复南京路总管，兼开封府尹。
现代文：父母双亡，他连年在家守孝，期满，起任南京路总管，兼开封府尹。
English: After the death of his parents, he was a dutiful son at home for many years, and at the end of his term, he became the head of Nanjing Road, and also the head of Kaifeng.

古文：开封有控鹤军士十余人，赁大宅聚居，纵横街陌。
现代文：开封有管鹤军士十余人，赁大宅聚居，到处横行霸道。
English: In Kaifeng, there are more than ten sergeants of Guanzhe, they live together in a rented mansion, and they are domineering everywhere.

古文：庭珍始至，察其必为盗，急捕之，得宝玩、器服、子女满室，穷索其党，俱杀之，民以为神。
现代文：庭珍一到便察觉他们必做盗贼，立即将他们逮捕，搜出珍宝、器物、衣服、女子，追捕其党徒，均予处死，百姓以为庭珍是神。
English: As soon as he arrived, Tianzhen realized that they must be thieves, immediately arrested them, found treasures, utensils, clothes, and women, pursued his party members, and all of them were put to death. The people thought that Tianzhen was a god.

古文：河决，灌太康，漂溺千里，庭珍括商人渔子船及缚木为筏，载糗粮四出救之，全活甚众。
现代文：黄河决堤，淹没太康，水漫千里，一片汪洋，庭珍征发商人渔船及制作木筏，载粮到各地赈救，为他救活者甚众。
English: The Yellow River burst its banks, drowning Taikang, flooding thousands of miles, and creating a vast ocean. Ting Zhen conscripted merchant fishing boats and made rafts to carry grain to various places for rescue. Many people were saved by him.

古文：水入善利门，庭珍亲督夫运薪土捍之，不能止，乃颓城为堰。
现代文：水入善利门，庭珍亲临险地督促民工运薪运土防御，还不能挡住洪水，便毁城墙以筑堤防。
English: When the water entered the Zhenli Gate, Ting Zhen personally urged the migrant workers to carry the earth and soil defenses, but they could not stop the flood, so they destroyed the city wall to build an embankment.

古文：水既退，即发民增外防百三十里，人免水忧。
现代文：水退后，征发民工增修外堤一百三十里，使百姓免于水患。
English: After the water receded, migrant workers were recruited and dispatched to build an additional 130-mile outer dike to save the people from flooding.

古文：俄卒于官。
现代文：不久去世。
English: He died soon after.

古文：庭珍性清慎，丞相伯颜尝语人曰： 诸将渡江，无不荒贪，唯我与国宝始终自守。 
现代文：庭珍为官清廉，丞相伯颜曾对人说： 诸将渡江无不贪婪，唯我与国宝始终保持廉洁。 
English: Niizhen is a clean and honest official, and the Minister of Justice, Bo Yan, once said to people: All generals crossing the river are greedy, but I and the national treasure have always maintained cleanliness.

古文：闻者以为知言。弟庭瑞。庭瑞字天表，幼以功业自许，兵法、地志、星历、卜筮无不推究，以宿卫从宪宗伐蜀为先锋。
现代文：庭瑞字天表，自幼就立志要建功立业，对于兵法、地理、星历、卜筮无不研究。加入宿卫军，随宪宗伐蜀，为先锋。
English: Ting Rui Zi Tianbo, from a young age, he was determined to build a career, and studied the art of war, geography, ephemeris, and divination. He joined the Suiwei Army and followed the Qian Zong to attack Shu, as a pioneer.

古文：中统二年，授元帅府参议，留戍青居。
现代文：中统二年，授元帅府参议，留戍青居。
English: In the second year of the unification of Korea, he was awarded the title of marshal and became a councillor.

古文：诸军攻开州、达州，庭端将兵筑城虎啸山，扼二州路。
现代文：蒙军攻开州、达州，庭瑞领兵在虎啸山构筑城堡，控制通往两州的通道。
English: The Mongolian army attacked Kaizhou and Dazhou, and Ting Rui led the troops to build a castle in Tiger Mountain to control the passage to the two states.

古文：宋将夏贵以师数万围之，城当炮，皆穿，筑栅守之，栅坏，乃依大树张牛马皮以拒炮。
现代文：宋将夏贵以数万大军围攻，庭瑞城堡被炮打穿，筑木栅守御；木栅被打坏，就用大树支张牛马皮挡住炮弹。
English: Song besieged Xia Gui with tens of thousands of troops. Ting Rui Castle was pierced by cannons, and a wooden grate was built to defend it. When the wooden grate was damaged, a large tree was used to hold up the cowhide to block the cannonballs.

古文：贵以城中人饮于涧，外绝其水。
现代文：夏贵知道城堡中的饮水是取于城外溪谷，便截断水源。
English: Knowing that the drinking water in the castle came from a valley outside the city, Shagui cut off the water source.

古文：庭瑞取人畜溲沸煮之，泻土中以泄臭，人日饮数合，唇皆疮裂。
现代文：庭瑞则将人畜尿先煮沸，再用土滤去其臭味，军士日饮数合，嘴唇破裂。
English: Ting Rui boiled human and animal urine first, and then filtered it with soil to remove its odor. The sergeant drank several cups a day, and his lips were cracked.

古文：坚守逾月，援兵不敢进。
现代文：就这样坚守一个多月，敌援兵不敢进。
English: In this way, they held out for more than a month, and the enemy reinforcements did not dare to enter.

古文：庭瑞度宋兵稍懈，三分其兵，夜劫贵营，宋兵惊溃，杀都统栾俊、雍贵、胡世雄等五人，斩千余级，庭瑞亦被伤数处。以功授奉议大夫、知高唐州，改濮州尹，迁陕西四川道按察副使。
现代文：庭瑞料知宋兵士气稍松懈，夜间分三路袭击贵营，宋兵大败，杀宋都统栾俊、雍贵、胡世雄等五人，斩士卒千余，庭瑞也数处受伤，因功授奉议大夫、高唐州知州，后改任濮州尹，又升陕西四川道按察副使。
English: Ting Rui learned that the soldiers of the Song Dynasty were a little slack. They attacked the Guizhou camp in three directions at night. The Song soldiers were defeated and killed five people, including the Song Emperor Shunjun, Yong Gui, and Hu Shixiong. More than a thousand soldiers were killed. Ting Rui was also injured in several places. For his merits, he was awarded the title of doctor, Gao Tangzhou Chizhou, and later he was changed to Zhangzhou Yin. He was also promoted to deputy envoy of Shaanxi Sichuan Province.

古文：政过于猛，上官弗便，陷以罪，徙四川屯田经略副使。
现代文：因为政过严，不受上官的喜欢，加罪降为四川屯田经略副使。
English: Because the government was too strict and he was not liked by his superiors, he was further punished and demoted to the rank of deputy envoy of the Sichuan Military Region.

古文：东西川行枢密院发兵围重庆，朝廷知庭瑞练习军事，换成都总管，佩虎符，舟楫兵仗粮储皆倚以办。
现代文：东、西川行枢密院发兵围攻重庆，朝廷知庭瑞习于军事，任命他为成都总管，佩虎符，凡舟船、兵器、粮草都靠他办理。
English: The Privy Council sent troops to besiege Chongqing on the east and west bank of the Sichuan River. The imperial court knew that Rui Xi was a military man and appointed him as the general manager of Chengdu. He wore a tiger badge and was in charge of all ships, weapons, grain and grass.

古文：蜀平，升诸蛮夷部宣慰使，甚得蛮夷心。
现代文：四川平定后，升庭瑞为诸蛮夷部宣慰使，他甚得当地各民族的信任。
English: After the pacification of Sichuan, Sheng Ting Rui served as a messenger of consolation to the barbarian tribes. He gained the trust of the local ethnic groups.

古文：碉门羌与妇人老幼入市，争价杀人，碉门鱼通司击其人。
现代文：碉门羌族人与妇人老幼一同入城买卖，争价杀人，碉门鱼道司逮捕了入城羌民。
English: Qimen Yao people entered the city together with women, children and the elderly to buy and sell, and fought and killed people. Qimen Fish Road Division arrested the Yao people who entered the city.

古文：羌酋怒，断绳桥，谋入劫之。
现代文：羌族酋长大怒，斩断绳索桥，计划入城劫掠。
English: Enraged, the chief of the Yao people cut the rope bridge and planned to enter the city to plunder.

古文：鱼通司来告急，左丞汪惟正问计，庭瑞曰： 羌俗暴悍，以斗杀为勇。
现代文：鱼通司来告急，左丞汪惟正问如何对待，庭瑞说： 羌族人强悍，以争斗杀人为勇。
English: Yu Tongji came to express his concern, Zuo Wang Wei Zheng asked how to deal with him, and Ting Rui said: The Yi people are strong, and they are brave enough to fight and kill.

古文：今如蜂毒一人，而即以门墙之寇待之，不可。
现代文：今如杀他一人，而即当作大敌来对待，这是不行的。
English: It would not do to kill him now and treat him as a mortal enemy.

古文：宜遣使往谕祸福，彼悟，当自回矣。 
现代文：应派人去说明祸福，他们明白了，就会自己回去。 
English: They should send someone to explain the benefits and harms. Once they understand, they will go back on their own.

古文：惟正曰： 使者无过于君。 
现代文：惟正曰： 派遣使臣莫如君。 
English: Wen Zheng said, "You should not send an envoy.

古文：遂从数骑，抵羌界。
现代文：于是庭瑞带数骑到达羌族居住区。
English: As a result, Ting Rui arrived at the Yao residential area with several horses.

古文：羌陈兵以待，庭瑞进前语之曰： 杀人偿死，羌与中国之法同，有司击诸人，欲以为见证耳。
现代文：羌人摆开阵势等待，庭瑞上前同他们说： 杀人偿命，羌与中原之法是相同的。官府逮捕了一些羌人，是想让他们作为见证人。
English: The eunuchs lined up and waited, and Ting Rui stepped forward and said to them, "Killing is for life, and the eunuchs' law is the same as that of the Central Plains. The government arrested some eunuchs in order to use them as witnesses.

古文：而汝即肆无礼，如行省闻于朝，召近郡兵，空汝巢穴矣。 
现代文：而你们蛮不讲理，如行省上报于朝廷，召近郡军队来，会杀尽你们。 
English: And you are quite unreasonable. If you report to the Imperial Court and call the county army to come, they will kill you.

古文：其酋长弃枪弩罗拜曰： 我近者生裂羊脾卜之，视肉之文理何如，则吉其兆，曰： 有白马将军来，可不劳兵而罢。 
现代文：酋长丢掉手中武器，下拜道 ：我近来撕裂羊脾，看肉的纹理如何来判断凶吉，纹理显示： 有白马将军来，可不兴兵而解除对抗。 
English: The chief dropped the weapon in his hand and bowed down, "I recently tore the spleen of a sheep. How can I judge the bad luck by looking at the texture of the meat? The texture shows: If there is a white horse general, I can disengage from the confrontation without raising an army."

古文：今公马果白，敢不从命。 
现代文：今公果然是骑白马，我们不敢不遵从。 
English: Now that the emperor is riding a white horse, we dare not disobey.

古文：乃论杀人者，余尽纵遣之。
现代文：将杀人者论罪，其余释放。
English: Convict the killers and release the rest.

古文：都掌蛮叛，蛮善飞枪，联松枝为牌自蔽，行省命庭瑞讨之。
现代文：并约定：今后交易以碉门为界。官买四川茶叶，而加价卖与羌人，汉羌人都不满。
English: It was also agreed that in the future, transactions would be limited to Qimen. The government would buy Sichuan tea, but sell it at a higher price to the people of Qimen. The people of Han and Qimen were dissatisfied.

古文：庭瑞所射矢，出其牌半竿，蛮惊曰： 何物弓矢如此之力！ 
现代文：庭瑞改变茶引法，汉族人民只要每引向官府交纳钱二缗，便可自由卖与羌人，羌蜀人民都感到方便。以前，运粮是由杨山逆江而上，往往翻船，庭瑞开始设立屯田，免去人们运粮之苦。
English: Ting Rui changed the method of tea importation, and the Han people could freely sell to foreigners as long as they paid two yuan to the government every time they imported tea, which was convenient for the people of Gansu. Previously, grain was transported from Yangshan upstream, often overturned, and Ting Rui began to set up farmlands to relieve people of the pain of transporting grain.

古文：即请服。惟斩其酋德兰酉等十余人，而招复其余民。
现代文：都掌蛮反叛，行省命庭瑞讨平，他只斩酋长德兰酉等十余人，招回逃散人民。
English: He only killed more than ten people, including the chief Delan Yu, and called back the people who had fled.

古文：授叙州等处蛮夷部宣抚使，改潭州路总管。
现代文：授庭瑞为叙州等处蛮夷部宣抚使，又改任潭州路总管。
English: He was appointed as the propaganda envoy of the barbarian and barbarian departments in Shuzhou and other places, and was also appointed as the head of the Tanzhou Road.

古文：时湖广省臣方剥民为功，庭瑞知不可拒，乃辞归关中。
现代文：当时，湖广省臣正以剥削百姓为有功，庭瑞知道不能抗拒他们，便辞职回关中。
English: At that time, the minister of Hubei and Guangxi provinces was exploiting the people, and Ting Rui knew that he could not resist them, so he resigned.

古文：三年，思成都，遂从汉中分家奴往居焉。
现代文：中统三年，庭瑞思念成都，从汉中迁居成都，卒于成都。
English: In the third year of unification, Ting Rui missed Chengdu, moved from Hanzhong to Chengdu, and died in Chengdu.

古文：以疾卒。
现代文：庭瑞初屯住于青居，该地多橘。
English: He later died of illness.

古文：庭瑞初屯青居，其土多橘，时中州艰得蜀药，其价倍常。庭瑞课闲卒，日入橘皮若干升储之，人莫晓也。
现代文：当时中州难以得到蜀药，因而药价比平常贵一倍。庭瑞向士卒征收橘皮，每日若干升，人们不明他征收橘皮的用意何在。
English: At that time, it was difficult for Chuzhou to obtain Shu medicine, so the price of medicine was twice as expensive as usual. Ting Rui levied orange peel on the soldiers, several liters per day, and people did not know what his intention was to levy orange peel.

古文：贾人有丧其资不能归者，人给橘皮一石，得钱以济，莫不感之。
现代文：商人在成都失去资本而不能归家，他给每个商人橘皮一石，使他们有钱回家，受到周济的商人莫不感激。
English: A merchant in Chengdu lost his capital and could not return home. He gave each merchant a stone of orange peel so that they would have money to return home. The merchants who received Zhou's help were very grateful.

古文：家有爱妾，一日见老人与之语，乃其父也，妾以告庭瑞。
现代文：他家有爱妾，有天见爱妾同一位老人谈话，这老人是她父亲。
English: His family had a mistress, and one day the mistress was talking to an old man, who was her father.

古文：召视之，其貌甚似，问： 欲得汝女归耶？ 
现代文：妾告诉庭瑞，庭瑞把那位老人召来，看他的相貌与其爱妾很相像，问他 ：你想你女儿回去吗？ 
English: The concubine told Ting Rui that Ting Rui had called the old man to see if his appearance was similar to that of his beloved concubine, and asked him: Do you want your daughter to go back?

古文：子克修，事裕宗于东宫，出为江南湖北、河北河南、陕西汉中三道提刑按察使。
现代文：老人想到他女儿在侍奉庭瑞，不敢要求女儿与他回去。庭瑞说 ：你女儿在我家，不过是个奴婢，回去出嫁则为良人。 
English: The old man thought of his daughter serving Ting Rui and dared not ask her to return with him. Ting Rui said, "In my family, your daughter is just a slave, but when she returns to get married, she will be a lady."

古文：孙男三人：曰忠，曰质，曰文。王惲王惲，字仲谋，卫州汲县人。
现代文：把他爱妾的梳装盒及卖身契都还给她，让她随父亲回去。当时人认为是难得的事。王恽字仲谋，卫州汲县人。
English: He gave her back the dressing-up box and the deed of sale of his beloved concubine, and let her go back with her father. At that time, people thought it was a rare thing.

古文：曾祖经。
现代文：曾祖父名王经。
English: His great-grandfather was named Wang Jing.

古文：祖宇，仕金，官敦武校尉。
现代文：祖父名王宇，在金朝做过敦武校尉。
English: My grandfather, Wang Yu, was a captain of the Dunwu School in the Jin Dynasty.

古文：父天铎，金正大初，以律学中首选，仕至户部主事。
现代文：父名王天铎，金正大初年，以其精于律学而首选入仕，官至户部主事。
English: His father's name was Wang Tianyao. In the first year of Kim Jong-un University, he was the first to be selected for service due to his proficiency in jurisprudence. He rose through the ranks to become the head of the household department.

古文：惲有材干，操履端方，好学善属文，与东鲁王博文、渤海王旭齐名。
现代文：王恽有才干，品行端正，好学且善于文辞，与东鲁王博文、渤海王旭等齐名。
English: Wang Hui was talented, upright, eager to learn, and good at writing. He was as famous as the King of Donglu, Bo Wen, and the King of Bohai, Wang Xu.

古文：史天泽将兵攻宋，过卫，一见接以宾礼。
现代文：史天泽领兵攻宋，路过卫州，初见王恽就优加礼遇。
English: Shi Tianze led an army to attack Song, passing through Weizhou, and was treated with great courtesy when he first saw Wang Xi.

古文：中统元年，左丞姚枢宣抚东平，辟为详议官。
现代文：中统元年，左丞姚枢任东平宣抚使时，荐举他为评议官。
English: In the first year of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, when Yao Zuo was appointed as the Dongping envoy, he recommended him as a commentator.

古文：时省部初建，令诸路各上儒吏之能理财者一人，惲以选至京师，上书论时政，与渤海周正并擢为中书省详定官。
现代文：当时元朝政府初建，令各路推荐一名善于管理财政的官吏，王恽被推荐至京师。王恽到京后上书评议当时政治，因而与渤海周正并提升为中书省评定官。
English: At that time, the government of the Yuan Dynasty was just beginning to be built, so all roads recommended a government official who was good at managing finances. Wang Xi was recommended to the Beijing division. After Wang Xi arrived in Beijing, he wrote a book to comment on the politics of the time, and thus he and Bohai Zhou Zheng were promoted to the evaluation officer of the Chinese book province.

古文：二年春，转翰林修撰、同知制诰，兼国史院编修官，寻兼中书省左右司都事。
现代文：中统二年转为翰林修撰、同知制诰，兼国史院编修官，不久又兼任中书省左右司都事。
English: In the second year of the unification of China, he was transferred to Hanlin Shuxian, Tongzhi Shijian, and editor-in-chief of the National Academy of History, and soon he also served as the left and right director of the Central Literature Department.

古文：治钱谷，擢材能，议典礼，考制度，咸究所长，同僚服之。
现代文：王恽善于管理财政，识别和任用人材，评议典礼，研考制度，同僚无不佩服。
English: Wang Wei is good at financial management, identification and appointment of human resources, review ceremony, research and examination system. Colleagues are all impressed.

古文：至元五年，建御史台，首拜监察御史，知无不言，论列凡百五十余章。
现代文：至元五年，建御史台，最先拜王恽为监察御史。王恽知无不言，奏论时政一百五十余章。
English: In the fifth year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Imperial Historian's Office was established, and Wang Xi was the first to be appointed as the inspector of the Imperial Historian's Office. Wang Xi knew everything and wrote more than 150 chapters on contemporary politics.

古文：时都水刘晸交结权势，任用颇专，陷没官粮四十余万石，惲劾之，暴其奸利，权贵侧目。
现代文：当时都水刘交结权势，受到重用，损失官粮四十余万石，王恽进行弹劾，揭发其营私谋利的罪恶，权贵们恐惧不安。
English: At that time, Du Shui Liu's power was transferred, he was reused, the loss of official grain was more than 400,000 koku, Wang Xi was impeached, and his crime of self-interest was exposed. The powerful were afraid and uneasy.

古文：又言： 晸监修太庙毕功，特转官锡赏，今才数年，梁柱摧朽，事涉不敬，宜论如法。 
现代文：王恽揭发刘 ：监修太庙，因功特蒙升官赐赏，但仅过几年，太庙的梁柱就腐朽毁坏了。这是对祖宗的不敬，应依法论罪。 
English: Wang Qi exposed Liu: He supervised the renovation of the Great Temple and was rewarded with promotion for his efforts, but after only a few years, the beams and pillars of the Great Temple were rotten and destroyed. This was disrespectful to the ancestors and should be punished according to the law.

古文：晸竟以忧卒。
现代文：忧愤而死。
English: He died of grief and anger.

古文：秩满，陈天祐、雷膺交荐于朝。
现代文：王恽任监察御史期满，陈天佑、雷膺都奏请朝廷挽留。
English: At the expiration of Wang Xi's term of supervision, Chen Tianyou and Lei Xi both appealed to the imperial court to stay.

古文：九年，授承直郎、平阳路总管府判官。
现代文：至元九年，王恽受任为承直郎、平阳路总管府判官。
English: In the ninth year of the Yuan Dynasty, Wang Xi was appointed as the successor of Zheng Naorong and the judge of the General Administration of Pingyang Road.

古文：初，绛之太平县民有陈氏者杀其兄，行赂缓狱，蔓引逮系者三百余人，至五年不决。朝廷委惲鞫之，一讯即得其实，乃尽出所逮系者。
现代文：绛州太平县民陈氏杀其兄，行贿缓刑，株连三百余人，以致历时五年不能判决，朝廷委任王恽去审理此案，一审即得实情，将株连者尽行释放。
English: In Taiping County, Zhangzhou, Mr. Chen killed his brother, bribed and suspended the sentences of more than 300 people, so that it took five years to reach a verdict. The imperial court appointed Wang Qi to try the case. The first trial would get the truth and release the people who were bribed.

古文：时绛久旱，一夕大雨。十三年，奉命试儒人于河南。十四年，除翰林待制，拜朝列大夫、河南北道提刑按察副使，寻改置诸道制下，迁燕南河北道，按部诸郡，赃吏多所罢黜。
现代文：至元十四年任翰林待制，拜为朝列大夫、河南北道提刑按察副使，不久调燕南河北道，巡察诸州郡，罢黜许多贪官污吏。
English: In the 14th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was appointed as the Hanlin-waiting system, and served as the doctor of the imperial line, the vice-envoy of the Henan and North-South Provinces, and the vice-envoy of the North-South Provinces. Soon, he was transferred to Yan'an and South-North Provinces, inspected Zhouzhou County, and dismissed many corrupt officials.

古文：十八年，拜中议大夫、行御史台治书侍御史，不赴。
现代文：十八年拜中议大夫、行御史台治书侍御史，但未赴任。
English: In 18 years, he was appointed as a doctor of the Central Council of State, and served as the acting governor of Taiwan, but he did not take up the post.

古文：太子善其说，赐酒慰喻之。令诸皇孙传观，称其书弘益居多。
现代文：裕宗为皇太子，王恽进呈《承华事略》二十篇，计为：广孝、立爱、端本、进学、择术、谨习、听政、达聪、抚军、崇儒、亲贤、去邪、纳诲、几谏、从谏、推恩、尚俭、戒逸、知贤、审官。
English: Yu Zong was the crown prince, and Wang Xi Jin presented 20 articles of "A Brief Introduction to the History of China" to Yu Zong, including: filial piety, love, originality, further education, choice of skills, careful study, listening to politics, learning to be wise, leading the army, being a scholar, being a wise man, getting rid of evil, learning to be a scholar, being a good student, being a benevolent person, being frugal, being a virtuous person, being a wise man, and being a judge.

古文：十九年春，改山东西道提刑按察副使，在官一年，以疾还卫。
现代文：至元十九年春，改任山东东西道提刑按察副使，仅一年因病回归卫州。
English: In the spring of the 19th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was reappointed as the deputy envoy of Shandong East-West Highway Criminal Investigation, and returned to Weizhou after only one year due to illness.

古文：二十二年春，以左司郎中召。
现代文：二十二年春，召为左司郎。
English: In the spring of 1922, he was called to the position of Sasiro.

古文：时右丞卢世荣以聚敛进用，屡趣之不赴。或问其故，惲曰： 力小任大，剥众利己，未闻能全者。远之尚恐见浼，况可近乎！ 
现代文：当时右丞卢世荣大肆搜括民财而被朝廷重用，因此，虽多次催王恽赴任，他始终不应召，问他为什么，回答说： 卢世荣本无能之辈，而担此理财重任，不过是剥削民众以肥己而已，像这样的人没听说能保持名节的，离他远的人还怕受其不好的影响，同他一块共事又怎能避免！ 
English: At that time, the right-hand man, Lu Shirong, was extensively collecting people's wealth and was reused by the imperial court. Therefore, although he repeatedly urged Wang Yao to take office, he still did not invite him. When asked why, he replied: Lu Shirong was an incompetent generation, and taking on this important financial management task was nothing more than exploiting the people to enrich himself. People like this have not heard of people who can maintain fame, and people who are far away from him are still afraid of being affected by their bad influence. How can you avoid working with him?

古文：既而果败，众服其识。
现代文：卢世荣终于身败名裂，众人都佩服王恂的卓识远见。
English: Lu Shirong was finally disgraced, and everyone admired Wang Yao's foresight.

古文：二十六年，授少中大夫、福建闽海道提刑按察使。
现代文：至元二十六年，授任少中大夫、福建闽海道提刑按察使。
English: In 1869, he was appointed as a junior middle school doctor, and later as the inspector of Fujian Shikaido.

古文：黜官吏贪污不法者凡数十人；察系囚之冤滞者，决而遣之；戒戍兵无得寓民家，而创营屋以居之。
现代文：在任期间，罢黜贪官污吏数十人，查明被下狱的冤屈者并释放归家，禁止戍边士兵不得住民房，自建营房。
English: During his term of office, he dismissed dozens of corrupt officials, identified the wrongdoers who were sent to prison and released to return home, and prohibited soldiers from living in residential buildings and building their own barracks.

古文：每谓为治之本在于得人，乃进言于朝曰： 福建所辖郡县五十余，连山距海，实为边徼重地。而民情轻诡，由平定以来官吏贪残，故山寇往往啸聚，愚民因而蚁附，剽掠村落，官兵致讨，复蹂践之甚，非朝廷一视同仁之意也。
现代文：他常说治国之本在于得人材，建议朝廷： 福建所辖郡县五十余，连山濒海，实为边境重地，但自平定该地区以来，由于官吏的贪残，致使民情不安，往往聚集为寇，一些无知之民也响应附和，以至剽掠村落，加上官兵镇压时又蹂躏百姓更加厉害，违背朝廷一视同仁之意。
English: He often said that the basis of governing the country is to obtain human resources, and suggested to the imperial court: the more than 50 counties and counties under the jurisdiction of Fujian, even the mountains and the coast, are actually important border areas. However, since the pacification of the region, due to the greed of officials, the people are uneasy and often gather as robbers. Some ignorant people also respond to the harmony, and even pillage villages. In addition, when the officers and soldiers suppress, they ravaged the people more severely, violating the imperial court's intention to treat everyone equally.

古文：今虽不能一一择任守令，而行省官僚如平章、左丞尚缺，宜特选清望素著、简在帝心、文足以抚绥黎庶、武足以折冲外侮者，使镇静之，庶几治安可期矣。 
现代文：今虽将各处守令不能一一加以选择，但行省的官僚如平章、左丞这些尚空缺官员，应选派素有重望，才干足以安抚百姓，武略足以抵御外侮者，使之镇守边防，也许福建地方可望治理好。 
English: Although it is not possible to select the provincial governors one by one, the provincial bureaucrats such as Pingzhang and Zuo Rong, who are still vacant, should be selected to have high expectations, the ability to appease the people, and the military strategy to resist foreign attacks and guard the border. Perhaps Fujian can be expected to be well governed.

古文：时行省讨剧贼钟明亮无功，惲复条陈列利害曰： 福建归附之民户几百万，黄华一变，十去四五。
现代文：当时行省镇压钟明亮反叛无功，王恽再条陈其利害说 ：福建归附之民户几百万，而黄华一变，十去四五。
English: At that time, the provincial government had no success in suppressing the bell-bright rebellion, and Wang Zhaozhu said: "Fujian has annexed millions of private households, but Huanghua has changed from ten to forty-five.

古文：今剧贼猖獗，又酷于华，其可以寻常草窃视之？
现代文：今强贼猖獗，又加上黄华之变，非同寻常。况该地有溪山之险，东击则西走，出没难测，招之则不降，攻之又不克。
English: Now strong thieves are rampant, coupled with the change of Huanghua, it is extraordinary. Moreover, there is a danger of streams and mountains in this area, eastward attack is westward, it is difficult to predict where to go, if you invite it, it will not fall, and if you attack it, it will not be subdued.

古文：况其地有溪山之险，东击西走，出没难测，招之不降，攻之不克，宜选精兵，申明号令，专命重臣节制，以计讨之，使彼势穷力竭，庶可取也。 
现代文：宜挑选精兵，严申号令，专委重臣统领，用计征讨，使彼势穷力竭，或可能取胜。 
English: It is advisable to select elite soldiers, issue strict orders, lead the special committee of senior ministers, and use measures to solicit them, so that they exhaust their strength, or may win.

古文：二十八年，召至京师。
现代文：至元二十八年，召恽至京师。
English: In the 28th year of the Yuan Dynasty, he was summoned to Beijing as a teacher.

古文：二十九年春，见帝于柳林行宫，遂上万言书，极陈时政。
现代文：二十九年春，叩见帝于柳林行宫，上万言书，透彻陈述当时政治弊端。
English: In the spring of the 29th year, he saw the emperor marching to the palace in Liulin, and wrote thousands of words, thoroughly stating the political drawbacks at that time.

古文：授翰林学士、嘉议大夫。
现代文：授翰林学士，嘉议大夫。
English: He was awarded the title of Hanlin Baccalaureate and the title of Jiajing Doctor.

古文：成宗即位，献《守成书鉴》一十五篇，所论悉本诸经旨。
现代文：成宗即位，王恽进呈《守成事鉴》一十五篇，所论都是根据经书精神。
English: When Chengzong ascended the throne, Wang Yujin presented 15 articles of "Shou Chengji Jian," all of which were based on the spirit of the scripture.

古文：元贞元年，加通议大夫、知制诰同修国史，奉旨纂修《世祖实录》，因集《圣训》六卷上之。
现代文：元贞元年加通议大夫、知制诰同修国史，奉旨纂修《世祖实录》。他从中集录《圣训》六卷进呈皇帝。
English: In the first year of Yuan Zhen, Jia Tong, a scholar, and Zhizhe Tong, a scholar of national history, were ordered to compile the "Ancestor's Record." He compiled the "Hadith" in six volumes and presented it to the emperor.

古文：大德元年，进中奉大夫。
现代文：大德元年，进升中奉大夫。
English: In the first year of the Great Patriotic War, he was promoted to junior doctor.

古文：二年，赐钞万贯。
现代文：二年，赐钞万贯。
English: Two years later, he was given a large sum of money.

古文：乞致仕，不许。
现代文：恽请求退休，未准。
English: His request to retire was not approved.

古文：五年，再上章求退，遂授其子公孺为卫州推官，以便养，仍官其孙笴秘书郎。大德八年六月卒。
现代文：五年再上书乞退，朝廷准许，并授其子公孺为卫州推官，以便就近奉养。大德八年六月卒。
English: Five years later, he sent a letter begging to be allowed to retire, and the court allowed him to do so, as well as awarding his son the title of Prince of the State of Wei, so that he could be raised nearby. He died in June of the eighth year of the Great German Reign.

古文：赠翰林学士承旨、资善大夫，追封太原郡公，谥文定。
现代文：赠翰林学士承旨、资善大夫，进封太原郡公，谥 文定 。
English: Hanlin was given the title of Zhengzhi, Zhisheng, and Jinfeng, Taiyuan County, and the title of Wending.

古文：其著述有《相鉴》五十卷、《汲郡志》十五卷、《承华事略》、《中堂事记》、《乌台笔补》、《玉堂嘉话》，并杂著诗文，合为一百卷。
现代文：王恽的著述有《相鉴》五十卷、《汲郡志》十五卷、《承华事略》、《中堂事记》、《乌台笔补》、《玉堂嘉话》等，并杂著诗文，合为一百卷。
English: Wang Yao's writings include the 50 volumes of the "Historical Compendium," the 15 volumes of the "History of Ku County," the "Summary of the History of Chenghua," the "History of Zhongtang," the "Utai Pen Supplement" and the "Gyoktang Story," as well as his poetry, totaling 100 volumes.

