古文：齐氏后妃之族，多自保全，唯胡长仁以谮诉贻祸，斛律光以地势被戮，俱非女谒盛衰之所致也。
现代文：自从两汉以来，外戚的家庭极少有能保全的，他们倾覆的道路，叛逆作乱的情况，在前史中记载得都很详细。北齐一代后妃的家族，大都能够保全，仅有胡长仁因为进谐言诋毁别人才招来灾祸，斛律光由于拥兵割据被杀，都不是因为女儿失去皇帝宠幸造成的。
English: Since the two Han dynasties, there have been very few families of maternal relatives that can be preserved. The path of their overthrow, the situation of rebellion and disorder, is recorded in detail in the prehistory. The family of the Northern Qi generation of empresses, most of them can be preserved. Only Hu Changren brought disaster because he slandered others, and Bao Riguang was killed because of the separation of troops, not because his daughter lost the favor of the emperor.

古文：今依前代史官，述外戚云尔。
现代文：现依照前代史官的体例，编成《外戚传》。
English: Now, in accordance with the style of the previous historian, it has been compiled into "Makizuchibune."

古文：赵猛，太安狄那人，姊为文穆皇帝继室，生赵郡王琛。
现代文：赵猛，太安狄那人。姐姐是文穆皇帝继室，生下了南赵郡公鱼拯。
English: Zhao Meng, a native of Taian, whose sister was a step-sister of the Emperor Wenmu, gave birth to Gongyu Zheng of Nan Zhao County.

古文：猛性方直，颇有器干。
现代文：产妪性情刚直，很有器度和才干。
English: Puerperal temperament is upright, very organized and talented.

古文：高祖举义，迁南营州刺史，卒。
现代文：直担起兵时，升任南营州刺史，去世。
English: When he took direct charge of raising an army, he was promoted to the post of Nanying State Historian, and passed away.

古文：娄叡，字佛仁，武明皇后兄子也。
现代文：娄敬，字佛仁，武明皇后哥哥的儿子。
English: Yu Jing, also known as Furen, was the son of Empress Wu Ming's brother.

古文：父壮，魏南部尚书。
现代文：父亲娄壮，任魏南部尚书。
English: His father, Zou Zhuang, was a scholar in the southern Wei Dynasty.

古文：叡少好弓马，有武干，为高祖帐内都督。
现代文：娄数少年时喜好弓马，有军事才干，任高祖帐内都督。
English: He was fond of archery and horsemanship when he was a boy, and had military talent. He was appointed governor of Gaozou.

古文：从破尒朱于韩陵，累迁开府仪同、骠骑大将军。
现代文：随从高祖在韩陵打败叁塞，多次升官任开府仪同、骠骑大将军。
English: He followed Gao Zu to defeat Fusai in Hanling, and was promoted several times to the posts of Kaifu Yidong and General of Cavalry.

古文：叡无器干，唯以外戚贵幸，而纵情财色，为时论所鄙。
现代文：他没有什么器度才干，通过外戚的关系作高官受到宠幸，纵情于财色，受到当时人的鄙弃。
English: He had little talent, was favoured as a high-ranking official through the relationship of a relative, indulged in money, and was despised by the people of the time.

古文：皇建初，封东安王。
现代文：皇建初，封为束安王。
English: At the beginning of the reign of Emperor Jianchu, he was given the title of King Sokuan.

古文：高归彦反于冀州，诏叡往平之。
现代文：高归彦在冀州谋反，朝廷命他率军平叛。
English: Gao Guihang plotted a rebellion in Jizhou, and the imperial court ordered him to lead an army to put down the rebellion.

古文：还，拜司徒公。
现代文：回来后，任司徒公。
English: After his return, he was appointed to the post of governor.

古文：周兵寇东关，叡率军赴援，频战有功，擒周将杨□等。
现代文：周军入侵东关，他领兵前往救援，多次立下战功，擒获周将杨尉等人。
English: Zhou's army invaded Dongguan, he led the troops to the rescue, made many war exploits, and captured Zhou general Yang Yu and others.

古文：进大司马，出总偏师，赴悬瓠。
现代文：升为大司马，出朝率领军队，开赴悬瓠。
English: He was promoted to the rank of grand steward, led the army out of the court, and went to the capital.

古文：叡在豫境，留停百余日，侵削官私，专行非法，坐免官。
现代文：娄散在豫州境内，停留了一百多天，侵吞公私财产，专门做违法的事，被定罪免去官职。
English: He stayed in the territory of Yuzhou for more than 100 days, embezzled public and private property, did illegal things, and was convicted and removed from office.

古文：寻授太尉。
现代文：不久授太尉。
English: He was soon promoted to first lieutenant.

古文：薨。
现代文：去世。
English: He died.

古文：尒朱文畅，荣第四子也。
现代文：尔朱文畅，氽朱荣第四子。
English: Zhu Wenchang, the fourth son of Zhu Rong.

古文：初封昌乐王。
现代文：最初封为昌乐王。
English: He was originally given the title of Changle Wang.

古文：其姊魏孝庄皇后，及四胡败灭，高祖纳之，待其家甚厚，文畅由是拜肆州刺史。
现代文：他的姐姐是盐画蓝皇后，四胡被消灭后，高担又纳她作了妃子，对待她家很优厚，因此文畅被任肆业刺史。
English: His older sister was the blue queen of salt painting. After the four Hu were eliminated, Gaotan took her as his concubine and treated her family very generously. Therefore, Wenchang was appointed to write history.

古文：家富于财，招致宾客，既藉门地，穷极豪侈。
现代文：他家广有资财，招了许多门客，门第升高后，更是穷奢极欲。
English: His family has a lot of wealth and has attracted many customers. After the increase in the number of customers, they are even more extravagant.

古文：与丞相司马任冑、主簿李世林、都督郑仲礼、房子远等深相爱狎，外示杯酒之交，而潜谋逆乱。
现代文：和丞相司马任胄、主簿李世林、都督郑仲礼等人交往密切，表面上在一起饮酒赴宴，暗地裹圆谋反叛。
English: He was in close contact with the prime minister, Sima Renjun, the chief secretary, Li Shilin, and the governor, Zheng Zhongli. On the surface, they drank and dined together, but secretly plotted rebellion.

古文：自魏氏旧俗，以正月十五日夜为打竹簇之戏，有能中者，实时赏帛。
现代文：从魏开始形成一种风俗，正月十五的晚上流行打竹簇的游戏，有能打中的，马上赏给丝帛。
English: From the Wei Dynasty, a custom began to form. On the evening of the fifteenth day of the first month, the game of playing bamboo clusters was popular. If anyone could hit it, they would immediately be rewarded with silk cocoons.

古文：任冑令仲礼藏刀于□中，因高祖临观，谋为窃发，事捷之后，共奉文畅为主。
现代文：任胄命健礼在裤中暗藏武器，趁着高祖来观看的时候，计划偷偷刺杀他，事情成功后，一起拥戴文蝗作皇帝。
English: Ren desperately hides a weapon in his trousers and takes advantage of Gaozu's visit to secretly assassinate him. When the plot succeeds, they jointly make Wen Locust emperor.

古文：为任氏家客薛季孝告高祖，问皆具伏。
现代文：驴家的门客薛季耋向直担告发了这件事，审问时都供认不讳。
English: The donkey's doorman, Xue Jizhe, reported the incident to Zhitang, and all of them confessed during the interrogation.

古文：以其姊宠故，止坐文畅一房。
现代文：因为她姐姐受宠幸的缘故，仅给文畅一房定罪。
English: Because of her sister's favor, only Wenchang was convicted.

古文：弟文略，以兄文罗卒无后，袭梁郡王。
现代文：弟弟塞堕，由于兄长塞墨死后没有后代，就继承了凿塑王的爵位。
English: His younger brother, Sepoko, inherited the title of chiseling king due to the fact that there were no descendants after the death of his older brother, Seimo.

古文：以兄文畅事，当从坐，高祖特加宽贷。
现代文：受兄长文畅的牵连，应该一同定罪，直担特别宽大赦免了他。
English: He was implicated by his elder brother, Wenchang, and should have been convicted together. He was pardoned with special clemency.

古文：文略聪明□爽，多所通习。
现代文：文略聪明有才智，各种技艺都通。
English: He is witty, clever, and talented. He is proficient in all kinds of skills.

古文：世宗尝令章永兴于马上弹胡琵琶，奏十余曲，试使文略写之，遂得其八。
现代文：有一次世宗命令章永兴在马上弹奏胡琵琶，演奏了十几曲，试着让文略记下曲谱，共记下了八曲。
English: On one occasion, Shizong ordered Zhang Yongxing to play the Chinese lute on a horse. He played more than a dozen pieces and tried to get Wenli to write down the score. He wrote down a total of eight pieces.

古文：世宗戏之曰： 聪明人多不老寿，梁郡其慎之。 文略对曰： 命之修短，皆在明公。 世宗怆然曰： 此不足虑也。 初高祖遗令恕文略十死，恃此益横，多所凌忽。
现代文：世宗开玩笑说： 聪明人大多不长寿，你可要谨慎从事。 文略回答说： 我命的长短，全在明公。 世宗感慨地说： 这一点你可以不用担心。 当初高祖遣令恕他十次死罪，他依仗这些更加骄横，常常欺凌别人。
English: Sejong jokingly said, "Most of the smart people don't live long, so you have to be careful in what you do." Wen Rong replied, "The length of my life is entirely up to the public." Sejong said with emotion, "You don't have to worry about that." At that time, Gaozhu had pardoned him ten times for capital crimes, which made him more arrogant and often bullied others.

古文：平秦王有七百里马，文略敌以好婢，赌而取之。
现代文：平台王有一匹能跑百里的好马，他用漂亮侍女和平秦王相互打赌，他得到了马。
English: The king of the platform had a good horse that could run for a hundred miles. He bet his beautiful maidservant and King Ping of Qin against each other, and he won the horse.

古文：明日，平秦致请。
现代文：第二天，平秦王请求归还他的马。
English: The next day, King Pingqin asked for his horse back.

古文：文略杀马及婢，以二银器盛婢头马肉而遗之。
现代文：塞监杀了侍女和马，用两个银器盛着侍女的头和马肉给他。
English: The jailer killed the maid and the horse, and gave him the maid's head and the horse's meat in two silver dishes.

古文：平秦王诉之于文宣，系于京畿狱。
现代文：平秦王到文宣帝那裹去告状，把他捉到京畿监狱。
English: King Pingqin went to Emperor Wenzong to file a complaint, and he was arrested and sent to Gyeonggi Prison.

古文：文略弹琵琶，吹横笛，谣咏，倦极便卧唱挽歌。
现代文：在狱中，文略弹奏琵琶，吹起横笛，有时唱起民谣，累了就躺下来唱挽歌。
English: In prison, Wen Liang played the lute, blew the flute, and sometimes sang folk songs. When he was tired, he would lie down and sing elegies.

古文：居数月，夺防者弓矢以射人曰： 不然，天子不忆我。 有司奏之，伏法。
现代文：过了数月，夺取看守的弓箭射人说： 不这样，皇上记不起我。 有关部门上奏，被处决。
English: A few months later, the archer who captured the guard said, "No, the emperor can't remember me," and was executed.

古文：文略尝大遗魏收金，请为其父作佳传，收论尒朱荣比韦、彭、伊、霍，盖由是也。
现代文：塞堕曾经送给馥业大量金钱，请他为父亲作一篇好传，麸业在传记中把叁朱荣比作韦、彭、伊、霍，就是由于这缘故。
English: Zeku once gave Xingye a large amount of money and asked him to write a good biography of his father. It was for this reason that Xingye compared Zou Zhu Rong to Wei, Peng, Yi and Huo in his biography.

古文：郑仲礼，荥阳开封人，魏鸿胪严庶子也。
现代文：郑仲礼，莹墨迩旦人，魏鸿胪卿翅屋的庶子。
English: Zheng Zhongli, a native of Yingmo County, was the illegitimate son of Wei Hongxuanqing Yingya.

古文：少轻险，有膂力。
现代文：年少时轻浮狠毒，有气力。
English: When he was young, he was playful, mischievous and energetic.

古文：高祖嬖宠其姊，以亲戚被昵，擢帐内都督。
现代文：直担宠爱他的姐姐，由于姐弟关系也受到高祖的喜爱，提拔为帐内都督。
English: His beloved sister, who was directly responsible for him, was also loved by Gao Zu due to the brother-sister relationship, and was promoted to the governor of the household.

古文：尝执高祖弓刀，出入随从。
现代文：曾经拿着高祖的弓箭佩刀，出入跟随。
English: He used to carry his ancestor's bow and arrows, wear a sword, and follow him in and out.

古文：任冑为好酒不忧公事，高祖责之，冑惧，谋为逆。
现代文：任胄因为好喝酒不顾及公事，被高祖谴责，任胄害怕，图谋反叛。
English: Because Ren Rong liked to drink and did not care about public affairs, he was condemned by Gao Zu. Ren Rong was afraid and plotted to rebel.

古文：赖武明娄后为请，故仲礼死，不及其家。
现代文：仲礼也参与其事，幸亏武明娄皇后替他求情，所以仅杀了仲礼一人，没有牵连到他的家族。
English: Zhongli was also involved in the matter. Fortunately, Empress Wu Mingshan interceded on his behalf, so he only killed Zhongli and did not implicate his family.

古文：李祖升，赵国平棘人，显祖李皇后之长兄。
现代文：李超垦，盘蝈戳叁人，题担奎皇逅的大哥。
English: Li Chaohui, the eldest brother of the founder of Li Chaohui, the founder of Li Chaohui.

古文：父希宗，上党守。
现代文：父亲奎益塞，任上墓太守。
English: His father, Kui Yixie, became the tomb's caretaker.

古文：祖升仪容丽，垂手过膝，睦姻好施，文学足以自通。
现代文：担昱相貌俊美，双手垂下来能超过膝盖，内外和睦乐善好施，文学足以自通典籍。
English: Dangdang is good-looking, his hands can reach above his knees when hanging down, he is harmonious and kind at home and abroad, and he is literate enough to read classic books.

古文：仕至齐州刺史，为徒兵所害。
现代文：官至变业刺史，被徒兵杀害。
English: He was killed by an apprentice soldier.

古文：弟祖勋。
现代文：弟弟祖勋。
English: His younger brother, Zuxun.

古文：显祖受禅，除秘书丞。
现代文：显祖接受帝位后，任秘书丞。
English: After Emperor Xianzu's accession to the throne, he served as secretary-general.

古文：及女为济南王妃，除侍中，封丹阳王。
现代文：女儿成为济南王的王妃后，任侍中，封为丹阳王。
English: After her daughter became the queen consort of the King of Jinan, she served as an attendant and was named the King of Danyang.

古文：济南废，为光州刺史。
现代文：济南王被废掉后，改任光州刺史。
English: After the king of Jinan was abolished, he was appointed as the king of Gwangju.

古文：祖勋性贪慢，兼妻崔氏骄豪干政，时论鄙之。
现代文：祖勋本性贪婪轻慢，加上妻子崔氏骄横参预政事，受到时人的鄙视。
English: Zu Xun's greedy and frivolous nature, coupled with his wife Cui's arrogant participation in pre-election politics, was despised by the people at the time.

古文：以数坐赃，免官。
现代文：因为多次贪脏，被罢官。
English: He was removed from office for repeated corruption.

古文：无才干，自少及长，居官皆因内宠，无可称述，卒。
现代文：没什么才干，从小到大，都是由于是外戚才能做官，没有什么值得称道记述的，后去世。
English: He did not have any talent. From childhood to adulthood, he was only able to become an official because he was a relative of a relative. He did not have anything worth mentioning, and then he passed away.

古文：元蛮，魏太师江阳王继子，肃宗元皇后之父也。
现代文：五蛮，毯太师江阳王亘銮之子，卢塞五皇后的父亲。
English: Goman, the son of the carpet master Jiangyang Wang Guanzhong, the father of the fifth queen of Luce.

古文：历光禄卿。
现代文：历任光禄卿。
English: Successive holders of the title of Koroku-kyo.

古文：天保十年，大诛元氏，肃宗为蛮苦请，因是追原之，赐姓步六孤氏。
现代文：型呈十年，大肆诛杀五区家族，卢塞替他苦苦求情，因此赦免了他，赐姓步六孤氏。
English: He was sentenced to ten years in prison for the wanton killing of a family in the Fifth District. Lucé begged for his forgiveness, pardoned him, and gave him the surname Bu Liugou.

古文：寻病卒。
现代文：不久因病去世。
English: He died of illness shortly afterwards.

古文：胡长仁，字孝隆，安定临泾人，武成皇后之兄。
现代文：胡长仁，字孝隆，安定临泾人，武成皇后之兄。
English: Hu Changren, the character Xiaolong, the stable Linyi people, the brother of the Empress Wu Cheng.

古文：父延之，魏中书令。
现代文：父亲胡延之，任魏中书令。
English: His father, Hu Yanzhi, held the post of Wei Zhong Shuling.

古文：长仁累迁右仆射及尚书令。
现代文：长仁多次升迁任右仆射及尚书令。
English: Nagahito was promoted several times to the position of right-hand man and later to that of secretary.

古文：世祖崩，预参朝政，封陇东王。
现代文：世祖去世后，开始参预朝政，被封为陇束王。
English: After the death of his ancestor, he began to participate in pre-imperial politics, and was crowned as the king of Hangeul.

古文：左丞邹孝裕、郎中陆仁惠、卢元亮厚相结托。长仁每上省，孝裕必方驾而来。
现代文：左丞邹孝裕、郎中陆仁惠、卢元亮都和他交往深厚：长仁每次到尚书省，孝裕一定和他并驾到达。
English: Zuo Zeng Rong Xiaoyu, Rong Zhong Lu Reng Hui and Lu Yuan Liang all had a deep relationship with him: every time Nagahito went to Shangshu, Xiaoyu would arrive with him.

古文：省务既繁，簿案堆积，令史欲谘都座，日有百数。
现代文：尚书省事务繁多，文书堆积，令史想向都座请示的事情，每天都有几百起。
English: The Ministry of Education and Culture has a lot of affairs, paperwork is piled up, and there are hundreds of things every day that make history want to request instructions from the capital.

古文：孝裕屏人私话，朝退亦相随，仁惠、元亮又伺间而往，停断公事，时人号为三佞，长仁私游密席，处处追寻。
现代文：孝裕把其他人屏退独自和长仁交谈。退朝时也紧紧跟随，仁惠、元亮又找机会来拜访，把公事都耽搁了，人们把他们叫作三佞，长仁私游或宴会，也到处追随。
English: Takahiro left the others behind to talk to Nagahito alone. When he left the imperial court, he was closely followed by Nagahito's wife, Renhui, and Genryo, who also took the opportunity to visit Nagahito, delaying their official duties. People called them the three emperors. Nagahito's private tour or banquet, they also followed him everywhere.

古文：孝裕劝其求进，和士开深疾之，于是奏除孝裕为章武郡守，元亮等皆出。
现代文：孝裕劝他去求取官职，和士开很忌恨他们，于是奏明朝廷任命孝裕为章武郡太守，元亮等人也都被派往外地。
English: Takahiro advised him to seek an official position, and Shikai hated them very much, so he petitioned the Ming court to appoint Takahiro as the governor of Zhangwu County, and Genryo and others were also sent to other places.

古文：孝裕又说长仁曰： 王阳卧疾，士开必来，因而杀之。
现代文：孝裕又劝长仁说： 王爷假装生病，士开一定会来探望，你就趁机杀了他。
English: Takahiro also advised Nagahito, saying, "If the prince pretends to be ill, Shikai will surely come to visit, so take the opportunity to kill him."

古文：入见太后，不过百日失官，便代其处。 士开知其谋，徙孝裕为北营州建德郡守。
现代文：进宫去见太后，也不过一百多天不当官，以后就可以顶替他的位置了。 和士开知道了他们的阴谋，把孝裕调任北营州建德郡太守。
English: When he went to the palace to meet the empress dowager, he was not an official for more than a hundred days, after which he could take his place. He Shikai learned of their plot and transferred Xiaoyu to the position of the governor of Jiande County, Beiying Province.

古文：后长仁倚亲，骄豪无畏惮。
现代文：后来长仁倚仗是皇亲，骄横而无所畏忌。
English: Later, Nagahito became a close relative of the emperor, arrogant and fearless.

古文：士开出为齐州刺史。
现代文：和士开出任齐州刺史。
English: He and Shikai became the history of Qiuzhou.

古文：长仁怨愤，谋令刺士开，事觉，遂赐死。
现代文：长仁心中怀恨，计划派人去刺杀他，事情败露，被赐死。
English: Nagahito harbored hatred in his heart and planned to send someone to assassinate him. The plot was uncovered and he was sentenced to death.

古文：寻而后主纳长仁女为后，重加赠谥，长仁弟等前后七人并赐王爵，合门贵盛。
现代文：不久后主娶他的女儿为皇后，重新加以追赠并加谧号，他的弟弟先后有七人被赐王爵，满门富贵之极。
English: Not long after, the lord married his daughter to the empress, re-gifted her and gave her a posthumous title. His younger brother was given seven peerages in succession, and was extremely wealthy.

古文：从祖兄长粲。
现代文：同祖堂兄长粲。
English: An ancestral cousin, Nagase.

古文：父僧敬，即魏孝静帝之舅，位至司空。
现代文：父亲僧敬，是魏孝静帝的舅舅，官至司空。
English: His father, Seng Jian, was the uncle of Emperor Wei Xiao Jing, and a high-ranking official.

古文：长粲少而敏悟，以外戚起家给事中，迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：长粲年少时聪明，由于是外戚而初任给事中，升黄门侍郎。
English: When he was young, Nagase was clever, and because he was a relative, he was promoted to the position of Yellow Gate chamberlain.

古文：后主践祚，长粲被□与黄门冯子琮出入禁中，专典敷奏。
现代文：后主即位，允许他和黄门冯于琮可以出入皇宫，专门负责向皇上传送奏章。
English: After the emperor ascended to the throne, he and Huangmen Feng Yuxuan were allowed to enter and leave the imperial palace, and were specifically responsible for delivering the music to the emperor.

古文：世祖崩，与领军娄定远、录尚书赵彦深、和士开、高文遥、领军綦连猛、高阿那肱、仆射唐邕同知朝政，时人号为八贵。
现代文：世担去世后，和领军娄宣远、绿尚书画瞠遝、扭馅、高文遥、领军墓蛆、高阿那肱、仆射卢垦共同执掌朝政，当时人称他们为八贵。
English: After the death of Shetan, he and the leading generals Zou Xuanyuan, Luo Shang Shuxiang Rong, Twisting and Filling, Gao Wenyao, the leading general Tomb Zou, Gao Ananyuan, and Druzha Lu Rong jointly presided over the imperial government. At that time, they were known as the Eight Noblemen.

古文：于后，定远、文遥并出，唐邕专典外兵，綦连猛、高阿那肱别总武任，长粲常在左左，兼宣诏令，从幸晋阳。
现代文：此后，娄定远、高文遥到外地任职，卢邕专门负责外兵，綦连猛、高阿那肱总领武职，旦塞常在皇帝左右，兼管宣布诏令，随从到晋阳。
English: After that, Lu Dingyuan and Gao Wenyao served overseas, Lu Xun was specifically in charge of foreign soldiers, Qian Lianmeng and Gao Ananyuan were in charge of the military, and Dansai was often around the emperor, also in charge of announcing the edict, and followed him to Jinyang.

古文：后主即位，富于春秋，庶事皆归委长粲，长粲尽心毗奉，甚得名誉。
现代文：后主即位时，年富力强，许多事情都交给他办理，他也尽心侍奉，博得了好名声。
English: When the late lord ascended the throne, he was rich and powerful, and many things were entrusted to him to handle. He also served wholeheartedly and gained a good reputation.

古文：又为侍中。
现代文：又任侍中。
English: He also served as a chamberlain.

古文：长仁心欲入处机要之地，为执政不许，长仁疑长粲通谋，大以为恨。
现代文：长仁想入朝执掌大权，没有被当权者允许，他怀疑是长粲合谋对付自己，十分仇恨。
English: Nagahito wanted to enter the imperial court and take over power, but was not allowed by those in power. He suspected that Nagahiro was plotting against him, and was filled with hatred.

古文：遂言于太后，发其阴私，请出为州，后主不得已从焉。
现代文：便上告于太后，揭发垦基的隐私，请求让垦塞到州任职，厘王迫不得已听从。
English: He then appealed to the empress dowager, exposed the private life of Zengji, and requested that Zengce be appointed to a state post. Li Wang had no choice but to obey.

古文：除赵州刺史。
现代文：任赵业刺史。
English: He was appointed as Zhaozhou chief historian.

古文：及辞，长粲流涕，后主亦悯默。
现代文：告别皇上时，长粲痛哭流涕，鲑也因为怜悯而默然不语。
English: When bidding farewell to the Emperor, Nagase cried bitterly, and Mochizuki was silent out of pity.

古文：至州，因沐发手不得举，失音，卒。
现代文：到了赵州，因为洗头发时手举不起来，说不出话而去世。
English: When he arrived in Zhaozhou, he died because he couldn't raise his hand to speak while washing his hair.

