古文：龙张温郭彦郎王宗郎犀浦龙井鱼安天龙曹宽梦青衣
现代文：龙张温郭彦郎王宗郎犀浦龙井鱼安天龙曹宽梦青衣
English: Long Zhang, Wen Guo, Yan Yan, Wang Zonglang, Xai Pu, Long Jing, Yu An, Tian Long, Cao Guang, Meng Qingyi

古文：蛟汉武白蛟浔阳桥王述王植陆社儿长沙女苏颋斗蛟洪氏女洪贞
现代文：蛟汉武白蛟浔阳桥王述王植陆社儿长沙女苏颋斗蛟洪氏女洪贞
English: Wang Shu, Wang Zhi, Lu Sha's son, Changsha woman, Su Xun Dou, Hong family woman, Hong Zhen

古文：老蛟武休潭伐蛟
现代文：老蛟武休潭伐蛟
English: Logging in Wuxutan, Laos

古文：龙
现代文：龙
English: The Dragon

古文：张温
现代文：张温
English: Zhang Wen

古文：王蜀时，梓州有张温者好捕鱼，曾作客馆镇将。
现代文：王蜀的时候，梓州有一个叫张温的人喜欢捕鱼，曾经做客馆的镇将。
English: At the time of Wang Shu, there was a man in Zizhou named Zhang Wen who liked fishing and used to be the mayor of a guesthouse.

古文：夏中，携宾观鱼，偶游近龙潭之下。
现代文：夏天里，他陪着客人看鱼，偶然走近龙潭之下。
English: In the summer, he accompanied the guests to watch the fish and accidentally walked under the Longtan.

古文：热甚，志不快。自入水举网，获一鱼长尺许，鬐鳞如金，拨刺不已。
现代文：这时天热得厉害，心里头很不爽快，他就进到龙潭，撒网捕到一条一尺来长的鱼。这条鱼的鬐和鳞都是金色的，不停地蹦跳。
English: At this time, the weather was very hot and his heart was not at ease, so he went to Longtan and cast a net to catch a foot-long fish. The gills and scales of this fish were golden and kept jumping.

古文：俯岸人皆异之。
现代文：在岸上俯着的人都很惊异。
English: People leaning over on the shore were amazed.

古文：逡巡晦暝，风雨骤作。
现代文：不一会儿，天阴暗起来，风雨骤然而起。
English: In a short time, the sky darkened and the wind and rain suddenly started.

古文：温惶骇，奔走数里，依然烈景。
现代文：张温害怕，跑出去好几里地，风雨依然猛烈。
English: Zhang Wen was scared and ran several miles away. The wind and rain were still fierce.

古文：或曰： 所获金鱼，即潭龙也。 
现代文：有人说，他捉到的那条金鱼，就是一条龙。
English: Some people say that the goldfish he caught was a dragon.

古文：是知龙为鱼服，自贻其患。苟无风雨之变，亦难逃鼎俎矣。
现代文：这才知道，龙因为穿了鱼的衣服，自己给自己惹了麻烦，如果没有风雨的变化，它也很难逃过被煮吃的下场。
English: It turned out that the dragon had got itself into trouble by dressing up as a fish. If there had been no change in the weather, it would have been difficult for it to escape being cooked and eaten.

古文：龙潭取鱼，亦宜戒慎。
现代文：到龙潭打鱼，也是应该千万谨慎才好。
English: When fishing in Longtan, you should also be very careful.

古文：郭彦郎
现代文：郭彦郎
English: Guo Hikoro

古文：世言乖龙苦于行雨，而多窜匿，为雷神捕之。
现代文：世人传说有了过错的龙不敢行雨，大多都到处逃窜藏匿，被雷神追捕。
English: According to legend, dragons that have made a mistake do not dare to rain, and most of them run and hide everywhere, pursued by the god of thunder.

古文：或在古木及楹柱之内，若旷野之间，无处逃匿，即入牛角或牧童之身。
现代文：有的藏在古木和楹柱之内。如果是在旷野间，没有地方躲藏，就可能藏进牛角或者牧童的身上。
English: Some hide in old trees and pillars. If it's in the wilderness and there's nowhere to hide, they might hide in a cow's horn or a shepherd boy's body.

古文：往往为此物所累而震死也。
现代文：常常有被这种龙连累而被雷击死的人或牲畜。
English: People or livestock are often killed by lightning after being entangled by the dragons.

古文：蜀邸有军将郭彦郎者，行舟侠江，至罗云溉。方食而卧，心神恍惚如梦，见一黄衣人曰： 莫错。 
现代文：蜀州官府里有一个叫郭颜郎的军将，行船在侠江上，来到了罗云溉，刚吃完饭躺在那里，心神恍恍惚惚，就象做了一个梦梦见一个黄衣人对他说： 不要把牙合上！ 
English: In the government of Shuzhou, there was a general named Guo Yanlang, who sailed on the Xiaojiang River and came to Luo Yun Irrigation. Just after eating, he lay there, his mind in a trance, as if he had a dream. He dreamed of a man in yellow who said to him: "Don't close your teeth!"

古文：而于口中探得一物而去。
现代文：于是黄衣人就在他的口中找到了一样东西离去了。
English: So the man in yellow found something in his mouth and left.

古文：觉来，但觉咽喉中痛。
现代文：醒来之后，只觉得咽喉有些疼痛。
English: After waking up, I only felt some pain in my throat.

古文：于是篙工辈但见船上雷电晦暝，震声甚厉。
现代文：在他做梦的时候，撑船的篙工们但见船上云雨昏暗，风狂雨怒，雷电震声极大。
English: While he was dreaming, the oarsmen on the boat saw dark clouds and rain, stormy weather, and thunder and lightning.

古文：斯则乖龙入口也。
现代文：这就是犯了过错的龙躲到他嘴里去了。
English: That's where the offending dragon went to hide in his mouth.

古文：南山宣律师，乖龙入中指节，又非虚说。
现代文：南山的宣琴师，犯有过错的龙逃进他的中指节，更不是瞎说。
English: Nanshan's Xuanqin player, the guilty dragon escaped into his middle finger joint, is not nonsense.

古文：所以孔圣之言，迅雷风烈必变，可不敬之乎？ 
现代文：所以孔圣人的话， 雷电迅猛，风雨猛烈，就一定有什么变故 ，能不谨慎对待吗？
English: Therefore, the words of Kong Shengren, lightning is swift and fierce, wind and rain are fierce, there must be some changes, can we not be cautious?

古文：王宗郎
现代文：王宗郎
English: Wang Zongro

古文：大小五十，累累接迹，行入汉江，却过庙所。
现代文：大的几丈长，小的一丈多长，什么颜色的都有，样子有如牛马驴羊，大的小的各占一半，挤挤撞撞地拥入汉江。
English: The big ones are several feet long, the small ones are several feet long, they are of any color, they look like cows, horses, donkeys and sheep, the big ones and the small ones each account for half, and they crowd into the Han River.

古文：往复数里，或隐或见。
现代文：还在经过有寺庙的地方，往往复复，徘徊数里，或隐或现。
English: Still, in places where there are temples, it often repeats, wandering for several miles, either hidden or present.

古文：三日乃止。
现代文：三天之后才停止。
English: It only stopped after three days.

古文：犀浦龙
现代文：犀浦龙
English: Rhino-Purple Dragon

古文：癸酉年，犀浦界田中有小龙青黑色。
现代文：癸酉年，犀浦境内的田地里有一种青黑色的小龙。
English: In the year of the rooster, there was a small blue-black dragon in a field in the territory of Sai Pu.

古文：割为两片，旬日臭败，寻亦失去。
现代文：把它切成两片，十来天才腐败发臭，不久也就失去了。
English: Cut it into two slices, it took about ten days to rot and stink, and it was soon lost.

古文：摩呵池大厅西面亦有龙井，甚灵，人不可犯。
现代文：摩呵池大厅的西面，也有一口龙井，特别灵验，谁也不能冒犯。
English: On the west side of the Mokro Hall, there is also a dragon well, which is particularly effective and cannot offend anyone.

古文：井鱼
现代文：井鱼
English: Fish from the well

古文：成都书台坊武侯宅南，乘烟观内古井中有鱼。
现代文：成都书台坊武侯宅的南面有一座乘烟观。观内的古井里有一条鱼。
English: On the south side of the Wuhou residence of Chengdu Shudaifang, there is an observation tower. There is a fish in the old well inside the observation tower.

古文：长六七寸。往往游于井上。
现代文：这条鱼六七寸长，常常游到井上来。
English: This fish is six or seven inches long and often swims up to Inoue.

古文：水必腾涌。
现代文：它每次游上来，水一定会翻腾汹涌。
English: Every time it swims up, the water must be churning.

古文：相传井中有龙。
现代文：相传这井里有龙。
English: Legend has it that there is a dragon in the well.

古文：安天龙
现代文：安天龙
English: An Tianlong

古文：后唐同光中，沧洲民有子母苦于科徭，流移近界封店。
现代文：后唐同光年间，沧州百姓中有这么娘儿俩为了躲避徭役，要迁到附近一个叫封店的地方去。
English: During the post-Tang Dynasty, there were two such daughters among the people of Cangzhou who wanted to move to a nearby place called Fucheng in order to escape the forced labor.

古文：路逢白蛇，其子以绳系蛇项，约而行，无何摆其头落。
现代文：路上遇到一条白蛇，那儿子就用绳子系住蛇的脖子，捆绑着它前进。
English: Encountering a white snake on the road, the son tied a rope around the snake's neck and bound it.

古文：须臾，一片白云起，雷电暴作，撮将此子上天空中，为雷火烧杀坠地。而背有大书，人莫之识。
现代文：没有过多长时间，摆来摆去，就把蛇头勒掉了。顷刻之间，一片白云升起，雷电突然炸响，把那儿子撕扯到天空中去，被雷火烧杀之后才又落到地上，而且他的后背上有字，没有人能认识。
English: It did not take long for him to swing around and pull the snake's head off, and all of a sudden, a white cloud rose up, lightning suddenly exploded, tearing the son into the sky, and he was burned by the lightning before he fell to the ground, and there were words on his back that no one could recognize.

古文：忽有一人云，何不以青物蒙之，即识其字。
现代文：忽然有一个人说： 为什么不用青色东西蒙上？蒙上就可以认识那些字了。 
English: Suddenly, one person said, "Why don't you use something blue and cover it up? If you cover it up, you can recognize the words."

古文：遂以青裙被之。
现代文：于是就用一件青色裙子盖上了。
English: So I covered it with a blue dress.

古文：有识字读之曰： 此人杀害安天龙，为天神所诛。 
现代文：有一个识字的人读后说： 这个人杀害了安天龙，被天神处死了。 
English: A literate person read it and said: This man killed An Tianlong and was executed by the gods.

古文：葆光子曰： 龙神物也，况有安天之号，必能变化无方。岂有一竖子绳系而殒之？
现代文：葆光子说： 龙是神物，况且它还有 安天 的尊号，一定能变化不定，哪能被一个臭小子随便用绳子勒死的道理？
English: Photon Thief said, "Dragon is a divine being, moreover, it also has the honorific name of An Tian. It can certainly change and fluctuate. How can it be strangled by a rascal with a rope?

古文：遽致天人之罚。斯又何哉！ 
现代文：马上就遭到天人的惩罚，这又算什么呢？ 
English: What does it mean to be immediately punished by the gods?

古文：曹宽
现代文：曹宽
English: Cao Guang

古文：石晋时，常山帅安重荣将谋干纪。
现代文：石晋的时候，常山帅安重荣将谋反作乱。
English: At the time of the Stone Jin Dynasty, the Changshan general An Chongrong plotted a rebellion.

古文：其管界与邢台连接，斗杀一龙。乡豪有曹宽者见之，取其双角。
现代文：他的管界与邢台相接处，死了一条龙，乡里有一个叫曹宽的豪士看见了。曹宽割取了龙的双角。
English: At the junction of his jurisdiction and Xingtai, a dragon died, and a gentleman in the village named Cao Guang saw it. Cao Guang cut off the dragon's horns.

古文：前有一物如帘，文如乱锦，人莫知之。
现代文：龙角前面有一种象帘子的东西，花纹如同锦绣，没有人知道这是什么。
English: In front of the dragon's horn there is something like a curtain, the pattern is like brocade, no one knows what it is.

古文：曹宽经年为寇所杀。
现代文：曹宽一年后被贼寇杀死。
English: Cao Guang was killed by bandits a year later.

古文：壬寅年，讨镇州，诛安重荣也。
现代文：壬寅年，朝廷的军队讨伐镇州，杀死了安重荣。
English: In the year of Ren Yin, the imperial army attacked Zhenzhou and killed An Chong Rong.

古文：葆光子读《北史》，见陆法和在梁时，将兵拒侯景将任约于江上。曰： 彼龙睡不动，吾军之龙。甚自跃踊。 遂击之大败，而擒任约。
现代文：葆光子读《北史》，发现陆法和在梁时，率领军队把侯景部将任约抵御在江上，说， 对方的龙正睡觉，不动，我军的龙非常活跃 ，于是就大举进攻，杀得敌军大败，并且生擒了任约。
English: Zou Guangzi read "Northern History" and found that Lu Fa and Zou Liang led the army to resist the Houjing general Ren Ying on the river, saying that the other side's dragon was sleeping and did not move, and our army's dragon was very active, so he launched a large-scale attack, defeated the enemy army, and captured Ren Ying alive.

古文：是则军阵之上，龙必先斗。
现代文：这就说明，军阵之上，一定是龙与龙先斗。
English: This shows that above the army, it must be the dragon that fights the dragon first.

古文：常山龙死，得非王师大捷，重荣授首乎？
现代文：常山的龙死了，莫不是王师大捷，安重荣掉脑袋的先兆？
English: The dragon of Changshan is dead, isn't it a harbinger of Wang Shida Jie, An Chong Rong losing his head?

古文：黄巢败于陈州，李克用脱梁王之难，皆大雨震雷之助。
现代文：黄巢在陈州战败，李克用摆脱梁王之难，都是在雨大雷厉的情况下发生的。
English: Huang Chao's defeat in Chenzhou and Li Keqin's escape from Liang Wang's difficulties both took place in heavy rain.

古文：梦青衣
现代文：梦青衣
English: Sung by Meng Qingyi

古文：孟蜀主母后之宫有卫圣神龙堂，亦尝修饰严洁。
现代文：孟蜀主母后的宫中，有一个 卫圣神龙堂 。这个卫圣神龙堂也同样修饰得庄严整洁。
English: In the palace of Queen Mengshu, there was a sacred dragon hall. This sacred dragon hall was also solemnly and neatly decorated.

古文：盖即世俗之家神也。
现代文：大概这就是世俗间的 家神 。
English: This is probably the secular house god.

古文：一旦别欲广其殿宇，因昼寝，梦一青衣谓后曰： 今神龙意欲出宫外居止，宜于寺观中安排可也。 后欲从之，而子未许。
现代文：有一天她想另外扩建殿宇，于是就在白天睡觉的时候做了一个梦，梦见一位婢女对她说： 现在神龙想要到宫外去住，可以安排到寺观之中。 她想照梦中婢女说的去做，但儿子不让。
English: One day, she wanted to expand the palace, so she had a dream while sleeping during the day. She dreamed that a servant girl said to her, "Now that Shennong wants to live outside the palace, we can arrange for him to live in the temple." She wanted to do as the servant girl said in the dream, but her son wouldn't let her.

古文：后又梦见青衣重请，因选昭觉寺廊庑间，特建一庙。
现代文：后来她又梦见婢女重新向她请求，就选了昭觉寺的厢房之间，在那里特盖了一座庙。
English: Later, she had another dream in which her maidservant asked her again, so she chose between the wing rooms of Shokei-ji Temple and built a special temple there.

古文：土木既就，绘事云毕，遂宣教坊乐。自宫中引出，奏送神曲；归新庙中，奏迎神曲。
现代文：建成之后，她就宣来教坊里的乐工。从宫中把 卫圣神龙 引出的时候，奏《送神曲》；送到新庙时，奏《迎神曲》。
English: After the temple was completed, she sent for the musicians of the temple. When the sacred dragon was brought out from the palace, they played the "Divine Gift" and when it was brought to the new temple, they played the "Divine Greeting."

古文：其日玄云四合，大风振起，及神归位，雨即滂沱。
现代文：那天黑云四布，大风四起，等到神龙归位，大雨就瓢泼般浇下来。
English: On that day, there were black clouds and high winds, and when the divine dragon returned to its place, heavy rain poured down.

古文：或曰： 卫圣神龙出离宫殿，是不祥也。 
现代文：有的人说： 卫圣神龙出离宫殿，这是不祥之兆。 
English: Some people said, "It's an ominous sign that the sacred dragon has left the palace."

古文：逾年，国亡灭而去，土地归庙中矣。
现代文：过了年，国家亡灭，神龙也遁去，土地归庙中所有了。
English: Years passed, the country died, the divine dragon disappeared, and the land became the property of the temple.

古文：蛟
现代文：蛟
English: 

古文：汉武白蛟
现代文：汉武白蛟
English: Hanwu Baijiu

古文：汉武帝恒以季秋之月，泛灵溢之舟于琳池之上，穷夜达昼。
现代文：汉武帝经常在九月的时候，坐上一只小船在琳池上漂荡，不分昼夜。
English: In September, Emperor Hanwu would often take a small boat to float on the Linyi Lake, day and night.

古文：于季台之下，以香金为钩，缩丝纶，以舟鲤为饵，不逾旬曰，钓一白蛟长三四丈，若龙而无鳞甲。
现代文：他在季台之下，用香金做成钓鱼的钩，拴上吊丝，用船上带来的鲤鱼为饵，没过十天，钓上来一条三四丈长的白蛟。白蛟象龙，但是没有鳞甲。
English: Under the bait station, he made a fishing hook with fragrant gold, hooked it with hanging wire, and used the carp brought on the boat as bait. After ten days, he caught a three-to-four-foot-long egret. The egret was like a dragon, but without scales.

古文：帝曰： 非龙也。 
现代文：汉武帝说： 这不是龙。 
English: Emperor Hanwu said: This is not a dragon.

古文：于是付太官为鲜。
现代文：于是就交给太官加工成食品。
English: So it was handed over to the eunuch to be processed into food.

古文：而肉紫青，脆美无伦。
现代文：白蛟的肉是紫青色的，又香又脆，鲜美无比。
English: The meat of the paddlefish is violet-blue, fragrant and crisp, and delicious beyond compare.

古文：诏赐臣下，以为神感所获。
现代文：汉武帝让赐给臣下们分享，臣下都认为这是神灵感知所得到的。
English: Emperor Hanwu gave it to his vassals to share, and the vassals all believed that it was divinely inspired.

古文：后竟不得。
现代文：以后再也没得到过。
English: I never got it again.

古文：浔阳桥
现代文：浔阳桥
English: Shenyang Bridge

古文：浔阳城东门通大桥，常有蛟为百姓害。
现代文：浔阳城的东门通向一座大桥，大桥下常常有蛟为害百姓。
English: The east gate of Fenyang City leads to a large bridge. Under the bridge, there are often moles that prey on people.

古文：董奉疏符沉水中，少日，见一蛟死浮出。
现代文：董奉书写一道符沉到水里不几天，就有一条死蛟浮在水面上。
English: A few days after Dong Feng wrote a letter and sank into the water, a dead dragonfly floated on the surface.

古文：王述
现代文：王述
English: Wang Shu

古文：吴大帝赤乌三年七月，有王述者采药于天台山。
现代文：吴大帝赤乌三年七月，有一个叫王述的人在天台山采药。
English: In July of the third year of Emperor Wu's reign, there was a man named Wang Su who was collecting medicines on Mount Tiantai.

古文：时热，息于石桥下，临溪饮。
现代文：当时天气很热，他在一座石桥下休息。
English: It was a hot day and he was resting under a stone bridge.

古文：忽见溪中有一小青衣长尺余，执一青衣乘赤鲤鱼，径入云中，渐渐不见。
现代文：他到溪边饮水，忽然发现溪水中有一位一尺多高的小婢女，手里拿着一件青衣，乘坐着一条赤色鲤鱼，直接飞进云中，渐渐看不见了。
English: He went to the stream to drink water, and suddenly found a foot-tall maid in the stream, holding a blue dress in her hand and riding a red snapper, flying directly into the clouds and gradually disappearing.

古文：述良久登峻岩四望，见海上风云起，顷刻雷电交鸣，俄然将至。
现代文：王述急忙登上高处向四处观望了好久。他望见海上风云骤起，顷刻间雷电轰鸣，马上就要来雨。
English: Wang Shu hurriedly climbed to a high place and looked around for a long time. He saw the sea wind and clouds suddenly rise, thunder and lightning thundered in an instant, and it was about to rain.

古文：述惧，伏于虚树中。见牵一物如布，而色如漆，不知所适。
现代文：王述心中害怕，趴在一棵空树里，看见那小青衣手里扯着一件颜色如漆，样子象布的东西，不知到哪儿去了。
English: Wang Su was afraid in his heart. He lay down in an empty tree and saw that the little boy was holding a lacquer-colored, cloth-like object in his hand. He didn't know where it had gone.

古文：及天霁，又见所乘之赤鲤小童，还入溪中，乃黑蛟耳。王植
现代文：等到天晴，他又看到骑着赤鲤的小孩回到溪中，原来是一条黑蛟。王植
English: When the weather cleared, he saw a child riding a red heron back into the stream. It turned out to be a black heron. Wang Zhi

古文：王植，新赣人也。
现代文：王植，新赣人。
English: Wang Zhi, from Xincheng.

古文：乘舟过襄江。时晚日远眺，谓友朱寿曰： 此中昔楚昭王获萍实之处，仲尼言童谣之应也。 
现代文：他坐着船过襄江，当时已近傍晚，他眺望着晚日对朋友朱寿说： 这就是以前楚昭王获得萍实的地方。是孔子说童谣应验的地方。 
English: He was crossing the Yangjiang River in a boat. It was already late in the evening. Looking out at the sunset, he said to his friend Zhu Shou: "This is where King Chu Zhao used to get the truth. It is the place where Confucius said the nursery rhyme came true."

古文：寿曰： 他人以童谣为偶然，而圣人必知之。 
现代文：朱寿说， 别人认为童谣是偶然的，而孔子本人肯定是先知的。 
English: Zhu Shou said that others think that the nursery rhyme is accidental, but Confucius himself must be prophetic.

古文：言讫，见二人自岸下。
现代文：说完，二人发现有两个人从岸上下来。
English: After saying this, they found two people coming down from the shore.

古文：青衣持芦杖谓植曰： 卿来何自？ 
现代文：这两个人都穿青色衣服，手持芦杖。他们问王植： 你从哪来？ 
English: The two men, both dressed in blue and carrying reed staffs, asked Wang Zi, "Where are you from?"

古文：植曰： 自新赣而至于此尔。 
现代文：王植说： 我们是从新赣来的。 
English: Wang Zhi said: We are from Xinjiang.

古文：二人曰： 观君皆儒士也，习何典教？ 植、寿曰，各习诗礼。
现代文：那两个人说： 看样子你们俩都是书生，念什么书呢？ 王植和朱寿说： 我们读的是《诗》和《礼》。 
English: The two men said, "It looks like you are both students, what kind of books do you read?" Wang Zhi and Zhu Shou said, "We read "Poetry" and "Rite."

古文：二人且笑曰： 尼父云： 子不语神怪 。又云： 敬鬼神而远之 。
现代文：那两个人笑着说： 孔子说，他不说神怪；又说，敬鬼神而远之，为什么呢？ 
English: The two men smiled and said, "Confucius said that he would not say 'gods and monsters'; he also said that he would respect ghosts and gods, but stay away from them. Why?

古文：何也？ 
现代文：朱寿说： 孔子是圣人。
English: What is it for?

古文：寿曰： 夫子圣人也，不言神怪者。恐惑典教。又言 敬鬼神而远之 者。
现代文：他不说神怪，是恐怕神怪扰惑了典教；他又说敬鬼神而远之，是为了警戒伦理纲常。
English: He didn't say "ghosts" because he was afraid that they might disturb orthodoxy; he also said that he stayed away from worshipping ghosts and gods in order to guard against ethical lapses.

古文：以戒彝伦，其意在奉宗之孝。 二人曰： 善。 又曰： 卿信乎？ 
现代文：他的本意在于教导人们奉行宗亲之孝。 那两个人说： 好！ 又说： 你信吗？ 
English: His intention was to teach people the importance of filial piety.The two men said, "Good!" and, "Do you believe?"

古文：曰； 然。 
现代文：回答说： 是的。 
English: "Yes," he replied.

古文：二人曰： 我实非鬼神，又非人类。
现代文：那两个人说： 我们其实不是鬼神，也不是人类。
English: The two said, "Actually, we are neither ghosts nor gods, nor humans.

古文：今日偶与卿谈，乃天使也。
现代文：今天偶然和你们交谈，是上天让我们这样做的。 
English: If we happen to be talking to you today, it is because God has allowed us to do so.

古文：又谓植曰： 明日此岸有李环、戴政，俱商徒，以利剥万民，所贪未已。上帝恶，欲惩其罪于三日内。
现代文：他们又对王植说： 明天有两个人来，一个叫李环，一个叫戴政，都是做买卖的，以获利剥削万民，贪得无厌，上天讨厌他们，想要在三天之内惩办他们的罪行。
English: They also said to Wang Zhi, "Tomorrow two men will come, one named Li Huan and the other named Dai Zheng. Both of them are traders and exploit the people for profit. They are insatiably greedy. Heaven hates them and wants to punish them for their crimes within three days."

古文：卿无此泊。
现代文：你们不要在这停船了。千万记住！ 
English: Don't stop here. Remember!

古文：慎之。 
现代文：说完两个人没入江中。
English: After saying this, the two men did not fall into the river.

古文：言讫，没于江。寿、植但惊异之，未明何怪也。
现代文：朱寿、王植深感惊异，不知道这是什么鬼怪。
English: Zhu Shou and Wang Zhi were deeply surprised and did not know what kind of ghost it was.

古文：及明，植谓寿曰： 有此之不祥，可移于远矣。 
现代文：到了天亮，王植对朱寿说： 有这种不吉祥的事，咱们还是早点把船弄得远远的吧。 
English: At dawn, Wang Zhi said to Zhu Shou, "With such an inauspicious event, let's get the boat far away as soon as possible."

古文：乃牵舟于上流五有余步。
现代文：就把船撑到上游五百多步的地方。
English: He pushed the boat to a place more than five hundred paces upstream.

古文：缆讫，见十余大舟自上流而至，果泊于植木处。
现代文：拴住船以后，就有十几条大船从上流到来，果然停在王植和朱寿原先停船的地方。
English: After anchoring the boat, more than a dozen large boats came from upstream, and indeed stopped at the place where Wang Zhi and Zhu Shou originally stopped.

古文：植曰： 可便详问其故，要知姓字。 
现代文：王植说： 现在就可以去详细问问，一定要知道他们的姓名。 
English: Wang Zhi said: Now you can go and ask them in detail, you must know their names.

古文：于是寿杖策而问之。
现代文：于是朱寿就过去打听。
English: So Zhu Shou went to inquire.

古文：二商姓字，果如其所言。
现代文：果然是两个商人，他们的姓名果然象那两个人说的一样。
English: They were indeed two merchants, and their names were indeed the same as the two men had said.

古文：寿心惊曰： 事定矣。 
现代文：朱寿心里吃惊地说： 这事肯定了！ 
English: Surprised, Zhu Shou said in his heart: This is certain!

古文：乃谓植曰： 夫阴晦之间，恶人之不善，今夕方信之矣。 
现代文：于是他对王植说： 那阴间也厌恶不行善的人，今天我才相信了！ 
English: Then he said to Wang Zhi, "That netherworld also abhors those who do no good. Today, I have come to believe!"

古文：植曰： 夫言幽明者，以幽有神而神之明，奈何不信乎？ 
现代文：王植说： 所谓 幽明 ，就是因为幽中有神而神自明，为什么不信呢？ 
English: Wang Zhi said: The so-called "darkness and light" is because there is a god in the darkness and the god is self-evident. Why not believe it?

古文：时晋恭帝元熙元年七月也。
现代文：当时是晋恭帝元熙元年七月。
English: It was July of the first year of the reign of Emperor Jingu.

古文：八日至十日，果有大风雷雨。而二商一时沉溺。
现代文：八日到十日，果然有一场大风暴雨，两个商人同时溺水而死。
English: From the 8th to the 10th, there was indeed a big storm, and two merchants drowned at the same time.

古文：植初闻二人之言，私告于人。
现代文：王植刚听到那两个人说的时候，私下告诉了一些人。
English: When Wang Zegang heard what the two men said, he told some people in private.

古文：及是共观者有数百人。
现代文：等到出事的时候，来看的一共有好几百人。
English: By the time the accident happened, several hundred people had come to watch.

古文：内有耿谭者年七十，素谙土事，谓植曰： 此中有二蛟如青蛇，长丈余，往往见于波中，时化游于洲渚，然亦不甚伤物。
现代文：其中有一个叫耿谭的，已经七十岁，平素熟知本地的事情。他对王植说： 这里边有两条很象青蛇的蛟，都一丈多长，常常出现在水波之中，也时常变化成人游览洲渚，但是也不怎么伤害东西。
English: One of them, Geng Tan, who is seventy years old and has always been familiar with local affairs, said to Wang Zhi: There are two dragonflies here that are very similar to the green snake. They are both more than a meter long. They often appear in the water waves. They also change from time to time, but they don't hurt things much.

古文：卿所见二人青衣者，恐是此蛟有灵，奉上帝之命也。 
现代文：你看到的那两个穿青衣的人，恐怕就是这两条蛟有灵，奉上帝的命令而做的。 
English: I'm afraid that the two men in blue you saw are the two living creatures made by God's command.

古文：陆社儿
现代文：陆社儿
English: Lu Sha'er

古文：陆社儿者，江夏民，常种稻于江际。
现代文：陆社儿，是江夏的普通百姓。他平常在江边种稻。
English: Lu Shaer is an ordinary citizen of Jiangxia. He usually grows rice by the river.

古文：夜归，路逢一女子，甚有容质。
现代文：有一天夜里归来，路遇一位女子。
English: One night, returning home, he met a woman on the road.

古文：谓社儿曰： 我昨自县前来，今欲归浦里，愿投君宿。 
现代文：这女子很有几分姿色，她对陆社儿说： 我昨天从县前来，今天想要回浦里，想到你家住一宿。 
English: The woman, who was somewhat attractive, said to Lu Sha'er: "I came from the county yesterday, and today I want to go back to Uri, and I'd like to stay at your house for a night.

古文：然辞色甚有忧容。
现代文：但是她说话时神色忧伤。
English: But she looked sad as she spoke.

古文：社儿不得已，同归，闭室共寝。
现代文：陈社儿不得已，就和她一块回到家里，关门共寝。
English: As a last resort, Chen Shaer went back home with her and slept together behind closed doors.

古文：未几，便闻暴风震雷明照。
现代文：没过多大一会儿，就听到暴风急雨袭来，电闪雷鸣。
English: It didn't take long before we heard the storm approaching, lightning and thunder.

古文：社儿但觉此女惊惶，制之不止。
现代文：陆社儿只觉得此女子惊惧，却不能制止。
English: Lu Sha'er only felt that the woman was frightened, but could not stop her.

古文：须臾雷震，只在帘前。
现代文：须臾之间，一声惊雷大震，有一个什么东西打开了陆社儿的寝室。
English: Suddenly, there was a loud bang, and something opened Lu Shaer's bedroom.

古文：社儿寝室，有物突开。乘电光，见一大毛手拿此女去。
现代文：趁着电光，他看见有一只毛茸茸的大手将那女子捉拿而去。
English: Taking advantage of the lightning, he saw a large furry hand grab the woman and take her away.

古文：社儿仆地，绝而复苏。
现代文：陆社儿吓得倒地昏死过去，好长时间才醒过来。
English: Lu Sha'er was so scared that she fainted, and it took her a long time to wake up.

古文：及明，邻里异而问之。
现代文：等到天明，邻里感到奇怪就来问他。
English: When daylight came, the neighbors felt strange and came to ask him.

古文：社儿告以女子投宿之事。
现代文：陆社儿就把女子投宿的事告诉他们。
English: Lu Sha'er told them about the woman's lodging.

古文：少顷，乡人有渡江来者，云，此去九里，有大蛟龙无首，长百余丈，血流注地，盘泊数亩。有千万禽鸟，临而噪之也。
现代文：少过了一会儿，有渡江来的乡里人说，离北九里的地方，有一条大蛟龙没有头，一百多丈长，血流满地，盘桓践踏了好几亩地，有千万只鸟雀在那里吵闹。
English: After a while, a villager who came across the river said that there was a large dragon without a head, more than a hundred meters long, with blood flowing all over the ground, trampling several acres of land, and tens of millions of birds and finches were noisy there.

古文：长沙女
现代文：长沙女
English: Changsha woman

古文：长沙有人忘姓名。
现代文：长沙有一个人，笔者忘了他叫什么名字。
English: There is a man in Changsha, but I have forgotten his name.

古文：家江边。有女下渚浣衣，觉身中有异，后不以为患，遂妊身。
现代文：他家住江边，有个女儿到江渚洗衣服，觉得身子里有异样的感觉，后来也不觉有什么可担忧的。
English: His family lived by the river, and one of his daughters went to the river to wash clothes. She felt a strange sensation in her body, and later she didn't feel there was anything to worry about.

古文：生三物，皆如虾鱼。
现代文：于是就怀了孕，生下了三个东西，都象虾鱼。
English: So she became pregnant and gave birth to three things, all resembling shrimp.

古文：女以己所生，甚怜之，著澡盘水中养。
现代文：因为是自己生的，她特别怜爱它们，把它们放到澡盆里养着。
English: Because she gave birth to them herself, she is particularly fond of them and keeps them in a bathtub.

古文：经三月，此物遂大，乃是蛟子。
现代文：过了三个月，三个东西长大了，原来是蛟子。
English: After three months, they gradually grew up and turned out to be lice.

古文：各有字，大者为当洪，次者名破阻，小者曰扑岸。
现代文：它们各有名字。大的叫 当洪 ，二的叫 破阻 ，小的叫 扑岸 。
English: They each have a name. The big one is called Danghong, the second one is called Breakthrough, and the small one is called Po Kishi.

古文：天暴雨，三蛟一时俱去，遂失所在。
现代文：天下暴雨，三蛟全都出去，于是就不知到哪儿去了。
English: There was a rainstorm, and the three storks all went out, and I don't know where they went.

古文：后天欲雨，此物辄来。
现代文：后来凡是天要下雨，这三个东西就来。
English: Later, when the sky is about to rain, these lice always want to come back.

古文：女亦知其当来，便出望之。
现代文：那女子也知道它们要来，就出去看它们。
English: The woman knew they were coming, too, and went outside to watch them.

古文：蛟子亦出头望母，良久复去。
现代文：蛟子也探出头来看母亲，很久才离去。
English: The mule also poked his head out to look at his mother, before leaving for a long time.

古文：经年，此女亡后，三蛟一时俱至墓所哭泣，经日乃去。
现代文：过去一年，此女子死了，三蛟同时来到墓地哭泣，整整一天才离去。
English: Last year, when the woman died, the three of them went to the cemetery at the same time to cry, and only left after a whole day.

古文：闻其哭声，状如狗嗥。
现代文：听它们的哭声象狗嗥。
English: The sound of their crying is like the howling of a dog.

古文：苏颋
现代文：苏颋
English: Su Shi

古文：唐苏颋始为乌程尉。
现代文：唐朝的苏颋，当初是乌程尉。
English: Su Shi of the Tang Dynasty was originally Wu Chengyi.

古文：暇日，曾与同寮泛舟沿溪，醉后讽咏，因至道矶寺。
现代文：有一天闲来无事，和几位同僚泛舟沿溪，船上饮酒，醉后讽咏抒怀，于是就来到道矶寺。
English: One day, he and a few colleagues went rafting along the creek, drinking alcohol on the boat, and after getting drunk, he sat down to meditate. Then he came to the Taoist Temple.

古文：寺前是雪溪最深处。
现代文：寺前是溪的最深处，深不可测，还生有蛟螭。
English: Teramae is the deepest part of the stream, unfathomable, and there are still crabs.

古文：此水深不可测，中有蛟螭，代为人患。颋乘醉步行，还自骆驼桥，遇桥坏堕水，直至潭底。
现代文：所以这里历代都是乡间的大患。苏颋趁着醉意登岸步行，走到骆驼桥上的时候，恰巧遇上桥坏了，就掉到水里去，直掉到潭底。
English: Therefore, it has been a big problem in the countryside in all ages. Su Yao took advantage of the drunkenness to walk ashore and walked to the camel bridge. When the bridge was broken, he fell into the water and fell straight to the bottom of the lake.

古文：水中有令人扶尚书出，遂冉冉至水上，颋遂得济。
现代文：水里有一个人把他扶了出来。于是他就慢慢来到水面，就得救了。
English: A man in the water helped him out, and he slowly made his way to the surface and was saved.

古文：斗蛟
现代文：斗蛟
English: Dueling cymbals

古文：唐天宝末，歙州牛与蛟斗。
现代文：唐朝天宝年末，歙州的一头牛与一头蛟相斗。
English: At the end of the Tianbao year of the Tang Dynasty, a cow and a donkey were fighting in Zhangzhou.

古文：初水中蛟杀人及畜等甚众，其牛因饮，为蛟所绕，直入潭底水中，便尔相触。
现代文：当初水中的这头蛟害死许多人和牲畜。那头牛因为到水边饮水，被蛟缠住，直掉入潭底水中。于是牛和蛟就在水底相斗。
English: At the beginning, this dragonfly in the water killed many people and livestock. The cow, because it came to the water's edge to drink, was entangled by the dragonfly and fell straight into the water at the bottom of the pond. So the cow and the dragonfly fought each other under the water.

古文：数日牛出，潭水赤。时人谓为蛟死。
现代文：几天后牛出来了，潭水变红了，人们说是蛟死了。
English: A few days later the cow came out, the pond turned red, and people said the toad was dead.

古文：洪氏女
现代文：洪氏女
English: Hong's daughter

古文：歙州祁门县蛟潭。
现代文：歙州祁门县有一个蛟潭。
English: There is a lake in Qimen County, Zhangzhou.

古文：俗传武陵乡有洪氏女，许嫁与鄱阳黎氏。
现代文：民间相传武陵乡有一个洪氏女，答应嫁给鄱阳的黎氏。
English: According to folk legend, there was a Hong woman in Wuling Township who agreed to marry a member of the Li clan in Shenyang.

古文：将娶，吉日未定，蛟化为男子。貌如其婿，具礼而娶去。
现代文：将要迎娶，还没有定下吉日的时候，潭里的蛟变成一位男子，相貌和洪氏女的女婿一样。放下了聘礼把洪氏女娶了去。
English: When the auspicious date had not yet been set, the dragonfly in the pond turned into a man, with the same appearance as the son-in-law of Hong's daughter. He put down the betrothal gift and married Hong's daughter.

古文：后月余，黎氏始到，知为蛟所娶，遂就蛟穴求之。
现代文：一个多月以后黎氏才到，知道洪氏女是被蛟娶去了，就到蛟洞中去找她。
English: It took more than a month for Lai to arrive. When he learned that Hong's daughter had been married off to a baboon, he went to the baboon's cave to look for her.

古文：于路逢其蛟化为人，容貌殊丽，其婿心疑为蛟。
现代文：在路上遇到了蛟变的人，相貌美得出奇，那女婿怀疑他就是蛟。
English: On the way, he met a metamorphosis person, surprisingly beautiful, and the son-in-law suspected that he was a dragonfly.

古文：视，见蛟窃笑，遂杀之。果复蛟形。
现代文：仔细看，见蛟偷偷地笑，于是就把他杀了，果然现出了蛟的原形。
English: On closer inspection, he saw that the baboon was secretly laughing, so he killed it, and the original form of the baboon was revealed.

古文：又前到蛟穴，见其妻，并一犬在妻之旁。
现代文：那女婿又往前走，来到蛟洞见到妻子，妻子的身边还有一条狗。
English: The son-in-law went further and came to a cave to see his wife, who was accompanied by a dog.

古文：乃取妻及犬以归。
现代文：他就领妻子和狗往回走。
English: He led his wife and dog back.

古文：始登船，而风雨暴至，木石飞腾，其妻及犬，皆化为蛟而去。
现代文：刚上船，风雨突然来临，飞沙走石，他的妻子和那条狗，都变成蛟而离去。
English: As soon as he got on the boat, the wind and rain suddenly came, the sand flew away, and his wife and the dog turned into toads and left.

古文：其婿为恶风飘到余姚，后数年归焉。
现代文：他被大风飘到了余姚，几年后才回来。
English: He was carried by the wind to Yuyao and only returned a few years later.

古文：其后道人许旌阳又斩蛟于此，仍以板窒其穴。
现代文：这以后有个叫许旌阳的道人又在这里斩杀过一头蛟，还用木板堵了它的洞。
English: After that, a Taoist named Xu Shiyang slaughtered a donkey here and blocked its hole with a wooden board.

古文：今天清日朗，尚有仿佛见之。洪贞
现代文：现在，如果天清日朗，仿佛还可以看见。洪贞
English: Now, if the sky is clear and the sun is bright, it seems that I can still see.Hong Zhen

古文：鸡笼山在婺源县南九十五里，高一百六十丈，回环一十五里九十步，形如鸡笼焉。
现代文：鸡笼山在婺源县南九十五里，高一百六十丈，回环一十五里九十步，样子就象个鸡笼。
English: Chicken Cage Mountain is located in the southern ninety-five miles of Luyuan County, with a height of one hundred and sixty meters and a circumference of fifteen miles and ninety paces. It looks like a chicken cage.

古文：唐开元中，有蛟龙变为道人，歙人洪贞以弟子之礼师之。
现代文：唐朝开元年间，有一条蛟龙变成一个道人，歙县人洪贞以弟子之礼，拜他为师。
English: During the first year of the Tang Dynasty, there was a dragon that turned into a Taoist. Hong Zhen, a native of Jixian County, became his disciple and worshiped him as his teacher.

古文：道流将卜居，寻诸名山。
现代文：道人要选择地方居住，到各名山寻找。
English: Taoists should choose a place to live and go to each famous mountain to look for it.

古文：到黄山，贞问此山何如，道流曰： 确而寒。 
现代文：来到黄山，洪贞问道： 这山怎么样？ 道人说： 这个地方贫瘠而且寒冷。 
English: Arriving at Huangshan, Hong Zhen asked: How is this mountain? Taoist said: This place is barren and cold.

古文：次到飞布山，又问之。道流曰： 高而无辅。 
现代文：来到飞布山，洪贞又问，道人说： 这个地方地势太高，孤立周围无山辅助它。 
English: When they came to Feibushan, Hong Zhen asked again, and Taoist said: This place is too high, isolated, and there are no mountains around to support it.

古文：到此山，又问之。
现代文：到了这座鸡龙山，洪贞还问，道人说： 这里最适合做墓地。
English: After arriving at this chicken dragon mountain, Hong Zhen also asked Taoist people: "This is the most suitable place for a cemetery."

古文：道流曰： 此山宜葬。葬者可致侯王。不然，即出妖怪而已。 
现代文：把人葬在这里，他的子孙可以成为王侯。不然的话，就出妖怪。 
English: If a person is buried here, his descendants can become princes. Otherwise, a monster will appear.

古文：贞问其所以，而不之告。
现代文：洪贞问这是为什么，道人不告诉他。
English: When Hong Zhen asked why this was, the Taoists did not tell him.

古文：道流于室中寝，贞入，但见蛟龙，由是候睡觉而辞归。
现代文：道人在屋里睡觉，洪贞进屋，见到的是一条睡蛟。因此，等到道人睡醒，洪贞告辞归来。
English: The Taoist was sleeping in the house, and Hong Zhen entered the house and saw a sleeping dragonfly. Therefore, when the Taoist woke up, Hong Zhen said goodbye and returned.

古文：道流遂入鄱阳而去。
现代文：道人就到鄱阳那边去了。
English: The Taoist went to the Poyang side of the river.

古文：贞归，迁其父于此山。
现代文：洪贞回到家里，把他父亲的坟迁到鸡笼山。
English: Hong Zhen returned home and moved his father's grave to Jiguanshan.

古文：后二年，鄱阳洪水大发，漂荡数千家。
现代文：二年，鄱阳发大水，淹了几千家居民。
English: Two years ago, Shenyang was hit by floods, inundating thousands of residents.

古文：贞本好道，常焚香持念，颇有方术。
现代文：洪贞本来就喜欢道教，常常烧香念经。他很有方术。
English: Originally, Hong Zhen liked Taoism and often burned incense to recite scriptures. He was very skilled in the art of Chinese medicine.

古文：居于祁南之回玉乡，乡人遂称其变现神通，将图非望。
现代文：他住在祁南的回玉乡，乡里的人就说他善于变化，很有神通，说他将来能做大事。
English: He lived in Huiyu Township in southern Anhui Province. The people in the township said that he was good at change, very magical, and that he would be able to do great things in the future.

古文：潜署百官，州中豪杰皆应之。
现代文：他暗中委任文武百官，州中的豪杰都响应。
English: He secretly appointed hundreds of civil and military officials, and the heroes in the state all responded.

古文：后州发兵就捕，获数十人，而贞竟不知所在。
现代文：后来州官发兵来捉拿这些反叛，捉到了好几十人，而洪贞却不知到哪儿去了。
English: Later, state officials sent troops to capture the rebels and caught dozens of people, but Hong Zhen did not know where to go.

古文：老蛟
现代文：老蛟
English: Laos

古文：苏州武丘寺山，世言吴王阖闾陵。
现代文：苏州的武丘寺山，世人传说是吴王阖闾的陵墓。
English: Wuqiu Temple Mountain in Suzhou is said to be the mausoleum of King Wu.

古文：有石穴，出于岩下，若嵌凿状。
现代文：山下有一个洞穴，从岸石中出来、样子象凿出来的。
English: At the foot of the mountain there is a cave, which appears to have been hewn out of the rocks.

古文：中有水，深不可测。
现代文：其中有水，深不可测。
English: There's water in it. It's unfathomable.

古文：或言秦王凿取剑之所。
现代文：有人说这是秦始皇凿取宝剑的地方。
English: Some people say that this is the place where Qin Shihuang chiseled the sword.

古文：唐永泰中，有少年经过，见一美女，在水中浴。
现代文：唐朝永泰年中，有一位年轻人从这里经过，看见一位美丽的少女在水中洗澡。
English: In the middle of the Yongtai year of the Tang Dynasty, a young man passed by here and saw a beautiful girl bathing in the water.

古文：问少年同戏否，因前牵拽。少年遂解衣而入，因溺死。
现代文：少女问年轻人愿不愿意和她一块玩水，说着就上来拽他，于是他就脱掉衣服下去了。他就淹死了。
English: The girl asked the young man if he would like to play in the water with her, saying that she would come up and drag him, so he took off his clothes and went down. He drowned.

古文：数日，尸方浮出，而身尽干枯。其下必是老蛟潜窟，媚人以吮血故也。
现代文：过了几天尸体才浮上来。人们一看，这具尸体已经干枯，那下面一定是老蛟潜藏着的洞穴，是先媚人后吸血造成的。
English: It took a few days for the body to surface, and when people saw it, they thought that the corpse had dried up, and that there must be a cave underneath where the old woman was hiding, and that it was caused by the blood sucking after the seduction.

古文：其同行者述其状云。武休潭
现代文：这是那个年轻人的同行者讲述的。武休潭
English: This was reported by the young man's companion.

古文：王蜀先主时，修斜谷阁道，凤州衙将白。掌其事焉。
现代文：王蜀先主那时候，修建斜谷阁道，凤州的一位衙将白某掌管这件事情。
English: At that time, when Emperor Wang Shu was building the Valley Road, a general from Fengzhou, Bai Mou, was in charge of the project.

古文：至武休潭，见一妇人浮水而来，意其溺者，命仆夫钩至岸滨。
现代文：修到武休潭，看见有一位妇人从水上漂来，以为她是落水被淹，白某就让人把她用钩子勾到岸上来。
English: When he reached Wuxiu Lake, he saw a woman floating on the surface of the water. He thought she had fallen into the water and was drowning, so he asked someone to hook her up to the shore.

古文：忽化为大蛇，没于潭中。
现代文：不料，那妇人忽然变成一条大蛇，没入潭水之中。
English: Unexpectedly, the woman suddenly turned into a big snake and sank into the pool of water.

古文：白公以为不祥，因而致疾。
现代文：白公以为这是不祥之兆，因而就病倒了。
English: Bai Gong thought this was an ominous sign and fell ill.

古文：愚为诵岑参《招北客赋》云： 瞿塘之东，下有千岁老蛟。
现代文：我给他读岑参的《招北客赋》说： 瞿塘之东，下有千岁老蛟。
English: I read Yu Zhen's "Invitation to the North" to him and said, "In the east of Qutang, there is a thousand-year-old dragonfly.

古文：化为妇人，炫服靓妆，游于水滨。 
现代文：老蛟变成妇人，衣服美丽，打扮漂亮，游于水滨。 
English: The toad turned into a woman, beautiful clothes, beautiful dress, swam on the waterfront.

古文：白公闻之，方悟蛟也，厥疾寻瘳。
现代文：白公听了，才恍然大悟，原来自己遇上的不是蛇而是蛟，他的病不久便好了。
English: After listening, Bai Gong suddenly realized that what he had encountered was not a snake, but a centipede. His illness would soon be over.

古文：又内官宋愈昭，自言于柳州江岸，为二三女人所招，里民叫而止之，亦蛟也。
现代文：另外，内官宋愈昭，他自己说有一次他在柳州江岸，有两三个女人招唤他，当地的居民呼唤制止他过去，那也是蛟。
English: In addition, Song Yuzhao, an internal affairs officer, said that once he was on the bank of the Liuzhou River, two or three women invited him, and local residents called out to stop him from going over.

古文：岑赋所言，斯足为证。
现代文：岑参的赋里讲的，是可以为证。
English: What Fu Li said about ginseng can be proved.

古文：伐蛟
现代文：伐蛟
English: Felling stubble

古文：《月令》： 季秋伐蛟取鼍，以明蛟可伐而龙不可触也。 
现代文：《月令》里说： 九月杀蛟捕鳄，以说明蛟可以杀伐而龙不可触动。 
English: "The Monthly" says: In September, kill the dragonfly and catch the crocodile, to show that the dragonfly can be killed and the dragon cannot be touched.

古文：蛟之为物，不识其形状。
现代文：蛟这种东西，不知道它是什么样子。
English: I don't know what it looks like.

古文：非有鳞鬣四足乎？
现代文：没有鳞、鬣和四条腿吗？
English: No scales, fins or four legs?

古文：或曰，虬蜧蛟蝹，状如蛇也。
现代文：有的人说，虬、蜧、蛟、蝹，样子和蛇差不多。
English: Some people say that the dragonfly, dragonfly, dragonfly, dragonfly, looks similar to a snake.

古文：南僧说蛟之形，如马蟥，即水蛭也，涎沫腥粘，掉尾缠人，而噬其血。
现代文：南方的和尚说，蛟的样子象马蟥，就是水蛭，一身又腥又粘的涎沫，掉过尾巴来缠住人吸人的血。
English: Monks in the south say that the dragonfly looks like a horsefly, that is, a leech. It is covered with a thick, sticky foam that falls over its tail to entangle people and suck their blood.

古文：蜀人号为 马绊蛇 。
现代文：蜀人称它为 马绊蛇 ，说它的头象猫和老鼠，有一个白点儿。
English: The people of Shu call it the horse tripping snake, saying that its head is like a cat and a mouse, with a white spot.

古文：头如猫鼠，有一点白，汉州古城潭内马绊蛇，往往害人。
现代文：汉州古城潭内的一条马绊蛇，往往害人。
English: A horse-tripping snake in the lake of the ancient city of Hanzhou often harms people.

古文：乡里募勇者伐之，身涂药，游泳于潭底，蛟乃跃于沙汭，蟠蜿力困，里灌噪以助，竟毙之。
现代文：乡里招募勇敢的人杀它。那人身上涂了药，潜水到潭底，把蛟逼到沙滩上，乡里人欢呼着跑上去相助，到底把它整死了。
English: The villagers recruited a brave man to kill it. The man put medicine on his body, dived to the bottom of the pool, forced the toad onto the beach, the villagers cheered and ran to help, and finally killed it.

