古文：魏武侯与诸大夫浮于西河，称曰： 河山之险，岂不亦信固哉！ 
现代文：魏武侯和大臣们乘船在西河上游玩，魏武侯赞叹道： 河山这样的险峻，边防难道不是很坚固吗！ 
English: Wei Wuhou and his ministers took a boat ride on the West River. Wei Wuhou said with admiration, "Such a steep river, isn't the border very strong?"

古文：王钟侍王，曰： 此晋国之所以强也。
现代文：大臣王钟在旁边陪坐，说： 这就是晋国强大的原因。
English: Minister Wang Zhong sat next to him and said, "This is why Jin is so powerful.

古文：若善修之，则霸王之业具矣。 
现代文：如果再修明政治，那么我们魏国称霸天下的条件就具备了。 
English: If politics were to be reformed, then the conditions would be in place for our country, the State of Wei, to dominate the world.

古文：吴起对曰： 吾君之言，危国之道也；而子又附之，是危也。 
现代文：吴起回答说： 我们国君所说的，是危害国家的话；但是你又附和他，这就更加危险了。 
English: Wu Qi replied, "What our sovereign has said is harmful to the country, but if you follow him, it will be even more dangerous.

古文：武侯忿然曰： 子之言有说乎? 
现代文：魏武侯气愤地说： 你说的话有什么说道吗？ 
English: Wei Wuhou said angrily, "What did you say?

古文：吴起对曰： 河山之险，信不足保也；是伯王之业，不从此也。
现代文：吴起回答说： 河山险峻不足以保全国家，霸业从不在河山险要处产生。
English: Wu Qi replied: The steepness of the mountains and rivers is not enough to protect the country. Domination never occurs at the critical point of the mountains and rivers.

古文：昔者三苗之居，左彭蠡之波，右有洞庭之水，文山在其南，而衡山在其北。
现代文：过去三苗居住的地方，左有彭蠡湖，右有洞庭湖，文山在它的南面，衡山在它的北面。
English: In the past, the place where the three seedlings lived had Penghu Lake on the left, Dongting Lake on the right, Wenshan Mountain to the south, and Hengshan Mountain to the north.

古文：恃此险也，为政不善，而禹放逐之。
现代文：虽然有这些天险依仗，可是政事治理不好，结果大禹赶走了他们。
English: Although there are these natural hazards, the political governance is not good, and as a result, Dayu drove them away.

古文：夫夏桀之国，左天门之阴，而右天溪之阳，庐、睪在其北，伊、洛出其南。
现代文：夏桀的国家，左面是天门山的北麓，右边是天溪山的南边，庐山和峄山在二山北部，伊水、洛水流经它的南面。
English: Xiaqi's country, on the left is the northern foot of Tianmen Mountain, on the right is the southern edge of Tianxi Mountain, Lushan and Lushan are in the northern part of the two mountains, and Yishui and Luoshui flow through its south.

古文：有此险也，然为政不善，而汤伐之。
现代文：有这样的天险可以依靠，但是没有治理好国政，结果被商汤攻破了。
English: There is such a natural hazard that can be relied on, but there is no good governance of national affairs, and as a result, it was broken by Shang Tang.

古文：殷纣之国，左孟门而右漳、釜，前带河，后被山。
现代文：殷纣的国家，左边有孟门山，右边有漳水和滏水，前面对着黄河，后面靠着山。
English: Yinchuan country, on the left is Mengmen Mountain, on the right is Surabaya and Surabaya, facing the Yellow River in front and the mountains behind.

古文：有此险也，然为政不善，而武王伐之。
现代文：虽有这样的天险，然而国家治理不好，遭到周武王的讨伐。
English: Although there was such a natural hazard, the country was not well governed and was attacked by King Zhou Wu.

古文：且君亲从臣而胜降城，城非不高也，人民非不众也，然而可得并者，政恶故也。
现代文：再说您曾经亲自率领我们占领、攻陷了多少城邑，那些城的墙不是不高，人不是不多，然而能够攻破它们，那还不是因为他们政治腐败的缘故吗?
English: Besides, how many cities have you personally led us to occupy and capture? The walls of those cities are not high, and there are not many people, but they can be broken through, is it not because of their political corruption?

古文：从是观之，地形险阻，奚足以霸王矣! 武侯曰： 善。
现代文：由此看来，靠着地形险峻，怎么能成就霸业呢？ 武侯说： 好。
English: From this perspective, relying on the steep terrain, how can you achieve hegemony? Wuhou said: Good.

古文：吾乃今日闻圣人之言也!
现代文：我今天终于听到圣人的高论了！
English: Today, I finally heard the sage's lofty discourse!

古文：西河之政，专委之子矣。 
现代文：西河的政务，就全托付给您了。 
English: The administration of the West River is entirely entrusted to you.

