古文：相如为郎数岁，会唐蒙使略通夜郎、僰中，发巴、蜀吏卒，千人，郡又多为发转漕万余人，用军兴法诛其渠率。巴、蜀民大惊恐。
现代文：相如作郎官几年，适逢唐蒙奉命开通夜郎及西面的焚中，征发巴郡、蜀郡的官吏士卒一千人，郡中又多派出几万人从陆路水道转运粮食，拿战时法处死违令的首领，巴、蜀二郡人民大为惊恐。
English: Similarly, a few years later, when Tang Meng was ordered to set fire to Yelang and Xiamen, he conscripted a thousand officials and officers from Ba County and Shu County, and sent tens of thousands of people from the county to transport grain from the land and waterways. The war-time law was used to execute the leaders who violated the order. The people of Ba County and Shu County were greatly alarmed.

古文：上闻之，乃遣相如责唐蒙等，因谕告巴、蜀民以非上意。
现代文：皇上得知此事，便派遣司马相如责备唐蒙等，趁此告知巴、蜀二郡的人民，说明唐蒙的这些做法并非皇上的本意。
English: When the emperor learned of this, he dispatched Sima Xiangru to reprimand Tang Mengru and inform the people of Ba and Shu two counties, explaining that these practices of Tang Mengru were not the intention of the emperor.

古文：檄曰：告巴、蜀太守：蛮夷自擅，不讨之日久矣，时侵犯边境，劳士大夫。
现代文：檄文说：告知巴郡、蜀郡太守：蛮夷不服汉朝管辖，已有很长时间没有讨伐了。他们时常侵犯边境，使军士将佐劳苦。
English: He said, "Tell the governors of Ba County and Shu County that the barbarians refuse to submit to the jurisdiction of the Han Dynasty and have not fought for a long time. They often violate the border, making the sergeants work hard.

古文：陛下即位，存抚天下，集安中国，然后兴师出兵，北征匈奴，单于怖骇，交臂受事，屈膝请和。
现代文：当今皇上登位，存恤抚养天下，和睦安稳中国。然后兴师出兵，在北方讨伐匈奴，单子恐惧，拱手臣服，屈膝求和。
English: Today's emperor ascended the throne, saved and raised the world, and brought harmony and stability to China. Then, he raised an army and sent troops to fight the Xiongnu in the north. He was terrified, surrendered, and knelt down to seek peace.

古文：康居西域，重译纳贡，稽首来享。
现代文：康居等西域各国，派使臣携带厚礼，进献贡品，参加祭祀。
English: Western countries, such as Kangju, sent envoys to bring gifts, offer tributes, and participate in rituals.

古文：移师东指，闽越相诛；右吊番禺，太子入朝。
现代文：军队指向东方，闽越被平定。安抚右方的番禺，南粤王派遣太子入朝。
English: The army pointed to the east, and Surabaya was pacified. To appease Panyu on the right, the King of Southern Guangdong sent the crown prince to the imperial court.

古文：南夷之君，西僰之长，常效贡职，不敢惰怠，延颈举踵，喁喁然，皆乡风慕义，欲为臣妾，道里辽远，山川阻深，不能自致。
现代文：南夷的君主，西焚的大帅，经常效劳，贡献朝廷，不敢懈怠，盼望早曰归附道义，想为汉家效力，衹因路程遥远，山河阻隔，不能亲自致意。
English: The monarch of Nanyi, the general of Xitan, often serves and contributes to the imperial court, does not dare to slack off, hopes to adhere to morality as soon as possible, wants to serve the Han family, but because of the long distance and the mountains and rivers, he cannot personally pay his respects.

古文：夫不顺者已诛，而为善者未赏，故道中郎将往宾之，发巴、蜀之士各百人以奉币，卫使者不然，靡有兵革之事，战斗之患。
现代文：那些不顺从的已经诛灭，而为善的未曾受到奖赏，因此派遣中郎将前往使其归服。征发巴郡、蜀郡的士卒各五百人，藉以供奉礼品，警卫使者以防止发生意外，没有战争之事，战斗之患。
English: Those who do not obey have been annihilated, and those who do good have not been rewarded, so the middlemen will be sent to subjugate them. Five hundred soldiers from Ba County and Shuxi County will be recruited to provide gifts, guard messengers to prevent accidents, no war, and the dangers of battle.

古文：今闻其乃发军兴制，惊惧子弟，忧患长老，郡又擅为转粟运输，皆非陛下之意也。
现代文：如今听说有兴兵之事，使年轻人感到惊恐，年高者心生忧患，郡中又擅自转运输送粮食物资，这都不是陛下的本意。
English: Now, the emperor heard that the middlemen would actually use the wartime laws to frighten the children of Ba and Shu, and the elders of Ba and Shu were worried about the disaster. Ba and Shu two counties also arbitrarily transported grain for the middlemen, which was not the original intention of the emperor.

古文：当行者或亡逃自贼杀，亦非人臣之节也。
现代文：应征的人有的自杀，有的逃跑，遣也不是臣民所应有的节操。
English: As for those who were conscripted, some ran away, and some killed each other. This was not the discipline of a vassal.

古文：夫边郡之士，闻烽举燧燔，皆摄弓而弛，荷兵而走，流汗相属，惟恐居后，触白刃，冒流矢，议不反顾，计不旋踵，人怀怒心，如报私仇。
现代文：边境郡县的士卒，听说烽火举起，积薪燃烧，都拿上弓箭驰马进击，扛着武器奔向战场，累得汗水直流仍然紧紧相随惟恐落在人后。打起仗来撞击利刃，冒着飞箭，为了道义勇往直前，不向后退，人人怀着愤怒之心，简直如报私仇一样。
English: The soldiers of the border counties and counties, hearing that the bonfire was raised and the accumulated salaries were burning, all took the bows and arrows and galloped into the attack, carrying weapons and running to the battlefield, still following each other closely with sweat and sweat, but fearing to fall behind. They fought to hit the sharp blade, braved the flying arrows, for the sake of morality, they went forward and did not retreat, and everyone was angry, just like revenge.

古文：彼岂乐死恶生，非编列之民，而与巴、蜀异主哉？
现代文：他们难道喜死厌生，非编入户籍的良民，而与巴郡、蜀郡不是同一个君主吗？
English: Aren't they good people who love life and hate death, who are not registered as permanent residents, and aren't they the same monarchs as Ba County and Shu County?

古文：计深虑远，急国家之难，而乐尽人臣之道也。
现代文：而是筹划思考深远，把国家的危难放在前面，乐意履行臣民的义务啊！
English: It's just that they are deep-thinking, have long-term considerations, are preoccupied with the country's peril, and like to do their best to fulfill their duties as subjects.

古文：故有剖符之封，析圭而爵，位为通侯，居列东第。终则遗显号于后世，传土地于子孙，事行甚忠敬，居位甚安佚，名声施于无穷，功烈著而不灭。
现代文：过去有的人剖符封赏，分圭受爵，位至列侯，居住上等住宅，临死为后代留下尊贵的称号，给子孙传下封上，他们生前做事极为忠敬，居官甚为安逸，死后名声延续无穷，功业昭著永不灭绝。
English: In the past, there were people who were awarded with the title of honor, were given the title of knight, were elevated to the rank of vassal, lived in high-class residences, and when they died, they left a noble title for future generations and passed down the seal to their descendants. They were extremely loyal in their lifetime, and they were very comfortable in office. After death, their reputation continues endlessly, and their achievements are known to never be extinct.

古文：是以贤人君子，肝脑涂中原，膏液润野草而不辞也。
现代文：因此贤人君子，以肝脑涂抹中原，拿血肉滋润堑草也在所不惜。
English: Therefore, virtuous people are able to keep their heads above water and their blood flowing freely.

古文：今奉币役至南夷，即自贼杀，或亡逃抵诛，身死无名，谥为至愚，耻及父母，为天下笑。
现代文：如今奉币使到了南夷，即自相残杀，有的逃跑受戮，身死而无美好的名声，应当称为最蠢的人，耻辱涉及父母，被天下人所讥笑。
English: Now, if a mere errand boy went to Nanyi to bear the burden of donating money, he would kill himself, or if he ran away, he would be beaten to death, and he would die without a good name. His nickname should be "The Fool," and his disgrace would implicate his parents, and he would be ridiculed by the whole world.

古文：人之度量相越，岂不远哉！
现代文：人的度量差距难道不是很远吗！
English: Isn't the gap between one's manners and one's talent very wide?

古文：然此非独行者之罪也，父兄之教不先，子弟之率不谨，寡廉鲜耻，而俗不长厚也。
现代文：当然这也不仅仅是那些应征的人的罪过，还在于他们的父兄管教导不严，没有给子弟作出表率，人们没有操守不知羞耻，而风俗也不淳厚了。
English: Of course, this is not only the fault of those who enlisted, but also that their fathers and brothers are not strict in teaching, do not set an example for their children, people do not know shame, and customs are not honest.

古文：其被刑戮，不亦宜乎！
现代文：他们中的有些人遭受诛杀，不也是应该的吗！
English: So it was only natural that they were sentenced to death.

古文：陛下患使者有司之若彼，悼不肖愚民之如此，故遣信使，晓谕百姓以发卒之事，因数之以不忠死亡之罪，让三老孝弟以不教诲之过。
现代文：当今皇上担心使者和官员会像这个样子，哀伤不贤的愚民也是如此，因此派遣诚信的使者把征发士卒的事明白地告知百姓，趁此机会斥责那些不忠逃跑和自杀的蠢人，责怪掌管教化的三老与孝悌不教诲之过。
English: Today, the emperor is worried that the envoys and officials will be like this, as well as the sad and stupid people. Therefore, he sent an honest envoy to clearly inform the people about the recruitment of soldiers, and took this opportunity to rebuke the fools who ran away and committed suicide, and to blame the three elders and filial piety who were in charge of education.

古文：方今田时，重烦百姓，已亲见近县，恐远所溪谷山泽之民不遍闻，檄到，亟下县道，咸谕陛下意，毋忽！
现代文：当前正值耕种时节，特别慎重考虑不去烦劳百姓，已经亲自面告郡旁近县之人，担心边远处所和溪谷山泽的人民不能普遍听到，檄文到达之曰，赶快下发到各个县、道，普遍告知皇上的心意，希望不要忽视。
English: At the current time of the farming season, especially careful consideration was given to not bothering the people. He had already personally addressed the people of the county and nearby counties, worried that the people in remote places and valleys, mountains and lakes could not be widely heard. On the day of the arrival of the letter, it was quickly sent to all counties and provinces to inform the general public of the emperor's will, hoping not to be ignored.

古文：相如还报。
现代文：相如返回报告。
English: After completing his mission, he returned to Beijing to report to Emperor Han.

古文：唐蒙已略通夜郎，因通西南夷道，发巴、蜀、广汉卒，作者数万人。
现代文：唐蒙已经打通了夜郎，趁此开通去西南夷的道路，征发巴、蜀、广汉三郡的士卒，做工的几万人。
English: Tang and Meng had already plundered and opened the Yelang, and took the opportunity to open the road to the southwest of Yiwu, enlisting soldiers from Ba, Shu and Guanghan, with tens of thousands of people participating in road construction.

古文：治道二岁，道不成，士卒多物故，费以亿万计。
现代文：筑道两年，道未修成，士卒多数死亡，耗费的钱用亿来计算。
English: It took two years to build the road, the road was not completed, most of the soldiers died, and the money spent was calculated in hundreds of millions.

古文：蜀民及汉用事者多言其不便。
现代文：蜀郡之民和汉朝当权者多数人说那对国家不利。
English: The people of Shu and those in power during the Han Dynasty had many opponents.

古文：是时邛、莋之君长闻南夷与汉通，得赏赐多，多欲愿为内臣妾，请吏，比南夷。
现代文：当时印夷和榨的长帅听说南夷与汉朝交往，得到的赏赐多，多数情愿成为汉朝的臣国，请求给他们设置官吏，使与南夷同等待遇。
English: At that time, the chieftain of Inyi and Ju heard that the Nanyi had been in contact with the Han Dynasty and received many rewards. Most of them would like to become a vassal state of the Han Dynasty and requested that officials be set up for them so that they would be treated the same as the Nanyi.

古文：上问相如，相如曰： 邛、莋、冉、駹者近署，道易通，异时尝通为郡县矣，至汉兴而罢。
现代文：天子询问翅扣，扭迦说： 印、榨、冉、骁这些夷族靠近蜀郡，道路也容易开通，秦朝时曾经开通置为郡县，到汉朝建立后罢废。
English: Tianzi inquired about the wing buckle, and Duijia said: Ying, Ju, Ran, and Zou, these barbarians are close to Shu County, and the road is also easy to open. During the Qin Dynasty, it was opened and placed as a county, but it was abolished after the establishment of the Han Dynasty.

古文：今诚复通，为置县，愈于南夷。 
现代文：现在如果又开通它，给设置郡县，胜过南夷。 
English: Now, if it is opened again, it will be better to set up county-by-county rather than south-by-south.

古文：上以为然，乃拜相如为中郎将，建节往使。
现代文：天子认为说得对，于是拜相如为中郎将，持节出使西夷。
English: The son of heaven thought he was right, so he sent an envoy to the Western Isles.

古文：副使者王然于、壶弃国、吕越人，驰四乘之传，因巴、蜀吏币物以赂西南夷。
现代文：副使有王然于、壶充国、吕越人，驾着四辆传车，打算依靠巴、蜀二郡的官吏和财物来拉拢、收买西南夷。
English: The deputy envoy, Wang Ranyu, a native of Kuching and Lv Yue, drove four vans and planned to rely on the officials and property of Ba and Shuji counties to win over and bribe the Xuanxi Yi.

古文：至蜀，太守以下郊迎，县令负弩矢先驱，蜀人以为宠。
现代文：到达蜀郡，蜀郡太守及所属官员都到郊界之上迎接，县令亲自背负弓箭在前面引路，蜀郡的人以此为荣。
English: Arriving in Shuxian, the Shuxian grand marshal and his subordinate officials all went to the suburbs to greet them. The county magistrate personally carried a bow and arrow on his back to lead the way. The people of Shuxian are proud of this.

古文：于是卓王孙、临邛诸公皆因门下献牛、酒以交欢。
现代文：于是卓王孙和临印的长辈都凭藉姻亲关系到相如门下，奉献牛肉和酒以讨取相如的欢心。
English: As a result, Zhuo Wangsun and the elders of Linyin were all related to each other through in-laws, and offered beef and wine to win the favor of each other.

古文：卓王孙喟然而汉，自以得使女尚司马长卿晚，乃厚分与其女财，与男等。
现代文：卓王孙感叹不已，自以为让女儿匹配司马长卿晚了，便分给女儿丰厚的财物，与儿子分得的均等。
English: Zhuo Wangsun sighed and thought that it was too late for his daughter to match Sima Changqing, so he gave his daughter a rich property, equal to that of his son.

古文：相如使略定西南夷，邛、莋、再、駹、斯榆之君皆请为臣妾，除边关，边关益斥，西至沫、若水，南至牁牂为徼，通灵山道，桥孙水，以通邛、莋。
现代文：司马长卿派人平定西南夷，印、榨、冉、騵和斯榆的君长都请求臣服于汉朝。于是拆除旧的关隘，新关更加往外扩展，西到沬水、若水，南达烊舸边界，开通灵山道，在孙水上架桥，用以连通工口、榨。
English: Sima Changqing sent people to subdue the southwestern Yi, and the rulers of Ying, Ju, Ran, Yan and Su all requested to submit to the Han Dynasty. Therefore, the old pass was dismantled, and the new pass was further expanded to the west to the borders of Surabaya, Yangshuo and South Dacca, the Lingshan Road was opened, and a bridge was built over Sunshui to connect the gate and the pass.

古文：还报，天子大说。
现代文：返回报告，天子大为高兴。
English: When he returned the report, he was overjoyed.

古文：相如使时，蜀长老多言通西南夷之不为用，大臣亦以为然。
现代文：相如出使时，蜀郡年高者多数说开通西南夷没有用处，大臣也有人认为是这样的。
English: Similarly, when dispatched, most of the elderly people in Shu County said that it was useless to open the Southwest Yiwu, and some ministers also thought so.

古文：相如欲谏，业已建之，不敢，乃著书，借蜀父老为辞，而己诘难之，以风天子，且因宣其使指，令百姓皆知天子意。
现代文：相如想劝谏皇上，又想到本已建议在先，不敢背弃前言，便写文章，藉与蜀郡父老谈话的形式，自己质问对方，用以讽谏天子，且就此宣告其旨令，让百姓知道天子的心意。
English: In the same way, he wanted to persuade Emperor Zeng, and thought that he had already proposed to do so, and did not dare to renege on the preamble, so he wrote an article, and through the form of a conversation with the parents and elders of Shu County, he questioned the other party, used it to ridicule the heavenly son, and then announced his decree, so that the people knew the will of the heavenly son.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：他的文章说：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：汉兴七十有八载，德茂存乎六世，威武纷云，港恩汪濊，群生霑濡，洋溢乎方外。
现代文：汉朝兴起七十八年，恩德美盛已有六代，威武雄壮，恩惠深广，泽及群生，充满中外。
English: In the 78th year of the rise of the Han Dynasty, there have been six generations of Ende Meisheng. They are powerful and strong, and have been blessed with a wide range of benefits. They are full of people from home and abroad.

古文：于是乃命使西征，随流而攘，风之所被，罔不披靡。
现代文：于是派遣使者西征，荒蛮顺流退让，王风覆盖之处，无不随风偃倒。
English: So they sent an emissary to the westward expedition, and they retreated along the wild river, and wherever the king wind covered, they all fell down with the wind.

古文：因朝冉从駹，定莋存邛，略斯榆，举苞蒲，结轨还辕，东乡将报，至于蜀都。
现代文：于是冉夷朝见，骥夷服从，平定榨都，抚恤都，占领斯榆，攻下苞蒲，车马络绎往返，将要柬报朝廷，驱车到达蜀都。
English: As a result, Ran Yi met with the imperial court, Yan Yi obeyed, leveled and squeezed the capital, raised the standard of living of the capital, occupied Shifang, captured Shifang, traveled back and forth by car and horse, reported to the imperial court, and drove to Shudu.

古文：耆老大夫搢绅先生之徒二十有七人，俨然造焉。
现代文：地方上德望高的年长者和高级官员等二十七人，庄严地去拜见使者。
English: Twenty-seven people, including elders and high-ranking officials who were respected for their local virtue, solemnly went to see the messenger.

古文：辞毕，进曰： 盖闻天子之于夷狄也，其义羁縻勿绝而已。
现代文：寒暄毕，就进氰苴： 听说天子对于夷狄，原则上是牵制它们不使断绝关系罢了。
English: After the cold war, they entered the cyanide war: I heard that the Son of Heaven, in principle, restrained them from breaking off relations with the Yidi.

古文：今罢三郡之士，通夜郎之涂，三年于兹，而功不竟。士卒劳倦，万民不赡；今又接之以西夷，百姓力屈，恐不能卒业，此亦使者这累也，窃为左右患之。
现代文：如今使三郡的士卒疲劳，开通去夜郎的道路，至今三年，其功未成，士卒劳苦疲倦，万民供应不能满足；现在又接着开通西夷，百姓力尽，恐怕不能完成此业，造也是使者的牵累，私下为你担忧。
English: At present, the work of opening the road to Yelang, which has made the officers of the three counties tired, has not been completed for three years so far. The officers are tired of hard work, and the supply of the people cannot be satisfied. Now, the work of opening Xiyi has begun again, and the people are exhausted. I am afraid that I cannot complete this work, because it is also the messenger's burden, and I am worried about you in private.

古文：且夫邛、莋、西僰之与中国并也，历年兹多，不可记已。
现代文：况且印、榨、西荚与中原并列，经历的年代已多，记不清了。
English: What's more, printing, pressing, and making zucchini are on the same level as in the Central Plains. I've been doing this for so many years, I can't remember.

古文：仁者不以德来，强者不以力并，意者殆不可乎！
现代文：自古帝王，虽有仁德不能招来，虽有强力不能并吞，想来恐怕足因其道路艰险遥远大概不可能吧！
English: Since the ancient emperors, although there is benevolence can not be attracted, although there is strength can not be swallowed up, I'm afraid it's probably impossible because the road is difficult and far away!

古文：今割齐民以附夷狄，弊所恃以事无用，鄙人固陋，不识所谓。 
现代文：如今分割编户之民的财物而令夷狄之人富足，使帝王所依靠的平民疲困而开拓无用之地，我们见识短浅，不知所说的对或是不对？ 
English: Now they are cutting off the wealth of the good people to increase the wealth of the ruffians, causing the people who rely on the Han Dynasty to suffer from fatigue, and to serve the useless ruffians. Those who despise them are short-sighted and do not know whether what they say is correct.

古文：使者曰： 乌谓此乎？
现代文：使者说： 为什么说这话呢？
English: The messenger said, "Why do you say this?

古文：必若所云，则是蜀不变服而巴不化俗也，仆尚恶闻若说。
现代文：倘若像你们所说的，那就是巴、蜀之民没有必要改变原先那些类似夷狄的服装习俗了。
English: If it is as you say, then there is no need for the people of Ba and Shu to change the original clothing customs that are similar to those of the Yidi.

古文：然斯事体大，固非观者之所覯也。
现代文：我总是不爱听这种话。然而这个事情重大，因此不是旁观者所能了解的。
English: I always hate to hear that, but it's a big deal, so it's not for the onlookers to know.

古文：余之行急，其详不可得闻已。
现代文：我的行程紧急，没有机会给你们捆解释了。
English: My trip is urgent and I haven't had a chance to explain it to you all.

古文：请为大夫粗陈其略：
现代文：请允许我给先生们粗略地陈述一下其中的情形：
English: Allow me to outline the situation for the gentlemen:

古文： 盖世必有非常之人，然后有非常之事；有非常之事，然后有非常之功。
现代文： 大凡世间有异乎寻常的人才，然后才有异乎寻常的事业；有异乎寻常的事业，才有异乎寻常的功勋。
English: There are extraordinary talents in the world, and then there are extraordinary careers; there are extraordinary careers, and then there are extraordinary achievements.

古文：非常者，固常人之所异也。
现代文：异乎寻常，原本是平常的人见到之后以为奇异的。
English: Unusual, originally ordinary people saw it and thought it was strange.

古文：故曰非常之元，黎民惧焉；及臻厥成，天下晏如也。 
现代文：所以说异乎寻常的东西开始出现时，众民感到恐惧；及至它获得成功，天下便平安了。
English: So when something out of the ordinary starts to happen, people get scared; when it succeeds, the world is safe.

古文： 昔者，洪水沸出，泛滥衍溢，民人升降移徙，崎岖而不安。
现代文： 从前洪水翻腾，泛滥漫溢，人民趋高避低到处迁移，地面崎岖不得安居。
English: In the past, floods surged and overflowed, people migrated from place to place, avoiding high places and low places, and people could not live safely on the rugged ground.

古文：夏后氏戚之，乃堙洪原，决江疏河，洒沈澹灾，东归之于海，而天下永宁。
现代文：夏禹为此忧愁，便堵塞洪水疏通江河，分散深水赈济救灾，从此水流向东方，归入大海，天下永宁。
English: Xia Yu was saddened by this, so he blocked the flood, dredged the rivers, and dispersed the deep water to help with the disaster relief. From then on, the water flowed to the east, into the sea, and the world was forever peaceful.

古文：当斯之勤，岂惟民哉？
现代文：当此费力之时，难道辛苦的衹有人民吗？
English: In this time of effort, is it the people who are toiling?

古文：心烦于虑，而身亲其劳，躬傶骿胝无胈，肤不生毛，故休烈显乎无穷，声称浃乎于兹。 
现代文：夏禹烦于思虑，亲自参与劳作，手脚上磨出了老茧，腿上看不到肌肉，皮肤长不出汗毛。因此美好的功业显于万世，美名称颂流传至于今日。
English: Xia Yu was so preoccupied with his thoughts that he took part in the work himself. He developed calluses on his hands and feet, no muscles could be seen on his legs, and no hair could grow on his skin. As a result, his good deeds have been manifested throughout the ages, and his beautiful name has been passed down to this day.

古文： 且夫贤君之践位也，岂特委琐握龊，拘文牵俗，循诵习传，当世取说云尔哉！
现代文： 贤明的君主践履大位，难道仅仅琐碎狭隘，拘泥于文字，牵涉于流俗，沿着古代的传说和记载，讨好当世、人云亦云吗！
English: Is the exercise of power by a wise monarch merely petty and narrow, confined to the written word, involving popular customs, following ancient legends and records, and pleasing the current world and people?

古文：必将崇论谹议，创业垂统，为万世规。
现代文：必将有崇高宏大的议论，能够开创基业传给后代，为子孙万世制定法度。
English: There will surely be lofty and grand discussions that can create a heritage to pass on to future generations and establish laws for future generations.

古文：故驰骛乎兼容并包，而勤思乎参天贰地。
现代文：故其能奔走趋赴而包容众物，勤于思索而与天地并列。
English: Therefore, we must make every effort to be compatible and inclusive, and we must diligently think about turning ourselves into people who can compete with heaven and earth.

古文：且《诗》不云乎： 普天之下，莫非王土；率土之滨，莫非王臣。 
现代文：况且《诗经》中不是说过： 普天之下，没有什么地方不是王的领土；四海之内，没有哪一个不是王的臣民。 
English: Moreover, isn't it said in the Book of Songs: "There is no place under heaven that is not the king's domain; there is no place within the four seas that is not the king's subject."

古文：是以六合之内，八方之外，浸淫衍溢，怀生之物有不浸润于泽者，贤君耻之。
现代文：所以天地之内，八方之外，浸润有余，若有哪个有生命的东西没有受到滋润，那是贤明的君主认为耻辱的事。
English: Therefore, within heaven and earth, beyond the eight directions, there is more than enough infiltration, if there is any living thing that has not been moisturized, it is a matter of shame for a wise monarch.

古文：今封疆之内，冠带之伦，咸获嘉祉，靡有阙遗矣。
现代文：如今疆界之内，卿大夫之类，都得到了幸福，没有缺遣。
English: Nowadays, within the borders, civil and military officials have all gained joy and happiness, and there is no shortage.

古文：而夷狄殊俗之国，辽绝异党之域，舟车不通，人迹罕至，政教未加，流风犹微，内之则犯义侵礼于边境，外之则邪行横作，放杀其上，君臣易位，尊卑失序，父兄不辜，幼孤为奴虏，系累号泣。
现代文：而夷狄乃是习俗不同的地区，辽远隔绝，是流放叛逆的场所，那里车船不通，人迹罕车。政治和教化尚未推行，前代遗留的懿美风尚还没显露，接纳它则在边境上触犯澧义，抛弃它则野蛮横行，肆意杀害他们的君主，颠倒君臣地位，尊卑等级？昆乱，父兄无罪被杀，孤儿沦为奴隶，被抓被抢被关押的人们哭号泣涕。
English: But Yidi is a region of different customs, far away and isolated, a place of exile and rebellion, where cars and ships do not pass, and there are few people. Politics and enlightenment have not yet been implemented, and the beauty of the previous generation has not yet been revealed. If it is accepted, it will violate the border, and if it is abandoned, it will be barbaric, killing their monarchs, reversing the status of monarchs and subjects, and the hierarchy of superiority and inferiority. Kunran, father and brother were killed without guilt, orphans became slaves, and people who were arrested, robbed and imprisoned cried and cried.

古文：内乡而怨，曰： 盖闻中国有至仁焉，德洋恩普，物磨不得其所，今独曷为遗己！ 
现代文：内向中原而怨，说： 听说中原有最美的仁政，德政多而恩惠广，人们没有不合适的处所，今日为何偏偏遗弃了我！ 
English: He turned inward and complained to Zhongyuan, saying, "I heard that Zhongyuan has the most beautiful benevolent government, that there are many virtuous governments and many benefits, and that there are no unsuitable places for people. Why did you abandon me today?

古文：举踵思慕，若枯旱之望雨，盭夫为之垂涕，况乎上圣，又乌能已？
现代文：踮起脚跟想念，犹如枯萎干旱的草木渴望下雨，即使凶狠暴烈的人也会为此垂下眼泪，何况当今皇上圣明，又怎能停止开通夷狄？
English: To stand on one's tiptoes is to yearn for rain, just as withered and parched plants yearn for rain. Even the most ferocious and violent people will shed tears for it. Besides, how can today's Emperor Shengming stop the opening of the Yidi?

古文：故北出师以讨强胡，南驰使以诮劲越。
现代文：所以向北面派出军队讨伐强悍的匈奴，向南面派遣急驰的使者责问强劲的南越。
English: So they sent troops to the north to fight the powerful Xiongnu, and sent fast-moving envoys to the south to challenge the powerful South Vietnamese.

古文：四面风德，二方之君鳞集仰流，愿得受号者以亿计。
现代文：派使者四面宣谕恩德，西夷和西南夷二方的君长像鱼集上流，希望得到爵号的有几亿个。
English: Envoys were sent all over the country to proclaim the prosperity of the country, and the kings of both the West and the Southwest were like fish swimming upstream. Hundreds of millions of people hoped to receive a title.

古文：故乃关沫、若，徼牂牁，镂灵山，梁孙原，创道德之涂，垂仁义之统，将博恩广施，远抚长驾，使疏逖不闭，昒爽暗昧得耀乎光明，以偃甲兵于此，而息讨伐于彼。
现代文：因此才以沬水、若水为关隘，拿胖舸作边界，疏通去囊山的道路，在孙水的源头架桥，开创道德的通路，流传仁义的传统，将要广泛地施行恩惠，安抚和驾驭远方，使疏远者不被关闭，昏暗处有光明照耀，用以平息这儿的战事，停止那儿的征讨。
English: Therefore, it is necessary to take Surabaya and Yangshuo as the bottleneck, take Phu Quoc as the boundary, clear the road to Jinshan, build a bridge at the source of Sunshui, create a moral passage, spread the tradition of benevolence, will widely implement the grace, pacify and control the distant, so that the alienated will not be closed, and there will be light shining in the dark to calm the war here and stop the solicitation there.

古文：遐迩一体，中外禔福，不亦康乎？
现代文：远近一体，中外安康，不是也快乐吗？
English: Far and near are one, both at home and abroad are healthy, aren't they also happy?

古文：夫拯民于沈溺，奉至尊之休德，反衰世之陵夷，继周氏之绝业，天子之急务也。
现代文：救助人民于水深火热之中，尊奉皇帝的美德，扭转末世的衰颓，继承周代开国君主的事业，这就是天子的当务之急。
English: To save the people in the midst of the fire, to honor the emperor's virtue, to reverse the decline of the end of the world, to inherit the cause of the founding monarchs of the dynasty, this is the urgent task of the heavenly son.

古文：百姓虽劳，又恶可以已哉？
现代文：百姓虽然劳苦，又怎么可以停止呢？
English: Even if the people have to work a little, how can they stop?

古文： 且夫王者固未有不始于忧勤，而终于佚乐者也。
现代文： 况且帝王的事业本来就是从忧患开始而以安乐告终的。
English: Moreover, the emperor's career originally began with sorrow and ended with happiness.

古文：然则受命之符合在于此。
现代文：既然如此，那么天命的征兆，全在这裹。
English: If that's the case, then the signs of destiny are all here.

古文：方将增太山之封，加梁父之事，鸣和鸾，扬乐颁，上咸五，下登三。
现代文：将要增泰山之封，加梁父之惮，使车上的鸾铃和协叮当作响，让音乐和歌颂之声张扬，上与五帝同高大，下登三王之上。
English: The seal of Mount Tai will be increased, the father of the beams will be strengthened, the car's bells and chimes will be rung, the music and songs will be promoted, the top will be as high as the five emperors, and the bottom will be higher than the three kings.

古文：观者未睹指，听者未闻音，犹焦朋已翔乎寥廓，而罗者犹视乎薮泽，悲夫！ 
现代文：观看者没看到手指，谛听者没听见声音，好像焦明鸟已经翱翔在辽阔的天空，而张纲捕鸟的入仍在注视着湖泽一样。可悲啊！ 
English: The viewer did not see the fingers, the listener did not hear the sound, as if the Jiaoming bird had already soared in the vast sky, while the Zhanggang bird catcher was still watching the lake. How sad!

古文：于是诸大夫茫然丧其所怀来，失厥所以进，喟然并称曰： 允哉汉德，此鄙人之所愿闻也。
现代文：于是各位大夫茫然丧失了他们来时所抱的期望和进见时要陈述的意见，感叹地一道称颂说： 确实啊汉朝的恩德，这正是我们所希望听到的。
English: The doctors then lost sight of the expectations they had when they came and the opinions they had to express when they advanced their views, and exclaimed with one voice: Indeed, the benevolence of the Han Dynasty, this is exactly what we hoped to hear.

古文：百姓虽劳，请以身先之。 
现代文：百姓虽然劳倦，请让我们以身作则，走在百姓的前面。 
English: Although the people are tired, please let us lead by example and walk ahead of the people.

古文：敞罔靡徙，迁延而辞避。
现代文：精神怅惘而移足后退，过了一会儿而告辞退出。
English: He shifted his feet and retreated in a daze. After a while, he bowed out.

古文：其后人有上书言相如使时受金，失官。
现代文：自那以后，有人上书告发相如出使时接受别人给予的金钱，被免去了官职。
English: Since then, officials have been removed from their posts after complaints that they had accepted money from others while on official business.

古文：居岁余，复召为郎。
现代文：过了一年多，又被召见任为郎官。
English: After more than a year, he was called up again to serve as a steward.

古文：相如口吃而善著书。
现代文：相如口吃却擅长写文章。
English: Same as stuttering, but good at writing articles.

古文：常有消渴病。
现代文：经常患消渴病。
English: Frequent thirst-quenching illnesses.

古文：与卓氏婚，饶于财。
现代文：与卓氏结亲，财产丰饶。
English: He became a relative of the Zhuo family and amassed a large fortune.

古文：故其仕宦，未尝肯与公卿国家之事，常称疾闲居，不慕官爵。
现代文：因此他担任官职，不曾愿意参与公卿和国家之事，托言有病闲居家中，不羡慕官职爵位。
English: Therefore, he held an official position, was not willing to participate in the affairs of the nobility and the state, stayed at home on the pretext of illness, and did not envy the official position and knighthood.

古文：尝从上至长杨猎。
现代文：曾经跟随皇上到长杨宫打猎。
English: He once followed the emperor to the Palace of the Chou Yeung for hunting.

古文：是时天子方好自击熊豕，驰逐野兽，相如因上疏谏。
现代文：这时天子正喜欢亲自击杀熊、野猪，驱马追逐野兽，相如上疏劝谏。
English: At this time, the heavenly son was fond of personally killing bears and wild boars, and driving horses to chase wild beasts.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：疏文写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：臣闻物有同类而殊能者，故力称乌获，捷言庆忌，勇其贲、育。
现代文：我听说有的人类型相同而能力不同，所以论力气称乌获，讲敏捷言庆忌，谈勇猛数孟贲和夏育。
English: I have heard that some people are of the same type but have different abilities, so they talk about strength as "wu guo," about agility as "qing boi," and about bravery as "Meng Yao" and "Xia Yu."

古文：臣之愚，窃以为人诚有之，兽亦宜然。
现代文：我愚昧，私下认为人确实有这种情形，兽类也应该如此。
English: Foolishly, I privately thought that if this was the case for humans, it should also be the case for animals.

古文：今陛下好陵阻险，射猛兽，卒然遇逸材之兽，骇不存之地，犯属车之清尘，舆不及还辕，人不暇施巧，虽有乌获、逢蒙之技不能用，枯木朽株尽为难矣。
现代文：如今陛下喜爱登上险要的地方，射击猛兽，突然遇上特别厉害的野兽，在意料不到的地方使马受惊，冒犯您清道的副车，乘舆来不及旋转车辕，侍卫没机会施展技巧，纵然有乌获、逢蒙那样的技艺，才能得不到发挥，就连枯朽的树木都可以成为祸害了。
English: Nowadays, His Majesty likes to go to dangerous places, shoot fierce beasts, suddenly encounter particularly fierce beasts, frighten horses in unexpected places, offend the sidecar of your clear road, take the wheel of the carriage too late, the guards have no opportunity to perform skills, even if there are skills such as wuhuo and fanzhong, they can not be exerted, and even dead trees can become a scourge.

古文：是胡越起于毂下，而羌夷接轸也，岂不殆哉！
现代文：就像胡人越人起兵于京城，而羌人、夷人也很接近，难道不危险吗？
English: Just as the Hu people and the Yue people raised an army in Beijing, and the Ya people and the Iroquois are also very close, isn't it dangerous?

古文：虽万全而无患，然本非天子之所宜近也。
现代文：即使绝对安全无灾祸发生，然而这原本不是天子所应接近的地方啊。
English: Even if it is absolutely safe and no disaster occurs, however, this is not a place that should be approached by the Son of Heaven.

古文：且夫清道而后行，中路而驰，犹时有衔橛之变。
现代文：况且警戒行人，随后前进，中断道路，驱车而行，也时常出现衔在马中的铁勒和横木折断的事件。
English: Moreover, pedestrians are warned, and then they move forward, interrupt the road, drive away, and there are also frequent incidents of broken tiller and crossbars in the horse.

古文：况乎涉丰草，骋丘虚，前有利兽之乐，而内无存变之意，其为害也不亦难矣！
现代文：何况在繁茂的草丛中经过，到荒丘上奔驰，眼前有猎获野兽的快乐，内心没有应付意外事变的防备，恐怕灾祸也是不难发生的了！
English: What's more, passing through the luxuriant grass and speeding up to the barren hills, with the joy of hunting wild animals in front of you, and without the inner preparedness to deal with unexpected events, I'm afraid disaster is not hard to happen!

古文：夫轻万乘之重不以为安，乐出万有一危之涂以为娱，臣窃为陛下不取。
现代文：看轻帝王的尊位不以平安为乐事，而以行进在万一有危险的道路上为欢乐，我认为陛下不要这样做。
English: I do not think your majesty would do well to underestimate the dignity of an emperor who does not take pleasure in peace, but delights in marching on a road that may be dangerous.

古文：盖明者远见于未萌，而知者避危于无形，祸固多藏于隐微而发于人之所忽者也。
现代文：大概明察的人能远见尚未萌芽的事物，聪明的人能在尚无形迹的情况下避开灾祸，灾祸本来大多隐藏在不易察觉的地方，发生在人们疏忽大意的时候。
English: Presumably, a discerning person can foresee things that have not yet sprouted, and a clever person can avoid disaster without a trace, and disasters are mostly hidden in places that are not easy to detect, and occur when people are negligent.

古文：故鄙谚曰： 家累千金，坐不垂堂。 
现代文：所以俗谚说： 家中积累千金，不在屋檐垂瓦下坐。 
English: Therefore, as the saying goes: Accumulate a lot of money at home, do not sit under the eaves.

古文：此言虽小，可以谕大。
现代文：造话虽然说的是小事，却可以用来比喻大事。
English: Although it is a small thing to make up words, it can be used as a metaphor for big things.

古文：臣愿陛下留意幸察。
现代文：我希望陛下能留心详审这些话。
English: I hope Your Majesty will consider these words carefully.

古文：上善之。
现代文：皇上认为写得好。
English: The emperor thought Sima Xiangru spoke very well.

古文：还过宜春宫，相如奏赋以哀二世行失。
现代文：返回时路过宜春宫，相如献赋，用以哀悯秦二世行为的失误。
English: When returning, he passed by the Yichun Palace, as if it were a gift, to commiserate with the mistakes of Qin II's behavior.

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：他的辞写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：登陂陁之长阪兮，坌入曾宫之嵯峨。临曲江之隑州兮，望南山之参差。
现代文：登上倾斜不乎的长山坡，一并进入宫殿重重嵯峨，凭临曲江弯弯的码头，远望南山层层参差。
English: Climbing up the long hillside, which is not far from sloping, and entering the palace at the same time, you will be overwhelmed by the grandeur. With the curving pier of the Linqu River, you can see the jagged layers of the Nan Mountains in the distance.

古文：岩岩深山之谾々兮，通谷豁乎谷今谺。
现代文：高耸的深山如此绵长，相通山谷深不可及。
English: The towering mountains are so long and deep that the valleys are unreachable.

古文：汨淢靸以永逝兮，注平皋之广衍。
现代文：水流湍急倏息永逝，注入水遏广阔的地域。
English: The torrent of water is relentless, inundating a vast area.

古文：观众树之蓊薆兮，览竹林之榛榛。
现代文：观众树茂密成荫，看竹子片片成林。
English: The audience is shaded by thick trees, watching the bamboo pieces grow into a forest.

古文：东驰土山兮，北揭石濑。
现代文：东奔流过土山，北渡浅流激石。
English: To the east, the earthy mountains gallop, and the jackets walk through the rapids on the sand and rocks.

古文：弭节容与兮，历吊二世。
现代文：欲停还停，凭吊二世。
English: If you want to stop and stop, you have to hang the second.

古文：持身不谨兮，亡国失势；信谗不寤兮，宗庙灭绝。
现代文：作事不谨慎，导致亡国失势；听信谗言不醒悟，宗庙被灭绝。
English: He was not prudent in his work, which led to the downfall of the country and the loss of power; he did not listen to advice, and his ancestral temple was destroyed.

古文：乌乎！
现代文：唉呀！
English: Alas!

古文：操行之不得，墓芜秽而不修兮，魂亡归而不食。
现代文：没有操行的入主，坟墓被污秽没有人修整，魂灵没有去处，没有人供奉。
English: There is no proper entry into the Lord, the graves are filthy and no one cleans them, the souls have no place to go, and there is no one to make offerings.

古文：相如拜为孝文园令。
现代文：相如被任命为孝文园令。
English: It is similar to the order to build a mausoleum for Emperor Hanwen.

古文：上既美子虚之事，相如见上好仙，因曰： 上林之事未足美也，尚有靡者。
现代文：天子赞美子虚之事以后，相如见皇上喜爱仙道，于是说： 上林之事并不够美，还有华丽的。
English: After praising the virtuous son, the emperor liked the fairy tale, so he said, "Going to the forest is not beautiful enough, there are gorgeous things.

古文：臣尝为《大人赋》，未就，请具而奏之。 
现代文：我曾经写作《大人赋》，尚未完成，请允许我写成献上。 
English: I used to write "Adult Fable" and haven't finished it yet, so please allow me to write it as a gift.

古文：相如以为列仙之儒居山泽间，形容甚臞，此非帝王之仙意也，乃遂奏《大人赋》。
现代文：相如认为传说的诸仙术士居住在山泽之间，形体容貌甚瘦，这不像是帝王的仙意，于是便写成《大人赋》。
English: Similarly, it is believed that the legendary sorcerers live between the mountains and lakes, and their appearance is very thin, which is not like the emperor's fairy tale, so they wrote "Adult Fu."

古文：其辞曰：
现代文：他的赋写道：
English: The text reads as follows:

古文：宅弥万里兮，曾不足以少留。
现代文：世上有天子在中州，广宅万里却不能停留。
English: If there is a heavenly son in the world, he is in Zhongzhou, but he can't stay in Guangya.

古文：悲世俗之迫隘兮，朅轻举而远游。
现代文：悲伤世俗如此狭隘，离开它轻装而远游。
English: Saddened by the worldly coercion and distress, he left the world lightly and roamed far and wide.

古文：乘绛幡之素蜺兮，载云气而上浮。
现代文：车驾红旗飘舞踏上白色的霓，载着云气向上浮。
English: Driving a car, the red flag fluttering, stepping on a white raft, floating up with the clouds.

古文：建格泽之修竿兮，总光耀之采旄。
现代文：建格泽星的光柱作长长的旗竿，系拢光芒作旌旗的旄。
English: The light pillar of Ge Ge Zexing is built as a long flagpole, and the light is tied together as a flagpole.

古文：垂旬始以为幓兮，曳慧星而为髾。
现代文：垂挂著作旬始星旌旗的流苏，拖着光尾的彗星作旌旗上装饰的羽毛。
English: The tassels of the Star Spangled Banner are hanging, and the tail of a comet is trailing behind to make the feathers on the banner.

古文：掉指桥以偃■兮，又猗抳以招摇。
现代文：那旗帜随风翻摇拽杖，又猗昵而招摇。
English: The banner twisted and swayed in the wind, tugging at the cane and swaying precariously.

古文：揽搀抢以为旌兮，靡屈虹而为绸。
现代文：拿来天搀、天枪星让它们作旌旗，披裹着弯弯的虹做的彩绸。
English: Take the heavenly harpoon and the heavenly shooting star and make them into a banner, draped in colorful silk made of crooked rainbow.

古文：红杳眇以玄湣兮，猋风涌而云浮。
现代文：红霭杳渺而氲氤，应气动而风涌云浮。
English: The red dragonfly is elusive and elusive, but rises and falls with the wind.

古文：纠蓼叫奡踏以■路兮，薎蒙踊跃腾而狂趭。
现代文：驾飞龙乘象车行走逶迤，驱赤龙青虬游行蜿蜒。昂首曲颈恣意表现着骄傲，上下起伏腾挪翻卷。忽而凝步而静伫，忽而翘首释放着尊严。
English: The flying dragons travel by elephant car, the red dragons are driven by the red dragon, and the parade meanders. The head is held high and the neck is bent arbitrarily to show pride, and the ups and downs are rolled over. Suddenly, the pace is stiff and quiet, and suddenly, the head is uplifted to release dignity.

古文：莅飒芔歙焱至电过兮，焕然雾除，霍然云消。
现代文：进退踱步辗转相随，左顾右盼奔走相倚。纠缠着叫嚣着践踏着，不知道为什么又驰跃如狂蛟。吐气间火闪电过，朗朗雾除豁然云消。
English: Advancing and retreating, pacing and turning follow each other, looking left and right, rushing and running, leaning on each other. Entangled, shouting, trampling, I don't know why, and galloping like a madman. Fire and lightning flashed between exhalations, and the fog suddenly disappeared.

古文：邪绝少阳而登太阴兮，与真人乎相求。
现代文：斜渡束极而登上北极，与仙人相邀求。
English: Cross the East Pole diagonally and ascend to the North Pole, and mingle with the immortals.

古文：互折窈窕以右转兮，横厉飞泉以正东。
现代文：相互交往致意向西转，又横过飞泉以向正东。
English: After going through the intricate twists and turns of the vast expanse, turn right again, and cross the flying spring to the east.

古文：悉征灵圉而选之兮，部署众神于摇光。
现代文：全部征集仙子而挑选之，安排众神于北斗摇光。
English: All the fairies are collected and selected, and the gods are arranged to shake the light in the Big Dipper.

古文：使五帝先导兮，反大壹而从陵阳。
现代文：让五帝作先导，摒退太一而用侍从仙人陵阳。
English: Let the Five Emperors lead the way, abandoning the Great One and using the attendant Immortal Lingyang.

古文：左玄冥而右黔雷兮，前长离而后矞皇。
现代文：左边是玄冥右边是黔雷，前面是长离后面是南皇。
English: On the left is the dark and mysterious, on the right is the thunder and lightning, in front is the crane, and behind is the Southern Emperor.

古文：厮征伯侨而役羡门兮，诏岐伯使尚方。
现代文：仆役是仙人征伯侨、羡门高，吩咐岐伯去管理药方。
English: The servant was a hermit called Zhengbo Qiao and Enmen Gao, who ordered Qibo to manage the prescription.

古文：祝融警而跸御兮，清气氛而后行。
现代文：让祝融警卫清道，廓清恶气而后行。
English: Let the congratulation guard clear the way, clear the bad breath and follow.

古文：屯余车而万乘兮，綷云盖而树华旗。
现代文：集合我的车一万乘，用五彩云为盖立华丽的旗。
English: Gather my ten thousand chariots and hoist a magnificent banner with five-colored clouds.

古文：使句芒其将行兮，吾欲往乎南娭。
现代文：让句芒为将领从行，我想去南方游戏。
English: I want to go to the South to play.

古文：历唐尧于崇山兮，过虞舜于九疑。纷湛湛差差错兮，杂遝胶輵以方驰。
现代文：走过唐尧所在的崇山，走过虞舜所在的九疑，路途纷繁交错，驱驰车乘杂沓驱驰。
English: Walking through the lofty mountains where Tang Jun is located, walking through the nine doubts where Yu Jun is located, the road is complex and intertwined, and the driving car is driven by the chaff.

古文：骚扰冲苁其纷拏兮，滂濞泱轧丽以林离。
现代文：横冲直撞踏采纷至，无边无际瀚漫淋潍。攒拢罗列而聚集，漫散流乱光怪陆离。
English: Rampaging, crashing, stampeding, endless, boundless, endless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless, boundless.

古文：攒罗列聚丛以笼茸兮，衍曼流烂痑以陆离。
现代文：直入雷渊听隆隆雷声，穿出鬼谷看山势突嵬。
English: Straight into the thundery abyss to listen to the rumble of thunder, and through the ghost valley to see the sudden movement of the mountain.

古文：径入雷室之砰磷郁律兮，洞出鬼谷之堀礨崴魁。遍览八纮而观四海兮，朅度九江越五河。
现代文：遍览八荒观四海，尽渡九江越五河。
English: Explore the eight deserts, view the four seas, and cross the nine rivers and five rivers as far as possible.

古文：经营炎火而浮弱水兮，杭绝浮渚涉流沙。
现代文：经过火焱山又漂流于弱水，涉水江中沙洲也见过大漠流沙。
English: After passing through the Flaming Mountains and drifting in weak water, the sandbank in the wading river has also seen the desert quicksand.

古文：奄息葱极泛滥水娭兮，使灵娲鼓琴而舞冯夷。
现代文：源出葱岭的河水供我嬉戏，让女娲鼓琴河伯舞戚。
English: The river water from the source of the Qilian Mountains is for me to play, and let the female gongs and harps of the Hebe dance.

古文：时若暧暧将混浊兮，召屏翳诛风伯，刑雨师。
现代文：这时像是暗时混浊，就召讨雷神刑诛风伯、雨师。
English: At this time, it was as if it was cloudy in the dark, so they summoned the thunder god, the wind god, and the rain god.

古文：西望昆仑之轧沕荒忽兮，直径驰乎三危。
现代文：西望昆仑山浑恶不明，径直飞驰向三危。
English: Looking westward, Kunlun Mountain is unclear, and it flies straight towards the Three Dangers.

古文：排阊阖而入帝宫兮，载玉女而与之归。
现代文：推天门而入帝宫，载玉女而返回。
English: Push open the gates of heaven and break into the imperial palace, carrying the princess back with her.

古文：登阆风而遥集兮，亢鸟腾而壹止。
现代文：登上闽风山远远的召集，像鸟一样飞翔又整齐停止。
English: Gathered far away on the top of the Qianfeng Mountain, flying like a bird and neatly stopping.

古文：低徊阴山翔以纡曲兮，吾乃今日睹西王母。
现代文：在阴山低空盘旋折曲，我现在才看见了西王母。
English: Circling low over the gloomy mountains, I now saw the Western Queen Mother.

古文：暠然白首戴胜而穴处兮，亦幸有三足乌为之使。
现代文：皓然白发戴玉簪住洞穴，也幸亏有三足青鸟为她役使。
English: The dazzlingly white-haired Dai Yu lives in a cave, and thanks to a three-legged blue bird, she is able to do so.

古文：必长生若此而不死兮，虽济万世不足以喜。
现代文：一定如此才能长生不死，虽能渡过万世也不足喜。
English: You must be immortal like this. Even if you can live forever, it's not worth being happy.

古文：回车朅来兮，绝道不周，会食幽郁。
现代文：回车离去，跨过不周山会食在幽都。
English: Returning to the car and leaving, we will eat in Yudu after crossing the mountain.

古文：呼吸沆瀣兮餐朝霞，咀噍芝英兮叽琼华。
现代文：吸露水餐朝霞，品尝芝英和琼华。
English: Absorb dew water, dine on morning glories, and taste zhiying and qionhua.

古文：僸祲寻而高纵兮，纷鸿溶而上厉。
现代文：仰首向上渐渐地高升，纷纷腾跃而急飞。
English: Heads up, heads up, heads up, heads up, heads up.

古文：贯列缺之倒景兮，涉丰隆之滂濞。
现代文：穿遇高空电闪的光影，渡过雨师的大雨狂疾。
English: Through the light and shadow of high-altitude lightning, we have passed the heavy rain of the rainmaker.

古文：骋游道而修降兮，骛遗雾而远逝。
现代文：驰骋游车导车从天而下，留下迷雾远远而逝。
English: The guide car of the galloping car came down from the sky, leaving the fog far behind.

古文：迫区中之隘陕兮，舒节出乎北垠。遗屯骑于玄阙兮，轶先驱于寒门。下峥嵘而无地兮，上嵺廓而无天。
现代文：迫于家中太狭隘，缓缓地向北出界一望无垠，把车骑留在玄迩，让先辈留在丢韭旦，下看深远不见大地，仰视寥廓不见天。
English: Forced by the narrowness of his home, he slowly moved northward out of the bounds and saw nothing. He left his car and bicycle in Xuanfan, and let his ancestors stay in Jiuyutan. He could not see the earth when he looked down, and he could not see the sky when he looked up.

古文：视眩泯而亡见兮，听敞怳而亡闻。
现代文：目光眩晕看不见，听力模糊无所闻。
English: Blinded, dizzy, unable to see, deaf and dumb.

古文：乘虚亡而上遐兮，超无友而独存。
现代文：乘着虚无而游思远遐，超越有无而独存。
English: Taking advantage of nothingness and wandering far and wide, transcending nothingness and existing alone.

古文：相如既奏《大人赋》，天子大说，飘飘有陵云气游天地之间意。
现代文：相如进献《大人赋》后，天子大为高兴，飘飘然有凌云的气概，好像有遨游于天地之间的意境。
English: Similarly, after the presentation of "Adult Fu," Tianzi was very happy, and had the spirit of a soaring cloud, as if he had the state of mind to travel between heaven and earth.

古文：相如既病免，家居茂陵。
现代文：相如因病免职以后，居住在茂陵家中。
English: He has been relieved of his duties due to illness, and lives in Moguryo.

古文：天子曰： 司马相如病甚，可往从悉取其书，若后之矣。 
现代文：天子说： 司马相如病得厉害，可派人去把他写的书都取来，你现在去已经落在别人后面了。 
English: Tianzi said, "Sima Xiang is very ill, you can send someone to fetch all the books he has written. If you go now, you will fall behind others."

古文：使所忠往，而相如已死，家无遗书。
现代文：派遣所忠前去时，相如已死，家中没有留下的书。
English: When Sotada was dispatched, it was as if he had died, and there were no books left at home.

古文：问其妻，对曰： 长卿未尝有书也。
现代文：问他的妻子，回答说： 长卿原来不曾有书。
English: Asked his wife, she replied: "Choseki never had a book.

古文：时时著书，人又取去。
现代文：他时常写书，又时常被人拿去。
English: He often wrote books, and they were often taken away.

古文：长卿未死时，为一卷书，曰有使来求书，奏之。 
现代文：长卿没有死时，写了一卷书，说有使者来寻书时，就献给朝廷。 
English: When Chokyeong did not die, he wrote a book, saying that if an envoy came to look for the book, he would dedicate it to the imperial court.

古文：其遗札书言封禅事，所忠奏焉，天子异之。
现代文：他遣留下来的书札说到封惮的事，所忠进献给天子，天子认为此书奇异。
English: The bookplate he left behind talks about the sealing, and is dedicated to the Son of Heaven. The Son of Heaven thinks the book is strange.

古文：其辞曰：伊上古之初肇，自颢穹生民。
现代文：他的书说：远古开天辟地之始，天生众民。
English: His book says: From ancient times, from the beginning of the heavens and the earth, all people were born.

古文：历选列辟，以迄乎秦。
现代文：历数历代君主，直到秦。
English: Count the number of successive monarchs, up to the Qin Dynasty.

古文：率迩者踵武，听逖者风声。
现代文：循着近世的遗迹，听听远古的风声。
English: Follow the relics of the modern world and listen to the sounds of ancient times.

古文：纷轮威蕤，堙灭而不称者，不可胜数也。
现代文：混杂纷乱，沉埋而不为世所称道的，不计其数。
English: There are innumerable chaotic, confused, buried, but not world-renowned.

古文：继《昭》、《夏》，崇号谥，略可道者七十有二君。
现代文：发扬正大光明，崇尚尊号美谧，封禅于泰山者可说有七十二君。
English: It is said that there are seventy-two princes who carry forward the righteous light and advocate the virtue of beauty.

古文：罔若淑而不昌，畴逆失而能存？
现代文：没有谁施政善良而不兴盛，谁逆行失德而能久存？
English: If one follows the virtuous path, no one will fail to prosper; if one defies common sense and acts immorally, who can survive?

古文：轩辕之前，遐哉邈乎，其详不可得闻已。
现代文：轩辕之前，时间极远，事物邈茫，其间的详情已无从知道了。
English: Before the uproar, time was very far away, things were vague, and the details in between were impossible to know.

古文：五三《六经》载籍之传，维见可观也。《书》曰： 元首明哉！
现代文：五帝、三王由于《六经》典籍的记载和传说，其遣风可知。《尚书》说： 君主英明啊！
English: The Five Emperors and Three Kings can be traced back to the records and legends of the classics of the Six Classics. "Shang Shu" said: The monarch is wise!

古文：股肱良哉！ 
现代文：大臣得力！ 
English: People are in good health!

古文：因斯以谈，君莫盛于尧，臣莫贤于后稷。
现代文：据此而论，君主没有哪个能比唐尧美盛，臣下没有哪个比后稷贤能。
English: According to this, there is no monarch who can be better than Tang Xi Mei Sheng, and there is no vassal who can be better than Hou Yi Xian Neng.

古文：后稷创业于唐，公刘发迹于西戎，文王改制，爰周郅隆，大行越成，而后陵迟衰微，千载亡声，岂不善始善终哉！
现代文：后稷在唐尧时创立功业，公刘在西戎得志，文王改革制度，至周极为昌盛，实现太平之道，功业于是而成，以后虽衰颓微弱，千载没有恶声，难道不是善始善终！
English: Hou Yi founded Gongye at the time of Tang Xi, Gong Liu gained fame in Xi Rong, King Wen reformed the system, and Zhou became extremely prosperous, achieving the way of peace, and the work was thus accomplished. Although the decline is weak, there is no evil voice for thousands of years. Isn't it a good beginning and a good ending!

古文：然无异端，慎所由于前，谨遗教于后耳。
现代文：然而没有别的缘故，不过是在开始时谨慎，在终结时小心地秉承遣训罢了。
English: However, there is no other reason but to be cautious at the beginning and carefully adhere to the training at the end.

古文：故轨迹夷易，易遵也；湛恩庞洪，易丰也；宪度著明，易则也；垂统理顺，易继也。
现代文：所以规范简易，容易遵奉；恩德深广，容易富足；法度明确，容易仿效；基业承接顺理，容易继承。
English: Therefore, the norms are simple and easy to follow; the benevolence is deep and wide, and it is easy to be rich; the laws are clear and easy to follow; the inheritance is logical and easy to inherit.

古文：是以业隆于繦保而崇冠乎二后。
现代文：因此王业在成王时兴隆，功绩却在文王、武王时造就。
English: Therefore, Wangye flourished when he became king, but his achievements were made when he was King Wen and King Wu.

古文：揆厥所元，终都攸卒，未有殊尤绝迹可考于今者也。
现代文：度量其始，竞于所终，没有特别突出和异乎寻常的事迹可以和汉朝相比较。
English: In terms of its beginning and its end, there is no particularly outstanding performance that can be compared with today's Han Dynasty.

古文：然犹蹑梁甫，登太山，建显号，施尊名。
现代文：然而还登上泰山和梁父山，建立显贵的尊号，施加崇高的美名。
English: However, he also climbed Mount Tai and Mount Liangchi, established a distinguished honorary title, and exerted a lofty reputation.

古文：大汉之德，逢涌原泉，沕谲曼羡，旁魄四塞，云布雾散，上畅九垓，下溯八埏。
现代文：大汉的恩德，像源泉一样涌流，泽及遍地，广被四方，像云雾一样散布，上通九天，下流八方。
English: The great man's benevolence, like a spring, gushes forth and spreads everywhere. It is widely dispersed in all directions, like clouds and fog. It flows upstream for nine days and downstream in all directions.

古文：怀生之类，沾濡浸润，协气横流，武节焱逝，尔陿游原，迥阔泳末，首恶郁没，闇昧昭晰，昆虫闿怪，回首面内。
现代文：凡属生物，皆被恩泽，和气横溢四方。武威烈焰奔腾，近狭之地游经根本，远阔之处泽及枝叶，罪魁祸首皆已湮灭，夷狄之人见到光明，各种动物欢乐喜悦，回过头来面向中原。
English: All living beings are blessed with grace, and harmony pervades all four directions. The mighty flames are surging, the narrow land is traveling through the root, the wide places are the branches and leaves, the culprits have all been annihilated, the people of Yidi have seen the light, and all kinds of animals are joyful and happy, turning back to face the Central Plains.

古文：然后囿驺虞之珍群，徼麋鹿之怪兽，导一茎六穗于疱，牺双觡共抵之兽，获周馀放龟于岐，招翠黄乘龙于沼。
现代文：然后畜养成群的珍贵的绉虞，拦截罕见的麋鹿怪兽，从庖厨选一茎六穗之米供给祭祀，拿长出双角的野兽作为祭品，在岐山之旁获得周代放养的遣龟，在沼泽招来黄帝登仙时乘坐的神马。
English: Then, they raised herds of precious yakitori, intercepted the rare elk monster, selected a stalk of six-spike rice from the yakitori kitchen to supply the sacrifice, took the two-horned beast as a sacrifice, obtained the turtle released by Zhou Dynasty next to the Qishan Mountain, and rode the divine horse when the Yellow Emperor ascended to heaven in the swamp.

古文：鬼神接灵圉，宾于闲馆。奇物谲诡，俶倘穷变。
现代文：至德与神明相通，仙人在闲馆旅居，奇物变化莫测，卓越之才可以深究变化。
English: Utmost virtue communicates with the gods. Immortals live in idle mansions. Strange things are ever-changing. Only excellence can explore change.

古文：钦哉，符瑞臻兹，犹以为薄，不敢道封禅。
现代文：敬佩啊，符光祥瑞至此，仍然以为德薄，不敢讲到封禅。
English: Admire ah, Fuguang Xiangrui so far, still think that virtue is weak, dare not talk about fuzan.

古文：盖周跃鱼陨杭，休之以燎。微夫斯之为符也，以登介丘，不亦恧乎！
现代文：周代时跳跃的鱼儿坠落到船上，武王烘烤了拿它祭天，把它作为符兆，是多么微小啊，但是要是以白鱼为祥瑞去登上泰山，不是显得惭愧吗？
English: In the Zhou Dynasty, the jumping fish fell into the boat, and King Wu roasted the fish and sacrificed it to the heavens, taking it as a sign, how small it was, but if he used the white fish as a good luck charm to climb Mount Tai, wouldn't he be ashamed?

古文：进攘之道，何其爽与？
现代文：周朝不可以封禅而去封掸，汉朝可以封禅而不封惮，争、让差异多么大啊！
English: The Zhou Dynasty could not seal Zen without sealing Jie, while the Han Dynasty could seal Zen without sealing Jie. What a big difference!

古文：于是大司马进曰： 陛下仁育群生，义征不譓，诸夏乐贡，百蛮执贽，德牟往初，功无与二，休烈液洽，符瑞众变，斯应绍至，不特创见。
现代文：于是大司马向皇上进言说： 陛下仁爱抚育天下百姓，依仗道义征讨不顺，华夏乐意贡献，蛮夷赍礼朝见，德同当初，功无与比，盛美的功业融和，符兆祥瑞多变，应期相续而至，不是第一次出现。
English: Therefore, the grand steward said to the emperor: His Majesty's benevolence nurtures the people of the world, relies on morality to settle disputes, is willing to contribute to China, is barbaric and disrespectful to the imperial court, and has unparalleled achievements, magnificent achievements and harmony, and the signs of auspiciousness and auspiciousness are changeable. It is not the first time that it has appeared.

古文：意者太山、梁父设坛场望幸，盖号以况荣，上帝垂恩储祉，将以庆成，陛下嗛让而弗发也。
现代文：想来大概是泰山和梁父山的坛场盼望皇上临幸，欲加上尊号以和前代比荣耀，上天垂恩积福于下，要实行庆告成功之礼，陛下谦虚礼让，不肯举行封惮。
English: It is probably the altar of Mount Taishan and Mount Liangchuzhan that hopes for the emperor's happiness, wants to add the honorary title to compare with the glory of the previous generation, praises the heavens and accumulates blessings, and wants to celebrate the success. His Majesty is modest and courteous, and refuses to hold a sealing ceremony.

古文：挈三神之欢，缺王道之仪，群臣恧焉。
现代文：断绝天、地、山三神的喜悦，使王道的礼义阙失，群臣惭愧呀！
English: Cutting off the joy of the three gods of heaven, earth, and mountain, causing the royal etiquette to be lost, the courtiers are ashamed!

古文：或谓且天为质闇，示珍符固不可辞；若然辞之，是泰山靡记而梁父罔几也。
现代文：有人说，况且天意诚然已经暗示，珍稀的符兆本来不可辞让；假若辞让它，就是泰山将无立表记的机会而梁父山无享受祭礼的希望了。
English: Some people say that, moreover, the will of heaven has indeed hinted that the rare signs should not be conceded; if it were, then Mount Tai would not have the opportunity to stand as a symbol and Mount Liangchishan would not have the hope of enjoying the festival.

古文：亦各并时而荣，咸济厥世而屈，说者尚何称于后，而云七十二君哉？
现代文：况自古帝王如果都是与时而荣，帝位结束而祭祀断绝，述说者还有什么可以称述于后代，而能说有七十二位君主封禅过泰山呢？
English: Moreover, if the emperors since ancient times were all with the times, the imperial throne ended and the sacrificial rites were discontinued, what else can the narrator be called in future generations, but can it be said that seventy-two monarchs passed through Mount Tai?

古文：夫修德以锡符，奉符以行事，不为进越也。
现代文：德行修明而赐给符瑞，尊奉符瑞而行封禅，不算是苟进越礼。
English: The virtue of practice is given to Fu Rui by Shuming, and the worship of Fu Rui and the practice of Fuchen are not regarded as Gojin Yue Li.

古文：故圣王弗替，而修礼地祇，谒款天神，勒功中岳，以章至尊，舒盛德，发号荣，受厚福，以浸黎民。
现代文：所以圣明的君主不废封惮，而尊敬地礼奉土神，诚恳地谒告天神，在中岳刻石记功，以此彰明至上的地位，舒展隆盛的德行，显露荣耀的称号，承受丰厚的福禄，用以浸润众民。
English: Therefore, the monarch of the Holy Light did not abandon the seal of fear, but respectfully worshipped the earth god, earnestly denounced the heavenly god, and carved a stone in Zhongyue to record the merits, in order to highlight the supreme position, extend the prosperous virtue, reveal the glory of the title, and receive abundant blessings to infiltrate the people.

古文：皇皇哉斯事，天下之壮观，王者之卒业，不可贬也。
现代文：这种事美盛啊！天下的雄伟景象，帝王的宏大事业，不可减损呀！
English: This is a splendid thing! The majestic scenery of the world, the grand cause of the emperor, cannot be detracted from!

古文：愿陛下全之。
现代文：希望陛下办得更加完备。
English: I hope His Majesty will do a better job.

古文：而后因杂缙绅先生之略术，使获曜日月之末光绝炎，以展采错事。
现代文：然后汇集群儒见解，使他们得到曰月余光末焰的照耀以提拔他们的官职，施展他们的事业。
English: Then, they gathered the opinions of the group of Confucians, so that they could receive the light of the last rays of the last day to promote their official positions and carry out their undertakings.

古文：犹兼正列其义，祓饰厥文，作《春秋》一艺。将袭旧六为七，摅之无穷，俾万世得激清流，扬微波，蜚英声，腾茂实。
现代文：因而兼天时正人事陈列封禅意义，校订润饰其文，作为《春秋》笔法新的一经，将沿袭原有的 六经 而增为 七经 ，述之无穷，使万代得以激发忠义之士，光大隐微之波，飞传英华之声，腾驰茂盛之实。
English: Therefore, Tian Shizheng's personnel displayed the meaning of the seal of Zen, revised and embellished its text, and as a new sutra of the "Spring and Autumn" style, it will follow the original six sutras and increase to seven sutras, and the description is endless, so that all generations can inspire the loyal people, the great and hidden wave, the flying voice of Yinghua, and the flourishing reality.

古文：前圣之所以永保鸿名而常为称首者用此。
现代文：以前的圣君之所以能够永远保持他的美名而时常被赞颂，就在于这个缘故。
English: It is for this reason that the former saint has been able to keep his good name forever and is often praised.

古文：宜命掌故悉奏其仪而览焉。 
现代文：应该让掌故把封禅的礼仪呈奏给您观览。 
English: You should let Shoko perform the etiquette of Fuzen for you to watch.

古文：于是天子沛然改容，曰： 俞乎，朕其试哉！ 
现代文：于是天子感动地改变了神色，说： 是啊，我来尝试一下吧！ 
English: So the son of heaven, moved, changed his expression and said, "Yes, let me try it!"

古文：乃迁思回虑，总公卿之议，询封禅之事，诗大泽之博，广符瑞之富。
现代文：便改变想法，转换念头，总括公卿的议论，咨询封惮的大事，作诗歌咏大泽的广博，增广符瑞的富饶。
English: Tianzi thought about it, summarized the discussion of the nobles, inquired about the specific situation of the Fuzan, described the generosity of the grace, and deduced the richness of the Fu Rui.

古文：遂作颂曰：
现代文：于是作颂说：
English: Then the eulogist said:

古文：自我天覆，云之油油。
现代文：自我天覆，云之油油。
English: The sky that covers me, the clouds are drifting.

古文：甘露时雨，厥壤可游。
现代文：甘露时雨，厥壤可游。
English: The general fall of nectar and timely rain, its place can travel.

古文：滋液渗漉，何生不育！
现代文：滋液渗漉，何生不育！
English: The nipple is oozing, how sterile!

古文：嘉谷六穗，我穑曷蓄？
现代文：嘉谷六穗，我穑曷蓄？
English: Jiayu six ears, do I save?

古文：匪唯雨之，又润泽之；匪唯偏我，泛布护之；万物熙熙，怀而慕之。
现代文：匪唯雨之，又润泽之；匪唯偏我，泛布护之；万物熙熙，怀而慕之。
English: The bandits covet rain and moisture; the bandits covet favoritism and protection; the bandits covet everything that is bountiful.

古文：名山显位，望君之来。
现代文：名山显位，望君之来。
English: Famous mountains should have a prominent position, and it is hoped that the saint will come.

古文：君兮君兮，侯不迈哉！
现代文：君兮君兮，侯不迈哉！
English: You, you, you, you, you!

古文：股股之兽，乐我君圃；白质黑章，其仪可喜；旼々穆穆，君子之态。
现代文：股股之兽，乐我君圃；白质黑章，其仪可喜；畋吱穆穆，君子之态。
English: The beast of the stocks and shares, the pleasure of my guru's garden; the white quality black chapter, its ceremony is gratifying; the state of a gentleman, the state of a gentleman.

古文：盖闻其声，今视其来。
现代文：盖闻其声，今视其来。
English: Overheard it, now seen it.

古文：厥涂靡从，天瑞之征。
现代文：厥涂靡从，天瑞之征。
English: Conform to the whims of others, and you will be blessed by the heavens.

古文：慈尔于舜，虞氏以兴。
现代文：兹尔于舜，卢压以兴。
English: Zil is in the yang, Lu is in the yang.

古文：濯濯之麟，游彼灵畤。
现代文：濯濯之麟，游彼灵峙。
English: Moo Moo's unicorn, Yoo Pei's ghost.

古文：孟冬十月，君徂郊祀。
现代文：孟冬十月，君徂郊祀。
English: In October, Meng Dongjun, Jun Xi suburb worship.

古文：驰我君舆，帝用享祉。
现代文：驰我君舆，帝用享祉。
English: I'll do my best, and the emperor will enjoy his welfare.

古文：三代之前，盖未尝有。
现代文：三伐之前，盖未尝有。
English: Before the third generation of Xia merchants, there was probably no such miracle.

古文：宛宛黄龙，兴德而升；采色玄耀，炳炳辉煌。
现代文：宛宛黄龙，兴德而升；采色玄耀，炳炳辉煌。
English: To the yellow dragon, to the rising virtue; to the brilliant colors, to the dazzling brilliance.

古文：正阳显见，觉寤黎烝。
现代文：正阳显见，觉寤黎燕。
English: The appearance of the dragon's body will surely enlighten the people.

古文：于传载之，云受命所乘。
现代文：于传载之，云受命所乘。
English: According to the transcript, Yun was ordered to do so.

古文：厥之有章，不必谆谆。
现代文：厥之有章，不必谆谆。
English: The evidence of heaven has clearly shown that there is no need for further admonition.

古文：依类托寓，谕以封峦。
现代文：依类托寓，谕以封峦。
English: According to the type of nursery rhyme, the oracle begins with a seal.

古文：披艺观之，天人之际已交，上下相发允答。
现代文：翻开《六经》来看，天道和人道界限已经连接，上天和下民相互表达和谐。
English: It should be entrusted according to the class, and the monarch should be told to hold a grand ceremony of fuzen.Opening the classics, we can see that the natural world and human society have already had a relationship, and the two inspire each other and are in harmony.

古文：圣王之事，兢兢翼翼。
现代文：圣王的事业，兢兢业业，小心翼翼。
English: The cause of the holy king is carried out diligently and carefully.

古文：故曰于兴必虑衰，安必思危。
现代文：所以说 兴盛的时候一定要考虑衰亡，平安的时候一定要想到危险 。
English: Therefore, when there is prosperity, we must consider decline and fall, and when there is peace, we must think of danger.

古文：是以汤、武至尊严，不失肃祗，舜在假典，顾省厥遗：此之谓也。
现代文：因此商汤和周武王居至尊之位，不失恭敬之礼；虞舜观察星象，察看政事的得失。
English: Therefore, Shang Tang and Zhou Wu Wang hold the supreme position, and they do not lose the courtesy of respect; Gu Yao observes the stars and observes the gains and losses of political affairs.

古文：相如既卒五岁，上始祭后土。
现代文：说的就是造回事。司马相如已死去五年，天子方才祭祀地神。
English: This is a fabrication. Sima Xiangru has been dead for five years, and it is only now that the Heavenly Child is offering sacrifices to the Earth God.

古文：八年而遂礼中岳，封于太山，至梁甫，禅肃然。
现代文：八年，遂先敬中岳之神，再封泰山，到梁父山，祭肃然山。
English: Eight years later, they first paid homage to the god of Nakadake, then to Mount Tai, then to Mount Liangzhi, and finally to Mount Solemn.

古文：相如它所著，若《遗平陵侯书》、《与五公子相难》、《草木书篇》，不采，采其尤著公卿者云。
现代文：相如的其他著作，如《遣平陵侯书》、《与五公子相难》、《草木书篇》没有采录，衹采录他在公卿大臣中特别知名的文章。
English: Similarly, other works, such as "The Tale of the Five Noblemen," "The Trouble with the Five Noblemen" and "The Herbals" were not included, but his articles, which were particularly well-known among court nobles and ministers, were included.

古文：赞曰：司马迁称：《春秋》推见至隐，《易本》隐以之显，《大雅》言王公大人，而德逮黎庶，《小雅》讥小己之得失，其流及上。
现代文：赞曰：太史公称： 《春秋》以微妙的言辞推求人事大义，《易经》以自然之微妙着明人事，《大雅》言王公大人而德至平民，《小雅》以己之得失非难政事，其流言至于王公大人。
English: Praise: Taishi publicly said: "Spring and Autumn" uses subtle words to promote personal righteousness, "I Ching" uses the subtlety of nature to highlight personnel, "Great Elegance" says that the prince is an adult and a commoner, "Small Elegance" blames difficult political affairs for its own gains and losses, and its rumor is about the prince.

古文：所言虽殊，其合德一也。
现代文：所以言词的外表虽有不同，在符合道德标准上都是一致的。
English: Therefore, although the appearance of the words is different, they are consistent in terms of ethical standards.

古文：相如虽多虚辞滥说，然要其归引之于节俭，此亦《诗》之风谏何异？ 
现代文：相如虽然多有虚构言词和夸张说法，然而其要领归结到一处，还在于提倡节俭，这与《诗经》的讽谏有什么不同？ 
English: Similarly, although there are many fictitious words and exaggerated statements, its essence boils down to one thing, and that is to promote frugality. How is this different from the irony of the Book of Songs?

古文：扬雄以为靡丽之赋，劝百而讽一，犹骋郑、卫之声，曲终而奏雅，不已戏乎！
现代文：扬雄以为他华丽的辞赋，鼓励奢靡的言辞占多数，劝谏节俭的言辞不过百分之一，好像奔驰在淫靡的郑、卫之声中，曲终时才奏雅乐，这不也是轻薄之戏吗！
English: Yang Xiong thought that his magnificent rhetoric, encouraging extravagant rhetoric accounted for the majority, and exhorting frugal rhetoric was only one percent. It was as if Benzi only played elegant music at the end of the song in the midst of the lascivious voices of Zheng and Wei. Isn't this also a frivolous play!

