古文：崔光，清河人，本名孝伯，字长仁，孝文赐名焉。
现代文：崔光，清河人，原名叫孝伯，字长仁，这是孝文帝赐给他的名字。
English: Cui Guang, a native of Qinghe, was originally named Xiao Bo (孝伯) and later Changren (字長仁). This was the name given to him by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：祖旷，从慕容德南度河，居青州之时水。
现代文：祖父崔旷跟随慕容德南渡黄河，住在青州的时水。
English: Grandfather Cui Yuan followed Murong De Nan to cross the Yellow River and lived in the Jishui District of Qingzhou.

古文：慕容氏灭，仕宋为乐陵太守。
现代文：慕容氏败亡，崔旷入仕南朝任宋国乐陵太守。
English: After the defeat of the Murong clan, Cui Yu entered the Southern Dynasty and was appointed the governor of Song Guole Mausoleum.

古文：于河南立冀州，置郡县，即为东清河鄃人。
现代文：宋在黄河南边建立冀州，设置郡县，他便成了东清河俞阝地人。
English: Song established Jizhou on the south side of the Yellow River and set up counties, and he became a native of the East Qing River.

古文：县分易，更为南平原贝丘人也。父灵延，宋长广太守，与宋冀州刺史崔道固共拒魏军。慕容白曜之平三齐，光年十七，随父徙代。
现代文：崔光的父亲崔灵廷任宋的长广太守，与宋冀州刺史崔道固共同抗拒魏军。慕容白曜平定三齐之地，崔光十七岁，随父亲迁至代。
English: Cui Guang's father, Cui Lingding, was appointed as the Changguang governor of Song Dynasty. He and Cui Daogu, the governor of Song Hebei Province, jointly resisted the Wei army. Cui Guang was seventeen years old when he moved with his father to Jin Dynasty.

古文：家贫好学，昼耕夜诵，佣书以养父母。
现代文：家里贫穷，却酷好学习。白天耕地，夜晚读书。后来，靠教书赡养父母。
English: His family was poor, but he was a great student. He farmed during the day and studied at night. Later, he supported his parents by teaching.

古文：太和六年，拜中书博士、著作郎，与秘书丞李彪参撰国书，再迁给事黄门侍郎。
现代文：太和六年，崔光任中书博士、著作郎，与秘书丞李彪参与修撰国书，又升任给事黄门侍郎，很被孝文帝信任。
English: In the sixth year of Tahei, Cui Guanglong was appointed as the doctor of Chinese calligraphy, the author of the book, and the secretary, Jiao Li Biao, participated in the compilation of the national book, and was promoted to the attendant of Huangmen, and was very trusted by Emperor Xiaowen.

古文：还，仍兼侍中。以谋谟之功，进爵为伯。
现代文：孝文帝曾称赞他说 ：崔光的才学浩浩荡荡，如黄河奔腾东流，真是我朝的一代文宗啊！ 他由参赞迁任都谋，朝廷赐爵号为朝阳子。
English: Emperor Xiaowen once praised him, saying: "Cui Guang's talent for learning is as vast as the Yellow River's rushing eastward flow. He is truly my generation's Wenzong! He was transferred from counselor to strategist, and the imperial court gave him the title of Chaoyangzi.

古文：光少有大度，喜怒不见于色。
现代文：崔光从小就有很大的度量，喜怒不形于色。
English: From a young age, Cui Guang had a great sense of proportion, and was never angry or sad.

古文：有毁恶之者，必善言以报，虽见诬谤，终不自申曲直。
现代文：有人诋毁他，他也一定用好话回报，虽然被诬陷诽谤，始终不替自己辩白。
English: If someone slanders him, he is sure to reciprocate with kind words. Although he has been slandered, he never defends himself.

古文：皇兴初，有同郡二人并被掠为奴婢，后诣光求哀，光乃以二口赎免。孝文闻而嘉之。
现代文：皇兴初年，有同郡的两个人被掠卖为奴婢，找到崔光哀求，崔光便将这两个人赎出，孝文帝听说后嘉奖了他。
English: In the first year of the Emperor's enthronement, two people from the same county were plundered and sold as slaves. They found Cui Guang and pleaded with him. Cui Guang then ransomed the two people, and Emperor Xiaowen rewarded him after hearing about it.

古文：虽处机近，未曾留心文案，唯从容论议，参赞大政而已。
现代文：他虽然处于国家的枢要机密的重要位置，却从不留意文案上的事，只参与讨论朝廷的大政方针。
English: Although he was in an important position of the country's most important secret, he never paid attention to the matter of copywriting, and only participated in the discussion of the general policy of the imperial court.

古文：孝文每对群臣曰： 以崔光之高才大量，若无意外咎谴，二十年后当作司空。 
现代文：孝文帝常对群臣们说 ：以崔光这样杰出的才能，宽广的胸襟，如果没有意外的变故，二十年以后应当位至司空。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen often said to his courtiers: With Cui Guang's outstanding talent and broad-mindedness, if there are no unexpected changes, he should be promoted to the position of the Empress Dowager in 20 years.

古文：宣武即位，正除侍中。
现代文：宣武帝即位，任他为侍中。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu ascended the throne, he appointed him as a chamberlain.

古文：初，光与李彪共撰国书，太和之末，彪解著作，专以史事任光。彪寻以罪废。
现代文：他与李彪一起撰写国书。太和末年，李彪被解除著作的职务，朝廷专门把写史的事交给崔光，李彪不久因犯罪被免官。
English: He and Li Biao wrote the national book together. In the last years of the reign of the Empress Dowager Cixi, Li Biao was relieved of his duties as a writer. The imperial court specifically entrusted the writing of history to Cui Guang. Li Biao was soon removed from office for a crime.

古文：光虽领史官，以彪意在专功，表解侍中、著作以让彪。
现代文：宣武帝当太子时，李彪上表，请求朝廷允许他撰写《魏书》，朝廷下诏同意。李彪便以布衣百姓的身份在秘书省专门从事史书的著述。
English: When Emperor Xuanwu was crown prince, Li Biao petitioned the imperial court to allow him to write the "Weishu," and the imperial court agreed. Li Biao then specialized in writing history books as a commoner in the Ministry of Secretaries.

古文：宣武不许。迁太常卿，领齐州大中正。
现代文：崔光虽然任史官，认为李彪的意思是想专擅写史的功劳，便上表请求将自己的侍中和著作的职务解除，让给李彪，宣武帝不同意。
English: Although Cui Guang was appointed as a historian, he thought that Li Biao's intention was to monopolize the credit of writing history, so he requested that he be relieved of his duties as an attendant and author and give it to Li Biao. Emperor Xuanwu did not agree.

古文：正始元年夏，有典事史元显献四足四翼鸡，诏散骑侍郎赵邕以问光。
现代文：正始元年，典事史元显将一只长了四只爪、四个翅膀的鸡献给朝廷。朝廷下诏让散骑侍郎赵邕询问崔光：这种怪异现象的出现象征着什么？
English: At the beginning of the first year of the year, the ceremonial historian Yuan Xian presented a chicken with four claws and four wings to the imperial court. The imperial court ordered the horseman Zhao Wei to ask Cui Guang: What does the appearance of this strange phenomenon symbolize?

古文：光表曰：臣谨案《汉书·五行志》宣帝黄龙元年，未央殿路軨中雌鸡化为雄，毛变而不鸣不将无距。
现代文：崔光上表说 ：《汉书》《五行志》记载：宣帝黄龙元年，未央殿的路车令厩内雌鸡变成了雄鸡，羽毛变了却不会打鸣，不会带领母鸡，爪上无距指。
English: Cui Guang said on the table: "Hanshu" "Wu Xing Zhi" records: In the first year of Emperor Huanglong, the carriage of Wei Yang's palace turned the hen in the stable into a rooster, the feathers changed but would not sing, would not lead the hen, and there was no distance on the claws.

古文：元帝初元中，丞相府史家雌鸡伏子，渐化为雄，冠距鸣将。
现代文：元帝初元年间，丞相府史家的雌鸡孵化鸡雏，却渐渐变成雄鸡，长出鸡冠和距爪，并会打鸣。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, the hen of the chancellor prefectural historian hatched chicken chicks, but gradually became a rooster, grew a crest and talons, and would chirp.

古文：永光中，有献雄鸡生角。
现代文：永光年间，有人献上一只头上生角的雄鸡。
English: During the Yongguang era, someone offered a rooster with a horn on its head.

古文：刘向以为鸡者小畜，主司时起居，小臣执事为政之象也，言小臣将乘君之威，以害政事，犹石显也。
现代文：刘向认为鸡是一种小的家禽，主管报时和人的起居，出现这些是地位低的小臣报事为政的象征，说明小臣将要假借君主的威望侵害朝廷。石显就是这样的人。
English: Liu Xiang believed that the chicken was a small fowl, and that the person in charge of telling the time and people's lives was a rooster. The appearance of these was a symbol of a low-ranking vassal reporting on politics, indicating that the vassal would use the prestige of the monarch to infringe on the imperial court. Shi Xian was such a person.

古文：竟宁元年，石显伏辜，此共效也。
现代文：竟宁元年，石显被诛杀，这就是动物垂象的作用。
English: In the first year of King Ning's reign, Shi Xian was killed in a fight. This is the role of the animal pendant.

古文：灵帝光和元年，南宫寺雌鸡欲化为雄，一身皆似雄，但头冠上未变，诏以问议郎蔡邕。邕对曰： 貌之不恭，则有鸡祸。
现代文：汉灵帝光和元年，南宫寺的雌鸡要变成雄鸡，浑身长得都像雄鸡，但鸡冠却没有变。朝廷下诏询问议郎蔡邕，他回答说： 形貌不端正，就会有鸡祸出现。
English: In the first year of Emperor Guangwu's reign, the hens at Nangong Temple were to be turned into roosters. They all looked like roosters, but the roosters' crowns did not change. The imperial court sent an inquiry to the procurator Cai Xuan, who replied: "If the shape is not correct, there will be a chicken plague."

古文：臣窃推之，头为元首，人君之象也。
现代文：据我推断，头象是元首，是君主的象征。
English: According to my deduction, the head of the elephant is the head, the symbol of the monarch.

古文：今鸡一身已变，未至于头，而上知之，是将有其事而不遂成之象也。
现代文：现在，这只雌鸡浑身都变成了雄鸡，没有变到头上，而皇上您知道，这是将要发生令朝廷不顺心的事情的象征。
English: Now, this hen has turned into a rooster all over, not to the head, and, Your Majesty, you know that this is a symbol of something that will happen that is not to the liking of the court.

古文：若政无所改，头冠或成，为患滋大。 
现代文：如果朝廷政治无所改变，雌鸡的头冠也会变成了雄鸡的，祸患就会更大。 
English: If there is no change in imperial politics, the headdress of the hen will also become that of the rooster, and the disaster will be even greater.

古文：是后张角作乱，称黄巾贼，遂破坏四方，疲于赋役，人多叛者。
现代文：以后不久，巨鹿人张角作乱，号称黄巾军，四方动荡，百姓负担不了繁重的赋役，大多响应叛军。
English: Soon after that, Zhang Jiao, a giant deer, started a riot, known as the Yellow Turban Army. The four directions were in turmoil. The people could not bear the heavy labor, and most of them responded to the rebels.

古文：上不改政，遂至天下大乱。
现代文：朝廷不刷新政治，导致天下大乱。
English: If the imperial court does not renew politics, it will lead to chaos in the world.

古文：今之鸡状不同，其应颇相类矣。
现代文：今天这只鸡的形状与过去不同，但它象征的内容却很类似啊。
English: Today, the shape of the chicken is different from the past, but its symbolic content is very similar.

古文：向、邕并博达之士，考物验事，信而有证，诚可畏也。
现代文：刘向、蔡邕都是渊博通达之士，考察物象，验证实事，准确而又有力，实在令人信服。
English: Liu Xiang and Cai Qian are both well-versed and knowledgeable people. They examine objects, verify facts, are accurate and powerful, and are really convincing.

古文：臣以邕言推之，翅足众多，亦群下相扇助之象。
现代文：我根据蔡邕的话推断，这只鸡的翅膀和爪子增多，是群小们互相勾结联络的象征。
English: I deduced from Cai Qi's words that the wings and claws of this chicken have increased, which is a symbol of the children's cooperation and connection.

古文：雏而未大，脚羽差小，亦其势尚微，易制御也。
现代文：鸡还没有长大，爪子和羽翅还小，说明他们的势力还很微弱，容易制服。
English: Chickens have not grown up yet, their claws and wings are still small, which means that their power is still very weak and easy to subdue.

古文：臣闻灾异之见，皆所以示吉凶。
现代文： 我听说自然灾异的显现，都可以昭示朝廷国家的吉与凶。
English: I have heard that the appearance of natural disasters and abnormalities can show the good fortune and misfortune of the imperial state.

古文：明君睹之而惧，乃能招福，闇主视之弥慢，所用致祸。
现代文：圣明的君主看了就会戒惧，因而能化祸为福；昏愦的君主看了不以为然，所以导致祸患降临。
English: The saintly monarch will be afraid when he sees it, so he can turn misfortune into good luck; the foolish monarch will not be convinced when he sees it, so it leads to misfortune.

古文：《诗》、《书》、《春秋》、秦、汉之事多矣，此皆陛下所观者。
现代文：《诗经》、《书经》、《春秋》以及秦、汉以来的典籍中记载这一类的事情，都是陛下您所了解的。
English: "The Book of Songs," "The Book of Songs," "Spring and Autumn" as well as the classics since the Qin and Han dynasties have recorded this kind of thing, all of which Your Majesty knows about.

古文：今或有自贱而贵，关预政事，殆亦前代君房之匹。
现代文：今天，如果有人由卑贱而变成显贵，干涉朝廷政事，这是前代君房一类人。
English: Today, if someone rises from a lowly position to become a dignitary and interferes in the affairs of the imperial court, this is the same type of person as the previous monarch.

古文：比者南境死亡千计，白骨横野，存有酷恨之痛，殁为怨伤之魂。
现代文：前者与南朝交战，死亡数以千计，白骨横陈原野。活着的有败家丧亲之痛，死去的化为怨恨伤悲的冤魂。
English: The former was at war with the Southern Dynasty, thousands died, and their bones were scattered across the plain. Those who survived suffered the pain of losing family members, and those who died turned into angry and sad ghosts.

古文：义阳屯师，盛夏未反；荆蛮狡猾，征人淹次。
现代文：在义阳屯扎军队，炎天盛暑还未回来；荆地蛮族反叛，征讨的将士长期停留在那里。
English: Troops were stationed in Yiyang, but the hot weather had not yet returned; the barbarians in Jingdi rebelled, and the conscripted soldiers stayed there for a long time.

古文：东州转输，多往无还，百姓困穷，绞缢以殒。
现代文：东部州郡转送军资，频繁往返于道路。百姓输纳净尽，贫困不堪，就像套上绳索要被勒死。
English: The eastern prefectures and counties transferred military funds and frequently traveled on the road. The people were exhausted and impoverished. It was like being strangled with a rope.

古文：北方霜降，蚕妇辍事。
现代文：北方春降寒霜，蚕妇们因桑树被冻死而无所事事。
English: In the northern spring, frost falls, and the silkworms have nothing to do because the mulberry trees have frozen to death.

古文：群生憔悴，莫甚于今。
现代文：黎民百姓的艰难困苦，没有不超过现在的。
English: The hardships of the Lebanese people have never been greater than they are now.

古文：此亦贾谊哭叹，谷永切谏之时。
现代文：这正是贾谊痛哭叹息，谷永痛切直谏的时候。
English: This is exactly the time when Jia Yi cried and sighed, and Gu Yong was heartbroken.

古文：司寇行戮，君为之不举，陛下为人父母，所宜矜恤。
现代文：掌管刑狱的司寇杀戮囚犯，君子们认为不应该这样。陛下是天下人的父母，应该对他们可怜体恤。
English: The gentlemen think that it is not right that the scout in charge of the prison should kill the prisoners. His Majesty is the parent of the world's people and should have pity on them.

古文：国重戎战，用兵犹火，内外怨弊，易以乱离。
现代文：国家重视战争，用兵好像用火，容易引起上下的埋怨而产生动乱。
English: The country attaches great importance to war, and the use of soldiers is like the use of fire, which is likely to cause complaints from above and below and create turmoil.

古文：陛下纵欲忽天下，岂不仰念太祖取之艰难，先帝经营劬劳也？
现代文：陛下为了驰纵自己统一天下的欲望，而忽视了苍生万民，难道不顾念太祖道武帝夺取天下的艰难，前代帝王们经营国家的辛劳吗？
English: In order to indulge his desire to unify the world, His Majesty ignored all living beings. Did he not consider the hardships of his great-grandfather Emperor Daowu in conquering the world and the hard work of previous emperors in running the country?

古文：诚愿陛下留聪明之鉴，警天地之意，礼处左右，节其贵越。
现代文：诚望陛下您以自己的聪明睿智吸取历史的教训，警觉天地昭示的深意。 宣武帝看了十分高兴，于是，对崔光更加倚重。
English: I sincerely hope that Your Majesty will learn from the lessons of history with your own wisdom and prudence, and be alert to the profound meaning of heaven and earth. Emperor Xuanwu was very happy to see this, so he placed more importance on Cui Guang.

古文：往者邓通、董贤之盛，爱之正所以害之。
现代文：正始二年八月，崔光又上表说 ：野树长在宫廷，野鸟飞入庙堂，古人认为是衰落灭亡的景象。惧怕灾祸的到来，因而修德齐政，都可以化凶为吉。
English: At the beginning of August of the second year, Cui Guang said again: wild trees grow in the court, wild birds fly into the temple, the ancients believed that it was a scene of decline and death. Fear of the arrival of disaster, so the construction of morality and politics, can all be good luck.

古文：又躬飨如罕，宴宗或阙，时应亲享郊庙，延敬诸父。
现代文：东南边境尚未平静，战火仍没有停息，京畿一带大旱多时，人民疲劳，万物凋敝，没有比这更严重的。
English: The southeastern border is not yet calm, the war has not yet stopped, the drought in the Gyeonggi area has lasted for a long time, the people are tired, and everything is withering. There is nothing more serious than this.

古文：检访四方，务加休息，爰发慈旨，抚振贫瘼。
现代文：百姓们承受天子的养育，应该对他们体恤怜爱。
English: The people have borne the rearing of the Son of God, and they should be treated with compassion and love.

古文：永平元年秋，将诛元愉妾李氏，群官无敢言者。
现代文：希望陛下您要追思殷代二位帝王感应天变的做法，躬身诚意，革新政治。那么，我大魏的基业就可以永远昌盛。 正始四年，任中书舍人。
English: I hope, Your Majesty, that you will think back to the two emperors of the Yin Dynasty who responded to the changes in the heavens, bowed down to sincerity, and innovated politics. Then, the foundation of my Great Wei Dynasty can flourish forever.

古文：敕光为诏，光逡巡不作，奏曰： 伏闻当刑元愉妾李，加之屠割。妖惑扇乱，诚合此罪。
现代文：永平元年秋，朝廷将诛杀元愉的妾李氏，群臣没有人敢替她求情的，朝廷命崔光起草诛杀李氏的诏书，他犹豫很久没有动笔，奏报朝廷说： 我听说要处决元愉的妾李氏，她妖言惑众，煽乱人心，实在应该杀戮。
English: In the autumn of the first year of the Yongping era, the imperial court ordered Cui Guang to draft an edict for the execution of Li, the concubine of Yuan Yu. He hesitated for a long time before writing the edict. A report to the imperial court said, "I heard that Li, the concubine of Yuan Yu, is to be executed. She has bewitched the public and incited the people. She really should be killed."

古文：但外人窃云，李今怀妊，例待分产。
现代文：但外面的人议论李氏现在有身孕，按例应该等她分娩之后再行刑。
English: However, people on the outside are talking about the fact that Ms. Li is now pregnant, and that the execution should wait until after she has given birth.

古文：且臣寻诸旧典，兼推近事，戮至刳胎，谓之虐刑，桀、纣之主，乃行斯事。
现代文：我查阅旧典，再推考近事，杀戮祸及腹中的胎儿，叫酷刑，只有像夏桀、殷纣这样的暴君才干这种事。
English: I consulted the old books and then reflected on recent events. The killing of babies and fetuses in the womb is called torture, and only tyrants like Xia Yao and Yin Yao can do such things.

古文：君举必书，义无隐讳，酷而乖法，何以示后？
现代文：君王的一举一动都被记录下来，没有任何可以隐瞒的地方，行刑残酷而又违背法律，怎么昭示后人？
English: The monarch's every move is recorded, there is nowhere to hide, the execution is cruel and against the law, how will it be revealed to future generations?

古文：陛下春秋已长，未有储体，皇子襁褓，至有夭失。
现代文：陛下年事已高，还没有东宫的储君，皇子还在襁褓中，恐怕会夭折。
English: His Majesty is very old, there is still no crown prince of the East Palace, the prince is still in infancy, I am afraid he will die young.

古文：臣之愚识，知无不言，乞停李狱，以俟育孕。 
现代文：我见识愚昧，却知无不言，请将李氏缓刑，以等待她的生育。 
English: I see stupidity, but I don't know what to say. Please suspend Li's sentence to wait for her to give birth.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：宣武帝同意。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：延昌元年，迁中书监，侍中如故。二年，宣武幸东宫，召光与黄门甄琛、广阳王深等并赐坐，诏光曰： 卿是朕西台大臣，当令为太子师傅。 
现代文：延昌二年，宣武帝到东宫，召见崔光与黄门甄琛、广阳王元深等人，赐给他们座位，对崔光说： 你是我中书省的大臣，应当让你当太子的老师。 
English: In the second year of Yanchang, Emperor Xuanwu went to the East Palace, summoned Cui Guang and Huangmen Zhenqi, Guangyang Wangyuan Sheng and others, gave them seats, and said to Cui Guang: You are the minister of my Central Literature Department, and you should be the prince's teacher.

古文：光起拜固辞，诏不许。即令明帝出焉，从者十余人，敕以光为傅之意，令明帝拜光。
现代文：崔光起身拜谢，并坚决推辞，宣武帝不同意，便让孝明帝出来，跟随他的有十多人，告诉他们，让崔光当太子的老师，令孝明帝拜见崔光。
English: Cui Guang stood up and bowed, and firmly refused. Emperor Xuanwu did not agree, so he let Xiao Mingdi come out, followed by more than ten people, and told them to let Cui Guang be the prince's teacher, and let Xiao Mingdi meet Cui Guang.

古文：光又拜辞，不当受太子拜，复不蒙许。
现代文：崔光又拜辞，说自己不应当受太子的叩拜，宣武帝仍然不同意。
English: Cui Guang also resigned, saying that he should not be worshipped by the prince, but Emperor Xuanwu still did not agree.

古文：明帝遂南面再拜。
现代文：孝明帝便面南站立，叩拜崔光。
English: Xiao Mingdi then stood facing south and bowed to Cui Guang.

古文：詹事王显启请从太子拜，于是宫臣毕拜。
现代文：詹事王显奏请随太子一起叩拜。于是，东宫的侍臣一起对崔光叩拜。
English: Zhan Zhi Wang Henso asked to bow down together with the prince. Therefore, the attendants of the East Palace bowed down to Cui Guang together.

古文：光北面立，不敢答拜，唯西面拜谢而出。
现代文：崔光北面站立，不敢答拜，惟向西拜谢后出来。
English: Cui Guang stood to the north and did not dare to bow, but bowed to the west and came out.

古文：于是赐光绣采一百匹，琛、深各有差。
现代文：朝廷赐给他锦绣一百匹。甄琛、元深的赏赐各有差别。
English: The imperial court gave him one hundred brocade horses. The rewards given to Zhen Xi and Yuan Sheng were different.

古文：寻授太子少傅，迁右光禄大夫，侍中、监如故。
现代文：不久，授予他太子少傅，升任为右光禄大夫。延昌四年正月，宣武帝在一天晚上去世。
English: Soon, he was awarded the title of prince junior tutor and promoted to the position of Uguanglu doctor. In the first month of the fourth year of Yanchang, Emperor Xuanwu passed away in the evening.

古文：四年正月，宣武夜崩，光与侍中、领军将军于忠迎明帝于东宫，安抚内外，光有力焉。
现代文：崔光与侍中、领军将军于忠到东宫迎接孝明帝。
English: Cui Guang and Yu Zhong, an attendant and the leading general, went to the East Palace to meet Emperor Xiaoming.

古文：帝崩后二日，广平王怀扶疾入临，以母弟之亲，径至太极西庑，哀恸禁内。
现代文：安抚内外臣民，崔光最为有力。宣武帝死后两天，广平王元怀抱病入宫，以同母兄弟的身份，直接来到太极殿的西庑下，哀号痛哭，震动宫廷。
English: Two days after the death of Emperor Xuanwu, Guangping Wangyuan, who was ill, entered the palace and, as a brother of the same mother, came directly to the west wing of the Taiji Hall, wailing and crying, shaking the palace.

古文：呼侍中、黄门、领军二卫，云身欲上殿哭大行，又须入见主上。
现代文：又叫来侍中、黄门、领军、二卫，说他想上殿哭祭，还要入见新主。
English: He also summoned the chamberlain, the yellow gate, the leader of the army, and the two guards, and said that he wanted to go to the temple to offer sacrifices, and that he wanted to see the new lord.

古文：诸人皆愕然相视，无敢抗对者。
现代文：大臣们都惊愕地互相看着，没有人敢反对。
English: Ministers looked at each other in consternation. No one dared to object.

古文：光独攘衰振杖，引汉光武初崩，太尉赵熹横剑当阶，推下亲王故事，辞色甚厉。闻者莫不称善，壮光理义有据。
现代文：崔光却掂起衰衣的衣襟，晃动着丧杖劝阻他。他引用汉光武帝刘秀初去世时，太尉赵瞲横着剑站在台阶上，将亲王们推开，不让他们上殿哭祭的故事，说时面色十分严厉，听的人没有认为不恰当的，佩服崔光说得有理有据。
English: However, Cui Guang lifted up the faded collar of his robe and waved his cane to dissuade him. He quoted the story of the Han Emperor Liu Xiu's death, in which Lieutenant Zhao Qi stood on the steps with his sword at his side and pushed the princes away, preventing them from going to the temple for the wailing ceremony. He said that he was very stern-faced at the time, and the listeners did not think it was inappropriate. They had reason to admire Cui Guang.

古文：怀声泪俱止，云： 侍中以古事裁我，我不敢不服。 
现代文：元怀听完，声泪俱止，说 ：侍中您用古代的事要求我，我不能不服从。 
English: After listening, Yuan Hui broke down in tears and said, "Waiter, you are asking me to do something from ancient times. I cannot disobey.

古文：于是遂还，频遣左右致谢。
现代文：于是便回去了，多次派家人向崔光等表示感谢。
English: So he went back and repeatedly sent his family members to express their gratitude to Cui Guang and others.

古文：初，永平四年，以黄门郎孙惠蔚代光领著作。惠蔚首尾五岁，无所厝怀。
现代文：永平四年，朝廷曾经让黄门郎孙惠蔚代替崔光任著作，孙惠蔚前后五年没有任何举措。
English: In the fourth year of Yongping, the imperial court once asked Huangmen Lang Sun Hui Wei to write a book in place of Cui Guangren. Sun Hui Wei did not take any measures for five years.

古文：至是，尚书令、任城王澄表光宜还史任。
现代文：至此，尚书令、任城王元澄上表奏请让崔光重新担任史官职务。
English: At this point, Shang Shuling and Wang Yuancheng, the appointed king of the city, came forward to ask Cui Guang to resume his duties as a historian.

古文：于是诏光还领著作，迁特进。
现代文：于是，朝廷下诏仍让崔光任史职，升任为特进。
English: As a result, the imperial court still allowed Cui Guang to hold the post of historian, and he was promoted to special promotion.

古文：以奉迎明帝功，封博平县公，领国子祭酒，诏乘步挽于云龙门出入。
现代文：因奉迎孝明帝有功，封为博平县公，任国子监祭酒，下诏允许他乘坐推车从元龙门出入。
English: For his meritorious service to Emperor Ying Xiao Ming, he was made the governor of Boping County and appointed the state overseer of sacrificial liquor. He was allowed to enter and leave Yuanlongmen by cart.

古文：寻迁车骑大将军、仪同三司。
现代文：不久，迁任车骑大将军、仪同三司。
English: Soon after, he was transferred to the General of the Cavalry and the Third Division of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：灵太后临朝后，光累表逊位。
现代文：灵太后临朝听政后，崔光多次上表表示要辞职引退。
English: After listening to the politics of Lingdai Hou Lin, Cui Guang repeatedly said that he wanted to resign and retire.

古文：于忠擅权，光依附之。
现代文：于忠专擅朝政，崔光依附他。
English: Yu Zhongxuan was good at politics, and Cui Guang followed him.

古文：及忠稍被疏黜，光并送章绶冠服茅土，表至十余上，灵太后优答不许。
现代文：等到于忠稍被朝廷疏远，崔光一起将朝廷赐给他的表示等级的绶带、帽子、官服和封地的茅和土送还给朝廷，上表十余道，请求辞官，灵太后不答应。
English: When Yu Zhong was slightly alienated by the imperial court, Cui Guang together with Maru returned to the imperial court the sash, cap, official uniform, and the fief's mao and soil, which indicated the rank given to him by the imperial court. He presented more than ten ways to request a dictionary, but the Empress Dowager did not agree.

古文：有司奏追于忠及光封邑。
现代文：有司奏请赠给于忠和崔光封地。
English: Please give the fiefdoms of Yu Zhong and Cui Guang to Siso.

古文：熙平元年二月，太师、高阳王雍等奏举光授明帝经。
现代文：熙平元年二月，太师、高阳王无雍等人奏表举荐崔光给孝明帝讲授经书。
English: In February of the first year of Heeping, Grand Master, Goyang Wang Woyong and others made a list to recommend Cui Guang to teach scriptures to Emperor Xiaoming.

古文：初，光有德于灵太后。四月，更封光平恩县侯，以朝阳伯转授第三子勖。
现代文：原先，崔光有恩德于灵太后，四月，朝廷又封给他平恩县侯的爵位，把朝阳伯的封爵转授给他的二儿子崔勖。
English: Originally, after Choe Kwang-geun had shown his gratitude to the Dowager Empress Dowager, in April, the Imperial Court conferred the title of Marquis of Binh Duong County on him, and transferred the title of Chaoyang Bo to his second son Choe Son.

古文：其月，敕赐羊车一乘。
现代文：这一月，朝廷又赐给他羊车一辆。
English: This month, the court gave him another sheep wagon.

古文：时灵太后临朝，每于后园亲执弓矢，光乃表上中古妇人文章，因以致谏。
现代文：当时，灵太后临朝掌管国家大政，却经常在宫廷的后园拉弓射箭，演习武艺。崔光将前代妇人们写的文章送上，用来劝谏她弃武习文。
English: At that time, Empress Dowager Ling was in charge of the country's politics, but she often practiced martial arts in the backyard of the palace. Cui Guang sent her articles written by the previous generation of women to persuade her to abandon martial arts.

古文：伯姬待姆，安就炎燎；樊姜候命，忍赴洪流。《传》皆缀集，以垂来训。
现代文：这年秋天，灵太后多次到王公大臣的府宅，崔光上表劝谏说： 《礼记》上说：诸侯不是因为慰问病人，赴丧吊唁，而到臣子们的家中，这样的君臣关系就叫做戏谑。
English: In the autumn of that year, the Reverend Mother repeatedly visited the residence of the prince minister, and Cui Guang went to persuade her: "The Book of Etiquette" said: "The princes did not go to the funeral to offer condolences for the sick, but to the homes of their vassals. Such a relationship between ruler and vassal is called banter."

古文：昨轩驾频出，幸冯翊君、任城王第。
现代文：昨日您的车驾几次出动，到冯翊君、任城王的府第。
English: Yesterday, your car was dispatched several times to the residence of Feng Rongjun, the king of Rencheng.

古文：虽渐中秋，余热尚蒸。
现代文：虽然天气渐到中秋，但仍然蒸热。
English: Although the weather is getting to mid-autumn, it is still steamy.

古文：衡盖往还，圣躬烦倦。
现代文：车马往返，您的身体一定疲劳困倦。
English: Your body must be tired and sleepy.

古文：左右仆侍，众过千百，扶卫跋涉，袍钾在身。
现代文：左右的侍从，多至千百个，跟在车驾后面护卫，穿着坚硬沉重的盔甲不停地奔跑。
English: Right and left attendants, as many as a thousand, follow behind the chariot escort, wearing hard and heavy armor constantly running.

古文：昔人称陛下甚乐，臣等至苦，或其事也。
现代文：过去有人说您十分快乐，而随从的臣子们却很辛苦，看来真有这种事啊。
English: In the past, some people said that you were very happy, but the courtiers who followed you were very hard-working. It seems that this is really the case.

古文：光表谏曰： 伏见亲升上级，伫跸表刹之下，祗心图构，诚为福善，圣躬玉趾，非所践陟。
现代文：皇帝的家族人口繁衍，勋臣贵戚日益增加，邀请您的人也越来越多，恐怕将要成为规矩了。陛下您接受前王的遗命，辅助幼主，以天下为公，以亿万百姓的生存安乐为己任，希望能常到郊庙祭祀和决定朝廷的大政方针。爱惜身体，蓄养精神，停止游乐，那么全国上下都会为此感到高兴。 
English: The population of the emperor's family is proliferating, the number of honored servants and noble relatives is increasing day by day, and the number of people who invite you is also increasing. I am afraid that it will become a rule. Your Majesty, you accept the former king's last will and testament, assist the young master, take the world as the public, take the survival and happiness of hundreds of millions of people as your own responsibility, and hope to often go to the suburban temple to worship and decide the general policy of the imperial court. Cherish the body, cultivate the spirit, stop the amusement, then the whole country will be happy about it.

古文：臣庶恇惶，窃谓未可。 九月，灵太后幸嵩山佛寺，光上表谏，不从。
现代文：神龟元年，崔光上表请求修补破损的石鼓经。朝廷同意，后因灵太后被废黜，便停止了。神龟二年八月，灵太后到永宁寺，亲自登上佛塔上层，崔光上表劝阻。九月，灵太后要到嵩山佛寺去，崔光上表劝谏，太后没有采纳。
English: In the first year of the Divine Tortoise, Choe Kwang made a request to repair the broken stone drum sutra. The Imperial Court agreed, but it was later stopped because the Empress Dowager was deposed. In August of the Divine Tortoise's second year, the Empress Dowager went to Yongning Temple and personally ascended to the upper floor of the stupa, but Choe Kwang dissuaded her. In September, the Empress Dowager wanted to go to Songshan Buddhist Temple, but Choe Kwang dissuaded her and the Empress Dowager did not accept.

古文：正光元年冬，赐光几杖衣服。
现代文：正光元年冬，朝廷赐给崔光矮桌、拐杖和衣服。
English: In the winter of the first year of Zhengguang, the imperial court gave Cui Guangru a low table, crutches and clothes.

古文：二年春，明帝亲释奠国学，光执经南面，百寮陪列。
现代文：二年春天，孝明帝在国学举行释奠大礼，崔光拿着经书面南而立，百官陪着站在两旁。
English: In the spring of the second year, Emperor Xiaoming held a grand ceremony of explanation and commemoration at the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Cui Guang stood to the south holding a written sutra, accompanied by hundreds of officials standing on both sides.

古文：司徒、京兆王继频上表以位让光。
现代文：司徒、京兆王元继多次上表请求将自己的职位让给崔光。
English: Following repeated requests, Szeto and Jingzhao Wangyuan relinquished their positions to Cui Guang.

古文：四月，以光为司徒，侍中、国子祭酒、领著作如故。
现代文：四月，朝廷命崔光为司徒，侍中、国子监祭酒、领著作的职务不变。
English: In April, the Imperial Court appointed Choe Kwang as an attendant, and his duties as a chamberlain, the head of the Imperial Household Agency, and the head of the Imperial Library remained unchanged.

古文：光表固辞，历年终不肯受。
现代文：他上表坚决推辞，过了一年也不肯接受。
English: He made a firm refusal at the table and refused to accept it a year later.

古文：八月，获秃鹙于宫内，诏以示光。光表曰： 此即《诗》所谓 有鹙在梁 。解云 秃鹙也 ，贪恶之鸟，野泽所育，不应入于殿廷。
现代文：这年八月，有人在宫内抓获一只秃鹫，朝廷下诏问崔光这象征着什么，崔光上表说 ：秃鹫，是贪婪而又凶恶的鸟，在荒野大泽中生长，不应该飞到宫廷中。
English: In August of that year, someone caught a vulture in the palace, and the court asked Cui Guang what it symbolized. Cui Guang said, "The vulture is a greedy and vicious bird that grows in the wilderness of Ozawa and should not fly into the palace."

古文：昔魏氏黄初中，有鹈鹕集于灵芝池，文帝下诏，以曹恭公远君子，近小人，博求贤俊，太尉华歆由此逊位而让管宁者也。
现代文：过去，晋魏黄初年间，有鹈鹕飞集在灵芝池，文帝下诏书认为曹恭公疏远君子，亲近小人。因而向天下寻求贤明杰出的人才。太尉华歆因此罢职，让管宁接替他的职务。
English: In the past, in the early years of the Jin, Wei, and Huang Dynasties, there was a group of eunuchs gathered at Lingzhi Pool. Emperor Wen issued an edict that Cao Qiong was alienating the gentlemen and getting close to the villains. Therefore, he sought out wise and outstanding talents from all over the world. As a result, Taiyi Hua Wei resigned and let Guanning take over his duties.

古文：臣闻野物入舍，古人以为不善。
现代文：我听说在野外生活的动物进入房舍，古人认为不吉祥。
English: I heard that animals that live in the wild enter houses, which the ancients considered unlucky.

古文：是以张臶恶任，贾谊忌鵩。
现代文：所以，张王存厌恶任鸟，贾谊忌讳鹕。
English: Therefore, Zhang Wangcun dislikes any bird, and Jia Yi is taboo.

古文：鹈鹕暂集而去，前王犹为至诚，况今亲入宫禁，为人所获，方被畜养，晏然不以为惧。
现代文：鹈鹕暂时聚集而很快又飞去，前代帝王还引以为戒，何况现在秃鹫飞入宫中，被人擒获，正被饲养，安然闲静，毫不惧怕。
English: The vultures gathered for a while and quickly flew away. The previous emperor was also warned about this. What's more, the vultures now fly into the palace, are caught by someone, are being raised, are safe and quiet, and have no fear.

古文：准诸往义，信有殊矣。
现代文：和过去的情况相比较，真特殊啊！
English: Compared to the situation in the past, it's really special!

古文：饕餮之禽，必资鱼肉，菽麦稻粱，时或飡啄，一食之费，容过斤镒。
现代文：贪婪的禽类，一定靠吃鱼肉生活，豆麦稻米，有时也会啄食。吃一次的耗费，就有一斤多粮食和肉类。
English: The greedy birds must live on fish and meat, and sometimes nibble on beans, wheat and rice. The cost of one meal is more than a kilo of grain and meat.

古文：今春夏阳旱，谷籴稍贵，穷窘之家，时有菜色。
现代文：今年春夏干旱，谷价上涨。贫穷之家都面有菜色。
English: This spring and summer have been dry, and grain prices have risen. Poor households are all suffering from food shortages.

古文：陛下为人父母，抚之如伤，岂可弃人养鸟，留意于丑形恶声哉！
现代文：陛下为天下百姓的父母，对他们爱抚备至，怎么能够抛开人不管而去养鸟，留意于这个形貌丑陋，声音刺耳的家伙呢？ 
English: Your Majesty is the parent of the people of the world, and you love them so much, how can you leave people alone to raise birds, and pay attention to this ugly-looking, harsh-sounding guy?

古文：光年耆多务，病疾稍增。
现代文：孝明帝看到奏章十分高兴，将这只鸟放回沼泽中。
English: Xiao Mingdi was very happy to see the song and released the bird back into the swamp.

古文：而自强不已，常在著作，疾笃不归。
现代文：崔光年纪高迈而又政务繁巨，疾病渐渐增加，而却自强不息。经常在史馆写作，病重了也不回去。
English: Cui Guang is very old and his political affairs are complicated. His illnesses are gradually increasing, but he never gives up. He often writes in the history museum and does not go back when he is seriously ill.

古文：四年十月，帝亲临光疾，诏断宾客，中使相望，为止声乐，罢诸游眺，拜长子励为齐州刺史。
现代文：正光四年十月，孝明帝亲自探望他的疾病，下诏停止他接待宾客，不断派宦官去问候。为此，还停止了宫廷中的音乐歌唱，不再游览观光。又封崔光的长子崔励为齐州刺史。
English: In October of the fourth year of Zhengguang, Emperor Xiaoming personally visited his illness, and issued an edict to stop him from receiving guests and constantly sending eunuchs to greet him. For this reason, he also stopped the music and singing in the court, and no longer went sightseeing. He also sealed Cui Li, the eldest son of Cui Guang, as the history of Qizhou.

古文：十一月，疾甚，敕子侄等曰： 吾荷先帝厚恩，位至于此，史功不成，殁有遗恨。
现代文：十一月，崔光病情加剧，对他的子侄们说 ：我蒙受先帝的厚恩大德，有了今天很高的职位，史书没有写成，死了也留有遗憾。
English: In November, as Cui Guang's illness worsened, he told his nephews and nieces, "I was greatly blessed by the late emperor, and I have a high position today. The history book has not been written, and I regret to die.

古文：汝等速可送我还宅。 
现代文：你们赶快把我接回家去。 
English: You've got to get me home.

古文：气力虽微，神明不乱，至第而薨，年七十三。
现代文：气力虽然微弱，但神志却很清醒，到了家里就去世了，享年七十三岁。
English: Although his strength was weak, his sanity was clear. He died at home at the age of seventy-three.

古文：彪为十二次诗以报光。
现代文：孝明帝听到死讯后，悲哀得痛哭流涕，一趟又一趟派宦官去他家里。又亲自去祭奠，抚着崔光的尸体，大放悲声。车驾回宫的路上，也一直痛哭不止。因为过于悲哀，饭量大为减少，一说起话来，都因追忆崔光而伤心。
English: After hearing the news of the death, Emperor Xiaoming was so sad that he cried bitterly. He sent eunuchs to his house again and again. He also personally went to pay tribute, stroked the body of Cui Guang, and cried loudly. On the way back to the palace, he also cried bitterly all the time. Because it was too sad, the amount of food was greatly reduced, and every time he spoke, he was saddened by the memory of Cui Guang.

古文：光又为百三郡国诗以答之。
现代文：每来到崔光为他讲学的地方，就改变容色，悲怆地哀悼。谥号文宣。
English: Whenever he came to the place where Cui Guang lectured for him, he would change his appearance and mourn miserably.

古文：国别为卷，为百三卷焉。
现代文：出殡那天，孝明帝在建春门外设祭，一看到灵车到来就伤心欲绝。儒士们都为此感到光荣。
English: On the day of the funeral, Emperor Xiaoming held a festival outside the Jianchun Gate, and was heartbroken when he saw the hearse arrive. The Confucianists were all honored by this.

古文：光宽和慈善，不忤于物，进退沈浮，自得而已。
现代文：崔光待人宽厚慈爱，不与任何人和事相牛氐牾，进退沉浮，平心处置，不以为意。
English: Cui Guang treats people with kindness and mercy, does not quarrel with anyone and things, advances and retreats, ups and downs, treats others with equanimity, is not impressed.

古文：常慕胡广、黄琼为人，故为气概者所不重。
现代文：曾经仰慕胡广、黄琼的为人，因而，被提倡气节的人所轻视。
English: He once admired Hu Guang and Huang Qiong, and was therefore despised by those who advocated qi jie.

古文：始领军于忠，以光旧德，事之。元叉于光亦深宗敬。
现代文：当初，领军于忠，因崔光与他有旧日的恩德，所以倾附于他；元叉对崔光也很敬重。
English: At the beginning, the leader of the army was Yu Zhong, because Cui Guang had the old friendship with him, so he was devoted to him; Yuan Zhao also respected Cui Guang.

古文：及郭祚、裴植见杀，清河王怿遇祸，光随时俯仰，竟不匡救，于是天下讥之。
现代文：郭祚、裴植被杀，清河王元怿遇到灾祸，崔光随时改变态度，不对他们匡救帮助，于是，被天下人所讥笑。
English: Guo Gan and Baizhe were killed, Qinghe Wang Yuanjun encountered a disaster, Cui Guang changed his attitude at any time and did not help them, so he was ridiculed by the world.

古文：自从贵达，罕所申荐，曾启其女婿彭城刘敬徽，云敬徽为荆州五陇戍主，女随夫行，常虑寇抄，南北分张，乞为徐州长兼别驾，暂集京师。
现代文：他自从得到高官重爵后，很少再推荐别人。他曾向朝廷启奏过自己的女婿、彭城人刘敬徽的事，说敬徽在荆州五陇担任守将，女儿跟随丈夫在任所。他因此常常忧虑敌寇去袭击。自己又和女儿南北分离，请求让女婿任徐州长兼别驾，暂时住在京城。
English: Since he was given the title of high-ranking official, he rarely recommended others. He once told the imperial court about his son-in-law, Liu Jinghui, a native of Pengcheng, saying that Jinghui served as a guard in Wuxi, Jingzhou, and that his daughter followed her husband in the post. He was therefore often worried about enemy raiders attacking. He separated from his daughter Nanbei and requested that his son-in-law be appointed governor of Xu and live temporarily in Beijing.

古文：明帝许之。
现代文：孝明帝答应了他的要求。
English: Emperor Xiaoming agreed to his request.

古文：时人比之张禹。
现代文：世人因此将他比作张禹。
English: The world therefore likened him to Zhang Yu.

古文：光初为黄门则让宋弁；为中书监让汝南王悦；为太常让刘芳；为少傅让元晖、穆绍、甄琛；为国子祭酒让清河王怿、任城王澄；为车骑、仪同让江阳王继，又让灵太后父胡国珍，皆顾望时情，议者以为矫饰。
现代文：他初任黄门，则辞让给宋弁；任中书监，则辞让给汝南王元悦；任太常，则辞让给刘芳；任少傅，则给元晖、穆绍、甄琛；任国子祭酒，则辞让给清河王元怿、任城王元澄；任车骑、仪同，则辞让给江阳王元继，又辞让给灵太后的父亲胡国珍，都是他观望形势作出的不同选择。
English: When he was first appointed as Huangmen, he resigned to Song Ben; when he was appointed as a middle school librarian, he resigned to Runan King Yuan Yue; when he was appointed as Taizhang, he resigned to Liu Fang; when he was appointed as Shao Fu, he resigned to Yuan Xuan, Musao, Zhen Xuan; when he was appointed as the son of the country, he resigned to Qinghe King Yuan Xuan, and when he was appointed as the king of the city, he resigned to Yuan Cheng; when he was appointed as the chariot and horse rider, he resigned to Jiangyang King Yuan Zhi; and when he was appointed as the father of the

古文：崇信佛法，礼拜读诵，老而逾甚。
现代文：所以，人们议论他过于矫情。他相信佛教，礼拜佛像，诵读佛经，年纪逾老而迷信逾深。
English: He believes in Buddhism, worships Buddha statues, recites Buddhist scriptures, and is very old and superstitious.

古文：终日怡怡，未曾恚忿。
现代文：终日怡然自得，不再烦恼生气。
English: I feel happy and content all day long, and I don't get upset or angry anymore.

古文：曾于门下省昼坐读经，有鸽飞集膝前，遂入于怀。缘臂上肩，久之乃去。
现代文：曾在门下省白天坐着读书，有一只鸽子飞到他的膝前，又飞到他的怀里，沿着胳膊上到他的肩头，过了很久才飞去。
English: Once, when he was sitting under the gate reading a book in the daytime, a pigeon flew to his knees, then to his arms, up his arm to his shoulder, and only flew away after a long time.

古文：曾祖辑，南徙青州，因仕宋为太山太守。
现代文：僧俗两道有数十人写诗赞颂。每次被和尚、达官贵人邀请讲解《维摩》、《十地经》，听众常常有数百人。
English: Dozens of people from both the monastic and secular worlds wrote poems in praise of him. Each time, he was invited by monks and dignitaries to give a lecture on "Vima" and "Ten Classics," and the audience often numbered in the hundreds.

古文：祖修之，清河太守。
现代文：崔亮，字敬儒，清河东武成人，魏中尉崔琰的后代。
English: Cui Liang, also known as Jing Ru, Qinghe Dongwu adult, descendant of Wei Lieutenant Cui Xi.

古文：父元孙，尚书郎。
现代文：父亲崔元孙任尚书郎。
English: His father was Choe Won Sonin Sho Shuro.

古文：青州刺史沈文秀之叛，宋明帝使元孙讨之，为文秀所害。
现代文：青州刺史沈文秀反叛，宋明帝派崔元孙讨伐，被沈文秀杀害。
English: Shen Wenshu rebelled in Qingzhou, Song Ming Emperor sent Choe Won Son to fight, and he was killed by Shen Wenshu.

古文：亮母房携亮依其叔祖冀州刺史道固于历城，及慕容白曜平三齐，内徙桑乾为平齐人。
现代文：崔亮的母亲房氏带着他到历城投奔叔祖、冀州刺史崔道固。十岁时又依靠叔父崔幼孙。家境贫困，他常租书学习。
English: Cui Liang's mother, Fang, took him to Licheng to join his uncle, Jizhou Jinshi Cui Daogu. At the age of ten, he relied on his uncle Cui's young grandson. The family was poor, and he often rented books to study.

古文：时年十岁，常依季父幼孙。居贫，佣书自业。时陇西李冲当朝任事，亮族兄光往依之，谓亮曰： 安能久事笔砚而不往托李氏也？
现代文：当时，陇西人李冲在朝廷掌握大权，崔亮的族兄崔光去投靠他，并对崔亮说： 您怎么能长久地与笔墨纸砚打交道，而不去依附李冲呢？
English: At that time, Li Chong, a native of Shaanxi, held great power in the imperial court. Cui Liang's elder brother Cui Guang went to him and said to Cui Liang: "How can you deal with pen, ink and paper for a long time without adhering to Li Chong?"

古文：彼家饶书，因可得学。 
现代文：他家里有很多书，借此机会可以阅读。 
English: He has a lot of books at home and takes the opportunity to read.

古文：亮曰： 弟妹饥寒，岂容独饱？
现代文：崔亮答道 ：弱弟幼妹在家忍饥受寒，我怎么能扔下他们，独自一个人去享受温饱？
English: Cui Liang replied, "My weak brothers and sisters are at home suffering from hunger and cold. How can I leave them behind and enjoy food and clothing alone?"

古文：自可观书于市，安能看人眉睫乎！ 
现代文：我自可以到市上租书，又怎能去他家看他们的脸色呢？ 
English: I can go to the market to rent books, but how can I go to his house to see their faces?

古文：光言之于冲，冲召亮与语，因谓曰： 比见卿先人《相命论》，使人胸中无复怵迫之念。
现代文：崔光将他的情况告诉给了李冲，李冲召见他，问： 你的先人写了一篇《相命论》，读了使人不再产生受利用和驱迫的想法。
English: Cui Guang told Li Chong about his situation. Li Chong summoned him and asked: Your ancestors wrote an article called "Theory of Fate" and read it so that people would no longer have the idea of being exploited and forced.

古文：今遂亡本，卿能记之不？ 
现代文：我把这本书丢失了，你还能记得吗？ 
English: I lost this book. Do you still remember?

古文：亮即为诵之，涕泪交零，声韵不异。
现代文：崔亮便立即背诵，涕泪齐下，声音和韵调却不改变。
English: Cui Liang immediately recited it with tears streaming down her face, but her voice and rhyme did not change.

古文：冲甚奇之，迎为馆客。冲谓其兄子彦曰： 大崔生宽和笃雅，汝宜友之；小崔生峭整清彻，汝宜敬之，二人终将大至。 
现代文：李冲十分惊奇，将他接到家中为馆客，又对哥哥的儿子李彦说： 崔光宽厚静雅，你应该把他作为朋友；崔亮清峻透彻，你应该敬重他。这两个人将来都会大有作为。 
English: Li Chong was very surprised to receive him at home as a guest, and said to his brother's son Li Yan: Cui Guang is broad and quiet, you should treat him as a friend; Cui Liang is clear and thorough, you should respect him. Both of these people will have great achievements in the future.

古文：冲荐之为中书博士，转议郎，寻迁尚书二千石。
现代文：李冲举荐崔亮为中书博士，转任议郎，不久又迁任尚书二千石。
English: Li Chong recommended that Cui Liang be promoted to Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy, and he was transferred to the post of deputy, and soon he was transferred to the post of 2,000-koku calligrapher.

古文：孝文在洛，欲创革旧制，选置百官，谓群臣曰： 与朕举一吏部郎，必使才望兼允者，给卿三日假。 
现代文：孝文帝迁都洛阳，想改革旧的制度，重新选拔官吏，对群臣们说： 给我推荐一名吏部郎官，一定要才学和声望都合适的。我给你们三天期限。 
English: Emperor Xiaowen moved the capital to Luoyang. He wanted to reform the old system and re-select officials, so he said to his courtiers: "Recommend me a bureaucrat. You must have the right education and reputation. I will give you a three-day deadline."

古文：又一日，孝文曰： 朕已得之，不烦卿辈也。 
现代文：过了一天，孝文帝又对大家说 ：我已得到了吏部郎官的合适人选，不烦劳你们了。 
English: A day later, Emperor Xiaowen said to everyone, "I have found the right person to be the head of the Imperial Household Agency, so I won't bother you anymore."

古文：驿征亮兼吏部郎。
现代文：他赶快征召崔亮任吏部郎。
English: He quickly conscripted Cui Liang to serve as secretary.

古文：俄为太子中舍人，迁中书侍郎，兼尚书左丞。
现代文：不久，任太子中舍人，迁任中书侍郎，兼尚书左丞。
English: Soon, he was appointed as the Prince's junior attendant, transferred to the post of junior secretary, and concurrently became the junior secretary.

古文：亮虽历显任，其妻不免亲事舂簸，孝文闻之，嘉其清贫，诏带野王令。
现代文：他虽然历任显要职务，但妻子仍亲自料理舂米做饭一类的家务。孝文帝听说后，十分赞许他的清贫。
English: Although he had held important positions, his wife still personally took care of household chores such as cooking sticky rice. Upon hearing this, Emperor Xiaowen highly praised his poverty.

古文：孝明亲政，迁给事黄门侍郎，仍兼吏部郎，领青州大中正。
现代文：宣武帝掌管朝政，任崔亮为黄门侍郎，仍兼任吏部郎，被封为青州大中正。
English: Emperor Xuanwu was in charge of the imperial government, and appointed Cui Liang as the Yellow Gate's chamberlain. He also served as the secretary and was appointed as the vice-president of Qingzhou University.

古文：亮自参选事，垂将十年，廉慎明决，为尚书郭祚所委，每云： 非崔郎中选事不办。 
现代文：崔亮在吏部任职将近十年，廉洁谨慎，明于决断，被尚书郭祚器重，他常说 ：不是崔郎中铨选的职官，就不要办理。 
English: Cui Liang served in the Personnel Department for nearly ten years. He was honest, prudent, and decisive, and was highly respected by Shang Shuguo. He often said, "If you are not an official selected by Cui Lang, don't apply."

古文：寻除散骑常侍，仍为黄门。
现代文：不久，他任散骑常侍，仍为黄门侍郎。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a straggler and a regular attendant, still serving as a Yellow Gate attendant.

古文：迁度支尚书，领御史中尉。
现代文：升任为度支尚书，兼御史中尉。
English: Promoted to Doushishosho, concurrently Lieutenant of Goshi.

古文：白迁都之后，经略四方，又营洛邑，费用甚广。
现代文：朝廷自从迁都洛阳之后，向四方开疆拓土，又营造洛阳城，费用很大。
English: After moving the capital to Luoyang, the imperial court expanded its territory to the four directions and built Luoyang City, which was very expensive.

古文：亮在度支，别立条格，岁省亿计。
现代文：崔亮任度支尚书，订立规章制度，每年节省数以亿计。
English: Cui Liang has set up rules and regulations, saving hundreds of millions of yuan every year.

古文：又议修汴、蔡三渠以通边运，公私赖焉。
现代文：又建议修建汴、蔡两条渠，与边境交通运输。
English: In addition, it is proposed to build two canals, Zou and Cai, and improve border transportation.

古文：侍中、广平王怀以母弟之亲，左右不遵宪法，敕亮推究。
现代文：朝中的公私大事都依赖他。侍中、广平王元怀仗着是宣武帝的亲兄弟，不遵守国家法纪，朝廷命崔亮调查处分。
English: The Emperor and Empress relied on him for all their public and private affairs. A chamberlain, Guangping Wang Yuanhai, who claimed to be Emperor Xuanwu's own brother, did not comply with state laws and regulations, and the imperial court ordered Cui Liang to investigate and punish him.

古文：宣武禁怀不通宾客者久之。
现代文：宣武帝因而有很长时间禁止元怀与外人接触。
English: Emperor Xuanwu therefore banned Yuan Huai from contact with outsiders for a long time.

古文：后因宴集，怀侍亲使忿，欲陵突亮。
现代文：后来在一次宴会上，元怀依恃皇帝的关系发泄私愤，想污辱崔亮。
English: Later, at a banquet, Yuan Huai took advantage of the emperor's relationship to vent his personal anger and wanted to insult Cui Liang.

古文：亮乃正色责之，即起于宣武前脱冠请罪，遂拜辞欲出。
现代文：崔亮面色严肃地斥责他，并起身到宣武帝面前脱下官帽请求治罪，叩拜后就要出去。
English: Cui Liang sternly reprimanded him, and stood up in front of Emperor Xuanwu to take off his official cap and plead for punishment. After bowing, he would go out.

古文：宣武曰： 广平粗疏，向来又醉，卿之所悉，何乃如此也！
现代文：宣武帝劝阻说 ：元怀性格粗鲁，又喝醉了酒，你都是知道的，又何必这样呢？ 
English: Emperor Xuanwu dissuaded him, saying, "You know that Yuan Huai is rude and drunk, so why do you have to do this?

古文：遂诏亮复坐，令怀谢焉。
现代文：便命他重新坐下，让元怀向他谢罪。
English: He then ordered him to sit down again and let Yuan Hua apologize to him.

古文：亮外虽方正，内亦承候时情。
现代文：崔亮虽然外表端方正直，性情却也随和。
English: Although Cui Liang is honest on the outside, his temperament is also easy-going.

古文：宣传左右郭神安颇被宣武识遇，以弟托亮，亮引为御史。
现代文：宣传左右郭神安很被宣武帝赏识，他把弟弟的事托付崔亮，崔亮将他的弟弟推荐任御史。
English: Guo Shen'an was highly appreciated by Emperor Xuanwu, and he entrusted his brother's affairs to Cui Liang, who recommended his brother to be appointed as imperial historian.

古文：及神安败后，因集禁中，宣武令兼侍中卢昶宣旨责亮曰： 在法官，何故受左右嘱请！ 
现代文：郭神安因犯罪被关在宫中。宣武帝命兼侍中卢昶宣读圣旨，责备崔亮说： 你是执掌法律的官员，为什么枉法受人请托？ 
English: Guo Shen'an was locked up in the palace for committing a crime. On the order of Emperor Xuanwu, Lu Wei, who was also an attendant, read out the imperial edict and reproached Cui Liang, saying, "You are an official in charge of the law, why do you abuse the law by accepting someone's commission?

古文：亮拜谢而已，无以上对。
现代文：他只有叩头谢罪，却无言对答。
English: He only bowed his head in apology, but did not say a word.

古文：转都官尚书，又转七兵，领廷尉卿，加散骑常侍。徐州刺史元昞抚御失和，诏亮驰驿安抚。亮至，劾昞处以大辟，劳赉绥慰，百姓帖然。除安西将军、雍州刺史。
现代文：转任都官尚书。徐州刺史元日丙为政无方，引起地方骚动，朝廷命崔亮赶快去安抚，崔亮到后，奏报元日丙的罪过当处以大辟，对地方士绅百姓进行慰问安抚，民情很快平静下来。任安西将军、雍州刺史。
English: He was transferred to the post of the governor of the capital, Shangshu. Xuzhou Zhishi Yuan Rong was helpless in politics, causing local turmoil. The imperial court ordered Cui Liang to quickly pacify. After Cui Liang arrived, he reported the crime of Yuan Rong to the local gentry and the people, and the situation soon calmed down. He was appointed as the general of Anxi and the governor of Yongzhou.

古文：城北渭水浅不通船，行人艰阻。
现代文：州城北面的渭水因水浅不能通船，行人因而受到阻隔。
English: Due to the shallowness of the Surabaya water to the north of the provincial capital, boats cannot pass through, and pedestrians are therefore blocked.

古文：亮谓寮佐曰： 昔杜预乃造河梁，况此有异长河，且魏、晋之日，亦自有桥。
现代文：崔亮对僚属们说 ：过去杜预在黄河上建造桥梁，何况渭水与黄河不同，魏晋时期，这里又架起过桥梁呢？
English: Cui Liang said to his colleagues: In the past, Du Yu built bridges on the Yellow River. What's more, Surabaya is different from the Yellow River. During the Wei and Jin Dynasties, bridges were also built here.

古文：吾今决欲营之。 
现代文：我今天决定营造桥梁。 
English: I decided today to build bridges.

古文：咸曰： 水浅，不可为浮桥；泛长无恆，又不可施柱。恐难成立。 
现代文：大家都说： 水太浅，不能架设浮桥；河水泛滥不定，又不能埋设桥柱，恐怕难以造成。 
English: Everyone said: The water is too shallow to build a pontoon bridge; the river is flooding erratically, and it is not possible to bury the bridge pillars. I'm afraid it will be difficult to do.

古文：亮曰： 昔秦居咸阳，横桥度渭，以像阁道，此即以柱为桥。
现代文：崔亮说： 过去秦人在咸阳，曾在渭水上架桥，好像是两座楼阁中的通道。这是在柱子上架设。
English: Cui Liang said: In the past, the Qin people in Xianyang used to build a bridge over the Surabaya River. It was like a passageway between two towers. It was built on pillars.

古文：会天大雨，山水暴至，浮出长木数百根，籍此为用，桥遂成立。百姓利之，至今犹名崔公桥。
现代文：现在，恐怕无法得到这些长大的木柱。 适逢天降大雨，洪水暴涨，漂来数百根长木。用这些作木柱，桥梁便建成了，百姓受益不少，至今，桥仍叫崔公桥。
English: Now, I'm afraid I won't be able to get hold of these growing wooden posts. It was a time of heavy rain, flooding, and hundreds of long trees floating down. Using these as wooden posts, the bridge was built, and the people benefited a lot. To this day, the bridge is still called Cui Gong Bridge.

古文：亮性公清，敏于断决，所在并号称职，三辅服其德政。宣武嘉之，诏赐衣马被褥。
现代文：崔亮公正清廉，决断迅速，历任官职都很称职。三辅之地的官民都很敬佩他的德政，宣武帝赞赏他，下诏赐给他衣服、马匹、被褥。
English: Cui Liang was fair and incorruptible, he made decisions quickly, and his successive officials were very competent. The officials and people in the Three Subsidiary Provinces all admired his German politics, Emperor Xuanwu appreciated him, and gave him clothes, horses, and bedding.

古文：后纳其女为九嫔，征为太常卿，摄吏部事。
现代文：后来，又将他的女儿纳为九嫔，任他为太常卿，掌管吏部的事务。
English: Later, he also raised his daughter to the rank of Jiuyong and appointed him as the First Secretary of the Central Military Commission, in charge of the affairs of the General Staff Department.

古文：孝明初，出为定州刺史。
现代文：孝明帝初年，他离开京城任定州刺史。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaoming, he left Beijing and was appointed the governor of Dingzhou.

古文：梁左游击将军赵祖悦率众据硖石，诏亮假镇南将军，齐王萧宝夤镇东将军，章下王融安南将军，并使持节，督诸军以讨之。
现代文：南梁左游击将军赵祖悦率军占据硖石，朝廷命他为镇南将军，齐王萧宝夤为镇东将军，章武王元融为安南将军，共同持节，督促各路人马讨伐梁军。
English: South Liang Province left-wing guerrilla general Zhao Zuyue led the army to occupy Shanshi. The imperial court appointed him as Zhenan general, Qi Wang Xiaobao as Zhendong general, Zhang Wu Wangyuan as Annan general. They jointly celebrated the festival and urged everyone to fight against Liang's army.

古文：亮至硖石，祖悦出城逆战，大破之。
现代文：崔亮到达硖石，赵祖悦出城迎战，被崔亮打得大败。
English: When Cui Liang arrived in Shanshi, Zhao Zuyue went out to meet him and was soundly defeated by Cui Liang.

古文：祖悦复于城外置二栅，欲拒军，亮焚击破之。
现代文：赵祖悦又在城外设置两道栅栏，想抗拒魏军，被崔亮烧毁攻破。
English: Zhao Zuyue also set up two fences outside the city to resist the Wei army, which were burned and breached by Cui Liang.

古文：亮与李崇为水陆之期，日日进攻，而崇不至。
现代文：崔亮与李崇约好从水陆两路进攻的日期，他天天率军向敌人进攻，而李崇却爽约不至。
English: Cui Liang and Li Chong agreed on the date of the attack from land and water. He led the army to attack the enemy every day, but Li Chong did not keep his promise.

古文：平表亮辄还京，失乘胜之机，阙水陆之会，今处亮死，上议。
现代文：等到李平率军到来，李崇才进军，一起打败了硖石的敌兵。崔亮因立有战功，晋号为镇北将军。李平率部分军队，准备水陆两路一齐进发，进攻淮河堤堰上的敌军。
English: It was not until Li Ping arrived with his army that Li Chong marched in and together they defeated the enemy soldiers of Shanshi. Cui Liang was awarded the title of Zhenbei General for his military exploits. Li Ping led a part of the army, preparing to advance on both land and water to attack the enemy forces on the dam of the Huaihe River.

古文：灵太后令曰： 亮去留自擅，违我经略，虽有小捷，岂免大咎。
现代文：崔亮违拗李平的节制，以有病为由请求回京，人随着奏章一起出发。
English: In defiance of Li Ping's restraint, Cui Liang requested to return to Beijing on the grounds of illness, and everyone set off together with the orchestra.

古文：但吾摄御万机，庶兹恶杀，可特听以功补过。 
现代文：李平上表奏劾他擅自回京，以至失去了乘胜打击敌人，使水陆两路会合作战的战机，提议将他处死，请朝廷议决。灵太后不同意将他杀死，下诏命他将功折过。
English: Li Ping publicly accused him of returning to Beijing without permission, to the extent that he lost a fighter plane that could have been used to defeat the enemy and make the land and sea forces fight together. He proposed that he be put to death, and asked the Imperial Court for a ruling. The Empress Dowager did not agree to kill him, and issued a decree ordering him to serve out his term.

古文：及平至，亮与争功禁中，形于声色。
现代文：李平回到京城，两个人在宫中声色俱厉，争夸功劳。
English: When Li Ping returned to Beijing, the two men were at loggerheads in the palace, arguing about their merits.

古文：寻除殿中尚书，迁吏部尚书。
现代文：不久，任殿中尚书，又迁任吏部尚书。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the post of secretary of the palace, and then moved to the post of secretary of the personnel department.

古文：时羽林新害张彝之后，灵太后令武官得依资入选。
现代文：这时，羽林军刚害死张彝后不久，灵太后命武官可以依靠资历入选为官。
English: At this time, shortly after the Ulin Army had just killed Zhang Xuan, the Empress Dowager ordered that military attachés could be selected as officers based on their qualifications.

古文：官员既少，应选者多，前尚书李韶循常擢人，百姓大为怨。
现代文：官员的名额少，应选的人很多，前任吏部尚书李韶根据常例选拔人才，百姓大为怨忿。
English: The quota of officials is small, and there are many people to be elected. The former head of the personnel department, Shangshu Li, selects talents according to the usual practice, and the people are very resentful.

古文：亮乃奏为格制，不问士之贤愚，专以停解日月为断，虽复官须此人，停日后者终不得。庸才下品，年月久者灼然先用。
现代文：崔亮便奏请朝廷订立标准，不管人的贤能与愚笨，只凭离职的时间为标准。虽然某个官职需要这个人，但离职较晚的人即使有才能，也不能得到这个职务；那些庸碌无能的人，离职时间长的仍可优先被选用。
English: Cui Liang then asked the imperial court to set a standard, regardless of the person's ability and stupidity, only by the time of departure as the standard. Although a certain official position needs this person, those who leave the office late, even if they have talent, cannot get this position; those mediocre incompetent people who have a long time to leave the office can still be preferred.

古文：沈滞者皆称其能。亮外甥司空谘义刘景安书规亮曰： 殷、周以乡塾贡士，两汉由州郡荐才，魏、晋因循，又置中正。
现代文：那些长久沉滞的人都称赞这个办法好，而他的外甥、司空咨议刘景安却写信规劝他，说： 殷、周两代让乡间私塾给国家贡献读书人，两汉时由州郡举荐人才，魏、晋因循汉制，又设置中正官，专负察举之责。
English: Those who had been stagnant for a long time praised this method as a good one, but his nephew, Liu Jing'an, the Secretary of Civil Aviation Consultation, wrote a letter to persuade him, saying: Yin and Zhou allowed the country's private schools to contribute readers to the country. During the Han Dynasty, talents were recommended by the state and county. Wei and Jin followed the Han system and set up a middle-ranking official to be responsible for the inspection and recommendation.

古文：谛观在昔，莫不审举，虽未尽美，足应十收六七。
现代文：调查了解察举对象的过去，没有不清楚的。虽然不尽善尽美，但十有六七都选拔得人。
English: There is nothing unclear about the investigation into the past of the subject of the investigation. Although it is not perfect, in six out of ten cases, people are selected.

古文：而朝廷贡才，止求其文，不取其理。
现代文：而现在朝廷选拔人才，只看他写文章的词藻，不看其中的道理。
English: And now the imperial court selects talent, only looking at his writing style, not the reason for it.

古文：察孝廉唯论章句，不及治道；立中正不考人才行业，空辨氏姓高下。至于取士之途不溥，沙汰之理未精。
现代文：考察孝廉只评论他的文章句读，不涉及他治国的本领；中正官不考察人才品行的好坏，事业的成败，只去分辨姓氏的高下，以至于使选人取士的道路不畅通，淘汰庸劣卑陋者的标准不准确。
English: The inspection of the filial piety only comments on his sentence reading of the article, but does not involve his ability to govern the country; the middle and high officials do not examine the quality of the talent, the success or failure of the cause, but only distinguish the high and low of the surname, so that the road of selecting people is not smooth, and the standard for eliminating the mediocre and low is not accurate.

古文：而舅属当铨衡，宜须改张易调。
现代文：舅父你身居铨选人才的机衡要职，应该改弦易张。
English: Uncle, you are in the important position of selecting talents, you should change your mind.

古文：如何反为停年格以限之，天下士子谁复修厉名行哉？ 
现代文：为什么反而制定离职的年限标准，去限制那些奋发有为的人，天下的读书人谁还厉修学问和名节呢？ 
English: Why, on the contrary, set a standard for the length of time for leaving office, to restrict those who have made great efforts, and the readers of the world who have vigorously cultivated knowledge and famous festivals?

古文：亮答书曰：
现代文：崔亮写信作答，说： 你说的很有道理。
English: Cui Liang wrote a letter in reply, saying: What you said makes a lot of sense.

古文：汝所言乃有深致。
现代文：前几天定的这个标准，是有一定道理的。
English: This standard, which was set a few days ago, makes sense.

古文：今已为汝所怪，千载之后，谁知我哉！
现代文：现在已被你责怪，千年之后，谁能了解我呢？
English: Blamed by you now, a thousand years later, who can understand me?

古文：可静念吾言，当为汝论之。
现代文：你静心看我的信，我当给你说清楚。
English: Read my letter attentively and I will explain it to you clearly.

古文：吾兼正六为吏部郎，三为尚书，铨衡所宜，颇知之矣。
现代文： 我一生六任吏部郎官，三任尚书。对于铨选大权的重要，是十分了解的。
English: In my lifetime, I have held six posts of liaison officer and three posts of secretary. I am fully aware of the importance of the power of election.

古文：但古今不同，时宜须异。
现代文：但是，古代与今天不同，时代变化，做法也不相同。
English: However, ancient times and today are different, times change, and practices are also different.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：昔有中正品其才第，上之尚书，尚书据状，量人授职，此乃与天下群贤共爵人也。
现代文：过去中正官考察人选的才能门第，报告给尚书，尚书根据情况，量人授职，这是将官爵交给天下的贤能俊才之士共同分享啊。
English: In the past, the high-ranking officials examined the talents of the candidates, and reported to Shangshu. According to the situation, Shangshu measured the people to be appointed. This is to share the peerage with the world's capable and talented people.

古文：吾谓当尔之时，无遗才、无滥举矣，而当犹云十收六七。
现代文：我认为那时天下没有遗漏人才，没有滥肆举荐的情况，而你却还说十个人中有六七个是举荐得当的。
English: I think that at that time there was no shortage of talent in the world, no excessive recommendation, and yet you said that six or seven out of ten people were recommended properly.

古文：况今日之选，专归尚书，以一人之鉴，照察天下，刘毅所云一吏部、两郎中而欲究镜人物，何异以管窥天而求其博哉！
现代文：而今天选拔人才，权力全归尚书，靠一个人的鉴别能力去考察天下的人才，正如刘毅所说的一个吏部尚书，两个吏部郎中，就想察明所有的人物，何异于以管窥天，怎么能全面呢？
English: But today, when selecting talent, all power belongs to Shang Shu, relying on a person's ability to identify to examine the world's talent. As Liu Yi said, one cadre is Shang Shu, two cadres are Lang, and they want to detect all the characters. What is different from peering into the sky, how can it be comprehensive?

古文：今勋人甚多，又羽林入选。
现代文：现在有功勋的人很多，再则，羽林健儿又要入选为官，武夫们崛起进入仕途。
English: Now, there are many people with meritorious deeds. In addition, Ulin Jian'er will be elected as an official, and warriors will rise to enter the career.

古文：武夫崛起，不解书计，唯可彍弩前驱，指踪捕噬而已。忽令垂组乘轩，求其烹鲜之效，未曾操刀，而使专割。
现代文：他们不知书达礼，只知道拉弓驱驰，追杀敌人，忽然让他们穿着峨冠博带的官服，乘着高大宽敞的车子，要求他们有治国安邦的才能，正如没有拿过刀，而让他掌管菜案。
English: They don't know how to read and write, they only know how to draw a bow and drive away, chase and kill the enemy. Suddenly, they put them in official uniforms with crowns and sashes, on a tall and spacious car, and require them to have the ability to govern the country, just as they did not take a knife, and let him take charge of the kitchen case.

古文：又武人至多，官员至少，不可周溥。
现代文：另外，武人太多，官员数额太少，不能让每个人都得到官职。
English: In addition, there are too many warriors and too few officials, and it is impossible for everyone to get an official post.

古文：自是贤愚同贯，泾、渭无别。
现代文：假如让十人担任一个职务，还无官位可授，更何况每人都希望得到一个官位，他们怎么能不怨忿呢？
English: If ten men are appointed to a post, and there is no post to be filled, and each of them wants a post, how can they not be angry?

古文：魏之失才，从亮始也。历侍中、太常卿、左光禄大夫、尚书右仆射。
现代文：我最近在朝廷当面争执，提出不应该让军人们入选官职，请求只赐给他们爵位，增加他们俸禄，却不被采纳，所以暂时定下这个标准。 后来，甄琛、元修义、城阳王元徽继任吏部尚书，认为崔亮的办法对自己方便有利，相继执行。
English: I recently argued in front of the imperial court, suggesting that soldiers should not be allowed to be elected to official positions, requesting only to grant them a title and increase their salary, but it was not accepted, so I temporarily set this standard.Later, Zhen Rong, Yuan Xiu Yi, and Chengyang Wang Yuanhui succeeded to the position of cadres, and thought that Cui Liang's method was convenient and beneficial to themselves, and implemented it successively.

古文：时刘腾擅权，亮托妻刘氏，倾身事之。
现代文：自此，贤愚同时为官，泾水渭水没有区别，北魏丧失人才，就从崔亮这里开始。当时，刘腾专擅朝政，崔亮让妻子刘氏倾身侍奉刘腾。
English: Since then, both the wise and the foolish have served as officials, and there is no difference between the wise and the foolish. The loss of talent in the Northern Wei Dynasty began with Cui Liang. At that time, Liu Teng was exclusively in charge of the government, and Cui Liang let his wife Liu devote herself to serving Liu Teng.

古文：故频年之中，名位隆赫。有识者讥之。
现代文：所以，他数年之中官位显赫，有见识的人都讥笑他。
English: That's why, during his years as a high-ranking official, people with insight ridiculed him.

古文：转尚书仆射，加散骑常侍。
现代文：转尚书仆射，加散骑常侍。
English: He changed his name to Shang Shufu Ya, and added Sanzhi, a regular attendant.

古文：疽发于背，明帝遣舍人问疾，亮上表乞解仆射，诏不许。
现代文：因痈疽在脊背上发作，孝明帝派内侍问候，他上表请求解除仆射的职务，朝廷下诏不同意，他不久去世。
English: Due to the onset of gangrene on his dorsal spine, Emperor Xiaoming sent greetings to the chamberlains. He requested to be relieved of his duties as a footman, but the court did not agree, and he died soon after.

古文：父幼孙，太原太守。光韶事亲以孝悌。
现代文：崔亮在雍州时读《杜预传》，见他做了八盘磨，称赞石磨对百姓有益，便教人做碾。
English: When Cui Liang was in Yongzhou, he read "Du Zhaoxuan" and saw that he had made an eight-wheel mill. He praised the stone mill as beneficial to the people and taught others to grind.

古文：初除奉朝请，光韶与弟光伯孪生，操业相侔，特相友爱，遂经吏部尚书李冲，让官于光伯，辞色恳至。
现代文：他任仆射后，奏请朝廷在张方桥东堤的谷水建造石磨数十盘，其效率增加十倍，使用起来十分方便。崔光韶，是崔亮的从父兄弟。最初被朝廷授予奉朝请，光韶与兄弟光伯是孪生，两人的学业相当，相处十分友爱。光韶便通过吏部尚书李冲，把官职让给光伯，表情和言辞十分恳切。
English: After he assumed the position of minion, he asked the imperial court to build dozens of stone mills in the valley of the east embankment of Zhangfang Bridge. Its efficiency increased tenfold, and it was very convenient to use. Cui Guangyao was Cui Liang's half-brother. He was initially awarded by the imperial court to serve the imperial court. Guangyao and his brother Guangbo were twins. Their studies were equal, and they got along very amicably. Guangyao passed the official position to Guangbo through Shangshu Li Chong of the Personnel Department. His expression and words were very sincere.

古文：冲为奏闻，孝文嘉而许之。
现代文：李冲替他奏闻朝廷，孝文帝表彰了他的行为，并同意他的请求。
English: Li Chong reported on his behalf to the imperial court, and Emperor Xiaowen commended his actions and agreed to his request.

古文：太和二十年，以光韶为司空行参军，复请让从叔和，曰： 臣诚微贱，未登让品，属逢皇朝，耻无让德。 
现代文：太和二十一年，朝廷命他为司空行参军，他又请求将官职让给从叔崔和，说： 我实在卑微轻贱，没有具备辞让的品格；生逢圣朝，我耻于没有辞让的道德。 
English: In the twenty-first year of his reign, the imperial court ordered him to join the army as a cadet. He also asked to give up his official position to his uncle Cui He, saying: I am really humble and lowly, and I do not have the character to make concessions; I was born in the Holy Dynasty, and I am ashamed of the morality of not making concessions.

古文：和亦谦退，辞而不当。孝文善之，遂以和为广陵王国常侍。
现代文：崔和也谦让，拒不任职，孝文帝称赞他们，便任崔和为广陵王的国常侍。
English: Cui He also humbly conceded, refusing to serve, and Emperor Xiaowen praised them, and then appointed Cui He as the national attendant of the Guangling King.

古文：寻敕光韶秘书郎，掌校华林御书。
现代文：不久，朝廷命崔光韶任秘书郎，掌管校勘华林的皇家图书。
English: Soon after, the imperial court appointed Cui Guangyao as secretary and in charge of the Royal Library of Kanghualin School.

古文：累迁青州中从事。
现代文：累次升迁，官任至青州中从事。
English: Repeatedly promoted, he served as a government official until he became a junior high school teacher in Qingzhou.

古文：后为司空骑兵参军，又兼司徒户曹。
现代文：后任司空骑兵参军，又兼任司徒户曹。
English: Later, he joined the army as an air cavalry officer, and also served as a house guard.

古文：出为济州辅国府司马，刺史高植甚知之，政事多委访焉。
现代文：出任济州辅国府司马，刺史高植十分信任他，政事大多向他征询意见。
English: He was appointed as the secretary of the Jeju Provincial Government, and Gao Zhi trusted him very much, and asked him for advice on most of the government affairs.

古文：迁青州平东府长史。
现代文：又迁任青州平东府长史。
English: He was also transferred to the post of governor of Qingzhou Pingdong Prefecture.

古文：府解，敕知州事。光韶清直明断，吏人畏爱之。
现代文：他清廉正直，明于决断，官吏百姓对他既敬畏又喜爱。回到朝廷，任司空从事中郎。
English: He was pure, honest, and decisive, and the officials and common people both feared and loved him. He returned to the imperial court, and was appointed as a middle-ranking official.

古文：入为司空从事中郎，以母老解官归养，赋诗展意，朝士属和者数十人。
现代文：因母亲年迈，请求解职回家奉养，并写诗表达心意。朝臣们与之唱和的有数十人。
English: Due to his mother's old age, he asked to be relieved of his duties so that he could take care of her and wrote a poem to express his feelings. There were dozens of courtiers who sang along with him.

古文：久之，征为司徒谘议，固辞不拜。
现代文：过了很久，朝廷征用他为司徒咨议，他坚决推辞。
English: After a long time, the Imperial Court requisitioned him as a consultant to the Stukas, but he firmly refused.

古文：光韶性严，声韵抗烈，与人平谈，常若震厉。
现代文：他性格严猛峭刻，说话声音高亢激烈。与人谈话，常常好像是发怒。
English: His personality is stern and abrupt, his voice high-pitched and intense. When he talks to people, it often seems to be in anger.

古文：至于兄弟议论，外闻谓为忿怒，然孔怀雍睦，人少逮之。
现代文：以至于兄弟间的议论，外面听了都认为在气忿争吵，实际上互相辞让，气氛和睦，一般人都很少能赶得上。
English: So much so that discussions between brothers, when heard outside, are thought to be angry quarrels, but in fact they are mutual concessions and a harmonious atmosphere. Ordinary people can rarely catch up.

古文：孝庄初，河间邢杲率河北流人十余万众攻逼州郡，刺史元俊忧不自安。
现代文：孝庄帝初年，河间人邢杲率领河北的流人十多万进逼州郡，刺史元俊忧虑愁思，很不安心。
English: In the first year of Emperor Xiaozhuang, more than one hundred thousand refugees from Hebei were led by the leader of the Hebei People's Liberation Army, and they came to Xuzhou County. Shih Yuanjun was worried and anxious, very uneasy.

古文：州人乞光韶为长史以镇之。
现代文：州人请求让光韶任长史镇守州城。
English: The people of the state requested that Guangyao be appointed as the governor of Changshi Town.

古文：时阳平路回寓居齐土，与杲潜相影响，引贼入郭，光韶临机处分，在难确然。
现代文：当时，阳平人路回寓居在齐地，与邢杲暗中联络，勾引敌兵进入州城的外郭。光韶面临危机，从容处置，镇定自若。
English: At that time, Yang Ping was living in Qiji, and he was in contact with Zou secretly to lure enemy soldiers into the outskirts of the state capital. Faced with a crisis, Guang Zou dealt with it calmly and calmly.

古文：贼退之后，刺史表光韶忠毅，朝廷嘉之，发使慰劳。
现代文：敌兵退后，刺史表彰他的忠诚勇敢果毅，朝廷也下令嘉奖他，派出使者前来慰劳。
English: The enemy soldiers retreated, and history commended his loyalty, bravery and determination. The imperial court also ordered to reward him and sent an envoy to comfort him.

古文：寻为东道军司。
现代文：不久，任东道军司。
English: Soon after, he became the host's military commander.

古文：及元颢入洛，自河以南，莫不风靡。
现代文：元颢入居洛阳后，黄河以南，莫不望风披靡。
English: After the Yuan Dynasty settled in Luoyang, south of the Yellow River, the wind was irresistible.

古文：刺史广陵王欣集文武以议所从，在坐之人，莫不失色。
现代文：刺史、广陵王元欣召集文臣武将商议下一步的去从，在座的人们没有不吃惊变色的。
English: Wang Yuanxin, the ruler of Zhishi and Guangling, called together the generals to discuss the next step. The people present were taken aback.

古文：光韶独抗言曰： 元颢受制梁国，称兵本朝，乱臣贼子，旷代少畴。
现代文：独有光韶大声说道 ：元颢投降了梁国，又向本国用兵，实在是历史上罕见的乱臣贼子。
English: Only Guangyao said in a loud voice: Yuan Zang surrendered Liang's country and sent troops to his own country. He was truly a ruffian thief, which is rare in history.

古文：何但大王家事，所宜切齿。等荷朝眷，未敢仰从。 
现代文：这不仅是大王您家中的事情，我们都应该对他切齿痛恨，我等受皇帝的恩宠，不敢顺从元颢。 
English: This is not only the matter of the great king in your family, we should all hate him with all our teeth. We are waiting for the grace of the emperor, and dare not obey the emperor.

古文：长史崔景茂、前瀛州刺史张烈、前郢州刺史房叔祖、征士张僧皓咸云： 军司议是。 欣乃斩颢使。
现代文：长史崔景茂等人都说 ：军司的意见很对。 
English: Choi Jingmao, the Chief of the General Staff, and others all said, "The opinion of the Generalissimo is very correct."

古文：寻征辅国将军，再迁廷尉卿。
现代文：元欣便杀了元颢派来的使者。不久他被征用为辅国将军，再升任为廷尉卿。
English: Yuan Xin then killed the envoy sent by Yuan Shao. Soon after, he was requisitioned as an auxiliary general and then promoted to the position of court lieutenant.

古文：秘书监祖莹以赃罪被劾。
现代文：秘书监祖莹因贪污罪被纠劾，光韶坚持要求依法重处。
English: Secretary Supervisor Zu Ying was impeached for corruption, and Guangya insisted that he be punished according to law.

古文：光韶必欲致之重法，太尉城阳王徽、尚书令临淮王彧、吏部尚书李神俊、侍中李彧并势望当时，皆为莹求宽。
现代文：太尉、城阳王元徽、尚书令、临淮王元、吏部尚书李神俊、侍中李位高权重，威望著于当时，都为祖莹说情，要求从宽处理。
English: Captain, Chengyang Wang Yuanhui, Shang Shuling, Lin Huai Wang Yuan, Li Shenjun, Shang Shuling of the Personnel Department, and Li Jizhong of the Chamberlain's Office were all highly respected at that time. They all interceded for Zu Ying and asked for lenient treatment.

古文：光韶正色曰： 朝贤执事，于舜之功，未闻其一，如何反为罪人言乎。 
现代文：光韶声色俱厉说道： 朝廷的贤臣办理公事，没有听说建立一件像尧舜那样的功业，为什么反而替犯罪的人说话呢？ 
English: Guang Rong said in a strident voice: The court's wise men handle public affairs, and they have not heard of establishing a work like Gong, so why do they speak for the criminal?

古文：其执意不回如此。
现代文：他就是这样敢于秉公执法。
English: That's how he dares to enforce the law impartially.

古文：永安据乱，遂还乡里。
现代文：永安年间，孝庄帝被尔朱荣杀害，崔光韶辞官还乡。
English: During the Yongan era, Emperor Xiaozhuang was killed by Er Zhu Rong, and Cui Guangyao returned to his hometown.

古文：光韶博学强辩，尤好理论，至于人伦名教，得失之间，榷而论之，不以一毫假物。
现代文：他学问广博，长于词辩，尤其喜好说理辩论，至于人伦纲常，正名定分的礼教，在是与非，对与错之间，能准确地分析论辩，一点也不凭借其他书籍和典章。
English: He has a broad knowledge, is good at rhetoric, and is particularly fond of reasoned debate. As for human ethics, the etiquette of correct name determination, he can accurately analyze and argue between right and wrong, right and wrong, without relying on other books and ordinances.

古文：家足于财，而性俭吝，衣马敝瘦，食味粗薄。
现代文：家中十分丰足，而性情吝啬，自己穿着破旧的衣服，骑着瘦马，吃的东西粗糙寡味。
English: His family was very rich, but his disposition was stingy. He wore worn-out clothes, rode a thin horse, and his food was coarse and tasteless.

古文：始光韶在都，同里人王蔓于夜遇盗，害其二子。
现代文：他在京城居住时，同乡人王蔓家夜晚被盗，两个儿子被盗贼杀害。
English: When he was living in Beijing, the home of his countryman Wang Meng was robbed at night, and his two sons were killed by the thieves.

古文：孝庄诏黄门高道穆，令加检捕，一坊之内，家别搜索。
现代文：孝庄帝命黄门高道穆搜捕，一坊之内，挨家挨户搜查。
English: Xiaozhuang Emperor ordered Huangmen Gao Daomu to be searched and arrested, and a house-to-house search was carried out within one square.

古文：至光韶宅，绫绢钱布匮箧充积。
现代文：到了光韶的府第，看到绫罗绸缎，金银财宝，装满了大箱小柜。
English: When they arrived at the bare-bones capital, they saw silk and silk brocades, gold and silver treasures, and large boxes and small cabinets filled with them.

古文：议者讥其矫啬。
现代文：人们都讥讽他矫揉造作，假装省俭。
English: People mocked him for being pretentious and pretending to be frugal.

古文：其家资产，皆光伯所营。
现代文：他家的资产，都是兄弟光伯经营的。
English: His family's assets are all managed by his brother, Guangbo.

古文：光伯亡，悉焚其契。
现代文：光伯死后，他将所有的契约文书都烧掉了。
English: After Guangbo's death, he burned all the contract documents.

古文：河间邢子才曾贷钱数万，后送还之。光韶曰： 此亡弟相贷，仆不知也。 
现代文：河间人邢子才曾向他家借钱数万，后来送还，他却说 ：这是我去世的弟弟借给你的，我不知道呀。 
English: Kawama-native Hanzo Cai once borrowed tens of thousands of dollars from his family and later returned it, but he said, "My deceased brother lent it to you, I don't know."

古文：竟不纳。
现代文：竟不接受。
English: It was not accepted.

古文：刺史元弼前妻，是光韶之继室兄女。
现代文：刺史元弼的前妻是他的继室哥哥的女儿。
English: Susumu Motohiro's ex-wife was the daughter of his stepbrother.

古文：弼贪婪不法，光韶以亲情亟相非责，弼衔之。
现代文：元弼贪赃枉法，他因为是亲戚，就极力劝告和批评元弼，元弼十分恼恨。
English: Because he was a relative, he tried his best to advise and criticize Yuan Shao. Yuan Shao was very angry.

古文：时耻翔反于州界，弼诬光韶子通与贼连结，囚其合家，考掠非理。
现代文：当时，耿翔在州中造反，元弼诬告光韶和他的儿子与反贼勾结，囚禁了他们全家，进行残酷的拷打。
English: At that time, Geng Xiang rebelled in the middle of the state, the Yuan Dynasty falsely accused Guangyao and his son of colluding with anti-thieves, imprisoned their whole family, and carried out cruel torture.

古文：而光韶与之辨争，词色不屈。
现代文：光韶和他争论，一点都不屈服。
English: She argued with him and did not give in at all.

古文：会樊子鹄为东道大使，知其见枉，理出之。时人劝令诣樊陈谢，光韶曰： 羊舌大夫已有成事，何劳往也！ 
现代文：恰逢樊子鹄任东道大使，知道他受了冤枉，据理将他释放，有人劝他到樊子鹄那里道谢，他说： 羊舌大夫已经完成了道义，何劳我再去呢？ 
English: It happened to coincide with Nian Zixuan's appointment as host ambassador. Knowing that he had been wronged, he was released. Someone advised him to go to Nian Zixuan to thank him. He said: "Dr. Yang Ziyi has already completed his moral duty. Why should I go again?"

古文：子鹄亦叹尚之。
现代文：樊子鹄听了对他更加尊敬。
English: I have a lot more respect for him now.

古文：后刺史侯深代下，疑惧，谋为不轨。夜劫光韶，以兵胁之，责以谋略。
现代文：后来，刺史侯深因更替降职，对朝廷心存疑惧，因而谋图不轨，夜晚劫持了光韶，威胁他给自己出谋划策。
English: Later, because of his demotion and suspicion of the imperial court, Zhi Shihoshen's plan went awry. He kidnapped Guangya at night and threatened him to come up with a plan for himself.

古文：光韶曰： 凡起兵须有名义，使君今日举动，直是作贼耳，知复何计！ 
现代文：光韶说： 凡起兵，必须有名义。使君您今天师出无名，真是要作贼呀。我还替你出什么计谋？ 
English: Kwang-soo said, "Anyone who raises an army must have a name and a meaning. For you to lead out a nameless army today is to be a thief. What else can I do for you?

古文：深虽恨之，敬而不敢害。
现代文：侯深虽然恼恨他，但却因敬重而不敢加害。
English: Although Hou Sheng resented him, he did not dare to harm him out of respect.

古文：寻除征东将军、金紫光禄大夫，不起。
现代文：他因时局动荡沉浮，朝廷多次变动，便闭门却扫，断绝一切交往。
English: Due to the ups and downs of the current situation and the many changes in the imperial court, he closed the door and cut off all contacts.

古文：光韶以世道屯邅，朝廷屡变，闭门却扫，吉凶断绝。诫子孙曰： 吾自谓立身无惭古烈，但以禄命有限，无容希世取进。
现代文：他告诫子孙们说： 我自认为有生以来的立身行事，无愧于古代的英烈，但因为禄食运数的限制，不迎合世事，一味进取。
English: He admonished his children and grandchildren, saying, "I believe that I have acted with integrity since I was born, and am worthy of the heroes of ancient times, but because of the limitation of the number of years of service, I do not meet the needs of the world, and I am determined to forge ahead.

古文：在官以来，不冒一级，官虽不达，经为九卿。
现代文：我出仕以来，没有越级升迁过一次，职位虽不显赫，但也位列九卿。
English: Since I have been in the service, I have not been promoted beyond my grade once. Although my position is not prominent, I am also ranked as one of the nine nobles.

古文：且吾平生素业，足以遗汝，官阀亦何足言也。
现代文：况且我平生创立的家业，足够留给你们受用，追求官位又何足称道呢？
English: Moreover, the family business that I have created in my lifetime is enough for you to use, so how can I be commended for pursuing an official position?

古文：吾既运薄，便经三娶，而汝之兄弟各不同生。
现代文：我命运不好，一生三次娶妻，你们兄弟几个都不是一母所生。
English: My fate is not good. I have been married three times in my life. Several of your brothers were not born from the same mother.

古文：合葬非古，吾百年之后，不须合也。
现代文：合葬并不是古礼，我去世之后，不需要合葬。
English: A joint funeral is not an ancient rite. After my death, there is no need for a joint funeral.

古文：然赠谥之及，出自君恩，岂容子孙自求之也？
现代文：朝廷赠谥号的事，是出自君主的恩德，怎么能让子孙们去讨要呢？
English: The bestowal of the imperial title by the court came from the monarch's benevolence. How could he allow his children and grandchildren to ask for it?

古文：勿须求赠。
现代文：你们不要向朝廷请求封赠。
English: Don't ask the Imperial Court for a grant.

古文：若违吾志，如有神灵，不享汝祀。
现代文：如果违背我的意志，我如果有神灵的话，就不享受你们的祭祀。
English: If it is against my will, if I have a god, I will not enjoy your sacrifice.

古文：吾兄弟自幼及老，衣服饮食未尝一片不同，至于兒女官婚，荣利之事，未尝不先以推弟。
现代文：我和兄弟光伯从小到老，衣服饮食，不曾有过两样。至于儿女的婚姻和做官，以及有名有利的事，没有不让给兄弟的。
English: From childhood to old age, my brother Guangbo and I have never had different clothes or diets. As for our children's marriages and official positions, as well as famous and advantageous things, there is nothing we would not give to our brothers.

古文：弟顷横祸，权作松榇，亦可为吾作松棺，使吾见之。 
现代文：兄弟光伯身遭横祸死去，匆忙间做了一口松木棺材埋葬。你们也可为我做一口松木棺，让我活着能看到它。 
English: My brother, Guangbo, died in a freak accident and was hastily buried in a pine coffin. You can also make a pine coffin for me so that I can see it while I'm still alive.

古文：卒，年七十一。
现代文：去世，享年七十一岁。
English: He died at the age of 71.

