古文：少牢馈食之礼。日用丁己。筮旬有一日。筮于庙门之外。
现代文：少牢馈食之礼：祭日用丁日或己日，如以先月下旬之丁日筮来月上旬之丁日，则以丁日筮并筮日之日数共计十一天。在庙门之外卜筮。
English: For the gift of food to a minor prisoner: the festival day should be on the same day or the same day. If the ding day of the end of the last month is taken as the ding day of the first half of the month, the total number of days on which the ding day and the ding day are taken will be 11 days.

古文：主人朝服，西面于门东。
现代文：卜筮之时，主人衣朝服，面朝西，立于门的东边。
English: At the time of the burial, the owner dressed in a morning suit, facing west, stood on the east side of the door.

古文：史朝服，左执筮，右取上韇，兼与筮执之，东面受命于主人。
现代文：家中主筮事者史亦衣朝服，左手执蓍草，右手揭开韇盖，而后与左手一起执握蓍韇，面朝东接受主人之命。
English: The main storyteller of the family, Shi, also dressed in a morning suit, held the reed in his left hand, uncovered the reed cover with his right hand, and then held the reed together with his left hand, facing east to accept the master's order.

古文：主人曰： 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用荐岁事于皇祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。
现代文：主人说： 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用少牢之礼祭祀曾祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。
English: The master said: "Son of a filial son, come to Japan, Ding Hai, use the rite of Shao Rong to worship Zeng Zubao, and match a certain princess with a certain clan.

古文：尚飨！ 
现代文：请享祭。 
English: It's the Feast of Invitations.

古文：史曰： 诺！ 
现代文：史答道： 诺！ 
English: Shi replied: Nope!

古文：西面于门西，抽下韇，左执筮，右兼执韇以击筮，遂述命曰： 假尔大筮有常。
现代文：面朝西立于门的西边，抽出韇底，左手执蓍草，右手兼执韇盖和韇底击打蓍草，进而述主人之命说： 假借太筮之灵以问吉凶。
English: Standing on the west side of the door, facing west, pull out the bottom of the bowl, hold the reeds with the left hand, and hit the reeds with the right hand while holding the lid and the bottom of the bowl, and then recite the master's order: "Using the spirit of the great reed to ask for good or bad fortune."

古文：孝孙某，来日丁亥，用荐岁事于皇祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。
现代文：孝孙某，来日丁亥，用少牢之礼祭祀曾祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。
English: Filial son and grandson, Ding Hai came to Japan, and used the rite of Shao Jiao to worship Zeng Zubao, and match a certain princess with a certain clan.

古文：尚飨！ 
现代文：请享祭。 
English: It's the Feast of Invitations.

古文：乃释韇立筮。
现代文：然后将韇盖和韇底放在地上，站着卜筮。
English: Then place the lid and base of the urn on the ground and stand to pray.

古文：卦者在左坐，卦以木。
现代文：这时，史的助手卦者在左侧坐着，用木条将每一爻画在地上。
English: Meanwhile, Shi's assistant, Gua Zhou, sat on the left side of the table, using a piece of wood to draw each mark on the ground.

古文：卒筮，乃书卦于木，示主人，乃退占。
现代文：俟卜筮完毕，将卦写于木版上给主人看，而后退还东面位占卜。
English: After finishing the divination, he would write the fortune on a wooden board for his master to see, and then return to the east for divination.

古文：吉，则史韇筮，史兼执筮与封以告于主人： 占曰从。 
现代文：如果筮的结果是吉，史就将蓍草藏于韇中，兼执韇与卦诏告主人： 筮的结果为 吉 。 
English: If the result of the casting is auspicious, the historian will hide the eelgrass in the eelgrass, and simultaneously hold the eelgrass and the gua to tell the owner: The result of the casting is auspicious.

古文：乃官戒，宗人命涤，宰命为酒，乃退。
现代文：于是主人告诫各执事备齐祭物，宗人命属下清洗祭器，冢宰命属下备好祭酒，然后退下。
English: Then the master admonished each of the deacons to prepare the sacrificial offerings, to wash the sacrificial vessels, and to prepare the sacrificial wine, and then to withdraw.

古文：若不吉，则及远日，又筮日如初。
现代文：如果筮的结果不吉，就得于下一个丁日卜筮，筮日之礼和前面相同。
English: If the result of the ceremony is not auspicious, the next Ding Day Pu Pu will be performed, and the ceremony on the 3rd day will be the same as the previous one.

古文：宿。前宿一日，宿戒尸。
现代文：宿，即于祭前两天通知 尸 于祭礼开始时准时到。
English: The lodging should be notified two days before the festival, and the corpse should arrive on time at the beginning of the festival.

古文：明日，朝服筮尸，如筮日之礼。命曰： 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用荐岁事于皇祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。以某之某为尸。
现代文：祭前三天早上，以卜筮择选代死者受祭之人一一 尸 ，筮 尸 之礼和筮日之礼相同，祝告之辞为： 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用少牢之礼祭祀曾祖伯某，以某妃配某氏，以某人之子某为 尸 。
English: On the morning of the third day before the festival, the people to be sacrificed on behalf of the deceased were selected by the Bo'ao, and the ceremony for the dead was the same as that for the dead. The congratulatory speech was as follows: Xiao Sun Mou, Coming Day Ding Hai, use the ceremony for the young prisoners to sacrifice Zeng Zuo Mou, use the ceremony for the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners to sacrifice the young prisoners.

古文：尚飨！ 
现代文：请享祭。 
English: It's the Feast of Invitations.

古文：筮、卦占如初。
现代文：筮、卦、占之礼皆和筮日相同。
English: , 卦, and 占 are the same as 日.

古文：吉，则乃遂宿尸。
现代文：如果筮的结果是吉，就可通知 尸 请准时参加。
English: If the result of the game is a draw, you can inform the referee. Please be on time.

古文：祝摈，主人再拜稽首。
现代文：以祝为傧相，主人向祝行拜两次并叩首。
English: With Zhu as the gong, the host bowed twice to Zhu and bowed his head.

古文：祝告曰： 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用荐岁事于皇祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。敢宿！ 
现代文：祝转达主人之意于 尸 说： 孝孙某，来日丁亥，用少牢之礼祭祀曾祖伯某，以某妃配某氏，敢请阁下务必按时参加！ 
English: Wish to convey the master's intention to the corpse, saying: "Son of a filial son, come to Japan in the year of the pig, use the rite of a minor prisoner to sacrifice your great-great-grandfather, match a certain princess with a certain lord, dare to ask your excellency to attend on time!

古文：尸拜，许诺，主人又再拜稽首。
现代文： 尸 回拜，应： 诺 ；主人又行拜两次并叩首。
English: The corpse bowed back and replied, "Nope"; the master bowed twice more and bowed his head.

古文：主人退，尸送，揖，不拜。
现代文：主人退下； 尸 拱手相送，但不拜。
English: The master withdraws; the corpse is sent away empty-handed, but does not bow.

古文：若不吉，则遂改筮尸。
现代文：如果筮 尸 的结果不吉，就立即再卜筮，择另一人为 尸 。
English: If the result of the autopsy is unfavorable, immediately re-examine the case and choose another person as the cadaver.

古文：既宿尸，反，为期于庙门之外。
现代文：告 尸 请 尸 完毕，主人等返回于庙门之外商定祭祀之时辰。
English: Announcement of the body When the body is finished, the owner and others return outside the temple gate to agree on the time of the ritual.

古文：主人门东，南面。
现代文：主人于门东面朝南而立。
English: The owner stands facing south on the east side of the door.

古文：宗人朝服北面，曰： 请祭期。 
现代文：宗人衣朝服面朝北，请示主人说： 请主人决定祭祀的时辰。 
English: Dressed in the morning robe and facing north, he asked his master to decide on the time of the sacrifice.

古文：主人曰： 比于子。 
现代文：主人说： 由你决定。 
English: The owner said: It's up to you.

古文：宗人曰： 旦明行事。 
现代文：宗人说： 明日天明行祭事。 
English: The ancestor said, "Tomorrow, the festival will be held in broad daylight."

古文：主人曰： 诺！ 
现代文：主人说： 行。 
English: The owner said, "Go ahead.

古文：乃退。
现代文：于是皆退下。
English: So back off.

古文：明日，主人朝服，即位于庙门之外，东方南面。
现代文：次日天明，主人衣朝服，于庙门之外东边就位，面朝南。
English: The next day at dawn, the master, dressed in a morning suit, took his place on the east side outside the temple gate, facing south.

古文：宰、宗人西面，北上。
现代文：冢宰、宗人面朝西，以北为上。
English: The heads of families and clans face west, with north at the top.

古文：牲北首东上。
现代文：祭牲头朝北，以东为上。
English: The head of the sacrificial animal faces north, with the east at the top.

古文：司马圭刀羊，司士击豕。
现代文：司马杀羊，司士杀猪。
English: The steed slays the sheep, the steward slays the pig.

古文：宗人告备，乃退。
现代文：宗人诏告祭牲备齐，主人退下。
English: The priest announced that all the sacrificial animals were ready, and the owner withdrew.

古文：雍人摡鼎、匕、俎于雍爨，雍爨在门东南，北上。
现代文：掌管割烹之事的雍人清洗牲鼎，又将匕、俎设于烹煮鱼、肉之灶边，烹煮鱼、肉之灶在庙门东南，以北为上。
English: The Yong people, who were in charge of cooking, cleaned the stepladder, and placed the ladle and ladle on the edge of the fish and meat cooking stove. The fish and meat cooking stove was in the southeast of the temple gate, with the north at the top.

古文：廪人摡甑甗、匕与敦于廪爨，廪爨在雍爨之北。
现代文：掌管米仓的廪人于炊黍稷的灶边清洗煮饭之甑、甗和匕饭之匕、盛饭之敦，炊黍稷之灶在烹煮鱼、肉之灶的北边。
English: The eunuch in charge of the rice storehouse cleans the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle and the ladle of stewed rice, and the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, the ladle of boiled rice, and the ladle of boiled rice.

古文：司宫摡豆、笾、勺、爵、觚、觯、几、洗、篚于东堂下，勺、爵、觚、觯实于篚；卒摡，馔豆、笾与篚于房中，放于西方；设洗于阼阶东南，当东荣。
现代文：兼掌祭器的司宫于东堂下清洗豆、笾、勺、酒爵、酒觚、酒觯、几、洗和篚，又将勺、酒爵、酒觚和酒觯放于篚中；清洗完毕，将豆、笾和篚放在房中近西处；再将洗设在东阶东南，并与东边屋翼对齐。
English: The priest, who also handles the altar utensils, cleans the beans, ladle, spoon, ladle, ladle, ladle, spoon and ladle under the east hall, and places the spoon, ladle, ladle and ladle in the ladle; after cleaning, the beans, ladle and ladle are placed near the west of the room; then the ladle is placed in the southeast of the east wing, and aligned with the east wing.

古文：羹定，雍人陈鼎五，三鼎在羊镬之西，二鼎在豕镬之西。
现代文：羹制好，掌管割烹之事的雍人陈设羊、豕、鱼、腊、肤五鼎，其中三只鼎设在烹煮羊的锅子西边，两只鼎设在烹煮豕的锅子西边。
English: Once the yakitori was ready, the Yong people in charge of the cooking set out five pots of yakitori: lamb, eel, fish, wax, and skin. Three pots were placed on the west side of the pot for cooking lamb, and two pots were placed on the west side of the pot for cooking eel.

古文：司马升羊右胖。髀不升，肩、臂、臑、□、骼，正脊一、横脊短胁一、正胁一、代胁一，皆二骨以并，肠三、胃三、举肺一、祭肺三，实于一鼎。
现代文：司马将羊的右半体从锅中升出，放入鼎中，去髀，将其前胫骨、后胫骨、前脊骨一块、中脊骨一块、后脊骨一块、后肋骨一块、中肋骨一块、前肋骨一块，都二骨相并放入鼎中；又将肠三截、胃三块、整肺一块、切肺三块放入鼎中。
English: Sima lifted the right half of the sheep from the pot, put it in the ding, removed the yoke, and put its front shinbone, back shinbone, front spine, middle spine, back spine, back rib, middle rib, and front rib into the ding. He also put three pieces of intestine, three pieces of stomach, one whole lung, and three pieces of lung into the ding.

古文：司士升豕右胖。髀不升，肩、臂、臑、□骼，正脊一、横脊一、短胁一、正胁一、代胁一，皆二骨以并，举肺一、祭肺三，实于一鼎。
现代文：司士将豕之右半体从煮豕之锅中升出，放入另一鼎中，亦去髀，将其前胫骨、后胫骨、前脊骨一块、中脊骨一块、后脊骨一块、后肋骨一块、中肋骨一块、前肋骨一块，都二骨相并放入鼎中；又将整肺一块、切肺三块放入鼎中。
English: The magistrate lifted the right half of the eel from the pot of boiled eel, put it in another ring, and also went to the eel, and put its anterior tibia, posterior tibia, anterior vertebra, middle vertebra, posterior vertebra, posterior rib, middle rib, and anterior rib, all two bones together into the ring; and put one whole lung and three cut lungs into the ring.

古文：雍人伦肤九，实于一鼎。
现代文：雍人选择豕两肋处带皮之肉九块放入另一只鼎中。
English: Yongren selected nine pieces of meat with skin from the two ribs of the eel and put them into another ding.

古文：司士又升鱼、腊，鱼十有五而鼎，腊一纯而鼎，腊用麋。
现代文：司士又将鱼和干兽从煮鱼和干兽之锅中升出，放入鼎中，其中，鱼十五条放一鼎，干兽一整只放一鼎，兽用麋鹿。
English: The magistrate also lifted the fish and dried animal out of the pot of boiled fish and dried animal, and put them into a trough. Among them, 15 fish were put in a trough, a whole dried animal was put in a trough, and the animal was an elk.

古文：卒脀，皆设扃幂，乃举，陈鼎于庙门之外，东方，北面，北上。
现代文：载牲于鼎完毕，各鼎都加以抬鼎之杠和覆鼎之幂，然后抬鼎，将其陈设在庙门之外的东边，面朝北，以北为上。
English: After the carrying of the sacrificial animals was completed, each deity carried the rod of the deity and the yoke of the deity, and then carried the deity and displayed it on the east side outside the temple gate, facing north, with north as the top.

古文：司宫尊两甒于房户之间，同棜，皆有幂，甒有玄酒。
现代文：司宫设两甒于房户之间，同放在一棜上面，分别覆盖以幂，二甒皆盛以玄酒。
English: In the palace of the magistrate, there are two urns between the houses, both placed on top of one urn, covered with urns, and both urns are filled with wine.

古文：司宫设罍水于洗东，有枓，设篚于洗西，南肆。
现代文：司宫又设盛有水的罍于洗的东边，勺子放在罍上，设篚于洗的西边，皆南北放，以北为上。
English: In the imperial palace, a spoon with water was placed on the east side of the basin, a spoon was placed on the spoon, and a spoon was placed on the west side of the basin. They were all placed facing north-south, with the north facing up.

古文：改馔豆、笾于房中，南面，如馈之设，实豆、笾之实。
现代文：继而改设豆、笾于户中，正面朝南，和馈食陈设之次第相同，豆、笾之中盛以菹菜和肉酱等祭品。
English: Next, the beans and bean paste were placed in the middle of the house, facing south, in the same order as the food offerings, and the beans and bean paste were filled with sacrificial offerings such as stew and meat sauce.

古文：小祝设槃、匜与箪、巾于西阶东。
现代文：小祝则将盘、匜与箪、巾设在西阶的东边。
English: On the other hand, Xiaozhu placed the tray, bowl, spoon and napkin on the east side of the west steps.

古文：主人朝服，即位于阼阶东，西面。
现代文：主人衣朝服，在东阶的东边就位，面朝西。
English: The host, dressed in a morning suit, takes his place on the east side of the east steps, facing west.

古文：司宫筵于奥，祝设几于筵上，右之。
现代文：司宫在室之西南隅铺席，祝将几设在席的东南边。
English: The palace is located in the southwest corner of the room, and I hope that some will be located on the southeast side of the seat.

古文：主人出迎鼎，除鼏。
现代文：主人迎鼎于庙门之外，除去覆鼎之幂。
English: The host greets Ding outside the temple gate and removes the cocoon covering Ding.

古文：士盥，举鼎，主人先入。
现代文：士洗手，抬鼎，主人先入庙门。
English: The priest washes his hands, raises the thong, and the host enters the temple gate first.

古文：司宫取二勺于篚，洗之，兼执以升，乃启二尊之盖幂，奠于棜上。加二勺于二尊，覆之，南柄。
现代文：司宫从篚中取出二勺清洗，执二勺登堂；接着拿开覆于两鼎之鼏，放在棜上；然后放二勺于两鼎中，并覆盖以鼏，勺柄朝南。
English: The chief priest took two spoons from the urn, washed them, and carried the two spoons to the hall; then he took off the urn that was covered with the two rings and placed it on the urn; then he placed the two spoons in the two rings and covered them with the urn, with the spoon handle facing south.

古文：鼎序入。雍正执一匕以从，雍府执四匕以从，司士合执二俎以从。
现代文：五只鼎依次抬入庙门，雍人之长雍正执拿一匕随从于后，雍正之助手雍府二人各执二匕随从于雍正之后，司士一人执拿二俎又从于雍府之后而入。
English: Five tripods were carried into the temple door in turn. The head of the Yong people, Yong Zheng, followed behind holding a scepter. Yong Zheng's assistant, Yong Fu, followed behind holding two scepters each. A magistrate followed behind holding two scepters.

古文：司士赞者二人，皆合执二俎以相，从入。
现代文：司士之助手二人又各执二俎从于司士之后而入。
English: Two of the magistrate's assistants, each holding a pair of scissors, followed the magistrate.

古文：陈鼎于东方，当序，南于洗西，皆西面，北上，肤为下。匕皆加于鼎。
现代文：鼎抬进来后陈设在东边，正对着东序，位于洗的西南，皆正面朝西，以北为上，肤鼎在最下边，匕都加于鼎上，其柄朝东。
English: After the tripod was brought in, it was set up on the east side, facing the east row, located in the southwest of the wash, all facing west, with the north as the top, the skin tripod at the bottom, and the hoops were added to the tripod, with the handle facing east.

古文：东枋。俎皆设于鼎西，西肆。
现代文：俎都设在鼎的西边，东西陈设，以东为上。
English: The urns are placed on the west side of the throne, and the east side is on the top.

古文：肵俎在羊俎之北，亦西肆。
现代文：其中，肵俎设在羊俎的北边，亦东西陈设，以东为上。
English: Among them, the yoke is located on the north side of the yoke, and it is also arranged from east to west, with the east as the top.

古文：宗人遣宾就主人，皆盥于洗，长朼。
现代文：宗人要求宾客到主人跟前，都于洗中洗手，宾客之长先洗，众宾后洗。
English: My father-in-law requires that all guests wash their hands in the middle of the bath when they come to the master. The eldest guest washes first, and then all the guests.

古文：佐食上利升牢心舌，载于肵俎。
现代文：上佐食将心、舌从羊、豕之鼎中升出，载于肵俎之上。
English: The heart and tongue are lifted out of the sheep and yakitori and placed on top of the yakitori.

古文：心皆安下切上，午割勿没，其载于肵俎，末在上。
现代文：心都是切平下方，切掉上方，中间横割之而不切断；载于肵俎时则立着放。
English: The hearts are cut flat at the bottom, cut off the top, and cut across the middle without cutting; when placed in a bowl, they are placed upright.

古文：舌皆切本末，亦午割勿没；其载于肵，横之。
现代文：舌都是切去两端，中间亦横割之而不切断；载于肵俎时则横着放。
English: Both ends of the tongue are cut off, and the middle is also cut horizontally without cutting it off; when it is placed in the beak, it is placed horizontally.

古文：皆如初为之于爨也。
现代文：凡此皆于先前烹煮之时已切好。
English: All of this had been sliced when the noodles were previously cooked.

古文：佐食迁肵俎于阼阶西，西缩，乃反。
现代文：接着上佐食将肵俎迁到东阶的西边，东西陈放，以东为上，放好后返回。
English: Next, the chefs move the bowl to the west side of the east step, put things away, with the east as the top, and return after putting them away.

古文：佐食二人。
现代文：佐食有上佐食和下佐食二人。
English: There are two types of sashimi, upper sashimi and lower sashimi.

古文：上利升羊，载右胖，髀不升，肩、臂、臑、□骼；正脊一、横脊一、短胁一、正胁一、代胁一，皆二骨以并；肠三、胃三，长皆乃俎拒；举肺一，长终肺，祭肺三，皆切。
现代文：上佐食将羊之右半体从鼎中升出，载于俎上，去髀，又将前胫骨和后胫骨载于俎上；将前脊骨一块、中脊骨一块、后脊骨一块和后肋骨、中肋骨、前肋骨各一块，都二骨相并载于俎上；又将肠三截、胃三块，其长皆及俎相邻二足之间的横木，载于俎上；又将整肺一块和切成小块的祭肺三块载于俎上。
English: Uwasa-gashi would lift the right half of the sheep's body out of the trough and place it on the yoke, remove the yoke, and place the anterior and posterior yoke bones on the yoke; place the anterior backbone, the middle backbone, the posterior backbone, the posterior ribs, the middle ribs, and the anterior ribs, all two-bone phase, on the yoke; place three pieces of intestine, three pieces of stomach, all of which were long and the yoke between two adjacent legs, on the yoke; and place one whole lung and three small pieces of sacrificial lung on the yoke.

古文：肩、臂、臑、□、骼在两端，脊、胁、肺，肩在上。
现代文：其中，牲之前胫骨放在俎的上端，牲之后胫骨放在俎的下端，脊、肋和肺放在俎的中间，肩则放在俎的最上端。
English: Among them, the tibia was placed at the upper end of the yoke before the sacrifice, the tibia was placed at the lower end of the yoke after the sacrifice, the spine, ribs and lungs were placed in the middle of the yoke, and the shoulders were placed at the upper end of the yoke.

古文：下利升豕，其载如羊，无肠胃。体其载于俎，皆进下。
现代文：下佐食将豕之右半体从鼎中升出，载于俎上，豕俎所载和羊俎相同，只是无肠胃而已；牲体载于俎上，在进献时皆以下端朝前。
English: Shimo-sashiki lifts the right half of the yakitori out of the ring and places it on the yakitori. The yakitori is the same as the yakitori of sheep, except that it does not have a stomach. The animals are placed on the yakitori, and they all face forward when presented.

古文：司士三人，升鱼、腊、肤。
现代文：司士三人各将鱼、干兽和肤从鼎中升出，载于俎上。
English: Each of the three magistrates lifted the fish, the dried animal and the skin out of the trough and placed them on the raft.

古文：鱼用鲋十有五而俎，缩载，右首，进腴。
现代文：鱼用鲫鱼十五条，直接载于俎上，鱼头朝右，在进献时则以鱼腹向神。
English: Fifteen eels are placed directly on the yoke, with the head facing to the right, and the belly of the eel is presented to the gods.

古文：腊一纯而俎，亦进下，肩在上。
现代文：于兽则左右两半皆载于俎，在进献时亦是下端朝前，兽肩放在俎的最上端。
English: The right and left halves of the animal are contained in the yoke, and when presented, the lower end is also facing forward, and the animal's shoulders are placed at the uppermost end of the yoke.

古文：肤九而俎，亦横载，革顺。
现代文：肤九块横着载于俎上，肤不去皮，列载于俎。
English: Nine pieces of skin were laid across on the yoke. The skin was not peeled, it was laid on the yoke.

古文：卒脀，祝盥于洗，升自西阶。
现代文：载俎完毕，祝在洗中洗手，从西阶登堂。
English: When you have finished carrying the basket, please wash your hands in the sink and enter the church from the west steps.

古文：主人盥，升自阼阶。
现代文：主人洗手，从东阶登堂。
English: The master washed his hands and entered the church from the east steps.

古文：祝先入，南面。
现代文：祝先入室，面朝南而立。
English: Please enter the room first and stand facing south.

古文：主人从，户内西面。
现代文：主人从祝而入室，立于户内，面朝西。
English: The owner entered the room from the hallway and stood inside, facing west.

古文：主妇被锡，衣侈袂，荐自东房，韭、菹、醓、醢，坐奠于筵前。
现代文：主妇戴假发，服绡衣，其衣之袖长和袖口较士妻之绡衣的袖长和袖口要大半倍，从东房端来韭菹和肉酱，坐下放在席的前面。
English: The housewife, wearing a wig and a long dress, whose sleeves and cuffs were half as long as those of the judge's wife, brought the stew and meat sauce from the east room, sat down and placed it in front of the table.

古文：主妇赞者一人，亦被锡。衣侈袂。执葵菹、蠃醢，以授主妇。
现代文：主妇之助手一人亦戴假发，服绡衣，其衣之袖长和袖口亦较士妻之绡衣的袖长和袖口要大半倍，执葵菹、蜗酱，授给主妇。
English: One of the housewife's assistants also wore a wig and a robe, the sleeves and cuffs of which were half as long as those of the judge's wife's robe, and he gave the housewife some sunflower seeds and dipping sauce.

古文：主妇不兴，遂受，陪设于东，韭菹在南，葵菹在北。
现代文：主妇不起立，坐着接过来，附设于席的东面，韭菹在南边，葵菹在北边。
English: The housewife does not stand up, but sits and takes over, attached to the east side of the seat, with the urn on the south side and the sunflower seed on the north side.

古文：主妇兴，入于房。
现代文：主妇起立，入于房中。
English: All faces are south-facing. The housewife stands up and returns to the room.

古文：佐食上利执羊俎，下利执豕俎，司士三人执鱼，腊、肤俎，序升自西阶，相，从入。
现代文：上佐食执拿羊俎，下佐食执拿豕俎，司士三人各执鱼俎、兽俎和肤俎，依次从西阶登堂、入室。
English: The three judges each held a fish hook, animal hook and skin hook, and entered the hall and the room from the west steps in turn.

古文：设俎，羊在豆东，豕亚其北，鱼在羊东，腊在豕东，特肤当俎北端。
现代文：然后设俎，羊俎设在豆的东边，豕俎设在豆的北边，鱼俎设在羊俎的东边，兽俎设在豕俎的东边，肤俎单独设在上述四俎的北边，也即设在豕俎之北。
English: Then, the gills were set up. The sheep's gills were set on the east side of the bean, the gills were set on the north side of the bean, the fish gills were set on the east side of the sheep's gills, the animal gills were set on the east side of the gills, and the skin gills were separately set on the north side of the above-mentioned four gills, that is, on the north side of the gills.

古文：主妇自东房，执一金敦黍，有盖，坐设于羊俎之南。
现代文：主妇执一饰金、盛黍、有盖之敦从东房出来，坐下设于羊俎的南边。
English: The housewife came out of the east room holding an ornament of gold, a large bowl, and a lidded bowl, and sat down on the south side of the sheep pen.

古文：妇赞者执敦稷以授主妇。
现代文：主妇助手执一盛稷之敦呈给主妇。
English: The housewife's assistant, Keiichi Morimoto, presented it to the housewife.

古文：主妇兴受，坐设于鱼俎南；又兴受赞者敦黍，坐设于稷南；又兴受赞者敦稷，坐设于黍南。敦皆南首。
现代文：主妇起立，接过来，坐下设于鱼俎的南边；又起立接过其助手呈上的盛黍之敦，坐下设于盛稷之敦的南边；又起立接过其助手呈上的盛稷之敦，坐下设于盛黍之敦的南边。
English: The hostess stood up, took over, and sat down on the south side of the bait. She also stood up and took over the bait presented by her assistant, and sat down on the south side of the bait. She also stood up and took over the bait presented by her assistant, and sat down on the south side of the bait.

古文：主妇兴，入于房。
现代文：诸敦皆正面朝南。主妇起立，返于房中。
English: All faces are south-facing. The housewife stands up and returns to the room.

古文：祝酌，奠，遂命佐食启会。
现代文：祝斟酒，放在席前，接着命佐食启开敦盖。
English: The wine is poured, placed in front of the table, and then the sashimi is served.

古文：佐食启会盖，二以重，设于敦南。
现代文：佐食遵命启开敦盖，并将二盖相叠，设在敦的南边。
English: In compliance with the order, Sasaki opened the Kaidong cover and stacked the two covers on top of each other, placing them on the south side of Kaidong.

古文：主人西面，祝在左，主人再拜稽首。
现代文：主人面朝西，祝在主人的左边，主人向祝行拜两次并叩首。
English: The host faces west, the blessing is on the host's left, the host bows twice to the blessing and bows his head.

古文：祝祝曰： 孝孙某，敢用柔毛、刚鬣、嘉荐、普淖，用荐岁事于皇祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。
现代文：祝致祝辞说： 孝孙某今用羊、豕、菹菜、肉酱和黍稷以少牢之礼祭祀曾祖伯某，以某妃配某氏。
English: The congratulatory speech said: "A filial grandson is now using sheep, quail, leeks, meat sauce and quail to worship his great-great-grandfather with the rite of a minor, and to match a certain princess with a certain clan.

古文：尚飨！ 
现代文：请享祭。 
English: It's the Feast of Invitations.

古文：主人又再拜稽首。
现代文：主人又行拜两次并叩首。
English: The host bowed twice more and nodded his head.

古文：祝出，迎尸于庙门之外。
现代文：祝出室，到庙门之外迎接 尸 。
English: Go out of the room and meet the corpse outside the temple gate.

古文：主人降立于阼阶东，西面。
现代文：主人下堂，立于东阶的东边，面朝西。
English: The master lower hall stands to the east of the east steps, facing west.

古文：祝先，入门右。
现代文：祝先从右边进庙门。
English: Please enter the temple gate from the right first.

古文：尸入门左。
现代文：尸接着从左边入庙门。
English: The corpse then entered the temple gate from the left.

古文：宗人奉槃，东面于庭南。
现代文：宗人捧拿盥盘立于中庭的南边，面朝东。
English: The patriarch stands holding a yakitori platter on the south side of the atrium, facing east.

古文：一宗人奉匜水，西面于槃东。
现代文：另一位宗人捧拿舀水的匜立于端盘之宗人的东边，面朝西。
English: Another sōnin, holding a bowl of water, stands to the east of the sōnin at the end of the table, facing west.

古文：一宗人奉箪、巾，南面于槃北。
现代文：又一位宗人捧拿着箪和巾立于端盘之宗人的北边，面朝南。
English: Another deity, holding a scepter and a scarf, stands on the north side of the deity of the end plate, facing south.

古文：乃沃尸，盥于槃上。
现代文：进而一宗人在盥盘上用槃浇水使 尸 洗手。
English: Then, one of them used a ladle to pour water over the corpse to wash his hands.

古文：卒盥，坐奠箪，取巾，兴，振之三，以授尸，坐取箪，兴，以受尸巾。
现代文：洗手完毕，另一宗人跪坐着将箪放在地上，从中取出巾，起立，将巾抖三下，然后呈于 尸 ；又坐下取箪，起立，用箪接过 尸 拭手后的巾。
English: After washing their hands, another group of people kneeled and sat on the ground to put the cocoon on the ground, took out the towel, stood up, shook the towel three times, and then presented it to the corpse; sat down again to take the cocoon, stood up, and used the cocoon to pick up the towel after wiping their hands on the corpse.

古文：祝延尸。尸升自西阶，入，祝从。
现代文：祝于 尸 后请 尸 登堂。 尸 从西阶登堂，入室，祝从 尸 而入。
English: After the funeral, please invite the corpse to enter the hall.The corpse will enter the hall from the west staircase and enter the room.Please enter from the corpse.

古文：主人升自阼阶，祝先入，主人从。
现代文：主人从东阶登堂，祝先于主人入室，主人从祝而入。
English: The master enters the hall from the east steps, the host enters the room before the master, and the master enters from the host.

古文：尸升筵，祝、主人西面立于户内，祝在左。
现代文：尸于席间就位，祝和主人立于户内，面向西，祝在主人的左侧。
English: The corpse takes its place between the seats, and the host and the blessing stand inside, facing west, with the blessing on the left side of the host.

古文：祝、主人皆拜妥尸，尸不言尸答拜，遂坐，祝反南面。
现代文：祝和主人皆向 尸 行拜，请 尸 安坐， 尸 不说话； 尸 答拜，然后坐下。
English: I wish you and your masters all to bow to the corpse, ask the corpse to sit down, the corpse not to speak; the corpse to bow and then sit down.

古文：尸取韭菹，辩手耎于三豆，祭于豆间。
现代文：祝返回室中原位，面朝南。 尸 取韭菹，在三只豆中一一蘸过，并于豆间行祭。
English: Return to the original position in the room, facing south, take the coffin, pass through the three beans one by one, and perform the ritual between the beans.

古文：上佐食取黍稷于四敦。下佐食取牢一切肺于俎，以授上佐食。
现代文：上佐食从四只敦中取下黍稷，下佐食从羊、豕二俎上各取切肺一块，献给上佐食。
English: The top sashimi is made by removing the gills from four scallops, while the bottom sashimi is made by cutting a lung from a sheep and two gills from two scallops, and presenting them to the top sashimi.

古文：上佐食兼与黍以授尸。尸受，同祭于豆祭。
现代文：上佐食接过来，将其与黍稷一起献于 尸 。 尸 接过来，一并于刚祭过的豆间行祭。
English: When the kamisasho is received, it is offered to the corpse together with the yakitori. When the corpse is received, the yakitori is offered together with the freshly offered beans.

古文：上佐食举尸牢肺、正脊以授尸。
现代文：上佐食又献羊、豕之整肺和前脊骨给 尸 。 尸 都接过来，并以肺行祭。
English: They also sacrificed sheep, whole lungs and the anterior spine of a donkey to the corpse, and the corpse was taken over and sacrificed with the lungs.

古文：上佐食尔上敦黍于筵上，右之。
现代文：上佐食将设在上方的盛黍之敦移至席上右侧。
English: Uwasa food will be moved to the upper right side of the table.

古文：主人羞肵俎，升自阼阶，置于肤北。
现代文：主人从东阶登堂，呈上肵俎并置于肤俎的北边。
English: The owner enters the hall from the east steps, presents the urn and places it on the north side of the urn.

古文：上佐食羞两鉶，取一羊鉶于房中，坐设于韭菹之南。
现代文：上佐食呈献两只铏，先亲自从房中取一只羊铏，坐下设于韭菹的南边。
English: When presenting two yakitori to the chefs, he first personally took a yakitori from the room, sat down and placed it on the south side of the yakitori.

古文：下佐食又取一豕鉶于房中以从。上佐食受，坐设于羊鉶之南。
现代文：下佐食于其后又从房中取来一只豕铏。上佐食接过来，坐下设于羊铏的南边。
English: Shimo-sashiki then fetched another yakitori from the room. Ue-sashiki took over and sat down on the south side of the yakitori.

古文：皆芼，皆有柶。尸扱以柶，祭羊鉶，遂以祭豕鉶，尝羊鉶，食举，三饭。上佐食举尸牢干，尸受，振祭，哜之。
现代文：二铏都放菜，羊羹放苦菜，豕羹放薇菜，并都有羹勺放在铏中。 尸 拿勺先以羊羹行祭，继以豕羹行祭；然后又尝羊羹。上佐食呈上羊、豕之整肺和前脊骨请 尸 食之。
English: Vegetables are placed in both bowls, bitter vegetables in the yakitori, and vegetables in the yakitori, and the bowls are placed in the bowls. The corpse is first sacrificed with the yakitori, then with the yakitori, and then with the yakitori. The soup is served with lamb, and the lungs and anterior spine of the yakitori are eaten by the corpse.

古文：佐食受，加于肵。
现代文：尸取黍饭三次。
English: Sake is then taken over and added to the broth.

古文：上佐食羞胾两瓦豆，有醢，亦用瓦豆，设于荐豆之北。
现代文：上佐食又献上羊、豕二牲之中肋骨给 尸 ； 尸 接过来振祭，尝过后还给上佐食。上佐食接过来，加于肵俎之上。
English: The host also offered a lamb and a yakitori, and the ribs of a cow were given to the corpse; the corpse was brought to the priest, who tasted it and then returned it to the host. The host then took the yakitori and added it to the yakitori.

古文：尸又食，食胾。上佐食举尸一鱼，尸受，振祭，哜之。
现代文：上佐食又呈上盛于两瓦豆中的切肉和另两瓦豆中的肉酱，将其设在韭菹等四豆的北边。 尸 又吃，即吃切肉。上佐食又献上鱼一条； 尸 接过来振祭，尝过后还给上佐食。
English: In the kamisaki, minced meat and meat sauce made from two-watt beans and another two-watt beans are placed on the north side of four beans such as bean paste. The corpse is eaten, that is, the minced meat is eaten. In the kamisaki, a fish is presented; the corpse is brought to the shaking ceremony, and after tasting it, it is returned to the kamisaki.

古文：佐食受，加于肵，横之。又食。
现代文：上佐食接过来，加于肵俎上面，横着放。 尸 又吃。
English: Take the sauce, add it to the top of the bowl, and put it on the side.

古文：上佐食举尸腊肩，尸受，振祭，哜之，上佐食受，加于肵。又食。
现代文：上佐食献上兽肩给 尸 ； 尸 接过来振祭，尝过后还给上佐食；上佐食接过来，加于肵俎上面。 尸 又吃。
English: The kamisaki is offered with the shoulder of the animal to the corpse; the corpse is served with the shinzai, tasted and then given back to the kamisaki; the kamisaki is served and added to the top of the bowl; the corpse is eaten again.

古文：上佐食举尸牢胳，如初。又食。
现代文：上佐食献上羊、豕之后胫骨给 尸 ，礼仪如前。 尸 又接着吃。
English: As before, the etiquette was to present a sheep as the meal offering, and then the skull and crossbones to the corpse, which was then eaten.

古文：尸告饱。
现代文：继而告主人已吃饱。
English: He then announced to his host that he had eaten enough.

古文：祝西面于主人之南，独侑不拜。
现代文：祝立于主人的南边，面朝西，单独劝尸继续吃，但不拜。
English: He stood on the south side of the host, facing west, and exhorted the corpse to continue eating, but not to worship.

古文：侑曰： 皇尸未实，侑！ 
现代文：祝的劝辞为： 尊 尸 未饱，请再吃。 
English: The exhortation is: "Respect the corpse. If you haven't had enough, please eat again."

古文：尸又食。上佐食举尸牢肩，尸受，振祭，哜之，佐食受加于肵。尸不饭，告饱。
现代文： 尸 又吃，上佐食又献上羊、豕的肩给 尸 ； 尸 接过来振祭，尝过后还给上佐食；上佐食接过来，加于肵俎上面。 尸 不再吃，告主人已饱。
English: The corpse was eaten again, and the sausage was served to the corpse in the form of a sheep and a donkey's shoulder; the corpse was brought to the funeral offering, and after tasting it was given back to the sausage; the sausage was taken and added to the donkey; the corpse was no longer eaten, and the owner was told that he had had enough.

古文：祝西面于主人之南。
现代文：祝立于主人的南边，面朝西又劝食。
English: Wish to stand on the south side of the owner, face west and persuade to eat.

古文：主人不言，拜侑。尸又三饭。上佐食受尸牢肺、正脊，加于肵。
现代文：主人不说话，以拜 尸 代劝食。 尸 又取饭三次。 尸 取下置放于菹豆上的羊、豕之整肺和前脊骨授给上佐食，上佐食接过来，加于肵俎上面。
English: The master did not speak, but prayed over the corpse to persuade it to eat.The corpse was brought to the table three times.The sheep, the whole lung and the anterior spine of the donkey, which had been placed on the peas after the corpse was removed, were given the topping sauce, and the topping sauce was taken over and added to the donkey.

古文：主人降，洗爵，升，北面酌酒，乃酳尸。尸拜受，主人拜送。尸祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：主人下堂，清洗酒爵；登堂，面朝北斟酒，然后献给 尸 。 尸 行拜后接过酒爵，主人拜送爵。 尸 祭酒，尝酒。
English: The host goes down to the hall, cleans the chalice; goes up to the hall, faces north, pours the wine, and then offers it to the corpse; the corpse bows and receives the chalice, the host bows and sends the chalice; the corpse sacrifices the wine, and tastes the wine.

古文：宾长羞牢肝，用俎，缩执俎，肝亦缩，进末，盐在右。尸左执爵，右兼取肝，手耎于俎盐，振祭，哜之，加于俎豆，卒爵。
现代文：宾客之长用俎献羊、豕之肝给 尸 ，进献时俎的下端朝前，肝亦相同；盐在俎上肝的右侧。 尸 左手执酒爵，右手兼取羊、豕之肝，于俎上蘸盐后振祭，然后先尝羊肝，继尝豕肝，尝过后加于菹豆上面，饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: The head of the guests offers the sheep with the pestle, and the liver of the pestle to the corpse; when the offering is made, the lower end of the pestle faces forward, and the liver is the same; the salt is on the right side of the liver on the pestle; the corpse holds the wine in the left hand, and the right hand takes both the sheep and the liver of the pestle, and after rubbing the salt on the pestle, they first taste the sheep's liver, then the cod's liver, and after tasting it, they add it to the peas, and drink all the wine in the wine.

古文：主人拜。
现代文：主人向 尸 行拜。
English: The owner bowed to the corpse.

古文：祝受尸爵。尸答拜。
现代文：祝接过 尸 的空爵。 尸 向主人答拜。
English: I wish you to take over the empty chair from the corpse. The corpse bows to the housewife.

古文：祝酌授尸，尸醋主人。
现代文：祝斟酒献给 尸 ， 尸 接过来回敬主人。
English: The wine is offered to the corpse, and the corpse returns the compliment.

古文：主人拜受爵，尸答拜。
现代文：主人行拜后接过酒爵， 尸 向主人答拜。
English: After the master had bowed, he received the baron, and the corpse bowed to the master.

古文：主人西面奠爵，又拜。
现代文：主人面朝西放下酒爵，向尸行拜。
English: The host, facing west, put down his wine goblet and bowed to the corpse.

古文：上佐食取四敦黍稷，下佐食取牢一切肺，以授上佐食。
现代文：上佐食从四只敦中取黍稷少许；下佐食从 尸 俎上取羊、豕切肺各一块呈给上佐食。
English: For the top sashimi, a small amount of sea bream was taken from four tuna; for the bottom sashimi, a sheep was taken from the carcass, and a piece of lung was cut from the eel and presented to the top sashimi.

古文：上佐食以绥祭。
现代文：上佐食将黍稷及切肺授给主人以行祭。
English: The host of the ceremony is presented with a yakitori noodle and sliced lung.

古文：主人左执爵，右受佐食，坐祭之，又祭酒，不兴，遂啐酒。
现代文：主人左手执酒爵，右手接过上佐食呈上的黍稷和切肺，坐下行祭；又祭酒，不起立，尝酒。
English: In his left hand, the host holds a wine goblet. In his right hand, he takes the pickled radish and chopped lung presented with the hors d'oeuvres, sits down and performs the ritual. He also offers wine, does not stand up, and tastes it.

古文：祝与二佐食皆出，盥于洗，入。
现代文：祝和上佐食、下佐食都出外边于洗中洗手，继而入室。
English: I washed my hands in the middle of washing, and then entered the room.

古文：二佐食各取黍于一敦。上佐食兼受，抟之，以授尸，尸执以命祝。
现代文：上佐食从上敦中取来黍饭，下佐食从下敦中取来黍饭，抟成团状献给 尸 ；尸接过来拿着命祝致辞。
English: The upper sashimi takes the risotto from the upper bowl, and the lower sashimi takes the risotto from the lower bowl, and they are presented to the corpse in a ball; the corpse then takes the bowl and makes a speech wishing for good luck.

古文：卒命祝，祝受以东，北面于户西，以嘏于主人，曰： 皇尸命工祝，承致多福无疆于女孝孙。
现代文：命毕，祝站在户西，面朝东北，接过黍饭团，向主人祝福，祝辞是： 尊 尸 命官祝转告于你这位孝孙，赐你多福无疆，愿你得到上天之福佑，五谷丰收，长寿永年，无废无止。 
English: At the end of your life, I wish you to stand in the west of the house, facing the northeast, take over the bowl of rice, and bless the owner. The congratulatory words are: Honorable coroner, I wish to convey to you this filial son, give you many blessings without borders, may you receive the blessing of heaven, rich harvest, long life forever, endless waste.

古文：来女孝孙，使女受禄于天，宜稼于田，眉寿万年，勿替引之。 主人坐奠爵，兴；再拜稽首，兴；受黍，坐振祭，哜之；诗怀之，实于左袂，挂于季指，执爵以兴；坐卒爵，执爵以兴；坐奠爵，拜。尸答拜。
现代文：主人坐下，放下酒爵，起来；行拜礼两次并叩首，又起立；接过黍饭，坐下振祭，尝黍饭；接着将黍饭承纳入怀中，再倒入左袖之中，并将袖口挂在左手小指上，然后右手拿起酒爵，起立；旋即坐下，饮尽酒爵中酒，执空爵起立；继坐下放下空爵，向 尸 行拜。 尸 答拜。
English: The host sits down, puts down the chalice, stands up; performs two prostrations and bows his head, and then stands up again; receives the risotto, sits down to make the libation, tastes the risotto; then takes the risotto into his arms, then pours it into his left sleeve, and hangs the cuff on the little finger of his left hand, then picks up the chalice with his right hand, and stands up; immediately sits down, drinks the wine in the chalice, and holds the empty chalice, and stands up; then sits down, puts down the empty chalice, and bows to the corpse.

古文：执爵以兴，出。
现代文：主人拣起空爵起立，出室。
English: The master picked up the empty chair, stood up, and left the room.

古文：宰夫以笾受啬黍。
现代文：掌管饮食之事者宰夫拿着笾接过主人左袖中的黍饭。
English: Zaif, who is in charge of the meal, takes the ladle and picks up the risotto from his master's left sleeve.

古文：主人尝之，纳诸内。
现代文：主人再尝一下，然后将黍饭倒入笾中。
English: The owner tastes it again, and then pours the risotto into the soup.

古文：主人献祝，设席南面。
现代文：主人向祝进献，要先设席，席的正面朝南。
English: If the host wishes to make an offering, he must first set up a seat, the front of the seat facing south.

古文：祝拜于席上，坐受。主人西面答拜。
现代文：祝于席上向主人行拜，坐下接过主人之所献。主人面朝西答拜。
English: At the banquet, bow to the host, sit down and accept the host's offering. The host faces west and responds.

古文：荐两豆菹、醢。
现代文：接着有司进献一豆葵菹、一豆蜗酱。
English: Next, there was a presentation of one bean of azuki bean paste and one bean of dipping sauce.

古文：佐食设俎，牢髀，横脊一、短胁一、肠一、胃一、肤三，鱼一横之，腊两髀属于尻。
现代文：佐食设俎，俎上所载：羊、豕之髀，后脊骨一块，后肋骨一块，肠一截，胃一块，肤三块，鱼一条横着放，麋鹿连着臀的大腿肉两块。
English: Sasaki set up a basket, on which were placed: a lamb, a yakitori, a piece of backbone, a piece of back rib, a piece of intestine, a stomach, three pieces of skin, a fish lying on its side, and two pieces of elk thigh meat attached to the rump.

古文：祝取菹手耎于醢，祭于豆间。
现代文：祝取菹菜蘸过肉酱后，在豆之间行祭。
English: After the stew is marinated in the meat sauce, there is a ritual between the beans.

古文：祝祭俎，祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：祝又取俎上之肤行祭，又以酒行祭并尝酒。
English: I wish you to take the skin from the yakitori and perform the ritual, and also perform the ritual with sake and taste the sake.

古文：肝牢从。
现代文：随后献上羊、豕的肝。
English: Then the liver of a sheep and an eel were offered.

古文：祝取肝手耎于盐，振祭，哜之，不兴，加于俎，卒爵，兴。
现代文：祝取肝蘸过盐后振祭，尝肝；不起立，直接加于俎上；然后饮尽酒爵中酒，起立。
English: Shake after salting, taste the liver; if it doesn't rise, add it directly to the yakitori; then drink all the sake in the sake jar and stand up.

古文：主人酌，献上佐食。
现代文：主人斟酒献于上佐食。
English: The host pours sake for the sushi.

古文：上佐食户内牖东北面拜，坐受爵。
现代文：上佐食于户内窗子东边面朝北向主人行拜，坐下接过酒爵。
English: Kamisaki bowed to his master from the east side of the window, facing north, and sat down to receive the sake master.

古文：主人西面答拜。
现代文：主人面朝西答拜。
English: The master bowed his head to the west.

古文：佐食祭酒，卒爵，拜，坐授爵，兴。
现代文：上佐食祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，向主人行拜，坐下将空爵交给主人，然后起立。
English: After eating the sashimi, drinking the sake, bowing to the host, sitting down, handing the empty sake cup to the host, and then standing up.

古文：俎设于两阶之间，其俎，折，一肤。
现代文：上佐食之俎设于两阶之间，俎上所载：羊、豕正体之余骨，肤一块。
English: Kamisakiyaki bowl is placed between the two tiers, and on the bowl are placed: the bones of a sheep and a yakitori, and a piece of skin.

古文：主人又献下佐食，亦如之。
现代文：主人又斟酒献于下佐食，其礼仪和献上佐食相同。
English: The host then pours the wine and offers it to the next guest. The etiquette is the same as for the first guest.

古文：其脀亦设于阶间，西上，亦折，一肤。
现代文：下佐食之俎也设于东西两阶之间，以西为上，其俎所载：亦羊、豕正体之余骨，肤一块。
English: The lower sashimi bowl is also placed between the east and west two tiers, with the west at the top, and its bowl contains: yakitori, the remains of the bowl's main body, and a piece of skin.

古文：有司赞者取爵于篚以升，授主妇赞者于房庐。妇赞者受，以授主妇。
现代文：有司助手从篚中取出酒爵登堂，于房门口授给主妇助手。主妇助手接过来，交给主妇。
English: A steward's assistant took the bottle from the urn and presented it to the housewife's assistant at the door of the house. The housewife's assistant took it and handed it to the housewife.

古文：主妇洗于房中，出酌，入户，西面拜，献尸。尸拜受。
现代文：主妇于房中清洗酒爵，出去到堂上斟酒，返回室户，面朝西向 尸 行拜，将酒爵献给 尸 。 尸 行拜后接过来。
English: The housewife cleans the bottle in the room, goes out to the hall to pour the wine, returns to the house, faces west to the corpse, bows and offers the bottle to the corpse.

古文：主妇主人之北西面拜送爵。
现代文：主妇站在主人的北边，面朝西行拜送爵。
English: The lady-in-waiting stood on the north side of her master, facing west, and went to see him off.

古文：尸祭酒，卒爵。
现代文：尸接过酒爵后祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: After receiving the body, he drank the sacrificial wine and finished the wine.

古文：主妇拜。
现代文：主妇又向 尸 行拜。
English: The housewife bowed to the corpse.

古文：祝受尸爵。尸答拜。
现代文：祝接过 尸 的空爵， 尸 向主妇答拜。
English: I wish you to take over the empty chair from the corpse. The corpse bows to the housewife.

古文：易爵，洗，酌，授尸。
现代文：祝更换酒爵，洗净，斟酒，献给 尸 。
English: Wish to change the liquor, wash, pour wine, dedicated to the corpse.

古文：主妇拜受爵，尸答拜。
现代文：主妇向 尸 行拜后，接过酒爵， 尸 答拜。
English: After the housewife bowed to the corpse, she took over the liquor baron, and the corpse bowed.

古文：上佐食绥祭。
现代文：上佐食请主妇行祭。
English: Housewives are invited to the festival to feast on sashimi.

古文：主妇西面，于主人之北受祭，祭之，其绥祭如主人之礼，不嘏，卒爵，拜。尸答拜。
现代文：主妇立于主人之北，面朝西，接过上佐食呈上的祭品行祭；主妇行祭之礼仪和主人行祭之礼仪相同， 尸 不致祝辞，主妇饮尽酒爵中酒，向 尸 行拜， 尸 答拜。
English: The hostess stands to the north of the host, facing west, and receives the offerings of sashimi and performs the ritual; the etiquette of the hostess performing the ritual is the same as that of the host performing the ritual, the corpse does not make a greeting, the hostess drinks all the wine in the wine jar, and bows to the corpse, and the corpse bows back.

古文：主妇以爵出。
现代文：主妇执空爵出室。
English: The lady-in-waiting leaves.

古文：赞者受，易爵于篚，以授主妇于房中。
现代文：有司助手接过空爵，从篚中再换一只酒爵，交给主妇助手，主妇助手入房而授给主妇。
English: A steward's assistant took over the empty gong, replaced another gong from the gong, and gave it to the housewife's assistant. The housewife's assistant entered the room and gave it to the housewife.

古文：主妇洗，酌，献祝。
现代文：主妇洗爵，斟酒，献给祝。
English: The housewife baptizes, pours wine, and offers it to the celebrant.

古文：祝拜，坐受爵。
现代文：祝向主妇行拜，坐下，接过酒爵。
English: After bowing to the head of the guests, he sat down to receive the baron.

古文：主妇答拜于主人之北。
现代文：主妇立于主人之北答拜。
English: The housewife stood to the north of her master and bowed.

古文：卒爵，不兴，坐授主妇。
现代文：祝饮尽酒爵中酒，不起立，坐着将空爵交给主妇。
English: After drinking all the wine in the goblet, without standing up, he sat down and handed the empty goblet to his wife.

古文：主妇受，酌，献上佐食于户内。
现代文：主妇接过空爵，斟酒，在室户内献给上佐食。
English: The housewife took over the empty jar, poured the wine, and presented it to Josa Shoku in the room.

古文：佐食北面拜，坐受爵，主妇西面答拜。
现代文：上佐食面朝北向主妇行拜，坐下接过酒爵，主妇面朝西答拜。
English: Kamisaki bowed to the hostess with his face to the north, sat down to receive the sake sommelier, and the hostess bowed to him with her face to the west.

古文：祭酒，卒爵，坐授主妇。
现代文：上佐食祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，坐着将空爵交给主妇。
English: He drank up all the sake in the jar and handed the empty jar to the housewife.

古文：主妇献下佐食，亦如之。
现代文：主妇又斟酒献给下佐食，其礼仪和献上佐食相同。
English: The hostess also pours wine for the serving of sashimi, following the same etiquette as for the serving of sashimi.

古文：主妇受爵以入于房。
现代文：主妇接过下佐食之空爵，入于房中。
English: The housewife took over the sashimi and went into the room.

古文：宾长洗爵献于尸，尸拜受爵。宾户西北拜送爵。尸祭酒，卒爵。
现代文：宾客之长清洗酒爵，斟酒后献给 尸 。 尸 向宾客之长行拜后接过酒爵，宾客之长立于户西面朝北行拜送爵。 尸 祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒。
English: The head of the guests cleans the wine jar, pours the wine and then offers it to the corpse.The corpse bows to the head of the guests and then receives the wine jar.The head of the guests stands on the west side of the house and bows to the north to send the wine jar.The corpse sacrifices the wine and drinks the wine from the wine jar.

古文：宾拜。
现代文：宾客之长向 尸 行拜。
English: The head waiter bowed to the corpse.

古文：祝受尸爵，尸答拜。
现代文：祝接过 尸 之空爵。 尸 向宾客之长答拜。
English: Best wishes to the Empress Dowager, who received the corpse.

古文：祝酌授尸，宾拜受爵，尸拜送爵。
现代文：祝斟酒授于 尸 。宾客之长向 尸 行拜后接过酒爵。 尸 行拜送爵。
English: The head of the guests bowed to the corpse and received the baron. The corpse bowed to the lord.

古文：宾坐奠爵，遂拜，执爵以兴，坐祭，遂饮，卒爵，执爵以兴，坐奠爵，拜。尸答拜。
现代文：宾客之长坐下，放下酒爵，向尸行拜，接着拿起酒爵起立；又坐下行祭，饮尽酒爵中酒，执爵起立；再坐下，放下空爵，向 尸 行拜， 尸 答拜。
English: The head of the guests sits down, puts down the wine goblet, bows to the corpse, then picks up the wine goblet and stands up; he also sits down to perform the rite, drinks all the wine in the wine goblet, and stands up; he then sits down again, puts down the empty goblet, bows to the corpse, and answers the corpse.

古文：宾酌献祝。
现代文：宾客之长又斟酒献于祝。
English: The head of the guests pours more wine to celebrate.

古文：祝拜，坐受爵。
现代文：祝向宾客之长行拜后，坐下接过酒爵。
English: After bowing to the head of the guests, he sat down to receive the baron.

古文：宾北面答拜。
现代文：宾客之长面朝北答拜。
English: The guests bowed their heads to the North.

古文：祝祭酒，啐酒，奠爵于其筵前。
现代文：祝祭酒，尝酒，然后将酒爵放在席的南边。
English: Celebrate the wine, taste the wine, and then place the bottle on the south side of the table.

古文：主人出立于阼阶上，西面。
现代文：主人出室，于东阶上站立，面朝西。
English: The master left the room and stood on the east steps, facing west.

古文：祝出立于西阶上，东面。
现代文：祝出室，站在西阶上，面朝东。
English: Go out of the room and stand on the west steps, facing east.

古文：祝告曰： 利成。 
现代文：祝告主人说： 孝子之养礼毕。 
English: He congratulated his master, saying, "You have raised a filial son.

古文：祝入，尸谡。
现代文：祝入于室。 尸 起立。
English: Welcome back, corpse, arise.

古文：主人降立于阼阶东，西面。
现代文：主人下堂立于东阶的东边，面朝西。
English: The master lower hall stands to the east of the east steps, facing west.

古文：祝先，尸从，遂出于庙门。
现代文：祝于前引导， 尸 于祝后面跟着，一同从庙门里出来。
English: Zhu Yu led the way forward, and the corpse of Zhu Yu followed, and they came out of the temple gate together.

古文：祝反，复位于室中。
现代文：祝返回室中原位，面朝南。
English: Return to your original position in the middle of the room, facing south.

古文：主人亦入于室，复位。
现代文：主人也返回室中原位，面朝西。
English: The owner also returned to his original position in the room, facing west.

古文：祝命佐食彻肵俎，降设于堂下阼阶南。
现代文：祝命上佐食撤下肵俎，改设于堂下东阶的南边。
English: In accordance with the wishes of the Emperor, the table of the Upper Sashimi Course was removed and placed on the south side of the east steps of the Lower Hall.

古文：司宫设对食，乃四人餕。上佐食盥升，下佐食对之，宾长二人备。
现代文：司宫于 尸 席对面设一席，此席为上下二佐食和宾长二人馂食而设。
English: There is a seat opposite the corpse's seat, which is set up for two diners, the chief steward and the chief barmaid.

古文：司士进一敦于上佐食，又进一敦黍于下佐食，皆右之于席上。
现代文：上佐食洗手登堂入席，下佐食亦洗手登堂，并坐在上佐食的对面，宾长二人也都洗手登堂入席，一坐于上佐食之北，一坐于下佐食之南，两佐食两宾长，四人之席完备。
English: The Upper Sashimi washed his hands and entered the hall, the Lower Sashimi also washed his hands and entered the hall, and sat opposite the Upper Sashimi. The two head chefs also washed their hands and entered the hall, one sat in the north of the Upper Sashimi, one sat in the south of the Lower Sashimi. Two Sashimi and two head chefs, four seats complete.

古文：资黍于羊俎两端，两下是餕。
现代文：司士先进献一盛黍之敦给上佐食，再进献一盛黍之敦给下佐食，都设于席上二佐食的右边。
English: The server first presents a large bowl of miso soup to the upper diners, and then a large bowl of miso soup to the lower diners. Both are placed to the right of the two miso soup bowls on the table.

古文：司士乃辩举，餕者皆祭黍、祭举。
现代文：接着分减二佐食敦中之黍置于羊俎的两端，给二宾长馂食。司士遍授二佐食、二宾长四人肤各一块，四人皆以黍和肤行祭。
English: The steward then divides the food into two portions and places the yakitori in the middle of the yakitori on the two ends of the yakitori, giving the yakitori to the two chief guests. The steward gives them two pieces of yakitori, and the two chief guests give each of the four guests a piece of the yakitori. All four of them perform the ritual with the yakitori and the yakitori.

古文：主人西面，三拜餕者。
现代文：主人面朝西向四人行拜三次。
English: The host, facing west, bowed three times to the eater.

古文：餕者奠举于俎，皆答拜，皆反，取举。
现代文：四人各将肤放在俎上，离席答拜，继而入席，从俎上取肤。
English: Each of the four people places the skin on the yoke, leaves the table and prays, then enters the table and takes the skin from the yoke.

古文：司士进一鉶于上餕，又进一鉶于次餕，又进二豆湆于两下。
现代文：司士进献一只铏给上佐食，又进献一只铏给下佐食，又进献盛肉汁的豆两只给两位宾长。
English: The steward presented a maggot to the first guest, a maggot to the second guest, and two beans with gravy to the two chief guests.

古文：乃皆食，食举，卒食。
现代文：接着二佐食、二宾长食黍、食肤。
English: This was followed by nisa-shoku, nibin-chōshoku, and shikara-shoku.

古文：主人洗一爵，升酌，以授上餕。
现代文：食毕，主人清洗一只酒爵，登堂斟酒，授给上佐食。
English: After the meal, the host cleans a sake cup, goes to the hall to pour the wine, and gives it to Josa.

古文：赞者洗三爵，酌。
现代文：有司助手再清洗三只酒爵，上堂斟酒。
English: An assistant steward then cleans the three bottles and pours the wine into the hall.

古文：主人受于户内，以授次餕，若是以辩。皆不拜，受爵。
现代文：主人于户内接过酒爵，先授给下佐食，接着授给二宾长，二佐食、二宾长接过酒爵时都不向主人行拜。
English: When the host receives the sake sashimi in the house, he first gives it to the hostess, and then to the second guest. When the second guest and the second guest receive the sake sashimi, they do not bow to the host.

古文：主人西面，三拜餕者。
现代文：主人面朝西向馂食者行拜三次。
English: The host, facing west, bowed three times to the eater.

古文：餕者奠爵，皆答拜，皆祭酒，卒爵，奠爵，皆拜。主人答壹拜。
现代文：馂食者放下酒爵，都向主人答拜，都祭酒，饮尽酒爵中酒，然后放下空爵，向主人行拜，主人向四人总答一拜。
English: The diners put down their wine goblets, all bowed to the host, all offered wine, drank up the wine in the wine goblets, then put down the empty goblets and bowed to the host. The host bowed to all four.

古文：餕者三人兴，出，上餕止。
现代文：下佐食和二宾长起立，出室；上佐食留下不走。
English: Shimo-sashiki and the two chief guests got up and left the room; Ue-sashiki stayed and would not leave.

古文：主人受上餕爵，酌以酢于户内，西面坐奠爵，拜，上餕答拜。
现代文：主人接过上佐食的空爵，于户内斟酒自酬，然后面朝西坐下，放下酒爵，向上佐食行拜；上佐食答拜。
English: The host takes the empty sake cup, pours his own sake inside the house, and then sits down facing west, puts down the sake cup, and bows to the sake cup; the sake cup responds.

古文：坐祭酒，啐酒。
现代文：主人又坐下祭酒，尝酒。
English: The host sat down again and tasted the sacrificial wine.

古文：上餕亲嘏，曰： 主人受祭之福，胡寿保建家室。 
现代文：上佐食向主人亲致祝辞，祝辞说： 主人定将得到祭祀之福，长寿并致家业兴旺。 
English: Kamisashiki sent a congratulatory message to the owner's relatives, saying: The owner will surely receive the blessing of sacrifice, live a long life and make the family business prosper.

古文：主人兴，坐奠爵，拜，执爵以兴，坐卒爵，拜，上餕答拜。
现代文：主人起立，又坐下放下酒爵，向上佐食行拜，然后执爵起立；又坐下饮尽酒爵中酒，向上佐食行拜；上佐食答拜。
English: The host stood up, sat down again, put down the sake sash, bowed to the sashimi, and then the sashimi stood up; sat down again, drank the sake sashimi, bowed to the sashimi; and bowed to the sashimi.

古文：上餕兴，出。主人送,乃退。
现代文：上佐食出庙门，主人送其出门后返回。
English: Kamisasa went out to eat at the temple gate, and the owner sent him out and then returned.

