古文：起强圉作噩，尽昭阳单阏，凡七年。
现代文：起，止，一共七年。汉桓帝永寿三年
English: It lasted for seven years. Emperor Han Huan lived for three years.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下永寿三年
现代文：春季，正月己未，大赦天下。
English: Spring, the first month of the year has not yet come, the world is wide open.

古文：春，正月，己未，赦天下。居风令贪暴无度，县人硃达等与蛮夷同反，攻杀令，聚众至四五千人。
现代文：居风县县令贪污暴虐没有限度，县民朱达等和蛮夷联合反叛，攻打县城，杀死县令，聚集群众四五千人。
English: There is no limit to the corruption and tyranny of the county magistrate of Guifeng County. The county people, including Zhu Da and the barbarians, jointly rebelled, attacked the county seat, killed the county magistrate, and gathered 45,000 people.

古文：夏，四月，进攻九真，九真太守儿式战死。
现代文：夏季，四月，进攻九真郡，九真郡太守式战死。
English: In the summer, in April, he attacked Jiuzhen County, and was killed in the battle of Jiuzhen County.

古文：诏九真都尉魏朗讨破之。
现代文：桓帝下诏，命九真郡都尉魏朗率军将朱达等击败。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict, ordering Wei Lang, the lieutenant of Jiu Zhen County, to lead the army to defeat Zhu Da and others.

古文：闰月，庚辰晦，日有食之。
现代文：闰五月庚辰晦，出现日食。
English: At the end of the leap month of May, a solar eclipse occurs.

古文：京师蝗。
现代文：京都洛阳发生蝗灾。
English: Locust plague in Beijing.

古文：或上言： 民之贫困以货轻钱薄，宜改铸大钱。 
现代文：有人上书说： 人民所以贫困，原因在于钱币的重量太轻，厚度太薄，应该改铸大钱。 
English: Someone wrote: The reason why the people are poor is that the weight of the coins is too light and the thickness is too thin. They should be changed to large coins.

古文：事下四府群僚及太学能言之士议之。
现代文：奏章交付给大将军、太尉、司徒、司空等四府的官员，以及太学中有见解的学生，共同讨论。
English: The report was delivered to officials from the four prefectures, including the general, captain, Sito, and Sikuo, as well as students with opinions at Taihaku, for joint discussion.

古文：太学生刘陶上议曰： 当今之忧，不在于货，在乎民饥。
现代文：太学生刘陶上书说： 我们当前面临的忧患，不在于钱币，而在于人民饥荒。
English: Liu Tao, a student of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, said in a letter: "The sorrow we are currently facing lies not in coins, but in the famine of the people.

古文：窃见比年已来，良苗尽于蝗螟之口，杼轴空于公私之求。
现代文：我看到，连年以来，茂盛的庄稼都被蝗虫和螟虫吃光；民间所织的布匹都被朝廷和官吏私人搜刮一空。
English: I saw that over the years, the lush crops had been eaten up by locusts and aphids; the cloth woven by the people had been raided by the court and officials.

古文：民所患者，岂谓钱货之厚薄，铢两之轻重哉！
现代文：人民所忧患的，难道是钱币的厚薄和铢两的轻重吗？
English: Is it the thickness of coins and the weight of ingots that people are worried about?

古文：就使当今沙砾化为南金，瓦石变为和玉，使百姓渴无所饮，饥无所食，虽皇、羲之纯德，唐、虞之文明，犹不能以保萧墙之内也。
现代文：即令当前能把沙砾化作南方出产的黄金，把瓦片变成和发现的白玉，而让百姓渴了没有水喝，饿了没有饭吃，尽管有天皇氏、伏羲氏的纯洁美德，唐尧和虞舜的清明政治，仍不能保证宫室门屏之内的安全。
English: Textiles cannot meet the needs of both the public and the private sector. The most urgent need is for two meals a day, and the greatest fear is that the state's labor service is exhausted. Can we still talk about the thickness of money and goods, and the importance of the two! Even if sand and gravel are now turned into gold, and rocks and pebbles are turned into gems of peace, and the people are thirsty and have nothing to drink, and hungry and have nothing to eat, even though the Three Kings' pure morality and the Tang and Yu civilizations, they still cannot guarantee that there will be no chaos within the country!

古文：盖民可百年无货，不可一朝有饥，故食为至急也。
现代文：人民可以有一百年不用钱币，不可以有一天饥饿，所以吃饭才是最急迫的问题。
English: People can live without money and goods for a hundred years, but they cannot go without food for a day. Therefore, grain is the most urgently needed.

古文：议者不达农殖之本，多言铸冶之便。
现代文：主张改铸钱币的人，不了解农业生产是国家的根本大计，多数只说改铸钱币的好处。
English: Those who advocate the change of coinage do not understand that agricultural production is the fundamental plan of the country. Most of them only talk about the benefits of the change of coinage.

古文：盖万人铸之，一人夺之，犹不能给；况今一人铸之，则万人夺之乎！
现代文：但是，如果一万个人铸钱，一个人掠夺，仍是不能满足。何况现在是一个人铸钱，而有一万个人来掠夺！
English: But if ten thousand people minted money and one person plundered it, that would still not be enough. Moreover, now it is one person minting money and ten thousand people plundering it!

古文：虽以阴阳为炭，万物为铜，役不食之民，使不饥之士，犹不能足无厌之求也。
现代文：尽管把天地间的阴阳二气都当作炭火，把万物都当成铜，驱使不吃饭的人民，使用不饥饿的役夫，仍不能满足永无止境的需求。
English: Even if you use yin and yang as charcoal, use all things as copper, drive away the people who do not need to eat, and serve those who do not know hunger, you still cannot satisfy the endless demands.

古文：夫欲民殷财阜，要在止役禁夺，则百姓不劳而足。
现代文：要想使人民富裕，财富充足，最要紧的在于停止征役，禁止掠夺，则百姓不必劳苦而自然富足。
English: If you want to make the people rich and have enough wealth, the most important thing is to stop conscription and prohibit plunder. Then the people will not have to work hard and will be naturally rich.

古文：陛下愍海内之忧戚，欲铸钱齐货以救其弊，犹养鱼沸鼎之中。
现代文：如果陛下哀怜天下百姓的忧愁，想改铸钱币，使其整齐划一，用来拯救时弊，这就犹如将鱼养在鼎的沸水之中，让鸟栖息在燃烧着烈火的树木之上。
English: If your majesty pities the sorrow of the people of the world and wants to change the minting of money to make it neat and uniform to save the times, it is like keeping fish in boiling water and letting birds perch on burning trees.

古文：栖鸟烈火之上；水、木，本鱼鸟之所生也，用之不时，必至焦烂。
现代文：水和树木，本来是鱼和鸟赖以生存的，用的不是时候，一定会被烧焦煮烂。
English: Water and trees, on which fish and birds depend for their survival, will be burned and boiled away if not used at the right time.

古文：愿陛下宽锲薄之禁，后冶铸之议，听民庶之谣吟，问路叟之所忧，瞰三光之文耀，视山河之分流，天下之心，国家大事，粲然皆见，无有遗惑者矣。
现代文：希望陛下放宽刻薄的禁令，暂缓实行改铸钱币的建议，倾听民间百姓流传的评议时政的歌谣和谚语，询问路旁老人的忧患，观察日、月、星辰等三光的变异，察视山峰崩裂和河水干涸的警告。天下人民的心愿，国家急需办理的大事，就可以看得明明白白，没有遗漏和疑惑的地方。
English: It is hoped that His Majesty will relax the harsh ban, postpone the implementation of the proposal to change the coinage, listen to the folk songs and proverbs circulating to discuss current politics, inquire about the worries of the old people on the roadside, observe the variation of the three lights such as the sun, the moon and the stars, and observe the warning of the collapse of the mountain peaks and the drying up of rivers. The wishes of the people of the world and the major matters that the country urgently needs to handle can be seen clearly and clearly, and there is no place for omissions and doubts.

古文：伏念当今地广而不得耕，民众而无所食，群小竞进，秉国之位，鹰扬天下，鸟钞求饱，吞肌及骨，并噬无厌。
现代文：我想到，当今田地虽然宽广却得不到耕种，人民虽然很多却得不到食物。众小人争相抢夺官爵，掌握国家的高位，犹如兀鹰凶残而横行天下，犹如乌鸦掠夺而贪婪无厌，连皮带骨，把人民一口吞下，而仍不能满足。
English: It occurred to me that today, although the fields are wide, they cannot be cultivated, and although the people are many, they cannot get food. Many villains compete to snatch official titles and seize high positions in the country, just as the vultures are ferocious and rampant in the world, just as the ravens are rapacious and greedy, even the bones of the belt, swallowing the people in one bite, but still cannot be satisfied.

古文：诚恐卒有役夫、穷匠起于板筑之间，投斤攘臂，登高远呼，使怨之民响应云合。虽方尺之钱，何有能救其危也！ 
现代文：我担心役夫和穷困的工匠会突然从版筑之间崛起，扔掉斧头，捋衣出臂，登高向远方呐喊，使忧愁怨恨的人民起来响应，犹如云一样纷纷集合，到那时候，即令有一尺见方的钱币，营怎能挽救危亡！ 
English: I fear that the laborer and the destitute artisan will suddenly rise up from between the boards, throw down his axe, raise his arm, and shout to the distance, causing the sad and resentful people to rise up in response, gathering like clouds. At that time, even if there is a foot-square coin, how can the camp save the peril!

古文：遂不改钱。
现代文：于是不改铸钱币。
English: So they did not change the coinage.

古文：冬，十一月，司徒尹颂薨。
现代文：冬季，十一月，司徒尹颂去世。
English: In the winter, in November, Siu Yin Song passed away.

古文：长沙蛮反，寇益阳。
现代文：长沙郡蛮人反叛，攻打益阳县。
English: The barbarians in Changsha County rebelled and attacked Yiyang County.

古文：以司空韩縯为司徒，以太常北海孙朗为司空。
现代文：任命司空韩为司徒；擢升太常、北海人孙朗为司空。
English: Appointed Sifu Han as Sifu; promoted Taejong, and Hokkai native Sun Lang as Sifu.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下延熹元年夏，五月，甲戊晦，日有食之。太史令陈授因小黄门徐璜陈 日食之变咎在大将军冀 。
现代文：延熹元年夏季，五月甲戌晦，出现日食。太史令陈授通过小黄门徐璜，奏称： 出现日食灾异，罪过在于大将军梁冀。 
English: In the summer of the first year of Yancheng, in late May, a solar eclipse occurred. Taishi ordered Chen Zuo to pass through Xiaohuangmen Xuhui, saying: If a solar eclipse occurs, it is the fault of General Liang Jie.

古文：冀闻之，讽雒阳收考授，死于狱。
现代文：梁冀听到这个消息后，于是，授意洛阳县令逮捕和拷问陈授，陈授死在狱中。
English: After Liang Jie heard the news, he ordered Luoyang County to arrest and torture Chen Zuo. Chen Zuo died in prison.

古文：帝由是怒冀。
现代文：桓帝因此恼恨梁冀。
English: Emperor Kuan therefore resented Liang Jie.

古文：六月，戊寅，赦天下，改元。
现代文：六月戊寅，大赦天下。改年号。
English: June, Wu Yin, amnesty to the world. Change the year.

古文：大雩。
现代文：举行求雨的祭祀大典。
English: The festival is held to pray for rain.

古文：秋，七月，甲子，太尉黄琼免；以太常胡广为太尉。
现代文：秋季，七月甲子，太尉黄琼被免官，擢升太常胡广为太尉。
English: In the autumn, in July, First Lieutenant Huang Qiong was dismissed and promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：冬，十月，帝校猎广成，遂幸上林苑。
现代文：冬季，十月，桓帝前往广成苑打猎，随后到上林苑。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Huan went to Guangcheng Garden to hunt, and then to Shanglin Garden.

古文：十二月，南匈奴诸部并叛，与乌桓、鲜卑寇缘边九郡。
现代文：十二月，南匈奴各部部众同时反叛，和乌桓、鲜卑等联合侵犯沿边九郡。
English: In December, all the Southern Xiongnu rebelled at the same time, and together with the Wuhuan and Xianbei jointly invaded nine counties along the border.

古文：帝以京兆尹陈龟为度辽将军。
现代文：桓帝任命京兆尹陈龟为度辽将军。
English: Emperor Kuan appointed Jing Zhaoying Chen Gui as General Du Liao.

古文：龟临行，上疏曰： 臣闻三辰不轨，擢士为相；蛮夷不恭，拔卒为将。
现代文：陈龟临行前，向桓帝上书说： 我曾经听说，当日、月、星辰不顺着轨道运行时，应该选拔士人为相；蛮夷不恭顺朝廷时，应该选拔士卒为将。
English: Before leaving, Chen Kame wrote to Emperor Huan: I once heard that when the sun, moon, and stars do not follow the same orbit, a scholar should be selected as the leader; when a barbarian does not obey the imperial court, a scholar should be selected as the leader.

古文：臣无文武之才，而忝鹰扬之任，虽殁躯体，无所云补。
现代文：我没有文武双全的才能，却担当大军统帅的重任，即令身死，也难以报答。
English: I do not have the talent to be both a man and a warrior, but I am responsible for the heavy responsibility of the commander-in-chief of the great army, even if I die, it is difficult to repay.

古文：今西州边鄙，土地塉埆，民数更寇虏，室家残破，虽含生气，实同枯朽。
现代文：而今，西方边界地区，土地瘠薄多石，人民不断受到外族的侵犯掳掠，家家户户都已经残破不堪，虽然还有一口气可以呼吸，但实际上如同一具枯干的朽骨。
English: But now, in the western border area, the land is thin and rocky, and the people are constantly invaded and plundered by foreigners. Every family has been devastated. Although there is still a breath to breathe, it is actually like a dry rotten bone.

古文：往岁并州水雨，灾螟互生，稼穑荒耗，租更空阙。
现代文：往年并州下大雨，同时发生水灾和虫灾，农作物荒废，人民缴纳不起租税和更赋。
English: In previous years, there was too much rain in the state, which led to disasters, crop wastage, and rent vacancies.

古文：陛下以百姓为子，焉可不垂抚循之恩哉！
现代文：陛下把百姓当作子女，怎么能够不尽抚养的恩惠？
English: Your Majesty regards the people as your children, how can you not give them the benefit of your upbringing?

古文：呼嗟之声，招致灾害，胡虏凶悍，因衰缘隙；而令仓库单于豺狼之口，功业无铢两之效，皆由将帅不忠，聚奸所致。
现代文：外族凶猛强悍，趁着政治衰败，利用人民的怨恨，起兵作乱。至使仓库的粮秣，全被豺狼吃光；朝廷屡次出兵讨伐，却收不到丝毫功效。这都是由于将帅不忠，贪官聚敛所造成的。
English: Foreigners are ferocious and strong, taking advantage of the political decline, taking advantage of the people's resentment, starting a riot. To the extent that the grain in the warehouse was completely eaten up by wolves; the imperial court repeatedly sent troops to fight, but did not receive the slightest effect. This was all caused by the disloyalty of generals and the gathering of corrupt officials.

古文：前凉州刺史祝良，初除到州，多所纠罚，太守令长，贬黜将半，政未逾时，功效卓然，实应赏异，以劝功能；改任牧守，去斥奸残；又宜更选匈奴、乌桓护羌中郎将、校尉，简练文下，授之法令；除并、凉二州今年租更，宽赦罪隶，扫除更始。
现代文：前凉知刺史祝良，初被任命到州上任后，对贪官污吏多有举发和惩处，郡太守和县令、长，受到贬谪和撤职的将近半数，任职不到一年，功绩和效果卓著，实在应该给他特别的奖赏，以勉励他的功绩和才能。还应更换其他不称职的州牧和郡太守，罢免邪恶贪残的官吏。并应该重新遴选护匈奴、乌桓、羌等中郎将及校尉，要求具备文武全才，授予行使法令的权力。免除并州、凉州今年应该缴纳的田租和更赋，宽大和赦免罪犯，给他们改过自新的机会。
English: After the former Liangzhi and Zhuliang were appointed to the state for the first time, most of the corrupt officials were punished and punished, and nearly half of the county governors and county magistrates and chiefs were demeaned and dismissed. He served for less than a year, and his achievements and results were outstanding. He should really be given a special award to encourage his achievements and talents. Other incompetent state pastors and county governors should also be replaced, and evil and greedy officials should be removed. And the lieutenant generals and captains such as Gu Xiongnu, Wuhuan, and Zou should be re-selected, and they should be required to

古文：则善吏知奉公之祐，恶者觉营私之祸，胡马可不窥长城，塞下无候望之患矣。 
现代文：这样，善吏知道奉公守法的福气，恶吏知道营私舞弊的祸害，胡马将不会再暗中窥伺长城，边塞也将没有候望烽火的忧患。 
English: Then the good officials will know how to serve the public, the evil ones will know how to exploit the private sector, Humma will not see the Great Wall, and there will be no long-awaited troubles.

古文：帝乃更选幽、并刺史，自营、郡太守、都尉以下，多所革易。
现代文：于是，桓帝重新任命幽州、并州刺史，京兆虎牙营、扶风雍营的都尉，郡太守和都尉及以下的官吏，也多有更换。
English: As a result, Emperor Kuan reappointed Yuzhou, Bingshu Zhiguo, the captains of Jinghao Hoga Camp and Fufeng Yong Camp, the county governor and captain and other officials, and there were also many changes.

古文：下诏为陈将军除并、凉一年租赋，以赐吏民。
现代文：并且下诏： 为了陈将军的请求，免除并州、凉州一年的田租和更赋，以表示朝廷对官吏和人民的恩赐。 
English: He also issued the following edict: At the request of General Chen, a year's land rent and additional land allotment were waived for the two provinces of Nianzhou and Liangzhou, in order to show the imperial court's generosity to officials and the people.

古文：龟到职，州郡重足震栗，省息经用，岁以亿计。
现代文：陈龟到职以后，所在州郡官府的官吏，都大为震恐，节省下来的经费，每年以亿计算。
English: After Chen Zhe took office, the officials of the county government of the state where he was stationed were greatly shocked. The amount of money saved was calculated at hundreds of millions of yuan each year.

古文：诏拜安定属国都尉张奂为北中郎将，以讨匈奴、乌桓等。
现代文：诏拜安定属国都尉张奂为北中郎将，以讨匈奴、乌桓等。
English: Zhang Ye, a lieutenant of the State of Anhui, was appointed as the North Vice Admiral to fight against the Xiongnu, Wuhuan and others.

古文：匈奴、乌桓烧度辽将军门，引屯赤阬，烟火相望。兵众大恐，各欲亡去。
现代文：匈奴、乌桓烧度辽将军门，引屯赤坑，烟火相望，兵众大恐，各欲亡去。
English: Xiongnu and Wuhuan set fire to Liao Zhenzhen's gate, led the troops to the red pit, watched the fireworks, the soldiers were terrified, and they all wanted to die.

古文：奂安坐帷中，与弟子讲诵自若，军士稍安。
现代文：奂安坐帷中，与弟子讲诵自若，军士稍安。
English: Zhang Ye sat calmly in the middle of the curtain, chanting freely with his disciples. Only then did his subordinates calm down a little.

古文：乃潜诱乌桓，阴与和通，遂使斩匈奴、屠各渠帅，袭破其众，诸胡悉降。
现代文：乃潜诱乌桓，阴与和通，遂使斩匈奴、屠各渠帅，袭破其众，诸胡悉降。
English: Naikaku lured Wuhuan, Yin and He Tong, and then ordered the execution of Xiongnu and the slaughter of the commanders of each canal, breaking through their people, and all the Hu were defeated.

古文：奂以南单于车儿不能统理国事，乃拘之，奏立左谷蠡王为单于。
现代文：奂以南单于车儿不能统理国事，乃拘之，奏立左谷蠡王为单于。
English: South of the Yangtze River, a chariot alone could not manage the affairs of state. In any case, the establishment of the King of the Left Valley Yangtze River was a one-man operation.

古文：诏曰： 《春秋》大居正；车儿一心向化，何罪而黜！
现代文：诏曰： 《春秋》大居正；车儿一心向化，何罪而黜！
English: The edict said: "Spring and Autumn" is very positive; the car is one-sided, what a crime!

古文：其遣还庭！ 
现代文：送他返回王庭！ 
English: Send him back to the royal court!

古文：大将军冀与陈龟素有隙，谮其沮毁国威，挑取功誉，不为胡虏所畏，坐征还，以种暠为度辽将军。
现代文：大将军梁冀和陈龟之间一向有怨恨。梁冀诬陷陈龟毁坏国家的威严，牟取个人的功劳和名誉，不能得到匈奴人的敬重和畏服。陈龟因罪被征召，返回京都洛阳，种被任命为度辽将军。
English: There has always been a grudge between the great general Liang Jie and Chen Jie. Liang Jie framed Chen Jie for destroying the country's dignity and gaining personal merit and honor, which could not be respected and feared by the Huns. Chen Jie was conscripted for his crime, returned to Kyoto Luoyang, and was appointed General Du Liao.

古文：龟遂乞骸骨归田里，复征为尚书。
现代文：于是，陈龟请求退休，回归故乡。后来，朝廷又征召他担任尚书。
English: As a result, Chen Kuei asked to retire and return to his hometown. Later, the imperial court also called him to serve as Shangshu.

古文：冀暴虐日甚，龟上疏言其罪状，请诛之，帝不省。
现代文：这时，梁冀暴虐的程度，一天比一天厉害，陈龟向桓帝上书弹劾他的罪状，请求诛杀梁冀，桓帝不予理会。
English: At this time, the degree of Liang Jie's brutality became more and more severe day by day. Chen Turtle sent a letter to Emperor Huan to impeach him and request that he kill Liang Jie. Emperor Huan ignored the letter.

古文：龟自知必为冀所害，不食七日而死。
现代文：陈龟知道自己一定会被梁冀所害，于是绝食七天而死。
English: Chen Zhe knew that he would definitely be harmed by Liang Ji, so he went on a seven-day hunger strike and died.

古文：种暠到营所，先宣恩信，诱降诸胡，其有不服，然后加讨；羌虏先时有生见获质于郡县者，悉遣还之；诚心怀抚，信赏分明，由是羌、胡皆来顺服。
现代文：种到度辽将军大营以后，首先宣布朝廷的恩德和信义，劝诱外族归降；有不归降的，再进行讨伐。有些羌人先前被生擒，现囚禁在郡县官府做人质，种命令将他们全部释放。他诚心诚意地进行怀柔和安抚，赏罚分明，因此羌人、胡人都纷纷前来归服。
English: When he arrived at General Du Liao's camp, he first announced the benevolence and sincerity of the imperial court, and persuaded the foreigners to surrender; if some did not surrender, he would then go on a crusade. Some of the Xiong people had previously been captured alive, and were now imprisoned in the county government as hostages, and he ordered them all to be released. He sincerely carried out the policy of pacifying and appeasing, with clear rewards and punishments, so the Xiong people and the Hu people came to surrender one after another.

古文：暠乃去烽燧，除候望，边方晏然无警；入为大司农。
现代文：于是，种下令拆除烽火台和了望亭，边境地区一片安宁，没有警报。种被调回京都洛阳担任大司农。
English: As a result, he ordered the bonfires and watchtowers to be dismantled, and the border area was peaceful, with no alarms. He was transferred back to Kyoto's Luoyang to serve as chief farmer.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下延熹二年春，二月，鲜卑寇雁门。蜀郡夷寇蚕陵。
现代文：延熹二年春季，二月，鲜卑侵犯雁门郡。蜀郡夷人攻打蚕陵县。
English: In the spring of the second year of Yancheng, in February, Xianbei invaded Yanmen County. Shu County's barbarians attacked Siling County.

古文：三月，复断刺史、二千石行三年丧。
现代文：三月，再次取消刺史和二千石官吏为父母服丧三年的规定。
English: In March, the three-year mourning period imposed by the 2,000-koku system was reinstated.

古文：夏，京师大水。
现代文：夏季，京都洛阳发生水灾。
English: In the summer, flooding occurred in Kyoto's Luoyang district.

古文：六月，鲜卑寇辽东。
现代文：六月，鲜卑侵犯辽东郡。
English: In June, the Xinbei corsair raided Liaodong Province.

古文：梁皇后恃姊、兄廕势，恣极奢靡，兼倍前世，专宠妒忌，六宫莫得进见。
现代文：梁皇后仗恃姊姊梁太后和哥哥大将军梁冀的庇护和势力，穷极奢华，比前世加倍，独占桓帝的宠爱，嫉妒成性，六宫的其他嫔妃都不得侍奉桓帝。
English: The protection and power of Empress Liang, her sister Empress Dowager Liang and her brother General Liang Ji, were extremely luxurious, twice as much as in previous lifetimes, monopolized Emperor Huan's favor, and jealousy became natural. Other concubines in the Sixth Palace were not allowed to serve Emperor Huan.

古文：及太后崩，恩宠顿衰。
现代文：等到梁太后去世，桓帝对她的恩宠顿时衰退。
English: When Empress Dowager Liang died, Emperor Kuan's favor toward her suddenly declined.

古文：后既无嗣，每宫人孕育，鲜得全者。
现代文：梁皇后自己没有儿子，每当其他嫔妃怀有身孕，很少能得到保全。
English: Empress Liang does not have a son of her own, so she is rarely spared when other empresses are pregnant.

古文：帝虽迫畏梁冀，不敢谴怒，然进御转希，后益忧恚。秋，七月，丙午，皇后梁氏崩。
现代文：桓帝虽然畏惧梁冀，不敢谴责和发怒，然而让梁皇后来陪侍的次数变得稀少，梁皇后越来越忧愁愤恨。秋季，七月丙午，梁皇后去世。
English: Although Emperor Kuan feared Liang Ji and did not dare to condemn and get angry, the number of times Emperor Liang accompanied him later became rare, and Empress Liang became more and more sad and angry. In autumn, on the afternoon of July 3rd, Empress Liang died.

古文：乙丑，葬懿献皇后于懿陵。
现代文：乙丑，将她安葬在懿陵，谥号为懿献皇后。
English: On the twenty-first day, the funeral pyre dedicated to the empress was set up in the imperial mausoleum.

古文：梁冀一门，前后七侯，三皇后，六贵人，二大将军，夫人、女食邑称君者七人，尚公主者三人，其馀卿、将、尹、校五十七人。
现代文：梁冀家族一门，前后共有七个侯，三个皇后，六个贵人，两个大将军，夫人和女儿享有食邑而称君的七人，娶公主为妻的三人，其他担任卿、将、尹、校等官职的五十七人。
English: In the Liang Ji family, there are seven princes, three queens, six nobles, two generals, seven people whose wives and daughters enjoy the title of prince, three people who married princesses, and other fifty-seven people who hold official positions such as lord, general, Yin, and school.

古文：冀专擅威柄，凶恣日积，宫卫近侍，并树所亲，禁省起居，纤微必知。
现代文：梁冀把持朝廷威权，独断专行，凶暴放肆，日甚一日。宫廷禁军和皇帝最亲近的侍卫和随从中，都有他的亲信，皇宫内部皇帝的起居，再细小的情况，他都必定了如指掌。
English: Liang Jie wielded imperial authority, exercised arbitrary power, and became increasingly violent and reckless. The palace guards and the emperor's closest bodyguards and attendants were all his close confidants, and he must have known every detail of the emperor's life inside the palace.

古文：其四方调发，岁时贡献，皆先输上第于冀，乘舆乃其次焉。
现代文：向四方征调的物品，以及各地每年按时向皇帝贡献的礼品，都先将最好的呈送给梁冀，皇帝还得排在他的后面。
English: The items requisitioned from the four directions, as well as the gifts donated to the emperor on time every year from all over the country, will be presented to Liang Jie first, and the emperor will have to line up behind him.

古文：吏民赍货求官、请罪者，道路相望。
现代文：官吏和百姓带着财物，到梁冀家里请求做官或者免罪的，在道路上前后相望。
English: Officials and ordinary people with their belongings, who came to Liang Jie's home to request to be made an official or to be exonerated, looked at each other on the road.

古文：百官迁召，皆先到冀门笺檄谢恩，然后敢诣尚书。
现代文：文武百官升迁或被征召，都要先到梁冀家门呈递谢恩书，然后才敢到尚书台去接受指示。
English: Civil and military officials who are promoted or conscripted must first go to Liang Jie's home to submit a letter of thanks, and then dare to go to Shang Shudai to receive instructions.

古文：下邳吴树为宛令，之官辞冀，冀宾客布在县界，以情托树，树曰： 小人奸蠹，比屋可诛。
现代文：下邳国人吴树被任命为宛县县令，上任之前向梁冀辞行，梁冀的宾客散布在宛县县境的很多，梁冀托吴树照顾他们。吴树说： 邪恶的小人是残害百姓蛀虫，即令是近邻，也应诛杀。
English: Wu Shu, a native of Lower Yunnan Province, was appointed as the county magistrate of Wan County. Before taking office, he resigned to Liang Jie. Many of Liang Jie's guests were scattered in the county border of Wan County, and Liang Jie asked Wu Shu to take care of them. Wu Shu said: Evil villains are destroying people and killing insects, even if they are close neighbors, they should be killed.

古文：明将军处上将之位，宜崇贤善以补朝阙。
现代文：将军高居上将之位，应该崇敬贤能，弥补朝廷的缺失。
English: As a high-ranking general, the shogun should be revered for his ability to make up for the shortcomings of the imperial court.

古文：自侍坐以来，未闻称一长者，而多托非人，诚非敢闻！ 
现代文：可是，自从我随同您坐下以后，没有听见您称赞一位长者，而嘱托我照顾很多不恰当的人，我实在不敢听！ 
English: But since I've sat with you, I haven't heard you praise one elder, and you've asked me to take care of a lot of inappropriate people. I really don't dare to listen!

古文：冀嘿然不悦。
现代文：梁冀沉默不语，心里很不高兴。
English: Liang Jie remained silent, feeling very unhappy.

古文：树到县，遂诛杀冀客为人害者数十人。
现代文：吴树到县上任后，便将梁冀的宾客中为人民所痛恨的数十人诛杀。
English: After Wu Shu took office in the county, he killed dozens of guests of Liang Jie, who were hated by the people.

古文：树后为荆州刺史，辞冀，冀鸩之，出，死车上。
现代文：吴树后来升任荆州刺史，上任前向梁冀辞行，梁冀请他喝下了毒酒。吴树出来，死在车上。
English: Wu Shu was later promoted to Jingzhou chief historian. Before taking office, he resigned to Liang Jie. Liang Jie asked him to drink poisoned wine. Wu Shu came out and died in the car.

古文：辽东太守侯猛初拜，不谒冀，冀托以它事腰斩之。
现代文：东郡太守侯猛，刚刚接受任命时，没有去谒见梁冀，梁冀就另外找了一个罪名将他腰斩。
English: Dong County Deputy Governor Hou Meng, when he had just accepted the appointment, did not go to see Liang Jie, and Liang Jie found another crime to behead him.

古文：郎中汝南袁著，年十九，诣阙上书曰： 夫四时之运，功成则退，高爵厚宠，鲜不致灾。
现代文：郎中、汝南人袁著，年方十九岁，到宫门上书说： 春夏秋冬的运转，每个季节都在达到极盛时便消退。
English: His son-in-law, Yuan, a man from the south of the country, at the age of nineteen, wrote a letter to the palace gate saying: The operation of spring, summer, autumn and winter, each season reaches its peak and then subsides.

古文：今大将军位极功成，可为至戒，宜遵县车之礼，高枕颐神。传曰： 木实繁者披枝害心。 
现代文：太高的官职爵位，过分的宠爱信任，很少不招来灾祸。如今大将军已经位极人臣，功成名遂，应该特别警戒；最好是效法汉元帝时的御史大夫薛广德，把皇帝赏赐他的安车悬挂起来，高卧家中，颐养精神，不再过问政事。经传上说： 树木果实太多，会劈开树枝，伤害树根。 
English: Too high an official title, too much favor and trust, rarely fail to bring disaster. Nowadays, the general has become an extremely high-ranking official, with great achievements, and should be particularly vigilant; it is best to follow the example of Xue Guangde, the imperial historian at the time of Emperor Han Yuan, and hang up the carriage given to him by the emperor. He should lie high at home, nurture his spirit, and no longer ask questions about politics. According to legend, if there are too many fruits on the tree, it will split the branches and damage the roots.

古文：若不抑损盛权，将无以全其身矣！ 
现代文：如果不抑制和减损他手中所掌握的过盛的权力，恐怕不能保全他的性命。 
English: If the excessive power he wields is not curbed and curtailed, his life may not be spared.

古文：冀闻而密遣掩捕，著乃变易姓名，托病伪死，结蒲为人，市棺殡送。
现代文：联冀听到这个消息后，秘密派人搜捕袁著。于是，袁著改名换姓，假装有病身死，家里人用蒲草结扎成尸体，买来棺木殡葬。
English: After hearing this news, Lianhe secretly sent someone to search for Yuan Zheng. As a result, Yuan Zheng changed his name and pretended to be ill and died. His family tied his body with rushes and bought a coffin for his funeral.

古文：冀知其诈，求得，笞杀之。
现代文：梁冀识破这是一个骗局，继续追捕，终于抓到袁著，将他鞭打至死。
English: Liang Jie realized that this was a hoax, continued to pursue, and finally caught Yuan Zhi and whipped him to death.

古文：太原郝絜、胡武，好危言高论，与著友善，絜、武尝连名奏记三府，荐海内高士，而不诣冀。
现代文：太原人郝、胡武，好说惊人的话，喜欢高谈阔论，和袁著交情很好。郝、胡武曾经联名上书太尉、司徒、司空等三府，推荐天下的高明人士，却没有将推荐书送给梁冀。
English: The Taiyuan people, Zhai and Hu Wu, are good at saying surprising things, like to talk about high-level discussions, and have a good relationship with Yuan. Zhai and Hu Wu once jointly submitted a letter to three prefectures, such as Taifu, Sito, and Siku, recommending the world's brilliant people, but did not send the recommendation letter to Liang Jie.

古文：冀追怒之，敕中都官称檄禽捕，遂诛下家，死者六十馀人。
现代文：袁著死后，梁冀记起旧恨，命京师有关官署发文书逮捕郝、胡武。于是，胡武全家被杀，死了六十余人。
English: After Yuan's death, Liang Hebei remembered the old hatred and ordered the Beijing Division of the relevant government office to issue a document to arrest Zhai and Huwu. As a result, Huwu's whole family was killed, and more than sixty people died.

古文：絜初逃亡，知不得免，因舆梓奏书冀门，书入，仰药而死，家乃得全。
现代文：郝起初逃亡，后来知道无法逃掉，于是带着棺木，亲自到梁冀家门上书，将书递进去后，便服毒而死，家属才得以保全。
English: Zhai initially fled, but later knew that he could not escape, so he took the coffin and personally went to Liang Jie's house to write a letter. After handing the letter in, he took poison and died, and his family was saved.

古文：安帝嫡母耿贵人薨，冀从贵人从子林虑侯承求贵人珍玩，不能得，冀怒，并族其家十馀人。
现代文：安帝的嫡母耿贵人去世，梁冀向耿贵人的侄儿、林虑侯耿承索取耿贵人的珍宝玩物，但没有得到手。于是梁冀恼羞成怒，诛杀耿承及他的家属十余人。
English: After the death of An Di's legitimate mother, Geng Guiren, Liang Jie asked Geng Guiren's nephew, Lin Qian Hou, Geng Cheng, for Geng Guiren's precious toys, but he did not get his hands on them. As a result, Liang Jie became angry and killed Geng Cheng and more than ten members of his family.

古文：涿郡崔琦以文章为冀所善，琦作《外戚箴》、《白鹄赋》以风，冀怒。
现代文：涿郡人崔琦因擅长于撰写文章，而得到梁冀的喜爱。崔琦作《外戚箴》、《白鹄赋》向梁冀讽劝。
English: Cui Wei, a resident of Handan County, was loved by Liang Jie because he was good at writing articles. Cui Wei wrote "Mother-in-law's Prayer" and "White Gift" to ironically persuade Liang Jie.

古文：琦曰： 昔管仲相齐，乐闻讥谏之言；萧何佐汉，乃设书过之吏。
现代文：梁冀大怒。崔琦对梁冀说： 从前，管仲担任齐国的宰相，喜欢听讥刺和规劝的话；萧何辅佐汉室王朝，专门设置记录自己过失的官吏。
English: Liang Jie was furious. Cui Yao said to Liang Jie: In the past, Guanzhong served as the prime minister of Qi, and liked to listen to ridicule and exhortation; Xiao He assisted the Han Dynasty, and specially set up officials to record his mistakes.

古文：今将军屡世台辅，任齐伊、周，而德政未闻，黎元涂炭，不能结纳贞良以救祸败，反欲钳塞士口，杜蔽主听，将使玄黄改色、马鹿易形乎！ 
现代文：而今，将军身居辅政高位两朝，责任和伊尹、周公同等重大，可是没有听说您推行德政，却只生灵涂炭，灾难深重。将军不但不能结交忠贞贤良来拯救大祸，反而想要堵塞士人的口，蒙蔽主上的耳目，使天地颜色颠倒，鹿马换形吗？ 
English: But now, the general is in the high position of supporting the two dynasties, and the responsibility is as important as that of Yi Yin and Zhou Gong. However, he has not heard of your implementation of German politics, but only the living and the dead are charred, and the disaster is serious. Not only can the general not make friends with the loyal and virtuous to save the great disaster, but he wants to block the mouth of the scholar, blind the eyes of the Lord, reverse the color of heaven and earth, and change the shape of the deer and horse?

古文：冀无以对，因遣琦归。
现代文：梁冀无法回答，便将崔琦遣送回乡。
English: Liang Jie didn't have a word to say in reply, so he sent Cui Jun back home.

古文：琦惧而亡匿，冀捕得，杀之。
现代文：崔琦因恐惧而离家，四处逃亡躲藏。
English: Out of fear, Cui Yao left home and ran and hid everywhere.

古文：冀秉政几二十年，威行内外，天子拱手，不得有所亲与，帝既不平之；及陈授死，帝愈怒。
现代文：梁冀派人将他搜捕到手，加以诛杀。冀秉政几二十年，威行内外，天子拱手，不得有所亲与，帝既不平之；及陈授死，帝愈怒。
English: Liang Jie sent people to hunt him down and kill him. Jie had been in power for more than 20 years. He was a tyrant both at home and abroad. He was the son of Heaven. He was not allowed to have any relatives. The emperor was not happy about this. When Chen Jie died, the emperor was furious.

古文：和熹皇后从兄子郎中邓香妻宣，生女猛，香卒，宣更适梁纪；纪，孙寿之舅也。
现代文：和熹皇后从兄子郎中邓香妻宣，生女猛，香卒，宣更适梁纪；纪，孙寿之舅也。
English: From the elder brothers and sisters of Empress Huan, Deng Xiang's wife, Xuan, and his daughter, Meng, Xiang's father, Xuan is more suitable for Liang Ji; Ji is also the uncle of Sun Shou.

古文：寿以猛色美，引入掖庭，为贵人，冀欲认猛为其女，易猛姓为梁。
现代文：寿以猛色美，引入掖庭，为贵人，冀欲认猛为其女，易猛姓为梁。
English: Shou, with her fierce beauty, was introduced to the imperial court as a noblewoman, Ji, who wanted to be recognized as a noblewoman, and Yi, whose surname was Liang.

古文：冀恐猛姊婿议郎邴尊沮败宣意，遣客刺杀之。
现代文：冀恐猛姊婿议郎邴尊沮败宣意，遣客刺杀之。
English: In fear of his violent brother-in-law, the disheartened Xuan Zi, sent a guest to assassinate him.

古文：又欲杀宣，宣家与中常侍袁赦相比，冀客登赦屋，欲入宣家，赦觉之，鸣鼓会众以告宣。
现代文：又欲杀宣，宣家与中常侍袁赦相比，冀客登赦屋，欲入宣家，赦觉之，鸣鼓会众以告宣。
English: He also wanted to kill Xuan Xuan, and compared to the middle-ranking attendant Yuan Meng, the guests went to the house of Xuan Xuan, wanted to enter the house of Xuan Xuan, and were pardoned, and the drumming congregation announced the announcement.

古文：宣驰入白帝，帝大怒，因如厕，独呼小黄门史唐衡，问： 左右与外舍不相得者，谁乎？ 
现代文：宣驰入白帝，帝大怒，因如厕，独呼小黄门史唐衡，问： 左右与外舍不相得者，谁乎？ 
English: Xuan Zhi entered the White Emperor, the Emperor was furious, because of the toilet, he called Xiao Huangmen Shi Tang Heng, asked: If the left and right are not compatible with the outside world, who is?

古文：衡对： 中常侍单超、小黄门史左悺与梁不疑有隙；中常侍徐璜、黄门令具瑗常私忿疾外舍放横，口不敢道。 
现代文：衡对： 中常侍单超、小黄门史左与梁不疑有隙；中常侍徐璜、黄门令具瑗常私忿疾外舍放横，口不敢道。 
English: The balance is right: there is no doubt that there is a gap between the middle-ranking attendant Shanchao and the small Huangmen Shi Zuo and Liang; the middle-ranking attendant Xu Qi and the Huangmen commander Guo Qi are often angry and angry, and they dare not speak.

古文：于是帝呼超、悺入室，谓曰： 梁将军兄弟专朝，迫胁内外，公卿以下，从其风旨，今欲诛之，于常侍意如何？ 
现代文：于是帝呼超、入室，谓曰： 梁将军兄弟专朝，迫胁内外，公卿以下，从其风旨，今欲诛之，于常侍意如何？ 
English: So the emperor summoned the emperor and entered the palace, saying, "General Liang's brothers have come to the imperial court to coerce people at home and abroad, from the nobility on down. Given their style, how would you like to be served by them now and how would you like to be served by them always?"

古文：超等对曰： 诚国奸贼，当诛日久；臣等弱劣，未知圣意如何耳。 
现代文：超等对曰： 诚国奸贼，当诛日久；臣等弱劣，未知圣意如何耳。 
English: The superior replied, "A sincere traitor to the country should be punished for a long time; a subordinate should be punished for a short time; and a subordinate should be punished for a long time.

古文：帝曰： 审然者，常侍密图之。 
现代文：帝曰： 审然者，常侍密图之。 
English: The emperor said, "Since this is the case, it is best for the regular attendants to keep it a secret."

古文：对曰： 图之不难，但恐陛下腹中狐疑。 
现代文：对曰： 图之不难，但恐陛下腹中狐疑。 
English: To say: The diagram is not difficult, but I'm afraid your majesty has a nagging doubt.

古文：帝曰： 奸臣胁国，当伏其罪，何疑乎！ 
现代文：桓帝说： 奸臣威胁国家，应当定罪伏法，为什么狐疑不决呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "If a traitor threatens the country, he should be ambushed. What hesitation!

古文：于是更召璜、瑗等，五人共定其议，帝齧超臂出血为盟。
现代文：于是，把徐璜、具瑷叫来，桓帝和五个宦官共同定计，桓帝将单超的手臂咬破出血，作为盟誓。
English: As a result, Emperor Huan and the five eunuchs made a joint prediction that Emperor Huan would bite the arm of Shanchao until it bled, as an oath.

古文：超等曰： 陛下今计已决，勿复更言，恐为人所疑。 
现代文：单超等人对桓帝说： 陛下如今既然已下定决心，千万不要再提这件事，怕会引起猜疑。 
English: Shanchao and the others said to Emperor Huan, "Since Your Majesty has now made up your mind, you must not mention this matter again, for fear of arousing suspicion."

古文：冀心疑超等，八月，丁丑，使中黄门张恽入省宿，以防其变。
现代文：梁冀果然对单超等产生猜疑，八月丁丑，派遣中黄门张恽入宫住宿，以防范意外变故。
English: Liang Jie indeed had suspicions about the single super and so on. In August, Ding Yuxi sent Zhonghuangmen Zhang Ye into the palace for accommodation in order to prevent accidents.

古文：具瑗敕吏收恽，以 辄从外入，欲图不轨。 
现代文：具瑷命令属吏逮捕张恽，罪名是： 擅自从外入宫，想要图谋不轨。 
English: Gu Gu ordered his subordinates to arrest Zhang Yao on the charge of: Entering the palace without permission and plotting illegal activities.

古文：帝御前殿，召诸尚书入，发其事，使尚书令尹勋持节勒丞、郎以下皆操兵守省阁，敛诸符节送省中，使具瑗将左右厩驺、虎贲、羽林、都候剑戟士合千馀人，与司隶校尉张彪共围冀第，使光禄勋袁于持节收冀大将军印绶，徙封比景都乡侯。
现代文：桓帝登上前殿，召集各位尚书前来，揭发了这件事，派遣尚书令尹勋持节统率丞、郎以下官吏，命全都手执兵器，守卫省阁，将所有代表皇帝和朝廷的符节收集起来，送进内宫。又派遣具瑷率领左右御厩的骑士、虎贲、羽林卫士、都候所属的剑戟士，共计一千余人，和司隶校尉张彪一同包围梁冀的府第。派光禄勋袁持节，向梁冀收缴了他的大将军印信，将他改封为比景都乡侯。
English: Emperor Kuan ascended to the front hall and summoned all the officials to come and denounce the matter. He dispatched the officials under the command of the commander-in-chief Yin Xun and the officials under the command of the commander-in-chief Yong, all of whom were ordered to hold weapons and guard the provincial pavilion, to collect all the symbols representing the emperor and the court and send them to the inner palace. He also dispatched the knights of the left and right stables, the tigers, the guards of the forest and the swordsmen belonging to the duke, a total of more than a thousand people, together with the lieutenant Zhang Biao, to surround the capital of Liang

古文：冀及妻寿即日皆自杀；不疑、蒙先卒。
现代文：梁冀和他的妻子孙寿，当天双双自杀。梁不疑、梁蒙在此以前已经去世。
English: Liang Jie and his wife, Sun Shou, both committed suicide on the same day. There is no doubt that Liang Meng had already passed away before this.

古文：悉收梁氏、孙氏中外宗亲送诏狱，无长少皆弃市；它所连及公卿、列校、刺史、二千石，死者数十人。
现代文：将梁氏和孙氏家族，包括他们在朝廷和地方的亲戚，全部逮入诏狱，不论男女老幼，全都押往闹市斩首，尸体暴露街头。受牵连的公卿、列校、州刺史、二千石官员，被诛杀的有数十人。
English: The Liang and Sun families, including their relatives at the imperial court and in the provinces, were all arrested and sent to the imperial prison. Regardless of whether they were men, women, or children, they were all sent to the downtown area to be beheaded, and their bodies were exposed on the streets. Dozens of people were killed, including those implicated in the case, such as court nobles, high-ranking officials, state officials, and officials of 2,000 koku.

古文：太尉胡广、司徒韩縯、司空孙朗皆坐阿附梁冀，不卫宫，止长寿亭，减死一等，免为庶人。
现代文：太尉胡广、司徒韩、司空孙郎，都因阿附梁冀，没有去保卫宫廷而停留在长寿亭，被指控有罪，以减死罪一等论处，免去官职，贬为平民。
English: Captains Hu Guang, Szeto Han, and Szoku Sunro, all of whom stayed in Changsutei because of Azhu Liang Ji, did not go to defend the palace, were accused of being guilty and sentenced to the first class of the crime of commutation of death, removed from office, and reduced to civilians.

古文：故吏、宾客免黜者三百馀人，朝廷为空。
现代文：此外，梁冀的旧时属吏和宾客，被免官的有三百余人，整个朝廷，为之一空。
English: In addition, more than three hundred of Liang Jie's former subordinates and guests were dismissed, and the entire court was empty.

古文：是时，事猝从中发，使者交驰，公卿失其度，官府市里鼎沸，数日乃定；百姓莫不称庆。
现代文：当时，事情突然从皇宫中发动，使者来往奔驰，三公九卿等朝庭大臣都失去常态，官府和大街小巷犹如鼎中的开水一片沸腾，数日之后，方才安定，百姓们无不称快，表示庆祝。
English: At that time, the matter was suddenly launched from the imperial palace, the emissaries went back and forth in Mercedes, the three princes and nine nobles and other court ministers lost their normal state, the government offices and the streets and alleys were boiling like boiling water. A few days later, it was stabilized, and the people were all happy and celebrated.

古文：收冀财货，县官斥卖，合三十馀万万，以充王府用，减天下税租之半，散其苑囿，以业穷民。
现代文：桓帝下令没收梁冀的财产，由官府变卖，收入共计三十余亿，全都上缴国库，减收当年全国租税的一半。并将梁冀的园林分散给贫民耕种。
English: Emperor Huan ordered the confiscation of Liang Jie's property, which was sold by the government, with a total income of more than 3 billion yuan, all of which was handed over to the national treasury, and half of the national tax revenue of that year was reduced. Liang Jie's gardens were distributed to the poor for cultivation.

古文：壬午，立梁贵人为皇后，追废懿陵为贵人冢。
现代文：壬午，桓帝立梁贵人为皇后，并将梁冀的妹妹、梁皇后的坟墓懿陵贬称为贵人冢。
English: At the same time, Emperor Kuan made Liang Guizhong the empress, and renamed the tomb of Liang Jie's sister, Empress Liang, as the Tomb of Guizhong.

古文：帝恶梁氏，改皇后姓为薄氏，久之，知为邓香女，乃复姓邓氏。
现代文：桓帝厌恶梁氏，便将皇后梁猛的姓，改为薄氏。过了许久，才知道皇后是邓香的女儿，于是，又重新改姓邓氏。
English: Emperor Kuan detested the Liang family, so he changed the surname of Empress Liang Meng to Bo. It took a long time before it was known that the Empress was the daughter of Deng Xiang, so she changed her surname back to Deng.

古文：诏赏诛梁冀之功，封单超、徐璜、具瑗、左悺、唐衡皆为县侯，超食二万户，璜等各万馀户，世谓之五侯。
现代文：桓帝下诏，赏赐诛杀梁冀的功臣，将单超、徐璜、具瑷、左、唐衡，都封为县侯，单超食邑二万户，徐璜等四人各一万余户，当世称他们为 五侯 。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict to reward the meritorious vassals who killed Liang Ji, and appointed Shanchao, Xu Xi, Gu Xi, Zuo, and Tang Heng as county magistrates. Shanchao had 20,000 households, and Xu Xi and the other four had more than 10,000 households each. They were called the Five Magistrates.

古文：仍以悺、衡为中常侍。
现代文：擢升左、唐衡为中常侍。
English: He was promoted to the left, and Tang Heng was promoted to the middle attendant.

古文：又封尚书令尹勋等七人皆为亭侯。
现代文：又将尚书令尹勋等七人都封为亭侯。
English: In addition, seven people, including Shang Shuling and Yin Xun, were appointed as princes.

古文：以大司农黄琼为太尉，光禄大夫中山祝恬为司徒，大鸿胪梁国盛允为司空。
现代文：擢升大司农黄琼为太尉，光禄大夫、中山国人祝恬为司徒，大鸿胪、梁国人盛允为司空。
English: Farmer Huang Qiong, the chief secretary, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant, Guanglu Daifu, Zhongshan Guozhong Zhu Rong was promoted to the rank of apprentice, and Dahong Rong and Liang Guozhong Shengyong were promoted to the rank of secretary.

古文：是时，新诛梁冀，天下想望异政，黄琼首居公位，乃举奏州郡素行贪污，至死徙者十馀人，海内翕然称之。
现代文：这时，刚刚诛杀梁冀，天下人都希望政治改观。黄琼位居三公之首，于是，他举发弹劾各州郡一向行为残暴贪婪的官吏，有十余人被处死或流放，全国齐声称赞。
English: At this time, just after the assassination of Liang Jie, people all over the world hoped that politics would change. Huang Qiong was at the top of the Three Princes, so he initiated the impeachment of officials in all states and counties who had always been cruel and greedy. More than a dozen people were executed or exiled, and the whole country applauded.

古文：琼辟汝南范滂。
现代文：黄琼征聘汝南人范滂。
English: Huang Qiong recruits Fan Qi from the south of China.

古文：滂少厉清节，为州里所服。
现代文：范滂从少年时，便磨砺清高的节操，受到州郡和乡里的佩服。
English: Since he was a young boy, Fan Qi has been honing his clear and high self-discipline, which has been admired by the state, county and township.

古文：尝为清诏使，案察冀州，滂登车揽辔，慨然有澄清天下之志。
现代文：他曾经担任清诏使，到冀州巡视考察。出发时，他登上车，手揽缰绳，慷慨激昂，大有澄清天下吏治的壮志。
English: He once served as an envoy of the Qing Dynasty to inspect Jizhou. When he set off, he boarded the car, took the reins, and was impassioned. He had a great ambition to clarify the world's leadership.

古文：守令臧污者，皆望风解印绶去；其所举奏，莫不厌塞众议。
现代文：贪赃枉法的郡太守和县令、县长＊一听说范滂要来巡察，都自动解下印信，辞职离去。凡是范滂所举发和弹劾的，全都符合众人的愿望。
English: As soon as the corrupt county magistrate, the county magistrate and the county governor* heard that Fan Hui was coming to inspect, they all automatically opened the letter and resigned. Everything that Fan Hui raised and impeached was in line with everyone's wishes.

古文：会诏三府掾属举谣言，滂奏刺史、二千石权豪之党二十馀人。
现代文：当时，正好遇上皇帝下诏，命太尉、司徒、司空等三府掾属品评地方官吏的为政善恶和得失，反映民间疾苦。于是范滂弹劾刺史、二千石官员、权贵党羽，共二十余人。
English: At that time, just as the emperor issued an edict, the three prefectural governments ordered their subordinates, such as Taifu, Szeto, and Sikuo, to evaluate the political virtues and vices, as well as the gains and losses of local officials, reflecting the hardships of the people. As a result, Fan Yu impeached more than 20 people, including the chief historian, 2,000-koku officials, and influential party members.

古文：尚书责滂所劾猥多，疑有私故。
现代文：尚书责备他弹劾得太滥太多，怀疑他有私人恩怨。
English: Shang Shu reproached Fan Qi for making too many impeachments and suspected him of taking revenge.

古文：滂对曰： 臣之所举，自非叨秽奸暴，深为民害，岂以污简札哉！
现代文：范滂回答说： 我所举发弹劾的官吏，假如不是奸邪暴戾，为害百姓，怎么会让他们来玷污我的奏章吗？
English: Fan Zhe replied: If my impeachment is not for corruption, rape and violence, and is deeply harmful to the people, is it for the sake of dirty stamps?

古文：间以会日迫促，故先举所急，其未审者，方更参实。
现代文：只是因为迫于朝会的日期太紧，所以先举发应该急待惩处的，还有一些没有查清的，待调查核实后再行弹劾。
English: Because the time is too short, those urgent impeachments are carried out first, and there is no clear review of when to implement them.

古文：臣闻农夫去草，嘉谷必茂；忠臣除奸，王道以清。
现代文：我听说，农夫必须除草，庄稼才能茂盛，忠臣必须铲除奸臣，王道才能清平。
English: I have heard that when a farmer weeds, the good grain will surely flourish; when a loyal subject removes a traitor, the national politics will be clear.

古文：若臣言有贰，甘受显戮！ 
现代文：如果我的弹劾有差错，我甘愿公开被处决！ 
English: If my impeachment is flawed, I am willing to be publicly executed!

古文：尚书不能诘。
现代文：尚书无法责问。
English: Shangshu can't be blamed.

古文：尚书令陈蕃上疏荐五处士，豫章徐稚、彭城姜肱、汝南袁闳、京兆韦著，颍川李昙。
现代文：尚书令陈蕃向桓帝上书，推荐五位隐居不肯出来作官的士人：豫章人徐稚、彭城人姜肱、汝南人袁闳、京兆人韦著、颍川人李昙。
English: Shang Shu ordered Chen Xi to write a letter to Emperor Huan, recommending five retired officials who refused to come out of seclusion: Xu Zhi from Yu Zhang, Jiang Qi from Pengcheng, Yuan Qi from Yunnan, Wei Wei from Beijing Zhao, and Li Qi from Sichuan.

古文：帝悉以安车、玄纁备礼征之，皆不至。
现代文：桓帝对所有的人都送给用一马牵拉的安车和黑色的币帛，礼仪周全地征聘他们，但他们都不肯应聘。
English: Emperor Huan gave everyone a horse-drawn cart and a black coin purse, and recruited them with perfect etiquette, but they all refused to apply.

古文：稚家贫，常自耕稼，非其力不食，恭俭义让，所居服其德；屡辟公府，不起。
现代文：徐稚家境贫穷，经常亲自耕种，不吃不是自己劳动得来的食物，谦恭节俭，待人礼让，当地的人都很佩服他的品德。
English: Xu's family is poor, he often farms by himself, he does not eat food that he did not earn by his own labor, he is humble and frugal, and he treats people with courtesy. Local people admire his character.

古文：陈蕃为豫章太守，以礼请署功曹；稚不之免，既谒而退。
现代文：三公府多次前来征聘，他都没有答应。陈蕃担任豫章郡太守时，曾很礼敬地请他出来担任功曹。徐稚也不推辞，但在晋见陈蕃后，即行告退，不肯就职。
English: The three public offices repeatedly came to recruit him, but he did not agree. When Chen Yu served as the governor of Yuzhang County, he respectfully asked him to come out and serve as a gong cao. Xu Zhi also did not refuse, but after Jin saw Chen Yu, he immediately resigned and refused to take office.

古文：蕃性方峻，不接宾客，唯稚来，特设一榻，去则县之。
现代文：陈蕃性格方正严峻，从不接见宾客，唯独徐稚来时，特地为他摆设一张坐塌，徐稚走后，他就把坐榻悬挂起来。
English: Chen Yao's character was stern and stern, and he never received guests. However, when Xu Zhiguo came, he specially set up a chaise lounge for him. After Xu Zhiguo left, he hung up the chaise lounge.

古文：后举有道，家拜太原太守，皆不就。
现代文：后来，徐稚又被推举为 有道 之士，在家中被任命为太原郡太守，他仍不肯就任。
English: Later, a Taoist was selected, and people went to his house to worship him as the Taiyuan governor, but they did not take office.

古文：稚虽不应诸公之辟，然闻其死丧，辄负笈赴吊。
现代文：徐稚虽然不肯接受诸公的征聘，但是听到他们的死讯，一定背着书箱前往吊丧。
English: Although Xu Rong refused to accept Zhu Gong's recruitment, when he heard of their deaths, he went to the funeral with a bookcase on his back.

古文：常于家豫炙鸡一只，以一两绵絮渍酒中暴干，以裹鸡，径到所赴冢隧外，以水渍绵，使有酒气，斗米饭，白茅为藉。以鸡置前，醊酒毕，留谒则去，不见丧主。
现代文：他通常是先在家里烤好一只鸡，另外将一两绵絮浸泡在酒中，再晒干，然后用绵絮包裹烤鸡，一直来到死者的坟墓隧道之外，用水将绵絮泡湿，使酒味溢出，准备一斗米饭，以白茅草为垫，把鸡放在坟墓前面，将酒洒在地上进行祭吊后，留下自己的名帖，立即离去，不去见主丧的人。
English: He usually first roasted a chicken at home, soaked one or two pieces of lint in wine, dried it, then wrapped the roast chicken in lint, came all the way to the outside of the deceased's tomb tunnel, soaked the lint with water to overflow the wine, prepared a bucket of rice, padded with white thatch, placed the chicken in front of the tomb, sprinkled the wine on the ground for sacrifice, left his name tag, and immediately left without seeing the mourners.

古文：肱与二弟仲海、季江俱以孝友著闻，常同被而寝，不应征聘。
现代文：姜肱和两个弟弟姜仲海、姜季江，都以教敬父母、友爱兄弟而著称，经常同盖一条被子睡觉。他们不肯答应官府的征聘。
English: Jiang Qi and his two younger brothers, Jiang Zhonghai and Jiang Jijiang, are known for their filial piety and brotherly love, and often sleep under the same quilt. They refused to be recruited by the government.

古文：肱尝与弟季江俱诣郡，夜于道为盗所劫，欲杀之，肱曰： 弟年幼，父母所怜，又未聘娶，愿杀身济弟。 
现代文：姜肱曾经和他的弟弟姜季江一道前往郡府，夜间在道路上遇到强盗抢劫。强盗要杀他俩，姜肱对强盗说： 我的弟弟年龄还小，受到父母怜爱，又没有定亲娶妻，我希望你们把我杀死，保全我弟弟的性命。 
English: Jiang Hui once went with his brother Jiang Jijiang to the county seat of Wumen. At night, they encountered robbers on the road. The robbers wanted to kill them both. Jiang Hui said to the robbers: My brother is still young, is loved by his parents, and has not yet married. I hope you will kill me and save my brother's life.

古文：季江曰： 兄年德在前，家之珍宝，国之英俊，乞自受戮，以代兄命。 
现代文：然而，姜季江却对强盗说： 我的哥哥年龄比我大，品德比我高，是我家的珍宝，国家的英才，请来杀我，我愿代哥哥一死。 
English: However, Jiang Jijiang said to the robbers: My brother is older than me, has a higher moral character than me, is the treasure of my family and the talent of the country. Please come and kill me. I am willing to die for my brother.

古文：盗遂两释焉，但掠夺衣资而已。
现代文：强盗听后很受感动，便将他俩都释放了，只将衣服和财物抢光而已。
English: The robber was so moved by what he heard that he released both of them, taking nothing but their clothes and belongings.

古文：既至，郡中见肱无衣服，怪问其故，肱托以它辞，终不言盗。
现代文：兄弟二人到了郡府，人们看见姜肱没有穿衣服，觉得奇怪，问他是什么缘故。姜肱用其他原因进行推托，到底不肯指控强盗。
English: When the two brothers arrived at the county government, people found it strange to see Jiang Chen without clothes and asked him why. Jiang Chen used other reasons to excuse himself and refused to accuse the robbers.

古文：盗闻而感悔，就精庐求见征君，叩头谢罪，还所略物。
现代文：强盗听到这个消息，感到惭愧和后悔，就到姜肱的学舍来拜见他，叩头请罪，奉还所抢走的衣物。
English: When the robber heard the news, he felt ashamed and regretful, so he went to Jiang Chen's dormitory to pay him a visit, apologize and return the stolen clothes.

古文：肱不受，劳以酒食而遣之。
现代文：姜肱不肯接受，用酒饭招待强盗，送走他们。
English: Unimpressed, Jiang Yan plied them with food and drink and told them to leave.

古文：帝既征肱不至，乃下彭城，使画工图其形状。
现代文：桓帝既然不能将姜肱征聘到京都洛阳，于是下诏，命彭城地方官派画工画出姜肱的肖像。
English: Since Emperor Kuan could not recruit Jiang Chen to Kyoto Luoyang, he issued an edict ordering the local officials in Pengcheng to send an artist to paint a portrait of Jiang Chen.

古文：肱卧于幽暗，以被韬面，言患眩疾，不欲出风，工竟不得见之。
现代文：姜肱躺卧在一间幽暗的房屋里，用被子蒙住脸，声称患了昏眩病，不愿出来受风，画工竟然未能见到他的面目。
English: Lying in a gloomy house, Jiang Qi covered his face with a quilt, claiming that he suffered from vertigo and did not want to be exposed to the wind. The painter was unable to see his face.

古文：闳，安之玄孙也，苦身修节，不应辟召。
现代文：袁闳，即袁安的玄孙，刻苦修养自己的节操，不接受官府和朝廷的征召。
English: Yuan Shun, the great-great-grandson of Yuan An, assiduously cultivated his self-restraint and refused to be conscripted by the government or the imperial court.

古文：著隐居讲授，不修世务。
现代文：韦著隐居在家，讲授经书，不肯过问世事。
English: Wei lived in seclusion at home, lectured on scriptures, and refused to meddle in the affairs of the world.

古文：昙继母酷烈，昙奉之逾谨，得四时珍玩，未尝不先拜而后进，乡里以为法。
现代文：李昙的继母非常凶暴，可是李昙对她的奉养却愈发恭谨，得到四季的珍贵玩物，从来没有不先行礼，而后送上给继母的，乡里都将他作为榜样。
English: Li Yao's stepmother was very fierce, but Li Yao's upbringing of her became more and more respectful. He never received the precious playthings of the four seasons without first bowing, and when he later sent them to his stepmother, the villagers used him as a role model.

古文：帝又征安阳魏桓，其乡人劝之行，桓曰： 夫干禄求进，所以行其志也。
现代文：桓帝又征召安阳人魏桓，魏桓家乡的人都劝他前往应聘。魏桓对他们说： 接受朝延的俸禄，追求升迁高级官职，目的是为了实现自己的政治理想。
English: Emperor Huan also conscripted Wei Huan from Anyang, and the people from Wei Huan's hometown urged him to apply for the position. Wei Huan said to them, "Accepting the salary of Asanobu and pursuing promotion to a high-ranking official position is to realize my political ideal."

古文：今后宫千数，其可损乎？
现代文：如今后宫美女数以千计，能缩小数目吗？
English: Nowadays, there are thousands of beautiful women in the harem. Can the number be reduced?

古文：厩马万匹，其可减乎？
现代文：御厩骏马一万匹，能减少吗？
English: There are ten thousand horses in the imperial stables. Can they be reduced?

古文：左右权豪，其可去乎？ 
现代文：皇帝左右的权贵豪门，能排除吗？ 
English: Can the powerful and wealthy families around the emperor be eliminated?

古文：皆对曰： 不可。 
现代文：大家都回答说： 不能。 
English: They all replied, "No."

古文：桓乃慨然叹曰： 使桓生行死归，于诸子何有哉！ 
现代文：于是，魏桓慨然长叹说： 让我活着前去就聘，死后再被送回，对你们有什么好处？ 
English: Therefore, Wei Huan said with a sigh of exasperation, "What is the benefit for you to let me go and be hired while I am still alive, and then be sent back after I die?"

古文：遂隐身不出。
现代文：于是隐居不出。
English: As a result, he could not live in seclusion.

古文：帝既诛梁冀，故旧恩敌，多受封爵：追赠皇后父邓香为车骑将军，封安阳侯；更封后母宣为昆阳君，兄子康、秉皆为列侯，宗族皆列校、郎将，赏赐以巨万计。
现代文：桓帝诛杀梁冀以后，跟他有旧交私情的，大多受了封爵：追赠皇后的父亲邓香为车骑将军，封安阳候；改封皇后的母亲宣为昆阳君，侄儿邓康、邓秉，都被封为列侯。邓氏宗族，都被任命为列校或郎将，赏赐数目以亿计算。
English: After Emperor Huan killed Liang Jie, most of his old friends and relatives were knighted: the queen's father, Deng Xiang, was posthumously awarded the title of general of cavalry and cavalry, and was given the title of Anyang; the queen's mother, Xuan, was awarded the title of Kunyang Jun, and her nephews, Deng Kang and Deng Bing, were both knighted. The Deng family members were all appointed as enlisted schoolmasters or vassals, and the number of rewards was counted in hundreds of millions.

古文：中常侍侯览上缣五千匹，帝赐爵关内侯，又托以与议诛冀，进封高乡侯；又封小黄门刘普、赵忠等八人为乡侯。
现代文：中常侍侯览，进献缣帛五千匹，桓帝就封赐他为关内侯，又托言曾经参与诛杀梁冀的密谋，进封为高乡侯。又封小黄门刘普、赵忠等八人为乡侯。
English: Emperor Huan bestowed the title of Guan Nei Hou (county magistrate) to Zhong Changzhi Houzhan for his donation of five thousand yakitori. He was also awarded the title of Gao Xiang Hou (county magistrate) on the pretext that he had participated in the conspiracy to kill Liang Ji. Xiao Huangmen Liu Pu, Zhao Zhong and eight others were also awarded the title of Xiang Hou.

古文：自是权势专归宦官矣。
现代文：从此以后，朝廷的大权和威势全都归属宦官。
English: From then on, all the power and prestige of the imperial court belonged to the eunuchs.

古文：五侯尤贪纵，倾动内外。
现代文：其中， 五侯 尤其贪残放纵，权势震动朝廷内外。
English: Among them, the Five Princes were particularly greedy and indulgent, and their power shook the imperial court and beyond.

古文：时灾异数见，白马令甘陵李云露布上书，移副三府曰： 梁冀虽持权专擅，虐流天下，今以罪行诛，犹召家臣扼杀之耳，而猥封谋臣万户以上；高祖闻之，得无见非！
现代文：当时屡次出现灾异，白马县县令、甘陵人李去，用不缄封的文书公开上奏桓帝，并将副本呈送太尉、司待、司空等三府，说： 梁冀虽然仗恃权势，独断专行，残害天下，如今论罪处死，不过如同召来家奴掐死他罢了。然而却滥封参与密谋的臣子，赏赐万户以上的食邑，如果高祖知道的话，能不被他怪罪吗？
English: At that time, disasters occurred repeatedly. Li Gang, the county magistrate of Baima County and a resident of Ganling, publicly appealed to Emperor Huan with an unsealed document, and sent copies to the three prefectures including the captain, the secretary, and the secretary, saying: Although Liang Jie wields power, acts arbitrarily, and destroys the world, he is now sentenced to death, but it is just like summoning a domestic slave to strangle him. However, he arbitrarily seals the vassal who participated in the conspiracy and rewards more than ten thousand households. If Gao Zu knew, could he not be blamed?

古文：西北列将，得无解体！
现代文：西北边疆保卫国土的各位将领听说此事，能不人心叛离？
English: When the generals in charge of defending the country in the northwest frontier heard about this, could they not rebel?

古文：孔子曰： 帝者，谛也。 
现代文：孔子说 帝就是审谤的意思 。
English: Confucius said, "If you want to be an emperor, you must also be a scholar."

古文：今官位错乱，小人谄进，财货公行，政化日损；尺一拜用，不经御省，是帝欲不谤乎！ 
现代文：而今官位错乱，奸佞小人依靠诌媚追求升迁，贿赂公行，政令和教化日益败坏。任命官员的诏书，不经皇帝过目，是皇帝不打算审谤吗？ 
English: Now, however, official positions are in disarray, crooks and scoundrels rely on flattery to seek promotion, bribes are used in public affairs, and decrees and edifications are becoming increasingly corrupt. The imperial rescript appointing officials is not reviewed by the emperor. Is it because the emperor does not intend to sue for libel?

古文：帝得奏震怒，下有司逮云，诏尚书都护剑戟送黄门北寺狱，使中常侍管霸与御史、廷尉杂考之。
现代文：桓帝看到奏章后，大发雷霆，下令有关官吏逮捕李云，命尚书率领皇宫内的剑戟士将他押送到黄门北寺狱，派遣中常侍管霸和御史、廷尉一同拷问李云。
English: After Emperor Kuan saw the record, he flew into a rage, ordered the relevant officials to arrest Li Yun, and ordered Shang Shu to lead the sword fighters in the imperial palace to escort him to the Huangmen North Temple Prison, and dispatched the middle-ranking attendants, Guanba and Gu Shi, and the court officers to torture Li Yun.

古文：时弘农五官掾杜众伤云以忠谏获罪，上书 愿与云同日死 ，帝愈怒，遂并下廷尉。
现代文：氮时，弘农郡五官掾杜众因李云忠心进谏遭到惩罚而感到以痛心，上书桓帝说： 我甘愿和李云同日受死。 桓帝愈发生气，于是将杜众和李去一道交由廷尉审理。
English: At that time, the five officials of Hongnong County, including Du Zong, were heartbroken because Li Yun was punished for his loyalty to the imperial court, and wrote to Emperor Kuan: "I am willing to die on the same day as Li Yun." Emperor Kuan became more and more angry, so he sent Du Zong and Li together to the court for trial.

古文：大鸿胪陈蕃上疏曰： 李云所言，虽不识禁忌，干上逆旨，其意归于忠国而已。
现代文：大鸿胪陈蕃上书说： 李云所说的话，虽然不知道禁忌，冒犯主上，违背圣旨，但他的本意只在于效忠国家而已。
English: In his letter, Grand Dragon Chen Jun said: Although what Li Yun said was not taboo, offensive to the Lord, and contrary to God's will, his intention was only to be loyal to the country.

古文：昔高祖忍周昌不讳之谏，成帝赦硃云腰领之诛，今日杀云，臣恐剖心之讥，复议于世矣！ 
现代文：从前，高祖容忍周昌毫不隐讳的进谏，成帝赦免朱云的杀身之罪。今天如果诛杀李云，我恐怕世人会将这件事比作商纣王对尽忠劝谏他的比干施行挖心的酷刑，因而再次进行谴责。 
English: In the past, Gao Zu tolerated Zhou Chang's undisguised advances, and Emperor Cheng pardoned Zhu Yun's crime of killing himself. Today, if he kills Li Yun, I am afraid that the world will compare this matter to the mercantile king's heart-wrenching torture of his loyal counselor, and thus condemn it again.

古文：太常杨秉、雒阳市长沐茂、郎中上官资并上疏请云。
现代文：太常杨秉、洛阳市长沐茂、郎中上官资等，都上书请求赦免李云。
English: Yang Bing Taizhong, Luoyang Mayor Mu Mao, and other high-ranking government officials all sent letters requesting Li Yun to be pardoned.

古文：帝恚甚，有司奏以为大有敬。
现代文：桓帝十分愤恨，有关官吏弹劾陈蕃等上书的人犯了对皇帝 大不敬 的罪行。
English: Emperor Kuan was very angry, and the relevant officials impeached Chen Qi and others who wrote the letter for committing the crime of disrespecting the emperor.

古文：诏切责蕃、秉，免归田里，茂、资贬秩二等。
现代文：桓帝下诏，严厉责备陈蕃、杨秉，将他们免职，逐回故乡；沐茂、上官资被贬降官秩二级。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict severely reprimanding Chen Xi and Yang Bing, dismissing them from their posts and sending them back to their hometowns; Mu Mao and Shang Guanzhai were demoted to the second level of official rank.

古文：时帝在濯龙池，管霸奏云等事，霸跪言曰： 李云野泽愚儒，杜众郡中小吏，出于狂戆，不足加罪。 
现代文：当时，桓帝正在濯龙池，管霸向桓帝奏报对李去等人的判决情况，他跪下劝说桓帝说： 李云是荒野草泽中的一个愚蠢儒生，杜众是郡府中的小吏，他们言行是出于狂妄和愚昧，不足以给予处罚。 
English: At that time, Emperor Huan was washing the dragon pond, and the supervisor reported to Emperor Huan about the judgment of Li Gao and others. He knelt down and persuaded Emperor Huan to say: Li Yun is a stupid Confucian in the wilderness, and Du Zhong is a minor official in the county government. Their words and deeds are out of arrogance and ignorance, and are not enough to punish.

古文：帝谓霸曰：  帝欲不谛 ，是何等语，而常侍欲原之邪！ 
现代文：桓帝对管霸说：  皇帝不打算审谤 ，这是什么话？而你想宽赦他吗！ 
English: Emperor Huan said to Guanba, "What do you mean by saying that the emperor does not intend to slander? Do you want to pardon him?"

古文：顾使小黄门可其奏，云、众皆死狱中，于是嬖宠益横。
现代文：于是，回头命令小黄门批准奏章。李云和杜众都死在狱中。从此，皇帝左右的宦官和亲信，更加骄纵横行。
English: As a result, he turned around and ordered Xiao Huangmen to approve the record. Li Yun and Du Zhuang both died in prison. From then on, the eunuchs and cronies around the emperor became even more arrogant.

古文：太尉琼自度力不能制，乃称疾不起，上疏曰： 陛下即位以来，未有胜政，诸梁秉权，竖宦充朝，李固、杜乔既以忠言横见残灭，而李云、杜众复以直道继踵受诛，海内伤惧，益以怨结，朝野之人，以忠为讳。
现代文：太尉黄琼自知没有能力控制他们，于是声称有病，卧床不起，上书说： 陛下即位以来，没有胜过前朝的善政，梁姓家族擅弄威权，宦官充斥朝廷，李固、杜介因为口吐忠言已经惨遭屠杀，而李云、杜众又因为直言劝谏相继遭到诛杀。四海之内悲伤恐惧，日益怨恨，无论是在朝的官吏，或者是在野的百姓，都把尽忠朝廷视为禁忌。
English: Captain Huang Qiong knew that he was not able to control them, so he claimed to be ill and bedridden, and wrote: Since His Majesty ascended the throne, there has been no better than the good governance of the former dynasty, the Liang family has been wielding authority, eunuchs abound in the imperial court, Li Gu and Du Jie have been brutally slaughtered for their outspoken loyalty, and Li Yun and Du Zong have been killed one after another for their outspoken advice. Within the four seas, there is sadness, fear, and growing resentment, and both the officials in the imperial court and the people in the countryside regard loyalty to the imperial court as

古文：尚书周永，素事梁冀，假其威势，见冀将衰，乃阳毁示忠，遂因奸计，亦取封侯。
现代文：尚书周永，一向侍奏梁冀，假借梁冀的威风和权势，在发现梁冀快要败亡时，又在表面上抨击梁冀，以此向陛下表示忠心。正因为他采取这样的奸计，竟然也被封侯。
English: Shangshu Zhou Yong, who had always served Liang Jie, took advantage of Liang Jie's prestige and power, and when he discovered that Liang Jie was about to be defeated, he attacked Liang Jie on the surface to show his loyalty to His Majesty. It was because he took such a trick that he was also banned.

古文：又，黄门挟邪，群辈相党，自冀兴盛，腹背相亲，朝夕图谋，共构奸轨；临冀当诛，无可设巧，复记其恶以要爵赏。
现代文：还有，宫廷内的黄门宦官，挟持邪恶势力，互相结党。自从梁冀权势兴盛，他们和梁冀之间互相勾结，犹如腹背一样地相亲相爱，朝夕相处，共同图谋不轨，狼狈为奸。当梁冀将要被诛杀时，他们无计可施，于是翻过脸来，揭发和攻击梁冀的罪恶，以此来邀取封爵赏赐。
English: Furthermore, the eunuchs of the Yellow Gate in the court held evil forces hostage and formed parties with each other. Since Liang Jie's power flourished, they and Liang Jie have colluded with each other, loving each other as if they were brothers, getting along with each other day and night, plotting together and acting as spies. When Liang Jie was about to be killed, there was nothing they could do, so they turned around and exposed and attacked Liang Jie's evil, in order to invite him to be knighted.

古文：陛下不加清征，审别真伪，复与忠臣并时显封，使硃紫共色，粉墨杂糅，所谓抵金玉于沙砾，碎珪璧于泥涂，四方闻之，莫不愤叹。
现代文：陛下不加以澄清，也不辨别真假，使他们又和真正的忠臣同时受到显赫的封赏。黑白被混淆，真可谓把黄金抛掷在沙石中，将玉璧敲碎扔进泥泞的道路，四方的人听到后，无不愤恨叹息。
English: His Majesty did not clarify, nor did he distinguish between the true and the false, so that they received a prominent award at the same time as the true loyalists. The black and white were confused, and it was really like throwing gold in the sandstone, breaking the jade into pieces and throwing them into the muddy road. After hearing this, people from all over the country sighed with indignation.

古文：臣世荷国恩，身轻位重，敢以垂绝之日，陈不讳之言。 
现代文：我累世蒙受朝廷的恩惠，身虽微贱，但居位重要，所以胆敢在临死之日，向陛下说出不隐讳的话。 
English: Throughout my life, I have received the grace of the Imperial Court. Although I am a lowly person, my position is important, so I dare to speak openly to His Majesty on the day of my death.

古文：书奏，不纳。
现代文：奏章呈上后，桓帝不肯采纳。
English: Emperor Kanto did not approve of the play.

古文：冬，十月，壬申，上行幸长安。
现代文：冬季，十月壬申，桓帝前往长安巡视。
English: In winter, in October in Jinshin, Emperor Huan went to Chang'an for inspection.

古文：中常侍单超疾病；壬寅，以超为车骑将军。
现代文：中常侍单超患病。壬寅，任命单超为车骑将军。
English: The Vice-Commander-in-Chief, Shan Chao, fell ill. Ren Yin, appointed Shan Chao as the General of Chariots and Cavalry.

古文：十二月，己巳，上还自长安。
现代文：十月己巳，桓帝从长安返回京都洛阳。
English: In October, Emperor Kan returned to Kyoto Luoyang from Chang'an.

古文：烧当、烧何、当煎、勒姐等八种羌寇陇西金城塞，护羌校尉段颍击破之，追至罗亭，斩其酋豪以下二千级，获生口万馀人。
现代文：烧当、烧何、当煎、勒姐等八部种羌，侵犯陇西金城塞，护羌校尉段将其击破。并追到罗亭，斩酋长、豪帅及以下二千余人，俘虏一万余人。
English: There were eight groups of eunuchs, including Xiangtang, Xianghe, Dangren and Lejie, who invaded the Jincheng fortress in Shaanxi Province. The eunuch guards broke them up and chased them to Luoting, where they killed more than 2,000 chiefs, grand marshals and their subordinates, and took more than 10,000 prisoners.

古文：诏复以陈蕃为光禄勋，杨秉为河南尹。
现代文：桓帝下诏，重新任命陈蕃为光禄勋，杨秉为河南尹。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict, reappointing Chen Qi as Guanglu Xun and Yang Bing as Henan Yin.

古文：单超兄子匡为济阴太守，负势贪放。
现代文：单超哥哥的儿子单匡，担任济阴郡太守，仗势贪污放纵。
English: Shan Chao's brother's son, Shan Kuang, served as the governor of Jiyin County, and was prone to corruption and indulgence.

古文：兗州刺史第五种使从事卫羽案之，得臧五六千万，种即奏匡，并以劾超。
现代文：兖州刺史第五种派从事卫羽调查审问，查出赃款五六千万钱。第五种立即上奏告发单匡，并弹劾单超。
English: The fifth faction of Zhangzhou Jingshi engaged in Wei Yu's investigation and interrogation, and found the stolen money of fifty or sixty million yuan. The fifth immediately reported to the procuratorate and impeached the procuratorate.

古文：匡窘迫，赂客任方刺羽。
现代文：单匡困迫，于是贿赂刺客任方行刺卫羽。
English: Shan Kuang was in trouble, so he bribed the assassin Ren Fang to assassinate Wei Yu.

古文：羽觉其奸，捕方，囚系雒阳。
现代文：卫羽发觉奸谋，将任方逮捕，囚禁在洛阳监狱。
English: Wei Yu discovered the plot, arrested Ren Fang and imprisoned him in Luoyang Prison.

古文：匡虑杨秉穷竟其事，密令方等突狱亡走。
现代文：单匡害怕河南尹杨秉穷追这件事的来龙去脉，秘密命令任方等越狱逃跑。
English: Shan Kuang was afraid that Yin Yang Bing of Henan Province would exhaustively pursue the ins and outs of this matter, and secretly ordered Ren Fang and others to escape from prison.

古文：尚书召秉诘责，秉对曰： 方等无状，衅由单匡，乞槛车征匡，考核其事，则奸慝踪绪，必可立得。 
现代文：尚书召见杨秉责备质问，杨秉回答说： 任方等人为非作歹，实由单匡主使，请用囚车把单匡押解到京都洛阳，当面考问这件事，他们作奸犯科的行踪影迹定会立刻清楚。 
English: Shang Shu summoned Yang Bing for questioning. Yang Bing replied, "Ren Fang and others have done wrongdoing, but it was actually instigated by Shan Kuang. Please escort Shan Kuang to Kyoto Luoyang in a prison van, and ask him about this in person. The whereabouts of their criminal activities will be clear immediately."

古文：秉竟坐论作左校。
现代文：然而杨秉竟被判罪，送到左校营去罚作苦役。
English: However, Yang Bing was found guilty and sent to the Left School Camp to do hard labor.

古文：时泰山贼叔孙无忌寇暴徐、兗，州郡不能讨，单超以是陷第五种，坐徙朔方；超外孙董援为朔方太守，稸怒以待之。
现代文：当时，正好遇上泰山郡的叔孙无忌攻打劫掠徐州、兖州，州郡官府都无力讨伐。于是，单超就以椽为理由陷害第五种。第五种因罪被放逐到朔方郡。单超的外孙董援，当时正担任朔方郡太守，蓄积愤怒，等待着第五种的到来。
English: At that time, when it happened that the uncles and grandsons of Taishan County attacked and plundered Xuzhou and Zhangzhou, the state and county governments were powerless to fight back. Therefore, Shanchao framed the fifth kind for the reason of robbery. The fifth kind was exiled to Shuofang County for the crime. Shanchao's grandson, Dong Yuan, was serving as the governor of Shuofang County at the time, accumulating anger and waiting for the arrival of the fifth kind.

古文：种故吏孙斌知种必死，结客追种，及于太原，劫之以归，亡命数年，会赦得免。
现代文：第五种过去的属吏孙斌知道第五种到朔方后必死，就集结宾客追赶第五种，一直追赶到太原，将第五种劫走，救归家乡，逃亡了好几年，遇到大赦才得以免罪。
English: Sun Bin, a former subordinate of the fifth kind, knew that the fifth kind would die after reaching Shuo Fang, so he gathered guests to chase the fifth kind, chased it all the way to Taiyuan, kidnapped the fifth kind, rescued it back to his hometown, fled for several years, and was only exonerated when he encountered an amnesty.

古文：种，伦之曾孙也。
现代文：第五种是第五伦的曾孙。
English: The fifth is the great-grandson of the fifth lot.

古文：是时，封赏逾制，内宠猥盛。
现代文：这时，封爵和赏赐超出正常的制度，皇宫内的美女过于滥盛。
English: At this time, the knighthoods and rewards were beyond the normal system, and the beautiful women in the palace were too extravagant.

古文：陈蕃上疏曰： 夫诸侯上象四七，籓屏上国；高祖之约，非功臣不侯。
现代文：陈蕃上书说： 封国的诸侯王好像天上的二十八宿，拱卫着帝王。高祖曾经约定，不是有功之臣不能封侯。
English: Chen Xuan's letter said: "The vassal princes of a vassal state are like the twenty-eight mansions in the sky, guarding the emperor. Gao Zu once agreed that vassals who are not meritorious could not be vassals.

古文：而闻追录河南尹邓万世父遵之微功，更爵尚书令黄俊先人之绝封。
现代文：然而，我听说，皇上追录河南尹邓万世的父亲邓遵的微小功劳而赐封邓万世，并重新恢复尚书令黄隽祖先已经断绝的封爵。
English: However, I heard that the emperor gave Deng Wansei the title after recording the small merit of Deng Zun, the father of Henan Yin Deng Wansei, and reinstated the knighthood that Shang Shuling Huang Yao's ancestors had cut off.

古文：近习以非义授邑，左右以无功传赏，至乃一门之内，侯者数人，故纬象失度，阴阳谬序。
现代文：对亲近的人，不按照正常的制度授予食邑，对左右随从，没有功劳而颁给赏赐。甚至一家之内，被封为侯爵的有数人之多。所以天象失去常度，阴阳秩序错乱颠倒。
English: For those who are close to him, he does not award food in accordance with the normal system, and for those who follow him, he awards them without merit. Even within a family, there are many people who have been made marquesses. Therefore, the celestial body has lost its stability, and the yin and yang order has been disrupted and reversed.

古文：臣知封事已行，言之无及，诚欲陛下从是而止。
现代文：我也知道，爵位已封，再谈论也来不及，只是希望陛下到此为止。
English: I know that the sealing has already taken place, and it is useless to say anything, but I sincerely hope that the Emperor will stop here.

古文：又，采女数千，食肉衣绮，脂油粉黛，不可赀计。
现代文：还有，在皇宫之中有美女数千人，她们吃的是肉，穿的是绫罗绸缎，用的是胭脂粉黛，费用无法计算。
English: Also, there are thousands of beautiful women in the royal palace, they eat meat, wear silk and satin, and use rouge powder, the cost is incalculable.

古文：鄙谚言 盗不过五女门 ，以女贫家也；今后宫之女，岂不贫国乎！ 
现代文：民间有谚语说： 偷盗不经过五女之门。 因为女儿多会使一家贫穷。如今后宫有这么多美女，难道不使国家贫穷？ 
English: There is a folk saying: Stealing does not pass through the gate of five daughters, because more daughters will make a family poor. Nowadays, there are so many beautiful women in the harem, does it not make the country poor?

古文：帝颇采其言，为出宫女五百馀人，但赐俊爵关内侯，而封万世南乡侯。
现代文：桓帝对陈蕃的建议颇为采纳，释放宫女五百余人，只赐给尚书令黄隽关内侯的封爵，而封邓万世为南乡侯。
English: Emperor Kuan accepted Chen Yao's suggestion and released more than five hundred court ladies. He only gave Shang Shuling the title of Huang Qi Guan Inner Marquis, while Deng Mansei was given the title of Nan Xiang Marquis.

古文：帝从容问侍中陈留爰延： 朕何如主也？ 
现代文：桓帝曾经语气和缓地询问侍中、陈留人爰延说： 朕是一个什么样的君主？ 
English: Emperor Kuan once asked the chamberlain, Chen Liu Ren Ren, in a gentle tone: "What kind of monarch am I?

古文：对曰： 陛下为汉中主。 
现代文：爰延回答说： 在汉王朝的君主中，陛下属于中等。 
English: He replied: Your Majesty is the head of the Han Dynasty.

古文：帝曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：桓帝又问： 为什么这么说？ 
English: Emperor Wu said, "Why do you say that?

古文：对曰： 尚书令陈蕃任事则治，中常侍黄门与政则乱。
现代文：爰延又回答说： 尚书令陈蕃管事时，国家得到治理，中常侍黄门参与政事时，国家混乱。
English: Yu Yan also replied, "When Shang Shuling put Chen Quan in charge, the country was governed, but when Huang Men, the vice-premier, took part in government affairs, the country was in chaos.

古文：是以知陛下可与为善，可与为非。 
现代文：所以说，可以辅佐陛下您为善，也可以辅佐您作恶。 
English: Therefore, it is possible to assist His Majesty in doing good, and it is also possible to assist him in doing evil.

古文：帝曰： 昔硃云廷折栏槛，今侍中面称朕违，敬闻阙矣。 
现代文：桓帝说： 过去，朱云曾在朝廷上折断栏杆强谏成帝，而今你又当面指责朕的过失，朕知道自己的缺点了。 
English: Emperor Huan said: In the past, Zhu Yun had broken the railing in the imperial court to force his way into the throne, but now you are accusing me of my faults in front of me. I know my own shortcomings.

古文：拜五官中郎将，累迁大鸿胪。
现代文：于是，任命爰延为五官中郎将，后又擢升，官至大鸿胪。
English: As a result, Zou Yan was appointed to the position of General of the Five Departments, and was later promoted to the position of General of the Five Departments.

古文：会客星经帝坐，帝密以问延，延上封事曰： 陛下以河南尹邓万世有龙潜之旧，封为通侯，恩重公卿，惠丰宗室；加顷引见，与之对博，上下枼黩，有亏尊严。
现代文：正好，天象有变，一颗异常的星经过帝座星座，桓帝秘密向爰延询问此事。爰延呈上密封的奏章说： 陛下跟河南尹邓万世是未即位以前的旧友，于是，封他为列侯，对他的恩惠，重于三公九卿，厚于皇族。并且，经常召见他，和他相对玩博塞等博戏，上下亲昵而不讲礼仪，有损至尊的威严。
English: Just at that time, there was a change in the celestial bodies. An unusual star passed through the constellation of the imperial throne. Emperor Huan secretly asked Qian Yan about the matter. Qian Yan presented a sealed record saying: His Majesty was an old friend of Henan's Yin Deng Wan before he ascended the throne. Therefore, the favor of appointing him as a vassal lord was greater than that of the three princes and nine nobles, and was greater than that of the imperial family. Moreover, he often invited him to play games such as bossa against him, and was intimate with him without talking about etiquette, which undermined the supreme majesty.

古文：臣闻之，帝左右者，所以咨政德也。
现代文：我听说，皇帝左右的人，都是商量政事和德教的。
English: The minister heard that he was at the emperor's side in order to consult him on political ethics.

古文：善人同处，则日闻嘉训；恶人从游，则日生邪情。
现代文：和善人相处，则每天都能听到有益的训勉；和恶人一起游娱，则每天都要产生邪恶之情。
English: If you spend time with good people, you will hear beneficial exhortations every day; if you spend time with evil people, you will have evil feelings every day.

古文：惟陛下远谗谀之人，纳謇謇之士，则灾变可除。 
现代文：但愿陛下疏远好进谗言和阿谀奏承的小人，接纳忠贞的人士，则灾变可以消除。 
English: I hope that His Majesty will alienate the villains who are good at insinuation and flattery, and accept the loyal people, then the disaster can be eliminated.

古文：帝不能用。
现代文：桓帝不能采纳。
English: Emperor Shun disobeyed.

古文：延称病，免归。
现代文：于是，爰延声称有病，被免官，回归故乡。
English: As a result, Hao Yan claimed to be ill, was removed from office, and returned to his hometown.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下延熹三年
现代文：延熹三年庚子，公元年春季，正月丙申，大赦天下。
English: In the third year of Yancheng's reign, Geng Zi, in the spring of the year AD, in the first month of the year Bishen, was pardoned.

古文：春，正月，丙申，赦天下，诏求李固后嗣。
现代文：桓帝下诏寻找李固的后裔。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict to search for descendants of Li Gu.

古文：初，固既策罢，知不免祸，乃遣三子基、兹、燮皆归乡里，时燮年十三，姊文姬为同郡赵伯英妻，见二兄归，具知事本，默然独悲曰： 李氏灭矣！
现代文：当初，李固被颁策罢官以后，知道免不了要遭大祸，于是，就把他的三个儿子李基、李兹、李燮，都送回故乡。当时，李燮十三岁，他的姐姐李文姬嫁给同郡人赵伯英为妻，看到两位哥哥从京都洛阳回来，全部了解了事情的本末，暗暗独自悲叹： 李家要灭亡了。
English: At first, after Li Gu was removed from office, he knew that he would inevitably suffer a great disaster, so he sent his three sons, Li Qi, Li Zi, and Li Yao, all back to his hometown. At that time, Li Yao was thirteen years old, his sister Li Wenji married a fellow county resident, Zhao Boying, and saw the two brothers return from Kyoto Luoyang. They all understood the bottom line of the matter, and secretly lamented alone: the Li family was about to perish.

古文：自太公已来，积德累仁，何以遇此！ 
现代文：自祖父李以来，积德积仁，怎么会落得如此下场！ 
English: Ever since Grandpa Li, who was a man of great virtue and compassion, how could he have ended up like this!

古文：密与二兄谋，豫藏匿燮，托言还京师，人咸信之。
现代文：她秘密地跟两位哥哥商议，事先把三弟李燮藏匿起来，然后传出消息说李燮已回京都洛阳，人们全都相信。
English: She secretly negotiated with her two brothers and hid her third brother, Li Yao, in advance. Then the news spread that Li Yao had returned to Luoyang, Kyoto, and everyone believed it.

古文：有顷，难作，州郡收基、兹，皆死狱中。
现代文：不久，大祸发生，州郡官府逮捕李基、李兹，二人全都死在狱中。
English: Soon after, a big disaster occurred, the state and county government arrested Liki and Liz, and they both died in prison.

古文：文姬乃告父门生王成曰： 君执义先公，有古人之节；今委君以六尺之孤，李氏存灭，其在君矣！ 
现代文：于是，李文姬亲自拜托父亲的学生王成说： 您为我的先父坚持正义，有古人的气节。而今，我把六尺高的孤儿托付给您。李家是存还是灭，就在您的身上了！ 
English: As a result, Li Wenji personally asked his father's student, Wang Chengwu, to say: You have upheld justice for my forefather and have the stamina of the ancients. And now, I entrust you with a six-foot-tall orphan. Whether the Li family survives or dies is up to you!

古文：成乃将燮乘江东下，入徐州界，变姓名为酒家佣，而成卖卜于市，各为异人，阴相往来。
现代文：王成便带着李燮乘船沿长江东下，进入徐州境内。李燮改名换姓，在一家酒店里做佣工，王成则在街市上给人占卦算命，二人假装不认识，暗地里互相来往。
English: Wang Cheng then took Li Yao on a boat along the Yangtze River to the east and entered the territory of Xuzhou. Li Yao changed his name and surname and worked as a helper in a hotel, while Wang Cheng told fortunes to people at the street market. The two pretended not to know each other and secretly interacted with each other.

古文：积十馀年，梁冀既诛，燮乃以本末告酒家，酒家具车重厚遣之，燮皆不受，遂还乡里，追行丧服，姊弟相见，悲感傍人。
现代文：过了十余年之久，当梁冀被诛杀后，李燮才将自己身世告诉酒店老板。酒店老板大为震惊，准备了车马和丰厚的礼物，要送李燮回乡，李燮都不肯接受。李燮于是回到故乡为他的父亲追补服丧。姐弟机见，十分悲伤，旁边的人无不为之感动。
English: It took more than ten years, when Liang Jie was killed, for Li Yao to tell the hotel owner about his past. The hotel owner was shocked and prepared a car, a horse and a rich gift to send Li Yao back to his hometown, but Li Yao refused to accept it. Li Yao then returned to his hometown to make up for his father's funeral. The siblings saw the opportunity and were very sad, and the people around them were touched.

古文：姊戒燮曰： 吾家血食将绝，弟幸而得济，岂非天邪！
现代文：姐姐李文姬告诫李燮说： 我们李家的祭祀几乎灭绝，你幸而逃得活命，岂不是天意吗？
English: Sister Li Wenji admonished Li Yao, saying, "Our Li family's sacrificial rites are almost extinct. Aren't you lucky to have escaped with your life? Isn't that God's will?

古文：宜杜绝众人，勿妄往来，慎无一言加于梁氏！加梁氏则连主上，祸重至矣，唯引咎而已。 
现代文：应该闭门自守，不要随便和别人往来，千万不要对梁家有一言抨击，如果抨击梁家，势必牵连到主上，大祸就会重新降临了，我们只有引咎自责而已。 
English: We should keep our doors closed, not casually socialize with others, and never criticize the Liang family. If we criticize the Liang family, we are bound to implicate the Lord, and the great calamity will befall us again. We only have ourselves to blame.

古文：燮谨从其诲。
现代文：桓帝赏赐给他御用棺木和玉衣。
English: Emperor Kan rewarded him with a royal coffin and a jade robe.

古文：后王成卒，燮以礼葬之，每四节为设上宾之位而祠焉。
现代文：等到埋葬时，又调发五营的骑士，由将作大匠督率，为他兴筑坟墓。
English: When the time came for his burial, five battalions of knights were dispatched, led by the Grand Master, to build his tomb.

古文：丙午，新丰侯单超卒，赐东园秘器，棺中玉具；及葬，发五营骑士、将作大匠起冢茔。其后四侯转横，天下为之语曰： 左回天，具独坐，徐卧虎，唐雨堕。 
现代文：其后，剩下的 四侯 ，更加骄横跋扈，天下的人民流传着一句刻划他们形象的歌谣说： 左有回天之力，具瑷是唯我独尊，徐璜的威风如卧虎，唐衡的势力像大雨。 
English: Later, the remaining four princes became even more arrogant, and the people of the world circulated a song depicting their image, saying: "The left has the power to return to heaven, the right is self-respect, the power of Xu Xi is like a crouching tiger, and the power of Tang Heng is like heavy rain."

古文：皆竞起第宅，以华侈相尚，其仆从皆乘牛车而从列骑，兄弟姻戚，宰州临郡，辜较百姓，与盗无异，虐遍天下；民不堪命，故多为盗贼焉。
现代文：他们竞相修建宅第，追求豪华奢侈，连仆从都乘坐牛车，有骑马卫士跟随。他们的兄弟和有婚姻关系的亲戚中，担任州刺史和郡太守的，搜刮和掠夺百姓的财富，和盗贼没有区别，暴虐遍及全国各地。民不聊生，所以很多人去做盗贼。
English: They compete to build mansions, pursue luxury and luxury, and even their servants ride in ox carts, followed by mounted guards. Their brothers and relatives by marriage, who serve as state magistrates and county governors, scrounge and plunder the wealth of the people, and there is no difference between thieves and tyranny throughout the country. People do not want to live, so many people become thieves.

古文：中常侍侯览，小黄门段珪，皆有田业近济北界，仆从宾客，劫掠行旅。
现代文：中常侍侯览，小黄门段，都在邻近济北国边界的地方有田产，他们的奴仆和宾客仗势公开抢劫来往的旅客。
English: The middle-ranking attendant, Hou Chan, and Xiao Huang Men, both had farms near the border of North Jeolla Province, and their servants and guests would openly rob passing travelers.

古文：济北相滕延，一切收捕，杀数十人，陈尸路衢。
现代文：济北国相滕延将他们一律逮捕，诛杀了数十人，把尸首放在路口示众。
English: Tengyan, the governor of North Jeju Province, arrested all of them, killed dozens of them, and put their bodies on display at a road junction.

古文：览、珪以事诉帝，延坐征诣廷尉，免。
现代文：侯览、段为此事向桓帝告状，于是，滕延被征召回京都洛阳，送往廷尉治罪，免官。
English: Hou Zhan and Duan complained to Emperor Huan about this matter, and as a result, Teng Yan was called back to Kyoto Luoyang, sent to the imperial court to be punished, and dismissed.

古文：左悺兄胜为河东太守，皮氏长京兆岐耻之，即日弃官西归。
现代文：左的哥哥左胜担任河东郡太守，下属皮氏县长京兆人赵岐，对此感到耻辱，当天便自动离职，西归故乡。
English: Zu's older brother Zu Sheng served as the governor of Hedong County, subordinate to the governor of Pi County, Zhao Qi, who felt humiliated and left the post on the same day, returning to his hometown in the west.

古文：唐衡兄玹为京兆尹，素与岐有隙，收岐家属宗亲，陷以重法，尽杀之。
现代文：唐衡的哥哥唐担任京兆尹，他和赵岐之间向来有怨恨，于是逮捕赵岐的家属、宗族和亲戚，扣上重大的罪名，全部加以诛杀。
English: Tang Heng's brother, Tang, served as Jing Zhaoyun. He and Zhao Qi always had a grudge against each other, so they arrested Zhao Qi's family members, clansmen and relatives, charged them with serious crimes, and killed them all.

古文：岐逃难四方，靡所不历，自匿姓名，卖饼北海市中；安丘孙嵩见而异之，载与俱归，藏于复壁中。
现代文：赵岐只身外逃，走遍全国，后来隐姓埋名，在北海国的街市上以卖饼为生。安丘县人孙嵩，发现他不同寻常，就带他一同乘车回家，把他藏在夹墙之中。
English: Zhao Qi just ran away and traveled all over the country. Later, he went incognito and sold cakes at a street market in the North Sea country. Sun Song, a resident of Anqiu County, found him unusual and took him home with him and hid him in a wall.

古文：及诸唐死，遇赦，乃敢出。
现代文：等到唐衡兄弟死后，遇到了赦令，才敢出来。
English: It was only after the death of Tang Heng's brothers and the pardon order that he dared to come out.

古文：闰月，西羌馀众复与烧何大豪寇张掖，晨，薄校尉段颎军。
现代文：闰正月，西羌的残余部众，再度与烧何种的大豪帅联合攻打张掖郡。早晨，逼进护羌尉段的军营。
English: In the first month of the leap year, the remnants of Xidi's troops once again jointly attacked Zhangye County with the grand marshal of Xidi. In the morning, they forced their way into the military camp of the garrison.

古文：颎下马大战，至日中，刀折矢尽，虏亦引退。
现代文：段下马大战，一直打到中午，刀刃折断，箭已射尽，诸羌部众也向后退却了。
English: Duan Yan dismounted his horse and fought with them. The battle lasted until noon. The battle ended in a draw, and the invaders retreated.

古文：颎追之，且斗且行，昼夜相攻，割肉食雪，四十馀日，遂至积石山，出塞二千馀里，斩烧何大帅，降其馀众而还。
现代文：段率军追击，一边战斗，一边前进，昼夜不停地进行攻击，饥饿时吃战马的肉，口渴时饮雪水，历时四十余天，终于抵达积石山，追出塞外二千余里，斩杀烧何种的大豪帅，接受残余部众的投降，班师而还。
English: Duan led the army to pursue, while fighting, while advancing, attacked day and night, ate horse meat when hungry, drank snow water when thirsty, lasted more than forty days, finally arrived at Jishi Mountain, chased more than two thousand miles outside the province, killed and burned what kind of great hero, accepted the surrender of the remaining members, and returned.

古文：夏，五月，甲戌，汉中山崩。
现代文：夏季，五月甲戌，汉中郡发生山崩。
English: In the summer, a landslide occurred in Hanzhong County, Jiaozuo in May.

古文：六月，辛丑，司徒祝恬薨。
现代文：六月辛丑，司徙祝恬去世。
English: In June, Xin ugly, Siyuan Zhu Xi passed away.

古文：秋，七月，以司空盛允为司徒，太常虞放为司空。
现代文：秋季，七月，任命司空盛允为司徒，擢升太常虞放为司空。
English: In the autumn, in July, Shengjun Sku was appointed as a disciple, and Taizhang Fang was promoted to Sku.

古文：长沙蛮反，屯益阳，零陵蛮寇长沙。
现代文：长沙郡蛮人起兵反叛，进驻益阳。零陵蛮人起兵攻打长沙。
English: The barbarians of Changsha County rebelled and stationed themselves in Yiyang. The barbarians of Luling raised an army to attack Changsha.

古文：九真馀贼屯据日南，众转强盛；诏复拜桂阳太守夏方为交趾刺史。
现代文：九真郡残余盗贼，攻占和据守日南郡，势力转强。桓帝下诏，擢升桂阳郡太守夏方为交趾刺史。
English: The remnants of the bandits in Jiu Zhen County captured and held Nichinan County, and their power grew stronger. Emperor Huan issued an edict to promote Xia Fang, the governor of Guiyang County, to grand marshal.

古文：方威惠素著，冬，十一月，日南贼二万馀人相率诣方降。
现代文：夏方一向以威严和恩德著称。冬季，十一月，日南郡盗贼二万余人相继向夏方投降。
English: In the winter, in November, more than twenty thousand thieves in Nichinan County surrendered to Xia Fang.

古文：勒姐、零吾种羌围允街；段颎击破之。
现代文：勒姐、零吾种羌人包围允街，段将其击破。
English: Le's sister and Zou's followers surrounded Yunjie, and Duan broke them down.

古文：泰山贼叔孙无忌攻杀都尉侯章；遣中郎将宗资讨破之。
现代文：泰山郡贼帅叔孙无忌，攻杀郡都尉侯章。朝廷派遣中郎将宗资率军讨伐，将其击破。
English: His great-uncle and great-grandson, the Thief-in-Chief of Taishan County, attacked and killed the county's governor, Hou Zhang. The imperial court dispatched a middle-ranking official to lead the army to fight and defeat him.

古文：诏征皇甫规，拜泰山太守。
现代文：桓帝下诏征召皇甫规，任命他为泰山郡太守。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an imperial edict summoning Emperor Fuhe and appointing him as the governor of Taishan County.

古文：规到官，广设方略，寇虏悉平。
现代文：皇甫规到任后，采取多种计谋和策略，将盗贼全平部息下去。
English: After Emperor Fu Zheng took office, he adopted a variety of stratagems and strategies to completely suppress the thieves.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下延熹四年春，正月，辛酉，南宫嘉德殿火；戊子，丙署火。
现代文：延熹四年春季，正月辛酋，南宫嘉德殿失火。戊子，丙署失火。发生大瘟疫。
English: In the spring of the 4th year of Yanqi, in the first month of Xinhui, the South Palace Jiade Hall caught fire. Wuzi, C Division caught fire. A great plague occurred.

古文：大疫。二月，壬辰，武库火。
现代文：二月壬辰，兵器库失火。
English: February, Imjin, arsenal fire.

古文：司徒盛允免，以大司农种暠为司徒。
现代文：司徒盛允被免官，擢升大司农种为司徒。
English: Szeto Shengyong was removed from his post and promoted to the position of Senior Secretary of Agriculture as Szeto.

古文：三月，太尉黄琼免；夏，四月，以太常沛国刘矩为太尉。
现代文：三月，太尉黄琼被免官。夏季，四月，擢升太常、太常沛国刘矩为太尉。
English: In March, Second Lieutenant Huang Qiong was relieved of duty. In the summer, in April, he was promoted to Second Lieutenant.

古文：初，矩为雍丘令，以礼让化民；有讼者，常引之于前，提耳训告，以为忿恚可忍，县官不可入，使归更思。
现代文：当初，刘矩担任雍丘县令时，用礼义谦让教化人民。凡是有人到县府进行诉讼，他经常把告状的人带到跟前，耳提面命地训告他们：愤怒可以忍耐，而县府法庭，不可以进，让他们回去重新考虑。
English: At first, when Liu Rong served as the county magistrate of Yongqiu County, he used courtesy and modesty to let the educated people go. Whenever someone went to the county government for a lawsuit, he often brought the plaintiff to the front, and told them with a straight face: anger can be tolerated, but the county court cannot enter, let them go back and reconsider.

古文：讼者感之，辄各罢去。
现代文：投诉的人被他的话所感动，总是各自作罢离去。
English: The complainants were moved by his words and always went their separate ways.

古文：甲寅，封河间孝王子参户亭侯博为任城王，奉孝王后。
现代文：甲寅，封河间孝王刘开的儿子、参户亭侯刘博为任城王，做已故任城孝王刘尚的继承人，侍奉祭祀。
English: Jia Yin, the son of Liu Kai, the feudal lord of Xiaowang, and Liu Bo, the lord of Sanhu Pavilion, were appointed as the kings of the city, and served as the successors of the late Liu Shang, the appointed king of Xiaowang, and served the sacrifices.

古文：五月，辛酉，有星孛于心。
现代文：五月酉，有异星出现在心宿星座。
English: At the end of May, a strange star appeared in the constellation of Antares.

古文：丁卯，原陵长寿门火。
现代文：丁卯，光武帝陵园原陵长寿门失火。
English: On the tenth day of the first month, the gate of Changshou Gate of the original mausoleum caught fire.

古文：己卯，京师雨雹。
现代文：己卯，京都洛阳降雹。
English: On the 22nd, the capital was hit by hailstones as big as eggs.

古文：六月，京兆、扶风及凉州地震。
现代文：六月，京光、扶风及凉州发生地震。
English: In June, the Keizhao, Fufeng and Liangzhou earthquakes occurred.

古文：庚子，岱山及博尤来山并颓裂。
现代文：庚子，岱山以及博县境内的尤来山都发生了山崩。
English: Landslides occurred in Gengzi, Lushan and Yulai Mountain in Bo County.

古文：己酉，赦天下。
现代文：己酉，大赦天下。
English: Forgive yourself, and the world will forgive you.

古文：司空虞放免，以前太尉黄琼为司空。
现代文：司空虞放被免官，任命前太尉黄琼为司空。
English: Sifu Yu Fang was removed from office, and former Second Lieutenant Huang Qiong was appointed as Sifu.

古文：犍为属国夷寇钞百姓。
现代文：犍为属国夷人劫掠百姓。
English: He plundered the people for the barbarians belonging to his country.

古文：益州刺史山昱击破之。
现代文：益州刺史山昱将其击破。
English: It was defeated by Ikshushan Shanzhao.

古文：零吾羌与先零诸种反，寇三辅。
现代文：零吾羌人和先零诸种反叛，攻打三辅地区。
English: Zero Uighurs and Zero rebels of all kinds attacked the Sanfu area.

古文：秋，七月，京师雩。
现代文：秋季，七月，京都洛阳举行求雨大典。
English: In the autumn, in July, a rainmaking ceremony is held in Kyoto's Luoyang.

古文：减公卿已下奉，貣王侯半租，占卖关内侯、虎贲、羽林缇骑、营士、五大夫钱各有差。
现代文：朝廷削减三公九卿以下官吏的俸禄。向各封国的王、侯，借贷他们所食租税的一半。出卖关内侯、虎贲、羽林缇骑、营士、五大夫等官爵，价钱各有差别。
English: The Imperial Court cut the salaries of officials below the rank of three dukes and nine lords. They borrowed half of the tax they paid from the kings and lords of the fiefs. They sold the lordships of Guanai, Tigris, Yulin, Yingzi, and Wudaofu, and the prices varied.

古文：九月，司空黄琼免，以大鸿胪东莱刘宠为司空。
现代文：九月，司空黄琼被免官，擢升大鸿胪、东莱人刘宠为司空。
English: In September, Sikyong Huang Qiong was removed from office and promoted to Daxiong, and Donglai resident Liu Ji was promoted to Sikyong.

古文：宠常为会稽太守，简除烦苛，禁察非法，郡中大治；征为将作大匠。
现代文：刘宠曾经担任过会稽郡太守，削减和废除烦琐的苛捐杂税，禁止和督察官吏的非法行为，郡内大治。
English: Liu Zhao once served as the county's auditor-general, reducing and abolishing cumbersome taxes, prohibiting and inspecting the illegal actions of officials, and governing the county.

古文：山阴县有五六老叟，自若邪山谷间出，人赍百钱以送宠曰： 山谷鄙生，未尝识郡朝，它守时，吏发求民间，至夜不绝，或狗吠竟夕，民不得安。
现代文：朝廷征召他去京都洛阳担任将作大匠，山阴县有五六位老翁，从若邪山山谷里出来，每人带着一百钱，送给刘宠说： 我们都是山谷里的鄙陋之人，从来没有见过郡太守。只知道别人担任郡太守时，派官吏到民间征发赋税和徭役，从早到晚，络绎不绝，有时狗叫的声音通宵不停，人民不得安宁。
English: The imperial court called him to go to Kyoto Luoyang to serve as a master craftsman. There were five or six old men in San'in County who came out of the Rakuya Mountain Valley, each with a hundred money, and gave it to Liu Daming, saying: We are all despicable people in the valley, and have never seen the county magistrate. I only know that when others served as the county magistrate, they sent officials to the people to collect and distribute taxes and duties, from morning to night, incessantly, sometimes the sound of dogs barking all night long, and the people were not at peace.

古文：自明府下车以来，狗不夜吠，民不见吏；年老遭值圣明，今闻当见弃去，故自扶奉送。 
现代文：自从您下车任职以来，狗在晚上从来没有叫过，人民也看不见官吏。在我们年老之时，遇到了圣明的太守。而今，听说您要抛弃我们离去，所以，我们互相扶持，为您送行。 
English: Since you took office, the dogs have never barked at night, and the people have not been able to see the officials. In our old age, we met the Emperor of the Sacred Light, and now, we heard that you are going to abandon us, so we support each other and see you off.

古文：宠曰： 吾政何能及公言邪！
现代文：刘宠说： 我的政绩，哪里有您们所夸奖的那么好！
English: Liu Zhe said, "My political achievements are nowhere as good as you praise them to be!

古文：勤苦父老！ 
现代文：各位父老辛苦了！ 
English: You have worked hard!

古文：为人选一大钱受之。
现代文：为每人选一枚大钱收下。
English: He took a large piece of each man's money and accepted it.

古文：冬，先零、沈氐羌与诸种羌寇并、凉二州，校尉段颎将湟中义从讨之。
现代文：冬季，先零、沈氐羌和其他诸种羌人攻打并、凉二州，护羌校尉段率领湟中志愿从行的胡人部队前往讨伐。
English: In the winter, Xian Zi, Shen Zi and other kinds of Yao people attacked and conquered Liang Er Zhou, and Guo Zi captain Duan led the volunteer Hu troops to go to the crusade.

古文：凉州刺史郭闳贪共其功，稽固颎军，使不得进；义从役久恋乡旧，皆悉叛归。
现代文：凉州刺史郭闳，贪图分享段的功劳，故意拖住段的军队，使段无法前进。志愿从行的胡人部队因为服役的时间太久，思念故乡，全都起来反叛，逃归家乡。
English: Liangzhou's governor Guo Wei, eager to share the credit for the victory, deliberately held back the troops of the first section, making it impossible for the first section to advance. The volunteer Hu troops, because they had served for too long and missed their hometown, all rebelled and fled back to their hometown.

古文：郭闳归罪于颎，颎坐征下狱，输作左校，以济南相胡闳代为校尉。
现代文：郭闳把罪过推到段头上，段因罪被征回京都洛阳，投入监狱，被送往左校营罚作苦役。朝廷任命济南国相胡闳接任护羌校尉。
English: Guo Gan blamed the crime on Duan. Duan was recalled to Luoyang, Kyoto, for his crime, thrown into prison, and sent to Zuo School Camp for punishment and hard labor. The imperial court appointed Hu Yao, the governor of Jinan Province, to succeed Duan as the school captain.

古文：胡闳无威略，羌遂陆梁，覆没营坞，转相招结，唐突诸郡，寇患转盛。
现代文：胡闳既无威信，又没有谋略，诸种羌人于是气焰嚣张，不断攻陷军营和鄣塞，辗转招聚集结，在各郡之间横冲直撞，攻劫掠夺的祸患豹得严重起来。
English: Without any prestige or strategy, all kinds of bandits were full of arrogance, constantly attacking military camps and obstructing, turning tricks and gathering knots, and rampaging between counties. The scourge of robbery and plunder became serious.

古文：泰山太守皇甫规上疏曰： 今猾贼就灭，泰山略平，复闻群羌并皆反逆。
现代文：泰山郡太守皇甫规上书说： 现在，奸猾的盗贼已经就地剿灭，泰山郡大致恢复太平，又听说诸种羌人都同时反叛。
English: Taishan County Daju Wangfujing said in a letter: Now, the treacherous thieves have been annihilated on the spot, Taishan County has largely restored peace, and it is heard that all kinds of eunuchs have rebelled at the same time.

古文：臣生长邠岐，年五十有九，昔为郡吏，再更叛羌，豫筹其事，有误中之言。
现代文：我生长在山、岐山一带，今年五十九岁，过去曾任郡吏，经历过两次羌人叛乱，我曾事先筹划平乱，不幸而言中。
English: I am 59 years old. I used to be a county magistrate. After several rebellions, I often said the right thing.

古文：臣素有痼疾，恐犬马齿穷，不报大恩，愿乞冗官，备单车一介之使，劳来三辅，宣国威泽，以所习地形兵势佐助诸军。
现代文：我一向身患顽疾，恐怕自己象犬马一样牙齿掉尽，而不能报答皇上大恩，但愿陛下让我做一个有官阶而无职事的散官，给我备一辆车，我将做朝廷的使者，到三辅地区进行慰问和鼓励，宣扬朝廷的声威和恩德，用我所熟悉的地理形势知识和用兵的谋略帮助各军。
English: I have always suffered from an incurable disease, and I am afraid that I will lose my teeth like a dog and horse, and will not be able to repay the emperor's great kindness. I hope that His Majesty will make me a non-commissioned officer with a rank but no duties, prepare a car for me, and I will be an emissary of the imperial court, go to the Sanfu area to offer condolences and encouragement, promote the prestige and benevolence of the imperial court, and use my familiar knowledge of the geographical situation and the strategy of using soldiers to help the army.

古文：臣穷居孤危之中，坐观郡将已数十年，自鸟鼠至于东岱，其病一也。
现代文：我处于孤单危险的境地中，静坐观察郡太守已达数十年，从鸟鼠山到泰山，弊病全都一样。
English: I am in the dangerous situation of being alone. I have been sitting and observing the County Taishou for decades. From Bird Mouse Mountain to Mount Tai, the ills are all the same.

古文：力求猛敌，不如清平；勤明孙、吴，未若奉法。
现代文：与其着力访求勇猛的将领，不如施行清平的政治；与其精通孙子和吴起的兵书，不如郡太守奉公守法。
English: Instead of making efforts to visit the brave generals, it is better to implement a clean and peaceful politics; instead of being proficient in the military books of Sun Zi and Wu Zhi, it is better to be a county magistrate and abide by the law.

古文：前变未远，臣诚戚之，是以越职尽其区区。 
现代文：前次羌人反叛，距今时间并不很久，我的确为此而忧虑，所以，虽然已经超越了我的职责范围，仍尽量陈述我的意见。 
English: The last mutiny was not so long ago, and I am really worried about it, so, although I have gone beyond the scope of my duties, I still try to express my opinion.

古文：诏以规为中郎将，持节监关西兵讨零吾等。
现代文：于是桓帝下诏，任命皇甫规为中郎将，命他持节督察函谷关以西的军队，讨伐零吾等诸种羌人。
English: As a result, Emperor Kan issued an edict, appointing Emperor Hokyo as the middle-ranking general, and ordered him to hold a festival to inspect the army west of Hakodate, and to fight all kinds of barbarians such as us.

古文：十一月，规击羌，破之，斩首八百级。
现代文：十一月，皇甫规进击羌军，将其击破，斩杀八百人。
English: In November, Emperor Fu Jie marched into the Han army, defeated it, and killed 800 people.

古文：先零诸种羌慕规威信，相劝降者十馀万。
现代文：先零等诸种羌人敬慕皇甫规的威望和信誉，他们互相规劝，归降的有十余万人。
English: The first and the last, as well as all kinds of people, admired the prestige and credibility of Emperor Fu Zi. They persuaded each other, and more than one hundred thousand people surrendered.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下延熹五年春，正月，壬午，南宫丙署火。
现代文：延熹五年春季，正月壬午，南宫丙署失火。
English: In the spring of the fifth year of Yancheng, at noon on the first day of the first month, the Nan Gong C Station caught fire.

古文：三月，沈氐羌寇张掖、酒泉。
现代文：三月，沈氐种羌攻打张掖郡、酒泉郡，皇甫规征发先零等诸种羌，共同前往陇右地区进行讨伐。
English: In March, Shen Yigou raided Zhang Ye and Jiuquan.

古文：皇甫规发先零诸种羌，共讨陇右，而道路隔绝，军中大疫，死者十三四。
现代文：然而，道路已经被断绝，军中又流行瘟疫，死亡的人数达十分之三四。
English: However, the roads had been cut off, and there was a plague in the army, with the death toll reaching three-fourths.

古文：规亲入庵庐，巡视将士，三军感悦。
现代文：皇甫规亲自到各军营巡视和安抚将士，整个军队都感动得心悦诚服。
English: The emperor personally entered the hermitage to offer condolences to the soldiers, and the three armies were grateful and happy.

古文：东羌遂遣使乞降，凉州复通。
现代文：东羌于是派人前来请求投降，通往凉州的道路重新得到恢复。
English: Donglu sent an envoy to beg for surrender, but Liangzhou did not stop them.

古文：先是安定太守孙俊受取狼藉，属国都尉李翕、督军御史张禀多杀降羌，凉州刺史郭闳、汉阳太守赵熹并老弱不任职，而皆倚恃权贵，不遵法度。
现代文：在此以前，安定郡太守孙隽贪婪无厌，声名狼藉；属国都尉李翕、督军御史张禀，滥杀归降的羌人；凉州刺史郭闳、汉阳郡太守赵熹，又都年老软弱，不能胜任。可是，他们全部倚仗朝廷权贵的势力，不遵守法令和制度。
English: Prior to this, Sun Yat-sen, the governor of Anding County, was notorious for his insatiable greed; Li Yat-sen, the lieutenant of the state, and Zhang Yat-sen, the governor of the army, were notorious for their indiscriminate killing of subordinates; Guo Yat-sen, the governor of Liangzhou, and Zhao Yat-sen, the governor of Hanyang County, were old and weak, and not competent. However, they all relied on the power of the imperial court and did not comply with laws and systems.

古文：规到，悉条奏其罪，或免或诛。
现代文：皇甫规到职后，将他们的罪状一一上奏，进行弹劾。
English: After Emperor Fu Jie took office, he reported their charges one by one and impeached them.

古文：羌人闻之，翕然反善，沈氐大豪滇昌、饥恬等十馀万口复诣规降。
现代文：这些人有的被免官，有的被诛杀。羌人听到这个消息后，都一致改变态度，跟汉王朝亲善。沈氐羌大豪帅滇昌、饥恬等率领十余万人，再度向皇甫规投降。
English: Some of these people were dismissed from their posts, and some were killed. After hearing this news, the people of Hunan unanimously changed their attitude and became friendly with the Han Dynasty. The great warlords of Shenyang, such as Qichang and Hungzhen, led more than 100,000 people to surrender to the emperor once again.

古文：夏，四月，长沙贼起，寇桂阳、苍梧。
现代文：夏季，四月，长沙盗贼反叛，攻打桂阳郡、苍梧郡。
English: In the summer, in April, the Changsha thieves rebelled and attacked Guiyang County and Cangwu County.

古文：乙丑，恭陵东阙火。
现代文：乙丑，安帝陵园恭陵寝殿东门失火。
English: In the second case, a fire broke out on the east side of the gate of the Gong Mausoleum.

古文：戊辰，虎贲掖门火。
现代文：戊辰，虎贲卫士所在地的厕门失火。
English: At that time, a fire broke out at the gate next to the palace where Tigress was staying.

古文：五月，康陵园寝火。
现代文：五月，殇帝陵园康陵寝殿失火。
English: In May, the Kangling Garden caught fire.

古文：长沙、零陵贼入桂阳、苍梧、南海，交趾刺史及苍梧太守望风逃奔，遣御史中丞盛修督州郡募兵讨之，不能克。
现代文：长沙郡、零陵郡盗贼攻入桂阳、苍梧、南海等郡，交趾刺史和苍梧郡太守望风而逃。朝廷派遣御史中丞盛督率州郡募兵讨伐，未能取胜。
English: Thieves from Changsha County and Luling County invaded Guiyang, Cangwu, Nanhai and other counties, and fought with the governor of Cangwu County and the governor of Cangwu County, and fled. The imperial court sent the governor of Cangwu County, Zhi Zhongzheng, and the governor of Cangwu County to recruit soldiers, but failed to win.

古文：乙亥，京师地震。
现代文：乙亥，京都洛阳发生地震。
English: On the 18th, there was an earthquake in Kyoto.

古文：甲申，中藏府丞禄署火。
现代文：甲申，中藏府丞掌管的俸禄署失火。
English: A fire broke out at the Central Tibetan Administration's salary office in Jiaxing.

古文：秋，七月，己未，南宫承善闼火。
现代文：秋季，七月己未，南宫承善闼失火。
English: In autumn, before July is over, the Southern Palace Cheng Son Pagoda catches fire.

古文：鸟吾羌寇汉阳，陇西、金城诸郡兵讨破之。
现代文：鸟吾羌攻打汉阳，陇西、金城等郡军队将其讨伐击破。
English: Chou Wuqi attacked Hanyang, and the county armies of Shaanxi, Jincheng and other counties defeated his crusade.

古文：艾县贼攻长沙郡县，杀益阳令，众至万馀人；谒者马睦督荆州刺史刘度击之，军败，睦、度奔走。
现代文：艾县盗贼攻打长沙郡所属各县，杀死益阳县令，部众发展到一万余人。谒者马睦督率荆州刺史刘度前往讨伐，结果大败，马睦、刘度逃走。
English: Thieves from Ai County attacked the counties belonging to Changsha County, killed the governor of Yiyang County, and their followers grew to more than ten thousand people. The thief, Ma Mutsuko, led by Liu Du, the governor of Jingzhou, went to fight, but was defeated, and Ma Mutsuko and Liu Du fled.

古文：零陵蛮亦反。
现代文：零陵郡蛮人也起兵反叛。
English: The barbarians in Luling County also rebelled.

古文：冬，十月，武陵蛮反，寇江陵，南郡太守李肃奔走，主簿胡爽扣马首谏曰： 蛮夷见郡无儆备，故敢乘间而进。
现代文：冬季，十月，武陵蛮人起兵反叛，攻打江陵。南郡太守李肃逃跑，主簿胡爽拦住马头劝阻说： 蛮夷发现郡府没有戒备，所以敢乘隙进攻。
English: In the winter, in October, the barbarians of Wuling rebelled and attacked Jiangling. The governor of Nan County, Li Su, fled, and the chief secretary, Hu Shuang, stopped Ma Tou and dissuaded him, saying, "The barbarians found that the county seat was not guarded, so they dared to attack by taking advantage of a loophole."

古文：明府为国大臣，连城千里，举旗鸣鼓，应声十万，奈何委符守之重，而为逋逃之人乎！ 
现代文：阁下身为国家大臣，管辖的城池和地区，连接有千里之广，如果发出军令，高举大旗，擂响战鼓，可以有十万军队应声而来。怎么能抛弃剖符守土的重任，而做临阵脱逃的人呢？ 
English: Your Excellency, as a minister of state, the cities and regions under your jurisdiction are connected across thousands of miles. If you issue a military order, raise a large flag, and beat a war drum, you can have a hundred thousand troops come in response. How can you abandon the important task of protecting the land and become a person who escapes?

古文：肃拔刃向爽曰： 掾促去！
现代文：李肃抽刀直指胡爽说： 你快走开！
English: Li Su pulled out a knife, pointed it at Hu Shuang and said, "Get out of the way!

古文：太守今急，何暇此计！ 
现代文：我现在正急，哪有空谈这些？ 
English: I'm in a hurry. Where's the time to talk about this?

古文：爽抱马固谏，肃遂杀爽而走。
现代文：胡爽抱住马颈，执意进行劝阻，李肃就用佩刀杀死胡爽而逃。
English: Hu Shuang hugged Ma repeatedly to dissuade him, but Li Su actually killed Hu Shuang and fled.

古文：帝闻之，征肃，弃市；度、睦减死一等；复爽门闾，拜家一人为郎。
现代文：桓帝听到报告后，将李肃召回京都洛阳，在街市斩首示众。刘度、马睦被判处低于死刑一等的刑罚。免除胡爽全家的赋税徭役，并任命胡爽家一人为郎。
English: After hearing the report, Emperor Huan called Li Su back to Luoyang, Kyoto, and beheaded him in the market. Liu Du and Ma Mu were sentenced to a penalty lower than the death penalty. Hu Shuang's entire family was exempted from paying taxes, and only one member of the Hu Shuang family was appointed as a retainer.

古文：尚书硃穆举右校令山阳度尚为荆州刺史。
现代文：尚书朱穆向朝廷推荐右校令、山阳人度尚为荆州刺史。
English: Shangshu Zhu Mu recommended the right school order to the imperial court, and Shanyang People's Court was still the history of Jingzhou.

古文：辛丑，以太常冯绲为车骑将军，将兵十馀万讨武陵蛮。
现代文：辛丑，朝廷任命太常冯绲为车骑将军，率领大军十余万人，讨伐反叛的武陵郡蛮人。
English: In a cruel twist of fate, the imperial court appointed the all-too-common Feng Xuan as a cavalry general, leading an army of more than 100,000 people to fight the rebellious barbarians of Wuling County.

古文：先是，所遣将帅，宦官多陷以折耗军资，往往抵罪，绲愿请中常侍一人监军财费。
现代文：在此以前，朝廷所派遣的将帅，多被宦官以损耗军用物资的罪名而加以诬陷，并往往受到相应的处罚。冯绲于是请求桓帝派遣一位中常侍去监督军用财物的开支。
English: Prior to this, the generals sent by the imperial court were often framed by eunuchs on the charge of wasting military supplies, and were often punished accordingly. Feng Yu therefore requested Emperor Huan to send a middle-ranking attendant to supervise the expenditure of military property.

古文：尚书硃穆奏 绲以财自嫌，失大臣之节； 有诏勿劾。
现代文：尚书朱穆上书弹劾说： 冯绲躲避财物方面的嫌疑，有失大臣的节操。 桓帝下诏，不要弹劾。
English: Shangshu Zhumu wrote a letter of impeachment, saying: "Feng Xuan has evaded suspicion in terms of property, and has the discipline of a lost minister.

古文：绲请前武陵太守应奉与俱，拜从事中郎。
现代文：冯绲又向朝廷请求派遣前任武陵郡太守应奉和自己一道前往，任命他为从事中郎。
English: Feng Xuan also requested the imperial court to send the former Wuling County Governor Ying Bong to go with him and appointed him to be the middle man.

古文：十一月，绲军至长沙，贼闻之，悉诣营乞降。
现代文：十一月，冯绲所率领的军队抵达长沙，盗贼听到这个消息，都到军营请求投降。
English: In November, the army led by Feng Yu arrived in Changsha. When the thieves heard the news, they all went to the military camp to ask for surrender.

古文：进击武陵蛮夷，斩首四千馀级，受降十馀万人，荆州平定。
现代文：冯绲于是率领军队进击武陵郡蛮夷，斩杀四千余人，接受十余万人归降，荆州得以平定。
English: Feng Hui invaded Wuling barbarians, beheaded more than four thousand, suffered more than one hundred thousand people, and Jingzhou was able to be pacified.

古文：诏书赐钱一亿，固让不受，振旅还京师，推功于应奉，荐以为司隶校尉；而上书乞骸骨，朝廷不许。
现代文：桓帝下诏，赏给冯绲一亿钱，冯绲执意推辞，不肯接受。他振旅班师，返回京都洛阳，将功劳全都归于应奉，举荐应奉担任司隶校尉，而他自己却上书请求退休，朝廷没有批准。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict to award Feng Xuan 100 million yuan. Feng Xuan refused to accept the edict, insisting on withdrawing his resignation. He resigned as a traveling instructor and returned to Kyoto and Luoyang, attributing all the credit to Ying Bong and recommending Ying Bong to serve as an officer of the regiment. However, he submitted a letter requesting retirement, which was not approved by the imperial court.

古文：滇那羌寇武威、张掖、酒泉。
现代文：滇那羌攻打武威郡、张掖郡、酒泉郡。
English: The invaders plundered Wuwei, Zhangye and Jiuquan.

古文：太尉刘矩免，以太常杨秉为太尉。
现代文：太尉刘矩被免官，擢升太常杨秉为太尉。
English: Second Lieutenant Liu Rui was relieved of his duties, and Second Lieutenant Yang Bing was promoted.

古文：皇甫规持节为将，还督乡里，既无它私惠，而多所举奏，又恶绝宦官，不与交通。
现代文：皇甫规持节担任大军统帅，回到故乡，督率军政，既没有树立个人的私恩，反而不断举奏弹劾贪官污官，而且对宦官深恶痛绝，不跟他们结交往来。
English: Emperor Fuxi served as the commander-in-chief of the great army, returned to his hometown, and supervised the military and political affairs. He did not establish a personal personal favor, but constantly raised the impeachment of corrupt officials, and was deeply disgusted with eunuchs, and did not associate with them.

古文：于是中外并怨，遂共诬规货赂群羌，令其文降，帝玺书诮让相属。
现代文：当时朝廷和地方都对他有怨言，于是众人一同诬陷他用货财贿赂诸种叛羌，命令他们在表面上假装投降。因此，桓帝谴责他的诏书相继而来。
English: At that time, both the imperial court and localities had complaints against him, so everyone together framed him with goods and money to bribe all kinds of traitors and ordered them to pretend to surrender on the surface. Therefore, Emperor Huan's decrees condemning him came one after another.

古文：规上书自讼曰： 四年之秋，戎丑蠢戾，旧都惧骇，朝廷西顾。
现代文：皇甫规上书为自己辩解说： 去年秋季，西羌诸种蠢动，背叛朝廷，旧都长安恐惧震骇，朝廷深为西方的形势而担忧。
English: The emperor wrote a letter to justify himself, saying: Last autumn, Xidi made all kinds of stupid moves and betrayed the imperial court. The old capital Chang'an was terrified and shocked. The imperial court was deeply worried about the situation in the West.

古文：臣振国威灵，羌戎稽首，所省之费一亿以上。
现代文：我重振国家的声威，使诸种叛羌都低头请求归降，所节省的经费达一亿以上。
English: I reinvigorated the country's prestige, made all kinds of traitors bow their heads and beg for surrender, and saved more than 100 million yuan.

古文：以为忠臣之义不敢告劳，故耻以片言自及微效，然比方先事，庶免罪悔。
现代文：我认为这是忠臣应尽的义务，不敢向朝廷自称有功，所以，耻于以片言只语谈及自己的微薄贡献，然而，豹起前面那些败军之将，我也许可以无罪无悔。
English: I think this is the duty of a loyal subject, and I dare not claim any merit to the imperial court. Therefore, I am ashamed to talk about my meager contribution in a few words. However, I may not be guilty and have no regrets when I pick up those defeated generals in front.

古文：前践州界，先奏孙俊、李翕、张禀；旋师南征，又上郭闳、赵熹，陈其过恶，执据大辟。
现代文：当初，我一进入凉州境内，先行弹劾孙隽、李翕、张禀；随即率师南征，又弹劾郭闳、赵熹，列举他们的罪状，依据这些罪状，他们应被判处死刑。
English: At first, as soon as I entered the territory of Liangzhou, I first impeached Sun Qian, Li Qian and Zhang Qian; then I led the division southward, and also impeached Guo Qian and Zhao Qian, and listed their charges, according to which they should be sentenced to death.

古文：凡此五臣，支党半国，其馀墨绶下至小吏，所连及者复有百馀。
现代文：这五位臣子，党羽遍布半个中国，其余身佩黑色绶带印信的官员，直至小吏，所牵连的还有一百余人。
English: These five courtiers, the party feathers all over half of China, the rest of the officials wearing black ribbon seal letters, up to petty officials, there are more than a hundred people involved.

古文：吏托报将之怨，子思复父之耻，载贽驰车，怀粮步走，交构豪门，竞流谤讟，云臣私报诸羌，雠以钱货。
现代文：属吏借口要为长官报仇，儿子一心想为父亲雪耻，他们载着礼物，驾车奔驰，有的怀揣口粮，徒步前往，交结有权势的豪门，竞相散布诽谤谣言，说我私下贿赂反叛的羌人，用财物酬谢他们。
English: Under the pretext that their subordinate officers wanted to take revenge for their superiors, and their sons were bent on shaming their father, they carried gifts, drove in a Mercedes Benz, some carried rations, and traveled on foot, making contacts with powerful magnates, competing to spread slanderous rumors that I was secretly bribing the rebellious people of Handan and rewarding them with wealth.

古文：若臣以私财，则家无担石；如物出于官，则文簿易考。
现代文：假如说我用的是自己的私财，那么我家清贫，没有一石以上的存粮；如果说我用的是官府的财物，那么有官府的文书帐簿，很容易考查。
English: If I send something with my own money, I don't have any savings for stone-laying at home. If I send something from the public sector, there is a register to check.

古文：就臣愚惑，信如言者，前世尚遗匈奴以宫姬，镇乌孙以公主；今臣但费千万以怀叛羌，则良臣之才略，兵家之所贵，将有何罪负义违理乎！
现代文：特别让我疑惑不解的是，即令他们所说的都是真话，那么，前朝还把宫女赏赐给匈奴单于，将公主嫁到乌孙王国；而今，我不过仅仅花费一千万钱，却收到了怀柔和安抚叛羌的效果，这是良臣的才干，是军事家所推崇的谋略，又有什么罪过违背了义理？
English: What puzzled me in particular was that, even if what they said was true, the previous government had given the princess to the Xiongnu simply to marry her off to the Wusun Kingdom; but now, I had only spent ten million yuan, but had received the effect of appeasing and pacifying the rebels. This was the talent of a good minister, and was a strategy respected by military strategists. What was the sin of violating justice?

古文：自永初以来，将出不少，覆军有五，动资巨亿，有旋车完封，写之权门，而名成功立，厚加爵封。
现代文：并且，从安帝永初年间以来，朝廷派出的将帅不少，其中全军覆灭的就有五位，动用资财多达万万。有人在班师之日，将朝廷调拨给军队使用的钱币，连封条都没打开，就原封不动运回京都洛阳，直接送进权贵的家门。然而，他们却都名成功就，加官晋爵，得到丰厚的封赏。
English: Moreover, since the early years of Emperor Andiyong, there have been many generals sent by the imperial court. Among them, only five were destroyed, and they spent as much as tens of thousands of yuan. On the day of the inspection, someone transferred the coins allocated by the imperial court to the army for use, without even opening the seal, and they were transported back to Kyoto Luoyang without opening the original seal, and sent directly to the homes of the powerful. However, they were all successful, promoted to higher ranks, and received a rich reward.

古文：今臣还督本土，纠举诸郡，绝交离亲，戮辱旧故，众谤阴害，固其宜也！ 
现代文：而今我返回故乡，纠察和弹劾各郡的官吏，断绝和朋友、亲戚的关系，杀戮侮辱过去的老朋友，于是，招来众多的诽谤和暗害，的确是在情理之中。 
English: But now that I have returned to my hometown, picketed and impeached officials in various counties, severed relations with friends and relatives, killed and insulted old friends in the past, and thus attracted a lot of slander and conspiracy, it is indeed reasonable.

古文：帝乃征规还，拜议郎，论功当封；而中常侍徐璜、左悺欲从求货，数遣宾客就问功状，规终不答。
现代文：于是桓帝把皇甫规征召回京都洛阳，任命他为议郎，按照他的功勋，本来应该加封侯爵，可是中常侍徐璜、左却打算从中勒索财物，多次派遣宾客向皇甫规询问立功的情况，但皇甫规始终不肯出财物酬答。
English: As a result, Emperor Kuan summoned Emperor Houki back to Luoyang, Kyoto, and appointed him as a councillor. According to his merits, he should have been given the title of marquis. However, the middle attendants, Xu Xi and Zuo, intended to extort property from him. They repeatedly sent guests to ask Emperor Houki about the circumstances of his meritorious service, but Emperor Houki always refused to pay compensation.

古文：璜等忿怒，陷以前事，下之于吏。
现代文：于是徐璜等人恼羞成怒，重提前事进行诬陷，将皇甫规交付有关官吏审问治罪。
English: As a result, Xu Xi and others became angry and angry, repeated the false accusation in advance, and delivered the imperial edict to the relevant officials for interrogation and punishment.

古文：官属欲赋敛请谢，规誓而不听，遂以馀寇不绝，坐系廷尉，论输左校。
现代文：皇甫规的部属打算收集钱财送给徐璜等人，向他们道歉，但皇甫规誓不听从这种建议。于是，皇甫规就以没有肃清叛羌余众的罪名，被关押到廷尉狱，判处到左校服苦役的刑罚。
English: His subordinates planned to collect money and send it to Xu Xuan and others to apologize to them, but he vowed not to listen to such a suggestion. Therefore, he was arrested and sentenced to forced labor in Zuo School for the crime of failing to purge the remaining traitors.

古文：诸公及太学生张凤等三百馀人诣阙讼之，会赦，归家。
现代文：三公以及太学生张凤等三百余人，前往宫门为皇甫规诉冤。
English: More than three hundred people, including the three princes and the student Zhang Feng, went to the palace gate to appeal for the emperor.

古文：孝桓皇帝上之下延熹六年
现代文：正遇到朝廷颁布赦令，皇甫规才回到家中。延熹六年
English: Just as the Imperial Court was about to issue a pardon, Empress Fu Jie returned home. She died six years later.

古文：春，二月，戊午，司徒种暠薨。
现代文：春季，二月戊午，司徒种去世。
English: In the spring, in the afternoon of February, Szeto died.

古文：三月，戊戌，赦天下。
现代文：三月戊戌，大赦天下。
English: In March, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：以卫尉颍川许栩为司徒。
现代文：擢升卫尉、颍川人许栩为司徒。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Lieutenant of the Imperial Guard, and Hijikawa's son, Hideto, became an apprentice.

古文：夏，四月，辛亥，康陵东署火。
现代文：夏季，四月辛亥，康陵东署失火。
English: In the summer, in April of Xinhai, the Kangling East Station caught fire.

古文：五月，鲜卑寇辽东属国。
现代文：五月，鲜卑攻打辽东属国。
English: In May, the Xinbei corsair raided the Liaodong vassal state.

古文：秋，七月，甲申，平陵园寝火。
现代文：秋季，七月甲申，昭帝陵园平陵墓园寝殿失火。
English: In autumn, in July of Jiaxing, the sleeping hall of the Pingling Mausoleum of the Zhao Emperor's Mausoleum caught fire.

古文：桂阳贼李研等寇郡界，武陵蛮复反。太守陈奉讨平之。
现代文：桂阳郡贼李研等攻打郡界，武陵郡蛮族再度起兵反叛，太守陈举将他们讨平。
English: Li Yan, the bandit of Guiyang County, and others attacked the county boundary, and the barbarians of Wuling County rebelled again, and Chen Ju, the governor of Wuling County, defeated them.

古文：宦官素恶冯绲，八月，绲坐军还盗贼复发，免。
现代文：宦官一向憎恨冯绲，八月，冯绲因班师后盗贼重新起兵反叛而被问罪，免官。
English: The eunuchs always hated Feng Xuan. In August, Feng Xuan was found guilty and dismissed from his post for rebelling against the thieves after his shift.

古文：冬，十月，丙辰，上校猎广成，遂幸函谷关、上林苑。
现代文：冬季，十月丙辰，桓帝去广成苑打猎，随后临幸函谷关和上林苑。
English: In winter, in October, Emperor Huan went to Guangcheng Garden to hunt, and then went to Hanzhong Valley and Shanglin Garden.

古文：光禄勋陈蕃上疏谏曰： 安平之时，游畋宜有节，况今有三空之厄哉！
现代文：光禄勋陈番上书进谏说： 天下太平的时候，游猎还应当有节制，何开今天有 三空 的严重灾难呢！
English: "When the world is at peace, hunting should still be restrained, so why is there a serious disaster in the Three Skies today?

古文：田野空，朝廷空，仓库空。
现代文：农田空，朝廷空，仓库空。
English: Farmland is empty, the imperial court is empty, warehouses are empty.

古文：加之兵戎未戢，四方离散，是陛下焦心毁颜，坐以待旦之时也，岂宜扬旗曜武，骋心舆马之观乎！
现代文：加上战事没有停止，四方人民逃亡，正是陛下忧心如焚，损毁容颜，坐等天明的时候，怎么能够扬旗耀武，把心思用到驾着车马观光上呢！
English: In addition to the fact that the war has not stopped and the people in all four directions have fled, it is His Majesty who is worried and worried, his face is ruined, and when he is waiting for the dawn, how can he raise the banner and use his mind to drive the car and horse sightseeing!

古文：又前秋多雨，民始种麦，今失其劝种之时，而令给驱禽除路之役，非贤圣恤民之意也。 
现代文：而且，先前秋季多雨，农民才开始种麦，而今失去鼓励他们耕种的时机，而命令他们供应驱赶禽兽、修筑道路的劳役，这不是圣贤体恤人民的本意。 
English: Moreover, it is not the intention of sages and sages to sympathize with the people by ordering them to provide laborers to drive away animals and build roads, when it was raining in the autumn and farmers had just begun to grow wheat. Now they have lost the opportunity to encourage them to cultivate.

古文：书奏，不纳。
现代文：奏章呈上，桓帝不采纳。
English: Emperor Kanto did not approve of the play.

古文：十一月，司空刘宠免。
现代文：十一月，司空刘宠被免官。
English: In November, Secretary Liu Jie was relieved of his duties.

古文：十二月，以卫尉周景为司空。
现代文：十二月，擢升卫尉周景为司空。
English: In December, Guards Lieutenant Zhou Jing was promoted to Air Vice Marshal.

古文：景，荣之孙也。
现代文：周景是周荣的孙子。
English: Zhou Jing is Zhou Rong's grandson.

古文：时宦官方炽，景与太尉杨秉上言： 内外吏职，多非其人。
现代文：这时，宦官的势力正象烈火一样炽盛，周景和太尉杨秉上书说： 朝廷和地方官府的官吏，有很多人都不是合适的人选。
English: At this time, the power of eunuchs was blazing like a fire. Zhou Jing and Lieutenant Yang Bing wrote: There are many officials in the imperial court and local government offices who are not suitable candidates.

古文：旧典，中臣子弟，不得居位秉势；而今枝叶宾客，布列职署，或年少庸人，典据守宰；上下忿患，四方愁毒。
现代文：按照过去的典章制度，宦官子弟不准许担任官职，掌握权力。可是如今宦官的亲戚和宾客遍布各级官府；有些年纪轻轻而才能平庸的人，也都担任郡太守或县令、长等地方要职。上下怨愤，四方愁惨。
English: According to the previous code system, the children of eunuchs were not allowed to hold official positions and wield power. However, nowadays, the relatives and guests of eunuchs are all over government offices at all levels; some young and mediocre people also hold important local positions such as county governors, county magistrates, and mayors. There is resentment from all sides, and all sides are sad.

古文：可遵用旧章，退贪残，塞灾谤。
现代文：应该遵守传统的法令规章，斥退贪婪和凶残之人以堵塞天象变异和人民的非议。
English: Traditional laws and regulations should be observed, and greedy and cruel people should be repelled to block the changes of the celestial phenomena and the criticism of the people.

古文：请下司隶校尉、中二千石、城门、五营校尉、北军中候，各实核所部；应当斥罢，自以状言三府，兼察有遗漏，续上。 
现代文：请求陛下命令司隶校尉、中二千石官员、城门和五营校尉、北军中候，各自切实清查自己的部属，应当斥退和罢黜的，自动将情况呈报给太尉、司徒、司空等三府，如果发现还有遗漏，再继续向上呈报。 
English: I request Your Majesty to order the captain of Sili, the officer of the middle school of 2,000 koku, the captain of the city gate and five battalions, and the junior officer of the Northern Army to each thoroughly investigate their subordinates, and if they should be expelled or dismissed, they will automatically report the situation to the captain, Sito, Sikuo and other three prefectures, and if there are any omissions found, they will continue to report to the top.

古文：帝从之。
现代文：桓帝采纳。
English: The emperor obeyed.

古文：于是秉条奏牧、守、青州刺史羊亮等五十馀人，或死或免，天下莫不肃然。
现代文：于是，杨秉上书逐条弹劾青州刺史羊亮等州牧和郡太守五十余人，他们有的被诛杀，有的被免官，天下人无不肃然起敬。
English: As a result, Yang Bing wrote a piece-by-piece impeachment of more than 50 state pastors and county governors such as Qingzhou Zhishi Yangliang. Some of them were killed, some were dismissed, and the whole world was awestruck.

古文：诏征皇甫规为度辽将军。
现代文：桓帝下诏征召皇甫规，任命他为度辽将军。
English: Emperor Kuan issued an edict to conscript Emperor Fuxi and appointed him as General Du Liao.

古文：初，张奂坐梁冀故吏，免官禁锢，凡诸交旧，莫敢为言；唯规荐举，前后七上，由是拜武威太守。
现代文：当初，张奂因被指控为梁冀的旧属而遭到免官和终身不准再出来做官的惩罚，他的故交老友没有一个人胆敢为他说话，只有皇甫规向朝廷推荐张奂，前后一连呈递了七次奏章，朝廷因而任命张奂为武威郡太守。
English: At first, Zhang Ye was accused of being Liang Jie's former subordinate and was punished by being dismissed from his post and banned from holding public office for life. None of his old friends dared to speak for him. Only the emperor recommended Zhang Ye to the imperial court. He submitted seven reports in succession, and the imperial court appointed Zhang Ye as the governor of Wuwei County.

古文：及规为度辽，到营数月，上书荐奂， 才略兼优，宜正元帅，以从众望。
现代文：及至皇甫规为度辽将军，到军营数月后，便向朝廷推荐张奂说： 才能和谋略都很优秀，应该担任大军统帅的重任，以顺从众人的期望。
English: A few months after he arrived at the military camp, he recommended Zhang Xuan to the imperial court, saying, "Your talent and strategy are excellent. You should assume the important task of the commander of a large army in order to comply with the expectations of many people."

古文：若犹谓愚臣宜充举事者，愿乞冗官，以为奂副。 
现代文：如果认为我还适合担任军职，就请给让我当一个只有官阶没有职事的散官，做张奂副手。 
English: If you think that I am still suitable to serve in the military, please let me be a non-commissioned officer with only a rank and no duties, and make me the deputy of Zhang Xuan.

古文：朝廷从之。以奂代规为度辽将军，以规为使匈奴中郎将。
现代文：朝廷采纳皇甫规的建议，任命张奂接替皇甫规担任度辽将军，任命皇甫规为使匈奴中郎将。
English: The Imperial Court accepted the suggestion of the Emperor Fu Gui and appointed Zhang Xi to succeed the Emperor Fu Gui as General Du Liao, and appointed the Emperor Fu Gui as the General of the Xiongnu.

古文：西州吏民守阙为前护羌校尉段颎讼冤者甚众，会滇那等诸种羌益炽，凉州几亡，乃复以颎为护羌校尉。
现代文：西方州郡的官吏和百姓，守在宫门为前任护羌校尉段诉冤的人很多；正遇到滇那等诸部羌人的势力日益强盛，凉州几乎灭亡，于是朝迁重新任命段为护羌校尉。
English: There were many officials and common people from Xizhou County who stayed at the palace gate to sue for the grievances of the former guard captain Duan. Faced with the increasingly powerful forces of various departments such as Jina, Liangzhou almost perished, so the court moved to reappoint Duan as the guard captain.

古文：尚书硃穆疾宦官恣横，上疏曰： 按汉故事，中常侍参选士人，建武以后，乃悉用宦者。
现代文：尚书朱穆痛恨宦官集团的恣意专横，上书说： 按照汉朝的传统制度，中常侍并非全是宦官，也参选士人担任。从光武帝建武年间以后，才全部任用宦官。
English: Shangshu Zhu Mu hated the arbitrariness of the eunuch clique, and wrote: According to the traditional system of the Han Dynasty, the middle chamberlains were not all eunuchs, but also candidates for the position of eunuch. From the time of Emperor Guangwu Jianwu, all eunuchs were appointed.

古文：自延平以来，浸益贵盛，假貂珰之饰，处常伯之任，天朝政事，一更其手。权倾海内，宠贵无极，子弟亲戚，并荷荣任。放滥骄溢，莫能禁御，穷破天下，空竭小民。
现代文：自殇帝延平年间以来，宦官的地位一天比一天尊贵，他们的权势也元来越大，帽子上截着金，貂尾垂到右侧，身居侍中的重任，凡是朝廷的政事，一律要经过他们的手；权力大得可以倾覆全国，宠信和尊贵无与伦比，他们的子弟和亲戚，都担负着荣耀的职务，肆意骄纵专横，谁都无法控制和驾驭，致使天下穷困，小民枯竭。
English: Since the reign of Emperor Yanping, the status of eunuchs has become more and more honorable day by day, and their power has also increased. Their hats are trimmed with gold, and their appendages hang down to the right side. They hold important positions as attendants. All the political affairs of the imperial court must pass through their hands. Their power is so great that they can overthrow the whole country. Their favor and dignity are incomparable. Their children and relatives all hold glorious positions. They are wantonly arrogant and despotic, and no one can control and drive them, resulting in poverty in the world and the depletion of the common people.

古文：愚臣以为可悉罢省，遵复往初，更选海内清淳之士明达国体者，以补其处，即兆庶黎萌，蒙被圣化矣！ 
现代文：我认为应该将他们全都罢黜，恢复从前的制度，重新选择天下高洁淳朴而又通晓国家制度的人士，来补任留下的官位，这样，使黎民百姓就都能受到圣明的教化了！ 
English: I think that all of them should be dismissed, the previous system should be restored, and people who are noble and simple and familiar with the national system should be re-elected to fill the remaining positions, so that the people of Lebanon can all be enlightened by the Holy Light!

古文：帝不纳。
现代文：桓帝不肯采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：后穆因进见，复口陈曰： 臣闻汉家旧典，置侍中、中常侍各一人，省尚书事；黄门侍郎一人，传发书奏；皆用姓族。
现代文：后来，朱穆有事进见，又口头向桓帝陈述说： 我听说汉朝的传统制度，设置侍中、中常侍名一人，负责省览尚书呈报皇帝的奏章；设置黄门侍郎一人，传达皇帝的命令，收受臣下的奏章，全都选用有声望的家族出身的人士。
English: Later, Zhu Mu had an insight into the matter, and verbally stated to Emperor Huan: I heard that the traditional system of the Han Dynasty, setting up an attendant and a regular attendant to be responsible for reviewing and reporting the emperor's medals; setting up a Yellow Gate attendant to convey the emperor's orders and receive the medals of his subjects, all selected people from prestigious families.

古文：自和熹太后以女主称制，不接公卿，乃以阉人为常侍，小黄门通命两宫。
现代文：自从和熹太后以女主的地位主持朝政，不跟三公和九卿接触，于是用宦官担任常侍，由小黄门奔走于皇宫和后宫之间。
English: Empress Dowager Zi and Empress Dowager Yao were styled as empresses, they did not receive court nobles, they used eunuchs as attendants, and Xiao Huangmen was in charge of the two palaces.

古文：自此以来，权倾人主，穷困天下，宜皆罢遣，博选耆儒宿德，与参政事。 
现代文：从此以后，宦官的权力压倒人主，使天下困苦。应该将掌权的宦官全部罢黜遣退，广选年老博学而又有德望的儒者参与政事。 
English: From then on, the power of the eunuchs overpowered the people and made the world a misery. All eunuchs in power should be dismissed, and old, learned, and respected Confucians should be widely elected to participate in politics.

古文：帝怒，不应。
现代文：桓帝勃然大怒，不肯应允。
English: The emperor was furious and did not agree.

古文：穆伏不肯起，左右传 出！ 
现代文：朱穆伏在地上，不肯起来。桓帝左右的人传命： 出去！ 
English: Zhu Mu prostrated himself on the ground, refusing to get up. The people around Emperor Huan gave the order: Get out!

古文：良久，乃趋而去。
现代文：过了很久，朱穆才快步离去。
English: It was a long time before Zhu Mu left at a brisk pace.

古文：自此中官数因事称诏诋毁之。
现代文：从此以后，宦官多次借故用皇帝的名义对朱穆进行诋毁。
English: Since then, the lieutenant-general has repeatedly denigrated Zhu Mu for the incident.

古文：穆素刚，不得意，居无几，愤懑发疽卒。
现代文：朱穆一向性格刚直，很不如意，过了不久，因愤恨和郁闷而生毒疮，身死。
English: Zhu Mu had always been an upright character, but he was very unhappy. Soon after, he developed poisonous sores due to resentment and depression, and died.

