古文：段颜段秀实，字成公，本姑臧人。曾祖师濬，仕为陇州刺史，留不归，更为汧阳人。
现代文：段秀实字成公，本是姑臧人，他的曾祖父师浚，出任陇州刺史，留在那里没有回家乡，于是变为阳籍人。
English: Duan Xiushi, originally from Gushan, became a prince. His great-grandfather Shijun, who served as the governor of Zhangzhou, stayed there and did not return to his hometown, so he became a male citizen.

古文：秀实六岁，母疾病，不勺饮至七日，病间乃肯食，时号 孝童 。
现代文：秀实六岁时，母亲病重，他急得七天不吃不喝，母亲病情好转才肯吃饭，当时人们称他为 孝童 。
English: When Xiushi was six years old, his mother was seriously ill. He was so anxious that he didn't eat or drink for seven days. It was only when his mother's condition improved that he was willing to eat. At that time, people called him a filial child.

古文：及长，沈厚能断，慨然有济世意。
现代文：到长大了，深沉忠厚，能决断，慷慨激昂有救天下的志向。
English: When he grows up, he will be deeply loyal, decisive, and impassioned with the ambition to save the world.

古文：举明经，其友易之，秀实曰： 搜章擿句，不足以立功。 
现代文：被推荐为明经，他的朋友轻视他，秀实说： 搜章摘句，凭这本事不能为国立功。 
English: His friends despised him, and Shusheng said: "He can't be awarded the National Merit Award for his ability to collect chapter excerpts.

古文：乃弃去。
现代文：就放弃了。
English: I just gave up.

古文：天宝四载，从安西节度使马灵詧讨护密有功，授安西府别将。
现代文：玄宗天宝四年，跟随安西节度使马灵鮞征伐护蜜有功，任安西别将。
English: Xuanzong Tianbao served for four years. Following the Anxi Festival, he made a great contribution to the conquest and protection of honey in Malingyi, and was appointed as the Anxi General.

古文：灵詧罢，又事高仙芝。
现代文：灵鮞罢官后，又跟随高仙芝。
English: After Lingya retired, he followed Gao Xianzhi.

古文：仙芝讨大食，围怛逻斯城。会虏救至，仙芝兵却，士相失。
现代文：仙芝征伐大食，围困了怛逻斯城，碰到敌人救兵来了，仙芝的军队撤退，部下都失散了。
English: Xian Zhi conquered Taifeng, besieged the city of Qiluos, encountered the enemy and came to the rescue, Xian Zhi's army retreated, and his subordinates were dispersed.

古文：秀实夜闻副将李嗣业声，识之，因责曰： 惮敌而奔，非勇也；免己陷众，非仁也。 
现代文：秀实在暗夜中听到副将李嗣业的声音，认出他，就批评他说： 害怕敌人而逃跑，是不勇敢，为了自己脱险而让大家陷入危难，是不仁义。 
English: In the middle of the night, Xiuzhen heard the voice of Vice Admiral Li Shigeye, recognized him, and criticized him, saying, "It is not brave to run away in fear of the enemy, and it is not fair to let everyone fall into danger in order to escape.

古文：嗣业惭，乃与秀实收散卒，复成军，还安西，请秀实为判官。迁陇州大推府果毅。
现代文：嗣业听了很惭愧。于是与秀实召集逃散的士兵，又组成了军队，回到安西，请秀实任判官，接着升任陇州大堆府果毅。
English: He was very ashamed to hear this, so he and Hidemitsu gathered the soldiers who had run away and formed an army. They returned to Anxi and asked Hidemitsu to serve as a judge, after which he was promoted to Daduifu Koki of Zhangzhou.

古文：后从封常清讨大勃律，次贺萨劳城，与虏战，胜之。常清逐北，秀实曰： 贼出羸师，饵我也，请大索。 
现代文：后随封常清征伐大勃律，驻扎在贺萨劳城，与敌人作战打胜了，常清追击败兵，秀实说： 敌人派出老弱的士兵，是引诱我方，请大规模搜索。 
English: After that, he followed Feng Changqing's campaign to conquer the Great Brood, and was stationed in the city of Hesalao. He fought with the enemy and won. Changqing chased and defeated the soldiers. Husi said: The enemy sent old and weak soldiers to lure us. Please conduct a large-scale search.

古文：悉得其廋伏，虏师唧。
现代文：搜获了所有伏兵，敌人全军溃败。
English: All the ambush soldiers were captured and the entire enemy army was routed.

古文：改绥德府折冲都尉。
现代文：这之后，改任绥德府折冲都尉。
English: After that, he was reassigned to the post of Shunde Prefecture Orizucho captain.

古文：肃宗在灵武，诏嗣业以安西兵五千走行在。
现代文：肃宗在灵武避难，下诏调李嗣业率五千安西军到自己行宫。
English: Su Zong took refuge in Lingwu, and ordered Li Shigeye to lead five thousand Anxi troops to his own palace.

古文：节度使梁宰欲逗留观变，嗣业阴然可。秀实责谓曰： 天子方急，臣下乃欲晏然，公常自称大丈夫，今诚儿女耳。 
现代文：节度使梁宰想逗留观望形势的变化，李嗣业暗中答应了，秀实责备他说： 天子正危急，臣子却想安逸，你经常自称为大丈夫，现在真如同妇孺！ 
English: The festival made Liang Zai want to stay and wait for the situation to change. Li Siye secretly agreed, and Shuxi scolded him: The emperor is in a critical situation, but the vassal wants to be at ease. You often say you are fine, now you are really like a woman and child!

古文：嗣业因固请宰，遂东师，以秀实为副。
现代文：嗣业因此坚决请求梁宰发兵。于是向东进兵，用秀实为副帅。
English: As a result, Tsugyo firmly requested Liang Zai to send an army. He then marched eastward, with Xiushi as his second-in-command.

古文：嗣业为节度使，而秀实方居父丧，表起为义王友，充节度判官。
现代文：李嗣业任节度使，秀实正守父丧，嗣业上表起用他为义王的助手，充任节度使判官。
English: Li Shigeye was appointed as the festival envoy, while Xiushi was attending his father's funeral. He was formally appointed as the assistant of the righteous king and served as the festival envoy judge.

古文：安庆绪奔鄴，嗣业与诸将围之，以辎重委河内，署秀实兼怀州长史，知州事，兼留后。
现代文：安庆绪奔逃到邺城，李嗣业与众将领围困了他，把作战物资放在河内，安排秀实兼怀州长史，主持怀州事务，还兼留后。
English: An Qingxu fled to Baicheng, but Li Siyuan and his generals besieged him, placed war materials in Hanoi, and arranged for Xiushi to become governor of Huai, preside over the affairs of Huai, and stay behind.

古文：时师老财覂，秀实督馈系道，募士市马以助军。
现代文：当时军队疲劳，钱粮缺少，秀实接连不断地督运粮草，招兵买马，充实前线军队。
English: At that time, the army was fatigued, money and grain were in short supply, and Xiushi continuously supervised the transportation of grain and grass, recruited soldiers and horses, and enriched the front-line army.

古文：诸军战愁思冈，嗣业中流矢卒，众推荔非元礼代将其军。
现代文：各路军队在愁思岗激战，李嗣业中流箭阵亡，众将推举荔非元礼代管嗣业的军队。
English: The armies on all sides fought fiercely at Shuxigang, Li Shigeye was killed in the middle of the battle, and the army of Li Fei Yuan, the deputy of Shigeye, was elected by the people.

古文：秀实闻之，即遗白孝德书，使发卒护丧送河内，亲与将吏迎诸境，倾私财葬之。
现代文：秀实听到这件事，立即送信给白孝德，让他派兵护送嗣业的灵柩到河内，秀实亲自与文武官员到县境迎接，并拿出全部私人钱财给嗣业办丧事。
English: Upon hearing of this, Hsü-sü immediately sent a message to Paik Hsü-de, asking him to send soldiers to escort Heir's coffin to Hanoi. Hsü-sü personally went to the county border with civil and military officials to greet the coffin, and took out all of his private money to pay for Heir's funeral.

古文：元礼高其义，奏擢试光禄少卿。
现代文：元礼推崇他的义气，奏请朝廷提升他为光禄少卿。
English: The Yuan Li respected his loyalty and petitioned the imperial court to promote him to the rank of Guanglu Shaoqing.

古文：俄而元礼为麾下所杀，将佐多死，惟秀实以恩信为士卒所服，皆罗拜不敢害，更推白孝德为节度使。
现代文：不久元礼被部下所杀，下属将领也被杀多人，只有秀实因为为人恩义诚信，被士兵们敬服，都在他的周围跪拜，不敢杀害他，将士们另外推举白孝德任节度使。
English: Soon after, Yuan Li was killed by his subordinates, and many of his subordinate generals were also killed. Only Xiushi was honored by the soldiers because of his kindness and honesty. They all knelt around him, not daring to kill him, and the generals also nominated Bai Xiaodong to be the envoy of the festival.

古文：秀实凡佐三府，益知名。
现代文：秀实共辅佐三任节度使，更加知名。
English: Hidemitsu was a co-assistant to the third chief of the Imperial Household Agency, and is even better known.

古文：时吐蕃袭京师，代宗幸陕，劝孝德即日鼓行入援。
现代文：当时吐蕃偷袭京城，代宗走避陕州，秀实劝孝德当日就进军救援。
English: At that time, Tubo secretly attacked Beijing, Daizong avoided Shaanxi, and Xiushi advised Xiaode to go to the rescue on the same day.

古文：孝德徙邠宁，署支度营田副使。
现代文：孝德移军宁，命秀实代理支度营田副使。
English: Filial piety moved Junning, and the deputy envoy of Yingtian, acting as the agent of preparation, was appointed.

古文：于是邠宁乏食，乃请屯奉天，仰给畿内。
现代文：这时宁缺粮，于是请求在奉天驻军，想仰仗京城郊县供应粮草。
English: At this time, Ning was short of grain, so he asked for troops to be stationed in Fengtian and wanted to rely on the suburbs of Beijing to supply grain and grass.

古文：时公廪竭，县吏不知所出，皆逃去，军辄散剽，孝德不能制。
现代文：当时国家粮仓空虚，县府官吏真不知道从哪里弄粮草供应军队，都逃走了，军队就散开抢掠，孝德制止不住。
English: At that time, the national granary was empty, the county government officials really did not know where to get grain and grass to supply the army, and they all fled. The army spread out to loot and pillage, and filial piety could not stop them.

古文：秀实曰： 使我为军候，岂至是邪？ 
现代文：秀实说 ：如果任用我做军侯，哪能乱到这地步呢？ 
English: Hidemitsu said, "If I am appointed military governor, how can things get so out of hand?"

古文：司马王稷言之，遂知奉天行营事。号令严壹，军中畏戢。
现代文：司马王稷报告了这事，于是令秀实掌管奉天行营的军务，号令严明，军中畏惧，停止违纪。
English: Sima Wangye reported the matter, so he ordered Xiuxi to take charge of the military affairs of the Fengtianxing camp, issue strict orders, instill fear in the army, and stop violating discipline.

古文：兵还，孝德荐为泾州刺史，封张掖郡王。
现代文：回师后，孝德推荐秀实任泾州刺史，朝廷封他为张掖郡王。
English: After returning to his teacher, Xiaode recommended that Xiuxi be appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the court made him the king of Zhangye County.

古文：时郭子仪为副元帅，居蒲，子晞以检校尚书领行营节度使，屯邠州。士放纵不法，邠人之嗜恶者，纳贿窜名伍中，因肆志，吏不得问。
现代文：这时候郭子仪以副元帅的职位驻扎蒲州，他的儿子郭以检校尚书的职位任行营节度使，驻扎州，放纵士兵，不守法纪，州中一贯作恶的人，行使贿赂，在军队里挂个名，混个军籍，就肆意胡为，地方官吏不能过问。
English: At this time, Guo Ziyi was stationed in Puzhou with the post of deputy marshal, and his son Guo was stationed in the state with the post of inspector of schools and books and served as a camp commander, indulging soldiers, not abiding by laws and regulations, consistently committing evil in the state, exercising bribery, hanging a name in the army, mixing a military record, and acting wantonly, and local officials could not ask questions.

古文：白昼群行丐颉于市，有不嗛，辄击伤市人，椎釜鬲甕盎盈道，至撞害孕妇。
现代文：他们白昼结伙在街上强索市民财物，不满意，就打伤市民，砸碎的锅盆碗盏，满街皆是，甚至撞伤撞死孕妇。
English: During the day, they gang up on the streets to extort citizens' property. When they are not satisfied, they injure citizens, smash pots and pans, fill the streets, and even injure and kill pregnant women.

古文：孝德不敢劾，秀实自州以状白府，愿计事，至则曰： 天子以生人付公治，公见人被暴害，恬然，且大乱，若何？ 
现代文：孝德不敢治他们的罪，秀实从泾州写信告诉白孝德，希望能谋划这事，到节度使府就说： 天子把老百姓交给您治理，您看见百姓被残害，却无动于衷。将来出大乱子，怎么办？ 
English: Xiaode did not dare to punish them for their sins. Xiushi wrote a letter to Bai Xiaode from Zhangzhou, hoping to plan the matter. At the festival, he sent a message to the government, saying, "God has entrusted the people to your governance. You see the people being destroyed, but you are indifferent. What if there is a big disturbance in the future?

古文：孝德曰： 愿奉教。 
现代文：孝德说 ：请教给我办法。 
English: Takanori said, "Please teach me how to do it."

古文：因请曰： 秀实不忍人无寇暴死，乱天子边事。
现代文：秀实趁机请求说： 我不忍心没有敌人侵犯而百姓被残害死，扰乱天子的边防。
English: Husi took the opportunity to plead: "I can't bear not to have the enemy invade while the people are being killed and maimed, disrupting the border defense of Tianzi.

古文：公诚以为都虞候，能为公已乱。 
现代文：您果真让我任都虞候，便可替您结束祸乱。 
English: If you really let me wait, I can end the calamity for you.

古文：孝德即檄署付军。
现代文：孝德就写了文告签了名，张贴在军中。
English: Xiaode wrote a statement, signed it, and posted it in the army.

古文：俄而晞士十七人入市取酒，刺酒翁，坏酿器，秀实列卒取之，断首置槊上，植市门外。
现代文：不一会，郭的十七个士兵到街上买酒，刺伤卖酒的老头，捣毁了酿酒的器具，秀实摆开士兵，逮捕了他们，并斩首，将头挂在长矛上，竖在街口示众。
English: Not long after, Guo's seventeen soldiers went to the street to buy liquor, stabbed the old man selling liquor, destroyed the equipment for making liquor, bravely opened the soldiers, arrested them, and beheaded them, hung their heads on spears, and displayed them at the street entrance.

古文：一营大噪，尽甲，孝德恐，召秀实曰： 奈何？ 
现代文：郭的整个军营鼓噪起来了，士兵都穿上铠甲。孝德害怕，叫来秀实说 ：怎么办？ 
English: Guo's entire military camp was in an uproar, and the soldiers all put on their armor. Xiaode was afraid and called Xiu Sheng to say, "What should we do?"

古文：秀实曰： 请辞于军。 
现代文：秀实说 ：让我到军中去说说。 
English: Shusho said, "Let me go to the army and talk about it."

古文：乃解佩刀，选老鐍一人持马，至晞门下。甲者出，秀实笑且入，曰： 杀一老卒，何甲也！吾戴头来矣。 
现代文：于是解下佩刀，选一个又老又跛的兵牵马，到郭军营门口，穿着铠甲的士兵都围上来，秀实笑着走入军营，说： 杀一个老迈的兵，还用穿甲衣，我戴着头来了。 
English: So he unsheathed his sword, chose an old and haggard soldier to lead the horse, and went to the gate of the Guo military camp. The soldiers wearing armor surrounded him and walked into the military camp with a smile, saying: "Kill an old soldier, and wear armor, I'm wearing my head."

古文：甲为愕眙。
现代文：穿甲衣的士兵惊愕地瞪着眼。
English: The armour-clad soldiers stared in amazement.

古文：因晓之曰： 尚书固负若属邪，副元帅固负若属邪？
现代文：秀实趁机开导说 ：尚书一向对不起你们吗？副元帅一向对不起你们吗？
English: Hidemitsu took the opportunity to enlighten them, saying, "Has Shangshu always been sorry for you? Has the vice marshal always been sorry for you?

古文：奈何欲以乱败郭氏！ 
现代文：怎么想制造祸乱败坏郭家呢？ 
English: How could they want to create havoc and corrupt the Guo family?

古文：晞出，秀实曰： 副元帅功塞天地，当务始终。今尚书恣卒为暴，使乱天子边，欲谁归罪？
现代文：郭出来，秀实说： 副元帅功满天下，应该保持始终，现在尚书放纵士兵做残害百姓的事，让他们扰乱天子的边防，将归罪于谁？
English: Guo came out and said to Xiushi, "The vice-marshal's achievements have spread all over the world and should be maintained forever. Now, if you allow soldiers to do things that harm the people and let them disrupt the border defense of Tianzi, who will be blamed?

古文：罪且及副元帅。
现代文：将归罪到副元帅。
English: The vice-marshal will be blamed.

古文：今邠恶子弟以货窜名军籍中，杀害人，藉藉如是，几日不大乱？
现代文：现在州的恶少行使贿赂，在军籍中混个名，杀人害命，混乱到了这个地步，还有几天边防不大乱？
English: At present, the state's evil few are exercising bribery, mixing names in the military register, killing and killing, the chaos has reached this level, and there are still a few days before the border is not chaotic?

古文：乱由尚书出。
现代文：这乱子是尚书造成的！
English: This mess was caused by Shang Shu!

古文：人皆曰：尚书以副元帅故不戢士。然则郭氏功名，其与存者有几！ 
现代文：人们都说尚书仗着副元帅的权势不制止士兵胡为，那么郭家的功劳荣誉将有多少能保存？ 
English: People say that Shang Shuxu, relying on the power of the vice-marshal, did not stop the soldiers from doing wrong, so how much of the Guo family's merit and honor will be preserved?

古文：晞再拜曰： 公幸教，晞愿奉军以从。 
现代文：郭向秀实拜了两拜，说： 幸亏您教导我，愿意让全军服从你的管束！ 
English: Guo Xiangxiu bowed twice and said: "Thanks to you teaching me, I am willing to let the whole army obey your discipline!"

古文：即叱左右皆解甲，令曰： 敢喧者死！ 
现代文：立即呵斥左右的士兵都脱下甲衣，下令说： 敢喧哗者死！ 
English: He immediately yelled at the soldiers on both sides to take off their armor and ordered: "Death to those who dare to make noise!"

古文：秀实曰： 吾未晡食，请设具。 
现代文：秀实说： 我没有吃午饭，请安排我吃饭。 
English: "I haven't had lunch, please make arrangements for me to have a meal," she said.

古文：已食，曰： 吾疾作，愿宿门下。 遂卧军中。
现代文：饭后，又说： 我的病发了，希望在你营中住。 
English: And it came to pass after they had eaten, that he said, I am sick at heart, I will abide in thy camp.

古文：晞大骇，戒候卒击柝卫之。
现代文：于是就睡在军营中，郭非常害怕，告诫放哨的士兵敲梆保护他。
English: So he slept in the military camp. Guo was very scared and told the soldiers on guard duty to knock on the door to protect him.

古文：旦，与俱至孝德所，谢不能。
现代文：天亮后，与秀实一起到孝德住所赔罪说自己无能。
English: After dawn, he went to Xiaode's residence with Xiushi to make amends, saying that he was incompetent.

古文：邠由是安。
现代文：州从此安定了。
English: The state has since stabilized.

古文：初，秀实为营田官。泾大将焦令谌取人田自占，给与农，约熟归其半。
现代文：当初，秀实任营田官，泾州大将焦令谌夺占百姓的田地为自己所有，又转租给农户，约定粮食成熟收一半租。
English: At the beginning, Hsiu-sze was appointed Yingdan official, and Jiaozhou general Jiao Lingjun seized the fields occupied by the people for himself, and subleased them to farmers, agreeing to collect half of the rent when the grain was ripe.

古文：是岁大旱，农告无入，令谌曰： 我知入，不知旱也。 
现代文：这年大旱，农户报告没有收成，令谌说 ：我只知道收租，不知大旱不大旱！ 
English: This year, there was a drought, and farmers reported no harvest. Ling said, "I only know how to collect rent, but I don't know whether the drought is bad or not!"

古文：责之急，农无以偿，往诉秀实。
现代文：催逼紧，农户没粮交租，到秀实处诉说。
English: Urged to tighten up, farmers had no grain to pay rent, and went to Shushi to complain.

古文：秀实署牒免之，因使人逊谕令谌。
现代文：秀实写了块牌免了他的租，接着派人恭谨地告诉令谌。
English: Xiushi wrote a piece of paper to waive his rent, and then sent someone to respectfully tell Lingya.

古文：令谌怒，召农责曰： 我畏段秀实邪？ 
现代文：令谌发怒，唤来农户斥责说： 我怕段秀实吗？ 
English: Enraged, he summoned the farmers to reprimand them, saying, "Am I afraid of Duan Xiusheng?

古文：以牒置背上，大杖击二十，舆致廷中。
现代文：把牌放在农户背上，打了他二十大棍，抬到秀实的大堂中。
English: He put the cards on the farmer's back, hit him with twenty big sticks, and carried him to the lobby of Hsü-sü.

古文：秀实泣曰： 乃我困汝。 
现代文：秀实流着泪说 ：是我让你受苦了。 
English: With tears streaming down her face, Shusho said, "It was I who made you suffer."

古文：即自裂裳裹疮注药，卖己马以代偿。
现代文：就撕下自己的衣裳为他裹伤上药，卖自己的马来代他还租。
English: He tore off his clothes to bandage his wounds and sold his horse to pay the rent.

古文：淮西将尹少荣颇刚鲠，入骂令谌曰： 汝诚人乎！
现代文：淮西将领尹少荣很刚直，进去骂令谌说 ：你真的是个人吗？
English: Yin Shao Rong, the general of Huaxi, was very straightforward. He went in and scolded him, saying, "Are you really an individual?

古文：泾州野如赭，人饥死，而尔必得谷，击无罪者。
现代文：泾州旱得遍野如赤，百姓都饿死了，而你一定要得到租谷，打无罪的人。
English: Luzhou is so dry that the countryside is red and the people are starving to death, but you must get a lease on the valley and beat up innocent people.

古文：段公，仁信大人，惟一马，卖而市谷入汝，汝取之不耻？
现代文：段公是仁厚诚信品德高尚的长者，只有一匹马，卖了买粮交给你，你收取他的粮还不感到羞耻。
English: Duan Gong is a kind, honest and moral elder. He only has one horse. He sold it to you to buy grain, and you are not ashamed to accept his grain.

古文：凡为人傲天灾、犯大人、击无罪者，尚不愧奴隶邪！ 
现代文：凡是做人傲视天灾，冒犯德行高尚的长者，打无罪的人，在奴隶面前都应感到羞愧！ 
English: Any man who disdains a natural calamity, offends a virtuous and noble elder, and strikes an innocent man, ought to be ashamed before a slave!

古文：令谌闻，大愧流汗，曰： 吾终不可以见段公。 
现代文：令谌听了，羞愧得直流汗，说 ：我以后没有脸去见段公！ 
English: Upon hearing this, Ling Yao, sweating with shame, said, "I don't have the face to see Duan Gong anymore!"

古文：一夕，自恨死。
现代文：一天晚上，自己悔恨而死。
English: One night, he died of remorse.

古文：马璘代孝德，每所咨逮。
现代文：马瞞代替孝德的职位，遇事常常同秀实商量。
English: Ma Zhe replaced the position of filial piety, and often consulted with Xiushi in times of need.

古文：璘处决不当，固争之，不从不止。
现代文：马瞞决断处理不恰当的，秀实坚持争辩，不答应不罢休。
English: Ma Zhe decisively dealt with the inappropriate, and Huxi insisted on arguing, refusing to give up.

古文：始，璘城泾州，秀实为留后，以劳加御史中丞。
现代文：开初，马瞞驻在泾州城，秀实任留后，因为勤恳加封为御史中丞。
English: At the beginning of the year, Ma Xie was stationed in Zhangzhou City. After Shuxi stayed in the post, he was diligently awarded the title of "Goshi Chujo."

古文：大历三年，遂徙泾州。
现代文：大历三年，这支部队从京城郊外地区迁驻泾州。
English: In the third year of the lunar calendar, this unit moved from the suburbs of Beijing to Bozhou.

古文：是军自四镇、北庭赴难，征伐数有功，既骤徙，相与出怨言。
现代文：该部从四镇、北庭奔赴国难，征战中多次立功，突然移驻，士兵相互发怨言。
English: The department rushed to the national calamity from the four towns and Beiting, made many contributions in the war, suddenly moved, and the soldiers complained to each other.

古文：别将王童之谋作乱，约曰： 闻警鼓而纵。 
现代文：别将王童之阴谋叛乱，约定说： 听到报警的鼓声就跑散。 
English: Don't make Wang Tong's conspiracy into a rebellion, the agreement said: When you hear the sound of the alarm, run away.

古文：秀实知之，召鼓人，阳怒失节，戒曰： 每筹尽当报。 
现代文：秀实知道了，召来击鼓的人，假装为他敲鼓失去节奏而生气，告诫他： 每刻计时筹码用完应当报告。 
English: When Xiushi found out, he summoned the drummer, pretended to be angry that his drumming had lost its rhythm, and warned him: If the time chips run out every hour, he should report it.

古文：因延数刻，尽四鼓而曙。
现代文：因此延迟了几个时刻，敲完第四更鼓天就亮了。
English: As a result, there was a delay of a few moments, and after the fourth gong was struck, the sky lit up.

古文：明日，复有告者曰： 夜焚稿积，约救火则乱。 
现代文：第二天，又有人报告秀实说： 今夜烧草库，约定趁救火叛乱。 
English: The next day, another person reported to Xiushi: "Tonight we will burn the hay barn, and we have agreed to take advantage of the opportunity to put out the fire of the rebellion."

古文：秀实严警备。
现代文：秀实严加警备。
English: Shusho is on high alert.

古文：夜中果火发，令军中曰： 敢救者斩！ 
现代文：半夜里果然起火，秀实在军中下令说： 敢去救火的斩首！ 
English: In the middle of the night, a fire did indeed break out, and Shushin gave an order to the troops, saying: "Behead anyone who dares to go and put out the fire!"

古文：童之居外，请入，不许。
现代文：王童之住在营外，请求进军营，秀实不准。
English: Wang Tongzhi lived outside the camp and requested to enter the camp, but Xiushi did not allow it.

古文：明日，捕之，并其党八人斩以徇，曰： 后徙者族！ 
现代文：第二天逮捕了王童之，连他的同党八人一起斩首示众，号令说： 后迁营的杀全族！ 
English: The next day, Wang Tongzhi was arrested, and he and eight of his party members were beheaded in front of the public, with the order: "Those who move the camp later should kill the whole family!"

古文：军遂迁泾州。
现代文：部队于是迁到泾州。
English: The troops then moved to Zhangzhou.

古文：于时，食无久储，郛无居人，朝廷患之，诏璘领郑、颍二州以佐军，命秀实为留后。
现代文：当时仓库里储粮不多，外城没有居民，朝廷为此担心，命令马瞞管辖郑、颍两州来资助军队，命令秀实任留后。
English: At that time, there was not much grain stored in the warehouse, and there were no residents in the outer city. The court was worried about this, and ordered Ma Xie to govern Zheng and Handan to fund the army, and ordered Xiuxi to stay behind.

古文：军不乏资，二州以治。
现代文：军队不缺乏钱粮，两州因此太平。
English: The army is not short of food and money, and the two states are therefore at peace.

古文：璘嘉其绩，奏为行军司马，兼都知兵马使。
现代文：马瞞嘉奖他的功绩，奏请朝廷任他为行军司马兼都兵马使。
English: Ma Shide praised his achievements and petitioned the imperial court to appoint him as the marshal and the envoy of the capital.

古文：吐蕃寇边，战盐仓，师不利。璘为虏隔，未能还，都将引溃兵先入，秀实让曰： 兵法：失将，麾下斩。公等忘死，而欲安其家邪！ 
现代文：吐蕃侵犯边境，进攻盐仓，唐军处于劣势，马瞞被敌人隔断不能回来，都将带着溃败的士兵先回城，秀实责备说： 兵法规定，失去统帅，部下要斩首，你们不死战能使家属安全吗？ 
English: Tubo invaded the border, attacked the salt warehouse, the Tang army was at a disadvantage, Ma Xie was cut off by the enemy and could not return, and they would all return to the city first with the defeated soldiers. Xiushi reproached: According to the law of war, if you lose the commander, your subordinates must be beheaded. Can you make your family members safe without dying?

古文：乃悉城中士，使锐将统之，依东原列奇兵，示贼将战。虏望之，不敢逼。
现代文：于是集合城中全部士兵，派勇猛的将领统领，依托东边的高岗，布列奇兵，摆出与敌决战的样子，敌人望见，不敢逼近。
English: So they gathered all the soldiers in the city, sent brave generals to lead, relying on the high hill on the east, the Burechi soldiers, and put up a decisive battle with the enemy. The enemy saw it and did not dare to approach.

古文：俄而璘得归。
现代文：不久，马瞞回到了军中。
English: Soon afterwards, he returned to the army.

古文：久之，璘有疾，请秀实摄节度副使。
现代文：过了好长时间，马瞞有病，请秀实代理节度副使，秀实巡查士兵，防备变乱。
English: After a long time, Ma Shide was ill, so he asked Xiuxi, the deputy vice-envoy of the State Council, and Xiuxi, a patrol soldier, to prepare for a riot.

古文：秀实按甲备变，璘卒，命愿将马頔主丧，李汉惠主宾客，家人位于堂，宗族位于廷，宾将位于牙内，尉吏士卒位于营次，非其亲，不得居丧侧。
现代文：马瞞死了，秀实命令谨慎老实的将领马由页掌管丧事，李汉惠掌管招待宾客，家属位于灵堂，宗族位于庭院，宾客、将领位于府内，校尉、文官、士兵位于军营内，不是马的亲人，不得留在灵柩旁边。
English: The horse was dead, and Xiushi ordered the prudent and honest general Ma Yuzhe to be in charge of the funeral, Li Hanhui was in charge of inviting guests, family members were in the chapel, the clan was in the courtyard, guests and generals were in the government office, and the lieutenant, civilian officials and soldiers were in the military camp. They were not Ma's relatives and were not allowed to stay next to the coffin.

古文：朝夕临，三日止。
现代文：早晚临祭，三天才结束。
English: Morning and evening before the festival, three days before the end.

古文：有族谈离立者，皆捕囚之。
现代文：有聚集一伙谈话，离开指定位置的，都逮捕关押起来。
English: A group of people gathered to talk, and anyone who left the designated area was arrested and detained.

古文：都虞候史廷幹、裨将崔珍、张景华欲谋乱，秀实送廷幹京师，徙珍、景华于外，一军遂安。
现代文：都虞候史廷干，裨将崔珍、张景华想发动叛乱，秀实把廷干送到京城治罪，把崔珍、张景华流放到境外，整个部队就安定下来了。
English: Shushih sent Tinggan to Beijing to deal with the crime, and sent Cui Zhen and Zhang Jinghua abroad, and the entire army was stabilized.

古文：即拜四镇北庭行军、泾原郑颍节度使。
现代文：很快，秀实被封为四镇、北庭行军，泾、原、郑、颍节度使。
English: Soon, Xiushi was appointed as the envoy of the Four Towns and the North Courtyard March, along with Zou, Yuan, Zheng, and Zou.

古文：数年，吐蕃不敢犯塞。
现代文：好几年，吐蕃不敢侵犯边塞。
English: For several years, Tibetans did not dare to encroach on the border fortress.

古文：又按格令，官使二料取其一，非公会不举乐饮酒；室无妓媵，无赢财；宾佐至，议军政，不及私。
现代文：又依照法律，官员身兼二职可拿两份俸禄，秀实只拿取一份；不是因公聚会不奏乐，不饮酒；房内没有歌女和侍妾，家无余财；宾客和部下来了，只谈论军政事务，不谈家事。
English: Moreover, according to the law, an official holding two posts can receive two salaries, while a dignitary receives only one; he does not play music or drink alcohol at public gatherings; there are no singers and concubines in the room, and the family has no extra money; guests and ministers have come down, and they only talk about military and political affairs, not about family affairs.

古文：十三年来朝，对蓬莱殿，代宗问所以安边者，画地以对，件别条陈。帝悦，慰赉良渥，又赐第一区，实封百户。
现代文：大历十三年，回京城朝见皇帝，在蓬莱殿回答天子的提问。代宗问及安定边防的谋略，秀实在地上画出地形图，分门别类、井井有条地回答，代宗高兴，慰劳赏赐很丰厚，又赏赐第一等的住宅，实封一百户，让他回到任所。
English: In the thirteenth year of the lunar calendar, he returned to the capital to see the emperor, and answered the emperor's questions at Penglai Palace. Daizong asked about the strategy of stable border defense, Xiuzong drew a topographical map on the ground, divided into categories, and answered in an orderly manner. Daizong was happy, the reward was very rich, and he was rewarded with a first-class residence, a hundred households were sealed, and he was allowed to return to his post.

古文：还之镇。德宗立，加检校礼部尚书。
现代文：德宗皇帝即位，加封为检校礼部尚书。
English: Emperor Dezong ascended to the throne, and the seal was added to the school inspection etiquette book.

古文：建中初，宰相杨炎追元载议，欲城原州，诏中使问状，秀实言： 方春不可兴土功，请须农隙。 
现代文：建中初年，宰相杨炎重提前宰相元载的建议，想在原州筑城。下诏派朝廷使者询问，秀实说： 现在正是春耕，不能兴土木工程，请求在农闲动工。 
English: In the first year of the middle school, the Prime Minister Yang Yanjie wanted to build a city in Wonju ahead of the recommendation of the Prime Minister Yuanjo. He sent an imperial envoy to inquire, and Husi said: Now it is spring plowing, it is impossible to start civil engineering projects, and he requested to start construction at idle time.

古文：炎谓沮己，遂召为司农卿。
现代文：杨炎认为秀实坏了自己的主意，于是召秀实回京任司农卿。
English: Yang Yan thought that Xiuxi had ruined his own idea, so he summoned Xiuxi back to Beijing to be appointed Secretary of the Ministry of Agriculture.

古文：硃泚反，以秀实失兵，必恨愤，且素有人望，使骑往迎。
现代文：朱氵此反叛，认为秀实失去实权，必然怨恨朝廷，并且秀实一向威望高，派骑兵去迎接他。
English: Zhu Xi rebelled, believing that since Husi had lost real power, he would inevitably resent the imperial court. Husi had always been highly respected, and sent cavalry to meet him.

古文：秀实与子弟诀而入，泚喜曰： 公来，吾事成矣。 
现代文：秀实与子侄诀别后到朱氵此处，朱氵此高兴地说： 您来，我的事业就成功了。 
English: After saying goodbye to his son and nephew, Husi came to Zhu Xi here. Zhu Xi said happily: You come, my career will be successful.

古文：秀实曰： 将士东征，宴赐不丰，有司过耳，人主何与知？
现代文：秀实说： 将士东征，酒宴和赏赐不丰盛，是有关部门的过失，皇上怎么知道？
English: Xiushi said: The eastward expedition of the generals, the wine banquet and the reward were not abundant, it was the fault of the relevant departments, how did the emperor know?

古文：公本以忠义闻天下，今变起仓卒，当谕众以祸福，扫清宫室，迎乘舆，公之职也。 
现代文：您本来因为忠义天下闻名，现在仓促间出现变乱，应当把祸福告诉部队，扫清叛乱，迎接皇上的车驾，这是您的职分啊！ 
English: Originally, you were famous throughout the world for your loyalty, but now there are sudden upheavals. It is your duty to inform the troops of misfortunes and blessings, clear up rebellions, and welcome the emperor's carriage. This is your duty!

古文：泚默然。
现代文：朱氵此沉着脸不做声。
English: Zhu Xi did not make a sound with a calm face.

古文：秀实知不可，乃阳与合，阴结将军刘海宾、姚令言、都虞候何明礼，欲图泚。
现代文：秀实知道他不会回心转意，就假装与他合作，暗中联络将军刘海宾、姚令言的判官歧灵岳、都虞候何明礼，想杀死朱氵此。
English: Knowing that he would not change his mind, Xiushi pretended to cooperate with him and secretly contacted General Liu Haibin, Yao Lingyan's adjudicator Shifu Lingyue, and Governor He Mingli to kill Zhu Rongguo.

古文：三人者，皆秀实素所厚。
现代文：这三个人都是秀实的厚交。
English: All three are good friends.

古文：会源休教泚伪迎天子，遣将韩旻领锐师三千疾驰奉天。秀实以为宗社之危不容喘，乃遣人谕大吏岐灵岳窃取令言印，不获，乃倒用司农印追其兵。
现代文：恰适源休教朱氵此假装迎接天子，派部将韩带三千精锐的骑兵急速奔往奉天，秀实认为国家危急，刻不容缓，于是派人告诉歧灵岳盗取姚令言的印信，没有盗到，于是改用司农卿的印信追赶韩军。
English: It was just the right time for Zhu Xi to pretend to welcome the Son of Heaven, and he sent Han Han and three thousand elite cavalry to rush to Feng Tian. Husi believed that the country was in a critical situation, and it was urgent. So he sent someone to tell Gui Lingyue to steal Yao Lingyan's seal letter. He did not steal it, so he used the seal letter of the Secretary of Agriculture to chase the Korean army.

古文：旻至骆驿，得符还。
现代文：韩兵到骆驿，得到兵符就领兵回来了。
English: The Korean soldiers went to Luojun, got the soldier's badge and led the soldiers back.

古文：秀实谓海宾曰： 旻之来，吾等无遗类。
现代文：秀实对海宾说 ：韩回来后，我们没有一个能活命。
English: Hidemasa said to Haibin, "After Han comes back, none of us will be able to survive."

古文：我当直搏杀贼，不然则死。 
现代文：我应当直接击杀反贼朱氵此，不然就死。 
English: I should directly kill the anti-thief Zhu Xizhe, otherwise I will die.

古文：乃约事急为继，而令明礼应于外。
现代文：于是约定如果情况危急，海宾接上去杀，又令明礼在外面接应。
English: So it was agreed that if the situation was critical, Haibin would go and kill him, and Mingli would respond outside.

古文：翌日，泚召秀实计事，源休、姚令言、李忠臣、李子平皆在坐。秀实戎服与休并语，至僭位，勃然起，执休腕，夺其象笏，奋而前，唾泚面大骂曰： 狂贼！可磔万段，我岂从汝反邪！ 
现代文：第二天，朱氵此召集秀实商议事务，源休、姚令言、李忠臣、李子平都在座，秀实穿上甲衣与源休并排坐着，说到拥立朱氵此为帝，秀实愤怒地站起来，抓住源休的手腕，夺取象笏，奋勇上前，一口唾沫，吐到朱氵此脸上，大骂道 ：狂妄的强盗，你可把我剁为万段，我怎会跟着你反叛！ 
English: The next day, Zhu Xi summoned Xiushi to discuss the matter. Yuan Hui, Yao Lingyan, Li Zhongchen, and Li Zhiping were all present. Xiushi put on a coat of armor and sat side by side with Yuan Hui. When it came to embracing Zhu Xi as the emperor, Xiushi stood up angrily, grabbed Yuan Hui's wrist, seized the elephant shin, stepped forward bravely, spat on Zhu Xi's face, and cursed: "You arrogant robber, you can make me a millionaire, how can I rebel with you!"

古文：遂击之。泚举臂捍笏，中颡，流血衊面，匍匐走。
现代文：于是拿象笏打朱氵此，朱氵此举手臂抵挡，打中朱氵此额头，血流满面，朱氵此爬着逃了。
English: So he took an elephant's paw and beat Zhu Xi, Zhu Xi raised his arm to resist, hit Zhu Xi's forehead, blood flowed all over his face, and Zhu Xi crawled away.

古文：贼众未敢动，而海宾等无至者。
现代文：众反贼不敢动手杀秀实，但海宾等没有哪个来接应。
English: The anti-thieves did not dare to kill Shuxi, but none of them, such as Haibin, responded.

古文：秀实大呼曰： 我不同反，胡不杀我！ 
现代文：秀实大声呼喊道： 我不同你们一起反叛，为什么不杀我！ 
English: Shusan shouted loudly: I rebelled with you, why not kill me!

古文：遂遇害，年六十五。
现代文：于是遇害，时年六十五岁。
English: He was killed at the age of sixty-five.

古文：海宾、明礼、灵岳等皆继为贼害。
现代文：海宾、明礼、灵岳等都相继被反贼杀害。
English: Haibin, Mingli, Lingyue, etc. were all killed one after another by the anti-thieves.

古文：帝在奉天，恨用秀实不极才，垂涕悔怅。
现代文：皇帝在奉天，听到这个消息，恨自己没有重用秀实，流着泪后悔惆怅不已。
English: Upon hearing this news, the emperor, who was in Mukden, hated himself for not making more use of Xiushi, and wept with regret.

古文：初，秀实自泾州被召，戒其家曰： 若过岐，硃泚必致赠遗，慎毋纳。 
现代文：当初，秀实自泾州被召回京城，告诫家里人说 ：如果经过岐山，朱氵此必定赠送财物，千万不要收。 
English: At first, Xiushi was called back to Beijing from Zhangzhou, and he warned his family, saying, "If you pass through Qishan, Zhu Xi will surely give away your property, so don't accept it."

古文：至岐，泚固致大绫三百，家人拒，不遂。至都，秀实怒曰： 吾终不以污吾第。 
现代文：家属到岐山，朱氵此非送三百匹大绫不可，家里人坚决不收，但办不到；到京城，秀实生气说： 我终归不让这些东西脏了我的家。 
English: When his family members went to Qishan, Zhu Xi had no choice but to send three hundred large donkeys. His family members resolutely refused to accept them, but it couldn't be done. When they got to Beijing, Xiushi angrily said, "In the end, I won't let these things dirty my home."

古文：以置司农治堂之梁间。吏后以告泚，泚取视，其封帕完新。
现代文：把它挂在司农府大堂的屋梁间，司农府的属官后来报告了朱氵此，取下来一看，上面封记完好如新。
English: He hung it between the roof beams of the lobby of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary of the General Secretary.

古文：秀实尝以禁兵寡弱，不足备非常，言于帝曰： 古者天子曰万乘，诸侯曰千乘，大夫曰百乘，盖以大制小，以十制一。
现代文：秀实曾认为皇帝的禁卫军又少又弱，不足以应付非常的事变，向皇帝说： 古时天子号称战车万乘，诸侯千乘，大夫百乘，因为大能控制小、用十人能制服一人。
English: Husi once thought that the emperor's imperial guards were few and weak, not enough to cope with extraordinary events, and said to the emperor: In ancient times, the Son of Heaven was known as the chariot of a thousand chariots, the lords of a thousand chariots, and the doctors of a hundred chariots, because the great can control the small, and ten people can subdue one person.

古文：今外有不廷之虏，内有梗命之臣，而禁兵寡少，卒有患难，何以待之？
现代文：现在外有不听朝廷使命的叛贼，内有抗拒皇上命令的臣子，而皇上的禁卫军太少，突然间有祸患，拿什么去对付呢？
English: Now there are traitors outside who do not listen to the mission of the imperial court, and there are courtiers inside who resist the emperor's orders, and the emperor's imperial guard is too few, and suddenly there is a disaster, what should we do?

古文：且猛虎所以百兽畏者，为爪牙也；若去之，则犬彘马牛，皆能为敌。 
现代文：况且猛虎之所以使百兽畏惧，是因为有锋利的爪牙呀，如果去掉爪牙，那么猪狗牛马都敢与它作对。 
English: Moreover, the reason why the tiger is feared by all animals is because it has sharp claws. If the claws are removed, then pigs, dogs, cattle and horses will dare to fight against it.

古文：帝不用。
现代文：皇帝不采纳。
English: The emperor would not accept it.

古文：及泾卒乱，召神策六军，无一人至者，世多其谋。
现代文：到泾州突然叛乱，调神策军六支部队，没有一兵一卒来援的，世人称赞秀实的谋略。
English: When there was a sudden rebellion in Zhangzhou, and six units of the Shengzhao Army were dispatched, but not a single soldier came to help, the world praised Xiuzhen's strategy.

古文：兴元元年，诏赠太尉，谥曰忠烈。
现代文：兴元元年，皇帝下令追封秀实为太尉，追赠谥号 忠烈 。
English: In the first year of the Xingyuan era, the emperor ordered that Husi be posthumously promoted to the rank of first lieutenant and given the posthumous title of Zhongre.

古文：赐封户五百，庄、第各一区；长子三品，诸子五品，并正员官。
现代文：赏赐五百户的赋税，庄园、府第各一座。大儿子封三品官，其余儿子封五品官，都是正品官员。
English: The tax of 500 households was rewarded, with one manor and one prefectural office each. The eldest son was given the title of Sanbonkan, and the remaining sons were given the title of Gohonkan, both of which are Genuine officials.

古文：帝还都，又诏致祭，旌其门闾，亲铭其碑云。
现代文：皇帝回到京城后，又下令祭祀他，表彰门庭，亲自题写碑文。
English: After the emperor returned to the capital, he also ordered to sacrifice him, commend the courtyard, and personally inscribe the inscription.

古文：太和中，子伯伦始立庙，有诏给卤簿，赐度支绫绢五百，以少牢致祭。
现代文：文宗太和年间，秀实的儿子伯伦才为他建庙，皇帝下诏赐给仪仗队，赐给国库的绫绢五百匹，用少牢的规格祭祀。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzong and Empress Dowager Cixi, it was Husi's son Buren who built a temple for him. The emperor issued an edict to give 500 yakitori to the guard of honor, 500 yakitori to the treasury, and a small number of yakitori to the temple.

古文：伯伦累官福建观察使，终太仆卿。
现代文：伯伦经多次升官，官至福建观察使，死在太仆卿任上。
English: After being promoted several times, he was promoted to Fujian Observation Envoy, and died in the position of eunuch.

古文：时宰相李石请文宗加赙襚，郑覃曰： 自古杀身利社稷，未有如秀实者。 
现代文：当时宰相李石请求文宗增加办丧事的财物衣衾，郑覃说： 自古以来的为国捐躯者，还没有谁比得上段秀实。 
English: At that time, the Prime Minister Li Shishi asked Wenzong to increase the amount of property and clothing for the funeral, and Zheng Yao said: Since ancient times, no one who has died for the country has been as good as the previous section.

古文：帝恻然，为罢朝，可其请。
现代文：皇帝心里难受，因此提前退朝，并批准宰相的请求。
English: The emperor felt uncomfortable, so he retired ahead of schedule and approved the chancellor's request.

古文：孙嶷、文楚、珂知名。
现代文：秀实的孙子嶷、文楚、珂都是知名人物。
English: Huxi's grandsons, Zou, Wenchu and Ke, are all famous figures.

古文：嶷自郑滑节度使入为右金吾卫大将军，封西平郡公。
现代文：段嶷自郑滑节度使任上入京都任右金吾卫大将军，封为西平郡公。
English: Duan Yu, appointed by Zheng Niu, entered Kyoto as the Grand General of the Right Wing Army, and was made the governor of Xiping County.

古文：甘露之变，嶷当诛，裴度奏忠臣后，宜免死，贬循州司马。
现代文：文宗时的 甘露之变 ，段嶷应当处死，裴度奏请皇帝说，忠臣的后代，应当免去死罪。降职出任循州司马。
English: According to the "Kamro" of the time of Wenzong, Duan Xi should be put to death, and Pei Duo asked the emperor to say that the descendants of loyal subjects should be exempted from the death penalty. He was demoted to the post of Xuzhou Sima.

古文：文楚，咸通末为云州防御使。时李国昌镇振武，国昌子克用欲得云中，引兵攻之，杀于斗鸡台下，沙陀之乱自此始。
现代文：段文楚在咸通末年任云州防御使，当时李国昌是振武节度使，国昌的儿子克用想得到云中郡，带兵攻打云州，在斗鸡台下杀死了文楚。
English: Duan Wenchu served as Yunnan defense envoy in the last years of Hamdang, when Li Guochang was the envoy of Zhenwu Festival. Guochang's son Ke used to want to get Yunnan County, led troops to attack Yunnan, and killed Wenchu under the cockfighting table.

古文：既还，光国手斩文喜献阙下，拜左骁卫大将军，封五原郡王；海宾乐平郡王，赠太子太保，实封百户。
现代文：沙陀人叛乱是从这时开始的。段珂，僖宗时住在颍州。黄巢起义军围攻颍州，刺史想以全城投降，段珂招募青年抵抗，大家带着干粮请求跟随他作战，黄巢起义军就败退了。
English: The rebellion of the Sado people began at this time. Duan Ke lived in Zhangzhou when he was a monk. The Yellow Nest rebels besieged Zhangzhou, and Zhishi wanted to surrender the whole city. Duan Ke recruited young people to resist, and everyone followed him to fight with requests for dry grain. The Yellow Nest rebels were defeated and retreated.

古文：颜真卿，字清臣，秘书监师古五世从孙。
现代文：段珂被任命为颍州司马。颜真卿，字清臣，秘书监颜师古第五代侄孙。
English: Duan Ke was appointed as the secretary of Zhangzhou Sima. Yan Zhenqing, also known as Qingcheng, was the secretary and overseer of Yan Shigu, the fifth generation grandnephew of Yan Zhenqing.

古文：少孤，母殷躬加训导。
现代文：年幼时父亲就去世了，母亲殷氏亲自教育他。
English: His father died when he was young, and his mother, Yin, educated him herself.

古文：既长，博学工辞章，事亲孝。
现代文：长大后，学问渊博，擅长写文章，侍奉母亲很孝顺。
English: When he grew up, he was well-educated, good at writing articles, and very obedient to his mother.

古文：开元中，举进士，又擢制科。
现代文：玄宗开元年间，参加进士考试，通过殿试。
English: During the first year of Xuanzong, he took the entrance examination and passed the hall examination.

古文：调醴泉尉。
现代文：调到醴泉当县尉。
English: He was transferred to Shisen as a county lieutenant.

古文：再迁监察御史，使河、陇。
现代文：经两次提升，任监察御史，奉命巡查河东、陇州。
English: After two promotions, he was appointed Inspector General of History, and was ordered to inspect Hedong and Zhangzhou.

古文：时五原有冤狱久不决，天且旱，真卿辨狱而雨，郡人呼 御史雨 。
现代文：当时五原有冤狱很久没有断案，天又干旱，真卿平反冤狱后，天降大雨，五原的百姓称为 御史雨 。
English: At that time, the unjust imprisonment in Wuhuan had not been resolved for a long time, and the sky was dry. After Zhenqing was rehabilitated from the unjust imprisonment, the sky rained heavily, and the people of Wuhuan called it the historic rain.

古文：复使河东，劾奏朔方令郑延祚母死不葬三十年，有诏终身不齿，闻者耸然。
现代文：又巡查河东郡，上书皇帝，弹劾朔方令郑延祚，母亲死了三十年不下葬，皇帝诏令郑终身不录用。听到的人都害怕。
English: He also inspected Hedong County, sent a letter to the emperor, impeached Zheng Yanqi, his mother died and was not buried for thirty years, and the emperor decreed that Zheng would not be hired for life. Everyone who heard this was afraid.

古文：迁殿中侍御史。
现代文：升为殿中侍御史。
English: He was promoted to the position of palace chamberlain.

古文：时御史吉温以私怨构中丞宋浑，谪贺州，真卿曰： 奈何以一时忿，欲危宋璟后乎？ 
现代文：当时御史吉温因为私怨给中丞宋浑罗织罪名，使其降职到贺州。真卿说 ：怎么能一时气愤就想害宋瞡的后代呢？ 
English: At that time, because of a personal grudge, the Shih Ji Wen punished the middle-ranked general Song Hun Lo, and demoted him to Hezhou. Zhenqing said: "How can you want to harm the descendants of Song Xi in a moment of anger?"

古文：宰相杨国忠恶之，讽中丞蒋冽奏为东都采访判官，再转武部员外郎。国忠终欲去之，乃出为平原太守。
现代文：宰相杨国忠讨厌他，暗示中丞蒋冽奏请皇帝任真卿为东都采访判官，再转任武部员外郎，杨国忠始终想排挤他，就赶他出京，任平原太守。
English: The Prime Minister Yang Guozhong hated him, suggesting that the Vice-Premier Chiang Kai-shek ask the Emperor Ren Zhengying to interview the judge for Dongdu, and then be transferred to the military attaché Wai Lang. Yang Guozhong always wanted to push him out, so he drove him out of Beijing and appointed him the governor of Pingyuan.

古文：安禄山逆状牙孽，真卿度必反，阳托霖雨，增陴浚隍，料才壮，储廥廪。
现代文：安禄山谋反的迹象已显露出来，真卿估计他一定要反叛，假托阴雨不断，加高城墙，疏通护城河，调查统计有才德的壮士，储备粮草。
English: The signs of Anlu Mountain's plotting to rebel have already been revealed. Zhengyang estimates that he must rebel. Under the guise of constant rain and gloom, the city walls are raised, the moat is dredged, talented heroes are surveyed and counted, and grain and grass are stockpiled.

古文：日与宾客泛舟饮酒，以纾禄山之疑。
现代文：每天与宾客驾船饮酒，来解除安禄山的怀疑。
English: He drank alcohol with guests on the boat every day to dispel Anlu's suspicions.

古文：果以为书生，不虞也。
现代文：安禄山果真认为真卿是个书生，不足忧虑。
English: An Lushan Guozhen thought that Zhengyong was a scholar and was not worried.

古文：禄山反，河朔尽陷，独平原城守具备，使司兵参军李平驰奏。
现代文：安禄山反叛，河朔都陷落了，只有平原城防守严密，真卿派司兵参军李平骑快马到京都报告皇帝。
English: Mount Anlu rebelled, and all of Hebei fell, except for Plains City, which was heavily defended. Emperor Zhengyang sent Li Ping on a fast horse to report to the emperor in Kyoto.

古文：玄宗始闻乱，叹曰： 河北二十四郡，无一忠臣邪？ 
现代文：玄宗初听到安禄山反叛的消息，叹息说 ：河北二十四个郡，就没有一个忠臣吗？ 
English: When Xuanzong first heard the news of the rebellion in Anlu Mountain, he sighed and said, "There are twenty-four counties in Hebei, is there not one loyal subject?"

古文：及平至，帝大喜，谓左右曰： 朕不识真卿何如人，所为乃若此！ 
现代文：等李平到京，皇帝大喜，对左右的官员说 ：我不了解真卿的为人，他做的事竟这样出色！ 
English: When Li Ping arrived in Beijing, the emperor was overjoyed and said to the officials around him, "I don't understand what kind of person Lord Zhen is. What he has done is so outstanding!"

古文：时平原有静塞兵三千，乃益募士，得万人，遣录事参军李择交统之，以刁万岁、和琳、徐浩、马相如、高抗朗等为将，分总部伍。大飨士城西门，慷慨泣下，众感励。
现代文：当时平原郡有三千静塞兵，又增招士兵一万人，派录事参军李择交统领，用刁万岁、和琳、徐浩、马相如、高抗朗等人为将领，分别统领军队，在城西门盛大地犒劳士兵，真卿慷慨陈词，泪水直流，全军感奋。
English: At that time, Plains County had three thousand quiet soldiers, and recruited ten thousand more soldiers. Li Zhengjia, the commander of the army, sent a record to join the army, and used Zou Wanlian, Wo Lin, Xu Hao, Ma Xiangru, Gao Ganlang and other generals to lead the army separately. At the west gate of the city, Zhengying generously rewarded the soldiers. Zhengying made a speech, tears flowed, and the whole army was excited.

古文：饶阳太守卢全诚、济南太守李随、清河长史王怀忠、景城司马李韦、鄴郡太守王焘各以众归，有诏北海太守贺兰进明率精锐五千济河为助。
现代文：饶阳太守卢全诚、济南太守李随、清河长史王怀忠、景城司马李日韦、邺郡太守王焘各领军来归附他。诏令北海太守贺兰进明率领五千精锐士兵渡河援助。
English: Raoyang governor Lu Quancheng, Jinan governor Li Zui, Qing River governor Shi Wang Huizhong, Jingcheng governor Ma Li Rihwei, and Qi County governor Wang Hui all led their armies to join him. He ordered the North Sea governor Helan Jinming to lead five thousand elite soldiers to cross the river to help.

古文：贼破东都，遣段子光传李憕、卢奕、蒋清首徇河北，真卿畏众惧，绐诸将曰： 吾素识忄登等，其首皆非是。 
现代文：叛贼攻下东都洛阳，派段子光送李忄登、卢奕、蒋清的头到河北示众。真卿担心大家害怕，哄各位将领说： 我一向认识李忄登等人，这些头都不是他们的。 
English: The traitors captured the eastern capital of Luoyang and sent Duan Ziguang to take the heads of Li Yu-deng, Lu Yi, and Jiang Qing to Hebei to show them to the public. Zhenqing, worried that everyone would be afraid, coaxed the generals to say: I have always known Li Yu-deng and others, and these heads are not theirs.

古文：乃斩子光，藏三首。
现代文：于是杀了段子光，把三颗头藏起来。
English: So he killed Duan Ziguang and hid the three heads.

古文：它日，结刍续体，敛而祭，为位哭之。
现代文：过了些时候，用草编个人体，接上头，装殓后祭奠，设灵位哭祭他们。
English: After some time, we weave the human body with grass, connect the head, decorate it with a memorial, and set up a place to mourn for them.

古文：是时，从父兄杲卿为常山太守，斩贼将李钦凑等，清土门。十七郡同日自归，推真卿为盟主，兵二十万，绝燕、赵。
现代文：当时堂兄杲卿任常山太守，杀了叛军将领李钦凑等人，清除了土门的敌人，十七个郡同一天自动归顺朝廷，推举真卿任盟主，有二十万兵力，截断了燕赵的交通联络。
English: At that time, his cousin Zengqing Ren was the governor of Changshan, killed the rebel general Li Qinqiao and others, cleared the enemy of Tuyun, 17 counties automatically submitted to the imperial court on the same day, elected Zhenqing as the leader of the alliance, had 200,000 troops, and cut off Yanzhao's transportation links.

古文：诏即拜户部侍郎，佐李光弼讨贼。
现代文：皇帝下诏封真卿任户部侍郎，辅助李光弼讨伐叛贼。
English: Emperor Zhaofu appointed Zhengying as the attendant of the household department, and he assisted Li Guangyao in fighting against the traitors.

古文：真卿以李晖自副，而用李铣、贾载、沈震为判官。
现代文：真卿任李晖为自己的副手，而任李铣、贾载、沈震为判官。
English: Zhenqing appointed Li Jie as his deputy, and appointed Li Jie, Jia Jie and Shen Zhen as judges.

古文：俄加河北招讨采访使。
现代文：不久，加封为河北招讨采访使。
English: Soon after, Jafeng invited an envoy from Hebei to interview him.

古文：清河太守使郡人李崿来乞师，崿曰： 闻公首奋裾唱大顺，河朔恃公为金城。
现代文：清河太守派郡人李萫来向真卿求援兵，李萫说： 听说您首先奋臂号召归顺朝廷，河朔依仗您成为铜墙铁壁。
English: The grand marshal of Qinghe sent the county man Li Yan to ask Zhengying for reinforcements. Li Yan said: I heard that you were the first to call for surrender to the imperial court, and the county relied on you to become a bronze wall and iron wall.

古文：清河，西邻也，有江淮租布备北军，号 天下北库 。计其积，足以三平原之有，士卒可以二平原之众。公因而抚有，以为腹心，它城运之如臂之指耳。 
现代文：清河郡是您的西邻，有江淮财富供应北边军队，号称 天下北库 ，计算它储藏的粮食，是平原郡的三倍，士兵是平原郡的二倍，您如果趁此机会安抚它，作为腹心，那么控制其他城池就像身躯驱动臂膀，臂膀挥动手指一样容易。 
English: Qinghe County is your western neighbor. It has the wealth of the Jianghuai River to supply the northern army. It is known as the northern treasure of the world. It is calculated that it stores three times the grain of the plain county and twice the soldiers of the plain county. If you take this opportunity to appease it, as a confidant, then controlling other cities is as easy as the body driving the arm, and the arm waving the fingers.

古文：真卿为出兵六千，谓曰： 吾兵已出，子将何以教我？ 
现代文：真卿为清河郡派出六千援兵，对李萫说： 我的援兵已出发，您有什么计谋教给我呢？ 
English: Zhenqing sent six thousand reinforcements to Qinghe County, and said to Li Xi: My reinforcements have set out. Do you have any plan to teach me?

古文：崿曰： 朝家使程千里统众十万，自太行而东，将出郭口，限贼不得前。
现代文：李萫说： 朝廷派程千里统帅十万军队，自太行山向东进发，准备兵出山郭口，限制叛军前进。
English: Li Wei said: The imperial court sent a thousand-mile-long detachment to command a hundred thousand troops, marching eastward from the Taigang Mountains, preparing soldiers to leave the mountain gate, and restricting the rebels' advance.

古文：公若先伐魏郡，斩贼守袁知泰，以劲兵披郭口，出官师使讨鄴、幽陵，平原、清河合十万众徇洛阳，分犀锐制其冲。
现代文：您如果攻打魏郡，杀掉叛军将领袁知泰，用精兵打下口。迎接朝廷的军队出口攻打邺城、幽陵，平原、清河两郡共十万军队攻向洛阳，分出精锐部队控制要冲。
English: If you attack Wei County, kill the rebel general Yuan Zhitai and defeat him with elite soldiers, welcome the imperial court's troops to attack the two counties of Lucheng, Yuling, Plain and Qinghe, a total of 100,000 troops will attack Luoyang, and separate the elite troops to control the key.

古文：公坚壁勿与战，不数十日，贼必溃，相图死。 
现代文：您坚守不与敌人交战，不超过几十天，叛贼必然溃败，自相残杀而死。 
English: If you persist in not engaging the enemy for no more than a few dozen days, the traitors will inevitably be routed and will kill each other.

古文：真卿然之。乃檄清河等郡，遣大将李择交、副将范冬馥、和琳、徐浩与清河、博平士五千屯堂邑。
现代文：真卿认为可行，就传送文告给清河等郡，派大将李择交、副将范冬馥、和琳、徐浩与清河郡、博平郡的五千兵驻扎在堂邑。
English: Zhenqing thought it was feasible, so he sent a message to Qinghe County and other counties, and sent General Li Zengjia, Vice Generals Fan Dongjun, Waring, Xu Hao and 5,000 soldiers from Qinghe County and Boping County to be stationed in Dongyue.

古文：袁知泰遣将白嗣深、乙舒蒙等兵二万拒战，贼败，斩首万级，知泰走汲郡。
现代文：袁知泰派白嗣深、乙舒蒙等领兵二万交战，叛军战败，被斩了一万多颗首级，知泰败逃到汲郡。
English: Yuan Zhitai sent Bai Shishen, Yi Shumeng and other leaders of 20,000 soldiers to fight, the rebels were defeated, more than 10,000 heads were cut off, and Zhitai fled to Kyu County in defeat.

古文：史思明围饶阳，遣游奕兵绝平原救军，真卿惧不敌，以书招贺兰进明，以河北招讨使让之。
现代文：史思明围攻饶阳，派游动的军队截断了平原郡的救兵，真卿害怕打不过敌军，用信招贺兰进明，把河北招讨使让给他。
English: Shishiming besieged Raoyang and sent a roving army to cut off the relief troops in Pingyuan County. Zhenqing was afraid that he could not defeat the enemy army. He sent a letter to He Lan Jinming to persuade him to cede Hebei to him.

古文：进明败于信都。
现代文：进明在信都作战失败。
English: Jinming failed in the battle of Xindu.

古文：会平卢将刘正臣以渔阳归，真卿欲坚其意，遣贾载越海遗军资十余万，以子颇为质。
现代文：恰逢平卢将领刘正臣据渔阳起义，真卿想坚定他的信心，派贾载渡海送去十多万军费，并用儿子颜颇做人质。
English: When the Pinglu general Liu Zhengchen led the Yuyang Uprising, Zhengying wanted to strengthen his confidence, so he sent Jia Zhai across the sea to send more than one hundred thousand military funds, and used his son Yanpo as a hostage.

古文：颇甫十岁，军中固请留之，不从。
现代文：颜颇才十岁，军中的人坚决求他留下儿子，真卿没有听从。
English: Yanpo was only ten years old. People in the army begged him to keep his son, but Zhengying did not listen.

古文：肃宗已即位灵武，真卿数遣使以蜡丸裹书陈事。拜工部尚书兼御史大夫，复为河北招讨使。
现代文：肃宗已在灵武登上了皇帝位。真卿多次派使者带着用蜡丸封的信向皇帝汇报军政事务，拜为工部尚书兼御史大夫，复任河北招讨使。
English: Su Zong had ascended to the imperial throne in Lingwu. Zhengying repeatedly sent envoys with wax-sealed letters to the emperor to report on military and political affairs, and was appointed as the official secretary of the Ministry of Industry and the chief historian, and was reinstated as the envoy of Hebei.

古文：时军费困竭，李崿劝真卿收景城盐，使诸郡相输，用度遂不乏。
现代文：当时军费困难，李萫劝真卿收取景城的盐，让各郡之间互相调济，军中的费用才不缺。
English: At that time, military expenses were difficult. Li Qian advised Zhenqing to collect salt from Jingcheng and let the counties exchange it with each other, so that there would be no shortage of expenses in the army.

古文：第五琦方参进明军，后得其法以行，军用饶雄。
现代文：第五琦刚在进明军中参谋军务，后来实行这个方法，军中的物资很丰富。
English: The Fifth Prince was a staff officer of military affairs in the army of the Ming Dynasty. Later, this method was implemented, and the army was very rich in materials.

古文：禄山乘虚遣思明、尹子奇急攻河北，诸郡复陷，独平原、博平、清河固守。
现代文：安禄山乘虚派史思明、尹子奇急攻河北一带，各郡又沦陷了，只有平原郡、博平郡、清河郡防守坚固。
English: Anlu Mountain, led by the false faction of Shi Siming and Yin Ziqi, made a sudden attack on the Hebei area, and all counties fell again. Only Pingyuan County, Boping County and Qinghe County were well defended.

古文：然人心危，不复振。
现代文：但人心惶惶，不能再振奋起来。
English: But people are panicking and can't be cheered up any more.

古文：真卿谋于众曰： 贼锐甚，不可抗。若委命辱国，非计也。不如径赴行在，朝廷若诛败军罪，吾死不恨。 
现代文：真卿与大家商量说： 敌军锐气很盛，抵挡不住，如果被俘会使国家受辱，不是好办法，不如直接到皇帝行宫，朝廷如果以打败仗的罪名杀我，我死了也不悔恨。 
English: Zhenqing consulted with everyone and said: The enemy army is very vigorous and cannot be resisted. If being captured would humiliate the country, it is not a good way. It is better to go directly to the emperor's palace. If the court kills me on the charge of losing the war, I will not regret my death.

古文：至德元载十月，弃郡度河，间关至凤翔谒帝，诏授宪部尚书，迁御史大夫。
现代文：至德元年十月，放弃平原郡，渡过黄河，走崎岖小路到凤翔拜见皇帝，皇帝任他为宪部尚书，又调任御史大夫。
English: In October of the first year of the German era, he gave up Pingyuan County, crossed the Yellow River, and walked along the rugged path to Fengxiang to meet the emperor. The emperor appointed him as the constitutional department secretary, and transferred him to the doctor of history.

古文：方朝廷草昧不暇给，而真卿绳治如平日。武部侍郎崔漪、谏议大夫李何忌皆被劾斥降。
现代文：此时，朝廷正处于混乱状态，但真卿仍像平常一样按法律治事，武部侍郎崔漪、谏议大夫李何忌都被真卿弹劾降职。
English: At this time, the imperial court was in a state of chaos, but Zhengying still managed affairs according to the law as usual. The attendant of the military department, Cui Wei, and the doctor of the imperial court, Li Heyi, were all impeached and demoted by Zhengying.

古文：广平王总兵二十万平长安，辞日，当阙不敢乘，趋出■枑乃乘。
现代文：广平王统率二十万军队收复长安，辞行的那天，在行宫门前不敢上马，快步走出栅栏才上马。
English: Guangping Wang Tong led two hundred thousand troops to recover Chang'an. On the day of his resignation, he did not dare to mount his horse in front of the palace gate, and only mounted his horse after quickly walking out of the fence.

古文：王府都虞候管崇嗣先王而骑，真卿劾之。
现代文：王府都虞候管崇嗣在广平王之先上马，真卿弹劾他。
English: The governor-in-waiting of the royal capital, Chong Zi, rode on a horse before Guang Ping Wang, and Zhengying impeached him.

古文：帝还奏，慰答曰： 朕子每出，谆谆教戒，故不敢失。
现代文：皇帝退回奏章，慰勉说： 我的儿子每次外出，我都谆谆教育他，所以不敢失礼。
English: The emperor returned the music and consoled him, saying, "Every time my son goes out, I have to educate him, so I don't dare to be rude."

古文：崇嗣老而鐍，卿姑容之。 
现代文：崇嗣年老腿跛，你暂且宽容他。 
English: Chong Zi is old and lame. You should tolerate him for the time being.

古文：百官肃然。
现代文：百官由此都严肃守礼起来。
English: As a result, hundreds of officials began to seriously observe the etiquette.

古文：两京复，帝遗左司郎中李选告宗庙，祝署 嗣皇帝 ，真卿谓礼仪使崔器曰： 上皇在蜀，可乎？ 
现代文：长安洛阳收复后，皇帝派左司郎中李选祭宗庙，在祝词上署名 嗣皇帝 ，真卿对礼仪使崔器说 ：太上皇还在四川，这样行吗？ 
English: After the recapture of Luoyang in Chang'an, the emperor sent Zuo Si Lang to the Li Xuan Festival ancestral temple to sign the congratulatory message. Heir emperor, Zhengying said to the ceremonial messenger Cui Wei: The emperor is still in Sichuan, is this okay?

古文：器遽奏改之，帝以为达识。
现代文：崔器立即报告皇帝更改，皇帝认为他通达事理。
English: Cui immediately reported the change to the emperor, who thought he knew the situation.

古文：又建言： 《春秋》，新宫灾，鲁成公三日哭。
现代文：又向皇帝建议 ：《春秋》上记载，新建宗庙，请安神主，鲁成公哭了三天。
English: He also suggested to the emperor: "Recorded in "Spring and Autumn," build a new ancestral temple, and ask for peace. Lu Chenggong cried for three days.

古文：今太庙为贼毁，请筑坛于野，皇帝东向哭，然后遣使。 
现代文：现在太庙被叛贼毁坏，请在京都郊野筑坛，皇帝向着东方哭祭，然后再派出礼仪使。 
English: Now that the Great Temple has been destroyed by the traitors, please build a shrine in the suburbs of Kyoto. The emperor should offer a memorial service facing the east, and then send a ceremonial envoy.

古文：不从。
现代文：皇帝没有采用这个建议。
English: Le Zhu Rong did not listen.

古文：宰相厌其言，出为冯翊太守。
现代文：宰相讨厌真卿直言劝谏，调真卿出京任冯翊太守。
English: The prime minister disliked Zhengying's straightforward advice, and dispatched Zhengying to Beijing to be appointed as the regent of Fengye.

古文：转蒲州刺史，封丹阳县子。
现代文：转任蒲州刺史，封丹阳县子。
English: He was transferred to the post of Puzhou magistrate and assigned to Danyang County.

古文：为御史唐旻诬劾，贬饶州刺史。
现代文：被御史唐在皇帝面前诬陷，降为饶州刺史。
English: He was framed in front of the emperor by Emperor Tang and was reduced to the status of Raozhou assassin.

古文：乾元二年，拜浙西节度使。刘展将反，真卿豫饬战备，都统李峘以为生事，非短真卿，因召为刑部侍郎。
现代文：乾元二年，任浙西节度使，刘展将要反叛，真卿指示预先做好打仗的准备，都统李山亘认为他无事生非，攻击真卿，皇帝因此任命真卿为刑部侍郎。
English: In the second year of Qianyuan, Liu Zhan, who was appointed as the envoy of the Western Zhejiang Festival, was about to rebel, and Zhengying instructed him to prepare for war in advance. Li Shanwu, the general of the capital, thought that he had nothing to do with it and attacked Zhengying. The emperor therefore appointed Zhengying as the sergeant of the criminal department.

古文：展卒举兵度淮，而峘奔江西。
现代文：刘展终于起兵反叛，渡过淮河，李山亘逃奔江西。
English: Liu Zhan finally rebelled and crossed the Huai River, while Li Shanfu fled to the west of Jiangxi Province.

古文：李辅国迁上皇西宫，真卿率百官问起居，辅国恶之，贬蓬州长史。
现代文：李辅国将太上皇迁居西宫，真卿率百官问安，辅国讨厌他，降他为蓬州长史。
English: Li Fuguo moved the emperor to the West Palace, Zhengying led hundreds of officials to greet him. Fuguo hated him and relegated him to the position of governor of Penghu.

古文：代宗立，起为利州刺史，不拜，再迁吏部侍郎。
现代文：代宗即位，起用他为利州刺史，没有下任命书，任吏部侍郎。
English: When the daimyō ascended the throne, he was appointed as the official historian of Lizhou, and without a letter of appointment, he was appointed as an attendant of the cadre department.

古文：除荆南节度使，未行，改尚书右丞。
现代文：任荆南节度使，还未赴任，改任尚书右丞。
English: Jing Nan was appointed as the festival envoy, but before taking office, he was transferred to the post of Shang Shu Rongzheng.

古文：帝自陕还，真卿请先谒陵庙而即宫，宰相元载以为迂，真卿怒曰： 用舍在公，言者何罪？
现代文：皇帝自陕州回朝，真卿请皇帝先参拜陵墓宗庙，后在正殿即位。宰相元载认为他迂腐，真卿生气地说： 这意见用不用在您，进言的人有什么罪过？
English: When the emperor returned to China from Shaanxi, Zhenqing asked the emperor to first visit the mausoleum and the ancestral temple, and then ascend the throne in the main hall. The prime minister thought he was pedantic, and Zhenqing said angrily: This opinion does not apply to you, what is the fault of the person who made the suggestion?

古文：然朝廷事岂堪公再破坏邪！ 
现代文：但朝廷规章哪能经受您两次破坏呢？ 
English: But how can the rules of the imperial court stand two breaches by you?

古文：载衔之。
现代文：元载记恨在心。
English: I've been holding a grudge for a long time.

古文：俄以检校刑部尚书为朔方行营宣慰使，未行，留知省事，更封鲁郡公。
现代文：不久以检校刑部尚书的职务任朔方行营宣慰使，没有赴任，留在京城主持尚书省的事务，改封为鲁郡公。
English: Soon after, he was appointed to the position of inspector of schools and punishment department of Shangshu, but he did not go to the post, he stayed in Beijing to preside over the affairs of Shangshu, and was renamed Lu County.

古文：时载多引私党，畏群臣论奏，乃绐帝曰： 群臣奏事，多挟谗毁。请每论事，皆先白长官，长官以白宰相，宰相详可否以闻。 
现代文：当时元载招纳很多私党，怕群臣议论报告皇帝，就哄骗皇帝说： 群臣向您上书报告事情，多数进谗言诽谤，请求每次议论朝政，都先报告各自的长官，长官报告宰相，宰相审察对还是错，然后再向您报告。 
English: At that time, Yuan Zi recruited many private parties. He was afraid that the ministers would discuss and report to the emperor, so he tricked the emperor and said, "The ministers have written to you to report things, most of them are slanderous, and request that every time they discuss the government, they first report to their respective superiors, the superiors report to the prime minister, the prime minister examines whether it is right or wrong, and then reports to you.

古文：真卿上疏曰：诸司长官者，达官也，皆得专达于天子。郎官、御史，陛下腹心耳目之臣也，故出使天下，事无细大得失，皆俾访察，还以闻。
现代文：真卿上奏表说：各部门长官，是显贵的官员，都可专向天子报告，郎官、御史是陛下的腹心，是起耳目作用的臣子，所以出使天下，事情无论是大是小，是对是错，都要察访，回朝报告皇帝。
English: Zhenqing's report said: "The heads of departments, who are high-ranking officials, can report directly to the emperor. The vassals, who are subordinate to the emperor, are the eyes and ears of the emperor. Therefore, the emissaries from all over the world, whether the matter is big or small, right or wrong, must visit and report back to the emperor.

古文：此古明四目、达四聪也。
现代文：这是古代贤君广开四方视听呀！
English: This is the ancient sage opening up the four directions of audio-visual!

古文：今陛下欲自屏耳目，使不聪明，则天下何望焉？
现代文：现在陛下想自己堵住耳朵、蒙住眼睛，听不清、看不明，那国家还有什么希望呢？
English: Now that His Majesty wants to plug his ears and blindfold himself, unable to hear or see, what hope is there for the country?

古文：《诗》曰： 营营青蝇，止于棘；谗言罔极，交乱四国。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 苍蝇飞舞声嘤嘤，飞上荆棘停住身，进谗说话没定准，搅乱各国不太平。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: Flies dance to the sound of crickets, fly up thorns to stop themselves, enter the cocoon of speech without certainty, and disrupt countries without peace.

古文：以其能变白为黑，变黑为白也。
现代文：因为他能把白的说得变成黑的，把黑的说得变成白的。
English: Because he can talk white into black, talk black into white.

古文：诗人疾之，故曰： 取彼谗人，投畀豺虎；豺虎不食，投畀有北。 
现代文：诗人恨他们，所以写道： 捉住进谗的家伙，丢到野外喂虎狼，虎狼讨厌不愿吃，把他丢到北大荒。 
English: The poet hated them, so he wrote: "Catch a lame man, throw him into the wild and feed him to the tiger-wolf. The tiger-wolf hates it and does not want to eat it. Throw him into the Great Northern Wilderness.

古文：昔夏之伯明、楚之无极、汉之江充，皆谗人也，陛下恶之，宜矣。
现代文：昔日夏朝的伯明、楚国的无极、汉朝的江充，都是奸谗的人，陛下讨厌他们，是应该的。
English: In the past, Boming of the Xia Dynasty, Wuji of the Chu Dynasty, and Jiangchong of the Han Dynasty were all traitors, and His Majesty hated them, as he should.

古文：胡不回神省察？
现代文：为什么不回过头来反思明察一下呢？
English: Why not look back and reflect?

古文：其言虚诬，则谗人也，宜诛殛之；其言不诬，则正人也，宜奖励之。
现代文：他说的话是假的，是造谣，那就是奸邪的人，应该把他杀掉；如果他说的话不假，就是正派的人，应该奖励他。
English: If what he says is false and a lie, then he is a traitor and should be killed; if what he says is true and not a lie, then he is a decent person and should be rewarded.

古文：舍此不为，使众人谓陛下不能省察而倦听览，以是为辞，臣窃惜之。
现代文：如果丢掉这些不做，让众人认为陛下不能反思明察而懒得听、懒得看，用这为借口不提意见，那么我私下认为是很可惜的事。
English: If you throw these things away and don't do them, and let people think that Your Majesty can't reflect and is too lazy to listen, too lazy to look, and use this as an excuse not to offer opinions, then I think it's a shame.

古文：昔太宗勤劳庶政，其《司门式》曰： 无门籍者有急奏，令监司与仗家引对，不得关碍。 
现代文：昔日太宗皇帝辛勤管理各种政务，他在《司门式》中说 ：没有门第的人有紧急事上奏，派监司和仗家带到皇帝处当面报告，不得阻碍。 
English: Once upon a time, Emperor Taizong diligently managed all kinds of government affairs. He said in the "Diamond Style": If someone without a family member has an urgent matter to report, he must not be hindered from sending supervisors and warriors to report to the emperor in person.

古文：防拥蔽也。
现代文：是防止堵塞言路而受蒙蔽呀。
English: It is to prevent blocking the speech path and being deceived.

古文：置立仗马二，须乘者听。
现代文：设立二个马队做仪仗，让必须乘马的处理。
English: Set up two horse teams to do the ceremonial battle, so that the horse must be handled.

古文：此其平治天下也。
现代文：这就是他平定天下，使国家太平的原因啊。
English: That's why he pacified the world and made the country peaceful.

古文：天宝后，李林甫得君，群臣不先咨宰相辄奏事者，托以他故中伤之，犹不敢明约百司，使先关白。
现代文：天宝以后，李林甫得到皇帝宠信，群臣有不先询问宰相就向皇帝报告政事的，就借其他事中伤他，还不敢明目张胆地规定各部门奏事须先报告宰相。
English: After Tianbao, Li Linfu was favored by the emperor. Some ministers reported to the emperor on government affairs without first asking the prime minister, and slandered him with other things. They also dared not openly stipulate that all departments should report to the prime minister first.

古文：时阉人袁思艺日宣诏至中书，天子动静必告林甫，林甫得以先意奏请，帝惊喜若神，故权宠日甚，道路以目。上意不下宣，下情不上达，此权臣蔽主，不遵太宗之法也。
现代文：当时宦官袁思艺每天到中书省传达皇帝指示，皇帝的举动，必定告诉林甫。林甫就能揣摸皇帝的意思来报告请示，皇帝又惊又喜，把林甫当作能掐会算的神仙，所以皇帝一天比一天宠信他，他一天比一天专权，国人敢怒不敢言，皇帝的意见不能向下宣布，民情不让皇帝知道，这是专权的臣子蒙蔽皇帝，不遵守太宗的法规呀。
English: At that time, the eunuch Yuan Siyi went to Zhongshu every day to convey the emperor's instructions. The emperor's actions must be told to Lin Fu. Lin Fu could guess the emperor's meaning to report and ask for instructions. The emperor was surprised and pleased, and regarded Lin Fu as a god who could count. Therefore, the emperor trusted him more and more every day. He became more and more authoritarian every day. The people dared not speak out, the emperor's opinions could not be announced, and the people's feelings did not let the emperor know. This was an authoritarian vassal who blinded the emperor and did not abide by the Taizong's

古文：陵夷至于今，天下之敝皆萃陛下，其所从来渐矣。
现代文：一步步衰落至现在，国家衰败集中到陛下这一朝，这是逐渐积累起来的。
English: Step by step, the decline has accumulated until now, and the national decline has been concentrated on His Majesty this morning.

古文：自艰难之初，百姓尚未凋竭，太平之治犹可致，而李辅国当权，宰相用事，递为姑息。开三司，诛反侧，使余贼溃将北走党项，裒啸不逞，更相惊恐，思明危惧，相挻而反，东都陷没，先帝由是忧勤损寿。
现代文：安史之乱之初，百姓还没有疲惫，国家太平的局面尚可达到，但李辅国当权，宰相操纵朝政，互相勾结包庇，开设三司衙门，反复无常，胡乱杀人，使残余的叛贼、溃败的将领向北逃到党项，聚集在一起为非作歹，又加上惊恐，史思明觉得处境危险而害怕，相互勾结发动反叛，东都陷落，先皇帝因此忧虑辛勤而减寿。
English: At the beginning of the Anshi Rebellion, the people were not yet exhausted, and the country's peaceful situation could still be achieved, but Li Shuo was in power, the prime minister manipulated the government, colluded with each other to cover up, opened the three departments, capricious, indiscriminate killing, so that the remaining traitors and defeated generals fled north to the party line, gathered together for misdeeds, and added fear. Shi Siming felt the situation was dangerous and was afraid, colluded with each other to launch a rebellion, Dongdu fell, and the first emperor was worried and worked hard to shorten his life.

古文：臣每思之，痛贯心骨。
现代文：臣每当想到这些事，就痛彻心骨。
English: Whenever the minister thought of these things, his heart sank.

古文：今天下疮痏未平，干戈日滋，陛下岂得不博闻谠言以广视听，而塞绝忠谏乎？
现代文：现在国家创伤未平，战乱一天比一天增加，陛下怎能不多听正直的言论，广开视听而堵塞断绝忠心劝谏的言路呢？
English: Now that the country's trauma has not yet been smoothed over, and the turmoil of war is increasing day by day, how can His Majesty listen to more honest speech, open up audio-visual, and block the speech path of breaking off loyal advice?

古文：陛下在陕时，奏事者不限贵贱，群臣以为太宗之治可跂而待。
现代文：陛下在陕州时，奏事的人不限贵贱，群臣认为太宗时的升平局面踮脚就会看到了。
English: When His Majesty was in Shaanxi, the people who reported the matter were of all ranks. The courtiers thought that the rise and fall of Taizong's situation would soon be seen.

古文：且君子难进易退，朝廷开不讳之路，犹恐不言，况怀厌怠。令宰相宣进止，御史台作条目，不得直进，从此人不奏事矣。陛下闻见，止于数人耳目。天下之士，方钳口结舌，陛下便谓无事可论，岂知惧而不敢进，即林甫、国忠复起矣。
现代文：况且正人君子难得挺身而进，容易退隐，朝廷开放不避忌讳的言路，尚且怕他们不肯进言，何况怀厌倦的心理，命令宰相宣布准许或不准许进言，命令御史台拟定进言的条目，不能直接向皇帝进言，从此人们不向皇帝报告国事，陛下的见闻，停留在几个人的见闻上，天下的有才智的人，闭着嘴不说话，陛下便认为没有事可说，哪知他们是正害怕不敢进言呢？这是李林甫、杨国忠又复活了。
English: Moreover, it is rare for an upright gentleman to step forward, it is easy to retreat. The imperial court is open to the way of speech that does not avoid taboos, even if they are afraid that they will not speak. Moreover, with a tired mentality, they ordered the prime minister to announce whether to allow or not to speak, ordered the History Channel to prepare the entry for the speech, and could not speak directly to the emperor. From then on, people did not report to the emperor the state affairs. His Majesty's knowledge and experience remained in the knowledge and experience of a few people. The talented people in the world kept their mouths shut and did not speak, and His Majesty thought that there was nothing to say

古文：臣谓今日之事，旷古未有，虽林甫、国忠犹不敢公为之。
现代文：臣认为现在的事，是旷古未有的，即使是李林甫、杨国忠也不敢公开这样做。
English: Even Li Linfu and Yang Guozhong would not dare to do so openly.

古文：陛下不早觉悟，渐成孤立，后悔无及矣。
现代文：陛下如果不早觉悟，就会渐渐变得孤立，后悔就来不及了。
English: If His Majesty does not wake up soon, he will gradually become isolated, and it will be too late to regret it.

古文：于是中人等腾布中外。
现代文：于是宦官等在宫中和朝廷外传播。
English: As a result, eunuchs and others spread the rumor in the palace and outside the court.

古文：后摄事太庙，言祭器不饬，载以为诽谤，贬峡州别驾。改吉州司马，迁抚、湖二州刺史。
现代文：后来掌管太庙的事务，说祭器没有整治，元载认为他诽谤朝廷，降为峡州别驾，后改任吉州司马；调到抚州、湖州二州任刺史。
English: Later, he was put in charge of the affairs of the Grand Temple, saying that the sacrificial objects had not been rectified, and Yuan Zang believed that he had slandered the imperial court. He was demoted to the position of the head priest of Xiaozhou, and later he was transferred to the position of the chief priest of Jizhou; he was transferred to Fuzhou and the two states of Huzhou as the head priest.

古文：载诛，杨绾荐之，擢刑部尚书，进吏部。
现代文：元载被杀后，杨绾推荐他，提升为刑部尚书，随后升任吏部尚书。
English: After Yuan Zhao was killed, Yang Qi recommended him and promoted him to the Criminal Investigation Department, and then to the Criminal Investigation Department.

古文：帝崩，以为礼仪使。因奏列圣谥繁，请从初议为定，袁傪固排之，罢不报。
现代文：皇帝逝世后，任礼仪使，因而上奏说前几朝皇帝追加谥号的礼节繁复，请按初定的礼节为准，袁亻参坚决排斥他的意见，扣住不上报朝廷。
English: After the death of the emperor, he was in charge of the etiquette, so he said that the etiquette of the emperors in previous dynasties was complicated. Please follow the initial etiquette. Yuan Shishan firmly rejected his opinion and could not hold back the imperial court.

古文：时丧乱后，典法湮放，真卿虽博识今古，屡建议釐正，为权臣沮抑，多中格云。
现代文：时值国家死丧战乱之后，典章法令废弛，真卿虽然博古通今，多次建议更正，但被专权的大臣阻止，多数被隔断，不能送达皇帝。
English: At the time of the death of the country after the war, the ordinances and decrees were abolished. Although Bo Gu Tongxian repeatedly proposed corrections, they were blocked by the autocratic minister. Most of them were cut off and could not be delivered to the emperor.

古文：杨炎当国，以直不容，换太子少师，然犹领使。
现代文：杨炎掌管国政，真卿因刚正，不被杨炎容忍，改任太子少师，但还兼任礼仪使。
English: Yang Yan was in charge of state affairs. Zhengying, because of his uprightness, was not tolerated by Yang Yan and was reassigned as the young prince's tutor, but he also served as the ceremonial envoy.

古文：及卢杞，益不喜，改太子太师，并使罢之，数遣人问方镇所便，将出之。
现代文：到卢杞掌权，更加不喜欢真卿的刚正，改任太子太师，连礼仪使也罢免了，多次派人探听哪一个方镇方便些，准备把他排挤出京都。
English: When Lu Wei came to power, he disliked Zhengying's uprightness even more. He was appointed crown prince and grand master, and even the etiquette officer was dismissed. He repeatedly sent people to find out which Fangzhen was more convenient, and prepared to push him out of Kyoto.

古文：真卿往见杞，辞曰： 先中丞传首平原，面流血，吾不敢以衣拭，亲舌舐之，公忍不见容乎！ 
现代文：真卿去见卢杞，告诉他说： 你先父卢中丞的头颅送到平原郡，脸上满是血，我不忍心用衣服擦，亲自用舌头舔净，您忍心不容忍我吗？ 
English: Zhenqing went to see Lu Yao and told him: Your father Lu Zhongzheng's head was sent to Pingyuan County. His face was covered with blood. I couldn't bear to wipe it with my clothes and lick it off with my tongue. Can you bear not to tolerate me?

古文：杞矍然下拜，而衔恨切骨。
现代文：卢杞表面惊惶地下拜，但内心恨之入骨。
English: On the surface, Lu Wei bowed down in dismay, but his heart was filled with hatred.

古文：李希烈陷汝州，杞乃建遣真卿： 四方所信，若往谕之，可不劳师而定。 
现代文：李希烈攻陷汝州，卢杞竟然建议派遣真卿做使者： 真卿四方信服，如果到李希烈军中去传达朝廷旨意，可以不烦劳军队就能平定。 
English: When Li Xilai invaded Ruzhou, Lu Wei even suggested sending Zhengying as an envoy: Zhengying convinced the four parties that if he went to Li Xilai's army to convey the imperial court's will, the army could be pacified without much effort.

古文：诏可，公卿皆失色。
现代文：皇帝下诏认可。朝中大臣们为此大惊失色。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict of approval, and the ministers of the two Koreas were shocked and disgraced.

古文：李勉以为失一元老，贻朝廷羞，密表固留。
现代文：李勉认为失去一个朝廷元老，会给朝廷留下羞耻，秘密上表给皇帝，坚决要求留下真卿。
English: Li Mian thought that the loss of a court elder would bring shame to the court. He secretly submitted a report to the emperor and insisted on keeping Zhengying.

古文：至河南，河南尹郑叔则以希烈反状明，劝不行，答曰： 君命可避乎？ 
现代文：真卿到河南，河南尹郑叔则认为希烈反叛的迹象很明显，劝他不要去，他回答说 ：皇帝的命令能逃避吗？ 
English: Zhenqing went to Henan, and Henan's Yin Zhengshuo thought that the signs of Xilei's rebellion were obvious and advised him not to go. He replied: Can the emperor's order be evaded?

古文：既见希烈，宣诏旨，希烈养子千余拔刃争进，诸将皆慢骂，将食之，真卿色不变。
现代文：见了希烈后，宣读皇帝的诏书，希烈的养子千余人拔出刀来争着上前杀真卿，众将领都谩骂他，想把他一口吞掉，真卿面不改色。
English: After meeting Hillel, the emperor's edict was read out. More than a thousand of Hillel's adopted sons drew their swords and fought to kill Lord Zhen. All the generals cursed him and wanted to devour him in one bite. Lord Zhen did not change his face.

古文：希烈以身捍，麾其众退，乃就馆。
现代文：希烈用身子护着他，命令众将退下，于是让真卿住进宾馆。
English: Hillel protected him with his body and ordered the generals to retreat, so he let Zhengying live in a hotel.

古文：逼使上疏雪己，真卿不从。乃诈遣真卿兄子岘与从吏数辈继请，德宗不报。
现代文：希烈逼真卿写信给皇帝洗刷自己，真卿不听，希烈就借真卿的名义派真卿哥哥的儿子颜岘与几个随从到朝廷继续请求，德宗没有答复。
English: Hiri wrote a letter to Emperor Jianzhen to purify himself, but Jianzhen did not listen, so Hiri sent Jianzhen's brother's son, Yan Xuan, and several attendants to the imperial court in Jianzhen's name to continue the request. Dezong did not reply.

古文：真卿每与诸子书，但戒严奉家庙，恤诸孤，讫无它语。
现代文：真卿每次给儿子写信，只告诫他们严谨地敬奉祖宗，抚养孤儿，一直没有其他的话。
English: Whenever Zhenqing wrote to his sons, he only warned them to strictly honor their ancestors and raise orphans, and never said anything else.

古文：希烈遣李元平说之，真卿叱曰： 尔受国委任，不能致命，顾吾无兵戮汝，尚说我邪？ 
现代文：李希烈派李元平劝说他，真卿斥责元平说： 你受国家委任为官，不能报答国家，想我没有兵杀你，还来诱说我吗？ 
English: Li Xilai sent Li Yuanping to persuade him, and Zhenqing rebuked Yuanping, saying: "You were appointed by the state as an official, and you cannot repay the state. Do you think that I did not kill you, and you are still trying to seduce me?

古文：希烈大会其党，召真卿，使倡优斥侮朝廷。
现代文：希烈请来他的同党，设盛会，唤来真卿，并指使戏子们借唱戏攻击和侮辱朝廷。
English: Hillel invited his co-partisans, held a grand banquet, summoned Zhenqing, and ordered the actors to attack and insult the imperial court with their songs.

古文：真卿怒曰： 公，人臣，奈何如是？ 
现代文：真卿愤怒地说 ：您是皇帝的臣子，怎么能这样做！ 
English: Zhenqing said angrily, "You are the emperor's vassal, how can you do this!"

古文：拂衣去。
现代文：起身拂衣离去。
English: He got up, brushed off his clothes and left.

古文：希烈大惭。
现代文：希烈非常惭愧。
English: Hille is very ashamed.

古文：时硃滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳使者皆在坐，谓希烈曰： 闻太师名德久矣，公欲建大号而太师至，求宰相孰先太师者？ 
现代文：当时朱滔、王武俊、田悦、李纳等叛贼的使者都在座，对希烈说： 很早就听说太师的名望高，品德好，您想当皇帝，太师来了，选人当宰相谁能超过太师？ 
English: At that time, emissaries of traitors such as Zhu Tao, Wang Wujun, Tian Yue, and Li Na were all present, and they said to Xilai: I have long heard that the great master has a high reputation and good moral character, you want to be emperor, the great master is coming, who can choose someone to be prime minister who can surpass the great master?

古文：真卿叱曰： 若等闻颜常山否？
现代文：真卿斥责说： 你们听说颜常山没有？
English: Zhenqing scolded: Have you heard of Yan Changshan?

古文：吾兄也。禄山反，首举义师，后虽被执，诟贼不绝于口。
现代文：那是我的哥哥，安禄山反叛，首先起义兵抵抗，后来即使被俘了，也不住口地骂叛贼。
English: That was my brother, the rebel from Anlu Mountain. First, the insurgents resisted, and later, even when they were captured, they didn't stop cursing the traitors.

古文：吾年且八十，官太师，吾守吾节，死而后已，岂受若等胁邪！ 
现代文：我将近八十岁了，官做到太师，我至死保持我的名节，怎么会屈服于你们的胁迫？ 
English: I am nearly eighty years old, I have been promoted to the rank of grandmaster, I will keep my title to the death, how can I succumb to your coercion?

古文：诸贼失色。
现代文：众叛贼面尽失色。
English: All the traitors are disgraced.

古文：希烈乃拘真卿，守以甲士，掘方丈坎于廷，传将坑之，真卿见希烈曰： 死生分矣，何多为！ 
现代文：希烈终于逮捕了真卿，用甲士看守着。在庭院中挖了一丈见方的坑，传言说要活埋他，真卿约见希烈说： 死生有命，何必搞那些鬼把戏！ 
English: Hillel finally arrested Zhengyong and kept him under guard with an eunuch. He dug a square pit in the courtyard, and rumor had it that he wanted to bury him alive. Zhengyong met with Hillel and said, "Life and death are intertwined, so why bother with those evil tricks!"

古文：张伯仪败，希烈令赍旌节首级示真卿，真卿恸哭投地。
现代文：张伯仪兵败，希烈命令把张伯仪的仪仗和头颅送给真卿看，真卿悲痛地哭倒在地。
English: Zhang Bo Yi was defeated, and Hyeres ordered that the ceremonial battle and head of Zhang Bo Yi be presented to Zhengying. Zhengying cried and fell to the ground in grief.

古文：会其党周曾、康秀林等谋袭希烈，奉真卿为帅。事泄，曾死，乃拘送真卿蔡州。
现代文：恰逢希烈同伙中的周曾、康秀林想偷袭杀掉希烈，尊真卿为统帅，事情泄露，周曾被杀死，就把真卿押送到蔡州。
English: Coincidentally, Zhou Zeng and Kang Xiulin, two of the associates of Hyeres, wanted to make a surprise attack to kill Hyeres, with Zonzhengyi as the commander. The matter was leaked, Zhou Zeng was killed, and Zonzhengyi was escorted to Caizhou.

古文：真卿度必死，乃作遗表、墓志、祭文，指寝室西壁下曰： 此吾殡所也。 
现代文：真卿估计一定会死，于是写了给皇帝的遗书、自己的墓志和祭文，指着寝室西墙下说： 这是放我尸体的地方啊！ 
English: Zhengyang estimated that he would certainly die, so he wrote a suicide note to the emperor, his own epitaph and a dedication, pointing to the west wall of the bedroom and saying: This is the place to put my body!

古文：希烈僭称帝，使问仪式，对曰： 老夫耄矣，曾掌国礼，所记诸侯朝觐耳！ 
现代文：希烈称帝，派使者问登帝位的仪式，真卿回答说： 老夫年近八十，曾经掌管国家礼仪，只记得诸侯朝见皇帝的礼仪！ 
English: Heraclius proclaimed himself emperor and sent an envoy to ask about the ceremony of ascending the throne, to which Zhenqing replied: My husband is nearly eighty years old, he used to be in charge of state etiquette, he only remembers the etiquette of princes meeting the emperor!

古文：兴元后，王师复振，贼虑变，遣将辛景臻、安华至其所，积薪于廷曰： 不能屈节，当焚死。 
现代文：兴元年后，朝廷的军队又强大起来，叛贼料想形势会变，派将领辛景臻、安华到真卿住所，在庭院里堆起干柴说： 不投降，就烧死你！ 
English: After the founding of the People's Republic of China, the army of the imperial court became strong again. The traitors expected the situation to change, and sent generals Xin Jingzhen and An Hua to Zhengying's residence. They piled up firewood in the courtyard and said, "If you don't surrender, we'll burn you!"

古文：真卿起赴火，景臻等遽止之。
现代文：真卿起身跳入火中，景臻等人急忙拉住了他。
English: Zhenqing got up and jumped into the fire. Jing Zhen and others quickly caught him.

古文：希烈弟希倩坐硃泚诛，希烈因发怒，使阉奴等害真卿，曰： 有诏。 
现代文：希烈的弟弟希倩因跟朱氵此叛乱被杀，希烈因而发怒，派宦官杀真卿，说： 有诏书！ 
English: Hillel's brother, Hillel, was killed because of this rebellion with Zhu Xi. Hillel became angry and sent an eunuch to kill Lord Zhen, saying, "There is an edict!

古文：真卿再拜。
现代文：真卿拜了两拜。
English: The emperor bowed twice.

古文：奴曰： 宜赐卿死。 
现代文：宦官说 ：应该赐你死。 
English: And the eunuch said, Thou shalt surely die.

古文：曰： 老臣无状，罪当死，然使人何日长安来？ 
现代文：真卿说 ：老臣没有完成使命，有罪该死，但使者是哪一天从长安来的？ 
English: Zhenqing said, "The old minister did not complete his mission, he is guilty and deserves to die, but when did the messenger come from Chang'an?"

古文：奴曰： 从大梁来。 
现代文：宦官说 ：从大梁来。 
English: The eunuch said, "From the crossbeam."

古文：骂曰： 乃逆贼耳，何诏云！ 
现代文：真卿骂道： 原来是叛贼，何敢称诏！ 
English: Zhenqing scolded: It turned out to be a traitor, how dare you call it a decree!

古文：遂缢杀之，年七十六。
现代文：于是勒死了真卿，时年七十六岁。
English: So he strangled Zhenqing, who was 76 years old at the time.

古文：嗣曹王皋闻之，泣下，三军皆恸，因表其大节。
现代文：嗣曹王皋听到真卿死节的消息，流下眼泪，三军都痛哭。朝廷因而表彰他不屈的气节。
English: When the heir Cao Wangtao heard the news of Zhenqing's death, he shed tears, and all three armies cried bitterly. The imperial court thus commended his indomitable spirit.

古文：淮、蔡平，子頵、硕护丧还，帝废朝五日，赠司徒，谥文忠，赙布帛米粟加等。
现代文：淮西、蔡州平定后，真卿的儿子君页、硕护送灵柩回京，皇帝因此五天没有上朝，追封真卿为司徒，赠谥号 文忠 。提高一个等级支出办丧事的钱粮布帛。
English: After the pacification of Huaixi and Caizhou, Zhengying's sons Junzhe and Shuo escorted the coffin back to Beijing. As a result, the emperor did not go to the imperial court for five days. Zhengying was posthumously awarded the title of "Stu" and the posthumous title of "Wenzhong." The amount of money spent on the funeral was raised by one level.

古文：真卿立朝正色，刚而有礼，非公言直道，不萌于心。天下不以姓名称，而独曰鲁公。
现代文：真卿立身朝堂，正气凛然，刚直而有礼节，不是公正的话和正义的事不去想，天下的人不叫他的姓名，只称鲁公。
English: Zhenqing stood up in the morning hall, upright and dignified, upright and courteous, not just words and not thinking about justice. People around the world do not call him by his name, they only call him Lu Gong.

古文：如李正己、田神功、董秦、侯希逸、王玄志等，皆真卿始招起之，后皆有功。
现代文：像李正己、田神功、董秦、侯希逸、王玄志等人，都是真卿最先任用提拔的，后来都有功劳。
English: Li Zhengyi, Tian Shengong, Dong Qin, Hou Xiyi, Wang Xianzhi and others were the first to be appointed and promoted by Zhengyi, and later they all had merits.

古文：善正、草书，笔力遒婉，世宝传之。
现代文：真卿擅长正楷、草书，笔力遒劲婉转，世间人当作珍宝传习。
English: Zhenqing is good at block letters and cursive, and his penmanship is vigorous and gentle. People around the world regard him as a precious treasure.

古文：贞元六年，赦书授頵五品正员官。
现代文：贞元六年，皇帝发赦书，封颜君页为五品正员官。
English: In the sixth year of the Zhengyuan era, the emperor issued a letter of pardon, and Yan Junshi was awarded the title of the fifth grade official.

古文：开成初，又以曾孙弘式为同州参军。
现代文：开成初年，又封曾孙颜弘式为同州参军。
English: In the first year of Kaisei, his great-grandson Yanhong also joined the army.

