古文：游明根，字志远，广平任人也。
现代文：游明根，字志远，广平任人。
English: Yu Minggen, Zizhi Yuan, Guangping Renren.

古文：祖鱓，慕容熙乐浪太守。
现代文：祖游鳝，慕容熙政权的乐浪太守。
English: Zu Youjun, the first ruler of the Murongxi regime.

古文：父幼，冯跋假广平太守。
现代文：父游幼，冯跋假广平太守。
English: His father, Yu, was a child, and Feng Bafu was the governor of Guangping.

古文：和龙平，明根乃得归乡里。
现代文：和龙被平定之后，游明根得归乡里。
English: After the dragon was subdued, Yu Minggen had to return to his hometown.

古文：游雅称荐之，世祖擢为中书学生。
现代文：游雅称赞推举他，魏世祖擢拔他为中书学生。
English: Yu Ya praised and promoted him, and Wei Shizhu promoted him as a student of Chinese classics.

古文：性贞慎寡欲，综习经典。
现代文：游明根生性贞正谨慎，清心寡欲，广习经典。
English: Yu Minggen was born with a chaste and prudent nature, a pure heart and little desire, and a broad knowledge of the classics.

古文：及恭宗监国，与公孙叡俱为主书。
现代文：等到魏恭宗监国，他与公孙睿一起掌管朝中文书撰写事宜。
English: When Wei Kyongjong became the supervisor of the country, he and Gongsun Rong took charge of the writing of Chinese books in the DPRK.

古文：高宗践祚，迁都曹主书，赐爵安乐男、宁远将军。
现代文：高宗登基，迁官都曹主书，赐爵安乐男、宁远将军。
English: Gao Zong ascended to the throne, officials were transferred to Cao Shushi, and Anle Nang and Ningyuan Geng were given peerages.

古文：高宗以其小心敬慎，每嗟美之。
现代文：魏高宗以其小心谨慎，每每嗟叹赞美他。
English: Wei Gaozong praised him for his prudence and caution.

古文：假员外散骑常侍、冠军将军、安乐侯，使于刘骏，直使明僧暠相对。
现代文：任他为假员外散骑常侍、冠军将军、安乐侯，出使刘骏政权，直使明僧詗相对。
English: He was allowed to be a vacationer, horseback riding attendant, champion general, and happy peasant. He was dispatched by the Liu Bei regime and directly opposed by the Ming Dynasty.

古文：前后三返，骏称其长者，迎送之礼，有加常使。
现代文：前后出使三次，刘骏称他为长者，迎送的礼节，超出一般的使者。
English: He sent envoys back and forth three times, and Liu Bei called him an elder, and the etiquette of welcoming him was beyond that of an ordinary envoy.

古文：显祖初，以本将军出为东青州刺史，加员外常侍。
现代文：魏显祖初年，以本将军出任东青州刺史，加授员外常侍。
English: In the first year of Wei Xianzu, General Yimoto served as the East Qingzhou chief historian, and was promoted to the rank of non-commissioned officer.

古文：迁散骑常侍、平东将军、都督兗州诸军事、瑕丘镇将，寻就拜东兗州刺史，改爵新泰侯。
现代文：迁任散骑常侍、平东将军，都督兖州诸军事、瑕丘镇将，不久就被拜为东兖州刺史，改爵新泰侯。
English: He was transferred to the post of strolling equerry, the general of Pingdong, the military governor of Bozhou, and the general of Keqiu Town, and was soon worshiped as the history of East Bozhou, and was renamed the new Thai lord.

古文：为政清平，新民乐附。
现代文：为政清平，新附之民都乐意归心于他。
English: Because of his political cleanness, the people of Niitsu were happy to have him as their leader.

古文：高祖初，入为给事中，迁仪曹长，加散骑常侍。
现代文：魏高祖初年，入朝任给事中，迁任仪曹长，加散骑常侍。
English: In the first year of Emperor Gaozu of the Wei Dynasty, he was transferred to the position of chief etiquette officer, and he was also assigned to be an equestrian.

古文：清约恭谨，号为称职。
现代文：清廉简约，恭诚谨慎，十分称职。
English: Clean, simple, respectful and prudent, very competent.

古文：后王师南讨，诏假安南将军、仪曹尚书、广平公，与梁郡王嘉参谋军计。
现代文：后来，王师南讨，假安南将军、仪曹尚书、广平公，与梁郡王元嘉一道参谋军计。
English: Later, Wang Shiminan, the fake General Annan, Yi Cao Shangshu, Guangping Gong, and Liang County's Wang Yuanjia jointly led the military staff.

古文：后兗州民叛，诏明根慰喻。
现代文：后来兖州百姓叛乱。帝诏游明根前去抚慰。
English: Later, the people of Zhangzhou rebelled. Emperor Yao Minggen went to comfort them.

古文：敕南征沔西、仇城、连口三道诸军，禀明根节度。
现代文：皇帝命调拨沔水西、仇城、连口三道军马，让游明根节度指挥。
English: The emperor ordered the dispatch of three armies and horses to the west of Surabaya, Qucheng, and Liankou, with You Minggen as commander of the troops.

古文：还都，正尚书，仍加散骑常侍。
现代文：回京之后，任正尚书，仍加授散骑常侍。
English: After returning to Beijing, Ren Zheng Shangshu was still awarded the title of Sanzhi (free-riding) regular attendant.

古文：诏以与萧赜绝使多年，今宜通否，群臣会议。
现代文：帝下诏因与萧赜断绝使节往来多年，现在是否应该通使，让群臣一起讨论此事。
English: Since Emperor Zhao had cut off diplomatic relations with Xiao Yao for many years, should he now send an envoy to let the ministers discuss the matter together?

古文：尚书陆叡曰： 先以三吴不靖，荆梁有难，故权停之，将观衅而动。
现代文：尚书陆睿说： 先前因三吴不宁，荆、梁有难，所以权且停使，准备伺机而动。
English: Shangshu Lu Rui said, "Previously, due to the unrest in Sanwu and the difficulties in Jing and Liang, the authorities had stopped moving and were ready to wait for an opportunity to move.

古文：今彼方既靖，宜还通使。 
现代文：而今那里既已平静，应该再行通使。 
English: But now that there is calm, it is time to reopen the crossing.

古文：明根曰： 中绝行人，是朝廷之事，深筑醴阳，侵彼境土，二三之理，直在萧赜。
现代文：游明根说： 中绝行人，是朝廷之事，深筑醴阳，侵他境土，只有二三分理在萧赜那里。
English: You Minggen said, "It is a matter for the imperial court to decide who should be executed, and only two-thirds of Xiao Yao's territory should be destroyed.

古文：我今遣使，于理为长。 
现代文：我们今天遣使前去，占了道理。 
English: We sent an envoy today, and we got the message.

古文：高祖从之。
现代文：魏高祖接纳了这个意见。
English: Gaozu listened to him.

古文：文明太后崩，群臣固请公除，高祖与明根往复。
现代文：文明太后死后，群臣坚决要求高祖停职服丧，高祖与游明根议论往复。
English: After the death of the Empress Dowager of Civilization, a group of ministers resolutely demanded that Gao Zu suspend his duties to attend the funeral. Gao Zu and You Minggen argued back and forth.

古文：事在《礼志》。
现代文：事情记在《礼志》。
English: The event is recorded in the "Li Zhi."

古文：迁大鸿胪卿、河南王干师，尚书如故。
现代文：迁任大鸿胪卿、河南王元干老师，尚书职位仍旧。
English: Wang Yuangan, a teacher from Henan Province, has been transferred to the position of Daihong Qianqing. Shangshu's position is still the same.

古文：随例降侯为伯。
现代文：后随惯例降侯为伯。
English: Later, as was the custom, he was demoted to the rank of prince.

古文：又参定律令，屡进谠言。
现代文：又参与修订律令，屡次进奏忠谠之言。
English: He also participated in the revision of the ritsuryo code, and repeatedly quoted the words of Zhongzheng.

古文：明根以年逾七十，表求致仕，诏不许。
现代文：游明根因自己年过七十，上表请求退休。
English: You Minggen requested to retire because he was over seventy years old.

古文：频表固请，乃诏曰： 明根风度清干，志尚贞敏，温恭静密，乞言是寄，故抑其高蹈之操，至于再三。
现代文：皇帝下诏不同意，他频频上表坚决请求，帝下诏书： 明根风度清干，志尚贞敏，温恭静密，请求退休的表章被朕搁置，故请求退休的要求，再三提出。
English: The emperor did not agree, he frequently made a firm request on the table, the emperor's edict: Ming-rooted demeanor is clean, ambitious, virtuous, gentle and quiet, the request for retirement was put on hold, so the request for retirement was repeatedly proposed.

古文：表请殷勤，不容违夺，便己许其告辨。
现代文：表请殷勤，不容违夺，朕便已答应其请求。
English: I have accepted his request with all due courtesy.

古文：可出前后表付外，依礼施行。 
现代文：现把他前后表交予有关部门，依礼施行。 
English: He is now handing over his time sheets to the relevant departments, which will be carried out according to protocol.

古文：引明根入见，高祖曰： 卿年耆德茂，服勤累朝，历职内外，并著显绩，逮于耆老，履道不渝。是以釐革之始，委以礼任，迟能迂德，匡赞于朕。
现代文：侍者引游明根入见，高祖说： 卿年高德茂，累朝尽职，历职内外，都有显著功绩，到了老年，不改志操，所以我朝改革之始，朕委你以礼任，你年老德盛，经验丰富，定能为朕辅佐。
English: The waiter led the tour with a clear insight, Gao Zu said: Sir, you are old and virtuous, you have been doing your duty for a long time, you have made remarkable achievements in and out of your career. When you are old, you will not change your mind. Therefore, at the beginning of the reform, I entrust you with a ceremonial post, you are old and virtuous, and you are rich in experience. You will surely be able to assist me.

古文：然高尚悠邈，便尔言归，君臣之礼，于斯而毕，眷德思仁，情何可已。
现代文：然而你志高节远，便即言归，君臣之礼，从此结束，眷德思仁，情何可已。
English: However, if you set your sights too high, you will soon return home, and the courtesy of the monarchs and ministers will come to an end.

古文：夫七十致仕，典礼所称；位隆固辞，贤者达节。
现代文：夫七十退休，是礼典的说法；你位隆固辞，贤者达节。
English: When a husband retires at the age of seventy, it is said to be a ceremonial event.

古文：但季俗陵迟，斯道弗继。
现代文：但是礼俗不整，此道无继。
English: However, since the etiquette and customs are not in order, there is no way out.

古文：卿独秉冲操，居今行古，有魏以来，首振颓俗，进可以光我朝化，退可以荣慰私门。 
现代文：卿独具高远志操，有远古之风，有魏以来，首振颓俗，进可以光我朝化，退可以劳慰私门。 
English: Xing has a unique lofty aspiration, an ancient style, and since the Wei Dynasty, he has been the first to shake up the customs. He can enter the light and become a dynasty, and he can return to work and comfort his family.

古文：明根对曰： 臣桑榆之年，钟鸣漏尽，蒙陛下之泽，首领获全，待尽私庭，下奉先帝、陛下大恩，臣之愿也。
现代文：游明根回答说： 为臣已到日暮之年，钟鸣漏尽，蒙陛下恩泽，身首保全，回家之后，下奉先帝、陛下大恩大德，是为臣的一片心愿。
English: Yu Minggen replied, "It is my heart's desire to serve the late Emperor, His Majesty the Great, after I return home, since I have reached the twilight years and the bells have stopped ringing, and I have received His Majesty's grace and my head has been preserved.

古文：但犬马之恋，不胜悲塞。 
现代文：然而现在犬马恋主的心情，使为臣不胜悲伤。 
English: However, the current mood of "dogs and horses in love with the master" has made the vassal extremely sad.

古文：因泣不自胜。
现代文：因而泪水不断。
English: That's why the tears keep coming.

古文：高祖命之令进，言别殷勤，仍为流涕。
现代文：高祖要他上前来，殷勤言别，涟涟流涕。
English: Gao Zu asked him to come forward, politely say goodbye, and then leave.

古文：赐青纱单衣、委貌冠、被褥、锦袍等物。
现代文：皇帝赐予青纱单衣，还有貌冠、被褥、锦袍等物品。
English: The emperor gave him a gauze single garment, as well as a beauty crown, bedding, brocade robe and other items.

古文：其年，以司徒尉元为三老，明根为五更，行礼辟雍。
现代文：这一年，朝廷以司徒尉元为三老，明根为五更，行礼官学。
English: In this year, the imperial court named Sittu Rong Yuan as the third elder and Mingen as the fifth elder, and began the study of etiquette.

古文：语在《元传》。
现代文：语在《徒元传》。
English: in "The Tale of Genji."

古文：赐步挽一乘，给上卿之禄，供食之味，太官就第月送之。
现代文：皇帝赐给步挽一乘，给予上卿俸禄、美味佳肴，太官每月送上府门。
English: The emperor gave Bu Bu a carriage ride, gave Shangqing a salary and delicious food, and sent the eunuch to the palace every month.

古文：以定律令之勤，赐布帛一千匹、谷一千斛。
现代文：以其制定律令时的勤勉，赐给他布帛一千匹、谷一千斛。
English: For his diligence in making the edicts, he was given a thousand camels and a thousand yoke of oxen.

古文：后明根归广平，赐绢五百匹、安车一乘、马二匹、幄帐被褥。
现代文：后来游明根回到广平家中，朝廷又赐绢五百匹、安车一乘、马二匹、幄帐被褥。
English: Later, Yu Minggen returned to Guangping's home, and the imperial court granted him another 500 horses, a carriage, two horses, and bedding.

古文：车驾幸鄴，明根朝于行宫。
现代文：帝驾到邺城，游明根到行宫朝见皇帝。
English: The emperor drove to Shicheng, and Yu Minggen went to the imperial palace to see the emperor.

古文：诏曰： 游五更光素蓬檐，归终衡里，可谓朝之旧德，国之老成。
现代文：帝下诏说： 游五更两袖清风，还归乡里，而他昔日在朝中劳苦功高，威望显赫。
English: Emperor Zhao said: "You are five times stronger than the two-sleeved breeze, and you have returned to your hometown. In the past, he worked hard in the middle of the dynasty, and his prestige was outstanding.

古文：可赐帛五百匹、谷五百斛。 
现代文：可赐予帛五百匹，谷五百斛。 
English: He may give 500 horses to the donkey and 500 donkeys to the ox.

古文：敕太官备送珍羞。
现代文：敕令太官备送珍肴。
English: The emperor ordered the eunuch to prepare a special dish.

古文：后车驾幸鄴，又朝行宫，赐谷帛如前，为造甲第。
现代文：后来皇帝到邺城，游明根又在行宫朝见皇帝，帝如前式又赐给他谷帛，还为他建造第宅。
English: Later, when the emperor came to Shicheng, Yu Minggen went to see the emperor at the imperial court, and the emperor gave him Gu Yao, and also built a second house for him.

古文：国有大事，恆玺书访之。
现代文：国家有什么大事，总是写信访请于他。
English: If there is something important for the country, I always write to him and ask him to visit.

古文：旧疹发动，手诏问疾，太医送药。
现代文：游明根旧病发作，皇帝手诏问疾，太医上门送药。
English: Yu Minggen had an attack of an old disease, the emperor inquired about his illness, and the imperial physician sent medicine to his home.

古文：太和二十三年卒于家，年八十一。
现代文：太和二十三年在家中去世，享年八十一岁。
English: His wife of 23 years passed away at home at the age of 81.

古文：世宗遣使吊祭，赙钱一十万、绢三百匹、布二百匹，赠光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，谥靖侯。
现代文：魏世宗派使者前去吊祭，赠钱十万、绢三百匹、布二百匹，赠光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，谥称靖侯。
English: The Wei Sect sent an emissary to the hanging ceremony, giving 100,000 yuan, 300 horseshoes, 200 cloths, a doctor's badge, a gold medal with a purple ribbon, and the title of Jinghou.

古文：明根历官内外五十余年，处身以仁和，接物以礼让，时论贵之。
现代文：游明根历任朝野内外官职达五十多年，以仁义和顺立身，以礼义辞让接物，当时人以此为贵。
English: You Myung-geun, who served as a high-ranking official in and out of court for more than fifty years, stood up with benevolence and righteousness, and accepted things with courtesy, which was valued at the time.

古文：高祖初，明根与高闾以儒老学业，特被礼遇，公私出入，每相追随，而闾以才笔时侮明根，世号高、游焉。
现代文：高祖初年，游明根与高闾以儒老方面的学问，受到特别的礼遇，公私场合出入，二人相伴相随，而高闾以自己文才时时怠慢游明根，世称高、游。
English: In Gao Zu's first year, Yu Minggen and Gao Yao, who were both scholars in Confucianism and Laoism, were treated with special courtesy. They went out in public and private occasions, and the two accompanied each other, while Gao Yao, with his literary talent, always neglected Yu Minggen, and was known as Gao Yao.

古文：子肇，袭爵。
现代文：子游肇袭继爵位。
English: Ziyou's succession to a knighthood.

古文：肇，字伯始，高祖赐名焉。
现代文：游肇，字伯始，高祖赐予的名字。
English: Yu Zhao, the character of Bo Zhi, the name given by Gao Zu.

古文：幼为中书学生，博通经史及《苍》、《雅》、《林》说。
现代文：游肇幼年为中书学生，博通经史以及《苍》、《雅》、《林》的学说。
English: As a child, You Zhao was a student of Chinese classics, and was well-versed in the history of literature and the teachings of "Cang," "Ya" and "Lin."

古文：高祖初，为内秘书侍御中散。
现代文：高祖初年，任内秘书侍御中散。
English: In the first year of Gaozu's reign, the post of secretary to the Emperor was abolished.

古文：司州初建，为都官从事，转通直郎、秘阁令，迁散骑侍郎、典命中大夫。
现代文：司州初建，任都官从事，转任通直郎、秘阁令，迁任散骑侍郎、典命中大夫。
English: At the beginning of the construction of Sishu, he was appointed as the official of the capital to engage in construction, and then he was transferred to the post of Tsunenairo, Hikkaku-ryo, transferred to the post of Sanki-jiro, and then to the post of Denshoku Chudafu.

古文：车驾南伐，肇上表谏止，高祖不纳。
现代文：皇帝车驾南伐，游肇上表劝阻，高祖没有接受其意见。
English: Gaozu did not accept the emperor's suggestion to discourage Yu Zhao from going south by car.

古文：寻迁太子中庶子。
现代文：不久迁任太子中庶子。
English: He was soon transferred to the position of crown prince and became an illegitimate child.

古文：肇谦素敦重，文雅见任。
现代文：游肇谦虚朴素、敦厚笃重、温文尔雅。
English: You Zhao is modest and simple, dignified and dignified, gentle and elegant.

古文：以父老，求解官扶侍。
现代文：因为他的父亲年老，请求解官服侍。
English: Because his father was old, he asked to be relieved of his duties.

古文：高祖欲令遂禄养，乃出为本州南安王祯镇北府长史，带魏郡太守。
现代文：高祖想让他带禄奉养，于是令他出任本州南安王元桢镇北府长史，带领魏郡太守。
English: Gao Zu wanted him to bring a stipend to support him, so he appointed him as the governor of the North Prefecture of Wangyuanqian Town in Nan'an, leading Wei County.

古文：王薨，复为高阳王雍镇北府长史，太守如故。
现代文：南安王死后，又为高阳王元雍镇北府长史，太守官职仍旧。
English: After the death of Nan'an Wang, Gaoyang Wang became the governor of the northern capital of Yongzheng, and still held the position of governor.

古文：为政清简，加以匡赞，历佐二王，甚有声迹。
现代文：为政清简，加以匡赞朝廷，历辅二王，很有政绩。
English: For political clearness and simplicity, and for praising the imperial court, the two successive emperors have made great achievements in politics.

古文：数年，以父忧解任。
现代文：数年之后，因为居父丧被解除官职。
English: A few years later, he was relieved of his duties due to the death of his father.

古文：景明末，征为廷尉少卿，固辞，乃授黄门侍郎。
现代文：景明末年，朝廷征召他为廷尉少卿，坚决推辞，于是授他为黄门侍郎。
English: In the last years of the reign of Emperor Jingming, the imperial court called him to serve as a court lieutenant, but he firmly refused, so he was awarded the title of Huangmen Zhi Rong.

古文：迁散骑常侍，黄门如故。
现代文：迁任散骑常侍，黄门侍郎仍旧。
English: He was transferred to the position of straggler regular attendant, but remained the yellow gate attendant.

古文：兼侍中，为畿内大使，黜陟善恶，赏罚分明。
现代文：兼任侍中，任畿内大使，升善贬恶，赏罚分明。
English: Served concurrently as a chamberlain, appointed ambassador to the Kinai region, promoted for good or evil, with clear rewards and punishments.

古文：转太府卿，徙廷尉卿，兼御史中尉，黄门如故。
现代文：转任太府卿，迁任尉卿，兼任御史中尉，黄门侍郎官职仍旧。
English: He was transferred to the position of Taifu-kyo, then to the position of Jo-kyo, and concurrently to the position of Goshi-lieutenant. However, the position of Huangmen-servant remained the same.

古文：肇，儒者，动存名教，直绳所举，莫非伤风败俗。
现代文：游肇是位儒者，动存名教，直纠所举，无不是伤风败俗的事情。
English: You Zhao is a Confucianist, the movement to preserve the famous teaching, and the rectification of what has been raised are all things that are unethical.

古文：持法仁平，断狱务于矜恕。
现代文：他持法宽仁公平，断察狱讼务求矜悯仁恕。
English: He upholds the law, is lenient and fair, and investigates prison cases to seek mercy and forgiveness.

古文：尚书令高肇，世宗之舅，为百僚慑惮，以肇名与己同，欲令改易。
现代文：尚书令高肇，魏世宗的舅舅，声势之大，文武百官都十分忌怕，因游肇名字与自己相同，想让他改掉。
English: Shang Shuling Gao Zhao, the uncle of Wei Shizong, was so powerful that all the civil and military officials were afraid of him because he had the same name as themselves and they wanted him to change it.

古文：肇以高祖所赐，秉志不许，高肇甚衔之。
现代文：游肇以自己的名字是高祖所赐，坚决不改，高肇耿耿于怀。
English: You Zhao was given his name by Gao Zu, and he is determined not to change it. Gao Zhao is deeply concerned about it.

古文：世宗嘉其刚梗。
现代文：魏世宗听说，称赞游肇的刚正耿直。
English: Wei Shizong heard about it and praised You Zhao's uprightness.

古文：卢昶之在朐山也，肇谏曰： 朐山蕞尔，僻在海滨，山湖下垫，民无居者，于我非急，于贼为利。
现代文：卢昶在朐山，游肇上疏说： 朐山是弹丸之地，远在偏僻的海边，其地形非湖即山，老百姓连居住的地方都没有，对我们不是急需之地，对于敌人来说却是有利的地方。
English: Lu Wei in Lushan, Yu Zhaojang said: Lushan is a place of projectiles, far away on the remote coast, its terrain is not a lake but a mountain, the common people do not even have a place to live, it is not a place of urgent need for us, but it is an advantageous place for the enemy.

古文：为利，故必致死而争之；非急，故不得已而战。
现代文：有利，所以必然会为他而拼死争夺；非急，故不得已而战。
English: Precisely because it is useful to them, they must fight to the death; it is of little use to us, so we have no choice but to fight.

古文：以不得已之众，击必死之师，恐稽延岁月，所费遂甚。
现代文：以不得已之众打击拼命之师，臣担心会耽延岁月，所费很多。
English: With the last resort of the masses to fight the desperate division, the minister worried that it would delay the years and cost a lot.

古文：假令必得朐山，徒致交争，终难全守，所谓无益之田也。
现代文：假令必得朐山，徒致交争，最终还是难以全守，这正是所谓无益之田也。
English: If you have to fight, it will eventually be difficult to defend everything, which is the so-called useless field.

古文：知贼将屡以宿豫求易朐山，臣愚谓此言可许。
现代文：臣知敌人屡屡以宿豫请求交换朐山，臣愚蠢地认为这可以答应。
English: The vassal knew that the enemy had repeatedly requested Sukuyaku to exchange Hatakeyama, and the vassal foolishly thought that this could be granted.

古文：朐山久捍危敝，宜速审之。
现代文：朐山长久以来，危弊迭出，应该速速考虑对策。
English: For a long time in Lushan, dangers and drawbacks have repeatedly emerged, and countermeasures should be promptly considered.

古文：若必如此，宿豫不征而自伏。
现代文：如果交换了，宿豫便不征自伏。
English: If they are exchanged, Sukeyo will not surrender.

古文：持此无用之地，复彼旧有之疆，兵役时解，其利为大。 
现代文：握有这块无用之地，恢复旧有河山，兵事即刻而解，利益很大。 
English: Holding this useless piece of land, restoring the old rivers and mountains, the war will be solved immediately, and the profit will be great.

古文：世宗将从之，寻而昶败。
现代文：魏世宗准备这样做，不久卢昶就失败了。
English: Wei Shizong was ready to do so, but Lu Yao soon failed.

古文：迁侍中。
现代文：迁任侍中。
English: Transferred to the position of Samurai Junior High School.

古文：萧衍军主徐玄明斩其青冀二州刺史张稷首，以郁洲内附，朝议遣兵赴援。
现代文：萧衍军主徐玄明斩杀其青、冀二州刺史张稷的脑袋，以郁洲内附朝廷，朝中商议派兵赴援。
English: Xu Xuanming, the commander of Xiao Yan's army, cut off the head of his younger brother, Zhang Xuan, the chief of the two states of Hebei, and annexed the imperial court to Yuzhou, and North Korea and China negotiated to send troops to help.

古文：肇表曰： 玄明之款，虽奔救是当，然事有损益，或惮举而功多，或因小而生患，不可必也。
现代文：游肇表奏说： 徐玄明表达了款诚之意，虽然说应去增援拯救，然而此事有利也有害，或怕举而功多，或许因小而生祸患，可能出现的情况还说不定。
English: Yu Zhaohui said: Xu Xuanming expressed his sincerity. Although he said that reinforcements should be sent to rescue, the matter is beneficial and harmful, or it may be a lot of work, or it may be a small disaster, and the possible situation is still uncertain.

古文：今六里、朐山，地实接海，陂湖下湿，人不可居。
现代文：现今六里、朐山，地域接海，陂塘湖泊低下潮湿，人不可居。
English: Today, Liuli, Lushan, and the region are connected to the sea, and the Qutang lakes are low and wet, and people cannot live there.

古文：郁洲又在海中，所谓虽获石田，终无所用。
现代文：郁洲又在海中，正是所谓虽获石田，终无所用。
English: Ikusu is in the middle of the sea again. It is exactly the so-called "winning Ishida" that is ultimately useless.

古文：若不待连兵，六里虽克，尚不可守，况方事连兵，而争非要也。
现代文：如果不得到连口，六里虽然克平，尚且不可据守，何况想要连兵，而去争夺并不重要的地方。
English: If you don't get a liaison, you can't defend the six-district line, even though it's flat. What's more, if you want a liaison, you have to fight for places that aren't important.

古文：且六里于贼逾要，去此闲远。
现代文：况且六里对于敌人来说至为重要，离此又很遥远。
English: Moreover, six miles is very important for the enemy, and it is very far from here.

古文：若以闲远之兵，攻逼近之众，其势既殊，不可敌也。
现代文：如用赴远之兵，攻打逼近之敌，其势力自然悬殊，不能克敌制胜。
English: If you use soldiers from far away to attack an approaching enemy, their power will naturally be disproportionate and they will not be able to defeat the enemy.

古文：灾俭之年，百姓饥敝，饿死者亦复不少。
现代文：灾害之年，百姓饥寒交迫，饿死的也不在少数。
English: In the year of disasters, the people suffered from cold and hunger, and many died of starvation.

古文：何以得宜静之辰，兴干戈之役？
现代文：怎么能在应该停息争斗的时候，兴起干戈之役呢？
English: How can there be a battle of wits when the fighting is supposed to be over?

古文：军粮资运，取济无所。
现代文：这样的话，军粮资运，无处取给。
English: In this case, there would be nowhere to get the military food and supplies.

古文：唯见其损，未睹其益。
现代文：为臣只见其损，不见其益。
English: To be a vassal is to lose, not to gain.

古文：且新附之民，服化犹近，特须安帖，不宜劳之。
现代文：而且新附之民，刚承皇魏教化，特别需要安宁慰贴，不应劳役他们。
English: Moreover, the newly annexed people, who have just inherited the imperial and Wei civilization, are in particular need of peace and comfort, and they should not be forced to work.

古文：劳则怨生，怨生则思叛，思叛则不自安，不安则扰动。
现代文：劳则怨生，怨生则会想到叛乱，叛乱则国家不安定，不安是则必会动乱。
English: Work breeds resentment, resentment breeds rebellion, rebellion breeds instability, and instability breeds turmoil.

古文：脱尔则连兵难解，事不可轻。
现代文：如果是这样，则战事难以平息。事情轻重，不可小视。
English: If this is the case, it will be difficult to end the war. This is a serious matter and should not be taken lightly.

古文：宜损兹小利，不使大损。 
现代文：应该损彼小利，不使国家受到大的损害。 
English: It is necessary to damage others' small profits, and not to cause great damage to the country.

古文：世宗并不纳。
现代文：魏世宗又不接受意见。
English: Wei Shizong did not accept the opinion.

古文：大将军高肇伐蜀，肇谏曰： 臣闻：远人不服，则修文德以来之。
现代文：大将军高肇征伐蜀地，游肇谏奏说： 臣听说：远方的人不服统治，我们便修整文德以吸引他们。
English: The great general Gao Zhaozhou invaded and conquered Shu, and You Zhaozhuang said: "The minister heard that people in far away places would not submit to rule, so we rectified the literary and moral standards to attract them.

古文：兵者凶器，不得已而后用。
现代文：兵者凶器，不得已而后用。
English: The soldiers took the murder weapon and used it as a last resort.

古文：当今治虽太平，论征未可。
现代文：当今虽说是天下治平，但讨论征战则不可。
English: Although today it is said that the world is at peace, it is impossible to discuss going to war.

古文：何者？
现代文：为什么呢？
English: Why is that?

古文：山东、关右，残伤未复，频年水旱，百姓空虚，宜在安静，不宜劳役。
现代文：太行山东、关右，伤残没有恢复，连年水旱，百姓空虚，宜在安静，不应劳役。
English: Taihang, Shandong, Guanzhong, the injured and disabled have not recovered, consecutive years of floods and droughts, the people are empty, it is appropriate to be quiet, and should not be forced to work.

古文：然往昔开拓，皆因城主归款，故有征无战。
现代文：然而往年开拓疆域，都因城主归降，所以有征无战。
English: However, in previous years, the expansion of the territory was due to the surrender of the lord of the city, so there was no war.

古文：今之据者，虽假官号，真伪难分，或有怨于彼，不可全信。
现代文：而今据城而降的，虽假官号，但真假难分，也许有怨于彼，不可全信。
English: And now, according to the city, although the fake official title, but true and false are inseparable, perhaps there is a grudge against him, can not be fully trusted.

古文：且蜀地险隘，称之自古，镇戍晏然，更无异趣，岂得虚承浮说，而动大军。
现代文：而且蜀地险隘，自古有此说法，镇戍安泰，更无他图，我们哪能凭着传闻，便动用大军。
English: Moreover, the Shu region is narrow and dangerous. Since ancient times, there has been this saying that the town is safe and secure, and there is no other plan. If we can rely on rumors, we will use a large army.

古文：举不慎始，悔将何及！
现代文：行动开始不谨慎，后悔都会来不及！
English: If you are not cautious at the beginning of a move, how can you regret it?

古文：讨蜀之略，愿俟后图。 
现代文：征讨蜀地计策，愿等以后再议。 
English: He is willing to discuss the strategy in Shunde at a later time.

古文：世宗又不纳。
现代文：魏世宗又不接纳。
English: The Wei Sect did not accept them.

古文：肃宗即位，迁中书令、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，相州大中正。
现代文：肃宗即位，迁任中书令、光禄大夫，加金章紫绶，相州大中正。
English: Su Zong ascended to the throne, and was transferred to the posts of Zhongshirong (中書令), Guanglu Dafu (光禄大夫), Cajin Zhang Zijie (加金章紫) and Soshu Da Zhongzheng (相州大中正).

古文：出为使持节，加散骑常侍、镇东将军、相州刺史，有惠政。
现代文：出为使持节，加散骑常侍、镇东将军、相州刺史，有很好的政绩。
English: On the occasion of the Envoys' Day, he was accompanied by the Sanzhong riding attendants, the Zhendong general, and the Sangzhou stabbing history, and had a good political performance.

古文：征为太常卿，迁尚书右仆射，固辞，诏不许。
现代文：征召为太常卿，迁任尚书右仆射，游肇坚决推辞，帝下诏不许。
English: He was conscripted as Tai Changqing, transferred to the post of Shang Shuxu's right-hand man, You Zhao resolutely refused, and the emperor did not allow it.

古文：肇于吏事，断决不速。
现代文：游肇对于官吏的事情，决断不快。
English: You Zhao is not comfortable making decisions for government officials.

古文：主者谘呈，反覆论叙，有时不晓，至于再三，必穷其理，然后下笔；虽宠势干请，终无回挠。
现代文：碰到什么事情，他反复论叙，有什么不清楚的地方，询问再三，必定穷尽其理，然后方才下笔，即使宠幸显贵干涉，他也决不让步。
English: If he comes across something, he will repeatedly discuss it, if there is anything unclear, he will repeatedly ask questions, he will certainly exhaust his reason, and only then will he write. Even if he is privileged to interfere, he will never give in.

古文：方正之操，时人服之。
现代文：方正的操守，当时人都很佩服。
English: At the time, people were very impressed by the Founder's integrity.

古文：及领军元义之废灵太后，将害太傅、清河王怿，乃集公卿会议其事。
现代文：等到领军元叉废黜灵太后，准备加害太傅、清河王元怿，于是召集公卿商议其事。
English: When the leader of the army, Yuan Zha, deposed the Qianling Empress Dowager, he prepared to harm the Taifu, the Qing River King, Yuan Zi, and then summoned the nobles to discuss the matter.

古文：于时群官莫不失色顺旨，肇独抗言以为不可，终不下署。
现代文：当时群官无不失言顺从，游肇独独抗言认为不能这样做，终于让这事没能进行下去。
English: At that time, the group officials were all obedient, and Yu Zhaodong Duoduo protested that this could not be done, and finally the matter could not proceed.

古文：正光元年八月卒，年六十九。
现代文：正光元年八月，游肇去世，享年六十九岁。
English: In August of the first year of Zengguang, You Zhao died at the age of sixty-nine.

古文：诏给东园秘器、朝服一袭，赗帛七百匹。
现代文：帝诏给予东园秘器、朝服一套，赠帛七百匹。
English: The emperor gave Dongyuan secret utensils, a set of morning dress, and seven hundred horses.

古文：肃宗举哀于朝堂。
现代文：肃宗在朝堂举哀。
English: Suson held a memorial service in the Imperial Hall.

古文：赠使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史，谥文贞公。
现代文：赠使持节、散骑常侍、骠骑大将军、仪同三司、冀州刺史，谥称文贞公。
English: He was bestowed with the titles of Ji Jie, Zang Jie Chang Zhi, Zang Jie Da Gen, Yi Tong San Si, and Jizhou Jie Shi, and was nicknamed Wen Zhen Gong.

古文：肇外宽柔，内刚直，耽好经传，手不释书。
现代文：游肇外表宽柔，内心刚直，喜好经传，手不释书。
English: You Zhao is soft-spoken on the outside, upright on the inside, likes to read the classics, and can't read a book.

古文：治《周易》、《毛诗》，尤精《三礼》。
现代文：治学《周易》、《毛诗》，尤其精通《三礼》。
English: He has studied "Zhou Yi" and "Mao Shi" and is especially proficient in "Three Rites."

古文：为《易集解》，撰《冠婚仪》、《白珪论》，诗赋表启凡七十五篇，皆传于世。
现代文：写有《易集解》，撰《冠婚仪》、《白皀论》，并有诗赋表启一共七十五篇，都流传于世。
English: He wrote "Easy Set Solution," "Crowned Wedding Ceremony" and "White Heron Theory," as well as a total of seventy-five poems, all of which have been passed down to the world.

古文：谦廉不竞，曾撰《儒棋》，以表其志焉。
现代文：谦虚廉洁，不好夸饰，曾经撰写《儒鸉》，表达自己的志向。
English: Modest and incorruptible, not prone to boasting, he once wrote "Dugong" to express his aspirations.

古文：清贫寡欲，资仰俸禄而已。
现代文：清贫寡欲，养家糊口仅靠自己的俸禄。
English: He was poor and miserly, supporting his family on his salary alone.

古文：明根叔父矫，中书博士，濮阳、钜鹿二郡太守。
现代文：游肇任廷尉时，魏世宗曾经私下指示游肇，希望其笔下留情。游肇执意不肯，说： 陛下自己能原谅自己，怎能让为臣替你曲笔隐瞒呢！ 
English: When You Zhao was appointed as a courtier, Wei Shizong once privately instructed You Zhao, hoping that his pen would be spared. You Zhao stubbornly refused, saying: Your Majesty can forgive yourself, how can you let a vassal hide your handwriting!

古文：卒，赠冠军将军、相州刺史。矫孙馥，国子博士。
现代文：其固执可见一斑。到了肃宗初年，近侍群官在世宗生病期间侍奉皇帝的，自侍中崔光以下全都加授封邑，当时游肇被封为文安县开国侯，食邑八百户。
English: In the first year of Su Zong, the close attendants and officials who served the emperor during Sejong's illness were all awarded additional fiefs, from the attendant Cui Guang on down. At that time, You Zhao was named the founding lord of Wen'an County, with 800 households.

古文：馥弟思进，尚书郎中。
现代文：游肇独说： 子袭父位，自古为常，因为这而获得赏封，臣何以自安？ 
English: You Zhaodu said, "It has always been the custom for sons to succeed their fathers, so why should a vassal feel secure when he is awarded a title?

古文：刘芳，字伯文，彭城人也，汉楚元王之后也。
现代文：坚决推辞不受，议论的以此推崇他。刘芳，字伯文，彭城人，汉代楚元王的后人。
English: Liu Fang, a native of Pengcheng, a descendant of King Chu Yuan of the Han Dynasty.

古文：六世祖讷，晋司隶校尉。
现代文：六世祖刘纳，晋代任司隶校尉。
English: Liu Ne, the sixth generation ancestor, was a lieutenant of the Division of Civil Affairs at the time of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：祖该，刘义隆征虏将军、青徐二州刺史。
现代文：祖刘该，任刘义隆政权的征虏将军、青徐二州刺史。
English: Liu's ancestor Liu Jia was a conscript general in Liu Yilong's regime, and Qing Xu was the governor of Erzhou.

古文：父邕，刘骏兗州长史。
现代文：父刘邕，刘骏政权的兖州长史。
English: His father, Liu Bei, was the first governor of the Liu Bei regime.

古文：芳出后伯父逊之。逊之，刘骏东平太守也。
现代文：刘芳出继给伯父刘逊之当儿子，逊之，任刘骏政权的东平太守。
English: Liu Fang was succeeded by his uncle Liu Xun's eldest son, Xun Zhi, who was appointed the governor of Dongping in Liu Bei's regime.

古文：邕同刘义宣之事，身死彭城。
现代文：刘邕参与刘义宣的事情，身死彭城。
English: Liu Ye was involved in Liu Yixuan's case and died in Pengcheng.

古文：芳随伯母房逃窜青州，会赦免。
现代文：刘芳跟随伯母房氏逃窜青州，逢大赦获得自由。
English: Liu Fang fled Qingzhou with her aunt and uncle, and was released after an amnesty.

古文：舅元庆，为刘子业青州刺史沈文秀建威府司马，为文秀所杀。
现代文：舅房元庆，任刘子业青州刺史、刘文秀建威府司马，被刘文秀所杀。
English: His uncle, Yuanqing, was appointed as Liu Ziye's secretary in Qingzhou and Liu Wenxiu's secretary in Jianwei. He was killed by Liu Wenxiu.

古文：芳母子入梁邹城。
现代文：刘芳母子进入梁邹城。
English: Liu Fang and her son moved into Liangyaocheng.

古文：慕容白曜南讨青齐，梁邹降，芳北徙为平齐民，时年十六。
现代文：慕容白曜南讨青、齐，梁邹降顺，刘芳北迁为平齐百姓，时年十六岁。
English: Murong Baiyue was 16 years old when he moved south to Qingdao and Qi, Liang Kun to Shun, and Liu Fang to the north to become a citizen of Pingqi.

古文：南部尚书李敷妻，司徒崔浩之弟女；芳祖母，浩之姑也。
现代文：魏南部尚书李敷妻，司徒崔浩弟弟的女儿，刘芳的祖母，是崔浩的姑姑。
English: She was the wife of Shangshu Lijiki in the southern Wei Dynasty, the daughter of the younger brother of Stu Cuihao, the grandmother of Liu Fang, and the aunt of Cuihao.

古文：芳至京师，诣敷门，崔耻芳流播，拒不见之。
现代文：刘芳到京城，来到李敷府上，崔以刘芳四处流浪为耻，拒绝见他。
English: Liu Fang went to Beijing and came to Lishiki Prefecture. Cui was ashamed of Liu Fang's wandering around and refused to see him.

古文：芳虽处穷窘之中，而业尚贞固，聪敏过人，笃志坟典。
现代文：刘芳虽然处于穷苦窘迫之中，但学业仍未荒废，他聪敏过人，笃志经典。
English: Although Liu Fang is in poverty and distress, his studies have not been wasted. He is extremely intelligent and has a passion for classics.

古文：昼则佣书，以自资给，夜则读诵，终夕不寝，至有易衣并日之敝，而澹然自守，不汲汲于荣利，不戚戚于贱贫，乃著《穷通论》以自慰焉。
现代文：白天读书终日，以自资给，夜则诵读，终夜不睡，以至有典衣度日之困，而他却淡然自守，不急急于荣利，不戚戚于贫贱，写下《穷通论》以安慰自己。
English: During the day, he read all day, at his own expense, and at night he read, and did not sleep all night, to the point that he had to wear elegant clothes to get through the day. However, he kept to himself, was not eager for fame and fortune, and had nothing to do with poverty. He wrote "The Theory of Poverty" to comfort himself.

古文：芳常为诸僧佣写经论，笔迹称善，卷直以一缣，岁中能入百余匹，如此数十年，赖以颇振。
现代文：刘芳为诸僧抄写经论，字迹很漂亮，一卷价格一匹布，一年之中能收入百余匹布，像这样持续了数十年，赖此度日，情况渐渐好起来。
English: Liu Fang copied the sutras for the monks, the handwriting was beautiful, one volume cost one cloth, and more than a hundred cloths could be earned in a year. It lasted for decades like this, and thanks to this, the situation gradually improved.

古文：由是与德学大僧，多有还往。
现代文：由于刘芳与有德学的著名僧人，经常交往。
English: Because Liu Fang is a famous monk with virtue, he often interacts with him.

古文：时有南方沙门惠度以事被责，未几暴亡。芳因缘闻知文明太后。召入禁中，鞭之一百。
现代文：当时南方有位和尚叫惠度因事被责，不久暴亡，刘芳因此被牵连，文明太后把他召入宫中，抽了一百鞭子。
English: At that time, there was a monk in the south named Huidu who was blamed for the incident and soon died violently. Liu Fang was implicated as a result. Empress Dowager Wenming summoned him to the palace and gave him a hundred lashes.

古文：时中官李丰主其始末，知芳笃学有志行，言之于太后，太后微愧于心。
现代文：当时，宦官李丰主持这件事，他知道刘芳笃于学业，志行很高，便在太后面前讲起他，太后听说，有些惭愧。
English: At that time, the eunuch Li Feng presided over the matter. He knew that Liu Fang was devoted to his studies and had high aspirations, so he spoke about him in front of the empress dowager. The empress dowager was a little ashamed.

古文：会萧赜使刘缵至，芳之族兄也，擢芳兼主客郎，与缵相接。
现代文：正逢萧赜的使者刘缵来了，他是刘芳的同族兄弟，太后提拔刘芳为主客郎，与刘缵应对。
English: Just at the right time, Liu Ye, the emissary of Xiao Ye, arrived. He was a brother of Liu Fang. The empress dowager promoted Liu Fang as the chief guest and dealt with Liu Ye harshly.

古文：寻拜中书博士。
现代文：不久被拜授为中书博士。
English: He was soon awarded the title of Doctor of Chinese Calligraphy.

古文：后与崔光、宋弁、邢产等俱为中书侍郎。俄而诏芳与产入授皇太子经，迁太子庶子、兼员外散骑常侍。
现代文：后来与崔光、宋弁、邢产等人一起任中书侍郎，不久帝诏刘芳与邢产到东宫教授太子经书，迁任太子庶子，兼任员外散骑常侍。
English: Later, together with Cui Guang, Song Ben, Xizang and others, he was appointed as the attendant of the middle book, and soon the emperor sent Liu Fang and Xizang to the East Palace to teach the prince's scripture, transferred to the prince's illegitimate son, and concurrently served as a member of the outer cavalry.

古文：从驾洛阳，自在路及旋京师，恆侍坐讲读。
现代文：跟随车驾到洛阳，刘芳在路途上及到京城，总是侍坐太子讲读孜孜。
English: He followed the Holy Spirit to Luoyang, and on the way and back to Beijing, he was often given a seat by the emperor to read scriptures.

古文：芳才思深敏，特精经义，博闻强记，兼览《苍》、《雅》，尤长音训，辨析无疑。
现代文：刘芳才思深渊敏捷，特别精于经义，博闻强记，兼览《苍》、《雅》，尤其擅长音训，辨析字义确当无疑。
English: Liu Fang can think deeply and quickly, is particularly proficient in the meaning of the sutras, has a strong memory, can read "Chen" and "Ya," and is particularly good at phonetic training. There is no doubt that it is appropriate to analyze the meaning of the characters.

古文：于是礼遇日隆，赏赉丰渥，正除员外散骑常侍。
现代文：从这以后，他受到的礼遇日盛一日，得到的赏赐也很丰厚优渥，被正除为员外散骑常侍。
English: From then on, the courtesy he received increased day by day, the rewards he received were also very rich and generous, and he was removed as a non-member straggler.

古文：俄兼通直常侍，从驾南巡，撰述行事，寻而除正。
现代文：不久兼通直常侍，跟随皇帝车驾南巡，撰述行事，不久正除。
English: Soon after, he was also appointed as Tsunotsuna's personal attendant, following the sacred driver on his southern tour, responsible for recording the emperor's activities, and was soon officially appointed to the post.

古文：王肃之来奔也，高祖雅相器重，朝野属目。
现代文：王肃投奔皇魏，高祖十分器重，朝野为之瞩目。
English: Wang Su defected to the Wei Dynasty, Gao Zu was very powerful, and Asano attracted attention.

古文：芳未及相见。
现代文：刘芳没机会与他相见。
English: Liu Fang did not have time to meet him.

古文：高祖宴群臣于华林，肃语次云 古者唯妇人有笄，男子则无 。
现代文：高祖在华林宴请群臣，王肃说到 古时候只有妇人有成年礼，而男子则没有 。
English: Gao Zu held a banquet for his ministers in Hualin. Wang Su said that in ancient times, only women had the rite of passage, while men did not.

古文：芳曰： 推经《礼》正文，古者男子妇人俱有笄。 
现代文：刘芳说： 推寻经书《礼》正文，古时候女子男子都有此礼。 
English: Liu Fang said: According to the "Book of Rites," both men and women in ancient times used the gong.

古文：肃曰： 丧服称男子免而妇人髽，男子冠而妇人笄。
现代文：王肃说： 《丧服》说男子免而妇人结丧髻，男子戴帽而妇人插笄。
English: Wang Su said: "Mourning Clothes" says that men are exempt and women are in mourning, men wear hats and women wear braids.

古文：如此，则男子不应有笄。 
现代文：像这样，则男子不应该有插笄以示成年的礼制。 
English: As such, men are not supposed to have a moustache as a sign of adulthood.

古文：芳曰： 此专谓凶事也。
现代文：刘芳说： 这专门说的是不幸的凶事。
English: Liu Fang said, "This is a special funeral.

古文：《礼》：初遭丧，男子免，时则妇人髽；男子冠，时则妇人笄。
现代文：《礼》： 初遭丧，男子免冠，这时妇人则结丧髻；男子戴帽，则妇人插笄。 
English: "The Book of Rites" says that just after a funeral, a man should take off his hat, while a woman should use a hemp bundle; after the funeral, a man should put on his hat, while a woman should use a broom.

古文：言俱时变，而男子妇人免髽、冠笄之不同也。
现代文：这说的都是应时而变，而男子、妇人免冠结髻、戴帽插笄表示伤悼的方式不同。
English: What is said changes from time to time, and men and women express their condolences in different ways, such as wearing a crown or a hat.

古文：又冠尊，故夺其笄称。
现代文：又冠尊，所以代替了其插笄。
English: It is also called Guan Zun, so it replaced its interpolation.

古文：且互言也，非谓男子无笄。
现代文：而且这是换言互称，并不是说男子无笄。
English: And this is a play on words, not to say that men are blameless.

古文：又《礼》、《内则》称： 子事父母，鸡初鸣，栉纚笄总。 
现代文：又《礼内则》称： 子事父母，夜晚鸡开始鸣叫时，梳洗插笄。 
English: In addition, the "Principles of Etiquette" said: Parents of children, when the chicken starts chirping at night, comb out the bedding.

古文：以兹而言，男子有笄明矣。 
现代文：由此而言，男子有笄也就很明确了。 
English: According to this view, it is a matter of course for men to wear their hair in a bun.

古文：高祖称善者久之。
现代文：高祖赞赏这番议论，玩味了很久。
English: Gao Zu listened and praised him again and again, saying that he was right.

古文：肃亦以芳言为然，曰： 此非刘石经邪？ 
现代文：王肃也觉得刘芳说得很对，说： 这莫非就是刘石经吗？ 
English: Wang Su also felt that Liu Fang was right, saying: Isn't this Liu Shijing?

古文：昔汉世造三字石经于太学，学者文字不正，多往质焉。
现代文：过去汉代建造三字石经放置在太学，学者有什么文字上的问题，多到那里校质。
English: In the past, during the Han Dynasty, a three-character stone sutra was made in Taigaku. If the reader was not sure of the characters, he would go there to correct them.

古文：芳音义明辨，疑者皆往询访，故时人号为刘石经。
现代文：刘芳音义明辨，有疑问的人多前往询咨访求，所以当时人称为刘石经。
English: Liu Fangyin was clearly distinguished, and many people with doubts went to inquire, so at that time he was called Liu Shijing.

古文：酒阑，芳与肃俱出，肃执芳手曰： 吾少来留意《三礼》，在南诸儒，亟共讨论，皆谓此义如吾向言，今闻往释，顿祛平生之惑。 
现代文：酒宴完毕，刘芳与王肃一起出去，王肃握着刘芳的手说： 我从小留意《三礼》，在南方与诸儒生一起，经常一起讨论，大家都说此义就像我方才说的那样，今天听到你这番解释，顿时去掉我平生之惑。 
English: After the wine banquet, Liu Fang and Wang Su went out together. Wang Su shook Liu Fang's hand and said: I have been paying attention to the "Three Rites" since I was a child. In the south, together with the Confucianists, we often discuss it together. Everyone says that this meaning is just like what I just said. Hearing your explanation today, I immediately got rid of my lifelong confusion.

古文：芳理义精通，类皆如是。
现代文：刘芳理义精通，都像此字这样。
English: Liu Fang is well-versed in logic and reason. Everything is like this word.

古文：高祖迁洛，路由朝歌，见殷比干墓，怆然悼怀，为文以吊之。
现代文：高祖迁居洛阳，经过朝歌，见到殷商比干的墓冢，怆然悼怀，撰文吊惜。
English: Gao Zu moved to Luoyang. After the morning song, he saw the tombstone of Yin Shang Bi Gan. He was deeply saddened and wrote a regretful article.

古文：芳为注解，表上之。
现代文：刘芳为之注解，表奏呈上。
English: Annotated by Liu Fang, the performance is presented below.

古文：诏曰： 览卿注，殊为富博。
现代文：帝下诏说： 看卿的注文，很是广富渊博。
English: The emperor said, "The emperor's order is very rich and profound.

古文：但文非屈宋，理惭张贾。
现代文：但是辞藻不如屈、宋，义理不如张、贾。
English: However, his rhetoric is not as good as that of Qu and Song, and his righteousness is not as good as that of Zhang and Jia.

古文：既有雅致，便可付之集书。 
现代文：既然有此雅致，便可把它付印集书。 
English: Since it is refined and refined, it can be printed and included in the book.

古文：诏以芳经学精洽，超迁国子祭酒。
现代文：帝下诏因刘芳经学精深博洽，超阶迁授国子祭酒。
English: The following edict considered Liu Fang to be a profound scholar of the classics, and he was promoted to the position of the national overseer of the festival of wine.

古文：以母忧去官。
现代文：刘芳因居母丧离职。
English: Due to the death of his mother, he resigned from his post.

古文：高祖南征宛邓，起为辅国将军、太尉长史，从太尉、咸阳王禧攻南阳。
现代文：高祖南征宛、邓，起任他为辅国将军、太尉长史，跟从太尉、咸阳王元禧攻打南阳。
English: His great-great-grandfather was Nanzhewan and Deng, and he was appointed as an auxiliary general and captain Changshi, and followed the captain, Xianyang Wang Yuanxi, to attack Nanyang.

古文：萧鸾将裴叔业入寇徐州，疆场之民颇怀去就，高祖忧之，以芳为散骑常侍、国子祭酒、徐州大中正，行徐州事。
现代文：萧鸾将领裴叔业入侵徐州，疆场之民，大都很想归顺裴叔业，高祖很担忧，任命刘芳为散骑常侍、国子祭酒、徐州大中正，行徐州事。
English: Xiao Yu's general Pei Shuhei invaded Xuzhou. Most of the people in the battlefield wanted to surrender to Pei Shuhei. Gao Zu was very worried and appointed Liu Fang as a horseback riding attendant, the son of the country's sacrificial wine, and the president of Xuzhou University, to conduct Xuzhou affairs.

古文：后兼侍中，从征马圈。
现代文：徙迁兼任侍中，随征马圈。
English: Later, he also served as a chamberlain, following the large army to collect horse harnesses.

古文：高祖崩于行宫。
现代文：高祖在行宫去世。
English: Gaozu died on the way to the palace.

古文：及世宗即位，芳手加衮冕。
现代文：及世宗即位，刘芳为他手加莽袍冠帽。
English: When King Sejong ascended to the throne, Liu Fang dressed him in a magnificent robe and crown.

古文：高祖自袭敛暨于启祖、山陵、练除，始末丧事，皆芳撰定。
现代文：高祖的遗体从装殓到启祖、山陵、练除、丧事的自始至终，都是刘芳一手操办。
English: From the decoration of Gao Zu's body to the initiation, the tomb, the exorcism, and the funeral, Liu Fang was in charge of the entire process.

古文：咸阳王禧等奉申遗旨，令芳入授世宗经。
现代文：咸阳王元禧等人奉高祖遗诏，命令刘芳入宫教授魏世宗经书。
English: King Yuanxi of Xianyang and others ordered Liu Fang to enter the palace to teach Wei Shizong's scriptures according to Gao Zu's last will and testament.

古文：及南徐州刺史沈陵外叛，徐州大水，遣芳抚慰赈恤之。
现代文：等到南徐州刺史沈陵外叛于敌，徐州大水，朝廷派刘芳抚慰赈恤灾民。
English: When Southern Xuzhou rebelled against the enemy, and Xuzhou was flooded, the imperial court sent Liu Fang to comfort and support the victims.

古文：寻正侍中，祭酒、中正并如故。
现代文：不久被授职正侍中、祭酒，中正官职照旧。
English: Soon after, the imperial court made him an attendant, and the official posts of sacrificial wine and chujo remained the same as before.

古文：芳表曰： 夫为国家者，罔不崇儒尊道，学校为先。诚复政有质文，兹范不易，谅由万端资始，众务禀法故也。
现代文：刘芳上表说： 大凡治理国家的，无不崇儒尊道，先设学校，即使政有质朴文饰，这一范式从不改易，这是由于它是万端资始，众务禀法的缘故。
English: Liu Fang said on the table: When it comes to governing the country, the first thing to do is to respect Confucianism and set up a school. Even if the government has a rustic decoration, this paradigm will never change. This is because it is the beginning of everything and the cause of all affairs.

古文：唐虞已往，典籍无据；隆周以降，任居虎门。
现代文：唐、虞之世以前，典籍不存；盛周以来，学校任居虎门。
English: Before the Tang and Yu dynasties, classic books did not exist; since Sheng Zhou, the school has been located in Humen.

古文：《周礼·大司乐》云： 师氏，掌以微诏王。
现代文：《周礼·大司乐》云： 师氏，掌美以女微诏王。
English: "Zhou Li · Taisile" cloud: master, master of the hand, king of the woman.

古文：居虎门之左，司王朝，掌国中之事，以教国子弟。 
现代文：居虎门之左，司王朝，执掌国中过失的事情，以之教诲国臣子弟。 
English: On the left of the gate is the king's secretary, who presides over the affairs of the state and instructs the sons of state officials.

古文：蔡氏《劝学篇》云： 周之师氏，居虎门左，敷陈六艺，以教国子。 
现代文：蔡氏《劝学篇》说： 周朝师氏，居虎门左，阐释六艺，以教国子。 
English: Cai's "Persuasion" says: Zhou Chao Shi, on the left of the gate, explains the six arts to teach Kuniko.

古文：今之祭酒，即周师氏。
现代文：而今的祭酒，就是周朝的师氏。
English: And today's sacrificial wine is the Shizu of the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：《洛阳记》：国子学宫与天子宫对，太学在开阳门外。
现代文：《洛阳记》： 国子学官与天子宫殿相对，太学在开阳门外。 
English: "Record of Luoyang": The scholar-officials of the state stood opposite the palace of the emperor, while the scholar-officials of the imperial court stood outside the Kaiyang Gate.

古文：案《学记》云： 古之王者，建国亲民，教学为先。 
现代文：案查《学记》说： 古代王者，建立国家，亲爱人民，都以教学为先。 
English: A case study of the "Study" said: "Ancient kings, the establishment of the country, dear people, are all based on teaching first.

古文：郑氏注云： 内则设师保以教，使国子学焉；外则有太学、庠序之官。 
现代文：郑氏注释说： 内则设立师保以教，使国中子弟学受，外则有太学、庠序的官职。 
English: Zheng commented, "Inside, there is a teacher's guarantor to teach, so that the country's children can learn, and outside, there are official positions such as Taigaku and Shujie.

古文：由斯而言，国学在内，太学在外，明矣。
现代文：由此而论，国学在宫殿之内，太学在皇廷之外，很明确了。
English: From this point of view, it is very clear that the national school is in the inner city, and the international school is in the outer city.

古文：案如《洛阳记》，犹有仿像。
现代文：案如《洛阳记》，还是仿此设置的。
English: In the case of "Luoyang Chronicle," it is still set up like this.

古文：臣愚谓：今既徙县崧瀍，皇居伊洛，宫阙府寺，佥复故趾，至于国学，岂可舛替？
现代文：臣愚蠢地认为：现在既已徙县崧、鏶，皇宫迁居伊、洛，宫殿府寺，都依旧式，至于国学，怎么就不照原样了？
English: The vassal foolishly thought: Now that the county seat and capital have been moved, the imperial palace has moved to Ia and Luo, and the palaces and temples are still the same, as for the study of Chinese classics, why is it not as it was?

古文：校量旧事，应在宫门之左。
现代文：校比旧事，其位置应在宫门左边。
English: To explore the past, the location should be to the left of the palace gate.

古文：至如太学，基所炳在，仍旧营构。
现代文：至如太学，旧基仍在，仍旧营构。
English: As far as Taiyue is concerned, the old foundation is still in place, and the structure is still in place.

古文：又云：太和二十年，发敕立四门博士，于四门置学。
现代文：又过去太和二十年，朝廷下诏设立四门博士，在四门置学宫。
English: Twenty years after the Great Peace, the Imperial Court issued an edict to establish Shimen hakase, and a palace of learning was built at Shimen.

古文：臣案：自周已上，学惟以二，或尚西，或尚东，或贵在国，或贵在郊。
现代文：臣按：从周朝溯上，学校只有两种，或尚西，或尚东，或者以在都城为贵，或以在郊郭为上。
English: From the Zhou Dynasty onward, there were only two types of schools: Shangxi and Shangdong, with Shangxi being more expensive than Shangdong and Shangdong being more expensive than Shangdong.

古文：计太学坊并作四门，犹为太广。
现代文：到了周代，学校有六。师氏居内，太学在国都，四小学在郊郭。
English: By the Zhou Dynasty, there were six schools: Shishi in the inner city, Taigaku in the capital, and four elementary schools in the suburbs.

古文：以臣愚量，同处无嫌。且今时制置，多循中代，未审四学应从古不？
现代文：《礼记》说周人 养众老于学校，学校在国都四郊 ，《礼》又说： 天子设立四学，当入学而太子立。 
English: "Li Ji" said that Zhou people raised everyone to be good at school, and the school was in the four suburbs of the capital. "Li" also said: the Son of Heaven set up four schools, and when he entered the school, the prince stood up.

古文：求集名儒礼官，议其定所。 
现代文：注云： 四学，周代国都四郊的学校。 
English: Note: There were four schools in the four suburbs of the capital in the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：从之。
现代文：案《大戴礼记·了他的意见。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：迁中书令，祭酒如故。
现代文：迁任中书令，祭酒官职照旧。
English: The post of the chief priest was transferred, but the post of the sacrificial liquor officer remained the same.

古文：出除安东将军、青州刺史。
现代文：出任安东将军、青州刺史。
English: He was appointed as General Anton, and the history of Qingzhou was written.

古文：为政儒缓，不能禁止奸盗，廉清寡欲，无犯公私。
现代文：刘芳为政儒慢缓顺，不能禁止奸邪盗贼，但廉洁清正，寡求少欲，无犯公私利益。
English: Liu Fang is a slow-moving politician, unable to prohibit evil-doers and thieves, but he is clean and upright, has few desires, and does not commit public or private interests.

古文：还朝，议定律令。
现代文：还朝后，参预议定律令。
English: The next morning, the participants agreed on a code of conduct.

古文：芳斟酌古今，为大议之主，其中损益，多芳意也。
现代文：刘芳斟酌古今，成为大议的主要人物，律令中损减增益的内容，大多出自刘芳的意图。
English: Liu Fang has become a major figure in the discussion, considering the past and the present. Most of the content of the loss and gain in the regulation comes from Liu Fang's intention.

古文：世宗以朝仪多阙，其一切诸议，悉委芳修正。
现代文：魏世宗以朝廷礼仪多有缺损，其一切议论，都交给刘芳修正。
English: Wei Shizong said that the imperial court etiquette had many defects, and all his discussions were handed over to Liu Fang for correction.

古文：于是朝廷吉凶大事皆就谘访焉。
现代文：于是朝廷中吉凶大事都找刘芳咨询访求了。
English: As a result, all auspicious and inauspicious events in the imperial court sought Liu Fang's consultation and visit.

古文：转太常卿。芳以所置五郊及日月之位，去城里数，于礼有违，又灵星、周公之祀，不应隶太常，乃上疏曰：
现代文：转任太常卿，刘芳以所设置的五郊以及日月的位置，离都城的里数于礼有相违背的地方，又加上对灵星、周公的祭礼仪式，觉得不应该隶属太常寺，于是上疏说：
English: When Liu Fang was transferred to the post of Tai Chang Ching, he felt that he should not belong to the Tai Chang Temple because of the location of the five suburbs and the position of the sun and the moon, the number of miles away from the capital city in a place that is contrary to etiquette, and the ritual of the spirit star and Zhou Gong. Therefore, Shang Shou said:

古文：臣闻国之大事，莫先郊祀，郊祀之本，实在审位。
现代文： 臣闻国家大事，没有比郊祀更重要的了，郊祀的根本，实质是在审定位置。
English: Subordinate to national affairs, there is nothing more important than suburban worship. The essence of suburban worship lies in the approved location.

古文：是以列圣格言，彪炳绵籍；先儒正论，昭著经史。
现代文：所以列圣区别之言，彰明浩浩典籍；先儒正确之论，昭著于经史。
English: Therefore, the canonization of the word of distinction highlights the vast classics; the theory that the first Confucian was correct is well-known in the history of scripture.

古文：臣学谢全经，业乖通古，岂可轻荐瞽言，妄陈管说。
现代文：为臣学识谈不上通经，业也不能说通古，怎敢轻率地奏陈瞽妄之言，妄陈管见之说。
English: As a scholar, I can't talk about the transmission of the sutras, and I can't talk about the transmission of the classics. How dare I carelessly play the words of Chen Yu, and the words of Chen Guanzhong.

古文：窃见所置坛祠远近之宜，考之典制，或未允衷，既曰职司，请陈肤浅。
现代文：臣窃见所设置的祭坛祀祠远近的法度，考证典制，或许有欠妥的地方，臣既忝居此职，请陈肤浅之见。
English: The minister surmised that there might be something wrong with the far-and-near laws and the examination and certification system for the altars and shrines that had been set up. Since the minister was a recluse, he asked Chen for a superficial opinion.

古文：《孟春令》云 其数八 ，又云 迎春于东郊 。
现代文： 《孟春令》说 其数八 ，又说 迎春于东郊 。
English: "Meng Chunling" says that the number is eight, and also says that spring is coming to the eastern suburbs.

古文：卢植云： 东郊、八里之郊也。 
现代文：卢植说： 东郊，八里郊也。 
English: Lu Zhe said: the eastern suburbs and the eight-mile suburbs are also the best.

古文：贾逵云： 东郊，木帝太昊，八里。 
现代文：贾逵说： 东郊，木帝太昊，距京都八里。 
English: Jia Wei said, "In the eastern suburbs, there is a temple to the Wood God Taihao, eight miles from the city.

古文：许慎云： 东郊，八里郊也。 
现代文：许慎说： 东郊，八里郊也。 
English: Xu Shen said: The eastern suburbs are eight miles away from the city.

古文：郑玄《孟春令》注云： 王居明堂。
现代文：郑玄《孟春令》注云： 王者居明堂。
English: Zheng Xuan said in "Meng Chun Ling" Note: The heavenly son is sitting in the Ming Hall.

古文：《礼》曰：王出十五里迎岁，盖殷礼也。
现代文：《礼》曰：王者出城十五里迎岁，是殷代礼制。
English: "Rite" says: the king is out of the city for fifteen miles to welcome the new year, which is the Yin Dynasty ritual system.

古文：周礼，近郊五十里。 
现代文：《周礼》曰，在离城十五里的近郊祭祀。 
English: According to the etiquette of the Zhou Dynasty, there are a total of fifty miles in the suburbs.

古文：郑玄别注云： 东郊，去都城八里。 
现代文：郑玄另注说： 东郊，离都城八里。 
English: Zheng Xuan also noted: Eastern suburb, eight miles from the capital.

古文：高诱云： 迎春气于东方，八里郊也。 
现代文：高诱说： 帝迎于东方，坛祠在离都城八里的郊郭。 
English: Gao Yu said: To welcome the arrival of the god of spring in the east is to be in the suburbs eight miles from the city.

古文：王肃云： 东郊，八里，因木数也。 
现代文：王肃说： 东郊，八里，因木数。 
English: Wang Su said: In the eastern suburbs, eight miles, because of the number of trees.

古文：此皆同谓春郊八里之明据也。
现代文：这都同是春郊坛祠离都城八里的明据。
English: All of this is clear evidence that the Spring Suburban Shrine is eight miles away from the capital.

古文：《孟夏令》云 其数七 ，又云 迎夏于南郊 。
现代文：《孟夏令》云 其数七 ，又说 迎夏于南郊 。
English: "Meng Xia Ling" says that the number of clouds is seven, and also says that summer is coming to the southern suburbs.

古文：卢植云： 南郊、七里郊也。 
现代文：卢植说： 南郊，七里郊也。 
English: Lu Zhe said: the southern suburbs and the seven-mile suburbs are also important.

古文：贾逵云： 南郊，火帝炎帝，七里。 
现代文：贾逵说： 南郊坛祠，祭火帝炎帝，离都城七里。 
English: Jia Wei said: The southern suburb altar, dedicated to the Fire Emperor, is seven miles away from the capital.

古文：许慎云： 南郊，七里郊也。 
现代文：许慎说： 南郊坛祠，在离都城七里的郊郭。 
English: Xu Shen said: "Southern suburb" refers to a place seven miles away from the city.

古文：郑玄云： 南郊，去都城七里。 
现代文：郑玄说： 南郊，离都城七里。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: Southern suburb, seven miles from the capital.

古文：高诱云： 南郊，七里之郊也。 
现代文：高诱说： 南郊，七里郊也。 
English: Gao Yu said: Nanjiao She is a suburb seven miles from the capital.

古文：王肃云： 南郊，七里，因火数也。 
现代文：王肃说： 南郊坛祠，离都城七里，因于火数。 
English: Wang Su said: Nanjiao Altar, seven miles away from the capital, due to the number of fires.

古文：此又南郊七里之审据也。《中央令》云 其数五 。
现代文：这又是南郊坛祠离城七里的详细根据。《中央令》说： 其数五。 
English: This is also the detailed basis for the fact that the South Suburban Altar Shrine is seven miles from the city. "Central Ordinance" says: The number is five.

古文：卢植云： 中郊，五里之郊也。 
现代文：卢植说： 中郊，五里之郊也。 
English: Lu Zhe said: the middle suburbs, the suburbs of Wuli are also important.

古文：贾逵云： 中央，黄帝之位，并南郊之季，故云兆五帝于四郊也。 
现代文：贾逵说： 中兆，黄帝之位，并南郊之季，所以说兆五帝于四郊。 
English: Jia Wei said: in the middle of the zodiac, the position of the Yellow Emperor, and the southern suburbs of the season, so it is said that the Zhao Emperor is in the four suburbs.

古文：郑玄云： 中郊，西南未地，去都城五里。 
现代文：郑玄说： 中郊，在西南未地，离都城五里。 
English: Zheng Xuan explained: the middle suburb is located in the southwest of the city, five miles from the capital.

古文：此又中郊五里之审据也。
现代文：这又是中郊五里的明据。
English: This is another proof that the middle suburbs are five miles away from the capital.

古文：《孟秋令》云 其数九 ，又曰： 迎秋于西郊 。
现代文：《孟秋令》说 其数九 ，又说 迎秋于西郊 。
English: "Meng Qiu Ling" says that there are nine of them, and also says that autumn is coming to the western suburbs.

古文：卢植云： 西郊、九里郊。 
现代文：卢植说： 西郊坛祠，在离城九里的郊郭。 
English: Lu Zhe said, "The West Suburban Altar Shrine is in a suburb nine miles from the city.

古文：贾逵云： 西郊，金帝少皞，九里。 
现代文：贾逵说： 西郊，祭金帝少，在离都城九里的地方。 
English: Jia Wei said, "In the western suburbs, there are fewer offerings to the Golden Emperor, in a place nine miles from the capital.

古文：许慎云： 西郊，九里郊也。 
现代文：许慎说： 西郊坛祠，在离城九里的郊郭。 
English: Xu Shen said: West suburb, in the suburbs nine miles away from the capital.

古文：郑玄云： 西郊，去都城九里。 
现代文：郑玄说： 西郊，去都城九里。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: West suburb, nine miles to the capital.

古文：高诱云： 西郊，九里之郊也。 
现代文：高诱说： 西郊坛祠，在离城九里郊郭。 
English: Gao Yu said: The western suburbs are nine miles away from the capital.

古文：王肃云： 西郊，九里，因金数也。 
现代文：王肃说： 西郊，九里，因金数。 
English: Wang Su said, "The western suburb, Jiuli, is the number of gold.

古文：此又西郊九里之审据也。
现代文：这又是西郊九里的明据。
English: This is again a clear indication of the West Suburbs nine miles.

古文：《孟冬令》云 其数六 ，又云 迎冬于北郊 。
现代文：《孟冬令》说 其数六 ，又说 迎冬于北郊 。
English: "Meng Dongling" says that there are six of them, and also says that wintering is in the northern suburbs.

古文：卢植云： 北郊，六里郊也。 
现代文：卢植说： 北郊坛祠，在离都城六里的郊郭。 
English: Lu Zhe explained: The northern suburb is a suburb six miles from the capital.

古文：贾逵云： 北郊，水帝颛顼，六里。 
现代文：贾逵说： 北郊坛祠，祭祀水帝颛顼，在离城六里的郊郭。 
English: Jia Wei said: The North Suburban Altar Shrine, dedicated to the Water God, is in a suburb six miles from the city.

古文：许慎云： 北郊，六里郊也。 
现代文：许慎说： 北郊坛祠，在离城六里的郊郭。 
English: Xu Shen said: The North Suburban Altar Shrine is in a suburb six miles from the city.

古文：郑玄云： 北郊，去都城六里。 
现代文：郑玄说： 北郊坛祠，离城六里。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: "North suburb altar, six miles from the city.

古文：高诱云： 北郊，六里之郊也。 
现代文：高诱说： 北郊，六里之郊也。 
English: Gao Yu said: The northern suburb is a suburb six miles from the capital.

古文：王肃云： 北郊六里，因水数也。 
现代文：王肃说： 北郊六里，因水之数也。 
English: Wang Su said: The northern suburb is six miles away from the city, and it is by virtue of water transportation.

古文：此又北郊六里之审据也。
现代文：这又是北郊六里的明据。
English: These are all real evidence that the northern suburbs are six miles from the capital.

古文：宋氏《舍文嘉》注云： 《周礼》，王畿千里，二十分其一以为近郊。
现代文：宋氏《含文嘉》注说： 《周礼》，王郊千里，二十分其一为近郊。
English: Song's "Han Wenjia" notes: "Zhou Li," Wang Qianli, twenty-one is a suburb.

古文：近郊五十里，倍之为远郊。迎王气盖于近郊。
现代文：近郊五十里，一百里则为远郊，迎祭王气都在近郊举行。
English: There are 50 li in the suburbs and 100 li in the outlying areas. All the welcoming ceremonies are held in the suburbs.

古文：汉不设王畿，则以其方数为郊处，故东郊八里，南郊七里，西郊九里，北郊六里，中郊在西南未地，五里。 
现代文：汉代不设王畿，则以方比之数为郊郭的位置，所以东郊八里，南郊七里，西郊九里，北郊六里，中郊在西南未地，离都城五里。 
English: In the Han Dynasty, there was no Wang Gui, and the location of the suburb was determined by the number of square ratios, so the eastern suburb was eight miles, the southern suburb was seven miles, the western suburb was nine miles, the northern suburb was six miles, and the middle suburb was in the southwest, five miles from the capital city.

古文：《祭祀志》云： 建武二年正月，初制郊兆于雒阳城南七里。
现代文：《祭祀志》说： 建武二年正月，开始制立郊祀于雒阳城南七里的地方。
English: "Sacrifice Chronicle" says: In the first month of the second year of Jianwu, the establishment of suburb shrines began in a place seven miles south of Shenyang City.

古文：依采元始中故事，北郊在雒阳城北四里。 
现代文：这是依照元始年间的做法，北郊在雒阳城北四里的地方。 
English: This is in accordance with the practice of the early years, the northern suburb is located four miles north of Fenyang City.

古文：此又汉世南北郊之明据也。
现代文：这又是汉代南北郊的明证。
English: This is again clear evidence of the Han Dynasty's North and South Suburbs.

古文：今地祗准此。
现代文：今天的地点只按照这个选择。
English: Now the address must be in one of these places.

古文：至如三十里之郊，进乖郑玄所引殷周二代之据，退违汉魏所行故事。
现代文：至如离城三十里设立郊祀之坛，进与郑玄所引的殷、周两代的做法相违，退与汉、魏所行办法相背。
English: As far as setting up a suburb shrine thirty miles away from the city is concerned, it is contrary to the practice of Yin and Zhou, which was introduced by Zheng Xuan, and it is contrary to the Han and Wei methods.

古文：凡邑外曰郊，今计四郊，各以郭门为限，里数依上。
现代文：凡是邑城之外都称郊，今天计算四郊，应各以郭门为限度，距城里数依上典制。
English: All areas outside the town are called suburbs. Today, the four suburbs should be counted up to the city gate, and the number of miles from the city should be based on the above-mentioned system.

古文：《礼》：朝拜日月，皆于东西门外。
现代文： 《礼》，朝拜日月，都在城的东西门外。
English: "Rite," morning worship, sun and moon, all take place outside the east and west gates of the city.

古文：今日月之位，去城东西路各三十，窃又未审。
现代文：而今祭日月的位置，离城东西路程各为三十里，臣窃以为又未详审。
English: However, the location of today's festival, 30 miles east to west of the city, has not been examined in detail.

古文：《礼》又云： 祭日于坛，祭月于坎。 
现代文：《礼》又说： 祭日于坛，祭月于坎。 
English: "The Book of Rites" also says: "Sacrifice the sun on the altar and the moon in the pit.

古文：今计造如上。
现代文：而今计造如上。
English: Now, construction continues as before.

古文：《礼仪志》云 立高禖祠于城南 ，不云里数。
现代文：《礼仪志》说 设立高谋祠于都城南面 ，不说离都城里数。
English: "The Book of Etiquette" says that it is best to set up a Gaomo shrine in the south of the capital, not to mention the number of miles away from the capital.

古文：故今仍旧。
现代文：所以现在仍照旧。
English: So now it's business as usual.

古文：灵星本非礼事，兆自汉初，专为祈田，恆隶郡县。
现代文：灵星本不是礼制之事，祭祀出自汉初，专门为了祝祀田耕，总是隶祭于郡县。
English: Originally, it was not a matter of etiquette to offer sacrifices to the spirit star of the Lord's harvest. From the beginning of the Han Dynasty, special prayer activities were carried out by counties.

古文：《郊祀志》云： 高祖五年，制诏御史，其令天下立灵星祠，牲用太牢，县邑令长得祠。 
现代文：《郊祀志》说： 高祖五年，高祖诏示御史，命令天下设置灵星祠，祭祀用太牢，县邑的令长主祭。 
English: "Furusishishi" said: In the fifth year of Gaozu, Gaozu issued an imperial edict, ordering the world to set up a spiritual star shrine, a dungeon for sacrifices, and the chief priest of the county.

古文：晋祠令云： 郡、县、国祠稷、社、先农，县又祠灵星。 
现代文：晋代祠祀令说： 郡、县、国祭祀稷神、社神、先农，县又祭祀灵星。 
English: The Jin Dynasty Ancestral Shrine Ritual Order said: The county, prefecture, and country should offer sacrifices to the god, the shrine god, and the farmer, and the county should also offer sacrifices to the spirit star.

古文：此灵星在天下诸县之明据也。
现代文：这是灵星的祭祀在天下众县的明据。
English: These are conclusive proofs of the success of the establishment of Ling Xing Ancestral Shrine in all counties of the country.

古文：周公庙所以别在洛阳者，盖姬旦创成洛邑，故传世洛阳，崇祠不绝，以彰厥庸。
现代文：周公庙所以别设在洛阳，是因为姬旦创成洛邑，所以传祭洛阳，崇祠不绝，以彰明其功劳。
English: The reason why the Zhou Gong Temple should not be located in Luoyang is because Hidan created Luoyang, so the festival of Luoyang is passed down, and the reverence of the shrine is endless, in order to highlight its merits.

古文：夷齐庙者，亦世为洛阳界内神祠。
现代文：伯夷、叔齐的祠庙，也世世代代为洛阳界内的神祠。
English: The ancestral temples of Bo Yi and Shu Qi have also been shrines within Luoyang for generations.

古文：今并移太常，恐乖其本。
现代文：而今都移祭太常，臣担心会与其本意相违。
English: Now they are moving together to Taiji Temple, which I'm afraid goes against the original intention of building a shrine.

古文：天下此类甚众，皆当部郡县修理，公私施之祷请。
现代文：天下祭祀错位的事情很多，都应该归应属的部门郡县修理，公私在所祭的地方祈请。
English: There are many misplaced things in the world of sacrifice. They should all be repaired by the department to which they belong, county by county. Both public and private should pray at the place of sacrifice.

古文：窃惟太常所司郊庙神祗，自有常限，无宜临时斟酌以意，若遂尔妄营，则不免淫祀。
现代文：为臣窃以为太常寺所掌祭的郊庙神祗，自有其常限，不应该临时随意斟酌，如果随便乱来，则不免会淫侵祠祭常规。
English: Stealing the sacred relics of a suburb temple, which is the main festival of Taizhoji Temple, has its own time limit. It should not be arbitrarily considered. If it is done randomly, it will inevitably violate the rules of the ancestral shrine festival.

古文：二祠在太常，在洛阳，于国一也，然贵在审本。
现代文：二祠在太常，在洛阳，对于国家来说都是一样的，然而具体做起来就应审其根本。
English: Whether the Zhou Gong Ancestral Hall and the Boyi Shu Qi Ancestral Hall are located in the Taiji Temple or in the city of Luoyang is the most important matter related to the country as a whole. However, you are investigating their fundamentals.

古文：臣以庸蔽，谬忝今职，考括坟籍，博采群议，既无异端，谓粗可依据。
现代文： 为臣以庸懒卑陋，谬妄忝居今天的职位，为臣考索经典，博采群议，既无别样说法，可以说大致可以此为据。
English: With my mediocre and inferior talent, I mistakenly occupied the current position, reviewed and verified the past award system, and widely adopted everyone's opinions. Since there is no heresy, I think that it can be used as a basis for implementation.

古文：今玄冬务隙，野罄人闲，迁易郊坛，二三为便。
现代文：而今年冬天劳作的间隙，野静人闲，便可迁移郊祠神坛，各方都很方便。 
English: Now it is mid-winter, there are fewer official duties, the fields are exhausted, the farmers are at leisure, and it is more convenient to relocate the suburban altar.

古文：诏曰： 所上乃有明据，但先朝置立已久，且可从旧。 
现代文：皇帝下诏说： 所上奏陈确有明据，但是郊庙先朝置立已久，也就姑且依照旧式。 
English: The Imperial Court issued an edict saying, "The above-mentioned appeals all have a clear basis, however, the previous government has been in place for a long time, and the old system can still be used."

古文：先是，高祖于代都诏中书监高闾、太常少卿陆琇、并公孙崇等十余人修理金石及八音之器。
现代文：这以前，魏高祖在代都诏令中书监高闾、太常少卿陆王秀，加上公孙崇等十多人修理金石乐器，以及八音之器。
English: Prior to this, Wei Gao Zu had more than ten people, including Gao Zhen, the librarian, Lu Wangxiu, the too-frequent minor lord, and Gongsun Chong, repair the precious stone musical instruments and the eight-tone musical instruments.

古文：后崇为太乐令，乃上请尚书仆射高肇，更共营理。
现代文：后来，公孙崇任太乐令，上书奏请尚书仆射高肇，一起办理此事。
English: Later, when Gongsun Chongren was appointed Tailei, he sent a letter requesting Shang Shuxu's servant Gaozhao to jointly manage the matter with him.

古文：世宗诏芳共主之。
现代文：魏世宗下诏让刘芳一起处理。
English: Wei Shizong issued an edict to let Liu Fang deal with it together.

古文：芳表以礼乐事大，不容辄决，自非博延公卿，广集儒彦，讨论得失，研穷是非，则无以垂之万叶，为不朽之式。
现代文：刘芳上表认为礼乐之事关系重大，不能马上下决断，如不广泛招延公卿大臣，广泛聚集大儒宿彦，讨论得失，研究是非，就会无法让它垂之万世，成为不朽的法式。
English: Liu Fang believes that the matter of ceremonial music is very important and cannot be decided immediately. If we do not widely invite noblemen and ministers, widely gather great scholars, discuss the pros and cons, and study the rights and wrongs, we will not be able to make it last forever and become an immortal French style.

古文：被报听许，数旬之间，频烦三议。
现代文：所陈得到采纳，数旬之内，朝臣频繁讨论三次。
English: The proposal was accepted by the Imperial Court, and the courtiers discussed it several times over the next few days.

古文：于时，朝士颇以崇专综既久，不应乖谬，各嘿然无发论者。
现代文：在那时，朝中官员都觉得公孙崇既然专门管理此事已有很长时间，不应该有什么乖异谬妄的地方，讨论时大家各各默然无话可说。
English: At that time, officials from both North Korea and China felt that since Gongsun Chong had been specifically managing this matter for a long time, there should not be any abnormal or absurd place, and everyone had nothing to say during the discussion.

古文：芳乃探引经诰，搜括旧文，共相难质，皆有明据，以为盈缩有差，不合典式。
现代文：刘芳于是探引经书，搜寻旧文，共相质难，所说都有明确的根据，认为乐器盈缩尺度都与典制有差距，不合典制范式。
English: Liu Fang then cited the scriptures, searched the past literature, and with Gongsun Chong, it was difficult to question each other, and there was conclusive evidence to support the theory. He believed that the strengths and weaknesses were different and did not conform to the model.

古文：崇虽示相酬答，而不会问意，卒无以自通。
现代文：公孙崇虽然也有一些应答，而往往答非所问，终而无法自圆其说。
English: Although Gongsun Chong answered the question, he could not understand it well, so he could not understand it.

古文：尚书述奏，仍诏委芳别更考制，于是学者弥归宗焉。
现代文：尚书把这些情况述奏皇帝，帝仍诏委派刘芳另外继续考索典制，从此以后学者更加崇敬他了。
English: Shang Shu recounted these circumstances to the emperor, but the emperor still ordered Liu Fang to continue his research on the imperial system. Since then, scholars have revered him even more.

古文：芳以社稷无树，又上疏曰： 依《合朔仪注》：日有变，以朱丝为绳，以绕系社树三匝。
现代文：刘芳以社稷坛上无树，又上疏说： 依照《合朔仪注》： 日有变化，用朱丝结绳，以之绕系社树三周。 
English: Liu Fang said that there was no tree on the altar of the shrine, and it was sparse: According to the "Heshuo Ceremony Note": There are changes every day, tie a rope with jade and use it to wrap around the shrine tree for three weeks.

古文：而今无树。
现代文：而今连社树都没有。
English: Now, however, no trees have been planted in the shrine.

古文：又《周礼·司徒职》云： 设其社稷之壝，而树之田主，各以其社之所宜木。 
现代文：又《周礼·司徒职》云： 设立社稷之墙，而树之以田主，各种上社庙所宜种的树木。 
English: In addition, "Zhou Li, Shitong Li" also said that the wall of the community hall should be built, and the trees should be planted by the owner of the field, and the trees should be planted by various temples of the community.

古文：郑玄注云： 所宜木，谓若松柏栗也。 
现代文：郑玄注说： 所宜种的树木，指像松柏栗树之类。 
English: Zheng Xuan said: The trees that are suitable for planting are pine, cypress and chestnut trees.

古文：此其一证也。
现代文：这是一证。
English: This is a proof.

古文：又《小司徒》、《封人职》云： 掌设王之社壝，为畿封而树之。 
现代文：又《小司徒·封人职》说： 掌设君王的社墙，确立边界封土而种树。 
English: In addition, "Little Siddhartha, the post of fetter" said: Take control of the monarch's social wall, establish the boundary of the fief and plant trees.

古文：郑玄注云： 不言稷者，王主于社。稷，社之细也。 
现代文：郑玄注说： 不说稷，因为王主祭于社，而稷，是社的分支。 
English: Zheng Xuan said, "We don't say that because the king's main festival is held at the shrine, and the yakitori is a branch of the shrine.

古文：此其二证也。
现代文：这是二证。
English: This is another proof.

古文：又《论语》曰： 哀公问社于宰我，宰我对曰：夏后氏以松，殷人以柏，周人以栗。 
现代文：又《论语》曰： 哀公找宰我问社庙之事，宰我说：夏后氏种松，殷人种柏，周人种栗。 
English: "The Analects" also says: "Aigong sought me out and asked me about the temple, and I said: Xiao's kind of pine, Yin's kind of cypress, and Zhou's kind of chestnut."

古文：是乃土地之所宜也。
现代文：这是根据土地情况而决定的。
English: This was decided on the basis of the land situation.

古文：此其三证也。
现代文：这是三证。
English: These are the three certificates.

古文：又《白虎通》云： 社稷所以有树，何也？
现代文：又《白虎通》说： 社稷所以有树，是什么原因呢？
English: Also, "White Tiger" said: The community has trees, so what is the reason?

古文：尊而识之也，使民望见即敬之，又所以表功也。 
现代文：还是尊崇它的标志。也为的是让老百姓看到就产生敬仰之意，又是为了表彰其功。 
English: It is also a sign of respect for it. It is also for the common people to see and have a sense of admiration, and it is also to commend their work.

古文：案此正解所以有树之义，了不论有之与无也。
现代文：案此是正面解释所以有树的意义，而不是说有还是没有树。
English: This is a positive interpretation, so the meaning of having a tree is not whether there is a tree or not.

古文：此其四证也。
现代文：这是四证。
English: These are the four proofs.

古文：此云 社稷所以有树何 ，然则稷亦有树明矣。
现代文：这里说 社稷所以有树的原因 ，这样，稷庙中有树也应很明确了。
English: It says here that the reason why there is a tree in the community hall, so it should be clear why there is a tree in the temple.

古文：又《五经通义》云： 天子太社、王社，诸侯国社、侯社。制度奈何？
现代文：又《五经通义》说： 天子太社、王社，诸侯的国社、侯社，制度怎样？
English: Also, "Five Classics of Confucianism" says: Emperor's Grand Shrine, King's Shrine, Princes' State Shrine, Princes' Shrine, what is the system?

古文：曰：社皆有垣无屋，树其中以木，有木者土，主生万物，万物莫善于木，故树木也。 
现代文：曰：社都只有垣墙而没有屋宇，在其中植树，可种木的是因为有土，主土生万物，万物之中没有比木更好的了，所以种树。 
English: He said: "Shrines have only walls and no buildings, and trees are planted in them. The reason why trees can be planted is because there is soil. The Lord gave birth to all things, and among all things, there is nothing better than trees, so plant trees."

古文：此其五证也。
现代文：这是第五证。
English: This is the fifth sign.

古文：此最其丁宁备解有树之意也。
现代文：这是最为合适的说明社中有树的意旨了。
English: This is the most appropriate way to explain the meaning of the tree in the company.

古文：又《五经要义》云： 社必树之以木。 
现代文：又《五经要义》说 社庙中必定种上树木 。
English: In addition, the "Five Essentials of the Classics" also says that trees must be planted in shrines that worship the gods of the land.

古文：《周礼·司徒职》曰： 班社而树之，各以土地所生。 
现代文：《周礼·司徒职》说： 分社而种树，各因土地所适宜生长的树木。 
English: "Zhou Li and Shituxi" said: The branch planted trees, each tree suitable for growth according to the land.

古文：《尚书逸篇》曰： 太社惟松，东社惟柏，南社惟梓，西社惟栗，北社惟槐。 
现代文：《尚书逸篇》说： 太社种松，东社种柏，南社种梓，西社种栗，北社种槐。 
English: "Shang Shu Yih Hen" said: Taisha grows pine, Dongsha grows cypress, Nansha grows zi, Saisha grows chestnut, and Hokusha grows maple.

古文：此其六证也。
现代文：这是第六证。
English: This is the sixth proof.

古文：此又太社及四方皆有树别之明据也。
现代文：这又是太社及四方种树有区别的明据。
English: This is another proof that there is a difference between planting trees in Taihe and Shifang.

古文：又见诸家《礼图》、《社稷图》皆画为树，唯诫社、诫稷无树。
现代文：臣又见到诸家《礼图》，社稷图都画上了树木，只有诫社、戒稷没有树。
English: The minister also saw the "ritual maps" of various families, and the society maps were all painted with trees, but there were no trees in the precepts and commandments.

古文：此其七证也。
现代文：这是第七证。
English: This is the seventh sign.

古文：虽辨有树之据，犹未正所植之木。
现代文：为臣虽然辨社稷中有树种植的依据，还没有确定所种植的树种。
English: Although the basis for the trees in the community garden has been identified, it is not yet clear what kind of trees have been planted.

古文：案《论语》称 夏后氏以松，殷人以柏，周人以栗 ，便是世代不同。
现代文：查《论语》称 夏后氏以松，殷人以柏，周人以栗 ，可见世代不同。
English: According to the "Analects," it is said: the pine tree of Xia Guo, the cypress tree of Yin people, and the chestnut tree of Zhou people. It can be seen that each generation is different.

古文：而《尚书逸篇》则云 太社惟松，东社惟柏，南社惟梓，西社惟栗，北社惟槐 ，如此，便以一代之中，而五社各异也。
现代文：而《尚书·逸篇》则说 太社种松，东社种柏，南社种梓，西社种栗，北社种槐 ，像这样，便是一代之中，而五社所种树种也各不相同。
English: However, "Shangshu·Yi Hen" says that Taisha's pine, Dongsha's cypress, Nansha's azalea, Saisha's chestnut, and Hokusha's maple are all within one generation, and the tree species planted by the five companies are also different.

古文：愚以为宜植以松。
现代文：愚见认为应该种植松树。
English: I think we should plant pine trees. Why do I say that?

古文：何以言之？
现代文：为什么这样说呢？
English: Why do you say that?

古文：《逸书》云 太社惟松 ，今者植松，不虑失礼。
现代文：《逸书》说 太社惟松 ，今天种植松树，不怕失于礼制。
English: "Histories" said, "Taishe Woesong, planting pine trees today, is not afraid to lose the etiquette."

古文：惟稷无成证，乃社之细，盖亦不离松也。 
现代文：只有稷坛所种树种没有现成根据，但它是社的分支，大概也不会离了松树。 
English: Only the tree species planted by the gourd altar does not have a ready basis, but it is a branch of the company, and probably will not leave the pine tree.

古文：世宗从之。
现代文：魏世宗接受了他的意见。
English: Sejong accepted his opinion.

古文：芳沉雅方正，概尚甚高，经传多通，高祖尤器敬之，动相顾访。
现代文：刘芳沉雅方正，气度甚高，精通经传，魏高祖尤其器重礼敬他，动不动就咨询于他。
English: Liu Fang was dignified, elegant and upright. He was very high-spirited and well-versed in the classics. The Wei Gao Zu especially respected him and consulted him at every turn.

古文：太子恂之在东宫，高祖欲为纳芳女，芳辞以年貌非宜。高祖叹其谦慎，更敕芳举其宗女，芳乃称其族子长文之女。
现代文：太子元恂在东宫的时候，魏高祖想为他娶刘芳的女儿，刘芳以其女年龄相貌不合适推辞了，魏高祖叹服他的谦虚谨慎，改敕刘芳推举其宗族中的姑娘，刘芳推举了其族子刘长文的女儿。
English: When Prince Yuan Rong was in the East Palace, Wei Gao Zu wanted to marry Liu Fang's daughter for him. Liu Fang declined because of her age and unsuitable appearance. Wei Gao Zu admired his modesty and caution, and changed Liu Fang's name to a girl from his clan. Liu Fang chose the daughter of his son Liu Changwen.

古文：高祖乃为恂聘之，与郑懿女对为左右孺子焉。
现代文：高祖于是为元恂娶了过来，与郑碅女儿相对为左右妻室。
English: Gao Zu then married her to Geng Yao, and became the left and right wife of Zheng Yao's daughter.

古文：崔光于芳有中表之敬，每事询仰。
现代文：崔光对刘芳有师长之敬，遇事必去询问。
English: Cui Guang and Liu Fang are close relatives, and Cui Guang asks Liu Fang for advice whenever he encounters a problem.

古文：芳撰郑玄所注《周官仪礼音》、干宝所注《周官音》、王肃所注《尚书音》、何休所注《公羊音》、范宁所注《谷梁音》、韦昭所注《国语音》、范晔《后汉书音》各一卷，《辨类》三卷，《徐州人地录》二十卷，《急就篇续注音义证》三卷，《毛诗笺音义证》十卷，《礼记义证》十卷，《周官》、《仪礼义证》各五卷。
现代文：刘芳撰郑玄所注的《周官·仪礼音》、干宝所注的《周官音》、王肃所注的《尚书音》、何休所注的《公羊音》、范宁所注的《谷梁音》、韦昭所注的《国语音》、范晔《后汉书音》各一卷、《辨类》三卷、《徐州人地录》四十卷、《急就篇续注音义证》三卷、《毛诗笺音义证》十卷、《礼记义证》十卷、《周官》、《仪礼义证》各五卷。
English: Liu Fang compiled Zheng Xuan's "Zhou Guan, Yi Liyin," Gan Bao's "Zhou Guan Yin," Wang Su's "Shang Shu Yin," He Xiu's "Ram Yin," Fanning's "Gu Liang Yin," Wei Zhao's "Voice of the Nation," Fan Zhe's "Post-Han Shu Yin" in one volume each, "Differentiation" in three volumes, "Xuzhou People's Geography" in forty volumes, "Emergency Continuation of Notes" in three volumes, "Mao Shi Yan Yin" in ten volumes, "Li Ji" in ten volumes, "Zhou

古文：崔光表求以中书监让芳，世宗不许。
现代文：崔光上表请求让刘芳取代自己任中书监的官职，世宗不同意。
English: Sejong did not agree to Choe Kwang's request to have Liu Fang replace him as the official librarian.

古文：延昌二年卒，年六十一。
现代文：延昌二年去世，享年六十一岁。
English: Yanchang died two years later at the age of 61.

古文：诏赐帛四百匹，赠镇东将军、徐州刺史，谥文贞。
现代文：帝下诏赐帛四百匹，赠镇东将军、徐州刺史，谥称文贞。
English: Emperor Zhao granted 400 horses to Zhen Dongzhen and Xuzhou Zhishi, nicknamed Wen Zhen.

