古文：古之善用天下者，必量天下之权，而揣诸侯之情。
现代文：古时候，善于治理天下的人，必然会审慎地把握国家的发展趋势，揣度各诸侯国的具体情形。
English: In ancient times, those who were good at governing the world would necessarily carefully grasp the development trend of the country and calculate the specific situation of each vassal state.

古文：量权不审，不少强弱轻重之称；揣情不审，不知隐匿变化之动静。
现代文：如果不能周密切实地审时度势，权衡利害，就不会知道诸侯国的强弱情况。如果不能周密地揣度形势，便不知道个中隐蔽的情况的发展变化。什么叫权衡得失呢？
English: If you can't carefully examine the situation on the ground and weigh the interests, you won't know the strength and weakness of the vassal states. If you can't carefully estimate the situation, you won't know the development and change of the hidden situation. What is the balance of gains and losses?

古文：何谓量权？曰： 度于大小，谋于众寡。称货财有无，料人民多少、饶乏，有余不足几何？
现代文：就是能准确揣测大与小，明察多与少，衡量财货有与无，预测百姓众与寡，丰足与贫乏，不足与有余各有多少？
English: Is it to be able to accurately estimate the big and the small, clearly observe the many and the few, measure the goods and the goods, predict the people and the few, the abundance and the poverty, the shortage and the surplus, and how much of each?

古文：辨地形之险易孰利、孰害？谋虑孰长、孰短？
现代文：分辨山川地貌的险要与平易，哪处与己有利，哪处与己有害，哪个是长策，哪个是权宜之计。
English: Distinguish between the dangerous and the easy in mountain and river landforms, which is beneficial to oneself, which is harmful to oneself, which is a long-term strategy, which is a stopgap measure.

古文：揆群臣之亲疏，孰贤、孰不肖？与宾客之智慧孰少、孰多？
现代文：在君臣亲疏关系中，要知道哪些人贤德，哪些人不正派；在谋士与宾客中，哪个足智多谋，哪个是平庸之才。
English: In the intimate relationship between monarch and vassal, it is necessary to know which ones are virtuous and which ones are crooked; among the advisers and guests, which one is resourceful and which one is mediocre.

古文：观天时之祸福，孰吉、孰凶？诸候之亲孰用、孰不用？百姓之心去就变化，孰安、孰危？孰好、孰憎？
现代文：考察命运的福祸时，什么是吉利的，什么是凶险的；与诸侯交谊中，谁是可以效力的，谁是不能效力的；在判断老百姓的心理趋向时，哪种是平安的，哪种是具有危险的，什么是老百姓喜好的，什么是老百姓厌恶的；不顺从者，哪些要审察，哪些可相契。
English: When examining the blessings and misfortunes of fate, what is auspicious and what is dangerous; in the friendship with the princes, who can be effective and who cannot be effective; in judging the psychological tendencies of the common people, which is safe, which is dangerous, what is the people's preference, what is the people's aversion; non-conformists, which should be examined, which can be compatible.

古文：反侧孰辨？
现代文：以此明察百姓心理变化的趋势。
English: In this way, the trend of people's psychological changes can be clearly observed.

古文：能知此者，是谓量权。 
现代文：在准确地把握上述事态发展变化之后，才能称为审时度势，权衡利弊得失。
English: After accurately grasping the above-mentioned developments and changes, it can only be called a review of the situation, weighing the pros and cons.

古文：揣情者，必以其甚喜之时，往而极其欲也，其有欲也，不能隐其情；必以其甚惧之时，往而极其恶也，具有恶也，不能隐其情：情欲必知其变。
现代文：揣摩人情，游说人主的谋士，应在对方最高兴的时候去游说，要使其愿望极度膨胀。
English: The counsellor who speculates on people's feelings and lobbies the owner should lobby when the other party is happiest, so that their wishes are extremely inflated.

古文：感动而不知其变者，乃且错其人勿与语，而更问所亲，知其所安。
现代文：只要对方有欲望，他就不愿隐瞒事物的真实情况。而在对方怀疑，戒惧时去游说他，则要使其对所厌恶的事情恨至极点。
English: As long as the other party has the desire, he is not willing to hide the true situation of things. And when the other party doubts and fears, to persuade him, it is to make him hate the things he dislikes to the extreme.

古文：夫情变于内者，形见于外；故常必以其见者，而知其隐者；此所谓测深揣情。
现代文：倘若对方有所厌恶的事，此时也不会隐瞒其真实情况。对方在有欲求的时候，常会反映在他们外在神态变化之中。
English: If the other person dislikes something, they will not hide the true situation at this time. When the other person has a desire, it is often reflected in their outward appearance.

古文：故计国事者，则当审量权；说人主，则当审揣情；谋虑情欲必出于此。
现代文：如果对方有所感动，却不显露在外部神态中，可先不要着急，不要与他直面地讨论，可与他说一些另外他能熟悉的东西，说一些使他感到亲近的事情，就可以知道他安身立命不露神色的依据。
English: If the other party is moved, but does not show it in his external demeanor, you can first not worry, do not discuss with him face to face, you can talk to him about some other things he can be familiar with, say some things that make him feel close, you can know the basis for him to settle down and not show his face.

古文：乃可贵、乃可贱、乃可重、乃可轻、乃可利、乃可害、乃可成、乃可败，其数一也。
现代文：一般地说来，心中的欲求，能形之于外部神态，因此，不时地察颜观色，就能知道人的心灵深处的欲求。这就是所谓 测深揣情 。因而，决策国家大事的人，就要权衡利弊得失；同理，游说人主的谋士，就要会揣摩其内心的真实想法。
English: Generally speaking, the desire in the heart can be shaped by the external appearance. Therefore, from time to time, by observing the appearance, it is possible to know the desire in the depths of the human soul. This is the so-called "deep guessing." Therefore, those who make decisions on national affairs must weigh the pros and cons; similarly, the counselor who lobbies the owner must guess the true thoughts of his heart.

古文：故虽有先王之道、圣智之谋，非揣情，隐匿无所索之。此谋之本也，而说之法也。常有事于人，人莫能先。
现代文：策划、谋略、探察人的欲求，均同此理。揣情之术，可以使人富贵，也可以使人贫贱；可以使人有重权，也可以使人微不足道；可以使人受益，也可使人受害；可以使人成功，也可以使人失败；这些都是揣情之术产生的后果。
English: It is the same for planning, strategizing, and exploring people's desires. The art of speculation can make people rich or poor; it can make people powerful or insignificant; it can make people benefit or harm; it can make people succeed or fail; these are the consequences of the art of speculation.

古文：先事而至，此最难为。故曰 揣情最难守司 。
现代文：所以，即使有贤明君王的大德，有上智之人的聪慧，若无忖度时势，探人心理的揣情之术，面对着隐藏了真实情况的事实，也依然不能识破它。
English: Therefore, even if there is the great virtue of a wise king, the wisdom of a wise man, if there is no shyness of the situation, the speculation of the human psychology, in the face of the fact that the true situation is hidden, it still can not see through it.

古文：言必时其谋虑，故观蜎飞蠕动，无不有利害，可以生事变。
现代文：由此可知，揣情之术是策划事物的基本条件，游说人主的基本法则。事情发生在人们面前，往往人们难以事先预料。
English: From this, it can be seen that the art of speculation is the basic condition for planning things, and the basic law of lobbying. Things happen in front of people, and it is often difficult for people to predict in advance.

古文：生事者，几之势也。此揣情饰言成文章，而后论之。
现代文：揣情者，就要用合情合理的言词装饰成文章，而后再与对方论说。
English: Those who speculate, must use reasonable words to decorate into articles, and then discuss with the other party.

