古文：和帝和帝讳宝融，字智昭，高宗第八子也。
现代文：和帝萧宝融，字智伯，是高宗第八个儿子。
English: He was the eighth son of Emperor Gaozong.

古文：建武元年，封随郡王，邑二千户。
现代文：建武元年，被封为随郡王，食邑二千户。
English: In the first year of the Jianwu era, it was awarded the title of Sui County King, and served 2,000 households in the county.

古文：三年，为冠军将军，领石头戍军事。
现代文：建武三年，任冠军将军，领石头戍军事。
English: Jianwu three years, as a champion general, leading the military.

古文：永元元年，改封南康王，为持节，督荆、雍、益、宁、梁、南北秦七州军事，西中郎将，荆州刺史。
现代文：永元元年，改封为南康王，持节、都督荆雍益宁梁南秦北秦七州军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史。
English: In the first year of the Yongyuan era, he was given the title of the King of Southern Kangxi, and held the title of the Governor of the Southern Qin, the Military Governor of the Northern Qin and the Military Governor of the Seven Provinces of the Southern Qin, the Vice Admiral of the Western Qin, and the Historian of the Southern Qin.

古文：二年十一月，甲寅，长史萧颖胄杀辅国将军、巴西梓潼二郡太守刘山阳，奉梁王举义。
现代文：永元二年十一月十八日，长史萧颖胄杀辅国将军、巴西、梓潼二郡太守刘山阳，拥戴南康王举义。
English: On November 18th, Yongyuan year two, Changshi Xiao Yingxuan killed the general of Fu Guo, Brazil, Zizhou two counties governor Liu Shanyang, and supported Nankang Wang Qiuyi.

古文：所领内系囚见徒，罪无轻重，殊死已下，皆原遣。
现代文：十九日，南康王下教实行戒严。又下教说： 我亲自率领晋阳军队，翦除朝廷那个大凶孽，现在战事正忙，应该多施恩惠，除了已判斩首之刑的以外，一概释放。
English: On the 19th, Emperor Nankang imposed martial law. Emperor Nankang said, "I personally led the Jin and Yang armies to eradicate the great wickedness of the imperial court. Now that the war is in full swing, I should do more favors and release everyone except those who have been sentenced to beheading."

古文：先有位署，即复本职。
现代文：原来有职务的，立即恢复。
English: Those who were previously on duty will be reinstated immediately.

古文：将吏转一阶。从征身有家口停镇，给廪食。
现代文：将吏提升一阶，在役人员有家属的，发给官粮。
English: The officers will be promoted to the first rank, and the officers in service who have family members will be given government grain.

古文：凡诸杂役见在诸军带甲之身，克定之后，悉免为民。
现代文：其他各种杂役人员现在各军中作战士的，事成之后，都宽免为民。
English: All other non-commissioned officers who are now combatants in various armies will be pardoned after the event.

古文：其功效赏报，别有科条。 
现代文：有关立功奖赏等办法，另有规定。 
English: There are other provisions concerning methods for rewarding meritorious achievement.

古文：丙辰，以雍州刺史梁王为使持节、都督前锋诸军事、左将军。
现代文：二十日，任命雍州刺史梁王为使持节、都督前锋诸军事、左将军。
English: On the 20th, Liang Wang, the governor of Yongzhou, was appointed as the envoy of the festival, the vanguard of the military, and the left general.

古文：丁巳，以萧颖胄为右将军、都督行留诸军事。
现代文：二十一日，任命萧颖胄为右将军、都督行留诸军事。
English: On the twenty-first day, Xiao Yingtao was appointed as the right general, and the governor was retained in the military.

古文：戊午，梁王上表劝进。
现代文：二十二日，梁王上表敦促劝请他做皇帝。
English: On the 22nd, Liang Wang went to the table to urge and persuade him to become emperor.

古文：十二月，乙亥，群僚劝进，并不许。
现代文：十二月十日，群僚又敦促劝请，都没答应。
English: On December 10th, my colleagues urged me to persuade him again, but he did not agree.

古文：壬辰，骁骑将军夏侯亶自京师至江陵，称宣德太后令： 西中郎将南康王宜纂承皇祚，光临亿兆。
现代文：二十七日，骁骑将军夏侯从京师来到江陵，称说宣德太后有令： 西中郎将南康王应继承皇位，光临万民，等清除宫廷之后，便举行大典。
English: On the 27th, the cavalry general Xia Hou came from Beijing to Gangneung, saying that the Empress Dowager Xuande had ordered: Nizhong Lang should make King Nankang succeed to the throne, visit all the people, and after clearing the palace, hold a grand ceremony.

古文：方俟清宫，未即大号，可且封宣城、南琅邪、南东海、东阳、临海、新安、寻阳、南郡、竟陵、宜都十郡为宣城王，相国、荆州牧，加黄皞，置僚属，选百官，西中郎府南康国并如故。
现代文：现在暂且封给宣城、南琅邪、南东海、东阳、临海、新安、寻阳、南郡、竟陵、宜都十郡为宣城王，任命为相国、荆州牧，加黄钺，置僚属，选百官，西中郎府南康国的建制仍旧保留。
English: For the time being, the ten counties of Xuancheng, Nanzhuizhe, Nantonghai, Dongyang, Linhai, Xin'an, Xingyang, Nan County, Jingling and Yidu will be given the title of King of Xuancheng, and the establishment of the neighboring counties, Jingzhou Maki, Jiahuanglu, Gujiao Zi, Xinghai Guan, and West Zhonglangfu of Nankang Province is still reserved.

古文：须军次近路，主者详依旧典，法驾奉迎。 
现代文：军队所经之处，附近主管官长都必须依照旧典，备法驾奉迎。 
English: Wherever the army passes, the nearby competent officials must prepare and welcome them in accordance with the old law.

古文：三年正月，乙巳，王受命，大赦，唯梅虫儿、茹法珍等不在赦例。
现代文：永元三年正月初十，南康王受命登基，大赦天下，只有梅虫儿、茹法珍不予赦免。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 3rd year of the Yong Yuan, King Nankang ascended to the throne and granted amnesty to the whole world. Only Meizhou Er and Zhu Fazhen were not pardoned.

古文：右将军萧颖胄为左长史，进号镇军将军，梁王进号征东将军。
现代文：任命右将军萧颖胄为左长史，进号镇军将军。梁王进号征东将军。
English: He appointed Right General Xiao Yingtao as Left Long History, and promoted him to General of the Town Army. Liang Wang promoted him to General of the Eastern Expedition.

古文：甲戌，以冠军将军杨公则为湘州刺史。
现代文：初九，任命冠军将军杨公则为湘州刺史。
English: On the ninth day of the new year, Yang Gong, the champion general, was appointed as the history of Xiangzhou.

古文：甲寅，建牙于城南。
现代文：甲寅日，在城南树大旗幕府。
English: On the first day of the year, the Great Banner of the Shogunate is hoisted in the south of the city.

古文：二月，乙丑，以冠军长史王茂先为江州刺史，冠军将军曹景宗为郢州刺史，右将军邵陵王宝攸为荆州刺史。
现代文：二月初一，任命冠军长史王茂先为江州刺史，冠军将军曹景宗为郢州刺史，右将军邵陵王萧宝攸为荆州刺史。
English: On the first day of February, the champion general Wang Shuxian was appointed as the governor of Jiangzhou, the champion general Cao Jingzong was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou, and the right general Shaoling Wang Xiaobaoyu was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou.

古文：己巳，群僚上尊号，立宗庙及南北郊。
现代文：初五，群僚进上皇帝尊号，设立宗庙及南北郊祭祠。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of the year, members of the group assumed the title of emperor and established a family temple and a festival shrine in the northern and southern suburbs.

古文：甲申，梁王率大众屯沔口，郢州刺史张冲拒守。
现代文：二十日，梁王率大军驻扎在沔口，郢州刺史张冲拒守。
English: On the 20th, Liang Wang and his army were stationed in Hekou. Zhang Chong, the governor of Hekou, refused to defend the city.

古文：三月，丁酉，张冲死，骠骑将军薛元嗣等固城。
现代文：三月三日，张冲死，骠骑将军薛元嗣等固城拒守。
English: On March 3, Zhang Chong died, and the cavalry general Xue Yuan Ci and others refused to defend Gucheng.

古文：中兴元年春，三月，乙巳，即皇帝位，大赦，改元。
现代文：中兴元年春三月十一日，即皇帝位，大赦天下，改元。
English: On the 11th day of March in the spring of the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhongxing, the emperor abdicated and the era was changed.

古文：文武赐位二等；鳏寡孤独不能自存者谷，人五斛。
现代文：文武官员赐位二等；鳏寡孤独不能自养之人，每人赐给谷五斛。
English: Civil and military officials were given second-class ranks; widows, widowers, and those who were unable to support themselves were each given five gu.

古文：即永元三年也。
现代文：这一年也就是永元三年。
English: This year is the third year of Yongyuan.

古文：以相国左长史萧颖胄为尚书令，晋安王宝义为司空，庐陵王宝源为车骑将军、开府仪同三司，建安王宝夤为徐州刺史，散骑常侍夏侯详为中领军，领军将军萧伟为雍州刺史。
现代文：任命相国长史萧颖胄为尚书令，晋安王萧宝义为司空，庐陵王萧宝寅为徐州刺史，散骑常侍夏侯详为中领军，领军将军萧伟为雍州刺史。十二日，有关部门奏请封庶人萧宝卷为零阳侯，下诏不答应。
English: On the 12th, the relevant departments made a request to appoint the commoner Xiao Baoru as the prince of Ziyang, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：又奏为涪陵王，诏可。乙酉，尚书令萧颖胄行荆州刺史，假梁王黄皞。
现代文：又奏请封他为涪陵王，下诏许可。乙酉日，任命尚书令萧颖胄行荆州刺史，假梁王黄钺。
English: He also requested that he be appointed as the King of Fuling, with imperial permission. On the day of the Eighth Day of the 9th month, he appointed Shang Shuling Xiao Yingjun to go to Jingzhou to study history, and Liang Wang Huangjun to be the King of Liang.

古文：壬子，以征虏将军柳惔为益、宁二州刺史。
现代文：十八日，任命征虏将军柳忄炎为益、宁二州刺史。
English: On the 18th, Liu Xuanyan, a conscript general, was appointed for the benefit of Ning Erzhou.

古文：己未，以冠军将军庄丘黑为梁、南秦二州刺史，冠军将军邓元起为广州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，任命冠军将军庄丘黑为梁、南秦二州刺史，冠军将军邓元起为广州刺史。
English: On the 25th, the champion general Zhuang Qiuhe was appointed as Liang, and the champion general Deng Yuanqi was appointed as Guangzhou.

古文：夏，四月，戊辰，诏曰： 荆、雍义举所基，实始王迹。
现代文：夏四月初五，下诏说： 荆、雍一带，是举义的根据地，也是我走向皇位的出发点。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, he issued the following edict: The Jing and Yong regions are the base areas for the promotion of righteousness, and also the starting point for my march toward the throne.

古文：君子劳心，细人尽力，宜加酬奖，副其乃诚。
现代文：那里的君子和民众，为此献计献力，为了表彰他们的忠诚，应当予以酬劳和奖赏。
English: The men and women there who have devoted their lives to this cause deserve to be rewarded for their loyalty.

古文：凡东讨众军及诸向义之众，可普复除。 
现代文：凡随我东讨的各路军队以及所有响应的人们，一律免除各种赋税徭役。 
English: All the troops and all the people who have responded to the eastward campaign will be exempted from all kinds of taxes and duties.

古文：五月，乙卯，车驾幸竹林寺禅房宴群臣。
现代文：五月二十二日，皇帝来到竹林寺禅房，宴会群臣。
English: On the 22nd of May, the emperor came to the Chikurin-ji Temple's Zen room to give a banquet to a group of ministers.

古文：巴西太守鲁休烈、巴东太守萧惠训子璝拒义军。
现代文：巴西太守鲁休烈、巴东太守萧惠训之子萧王贵抗拒义师。
English: Xiao Wanggui, the son of Lu Xury, the Brazilian eunuch, and Xiao Huixun, the eunuch of Padang, resisted the righteous teacher.

古文：秋，七月，东军主吴子阳十三军救郢州，屯加湖。
现代文：秋七月，东军主帅吴子阳十三军救援郢州，兵驻加湖。
English: In autumn and July, the commander of the Eastern Army, Wu Ziyang of the 13th Army, came to the rescue of Bozhou and stationed soldiers in Jiahu.

古文：丁酉，征虏将军王茂先击破之。
现代文：初五，被征虏将军王茂先击破。
English: On the fifth day of the first month, it was defeated by the conscript general Wang Maozong.

古文：辛亥，以茂先为中护军。
现代文：十九日，任命王茂先为中护军。
English: On the 19th, Wang Maosheng was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：丁卯，鲁山城主孙乐祖以城降。
现代文：二十五日，鲁山城主将孙乐祖献城投降。
English: On the twenty-fifth day, the lord of Lushan surrendered the city to Sun Lezu.

古文：己未，郢城主薛元嗣降。
现代文：二十七日，郢城主将薛元嗣投降。
English: On the 27th, the lord of the city surrendered to Xue Yuanxi.

古文：八月，丙子，平西将军陈伯之降。
现代文：八月十四日，平西将军陈伯之投降。
English: On August 14, Pingxi General Chen Bozhi surrendered.

古文：乙卯，以伯之为江州刺史，子虎牙为徐州刺史。
现代文：乙卯日，任命陈伯之为江州刺史，任命陈伯之之子陈虎牙为徐州刺史。
English: On the second day of the month, Chen Bo was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province, and Chen Bo's son, Chen Huya, was appointed as the governor of Xuzhou Province.

古文：九月，乙未，诏梁王若定京邑，得以便宜从事。
现代文：九月初四，下诏让梁王如果平定京城，可以自行决断处置，不必奏请皇上。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th month, the emperor issued an edict that if Liang Wang conquered the capital, he could decide on his own, and did not need to petition the emperor.

古文：冬，十一月，乙未，以辅国将军李元履为豫州刺中。
现代文：冬十一月初五，任命辅国将军李元履为豫州刺史。
English: On the fifth day of the first month of November in winter, Li Yuanlu, the general of the auxiliary state, was appointed as the leader of the history of Yuzhou.

古文：壬寅，尚书令、镇军将军萧颖胄卒，以黄门郎萧澹行荆州府州事。
现代文：十二日，尚书令、镇军将军萧颖胄去世。任命黄门郎萧澹行荆州府事。
English: On the 12th, Shang Shuling and town general Xiao Yingyao passed away. Huangmen Lang Xiao Yao was appointed to manage the affairs of Jingzhou.

古文：丁巳，萧璝、鲁休烈降。
现代文：二十七日，萧王贵、鲁休烈投降。
English: On the 27th, Xiao Wanggui and Lu Xiu surrendered.

古文：十二月，丙寅，建康城平。
现代文：十二月初六，平定建康城。
English: On the 6th day of the 12th month, Jiankang City was pacified.

古文：己巳，皇太后令以梁王为大司马、录尚书事、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，封建安郡公，依晋武陵王遵承制故事，百僚致敬。
现代文：九日，皇太后下令任命梁王为大司马、录尚书事、骠骑大将军、扬州刺史，并封他为建安郡公，比照晋武陵王司马遵的先例，承制总揽政务，百僚致敬。
English: On the 9th, the empress dowager ordered the appointment of Liang Wang as the grand steward, record of records, general of cavalry, and Yangzhou chief historian, and he was named the governor of Jian'an County. According to the precedent of Jinwuling King Sima Zun, he undertook the general government affairs, and was saluted by hundreds of colleagues.

古文：壬申，改封建安王宝寅鄱阳王。
现代文：十二日，改封建安王萧宝寅为鄱阳王。
English: On the 12th, Xiao Baoying, the King of Jian'an, was changed to the King of Shenyang.

古文：癸酉，以司徒、扬州刺史晋安王宝义为太尉，领司徒。
现代文：十三日，任命司徒、扬州刺史晋安王萧宝义为太尉，领司徒。
English: Wang Xiao Baoyi was appointed as the first lieutenant and the second-in-command of the Yangzhou Zhishi Jinan.

古文：甲戌，给大司马钱二千万，布绢各五千匹。
现代文：十四日，给大司马钱二千万，布绢各五千匹。
English: On the 14th day, he gave the chief steed 20 million yuan and 5,000 cloth donkeys each.

古文：乙酉，以辅国将军萧宏为中护军。
现代文：二十五日，任命辅国将军萧宏为中护军。
English: Acetylene, Xiao Yan appointed the auxiliary general Xiao Zhao as the middle guard.

古文：二年春，正月，戊戌，宣德太后临朝，入居内殿。
现代文：中兴二年春正月初九，宣德太后临朝执政，入居内殿。
English: On the 9th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of Zhongxing's reign, Empress Dowager Xuande came to power and moved into the inner palace.

古文：大司马梁王解承制，致敬如先。
现代文：解除大司马梁王的承制，百僚致敬仍旧。
English: After the dismissal of the grand secretary Ma Liang Wang, the hundred colleagues still pay tribute to him.

古文：己亥，以宁朔将军萧昺监南兖州。
现代文：初十，任命宁朔将军萧籨监南兖州。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the year, Ningshuo General Xiao Yingjun was appointed to supervise Nan Yingzhou.

古文：壬寅，以大司马都督中外诸军事，加殊礼。
现代文：十三日，让大司马都督中外诸军事，加殊礼。
English: On the thirteenth day, let the grand secretary Ma Duodu lead the military from inside and outside, and add a special salute.

古文：己酉，以大司马长史王亮为守尚书令。
现代文：二十日，任命大司马长史王亮为守尚书令。
English: On the 20th, Shi Wangliang, the Chief Secretary of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the Keeper of the Great Seal.

古文：甲寅，诏大司马梁王进位相国，总百揆，扬州牧，封十郡为梁公，备九锡之礼，加远游冠，位在诸王上，加相国绿騑绶。
现代文：二十五日，下诏大司马梁王晋位相国，总摄一切政务，并兼扬州牧，封十郡为梁公，配备九锡之礼，加远游冠，位在诸王上，加相国绿纟戾绶。
English: On the 25th day of the following month, the grand secretary Ma Liang Wang ascended to the throne of the neighboring country, took charge of all government affairs, and also served as Yangzhou herdsman, sealed ten counties as Liang Gong, equipped with the gift of Jiuxi, added the crown of traveling far and wide, reigned over all kings, and added the green scepter of the neighboring country.

古文：己未，以新除右将军曹景宗为郢州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命新授职的右将军曹景宗为郢州刺史。
English: On the 30th, the newly appointed right general Cao Jingzong was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：二月，壬戌，湘东王宝晊伏诛。
现代文：二月三日，诛杀湘东王萧宝蛭。
English: On February 3, Xiao Baojun, the king of eastern Hunan, was assassinated.

古文：戊辰，诏进梁公爵为梁王，增封十郡。
现代文：初九，下诏梁公晋封为梁王，增封十郡。
English: In the early 9th century, Liang Gong was promoted to Liang Wang, and ten counties were added.

古文：三月，乙未，皇太后令给梁国钱五百万，布五千匹，绢千匹。
现代文：三月初七，皇太后下令给梁王钱五百万，布五千匹。
English: On the seventh day of the third month, the empress dowager ordered to give Liang Wang five million yuan in money and five thousand pieces of cloth.

古文：辛丑，鄱阳王宝寅奔虏，邵陵王宝攸、晋熙王宝嵩、桂阳王宝贞伏诛。
现代文：十三日，鄱阳王萧宝寅投奔虏方，诛杀邵陵王南齐书萧宝攸、晋熙王萧宝嵩、桂阳王萧宝贞。
English: On the 13th, Xiao Baoying, the King of Shenyang, rushed to the Ru Ru Ru side and killed Xiao Baoyu, the King of Shao Ling, the King of Nanqishu, the King of Jinxi, Xiao Baosong, and the King of Guiyang, Xiao Baozhen.

古文：甲午，命梁王冕十有二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金根，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟歔宫悬。
现代文：初六，命梁王冕十二旒，建天子旌旗，出警入跸，乘金银，驾六马，备五时副车，置旄头云罕，乐舞八佾，设钟宫悬。
English: On the 6th day of the first month of the year, the king's coronation will be held on the 12th day of the month, the flag of the son of heaven will be raised, the police will be sent to the capital, the gold and silver will be used, six horses will be driven, a five o'clock car will be prepared, the bowl will be set up, the music and dance will be set up, and the bell palace will be set up.

古文：王子王女爵命一如旧仪。
现代文：王子、王妇按旧仪赐封爵位。
English: Princes and princesses were given titles of nobility according to the old rite.

古文：庚戌，以冠军长史萧秀为南徐州刺史，新除中领军蔡道恭为司州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，任命冠军长史萧秀为南徐州刺史，新授职的中领军蔡道恭为司州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, the champion, Long Shi Xiao Xiu, was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou, and the newly appointed leader, Cai Daogong, was appointed as the governor of Shizhou.

古文：车驾东归至姑熟。
现代文：皇上东回到姑熟。
English: The emperor went back to his aunt.

古文：丙辰，禅位梁王。
现代文：二十八日，禅位给梁王。
English: On the 28th, the throne was given to Liang Wang.

古文：丁巳，庐陵王宝源薨。
现代文：二十九日，庐陵王萧宝源去世。
English: On the 29th, Xiao Baoyuan, the King of Fuling, passed away.

古文：夏，四月，辛酉，禅诏至，皇太后逊外宫。
现代文：夏四月初三，禅位诏书下达，皇太后退居外宫。
English: On the 3rd day of the 4th month of the summer, the imperial edict was issued, and the empress dowager retired to the outer palace.

古文：丁卯，梁王奉帝为巴陵王，宫于姑熟，行齐正朔，一如故事。
现代文：初九，梁王让皇上做巴陵王，王宫设在姑熟，仍然使用齐的日历，一切照先例进行。
English: At the beginning of the ninth month, King Liang asked the emperor to be the king of Baling, and the royal palace was set up in the familiar, still using the same calendar. Everything proceeded according to precedent.

古文：戊辰，薨，年十五。
现代文：初十，巴陵王去世，当时才十五岁。
English: At the age of ten, King Baling passed away. He was only fifteen years old at the time.

古文：追尊为齐和帝，葬恭安陵。
现代文：追尊为齐和帝，埋葬在恭安陵。
English: His posthumous name was Qi He, and he was buried in the Gong'an Mausoleum.

古文：史臣曰：夏以桀亡，殷随纣灭，郊天改朔，理无延世。
现代文：史臣曰：夏代因为有了桀而灭亡，殷代由于有了纣而覆灭，改朝换代，理所当然。
English: Shichen said: The Xia Dynasty perished because of the Ying Dynasty, the Yin Dynasty was overthrown because of the Ying Dynasty, and it is natural to change the dynasty.

古文：而皇符所集，重兴西楚，神器暂来，虽有冥数，徽名大号，斯为幸矣。
现代文：然而皇权的运数，重兴于西楚，暂时获得的皇位，也是有冥数的，能获得这样美好的名号，也算是幸运了。
English: However, the number of operations of the imperial power, the revival in the West Chu, the temporarily obtained imperial throne, is also unlucky, and it is lucky to get such a beautiful name.

古文：赞曰：和帝晚隆，扫难清宫。
现代文：赞曰：和帝在齐朝末期能够兴隆一时，扫除了艰难，清理了宫廷。
English: Zang said: Emperor He was able to prosper for a while at the end of the Qi Dynasty, swept away difficulties, and cleaned up the court.

古文：达机睹运，高颂永终。
现代文：他能够明达徵兆察知运数，这样的结局也很值得后人传颂。
English: He was able to know the signs and know the number of luck, and this outcome is also worthy of being passed down to future generations.

