古文：大人之爱小人也，薄于小人之爱大人也；其利小人也，厚于小人之利大人也。
现代文：上天爱人，比圣人爱人浅薄；但施利比圣人多。君子爱小人，薄于小人爱君子；君子施利给小人，胜过小人施利给君子。
English: Heaven loves a man more shallowly than a saint loves a man; but a gentleman loves a lesser man more than a saint. A gentleman loves a lesser man less than a lesser man loves a gentleman; a gentleman loves a lesser man more than a lesser man loves a gentleman.

古文：以臧为其亲也，而爱之，非爱其亲也；以臧为其亲也，而利之，非利其亲也。
现代文：认为厚葬是爱父母亲的表现，因而喜欢厚葬，这其实并不是爱父母亲；认为厚葬对父母亲有利，因而以厚葬为利，这并非有利父母亲。
English: Believing that a large funeral is a manifestation of love for one's parents, and therefore liking a large funeral, is not actually loving one's parents; believing that a large funeral is beneficial to one's parents, and therefore taking advantage of a large funeral, is not beneficial to one's parents.

古文：以乐为爱其子，而为其子欲之，爱其子也。
现代文：认为教给儿子音乐是爱儿子的表现，因而音乐被儿子喜欢，这是爱儿子。
English: He thought that teaching music to his son was an expression of love for his son, and therefore music was liked by his son, which was love for his son.

古文：以乐为利其子，而为其子求之，非利其子也。
现代文：认为教给儿子音乐有利儿子，因而音乐被儿子欲求，这并非有利儿子。
English: The idea that teaching music to your son will benefit your son, and therefore music will be desired by your son, is not beneficial to your son.

古文：于所体之中，而权轻重之谓权。
现代文：在所做的事体中，衡量它的轻重叫做 权 。
English: In doing things, measuring its importance is called "power."

古文：权，非为是也，非非为非也，权，正也。
现代文：权，并不是对的，也不就是错的，权，是正当的。
English: Right is not right, nor is it wrong, right is just.

古文：断指以存腕，利之中取大，害之中取小也。
现代文：砍断手指以保存手腕，那是在利中选取大的，在害中选取小的。
English: To cut off the finger to save the hand is to choose the greater good and the lesser evil.

古文：害之中取小也，非取害也，取利也。
现代文：在害中选取小的，并不是取害，这是取利。
English: To choose the lesser of two evils is not to choose evil, but to choose good.

古文：其所取者，人之所执也。
现代文：他所选取的，正是别人抓着的。
English: What he has chosen is exactly what others are grasping for.

古文：遇盗人，而断指以免身，利也；其遇盗人，害也。
现代文：遇上强盗，砍断手指以免杀身之祸，这是利；遇上强盗，这是害。
English: In the case of a robber, it is an advantage to cut off one's finger to avoid killing oneself; in the case of a robber, it is a disadvantage.

古文：断指与断腕，利于天下相若，无择也。
现代文：砍断手指和砍断手腕，对天下的利益是相似的，那就没有选择。
English: Chopping off a finger and chopping off a wrist are of similar benefit to the world, so there is no choice.

古文：死生利若，一无择也。
现代文：就是生死，只要有利于天下，也都没有选择。
English: Even if it is life or death, as long as it is beneficial to the world, there is no choice.

古文：杀一人以存天下，非杀一人以利天下也；杀己以存天下，是杀己以利天下。
现代文：杀一个人以保存天下，并不是杀一个人以利天下；杀死自己以保存天下，这是杀死自己以利天下。
English: To kill a man to save the world is not to kill a man to benefit the world; to kill yourself to save the world is to kill yourself to benefit the world.

古文：于事为之中而权轻重之谓求。
现代文：在做事中衡量轻重叫做 求 。
English: To weigh things in one's work is called seeking.

古文：求为之，非也。
现代文：只注重求，是不对的。
English: It's not right to just focus on asking.

古文：害之中取小，求为义，非为义也。
现代文：在害中选取小的，追求合义，并非真正行义。
English: To choose the lesser of two evils and pursue righteousness is not to truly practice righteousness.

