古文：蔡州人也。
现代文：赵匡凝，蔡州人。
English: Zhao Kuangning, from Caizhou.

古文：父德諲，初事秦宗权为列校，当宗权强暴时，表为襄州留后。
现代文：父亲赵德，开始时服事秦宗权，任列校，当秦宗权强暴时，任襄州留后。
English: His father, Zhao De, served Qin Zongquan at the beginning and was appointed to the school. When Qin Zongquan was violent, he was appointed to stay in Xiangzhou.

古文：唐光启四年夏六月，德諲审宗权必败，乃举汉南之地以归唐朝，仍遣使投分于太祖，兼誓戮力，同讨宗权。
现代文：唐朝光启四年夏六月，赵德知道秦宗权必败无疑，于是将汉南之地全部归顺唐朝，又派使者与太祖结好，并发誓戮力同心，共讨宗权。
English: At the dawn of the Tang Dynasty, in the summer and June of the fourth year, Zhao De knew that Qin's suzerainty was doomed to fail, so he surrendered all of Hannan to the Tang Dynasty, sent an envoy to make peace with his great-grandfather, and vowed to work together to fight for suzerainty.

古文：时太祖为蔡州四面行营都统使，乃表德諲为副，仍领襄州节度使。
现代文：这时太祖做蔡州四面行营都统使，于是任赵德为副，又遥任襄州节度使。
English: At this time, the great-grandfather was the general envoy to all four sides of Caizhou, so he appointed Zhao De as deputy, and also appointed Yangzhou festival envoy.

古文：蔡州平，以功累加官爵，封淮安王。
现代文：蔡州平定后，因功屡次加官封爵，封为淮安王。
English: After the pacification of Caizhou, he was knighted several times for his achievements and crowned King of Huai'an.

古文：匡凝以父功为唐州刺史兼七州马步军都校。
现代文：赵匡凝凭借父亲的功劳任唐州刺史兼七州马军步军大校。
English: By virtue of his father's merits, Zhao Kuangning served as the Tangzhou chief historian and the senior colonel of the seven-state horse army.

古文：及德諲卒，匡凝自为襄州留后，朝廷即以旄钺授之。
现代文：到赵德去世后，赵匡凝自封为襄州留后，朝廷也就将旄节斧钺授与他。
English: After Zhao De's death, when Zhao Kuang Rong stayed in Xiangzhou, the imperial court also conferred the imperial edict on him.

古文：作镇数年，甚有威惠，累官至检校太尉、兼中书令。
现代文：镇守多年，很有威望德惠，历官至检校太尉、兼中书令。
English: He had been a town guard for many years, and was highly respected by the townspeople. He rose through the ranks to become a school inspector, captain, and chushiro.

古文：匡凝气貌甚伟，好自修饰，每整衣冠，必使人持巨鉴前后照之。
现代文：匡凝气概相貌非常雄伟，喜欢打扮修饰，每次整理衣冠，必使人拿着巨大的镜子在前后照看。
English: Condensed temperament, his appearance is very majestic, he likes to dress up and decorate, every time he straightens his crown, he will make people hold a huge mirror to look before and after.

古文：对客之际，乌巾上微觉有尘，即令侍妓持红拂以去之。
现代文：会见客人时，乌巾上稍觉有灰尘，就让侍候的歌妓拿着红色的拂尘拂去它。
English: When meeting a guest, if there is a bit of dust on the black scarf, let the waiting geisha take a red whisk to brush it off.

古文：人有误犯其家讳者，往往遭其木槚楚，其方严也如是。
现代文：如有人误犯了他的家讳，往往要遭受他的鞭打，其方正严明就这样。
English: If someone inadvertently broke his taboo, he would often whip them, which Fang Zheng Yanming did.

古文：光化初，匡凝以太祖有清口之败，密附于淮夷，太祖遣氏叔琮率师伐之。
现代文：光化初年，匡凝因太祖在清口战役失败，便密切依附于淮南吴国，太祖派氏叔琮领兵攻伐他。
English: In the first year of the Guanghua Dynasty, Congee closely adhered to the State of Wu in South Huainan due to the failure of Emperor Taizu in the Battle of Qingkou. Emperor Taizu sent his uncle Zhu to lead the army to attack him.

古文：未几，其泌州刺史赵璠越墉来降，随州刺史赵匡璘临阵就擒。
现代文：不久，他属下泌州刺史赵越城投降，隋州刺史赵匡王临阵被擒。
English: Soon after, Zhao Yuecheng, his subordinate in Zhouzhou, surrendered, and Zhao Kuangwang, his subordinate in Suizhou, was captured.

古文：俄而康怀英攻下邓州，匡凝惧，遣使乞盟，太祖许之，自是附庸于太祖。
现代文：不久康怀英又攻下邓州，赵匡凝害怕，派使者乞求结盟，太祖答应了他，从此附属于太祖。
English: Soon after, Kang Huaiying conquered Dengzhou again. Zhao Kuangning was afraid and sent an envoy to beg for an alliance. Emperor Taizu agreed to this, and from then on he was subordinate to Emperor Taizu.

古文：及成汭败于鄂州，匡凝表其弟匡明为荆南留后。
现代文：到成在鄂州战败，赵匡凝上表推荐他弟弟赵匡明任荆南留后。
English: After the defeat of Chengdu in Ezhou, Zhao Kuangjing recommended his brother Zhao Kuangming to stay in Jingnan.

古文：是时唐室微弱，诸道常赋多不上供，惟匡凝昆仲虽强据江山，然尽忠帝室，贡赋不绝。
现代文：这时唐朝王室微弱，各道通常的赋税多不上供，只有赵匡凝兄弟虽然雄据一方江山，然而尽忠于唐朝王室，贡赋不曾停止。
English: At this time, the royal family of the Tang Dynasty was weak, and the usual taxes of each province were more than sufficient. Only the Zhao Kuangning brothers, although they ruled the country, were loyal to the royal family of the Tang Dynasty, and the tribute never stopped.

古文：太祖将期受禅，以匡凝兄弟并据籓镇，乃遣使先谕旨焉。
现代文：太祖正准备接受禅让的帝位，因为赵匡凝兄弟都据守藩镇，于是派遣使者预先告诉他自己的意思。
English: Emperor Taizu was preparing to accept Emperor Zen's abdication, and since both brothers of Zhao Kuangning were defending their towns, he sent an envoy to inform him of his intention in advance.

古文：匡凝对使者流涕，答以受国恩深，岂敢随时妄有他志。
现代文：匡凝对着使者流泪，回答说自己深受唐朝恩德，不敢随时世而妄自变节。
English: Congealing tears at the messenger, he replied that he was deeply grateful to the Tang Dynasty and did not dare to change his mind at any time.

古文：使者复命，太祖大怒。
现代文：使者回来复命，太祖大怒。
English: When the messenger returned with his orders, the great-grandfather flew into a rage.

古文：天祐二年秋七月，遣杨师厚率师讨之。
现代文：天二年秋天七月，派杨师厚领兵征讨他。
English: In the autumn of the second year of Heaven in July, Yang Shihou was sent to lead the army to recruit him.

古文：八月，太祖亲领大军南征，仍请削匡凝在身官爵。
现代文：八月，太祖亲自率领大军南征，又请求削除赵匡凝身任官爵。
English: In August, Emperor Taizu personally led a large army to invade the south, and also requested that Zhao Kuang Rong be removed from his position as an official peer.

古文：及师厚济江，匡凝以兵数万逆战，大为师厚所败，匡凝乃燔其舟，单舸急棹，沿汉而遁于金陵。
现代文：到杨师厚横渡长江时，赵匡凝率领士兵数万迎战，被杨师厚大败，赵匡凝于是焚烧自己的舟船，驾着一只小船急忙划桨，沿汉水逃往金陵。
English: When Yang Shihou crossed the Yangtze River, Zhao Kuangning led tens of thousands of soldiers to meet the battle, and was defeated by Yang Shihou. Zhao Kuangning then burned his boat, drove a small boat to paddle quickly, and fled along the Han River to Jinling.

古文：后卒于淮南。
现代文：后死于吴国。
English: He later died in the State of Wu.

古文：初，匡凝好聚书，及败，杨师厚获数千卷于第，悉以来献。
现代文：以前赵匡凝爱好藏书，到兵败后，杨师厚在他府第得到数千卷书，全部献给了朝廷。
English: In the past, Zhao Kuangning loved to collect books. After the military defeat, Yang Shihou obtained thousands of volumes of books in his prefecture, all of which were dedicated to the imperial court.

