古文：起昭阳单阏，尽著雍涒滩，凡六年。
现代文：起昭阳单阏，尽著雍涒滩，凡六年。
English: It's been six years since Zhao Yang single-handedly completed the construction of Yongkang Beach.

古文：穆宗睿圣文惠孝皇帝下
现代文：穆宗睿圣文惠孝皇帝下
English: Mu Zong Rui under Emperor Shengwen Hui Xiao

古文：长庆三年癸卯，公元八二三年春，正月，癸未，赐两军中尉以下钱。
现代文：唐穆宗长庆三年春季，正月，癸未，唐穆宗赏赐左、右神策军护军中尉以下军将钱。
English: In the spring of the third year of Tang Mu Zong's reign, in the first month of the third year, Tang Mu Zong gave money to the left and right guarding lieutenants of the Shen Zhe army.

古文：二月，辛卯，赐统军、军使等绵彩、银器各有差。
现代文：二月，辛卯，赏赐左、右羽林军，左、右龙武军，左、右神武军统军、军使等军将丝绵、银器，根据他们的职务高低分等级颁给。
English: In February, in Xinwu, the Left and Right Feather Forest Armies, the Left and Right Dragon Armies, the Left and Right Divine Armed Forces, and the military envoys were awarded silk and silverware, according to their high and low grades.

古文：户部侍郎牛僧孺，素为上所厚。
现代文：户部侍郎牛僧孺向来被唐穆宗所器重。
English: The household attendant, Niu Zengqi, has always been held in high esteem by the Tang Mu sect.

古文：初，韩弘之子右骁卫将军公武为其父谋，以财结中外。
现代文：当初，宣武节度使韩弘的儿子，右骁卫将军韩公武为了巩固父亲的地位，向朝廷内外的许多当权的官员行贿。
English: At first, in order to consolidate his father's position, Xuanwu Jiedu had Han Hong's son, Han Gongwu, the general of the Right Division of the National Guard, pay bribes to many powerful officials inside and outside the imperial court.

古文：及公武卒，弘继薨，稚孙绍宗嗣，主藏奴与吏讼于御史府。
现代文：后来，韩公武去世。接着，韩弘也去世了，韩弘的小孙子韩绍宗继承家业。这时，韩绍宗家里主管储藏的家奴和宣武的官吏和御史台起诉韩公武行贿的问题。
English: Later, when Han Gongwu died, Han Hongwu also died, and Han Hongwu's youngest grandson, Han Shaosong, inherited the family business. At that time, Han Shaosong, who was in charge of storing the family slaves, sued Han Gongwu for bribery.

古文：上怜之，尽取弘财簿自阅视，凡中外主权，多纳弘货，独硃句细字曰： 某年月日，送户部牛侍郎钱千万，不纳。 
现代文：穆宗怜悯韩绍宗，于是，把韩弘家里的财产登记本全部调来，亲自审阅，发现朝廷内外凡当权的官员，大多接受过韩弘的贿赂。登记本上只有一处用红笔小字记裁着： 某年某月某日，送户部牛侍郎钱一千万，拒而不收。 
English: Mu Zong took pity on Han Shao Zong, so he brought all the property registration books of Han Hongzong's family and personally reviewed them. He found that most of the officials in power both inside and outside the imperial court had accepted Han Hongzong's bribes. There was only one place in the registration book that was written in small red letters: "On a certain year, a certain month, and a certain day, I sent 10 million yuan to the Cattle Attendant of the Household Department, but he refused to accept it."

古文：上大喜，以示左右曰： 果然，吾不缪知人！ 
现代文：穆宗看后大喜，拿来给左右侍从看，并说： 果然不出我的所料，我没有看错人！ 
English: Mu Zong was overjoyed after seeing it. He showed it to the attendants on his right and left, and said, "It certainly didn't go as I expected. I didn't see the wrong person!"

古文：三月，壬戌，以僧孺为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：三月，壬戌，任命牛僧孺为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: In March of the same year, Niu Xiangyong was appointed as the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China and Tongping Zhangji.

古文：时僧孺与李德裕皆有入相之望。德裕出为浙西观察使，八年不迁。
现代文：这时，牛僧孺和李德裕都有升迁宰相的希望，但李德裕被任命为浙西道观察使，以后八年没有升迁。
English: At this time, both Niu Xiangyao and Li Deyu had the hope of being promoted to prime minister, but Li Deyu was appointed as the western Zhejiang province observation envoy, and was not promoted for the next eight years.

古文：以为李逢吉排己，引僧孺为相，由是牛、李之怨愈深。
现代文：因此，他认为是宰相李逢吉为了排斥自己，而引荐牛僧孺为宰相。从此以后，牛僧孺和李德裕二人之间的怨恨越来越深。
English: Therefore, he believed that it was the Prime Minister Li Fengji who, in order to exclude himself, introduced Niu Son Gung as Prime Minister. Since then, the resentment between Niu Son Gung and Li Deyu has become deeper and deeper.

古文：夏，四月，甲午，安南奏陆州獠攻掠州县。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲午，安南都护府奏报：陆州的獠人攻打掠夺本道州县。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Annan Dugo-fu reported that the Hakka people in Luzhou attacked and plundered their own prefectures.

古文：丙申，赐宣徽院供奉官钱，紫衣者百二十缗，下至承旨各有差。
现代文：丙申，唐穆宗赏赐宣徽院供奉官钱，凡身着紫色官服的赐一百二十缗，下至承旨官，各根据他们的官品高低分等级颁给。
English: In other words, Tang Mu Zong rewarded the officials of Xuan Hui Academy with official money. Those who wore purple official uniforms were given 120 baht, and the officials who received orders were given 120 baht according to their official rank.

古文：初，翼城人郑注，眇小，目下视，而巧谲倾谄，善揣人意，以医游四方，羁贫甚。
现代文：当初，翼城人郑注虽然身材瘦小，眼睛近视，但却巧言谄媚，善解人意，他以行医游行四方，羁旅他乡，十分贫穷。
English: At the beginning, although Zheng Zhu, a resident of Yingcheng, was thin and short, and his eyes were short-sighted, he was eloquent and sympathetic. He traveled extensively as a medical practitioner and traveled to other towns, and he was very poor.

古文：尝以药术干徐州牙将，牙将悦之，荐于节度使李愬。
现代文：一次，他以精湛的医术得到一个徐州牙将的赏识，于是，这个牙将把他推荐给节度使李。
English: On one occasion, he won the appreciation of a Xuzhou dentist for his exquisite medical skills, and the dentist recommended him to Li.

古文：愬饵其药颇验，遂有宠，署为牙推，浸预军政，妄作威福，军府患之。
现代文：李服用他的药后，很有效果，因而非常宠爱，任命他为牙推。郑注恃宠，逐渐干预军政，胡作非为，节度使府的官员都感到忧虑。
English: After Li took his medicine, it was very effective, so he was very fond of him and appointed him as a toothpick. Zheng Zhusheng's pet, gradually intervened in military and political affairs, misbehaved, and made the government officials worried.

古文：监军王守澄以众情白愬，请去之，愬曰： 注虽如是，然奇才也，将军试与之语，苟无可取，去之未晚。 
现代文：监军王守澄把众人对郑注的反映转告李，请求把他驱除出去。李说： 郑注虽然如此，但他是个奇才，您若不信，请和他试见一面，如果一无是处，再驱除也不晚。 
English: Supervisor Wang Shoucheng relayed the crowd's reaction to Zhengzhu to Li and asked him to expel him. Li said, "Although Zhengzhu is like this, he is a genius. If you don't believe me, please meet him. If he is no good, then it's not too late to expel him."

古文：乃使注往谒守澄，守澄初有难色，不得已见之。
现代文：于是，李让郑注去拜见王守澄。王守澄开始还面有难色，后来不得已接见郑注。
English: As a result, Li asked Zheng Zhu to visit Wang Shoucheng. Wang Shoucheng was reluctant at first, but later had no choice but to meet Zheng Zhu.

古文：坐语未久，守澄大喜，延之中堂，促膝笑语，恨相见之晚。
现代文：交谈不久，王守澄大喜，把郑注引到正堂，两人促膝交谈，笑声不断，恨相见太晚。
English: Not long after the conversation, Wang Shoucheng was overjoyed and led Zheng Zhu to the main hall. The two had a knee-jerk conversation, laughing constantly. It was too late to see each other.

古文：明日，谓愬曰： 郑生诚如公言。 
现代文：第二天，王守澄对李说： 郑注的确像您说的那样，是个奇才。 
English: The next day, Wang Shoucheng said to Li: Zheng Zhu is indeed a genius as you said.

古文：自是又有宠于守澄，权势益张，愬署为巡官，列于宾席。
现代文：从此以后，郑注到得到王守澄的宠爱，权势更加扩张。李又任命他为巡官，成为李的重要幕僚。
English: From then on, Zheng Zhu was favored by Wang Shoucheng, and his power expanded even more. Li also appointed him as an inspector, and he became an important staff member of Li.

古文：注既用事，恐牙将荐己者泄其本末，密以它愬，愬杀之。
现代文：郑注掌握一定权力后，恐怕原来推荐自己的牙将暴露自己的身世，秘密地以其他罪名告于李，李把牙将杀死。
English: After Zheng Zhu gained a certain amount of power, I'm afraid that Fang, who originally recommended him, would reveal his true identity and secretly accuse Li of other crimes. Li would kill Fang.

古文：及守澄入知枢密，挈注以西，为立居宅，赡给之。
现代文：等到王守澄被穆宗召入朝廷，任命为知枢密时，王守澄带郑注到京城，给他修建住宅，加以供养。
English: When Wang Shoucheng was summoned to the imperial court by Mu Zong and appointed as a privy councilor, Wang Shoucheng took Zheng Zhu to the capital, built him a house, and provided for him.

古文：遂荐于上，上亦厚遇之。
现代文：接着，又向穆宗推荐，穆宗也很器重郑注。
English: Next, he recommended it to Mu Zong, who was also very enthusiastic about it.

古文：自上有疾，守澄专制国事，势倾中外。
现代文：自从穆宗得病以后，王守澄专制朝政，势倾中外。
English: Since Mu Zong fell ill, Wang Shoucheng has been in charge of the autocratic imperial government, exerting his influence both at home and abroad.

古文：注日夜出入其家，与之谋议，语必通夕，关通赂遗，人莫能突击其迹。
现代文：郑注频繁地出入王守澄的家里，和他商议谋划，经常通宵达旦。二人串通收受贿赂，外人都无法窥测他们的踪迹。
English: Zheng Zhu frequently went in and out of Wang Shoucheng's home, discussed plans with him, and often stayed up all night. The two colluded in accepting bribes, and outsiders could not spy on their tracks.

古文：始则有微贱巧宦之士，或因以求进，数年之后，达官车马满其门矣。
现代文：开始时，还只是一些身世卑贱但又善于钻营趋奉的官吏，通过贿赂郑注而求迁升；几年以后，达官贵戚也都争着和他交往，以致门前车水马龙。
English: At the beginning, it was just a few officials who were lowly in life but also good at drilling, seeking promotion by bribing Zheng Zhu; a few years later, the relatives of high-ranking officials also competed with him, resulting in a lot of traffic in front of the door.

古文：工部尚书郑权，家多姬妾，禄薄不能赡，因注通于守澄以求节镇。
现代文：工部尚书郑权在家中畜养了很多妻妾，但由于俸禄少而无力供养，于是，通过郑注向王守澄推荐，求为节度使。
English: Zheng Quan, a senior official of the Ministry of Works, kept many wives and concubines at home, but due to the low salary, he was unable to provide for them. Therefore, he recommended Wang Shoucheng through Zheng Quan, and asked him to be the minister of the festival.

古文：己酉，以权为岭南节度使。
现代文：已酉，唐穆宗任命郑权为岭南节度使。
English: After his death, Tang Mu Zong appointed Zheng Quan as the Lingnan Festival envoy.

古文：五月，壬申，以尚书左丞柳公绰为山南东道节度使。
现代文：五月，壬申，唐穆宗任命尚书左丞柳公绰为山南东道节度使。
English: In May, in Jinshin, Tang Mu Zong appointed Shang Shuzhong Liu Gongqiao as the Shannan host festival envoy.

古文：公绰过邓县，有二吏，一犯赃，一舞文，众谓公绰必杀犯赃者。
现代文：柳公绰途经邓县，发现有两个官吏犯法：一个贪污，一个舞文弄墨。众人都认为柳公绰肯定要杀贪污者。
English: Liu Gongpu passed through Deng County and found two officials who had broken the law: one for corruption and one for tampering with official documents. Everyone believed that Liu Gongpu would definitely kill the corrupt.

古文：公绰判曰： 赃吏犯法，法在；奸吏乱法，法亡。 
现代文：不料柳公绰宣判说： 贪污的官吏虽然犯法，但法律仍在；而舞文弄墨的奸吏紊乱法律，则法律已亡。 
English: Unexpectedly, Liu Gongqu pronounced the verdict: Although the corrupt officials violated the law, the law is still in place; while the corrupt officials who tampered with the law, the law is dead.

古文：竟诛舞文者。
现代文：最后，竟杀舞文弄墨者。
English: In the end, he killed the artist.

古文：丙子，以晋、慈二州为保义军，以观察使李寰为节度使。
现代文：丙子，唐穆宗命以晋、慈二州为保义军，任命观察使李寰为节度使。
English: B, Tang Mu Zong ordered Jin and C two states to be the guarantors of the rebels, and appointed the observer Li Yu to be the festival envoy.

古文：六月，己丑，以吏部侍郎韩愈为京兆尹。六军不敢犯法，私相谓曰： 是尚欲烧佛骨，何可犯也！ 
现代文：六月，已丑，唐穆宗任命吏部侍郎韩愈为京兆尹，禁军将士都不敢犯法，私下里相互说： 他连佛骨都敢烧，我们怎么敢犯法！ 
English: In June, already ugly, Tang Mu Zong appointed Han Yu, the attendant of the cadre department, as Jing Zha Yin. The soldiers of the Forbidden Army did not dare to break the law, and said to each other in private: He even dared to burn the Buddhist bones, how dare we break the law!

古文：秋，七月，癸亥，岭南奏黄洞蛮寇邕州，破左江镇。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸亥，岭南奏报：黄洞蛮侵犯邕州，攻破左江镇。
English: In the autumn, in July, at the time of the Qinghai-Nanjing Earthquake, the South China Morning Post reported that Huangdong violently invaded Zhangzhou and overran Zuojiang Town.

古文：丙寅，邕州奏黄洞蛮破钦州千金镇，刺史杨屿奔石南砦。
现代文：丙寅，邕州奏报：黄洞蛮攻破钦州千金镇，刺史杨屿逃往石南砦。
English: Hsin Yin, Lianzhou Report: Huangdong brutally attacked Qianjin Town in Qinzhou, stabbed Shi Yangyu and fled to Heenan Fort.

古文：南诏劝利卒，国人请立其弟丰祐。
现代文：南诏国王劝利去世，南诏人向唐奏请立劝利的弟弟丰为王。
English: Nanzhao King Xuan Li died, and the Nanzhao people asked Tang So to appoint Xuan Li's younger brother Feng as king.

古文：丰祐勇敢，善用其众，始慕中国，不与父连名。
现代文：丰勇敢而善于用人，羡慕唐朝的礼仪和文化，从他开始不再与父辈连名。
English: Feng was brave and good at employing people, and he admired the etiquette and culture of the Tang Dynasty. From that time on, he no longer had the same name as his parents.

古文：八月，癸已，邕管奏破黄洞蛮。
现代文：八月，癸巳，邕州奏称攻破黄洞蛮。
English: In August, Kunming and Zhangzhou announced that they had broken through Huangdong.

古文：丙申，上自复道幸兴庆宫，至通化门楼，投绢二百匹施山僧。
现代文：丙申，唐穆宗从复道到兴庆宫，途经通化门楼时，向山里的僧人施舍绢二百匹。
English: According to legend, when Tang Mu Zong passed through the Tonghua Gate from Fudao to Xingqing Palace, he gave 200 yakitori to the monks in the mountains.

古文：上之滥赐皆此类，不可悉记。
现代文：穆宗滥施赏赐，毫无节制，像这一类事情，无法一一记载。
English: There is no record of anything like this in the history of Islam, where rewards are lavished without restraint.

古文：癸卯，以左仆射裴度为司空、山南西道节度使，不兼平章事。
现代文：癸卯，唐穆宗任命左射裴度为司空、山南西道节度使，不再兼同平章事。
English: At the same time, Tang Mu Zong appointed Zuosha Pei Du as the Secretary of the Sky and the Commissioner of the West Shannan Road Festival, and no longer concurrently with Ping Zhang.

古文：李逢吉恶度，右补阙张又新等附逢吉，竞流谤毁伤度，竟出之。
现代文：宰相李逢吉憎恨裴度。右补阙张又新等人附合李逢吉，竞相用流言诽谤中伤裴度，结果，竟然使裴度离开朝廷，放任为外地的节度使。
English: Prime Minister Li Fengji hated Pei Du. Others, such as the Right Assistant Minister Zhang Yatxin, sided with Li Fengji and competed in slandering Pei Du with rumors. As a result, Pei Du was even forced to leave the imperial court and was allowed to serve as a foreign envoy.

古文：又新，荐之子也。
现代文：张又新是唐德宗时朝臣张荐的儿子。
English: Zhang Yaxin was the son of Tang Dezong's courtier Zhang Ruo.

古文：九月，丙辰，加昭义节度使刘悟同平章事。
现代文：九月，丙辰，唐穆宗加封昭义节度使刘悟同平章事的荣誉职务。
English: In September, Tang Mu Zong was awarded the honorary title of Zhaoyi, and Liu Wudongping was awarded the honorary title of Liu Wudongping.

古文：李逢吉为相，内结知枢密王守澄，势倾朝野。
现代文：李逢吉但任宰相，在宫中交结知枢密王守澄，因而势倾朝野。
English: However, Li Fengji was appointed prime minister, and in the palace he befriended the privy councillor, King Shuzhen, and thus gained power in the court.

古文：惟翰林学士李绅每承顾问，常排抑之，拟状至内庭，绅多所臧否。
现代文：只有翰林学士李绅在每次参预穆宗的谘询时，经常对他加以遏制。
English: Only the scholar of Hanlin, Li Sheng, often restrained him every time he consulted the precepts of Mu Zong.

古文：逢吉患之，而上待遇方厚，不能远也。
现代文：李逢吉推荐官员的拟状上奏后，穆宗拿到翰林学士院听了意见，李绅多有批评。
English: After Li Fengji's imitation of the recommended official was played, Mu Zong went to the Hanlin Academy to listen to the opinions, and Li Sheng was more critical.

古文：会御史中丞缺，逢吉荐绅清直，宜居风宪之地。
现代文：李逢吉十分忧虑，但因穆宗正信任李绅，李逢吉无法进谗言使穆宗疏远他。这时，正好御史中丞缺职，李逢吉推荐李绅清廉正直，适合担任监察工作的职务。
English: Li Fengji was very worried, but because Mu Zong Zheng trusted Li Sheng, Li Fengji could not make any suggestions to alienate Mu Zong from him. At this time, it happened that Gu Shizhong Zheng was absent, Li Fengji recommended that Li Sheng was honest and suitable for the position of supervision.

古文：上以中丞亦次对官，不疑而可之。
现代文：穆宗考虑到御史中丞也是次对官，因而，未加怀疑就同意了。
English: Muzong agreed without hesitation, considering that Mishi Chujo was also a subordinate officer.

古文：会绅与京兆尹兼御史大夫韩愈争台参及它职事，文移往来，辞语不逊。
现代文：适逢李绅与京兆尹、御史大夫韩愈因台参及其他任职事争议不休，二人奏章往来，辞语多有不逊。
English: At the right time, Li Sheng and Jing Zhaoyun, and Han Yu, the imperial historian, were engaged in a dispute over Taiwan's participation in the Second Sino-Japanese War and other official matters, and the two of them exchanged inscriptions, and their words were more or less inferior.

古文：逢吉奏二人不协，冬，十月，丙戌，以愈为兵部侍郎，绅为江西观察使。
现代文：于是，李逢吉上奏二人关系不合，冬季，十月，丙戌，穆宗罢免二人的监察职务，任命韩愈为兵部侍郎，李绅为江西道观察使。
English: As a result, Li Fengji played up the fact that the two did not get along, and in the winter, in October, he and Mu Zong removed the two men from their supervisory positions, and appointed Han Yu as the attendant of the military department, and Li Sheng as the observer of Jiangxi Province.

古文：己丑，以中书侍郎、同平章事杜元颖同平章事，充西川节度使。
现代文：已丑，唐穆宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事杜元颖兼同平章的荣誉职务，充任剑南西川节度使。
English: Already ugly, Tang Mu Zong appointed Du Yuan Ying, a middle-ranking secretary, and Tongping Zhangji, who also held the honorary position of Tongping Zhang, to serve as the Jianan Nishikawa festival envoy.

古文：辛卯，安南奏黄洞蛮为寇。
现代文：辛卯，安南奏报：黄洞蛮侵扰。
English: Xinwu, Annan report: Huangdong is very intrusive.

古文：韩愈、李绅入谢，上各令自叙其事，乃深寤。
现代文：韩愈、李绅上殿向穆宗感谢新任职务，穆宗令二人各自陈述争论的事情经过，方才明白其中的原因。
English: Han Yu and Li Sheng went to the palace to thank Mu Zong for his new position. Mu Zong ordered the two of them to explain the dispute, and only then did they understand the reasons for it.

古文：壬辰，复以愈为吏部侍郎，绅为户部侍郎。
现代文：壬辰，重新任命朝愈为吏部侍郎，李绅为户部侍郎。
English: Imjin, reappointed Asayasu as the secretary of the personnel department, and Li Sheng as the secretary of the household department.

古文：长庆四年甲辰，公元八二四年春，正月，辛亥朔，上始御含元殿朝会。
现代文：长庆四年春季，正月，辛亥朔，唐穆宗自即位以来，首次亲临在含元殿举行的大朝会。
English: In the spring of the fourth year of the Long Qing Dynasty, in the first month of the new year, Tang Mu Zong attended for the first time since his accession to the throne the Grand Imperial Assembly held in the Hall of Han Yuan.

古文：初，柳泌等既诛，方士稍复，因左右以进，上饵其金石之药。
现代文：当初，柳泌等人被杀后，方士又逐渐通过穆宗的左右侍从进入宫中，穆宗服用方士所炼制的金石药物。
English: At first, after Liu Xiu and others were killed, the magicians gradually entered the palace through Mu Zong's right and left attendants, and Mu Zong took the gold and stone medicine refined by the magicians.

古文：有处士张皋者上疏，以为： 神虑淡则血气和，嗜欲胜则疾疹作。
现代文：有一个隐居未仕名叫张皋的人上书朝廷，认为： 凡是精神澹泊的人就血气相和，身体康健；而欲望强烈的人则容易疾病发作。
English: A recluse named Zhang Xuan wrote a letter to the imperial court, arguing that: Anyone who is mentally healthy is healthy; while people with strong desires are prone to illness.

古文：药以攻疾，无疾不可饵也。
现代文：药是用来治病的东西，没有病就不要轻易吃。
English: Medicine is something that is used to cure diseases. If you don't have a disease, don't take it lightly.

古文：昔孙思邈有言： 药势有所偏助，令人藏气不平，借使有疾用药，犹须重慎。 
现代文：过去，孙思邈曾说： 药对人身体各个器官的作用是有所偏重的，它会导致人的五脏元气不平，所以，即使有病吃药，也要非常慎重。 
English: In the past, Sun Siyu once said: The effect of medicine on various organs of the human body is somewhat biased. It will lead to the imbalance of the human internal organs. Therefore, even if you are sick and take medicine, you should be very cautious.

古文：庶人尚尔，况于天子！
现代文：对于一般百姓尚且如此，何况天子呢！
English: This is still the case for ordinary people, let alone the Son of God!

古文：先帝信方士妄言，饵药致疾，此陛下所详知也，岂得复循其覆辙乎！
现代文：先帝听信方士的胡言乱语，服用金丹导致疾病发作，陛下是十分清楚的，岂可再蹈覆辙！
English: The former emperor listened to the nonsense of the fortune-teller, taking the jade caused the onset of the disease, His Majesty is very clear, how can he repeat the same mistake!

古文：今朝野之人纷纭窃议，但畏忤旨，莫敢进言。
现代文：现在，朝廷内外纷纷私下议论这件事，但都恐怕违背陛下的旨意，不敢上书直言。
English: Now, both inside and outside the Imperial Court are discussing this matter in private, but they are afraid to go against His Majesty's will and dare not speak openly in writing.

古文：臣生长蓬艾，麋鹿与游，无所邀求，但粗知忠义，欲裨万一耳！ 
现代文：我是生长在草莽中的隐居人士，整天和麋鹿相处一起，无所追求，但也大略懂得一些忠义的道理，所以上书朝廷，请以防患于万一。 
English: I am a recluse who grew up in the grasslands. I spend all day with the elk. I have nothing to pursue, but I also understand some of the principles of loyalty. Therefore, I would like to write to the imperial court, please, just in case.

古文：上甚善其言，使求之，不获。
现代文：穆宗十分赞赏张皋的这一番话，派人去访求张皋，结果，没有找到。
English: Mu Zong highly appreciated Zhang Ye's words and sent someone to visit Zhang Ye, but they did not find him.

古文：丁卯，岭南奏黄洞蛮寇钦州，杀将吏。
现代文：丁卯，岭南奏报：黄洞蛮侵扰钦州，杀将士和官吏。
English: Dingwu, Lingnan report: Huangdong brutally invaded Qinzhou, killing generals and officials.

古文：庚午，上疾复作。
现代文：庚午，唐穆宗疾病再次发作。
English: In the afternoon, Tang Muzong's illness flared up again.

古文：壬申，大渐，命太子监国。
现代文：壬申，病重，命皇太子代理朝政。
English: Jinshin, seriously ill, ordered the crown prince to act as regent.

古文：宦官欲请郭太后临朝称制。太后曰： 昔武后称制，几倾社稷。我家世守忠义，非武氏之比也。
现代文：宦官想请郭太后临朝代行皇权，太后说： 过去，武皇后称帝，几乎危害江山社稷，我家世代恪守忠义，决非武氏所能相比。
English: The eunuch wanted to ask Empress Dowager Guo to act as the acting emperor, and the empress dowager said, "In the past, Empress Wu proclaimed herself emperor, almost endangering the country and society. My family has been loyal for generations, and it is by no means comparable to the Wu clan."

古文：太子虽少，但得贤宰相辅之，卿辈勿预朝政，何患国家不安！
现代文：太子虽然年轻，但如果能有德才兼备的宰相辅佐，你们这些人也都不干预朝政，就不用忧虑国家不安定！
English: Although the crown prince is young, if you can have a chancellor's assistant who is both virtuous and talented, and you all do not interfere in the government, you do not have to worry about the instability of the country!

古文：自古岂有女子为天下主，而能致唐、虞之理乎！ 
现代文：自古以来，岂有女人主宰天下，而能达到唐尧、虞舜那样的天下大治吗？ 
English: Since ancient times, has there ever been a woman to rule the world, and can she achieve the great rule of the world like Tang Xi and Yu Xi?

古文：取制书手裂之。
现代文：说完，把宦官拟定的制书拿过来撕了。
English: Having said that, he took the eunuch's proposed book and tore it up.

古文：太后兄太常卿钊闻有是议，密上笺曰： 若果徇其请，臣请先帅诸子纳官爵归田里。 
现代文：郭太后的兄弟、太常卿郭钊听到宦官的建议，秘密上书给郭太后说： 如果您听从宦官的请求，那么，我就和儿子们把自己的官衔和爵位交还朝廷，然后回家种田。 
English: Upon hearing the eunuch's suggestion, Guo Zhengxing, the brother of Empress Dowager Guo, secretly wrote to Empress Dowager Guo, saying, "If you follow the eunuch's request, then I and my sons will return my official title and peerage to the imperial court, and then return home to farm the land."

古文：太后泣曰： 祖考之庆，钟于吾兄。 是夕，上崩于寝殿。
现代文：郭太后哭着说： 祖先庆幸有我的兄弟这样的好后代。 
English: Empress Dowager Guo cried and said, "Our ancestors are lucky to have such a good descendant as my brother.

古文：癸酉，以李逢吉摄冢宰。
现代文：当晚，穆宗在寝殿驾崩。癸酉，朝廷任命李逢吉兼任冢宰，主持穆宗的治丧事宜。
English: That evening, Mu Zong passed away in his bedchamber. Therefore, the imperial court appointed Li Fengji to also serve as the regent to preside over Mu Zong's funeral.

古文：丙子，敬宗即位于太极东序。
现代文：丙子，唐敬宗李湛在太极殿东厢即位。
English: Li Zhan, the eldest son of Tang Jingzong, ascended the throne in the east wing of the Taiji Hall.

古文：初，穆宗之立，神策军士人赐钱五十千，宰相议以太厚难继，乃下诏称： 宿卫之勒，诚宜厚赏，属频年旱歉，御府空虚，边兵尚未给仪，沾恤期于均济。
现代文：当初，唐穆宗即位时，赏赐神策军军士每人钱五十缗。宰相商议，认为赏赐过于优厚，难以继续实行。于是，敬宗下诏说： 按照禁军将士宿卫的功劳，实在应当给予优厚的赏赐。但近年以来屡有旱灾，庄稼歉收，国库空虚，戍边兵士至今尚未供给春衣。
English: At first, when Tang Mu Zong ascended the throne, he rewarded the soldiers of the Shen Cai Army with fifty baht each. The prime minister deliberated and thought that the reward was too generous and difficult to continue. Therefore, the emperor said: According to the merits of the soldiers of the Forbidden Army, they should really be given a generous reward. However, in recent years, there have been frequent droughts, poor harvests, and the national treasury is empty. The soldiers of the Lijiang side have not yet been provided with spring coats.

古文：神策军士人赐绢十匹、钱十千，畿内诸镇又减五千。
现代文：朝廷对将士的恩惠应当尽量平均，所以，凡神策军军士每人赐绢十匹，钱十缗；京畿神策诸镇军士每人钱减五缗。
English: The imperial court should be as generous as possible to the soldiers. Therefore, the soldiers of the Jinze Army were each given ten horses and ten cormorants; the soldiers of the Jinze Towns in Gyeonggi Province were each given five cormorants.

古文：仍出内库绫二百万匹付度支，充边军春衣。 
现代文：同时，从内库拨调绫二百万匹交给度支，充作边防戍兵的春衣。 
English: At the same time, two million yakitori yakitori were transferred from the internal reserve to the provincial branch to serve as the spring clothes for the border guards.

古文：时人善之。
现代文：当时人都称赞这次赏赐比较公允。
English: People at the time praised him for saying it so well.

古文：自戊寅至庚辰，上赐宦官服色及锦彩金银甚众，或今日赐绿，明日赐绯。
现代文：从戊寅至庚辰，唐敬宗赏赐宦官官服以及锦彩、金银，数额很多，或者今日赐给六品、七品的绿色官服，明日赐给四品、五品的红色官服。
English: From Wu Yin to Geng Chen, Tang Jingzong awarded eunuch official uniforms as well as decorations, gold and silver, a large amount, or today he gave six or seven green official uniforms, and tomorrow he would give four or five red official uniforms.

古文：初，穆宗既留李绅，李逢吉愈忌之。
现代文：当初，唐穆宗把李绅留在朝廷任职后，宰相李逢吉更加忌恨他。
English: At first, after Tang Mu Zong left Li Sheng in the imperial court, Prime Minister Li Fengji hated him even more.

古文：绅族子虞颇以文学知名，自言不乐仕进，隐居华阳川，及从父耆为左拾遗，虞与耆书求荐，误达于绅。绅以书诮之，且以语于众人。
现代文：李绅的族子李虞由于文章博学而知名一时，他自称不愿做官，因而隐居在华阳川。等到他的叔父李耆任左拾遗后，李虞写信给李耆，请求向朝廷推荐，不料这封信误送到李绅手中，李绅便写信讥讽他，并把这件事在大庭广众中张扬。
English: Li Sheng's son, Li Yu, was once famous for his erudite writings. He claimed that he did not want to be an official, so he lived in seclusion in Huayangchuan. After his uncle Li Xuan left to collect his inheritance, Li Yu wrote a letter to Li Xuan, asking him to recommend him to the imperial court. However, the letter was mistakenly sent to Li Sheng. Li Sheng then wrote a letter to ridicule him, and made the matter known to the public.

古文：虞深怨之，乃诣逢吉，悉以绅平日密论逢吉之语告之。
现代文：李虞得知后非常气愤，于是，求见李逢吉，把李绅平时暗地里议论李逢吉的话全都告诉了他。
English: After learning this, Li Yu was very angry, so he asked to see Li Fengji and told him everything that Li Sheng had said about Li Fengji in secret.

古文：逢吉益怒，使虞与补阙张又新及从子前河阳掌书记仲言等伺求绅短，扬之于士大夫间。且言 绅潜察士大夫有群居议论者，辄指为朋党，白之于上。 
现代文：李逢吉更加憎恨李绅，于是，让李虞和补阙张又新，以及侄子、前河阳掌书记李仲言等人探察李绅的过失，然后，在士大夫中间张扬，并说： 李绅暗地里窥察士大夫，凡有人在一起议论，便指斥为朋党，向皇上告状。 
English: Li Fengji hated Li Sheng even more. Therefore, he had Li Yu and Zhu Xuan, Zhang Yixin and Li Zhongyan, his nephew and the former secretary of Heyang, investigate the faults of Li Sheng. Then, he made it known among the magistrates and said: Li Sheng secretly spied on the magistrates. Whenever there was a discussion, he would accuse them of being partisans and complain to the emperor.

古文：由是士大夫多忌之。
现代文：由此士大夫也大多忌恨李绅。
English: As a result, most judges and magistrates hated Li Sheng.

古文：及敬宗即位，逢吉与其党快绅失势，又恐上复用之，日夜谋议，思所以害绅者。
现代文：敬宗即位后，李逢吉和他的党羽对李绅失势拍手称快，但又恐怕敬宗重新信用他，因而日夜策划，商量能够伤害李绅的办法。
English: After Emperor Jingzong ascended to the throne, Li Fengji and his followers were quick to applaud Li Sheng's loss of power, but they were afraid that Emperor Jingzong would trust him again, so they plotted day and night and discussed ways to harm Li Sheng.

古文：楚州刺史苏遇谓逢吉之党曰： 主上初听政，必开延英，有次对官，惟此可防。 
现代文：楚州刺史苏遇对李逢吉的党羽说： 皇上初次上朝听政，肯定要开延英殿访询百官。
English: Chuzhou assassin Su Shi said to Li Fengji's party members: "The emperor's first visit to the court to listen to the government must surely be to visit the palace of Yan Ying and interview hundreds of officials.

古文：其党以为然，亟白逢吉曰： 事迫矣，若俟听政，悔不可追！ 
现代文：李绅是次对官，在这时应防备李绅重新被皇上重用。 李逢吉的党羽认为言之有理，急忙转告李逢吉说： 事情紧迫，如果等到皇上驾临延英殿听政，就悔不可及了！ 
English: Li Sheng was the second-ranking official, and at this time it was necessary to prevent Li Sheng from being re-used by the emperor. Li Fengji's party members thought that this was a reasonable thing to say, and hurriedly told Li Fengji: "Things are urgent, and if we wait until the emperor comes to the Yan Ying palace to listen to politics, we will regret it!

古文：逢吉乃令王守澄言于上曰： 陛下所以为储贰，臣备知之，皆逢吉之力也。
现代文：于是，李逢吉让知枢密王守澄对敬宗说： 陛下所以能被立为皇太子，我全都知道，主要是李逢吉的功劳。
English: As a result, Li Fengji asked the Privy Councilor Wang Shoucheng to say to Emperor Keizong: I know all about why Your Majesty was able to become crown prince, and it was mainly due to Li Fengji.

古文：如杜元颖、李绅辈，皆欲立深王。 
现代文：像杜元颖、李绅这些人，都是要立深王李察的。 
English: People like Du Yuanying and Li Sheng all want to set up Shengwang Richard.

古文：度支员外郎李续之等继上章言之。
现代文：度支员外郎李续之等人接着上奏，也同样说。
English: Li Cui Rong, a member of the Provincial Party Committee, also said the same thing.

古文：上时年十六，疑未信。
现代文：敬宗这时十六岁，疑而未信。
English: At the time, Keizong was 16 years old and hesitant to believe.

古文：会逢吉亦有奏，言 绅谋不利于上，请加贬谪。 
现代文：这时，李逢吉也上奏说： 李绅不忠于陛下，请予以贬谪。 
English: At this time, Li Fengji also made a report, saying: Li Sheng is not loyal to His Majesty, please disparage him.

古文：上犹再三覆问，然后从之。
现代文：敬宗仍再三询问是否属实，然后听从了李逢吉的意见。
English: Keizong still repeatedly asked if it was true, and then listened to Li Fengji's opinion.

古文：二月，癸未，贬绅为端州司马。
现代文：二月，癸未，贬李绅为端州司马。
English: In February, at the last minute, Li Sheng was demoted to Danzhou Sima.

古文：逢吉仍帅百官表贺，既退，百官复诣中书贺，逢吉方与张又新语，门者弗内。良久，又新挥汗而出，旅揖百官曰： 端溪之事，又新不敢多让。 
现代文：于是，李逢吉率领百官上表称贺。退朝后，百官又到中书省称贺。这时，李逢吉正和张又新在中书省交谈，守门人不让百官进去，百官等待很久，只见张又新挥汗而出，向百官作揖说： 李绅贬官端州一事，我不能再退让了。 
English: As a result, Li Fengji led hundreds of officials to go to the table to congratulate. After the withdrawal, the hundreds of officials went to the Chinese Literature Province to congratulate. At this time, Li Fengji was talking with Zhang Yixin in the Chinese Literature Province. The gatekeepers did not allow the hundreds of officials to enter, and the hundreds of officials waited for a long time. Zhang Yixin sweated profusely and said to the hundreds of officials: I can no longer concede the matter of Li Sheng's demotion of the officials to Duanzhou.

古文：众骇愕辟易，惮之。
现代文：百官都惊愕退下，惧怕张又新。
English: All the officials were stunned and retreated, fearing Zhang Muxin.

古文：右拾遗内供奉吴思独不贺，逢吉怒，以思为吐蕃告哀使。
现代文：百官称贺时，只有右拾遗内供奉吴思不作祝贺的表示，李逢吉发怒，任命他为吐蕃告哀使。
English: When all the officials congratulated him, only Wu Si, the Right Reverend, did not offer his congratulations. Li Fengji was angry and appointed him as a messenger of condolence.

古文：丙戌，贬翰林学士庞严为信州刺史，蒋防为汀州刺史。
现代文：丙戌，贬翰林学士庞严为信州刺史，蒋防为汀州刺史。
English: Peng Rong, Han Lin and Pang Yan are the history of Shinshu, and Jiang Bao is the history of Tingzhou.

古文：严，寿州人。与防皆绅所引也。
现代文：庞严是寿州人，他和蒋防都是由李绅推荐到翰林院任职的。
English: Pang Yan is a native of Shoushou. Both he and Jiang Fang were recommended by Li Sheng to serve in the Hanlin Academy.

古文：给事中于敖，素与严善，封还敕书。人为之惧。曰： 于给事为庞、蒋直冤，犯宰相怒，诚所难也！ 
现代文：给事中于敖向来和庞严关系密切，他把贬谪二人的敕书封还朝廷，百官都以为他要为二人辩解，因而替他担忧说： 于给事敢于为庞、蒋二人辩冤，触犯宰相，真是不容易啊！ 
English: In this matter, Yu Zheng has always been closely related to Pang Yan. He returned to the imperial court the sealed letter of reprimand against the two people. All the officials thought that he was going to defend the two people, so they were worried about him and said: It is really not easy to dare to defend the two people, Pang and Chiang, and offend the prime minister!

古文：及奏下，乃言贬之太轻，逢吉由是奖之。
现代文：后来，于敖上奏辩驳时，反而说对二人贬得太轻。李逢吉由此而夸奖他。
English: Later, when Yu Yuanzhang made a rebuttal, he said that the two were treated too lightly. Li Fengji praised him for this.

古文：张又新等犹忌绅，日上书言贬绅太轻，上许为杀之。
现代文：张又新等人仍然忌恨李绅，每天上书朝廷，认为对李绅贬得太轻，敬宗许可杀李绅。
English: Zhang Yanshin and others still hated Li Sheng and wrote to the imperial court every day, saying that Li Sheng was treated too lightly and that Emperor Jingzong had given permission to kill Li Sheng.

古文：朝臣莫敢言，独翰林侍读学士韦处厚上疏，指述 绅为逢吉之党所谗，人情叹骇。
现代文：朝臣都不敢再言，只有翰林侍读学士韦处厚上奏，指出 李绅被李逢吉的党羽进谗言诬陷贬谪，人们都感到震惊，无不叹息。
English: None of the courtiers dared to say anything more, only Hanlin, who was attending the bachelor's degree of Wei, made a strong appeal, pointing out that Li Sheng was framed and demeaned by Li Fengji's party. People were shocked and all sighed.

古文：绅蒙先朝奖用，借使有罪，犹宜容假，以成三年无改之孝，况无罪乎！ 
现代文：李绅是由穆宗提拔任用的大臣，即使他有罪，也应当本着对父亲尽三年孝道的精神，对他予以宽容，何况他根本无罪！ 于是，敬宗渐渐觉悟。
English: Li Sheng is a minister who was promoted and appointed by Mu Zong. Even if he is guilty, he should be tolerated in the spirit of performing three years of filial piety to his father. Moreover, he is not guilty at all! As a result, Keizong gradually became aware.

古文：于是上稍开寤，会阅禁中文书，有穆宗所封一箧，发之，得裴度、杜元颖、李绅疏请立上为太子，上乃嗟叹，悉焚人所上谮绅书。
现代文：这时，恰巧敬宗阅览宫中的文书，发现有一小箱穆宗亲手封存的文书，打开后，看到其中一件是裴度、杜元颖、李绅上疏请立自己为皇太子的上奏，这才嗟叹不已，把朝臣离间李绅的上书全都烧掉，不再相信。
English: At this time, Jingzong happened to be reading the documents in the palace and found that there was a small box of documents sealed by Mu Zong himself. After opening it, he saw that one of them was Baidu, Du Yuanying, and Li Shengzang's request to set himself up as the crown prince's first player. This made him sigh, and he burned all of Li Sheng's letters between courtiers, and no longer believed.

古文：虽未即召还，后有言者，不复听矣。
现代文：虽然敬宗尚未立即把李绅从端州召回朝廷，但以后再有人上奏离间，不再听了。
English: Although Emperor Jingzong did not immediately recall Li Sheng from Danzhou to the imperial court, later on, some people tried to dissuade him, and he no longer listened.

古文：己亥，尊郭太后为太皇太后。
现代文：己亥，唐敬宗尊奉郭太后为太皇太后。
English: At the same time, the Tang Emperor Jingzong honored the Empress Dowager Bongguo as the Grand Empress Dowager.

古文：乙已，尊上母王妃为皇太后。
现代文：乙巳，唐敬宗尊奉自己的母亲王妃为皇太后。
English: Now, Tang Jingzong revered his own mother, the princess, as empress dowager.

古文：太后，越州人也。
现代文：皇太后是越州人。
English: The empress dowager is a native of Yuezhou.

古文：丁未，上幸中和殿击球，自是数游宴、击球、奏乐，赏赐宦官、乐人，不可悉纪。
现代文：丁未，唐敬宗到中和殿去踢球，此后多次游宴、踢球、奏乐，并赏赐宦官和奏乐的伎工，难以全部记载。
English: Ding Wei, Tang Jingzong went to Zhonghe Hall to play football, after which there were many banquets, playing football, playing music, and rewarding eunuchs and musicians. It is difficult to record everything.

古文：三月，壬子，赦天下。诸道常贡之外，毋得进奉。
现代文：三月，壬子，唐敬宗大赦天下，命诸道在规定的上贡数额以外，不准再向朝廷进奉。
English: In March, Emperor Jingzong of Tang was pardoned by the emperor, and ordered that all sects were no longer allowed to make offerings to the imperial court beyond the prescribed amount of tribute.

古文：甲寅，上始对宰相于延英殿。
现代文：甲寅，唐敬宗开始在延英殿会见宰相，商议朝政大事。
English: In the eleventh year of the eleventh month, Tang Jingzong began to meet with the prime minister at Yan Ying Palace to discuss important matters of imperial politics.

古文：初，牛元翼在襄阳，数赂王庭氵奏以清其家，庭凑不与。
现代文：当初，牛元翼镇守襄阳后，多次贿赂成德节度使王庭凑，请求把自己的家眷释放送还，王庭凑拒不释放。
English: At the beginning, after Niu Yuan Ying Zhen guarded Xiangyang, he bribed Chengde Festival several times to make Wang Tingpai release his family members, but Wang Tingpai refused to release them.

古文：闻元翼薨，甲子，尽杀之。
现代文：后来，听说牛元翼已死，甲子，把他的家眷全部杀死。
English: Later, when he heard that Niu Yuan Ying had died, he killed his entire family.

古文：上视朝每晏，戊辰，日绝高尚未坐，百官班于紫宸门外，老病者几至僵踣。
现代文：唐敬宗每次上朝都很晚。戊辰，太阳已经很高了尚未来到，百官在紫宸门外列班等待，老弱有病者几乎双腿麻木跌倒。
English: Tang Jingzong was always very late in the morning. In the morning, when the sun was already high and had not yet arrived, hundreds of officials waited in line outside the Ziyang Gate, and the old, weak and sick almost fell down with numb legs.

古文：谏议大夫李渤白宰相曰： 昨日疏论坐晚，今晨愈甚，请出阁待罪于金吾仗。 
现代文：谏议大夫李渤对宰相说： 昨天我上疏论皇上上朝太晚，不料今天早晨上朝更晚。
English: "Yesterday, I was too late to go to the Imperial Palace to discuss the Emperor's death, but this morning, I woke up even later," said Li Yao, the doctor in charge of deliberation, to the prime minister.

古文：既坐班退，左拾遗刘栖楚独留，进言曰： 宪宗及先帝皆长君，四方犹多叛乱。
现代文：皇上不改，请允许我在金吾仗前等候皇上治罪。 敬宗上朝结束，百官退朝后，左拾遗刘栖楚独自留下，对敬宗说： 宪宗皇帝和先帝都是成年后即位，但各地仍多有叛乱。
English: The emperor does not change, please allow me to wait for the emperor's punishment before the battle of Kingu. After the end of the reign of Emperor Keizong and the withdrawal of hundreds of officials from the imperial court, Liu Qiuchu, who was left alone, said to Emperor Keizong: Emperor Xianzong and the former emperor both ascended the throne after reaching adulthood, but there are still many rebellions around the country.

古文：陛下富于春秋，嗣位之初，当宵衣求理。
现代文：陛下年纪正轻，即位之初，应当早起晚睡，勤于政事，以求治理天下。
English: His Majesty is very young, and at the beginning of his reign, he should get up early and go to bed late, and be diligent in political affairs in order to govern the world.

古文：而嗜寝乐色，日晏方起，梓宫在殡，鼓吹日喧，令闻未彰，恶声遐布。
现代文：但您却喜好音乐女色，贪睡晚起。现在，先皇帝的棺木还未下葬，治丧的乐队鼓吹声不绝于耳。
English: But you like to listen to music and sleep late. Now, the coffin of the former emperor has not yet been buried, and the sound of the funeral band is incessant.

古文：臣恐福祚之不长，请碎首王阶以谢谏职之旷。 
现代文：而陛下勤政的名声尚未显扬，不孝的恶名却已遐迩闻知。我担心国家的命运难以长久，现在，我请求死在陛下面前，作为对我这个谏官失职罪责的惩罚。 
English: But your majesty's reputation for diligence is not yet well known, and his infidelity is notorious. I fear that the fate of the country will not last long, and I now ask to die in front of your majesty as a punishment for my eunuch's dereliction of duty.

古文：遂以额叩龙墀，见血不已，响闻閤外。
现代文：说完，用前额叩撞敬宗前面的龙形台阶，流血不止，叩撞声连宫殿外面都能听见。
English: Having said that, he banged his forehead on the dragon-shaped steps in front of the Jingzong. He was bleeding profusely, and the banging could be heard even outside the palace.

古文：李逢吉宣曰： 刘栖楚休叩头，俟进止！ 
现代文：李逢吉宣布敬宗的旨意说： 刘栖楚不要再叩头了，现在听候皇上的决定！ 
English: Li Fengji announced the will of Emperor Jingzong and said: Liu Qi Chu, do not kowtow anymore, now wait for the emperor's decision!

古文：栖楚捧首而起，更论宦官事，上连挥令出。
现代文：刘栖楚用手揍头而起，接着，又上奏宦官专权的问题。敬宗很不耐烦，连连挥手令他出去。
English: Liu Qichu started with a hand gesture, and then went on to raise the issue of the eunuch's exclusive right. Keizong was very impatient and waved his hand repeatedly to make him leave.

古文：栖楚曰： 不用臣言，请继以死。 
现代文：刘栖楚说： 陛下如果不采纳我的意见，我请求接着死在陛下面前。 
English: Liu Qichu said, "If Your Majesty does not accept my opinion, I request that I continue to die in front of Your Majesty."

古文：牛僧孺宣曰： 所奏知，门外俟进止！ 
现代文：牛僧孺又宣布敬宗的旨意说： 你的上奏已经知道了，请到门外听候皇上的决定！ 
English: The Cow Monk also announced the Emperor's will, saying, "Your first move is already known, please wait outside the gate for the Emperor's decision!"

古文：栖楚乃出，待罪金吾仗，于是宰相赞成其言。
现代文：刘栖楚于是出去，到金吾仗前等候。这时，宰相都上奏赞成刘栖楚的意见。
English: Liu Qichu then went out and waited until the battle of Kingu. At this time, the prime ministers all voiced their approval of Liu Qichu's opinion.

古文：上命中使就仗，并李渤宣慰令归。
现代文：于是，敬宗派宦官到金吾仗前安抚刘栖楚和李渤，命二人回家。
English: As a result, the eunuchs of the Jing sect went to Kingu before the battle to pacify Liu Qichu and Li Yao, and ordered the two to go home.

古文：寻擢栖楚为起居舍人，仍赐绯。
现代文：不久，提拔刘栖楚为起居舍人，并赐予五品的红色官服。
English: Soon after, Liu Qiuchu was promoted to the position of chief official and given a five-star red official uniform.

古文：栖楚辞疾不拜，归东都。
现代文：刘栖楚借口身体有病而不接受，回到东都去了。
English: Liu Qichu did not accept the excuse that he was ill and went back to Dongdu.

古文：庚午，赐内教坊钱万缗，以备行幸。
现代文：庚年，唐敬宗赏赐内教坊钱一万缗，作为外出巡行的准备。
English: In the year of the Go, Emperor Jingzong of the Tang Dynasty rewarded the Inner Diocese with 10,000 baht as a preparation for the outing parade.

古文：夏，四月，甲午，淮南节度使王播罢盐铁转运使。
现代文：夏季，四月，甲午，唐敬宗罢免淮南节度使王播兼任的盐铁转运使的职务。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the fourth month of the summer, Tang Jingzong dismissed the Huainan Festival envoy Wang Bo, who also served as the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron.

古文：乙未，以布衣姜洽为补阙，试大理评事陆洿、布衣李虞、刘坚为拾遗。
现代文：乙未，唐敬宗任命平民姜洽为补阙，试大理评事陆、平民李虞、刘坚为拾遗。
English: At the same time, Tang Jingzong appointed the commoner Jiang Cai as the supplemental magistrate, and tried the great scholar and critic Zhilu, the commoner Li Yu, and Liu Jian as the scavengers.

古文：时李逢吉用事，所亲厚者张又新、李仲言、李续之、李虞、刘栖楚、姜洽及拾遗张权舆、程昔范，又有从而附丽之者，时人恶逢吉者，目之为八关、十六子。
现代文：这时，宰相李逢吉专制朝政，他所亲信重用的人有张又新、李仲言、李续之、李虞、刘栖楚、姜洽以及拾遗张权舆、程昔范，还有一些顺从而依附他们的士人。当时凡僧恨李逢吉的人，都把他们称为八关、十六子。
English: At this time, the prime minister Li Fengji was in charge of the autocratic imperial government, and his trusted and important people included Zhang Muxin, Li Zhongyan, Li Cunzhi, Li Yu, Liu Qi Chu, Jiang Cai, as well as Zhiwei Zhang Quan Ying, Cheng Xiao Fan, and some scholars who followed and depended on them. At that time, all those who hated Li Fengji were called eight gates and sixteen sons.

古文：卜者苏玄明与染坊供人张韶善，玄明谓韶曰： 我为子卜，当升殿坐，与我共食。
现代文：占卜术士苏玄明和朝廷染坊的供役人张韶关系亲近，苏玄明对张韶说： 我为你占卜了吉凶，你将来应当进宫升殿而坐，和我同食，同享富贵。
English: The soothsayer Su Xuanming had a close relationship with Zhang Xuan, the official in charge of the imperial dyeing workshop. Su Xuanming said to Zhang Xuan: "I have divined the fortunes for you. In the future, you should enter the palace and sit, eat with me, and enjoy wealth and riches together."

古文：今主上昼夜球、猎，多不在宫中，大事可图也。 
现代文：现在皇上昼夜踢球游猎，大多数时间不在宫中，可以乘机而图大事。 
English: Now the emperor is playing football and hunting day and night, and most of the time he is not in the palace, so he can take the opportunity to do great things.

古文：韶以为然，乃与玄明谋结染工无赖者百馀人，丙申，匿兵于紫草，车载以入银台门，伺夜作乱。
现代文：张韶认为言之有理，于是，和苏玄明在暗地里交结染坊工匠无赖者一百多人。丙申，他们把兵器藏在柴草中，装在车上，打算运进银台门，趁夜黑时作乱。
English: Zhang Ye thought his words were reasonable, so he and Su Xuanming secretly made contact with more than a hundred rogue dyeing workshop craftsmen. According to him, they hid their weapons in firewood and loaded them onto a car, intending to transport them into the Yintai Gate and take advantage of the darkness of the night to make trouble.

古文：未达所诣，有疑其重载而诘之者，韶急，即杀诘者，与其徒易服挥兵，大呼趣禁庭。
现代文：还未到达目的地，有人怀疑他们的车超重，加以盘问。张韶着急，立即杀死盘问者。然后，和他的同党换去外衣，手握兵器，大喊直冲宫中。
English: Before reaching the destination, someone suspected that their car was too heavy and interrogated them. Zhang Ye was in a hurry and immediately killed the interrogator. Then, he and his fellow party members changed their coats, held weapons and shouted straight into the palace.

古文：上时在清思殿击球，诸宦者见之，惊骇，急入闭门，走白上。
现代文：敬宗这时正在清思殿踢球。宦官们发觉有人向宫中冲来，大为吃惊，急忙跑进来关闭宫门，然后跑去向敬宗报告。
English: At that time, Emperor Keizong was playing football at the Palace of Ching Si. The eunuchs were surprised to see someone rushing into the palace, and they hurried in to close the palace gate, and then ran to report to Emperor Keizong.

古文：盗寻斩关而入。
现代文：顷刻间，张韶等人攻破宫门，冲入宫中。
English: In an instant, Zhang Ye and others broke through the palace gate and rushed into the palace.

古文：先是右神策中尉梁守谦有宠于上，每两军角伎艺，上常佑右军。
现代文：原先，敬宗宠爱右神策军护军中尉梁守谦，每次左、右神策军比试武艺，敬宗常常为右军助威。
English: Originally, Keizong favored Lieutenant Liang Shouqian of the Right Divine Defense Force. Every time the Left Divine Defense Force and the Right Divine Defense Force competed in martial arts, Keizong often cheered for the Right Divine Defense Force.

古文：至是，上狼狈欲幸右军，左右曰： 右军远，恐遇盗，不若幸左军近。 
现代文：这时，敬宗狼狈不堪，想到右神策军营中避难，左右侍从说： 右军路近，恐怕半路遇上盗贼，不如到左军近。 
English: At this time, Jingzong was distraught and thought of taking refuge in the right-hand army camp. The left and right attendants said, "The right-hand army is close by. I'm afraid we'll meet thieves halfway. It's better to get close to the left-hand army."

古文：上从之。
现代文：敬宗同意。
English: Emperor Dezong accepted his suggestion.

古文：左神策中尉河中马存亮闻上至，走出迎，捧上足涕泣，自负上入军中，遣大将康艺全将骑卒入宫讨贼。
现代文：左神策军护军中尉河中人马存亮听说敬宗驾临，急忙跑出军营迎接，他两手捧住敬宗的双脚哭泣不已，亲自把敬宗背到军中，然后，命大将康艺全率骑兵入宫讨伐乱党。
English: Zuo Shensha's military escort lieutenant, Hechuan Renma Cunliang, heard that Emperor Keizong was coming and hurried out of the military camp to meet him. He held Emperor Keizong's feet with both hands and wept uncontrollably. He personally carried Emperor Keizong back to the army. Then, the Grand Marshal Kang Yi led the cavalry into the palace to fight against the disorderly party.

古文：上忧二太后隔绝，存亮复以五百骑迎二太后至军。
现代文：敬宗担心太皇太后和皇太后隔在宫中有危险，存亮又派五百骑兵把两位太后接到军中。
English: Keizong was worried that the empress dowager and the empress dowager were in danger in the palace, and sent five hundred cavalrymen to bring the two empress dowagers into the army.

古文：张韶升清思殿，坐御榻，与苏玄明同食，曰： 果如子言！ 
现代文：张韶登上清思殿，坐在皇帝的御榻上，和苏玄明一同吃饭，说： 果然像你说的那样！ 
English: Zhang Ye boarded the Palace of Pure Thoughts, sat on the emperor's couch, and dined with Su Xuanming, saying, "It's just as you said!

古文：玄明惊曰： 事止此邪！ 
现代文：苏玄明大惊，说： 难道你所企求的就是吃吗？ 
English: Su Xuanming was shocked and said, "Is it eating that you want?

古文：韶惧而走。
现代文：张韶畏惧而逃。
English: Zhang Yao fled in fear.

古文：会康艺全与右军兵马使尚国忠引兵至，合击之，杀韶、玄明及其党，死者狼藉。
现代文：正在这时，康艺全和右神策军兵马使尚国忠率兵到达，二人合兵讨击，杀张韶、苏玄明及其同党，尸体狼藉遍地。
English: Just at this time, Kang Yichuan and Shang Guozhong arrived with the soldiers of the Right Divine Providence Army, and the two of them fought together to kill Zhang Ye, Su Xuanming and their comrades-in-arms. Bodies were strewn all over the ground.

古文：逮夜始定，馀党犹散匿禁苑中。明日，悉擒获之。
现代文：直到夜里，宫中方才安定。张韶的余党仍有人散藏在禁苑中，第二天，全部擒获。
English: It was not until the night that the situation in the palace became stable. Some of Zhang Ye's remaining followers were still hiding in the Forbidden City, but they were all captured the next day.

古文：时宫门皆闭，上宿于左军，中外不知上所在，人情恇骇。
现代文：这时，大明宫的各个大门都已关闭，敬宗住在左神策军中，朝廷内外都不知敬宗去向，人心恐惧。
English: At this time, all the gates of the Daming Palace had been closed, and Keizong was living among Zuo Shensha's army. Both inside and outside the imperial court did not know where Keizong was going, and people were afraid.

古文：丁酉，上还宫，宰相帅百官诣延英门贺，来者不过数十人。
现代文：丁酉，敬宗回宫，宰相率百官到延英门祝贺，前来的朝官不过数十人。
English: Ding Xi, Jing Zong returned to the palace, the prime minister led hundreds of officials to Yan Yingmen to congratulate, but only dozens of imperial officials came.

古文：盗所历诸门，监门宦者三十五人法当死。
现代文：按照法律规定，凡张韶和他的同党所经过的宫门，监门宦官有三十五人由于失职而应当叛处死刑。
English: According to the law, 35 eunuchs should be sentenced to death for dereliction of duty whenever Zhang Jun and his party passed through the palace gate.

古文：己亥，诏并杖之，仍不改职任。
现代文：己亥，敬宗下诏，命用刑杖责罚宦官，但未变动他们的职务。
English: Ji Hai and Jing Zong issued an edict ordering eunuchs to be punished with the cane, but did not change their positions.

古文：壬寅，厚赏两军立功将士。
现代文：壬寅，命重赏左、右神策军立功的将士。
English: Minshinin, a soldier who rendered distinguished service to the Left and Right Divisions of the Imperial Japanese Army, was awarded a posthumous medal.

古文：五月，乙卯，以吏部侍郎李程、户部侍郎、判度支窦易直并同平章事。
现代文：五月，乙卯，唐敬宗任命吏部侍郎李程，户部侍郎、判度支窦易直并为同平章事。
English: In May, Emperor Gaozong of Tang Dynasty appointed Li Cheng, the attendant of the cadre department, as well as Li Cheng, the attendant of the household department, and Guandu Shiduo Yizhi as the same-level officials.

古文：上问相于李逢吉，逢吉列上当时大臣有资望者，程为之首，故用之。
现代文：敬宗曾问李逢吉谁可以做宰相，李逢吉把朝中大臣按资功和声望高低，列表奏上。
English: Emperor Keizong once asked Li Fengji who could be prime minister, and Li Fengji made a list of the ministers of the dynasty according to their merits and reputation.

古文：上好治宫室，欲营别殿，制度甚广，李程谏，请以所具木石回奉山陵，上即从之。
现代文：结果，李程排在首位，所以敬宗任命他为宰相。敬宗喜好修筑宫殿，打算再修一座别殿，设计的规模很大。李程劝阻敬宗，请求将准备好的木材和石料用来修筑穆宗的陵墓。敬宗随即采纳了他的意见。
English: As a result, Li Cheng ranked first, so Keizong appointed him as prime minister. Keizong liked to build a palace and planned to build another hall, the design was large. Li Cheng dissuaded Keizong and requested that the prepared wood and stone be used to build Mu Zong's mausoleum. Keizong immediately accepted his opinion.

古文：六月，己卯朔，以左神策大将军康艺全为鄜坊节度使。
现代文：六月，己卯朔，唐敬宗任命左神策军大将军康艺全为坊节度使。
English: In June, Emperor Jingzong of Tang appointed Kang Yizhen, the general of the Zuo Shen Zhe Army, as the official of the festival.

古文：上闻王庭凑屠牛元翼家，叹宰辅非才，使凶贼纵暴。
现代文：唐敬宗听说成德节度使王庭凑屠杀了牛元翼的家眷，叹息辅政大臣无治国的才能，导致凶贼目无朝廷，恣意残暴。
English: When Tang Jingzong heard that the Chengde Festival made the royal court slaughter the family members of Niu Yuanyi, he lamented that the Vice-Minister of State had no ability to govern the country, which led to the murderer having no eyes for the court and being arbitrarily cruel.

古文：翰林学士韦处厚因上疏言： 裴度勋高中夏，声播外夷，若置之岩廊，委其参决，河北、山东必禀朝算。
现代文：于是，翰林学士韦处厚上疏说： 裴度的功勋冠盖全国，声望远播四夷，如果把他召入朝廷，委托他主持朝政，河北、山东的割据藩镇必然顺从朝命。
English: As a result, Hanlin scholar Wei Chuangzhuo said: Pei Du's exploits covered the whole country, and his voice was broadcast far and wide. If he was summoned to the imperial court and entrusted to preside over the imperial government, the divided towns in Hebei and Shandong would inevitably obey the imperial order.

古文：管仲曰： 人离而听之则愚，合而听之则圣。 
现代文：管仲说： 一个人拒绝听取别人的意见就会愚昧，乐于听取别人的意见才会聪明。 
English: Guanzhong said: "Talent dispersed and left to the mercy of others is foolishness, while talent gathered and put to good use is sacredness."

古文：理乱之本，非有他术，顺人则理，违人则乱。
现代文：所以，国家治乱的根本徐径，没有别的办法，只要顺从人心就会天下大治，违背人心则必然天下大乱。
English: There is no other way to govern the country. If you follow the will of the people, there will be peace. If you go against the will of the people, there will be turmoil.

古文：伏承陛下当食叹息，恨无萧、曹，今有一裴度尚不能留，此冯唐所以谓汉文得廉颇、李牧不能用也。
现代文：现在，陛下正当用人的时候却叹息不已，遗憾朝廷中没有像萧何、曹参那样德才兼备的宰相，但是，现在有裴度却不能留用，这就和汉代的冯唐所说汉文帝即使得到廉颇、李牧那样的优秀将领而不能任用的道理一样。
English: Now, when His Majesty justly employs someone, he sighs deeply. It is a pity that the Imperial Court does not have a chancellor who is both virtuous and talented like Xiao He and Cao San. However, now there is Baidu, but it cannot be retained. This is the same reason as the Han Dynasty's Feng Tang said that Emperor Hanwen could not appoint an excellent general like Li Mu, even if he was well-off.

古文：夫御宰相，当委之，信之，亲之，礼之，于事不效，于国无劳，则置之散寮，黜之远郡。
现代文：皇上任用宰相，首先任命他，然后就应当信任他，亲近他，敬重他。如果不称职，没有政绩，那么，就罢免他的职务，任命他作闲散的官吏。或者黜放到荒远的州郡，予以惩罚。
English: When the emperor appoints a prime minister, he should first appoint him, and then trust him, be close to him, and respect him. If he is incompetent and has no political achievements, then he should be removed from his post, appointed as an idle official, or sent to a remote prefecture to be punished.

古文：如此，则在位者不敢不厉，将进者不敢苟求。
现代文：这样，凡是在宰相职位上的人就不敢不励精图治，想牟取宰相职务的人也就不敢懈怠，得过且过。
English: In this way, anyone who is in the position of prime minister will not dare not to work hard to govern, and those who want to gain the position of prime minister will not dare to slack off, and will have to take it easy.

古文：臣与逢吉素无私嫌，尝为裴度无辜贬官。
现代文：我和李逢吉向来没有私仇，反而曾经被裴度无辜地贬过朝中官职。
English: Li Fengji and I have never had any personal enmity. On the contrary, I was once innocently demoted from the position of vice-minister of the DPRK by Baidu.

古文：今之所陈，上答圣明，下达群议耳。 
现代文：以上所陈述的这些意见，只是为了对上报答陛下对我的信任，对下转达群臣的意见罢了。 
English: The above-stated opinions are merely for the purpose of repaying His Majesty's confidence in me and conveying the opinions of the ministers.

古文：上见度奏状无平章事，以问处厚。
现代文：后来，敬宗看到裴度的奏折上没有同平章事的官衔，问韦处厚是什么原因？
English: Later, when Jingzong saw that there was no official title of Tongping Zhang on Pei Du's record, he asked Wei what the reason was.

古文：处厚具言李逢吉排沮之状。
现代文：韦处厚就把李逢吉怎样排挤裴度的情况作了详细的汇报，敬宗说： 怎么到了这种地步！ 
English: Wei Shuchu gave a detailed report on how Li Fengji ousted Pei Du, and Keizong said: How did it come to this!

古文：上曰： 何至是邪！ 李程亦劝上加礼于度。丙申，加度同平章事。
现代文：这时，李程也劝敬宗对裴度表示敬重，于是，丙申，敬宗加封裴度同平章事的职务。
English: At this time, Li Cheng also persuaded Jingzong to show respect for Pei Du, and therefore, he suggested that Jingzong add Pei Du to the post of peer.

古文：张韶之乱，马存亮功为多，存亮不自矜，委权求出。
现代文：张韶作乱时，左神策军护军中尉马存亮立功最多，但马存亮并不居功自矜，反而请求出任地方职务。
English: During Zhang Ye's rebellion, Ma Cunliang, a lieutenant of Zuoshensha's army and escort, did the most meritorious work. However, Ma Cunliang did not take the credit for himself, but asked to be appointed to a local post.

古文：秋，七月，以存亮为淮南监军使。
现代文：秋季，七月，唐敬宗任命马存亮为淮南监军使。
English: In the autumn, in July, Emperor Jingzong of Tang appointed Ma Cunliang as the military inspector of Huainan.

古文：夏绥节度使李祐入为左金吾大将军，壬申，进马百五十匹，上却之。
现代文：夏绥节度使李入朝被任命为左金吾大将军，壬申，他向朝廷进奉马一百五十匹，敬宗拒而不收。
English: During the Xiaqi Festival, Li Rong was appointed as the Great General of Zuo Kingu and Jinshin. He offered 150 horses to the imperial court, but Emperor Jingzong refused to accept them.

古文：甲戌，侍御史温造于阁内奏弹祐违敕进奉，请论如法，诏释之。
现代文：甲戍，侍御史温造在紫宸殿弹劾李违法进奉，请按法律治罪，敬宗下诏释免。
English: Armor and armor, the attendant Shi Wenzong impeached Li for illegal promotion in the Zijian Palace, please punish according to the law, and release and pardon him according to the Emperor's order.

古文：祐谓人曰： 吾夜半入蔡州城取吴元济，未尝心动，今日胆落于温御史矣！ 
现代文：李对人说： 当年我率军半夜攻入蔡州城活吴元济，都未胆祛，今天在温御史面前竟魂飞胆破了！ 
English: Li said to the people, "Back then, I led the army to attack the city of Caizhou in the middle of the night, but Wu Yuanji did not have the courage to do so. Today, in front of Emperor Wen, my courage was broken!

古文：八月，丁卯朔，安南奏黄蛮入寇。
现代文：八月，丁卯朔，安南奏报：黄洞蛮进犯。
English: In August, Ding Yushuo and Annan reported that Huangdong was attacked.

古文：龙州刺史尉迟锐上言： 牛心山素称神异，有掘断处，请加补塞。 
现代文：龙州刺史尉迟锐上奏： 州内江油县牛心山向来以神仙怪异著名，现在，山上有一处被挖断，请求朝廷批准征发民夫塞补。 
English: Longzhou Sashifu Chi Rui: Niu Xin Shan, Neijiangyu County, Liaoning Province, has always been famous for its supernatural eeriness. Now, a place on the mountain has been excavated, and it is requested that the court approve the solicitation and dispatch of miners to fill it in.

古文：从之。
现代文：敬宗批准。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：役数万人于绝险之地，东川为之疲弊。
现代文：于是，当地征发一万多人，在高山险要处作业，整个东川都疲弊不堪。
English: As a result, more than 10,000 people were conscripted locally to work in the high mountain danger areas, and the entire Dongchuan was exhausted.

古文：九月，丁未，波斯李苏沙献沉香亭子材。
现代文：九月，丁未，波斯国大商人李苏沙向朝廷奉献沉香木的亭榭材料。
English: In September, Ding Wei, the Persian merchant Li Susha presented the imperial court with the materials for the pavilion made of agate wood.

古文：左拾遗李汉上言： 此何异瑶台、琼室！ 
现代文：左拾遗李汉上奏说： 这和瑶台、琼室有什么两样！ 
English: Li Han, who was left behind, said, "What's the difference between this and Xingtai and Qiongshu?"

古文：上虽怒，亦优容之。
现代文：敬宗虽然发怒，但仍然宽容了他。
English: Although Keizong was angry, he still tolerated him.

古文：汉，道明之六世孙也。
现代文：李汉是唐初淮阳王李道玄的弟弟李道明的第六代子孙。
English: Li Han was the sixth generation descendant of Li Daoming, the younger brother of Li Daoxuan, King of Huaiyang in the early Tang Dynasty.

古文：冬，十月，戊戌，翰林学士韦处厚谏上宴游曰： 先帝以酒色致疾损寿，臣是时不死谏者，以陛下年已十五故也。
现代文：冬季，十月，戊戍，翰林学士韦处厚劝阻敬宗游乐饮宴说： 先帝穆宗皇帝由于酒色过度而导致疾病，减损了寿命。当时，我没有冒死劝阻，是考虑到陛下已经十五岁，长大成人了。
English: In the winter, in October, the Hanlin Scholar Wei Shiguo dissuaded the Jingzong Recreation Banquet, saying, "The late Emperor Mu Zong lost his life due to illness caused by excessive drinking. At that time, I did not risk my life to dissuade him, considering that His Majesty was already fifteen years old and had grown up.

古文：今皇子才一岁，臣安敢畏死而不谏乎！ 
现代文：现在，陛下的儿子才一岁，我怎么敢怕死而不规劝呢！ 
English: Now that your majesty's son is only one year old, how dare I be afraid to die without persuading him!

古文：上感其言，赐锦彩百匹、银器四。
现代文：敬宗被他的忠心所感动，于是，赏赐韦处厚锦彩一百匹，银器四件。
English: Keizong was moved by his loyalty, and rewarded Wei with a hundred pieces of thick brocade and four pieces of silverware.

古文：十一月，戊午，安南奏：黄蛮与环王合兵攻陷陆州，杀刺史葛维。
现代文：十一月，戊午，安南奏报：黄洞蛮与环王合兵攻陷陆州，杀刺史葛维。
English: November, Wu noon, Annan report: Huang Dongman and Huan Wang jointly invaded Luzhou and assassinated Shi Gewei.

古文：庚申，葬睿圣文惠孝皇帝于光陵，庙号穆宗。
现代文：庚申，朝廷在光陵埋葬睿圣文惠孝皇帝李桓，庙号穆宗。
English: Goshun, the imperial court buried Emperor Li Huan, the temple name Mu Zong, in the Guangling Mausoleum.

古文：王播以钱十万缗赂王安澄，求复领利权，十二月，癸未，谏议大夫独孤朗、张仲方、起居郎柳公权、起居舍人宋申锡、拾遗李景让、薛廷老请开延英论其奸邪。
现代文：淮南节度使王播贿赂知枢密王守澄钱十万缗，请求重新兼任盐铁转运使。十二月，癸未，谏议大夫独孤朗、张仲方、起居郎柳公权、起居舍人宋申锡、拾遗李景让、薛廷老联名上奏，请求开延英殿，当面向敬宗揭发王播的奸邪行为。
English: During the Huainan Festival, Wang Huan bribed Wang Shuzhen, a member of the Privy Council, with 100,000 yuan to request that he be reinstated as the Salt and Iron Conveyance Envoy. In December of the same year, Wang Huan's advisors, Dr. Du Kuo-lang, Zhang Zhongfang, his chief retainer Liu Gongquan, his chief retainer Song Shenxi, his chief retainer Li Jingzhang, and his chief retainer Xue Ting made a joint appeal, requesting that Yan Ying denounce Wang Huan's treachery in front of the emperor.

古文：上问： 前廷争者不在中邪？ 
现代文：敬宗问： 上次在朝廷以死规劝我的刘栖楚是不是在你们中间？ 
English: Jingzong asked: Is Liu Qichu, who last time tried to persuade me by death at the imperial court, among you?

古文：即日，除刘栖楚谏议大夫。
现代文：当天，任命刘栖楚为谏议大夫。
English: On the same day, Liu Qiuchu was appointed as the chairman of the meeting.

古文：景让，憕之曾孙；廷老，河中人也。
现代文：李景让是李的曾孙；薛廷老是河中人。
English: Li Jingzhang is Li's great-grandson; Xue Ting has always been a man of the river.

古文：十二月，庚寅，加天平节度使乌重胤同平章事。
现代文：十二月，庚寅，唐敬宗加封天平节度使乌重胤同平章事的职务。
English: In December, Geng Yin and Tang Jingzong conferred the title of Tianping Jiedu (天平節度) to Wu Chongyin, and Wu Chongyin assumed the position of Tongping Shanzhi.

古文：乙未，徐泗观察使王智兴以上生日，请于泗州置戒坛，度僧尼以资福，许之。
现代文：乙未，徐泗观察使王智兴借口唐敬宗要过生日，奏请在泗州设置戒坛，剃度僧尼，以此作为向皇上生日的祝福，敬宗批准。
English: At the same time, Wang Zhixing, on the pretext of Tang Jingzong's birthday, asked Wang Zhixing to set up a Buddhist altar in Bozhou and ordain monks and nuns as a birthday blessing for the emperor, which was approved by Tang Jingzong.

古文：自元和以来，敕禁此弊，智兴欲聚货，首请置之，于是四方辐凑，江、淮尤甚，智兴家赀由此累巨万。
现代文：自从元和年以来，朝廷下敕禁止各地设戒坛剃度僧尼这种弊政，王智兴企图积聚钱财，首先破例请求设置，于是，四方百姓云集而来，其中，以江、淮尤多，王智兴的家财由此而达到数万之多。
English: Since the Yuan and He years, the imperial court has issued an edict prohibiting all regions from setting up votive altars and ordaining monks and nuns. In an attempt to accumulate money, Wang Zhixing first requested the establishment of an exception. As a result, people from all over the country gathered. Among them, there were many from Jiangsu and Huaiyu, and Wang Zhixing's family wealth reached tens of thousands.

古文：浙西观察使李德裕上言： 若不钤制，至降诞日方停，计两浙、福建当失六十万丁。 
现代文：浙西道观察使李德裕上奏说： 如果不赶快制止，到了陛下的生日才停止的话，那么，总计浙江东道、浙江西道、福建道就会丧失六十万个劳动力。 
English: The observation of West Zhejiang Province prompted Li Deyu to make a report: If it is not stopped soon, and if it is not stopped until His Majesty's birthday, then a total of six hundred thousand laborers in Zhejiang Province, West Zhejiang Province, and Fujian Province will be lost.

古文：奏至，即日罢之。
现代文：奏折送到朝廷的当天，敬宗命令王智兴停罢。
English: On the day the report was delivered to the Imperial Court, Emperor Keizong ordered Wang Zhixing to stop.

古文：是岁，回鹘崇德可汗卒，弟曷萨特勒立。
现代文：这一年，回鹘国崇德可汗去世，他的弟弟曷萨特勒被立为可汗。
English: In the same year, the Uighur chieftain Zond Khan died, and his brother Zisattler was made khan.

古文：敬宗睿武昭愍孝皇帝
现代文：敬宗睿武昭愍孝皇帝
English: Emperor Keizong, Rui, Wu, Zhao, and Xiao

古文：宝历元年乙巳，公元八二五年春，正月，辛亥，上祀南郊。
现代文：唐敬宗宝历元年春季，正月，辛亥，唐敬宗亲自到京城南郊祭天。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Tang Dynasty, the first month of the lunar calendar, and the Chinese New Year, Tang Jingzong himself went to the southern suburbs of Beijing to hold a festival.

古文：还，御丹凤楼，赦天下，改元。
现代文：回宫后，御临丹凤楼，大赦天下，改年号为宝历。
English: After returning to the palace, he visited the Danfeng Tower, pardoned the world, and changed the year name to Baoli.

古文：先是鄠令崔发闻外喧嚣，问之，曰： 五坊人殴百姓。 
现代文：先前，县令崔发有一次听到门外有喧嚣嘈杂的声音，就问是怎么回事，有人答称： 是五坊使的人殴打百姓。 
English: Previously, the county magistrate Cui Fa once heard a loud and noisy noise outside the door, and asked what was going on. Someone replied: It was the people from Wufang who beat the people.

古文：发怒，命擒以入，曳之于庭。
现代文：崔发大怒，命将此人抓进来，拉到庭院中间。
English: Choi flew into a rage and ordered the man to be brought in and dragged to the middle of the courtyard.

古文：时已昏黑，良久，诘之，乃中使也。
现代文：这时，天已黑暗，过了很久，方才询问，得知是出使的宦官。
English: At this time, the sky was already dark, and it was a long time before they inquired and learned that it was the eunuch who had been sent.

古文：上怒，收发，系御史台。
现代文：敬宗知道后大怒，下令把崔发逮捕，押在御史台监狱。
English: After learning of this, Keizong flew into a rage and ordered Cui Fa to be arrested and detained in the Gushidai Prison.

古文：是日，发与诸囚立金鸡下，忽有品官数十人执梃乱捶发，破面折齿，绝气乃去。
现代文：敬宗大赦天下的当天，崔发与即将赦免的罪犯都立在丹凤楼下的金鸡旁，等待赦罪回家。忽然，有几十个宦官冲过来，手拿棍棒照着崔发劈头盖脑就打，崔发被打得满面流血，牙齿折断，顿时不醒人事，宦官这才离去。
English: On the day of the amnesty, Cui Fa and the soon-to-be-pardoned criminals were standing next to the golden rooster under the Dan Feng building, waiting for the pardon to go home. Suddenly, dozens of eunuchs rushed over, clubbing Cui Fa's head and beating him. Cui Fa was beaten until his face was covered in blood, his teeth were broken, and he was unconscious. The eunuchs then left.

古文：数刻而苏，复有继来求击之者，台吏以席蔽之，仅免。
现代文：过了一会儿崔发苏醒，这时又有宦官跑来要打，御史台的官吏用席子遮挡，崔发才幸免再次被打。
English: After a while, Cui Fa woke up. At that time, another eunuch came to beat him. The officials of the Imperial Historian's Office covered him with a mat, and Cui Fa was spared from being beaten again.

古文：上命复系发于台狱而释诸囚。
现代文：于是敬宗下令，把崔发重新押进御史台监狱，其余罪犯释放。
English: As a result, Keizong ordered that Cui Fa be re-imprisoned in the Gushidai Prison and the rest of the criminals released.

古文：中书侍郎、同平章事牛僧孺以上荒淫，嬖幸用事，又畏罪不敢言，但累表求出。
现代文：中书侍郎、同平章事牛僧孺认为唐敬宗荒淫奢侈，身旁的亲信小人掌权，但又怕被敬宗怪罪而不敢直言劝阻，因而，多次上奏请求辞职，出任外地官职。
English: Zhongshu's attendant, Tongping Zhang Zhi Niu, thought that Tang Jingzong was extravagant and extravagant, and that the close confidants around him were in power. However, he was afraid of being blamed by Jingzong and did not dare to dissuade him. Therefore, he repeatedly requested to resign and served as a foreign official.

古文：乙卯，升鄂岳为武昌军，以僧孺同平章事、充武昌节度使。
现代文：乙卯，敬宗下令升鄂岳观察使为武昌军节度使，加封牛僧孺同平章事的职务，充任武昌节度使。
English: At the same time, Emperor Keizong ordered that the observation envoy to Mt. E should be promoted to the festival envoy of the Wuchang Army, and that Niu Xiang and Tong Ping should be appointed as the festival envoys of Wuchang.

古文：中旨复以王播兼盐铁转运使，谏官屡争之，上皆不纳。
现代文：唐敬宗任命淮南节度使王播重新兼任盐铁转运使，谏官多次劝阻，敬宗不听。
English: Tang Jingzong appointed Huainan Jiedu to make Wang Bo again concurrently serve as salt and iron transport envoy. The eunuchs repeatedly dissuaded him, but Jingzong did not listen.

古文：牛僧孺过襄阳，山南东道节度使柳公绰服橐鞬候于馆舍，将佐谏曰： 襄阳地高于夏口，此礼太过！ 
现代文：牛僧孺赴任武昌，途经襄阳，山南东道节度使柳公绰身佩，在客馆恭恭敬敬的迎候牛僧孺。部将和幕僚劝阻他说： 我们襄阳的地位高于武昌，您用这样隆重的礼节，似乎太过份了！ 
English: Niu Sang Hui went to Wuchang, passing through Xiangyang, Shannan's host city. Liu Gong was impressed by the ceremony, and respectfully greeted Niu Sang Hui at the guest house. The minister and staff members dissuaded him: Our position in Xiangyang is higher than in Wuchang, you use such grand etiquette, it seems too excessive!

古文：公绰曰： 奇章公甫离台席，方镇重宰相，所以尊朝廷也。 
现代文：柳公绰说： 僧孺刚刚离开宰相的职位，藩镇都看重宰相，我这样做，是为了表示对朝廷的尊重。 
English: Liu Gongchao said, "Sangye has just left the post of prime minister, and all the provinces and towns attach importance to the prime minister. I did this to show my respect for the imperial court.

古文：竟行之。上游幸无常，昵比群小，视朝月不再三，大臣罕得进见。
现代文：最后，仍然用这种礼节来迎接牛僧孺。唐敬宗三天两头游乐，亲近左右小人，每月听朝不过几次，即使大臣也很难进见。
English: In the end, they still use this etiquette to welcome the bull monk. Tang Jingzong has three days of amusement, is close to the left and right villains, listens to the emperor only a few times a month, and even the minister is difficult to see.

古文：二月，壬午，浙西观察使李德裕献《丹扆六箴》：一曰《宵衣》，以讽视朝稀晚；二曰《正服》，以讽服御乖异；三曰《罢献》，以讽征求玩好；四曰《纳诲》，以讽侮弃谠言；五曰《辨邪》，以讽信任群小；六曰《防微》，以讽轻出游幸。
现代文：二月，壬午，浙西道观察使李德裕向敬宗奉献《丹六箴》，第一叫《宵衣箴》，规劝敬宗勤政爱民，上朝不要太少太晚；第二叫《正服箴》，规劝敬宗遵循法度，服饰不要杂乱而不合制度；第三叫《罢献箴》，规劝敬宗禁止各地奉献，不要向地方征求珍宝古玩；第四叫《纳海箴》，规劝敬宗虚心纳谏，不要侮弄和抛弃百官的忠直上言；第五叫《辨邪箴》，规劝敬宗辨别忠正奸邪，不要信用左右的小人；第六叫《防微箴》，规劝敬宗提高警惕，不要轻易外出游玩。
English: In February, at noon, the observation of the western Zhejiang Road made Li Deyu dedicate the "Six Precepts of the Dan" to the Jingzong. The first is the "Precept of the Evening Dress," exhorting the Jingzong to be diligent in politics and love the people, and not to be too little and too late; the second is the "Precept of the Formal Dress," exhorting the Jingzong to follow the law, and not to be disorderly and not to conform to the system; the third is the "Precept of the Strike," exhorting the Jingzong to prohibit the dedication of various places, and not to solicit precious antiques from

古文：其《纳诲箴》略曰： 汉骜流湎，举白浮钟；魏睿侈汰，陵霄作宫。
现代文：其中，《纳诲箴》的大意说： 汉成帝刘骜沉湎酒色，日夜饮宴；魏明帝曹睿骄纵奢侈，修筑陵霄宫阙。
English: Among them, the gist of the "Admonition" says: Hancheng Emperor Liu Bei indulged in wine and feasted day and night; Wei Ming Emperor Cao Rui indulged in luxury and built a mausoleum.

古文：忠虽不忤，善亦不从。
现代文：他们对逆耳忠言虽然不加拒绝，但也不予采纳。
English: Faithful words go unheard, and kind words are not heeded.

古文：以规为瑱，是谓塞聪。 《防微箴》曰： 乱臣猖獗，非不遽数。
现代文：武帝曾私服到柏谷巡访，被人怀疑是奸盗，不得饮食，险遭围攻，幸赖一个村妇看武帝面貌似非常人，因而杀鸡献食，武帝方才脱险，平安回家。
English: Emperor Wu once paid a private visit to Kashiwagaya. He was suspected of being a traitor, was not allowed to eat, and was in danger of being besieged. Fortunately, a village woman saw that Emperor Wu looked very human, so she sacrificed a chicken for food. Emperor Wu only escaped danger and returned home safely.

古文：玄服莫辨，触瑟始仆。柏谷微行，豺豕塞路。
现代文：这些前车之鉴，实在是应当引以为戒的！ 
English: These precedents should really serve as a warning!

古文：睹貌献餐，斯可戒惧！ 
现代文：敬宗下诏，用委婉的言辞给予答复。
English: Emperor Jingzong issued an edict and gave a euphemistic reply.

古文：上优诏答之。上既复系崔发于狱，给事中李渤上言： 县令不应曳中人，中人不应殴御囚，其罪一也。
现代文：敬宗下令把崔发重新押进御史台监狱后，给事中李渤上言说： 县令不应当随便拉扯宦官，但宦官也不应当随便殴打御史台监狱的囚犯，两方面的罪责是一样的。
English: After Jingzong ordered Cui Fa to be re-imprisoned in the Gushidai Prison, Li Yan said in the matter: The county should not arbitrarily drag the eunuch, but the eunuch should not arbitrarily beat the prisoners of the Gushidai Prison. The two aspects of guilt are the same.

古文：然县令所犯在赦前，中人所犯在赦后。
现代文：不过，县令所犯罪责是在陛下大赦以前，而宦官所犯罪责是在大赦以后。
English: However, the criminal responsibility of the county magistrate is before His Majesty's amnesty, while the criminal responsibility of the eunuch is after the amnesty.

古文：中人横暴，一至于此。
现代文：宦官横行霸道，已经达到目无朝廷诏令的程度。
English: The eunuchs' domineering behavior has reached a level where there is no longer any imperial edict.

古文：若不早正刑书，臣恐四夷籓镇闻之，则慢易之心生矣。 
现代文：如果不及时予以制裁，我担心各地藩镇得知这件事后，就会萌发轻视朝廷的念头。 
English: If sanctions are not imposed in a timely manner, I am afraid that after the various provinces and towns learn about this matter, the idea of despising the imperial court will sprout.

古文：谏议大夫张仲方上言，略曰： 鸿恩将布于天下而不行御前，霈泽遍被于昆虫而独遗崔发。 
现代文：谏议大夫张仲方上言，大略说： 陛下大赦，大恩大德遍布天下，但却不能实行于您的御驾前，恩济遍及于昆虫，惟独遗漏了崔发。 
English: Zhang Zhongfang, the doctor of the discussion, began his speech, roughly saying: Your Majesty's amnesty, great grace is all over the world, but it cannot be implemented in front of you. The grace extends to insects, but Cui Fa is omitted.

古文：自馀谏官论奏甚众，上皆不听。
现代文：其余谏官也都纷纷上奏，敬宗一概不听。
English: The rest of the eunuchs also played along, but Keizong did not listen at all.

古文：戊子，李逢吉等从容言于上曰： 崔发辄曳中人，诚大不敬，然其母，故相韦贯之之姊也，年垂八十，自发下狱，积忧成疾。
现代文：戊子，宰相李逢吉等人语气和缓地对敬宗说： 崔发随意拉扯宦官，确实是对陛下的不尊重。但他的母亲是原宰相韦贯之的姐姐，年纪已近八十岁了。自从崔发被押进监狱后，她日夜忧虑思念，已经得了疾病。
English: Bo Zi, Prime Minister Li Fengji and others said to Keizong in a gentle tone: "Cui Fa's pulling eunuchs at will is indeed disrespectful to His Majesty. But his mother is the sister of the former Prime Minister Wei Gangzhi, who is nearly eighty years old. Since Cui Fa was taken to prison, she has been worried day and night and has become ill.

古文：陛下方以孝理天下，此所宜矜念。 
现代文：现在，陛下是以孝道来治理天下，所以，对于崔发母亲的情况，应当予以怜悯。 
English: Now that His Majesty is ruling the world with filial piety, we should have compassion for the situation of Cui Fa's mother.

古文：上乃愍然曰： 此谏官但言发冤，未尝言其不敬，亦不言有老母。
现代文：敬宗于是哀怜地说： 近来谏官上奏，只说崔发冤枉，却从来不说他对朕不尊重，也不曾说他有老母在家。
English: Jingzong then said sadly, "Recently, the eunuch has only said that Cui Fa has wronged me, but he never said that he did not respect me, nor did he say that he had an old mother at home.

古文：如卿所言，朕何为不赦之！ 
现代文：按照你所说的情况，朕怎能不赦免崔发的罪责呢！ 
English: According to what you said, how can I not pardon Cui Fa's guilt!

古文：即命中使释其罪，送归家，仍慰劳其母。
现代文：随即下令宦官传达诏令，释免崔发的罪行，送他回家，并慰劳他的老母亲。
English: He immediately ordered the eunuch to convey the imperial edict, absolve Cui Fa of his crime, send him home, and comfort his old mother.

古文：母对中使杖发四十。
现代文：崔发到家后，他的母亲当着宦官的面打了崔发四十棍，表示对他的惩罚。
English: After Cui Fa arrived home, his mother beat Cui Fa with forty sticks in front of the eunuch, indicating his punishment.

古文：三月，辛酉，遣司门郎中于人文册回鹘曷萨特勒为爱登里啰汩没密于合毘伽昭礼可汗。
现代文：三月，辛酉，唐敬宗派遣司门郎中于人文册命回鹘国曷萨特勒为爱登里汩没密於合毗伽昭礼可汗。
English: In March, Emperor Jingzong of the Tang Dynasty dispatched Simen Lang in the Book of Humanities to summon the statesman Sattler to serve as an emissary to the Sholay Khan.

古文：夏，四月，癸巳，群臣上尊号曰文武大圣广孝皇帝。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸巳，群臣为唐敬宗上尊号，称为文武大圣广孝皇帝。
English: In the summer, in April, the emperors were called Tang Jingzong Shangzong, known as Emperor Wenwu Da Sheng Guangxiao.

古文：赦天下。
现代文：然后，敬宗下诏大赦天下。
English: Pardons all around.

古文：赦文但云： 左降官已经量移者，宜与量移， 不言未量移者。
现代文：对于因罪被贬的官吏，赦文只说： 凡因罪被贬到荒远之地的官吏，已经酌情移往近处任职者，应再酌情迁移任职。 而不提未曾酌情移往近处任职的官吏。
English: For officials who have been demoted for crimes, the amnesty only says: All officials who have been demoted to a desolate land for crimes, who have been transferred to a nearby post as appropriate, should be transferred again as appropriate, without mentioning officials who have not been transferred to a nearby post as appropriate.

古文：翰林学士韦处厚上言： 逢吉恐李绅量移，故有此处置。
现代文：翰林学士韦处厚上言说： 李逢吉恐怕李绅也酌情被移往近处任职，所以拟定赦文时故意这样说。
English: Li Fengji was afraid that Li Sheng would also be transferred to a nearby post, so he deliberately said so when drafting the pardon.

古文：如此，则应近年流贬官，因李绅一人皆不得量移也。 
现代文：如果按照诏书的这项规定，那么，近年来凡流放贬谪到荒远之地的官吏，就会由于李绅一人的缘故而不能酌情移往近处任职。 
English: If this provision of the edict is followed, then all officials who have been exiled to desolate places in recent years will not be able to move to a nearby place to serve because of Li Sheng.

古文：上即追赦文改之。
现代文：敬宗即命追回赦文，予以更正。
English: Keizong immediately retrieved the pardon and corrected it.

古文：绅由是得移江州长史。
现代文：于是，李绅由此而从端州移任江州长史。
English: As a result, Li Sheng was transferred from Danzhou to become the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，盐铁使王播进羡馀绢百万匹。
现代文：秋季七月，甲辰，盐铁转运使王播以节余为名，向朝廷进奉丝绢一百万匹。
English: In the autumn of July, in Jia Chen, the salt and iron transport made Wang Bo, in the name of saving money, present one million silk worms to the imperial court.

古文：播领盐铁，诛求严急，正入不充而羡馀相继。
现代文：王播担任盐铁转运使后，对百姓严厉征求，急如星火，朝廷规定的盐铁专卖收入往往征收不够，而以节余为名向朝廷进奉的财物却源源不断。
English: After serving as the envoy for the transfer of salt and iron, Wang Bo solicited the people harshly and urgently. The income from the sale of salt and iron stipulated by the imperial court was often insufficient, but the wealth that was sent to the imperial court in the name of savings continued to flow.

古文：己未，诏王播造竞渡船二十艘，运材于京师造之，计用转运半年之费。
现代文：己未，唐敬宗下诏，命王播修造用来游乐比赛用的竞渡船二十艘，并命把造船用的木材运到京城长安修造，总计费用大体相当盐铁转运半年的收入。
English: At that time, Emperor Jingzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict, ordering Wang Bo to build 20 ferries for pleasure competitions, and ordered the timber used for shipbuilding to be transported to the capital Chang'an for construction. The total cost was roughly equivalent to half a year's income from the transportation of salt and iron.

古文：谏议大夫张仲方等力谏，乃减其半。
现代文：谏议大夫张仲方等人极力劝阻，敬宗方才下令减为十艘。
English: Zhang Zhongfang and others tried their best to dissuade them, but it was only then that Emperor Jingzong ordered the number of ships to be reduced to ten.

古文：谏官言京兆尹崔元略以诸父事内常侍崔潭峻。
现代文：谏官上言，揭发京兆尹崔元略认宦官、内常侍崔潭峻为父。
English: The eunuch spoke up and revealed that the eunuch, the inner chamberlain Cui Tanjun, was the father of the eunuch, the inner chamberlain Cui Yuan.

古文：丁卯，元略迁户部侍郎。
现代文：丁卯，崔元略被迁为户部侍郎。
English: Dingwu and Cui Yuanliu were transferred to the position of household attendants.

古文：昭义节度使刘悟方去郓州也，以郓兵二千自随为亲兵。
现代文：昭义节度使刘悟当初离开郓州时，率郓州兵二千人作为自己的随从亲兵。
English: When Liu Wuxu left Zhangzhou, he was accompanied by 2,000 Zhangzhou soldiers as his entourage.

古文：八月，庚戌，悟暴疾薨，子将作监主簿从谏匿其丧，与大将刘武德及亲兵谋，以悟遗表求知留后。
现代文：八月，庚戌，刘悟突患急病去世。他的儿子、将作监主簿刘从谏隐瞒父亲去世的消息，拒不向朝廷报丧。他和大将刘武德以及亲兵密谋，打算以父亲的遗书上奏朝廷，请求任命自己为留后。
English: In August, Geng Bing, Liu Wugu suddenly died of an acute illness. His son, Liu Zonglu, who would serve as supervisor, concealed the news of his father's death and refused to inform the court of his death. He conspired with General Liu Wude and his own soldiers, intending to use his father's suicide note to appeal to the court and request that he be appointed as his successor.

古文：司马贾直言入责从谏曰： 尔父提十二州地归朝廷，其功非细，只以张汶之故，自谓不洁淋头，竟至羞死。
现代文：这时，司马贾直言进来，责备刘从谏说： 您的父亲当年杀死李师道，率淄青十二州归顺朝廷，功劳不小，只是由于擅杀磁州刺史张汶的缘故，自认为沾染上不干净的恶名，以至羞耻而死。
English: At this time, Sima Jia bluntly came in and reproached Liu Conglu, saying: Your father killed Li Shidao that year and led twelve states to submit to the imperial court. The merit is not small, but because of the unauthorized killing of the magnetic state assassin Zhang Wen, he thought that he was tainted with an unclean reputation, and died of shame.

古文：尔孺子，何敢如此！
现代文：您现在不过是个后生，怎敢如此大胆，欺骗朝廷！
English: You are now but an offspring, how dare you be so bold as to deceive the court!

古文：父死不哭，何以为人！ 
现代文：父亲死了不赶快吊丧哭泣，今后还怎样做人！ 
English: If you don't mourn and weep when your father dies, how will you behave in the future?

古文：从谏恐悚不能对，乃发丧。
现代文：刘从谏恐惧，无言以答，于是，公开父亲死亡的消息，为他吊丧。
English: Liu Congyao was scared and speechless, so he publicly announced the news of his father's death and mourned for him.

古文：初，陈留人武昭罢石州刺史，为袁王府长史，郁郁怨执政。
现代文：当初，陈留人武昭被罢免石州刺史后，廷任命他为袁王府长史，武昭郁郁不得志，怨恨朝廷当权者。
English: At first, after Chen's retainer Wu Zhao was removed from his post as governor of Shizhou, the imperial court appointed him governor of Yuanwang. Wu Zhao was despondent and resented those in power at the imperial court.

古文：李逢吉与李程不相悦，水部郎中李仍叔，程之族人，激怒之云，程欲与昭官，为逢吉所沮。
现代文：宰相李逢吉与李程关系不合，水部郎中李仍叔是李程的同族人，故意激怒武昭说： 李程本来建议朝廷授予您官职，但被李逢吉阻挡而未果。 
English: The relationship between Prime Minister Li Fengji and Li Cheng was not a good one. The Minister of Water Affairs' son-in-law, Li Yingzhu, was a member of the same ethnic group as Li Cheng. He deliberately angered Wu Zhao by saying: Li Cheng originally proposed that the imperial court grant you an official post, but was blocked by Li Fengji and was unsuccessful.

古文：昭因酒酣，对左金吾兵曹茅汇言欲刺逢吉，为人所告。
现代文：一次，武昭正在饮酒兴头时，对左金吾兵曹茅汇说自己要刺杀李逢吉。后来，这件事被人告发。
English: On one occasion, while he was enjoying a drink, Takeaki told Zuo Kingu soldier Cao Maohui that he was going to assassinate Li Fengji. Later, the matter was reported to the authorities.

古文：九月，庚辰，诏三司鞫之。
现代文：九月，庚辰，敬宗下诏，命御史台、刑部、大理寺三司会同审判此案。
English: In September, Geng Chen and Emperor Keizong issued an edict ordering the Imperial Historical Records Office, the Criminal Law Department, and the Three Departments of Dali Temple to jointly try the case.

古文：前河阳掌书记李仲言谓汇曰： 君言李程与昭谋则生，不然必死。 
现代文：前河阳掌书记李仲言对茅汇说： 你如果能证明武昭刺杀李逢吉是与李程同谋，那么，还能保全性命：否则，就不免一死。 
English: Li Zhongyan, the former secretary of Heyangpu, said to Mao Hui: If you can prove that Wu Zhao assassinated Li Fengji and was a co-conspirator with Li Cheng, then you can also save your life: otherwise, you will die.

古文：汇曰： 冤死甘心！
现代文：茅汇说： 我甘心被冤枉而死！
English: Mao Hui said: I am willing to die for being wronged!

古文：诬人自全，汇不为也！ 
现代文：但要我诬告别人来保全自己，我是绝对不做这种事的！ 
English: But if I had to falsely accuse someone to save myself, I would never do such a thing!

古文：狱成。冬，十月，甲子，武昭杖死，李仍叔贬道州司马，李仲言流象州，茅汇流崖州。
现代文：三司审判结束，冬季，十月，甲子，武昭被判处杖责死刑，李仍叔被贬为道州司马，李仲言流放到象州，茅汇流放到崖州。
English: At the end of the trial of the three departments, in winter, October, Ji Zi and Wu Zhao were sentenced to death by caning, Li Yunsu was relegated to the position of Doushu Sima, Li Zhongyan was exiled to Xiangzhou, and Mao Hui was exiled to Yanzhou.

古文：上欲幸骊山温汤，左仆射李绛、谏议大夫张仲方等屡谏不听，拾遗张权舆伏紫宸殿下，叩头谏曰： 昔周幽王幸骊山，为犬戎所杀；秦始皇葬骊山，国亡；玄宗宫骊山而禄山乱；先帝幸骊山，而享年不长。 
现代文：唐敬宗打算前往骊山温泉游玩，左仆射李绛、谏议大夫张仲方等人多次劝阻，敬宗不听。拾遗张权舆拜伏在紫宸殿下，叩头劝阻说： 过去，周幽王到骊山巡行游玩时，被犬戎杀死；秦始皇埋葬在骊山，后来秦朝也灭亡了；唐玄宗在骊山建筑宫殿，结果导致安禄山叛乱；先帝由于到骊山去游乐，后来寿命不长。 
English: Tang Jingzong planned to visit Lushan Hot Spring, but was repeatedly dissuaded by his left-hand man, Sha Lijuan, and his chief adviser, Zhang Zhongfang. Jingzong did not listen. He bowed down to Ziyang to dissuade him, saying: In the past, King Zhou Yu was killed by dogs when he went on a tour of Lushan; Qin Shi Huang was buried in Lushan, and later the Qin Dynasty also perished; Tang Xuan Zong built a palace in Lushan, which led to the Anlu rebellion; the former emperor did not live long because he went to Lushan for pleasure.

古文：上曰： 骊山若此之凶邪？
现代文：敬宗说： 骊山真的这么不吉利吗？
English: Keizong said: Is Lushan really so unlucky?

古文：我宜一往以验彼言。 
现代文：那么，我应当亲自前往一次，以便验证他说的话是否灵验。 
English: Well, I should go and see for myself to see if what he says is true.

古文：十一月，庚寅，幸温汤，即日还宫，谓左右曰： 彼叩头者之言，安足信哉！ 
现代文：十一月，庚寅，敬宗前往骊山温泉，当天回到宫中，对左右侍从说： 那个叩头的人所说的话，能相信吗？ 
English: In November, Gyeongin and Gyeongjong went to Lushan Hot Spring. On the same day, Gyeongin returned to the palace and said to the attendants on his right and left, "Can you believe what that kowtowing person said?

古文：丙申，立皇子普为晋王。
现代文：丙申，唐敬宗下诏，立皇子李普为晋王。
English: According to the edict issued by Emperor Jingzong of the Tang Dynasty, Prince Li Pu was appointed as the King of Jin.

古文：朝廷得刘悟遗表，议者多言上党内镇，与河朔异，不可许。
现代文：朝廷接到刘悟的遗书后，朝廷商议，多数人认为上党历来是朝廷的内镇，与应朔藩镇长期割据不同，不应充许刘从谏继承父位而为留后。
English: After receiving Liu Wuxu's suicide note, the imperial court held a discussion. The majority of people believed that the Shang Party had always been the inner town of the imperial court, and unlike the long-term allocation of the Han town, Liu Zonglu should not be allowed to inherit his father's throne and stay behind.

古文：左仆射李绛上疏，以为： 兵机尚速，威断贵定，人情未一，乃可伐谋。
现代文：左仆射李绛上疏，认为： 作战用兵的关键在于军事行动的速度要快，建立权威的关键在于对任何情况作出正确的判断。
English: Zuo Zhuoxing Li Rong Shang Zuo believed that: The key to the use of soldiers in combat is that the speed of military operations should be fast, and the key to establishing authority is to make a correct judgment on any situation.

古文：刘悟死已数月，朝廷尚未处分，中外人意，共惜事机。
现代文：只有当人心尚未统一的时候，才可使用谋略而制敌取胜。现在，刘悟已死去几个月了，朝廷却至今未对昭义的人事安排作出决定。
English: It is only when the hearts of the people are not yet unified that strategies can be used to defeat the enemy and win. Now, Liu Wuxu has been dead for several months, but the imperial court has not yet made a decision on the personnel arrangement of Zhao Yi.

古文：今昭义兵众，必不尽与从谏同谋，纵使其半叶同，尚有其半效顺。
现代文：朝廷内外，人们都对未能把握住解决昭义问题的良机感到痛惜。虽然现在昭义的兵马众多，但肯定不会都和刘从谏同谋对抗朝廷，即使有一半随同刘从谏叛乱，另有一半也还效忠朝廷。
English: Both inside and outside the court, people deplored the failure to grasp the good opportunity to solve the problem of Zhao Yiyi. Although there are many soldiers and horses of Zhao Yiyi now, they will certainly not all conspire with Liu Congyi against the court. Even if half of them follow Liu Congyi's rebellion, the other half will still be loyal to the court.

古文：从谏未尝久典兵马，威惠未加于人。
现代文：何况刘从谏未曾一直掌握军权，对将士没有恩惠和应有的权威，将士怎么可能都和他一起叛乱呢？
English: What's more, Liu Conglu hadn't always held military power, and he didn't have the favor and authority he should have had over the soldiers. How could the soldiers have all rebelled with him?

古文：又此道素贫，非时必无优赏。
现代文：另外，昭义向来地瘠人穷，刘从谏在时机不当的时候，必定还不会给予将士优厚的赏赐。
English: In addition, Zhao Yi has always favored the poor, and Liu Conglu will certainly not give generously rewarded soldiers when the timing is not right.

古文：今朝廷但速除近泽潞一将充昭义节度使，令兼程赴镇，从谏未及布置，新使已至潞州，所谓 先人夺人之心 也。
现代文：现在，朝廷只要尽快从邻近昭义的藩镇选拔一位大将，任命为昭义节度使。命令他日夜兼程，赶赴昭义上任，那么，刘从谏尚未来得及安排部署，新使已到昭义的治所潞州就任了，这正是古人所说的 先于敌人一步，就可摧折敌人士气 的道理。
English: Now, as long as the imperial court selects a general as soon as possible from the neighboring towns of Shouyi and appoints him as Shouyi's festival envoy, ordering him to travel day and night to rush to Shouyi to take office, then Liu Congjun will not have time to arrange the deployment, and the new envoy has already taken office in Shoushou, the capital of Shouyi. This is exactly what the ancients said about being one step ahead of the enemy, it can destroy the enemy's morale.

古文：新使既至，军心自有所系。
现代文：新使上任后，昭义的军心已有所归。
English: After the new envoy took office, Akiyoshi's military spirit has returned.

古文：从谏无位，何名主张，设使谋挠朝命，其将士必不肯从。
现代文：刘从谏得不到朝廷的任命，就没有资格对将士发号施令，假如他仍顽固不化，密谋阻挠新使上任。将士肯定不会听从。
English: If Liu Conglu is not appointed by the imperial court, he is not qualified to give orders to the generals. If he remains stubborn and conspires to prevent the new envoy from taking office, the generals will certainly not obey.

古文：今朝廷久无处分，彼军不晓朝廷之意，欲效顺则恐忽授从谏，欲同军恶则恐别更除人，犹豫之间，若有奸人为之画策，虚张赏设钱数，军士觊望，尤难指挥。
现代文：现在，朝廷对昭义的人事安排很长时间未作出决断，昭义的将士不明朝廷的意图，他们想效忠朝廷，但又恐怕朝廷忽然任命刘从谏为留后；想与刘从谏同谋，又恐怕朝廷另有任命。这样，在军心浮动不定的时候，如果有人给刘从谏出谋划策，虚张声势，宣称要赏赐军士若干线，军士贪图钱财，到了那时，朝廷再任命节度使前往，就很难指挥得手。
English: At present, the imperial court has not made a decision on the personnel arrangement of Zhao Yi for a long time. Zhao Yi's soldiers do not know the intention of the imperial court. They want to be loyal to the imperial court, but they are afraid that the imperial court will suddenly appoint Liu Conglu to stay behind; if they want to conspire with Liu Conglu, they are afraid that the imperial court will appoint someone else. In this way, when the military is uncertain, if someone gives Liu Conglu advice, bluffs, and claims to reward the soldiers with a number of lines, and the soldiers are greedy for money. At that time, if the imperial court appoints another commander, it will

古文：伏望速赐裁断，仍先下明敕，宣示军众，奖其从来忠节，赐新使缯五十万匹，使之赏设。续除刘从谏一剌史。
现代文：所以，我请求陛下讯速作出决断，首先公开下诏，向将士明确宣布，昭义的军队从李抱真担任节度使以来，一直是忠于朝廷的。为此，朝廷给予新任节度使丝织品五十万匹，命他犒赏将士，以便稳定军心；然后，任命刘从谏为一个州的刺史。
English: Therefore, I request His Majesty the Emperor to make a decision as soon as possible. First, issue a public edict and clearly announce to the soldiers that the army of Zhao Yi has always been loyal to the imperial court since Li Baozhen served as the festival envoy. To this end, the imperial court gave the new festival envoy half a million pieces of silk fabric and ordered him to reward the soldiers in order to stabilize the military spirit; then, appointed Liu Conglu as a state scribe.

古文：从谏既粗有所得，必且择利而行，万无违拒。
现代文：刘从谏觉得自己也有所得，肯定会择利而行，决无理由违抗朝命。
English: Liu Conglu felt that he also had income, and he would certainly choose profit, and there was no reason to defy the imperial order.

古文：设不从命，臣亦以为不假攻讨，何则？
现代文：因为我听说刘从谏已禁止太行山的东邢、磁、三州将士，不许他们私自储备兵器，可见其内部貌合神离，并不统一。
English: Because I heard that Liu Conglu has banned the soldiers of Donglu, Magong and Sanzhou in Taihang Mountain, not allowing them to privately stockpile weapons, it can be seen that their internal appearance is mixed and not unified.

古文：臣闻从谏已禁山东三州军士不许自畜兵刀，足明群心殊未得一，帐下之事亦在不疑。
现代文：那么，刘从谏的帐下亲兵中是否也会有人离心离德，甚至擒杀刘从谏而归顺朝廷，以便邀求赏赐，我看是势在必行，不容置疑了。
English: So, I think it is inevitable and beyond doubt that some soldiers under Liu Conglu's command will abandon their morals and even fight and kill Liu Conglu and surrender to the imperial court in order to ask for rewards.

古文：熟计利害，决无即授从谏之理。 
现代文：所以，考虑到各方面的利害得失，决没有任命刘从谏为昭义留后的任何理由。 
English: Therefore, considering the advantages and disadvantages of all aspects, there is no reason to appoint Liu Conglu as the successor of Zhao Yi.

古文：时李逢吉、王守澄计议已定，竟不用绛等谋。
现代文：这时，宰相李逢吉和知枢密王过守澄已商议决定任命刘从谏，所以，竟然不采纳李绛的建议。
English: At this time, the Prime Minister Li Fengji and the Privy Councilor Wang Chao Shoucheng had already discussed the decision to appoint Liu Conglu, so they did not accept Li Conglu's suggestion.

古文：十二月，辛丑，以从谏为昭义留后。
现代文：十二月，辛丑，唐敬宗任命刘从谏为昭义留后。
English: In December, Xinwu, Tang Jingzong appointed Liu Conglu as the successor of Zhao Yi.

古文：刘悟烦苛，从谏济以宽厚，众颇附之。
现代文：当初刘悟担任昭义节度使时，对部下烦扰苛刻；刘从谏上任后，略加宽厚，将士逐渐依附听命。
English: At the beginning, when Liu Gou served as the special envoy of Zhao Yi, he was harsh on his subordinates; after Liu Conglu took office, he was a little more lenient, and the generals gradually adhered to their orders.

古文：李绛好直言，李逢吉恶之。
现代文：李绛对朝政得失，喜好直言不讳，李逢吉由此而憎恨他。
English: Li Lan was outspoken about the gains and losses of the imperial government and his preferences, which made Li Fengji hate him.

古文：故事，仆射上日，宰相送之，百官立班，中丞列位于廷，尚书以下每月当牙。
现代文：按照以往的惯例，尚书仆射上朝时，宰相送行，百官列班迎接，御史中丞在上朝的大廷中站立迎假，尚书省六部尚书以下官员每月要到仆射的府衙上去参拜。
English: According to the previous practice, when Shang Shuxu's servant shot into the imperial palace, the prime minister saw him off, hundreds of officials lined up to greet him, and Goshi Zhongzheng stood in the great court of the former imperial palace to welcome the holiday, and officials from the six departments of Shang Shuxu and below had to visit the palace of the servant every month.

古文：元和中，伊慎为仆射，太常博士韦谦上言旧仪太重，削去之。
现代文：元和年间，伊慎担任仆射时，太常博士韦谦上言朝廷，认为以往对仆射的礼仪过于崇重，唐宪宗采纳了他的意见，同意消除。
English: During the years of Yuan and Wu, when Isen served as the cupbearer, Dr. Wei Qian, a doctor of medicine, appealed to the imperial court, arguing that the etiquette of the cupbearer was too noble in the past. Tang Xianzong adopted his opinion and agreed to eliminate it.

古文：御史中丞王播恃逢吉之势，与绛相遇于涂，不之避。
现代文：这时，御史中丞王播恃李逢吉的势力，与李绛在半路相遇时，不加回避。
English: At this time, when the forces of Wang Banyan Li Fengji, the King of the Middle Ages, and Li Xi met in the middle of the road, they did not avoid.

古文：绛引故事上言： 仆射，国初为正宰相，礼数至重。倘人才忝位，自宜别授贤良。若朝命守官，岂得有亏法制。
现代文：于是，李绛引用过去的惯例，上言朝廷说： 尚书仆射在建国初期是正宰相，礼仪非常崇重，如果朝廷认为我不称职，就应当另外任命德才兼备的人担任此职；如果仍然由我担任这项职务，岂能听任有人违法乱纪。
English: Therefore, Li Qiye quoted the past practice and said to the imperial court: Shang Shupusa was the prime minister at the beginning of the founding of the country, and the etiquette was very noble. If the imperial court thinks that I am not competent, it should appoint another person who is both virtuous and talented to hold this position. If I still hold this position, I will not allow anyone to violate the law and discipline.

古文：乞下百官详定。 
现代文：请将我的意见交给百官，让他们详加讨论，予以裁定。 
English: Please submit my opinion to the hundred officials, let them discuss it in detail, and make a ruling.

古文：议者多从绛议。上听行旧仪。
现代文：百官讨论时，多数人同意李绛的意见，于是，敬宗下令，对尚书仆射的礼仪，仍恢复过去的制度。
English: During the discussion among the officials, most of them agreed with the opinion of Li Xuan. Therefore, Emperor Jingzong ordered to restore the previous system for the etiquette of still writing and shooting.

古文：甲子，以绛有足疾，除太子少师、分司。
现代文：甲子，敬宗鉴于李绛的脚有病，任命他为太子少师、分司。
English: In view of the fact that Li Yao's foot was ailing, Emperor Gaozong appointed him as the prince's junior teacher and branch secretary.

古文：言事者多称裴度贤，不宜弃之籓镇，上数遣使至兴元劳问度，密示以还期。
现代文：百官向朝廷上言者，大多称颂裴度德才兼备，不应弃而不用，仅仅让他做一个藩镇的节度使。于是，唐敬宗多次派人到山南西道的治所兴元去慰问裴度，向他秘密地转告即将召回朝廷重用的日期。
English: Most of the officials who made appeals to the imperial court praised Pei Du as a man of great virtue and talent, saying that he should not be abandoned, but should only be used as a festival envoy of the town. Therefore, Tang Jingzong repeatedly sent people to Xingyuan, the administrative center of Shannan West Road, to console Pei Du, and secretly told him the date when the imperial court would be recalled for heavy use.

古文：度因求入朝，逢吉之党大惧。
现代文：于是，裴度上奏朝廷，请求入朝参见皇上。李逢吉和他的党羽由此而大为恐惧。
English: As a result, Baidu appealed to the imperial court and requested to enter the imperial court to see the emperor. Li Fengji and his followers were greatly frightened by this.

古文：宝历二年丙年，公元八二六年
现代文：宝历二年春季，正月，壬辰，裴度从兴元抵达长安。
English: In the spring of the second year of the Baoli calendar, the first month, Imjin, Pei Du arrived in Chang'an from Xingyuan.

古文：春，正月，壬辰，裴度自兴元入朝，李逢吉之党百计毁之。先是民间谣云： 绯衣小儿坦其腹，天上有口被驱逐。 又，长安城中有横亘六冈，如乾象，度宅偶居第五冈。
现代文：李逢吉和他的党羽千方百计地诋毁裴度。此前，民间已有民谣说： 绯衣小儿坦其腹，天上有口被驱逐。 绯衣，合起来是一个 裴 字；天上有口，合起来是一个 吴 字，意思是说裴度当年指挥官军擒获淮西的叛将吴元济，他的才能应当值得到朝廷重用。另外，长安城中从南到北，有东西方向的六个高坡，正如《易经》上所说的《乾卦》的六画的样子，裴度的住宅正好在第五个高坡上。
English: Li Fengji and his followers tried their best to discredit Pei Du. Previously, there was a folk song that said: "The emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the emperor's son, the

古文：张权舆上言： 度名应图谶，宅占冈原，不召而来，其旨可见。 
现代文：张权舆上言说： 裴度的名字应映图谶，住宅选择在第五个高坡上；现在，不待朝廷召见，竟然擅自来到京城，他的目的可以想见。 
English: Zhang Quanzhong said: Pei Du's name should be reflected in the map, and his residence should be on the fifth hill. Now, without being summoned by the imperial court, he has come to Beijing without permission. His purpose can be imagined.

古文：上虽年少，悉察其诬谤，待度益厚。
现代文：敬宗虽然还年轻，但也洞察张权舆的诬陷和诽谤，对裴度更加亲近信任。
English: Although Keizong is still young, he also sees through Zhang Quanzhong's frame-up and slander, and trusts Pei Du more.

古文：度初至京师，朝士填门，度留客饮。
现代文：裴度刚到京城时，百官纷纷前往看望，以至门满为患。
English: When Pei Du had just arrived in Beijing, hundreds of officials visited him one after another, so much so that his door was always full.

古文：京兆尹刘栖楚附度耳语，侍御史崔咸举觞罚度曰： 丞相不应许所由官呫嗫耳语。 
现代文：裴度留请百官饮宴，京兆尹刘栖楚附在裴度的耳旁说话，侍御史崔咸举杯要罚裴度，说： 作为宰相，不应当允许京兆尹在耳旁低声说悄悄话。 
English: Baidu invited hundreds of officials to a banquet, and Beijing Zhaoyun and Liu Qichu spoke next to Baidu's ear, and the waiter Cui Xian raised a glass to punish Baidu, saying: As a prime minister, Beijing Zhaoyun should not be allowed to whisper in his ear.

古文：度笑而饮之。
现代文：裴度笑着饮了一杯酒。
English: Pei Du laughed and drank a glass of wine.

古文：栖楚不自安，趋出。
现代文：刘栖楚却很不自在，急忙出去了。
English: Liu Qiuchu, however, was very uncomfortable and hurried out.

古文：二月，丁未，以度为司空、同平章事。
现代文：二月，丁未，唐敬宗任命裴度为司空、同平章事。
English: In February, Ding Wei, Tang Jingzong appointed Pei Du as Siku and Tongping.

古文：度在中书，左右忽白失印。
现代文：一次，裴度在中书门下办公时，左右官吏忽然报告说，中书门下的大印丢失了。
English: On one occasion, when Pei Du was working under the Zhongshu Gate, officials on both sides suddenly reported that the Great Seal under the Zhongshu Gate had been lost.

古文：闻者失色，度饮酒自如。
现代文：当时在场听到这个消息的官吏无不大惊失色，裴度却仍然饮酒，神态自如。
English: The officials who were present at the time and heard the news were all shocked and disgraced, but Baidu still drank alcohol and looked at ease.

古文：顷之，左右白复于故处得印，度不应。
现代文：不久，左右官吏又报告说，大印在原来的地方找到来了，裴度似未听见，闭口不应。
English: Soon, officials on both sides reported that the seal had been found in its original place, that Pei Du did not seem to have heard it, and that he should not keep his mouth shut.

古文：或问其故，度曰： 此必吏人盗之以印书券耳，急之则投诸水火，缓之则复还故处。 
现代文：有人问他是什么缘故，裴度说： 大印丢失，肯定是官吏偷走，拿去私自印制文书。如果急于追查，他们就会畏罪把印烧毁，或者扔到池水里；相反，不动声色的话，则必然把印又放回原处。 
English: When asked why the seal was lost, Pei Du said: The officials must have stolen it and used it to privately print documents. If they were in a hurry to investigate, they would be afraid to burn the seal or throw it into the pond; on the other hand, if they didn't make a fuss, they would inevitably put the seal back in its original place.

古文：人服其识量。
现代文：部下们都佩服他的见识和气量。
English: His subordinates all admire his insight and stamina.

古文：上自即位以来，欲幸东都，宰相及朝臣谏者甚众。上皆不听，决意必行，已令度支员外郎卢贞按视，修东都宫阙及道中行宫。
现代文：唐敬宗自从即位以来，一直想到东都洛阳去巡行，宰相和百官很多人都劝阻他，敬宗一概不听，决心一定要去，并已下令度支员和外郎卢贞前往巡察，修建洛阳的宫阙和长安到洛阳途中的行宫。
English: Since his accession to the throne, Tang Jingzong had always wanted to go on a tour of Luoyang, the eastern capital. Many prime ministers and officials had dissuaded him, but Jingzong did not listen at all. He was determined to go, and had ordered the governor of Du and his son-in-law Lu Zhen to go on a tour to build the imperial palace in Luoyang and the imperial palace in Chang'an on the way to Luoyang.

古文：裴度从容言于上曰： 国家本设两都以备巡幸，自多难以来，兹事遂废。
现代文：裴度不慌不忙地对敬宗说： 国家设置东、西两都，本来就是为了皇上能够巡行。但是，自从安史之乱以来，这件事实际上已经废除。
English: Pei Du unhurriedly said to Keizong: The country originally set up two capitals, East and West, so that the emperor could parade. However, since the Anshi Rebellion, this matter has actually been abolished.

古文：今宫阙、营垒、百司廨舍率已荒阤，陛下倘欲行幸，宜命有司岁月间徐加完葺，然后可往。 
现代文：现在，洛阳的宫阙、禁军的营垒和朝廷的各部门办公的用房都已荒废。陛下如果一定要去巡行，应当首先命令有关部门花一段时间，慢慢加以修补，然后再走。 
English: If His Majesty must go on a tour, he should first order the relevant departments to spend some time slowly repairing and then leave.

古文：上曰： 从来言事者皆云不当往，如卿所言，不往亦可。 
现代文：敬宗说： 从来上言劝阻我的人，都众口一辞，说不应去洛阳巡行。
English: Keizong said, "Those who have been dissuading me have all said that I should not go to Luoyang for the parade.

古文：会硃克融、王庭氵奏皆请以兵匠助修东都。
现代文：按照你这样所说，我真的不去倒也可以。 这时，恰好幽州节度使朱克融和成德节度使王庭凑二人，请求本道出兵士和工匠帮助朝廷修补洛阳的宫阙。
English: According to what you said, I really can do without it. At this time, it just so happened that the Yuzhou Festival made Zhu Ke Rong and Chengde Festival made the royal court bring together two people to ask soldiers and craftsmen from this province to help the court repair the palace moat in Luoyang.

古文：三月丁亥，敕以修东都烦扰，罢之，召卢贞还。
现代文：三月丁亥，敬宗下敕，鉴于修补洛阳的宫阙烦扰很多，宣布停罢，召卢贞回京城。
English: In March of Dinghai, when Emperor Jingzong was about to abdicate, in view of the many troubles of repairing the imperial palace in Luoyang, he declared a halt and called Lu Zhen back to Beijing.

古文：先是，朝廷遣中使赐硃克融时服，克融以为疏恶，执留敕使。
现代文：此前，朝廷曾派遣宦官出使幽州，赐予节度使朱克融春衣。朱克融认为朝廷所给春衣质地粗劣，于是，拘留臣官。
English: Previously, the imperial court had sent eunuchs to Yuzhou to give Zhu Ke Rong, the regent, a spring garment. Zhu Ke Rong thought that the spring garment given by the imperial court was of poor quality, so he detained the vassal.

古文：又奏 当道今岁将士春衣不足，乞度支给三十万端匹 ，又奏 欲将兵马及丁匠五千助修宫阙 。
现代文：同时又奏请朝廷说： 本道将士今年的春衣不足，乞请度支补给三十万端匹。 又奏请说： 我打算率领兵马和工匠五千人帮助朝廷修建东都洛阳的宫阙。 
English: At the same time, he also appealed to the imperial court, saying, "This year's spring clothing for the soldiers of this province is insufficient, and I would like to ask you to supply 300,000 horses and mules." He also appealed to the imperial court, saying, "I intend to lead 5,000 soldiers, horses and craftsmen to help the imperial court build the imperial palace in Luoyang, the eastern capital.

古文：上患之，以问宰相，欲遣重臣宣慰，仍索敕使。
现代文：敬宗忧虑朱克融发兵叛乱，就问宰相，说自己打算派遣一位有威望的大臣前往幽州安抚朱克融，同时索还宦官。
English: Keizong was worried that Zhu Keh Rong would send troops to rebel, so he asked the prime minister, saying that he planned to send a prestigious minister to Yuzhou to appease Zhu Keh Rong, and at the same time retrieve the eunuch.

古文：裴度对曰： 克融无礼已甚，殆将毙矣！
现代文：裴度认为： 朱克融对朝廷极为无礼，必将自取灭亡！
English: Pei Du thought: Zhu Ke Rong is extremely rude to the imperial court and will surely perish!

古文：譬如猛兽，自于山林中咆哮跳踉，久当自困，必不敢辄离巢穴。
现代文：这就像猛兽一样，在山林自我跳跃，时间长了，就会感到困乏，必然不敢随便离开自己的窝巢。
English: It's like a beast of prey, jumping on its own in the mountains and forests. If it takes a long time, it will feel tired and will not dare to leave its nest.

古文：愿陛下勿遣宣慰，亦勿索敕使，旬日之后，徐赐诏书云： 闻中官至彼，稍失去就，俟还，朕自有处分。
现代文：所以，我希望陛下不要派人去幽州安抚，也不要索还宦官，等十天以后，再考虑下诏给朱克融，说： 朕听说宦官到幽州后，行踪去留稍有差失，等他回京后，朕自当有所处理。
English: Therefore, I hope that His Majesty will not send someone to Yuzhou to appease, and will not ask for the return of the eunuch. After ten days, he will consider issuing an edict to Zhu Ke Rong, saying: I heard that after the eunuch arrived in Yuzhou, there was a slight error in his whereabouts. After he returned to Beijing, I should deal with it myself.

古文：时服，有司制造不谨，朕甚欲知之，已令区处。
现代文：朝廷所赐予你的春衣，有关部门制造时很不严格，朕也很想知道真实情况，现在，已经下令调查查办。
English: The spring coats given to you by the imperial court were not strictly manufactured by the relevant departments. I would also like to know the true situation. Now, an investigation has been ordered.

古文：其将士春衣，从来非朝廷征发，皆本道自备。
现代文：关于幽州将士的春衣，从来都不是由朝廷征调供给，而是由本道自行安排。
English: As for the spring coats of Yuzhou warriors, they were never requisitioned and supplied by the imperial court, but arranged by themselves.

古文：朕不爱数十万匹物，但素无此例，不可独与范阳。 
现代文：朕并非舍不得几十万匹财物，只是朝廷向来没有先例，不能只给幽州。 
English: It's not that I'm reluctant to give away hundreds of thousands of horses, but the imperial court has never had a precedent, so I can't just give it to Yuzhou.

古文：所称助修宫阙，皆是虚语，若欲直挫其奸，宜云 丁匠宜速遣来，已令所在排比供拟。 
现代文：至于朱克融上奏声称要帮助朝廷修补东都洛阳的宫阙，其实都是假话。如果陛下想直接挫败他的奸谋，就应当在敕文中说： 助修洛阳的工匠，应当迅速派来，朕已命沿途各地安排接待。 
English: As for Zhu Ke Rong's claim that he wanted to help the imperial court repair the palace moat in the eastern capital of Luoyang, it was actually a lie. If His Majesty wanted to directly thwart his treachery, he should say in the obituary: "The craftsmen who helped repair Luoyang should be sent quickly, I have ordered to arrange receptions along the way."

古文：彼得此诏，必苍黄失图。
现代文：这样，朱克融接到这个诏书后，肯定惊慌失措。
English: Thus, Zhu Ke Rong must have panicked after receiving this edict.

古文：若且示含容，则云 修宫阙事在有司，不假丁匠远来。 如是而已，不足劳圣虑也。 
现代文：如果陛下还想对朱克融的跋扈无礼表示宽容，也可以说： 洛阳修补宫阙的事情，已命有关部门安排，不必劳驾幽州的工匠从远地而来， 这样，就足以解决问题，不必再劳陛下担忧。 
English: If His Majesty still wants to show tolerance for Zhu Ke Rong's impertinence, it can also be said: Luoyang has ordered the relevant departments to arrange for the repair of the palace gate, without having to bring Yuzhou craftsmen from far away. In this way, it is enough to solve the problem, and there is no need to worry about His Majesty.

古文：上悦，从之。
现代文：敬宗听后十分高兴，欣然采纳了裴度的意见。
English: Xuanzong was very happy and obeyed Li Linfu's words.

古文：立才人郭氏为贵妃。妃，晋王普之母也。
现代文：唐敬宗立才人郭氏为贵妃，郭贵妃即晋王李普的母亲。
English: Guo, the founder of Tang Jingzong, was a noblewoman, and Guo was the mother of King Lippu of Jin.

古文：横海节度使李全略薨。其子副大使同捷擅领留后，重赂邻道，以求承继。
现代文：横海节度使李全略去世，他的儿子、横海节度使副大使李同捷擅自为留后，用重金贿赂邻近藩镇，以求继任为节度使。
English: After the death of Li Quanliao by Henghai Jiedu, his son, Henghai Jiedu's deputy ambassador Li Tongjie, stayed without permission and bribed the neighboring towns with heavy money in order to succeed as Jiedu envoy.

古文：夏，四月，戊申，以昭义留后刘从谏为节度使。
现代文：夏季，四月，戊申唐敬宗任命昭义留后刘从谏为昭义节度使。
English: In the summer, in April, after Wu Shen Tang Jingzong appointed Zhao Yi to stay, Liu Conglu became Zhao Yi's festival envoy.

古文：五月，幽州军乱，杀硃克融及其子延龄，军中立其少子延嗣主军务。
现代文：五月，幽州发生军乱，将士杀节度使朱克融和他的儿子朱延龄，立他的小儿子朱延嗣主持军务。
English: In May, a military conflict broke out in Yuzhou. Zhu Ke Rong and his son Zhu Yanling were ordered to kill soldiers, and his youngest son, Zhu Yan Zi, was put in charge of military affairs.

古文：六月，甲子，上御三殿，令左右军、教坊、内园为击球、手搏、杂戏。
现代文：六月，甲子，唐敬宗亲临三殿，令左右神策军、教坊使、内园栽接使的军士和官吏踢球、摔跤、玩杂戏。
English: In June, Emperor Gao Zi and Emperor Jingzong of Tang personally visited the Third Palace and ordered the military officers and officials of the Left and Right Divisions, the Teaching Division, and the Inner Garden Division to play football, wrestle, and play miscellaneous games.

古文：戏酣，有断臂、碎首者，夜漏数刻乃罢。
现代文：游玩到兴头时，有人不慎折断胳膊，打破头部，直到半夜很晚才停。
English: When they were having fun, someone accidentally broke their arm and head, and they didn't stop until very late at night.

古文：己卯，上幸兴福寺，观沙门文溆俗讲。
现代文：已卯，唐敬宗亲临兴福寺，观看僧人文溆宣讲经文。
English: In the past, Tang Jingzong himself came to Xingfu Temple to watch the monks preach scriptures.

古文：癸未，衡王绚薨。
现代文：癸未，衡王李绚去世。
English: On the 18th, Heng Wang Li Hua passed away.

古文：壬辰，宣索左藏见在银十万两、金七千两，悉贮内藏，以便赐与。
现代文：壬辰，唐敬宗向左藏库宣旨，索取现银十万两，金子七千两，都贮备在皇帝的私人内藏库中，以便随时赏赐用。
English: At that time, Emperor Jingzong of the Tang Dynasty issued an edict to the Zuo Vault, requesting 100,000 taels of silver and 7,000 taels of gold, both of which were stored in the emperor's private vault for use at any time.

古文：道士赵归真说上以神仙，僧惟贞、齐贤、正简说上以祷祠求福，皆出入宫禁，上信用其言。
现代文：道士赵归真以神仙术向唐敬宗宣传游说，僧人惟贞、齐贤、正简以佛教的祈祷求福理论向敬宗宣传游说，这几个人都得出入皇宫，以致敬宗听信他们的宣传游说。
English: The moralist Zhao Guizhen lobbied the Tang Emperor Jingzong with magic, and the monks Wei Zhen, Qi Xian, and Zheng Jian lobbied the Emperor Jingzong with the Buddhist theory of praying for good fortune. All of these people entered the imperial palace, so that the Emperor Jingzong listened to their lobbying.

古文：山人杜景先请遍历江、岭，求访异人。
现代文：占卜算命人杜景先请求敬宗允许自己前往江淮、岭南各道，历遍各州，为敬宗求访有特殊才能异人。
English: Du Jingxian, a fortune teller, asked Keizong to allow him to travel to Jianghuai and Lingnan Provinces, visiting all the provinces, to seek out people with special talents for Keizong.

古文：有润州人周息元，自言寿数百岁，上遣中使迎之。
现代文：另有润州人周息元，自称已在世数百年，敬宗派宦官前往迎接。
English: In addition, Runchu resident Zhou Xiyuan, who claims to have been alive for hundreds of years, went to meet the eunuchs of the Jing sect.

古文：八月，乙巳，息元至京师，上馆之禁中山亭。
现代文：八月，乙巳，周息元抵达长安，敬宗把他安排在皇宫中的山亭住宿。
English: In August, when Zhou Xiyuan arrived in Chang'an, Emperor Jingzong arranged for him to stay in a pavilion in the palace.

古文：硃延嗣既得幽州，虐用其人。
现代文：朱克融的小儿子朱延嗣被将士推为幽州留后以后，对部下和百姓残暴苛刻。
English: After Zhu Yanzhi, the youngest son of Zhu Ke Rong, was pushed by the generals to stay in Yuzhou, he was cruel and harsh to his subordinates and the people.

古文：都知兵马使李载义与弟牙内兵马使载宁共杀延嗣，并屠其家三百馀人。
现代文：都知兵马使李载义和弟弟牙内兵马使李载宁同谋杀死朱延嗣，并屠杀他的家眷三百余人，李载义暂时主持留后。
English: Li Zaiyi and his brother, Yanai's Terracotta Warriors and Horses, together with Li Zai Ning, murdered Zhu Yanzhi and killed more than 300 members of his family. Li Zaiyi remained in charge for the time being.

古文：载义权知留后，九月，数延嗣之罪以闻。
现代文：九月，李载义历数朱延嗣的罪行，向朝廷奏报。
English: In September, Li Zaiyili enumerated Zhu Yanzhi's crimes and reported them to the imperial court.

古文：载义，承乾之后也。
现代文：李载义，即唐太宗的长子李承乾的后代。
English: Li Zaiyi, the eldest son of Emperor Taizong of Tang Dynasty, was a descendant of Li Chengxian.

古文：庚申，魏博节度使史宪诚妄奏李同捷为军士所逐，走归本道，请束身归朝。
现代文：庚申，魏博节度使史宪诚上奏，欺骗朝廷说，李同捷已被横海士卒驱逐，逃来魏博，请求归顺朝廷。
English: According to Goshun, the Wei Bo Festival made Shi Xiancheng play up, deceiving the imperial court that Li Tongjie had been expelled by Henghai Shizuo, fled to Wei Bo, and requested to surrender to the imperial court.

古文：寻奏同捷复归沧州。
现代文：不久，又上奏说，李同捷又返回横海的治所沧州。
English: Soon after, it was reported that Li Tongjie had returned to Cangzhou, the administrative center of Henghai.

古文：壬申，以中书侍郎、同平章事李程同平章事、充河东节度使。
现代文：唐敬宗任命中书侍郎、同平章事李程以同平章事的荣誉头衔，充任河东节度使。
English: Emperor Keizong of Tang appointed Li Cheng, the secretary of Zhongshu, and Tongping Zhangji, as the honorary title of Tongping Zhangji, and appointed him as the special envoy of the Eastern Song Festival.

古文：冬，十月，己亥，以李载义为卢龙节度使。
现代文：冬季，十月，已亥，唐敬宗任命李载义为卢龙节度使。
English: In winter, in October, already in the autumn, Tang Jingzong appointed Li Zaiyi as the Lulong Festival envoy.

古文：十一月，甲申，以门下侍郎、同平章事李逢吉同平章事、充山南东道节度使。
现代文：十一月，甲申，唐敬宗任命门下侍郎、同平章事李逢吉以同平章事的荣誉头衔，充任山南东道节度使。
English: In November, Gao Sheng, Tang Jingzong appointed Li Fengji, a servant of his disciple and Tongping Zhangji, as the honorary title of Tongping Zhangji, and appointed him as the Shannan Host Festival Envoy.

古文：上游戏无度，狎暱群小，善击球，好手抟，禁军及诸道争献力士，又以钱万缗付内园令召募力士，昼夜不离侧。
现代文：唐敬宗游乐毫无节制，和身边的小人亲密无间，经常一起游玩。他擅长踢球，喜爱摔跤，于是，禁军和诸道藩镇争相进献大力士，供他游乐。敬宗又出钱一万缗给内园栽接使，命令他们为自己召募大力士。这些大力士陪同敬宗摔跤游玩，昼夜不离开他的身旁。
English: He was good at football and loved wrestling. Therefore, the Imperial Army and various provinces and towns vied with each other to provide wrestlers for him to play with. Emperor Jingzong also paid 10,000 baht to the courtiers of the Inner Court and ordered them to recruit wrestlers for him. These wrestlers accompanied Emperor Jingzong on his wrestling outings and never left his side day or night.

古文：又好深夜自捕狐狸。
现代文：敬宗还喜欢深夜外出捕捉狐狸。
English: Keizong also likes to go out late at night to catch foxes.

古文：性复褊急，力士或恃恩不逊，辄配流、籍没。
现代文：他的性情极为急躁，大力士们有时恃宠出言不逊，动不动就用棍棒毒打一顿，众人既怒又怕。
English: His temper is extremely quick-tempered, and the Hercules sometimes taunts him with insolent words, beating him severely with a club at every turn, and people are both angry and afraid.

古文：宦官小过，动遭捶挞，皆怨且惧。十二月，辛丑，上夜猎还宫，与宦官刘克明、田务澄、许文端及击球军将苏佐明、王嘉宪、石从宽、阎惟直等二十八人饮酒。
现代文：十二月，辛丑，敬宗在夜里外出打猎后回到宫中，与宦官刘克明、田务澄、许文端以及踢球军将苏佐明、王嘉宪、石从宽、阎惟直等二十八人一起饮酒。
English: In December, Xin Yuxiu, Jing Zong returned to the palace after going out hunting at night, and drank alcohol with twenty-eight people, including eunuchs Liu Kemin, Tian Wucheng, and Xu Wentuan, as well as football team captains Su Zaming, Wang Jiaxian, Shizhong Kuan, and Yan Weizhi.

古文：上酒酣，入室更衣，殿上烛忽灭，苏佐明等弑上于室内。
现代文：敬宗酒兴正浓时，到房中换衣，这时，大殿里的火烛忽然被吹灭，苏佐明等人乘机在房中杀死敬宗。
English: When Keizong's wine was getting strong, he went to the room to change his clothes. At this time, the candles in the main hall were suddenly blown out, and Su Zoming and others took the opportunity to kill Keizong in the room.

古文：刘克明等矫称上旨，命翰林学士路隋草遗制，以绛王悟权句当军国事。
现代文：刘克明等人假传敬宗的旨意，命翰林学士路隋起草遗制，由绛王李悟暂时代理朝政。
English: Liu Kemin and others falsely transmitted the will of Emperor Keizong and ordered Hanlin to draft the Sui Dynasty's legacy system, with King Gong Liwu acting as the head of state for the time being.

古文：壬寅，宣遗制，绛王见宰相百官于紫宸外庑。
现代文：壬寅，宣布敬宗的遗制，然后，绛王在紫宸殿的外廊接见宰相和百官。
English: Jinyin, announced the succession of Emperor Keizong, and then, Emperor Yao received the prime minister and hundreds of officials in the outer porch of the Purple Pagoda.

古文：克明等欲易置内侍之执权者，于是枢密使王守澄、杨承和、中尉魏从简、梁守谦定议，以卫兵迎江王涵入宫，发左、右神策、飞龙兵进讨贼党，尽斩之。
现代文：刘克明等人打算撤换内侍省掌权的宦官，消息传出，于是，枢密使王守澄、杨承和、审策军护军中尉魏从简、梁守谦四人商议决定，派禁军前往迎接江王李涵入宫，同时，发左右神策军和飞龙兵讨伐杀害敬的贼党，全部斩首。
English: Liu Kemin and others planned to replace the eunuchs in power at the Ministry of the Inner Palace, and the news spread. As a result, the four privy councilors Wang Shoucheng, Yang Chenghe, Wei Congjian, and Liang Shouqian, the lieutenant of the reviewing and guarding army, discussed and decided to send the forbidden army to welcome King Jiang Lihan to the palace. At the same time, they sent the left and right shenzhao army and the flying dragon soldiers to fight and kill the thieves, and all of them were beheaded.

古文：克明赴井，出而斩之。
现代文：刘克明跳井躲藏，被禁军搜出斩首。
English: Liu Kemin jumped into a well to hide and was found beheaded by the forbidden army.

古文：绛王为乱兵所害。
现代文：绛王也被乱兵所杀害。
English: The warlord was also killed by the rioters.

古文：时事起苍猝，守澄等以翰林学士韦处厚博通古今，一夕处置，皆与之共议。
现代文：这时，由于诛讨贼党的事件决定得非常仓促，王守澄认为翰林学士韦处厚博通古今，所以，当天晚上的所有决定，都和他共同商议。
English: At this time, due to the fact that the incident of instigating the Kuomintang was decided very hastily, Wang Shoucheng believed that the Hanlin scholar Wei was well versed in ancient and modern times, so all decisions that evening were discussed with him.

古文：守澄等欲号令中外，而疑所以为辞。
现代文：王守澄等人打算对朝廷内外发号施令，疑虑用什么名义来措辞。
English: Wang Shoucheng and others were planning to issue orders to both inside and outside the imperial court, and doubts arose as to what name to use for the wording.

古文：处厚曰： 正名讨罪，于义何嫌，安可依违，有所讳避！ 
现代文：韦处厚说： 讨伐贼党的目的是为了端正国家的名份，这时忠君的大义有什么嫌疑呢？
English: Wei Shuanhou said: The purpose of fighting against the Kuomintang is to straighten out the country's name. At this time, what is the suspicion of the great righteousness of the prince?

古文：又问： 江王当如何践祚？ 
现代文：在这个关系国家命运的紧急关头，怎么能够犹豫不决、模棱两可而躲避嫌疑！ 
English: At this critical juncture in the fate of the country, how can you hesitate, equivocate and evade suspicion!

古文：处厚曰： 诘朝，当以王教布告中外以已平内难。然后群臣三表劝进，以太皇太后令册命即皇帝位。 
现代文：王守澄又问： 江王应当采取什么方式登基？ 韦处厚说： 明天百官上朝时，应当首先以江王教令的名义宣告天下，声称已经平定宫庭内部的叛乱，正式册命江王即皇帝位。 
English: Wang Shoucheng also asked: What method should King Jiang take to ascend to the throne? Wei Shuanghou said: When a hundred officials ascend to the throne tomorrow, they should first proclaim to the world in the name of King Jiang's edict, claim to have quelled the rebellion within the palace, and officially appoint King Jiang as emperor.

古文：当时皆从其言，时不暇复问有司，凡百仪法，皆出于处厚，无不叶宜。
现代文：当时，王守澄等人都同意韦处厚的意见，也无暇再去问有关部门是否正确，凡江王登基的种种仪式和法规，都出于韦处厚，无不适宜。
English: At that time, Wang Shoucheng and others all agreed with Wei Shuanhu's opinion, and had no time to ask the relevant departments whether it was correct. All the various ceremonies and regulations for the enthronement of the king of Jiangsu were due to Wei Shuanhu, and none of them were inappropriate.

古文：癸卯，以裴度摄冢宰。
现代文：癸卯，朝廷任命裴度暂兼冢宰，主持敬宗的治丧事宜。
English: In the meantime, the imperial court appointed Pei Du as temporary regent to preside over the funeral affairs of Emperor Keizong.

古文：百官谒见江王于紫宸外庑，王素服涕泣。
现代文：百官在紫宸殿外廊拜见江王，江王身着丧服，器泣流泪。
English: Hundreds of officials paid their respects to Jiang Wang in the outer corridor of the Palace of Purple and Gold. Wearing mourning clothes, Jiang Wang wept and shed tears.

古文：甲辰，见诸军使于少阳院。
现代文：甲辰，江王在少阳院接见禁军诸位军使。
English: At that time, the king of the Yangtze River received the envoys of the imperial army in Shaoyang Courthouse.

古文：赵归真等诸术士及敬宗时佞幸者，皆流岭南或边地。
现代文：道士赵归真等术士以及敬宗在世时的奸妄而得庞者，都被流放到岭南或荒远的边防。
English: Sorcerers such as the Taoist Zhao Guizhen, as well as those who gained power through treachery when Keizong was alive, were all exiled to Lingnan or the desolate frontier.

古文：乙已，文宗即位，更名昂。
现代文：乙巳，文宗李涵正式即皇帝位，改名为李昂。
English: At this time, Emperor Wenzong Lihan officially ascended to the throne and changed his name to Liang.

古文：戊申，尊母萧氏为皇太后，王太后为宝历太后。
现代文：戊申，尊奉母亲萧氏为皇太后，敬宗的母亲玉太后为宝历太后。
English: Wushin, the revered mother of Xiao, was the empress dowager, and the mother of Keizong, the Jade Empress Dowager, was the Empress Dowager of Baoli.

古文：是时，郭太后居兴庆宫，王太后居义安殿，萧太后居大内。
现代文：这时，穆宗的母亲郭太后住在兴庆宫，王太后住在义安殿，萧太后住在太极宫。
English: At this time, Mu Zong's mother, Empress Dowager Guo, lived in the Xingqing Palace, Empress Dowager Wang lived in the Yi'an Palace, and Empress Dowager Xiao lived in the Taiji Palace.

古文：上性孝谨，事三宫如一，每得珍异之物，先荐郊庙，次奉三宫，然后进御。
现代文：文宗生性孝顺谨慎，侍奉三位太后如同一人，每次得到珍贵奇异的食品，首先用来祭天以及奉献祖庙，其次奏献三位太后，最后才自己吃。
English: With filial piety and prudence, Wenzong served the three empresses as if they were one person. Each time, he received rare and unusual food, which was first used to sacrifice to the gods and to dedicate the ancestral temple, then presented to the three empresses, and finally eaten by himself.

古文：萧太后，闽人也。
现代文：萧太后是福建人。
English: Empress Dowager Xiao was from Fujian Province.

古文：庚戌，以翰林学士韦处厚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：庚戌，唐文宗任命翰林学士韦处厚为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Geng Zong, Tang Wenzong appointed Hanlin Baccalaureate Wei Shizhuang as the secretary of the Chinese book, Tongping Zhangji.

古文：上自为诸王，深知两朝之弊，及即位，励精求治，去奢从俭。
现代文：唐文宗自从被封为亲王后，深知穆宗、敬宗两朝的弊政，因此，即位以后，励精求治，除去奢侈，厉行节俭。
English: Since Tang Wenzong was made a prince, he was well aware of the bad politics of the two dynasties of Mu Zong and Keizong. Therefore, after he ascended the throne, he worked hard to seek a cure, eliminated extravagance, and enforced frugality.

古文：诏宫女非有职掌者皆出之，出三千馀人。
现代文：于是下诏：凡宫女未担任后宫职务者全部放出，共放三千多人。
English: Therefore, it was decreed that all maids of honor who did not hold a position in the harem would be released, a total of more than three thousand people.

古文：五坊鹰犬，准元和故事，量留校猎外，悉放之。
现代文：五坊使所养的鹰和猎狗，按照元和年间唐宪宗的规定，除保留少数用于游猎外，其余一律放出。
English: In accordance with the regulations of the Tang Dynasty in the Yuan Dynasty and the Tang Dynasty in the Tang Dynasty, all the eagles and hunting dogs raised by the five envoys were released, except for a few that were kept for hunting.

古文：有司供宫禁年支物，并准贞元故事。
现代文：度支、盐铁、户部和州府每年供应宫中的日常用品，一律按照贞元年间唐德宗规定的数额供给，不得增加。
English: The annual supply of daily necessities in the imperial palace by the Imperial Household Agency, the Salt and Iron Ministry, the Household Ministry, and the prefectural government shall all be in accordance with the amount specified by Emperor Dezong of Tang in the first year of the reign of Emperor Zhao, and shall not be increased.

古文：省教坊、翰林、总监冗食千二百馀员，停诸司新加衣粮。
现代文：裁减教坊、翰林院和宫苑总监所辖多余人员一千二百多人。停止唐敬宗对内诸司所辖宦官增加的衣粮待遇。
English: The number of superfluous personnel under the jurisdiction of the Director-General of the Education Center, the Hanlin Academy and the Palace Garden will be reduced by more than 1,200 people. The increase in the clothing and grain allowance for eunuchs under the jurisdiction of various departments by Tang Jingzong will be stopped.

古文：御马坊场及近岁别贮钱谷所占陂田，悉归之有司。
现代文：皇家养马坊场和近年来为皇上另外积存的钱谷所占用的水田，一律归还当地州县收管。
English: The imperial horse-breeding farm and the paddy fields occupied in recent years by the emperor's additional accumulation of money will all be returned to the local state and county.

古文：先宣索组绣、雕镂之物，悉罢之。
现代文：此前，敬宗在各地按规定所贡奉朝廷的数额之外所下诏勒索的绣缎、镂等物，一律停罢。
English: Previously, in addition to the amount of tribute paid to the imperial court in accordance with the regulations, all embroidered brooches, brooches and other items extorted by the Emperor Jingzong in various regions should be stopped.

古文：敬宗之世，每月视朝不过一二，上始复旧制，每奇日未尝不视朝，对宰相群臣延访政事，久之方罢。
现代文：敬宗在世时，每月上朝不过一二次，文宗开始恢复过去的制度，每逢单日都去上朝，向宰相和群臣百官访询朝政大事，很晚才罢朝。
English: When Keizong was alive, he went to the court only once or twice a month. Wenzong began to restore the old system. He went to the court every single day to inquire about the political affairs of the court from the prime minister and hundreds of officials. He did not go to the court until very late.

古文：待制官旧虽设之，未尝召对，至是屡蒙延问。
现代文：过去，朝廷虽然设置了待制官，但未曾召集咨询，这时，才多次被文宗召集顾问。
English: In the past, although the imperial court had set up a government-in-waiting, it had not called for consultation, and it was only then that advisers were repeatedly summoned by Emperor Wenzong.

古文：其辍朝、放朝皆用偶日，中外翕然相贺，以为太平可冀。
现代文：另外，凡是对大臣去世表示哀悼等原因而辍朝，以及因酷暑或雨雪天气而放朝，也都尽量安排在双日，以便不影响单日上朝商议朝政大事。于是，朝廷内外都一致相互庆贺，认为天下太平大有希望。
English: In addition, for reasons such as expressing condolences for the death of a minister and leaving the imperial court, as well as leaving the imperial court due to extreme heat or rain and snow, they are also arranged as much as possible on double days, so as not to affect the single day of the imperial court to discuss the imperial political events. Therefore, both inside and outside the imperial court are unanimous in celebrating each other, believing that there is great hope for world peace.

古文：太和元年丁未，公元八二七年春，二月，乙巳，赦天下，改元。
现代文：唐文宗太和元年春季，二月，乙巳，唐文宗下诏赦天下，改年号为太和。
English: In the spring of the first year of Tang Wenzong Taihe, in February, at the stroke of midnight, Tang Wenzong issued an edict to pardon the whole world, and changed the year name to Taihe.

古文：李同捷擅据沧景，朝廷经岁不问。
现代文：李同捷擅自为横海留后，割据沧景将一年，而朝廷不闻不问。
English: After Li Tongjie stayed in Henghai without permission, the separation lasted for a year, and the imperial court did not hear or ask about it.

古文：同捷冀易世之后或加恩贷，三月，壬戌朔，遣掌书记崔从长奉表与其弟同志、同巽俱入见，请遵朝旨。
现代文：李同捷寄希望于文宗即位后会宽容自己，于是，三月，壬戌逆，派遣掌书记崔从长携带他给文宗的奏折，和他的弟弟李同志、李同巽一起前往长安，参见文宗，请求归顺朝延。
English: Li Tongjie pinned his hopes on the fact that Emperor Wenzong would be tolerant of him after he ascended to the throne. Therefore, in March, against all odds, he sent the chief secretary, Cui Congchang, to carry his report to Emperor Wenzong. Together with his younger brothers, Comrade Li and Li Tongjie, they went to Chang'an to see Emperor Wenzong and request him to submit to Emperor Wenzong.

古文：上虽虚怀听纳而不能坚决，与宰相议事已定，寻复中变。
现代文：唐文宗虽然虚心听取百官意见，但往往犹豫而不能决断，有时和宰相商议已经决定的事情，不久，又中途改变。
English: Although Tang Wenzong was open-minded enough to listen to the opinions of hundreds of officials, he often hesitated and was unable to make a decision. Sometimes he would discuss with the prime minister what had already been decided, and then change it in the middle.

古文：夏，四月，丙辰，韦处厚于延英极论之，因请避位。
现代文：夏季，四月，丙辰，宰相韦处厚在延英殿极力批评文宗这种做法的弊端，于是，请求辞职。
English: In the summer, in April, the prime minister, Wei Shuchuo, strongly criticized the drawbacks of this practice of Wenzong in the palace of Yan Ying, and then asked for his resignation.

古文：上再三慰劳之。
现代文：文宗再三加以慰劳。
English: Wenzong repeatedly consoled him.

古文：忠武节度使王沛薨。
现代文：忠武节度使王沛去世。
English: Zhongwu Jiedu caused the death of Wang Pei.

古文：庚申，以太仆卿高瑀为忠武节度使。
现代文：庚申唐文宗任命太仆卿高为忠武节度使。
English: Emperor Gaoshen of the Tang Dynasty and Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Taigu Qing Gao as the minister of loyalty and military discipline.

古文：自大历以来，节度使多出禁军，其禁军大将资高者，皆以倍称之息贷钱于富室，以赂中尉，动逾亿万，然后得之，未尝由执政。
现代文：自从唐代宗大历年间以来，藩镇节度使大多出自禁军将领。禁军大将由是资历较高者，都愿出百分之一百的利息向富豪贷款，用来贿赂神策军护军中尉，请求授任节度使。
English: Since the period of the Great Calendar of the Zong Dynasty in the Tang Dynasty, most of the Han town festival envoys came from the generals of the Forbidden Army. The senior generals of the Forbidden Army were willing to lend one hundred percent interest to the rich, which was used to bribe the lieutenant of the Shenchao Army to request the appointment of a festival envoy.

古文：至镇，则重敛以偿所负。
现代文：贿赂的钱数动不动就是数万，数额巨大，所以，往往能够达到预期的目的，而不曾经过宰相。
English: The amount of bribe money is always tens of thousands, a huge amount, so it is often possible to achieve the desired goal without ever having been prime minister.

古文：及沛薨，裴度、韦处厚始奏以瑀代之。
现代文：他们赴任以后，再重税盘剥百姓，以便偿还所欠的本息。王沛去世后，裴度、韦处厚方才奏请由高继任。
English: After they took office, they imposed heavy taxes on the people in order to repay the principal and interest. After Wang Pei's death, Pei Du and Wei Shiguo only asked Gao to succeed them.

古文：中外相贺曰： 自今债帅鲜矣！ 
现代文：于是，朝廷内外官员都相互庆贺说： 从今以后， 债帅 就少了！ 
English: As a result, officials both inside and outside the imperial court congratulated each other and said: From now on, there will be fewer debtors!

古文：五月，丙子，以天平节度使乌重胤为横海节度使，以前横海节度副使李同捷为兗海节度使。
现代文：五月，丙子，唐文宗任命天平节度使乌重胤为横海节度使。任命前横海节度副使李同捷为兖海节度使。
English: In May, Emperor Wenzong of Tang appointed Tianping Sect Leader Wu Shigetian as the Sect Leader of Henghai, and appointed Li Tongjie, the former Deputy Sect Leader of Henghai, as the Sect Leader of Bohai.

古文：朝廷犹虑河南、北节度使构扇同捷使拒命，乃加魏博史宪诚同平章事。
现代文：这时，朝廷仍然担忧河南、河北的藩镇节度使怂恿和煽动李同捷抗拒朝廷任命，于是，加赐魏博节度使史宪诚同平竟事的荣誉职务。
English: At this time, the imperial court was still worried that the Han and town councils in Henan and Hebei would instigate and instigate Li Tongjie to resist the appointment of the imperial court. Therefore, the Wei Bo Festival was given to make Shi Xiancheng equal to the honorary position.

古文：丁丑，加卢龙李载义、平卢康志睦、成德王庭凑检校官。
现代文：丁丑，分别授予卢龙节度使李载义、平卢节度使康志睦、成德节度使王庭凑兼任检校官的职务。
English: Dingwuxi, respectively, awarded the Lulong Festival to Li Zaoyi, the Pinglu Festival to Kang Zhiming, and the Chengde Festival to Wang Tingpi, who also served as a school inspector.

古文：盐铁使王播自淮南入朝，力图大用，所献银器以千计，绫绢以十万计。
现代文：盐铁转运使王播从淮南来京朝拜，企图得到朝廷的进一步重用，因而，奉献银器数千件，绫绢数十万匹。
English: The transfer of salt and iron caused Wang Bo to come from Huainan to Beijing to worship, in an attempt to obtain further reuse by the imperial court. As a result, he donated thousands of pieces of silverware and hundreds of thousands of horses.

古文：六月，癸巳，以播为左仆射、同平章事。
现代文：六月，癸巳，唐文宗任命王播为左仆射、同平章事。
English: In June, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Bo to be the left-hand man and the second-in-command.

古文：秋，七月，癸酉，葬睿武昭愍孝皇帝于庄陵，庙号敬宗。
现代文：秋季，七月，癸酉，朝廷举行葬礼，在庄陵埋葬睿武昭愍孝皇帝李湛，庙号为敬宗。
English: In the autumn, in July, the imperial court held a funeral, burying Emperor Li Zhan in Zhuangling. The temple's name was Jingzong.

古文：李同捷托为将士所留，不受诏。乙酉，武宁节度使王智兴奏请将本军三万人，自备五月粮以讨同捷，许之。
现代文：李同捷借口被将士所强留，拒不执行朝廷的诏令，乙酉，武宁节度使王智兴上奏，请求率本军三万人，自备五个月的粮饷，出兵讨伐李同捷，文宗批准。
English: On the pretext that Li Tongjie had been forcibly detained by the generals, he refused to implement the imperial edict, and Wang Zhixing made Wang Zhixing appeal to him, asking him to lead the army of thirty thousand people, prepare five months of grain, send troops to fight Li Tongjie, and Wenzong approved.

古文：八月，庚子，削同捷官爵，命乌重胤、王智兴、康志睦、史宪诚、李载义与义成节度使李听、义武节度使张播各帅本军讨之。
现代文：八月，庚子，文宗下诏，消除李同捷的官爵，命乌重胤、王智兴、康志睦、史宪诚、李载义和义成节度使李听、义武节度使张，各率本镇兵马讨伐李同捷。
English: In August, Geng Zi and Wenzong issued an edict to eliminate the official title of Li Tong Jie, and ordered Wu Chongyin, Wang Zhixing, Kang Zhiming, Shi Xiancheng, Li Zaiyi and Yicheng Jiedu to listen to Li, and Yiwu Jiedu to listen to Zhang, and each led the town's soldiers and horses to fight against Li Tong Jie.

古文：同捷遣其子弟以珍玩、女妓赂河北诸镇，戊午，李载义执其侄，并所赂献之。
现代文：李同捷派他的儿子和侄子用珍贵的玩赏物品、歌舞妓女贿赂河北各藩镇，戊午，幽州节度使李载义逮捕李同捷的侄子，把他和他所贿赂的物品一并献给朝廷。
English: Li Tongjie sent his son and nephew to bribe all the towns in Hebei Province with precious trinkets and singing and dancing prostitutes. On the afternoon of the Yuzhou Festival, Li Zaiyi arrested Li Tongjie's nephew and presented him and the bribe to the imperial court.

古文：史宪诚与李全略为婚姻，及同捷叛，密以粮助之。
现代文：魏博节度使史宪诚与李同捷的父亲李全略是亲家。于是，李同捷叛乱后，史宪诚秘密地用粮饷援助李同捷。
English: The Wei Bo Festival made Shi Xiancheng a relative of Li Tongjie's father, Li Quanliao. Therefore, after Li Tongjie's rebellion, Shi Xiancheng secretly used grain to aid Li Tongjie.

古文：裴度不知其所为，谓宪诚无贰心。
现代文：裴度不知道史宪诚已与李同捷相勾结，认为他对朝廷忠贞不二。
English: Baidu did not know that Shi Xiancheng had colluded with Li Tongjie and believed that he was loyal to the imperial court.

古文：宪诚遣亲吏至中书请事，韦处厚谓曰： 晋公于上前以百口保尔使主，处厚则不然，但仰俟所为，自有朝典耳！ 
现代文：这时，史宪诚派遣他的亲信官吏到中书门下奏请公事，韦处厚对他说： 裴晋公在皇上面前百般为你的节度使主人作保，认为他对朝廷忠心耿耿。但是，我却不以为然。
English: At this time, Shi Xiancheng dispatched his trusted officials to the gate of the Chinese Academy of Letters to ask for official business. Wei Duanhou said to him: "Pei Jin Gong has guaranteed your master's honor in front of the emperor in many ways. I think he is loyal to the imperial court. However, I do not agree.

古文：宪诚惧，不敢复与同捷通。
现代文：史宪诚到底对朝廷是否忠心，要看他的所作所为，朝廷自有法典制裁！ 
English: Whether Shi Xiancheng is loyal to the imperial court depends on what he does. The imperial court has its own code of sanctions!

古文：王庭凑为同捷求节钺不获，乃助之为乱，出兵境上以挠魏师。
现代文：史宪诚得知后，十分恐惧，不敢再与李同捷勾结。成德节度使王庭凑上奏朝廷，请求授任李同捷为横海节度使，而未得批准。于是，他援助李同捷叛乱，出兵边境，以阻挠魏博讨伐李同捷的军队。
English: After Shi Xiancheng learned of this, he was very afraid and did not dare to collude with Li Tongjie again. Chengde Jiedu made Wang Ting approach the imperial court and request that Li Tongjie be appointed as the envoy of the Trans-Hai Jiedu, but he was not approved. Therefore, he supported Li Tongjie's rebellion and sent troops to the border to prevent Wei Bo from fighting Li Tongjie's army.

古文：又遣使厚赂沙陀酋长硃邪执宜，欲与之连兵，执宜拒不受。
现代文：与此同时，他还派人向沙陀酋长朱邪执宜贿赂厚礼，想和沙陀连兵叛乱，执宜坚拒不收。
English: At the same time, he also sent someone to pay a bribe to Shado chief Zhu Yanzhong, hoping to rebel with Shado's company of soldiers, but Shado refused to accept it.

古文：冬，十月，天平、横海节度使乌重胤击同捷，屡破之。
现代文：冬季，十月，天平兼横海节度使乌重胤率军进攻李同捷，多次打败李同捷的军队。
English: In the winter, in October, the Tianping and Henghai Festival, Wu Chongyan led the army to attack Li Tongjie, and repeatedly defeated Li Tongjie's army.

古文：十一月，丙寅，重胤薨。
现代文：十一月，丙寅，乌重胤去世。
English: In November, Cui Yin and Wu Chongyin passed away.

古文：庚辰，以保义节度使李寰为横海节度使，从王智兴之请也。十二月，庚戌，加王智兴同平章事。
现代文：庚辰，唐文宗根据王智兴的建议，任命保义节度使寰为横海节度使。十二月，庚戌，唐文宗加封武宁节度使王智兴同平章事的职务。
English: In accordance with Wang Zhixing's suggestion, Geng Chen and Tang Wenzong appointed Wang Zhixing, the commander of the Guoying Festival, as the commander of the Henghai Festival. In December, Geng Chen and Tang Wenzong appointed Wang Zhixing, the commander of the Wu Ning Festival, as the commander of the Henghai Festival.

古文：太和二年戌申，公元八二八年
现代文：太和二年春季，三月，已卯，王智兴率兵攻打棣州，焚烧三个城门。
English: In March of the spring of the second year of Taihe, Wang Zhixing led his troops to attack Zhangzhou and burned three city gates.

古文：春，三月，己卯，王智兴攻棣州，焚其三门。
现代文：自从元和末年以后，宦官日益骄横跋扈，皇帝废立都由他们掌握，权威远在皇帝之上，百官敢怒而不敢言。
English: Since the Yuan Dynasty and the late Qing Dynasty, eunuchs have become more and more arrogant. They control the appointment and dismissal of emperors. Their authority far exceeds that of emperors. Eunuchs dare not say anything lest they incur the wrath of the emperor.

古文：自元和之末，宦官益横，建置天子在其掌握，威权出人主之右，人莫敢言。辛已，上亲策制举人，贤良方正，昌平刘蕡对策极言其祸，其略曰： 陛下宜先忧者：宫闱将变，社稷将危，天下将倾，海内将乱。 
现代文：这时，唐文宗亲自主持科举考试，贤良方正科考生、昌平县人刘在回答文宗的对策中，愤怒抨击宦官的专权的罪行，大意说： 陛下首先应当忧虑的是，宫廷即将发生变乱，国家即将出现危机，天下即将倾覆，海内即将大乱。 
English: At this time, Tang Wenzong personally presided over the imperial examination. In his reply to Wenzong's countermeasures, Liu Fangzheng, a virtuous candidate for the imperial examination and a native of Changping County, angrily attacked the eunuch's crime of autocracy, to the effect that: His Majesty should first worry about the impending turmoil in the court, the impending crisis in the country, the impending overthrow of the country, and the impending chaos at sea.

古文：又曰： 陛下将杜篡弑之渐，则居正位而近正人，远刀锯之贱，亲骨鲠之直，辅相得以专其任，庶职得以守其官，奈何以亵近五六人总天下大政！
现代文：又说： 陛下如果真想杜绝有人可能篡夺皇位的野心，就应当端正自己的言行，亲近百官，疏远宦官，信用耿直忠正的大臣做宰相，主持朝政，使朝廷各个部门都能忠于自己的职守。但是，为什么现在却放任身边的五六个宦官专制朝政！
English: He also said: "If His Majesty really wants to prevent the ambitions of someone who may usurp the throne, he should correct his words and deeds, be close to a hundred officials, alienate eunuchs, trust Geng Zhi Zhongzheng's ministers to be prime ministers, preside over the government, so that all departments of the imperial court can be loyal to their duties. However, why is he now letting the five or six eunuchs around him dictate the government!

古文：祸稔萧墙，奸生帷幄，臣恐曹节、侯览复生于今日。 
现代文：这样下去，宫廷内部就必然酝酿祸乱，陛下身边出现奸邪小人，我担心汉桓帝时宦官曹节、侯览专权的局面又可能在今天重演。 
English: If things continue like this, there will inevitably be trouble brewing within the court, and villains will appear around His Majesty. I am worried that the situation of Cao Jie, eunuch of Emperor Han, and the power of the prince-electors may be repeated again today.

古文：又曰： 忠贤无腹心之寄，阃寺恃废立之权，陷先君不得正其终，致陛下不得正其始。 
现代文：又说： 忠正贤良的大臣得不到朝廷的信用，而宦官小人却窃取了废立皇帝的大权，使敬宗皇帝惨遭杀害，不能堂堂正正地终了一生，而陛下又被宦官所拥立即位，也不能堂堂正正地开始亲政。 
English: He also said, "Loyal, upright, and virtuous ministers cannot win the trust of the imperial court, while eunuch villains have stolen the power to depose the emperor, causing Emperor Keizong to be brutally murdered and unable to end his life in a dignified manner, while His Majesty was enthroned by eunuchs and unable to begin personal governance in a dignified manner.

古文：又曰： 威柄陵夷，籓臣跋扈。或有不达人臣之节，首乱者以安君为名；不究《春秋》之微，称兵者以逐恶为义。
现代文：又说： 现在，朝廷威信扫地，藩镇骄横跋扈，在此情况下，如果有不懂儒家人臣礼义的武夫悍将，就可能以安定皇位为名，首先举兵发动叛乱；而不明白孔子在《春秋》中微言大义的节将大臣，也可能以清君侧为旗号，举兵发动内战。
English: He also said, "Nowadays, the prestige of the imperial court has been swept away, and the arrogance of the feudal towns is rampant. Under these circumstances, if there is a warrior general who does not understand the propriety of the Confucian subjects, he may first raise an army to launch a rebellion in the name of stabilizing the imperial throne; but if he does not understand that Confucius in "Spring and Autumn" said a great deal, he may also raise an army to launch a civil war under the banner of the Qing Dynasty.

古文：则政刑不由乎天子，征伐必自于诸侯。 
现代文：这样一来，朝廷的大政方针就由不得陛下作主，征战讨伐都出于藩镇的好恶。 
English: As a result, the major policies of the imperial court were determined by His Majesty, and the war campaigns were based on the likes and dislikes of the feudal lords.

古文：又曰： 陛下何不塞阴邪之路，屏亵狎之臣，制侵陵迫胁之心，复门户扫除之役，戒其所宜戒，忧其所宜忧！既不能治于前，当治于后，既不能正其始，当正其终；则可以虔奉典谟，克承丕构矣。
现代文：又说： 陛下为什么不下决心杜绝奸邪小人往上爬的门路，革除身边那些阿谀放纵的臣僚，制止当权宦官的凌辱和威于总结历史经验，从中汲取必要的教训，引以为戒；同时和朝廷大臣一起制定周密的计划，并注意保守秘密，设身处地替他们的处境考虑，以免遭受当权宦官的诬陷迫害。
English: He also said, "Why doesn't Your Majesty make up your mind to cut off the way for the villains to climb up the ladder, expel those indulgent ministers around you, stop the abuse and arrogance of the eunuchs in power, sum up the historical experience, draw the necessary lessons from it, and take it as a warning; at the same time, work out a thorough plan with the ministers of the Imperial Court, and pay attention to keeping secrets, put yourself in their shoes and consider their situation, so as not to suffer the persecution of the eunuchs in power.

古文：昔秦之亡也失于强暴，汉之亡也失于微弱。
现代文：过去秦朝灭亡是由于皇帝强横残暴，而汉朝灭亡则是由于皇帝软弱无能。
English: In the past, the Qin Dynasty fell due to the emperor's arrogance and brutality, while the Han Dynasty fell due to the emperor's weakness and incompetence.

古文：强暴则贼臣畏死而害上，微弱则奸臣窃权而震主。
现代文：皇帝强横残暴，则乱臣贼子惧怕被杀，千方百计地谋害皇上；皇帝软弱无能，则朝廷大权易被奸臣窃取，威震皇上。
English: If the emperor is tyrannical and cruel, then the traitorous vassals will be afraid of being killed and will do everything possible to kill the emperor; if the emperor is weak and incompetent, then the imperial power will be easily stolen by the treacherous vassals, and the emperor will be terrified.

古文：伏见敬宗皇帝不虞亡秦之祸，不翦其萌。
现代文：先帝敬宗皇帝未能汲取秦朝灭亡的经验教训，把可能发生的问题消灭在萌牙之中，而导致自身被害。
English: The previous emperor, Emperor Keizong, failed to learn from the lessons of the Qin Dynasty's demise and to nip possible problems in the bud, leading to his own demise.

古文：伏惟陛下深轸亡汉之忧，以杜其渐，则祖宗之鸿业可绍，三、五之遐轨可追矣。 
现代文：所以，陛下应当深入地总结汉朝灭亡的经验教训，根绝朝廷大权可能旁落的根源。这样，不仅能够真正继承祖宗的宏图大业，而且，也可追随三皇五帝所开创的圣贤大德。 
English: Therefore, His Majesty should thoroughly summarize the experience and lessons of the demise of the Han Dynasty, and root out the root causes of the possibility that the power of the imperial court may fall by the wayside. In this way, not only can he truly inherit the great cause of his ancestors, but he can also follow the wisdom and virtue created by the three emperors and five emperors.

古文：又曰： 臣闻昔汉元帝即位之初，更制七十馀事，其心甚诚，其称甚美，然而纪纲日紊，国祚日衰，奸宄日强，黎元日困者，以其不能择贤明而任之，失其操柄也。 
现代文：又说： 我听说过去汉元帝刚刚即位的时候，就大刀阔斧地革除朝廷弊政七十多件，励精图治，内心十分虔诚，由此而获得朝廷内外对他的美好赞誉。然则，没过多久，朝政却日益紊乱，国家日益衰败，奸臣日益强盛，百姓日益贫困，原因在于他未能选拔德才兼备的大臣予以重任，以致朝廷大权落到奸臣手中的缘故。 
English: He also said, "I heard that in the past, when Emperor Han Yuan had just ascended the throne, he boldly eliminated more than seventy cases of maladministration in the imperial court, worked hard to govern, and was very pious at heart, thereby gaining good praise for him both inside and outside the imperial court. However, it did not take long for the imperial government to become increasingly chaotic, the country to become increasingly decadent, treacherous ministers to become increasingly powerful, and the people to become increasingly impoverished. The reason for this was that he was unable to select ministers who were both capable and virtuous, so that the supreme power of the imperial court fell into the hands of treacher

古文：又曰： 陛下诚能揭国权以归相，持兵柄以归将，则心无不达，行无不孚矣。 
现代文：又说： 陛下如果真的能够把朝廷大权交还宰相掌握，把军权交还大将执掌，那么，您励精图治的愿望就会完全实现，您所发布的诏令就会全部得到贯彻执行。 
English: He also said, "Your Majesty, if you can really return the power of the imperial court to the control of the prime minister, and the military power to the control of the general, then your desire to work hard to govern will be fully realized, and the edict you issued will be fully implemented.

古文：又曰： 法宜画一，官宜正名。
现代文：又说： 朝廷执法应当内外统一，设官任职应当名正言顺。
English: He also said: The enforcement of laws by the Imperial Court should be uniform both inside and outside, and the appointment of officials should be in accordance with the law.

古文：今分外官、中官之员，立南司、北司之局，或犯禁于南则亡命于北，或正刑于外则破律于中，法出多门，人无所措，实由兵农势异而中外法殊也。 
现代文：现在，朝廷的官制区分为外官、内官，设置南衙、北司分别统辖。有人在南衙犯法，就逃往北司躲避；同一罪行在南衙被判刑，在北司却被枉法释免，以致当出多门，人们不知所措。原因在于国家自从兵制度崩溃后，兵农分离，宦官执掌军权，因而对中官、外官法律不一的缘故。 
English: At present, the official system of the imperial court is divided into external officials and internal officials, and the Southern Court and the Northern Court are set up separately. If someone breaks the law in the Southern Court, he will flee to the Northern Court to escape; the same crime was sentenced in the Southern Court, but he was unjustly released in the Northern Court, so that there are many cases, and people are at a loss. The reason is that since the collapse of the military system, the country has been separated into soldiers and peasants, and eunuchs hold military power, so there are different laws for middle officers and external officials.

古文：又曰： 今夏官不知兵籍，止于奉朝请；六军不主兵事，止于养勋阶。
现代文：又说： 现在，朝廷的兵部不管军队，仅仅上朝时充数装装门面，禁卫六军大将不统帅兵马，仅仅靠勋爵领取俸禄而已。
English: He also said, "Nowadays, the Imperial General Staff, regardless of the size of the army, is just a front for the Emperor. The General of the Sixth Army of the Imperial Guard does not command the soldiers and horses, but only receives a salary from the Lord.

古文：军容合中官之政，戎律附内臣之职。
现代文：而由宦官担任的军容使掌握军权，藩镇军将都依附于由宦官的担任的监军。
English: The commander-in-chief managed the affairs of the eunuchs, and the eunuchs were in charge of the guards.

古文：首一戴武弁，疾文吏如仇雠。足一蹈军门，视农夫如草芥。
现代文：宦官一旦身着军装，就视文官如同仇敌，鄙视农夫如同草芥。
English: Once eunuchs put on military uniforms, they regard civil servants as enemies and despise farmers.

古文：谋不足以翦除凶逆，而诈足以抑扬威福；勇不足以镇卫社稷，而暴足以侵轶里闾。
现代文：他们在朝廷用兵伐叛时毫无谋略，而耀武扬威时却诡计多端；保卫国家时胆怯无勇，而侵掠百姓时却凶狠残暴。
English: They have no strategy when they use troops to rebel against the imperial court, but they are very cunning when they show off their military prowess; they are timid when defending the country, but they are ferocious and cruel when they invade and plunder the people.

古文：羁绁籓臣，干陵宰铺，隳裂王度，汩乱朝经。
现代文：他们在地方钳制和欺凌节度使，在朝廷凌辱宰相，败坏法纪，搅乱朝政。
English: They bribed and bullied officials at the local level, abused prime ministers at the imperial court, corrupted law and order, and disrupted the imperial government.

古文：张武夫之威，上以制君父；假天子之命，下以御英豪。有藏奸观衅之父，无伏节死难之义。
现代文：他们倚仗掌握军权的威势，在朝廷挟制皇帝上，同时，又假借皇上的诏令，对下驾驭百官和藩镇，心怀叵测，伺机而动，牟取私利，却毫无忠义之心去为国家赴难而死的节义。
English: They rely on the prestige of holding military power, on the imperial court to control the emperor, and at the same time, on the pretext of the emperor's edict, to control hundreds of officials and townships. They are full of conjecture, wait for opportunities, and seek personal gain, but they have no loyalty to die for the country.

古文：岂先王经文纬武之旨邪！ 
现代文：朝政弄到这个地步，难道是古代的圣王所倡导的用文武功治理天下的本意吗？ 
English: Is this consistent with the original intention of the ancestors to arrange civil and military officials?

古文：又曰： 臣非不知言发而祸应，计行而身戮，盖痛社稷之危，哀生人之困，岂忍姑息时忌，窃陛下一命之宠哉！ 
现代文：又说： 我并非不知道自己毫无顾忌地抨击宦官后，必然遭受他们的打击报复，即使皇上采纳我的意见，我也难免被迫害致死。只是由于痛感国家面临危机，百姓身处水深火热，因此，岂能眼看着这些丑恶的现象，为了牟取陛下的一官半职，而不闻不问呢？ 
English: He also said, "It is not that I do not know that if I criticize the eunuchs without scruples, I will inevitably suffer their retaliation, and even if the emperor adopts my opinion, I will inevitably be persecuted to death. It is only because I am painfully aware that the country is facing a crisis, and the people are in a deep fire, therefore, can I watch these ugly phenomena, in order to gain His Majesty's position, without asking questions?

古文：闰月，丙戌朔，史宪诚奏遣其子副大使唐、都知兵马使亓志绍将兵二万五千趣德州讨李同捷。
现代文：闰三月，丙戌朔，史宪诚上奏朝廷说，他已派遣儿子、魏博节度副大使史唐、都知兵马使亓志绍率领二万五千人前往德州，讨伐李同捷。
English: In the intercalary month of March, Bing Xinshuo and Shi Xiancheng reported to the imperial court that he had dispatched his son, Wei Bo, the vice-ambassador of the Qing Dynasty, Shi Tang, and the Tochi envoy, Zou Zhishao, to lead 25,000 men to Texas to fight against Li Tongjie.

古文：时宪诚欲助同捷，唐泣谏，且请发兵讨之；宪诚不能违。
现代文：当时，史宪诚本想援助李同捷，史唐一边哭泣，一边劝阻，请求遵循朝廷命令，发兵讨伐。史宪诚无言拒绝，只好同意。
English: At that time, Shi Xiancheng originally wanted to help Li Tongjie, but Shi Tang, while crying, dissuaded him and asked him to follow the imperial order and send troops to fight. Shi Xiancheng refused without a word and had to agree.

古文：甲午，贤良方正裴休、李郃、李甘、杜牧、马植、崔玙、王式、崔慎由等二十二人中第，皆除官。
现代文：甲午，参加贤良方正科考试的考生裴休、李、李甘、杜牧、马植、崔、王式、崔慎由等二十二人应试中选，都被授予官职。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the month, 22 candidates including Pei Xiu, Li, Li Gan, Du Mu, Ma Zhi, Cui, Wang Shih and Cui Shengyu, who took part in the examination of virtuous people, were selected and all of them were awarded official positions.

古文：考官左散骑常侍冯宿等见刘蕡策，皆叹服，而畏宦官，不敢取。
现代文：担任考官的左散骑常侍冯宿等人看到刘的对策后，都赞叹不绝，十分佩服他的才能和胆识，但由于惧怕宦官，而不敢录取。
English: After witnessing Liu's countermeasures, the examiners, including the left-hand rider and regular attendant Feng Shukran, were full of admiration for his talent and courage. However, they were afraid to admit him for fear of the eunuch.

古文：诏下，物论嚣然称屈。
现代文：朝廷录取的诏书宣布后，舆论哗然，都认为刘被冤屈。
English: After the imperial edict of admission to the imperial court was announced, public opinion was in an uproar, all believing that Liu had been wronged.

古文：谏官、御史欲论奏，执政抑之。
现代文：谏官和御史台官员打算上奏反映，被当权宰相所制止。
English: The eunuch and the official of the Imperial Historian's Office intended to report the incident, but were stopped by the Prime Minister in power.

古文：李郃曰： 刘蕡下第，我辈登科，能无厚颜！ 
现代文：考生李说： 刘落选，而我们却中举了，能不感到厚颜无耻吗？ 
English: Candidate Li said, "Liu lost the election, but we were promoted. Can't you feel shameless?

古文：乃上疏，以为： 蕡所对策，汉、魏以来无与为比。
现代文：于是上疏，认为： 刘对策的水平，自从汉和魏以来，没有人能够和他相比。
English: As a result, Shang Zuo believed: Liu's level of countermeasures, since the Han and Wei Dynasties, no one can compare with him.

古文：今有司以蕡指切左右，不敢以闻，恐中良道穷，纲纪遂绝。
现代文：现在，考官考虑到刘的对策抨击陛下左右的亲信宦官，不敢把他的对策上报陛下，我担心这样一来，忠正贤良的读书人今后入仕做官再无指望，朝廷的法纪至此荡然无存。
English: Now, the examiner, taking into account Liu's countermeasures, criticized the close eunuchs around His Majesty and did not dare to report his countermeasures to His Majesty. I am afraid that as a result, there is no hope for loyal and virtuous readers to become officials in the future, and the legal discipline of the imperial court has disappeared.

古文：况臣所对不及蕡远甚，乞回臣所授以旌蕡直。 
现代文：况且我的对策远不如刘，请求朝廷把授予我的官职转授给刘，作为对他的表彰。 
English: Moreover, my countermeasures were far inferior to Liu's, and I asked the court to transfer the official position awarded to me to Liu as a commendation to him.

古文：不报。
现代文：没有得到答复。
English: It didn't make the papers.

古文：蕡由是不得仁于朝，终于使府御史。
现代文：于是，刘一直未能在朝廷任职，到他去世为止，都在藩镇担任幕僚。
English: As a result, Liu was never able to serve in the imperial court, and until his death, he served as a staff member in the town.

古文：牧，佑之孙；植，勋之子；式，起之子；慎由，融之玄孙也。
现代文：杜牧是杜佑的孙子；马植是马勋的儿子；王式是王起的儿子；崔慎由是崔融的玄孙。
English: Du Mu is the grandson of Du You; Ma Zhi is the son of Ma Xun; Wang Shih is the son of Wang Zhi; Cui Shanyu is the great-great-grandson of Cui Rong.

古文：夏，六月，晋王普薨。
现代文：夏季，六月，晋王李普去世。
English: In the summer, in June, Jin Wang Lipu passed away.

古文：辛酉，赠悼怀太子。
现代文：辛酉，朝廷追赠谥号为悼怀太子。
English: The Imperial Court posthumously bestowed the posthumous title of 号 (号) to the late Crown Prince.

古文：初，萧太后幼去乡里，有弟一人。
现代文：当初，唐文宗的母亲萧太后从小离开故乡，家里还有一个弟弟。
English: At first, Tang Wenzong's mother, Empress Dowager Xiao, left her hometown as a child, and there was a younger brother at home.

古文：上即位，命福建观察使求访，莫知所在。
现代文：文宗即位后，命福建观察使为太后寻找弟弟，福建观察使报告说，已不知下落。
English: After Emperor Wenzong ascended the throne, he ordered the Fujian Observer to look for a younger brother for the empress dowager. The Fujian Observer reported that his whereabouts were unknown.

古文：有茶纲役人萧洪，自言有姊流落，商人赵缜引之见太后近亲吕璋之妻，亦不能辨，与之俱见太后。
现代文：有一个给茶商当役夫的人名叫萧洪，自称有一个姐姐流落他乡，不知去向。商人赵缜把萧洪引见给萧太后的亲戚吕璋的妻子，吕璋的妻子无法辨别真假，于是，带他一起去见萧太后。
English: There was a man named Xiao Hong who worked as a porter for a tea merchant. He claimed to have a sister who had moved to another village and whose whereabouts were unknown. The merchant Zhao Wei introduced Xiao Hong to the wife of Lv Ying, a relative of Empress Dowager Xiao. Lv Ying's wife could not distinguish between the true and the false, so she took him to see Empress Dowager Xiao.

古文：上以为得真舅，甲子，以为太子洗马。
现代文：文宗便以为萧洪就是自己的真舅舅，甲子，任命萧洪为太子洗马。
English: Emperor Wenzong then thought that Xiao Hong was his own real uncle, Jia Zi, and appointed Xiao Hong as the crown prince.

古文：峰州刺史王升朝叛。
现代文：峰州刺史王升朝叛乱。
English: There was a rebellion in Fengzhou against Wang Sheng's dynasty.

古文：庚辰，安南都护武陵韩约讨斩之。
现代文：庚辰，安南都护、武陵县人韩约出兵讨伐，把王升朝斩首。
English: Geng Chen, Annan Tuo, and Han Yu, a man from Wuling County, sent troops to fight and decapitated Wang Sheng.

古文：王庭凑阴以兵及盐粮助李同捷，上欲讨之。
现代文：王庭凑暗地里援助李同捷兵器、食盐和粮食，唐文宗打算讨伐王庭凑。
English: Wang Tingchu secretly aided Li Tongjie with weapons, salt and grain, and Tang Wenzong planned to fight Wang Tingchu.

古文：秋，七月，甲辰，诏中书集百官议其事。
现代文：秋季，七月；甲辰，文宗下诏，命中书门下召集百官商议讨伐王庭凑的事。
English: Autumn, July; Jia Chen, Wen Zong issued an edict, and ordered to convene a hundred officials to discuss the matter of fighting against Wang Tianzhu.

古文：宰相以下莫敢违，卫尉卿殷侑独以为： 廷凑虽附凶徒，事未甚露，宜且含容，专讨同捷。 
现代文：宰相和百官都无人敢有违抗，只有卫尉卿殷侑认为： 王庭凑虽然附合李同捷叛乱，但这件事尚未显露，所以，朝廷应当暂且容忍，集中兵力讨伐李同捷。 
English: None of the chancellors and officials dared to defy him, only the captain of the imperial guard, Yin Qi, thought: Although Wang Tingpai had joined the rebellion of Li Tongjie, the matter had not yet been revealed, so the imperial court should temporarily tolerate and concentrate its forces to fight Li Tongjie.

古文：己巳，下诏罪状廷凑，命邻道各严兵守备，听其自新。
现代文：已巳，文宗下诏公布王庭凑的罪行，命邻近成德的各个藩镇严兵守备，等候王庭凑改过自新。
English: Already, Emperor Wenzong issued an edict announcing Wang Tingpiao's crimes and ordered all the towns in the vicinity of Chengde to be on high alert, waiting for Wang Tingpiao to reform.

古文：九月，丁亥，王智兴奏拔棣州。
现代文：九月，丁亥，王智兴奏称攻下横海管辖的棣州。
English: In September, Dinghai, Wang Zhixing claimed to have conquered Zhangzhou under the jurisdiction of Henghai.

古文：李寰自晋州兵赴镇，不戢士卒，所过残暴，至则拥兵不进，但坐索供馈。
现代文：新任横海节度使李寰从晋州率兵前往横海赴任，一路对士卒不加约束，听任士卒掠夺百姓。到达前线后，又拥兵不进，只是向朝廷索取粮饷供给。
English: The new governor of Henghai sent Li Qian from Jinzhou to Henghai to lead the troops. All the way, he did not impose any restrictions on the officers and men, and allowed them to plunder the people. After reaching the front line, he did not advance with the troops, but only asked the court for grain and supplies.

古文：庚寅，以寰为夏绥节度使。
现代文：庚寅，朝廷任命李寰为夏绥节度使。
English: In Goyang, the imperial court appointed Li Jie as the chief envoy of the Xiali Festival.

古文：甲午，诏削夺王庭凑官爵，命诸军四面进讨。
现代文：甲午，唐文宗下诏，撤销王庭凑担任的成德节度使的职务及其爵位，命令诸道兵马四面围攻讨伐。
English: In the afternoon of the first day of the first month, Tang Wenzong issued an edict to revoke the post of Chengde Festival envoy held by Wang Tiantong and his peerage, and ordered the soldiers and horses of all sects to besiege and fight on all sides.

古文：加王智兴守司徒，以前夏绥节度使傅良弼为横海节度使。
现代文：唐文宗任命王智兴暂守司徒，任命前夏绥节度使傅良弼为横海节度使。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty appointed Wang Zhixing as the temporary governor of Shitu, and appointed the former Xiali Festival envoy Fu Liangyao as the Henghai Festival envoy.

古文：岳王绲薨。
现代文：岳王李绲去世。
English: His father-in-law King Lihong passed away.

古文：庚戌，容管奏安南军乱，逐都护韩约。
现代文：庚戌，容管奏报安南发生军乱，都护韩约被驱逐。
English: Geng Hui and Kang Guan reported that there was a military riot in Annan, and the Korean Protectorate was expelled.

古文：冬，十月，洋王忻薨。
现代文：冬季，十月，洋王李忻去世。
English: In the winter, in October, Yang Wang Lijun passed away.

古文：魏博败横海兵于平原，遂拔之。
现代文：魏博军队在平原打败横海军队，接着，乘胜攻占了平原城。
English: The Wei Bo army defeated the Henghai army in the plain, and then captured the plain city.

古文：十一月，癸未朔，易定节度使柳公济奏攻李同捷坚固寨，拔之。又破其兵于寨东。
现代文：十一月，癸未朔，易定节度使柳公济奏称在沧州的西面攻占了李同捷设置的坚固寨，接着，又在坚固寨东打败横海军队。
English: In November, before the New Year's Day, Yi Ding Jie led Liu Gongji to claim that he had captured the fortified village set up by Li Tongjie in the west of Cangzhou, and then defeated the Henghai army in the east of the fortified village.

古文：时河南、北诸军讨同捷久未成功，每有小胜，则虚张首虏以邀厚赏，朝廷竭力奉之，江、淮为之耗弊。
现代文：这时，河南、河北诸道出兵讨伐李同捷，一直没有较大进展，他们每取得一点小小的胜利，就向朝廷虚报斩获敌军的人数，邀求优厚的赏赐。朝廷竭尽全力供给诸军粮饷，以致江淮地区的百姓消耗疲弊，不堪而担。
English: At this time, the armies of Henan and Hebei dispatched to fight against Li Tongjie had not made much progress. Every time they achieved a small victory, they falsely reported the number of enemy troops captured to the imperial court and asked for a generous reward. The imperial court did its best to supply the troops with grain, so that the people in the Jianghuai region were exhausted and unbearably burdened.

古文：傅良弼至陕而薨。
现代文：傅良弼赶赴横海上任，走到陕州时死去。
English: Fu Liangyao rushed to Henghai to take office, and died when he reached Shaanxi.

古文：乙酉，以左金吾大将军李祐为横海节度使。
现代文：乙酉，唐文宗任命左金吾大将军李为横海节度使。
English: At the same time, Emperor Wenzong of the Tang Dynasty appointed General Li of the Left Jingu to be the envoy of the Henghai Festival.

古文：甲辰，禁中昭德寺火，延及宫人所居，烧死者数百人。
现代文：甲辰，宫中昭德寺着火，火势延伸到宫女居住的地方，烧死几百人。
English: At that time, the Zhaode Temple in the palace caught fire, and the fire spread to the place where the palace maids lived, burning hundreds of people to death.

古文：十二月，丁已，王智兴奏兵马使李君谋将兵济河，破无棣。壬申，中书侍郎、同平章事韦处厚薨。
现代文：十二月，丁巳，王智兴上奏说，他的兵马使李君谋率兵渡过黄河，攻破横海管辖的无棣县壬申，中书侍郎、同平章事韦处厚去世。
English: In December, Wang Zhixing reported that his soldiers and horses had led Li Junmo to cross the Yellow River and break through the Jinshin of Muxi County under the jurisdiction of Henghai. The secretary of the Central Committee and Tongping Zhang Zhiwei passed away.

古文：李同捷军势日蹙，王庭凑不能救，乃遣人说魏博大将亓志绍使杀史宪诚父子取魏博。
现代文：李同捷在官军的四面围攻下，军势日渐紧迫。王庭凑无法再加援救，于是，派人去游说魏博大将亓志绍，劝他杀节度使史宪诚父子，夺取魏博。
English: Li Tongjie was besieged on all sides by the government army, and the military situation became more and more pressing. Wang Tingpai was unable to provide further assistance, so he sent someone to lobby Wei Bo's general Zou Zhishao, to persuade him to kill Shi Xiancheng and his son, and seize Wei Bo.

古文：志绍遂作乱，引所部兵二万人还逼魏州。
现代文：亓志绍于是叛乱。率领本部兵力二万人回逼魏州。
English: Zou Zhishao then rebelled. He led the headquarters force of 20,000 men back to Wei Prefecture.

古文：丁丑，命谏议大夫柏耆宣慰魏博，且发义成、河阳兵以讨志绍。
现代文：丁丑，唐文宗命谏议大夫柏耆前往魏博安抚将士，同时，征发义成、河阳两道兵马讨伐亓志绍。
English: At the request of Emperor Dingwu and Tang Wenzong, Dr. Baojun went to Weibo to pacify the soldiers. At the same time, he sent soldiers and horses from Yicheng and Heyang to fight against Shishao.

古文：戊寅，以翰林学士路隋为中书侍郎、同平章事。
现代文：戊寅，唐文宗任命翰林学士路隋为中书侍郎、同平章事。
English: Wu Yin, Tang Wenzong appointed Han Lin Biao Lu Sui as the secretary of the Central Committee, and Tong Ping as the secretary.

古文：辛已，史宪诚奏亓志绍兵屯永济，告急求援。
现代文：辛巳，史宪诚奏报：亓志绍已率兵进驻永济。于是，向朝廷告急并请求援助。
English: Soon after, Shiken Shosho reported that Zou Zhishao had led his troops to Yongji, whereupon he urgently appealed to the imperial court and requested assistance.

古文：诏义成节度使李听帅沧州行营诸军以讨志绍。
现代文：唐文宗下诏，命义成节度使李听率领讨伐李同捷的沧州行营诸军，前往魏博征讨亓志绍。
English: Emperor Wenzong of Tang Dynasty issued an edict that Li Huan should lead the army to march to Cangzhou to fight against Li Tongjie, and go to Weibo to fight against Shishao.

