古文：二十年春，齐人来征会。
现代文：二十年春季，齐国人来鲁国征召会见。
English: In the spring of the 20th year, the people of Qi came to Lu to recruit and meet.

古文：夏，会于廪丘。为郑故，谋伐晋。
现代文：夏季，在廪丘会见，为了郑国的缘故，策划攻打晋国。
English: In the summer, they met at Mengqiu and, for the sake of Zheng, planned to attack Jin.

古文：郑人辞诸侯，秋，师还。
现代文：郑国人向诸侯辞谢。秋季，军队回国。
English: The people of Zheng resigned to the lords. In autumn, the army returned to the country.

古文：吴公子庆忌骤谏吴子曰： 不改，必亡。 
现代文：吴国的公子庆忌屡次劝谏吴王说： 如果不改变政令，一定亡国。 
English: The prince of the State of Wu, Qingyi, repeatedly advised the King of Wu, saying: If you do not change the decree, you will surely perish.

古文：弗听。出居于艾。遂適楚。
现代文：吴王不听，庆忌离开国都住在艾地，又乘机到楚国去。
English: Wu Wang did not listen, and he left the country to live in Ai, and then took the opportunity to go to Chu.

古文：闻越将伐吴。冬，请归平越，遂归。
现代文：庆忌听说越国准备进攻吴国，冬季，请求回国和越国讲和，于是就回国了。
English: Qingyi heard that Yue was preparing to attack Wu, and in the winter, he asked to return to Yue to make peace, so he went back to China.

古文：欲除不忠者以说于越。
现代文：想要除掉不忠的人来讨越国的喜欢。
English: They want to get rid of disloyal people to win the favor of Vietnam.

古文：吴人杀之。
现代文：吴国人杀死了庆忌。
English: The people of Wu killed Qingyi.

古文：十一月，越围吴，赵孟降于丧食。
现代文：十一月，越国军队包围了吴国，赵孟的饮食比居丧时的饮食还要降等。
English: In November, the Vietnamese army encircled the State of Wu. Zhao Meng's diet was even worse than that of the deceased.

古文：楚隆曰： 三年之丧，亲暱之极也。主又降之，无乃有故乎？ 
现代文：楚隆说： 三年的丧礼，是表示亲情关系的极点，现在您又降等，恐怕另有缘故吧！ 
English: Chulong said: A three-year funeral is the pinnacle of a family relationship, and now you're downgrading, I'm afraid there's another reason!

古文：赵孟曰： 黄池之役，先主与吴王有质，曰： 好恶同之。 
现代文：赵孟说： 黄池那一次盟会，先主和吴王有过盟誓，说： 同好共恶。 
English: Zhao Meng said: At the alliance meeting in Huangchi, the Lord and the King of Wu had sworn an oath, saying: "Good and evil are the same."

古文：今越围吴，嗣子不废旧业而敌之，非晋之所能及也，吾是以为降。 楚隆曰： 若使吴王知之，若何？ 赵孟曰： 可乎？ 
现代文：现在越国包围吴国，继承人想不废弃过去的誓言而帮助吴国，但又不是晋国的力量所能达到的，我因此只能用饮食降等来表示心意。 楚隆说： 如果让吴王知道，怎么样？ 赵孟说： 行吗？ 
English: Now Yue is encircling Wu, and the heir wants to help Wu without abandoning the oaths of the past, but it is not within the power of Jin, so I can only express my will by reducing my diet.Chu Long said: What if I let King Wu know?Zhao Meng said: Is it okay?

古文：隆曰： 请尝之。 
现代文：楚隆说： 请试一试。 
English: Chu Long said: Please try it.

古文：乃往。先造于越军，曰： 吴犯间上国多矣，闻君亲讨焉，诸夏之人莫不欣喜，唯恐君志之不从。请入视之。 
现代文：于是就前去，先到越军那里，说： 吴国冒犯上国已经多次了，听说君王亲自讨伐，中原的人们莫不欢欣鼓舞，惟恐君王的意愿不能实现，请让我进去看看吴军的情况。 
English: So he went ahead and went to the Vietnamese army first and said, "Wu has already offended Shang several times. When I heard that the king personally led a crusade, the people of the Central Plains were overjoyed and encouraged. However, I am afraid that the king's wishes will not be realized. Please let me go in and see the situation of the Wu army."

古文：许之。
现代文：越王答应了。
English: The customs officer allowed him to pass through.

古文：告于吴王曰： 寡君之老无恤，使陪臣隆敢展谢其不共。黄池之役，君之先臣志父得承齐盟，曰： 好恶同之。 
现代文：楚隆告诉吴王说： 寡君的老臣无恤派陪臣隆前来，谨敢为他前来道歉；黄池那一次结盟，君王的先臣志父得以参加盟会，盟誓说 同好共恶 。
English: Chulong told King Wu, "Your father's senior vassal, the unsympathetic vassal, has come to accompany you, and I dare to apologize for him coming here. During the alliance in Huangchi, the king's senior vassal, his father, was able to attend the alliance meeting, and he swore to be on the same side as you.

古文：今君在难，无恤不敢惮劳。非晋国之所能及也，使陪臣敢展布之。 
现代文：现在君王处在危难之中，无恤不敢害怕辛劳，但又不是晋国的力量所能达到的，谨派我向君王报告。 
English: Now that your majesty is in danger and is not afraid of hard work, which is beyond the power of Jin, I have been sent to report to your majesty.

古文：王拜稽首曰： 寡人不佞，不能事越，以为大夫忧。拜命之辱。 
现代文：吴王下拜叩头说： 寡人没有才能，不能事奉越国，因而让大夫忧虑，谨拜谢您的命令。 
English: King Wu bowed his head and said, "Many people do not have the ability to serve Yue, which worries the doctor. I thank you for your order."

古文：与之一箪珠，使问赵孟曰： 句践将生忧寡人，寡人死之不得矣。 
现代文：给了楚隆一小盒珍珠，让他送给赵孟，说： 勾践要让我活着不好过，我是不得好死了。 
English: He gave Chu Long a small box of pearls and asked him to give them to Zhao Meng, saying, "It's not good for me to live, I'd rather die."

古文：王曰： 溺人必笑，吾将有问也。史黯何以得为君子？ 
现代文：又说： 快淹死的人必然强作欢笑，我还要问你，史黯为什么能成为君子？ 
English: He also said: People who are about to drown are bound to force a laugh. I would also like to ask you, why can Shi Qian become a gentleman?

古文：对曰： 黯也进不见恶，退无谤言。 王曰： 宜哉。 
现代文：楚隆回答说： 史黯这个人做官没有人讨厌他，不做官没有人诽谤他。 吴王说： 真是说得恰当啊！ 
English: Chulong replied, "Shu Qian is a person who no one dislikes when he is an official, and no one slanders him when he is not an official. "Wu Wang said, "What an appropriate thing to say!"

