古文：琉球居东南大海中，自古不通中国。
现代文：琉球，位于东南方的大海之中，自古与中国不相往来。
English: Ryukyu, located in the middle of the ocean in the southeast, has not been in contact with China since ancient times.

古文：元世祖遣官招谕之，不能达。
现代文：元世祖时派官员前去招谕他们，他们也不来。
English: At the time of the founding fathers, officials were sent to invite them, but they did not come.

古文：洪武初，其国有三王，曰中山，曰山南，曰山北，皆以尚为姓，而中山最强。
现代文：洪武初年，琉球国有三个王，分别是中山王、山南王和山北王，他们都姓尚，其中中山王最为强大。
English: In the first year of Hongwu, there were three kings in Ryukyu, namely Zhongshan King, Shannan King and Shanbei King. All of them were surnamed Shang, with Zhongshan King being the most powerful.

古文：五年正月命行人杨载以即位建元诏告其国，其中山王察度遣弟泰期等随载入朝，贡方物。
现代文：五年正月朝廷派行人杨载持皇帝即位建元的诏令谕召其国，琉球国的中山王察度便派其弟泰期等人随杨载一起进京，向朝廷贡献土特产品。
English: In the first month of the fifth year, the imperial court sent a messenger, Yang Zhaoji, to summon his country with the Emperor's edict of enthroning Jianyuan. Ryukyu's Zhongshan King Chado then sent his brother Taiji and others to Beijing with Yang Zhaoji to contribute local products to the imperial court.

古文：帝喜，赐《大统历》及文绮、纱罗有差。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，按等级给泰期等人赏赐《大统历》和文绮、纱罗等礼品。
English: The emperor was very pleased and gave gifts such as the "Great General Calendar" and papyri and saros to Thais according to their rank.

古文：七年冬，泰期复来贡，并上皇太子笺。
现代文：七年冬天，泰期又来献贡，并给皇太子呈上一份奏笺。
English: In the winter of the seventh year, Emperor Taizong came to pay tribute again, and presented the crown prince with a copy of the imperial rescript.

古文：命刑部侍郎李浩赍赐文绮、陶铁器，且以陶器七万、铁器千，就其国市马。
现代文：朝廷命令刑部侍郎李浩给他赏赐文绮、陶器和铁器，并让李浩带上陶器七万件、铁器一千件到琉球国中去买马。
English: The imperial court ordered Li Hao, the attendant of the Department of Justice, to reward him with books, pottery and ironware, and let Li Hao take seventy thousand pieces of pottery and one thousand pieces of ironware to Ryukyu Kingdom to buy a horse.

古文：九年夏，泰期随浩入贡，得马四十匹。
现代文：九年夏天，泰期又随李浩前来献贡，朝廷得马四十匹。
English: In the summer of the ninth year, Taiji followed Li Hao to pay tribute, and the imperial court received forty horses.

古文：浩言其国不贵纨绮，惟贵磁器、铁釜，自是赏赉多用诸物。
现代文：李浩说琉球国不以纨绮为贵，只重磁器和铁釜，从此朝廷给他们的赏赐多是磁器和铁釜。
English: Li Hao said that the Ryukyu Kingdom didn't value earthworms, only magnets and iron kettles. From then on, the imperial court rewarded them mostly with magnets and iron kettles.

古文：明年遣使贺正旦，贡马十六匹、硫黄千斤。
现代文：第二年琉球派使臣向明朝廷祝贺正旦，献贡马十六匹、硫磺一千斤。
English: In the following year, Ryukyuan envoys sent to the Ming court to congratulate Zhengdan, offering 16 horses and 1,000 kg of sulphur.

古文：又明年复贡。
现代文：过了一年又来上贡。
English: A year later came the tribute.

古文：山南王承察度亦遣使朝贡，礼赐如中山。
现代文：山南王承察度也派使者向明朝廷献贡，朝廷按中山王的例子礼赐山南王的使臣。
English: The king of Shannan also sent an envoy to pay tribute to the Ming court, and the court honored the envoy of the king of Shannan according to the example of the king of Zhongshan.

古文：十五年春，中山来贡，遣内官送其使还国。
现代文：十五年春天，中山王派使者前来献贡，朝廷派宦官将其使者送回国。
English: In the spring of the fifteenth year, King Zhongshan sent an envoy to pay tribute, and the imperial court sent a eunuch to send his envoy back to the country.

古文：明年与山南王并来贡，诏赐二王镀金银印。
现代文：第二年中山王与山南王一起来向朝廷献贡，皇帝下诏给二王赐予镀金银印。
English: In the second year, the Mountain King and the Shannan King came together to pay tribute to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict to give the two kings a gold-plated silver seal.

古文：时二王与山北王争雄，互相攻伐。命内史监丞梁民赐之敕，令罢兵息民，三王并奉命。
现代文：此时二王与山北王相互争雄作战，皇帝派内史监丞梁民给他们赐敕令，让他们各自罢兵息战，三位王都遵奉皇帝的敕命。
English: At this time, the two kings and the king of Shanbei fought against each other. The emperor sent Liang Min, the superintendent of internal history, to give them a royal order, so that they would each withdraw their troops and cease fighting. The three kings all obeyed the emperor's command.

古文：山北王怕尼芝即遣使偕二王使朝贡。
现代文：山北王怕尼芝即派使者偕同中山王和山南王的使者一起前来向朝廷献贡。
English: The king of Shanbei, fearing Nizhi, sent an envoy together with the envoys of the king of Zhongshan and the king of Shannan to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：十八年又贡，赐山北王镀金银印如二王，而赐二王海舟各一。
现代文：十八年他们又来上贡，朝廷给山北王赏赐一枚镀金银印，而给另二位王赏赐海船各一艘。
English: In the 18th year, they came again to pay tribute. The court rewarded the king of Shanbei with a gold-plated silver seal, and the other two kings with a ship each.

古文：自是，三王屡遣使奉贡，中山王尤数。
现代文：从此，三位王屡次派使者向朝廷进贡，其中中山王次数最多。
English: From then on, the three kings repeatedly sent emissaries to pay tribute to the imperial court, of which King Zhongshan was the most frequent.

古文：二十三年，中山来贡，其通事私携乳香十斤、胡椒三百斤入都，为门者所获，当入官。
现代文：二十三年，中山王的使者前来献贡，他们的通事私自携带了乳香十斤、胡椒三百斤，进入都城时被守门者缴获，按理应当上交官库。
English: In 233, the emissaries of the King of Zhongshan came to pay tribute. Their courier secretly brought 10 catties of frankincense and 300 catties of pepper. When they entered the capital, they were seized by the gatekeepers and should have been handed over to the treasury.

古文：诏还之，仍赐以钞。
现代文：皇帝下诏将缴获的私物归还他们，并赏赐钱钞。
English: The emperor decreed that the confiscated personal belongings should be returned to them and that they should be rewarded with money.

古文：二十五年夏，中山贡使以其王从子及寨官子偕来，请肄业国学。
现代文：二十五年夏天，中山王的献贡使者带着中山王的次子和寨官的儿子一起来到京城，请求让他们在国子监就学。
English: In the summer of the twenty-fifth year, Zhongshan Wang's tribute-giving envoy came to Beijing with Zhongshan Wang's second son and the son of the village official, requesting that they be allowed to study under the tutelage of the state.

古文：从之，赐衣巾靴袜并夏衣一袭。
现代文：皇帝同意，给他们赏赐衣巾靴袜和一袭夏衣。
English: The emperor agreed and rewarded them with towels, shoes, socks and a set of summer clothes.

古文：其冬，山南王亦遣从子及寨官子入国学，赐赉如之。
现代文：该年冬天，山南王也派自己的次子和寨官的儿子进国子监学习，皇帝也按前例给予赏赐。
English: In the winter of that year, the king of Shannan also sent his second son and the son of the village official to study in the country, and the emperor also gave rewards according to the precedent.

古文：自是，岁赐冬夏衣以为常。
现代文：从此，每年给他们赏赐冬衣、夏衣成为常事。
English: Since then, it has become customary to give them winter coats and summer coats every year.

古文：明年，中山两入贡，又遣寨官子肄业国学。
现代文：第二年，中山王两次派人献贡，又派寨官的儿子进国子监学习。
English: In the second year, King Zhongshan twice sent people to pay tribute, and also sent the son of the village official to study in the country.

古文：是时，国法严，中山生与山南生有非议诏书者。
现代文：此时，国法严明，中山王所派的学生和山南王所派的学生中有人非议皇帝的诏书。
English: At this time, the country's laws were strict, and some of the students sent by the King of Zhongshan and the King of Shannan criticized the emperor's edict.

古文：帝闻，置之死，而待其国如故。
现代文：皇帝知道后，将非议者处死，但对其国却依然如故。
English: When the emperor found out, he put the critic to death, but the same thing happened to his country.

古文：山北王怕尼芝已卒，其嗣王攀安知二十九年春遣使来贡。
现代文：山北王怕尼芝此时已经去世，继承王位的是攀安知。二十九年春天攀安知派人来朝贡。
English: Shanbei King Xian Nizhi had already passed away at this time, and the successor to the throne was Pan Anchi. In the spring of 29th year, Pan Anchi sent people to pay tribute.

古文：令山南生肄国学者归省，其冬复来。
现代文：朝廷让山南王派来的到国子监学习的学生全部回国省亲，到冬天再来。
English: The imperial court ordered all the students sent by the king of Shannan to study in the provincial nursery to return to their home provinces and come back in the winter.

古文：中山亦遣寨官子二人及女官生姑、鲁妹二人，先后来肄业，其感慕华风如此。
现代文：中山王也派寨官的儿子二人和女官生姑、鲁妹二人先后来国子监学习，其感慕中华之风竟达如此程度。
English: King Zhongshan also sent the two sons of the village official and the two daughters of the official's mother-in-law and sister-in-law, Lu Mei, to study first and then the state's son-in-law, and his admiration for the Chinese style actually reached such a level.

古文：中山又遣使请赐冠带，命礼部绘图，令自制。
现代文：中山王又派使者到朝廷请求皇帝赐冠带，皇帝命令礼部给他们绘图，让他们回去自己制造。
English: King Zhongshan also sent an envoy to the court to ask the emperor to bestow the crown belt. The emperor ordered the ceremonial department to give them a drawing and let them go back and make it themselves.

古文：其王固以请，乃赐之，并赐其臣下冠服。
现代文：中山王坚持自己的请求，皇帝便给中山王赏赐冠带，还给中山王的下属大臣赏赐冠服。
English: Zhongshan Wang insisted on his request, and the emperor rewarded Zhongshan Wang with a crown belt, and also rewarded Zhongshan Wang's subordinate ministers with crown robes.

古文：又嘉其修职勤，赐闽中舟工三十六户，以便贡使往来。
现代文：皇帝又认为中山王修贡述职很勤，嘉奖他福建的船工三十六户，以便于他们朝贡的使者往来。
English: The emperor also thought that Zhongshan King Xiu Gong was very diligent in reporting duties, and rewarded him with thirty-six shipbuilders in Fujian to facilitate the exchange of envoys for their tribute.

古文：及惠帝嗣位，遣官以登极诏谕其国，三王亦奉贡不绝。
现代文：惠帝即位时，派官以登极的诏令谕告琉球国，琉球国的三位王也对新皇帝奉贡不绝。
English: When Emperor Hui ascended the throne, he sent an official to the Ryukyu Kingdom with the imperial edict of ascending to the throne. The three kings of the Ryukyu Kingdom also paid tribute to the new emperor.

古文：成祖承大统，诏谕如前。
现代文：成祖即皇帝位时，也像前任皇帝一样下诏书谕告他们。
English: When Cheng Zu, the emperor, ascended the throne, he also issued an edict to them, just like the previous emperor.

古文：永乐元年春，三王并来贡。
现代文：永乐元年春，三位王一起来京城朝贡。
English: In the spring of the first year of Yongle, the three kings came together to pay tribute to the capital.

古文：山北王请赐冠带，诏给赐如中山。
现代文：山北王请求皇帝赏赐冠带，皇帝下诏按中山王的前例给予赏赐。
English: Shanbei King requested the emperor to reward the crown belt, and the emperor issued an edict to reward it according to the precedent of Zhongshan King.

古文：命行人边信、刘亢赍敕使三国，赐以绒锦、文绮、纱罗。
现代文：朝廷还派行人边信、刘元持敕出使琉球的三个王国，给他们赐以绒锦、文绮和纱罗。
English: The imperial court also sent the missionaries Bianxin and Liu Yuanji to the three kingdoms of Ryukyu, and gave them brocade, papier-mache and saros.

古文：明年二月，中山王世子武宁遣使告父丧，命礼部遣官谕祭，赙以布帛，遂命武宁袭位。
现代文：第二年二月，中山王的世子武宁派使者来朝廷讣告父丧，朝廷命令礼部派官员前去谕祭，并资以布帛协助武宁办丧事，任命武宁继承中山王的王位。
English: In February of the following year, King Zhongshan's heir, King Wu Ning, sent an envoy to the imperial court to announce his father's death. The imperial court ordered the Ministry of Ceremonies to send officials to the funeral, and to assist King Zhongshan in the funeral with cloth and money, and appointed King Wu Ning to succeed the throne of King Zhongshan.

古文：四月，山南王从弟汪应祖亦遣使告承察度之丧，谓前王无子，传位应祖，乞加朝命，且赐冠带。
现代文：四月，山南王的第二个弟弟汪应祖也派使者来朝廷讣告山南王承察度的丧讯，说承察度没有儿子，王位已传给汪应祖，请求朝廷加以任命，并赏赐冠带。
English: In April, Wang Yingzu, the second brother of the king of Shannan, also sent an envoy to the court to inform the court of the death of Shannan King Chengzadu, saying that Chengzadu did not have a son, and the throne had been passed to Wang Yingzu. He asked the court to appoint him and reward him with a crown.

古文：帝并从之，遂遣官册封。
现代文：皇帝都同意了他的要求，于是派官员前去册封。
English: All the emperors agreed to his request, so they sent officials to register him.

古文：时山南使臣私赍白金诣处州市磁器，事发，当谕罪。
现代文：这时山南王的使臣私自带白金到处州去买磁器，此事被揭发后，按法应当治罪。
English: At this time, the envoy of the king of Shannan took platinum to buy porcelain from all over the state. After the matter was exposed, it should be punished according to the law.

古文：帝曰： 远方之人，知求利而已，安知禁令。 
现代文：皇帝说： 远方来的人，只知道求利罢了，怎么会知道这是禁令不可为的事呢！ 
English: The emperor said, "People who come from far away only know how to seek profit. How can they know that this is a forbidden thing to do?"

古文：悉贳之。
现代文：于是全宽恕了他们。
English: So he forgave them all.

古文：三年，山南遣寨官子入国学。
现代文：三年，山南王派遣寨官的儿子进入国子监学习。
English: In the third year, the king of Shannan sent the son of the village official to study under the tutelage of the state inspector.

古文：明年，中山亦遣寨官子六人入国学，并献奄竖数人。
现代文：第二年，中山王亦派寨官的儿子六人进入国子监学习，并向朝廷献上阉孩数名。
English: In the following year, King Zhongshan also sent six sons of Zhaiguan to study in the State Children's Prison, and presented several children to the imperial court.

古文：帝曰： 彼亦人子，无罪刑之，何忍？ 
现代文：皇帝说 ：他们也是人家的儿子，没犯罪而对他们施行阉割，怎么忍心呢？ 
English: The emperor said, "They are also other people's sons. How can you have the heart to castrate them when they have committed no crime?"

古文：命礼部还之。
现代文：让礼部将阉孩送还其国。
English: Let the Ministry of Ceremonies send the child back to his country.

古文：部臣言： 还之，虑阻归化之心，请但赐敕，止其再进。 
现代文：礼部大臣说 ：送还他们，怕会阻碍他们归化中国之心，请皇上只赐敕令，制止他们再进献阉孩。 
English: The Minister of Ceremonies said, "If returning them would hinder their naturalization into the heart of China, I would ask the emperor to issue a royal decree to stop them from bringing any more children."

古文：帝曰： 谕以空言，不若示以实事。
现代文：皇帝说： 以空话谕告他们，还不如以实事明示他们为好。
English: The emperor said: It is better to tell them with empty words than to show them with facts.

古文：今不遣还，彼欲献媚，必将继进。
现代文：现今若不将阉孩送还回去，他们想向朝廷献媚，必然会再继续进献。
English: Now, if they don't send the children back, they want to curry favor with the imperial court, and they will certainly continue to do so.

古文：天地以生物为心，帝王乃可绝人类乎？ 
现代文：生长万物是天地之心，作为帝王我怎么能绝人类之后呢？ 
English: The growth of all things is the heart of heaven and earth. As the emperor, how can I destroy mankind?

古文：竟还之。
现代文：最终将阉孩送还回去。
English: The beads were eventually returned.

古文：五年四月，中山王世子思绍遣使告父丧，谕祭，赐赙册封如前仪。
现代文：五年四月，中山王的世子思绍派使者到朝廷讣告其父的丧讯，皇帝派官谕祭，像前次那样资助他们办丧事并册封思绍为中山王。
English: In April of the fifth year, Sisiao, the son of King Zhongshan, sent an envoy to the imperial court to announce the death of his father. The emperor sent an official envoy to support them in the funeral and crowned Sisiao as King Zhongshan.

古文：八年，山南遣官生三人入国学，赐巾服靴绦、衾褥帷帐，已复频有所赐。
现代文：八年，山南王派遣三名官生到国子监学习，皇帝给他们赐予巾服靴绦和衾褥帷帐，他们回去之后皇帝对他们还频有所赐。
English: In the eighth year, the king of Shannan sent three government officials and students to study at the Imperial Children's Prison. The emperor gave them scarves, shoes, and curtains. After they returned, the emperor often gave them gifts.

古文：一日，帝与群臣语及之。
现代文：一天，皇帝与群臣谈到此事。
English: One day, the emperor discussed the matter with his courtiers.

古文：礼部尚书吕震曰： 昔唐太宗兴庠序，新罗、百济并遣子来学。
现代文：礼部尚书吕震说 ：以前唐太宗建立学校，新罗、百济等国也一起派弟子来学习。
English: Lv Zhen from the Ministry of Rites and Ceremonies said, "In the past, Tang Taizong established a school, and countries such as Silla and Baekje also sent disciples to study together.

古文：尔时仅给廪饩，未若今日赐予之周也。 
现代文：那时朝廷仅供给他们饭菜，不像今天对他们照顾得那么周全。 
English: At that time, the imperial court only provided them with food, unlike today when they are well taken care of.

古文：帝曰： 蛮夷子弟慕义而来，必衣食常充，然后向学。
现代文：皇帝说： 蛮夷族的子弟是仰慕我们中国的仁义而来学习的，必须让他们衣食充足，才能向往和学习我们的仁义。
English: The emperor said, "The children of barbarian tribes admire our Chinese benevolence and righteousness and come here to study. They must have enough food and clothing in order to yearn for and study our benevolence and righteousness.

古文：此我太祖美意，朕安得违之。 
现代文：这是我们太祖皇帝立下的美好愿望，我怎能违反呢？ 
English: This is the beautiful wish of our great-grandfather emperor, how can I violate it?

古文：明年，中山遣国相子及寨官子入国学，因言： 右长史王茂辅翼有年，请擢为国相。
现代文：第二年，中山王派其国相的儿子到国子监学习，并上奏说： 右长史王茂辅佐我有些年头了，请求朝廷允许我将他提升为国相。
English: In the second year, King Zhongshan sent the son of his minister of state to study at the Imperial Household Agency, and reported: "I have been the right-hand man of Shi Wang Mo Fu Zuo for some years, and I request the imperial court to allow me to promote him to minister of state.

古文：左长史朱复，本江西饶州人，辅臣祖察度四十余年不懈。
现代文：左长史朱复，原本是江西的饶州人，辅佐我的祖父察度四十多年，丝毫没有懈怠之处。
English: Zuo Changshi Zhu Fu, originally from Jiangxi's Raozhou, assisted my grandfather for more than forty years, and did not slack off at all.

古文：今年逾八十，请令致仕还乡。 
现代文：现今他年过八十，请求朝廷允许我让他辞官还乡。 
English: Now in his eighties, he has asked the Imperial Court to allow him to return to his hometown.

古文：从之，乃命复、茂并为国相，复兼左长史致仕，茂兼右长史任其国事。
现代文：皇帝同意，于是中山王便任命朱复、王茂一并为国相，朱复以国相兼左长史的身份辞官回家，王茂以国相兼右长史的身份处理本职事务。
English: The emperor agreed, so King Zhongshan appointed Zhu Fu and Wang Mao as the ministers of state. Zhu Fu returned home as the minister of state and the left long history, and Wang Mao handled his duties as the minister of state and the right long history.

古文：十一年，中山遣寨官子十三人入国学。
现代文：十一年，中山王又派寨官的儿子十三人进入国子监学习。
English: In the eleventh year, King Zhongshan also sent thirteen sons of the village officials to study in the State Children's Prison.

古文：时山南王应祖为其兄达勃期所弑，诸寨官讨诛之，推应祖子他鲁每为主，以十三年三月请封。
现代文：此时山南王汪应祖被其兄达勃斯所杀，诸寨都起来讨伐并诱杀了达勃斯，推举汪应祖的儿子他鲁每为国主，在十三年三月请求朝廷予以册封。
English: At this time, Wang Yingzu, the king of Shannan, was killed by his brother Dabbs, and all the villages rose up to fight and kill Dabbs. They elected Wang Yingzu's son Tarugui as the ruler of the country, and in March of the thirteenth year, they asked the court to canonize him.

古文：命行人陈季若等封为山南王，赐诰命冠服及宝钞万五千锭。
现代文：皇帝命令行人陈季若等人前往琉球的山南王国册封他鲁每为山南王，并赏赐给他诰命、冠服和一万五千锭宝钞。
English: The emperor ordered the travelers Chen Jirong and others to go to the Shannan Kingdom in the Ryukyus to crown him as the king of Shannan, and rewarded him with his life, crown and fifteen thousand baht banknotes.

古文：琉球之分三王也，惟山北最弱，故其朝贡亦最稀。
现代文：琉球分为三个王国，只有山北王国势力最弱，所以其对朝廷的贡献也最稀少。
English: Ryukyu is divided into three kingdoms, only the Shankoku Kingdom has the weakest power, so its contribution to the imperial court is also the rarest.

古文：自永乐三年入贡后，至是年四月始入贡。
现代文：从永乐三年向朝廷进贡以后，到这一年四月才来献贡。
English: After paying tribute to the imperial court for three years from Yongle, it was not until April of this year that they came to pay tribute.

古文：其后，竟为二王所并，而中山益强，以其国富，一岁常再贡三贡。
现代文：后来，山北王国竟然被中山王和山南王瓜分了，这样中山王就更为强大，仗着其国家富有，常常向朝廷一年献贡二次三次。
English: Later, the Kingdom of Shannbei was even divided between the King of Zhongshan and the King of Shannan. As a result, the King of Zhongshan became more powerful and, thanks to his country's wealth, he often paid tribute to the imperial court two or three times a year.

古文：天朝虽厌其繁，不能却也。
现代文：明朝廷虽然对其频繁的献贡感到厌倦，但也无法推却。
English: Although the Ming court was tired of its frequent tribute, it could not refuse.

古文：其冬，贡使还，至福建，擅夺海舶，杀官军，且殴伤中官，掠其衣物。
现代文：该年冬天，中山王的献贡使者回国时途经福建，擅自抢夺海船，杀死官军，并打伤宦官，抢走他的衣物。
English: In the winter of that year, Zhongshan Wang's tribute-giving envoy passed through Fujian on his way back to China, seized a ship without authorization, killed the government army, and wounded a eunuch and took away his clothes.

古文：事闻，戮其为首者，余六十七人付其主自治。
现代文：此事传到朝廷后，朝廷派人杀死为首的闹事者，其余的六十七人交付给中山王自己处理。
English: After the matter was reported to the imperial court, the court sent someone to kill the troublemaker led by Cang, and the remaining sixty-seven people were handed over to King Zhongshan to deal with on his own.

古文：明年遣使谢罪，帝待之如初，其修贡益谨。
现代文：第二年中山王派使者向朝廷谢罪，皇帝像原先那样礼待他们，他们给朝廷献贡也就更加慎重小心。
English: In the second year, the mountain king sent an envoy to the court to apologize. The emperor treated them with the same courtesy as before, and they were more cautious in paying tribute to the court.

古文：二十二年春，中山王世子尚巴志来告父丧，谕祭赐赙如常仪。
现代文：二十二年春天，中山王的世子尚巴志向朝廷讣告其父的丧讯，皇帝像以往那样给予谕祭和赏赐钱财资助其办丧事。
English: In the spring of the 22nd year, Shangba Zhi, the son of King Zhongshan, announced his father's death to the imperial court. As in the past, the emperor gave the funeral rites and money to support the funeral.

古文：仁宗嗣位，命行人方彝诏告其国。
现代文：仁宗接皇帝位后，派行人方彝持诏令谕告中山王国。
English: After Emperor Nanzong ascended the throne, he sent an envoy to the Kingdom of Zhongshan with an imperial edict.

古文：洪熙元年命中官赍敕封巴志为中山王。
现代文：洪熙元年皇帝派宦官持敕令册封尚巴志为中山王。
English: In the first year of Hongxi, the emperor sent an eunuch to hold the imperial edict to enthrone Shangbazhi as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：宣德元年，其王以冠服未给，遣使来请，命制皮弁服赐之。
现代文：宣德元年，中山王因朝廷未赐予为王的冠服，特地派使者来请求，皇帝下令制造皮弁服赏赐给他。
English: In the first year of the Xuande era, King Zhongshan sent a special envoy to request the imperial court not to grant him the crown. The emperor ordered the production of leather trousers to reward him.

古文：三年八月，帝以中山王朝贡弥谨，遣官赍敕往劳，赐罗锦诸物。
现代文：三年八月，皇帝认为中山王向朝廷朝贡又勤又小心，便派官员持敕令前去慰劳，并给他赏赐罗锦等物品。
English: In August of the third year, the emperor thought that King Zhongshan was diligent and careful in paying tribute to the imperial court, so he sent an official with an imperial decree to comfort him, and rewarded him with brocade and other items.

古文：山南自四年两贡，终帝世不复至，亦为中山所并矣。
现代文：山南王自从在四年献了两次贡品后，直到宣德皇帝逝世都没有再来，后亦被中山王国所吞并了。
English: After paying tribute twice in four years, the king of Shannan did not return until the death of Emperor Xuande, and was later annexed by the Kingdom of Zhongshan.

古文：自是，惟中山一国朝贡不绝。
现代文：从此，只有中山王国向朝廷进贡不绝。
English: From then on, only the Zhongshan Kingdom continued to pay tribute to the imperial court.

古文：正统元年，其使者言： 初入闽时，止具贡物报闻。下人所赍海〈贝巴〉、螺壳，失于开报，悉为官司所没入，致来往乏资，乞赐垂悯。 
现代文：正统元年，中山王的使者上奏说 ：当初进入福建时，我只上报了所携带的贡品，而我私人所携带的海贝巴、螺壳因未向当地官府申报，结果全被当地有关官府没收，致使我来往时资金缺乏，请求皇上垂悯我们，赐还被没收之物。 
English: In the first year of the orthodox era, the emissary of the King of Zhongshan made a report: "When I first entered Fujian, I only reported the tribute I was carrying. However, because I did not declare to the local government the sea beaver and conch shells that I personally carried were all confiscated by the relevant local government. As a result, I was short of funds when I came and went. I asked the emperor to have mercy on us and return the confiscated items.

古文：命给直如例。
现代文：皇帝下令按前例依其货物的价值给钱。
English: The emperor decreed that, in accordance with precedent, they should be paid the value of their goods.

古文：明年，贡使至浙江，典市舶者复请籍其所赍，帝曰： 番人以贸易为利，此二物取之何用，其悉还之，著为令。 
现代文：第二年，其朝贡的使者到达浙江，主持市舶事务的官员又请求朝廷没收其使者私自携带的物品，皇帝说： 番人通过贸易来获取利益，他们所私带的两种东西没收来也没什么用，还是全还给他们，作为命令传下去。 
English: The following year, his envoy of tribute arrived in Zhejiang, and the official in charge of the city's shipping affairs requested the court to confiscate the items that his envoy had brought with him. The emperor said: "The guards gain profits through trade, and it is of no use to confiscate the two things they brought with them. Instead, they were all returned to them and passed on as an order."

古文：使者奏： 本国陪臣冠服，皆国初所赐，岁久敝坏，乞再给。 
现代文：中山王的使者上奏说 ：我国陪臣的冠服，都是建国之初由朝廷所赐给的，现在因年久已破旧损坏，请朝廷再给予赏赐。 
English: The emissary of the king of Zhongshan made a report, saying: The crowned robes of our country's vassals were all given by the imperial court at the beginning of the founding of the country. Now, because they have been worn out and damaged for a long time, please ask the imperial court to reward them again.

古文：又言： 小邦遵奉正朔，海道险远，受历之使，或半岁一岁始返，常惧后时。 
现代文：又说 ：我们小国都遵奉朝廷所颁的历法，由于海道又危险又远，接受历法的使者有的半年有的甚至一年才能返回去，因此常常害怕赶不上季节。 
English: He also said: "Our small countries all follow the calendar issued by the imperial court. Since the sea route is dangerous and far away, the emissaries who receive the calendar can only return for half a year or even a year, so they are often afraid of not catching up with the season.

古文：帝曰： 冠服令本邦自制。
现代文：皇帝说 ：冠服，由你们本国自己制造就可以了。
English: The emperor said, "Crown robes can be made in your own country.

古文：《大统历》，福建布政司给予之。 
现代文：《大统历》，由福建的布政司交给你们。 
English: The "Grand Unified Calendar" was handed over to you by the Secretary for Political Affairs of Fujian Province.

古文：七年正月，中山世子尚忠来告父丧，命给事中余忭、行人刘逊封忠为中山王。
现代文：七年正月，中山王的世子尚忠前来讣告其父去世的消息，皇帝让给事中余忭、行人刘逊前去册封尚忠为中山王。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the heir of King Zhongshan, Shang Zhong, came to announce the news of his father's death. The emperor asked Liu Xun, who was a bystander during the incident, to go and register Shang Zhong as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：敕使之用给事中，自兹始也。
现代文：皇帝派给事中做使者，就是从这里开始的。
English: It was from here that the emperor sent an emissary to mediate.

古文：忭等还，受其黄金、沉香、倭扇之赠，为侦事者所觉，并下吏，杖而释之。
现代文：余忭等人回国时，接受了中山王尚忠所赠送的黄金、沉香和倭扇等物，被侦探发觉，将他们全逮捕后交给有关官吏处理。
English: When Yu Xuan and others returned to China, they accepted gifts of gold, incense and Japanese fans from King Shangzhong of Zhongshan. Detectives found them and arrested them all and handed them over to the relevant officials.

古文：十二年二月，世子尚思达来告父丧，命给事中陈傅、行人万祥往封。
现代文：有关官吏将他们实行杖罚后释放了他们。十二年二月，中山王的世子尚思达来朝廷讣告其父的死讯，皇帝命给事中陈傅、行人万祥二人前去册封尚思达为中山王。
English: The officials concerned punished them with the cane and then released them. In February of the twelfth year, Shang Sida, the son of the King of Zhongshan, came to the court to announce the death of his father. The emperor ordered Chen Fu and Wang Xiang, both of whom were involved in the matter, to go and register Shang Sida as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：景泰二年，思达卒，无子，其叔父金福摄国事，遣使告丧。
现代文：景泰二年，尚思达去世，没有留下子嗣，尚思达的叔父金福摄理国事，派使者向朝廷告丧。
English: In the second year of King Taejo's reign, Shang Sida passed away without leaving a son. Shang Sida's uncle Jinfu took charge of state affairs and sent an envoy to the imperial court to mourn.

古文：命给事中乔毅、行人童守宏封金福为王。
现代文：朝廷派给事中乔毅、行人童守宏册封金福为中山王。
English: The imperial court sent Qiao Yi and Pedestrian Tongshou Hongzhu to confer the title of King of Zhongshan on Jinfu.

古文：五年二月，金福弟泰久奏： 长兄金福殂，次兄布里与兄子志鲁争立，两伤俱殒，所赐印亦毁坏。
现代文：五年二月，金福的弟弟泰久上奏说： 我的长兄金福去世，次兄布里与长兄的儿子志鲁争夺王位，在两败俱伤之后两人都已去世，朝廷所赐的王印亦遭毁坏。
English: In February of the fifth year, Jinfu's younger brother, Taiju Shangsoo, said: My eldest brother, Jinfu, passed away. My second brother, Buri, competed for the throne with the eldest brother's son, Shiru. After both lost, they both passed away. The royal seal given by the court was also destroyed.

古文：国中臣民推臣权摄国事，乞再赐印镇抚远藩。 
现代文：现本国的臣民推举我暂时摄理国事，请求朝廷再颁赐王印以便镇抚远方的藩国。 
English: The current subjects of my country elected me to temporarily take charge of state affairs, and requested the Imperial Court to issue a royal seal again in order to pacify the distant domain.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：明年四月命给事中严诚、行人刘俭封泰久为王。
现代文：第二年四月，朝廷派给事中严诚、行人刘俭前往中山王国册封泰久为中山王。
English: In April of the following year, the imperial court sent Yancheng and Liu Jian to Zhongshan Kingdom to crown Yasuhisa as the King of Zhongshan.

古文：天顺六年三月，世子尚德来告父丧，命给事中潘荣、行人蔡哲封为王。
现代文：天顺六年三月，中山王的世子尚德来朝廷讣告其父去世的消息，朝廷派给事中潘荣、行人蔡哲册封尚德为中山王。
English: In March of the 6th year of Tianshun, Sun De, the son of Sun Yat-sen, came to the court to announce the news of his father's death. The court sent Pan Rong and pedestrian Cai Zhe to proclaim Sun De as the king of Sun Yat-sen.

古文：成化五年，其贡使蔡璟言： 祖父本福建南安人，为琉球通事，传至璟，擢长史。
现代文：成化五年，中山王派来上贡的使者蔡瞡说 ：我的祖父本是福建南安人氏，在琉球做事，传到我蔡瞡时，被提升为长史。
English: Five years later, Cai Jiao, an envoy sent by King Zhongshan to pay tribute, said: My grandfather was originally from Nan'an in Fujian and worked in Ryukyu. When he was passed down to me, Cai Jiao, he was promoted to Long History.

古文：乞如制赐诰赠封其父母。 
现代文：请求朝廷如制度赐诰命赠封我的父母。 
English: I request the Imperial Court to bestow the title of nobility on my parents according to the system.

古文：章下礼官，以无例而止。
现代文：皇帝将该奏章交礼官处理，礼官认为这无前例可循而制止了这个请求。
English: The emperor referred the request to the etiquette officer, who deemed it unprecedented and halted the request.

古文：明年，福建按察司言： 贡使程鹏至福州，与指挥刘玉私通货贿，并宜究治。 
现代文：第二年，福建按察司上奏说： 琉球的上贡使者程鹏到福州，与指挥刘玉私通货物收受贿赂，应将他们一起治罪。 
English: In the second year, the chief prosecutor of the Fujian provincial procuratorate said: Ryukyu's envoy Cheng Peng went to Fuzhou to smuggle goods and accept bribes with the commander Liu Yu, and they should be punished together.

古文：命治玉而宥鹏。
现代文：朝廷下令将刘玉治罪而宽免程鹏。
English: The imperial court ordered that Liu Yuzhi be pardoned and Cheng Peng be pardoned.

古文：七年三月，世子尚圆来告父丧，命给事中丘弘、行人韩文封为王。
现代文：七年三月，中山王的世子尚圆来朝廷讣告其父的丧讯，朝廷派给事中丘弘、行人韩文前去册封尚圆为中山王。
English: In March of the seventh year, the heir of King Zhongshan, Shang Yuan, came to the imperial court to announce the death of his father. The imperial court sent Zhongqiu Hong and Xingren Hanwen to register and enthrone Shang Yuan as King Zhongshan.

古文：弘至山东病卒，命给事中官荣代之。
现代文：丘弘行到山东时病逝，朝廷便派给事中官荣代替丘弘。
English: When Qiu Hongxing died of illness in Shandong, the imperial court sent the vice-governor Rong to replace Qiu Hongxing.

古文：十年，贡使至福建，杀怀安民夫妇二人，焚屋劫财，捕之不获。
现代文：十年，琉球使者到福建时，杀死了怀安一对百姓夫妇，焚烧了他们的房屋，抢劫了财物，官府没有追捕到凶手。
English: Ten years ago, when the Ryukyuan envoy arrived in Fujian, he killed a couple from Huai'an, burned their house, and robbed their belongings. The government did not pursue the murderer.

古文：明年复贡，礼官因请定令二年一贡，毋过百人，不得附携私物，骚扰道途。
现代文：第二年琉球使者又来献贡，礼部官员便请求皇帝下令，让他们两年献贡一次，献贡使者随行人员不得超出一百人，使者不能附带私物，不得骚扰所经道途中的百姓。
English: The next year, the Ryukyuan envoys came again to pay tribute, and officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies asked the emperor to order that they should pay tribute once every two years, that the envoys accompanying the tribute should not exceed one hundred people, that the envoys should not bring personal belongings, and that they should not harass the people on their way.

古文：帝从之，赐敕戒王。
现代文：皇帝同意这个提议，颁赐敕令将此意转达给中山王。
English: The emperor agreed to the proposal and issued an imperial edict to convey this to King Zhongshan.

古文：其使者请如祖制，比年一贡，不许。
现代文：中山王的使者请求皇帝按祖先的惯制，一年献一次贡，皇帝没答应。
English: The emissary of the king of Zhongshan asked the emperor to pay tribute once a year according to the custom of his ancestors, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：又明年，贡使至，会册立东宫，请如朝鲜、安南，赐诏赍回。
现代文：又过了一年，琉球使者到达京城，正好碰上册立太子，其使者请求朝廷像对待朝鲜、安南等国一样，给他们颁赐诏令让他们带回国去。
English: A year later, when the Ryukyuan envoy arrived in Kyoto, he happened to run into Prince Takehito. The envoy asked the Imperial Court to issue an imperial decree for them to be taken back to their country, just as they had done with North Korea, Annan, and other countries.

古文：礼官议：琉球与日本、占城并居海外，例不颁诏，乃降敕以文锦、彩币赐其王及妃。
现代文：礼部官员认为琉球与日本、占城一样都处于海外，按惯例是不颁诏令的，于是皇帝便降敕令给中山王及王妃赏赐文锦和彩币。
English: The officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies believed that Ryukyu, like Japan and Chamcheng, was overseas, and according to the usual practice, no imperial edict was issued, so the emperor issued an imperial edict to reward the King and Queen of Zhongshan with brocade and coins.

古文：十三年，使臣来，复请比年一贡，不许。
现代文：十三年，琉球的使臣来后，又请求朝廷允许他们一年献贡一次，皇帝没答应。
English: In the thirteenth year, after the Ryukyuan envoys came, they asked the court to allow them to pay tribute once a year, but the emperor did not agree.

古文：明年四月，王卒，世子尚真来告丧，乞嗣爵，复请比年一贡。
现代文：第二年四月，中山王去世，其世子尚真来朝廷告丧，请求朝廷允许他继承王位，并请求让他们一年献贡一次。
English: In April of the following year, King Zhongshan died, and his heir, Shang Zhen, came to the court to mourn, asking the court to allow him to inherit the throne, and asking them to pay tribute once a year.

古文：礼官言，其国连章奏请，不过欲图市易。
现代文：礼部官员上奏说，这个国家接连上奏章请求一年献一次贡，目的不过是想在交易中获利。
English: Officials at the Ministry of Ceremonies said in a statement that the country's repeated requests for an annual tribute were nothing more than an attempt to profit from the trade.

古文：近年所遣之使，多系闽中逋逃罪人，杀人纵火，奸狡百端，专贸中国之货，以擅外蕃之利，所请不可许。
现代文：该国近年来所派遣来的使者，大多系福建的在逃罪犯，他们杀人放火，奸诈无比，专门买卖中国货物，为外蕃之国谋利，所以不可答应他们的请求。
English: Most of the emissaries sent by the country in recent years are fugitive criminals from Fujian. They have committed murder and arson, are extremely treacherous, and specialize in buying and selling Chinese goods to make a profit for the foreign country. Therefore, it is impossible to grant their request.

古文：乃命给事中董旻、行人张祥往封，而不从其请。
现代文：皇帝于是便派给事中董、行人张祥前去册封尚真为中山王，但对他的其他请求没有答应。
English: The emperor then sent Zhang Xiang, the middle-man in the matter, to record Shang Zhen as the king of Zhongshan, but did not grant his other requests.

古文：十六年，使来，复引《祖训》条章请比年一贡，帝赐敕戒约之。
现代文：十六年，该国使者来到京城，又引述《祖训》中的有关章节条文，请求允许他们连年献贡，皇帝赐予敕令戒约他们。
English: Sixteen years later, the emissary of the country came to Beijing and quoted the relevant chapter of the "Ancestor's Teaching" to request that they be allowed to pay tribute year after year. The emperor gave them an imperial edict.

古文：十八年，使者至，复以为言，赐敕如初。
现代文：十八年，他们的使者又来献贡，又提上述要求，皇帝的答复还是原样。
English: In the eighteenth year, their emissaries came again to offer tribute and to make the same request, but the emperor's reply remained the same.

古文：使者携陪臣子五人来受学，命隶南京国子监。
现代文：使者带了他们国内陪臣的儿子五人前来学习，皇帝让他们到南京的国子监去学。
English: The envoys brought five sons of their domestic vassals to study, and the emperor sent them to Nanjing to study under the tutelage of the son of the emperor.

古文：二十二年，贡使来，其王移咨礼部，请遣五人归省，从之。
现代文：二十二年，琉球的献贡使者来到京城，携带其王的咨文移交给礼部，请礼部将五位陪臣的儿子送回国省亲，朝廷同意。
English: In 1922, the Ryukyuan tribute envoy came to the capital, carrying the king's message and handing it over to the Ministry of Ceremonies. He asked the Ministry of Ceremonies to send the five sons of the attendants back to their provincial relatives, and the Imperial Court agreed.

古文：弘治元年七月，其贡使自浙江来。
现代文：弘治元年七月，琉球的献贡使者从浙江来到京城。
English: In July of the first year of the Heian period, Ryukyu's tribute envoy came from Zhejiang to the capital.

古文：礼官言贡道向由福建，今既非正道，又非贡期，宜却之，诏可。
现代文：礼部官员说琉球向朝廷献贡的道路向来都是从福建过来的，这次他们走的不是正道，而且现在又不是献贡的日期，所以应该拒绝他们的贡品，皇帝下诏同意这么做。
English: Officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies said that the road of Ryukyu's tribute to the imperial court had always come from Fujian, this time they did not go the right way, and now is not the date of tribute, so they should refuse their tribute, and the emperor agreed to do so.

古文：其使臣复以国王移礼部文来，上言旧岁知东宫册妃，故遣使来贺，非敢违制。
现代文：琉球使者又拿出其国王给礼部的咨文，说是去年得知太子册封王妃，所以派使者前来祝贺，并不是故意违反朝贡制度。
English: The Ryukyuan envoy also took out a message from his king to the Ministry of Ceremonies, saying that last year he learned that the crown prince was crowned queen, so he sent an envoy to congratulate, and did not intentionally violate the tribute system.

古文：礼官乃请纳之，而稍减傔从赐赉，以示裁抑之意。
现代文：礼部官员这才请求皇帝接纳他们的礼品，而对使者侍从的赏赐稍有减少，以表示他们的侍从太多应作减少的意思。
English: The ceremonial officials then asked the emperor to accept their gifts, and the reward for the messenger's attendants was slightly reduced to indicate that their attendants were too much to be reduced.

古文：三年，使者至，言近岁贡使止许二十五人入都，物多人少，虑致疏虞。
现代文：三年，琉球使者到京城，向朝廷上奏说近年朝廷只允许二十五名献贡使者进入京城，物多人少，怕会有所疏损。
English: Three years later, Ryukyuan emissaries came to the capital and reported to the imperial court that in recent years, the imperial court had only allowed twenty-five emissaries to pay tribute to enter the capital.

古文：诏许增五人，其傔从在闽者，并增给二十人廪食，为一百七十人。
现代文：皇帝下诏给他们进京的使者增加五人；其留在福建的侍从，朝廷给他们增加二十个人的粮食，即为一百七十人。
English: The emperor issued an edict to increase the number of his envoys to Beijing by five, and to his retainers in Fujian, the imperial court gave them food for twenty more people, that is, one hundred and seventy people.

古文：时贡使所携土物，与闽人互市者，为奸商抑勒，有司又从而侵削之。
现代文：此时献贡使者所带的土特产品，与福建人互相交易时，遭到奸商的勒索，有关官府又从中侵削他们的利益。
English: At this time, when trading with the Fujianese, the local products brought by the tribute emissaries were extorted by profiteers, and the relevant government agencies also encroached on their interests.

古文：使者诉于朝，有诏禁止。
现代文：使者将此情况上诉到朝廷，皇帝下诏禁止这种行为。
English: The envoy appealed the situation to the imperial court, and the emperor issued an edict forbidding such actions.

古文：十七年遣使补贡，谓小邦贡物常市之满剌加，因遭风致失期，命宴赉如制。
现代文：十七年琉球派使者补献贡品，声称他们小国所献的贡品经常是从满剌加买的，因遭风暴的袭击以致耽误了按期献贡。
English: Seventeen years later, Ryukyu sent an envoy to make up the tribute, claiming that the tribute offered by their small country was often bought from Manchukuo, and that the storm had delayed the scheduled tribute.

古文：正德二年，使者来，请比年一贡。
现代文：皇帝命令设宴款待如以前一样。正德二年，琉球使者来到京城，请求允许他们一年献一次贡。
English: In the second year of Zhengde, emissaries from the Ryukyus came to the capital to request permission to pay tribute once a year.

古文：礼官言不可许，是时刘瑾乱政，特许之。
现代文：礼部官员认为不能答应，而此时正是刘瑾把持朝政，特别允许了他们。
English: The officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies thought that they could not agree, but at this time, it was Liu Bei who was in charge of the government, and gave them special permission.

古文：五年遣官生蔡进等五人入南京国学。
现代文：五年琉球派遣官生蔡进等五人进南京国子监学习。
English: Five years ago, Ryukyu sent five government officials and students, including Cai Jin, to study in Nanjing.

古文：嘉靖二年从礼官议，敕琉球二年一贡如旧制，不得过百五十人。
现代文：嘉靖二年皇帝听从礼部官员的建议，敕令琉球像以前一样两年献一次贡，献贡人数不得超过一百五十人。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, the emperor followed the advice of the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies and ordered the Ryukyus to pay tribute once every two years as before, and the number of tribute should not exceed one hundred and fifty people.

古文：五年，尚真卒，其世子尚清以六年来贡，因报讣，使者还至海，溺死。
现代文：五年，尚真去世，琉球国世子尚清在六年派使者向朝廷献贡，并报告其父的讣闻。其使者回国时行到海中溺死。
English: In the fifth year, Shang Zhen died, and in the sixth year, the heir of the Ryukyu Kingdom, Shang Qing, sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court and report on his father's misadventures. When the envoy returned to China, he drowned in the sea.

古文：九年遣他使来贡，并请封。
现代文：九年尚清派其他使者又来献贡，并请求给予册封。
English: In the ninth year of the Shang and Qing Dynasties, other emissaries were sent to pay tribute and request the conferment of the title.

古文：命福建守臣勘报。
现代文：皇帝命令福建的守卫大臣将情况调查审核后上报朝廷。
English: The emperor ordered the Minister of Defense of Fujian to report the situation to the imperial court after investigation and review.

古文：十一年，世子以国中臣民状来上，乃命给事中陈侃、行人高澄持节往封。
现代文：十一年，世子尚清向朝廷上交其国中臣民拥戴他的状文，皇帝便派给事中陈侃、行人高澄持符节前去册封尚清为王。
English: In the eleventh year, the heir of Shang Qing submitted a petition to the imperial court, which was supported by the subjects of his country. The emperor then sent Chen Kan and Gao Cheng, who were in the middle of the matter, to register and crown Shang Qing as king before the festival.

古文：及还，却其赠。
现代文：陈侃等人回国时，推辞了他们所给的赠品。
English: When Chen Kan and others returned to China, they rejected the gifts they had given.

古文：十四年，贡使至，仍以所赠黄金四十两进于朝，乃敕侃等受之。
现代文：十四年，琉球上贡的使者到达京城，仍把赠送给陈侃等人的黄金四十两进献到朝廷，皇帝乃敕令陈侃等人接受。
English: Fourteen years later, the emissary of the Ryukyuan tribute arrived in the capital and still presented the forty-two gold coins presented to Chen Kan and others to the imperial court. The emperor ordered Chen Kan and others to accept them.

古文：二十九年来贡，携陪臣子五人入国学。
现代文：二十九年，琉球使者前来献贡，带陪臣的儿子五人进国子监学习。
English: In the 29th year, the Ryukyuan envoy came to pay tribute, and brought five sons of his attendants to study in the country.

古文：三十六年，贡使来，告王尚清之丧。
现代文：三十六年，琉球献贡的使者到达京城，向朝廷报告了尚清的丧讯。
English: In 1936, the emissary of the Ryukyuan tribute arrived in the capital and reported the news of Shang Qing's death to the imperial court.

古文：先是，倭寇自浙江败还，抵琉球境。
现代文：此前，倭寇从浙江败退后回去，抵达琉球境内。
English: Previously, wako returned from Zhejiang after being defeated and arrived in Ryukyu.

古文：世子尚元遣兵邀击，大歼之，获中国被掠者六人，至是送还。
现代文：琉球的世子尚元派兵邀击倭寇，将其大部分歼灭，缴获被倭寇掳掠去的中国人六名，这次也送还回来了。
English: Ryukyu's heir, Shang Yuan, sent soldiers to invite the wokou, annihilated most of them, captured six Chinese who had been abducted by the wokou, and this time also sent them back.

古文：帝嘉其忠顺，赐赉有加，即命给事中郭汝霖、行人李际春封尚元为王。
现代文：皇帝对尚元的忠顺之心深为嘉奖，除加以赏赐外，这次即派给事中郭汝霖、行人李际春前去册封尚元为王。
English: The emperor was deeply appreciative of Shang Yuan's loyalty. In addition to rewarding him, this time he sent Guo Rulin and Li Jiachun, who were involved in the matter, to register and crown Shang Yuan as king.

古文：至福建，阻风未行。
现代文：郭汝霖等人到达福建时，因大风所阻未能成行。
English: When Guo Rulin and others arrived in Fujian, they were unable to leave because of the strong winds.

古文：三十九年，其贡使亦至福建，称受世子命，以海中风涛叵测，倭寇又出没无时，恐天使有他虑，请如正德中封占城故事，遣人代进表文方物，而身偕本国长史赍回封册，不烦天使远临。
现代文：三十九年，琉球的朝贡使臣也到达福建，声称自己接受了世子尚元的命令，因海中风急涛大变幻莫测，况且倭寇又出没无常，怕朝廷所派的使者遭遇危险，因此请求朝廷像正德年间册封占城国王的事例那样，由琉球国派人代替该使者向朝廷进献表文和土特产品，而由该使者偕同本国的长史一起将册封尚元为中山王的封册带回去，不用劳动朝廷的使者远临琉球了。
English: In the 39th year, the Ryukyuan tributary envoys also arrived in Fujian, claiming that they had accepted the order of the heir of Shangyuan. Due to the unpredictable wind and waves in the sea, and the fact that the wokou also came and went, they were afraid that the envoys sent by the court would be in danger. Therefore, they requested the court to send a person from the Ryukyuan country to the court to present the documents and local products in place of the envoy, as was the case in the Zhengde years when the city was occupied by the king. The envoy, together with the long history of the country, would bring back

古文：巡按御史樊献科以闻，礼官言： 遣使册封，祖制也。
现代文：巡按御史樊献科将此上报朝廷，礼部官员上奏说： 派遣使臣前去册封，是祖宗所定的制度。
English: This was reported to the Imperial Court by the Inspector-General of the Imperial Household Archives, and officials from the Ministry of Ceremonies reported: "Sending envoys to confer titles of nobility is a system established by the ancestors.

古文：今使者欲遥受册命，是委君贶于草莽，不可一。
现代文：现今其使者想遥受册命，这是将君主的恩赐当成草芥，这是第一条不可行的理由。
English: Now his emissaries want to be ordained from afar, which is to treat the gift of the monarch as a mustard seed, which is the first reason why it is not feasible.

古文：使者本奉表朝贡，乃求遣官代进，是弃世子专遣之命，不可二。
现代文：使者本身就是在奉表文向朝廷献贡，却要求另派官员代他进献表文和土特产品，是该使者放弃世子专门派遣他来京城的使命，这是第二条不可行的理由。
English: The second reason why it is not feasible is that the envoy himself is paying tribute to the imperial court by presenting a document, but is demanding that another official be sent to present the document and local products on his behalf. This is because the envoy is abandoning the mission of specially sending him to the capital.

古文：昔正德中，占城王为安南所侵，窜居他所，故使者赍回敕命，出一时权宜。
现代文：以前正德年间，占城王因受安南的侵略，逃窜到其他地方居住，所以让其使者将皇帝的敕命带回去，这是出于一时的权宜之计。
English: During the previous Zhengde era, King Zhan fled to live elsewhere due to Annan's invasion, so he asked his emissary to bring back the emperor's life, which was a temporary expedient.

古文：今援失国之事，以儗其君，不可三。
现代文：现今该使者援引别人的失国之例来拟比自己本国的君王，这是第三条不可行的理由。
English: The third reason for the impracticability is that the envoy is now invoking the example of someone else's exile to compare himself to the king of his own country.

古文：梯航通道，柔服之常。
现代文：海上通航道路，大多畅通无阻。
English: The sea navigation routes are mostly unimpeded.

古文：彼所藉口者倭寇之警、风涛之险尔，不知琛賨之输纳、使臣之往来，果何由而得无患乎？
现代文：该使者以倭寇为乱、风涛凶险做借口，不知别人在运送收纳珍宝赋税和使臣往来时，是何以安然无恙的？
English: The envoy used the excuse that the wokou were in chaos and the wind and waves were dangerous. I don't know why other people were safe and sound when they were transporting, collecting and paying taxes on precious treasures and when envoys were in and out of the country.

古文：不可四。
现代文：这是第四条不可行的理由。
English: This is the reason why Article 4 is not feasible.

古文：曩占城虽领封，其王犹恳请遣使。今使者非世子面命，又无印信文移。
现代文：昔日占城国虽然接受遥封，其国王还恳求朝廷派使者去册封，现今该使者不是世子当面任命的，又没有琉球国的印信和咨文。
English: In the past, although the Ryukyu Kingdom accepted remote sealing, its king also implored the court to send an envoy to seal it. Today, the envoy is not appointed by the emperor in person, and there is no seal letter and message from the Ryukyu Kingdom.

古文：若轻信其言，倘世子以遣使为至荣，遥拜为非礼，不肯受封，复上书请使，将谁执其咎？
现代文：假若轻信他的话，若琉球世子以朝廷派遣使臣去当面册封为至荣，认为遥拜是非礼，不肯接受遥封，又上书朝廷请求派使臣去当面册封，这将是谁的过错？
English: If one were to believe his words, if a Ryukyuan descendant were to regard it as a great honor for the Imperial Court to send an envoy to be crowned in person, consider it impolite to worship at a distance, refuse to accept being crowned at a distance, and then write to the Imperial Court to request that an envoy be sent to be crowned in person, whose fault would it be?

古文：不可五。
现代文：这是第五条不可行的理由。
English: This is why Article 5 is unworkable.

古文：乞命福建守臣仍以前诏从事。
现代文：请求皇上命令福建的守卫大臣仍按前番所下的诏令行事。
English: Request the Emperor to order the Minister of Defense of Fujian Province to continue to act in accordance with the edict issued by the previous guard.

古文：至未受封而先谢恩，亦非故事。
现代文：至于还未受封就先谢恩，也不是以前就有的。
English: As for giving thanks before receiving the title, that didn't exist before.

古文：宜止听其入贡，其谢恩表文，俟世子受封后遣使上进，庶中国之大体以全。 
现代文：因此对琉球使者，应该只听其前来进贡，而其谢恩的表文，等世子受封为王之后再派使者来进献表文，以全中国的大体礼仪。 
English: Therefore, for Ryukyuan envoys, they should only listen to their tributes, and their letters of thanks should be sent after the heir is crowned king, according to the general etiquette of the whole of China.

古文：帝如其言。
现代文：皇帝同意礼部官员的提议。
English: The postmaster did as he was told.

古文：四十一年夏，遣使入贡谢恩。
现代文：四十一年夏，琉球国派使者前来献贡并向皇帝谢恩。
English: In the summer of 1941, the Ryukyu Kingdom sent an envoy to pay tribute and thank the emperor.

古文：明年及四十四年并入贡。
现代文：第二年及四十四年又来献贡。
English: In the second year and in the forty-fourth year, they came again to pay tribute.

古文：隆庆中，凡三贡，皆送还中国飘流人口。
现代文：隆庆年间，共献贡三次，将飘流到琉球的中国人都送了回来。
English: During the Longqing period, a total of three tributes were made, and the Chinese who had drifted to Ryukyu were all sent back.

古文：天子嘉其忠诚，赐敕奖励，加赉银币。
现代文：皇帝对琉球中山王的忠诚颇为嘉赏，赐敕予以奖励，并赏赐银币。
English: The emperor was quite appreciative of the loyalty of the Ryukyu Chuzan King, awarding him a medal and a silver coin.

古文：万历元年冬，其国世子尚永遣使告父丧，请袭爵。
现代文：万历元年冬天，琉球国世子尚永派使者到朝廷讣告其父的丧讯，并请求继承王位。
English: In the winter of the first year of the Wanli era, the heir to the Ryukyuan throne, Shang Yong, sent an envoy to the imperial court to announce his father's death and request to inherit the throne.

古文：章下礼部，行福建守臣核奏。
现代文：皇帝将其奏章交到礼部，让福建的守卫大臣将情况核实后上奏朝廷。
English: The emperor submitted his report to the Ministry of Ceremonies, and asked Fujian's Minister of Defense to verify the situation before reporting it to the imperial court.

古文：明年遣使贺登极。
现代文：第二年琉球世子派使者到朝廷祝贺万历皇帝登基。
English: The following year, the Ryukyuan heir sent an envoy to the imperial court to congratulate Emperor Wanli on his accession to the throne.

古文：三年入贡。
现代文：三年向朝廷进贡。
English: Three years of tribute to the imperial court.

古文：四年春，再贡。
现代文：四年春天，又来进贡。
English: In the spring of the fourth year, the tribute came again.

古文：七月命户科给事中萧崇业、行人谢杰赍敕及皮弁冠服、玉珪，封尚永为中山王。
现代文：七月，皇帝任命户科给事中萧崇业、行人谢杰带敕令和皮弁冠服、玉王圭等物，前去册封尚永为中山王。
English: In July, the emperor appointed Xiao Chongye, pedestrian Xie Jie with the imperial edict and leather-bent crown clothes, Jade King Gui and other things to the household science department, and went forward to register and seal Shang Yong as the king of Zhongshan.

古文：明年冬，崇业等未至，世子复遣使入贡，其后，修贡如常仪。
现代文：第二年冬天，萧崇业等人还未到，世子又派使者前来献贡。此后，他们对朝廷像以前那样按常仪献贡。
English: In the winter of the second year, before Xiao Chongye and others arrived, the emperor sent another envoy to pay tribute. After that, they paid tribute to the imperial court as usual.

古文：八年冬，遣陪臣子三人入南京国学。
现代文：八年冬，中山王派陪臣的儿子三人到南京的国子监学习。
English: In the winter of the eighth year, King Zhongshan sent three sons of his attendants to study in Nanjing.

古文：十九年遣使来贡，而尚永随卒。
现代文：十九年派使者来献贡，不久中山王尚永去世。
English: In 1919, an envoy was sent to pay tribute, and soon after, the king of Zhongshan, Shang Yong, passed away.

古文：礼官以日本方侵噬邻境，琉球不可无王，乞令世子速请袭封，用资镇压。
现代文：礼部官员认为此时日本正在侵噬邻国，琉球不能没有王，请求朝廷让琉球世子速向朝廷请求继承王位，以便镇守其国。
English: Officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies believed that at this time Japan was encroaching on neighboring countries, and Ryukyu could not do without a king. They requested the Imperial Court to let the Ryukyuan heir quickly request the Imperial Court to inherit the throne in order to defend their country.

古文：从之。二十三年，世子尚宁遣人请袭。
现代文：皇帝同意礼部官员的这个意见。二十三年，琉球世子尚宁派人来向朝廷请求继承王位。
English: The emperor agreed with this opinion of the ceremonial officials. In 233, Ryukyu's heir, Shonin, sent someone to the imperial court to request succession to the throne.

古文：福建巡抚许孚远以倭氛未息，据先臣郑晓领封之议，请遣官一员赍敕至福建，听其陪臣面领归国，或遣习海武臣一人，偕陪臣同往。
现代文：福建巡抚许孚远认为倭寇未平，根据以前琉球的大臣郑晓关于领封的提议，请求朝廷派官员一名带着敕命到福建，听任琉球的陪臣当面册封敕命领受回国，或者派遣习于航海的武臣一人，偕同陪臣同往琉球也可。
English: The governor of Fujian, Xu Fuyuan, believed that the wako were not pacified. According to the proposal of the former minister of Ryukyu, Zheng Xiao, to receive the seal, he asked the court to send an official to Fujian with the seal and let the Ryukyuan vassal receive the seal and return to the country, or to send a vassal who was used to sailing. He could also go to Ryukyu with the vassal.

古文：礼官范谦议如其言，且请待世子表至乃许。
现代文：礼部官员范谦建议朝廷按许孚远的建议行事，并请求朝廷等到世子的表文到达后才答应册封之事。
English: Fan Qian, an official from the Ministry of Ceremonies, suggested that the imperial court act according to Xu Fuyuan's suggestion, and requested that the imperial court wait until the heir's letter arrived before agreeing to the canonization.

古文：二十八年，世子以表至，其陪臣请如祖制遣官。
现代文：二十八年，世子的表文到达京城，琉球的陪臣请求朝廷按先前的制度派遣官员前去册封。
English: In the 28th year, the heir's document arrived in the capital, and the Ryukyuan vassal requested the imperial court to send an official to register it according to the previous system.

古文：礼官余继登言： 累朝册封琉球，伐木造舟，动经数岁。
现代文：礼部官员余继登说 ：以前各朝册封琉球时，要伐木造船，动辄几年才能完成。
English: Yu Jiden, an official from the Ministry of Ceremonies, said, "In the past, when each dynasty tried to annex Ryukyu, they had to cut down trees and build ships, which often took several years to complete.

古文：使者蹈风涛之险，小国苦供亿之烦。
现代文：这样，使者有蹈风涛的危险，而其小国也有花资供奉使者的烦苦。
English: In this way, the envoy runs the risk of making waves, and his small country also has the trouble of spending money to serve the envoy.

古文：宜一如前议从事。 
现代文：应像许孚远等人所建议的那样行事为好。 
English: It is better to act as suggested by Xu Fuyuan and others.

古文：帝可之，命今后册封，止遣廉勇武臣一人偕请封陪臣前往，其祭前王，封新王，礼仪一如旧章，仍命俟彼国大臣结状至乃行。
现代文：皇帝同意，下令今后册封时，只派廉勇的武官一人偕同请求册封的陪臣一道前往其国。至于其祭吊前王、册封新王的礼仪，一如旧章的规定仍等其国的大臣结下状文送达朝廷才能进行。
English: The emperor agreed, and ordered that in the future, when a person was to be canonized, only a military attaché who was honest and brave would be sent to his country together with a vassal who requested to be canonized. As for the etiquette of sacrificing and hanging the former king and canonizing the new king, as stipulated in the old chapter, it would still be necessary for the minister of his country to write a letter and send it to the imperial court.

古文：明年秋，贡使以状至，仍请遣文臣。
现代文：第二年秋天，琉球的献贡使者将状文送到朝廷，仍然请求朝廷派遣文官前去行册封礼。
English: In the autumn of the following year, Ryukyu's envoy to pay tribute sent a letter to the imperial court, still requesting the imperial court to send a civil servant to seal the register.

古文：乃命给事中洪瞻祖、行人王士祯往，且命待海寇息警，乃渡海行事。
现代文：朝廷便任命给事中洪瞻祖、行人王士祯前往琉球，并命令他们等到海盗停息后再渡海过去办事。
English: The imperial court then appointed Hong Jianzu and Wang Shijun, both of whom were involved in the incident, to go to the Ryukyus, and ordered them to wait until the pirates had stopped before crossing the sea to carry out their duties.

古文：已而瞻祖以忧去，改命给事中夏子阳，以三十一年二月抵福建。
现代文：不久洪瞻祖因担忧而去职，朝廷改而任命给事中夏子阳代替洪瞻祖，他们在三十一年二月抵达福建。
English: Soon after, Hong Jianzu resigned out of concern, and the imperial court appointed Xia Ziyang to replace him. They arrived in Fujian in February 31st.

古文：按臣方元彦复以海上多事，警报频仍，会巡抚徐学聚疏请仍遣武臣。
现代文：巡按大臣方元彦又以海上多事，盗贼频繁为由，会同巡抚大臣徐学聚上疏朝廷仍只派武官前往琉球。
English: On the grounds that there was a lot going on at sea and that there were frequent robberies, the minister of patrols, Fang Motohiko, got together with the minister of patrols, Xu Xu, and the imperial court still only sent military attaches to Ryukyu.

古文：子阳、士祯则以属国言不可爽，使臣义当有终，乞坚成命慰远人。
现代文：夏子阳、王士祯则认为对待给属国许下的诺言不能爽约，作为使臣义当有终，请求朝廷坚定已做的成命以抚慰远方之人。
English: Xia Ziyang and Wang Shijun, on the other hand, believed that the promises made to their vassal states could not be broken, and as envoys, their loyalty should have an end, and they asked the imperial court to firmly fulfill the promises it had already made in order to comfort those far away.

古文：章俱未报，礼部侍郎李廷机言： 宜行领封初旨，并武臣不必遣。 
现代文：方元彦和夏子阳两方的奏章都没有上报给皇帝，礼部侍郎李廷机说： 应按领封遥拜的初旨行事，连武臣都不必派遣。 
English: Both Fang Motohiko and Xia Ziyang did not report their music to the emperor. Li Tingji, the attendant of the ceremonial department, said: We should act according to the original intention of bowing before the emperor. Even the warriors do not need to be dispatched.

古文：于是御史钱桓、给事中萧近高交章争其不可，谓： 此事当在钦命未定之前，不当在册使既遣之后，宜敕所司速成海艘，勿误今岁渡海之期。
现代文：于是御史钱桓、给事中萧近高等人交相上疏认为不能按李廷机的话去做，说： 这样的话，只能在皇帝的钦命还未决定之前说，不应当在册封使者已经派出之后说，所以应当敕令有关官府迅速完成海船，不要耽误今年的渡海日期。
English: Therefore, the imperial historian Qian Huan, Xiao Qian and other high-ranking people in the middle of the matter thought that it was not possible to do as Li Tingji said, saying: In this case, it can only be said before the emperor's imperial command has not yet been decided, and it should not be said after the envoy has been sent, so it should be ordered to the relevant government departments to quickly complete the sea ship and not delay this year's crossing date.

古文：俟竣事复命，然后定为画一之规，先之以文告，令其领封海上，永为遵守。 
现代文：等到册封完毕、回来复命时，再定一个统一的规定，先以文书的方式通告他们，让他们在海上领受册封，让他们永远遵守。 
English: When they come back to resume their duties after the seal has been completed, they should set a unified regulation, first notify them by letter, let them receive the seal at sea, and let them abide by it forever.

古文：帝纳之。
现代文：皇帝接受这个提议。
English: The emperor took him at his word.

古文：三十三年七月，乃命子阳等速渡海竣事。
现代文：三十三年七月，皇帝便命令夏子阳等人快速渡海到琉球去完成册封之事。
English: In July 33rd, the emperor ordered Xia Ziyang and others to quickly cross the sea to Ryukyu to complete the canonization.

古文：当是时，日本方强，有吞灭之意。
现代文：当此之时，日本正强盛，有吞灭琉球国之意。
English: At the time, Japan was growing in strength and had the intention of swallowing up the Ryukyu Kingdom.

古文：琉球外御强邻，内修贡不绝。
现代文：琉球对外抵御强邻的侵略，对内则向朝廷修贡不绝。
English: To the outside world, Ryukyu resisted the aggression of its powerful neighbors, but internally, it paid tribute to the imperial court incessantly.

古文：四十年，日本果以劲兵三千入其国，掳其王，迁其宗器，大掠而去。
现代文：四十年，日本果然派精兵三千侵入琉球，掳走中山王，将王室的宗器迁移到日本，经大肆劫掠后才离去。
English: Forty years later, Japan did indeed send 3,000 elite soldiers to invade Ryukyu, kidnap King Nakayama, and relocate the royal heirloom to Japan, only to leave after extensive looting.

古文：浙江总兵官杨宗业以闻，乞严饬海上兵备，从之。
现代文：浙江总兵官杨宗业将此事上报给朝廷，请求严饬海上的军备，皇帝同意。
English: Yang Zongye, the chief military officer of Zhejiang, reported the matter to the imperial court, requesting strict control of armaments on the sea, and the emperor agreed.

古文：已而其王释归，复遣使修贡，然其国残破已甚，礼官乃定十年一贡之例。
现代文：不久琉球的中山王被释放回国，他又派遣使者向朝廷修贡，但是琉球国经日本劫掠之后已残破不堪，礼部官员便让他们每十年献一次贡。
English: Not long after, King Nakayama of Ryukyu was released to return to his country. He also sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court. However, Ryukyu had been devastated after being plundered by Japan, and officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies made them pay tribute once every ten years.

古文：明年修贡如故。
现代文：第二年琉球又依旧献贡如故。
English: The following year, Ryukyu continued to pay tribute as before.

古文：又明年再贡，福建守臣遵朝命却还之，其使者怏怏而去。
现代文：又过了一年琉球又来献贡，福建守卫大臣遵照朝廷的命令拒绝并归还了他们的贡品，其使者怏怏不乐地回去了。
English: After another year, the Ryukyus came to pay tribute again, but the Fujian Minister of Defense refused and returned their tribute in accordance with the order of the imperial court, and his emissary went back unhappily.

古文：四十四年，日本有取鸡笼山之谋，其地名台湾，密迩福建，尚宁遣使以闻，诏海上警备。
现代文：四十四年，日本图谋夺取鸡笼山，其地名称台湾，离福建很近，尚宁派使者将此情报上奏朝廷，皇帝下诏令海上守军加强警备。
English: In 1944, when Japan attempted to seize Jiguanshan, also known as Taiwan, which is very close to Fujian, Shangning sent an envoy to report this information to the imperial court, and the emperor issued a decree ordering the naval defenders to strengthen their vigilance.

古文：天启三年，尚宁已卒，其世子尚丰遣使请贡请封。
现代文：天启三年，尚宁已经去世，琉球的世子尚丰派使者向朝廷请求献贡和册封。
English: Three years after the apocalypse, Shang Ning had already passed away, and Ryukyu's heir, Shang Feng, sent an envoy to the imperial court to request tribute and a royal seal.

古文：礼官言： 旧制，琉球二年一贡，后为倭寇所破，改期十年。
现代文：礼部官员说： 按以前的制度，琉球是两年献一次贡，后来其国被倭寇所侵略，改为十年献一次贡。
English: An official from the Ministry of Ceremonies said: According to the previous system, Ryukyu used to pay tribute once every two years. Later, when the country was invaded by Japanese pirates, it was changed to once every ten years.

古文：今其国休养未久，暂拟五年一贡，俟新王册封更议。 
现代文：现今其国休养生息时间未久，暂时拟定让他们五年献一次贡，等新王册封以后再商议此事。 
English: At present, their national rest and recuperation period is not long, and it is tentatively proposed that they should pay tribute once every five years, and then discuss the matter after the new king is crowned.

古文：从之。
现代文：皇帝同意。
English: I followed his advice.

古文：五年遣使入贡请封。
现代文：五年琉球派使者向朝廷进贡并请求给世子册封为王。
English: Five years later, Ryukyu sent an envoy to pay tribute to the imperial court and request that the heir be crowned king.

古文：六年再贡。
现代文：六年再次向明朝廷进贡。
English: Six years later, it paid tribute to the Ming court again.

古文：是时中国多事，而科臣应使者亦惮行，故封典久稽。
现代文：此时中国自身多战乱，而科臣充当的使者也怕出使到琉球，所以对琉球世子的册封典礼便长期搁置起来。
English: At this time, China itself was at war, and Kosen's emissaries were afraid to be sent to Ryukyu, so the ceremony of the Ryukyuan heir was put on hold for a long time.

古文：崇祯二年，贡使又至请封，命遣官如故事。
现代文：崇祯二年，琉球的献贡使者又到京城，请求朝廷派官前去册封，皇帝同意。
English: In the second year of Chongzhen, the Ryukyuan tribute envoy went to Beijing again and asked the imperial court to send an official to register the seal. The emperor agreed.

古文：礼官何如宠复以履险糜费，请令陪臣领封。
现代文：礼部官员何如宠又以海上危险、花费糜多为由，请求皇帝让琉球的陪臣领封遥拜即可。
English: On the grounds that it was dangerous at sea and would cost a lot of money, the officials of the Ministry of Ceremonies asked the emperor to let the Ryukyuan vassal lead the seal away to worship.

古文：帝不从，乃命户科给事中杜三策、行人杨抡往，成礼而还。
现代文：皇帝不同意，便任命户科给事中杜三策、行人杨抡前往琉球，完成册封典礼后才回国。
English: The emperor did not agree, so he appointed Huko to go to Ryukyu with Du Sanze and Yang Jie, and only returned to China after the investiture ceremony.

古文：四年秋，遣使贺东宫册立。
现代文：四年秋，琉球派使者向朝廷祝贺册立太子。
English: In the autumn of the fourth year, Ryukyu sent an envoy to the imperial court to congratulate the crown prince.

古文：自是，迄崇祯末，并修贡如仪。
现代文：从此，直到崇祯末年，琉球都按仪规向朝廷进贡。
English: From then on, until the last years of the reign of Emperor Chongzhen, Ryukyu paid tribute to the imperial court according to the rules of etiquette.

古文：后两京继没，唐王立于福建，犹遣使奉贡。
现代文：后来北京、南京相继失陷，唐王在福建立足，琉球还派使者向唐王献贡。
English: Later, Beijing and Nanjing successively fell, Tang Wang established a foothold in Fuxi, and Ryukyu also sent an envoy to Tang Wang to pay tribute.

古文：其虔事天朝，为外藩最云。
现代文：他们对待明朝廷，是所有外藩国家中最忠顺虔诚的一个。
English: They treated the Ming court as one of the most loyal and pious of all foreign countries.

