古文：韦贤字长孺。鲁国邹人也。
现代文：韦贤，字长孺，是鲁国邹人。
English: Wei Xian, also known as "Chang Yao," was a native of Lu.

古文：其先韦孟，家本彭城，为楚元王傅，傅子夷王及孙王戊。
现代文：他的祖先是韦孟，本来家住彭城，做楚元王的傅，又做元王的儿子夷王和他孙子刘戊的傅。
English: His ancestor was Wei Meng, who originally lived in Pengcheng. He was the tutor of King Chu Yuan, and also the tutor of King Yi, the son of King Yuan, and his grandson Liu E.

古文：戊荒淫不遵道，孟作诗风谏。
现代文：刘戊荒淫无度，不遵王道，韦孟就作了诗对他讥刺、劝谏。
English: Liu Wu was wild and immoral, and did not follow the king's way. Wei Meng wrote a poem to ridicule and persuade him.

古文：后遂去位，徒家于邹，又作一篇。
现代文：后来韦孟就辞去了官位，把家搬迁到邹地，又作了一篇谏诗。
English: Later, Wei Meng resigned from his post, moved his family to Handan, and wrote another poem.

古文：其谏诗曰：
现代文：他做的谏诗说道：
English: His poem goes:

古文：肃肃我祖，国自豕韦，黼衣朱绂，四牡龙旂。
现代文：庄严伟大的我们的祖先，从豕韦氏开始建国，穿戴着饰有斧形图案的黼衣和饰有 亚 字图案的朱绂，驾驭着四匹雄马拉的战车，上插龙旃。
English: Our dignified and great ancestors, who founded the country from the Wei dynasty, wore a robe decorated with an axe-shaped pattern and a scarlet robe decorated with an Asian-style pattern, drove a chariot with four male horses, and mounted a dragon.

古文：彤弓斯征，抚宁遐荒，总齐群邦，以翼大商，迭披大彭，勋绩惟光。
现代文：被赐给彤弓，专司征伐；安抚边远地的人民，总管众多邦国，来辅佐大商朝。后来又有大彭，也是功勋卓著。
English: He was given the command of the bow and arrow, was in charge of conquests, pacified the people in remote areas, was the head of many states, and assisted the great merchant dynasty. Later, he was given the title of Dapeng, which is also a distinguished service.

古文：至于有周，历世会同。
现代文：到了周朝的时候，我们楚国几代位列诸侯，参与会盟。
English: By the time of the Zhou Dynasty, several generations of us in Chu had become lords and participated in the League.

古文：王赧听谮，实绝我邦。
现代文：后来周赧王听信谗言，削夺了我们楚国的爵位。
English: Later, King Zhou Enlai listened to his advice and deprived us of the title of the Kingdom of Chu.

古文：我邦既绝，厥政斯逸，赏罚之行，非由王室。
现代文：我们楚国既与周朝断绝关系，周朝的政令更不再在楚国施行。赏功罚罪的事也不再由周王朝决定。
English: Since we, the State of Chu, have severed relations with the Zhou Dynasty, the decrees of the Zhou Dynasty will no longer be implemented in the State of Chu, and the matter of reward and punishment will no longer be decided by the Zhou Dynasty.

古文：庶尹群后，靡扶靡卫，五服崩离，宗周以队。
现代文：朝廷大臣和诸侯王，都不再辅佐、护卫周朝；京城周围五服的地区，都分崩离析，宗周便这样瓦解了。
English: The ministers of the imperial court and the princes no longer supported and guarded the Zhou dynasty; the five-clothed regions around the capital all fell apart, and Zong Zhou thus disintegrated.

古文：我祖斯微，迁于彭城，在予小子，勤诶厥生，厄此嫚秦，耒耜以耕。
现代文：我们的祖先也衰微了，迁徙到彭城居住。到了我们这一辈，那生活真是勤苦之极啊。
English: Our ancestors also declined and migrated to live in Pengcheng. In our generation, that life is really hard work.

古文：悠悠嫚秦，上天不宁，乃眷南顾，授汉于京。
现代文：遭遇了强秦欺侮的灾祸，先王祇好亲自到田野中耕种土地。
English: Encountering the calamity of being bullied by the Qiang Qin, the former King Guihao personally went to the fields to cultivate the land.

古文：于赫有汉，四方是征，靡适不怀，万国逌平。
现代文：轻慢傲横的秦国，上天不保佑他们。上天垂青、赐福给南方，把秦朝的京城授给汉朝。汉朝建立真伟大，四面八方去征伐；所到地方都投降，千邦万国都安畅。
English: The heavens do not bless the proud and haughty Qin. The heavens bless the south, and bestow the capital city of the Qin Dynasty on the Han Dynasty. The Han Dynasty was truly great, conquering in all directions; everywhere it went, it surrendered, and all nations were at peace.

古文：乃命厥弟，建侯于楚，俾我小臣，惟傅是辅。
现代文：任命他的小弟弟，建侯封国在楚地；让我们这些小臣子，辅佐楚王要仔细。
English: He appointed his little brother, Jianhou, to fief the country in Chu; let us, these little ministers, be careful in assisting the King of Chu.

古文：兢兢元王，恭俭净一，惠此黎民，纳彼辅弼。
现代文：兢兢业业是元王，恭敬勤俭持续长；赐福万民乐安康，任用辅弼纳贤良。
English: Dedication is the original king, respect, diligence and thrift are long-lasting; blessing the people with happiness and well-being, and appointing assistants to reward the virtuous.

古文：飨国渐世，垂烈于后，乃及夷王，克奉厥绪。
现代文：在位将近三十载，基业遗留给后代；后来继位是夷王，能承继遗风。
English: He reigned for nearly thirty years, leaving his legacy to future generations. Later, he was succeeded by King Yi, who was able to carry on his legacy.

古文：咨命不永，唯王统祀，左右陪臣，此惟皇士。
现代文：可叹夷王命不长，登基继位是戊王；左右身边诸臣子，正人君子皆栋梁。
English: It is lamentable that King Yi did not live long. He was succeeded by King Wu. All the courtiers on his right and left, and all the upright gentlemen, were his supporters.

古文：如何我王，不思守保，不惟履冰，以继祖考！
现代文：为什么我们的大王，却不考虑保守祖宗基业；为什么不想着如履薄冰的艰难，从而继承发扬祖业！
English: Why doesn't our great king think about preserving the ancestral heritage? Why doesn't he want to walk on thin ice to inherit and carry forward the ancestral heritage?

古文：邦事是废，逸游是娱，犬马繇繇，是放是驱。
现代文：国家大事废弛不问，整日游荡娱乐无垠；猎犬骏马漂亮雄壮，东奔西跑前驱后放。
English: National events are not questioned, all-day wandering entertainment is perfect; hunting dogs and horses are beautiful and strong, and they run around.

古文：务彼鸟兽，忽此稼苗，烝民以匮，我王以愉。
现代文：一心一意喜兽爱鸟，轻忽农事忘记稼苗。百姓因此而匮乏，大王以此为乐。
English: He loved animals and birds with all his heart, neglected farming and forgot to grow seedlings. As a result, the people were in need, and the great king took pleasure in this.

古文：所弘非德，所亲非悛，唯囿是恢，唯谀是信。
现代文：所弘扬的不是德行，所亲近的不是俊才。衹是扩建苑囿，衹是亲近小人。
English: It is not virtue that is being promoted, and it is not talent that is being approached. It is the expansion of the garden, and it is the approach to the villain.

古文：睮々谄夫，咢咢黄发，如何我王，曾不是察！
现代文：阿谀奉迎的谄媚之人，刚正不阿的正人君子；为什么大王对此不予明察分辨！
English: The flatterer of flatterers, the just and upright gentleman; why does the great king not discern this?

古文：既藐下臣，追欲从逸，嫚彼显祖，轻兹削黜。
现代文：藐视轻慢你的臣子，又一味纵欲放逸。侮辱了你那圣明的祖先，把被削国废黜看得那么轻。
English: You despise your contemptuous vassals and indulge in debauchery. You have insulted your holy forefathers by treating the dethronement of the defeated nation so lightly.

古文：嗟嗟我王，汉之睦亲，曾不夙夜，以休令闻！
现代文：可叹我们大王是汉朝近亲，却不能日夜勤劳以扬祖先美名！
English: It's a pity that our great king is a close relative of the Han Dynasty, but he can't work hard day and night to promote the good name of his ancestors!

古文：穆穆天子，临尔下土，明明群司，执宪靡顾。
现代文：肃穆庄严的天子，统治着天下国土；公正贤明的官员，执法严明没有顾虑。
English: The solemn and dignified son of heaven rules the land of the whole world; the just and wise officials strictly enforce the law without any concerns.

古文：正遐由近，殆其怙兹，嗟嗟我王，曷不此思！
现代文：端正远方的人要从自己身边开始做起，衹凭恃自己是汉室宗亲肆意横行是十分危险的。哎呀我们的大王，为什么不考虑这些！
English: A righteous person from afar should start from his or her own side. It is very dangerous to rely on one's Han family to run amok. Alas, our great king, why don't you consider this!

古文：非思非鉴，嗣其罔则，弥弥其失，岌岌其国。
现代文：不思考不鉴戒，就会使后代没法则可循；失误如此重大，使国家岌岌可危。
English: Failure to think, failure to learn, leaves future generations without a guide; failure on such a scale leaves a nation vulnerable.

古文：致冰匪霜，致队靡嫚，瞻惟我王，昔靡不练。
现代文：坚冰形成于微霜，国家崩溃起于懈怠轻慢；看看想想我们的先王，没有不考虑周到的。
English: Hard ice is formed from fine frost, the collapse of the country from laxity and frivolity; look and think of our forefathers, there is nothing inconsiderate.

古文：兴国救颠，孰违悔过，追思黄发，秦缪以霸。
现代文：挽救振兴危亡的国家，最好的方法是王者善于悔过，谁又能违背这一规律；想想以往秦穆公向黄发老人求教，最后终于称霸。岁月流逝，年岁将老；哎！
English: The best way to save and revitalize a country in danger is that the king is good at repenting, and who can violate this rule; think of the past when Qin Mu Gong asked the yellow-haired old man for advice, and finally became the ruler.

古文：岁月其徂，年其逮耇，于昔君子，庶显于后。
现代文：过去那些君子，善于悔过白新，有幸能扬名于后世。
English: Those gentlemen in the past, who were good at repenting, were fortunate to be able to make a name for themselves in the future.

古文：我王如何，曾不斯觉！
现代文：大王您怎么样呢，竟然看不到这些！
English: How dare you not see this!

古文：黄发不近，胡不时监！
现代文：不亲近黄发智者，你为什么不借鉴以往的事例！
English: If you are not close to the yellow-haired sage, why don't you learn from past examples!

古文：其在邹诗曰：
现代文：韦孟在邹地作的谏诗说：
English: Wei Meng said in his poem:

古文：微微小子，既耇且陋，岂不牵位，秽我王朝。
现代文：卑微的小臣我又老又丑，难道我不留恋自己的官位？
English: Humble minister I am old and ugly, do I not long for my post?

古文：王朝肃清。
现代文：是因为我们的朝廷太污秽了我才离去。
English: It was because our court was so filthy that I left.

古文：唯俊之庭，顾瞻余躬，惧秽此征。
现代文：朝廷应当肃清，那裹应该是英才俊杰聚集的地方。
English: The imperial court should be purged. It should be a place where the talented and outstanding gather.

古文：我之退征，请于天子，天子我恤，矜我发齿。
现代文：看看自己的境况，仔细想一想，我害怕这种污秽混乱的状况，还是造就离去吧。我辞去官位离去的时候，向天子请罪告辞；天子抚恤我，说可怜我年迈体衰。
English: Look at your own situation, think about it carefully, I am afraid of this filthy and chaotic situation, or create a departure. When I resigned from my official position and left, I apologized to the Son of Heaven; the Son of Heaven took pity on me and said pity on my old age and poor health.

古文：赫赫天子，明哲且仁，悬车之义，以洎小臣。嗟我小子，岂不怀土？
现代文：伟大的天子，圣明仁义；准许我辞官，恩义不浅。哎！小臣我难道不怀恋故土？
English: Great heavenly Son, holy, bright, and benevolent; grant me the right to hold office, my gratitude is not shallow. Alas, little minister, do I not yearn for my native land?

古文：庶我王寤，越迁于鲁。
现代文：希望我们的国王也许能悔悟，因此我迁居到鲁地。
English: Hoping that our king might come to his senses, I moved to Ludi.

古文：既去祢祖，惟怀惟顾，祁祁我徒，戴负盈路。
现代文：离开了父辈居住的地方，我一路伤心回顾观望；许多跟随我的徒弟，肩负背扛满路都是。
English: When I left the place where my parents lived, I was sad to look back all the way; many of my apprentices followed me, shouldering the burden all the way.

古文：爰戾于邹，剪茅作堂，我徒我环，筑室于墙。
现代文：后来到达了邹地，割下茅草盖屋造房；我的徒弟们环绕在旁，盖了房子在我的邻墙。
English: Then came the ploughing, and the cutting of the thatch, and the building of the house; my apprentices were round about, and built the house against my wall.

古文：我即逝，心存我旧，梦我渎上，立于王朝。
现代文：我搬迁到这里，心里还想念着旧土；梦见了我渎上的故居，梦见我还在朝廷上供职。
English: When I moved here, I was still thinking about the old country; I dreamed of my former house, which I had trashed, and I dreamed that I was still working at the imperial court.

古文：其梦如何？
现代文：那梦怎么样呢？
English: What about that dream?

古文：梦争王室。
现代文：梦见我在朝廷上争论政事。
English: I dreamt that I was arguing about politics in the imperial court.

古文：其争如何？
现代文：那争论怎么样呢？
English: What about that argument?

古文：梦王我弼。
现代文：梦见国王暴戾地训斥我。
English: Dreamed that the king scolded me violently.

古文：寤其外邦，叹其喟然，念我祖考，泣涕其涟。
现代文：醒来后我原来仍在异乡，我感叹非常；想到我的祖先，我哭得像泪人一般。
English: When I woke up, I was still in a foreign country, and I lamented very much; thinking of my ancestors, I cried like a tearful person.

古文：微微老夫，咨既迁绝，洋洋仲尼，视我遗烈。
现代文：我这卑微的老人，与旧邦已经隔绝；光彩辉煌的孔于，向我显示他的遣业旧迹。
English: I, a humble old man, have been cut off from the old country; a glorious hole in it, shows me the old traces of his departure.

古文：济济邹鲁，礼义唯恭，诵习弦歌，于异他邦。
现代文：兴盛的邹鲁之地，人们恭遵礼义之道；诵读经书、学习礼乐，很不同于其他地方。
English: In the flourishing land of Bailu, people respectfully follow the path of etiquette and righteousness; reading scriptures and learning liturgical music is very different from other places.

古文：我虽鄙耇，心其好而，我徒侃尔，乐亦在而。
现代文：我虽然年迈，内心仍十分喜好这事；我的徒弟们十分高兴，也很喜好礼乐之事。
English: Although I am old, I still like it very much in my heart; my disciples are very happy, and they also like the ritual music.

古文：孟卒于邹。
现代文：韦孟后来死在了邹地。
English: Wei Meng later died in Handan.

古文：或曰其子孙好事，述先人之志而作是诗也。
现代文：也有人说是他的后代子孙好事，追述先人的志向，而写了此诗。
English: Some people also said that it was his descendants who wrote this poem, recounting the aspirations of the ancestors.

古文：自孟至贤五世。
现代文：从韦孟到韦贤共传了五代。
English: From Wei Meng to Wei Xian, a total of five generations have been passed down.

古文：贤为人质朴少欲，笃志于学，兼能《礼》、《尚书》，以《诗》教授，号称邹鲁大儒。
现代文：韦贤为人质朴，清心寡欲，一心一意做学问，对《礼》、《尚书》都很精通，向人传授《诗》，被称为邹鲁的大儒。
English: Wei Xian was a simple man, with a pure heart and little desire. He devoted himself to learning. He was well versed in "Rite" and "Shangshu" and taught "Poetry" to others. He was known as the great scholar of Jilin.

古文：征为博士，给事中，进授昭帝《诗》，稍迁光禄大夫、詹事，至大鸿胪。
现代文：后来朝廷征召他为博士，授官给事中，进宫教授昭帝学习《诗》，慢慢地升迁为光禄大夫詹事，后来升到大鸿胪。
English: Later, the imperial court called him to be a doctor, and he was promoted to the palace to teach "Poetry" to Emperor Zhao. He was slowly promoted to the position of Guanglu Doctor Zhanji, and later to the position of Daihongye.

古文：昭帝崩，无嗣，大将军霍光与公卿共尊立孝宣帝。
现代文：昭帝死了，没有继承人，大将军霍光与公卿大臣一起尊立孝宣帝。
English: Emperor Zhao died without an heir. General Huo Guang and the Minister of the Court jointly established Emperor Xiao Xuan.

古文：帝初即位，贤以与谋议，安宗庙，赐爵关内侯，食邑。
现代文：宣帝刚刚即位，韦贤因为参与拥立宣帝的计谋，安定社稷、稳定国家，被赐爵关内侯，有供奉的邑户。
English: Emperor Xuancheng had just ascended to the throne. Wei Xian was given the title of Lord of Guanai because he took part in the conspiracy to support Emperor Xuancheng, stabilizing the society and the country, and there were households in the town that offered him homage.

古文：徙为长信少府，以先帝师，甚见尊重。
现代文：迁为长信宫少府。因为韦贤曾是昭帝的老师，因而十分受尊重。
English: Because Wei Xian was a teacher of Emperor Zhao, he was highly respected.

古文：本始三年，代蔡义为丞相，封扶阳侯，食邑七百户。
现代文：在本始三年，韦贤代替蔡义做了丞相，被封为扶阳侯，有食邑七百户。
English: In the first three years, Wei Xian replaced Cai Yi as chancellor, was named Fuyang marquis, and had 700 households.

古文：时，贤七十余，为相五岁，地节三年以老病乞骸骨，赐黄金百斤，罢归，加赐第一区。
现代文：那时韦贤已七十多岁，做宰相五年，到地节三年，因为年老多病向朝廷请求辞官，朝廷赏赐他黄金一百斤，罢官回归故里，另外赐给他一处府第。
English: At that time, Wei Xian was more than 70 years old, he had been the prime minister for five years, and had been to the prefecture for three years. Because he was old and sick, he asked the court for a resignation. The court rewarded him with a hundred catties of gold, he was dismissed and returned to his hometown, and he was also given a residence.

古文：丞相致仕自贤始。
现代文：丞相辞职从韦贤开始。
English: The resignation of chancellors began with Wei Xian.

古文：年八十二薨，谥曰节侯。
现代文：韦贤八十二岁时死去，朝廷赐他谧号为节侯。
English: When Wei Xian died at the age of eighty-two, the imperial court gave him the title of "Imperial Prince."

古文：贤四子：长子方山为高寝令，早终；次子弘，至东海太守；次子舜，留鲁守坟墓；少子玄成，复以明经历位至丞相。
现代文：韦贤有四个儿子：长子韦方山做高寝县令，很早就死了；次子韦弘，官至束海太守；第三个儿子叫韦舜，留在鲁地守候韦氏祠堂墓地；小儿子韦玄成，也因为精通经术多次升迁官位到丞相。
English: Wei Xian had four sons: the eldest son, Wei Fangshan, was the county magistrate of Gaoxing County, and died very early; the second son, Wei Hong, was the governor of Sokhai; the third son, Wei Wei, stayed in Ludi to guard the cemetery of Wei's ancestral hall; the youngest son, Wei Xuancheng, was also promoted many times to the position of minister because of his proficiency in scripture.

古文：故邹鲁谚曰： 遗子黄金满籝，不如一经。 
现代文：所以邹鲁地方有谚语说： 留给儿子满箱的黄金，也不如留给他一部经书。 
English: Therefore, there is a saying in Jhelum: "It is better to leave a chest full of gold to one's son than to leave him a book of scriptures."

古文：玄成字少翁，以父任为郎，常侍骑。
现代文：韦玄成字少翁，凭藉父亲的恩荫被任命为郎官、常侍散骑。
English: Wei Xuancheng Shao Weng, by virtue of his father's favor, was appointed as a steward, a regular attendant and a rider.

古文：少好学，修父业，尤谦逊下士。
现代文：他年少好学，继承父亲的儒业，特别谦逊，礼贤下士。
English: He is young and eager to learn, inherits his father's Confucianism, is particularly humble, and is a virtuous corporal.

古文：出遇知识步行，辄下从者，与载送之，以为常。
现代文：有时出门遇见认识的人步行，他总是让自己的侍从仆役下车，载送别人回去，作为常事。
English: Sometimes when he went out, he would meet someone he knew on foot. He would always ask his servants to get out of the car and carry someone back, as a matter of course.

古文：其接人，贫贱者益加敬，繇是名誉日广。
现代文：他对待人，贫贱者愈加礼敬，以此他的美名曰益远扬。
English: He treated people, especially the poor, with the utmost respect, and his reputation spread far and wide.

古文：以明经擢为谏大夫，迁大河都尉。
现代文：因为精通经术，他被提拔为谏大夫，又迁为大河郡都尉。
English: Because of his proficiency in the art of Chinese medicine, he was promoted to the position of Shao doctor, and was also transferred to the position of the captain of Dahe County.

古文：初，玄成兄弘为太常丞，职奉宗庙，典诸陵邑，烦剧多罪过。
现代文：当初，玄成的哥哥韦弘做太常丞，职责是奉守宗庙，掌管皇陵园邑，因为事务繁杂，犯了不少罪过。
English: At the beginning, Xuanzeng's brother Wei Hong was appointed as the Grand Vizier. His duties were to guard the ancestral temple and take charge of the imperial mausoleum and gardens. Due to his complicated affairs, he committed a lot of sins.

古文：父贤以弘当为嗣，故敕令自免。弘怀谦，不去官。
现代文：他的父亲韦贤因为韦弘将来应当做韦家的继承人，怕他因犯罪被贬黜，所以命令韦弘托病辞去太常丞的官职。韦弘却心怀谦让，不肯辞官。
English: His father, Wei Xian, ordered Wei Hong to resign from his position as Tai Changzheng because he was to be the heir of the Wei family in the future, fearing that he would be disgraced for his crimes. However, Wei Hong was humble and refused to resign.

古文：及贤病笃，弘竟坐宗庙事系狱，罪未决。
现代文：到韦贤病重的时候，韦弘终于因为奉守宗庙不周到的事被关进了监狱，还没有判罪。
English: By the time Wei Xian was seriously ill, Wei Hong was finally put in prison for carelessly guarding the ancestral temple, but had not yet been convicted.

古文：室家问贤当为后者，贤恚恨不肯言。
现代文：家裹人向韦贤询问谁应当做韦家的继承人，韦贤却表现出愤怒痛恨的表情，不肯说话。
English: A family member asked Wei Xian who should be the heir of the Wei family, but Wei Xian showed an angry and hateful expression and refused to speak.

古文：于是贤门下生博士义倩等与宗家计议，共矫贤令，使家丞上书言大行，以大河都尉玄成为后。
现代文：于是韦贤的门生、博士义倩等人与韦贤的同族人共同商议，假托是韦贤的遣命，让韦家总管上书大行令，立大河郡都尉韦玄成为韦家的后继人。
English: As a result, Wei Xian's protégé, Dr. Yixuan and other people jointly discussed with Wei Xian's compatriots. Under the pretext of Wei Xian's death, Wei Xian, the head of the Wei family, issued an order to make Wei Xian, the governor of Dayahe County, the successor of the Wei family.

古文：贤薨，玄成在官闻丧，又言当为嗣，玄成深知其非贤雅意，即阳为病狂，卧便利，妄笑语昏乱。
现代文：韦贤死后，玄成在官位上听到噩耗，又听说自己应当做继承人，玄成深知遣并不是父亲韦贤一贯的意思，于是便假装犯了痴狂病，睡在床上大小便，乱说一气，狂笑不止。
English: After Wei Xian's death, Xuanzheng heard bad news about the official position, and also heard that he should be the heir. Xuanzheng was well aware that being sent was not what his father, Wei Xian, had always meant, so he pretended to be insane, slept on the bed, urinated and defecated, talked wildly, and laughed uncontrollably.

古文：征至长安，既葬，当袭爵，以病狂不应召。
现代文：朝廷征召他到长安，葬礼完后，韦玄成应承袭父亲的爵位，玄成却假托病狂不应朝廷诏命。
English: The court summoned him to Chang'an. After the funeral, Wei Xuancheng should inherit his father's title, but Xuancheng should not pretend to be a madman.

古文：大鸿胪奏状，章下丞相、御史案验。
现代文：大鸿胪上书朝廷，朝廷发下文书给丞相、御史，要求他们调查办理。
English: Dahongye wrote to the imperial court, and the imperial court sent a document to the prime minister and the imperial historian, requesting them to investigate the matter.

古文：玄成素有名声，士大夫多疑其欲让爵辟兄者。
现代文：玄成一向有美好的名声，士大夫中许多人认为玄成是想把爵位避让给哥哥韦弘，才假装狂病。
English: Hyunseong always had a good reputation, and many of the scholars and doctors thought that Hyunseong was pretending to be mad in order to give up his title to his brother, Wei Hong.

古文：案事丞相史乃与玄成书曰： 古之辞让，必有文义可观，故能垂荣于后。
现代文：负责调查的丞相史于是写信给玄成，说： 古人辞让，一定要有像样的名义，所以才能流芳传名于后代。
English: The minister in charge of the investigation then wrote to Hyun Seong, saying: The ancient people must have a decent name, so that the name can be passed down to future generations.

古文：今子独坏容貌，蒙耻辱，为狂痴，光耀暗而不宣。
现代文：现在你衹是一味地破坏自己的容貌，蒙受耻辱，假装狂痴，一点没有光彩，仁义都隐藏起来而不外露。
English: Now you're busy ruining your looks, suffering shame, pretending to be a lunatic, with no glory at all, and your goodness is all hidden and not revealed.

古文：微哉！子之所托名也。
现代文：你用来辞让的名义也太卑小了。
English: The name you used to resign is too lowly.

古文：仆素愚陋，过为宰相执事，愿少闻风声。
现代文：我向来没什么聪明之处，朝廷还过分重用，让我做了宰相执事，希望能让我听听你用来推托的好名义。
English: I've never been very clever, and the imperial court is still overusing me. They made me the prime minister's secretary, hoping that I would listen to the good name that you use to hide behind.

古文：不然，恐子伤高而仆为小人也。 
现代文：不然的话，恐怕你会伤害高尚之行，而我也成了小人。 
English: Otherwise, I'm afraid you'll hurt the noble cause, and I'll become a villain.

古文：玄成友人侍郎章亦上疏言： 圣王贵以礼让为国，宜优养玄成，勿枉其志，使得自安衡门之下。 
现代文：韦玄成的朋友、侍郎章也向朝廷上书说： 圣明的君主治理国家，崇尚的是礼让仁义的行为。对玄成朝廷应当优礼相待，不要委屈冤枉了他的好志向，让他自居贫贱而能心安。 
English: Wei Xuancheng's friend, Zhi Lang Zhang, also wrote a letter to the imperial court, saying: The sacred monarch governs the country, advocating the behavior of courtesy and benevolence. The imperial court should treat Xuancheng with courtesy, do not wrong his good aspirations, let him be poor and have peace of mind.

古文：而丞相、御史遂以玄成实不病，劾奏之。
现代文：而丞相、御史终于因为玄成实在是没病装病，而向朝廷弹劾他。
English: However, the Prime Minister and the Minister of History finally impeached him to the Imperial Court because Hyun Seong did not feign illness.

古文：有诏勿劾，引拜。
现代文：朝廷下诏，不要弹劾玄成，派人叫他来，拜他为官。
English: The imperial court issued an edict, not to impeach Hyun Song, but to send someone to summon him and make him an official.

古文：玄成不得已受爵。
现代文：玄成不得已，接受了官爵。
English: As a last resort, Hyun Seong accepted a peerage.

古文：宣帝高其节，以玄成为河南太守。
现代文：宣帝很欣赏他的节操，让玄成做河南太守。
English: Emperor Xuan appreciated his self-restraint and made him the governor of Henan Province.

古文：兄弘太山都尉，迁东海太守。
现代文：让他的哥哥韦弘做了太山郡都尉，迁为东海太守。
English: He made his brother Wei Hong the governor of Taishan County and moved him to become the governor of the East China Sea.

古文：数岁，玄成征为未央卫尉，迁太常。
现代文：几年后，玄成被朝廷征召为未央宫的卫尉，升迁为太常。
English: A few years later, Gengcheng was called up by the imperial court to be the guard of the Weiyang Palace, and was promoted to the position of Grand Marshal.

古文：坐与故平通侯杨惲厚善，惲诛，党友皆免官。
现代文：因为与原来的平通侯杨惮关系很好，杨惮被杀，他的同党和朋友都被免去官职。
English: Because he had a good relationship with the original Pingtong Hou Yang Shuo, Yang Shuo was killed, and his fellow party members and friends were removed from their official positions.

古文：后以列侯侍祀孝惠庙，当晨入庙，天雨淖，不驾驷马车而骑至庙下。
现代文：后来又因为列侯陪同祭祀孝惠帝庙，应当在早晨入庙，因为天下雨形成了水坑，他们没有坐四马拉的车，而是骑马到了宗庙。
English: Later, because the vassals accompanied the sacrificial offering to the temple of Emperor Xiao Hui, they should enter the temple in the morning, because the rain formed puddles, they did not take the four-horse carriage, but rode to the ancestral temple.

古文：有司劾奏，等辈数人皆削爵为关内侯。
现代文：主管官员上书弹劾，与韦玄成同辈的几个王侯都因此被削爵为关内侯。
English: The responsible official wrote a letter of impeachment, and several princes of the same generation as Wei Xuancheng were therefore demoted to Guanai.

古文：玄成自伤贬黜父爵，叹曰： 吾何面目以奉祭祀！ 
现代文：玄成因为自己犯错而致使父亲的爵位被削而十分难过，叹息道： 我有什么脸面主持祖庙的祭祀！ 
English: As a result of his mistake, his father's title was taken away from him, which made him very sad. He sighed and said, "What kind of face do I have to preside over the ancestral temple's sacrificial rites!

古文：作诗自劾责，曰：
现代文：写了诗自己责备自己，诗裹说：
English: Wrote a poem blaming himself, the poem says:

古文：赫矣我祖，侯于豕韦，赐命建伯，有殷以绥。
现代文：光彩荣耀的我们的祖先，自豕韦氏开始封侯，受命称伯，辅佐殷商得以安定。
English: Our glorious forefathers, since the Wei clan began to be a feudal lord, were ordered to be a nobleman, and assisted Yin merchants to be stable.

古文：厥绩既昭，车服有常，朝宗商邑，四牡翔翔，德之令显，庆流于裔，宗周至汉，群后历世。
现代文：功绩昭著，朝廷赐给礼服车仗；到商朝都城去朝拜，四匹马儿跑的真快。他们的美德昭扬，影响教育了后代；从宗周到汉朝，历代封侯。
English: For their outstanding achievements, the imperial court gave them ceremonial uniforms and chariots; they went to the capital city of the Shang Dynasty to pay homage, and the four horses ran really fast. Their virtues were well known and influenced the education of future generations; from Zong Zhou to the Han Dynasty, they were feudal lords throughout the ages.

古文：肃肃楚傅，辅翼元、夷，厥驷有庸，惟慎惟祗。
现代文：庄严的楚国王傅我的先辈，辅佐元王和夷王；车马都有常例，他对此十分谨慎敬重。
English: The stately King Fu of Chu was my ancestor, and he assisted King Yuan and King Yi. There were regular horse and carriage rides, and he was very careful and respectful of this.

古文：嗣王孔佚，越迁于邹，五世圹僚，至我节侯。
现代文：后来的戊王荒淫无道，我的祖先迁到丁邹地；遣之后五代没有人做官，一直到节侯我的父亲。
English: The later King E was a senseless despot, and my ancestors moved to Dingyao. For five generations after the expulsion, no one held any official position, until my father's time.

古文：惟我节侯，显德遐闻，左右昭、宣，五吕以训。
现代文：我的父亲节侯，美德令名远扬；佐助昭帝、宣帝，从五方面训导他们。
English: My father, Saeki-hō, was famous for his virtue; Sasuke Shōdi and Emperor Xuan taught them from five aspects.

古文：既耇致位，惟懿惟奂，厥赐祁祁，百金洎馆。
现代文：年老时他辞官归家，仪容壮美；朝廷的赏赐人员来来往往，许多金银抬到家馆。
English: When he retired in old age, he returned home with a magnificent appearance; the awarding staff of the imperial court came and went frequently, and a lot of gold and silver were carried to his home.

古文：国彼扶阳，在京之东，惟帝是留，政谋是从。
现代文：被封国在扶阳，是在京城的柬面；皇帝常常留在那裹，听取采纳时政的建议谋划。
English: The fiefdom was in Fuyang, a suburb of the capital; the emperor often stayed there to listen to and plan the adoption of the current government's proposals.

古文：绎绎六辔，是列是理，威仪济济，朝享天子。
现代文：顺顺当当六匹马的缰绳，十分有条理；雄威的仪仗十分整齐，去朝拜天子。
English: The bridle of Shun Shun Dang's six horses is very orderly; the majestic ceremonial battle is very neat, to worship the Son of Heaven.

古文：天子穆穆，是宗是师，四方遐尔，观国之辉。
现代文：天子肃穆庄严，把他当作老师；远近四方的人们，都敬仰我们封国的荣耀。
English: The Son of Heaven is solemn and dignified, and we regard him as a teacher. People from far and wide admire the glory of our founding.

古文：茅土之继，在我俊兄，惟我俊兄，是让是形。
现代文：祖先封地的继承，应当是我那英俊的长兄；可我那英俊的长兄，却一再谦让来把仁义表明。
English: It should have been my handsome eldest brother who inherited the ancestral fiefdom, but my handsome eldest brother humbly showed his benevolence again and again.

古文：于休厥德，于赫有声，致我小子，越留于京。
现代文：多么美啊他的品德，多么响亮他的名声；祖先官爵遗留给我，我于是留在了京城。
English: How beautiful his character, how resounding his fame; my ancestors, the nobles, bequeathed it to me, and so I stayed in the capital.

古文：惟我小子，不肃会同，惰彼车服，黜此附庸。
现代文：可是卑小的我呀，却对重大朝会不慎敬；礼服车仗懒散混乱，才被朝廷黜为附庸。
English: However, I, a lowly person, did not pay attention to the important imperial meeting; I was lazy and disorganized in dress and carriage, and only then was I made a vassal by the imperial court.

古文：赫赫显爵，自我队之；微微附庸，自我招之。
现代文：光耀尊显的爵位，让我给丢失了；卑微的附庸地位，从我开始招致。
English: The glittering dignity of a knighthood is lost to me; the humbleness of a vassalage beckons from me.

古文：谁能忍愧，寄之我颜；谁将遐征，从之夷蛮。
现代文：谁能够忍受这么大的羞耻？把你的脸面借给我一下；谁要去遥远的地方旅行？
English: Who can bear this great shame? Lend me your face; who will travel far away?

古文：于赫三事，匪俊匪作，于蔑小子，终焉其度。
现代文：让我跟他一起去那蛮荒之地。荣耀的三公，不是俊才不能担任；我虽然卑微，最终一定要坐到那样的高位。
English: Let me go with him to that wild and desolate land. The three noblemen of glory, it is not handsome who can not serve; although I am humble, I must eventually sit in such a high position.

古文：谁谓华高，企其齐而；谁谓德难，厉其庶而。
现代文：谁说华山高？我希望与它一样高；谁说修德艰难？通过努力希望我能达到。
English: Who said that Huashan is high? I hope to be as high as it; who said that cultivating virtue is difficult? I hope I can achieve it through hard work.

古文：嗟我小子，于贰其尤，队彼令声，申此择辞。
现代文：哎呀小小的我呀，再也不能犯这样的过错；毁坏了自己的美名，我说了这些伤心话。
English: Alas, poor little me, I can never make such a mistake again; I have ruined my good name, I have said these sad words.

古文：四方群后，我监我视，威仪车服，唯肃是履！
现代文：各地的诸侯王啊，要以我为鉴；礼服车仗要威严整齐，步履要严肃端庄。
English: Princes and kings everywhere, take me as a model; dress and carriage should be dignified and neat, and the steps should be serious and dignified.

古文：初，宣帝宠姬张婕妤男淮阳宪王好政事，通法律，上奇其才，有意欲以为嗣，然用太子起于细微，又早失母，故不忍也。
现代文：当初，宣帝的宠姬张婕妤生的儿子淮阳宪王喜欢处理国家政务，通晓法律，皇帝欣赏他的才干，有意要立他做继承人；然而又因为太子生于贫贱，又早早地失去了母亲，所以不忍心废太子。
English: At first, Huai Yang Xian Wang, the son of Emperor Xuan's favorite concubine Zhang Xiansheng, liked to deal with state affairs and knew the law. The emperor appreciated his talent and intended to make him the heir; however, because the prince was born poor and lost his mother early, he could not bear to lose the prince.

古文：久之，上欲感风宪王，辅以礼让之臣，乃召拜玄成为淮阳中尉。
现代文：过了许久，宣帝想从侧面感化宪王，使他明白，便想让懂礼节知辞让的人辅佐他，于是就召来韦玄成，拜他为淮阳中尉。
English: After a long time, Emperor Xuanxuan wanted to influence Emperor Xian from the side to make him understand, so he wanted someone who understood the etiquette to assist him, so he summoned Wei Xuancheng and made him a lieutenant of Huaiyang.

古文：是时，王未就国，玄成受诏，与太子太傅萧望之及《五经》诸儒杂论同异于石渠阁，条奏其对。
现代文：这时宪王还没有到自己的封国就职，玄成接受韶令，与太子太傅萧望之以及治《五经》的儒士们在石渠合讨论经书的异同之处，写成条目奏对皇上的询问。
English: At this time, Emperor Gensho had not yet taken office in his own country, and Emperor Gensho accepted the imperial edict. He discussed the similarities and differences of the scriptures with the Crown Prince Taifu and the Confucianists who governed the "Five Classics" in the stone channel, and wrote an article to inquire about the emperor.

古文：及元帝即位，以玄成为少府，迁太子太傅，至御史大夫。
现代文：等到元帝即位后，任命玄成做少府，升迁为太子太傅，后来做到了御史大夫。
English: After Emperor Yuan ascended to the throne, he appointed Xuanzeng as a minor prefect and promoted him to the position of Prince Taifu (太子太傅), and later made him a goshi taifu (御史大夫).

古文：永光中，代于定国为丞相。
现代文：永光年间，韦玄成代替于定国做了丞相。
English: During the Yongguang era, Wei Xuancheng replaced Dingguo as chancellor.

古文：贬黜十年之间，遂继父相位，封侯故国，荣当世焉。
现代文：韦玄成被贬十年左右，就继而做了父亲原来做遇的丞相的官位，又在原来的封国被封侯，荣耀于当世。
English: After Wei Xuancheng was demoted for about ten years, he became the prime minister that his father had been, and he was also made a vassal in the original vassal state, which was a great honor in the modern world.

古文：玄成复作诗，自著复玷缺之艰难，因以戒示子孙，曰：
现代文：玄成就又写了诗，自己表述从错误中奋起的艰难，以此来训诫子孙，诗中说：
English: Xuanzang also wrote a poem, describing the hardships that arose from his mistakes, as a way to teach his children and grandchildren, saying in the poem:

古文：于肃君子，既令厥德，仪服此恭，棣棣其则。
现代文：肃穆的君子，行为端重以修好自己的美德，礼仪服饰恭敬对待，整整齐齐可做楷模。
English: A serious gentleman, his behavior is focused on improving his own virtue, his etiquette and dress are respectful, and his neatness can be a model.

古文：咨余小子，既德靡逮，曾是车服，荒嫚以队。
现代文：哎，微贱的我，德行赶不上他们；曾因为礼服车仗之事荒疏，被削夺了爵位。
English: Alas, poor me, I am not as virtuous as they are. I was deprived of my knighthood because I was careless in dress and carriage.

古文：明明天子，俊德烈烈，不遂我遗，恤我九列。
现代文：圣明的天子，美德昭著；没有最终抛弃我，让我位列九卿。
English: The holy Son of God, full of virtue, did not abandon me in the end, but made me one of the nine nobles.

古文：我既兹恤，惟夙惟夜，畏忌是申，供事靡惰。
现代文：我蒙皇帝这样的恩遇，便日夜小心；告诫自己要自我约束，做官为政不能怠慢。
English: Having been so favored by the emperor, I was careful day and night; I warned myself to be self-disciplined and not to neglect my duties as an official.

古文：天子我监，登我三事，顾我伤队，爵复我旧。
现代文：天子明察我的情况，提拔我做丞相位列三公；考虑到我为以前的犯过失爵而伤感，又恢复了我原来的爵位。
English: The Son of Heaven clearly saw my situation and promoted me to the third rank of the three princes; considering that I was saddened by the previous offense of losing my title, I restored my original title.

古文：我即此登，望我旧阶，先后兹度，涟涟孔怀。
现代文：我登上了官位后，看着原来的旧台阶和房子；我先父曾住在这裹的房宅，回想起来使我十分怀念伤心。
English: When I came into office, I looked at the old steps and the house as it was, the house my father had lived in, and it made me very nostalgic and sad.

古文：司直御事，我熙我盛；群公百僚，我嘉我庆。
现代文：丞相司直和帮助治理政事的人，协助得很好使我事业兴盛；公卿百官，都来向我祝贺。
English: The prime minister, Tsitsuna, and those who helped to administer the affairs of state assisted me very well in making my career flourish; hundreds of nobles and officials came to congratulate me.

古文：于异卿士，非同我心，三事惟艰，莫我肯矜。
现代文：哎呀这些官吏，与我的心思真不一样；三公之事多么艰难，没有人肯同情我。
English: Alas, these officials are so different from my heart and mind; no one is willing to sympathize with me, no matter how difficult things are in the Three Kingdoms.

古文：赫赫三事，力虽此毕，非我所度，退其罔日。
现代文：盛大的三公之事，我的精力虽然都花费在上边了，但恐怕不是我能长居的官位，不知那一天就会被贬退。
English: Although I have spent all my energy on the grand three noble things, I am afraid that it is not a position I can hold for long. I do not know if I will be demoted that day.

古文：昔我之队，畏不此居，今我度兹，戚戚其惧。
现代文：以前我被削官夺爵时，害怕不能做到这样的高位；现在我做了丞相，却十分担忧恐惧。
English: Before, when I was knighted, I was afraid of not being able to achieve such a high position; now that I have become the prime minister, I am very worried and afraid.

古文：嗟我后人，命其靡常，靖享尔位，瞻仰靡荒。
现代文：哎呀我的后代们，要知道天命无常啊；想办法好好做你们的官，处理政务不要荒怠。
English: Alas, my descendants, you must know that fate is fickle; find a way to do your official duties well, and do not be lazy in handling government affairs.

古文：慎尔会同，戒尔车服，无惰尔仪，以保尔域。
现代文：对朝会大事要慎重，礼服车仗之事要注意，不要仪表不成体统，好好保存自己的封地。
English: You should be careful about the important events of the imperial court, pay attention to the dress and car wars, do not make the appearance unseemly, and preserve your fief well.

古文：尔无我视，不慎不整；我之此复，惟禄之幸。
现代文：你们不要看着我跟我学，像我那样不慎重不齐整；我官位的恢复，是上天赐福。
English: Don't look at me and learn from me, don't be as careless and disorganized as I am; my reinstatement is a blessing from God.

古文：於戏后人，惟肃惟栗。
现代文：哎呀后辈们，要小心慎重。
English: Ah, juniors, be careful.

古文：无忝显祖，以蕃汉室！
现代文：不要玷污了你们光荣的祖先，来保护汉王朝！
English: Don't defile your glorious ancestors to protect the Han Dynasty!

古文：玄成为相七年，守正持重不及父贤，而文采过之。
现代文：韦玄成做丞相七年，在操守端重稳当方面不如他父亲韦贤，而文采超过了父亲。
English: Wei Xuancheng served as chancellor for seven years. In terms of integrity and stability, he was not as good as his father Wei Xian, but his literary skills surpassed his father.

古文：建昭三年薨，谥曰共侯。
现代文：建昭三年韦玄成死去，谧号为共侯。
English: Wei Xuancheng died in the third year of Jian Zhao's reign, and his posthumous name was Jian Hou.

古文：初，贤以昭帝时徙平陵，玄成别徙杜陵，病且死，因使者自白曰： 不胜父子恩，愿乞骸骨，归葬父墓。 上许焉。
现代文：当初，韦贤在昭帝年间迁到平陵，韦玄成另迁居杜陵，玄成病得快要死了，派使者向朝廷表白自己的意思，他说： 我忍受不了父子恩深却分葬两地，希望皇上能准许我辞官，回去与父亲葬在一起。 
English: At first, Wei Xian moved to Pingling during the reign of Emperor Zhao, and Wei Xuancheng moved to Du Ling. Xuancheng was so ill that he was about to die. He sent an envoy to the imperial court to express his intention. He said: I can't bear the fact that my father and son were deeply grateful, but they were buried in two different places. I hope the emperor will allow me to resign and go back to be buried with my father.

古文：子顷侯宽嗣。
现代文：皇帝答应了他的请求。
English: The emperor agreed to his request.

古文：薨，子僖侯育嗣。
现代文：他的儿子顷侯韦宽继承了爵位。
English: His son, Hou Wei Kuan, inherited the title.

古文：薨，子节侯沉嗣。
现代文：韦宽死后，他的儿子僖侯韦育继承了爵位。
English: After Wei Kuan's death, his son Zou Hou Wei Yu inherited the title.

古文：自贤传国至玄孙乃绝。
现代文：韦育死后，他的儿子节侯韦沈继立。韦贤的封国一直传到玄孙才断绝。
English: After Wei Yu's death, his son, Wei Shen, succeeded him. Wei Xian's fiefdom was passed down to his great-great-grandson.

古文：玄成兄高寝令方山子安世历郡守、大鸿胪、长乐卫尉，朝廷称有宰相之器，会其病终。
现代文：韦玄成的哥哥高寝县令韦方山的儿子韦安世从郡守一直做到大鸿胪、长乐宫卫尉，朝廷称赞他有宰相的才干，可是他却不巧得病死去了。
English: Wei Xuancheng's brother Gao Xingxian ordered Wei Fangshan's son Wei Anse from the county seat to be a great nobleman and Chao Le Palace guard, and the court praised his ability as prime minister, but he unfortunately died of illness.

古文：而东海太守弘子赏亦明《诗》。
现代文：束海太守韦弘的儿子韦赏也通晓《诗经》。
English: Wei Yun, the son of Wei Hong, the governor of Sokai, was also familiar with the "Book of Songs."

古文：哀帝为定陶王时，赏为太傅。
现代文：哀帝做定陶王的时候，韦赏做过他的太傅。
English: When Emperor Ai was the king of Dingtao, Wei Xuan was his grand tutor.

古文：哀帝即位，赏以旧恩为大司马车骑将军，列为三公，赐爵关内侯，食邑千户，亦年八十余，以寿终。
现代文：哀帝即位后，韦赏因为曾做哀帝老师的旧恩情，做了大司马车骑将军，位列三公，赏给他关内侯的爵位，食邑有一千户，也活到八十多岁，终其天年。
English: After Emperor Ai ascended to the throne, Wei Yun, who had once been Emperor Ai's teacher, because of the old favor, became the general of the grand coach, ranked as the three princes, awarded him the title of Guan Nei Marquis, there were a thousand households in the food village, and he also lived to be more than eighty years old.

古文：宗族至吏二千石者十余人。
现代文：韦氏家族中做到二千石官位的有十多人。
English: There are more than ten people in the Wei family who have achieved the official rank of two thousand stone.

古文：初，高祖时，令诸侯王都皆立太上皇庙。
现代文：当初，在高祖的时候，命令各诸侯王在自己的都城中都要建立太上皇庙。
English: In the beginning, at the time of Emperor Gaozu, all princes were ordered to build imperial temples in their capitals.

古文：至惠帝尊高帝庙为太祖庙，景帝尊孝文庙为太宗庙，行所尝幸郡国各立太祖、太宗庙。
现代文：到惠帝时，把高帝庙尊奉为太祖庙；景帝时把孝文庙尊奉为太宗庙，命令在皇帝所在的地方、曾经去过的那些郡国都要建立太祖、太宗庙。
English: When Emperor Hui arrived, he revered the Gao Temple as the Great Ancestor's Temple; when Emperor Jing arrived, he revered the Xiaowen Temple as the Great Patriarch's Temple, and ordered that the Great Ancestor's Temple and the Great Patriarch's Temple should be built in the places where the emperor was and in the counties he had visited.

古文：至宣帝本始二年，复尊孝武庙为世宗庙，行所巡狩亦立焉。
现代文：到了宣帝本始二年，又把孝武庙尊奉为世宗庙，皇帝所在的地方和曾巡幸的地方也要建立世宗庙。
English: In the first two years of Emperor Xuanzong's reign, the Xiaowu Temple was also honored as the world's ancestral temple, and the world's ancestral temple was to be built in the place where the emperor was and the place where he had visited.

古文：凡祖宗庙在郡国六十八，合百六十七所。
现代文：在六十八个诸侯国中，供奉漠室祖先的庙共有一百六十七所。
English: Among the sixty-eight vassal states, there were a total of one hundred and sixty-seven temples dedicated to the ancestors of the Mushrooms.

古文：而京师自高祖下至宣帝，与太上皇、悼皇考各自居陵旁立庙，并为百七十六。
现代文：而在京城，从高祖以下到宣帝，与太上皇、悼皇考一起，各自在陵墓旁建庙，合在一起共有一百七十六所。
English: In the capital, from Emperor Gaozu on down to Emperor Xuan, together with the Emperor and Empress Dowager, they each built a temple next to the mausoleum, for a total of 176 temples.

古文：又园中各有寝、便殿，日祭于寝，月祭于庙，时祭于便殿。
现代文：另外园陵中又分别有正殿与偏殿。每曰在陵寝正殿进行祭祀，每月一次在宗庙进行祭祀，不时地在偏殿也进行祭祀。
English: In addition, there are a main hall and a side hall in the garden. Daily rituals are held in the main hall, once a month in the ancestral temple, and from time to time in the side hall.

古文：寝，日四上食；庙，岁二十五祠；便殿，岁四祠。
现代文：陵寝正殿的祭祀，每日上供祭食四次；宗庙每年祭祀二十五次；偏殿一年祭祀四次。
English: In the main hall of the mausoleum, offerings are made four times a day; in the ancestral temple, offerings are made twenty-five times a year; and in the side hall, offerings are made four times a year.

古文：又有一游衣冠。
现代文：并且每月一次抬着先皇帝的衣冠在陵寝与祭庙之间出游。
English: And once a month, he travels between the mausoleum and the temple, carrying the former emperor's crown.

古文：而昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、孝文太后、孝昭太后、卫思后、戾太子、戾后各有寝园，与诸帝合，凡三十所。
现代文：而昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、孝文太后、孝昭太后、卫思后、戾太子、戾后也分别都有陵寝园邑，与先皇帝们的祭庙陵园合在一起，共有三十所。
English: And Zhaoling Hou, King Wu'er, Zhaoling Hou, Empress Dowager Xiaowen, Empress Dowager Xiaozhao, Empress Dowager Wei Si, Crown Prince Zou and Empress Dowager Zhou also have mausoleums respectively, and together with the temples and mausoleums of the previous emperors, there are a total of thirty.

古文：一岁祠，上食二万四千四百五十五，用卫士四万五千一百二十九人，祝宰乐人万二千一百四十七人，养牺牲卒不在数中。
现代文：每年的祭祀活动，负责上供祭食的人要用二万四千四百五十五个，用卫士四万五千一百二十九人，用男巫、宰人、乐人一万二千一百四十七人，负责饲养用于祭祀的牲畜的人员还不算在数内。
English: In the annual ritual activities, the number of people responsible for offering sacrificial food is up to 24,455, the number of guards is up to 45,129, and the number of sorcerers, slaughterers, and musicians is up to 12,147. The number of people responsible for raising sacrificial animals is not included.

古文：至元帝时，贡禹奏言： 古者天子七庙，今孝惠、孝景庙皆亲尽，宜毁。
现代文：到元帝时，贡禹上书说： 古代的礼制天子有七庙就可以了，现在孝惠帝、孝景帝宗庙的直系亲人都已死光了，庙也该毁掉了。
English: At the time of Emperor Yuan, Gong Yu wrote: It is enough to have seven temples in the ancient ritual system. Now, the direct relatives of Emperor Xiao Hui and Emperor Xiao Jing's ancestral temple have all died, and the temple should be destroyed.

古文：及郡国庙不应古礼，宜正定。 
现代文：以及各诸侯国的宗庙不符合古代礼制的，也应该予以改正。 
English: as well as the ancestral temples of various states that do not conform to the ancient ritual system, should also be corrected.

古文：天子是其议，未及施行而禹卒。
现代文：元帝赞成他的建议，还没来得及施行贡禹就死了。
English: Emperor Yuan approved of his suggestion, but died before he could implement the tribute.

古文：光永四年，乃下诏先议罢郡国庙，曰： 朕闻明王之御世也，遭时为法，因事制宜。
现代文：永光四年的时候，皇帝下诏让群臣议论撤销各诸侯国宗庙的事，韶书说： 我听说圣明的君王治理天下时，随着时代的变迁制定法令，随事件的不同采用不同的方法。
English: In the fourth year of Emperor Yongguang's reign, the emperor issued an edict to his courtiers to discuss the issue of revoking the ancestral temples of various states. The imperial edict said, "I have heard that when the holy emperors governed the world, they made decrees according to the changes of the times and adopted different methods according to different events.

古文：往者天下初定，远方未宾，因尝所亲以立宗庙，盖建威销萌，一民之至权也。
现代文：以前的时候，天下刚刚平定，边远地方的人还没有臣服，因而先皇帝在亲自巡幸过的地方建立宗庙，那是为了树立威望，消除隐患，使人们统一到一个最高权威之下。
English: In the past, when the country had just been pacified and people in remote areas had not yet been subjugated, the first emperor would establish a family temple in a place he had personally visited. This was to establish prestige, eliminate hidden dangers, and unify people under a supreme authority.

古文：今赖天地之灵，宗庙之福，四方同轨，蛮貊贡职，久遵而不定，令疏远卑贱共承尊祀，殆非皇天祖宗之意，朕甚惧焉。
现代文：现在托天地的威灵，靠祖宗的洪福，天下统一，边远民族臣服。后代君主长久地遵从先帝的礼制，没有改变，使得疏远卑贱的人们也能一起与皇族供奉圣严的宗庙，这大概不是上天和祖宗所希望的，所以我十分恐惧。
English: Now, relying on the benevolence of heaven and earth, and the bountiful blessings of our ancestors, the world is unified, and the outlying peoples are subjugated. The descendants of the monarchs have long obeyed the rituals of the former emperor, and have not changed, so that the alienated and lowly people can worship the sacred ancestral temple together with the royal family. This is probably not what heaven and the ancestors hoped for, so I am very afraid.

古文：传不云乎？ 吾不与祭，如不祭。 其与将军、列侯、中二千石、二千石、诸大夫、博士、议郎议。 
现代文：《论语》上不是说过 我不亲自参加祭祀，舆没有举行祭祀是一样的，现在请将军、各诸侯王、中二千石的官员、二千石的官员、各位大夫、博士、议郎一起商议这事情。 
English: Didn't it say in the "Analects" that if I don't personally participate in the sacrifice, it's the same as if I didn't hold the sacrifice? Now, I ask the generals, the princes, the officials of 2,000 koku, the officials of 2,000 koku, the doctors, the doctors, and the councilors to discuss this matter together.

古文：丞相玄成、御史大夫郑弘、太子太傅严彭祖、少府欧阳地馀、谏大夫尹更始等七十人皆曰： 臣闻祭，非自外至者也，繇中出，生于心也。
现代文：丞相韦玄成、御史大夫郑弘、太子太傅严彭祖、少府欧阳地余、谏大夫尹更始等七十人一起回奏说： 我们听说，祭祀祖先不是由于外界的影响，而是从内心要这么做。
English: Seventy people, including the chancellor Wei Xuancheng, the chief historian Zheng Hong, the prince Taifu Yan Peng Zu, the minor prefect Ouyang Jiyu, and the chief historian Yin Gangshi, echoed together and said: We have heard that the sacrifice of ancestors is not due to external influences, but to do so from the heart.

古文：故唯圣人为能飨帝，孝子为能飨亲。
现代文：所以衹有圣人才真正祭祀先帝，衹有孝子才能真正祭祀父亲。
English: Therefore, only a saint can truly worship the former emperor, and only a filial son can truly worship his father.

古文：立庙京师之居，躬亲承事，四海之内各以其职来助祭，尊亲之大义，五帝、三王所共，不易之道也。
现代文：如果在京城皇帝您居住的地方建立宗庙，亲自主持祭祀，天下各地的官员都按照自己的职分带着祭品来助祭，这是崇奉先祖的要义，是五帝三王共同遵守的、永远不变的大道。
English: If a family temple is built in the place where you live, the emperor of the capital city, and you personally hold the sacrifice, officials from all over the world will bring offerings to assist the sacrifice according to their duties. This is the essence of worshiping the ancestors, and it is the eternal and unchanging road that the five emperors and three kings jointly abide by.

古文：《诗》云： 有来雍雍，至止肃肃，相维辟公，天子穆穆。 《春秋》之义，父不祭于支庶之宅，君不祭于臣仆之家，王不祭于下土诸侯。
现代文：《诗》中说： 来助祭的人十分和静，来到后十分肃敬；助祭的人都是卿士、诸侯、天子主持祭祀十分肃穆庄严，《春秋》大义，是不在旁支庶人家裹祭祀先父，不在大臣仆役家中祭祀先君，不在下边诸侯那裹祭祀先王。
English: "The poem" says: "Those who come to assist at the festival are very peaceful and quiet, and they are very reverent when they arrive; those who assist at the festival are nobles, lords, and sons of heaven, and they are very solemn and dignified when they preside over the sacrifice. In the Spring and Autumn Period, it was considered to be a great virtue not to support a commoner's family to sacrifice the ancestor, not to sacrifice the ancestor in the house of a minister's servant, and not to sacrifice the ancestor in the house of a vassal, and not to sacrifice the ancestor in the house of a vassal.

古文：臣等愚以为宗庙在郡国，宜无修，臣请勿复修。 
现代文：我们认为在各诸侯国的先帝宗庙不应该修建，我们请求不要再修建了。 
English: We believe that the ancestral temples of the former emperors in various provinces should not be built, and we request that they no longer be built.

古文：奏可。
现代文：大臣们的奏书得到皇帝许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：因罢昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后、戾太子、戾后园，皆不奉祠，裁置吏卒守焉。
现代文：于是便撤销了昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后、卫思后、戾太子、戾后的陵园，都不再进行祭祀，裁减了守陵的官吏士卒。
English: As a result, the cemeteries of Zhaolinghou, Wu'ei Wang, Zhaolinghou, Weizhihou, Shun Taizi, and Shun Hou were abolished. No more sacrifices were made, and the number of officials guarding the tombs was reduced.

古文：罢郡国庙后月余，复下诏曰： 盖闻明王制礼，立亲庙四，祖宗之庙，万世不毁，所以明尊祖敬宗，著亲亲也。
现代文：撤销了各诸侯国的宗庙一个多月后，皇帝又下诏说： 我听说圣明的君王制定礼仪，建立四个先帝的祭庙，祖宗的祭庙万世不毁，这是为了昭明尊敬祖宗，表明亲近父亲长辈。
English: More than a month after revoking the ancestral temples of the various principalities, the emperor issued another edict, saying: I have heard that the king of Shengming has formulated a ritual to establish four ancestral temples, and the ancestral temples will never be destroyed. This is to show respect for the ancestors and to show closeness to the fathers and elders.

古文：朕获承祖宗之重，惟大礼未备，战栗恐惧，不敢自颛，其与将军、列侯、中二千石、二千石、诸大夫、博士议。 
现代文：我继承祖宗重大的基业，衹因这重大的礼节没有完备，因而十分恐惧。我不敢自己专断，就这事与将军、诸侯、中二千石、二千石、各位大夫、博士一起商议。 
English: I am inheriting the great heritage of my ancestors, but I am very afraid because this important etiquette is not complete. I dare not arbitrarily decide, and I will discuss this matter with generals, lords, 2,000 koku, 2,000 koku, and doctors and doctors.

古文：玄成等四十四人奏议曰： 《礼》，王者始受命，诸侯始封之君，皆为太祖。
现代文：韦玄成等四十四人议论后回奏说： 《礼》上说，受命于天的开国君王，最初受封的诸侯国的君主，都称为太祖。
English: After the discussion, Wei Xuancheng and other forty-four people echoed: "The Ritual says that the founding king, who was ordered by heaven, and the monarch of the vassal state, who was first crowned, are all called grandfathers.

古文：以下，五庙而迭毁，毁庙之主臧乎太祖，五年而再殷祭，言一禘祫也。
现代文：这以后的君王，死后建立的庙经过五代就相继拆毁，被毁的庙裹的神主收藏在太祖庙裹，五年之后举行大祭，叫做一次椅祭一次夹祭。
English: After five generations, the temples built after the death of the monarchs were successively demolished. The shrouded deities of the destroyed temples were collected in the ancestral temple. Five years later, a grand festival was held, called a chair festival and a clip festival.

古文：祫祭者，毁庙与未毁庙之主皆合食于太祖，父为昭，子为穆，孙复为昭，古之正礼也。
现代文：夹祭就是把已毁庙的神主与没有毁庙的神主都收集到太祖庙裹受祭享，父辈为昭，子辈为穆，孙辈又为昭，这是古代正统的礼法。
English: The sacrifice is to gather the deities who have destroyed the temple and the deities who have not destroyed the temple to the ancestral temple to enjoy the sacrifice. The fathers are Zhao, the children are Mu, and the grandchildren are Zhao. This is the ancient orthodox etiquette.

古文：《祭义》曰： 王者禘其祖自出，以其祖配之，而立四庙。 
现代文：祭祀书上说： 君王敬祭自己祖先的父亲，让太祖的神主一起受祭，从而建立四个庙。 
English: According to the ritual book: "The king offered a sacrifice to the father of his ancestors, and let the god of his great-grandfather be sacrificed together, thus establishing four temples.

古文：言始受命而王，祭天以其祖配，而不为立庙，亲尽也。
现代文：说的是最初受命于天而称王，祭祀上天时以自己的祖先配祭，而不为他建庙，是因为亲属关系疏远了。
English: It is said that he was originally commanded by heaven to become king, and when he was sacrificed to heaven, he used his own ancestors to match the sacrifice, but did not build a temple for him, because the kinship was estranged.

古文：立亲庙四，亲亲也。
现代文：活着的皇帝建立四个祭庙，是为了表明亲敬父辈。
English: The living emperor built four temples to show his reverence for his ancestors.

古文：亲尽而迭毁，亲疏之杀，示有终也。
现代文：亲属关系疏远了，庙也就相继拆毁，由亲慢慢降变为疏，是表示有终了。
English: When the kinship is estranged, the temples are demolished one after another, and the relationship slowly declines to estrangement, indicating that there is an end.

古文：周之所以七庙者，以后稷始封，文王、武王受命而王，是以三庙不毁，与亲庙四而七。
现代文：周代之所以建立七庙，是因为后稷最早受封建国，文王、武王受命于天而称王，所以为祭祀他们而建的三座庙一直不毁弃，与供奉高、曾、祖、补四座庙加在一起共有七座。
English: The reason why Zhou Dynasty built seven temples is that Houyi was the first to be conquered by the feudal state, and King Wen and King Wu were ordered by heaven to become kings. Therefore, the three temples built to worship them have not been destroyed, and together with the four temples dedicated to Gao, Zeng, Zu and Shu, there are a total of seven temples.

古文：非有后稷始封，文、武受命之功者，皆当亲尽而毁。
现代文：不是有后稷最早受封建国，文王与武王受命于天称王那样功绩的，都应当在亲子孙死尽以后就把庙毁弃。
English: It is not the case that Hou Yi was the first to receive the feudal founding of the country, and King Wen and King Wu were ordered by heaven to perform the same feat as the king, and they should destroy the temple after the death of their children and grandchildren.

古文：成王成二圣之业，制礼作乐，功德茂盛，庙犹不世，以行为谥而已。
现代文：周成王成就了像文王、武王那样的功业，制定礼仪音乐、功高德深，可是他的庙还不世代相传，祇按他的行为赠他相应的谧号而已。
English: Like King Wen and King Wu, King Zhou Chenggong accomplished great feats, established etiquette and music, and was deeply virtuous. However, his temple was not passed down from generation to generation, and he was only given a corresponding nickname according to his actions.

古文：《礼》，庙在大门之内，不敢远亲也。
现代文：《礼记》上说，先帝的庙要修建在大门之内，是为了表示不敢疏远亲父。
English: "Li Ji" said that the temple of the former emperor should be built within the gate, in order to show that he did not dare to alienate his father.

古文：臣愚以为高帝受命定天下，宜为帝者太祖之庙，世世不毁，承后属尽者宜毁。
现代文：我们认为高皇帝受命于天，平定天下，应当建成为太祖庙，世世代代不毁弃，随后的皇帝亲子孙死尽了的都要毁弃祭庙。
English: We believe that Emperor Gao was ordered by heaven to pacify the world, and that it should be built as a great ancestor temple, and it should not be destroyed for generations to come. Subsequent emperors and their descendants who have died should destroy the temple.

古文：今宗庙异处，昭穆不序，宜入就太祖庙而序昭穆如礼。
现代文：现在祖宗祭庙建在各处，不分昭穆次序，应当按礼仪规定把他们的神主都搬到太祖庙内，按昭穆次序排列。
English: Now ancestor temples are built everywhere, regardless of the order of the Shomu, it should be moved to the ancestor temple according to the rules of etiquette, and arranged in the order of the Shomu.

古文：太上皇、孝惠、孝文、孝景庙皆亲尽宜毁，皇考庙亲未尽，如故。 
现代文：太上皇、孝惠帝、孝文帝、孝景帝的祭庙，因为亲子孙都已死尽，都应该毁弃，皇考庙因为亲子孙还没有死尽，就还像原来那样。 
English: The ceremonial temples of Emperor Taejong, Emperor Xiaowei, Emperor Xiaowen, and Emperor Xiaojing should all be destroyed because their descendants have already died, while the imperial examination temple should remain as it is because their descendants have not yet died.

古文：大司马车骑将军许嘉等二十九人以为，孝文皇帝除诽谤，去肉刑，躬节俭，不受献，罪人不帑，不私其利，出美人，重绝人类，宾赐长老，收恤孤独，德厚侔天地，利泽施四海，宜为帝者太宗之庙。
现代文：大司马车骑将军许嘉等二十九人认为孝文皇帝排除谤议，减去肉刑，亲身厉行节俭，不接受贺献，处罚有罪之人不及妻子，不贪利，放出宫中美人，对闱人为宦官十分慎重，礼遇年长之人，收养抚恤没父母没子女的人，功德之高可比天地，恩惠利益广施天下之人，应该为他建立太宗之庙。
English: Twenty-nine people, including the head coachman General Xu Jia, believed that Emperor Xiaowen should eliminate slander, reduce corporal punishment, personally practice frugality, not accept gifts, punish the guilty less than his wife, not be greedy, release the beauty of the palace, be very cautious about eunuchs, treat the elderly with courtesy, adopt people who have no parents and no children, whose merits are as high as heaven and earth, and who are generous with favors and benefits, should build a temple for him.

古文：廷尉忠以为，孝武皇帝改正朔，易服色，攘四夷，宜为世宗之庙。
现代文：廷尉忠认为孝武皇帝改定正朔历法，更换人们衣服的颜色，击退四边的少数民族，应该为他建立世宗之庙。
English: Tinglizhong believed that Emperor Xiaowu changed the Gregorian calendar, changed the color of people's clothes, repelled ethnic minorities on all sides, and should build a temple for him.

古文：谏大夫尹更始等十八人以为，皇考庙上序于昭穆，非正礼，宜毁。
现代文：谏大夫尹更始等十八人认为皇考庙上接于昭穆次序，不符合正统礼节规定，应当毁弃。
English: Eighteen people, including Dr. Yin Qianxi, believed that the imperial examination temple was next to Zhaomu in order, did not meet the requirements of orthodox etiquette, and should be destroyed.

古文：于是上重其事，依违者一年，乃下诏曰： 盖闻王者祖有功而宗有德，尊尊之大义也；存亲庙四，亲亲之至恩也。高皇帝为天下诛暴除乱，受命而帝，功莫大焉。
现代文：高皇帝为天下百姓诛杀除掉暴乱之人，受命于天，做了皇帝，功劳没有比这更大的了。孝文皇帝在封国是代王，吕氏的人叛乱，天下混乱震动，然而群臣百姓都一个心思，要归顺文帝；可文帝还十分谦虚，坚决辞让。
English: Emperor Gao fought for the people of the world and killed those who eliminated the riots. He was ordered by heaven to become an emperor, and there is no greater merit than this. Emperor Xiaowen was the acting king in sealing the country, the people of Lv Shi rebelled, and the world was in turmoil. However, the courtiers and the people were all of one mind, to surrender to Emperor Shunwen; but Emperor Shunwen was also very modest and resolutely resigned.

古文：孝文皇帝国为代王，诸吕作乱，海内摇动，然群臣黎庶靡不一意，北面而归心，犹谦辞固让而后即位，削乱秦之迹，兴三代之风，是以百姓晏然，咸获嘉福，德莫盛焉。高皇帝为汉太祖，孝文皇帝为太宗，世世承祀，传之无穷，朕甚乐之。
现代文：然后才即位做了皇帝。文帝消除像当初秦国那样的混乱局面，重振三代的和美风尚，所以百姓才得以安居乐业，都蒙受了文帝的恩惠，文帝的功德仁义没人能比。我认为应该尊奉高皇帝为汉太祖，孝文皇帝为太宗，世世代代接受后人祭祀，永远传下去，我十分高兴这样做。
English: Only then did Emperor Wen ascend the throne. Emperor Wen eliminated the chaotic situation like that of Qin at the beginning, and revived the three generations of harmony and beauty. Therefore, the people were able to live and work in peace. They all received the grace of Emperor Wen. No one can match the merits and benevolence of Emperor Wen. I think that Emperor Gao should be honored as the ancestor of the Han Dynasty, and Emperor Xiaowen as the Taizong. For generations to come, they will receive the sacrifice of posterity and pass it on forever. I am very happy to do so.

古文：孝宣皇帝为孝昭皇帝后，于义一体。
现代文：孝宣皇帝是孝昭皇帝的后代，从礼义角度来说都是一样的。
English: Emperor Xiaoxuan is a descendant of Emperor Xiaozhao, and from the perspective of etiquette, they are all the same.

古文：孝景皇帝庙及皇考庙皆亲尽，其正礼仪。 
现代文：孝景皇帝的祭庙与皇考庙因为都是亲子孙已死尽，应当按礼法规定予以毁弃。 
English: Emperor Xiaojing's festival temple and the imperial examination temple should be destroyed in accordance with the rules of etiquette, because they are the descendants of the deceased.

古文：玄成等奏曰： 祖宗之庙世世不毁，继祖以下，五庙而迭毁。
现代文：韦玄成等人上书说： 祖宗的祭庙世世代代不毁弃，从祖宗以下，传五代祭庙就相继毁弃。
English: Wei Xuancheng and others wrote: The ancestral festival temple will not be destroyed for generations. From the ancestors down, the five-generation festival temple will be destroyed one after another.

古文：今高皇帝为太祖，孝文皇帝为太宗，孝景皇帝为昭，孝武皇帝为穆，孝昭皇帝与孝宣皇帝俱为昭。
现代文：现在高皇帝是太祖，孝文皇帝是太宗，孝景皇帝排次序是昭，孝武皇帝是穆，孝昭皇帝舆孝宣皇帝都排为昭。
English: Now Emperor Gao is Taizu, Emperor Xiaowen is Taizong, Emperor Xiaojing is Zhao, Emperor Xiaowu is Mu, Emperor Xiaozhao is Miao, and Emperor Xiaoxuan is Zhao.

古文：皇考庙亲未尽。
现代文：皇考庙因为亲子孙没有死尽不该毁弃。
English: The imperial examination temple should not be destroyed because the relatives and descendants did not die.

古文：太上、孝惠庙皆亲尽，宜毁。
现代文：太上、孝惠庙因亲属关系都已疏远，应该撤除。
English: Both the Mother Superior and Xiao Hui Temple have been estranged due to kinship, and should be removed.

古文：太上庙主宜瘗园，孝惠皇帝为穆，主迁于太祖庙，寝园皆无复修。 
现代文：太上皇庙中的神主应该埋在陵园中，孝惠皇帝为穆，神主迁到太祖庙中，陵寝园邑都不要再修建了。 
English: The deity of the temple of the late emperor should be buried in the cemetery, the emperor Xiao Hui should be buried, the deity should be moved to the ancestral temple, and no more mausoleums should be built.

古文：奏可。
现代文：他们的奏书得到了许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：议者又以为《清庙》之诗言交神之礼无不清静，今衣冠出游，有车骑之众，风雨之气，非所谓清静也。 祭不欲数，数则渎，渎则不敬。 
现代文：议事的大臣又认为《清庙》诗中说过祭祀神主的礼仪没有不要求清静的，可现在每月一次抬先皇帝的衣冠在陵寝与祭庙间游行，有众多的车马，有风有雨，不符合清静的要求。《礼记》上说： 祭祀不要次数太多，太多了就是亵渎，亵渎就是不尊敬祖先了。 
English: The deliberating minister also thought that the poem "Clear Temple" said that the ritual of sacrificing the god did not require quietness, but now once a month, the emperor's crown is carried in the procession between the mausoleum and the temple. There are many chariots and horses, wind and rain, which does not meet the requirements of quietness. "Rituals" said: Do not have too many sacrifices, too much is blasphemy, blasphemy is disrespecting ancestors.

古文：宜复古礼，四时祭于庙，诸寝园日月间祀皆可勿复修。
现代文：因此应当恢复古代的礼制，按四季在庙中祭祀，另外那些陵寝园邑或几曰一次或几月一次不时地祭祀，都可以不必再修建。
English: Therefore, the ancient ceremonial system should be restored, and sacrifices should be made in temples according to the four seasons. In addition, those mausoleums or mausoleums should be sacrificed from time to time, once every few days or once every few months. There is no need to build them again.

古文：上亦不改也。
现代文：皇帝也就不再改变。
English: The emperor will not change.

古文：明年，玄成复言： 古者制礼，别尊卑贵贱，国君之母非適不得配食，则荐于寝，身没而已。
现代文：第二年，韦玄成又上书说： 古代制定礼法，是为了区分尊卑贵贱，国王的母亲如果不是嫡氏就不能与先皇帝一起受祭于庙，那么就在陵寝献上食物进行祭祀，皇帝死了也就停止。
English: In the second year, Wei Xuancheng wrote again, saying: The ancient ritual law was established in order to distinguish between the high and the low. If the king's mother was not a legitimate heir, she could not be sacrificed together with the former emperor in the temple, so she would offer food in the mausoleum for sacrifice, and the emperor would stop when he died.

古文：陛下躬至孝，承天心，建祖宗，定迭毁，序昭穆，大礼既定，孝文太后、孝昭太后寝祠园宜如礼勿复修。 
现代文：陛下您十分孝顺，秉承天意，建立祖庙宗庙，制定相继毁弃祭庙的制度，排列昭穆，大礼已定好了，孝文太后、孝昭太后的陵寝园邑应该按照礼法，不再修复。 
English: Your majesty, you are very filial, adhering to the will of heaven, establishing ancestral temples and ancestral temples, formulating a system of successively destroying temples, arranging honorifics, the grand ceremony has been set, the Empress Dowager Xiaowen and the Empress Dowager Xiaowen's mausoleum should be in accordance with the etiquette, and will not be repaired.

古文：奏可。
现代文：他的奏书得到许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：后岁余，玄成薨，匡衡为丞相。
现代文：一年多以后，韦玄成去世，匡衡做了丞相。
English: More than a year later, Wei Xuancheng died, and Kuangheng became chancellor.

古文：上寝疾，梦祖宗谴罢郡国庙，上少弟楚孝王亦梦焉。
现代文：皇上卧病在床，梦见祖宗谴责自己毁弃了各封国的祭庙；皇帝的小弟弟楚孝王也梦见了这事。
English: The emperor was ill in bed and dreamed that his ancestors had condemned him for destroying the temples of the feudal states; the emperor's younger brother, King Chu Xiaowang, also dreamed about this.

古文：上诏问衡，议欲复之，衡深言不可。
现代文：皇帝下韶向匡衡询问怎么办，商议着想要重新在各封国建立祭庙，匡衡极力劝阻，认为不能这样做。
English: When the emperor asked Kuangheng what to do, Kuangheng tried his best to dissuade him, saying that it was not possible to do so.

古文：上疾久不平。衡惶恐，祷高祖、孝文、孝武庙曰： 嗣曾孙皇帝恭承洪业，夙夜不敢康宁，思育休烈，以章祖宗之盛功。
现代文：皇帝的病很长时间不能好，匡衡很害怕，在高祖、孝文帝、孝武帝庙中祷告说： 后代曾孙皇帝继承先代伟大的功业，日夜勤劳，不敢好好享乐，想着发扬光大祖宗的基业，来昭明祖宗的伟大功绩。
English: The emperor's illness would not get better for a long time, and Kuangheng was very afraid. He prayed in the temple of Emperor Gaozu, Emperor Xiaowen, and Emperor Xiaowu, saying: The descendants of the great-grandson of the emperor will inherit the great achievements of the previous generation, work hard day and night, dare not enjoy themselves, and think about carrying forward the great-grandfather's foundation, to show the great achievements of the ancestors.

古文：故动作接神，必因古圣之经。
现代文：所以一举一动，迎接神主，都一定要遵从古代圣人的经术。
English: Therefore, we must follow the ancient sage's sutras in every move to welcome the Lord.

古文：往者有司以为前因所幸而立庙，将以系海内之心，非为尊祖严亲也。
现代文：以前的时候，主管官员认为先前在皇帝到过的地方建立宗庙，是为了笼络海内人心，并不是为了尊奉祖先父辈。
English: In the past, officials in charge believed that the establishment of ancestral temples in places where the emperor had visited before was to win the hearts of the people, not to honor the ancestors.

古文：今赖宗庙之灵，六合之内莫不附亲，庙宜一居京师，天子亲奉，郡国庙可止毋修。
现代文：现在靠宗庙的神灵，天下没人敢不归附，因而祖宗祭庙应当统一建在京城，由天子亲自主持祭祀，各封国的祭庙可以停止不再修建了。
English: Nowadays, no one in the world dares not to belong to the deities of ancestral temples. Therefore, ancestral temples should be built uniformly in the capital city, and sacrifices should be held by the sons of heaven themselves. The temples of various fiefdoms can be stopped and no longer built.

古文：皇帝祗肃旧礼，尊重神明，即告于祖宗而不敢失。
现代文：皇帝崇敬过去的礼制，敬重祖先的神明，便上告于祖宗，不敢失礼。
English: The emperor revered the etiquette of the past and respected the gods of his ancestors, so he appealed to his ancestors and dared not be impolite.

古文：今皇帝有疾不豫，乃梦祖宗见戒以庙，楚王梦亦有其序。
现代文：现在皇帝害了病，久不能愈，又梦见祖宗用毁弃宗庙的事告诫他，楚王的梦也有这样的意思。
English: Now the emperor is ill and cannot be cured for a long time, and he dreamed that his ancestors warned him about the destruction of the ancestral temple. King Chu's dream also has this meaning.

古文：皇帝悼惧。即诏臣衡复修立。
现代文：皇帝十分害怕，便韶令我重新修建祭庙。
English: The emperor was so afraid that he ordered me to rebuild the temple.

古文：谨案上世帝王承祖祢之大礼，皆不敢不自亲。
现代文：我恭敬地认为上代帝王在主持祖宗神主祭祀的时候，最大的礼节是必须亲自到场。
English: I respectfully believe that when the previous emperor presided over the ancestor god's sacrifice, the greatest etiquette is that he must be present in person.

古文：郡国吏卑贱，不可使独承。
现代文：诸侯国的官吏地位卑贱，祭祀祖先的事不能让他们单独承办。
English: The officials of the vassal states had a lowly status, and they could not be allowed to carry out the ancestral rites on their own.

古文：又祭祀之义以民为本，间者岁数不登，百姓困乏，郡国庙无以修立。
现代文：另外，祭祀的要义是以百姓为根本准则，以前几年屡次没有丰收，百姓生活贫困，各封国的祭庙没办法修建。
English: In addition, the essence of the sacrificial rites is to take the people as the fundamental criterion. In previous years, there were many times no bumper harvest, the people lived in poverty, and there was no way to build the temples of various fiefdoms.

古文：《礼》，凶年则岁事不举，以祖祢之意为不乐，是以不敢复。
现代文：《礼》上说，不好的年景就不要举行祭祀，因为那样祖宗神主不高兴，所以不敢举行。
English: "Rite" says that if the year is not good, don't hold a sacrifice, because then the ancestor god is not happy, so he doesn't dare to hold it.

古文：如诚非礼义之中，违祖宗之心，咎尽在臣衡，当受其殃，大被其疾，队在沟渎之中。
现代文：如果确是因为朝廷做事不合礼义，违背了祖宗的心意，那罪过全在匡衡我一人身上，我应当受灾祸，害大病，掉到沟裹死去。
English: If it is indeed because the imperial court did things that were not in accordance with propriety and violated the will of the ancestors, then the fault is entirely on Kuangheng and me alone. I should suffer a disaster, get seriously ill, fall into a ditch and die.

古文：皇帝至孝肃慎，宜蒙祐福。
现代文：现在的皇帝十分孝顺诚敬，应该得到祖宗的保佑与赐福。
English: The current emperor is very filial and obedient, and deserves the blessings of his ancestors.

古文：唯高皇帝、孝文皇帝、孝武皇帝省察，右飨皇帝之孝，开赐皇帝眉寿亡疆，令所疾日瘳，平复反常，永保宗庙，天下幸甚！ 
现代文：希望高皇帝、孝文皇帝、孝武皇帝能够明察，保佑孝顺的皇帝，开恩赐予皇帝高寿，让他的病早些好，恢复平常的样子，永远奉保宗庙，那么天下百姓便十分幸运了！ 
English: It is hoped that Emperor Gao, Emperor Xiaowen, and Emperor Xiaowu will be able to see clearly, bless the dutiful emperor, grant the emperor a long life, let his illness get better sooner, recover his normal appearance, and always protect the ancestral temple. Then the people of the world will be very lucky!

古文：又告谢毁庙曰： 往者大臣以为，在昔帝王承祖宗之休典，取象于天地，天序五行，人亲五属，天子奉天，故率其意而尊其制。
现代文：又就毁庙的事祷告说： 以前，大臣们认为先前的帝王秉承祖宗传下的美好的法典，模仿天地之事，上天的序列有五行，人亲近的是五服之内，天子遵从天意，所以顺从其意而尊崇其制度。
English: He also prayed about the destruction of the temple, saying: In the past, ministers believed that previous emperors adhered to the beautiful code passed down by their ancestors and imitated the things of heaven and earth. The order of heaven has five elements, and what is close to people is within the five elements. The Son of Heaven obeys the will of Heaven, so they obey His will and respect His system.

古文：是以禘尝之序，靡有过五。
现代文：所以谛祭尝祭的次序，没有超过五代的。
English: Therefore, the order of the Buddha's teachings and rituals does not exceed five generations.

古文：受命之君躬接于天，万世不堕。
现代文：受命于天的开国君主亲自接近了上天，所以他的祭庙万世不毁。
English: The founding monarch, who was ordered by heaven, personally approached heaven, so his temple will never be destroyed.

古文：继烈以下，五庙而迁，上陈太祖，间岁而祫，其道应天，故福禄永终。
现代文：继承基业的后代君主，他们的祭庙经过五代就要变迁，其神主迁到太祖庙中，每隔一年举行一次合祭，这种方法上应天意，所以能享尽福禄，终其天年。
English: The descendants of the monarchs who inherit the inheritance, their temples will change after five generations, and their gods will move to the ancestral temple, and hold a closing ceremony every other year. This method is in accordance with the will of heaven, so they can enjoy all the blessings and live forever.

古文：太上皇非受命而属尽，义则当迁。
现代文：太上皇不是受命于天的开国君主，亲子孙死尽后，他的祭庙按礼法之义就该迁移。
English: The Emperor is not a founding monarch who was ordered by heaven. After the death of his children and grandchildren, his temple should be relocated according to the principles of etiquette.

古文：又以为孝莫大于严父，故父之所尊子不敢不承，父之所异子不敢同。
现代文：又认为最大的孝道就是尊崇父亲，所以父亲所信奉的事情他的儿子不敢不秉承，父亲不赞同的他的儿子也不敢赞同。
English: He also believed that the greatest filial duty is to respect one's father. Therefore, his son did not dare not to follow what his father believed in, and his son did not dare not to agree with what his father did not agree with.

古文：礼，公子不得为母信，为后则于子祭，于孙止，尊祖严父之义也。
现代文：礼法规定，公子为尊父不许为母亲过分伸扬，做了宗族的后代，儿子可以祭祀，到孙子辈就不要祭祀了，这是为了尊敬祖先、父亲。
English: According to the rules of etiquette, a noble son is not allowed to over-extend himself as a father or a mother, and he has become a descendant of the clan. The son can be sacrificed, but the grandchildren should not be sacrificed. This is to respect the ancestors and father.

古文：寝日四上食，园庙间祠，皆可亡修。
现代文：陵寝每要上四次祭品，陵园中的庙不时的祭祀，都可以不再修建。
English: For every four times that offerings are made at the mausoleum, the occasional sacrifices at the temple in the cemetery can no longer be built.

古文：皇帝思慕悼惧，未敢尽从。
现代文：皇帝思慕先君，伤悼畏惧，不敢完全按礼法行事。
English: The emperor pined for his predecessor, grieved and feared, and did not dare to act completely according to etiquette.

古文：惟念高皇帝圣德茂盛，受命溥将，钦若稽古，承顺天心，子孙本支，陈锡亡疆。
现代文：衹是想到高皇帝崇高的仁德，受命于广大的上天，敬善乐古，顺承天意，后代子孙承受广厚的赐福，世世无穷。
English: It is to think of the lofty benevolence of the high emperor, ordered by the vast heaven, to respect the good and enjoy the ancient times, to obey the will of heaven, and for future generations to receive abundant blessings, for all eternity.

古文：诚以为迁庙合祭，久长之策，高皇帝之意，乃敢不听？
现代文：实在是认为把祖庙的神主迁到一起进行合祭是长久之计，高皇帝的旨意，后代敢不听从？
English: Do they really think that moving the deities of the ancestral temple together for the closing ceremony is a long-term strategy? Will future generations dare to disobey Emperor Gao's will?

古文：即以令日迁太上、孝惠庙，孝文太后、孝昭太后寝，将以昭祖宗之德，顺天人之序，定无穷之业。
现代文：造就选择吉，把太上皇、孝惠帝的神主迁入宗庙，把孝文太后、孝昭太后的神主迁入陵寝，用来昭明祖宗的仁德，顺应天人之序，安定世代无穷的基业。
English: To create the auspicious choice, the deities of the former emperor and Emperor Xiaowei were moved to the ancestral temple, and the deities of Empress Dowager Xiaowen and Empress Dowager Xiaozhao were moved to the mausoleum, which was used to show the benevolence of the ancestors, comply with the order of heaven and man, and stabilize the endless inheritance of generations.

古文：今皇帝未受兹福，乃有不能共职之疾。
现代文：现在皇帝没有蒙受这样的赐福，却害了病，不能处理政事。
English: Now the emperor has not received such a blessing, but has fallen ill and is unable to deal with political affairs.

古文：皇帝愿复修承祀，臣衡等咸以为礼不得。
现代文：皇帝希望能再修宗庙，主持祭祀，我和大臣们都认为这不符合礼制。
English: The emperor hopes to rebuild the ancestral temple and preside over the sacrificial rites, and I and the ministers all think that this is not in line with the etiquette.

古文：如不合高皇帝、孝惠皇帝、孝文皇帝、孝武皇帝、孝昭皇帝、孝宣皇帝、太上皇、孝文太后、孝昭太后之意，罪尽在臣衡等，当受其咎。
现代文：如果我们的建议不合高皇帝、孝惠皇帝、孝文皇帝、孝武皇帝、孝昭皇帝、孝宣皇帝、太上皇、孝文太后、孝昭太后的意愿，那么罪过都在于我们这些臣子，我们应当受责备。
English: If our suggestions do not meet the wishes of Emperor Gao, Emperor Xiaohui, Emperor Xiaowen, Emperor Xiaowu, Emperor Xiaozhao, Emperor Xiaoxuan, the Retired Emperor, Empress Dowager Xiaowen, and Empress Dowager Xiaozhao, then the fault lies with us, the courtiers, and we should be blamed.

古文：今皇帝尚未平，诏中朝臣具复毁庙之文。
现代文：现在皇帝还没有病愈，下诏命令朝中大臣就毁庙之事详细撰文上覆先祖。
English: Now that the emperor has not yet recovered from his illness, he has issued a decree ordering the ministers of the dynasty to write a detailed article on the destruction of the temple.

古文：臣衡中朝臣咸复以为天子之祀义有所断，礼有所承，违统背制，不可以奉先祖，皇天不祐，鬼神不飨。
现代文：臣子匡衡我与朝中大臣回答了天子，都认为天子的祭祀活动从礼义上来说要有所依据，从礼制上来说要有所秉承，如果违背传统，违背礼制，那就没法奉祀先祖。皇天不会保佑他，祖宗在天之灵也不会享用他的供品祭物。
English: My vassal Kuangheng and I, as well as the ministers of the two Koreas, answered the heavenly son, and we all agreed that the heavenly son's sacrificial activities should have a basis in terms of etiquette and should be adhered to in terms of etiquette. If you violate tradition and violate etiquette, then you will not be able to worship your ancestors. The emperor will not bless him, and the ancestors will not enjoy his offerings in the spirit of heaven.

古文：《六艺》所载皆言不当，无所依缘以作其文。
现代文：《六经》上记载的礼制，都说各地建庙不合适。
English: The etiquette recorded in the "Six Classics" all say that it is inappropriate to build temples in various regions.

古文：事如失指，罪乃在臣衡，当深受其殃。
现代文：我们没有什么依据顺应先祖之意，来写作这篇毁庙之文。
English: We have no basis for writing this article about the destruction of the temple in accordance with the wishes of our ancestors.

古文：皇帝宜厚蒙祉福，嘉气日兴，疾病平复，永保宗庙，与天亡极，群生百神，有所归息。 
现代文：祭祀方面的事如果不合先祖们的旨意，那么罪过都在臣匡衡身上，我应当遭受惩罚灾祸。皇帝应该受到祖先的赐福，运气越来越好，疾病痊愈，让他能够永远奉祀宗庙，与天地一样长远，使天下万物之神，有所归息。 
English: The emperor should be blessed by his ancestors, his luck should get better and better, and his illness should be cured, so that he can always worship his ancestral temple, which is as far away as heaven and earth, so that the god of all things in the world can rest in peace.

古文：诸庙皆同文。
现代文：各个宗庙用的是同一篇祭文。
English: Each ancestral temple uses the same ritual text.

古文：久之，上疾连年，遂尽复诸所罢寝庙园，皆修祀如故，初，上定迭毁礼，独尊孝文庙为太宗，而孝武庙亲未尽，故未毁。
现代文：过了许久，皇帝连年害病，于是下诏全部恢复了以前撤销的那些陵寝、祭庙、园邑，还像以前那样修葺祭祀。当初，皇帝制定相继毁庙的制度，衹尊奉孝文庙为太宗庙，而孝武庙因为亲子孙没有死尽，所以没有毁弃。
English: After a long time, the emperor was ill for many years, so the following edict restored all the mausoleums, temples and gardens that were previously revoked, and also repaired the sacrificial rites as before. At the beginning, the emperor established a system of successive destruction of temples, and the temple dedicated to Fong Xiaowen was the Taizong Temple, while the temple dedicated to Fong Xiaowu was not destroyed because his children and grandchildren had not died.

古文：上于是乃复申明之，曰： 孝宣皇帝尊孝武庙曰世宗，损益之礼，不敢有与焉。
现代文：皇帝于是又重新申明说： 孝宣皇帝尊奉孝武庙为世宗，增加或减少其间的礼节，我不敢参与进去。
English: The emperor then re-affirmed: "Since Emperor Xiaoxuan reveres the Xiaowu Temple as a world-renowned temple and increases or decreases the etiquette, I dare not get involved.

古文：他皆如旧制。 
现代文：其他祭祀方面的事，都按原来的制度办理。 
English: All other matters related to religious services will continue to be handled according to the previous system.

古文：唯郡国庙遂废云。
现代文：衹是各封国的宗庙终于废弃了。
English: The ancestral temples of the feudal states were finally abandoned.

古文：元帝崩，衡奏言： 前以上体不平，故复诸所罢祠，卒不蒙福。
现代文：元帝死后，匡衡又上书说： 先前的时候，因为皇帝的身体有病，所以才完全恢复了被撤销的那些祭庙，但是皇帝最终也没能蒙福长寿。
English: After the death of Emperor Yuan, Kuangheng also wrote: In the past, because the emperor's body was ill, those temples that had been revoked were fully restored, but the emperor was ultimately unable to receive blessings and live a long life.

古文：案卫思后、戾太子、戾后园，亲未尽。孝惠、孝景庙亲尽，宜毁。
现代文：据察卫思后、戾太子、戾后园，他们的亲子孙还没有死尽，可以保留，孝惠庙、孝景庙亲子孙都已死尽，可予以毁弃。
English: According to Zha Weizhong, Zou Taizi, and Zou Houyuan, their children and grandchildren have not yet died and can be retained, while the children and grandchildren of Xiao Hui Temple and Xiao Jing Temple have all died and can be destroyed.

古文：及太上皇、孝文、孝昭太后、昭灵后、昭哀后、武哀王祠，请悉罢，勿奉。 
现代文：以及太上皇、孝文帝、孝昭太后、昭灵后、昭哀后、武哀王的祀庙，请一起撤销，不再供奉。 
English: As well as the temples dedicated to the Retired Emperor, Emperor Xiaowen, Empress Dowager Xiaozhao, Empress Dowager Zhao Ling, Empress Dowager Zhao Ai, and King Wu Ai, please revoke them together and no longer worship them.

古文：奏可。
现代文：他的奏书得到许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：初，高后时患臣下妄非议先帝宗庙寝园官，故定著令，敢有擅议者弃市。
现代文：当初，高后的时候担心臣子们妄自非议先君先祖的宗庙陵寝园邑，所以制定明令，有敢擅自非议的处以弃市之罪。
English: At first, the empress dowager was worried that courtiers would dare to criticize the ancestral mausoleums and burial grounds of her ancestors, so she made a clear order that anyone who dared to criticize without authorization would be punished with the crime of abandoning the city.

古文：至元帝改制，蠲除此令。
现代文：到元帝时改易制度，撤销了这条律令。
English: At the time of the Yuan Dynasty, the system of compensation was changed, and this rite was revoked.

古文：成帝时以无继嗣，河平元年复复太上皇寝庙园，世世奉祠。
现代文：成帝时因为没有继承人，在河平元年又恢复了太上皇的陵寝祭庙园邑，世代供奉祭祀。
English: Since there was no heir at the time of the emperor's enthronement, in the first year of the Heping Dynasty, the imperial mausoleum and temple gardens were restored, and sacrifices were offered for generations.

古文：昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后并食于太上寝庙如故，又复擅议宗庙之命。
现代文：把昭灵后、武哀王、昭哀后的神主一起归到太上皇的陵寝祭庙裹，像以前那样受供奉祭祀。又恢复了擅议宗庙之事杀死弃市的律令。
English: Shoryingou, King Wuye, and Shoryingou's deity were wrapped together and brought to the Emperor's mausoleum, where they were offered to the gods as before, and the ordinance of killing and abandoning the city for discussing the matter of the family temple was restored.

古文：成帝崩，哀帝即位。
现代文：成帝死后，哀帝登位。
English: Emperor Cheng died and Emperor Paidei ascended to the throne.

古文：丞相孔光、大司空何武奏言： 永光五年制书，高皇帝为汉太祖，孝文皇帝为太宗。
现代文：丞相孔光、大司空何武上奏说： 永光五年朝廷颁布制书，命令称呼高皇帝为汉太祖，孝文皇帝为太宗。
English: "In the fifth year of Yongguang, the imperial court issued a document ordering that Emperor Gao should be called Han Taizu, and Emperor Xiaowen should be called Taizong.

古文：建昭五年制书，孝武皇帝为世宗。
现代文：建昭五年颁布制书，命令称孝武皇帝为世宗。
English: In the fifth year of Jian Zhao's reign, he issued an edict ordering that Emperor Xiaowu should be referred to as Shizong.

古文：损益之礼，不敢有与。
现代文：对这些重大礼制的增减，我们不敢参与。
English: We dare not take part in the addition and subtraction of these important ceremonial rites.

古文：臣愚以为迭毁之次，当以时定，非令所为擅议宗庙之意也。
现代文：我们认为相继毁庙的次序，应当按照当时情况来决定，这并不是要人们擅自非议宗庙的意思。
English: We believe that the order of successive destruction of temples should be decided according to the situation at the time. This does not mean that people should criticize the ancestral temple without authorization.

古文：臣请与群臣杂议。 
现代文：请允许我与大臣们一起商议此事。 
English: Please allow me to discuss this matter with the ministers.

古文：奏可。于是，光禄勋彭宣、詹事满昌、博士左咸等五十三人皆以为继祖宗以下，五庙而迭毁，后虽有贤君，犹不得与祖宗并列。
现代文：奏书得到许可，于是，光禄勋彭宣、詹事满昌、博士左咸等五十三人，都认为从祖宗以下的皇帝们，都应该在五代以后毁弃祭庙，后代虽然有贤明的君主，也不能与祖宗并列。
English: The report was approved, and the fifty-three emperors, including Guanglu Xun, Peng Xuan, Zhan Zhi Manchang, and Dr. Zuo Xian, all agreed that the emperors from the ancestor down should abandon the temple after five generations. Although the descendants are wise monarchs, they cannot be ranked with the ancestors.

古文：子孙虽欲褒大显扬而立之，鬼神不飨也。
现代文：子孙后人虽然想为了宣扬光大他而为他立庙，他的神灵也不会来享受祭祀。
English: Although his descendants want to build a temple for him in order to glorify him, his deities will not come to enjoy the sacrifice.

古文：孝武皇帝虽有功烈，亲尽宜殿。
现代文：孝武皇帝虽然功绩卓著，但亲子孙死完后祭庙也应毁弃。
English: Although Emperor Xiaowu's achievements are outstanding, the temple should also be destroyed after the death of his children and grandchildren.

古文：太仆王舜、中垒校尉刘歆议曰：
现代文：太仆王舜、中垒校尉刘歆商议后上奏皇帝说：
English: After deliberation between the manservant Wang Yao and the captain of the middle school Liu Yao, the emperor said:

古文：臣闻周室既衰，四夷并侵，猃狁最强，于今匈奴是也。
现代文： 我们听说周室衰落后，四方少数民族一起入侵，而以殓狁最为强盛，就是现在的匈奴。
English: We heard that after the decline of the Zhou dynasty, the four ethnic minorities invaded together, and the most powerful of them was the Xiongnu.

古文：至宣王而伐之，诗人美而颂之曰 薄伐猃狁，至于太原 ，又曰 啴々推推，如霆如雷，显允方叔，征伐猃狁，荆蛮来威 ，故称中兴。
现代文：到周宣王时攻伐他们，诗人写诗赞美说 攻打殓狁，到达了太原，又说 军队众多又强盛，出击迅速如雷霆，方叔昭明仁德，攻打捡狁，南荆的蛮夷也畏服来朝拜，所以宣王被称为中兴之主。
English: When Zhou Xuan Wang attacked and defeated them, the poet wrote a poem praising and saying, "Attacking and defeating them," and arrived at Taiyuan. He also said, "The army is numerous and powerful, and the attack is as quick as thunder. Uncle Fang showed benevolence, attacked and defeated them, and the barbarians of Nanjing were afraid to come and worship, so Xuan Wang was called the Lord of Zhongxing."

古文：及至幽王，犬戎来伐，杀幽王，取宗器。
现代文：等到了周幽王时，犬戎来攻打中原，杀了幽王，夺走了宗庙祭器。
English: While waiting for Zhou Yuwang, the dog Rong came to attack Zhongyuan, killed Yuwang, and took away the sacrificial vessels of the ancestral temple.

古文：自是之后，南夷与北夷交侵，中国不绝如线。
现代文：从此以后，南蛮与北夷交相侵伐中原，中原王朝不绝如缕，危险万分。
English: Since then, the Southern Barbarians and the Northern Barbarians have been invading the Central Plains, and the Central Plains dynasties have been incessant and extremely dangerous.

古文：《春秋》纪齐桓南伐楚，北伐山戎，孔子曰： 微管仲，吾其被发左衽矣。 是故弃桓之过而录其功，以为伯首。
现代文：《春秋》记载齐桓公南伐楚国，北伐山戎，孔子称赞说： 如果没有管仲帮助齐桓公攻打蛮夷，我们这些人都要散发、衣襟左开，成了蛮夷之人了，所以孔子放过了齐桓公的罪过而记录他的功绩，作为五霸之首。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records King Qi Huan's southern campaign to conquer Chu and his northern campaign to conquer Mt. Rong. Confucius praised him, saying, "If there were no Guanzhong to help King Qi Huan attack and fight barbarians, we would all be scattered, our collars would be open, and we would become barbarians. Therefore, Confucius forgave the sins of King Qi Huan and recorded his exploits as the head of the Five Dynasties."

古文：及汉兴，冒顿始强，破东胡，禽月氏，并其土地，地广兵强，为中国害。
现代文：等到汉朝建立，冒顿单于刚刚强盛起来，攻破东胡，擒杀月氏国王，吞并了他们的土地，地广兵强成为中原的祸害。
English: By the time the Han Dynasty was established, the Mongols had just become powerful, defeated the Donghu, killed the King of the Yue clan, and annexed their land. Their vast military strength became the scourge of the Central Plains.

古文：南越尉佗总百粤，自称帝。
现代文：南越王尉佗统领百粤诸国，自称皇帝。
English: The king of southern Vietnam, Wang Lijun, ruled hundreds of countries in Guangdong and called himself an emperor.

古文：故中国虽平，犹有四夷之患，且无宁岁。
现代文：所以中原虽然平定了，汉朝还是有四边少数民族入侵的忧患，还没有安宁的子。
English: Therefore, although the Central Plains have been pacified, the Han Dynasty is still worried about the invasion of ethnic minorities from the four sides, and there is no sign of peace.

古文：一方有急，三面救之，是天下皆动而被其害也。
现代文：如果一方有紧急战事，三方面的人众都要去救援，因此牵动天下，都遭祸害。
English: If there is a war emergency on one side, people from all three sides will go to the rescue, thus affecting the whole world, and all of them will be plagued.

古文：孝文皇帝厚以货赂，与结和亲，犹侵暴无已。
现代文：孝文皇帝拿出许多财物送给匈奴，与他们和亲结盟，可他们仍然不停地侵略中原。
English: Emperor Xiaowen gave a lot of wealth to the Xiongnu and allied with them, but they still invaded the Central Plains.

古文：甚者，兴师十余万众，近屯京师及四边，岁发屯备虏，其为患久矣，非一世之渐也。
现代文：特别严重的时候，匈奴出动十余万军队，逼近京城驻扎，围困四周边境；朝廷每年发兵防备匈奴，匈奴危害中原由来已久，不是一代形成的。
English: In particularly serious times, the Huns dispatched more than a hundred thousand troops, approaching the capital and encamped there, besieging the border around it; the imperial court sent troops every year to guard against the Huns. The Huns have been harming the Central Plains for a long time, not just for one generation.

古文：诸侯郡守连匈奴及百粤以为逆者非一人也。
现代文：诸侯国的郡守勾结匈奴、串通百粤，背叛朝廷的不止一人。
English: There was more than one county governor in the princely states who colluded with the Xiongnu, colluded with the Hundred Yue, and betrayed the imperial court.

古文：匈奴所杀郡守、都尉，略取人民，不可胜数。
现代文：匈奴杀害的汉朝郡守都尉，抢走的百姓也不可胜数。
English: The number of Han Dynasty county governors and captains who were killed by the Huns, as well as the number of people who were robbed, cannot be counted.

古文：孝武皇帝愍中国罢劳无安宁之时，乃遣大将军、骠骑、伏波、楼船之属，南灭百粤，起七郡；北攘匈奴，降昆邪十万之众，置五属国，起朔方，以夺其肥饶之地；东伐朝鲜，起玄菟、乐浪，以断匈奴之左臂；西伐大宛，并三十六国，结乌孙，起敦煌、酒泉、张掖，以隔婼羌，裂匈奴之右肩。
现代文：孝武皇帝哀怜中原人民疲惫困顿，没有安宁的子，于是派遣大将军卫青、骠骑将军霍去病、伏波将军路博德、楼船将军等人，向南攻灭百粤，建立了七个郡；向北攻打匈奴，俘获了昆邪十万人，建立了五个属国，建起朔方城，夺取匈奴肥饶的土地；向东攻打朝鲜，建起玄菟、乐浪郡，切断匈奴的左臂；向西攻打大宛国，吞并了那裹的三十六个小国，连结乌孙国，建立了敦煌、酒泉、张掖诸郡，来隔断蜡羌，切断匈奴的右肩。
English: Emperor Xiaowu felt sorry for the Central Plains people who were tired and poor and had no peace of mind, so he dispatched General Wei Qing, Cavalry General Huo De to the sick, Fubo General Lu Bode, and General Lou Ship to the south to attack and destroy Baidu, and established seven counties; to the north to attack the Huns, captured 100,000 Kunzhu, established five vassal states, built Shuo Fangcheng, and seized the fertile land of the Huns; to the east to attack Korea, built Xuan Ye, Le Lang County, and cut off the left arm of the Huns; to the west to attack the Great Wan, annexed the 36 small

古文：单于孤特，远遁于幕北。
现代文：单于孤立无援，远远地逃到了大漠以北。
English: Alone and without help, he fled far away to the north of the desert.

古文：四垂无事，斥地远境，起十余郡。
现代文：武帝终于使四边不再有战事，拓展了中原的领土，建起了十多个郡。
English: Emperor Wu finally put an end to the fighting on all sides, expanded the territory of the Central Plains, and established more than ten counties.

古文：功业既定，乃封丞相为富民侯，以大安天下，富实百姓，其规橅可见。
现代文：建立功业后，武帝封丞相为富民侯，来安定天下，使百姓富裕，那规范法式还可见到。
English: After the establishment of Gongye, Emperor Wu appointed the prime minister as Fu Min Hou, to stabilize the world and make the people rich, and the standard French style can still be seen.

古文：又招集天下贤俊，与协心同谋，兴制度，改正朔，易服色，立天下之祠，建封禅，殊官号，存周后，定诸侯之制，永无逆争之心，至今累世赖之。
现代文：武帝又招集天下贤人俊才，与自己协助共同谋划，建立制度，改定正朔历法，改变人民衣服颜色，建立天地祭祠之处，封禅泰山，改易宫号名称，保存周朝的杰出方法，制定分封诸侯的制度，使他们永远不生背叛争位的心思，到现在几代人还依靠它。
English: Emperor Wu also summoned the world's wise and talented people to assist him in planning, establishing a system, revising the Gregorian calendar, changing the color of people's clothes, establishing temples and shrines, sealing Mount Tai, changing the name of the palace, preserving the outstanding methods of the Zhou Dynasty, and formulating the system of dividing the princes, so that they would never betray the spirit of competition. To this day, several generations still rely on it.

古文：单于守藩，百蛮服从，万世之基也，中兴之功未有高焉者也。
现代文：单于称臣做汉朝守卫，百蛮服从汉朝命令，这是万世的基业，中兴之类的功绩没有比得上这的。
English: Merely calling oneself a vassal to guard the Han Dynasty and obeying the orders of the Han Dynasty, this is the foundation of the world, and there is nothing comparable to the achievements of ZTE.

古文：高帝建大业，为太祖；孝文皇帝德至厚也，为文太宗；孝武皇帝功至著也，为武世宗，此孝宣帝所以发德音也。
现代文：高皇帝建立汉朝大业，做太祖；孝文皇帝仁德至厚，做文太宗；孝武皇帝功绩最大，做武世宗；这是孝宣帝制定的宣扬仁德的声音。
English: Emperor Gao established the great cause of the Han Dynasty and became the great-great-grandfather; Emperor Xiaowen was the most benevolent, and became the great-great-grandfather; Emperor Xiaowu was the most meritorious, and became the great-great-grandfather; this is the voice of promoting benevolence formulated by Emperor Xiaoxuan.

古文：《礼记·王制》及《春秋穀梁传》，天子七庙，诸侯五，大夫三，士二。
现代文：《礼记·王制》以及《春秋谷梁传》说，天子要有七座祭庙，诸侯五座，大夫三座，士二座。
English: "The Book of Rites and the Royal System" and "The Spring and Autumn Leaves of the Valley of the Dragon" say that the Son of Heaven should have seven temples, five princes, three doctors, and two judges.

古文：天子七日而殡，七月而葬；诸侯五日而殡，五月而葬。此丧事尊卑之序也，与庙数相应。
现代文：天子死后停柩七天，七月后入葬；诸侯王死后停柩五天，五月后入葬；这是办理葬事的尊卑次序，与庙的数量是对应的。
English: After the death of the son of heaven, the funeral lasted seven days, and he was buried after July; after the death of the prince of princes, the funeral lasted five days, and he was buried after May; this is the order of superiority and inferiority in handling funerals, which corresponds to the number of temples.

古文：其文曰： 天子三昭三穆，与太祖之庙而七；诸侯二昭二穆，与太祖之庙而五。 故德厚者流光，德薄者流卑。
现代文：那文字是： 天子的祭庙有三个昭庙、三个穆庙，加上太祖的庙共有七个；诸侯的祭庙有二个昭庙、二个穆庙，加上太祖的庙共有五个，因此仁德至厚的人流芳后世，德行浅薄的人传福不厚。
English: The text reads: The temple of the Son of Heaven has three Zhaomiao, three Mu temples, and a total of seven temples in addition to the ancestor's temple; the temple of the princes has two Zhaomiao, two Mu temples, and a total of five temples in addition to the ancestor's temple. Therefore, people with the greatest benevolence will be loved by future generations, and people with shallow virtue will not be blessed.

古文：《春秋左氏传》曰： 名位不同，礼亦异数。 
现代文：《春秋左氏传》说： 名称地位不同，礼节上也就不一样。 
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography" said: The name status is different, and the etiquette is also different.

古文：自上以下，降杀以两，礼也。
现代文：从上边的皇帝到下边的诸侯等，每降一级减少二个祭庙，这是礼制。
English: From the emperor at the top to the feudal lords at the bottom, there are two fewer temples for each step down. This is a ceremonial system.

古文：七者，其正法数，可常数者也。宗不在此数中。
现代文：七个庙是正法数，也是常数。宗不在这数中。
English: Seven temples is a positive number and a constant. Zong is not one of them.

古文：宗，变也，苟有功德则宗之，不可预为设数。
现代文：宗是可以变通的，如果有功绩德行就把他当做宗，不能先在宗庙数中为他留设。
English: Zong can be flexible. If there is merit and virtue, he can be regarded as Zong. It cannot be reserved for him in the number of ancestral temples.

古文：故于殷，太甲为太宗，大戊曰中宗，武丁曰高宗。
现代文：所以在殷朝，太甲是太宗，大戊叫中宗，武丁叫高宗。
English: Therefore, in the Yin Dynasty, Taiga was called Taizong, Daiwu was called Zhongzong, and Wuding was called Gaozong.

古文：周公为《毋逸》之戒，举殷三宗以劝成王。
现代文：周公做《毋逸》之文劝诫成王，列举了殷朝的三宗。
English: Zhou Gong exhorted Cheng Wang with the text "Do not be negligent" and listed three schools of the Yin Dynasty.

古文：繇是言之，宗无数也，然则所以劝帝者之功德博矣。
现代文：从这方面来说，宗是没有在宗庙定数内的，然而它用来劝勉帝王的功绩德行却是十分博大的。
English: In this regard, Zong is not included in the fixed number of ancestral temples, but it is used to exhort the emperor's merits and virtues.

古文：以七庙言之，孝武皇帝未宜殿；以所宗言之，则不可谓无功德。
现代文：按天子应有七座祭庙来说，孝武皇帝的祭庙不应当毁弃；从对他称宗的角度说，也不能说他没有功绩德行。
English: According to the theory that the Son of Heaven should have seven temples, Emperor Xiaowu's temple should not be destroyed; from the perspective of his claim to the throne, it cannot be said that he did not have merits and virtues.

古文：《礼记》祀典曰： 夫圣王之制祀也，功施于民则祀之，以劳定国则祀之，能救大灾则祀之。 
现代文：《礼记》的祭祀法典部分说： 圣明的君王制定祭祀之礼时，对功德广施于民的就祭祀他，对凭劳苦安定国家的要祭祀他，对能救民于灾难的要祭祀他。 
English: The part of the sacrificial code in the "Book of Rites" says: When the king of Shengming established the sacrificial rite, he should be sacrificed for those who have made great contributions to the people, for those who have stabilized the country through hard work, and for those who can save the people from disaster.

古文：窃观孝武皇帝，功德皆兼而有焉。
现代文：我们考察孝武皇帝的一生，功绩德行兼而有之。
English: We examine the life of Emperor Xiaowu, and his achievements and virtues.

古文：凡在于异姓，犹将特祀之，况于先祖？
现代文：异姓有功有德的人，还要特别的祭祀他，何况是先祖皇帝？
English: A person with a different surname, who is meritorious and virtuous, should be specially worshipped, let alone an ancestor emperor?

古文：或说天子五庙无见文，又说中宗、高宗者，宗其道而毁其庙。
现代文：有人说天子要有五庙，却没有见文字记载，又说中宗、高宗，崇尚他们的功德而毁弃他们的祭庙。
English: Some people say that the Son of Heaven should have five temples, but there is no written record of this. Others say that the Middle and High Dynasties worshipped their merits and destroyed their temples.

古文：名与实异，非尊德贵功之意也。
现代文：这样做名实不符，就不是尊崇仁德、重视功绩的意思了。
English: Doing so in a way that is inconsistent with reality is not the meaning of respecting benevolence and valuing merit.

古文：《诗》云： 蔽芾甘棠，勿剪勿伐，邵伯所茇。 
现代文：《诗经》上说： 茂盛的甘棠，不要砍伐它，这是邵伯种下的。 
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Do not cut down the luxuriant mandarin oranges. They were planted by Shao Bo."

古文：思其人犹爱其树，况宗其道而毁其庙乎？
现代文：思念有功德的人甚至爱护到他种的树，又怎能崇尚他的仁德却毁弃了他的祭庙？
English: How can one admire a man of merit, even to the extent of caring for the trees he planted, and yet destroy his temple?

古文：迭毁之礼自有常法，无殊功异德，固以亲疏相推及。
现代文：相继毁弃祭庙有惯常的法式，没有特殊的功绩仁德，当然要按亲近疏远来推算而轮到它。
English: Destroying and abandoning temples one after another has the usual French style, without special merit and benevolence. Of course, it should be calculated according to closeness and distance, and it is its turn.

古文：至祖宗之序，多少之数，经传无明文，至尊至重，难以疑文虚说定也。
现代文：至于祖宗的次序，祭庙的数量，经传上没有明确的记载，祭祀先皇帝这样至尊至重的大事，很难凭虚空的有疑问的说法来决定。
English: As for the order of ancestors and the number of temples, there is no clear record in the sutras, and it is difficult to decide on the basis of empty and doubtful arguments such as the supreme importance of sacrificing the first emperor.

古文：孝宣皇帝举公卿之议，用众儒之谋，既以为世宗之庙，建之万世，宣布天下。
现代文：当初孝宣皇帝称举公卿大臣们的议论，采纳众位儒士的谋划，已经认定建立武帝的世宗之庙，传到万世之后，已宣告天下。
English: At the beginning, Emperor Xiaoxuan cited the discussions of the nobles and ministers, adopted the plans of numerous Confucianists, and decided to establish the temple of Emperor Wu's dynasty. After being passed down to all generations, it was announced to the world.

古文：臣愚以为孝武皇帝功烈如彼，孝宣皇帝崇立之如此，不宜毁。
现代文：我们认为孝武皇帝功业那样盛大，孝宣皇帝又这样崇尚他，因而武帝的祭庙不应该毁弃。 
English: We believe that Emperor Xiaowu's achievements were so great, and Emperor Xiaoxuan revered him so much, that Emperor Wu's temple should not be destroyed.

古文：上览其议而从之。
现代文：皇帝看了他们的建议后，予以采纳。
English: The emperor read their suggestion and accepted it.

古文：制曰： 太仆舜、中垒校尉歆议可。 
现代文：颁布制书说： 太仆王舜、中垒校尉刘歆的计议可以施行。 
English: The promulgation of the document said: the proposal of the servant Wang Yao and the middle school captain Liu Yao can be implemented.

古文：歆又以为 礼，去事有杀，故《春秋外传》曰： 日祭，月祀，时享，岁贡，终王 祖祢则日祭，曾高则月祀，二祧则时享，坛墠则岁贡，大禘则终王。
现代文：刘歆又认为 依照礼，处理丧事要有等差区别，所以《春秋外传》说： 每一祭，每月一祀，时时举行享祭，每年一贡，王死大祭，祖宗要每一祭，曾祖、高祖每月一祀，远祖要时时享祭，坛珲等祭祀场所要每年贡物品，王死了要进行大祭。
English: Liu Wei also believed that according to the ritual, the handling of funerals should be equal and different, so "Spring and Autumn Foreign Biography" said: Every festival, every month, holding a festival, holding a festival at any time, a tribute every year, the king's death festival, the ancestors want every festival, the great-grandfathers and great-grandfathers worship once a month, the distant ancestors want to enjoy the festival at any time, the altar and other places of worship want to pay tribute every year, and the king's death wants to carry out the grand festival.

古文：德盛而游广，亲亲之杀也；弥远则弥尊，故禘为重矣。
现代文：德行盛大流被广泛，其间也有尊崇不同祖先亲人的区别；越是远祖越要尊崇，所以柿祭特别重要。
English: There is also a difference between honoring different ancestors and relatives; the more distant the ancestors, the more they should be honored, so the persimmon festival is particularly important.

古文：孙居王父之处，正昭穆，则孙常与祖相代，此迁庙之杀也。
现代文：后代子孙死后神主放到王父那裹，要正昭穆，那么后代子孙与祖先常要左右相代换，这是迁到祖庙裹要有的区别。
English: After the death of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the ancestors of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the ancestors of the descendants of the descendants of the ancestors of the descendants of the descendants of the ancestors of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of the descendants of

古文：圣人于其祖，出于情矣，礼无所不顺，故无毁庙。
现代文：圣人祭祀祖先，是出于真情，礼节没有不顺应的地方，所以不毁弃祭庙。
English: It is out of sincerity that the saints sacrifice their ancestors, and there is no place where the etiquette does not conform, so they do not abandon the temple.

古文：自贡禹建迭毁之议，惠、景及太上寝园废而为虚，失礼意矣。 
现代文：自从贡禹主张祭庙要相继毁弃，孝惠帝、孝景帝以及太上皇的祭庙都废弃为丘墟了，这就与礼义不符合了。 
English: Since Gong Yu advocated that the temples should be destroyed one after another, the temples of Emperor Xiao Hui, Emperor Xiao Jing, and the last emperor have all been abandoned as ruins, which is not in line with etiquette.

古文：至平帝元始中，大司马王莽奏： 本始元年丞相义等议，谥孝宣皇帝亲曰悼园，置邑三百家，至元康元年，丞相相等奏，父为士，子为天子，祭以天子，悼园宜称尊号曰 皇考 ，立庙，益故奉园民满千六百家，以为县。
现代文：到了平帝元始年间，大司马王莽上奏说： 本始元年时丞相蔡义等人计议，把孝宣皇帝父亲的祭祀地谧称为悼园，设置三百家食邑。到了元康元年，丞相魏相等人上奏，说父亲是一般的士人，儿子做了天子，对父亲的祭祀也应按天子礼仪，悼园应该尊称为 皇考 ，建立祭庙，增加原来奉守的园民到一千六百家，建成一县。
English: In the first year of the Ping Emperor's reign, the grand secretary Ma Wang Mang made the following report: In the first year of this reign, the prime minister Cai Yi and others deliberated and called the sacrificial mound of Emperor Xiaoxuan's father a mourning garden and set up three hundred food villages. In the first year of the Yuan Kang, the prime minister Wei Xiang and others made a report, saying that the father was an ordinary scholar, the son became the son of heaven, and the sacrifice to the father should also be according to the etiquette of the son of heaven, the mourning garden should be respectfully called the imperial examination, a temple should be established, the number of

古文：臣愚以为皇考庙本不当立，累世奉之，非是。
现代文：我认为皇考庙本来不应当建立，世代奉守，是不正确的。
English: I think that the imperial examination temple should not have been built in the first place, and it is not true that it has been kept for generations.

古文：又孝文太后南陵、孝昭太后云陵园，虽前以礼不复修，陵名未正。
现代文：另外孝文太后的南陵、孝昭太后的云陵园，虽然以前按礼法不再修葺，但陵寝的名称不正。
English: In addition, the southern mausoleum of Empress Dowager Xiaowen and the Yunling Garden of Empress Dowager Xiaozhao, although they were no longer repaired according to etiquette, the names of the mausoleums are incorrect.

古文：谨与大司徒晏等百四十七人议，皆曰孝宣皇帝以兄孙继统为孝昭皇帝后，以数，故孝元世以孝景皇帝及皇考庙亲未尽，不毁。
现代文：我谨敬地与大司徒晏等一百四十七人计议，都认为孝宣皇帝是孝昭皇帝哥哥的孙子，继位为皇帝，按礼数，过去孝元帝时因为孝景皇帝庙及皇考庙亲子孙都没有死尽，所以庙不毁弃。
English: I respectfully discussed with the 147 people including Daishi Tutu, and they all believed that Emperor Xiaoxuan was the grandson of Emperor Xiaozhao's brother and succeeded to the throne as emperor. According to the number of rites, the temple would not be destroyed in the past because Emperor Xiaoyuan's children and grandchildren of Emperor Xiaojing's temple and the imperial examination temple had not died.

古文：此两统贰父，违于礼制。
现代文：这样国家有两个根统两个国父，不符合礼制。
English: In this way, the country has two roots and two fathers of the country, which is not in line with the etiquette.

古文：案义奏亲谥曰 悼 ，裁置奉邑，皆应经义。
现代文：那时蔡义奏请皇父谧号为。阵 ，裁定设置奉守的园邑，都符合经义。
English: At that time, Cai Yisuo asked the emperor's father to give him the posthumous name of "Phalanx," and decided to set up a garden village to observe, all of which are in line with the scriptures.

古文：相奏悼园称 皇考 ，立庙，益民为县，违离祖统，乖缪本义。
现代文：魏相奏请称悼园为 皇考，建立祭庙，增加奉守陵园的邑民成为县，远远背离了祖先的本统，与礼义不符。
English: Wei Xiangso requested that the memorial garden be called the "Imperial Examination," the establishment of a festival temple, and the increase in the number of townspeople who observe the cemetery to become counties, which is far from the original ancestor, and is inconsistent with etiquette.

古文：父为士，子为天子，祭以天子者，乃谓若虞舜、夏禹、殷汤、周文、汉之高祖受命而王者也，非谓继祖统为后者也。
现代文：父亲为一般士人，儿子做了天子，就要按天子的礼仪祭祀他的父亲的情况，指的是像虞舜、夏禹、殷汤、周文王、汉高祖那样的受命于天，称王建国的人，不是指继承祖先基业做后王的人。
English: If the father is an ordinary scholar, but the son has become the son of heaven, he should sacrifice his father according to the etiquette of the son of heaven. This refers to the case of those who were ordered by heaven, such as Yu Xi, Xia Yu, Yin Tang, King Zhouwen, and Emperor Gaozu of the Han Dynasty, and who were called the founding king of the country, not those who inherited the ancestral inheritance and became the queen.

古文：臣请皇高祖考庙奉明园毁勿修，罢南陵、云陵为县。 
现代文：我请求皇高祖考庙奉明园应毁弃，不再修葺，撤销南陵、云陵，建成为县。 
English: I request that the Fengming Garden of the Imperial College Ancestor Examination Temple should be destroyed, no longer repaired, the South Mausoleum and Yunnan Mausoleum should be revoked, and the county should be built.

古文：奏可。
现代文：王莽的奏书被许可。
English: The Emperor assents.

古文：司徒掾班彪曰：汉承亡秦绝学之后，祖宗之制因时施宜。
现代文：司徒掾班彪说：汉朝在秦朝灭绝学术之后建国，祖宗的制度都是因时宜而定。
English: Szeto Ban Biao said: The Han Dynasty was founded after the Qin Dynasty exterminated scholarship, and the system of ancestors is determined by the times.

古文：自元、成后学者蕃滋，贡禹毁宗庙，匡衡改郊兆，何武定三公，后皆数复，故纷纷不定。
现代文：自元帝、成帝以后继起的学者越来越多，贡禹提议相继毁弃宗庙，匡衡改定郊兆，何武议定三公，后来都有多次反覆，纷纷乱乱，没有定制。
English: Since Emperor Yuan and Emperor Cheng, there have been more and more scholars succeeding him. Gong Yu proposed to destroy the ancestral temple, Kuang Heng proposed to change the suburb sign, and He Wu proposed the three kings. Later, they were repeated many times, they were chaotic and there was no customization.

古文：何者？
现代文：这是什么原因？
English: Why is that?

古文：礼文缺微，古今异制，各为一家，未易可偏定也。
现代文：是因为礼制文献文字缺损，古今制度不同，自成一家，要都制定下来不是容易的。
English: It is because of the defect of the text in the documents of the etiquette system, the system is different from the past to the present, and it is not easy to work out.

古文：考观诸儒之议，刘歆博而笃矣。
现代文：考察那些儒士们的计议，刘歆可称得上博大精深。
English: Examining the proposals of those Confucianists, Liu Ye can be called the most profound and profound.

