古文：徐阶高拱张居正
现代文：徐阶，字子升，松江华亭人。
English: Xu Qia, Zhizi Sheng, from Songjiang Huating.

古文：徐阶，字子升，松江华亭人。
现代文：出生刚满周岁时，堕入枯井中，救出后三天才苏醒。
English: When he was just one year old, he fell into a dry well and only woke up three days after being rescued.

古文：生甫周岁，堕眢井，出三日而苏。五岁从父道括苍，堕高岭，衣挂于树不死。
现代文：五岁时跟随父亲前往括苍，从高高山岭堕落下来，衣裳挂到树梢而没有死。
English: When he was five years old, he followed his father to Kecheng, fell down from a high mountain, and his clothes hung to the treetops, but he did not die.

古文：人咸异之。
现代文：人们都对他感到惊奇。
English: People were also very surprised by this.

古文：嘉靖二年进士第三人。
现代文：嘉靖二年考取进士第三名。
English: In the second year of Jiajing, he won the third place in the entrance examination.

古文：授翰林院编修，予归娶。
现代文：被授予翰林院编修，准许他回家婚娶。
English: He was awarded an editor's degree from Hanlin Academy and allowed to return home to get married.

古文：丁父忧，服除，补故官。
现代文：遭逢父亲的丧事，丧服解去后，补任原官职。
English: After his father's death, he was relieved of his official duties.

古文：阶为人短小白皙，善容止。
现代文：徐阶身材矮小，肤色白皙，容貌俊秀，举止优雅。
English: Xu Jia is short in stature, with a fair complexion, handsome appearance and elegant manners.

古文：性颖敏，有权略，而阴重不泄。
现代文：性情聪颖机敏，有权术谋略，却深藏不露。
English: Clever and quick-witted, he has the power to strategize, but he hides it well.

古文：读书为古文辞，从王守仁门人游，有声士大夫间。
现代文：学习古文经学，与王守仁的门生交游，在士大夫中享有声誉。
English: He studied ancient literature and classics, befriended a protégé of Wang Shouren, and gained a reputation among scholars.

古文：帝用张孚敬议，欲去孔子王号，易像为木主，笾豆礼乐皆有所损抑。下儒臣议，阶独持不可。
现代文：皇帝采纳张孚敬的建议打算废除孔子的王号，改孔子像为柱，祭祀器皿、礼仪声乐都有所简省，下交儒士大臣议论，唯独徐阶认为不可行。
English: The emperor adopted Zhang Fuqing's suggestion to abolish Confucius' royal title and change Confucius' image into a pillar. The sacrificial vessels and ceremonial vocal music were simplified, and the Confucian ministers were sent down to discuss. However, Xu Qi thought it was not feasible.

古文：孚敬召阶盛气诘之，阶抗辩不屈。
现代文：孚敬将徐阶召唤去怒责，徐阶辩驳，毫不屈服。
English: Fu Jing summoned Xu Jia to angrily rebuke him, but Xu Jia refuted him and did not give in.

古文：孚敬怒曰： 若叛我。 
现代文：孚敬恼怒地说： 你背叛我。 
English: Fu Jing said angrily: You betrayed me.

古文：阶正色曰： 叛生于附。
现代文：徐阶神色严肃地回答 ：背叛生于依附。
English: Xu Cha replied gravely: "Betrayal is born from attachment."

古文：阶未尝附公，何得言叛？ 
现代文：阶未曾依附公卿，怎么称得上背叛？ 
English: How can it be called treachery if you have never been attached to a nobleman?

古文：长揖出。
现代文：作深长揖礼而出。
English: He came out with a long bow.

古文：斥为延平府推官。
现代文：他被贬斥为延平府的推官。
English: He was denounced as the shogun of Yanping.

古文：连摄郡事。
现代文：接连摄法郡中事务。
English: Successive photos of Fa County middle school affairs.

古文：出系囚三百，毁淫祠，创乡社学，捕剧盗百二十人。
现代文：交出拘禁囚徒三百人，捣毁淫祠，创办乡间社学，捕获大盗一百二十人。
English: Three hundred prisoners were handed over, a brothel was destroyed, a village sociology school was established, and 120 thieves were caught.

古文：迁黄州府同知，擢浙江按察佥事，进江西按察副使，俱视学政。
现代文：调任黄州府同知，提拔为浙江按察佥事，晋升江西按察副使，均负责学政。
English: He was transferred to Tongzhi of Huangzhou Prefecture, promoted to Zhejiang Azecha Envoy, and promoted to Vice Envoy of Jiangxi Azecha, all of which were responsible for school administration.

古文：皇太子出阁，召拜司经局洗马兼翰林院侍讲。
现代文：皇太子出阁，皇帝召拜他为司经局洗马兼翰林院侍讲。
English: The crown prince was appointed to the cabinet, and the emperor summoned him to serve as the secretary of the economic bureau and the attendant speaker of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：丁母忧归。
现代文：遭逢母亲丧事归乡。
English: He returned home after his mother's death.

古文：服除，擢国子祭酒，迁礼部右侍郎，寻改吏部。
现代文：丧服解除，被提拔为国子监祭酒，调任礼部右侍郎，不久调吏部。
English: His mourning clothes were removed, and he was promoted to the position of provincial overseer of sacrificial wine, transferred to the position of right hand man of the ceremonial department, and soon transferred to the administrative department.

古文：故事，吏部率鐍门，所接见庶官不数语。
现代文：旧例，吏部总是大门紧闭，接见下层官吏不多言语。
English: In the old days, the gate of the cadre department was always closed, and the lower-level officials did not speak much when they were received.

古文：阶折节下之。
现代文：徐阶屈尊礼遇他们。
English: Xu Jia treated them with courtesy.

古文：见必深坐，咨边腹要害，吏治民瘼。
现代文：会见必定久坐，咨询边塞腹地要害，吏治民疾。
English: The meeting is bound to be long, the consultation is bound to be about the key problems in the hinterland of the border fortress, and the officials are bound to deal with the problems of the people.

古文：皆自喜得阶意，愿为用。
现代文：他们都自我欢喜得意于徐阶，愿意为其所用。
English: They are all pleased with themselves and proud of Xu Ju, and are willing to be used by him.

古文：尚书熊浃、唐龙、周用皆重阶。
现代文：尚书熊浃、唐龙、周用都看重徐阶。
English: Shangshu Xiongyao, Tang Long and Zhou Ying all valued Xu Ji.

古文：阶数署部事，所引用宋景、张岳、王道、欧阳德、范皆长者。
现代文：徐阶几次代理吏部事务，召引任用的宋景、张岳、王道、欧阳德都是长者。
English: Xu Qia acted as the agent of the cadre department several times, and Song Jing, Zhang Yue, Wang Dao and Ouyang De, who were summoned and appointed, were all elders.

古文：用卒，闻渊代，自处前辈，取立断。
现代文：周用死后，闻渊接替，自居前辈，取事立断。
English: After Zhou Ying's death, Wen Yuan took over, claiming to be the forerunner and making decisions.

古文：阶意不乐，求出避之。
现代文：徐阶不乐意，恳请将自己调出以回避他。
English: Xu Jia is not happy, please remove yourself to avoid him.

古文：命兼翰林院学士，教习庶吉士。
现代文：被任命兼任翰林院学士，教习庶吉士。
English: He was also appointed as a bachelor of the Hanlin Academy and a teaching associate.

古文：寻掌院事，进礼部尚书。
现代文：不久执掌翰林院事务，晋升礼部尚书。
English: Soon he was in charge of the affairs of the Hanlin Academy and was promoted to the etiquette department.

古文：帝察阶勤，又所撰青词独称旨，召直无逸殿。
现代文：皇帝明察徐阶的辛勤，加之唯独他所撰写的青词称乎圣意，直接召至无逸殿。
English: The emperor clearly noticed Xu Ji's hard work, and called him directly to Muxiyi Hall, adding that the only words he wrote were sacred.

古文：与大学士张治、李本俱赐飞鱼服及上方珍馔、上尊无虚日。
现代文：与大学士张治、李本一起受赐飞鱼服和宫廷饮食殊荣，皇帝对徐阶优礼不断。
English: Together with the university scholars Zhang Zhi and Li Ben, he was awarded the flying fish costume and the palace dining award. The emperor continued to be courteous to Xu Ji.

古文：廷推吏部尚书，不听，不欲阶去左右也。
现代文：朝廷推举徐阶为吏部尚书，皇帝没有同意，不想徐阶离其左右。
English: The imperial court nominated Xu Jia as the head of the personnel department, but the emperor did not agree and did not want Xu Jia to leave his side.

古文：阶遂请立皇太子，不报。复连请之，皆不报。
现代文：徐阶于是请求册立皇太子，皇帝没有答复，又连续奏请此事都没有结果。
English: Xu Ji then asked for the crown prince to be appointed, but the emperor did not reply, and there was no result in this matter.

古文：后当冠婚，复请先裕王，后景王，帝不怿。
现代文：后来当行弱冠婚娶礼，又奏请先裕王、后景王，皇帝不高兴。
English: Later, when the weak crown wedding ceremony was performed, the emperor was not happy to invite King Senyu and King Houjing again.

古文：寻以推恩加太子太保。
现代文：不久施恩于他，加封太子太保。
English: He was soon rewarded with the title of Crown Prince and Grand Protector.

古文：俺答犯京，阶请释周尚文及戴纶、欧阳安等自效，报可。
现代文：俺答汗进犯京都，徐阶奏请开释周尚文和戴纶，欧阳安等人自求效力，答复许可。
English: I reply that we should invade Kyoto, and Xu Jiasu asks for the release of Zhou Shangwen and Dai Yao, Ouyang An and others to seek their own effectiveness. Permission to reply.

古文：已，请帝还大内，召群臣计兵事，从之。
现代文：奏请皇帝返还皇宫，召集群臣谋划兵事，被采纳。
English: His petition to the emperor to return the imperial palace and to summon his vassals to plan for war was accepted.

古文：中官陷寇归，以俺答求贡书进。
现代文：宦官陷落敌手后被释归来，递呈俺答汗索求贡品的信件。
English: The eunuch was released after the fall of the enemy and returned with a letter demanding tribute.

古文：帝以示严嵩及阶，召对便殿。
现代文：皇帝把它给严嵩和徐阶看，召他们到便殿商议。
English: The emperor showed it to Yan Song and Xu Cha and called them to the hall to discuss.

古文：嵩曰： 饥贼耳，不足患。 
现代文：严嵩说： 饥饿之贼，不足忧患。 
English: Yan Song said, "Hunger is the thief, lack is the plague."

古文：阶曰： 傅城而军，杀人若刈菅，何谓饥贼？ 
现代文：徐阶说 ：临城驻扎，杀人如刈菅草，怎么只称饥饿之贼？ 
English: Xu Ji said: stationed in the outskirts of the city, killing people is like cutting grass, how can they only be called hungry thieves?

古文：帝然之，问求贡书安在。
现代文：皇帝认为他的话是对的，询问求贡书在哪里。
English: The emperor thought he was right and asked where the tribute book was.

古文：嵩出诸袖曰： 礼部事也。 
现代文：严嵩从袖中取出书信说 ：这是礼部的事。 
English: Yan Song took the letter out of his sleeve and said, "This is a matter for the etiquette department."

古文：帝复问阶。
现代文：皇帝又询问徐阶。
English: The emperor also inquired about Xu Jia.

古文：阶曰： 寇深矣，不许恐激之怒，许则彼厚要我。
现代文：他回答说： 敌寇深入，不应允恐怕激怒他们，应允他们则会加勒索。
English: He replied: If the enemy invaders advance, do not agree for fear of angering them, but if they do, they will retreat.

古文：请遣译者绐缓之，我得益为备。
现代文：恳请派遣翻译与敌周旋、稳住敌寇，便于我们做好准备。
English: I earnestly request you to send an interpreter to negotiate with the enemy and stabilize the enemy raiders, so that we can be prepared.

古文：援兵集，寇且走。 
现代文：援兵聚集而来，敌寇就会逃离。 
English: When reinforcements arrive, the bandits flee.

古文：帝称善者再。
现代文：皇帝连连称好。
English: The emperor congratulated Lian Lian.

古文：嵩、阶因请帝出视朝。
现代文：严嵩、徐阶就请皇帝出宫巡视朝政。
English: Yan Song and Xu Ji invited the emperor to leave the palace to inspect the imperial government.

古文：寇寻饱去，乃下阶疏，弗许贡。
现代文：敌寇很快饱掠而去，于是颁布徐阶的奏疏，不许进贡。
English: The enemy raiders soon left in full force, so the slow-step regulations were promulgated, and no tribute was allowed.

古文：嵩怙宠弄权，猜害同列。
现代文：严嵩倚宠弄权，猜嫉加害同列。
English: Relying on the right to pamper oneself is strictly prohibited, and so is causing harm through suspicion and envy.

古文：既仇夏言置之死，而言尝荐阶，嵩以是忌之。
现代文：因为仇视夏言，置其于死地，而夏言曾推荐过徐阶，严嵩因而忌恨他。
English: Because of his hatred of Xia Yan, he put him to death, and Xia Yan had recommended Xu Ji, so Yan Song hated him.

古文：初，孝烈皇后崩，帝欲祔之庙，念压于先孝洁皇后，又睿宗入庙非公议，恐后世议祧，遂欲当己世预祧仁宗，以孝烈先祔庙，自为一世，下礼部议。
现代文：起初，孝烈皇后去世，皇帝想祭祀她于宗庙，考虑到他前面有孝洁皇后，而且睿宗进宗庙不是公议，担心后世议论宗庙，于是想在自己当世预立仁宗宗庙，将孝烈皇后先祭于宗庙，自成一世，下交礼部议论。
English: At first, after the death of Empress Xiaoling, the emperor wanted to enshrine her in the ancestral temple. Considering that he had Empress Xiaojie before him, and that Emperor Ruizong's entry into the ancestral temple was not a matter of public discussion, and fearing that future generations would discuss the ancestral temple, he wanted to establish a Rinzong ancestral temple in his own lifetime. He would first enshrine Empress Xiaoling in the ancestral temple, and since he was the first generation, he would discuss it with the ceremonial department.

古文：阶抗言女后无先入庙者，请祀之奉先殿。礼科都给事中杨思忠亦以为然。
现代文：徐阶抗争声称女后没有先入宗庙的，奏请在奉先殿祭祀她，礼部给事中杨思忠也这般认为。
English: Xu Ji protested, saying that if the empress did not enter the ancestral temple first, she should be sacrificed in the temple hall, and Yang Sizhong also thought so.

古文：疏上，帝大怒。
现代文：奏疏递上，皇帝大怒。
English: The emperor was furious at the delay in delivering the report.

古文：阶皇恐谢罪，不能守前议。
现代文：徐阶惶恐谢罪，不能坚持前议。
English: Xu Shifu was afraid of committing the sin of gratitude, so he couldn't stick to the previous proposal.

古文：帝又使阶往邯郸落成吕仙祠。
现代文：皇帝又遣徐阶前往邯郸落成吕仙祠。
English: The emperor also sent Xu Jia to Shijiazhuang to complete the Luxian Temple.

古文：阶不欲行，乃以议祔庙解，得缓期。
现代文：徐阶不想动身，就用议论祭祀宗庙的事来开脱，得以缓期。
English: Xu Ji did not want to leave, so he used the discussion about the ritual of the ancestral temple to excuse himself, and was able to postpone his departure.

古文：至寇逼城，帝益懈，乃使尚书顾可学行，而内衔阶。
现代文：至敌寇逼城，皇帝更加松懈，于是派尚书顾可学前往，却心中怀恨徐阶。
English: When the enemy raiders besieged the city, the emperor was even more lax, so he sent Shang Shugu to study, but he hated Xu Jian in his heart.

古文：摘思忠元旦贺表误，廷杖之百，斥为民，以怵阶。
现代文：选取思忠元旦贺表的失误，廷杖百次，斥退为民，用以恐吓徐阶。
English: The mistake of selecting Shizhong's New Year's Day greeting card was repeated a hundred times by the imperial scepter, which was used to intimidate Xu Jie.

古文：嵩因谓阶可间也，中伤之百方。
现代文：严嵩以为徐阶可以离间，百般中伤他。
English: Yan Song thought that Xu Cha could be separated from him and slandered him in various ways.

古文：一日独召对，语及阶，嵩徐曰： 阶所乏非才，但多二心耳。 
现代文：一天皇帝单独召对严嵩，谈及徐阶。严嵩缓缓地说： 徐阶缺的不是才干，仅多二心罢了。 
English: One day, the emperor summoned Yan Song alone to talk about Xu Jia. Yan Song said slowly: "What Xu Jia lacks is not talent, but two hearts."

古文：盖以其尝请立太子也。
现代文：大概因为他曾奏请册立太子吧。
English: Probably because he once played the role of the crown prince.

古文：阶危甚，度未可与争，乃谨事嵩，而益精治斋词迎帝意，左右亦多为地者。
现代文：徐阶岌岌可危，考虑到不能与其争执，于是谨慎奉事严嵩，而且更精心撰写青词迎合皇帝心意，皇帝周围的人也多为他斡旋。
English: Xu Jia was in a precarious situation. Considering that it was impossible to argue with him, he cautiously served Yansong, and wrote more carefully to meet the emperor's wishes. The people around the emperor also mediated for him.

古文：帝怒渐解。
现代文：皇帝怒怨渐解。
English: The emperor's anger gradually subsided.

古文：未几，加少保，寻进兼文渊阁大学士，参预机务。
现代文：不久，加封他为少保，随即晋升兼任文渊阁大学士，参预机要事务。
English: Not long after, he was awarded the title of Junior Security Officer, and was immediately promoted to concurrently hold the post of Professor of Wenyu Pavilion University, taking part in important affairs.

古文：密疏发咸宁侯仇鸾罪状。
现代文：秘密上书告发咸宁侯仇鸾罪状。
English: A secret complaint was filed accusing Xianning of harboring enemies.

古文：嵩以阶与鸾尝同直，欲因鸾以倾阶。
现代文：严嵩认为徐阶与仇鸾曾经共执政事，打算以仇鸾事打倒徐阶。
English: Yan Song thought that Xu Ji and Qian Ye had once been in power together, and intended to overthrow Xu Ji with Qian Ye.

古文：及闻鸾罪发自阶，乃愕然止，而忌阶益甚。
现代文：待听说仇鸾的罪行是徐阶告发，才愕然作罢，但对徐阶更加猜忌。
English: It was only when he heard that the crime of the enemy was reported by Xu Jia that he was stunned, but he was even more suspicious of Xu Jia.

古文：帝既诛鸾，益重阶，数与谋边事。
现代文：皇帝诛杀仇鸾后，更重视徐阶，屡次同他谋划边疆事务。
English: After the emperor killed his enemy, he paid more attention to Xu Ji, and repeatedly plotted frontier affairs with him.

古文：时议减鸾所益卫卒，阶言： 不可减。
现代文：当时商议减去仇鸾所增加的卫兵，徐阶说： 不能减。
English: At that time, it was discussed to reduce the number of guards added by the enmity, and Xu Ji said: It can't be reduced.

古文：又京营积弱之故，卒不在乏而在冗，宜精汰之，取其廪以资赏费。 
现代文：京营积弱的原因，终不在疲乏而在于闲散，应当做精选淘汰，提取他们的粮饷作为奖赏的花费。 
English: The reason for the weak accumulation in Beijing is not fatigue, but idleness. It should be selected and eliminated, and their grain cane should be extracted as a reward.

古文：又请罢提督侍郎孙禬。
现代文：又奏请罢免提督侍郎孙礻会。
English: He also called for the dismissal of the Admiral's aide-de-camp, Sun Yat-sen.

古文：帝始格于嵩，久而皆用之。
现代文：皇帝开始由于严嵩的阻碍未能实行，久而完全听从了徐阶的意见。
English: At first, the emperor could not implement it due to the obstruction of Yan Song, but he completely obeyed the opinions of Xu Ji.

古文：一品满三载，进勋，为柱国，再进兼太子太傅、武英殿大学士。
现代文：徐阶一品三年满期，功勋有加，任柱国，进而兼任太子太傅、武英殿大学士。
English: Xu Ji, who was awarded the Order of Merit three years after his term of office expired, was awarded the title of pillar state for his meritorious service, and he also served as the Prince's Daifu and the Grand Scholar of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：满六载，兼食大学士俸，再录子为中书舍人，加少傅。
现代文：六年考满，兼支大学士俸禄，并任用其子为中书舍人，加封少傅。
English: After passing the examination in the sixth year, he also received a stipend from the university, and appointed his son as a junior high school teacher, and promoted him to junior high school teacher.

古文：九载，改兼吏部尚书。
现代文：第九年，改兼吏部尚书。
English: In the ninth year, he was promoted to vice-minister of the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：赐宴礼部，玺书褒谕有加。
现代文：皇帝赐宴于礼部，玺书中对他褒扬有加。
English: The emperor gave a banquet to the ceremonial department, and he was highly praised in the imperial edict.

古文：帝虽重阶，稍示形迹。
现代文：皇帝虽看重徐阶，却只稍稍显露迹象。
English: Although the emperor valued Xu Jie, he only showed slight signs of improvement.

古文：尝以五色芝授嵩，使练药，谓阶政本所关，不以相及。
现代文：曾把五色芝麻授予严嵩，让他炼药，称徐阶是政治根本的关节，不能做相。
English: He once awarded the five-colored sesame seeds to Yan Song and asked him to refine the medicine, saying that Xu Qian was a political fundamental joint and could not be made into a phase.

古文：阶皇恐请，乃得之。
现代文：徐阶惶恐地请求，才得到。
English: With trepidation, Xu Shu made a request, and it was granted.

古文：帝亦渐委任阶，亚于嵩。
现代文：皇帝也渐渐委任于徐阶，仅次于严嵩。
English: The emperor also gradually delegated to Xu Jia, second only to Yan Song.

古文：杨继盛谕嵩罪，以二王为徵，下锦衣狱。
现代文：杨继盛议论严嵩的罪行，用二位王子的事为证，被打入锦衣卫的牢狱。
English: Yang Jisheng discussed Yan Song's crimes, using the two princes as evidence, and was sent to the brocade guard's prison.

古文：嵩属陆炳究主使者。
现代文：严嵩嘱托陆炳追究主使人。
English: Yan Song ordered Lu Yao to investigate the owner.

古文：阶戒炳曰： 即不慎，一及皇子，如宗社何！ 
现代文：徐阶告诫陆炳 ：如果不谨慎，一旦涉及皇子，对宗庙社稷如何！ 
English: Xu Zha cautioned Lu Yao: If you are not careful, once the prince is involved, how about the family temple!

古文：又为危语动嵩曰： 上惟二子，必不忍以谢公，所罪左右耳。
现代文：又用危言劝阻严嵩 ：皇上只有两个儿子，必定不忍心以此责备您，开罪于皇子，以回答你的质询，问罪的只是左右朝臣。
English: He also used threatening words to dissuade Yan Song: The emperor has only two sons, and he will not have the heart to reproach you with this, to incriminate the prince in order to answer your inquiry. The only ones to be incriminated are the right and left courtiers.

古文：公奈何显结宫邸怨也。 
现代文：您何必公开同宫邸结仇怨呢？ 
English: Why do you need to publicly feud with the Imperial Palace?

古文：嵩忄双惧，乃寝。
现代文：严嵩闻言惊恐，才算了结。
English: Yan Song heard the words and panicked, and that was the end of it.

古文：倭躏东南，帝数以问阶，阶力主发兵。
现代文：倭寇蹂躏东方，皇帝几次询问徐阶，他力主发兵。
English: The Japanese invaders ravaged the East. The emperor asked Xu Ji several times, but he insisted on sending troops.

古文：阶又念边卒苦饥，请收畿内麦数十万石，自居庸输宣府，紫荆输大同。
现代文：又念及边关士卒辛苦饥寒，奏请征收京都辖区的麦子数十万石，自居庸输往宣府，从紫荆输往大同。
English: Also bearing in mind the hard work, hunger and cold of the border guards, he requested the collection of hundreds of thousands of koku of wheat from the Kyoto area, which would be transported from Jiuyang to Xuanfu, and from Bauhinia to Datong.

古文：帝悦，密传谕行之。
现代文：皇帝很高兴，密传实施这个方案。
English: The emperor was delighted and ordered the plan to be carried out.

古文：杨继盛之劾嵩也，嵩固疑阶。
现代文：杨继盛弹劾严嵩，严固然疑心徐阶。
English: Yang Jisheng's impeachment of Yan Song, Yan solidly suspicious.

古文：赵锦、王宗茂劾嵩，阶又议薄其罚。
现代文：赵锦、王宗茂弹劾严嵩，徐阶又建议从轻发落。
English: Zhao Jin and Wang Zongmao impeached Yan Song, and Xu Qi also suggested that Yan Song be impeached.

古文：及是给事中吴时来、主事董传策、张翀劾嵩不胜，皆下狱。
现代文：到此次给事中吴时来、主事董传策、张罛弹劾严嵩失败，都被投进监牢。
English: In this case, Wu Shilai, the principal, Dong Chuanxue, and Zhang Xuan, who failed to impeach Yan Song, were all thrown into prison.

古文：传策，阶里人；时来、翀，阶门生也。
现代文：传策，徐阶的同乡；时来、罛，徐阶的门生。
English: Chuan Zhao, a fellow villager of Xu Jia; Shi Lai, Zou Long, a protégé of Xu Jia.

古文：嵩遂疏辨，显谓阶主使，帝不听。
现代文：严嵩上书议论此事，公开称徐阶为主使，皇帝不听。
English: Yan Song wrote a book to discuss the matter, publicly saying that Xu Ji was the main instigator, but the emperor did not listen.

古文：有所密询，皆舍嵩而之阶。
现代文：秘密询查，他们都舍严嵩而趋徐阶。
English: In secret inquiries, they are all reluctant to be strict and tend to be slow.

古文：寻加太子太师。
现代文：随即加封徐阶为太子太师。
English: He was then given the title of Crown Prince and Grand Master.

古文：帝所居永寿宫灾，徙居玉熙殿，隘甚，欲有所营建，以问嵩。嵩请还大内，帝不怿。
现代文：皇帝居住的永寿宫遭火灾，移居玉熙殿太狭小，打算做些营建，询问严嵩，严嵩奏请返还皇宫，皇帝挺不高兴。
English: The Yongshou Palace, where the emperor lived, was destroyed by fire. The Emperor was not happy to move to the Jade Emperor's Palace because it was too small. He planned to do some construction work. He asked Yan Song to please return the palace.

古文：问阶，阶请以三殿所余材，责尚书雷礼营之，可计月而就。
现代文：询问徐阶，阶奏请用三殿的多余材料，责成尚书雷礼营建，可在几个月内建成。
English: Ask Xu Jia, please use the excess materials of the third hall to build the staircase, and instruct Shang Shulei to build it. It can be completed within a few months.

古文：帝悦，如阶议。
现代文：皇帝欣喜，照徐阶建议建造。
English: The emperor was delighted and built it according to Xu Ju's suggestion.

古文：命阶子尚宝丞璠兼工部主事，董其役，十旬而功成。
现代文：任命徐阶的儿子尚宝丞兼上部主事都察，此后十旬功成。
English: He appointed Xu Jia's son, Shang Bao Rong, as well as the head of the upper department, Du Cha, and achieved great success in the following ten years.

古文：帝即日徙居之，命曰万寿宫。
现代文：皇帝即日移居那里，命名万寿宫。
English: The emperor moved there the same day and named it the Manshou Palace.

古文：以阶忠，进少师，兼支尚书俸，予一子中书舍人。
现代文：因徐阶的忠诚，晋升少师，同时支取尚书俸禄，准许一子为中书舍人。
English: Because of Xu Ji's loyalty, he was promoted to Junior Teacher, and at the same time, he received the salary of a junior teacher, and his son was allowed to be a junior teacher.

古文：子璠亦超擢太常少卿。
现代文：其子也破格提拔为太常少卿。
English: His son was also exceptionally promoted to the position of Taijo Shokei.

古文：嵩乃日屈。
现代文：严嵩日渐衰落。
English: Yan Song is in gradual decline.

古文：嵩子世蕃贪横淫纵状亦渐闻，阶乃令御史邹应龙劾之。
现代文：严嵩的儿子世蕃贪横淫纵的劣迹也渐有传闻，徐阶指令御使邹应龙弹劾严嵩。
English: There were also rumours that Yan Song's son, Shifang, was a greedy and immoral person. Xu Jia ordered his emissaries to impeach Yan Song.

古文：帝勒嵩致仕，擢应龙通政司参议。
现代文：皇帝勒令严嵩退休，提拔邹应龙为通政司参议。
English: The emperor ordered Yan Song to retire, and promoted Zou Yinglong to be the adviser to the Secretary of State for Political Affairs.

古文：阶遂代嵩为首辅。
现代文：徐阶取代严嵩任首辅。
English: Xu Jia replaced Yan Song as chief aide.

古文：已而帝念嵩供奉劳，怜之。
现代文：不久皇帝念及严嵩供奉之劳，怜悯他。
English: Soon, the emperor thought of the hard work of offering sacrifices and took pity on him.

古文：又以调去，忽忽不乐，乃降谕，欲退而修真且传嗣，复责阶等奈何以官与邪物，谓应龙也。阶言： 退而传嗣，臣等不敢奉命。
现代文：又因严嵩离去，恍惚不乐，于是颁布诏谕打算退隐而修本性并做传嗣打算，又责备徐阶等不该给邪物封官，称邹应龙为邪物，徐阶陈述： 退隐并传嗣，臣子们不敢奉命。
English: Also, because Yan Song left, he was in a trance and unhappy, so he issued an edict that he intended to retire and reform his nature and make a succession plan. He also reproached Xu Ji and others that they should not give the evil thing an official seal, saying that Yu Yinglong was an evil thing. Xu Ji said: Retire and inherit, the courtiers did not dare to follow the order.

古文：应龙之转，乃二部奉旨行之。 
现代文：应龙转官，是二部奉旨行事。 
English: In response to Long's transfer, the two departments acted on his orders.

古文：帝乃已。
现代文：皇帝才罢休。
English: The emperor only relented.

古文：帝以嵩在直久，而世蕃顾为奸于外，因命阶无久直。
现代文：皇帝以为严嵩在职过长，世蕃却在外违法犯禁，因此令称徐阶不要长久的宫廷侍候。
English: The emperor thought that Yan Song had been in office for too long, but Shifu had broken the law and violated the ban, so he ordered Xu Ji not to wait for the court for a long time.

古文：阶窥帝意，言苟为奸，在外犹在内，固请入直。
现代文：徐阶窥察皇帝意图，声称如果为奸，在外犹如在内，坚持请求就职。
English: Xu Jia spied on the emperor's intentions, claimed that if he was a traitor, he would act as if he were one, and insisted on being appointed to the post.

古文：帝以嵩直庐赐阶。
现代文：皇帝把严嵩值宿的房子赐给徐阶。
English: The emperor gave Xu Zhizhi the valuable residence of Yan Song.

古文：阶榜三语其中曰： 以威福还主上，以政务还诸司，以用舍刑赏还公论。 
现代文：徐阶标榜三语： 威福还主上，政务还诸司，用舍刑赏还公论。 
English: Xu Jia advertised in three languages: Weifu is still the main, government affairs are still subordinate, and public discussion is still rewarded with punishment.

古文：于是朝士侃侃，得行其意。
现代文：从此朝臣儒士侃侃而谈，得以依自己意想行事。
English: From then on, courtier Confucius talked freely and was able to act according to his own wishes.

古文：袁炜数出直，阶请召与共拟旨。
现代文：袁炜几次直言，徐阶奏请召他共同议政。
English: Yuan Shao was outspoken several times, and Xu Shaoso invited him to discuss politics together.

古文：因言： 事同众则公，公则百美基；专则私，私则百弊生。 帝颔之。
现代文：就说 行事与众人共同议办为公，办事公道是成就一切事业的根本；专行为私，私则滋生百弊 。皇帝首肯。
English: The emperor agreed, saying, "To act in accordance with the common interests of all is to act for the public good, and to act justly is the foundation for the achievement of all undertakings; to act exclusively for one's self is to breed all kinds of evils."

古文：阶以张孚敬及嵩导帝猜刻，力反之，务以宽大开帝意。
现代文：徐阶因张孚敬和严嵩导致皇帝猜忌约束，力反其道，务必以宽大开阔皇帝的心胸。
English: Xu Ji, because of Zhang Fu Jian and Yan Song, led the emperor to be suspicious and restrained. On the contrary, it is necessary to open the emperor's heart with generosity.

古文：帝恶给事御史抨击过当，欲有所行遣。
现代文：皇帝厌恶给事御史抨击过当，想作番贬责。
English: The emperor disliked to be criticized too much and wanted to be the one to reprimand him.

古文：阶委曲调剂，得轻论。
现代文：徐阶委曲调剂，得以从轻发落。
English: Xu Shaoqi adjusted the melody, and was able to start and end with ease.

古文：会问阶知人之难，阶对曰： 大奸似忠，大诈似信。
现代文：皇帝会见时询问徐阶知人的难处。徐阶回答说 ：大奸似忠，大诈似信。
English: When the emperor met with him, he asked Xu Shifu about the difficulties of acquaintance. Xu Shifu replied: "Great treachery resembles loyalty, great deceit resembles trust."

古文：惟广听纳，则穷凶极恶，人为我撄之；深情隐慝，人为我发之。
现代文：只有广泛听取意见，对穷凶极恶的人，有人替我骚扰；对深情隐匿的罪行，有人替我揭发。
English: Only by listening to a wide range of opinions, for the most vicious people, there are people to harass me; for the hidden crimes, there are people to expose me.

古文：故圣帝明王，有言必察。
现代文：所以圣帝明王，有言必察。
English: Therefore, the Holy Emperor Mingwang must watch his words.

古文：即不实，小者置之，大则薄责而容之，以鼓来者。 
现代文：即使不真实，小事搁置一边，大事轻责并宽容人，以便鼓励后继者。 
English: Even if it is not true, the little things are put aside, the big things are neglected and tolerated in order to encourage successors.

古文：帝称善。
现代文：皇帝称好。
English: Wen Di thought it was right.

古文：言路益发舒。
现代文：言路越发舒展。
English: The conversation became more and more rambling.

古文：寇由墙子岭入，直趋通州。
现代文：敌寇从墙子岭攻入，直扑通州。
English: The enemy raiders entered from Wanziling and went straight to Tongzhou.

古文：帝方祠釐，兵部尚书杨博不敢奏，谋之阶，檄宣府总兵官马芳、宣大总督江东入援。
现代文：皇帝正在祭祀，兵部尚书杨博不敢启奏，与徐阶商议此事，发布檄文调宣府总兵官马芳、宣大总督江东来援救。
English: The emperor was in the middle of a religious service, and Yang Bo, the secretary of the military department, did not dare to open the music. He discussed the matter with Xu Chaoru and issued an imperial edict summoning Ma Fang, the chief military officer of Xuanwu, and Jiangdong, the governor of Xuanwu, to come to the rescue.

古文：芳兵先至，阶请亟赏之，又请重东权，俾统诸道兵。
现代文：马芳的兵马先到，徐阶奏请马上奖赏他，并请求扩大江东的权力，使他统率诸道兵马。
English: Ma Fang's soldiers and horses arrived first, and Xu Jiasong asked to reward him immediately, and requested to expand the power of Jiangdong, so that he could lead all the soldiers and horses.

古文：寇从通掠香河，阶请亟备顺义，而以奇兵邀之古北口。
现代文：敌寇从通州掳掠至香河，徐阶奏请在顺义马上设防，调骑兵至古北口。
English: The enemy raiders plundered and pillaged from Tongzhou to Xianghe. Xu Jiasong, please set up defenses in Shunyi immediately and dispatch cavalry to the ancient Beigou.

古文：寇趋顺义，不得入，乃走古北口。
现代文：敌寇攻顺义不得，于是奔向古北口。
English: The enemy raiders could not justify attacking Shun, so they rushed to the ancient North Gate.

古文：其后军遇参将郭琥伏而败，颇得其所掠人畜辎重。
现代文：敌人的后军遭参将郭琥伏击被打败，掳掠的大量人畜辎重被缴获。
English: The enemy's rearguard was ambushed and defeated by General Guo Ying, and a large number of plundered people and animals were captured.

古文：始帝怒博不早闻与总督杨选之任寇入也，欲罪之未发。阶言： 博虽以祠釐禁不敢闻，而二镇兵皆其所先檄。
现代文：起初皇帝恼怒杨博不早报告以及总督杨选放纵敌寇侵入，准备治罪却还没行动的时候，徐阶进谏： 杨博虽然因祭祀禁忌不敢传报，但两镇兵马都是他最早调来的。
English: At first, when the emperor was angry with Yang Bo for not reporting earlier and the governor Yang Zheng for letting the enemy invaders invade and preparing to punish them, but had not yet acted, Xu Jiajin said: Although Yang Bo did not dare to report because of the taboo of sacrifice, he was the first to transfer soldiers and horses from the two towns.

古文：若选则非尾寇，乃送之出境耳。 
现代文：而杨选则不是尾随敌寇而是礼送他们出境。 
English: Yang Xuan, on the other hand, did not follow the enemy raiders, but sent them out of the country.

古文：帝竟诛选，不罪博。
现代文：皇帝最终杀了杨选，没有治杨博的罪。
English: The emperor finally killed Yang Zheng, but did not punish Yang Bo.

古文：进阶建极殿大学士。
现代文：晋升徐阶为建极殿大学士。
English: Xu Jia was promoted to Jianji Temple College.

古文：袁炜以疾归，道卒，阶独当国。
现代文：袁炜因病还乡，死在路途，徐阶独掌国柄。
English: Yuan Shao returned to his hometown due to illness and died on the way, leaving Xu Ji in sole charge of the country.

古文：屡请增阁臣，且乞骸骨。
现代文：屡次奏请增添内阁大臣，并乞求辞官。
English: Repeatedly asked to add a cabinet minister, and begged to resign.

古文：乃命严讷、李春芳入阁，而待阶益隆。
现代文：于是皇帝任命严讷、李春芳入内阁，对徐阶更加恩宠。
English: As a result, the emperor appointed Yan Na and Li Chun Fang to the cabinet, showing more favor to Xu Ji.

古文：以一品十五载考，恩礼特厚，复赐玉带、绣蟒、珍药。
现代文：以任一品官第十五年考察，皇上待他恩宠礼遇特厚，一再赏赐玉带、绣蟒、珍贵药材。
English: On the occasion of the 15th anniversary of the inspection of any official, the emperor treated him with special grace and repeatedly rewarded him with jade belts, embroidered brooches, and precious medicinal materials.

古文：帝手书问阶疾，谆恳如家人，阶益恭谨。
现代文：皇帝亲手写信询问徐阶病情，谆恳地如同对待家人，徐阶更加恭谨。
English: The emperor personally wrote a letter to inquire about Xu Jian's illness, earnestly as if he were treating his family, and Xu Jian was more respectful.

古文：帝或有所委，通夕不假寐，应制之文，未尝逾顷刻期。
现代文：皇帝间或有所委任，徐阶整夜不合眼，承提起草的文书没有拖延片刻。
English: The emperors sometimes made appointments, and Xu Shifu was up all night, drafting documents without a moment's delay.

古文：帝日益爱阶。
现代文：皇帝日益厚爱徐阶。
English: The emperor became more and more fond of Xu Ji.

古文：阶采舆论利便者，白而行之。
现代文：徐阶采纳好的舆论，陈述给皇帝，然后施行。
English: Xu Jia adopted the good public opinion, reported to the emperor, and then implemented.

古文：嘉靖中叶，南北用兵。边镇大臣小不当帝指，辄逮下狱诛窜，阁臣复窃颜色为威福。
现代文：嘉靖中叶，南北用兵，边镇大臣稍有不合皇帝旨意，就逮捕下狱诛杀流放，内阁大臣又巧借皇恩作威作福。
English: In the middle of the Jiajing era, soldiers were used from north to south, the minister of the border town was arrested and sent to exile if he did not conform to the emperor's will, and the cabinet minister cleverly took advantage of the emperor's grace.

古文：阶当国后，缇骑省减，诏狱渐虚，任事者亦得以功名终。
现代文：徐阶主事后，缇骑省减，诏狱渐渐虚空，任事的人得以功名尽终身。
English: After the death of Xu Zhizhong, the number of imperial cavalry was reduced, the imperial prison was gradually emptied, and those in charge were able to perform their duties for life.

古文：于是论者翕然推阶为名相。
现代文：因此舆论一致推荐徐阶为名相。
English: Therefore, public opinion is unanimous in recommending Xu Jia as the celebrity.

古文：严讷请告归，命郭朴、高拱入阁，与春芳同辅政，事仍决于阶。
现代文：严纳奏请辞归，皇帝命令郭朴、高拱入内阁，与春芳共同辅政，事务仍旧由徐阶决断。
English: Yan Nao asked to resign, and the emperor ordered Guo Pu and Gao Gong to enter the cabinet and jointly assist the government with Chun Fang. Matters were still decided by Xu Jia.

古文：阶数请立太子，不报。
现代文：徐阶屡次奏请册立太子，没有答复，不久景王到封地，病逝。
English: Xu Jia repeatedly requested the registration of the crown prince, but there was no reply. Soon King Jing came to the fief and died of illness.

古文：已而景王之藩，病薨，阶奏夺景府所占陂田数万顷还之民，楚人大悦。
现代文：徐阶启奏剥夺景府占据的数万顷陂田还给百姓，楚地民众非常高兴。
English: The people of Chu are very happy that the tens of thousands of hectares of rice paddies occupied by Jingfu have been returned to the people.

古文：帝欲建雩坛及兴都宫殿，阶力止之。
现代文：皇帝打算建造云坛和兴都宫殿，徐阶极力劝阻。
English: The emperor planned to build the Yuntan and the Xindu Palace, but Xu Jia tried his best to dissuade him.

古文：鄢懋卿骤增盐课四十万金，阶风御史请复故额。
现代文：鄢懋卿骤然增加盐税四十万银两，徐阶暗示御史奏请恢复原来定额。
English: Emperor Yao suddenly increased the salt tax by 400,000 silver taels, and Emperor Xu suggested that the Emperor should restore the original quota.

古文：方士胡大顺等劝帝饵金丹，阶力陈其矫诬状，大顺等寻伏法。
现代文：方士胡大顺等劝皇上食用金丹，徐阶极力陈述此假言行骗的罪状，大顺等人随即伏法。
English: Fangshi Hu Dashun and others advised the emperor to eat the jade, Xu Ji tried his best to state the crime of lying and deception, and Dashun and others immediately submitted to the law.

古文：帝服饵病躁，户部主事海瑞极陈帝失，帝恚甚，欲即杀之，阶力救得系。
现代文：皇帝服药后躁烦。户部主事海瑞尽陈皇帝的过失，皇帝非常恼恨，想立即杀了他；徐阶尽力挽救才作罢。
English: After the emperor took the medicine, he was restless. The head of the household, Hai Rui, found fault with the emperor Chen. The emperor was very angry and wanted to kill him immediately; Xu Ji did his best to save him.

古文：帝病甚，忽欲幸兴都，阶力争乃止。
现代文：皇帝病情加重，忽然想到兴都去，徐阶力争方止。
English: As the emperor's condition worsened, he suddenly thought of going to Xingdu, and gradually stopped fighting.

古文：未几，帝崩。阶草遗诏，凡斋醮、土木、珠宝、织作悉罢， 大礼 大狱、言事得罪诸臣悉牵复之。
现代文：不久，皇帝死，徐阶草拟遗诏，所有斋醮、土木、珠宝、织物一律免去， 大礼 大案，论事治罪的大臣全部翻案。
English: Soon after, the emperor died, and Xu Jia drafted his last will and testament, exempting all the palanquins, civil engineering, jewelry, and fabrics, and reversing all the cases of the ministers of justice.

古文：诏下，朝野号恸感激，比之杨廷和所拟登极诏书，为世宗始终盛事云。
现代文：诏书颁布，朝野号恸感激，同杨廷和拟定的登基诏书并列，为世宗朝的盛事。
English: The imperial edict was promulgated, and the gratitude of the court and the people was so great that it was ranked alongside Yang Ting and the proposed imperial edict of enthronement as a grand event of the reign of King Sejong.

古文：同列高拱、郭朴以阶不与共谋，不乐。
现代文：同事高拱、郭朴因为徐阶没与他们共同商议，心中不快。
English: Colleagues Gao Gong and Guo Pu were not happy because Xu Ji did not consult with them.

古文：朴曰： 徐公谤先帝，可斩也。 
现代文：郭朴说： 徐公毁谤先帝，可以处斩。
English: Guo Pak said: Xu Gong slandered the former emperor and can be beheaded.

古文：拱初侍穆宗裕邸，阶引之辅政，然阶独柄国，拱心不平。
现代文：高拱起初侍从于穆宗裕邸，徐阶引荐他辅佐政务，然而徐阶独掌国家权柄，高拱心中不平。
English: At first, Gao Gong was an attendant at the residence of Mu Zongyu, and Xu Ji recommended him to assist in government affairs. However, Xu Ji was in sole control of state power, and Gao Gong felt uneasy.

古文：世宗不豫时，给事中胡应嘉尝劾拱，拱疑阶嗾之。
现代文：世宗生病时，给事中胡应嘉曾弹劾高拱，高拱怀疑是徐阶唆使。
English: When Shizong was ill, Hu Yingjia once impeached Gaoqong, and Gaoqong suspected that it was instigated by Xu Ji.

古文：隆庆元年，应嘉以救考察被黜者削籍去，言者谓拱修旧郤，胁阶，斥应嘉。
现代文：隆庆元年应嘉因救助考察被罢黜者的人被解职，谈论者称高拱修补旧怨协助徐阶斥责应嘉。
English: In the first year of the Longqing era, Ying Jia was dismissed for rescuing the person who investigated the ousted person. The talker said that Gao Gong mended old grievances and assisted Xu Qi to reprimand Ying Jia.

古文：阶复请薄应嘉罚，言者又劾拱。
现代文：徐阶再次请求对应嘉从轻责罚，谈论者又弹劾高拱。
English: Xu Ju once again asked for a light punishment for his counterpart Jia Cong, and the talker also impeached Gao Gong.

古文：拱欲阶拟杖，阶从容譬解，拱益不悦。
现代文：高拱希望徐阶拟用廷杖处罚应嘉，徐阶从容化解，高拱更不高兴。
English: Gao Gong hoped that Xu Jia would punish Ying Jia with a cane, but Xu Jia calmly defused the situation. Gao Gong was even more displeased.

古文：令御史齐康劾阶，言其二子多干请及家人横里中状。
现代文：指令御史齐康弹劾徐阶，说他的两个儿子经常与人私下交易以及家人横行乡里的罪状。
English: Shi Qikang ordered the impeachment of Xu Ji, saying that his two sons often traded with people in private and that the family was rampant in the countryside.

古文：阶疏辩，乞休。
现代文：徐阶上疏辩解，乞求告老还乡。
English: Xu Shijiazhuang apologized and begged to return to his hometown.

古文：九卿以下交章劾拱誉阶，拱遂引疾归。
现代文：九卿以下官吏上书弹劾高拱而赞美徐阶，高拱称病辞归故里。
English: Officials from the 9th lord and below wrote to impeach Gao Gong and praise Xu Ji, and Gao Gong said that he was returning to his hometown.

古文：康竟斥，朴亦以言者攻之，乞身去。
现代文：齐康终遭贬斥，郭朴也因舆论攻击，辞官归去。
English: Qikang was eventually reprimanded, and Guo Pu also resigned from his post due to public opinion attacks.

古文：给事、御史多起废籍，恃阶而强，言多过激。
现代文：给事中、御史多起于罢官，依靠徐阶而强，言语大多偏激。
English: In the course of the matter, Goshi was more active in dismissing officials, relying on gradual steps to be strong, and his words were mostly extreme.

古文：帝不能堪，谕阶等处之。
现代文：皇帝不能忍受，告知徐阶等人处理。
English: The emperor could not bear it and told Xu Qi and others to deal with it.

古文：同列欲拟谴，阶曰： 上欲谴，我曹当力争，乃可导之谴乎。 
现代文：同事意欲作贬谪，徐阶说 ：皇上想贬斥他们，我们应当尽力抗争，还能倡导贬谪吗？ 
English: Colleagues want to make derogatory remarks, Xu Ji said: the emperor wants to disparage them, we should try our best to resist, can we still advocate derogatory remarks?

古文：请传谕令省改。
现代文：奏请传谕责令他们反省改过。
English: The encyclical called on them to change their ways.

古文：帝亦勿之罪。
现代文：皇帝也没有治他的罪。
English: The emperor did not punish him either.

古文：是年，诏翰林撰中秋宴致语，阶言： 先帝未撤几筵，不可宴乐。 
现代文：这年诏令翰林撰写中秋宴贺词，徐阶说： 先帝没有撤去祭席，不能做宴乐。 
English: This year, the emperor ordered Hanlin to write a Mid-Autumn Festival banquet congratulatory message, and Xu Ji said: The former emperor did not remove the festival banquet, so he could not do the banquet music.

古文：帝为罢宴。
现代文：皇帝取消了宴会。
English: The emperor cancelled the banquet.

古文：帝命中官分督团营，阶力陈不可而止。
现代文：皇帝命令宦官分别督导团营，徐阶极力陈述不可而终止。
English: The emperor ordered the eunuchs to supervise the regimental camp separately, and Xu Ji made a strong statement that it was impossible to terminate.

古文：南京振武营兵屡哗，阶欲汰之。
现代文：南京振武兵营屡屡喧哗生变，徐阶打算解散他们。
English: The Nanjing Zhenwu Military Camp has repeatedly undergone tumultuous changes, and Xu Ji intends to dissolve it.

古文：虑其据孝陵不可攻也，先令操江都御史唐继录督江防兵驻陵傍，而徐下兵部分散之。
现代文：顾虑他们控制着孝陵不便进行攻击，先命令操江都御史唐继禄督导江防兵卒驻扎在孝陵旁，再下令兵部遣散振武兵。
English: Concerned that it was inconvenient for them to attack while controlling the Xiaoling Tomb, they first ordered the governor of the Yangtze River, Tang Jilu, to supervise the soldiers of the Yangtze River Defense Force stationed next to the Xiaoling Tomb, and then ordered the military department to disperse the Zhenwu soldiers.

古文：事遂定。
现代文：事情终于了结。
English: It's finally over.

古文：群小珰殴御史于午门，都御史王廷将纠之，阶曰： 不得主名，劾何益？
现代文：一群小宦官在午门殴打御史，都御史王廷准备检举他们。徐阶说 ：不知领头人姓名，弹劾有何益？
English: A group of eunuchs beat him at the noon gate, and Emperor Shi Wangting prepared to indict them. Xu Qia said: I do not know the name of the leader, what is the benefit of impeachment?

古文：且虑彼先诬我。 
现代文：还得思虑对方先诬告我们。 
English: We have to worry about the other side falsely accusing us first.

古文：乃使人以好语诱大珰，先录其主名。
现代文：于是派人用好言诱惑大宦官，先记录领头人的姓名。
English: So they sent someone to tempt the eunuch with good words, and first recorded the leader's name.

古文：廷疏上，乃分别逮治有差。
现代文：王廷上书皇帝，便分别逮捕区别治罪。
English: The royal court sent a letter to the emperor, and they arrested and punished them separately.

古文：阶之持正应变，多此类也。
现代文：徐阶主持公道应付事变，多属此类。
English: Xu Ju presided over justice to deal with the incident, mostly belonging to this type.

古文：阶所持诤，多宫禁事，行者十八九，中官多侧目。
现代文：徐阶所坚持谏争的，多数是宫廷禁事，十有八九被采纳，宦官大多对他侧目而视。
English: Most of the disputes that Xu Jia persisted in were forbidden by the court, and nine times out of ten they were accepted. The eunuchs mostly looked sideways at him.

古文：会帝幸南海子，阶谏，不从。
现代文：遇上皇帝到南海子，徐阶劝谏，皇帝不听。
English: When he met the emperor in Nanhaizi, Xu Jia tried to persuade him, but the emperor would not listen.

古文：方乞休，而给事中张齐以私怨劾阶，阶因请归。
现代文：刚请求告老，给事中张齐就因私怨弹劾徐阶，于是徐阶奏请回乡。
English: As soon as he asked to retire, Zhang Qi impeached Xu Jia due to personal grudge, so Xu Jiaxuan was invited to return to his hometown.

古文：帝意亦渐移，许之。
现代文：皇帝的心意也逐渐转移，批准了他的请求。
English: The emperor gradually changed his mind and approved his request.

古文：赐驰驿。
现代文：赏赐驿用马匹。
English: Rewarded with a donkey and a horse.

古文：以春芳请，给夫廪，玺书褒美，行人导行，如故事。
现代文：因为春芳的奏请，配给仆从和粮食、玺书褒奖，行人引导，依然如旧。
English: Because of Chunfang's invitation, the distribution of servants and grain, the awarding of books, and the guidance of pedestrians are still the same as before.

古文：陛辞，赐白金、宝钞、彩币、袭衣。
现代文：向皇帝辞行，皇帝赏赐他白金、宝钞、彩币、袭衣。
English: He resigned from the emperor, and the emperor rewarded him with platinum, banknotes, coins, and clothes.

古文：举朝皆疏留，报闻而已。
现代文：满朝官员都上奏挽留他，皇帝答复知道而已。
English: Officials throughout the dynasty pleaded to keep him, but the emperor only knew the answer.

古文：王廷后刺得张齐纳贿事，劾戍之边。
现代文：王廷后来探知张齐受贿赂的事，加以弹劾，张齐受贬戍边。
English: The royal court later found out that Zhang Qi had accepted bribes and impeached him. Zhang Qi was demoted to the rank of lieutenant.

古文：阶既行，春芳为首辅，未几亦归。
现代文：徐阶走后，春芳任首辅，不久也离职归乡。
English: After Xu Jia left, Chunfang served as the first assistant, and soon left to return to his hometown.

古文：拱再出，扼阶不遗余力。郡邑有司希拱指，争齮晷阶，尽夺其田，戍其二子。
现代文：高拱复出后，扼制徐阶不遗余力，郡邑的各级官吏观望高拱的意图，争相倾轧徐阶，完全剥夺了他的田产，把他的两个儿子送去戍边。
English: After Gao Gong's comeback, no effort was spared to stifle Xu Jia. County and township officials at all levels watched Gao Gong's intentions and vied to crush Xu Jia, completely depriving him of his farmland and sending his two sons to Lijiang.

古文：元春孙本高，官锦衣千户，天启中拒魏忠贤建祠夺职。崇祯改元，以荐起，累官左都督。
现代文：遇到高拱又被张居正倾轧而被罢免，打击徐阶的事才算停止。万历十年，徐阶八十岁。
English: When Gao Gong met Zhang Juzheng and was ousted, the crackdown on Xu Jia only stopped. After ten years, Xu Jia was eighty years old.

古文：诸生念祖，国变城破，与妻张，二妾陆、李，皆自缢。高拱，字肃卿，新郑人。
现代文：皇帝派遣人去问候，赏赐玺书、金币。次年徐阶去世。被追封为太师，谥号文贞。高拱，字肃卿，新郑人。
English: The emperor sent someone to send greetings and rewarded him with an imperial edict and gold coins. Xu Ji passed away the following year. He was posthumously named Grand Master, posthumously given the title of Wenzhen, Gao Gong, Zi Suqing, and Xin Zhengren.

古文：嘉靖二十年进士。
现代文：嘉靖二十年进士。
English: Jiajing has been a member for 20 years.

古文：选庶吉士。
现代文：当选庶吉士。
English: He was elected as the second-ranked Kishi.

古文：逾年，授编修。
现代文：第二年授予编修。
English: The second year is awarded to the editor.

古文：穆宗居裕邸，出阁请读，拱与检讨陈以勤并为侍讲。
现代文：穆宗住裕邸，出阁讲经读书，高拱与检讨陈以勤同为侍讲。
English: Mu Zong lived in Yu Yu's residence, went out to lecture and read, and Gao Gong and review Chen Yidong were the assistant lecturers.

古文：世宗讳言立太子，而景王未之国，中外危疑。
现代文：世宗忌讳提册立太子的事，景王没有去封国，朝廷内外很是担心。
English: When King Sejong tabooed the matter of appointing a crown prince, and King Gyeongbokgung did not go to seal the country, both inside and outside the imperial court were very worried.

古文：拱侍裕邸九年，启王益敦孝谨，敷陈剀切。
现代文：高拱在裕邸侍奉九年，教诲太子日益敦厚孝顺谨慎，陈述切合事理。
English: Gao Gong served at Yu's residence for nine years, teaching the prince to be more and more diligent, filial and prudent.

古文：王甚重之，手书 怀贤忠贞 字赐焉。
现代文：太子很看重他，亲手书写 怀贤忠贞 赐给他。
English: The crown prince thought highly of him and gave him a handwritten letter, "Wai Xian Zhongzheng."

古文：累迁侍讲学士。
现代文：晋升侍讲学士。
English: He was promoted to the rank of assistant lecturer.

古文：严嵩、徐阶递当国，以拱他日当得重，荐之世宗。
现代文：严嵩、徐阶顺次主持国政，认为高拱以后必受重用，将他举荐给世宗。
English: Yan Song and Xu Ji successively presided over state affairs. They believed that Gao Gong would be of great use in the future and recommended him to Shizong.

古文：拜太常卿，掌国子监祭酒事。
现代文：授予太常卿，掌管国子监祭酒事务。
English: He was awarded the title of Taizhongqing, and was in charge of the affairs of the imperial family's ceremonial wine.

古文：四十一年，擢礼部左侍郎。
现代文：四十一年提拔为礼部左侍郎。
English: In 1941, he was promoted to Reibu Sasajiro.

古文：寻改吏部，兼学士，掌詹事府事。
现代文：不久改调吏部兼任学士，执掌詹事府事务。
English: He was soon transferred to the clerk's department and concurrently served as a bachelor, in charge of Zhan's affairs.

古文：进礼部尚书，召入直庐。
现代文：晋升礼部尚书，召进内侍房。
English: He was promoted to the etiquette department and summoned to the inner waiting room.

古文：撰斋词，赐飞鱼服。
现代文：撰写斋戒词，被赏赐飞鱼服。
English: Wrote a sermon on fasting and was rewarded with a flying fish costume.

古文：四十五年，拜文渊阁大学士，与郭朴同入阁。
现代文：四十五年授予文渊阁大学士，与郭朴一道进入内阁。
English: In 1945, he was awarded a bachelor's degree from Wen Yuan Pavilion University and entered the cabinet together with Guo Pu.

古文：拱与朴皆阶所荐也。
现代文：高拱和郭朴都是徐阶推荐的。
English: Gao Gong and Guo Pak were both recommended by Xu Jia.

古文：世宗居西苑，阁臣直庐在苑中。
现代文：世宗居住西苑，内阁大臣的值班房子在宫苑中。
English: The Sejong resided in the west courtyard, and the duty house of the cabinet minister was in the middle of the courtyard.

古文：拱未有子，移家近直庐，时窃出。
现代文：高拱没有儿子，将家搬到值班地点附近，时常偷偷出来。
English: Gao Gong doesn't have a son, so he moved his home to be near the duty station, sneaking out from time to time.

古文：一日，帝不豫，误传非常，拱遽移具出。
现代文：当时皇帝身体不好，据传很危急，高拱迅即将家全部搬出。
English: At that time, the emperor was not in good health and was rumored to be in critical condition. Gao Gongxun was about to move his entire family out.

古文：始阶甚亲拱，引入直。
现代文：开始徐阶非常亲近高拱，推荐他入值内阁。
English: At the beginning, Xu Jia was very close to Gao Gong and recommended him to join the cabinet.

古文：拱骤贵，负气颇忤阶。
现代文：高拱骤然富贵，意气自负，颇忤逆徐阶。
English: Gao Gong was suddenly rich, conceited, and quite rebellious.

古文：给事中胡应嘉，阶乡人也，以劾拱姻亲自危。且瞷阶方与拱郤，遂劾拱不守直庐，移器用于外。世宗病，勿省也。
现代文：给事中胡应嘉，是徐阶的同乡，因弹劾高拱的姻亲而处境不妙，加之窥探出徐阶正与高拱有矛盾，于是弹劾高拱不坚守岗位，移家外出，世宗病情急迫，没有看奏章。
English: Hu Yingjia, a fellow villager of Xu Jia, was in a difficult situation due to the impeachment of Gao Jia's in-laws. In addition, it was discovered that Xu Jia Zheng had a conflict with Gao Jia. As a result, Gao Jia did not stick to his post, moved out of home, and suffered from an urgent illness. He did not read the transcript.

古文：拱疑应嘉受阶指，大憾之。
现代文：高拱怀疑应嘉受徐阶指使，大为不满。
English: Gao Gong suspected that he should be instructed by Xu Ji, and was very dissatisfied.

古文：穆宗即位，进少保兼太子太保。
现代文：穆宗即位，晋升他为少保兼太子太保。
English: Mu Zong ascended to the throne, and he was promoted to Shobao and Taibo.

古文：阶虽为首辅，而拱自以帝旧臣，数与之抗，朴复助之，阶渐不能堪。
现代文：徐阶虽然是首辅，但高拱自认为是皇帝旧臣，屡次与他对抗，郭朴又帮助他。徐阶渐渐不能忍受。
English: Although Xu Shifu was the chief aide, Gao Gong thought of himself as the emperor's old retainer. He repeatedly fought with him, and Guo Pu helped him. Xu Shifu gradually could not bear it.

古文：而是时以勤与张居正皆入阁，居正亦侍裕邸讲。
现代文：而且此时以勤与张居正都进入内阁，居正也是裕邸侍讲。
English: Moreover, at this time, Iqun and Zhang Jizheng both entered the cabinet, and Jizheng was also a lecturer at Yu's residence.

古文：阶草遗诏，独与居正计，拱心弥不平。会议登极赏军及请上裁去留大臣事，阶悉不从拱议，嫌益深。
现代文：徐阶草拟遗诏唯独与张居正商议，高拱心中大为不平，遇上讨论皇帝登基赏赐军队和奏请皇上裁决大臣们去留事宜，徐阶都不听取高拱建议，两人嫌隙更为加深。
English: Xu Ji, who was drafting the will, was only in discussion with Zhang Ju, and Gao Gong was very unhappy. When they discussed the emperor's enthronement, rewarding the army, and asking the emperor to decide whether the ministers should stay, Xu Ji did not listen to Gao Gong's suggestions, and the rift between the two deepened.

古文：应嘉掌吏科，佐部院考察，事将竣，忽有所论救。
现代文：应嘉掌管吏科，协助都院考察。事务将完成，忽然提出有所补充。
English: Ying Jia, in charge of the clerical department, assisted in the inspection of the capital. The work was about to be completed, but suddenly some additions were made.

古文：帝责其牴牾，下阁臣议罚。
现代文：皇帝责备他癥牾，下交内阁大臣议论处罚。
English: The emperor reproached him for his illness and sent a cabinet minister to discuss the punishment.

古文：朴奋然曰： 应嘉无人臣礼，当编氓。 
现代文：郭朴挺身而出指责道 ：应嘉没有为臣的礼议，应当编入平民籍。 
English: Guo Pak stood up and accused: Ying Jia did not have the courtesy of a vassal, and should be made a commoner.

古文：阶旁睨拱，见拱方怒，勉从之。
现代文：徐阶向旁斜视高拱，看到高拱正值恼怒中，就勉强听从了。
English: Xu Jia squinted sideways at Gao Gong, saw that Gao Gong was in a rage, and reluctantly obeyed.

古文：言路谓拱以私怨逐应嘉，交章劾之。
现代文：舆论称高拱因私人恩怨驱逐应嘉，上奏弹劾高拱。
English: The public opinion said that Gao Gong was expelled from Yingjia due to personal grudge, and Gao Gong was impeached.

古文：给事中欧阳一敬劾拱尤力。
现代文：给事中欧阳一敬对弹劾高拱最为积极。
English: Ouyang Yijian was the most active in the impeachment of Gao.

古文：阶于拱辩疏，拟旨慰留，而不甚谴言者。
现代文：徐阶对于高拱的争辩，草拟命令加以安慰挽留，却没怎么谴责造舆论的人。
English: For Gao Qiang's argument, Xu Ji drafted an order to comfort and retain, but did not condemn the opinion makers.

古文：拱益怒，相与忿诋阁中。
现代文：高拱更加恼怒，他们在内阁相互怨恨、诬蔑。
English: Gao Gong was even more angry. They were resentful and slandered each other in the cabinet.

古文：御史齐康为拱劾阶，康坐黜。
现代文：御史齐康替高拱弹劾徐阶，被罢免。
English: Gu Shi Qikang impeached Xu Ji for Gao Gong and was removed from office.

古文：于是言路论拱者无虚日，南京科道至拾遗及之。
现代文：因此舆论没有一天不谈论高拱，南京科道官以至于拾遗官都论及他。
English: Therefore, the public opinion does not have a day without talking about Gao Gong, and the Nanjing Science and Technology Official and the Relic Collector have all talked about him.

古文：拱不自安，乞归，遂以少傅兼太子太傅、尚书、大学士养病去。
现代文：高拱自感不安，请求辞职，于是以少傅兼太子太傅、尚书、大学士身份离职养病。
English: Gao Gong felt uneasy and asked to resign, so he left the post to recuperate in his capacity as Junior Master and Crown Prince Grand Master, Senior Scholar, and University Scholar.

古文：隆庆元年五月也。拱以旧学蒙眷注，性强直自遂，颇快恩怨，卒不安其位去。
现代文：隆庆元年五月，高拱因为曾为皇帝先生蒙宠爱，然而性情倔强刚直自负，快意处置恩怨，终于不安于此职位而离去。
English: In May of the first year of the Longqing era, Gao Gong left the position because he was once favored by the emperor, but he was stubborn, arrogant, and eager to deal with grudges.

古文：既而阶亦乞归。
现代文：不久徐阶也请求辞职退休。
English: Soon, Xu Jia also requested to resign and retire.

古文：三年冬，帝召拱以大学士兼掌吏部事。
现代文：隆庆三年冬，皇帝召用高拱任大学士兼管吏部。
English: In the winter of the third year of Longqing, the emperor summoned Gao Gong to serve as a university scholar and administrator.

古文：拱乃尽反阶所为，凡先朝得罪诸臣以遗诏录用赠恤者，一切报罢。
现代文：高拱完全与徐阶反其道而行，凡是先朝治罪而因遗诏被录用并作安抚的大臣，一概罢免。
English: Gao Gong completely went in the opposite direction from Xu Ji. All the ministers who had been appointed and pacified because of the last will and testament and who had committed crimes in the previous dynasty were dismissed.

古文：且上疏极论之曰： 《明伦大典》颁示已久。
现代文：并上奏极言阐述 ：明伦大典颁布很久了。
English: He went on to say: "It's been a long time since the Ming Lun Dynasty was promulgated.

古文：今议事之臣假托诏旨，凡议礼得罪者悉从褒显，将使献皇在庙之灵何以为享？先帝在天之灵何以为心？
现代文：现在任职的大臣假托诏书，凡是议论礼仪被治罪的人都被褒奖，这将使献皇在庙之灵怎样能宴享，先帝在天之灵怎么能得到思念？
English: The current minister's fake imperial edict, anyone who talks about etiquette and is punished will be rewarded, which will make the spirit of the emperor in the temple how to enjoy, and the former emperor in the spirit of heaven how to get missed?

古文：而陛下岁时入庙，亦何以对越二圣？
现代文：而且皇上年节入宗庙祭祀，又怎样面对二圣？
English: Moreover, the Emperor's New Year's Day is included in the ancestral temple ritual, so how do you face the two saints?

古文：臣以为未可。 
现代文：我认为不能这样做。 
English: I don't think we can do that.

古文：帝深然之。
现代文：皇帝颇为赞同。
English: Xuanzong deeply felt justified.

古文：法司坐方士王金等子弑父律。
现代文：法司审理方士王金等人子杀父案。
English: The Ministry of Justice is hearing the case of the murder of his father by the sons of Fang Shi Wang Jin and others.

古文：拱复上疏曰： 人君陨于非命，不得正终，其名至不美。
现代文：高拱又上奏： 君王死于非命，不能寿终正寝，这种声名很不好。
English: The high arch is played again: The king died a violent death, unable to end his life, this reputation is very bad.

古文：先帝临御四十五载，得岁六十有余。末年抱病，经岁上宾，寿考令终，曾无暴遽。
现代文：先帝在位四十五年，享年六十多岁，晚年患病，过了一年去世，寿数到了，并没有骤然的暴病。
English: The former emperor reigned for 45 years, died in his 60s, fell ill in his later years, passed away a year later, and reached the end of his life. There was no sudden violent illness.

古文：今谓先帝为王金所害，诬以不得正终，天下后世视先帝为何如主？
现代文：现在称王金谋害，诬蔑先帝不是寿终正寝，天下百姓和后世的人将把先帝看成怎样的君王呢？
English: Now that Wang Jin is said to have plotted the murder and the former emperor is slandered, is it not time for him to die? What kind of king will the people of the world and future generations see the former emperor as?

古文：乞下法司改议。 
现代文：请求下令法司更改议意。 
English: The request ordered the Department of Justice to change its mind.

古文：帝复然拱言，命减戍。
现代文：皇帝又赞同了高拱的意见，命将王金等人减罪戍边。
English: The emperor also agreed with Gao Gong's opinion and ordered Wang Jin and others to commute their sentences.

古文：拱之再出，专与阶修郤，所论皆欲以中阶重其罪。
现代文：高拱复出，专门同徐阶制造矛盾，所议论的事都希望能中伤和加重徐阶的罪行。
English: Gao Gong made a comeback, specifically to create a contradiction with Xu Jia. The things discussed were all in the hope of slandering and aggravating Xu Jia's crime.

古文：赖帝仁柔，弗之竟也。
现代文：幸赖皇帝仁慈怀柔，没让他终了。
English: Fortunately, the emperor's kindness to Huairou did not let him die.

古文：阶子弟颇横乡里。
现代文：徐阶的子弟横行乡里。
English: Xu Jia's son is running amok in the countryside.

古文：拱以前知府蔡国熙为监司，簿录其诸子，皆编戍。
现代文：高拱任命以前的知府蔡国熙做监司，将他的子弟立案侦查，都编入边兵军籍。
English: Gao Gong appointed the former prefectural governor Cai Guoxi as the supervisor, and put his son under investigation, both of whom were enrolled in the frontier soldiers.

古文：所以扼阶者，无不至。
现代文：所有遏制徐阶的事，没有不做的。
English: All the things to curb the slow steps have not been done.

古文：逮拱去位，乃得解。
现代文：等到高拱离职，徐阶才得解脱。
English: It was not until Gao Gong left office that Xu Shifu was able to break free.

古文：拱练习政体，负经济才，所建白皆可行。
现代文：高拱对政体熟谙，有经时济世的才干，所有建议、陈述都可以实施。
English: Gao Gong is familiar with the political system and has the ability to manage the times. All suggestions and statements can be implemented.

古文：其在吏部，欲遍识人才，授诸司以籍，使署贤否，志里姓氏，月要而岁会之。仓卒举用，皆得其人。
现代文：他在吏部，想全面鉴识人才，让各部门登录官员情况，让他们选定贤愚者，记下爵位籍贯姓氏，每月索要每年的汇编，仓促举荐任用人，都能得到人选。
English: In the personnel department, he wanted to comprehensively identify talents, let all departments register the situation of officials, let them select the wise and the foolish, record the titles and surnames, request the annual compilation every month, and hastily recommend the appointees, so that they could get the candidates.

古文：又以时方忧边事，请增置兵部侍郎，以储总督之选。由侍郎而总督，由总督而本兵，中外更番，边材自裕。又以兵者专门之学，非素习不可应卒。
现代文：又因为当时正忧患边防，请增设兵部侍郎，以为总督的后选人，由侍郎到总督，由总督到本部尚书，中外更替，边将之材自然充裕，而兵事是专门的学问，没有经常的训练不能应付兵事。
English: In addition, because the border defense was in trouble at that time, please add the attendant of the military department. It was thought that the successor of the governor would be selected from the attendant to the governor, and from the governor to the head office. There would be a natural turnover of Chinese and foreigners, and there would be plenty of border guards. However, military affairs is a specialized knowledge, and there is no regular training to cope with military affairs.

古文：储养本兵，当自兵部司属始。
现代文：蓄养帅才，应该从兵部司属开始。
English: It is necessary to start from the subordinates of the Ministry of Military Affairs to cultivate talents.

古文：宜慎选司属，多得智谋才力晓畅军旅者，久而任之，勿迁他曹。
现代文：应该慎重挑选司属，多多求得拥有智谋、才干和体能，通晓军旅事务的人，长任其职，不要调往其他部门。
English: It is necessary to carefully select the subordinates of the department, and seek more and more people who have wisdom, talent and physical ability, and are familiar with military travel affairs. They should stay in their positions for a long time, and should not be transferred to other departments.

古文：他日边方兵备督抚之选，皆于是取之。
现代文：日后边关的兵备和督抚的人选，都将从此选取。
English: In the future, the candidates for the provision of troops and supervision of the border will be selected from here.

古文：更各取边地之人以备司属，如铨司分省故事，则题覆情形可无扞格，并重其赏罚以鼓励之。
现代文：更应相应选取边疆的人给司属做准备，像考核部门分行省考核官员一样，这样上下之间就不会有矛盾，同时注重赏罚，以资鼓励。
English: Moreover, the person who selects the frontier should prepare for the subordinates accordingly, like the assessment department branch and provincial assessment officials, so that there will be no contradiction between the upper and lower levels, and at the same time pay attention to reward and punishment to encourage.

古文：凡边地有司，其责颇重，不宜付杂流及迁谪者。
现代文：所有边疆有司，职责很重，不适宜让非正途的官员和贬谪者去任职。
English: All border regions have departments with heavy responsibilities, and it is not appropriate to allow unprincipled officials and detractors to hold office.

古文：皆报可，著为令。
现代文：皇帝都答复可行，拟成命令。
English: The emperor replied that it was possible and drafted an order.

古文：拱又奏请科贡与进士并用，勿循资格。
现代文：高拱又奏请把科贡和进士一起任用，不遵循资格。
English: Gao Gong also played, please appoint Kogun and Jin Shi together, not according to qualifications.

古文：其在部考察，多所参伍，不尽凭文书为黜陟，亦不拘人数多寡，黜者必告以故，使众咸服。
现代文：他考察部中情况，大多错综复杂，不是全凭文书做出罢免提升，也不拘泥人数多少，必定告诉罢免者缘由，让众人都信服。
English: He examined the situation in the department, most of which was intricate and complex. He did not make the promotion of dismissal entirely based on documents, nor did he care about the number of people. He would certainly tell the reason to the person who was dismissed, so that everyone would be convinced.

古文：古田瑶贼乱，用殷正茂总督两广。
现代文：古田瑶出现贼乱，任用殷正茂为两广总督。
English: There was a bandit rebellion in Gutian County, and Yin Zhengmao was appointed as the governor of the two provinces.

古文：曰： 是虽贪，可以集事。 
现代文：解释： 此人虽然贪心，却可以办成事。 
English: Explanation: This person is greedy, but can get things done.

古文：贵州抚臣奏土司安国亨将叛，命阮文中代为巡抚。
现代文：贵州抚臣上奏土司安国亨将要叛乱，高拱任命阮文中代理贵州巡抚。
English: Guizhou Fushin reported that Tusi An Guoheng would rebel, and Gao Gong appointed Ruan Wenzhong as acting governor of Guizhou.

古文：临行语之曰： 国亨必不叛，若往，无激变也。 
现代文：临出发时对他说 ：国亨必定不会叛乱，你去，不要激发变乱。 
English: When he was about to leave, he said to him, "Kokugen will definitely not rebel, you go, don't incite a riot."

古文：即而如其言。
现代文：不久正像他所说。
English: Soon it was as he had said.

古文：以广东有司多贪黩，特请旌廉能知府侯必登，以历其余。
现代文：因为广东省司大多贪财，特意奏请表彰廉洁能干的知府侯必登，以便肃治其他人。
English: Because most of the provincial governors in Guangdong are greedy for money, they specifically requested that the clean and capable prefectural governor Hou Biden be commended in order to eliminate others.

古文：又言马政、盐政之官，名为卿、为使，而实以闲局视之，失人废事，渐不可训。
现代文：又说马政、盐政的官吏，名义上是卿、是使节，实际上视他们为清闲的人。误人坏事，渐渐不能教诲。
English: It is also said that the officials of Ma Zheng and Yan Zheng are nominally nobles and envoys, but in fact they are regarded as idlers. They are gradually unable to teach people wrongdoings.

古文：惟教官驿递诸司，职卑录薄，远道为难，宜铨注近地，以恤其私。
现代文：只有教导官府驿道诸司，职位低俸禄少，路途遥远较为困难。适宜注重从当地选拔官员，体恤他们的私情。
English: It is only necessary to teach the officials of the government and the various departments, the position is low-paid and the journey is long and difficult. It is appropriate to pay attention to the selection of officials from the local area and sympathize with their personal feelings.

古文：诏皆从之。
现代文：皇帝下诏同意施行。
English: Gao Zu's subordinate orders were all carried out in accordance with what the eldest grandson Jian said.

古文：拱所经画，皆此类也。
现代文：高拱所经办的，都是这类事。
English: This is the kind of thing that Gao Gong's office deals with.

古文：俺答孙把汉那吉来降，总督王崇古受之，请于朝，乞授以官。
现代文：俺答的孙子把汉那吉前来归降，总督王崇古接纳了他，向朝廷禀报，请求给他封官。
English: My grandfather's grandson came to Hanaji to surrender. Governor Wang Chongu received him, reported to the imperial court, and requested that he be given an official title.

古文：朝议多以为不可，拱与居正力主之。
现代文：朝中意见大多数认为不行，高拱与张居正极力主张授官。
English: The majority of opinions in the DPRK and China believe that it is not possible, and Gao Gong and Zhang Ju are strongly advocating the awarding of the post.

古文：遂排众议请于上，而封贡以成。
现代文：于是排除众议向皇帝奏请，使封官的事办成。
English: Therefore, the emperor was asked to make a request to the exclusion of public opinion, so that the matter of sealing the official was completed.

古文：事具崇古传。
现代文：事情详见崇古传。
English: The details of the incident can be found in the Chong Gu Chuan.

古文：进拱少师兼太子太师、尚书、大学士，改建极殿。
现代文：晋升高拱为少师兼太子太师、尚书大学士，改居建极殿。
English: He was promoted to the rank of Junior Teacher and Prince's Grand Master, and became a scholar of Shangshu University, and moved to Jianji Temple.

古文：拱以边境稍宁，恐将士惰玩，复请敕边臣及时闲暇，严为整顿，仍时遣大臣阅视。
现代文：高拱认为边境稍稍安宁，担心将士懒惰散漫，又奏请特敕边地大臣借此空闲时，严格整顿，仍然常常派遣大臣去视察。
English: Gao Gong thought that the border was a little quiet, worried that the generals were lazy and idle, and asked the special border minister to take advantage of this leisure time, strictly rectify, and still often send the minister to inspect.

古文：帝皆从之。
现代文：皇帝都听从了他的意见。
English: Taizong all adopted it.

古文：辽东奏捷，进柱国、中极殿大学士。
现代文：辽东传来捷报，晋升高拱为柱国、中极殿大学士。
English: Liaodong was reported to be successful, and he was promoted to the pillar country, and became a member of the Central Pole Hall.

古文：寻考察科道，拱请与都察院同事。
现代文：不久考察科道，高拱奏请同都察院共同办理。
English: We will soon be inspecting the science and technology course, and we would like to request that the high archery course be handled jointly with the Duza Academy.

古文：时大学士赵贞吉掌都察院，持议稍异同。
现代文：当时大学士赵贞吉负责都察院，意见略有差别。
English: At that time, Zhao Zhengyi, a university scholar, was in charge of the Duka Academy. Opinions differed slightly.

古文：给事中韩楫劾贞吉有所私庇。
现代文：给事中韩楫弹劾贞吉有隐私。
English: There is privacy in the matter of Han Zheng's impeachment of Zhengyi.

古文：贞吉疑拱嗾之，遂抗章劾拱，拱亦疏辨。
现代文：贞吉怀疑高拱唆使，于是上书弹劾高拱，高拱也上书争辩。
English: Zhengyi suspected Gao Gong of instigating, so she wrote a letter to impeach Gao Gong, and Gao Gong also wrote a letter to argue.

古文：帝不直贞吉，令致仕去。
现代文：皇帝不喜欢贞吉，命令他离职退休。
English: The emperor did not like Zhengyi and ordered him to retire.

古文：拱既逐贞吉，专横益著。
现代文：高拱驱逐了贞吉，更加专横。
English: Gao Gong expelled Zhengyi and became even more tyrannical.

古文：尚宝卿刘奋庸上疏阴斥之，给事中曹大埜疏劾其不忠十事，皆谪外任。
现代文：尚宝卿刘奋庸上书密告他，给事中曹大禁上奏弹劾他十件不忠的事，都被贬斥到京都之外。
English: Liu Fengyong, Shangbaoqing, wrote a letter to inform him, and Cao Dada forbade him to write a letter to impeach him for ten cases of disloyalty, all of which were dismissed outside of Kyoto.

古文：拱初持清操，后其门生、亲串颇以贿闻，致物议。帝终眷拱不衰也。
现代文：高拱开始操行清廉，后来他的门生，亲戚常被传闻受贿，遭人议论，皇帝始终宠爱高拱不减。
English: Gao Gong began to behave dishonestly. Later, his protégés and relatives were often rumored to have taken bribes and were discussed by others. The emperor always favored Gao Gong.

古文：始拱为祭酒，居正为司业，相友善，拱亟称居正才。
现代文：起初高拱任祭酒，居正任司业，互相友善，高拱极力称赞居正的才能。
English: At first, Gao Gong was in charge of the sacrificial wine, Ru Zheng was in charge of the business, and they were friendly with each other. Gao Gong highly praised Ru Zheng's talent.

古文：及是李春芳、陈以勤皆去，拱为首辅，居正肩随之。
现代文：等到李春芳、陈以勤都离去，高拱担任了首辅，居正比肩伴随。
English: When Li Chunfang and Chen Yiquan both left, Gao Gong took on the role of chief aide, accompanying them shoulder to shoulder.

古文：拱性直而傲，同官殷士儋辈不能堪，居正独退然下之，拱不之察也。
现代文：高拱性格直爽而且傲慢，同官殷士儋等人不能忍受，唯独张居正退让处其下，高拱没有察觉。
English: Gao Gong's character was forthright and arrogant. He could not stand his fellow officials such as Yin Shixuan and others. However, Zhang Ju was retreating under him, and Gao Gong did not notice.

古文：冯保者，中人，性黠，次当掌司礼监，拱荐陈洪及孟冲，帝从之，保以是怨拱。而居正与保深相结。
现代文：宦官冯保，性情狡黠，依次当为司礼右监。高拱推荐陈洪和孟冲，皇帝听从了，冯保因此怨恨高拱，张居正与冯保交情深厚。
English: The eunuch Feng Bao, with a cunning temperament, was successively appointed as the right supervisor of the ceremony. Gao Gong recommended Chen Hong and Meng Chong, and the emperor obeyed. As a result, Feng Bao resented Gao Gong. Zhang Jizheng had a deep friendship with Feng Bao.

古文：六年春，帝得疾，大渐，召拱与居正、高仪受顾命而崩。
现代文：六年春皇帝患病，病情加重时，召见高拱、张居正、高仪接受遗命而后去世。
English: In the spring of the sixth year, the emperor fell ill. When his condition worsened, he summoned Gao Gong, Zhang Jizheng, and Gao Yi to accept his last will and die.

古文：初，帝意专属阁臣，而中官矫遗诏命与冯保共事。
现代文：起初，皇帝的遗命只让内阁大臣执政，但宦官篡改遗诏命令他们与冯保共事。
English: At first, the emperor's will only allowed cabinet ministers to govern, but eunuchs altered the will to order them to work with Feng Bao.

古文：神宗即位，拱以主上幼冲，惩中官专政，条奏请诎司礼权，还之内阁。
现代文：神宗即位，高拱因为皇帝年幼，苦于宦官专政，分列条目奏请皇帝抑制司礼监，把权力交还给内阁。
English: When Emperor Shenzong ascended the throne, Gao Gong, because the emperor was young and suffered from the dictatorship of eunuchs, asked the emperor to restrain the chief eunuch and return power to the cabinet.

古文：又命给事中雒遒、程文合疏攻保，而己从中拟旨逐之。
现代文：又命令给事中雒遵、程文一起上书皇帝攻击冯保，自己从中拟定圣旨驱逐他。
English: He also ordered to send a letter to the emperor to attack Feng Bao, and to draw up a decree to expel him.

古文：拱使人报居正，居正阳诺之，而私以语保。
现代文：高拱派人报告张居正，居正表面同意，私下告诉了冯保。
English: Gao Gong sent a person to report to Zhang Juzheng. Juzheng agreed on the surface and told Feng Bao in private.

古文：保诉于太后，谓拱擅权，不可容。太后颔之。
现代文：冯保向太后投诉，称高拱擅权不能容忍，太后点头同意。
English: Feng Bao complained to the empress dowager, saying that Gao Gong's abuse of power could not be tolerated, and the empress dowager nodded in agreement.

古文：明日，召群臣入，宣两宫及帝诏。
现代文：第二天召集大臣们进宫，宣告两宫和皇帝的诏书。
English: The next day, the ministers were summoned to the palace, and the two palaces and the emperor's edict were announced.

古文：拱意必逐保也，急趋入。比宣诏，则数拱罪而逐之。
现代文：高拱心想必定是驱逐冯保，急忙进宫，等到宣读诏书，却是列举高拱罪状并驱逐他。
English: Gao Gong thought that he must expel Feng Bao, and hurried into the palace. When the edict was read out, Gao Gong's crimes were enumerated and he was expelled.

古文：拱伏地不能起，居正掖之出，僦骡车出宣武门。
现代文：高拱倒在地上不能起身，居正把他扶持出宫，雇骡车从宣武门送他离去。
English: Gao Gong fell to the ground and could not get up. Rui was helping him out of the palace and hired a carriage to take him away from Xuanwu Gate.

古文：居正乃与仪请留拱，弗许。
现代文：居正与高仪奏请挽留高拱，未获批准。
English: Ju Zheng and Gao Yi asked to retain the high arch, but this was not approved.

古文：请得乘传，许之。
现代文：请求给予高拱乘用驿站车马，批准同意。
English: The request to grant the high-arch passenger station wagon and horse, approval and consent.

古文：拱既去，保憾未释。
现代文：高拱走后，冯保的不满未消。
English: After Gao Gong left, Feng Bao's dissatisfaction remained.

古文：复构王大臣狱，欲连及拱，已而得寝。
现代文：又捏造王大臣案，想株连高拱，不久，事情终止。
English: He also fabricated the Wang minister case, hoping to become a high-ranking official, but the matter was soon terminated.

古文：居家数年，卒。
现代文：高拱在家中呆了几年后死去。
English: Gao Gong died after staying at home for several years.

古文：辅政二年无过。
现代文：居正奏请恢复高拱的官位使祭葬照前例。
English: Ju Zhengso please restore the high-arched official position to make the funeral ceremony a precedent.

古文：特以拱故，不容于朝，时颇有惜之者。
现代文：宫中下旨给他半葬的礼仪，祭文仍然作贬损语。很久之后，朝廷议论高拱的功绩，追封他为太师，谥号文襄，荫庇他的嗣子务观为尚宝丞。
English: The palace ordered that he be given a half-burial, and the sacrificial texts were still derogatory. Long afterwards, the court discussed Gao Gong's achievements, and he was given the title of Grand Master, the posthumous name of Wen Xiang, and the title of his heir, Shang Baojun.

古文：张居正，字叔大，江陵人。
现代文：张居正，字叔大，江陵人。
English: Zhang Jizheng, the eldest son, is from Jiangling.

古文：少颖敏绝伦。十五为诸生。
现代文：少年时期聪敏绝伦，十五岁就考取生员。
English: When he was a boy, he was brilliantly intelligent. At the age of fifteen, he passed the entrance examination to become a student.

古文：巡抚顾璘奇其文，曰： 国器也。 
现代文：巡抚顾王惊异他的文辞，称他为 国宝 。
English: The governor, Gu Wang, was surprised by his words and called him a national treasure.

古文：未几，居正举于乡，璘解犀带以赠，且曰： 君异日当腰玉，犀不足溷子。 
现代文：不久，居正乡试中举，顾王解下犀牛皮带赠给他，说： 你日后必定会佩玉腰带，犀牛皮带是捆束不住你的。 
English: Soon after, Gu Wang gave him a rhinoceros leather belt as a gift at the Ju Zhengxiang Middle School Examination, saying, "You will surely wear a jade belt in the future. A rhinoceros leather belt cannot bind you."

古文：嘉靖二十六年，居正成进士，改庶吉士。
现代文：嘉靖二十六年，居正考取进士，封为庶吉士。
English: In the twenty-sixth year of the Jiajing era, Ju Zheng took the entrance examination and was awarded the title of Junji.

古文：日讨求国家典故。
现代文：每天研讨国家朝章典故。
English: Study the history of the national emblem every day.

古文：徐阶辈皆器重之。授编修，请急归，亡何还职。
现代文：徐阶等人都器重他，授予编修职，他奏请马上归乡，不久返京就职。
English: Xu Jia and others all valued him highly and awarded him the post of editor. He requested to return to his hometown immediately and return to Beijing to take office soon.

古文：居正为人，颀面秀眉目，须长至腹。勇敢任事，豪杰自许。
现代文：居正脸长而眉目清秀，飘髯至腹。办事勇敢，自称豪杰。
English: Ju Zheng has a long face with a bright brow, and his hair flows down to his stomach. He is brave in his work and calls himself a hero.

古文：然沉深有城府，莫能测也。
现代文：但是城府深沉，不可窥测。
English: But the city is deep and cannot be surveyed.

古文：严嵩为首辅，忌阶，善阶者皆避匿。
现代文：严嵩任首辅，忌恨徐阶，与徐阶亲近的都作回避。
English: Yan Song was appointed chief aide, he hated Xu Jia, and those who were close to Xu Jia avoided him.

古文：居正自如，嵩亦器居正。
现代文：居正却很从容，严嵩也仍器重他。
English: Ju Zheng was very calm, and Yan Song still respected him.

古文：迁右中允，领国子司业事。
现代文：调他任右中允，负责国子司事务。
English: He was transferred to the post of Uchu-Junior Vice-Minister, responsible for the affairs of the Imperial Household Agency.

古文：与祭酒高拱善，相期以相业。
现代文：他与祭酒高拱友好，相约为相。
English: He is friendly with the sacrificial wine Gaoqong, and is comparable to it.

古文：寻还理坊事，迁侍裕邸讲读。
现代文：不久又受理春坊事务，调任裕邸讲读。
English: Soon he was in charge of the affairs of Chunfang, and was transferred to Yu's residence to lecture.

古文：王甚贤之，邸中中官亦无不善居正者。
现代文：裕王认为他很贤能，邸中的宦官也没有不与居正友善的。
English: Yu Wang thought that he was very capable, and the eunuchs in the mansion were friendly with him.

古文：而李芳数从问书义，颇及天下事。
现代文：李芳屡次向他询问尚书的义理，他对天下事很有见地。
English: Li Fang repeatedly asked him about the truth of Shang Shu, and he was very insightful about world affairs.

古文：寻迁右谕德兼侍读，进侍讲学士，领院事。
现代文：很快他被调任右谕德兼侍读，晋升为侍讲学士，负责院事。
English: Soon, he was transferred to the post of right-hand man and attendant, promoted to the post of attendant lecturer, and responsible for the affairs of the academy.

古文：阶代嵩首辅，倾心委居正。
现代文：徐阶取代严嵩任首辅，对居正很倚重。
English: Xu Jia replaced Yan Song as chief aide, and placed great importance on Ju Zheng.

古文：世宗崩，阶草遗诏，引与共谋。
现代文：世宗去世，徐阶草拟遗诏，召他共同谋划。
English: After the death of King Sejong, Xu Jia drafted his last will and called him to jointly plan.

古文：寻迁礼部右侍郎兼翰林院学士。
现代文：随即调他任礼部右侍郎兼翰林院学士。
English: He was immediately transferred to the post of Right Attendant of the Ministry of Ceremonies and Bachelor of the Hanlin Academy.

古文：月余，与裕邸故讲官陈以勤俱入閤，而居正为吏部左侍郎兼东阁大学士。
现代文：一个多月后，他与裕邸原讲官陈以勤一道进内阁，居正任吏部左侍郎兼东阁大学士。
English: A little more than a month later, he entered the cabinet together with Chen Yiqin, the former lecturer of Yuyi, and is currently serving as the left hand man of the personnel department and a scholar of Dongge University.

古文：寻充《世宗实录》总裁，进礼部尚书兼武英殿大学士，加少保兼太子太保，去学士五品仅岁余。
现代文：不久担任《世宗实录》的总裁，晋升礼部尚书兼武英殿大学士，加封少保兼太子太保，距做五品学士时仅仅一年多。
English: He soon became the president of "Sejong Jitsuroku," and was promoted to the highest rank in the etiquette department as well as the highest rank in the court of Emperor Wuying, and was also awarded the title of Shobo and Taibo of the Crown Prince. It was just over a year since he was awarded the rank of Goshin Baccalaureate.

古文：时徐阶以宿老居首辅，与李春芳皆折节礼士。
现代文：当时徐阶以宿老的身份任首辅，与李春芳都礼贤下士。
English: At that time, Xu Jia served as chief aide in the capacity of the elder, and he and Li Chunfang were both corporals.

古文：居正最后入，独引相体，倨见九卿，无所延纳。
现代文：居正最后进内阁，却单单做出丞相状，傲慢地接见九卿，并不引进任何人，也不听取任何意见。
English: Ju Zheng was the last to enter the cabinet, but he only made the title of prime minister, arrogantly received the nine nobles, did not introduce anyone, and did not listen to any opinions.

古文：间出一语辄中肯，人以是严惮之，重于他相。
现代文：间或说句话就很中肯，人们因此最害怕他，把他看得比其他丞相重。
English: From time to time, his words are very pertinent, which is why people are most afraid of him and regard him as more important than other prime ministers.

古文：高拱以很躁被论去，徐阶亦去，春芳为首辅。
现代文：高拱以强硬急躁被罢免，徐阶也被免职，春芳任首辅。
English: Gao Gong was removed from office for his strong-willed impetuousness, Xu Qi was also removed from office, and Chun Fang was appointed first assistant.

古文：亡何，赵贞吉入，易视居正。
现代文：不久赵贞吉入内阁，轻视居正。
English: Soon after, Zhao Zhengyi entered the cabinet and despised Ju Zheng.

古文：居正与故所善掌司礼者李芳谋，召用拱，俾领吏部，以扼贞吉，而夺春芳政。
现代文：居正与以前掌管司礼的相好李芳商议，召见任用高拱，让他负责吏部，用来扼制贞吉，并且夺取春芳的权力。
English: Ju was in discussion with his friend Li Fang, who had previously been in charge of the ceremonial, and summoned Gao Gong to be appointed, putting him in charge of the personnel department, which was used to strangle Zhengyi and seize the power of Chunfang.

古文：拱至，益与居正善。
现代文：高拱来后，与居正更加友好。
English: After Gao Gong came, he became more friendly with Ju Zheng.

古文：春芳寻引去，以勤亦自引，而贞吉、殷士儋皆为所构罢，独居正与拱在，两人益相密。
现代文：春芳不久离去，以勤也自动引退，贞吉、殷士儋都被罢免，只留下居正与高拱，两人更加亲密。
English: Soon after, Chunfang left, and Yi Qin also retired automatically. Zhengyi and Yin Shijun were both dismissed, leaving only Ju Zheng and Gao Gong, and the two became even closer.

古文：拱主封俺答，居正亦赞之，授王崇古等以方略。
现代文：高拱主张册封俺答，居正表示赞同，告诉王崇古等人方略。
English: Gao Gong advocated the enlistment and reply, Ju Zheng expressed his approval, and told Wang Chongu and others the strategy.

古文：加柱国、太子太傅。
现代文：加封柱国、太子太傅。
English: He was also given the title of Prince of the State and the title of Prince of Taifu.

古文：六年满，加少傅、吏部尚书、建极殿大学士。
现代文：时满六年，加封为少傅、吏部尚书、建极殿大学士。
English: When he was six years old, he was awarded the titles of Junior Master, Senior Officer, and Master of Jianji Temple.

古文：以辽东战功，加太子太师。
现代文：因为辽东的战功，加封太子太师。
English: Because of Liaodong's war exploits, he was awarded the title of crown prince.

古文：和市成，加少师，余如故。
现代文：媾和成功后，加封他为少师，其他照旧。
English: After the success of the reconciliation, he was awarded the title of junior teacher, and the rest continued as before.

古文：初，徐阶既去，令三子事居正谨。
现代文：起初，徐阶离去后，指示三个儿子谨慎事奉居正。
English: At first, after Xu Jia left, he instructed his three sons to be cautious in their service.

古文：而拱衔阶甚，嗾言路追论不已，阶诸子多坐罪。
现代文：但高拱对徐阶异常忌恨，挑动舆论追论不止，徐阶的儿子们都被治罪。
English: However, Gao Gong was extremely jealous of Xu Jia, provoked public opinion to pursue the matter, and Xu Jia's sons were all punished.

古文：居正从容为拱言，拱稍心动。
现代文：居正和缓地与高拱言及此事，高拱稍稍动心。
English: Ju Zheng gently mentioned the matter to Gao Gong, and Gao Gong was slightly moved.

古文：而拱客构居正纳阶子三万金，拱以诮居正。
现代文：但是高拱的门客捏造居正接受徐阶的儿子三万两银子的事，高拱因此谴责居正。
English: However, Gao Gong's concubine fabricated the story that Ju Zheng had accepted 30,000 taels of silver from Xu Ji's son, and Gao Gong condemned Ju Zheng for this.

古文：居正色变，指天誓，辞甚苦。
现代文：居正变了脸色，指天发誓，言辞很狠毒。
English: Ju Zheng turned pale and swore by the heavens that his words were very vicious.

古文：拱谢不审，两人交遂离。
现代文：高拱道歉称自己不慎重，两人的交情从此破裂。
English: Gao Gong apologized, saying that he was careless, and the friendship between the two has since broken down.

古文：拱又与居正所善中人冯保郄。
现代文：高拱又同居正相好的宦官冯保摩擦。
English: Feng Bao, a high-ranking eunuch who lives with Gao and is on good terms with him.

古文：穆宗不豫，居正与保密处分后事，引保为内助，而拱欲去保。
现代文：穆宗不快乐，居正与冯保密谋处置他，居正推荐冯保任内助，高拱却想赶走冯保。
English: Mu Zong is not happy, Ru Zheng and Feng Bao are secretly plotting to dispose of him, Ru Zheng is recommending Feng Bao as an assistant, but Gao Gong wants to drive Feng Bao away.

古文：神宗即位，保以两宫诏旨逐拱，事具拱传，居正遂代拱为首辅。
现代文：神宗即位，冯保凭两宫诏书驱逐高拱，居正取代高拱任首辅。
English: Shenzong ascended the throne, Feng Bao expelled Gao Gong with the edict of the two palaces, and Ruizheng replaced Gao Gong as the first assistant.

古文：帝御平台，召居正奖谕之，赐金币及绣蟒斗牛服。
现代文：皇帝幸临平台，召见张居正给奖赏，赏赐他金币和绣蟒斗牛服。
English: The emperor came to the platform, summoned Zhang Juzheng to give him a reward, and rewarded him with gold coins and embroidered bullfighting clothes.

古文：自是赐赉无虚日。
现代文：从此奖赏不断。
English: Since then, the awards have continued.

古文：帝虚己委居正，居正亦慨然以天下为己任，中外想望丰采。
现代文：皇帝授大权给居正，居正也慨然以天下为己任，朝廷内外人都想目睹他的丰采。
English: The emperor conferred the imperial power to Ju Zheng, and Ju Zheng also took the world as his own responsibility. People both inside and outside the court wanted to witness his exploits.

古文：居正劝帝遵守祖宗旧制，不必纷更，至讲学、亲贤、爱民、节用皆急务。
现代文：居正劝告皇帝遵守祖宗的旧制度，不必要纷纷更改，认为讲学、亲贤、爱民、节用都是紧迫的事。
English: Ju Zheng advised the emperor to abide by the old system of the ancestors and not to change it unnecessarily. He believed that teaching, being close to the people, loving the people, and saving money were all urgent matters.

古文：帝称善。大计廷臣，斥诸不职及附丽拱者。
现代文：皇帝称好，他着力考核朝廷大臣，贬斥所有不称职与依附过高拱的人。
English: The emperor was pleased. He made an effort to evaluate the ministers of the imperial court, and denounced all those who were incompetent and attached themselves to high-ranking officials.

古文：复具诏召群臣廷饬之，百僚皆惕息。
现代文：又下文书召见众大臣在朝廷中加以整治，朝廷众臣都谨慎小心。
English: In the next document, the ministers were summoned to rectify the situation in the imperial court. All the courtiers of the imperial court were cautious.

古文：帝当尊崇两宫。
现代文：皇帝应该尊崇两宫。
English: The emperor should respect the two palaces.

古文：故事，皇后与天子生母并称皇太后，而徽号有别。
现代文：先例，皇后与天子的生母并称皇太后，但标帜符号有区别。
English: As a precedent, the empress and the birth mother of the emperor's son are both called the empress dowager, but there is a difference in the banner symbols.

古文：保欲媚帝生母李贵妃，风居正以并尊。
现代文：冯保想阿谀皇帝的生母李贵妃，暗示居正把她们并尊。
English: Feng Bao thought of Li Guifei, the birth mother of the emperor, suggesting that he was treating them with equal respect.

古文：居正不敢违，议尊皇后曰仁圣皇太后，皇贵妃曰慈圣皇太后，两宫遂无别。
现代文：居正不敢违抗，提议尊称皇后为仁圣皇太后，皇贵妃为慈圣皇太后，于是两宫没有差别了。
English: Ju Zheng did not dare to disobey and proposed that the empress should be called Empress Dowager Ren Sheng and the empress dowager Empress Dowager Cixi, so there was no difference between the two palaces.

古文：慈圣徙乾清宫，抚视帝，内任保，而大柄悉以委居正。
现代文：慈圣皇太后迁居乾清宫，抚慰皇帝，内宫任用冯保，外面大权全部委任给居正。
English: Empress Dowager Cixing moved to Qianqing Palace to comfort the emperor. Feng Bao was appointed to the inner palace, and all external powers were delegated to Juzheng.

古文：居正为政，以尊主权、课吏职、信赏罚、一号令为主。
现代文：居正处理政务，以尊重皇权、考察吏绩、明辨赏罚、统一号令为主。
English: Ju Zheng handled government affairs, focusing on respecting imperial power, inspecting officials' performance, clearly distinguishing rewards and punishments, and unifying orders.

古文：虽万里外，朝下而夕奉行。
现代文：虽然是万里以外的地方，也是朝令夕行。
English: Although it is thousands of miles away, it is also a morning and evening trip.

古文：黔国公沐朝弼数犯法，当逮，朝议难之。
现代文：黔国公沐朝弼多次犯法，应该逮捕他，朝廷议论却难办。
English: Prince Mu Zhaohong of Shandong Province has repeatedly violated the law, he should be arrested, but it is difficult for the court to discuss.

古文：居正擢用其子，驰使缚之，不敢动。
现代文：居正提拔他的儿子，骑快马去绑缚他，不敢有所反抗。
English: Ju Zheng promoted his son, rode a fast horse to tie him up, and did not dare to resist.

古文：既至，请贷其死，锢之南京。
现代文：押到京城，他请求赐死，却被囚禁于南京。
English: Pushed to the capital, he asked to be allowed to die, but was imprisoned in Nanjing.

古文：氵曹河通，居正以岁赋逾春，发水横溢，非决则涸，乃采氵曹臣议，督艘卒以孟冬月兑运，及岁初毕发，少罹水患。
现代文：漕运的运河贯通，居正认为岁赋征收时间超出春季，发水就四方横溢，不是决堤就是干涸，于是采纳漕臣的建议，督促水兵在孟冬月份着手交税运送，到年初全部发运完，少遭水患之灾。
English: The canal for rowing transport was completed. Ruizheng believed that the tax collection time was longer than the spring, and the water was overflowing in all directions, either breaking the dike or drying up. Therefore, he adopted the suggestion of the oarsmen and urged the sailors to start paying taxes and transporting in the winter months. By the beginning of the year, all shipments were completed, and there were few floods.

古文：行之久，太仓粟充盈，可支十年。
现代文：推行此法很久，太仓的粮食丰盈，可以享用十年。
English: If this method is implemented for a long time, the grain in Taicang will be plentiful and can be enjoyed for ten years.

古文：互市饶马，乃减太仆种马，而令民以价纳，太仆金亦积四百余万。
现代文：互市上马匹丰饶，于是减少太仆的种马，指令百姓依价格交纳银两，太仆也积累四百多万银两。
English: There was an abundance of horses on the market, so he reduced the number of stallions owned by his servants, and ordered the people to pay two silver coins according to the price. The servants also accumulated more than four million silver coins.

古文：又为考成法以责吏治。
现代文：还制订考成法督导吏治。
English: It has also formulated a method for supervising and regulating officials.

古文：初，部院覆奏行抚按勘者，尝稽不报。
现代文：开始，部院反奏报地方巡视考察情况，曾经拖延不上报。
English: At the beginning, the ministry and institute did not report the local inspection and investigation to the newspaper, which was delayed.

古文：居正令以大小缓急为限，误者抵罪。
现代文：居正下令以大小缓急为标准，误事者治罪。
English: Ju Zheng ordered to prioritize according to size, and those who make mistakes will be punished.

古文：自是，一切不敢饰非，政体为肃。
现代文：从此，一切人都不敢掩饰过失，政治体制整肃。
English: From then on, no one dared to cover up their mistakes, and the political system was purged.

古文：南京小奄醉辱给事中，言者请究治。
现代文：南京的小宦官醉酒后侮辱给事中，舆论请求追究惩治。
English: When a minor eunuch in Nanjing was drunkenly insulted, public opinion demanded that he be investigated and punished.

古文：居正谪其尤激者赵参鲁于外以悦保，而徐说保裁抑其党，毋与六部事。
现代文：居正将最激进的赵参鲁贬出京城以便取悦冯保，再慢慢劝说冯保制裁，抑制他的党羽，不要同六部摩擦。
English: Ju Zheng banished the most radical Zhao Sanlu from Beijing in order to please Feng Bao, and then slowly persuaded Feng Bao to impose sanctions, restrain his followers, and avoid friction with the Six Departments.

古文：其奉使者，时令缇骑阴诇之。
现代文：奉命行事的人，也不时指令锦衣卫暗中刺探他们。
English: From time to time, those who were acting under orders also ordered Jin Rongwei to secretly spy on them.

古文：其党以是怨居正，而心不附保。
现代文：冯保的党羽因此怨恨居正，而且内心也不依附冯保。
English: As a result, Feng Bao's party members hold a grudge, and they are not attached to Feng Bao at heart.

古文：居正以御史在外，往往凌抚臣，痛欲折之。
现代文：居正认为御史在京城之外，往往凌辱抚臣，因此想大加整治。
English: Ju Zheng thought that since the imperial court was located outside the capital, it often abused and humiliated its vassals, so he wanted to tighten up the system.

古文：一事小不合，诟责随下，又敕其长加考察。
现代文：一件事稍微不合意，随即辱骂谴责，甚至下令他们的上司进行考察。
English: One slight disagreement, followed by name-calling, condemnation, and even an investigation ordered by their boss.

古文：给事中余懋学请行宽大之政，居正以为风己，削其职。
现代文：给事中余懋学奏请施行宽大政策，居正认为是讽喻自己，革去了他的职务。
English: In the matter, Yu Zhenxuexiao was asked to implement a lenient policy, and Ju Zheng thought it was a metaphor for himself, and dismissed him from his post.

古文：御史傅应祯继言之，尤切。下诏狱，杖戍。
现代文：御史傅应祯继续申诉此事，更加迫切，被投入诏狱，杖责后遣往边关。
English: Gu Shifu Yingyao continued to appeal the matter, more urgently, was put into the imperial prison, and was sent to the border after being punished.

古文：给事中徐贞明等群拥入狱，视具橐饘，亦逮谪外。
现代文：给事中徐贞明等人一起到监狱，并带了些饭食去探视，也被逮捕贬出京城。
English: During the incident, Xu Zhenming and others went to the prison together, and brought some meals to visit. He was also arrested and expelled from Beijing.

古文：御史刘台按辽东，误奏捷。
现代文：御史刘台巡视辽东，误传捷报。
English: General Historian Liu Tai inspects Liaodong and misrepresents the news of victory.

古文：居正方引故事绳督之，台抗章论居正专恣不法，居正怒甚。
现代文：居正引用先例绳治他，刘台上书称居正专横枉法，居正非常恼怒。
English: Ju Zheng cited the precedent of the rope to rule him, Liu wrote on the stage that Ju Zheng arbitrarily violated the law, and Ju Zheng was very angry.

古文：帝为下台诏狱，命杖百，远戍。
现代文：皇帝替居正将刘台打入诏狱，命令杖责百次，然后遣往遥远的边关。
English: The emperor's deputy put Liu Tai in the imperial prison, ordered him to be punished a hundred times, and then sent him to the distant frontier.

古文：居正阳具疏救之，仅夺其职。
现代文：居正公开奏请挽救，只剥夺他的官职。
English: Ju Zheng publicly appealed for rescue, only to be deprived of his official post.

古文：已，卒戍台。
现代文：不久，刘台终于还是被遣送边关。
English: Not long after, Liu Tai was finally sent to the border.

古文：由是诸给事御史益畏居正，而心不平。
现代文：因此，各位给事御史更加敬畏居正，但心中却愤愤不平。
English: Therefore, you are right to be more in awe of history, but you are resentful in your hearts.

古文：当是时，太后以帝冲年，尊礼居正甚至，同列吕调阳莫敢异同。
现代文：当时，太后认为皇帝年幼，很尊重礼遇居正，同事吕调阳不敢论及异同。
English: At that time, the empress dowager thought that the emperor was young and treated him with great respect and courtesy. Her colleague Lü Chunyang did not dare to discuss differences and similarities.

古文：及吏部左侍郎张四维入，恂恂若属吏，不敢以僚自处。
现代文：等到吏部左侍郎张四维进入内阁，恭敬谨慎得如同属官，不敢自视为同僚。
English: When Zhang Siwei, the left-hand man of the cadre department, entered the cabinet, he was as respectful and cautious as a subordinate official, and did not dare to regard himself as a colleague.

古文：居正喜建竖，能以智数驭下，人多乐为之尽。
现代文：居正喜好建树，能凭智术驾驭属下，人们大多数乐于为他效力。
English: Ju Zheng likes to build trees and can control his subordinates with intelligence. Most people are happy to work for him.

古文：俺答款塞，久不为害。
现代文：俺答求和于关塞，很久没有为害。
English: I asked for peace at the checkpoint, and it didn't hurt for a long time.

古文：独小王子部众十余万，东北直辽左，以不获通互市，数入寇。
现代文：只有小王子的部属十多万人，向东北至辽左，因互市没有被开通，屡次入侵。
English: Only the Little Prince's more than one hundred thousand subordinates, from the northeast to Liao Zuo, repeatedly invaded each other because the other cities were not opened.

古文：居正用李成梁镇辽，戚继光镇蓟门。
现代文：居正任用李成梁镇守辽省，戚继光镇守蓟门。
English: Ju Zheng appointed Li Chengliang Zhen to guard Liao Province, and Qi Jiguang Zhen to guard Yamen.

古文：成梁力战却敌，功多至封伯，而继光守备甚设。
现代文：李成梁奋战打退敌寇，功劳大得足以加封伯爵，而戚继光也设置了很好的防范。
English: Li Chengliang fought hard to repel the enemy raiders, his achievement was great enough to be awarded the title of count, and his relative Jiguang also set up a good defense.

古文：居正皆右之，边境晏然。
现代文：居正对他们都加以亲近信任，边境局势得以安然。
English: The situation at the border has been stabilised thanks to the closeness and trust placed in both of them.

古文：两广督抚殷正茂、凌云翼等亦数破贼有功。
现代文：两广督抚殷正茂、凌云翼等人也有多次破兵的功劳。
English: Two provincial governors, Fujian Zhengmao and Lingyun Ying, were also credited with defeating the enemy many times.

古文：浙江兵民再作乱，用张佳胤往抚即定，故世称居正知人。
现代文：浙江兵卒和百姓一再发难，他任用张佳胤前往安抚就得以平定，所以世人称居正知人善任。
English: The soldiers and people of Zhejiang repeatedly encountered difficulties. He appointed Zhang Jiayin to pacify them, and they were able to be pacified. Therefore, people around the world praised Ju Zhengcai as a good person.

古文：然持法严。
现代文：然而他执法严厉。
English: However, he enforced the law strictly.

古文：核驿递，省冗官，清庠序，多所澄汰。
现代文：核实驿道、裁减冗官、清理学校，澄清和淘汰的都很多。
English: There are a lot of reasons to check on-ramps, reduce redundant officials, clean up schools, clarify and eliminate.

古文：公卿群吏不得乘传，与商旅无别。
现代文：他说公卿和普通小吏不能乘坐驿站的车马，与商旅没有差别。
English: He said that courtiers and ordinary minor officials could not ride the horses and carriages of the station, and there was no difference between them and business travelers.

古文：郎署以缺少，需次者辄不得补。大邑士子额隘，艰于进取。亦多怨之者。
现代文：因为部署缺少的、需要次之的地方不能候补，大城镇的士子名额少，进取仕途很艰难，也有很多怨恨他的人。
English: Because of the lack of deployment, the need for the second place cannot be substituted, the number of scholars in large towns is small, the career is very difficult, and there are many people who resent him.

古文：时承平久，群盗猬起，至入城市劫府库，有司恒讳之，居正严其禁。
现代文：当时太平日久，众盗匪蜂起，以至于进城入市抢劫府库，有司常常隐讳这事，居正严格禁令。
English: At that time, it had been peaceful for a long time, and many robbers and bandits rose up, so much so that they entered the city and robbed the government treasury. Yuji often concealed this fact, and it was strictly prohibited.

古文：匿弗举者，虽循吏必黜。
现代文：隐匿不举报的人，虽然是良吏也必定罢免。
English: Those who conceal and do not report, even if they are good officials, will certainly be dismissed.

古文：得盗即斩决，有司莫敢饰情。
现代文：捕获盗匪立即斩杀，有司不敢掩饰情况。
English: When the robbers were caught, they were immediately killed, and the police did not dare to cover up the situation.

古文：盗边海钱米盈数，例皆斩，然往往长系或瘐死。
现代文：盗窃沿海钱米数额很多的人，惯例都斩杀，然而往往长期监禁或者死在狱中。
English: People who steal large amounts of coastal sticky rice are usually killed, but they are often imprisoned for a long time or die in prison.

古文：居正独亟斩之，而追捕其家属。
现代文：惟独张居正立即斩杀他们，而且追捕他们的家属。
English: But Zhang Jiusheng immediately killed them and hunted down their families.

古文：盗贼为衰止。
现代文：盗贼衰减。
English: Thieves decay.

古文：而奉行不便者，相率为怨言，居正不恤也。
现代文：但是觉得执行不便的人，都对他有怨言，居正也不加理会。
English: But those who find it inconvenient to carry out their duties complain about him, and Ju Zheng ignores them.

古文：慈圣太后将还慈宁宫，谕居正谓： 我不能视皇帝朝夕，恐不若前者之向学、勤政，有累先帝付托。
现代文：慈圣太后将要返回慈宁宫，告诉居正 ：我不能朝夕看着皇帝，担心他不像从前那样求学、勤于政务，有负先帝的嘱托。
English: Empress Dowager Cixing was about to return to Cining Palace and told Ju Zheng: I can't look at the emperor morning and evening. I'm worried that he won't study as he used to, be diligent in government affairs, and fail to carry out the instructions of the former emperor.

古文：先生有师保之责，与诸臣异。
现代文：先生负有师保的职责，与大臣们不同。
English: Teachers have a duty of care, unlike ministers.

古文：其为我朝夕纳诲，以辅台德，用终先帝凭几之谊。 
现代文：你替我朝夕教诲，用德辅佐我，尽你与先帝凭几的友谊。 
English: Teach me morning and evening, help me with virtue, and make the best of your friendship with the former emperor.

古文：因赐坐蟒、白金、彩币。
现代文：于是赏赐他坐蟒官服、白银、彩币。
English: So he rewarded him with a government uniform, silver, and coins.

古文：未几，丁父忧。
现代文：不久，遭遇父亲丧事。
English: Soon after, his father passed away.

古文：帝遣司礼中官慰问，视粥药，止哭，络绎道路，三宫膊赠甚厚。
现代文：皇帝派遣司礼宦官慰问他，送给他粥药，劝居正节哀，问候的人在道路上络绎不绝，三宫赠送的丧礼礼品很丰厚。
English: The emperor dispatched eunuchs to console him, gave him porridge medicine, and advised him to mourn on the day of the funeral. There was an endless stream of greetings on the road, and the funeral gifts presented by the three palaces were very plentiful.

古文：户部侍郎李幼孜欲媚居正，倡夺情议，居正惑之。
现代文：户部侍郎李幼孜想阿谀居正，倡议丧期未满、强令出仕，居正为此动心。
English: Li Yuzhe, the steward of the household department, thought of Ah Yan Ju Zheng, proposed that the period of mourning was not over, and forced him to serve. Ju Zheng was moved by this.

古文：冯保亦固留居正。
现代文：冯保也坚决挽留居正。
English: Feng Bao also resolutely retained his seat.

古文：诸翰林王锡爵、张位、赵志皋、吴中行、赵用贤、习孔教、沈懋学辈皆以为不可，弗听。
现代文：众翰林王锡爵、张位、赵志白牛、吴中行、赵用贤、习孔教、沈懋学等都认为不行，居正不听。
English: Lin Wang Xijue, Zhang Yi, Zhao Zhi Bai Niu, Wu Zhong Xing, Zhao Yixian, Xi Kong Jiao, Shen Xing Xue, etc. all think that it is not possible, and they are not listening.

古文：吏部尚书张瀚以持慰留旨，被逐去。
现代文：吏部尚书张瀚因为滞留了皇上劝居正留任的圣旨，被驱逐。
English: Shangshu Zhanghan, the head of the personnel department, was expelled because he had delayed the emperor's order to persuade Ju Zheng to remain in office.

古文：御史曾士楚、给事中陈三谟等遂交章请留。
现代文：御史曾士楚，给事中陈三谟等接着上书请求挽留张居正。
English: Historian Chu, Chen Sanmu and others in the case then sent a letter requesting the retention of Zhang Jizheng.

古文：中行、用贤及员外郎艾穆、主事沈思孝、进士邹元标相继争之。
现代文：吴中行、赵用贤和员外郎艾穆、主事沈思孝、进士邹元标相继争议此事。
English: Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian, and the members of the outside world, Ai Mu, the leader, Shen Sihiao, and the member of the inner circle, Zou Yuanbiao, successively disputed the matter.

古文：皆坐廷杖，谪斥有差。
现代文：都被处以廷杖责罚，分别遭贬职。
English: All of them were punished with the imperial scepter and demoted.

古文：时彗星从东南方起，长亘天。
现代文：当时有彗星从东南方出现，与天长长相连。
English: At that time, a comet appeared from the southeast, connecting with the celestial longitude.

古文：人情汹汹，指目居正，至悬谤书通衢。
现代文：人情激昂，目光都指向居正，以至于在交通要道悬挂诽谤书。
English: Emotions are running high, and all eyes are on Ju Zheng, so much so that defamatory books have been hung on major roads.

古文：帝诏谕群臣，再及者诛无赦，谤乃已。
现代文：皇帝下诏告诫群臣，再论及此事的人格杀无赦，诽谤才终止。
English: The emperor issued an imperial edict to admonish his courtiers, and then discussed the matter of character assassination without mercy, and the slander ended.

古文：于是使居正子编修嗣修与司礼太监魏朝驰传往代司丧。礼部主事曹诰治祭，工部主事徐应聘治丧。
现代文：因此派张居正的儿子编修张嗣修与司礼太监魏朝骑快马代替张居正主持丧葬，礼部主事曹诰负责祭祀，工部主事徐应聘负责葬礼。
English: Therefore, Zhang Jizheng's son, compiler Zhang Zixiu, and the eunuch Wei Cha, riding a fast horse, were sent to preside over the funeral in place of Zhang Jizheng. The head of the ceremonial department, Cao Wei, was responsible for the sacrificial rites, and the head of the work department, Xu Bei, was hired to be responsible for the funeral.

古文：居正请无造朝，以青衣、素服、角带入阁治政，侍经筵讲读，又请辞岁俸。
现代文：居正上奏请求不上朝，穿青衣、白孝服、角带进内阁主持朝政，讲读经书，并且奏请辞谢年薪。
English: Ju Zheng made a request not to go to the imperial court, wore a blue dress, a white filial piety robe, and a cape, and entered the cabinet to preside over the imperial court, read scriptures, and submitted a request to resign his annual salary.

古文：帝许之。
现代文：皇帝同意了。
English: Emperor Daowu agreed.

古文：及帝举大婚礼，居正吉服从事。给事中李涞言其非礼，居正怒，出为佥事。
现代文：等到皇帝举行婚礼，张居正穿吉祥的服装行事，给事中李涞说他违背礼仪，居正发怒，把他贬为佥事。
English: When the emperor held a wedding, Zhang Jiu was wearing auspicious clothing and acting. During the event, Li Wei said that he violated etiquette. Jiu Zheng was angry and reduced him to an anecdote.

古文：时帝顾居正益重，常赐居正札，称 元辅张少师先生 ，待以师礼。
现代文：当时皇帝对张居正很器重，经常赏赐居正御书，称他为 元辅张少师先生 ，用师礼待他。
English: At that time, the emperor held Zhang Jizheng in high esteem. He often rewarded him with the Jizheng Imperial Letter, called him the former assistant of Zhang Shao Shi, and treated him with the courtesy of a teacher.

古文：居正乞归葬父，帝使尚宝少卿郑钦、锦衣指挥史继书护归，期三月，葬毕即上道。
现代文：张居正请求回乡安葬父亲，皇帝派尚宝少卿郑钦、锦衣指挥史继书护送，约定三个月时间，葬礼结束立即返回。
English: Zhang Jiusheng requested to return to his hometown to bury his father. The emperor sent Shang Bao Shaoqing, Zheng Qin, and Jin Yi Commander Shi to escort him. It was agreed that it would take three months, and he would return immediately after the funeral.

古文：仍命抚按诸臣先期驰赐玺书敦谕。
现代文：虽然如此，皇帝还是指令抚按大臣们提前策马前去送达皇帝的催促诏书信。
English: In spite of this, the emperor ordered his ministers to ride ahead of time to deliver the emperor's urgent imperial edict.

古文：范 帝赉忠良 银印以赐之，如杨士奇、张孚敬例，得密封言事。
现代文：铸 帝赉忠良 银印赏赐给他，如同杨士奇、张孚敬一样，得到密函论事的特权。
English: He was granted the privilege of discussing secret matters, just like Yang Shiqui and Zhang Fuqing.

古文：戒次辅吕调阳等 有大事毋得专决，驰驿之江陵，听张先生处分。 
现代文：皇帝告诫次辅吕调阳等人 有大事不要专断，由驿马传到江陵，听任张先生处理 。
English: The emperor admonished the second-in-command, Lv Damingyang, and others not to arbitrarily decide on important matters, but to leave it to Mr. Zhang to handle.

古文：居正请广内阁员，诏即令居正推。
现代文：张居正奏请扩充内阁成员，皇帝下诏指令居正推荐。
English: Zhang Jiusheng appealed for the expansion of cabinet members, and the emperor issued a decree to recommend Jiusheng.

古文：居正因推礼部尚书马自强、吏部右侍郎申时行入阁。
现代文：居正就推荐礼部尚书马自强、吏部右侍郎申时行进入内阁。
English: Ju Zheng recommended Shang Shuma Zi Qiang from the Ministry of Ceremonies and Shen Jixing, the right-hand man of the Ministry of Personnel, to enter the cabinet.

古文：自强素迕居正，不自意得之，颇德居正，而时行与四维皆自昵于居正，居正乃安意去。
现代文：马自强一向抵触张居正，没料想到此事，很感激居正，而申时行与张四维都自觉与居正亲昵。居正就安心离去。
English: Ma Ziqiang had always resisted Zhang Juzheng. He did not expect this and was very grateful to Juzheng. Meanwhile, Shin Shih-hong and Zhang Siwei were consciously intimate with Juzheng. Juzheng left with peace of mind.

古文：帝及两宫赐赉慰谕有加礼，遣司礼太监张宏供张饯郊外，百僚班送。
现代文：皇帝和两宫对他赏赐安慰有加，派遣司礼太监张宏在郊外设宴为张居正饯行，朝廷众臣僚属列队相送。
English: The emperor and the two palaces rewarded him with comfort and sent the eunuch Zhang Hong to set up a banquet in the suburbs for Zhang Juzheng, and all the courtiers of the imperial court lined up to see him off.

古文：所过地，有司节厨传，治道路。
现代文：所有经过的地方，有司安排好食宿，整治道路。
English: In all the places they passed through, they arranged good accommodation and food, and repaired the roads.

古文：辽东奏大捷，帝复归功居正。
现代文：辽东奏报大捷，皇帝又归功于居正。
English: Liaodong reported a great victory, and the emperor credited it to Ju Zheng.

古文：使使驰谕，俾定爵赏。
现代文：派使者骑马奔告，让他确定封赏等次。
English: He sent an envoy on horseback to determine the order of the awards.

古文：居正为条列以闻。
现代文：张居正条列分明地予以上报。
English: Zhang Jizheng's column is clearly reported above.

古文：调阳益内惭，坚卧，累疏乞休不出。
现代文：吕调阳更加自惭，坚持卧病，多次上书请求退休。
English: Lu Chenyang was even more ashamed of himself, insisted on being bedridden, and repeatedly wrote to request retirement.

古文：居正言母老不能冒炎暑，请俟清凉上道。
现代文：张居正称母亲年老不能经受炎暑，奏请等待清凉的时候上路。
English: Zhang Juzheng said that his mother was too old to withstand the heat, so he asked her to wait for a cooler time to go on the road.

古文：于是内阁、两都部院寺卿、给事、御史俱上章，请趣居正亟还朝。
现代文：因此内阁、两都院寺卿、给事中、御史都上奏章，请求促张居正迅速返回朝廷。
English: Therefore, the cabinet, the chief priests of the two imperial courts, the vice-regent, and the governor of the imperial capital petitioned to urge Zhang Juzheng to return to the imperial court quickly.

古文：帝遣锦衣指挥翟汝敬驰传往迎，计日以俟；而令中官护太夫人以秋日由水道行。
现代文：皇帝派遣锦衣指挥翟汝敬骑催快马迎接。皇帝计日以待；指令宦官护卫老夫人在秋天从水路走。
English: The emperor dispatched the brocade-clad conductor Zou Ru to greet her on a swift horse. The emperor waited for a day; he ordered the eunuch to escort the old lady from the waterway in the autumn.

古文：居正所过，守臣率长跪，抚按大吏越界迎送，身为前驱。
现代文：张居正经过的地方，守备大臣都行长跪礼，抚按大吏越界迎送，担当前驱。
English: At the place where Zhang Ju was passing, the Minister of Defense knelt down and bowed, and the officials crossed the border to welcome him, and acted as the forerunner.

古文：道经襄阳，襄王出候，要居正宴。
现代文：路过襄阳，襄王出来迎候，邀请居正赴宴。
English: Passing through Xiangyang, King Xiang came out to greet them and invited them to a banquet.

古文：故事，虽公侯谒王执臣礼，居正具，宾主而出。
现代文：先例，虽然公侯拜见襄王也行臣子礼，张居正却受出迎和宴请的礼遇。
English: As a precedent, although the prince bowed to King Xiang and performed the courtier's salute, Zhang Jizheng received the courtesy of a welcome and a banquet.

古文：过南阳，唐王亦如之。
现代文：经过南阳，唐王也如此。
English: After Nanyang, Tang Wang also passed through.

古文：抵郊外，诏遣司礼太监何进宴劳，两宫亦各遣大珰李琦、李用宣谕，赐八宝金钉川扇、御膳、饼果、醪醴，百僚复班迎。
现代文：抵达京都郊外，皇帝下诏派遣司礼太监何进设宴慰劳，两宫也各派遣大宦官李琦、李用宣读谕旨，赏赐他八宝金钉川扇、御膳、饼果、酒，朝廷众官又列队迎接。
English: When he arrived in the suburbs of Kyoto, the emperor sent the eunuch Ho Jin to hold a banquet to console him, and the two palaces also sent the grand eunuchs Li Qian and Li Ying to read out the imperial edict, awarding him the eight-treasure Jinbei River fan, gourmet meal, biscuits, and wine. All the officials of the imperial court lined up to welcome him.

古文：入朝，帝慰劳恳笃，予假十日而后入阁，仍赐白金、彩币、宝钞、羊酒，因引见两宫。
现代文：进殿朝拜，皇帝诚挚地慰劳了他，批准他休十天假后再进内阁，赏赐他白银、彩币、宝钞、羊酒，顺道带他拜见两宫皇太后。
English: Entering the hall of worship, the emperor sincerely consoled him, approved him to take a ten-day vacation and then enter the cabinet, rewarded him with silver, coins, banknotes, and sheep wine, and took him to visit the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces.

古文：及秋，魏朝奉居正母行，仪从煊赫，观者如堵。
现代文：秋天，魏朝侍奉张居正的母亲上路，随从的仪礼煊赫，围观的人密集得像墙。
English: In autumn, Zhang Juzheng's mother, who served the Wei Dynasty, went on the road. The attendant's etiquette was exquisite, and the crowd of onlookers was as dense as a wall.

古文：比至，帝与两宫复赐赉加等，慰谕居正母子，几用家人礼。
现代文：抵达京城，皇帝和两宫皇太后又加倍赏赐财物，慰问居正母子，几乎像对待自家人。
English: Arriving in the capital, the emperor and the Empress Dowager of the Two Palaces doubled the reward of property, and consoled Ju Zheng's mother and son, almost like treating their own family.

古文：时帝渐备六宫，太仓银钱多所宣进。
现代文：当时皇帝逐渐备办六宫赐物，太仓提供的钱财很多。
English: At that time, the emperor gradually prepared gifts for the six palaces, and Taicang provided a lot of money.

古文：居正乃因户部进御览数目陈之，谓每岁入额不敌所出，请帝置坐隅时省览，量入为出，罢节浮费。
现代文：张居正就户部呈皇帝过目的清单发表意见，称每年太仓入不敷出，奏请皇帝坐下休息时抽空浏览一下清单，量入为出，节省过量的开支。
English: Zhang Juzheng expressed his opinion on the list of excess items presented to the emperor by the household department, saying that it was too much to live on every year, and asked the emperor to take time to browse the list when he was sitting down to rest, to live within his means, and to save excess expenses.

古文：疏上，留中。
现代文：奏章送去，皇帝留了下来。
English: The Emperor stayed behind after the medal had been sent.

古文：帝复令工部铸钱给用，居正以利不胜费止之。
现代文：皇帝又命令工部铸造钱币支付开支，居正认为获利抵不上耗费制止了此举。
English: The emperor also ordered the Ministry of Works to mint coins to pay for the expenses, but Ku Zheng thought that the profits could not meet the expenses and stopped the move.

古文：言官请停苏、松织造，不听。
现代文：劝谏的官吏奏请在苏、松地区停止织造活动，皇帝不听。
English: The emperor did not listen to the officials who urged him to stop weaving activities in the Su and Song regions.

古文：居正为面请，得损大半。
现代文：居正为此当面向皇帝奏请，才同意减去大半。
English: For this reason, Ju Zheng made an appeal to the emperor in person, and only then did he agree to subtract the greater part.

古文：复请停修武英殿工，及裁外戚迁官恩数，帝多曲从之。
现代文：他还奏请皇帝停止修建武英殿，以及裁减对外戚升官的恩惠，皇帝多数违心地顺从了他。
English: He also petitioned the emperor to stop the construction of the Imperial Palace, as well as to reduce the benefits of promotion for relatives, and the emperor obeyed him against his will.

古文：帝御文华殿，居正侍讲读毕，以给事中所上灾伤疏闻，因请振。
现代文：皇帝到文华殿，居正侍讲读完毕，告诉皇帝给事中呈送的有关灾害的奏章，请求赈济。
English: The emperor went to the Wenhua Hall, and after the attendant had finished reading the speech, he told the emperor about the report on the disaster presented to him, and asked for help.

古文：复言： 上爱民如子，而在外诸司营私背公，剥民罔上，宜痛钳以法。
现代文：他又说： 皇帝爱民如子，但是有司们在外损公肥私，盘剥百姓欺骗皇帝，应该依法严惩。
English: He also said, "The emperor loves the people like a son, but there are officials who are damaging public and private interests, manipulating the people and deceiving the emperor. They should be severely punished according to the law."

古文：而皇上加意撙节，于宫中一切用度、服御、赏赉、布施，裁省禁止。 
现代文：皇上努力节省，把宫中的一切开支、服饰、赏赐物、布施品，裁减或禁止。 
English: The emperor tried to economize, reducing or prohibiting all expenses, clothing, gifts, and gifts in the palace.

古文：帝首肯之，有所蠲贷。
现代文：皇帝点头同意，对一些地方税粮予以蠲免。
English: The emperor nodded and agreed to exempt some local taxes on grain.

古文：居正以江南贵豪怙势及诸奸猾吏民善逋赋，选大吏精悍者严行督责。
现代文：居正认为江南的贵族豪强仗势违法、奸诈狡猾的官吏和百姓长于拖欠赋税，挑选精悍的大官吏严格督导责罚。
English: Ju Zheng believed that the nobles in the south of the Yangtze River, the powerful and powerful, the illegal, the treacherous and cunning officials and the people were better than the tax arrears, and selected the powerful officials to strictly supervise and punish.

古文：赋以时输，国藏日益充，而豪猾率怨居正。
现代文：赋税因此按时输送，国库日益充实，但是豪强和狡猾的官民都怨恨居正。
English: As a result, taxes are paid on time and the state treasury is increasingly enriched, but the resentment of strong and cunning officials and citizens is on the rise.

古文：居正服将除，帝召吏部问期日，敕赐白玉带、大红坐蟒、盘蟒。
现代文：居正的服丧期将结束，皇帝召见吏部官员询问日期，敕令赏赐他白玉带、大红色坐蟒官服、盘蟒官服。
English: The period of mourning for Ju Zheng was coming to an end. The emperor summoned officials from the cadre department to inquire about the date, and the imperial edict rewarded him with a white jade belt, a large red official uniform, and an official uniform.

古文：御平台召对，慰谕久之。
现代文：皇帝在平台召见他，慰抚很久。
English: The emperor summoned him on the platform and consoled him for a long time.

古文：使中官张宏引见慈庆、慈宁两宫，皆有恩赉，而慈圣皇太后加赐御膳九品，使宏侍宴。
现代文：派宦官张宏引导他拜见慈庆、慈宁两宫皇太后，她们都有恩赐给他，而且慈圣皇太后还加赐九品御膳，派张宏侍奉居正宴享。
English: Zhang Hong, the eunuch, was sent to guide him to visit Empress Dowager Cixing and Empress Dowager Cining, both of whom had given him gifts. Moreover, Empress Dowager Cixing also gave him a nine-course meal, and Zhang Hong was sent to serve and enjoy the feast.

古文：帝初即位，冯保朝夕视起居，拥护提抱有力，小捍格，即以闻慈圣。
现代文：皇帝即位初期，冯保早晚巡视皇帝的起居，用力拥抱提拿，皇帝稍有冒犯，马上报告慈圣皇太后。
English: In the early days of the emperor's enthronement, Feng Bao inspected the emperor's living quarters in the morning and evening, hugged Tina with force, the emperor was slightly offended, and immediately reported to Empress Dowager Cixi.

古文：慈圣训帝严，每切责之，且曰： 使张先生闻，奈何！ 
现代文：慈圣皇太后管教皇帝很严格，每次责备他，就说 ：假使张先生知道了，会怎么样？ 
English: Empress Dowager Cixing was very strict in disciplining the emperor. Every time she scolded him, she said, "What would happen if Mr. Zhang found out?"

古文：于是帝甚惮居正。
现代文：因此皇帝很害怕居正。
English: As a result, the emperor was very afraid of Ju Zheng.

古文：及帝渐长，心厌之。
现代文：等到皇帝逐渐长大，心中就开始厌烦。
English: As the emperor grew up, he began to feel bored.

古文：乾清小珰孙海、客用等导上游戏，皆爱幸。
现代文：乾清宫小宦官孙海、客用等人引导皇帝游玩戏耍，都被皇帝宠爱。
English: Sun Hai, a minor eunuch of the Qianqing Palace, and other guests guided the emperor to play and play, and were all favored by the emperor.

古文：慈圣使保捕海、用，杖而逐之。
现代文：慈圣皇太后派冯保把孙海、客用抓起来，杖责后驱逐了他们。
English: Empress Dowager Cixing sent Feng Bao to arrest Sun Hai and Hakka, and banished them after a scolding.

古文：居正复条其党罪恶，请斥逐，而令司礼及诸内侍自陈，上裁去留。
现代文：居正又逐条列举这些小内侍的罪恶，请求贬逐他们，指令司礼和内侍们自己陈述，皇帝裁定他们的去留。
English: Ju Zheng enumerated the crimes of these minor courtiers one by one, requested that they be denounced, ordered the priests and courtiers to make their own statements, and the emperor ruled that they should stay.

古文：因劝帝戒游宴以重起居，专精神以广圣嗣，节赏赉以省浮费，却珍玩以端好尚，亲万几以明庶政，勤讲学以资治理。
现代文：张居正还趁机劝告皇帝戒除游玩和宴乐重视起居，精神专注以便增添圣上的后代，节制赏赐以便减少浪费，拒绝珍玩以便养成好习尚，亲理国事以了解政治事务，勤奋学习以便资助治理朝政。
English: Zhang Juzheng also took the opportunity to advise the emperor to abstain from playing and feasting, to attach importance to living, to concentrate on the spirit in order to increase the descendants of the sacred, to control rewards in order to reduce waste, to refuse precious games in order to develop good habits, to be familiar with state affairs in order to understand political affairs, and to study diligently in order to finance the governance of the dynasty.

古文：帝迫于太后，不得已，皆报可，而心颇嗛保、居正矣。
现代文：皇帝受太后的逼迫，没办法，都答复可以，但是内心很恨冯保和张居正。
English: Persecuted by the empress dowager, the emperor had no choice but to respond, but he hated Feng Bao and Zhang Jizheng in his heart.

古文：帝初政，居正尝纂古治乱事百余条，绘图，以俗语解之，使帝易晓。
现代文：皇帝刚开始主持朝政，居正曾编纂古代治乱的事例一百多条，绘有图画，用通俗的话进行解释，让皇帝容易理解。
English: The emperor had just begun to preside over the government of the dynasty, and Ju Zheng had compiled more than a hundred cases of ancient chaos, painted pictures, and explained in common words, so that the emperor could easily understand.

古文：至是，复属儒臣纪太祖列圣《宝训》、《宝录》分类成书，凡四十：曰创业艰难，曰励精图治，曰勤学，曰敬天，曰法祖，曰保民，曰谨祭祀，曰崇孝敬，曰端好尚，曰慎起居，曰戒游佚，曰正宫闱，曰教储贰，曰睦宗藩，曰亲贤臣，曰去奸邪，曰纳谏，曰理财，曰守法，曰儆戒，曰务实，曰正纪纲，曰审官，曰久任，曰重守令，曰驭近习，曰待外戚，曰重农桑，曰兴教化，曰明赏罚，曰信诏令，曰谨名分，曰裁贡献，曰慎赏赉，曰敦节俭，曰慎刑狱，曰褒功德，曰屏异端，曰节武备，曰御戎狄。
现代文：现在，又嘱咐儒臣记录太祖列圣的《宝训》、《实录》，分类编成书，共有四十条例：创业艰难，励精图治，勤奋学习，崇敬上天，效法先祖，保护百姓，谨慎祭祀，崇尚孝敬，开创好风尚，注意起居，戒除游荡，端正皇后和妃子的住处，教育太子，和睦宗族、藩国，亲近贤臣，远离奸邪的人，接受劝告，治理财产，遵守法律，告诫禁忌，办实事，端正纲纪，审察官吏，固定职位，加重地方太守县令的职权，驾驭亲幸的人，正确对待外戚，重视农业，提倡教化，明确赏罚，讲求诏书和命令的信用，慎重处理名分，裁减贡物和献祭，慎重地赏赐，敦促节俭，刑罚和狱审要慎重，表彰功德，摒弃异端，整顿武备，防御北方少数民族。
English: Now, he also instructed Confucius to record the "Homilies" and "Real Record" of the great-grandfather's canonization, which were classified and compiled into a book, with a total of forty regulations: starting a business is difficult, working hard to rule, studying hard, revering the heavens, following the example of ancestors, protecting the people, careful sacrifice, advocating filial piety, creating a good style, paying attention to living, avoiding wandering, correcting the residence of the queen and the concubine, educating the prince, reconciling the clan and the country, being close to wise ministers, and staying away from evil-doers, accepting advice, managing property,

古文：其辞多警切，请以经筵之暇进讲。
现代文：其中的话语很警诫人，张居正请求在皇帝读经的空暇为他讲解。
English: The words in it are very cautionary, and Zhang Jiu is asking Zang to explain them to him in his spare time when the emperor is reading the Bible.

古文：又请立起居注，纪帝言动与朝内外事，日用翰林官四员入直，应制诗文及备顾问。
现代文：并奏请设置皇帝起居注，记录皇帝的言行和朝廷内外的事情，每天派四名翰林官负责，及时著文做诗，准备皇帝顾问。
English: He also requested to set up the emperor's residence note, record the emperor's words and deeds and the affairs inside and outside the court, send four officials to be responsible for the daily affairs, timely write poems, and prepare the emperor's advisers.

古文：帝皆优诏报许。
现代文：皇帝都用最高级别的诏令颁行。
English: The emperors issued the highest-level imperial decrees.

古文：居正自夺情后，益偏恣。
现代文：张居正自从违反守丧礼制后，更加偏激放纵。
English: Zhang Jiusheng has become more extravagant since he violated the funeral etiquette.

古文：其所黜陟，多由爱憎。
现代文：大多数因为自己的爱憎，对官员进行罢免或晋升。
English: Most dismissed or promoted officials because of their own likes and dislikes.

古文：左右用事之人多通贿赂。
现代文：他左右办事的人大都通晓贿赂活动。
English: Most of the people around him knew about the bribery.

古文：冯保客徐爵擢用至锦衣卫指挥同知，署南镇抚。
现代文：冯保的门客徐爵被提拔为锦衣卫指挥同知，负责南镇抚司事。
English: Feng Bao's protégé, Xu Jie, was promoted to be a comrade-in-arms of the commander of Jin Yi Wei, and was responsible for leading the Nanzhen Fusiliers.

古文：居正三子皆登上第。
现代文：张居正的三个儿子都在科举考试中列为上等。
English: All three of Zhang Jizheng's sons were ranked in the upper class in the imperial examinations.

古文：苍头游七入赀为官，勋戚文武之臣多与往还，通姻好。
现代文：仆隶出身的游七出钱买官，有功劳的皇族亲戚和文武大臣很多人同他交往，缔结姻亲。
English: Yu Qi, who was born as a servant, paid money to buy officials, and many meritorious royal relatives and ministers of literature and armed forces interacted with him and concluded marriage.

古文：七具衣冠报谒，列于士大夫。
现代文：游七衣冠整齐地拜见张居正，被列入士大夫中。
English: Yu Qiguang neatly paid a visit to Zhang Jizheng and was included in the list of senior officials.

古文：世以此益恶之。
现代文：世人因此更加厌恶张居正。
English: As a result, the world is even more disgusted with Zhang Jizheng.

古文：亡何，居正病。
现代文：没多久，张居正患病。
English: Not long after, Zhang Ju fell ill.

古文：帝频颁敕谕问疾，大出金帛为医药资。
现代文：皇帝频繁地颁发圣旨询问他的病情，拿出很多银两和丝帛给他做医药费。
English: The emperor frequently issued decrees to inquire about his condition, and took out a lot of silver and silk to pay for his medical expenses.

古文：四阅月不愈，百官并斋醮为祈祷。
现代文：经过四个月没好转，朝廷众臣一齐斋戒替他祈祷。
English: After four months of no improvement, all the courtiers of the imperial court fasted and prayed for him.

古文：南都、秦、晋、楚、豫诸大吏，亡不建醮。
现代文：南都、秦、晋、楚、豫的大官吏，没有不建造祭坛的。
English: The great officials of Nanto, Qin, Jin, Chu and Yu did not fail to build altars.

古文：帝令四维等理阁中细务，大事即家令居正平章。
现代文：皇帝指令张四维等人处理内阁中细微的事务，大事情立即赶到张居正家中请他定夺。
English: The emperor ordered Zhang Siwei and others to deal with minor matters in the cabinet, and the big things immediately rushed to Zhang Juzheng's home to ask him to decide.

古文：居正始自力，后惫甚不能遍阅，然尚不使四维等参之。
现代文：居正起初自己处理，后来很疲惫不能全部审阅，却不让张四维等人掺和。
English: At first, Ju Zheng handled it himself, but later he was too tired to review everything, but he did not allow Zhang Siwei and others to meddle.

古文：及病革，乞归。
现代文：等到病情加重，请求辞官回乡。
English: Wait until the condition worsens and ask the discharge officer to return to his hometown.

古文：上复优诏慰留，称 太师张太岳先生 。
现代文：皇帝又颁布最高级别的诏书安慰、挽留他，称他为 太师张太岳先生 。
English: The emperor also issued the highest-level edict to comfort and retain him, calling him Mr. Zhang Taiyue.

古文：居正度不起，荐前礼部尚书潘晟及尚书梁梦龙、侍郎余有丁、许国、陈经邦，已，复荐尚书徐学谟、曾省吾、张学颜、侍郎王篆等可大用。
现代文：张居正考虑到自己不能康复，推荐以前礼部尚书潘晟和尚书梁梦龙，侍郎余有丁、许国、陈经邦。不久，又推荐尚书徐学谟、曾省吾、张学颜，侍郎王篆等人可以担当大任。
English: Zhang Jiusheng, considering that he could not recover, recommended the former etiquette department Shangshu Pan Qi and the etiquette department Shangshu Liang Menglong, the attendants Yu Yu Ding, Xu Guo and Chen Jingbang. Soon, he also recommended the etiquette department Shangshu Xu Xu Miao, Zeng Shuguo, Zhang Xueyan and the attendants Wang Yao and others to take on important duties.

古文：帝为黏御屏。
现代文：皇帝将张居正的推荐书贴在内宫屏风。
English: The emperor posted Zhang Juzheng's recommendation letter on the inner palace screen.

古文：晟，冯保所受书者也，强居正荐之。
现代文：潘晟、冯保接受别人的请托，强迫要张居正推荐。
English: Pan Zheng and Feng Bao accepted the request of others and were forced to recommend Zhang Juzheng.

古文：时居正已昏甚，不能自主矣。
现代文：当时居正已经很昏聩，不能自主。
English: At that time, Ju Zheng was already very dizzy and unable to move independently.

古文：及卒，帝为辍朝，谕祭九坛，视国公兼师傅者。
现代文：等到他死去，皇帝因他而中止朝见，下诏以九坛进行祭祀，把他看成国公兼师傅。
English: When he died, the emperor suspended the imperial court because of him, and ordered the nine altars to be used for sacrifices, and regarded him as a statesman and teacher.

古文：居正先以六载满，加特进中极殿大学士；以九载满，加赐坐蟒衣，进左柱国，荫一子尚宝丞；以大婚，加岁禄百石，录子锦衣千户为指挥佥事；以十二载满，加太傅；以辽东大捷，进太师，益岁禄二百石，子由指挥佥事进同知。
现代文：居正先因六年考绩满，特别加封中极殿大学士；满九年考绩，赏赐他坐蟒官服，加封左柱国，荫庇一个儿子为尚宝丞；因为皇帝婚娶大礼，增加他一百石年俸，录用做锦衣千户的儿子为指挥佥事；满十二年考绩，加封为少傅；因为辽东的大捷，晋升为太师，增加二百石年俸，儿子由指挥佥事提拔为同知。
English: Ju Zhengxian, due to his six-year performance appraisal, was specially awarded the title of Zhongyujidong University Scholar; due to his nine-year performance appraisal, he was awarded the official uniform, the title of the left pillar country, and the shadow of a son was Shangbao Rong; due to the emperor's wedding gift, his annual salary was increased by 100 koku, and his son, who was hired to make brocade clothes for thousands of households, was appointed as the conductor of Anji; due to his 12-year performance appraisal, he was awarded the title of Shao Fu; due to the great victory of Liaodong, he was promoted to

古文：至是，赠上柱国，谥文忠，命四品京卿、锦衣堂上官、司礼太监护丧归葬。
现代文：现在，追赠上柱国，谥号文忠，皇帝命令四品京官，锦衣堂的长官，司礼太监护送他的灵柩返乡安葬。
English: Now, as a posthumous gift to Shangzhu Province, the posthumous name of Wenzhong, the emperor ordered four Beijing officials, the head of Jinling Hall, and the guardian of the chief priest to send his coffin back to his hometown for burial.

古文：于是四维始为政，而与居正所荐引王篆、曾省吾等交恶。
现代文：从此张四维开始主持朝政，与居正推荐的王篆、曾省吾等人关系恶化。
English: From this time, Zhang Siwei began to preside over the imperial government, and the relationship with Wang Xi and Zeng Shouwu, who were recommended by Ju Zheng, deteriorated.

古文：初，帝所幸中官张诚见恶冯保，斥于外，帝使密诇保及居正。
现代文：开始，皇帝宠幸的宦官张诚遭冯保厌恶被贬出京都。皇帝派他秘密地调查冯保和张居正。
English: At first, the emperor's favorite eunuch, Zhang Cheng, was despised by Feng Bao and banished from Kyoto. The emperor sent him to secretly investigate Feng Bao and Zhang Jizheng.

古文：至是，诚复入，悉以两人交结恣横状闻，且谓其宝藏逾天府。
现代文：现在，张诚重返皇宫，详尽地告发他们两人相互勾结骄横恣肆的情况，并称他们的宝藏超过天府。
English: Now, Zhang Cheng has returned to the imperial palace to report in detail the two of them colluding arrogantly and arbitrarily, and saying that their treasure exceeds that of the Heavenly Palace.

古文：帝心动。
现代文：皇帝为此动心。
English: The emperor was moved by this.

古文：左右亦浸言保过恶，而四维门人御史李植极论徐爵与保挟诈通奸诸罪。
现代文：皇帝的左右侍从也都揭发冯保的过失与罪孽，张四维的门徒御史李植极力诉讼徐爵与冯保通奸行诈的多条罪状。
English: The emperor's right and left attendants also exposed Feng Bao's faults and sins, and Zhang Siwei's disciple, Gu Shi Li Zhi, vigorously sued Xu Jue and Feng Bao for multiple crimes of adultery and fraud.

古文：帝执保禁中，逮爵诏狱。
现代文：皇帝在皇宫拘捕了冯保，把徐爵逮捕投入诏狱。
English: The emperor arrested Feng Bao in the imperial palace and put Xu Jie in the imperial prison.

古文：谪保奉御居南京，尽籍其家金银珠宝巨万计。
现代文：贬斥冯保到南京的御居中供事，登记他家的全部金银珠宝，数额达万计。
English: Feng Bao went to the imperial residence in Nanjing to serve, and registered all the gold and silver jewelry of his family, amounting to tens of thousands of yuan.

古文：帝疑居正多蓄，益心艳之。
现代文：皇帝怀疑张居正也蓄藏很多，心中更加不高兴。
English: The emperor suspected that Zhang Jizheng had also accumulated a lot of money, and he was even more unhappy.

古文：言官劾篆、省吾，并劾居正，篆、省吾俱得罪。
现代文：言官弹劾王篆、曾省吾的同时也弹劾居正，王篆、曾省吾都被治罪。
English: The magistrate impeached Wang Xi and Zeng Shuguo at the same time as impeaching Yu Zheng, and Wang Xi and Zeng Shuguo were both punished.

古文：新进者益务攻居正。
现代文：刚受提拔的人更加积极地攻击张居正。
English: Those who had just been promoted were more active in attacking Zhang Jizheng.

古文：诏夺上柱国、太师，再夺谥。
现代文：皇帝下诏剥夺了他的上柱国、太师封号，又剥夺了谥号。
English: The emperor issued an edict to deprive him of the title of Shangzhu Guo and Taishi, and he was also deprived of his posthumous title.

古文：居正诸所引用者，斥削殆尽。
现代文：所有由张居正推荐的人，都被贬职削官。
English: All those recommended by Zhang Juzheng were demoted.

古文：召还中行、用贤等，迁官有差。
现代文：皇帝召回吴中行、赵用贤等人，担当不同的官职。
English: The emperor recalled Wu Zhongxing, Zhao Yixian and others to take on different official positions.

古文：刘台赠官，还其产。
现代文：刘台也被追封官职，偿还财产。
English: Liu Tai was also deprived of his official position and had to pay back the property.

古文：御史羊可立复追论居正罪，指居正构辽庶人宪节狱。
现代文：御史羊可立又继续追究居正的罪行指责居正捏造辽庶人宪火节的狱案。
English: Gu Shi Yang Keli also continued to investigate Ju Zheng's crimes and accused him of fabricating the prison case of the Liao people's constitutional fire festival.

古文：庶人妃因上疏辩冤，且曰： 庶人金宝万计，悉入居正。 
现代文：庶人的妃子趁机奏疏辩白冤屈，而且称： 庶人以万计的钱财，都被居正吞食。 
English: The commoner's concubine took the opportunity to play down the grievance, and said: The commoner has been devoured by tens of thousands of money and wealth.

古文：帝命司礼张诚及侍郎丘橓偕锦衣指挥、给事中籍居正家。
现代文：皇帝命令司礼张诚和侍郎丘木舜偕同锦衣指挥、给事中到居正家登记。
English: The emperor ordered the steward Zhang Cheng and the chamberlain Qiu Muxuan to go to Ju Zheng's house to register.

古文：诚等将至，荆州守令先期录人口，锢其门，子女多遁避空室中。
现代文：张诚等人将到，荆州守令事先登记人口，锁闭居正的家门，子女们大都逃进空屋中躲避。
English: Zhang Cheng and others will arrive, Jingzhou Shouling will register the population in advance, lock the door of the house, and most of the children will escape into the empty house.

古文：比门启，饿死者十余辈。
现代文：等到门开，饿死的有十多人。
English: By the time the doors opened, more than a dozen people had starved to death.

古文：诚等尽发其诸子兄弟藏，得黄金万两，白金十余万两。
现代文：张诚等将居正几个儿子兄弟的家藏全部搜出，获得万两黄金，十多万两白银。
English: Zhang Cheng and others searched out the entire family collections of several sons and brothers of Ju Zheng and obtained 10,000 taels of gold and more than 100,000 taels of silver.

古文：其长子礼部主事敬修不胜刑，自诬服寄三十万金于省吾、篆及傅作舟等，寻自缢死。
现代文：居正的长子礼部主事张敬修忍受不了刑罚，自己屈招寄存二十万两白银在曾省吾、王篆和傅作舟等人那里。不久自缢身亡。
English: The eldest son of Ju Zheng, the head of the ritual department, Zhang Jingxiu, could not bear the punishment, and he deigned to deposit 200,000 silver with Zeng Shouwu, Wang Qian and Fu Zuzhou. He soon hanged himself.

古文：事闻，时行等与六卿大臣合疏，请少缓之；刑部尚书潘季驯疏尤激楚。
现代文：事情传出，申时行等人同六卿大臣联合奏疏，请求皇帝稍稍宽缓居正家人；刑部尚书潘季驯的奏疏最激动直切。
English: When the news came out, Shin Shih-hong and others jointly petitioned the emperor with the six noble ministers, asking the emperor to be a little lenient with the Zheng family; the petition of the Penal Department's Shangshu Pan Jitai was the most emotional and direct.

古文：诏留空宅一所、田十顷，赡其母。
现代文：皇帝下诏保留一所空宅、十顷田，赡养居正的母亲。
English: The emperor issued an edict reserving an empty house and ten hectares of land to support Ju Zheng's mother.

古文：而御史丁此吕复追论科场事，谓高启愚以舜、禹命题，为居正策禅受。
现代文：但是御史丁此吕又追究科举考场的事情，称高启愚用舜、禹命题，是为皇帝让位张居正制造理论根据。
English: However, he also investigated the matter of the examination room of the imperial examination, saying that the propositions of Gao Qigong and Yu were used by Gao Qigong to create a theoretical basis for the emperor to give way to Zhang Juzheng.

古文：尚书杨巍等与相驳。
现代文：尚书杨巍等人与他辩驳。
English: Shangshu Yang Qi and others argued with him.

古文：此吕出外，启愚削籍。
现代文：丁此吕被调出京都。高启愚被削免官籍。
English: Ding Guolu was transferred out of Kyoto, and Gao Qigu was stripped of his official status.

古文：后言者复攻居正不已。
现代文：后来的议论者又不断攻击居正。
English: Later commentators continued to attack Ju Zheng.

古文：诏尽削居正官秩，夺前所赐玺书、四代诰命，以罪状示天下，谓当剖棺戮死而姑免之。
现代文：皇帝下诏全部削免居正的官衔品级，剥夺从前赏赐的玺书、四代封赠的荣誉称号，把居正的罪状向天下公告，称应当剖棺戮尸姑且宽免。
English: The emperor decreed that all the official titles and ranks of Ju Zheng should be removed, the imperial rescript previously awarded and the honorary titles conferred by the four dynasties should be revoked, and Ju Zheng's crimes should be announced to the world, saying that the coffin should be dissected and the corpse should be forgiven.

古文：其弟都指挥居易、子编修嗣修，俱发戍烟瘴地。
现代文：他的弟弟都指挥张居易，儿子编修张嗣修，都被发配戍守瘴气缭绕的边关。
English: Both his younger brother, commander Zhang Juyi, and his son, editor Zhang Zixiu, were assigned to guard the vibrant border.

古文：终万历世，无敢白居正者。
现代文：迄万历朝末，没有敢为居正辩白的。
English: By the end of the Wanli Dynasty, no one dared to defend Ju Zheng.

古文：熹宗时，廷臣稍稍追述之。
现代文：熹宗时期，朝臣们渐渐追忆他。
English: During the reign of Emperor Taizong, courtiers gradually began to remember him.

古文：而邹元标为都御史，亦称居正。诏复故官，予葬祭。
现代文：邹元标任都御史，也称赞居正，皇帝下诏恢复居正的原官职，允许祭祀他。
English: The emperor issued an edict to restore Ju Zheng to his former official position and allowed him to be enshrined.

古文：崇祯三年，礼部侍郎罗喻义等讼居正冤。
现代文：崇祯三年礼部侍郎罗喻义等人为居正诉讼冤屈。
English: The three-year-old etiquette club attendant, Luo Yuyi, and others were involved in the lawsuit.

古文：帝令部议，复二荫及诰命。
现代文：皇帝命令部里商议，恢复两代的荫庇和帝王的封赠称号。
English: The emperor ordered the ministry to discuss the restoration of the two-generation shade and the title of the emperor.

古文：十三年，敬修孙同敞请复武荫，并复敬修官。
现代文：十三年，敬修的孙子同敞又奏请皇帝恢复世袭武职，并恢复敬修的官职。
English: In the thirteenth year, the grandson of the revered priest, Tong Chang, petitioned the emperor to restore the hereditary military post and the official post of the revered priest.

古文：帝授同敞中书舍人，而下部议敬修事。
现代文：皇帝授予同敞中书舍人的职位，下旨让部里议论敬修的事情。
English: The emperor granted him the position of a scholar in the same room, and ordered the ministry to discuss the matter of reverence.

古文：尚书李日宣等言： 故辅居正，受遗辅政，事皇祖者十年，肩劳任怨，举废饬弛，弼成万历初年之治。
现代文：尚书李日宣等人说 ：先前的首辅张居正，接受遗诏辅治朝政，替皇帝的先祖供事十年。任劳任怨，完善了法度和风纪，辅佐皇帝在万历初年治有所成。
English: Shangshu Li Rixuan and others said: The previous chief aide, Zhang Juzheng, accepted the imperial edict to assist in the administration of the dynasty, and served the emperor's ancestors for ten years. He worked hard, perfected the laws and customs, and assisted the emperor in the first year of Wanli.

古文：其时中外乂安，海内殷阜，纪纲法度，莫不修明。
现代文：当时朝廷内外治理安平，国内物产丰盛，纲纪法度没有不严明的。
English: At that time, the internal and external governance of the imperial court was stable, domestic products were abundant, and there was no lack of strict discipline.

古文：功在社稷，日久论定，人益追思。 
现代文：他对国家的功勋，天长日久已成定论，人们更加怀念他。 
English: His merits to the country have been a foregone conclusion for a long time, and people miss him even more.

古文：帝可其奏，复敬修官。
现代文：皇帝同意了他们的奏议，恢复了敬修的官籍。
English: The emperor agreed to their request and restored Jing Xiu's official status.

古文：同敞负志节，感帝恩，益自奋。
现代文：评论：徐阶凭恭顺殷勤被皇帝赏识，他城府大度，虽然颇弄权谋，但主要的行为不失正直。
English: Comment: Xu Zhiping appreciated the emperor's attentiveness. He was very generous. Although he was quite power-hungry, his main behavior was honest.

古文：倾辄相寻，有自来已。
现代文：高拱自诩有才识谋略，傲气凌人。
English: Gao Gong prided himself on having talent, knowledge and strategy. He was arrogant and domineering.

古文：张居正通识时变，勇于任事。
现代文：等到他被冯保驱逐时，只好乘简陋无饰的破车走上归途。张居正通晓时世变化，敢于担当事任。
English: When he was expelled by Feng Bao, he had no choice but to take a simple and unadorned broken car on his way home. Zhang Jizheng is aware of the changes in the world and dares to take charge of affairs.

古文：神宗初政，起衰振隳，不可谓非干济才。
现代文：神宗初年主持朝政，使国家由衰弱中振兴，不能说没有济世的才干。
English: In the first year of his reign, Emperor Shenzong presided over the government of the dynasty, reviving the country from a weak state. It cannot be said that he did not have the ability to benefit the world.

古文：而威柄之操，几于震主，卒致祸发身后。
现代文：操持显赫大权后，几乎威震皇帝，最终招致死后祸患家嗣。
English: After wielding great power, he almost made himself emperor, which eventually led to the death of his heir.

古文：《书》曰 臣罔以宠利居成功 ，可弗戒哉！
现代文：《尚书》讲 大臣不要把皇帝的宠幸当作自己的成就事业 ，可以不作训诫吗？
English: "Shangshu" tells ministers not to take the emperor's favor as their own achievement, can they not be admonished?

