古文：道无始而有应。其未来也，无之；其巳来，如之。
现代文：包罗万象的大 道 浩广而没有边际，但却是实实在在存在着。
English: The all-encompassing road is vast and boundless, but it really exists.

古文：有物将来，其刑先之。
现代文：人们没有认识到它的时候，它好像没有；认识到它的时候，它便随之出现了。
English: When people don't recognize it, it doesn't seem to be there; when they recognize it, it appears.

古文：建以其刑，名以其名。
现代文：一个事物的形质和概念即将产生的时候，它的形状是首先显现出来的。
English: When the shape and concept of a thing is about to emerge, its shape is the first to appear.

古文：其言胃何?
现代文：事物的形质出现了，才可据此来给它定名。
English: It is only after the appearance of a thing's shape that it can be named.

古文：环伤威。
现代文：这样说意味着什么呢？
English: What does that mean?

古文：也欲伤法。
现代文：这是需要人们仔细思考的。
English: This is something that people need to think about carefully.

古文：无隋伤道。数举参者，有身弗能葆，何国能守?
现代文：乱用刑法就必然伤损威严，放纵私刑则有伤法度，不遵循客观规律就会伤损大 道 。
English: The abuse of criminal law will inevitably damage the dignity of the country, the indulgence of lynching will have a degree of injury, and not following the objective law will damage the high road.

古文：奇从奇，正从正，奇与正，恒不同廷。
现代文：这伤害威严、法度、大 道 的行为反复出现，其结果就是自身难保，甚至失掉国家。
English: This behavior of harming authority, law and order, and the high road occurs repeatedly, and the result is that it is difficult to protect oneself and even lose the country.

古文：凡变之道，非益而损，非进而退，首变者凶，有义而义则不过，侍表而望则不惑，案法而治则不乱。
现代文：最初改变常规的必有凶祸。依据仪器来测量就不会有误差，依靠仪表来观测就不会迷惑，用法度来治理就不会混乱。
English: There will be no error in measuring according to the instrument, no confusion in relying on the instrument to observe, and no confusion in using the method to control.

古文：圣人不为始，不专已，不豫谋，不为得，不辞福，因天之则。
现代文：作为圣人，不先动、不偏执一己之见，天时未到便不预先谋划、而天时到了也不可失去时机，不谋求索取、而福祥来至也不可放过：总之要因顺上天的法则。
English: As a saint, do not act ahead of time, do not stick to one's own opinion, do not plan in advance before the time comes, and when the time comes, do not lose the opportunity, do not seek to obtain, and do not miss the blessing: in short, the cause follows the law of heaven.

古文：失其天者死，欺其主者死。翟其上者危。
现代文：做为君主，如果失去天道他的国家就会灭亡；做为大臣，欺蒙主上就会戮死；做为小民，轻蔑上司就会危险。
English: As a monarch, if he loses the way of heaven, his country will perish; as a minister, if he deceives the Lord, he will die; as a commoner, if he despises his superior, he will be in danger.

古文：心之所欲则志归之。志之所欲则力归之。
现代文：人们心里想要得到的就应立志去完成它，立志想要达到的就应花费气力去实现它。
English: What a man sets his heart on, he should set his mind to achieve, and what a man sets his heart on, he should work hard to achieve.

古文：故巢居者察风，穴居者知雨，忧存故也。
现代文：巢居于高树者对风最敏感，穴处于低洼者对雨最敏感，这种对风或雨各自的担忧，都是由它们不同的生存环境所决定的。
English: Those whose nests are in tall trees are most sensitive to wind, while those whose burrows are in low-lying areas are most sensitive to rain. Their respective concerns about wind or rain are determined by their different living environments.

古文：忧之则取，安之则久。弗能令者弗得有。
现代文：而对各自的生存环境有明确的忧患意识的就能生存，如果能进一步安然处之的话就能长久；倘不能很好地对待这个问题，便不能自保其身。
English: On the other hand, those who have a clear sense of anxiety about their respective living environment can survive, and if they can further live in peace, they can live for a long time; if they cannot treat this problem well, they cannot protect themselves.

古文：帝者臣，名臣，其实师也。王者臣，名臣，其实友也。者臣，名臣也，其实□□。□□臣，名臣也，其实庸也。
现代文：做为 帝 的大臣，名义上是臣子，其实是他的老师；做为 王 的大臣，名义上是臣子，其实是他的朋友；做为 霸 的大臣，名义上是臣子，其实只是临时雇员；流亡君主的大臣，名义上是臣子，其实只是仆人罢了。
English: As the emperor's minister, he is nominally a vassal, but actually his teacher; as the king's minister, he is nominally a vassal, but actually his friend; as the tyrant's minister, he is nominally a vassal, but actually only a temporary employee; as the exiled monarch's minister, he is nominally a vassal, but actually only a servant.

古文：亡者臣，名臣也，其实虏也。者人绝之；□□人者其生危，其死辱翳。
现代文：自以为德能广大的人必被人们所唾弃，盛气凌人者很危险，甚至会自取耻辱和灭亡。
English: Those who think they are powerful will be rejected by the people, and those who are arrogant and domineering are very dangerous, and will even bring disgrace and ruin upon themselves.

古文：居不犯凶，困不择时。不受禄者，天子弗臣也。
现代文：人们在顺境时不要妄为乱作自取凶祸，在逆境时也不要自暴自弃放过机会。
English: In good times, people should not act recklessly and bring misfortune upon themselves, and in bad times, they should not abandon themselves and miss the opportunity.

古文：禄泊者，弗与犯难。故以人之自为□□□□□□□□不士于盛盈之国，不嫁子于盛盈之家，不友□□□易之。
现代文：没有享受朝廷俸禄的，天子就不要把人家当作臣仆来驱使，如果提供的俸禄本就不多，那么天子也不要强求人家与己共患难。所以说天子御下的方法，应该是因顺人的天性，而不要人为地去扭曲它。人们切勿到极端强盛的国家去做官，不要把女儿嫁到极端豪贵的家庭中，不能与骄傲自大、轻视他人的人交朋友。
English: If you do not enjoy the salary of the imperial court, the Son of Heaven should not drive people as a vassal. If the salary is not much, then the Son of Heaven should not force people to suffer together with him. Therefore, the method of the Son of Heaven should be due to people's nature, and should not artificially distort it. People should not go to extremely powerful countries to become officials, should not marry their daughters into extremely noble families, and should not make friends with people who are arrogant and despise others.

古文：□□不执偃兵，不执用兵，兵者不得已而行。
现代文：圣人不是一味地反对用兵，但也不主张一味地用兵；战争手段是在不得已的情况下才使用的。
English: The sage does not oppose the use of force, but neither does he advocate the use of force; the means of war are used only as a last resort.

古文：见□□□□□□□□□□蜀在。天子之地方千里，诸侯百里，所以联合之也。
现代文：圣人上知天道的根本，下知地道的规律，它能够顺应天地之道，所以他有远见卓识，并且恬然自在。天子辖地一千平方里，诸侯辖地一百平方里，这种等级差异是和他们的身份地位相联系对应的。
English: The sage knows the fundamentals of the heavenly way from above and the laws of the earthly way from below, and it can conform to the way of heaven and earth. Therefore, he has far-sightedness and insight, and is very comfortable. There are a thousand square miles of land under the jurisdiction of the sons of heaven, and a hundred square miles under the jurisdiction of the princes. This difference in rank corresponds to their status.

古文：故立天子诸侯疑焉。立正敌者，□不使庶孽疑焉。立正妻者，不使婢妾疑焉。
现代文：因此设立天子时，在等级制度上不能使诸侯与之相同；将正妻之子立为太子，就不使众妾之子在身份地位上与之相等；设立正妻，就不使众妾在身份地位上与之平等。
English: Therefore, when establishing a prince, it is not possible to make the princes the same as the princes in terms of the hierarchy system; if the son of the legitimate wife is established as the prince, the sons of the concubines will not be equal to them in terms of status; if the legitimate wife is established, the concubines will not be equal to them in terms of status.

古文：疑则相伤，杂则相方。
现代文：如果两相对等就会相互伤害，两相混淆就会互相敌对。
English: If the two are equal, they will harm each other, and if they are confused, they will be hostile to each other.

古文：时若可行，亟□勿言，若未可，涂其门，毋见其端。
现代文：时机成熟了，就要在行动上立刻做出反应而不要声张：时机未到，就要敛藏心机，不露声色。
English: When the time is ripe, it is necessary to immediately react in action and not to make a fuss: before the time comes, it is necessary to restrain the heart and not to show off.

古文：天制寒暑，地制高下，人制取予。
现代文：天道控制着寒来暑往，地道掌握着高低的差异，人道决定着夺取和给予。
English: The heavenly way controls the alternation of cold and heat, the earthly way controls the difference between high and low, and humanity decides what to take and what to give.

古文：取予当，立为□王。取予不当，流之死亡。
现代文：如果取予得法，就可以尊为圣王；取予失当，就会流徙四方、身亡国亡。
English: If you obtain the Fa, you can be revered as a holy king; if you obtain it improperly, you will be exiled to the four corners of the earth and perish.

古文：天有环刑，反受其央，世恒不可择法而用我，用我不可，是以生祸。
现代文：天道循环运行，有德必有刑，取予不当，就要受到天刑的惩罚，自取祸殃。人世规律是不允许舍弃法度而用一己之私的，如果偏执于一己之私，就会导致祸患。
English: The heavenly way runs in a cycle. If you are virtuous, you will be punished. If you are not virtuous, you will be punished by heaven. If you are selfish, you will be punished by heaven. The law of the universe does not allow you to abandon the law and use your own selfishness. If you are obsessed with your own selfishness, it will lead to disaster.

古文：有国存，天下弗能亡也。有国将亡，天下弗能存也。
现代文：当一个国家还具备存在的必然条件时，人们是不能够灭亡它的；当一个国家已经具备了必然灭亡的条件时，人们也无法再挽救它。
English: When a country still has the necessary conditions for existence, people cannot destroy it; when a country already has the necessary conditions for destruction, people can no longer save it.

古文：时机未至，而隐于德。既得其极，远其德。□浅□以力，既成其功，环复其从，人莫能代。诸侯不报仇，不修佴，唯□所在。
现代文：时机未到，要自隐其身以修德待时；时机到了，就应该广施其德，努力行事；而当大功告成以后，就要及时收踪敛迹，还原到最初的静隐，这样才不会受到任何危害。诸侯不一定有仇必报、有仇必血，关键要看是否合于道 义 。
English: Before the time is ripe, one should hide oneself and wait for the time by cultivating virtue; when the time is ripe, one should be generous with virtue and act diligently; and when the great work is completed, it is necessary to collect the traces in time and return to the original tranquility, so that one will not be harmed in any way. Princes do not necessarily have to have revenge or bloodshed, the key is to see if it is moral.

古文：隐忌妒妹贼妾如此者，下其等而远其身。
现代文：对于像蒙蔽君主、嫉妒贤才、陷害忠良、行为邪佞这一类的人，就应该贬黜和疏远；对他们如果不贬黜疏远，就会因此而生出祸患。
English: Those who deceive princes, envy the wise, slander the good, and do evil deeds should be despised and shunned; if they are not despised and shunned, evil will come of it.

古文：不下其德等，不远其身，祸乃将起。内事不和，不得言外。细事不察，不得言。
现代文：君主如果连自己家庭内部的事情都不能理顺，就没有资格来讨论国家的事情；小是不明，大事也就谈不上了。
English: If the monarch cannot even straighten out the internal affairs of his own family, he is not qualified to discuss the affairs of the state; small things are unclear, and big things cannot be discussed.

古文：利不兼，赏不倍。戴角者无上齿。
现代文：君主对臣民如果施赏不丰，那么相对的他获利亦少；这个道理就如同动物既然有了双角就不会再有上齿是一样的。
English: If the sovereign does not reward his subjects abundantly, then his relative profit is also small; this principle is the same as if an animal had double horns and no upper teeth.

古文：提正名以伐，得所欲而止。
现代文：兴兵征伐，必须师出有名，功成而止。
English: In order to raise an army for war, it is necessary to be famous and successful.

古文：实彀不华，至言不饰，至乐不笑。
现代文：饱满的谷物没有花，意蕴深远的语言没有装饰，真正的快乐不表现在欢声笑貌上。
English: Full-bodied cereals do not have flowers, far-reaching language is not decorated, and true happiness is not expressed in joyous laughter.

古文：华之属，必有核，核中必有意。
现代文：因为内在的东西才是最根本的东西，这就好比花的内里是果，果的内里是核儿，核儿的内里是仁儿。
English: Because what is inside is the most fundamental thing, just as the inside of a flower is the fruit, the inside of the fruit is the kernel, and the inside of the kernel is the kernel.

古文：天地之道，有左有右，有牝有牡。诰诰作事，毋从我冬始。
现代文：有左必有右，右雌必有雄，这是天造地设、自然而然的。
English: There must be a left and a right, and the right female must have a male. This is naturally arranged by heaven and earth.

古文：雷□为车，隆隆以为马。
现代文：因此，人们的一切行事，或终或始都不要固执己意，应因顺天道。
English: Therefore, in everything that people do, they should not be stubborn in the end or in the beginning, but should follow the way of heaven.

古文：行而行，处而处，因地以为资，因民以为师。弗因无衷也。
现代文：以雷为车，以云为马，当行则行，当止则止。因任地宜以为资财，因顺民心以为师旅；不知因顺之道，这是不明智的。
English: Take lightning as a vehicle, take clouds as a horse, when to go is to go, when to stop is to stop. Because it is appropriate to think of wealth, because it is in line with the people's heart, it is considered to be a teacher's journey; if you do not know the way to go, it is unwise.

古文：宫室过度，上帝所亚，为者弗居，唯居必路。
现代文：广修宫室，穷奢极欲，为上天所不容；大肆兴建了宫室也不能居住，即便居住了也不会长久。
English: Extensive renovation of the palace, extreme luxury, is unacceptable to heaven; the palace can not be lived in, even if it is lived in, it will not last long.

古文：减衣衾，泊棺椁，禁也。
现代文：随意减少葬埋死者的衣被、祭品的数量和棺犉的厚度，这是被禁止的。
English: It is forbidden to arbitrarily reduce the number of shrouds, offerings, and the thickness of the coffin in which the deceased is buried.

古文：疾役可发泽，禁也。
现代文：大肆兴动徭役而多处毁坏川泽，这是被禁止的。
English: It is forbidden to destroy Kawazawa in many places in a haphazard manner.

古文：草苁也浅林，禁也。
现代文：杂草丛生而多处砍伐山林，是被禁止的。
English: It is forbidden to cut down the mountain forest in many places where there are many weeds.

古文：聚□□隋高增下，禁也。大水至而可也。
现代文：为了多建宫室而掘低高地、填平低洼，是被禁止的；然而时逢洪水暴雨成灾，则为疏导大水而挖高填低是可以的。
English: In order to build more palaces, it is forbidden to excavate low elevations and fill low depressions; however, in the event of floods and heavy rains, it is possible to excavate high and fill low in order to channel heavy water.

古文：毋先天成，毋非时而荣。
现代文：植物不能违背自然生长规律而提前成熟，也不能不适时地开花茂盛。
English: Plants cannot mature ahead of time in violation of the laws of natural growth, nor can they bloom profusely at the wrong time.

古文：先天成则毁，非时而荣则不果。
现代文：提前成熟会毁败，不适时地开花茂盛也不会有好的结果。
English: Early ripening will ruin, untimely flowering and flourishing will not have good results.

古文：日为明，月为晦。昏而休，明而起。
现代文：太阳出来就是白天，月亮升起就是夜晚；夜晚人要休息，白天人要劳作。
English: When the sun rises, it is day, and when the moon rises, it is night; at night, people should rest, and during the day, people should work.

古文：毋失天极，厩数而止。
现代文：君主兴兵伐国不要超过天道所规定准度，达到了这个准度就应及时罢手。
English: The monarch should not raise an army to invade a country beyond the limit prescribed by Heaven and Earth. Once this limit has been reached, he should stop in time.

古文：强则令，弱则听，敌则循绳而争。
现代文：强大的国可以命令对方，弱小的国家要听命于对方，势力均等的国家之间才会按照规矩竞争。
English: A powerful country can order the other side, a weak country must obey the orders of the other side, and countries with equal power will compete according to the rules.

古文：行曾而索爱，父弗得子，行母而索敬，君弗得臣。
现代文：作父亲的行为恶劣，要想得到儿子的敬爱是不可能的；作为君主举止邪逆，要想得到臣下的敬爱也是不可能的。
English: It is impossible to win the affection of a son by behaving badly as a father, and impossible to win the affection of a subject by behaving badly as a sovereign.

古文：有宗将兴，如伐于□。有宗将坏，如伐于山。
现代文：当一个国家将要兴起的时候，其势如川泽之溃决；而当一个国家要灭亡的时候，其势如山峰之崩塌。
English: When a country is about to rise, its momentum is like the defeat of Kawazawa; and when a country is about to perish, its momentum is like the collapse of a mountain peak.

古文：贞良而亡，先人余央。商阙而恬，先人之连。
现代文：正直善良的人夭折，是因为祖上积累下了祸殃；猖獗的人长寿，是因为祖上积累下了功德。
English: Honest and kind people die young because their ancestors have accumulated misfortunes; rampant people live long because their ancestors have accumulated merits.

古文：埤而正者增，高而倚者崩。
现代文：其势低卑而根基平正的会不断增高，其势高峻而根基歪斜的早晚要倾覆。
English: If its potential is low and its foundation is flat, it will continue to rise. If its potential is high and its foundation is crooked, it will collapse sooner or later.

古文：山有□，□□屯屯。
现代文：山上种有树木，果实饱满盛多。
English: There are trees on the mountain, and the fruits are plentiful.

古文：虎狼为孟可盾，昆弟相居，不能相顺。
现代文：虎狼虽凶犹可驯顺，兄弟至亲却不和睦。
English: Although tigers and wolves are ferocious, they can be tamed, but brothers and relatives do not get along.

古文：同则不肯，离则不能。
现代文：他们既不能和睦共处，又不能远离别居，真是让死去的先人们伤心。
English: They can neither coexist harmoniously nor live far away from each other, which really makes the dead ancestors sad.

古文：伤国之神。□□不来，胡不来相教顺弟兄兹，昆弟之亲，尚可易哉。
现代文：死去的先人们为何不来，为何不来教诲他们呢？都是血缘亲属，不和睦的现象会改变的。
English: Why don't the dead ancestors come and teach them? They are all blood relatives, and the phenomenon of disharmony will change.

古文：天下有参死：忿不量力死，耆欲无穷死，寡不辟众死。
现代文：天下有三种人为的死亡现象，一种是因为逞努斗狠不自量力，二种是穷奢极侈欲壑难平，三种是以寡敌众不识时务。
English: There are three kinds of man-made death phenomena in the world. One is because of hard work and self-discipline, the second is because of extravagance and luxury, and the third is because of ignorance of current affairs.

古文：毋籍贼兵，毋裹盗量。
现代文：不要把武器借给贼人，不要把粮食给予强盗。
English: Do not lend weapons to a thief, and do not give food to a robber.

古文：籍贼兵，裹盗量，短者长，弱者强，嬴绌变化，后将反也。
现代文：倘使武器借给贼人，粮食给予强盗，就会造成短者变长、弱者变强的结果；这种力量消长变化的结果，是会反过来给自己施以伤害的。
English: If weapons are lent to thieves and grain is given to robbers, the result will be that the short will become long and the weak will become strong; the result of this increase and decrease in strength will, in turn, cause harm to oneself.

古文：弗同而同，举而为同。弗异而异，举而为异。弗为而自成，因而建事。
现代文：不相同却相同了，这是由于因顺的结果；不相异却相异了，这也是因顺的结果；无所作为却建成了事功，这仍然施因顺的结果。
English: Different but the same, this is due to the result of obedience; not different but different, this is also the result of obedience; doing nothing but accomplishing things, this is still the result of obedience.

古文：阳亲而阴亚，胃外其肤而内其。
现代文：表面和善而内里却险恶，这便称作用表面的美善来掩盖内在的罪恶。
English: The appearance is good, but the inside is evil. This is called using the appearance of goodness to cover up the evil within.

古文：不有内乱，必有外寇。
现代文：这样的话，即使没有内乱，也会有外敌侵侮。
English: In this case, even if there is no civil unrest, there will be foreign aggression.

古文：肤既为肤，既为。内乱不至，外客乃却。
现代文：美的就是美，丑的就是丑的，正视现实，实事求是，则内乱不生，外敌不至。
English: Beauty is beauty, ugly is ugly. If we face reality squarely and seek truth from facts, there will be no civil unrest and no foreign enemies.

古文：得焉者不受其赐，亡者不怨大□□天有明，而不忧民之晦也。
现代文：运用 道 的人，虽有所得，但不必认为是接受了 道 的赏赐，虽有所失，但也不必埋怨它的不是。
English: Those who practice the Way, although they have gained something, should not think that they have received the reward of the Way. Although they have lost something, they should not complain about it.

古文：姓辟其户牖而各取昭焉。天无事焉。
现代文：天有光明所以不忧虑百姓生活在黑暗中，百姓自可以开凿窗户来取得光亮；天不需要有所作为。
English: The sky has light, so it is not worried. The people live in darkness, the people can open windows to get light; the sky does not need to do anything.

古文：地有而不忧民之贫也。百姓斩木艾新而各取富焉。地亦无事焉。
现代文：地有财富所以不忧百姓生活在贫困之中，百姓自可以伐树割柴来取得财货；地是不需要有所作为的。
English: The land has wealth, so it is not worried about the people living in poverty. The people can cut trees and firewood to obtain goods; the land does not need to do anything.

古文：诸侯有乱，正乱者失其理，乱国反为焉。其时未能也，至其子孙必行焉。
现代文：诸侯国中有发动叛乱的，那么兴兵平定叛乱如果不合乎天道，则叛乱反而会施行报复的，即使当时报复不能得手，他们的后代也必然会报复的。
English: If it is not in accordance with Heaven's will to raise an army to put down a rebellion, then the rebellion will retaliate. Even if the retaliation does not succeed at that time, their descendants will inevitably retaliate.

古文：故曰：制人而失其理，反制焉。
现代文：所以说，要制服人却不合天道，反而被对方所制服。
English: Therefore, it is not the way of heaven to subdue people, but to be subdued by the other side.

古文：生人有居，人有墓。令不得与死者从事。
现代文：房屋用来居住活着的人，而墓穴用来葬埋死去的人。
English: Houses are used to house the living, while tombs are used to bury the dead.

古文：感而极反，□道不远。
现代文：不能将活人的房屋与死人的墓穴同等对待。
English: The houses of the living cannot be equated with the tombs of the dead.

古文：臣有两位者，其国必危。
现代文：有所迷惑，觉悟以后赶快回转，这样的话迷失大 道 就不会太远。
English: If you are confused, turn around as soon as possible after you are enlightened. In this case, the road to getting lost will not be too far.

古文：国若不危，君曳存也。失君必危。失君不危者，臣故佐也。
现代文：大臣身为臣子，却行使了君主的权力，国家必然危险；国家如不危亡，那是由于君主还存在。如果失去了君主，国家必然危险；国家如不危亡，那是由于大臣还在尽力起着辅弼的作用。
English: If the country is not in danger, it is because the monarch still exists. If the monarch is lost, the country is in danger; if the country is not in danger, it is because the minister is still trying to play a supporting role.

古文：子有两位者，家必乱，家若不乱，亲臾存也。
现代文：身为儿子却行使了父亲的权力，这个家庭就会混乱；家庭如果没有混乱，这是因为父亲还存在。
English: If there is no chaos in the family, it is because the father still exists.

古文：危，失亲不乱，子故佐也。
现代文：失去父亲，家庭必然混乱；如果没有混乱，那是由于儿子还在那里尽力支撑着。
English: With the loss of a father, a family is bound to be in turmoil; if there is no turmoil, it is because the son is still there trying to hold it together.

古文：不用辅佐之助，不听圣慧之虑，而侍其城郭之固，古其勇力之御，是胃身薄。身薄则贷。以守不固，以单不克。
现代文：如果不用贤良的辅佐，不听取开明聪慧者的谋虑，只知道依赖于城池的险固和倚仗兵力的强盛，这便叫做势单力薄；势单力薄就很危险，防守不会稳固，攻战不会取胜。
English: If you do not need the assistance of a good person, do not listen to the advice of an open-minded and intelligent person, and only rely on the strength of the city and rely on the strength of the army, this is called a weak force; a weak force is very dangerous, the defense will not be stable, and the offensive will not win.

古文：两虎相争，奴犬制其余。
现代文：二虎争斗疲弊时，劣犬便会从中获利。
English: When two tigers fight to the bitter end, the underdog will benefit.

古文：善为国者，大上无形，其□□□□，□下斗果讼果，大下不斗不讼有不果。
现代文：善于治理国家的，最理想的是不设刑罚，其次才是正定法律，再其次便是在参与天下的竞争和处理国内的狱讼时，态度和行动坚决果断，最次的便是竞争、断案都不能坚决果断。
English: To be good at governing the country, the most ideal is not to set a penalty, the next is to make a positive law, and the next is to be resolute and decisive in attitude and action when participating in global competition and dealing with domestic prison litigation, and the last is competition and decision-making.

古文：大上争于□，其次争于明，其下患祸。寒时而独暑。
现代文：不设刑罚，是说要争取做到转移人心为使迁于善；正定法度，是说要争取做到审明是非曲直；竞争断案坚决果断，是说要解救天下的灾患、止息国内的祸乱。
English: The absence of criminal penalties means that we should strive to achieve the transfer of people's hearts to do good; the positive determination of laws and regulations means that we should strive to clarify the rights and wrongs; the determination of competition cases is resolute and decisive, which means that we should save the world's disasters and stop domestic disasters.

古文：暑时而独寒。其生危，以其逆也，敬胜怠，敢胜疑。
现代文：该寒冷的时候却偏偏热起来，而该热的时候却偏偏寒冷起来，这种现象对动植物的生命是有危害的，因为这是违反自然规律的。谦恭胜过怠慢，坚决果断胜过优柔寡断。
English: When it is cold, it is hot, and when it is hot, it is cold. This phenomenon is harmful to the lives of animals and plants, because it is against the laws of nature. Humility is better than negligence, and determination is better than indecision.

古文：不可矣，而不信其口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口口卖前□以知反，故□□，卖今之曲直，审其名以称断之。
现代文：国家灭亡的祸患不相信 道 所肯定和认可的东西，这是不可以的；而不相信 道 所否定和不认可的东西，这才是正确的态度。考察国家治理的原因，也就会明白国家混乱的缘故；考察历史，就会懂得循环往复的规律。所以，要通过考察眼前的是非曲直现象，审复它们的性质，来加以权衡判断。所谓的 积 ，指的是囤积居奇，等待适当的实际售出获利。
English: The scourge of a country's downfall is not to believe in what the Tao affirms and approves, which is unacceptable; but not to believe in what the Tao denies and disapproves of, which is the correct attitude. Examining the reasons for the governance of the country, you will also understand the causes of the country's chaos; examining history, you will understand the law of the cycle. Therefore, it is necessary to weigh and judge by examining the merits and demerits of the phenomena in front of you and reviewing their nature. The so-called accumulation refers to hoarding, waiting for the appropriate actual sale profit.

古文：积者积而居，胥时而用，卖主树以知与治合积化以知时□□□正贵□存亡。
现代文：能够审知君主启用什么人，才能够去参与政治；合乎囤积货物的规律，才能够懂得如何把握天时；这样，也才能够真正明了奇正、贵贱、存亡的道理。
English: Only by being able to judge who is appointed by the monarch can one participate in politics; only by conforming to the law of hoarding goods can one understand how to grasp the time of day; only in this way can one truly understand the principles of justice, nobility, and survival.

古文：凡论必以阴阳□大义。
现代文：研讨一切问题，都要从 阴阳 这个总原则出发。
English: In studying all problems, we must proceed from the general principle of yin and yang.

古文：天阳地阴，春阳秋阴，夏阳冬阴，昼阳夜阴，大国阳，小国阴。重国阳，轻国阴。有事阳而无事阴。信者阳而屈者阴。
现代文：天属阳而地属阴，春属阳而秋属阴，夏属阳而秋属阴，白天属阳而黑夜属阴，大国属阳而小国属阴，强国属阳而弱国属阴，做事属阳而无为属阴，伸展属阳而屈缩属阴。
English: Heaven is yang and earth is yin, spring is yang and autumn is yin, summer is yang and autumn is yin, day is yang and night is yin, big countries are yang and small countries are yin, strong countries are yang and weak countries are yin, doing things is yang and doing nothing is yin, stretching is yang and shrinking is yin.

古文：主阳臣阴。上阳下阴。男阳。阳阴。兄阳弟阴。长阳少。贵贱阴。达阳穷阴。
现代文：君主属阳而大臣属阴，居上位属阳而居下位属阴，男属阳而女属阴，天属阳而地属阴，父为阳而子为阴，兄为阳而弟为阴，年长者为阳而年少者为阴，高贵者为阳而卑贱者为阴，显达者为阳而困穷者为阴。
English: The monarch is yang and the minister is yin, the superior is yang and the inferior is yin, the man is yang and the woman is yin, the sky is yang and the earth is yin, the father is yang and the son is yin, the brother is yang and the younger brother is yin, the elder is yang and the younger is yin, the noble is yang and the lowly is yin, the prominent is yang and the poor is yin.

古文：取妇姓子阳，有丧阴。
现代文：婚娶、生子这样的喜事属阳而死丧之事属阴。
English: Joyous events such as marriage and the birth of a child are yang, while death and bereavement are yin.

古文：制人者阳，制与人者阴。
现代文：统治者属阳而被统治者属阴。
English: Rulers are yang and ruled are yin.

古文：客阳主人阴。
现代文：主动来伐者属阳而被动静守者属阴。
English: Those who actively come to the forest are yang, and those who passively keep quiet are yin.

古文：师阳役阴。
现代文：长官属阳而士兵属阴。
English: Officers are yang and soldiers are yin.

古文：言阳黑阴。
现代文：说话属阳而沉默属阴。
English: Speaking is yang and silence is yin.

古文：予阳受阴。
现代文：给予属阳而接受属阴。
English: Giving is yang and receiving is yin.

古文：诸阴者法天，天贵正，过正曰□□□□□祭乃反。
现代文：凡属阳的都是取法天道，而天道最讲究正常的准度；跨过这个正常的准度就称作斜僻超越了极度就会走向反面。
English: All those who belong to the sun take the way of heaven, and the way of heaven is most concerned with the normal accuracy; crossing this normal accuracy is called oblique, and going beyond the extreme will go to the opposite side.

古文：诸阴者法地，地德安徐正静，柔节先进，善予不争。
现代文：凡属阴者都是取法地道，地道的特点便是安然舒迟正定静默，以雌柔正定天下，擅长于给予却不去争夺。
English: All those who belong to Yin take the path of law and order. The characteristics of the path of law and order are peace and tranquility, righteousness and tranquility, calmness and tranquility, the world is ruled by the feminine and the world is ruled by the masculine, and they are good at giving but not competing.

古文：此地之度而雌之节也。
现代文：这便是地道的准度和谦退柔弱的 雌节 。
English: This is the authentic accuracy and modesty of the weak female section.

