古文：子曰： 昔者明王事父孝，故事天明；事母孝，故事地察；长幼顺，故上下治。
现代文：孔子说： 从前，贤明的帝王奉事父亲很孝顺，所以在祭祀天帝时能够明白上天覆庇万物的道理；奉事母亲很孝顺，所以在社祭后土时能够明察大地孕育万物的道理；理顺处理好长幼秩序，所以对上下各层也就能够治理好。
English: Confucius said: In the past, wise emperors were very dutiful in serving their fathers, so they could understand the principle of the heavens covering and protecting all things when they offered sacrifices to the heavenly emperor; they were very dutiful in serving their mothers, so they could clearly observe the principle of the earth giving birth to all things when they held social festivals; they handled the order of the eldest and youngest children in a rational way, so they could also govern the upper and lower levels well.

古文：天地明察，神明彰矣。
现代文：能够明察天地覆育万物的道理，神明感应其诚，就会彰明神灵、降临福瑞来保佑。
English: Being able to clearly observe the principles of heaven and earth to transform and nurture all things, and the gods sensing their sincerity, will highlight the gods and bless them with blessings.

古文：故虽天子，必有尊也，言有父也；必有先也，言有兄也。
现代文：所以虽然尊贵为天子，也必然有他所尊敬的人，这就是指他有父亲；必然有先他出生的人，这就是指他有兄长。
English: Therefore, although He is the Son of God, there must be someone whom He respects, which means that He has a father; there must be someone who was born before Him, which means that He has a brother.

古文：宗庙致敬，不忘亲也；修身慎行，恐辱先也。
现代文：到宗庙里祭祀致以恭敬之意，是没有忘记自己的亲人；修身养心，谨慎行事，是因为恐怕因自己的过失而使先人蒙受羞侮辱。
English: To go to the ancestral temple to offer sacrifices with a sense of respect is not to forget one's relatives; to cultivate oneself and nurture one's heart, and to act cautiously, is because one is afraid of shaming and insulting one's ancestors due to one's own mistakes.

古文：宗庙致敬，鬼神著矣。
现代文：到宗庙祀表达敬意，神明就会出来享受。
English: If you go to the ancestral temple to pay your respects, the gods will come out to enjoy themselves.

古文：孝悌之至，通于神明，光于四海，无所不通。
现代文：对父母兄长孝敬顺从达到了极至，即可以通达于神明，光照天下，任何地方都可以感应相通。
English: Filial obedience to parents and brothers has reached the extreme, that is, it can reach the gods, illuminate the world, and can be sensed anywhere.

古文：《诗》云： 自西自东，自南自北，无思不服。  
现代文：《诗经·大雅·文王有声》篇中说： 从西到东，从南到北，没有人不想悦服的。  
English: "From west to east, from south to north, there is no one who does not want to be pleased," it said in the "Poetic Classics, Great Elegance, King Wen's Voice" article.

