古文：姚宋姚崇，字元之，陕州硖石人。
现代文：姚崇字元之，陕州硖石人。
English: Yao Chongzhi Yuan Zhi, a native of Shaanxi Province.

古文：父懿，字善懿，贞观中，为巂州都督，赠幽州大都督，谥文献。
现代文：父懿，字善懿，贞观年间，为辒州都督，殁后追赠幽州大都督，谥文献。
English: During his father's, Zenzhen's, and Zhenguan's reigns, he was the governor of Zhangzhou, and after his death he was posthumously awarded the governorship of Yuzhou.

古文：崇少倜傥，尚气节，长乃好学。仕为孝敬挽郎，举下笔成章，授濮州司仓参军，五迁夏官郎中。
现代文：姚崇少年时期风流倜傥，重视气节，年长很好学，仕为孝敬挽郎，下笔成章，被授为濮州司仓参军。五次迁升为夏官郎中。
English: When he was a boy, Yao Chong was good-natured, valued virtue, and was very studious when he was older. He served as a filial son, and was awarded the title of Cangzhou Cang and joined the army. He was promoted five times to become a middle son of Xia Guan.

古文：契丹扰河北，兵檄丛进，崇奏决若流，武后贤之，即拜侍郎。
现代文：当契丹侵扰河北，一时军书纷集上奏，姚崇处理得当，有条有理，武后很赏识他，就提拔他为侍郎。
English: When the Khitans invaded Hebei and the war chronicles began to be compiled, Yao Chong handled it properly and methodically. Empress Wu appreciated him very much and promoted him to the position of attendant.

古文：后尝语左右： 往周兴、来俊臣等数治诏狱，朝臣相逮引，一切承反。
现代文：武后曾对侍臣说： 从前周兴、来俊臣等多次奉诏承办狱案，朝臣互相牵连，都承认反朝廷。
English: Empress Wu once said to a courtier, "Former emperors Zhou Xing, Lai Junchen, and others have been ordered by imperial edict to undertake prison cases many times, and courtiers have been implicated in each other, and all of them have admitted that they are against the imperial court.

古文：朕意其枉，更畏近臣临问，皆得其手牒不冤，朕无所疑，即可其奏。
现代文：我怕有冤情，派近臣复查，都得他们亲自写的服罪书，并不冤枉。
English: I'm afraid of being wronged, so I sent my close subordinates to review it. They all had to write their own confession of guilt, and they didn't do anything wrong.

古文：自俊臣等诛，遂无反者，然则向论死得无冤邪？ 
现代文：我没有什么怀疑了，就批准周兴、来俊臣等的奏请。自从酷吏来俊臣等被诛后，竟没有反朝廷了。那么，过去被来俊臣等以反朝廷罪论处的人，该不会有冤枉的吧？ 
English: I no longer had any doubts, so I approved the report requested by Zhou Xing, Lai Jun Chen and others. Since the cruel officials Lai Jun Chen and others were arrested, there has actually been no anti-Imperial Court. So, those who were punished by Lai Jun Chen and others for anti-Imperial Court crimes in the past would not have been wronged, right?

古文：崇曰： 自垂拱后，被告者类自诬。
现代文：姚崇说 ：自垂拱以后，被告发者大多被迫自诬。
English: Yao Chong said: Since the hanging of the arch, most of the accused have been forced to self-flagellate.

古文：当是时，以告言为功，故天下号曰 罗织 ，甚于汉之钩党。
现代文：在那时，以告发别人反朝廷为有功，所以天下人称告发行为是 罗织 ，这比汉朝钩党之害更为严重。
English: At that time, it was considered to be meritorious to denounce others against the imperial court, so people around the world called the act of denouncing Luo Wei, which was more serious than the harm of the Han Dynasty.

古文：虽陛下使近臣覆讯，彼尚不自保，敢一摇手以悖酷吏意哉！
现代文：虽然陛下派近臣去重新审问，但他们自己尚且不能自保，怎么敢摇手否定原案而违背来俊臣等酷吏的意向呢？
English: Although His Majesty sent his close ministers to re-examine, they still could not protect themselves. How dare they shake hands to deny the original case and violate the intention of cruel officials such as Lai Junshi?

古文：且被问不承，则重罹其惨，如张虔勖、李安静等皆是也。
现代文：况且被审者如果不承认，就会又遭受惨酷肉刑，如像张虔勖、李安静等都是这样再受惨刑的。
English: Moreover, if the person on trial does not confess, he or she will be subjected to cruel physical punishment again, such as Zhang Qianyao, Li Qiyi, and so on.

古文：今赖天之灵，发寤陛下，凶竖歼夷，朝廷乂安，臣以一门百口保内外官无复反者。
现代文：现今靠上天的圣灵，启发陛下明通，凶残小人被消灭干净，朝廷太平安定，我以全家百口人的性命担保，朝廷内外官员再也没有谋反者了。
English: Now, with the help of the Holy Spirit from heaven, His Majesty has been enlightened, the villainous villains have been wiped out, the Imperial Court is peaceful and stable, and I guarantee the lives of my entire family of 100 people. Officials inside and outside the Imperial Court will no longer plot against each other.

古文：陛下以告牒置弗推，后若反有端，臣请坐知而不告。 
现代文：陛下将告密的小报告摆在一边不予追究，以后如果有谋反事查实，臣情愿按知而不告发的罪受惩处。 
English: His Majesty will not pursue the small report of whistleblowing, and if there is any countermeasure in the future, the vassal will be punished according to the crime of knowing and not reporting.

古文：后悦曰： 前宰相务顺可，陷我为淫刑主，闻公之言，乃得朕心。 
现代文：武后高兴地说道 ：以前的宰相都一定顺我意去办事，害我成了乱用刑法的君主，现在听你说的话，可说真合了我的心意。 
English: Wu Wu happily said, "The previous chancellors must have done things according to my wishes, causing me to become a monarch who abused the criminal law. Now, listening to what you said, I can say that it really fits my heart.

古文：赐银千两。
现代文：乃赐给银千两。
English: He was given a thousand taels of silver.

古文：圣历三年，进同凤阁鸾台平章事。
现代文：圣历三年，姚崇晋升为凤阁鸾台平章事，又迁凤阁侍郎，不久兼相王李旦府长史。
English: In the third year of the sacred calendar, Yao Chong was promoted to Fengge Xingtai Pingzhangji, and was also transferred to Fengge waiter, and soon became the governor of Li Dan, the king's consort.

古文：迁凤阁侍郎，俄兼相王府长史，以母老纳政归侍，乃诏以相王府长史侍疾，月余，复兼夏官尚书、同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：因母老要求免政回家侍奉，武后就诏令以相王府长史去服侍母病。一个多月后，回朝兼任夏官尚书，同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: Due to her mother's request to be excused from politics and return home to serve, Empress Wu issued an imperial edict to use the post of governor-general to attend to her mother's illness. More than a month later, she returned to the imperial court to serve concurrently as the summer official, Shang Shu, and the three-star general of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：崇建言： 臣事相王，而夏官本兵，臣非惜死，恐不益王。 
现代文：姚崇上奏说 ：我侍奉相王，而夏官属兵凶性质，我不是害怕死，而是怕兼任兵部不利于相王。 
English: Yao Chongzheng said: I serve the King of the Three Kingdoms, and Xia Guan is a fierce soldier. I am not afraid of death, but I am afraid that it is not good for the King of the Three Kingdoms to serve as a military commander.

古文：乃诏改春官。
现代文：武后乃下令改任他为春官。
English: However, Empress Wu ordered him to be promoted to Shunguan.

古文：张易之私有请于崇，崇不纳，易之谮于后，降司仆卿，犹同凤阁鸾台三品。
现代文：张易之曾私下恳求姚崇为他办事，姚崇不予理睬，易之向武后进谗言，崇被降职为司仆卿，还是同凤阁鸾台三品。
English: Zhang Yizhi had privately pleaded with Yao Chong to work for him, but Yao Chong ignored him. Yi Zhi made a suggestion to Empress Wu, but Chong was demoted to the position of secretary and servant, or to the third grade of Tongfeng Pavilion.

古文：出为灵武道大总管。
现代文：出朝任灵武道大总管。
English: Entered the imperial court and was appointed the chief instructor of Lingwu-do.

古文：张柬之等谋诛二张，崇适自屯所还，遂参计议。以功封梁县侯，实封二百户。
现代文：张柬之等谋商诛除张易之、张昌宗时，姚崇恰好正从屯所灵武回京，就参与筹划，以此有功封梁县侯，实封二百户。
English: When Zhang Kam and others were plotting to remove Zhang Yizhi and Zhang Changzong, Yao Chong happened to be returning to Beijing from Lingwu, and he took part in the planning. As a result, he was awarded the title of Prince of Liang County, and 200 households were actually sealed.

古文：后迁上阳宫，中宗率百官起居，王公更相庆，崇独流涕。
现代文：后来武后被迁往上阳宫，中宗率同百官去问安。大臣们为罢武后权力而相互称庆，只姚崇一人流着泪。
English: Later, Empress Wu was moved to Shangyang Palace, and Zhong Zong led hundreds of officials to pay their respects. The ministers congratulated each other on the power of Empress Wu, but only Yao Chong shed tears.

古文：柬之等曰： 今岂涕泣时邪？
现代文：张柬之等说： 今天难道是哭泣的时候？
English: Zhang Khamzhi and others said: Is today the time to cry?

古文：恐公祸由此始。 
现代文：我怕你从此要招祸殃了！ 
English: That's going to get you in trouble.

古文：崇曰： 比与讨逆，不足以语功，然事天后久，违旧主而泣，人臣终节也，由此获罪甘心焉。 
现代文：姚崇说 ：日前参与讨伐二张凶逆，不足以说有功劳；但我臣事则天后很久，现在为离旧主而流泪，是为人臣应有的节操，因为这样而获罪我是心甘情愿的！ 
English: Yao Chong said, "Participating in the crusade against two fierce rebels a few days ago is not enough to say that I have merit; but I have been a minister for a long time, and now I shed tears for leaving the old master. It is the discipline that a minister should have. I am willing to be punished for this!

古文：俄为亳州刺史。
现代文：不久，被出为亳州刺史。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou.

古文：后五王被害，而崇独免。历宋、常、越、许四州。
现代文：后来张柬之、敬晖、桓彦范、袁恕己、崔玄日韦等五王被害，而只有姚一人幸免，外放宋、常、越、许四州。
English: Later, five kings were killed, including Zhang Kamizhi, Jing Yi, Huan Yan Fan, Yuan Shouji, and Cui Xuan Rihwei, but only Yao was spared, and he was banished to Song, Chang, Yue, and Xu provinces.

古文：睿宗立，拜兵部尚书、同中书门下三品，进中书令。
现代文：睿宗即位，姚崇官拜兵部尚书，同中书门下三品，进中书令。
English: When Ruizong ascended to the throne, Yao Chong, an official, paid homage to Shang Shu of the Ministry of Military Affairs, and was awarded the Third Class of the Order of Merit of the People's Republic of China and the Order of the People's Republic of China.

古文：玄宗在东宫，太平公主干政，宋王成器等分典闲厩、禁兵。
现代文：玄宗立为太子时，太平公主干预朝政，宋王、成器等人分别主持闲厩、禁兵要职。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong was enthroned as crown prince, Princess Taiping intervened in court politics, and King Song, Chengqi and others presided over the important posts of idle stables and forbidden soldiers respectively.

古文：崇与宋璟建请主就东都，出诸王为刺史，以壹人心。
现代文：姚崇和宋瞡建议请太平公主迁居东都洛阳，令宋王等出为各州刺史，使天下人统一归心于太子。
English: Yao Chong and Song Tao suggested that Princess Taiping should move to Luoyang, the eastern capital, and that King Song should be made a historical figure for all the states, so that the people of the world would be united in their devotion to the prince.

古文：帝以谓主，主怒。
现代文：睿宗把这建议告诉了太平公主。公主发怒。
English: Ruizong relayed the suggestion to Princess Taiping, who was furious.

古文：太子惧，上疏以崇等槊间王室，请加罪，贬为申州刺史。移徐、潞二州，迁扬州长史。
现代文：太子害怕，又上疏睿宗，指劾姚崇等离间王室关系，请予重典惩处，乃贬为申州刺史，转徐、路二州，又调为扬州长史。
English: The prince was afraid, so he went to Zhaorizong again, and accused Yao Chong and others of disrupting the royal relationship, and asked for a heavy punishment, but he was relegated to Shenzhou stabbing history, to Xu and Lu two states, and was transferred to Yang governor history.

古文：政条简肃，人为纪德于碑。
现代文：姚崇为政条理简肃，百姓为他刻碑载德。
English: Yao Chong's political system is simple and concise, and the people have engraved a monument of virtue for him.

古文：徙同州刺史。
现代文：又迁同州刺史。
English: Another move to the same state.

古文：先天二年，玄宗讲武新丰。
现代文：先天二年，玄宗到新丰检阅。
English: Two years ago, Xuanzong went to Xinfeng for inspection.

古文：故事，天子行幸，牧守在三百里者，得诣行在。
现代文：按传统，天子行幸出巡，方圆三百里内的州郡牧守官员，都要到皇帝行宫朝见。
English: According to tradition, the Son of Heaven goes on a lucky tour, and the state and county pastoral officials within a radius of three hundred miles have to go to the emperor's palace for a meeting.

古文：时帝亦密召崇，崇至，帝方猎渭滨，即召见，帝曰： 公知猎乎？ 
现代文：这时玄宗也密召姚崇。崇到了，玄宗正在渭水畔打猎，马上召见。玄宗问： 你会打猎吗？ 
English: At this time, Xuanzong also secretly summoned Yao Chong. When Chong arrived, Xuanzong was hunting on the banks of the Surabaya River and immediately summoned him. Xuanzong asked: Can you hunt?

古文：对曰： 少所习也。
现代文：姚崇答道 ：我少年时就干这行当。
English: Yao Chong replied: I started this business when I was a boy.

古文：臣年二十，居广成泽，以呼鹰逐兽为乐。
现代文：我年二十居在广成泽，常以呼鹰逐兽为乐。
English: In my twenties, I lived in Guangchengze. I often enjoyed watching the hawks chase the animals.

古文：张憬藏谓臣当位王佐，无自弃，故折节读书，遂待罪将相。
现代文：友人张憬藏说我将会当帝王的辅臣，不要习猎自弃，所以才改变初衷专心勤读，于是如今能待罪于将相。
English: My friend Zhang Jingzang said that I would be the emperor's aide, don't give up hunting, so I changed my original intention to concentrate on studying, so now I can wait for the next phase.

古文：然少为猎师，老而犹能。 
现代文：但年青为打猎能手，老了仍然出色。 
English: But young men are good hunters, and old men are still good hunters.

古文：帝悦，与俱驰逐，缓速如旨，帝欢甚。
现代文：玄宗听了很高兴。他和玄宗一同驰逐，迅缓自如，玄宗喜欢极了。
English: Xuan Zong was very happy to hear this. He and Xuan Zong rode together at a leisurely pace, and Xuan Zong liked it very much.

古文：既罢，乃咨天下事，衮衮不知倦。
现代文：狩猎以后，玄宗咨问天下大事，姚崇侃侃畅谈不知疲倦。
English: After hunting, Xuanzong asked about the world's major events, and Yao Chongkan talked tirelessly.

古文：帝曰： 卿宜遂相朕。 
现代文：玄宗说 ：你正好做我的宰相。 
English: Xuanzong said, "You are just the right person to be my prime minister."

古文：崇知帝大度，锐于治，乃先设事以坚帝意，即阳不谢，帝怪之。
现代文：姚崇知玄宗大度，锐意图治，就先设法来巩固他的意志，佯作不当面表示接受。
English: Yao Chongzhi, knowing that Xuanzong was generous and determined to rule, first tried to consolidate his will, and accepted the fake.

古文：崇因跪奏： 臣愿以十事闻，陛下度不可行，臣敢辞。 
现代文：玄宗责怪他。姚崇于是跪奏 ：臣愿以十条建议奏闻，陛下考虑如果办不到，我就不能做宰相。 
English: Xuanzong blamed him. Yao Chong then knelt down and said, "Your Majesty, I would like to submit ten suggestions. Your Majesty should consider that if I can't do it, I can't be the prime minister."

古文：帝曰： 试为朕言之。 
现代文：玄宗说： 你跟我说说看。 
English: Xuanzong said, "Tell me about it."

古文：崇曰： 垂拱以来，以峻法绳下；臣愿政先仁恕，可乎？
现代文：姚崇说： 武后垂拱以来，以酷法治天下。我希望施政以仁恕为先，可以么？
English: Yao Chong said, "Since Empress Wu passed away, the world has been ruled by the rule of law. I hope that the policy of benevolence will prevail, okay?"

古文：朝廷覆师青海，未有牵复之悔；臣愿不倖边功，可乎？
现代文：朝廷兵败于青海，却没有因此而悔悟，接受教训，我希望不邀幸于边功，行吗？
English: The imperial soldiers were defeated in Qinghai, but they did not repent and accept the lesson. I hope I will not be invited to the frontier, okay?

古文：比来壬佞冒触宪网，皆得以宠自解；臣愿法行自近，可乎？
现代文：近来巧谄伪善者触犯法网，都因是宠臣而免惩；我希望严行执法从近臣做起，可以吗？
English: Recently, clever hypocrites who have violated the law have been exempted from punishment because they are favorites; I hope that the strict enforcement of the law will start from the vassals, is it OK?

古文：后氏临朝，喉舌之任出阉人之口；臣愿宦竖不与政，可乎？
现代文：武后临朝时，朝廷发言宣令的重任出自宦官之口，我希望宦官不要参与政事，可以吗？
English: When Empress Wu was on her way to the throne, the important task of the imperial court's speech and proclamation came from the eunuch's mouth. I hope the eunuch does not participate in politics, is that okay?

古文：戚里贡献以自媚于上，公卿方镇浸亦为之；臣愿租赋外一绝之，可乎？
现代文：近来豪族同里对上送礼行贿，公卿将相也这样干；我请求除国家租赋以外，一概禁绝，可以吗？
English: Recently, local magnates have been exchanging gifts and bribes with each other, and court nobles have been doing the same; may I request that all gifts and bribes, except for the state rent, be prohibited?

古文：外戚贵主更相用事，班序荒杂；臣请戚属不任台省，可乎？
现代文：外戚贵主窃居要职更替主政，朝廷秩序杂乱；我希望皇亲国戚不要任台省级要职，可以吗？
English: I hope that the relatives of the emperor do not hold important positions at the provincial level, is that okay?

古文：先朝亵狎大臣，亏君臣之严；臣愿陛下接之以礼，可乎？
现代文：前朝亵近狎玩大臣，有损君臣之间严正关系；我希望陛下接近臣下待之以礼，行吗？
English: The former emperor's insolence in approaching and playing with the minister damaged the solemn relationship between the monarch and the minister; I hope His Majesty will approach the minister and treat him with courtesy, is that okay?

古文：燕钦融、韦月将以忠被罪，自是诤臣沮折；臣愿群臣皆得批逆鳞，犯忌讳，可乎？
现代文：过去，燕钦融、韦月将因忠谏而被惩，从而直言忠臣都灰心沮丧；我希望让所有臣子都有批逆鳞之权，犯忌直谏，可以吗？
English: In the past, Yan Qin Rong and Wei Yue would be punished for being loyal, which made the outspoken loyalists discouraged; I hope that all the courtiers will have the right to reverse the scales and avoid committing crimes, is that OK?

古文：武后造福先寺，上皇造金仙、玉真二观，费钜百万；臣请绝道佛营造，可乎？
现代文：武后修筑福先寺，上皇兴建金仙、玉真两座道观，耗费巨资百万；我请求停止道观佛寺的修建，可以吗？
English: Empress Wu built Fuxian Temple, and the last emperor built the two Taoist temples of Jinxian and Yuzhen, at a huge cost of millions of yuan; may I request that the construction of the Taoist Buddhist temple be stopped?

古文：汉以禄、莽、阎、梁乱天下，国家为甚；臣愿推此鉴戒为万代法，可乎？ 
现代文：汉朝因任用外戚禄、莽、阎、梁而乱天下，而今朝廷更为严重；我希望强调这点以为鉴戒，作为后代王朝法则，可以吗？ 
English: The Han Dynasty caused chaos in the world by appointing foreign relatives Lu, Meng, Yan, and Liang, and the current imperial court is even more serious; I hope to emphasize this as a warning, as a dynasty rule for future generations, is it okay?

古文：帝曰： 朕能行之。 
现代文：玄宗说： 我能办得到。 
English: Xuanzong said: I can do it.

古文：崇乃顿首谢。
现代文：姚崇才叩首谢恩。
English: Yao Chongcai bowed his head in thanks.

古文：翌日，拜兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：次日，授兵部尚书、同中书门下三品。
English: The next day, three books, including a military award book and a junior high school textbook, went on sale.

古文：封梁国公。
现代文：封梁国公。
English: Horyo Kokugo.

古文：迁紫微令。
现代文：迁紫微令。
English: The relocation order has been issued.

古文：固辞实封，乃停旧食，赐新封百户。
现代文：姚崇再三辞谢实封，就停了过去的食邑，领赏新赐的百户食邑。
English: Yao Chong repeatedly thanked the seal, stopped the past meal, and received the newly given hundred-household meal.

古文：中宗时，近戚奏度僧尼，温户强丁因避赋役。
现代文：中宗时，近戚奏准可以度民为僧尼，以致富户壮丁因出家可免除赋税劳役。
English: During the Middle Kingdom, relatives were allowed to become monks and nuns, so that rich people were exempted from taxes and labor service.

古文：至是，崇建言： 佛不在外，悟之于心。
现代文：因此，姚崇建议： 信佛不在表面做，而要参悟于心。
English: Therefore, Yao Chong suggested: Believing in Buddha should not be done on the surface, but should be realized in the heart.

古文：行事利益，使苍生安稳，是谓佛理。
现代文：办事对民有利，使百姓安居乐业，这才是佛理。
English: To do things that are beneficial to the people, so that the people can live and work in peace, this is the Buddha's teaching.

古文：乌用奸人以汨真教？ 
现代文：怎么要妄度坏人来淹没真理佛法呢？ 
English: How is it possible for evil people to drown out the truth of Buddhism?

古文：帝善之，诏天下汰僧伪滥，发而农者余万二千人。
现代文：中宗认为很好，诏令天下淘汰佛僧中冒充和滥度的人，令其蓄发还俗为农的达一万二千多人。
English: Zhongzong thought it was a good idea. He ordered the world to weed out impostors and immoral people among Buddhist monks, and ordered them to reinstate more than twelve thousand people who had become farmers.

古文：崇尝于帝前序次郎吏，帝左右顾，不主其语。
现代文：姚崇曾在玄宗面前品评郎官并拟定其官职。玄宗环顾左右，对他的话不表态。
English: Yao Chong once evaluated a high-ranking official in front of Xuanzong and drafted his official position. Xuanzong looked around and did not make a statement about his words.

古文：崇惧，再三言之，卒不答，崇趋出。
现代文：姚崇惶恐，再三说明，玄宗始终不回答，姚崇连忙退出。
English: Panicked, Yao Chong repeatedly explained that Xuanzong never answered, and Yao Chong hurriedly withdrew.

古文：内侍高力士曰： 陛下新即位，宜与大臣裁可否。
现代文：内侍高力士说： 陛下刚即位，应该和大臣一道对政事裁定可否。
English: The Lord Chamberlain, Colossus, said: His Majesty has just ascended the throne, and he and his ministers should decide together whether or not to make a ruling on political matters.

古文：今崇亟言，陛下不应，非虚怀纳诲者。 
现代文：现在姚崇一再详尽进言，陛下却没有反应，这不是虚心听取意见的态度。 
English: Now Yao Chong has repeatedly made detailed suggestions, but His Majesty has not reacted. This is not an attitude of listening to opinions with an open mind.

古文：帝曰： 我任崇以政，大事吾当与决，至用郎吏，崇顾不能而重烦我邪？ 
现代文：玄宗说： 我把朝政交姚崇办理，大事我当然参与决断，至于品任郎吏这样的小事，姚崇却不能主办而要来烦扰我吗？ 
English: Xuanzong said, "I entrust Yao Chong with the administration of the imperial court. Of course, I participate in the decision-making of major events. As for minor matters such as the appointment of officials, can Yao Chong not host it and want to bother me?

古文：崇闻乃安。
现代文：姚崇听到这话后才心安。
English: Yao Chong was relieved to hear this.

古文：由是进贤退不肖而天下治。
现代文：从此，引进贤能贬退不肖而使国家治理得很好。
English: Since then, the introduction of meritocracy has made the country well-governed.

古文：开元四年，山东大蝗，民祭且拜，坐视食苗不敢捕。
现代文：开元四年，山东发生大蝗灾，百姓设祭膜拜，坐视蝗虫嚼食禾苗而不敢捕杀。
English: In the fourth year of the first century, a great locust plague occurred in Shandong. The people set up sacrificial worships and watched the locusts munching on the seedlings, but did not dare to kill them.

古文：崇奏： 《诗》云： 秉彼蟊贼，付畀炎火。 
现代文：姚崇上奏 ：《诗经》上说 ：秉彼蟊贼，付畀炎火。 
English: Yao Chong: "The Book of Songs" says, "If you are a thief, you will go to hell."

古文：汉光武诏曰： 勉顺时政，劝督农桑。
现代文：汉光武帝曾下诏说： 勉顺时政，劝督农桑。
English: Emperor Han Guangwu once issued an edict saying, "In order to ensure the smooth running of the current government, it is necessary to persuade farmers and peasants."

古文：去彼螟域，以及蟊贼。 
现代文：去彼螟蜮，以及蟊贼。 
English: Fuck him, and fuck the thieves.

古文：此除蝗谊也。
现代文：这些都证明灭除蝗虫是应该的。
English: All of this proves that locusts should be eradicated.

古文：且蝗畏人易驱，又田皆有主，使自救其地，必不惮劝。
现代文：况且蝗虫畏惧人，容易驱除；而田都有主，使他们自己救护自己的庄稼，一定很卖力。
English: Moreover the locusts fear man, and are easily driven away: but the fields are the Lord's, and they shall feed themselves with the fruit of the earth.

古文：请夜设火，坎其旁，且焚且瘗，蝗乃可尽。
现代文：夜间焚火，挖坑在其旁，一边焚烧一边埋，蝗虫才能灭尽。
English: Fire at night, dig a pit next to it, burn it while burying it, and the locusts can be exterminated.

古文：古有讨除不胜者，特人不用命耳。 
现代文：古代有除蝗而没能灭尽的，那只是人们没有卖力罢了。 
English: In ancient times, there were locusts that could not be exterminated, but that was just because people did not try hard enough.

古文：乃出御史为捕蝗使，分道杀蝗。
现代文：于是派出御史为捕蝗使，分道指挥灭蝗。
English: Therefore, he dispatched Mishi as a locust-catching envoy to lead the way to exterminate the locusts.

古文：汴州刺史倪若水上言： 除天灾者当以德，昔刘聪除蝗不克而害愈甚。 
现代文：汴州刺史倪若水说 ：消除天灾应靠修德，过去刘聪除蝗不成反而危害更大。 
English: Ni Ruoshui, the governor of Zhangzhou, said: the elimination of natural disasters should rely on morality. In the past, Liu Cong could not get rid of locusts, but it was more harmful.

古文：拒御史不应命。
现代文：拒绝御史指挥，不听命令。
English: Refusing to obey orders.

古文：崇移书诮之曰： 聪伪主，德不胜祆，今祆不胜德。
现代文：姚崇写信责备他，说： 刘聪是杀太子自立的伪主，他的德行不能胜妖异，今日是妖异不能胜过帝德。
English: Yao Chong wrote a letter to rebuke him, saying: Liu Cong is a self-serving pseudo-lord who killed the crown prince. His virtue can't beat the devil. Today, the devil can't beat God.

古文：古者良守，蝗避其境，谓修德可免，彼将无德致然乎？
现代文：古代州郡有好太守，蝗虫避不入境，如说修德可以免除蝗灾，发生蝗灾就是无德造成的么？
English: Ancient prefectures and counties had good emperors, and locusts avoided entering. If it is said that cultivating virtue can prevent locust plagues, are locust plagues caused by lack of virtue?

古文：今坐视食苗，忍而不救，因以无年，刺史其谓何？ 
现代文：现在坐视蝗虫食庄稼，忍心不救，以致没有收成，刺史你将怎么说？ 
English: Now you sit and watch the locusts devour the crops, and you can't help it, so there's no harvest. What will you say, goblin?

古文：若水惧，乃纵捕，得蝗十四万石。
现代文：若水畏惧，于是放手捕灭，所杀蝗虫多达十四万担。
English: If they are afraid of water, they will let go of their hands to catch and kill as many as 140,000 loads of locusts.

古文：时议者喧哗，帝疑，复以问崇，对曰： 庸儒泥文不知变。事固有违经而合道，反道而适权者。
现代文：当时对灭蝗议论纷纷。玄宗也引起怀疑，再以此询问姚崇。姚崇说 ：书呆子死扣书文不知变通，事物的发展常有违反经典而切合潮流的，也有违反潮流而合乎权宜的。
English: At that time, there was a lot of discussion about the extermination of locusts. Xuanzong also aroused suspicion, and then asked Yao Chong about it. Yao Chong said: nerds do not know how to change books, the development of things often violates the classics and fits the trend, but also violates the trend and is expedient.

古文：昔魏世山东蝗，小忍不除，至人相食；后奏有蝗，草木皆尽，牛马至相啖毛。
现代文：过去魏时山东发生蝗灾，小忍而不灭蝗，以致后来发生饥荒而人相食；后秦时蝗灾，草木被啮尽，以致牛马无食相互啃毛。
English: In the past, during the Wei Dynasty, locust plagues occurred in Shandong, but people did not have enough patience to exterminate the locusts, so that later famine occurred and people ate each other; after the Qin Dynasty, during the locust plagues, plants and trees were choked out, so that cattle and horses had no food to groom each other.

古文：今飞蝗所在充满，加复蕃息，且河南、河北家无宿藏，一不获则流离，安危系之。
现代文：现在飞蝗遍地都是，还会反复繁殖，而且河南河北都家无隔日储粮，一无收获百姓就要流离，国家安危也系于此。
English: Now the flying locusts are everywhere, and they will breed again and again. Moreover, the capital of Henan and Hebei has no grain reserves, and the people will be displaced if there is no harvest. The national security is also dependent on this.

古文：且讨蝗纵不能尽，不愈于养以遗患乎？ 
现代文：况且灭蝗即或不能尽灭，也比留下来成灾患为好！ 
English: Moreover, it is better to exterminate locusts even if they cannot be completely exterminated, than to leave them to become a disaster!

古文：帝然之。
现代文：玄宗认为这道理很对。
English: The emperor agreed to Wang Hun's score.

古文：黄门监卢怀慎曰： 凡天灾，安可以人力制也！
现代文：黄门监卢怀慎说 ：凡是天灾怎么能以人力来制止呢？
English: Lu Huaixin, the yellow gate supervisor, said: How can manpower be used to stop all natural disasters?

古文：且杀虫多，必戾和气。
现代文：况且杀虫多，必戾伤自然和气。
English: Moreover, there are a lot of insecticides, which is bound to hurt nature and qi.

古文：愿公思之。 
现代文：希望您考虑考虑。 
English: I hope you will consider it.

古文：崇曰： 昔楚王吞蛭而厥疾瘳，叔敖断虵福乃降。
现代文：姚崇说 ：过去楚王吞蛭终于使痼疾好了，孙叔敖斩蛇而福降。
English: Yao Chong said: In the past, King Chu swallowed the dragonfly and finally cured his illness. Sun Shuxuan cut off the snake and was blessed.

古文：今蝗幸可驱，若纵之，谷且尽，如百姓何？
现代文：当今蝗虫还可以驱除，如果任它成灾，谷将被食尽，那时百姓将怎么办？
English: Today's locusts can still be driven away, if it is allowed to become a disaster, the valley will be eaten up, then what will the people do?

古文：杀虫救人，祸归于崇，不以诿公也！ 
现代文：灭蝗救人，如有祸殃归我姚崇承担，不会推委给您！ 
English: To exterminate locusts and save people, if there is any disaster, I, Yao Chong, will bear the responsibility, and will not delegate it to you!

古文：蝗害讫息。
现代文：于是，蝗害终于息止。
English: As a result, the locust infestation has finally come to an end.

古文：于是，帝方躬万机，朝夕询逮，它宰相畏帝威决，皆谦惮，唯独崇佐裁决，故得专任。
现代文：这时，玄宗刚主持朝政，早晚随时要向大臣咨询，其他宰相惧他威严果毅，都表谦畏，只有姚崇辅助裁决，所以得到玄宗特别的信任。
English: At this time, Xuanzong had just presided over the government of the dynasty. Sooner or later, he had to consult with the minister at any time. Other prime ministers were afraid of his majesty and determination, and they all showed humility. Only Yao Chong assisted in the ruling, so he gained Xuanzong's special trust.

古文：崇第赊僻，因近舍客庐。
现代文：姚崇私第住得偏远，因而就近住于罔极寺客舍中。
English: Yao Chongzhi lived in a remote area, so he stayed in a guesthouse near Xingji Temple.

古文：会怀慎卒，崇病移告，凡大政事，帝必令源乾曜就咨焉。
现代文：不久，卢怀慎去世，姚崇患热疟休假，凡朝中大事，玄宗一定令源乾曜到崇那里咨询。
English: Soon after, Lu Huaixin died, and Yao Chong took a leave of absence due to malaria. Whenever there was a major event between the two countries, Xuanzong would definitely ask Yuan Qianyang to go to Chong for consultation.

古文：乾曜所奏善，帝则曰： 是必崇画之。 
现代文：每逢乾曜所奏意见较好，玄宗就说： 这一定是姚崇擘划的。 
English: Every time the Qianyang played a better opinion, Xuanzong said: This must be Yao Chongyi's plan.

古文：有不合，则曰： 胡不问崇？ 
现代文：遇有不合意的，就说： 为什么不去问姚崇？ 
English: If they don't agree, they say: Why don't you ask Yao Chong?

古文：乾曜谢其未也，乃已。
现代文：乾曜自责说未曾去问，乃罢。
English: On Tuesday, he chastised himself for not asking, saying he should have.

古文：帝欲崇自近，诏徙寓四方馆，日遣问食饮起居，高医、尚食踵道。
现代文：玄宗想让姚崇住得离自己近些，以便咨询，下诏让姚崇迁入 四方馆 。每天派人去问起居饮食等生活情况，并不断遣名医和送美食去。
English: Xuanzong wanted Yao Chong to live closer to him so that he could consult with him, so he ordered Yao Chong to move into the Shifang Pavilion. Every day, he sent someone to inquire about his living and eating conditions, and constantly sent famous doctors and food to him.

古文：崇以馆局华大，不敢居。
现代文：姚崇因馆豪华堂皇，不敢居住。
English: Yao Chong did not dare to live in the building because of its luxurious grandeur.

古文：帝使语崇曰： 恨不处禁中，此何避？ 
现代文：玄宗派人对姚崇说 ：我恨不得要你居进宫内来呢！
English: Xuanzong sent someone to say to Yao Chong: I can't wait for you to come to the palace!

古文：久之，紫微史赵诲受夷人赇，当死。
现代文：居在四方馆内何必谦辞。 过了很久，紫微史赵诲接受胡人贿赂，当处死。
English: After a long time, Zi Weishi Zhao Yan accepted Hu's bribe and should be put to death.

古文：崇素亲倚，署奏营减，帝不悦。
现代文：姚崇平时亲信倚重他，署名上奏设法为赵减刑，玄宗不悦。
English: When Yao Chongping's close confidants leaned on him, they tried to get Zhao's sentence reduced by signing a petition, but Xuanzong was not pleased.

古文：时曲赦京师，惟诲不原。
现代文：当时京师大赦，只有赵诲没有得赦。
English: At that time, there was a general amnesty for teachers in Beijing, but only Zhao Qi was not pardoned.

古文：崇惶惧，上还宰政，引宋璟代，乃以开府仪同三司罢政事。
现代文：姚崇惶恐害怕，上表辞宰相职，引荐宋瞡代替自己工作，就以开府仪同三司而停止参议朝政。
English: Yao Chongren was so afraid that he resigned from the post of prime minister and recommended Song Tao to take his place, so he stopped his participation in the imperial politics with the opening of the government and the establishment of three departments.

古文：帝将幸东都，而太庙屋自坏，帝问宰相，宋璟、苏颋同对曰： 三年之丧未终，不可以行幸。
现代文：玄宗将要巡幸东都洛阳，而此时太庙自行倒塌。玄宗问宰相，宋瞡、苏耮同时回答说： 陛下三年服丧期未满，不可以离宫巡幸。
English: Emperor Xuanzong was about to make a tour of Luoyang, the eastern capital, when the Great Temple collapsed on its own. Emperor Xuanzong asked the prime ministers, Song Xi and Su Xi, and they replied at the same time: His Majesty's three-year mourning period has not yet expired, and he is not allowed to leave the palace for a tour.

古文：坏压之变，天所以示教戒，陛下宜停东巡，修德以答至谴。 
现代文：太庙崩塌这种突发事件，是上天用来表示警告的，陛下应当停止东巡洛阳，以修德的行动回答上天的谴责。 
English: The sudden incident of the collapse of the Great Temple was used by Heaven to express a warning. His Majesty should stop the eastward patrol of Luoyang and respond to Heaven's condemnation with the action of cultivating virtue.

古文：帝以问崇，对曰： 臣闻隋取苻坚故殿以营庙，而唐因之。且山有朽坏乃崩，况木积年而木自当蠹乎。
现代文：玄宗又以此问姚崇。崇答道 ：我听说隋将北周苻坚的宫殿改建为太庙，而大唐又袭用作为太庙，就是山含有腐壤也要崩塌，何况木料经多年而自然会被蛀坏呢？
English: Xuanzong also asked Yao Chong about this. Chong replied: I heard that the Sui Dynasty converted the palace of Bei Zhou Xujian into a grand temple, and the Great Tang Dynasty used it as a grand temple. Even if the mountain contains rotten soil, it will collapse. What's more, the wood will naturally deteriorate after many years.

古文：但坏与行会，不缘行而坏。
现代文：这次太庙崩塌凑巧与陛下东幸行期碰到一起了，不是因为你要东幸才崩塌的。
English: This time, the collapse of the Imperial Temple happened to coincide with the period of His Majesty's auspicious journey. It did not collapse because you wanted auspiciousness.

古文：且陛下以关中无年，轮饷告劳，因以幸东都，所以为人不为己也。百司已戒，供拟既具，请车驾如行期。
现代文：况且陛下以关中无收，粮运劳民，因而东幸洛阳，这是为了有利百姓而不是为己；而且东都各部门都已做好准备，供给物资已备齐了，请启驾如原定行期。
English: Moreover, His Majesty did not receive any income from Guanzhong, and the grain was transported to the working people, so he went to Luoyang, which was for the benefit of the people and not for himself. Moreover, all departments of Dongdu have been prepared, and the supplies have been prepared. Please start driving as originally scheduled.

古文：旧庙难复完，尽奉神主舍太极殿？
现代文：现旧太庙难以恢复完整，何不奉神主到太极殿？
English: It is difficult to restore the integrity of the current and old Imperial Temples. Why not worship God at the Taiji Temple?

古文：更作新庙，申诚奉，大孝之德也。 
现代文：再重修一座新太庙以表真诚的供奉，这才是至孝的品德啊！ 
English: Rebuilding a new grand temple to show sincere devotion, this is the virtue of filial piety!

古文：帝曰： 卿言正契朕意。 
现代文：玄宗说 ：你说的正合我意。 
English: Xuanzong said, "What you said is exactly what I want."

古文：赐绢二百匹，诏所司如崇言，天子遂东。
现代文：并赐绢二百匹，还诏令有关部门按姚崇所说的办，玄宗就东巡洛阳了。
English: He also gave him two hundred yakitori, and ordered the relevant departments to do as Yao Chong said, and Xuanzong went on an eastward tour of Luoyang.

古文：因诏五日一参，入阁供奉。
现代文：以此，下诏姚崇每五天一参见，入阁供奉。
English: With this, the following edict Yao Chong every five days one see, into the cabinet to worship.

古文：八年，授太子少保，以疾不拜。
现代文：开元八年，玄宗授姚崇太子少保，因患病未到职。
English: In the eighth year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, Emperor Xuanzong awarded Prince Yao Chong with the title of Junior Protector, but he did not take up the post due to illness.

古文：明年卒，年七十二。
现代文：第二年去世，终年七十二岁。
English: He died the following year, aged 72.

古文：赠扬州大都督，谥曰文献。
现代文：追赠扬州大都督，谥文献。
English: Awarded the title of Yangzhou Grand Governor posthumously.

古文：十七年，追赠太子太保。
现代文：开元十七年，追赠太子太保。
English: In the seventeenth year of the first century, he was posthumously granted the title of Crown Prince Taibo.

古文：崇析赀产，令诸子各有定分。治令曰：比见达宦之裔多贫困，至铢尺是竞，无论曲直，均受絜，诋。
现代文：姚崇预分资产，让儿子各有一份，并立遗嘱说： 每见达官的后裔多半贫困，甚至为铢尺小利争夺，无论是对是错，都要受人讥笑与谴责。
English: Yao Chong pre-distributed assets, so that his sons each had a share, and made a will saying: Whenever you see the descendants of officials mostly poor, and even fight for small profits, whether it is right or wrong, they will be ridiculed and condemned.

古文：田宅水硙既共有之，至相推倚以顿废。
现代文：田宅水碾既是共有，因相互推委不管而荒废。
English: As well as being shared, the field house water mill was abandoned due to the fact that the committee members ignored each other.

古文：陆贾、石苞，古达者也，亦先有定分，以绝后争。
现代文：陆贾和石苞是古代贤达，也先预分产业以免后来争夺遗产。
English: Lu Jia and Shijie were sages in ancient times, and they also pre-assigned property first so as not to compete for heritage later.

古文：昔杨震、赵明、卢植、张奂咸以薄葬，知真识去身，贵速朽耳。
现代文： 过去杨震、赵咨、卢植、张奂都以薄葬，认识到死去的躯体，最好很快腐烂。
English: In the past, Yang Zhen, Zhao Ziazhi, Lu Zhi and Zhang Xuan were all buried with thin coffins, recognizing that the dead body, it is best to rot quickly.

古文：夫厚葬之家流于俗，以奢靡为孝，令死者戮尸暴骸，可不痛哉！
现代文：有那厚葬之家是流于习俗，认为奢靡营葬是孝，致后来死者遭戮尸暴骨，岂不令人哀痛？
English: Isn't it sad that the rich funeral home is rooted in custom and believes that extravagant funerals are filial piety, resulting in the dead being slaughtered and brutalized?

古文：死者无知，自同粪土，岂烦奢葬；使其有知，神不在柩，何用破赀徇侈乎？
现代文：死者无知觉，如同粪土。
English: The dead are unconscious, like excrement.

古文：吾亡，敛以常服，四时衣各一称。
现代文：难道会求厚葬？如果死者有知，但心神已不在柩，何用破赀求奢侈厚葬？我死了，用日常穿着来装殓，四季衣服各一套。
English: Would they ask for a lavish funeral? If the deceased had knowledge, but the spirit was no longer in the coffin, why use a broken coffin to ask for a lavish funeral? When I die, I will be dressed in everyday clothes, one set of clothes for each season.

古文：性不喜冠衣，毋以入墓。紫衣玉带，足便于体。
现代文：我性不喜官服，不要用这些入墓，紫衣玉带乃从省公服。
English: My nature does not like official uniforms, do not use these to go to the grave, the purple jade belt is from the provincial official uniform.

古文：今之佛经，罗什所译，姚兴与之对翻，而兴命不延，国亦随灭。
现代文： 现在的佛经是罗什所译，后秦姚兴与他对翻，但姚兴寿命却不长，国家也随之灭亡。
English: The current Buddhist sutras were translated by Rosh, and later Qin Yao Xing and him turned over, but Yao Xing's life was not long, and the country also perished.

古文：梁武帝身为寺奴，齐胡太后以六宫入道，皆亡国殄家。
现代文：梁武帝萧衍多次舍身庙寺为奴，齐胡太后以六官皆入道，但也都国破家亡。
English: Emperor Wu of the Liang Dynasty, Xiao Yan, repeatedly gave up his life as a slave to the temple. Empress Dowager Qi Hu and her six officials all entered the Buddhist path, but they also brought ruin to the capital.

古文：近孝和皇帝发使赎生，太平公主、武三思等度人造寺，身婴夷戮，为天下笑。
现代文：近代孝和皇帝派使去赎生，太平公主和武三思等度人为僧尼并修建寺庙，然而，仍遭杀身灭门之祸，并为天下人笑。
English: In modern times, Emperor Xiaowu sent emissaries to redeem lives, and Princess Taiping and Emperor Wu Sansi became monks and nuns and built temples. However, they were still killed and ridiculed by the world.

古文：五帝之时，父不丧子，兄不哭弟，致仁寿，无凶短也。
现代文：五帝那个时候，父不为子办丧，兄不为弟营丧，致长寿而没遭凶促。
English: At that time of the Five Emperors, the father did not mourn for his son, and the elder brother did not mourn for his younger brother, leading to a long life and not being persecuted.

古文：下逮三王，国祚延久，其臣则彭祖、老聃皆得长龄，此时无佛，岂抄经铸像力邪？
现代文：下至三王，国运久长，他们的臣下如彭祖、老聃都很长寿，这时还没有佛，难道是抄写经卷铸造神像的力量么？
English: Down to the Three Kings, the national fortune was long-lasting, and their vassals such as Peng Zu and Laojun lived long lives. At that time, there was no Buddha. Was it the power to copy scriptures and cast statues of gods?

古文：缘死丧造经像，以为追福。
现代文：为死者而抄经造像以为追福。
English: They copied scriptures and made statues for the dead to seek good fortune.

古文：夫死者生之常，古所不免，彼经与像何所施为？
现代文：要知死是生命的规律，自古以来在所不免，那抄经与造像又能起什么作用？
English: To know that death is the law of life, inevitable since ancient times, what role can copying scriptures and creating images play?

古文：儿曹慎不得为此！
现代文：儿辈们要慎重，不得干这些劳什子！ 
English: Our children should be careful not to do the same!

古文：崇尤长吏道，处决无淹思。
现代文：姚崇特别长于从政，办事决策思路不淹滞。
English: Yao Chong is particularly good at politics, and his work and decision-making ideas are not stagnant.

古文：三为宰相，常兼兵部，故屯戊斥候、士马储械，无不谙记。
现代文：三次任宰相，常兼职兵部，所以对边哨、军营分布、部队械储，没有不熟记于心的。
English: He served as prime minister three times, and often worked part-time in the military department, so he was very familiar with the outposts, the distribution of military camps, and the storage of military equipment.

古文：玄宗初立，宾礼大臣故老，雅尊遇崇，每见便殿，必为之兴，去辄临轩以送，它相莫如也。
现代文：玄宗刚即位时，以尊重宾客的态度对待大臣元老，特别尊重地对待姚崇，常在便殿召见，而且一定起座相迎；姚崇离去时，玄宗总是走近门边相送。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, he treated the ministers and elders with the attitude of respecting the guests. He treated Yao Chong with special respect. He often summoned him to the hall, and he always got up to greet him. When Yao Chong left, Emperor Xuanzong always walked close to the door to see him off.

古文：时承权戚干政之后，纲纪大坏，先天末，宰相至十七人，台省要职不可数。
现代文：别的宰相没有受这样的待遇。当时在重权贵戚干政之后，朝廷纲纪严重败坏。在先天末期，宰相多至十七人，居朝内台省要职的多得不可数计。
English: Other chancellors did not receive such treatment. At that time, after powerful noble relatives took over the government, the discipline of the imperial court was seriously corrupted. At the end of the previous day, there were as many as seventeen chancellors, and there were countless important positions in the Inner Tai Province.

古文：崇常先有司罢冗职，修制度，择百官各当其材，请无广释道，无数移吏。
现代文：姚崇先在各部门罢去冗职，修订制度，选用官吏各按其才。奏请不要推广释道，不要频繁调迁官吏。
English: Yao Chongxian removed redundancy in various departments, revised the system, and selected officials according to their talents. Please do not promote interpretation, and do not frequently transfer officials.

古文：繇是天子责成于下，而权归于上矣。
现代文：自此，天子责成于下，而权力归上了。
English: Since then, the Son of Heaven has been in charge, and the power has come down.

古文：然资权谲。始为同州，张说以素憾，讽赵彦昭劾崇。
现代文：但姚崇为人还讲权术且诡谲，如从同州将调宰相时，张说因妒曾示意赵彦昭弹劾姚崇。
English: However, Yao Chong is also a power-hungry and cunning person. For example, when he transferred the prime minister from the same state, Zhang said that because of jealousy, Zhao Yan Zhao wanted to impeach Yao Chong.

古文：及当国，说惧，潜诣岐王申款。
现代文：等到姚崇当了宰相主政时，张说惶恐，因此到岐王处申说自己的心情。
English: When Yao Chong became the prime minister, Zhang said he was scared, so he went to Qi Wang's office to express his feelings.

古文：崇它日朝，众趋出，崇曳踵为有疾状，帝召问之，对曰： 臣损足。 
现代文：姚崇有一天上朝议政后，众朝臣都已离去，他却跛着脚装成有病的样儿。玄宗叫住他问，他回答道： 我蹩伤了脚。 玄宗说 ：是不是很痛？ 
English: One day after Yao Chong went to the court to discuss politics, all the courtiers had left, but he was pretending to be ill by stomping his feet. Xuanzong called him and asked him, and he replied: I bruised my foot. Xuanzong said: Is it very painful?

古文：曰： 无甚痛乎？ 
现代文：他说 ：我心里担着忧，我的痛楚不在脚上！ 
English: He said, My heart is troubled, my feet are not in pain.

古文：曰： 臣心有忧，痛不在足。 
现代文：玄宗问是什么原故。
English: Xuanzong asked what the reason was.

古文：问以故，曰： 岐王陛下爱弟，张说辅臣，而密乘车出入王家，恐为所误，故忧之。 
现代文：姚崇说 ：岐王是陛下的爱弟，张说是陛下的辅臣，他秘密地乘车出入岐王家，恐怕岐王要为张说所误，所以我很担忧。 
English: Yao Chong said, "Qi Wang is Your Majesty's beloved younger brother. Zhang said that he was Your Majesty's aide-de-camp. He secretly rode in and out of Qi Wang's house. I'm afraid that Qi Wang will be fooled by Zhang, so I'm very worried."

古文：于是出说相州。
现代文：于是，玄宗将张说贬于相州。
English: As a result, Xuanzong relegated Zhang Xian to a subordinate state.

古文：魏知古，崇所引，及同列，稍轻之，出摄吏部尚书，知东都选，知古憾焉。
现代文：魏知古是姚崇引荐的，待到二人并列相位，对姚略有轻慢，姚即排挤他到东都任吏部尚书。知古心中不满。
English: Wei Zhigu was introduced by Yao Chong. When the two of them were side by side, he was a little rude to Yao, and Yao pushed him out to the Dongdu for the post of secretary. Zhigu was dissatisfied.

古文：时崇二子在洛，通宾客馈遗，凭旧请托。
现代文：那时，姚崇有二子在洛阳，曾通过宾客馈赠知古，想藉靠过去其父引荐的因缘而有所请托。
English: At that time, Yao Chong had two sons in Luoyang, who had received gifts of wisdom from guests, and wanted to rely on the circumstances introduced by his father in the past.

古文：知古归，悉以闻。
现代文：知古回朝时都向玄宗汇报了。
English: They all reported to Xuanzong when they returned to the imperial court.

古文：他日，帝召崇曰： 卿子才乎，皆安在？ 
现代文：有一天，玄宗招见姚崇，问： 你儿子才品怎样？都在什么地方？ 
English: One day, Xuanzong met with Yao Chong and asked: How are your son's talents? Where are they?

古文：崇揣知帝意，曰： 臣二子分司东都，其为人多欲而寡慎，是必尝以事干魏知古。 
现代文：姚崇揣摩到玄宗的心意，说： 我两个儿子在东都洛阳，他们为人贪欲而很少节制，他们一定曾有事而去麻烦过魏知古。 
English: Yao Chong guessed the intention of Xuanzong and said: My two sons are in the eastern capital Luoyang. They are greedy and have little self-control. They must have gone to trouble Wei Zhigu.

古文：帝始以崇私其子，或为隐，微以言动之。
现代文：玄宗最初以为姚崇会袒护儿子，或者为他们隐瞒，所以稍稍用这话点他一下。
English: Xuanzong initially thought that Yao Chong would protect his son, or hide it from them, so he used this word to tease him a little.

古文：及闻，乃大喜，问： 安从得之？ 
现代文：等听到姚崇这样说，就很高兴，问他： 你怎么知道的？ 
English: After hearing Yao Chong say this, he was very happy and asked him: How did you know?

古文：对曰： 知古，臣所荐也，臣子必谓其见德而请之。 
现代文：姚崇答道 ：知古是我引荐的，我儿子必定以为知古看重我对他有恩，因而向他有所请托。 
English: Yao Chong replied: I introduced Zhigu, and my son must have thought that Zhigu valued my gratitude to him, so he asked him to do something.

古文：帝于是爱崇不私而薄知古，欲斥之。
现代文：玄宗于是更爱姚崇的不谋私而鄙薄知古，打算罢除知古。
English: As a result, Xuanzong loved Yao Chong's selflessness even more and despised Bo Zhigu, intending to expel Zhigu.

古文：及德裕为令狐綯等谮逐，擿索支党，无敢通劳问；既海上，家无资，病无汤剂，勖数馈饷候问，不傅时为厚薄。
现代文：姚崇说： 是我儿子不像个东西，犯了陛下的法；而逐去知古，朝廷内外一定说陛下对我有私。 玄宗乃作罢，但是，还是罢知古为工部尚书。
English: Yao Chong said, "It is my son, who is not like a thing, who has violated Your Majesty's law; and if I were to expel Zhigu, both inside and outside the imperial court would certainly say that Your Majesty has a grudge against me.

古文：终夔王傅。自作寿藏于万安山南原崇茔之旁，署兆曰 寂居穴 ，坟曰 复真堂 ，中叕刂土为床曰 化台 ，而刻石告后世。
现代文：姚崇最初名元崇，因为与突厥反叛首领同名，在武后时以字行；到开元时，为避帝号，换用今名。三个儿子彝、异、弈，都官至卿和刺史。
English: Yao Chong was originally named Yuan Chong, because he had the same name as the leader of the Turkic rebellion. When he was the empress of Wu, he went by the name of Zhi Xing; when the Yuan Dynasty began, he changed his name to his current one in order to avoid the emperor. His three sons, Yu, Yi, and Yi, were high-ranking officials and historians.

古文：宋璟，邢州南和人。
现代文：宋瞡是邢州南和人。
English: Song Tao is a native of Nanhe, Zhangzhou.

古文：七世祖弁为元魏吏部尚书。
现代文：他的七世祖宋弁是元魏吏部尚书。
English: His seventh-generation ancestor, Song Ben, was a former Wei official named Shang Shu.

古文：璟耿介有大节，好学，工文辞，举进士中第。
现代文：宋瞡耿介重操节，好学，工于文辞，举进士中第。
English: Song Xi Geng Jie was a diligent student, eager to learn, good at writing, and ranked first in his class.

古文：调上党尉，为监察御史，迁凤阁舍人。
现代文：调上党尉，任监察御史，后升凤阁舍人。
English: He was promoted to the rank of party lieutenant, appointed as inspector of imperial history, and later promoted to phoenix pavilion attendant.

古文：居官鲠正，武后高其才。
现代文：居官耿介正直，武后很器重他的才能。
English: Geng Shu, the official in residence, was honest, and Wu Hou valued his talent highly.

古文：张易之诬御史大夫魏元忠有不臣语，引张说为验，将廷辩，说惶遽，璟谓说曰： 名义至重，不可陷正人以求苟免。
现代文：张易之诬陷御史大夫魏元忠有不符合臣子身份的言论，要张说作证。在武后将要于朝廷面审时，张说惶恐非常。宋瞡对张说讲 ：名誉与正义是人生至关重要的事，不可以诬陷正人而自求苟免。
English: Zhang Yi falsely accused the imperial historian Wei Yuanzhong of making remarks that were not in line with his status as a courtier, and asked Zhang Yi to testify. When Empress Wu was about to be tried in court, Zhang Yi said that he was very frightened. Song Xi said to Zhang Yi: Honor and justice are the most important things in life. You cannot falsely accuse a righteous person and ask for forgiveness.

古文：缘此受谪，芬香多矣。
现代文：如果因维护正义而受贬谪，也留芳久远了。
English: If you are disparaged for upholding justice, you will not be remembered for long.

古文：若不测者，吾且叩阁救，将与子偕死。 
现代文：如果不测遭罪，我将叩阁营救，将和你共生死。 
English: If you happen to suffer a crime, I will come to your rescue, and I will live and die with you.

古文：说感其言，以实对，元忠免死。
现代文：张说受这话的感动，据实廷辩，使元忠得以免死。
English: Zhang said that he was moved by these words and, according to the court's arguments, he was able to spare Yuan Zhong's life.

古文：璟后迁左台御史中丞，会飞书告张昌宗引相工观吉凶者，璟请穷治，后曰： 易之等已自言于朕。 
现代文：宋瞡后来迁任左台御史中丞，不久有人匿名揭发张昌宗引相士占卜武后重病吉凶，意欲谋反。宋瞡要求清查。武后说 ：易之等已自己向我坦白了。 
English: Soon after, someone anonymously revealed that Zhang Changzong was seriously ill after divining Wu's fortunes with the help of a fortune-teller, and that he intended to rebel. Song Hong asked for an investigation. Wu Hou said, "Yizhi and others have already confessed to me."

古文：璟曰： 谋反无容以首原，请下吏明国法。
现代文：宋瞡说 ：谋反之罪，不容自首而原宥，请下吏执行以彰明国家法纪。
English: Song Tao said, "The crime of plotting a rebellion is not allowed to surrender and be pardoned, please ask the lower officials to carry it out to clarify the national laws and regulations."

古文：易之等贵宠，臣言之且有祸，然激于义，虽死不悔。 
现代文：易之等人深受恩宠，我说这话也许会招祸，然而，激于大义，虽死不悔。 
English: Yi Zhi and others are deeply favored, I say this may be a disaster, however, inspired by the greater good, although do not regret.

古文：后不怿，姚遽传诏令出，璟曰： 今亲奉德音，不烦宰相擅宣王命。 
现代文：宰相姚王寿突传诏令宋瞡出去。宋瞡说： 我要亲自聆听圣上德音，不烦你擅宣王命。 
English: Prime Minister Yao Wang Shou suddenly issued an edict ordering Song Tao to leave. Song Tao said: I want to listen to the sacred sermon in person, I don't mind you proclaiming the king's life.

古文：后意解，许收易之等就狱。
现代文：武后才怒意缓解，准许收羁张易之等入狱。
English: Wu Hou only relented and allowed Zhang Yizhong to be taken into custody.

古文：俄诏原之，敕二张诣璟谢，璟不见，曰： 公事公言之，若私见，法无私也。 
现代文：不一会，武后却下诏赦免了二张，并令他们向宋瞡谢罪。宋瞡不见，说： 公事在公开场合说，如果私下会见，王法是无私的！ 
English: Not long after, Empress Wu issued an edict pardoning the two, and ordered them to apologize to Song Tao. Song Tao did not see them, and said, "In public affairs, if you meet in private, Wang Fa is selfless!"

古文：顾左右叹曰： 吾悔不先碎竖子首而令乱国经。 
现代文：他对左右叹道 ：我后悔没有击碎这小子的脑袋，以致现在让他们扰乱了朝廷纲纪。 
English: He sighed to the right and left: I regret that I did not smash the boy's head, so that now they have disturbed the imperial discipline.

古文：尝宴朝堂，二张列卿三品，璟阶六品，居下坐。
现代文：曾有一次在朝廷领赐饮宴，二张列位卿三品，而宋瞡官阶为六品，入就下座。
English: Once upon a time, there was a banquet held at the imperial court. Two officials were awarded three court ranks, while Song Xuan was awarded six court ranks.

古文：易之谄事璟，虚位揖曰： 公第一人，何下坐？ 
现代文：张易之想讨好宋瞡，离位虚席向宋瞡长揖说： 您是第一名流，怎么能下座？ 
English: Zhang Yizhi wanted to please Song Tao, so he left the empty seat and said to Song Tao Changtao: You are the first celebrity, how can you leave the seat?

古文：璟曰： 才劣品卑，卿谓第一何邪？ 
现代文：瞡说： 才能差品德低，卿说位在第一为什么？ 
English: Zou said, "Talent is poor, moral is low. Sir is first, why?"

古文：是时朝廷以易之等内宠，不名其官，呼易之 五郎 ，昌宗 六郎 。
现代文：那时，朝廷中人因张易之是武后内宠，故对他不称官职，而称易之为 五郎 ，昌宗为 六郎 。
English: At that time, because Zhang Yizhi was a favorite of Empress Dowager Wu, people in the imperial court did not consider him worthy of an official post, and referred to Yi as Goro, and Masamune as Rokuro.

古文：郑善果谓璟曰： 公奈何谓五郎为卿？ 
现代文：郑善果对宋瞡说 ：您为什么称五郎为 卿 ？ 
English: Zheng Zengguo said to Song Tao, "Why do you call Goro your lord?

古文：璟曰： 以官正当为卿。君非其家奴，何郎之云？ 
现代文：宋瞡说 ：依官职正应呼他是卿，阁下不是他的家奴，为啥称他为 郎 ？ 
English: Song Tao said, "According to his official position, he should be called Sir. Your Excellency is not his domestic slave. Why do you call him Brother?

古文：会有丧，告满入朝，公卿以次谒，通礼意。
现代文：适宋瞡家逢丧，假满回朝，朝廷公卿按序来看望，表达礼意。
English: When the Song and Qian family passed away and returned to the imperial court, the court nobles came to pay their respects.

古文：易之等后至，促步前，璟举笏却揖唯唯。
现代文：张易之等后到，忙步向前，宋瞡只举起笏拒揖应付。
English: When Zhang Yizhi arrived later, he hurried forward, but Song Tao only raised his hand to refuse.

古文：故积怨，常欲中伤，后知之，得免。
现代文：因而积怨，常欲在武后前中伤宋瞡。
English: As a result, he accumulated grudges and often wanted to slander Song Tao before he became empress.

古文：然以数忤旨，诏按狱扬州，璟奏： 按州县，才监察御史职耳。 
现代文：武后知晓这些过节，所以张易之不能得逞。然而，终因多次违反武后旨意，诏令按察扬州狱情。宋瞡说： 巡察州县只是监察御史的职责。 
English: Empress Wu was aware of these offenses, so Zhang Yizhi could not succeed. However, eventually, due to repeated violations of Empress Wu's will, the imperial decree was issued to investigate Yangzhou's prison conditions. Song Xi said: "Inspecting prefectures and counties is only the duty of supervising imperial history.

古文：又诏按幽州都督屈突仲翔，辞曰： 御史中丞非大事不出使。仲翔罪止赃，今使臣往，此必有危臣者。 
现代文：武后又诏令去幽州审查都督屈突仲翔。宋瞡推辞说 ：御史中丞非大事不出使，仲翔罪仅止赃污，现在派臣去，这一定有人危害我。 
English: Empress Wu also issued an imperial decree to go to Yuzhou to examine the governor of the capital, Qu Duan Zhong Xiang. Song Xi said, "Your Excellency, it's not a big deal if you don't go, Zhong Xiang's only crime was to spread slander. If you send a minister now, someone must be harming me."

古文：既而诏副李峤使陇、蜀，璟复言： 陇右无变，臣以中丞副李峤，非朝廷故事。 
现代文：过后又诏令作为李峤副使到陇蜀去。宋瞡又说： 陇右没有变乱，我以中丞职做李峤的副使，这不合朝廷过去的规法。 
English: Later, he issued an imperial edict to go to Shenshu as the vice-envoy of Li Zhe. Song Zhe also said: There was no turmoil in Shandong, I was the vice-envoy of Li Zhe with the title of Vice-Admiral, which was not in accordance with the rules of the imperial court.

古文：终辞。
现代文：一直推辞不去。
English: He has always refused to go.

古文：易之初冀璟出则劾奏诛之，计不行，乃伺璟〗家婚礼，将遣客刺杀之。
现代文：张易之最初指望宋瞡出使就弹劾诛杀他，然这计谋不能逞。乃就宋瞡家有婚礼吉事时，派人刺杀他。
English: Zhang Yizhi initially hoped that Song Xuan would send an envoy to impeach and assassinate him, but this plan did not succeed. When there was a wedding in Song Xuan's family, he sent someone to assassinate him.

古文：有告璟者，璟乘庳车舍他所，刺不得发。
现代文：有人告诉了宋瞡，宋瞡乘小车离开，住到别的地方去了，谋刺也不能进行。
English: Someone told Song Tao that Song Tao left by car and went to live somewhere else, and the assassination plot could not be carried out.

古文：俄二张死，乃免。
现代文：不久，二张被诛，宋瞡方免祸。
English: Soon, the two quilts were stolen, and Song Yifang was spared.

古文：神龙初，为吏部侍郎。
现代文：神龙初年，宋瞡任吏部侍郎。
English: In the first year of the divine dragon, Song Xi was appointed as a chamberlain of the cadre department.

古文：中宗嘉其直，令兼谏议大夫、内供奉，仗下与言得失。
现代文：中宗嘉许他耿直，令他兼谏议大夫，内供奉，与他议论朝政。
English: Zhongzong praised him for his straightforwardness and made him concurrently the doctor of the imperial edict, and discussed imperial politics with him.

古文：迁黄门侍郎。
现代文：后迁任黄门侍郎。
English: Later, he was transferred to the position of Huangmen waiter.

古文：武三思怙烝宠，数有请于璟。璟厉答曰： 今复子明辟，王宜以侯就第，安得尚干朝政，独不见产、禄事乎？ 
现代文：武三思恃淫上之宠，多次有求于宋瞡，瞡严厉地回答他，说： 今天我对你明说，王应以侯就第，怎么能干预朝政？难道你未见到吕产吕禄的下场吗？ 
English: Wu San thought about the favor of his mistress, and repeatedly asked Song Tao for help. Tao answered him sternly, saying, "Today I clearly told you that the king should be in charge, so how can you interfere in the court's politics? Don't you see the end of Lv Sheng Lv Lu?"

古文：后韦月将告三思乱宫掖，三思讽有司论大逆不道，帝诏殊死，璟请付狱按罪，帝怒，岸巾出侧门，谓璟曰： 朕谓已诛矣，尚何请？ 
现代文：后来韦月将告发武三思淫乱后宫。三思示意有司对月将以大逆不道论罪。
English: Later, Wei Yue will denounce Wu San Si's adulterous harem. San Si indicates that Yushi will judge Yue for high treason and immorality.

古文：璟曰： 人言后私三思，陛下不问即斩之，臣恐有窃议者，请按而后刑。 
现代文：中宗下诏处死，宋瞡坚请交狱羁押查清罪行后处理。中宗发怒，推巾露额从侧门走出，并对宋瞡说： 我已说杀了，你还说什么？ 宋瞡说 ：人说皇后与三思有私情，陛下不问就杀他，我怕外面有不良的议论，请你审查清楚而后按刑处理。 
English: Zhongzong issued an edict to execute him, while Song Yujian asked for him to be sent to prison to investigate the crime and deal with it later. Zhongzong became angry, pushed the towel out of the side door, and said to Song Yujian: I have already said to kill him, what else do you say? Song Yujian said: If someone says that the empress and San Si have a personal relationship, His Majesty will kill him without asking. I am afraid that there will be bad talk outside, please review it clearly and then deal with it according to the punishment.

古文：帝愈怒。
现代文：中宗听了更怒。
English: Hearing this, Zhongzong became even angrier.

古文：璟曰： 请先诛臣，不然，终不奉诏。 
现代文：宋瞡说 ：请先杀了我，不然，我决不奉诏。 
English: Song Tao said: Please kill me first, otherwise, I will never obey the edict.

古文：帝乃流月将岭南。
现代文：中宗只好流放韦月将去岭南。
English: Zhongzong had no choice but to exile Wei Yue to Lingnan.

古文：会还京师，诏璟权检校并州长史，未行，又检校贝州刺史。
现代文：不久还京师，诏令外任检校并州长史，未成，又检校贝州刺史。
English: He soon returned to Beijing as a teacher, and he ordered an external inspection of the school and the governor's history, but he did not succeed, and he also inspected the history of Beizhou.

古文：时河北水，岁大饥，三思使敛封租，璟拒不与，故为所挤。
现代文：当时河北水灾，年岁大饥荒，但武三思仍派人征敛封邑租赋，宋瞡拒绝来使，不交租赋。
English: At that time, there was a flood in Hebei and a great famine every year, but Wu Sansi still sent people to collect fiefs and fiefs. Song Xi refused to come and did not pay the rent.

古文：历杭、相二州，政清毅，吏下无敢犯者。
现代文：因此为武三思所排挤，又被调任杭相二州刺史。宋瞡为政清廉刚毅，属下官吏没有敢触犯法律的人。
English: As a result, he was ousted by Wu Sanxi and transferred to the post of the chief historian of the two states of Hangzhou. Song Xi was politically clean, honest and strong-willed, and his subordinate officials did not dare to violate the law.

古文：迁洛州长史。
现代文：以后又迁调洛州长史。
English: Later it was moved to the Governor's Mansion.

古文：睿宗立，以吏部尚书、同中书门下三品。
现代文：睿宗即位，宋瞡迁升吏部尚书同中书门下三品。
English: Emperor Ruizong ascended to the throne, and Emperor Song Jie was promoted to the Third Rank of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade of the Third Grade.

古文：玄宗在东宫，兼右庶子。
现代文：玄宗在东宫，兼右庶子。
English: Hyonjong is in the East Palace, and is also the second son.

古文：先是崔湜、郑愔典选，为戚近干夺，至迎用二岁阙，犹不能给，更置比冬选，流品淆并，璟与侍郎李乂、卢从愿澄革之，铨总平允。
现代文：先是崔和郑主持铨选，但被贵戚近臣干预强夺，以致超用第二年的铨选名额，还不能满足，更设置冬选，冗官泛滥，宋瞡与侍郎李耣和卢从愿澄革吏治，铨选才得平允。
English: First, Cui and Zheng presided over the election, but they were forcibly usurped by the intervention of their close relatives and ministers, so that the election quota for the second year was overused and could not be satisfied. Moreover, the winter election was set up, officials were overworked, and Song Xi and his attendants Li Xi and Lu Congyi wanted to clarify and reform the officials. The election was only approved.

古文：太平公主不利东宫，尝驻辇光范门，伺执政以讽。
现代文：太平公主欲对太子不利，曾待在光范门，伺机向睿宗暗示不当册立。
English: Princess Taiping wanted to be unfavorable to the prince, so she stayed at Guangfan Gate, waiting for an opportunity to hint to Ruizong that he should not be enthroned.

古文：璟曰： 太子有大功，宗朝社稷主也，安得异议？ 
现代文：宋瞡说 ：太子有大功，是宗庙社稷之主，怎么对他的册立有异议？ 
English: Song Tao said: The crown prince has made great contributions and is the head of the family temple, so how can there be any objection to his registration?

古文：乃与姚崇白奏出公主诸王于外，帝不能用。
现代文：就和姚崇奏请，让公主和诸王都出任外地。
English: Just ask Yao Chongxiao, and let the princess and the kings take the lead.

古文：贬楚州刺史，历兗冀魏三州、河北按察使，进幽州都督，以国子祭酒留守东都，迁雍州长史。
现代文：睿宗没有采纳，贬楚州刺史，后经兖、冀、魏三州刺史，河北按察使，升幽州都督，以国子祭酒留守东都洛阳，又迁任雍州刺史。
English: Ruizong did not adopt it, and he was demoted to the post of prefect of Chuzhou, and later to the post of prefect of three prefectures of Min, Hebei and Wei, to the post of inspector of Hebei, to the post of prefect of Youzhou, to the post of prefect of Luoyang, to the post of prefect of Dongdu, and to the post of prefect of Yongzhou.

古文：玄宗开元初，以雍州为京兆府，复为尹。进御史大夫，坐小累为睦州刺史，徙广州都督。
现代文：玄宗开元初年，雍州改为京兆府，瞡再任京兆尹，后来升任御史大夫，又因小事牵连，出任睦州刺史，再转调为广州都督。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Xuanzong changed Yongzhou to Jingzha Prefecture, and then to Jingzha Yin. Later, he was promoted to the post of imperial historian, and because of a minor incident, he was appointed as the imperial historian of Mutsu Province, and then transferred to the post of governor of Guangzhou.

古文：广人以竹茅茨屋，多火。
现代文：广州人用竹茅制屋，经常发生火灾。
English: People in Guangzhou use bamboo and thatch to build houses, and fires often occur.

古文：璟教之陶瓦筑堵，列邸肆，越俗始知栋宇利而无患灾。
现代文：宋瞡教他们烧瓦筑墙，改造店肆，越地才知道这种建筑很好而不怕火灾。
English: Song Tao taught them to burn tiles to build walls and remodel stores, and only later did they know that this kind of building was good and not afraid of fire.

古文：召拜刑部尚书。
现代文：以后还授刑部尚书职。
English: Later, he also worked as a clerk in the Penal Correction Department.

古文：四年，迁吏部兼侍中。
现代文：四年，改任吏部兼侍中。
English: Four years later, he was reassigned to the position of ribe and chamberlain.

古文：帝幸东都，次崤谷，驰道隘，稽拥车骑，帝命黜河南尹李朝隐、知顿使王怡等官。
现代文：玄宗巡视东都洛阳时，途经崤谷，因驰道狭隘，车骑阻拥难行，玄宗下令罢黜河南尹李朝隐和知顿使王怡等的官职。
English: When Xuanzong inspected the eastern capital Luoyang, he passed through Shugu, because the road was narrow and it was difficult to travel by car and horse. Xuanzong ordered the dismissal of Henan Yin Li Chaoying and Zhidong envoy Wang Yi.

古文：璟曰： 陛下富春秋，今始巡守，以道不治而罪二臣，繇此相饬，后有受其蔽者。 
现代文：宋瞡进谏说： 陛下正当盛年，现在才开始巡守，如因道路未修好而怪罪二臣，以此整治，恐以后会受弊端的筑路劳民的。 
English: Song Xi Jinqi said, "Your Majesty is in his prime, and it is only now that you have begun to patrol. If you blame the two ministers for the road not being repaired, and rectify it in this way, it is feared that the road construction workers will suffer from the drawbacks in the future.

古文：帝遽命舍之。
现代文：玄宗急忙命令不再过问。
English: Xuanzong hastily ordered that no more questions be asked.

古文：璟谢曰： 陛下向以怒责之，以臣言免之，是过归于上而恩在下。
现代文：宋瞡拜谢，说： 陛下刚才因怒而要责处他，又因我的谏言赦免了他，这就形成了过错归于上而恩德出自下边了。
English: Song Tao bowed and said, "Your Majesty just now wanted to punish him because of your anger, but you pardoned him because of my rebuke. This has created a situation where the fault is attributed to the top and the benefit comes from the bottom.

古文：姑听待罪于朝，然后诏还其职，进退得矣。 
现代文：不如让他待罪于朝，然后下诏恢复他的官职，这样就进退得宜了。 
English: It would be better to let him be punished by the imperial court, and then issue an edict to restore him to his official position. In this way, it would be appropriate to step down.

古文：帝善之。
现代文：玄宗认为这样做很好。
English: Emperor Wu agreed wholeheartedly.

古文：累封广平郡公。
现代文：加封为广平郡公。
English: Jafeng became the Guangping County magistrate.

古文：广人为璟立遗爱颂，璟上言： 颂所以传德载功也。
现代文：广州人为宋瞡立 遗爱颂 
English: Guangzhou residents sing Song Dynasty's "Ode to Love"

古文：臣之治不足纪，广人以臣当国，故为溢辞，徒成谄谀者。
现代文：碑。宋瞡上书说 ：颂碑是为了传德载功的，我的政绩不足记，广州人因为我入朝当政，所以做溢美之辞，反而成了谄谀了。
English: Song Zhe wrote: "The monument is for the purpose of propagating the virtues and achievements, my political achievements are not enough to record, Guangzhou people, because I entered the government, so I made a speech of praise, but it became a disgrace."

古文：欲厘正之，请自臣始。 
现代文：要厘正此风，请从我开始。 
English: To correct this trend, please start with me.

古文：有诏许停。
现代文：玄宗乃下诏准许停止。
English: Xuanzong was allowed to stop by imperial edict.

古文：帝尝命璟与苏颋制皇子名与公主号，遂差次所封，且诏别择一美称及佳邑封上。
现代文：玄宗曾命宋瞡和苏耮制订皇子和公主名号，按差次来封，并且另选择一个美称和好的食邑一起加封。
English: Emperor Xuanzong once ordered Emperor Songzong and Empress Su to work out the names of the prince and princess, seal them according to the order of precedence, and also choose a good name and good food to seal together.

古文：璟奏言： 七子均养，诗人所称。今若同等别封，或母宠子爱，恐伤跂鸠之平。
现代文：宋瞡奏言 ：七子均养是诗人所称道的，现在如果同一等级却有不同差别的实封，或因母宠或以子爱，恐怕要受用心不一的议论。
English: Song Tao's speech: Seven sons are equally raised, which is praised by poets. Now, if there are different seals of the same grade, or because of mother's favor or son's love, I am afraid that it will be discussed with different intentions.

古文：昔袁盎引却慎夫人席，文帝纳之，夫人亦不为嫌，以其得长久计也。
现代文：从前袁盎引却慎夫人席，文帝采纳了，夫人也不以此为嫌，因为是为长远着想啊！
English: Once upon a time, Yuan Huan referred to Lady Shen, and Emperor Wen adopted it. Lady Shen didn't mind, because she was thinking about the long term!

古文：臣不敢别封。 
现代文：我不敢另制封号。 
English: I wouldn't dare change the seal number.

古文：帝叹重其贤。
现代文：玄宗很感动，越发敬重他的贤德。
English: Xuanzong was very moved and respected his virtue more and more.

古文：皇后父王仁籞卒，将葬，用昭成皇后家窦孝谌故事，坟高五丈一尺。
现代文：皇后父王仁皎去世，将葬，要按昭成皇后父亲窦孝谌去世的规格，坟高五丈一尺。
English: The death of the Empress's father, Wang Renzhong, will be buried, according to the specifications of the death of the Empress's father, Dou Xiaozhu, the grave is five feet high.

古文：璟等请如著令，帝已然可，明日，复诏如孝谌者。
现代文：宋瞡等人请求按已成文的规定办。玄宗已经说可以这样办，但第二天，仍然下诏按孝谌那样办。
English: Song Xi and others requested that the matter be handled according to the written regulations. Xuanzong had already said that it could be handled in this way, but the next day, he still issued an edict to handle it in the same way as Xiao Xi.

古文：璟还诏曰： 俭，德之恭；侈，恶之大也。
现代文：宋瞡退还诏书，说： 俭是有德行的表现，侈是恶习中最严重的。
English: Song Xi returned the imperial edict, saying: Frugality is a manifestation of virtue, extravagance is the most serious vice.

古文：僭礼厚葬，前世所诫，故古墓而不坟。
现代文：越礼厚葬，前代也引为警戒。所以古墓不修培高陵。
English: The previous generation was also cautioned against over-decorative and lavish burials. Therefore, ancient tombs are not allowed to build high tombs.

古文：人子于哀迷则未遑以礼自制，故圣人制齐、斩、缌、免，衣衾棺郭，各有度数。
现代文：做儿子的在哀痛极了时未能考虑到以礼自制，所以圣人制定齐、斩、纟思、免等居丧的礼规，对亡者的衣衾棺椁，各有一定度数。
English: When the son was in the throes of grief, he failed to take into account the need for proper etiquette. Therefore, the sage established the etiquette of mourning, such as "harmonize," "cut," "reflect," and "avoid," and each had a certain degree of respect for the deceased's clothes, coffin, and coffin.

古文：虽有贤者，断其私怀。众皆务奢，独能以俭，所谓至德要道者。
现代文：贤者能断私怀，众人都追求奢侈，只他崇尚节俭，这就是至德要道。
English: A wise man can cut off his selfishness, everyone pursues luxury, only he advocates frugality, which is the path of virtue.

古文：中宫若谓孝谌逾制，初无非者，一切之令固不足以法。
现代文：皇后如说孝谌是超越了规格，开始没有人会反对的。一切权时的诏令不足以当作法纪。
English: As the empress said, filial piety is beyond the specification, and no one will oppose it at the beginning. The edict at the time of absolute power is not enough for legal discipline.

古文：贞观时嫁长乐公主，魏徵谓不可加长公主，太宗欣纳，而文德皇后降使厚谢。
现代文：贞观年间嫁长乐公主，魏征说不可加封长公主，太宗欣然采纳，而文德皇后派使厚谢。
English: During the reign of Zhenguan, Princess Changle was married. Wei Zheng said that the eldest princess could not be added, which was gladly accepted by Taizong, and Empress Wende sent her thanks.

古文：韦庶人追王其父，擅作，酆陵，而祸不旋踵。
现代文：韦庶人追封其父为王，擅自修筑邦陵，而祸殃立即来临。
English: Wei, a commoner, succeeded his father as king and built a national mausoleum without permission, but disaster struck immediately.

古文：国家知人情无穷，故为制度，不因人以摇动，不变法以爱憎。
现代文：国家了解人情是无穷尽的，所以定下制度，不因为人而变动，不以爱憎变法。
English: The state understands that human feelings are inexhaustible, so it has set up a system that does not change because of people, and does not hate change with love.

古文：比来人间竞务靡葬，今以后父重戚，不忧乏用，高冢大寝，不畏无人，百事官给，一朝可就，而区区屡闻者，欲成朝廷之政、中宫之美尔。
现代文：近来人们竞相求丰靡厚葬，现在以皇后父亲这样的重要国戚，不愁没有物资；修高冢大陵，不怕没有人力；办所有的事都由官府供应，一下子就可以完成。而我每次奏闻的，是想维护朝廷的政声，成全皇后的美德罢了。
English: Recently, people have been competing to have a lavish funeral. Now, with an important national relative such as the queen's father, there is no need to worry about the lack of materials; to build a tall and large mausoleum, there is no need to worry about the lack of manpower; everything is provided by the government and can be completed at once. And every time I report the news, I just want to maintain the political reputation of the court and fulfill the virtue of the queen.

古文：傥中宫情不可夺，请准令一品陪陵，坟四丈，差合所宜。 
现代文：倘若皇后的意志不可改变，那么请按一品陪陵坟四丈，就差不多合宜了。 
English: If the will of the Empress cannot be changed, then it would be appropriate to ask for one dish to accompany four tombs.

古文：帝曰： 朕常欲正身纪纲天下，于后容有私邪？
现代文：玄宗说： 我常想正身做天下纲纪，对皇后怎么能有私心呢？
English: Xuanzong said: I often want to be the world's disciplinarian. How can I be selfish with the empress?

古文：然人所难言，公等乃能之。 
现代文：然而人们所难以说出的，你们竟然说了。 
English: But what is difficult for people to say, you have said.

古文：即可其奏。
现代文：马上批准了宋瞡等的奏请。
English: It immediately approved the performance request of Song Tao and others.

古文：又遣使赉彩绢四百匹。
现代文：又派人赉赐彩绢四百匹。
English: And they sent and fetched four hundred fawns.

古文：会日食，帝素服俟变，录囚多所贷遣，赈恤灾患，罢不急之务。
现代文：不久，遇上日食。玄宗惊恐减奢着素服待变，囚徒多被遣释，放赈恤灾患，罢去不急办的事务。
English: Soon after, there was a solar eclipse. Terrified, Xuanzong reduced his extravagant lifestyle and prepared for a change. Many prisoners were released, the imperial residences were looted, and non-urgent matters were cancelled.

古文：璟曰： 陛下降德音，恤人隐，末宥轻系，惟流、死不免，此古所以慎赦也。
现代文：宋瞡说 ：陛下降德音，赈恤民陷，宽赦轻罪，只对流放和死罪不赦免，这是古代所慎赦的。
English: Song Tao said: His majesty lowered the tone, sympathized with the plight of the people, pardoned minor crimes, and only did not pardon exile and capital crimes, which was carefully pardoned in ancient times.

古文：恐议者直以月蚀修刑，日蚀修德，或言分野之变，冀有揣合。
现代文：但恐怕议者会认为不过只是因为月蚀才修刑，日蚀才修德的。有人说天际星宿的变化，常有人比附揣合。
English: But I am afraid that the councilors will think that it is only because of the eclipse of the moon that the punishment will be carried out, and the eclipse will be carried out. Some people say that the stars in the sky will change, and some people often speculate.

古文：臣以谓君子道长，小人道销。
现代文：我认为君子之道长，小人之道消。
English: I believe that the way of a gentleman is long, and the way of a villain is short.

古文：止女谒，放谗夫，此所谓修德也。囹圄不扰，兵甲不渎，官不苛治，军不轻进，此所谓修刑也。
现代文：禁止后宫弄权，逐散放谗小人，这就是修德；狱牢不惊扰，执兵甲者不渎中，官不苛治，军不轻进，这就是修刑。
English: Forbidding the harem from usurping power and dispersing the villains, this is the cultivation of virtue; the prison is not disturbed, the soldiers are not abusive, the officials are not harsh, and the army is not lightly advanced, this is the punishment.

古文：陛下常以为念，虽有亏食，将转而为福，又何患乎？
现代文：陛下常以这些放在心中思考，即或有不足之处，也会转化为福。那又怕什么呢？
English: Your Majesty often thinks with these things in mind, that even if there are shortcomings, they will be transformed into blessings. So what is there to be afraid of?

古文：且君子耻言浮于行，愿劝天以诚，无事空文。 
现代文：况且君子以言浮于行为耻，希望陛下用诚来感动天，不要徒事空文。 
English: Moreover, the gentleman is ashamed of his words and actions. I hope that His Majesty will use sincerity to move heaven, and not do empty words in vain.

古文：帝嘉纳。
现代文：玄宗嘉许并采纳了。
English: Xuanzong praised it and adopted it.

古文：后以开府仪同三司罢政事。
现代文：后以开府仪同三司罢政事。
English: Later, with the ceremony of opening the government, the three departments went on strike.

古文：京兆人权梁山谋逆，敕河南尹王怡驰传往按。
现代文：京兆人权梁山谋反，帝下令派河南尹王怡赶去调查审理，但牵连人众，狱中充满了犯人，久久不能定决。
English: The emperor ordered Yin Wangyi of Henan Province to be sent to investigate and investigate, but he implicated many people, the prison was full of prisoners, and it could not be decided for a long time.

古文：牢械充满，久未决，乃命璟为京留守，覆其狱。
现代文：玄宗乃派宋瞡为京兆留守，复查这一案狱。当初权梁山诡称婚集，向许多人借过钱。
English: Xuanzong sent Song Tao to Beijing to stay and review the case. At the beginning, Guan Liangshan had borrowed money from many people.

古文：初，梁山诡称婚集，多假贷，吏欲并坐贷人。璟曰： 婚礼借索大同，而狂谋率然，非所防亿。
现代文：承办的官员想一并坐罪借贷的人。宋瞡说 ：婚礼借索，所有的人都是这样，而狂谋率然，不是人所能防范测度的。
English: Song Tao said: Wedding borrowing, all people are like this, and reckless, it is not possible for people to prevent it.

古文：使知而不假，是与为反。贷者弗知，何罪之云？ 
现代文：如果知情而不借，则是和梁山一起谋反，而贷借的人不知内情，又有什么罪？ 
English: If you knew about it but didn't borrow it, then you were conspiring with Liang Shan to rebel, while the person who borrowed it didn't know the inside story, so what's the crime?

古文：平纵数百人。
现代文：免罪释放达数百人。
English: Hundreds of people have been released without charge.

古文：十二年，东巡泰山，璟复为留守。
现代文：十二年，玄宗东巡泰山，宋瞡又为留守。
English: In the twelfth year, Xuanzong went to the east to inspect Mount Tai, but Song Tao remained behind.

古文：帝将发，谓曰： 卿，国元老，别方历时，宜有嘉谋以遗朕。 
现代文：玄宗将要启驾时对宋瞡说 ：你是国家元老，我马上要走，要去一段时间，你应该有些好的计谋交给我。 
English: When Xuanzong was about to start driving, he said to Song Tao: You are the elder statesman, I am about to leave, I will be gone for a while, you should give me some good strategies.

古文：璟因一二极言。
现代文：宋瞡乃一条两条地详尽奏言。
English: Song Tao made a detailed speech in two parts.

古文：手制答曰： 所进当书之坐右，出入观省，以诫终身。 
现代文：玄宗下手制说 ：宋瞡所进奏的意见，可以写出来做座右铭，进出都看看做自省，以告诫终身。 
English: Xuanzong said in a low voice, "You can write down the opinions of Song Tao's prelude as a motto, and examine them as you go in and out, as a lifelong admonition."

古文：赐赉优渥，进兼吏部尚书。
现代文：对宋瞡赏赐丰厚，进兼吏部尚书。
English: He rewarded Song Tao generously and promoted him to the Ministry of Civil Affairs.

古文：十七年。为尚书右丞相，而张说为左丞相，源乾曜为太子少傅，同日拜。
现代文：十七年，任右丞相，而张说为左丞相，源乾曜任太子少傅，同一天授职。
English: For seventeen years, he served as the Minister of the Right, while Zhang said that he was the Minister of the Left. Yuan Qianyang was appointed as the Prince Junior Minister, and was conferred the post on the same day.

古文：有诏太官设馔，太常奏乐，会百官尚书省东堂。
现代文：玄宗下诏太官设馔宴，太常奏乐，聚集百官在尚书省东堂成仪。
English: Under Emperor Xuanzong, the imperial court officials held a banquet and regularly played music, gathering hundreds of officials in the East Hall of Shangshu.

古文：帝赋三杰诗，自写以赐。
现代文：玄宗赋《三杰诗》手写后赐给三人。
English: The handwritten copy of "Three Master Poems" by Xuanzongfu was given to three people.

古文：二十年，请致仕，许之，仍赐全禄。
现代文：二十年，请求辞官，玄宗批准，仍赐给全禄。
English: Twenty years later, after requesting the dictionary officer and obtaining the approval of Emperor Xuanzong, he was still given the full stipend.

古文：退居洛。
现代文：退下来居住在洛阳。
English: He retreated to live in Luoyang.

古文：乘舆东幸，璟谒道左。诏荣王劳问，别遣使赐药饵。
现代文：玄宗乘车舆东幸洛阳，宋瞡参谒于道左，玄宗诏令荣王慰问，另外派遣专人赐给药饵。
English: Xuanzong went to Luoyang by car from the east, Song Tao attended the funeral on the left side of the road, Xuanzong sent condolences to Rongwang, and sent a special person to give medicine.

古文：二十五年卒，年七十五，赠太尉，谥文贞。
现代文：二十五年卒，追赠太尉，谥文贞。
English: Twenty-five years old, posthumously promoted to the rank of captain, Zou Wenzhen.

古文：璟风度凝远，人莫涯其量。
现代文：宋瞡风度凝重玄远，人们莫知其胸臆。
English: Song Tao's demeanor is dignified and profound, and people can't help but be moved by it.

古文：始，自广州入朝，帝遣内侍杨思勖驿迓之。未尝交一言。
现代文：早在从广东调回朝时，玄宗派内侍杨思勖骑马去迎接他，瞡在途中未曾与他交一言。
English: As early as when he was transferred back to the imperial court from Guangdong, Emperor Xuanzong sent his equerry Yang Sijie to meet him on horseback, but Sijie never exchanged a word with him on the way.

古文：思勖自以将军贵幸，诉之帝，帝益嗟重。
现代文：杨思勖自认为是将军很得玄宗宠爱，就告到玄宗那里。
English: Yang Sijian thought that the general was very favored by Xuanzong, so he reported to Xuanzong.

古文：璟为宰相，务清政刑，使官人皆任职。
现代文：玄宗嗟叹宋瞡不谄的品格，对他越发尊重。宋瞡担任宰相时对政刑必定清正廉明，任用的官吏都能称职。
English: Xuanzong admired Song Tao's unscrupulous character and respected him more and more. When Song Tao served as prime minister, he must be clean and honest about the political punishment, and the appointed officials can be competent.

古文：圣历后，突厥默啜负其强，数窥边，侵九姓拔曳固，负胜轻出，为其狙击斩之，入蕃使郝灵亻传其首京师。
现代文：圣历以后，突厥默啜自负其强，多次犯边。后侵犯回纥九姓部落拔曳固，因负胜轻敌，被狙击斩首，交藩镇裨将郝灵亻全带着首级到京都。
English: After the introduction of the sacred calendar, the Turks became conceited of their strength and repeatedly violated the border. Later, they encroached on the nine tribes of the Uighurs, and because they were defeated, they were beheaded by snipers. When they were handed over to the towns of the domain, they took their heads to Kyoto.

古文：灵佺自谓还必厚见赏。
现代文：灵亻全自认为回朝必定得到厚赏。
English: Ling Xuanquan himself thought that he would definitely get a good reward for returning to the North.

古文：璟顾天子方少，恐后干宠蹈利者夸威武，为国生事，故抑之，逾年，才授右武卫郎将，灵佺恚愤不食死。
现代文：宋瞡考虑到天子很年轻，恐怕以后求宠蹈利的人夸威武，为国生事，所以有意抑止。过了年才授予右武卫郎将，灵亻全愤恨绝食死。
English: Considering that the son of heaven was very young, Song Tao deliberately restrained himself, fearing that those who sought favors and favors in the future would boast of their military prowess and cause trouble for the country. After a year, he only awarded the title to Ubuweiro, and Ling Tao was so angry that he went on a hunger strike.

古文：张嘉贞后为相，阅堂案，见其危言切议，未尝不失声叹息。
现代文：张嘉贞后来当了宰相，查阅档案，见到宋瞡当年危言切议，未曾不失声叹息。
English: Zhang Jiazhen later became the prime minister, consulted the archives, and saw Song Xi's critical speech that year, and never failed to sigh.

古文：赞曰：姚崇以十事要说天子而后辅政，顾不伟哉，而旧史不传。观开元初皆已施行，信不诬已。
现代文：宋瞡有六子：升、尚、混、恕、华、衡。评论：姚崇以陈述十大建议规劝天子而后辅政，岂不伟大吗？然而，旧史没有记载，回顾开元初期都已经施行，的确是真实而不是捏造的。
English: Comment: Isn't it great that Yao Chong used the Ten Suggestions to persuade the heavenly son to assist him in governing the country? However, there is no record in ancient history, and looking back at the early years of the founding of the People's Republic of China, they have all been implemented, and they are indeed true and not fabricated.

古文：宋璟刚正又过于崇，玄宗素所尊惮，常屈意听纳。
现代文：宋瞡刚正又超过了姚崇，玄宗也一向对他尊重并有所顾忌，常屈意听从。
English: Song Gan Gangzheng also surpassed Yao Chong, and Xuanzong always respected him and had scruples, often bowing down to him.

古文：故唐史臣称崇善应变以成天下之务，璟善守文以持天下之正。
现代文：所以唐史臣称姚崇善于应变得以完成天下事务，宋瞡善于恪守成文以巩固天下正气正统。
English: Therefore, Tang Shichen said that Yao Chong was good at dealing with the world affairs, and Song Xi was good at adhering to written documents to consolidate the world's righteousness and orthodoxy.

古文：二人道不同，同归于治，此天所以佐唐使中兴也。
现代文：二人为政方法不同，而都使天下得到治理，这是上天用以辅佐唐朝使之中兴啊！
English: The two of them, with their different methods of governance, have brought governance to the world. This is God's way of supporting the Tang Dynasty's envoy Zhongxing!

古文：呜呼！
现代文：呜呼！
English: Alas!

古文：崇劝天子不求边功，璟不肯赏边臣，而天宝之乱，卒蹈其害，可谓先见矣。
现代文：姚崇劝天子不追求边功，宋瞡不肯赏赐边臣，而天宝年间的变乱，终于遭受边臣所害。
English: Yao Chong advised Tian Zi not to pursue frontier exploits, Song Xuan refused to reward border retainers, and finally suffered from border retainers due to the turmoil during the Tian Bao era.

古文：然唐三百年，辅弼者不为少，独前称房、杜，后称姚、宋，何哉？
现代文：姚、宋可说是具有先见了。然而，有唐三百年间辅弼大臣是不少的，而人们只前称 房、杜 ，后称 姚、宋 ，这是什么原因？
English: Yao and Song can be said to have foresight. However, there were quite a few assistant ministers during the 300 years of the Tang Dynasty, and people only called them Fang and Du at first, and later Yao and Song. What is the reason for this?

古文：君臣之遇合，盖难矣夫！
现代文：君臣之间的遇合，似乎是非常难的哪！
English: The encounter between princes and ministers seems to be very difficult!

