古文：三十有一年春，王正月。
现代文：三四一年春季，周历正月，无事。
English: In the spring of 341, the first month of the lunar calendar, nothing happened.

古文：夏六月辛巳，公薨于楚宫。
现代文：夏季六月辛巳日，襄公在楚宫去世。
English: In the summer of June, Xiang Gong passed away in Chu Palace.

古文：秋九月癸巳，子野卒。
现代文：秋季九月癸巳日，子野去世。
English: On the last day of September in the autumn, Ikuno passed away.

古文：己亥，仲孙羯卒。
现代文：己亥日，仲孙羯去世。
English: On the same day, Nakasone passed away.

古文：冬十月，滕子来会葬。
现代文：冬季十月，滕成公来鲁国参加葬礼。
English: In the winter of October, Teng Chenggong came to Lu to attend a funeral.

古文：癸酉，葬我君襄公。
现代文：癸酉日，安葬国君襄公。
English: On the day of the funeral, the funeral of Guojun Xianggong took place.

古文：十有一月，莒人弑其君密州。
现代文：十一月，莒国人杀死了自己的君主。
English: In November, the Xiang people killed their monarch.

古文：三十一年春，王正月，穆叔至自会，见孟孝伯，语之曰： 赵孟将死矣。
现代文：三十一年春季，周王朝历法的正月，穆叔从澶渊会见回来，见了孟孝伯，对他说： 赵孟将要死了。
English: In the spring of the 31st year, the first month of the Zhou Dynasty calendar, Uncle Mu returned from a meeting in Shanyuan. He met with Meng Xiaobing and said to him, "Zhao Meng is about to die.

古文：其语偷，不似民主。
现代文：他的话毫无远虑，不像百姓的主人。
English: His words are without forethought, unlike the master of the people.

古文：且年未盈五十，而谆谆焉如八九十者，弗能久矣。
现代文：而且年纪不到五十，就絮絮叨叨好像八九十岁的人，他不能活得很长久了。
English: And he's not even fifty years old, and he's babbling like an eighty- or ninety-year-old. He can't live very long.

古文：若赵孟死，为政者其韩子乎！
现代文：如果赵孟死了，掌握政权的恐怕是韩起吧！
English: If Zhao Meng dies, I'm afraid it will be Han Qi who will seize power!

古文：吾子盍与季孙言之，可以树善，君子也。
现代文：您为何不对季孙去说这件事，可以及早建立友好关系，他是个君子。
English: Why don't you talk to Ji Sun Cho about this, you can establish a friendly relationship early, he is a gentleman.

古文：晋君将失政矣，若不树焉，使早备鲁，既而政在大夫，韩子懦弱，大夫多贪，求欲无厌，齐、楚未足与也，鲁其惧哉！ 
现代文：晋国的国君将要失去政权了，如果不去建立友好，让韩子早点为鲁国做些准备工作，不久以后政权落在大夫手里，韩子又懦弱，大夫大多贪婪，要求和欲望没有个止境，齐国、楚国却不足以依靠，鲁国将陷入可怕的困境！ 
English: The ruler of Jin is about to lose his power. If he does not establish friendship and let Han Zi do some preparatory work for Lu earlier, the power will soon fall into the hands of the doctor. Han Zi is weak and cowardly. Most doctors are greedy, and their demands and desires have no bounds. However, Qi and Chu are not enough to rely on. Lu will be in a terrible predicament!

古文：孝伯曰： 人生几何？谁能无偷？
现代文：孟孝伯说： 人的一辈子能活多久，谁能说没有点得过且过的思想？
English: Meng Xiaobo said: How long can a person live in a lifetime, who can say that there is no thought that has passed?

古文：朝不及夕，将安用树？ 
现代文：早晨活着还怕到不了晚上，哪里用得着去建立友好？ 
English: To be alive in the morning and afraid of not making it to the evening, what need is there to establish friendship?

古文：穆叔出而告人曰： 孟孙将死矣。
现代文：穆叔出去，告诉别人说： 孟孝伯将要死了。
English: Uncle Mu went out and told others, "Meng Xiaobo is about to die.

古文：吾语诸赵孟之偷也，而又甚焉。 
现代文：我告诉他赵孟的得过且过，但他比赵孟还不如。 
English: I told him that Zhao Meng in Jin Province was depressed, but he was even more depressed than Zhao Meng.

古文：又与季孙语晋故，季孙不从。
现代文：又和季孙说到晋国的事情，季孙不听。
English: He also talked to Ji Sun about the situation in Jin Province, but Ji Sun did not listen.

古文：及赵文子卒，晋公室卑，政在侈家。
现代文：等到赵文子死了，晋国公室的地位下降，政权落在豪奢的大夫手里。
English: By the time Zhao Wenzi died, the status of the Jin government office had declined, and power had fallen into the hands of a luxurious doctor.

古文：韩宣子为政，不能图诸侯。
现代文：韩宣子掌握国政，不能为诸侯所拥护。
English: Han Xuan Zi is in charge of state affairs and cannot be supported by the princes.

古文：鲁不堪晋求，谗慝弘多，是以有平丘之会。
现代文：鲁国难以担负晋国的要求，奸邪小人很多，因此有了平丘的会见。
English: It was difficult for the State of Lu to shoulder the demands of the State of Jin, and there were many traitors and villains, so there was a meeting with Pingyao.

古文：齐子尾害闾丘婴，欲杀之，使帅师以伐阳州。
现代文：齐国的子尾惧怕闾丘婴，想杀死他，派他带兵进攻阳州。
English: Ziwei of the State of Qi was afraid of Mengqiu Baby and wanted to kill him, so he sent him to attack Yangzhou with an army.

古文：我问师故。
现代文：我国询问他们为什么要出兵。
English: We asked them why they wanted to send troops.

古文：夏五月，子尾杀闾丘婴以说于我师。
现代文：夏季五月，子尾杀了闾丘婴，来向我军解释。
English: In the summer of May, Ziwei killed the Mengqiu infant and came to explain to our army.

古文：工偻灑、渻竈、孔虺、贾寅出奔莒。
现代文：工偻洒、渻灶、孔虺、贾寅逃亡到莒国。
English: Gong Xuan Sprinkling, Gong Zhao, Kong Xuan, Jia Ying fled to Shandong Province.

古文：出群公子。
现代文：子尾驱逐了公子们。
English: Ziwei expelled the nobles.

古文：公作楚宫。
现代文：鲁襄公建造楚国式的宫殿。
English: Prince Lu Xiang built a palace in the style of Chu.

古文：穆叔曰： 《大誓》云： 民之所欲，天必从之。 
现代文：穆叔说： 《大誓》说： 百姓所要求的，上天必然听从。 
English: He said, "The Great Oath says, 'Whatever the people demand, Heaven will surely obey.

古文：君欲楚也夫！故作其宫。
现代文：国君想要楚国了，所以建造楚国式的宫殿。
English: The sovereign wanted to have a Chu kingdom, so he built a palace in the style of Chu.

古文：若不复適楚，必死是宫也。 
现代文：如果不再去楚国，必然死在这座宫殿里。 
English: If I don't go to Chu any more, I will surely die in this palace.

古文：六月辛巳，公薨于楚宫。
现代文：六月二十八日，鲁襄公死在楚宫里。
English: On June 28th, Prince Lu Xiang died in Chu Palace.

古文：叔仲带窃其拱璧，以与御人，纳诸其怀而从取之，由是得罪。
现代文：叔仲带偷了襄公的大玉璧，给了驾车的人，放在他的怀里，又从他那里拿了过来，因此而得罪。
English: Uncle Zhong had stolen Xiang Gong's jade gems, gave them to the driver, put them in his arms, and then took them back from him, which made him feel guilty.

古文：立胡女敬归之子子野，次于季氏。
现代文：鲁国拥立胡国女人敬归的儿子子野，住在季氏那里。
English: The women of the State of Lu supported the son of the woman of the State of Hu, Zino, who lived with the Ji clan.

古文：秋九月癸巳，卒，毁也。
现代文：秋季，九月十一日，子野死，这是由于哀痛过度。
English: In the autumn, on September 11th, the son died, this was due to excessive grief.

古文：己亥，孟孝伯卒。
现代文：十七日，孟孝伯死了。
English: On the 17th, Meng Xiaobo died.

古文：立敬归之娣齐归之子公子裯，穆叔不欲，曰： 大子死，有母弟则立之，无则立长。
现代文：鲁国拥立敬归的妹妹齐归生的儿子公子裯为国君。穆叔不愿意，说： 太子死了，有同母兄弟就立他，没有就立年长的。
English: The state of Lu supported the enthronement of the prince's younger sister, who was born after the prince's death, as the country's ruler. Mu Xiu did not want to do so, saying: "The prince is dead, so a brother by the same mother should be enthroned instead of the older one."

古文：年钧择贤，义钧则卜，古之道也。
现代文：年纪差不多就选择贤能的，贤能又差不多就占卜，这是古代的常规。
English: It was the norm in ancient times to choose a virtuous person when he or she was about the same age, and a virtuous person when he or she was about the same age for divination.

古文：非適嗣，何必娣之子？
现代文：死去的子野并不是嫡子，何必非要立他母亲的妹妹的儿子？
English: The dead son was not the legitimate son, why did he have to become the son of his mother's sister?

古文：且是人也，居丧而不哀，在慼而有嘉容，是谓不度。
现代文：而且这个人，居丧却不哀痛，父母死了反而有喜悦的脸色，这叫做不孝。
English: Moreover, this person does not mourn the death of his parents, but has a joyful expression on his face. This is called being unfilial.

古文：不度之人，鲜不为患。
现代文：不孝的人，很少不捣乱的。
English: Few people who do not observe the rules of etiquette do not bring harm.

古文：若果立之，必为季氏忧。 
现代文：假如立了他，必然造成季氏的忧患。 
English: If he were to be appointed, it would inevitably lead to problems for Mr Ji.

古文：武子不听，卒立之。
现代文：季武子不听，结果立了他。
English: Ji Takeko didn't listen, and as a result he was fired.

古文：比及葬，三易衰，衰衽如故衰。
现代文：等到安葬襄公，三次更换丧服，丧服的衣襟脏得好像旧丧服一样。
English: By the time of the funeral for Prince Xiang, the new prince had changed his filial piety three times. The filial piety he had just put on quickly got dirty, just like the old filial piety.

古文：于是昭公十九年矣，犹有童心。君子是以知其不能终也。
现代文：当时昭公已十九岁了，还有孩子脾气，君子因此知道他不能善终。
English: At that time, Akihiro was nineteen years old and still had a child's temper, so the gentleman knew that he could not end well.

古文：冬十月，滕成公来会葬，惰而多涕。
现代文：冬季，十月，滕成公来鲁国参加葬礼，表现得不恭敬而眼泪很多。
English: In the winter, in October, Teng Chenggong came to Russia to attend a funeral. He showed no respect and shed many tears.

古文：子服惠伯曰： 滕君将死矣！
现代文：子服惠伯说： 滕国的国君将要死了。
English: Zifu Huibo said, "The sovereign of Teng is about to die."

古文：怠于其位，而哀已甚，兆于死所矣。能无从乎？ 
现代文：在他吊临的位置上表现懈怠，而哀痛太过分，在葬礼中已经显出将死的预兆了，能够不相继死吗？ 
English: Is it possible not to die one after the other, if one is sluggish in the place of his hanging, if one's grief is too great, if one's death is already foreshadowed in the funeral?

古文：癸酉，葬襄公。
现代文：十月二十一日，安葬鲁襄公。
English: On October 21st, Lu Xiang was buried.

古文：公薨之月，子产相郑伯以如晋，晋侯以我丧故，未之见也。
现代文：襄公死去的那一个月，子产陪同郑简公到晋国去，晋平公由于我国有丧事，没有接见。
English: In the month of Prince Xiang's death, Zi Bao accompanied Zheng Jian Gong to Jin Province. However, Prince Jin Ping did not receive him due to a death in China.

古文：子产使尽坏其馆之垣而纳车马焉。
现代文：子产派人将晋国宾馆的围墙全部拆毁而安放自己的车马。
English: His son sent someone to tear down all the walls of the Jin Guo Hotel and install his own chariots and horses.

古文：士文伯让之曰： 敝邑以政刑之不修，寇盗充斥，无若诸侯之属辱在寡君者何？是以令吏人完客所馆，高其闬闳，厚其墙垣，以无忧客使。
现代文：士文伯责备他，说： 敝邑由于政事和刑罚不够完善，到处都是盗贼，无奈诸侯的属官来向寡君朝聘，因此派官吏修缮宾客所住的馆舍，加高大门，围墙增厚，以不让宾客使者担忧。
English: Shwenbo rebuked him, saying: Due to the imperfection of government affairs and punishments, there are thieves everywhere in Xiangyue, but the vassals of the lords come to hire the nobles, so they send officials to repair the buildings where the guests live, raise the gates, and thicken the walls, so as not to worry the guests and messengers.

古文：今吾子坏之，虽从者能戒，其若异客何？
现代文：现在您拆毁了它，虽然您的随从能够自己戒备，让别国的宾客又怎么办呢？
English: Now that you have demolished it, although your entourage can guard themselves, what about the guests from other countries?

古文：以敝邑之为盟主，缮完葺墙，以待宾客，若皆毁之，其何以共命？
现代文：由于敝邑是盟主，修缮围墙，为接待宾客。如果都拆毁了，那么将怎么供应宾客的需要呢？
English: Since the county is the leader, it is necessary to repair the walls to receive guests. If they are demolished, how will the needs of the guests be supplied?

古文：寡君使匄请命。 
现代文：寡君派匄前来请问拆墙的意图。 
English: The monarch sent a messenger to inquire about the intention to demolish the wall.

古文：对曰： 以敝邑褊小，介于大国，诛求无时，是以不敢宁居，悉索敝赋，以来会时事。
现代文：子产回答说： 由于敝邑地方狭小，夹在大国之间，而大国需索贡品又没有一定的时候，因此不敢安居，尽量搜索敝邑的财富，以便随时来朝会。
English: The progeny replied, "Because of the small size of the county and the fact that it is sandwiched between big countries, and the big countries do not have a certain amount of time to demand tribute, they do not dare to live in peace and do their best to search for the wealth of the county so that they can come to the imperial court at any time.

古文：逢执事之不间，而未得见，又不获闻命，未知见时，不敢输币，亦不敢暴露。
现代文：碰上执事没有空闲，而没有能够见到；又得不到命令，不知道什么时候才能接见。我们不敢献上财币，也不敢让它日晒夜露。
English: When we meet a deacon, we have no leisure, but we cannot see him; we have no order, but we do not know when to receive him. We dare not offer money, and we dare not expose it to the sun and the dew.

古文：其输之，则君之府实也，非荐陈之，不敢输也。
现代文：如果奉献，那么它就是君王府库中的财物，不经过在庭院里陈列的仪式，就不敢奉献。
English: If it is dedicated, then it is the property of the royal treasury, and it would not dare to be dedicated without the ceremony of displaying it in the courtyard.

古文：其暴露之，则恐燥湿之不时而朽蠹，以重敝邑之罪。
现代文：如果让它日晒夜露，就又害怕时而干燥时而潮湿因而腐朽坏，以加重敝邑的罪过。
English: If it is exposed to the sun and dew, it will be afraid that it will be dry and wet, and it will rot, which will aggravate the sins of the city.

古文：侨闻文公之为盟主也，宫室卑庳，无观台榭，以崇大诸侯之馆。
现代文：侨听说晋文公做盟主的时候，宫室矮小，没有可供观望的台榭，而把接待诸侯的宾馆修得又高又大，宾馆好像现在君王的寝宫一样。
English: Overseas Chinese have heard that when Prince Jinwen was the head of the alliance, the palace was small and there was no platform to watch from, but the guesthouse that received the princes was built tall and large. The guesthouse is like the king's bedroom now.

古文：馆如公寝，库厩缮修，司空以时平易道路，圬人以时塓馆宫室。
现代文：对宾馆内的库房、马厩都加以修缮，司空及时整修道路，泥瓦工按时粉刷墙壁，诸侯的宾客来了，甸人点起火把，仆人巡逻宫馆。
English: The storerooms and stables in the hotel were all repaired, the Sifu repaired the roads in time, the masons painted the walls on time, the guests of the princes came, the Dian people lit torches, and the servants patrolled the palace.

古文：诸侯宾至，甸设庭燎，仆人巡宫，车马有所，宾从有代，巾车脂辖，隶人牧圉，各瞻其事，百官之属，各展其物。
现代文：车马有一定的处所，宾客的随从有人替代服役，管理车子的管理员为车轴加油，打扫的人、牧羊人、养马的人各人做自己分内的事情。各部官吏各自陈列他的礼品。
English: The carriage and horses have a certain place, the attendants of the guests are replaced by others, the manager of the car refuels the axle, the cleaners, shepherds and horse breeders each do their own thing, and the officials of each ministry display their gifts.

古文：公不留宾，而亦无废事，忧乐同之，事则巡之，教其不知，而恤其不足。
现代文：文公不让宾客耽搁，也没有因为这样而荒废宾主的公事。和宾客忧乐相同，有事就加以安抚，对宾客所不知道的加以教导，不周到的加以体谅。
English: Wen Gong did not let the guests delay, nor did he waste the business of the guests because of this. As with the guests' worries and joys, he would pacify them, teach them what they did not know, and be considerate.

古文：宾至如归，无宁菑患？
现代文：宾客来到晋国就像在自己家里一样，还有什么灾患？
English: When guests come to Jin Province, it's like they're in their own home. What other disasters are there?

古文：不畏寇盗，而亦不患燥湿。
现代文：不怕抢劫偷盗，也不担心干燥潮湿。
English: They are not afraid of being robbed or stolen, nor are they worried about being wet or dry.

古文：今铜鞮之宫数里，而诸侯舍于隶人。门不容车，而不可踰越。
现代文：现在铜鞮山的宫室绵延几里，而诸侯住在像奴隶住的屋子里，门口进不去车子，而又不能翻墙而入。
English: Now the palace of Tonglu Mountain stretches for several miles, and the princes live like slaves in the house, the door can not enter the car, but can not climb over the wall to enter.

古文：盗贼公行，而天疠不戒。
现代文：盗贼公开行动，而传染病又不能防止。
English: Thieves operate openly, and infectious diseases cannot be prevented.

古文：宾见无时，命不可知。
现代文：宾客进见诸侯没有一定的时候，君王接见的命令也不知道什么时候才能发布。
English: There is no set time for guests to visit the lords, and the orders received by the monarch do not know when to be issued.

古文：若又勿坏，是无所藏币以重罪也。
现代文：如果还不拆毁围墙，这就没有地方收藏财礼，反而要加重罪过了。 
English: If the wall is not demolished, there will be no place to collect money and gifts, but it will be an aggravated crime.

古文：敢请执事，将何所命之？
现代文：谨敢问执事，对我们将有什么指示？
English: Dare we ask the deacon, what will be our instruction?

古文：虽君之有鲁丧，亦敝邑之忧也。
现代文：虽然君王有鲁国的丧事，但这同样也是敝国的忧虑。
English: Although the king has the mourning of the Lu nation, this is also the concern of the Shao nation.

古文：若获荐币，修垣而行，君之惠也。敢惮勤劳？ 
现代文：如果能够奉上财礼，我们愿把围墙修好了再走。这是君王的恩惠，岂敢害怕修墙的辛勤劳动！ 
English: If we can offer a financial gift, we would like to repair the fence before we leave. This is the king's favor, do not dare to be afraid of the hard work of repairing the wall!

古文：文伯复命，赵文子曰： 信！
现代文：文伯回到朝廷汇报。赵文子说： 说得对。
English: Wenbo returned to the imperial court to report. Zhao Wenzi said: That's right.

古文：我实不德，而以隶人之垣以赢诸侯，是吾罪也。 
现代文：我们实在是不好，用容纳奴隶的房屋去接待诸侯，这是我们的罪过啊。 
English: It's really not good of us to use a house that accommodated slaves to receive princes. It's our fault.

古文：使士文伯谢不敏焉。
现代文：就派士文伯去表示歉意并说自己无能。
English: He sent his assistant to apologize and say he was incompetent.

古文：晋侯见郑伯有加礼，厚其宴好而归之。
现代文：晋平公接见郑简公，礼仪有加，举行极隆重的宴会，赠送更加丰厚，然后让他回去。
English: Jin Ping Gong received Zheng Jian Gong with great etiquette, held a very grand banquet, presented him with more generous gifts, and then let him go back.

古文：乃筑诸侯之馆。
现代文：于是就建造接待诸侯的宾馆。
English: As a result, a guesthouse was built to host the princes.

古文：叔向曰： 辞之不可以已也如是夫！
现代文：叔向说： 辞令的不能废弃就像这样吧！
English: Uncle Xiang said: Words cannot be discarded just like that!

古文：子产有辞，诸侯赖之，若之何其释辞也？
现代文：子产善于辞令，诸侯因他而得利，为什么要放弃辞令呢？
English: A progeny is good at rhetoric, the princes benefit from him, why give up rhetoric?

古文：《诗》曰： 辞之辑矣，民之协矣。辞之绎矣，民之莫矣。 
现代文：《诗》说： 辞令和谐，百姓团结，辞令动听，百姓安定。 
English: "Poetry" said: the speech is harmonious, the people are united, the speech is beautiful, and the people are stable.

古文：其知之矣。 
现代文：他已经懂得这个道理了。 
English: He already understands this.

古文：郑子皮使印段如楚，以適晋告，礼也。
现代文：郑国的子皮派印段去楚国，先到晋国报告这件事，这是合于礼的。
English: It is proper for Zheng Zi Pi to send the censor to Chu to report the matter to Jin first.

古文：莒犁比公生去疾及展舆，既立展舆，又废之。
现代文：莒犁比公生了去疾和展舆，已经立了展舆，又废了他。
English: Zou Bi Gongsheng was born to go to the disease and the exhibition, has set up the exhibition, and abolished him.

古文：犁比公虐，国人患之。
现代文：犁比公暴虐，国内的人们为此担心。
English: People in the country are worried about the brutality of Hao Bi Gong.

古文：十一月，展舆因国人以攻莒子，弑之，乃立。
现代文：十一月，展舆倚靠国内的人们攻打莒犁比公，杀死了他，就自立为国君。
English: In November, Zhan Yuxuan relied on the people in the country to attack Zou Bi Gong and killed him, and then became the sovereign.

古文：去疾奔齐，齐出也。
现代文：去疾逃亡到齐国，因为他是齐女所生的。
English: He fled to Qi Province because he was born to a Qi woman.

古文：展舆，吴出也。书曰： 莒人弑其君买朱鉏。 言罪之在也。
现代文：展舆是吴女所生，《春秋》记载说 莒人弑其君买朱鉏 ，这是说罪过在于莒犁比公。
English: Zhan Ying was born to a woman from Wu. "Spring and Autumn" recorded that "some people buy Zhu Ying." This means that the fault lies with Zhan Ying.

古文：吴子使屈狐庸聘于晋，通路也。
现代文：吴王派屈狐庸到晋国聘问，这是为了沟通吴、晋两国交往的道路。
English: King Wu sent Qu Fuxiong to Jin to ask questions. This was done in order to improve the communication between the two countries of Wu and Jin.

古文：赵文子问焉，曰： 延州来季子其果立乎？
现代文：赵文子询问他，说： 延州来季子最终能立为国君吗？
English: Zhao Wenzi asked him, saying: Can Yanzhou Lai Jizi finally become the king?

古文：巢陨诸樊，阍戕戴吴，天似启之，何如？ 
现代文：从前进攻巢地死了诸樊，看门人杀了戴吴，上天似乎为季子打开了做国君的大门，怎么样？ 
English: Zhu Xi died from advancing and attacking the nest, the gatekeeper killed Dai Wu, and heaven seems to have opened the door for Ji Zi to become the ruler of the country, how about it?

古文：对曰： 不立。
现代文：屈狐庸回答说： 不立。
English: Qu Fuxiong replied, "No.

古文：是二王之命也，非启季子也。
现代文：这是两位国王的命运不好，不是为季子打开做国君的大门。
English: This is the bad fate of the two kings, not to open the door for Ji Zi to become the king.

古文：若天所启，其在今嗣君乎！
现代文：如果上天打开了大门，恐怕是为了现在的国君吧！
English: If heaven has opened the door, I'm afraid it's for the sake of the current sovereign!

古文：甚德而度，德不失民，度不失事，民亲而事有序，其天所启也。
现代文：他很有德行而又合于法度。有德行就不会失去百姓，合于法度就不会办错事情。百姓亲附而事情有秩序，大概是上天为他打开大门的。
English: He is very virtuous and law-abiding. If he is virtuous, he will not lose the people, and if he is law-abiding, he will not do things wrong. If the people are friendly and things are orderly, it is probably heaven that opened the door for him.

古文：有吴国者，必此君之子孙实终之。
现代文：保有吴国的，最后一定是这位国君的子孙。
English: In the end, the descendants of this sovereign must be the ones to preserve the State of Wu.

古文：季子，守节者也。虽有国，不立。 
现代文：季子，是保持节操的人，虽然他应享有国家，也是不愿做国君的。 
English: Ji Zi is a man of discipline. Although he should enjoy the country, he does not want to be the ruler.

古文：十二月，北宫文子相卫襄公以如楚，宋之盟故也。
现代文：十二月，北宫文子陪同卫襄公到楚国去，这是由于在宋国结盟的缘故。
English: In December, Bei Gong Fumiko accompanied Wei Xiangong to Chu, which was due to the alliance in Song.

古文：过郑，印段迋劳于棐林，如聘礼而以劳辞。
现代文：经过郑国，印段到棐林去慰劳他们，依照聘问的礼仪，而使用慰劳的辞令。
English: After passing through Zheng, Yingdan went to Yulin to console them, and in accordance with the etiquette of the interview, he used the words of consolation.

古文：文子入聘。
现代文：文子进入国都聘问。
English: When Fumiko entered the country, she was interrogated.

古文：子羽为行人，冯简子与子大叔逆客。
现代文：子羽做行人，冯简子和太叔迎接客人。
English: Zi Yu as a pedestrian, Feng Jian Zi and his uncle welcome the guests.

古文：事毕而出，言于卫侯曰： 郑有礼，其数世之福也。其无大国之讨乎！《诗》云： 谁能执热，逝不以濯。 
现代文：事情完毕以后文子出来，对卫襄公说： 郑国讲究礼仪，这是几代的福气，恐怕不会有大国去讨伐他吧！《诗》说： 谁能耐热，不去洗澡。 
English: After the matter was over, Wenzi came out and said to Wei Xiangwu: Zheng pays attention to etiquette, this is the blessing of several generations, I'm afraid there will be no big country to fight him! "Poem" said: Who can withstand heat, do not take a bath.

古文：礼之于政，如热之有濯也。
现代文：礼仪对于政事，好像天热得要洗澡一样。
English: In politics, etiquette is like taking a hot shower.

古文：濯以救热，何患之有？ 
现代文：洗澡用来消除炎热，有什么可担心的？ 
English: Bathing is used to get rid of heat, so what is there to worry about?

古文：子产之从政也，择能而使之。
现代文：子产参与政事，选择贤能而使用他们。
English: Sons and daughters take part in government affairs, choose talents and make use of them.

古文：冯简子能断大事。
现代文：冯简子能决断大事。
English: Feng Jianzi is able to make important decisions.

古文：子大叔美秀而文。
现代文：子太叔外貌秀美而内有文采。
English: His great-uncle was handsome on the outside and witty on the inside.

古文：公孙挥能知四国之为，而辨于其大夫之族姓、班位、贵贱、能否，而又善为辞令。
现代文：子羽能了解四方诸侯的政令而且了解他们大夫的家族姓氏、官职爵位、地位贵贱、才能高低，又善于辞令。
English: Zi Yu was able to understand the decrees of the princes of the four directions, as well as the family names, official ranks, ranks, talents, and rhetoric of their doctors.

古文：裨谌能谋，谋于野则获，谋于邑则否。
现代文：裨谌能出谋划策，在野外策划就正确，在城里策划就不得当。
English: If you can come up with a plan, it is correct to plan in the field, but not in the city.

古文：郑国将有诸侯之事，子产乃问四国之为于子羽，且使多为辞令。与裨谌乘以適野，使谋可否。而告冯简子，使断之。
现代文：郑国将要有外交上的事情，子产就向子羽询问四方诸侯的政令，并且让他写一些有关的外交辞令稿；和裨谌一起坐车到野外去，让他策划是否可行；把结果告诉冯简子，让他决定。
English: Zheng will have diplomatic affairs, and Zifang will ask Zihuang about the decrees of the princes of the four directions, and let him write some relevant diplomatic speeches; take a car to the field with Duyun, and let him plan whether it is feasible; tell Feng Jianzi the results, and let him decide.

古文：事成，乃授子大叔使行之，以应对宾客。是以鲜有败事。
现代文：计划完成，就交给子太叔执行，交往诸侯应对宾客，所以很少有把事情办坏的时候。
English: When the plan is complete, it is handed over to the uncle to carry out, and the princes should deal with the guests, so there is rarely a time when things are done badly.

古文：北宫文子所谓有礼也。
现代文：这就是北宫文子所说的讲究礼节。
English: This is what Kitamiya Fumiko meant by paying attention to etiquette.

古文：郑人游于乡校，以论执政。
现代文：郑国人在乡校里游玩聚会，议论国家政事。
English: The people of Zheng played at parties in the village school and discussed national politics.

古文：然明谓子产曰： 毁乡校，如何？ 
现代文：然明对子产说： 毁了乡校怎么样？ 
English: Yan Ming said to his son: How about ruining the village school?

古文：子产曰： 何为？
现代文：子产说： 为什么？
English: The child said: Why?

古文：夫人朝夕退而游焉，以议执政之善否。
现代文：人们早晚事情完了到那里游玩，来议论政事的好坏。
English: Sooner or later, when things are over, people go there to have fun and discuss the state of affairs.

古文：其所善者，吾则行之。其所恶者，吾则改之。
现代文：他们认为好的，我就推行它；他们所讨厌的，我就改掉它。
English: If they like it, I'll implement it; if they don't like it, I'll change it.

古文：是吾师也。
现代文：这是我的老师。
English: This is my teacher.

古文：若之何毁之？
现代文：为什么要毁掉它？
English: Why destroy it?

古文：我闻忠善以损怨，不闻作威以防怨。
现代文：我听说用忠于为善，能减少怨恨，没有听说用摆出权威能防止怨恨。
English: I have heard it said that loyalty to a good cause can reduce resentment, but I have not heard it said that the display of authority can prevent resentment.

古文：岂不遽止，然犹防川，大决所犯，伤人必多，吾不克救也。
现代文：靠权威难道不能很快制止议论？但是就像堵塞河流一样，河堤大决口所毁坏的，伤人必然很多，我不能挽救。
English: Can't authority quickly stop the discussion? But just like blocking a river, the damage caused by the dam break is bound to hurt a lot of people, and I can't save them.

古文：不如小决使道，不如吾闻而药之也。 
现代文：不如把水稍稍放掉一点加以疏通，不如让我听到这些话而作为药石。 
English: It would be better to let the water out a little bit and clear it up, or to let me hear these words as a healing stone.

古文：然明曰： 蔑也今而后知吾子之信可事也。
现代文：然明说： 蔑从今以后知道您确实是可以成就大事的。
English: But he made it clear: From now on, know that you can really achieve great things.

古文：小人实不才。
现代文：小人实在没有才能。
English: The villain really has no talent.

古文：若果行此，其郑国实赖之。岂唯二三臣？ 
现代文：如果终于这样做下去，这确实有利于郑国，岂独有利于二三位大臣？ 
English: If this finally goes ahead, will it really benefit Zheng Guo, will it only benefit two or three ministers?

古文：仲尼闻是语也，曰： 以是观之，人谓子产不仁，吾不信也。 
现代文：孔子听到这些话，说： 从这里来看，别人说子产不仁，我不相信。 
English: When Confucius heard these words, he said, "Looking from here, I don't believe that others say that giving birth is unkind.

古文：子皮欲使尹何为邑。
现代文：子皮想要让尹何来治理自己的封邑。
English: Zoppi wanted to let Yin He govern his fief.

古文：子产曰： 少，未知可否。 
现代文：子产说： 尹何年纪轻，不知道能不能胜任。 
English: Zi Yuan said, "Yin He is young, I don't know if he can do it.

古文：子皮曰： 愿，吾爱之，不吾叛也。
现代文：子皮说： 这个人谨慎善良，我喜欢他，他不会背叛我的。
English: Zi Pi said, "This man is cautious and kind. I like him. He won't betray me."

古文：使夫往而学焉，夫亦愈知治矣。 子产曰： 不可。
现代文：让他去学习一下，他也就更加知道该怎么办事情了。 子产说： 不行。
English: Let him study, and he will know better what to do.The midwife said, "No."

古文：人之爱人，求利之也。
现代文：人家喜欢一个人，总是希望对这个人有利。
English: People like a person and always want to do good for that person.

古文：今吾子爱人则以政，犹未能操刀而使割也，其伤实多。
现代文：现在您喜欢一个人却把政事交给他，这好像一个人不会用刀而让他去割东西，多半是要损伤他自己的。
English: Now you like a person but leave politics to him. It's as if a person doesn't know how to use a knife and you ask him to cut something, mostly to hurt yourself.

古文：子之爱人，伤之而已，其谁敢求爱于子？
现代文：您喜欢他，不过是伤害他罢了，有谁还敢在您这里求得喜欢？
English: You like him, but only to hurt him. Who would dare to ask you to like him?

古文：子于郑国，栋也，栋折榱崩，侨将厌焉，敢不尽言。
现代文：您对于郑国来说是国家的栋梁。栋梁折断，椽子就会崩塌，侨将会被压在底下，我哪敢不把话全部说出来？
English: For Zheng Guo, you are the pillar of the country. If the pillar is broken, the rafters will collapse, and the overseas Chinese will be crushed underneath. How dare I not say everything?

古文：子有美锦，不使人学製焉。
现代文：您有了漂亮的丝绸，是不会让别人用它来学习裁制的。
English: Once you have beautiful silk, you won't let others use it to learn tailoring.

古文：大官、大邑，身之所庇也，而使学者製焉。其为美锦，不亦多乎？
现代文：大官和大的封邑，是庇护自身的，反而让学习的人去裁制，这比起漂亮的丝绸来价值不就多得多吗？
English: Great officials and great fiefdoms shelter themselves, but let people who learn to cut them. Isn't this worth much more than beautiful silk?

古文：侨闻学而后入政，未闻以政学者也。
现代文：侨听说学习以后才能从政，没有听说用从政来学习的。
English: Overseas Chinese have heard that they can only engage in politics after studying, but they have not heard that they can learn by engaging in politics.

古文：若果行此，必有所害。
现代文：如果真是这么办，一定有所伤害。
English: If that's the case, it's got to hurt.

古文：譬如田猎，射御贯则能获禽，若未尝登车射御，则败绩厌覆是惧，何暇思获？ 子皮曰： 善哉！
现代文：譬如打猎，熟悉射箭驾车的，就能获得猎物，如果从没有登车射过箭，驾过车，那么只担心车辆毁坏翻车被压，哪里有闲心想获得猎物？ 子皮说： 好啊！
English: For example, if you are hunting, familiar with archery and driving, you can get prey. If you have never boarded a vehicle to shoot arrows and drive a car, then you only worry about the vehicle being destroyed, overturned and crushed. Where is the idleness to get prey? ZiPi said: Good!

古文：虎不敏。
现代文：虎真是不聪明。
English: Tigers really aren't that smart.

古文：吾闻君子务知大者远者，小人务知小者近者。
现代文：我听说君子懂得大的远的，小人只懂得小的近的。
English: I've heard it said that a gentleman knows the big and the far away, while a rascal only knows the small and the near.

古文：我，小人也。
现代文：我，是小人啊。
English: I'm a villain.

古文：衣服附在吾身，我知而慎之。大官、大邑所以庇身也，我远而慢之。
现代文：衣服穿在我身上，我知道而且慎重对待它，大官和大的封邑是用来庇护自身的，我却疏远而且轻视它。
English: Clothes are worn on my body, I know it and treat it with caution. Great officials and great fiefdoms are used to protect themselves, but I alienate and despise it.

古文：微子之言，吾不知也。
现代文：要没有您的话，我是不知道的。
English: Without you, I wouldn't have known.

古文：他日我曰： 子为郑国，我为吾家，以庇焉其可也。 
现代文：从前我曾说过，您治理郑国，我治理我的家族以庇护我自己，这就可以了。
English: I once said, you govern Zheng, I govern my family to protect myself, that's enough.

古文：今而后知不足。
现代文：从今以后才知道这样不行。
English: From now on, we know that this is not acceptable.

古文：自今，请虽吾家，听子而行。 
现代文：从现在起我请求，虽然是我家族的事情，也听从您的意见去办理。 
English: From now on, I ask that, even though this is my family's business, I follow your advice.

古文：子产曰： 人心之不同，如其面焉。吾岂敢谓子面如吾面乎？
现代文：子产说： 每个人的想法不一样，好像他的面孔，我难道敢说您的面孔像我的面孔吗？
English: The offspring said: Everyone's thoughts are different, just like his face. Do I dare say that your face is like my face?

古文：抑心所谓危，亦以告也。 
现代文：不过心里觉得这样做是危险的，就把它告诉您了。 
English: But I felt in my heart that it was dangerous to do so, so I told you.

古文：子皮以为忠，故委政焉。
现代文：子皮认为他忠诚，所以把政事全交付给他。
English: Zoppi thought he was loyal, so she handed over the entire government to him.

古文：子产是以能为郑国。
现代文：子产因此能够执掌郑国大权。
English: As a result, Zibo was able to hold the supreme power of Zheng.

古文：卫侯在楚，北宫文子见令尹围之威仪，言于卫侯曰： 令尹似君矣！将有他志。
现代文：卫襄公在楚国，北宫文子见到楚令尹围的仪表，对卫襄公说： 令尹的言行像国君了，将要有别的想法。
English: Wei Xianggong in Chu, Bei Gong Fumiko saw the appearance of Chu Ling Yinwei, and said to Wei Xianggong: Ling Yin's words and deeds are like the king, he will have other ideas.

古文：虽获其志，不能终也。
现代文：虽然能实现这种想法，但是不能善终。
English: Although this idea can be realized, it cannot end well.

古文：《诗》云： 靡不有初，鲜克有终。 
现代文：《诗》说： 什么都有个开头，可是很少能有好的结束。 
English: The Book of Songs says: Everything has a good beginning, but few things have a happy ending.

古文：终之实难，令尹其将不免？ 
现代文：善终实在很难，令尹恐怕要不能免于祸难。 
English: In the end, it's really hard to be good, so I'm afraid Yin has to be saved from disaster.

古文：公曰： 子何以知之？ 
现代文：卫襄公说： 你怎么知道？ 
English: Jing Gong said, "On what basis do you know this?

古文：对曰： 《诗》云： 敬慎威仪，惟民之则。 
现代文：北宫文子回答说： 《诗》说： 恭敬而慎重地使用威仪，因为它是百姓的准则。 
English: Kitamiya Fumiko replied, "The poem says, "Respectfully and carefully use dignity, because it is the people's standard."

古文：令尹无威仪，民无则焉。
现代文：令尹没有威仪，百姓就没有准则。
English: If there is no dignity, there is no standard for the people.

古文：民所不则，以在民上，不可以终。 
现代文：百姓所不会效法的人，而在百姓之上，就不能善终。 
English: It is impossible for those who live above the people, but who cannot be imitated by the people, to have a happy ending.

古文：公曰： 善哉！
现代文：卫襄公说： 好啊！
English: That's what a saint is.

古文：何谓威仪？ 
现代文：什么叫威仪？ 
English: What is "Wai Yi"?

古文：对曰： 有威而可畏谓之威，有仪而可象谓之仪。
现代文：北宫文子回答说： 有威严而使人能害怕叫做威，有仪表而使人能仿效叫做仪。
English: Kitamiya Fumiko replied, "A thing that has majesty and can be feared is called majesty, and a thing that has a form and can be imitated is called a form.

古文：君有君之威仪，其臣畏而爱之，则而象之，故能有其国家，令闻长世。
现代文：国君有国君的威仪，他的臣子敬畏而爱戴他，把他作为准则而仿效他，所以能保有他的国家，有好名声，传于子孙后代。
English: The sovereign has the dignity of the sovereign, his subjects fear and love him, take him as a standard and imitate him, so he can keep his country, have a good reputation, and pass it on to future generations.

古文：臣有臣之威仪，其下畏而爱之，故能守其官职，保族宜家。
现代文：臣子有臣子的威仪，他的下面害怕而爱护他，所以能保住他的官职，保护家族，使家庭和睦。
English: A vassal has the dignity of a vassal, his subordinates fear and love him, so he can keep his official position, protect his family, and make the family harmonious.

古文：顺是以下皆如是，是以上下能相固也。
现代文：按照这个次序以下都像这样，因此上下能够互相巩固。
English: In this order, the top and bottom are like this, so the top and bottom can reinforce each other.

古文：《卫诗》曰： 威仪棣棣，不可选也。 言君臣、上下、父子、兄弟、内外、大小皆有威仪也。
现代文：《卫诗》说 威仪安详，好处不能计量 ，这是说君臣、上下、父子、兄弟、内外、大小都有威仪。
English: The "Hymn of Songs" says, "Dignity is serene, the benefits are immeasurable," which means that there are dignities for the king and the ministers, the high and the low, the father and the son, the brothers and sisters, the inside and the outside, and the great and the small.

古文：《周诗》曰： 朋友攸摄，摄以威仪。 言朋友之道，必相教训以威仪也。
现代文：《周诗》说， 朋友之间互相辅助，所用的就是威仪 ，这是说朋友之道一定要用威仪来互相教导。
English: "Zhou Shi" said that mutual assistance between friends is the use of dignity, which means that the way of friends must use dignity to teach each other.

古文：《周书》数文王之德曰： 大国畏其力，小国怀其德。 言畏而爱之也。
现代文：《周书》列举文王的德行，说， 大国害怕他的力量，小国怀念他的恩德 ，这是说对他既害怕而又爱护。
English: "Weekly News" listed the virtues of King Wen, saying that big countries fear his strength, and small countries miss his kindness, which means that they both fear and love him.

古文：《诗》云： 不识不知，顺帝之则。 言则而象之也。
现代文：《诗》说， 无知无识，顺着天帝的准则 ，这是说把他作为准则而加以仿效。
English: "Poetry" says, "Ignorance is the beginning of ignorance, following the standard of the heavenly emperor," which is to say, emulating him as a standard.

古文：纣囚文王七年，诸侯皆从之囚。纣于是乎惧而归之。
现代文：殷纣王囚禁周文王七年，诸侯跟着他去坐牢，纣王于是就害怕而把文王放了回去。
English: King Yin imprisoned King Zhou Wen for seven years, and the princes followed him to prison. King Yin was afraid and let King Wen go.

古文：可谓爱之。文王伐崇，再驾而降为臣，蛮夷帅服。可谓畏之。
现代文：可以说是敬爱文王了，文王攻打崇国，两次发兵，崇国就降服为臣，蛮夷相继归服，可以说是害怕文王了。
English: It can be said that they respect King Wen. King Wen attacked and defeated Chongguo, and sent troops twice. Chongguo surrendered as a vassal, and the barbarians surrendered one after another. It can be said that they are afraid of King Wen.

古文：文王之功，天下诵而歌舞之。可谓则之。
现代文：文王的功业，天下赞诵而歌舞，可以说以文王为准则了。
English: The world praises King Wen's achievements and sings and dances with him. It can be said that King Wen is the standard.

古文：文王之行，至今为法。可谓象之。
现代文：文王的措施，到今天还作为法则，可以说是仿效文王了。
English: King Wen's measures, which are still regarded as rules today, can be said to have been modeled after King Wen.

古文：有威仪也。
现代文：这是因为有威仪的缘故。
English: It's because of the pomp and circumstance.

古文：故君子在位可畏，施舍可爱，进退可度，周旋可则，容止可观，作事可法，德行可象，声气可乐，动作有文，言语有章，以临其下，谓之有威仪也。 
现代文：所以君子在官位上可使人怕他，施舍可使人爱他，进退可以作为法度，应付得体，容貌举止可以值得观赏，做事情可以让人学习，德行可以作为仿效，声音气度可以使人高兴，举动有修养，说话有条理，用这些来对待下面的人，这就叫做有威仪。 
English: Therefore, a gentleman in an official position can make people fear him, almsgiving can make people love him, advancing and retreating can be used as a measure, dealing with decency, appearance and behavior can be worth watching, doing things can make people learn, virtue can be used as an imitation, tone of voice can make people happy, behavior is cultivated, speech is organized, and using these to treat people below, this is called dignified.

