古文：强圉作噩，一年
现代文：丁酉，公元三九七年，一共一年
English: Ding Xi, 397 A.D., a total of one year

古文：安皇帝甲隆安元年
现代文：晋安帝隆安元年
English: The first year of Emperor Jinnang's reign

古文：春，正月，己亥朔，帝加元服，改元。
现代文：春季，正月，己亥朔，东晋安帝行加冕礼，改年号为隆安。
English: In the spring, the first month of the year, the Eastern Jin Emperor was crowned, and the year was changed to Longan.

古文：以左仆射王珣为尚书令；领军将军王国宝为左仆射，领选，仍加后将军、丹杨尹。
现代文：任命左仆射王为尚书令；领军将军王国宝为左仆射，兼管官员任免升降，仍兼任后将军、丹杨尹。
English: He appointed his left-hand man, Sha Wang, as Shang Shuling; the leading general, Wang Guobao, as his left-hand man, and the officials in charge of appointments, promotions, and dismissals. He also appointed his second-in-command, Tang Yangyin.

古文：会稽王道子悉以东宫兵配国宝，使领之。
现代文：会稽王司马道子把东宫太子的兵马全部分配给王国宝，让他带领这些部队。
English: The auditor-general, Wang Sima Daozi, assigned all of the Eastern Palace Prince's soldiers and horses to Wang Guobao, allowing him to lead these troops.

古文：燕范阳王德求救于秦，秦兵不出。
现代文：后燕范阳王慕容德向后秦请求援救，后秦不出兵，邺城军民惊恐异常。
English: Later Yan Fanyang Wang Murongde asked for help from Later Qin, Later Qin did not send troops, and the soldiers and people of Fucheng were extremely frightened.

古文：鄴中恟惧。贺赖卢自以魏王珪之舅，不受东平公仪节度，由是与仪有隙。
现代文：贺赖卢自以为他是魏王拓跋的舅舅，所以不听东平公拓跋仪的调度、指挥，因此，他与拓跋仪产生了矛盾。
English: Horai Lu thought that he was the uncle of Wei King Tuoba, so he did not listen to the dispatch and command of Dongping Gong Tuoba. Therefore, he had a conflict with Tuoba.

古文：仪司马丁建阴与德通，从而构间之，射书入城中言其状。
现代文：拓跋仪的司马丁建暗地里与慕容德勾结，在拓跋仪与贺赖卢中间挑拨离间，并把这种情况写成书信用箭射进邺城告诉给了慕容德。
English: Martin Jian, the secretary of Tuobaoyi, secretly colluded with Murongde, sowed discord between Tuobaoyi and Horailu, and told Murongde about this situation in a letter, Credit Arrow Shot into Handan City.

古文：甲辰，风霾，昼晦。
现代文：甲辰，大风突起，天昏地暗。
English: In the morning, a gale blows up, and the sky is dark.

古文：赖卢营有火，建言于仪曰： 赖卢烧营为变矣。 
现代文：贺赖卢的军营之中出现火光，丁建对拓跋仪说： 贺赖卢在焚烧营地举行叛乱。 
English: When a fire broke out in the military camp of the Herailu, Ding Jian said to Tuoba Yi: The Herailu rebelled by burning the camp.

古文：仪以为然，引兵退。
现代文：拓跋仪认为丁建说的很对，便迅速领兵撤退。
English: Tuoba Yi thought that what Ding Jian said was right, so he quickly led the troops to retreat.

古文：赖卢闻之，亦退。
现代文：贺赖卢听说了拓跋仪后撤的消息，也紧跟着带兵退了下来。
English: Horai Lu heard the news of Tuoba's retreat, and he also retreated with his soldiers.

古文：建帅其众诣德降，且言仪师老可击。
现代文：丁建此时则带领着他的部众向慕容德投降，并且告诉慕容德，拓跋仪的部队已经疲惫不堪，可以一击。
English: At this time, Ding Jian led his subordinates to surrender to Murongde, and told Murongde that Tuoba's troops were exhausted and ready to strike.

古文：德遣桂阳王镇、南安王青帅骑七千追击魏军，大破之。
现代文：于是，慕容德派遣桂阳王慕容镇、安南王慕容青率领骑兵七千人前去追赶袭击北魏军队，把他们打得大败。
English: As a result, Murong De dispatched Guiyang King Murong Zhen and Annan King Murong Qing to lead seven thousand cavalry to chase and attack the Northern Wei army, and they were defeated.

古文：燕主宝使左卫将军慕舆腾攻博陵，杀魏所置守宰。
现代文：燕主宝使左卫将军慕舆腾攻博陵，杀魏所置守宰。
English: Yanshu Bao ordered General Zuo Wei to attack Bo Ling and kill Wei's guards.

古文：王建等攻信都，六十馀日不下，士卒多死。
现代文：后燕国主慕容宝派遣左卫将军慕舆腾进攻博陵，杀掉了北魏的地方官吏。王建等进攻信都城，六十多天也没有攻下，兵卒伤亡很多。
English: Later, the lord of Yan, Murong Bao, sent the left guard general Mu Myuteng to attack Boling, killing the local officials of the Northern Wei Dynasty. Wang Jian and others attacked Xindu City, but did not capture it for more than sixty days, and there were many casualties among the soldiers.

古文：庚申，魏王珪自攻信都。
现代文：庚申，魏王拓跋带兵进攻信都。
English: Goshun, Wei King Tuoba led the troops to attack Xindu.

古文：壬戌夜，燕宜都王凤逾城奔中山。
现代文：壬戌夜晚，后燕宜都王慕容凤跳出城墙逃往中山。
English: In the middle of the night, King Murongfeng jumped out of the city wall and fled to Zhongshan.

古文：癸亥，信都降魏。
现代文：癸亥，信都城向北魏投降。
English: In 1911, Xindu City surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：凉王光以西秦王乾归数反覆，举兵伐之。
现代文：后凉王吕光因为西秦王乞伏乾归多次反覆，兴兵去讨伐。
English: Later, Liangyang King Liguang, because the Western Qin King repeatedly begged Qian to return, raised an army to fight.

古文：乾归群下请东奔成纪以避之，乾归曰： 军之胜败，在于巧拙，不在众寡。
现代文：乞伏乾归手下官员请求向东逃奔到成纪去躲避。乞伏乾归说： 战争的胜败，全在于用兵的巧拙，不在于兵马的多少。
English: He asked his officials to flee east to Chengji to avoid him. He said: "The success or failure of a war depends entirely on the skill of using soldiers, not on the number of soldiers and horses.

古文：光兵虽众而无法，其弟延勇而无谋，不足惮也。
现代文：吕光的部队虽然人多，但是却缺乏纪律，他的弟弟吕延虽然勇猛，但是却没有谋略，不值得担心。
English: Although Lü Guang's troops were numerous, they lacked discipline. His younger brother Lü Yan, although brave, had no strategy and was not worth worrying about.

古文：且其精兵尽在延所，延败，光自走矣。 
现代文：况且吕光的精锐部队全部由吕延统带，吕延一败，吕光自然而然就会逃跑。 
English: Moreover, all of Lü Guang's elite troops were led by Lü Yan. Once Lü Yan was defeated, Lü Guang would naturally flee.

古文：光军于长最，遣太原公纂等帅步骑三万攻金城；乾归帅众二万救之，未到，纂等拔金城。
现代文：这时吕光把大军集结在长最，派遣太原公吕纂等人统率步、骑兵共三万人进攻金城。乞伏乾归带领二万士兵前去解救，还没有赶到，吕纂便已攻克了金城。
English: At this time, Lü Guang gathered a large army at the furthest point, and sent Taiyuan Prince Lü Zuo and others to lead the way, with a total of 30,000 cavalry attacking Jincheng. Qian Gui led 20,000 soldiers to rescue, and before he arrived, Lü Zuo had conquered Jincheng.

古文：光又遣其将梁恭等以甲卒万馀出阳武下峡，与秦州刺史没弈干攻其东，天水公延以枹罕之众攻临洮、武始、河关，皆克之。
现代文：吕光又派遣他的部将梁恭等人带领全副甲胄的士卒一万多人直逼阳武下峡，与秦州刺史没弈干一起从东部进攻乞伏乾归。天水公吕延也率领罕的军队进攻临洮、武始、河关，全部攻克。
English: Lü Guang also sent his subordinate general Liang Qiong and others to lead more than ten thousand soldiers in full armor and armor directly to Yangwuxia Gorge, attacking from the east with Qinzhou Zishi Mengyuan. Tianshui Gong Lyu Yan also led a rare army to attack Linyi, Wuchih, and Heguan, and conquered them all.

古文：乾归使人绐延云： 乾归众溃，奔成纪。 
现代文：乞伏乾归派人去欺骗吕延说： 乞伏乾归的军队已经溃散，他自己逃往成纪去了。 
English: Kengui Kengui sent someone to deceive Lü Yan, saying: Kengui Kengui's army has been broken up, and he himself has fled to Chengji.

古文：延欲引以轻骑追之，司马耿稚谏曰： 乾归勇略过人，安肯望风自溃？
现代文：吕延打算带领轻装的骑兵前去追赶，司马耿稚劝说他道： 乞伏乾归的勇武和谋略超过常人，怎么可能听到一点风声便自行解体！
English: Lü Yan planned to lead the lightly-armed cavalry forward to catch up, and Sima Geng advised him: "The gallantry and strategy of begging for surrender surpasses that of ordinary people. How is it possible to hear a bit of wind and disintegrate on your own?"

古文：前破王广、杨定，皆羸师以诱之。
现代文：从前，乞伏乾归打败王广、杨定，都是这样先把自己的弱点暴露给敌人，引诱对方急功冒进。
English: In the past, Wang Guang and Yang Ding were defeated in this way, first exposing their weaknesses to the enemy and luring the other side to rush forward.

古文：今告者视高色动，殆必有奸，宜整陈而前，使步骑相属，俟诸军毕集，然后击之，无不克矣。 
现代文：这次我看报信的人目光向上，脸上的表情也闪烁不定，其中一定有诈，我们应该列好战阵，有条不紊地向前推进，使步兵与骑兵互相照应配合，等到各路大军全部集结，再去攻击敌人，那就没有攻不破的道理了。 
English: This time, I saw that the eyes of the person who reported the news were looking upward, and the expression on his face was also flickering. There must be some deception in it. We should form a good battle line, advance in an orderly manner, and make the infantry and cavalry take care of each other. When all the armies are assembled, and then attack the enemy, then there is no reason why we can't break through.

古文：延不从，进，与乾归遇，延战死。稚与将军姜显牧散卒，还屯枹罕。
现代文：吕延不听他的劝阻，挥军直进，与乞伏乾归遭遇，吕延战死，耿稚与将军姜显收集散逃的士卒，回到罕去驻守。
English: Lyu Yan did not listen to his dissuasion, waved his army straight ahead, encountered the begging Qian Gui, Lyu Yan died in battle, Geng Waki and General Jiang Xian collected the scattered soldiers and returned to Han to garrison.

古文：光亦引兵还姑臧。
现代文：吕光也领兵退回姑臧。
English: Lü Guang also led the troops back to Gushan.

古文：秃发乌孤自称大都督、大将军、大单于、西平王，大赦，改元太初。
现代文：秃发乌孤自称为大都督、大将军、大单于、西平王，实行大赦，改年号为太初。
English: Bald-faced Wu Kuo called himself the great governor, the great general, the great single, the king of Xiping, implemented an amnesty, and changed the year name to the first.

古文：治兵广武，攻凉金城，克之。
现代文：在广武集结整顿部队，进攻并攻克后凉金城。
English: Rectification troops were assembled in Guangwu to attack and conquer Houliangjin City.

古文：凉王光遣将军窦苟伐之，战于街亭，凉兵大败。
现代文：后凉王吕光派将军窦苟去讨伐，在街亭展开激战，后凉军大败。
English: After Liangyang, King Liguang sent General Dou Guo to fight, and a fierce battle broke out in the street pavilion. The Liangyang army was defeated.

古文：燕主宝闻魏王珪攻信都，出屯深泽，遣赵王麟攻杨城，杀守兵三百。
现代文：后燕国主慕容宝听说魏王拓跋带兵进攻信都，便率军驻扎在深泽，又派赵王慕容麟进攻杨城，杀死了守兵三百人。
English: After Yan's lord, Murong Bao, heard that Wei Wang Tuoba led an army to attack Xindu, he stationed his army in Shenzhen, and sent Zhao Wang Murong Lin to attack Yangcheng, killing three hundred guards.

古文：宝悉出珍宝及宫人募郡县君盗以击魏。
现代文：慕容宝将皇宫中所藏的珍宝甚至所有的宫女全部作为赏资，招募各郡各封国的强盗匪徒，让他们充军，去抗击北魏。
English: Murong Bao used the treasures hidden in the imperial palace and even all the palace maids as rewards, recruiting robber bandits from all counties and fiefdoms to join the army and fight against the Northern Wei Dynasty.

古文：二月，己巳朔，珪还屯杨城。
现代文：二月，己巳朔，拓跋带兵回到杨城驻扎。
English: In February, Tuoba led his troops back to Yangcheng and stationed there.

古文：没根兄子丑提为并州监军，闻其叔父降燕，惧诛，帅所部兵还国作乱。
现代文：叛将没根的侄儿丑提任并州监军，听说他的叔父降燕，害怕牵连自己被杀，索性带着自己所管辖的兵卒还国举行叛乱。
English: The traitor nominated his rootless nephew Ugly to the post of the State Supervisor of the Army. Hearing that his uncle was demoted, he was afraid of being implicated in his own death, so he simply took the soldiers under his jurisdiction back to the country to stage a rebellion.

古文：珪欲北还，遣其国相涉延求和于燕，且请以其弟为质。
现代文：拓跋打算北撤，派国相拓跋涉延前去向后燕求和，并且请求用他的弟弟作为人质。
English: Tuoba planned to retreat north, and sent Guozhong Tuoba to travel back and forth to Yanshan to sue for peace, and requested that his younger brother be used as a hostage.

古文：宝闻魏有内难，不许，使冗从仆射兰真责珪负恩，悉发其众步卒十二万、骑三万七千屯于曲阳之柏肆，营于滹沲水北以邀之。
现代文：慕容宝听说北魏内部出现动乱，没有答应讲和，又派冗从仆射兰真前往北魏军营，斥责拓跋忘恩负义，调动全部步兵十二万人、骑兵三万七千人去曲阳的柏肆驻守，在滹沱河的北岸立下大营，以拦截撤退的北魏军。
English: When Murong Bao heard that there was turmoil within the Northern Wei Dynasty, he did not agree to talk about peace. He also sent his subordinate, Lan Zhen, to the Northern Wei military camp to reprimand Tuoba for being ungrateful. He mobilized all 120,000 infantrymen and 37,000 cavalrymen to garrison the castle town of Quyang, and set up a large camp on the north bank of the Wei River to intercept the retreating Northern Wei Army.

古文：丁丑，魏军至，营于水南。
现代文：丁丑，北魏后撤的部队来到这里，在滹沱河的南岸扎营。
English: Dingwu, the retreating troops of the Northern Wei Dynasty came here and camped on the south bank of the Wei River.

古文：宝潜师夜济，募勇敢万馀人袭魏营，宝陈于营北以为之援。
现代文：慕容宝秘密地遣派一支部队连夜渡过河去，招募一万多敢死队袭击北魏军营，慕容宝在营北结阵作为援兵。
English: Murong Bao secretly dispatched an army to cross the river overnight, recruited more than 10,000 death squads to attack the Northern Wei army camp, and Murong Bao lined up in the north of the camp as reinforcements.

古文：募兵因风纵火。
现代文：后燕招募来的这些人，顺着风放火，对魏军发起迅猛的进攻。
English: These people, recruited by Houyan, set fire to the wind and launched a rapid attack on the Wei army.

古文：急击魏军，魏军大乱，珪惊起，弃营跣走；燕将军乞特真帅百馀人至其帐下，得珪衣靴。
现代文：北魏军一片大乱，拓跋也在睡梦中惊醒，光着双脚抛弃大营逃走。后燕将军乞特真带着一百多名士卒来到拓跋的大帐，只得到了拓跋仓促之间遗失下的衣服和皮靴。
English: The Northern Wei army was in chaos, and Tuoba also woke up in his sleep and fled barefoot, abandoning the camp. General Houyan and more than a hundred soldiers came to Tuoba's general ledger, and only got the clothes and leather boots that Tuoba lost in his haste.

古文：既而募兵无故自惊，互相斫射。
现代文：不久，招募来的那些兵勇不知什么原因便突然一片大乱，互相之间胡砍乱射。
English: Before long, for some unknown reason, the soldiers who had been recruited suddenly erupted into chaos, slashing and shooting at each other.

古文：珪于营外望见之，乃击鼓收众，左右及中军将士舟稍稍来集，多布火炬于营外，纵骑冲之。
现代文：拓跋在营外远远看到这种情况，于是，击鼓召集刚刚溃散了的兵士，不久，他左右的侍从以及中军将士渐渐地集合在一起，并在营地的外围设置了许多火炬，派骑兵向前冲击后燕兵营。
English: Tuoba saw this situation from far outside the camp, so he beat the drum to summon the soldiers who had just dispersed. Soon, his attendants around him and the Chinese soldiers gradually gathered together, and set up many torches on the periphery of the camp and sent the cavalry forward to attack the Houyan battalion.

古文：募兵大败，还赴宝陈，宝引兵复渡水北。
现代文：招募的兵勇大败，逃回慕容宝的大营，慕容宝带领着部队再一次渡到河的北岸。
English: The recruited soldiers were defeated and fled back to Murong Bao's camp. Murong Bao once again led the troops to the north bank of the river.

古文：戊寅，魏整众而至，与燕相持，燕军夺气。
现代文：戊寅，北魏整顿好部队渐渐逼近，并和后燕军相对峙。
English: Wu Yin, the good troops of the Northern Wei rectification gradually approached, and confronted the Yan army.

古文：宝引还中山，魏兵随而击之，燕兵屡败。
现代文：后燕军士气大为低落。慕容宝只好带着部队回到中山，北魏军随后追击，后燕军几次接战均告失败。
English: The morale of Houyan's army was very low. Murong Bao had no choice but to return to Zhongshan with his troops. The Northern Wei Army then chased them, and Houyan's army failed in several engagements.

古文：宝惧，弃大军，帅骑二万奔还。
现代文：慕容宝十分恐惧，丢下大部队，自己带二万骑兵逃奔回去。
English: Much frightened, Murong Bao left the large army and fled back with 20,000 cavalry.

古文：时大风雪，冻死者相枕。
现代文：这时正值狂风暴雪，冻死的人横躺竖卧在原野上。
English: At this time, there was a blizzard, and people who had frozen to death were lying on the ground.

古文：宝恐为魏军所及，命士卒皆弃袍仗、兵器数十万，寸刃不返，燕之朝臣将卒降魏及为魏所系虏者甚众。
现代文：慕容宝害怕被北魏军队追上抓获，命令兵士全都丢下袍甲枪杖，最后把几十万精良武器全部丢弃，甚至连一把小刀也没有带回。后燕的朝廷大臣、将帅士兵投降、被俘的人非常之多。
English: Afraid of being caught by the Northern Wei army, Murong Bao ordered the soldiers to throw away their uniforms, armor, and guns. Finally, he threw away hundreds of thousands of sophisticated weapons and did not even bring back a small knife. The imperial minister of Houyan, the commander-in-chief, and the soldiers surrendered, and there were a lot of prisoners.

古文：先是，张衮常为魏王珪言燕秘书监崔逞之材，珪得之，甚喜，以逞为尚书，使录三十六曹，任以政事。
现代文：在这之前，张衮曾经对魏王拓跋说过后燕秘书监崔逞的才能，这次拓跋得到崔逞，非常高兴，任命崔逞为尚书，掌管三十六曹，把政事委任给他来处理。
English: Prior to this, Zhang Ye had told Wei Wang Tuoba about the talent of the post-Yan Secretary Supervisor Cui Gang. This time, Tuoba was very happy to get Cui Gang, appointed Cui Gang as Shangshu, in charge of the Thirty-six Cao, and delegated the political affairs to him to deal with.

古文：魏军士有自柏肆亡归者，言大军败散，不知王处。
现代文：北魏军士中有从柏肆逃亡回来的人，说大部队已经惨败溃散，甚至也不知道魏王拓跋的下落。
English: Among the Northern Wei army sergeants, there are people who have returned from fleeing from Baihe, saying that the large army has been defeated and dispersed, and they don't even know the whereabouts of Wei Wang Tuoba.

古文：道过晋阳，晋阳守将封真因起兵攻并州刺史曲阳侯素延，素延击斩之。
现代文：他们途中经过晋阳，晋阳守将封真调集军队进攻并州刺史、曲阳侯拓跋素延，拓跋素延出城迎战，斩了封真。
English: On their way, they passed through Jinyang. The governor of Jinyang mobilized troops to attack Fuzhen and stabbed him in the back. The governor of Quyang, Tuoba Suyan, came out of the city to fight and killed Fuzhen.

古文：南安公顺守云中，闻之，欲自摄国事。幢将代人莫题曰： 此大事，不可轻尔，宜审待后问；不然，为祸不细。 
现代文：北魏南安公拓跋顺留守云中，听说了拓跋下落不明的消息后，打算自己代理国家政事，他的幢将代郡人莫题说： 这可是一件大事，千万不可草率从事，应该谨慎地等待观察事态的进一步发展，不然，为祸不浅。 
English: In the Northern Wei Dynasty, the Southern An Emperor Tuoba Shun stayed in Yunzhong. After hearing the news that Tuoba's whereabouts were unknown, he planned to act as the state's political agent. His deputy, the county's warlord Mo Qi, said: This is a big deal, it must not be done hastily, we should cautiously wait to observe the further development of the situation, otherwise, it will be disastrous.

古文：顺乃止。
现代文：拓跋顺才放弃了这个想法。
English: It was only then that Tuoba Shun gave up the idea.

古文：顺，什翼犍之孙也。
现代文：拓跋顺是拓跋什翼犍的孙子。
English: Tuoba Shun is the grandson of Tuoba Shiji.

古文：贺兰部帅附力眷、纥邻部帅匿物尼、纥奚部帅叱奴根皆举兵反，顺讨之，不克。
现代文：这时，贺兰部落的首领附力眷、纥邻部落的首领匿物尼、纥奚部落的首领叱奴根等也都闻迅拉起队伍反叛，拓跋顺带兵去征讨他们，却无法平息。
English: At this time, the chiefs of the Helan tribe, He Feng Lijian, the chiefs of the neighboring tribes, the leaders of the neighboring tribes, the leaders of the neighboring tribes, and the leaders of the Yao tribe, the leaders of the Yao tribe, and so on, also heard of the rebellion of the team, and Tuoba Shun led the soldiers to collect them, but they could not be calmed down.

古文：珪遣安远将军庾岳帅万骑还讨三部，皆平之，国人乃安。
现代文：拓跋派遣安远将军庾岳统率一万骑兵，赶回来讨伐这三个部落，把这三个部落平定之后，全国百姓才安定下来。
English: Tuoba sent Anyuan General Gong Yue to lead ten thousand cavalry, and rushed back to fight these three tribes. After these three tribes were pacified, the people of the whole country settled down.

古文：珪欲抚尉新附，深悔参合之诛，素延坐讨反者杀戮过多，免官；以奚牧为并州刺史。
现代文：拓跋打算安抚宽慰新投降的人，因此对在参合陂那次大批屠杀俘虏的举动深感后悔。拓跋素延讨伐叛变的人杀戮太多，免去了他的官职，任命奚牧为并州刺史。
English: Intending to appease and comfort the newly-surrendered people, Tuoba deeply regretted the mass slaughter of prisoners at Zhenghe. Tuoba had killed so many rebels that he was removed from his post and appointed as the governor of Zhengzhou.

古文：牧与东秦主兴书称 顿首 ，与之均礼。
现代文：奚牧与后秦国主姚兴通信，以对等之礼称 顿首 。
English: According to the correspondence between Yan Mu and Yao Xing, the ruler of the Later Qin Dynasty, Yan Mu bowed his head with equal courtesy.

古文：兴怒，以告珪，珪为之杀牧。
现代文：姚兴看后勃然大怒，把这事告诉了拓跋，拓跋因此杀了奚牧。
English: After watching, Yao Xing flew into a rage and told this to Tuoba, who then killed Yan Mu.

古文：己卯夜，燕尚书郎慕舆谋弑燕主宝，立赵王麟；不克，斩关出奔魏。
现代文：己卯夜间，后燕尚书郎慕舆皓阴谋刺杀后燕国主慕容宝，拥立赵王慕容麟，没有成功。
English: In the middle of the night, Houyan Shangshurang Murong conspired to assassinate Houyan ruler Murong Bao and support Zhao Wang Murong Lin, but failed.

古文：麟由是不自安。
现代文：因此慕舆皓便砍开城门，冲出去逃奔北魏。
English: Therefore, Mu Muxuan cut open the gate and rushed out to flee to Northern Wei.

古文：三月，燕以仪同三司武乡张崇为司空。
现代文：慕容麟从此心中万分不安。三月，后燕任命仪同三司、武乡人张崇为司空。
English: From then on, Muronglin felt extremely uneasy. In March, Houyan appointed Yi Tong San Si and Zhang Chong, a person from Wuxiang, as Sifu.

古文：初，燕清河王会闻魏军东下，表求赴难，燕主宝许之。
现代文：当初，后燕清河王慕容会听说北魏军大批东来，上表请求带兵出征，以救国难。
English: At first, King Murong of the Later Yanqing River heard that a large number of Northern Wei troops had come to the east, and he asked the table to take soldiers to fight to save the country.

古文：会初无去意，使征南将军库傉官伟、建威将军馀崇将兵五千为前锋。
现代文：后燕国主慕容宝同意了他的请求。但是，慕容会根本没有要去拯救国家的意思，只派遣征南将军库官伟、建威将军馀崇二人带兵五千人作为前锋出发。
English: Later, the lord of Yan Province, Murong Bao, agreed to his request. However, the Murong Association had no intention of saving the country at all, and only sent two Southern Expeditionary Generals, Ku Guan Wei and Jian Wei General Yu Chong, with five thousand soldiers as the vanguard.

古文：崇，嵩之子也。
现代文：馀崇是馀嵩的儿子。
English: Yu Chong is Yu Song's son.

古文：伟等顿卢龙近百日，无食，啖马牛且尽，会不发。
现代文：库官伟等人在卢龙一带停留了将近一百天，吃完了粮食，把军中的马牛也即将吃尽，慕容会还是没有带兵出发。
English: Ku Guan Wei and others stayed in the Lulong area for nearly a hundred days, finished eating the grain, and were about to eat up the horses and cattle in the army. The Murong Association still did not set out with soldiers.

古文：宝怒，累诏切责；会不得已，以治行简练为名，复留月馀。
现代文：慕容宝大怒，几次下诏严厉斥责他，慕容会迫不得已，以置办行装、加强训练为名，又滞留了一个多月。
English: Murong Bao was furious and severely reprimanded him several times. As a last resort, the Murong Association detained him for more than a month in the name of purchasing uniforms and strengthening training.

古文：时道路不通，伟欲使轻军前行通道，侦魏强弱，且张声势；诸将皆畏避不欲行。
现代文：这时，道路不通，库官伟打算派遣一支活动灵便的部队继续向前开通道路，侦察了解北魏军队的强弱虚实，而且，又能大肆张扬他们的声势。各位将领都因为害怕危险，不愿意去。
English: At this time, the road was impassable, and Ku Kuan Wei planned to send a mobile force to continue to open the road ahead, to reconnoitre and understand the strength and weakness of the Northern Wei army, and, moreover, to publicize their momentum. All the generals were afraid of danger and were unwilling to go.

古文：馀崇奋曰： 今巨寇滔天，京都危逼，匹夫犹思致命以救君父，诸君荷国宠任，而更惜生乎！
现代文：这时，馀崇奋然而起，说： 现在大敌强盛无比，京都正在遭受着强敌的逼迫。一个普通人都想到舍命拯救自己君主与父老，你们身受皇家的宠爱与重任，怎么能够再爱惜个人的性命呢！
English: At this time, Yuzong became excited and said, "Nowadays, the great enemy is extremely powerful, and Kyoto is being persecuted by a powerful enemy. An ordinary person would think of sacrificing his life to save his monarch and father. You are favored and entrusted by the imperial family. How can you cherish your personal life any longer?"

古文：若社稷倾覆，臣节不立，死有馀辱。
现代文：国家社稷一旦被推翻，作为臣子的节操不能保全，即便是死了，也要留下耻辱！
English: Once the state and society are overthrown, it is impossible to preserve one's integrity as a courtier. Even if one dies, one must leave behind the shame!

古文：诸君安居于此，崇请当之。 
现代文：你们几位就在这儿安安稳稳地呆着吧，我馀崇请求去抵挡敌人。 
English: The rest of you, stay here and stay safe. I implore you to resist the enemy.

古文：伟喜，简给步骑五百人。
现代文：库官伟非常高兴，挑选步、骑兵共五百人拨给馀崇。
English: Ku Kuan Wei was very pleased and selected 500 infantry and cavalry to be assigned to Yu Chong.

古文：崇进至渔阳，遇魏千馀骑，崇谓其众曰： 彼众我寡，不击则不得免。 
现代文：馀崇带兵来到渔阳，遇到北魏骑兵一千余人。馀崇对他手下的人说： 敌众我寡，不主动出击，我们就跑不掉了。 
English: Yu Chong led an army to Yuyang and encountered more than a thousand Northern Wei cavalry. Yu Chong said to his men: "I have few enemies. If we don't take the initiative to attack, we won't be able to escape."

古文：乃鼓噪直进，崇手杀十馀人。
现代文：于是大声呼喊着一直向敌人杀去，馀崇一个人便杀死了十几个敌兵。
English: As a result, he shouted loudly and continued to kill the enemy. Yu Chong alone killed more than a dozen enemy soldiers.

古文：魏骑溃去，崇亦引还，斩首获生，具言敌中阔狭，众心稍振。
现代文：魏军骑兵溃散而逃，馀崇也带着兵士们回营。这次出击，杀死了许多敌人，又生擒了一些，他仔细讲述了敌军的内部情况，军心因此稍稍得到了振作。
English: The cavalry of the Wei army scattered and fled, and Yu Chong also took the soldiers back to the camp. This sortie killed many of the enemy and wounded some. He carefully described the internal situation of the enemy army, and the military spirit was slightly invigorated.

古文：会乃上道徐进，是月，始达蓟城。
现代文：慕容会这才正式带兵上路，慢慢地向前开进。这个月，他们方才到达蓟城。
English: It was only then that the Murong Association officially took the soldiers on the road and slowly drove forward. This month, they just arrived in Lucheng.

古文：魏围中山既久，城中将士皆思出战。
现代文：北魏军围困后燕都城中山已经很久，中山城里的将士们都有心想要出城与敌人决一死战。
English: After the siege of the Northern Wei Army, the Yan capital, Zhongshan, had been under siege for a long time. The soldiers in Zhongshan were eager to leave the city and fight the enemy to the death.

古文：征北大将军隆言于宝曰： 涉珪虽屡获小利，然顿兵经年，凶势沮屈，士马死伤太半，人心思归，诸部离散，正是可破之时也。
现代文：征北大将军慕容隆对慕容宝说： 拓跋虽然多次获得一些小胜利，但大军在这里羁留已经一年，他们来时的那种凶恶的气势，已经委靡丧失，兵士马匹也或死或伤损失大半，人心思归，各部落正在离析瓦解，这正是我们可以将他们打败的大好时机呀！
English: The general of the Northern Expeditionary Force, Murong Long, said to Murong Bao: Although Tuoba has repeatedly won some small victories, the large army has been detained here for a year. The ferocious momentum they had when they came has been lost, and most of the soldiers and horses have been killed or injured. People are thinking of returning home, and the tribes are disintegrating. This is a great opportunity for us to defeat them!

古文：加之举城思奋，若因我之锐，乘彼之衰，往无不克。
现代文：再加上我们全城的兵民都在想着奋力一搏，如果利用我们的锐气，趁着他们的衰弱，就没有不胜利的。
English: In addition, our soldiers and people all over the city are thinking about fighting hard. If we use our spirit and take advantage of their weakness, there will be no failure.

古文：如其持重不决，将卒气丧，日益困逼，事久变生，后虽欲用之，不可得也， 宝然之。
现代文：如果谨慎持重、犹豫不决，等到将士的斗志丧失，环境又一天天艰苦，时间一久，事情就会发生变化，到那时候，虽然想利用机会，一定不会再有了。 
English: If you are cautious and indecisive, and wait until the soldiers' fighting spirit is lost, the environment is difficult day by day, and the time is long, things will change. At that time, although you want to take advantage of the opportunity, it will never happen again.

古文：而卫大将军麟每沮其议，隆成列而罢者，前后数四。
现代文：慕容宝觉得他说得很对。但是卫大将军慕容麟却几次都阻止慕容隆的建议，慕容隆准备好出击却被迫停止，前后一共四次。
English: Murong Bao thought he was right. However, General Murong Lin of the Wei Dynasty blocked Murong Long's suggestion several times. Murong Long was ready to attack but was forced to stop, a total of four times.

古文：宝使人请于魏王珪，欲还其弟觚，割常山以西皆与魏以求和。
现代文：慕容宝派人向魏王拓跋请求，打算把他弟弟拓跋觚护送回去，并且割让常山以西的大部地区送给北魏，向北魏求和。
English: Murong Bao sent a request to the Wei King Tuoba, intending to escort his younger brother Tuobao back, and cede most of the area west of Changshan to the Northern Wei, and sue for peace from the Northern Wei.

古文：珪许之；既而宝悔之。
现代文：拓跋答应了，但事后慕容宝却又后悔。己酉，拓跋来到卢奴。
English: Tuoba agreed, but afterwards Murong Bao regretted it. To his dismay, Tuoba came to Lunu.

古文：己酉，珪如卢奴，辛亥，复围中山。
现代文：辛亥，他再一次地包围了中山城。
English: Xinhai, he once again encircled Zhongshan City.

古文：燕将士数千人俱自请于宝曰： 今坐守穷城，终于困弊，臣等愿得一出乐战，而陛下每抑之，此为坐自摧败也。
现代文：后燕几千名将士都来主动向慕容宝请战说： 现在我们坐守这座已经山穷水尽的孤城，终有一天会被困死，我们愿意出城与敌人决一死战，但是陛下却每每制止我们，这是自取灭亡啊！
English: After Yan, several thousand soldiers came to actively ask Murong Bao to fight, saying: Now we are guarding this lonely city that has been exhausted, and one day we will be trapped. We are willing to go out of the city and fight the enemy to the death, but Your Majesty has stopped us every time. This is self-defeating!

古文：且受围历时，无他奇变，徒望积久寇贼自退。
现代文：况且我们被围已经很长时间，并没有产生其他的突然变化，只是白白地盼望时间久了贼兵便能自行退去。
English: Moreover, we have been surrounded for a long time, and there have been no other sudden changes, only the vain hope that after a long time the bandits will be able to withdraw on their own.

古文：今内外之势，强弱悬绝，彼必不自退明矣，宜从众一决。 宝许之。
现代文：所以，我们应该听从大家的意见，出城与敌人决战。 慕容宝答应了。
English: Therefore, we should listen to everyone's opinion and go out of the city to fight the enemy. Murongbao agreed.

古文：隆退而勒兵，召诸参佐谓之曰： 皇威不振，寇贼内侮，臣子同耻，义不顾生。
现代文：慕容隆退出去后，很快把部队调配完毕，召集参谋佐将，对他们说： 皇上的声威不振作，强盗贼子打到我们家门口来侮辱我们，这是我们做臣子的共同的耻辱，我们理应把自己的生死置之度外。
English: After Murong Long withdrew, he quickly finished deploying the troops, called together the staff colonels, and said to them: The emperor's prestige is not buoyant, the robbers and thieves have come to our doorstep to insult us. This is a common disgrace for us as courtiers. We should put our own life and death aside.

古文：今幸而破贼，吉还固善；若其不幸，亦使吾志节获展。
现代文：这次决战，如果侥幸地打败敌人，平平安安地回来固然最好，倘若有什么不幸，起码也让我们的志向节操获得一次舒展的机会。
English: This decisive battle, if we are lucky enough to defeat the enemy and return safely, is certainly the best, but if there is any misfortune, at least let our ambition and discipline get a chance to stretch.

古文：卿等有北见吾母者，为吾道此情也！ 乃被甲上马，诣门俟命。
现代文：你们这些人如有回到北方，看到我母亲的，请千万代替我向母亲禀告我的这种心情。 于是，他披戴盔甲，跨上战马，来到城门等候命令。
English: If any of you return to the north and see my mother, please, on my behalf, tell her of my feelings. So he put on his armor, mounted his horse, and went to the city gate to await orders.

古文：麟复固止宝，众大忿恨，隆涕泣而还。
现代文：慕容麟再一次坚决阻止了这次军事行动，众将士气忿之极，慕容隆也流着眼泪回去了。
English: Muronglin once again resolutely stopped this military operation. The generals were extremely angry, and Muronglong also went back in tears.

古文：是夜，麟以兵劫左卫将军北地王精，使帅禁兵弑宝。
现代文：这天夜晚，慕容麟派兵劫持了左卫将军、北地王慕容精，并且派他率领禁军去刺杀慕容宝。
English: That night, Muronglin sent soldiers to kidnap General Zuo Wei, the King of the North, Murong Jing, and sent him to lead the Imperial Army to assassinate Murong Bao.

古文：精以义拒之，麟怒，杀精，出奔西山，依丁零馀众。
现代文：慕容精用大义拒绝了慕容麟，慕容麟大怒，杀了慕容精，跑出城去逃奔西山，依靠丁零的残余部落。
English: Murong Jing refused Murong Lin with great righteousness, Murong Lin became furious, killed Murong Jing, ran out of the city and fled to the West Mountain, relying on Ding Zi's remnant tribe.

古文：于是城中人情震骇。
现代文：从此，中山城里的军民的情绪更加震惊动荡。
English: Since then, the mood of the military and civilians in Zhongshan City has been even more shocking and turbulent.

古文：宝不知麟所之，以清河王会军在近，恐麟夺会军，先据龙城，乃召隆及骠骑大将军农，谋去中山，走保龙城。
现代文：慕容宝不知道慕容麟到哪里去了，总是以为清河王慕容会的部队便在附近驻扎，因此害怕慕容麟夺走慕容会的部队，抢先跑去占据龙城，于是，他召集慕容隆及骠骑大将军慕容农，商议要放弃中山，去死保龙城。
English: Murong Bao did not know where Murong Lin had gone. He always thought that the troops of the Qing King Murong Association were stationed nearby. Therefore, he was afraid that Murong Lin would take away the troops of the Murong Association and run ahead to occupy Longcheng. Therefore, he summoned Murong Long and the cavalry general Murong Nong to discuss abandoning Zhongshan and dying to defend Longcheng.

古文：隆曰 先帝栉风沐雨以成中兴之业，崩未期年而天下大坏，岂得不谓之孤负邪！
现代文：慕容隆说： 先帝历经千辛万苦，才完成了中兴的大业，他死去不到一年便天下大乱，怎么能说我们没有辜负了先帝的嘱托厚望啊！
English: Muronglong said: The previous emperor went through a lot of hardships to complete the great cause of ZTE. Less than a year after his death, the world was in turmoil. How can we say that we did not live up to the high expectations of the previous emperor?

古文：今外寇方盛而内难复起，骨肉乘离，百姓疑惧，诚不可以拒敌；北迁旧都，亦事之宜。
现代文：现在，外面的强盗力量正当强盛，而我们内部又发生了危难，同胞骨肉反目成仇，百姓惊疑恐惧，这样，的确是根本不可能抗拒强敌的。向北迁回我们的旧都，也是事所当然。
English: Now, when the robber forces outside are justifiably strong, and a crisis has occurred within us, when our compatriots are at each other's throats, and the people are suspicious and fearful, it is really impossible to resist the strong enemy. It is also natural to move back to the north to our old capital.

古文：然龙川地狭民贫，若以中国之意取足其中，复朝夕望有大功，此必不可。
现代文：但是龙川那一带地方狭小，百姓贫困，如果我们打算在那里作为依凭，进图中原，仍然早晚都盼望着取得大的进展和成功，那是一定不行的。
English: However, the area around Longchuan is small and the people are poor. If we plan to rely on it as a base and enter the Central Plains, still hoping to make great progress and success sooner or later, it will definitely not work.

古文：若节用爱民，务农训兵，数年之中，公私充实，而赵、魏之间，厌苦寇暴，民思燕德，庶几返旆，克复故业。
现代文：如果我们节俭开支花费，爱惜民力，鼓励农耕，训练军队，那么几年之间，官府与民间的积蓄一定会充实起来，而赵、魏之间连年战乱，百姓一定苦不堪言，厌倦、怨恨之声四起，那时，他们思念我们燕国统治时的恩德，我们也或许有机会回转旗帜恢复自己往日的帝业。
English: If we are frugal in spending, cherish the people's strength, encourage farming, and train the army, then in a few years, the government and the people's savings will surely be enriched, and Zhao and Wei will be at war for years, and the people will be miserable, and the voices of weariness and resentment will be heard everywhere. At that time, they will miss the grace of our Yan rule, and we may also have the opportunity to turn back the flag and restore our former empire.

古文：如其未能，则凭险自固，犹足以优游养锐耳。 
现代文：即使不能这样，那么我们依据山川险要，巩固自己的势力，也还是足够我们在那里安闲度日养精蓄锐了。 
English: Even if we can't do that, it's still enough for us to spend our leisure time there to refresh ourselves and build up our strength according to the mountains and rivers.

古文：宝曰： 卿言尽理，腾一从卿意耳。 
现代文：慕容宝说： 你说的全都在理，我完全听从你的意见。 
English: Murongbao said, "Everything you said makes sense. I completely follow your advice.

古文：辽东高抚，善卜筮，素为隆所信厚，私谓隆曰： 殿下北行，终不能达，太妃亦不可得见。
现代文：辽东人高抚善于占卜算卦，一向得到慕容隆的信任与厚爱，他私下里告诉慕容隆说： 殿下此次向北撤退，绝对不可能到达目的地，也不可能看到您的母亲太纪。
English: Gao Fu, a man from eastern Liaodong, was good at divination and fortune-telling, and had always enjoyed Muronglong's trust and affection. He told Muronglong in private, "Your Highness, if you retreat north this time, it is absolutely impossible to reach your destination, and it is also impossible to see your mother Taiji.

古文：若使主上独往，殿下潜留于此，必有大功。 
现代文：假如让主上自己单独前往，殿下暗地里留在这里，一定会有大的功业可以建立。 
English: If the Lord Himself were to go alone, and His Royal Highness were to remain here secretly, there would certainly be a great work that could be established.

古文：隆曰： 国有大难，主上蒙尘，且老母在北，吾得北首而死，犹无所恨。卿是何言也！ 
现代文：慕容隆说： 国家有这样空前的大难，主上遭受奔波之苦与耻辱，而且我的老母亲又在北方，我能够在死的时候头向着北方，便没有什么遗憾了，你这是说的什么？ 
English: Murong Long said, "The country has such an unprecedented catastrophe, the Lord has suffered the suffering and disgrace of running, and my old mother is in the north, I can face the north when I die, there is no regret, what are you talking about?

古文：乃遍召僚佐，问其去留，唯司马鲁恭、参军成岌愿从，馀皆欲留，隆并听之。
现代文：于是，他将官吏僚属召集在一起，询问他们是去是留，只有司马鲁恭、参军成岌愿意跟从北迁，其余的都打算留下，慕容隆全听凭他们自己拿主意。
English: As a result, he gathered together his officials and subordinates and asked them whether they would go or stay. Only Sima Lukong and Cheng Du, who had joined the army, were willing to move to the north, while the rest intended to stay. Murong Longquan let them make up their own minds.

古文：农部将谷会归说农曰： 城中之人，皆涉珪、参合所杀者父兄子弟，泣血踊跃，欲与魏战，而为卫军所抑。
现代文：慕容农的部将谷会归劝说慕容农说： 中山城里的人，都是拓跋在参合陂所杀的士卒的父兄子弟，他们眼睛哭出血来，激愤奔走，打算同魏军决一死战，却被卫军慕容麟所压制。
English: Murong farmer's subordinate, the Gu Gu Association, persuaded Murong farmer to say: The people in Zhongshan City are all the fathers and brothers of the soldiers killed by Tuoba in the Battle of Shenghe. They cried with blood in their eyes, ran furiously, and intended to fight to the death with the Wei army, but were suppressed by the guards of Murong Lin.

古文：今闻主上当北迁，皆曰： 得慕容氏一人奉而立之，以与魏战，死无所恨。 
现代文：现在听说主上要北迁，都说： 能够找到慕容氏家族中的一个人而拥戴他当皇上，以此来与魏军苦战，即便死了，也没有什么遗憾。 
English: Now that they have heard that the Lord wants to move north, they all say: If we can find a member of the Murong family and make him emperor so that he can fight hard against the Wei army, even if he dies, there will be no regrets.

古文：大王幸而留此，以副众望，击退魏军，抚宁畿甸，奉迎大驾，亦不失为忠臣也。 
现代文：大王您最好是留在这里，以符合大家的冀望，等到击退魏军，使京畿地区得到安抚宁静，再奉迎皇上的大驾回来，这也不失为是一个忠臣呀。 
English: Your Majesty, it is best for you to stay here to meet everyone's expectations and wait until you have defeated the Wei army, pacified the Gyeonggi region, and then return with the emperor's welcome, which is also a loyal subject.

古文：农欲杀归而惜其材力，谓之曰： 必如此以望生，不如就死！ 
现代文：慕容农想杀了谷会归，但又爱惜他的才华，因此只对他说： 一定要那样来期望继续生存，还不如去死！ 
English: Murongong Nong wanted to kill Gu Hui, but he also cherished his talent, so he only said to him: "You must do that to expect to continue to live, or you might as well die!"

古文：壬子，夜，宝与太子策、辽西王农、高阳王隆、长乐王盛等万馀骑出赴会军，河间王熙、勃海王朗、博陵王鉴皆幼，不能出城，隆还入迎之，自为鞁乘，俱得免。
现代文：壬子夜晚，慕容宝与太子慕荣策、辽西王慕容农、高阳王慕容隆、长乐王慕容盛等率领一万多骑兵，出城去投奔慕容会的军营，河间王慕容熙、勃海王慕容朗、博陵王慕容鉴还都年幼，未能逃出城来，慕容隆又回到城里去迎护，亲自驾车，终于使他们全部逃脱。
English: On the night of Jinsi, Murong Bao, together with Prince Murong Zhao, Liaoxi King Murong Nong, Goyang King Murong Long, Changle King Murong Sheng, and others, led more than ten thousand cavalrymen out of the city to the military camp of the Murong Association. King Murong Xi of Hebei, King Murong Long of Bohai, and King Murong Jian of Boling were still young and could not escape from the city. Murong Long returned to the city to welcome them and drove himself, finally allowing them all to escape.

古文：燕将王沈等隆降魏。
现代文：后燕将领李沈等人投降北魏。
English: Later, Yan general Li Shen and others surrendered to the Northern Wei.

古文：乐浪王惠、中书侍郎韩范、员外郎段宏、太史令刘起等帅工伎三百奔鄴。
现代文：乐浪王慕容惠、中书侍郎韩范、员外郎段宏、太史令刘起等人率领工匠、艺伎等三百人逃奔邺城。
English: Three hundred people, including craftsmen and geisha, fled from Lucheng, led by the king of music, Murong Hui, the attendant of Chinese calligraphy, Han Fan, the attendant of foreign calligraphy, Duan Hong, and the superintendent of Chinese calligraphy, Liu Qi.

古文：中山城中无主，百姓惶惑，东门不闭。
现代文：中山城中没有了首领，老百姓惶惑惊恐，东门也没有关闭。
English: There was no leader in Zhongshan City, the people were confused and frightened, and the east gate was not closed.

古文：魏王珪欲夜入城，冠军将军王建志在虏掠，乃言恐士卒盗府库物，请俟明旦，珪乃止。
现代文：魏王拓跋打算连夜进城，冠军将军王建则一心想要抢劫，于是说恐怕手下的士卒偷盗府库中的财物，请求等到明天天亮再进城，拓跋才停止进城。
English: Wei King Tuoba planned to enter the city overnight, champion general Wang Jianzhe was bent on robbery, so he said that he was afraid that his soldiers would steal the property in the government treasury, and asked to wait until tomorrow morning to enter the city, and Tuoba would stop entering the city.

古文：燕开封公详从宝不及，城中立以为主，闭门拒守。
现代文：后燕开封公慕容详来不及跟随慕容宝北返，城中的军民便拥戴他做了统帅，关闭了城门抗拒北魏军。
English: After Yan opened the seal, Prince Murong did not have time to follow Murong Bao back to the north, and the soldiers and civilians in the city embraced him as the commander-in-chief and closed the city gate to resist the Northern Wei Army.

古文：珪尽众攻之，连日不拔，使人登巢车，临城谕之曰： 慕容宝已弃汝走，汝曹百姓空自取死，欲谁为乎？ 
现代文：拓跋出动他所有的军队发动进攻，接连几天也没有攻克。于是派人登上攻城用的巢车，接近城墙向城里喊话说： 慕容宝已经抛弃了你们自己逃走，你们这些老百姓白白地找死，打算为谁效忠呵？ 
English: Tuoba sent out all of his troops to launch an attack, but they were unable to conquer the city for several days. So he sent men to board the siege wagons and approach the city walls, shouting to the city: "Murongbao has abandoned you and fled. You people are seeking death in vain. Who do you plan to be loyal to?"

古文：皆曰： 群小无知，恐复如参合之众，故苟延旬月之命耳。 
现代文：城里的老百姓便都说： 我们这些无知的小民，只是害怕又像参合陂那些人一样，在这里权且拖延十天半月的活命罢了。 
English: The common people of the city all said: "We, the ignorant little people, are only afraid and, like the people of Gansu and Hebei, have power here and are delaying our lives for ten and a half days."

古文：珪顾王建唾其面，使中领将军长孙肥、左将军李栗将三千骑追宝至范阳，不及，破其新城戍而还。
现代文：拓跋气得直视王建，把唾味吐在他的脸上，并派遣中领将军长孙肥、左将军李栗二人带领着三千骑兵追杀慕容宝，到了范阳，没有赶上，攻克新城戍之后便返回。
English: Tuoba was so enraged that he looked directly at Wang Jian and spat in his face, and dispatched Lieutenant General Sun Hui and General Li Li, both of whom led three thousand cavalry to chase and kill Murong Bao. They reached Fanyang, but did not catch up, and returned after conquering Xincheng.

古文：甲寅，尊皇太后李氏为太皇太后。
现代文：甲寅，安帝尊奉他的祖母皇太后李氏为太皇太后。
English: In March of the year of Jia Yin, the Li clan revered the empress dowager as the great empress dowager.

古文：戊午，立皇后王氏。
现代文：戊午，册立王氏妃子为皇后。
English: In the afternoon, the Wang clan was crowned as empress.

古文：燕主宝出中山，与赵王麟遇于开城，麟不意宝至，惊骇，帅其众奔蒲阴，复出屯望都，土人颇供给之。
现代文：后燕国主慕容宝逃出都城中山，和赵王慕容麟在城相遇，慕容麟没有想到慕容宝来到这里，大惊失色，赶紧率领着他的部众向蒲阴逃去，然后又来到望都驻扎。当地的土人还为他提供粮草。
English: Later, the lord of Yan, Murong Bao, escaped from the capital, Zhongshan, and met Zhao Wang, Murong Lin, in the city. Murong Lin did not expect Murong Bao to come here, and was shocked. He hurriedly led his followers to Puyin to escape, and then came to the capital of Wangdu to stay. The local natives also provided him with grain and grass.

古文：慕容详遣兵掩击麟，获其妻子，麟脱走入山。
现代文：慕容详派兵袭击慕容麟，抓获了他的妻子儿女，慕容麟自己则逃脱，进入山中。
English: Murong Zhao sent troops to attack Murong Lin and captured his wife and children, while Murong Lin himself escaped into the mountains.

古文：甲寅，宝至蓟，殿中亲近散亡略尽，惟高阳王隆所领数百骑为宿卫。
现代文：甲寅，慕容宝来到蓟城，他的宫廷中的亲信近臣或走散或逃跑，几乎一个也不剩了，只有高阳王慕容隆所统领的几百名骑兵担任警卫。
English: When King Mu Rong Bao came to Lucheng, almost all of his trusted courtiers in the court scattered or ran away. Only a few hundred cavalrymen led by Goyang King Mu Ronglong served as guards.

古文：清河王会帅骑卒二万迎于蓟南，宝怪会容止怏怏有恨色，密告隆及辽西王农。
现代文：清河王慕容会率领骑兵二万人到蓟南去迎接。慕容宝对慕容会表情举止充满怨恨的样子感到奇怪，偷偷地告诉了慕容隆与辽西王慕容农。
English: Murong Bao was surprised by the resentful expression and behavior of the Murong Association, and secretly told Murong Long and the West Liao King Murong Nong.

古文：农、隆俱曰： 会年少，专任方面，习骄所致，岂有它也！
现代文：慕容农、慕容隆都说： 慕容会年纪小，但很早就能独当一面，养成了骄纵的习惯，怎么会有别的想法呢！
English: Both Murong Nong and Murong Long said: Murong is young, but he has been able to be on his own for a long time, and he has developed a habit of indulgence. How could he think otherwise!

古文：臣等当以礼责之。 
现代文：我们有机会一定依据礼仪制度的道理来责备他。 
English: We have an opportunity to rebuke him, certainly on the basis of etiquette.

古文：宝虽从之，然犹诏解会兵以属隆，隆固辞；乃减会兵分给农、隆。
现代文：慕容宝虽然听了他们的话，但还是下诏解除了慕容会的兵权，转交给慕容隆。慕容隆坚决推辞，于是慕容宝只好减少慕容会的一部分兵力，分别交给慕容农、慕容隆。
English: Although Murong Bao listened to their words, he still dismissed the military power of the Murong Association and transferred it to Murong Rong. Murong Rong firmly refused, so Murong Bao had to reduce part of the military power of the Murong Association and give it to Murong Nong and Murong Rong respectively.

古文：又遣西可公库傉官骥帅兵三千助守中山。
现代文：他又派遣西河公库官骥统领三千兵卒去帮助守卫中山。
English: He also sent three thousand soldiers under the command of the official of the West River Public Treasury to help guard Zhongshan.

古文：丙辰，宝尽徙蓟中府库北趣龙城。
现代文：丙辰，慕容宝把蓟城中府库里的所有财宝全部向北搬到龙城去。
English: Hunchin and Murong Bao moved all the treasures in the central government treasury of Lucheng to the north to Longcheng.

古文：魏石河头引兵追之，戊午，及宝于夏谦泽。
现代文：北魏将领石河头带领部队追击他们，戊午，在夏谦泽追上了慕容宝。
English: The Northern Wei general Shi Hetou led the troops to chase them, and in the afternoon, he caught up with Murong Bao in Xia Qianze.

古文：宝不欲战，清河王会曰： 臣抚教士卒，惟敌是求。
现代文：慕容宝并不打算恋战，清河王慕容会说： 我管教、训练我的部队，只是要寻找敌人求战。
English: Murong Bao did not intend to fall in love with war. Murong, the king of Qinghe, would say: I discipline and train my troops, but I just want to find an enemy to fight.

古文：今大驾蒙尘，人思效命，而虏敢自送，众心忿愤。《兵法》曰： 归师勿遏。 
现代文：现在您的大驾受到凌辱，我们人人都想着牺牲性命为您尽忠，强盗贼子胆敢前来送死，大家心中十分愤怒。《兵法》说： 急于回去的部队，千万不能阻止。 
English: Now that your great leader has been humiliated, we all want to sacrifice our lives to be loyal to you, robbers and thieves dare to come and send them to death, everyone is very angry. "Law of War" says: Troops who are in a hurry to go back must not be stopped.

古文：又曰 置之死地而后生。 
现代文：又说： 使人处于将要死的地位时，才能逼迫他求生存。 
English: He also said: Only when you put a person in a position where he is about to die can you force him to survive.

古文：今我皆得之，何患不克！
现代文：这两点，我们今天都符合，哪怕不能取得胜利！
English: We met both of these criteria today, even if we didn't manage to win!

古文：若其舍去，贼必乘人，或生馀变。 
现代文：如果我们只是一味地躲避逃跑，贼寇一定会得寸进尺，乘虚而入，恐怕还可能又产生别的变化。 
English: If we just avoid running away, the thief will certainly get an inch, take advantage of the situation, and I'm afraid there may be other changes.

古文：宝乃从之。
现代文：慕容宝才听从了他的建议。
English: It was only then that Murongbao heeded his advice.

古文：会整陈与魏兵战，农、隆等将南来骑冲之，魏兵大败，追奔百馀里，斩首数千级。
现代文：慕容会于是调整阵势与北魏军队接战，慕容农、慕容隆等人也带领南来的骑兵冲杀敌军，把北魏军队打得大败，并且追杀奔走了一百多里，杀了敌兵几千名。
English: Murong would then adjust his position to fight with the Northern Wei army. Murong Nong, Murong Long and others also led the cavalry from the south to kill the enemy army, defeated the Northern Wei army, and chased and ran for more than a hundred miles, killing several thousand enemy soldiers.

古文：隆又独追数十里而还，谓故吏留台治书阳璆曰： 中山城中积兵数万，不得展吾意，今日之捷，令人遗恨。 
现代文：慕容隆又独自再追出去几十里之后才回来，告诉他的旧部下、留台治书阳说： 中山城中集结部队几万，却没有机会使我一展心胸，今天的这次胜利，也仍然让我怀有遗恨！ 
English: Murong Long chased them out again alone for tens of miles before returning and telling his old subordinates, leaving the table to rule the country, saying, "I gathered tens of thousands of troops in Zhongshan City, but I didn't have a chance to show my heart. Today's victory still makes me hold a grudge!"

古文：因慷慨流涕。
现代文：因此大为激动，泪洒衣襟。
English: Therefore, he was very excited and burst into tears.

古文：会既败魏兵，矜很滋甚；隆屡训责之，会益忿恚。
现代文：慕容会击败了魏军后，狂傲凶狠越来越厉害。慕容隆曾北几次教训斥责他，慕容会更加怨恨。
English: After Murong Rong defeated the Wei army, his arrogance became more and more fierce. Murong Rong rebuked him several times, and Murong Rong became even more resentful.

古文：会以农、隆皆尝镇龙城，属尊位重，名望素出己右，恐至龙城，权政不复在己，已知终无为嗣之望，乃谋作乱。
现代文：慕容会想到慕容农、慕容隆都曾经在龙城镇守过，辈分既高，权位又重，名声威望一向又超过自己，因此恐怕到了龙城，权力政事不会再让自己掌握，再加上他又知道自己到头来也不会再有当太子的希望，于是，他便阴谋发动政变。
English: Murong would think that both Murong Nong and Murong Long had once served in Longcheng. Their seniority was high, their positions of power were important, and their fame and prestige had always exceeded his own. Therefore, I am afraid that when he arrived in Longcheng, he would no longer be able to control the power and government affairs. In addition, he knew that he would eventually no longer have the hope of becoming a prince, so he plotted to launch a coup.

古文：幽、平之兵皆怀会恩，不乐属二王，请于宝曰： 清河王勇略高世，臣等与之誓同生死，愿陛下与皇太子、诸王留蓟宫，臣等从王南解京师之围，还迎大驾。 
现代文：幽州及并州的部队都怀念着慕容会的恩德，不愿意隶属于慕容农、慕容隆两位亲王，向慕容宝请求说： 清河王的勇武谋略都高过当世，我们与他发誓要同生共死，愿陛下您与皇太子、各位亲王暂时留在蓟城宫中，我们这些人跟随清河王去向南解救被围困的京师，回来迎接大驾还朝。 
English: The troops in Yuzhou and the annexed prefectures were all nostalgic for the Murong Association's benevolence, unwilling to be subordinated to the two princes Murong Nong and Murong Long, and requested Murong Bao, saying, "King Qinghe's courageous military strategies are higher than the present world, and we swear to live and die together with him. May Your Majesty, you, the crown prince, and all the princes temporarily stay in the Lushan Palace. We, these people, will follow King Qinghe to the south to rescue the besieged Beijing division, and come back to welcome the return of the emperor.

古文：宝左右皆恶会，言于宝曰： 清河王不得为太子，神色甚不平。
现代文：慕容宝左右的近臣与侍卫都讨厌慕容会，对慕容宝说： 清河王因为当不上太子，神态与脸色都表现出非常的不满。
English: The courtiers and attendants around Murong Bao all hated the Murong Association. They said to Murong Bao, "Because King Qinghe could not become the crown prince, his demeanor and countenance showed great dissatisfaction.

古文：且其才武过人，善收人心；陛下若从众请，臣恐解围之后，必有卫辄之事。 
现代文：而且他的才能与武力又超过常人，很善于收买人心，陛下如果答应了这些人的请求，我们恐怕解除了中山的围困以后，就一定会有春秋时卫辄那样自己继承王位，却拒绝父亲回国的事发生。 
English: Moreover, his talent and strength exceeded that of an ordinary person, and he was very good at winning people's hearts. If His Majesty agreed to these people's request, I'm afraid that after the siege of Zhongshan was lifted, there would definitely be a situation like that of the Spring and Autumn Period, when Emperor Wei Jie succeeded to the throne, but refused to allow his father to return to the country.

古文：宝乃谓众曰： 道通年少，才不及二王，岂可当专征之任！
现代文：慕容宝对这些人说： 慕容会年纪还小，他的才干也赶不上慕容农、慕容隆二王，怎么可以承担自己单独带兵征战的大任！
English: Murong Bao said to these people: Murong Hui is still young, his talent can't keep up with Murong Nong and Murong Long II, how can he take on the big task of leading soldiers to war alone!

古文：且朕方自统六师，杖会以为羽翼，何可离左右也！ 
现代文：况且朕正要亲自统率六军，依靠慕容会作为我的助手，他怎么可以离开我的身边呢？ 
English: Moreover, I was about to personally lead the Six Armies, relying on Murong Hui as my assistant. How could he leave my side?

古文：众不悦而退。
现代文：那些人都很不高兴地退出去了。
English: Those people all quit in disgust.

古文：左右劝宝杀会，侍御史仇尼归闻之，告会曰： 大王所恃者父，父已异图；所杖者兵，兵已去手；欲于何所自容乎？
现代文：左右侍卫近臣都劝说慕容宝杀掉慕容会，侍御史仇尼归听说后，向慕容会报信说： 大王您所依仗的是自己的父亲，但您的父亲现在已另有打算；您所依仗的是军队，但是军队也已经不在您手里。
English: The guards and courtiers on both sides persuaded Murong Bao to kill the Murong faction. After hearing this, the attendant Shi Qian Ni reported to the Murong faction, saying: Great King, you relied on your father, but your father now has other plans; you relied on the army, but the army is no longer in your hands.

古文：不如诛二王，废太子，大王自处东宫，兼将相之任，以匡复社稷，此上策也。 
现代文：您还打算到什么地方、依仗什么容身呢？我看您不如诛杀慕容农、慕容隆两位亲王，废黜太子，您自己处于东宫的位置兼任宰相、大将军之职，以此来匡正恢复社稷，这才是上策。 
English: Where else do you plan to go, and what will you rely on? I think it would be better for you to fight and kill the two princes Murong Nong and Murong Long, depose the crown prince, and take your own position in the East Palace, concurrently serving as prime minister and general, in order to restore the social order. This is the best strategy.

古文：会犹豫，未许。
现代文：慕容会犹豫不决，没有应许。
English: Murong hesitates, not promising.

古文：宝谓农、隆曰： 观道通志趣，必反无疑，宜早除之。 
现代文：慕容宝对慕容农、慕容隆说： 我看慕容会的心思与志向，今后一定谋反无疑，应该早早除掉他。 
English: Murong Bao said to Murong Nong and Murong Long: I think that the thoughts and aspirations of the Murong Association will definitely rebel in the future, and he should be eliminated early.

古文：农、隆曰： 今寇敌内侮，中土纷纭，社稷之危，有如累卵。
现代文：慕容农、慕容隆说： 现在敌寇入侵欺侮我们，国中腹地一片大乱，政权危如累卵。
English: Murong Nong and Murong Long said: Now the enemy invades and bullies us, the heartland of the country is in chaos, and the regime is in danger.

古文：会镇抚旧都，远赴国难，其威名之重，足以震动四邻。
现代文：慕容会本来在旧都镇守，这次千里迢迢赶来解救国家的危难，他的声威名望的分量，足以使四邻震动。
English: Murong Hui was originally stationed in the old capital. This time, he traveled thousands of miles to save the country from danger. The weight of his prestige and fame is enough to shake the four neighbors.

古文：逆状未彰而遽杀之，岂徒伤父子恩，亦恐大损威望。 
现代文：他的叛逆的形迹还没有暴露便突然杀掉他，岂只是白白地伤损父子之间的恩德，恐怕也要使您的威望遭受重大损失。 
English: If you suddenly kill him before the trait of his rebellion is revealed, you will only damage the amity between father and son in vain, and I am afraid it will also cause your prestige to suffer a major loss.

古文：宝曰： 会逆志已成，卿等慈恕，不忍早杀，恐一旦为变，必先害诸父，然后及吾，至时勿悔自负也！ 
现代文：慕容宝说： 慕容会反叛的主意已经打定，你们这样仁慈宽恕，不忍心早点杀掉他，恐怕有一天他突然发动政变，一定会首先伤害你们几个做叔父的，然后再伤害我，那时候可不要因自负而后悔呀！ 
English: Murong Bao said, "The idea of Murong's rebellion has already been decided. You are so kind and forgiving that you can't bear to kill him early. I'm afraid that one day he will suddenly launch a coup, and he will first hurt a few of you uncles, and then hurt me. At that time, don't regret it because of your arrogance!"

古文：会闻之，益惧。
现代文：慕容会听说后，越加害怕。
English: After hearing about the Murong Association, he became more and more afraid.

古文：夏，四月，癸酉，宝宿广都黄榆谷。
现代文：夏季，四月，癸酉，慕容宝在广都黄榆谷扎营露宿。
English: In the summer, April, May, Murongbao camped and camped in the Huangpi Valley.

古文：会遣其党仇尼归、吴提染干帅壮士二十馀人分道袭农、隆，杀隆于账下；农被重创，执仇尼归，逃入山中。
现代文：慕容会派遣他的死党部下仇尼归、吴提染干率领壮士二十多人，分两路去偷袭慕容农、慕容隆。在寝帐之中将慕容隆杀死，慕容农则身受重伤，抓住了仇尼归，逃进了深山。
English: Murong would send his die-hard henchmen Qiu Nigui and Wu Tizeng Gan, leading more than twenty strong men, to attack Murong Nong and Murong Long separately. Murong Nong was killed in his bed, while Murong Nong was seriously injured. He caught Qiu Nigui and fled into the mountains.

古文：会以仇尼归被执，事终显发，乃夜诣宝曰： 农、隆谋逆，臣已除之。 
现代文：慕容会因为仇尼归被对方抓住，事情终于败露，于是只好连夜去拜见慕容宝说： 慕容农、慕容隆阴谋叛逆，我们已将他们除掉。 
English: Murong would be caught by the other side because of the feud, and the matter was finally revealed, so he had to visit Murong Bao overnight and said: Murong Nong and Murong Long conspired to rebel, we have eliminated them.

古文：宝欲讨会，阳为好言以安之曰： 吾固疑二王久矣，除之甚善。 
现代文：慕容宝准备讨伐慕容会，表面上只得用好话来稳住他，说： 我本来怀疑他们很长时间了，除掉他们很好。 
English: On the surface, Murong Bao only had to use kind words to steady himself as he prepared to fight the Murong Society, saying, "I've been suspicious of them for a long time, and it's good to get rid of them.

古文：甲戌，旦，会立仗严备，乃引道。
现代文：甲戌，清晨，慕容会下令严密戒备，在前面引路，继续前进。
English: Early in the morning, Murong ordered his men to be on high alert and to lead the way forward.

古文：会欲弃隆丧，馀崇涕泣固请，乃听载随军，农出，自归，宝呵之曰： 何以自负邪！ 
现代文：慕容会打算遗弃慕容隆的灵柩，将军馀崇流着眼泪坚决请求携带，就听凭他随着军队运载。慕容农从深山中出来，自己回到大营，慕容宝呵斥他说： 为什么自负前言！ 
English: The Murong Association planned to abandon the casket of Murong Long. General Yu Chong, with tears streaming down his face, firmly requested that it be carried, and he let him carry it along with the army. Murong farmers came out of the deep mountains and returned to the camp on their own. Murong Bao shouted at him: "Why are you so conceited?

古文：命执之。
现代文：命令手下人把他逮捕收押起来。
English: Gong Zhuang ordered the arrest of Yishaigu.

古文：行十馀里，宝顾召群臣食，且议农罪。
现代文：走了十几里路，慕容宝回头召集文武大臣一起吃饭，并商议如何给慕容农定罪。
English: After walking more than a dozen miles, Murong Bao returned to summon the Minister of Culture and Martial Arts to eat together and discuss how to convict Murong Nong.

古文：会就坐，宝目卫军将军慕舆腾使斩会，伤其首，不能杀。
现代文：慕容会也入席就座，慕容宝使眼色让卫军将军慕舆腾刺杀慕容会，却只将他的头部击伤，没有杀死。
English: The Murong Association also took their seats, and Murong Bao winked at the Guards General Mu Myuteng to assassinate the Murong Association, but only wounded him in the head, but did not kill him.

古文：会走赴其军，勒兵攻宝。
现代文：慕容会带伤逃奔自己的军队，马上集合部队向慕容宝发起猛攻。
English: Murong will run away from his own army with injuries, and immediately gather troops to launch an onslaught against Murongbao.

古文：宝帅数百骑驰二百里，晡时，至龙城。
现代文：慕容宝带着几百名骑兵跑出去二百里，下午晡时，到了龙城。
English: Murong Bao took several hundred horsemen and ran 200 miles to Longcheng at 3:00 in the afternoon.

古文：会遣骑追至石城，不及。
现代文：慕容会派遣骑兵追赶到石城，没有追上。
English: Murong sent his cavalry to chase them to Shicheng, but they did not catch up.

古文：乙亥，会遣仇尼归攻龙城；宝夜遣兵袭击，破之。
现代文：乙亥，慕容会派遣仇尼归前去攻打龙城，慕容宝却在夜里派遣一支部队袭击他，并将他打败。
English: In the year of the Fire Rooster, Murong would send Qian Ni to attack Longcheng, but Murong Bao sent an army to attack him at night and defeated him.

古文：会遣使请诛左右佞臣，并求为太子；宝不许。
现代文：慕容会派遣使者去面见慕容宝，请求诛杀左右的奸佞之臣，并且请求册立自己做太子，慕容宝不答应。
English: Murong would send an envoy to meet with Murong Bao, asking him to fight and kill the vassals of the traitors on both sides, and asking him to make himself crown prince. Murong Bao did not agree.

古文：会尽收乘舆器服，以后宫分给将帅，署置百官，自称皇太子、录尚书事，引兵向龙城，以讨慕舆腾为名；丙子，顿兵城下。
现代文：慕容会便把皇帝用的车马服装器具等全部收为己有，把后宫的姬妾宫女等分赏给各位将帅，并且设置了文武百官，自称为皇太子、录尚书事，带着部队直向龙城进发，名义上却说要讨伐慕舆腾。丙子，在城下驻扎下来。
English: The Murong Association then took possession of all the chariots, horses, clothing and other equipment used by the emperor, distributed the concubines and princesses of the harem to the generals, and set up a hundred military and civilian officials. They called themselves crown princes, recorded documents, and marched straight to Longcheng with their troops. However, they nominally said that they wanted to fight against the Murong Emperor. They were stationed under the city.

古文：宝临西门，会乘马遥与宝语，宝责让之。
现代文：慕容宝来到西门，慕容会乘着马从远处与慕容宝对话。慕容宝斥责他。
English: When Murong Bao came to Ximen, Murong would ride his horse to talk to Murong Bao from a distance. Murong Bao scolded him.

古文：会命军士向宝大噪以耀威，城中将士皆愤怒，向暮出战，大破之，会兵死伤太半，走还营。
现代文：慕容会命令士兵面对慕容宝大声鼓噪、起哄，以炫耀自己的威势。城里的将士都义愤填膺，傍晚的时候出城与慕容会接战，将他们打得大败。慕容会的兵卒死伤了一大半，他自己也逃回了大营。
English: The Murong ordered the soldiers to make loud noises and make noise in front of the Murong treasure to show off their power. The soldiers in the city were filled with indignation, and in the evening they went out of the city to fight the Murong and defeated them. Most of the soldiers of the Murong were killed and injured, and he himself fled back to the camp.

古文：侍御郎高云夜帅敢死士百馀人袭会军，会众皆溃。
现代文：侍御郎高云当夜率领一百多名敢死壮士偷袭慕容会的营寨，慕容会的部众完全崩溃。
English: On the night of the attack, Takayama, the Samurai Warlord, led more than a hundred brave warriors to raid the camp of the Murong Sect. The followers of the Murong Sect completely collapsed.

古文：会将十馀骑奔中山，开封公详杀之。
现代文：慕容会本人只带领着十几名骑兵逃奔中山，被开封公慕容详杀了。
English: Murong Hui himself only led a dozen horsemen to flee to Zhongshan, and was killed by Kaifeng Gong Murong.

古文：宝杀会母及其三子。
现代文：慕容宝杀掉了慕容会的母亲和他的三个儿子。
English: Murongbao killed the mother of Muronghui and his three sons.

古文：丁丑，宝大赦，凡与会同谋者，皆除罪，复旧职。
现代文：丁丑，慕容宝实行大赦，凡是慕容会同谋的人，全都免除罪名，恢复旧有的官职。
English: Dingwu and Murongbao implemented an amnesty, and all those who were accomplices of the Murong Association were exonerated and restored to their former official positions.

古文：论功行赏，拜将军、封侯者数百人。
现代文：论功行赏，晋升为将军、加封侯爵的有几百人。
English: There are hundreds of people who have been promoted to the rank of general and given the title of marquis.

古文：辽西王农骨破见脑，宝手自裹创，仅而获济。
现代文：辽西王慕容农头骨被击碎，甚至竟能看见脑髓，慕容宝亲手为他包扎伤口，居然救活了他的性命。
English: The skull of Murong Nong, King of West Liao, was smashed so badly that he could even see the brain marrow. Murong Bao bandaged his wound with his own hands, which actually saved his life.

古文：以农为左仆射，寻拜司空、领尚书令。
现代文：慕容宝任命慕容农为左仆射，不久又升为司空、领尚书令。
English: Murong Bao appointed Murong Nong as his left-hand man, and soon he was promoted to the position of Secretary of the Air Force and the leader of the General Staff.

古文：馀崇出自归，宝嘉其忠，拜中坚将军，使典宿卫。
现代文：慕容隆的部将馀崇从躲藏的地方回来，慕容宝赞赏他的忠诚，提升他为中坚将军，派他统领宫廷侍卫。
English: When Murong Long's subordinate, Yu Chong, returned from hiding, Murong Bao appreciated his loyalty, promoted him to general and sent him to command the palace guards.

古文：赠高阳王隆司徒，谥曰康。
现代文：追赠高阳王慕容隆为司徒，谥号康王。
English: King Muronglong of Goyang was posthumously given the title of sutra, and his posthumous name was King Kang.

古文：宝以高云为建威将军，封夕阳公，养以为子。
现代文：慕容宝任命高云为建威将军，封为夕阳公，并收养他做为自己的养子。
English: Murong Bao appointed Gao Yun as General Jian Wei, named him the Lord of the Sunset, and adopted him as his adopted son.

古文：云，高句丽之支属也，燕王皝破高句丽，徙于青山，由是世为燕臣。
现代文：高云是高句丽王室分支的后代，当年前燕王慕容击败高句丽王国的时候，曾把他的前辈迁移到青山一带，从此，他们便世世代代成了前燕国的臣民。
English: Gao Yun is a descendant of a branch of the Goguryeo royal family. When the former Yan King Murong defeated the Goguryeo Kingdom, he moved his predecessors to the Aoyama area. From then on, they became subjects of the former Yan Kingdom for generations.

古文：云沉厚寡言，时人莫知，惟中卫将军长乐冯跋奇其志度，与之为友。
现代文：高云平时沉稳敦厚，不善言谈，当时的人都不熟悉他，只有中卫将军长乐人冯跋觉得他的志向与气度极不一般，和他结为好友。
English: Gao Yun is usually calm and dignified, and is not good at talking. At that time, people were not familiar with him. Only the middle guard general and Changle musician Feng Ba felt that his ambition and temperament were extremely unusual, and became friends with him.

古文：跋父和，事西燕王永，为将军，永败，徙和龙。
现代文：冯跋的父亲冯和，为西燕国主慕容永效力并做了西燕的将军。慕容永失败以后，他被安置在和龙居住。
English: Feng Bao's father, Feng He, worked for Murong Yong, the lord of Xiyan, and became the general of Xiyan. After Murong Yong's defeat, he was placed in He Long.

古文：仆射王国宝、建威将军王绪依附会稽王道子，纳贿穷奢，不知纪极。
现代文：东晋仆射王国宝、建威将军王绪等人依附于会稽王司马道子，收受贿赂，穷奢极欲，无法无天已达到了极点。
English: The Eastern Jin Dynasty's vassals, such as Jianwei's general Wang Xiu and others, clung to the party chief Wang Sima Daozi, accepted bribes, indulged in extravagance, and lawlessness had reached its peak.

古文：恶王恭、殷仲堪，劝道子裁损其兵权；中外恟恟不安。
现代文：他们厌恶王恭、殷仲堪，劝司马道子裁减他们二人的兵权。朝廷内外流言四起，人心动荡不安。
English: They detested Wang Qiong and Yin Zhongkang, and persuaded Sima Daozi to reduce the military power of the two of them. Rumors spread inside and outside the imperial court, and people's hearts were in turmoil.

古文：恭等各缮甲勒兵，表请北伐；道子疑之，诏以盛夏妨农，悉使解严。
现代文：王恭等人各自都在整理兵甲，训练部队，上奏章请求北上讨伐。司马道子对他们怀有疑心，下诏以盛夏出兵防碍农业生产为由，命令他们解严。
English: Wang Qiong and the others were sorting out their armor, training their troops, and writing a petition to go to the north for a crusade. Sima Daozi was suspicious of them, and issued an edict ordering them to relax the restrictions on the grounds that sending troops in the middle of summer would hinder agricultural production.

古文：恭遣使与仲堪谋讨国宝等。
现代文：王恭派人去见殷仲堪，商议声讨王国宝等人的事情。
English: Wang Qiang sent someone to see Yin Zhongkan to discuss the matter of Wang Guobao and others.

古文：桓玄以仁不得志，欲假仲堪兵势以作乱，乃说仲堪曰： 国宝与君诸人素已为对，唯患相毙之不速耳。
现代文：桓玄也因为未能当上大官，郁郁不得志，打算趁此机会借助殷仲堪的兵马势力制造混乱，就对殷仲堪说： 王国宝与你们几个人向来都是死对头，只怕消灭你们的时间来得不快。
English: Huan Xuan was also depressed because he was not able to become a high-ranking official, and he intended to take advantage of this opportunity to create chaos with the help of Yin Zhongkan's soldiers and horses. He said to Yin Zhongkan: Kingdom treasure and several of you have always been mortal enemies. I'm afraid the time to destroy you will be unpleasant.

古文：今既执大权，与王绪相表里，其所回易，无不如志；孝伯居元舅之地，必未敢害之。
现代文：现在他既然已经执掌了大权，并且与王绪内外呼应，他们所想要改变的事，没有一件达不到目的。
English: Now that he has taken the reins of power, and echoed inside and outside Wang Xu, nothing they want to change will not achieve the goal.

古文：君为先帝所拔，超居方任，人情皆以君为虽有思致，非方伯才。
现代文：王恭处在国舅的位置上，王国宝不一定敢加害他，但你是先帝提拔起来的，超越常规地独领一方。人们都认为你虽然头脑清楚，有才干，却不是封疆大吏的人才。
English: Wang Qiong is in the position of the uncle of the state, and the treasure of the kingdom may not dare to harm him, but you were promoted by the former emperor, surpassing the conventional and leading the party. People all think that although you are clear-headed and talented, you are not the talent of the great official of the fief.

古文：彼若发诏征君为中书令，用殷觊为荆州，君何以处之？ 
现代文：他们如果征召你回朝做中书令，任命殷觊为荆州刺史，你将如何应付？ 
English: If they conscripted you back to the North to write the edict of the Central Government and appointed Yin Qi as the chief historian of Jing Province, how would you deal with it?

古文：仲堪曰： 忧之久矣，计将安出？ 
现代文：殷仲堪说： 我也忧虑很长时间了，你认为怎么办才好呢？ 
English: Yin Zhongkan said: I have been worried for a long time, what do you think I should do?

古文：玄曰： 孝伯疾恶深至，君宜潜与之约，兴晋阳之甲以除君侧之恶，东西齐举，玄虽不肖，愿帅荆、楚豪杰，荷戈先驱，此桓、文之勋也。 
现代文：桓玄说： 王恭为人正直，嫉恶如仇，你应该暗地里和他联合起来，约定时间，仿效战国赵鞅发动晋阳之兵马，以清除君侧之恶人的办法，东西两面一齐起兵，桓玄我虽然不成材，也愿意率领荆州、楚州两地的英雄豪杰，手拿武器充任前锋。这是齐桓公、晋文公似的功勋呵！ 
English: Huan Xuan said: Wang Qiong is an honest man, and jealousy is like a vendetta. You should secretly unite with him and set a time to follow the example of Zhao Xuan of the Warring States to launch the soldiers and horses of Jinyang to clear the way for the evildoers on the emperor's side. Both sides should raise an army. Although I am not talented, Huan Xuan is also willing to lead the heroes of Jingzhou and Chuzhou, and take up arms to serve as a striker. This is a merit similar to that of King Qi Huan and King Jinwen!

古文：仲堪心然之，乃外结雍州荆史郗恢，内与从兄南蛮校尉觊、南郡相陈留江绩谋之。觊曰： 人臣各守职分，朝廷是非，岂籓屏之所制也！晋阳之事，不敢预闻。 
现代文：殷仲堪心中以为他说得很对，于是向外联络雍州刺史郗恢，内部又与自己的堂兄南蛮校尉殷觊、南郡相陈留人江绩等人一起谋划，殷觊说： 作为国家的大臣，应当各自坚守自己的职责，朝廷里的是非对错，怎么能是做地方官员的人可以干预的！所说仿效晋阳出兵一事，我不敢听闻参预。 
English: In his heart, Yin Zhongkang thought he was right, so he contacted Yangzhou Zishi Xingwei. Internally, he plotted with his cousin, Nanban Captain Yin Qian, Nan County's Minister Chen Ruzhen Jiang Qi and others. Yin Qian said: As ministers of the state, they should each stick to their duties. What is right and wrong in the imperial court, how can people who are local officials intervene! I don't dare to listen to what has been said about emulating Jin Yang's dispatch of troops.

古文：仲堪固邀之，觊怒曰： 吾进不敢同，退不敢异。 
现代文：殷仲堪坚决邀请他出来一块干，殷觊大怒说： 我前进一步不会同意，退后一步不会反对。 
English: Yin Zhongkan resolutely invited him to come out together, and Yin Rong said angrily: I will not agree to move forward, and I will not oppose to step back.

古文：绩亦极言其不可。
现代文：江绩也竭力地分析认为不可。
English: Jiang Rong also tried his best to analyze and think that it was impossible.

古文：觊恐绩及祸，于坐和解之。
现代文：殷觊恐怕江绩说得太激烈，招来祸患，便坐在那里从中调解。
English: Yin Yao was afraid that Jiang Chen's words were too fierce and would bring misfortune, so he sat there to mediate.

古文：绩曰： 大丈夫何至以死相胁邪？
现代文：江绩说： 大丈夫怎么能用死来威胁呢？
English: Mr. Jiang said, "How can an okay husband threaten me with death?

古文：江仲元行年六十，但未获死所耳！ 
现代文：我江仲元活了六十岁，只是没有找到值得我去死的地方罢了！ 
English: I, Jiang Zhongyuan, have lived for sixty years, but I haven't found a place worth dying for!

古文：仲堪惮其坚正，以杨佺期代之。
现代文：殷仲堪对江绩的坚定正直很害怕，因此任命杨期代替江绩为南郡相。
English: Yin Zhongkang was afraid of Jiang Chen's steadfast honesty, so he appointed Yang Jie to replace Jiang Chen as the minister of the south county.

古文：朝廷闻之，征绩为御史中丞。
现代文：朝廷得知了这个消息后，征召江绩回朝廷担任御史中丞。
English: After the Imperial Court learned of this news, it summoned Jiang Jian to return to the Imperial Court to serve as the Imperial Historian.

古文：觊遂称疾发，辞位。
现代文：殷觊借口自己食用寒食散之后药性发作，辞去了职位。
English: On the pretext that he had a drug-induced seizure after eating cold food, Yin Xi resigned from his post.

古文：仲堪往省之，谓觊曰： 兄病殊为可忧。 
现代文：殷仲堪去看望他，对殷觊说： 堂兄的病实在值得忧虑。 
English: Yin Zhongkan went to visit him and said to Yin Qi: My cousin's illness is really worrisome.

古文：觊曰： 我病不过身死，汝病乃当灭门。
现代文：殷觊说： 我的病至多不过是我个人身死，你的病发作却会招致灭门大祸呀。
English: Yin Qi said, "At most, my illness is nothing more than my personal death, but the onset of your illness will bring about a great disaster.

古文：宜深自爱，勿以我为念！ 
现代文：你应当深深地爱惜保护自己，不要挂念我。 
English: You should deeply cherish and protect yourself, and not worry about me.

古文：郗恢亦不肯从。
现代文：雍州刺史郗恢也不愿意一起干。
English: Yangzhou Zhishihong also did not want to work together.

古文：仲堪疑未决，会王恭使至，仲堪许之，恭大喜。
现代文：殷仲堪犹疑不决。正巧王恭派来的信使来到，殷仲堪应诺了王恭的约定，王恭非常高兴。
English: It just so happened that the messenger sent by Wang Qiong arrived, and Yin Zhongkan agreed to Wang Qiong's appointment. Wang Qiong was very happy.

古文：甲戌，恭上表罪状国宝，举兵讨之。
现代文：甲戌，王恭便上奏章陈述了王国宝的罪状，同时发动部队前去讨伐。
English: Armored with armor, Wang Qiong then wrote a report stating the crimes of the kingdom treasure, and at the same time launched troops to go and fight.

古文：初，孝武帝委任王珣，及帝暴崩，不及受顾命，珣一旦失势，循默而已。
现代文：当初，晋孝武帝重任左仆射王，后来，孝武帝突然驾崩，他没来得及接受先帝的委托做顾命大臣。王失去权势，只好一言不发。
English: At first, Emperor Jin Xiaowu entrusted his left-hand man, King Sha, with important duties. Later, Emperor Xiaowu died suddenly, and he did not have time to accept the former emperor's commission to be the minister in charge of the emperor's life. The king lost power and had no choice but to say nothing.

古文：丁丑，王恭表至，外戒严严，道子问珣曰： 二籓作逆，卿知之乎？ 
现代文：丁丑，王恭的奏章送到朝中，朝廷内外十分紧张，戒备森严。司马道子问王道： 王、殷两股地方势力发动叛乱，你知道这件事吗？ 
English: Ding Huxi and Wang Qiong's report was sent to the central government, and both inside and outside the imperial court were very tense and on high alert. Sima Daozi asked Wang Dao: Wang and Yin, two local forces launched a rebellion, do you know about this?

古文：珣曰： 朝政得失，珣弗之预，王、殷作难，何由可知！ 
现代文：王说： 朝廷内部政治事务的好坏得失，我都不曾参预，王、殷两个人所发动的反叛，我怎么能知道呢？ 
English: The king said, "I have never been involved in the internal political affairs of the court, whether good or bad. How can I know about the rebellion launched by the king and Yin?"

古文：王国宝惶惧，不知所为，遣数百人戍竹里，夜遇风雨，各散归。
现代文：王国宝异常惶恐惧怕，不知如何是好，派了几百人到竹里去守卫，因为夜间遇到风雨大作，各自散去回家了。
English: King Bao was extremely frightened and did not know what to do, so he sent several hundred people to Bamboo Village to guard it. Due to the stormy weather at night, they dispersed and went home.

古文：王绪说国宝矫相王之命召王珣、车胤杀之，以除时望，因挟君相发兵以讨二籓。
现代文：王绪给王国宝出主意，让他假借相王司马道子的命令，召集王、车胤前来，将他们杀掉，先除掉有声望的人，然后以此要挟安帝和马司道子调兵讨伐两个藩臣。
English: Wang Xu suggested to Wang Guobao that he should, on the pretext of an order from the minister Wang Sima Daozi, summon Wang and Cheyin to come and kill them. He would first eliminate the prominent people, and then use this to blackmail Emperor An and Ma Sima Daozi to send troops to fight the two ministers.

古文：国宝许之。
现代文：王国宝同意了王绪的建议。
English: Wang Guobao agreed to Wang Xu's suggestion.

古文：珣、胤至，国宝不敢害，更问计于珣。
现代文：王、东胤来到之后，王国宝又不敢杀害，只好再向王询问解决的方法。
English: After Wang and Dongyin arrived, Wang Guobao did not dare to kill him, so he had to ask Wang for a solution.

古文：珣曰： 王、殷与卿素无深怨，所竞不过势利之间耳。 
现代文：王说： 王恭、殷仲堪与您素来没有什么深仇大恨，他们所要争的不过是一些权势利益罢了。 
English: The king said: Wang Qiong, Yin Zhongkan and you have never had any deep-seated hatred. All they want to fight about is some interests of power.

古文：国宝曰； 将曹爽我乎？ 
现代文：王国宝说： 莫非要把我当成曹爽吗？ 
English: Wang Guobao said, "Do you have to think of me as Cao Shuang?

古文：珣曰： 是何言欤！
现代文：王说： 你这是什么话呀！
English: And the king said, What is this word that thou hast spoken?

古文：卿宁有爽之罪，王孝伯岂宣帝之俦邪？ 
现代文：您哪里有曹爽那么重的罪过，王恭又哪里是宣帝司马懿那样的人呢？ 
English: Where do you find a crime as serious as Cao Shuang's, and where is Wang Qiong, a person like Xuan Di Sima Yu?

古文：又问计于胤，胤曰： 昔桓公围寿阳，弥时乃克。
现代文：王国宝又向车胤问计，车胤说： 过去，桓温围困寿阳，很长时间才攻克。
English: Wang Guobao also asked Che for advice. Che said, "In the past, Kuan Wen besieged Shouyang, and it took a long time to conquer it.

古文：今朝廷遣军，恭必城守。
现代文：现在朝廷如果派兵去攻，王恭便一定会坚守。
English: If the imperial court were to send troops to attack now, Wang Qiong would certainly hold out.

古文：若京口未拔而上流奄至，君将何以待之？ 
现代文：倘若京口还没有攻下，长江上游的殷仲堪又带兵突然乘虚而来，您准备怎样对付他呢？ 
English: If Kyoguchi has not yet been conquered, and Yin Zhongkan of the upper reaches of the Yangtze suddenly comes with soldiers to take advantage of the situation, how are you going to deal with him?

古文：国宝尤惧，遂上疏解职，诣阙待罪。
现代文：王国宝更加恐惧，于是上了一道奏章请求解除一切官职，前往宫门等待朝廷定罪。
English: Wang Guobao was even more afraid, so he wrote a petition asking to be relieved of all official duties and went to the palace gate to wait for the court to convict him.

古文：既而悔之，诈称诏复其本官。
现代文：奏章刚送上去，又后悔了，因此又谎称安帝已经下诏恢复他原来的官职。
English: As soon as the report was sent up, he regretted it again, and therefore falsely claimed that Emperor An had issued an edict to resume his former official position.

古文：道子暗懦，欲求姑息，乃委罪国宝，遣缥骑咨议参军谯王尚之收国宝付廷尉。
现代文：司马道子为人愚昧懦弱，只求暂时平息此事，便把一切罪过完全推到王国宝身上，并派遣骠骑谘议参军谯王司马尚之前去逮捕王国宝，交到廷尉那里去问罪。
English: Sima Daozi was stupid and cowardly. He only wanted to temporarily quell the matter, so he blamed all the sins entirely on Wang Guobao, and sent his cavalry to advise Wang Guobao to join the army to arrest Wang Guobao and hand him over to the courtier for questioning.

古文：尚之，恬之子也。
现代文：司马尚之是司马恬的儿子。
English: Sima Shangzhi is the son of Sima Yao.

古文：甲申，赐国宝死，斩绪于市，遣使诣恭，深谢愆失；恭乃罢兵还京口。
现代文：甲申，安帝下诏，命令王国宝自杀，把王绪绑赴街市斩首，并派使者前去面见王恭，对自己的过失表示深深的歉意。王恭于是带兵回京口。
English: Emperor An issued an edict, ordering Wang Guobao to commit suicide, tying Wang Xiu to the streets and beheading him, and sent an envoy to meet Wang Qiong to express his deep apologies for his mistake. Wang Qiong then led his troops back to Beijing.

古文：国宝兄侍中恺、骠骑司马愉并请解职；道子以恺、愉与国宝异母，又素不协，皆释不问。
现代文：王国宝的哥哥侍中王恺、骠骑司马王愉一起恳请辞职。司马道子因为王恺、王愉与王国宝不是同母所生，彼此的关系又历来不和，就都不予追究。
English: Wang Yao, the brother of Wang Guobao, and Wang Yu, the brother of Wang Guobao, both requested to resign. Sima Daozi did not investigate Wang Yao, Wang Yu and Wang Guobao because they were not born from the same mother, and their relationship had never been harmonious.

古文：戊子，大赦。
现代文：戊子，宣布大赦。
English: Peace, peace to all the world.

古文：殷仲堪虽许王恭，犹豫不敢下；闻国宝等死，乃始抗表举兵，遣杨佺期屯巴陵。
现代文：殷仲堪虽然已经答应王恭一起声讨王国宝，但仍然犹豫，不敢带兵东下。听说王国宝等已死，才开始上疏朝廷，起动大兵，派遣杨期去驻守巴陵。
English: Although Yin Zhongkang had already agreed with Wang Qiong to jointly denounce the royal treasure, he still hesitated and did not dare to take soldiers to the east. When he heard that the royal treasure was dead, he began to go to the imperial court, start the soldiers, and send Yang Ji to guard Baling.

古文：道子以书止之，仲堪乃还。
现代文：司马道子写信阻止，殷仲堪才回师。
English: Sima Daozi wrote a letter to stop it, but Yin Zhong could only return to the teacher.

古文：会稽世子元显，年十六，有隽才，为侍中，说道子以王、殷终必为患，请潜为之备。
现代文：会稽王司马道子的长子司马元显，十六岁，聪明能干。
English: Sixteen-year-old Sima Yuanxian, the eldest son of the Grand Inquisitor Wang Sima Daozi, is smart and capable.

古文：道子乃拜元显征虏将军，以其卫府及徐州文武悉配之。
现代文：此时他在朝中担任侍中。他提醒司马道子说，王恭、殷仲堪到头来一定会成为祸患，请在暗地作好准备。
English: At this time, he served as an attendant in the imperial court. He reminded Sima Daozi that Wang Qiong and Yin Zhongkang would eventually become a disaster, so please prepare secretly.

古文：魏王珪以军食不给，命东平公仪去鄴，徙屯巨鹿，积租杨城。
现代文：司马道子于是任命司马元显为征虏将军，把自己的卫队以及徐州的军政要员全部交给司马元显管辖。魏王拓跋因为军队中的粮食供应不足，命令东平公拓跋仪离开邺城，迁到钜鹿驻扎，并把粮食补给等聚积在杨城。
English: Sima Daozi then appointed Sima Yuanxian as a conscript general, and put his guards and all military and political dignitaries in Xuzhou under the jurisdiction of Sima Yuanxian. Wei King Tuoba, because of the shortage of grain supply in the army, ordered Dongping Gong Tuoba to leave Shicheng and move to Elk, and to accumulate grain supplies in Yangcheng.

古文：慕容详出步卒六千人，伺间袭魏诸屯；珪击破之，斩首五千，生擒七百人，皆纵之。
现代文：慕容详派出六千步兵，等待机会乘虚袭击搔扰魏军的几个驻地。被拓跋击溃，杀死了五千人，活捉了七百人，又把这些浮虏全部释放。
English: Murong Zhao sent out six thousand infantrymen, waiting for an opportunity to take advantage of a false attack to harass several stations of the Wei army. They were routed by Tuoba, killed five thousand people, captured seven hundred people alive, and released all these vagabonds.

古文：初，张掖卢水胡沮渠罗仇，匈奴沮渠王之後也，世为部帅。
现代文：当初，居住在张掖的卢水匈奴部落的首领沮渠罗仇，是匈奴沮渠王的后代，世世代代都当部落的首领。
English: At the beginning, the leader of the Lu Shui Hun tribe living in Zhangye, Deqiu Luoqiu, was a descendant of the Hun king Deqiu, and had been the leader of the tribe for generations.

古文：凉王光以罗仇为尚书，从光伐西秦。
现代文：后凉王吕光任命沮渠罗仇为尚书，跟着吕光一起去讨伐西秦。
English: Later, Liangyang King Liguang appointed Deshu Luoqiu as Shangshu, and followed Liguang to fight the Western Qin Dynasty.

古文：及吕延败死，罗仇弟三河太守麹粥谓罗仇曰： 主上荒耄信谗，今军败将死，正其猜忌智勇之时也。
现代文：吕延战败身死之后，沮渠罗仇的弟弟、三河太守沮渠粥对沮渠罗仇说： 主上吕光年老，昏聩，又常常听信谗言，这次军队失败，大将战死，正是他猜忌勇武有识的部下的时候，他一定容不得我们兄弟。
English: After the defeat and death of Lyu Yan, the younger brother of Deqiu Luoqiu, the Three Rivers Taishu Deqiu Luoqiu, said to Deqiu Luoqiu: Lord, Lyu Guang is old, dizzy, and often listens to insults. This time, the army failed, and the general died in battle. It was when he was suspicious of his brave and knowledgeable subordinates. He must not tolerate our brothers.

古文：吾兄弟必不见容，与其死之无名，不若勒兵向西平。出苕藋，奋臂一呼，凉州不足定也。 
现代文：与其平平庸庸死掉，不如干脆带领军队进攻西平，闯过苕，只要我们振臂一呼，凉州一带得以平定就不在话下了。 
English: Instead of dying of mediocrity, it would be better to simply lead the army to attack Xiping and break through the shackles. As long as we raise our arms, the area around Liangzhou can be pacified.

古文：罗仇曰； 诚如汝言。
现代文：沮渠罗仇说： 确实像你说的。
English: Frustrated, Luo Qian said, "It's really like you said.

古文：然吾家世以忠孝著于西土，宁使人负我，我不忍负人也。 
现代文：但是我们沮渠家，世世代代都以忠孝之名被西域的人们所称颂，所以，宁可让别人背叛我，我是绝对不忍心去背叛别人的。 
English: However, we, the Deshu family, have been praised by the people of the Western Regions in the name of loyalty and filial piety for generations. Therefore, rather than let others betray me, I absolutely cannot bear to betray others.

古文：光果听谗，以败军之罪杀罗仇及麹粥。
现代文：吕光果然听信谗言，以出战失败的罪名杀掉了沮渠罗仇与沮渠粥。
English: As expected, Lü Guang listened to the advice, and killed Deqiu Luoqiu and Deqiu Ruoqiu on the charge of failing to go to war.

古文：罗仇弟子蒙逊，雄杰有策略，涉猎书史，以罗仇、麹粥之丧归葬；诸部多其族姻，会葬者凡万馀人。
现代文：沮渠罗仇的侄儿沮渠蒙逊，为人雄武过人而又身怀奇才大略，阅读过许多经史典籍。他护送沮渠罗仇与沮渠粥的灵柩回乡安葬，附近的许多部落都与他们有姻亲关系，参加葬礼的竟达一万多人。
English: Deshu's nephew, Deshu Monsoon, who was a great warrior and a great genius, read many historical classics. He escorted the casket of Deshu and Deshu's porridge back to his hometown for burial. Many nearby tribes were related to them by marriage, and more than ten thousand people attended the funeral.

古文：蒙逊哭谓众曰： 吕王昏荒无道，多杀不辜。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊哭着对这些人说： 吕光昏聩无道，杀死了无辜的人。
English: Despondent, Mengxun cried and said to these people, "Luguang has lost his way and killed an innocent person.

古文：吾之上世，虎视河西，今欲与诸部雪二父之耻，复上世之业，何如？ 
现代文：我们的祖先，雄威震慑河西一带，今天我们要与各部落一起为我的两位伯叔报仇雪恨，进而恢复我们祖先的大业，各位意下如何？ 
English: Our ancestors, who held sway over the west of the river, today we want to work with the tribes to avenge my two uncles and restore the great cause of our ancestors. What do you think?

古文：众咸称万岁。
现代文：众人都高喊万岁。
English: Everyone was shouting hooray.

古文：遂结盟起兵，攻凉临松郡，拔之，屯据金山。
现代文：于是缔结了盟约，拉起队伍，攻占了后凉的临松郡，然后进军在金山据守。
English: So they concluded a covenant, raised an army, conquered Lin Song County in Houliang, and then marched to the Jinshan Fortress.

古文：司徒左长史王廞，导之孙也，以母丧居吴。
现代文：东晋司徒左长史王是王导的孙子，因为母亲去世，在吴地守丧。
English: Wang Zhichangshi, the grandson of Wang Dao, the Eastern Jin Emperor, held a funeral in Wudi after his mother's death.

古文：王恭之讨王国宝也，版廞行吴国内史，使起兵于东方。
现代文：王恭讨伐王国宝的时候，曾任命他暂时代理吴国内史的官职，让他在东方起兵。
English: When Wang Qiong was fighting for the treasure of the kingdom, he appointed him temporarily as the official in charge of Wu's domestic history, and let him raise an army in the East.

古文：廞使前吴国内史虞啸等入吴兴、义兴召募兵众，赴者万计。
现代文：王于是派前任吴国内史虞啸父等人到吴兴、义兴一带去招兵买马，赶来从军的人以万计。
English: The king then sent his predecessor Wu Jiaozhong Shi Yu Xiaofu and others to Wuxing and Yixing to recruit soldiers and buy horses, and tens of thousands of soldiers came.

古文：未几，国宝死，恭罢兵，符珪去职，反丧服。
现代文：不久，王国宝被赐自杀，王恭也停止了军事行动，便来信通知王可以离开任职、回家继续守丧。
English: Soon after, Wang Guobao committed suicide and Wang Qiong also stopped military operations. A letter was sent to inform Wang that he could leave his post and return home to continue the funeral.

古文：廞以起兵之际，诛异己者颇多，势不得止，遂大怒，不承恭命，使其子泰将兵伐恭，笺于会稽王道子，称恭罪恶；道子以其笺送恭，五月，恭遣司马刘牢之帅五千人击泰，斩之。
现代文：王在起兵的时候，诛杀了很多和自己意见不同的人，已经不能半途停止，于是不禁大怒，拒绝接受王恭的命令，并且派他的儿子王泰带兵前去讨伐王恭，又写信给会稽王司马道子，历数王恭的罪恶。司马道子把他的信送给了王恭。五月，王恭派司马刘牢之统领五千人迎击王泰，并把他杀了。
English: When the king raised an army, he killed many people who disagreed with him. He couldn't stop halfway, so he couldn't help but be furious. He refused to accept Wang Gong's order, and sent his son Wang Tai to lead an army to fight Wang Gong. He also wrote to the inspector Wang Sima Daozi to enumerate Wang Gong's crimes. Sima Daozi sent his letter to Wang Gong. In May, Wang Gong sent Sima Liu, the commander of the dungeon, five thousand people to confront Wang Tai and kill him.

古文：又与廞战于曲阿，众溃，廞单骑走，不知所在。
现代文：刘牢之又与王在曲阿展开激战，王的部队溃散，王一个人骑马跑走，下落不明。
English: Liu Duozhi and Wang Zhe in Qu'ao also fought a fierce battle. Wang's troops were dispersed, and Wang ran away alone on horseback. His whereabouts are unknown.

古文：收虞啸父下廷尉，以其祖潭有功，免为庶人。
现代文：又抓获虞啸父送到廷尉问罪，因为他的祖父虞谭过去有功，免死，贬为平民。
English: They also arrested Yu Xiao's father and sent him to the imperial lieutenant for questioning, because his grandfather Yu Tan had meritorious service in the past and was spared death and reduced to a commoner.

古文：燕库傉官骥入中山，与开封公详相攻。详杀骥，尽灭库傉官氏；又杀中山尹苻谟，夷其族。
现代文：后燕西河公库官骥进入中山，与留守在那里的开封公慕容详互相攻打，莫容详杀了库官骥，并把整个库官氏家族全部消灭。他又杀死了中山尹苻谟，屠杀了苻谟家一族。
English: Later, Yan Xihe's public treasury officials went to Zhongshan and fought with the remaining Kaifeng official Murong Zeng. Murong Zeng killed the treasury officials and wiped out the entire family of the treasury officials. He also killed Zhongshan's Yin Zengmo and massacred the Zengmo family.

古文：中山城无定主，民恐魏兵乘之，男女结盟，人自为战。
现代文：中山城内没有一个主事人，居民们害怕北魏的军队乘虚攻进城来，男女老幼自愿结起盟约，各自单独作战。
English: There was no one in charge in Zhongshan City, and the residents were afraid that the Northern Wei army would enter the city by false pretenses. Men, women, and children voluntarily formed a covenant and fought separately.

古文：甲辰，魏王珪罢中山之围，就谷河间，督诸郡义租。
现代文：甲辰，魏王拓跋撤除对中山的包围，开往河间征粮，督促各郡义务献粮。
English: Jia Chen and Wei Wang Tuoba removed the encirclement of Zhongshan, went to the river to collect grain, and urged all counties to make voluntary grain donations.

古文：甲寅，以东平公仪为骠骑大将军、都督中外诸军事、兗、豫、雍、荆、徐、扬六州牧、左丞相，封卫王。
现代文：甲寅，拓跋任命东平公拓跋仪为骠骑大将军，都督中外诸军事，豫、雍、荆、徐、扬六州牧，左丞相，封为卫王。
English: A Yin, Tuoba appointed Dongping Gong Tuoba Yi as the cavalry general, the military governor of the Middle and Outer Provinces, Yu, Yong, Jing, Xu, Yang as the six provincial governors, the left minister, and the king of Wei.

古文：慕容详自谓能却魏兵，威德已振，乃即皇帝位，改元建始，置百官。以新平公可足浑潭为车骑大将军、尚书令，杀拓跋觚以固众心。
现代文：慕容详自认为能使北魏军队撤去，他的声威与恩德已经重振，便登上了皇帝宝座，改年号为建始，设置了文武百官，任命新平公可足浑谭为车骑大将军、尚书令，杀掉了原来被扣押在中山的拓跋的弟弟拓跋觚，希望以此来稳定人心。
English: Murong Diao thought that he could make the Northern Wei army withdraw. His prestige and virtue had been reinvigorated, and he ascended the emperor's throne. He changed the year as the founding date, set up a hundred civil and military officials, appointed Xinping Gong Ke Fu Hun Tan as the cavalry general and Shang Shu Ling, and killed the younger brother of Tuoba, who was originally detained in Zhongshan, hoping to stabilize the hearts of the people.

古文：鄴中官属劝范阳王德称尊号，会有自龙城来者，知燕主宝犹存，乃止。
现代文：邺城的文武官员力劝范阳王慕容德面南称帝，正巧有一个人从龙城来，知道后燕国主慕容宝还活着，这才停止。
English: The civil and military officials in Lucheng strongly advised King Mu Rongde of Fanyang to go south and proclaim himself emperor. It was just by chance that a man came from Longcheng and knew that the ruler of Houyan, Mu Rongbao, was still alive. This only stopped.

古文：凉王光遣太原公纂将兵击沮渠蒙逊忽谷，破之。
现代文：后凉王吕光派遣太原公吕纂带兵在谷进攻沮渠蒙逊，并把他打败。
English: Later, Liangyang King Luguang dispatched Taiyuan King Liusan to lead an army to attack Deshu Mengsong in the valley, and defeated him.

古文：蒙逊逃入山中。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊逃进深山之中。
English: Despondent, Monsoon fled into the mountains.

古文：蒙逊从兄男成为凉将军，闻蒙逊起兵，亦合众数千屯乐涫。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊的堂兄沮渠男成，担任后凉的将军。他听说沮渠蒙逊起兵反叛，也集合了几千名兵众进驻乐涫。
English: Deqiu Mengxun's cousin, Deqiu Mancheng, served as the general of Houliang. He heard that Deqiu Mengxun had rebelled and gathered several thousand soldiers to enter Leju.

古文：酒泉太守垒澄讨男成，兵败，澄死。
现代文：酒泉太守垒澄带兵去讨伐沮渠男成，兵败，垒澄战死。
English: Jiuquan's daimyō, Gocho, led an army to fight against Shicheng, but the army was defeated and Gocho was killed.

古文：男成进攻建康，遣使说建康太守段业曰： 吕氏政衰，权臣擅命，刑杀无常，人无容处。
现代文：沮渠男成进攻建康，派遣使者去说服建康太守段业说： 吕氏的政治势力已经衰微，掌权的官僚操纵一切，刑罚杀戮没有法度，使人们无容身之处。
English: Dismayed, Nanchong attacked Jiankang and sent an envoy to persuade Jiankang's Tai Shou Duan Ye, saying: Lv's political power has waned, the bureaucrats in power manipulate everything, there is no law against punishment killings, and people have nowhere to hide.

古文：一州之地，叛者相望，瓦解之形，昭然在目，百姓嗷然无所依附。
现代文：仅在一个州的地域上，反叛的人接连不断，这种土崩瓦解的形势一看便知，百姓们饥饿痛苦，找不到可以依托的人。
English: Only in one region of the state, the rebels continue to rise one after another, and this crumbling situation can be seen at a glance, the people are starving and suffering, and they cannot find anyone to rely on.

古文：府君奈何以盖世之才，欲立忠于垂亡之国！
现代文：您为什么以盖绝当世的奇才，却打算向这个面临灭亡的国家尽效忠心呢？
English: Why do you want to kill a modern-day prodigy, when you're supposed to be loyal to a dying country?

古文：男成等既唱大义，欲屈府君抚临鄙州，使涂炭之馀，蒙来苏之惠，何如？ 
现代文：我们既然倡导大义，便打算委屈阁下出面领导安抚本州，使人们在灾难和不幸的缝隙之间，能够得到恢复生机的好处，你看怎么样？ 
English: What do you think of the fact that, as we advocate for the greater good, we intend to ask your excellency to step forward to lead the pacification of the state, so that people can enjoy the benefits of revitalization in the gap between disaster and misfortune?

古文：业不从。
现代文：段业不听从他的劝告。
English: Duan Ye did not listen to his advice.

古文：相持二旬，外救不至，郡人高逵、史惠等劝业从男成之请。
现代文：两方相持了二十天左右，外面的救援没有赶来，建康本郡的居民高逵、史惠等人劝说段业接受沮渠男成的建议。
English: The two sides held each other for about twenty days, and outside rescue did not arrive. Residents of Jiankang County, Gao Wei, Shi Hui and others persuaded Duan Ye to accept the suggestion of Deqiu Nanzheng.

古文：业素与凉侍中房晷、仆射王详不平，惧不自安，乃许之。
现代文：段业历来与后凉侍中房晷、仆射王详不融洽，经常恐惧不安，于是，他同意了沮渠男成的请求。
English: Duan Ye had always been at odds with Hou Liang's attendants, the Middle Chamberlain and the King's Footman, and was often fearful and uneasy. Therefore, he agreed to Duan Ye's request.

古文：男成等推业为大都督、龙骧大将军、凉州牧、建康公，改元神玺。
现代文：沮渠男成等人公推段业为大都督、龙骧大将军、凉州牧、建康公，改年号为神玺。
English: Deqiu Nanchong and others promoted him to the posts of grand governor, Longjing general, Liangzhou herdsman, and Jiankang, and changed his era name to Shenyuan.

古文：以男成为辅国将军，委以军国之任。
现代文：段业任命沮渠男成为辅国将军，把国家军政大权全部交给他掌管。
English: Duanye appointed the despondent man to be an auxiliary general and put him in charge of the country's military and political power.

古文：蒙逊帅众归业，业以蒙逊为镇西将军。
现代文：沮渠蒙逊听说这个消息之后，也带着自己的部众来归附段业。段业任命沮渠蒙逊为镇西将军。
English: When Deshu Monson heard the news, he also came with his followers to attach Danye. Danye appointed Deshu Monson as Zhenxi General.

古文：光命太原公纂将兵讨业，不克。
现代文：吕光命令太原公吕纂带领部队讨伐段业，没有攻克。
English: Luguang ordered Taiyuan Gong Liusan to lead the troops to fight Duanye, but failed to conquer it.

古文：六月，西秦王乾归征河州刺史彭奚念为镇卫将军；以镇西将军屋弘破光为河州牧；定州刺史翟瑁为兴晋太守，镇枹罕。
现代文：六月，西秦王乞伏乾归征召北河州刺史鼓奚念为镇卫将军，任命镇西将军屋弘破光为河州牧，定州刺史翟为兴晋太守，镇守罕。
English: In June, the Western Qin Emperor Qianlong called for the recruitment of the Northern Hezhou general Zhi Shiguo Ren as the Zhenwei general, the appointment of the Western Hezhou general Zhiya Hongbaguang as the Hezhou magistrate, the appointment of the Western Hezhou general Zhi Shiguo Ren as the Xingjin governor, and the appointment of the Western Hezhou general Zhiya Hongbaguang as the Hezhou magistrate.

古文：秋，七月，慕容详杀可足浑潭。
现代文：秋季，七月，慕容详杀掉了车骑大将军可足浑谭。
English: In the autumn, in July, Murong Duan killed the general of the chariot and cavalry.

古文：详嗜酒奢浮，不恤士民，刑杀无度，所诛王公以下五百馀人，群下离心。
现代文：慕容详嗜酒如命，又奢侈荒淫，从来也不体恤士人、百姓，施刑屠戮没有法度，被他诛杀的自王公以下的人有五百多，以致各级僚属和下层军民都和他离心离德。
English: Murong Jia was a drunkard and a debauched womanizer. He never had any consideration for the officials or the people. There was no law against his torture and killing. He killed more than five hundred people from the prince on down, so that his subordinates at all levels, as well as the lower ranks of the military and the people, were all alienated from him.

古文：城中饥窘，详不听民出采稆，死者相枕，举城皆谋迎赵王麟。
现代文：城中发生饥荒，慕容详不允许人们出城去采集野草和野生的粮食，因此，饿死的人尸横遍地，全城上下的人们都在希望设法把赵王慕容麟迎请回来。
English: There was a famine in the city, and Murong Zhao did not allow people to go out of the city to gather wild grass and wild grain. As a result, the corpses of starving people were all over the place, and people all over the city were hoping to find a way to welcome Zhao Wang Murong Lin back.

古文：详遣辅国将军张骧帅五千馀人督租于常山，麟自丁零入骧军，潜袭中山，城门不闭，执详，斩之。
现代文：慕容详派遣辅国将军张骧率领五千多人前去常山督促人们缴纳粮租，慕容麟从丁零部落那里潜入张骧军中，偷袭中山，城门没有关闭，慕容麟抓住慕容详，杀了他。
English: Murong Diao sent the general of the Auxiliary State, Zhang Xuan, to Changshan with more than 5,000 people to urge people to pay grain rent. Murong Lin sneaked into Zhang Xuan's army from the Dingye tribe and attacked Zhongshan. The city gate was not closed. Murong Lin caught Murong Diao and killed him.

古文：麟遂称尊号，听人四出采稆。
现代文：慕容麟自己做了皇帝，准许人们出城到四处去采集可吃的东西。
English: Muronglin made himself emperor and allowed people to go out of the city to gather food.

古文：人既饱，求与魏战。麟不从，稍复穷馁。
现代文：军民能够吃饱之后，便又提出要求与北魏军队决战，慕容麟却没有同意，不久，城中再次发生饥荒。
English: After the soldiers and civilians were able to eat their fill, they again demanded a decisive battle with the Northern Wei army, but Muronglin did not agree, and soon there was another famine in the city.

古文：魏王珪军鲁口，遣长孙肥帅骑七千袭中山，入其郛；麟进至泒水，为魏所败而还。
现代文：魏王拓跋驻扎在鲁口，派遣长孙肥率领骑兵七千人进攻中山，并且攻进了外城。慕容麟发动反击。
English: Wei King Tuoba was stationed in Lukou, and dispatched the eldest grandson Fei to lead seven thousand cavalry to attack Zhongshan, and invaded the outer city. Muronglin launched a counterattack.

古文：八月，丙寅朔，魏王珪徙军常山之九门。
现代文：并把北魏军追击到了水，却被北魏军队打败，回到中山。八月，丙寅朔，魏王拓跋迁到常山的九门驻扎。
English: He chased the Northern Wei army to the water, but was defeated by the Northern Wei army and returned to Zhongshan. In August, Yin Shuo and Wei Wang Tuo moved to Jiumen in Changshan.

古文：军中大疫，人畜多死，将士皆思归。
现代文：忽然军营流行严重瘟疫，人和牲畜都死了很多，将士们都在想着回家。
English: Suddenly, a serious plague broke out in the military camp, many people and livestock died, and the soldiers were all thinking about going home.

古文：珪问疫于诸将，对曰： 在者才什四、五。 
现代文：拓跋向手下的各位将领询问瘟疫的蔓延与治疗情况，将领们回答说： 活着的十分之四五。 
English: Tuoba asked his generals about the spread of the plague and how it was being treated. The generals replied, "About 45 percent are still alive."

古文：珪曰： 此固天命，将若之何？
现代文：拓跋说： 这本来是天命，我们有什么办法！
English: Tuoba said, "This was originally fate, what can we do!

古文：四海之民，皆可为国，在吾所以御之耳，何患无民！ 
现代文：四海之内的所有居民，都可以成为我们国家的一部分，只不过是要看我统治、驾奴他们的方法罢了，何必担忧我们没有百姓呢？ 
English: All the inhabitants of the four seas can become part of our country, it just depends on how I rule and enslave them. Why worry if we have no people?

古文：群臣乃不敢言。
现代文：大臣们不敢再多说话。
English: The courtiers did not dare to say anything.

古文：遣抚军大将军略阳公遵袭中山，入其郛而还。
现代文：拓跋派抚军大将军略阳公拓跋遵进攻中山，攻进了中山的外城之后撤回去了。
English: Tuoba sent the general Liaoyang Gong Tuoba Zun to attack Zhongshan, entered the outer city of Zhongshan and then withdrew.

古文：燕以辽西王农为都督中外诸军事、大司马、录尚书事。
现代文：后燕任命辽西王慕容农为都督中外诸军事、大司马、录尚书事。
English: Later, Yan appointed Murong Nong, the king of western Liaoning, as the military governor, grand steward, and record keeper of records.

古文：凉散骑常侍、太常西平郭黁，善天文数术，国人信重之。
现代文：后凉散骑常侍、太常、西平人郭，擅长观测天文和数术，国中的人们对他都很相信倚重。
English: After the cooling, he rode around the mansions of Tsuneishi, Taijo, and Xiping. He was good at observing astronomy and mathematics, and people in the country believed in and relied on him.

古文：会荧惑守东井，黁谓仆射王详曰： 凉之分野，将有大兵。
现代文：正巧赶上火星侵占井宿，郭对仆射王详说： 凉州一带，将要发生大的战争。
English: Just in time for Mars to invade and occupy Ijuku, Guo said to Fu Shaowang: Around Liangzhou, there will be a big war.

古文：主上老病，太子暗弱，太原公凶悍。一旦不讳，祸乱必起。
现代文：现在主上年老多病，太子又愚昧孱弱，太原公吕纂凶暴骄悍，一旦主上晏驾，祸乱便一定会发生。
English: Now the lord is old and sickly, the prince is stupid and weak, and King Lutsang is violent and arrogant. Once the lord passes away, the calamity will surely occur.

古文：吾二人久居内要，彼常切齿，将为诛首矣。
现代文：我们两个人长期居于朝廷要职，太原公一直咬牙切齿地痛恨我们，到那时我们一定会成为他所要诛杀的首要对象。
English: The two of us have been occupying important positions in the Imperial Court for a long time, and Prince Taiyuan has always hated us with gritted teeth. By then, we will surely become the primary target he wants to fight and kill.

古文：田胡王乞基部落最强，二苑之人，多其旧众。
现代文：田胡部落的首领王乞基的力量最强大，都城姑臧东苑、西苑的人，大多是他们的旧属部众。
English: The leader of the Tianhu tribe, Wang Qianji, is the most powerful. Most of the people in the capital, Gushan Dongyuan and Xiyuan, are their former subordinates.

古文：吾欲与公举大事，推乞基为主，二苑之众，尽我有也。
现代文：我打算和你一起发动一个大事，拥推王乞基为我们的首领，居住在两苑里的人，都会为我们所拥有。
English: I'm planning to launch a big event with you, to promote Wang Qianji as our leader, and the people living in the two courtyards will all belong to us.

古文：得城之后，徐更议之。 
现代文：攻占城池之后，再慢慢商议其他的事。 
English: After the capture of the city, then slowly discuss other things.

古文：详从之。
现代文：王详听从了他的话。
English: Wang Zhe listened to his words.

古文：黁夜以二苑之众烧洪范门，使详为内应；事泄，详被诛，黁遂据东苑以叛。
现代文：郭当夜便派两苑的人火烧洪范门，并且让王详作为内应。不料事情败露，王详被杀。郭便占据了东苑城公开反叛。
English: On that night, Guo sent people from the two courtyards to set fire to the Hongfan Gate, and asked Wang Zhao to act as a middleman. Unexpectedly, the matter was exposed, and Wang Zhao was killed. Guo then occupied Dongyuan City and openly rebelled.

古文：民间皆言圣人起兵，事无不成，从之者甚众。
现代文：民间都流传说，像郭那样的圣人带领部队战斗，事情没有不成功的，所以，跟从他的人很多。
English: Folklore has it that a saint like Guo led the troops into battle, and things were not without success, so there were many people who followed him.

古文：凉王光召太原公纂使讨黁。
现代文：后凉王吕光连忙征召太原公吕纂玄围剿郭。
English: Later, Liangyang King Luguang hurriedly conscripted Taiyuan Prince Lyu Zuo to guard the castle.

古文：纂将还，诸将皆曰： 段业必蹑军后，宜潜师夜发。 
现代文：吕纂将要回去，各位将领都说： 段业一定会跟在我军的背后追打，我们应该在夜间秘密撤退。 
English: Lu Xuan was about to return, and all the generals said: Duan Ye will definitely follow our army and chase it, and we should retreat secretly at night.

古文：纂曰： 业无雄才，恁城自守；若潜师夜去，适足张其气势耳。 
现代文：吕纂说： 段业没有雄才大略，只能凭借城池的险要保全自己。
English: Lu Xuan said: Duan Ye has no great talent, he can only rely on the dangers of the city to protect himself.

古文：乃遣使告业曰： 郭黁作乱，吾今还都；卿能决者，可早出战。 
现代文：如果我们在夜间偷偷撤军，恰恰长了敌人的志气。 于是，他派遣一个使者去告诉段业说： 郭发动了叛乱，我现要就要回都城去，你如果有胆量能来决一死战，那么可以尽早出战。 
English: If we secretly withdrew at night, it would only encourage the enemy, so he sent an envoy to tell Duan Ye: Guo has launched a rebellion, I am about to return to the capital, if you have the courage to fight a war to the death, then you can go to war as soon as possible.

古文：于是引还。业不敢出。
现代文：于是，撤军回去，段业没敢出来。
English: As a result, the retreating troops went back, and Duan Ye did not dare to come out.

古文：纂司马杨统谓其从兄桓曰： 郭黁举事，必不虚发。吾欲杀纂，推兄为主，西袭吕弘，据张掖，号令诸郡，此千载一时也。 
现代文：吕纂的司马杨统对他的堂兄杨桓说： 郭领兵起事，一定不会凭空地盲目作战，我想杀掉吕纂，推举您为首领，向西袭击吕弘，占据张掖，向其他几个郡发号施令。这真是千载难逢的好机会！ 
English: Lyu Zuo's Sima Yang Tong said to his cousin Yang Huan: Guo, the leader of the soldiers, started the war, he will not fight blindly. I want to kill Lyu Zuo, promote you as the leader, attack Luhong to the west, occupy Zhangye, and give orders to several other counties. This is really a once-in-a-lifetime opportunity!

古文：桓怒曰： 吾为吕氏臣，安享其禄，危不能救，岂可复增其难乎？
现代文：杨桓大怒说： 我作为吕氏的臣子，在平安的时候享受他们给我的荣禄，在危急的时候不能去解救，又怎么能再增加他们的困难呢？
English: Yang Huan said angrily, "As a vassal of the Lü clan, I enjoy the honor they give me in times of peace, but I can't save them in times of crisis. How can I add to their difficulties?"

古文：吕氏若亡，吾为弘演矣！ 
现代文：吕氏如果灭亡，我甘愿做春秋时忠君而死的弘演！ 
English: If the Lü clan were to perish, I would be willing to play the role of the loyal vassal who died in the Spring and Autumn Period!

古文：统至番禾，遂叛归黁。
现代文：杨统到了番禾县，反叛归附了郭。
English: When Yang Tong arrived in Panghe County, the rebels annexed Guo.

古文：弘，纂之弟也。
现代文：吕弘是吕纂的弟弟。
English: Lu Hong is the younger brother of Lu Zuo.

古文：纂与西安太守石元良共击黁，大破之，乃得入姑臧。
现代文：吕纂和西安太守石元良合击郭，把他打得大败，才得以进入都城姑臧。
English: Lu Xuan and Xi'an's eunuch governor Shi Yuanliang made a joint attack on Guo, and defeated him so badly that he was able to enter the capital city of Guoruo.

古文：黁得光孙八人于东苑，及败而恚，悉投于锋上，枝分节解，饮其血以盟众，众皆掩目。
现代文：郭在东苑城抓获了吕光的八个孙子，被吕纂击败之后恼羞成怒，把这八个孩子全部投掷到兵刃的锋口之上，并把他们的尸体一肢一节地分解开来，喝掉了他们的鲜血，用来和大家对天盟誓。
English: Guo captured eight of Lü Guang's grandchildren in Dongyuan City. After he was defeated by Lü Cao, he became enraged. He threw all eight children into the front of the blade, and dismembered their bodies limb by limb, drank their blood, and used it to swear to everyone.

古文：凉人张捷、宋生等招集戎、夏三千人，反于休屠城，与黁共推凉后将军杨轨为盟主。
现代文：其状极其凶惨，他手下的人也都蒙住双眼，不忍观看。凉州人张捷、宋生等，召集戎族和汉族三千人，在休屠城造反。他们与郭一起推举后凉后将军杨轨为盟主。
English: His condition was extremely gruesome, and his subordinates were also blindfolded and could not bear to watch. Zhang Jie, Song Sheng and others from Liangzhou rallied three thousand people from the Yongzheng and Han ethnic groups to rebel in Xiu Tuo. Together with Guo, they elected Yang Luo, the general of the Later Liang Dynasty, as their leader.

古文：轨，略阳氐也。
现代文：杨轨是略阳的氐人。
English: Yang Rail is a slightly yang person.

古文：将军程肇谏曰： 卿弃龙头而从虵尾，非计也。 
现代文：将军程肇劝阻杨轨说： 您抛弃了龙头而去追随蛇尾，不是上策。 
English: General Cheng Zhao dissuaded Yang Luo, saying: You have abandoned the leader to follow the snake's tail, which is not the best strategy.

古文：轨不从，自称大将军、凉州牧、西平公。
现代文：杨轨没有接受他的劝告，自称为大将军、凉州牧、西平公。
English: Yang Luo did not accept his advice and called himself the great general, Liangzhou Mu and Xiping Gong.

古文：纂击破黁将王斐于城西，黁兵势渐衰，遣使请救于秃发乌孤。
现代文：吕纂在城西又打败了郭的部将王斐。郭的军队势力渐渐衰微，派遣使者到秃发乌孤那里去求救。
English: In the west of the city, Lu Xuan defeated Guo's general Wang Fei. Guo's army was gradually weakening, and he sent an envoy to Balfa Wukong to ask for help.

古文：九月，乌孤使其弟骠骑将军利鹿孤帅骑兵五千赴之。
现代文：九月，秃发乌孤派他的弟弟骠骑将军秃发利鹿孤率领五千骑兵赶去救援。
English: In September, Baldur Wu Guo sent his younger brother, the cavalry general Baldur Lixiu Guo, to lead five thousand cavalrymen to the rescue.

古文：秦太后虵氏卒。
现代文：后秦太后氏去世。
English: After the Qin Empress Dowager passed away.

古文：秦主兴哀毁过礼，不亲庶政。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴哀恸过度，不能正常地处理国家的日常事务。
English: The late Qin sovereign, Yao Xingmo, suffered from excessive grief and was unable to properly handle the country's daily affairs.

古文：群臣请依汉、魏故事，即葬即吉。
现代文：众大臣请求依据汉朝与曹魏处理这类事的旧规矩，安葬之后便不再继续守丧。
English: The ministers requested that the funeral not continue after the burial, in accordance with the old rules of the Han Dynasty and Cao Wei to deal with such matters.

古文：尚书郎李嵩上疏曰： 孝治天下，先王之高事也。
现代文：尚书郎李嵩上奏章说： 用孝道来治理天下，是先王们的最高准则。
English: Shang Shulang Li Song said at the recital: To govern the world with filial piety is the highest standard of the ancient kings.

古文：宜遵圣性以光道训，既葬之后，素服临朝。 
现代文：应该遵守圣主的天性，来发扬光大道德的训诫。太后安葬之后，皇上应该穿着孝服来主持朝政。 
English: After the empress dowager is laid to rest, the emperor should preside over the imperial government in filial piety.

古文：尹纬驳曰： 嵩矫常越礼，请付有司论罪。 
现代文：尚书左仆射尹纬反驳说： 李嵩违反常规，冒犯礼法，请把他交付有关部门判定罪罚。 
English: Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Yinwei, retorted: Li Song violated the rules and violated the etiquette, please hand him over to the relevant departments for criminal punishment.

古文：兴曰： 嵩忠臣孝子，有何罪乎！
现代文：姚兴说： 李嵩在国是忠臣、在家是孝子，有什么罪呀！
English: Yao Xing said: Li Song is a loyal subject in the country and a filial son at home. What is his crime?

古文：其一如嵩议。 
现代文：这件事就完全按照李嵩的建议办理吧！ 
English: Let's handle this matter in full accordance with Li Song's suggestion!

古文：鲜卑薛勃叛秦，秦主兴自将讨之。勃败，奔没弈干，没弈干执送之。
现代文：后秦所属的鲜卑部落首领薛勃叛变，后秦国主姚兴亲自带兵去讨伐他，薛勃战败，去投奔没弈干，没弈干把他抓住送回后秦。
English: After the rebellion of Xue Bo, the leader of a lowly tribe belonging to the Qin Dynasty, Yao Xing, the ruler of the Qin Dynasty, personally led an army to fight against him. When Xue Bo was defeated, he had no choice but to flee, and no choice but to capture him and send him back to the Qin Dynasty.

古文：秦泫氏男姚买得谋弑秦主兴，不克而死。
现代文：后秦泫氏男、姚买得阴谋杀害后秦国主姚兴，没有成功而被杀死。
English: Yao Bai, a member of the later Qin Shi clan, conspired to kill Yao Xing, the later Qin sovereign, but was unsuccessful and was killed.

古文：秦主兴入寇湖城，弘农太守陶仲山、华山太守董迈皆降之。
现代文：后秦国主姚兴率军进犯东晋的湖城，东晋弘农太守陶仲山、华山太守董迈都投降了他。
English: Later, Yao Xing, the ruler of Qin, led an army to invade Hucheng in East Jin, and the East Jin governor Tao Zhongshan and Huashan governor Dong Mai both surrendered to him.

古文：遂至陕城，进寇上洛，拔之。
现代文：后秦军队便很快抵达陕城，进犯并攻克了上洛。
English: The post-Qin army soon arrived in Shaanxi, attacked and conquered Shangluo.

古文：遣姚崇寇洛阳，河南太守夏侯宗之固守金墉，崇攻之不克，乃徙流民二万馀户而还。
现代文：姚兴又派遣姚崇进犯洛阳，河南太守夏侯宗之坚守在金墉，姚崇进攻而没有攻克，他便裹胁迁移二万多户流民撤回。
English: Yao Xing also sent Yao Chong to invade Luoyang, and the governor of Henan Province, Xia Houzong, held out in Jinyu. Yao Chong attacked but did not conquer, so he retreated under the threat of relocating more than 20,000 displaced households.

古文：武都氐屠飞、啖铁等据方山以叛秦，兴遣姚绍等讨之，斩飞、铁。
现代文：武都的氐族人屠飞、啖铁等人占据了方山背叛后秦。姚兴派姚绍等人去讨伐，斩杀了屠飞和啖铁。
English: The Yi people of Wudu, including Tu Fei and Bao Tie, occupied Fangshan after the Qin rebellion. Yao Xing sent Yao Shao and others to fight, and killed Tu Fei and Bao Tie.

古文：兴勤于政事，延纳善言，京兆杜瑾等皆以论事得显拔，天水姜龛等以儒学见尊礼，给事黄门侍郎古成诜等以文章参机密。
现代文：姚兴对于国家的军政大事非常勤勉努力，并且善于接受采纳、征求一些好的意见，京兆人杜瑾等人因为经常议论国事而得到荣升提拔，天水人姜龛等人因为精通儒家学说而受到尊重和礼敬，给事黄门侍郎古成诜等人因为文章写得好而参预朝廷的机要。
English: Yao Xing worked very diligently for the country's military and political events, and was good at accepting and soliciting some good opinions. Beijing Zhao's Du Qian and others were promoted because they often discussed national affairs. Tianshui's Jiang Qian and others were respected and respected because they were proficient in Confucianism. Huangmen waiter Gu Chengyu and others were given the opportunity to attend the imperial court because their articles were well written.

古文：诜刚介雅正，以风教为己任。
现代文：古成诜为人刚直耿介、高雅正派，以维护道德、风尚作为自己的责任。
English: Gu Chengyu was an upright, elegant and decent person, who took it as his responsibility to uphold morality and fashion.

古文：京兆韦高慕阮籍之为人，居母丧，弹琴馀酒；诜闻之而泣，持剑求高，欲杀之，高惧而逃匿。
现代文：京兆人韦高仰慕阮籍的为人，母亲去世后的守丧期间，一边弹琴，一边饮酒。古成诜听说这件事之后，潸然流泪，提着佩剑去找韦高，准备杀了他。
English: During the mourning period after his mother's death, Wei Gao, a resident of Jingzhao, admired Nguyen Quan. He played the piano and drank alcohol at the same time. When Gu Chengtao heard about this, he burst into tears and went to Wei Gao with a sword, ready to kill him.

古文：中山饥甚，慕容麟帅二万馀人出据新市。
现代文：韦高非常害怕，逃走之后藏了起来。中山城里的饥荒越来越严重，慕容麟带领二万多人出城据守新市。
English: Wei Gao was very scared and hid after escaping. The famine in Zhongshan was getting worse and worse, and Murong Lin led more than twenty thousand people out of the city to defend the new city.

古文：甲子晦，魏王珪进军攻之。
现代文：甲子晦，魏王拓跋指挥军队进攻慕容麟。
English: At the turn of the century, Wei King Tuoba led the army to attack Muronglin.

古文：太史令晁崇曰： 不吉。
现代文：太史令晁崇说： 今天很不吉利。
English: "Today is very unlucky," Mr. Taishi told Mr. Yu.

古文：昔纣以甲子亡，谓之疾日，兵家忌之。 
现代文：过去纣王就是在甲子这天灭亡的，因此人们都把这天叫疾日，用兵的人忌讳这一天。 
English: In the past, the warlord died on this day, so people called this day the day of illness, and soldiers avoided this day.

古文：珪曰： 纣以甲子亡，周武不以甲子兴乎？ 
现代文：拓跋说： 纣王在甲子这天死，周武王不是在甲子这天兴起吗？ 
English: Tuoba said, "King Yao died on this day in Jiazi, but didn't King Zhouwu rise on this day in Jiazi?"

古文：崇无以对。
现代文：晁崇没有什么话可以回答。
English: Hao Chong had nothing to say.

古文：冬，十月，丙寅，麟退阻泒水。
现代文：冬季，十月，丙寅，慕容麟撤退到水去据守。
English: In winter, in October, He Yin and Murong Lin retreated to the water to defend themselves.

古文：甲戌，珪与麟战于义台，大破之，斩首九千馀级。麟与数十骑驰取妻子入西山，遂奔鄴。
现代文：甲戌，拓跋与慕容麟在义台展开激战，把后燕军打得落花流水，有九千多人被杀，慕容麟与几十个骑兵跑过去救出自己的妻子儿女逃进西山，随后又逃奔邺城。
English: Jia Jiao, Tuoba and Murong Lin fought a fierce battle in Yidai, beating the Houyan Army to a standstill. More than nine thousand people were killed. Murong Lin and dozens of cavalrymen ran over to rescue their wives and children and fled into the West Mountain, and then fled to Lucheng.

古文：甲申，魏克中山，燕公卿、尚书、将吏、士卒降者二万馀人。
现代文：甲申，北魏军队攻克中山，后燕的王公贵族、文武官吏以及士卒人等投降的有二万多人。
English: In Jiaxing, the Northern Wei army conquered Zhongshan. In Houyan, more than 20,000 princes, nobles, civil and military officials, and soldiers surrendered.

古文：张骧、李沈等先尝降魏，复亡去；珪入城，皆赦之。
现代文：张骧、李沈以前曾经投降过北魏国，后来又再次逃走，拓跋进城后，全部赦免了他们。
English: Zhang Ye and Li Shen had previously surrendered to the Northern Wei Dynasty, and later fled again. After Tuoba entered the city, he pardoned them all.

古文：得燕玺缓，图书、府库珍宝以万数，班赏群臣将士有差。
现代文：北魏兵所缴获的后燕的御玺印绶、图书典籍以及藏在府库中的奇珍异宝，都数以万计。北魏论功奖赏文武百官以及将帅士兵等有功人员。
English: The Northern Wei soldiers seized tens of thousands of Houyan's imperial seal seals, books and rare treasures hidden in the government treasury. The Northern Wei's merit awards were given to hundreds of officials and soldiers.

古文：追谥弟觚为秦愍王。发慕容详冢，斩其尸；收杀觚者高霸、程同，皆夷五族，以大刃剉之。
现代文：追谥拓跋的弟弟拓跋觚为秦愍王，掘开慕容详的坟墓，斩下尸首上头颅，抓住了杀害拓跋觚的主谋高霸、程同，把他们二人的五族亲属全部杀掉，并且用大刀一个个剁成肉块。
English: He pursued Tuoba Tuoba's younger brother, Tuoba Tuoba, who was the king of Qin Dynasty, dug up his grave, cut off the top of his head, caught the mastermind of Tuoba Tuoba's murder, Gaoba and Cheng Tong, killed all their relatives of the five ethnic groups, and cut them into pieces with a big knife.

古文：丁亥，遣三万骑就卫王仪，将攻鄴。
现代文：丁亥，拓跋又派遣三万骑兵到卫王拓跋仪那里去增援，准备进攻邺城。
English: Dinghai, Tuoba sent another thirty thousand cavalry to Wei Wang Tuoba to reinforce and prepare to attack Shicheng.

古文：秦长水校尉姚珍奔西秦，西秦王乾归以女妻之。
现代文：后秦长水校尉姚珍投奔西秦，西秦国主乞伏乾归把女儿嫁给他。
English: After Qin Changshui Captain Yao Zhen defected to West Qin, the ruler of West Qin begged Qian Rui to marry his daughter to him.

古文：河南鲜卑吐秣等十二部大人，皆附于秃发乌孤。
现代文：河南鲜卑族吐秣等十二个部落的首领，全部归附于秃发乌孤。
English: The leaders of twelve tribes, such as the Tubo of the Xianbei tribe in Henan Province, all belong to the Bald-faced Black Goat.

古文：燕人有自中山至龙城者，言拓跋涉珪衰弱，司徒德完守鄴城。
现代文：后燕国有从中山跑到龙城的人，说拓跋的力量已经衰微薄弱，司徒慕容德完好地坚守着邺城。
English: The people who ran from Zhongshan to Longcheng in the late Yan state said that the strength of Tuoba was already weak and weak, and that St. Mu Rongde was still holding fast to Lucheng.

古文：会德表至，劝燕主宝南还，宝于是大简士马，将复取中原。
现代文：正好此时有慕容德的一道奏章送到，说服后燕国主慕容宝回到南边，慕容宝大量遴选、征集士卒和兵马，准备重新夺取中原。
English: Just at this time, one of Murongde's sonatas was sent to him to persuade the lord of Houyan, Murong Bao, to return to the south. Murong Bao selected and recruited a large number of soldiers and horses and prepared to recapture the Central Plains.

古文：遣鸿胪鲁邃册拜德为丞相、冀州牧，南夏公候牧守皆听承制封拜。
现代文：他派遣鸿胪鲁邃在邺城任命慕容德为丞相、冀州牧，南部各公侯官吏都由慕容德全权任命。
English: He dispatched Hongbi Luqi to appoint Murongde as chancellor and governor of Jizhou in Handan City, and all the officials of the southern provinces were appointed by Murongde with full power.

古文：十一月，癸丑，燕大赦。
现代文：十一月，癸丑，后燕实行大赦。
English: In November, Gongushi and Houyan were granted amnesty.

古文：十二月，调兵悉集，戒严在顿，遣将军启仑南视形势。
现代文：十二月，调派的部队全部集结完毕，整装待发。慕容宝先派将军启仑南下，去观察形势。
English: In December, after all the transferred troops were assembled and ready to go, Murong Baosheng sent General Qilian to the south to observe the situation.

古文：乙亥，慕容麟至鄴，复称赵王，说范阳王德曰： 魏既克中山，将乘胜攻鄴，鄴中虽有蓄积，然城大难固，且人心恇惧，不可守也。
现代文：乙亥，慕容麟来到邺城，恢复自己赵王的称号，向范阳王慕容德游说： 魏既然已经攻克了中山，就一定要乘胜来攻打邺城。邺城中虽然有一些储备，但是，城池太大，很难固守，况且人心又慌乱恐惧，不可能守住。
English: Eihei and Muronglin came to Lucheng to restore their title of King Zhao, and lobbied Fanyang King Murongde: Since Wei has conquered Zhongshan, they must take advantage of the victory to attack Lucheng. Although there are some reserves in Lucheng, the city is too large and difficult to defend, and moreover, people's hearts are panicked and fearful, and it is impossible to defend.

古文：不如南趣滑台，阻河以待魏，伺衅而动，河北庶可复也。 
现代文：不如向南进军滑台，依靠黄河天险加强防守来对付魏，等待时机，再采取行动。那样，黄河以北或许可以收复。 
English: It is better to march to the south of the slide, rely on the Yellow River to strengthen the defense to deal with Wei, wait for the opportunity, and then take action. In that way, the north of the Yellow River may be recovered.

古文：时鲁阳王和镇滑台，和，垂之弟子也，亦遣使迎德，德许之。
现代文：这时，后燕鲁阳王慕容和正在镇守滑台。慕容和是慕容垂的侄儿，他也正好派遣使者前来迎接慕容德。
English: At this time, the late Yanluyang King Murong He was guarding the slide. Murong He was the nephew of Murong Du, and he also sent an envoy to meet Murong De.

