古文：公食大夫之礼。使大夫戒，各以其爵。
现代文：主国国君用食礼招待来聘问的大夫的礼仪：国君派大夫到馆舍告诉来聘的大夫，各自按相同的爵位去告之。
English: The etiquette for the host country's sovereign to invite a visiting doctor with a meal gift: The sovereign sends a doctor to the embassy to tell the visiting doctor, and they each report it according to the same rank.

古文：上介出请，入告。
现代文：上介出门问来馆舍有何事，进门报告。
English: The petitioner went out to ask what had happened to the library, and the report came through the door.

古文：三辞。
现代文：辞谢三次后答应。
English: He said yes after thanking me three times.

古文：宾出，拜辱。大夫不答拜，将命。
现代文：主宾出外门，为主国的大夫屈尊来迎接自己行拜礼。大夫不回拜，转达国君的命令。
English: The chief guest goes out and pays homage to the host country's doctor to greet him. The doctor does not return the salute, but conveys the sovereign's orders.

古文：宾再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾再拜稽首，接受国君的命令。
English: The chief guest bowed his head again and accepted the sovereign's order.

古文：大夫还，宾不拜送，遂从之。
现代文：大夫返回复命。主宾送行，不行拜礼，于是跟随大夫前往。
English: The doctor returned to resume his duties. The chief guest went to see him off, but was not able to pray, so he followed the doctor.

古文：宾朝服即位于大门外，如聘。
现代文：主宾穿朝服在大门外就位，如同聘礼。
English: The chief guest, dressed in court attire, takes his place outside the main gate, like a bridegroom.

古文：即位，具。羹定，甸人陈鼎七，当门，南面西上，设扃鼏，鼏若束若编。
现代文：甸人陈列七个鼎，对着门，面向南，以西为上位，设置鼎杠、鼎盖，鼎盖用茅草，或者捆扎，或者编结。
English: The dian people displayed seven rings, facing the door, facing south, with the west as the upper level, setting the ring bar, the ring cover, the ring cover with thatch, or tying, or knitting.

古文：设洗如飨。
现代文：洗的摆放位置与飨礼相同。
English: The place for washing is the same as that for bowing.

古文：小臣具槃匜，在东堂下。
现代文：小臣在东堂下为国君摆放盛水的盘和匜。
English: Under the East Hall, the vassals set out water dishes and bowls for the sovereign.

古文：宰夫设筵，加席、几。
现代文：宰夫在户西摆放蒲筵，在室中摆放萑席，在左边摆放几。
English: In the west of the house, Zayu placed a cormorant, in the middle of the room he placed a table, and on the left he placed a few.

古文：无尊。
现代文：没有酒尊。
English: There is no alcohol.

古文：饮酒、浆饮，俟于东房。
现代文：清酒、酨浆放在东房。
English: Sake and maple syrup are stored in the east room.

古文：凡宰夫之具，馔于东房。
现代文：凡是宰夫掌管的饮食器具、饭食都在东房。
English: All the eating and drinking utensils and food that Zaif is in charge of are in the east room.

古文：公如宾服迎宾于大门内。大夫纳宾。
现代文：主国国君如同主宾一样穿朝服，在大门内迎接主宾。
English: The host country's sovereign, dressed in a royal robe like the chief guest, greets the chief guest inside the gate.

古文：宾入门左，公再拜；宾辟，再拜稽首。
现代文：大夫按国君的命令引主宾进入，主宾进门，站在西方。国君两次行拜礼，主宾避开，再拜稽首。
English: According to the sovereign's order, the doctor led the chief guest in, and the chief guest entered the door and stood in the west. The sovereign performed two prostrations, the chief guest avoided them, and then bowed his head.

古文：公揖入，宾从。及庙门，公揖入。宾入，三揖。
现代文：国君拱手行礼进入，主宾跟随着，到祢庙的庙门，国君拱手行礼进入，主宾进入，每到转弯处拱手行礼，对着碑拱手行礼，相人偶拱手行礼。
English: The sovereign enters with a bow, the chief guest follows, to the temple gate of your temple, the sovereign enters with a bow, the chief guest enters, at every turn they bow, they bow to the monument, they bow to the doll.

古文：至于阶，三让。公升二等，宾升。
现代文：到达台阶，三次谦让，国君登上二级台阶后，主宾登阶。
English: After reaching the steps, three times to yield. After the sovereign ascended the second step, the chief guest ascended the steps.

古文：大夫立于东夹南，西面北上。
现代文：主国的大夫站在正堂的东边，面朝西，以北为上位。
English: The doctor of the host country stood on the east side of the main hall, facing west, with the north as the upper level.

古文：士立于门东，北面西上。
现代文：士站在门的东边，面朝北，以西边为上位。
English: The priests stood on the east side of the gate, facing north, with the west side at the top.

古文：小臣，东堂下，南面西上。
现代文：小臣在东堂下，面朝南，以西边为上位。
English: The ministers are in the lower part of the east hall, facing south, with the west side at the top.

古文：宰，东夹北，西面南上。
现代文：宰在东夹屋北边堂下，面朝西以南边为上位。
English: The slaughterhouse is at the bottom of the hall on the north side of the east wing, and faces west, with the top floor on the south side.

古文：内官之士在宰东北，西面南上。
现代文：内宰属下的士在宰的东北方，面朝西以南边为上位。
English: Those subordinate to the Inner Clerk are in the north-east of the Clerk, and those facing west and south are higher-ranking.

古文：介，门西，北面西上。
现代文：介在门的西边，面朝北以西边为上位。
English: It is located on the west side of the gate, facing north, with the west side being the highest.

古文：公当楣北乡，至壹拜，宾降也，公再拜。
现代文：国君与梁齐，面向北，主宾到达堂上，国君两次行拜礼，主宾下堂，国君两次行拜礼。
English: The sovereign and Liang Qi face north. When the chief guest arrives at the hall, the sovereign performs two prostrations. When the chief guest leaves the hall, the sovereign performs two prostrations.

古文：宾，西阶东，北面答拜。
现代文：主宾在西阶的东边，面朝北回拜。
English: The chief guest is on the east side of the west steps, facing north.

古文：摈者辞，拜也；公降一等。
现代文：摈者辞谢主宾回拜，主宾仍行拜礼，国君走下一级台阶亲自辞谢。
English: Those who bowed and thanked the chief guest bowed back, the chief guest still bowed, and the sovereign personally bowed and thanked the chief guest.

古文：辞曰：宾粟阶升，不拜，命之成拜，阶上北面再拜稽首。
现代文：摈者辞谢说： 敝国国君跟随您下堂，将要行拜礼，您还是起来吧。 主宾连步上台阶登堂，不行拜礼。国君命主宾完成拜礼，主宾在台阶上面朝北再拜稽首。
English: The eunuch thanked the king and said, "Your majesty, the king of the country is following you down the hall, and you are about to perform a religious service, so why don't you get up. The chief guest must walk up the steps to enter the hall, and cannot perform a religious service. The king ordered the chief guest to complete the religious service, and the chief guest bowed his head facing north at the top of the steps.

古文：士举鼎，去鼏于外，次于。陈鼎于碑南，南面西上。
现代文：士扛鼎，在门外去掉鼎盖，按顺序进入，在碑的南边摆放鼎，以西边为上位。
English: The scholars carry the tripod, remove the tripod cover outside the door, enter in order, and place the tripod on the south side of the monument, with the west side as the upper side.

古文：右人抽扃，坐奠于鼎西南，顺出自鼎西，左人待载。
现代文：鼎右的人抽出鼎杠，坐下把杠放在鼎的西边，南北方向放置。从鼎的西边出来。
English: The person on the right pulls out the rod, sits down and places the rod on the west side of the rod, facing north-south. Come out from the west side of the rod.

古文：雍人以俎入，陈于鼎南。
现代文：鼎左的人等着把鼎中的牲肉取出放在俎上。
English: The person on the left is waiting to take out the meat from the middle of the ring and place it on the roller.

古文：旅人南面加匕于鼎，退。
现代文：雍人拿着俎进来，把俎摆放在鼎的南边，旅人面朝南，把取食物的匕放在鼎上，退出。
English: Yong people come in with a basket, put the basket on the south side of the tripod, travelers face south, put the food basket on the tripod, and exit.

古文：大人长盥洗东南，西面北上，序进盥。
现代文：大夫站在洗的东南洗手，大夫们面朝西，以北为上位，依序进前洗手。
English: The doctor stands in the southeast of the wash and washes his hands, the doctors face west, with the north as the upper level, and wash their hands in order.

古文：退者与进者交于前。
现代文：退回的人和进前的人在洗的南边交错。
English: Returnees and newcomers intersect on the south side of the wash.

古文：卒盥，序进，南面匕。
现代文：洗手完毕，依次到碑的南边，鼎的北边，面朝南用匕取鼎中的牲肉。
English: After washing their hands, they went to the south side of the monument, the north side of the ding, and the south side of the ding to pick up the livestock meat.

古文：载者西面。
现代文：左人面朝西。
English: The left person faces west.

古文：鱼腊饪。
现代文：鱼和腊物煮熟。
English: The fish and pork are cooked.

古文：载体进奏。
现代文：载放牲体和腊物进前，肉皮朝上。
English: Load and unload the animal and the bacon and move forward, with the meat skin facing up.

古文：鱼七，缩俎，寝右。
现代文：鱼七条，纵放在俎上，鱼的右半朝下。
English: Seven fish, placed vertically on the bait, with the right half of the fish facing down.

古文：肠、胃七，同俎。
现代文：肠胃七份，放在同一俎上。
English: Seven portions of intestines and stomach, placed on the same tray.

古文：伦肤七。
现代文：纹理精细的猎肋条肉七份。
English: Seven portions of finely textured rib eye steak.

古文：肠、胃、肤，皆横诸俎，垂之。
现代文：肠胃和肋条肉都横放在俎上，两边下垂。
English: The intestines and ribs are laid horizontally on the yoke, hanging down on both sides.

古文：大夫既匕，匕奠于鼎，逆退，复位。
现代文：大夫已经用完匕，把匕放在鼎上。按与进前时相反的顺序退下，回到原位。
English: The doctor, having used up his forceps, placed them on the top of the canopy. He retreated in the opposite order to that in which he had advanced, and returned to his original position.

古文：公降盥，宾降，公辞。
现代文：国君下堂洗手，主宾下堂，国君辞谢。
English: The sovereign goes down to the hall to wash his hands, the chief guest goes down to the hall, and the sovereign says thank you.

古文：卒盥，公壹揖壹让。公升，宾升。
现代文：洗完手，国君拱手行礼一次，谦让一次，国君登堂，主宾登堂。
English: After washing his hands, the sovereign bowed his head and made a salute once, bowed once, the sovereign entered the hall, and the chief guest entered the hall.

古文：宰夫自东房授醯酱，公设之。
现代文：宰夫由东房出来，把用醋和的酱交给国君，国君亲自摆放它。
English: Zayu came out from the east room and handed the vinegar and sauce to the sovereign, who placed it there himself.

古文：宾辞，北面坐迁而东迁所。
现代文：主宾辞谢，面朝北跪下移动醋酱，向东移动到当放的位置。
English: The chief guest said thank you, kneeled down facing north to move the vinegar sauce, and moved east to the right place.

古文：公立于序内，西乡。宾立于阶西，疑立。
现代文：国君站在东墙内，面向西，主宾站在台阶的西边，正立不动。
English: The sovereign stood inside the east wall, facing west, and the chief guest stood on the west side of the steps, standing still.

古文：宰夫自东房荐豆六，设于酱东，西上，韭菹，以东醓醢、昌本；昌本南麋臡以西菁菹、鹿臡。
现代文：宰夫由东房进献豆六，摆放在酱的东边，以西边为上位。腌韭菜往东是肉汁酱，腌蒲根，腌蒲根的南边是带骨的麋肉酱，在西是腌韭菜花，带骨的鹿肉酱。
English: Zaif from the east room into the offering bean six, placed on the east side of the sauce, with the west side as the top. Leek to the east is gravy sauce, calamus root, the south side of the calamus root is boned stew sauce, in the west is chive flowers, boned venison sauce.

古文：士设俎于豆南，西上，牛、羊、豕，鱼在牛南，腊、肠、胃亚之，肤以为特。
现代文：士在豆的南边摆放俎，以西为上位。牛、羊、豕，鱼在牛的南边。腊、肠、胃依次往东。
English: Cows, sheep, donkeys, and fish are placed on the south side of the cow, while wax, intestines, and stomach are placed on the east side.

古文：旅人取匕，甸人举鼎，顺出，奠于其所。
现代文：猪肋条肉单独一行。旅人拿匕，甸人抬鼎，顺次而出，放在对着门的地方。
English: The pork ribs were in a separate line. The traveller took the tongs, the dean carried the spoon, and they went out one by one and placed them in front of the door.

古文：宰夫设黍、稷六簋于俎西，二以并，东北上。
现代文：宰夫在俎的西边摆放六簋黍、稷，二二并列，以东北方为上位。
English: On the west side of the yakitori, Zaif placed six yakitori and eight yakitori, two and two side by side, with the northeast at the top.

古文：黍当牛俎，其西稷，错以终，南陈。
现代文：黍对着牛俎，它的西边是稷，交错排完，往南陈设。
English: The yakitori is facing the beef yakitori, and the yakitori is on the west side of the yakitori. The yakitori is arranged in a staggered row, facing south.

古文：大羹湆，不和，实于镫。
现代文：煮肉汁，没有盐、菜拌和，放在瓦豆里。
English: Boil the gravy, without salt, mix with the vegetables and place in the wazu.

古文：宰右执镫，左执盖，由门入，升自阼阶，尽阶，不升堂，授公，以盖降，出，入反位。
现代文：太宰右手拿着瓦豆，左手拿着盖，从庙门外进入，由东阶登上，走到台阶尽头，不登堂，把瓦豆交给国君，拿着盖子走下台阶，出门放下盖子，然后进门回到原位。
English: Dazai held a wazu bean in his right hand and a lid in his left hand, entered from outside the temple gate, ascended from the east steps, walked to the end of the steps, did not enter the hall, handed the wazu bean to the sovereign, walked down the steps holding the lid, went out and put down the lid, then entered the door and returned to his original position.

古文：公设之于酱西，宾辞，坐迁之。
现代文：国君把瓦豆放在酱的西边，主宾辞谢，坐下往东移。
English: The sovereign placed the beans on the west side of the sauce, and the guest of honor bowed, sat down, and moved to the east.

古文：宰夫设鉶四于豆西，东上，牛以西羊，羊南豕豕以东牛。
现代文：宰夫在豆的西边摆放四只盛菜和羹的鼎，以东为上位。牛肉羹的西边是羊肉羹，羊肉羹的南边是猪肉羹，猪肉羹的东边是牛肉羹。
English: Zayu placed four dishes of vegetables and bean jelly on the west side of the bean, with the east being the highest. The west side of the beef jelly is lamb jelly, the south side of the lamb jelly is pork jelly, and the east side of the pork jelly is beef jelly.

古文：饮酒，实于觯，加于丰。
现代文：把清酒斟在觯中，放在丰上。
English: Pour the sake into the bowl and place it on top of the broth.

古文：宰夫右执觯，左执丰，进设于豆东。
现代文：宰夫右手拿着觯，左手拿着丰，进前摆放在豆的东边。
English: Zayu holds the bean in his right hand and the bean in his left hand. He moves forward and places them on the east side of the beans.

古文：宰夫东面，坐启簋会，各却于其西。
现代文：宰夫面朝东，坐下揭开簋的盖子，各仰放在簋的西边。
English: Zayf faces east, sits down, opens the lid of the jar, and places his back on the west side of the jar.

古文：赞者负东房，南面，告具于公。
现代文：佐助的人背向着东房，面朝南，报告国君正馔准备完毕。
English: Sasuke's men, with their backs to the East Room and their faces to the south, reported that the Emperor was ready to leave.

古文：公再拜，揖食，宾降拜，公辞，宾升，再拜稽首。
现代文：国君两次行拜礼，拱手请主宾进食。主宾下堂行拜谢。国君辞谢。主宾登堂，再拜稽首。
English: The sovereign performs two prostrations, bowing his head to invite the chief guest to eat. The chief guest goes down the hall to offer thanks. The sovereign declines. The chief guest enters the hall and bows his head again.

古文：宾升席，坐取韭菹，以辩擩于醢，上豆之间祭。
现代文：主宾登上席位，坐下取腌韭菜，一一浸入到肉酱里，在腌韭菜和肉酱两豆之间祭。
English: The chief guest climbed onto the seat, sat down to pick up the stew, dipped into the meat sauce one by one, and feasted between the stew and the meat sauce.

古文：赞者东面坐取黍，实于左手，辩，又取稷，辩，反于右手，兴，以授宾，宾祭之。
现代文：佐助的人面朝东坐下取黄米饭，放在左手中，一一取过，又取小米饭，一一取过，放回右手。站起来交给主宾，主宾祭饭。
English: Sasuke sat down with his face to the east, picked up the yellow rice, placed it in his left hand, picked it up one by one, then picked up the millet rice, picked it up one by one, and placed it back in his right hand. He stood up and handed it to the chief guest, the chief guest's meal.

古文：三牲之肺不离，赞者辩取之，壹以授宾。
现代文：把牛羊豕三牲的肺切断，佐助的人逐一取过来，一一交给主宾。
English: Sasuke's men cut out the lungs of the three victims, a cow, a sheep and a donkey, and took them one by one, handing them over to the chief guest.

古文：宾兴爱，坐祭。兑手，扱上鉶以柶，辩擩之，上鉶之间祭。
现代文：主宾站起来接受，坐下祭，主宾擦手，用角制祭勺舀取放在上位的小鼎中的菜，逐一浸入其他三个小鼎中。
English: The chief guest stands up to accept, sits down for the offering, the chief guest wipes his hands, scoops up the dish placed in the higher kodin with a square serving spoon, and dips it one by one into the other three kodin.

古文：祭饮酒于上豆之间。
现代文：在上位盛有牛肉羹的小鼎和盛有羊肉羹的小鼎之间祭。在上豆之间祭清酒。
English: There is a festival in the upper tier between the side dishes with beef jelly and the side dishes with lamb jelly. Between the side dishes with beans, there is a festival with sake.

古文：鱼、腊、酱、湆不祭。
现代文：鱼、腊、酱、湆不祭。
English: Fish, wax, sauce, and candy are not offered.

古文：宰夫授公饭粱，公设之于湆西。宾北面辞，坐迁之。
现代文：宰夫把小米饭递给国君，国君把它放在肉羹汁的西边，主宾面朝北辞谢，坐下往西移放。
English: The head waiter passed the millet rice to the sovereign, who placed it to the west of the meat soup. The chief guest bowed his thanks to the north, sat down and moved to the west.

古文：公与宾皆复初位。
现代文：国君和主宾都回到原位。
English: Both the sovereign and the chief guest returned to their original positions.

古文：宰夫□善稻于粱西。
现代文：宰夫进献稻米饭，放在小米饭的西边。
English: Zaif brought rice and placed it on the west side of the millet rice.

古文：士羞庶羞，皆有大、盖，执豆如宰。
现代文：士进献各种美味食物，都有大块的肉放在上面，食器上有盖，像太宰那样拿着豆。
English: Dazaifu offers a variety of delicious foods, with large pieces of meat placed on top, covered dishes, and beans like Dazaifu.

古文：先者反之，由门入，升自西阶。先者一人升，设于稻南簋西，间容人。
现代文：先进献的人返回门外拿取，再由门进入，从西阶登堂，先进献的人一人登堂，把食物放在稻米饭的南边，黄米和小米饭的西边，主宾可中间往来。
English: The first-come-first-served person returns outside the door to take it, then enters through the door, and enters the hall from the west steps. The first-come-first-served person enters the hall alone, and places the food on the south side of the rice, and on the west side of the yellow rice and the millet. The main guests can come and go between them.

古文：旁四列，西北上，膷以东，臐、膮、牛炙。
现代文：偏西的一旁摆放四列美味食物，以西北为上位。牛肉羹的东边是羊肉羹，羊肉羹的东边是猪肉羹、烤牛肉。
English: Four rows of delicious food are placed on the west side, with the northwest at the top. On the east side of beef jelly is mutton jelly, on the east side of mutton jelly is pork jelly and roast beef.

古文：炙南醢以西，牛胾、醢、牛鮨，鮨南羊炙，以东羊胾、醢、豕炙，炙南醢，以西豕胾、芥酱、鱼脍。
现代文：烤牛肉的南边是肉酱，往西是牛肉块、肉酱、牛鮨。牛鮨的南边是烤羊肉，往东是羊肉块、肉酱。烤猪肉，烤猪肉的南边是肉酱，往西是猪肉块、芥菜酱、鱼脍。
English: To the south of the roast beef is meat sauce, to the west is beef cubes, meat sauce, beef brisket. To the south of the beef brisket is roast lamb, to the east is lamb cubes, meat sauce. Roast pork, to the south of roast pork is meat sauce, to the west is pork cubes, mustard sauce, fish sauce.

古文：众人腾羞者尽阶、不升堂，授，以盖降，出。
现代文：进献食物的众人走完台阶，不登堂，交给先进献的人，拿着盖走下台阶，出门。
English: After all the people who donated food have walked up the steps, they don't go into the church, they hand it over to the person who donated first, take the cover and walk down the steps and out the door.

古文：赞者负东房，告备于公。
现代文：佐助的人背向着东房，向国君报告，各种美味食物都准备完毕。
English: Sasuke's men, with their backs to the east room, reported to the sovereign that all kinds of delicious food had been prepared.

古文：赞升宾。宾坐席末，取粱，即稻，祭于酱湆间。
现代文：佐助的人按国君的命令让主宾登堂就席。主宾在席的未端坐下取粱米，就手取稻米饭，在酱和肉羹汁中间祭。
English: Sasuke's men ordered the chief guest to take a seat in the hall. The chief guest sat down at the end of the table and took a bowl of glutinous rice. He then took a bowl of rice and dipped it in the sauce and meat soup.

古文：赞者北面坐，辩取庶羞之大，兴，一以授宾。
现代文：佐助的人面朝北坐下，遍取美味食物中的大肉块，站起来，一一交给主宾。
English: Sasuke sits down with his face to the north, picks up large pieces of meat from the delicious food, stands up, and hands them over to the main guest.

古文：宾受，兼壹祭之。
现代文：主宾一一接受，一次同时祭。
English: The chief guests were received one by one, and a simultaneous ceremony was held.

古文：宾降拜，公辞。
现代文：主宾下堂拜谢，国君辞谢。
English: The chief guest bowed his thanks, and the sovereign bowed his thanks.

古文：宾升，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾登堂，两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: The chief guest enters the church, performs two prostrations, and performs the ceremonial head salute.

古文：公答再拜。
现代文：国君再次回拜。
English: The Emperor bowed again.

古文：宾北面自间坐，左拥簠粱，右执湆，以降。
现代文：主宾面朝北，在正馔和加馔之间坐下，左手抱着盛有粱米的簠，右手拿着盛有肉羹汁的小鼎，下堂。
English: The chief guest faces north, sits down between the main bowl and side bowls, holds a bowl of glutinous rice in his left hand and a small bowl of meat soup in his right hand, and leaves the hall.

古文：公辞。宾西面坐奠于阶西，东面对，西面坐取之；栗阶升，北面反奠于其所；降辞公。
现代文：国君辞谢，主宾面朝西坐下，把拿着的食物放在台阶西边，面朝东回答，面朝西坐下拿取放下的食物。一步两级台阶地登堂，面朝北把食物放回原来的位置，下堂辞谢国君。
English: The sovereign declined, the guest of honor sat down facing west, placed the food he was holding on the west side of the steps, answered facing east, sat down facing west to pick up the food he had set down. He entered the hall two steps at a time, facing north, put the food back in its original place, and declined the sovereign.

古文：公许，宾升，公揖退于箱。摈者退，负东塾而立。
现代文：国君允许，主宾登堂，国君拱手行礼，退到东厢，摈者退回，背对东塾站立。
English: With the sovereign's permission, the chief guest enters the hall, the sovereign makes a bow, retreats to the east wing, and those who are absent return and stand with their backs to the east wing.

古文：宾坐，遂卷加席，公不辞。
现代文：主宾坐下，于是把加席卷起，国君不辞谢。
English: The chief guest sat down, so the attendant rolled it up, and the sovereign thanked him profusely.

古文：宾三饭以湆酱。
现代文：主宾就肉汁羹和酱吃三口饭。
English: The chief guest finished eating three mouthfuls of rice with gravy soup and sauce.

古文：宰夫执觯浆饮与其丰以进。宾兑手，兴受。
现代文：宰夫拿着斟有浆饮的觯和承托觯的丰进前，主宾擦手，站起来接受。
English: The host wipes his hands and stands up to receive it, before the host takes the bowl filled with syrup and the supporting bowl of plentiful rice.

古文：宰夫设其丰于稻西。
现代文：宰夫把丰摆放在稻米饭的西边。
English: Zaif placed the cornucopia on the west side of the rice.

古文：庭实设。
现代文：陈设庭实。
English: The judge's decision is final.

古文：宾坐祭，遂饮，奠于丰上。
现代文：主宾坐下祭，然后饮尽觯中浆饮，把觯放在丰上。
English: The chief guest sits down for the ceremony, and then drinks all the broth from the yakitori, placing the yakitori on top of the bonito.

古文：公受宰夫束帛以侑，西乡立。
现代文：国君接受宰夫送上的束帛，用来酬谢主宾，面向西站立。
English: The sovereign accepted a bunch of strawberries sent by Zaif, which he used to thank the chief guest, and stood facing west.

古文：宾降筵，北面。
现代文：主宾走下筵席，面朝北。
English: The chief guest stepped down from the table, facing north.

古文：摈者进相币。
现代文：摈者进前辅佐国君送上礼物。
English: Those who did not come forward were presented with gifts by the assistant governor.

古文：宾降辞币，升听命，降拜。
现代文：主宾下堂辞谢礼物，登堂，听从国君的命令，下堂拜谢。
English: The chief guest leaves the hall with a thank-you gift, enters the hall, obeys the command of the sovereign, and leaves the hall to give thanks.

古文：公辞。
现代文：国君辞谢。
English: The Emperor withdrew his thanks.

古文：宾升，再拜稽首，受币，当东楹，北面；退，西楹西，东面立。
现代文：主宾登堂，再拜稽首，接受礼物。对着东楹柱，面朝北，退回到西楹柱的西边，面朝东站立。
English: The chief guest enters the hall, bows his head again and accepts the gift. Facing the east pillar, he faces north, retreats to the west side of the west pillar, and stands facing east.

古文：公壹拜，宾降也，公再拜。
现代文：国君行一次拜礼，主宾下堂，国君两次行拜礼。
English: The sovereign performs one prayer, the chief guest leaves the hall, and the sovereign performs two prayers.

古文：介逆出。
现代文：介在主宾前出门。
English: Go out in front of the chief guest.

古文：宾北面揖，执庭实以出。
现代文：主宾面朝北拱手行礼，拿着庭实出门。
English: The chief guest bowed his head to the north and went out holding the garden.

古文：公降立。上介受宾币，从者讶受皮。
现代文：国君下堂站立，上介接过主宾手中的礼物，从者迎着随主宾出来的主国拿着兽皮的人，接过兽皮。
English: The sovereign came down to the hall and stood up. The host took the gift from the main guest. The attendant greeted the person from the host country who came out with the main guest and took the animal skin.

古文：宾入门左，没霤，北面再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾从门的左边进入，在屋檐的尽头，面朝北，再拜稽首。
English: The chief guest enters from the left side of the door, at the end of the eaves, facing north, and then bows his head.

古文：公辞，揖让如初，升。
现代文：国君辞谢，拱手行礼、谦让同开始时一样，登堂。
English: The sovereign bowed his thanks, bowed his head, bowed his head as he did at the beginning, and entered the hall.

古文：宾再拜稽首，公答再拜。
现代文：主宾再拜稽首，国君回拜两次。
English: The chief guest bowed his head again, and the sovereign bowed twice.

古文：宾降辞公，如初。
现代文：主宾下堂辞谢国君同开始时一样。
English: The chief guest left the hall, thanking the sovereign, just as he had at the beginning.

古文：宾升，公揖退于箱。
现代文：主宾登堂，国君拱手行礼退到东厢。
English: The chief guest entered the hall, and the sovereign bowed his head and retreated to the east wing.

古文：宾卒食会饭，三饮，不以酱湆。
现代文：主宾吃完黍、稷饭，三次饮浆漱口。不用酱和肉汁羹。
English: The chief guest rinsed his mouth three times after eating oysters and risotto. He did not use sauce or gravy broth.

古文：兑手，兴，北面坐，取粱与酱以降，西面坐奠于阶西，东面再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾擦手站起，面朝北坐下取粱米饭和酱下堂，面朝西坐下放在台阶的西边。面朝东两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: The chief guest wipes his hands, stands up, faces north, sits down, takes the glutinous rice and sauce, and leaves the hall. Faces west, sits down, and places it on the west side of the steps. Faces east, performs two prostrations, and performs the ceremonial head bow.

古文：公降，再拜。
现代文：国君下堂，两次行拜礼。
English: The sovereign enters the hall and performs two prostrations.

古文：介逆出，宾出。
现代文：介由进来时相反的方向出去，主宾出门。
English: By going out in the opposite direction from when you came in, the main guest leaves the house.

古文：公送于大门内，再拜。
现代文：国君送到大门内，两次行拜礼。
English: The sovereign was brought to the gate and performed two prostrations.

古文：宾不顾。
现代文：主宾不回视。
English: The chief guest does not look back.

古文：有司卷三牲之俎，归于宾馆。
现代文：有司收起三牲的俎放在篚中，带到主宾的馆舍。
English: A steward gathered up the three sacrificial lambs, placed them in a basket, and took them to the house of the chief guest.

古文：鱼腊不与。
现代文：鱼腊不予。
English: No fish sauce.

古文：明日，宾朝服拜赐于朝，拜食与侑币，皆再拜稽首。
现代文：第二天，主宾穿着朝服到主国国君的大门外拜谢赏赐，拜谢食礼和酬礼，都是两次行拜礼，行稽首礼。
English: On the second day, the chief guest, dressed in court attire, went to the gate of the host country to offer thanks and rewards. The thanksgiving meal and the reward were both performed twice, and the bowing ceremony was performed.

古文：讶听之。上大夫八豆，八簋，六鉶，九俎，鱼腊皆二俎；鱼，肠胃，伦肤，若九，若十有一，下大夫则若七，若九。庶羞，西东毋过四列。
现代文：主国掌管迎候接待的官听凭主宾行拜礼。如果来聘问的是上大夫，食礼是八豆，八簋，六铏，九俎，鱼和腊物都是二个俎，鱼、肠胃、纹理精细的猪肋条肉的数目因官爵不同而不同，或者九，或者十一。下大夫或者是七，或者是九，美味食物东西向排列，不超过四列。
English: The host country's official in charge of welcoming the guests performs a ritual according to the guest of honor. If the guest is a senior doctor, the food gifts are eight beans, eight clams, six clams, nine clams, fish and pork are two clams, and the number of fish, intestines, and finely textured pork ribs varies depending on the official rank, either nine or eleven. The junior doctor is either seven or nine, and the delicious food is arranged east to west, no more than four rows.

古文：上大夫，庶羞二十，加于下大夫，以雉、兔、鹑、鴽。
现代文：上大夫，美味食物二十。比下大夫多加四豆，用的是雉、兔、鹑、鴽。
English: Upper doctor, twenty delicious foods. Four more beans than the lower doctor, used asparagus, rabbit, lettuce, lettuce.

古文：若不亲食，使大夫各以其爵、朝服以侑币致之。
现代文：如果国君不能亲自主持食礼，就派大夫各按爵位穿朝服把食礼的酬谢礼物送上。
English: If the sovereign is unable to hold the meal in person, he or she will send a doctor, each dressed in a court dress according to his or her rank, to present the gift of thanks for the meal.

古文：豆实，实于瓮，陈于楹外，二以并，北陈。簋实，实于筐，陈于楹内、两楹间，二以并，南陈。
现代文：腌菜、肉酱等放在瓦器里，陈放在楹柱外，两两并列，往北陈放，黍稷饭等放在筐里，陈放在楹柱内，在两楹柱间，两两并列，往南陈放。
English: Leek, meat sauce, etc. are placed in a clay pot, and the stew is placed outside the stew column, two by two, and placed facing north. The risotto is placed in a basket, the stew is placed inside the stew column, and the stew is placed between the two stew columns, two by two, and placed facing south.

古文：庶羞陈于碑内，庭实陈于碑外。
现代文：美味食物放在碑的北边，庭实陈放在碑的南边。
English: Delicious food is placed on the north side of the monument, and the garden is placed on the south side of the monument.

古文：牛、羊、豕陈于门内，西方，东上。
现代文：牛、羊、豕陈放在门内西边，以东为上位。
English: Cattle, sheep, and donkeys are placed on the west side of the gate, with the east being the highest.

古文：宾朝服以受，如受饔礼。
现代文：主宾穿朝服接受，如接受饔的礼仪。
English: It is proper etiquette to receive the chief guest in a court dress, such as a hakama.

古文：无摈。
现代文：没有摈。
English: There are no crickets.

古文：明日，宾朝服以拜赐于朝。
现代文：第二天，主宾穿朝服在国君大门外拜谢国君的赏赐。
English: The next day, the chief guest, dressed in a court uniform, came outside the gate of the sovereign to thank the sovereign for his gift.

古文：讶听命。
现代文：接待的人听凭他拜谢。
English: The receptionist let him thank her.

古文：大夫相食，亲戒速。
现代文：主国大夫用食礼招待主宾，自己亲自通知，邀请。
English: The host country doctor invites the chief guest with a meal gift, and personally notifies and invites.

古文：迎宾于门外，拜至，皆如飨拜。
现代文：在大门外迎接主宾，为主宾到来行拜礼，都如食礼一样行拜礼。
English: Greet the chief guest outside the gate, pray for the arrival of the chief guest, and pray as if it were a meal.

古文：降盥。受酱、湆、侑币－－束锦也，皆自阼阶降堂受，授者升一等。宾止也。
现代文：大夫下堂洗手，接过酱、肉羹汁，酬谢的礼物一一束锦，都是由东阶下堂接受。授者登上一级台阶，主宾停止不动。
English: The doctor washed his hands in the lower hall, received the sauce and meat broth, and received a gift of a bunch of brocade as a reward. All of them were accepted by the lower hall of the East Steps. The giver ascended the first step, and the guest of honor stopped moving.

古文：宾执粱与湆，之西序端。
现代文：主宾拿着粱米饭和肉羹汁，到西墙的前端。
English: The chief guest took the sticky rice and meat soup soup and walked to the front of the west wall.

古文：主人辞，宾反之。
现代文：主人辞谢，主宾返回席位。
English: The host excused himself, and the guest of honor returned to his seat.

古文：卷加席，主人辞，宾反之。
现代文：主宾卷起加席，主人辞谢，主宾按原样摆设加席。
English: The chief guest rolls up an extra seat, the host says thank you, and the chief guest arranges the extra seat as it is.

古文：辞币，降一等，主人从。
现代文：主宾辞谢主人的礼的礼物，走下一级台阶。主人跟随着。
English: The chief guest thanked the host for the gift and walked down the first step. The host followed.

古文：受侑币，再拜稽首。
现代文：主宾接受束锦，再拜稽首。
English: The chief guest receives the brocade, and then bows his head.

古文：主人送币，亦然。
现代文：主人送上束锦也是再拜稽首。
English: The fact that the host sent bouquets of brocade is also another bow to the head.

古文：辞于主人，降一等，主人从。
现代文：主宾向主人辞谢，走下一级台阶。主人跟随着。
English: The chief guest thanked the host and walked down the first step. The host followed.

古文：卒食，彻于西序端；东面再拜，降出。
现代文：食礼结束，大夫在西墙前端撤去食物。主宾面朝东两次行拜礼，下堂出门。
English: When the meal is over, the doctor removes the food from the front of the west wall. The chief guest performs two prostrations facing east and leaves the hall.

古文：其他皆如公食大夫之礼。
现代文：其他都如同国君用食礼招待来聘大夫的礼仪。
English: Everything else is like the etiquette of the sovereign inviting guests to hire a doctor.

古文：若不亲食，则公作大夫朝服以侑币致之。
现代文：如果大夫不能亲自主持食礼，那么，国君就派爵位相同的大夫穿朝服把礼物送上。
English: If the doctor cannot personally present the gift, then the sovereign will send a doctor with the same rank to wear a royal robe to present the gift.

古文：宾受于堂。无摈。
现代文：主宾在堂上接受礼物，没有摈。
English: The chief guest accepted the gift in the hall without a bow.

古文：记。不宿戒，戒不速。
现代文：不在行食礼的前一天斋戒。行食礼告诉主宾后不再召请。
English: Do not fast the day before the meal, and do not invite the chief guest after the meal has been announced.

古文：不授几。无阼席。
现代文：不为主宾授几，东阶上没有席位。
English: There are no seats on the east steps unless you are the chief guest.

古文：亨于门外东方。
现代文：在门外东边烹煮食物。
English: Outside the door to the east, food is being prepared.

古文：司宫具几，与蒲筵常缁布纯，加萑席寻玄帛纯，皆卷自末。
现代文：司宫准备几和一丈六尺长的蒲草编的筵，筵用墨色布作边，筵上加八尺长的细苇编的席，席用黑色帛作边，筵、席都从末端卷起。
English: The palace is preparing a pair of six-foot-long, six-feet-tall rushes made of rushes. The rushes are edged with an ink-colored cloth, and an eight-foot-long, finely embroidered seat is added to the seat. The seat is edged with a black felt. Both the seat and the seat are rolled up from the end.

古文：宰夫筵，出自东房。宾之乘车在大门外西方，北面立。
现代文：宰夫铺设筵席，出自东房，主宾乘坐的车，在大门外的西边，主宾就位时面朝北站立。
English: The usher laid the table, and from the east room, the car in which the guest of honor was riding, to the west outside the gate, the guest of honor stood facing north as he took his seat.

古文：鉶芼，牛藿，羊苦，豕薇，皆有滑。
现代文：盛羹的小鼎中放的菜，牛肉羹放豆叶，羊肉羹放苦荼，猪肉羹放薇菜，都有调味的佐料。
English: The dishes put in the small ding of the soup, the beef soup with bean leaves, the mutton soup with bitter gourd, the pork soup with vegetables, all have seasonings.

古文：赞者盥，从俎升。
现代文：佐助的洗手，随俎登堂。
English: Sasuke washes his hands and follows Shiori into the hall.

古文：簠有盖幂。
现代文：盛稻粱的簠，有盖子和遮盖子的巾。
English: A bowl of rice with a lid and a cloth to cover it.

古文：凡炙无酱。
现代文：凡吃烤肉的，都不用酱。
English: Everyone who eats grilled meat doesn't use sauce.

古文：上大夫：蒲筵加萑席。其纯，皆如下大夫纯。
现代文：上大夫，蒲草编的筵，上边加上细苇编的席，筵、席的边饰和下大夫筵、席的边饰相同。
English: On the upper level, there is a cane made of papyrus, and on the upper level, there is a seat made of fine cane. The rim and seat trim are the same as on the lower level.

古文：卿摈由下。
现代文：卿充当上摈，在堂下诏礼。
English: The lord serves as the shogun, and the imperial proclamation is made in front of the hall.

古文：上赞，下大夫也。
现代文：堂上佐助的人由下大夫充当。
English: The person of Dojo Sasuke is played by a junior doctor.

古文：上大夫，庶羞。酒饮，浆饮，庶羞可也。
现代文：上大夫，有各种美味食用，宰夫又进献清酒、浆饮，上大夫饮清酒、浆饮时也可吃美味食物。
English: There are all kinds of delicious foods for the upper doctor, and the second doctor also offers sake and pulp drinks. When the upper doctor drinks sake and pulp drinks, he can also eat delicious foods.

古文：拜食与侑币，皆再拜稽首。
现代文：上大夫拜谢食礼和酬谢的礼物，都是再拜稽首。
English: The upper doctor's thanksgiving meal and the gift of thanksgiving are all thanksgiving gifts.

