古文：通书千篇以上，万卷以下，弘暢雅闲，审定文读，而以教授为人师者，通人也。
现代文：通读书千篇以上，万卷以下，读得很流畅，很熟练，能分析确定章节和断句，并以教授做老师的是通人。
English: Tongren read more than a thousand articles and less than ten thousand volumes. He read fluently and skillfully, could analyze and determine chapters and sentences, and was taught by a professor.

古文：杼其义旨，损益其文句，而以上书奏记，或兴论立说、结连篇章者，文人鸿儒也。
现代文：能够发挥古书意思，灵活引用古书词句，能上书奏记，或者提出见解和主张，串连成篇写成文章的是文人、鸿儒。
English: It is the literati and great scholars who can give full play to the meaning of ancient books, flexibly quote the words and sentences of ancient books, write books, or put forward opinions and propositions, and write articles in series.

古文：好学勤力，博闻强识，世间多有；著书表文，论说古今，万不耐一。
现代文：努力好学，见识多，记得牢的，世上有很多；著书写文章，能说古论今的，万人中没有一个。
English: There are many people in the world who study hard, know a lot, and remember well; but there is not one person in ten thousand who can write a book, write an article, or talk about the past and the present.

古文：然则著书表文，博通所能用之者也。
现代文：然而能著书写文章的，是知识渊博精通而能运用的人。
English: However, those who can write articles are those who are knowledgeable and can use them.

古文：入山见木，长短无所不知；入野见草，大小无所不识。
现代文：进山里看见树木，是长是短没有不知道的；到野外看见青草，是粗是细没有不了解的。
English: When you go into the mountains and see trees, you don't know whether they are long or short; when you see grass in the field, you don't know whether it is thick or thin.

古文：然而不能伐木以作室屋，采草以和方药，此知草木所不能用也。
现代文：然而不会砍伐树木用来作房子，采集百草用来配方调药，这是知道草木而不会运用。
English: However, they will not cut down trees to build houses and gather herbs to make herbal medicines. This is because they know the plants but do not use them.

古文：夫通人览见广博，不能掇以论说，此为匿生书主人，孔子所谓 诵《诗》三百，授之以政不达 者也，与彼草木不能伐采，一实也。
现代文：通人见识广博，却不会用它来论述事情，这叫藏书家，就是孔子所说的那种 能背诵《诗经》三百篇，把政治事务交给他，都干不了 的人，这跟那些见过草木不会采伐运用的人，是同一回事。
English: A bibliophile, as Confucius said, is a man who can recite three hundred pages of the Book of Songs by heart, but cannot handle political affairs entrusted to him. This is the same as a man who has seen that trees and plants cannot be harvested and used.

古文：孔子得《史记》以作《春秋》，及其立义创意，褒贬赏诛，不复因《史记》者，眇思自出於胸中也。
现代文：孔子拿鲁国编年史来写《春秋》，等到他创新立义，赞赏和贬责一番，就不再沿袭鲁国编年史，而是经过深思熟虑自然从胸中产生出来的了。
English: Confucius took the chronicles of Lu to write "Spring and Autumn." When he innovated the meaning, praised and disparaged, he no longer followed the chronicles of Lu, but thoughtfully and naturally came out of his heart.

古文：凡贵通者，贵其能用之也，即徒诵读，读诗讽术虽千篇以上，鹦鹉能言之类也。
现代文：大凡重视通人，是看重他们能运用学到的东西。如果他们仅仅能熟读，读诗读经，即使是千篇以上，也是鹦鹉能说话之类。
English: If they can only read well, recite poems and scriptures, even if they are more than a thousand, it is like a parrot being able to speak.

古文：衍传书之意，出膏腴之辞，非俶傥之才，不能任也。
现代文：能引申古书上的意思，写出美好的文辞，没有卓越的才能，是不能胜任的。
English: To be able to quote the meaning of ancient books, to write beautiful words, without outstanding talent, is incompetent.

古文：夫通览者，世间比有；著文者，历世希然。
现代文：能通读的人，世上到处有；能著书写文章的人，历代却少得很。
English: People who can read through are everywhere in the world; people who can write articles are very few in all ages.

古文：近世刘子政父子、扬子云、桓君山，其犹文、武、周公并出一时也；其余直有，往往而然，譬珠玉不可多得，以其珍也。
现代文：近代的刘子政父子、杨子云、桓君山，他们就象周文王、周武王、周公一样同时出现在同个时代；其余仅有而已，往往如此，譬如珍珠宝玉不可能多得，因为它们珍贵。
English: The modern Liu Zizheng, father and son, Yang Ziyun, and Huan Junshan, like King Zhou Wen, King Zhou Wu, and King Zhou, appeared at the same time in the same era; the rest are only, often so, for example, it is impossible to get more pearl gems, because they are precious.

古文：故夫能说一经者为儒生，博览古今者为通人，采掇传书以上书奏记者为文人，能精思著文连结篇章者为鸿儒。
现代文：因此能讲解一种经书的是儒生，能博览古今的是通人，能摘引传书来写报告提建议的是文人，能精心思考写文章连结成书的是鸿儒。
English: Therefore, it is the Confucian scholar who can explain a scripture, the scholar who can expound on ancient and modern times, the scholar who can write a report and make suggestions, and the scholar who can think carefully and write articles and link them into a book.

古文：故儒生过俗人，通人胜儒生，文人逾通人，鸿儒超文人。
现代文：所以儒生超过一般人，通人胜过儒生，文人超过通人，鸿儒又超过文人。
English: Therefore, Confucian scholars are superior to ordinary people, learned people are superior to Confucian scholars, literati are superior to learned people, and Confucian scholars are superior to literati.

古文：故夫鸿儒，所谓超而又超者也。
现代文：因此，鸿儒是所谓超而又超的人。
English: Therefore, Hong Ru is a so-called super and super person.

古文：以超之奇，退与儒生相料，文轩之比於敝车，锦绣之方於缊袍也，其相过，远矣。
现代文：以罕见的超人，去跟儒生相比，等于拿高贵华丽的车子跟破车相比，拿精致华美的丝绣跟旧袍相比，它们之间相差太远了。
English: Comparing a rare superman with a Confucian scholar is like comparing a noble and gorgeous car with a broken car, and a delicate and gorgeous silk embroidery with an old robe. The difference between them is too far.

古文：如与俗人相料，太山之巅墆，长狄之项跖，不足以喻。
现代文：如果跟一般人相比，即使拿泰山顶比山脚，拿长狄人的颈比脚掌，也不足以说明。
English: If compared with the average person, even if the top of Mount Tai is compared with the foot of the mountain, and the neck of the long Di people is compared with the foot of the foot, it is not enough to explain.

古文：故夫丘山以土石为体，其有铜铁，山之奇也。
现代文：山丘以泥土石头为主体，山中要是有铜铁，就是山上罕见的东西。
English: The hills are mainly composed of mud and stone. If there is copper and iron in the mountains, it is a rare thing on the mountains.

古文：铜铁既奇，或出金玉。
现代文：铜铁虽已罕见，有时还会挖出金子玉石。
English: Although copper and iron are rare, sometimes gold cobbles are dug out.

古文：然鸿儒，世之金玉也，奇而又奇矣。
现代文：鸿儒就是世上的金玉，罕见又罕见。
English: Hong Ru is the world's golden goose, rare and rare.

古文：奇而又奇，才相超乘，皆有品差。
现代文：才能突出还有突出的，他们才能相互超越但总有高低之分。
English: There are still outstanding talents, and they can surpass each other, but there are always high and low points.

古文：儒生说名於儒门，过俗人远也。
现代文：儒生托名在儒门，远远超过一般人。
English: Confucian scholars are famous in Confucianism, far more than ordinary people.

古文：或不能说一经，教诲後生。或带徒聚众，说论洞溢，称为经明。
现代文：可是有的不能讲解一种经书，教诲后代子孙；有的却能率引众多学生，讲解透彻内容丰富，能称作通晓经书。
English: However, some people are not able to explain one kind of scripture and teach it to future generations; others are able to lead many students, explain thoroughly and are rich in content, and can be called knowledgeable about scriptures.

古文：或不能成牍，治一说。或能陈得失，奏便宜，言应经传，文如星月。
现代文：有的不能写完一份公文，提出一种主张；有的却能陈述国家政治得失，提出适宜的建议，而且言论符合经传，文章如星月一般灿烂。
English: Some cannot finish writing a public document and put forward a proposition; others, however, can state the national political gains and losses, put forward appropriate suggestions, and their remarks are in line with the scriptures, and the article is as brilliant as the stars and the moon.

古文：其高第若谷子云、唐子高者，说书於牍奏之上，不能连结篇章。或抽列古今，纪著行事，若司马子长、刘子政之徒，累积篇第，文以万数，其过子云、子高远矣。然而因成纪前，无胸中之造。
现代文：他们象谷子云、唐子高一样优秀，能在报告和意见书上引经据典，却不能连结起来写成文章；有的能把古今事选取排列出来，把往事记载下来写成书，象司马迁、刘子政这些人，累积材料编成篇目，文章数万言，他们远远超过谷子云、唐子高，然而是沿袭以前现成的记载，没有自己心中的创造。
English: They are as excellent as Gu Zi Yun and Tang Zigao. They can quote scriptures in their reports and opinions, but they can't link them together to write articles. Some can select and arrange ancient and modern events and record the past to write a book. Like Sima Qian and Liu Zizheng, these people compile accumulated materials into articles with tens of thousands of words. They are far more than Gu Zi Yun and Tang Zigao, but they follow the ready-made records before, without their own creation.

古文：若夫陆贾、董仲舒，论说世事，由意而出，不假取於外，然而浅露易见，观读之者，犹曰传记。
现代文：至于陆贾、董仲舒评论国家大事，随心说出，不凭借外在条件，然而却内容浅显易懂，读者还叫它传记。
English: As for Lu Jia and Dong Zhongshu's commentary on national events, they freely speak out, without relying on external conditions, but the content is simple and easy to understand. Readers also call it a biography.

古文：阳成子长作《乐经》，扬子云作《太玄经》，造於思，极窅冥之深，非庶几之才，不能成也。
现代文：阳成子长作《乐经》，杨子云作《太玄经》，都是在精心思考后创造出来的，所以能穷尽深远难见的大道理，不是接近圣人的才能，是不可能写成功的。
English: The "Song of Songs" by Yang Cheng Zi Long and the "Mysterious Book" by Yang Zi Yun were both created after careful consideration. Therefore, it is impossible to write successfully if you can exhaust the profound and difficult truth without being close to the saint's talent.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，二子作两经，所谓卓尔蹈孔子之迹，鸿茂参贰圣之才者也。
现代文：孔子作《春秋》，阳成子长和杨子云二人作《乐经》和《太玄经》两经，真称得上高明地遵循着孔子的足迹，宏大精美有与圣人相提并论的才能。
English: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" and Yang Chengzichang and Yang Ziyun wrote "Song of Songs" and "Great Confucian Classic" together. They truly follow the footsteps of Confucius with great skill and have the ability to be compared with saints.

古文：王公问於桓君山以扬子云。
现代文：王公子向桓君山打听杨子云。
English: Wang Gongzi inquired about Yang Ziyun from Mount Huan.

古文：君山对曰： 汉兴以来，未有此人。 
现代文：桓君山回答说： 汉朝建立以来，没有谁能超过此人。 
English: Huan Junshan replied, "Since the founding of the Han Dynasty, no one can surpass this man.

古文：君山差才，可谓得高下之实矣。
现代文：桓君山区别人才，可以说是符合人才高下的实际情况。
English: It can be said that other talents in Huanjunshan District are in line with the actual situation of high talent.

古文：采玉者心羡於玉，钻龟能知神於龟。
现代文：采玉的人心比玉还美，钻龟的人智比神灵。
English: The human heart of a jade miner is more beautiful than jade, and the human intelligence of a drill turtle is greater than that of a god.

古文：能差众儒之才，累其高下，贤於所累。
现代文：君山能区别儒生的才能，排列出他们的名次，可见比所排列的人贤能。
English: Junshan was able to distinguish the talents of Confucians and rank them in order, which shows the merit of the people ranked.

古文：又作《新论》，论世间事，辩照然否，虚妄之言，伪饰之辞，莫不证定。
现代文：他又作《新论》，评论社会上的问题，辩明是非，虚假的话语，虚伪的文词，没有不被证明确定的。
English: He also wrote "A New Theory," commenting on social problems, arguing the rights and wrongs, false words, hypocritical words, and there is nothing that cannot be proved.

古文：彼子长、子云论说之徒，君山为甲。
现代文：在那阳成子长、杨子云等兴论立说的人当中，桓君山算是头一个了。
English: Among Yang Cheng Zichang, Yang Ziyun and other people who are interested in establishing a theory, Mount Huanjun is the first.

古文：自君山以来，皆为鸿眇之才，故有嘉令之文。
现代文：从桓君山以来的那些文人、鸿儒都具有博大精深的才能，所以有美好的文章。
English: All the literati and great men of letters since Kuanjunshan have a broad and profound talent, so there are wonderful articles.

古文：笔能著文，则心能谋论，文由胸中而出，心以文为表。
现代文：他们动笔能写文章，用心能谋划，文章从心中出，思想用文章来表明。
English: They can write articles with a pen, plan with their hearts, write articles from their hearts, and express their thoughts with articles.

古文：观见其文，奇伟俶傥，可谓得论也。
现代文：观看他们的文章，非同一般卓越超群，真称得上精辟的论述。
English: Watching their articles is a rare treat, a truly incisive discourse.

古文：由此言之，繁文之人，人之杰也。
现代文：这样说来，文章写得多的人，是人中最杰出的了。
English: In this way, those who have written more articles are the most outstanding people.

古文：有根株於下，有荣叶於上；有实核於内，有皮壳於外。
现代文：植物下面有根和茎，上面才有花和叶；果实里面有果核，外面才会有皮和壳。
English: Plants have roots and stems underneath, but flowers and leaves on top; fruits have kernels inside, but skin and shell on the outside.

古文：文墨辞说，士之荣叶、皮壳也。
现代文：文章言辞是读书人的花叶与皮壳。
English: An article's rhetoric is the reader's petals and husk.

古文：实诚在胸臆，文墨著竹帛，外内表里，自相副称。
现代文：真情实意在心中，文章写在竹简和帛上，表达与内心，自然要互相符合相称。
English: The true feelings and intentions are in the heart, and the articles are written on bamboo slips and scrolls. Naturally, the expression and the heart should be in proportion to each other.

古文：意奋而笔纵，故文见而实露也。
现代文：感情激动才能下笔流畅，所以文章写真情而能流露出来。
English: Only when you are emotionally excited can you write fluently, so the emotion of the article and photo can be revealed.

古文：人之有文也，犹禽之有毛也。
现代文：人会写文章，就像鸟兽有毛一样。
English: People write articles, just as birds and beasts have hair.

古文：毛有五色，皆生於体。
现代文：毛有五颜六色，都长在身体上。
English: The hairs are multi-coloured and all grow on the body.

古文：苟有文无实，是则五色之禽，毛妄生也。
现代文：如果写文章没有内容，这就是像五颜六色鸟兽的毛无故长了出来。
English: If you write an article without content, it's like the hair of a colorful bird or beast sprouting up for no reason.

古文：选士以射，心平体正，执弓矢审固，然後射中。
现代文：选拔武士来射箭，武士要心气平和身体站直，把弓和箭握牢固，然后才能射中。
English: When selecting a samurai for archery, the samurai should stand up straight with a peaceful mind and body, hold the bow and arrow firmly, and then shoot.

古文：论说之出，犹弓矢之发也；论之应理，犹矢之中的。
现代文：兴论立说一出口，就像弓箭射出一样。论说应当有道理，就像箭要射中靶子一样。
English: An argument should have a reason, just as an arrow should hit the target.

古文：夫射以矢中效巧，论以文墨验奇。
现代文：射箭是用箭射中靶子来验证其技巧，论说是用文章来证明是否超群。
English: Archery is to use arrows to hit the target to verify its skills, the argument is to use the article to prove whether it is superior.

古文：奇巧俱发於心，其实一也。
现代文：文章超群与射箭技巧都是从心里产生的，它们实际上是相同的。
English: Article excellence and archery skill are both born from the heart, they are actually the same.

古文：文有深指巨略，君臣治术，身不得行，口不能，表著情心，以明己之必能为之也。
现代文：文章中有深奥的意思，重大的谋略，君臣治国的方法，只是由于他们自己无法实行，口里又不能直说来表达心情，所以用文章来表明自己的看法，认为以后一定能实行它。
English: In the article, there are profound meanings, important strategies, and methods of ruling the country, but because they cannot implement them themselves and cannot express their feelings directly, they use the article to express their views and believe that they will be able to implement it in the future.

古文：孔子作《春秋》，以示王意。
现代文：孔子作《春秋》，是用来表达做君主的道理。
English: "Spring and Autumn" by Confucius is used to express the principle of being a monarch.

古文：然则孔子之《春秋》，素王之业也；诸子之传书，素相之事也。
现代文：然而孔子的《春秋》，是他素王的事业；桓君山一类人的传书，是素相的事业。
English: However, Confucius' "Spring and Autumn" is his crowning achievement; the handing down of books by people like Huan Junshan is the crowning achievement.

古文：观《春秋》以见王意，读诸子以睹相指。
现代文：看《春秋》可以看出做君主的道理，读桓君山一类人的传书，可以看出做相的意图。
English: Looking at "Spring and Autumn" you can see the reason for being a monarch, and reading the biographies of people like Huan Junshan, you can see the intention of being a pharaoh.

古文：故曰：陈平割肉，丞相之端见；叔孙敖决期思，令之兆著。
现代文：所以说：陈平分割祭肉，是当丞相的苗头；孙叔敖疏通期思河，是当令尹迹象的显现。
English: Therefore, it is said that: Chen Ping's division of the sacrificial meat is the seedling of being a prime minister; Sun Shujun's thinking about the dredging of the river is the manifestation of the signs of being a leader.

古文：观读传书之文，治道政务，非徒割肉决水之占也。
现代文：观看传书里的文章，有治理国家大事的道理，不仅是分割祭肉、疏通河水的预兆。
English: Viewing the articles in the biography, there is a reason for governing national affairs, not only a sign of dividing the sacrificial meat and dredging the river.

古文：足不强则迹不远，锋不銛，则割不深。
现代文：脚不强劲就走不远，锋刃不锐利就割不深。
English: If the foot is not strong, it will not go far. If the blade is not sharp, it will not cut deep.

古文：连结篇章，必大才智鸿懿之俊也。
现代文：能连结篇章写文著书，一定是才能大智慧高而完美的杰出人物。
English: An outstanding person with great talent, wisdom and perfection who can connect chapters and write a book.

古文：或曰：著书之人，博览多闻，学问习熟，则能推类兴文。
现代文：有人说： 写书的人，看得多听得多，熟悉学问，就能类推写出文章来。
English: Some people say: People who write books read more, listen more, and are familiar with learning, so they can write articles by analogy.

古文：文由外而兴，未必实才学文相副也。
现代文：文章是由见闻写出来的，不一定真实才能与文章相符合。
English: Articles are written from personal experience, and do not necessarily have to be true in order to be consistent with the article.

古文：且浅意於华叶之言，无根核之深，不见大道体要，故立功者希。
现代文：寄肤浅的见解于漂亮的文辞，没有深刻的内容，见不到治理国家的根本原则，所以很少有建立功业的人。
English: There are very few people who have built their careers by basing their shallow opinions on beautiful words, without any profound content, and without seeing the fundamental principles of governing the country.

古文：安危之际，文人不与，无能建功之验，徒能笔说之效也。
现代文：国家安危的关头，文人都不能参与其事，没有建立功绩的作用，只有动笔写文章的效果。
English: At the critical moment of national security, the literati can not participate in the matter, there is no role of establishing merit, only the effect of writing articles.

古文：曰：此不然。
现代文：我说：这不一定。
English: I said: That's not necessarily true.

古文：周世著书之人皆权谋之臣，汉世直言之士皆通览之吏，岂谓文非华叶之生，根核推之也？
现代文：周代写书的人，都是权谋的大臣，汉代敢于直说的人，都是博览群书的官吏，怎么能说文章写出来不是像花叶的生长那样是由根促成的呢？
English: The people who wrote books in the Zhou Dynasty were all power-seeking ministers, and the people who dared to speak out in the Han Dynasty were all officials who were well-read. How can it be said that writing articles was not promoted by the roots like the growth of flowers and leaves?

古文：心思为谋，集扎为文，情见於辞，意验於言。
现代文：用心思考作计谋，收集资料写文章，感情在文辞中表现出来，意思在说话中得到证明。
English: To think with the mind is to plot, to gather information is to write, to express feelings is to write, and to prove one's meaning is to speak.

古文：商鞅相秦，致功於霸，作《耕战》之书。虞卿为赵，决计定说，行退作春秋之思，起城中之议。
现代文：商鞅帮助秦国，想在霸业上得到功绩，于是写《耕战》；虞卿帮助赵国，提出计谋和主张并被采纳，辞官后写了《虞氏春秋》。
English: Shangguan helped Qin, and wanted to gain merit in the hegemony, so he wrote "Cultivation War"; Yuqing helped Zhao, put forward strategies and proposals and was adopted, and wrote "Yu's Spring and Autumn" after resigning.

古文：《耕战》之书，秦堂上之计也。
现代文：其基本思想，就是虞卿在赵国都城给赵王提的建议；《耕战》的内容，就是商鞅在秦国堂上向秦孝公提的建议。
English: Its basic idea is the suggestion made by Yu Ching to Zhao Wang in the capital city of Zhao; the content of "Cultivation War" is the suggestion made by Shangyu to Qin Xiaogong in the Qin Guodang.

古文：陆贾消吕氏之谋，与《新语》同一意。桓君山易晁错之策，与《新论》共一思。
现代文：陆贾消灭吕氏的计谋，跟《新语》是同样的见解；桓君山改变晁错的计谋，跟《新论》是同样的意见。
English: Lu Jia's strategy of eliminating the Lv clan is the same as that of "Xinhua"; Huan Junshan's strategy of correcting mistakes is the same as that of "Xinhua."

古文：观谷永之陈说，唐林之宜言，刘向之切议，以知为本，笔墨之文，将而送之，岂徒雕文饰辞，苟为华叶之言哉？
现代文：看谷永上书的陈述，唐林坦率的进言，刘向恳切的建议，都以见解为根本，写成文章，想借助它把见解表达出来，难道只是雕饰文辞，随便写成漂亮的言辞吗？
English: Looking at Gu Yong's written statement, Tang Lin's candid comments, and Liu Xiang's earnest suggestions, they are all based on opinions, written into articles, and want to use it to express their opinions. Is it just decorative words, casually written into beautiful words?

古文：精诚由中，故其文语感动人深。
现代文：真挚的感情发自内心，所以那文章上的话才深深地感动人。
English: Genuine feelings come from the heart, which is why the words in that article are so deeply moving.

古文：是故鲁连飞书，燕将自杀；邹阳上疏，梁孝开牢。
现代文：因此鲁仲连用箭射信，燕将会自杀；邹阳上书辩解，梁孝王才会打开牢门放他。
English: Therefore, Lu Zhonglian shoots a letter with an arrow, Yan will commit suicide; Fenyang writes a letter of apology, Liang Xiaowang will open the prison door and let him go.

古文：书疏文义，夺於肝心，非徒博览者所能造，习熟者所能为也。
现代文：书信、奏章和文章的内容，是从内心迸发出来的，并非只是博览群书的人能造出来的，熟悉学问的人能写出来的。
English: The content of letters, musical scores, and articles bursts forth from the heart, and is not something that can only be created by people who are well-versed in books, but can also be written by people who are familiar with learning.

古文：夫鸿儒希有，而文人比然，将相长吏，安可不贵？
现代文：鸿儒少有，而文人比比皆是，地方长吏，怎么能不尊重他们呢？
English: Great Confucian scholars are few and far between, but literati are everywhere. How can local officials not respect them?

古文：岂徒用其才力，游文於牒牍哉？
现代文：难道只是用他们的能力，在公文上舞文弄墨吗？
English: Are they just using their abilities to put ink on official documents?

古文：州郡有忧，能治章上奏，解理结烦，使州郡连事，有如唐子高、谷子云之吏，出身尽思，竭笔牍之力，烦忧适有不解者哉？
现代文：而是希望州郡长官有忧愁的时候，他们能写章上奏，解决处理困难烦杂的事务，使州郡无事。就象唐子高、谷子云这些官吏，要是出来尽心，完全拿出写公文的本领，那些麻烦和忧患的事怎么会有解决不了的呢？
English: Instead, they hope that when the prefect of a prefecture or county is worried, they can write a chapter and solve the difficult and complicated affairs, so that the prefecture or county will have nothing to worry about. Just like Tang Zigao and Yan Ziyun, if these officials come out wholeheartedly and fully demonstrate their ability to write official documents, how can those troubles and worries not be solved?

古文：古昔之远，四方辟匿，文墨之士，难得纪录，且近自以会稽言之，周长生者，文士之雄也，在州，为刺史任安举奏；在郡，为太守孟观上书，事解忧除，州郡无事，二将以全。
现代文：古代很遥远，四处偏僻隐蔽，动笔作文的人，记录有困难，那么暂时就近用自己家乡会稽的事来说。周长生是文人当中的魁首，在州府，是为剌吏任安起草奏章，在郡府，也是为太守孟观写奏章，解决了麻烦事消除了忧患，使得州郡无事，二位地方长官的职位得以保全。
English: Ancient times are very far away, hidden in remote places, and people who write compositions have difficulties in recording, so for the time being, let's take the case of using their hometown's records. Zhou Changsheng is the leader among the literati. In the state capital, he wrote a report for the magistrate Ren'an, and in the county capital, he also wrote a report for the governor Meng Guan. He solved the troubles and eliminated the worries, so that the state and county had nothing to do, and the positions of the two local governors were preserved.

古文：长生之身不尊显，非其才知少、功力薄也，二将怀俗人之节，不能贵也。
现代文：周长生的身份不显赫，不是他才智低、功力差，而是二位地方长官怀着俗人的节操，不能尊重他。
English: Zhou Changsheng's status is not prominent. It is not that he has low intelligence and poor ability, but that the two local governors have the discipline of a layman and cannot respect him.

古文：使遭前世燕昭，则长生已蒙邹衍之宠矣。
现代文：假使遇到前代的燕昭王，那么周长生早已蒙受邹衍那样的恩宠了。
English: If he had met the previous Yan Zhao Wang, then Zhou Changsheng would have already received the same grace as Yan Yan.

古文：长生死後，州郡遭忧，无举奏之吏，以故事结不解，征诣相属，文轨不尊，笔疏不续也。
现代文：周长生死后，州郡的长官遇到了忧患，没有能干的起草奏章官员，因此困难事解决不了，被追究责任押送到相属司直受审，这是由于写文章这一行不受重视，不再有擅长写奏章的人的缘故。
English: After the death of Zhou Chang Sheng, the prefect of the prefecture and county encountered difficulties. There was no competent official to draft the musical score, so the difficulties could not be solved. He was held accountable and sent to the relevant department to be directly tried. This is because the profession of writing articles is not valued, and there are no longer people who are good at writing musical scores.

古文：岂无忧上之吏哉？
现代文：那么难道就没有为地方长官分忧的官吏吗？
English: So are there no officials to share the worries of local governors?

古文：乃其中文笔不足类也。
现代文：而是他们当中的人，文笔远不如周长生之类的缘故。
English: It's because the people among them are not as good at writing as people like Zhou Changsheng.

古文：长生之才，非徒锐於牒牍也，作《洞历》十篇，上自黄帝，下至汉朝，锋芒毛发之事，莫不纪载，与太吏公《表》、《纪》相似类也。
现代文：周长生的才能，不仅仅擅长写公文，而且写了《洞历》十篇，上从黄帝，下到汉朝，就连细小轻微的事，没有不记载的，跟司马迁《史记》的《表》、《纪》相类似。
English: Zhou Changsheng's talent is not only good at writing official documents, but also wrote ten "Donglian," from the Yellow Emperor to the Han Dynasty, even small and light things, there is nothing that is not recorded, similar to Sima Qian's "History" "Table" and "Chronicle."

古文：上通下达，故曰《洞历》。
现代文：由于上通黄帝下达汉朝，所以叫做《洞历》。
English: It is called the "Hollow Calendar" because it was issued by the Yellow Emperor to the Han Dynasty.

古文：然则长生非徒文人，所谓鸿儒者也。
现代文：像这样，周长生不只是个文人，而且是个称得上鸿儒的人。
English: In this way, Zhou Changsheng is not only a man of letters, but also a man worthy of being called a great scholar.

古文：前世有严夫子，後有吴君，末有周长生。
现代文：前代有严忌，后来有吴君高，最后有周长生。
English: The previous generation had Yan Bo, later there was Wu Jungao, and finally there was Zhou Changsheng.

古文：白雉贡於越，暢草献於宛，雍州出玉，荆、扬生金。
现代文：白野鸡从越尝贡来，畅草从郁林献来，雍州出玉，荆州、扬州产铜。
English: White pheasants were brought from Yueyagong, smooth grass from Yulin, jade from Yongzhou, and copper from Jingzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：珍物产於四远幽辽之地，未可言无奇人也。
现代文：珍贵的东西出产在四面边远而偏僻的地方，这些地方不能说就没有特出的人物。
English: Precious things are produced in remote and isolated places on all sides, and these places cannot be said to be devoid of outstanding people.

古文：孔子曰： 文王既没，文不在兹乎！ 
现代文：孔子说： 周文王已经死了，文章不都在我这里吗！ 
English: Confucius said, "King Zhouwen is dead. Aren't all the articles here with me?"

古文：文王之文在孔子，孔子之文在仲舒。仲舒既死，岂在长生之徒与？
现代文：周文王的文章在孔子身上，孔子的文章在董仲舒身上，董仲舒已经死了，难道在周长生这些人身上吗？
English: Zhou Wenwang's article is on Confucius, Confucius's article is on Dong Zhongshu, Dong Zhongshu is dead, is it on these people born in Zhoulong?

古文：何言之卓殊，文之美丽也！
现代文：不然，怎么会说他语言高超，文章美丽呢！
English: Otherwise, how can we say that his language is superb and his articles are beautiful!

古文：唐勒、宋玉，亦楚文人也，竹帛不纪者，屈原在其上也。
现代文：唐勒和宋玉，也是楚国的文人，古书上没有记载的人，屈原就在那上边。
English: Tangler and Song Yu were also literati in Chu, people who were not recorded in ancient books. Quyuan is up there.

古文：会稽文才，岂独周长生哉？
现代文：会稽的文人，难道只有周长生吗！
English: Is it only Zhou Changsheng who is a literati who can read and write?

古文：所以未论列者，长生尤逾出也。
现代文：以没有加以论述的人来说，周长生尤其突出。
English: Zhou Chang Sheng is particularly outstanding for those who have not discussed it.

古文：九州多山，而华、岱为岳，四方多川，而江、河为渎者，华、岱高而江、河大也。
现代文：全国多山，而华山、泰山称岳，全国多河，而长江、黄河称渎的原因，是华山、泰山最高，长江、黄河最大。
English: The reason why there are many mountains in the country, but Huashan and Mount Tai are called mountains, and there are many rivers in the country, but the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are called rivers, is that Huashan and Mount Tai are the highest, and the Yangtze River and the Yellow River are the largest.

古文：长生，州郡高大者也。
现代文：周长生，是州郡中文章最好的人。
English: Zhou Changsheng is the best writer in the county.

古文：同姓之伯贤，舍而誉他族之孟，未为得也。
现代文：自己家族的老大贤能，抛开他而去称赞别家族的老大，这是不对的。
English: It is not right to praise the head of another family while neglecting the virtues of one's own.

古文：长生说文辞之伯，文人之所共宗，独纪录之，《春秋》记元於鲁之义也。
现代文：周长生是论说文章的头号人物，所以文人都尊崇他，唯独把他记录下来，这跟《春秋》采用鲁国自己的年号来记年以表示尊重本国的道理相同。
English: Zhou Changsheng is the number one figure in the essay, so the literati all respect him, but only record him, which is the same as the principle that "Spring and Autumn" uses Lu's own year to mark the year to show respect for their own country.

古文：俗好高古而称所闻，前人之业，菜果甘甜；後人新造，蜜酪辛苦。
现代文：一般人喜欢推崇古代而称颂传说中的事情，古人的东西，就是瓜菜也是甜美的；后代的新东西，即使是蜜酪，也是苦辣的。
English: Ordinary people like to praise the ancient and praise the legendary things. The things of the ancients, that is, the melon vegetables, are sweet; the new things of the descendants, even the honey cheese, are bitter.

古文：长生家在会稽，生在今世，文章虽奇，论者犹谓稚於前人。
现代文：周长生的家在会稽，生长在今天，文章虽然出众，评论的人还是认为比古人幼稚。
English: Zhou Changsheng's family is in the audition, growing up today, although the article is outstanding, the commentators still think that it is more childish than the ancients.

古文：天禀元气，人受元精，岂为古今者差杀哉？
现代文：天供元气，人受精气，难道因为人有古今差别，今人就要降低等级吗！
English: Heaven supplies vitality, man fertilizes vitality. Is it because there is a difference between man in the past and man in the present that man should lower his level?

古文：优者为高，明者为上，实事之人，见然否之分者，睹非却前，退置於後，见是，推今进置於古，心明知昭，不惑於俗也。
现代文：优秀的算高超，高明的算上等。尊重事实的人，明辩是非的人，看见错的，即使是古代的，也要降低其位置放在后面，看到正确的，即使是今天的，也要提高其位置放在前面，心智明白，不被一般人的喜好所迷惑。
English: Those who respect facts, those who clearly argue right and wrong, those who see the wrong, even if it is ancient, should lower their position and put it in the back, and those who see the right, even if it is today, should raise their position and put it in the front. The mind understands and is not confused by the preferences of ordinary people.

古文：班叔皮续《太史公书》百篇以上，记事详悉，义浅理备。观读之者以为甲，而太史公乙。
现代文：班叔皮续写《史记》百篇以上，记事详尽，讲理透彻，读者认为是第一，而司马迁的《史记》次之。
English: Banshu Pi continued to write more than a hundred "Histories," with detailed notes and thorough reasoning. Readers think it is the first, while Sima Qian's "Histories" is the second.

古文：子男孟坚为尚书郎，文比叔皮，非徒五百里也，乃夫周、召、鲁、卫之谓也。
现代文：其子班固是尚书郎，文章可以跟他相比，如果用国家大小来比喻文采的高下，那么他们不仅是五百里的大国，而且应称作像周、召、鲁、卫那样的大国。
English: His son Ban Gu is Shang Shulang, and the article can be compared with him. If we use the size of the country to compare the level of literature, then they are not only a big country of five hundred miles, but should also be called a big country like Zhou, Zhao, Lu and Wei.

古文：苟可高古，而班氏父子不足纪也。
现代文：如果要推崇古代，那么班叔皮、班固父子就不值得一提了。
English: If ancient times are to be revered, then Ban Shupi and Ban Gu, father and son, are not worth mentioning.

古文：周有郁郁之文者，在百世之末也。
现代文：周代有繁荣昌盛的文化，是因为在百代的末尾。
English: The reason why the Zhou Dynasty has a prosperous culture is because it is at the end of a hundred generations.

古文：汉在百世之後，文论辞说，安得不茂？
现代文：汉代在百代的后面，文辞论说，怎么能不繁茂呢！
English: The Han Dynasty is behind a hundred dynasties, the literary theory says, how can it not flourish!

古文：喻大以小，推民家事，以睹王廷之义。
现代文：从小看大，从老百姓的事来推论，可以看出朝廷政治上的道理。
English: Judging from the small to the large, and inferring from the affairs of the common people, we can see the reason for the imperial court's politics.

古文：庐宅始成，桑麻才有，居之历岁，子孙相续，桃李梅杏，丘蔽野。
现代文：住宅开始建成，才会种植桑麻，住上很多年，子孙继续栽种桃树、李树、梅树、杏树，才会遮住山丘盖满原野。
English: When the house is built, the mulberry will be planted, and the cucumbers will live for many years. The descendants will continue to plant peach trees, plum trees, plum trees, and apricot trees, and the hills will be covered with fields.

古文：根茎众多，则华叶繁茂。
现代文：植物根茎多，那么花叶就繁茂。
English: If there are more plant rhizomes, the flowers and leaves will flourish.

古文：汉氏治定久矣，土广民众，义兴事起，华叶之言，安得不繁？
现代文：汉朝统治已经很久了，土地辽阔，百姓众多，礼义盛行，事业兴旺，漂亮的文章，怎么会不繁茂呢！
English: The Han Dynasty has been ruling for a long time, the land is vast, the people are numerous, the etiquette and righteousness are prevalent, the cause is flourishing, the articles are beautiful, how could it not be prosperous!

古文：夫华与实，俱成者也，无华生实，物希有之。山之秃也，孰其茂也？
现代文：其实，花和果实是在一起生成的，无花而结果，这样的东西少有。山是秃的，怎么会繁茂呢？
English: As a matter of fact, flowers and fruits are produced together. There are few things that bear fruit without flowers. If a mountain is barren, how can it flourish?

古文：地之泻也，孰其滋也？
现代文：地是盐碱土，怎么会生长草木呢？
English: The soil is saline, so how can plants grow?

古文：文章之人，滋茂汉朝者乃夫汉家炽盛之瑞也。
现代文：著名文人在汉朝大量出现，就是汉朝兴盛的证明。
English: The appearance of a large number of famous writers in the Han Dynasty is proof of the prosperity of the Han Dynasty.

古文：天晏，列宿焕炳；阴雨，日月蔽匿。
现代文：天晴朗，群星明亮；天阴雨，日月被遮蔽。
English: The sky is clear, the stars are bright; the weather is cloudy and rainy, and the sun and moon are obscured.

古文：方今文人并出见者，乃夫汉朝明明之验也。
现代文：如今著名文人同时出现，就是汉朝光照日月的证明。
English: Nowadays, the simultaneous appearance of famous writers is proof that the Han Dynasty shines like the sun.

古文：高祖读陆贾之书，叹称万岁；徐乐、主父偃上疏，征拜郎中，方今未闻。
现代文：汉高祖每读陆贾的文章，群臣就发出 万岁 的称赞声；徐乐和主父偃上奏章，被任命为郎中的事，如今没有再听说了。
English: Every time Henkel's grandfather read Lu Jia's article, the courtiers shouted "Long live Lu Jia" in praise; Xu Le and his father were appointed to the post of vice-premier, but nothing has been heard of them since.

古文：膳无苦酸之肴，口所不甘味，手不举以啖人。
现代文：做饭食不会做又苦又酸的菜，因为自己的口觉得味道不好，手就不会拿去给别人吃。
English: Cooks will not make bitter and sour dishes, because their own mouth feels that the taste is not good, and their hands will not take it to others to eat.

古文：诏书每下，文义经传四科，诏书斐然，郁郁好文之明验也。
现代文：每次下诏书，都说要按文义经传四科选拔人材，诏书富有文采，是情文并茂的好文章的明证。
English: Every time the imperial edict was issued, it was said that the selection of talents in the four disciplines should be based on the text and meaning of the sutras. The imperial edict was full of literature, which is a clear evidence of a good article with rich sentiments.

古文：上书不实核，著书无义指， 万岁 之声， 征拜 之恩，何从发哉？
现代文：而如今上奏的公文没有经过核实，写书又没有实际内容， 万岁 的称赞声， 任命 的恩惠，从什么地方发出来呢？
English: But now the official document has not been verified, and there is no actual content in the writing of the book. Where did the praise of "long live" and the grace of appointment come from?

古文：饰面者皆欲为好，而运目者希；文音者皆欲为悲，而惊耳者寡。
现代文：装饰面孔的人都想打扮得好看，但值得看一眼的却很少；创作乐曲的人都想作得动听，但值得一听的却很少。
English: People who decorate their faces want to look good, but few are worth looking at; people who compose music want to sound good, but few are worth listening to.

古文：陆贾之书未奏，徐乐、主父之策未闻，群诸瞽言之徒，言事粗丑，文不美润，不指。所谓，文辞淫滑，不被涛沙之谪，幸矣！焉蒙征拜为郎中之宠乎？
现代文：陆贾的文章还没有上奏，徐乐、主父偃的简策还没有上呈，那些闭眼说瞎话的人，讲述事情粗鲁难听，写文章没有文采，不知道是指什么说的，文辞华而不实，不被流放到荒岛或沙漠上去充军，就算幸运了，怎么还能蒙受任命为郎中的宠幸呢？
English: Lu Jia's article has not yet been played, Xu Le and the master's father's brief plan have not yet been presented, those who tell lies with their eyes closed, tell things rudely and unpleasantly, write articles without literary merit, do not know what they mean, the words are flashy and insubstantial, and are not exiled to a desert island or desert to join the army, even if they are lucky, how can they be appointed as a favorite?

