古文：孟子曰： 仁则荣，不仁则辱。今恶辱而居不仁，是犹恶湿而居下也。
现代文：孟子说： 国君如果实行仁政就光荣，不施行仁政就耻辱；现在的人既厌恶耻辱又一直处于不仁的境地，这就好像既厌恶潮湿却又一直居于低洼的地方一样。
English: Mencius said: "If a ruler practices benevolence, he will be honored; if he does not practice benevolence, he will be disgraced. People nowadays both abhor disgrace and remain in an unbenevolent state, just as they both abhor dampness and remain in a low-lying place."

古文：如恶之，莫如贵德而尊士，贤者在位，能者在职。
现代文：如果是真的厌恶耻辱，那最好以仁德为贵，尊敬读书人，让贤德的人治理国家，有才能的人担任官职。
English: If one really abhors disgrace, then it is best to value benevolence, respect readers, let virtuous people govern the country, and talented people hold official positions.

古文：国家闲暇，及是时明其政刑。
现代文：并且趁国家无内忧外患的时候修明政教法典。
English: And they took advantage of the time when the country was free from internal and external troubles to amend the Political and Religious Code.

古文：虽大国，必畏之矣。
现代文：只要这样做，即使是大国也会畏惧你。
English: If you do that, even big countries will be afraid of you.

古文：诗云： 迨天之未阴雨，彻彼桑土，绸缪牖户。
现代文：《诗经》说： 趁着天晴还没阴雨，剥些桑树根上皮，把门窗修理好。
English: "The Book of Songs" says: "Take advantage of the fine weather before the rain, peel off some mulberry root epithelium, and repair the doors and windows.

古文：今此下民，或敢侮予？ 
现代文：那住在下面的人，有谁还敢欺侮我？ 
English: Who of the people who live downstairs would dare to bully me?

古文：孔子曰： 为此诗者，其知道乎！
现代文：孔子说： 写这首诗的人很懂得治理国家！
English: Confucius said, "The person who wrote this poem knows how to govern a country very well!"

古文：能治其国家，谁敢侮之？ 
现代文：能够治理好自己的国家，谁还敢欺侮他呢？ 
English: Who would dare to bully a man who is capable of running his own country?

古文：今国家闲暇，及是时般乐怠敖，是自求祸也。
现代文：现今国家局势稳定，趁此时机，一味地追求享乐，且又怠慢国政，这简直是自取祸害。
English: Now that the country's situation is stable, taking advantage of this opportunity, blindly pursuing pleasure and neglecting national politics is simply a self-inflicted disaster.

古文：祸褔无不自己求之者。
现代文：不管是福是祸都是自找的。
English: Whether it is a blessing or a misfortune, it is all self-inflicted.

古文：诗云： 永言配命，自求多褔。 
现代文：《诗经》说： 长久地与天命相配合，自己去多寻找些幸福。 
English: The "Book of Songs" says: Long-term cooperation with the fate of the world, go and find more happiness for yourself.

古文：太甲曰： 天作孽，犹可违；自作孽，不可活。 
现代文：《尚书大甲》说： 上天降下的灾害还可以躲避；自己造成的罪孽想逃都没有地方逃。 
English: "Taijia" said: If a calamity befalls us, we can still avoid it; if we do bad things, we cannot escape perdition.

古文：此之谓也。 
现代文：说的就是这个意思。 
English: This is exactly what is happening.

