古文：天文一言天者有三家，一曰宣夜，二曰盖天，三曰浑天，而天之正体，经无前说，马《书》、班《志》，又阙其文。
现代文：谈论天文的有三家学说，一家持宣夜说，一家持盖天说，一家持浑天说，但天真正的形状，经书上没有说过，司马迁的《史记天官书》、班固的《汉书。天文志》又无记载。
English: There are three schools of thought when it comes to astronomy. One holds that the sky is night, one holds that the sky is overcast, and one holds that the sky is cloudy. However, the true shape of the sky is not mentioned in the scriptures, and there is no record of it in Sima Qian's "History of Heaven" or Bangu's "Chinese Book of Astronomy."

古文：汉灵帝议郎蔡邕于朔方上书曰： 论天体者三家，宣夜之学，绝无师法。
现代文：汉灵帝时议郎蔡邀从塑立上书说： 谈论天的有三家，宣夜说毫无师法可言。
English: Han Lingdi's conciliator, Cai Ying, wrote from the statue: There are three schools of thought about heaven, but Xuan Ye said that there is no way to teach it.

古文：《周髀》术数具存，考验天状，多所违失。
现代文：盖天说的测算方法都还在，但验证天的状况则多有不合之处。
English: The mathematical arguments in "Zhou Xuan" have all been preserved, and there are many inconsistencies in the examination of the status of celestial bodies.

古文：惟浑天仅得其情，今史官所用候台铜仪，则其法也。立八尺圆体，而具天地之形，以正黄道；占察发敛，以行日月，以步五纬，精微深妙，百世不易之道也。
现代文：衹有浑天说符合实际情况，现在史官所用的候台铜仪就是根据浑天说制作的立八尺圆体，使它具备天地的形状，以确定太阳在空中的运行轨迹黄道；观察曰月、五星运行的快慢，以描述推算它们的运动规律，精微深妙，是百世不变的方法。
English: According to the theory that there is a cloudy sky, it corresponds to the actual situation. The waiting platform bronze instrument now used by historians is an eight-foot circle made according to the theory of cloudy sky, so that it has the shape of heaven and earth to determine the sun's trajectory in the sky, the ecliptic; observe the speed of the moon and the five stars to describe and calculate their movement patterns. It is subtle and profound, and is a method that has remained unchanged for centuries.

古文：官有其器而无本书，前志亦阙而不论。本欲寝伏仪下，思惟微意，按度成数，以著篇章。
现代文：国家有这种仪器却没有文字方面的记载，以前的天文志上也没有论述，我本来想卧伏在浑天仪之下，思考其隐含的意义，考定数据以写成文章。
English: The country has such an instrument, but there is no written record of it, and it has not been discussed in previous astronomy books. I originally wanted to lie under the armillary sphere, think about its hidden meaning, and examine the data to write an article.

古文：罪恶无状，投畀有北，灰灭雨绝，势路无由。
现代文：但因为我罪过太大，被放逐于荒凉的北方，处境艰难，没法做这件事。
English: But I couldn't do it because I was too guilty, and I was banished to the desolate north, and I was in a difficult situation.

古文：宜问群臣，下及岩穴，知浑天之意者，使述其义。 
现代文：应当询问群臣，下及隐居之士，有知道浑天含意者让他们叙述出来。 
English: Enquiries should be made of courtiers, subordinates and recluses, and those who know the meaning of Hun Tian should be asked to describe it.

古文：时阉官用事，邕议不行。
现代文：当时宦官当权，蔡邕的建议没有实行。
English: At that time, the eunuchs were in power, and Cai Jun's suggestion was not implemented.

古文：汉末吴人陆绩善天文，始推浑天意。
现代文：汉朝末年吴人陆绩擅长天文，始推浑天之含意。
English: At the end of the Han Dynasty, the Wu people excelled in astronomy and began to push the meaning of the sky.

古文：王蕃者，卢江人，吴时为中常侍，善数术，传刘洪《乾象历》。依《乾象法》而制浑仪，立论考度曰：
现代文：玉养是庐逗人，在三国时代的呈国担任中常侍，擅长天文历法，得传刘洪的《干象历》根据《干象历》之法制造浑仪，其论述考证如下：
English: Yunyang was a witty person. He served as a middle-ranking attendant during the Three Kingdoms period. He was good at astronomical calendars. It is said that Liu Hong's "Dry Elephant Calendar" was based on the method of "Dry Elephant Calendar" to make a mud instrument. The following is a review of the discussion:

古文：前儒旧说，天地之体，状如鸟卵，天包地外，犹壳之裹黄也。周旋无端，其形浑浑然，故曰浑天也。
现代文：前儒旧说，认为天地的形状就像乌蛋一样，天包在地的外面就像蛋壳裹住蛋黄相似，旋转不止，其形如浑然天成，所以叫做浑天。
English: Former Confucians used to say that the shape of heaven and earth is like a black egg, and the outside of the sky wrapped around the earth is similar to the eggshell wrapped around the yolk, and the rotation does not stop, and its shape is like a smooth natural formation, so it is called a smooth sky.

古文：周天三百六十五度五百八十九分度之百四十五，半露地上，半在地下。
现代文：周天分为三百六十五度五百八十九分度之一百四十五，一半在地上，一半在地下。
English: The circumference of the sky is divided into three hundred and sixty-five degrees five hundred and eighty-nine degrees one hundred and forty-five, half on the ground, half under the ground.

古文：其二端谓之南极、北极。
现代文：它的两端称为南极、北极。
English: Its two ends are called the South Pole and the North Pole.

古文：北极出地三十六度，南极入地亦三十六度，两极相去一百八十二度半强。
现代文：北极高出地面三十六度，南极入地也是三十六度，两极相去一百八十二度又十二分之七。
English: The North Pole is thirty-six degrees above the ground, the South Pole is also thirty-six degrees above the ground, and the two poles are one hundred and eighty-two degrees and seven twelfths apart.

古文：绕北极径七十二度，常见不隐，谓之上规；绕南极七十二度，常隐不见，谓之下规。
现代文：绕北极七十二度范围内，一直在地上出现而不会隐没，被称为上规；绕南极七十二度范围内，一直隐而不出现，称为下规。
English: Within seventy-two degrees around the North Pole, it always appears on the ground and does not disappear, and is called the upper gauge; within seventy-two degrees around the South Pole, it always appears and does not disappear, and is called the lower gauge.

古文：赤道带天之纮，去两极各九十一度少强。
现代文：赤道是天的纽带，离两极各九十一度又十二分之四。
English: The equator is the nexus of the heavens, ninety-one and four-twelfths of a degree from either pole.

古文：黄道，日之所行也。
现代文：黄道即太阳运行的轨迹。
English: The ecliptic is the path of the sun's orbit.

古文：半在赤道外，半在赤道内，与赤道东交于角五少弱，西交于奎十四少强。
现代文：一半在赤道南，一半在赤道北，与赤道束交在角宿五又十二分之二度，西交在奎宿十四又十二分之四度。
English: Half of it is south of the equator, and half is north of the equator. It intersects with the equatorial band at Cape Canaveral by two-twelfths of a degree, and west of Cape Verde by four-twelfths of a degree.

古文：其出赤道外极远者，去赤道二十四度，斗二十一度是也。
现代文：其在赤道南最远点与赤道相去二十四度，在斗宿距二十一度。
English: Those farthest from the equator are twenty-four degrees from the equator and twenty-one degrees from the star.

古文：其入赤道内极远者，亦二十四度，井二十五度是也。
现代文：其在赤道北离赤道最远的点与赤道相去二十四度，在井宿二十五度。
English: Those very far inside the equator are also twenty-four degrees, twenty-five degrees away from the star.

古文：日南至在斗二十一度，去极百一十五度少强是也。
现代文：冬至曰太阳在斗宿二十一度，去北极一百一十五度又十二分之四。
English: The winter solstice says that the sun sets at Dooshuku on the twenty-first, at the North Pole on the one hundred and fifteenth and four-twelfths.

古文：日最南，去极最远，故景最长。
现代文：太阳在最南面，离北极最远，所以曰影最长。
English: The sun is farthest south, farthest from the North Pole, so it casts the longest shadow.

古文：黄道斗二十一度，出辰入申，故日亦出辰入申。
现代文：黄道上在斗宿二十一度的点出于辰入于申，所以太阳也出于辰入于申。
English: On the twenty-first day of the zodiac, the morning star rises at the hour of the hour, not at the hour of the moon, so the sun also rises at the hour of the hour, not at the hour of the moon.

古文：日昼行地上百四十六度强，故日短；夜行地下二百一十九度少弱，故夜长。
现代文：太阳白天在地上运行一百四十六度又十二分之一，所以白天短；夜裹在地下运行二百一十九度又十二分之二，所以黑夜长。
English: During the day, the sun moves upwards by more than a hundred and forty-six degrees, so the day time is short; during the night, the sun moves underground by two hundred and nineteen degrees, slightly less, so the night time is long.

古文：自南至之后，日去极稍近，故景稍短。
现代文：从冬至曰后，太阳与北极渐渐靠近，所以日影逐渐变短。
English: Since the winter solstice, the sun's distance from the pole has gradually become closer, so the sun's shadow has gradually become shorter.

古文：日昼行地上度稍多，故日稍长；夜行地下度稍少，故夜稍短。
现代文：太阳白天在地上运行的度数逐渐增多，所以白天变长；夜裹于地下运行的度数逐渐减少，所以夜逐渐变短。
English: The frequency of the sun's movement on the ground during the day gradually increases, so the daytime time becomes longer; the frequency of the sun's movement underground at night gradually decreases, so the night time gradually becomes shorter.

古文：日所在度稍北，故日稍北，以至于夏至，日在井二十五度，去极六十七度少强，是日最北，去极最近，景最短。
现代文：太阳逐渐向北移动到达夏至曰，太阳在井宿二十五度，去北极六十七度又十二分之四，在最北面，离北极最近，影最短。
English: The sun gradually moves northward, and on the day of the summer solstice, the sun is 25 degrees above the well, 67 degrees and four-twelfths above the North Pole, and the shadow is shortest at the northernmost point, closest to the North Pole.

古文：黄道井二十五度，出寅入戌，故日亦出寅入戌。
现代文：黄道上在井宿二十五度的点，出于寅入于戌，所以太阳也出于寅入于戌。
English: On the ecliptic, at the 25th degree of Ijuku, the sun rises from the point where the tiger enters the cocoon.

古文：日昼行地上二百一十九度少弱，故日长；夜行地下百四十六度强，故夜短。
现代文：太阳白天在地上运行二百一十九度又十二分之二，所以白天长；夜裹在地下运行一百四十六度又十二分之一，所以夜短。
English: During the day, the sun moves a little less than two hundred and nineteen degrees on the ground, so the day time is long; at night, it moves a little more than a hundred and forty-six degrees underground, so the night time is short.

古文：自夏至之后，日去极稍远，故景稍长。
现代文：从夏至以后，太阳距北极逐渐远，所以曰影逐渐加长。
English: After the summer solstice, the sun gradually moves away from the North Pole, so the shadow gradually increases.

古文：日昼行地上度稍少，故日稍短；夜行地下度稍多，故夜稍长。日所在度稍南，故日出入稍南，以至于南至而复初焉。
现代文：太阳白天在地上运行的度数渐渐减少，所以白天渐渐变短；夜裹在地下账行的度数渐渐增多，所以夜渐渐变长，太阳逐渐向南移动，到冬至曰而回复如初。
English: During the day, the sun's orbit around the earth gradually decreases, so the day gradually becomes shorter; at night, the sun's orbit around the underground ledger gradually increases, so the night gradually becomes longer, the sun gradually moves south, and by the winter solstice, it returns to its original position.

古文：斗二十一，井二十五，南北相觉四十八度。
现代文：斗二十一，井二十五，南北相隔四十八度。
English: Twenty-one degrees north, twenty-five degrees south, forty-eight degrees north and south.

古文：春分日，在奎十四少强；秋分日，在角五少弱，此黄赤二道之交中也。去极俱九十一度少强，南北处斗二十一井二十五之中，故景居二至长短之中。
现代文：春分曰，在奎宿十四度又十二分之四；秋分曰，在角宿五度又十二分之二，即为黄赤二道的交点，去极都是九十一度又十二分之四，南北处于斗二十一井二十五之中，所以影长亦在冬至、夏至影艮之中。
English: According to the vernal equinox, it is 14 degrees and 4 twelfths at Kweijuku; according to the autumnal equinox, it is 5 degrees and 2 twelfths at Jiaojuku, that is, the intersection of the Yellow Equator and the Second Avenue. The extreme points are all 91 degrees and 4 twelfths, and the north and south are in the 21st and 25th meridians, so the shadow length is also in the winter solstice and the summer solstice.

古文：奎十四，角五，出卯入酉，故日亦出卯入酉。
现代文：奎十四、角五度之点，山于卯入于酉，所以太阳也出于卯入于酉。
English: The Kui Star is 14 degrees and the Angular Star is 5 degrees. It rises at midnight and sets at dawn. Therefore, the sun also rises at midnight and sets at dawn.

古文：日昼行地上，夜行地下，俱百八十二度半强。
现代文：太阳白天在地上运行，夜晚在地下运行，都是一百八十二度又十二分之七。
English: The sun moves over the earth during the day and under the earth at night, always at one hundred and eighty-two degrees and seven twelves.

古文：故日见之漏五十刻，不见之漏五十刻，谓之昼夜同。
现代文：所以太阳出现漏五十刻，不出现亦漏五十刻，白天黑夜一样长。
English: Therefore, when the sun appears, it appears for fifty minutes, and when it does not appear, it also appears for fifty minutes. Day and night are the same length.

古文：夫天之昼夜，以日出入为分；人之昼夜，以昏明为限。
现代文：天的白天黑夜，以太阳的出入为分界；人的白天黑夜，以昏与明为界限。
English: Heaven's day and night are delimited by the sun's rising and setting; man's day and night are delimited by twilight and dawn.

古文：日未出二刻半而明，日已入二刻半而昏，故损夜五刻以益昼，是以春秋分之漏昼五十五刻。
现代文：太阳未出二刻半时称为明，太阳已入二刻半时称为昏，所以对人来说应减去夜里的五刻加到白天，这样春、秋分曰白天漏刻为五十五刻。
English: When the sun has not risen for two and a half hours, it is said to be bright, and when the sun has already set for two and a half hours, it is said to be dim. Therefore, for humans, the five hours in the night should be subtracted and added to the daytime, so that in the spring and autumn equinox, the missing hours in the daytime are 55 hours.

古文：三光之行，不必有常，术家以算求之，各有同异，故诸家历法参差不齐。
现代文：曰月星辰的运行，不必有固定的轨迹，历算家以计算推求，由于方法各不相同，所以各家的历法不同。
English: The sun, moon and stars do not have to have a certain regularity in their three-pointed movement. Scholars who are good at astronomical calendar calculation use calculation methods to verify. Each has its own similarities and differences, so the calendar of the peephole in the tube is also uneven.

古文：《洛书甄耀度》、《春秋考异邮》皆云周天一百七万一千里，一度为二千九百三十二里七十一步二尺七寸四分四百八十七分分之三百六十二。
现代文：《洛书甄耀度》、《春秋考异邮》上都认为周天一百零七万一千里，一度为二千九百三十二里七十一步二尺七寸四分又四百八十七分分之三百六十二。
English: According to the "Laoshu Zhenyao" and the "Spring and Autumn Examination of Foreign Post," Zhou Tian is thought to be 1071,000 li, which was once 2932 li, 71 shaku, 22 shaku, 74 sun, 362/487.

古文：陆绩云：天东西南北径三十五万七千里，此言周三径一也。
现代文：陆绩认为：天东西、南北径长皆为三十五万七千里，这就是说周长三倍于径。
English: According to Lu Yi, the east-west and north-south diameters of the sky are both 357,000 li, which means that the circumference is three times the diameter.

古文：考之径一不啻周三，率周百四十二而径四十五，则天径三十三万九千四百一里一百二十二步三尺二寸一分七十一分分之九。
现代文：事实上径长为一一周长不止三，应当是周长一百四十二而径长四十五，所以天径长应为三十三万九千四百零一里一百二十二步三尺二寸一分七十一分分之九。
English: In fact, if the diameter is one and the length is more than three, the circumference should be one hundred and forty-two and the diameter forty-five, so the celestial diameter should be three hundred and thirty-nine thousand four hundred and one miles, one hundred and twenty-two paces, three feet two inches, one minute and nine seventy-one minutes.

古文：《周礼》： 日至之景，尺有五寸，谓之地中。 
现代文：《周礼》： 夏至曰太阳在中天时表的影长为一尺五寸的地方称为地中。 
English: "Zhou Li": On the summer solstice, the place where the sun rises with a shadow length of one foot and five inches is called the middle of the earth.

古文：郑众说： 土圭之长，尺有五寸。
现代文：郑众说 土圭的长是一尺五寸。
English: Zheng Zong said that the length of the dogue is one foot and five inches.

古文：以夏至之日，立八尺之表，其景与土圭等，谓之地中，今颍川阳城地也。 
现代文：在夏至曰立八尺高的表，如果太阳中天时表的影长与土圭相等，表之地称为地中，即现在题川的幽。 
English: At the summer solstice, the eight-foot-tall table is said to stand, and if the length of the shadow of the celestial time table in the middle of the sun is equal to that of the earth, the place of the table is called the middle of the earth, that is, the quiet of the present Tiechuan.

古文：郑玄云： 凡日景于地千里而差一寸，景尺有五寸者，南戴日下万五千里也。 
现代文：难玄认为： 两地相隔一千里则日影相差一寸，影长一尺五寸，所以太阳垂直对应地上之点距地中一万五千里。 
English: According to Nan Xuan: When two places are separated by a thousand miles, the sun's shadow is one inch apart, and the shadow length is one foot and five inches, so the sun vertically corresponds to the point on the ground that is fifteen thousand miles away from the center of the earth.

古文：以此推之，日当去其下地八万里矣。
现代文：以此推之，太阳应当离其垂直对应之地八万里。
English: By this reckoning, the sun should be eighty thousand miles away from the earth below it.

古文：日邪射阳城，则天径之半也。
现代文：太阳斜射疆越之距即为天的半径。
English: The sun slants to Yangcheng, exactly half the diameter of the celestial body.

古文：天体圆如弹丸，地处天之半，而阳城为中，则日春秋冬夏，昏明昼夜，去阳城皆等，无盈缩矣。
现代文：天的形状圆如弹丸，地处于天的正中截面，而阳城为地中。所以太阳无论春夏秋冬，白天黑夜离阳城的距离都相等，没有变化。
English: The shape of the sky is round like a projectile, the earth is in the middle section of the sky, and the yangcheng is in the middle of the earth. Therefore, the sun is the same distance from the yangcheng regardless of spring, summer, autumn and winter, day and night, and there is no change.

古文：故知从日邪射阳城为天径之半也。
现代文：因此，从太阳斜射阳城之距即为天的半径。
English: Therefore, the distance from the sun obliquely to Yangcheng is the radius of the sky.

古文：以句股法言之，傍万五千里，句也；立八万里，股也；从日邪射阳城，弦也。
现代文：按勾股定理，傍一万五千里是勾，立八万里是股，从太阳斜射阳继之距是弦。
English: According to the gradient theorem, the side of fifteen thousand miles is the gradient, the vertical eighty thousand miles is the gradient, and the distance from the sun to the oblique sun is the chord.

古文：以句股求弦法入之，得八万一千三百九十四里三十步五尺三寸六分，天径之半，而地上去天之数也。
现代文：用勾股求弦法可得天的半径为八万一千三百九十四里三十步五尺三寸六分，天径之半，即地距上天的距离。
English: The radius of the sky can be found to be as much as 81,394 li, 30 paces, 5 feet, 3 inches and 6 minutes, which is half of the diameter of the sky, i.e. the distance between the earth and the sky.

古文：倍之，得十六万二千七百八十八里六十一步四尺七寸二分，天径之数也。
现代文：乘二可得天径长为十六万二干七百八十八里六十一步四尺匕寸二分，天径之数。
English: If you double it, you get 162,788 miles, which is exactly the number of the diameter of the celestial body.

古文：以周率乘之，径率约之，得五十一万三千六百八十七里六十八步一尺八寸二分，周天之数也。
现代文：再乘圆周率，除以径率，可得周天长为五十一万三千六百八十七里六十八步一尺八寸二分。
English: Multiplying by the circumference, the radii are all approximately equal, and the result is 5,113,687 miles, 68 stadia, 1 foot, 8 inches and 2 minutes, which is the number of the circumference of the celestial body.

古文：减《甄耀度》、《考异邮》五十五万七千三百一十二里有奇。
现代文：减去《甄耀度》、《考异邮》上所说的五十五万七千三百卜二里有余。
English: Subtracting "screening brightness" and "testing different post," there are more than five hundred and fifty-seven thousand three hundred and two.

古文：一度凡千四百六里百二十四步六寸四分十万七千五百六十五分分之万九千三十九，减旧度千五百二十五里二百五十六步三尺三寸二十一万五千一百三十分分之十六万七百三十分。
现代文：一度一千四百零六里一百二十四步六寸四分十万七千五百六卜五分分之一万√千三十九，减旧度一千五百：二十五里二百五十六步二三尺三寸二十一万五千一百三十分分之十六万匕百三十分。
English: One thousand four hundred and six miles, one hundred and twenty-four paces, six inches and four minutes, one hundred and seventy-seven thousand five hundred and six pounds and one-fifth, one thousand and thirty-nine; the degree of obsolescence, one thousand five hundred and twenty-five miles, two hundred and fifty-six paces, two hundred and thirty-three feet and three inches, one hundred and sixty thousand three hundred and thirty minutes of two hundred and fifteen thousand one hundred and thirty minutes.

古文：黄赤二道，相与交错，其间相去二十四度。
现代文：黄赤两道，相与交错，其间相距二十四度。
English: Yellow and red, interlaced, twenty-four degrees apart.

古文：以两仪推之，二道俱三百六十五度有奇，是以知天体圆如弹丸。
现代文：以两仪推之，二道都是三百六十五度有余，所以知道天体圆如弹丸。
English: Pushed by two instruments, both are more than 365 degrees, so we know that the celestial sphere is like a projectile.

古文：而陆绩造浑象，其形如鸟卵，然则黄道应长于赤道矣。
现代文：陆绩制造的浑象其形状如乌卵，显然黄道应长于赤道。
English: But Lu Ji made the armillary sphere, which is shaped like a bird's egg, so that the ecliptic should be longer than the equator.

古文：绩云天东西南北径三十五万七千里，然则绩亦以天形正圆也。
现代文：陆縯说天东西、南北径为三十五万七千里，如此则陆绩亦认为天的形状为正圆。
English: Lu Xun said that the east-west and north-south diameter of the sky was 357,000 li, so Lu Yi also believed that the shape of the sky was a perfect circle.

古文：而浑象为鸟卵，则为自相违背。
现代文：而他造的浑象乌卵，显然是自相矛盾。
English: However, his creation of a mud elephant black egg is clearly a contradiction in terms.

古文：古旧浑象以二分为一度，凡周七尺三寸半分。
现代文：古旧浑象以二分为一度，周长七尺三寸半分。
English: In ancient times, the old armillary sphere was divided into two equal parts, with a circumference of seven feet, three and a half inches.

古文：张衡更制，以四分为一度，凡周一丈四尺六寸。
现代文：张衡改制，以四分为一度，周长一丈四尺六寸。
English: Zhang Heng reformed the system, divided by four into one, and the circumference was increased by one to four feet and six inches.

古文：蕃以古制局小，星辰稠穊；衡器伤大，难可转移。
现代文：王蕃认为古时的浑象太小，星辰稠密；张衡的浑象太大，旋转移动不方便。
English: Wang Yao thought that the mud elephant in ancient times was too small, and the stars were too dense; Zhang Heng's mud elephant was too large, and it was inconvenient to rotate and move.

古文：更制浑象，以三分为一度，凡周天一丈九寸五分四分分之三也。
现代文：所以他改制浑象，以三分为一度，周长一丈九寸五分又四分分之二。
English: Therefore, he reformed the mud elephant, dividing it into three parts by one, with a circumference of one foot, nine inches, five minutes and two quarters.

古文：御史中丞何承天论浑象体曰： 详寻前说，因观浑仪，研求其意，有以悟天形正圆，而水周其下。
现代文：御史中丞坦丞玉论述浑象形状时说： 仔细探寻以前的学说，观察现存的浑仪，研究探求其含意，可以悟出天之形状为正圆，而水环绕于它的下面。
English: Commenting on the shape of the mud elephant, the Grand Historian Tan Zhengyu said: By carefully exploring the previous theories, observing the existing mud instruments, and studying and exploring their meanings, we can realize that the shape of the sky is a perfect circle, and water surrounds it below.

古文：言四方者，东旸谷，日之所出，西至濛汜，日之所入。庄子又云： 北溟之鱼，化而为鸟，将徙于南溟。 
现代文：谈四方的人把太阳所出之处即东方称为堡爸，太阳所入之处即西方称为濛汜。庄子又说：比溟有鱼化为鸟，将迁徙于南溟。 
English: People who talk about the four directions call the place where the sun rises, that is, the east, the castle dad, and the place where the sun sets, that is, the west, the cormorant. Zhuo Zi also said: the cormorant has turned into a bird, and will migrate to the south.

古文：斯亦古之遗记，四方皆水证也。
现代文：这也是古代遗留下来的四方都是水的证据。
English: This is also evidence left over from ancient times that all four directions are covered by water.

古文：四方皆水，谓之四海。
现代文：四方皆水称为四海。
English: The waters in all four directions are called the four seas.

古文：凡五行相生，水生于金，是故百川发源，皆自山出，由高趣下，归注于海。
现代文：按五行相生的道理，水生于金，所以百川皆发源于山中，由高趋下，流入大海。
English: According to the principle of the five elements, water is born from gold, so all rivers originate in the mountains, flow from high to low, and flow into the sea.

古文：日为阳精，光耀炎炽，一夜入水，所经燋竭，百川归注，足于补复，故旱不为减，浸不为益。
现代文：太阳为阳精，明亮炽热，每夜入水中，所经之处海水干涸，但因有百川入注，足以补充，所以海水不会因旱而减少，不会因涝而增加。
English: The sun is a yang essence, bright and hot. It enters the water every night, and the seawater dries up wherever it passes. However, it is sufficiently replenished by rivers and streams, so the seawater will not decrease due to drought, and will not increase due to hail.

古文：径天之数，蕃说近之。 
现代文：天径的数值，手蕃之说接近真实。 
English: The numerical value of the celestial diameter is close to the truth.

古文：太中大夫徐爰曰： 浑仪之制，未详厥始。
现代文：太中大夫徐爰说： 浑天仪的制造，不知道什么时候开始。
English: Grand Vice-Marshal Xu Wei said: "I don't know when the manufacture of the armillary sphere will begin.

古文：王蕃言： 《虞书》称 在璇玑玉衡，以齐七政 。则今浑天仪日月五星是也。
现代文：王蕃认为 《尚书虞书》称 观察璇玑玉衡，以齐七政 的 七政 ，就是现在的浑天仪上的日、月、五大行星。
English: Wang Yao believed that "Shang Shu Yu Shu" said that the observation of Zou Yuheng was the best way to align the seven political powers, which were the sun, the moon and the five planets on the current armillary sphere.

古文：郑玄说： 动运为机，持正为衡，皆以玉为之。
现代文：郑玄说 动运为机，持正为衡，皆以玉为之。
English: Zheng Xuan said that the dynamic movement is the opportunity, the positive attitude is the balance, and all of them are made of jade.

古文：视其行度，观受禅是非也。 
现代文：视其运行度数，可以知道受禅的是非 。
English: Depending on the frequency of its operation, you can know what is right and what is wrong.

古文：浑仪，羲和氏之旧器，历代相传，谓之机衡，其所由来，有原统矣。
现代文：浑天仪乃羲和氏的旧器。历代相传，称为机衡，其所由来有其本来的系统。
English: The Huntengiri is an old instrument of the Minowa clan. It has been passed down through the generations and is called a balance. Its origin lies in its original system.

古文：而斯器设在候台，史官禁密，学者寡得闻见；穿凿之徒，不解机衡之意，见有七政之言，因以为北斗七星，构造虚文，托之谶纬，史迁、班固，犹尚惑之。
现代文：因为它被置于候台，史官秘不示人。所以一般学者难得闻见，使得穿凿附会之徒虽然不懂得机衡之意，但因见有七政这两字，就认为是北斗七星，假托谶纬之学构造不实之文，司马迁、班墨尚被迷惑。
English: Because it was placed on the waiting table, historical officials did not reveal the secret to anyone. Therefore, it is rare for ordinary scholars to hear it, so that although the people who wear the chisel attached to the association do not understand the meaning of the balance, but because they see the two words of the seven governments, they think that it is the Big Dipper and the seven stars, and the false structure of the academic structure of the supposition, and Sima Qian and Ban Mo are still confused.

古文：郑玄有赡雅高远之才，沈静精妙之思，超然独见，改正其说，圣人复出，不易斯言矣。 蕃之所云如此。
现代文：塑玄有博大精深的才学，沉静精妙的思想，超然独见，改正其说，即使圣人复出也不能改变这种说法，王蕃的观点就是这样。
English: Wang Xi's point of view is that Shuxuan has a profound and profound talent for learning, a calm and subtle thought, a transcendent and unique view, and corrects his statement. Even if the sage returns, he cannot change this statement.

古文：夫候审七曜，当以运行为体，设器拟象，焉得定其盈缩，推斯而言，未为通论。
现代文：考察日、月及五大行星，应当以它们的运行为主体，设置天文仪器模拟天象根本无法确定它们运行的快慢，以此推之王蕃之说亦不通。
English: The observation of the sun, the moon and the five major planets should be based on their movement. Setting up astronomical instruments to simulate celestial objects cannot determine the speed of their movement at all, and Wang Xizhi's argument based on this does not make sense.

古文：设使唐、虞之世，已有浑仪，涉历三代，以为定准，后世聿遵，孰敢非革。
现代文：倘若唐襄、虞灵时代已经有浑天仪，经过夏、商、周三伐已定为标准，后世遵守，无人敢改变。
English: If the Tang, Xiang and Yuling dynasties already had the Hun Tian Yi, and after the Xia, Shang and San Zheng calendars, it has been set as a standard for future generations to abide by, and no one dares to change it.

古文：而三天之仪，纷然莫辩，至扬雄方难盖通浑。
现代文：且宣夜、盖天、浑天之仪，纷乱莫辩，到扬雄才非难盖天说而肯定浑天说。
English: Moreover, the rites of proclaiming the night, covering the sky, and covering the sky, were in a chaotic state. It was only when Yang Xiong arrived that he found it difficult to say covering the sky, but affirmed that he would say covering the sky.

古文：张衡为太史令，乃铸铜制范。衡传云： 其作浑天仪，考步阴阳，最为详密。 
现代文：张堑担任太史令才铸造浑天仪，退蛮传上说： 他作浑天仪，推断阴阳，最为详细精密。 
English: Zhang Qian served as the Grand Historian before casting the Hun Tian Yi. According to legend, he made the Hun Tian Yi and deduced the yin and yang in the most detailed and precise manner.

古文：故知自衡以前，未有斯仪矣。
现代文：所以知道在张衡之前没有浑天仪。
English: So I know that there was no Huntenyi before Zhang Heng.

古文：蕃又云： 浑天遭秦之乱，师徒丧绝，而失其文，惟浑天仪尚在候台。 
现代文：旦养又说： 浑天说遭秦乱以致断了师传，且遣失了有关的文字记载，衹有浑天仪还保存于候台。 
English: Danzhao also said: Hun Tian said that the Qin Dynasty was in turmoil, which led to the interruption of the teacher's biography, and the relevant written records were lost. Some Hun Tian instruments are still preserved in the waiting room.

古文：案既非舜之璇玉，又不载今仪所造，以纬书为穿凿，郑玄为博实，偏信无据，未可承用。
现代文：经考证既不是爱时璇玉，又不记载于今天的浑天仪的造法，以纬书为穿凿附会，以郑玄为渊博详实，此偏信无据，不可接受采用。
English: After examination and verification, it is neither a love of time-honored jade, nor is it recorded in today's Hun Tian Yi's construction method, with the Weizhu as the wearer of the chisel, and Zheng Xuan as the profound and detailed. This bias is unsubstantiated and cannot be accepted.

古文：夫璇玉，贵美之名；机衡，详细之目。所以先儒以为北斗七星，天纲运转，圣人仰观俯察，以审时变焉。 
现代文：璇玉是美而贵重的名字，机衡是指事物的关键部分，所以先儒以其代表北斗七星，天纲运转，圣人仰观俯察，以审察时事的变化。 
English: Zhengyu is a beautiful and precious name, and balance refers to the key part of things, so the early Confucianists used it to represent the Big Dipper, the movement of the heavens, and the sages looking up and looking down to examine the changes in current affairs.

古文：史臣案：设器象，定其恆度，合之则吉，失之则凶，以之占察，有何不可。
现代文：史臣案：设置天文仪器，确定天体运行的常规，观察天象，与常规符合则吉，不合则凶，以这种方法考察时事有何不可?
English: Sison's case: setting up astronomical instruments, determining the routine of celestial bodies, observing celestial phenomena, and meeting the routine is good, and not meeting the routine is bad. Why is it impossible to investigate current affairs in this way?

古文：浑文废绝，故有宣、盖之论，其术并疏，故后人莫述。
现代文：浑天说失传，所以有宣夜、盖天说，此两种方法都很粗疏，因此后人没有记述。
English: Hunten said that it was lost, so there were Xuanye and Geitian said that these two methods were very rough, so later generations did not record.

古文：扬雄《法言》云： 或人问浑天于雄。
现代文：扰雄在《法言》中说： 有人问我浑天说。
English: Zhaoxiong said in "Dharma Sayings": Some people ask me to say all day long.

古文：雄曰： 落下闳营之，鲜于妄人度之，耿中丞象之，几乎莫之违也 。 若问天形定体，浑仪疏密，则雄应以浑仪答之，而举此三人以对者，则知此三人制造浑仪，以图晷纬。
现代文：我回答： 蓬工翅营造浑天仪，鲜于妄人用它来测量，耿中丞造了一个按浑天说模拟天球运动的仪器，很接近真实情况。 ，如果问的是天的形体，浑仪的粗疏精密，那么扬雄应该以浑天说的学说来回答，而之所以此三人来应答，因此可以知道这三人制造的浑天仪，以显示曰与在周天运行中的度数。
English: I replied, "Peng Gongyuang built the armillary sphere, but few people use it to measure. Geng Zhongzheng built an instrument that simulates the movement of the celestial sphere according to the theory of armillary sphere, which is very close to the real situation. If the question is about the shape of the sky and the coarse precision of the armillary sphere, then Yang Xiong should answer according to the theory of armillary sphere. And the reason why these three people came to answer is so that we can know the armillary sphere made by these three people to show the degrees of the day and the day of the week.

古文：问者盖浑仪之疏密，非问浑仪之浅深也。
现代文：问的大概是浑仪的粗疏精密，而不是浑仪的浅深。
English: The question was probably about the coarse precision of the instrument, not its shallow depth.

古文：以此而推，则西汉长安已有其器矣。
现代文：以此推之，西汉时长安已有浑天仪。
English: From this, it can be deduced that during the Western Han Dynasty, Chang'an already had the Hun Tian Yi.

古文：将由丧乱亡失，故衡复铸之乎？
现代文：是否因为战乱失传，所以张衡再次铸造?
English: Was Zhang Heng cast again because it was lost during the war?

古文：王蕃又记古浑仪尺度并张衡改制之文，则知斯器非衡始造，明矣。
现代文：王蕃又记载了古代浑天仪的尺度及张衡改制之事，因此更证明浑天仪不是由张衡第一次制造。
English: Wang Qian also recorded the scale of the ancient armillary sphere and the fact that Zhang Heng changed the system, thus proving that the armillary sphere was not made by Zhang Heng for the first time.

古文：衡所造浑仪，传至魏、晋，中华覆败，沈没戎虏；绩、蕃旧器，亦不复存。
现代文：张衡所造的浑天仪传到魏、晋时汉族政府失败，陷于胡虏，陆縯、王蕃时的旧器亦不复存。
English: The armillary sphere made by Zhang Heng was passed on to the Han government in the Wei and Jin dynasties, but it failed and was trapped in Huru, and the old instruments from the time of Lu Xun and Wang Xi also no longer exist.

古文：晋安帝义熙十四年，高祖平长安，得衡旧器，仪状虽举，不缀经星七曜。
现代文：置宣童羞壁十四年，壶趄平定垦互，获得强盗所制浑天仪，其形状得以保存，但上面没有标识恒星、曰、月及五大行星。
English: In the 14th year of Xuan Tong's apprenticeship, he obtained the armillary sphere made by the robbers. The shape of the armillary sphere was preserved, but there was no star, sun, moon and five planets marked on it.

古文：文帝元嘉十三年，诏太史令钱乐之更铸浑仪，径六尺八分少，周一丈八尺二寸六分少，地在天内，立黄赤二道，南北二极规二十八宿，北斗极星，五分为一度，置日月五星于黄道之上，置立漏刻，以水转仪，昏明中星，与天相应。
现代文：文帝元嘉十三年，诏令太史令钱乐之再铸浑天仪，直径六尺八分又十二分之三，周长一丈八尺二寸六分又十二分分之三，地在天内，其上有黄赤二道，南一一极，分划二十八宿及北斗极星，五分为一度，置曰月五大行星于黄道之上，置立漏刻，以水为动力转动仪器，昏明中星，与天象相应。
English: In the thirteenth year of the reign of Emperor Wen of the Yuan Dynasty, Emperor Zhao of the Taishi Dynasty ordered Qian Le to recast the armillary sphere, with a diameter of six feet, eight minutes and three twelfths, a circumference of one meter, eight feet, two inches, six minutes and three twelfths, the earth in the middle of the day, there are yellow and red two roads, south one pole, divided into twenty-eight lodges and the North Star, five divided into one, the five planets of the moon are placed above the ecliptic, a leak is set, a water-powered rotating instrument is set up, a dim central star, corresponding to

古文：十七年，又作小浑天，径二尺二寸，周六尺六寸，以分为一度，安二十八宿中外宫，以白黑珠及黄三色为三家星，日月五星，悉居黄道。
现代文：元嘉十七年又做小浑天仪，其径长二尺二寸，周长六尺六寸，以分为一度。定二十八宿中外宫，以白、黑及黄三种颜色分别表示甘区、亘臣及巫盛三家星，日、月和五大行星都居于黄道。
English: In the seventeenth year of Yuan Jia, he also made a small armillary sphere, with a diameter of two feet and two inches and a circumference of six feet and six inches, to be divided into one. There are 28 mansions in the middle and outside of the palace, with white, black and yellow three colors respectively to represent the three stars of Gan Guo, Guo Sheng and Wu Sheng. The sun, the moon and the five planets all live in the zodiac.

古文：盖天之术，云出周公旦访之殷商，盖假托之说也。
现代文：盖天说传言是周公旦从殷商而得，遣大概是假托之说。
English: Geitian said that the rumor was that Zhou Gongdan got it from a Yin merchant, and that it was probably a false rumor.

古文：其书号曰周髀。
现代文：谈盖天的书称为《周髀》。
English: The book that talks about covering the sky is called "Zhou Xuan Rong."

古文：髀者，表也，周天之数也。
现代文：髀即是表，用它能确定周天之数。
English: is the watch, which is used to determine the number of days in a week.

古文：其术云： 天如覆盖，地如覆盆，地中高而四隤，日月随天转运，隐地之高，以为昼夜也。
现代文：盖天说认为： 天像扣着的盖子，地像扣着的盆，地中间高而四方渐渐下降，日月随天运转，有时隐于地之高处的后面，如此就产生了白天与黑夜。
English: Gai Tian said that: The sky is like a clasped lid, the earth is like a clasped basin, the middle of the earth is high and gradually descends in all directions, the sun and moon move with the sky, sometimes hidden behind the high places of the earth, thus producing day and night.

古文：天地相去凡八万里，天地之中，高于外衡六万里；地上之高，高于天之外衡二万里也。 
现代文：天地相隔八万里，天地的中间比天体绕北极运行的最外圈轨道即外衡高六万里，地上的最高处比天上的外衡高二万里。 
English: Heaven and earth are separated by eighty thousand miles. The middle of heaven and earth is sixty thousand miles higher than the outermost orbit of celestial bodies orbiting the North Pole, that is, the balance. The highest point on earth is twenty thousand miles higher than the balance in the sky.

古文：或问盖天于扬雄。扬雄曰： 盖哉！
现代文：有人问扬雄关于盖天说，扬雄回答： 盖哉!
English: When someone asked Yang Xiong about covering the sky, Yang Xiong replied: Wow!

古文：盖哉！ 难其八事。郑玄又难其二事。
现代文：盖哉厂提出八项责难郑玄又指出二项。
English: Gaiya Factory put forward eight accusations, and Zheng Xuan pointed out two more.

古文：为盖天之学者，不能通也。
现代文：二人都以为盖天说不正确。
English: Both of them thought that it was not correct to say that it was covered by the sky.

古文：刘向《五纪》说，《夏历》以为列宿日月皆西移，列宿疾而日次之，月最迟。
现代文：刘向在《五纪》中谈到，《夏历》中列宿、曰、月皆向西移动，列宿快而太阳次之，月最慢。
English: Liu Xiang mentioned in the "Wu Ji" that in the "summer calendar," the sun, moon, and stars all move westward, the sun is the fastest, and the moon is the slowest.

古文：故日与列宿昏俱入西方；后九十一日，是宿在北方；又九十一日，是宿在东方；九十一日，在南方。
现代文：所以太阳与列宿昏时俱入西方；九十一天后，宿在北方；又九十一天，宿在东方；再九十一天在南方。
English: So the sun sets in the west at the same time as it sets; after ninety-one days, it sets in the north; after ninety-one days, it sets in the east; and after ninety-one days, it sets in the south.

古文：此明日行迟于列宿也。
现代文：这证明太阳运行速度慢于列宿。
English: This proves that the sun runs slower than it should.

古文：月生三日，日入而月见西方；至十五日，日入而月见东方；将晦，日未出，乃见东方。
现代文：新月出现三天，太阳入而月出现于西方；到第十五天，太阳入而月出现于东方；将晦，太阳未出而月于东方出现。
English: The new moon appears for three days, the sun sets and the moon appears in the west; on the fifteenth day, the sun sets and the moon appears in the east; at the end of the month, the sun does not rise and the moon appears in the east.

古文：以此明月行之迟于日，而皆西行也。
现代文：这证明月运行慢于太阳且二者都向西运行。
English: This proves that the moon moves slower than the sun and that both move westward.

古文：向难之以《鸿范传》曰： 晦而月见西方，谓之朓。
现代文：刘向以《鸿范传》非难《夏历》： 晦时月出现于西方，称为眺，眺即快的意思。
English: Liu Xiang used "The Biography of Hong Fan" to criticize "The Summer Calendar": The last day of the month appears in the west and is called "gazing," which means to look quickly.

古文：朔而月见东方，谓之侧匿。侧匿，迟不敢进也。
现代文：朔时月出现于东方称为侧匿，侧匿即徘徊不进的意思。
English: When the new moon appears in the east, it is called the sidereal. Sidereal means lingering and not advancing.

古文：星辰西行，史官谓之逆行。 
现代文：星辰向西运行，史官称之为逆行。 
English: The star moved westward, which historians call retrograde motion.

古文：此三说，《夏历》皆违之，迹其意，好异者之所作也。
现代文：此三说，《夏历》都违背，探求其含意，可知都是好异之人所作。
English: These three said, "the summer calendar" are all contradictory, explore its meaning, it can be known that they are all made by dissimilar people.

古文：晋成帝咸康中，会稽虞喜造《安天论》，以为 天高穷于无穷，地深测于不测。
现代文：晋成帝戚尘年间，食盐人卢重作《安天论》，以为 天高至于无穷，地深至于不可测。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jincheng, the salt-eater Lu Kang rewrote "On the Theory of Heaven and Earth," believing that the height of the heavens is infinite and the depth of the earth is unfathomable.

古文：地有居静之体，天有常安之形。论其大体，当相覆冒，方则俱方，圆则俱圆，无方圆不同之义也。 喜族祖河间太守耸又立《穹天论》云： 天形穹隆，当如鸡子幕，其际周接四海之表，浮乎元气之上。 
现代文：天地都有固定的形状，其大概情形应当是相覆盖，方则俱方，圆则俱圆，不可能一方一圆 虞喜的族祖过闾太守虞耸又作《穹天论》： 天的形状中央隆起而四周下垂像鶸蛋膜一样，其周界与四海的表面相接，浮于元气之上。 
English: Heaven and earth have a fixed shape, the general situation of which should be a phase cover, square is square, round is round, it is impossible to make one side round. Yu Xi's ancestor Gu Taizhou Yu Xuan also wrote "Concerning the Firmament": The shape of the sky bulges in the center and droops around like a crepe film, and its perimeter is connected to the surface of the four seas and floats on the vitality.

古文：而吴太常姚信造《昕天论》曰： 尝览《汉书》云：冬至日在牵牛，去极远；夏至日在东井，去极近。
现代文：而吴国太常型瞄作《昕天论》说： 曾见《汉书》上说：冬至太阳在牵牛之宿，离极远；夏至曰在东井之宿，离极近。
English: However, Wu Guotai's classic work, "The Analects of Confucius," says: "I once read in the "Chinese Book" that: the winter solstice sun is in the inn of the cowherd, very far away; the summer solstice is said to be in the inn of the east well, very close.

古文：欲以推日之长短，信以太极处二十八宿之中央，虽有远近，不能相倍。 
现代文：想以此推论白天的长短，我认为太极处在二十八宿的中央，既使有远近之分，其距离不可能相差一倍。 
English: In order to deduce the length of the day from this, I think that Taiji is in the center of the twenty-eight quarters, and even if there is a difference in distance, it is impossible to double the distance.

古文：今《昕天》之说，以为 冬至极低，而天运近南。故日去人远，而斗去人近；北天气至，故冰寒也。
现代文：《听天论》之说认为 冬至极低而天运行近南，所以太阳距人远而斗宿离人近，北天之气到来，因此天气寒冷。
English: "Listening to the sky" says that the winter solstice is very low and the sky runs close to the south, so the sun is far away from people and the fighting place is close to people. The north wind comes, so the weather is cold.

古文：夏至极起，而天运近北，而斗去人远，日去人近，南天气至，故炎热也。
现代文：夏至极上升而天运行近北，而斗宿距人远，太阳离人近南天之气到来，所以天气炎热。
English: The summer solstice is rising and the sky is moving close to the north, while the dojo is far away from the people, the sun is close to the people and the south wind is coming, so the weather is hot.

古文：极之立时，日行地中浅，故夜短；天去地高，故昼长也。
现代文：极高时太阳运行于地中较浅，所以夜短，天距地高，所以白天长。
English: When the pole is high, the sun is shallow when it reaches the middle of the earth, so the time of night is short; the sky is high from the ground, so the time of day is long.

古文：极之低时，日行地中深，故夜长；天去地下浅，故昼短也。然则天行寒依于浑，夏依于盖也。 按此说应作 轩昂 之 轩 ，而作 昕 ，所未详也。
现代文：极低时太阳于地中运行深，天距地近所以夜长曰短。如此说来天寒时其运行按浑天说，夏天炎热时依盖天说 。考察此说， 昕 字应为 轩昂 之 轩 ，不知何故。
English: When it is very low, the sun runs deep in the earth, and the sky is close to the earth, so the night is short. So when it is cold, it runs according to the sky, and when it is hot in summer, it runs according to the sky. According to this study, the  character should be 轩 昂 之 轩, for some reason.

古文：凡三说，皆好异之谈，失之远矣。
现代文：此三说皆好异之谈，离事实太远。
English: All three of these statements are contradictory and far from the truth.

古文：凡天文经星，常宿中外宫，前史已详。
现代文：凡中外星宫中的固定恒星，前史已详。
English: The history of the fixed stars in the extraterrestrial mansions is well known.

古文：今惟记魏文帝黄初以来星变为《天文志》，以续司马彪云。
现代文：今惟记魏文帝黄初以来星变编成《天文志》，上接司马彪《续汉书。
English: Now, however, it is recorded that since the beginning of Emperor Wen of Wei and Emperor Huang, the stars have changed into "Astronomy" and "Continuation of the Han Dynasty" by Sima Biao.

古文：魏文帝黄初三年九月甲辰，客星见太微左掖门内。
现代文：天文志》。魏文帝黄初三年九月甲辰，客星在太微左掖门内出现。
English: In September of the third year of Emperor Weiwenhuang's reign, a guest star appeared in the left atrium of Taibin Palace.

古文：占曰： 客星出太微，国有兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 客星在太微出现则国家将有战事、丧事。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If the guest star appears too faint, the country will have war and mourning.

古文：十月，孙权叛命，帝自南征，前驱临江，破其将吕范等。
现代文：十月，孙权叛，文帝亲自南征，前驱临近长江，攻破孙权的将领吕范等。
English: In October, Sun Quan rebelled, Emperor Wen personally marched south, drove forward near the Yangtze River, and defeated Sun Quan's general Lu Fan.

古文：是后累有征役。
现代文：此后屡有征战。
English: Since then, there have been frequent call-ups.

古文：七年五月，文帝崩。
现代文：七年五月，文帝逝世。
English: In May of the seventh year, Emperor Weiwen passed away.

古文：黄初四年三月癸卯，月犯心大星。
现代文：黄初四年三月癸卯，月犯心宿大星。
English: In March of the 4th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the Moon Criminals made their way to Daxing.

古文：十二月丙子，月又犯心大星。
现代文：十二月丙子，月又犯心宿大星。
English: In December, the moon and the stars collide.

古文：占曰： 心为天王，王者恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 心宿大星代表天王，这种天象对王者不利。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The great star represents the heavenly king, and this celestial body is unfavorable to the king.

古文：七年五月，文帝崩。
现代文：七年五月，文帝逝世。
English: In May of the seventh year, Emperor Weiwen passed away.

古文：黄初四年六月甲申，太白昼见。
现代文：黄初四年六月甲申，金星白天出现。
English: In June of the 4th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Venus appeared in the daytime.

古文：五年十一月辛卯，太白又昼见。
现代文：五年十一月辛卯，金星又于白天出现。
English: In November of the same year, Venus appeared again in the daytime.

古文：案刘向《五纪论》曰： 太白少阴，弱，不得专行，故以己未为界，不得经天而行。
现代文：考查刘向的《五纪论》上说： 金星属少阴，弱，不得任意运行，所以以巳未为界限，不得经天运行。
English: Liu Xiang's "Five Chronologies" said: Venus is a minor yin, weak and cannot travel alone, so it does not use itself as a boundary and cannot travel through the sky.

古文：经天则昼见，其占为兵，为丧，为不臣，为更王。
现代文：经天运行则白天出现，此预示着国家有兵事，有丧事，有臣下叛逆，王位更替。
English: If it passes through the sky, it will appear during the day, which indicates that the country will have military affairs, funerals, rebellious subjects, and a change of throne.

古文：强国弱，小国强。 
现代文：强国变弱，弱国变强。 
English: The strong get weaker, the weak get stronger.

古文：是时，孙权受魏爵号，而称兵距守。
现代文：当时表面上孙权接受魏国授予的爵位封号，却领兵拒守。
English: At that time, on the surface, Sun Quan accepted the title of nobility conferred by Wei, but refused to lead the army.

古文：七年五月，文帝崩。
现代文：七年五月，魏文帝逝世。
English: In May of the seventh year, Emperor Weiwen passed away.

古文：八月，吴遂围江夏，寇襄阳，魏江夏太守文聘固守得全。
现代文：八月，吴兵围江夏，进攻襄阳，魏江夏太守文聘固守得以保全。
English: In August, Wu soldiers encircled Jiangxia and attacked Xiangyang, and the Wei Jiangxia was able to maintain a tight defense.

古文：大将军司马懿救襄阳，斩吴将张霸。
现代文：大将军司马懿救援襄阳，斩吴将张霸。
English: General Sima Wei came to the rescue of Xiangyang and executed Wu general Zhang Ba.

古文：黄初四年十一月，月晕北斗。
现代文：黄初四年十一月，月晕于北斗。
English: In November of the 4th year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the moon was eclipsed by the North Star.

古文：占曰： 有大丧，赦天下。 
现代文：占辞说： 国家将有大丧，赦天下。 
English: Fortune-telling said: If there is a great mourning, it will be forgiven by the world.

古文：七年五月，文帝崩，明帝即位，大赦天下。
现代文：七年五月，文帝崩逝，明帝即位，大赦天下。
English: In May of the seventh year, Emperor Wen passed away, Emperor Ming ascended the throne, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：黄初五年十月，岁星入太微，逆行积百三十九日乃出。
现代文：黄初五年十月，木星入太微垣，逆行一百三十九天后出去。
English: In October of the fifth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, Jupiter entered the Great Wall of China and went out one hundred and thirty-nine days after retrograde.

古文：占曰： 五星入太微，从右入三十日以上，人主有大忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 五大行星从右进入太微垣三十天以上则君主有大忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said, "If the five-pointed star enters Taibai, and if it enters from the right for more than thirty days, the sovereign will be in great trouble."

古文：一曰： 有赦至。 
现代文：另一说： 将有赦。 
English: Another is: there will be an amnesty.

古文：七年五月，文帝崩，明帝即位，大赦天下。
现代文：七年五月，文帝崩，明帝即位，大赦天下。
English: In May of the seventh year, Emperor Wen passed away, Emperor Ming ascended the throne, and pardoned the whole world.

古文：黄初六年五月十六日壬戌，荧惑入太微，至二十六日壬申，与岁星相及，俱犯右执法；至二十七日癸酉，乃出。
现代文：黄初六年五月十六日壬戌，火星入太微垣至二十六日壬申与木星相遇，都犯右执法星，到二十七日癸酉才出去。
English: On the 16th day of the 5th month of the 6th year of the Yellow Emperor, Mars entered Taibiao, and until the 26th day of the Jinshin and Jupiter met, they all violated the right law enforcement star, and did not go out until the 27th day of the month.

古文：占曰： 从右入三十日以上，人主有大忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 行星从右入太微三十天以上则君主将有大忧患。 
English: According to the divination, if it takes more than thirty days to enter from the right, the monarch will be in great distress.

古文：又 日月五星犯左右执法，大臣有忧。 
现代文：又说 曰、月或五大行星犯左右执法星则大臣将有忧患 。
English: He also said that if the moon or the five planets were to become a law enforcement star, the minister would be in trouble.

古文：一曰： 执法者诛。
现代文：另一说： 执法大臣被诛杀。
English: Another said: "The law enforcement minister was beaten to death."

古文：金火尤甚。 
现代文：如果犯执法星的是金星、火星，情况就更严重。 
English: The situation is even more serious if the offending planet is Venus or Mars.

古文：十一月，皇子东武阳王鉴薨。
现代文：十一月，皇子东武疆王蔓鉴去世。
English: In November, Prince Dongwuyang Wang Cao Jian died.

古文：七年正月，骠骑将军曹洪免为庶人。
现代文：七年正月，骠骑将军曹洪被贬为平民。
English: In the first month of the seventh year, the cavalry general Cao Hong was exempted from being a civilian.

古文：四月，征南大将军夏侯尚薨。
现代文：四月，征南大将军夏侯尚去世。
English: In April, General Xia Hou of the Southern Expeditionary Army died.

古文：五月，文帝崩。
现代文：五月文帝崩。
English: Emperor Wen died in May.

古文：《蜀记》称： 明帝问黄权曰： 天下鼎立，何地为正？ 对曰： 当验天文。
现代文：《蜀记》称： 魏明帝问黄权： 现在天下三足鼎立，哪一处是正统，黄权回答： 应当验之于天文。
English: "Shu Ji" said: Wei Mingdi asked Huang Quan: Now that the world is standing on three legs, which one is orthodox, Huang Quan replied: It should be verified by astronomy.

古文：往荧惑守心，而文皇帝崩，吴、蜀无事，此其微也。 
现代文：往年火星守心宿而文帝崩，吴、蜀无事，造就是魏为正统的证明。
English: In previous years, Mars was the guardian of the heart, but Emperor Wen passed away, and Wu and Shu did nothing. This is proof that Wei is the orthodoxy.

古文：案三国史，并无荧惑守心之文，宜是入太微。
现代文：考查三国史，并无火星守心宿的记载，应当是火星入太微。
English: Examining the history of the three countries, there is no record of Mars guarding the heart, it should be Mars entering too small.

古文：黄初六年十月乙未，有星孛于少微，历轩辕。
现代文：黄初六年十月乙未，彗星出现于少微，经过轩辕。
English: In October of the sixth year of the Yellow Emperor's reign, the comet appeared in the sky.

古文：案占，孛、彗异状，其殃一也。为兵丧除旧布新之象，余灾不尽，为旱凶饥暴疾。
现代文：考查占书，孛星、彗星出现异常的形状，其预示的灾难相同，均为战事、丧事及除旧布新的天象，且余灾不尽并有干旱、严重的饥荒和突发的疾病。
English: An examination of the astrological books reveals that the appearance of anomalous shapes, such as the planet Uranus and comets, foretells the same calamities: war, death, and the appearance of new celestial phenomena, and the remaining disasters are inexhaustible and include drought, severe famine, and sudden illness.

古文：长大见久灾深；短小见速灾浅。
现代文：若星长、大且出现的时间久则灾深；若短而小且出现时间短则灾浅。
English: If the star is long and large and appears for a long time, the disaster will be deep; if it is short and small and appears for a short time, the disaster will be shallow.

古文：是时帝军广陵，辛丑，亲御甲胄，跨马观兵。
现代文：当时魏文帝驻军于广陵，辛丑，文帝亲自戎装骑马检阅军队。
English: At that time, Emperor Weiwen stationed troops in Guangling, Xinwu, Emperor Wen personally dressed in military attire and rode on horseback to inspect the army.

古文：明年五月，文帝崩。
现代文：第二年五月，文帝逝世。
English: In May of the following year, Emperor Wen died.

古文：魏明帝太和四年十一月壬戌，太白犯岁星。
现代文：魏明帝太和四年十一月壬戌，金星犯木星。
English: Emperor Ming of Wei and Emperor Taiwa married in November of the same year, and Venus married Jupiter.

古文：占曰： 太白犯五星，有大兵；犯列宿，为小兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 金星犯五大行星，将有大战争。犯列宿则将有小战事。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If Venus trespasses the five planets, there will be a big war. If it trespasses the inn, there will be a small war.

古文：五年三月，诸葛亮以大众寇天水，遣大将军司马懿距退之。
现代文：五年三月，诸葛亮以大军进攻天水，被明帝派遣大将军司马懿打退。
English: In March of the fifth year, Zhuge Liang attacked Tianshui with a large army, but was repulsed by the Ming emperor's dispatch of the general Sima Wei.

古文：太和五年五月，荧惑犯房。
现代文：太和五年五月，火星犯房宿。
English: In May of the same year, the Mars rover arrived at the rover's home.

古文：占曰： 房四星，股肱臣将相位也。
现代文：占辞说： 房宿四星代表将相等重要大臣。
English: The fortune-teller said: "The four-star representative will become an equally important minister."

古文：月五星犯守之，将相有忧。 
现代文：月或五大行星犯或守之则将相有忧患。 
English: If the Moon or the five planets are the culprit or the protector, there will be trouble.

古文：七月，车骑将军张郃追诸葛亮，为其所害。
现代文：七月，车骑将军退郃追击诸葛亮，为其所害。
English: In July, the cavalry general retreated and pursued Zhuge Liang, and was killed by him.

古文：十二月，太尉华歆薨。
现代文：十二月，太尉萋逖去世。
English: In December, Lieutenant Hua Xi died.

古文：太和五年十一月乙酉，月犯轩辕大星。
现代文：太和五年十一月乙酉，月犯轩辕大星。
English: In November of the 5th year of the Taihei era, the great star of the moon crime, Xuan Zang, was born.

古文：占曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 女主有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：十二月甲辰，月犯镇星。
现代文：十二月甲辰，月犯土星。
English: The first hour of December, the month of Saturn.

古文：占曰： 女主当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 女主应此灾祸。 
English: The fortune-teller said: The lady must bear the consequences foretold by this star.

古文：六年三月乙亥，月又犯轩辕大星。
现代文：六年三月乙亥，月又犯轩辕大星。
English: In March of the sixth year of the Chinese zodiac, the moon collided with a large star in the constellation of Virgo.

古文：青龙二年十一月乙丑，月又犯镇星。三年正月，太后郭氏崩。
现代文：青龙二年十一月乙丑，月又犯土星三年正月，太后郭氏逝世。
English: In November of the second year of the dragon, the second month of the year, the month of Saturn, the first month of the third year of the dragon, the empress dowager Guo died.

古文：太和六年十一月丙寅，太白昼见南斗，遂历八十余日恆见。
现代文：太和六年十一月丙寅，金星白天出现于南斗，接着八十余天一直出现。
English: In November of the same year, Venus appeared in the Southern Cross during the day, and continued to appear for more than 80 days.

古文：占曰： 吴有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 吴国将有战事。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a war in the State of Wu.

古文：明年，孙权遣张弥等将兵万人，锡授公孙渊为燕王。
现代文：第二年，孙权派遣张弥等领兵万人，赐授公孙渊为整王。
English: In the second year, Sun Quan dispatched Zhang Ya and others to lead ten thousand soldiers and bestowed the title of rectification king to Sun Yuan.

古文：渊斩弥等，虏其众。
现代文：后公磨周复叛呈，杀退迩等，俘虏其部众。
English: After that, Gongma Zhou rebelled, killed and drove back Zou and others, and captured his subordinates.

古文：太和六年十一月丙寅，有星孛于翼，近太微上将星。
现代文：太和六年十一月丙寅，有彗星出现于翼宿，靠近太微垣上将星。
English: In November of the 6th year of Taihei, a comet appeared in Tsubasa, close to the Taikogaki Admiral Star.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争、丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：甘氏曰： 孛彗所当之国，是受其殃。 
现代文：苴压说： 彗星出现之天空所对应的国家不利。 
English: Mr. Gan said: "The country corresponding to the star and comet will suffer its scourge.

古文：翼又楚分，孙权封略也。
现代文：翼宿又属楚地分野即当时孙权所占之地。
English: Tsubasa also belongs to the Chu region, which was occupied by Sun Quan at that time.

古文：明年，权有辽东之败。
现代文：第二年，孙权果然有辽东之败。
English: In the second year, Sun Quan suffered a defeat in Liaodong.

古文：权又向合肥新城，遣全琮征六安，皆不克而还。
现代文：孙权又亲自向合肥新城进军，同时派遣全琮征伐六安，但都不克而还。
English: Sun Quan also personally marched to Hefei New Town, and at the same time dispatched the whole army to conquer Lu'an, but they did not hesitate to fight back.

古文：又明年，诸葛亮入秦川，据渭南，司马懿距之。
现代文：又经一年，诸葛亮入秦川，占据渭南，魏将司马懿拒之。
English: After another year, Zhuge Liang entered the Qin River and occupied southern Anhui, but Wei rejected Sima Yu.

古文：孙权遣陆议、诸葛瑾等屯江夏口，孙韶、张承等向广陵淮阳，权以大众围新城以应亮。
现代文：孙权遣陆议、诸葛瑾等屯江夏口，孙韶、张承等进军广陵淮阳，孙权以大军围攻新城以策应诸葛亮北伐。
English: Sun Quan sent Lu Zhe, Zhuge Liang and others to Tunjiang Xiakou, while Sun Ying and Zhang Cheng marched into Guangling Huaiyang. Sun Quan besieged Xincheng with a large army in response to Zhuge Liang's Northern Expedition.

古文：于是帝自东征，权及诸将乃退。
现代文：当时明帝亲自束征，孙权和其将领才撤退。
English: At that time, Emperor Ming personally imposed conscription, and Sun Quan and his generals withdrew.

古文：太和六年十二月，陈王植薨。
现代文：太和六年十二月，魏陈王曹植去世。
English: In December of the same year, Wei Chen Wang Cao Zhi passed away.

古文：青龙元年夏，北海王蕤薨。
现代文：青龙元年夏天，魏北海王曹蕤去世。
English: In the summer of the first year of Qinglong, Cao Pi, the king of the Wei Beihai, passed away.

古文：三年正月，太后郭氏崩。
现代文：三年正月，魏皇太后郭氏逝世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Empress Dowager Guo of the Wei Dynasty passed away.

古文：明帝青龙二年二月己未，太白犯荧惑。
现代文：明帝青龙二年二月乙未，金星犯火星。
English: In February of the second year of the Ming Dynasty, the year of the blue dragon, the year of the rooster, the year of Venus and the year of the rooster.

古文：占曰： 大兵起，有大战。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有大的军事行动大的战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: A great army will be unleashed and a large-scale war will occur.

古文：是年四月，诸葛亮据渭南，吴亦起兵应之，魏东西奔命。
现代文：当年四月，诸葛亮占据渭南，吴国亦出兵响应，使魏东西奔命。
English: In April of that year, Zhuge Liang occupied the south of Hunan, Wu also raised an army to meet him, and the Wei army ran for their lives to the east and west.

古文：九月，亮卒，军退，将帅分争，为魏所破。
现代文：九月，诸葛亮去世而蜀军撤退，将帅纷争，被魏军攻破。
English: In September, Zhuge Liang died and the Shu army retreated, but was defeated by the Wei army.

古文：案占，太白所犯在南，南国败，在北，北国败，此宜在荧惑南也。
现代文：考查占书，金星从南面犯火星则南方国家军队失败，从北面犯则北国军队失败，因此当时金星应该在火星之南。
English: According to the examination of the horoscope, if Venus attacked Mars from the south, the southern country's army would fail, and if it attacked from the north, the northern country's army would fail. Therefore, Venus should have been south of Mars at that time.

古文：青龙二年三月辛卯，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：青龙二年三月辛卯，月犯舆鬼。
English: In March of the second year of Qinglong, Xinwu, a moon-criminal ghost.

古文：舆鬼主斩杀。
现代文：舆鬼宿主管斩杀之事。
English: The ghost of public opinion is slain.

古文：占曰： 民多病，国有忧，又有大臣忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此百姓多病，国家、大臣有忧患之天象。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This people is sickly, and the country and the minister have the appearance of sorrow.

古文：是年夏，大疫；冬，又大病，至三年春乃止。
现代文：当年夏天出现大瘟疫，冬天又出现大规模传染病，直到三年春天才停止。
English: In the summer of that year, there was a great plague, and in the winter there was a large-scale infectious disease, which did not stop until the spring of the third year.

古文：正月，太后郭氏崩。
现代文：正月，太后郭氏逝世。
English: In the first month of the year, Empress Dowager Guo died.

古文：四年五月，司徒董昭薨。
现代文：四年五月，司徒董昭去世。
English: In May of the same year, Siu Tung Shao died.

古文：青龙二年五月丁亥，太白昼见，积三十余日。
现代文：青龙二年五月丁亥，金星白天出现，延续三十多天。
English: In May of the second year of the dragon, Dinghai, Venus appeared during the day, lasting more than thirty days.

古文：以晷度推之，非秦、魏，则楚也。
现代文：以晷上度数推算，其位置不是在秦、魏地对应之星空就是楚地。
English: According to the calculation of the number of degrees above the horizon, its position is not in the corresponding starry sky of Qin and Wei, but in Chu.

古文：是时诸葛亮据渭南，司马懿与相持。
现代文：当时诸葛亮占据渭南，与司马懿对持。
English: At that time, Zhuge Liang occupied the south of Anhui Province and confronted Sima Yi.

古文：孙权寇合肥，又遣陆议、孙韶等入淮、沔，帝亲东征。
现代文：孙权进攻合肥，同时派遣陆议、孙韶等进军淮、沔，帝亲自东征。
English: Sun Quan attacked Hefei, and at the same time dispatched Lu Zhi, Sun Qian, and others to march into Huai and Qian, and the emperor personally marched eastward.

古文：蜀本秦地，则为秦、晋及楚兵悉起应占。
现代文：里国本属于羞地，如此则台、置及楚地都有战争，应验了占辞。
English: The country of Li originally belonged to Shidong, so there were wars in Taiwan and Chu, which fulfilled the prediction.

古文：青龙二年七月己巳，月犯楗闭。
现代文：青龙二年七月己巳，月犯楗闭。
English: In July of the second year of Qinglong, he was arrested for a month-long crime.

古文：占曰： 天子崩，又为火灾。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天子将逝，又将有火灾之征兆。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This heavenly son will pass away, and there will be signs of fire.

古文：三年七月，崇华殿灾。
现代文：三年七月，崇华殿出现火灾。
English: In July of the third year, a fire broke out in the Sohaden.

古文：景初三年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：景初三年正月，明帝逝世。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Emperor Ming passed away.

古文：青龙二年十月戊寅，月犯太白。
现代文：青龙二年十月戊寅，月犯金星。
English: In October of the second year of Qinglong, Wu Yin, the moon criminal jinxing.

古文：占曰： 人君死，又为兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示君主将死，又有战争。 
English: The fortuneteller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells the death of the monarch and war.

古文：景初元年七月，公孙渊叛。
现代文：景初元年七月，公逐渊反叛。
English: In July of the first year of the Jing era, Gong Bie Yuan rebelled.

古文：二年正月，遣司马懿讨之。
现代文：二年正月，魏司马懿征讨之。
English: In the first month of the second year, Sima Yi of the State Council of the State Council of the People's Republic of China went to collect it.

古文：三年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：三年正月，明帝逝世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Emperor Ming died.

古文：蜀后主建兴十二年，诸葛亮帅大众伐魏，屯于渭南，有长星赤而芒角，自东北，西南流投亮营，三投再还，往大还小。
现代文：蜀后主皇兴十二年，诸葛亮率大军伐魏，驻于渭南，有赤色、光芒带角的长星从东北向西南流投于诸葛亮所在的军营中，三投再还，往投时大而还时小。
English: In the twelfth year of Emperor Xing, the queen of Shu, Zhuge Liang led a large army to Wei, stationed in the south of Hunan. The long star with red color and light with horns flowed from the northeast to the southwest into the military camp where Zhuge Liang was located. It was thrown three times and then returned. When it was thrown, it was big and when it was thrown, it was small.

古文：占曰： 两军相当，有大流星来走军上及坠军中者，皆破败之征也。 
现代文：占辞说： 两军相持，如果有大流星运行于一方军队的上方或坠于军中，此是这方军队破败之征兆。 
English: Divination says: The two armies are facing each other, and a large meteor flying over and into the camp is a sign of defeat.

古文：九月，亮卒于军，焚营而退。
现代文：九月，诸葛亮逝于军中，蜀军焚烧自己的军营后撤退。
English: In September, Zhuge Liang died in the army, and the Shu army retreated after burning their own camp.

古文：群帅交恶，多相诛残。
现代文：群帅不和导致自相残杀。
English: The feud between the commanders led to internecine fighting.

古文：魏明帝青龙三年六月丁未，镇星犯井钺。
现代文：魏明帝青龙三年六月丁未，土星犯井宿之铁星。
English: Wei, Ming and Qing Dynasties, the third year of the Dragon, June, Ting Wei, Saturn, the iron star of Huanjing.

古文：四年闰四月乙巳，复犯。
现代文：四年闰四月乙巳再犯。戊戌日。
English: In leap April of the fourth year, he committed a second offense.

古文：戊戌，太白又犯。占曰： 凡月五星犯井钺，悉为兵起。 
现代文：金星又犯井铁。占辞说： 凡是月或五大行星犯井铁都预示着将有军事行动。 
English: The astrological oracle said, "Whenever the moon or the five planets are angry, it indicates that there will be military action."

古文：一曰： 斧钺用，大臣诛。 
现代文：另一说： 凡是月或五大行星犯井铁预示着斧铁被动用，大臣因罪被杀。 
English: Another theory is that a weapon such as an axe was used and the minister was killed.

古文：景初元年，公孙渊叛，司马懿讨灭之。
现代文：景初元年，公孙渊反叛，被司马懿征讨而消灭。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the Jing Dynasty, Gongsun Yuan rebelled and was defeated by Sima Yu.

古文：青龙三年七月己丑，镇星犯东井。
现代文：青龙三年七月己丑，土星犯束井。
English: In July of the third year of the blue dragon, he was ugly, and Saturn committed suicide.

古文：四年三月癸卯，在参，又还犯之。
现代文：四年三月癸卯，土星在参宿，又还犯束井。
English: At the end of March in the fourth year, Saturn was in Betelgeuse, and it was also in the constellation of Taurus.

古文：占曰： 镇星入井，大人忧。
现代文：占辞说： 土星进入井宿则大人将有忧患。
English: The fortune-teller said: When Saturn enters the well, the adults will be troubled.

古文：行近距为行阴，其占大水，五谷不成。 
现代文：行近距为行阴，预示着将有大水，五谷不熟。 
English: The proximity of the lines is negative, indicating that there will be heavy water, and the grain is not ripe.

古文：景初元年夏，大水，伤五谷。
现代文：景初元年夏天发大水而伤害五谷。
English: At the beginning of the first year of the summer, there was a lot of water, and the grain was damaged.

古文：九月，皇后毛氏崩。
现代文：九月，皇后毛氏逝世。
English: In September, Empress Mao passed away.

古文：三年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：三年正月，明帝去世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Emperor Ming died.

古文：青龙三年十月壬申，太白昼见在尾，历二百余日恆见。
现代文：青龙三年十月壬申，金星白天在尾宿出现，后一直持续二百多天。
English: In October of the third year of Qinglong, Jinshin, Venus appeared in the daytime in the tail lodge, and lasted for more than two hundred days.

古文：占曰： 尾为燕，燕臣强，有兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 尾宿代表燕地，蓝地臣强，此乃将有战争之兆。 
English: The fortune-teller said: Oyado represents the swallow land, and the blue land represents the strong vassal. This is a sign of war.

古文：青龙四年三月己巳，太白与月俱加丙，昼见。
现代文：青龙四年三月己巳，金星与月加丙，白天出现。
English: In March of the year of the dragon, Venus and the moon plus crescent appear in the daytime.

古文：月犯太白。
现代文：月犯金星。
English: The moon criminal and the too-white star.

古文：景初元年七月辛卯，太白又昼见，积二百八十余日。
现代文：景翅元年七月辛卯，金星又白天出现，持续二百八十多天。
English: In July of the first year of Jinglian, Venus appeared again during the day, lasting more than 280 days.

古文：占悉同上。
现代文：占辞全部同上。
English: The divination is exactly the same as the previous one.

古文：是时公孙渊自立为燕王，署置百官，发兵距守，遣司马懿讨灭之。
现代文：当时公孙渊自立为燕王，设置百官，发兵拒守，魏帝派遣司马懿征讨而消灭他。
English: At that time, Gongsun Yuan established himself as the king of Yan, set up a hundred officials, sent troops to resist, and the Wei Emperor sent Sima Yu to fight and destroy him.

古文：青龙三年十二月戊辰，月犯钩钤。
现代文：青龙三年十二月戊辰，月犯钩钤星。
English: In December of the third year of Qinglong, Wuchen, the moon offender hooked the star.

古文：占曰： 王者忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此王者有忧患之天象。 
English: The soothsayer said: The emperor is troubled.

古文：景初三年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：景初三年正月，明帝逝世。
English: In the first month of the third year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Emperor Ming passed away.

古文：青龙四年五月壬寅，太白犯毕左股第一星。
现代文：青龙四年五月壬寅，金星犯毕宿左股第一星。
English: In May of the fourth year of the Qing Long Dynasty, Ren Yin, Venus committed suicide and became the first star on the left.

古文：占曰： 毕为边兵，又主刑罚。 
现代文：占辞说： 毕宿代表边界之兵，又主管刑、罚之事。 
English: The soothsayer said: Bi-shuku symbolizes the frontier troops, and also presides over the punishment.

古文：九月，凉州塞外胡阿毕师侵犯诸国，西域校尉张就讨之，斩首捕虏万许人。
现代文：九月，速业塞外胡囚里面侵犯西域各国，西域校尉迟挞征讨之，斩首和俘虏一万多人。
English: In September, a group of Hu prisoners from outside of Hubei invaded the Western Regions, and the Western Region's lieutenant delayed to fight against them, beheading and capturing more than ten thousand people.

古文：青龙四年七月甲寅，太白犯轩辕大星。
现代文：青龙四年七月甲寅，金星犯轩辕大星。
English: In July of the year of the dragon, the year of the dragon, the year of the tiger, the year of the tiger, the year of the tiger, the year of the tiger, the year of the tiger, the year of the tiger.

古文：占曰： 女主忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示着女主将有忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The mistress is in trouble.

古文：景初元年，皇后毛氏崩。
现代文：景初元年。皇后毛氏逝世。
English: In the first year of the reign of Emperor Jing, Empress Mao passed away.

古文：青龙四年十月甲申，有星孛于大辰，长三尺。
现代文：青龙四年十月甲申，有长三尺的彗星出现于大辰。
English: In October of the fourth year of Qinglong, in Jiaxun, a star appeared in Xinjuku, three feet long.

古文：乙酉，又孛于东方。
现代文：乙酉，又有彗星出现于东方。
English: Acetylene also appeared in the East.

古文：十一月己亥，彗星见，犯宦者天纪星。
现代文：十一月己亥，彗星出现而犯宦者天纪星。
English: In November of the year of the boar, a comet appears, crashing into the constellation of Aquarius and the zodiac.

古文：占曰： 大辰为天王，天下有丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 大辰代表天王，造天象预示天下将有丧事。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "The great clock is the king of heaven, and death is everywhere."

古文：刘向《五纪论》曰： 《春秋》星孛于东方，不言宿者，不加宿也。 
现代文：刘向的《五纪论》上说： 《春秋》上衹说彗星出现于东方而没记下具体出现于哪宿是因为不加宿的缘故。 
English: Liu Xiang's "Five Chronologies" said: "Spring and Autumn" said that the comet appeared in the east, but did not write down where it appeared because it did not add accommodation.

古文：宦者在天市为中外有兵，天纪为地震。
现代文：宦者星处在天市垣，代表中外战争，天纪星代表地震。
English: The deaf star is located in the sky, representing the Sino-foreign war, and the celestial star represents the earthquake.

古文：孛彗主兵丧。
现代文：彗星主管军事和丧事。
English: Comet is in charge of military and funerals.

古文：景初元年六月，地震。
现代文：景初元年六月，地震。
English: In June of 1891, an earthquake occurred.

古文：九月，吴将硃然围江夏，荆州刺史胡质击走之。
现代文：九月，吴将朱然围攻江夏，被荆州刺史胡质击走。
English: In September, Wu besieged Zhu Ran in Jiangxia and was driven away by Jingzhou's Zhishi Wuzhong.

古文：皇后毛氏崩。
现代文：皇后毛氏逝世。
English: Empress Mao passed away.

古文：二年正月，讨公孙渊。
现代文：二年正月，魏出兵讨伐公孙渊。
English: In the first month of the second year, Wei sent troops to fight Gongsun Yuan.

古文：三年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：三年正月，明帝逝世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Emperor Ming died.

古文：魏明帝景初元年二月乙酉，月犯房第二星。
现代文：魏明帝景初元年二月乙酉，月犯房宿第二星。
English: Wei Ming Emperor Jing in February of the first year of the year, the second star of the monthly lodging.

古文：占曰： 将相有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象是将相有忧患的征兆。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be sorrow.

古文：七月，司徒陈矫薨。
现代文：七月，司徒陈矫去世。
English: In July, Szu Chen Jiao passed away.

古文：二年四月，司徒韩暨薨。
现代文：二年四月，司徒韩暨去世。
English: In April of the following year, Szeto Hanczy died.

古文：景初元年十月丁未，月犯荧惑。
现代文：景初元年十月丁未，月犯火星。
English: The scene is the first day of October in the year of the Dog, with the moon and the planet in the foreground.

古文：占曰： 贵人死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示显贵之人将死。 
English: The soothsayer said: The noble man is dead.

古文：二年四月，司徒韩暨薨。
现代文：二年四月，司徒韩暨去世。
English: In April of the following year, Szeto Hanczy died.

古文：八月，公孙渊灭。
现代文：八月，公孙渊被消灭。
English: In August, Gongsun Yuan was eliminated.

古文：景初二年二月癸丑，月犯心距星，又犯中央大星。
现代文：景初二年二月癸丑，月犯心宿距星，又犯中央大星。
English: In February of the second year of the Jingchu era, the ugly, the monthly crime of the heart, the distance star, and the central star.

古文：五月己亥，又犯心距星及中央大星。
现代文：五月己亥，又犯心宿距星及中央大星。
English: In May, at the time of the Chinese lunar new year, he also committed the sin of sleeping with a distant star and a great central star.

古文：闰月癸丑，月又犯心、中央大星。
现代文：闰月癸丑，月又犯心宿中央大星。
English: The intercalary moon is ugly, and the moon is also a bad omen for the Central Star.

古文：按占， 大星为天王，前为太子，后为皇子。
现代文：考查占书可知 大星代表天王，前星代表太子，后星代表皇子。
English: Examination of the horoscope book shows that the great star represents the heavenly king, the former star represents the prince, and the latter star represents the prince.

古文：犯大星，王者恶之。犯前星，太子有忧。
现代文：月犯大星则君不利，犯前星则太子有忧患。
English: If you are a monthly offender, you are at a disadvantage. If you are a former offender, the prince is in trouble.

古文：犯后星，庶子有忧。 
现代文：犯后星则皇庶子有忧患。 
English: After the crime, Hoshi, the Emperor's illegitimate son, was troubled.

古文：三年正月，帝崩，太子立，卒见废为齐王。
现代文：三年正月，明帝逝世，太子继位，最后被废为齐王。
English: In the first month of the third year, Emperor Ming died, the crown prince succeeded to the throne, and was finally abolished as King Qi.

古文：正始四年，秦王询薨。
现代文：正始四年，秦王曹询逝世。
English: In the first four years of the year, Qin King Cao Zhen passed away.

古文：景初二年八月彗星见张，长三尺，逆西行，四十一日灭。
现代文：景初二年八月，有长三尺的彗星出现于张宿，逆向西运行，四十一天后消失。
English: In August of the second year of the Jingchu era, a three-foot-long comet appeared in Zhangshu, moving in the opposite direction to the west, and disappeared after forty-one days.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示战争及丧事。
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：张，周分野，洛邑恶之。 
现代文：又因张宿与周地对应。所以盗邑将不利。 
English: In addition, because Zhangjuku corresponds to Zhou. Therefore, Puyi will be unfavorable.

古文：其十月，斩公孙渊。
现代文：十月，斩公孙渊。
English: In October, Sun Yuan was beheaded.

古文：明年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：第二年正月，明帝逝世。
English: In the first month of the second year, Emperor Ming died.

古文：景初二年十月甲午，月犯箕。
现代文：景初二年十月甲午，月犯箕宿。
English: On the afternoon of October 1st in the 2nd year of the Jingchu era, he was arrested for trespassing.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示军中之将将死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：正始元年四月，车骑将军黄权薨。
现代文：正始元年四月，车骑将军黄权逝世。
English: At the beginning of April in the first year of the year, the chariot and cavalry general Huang Quan died.

古文：景初二年，司马懿围公孙渊于襄平。
现代文：景初二年，司马懿围公遂赵于塞垩。
English: In the second year of the reign of King Jing, Zhao Yusei succeeded in besieging Sima Yusei.

古文：八月丙寅夜，有大流星长数十丈，色白有芒鬣，从首山北流坠襄平城东南。
现代文：八月丙寅之夜，有大流星长数十丈色白且带像马颈长毛一样的光芒，从苴山北流坠于塞芒撼东南。
English: On the night of August 4th, a large meteor, dozens of meters long, white in color and with a glow like a horse's neck, fell from the north stream of Lushan Mountain to the southeast of Saimang.

古文：占曰： 围城而有流星来走城上及坠城中者破。 
现代文：占辞说： 军队围城而有流星运行此城的上方及坠于城中，则被围之城必破。 
English: The soothsayer said: During the siege of the city, a meteor will fly over the city and fall into the city, and the city will be captured.

古文：又曰： 星坠，当其下有战场。 
现代文：又说： 流星所坠之地有战场。 
English: He also said, "When a meteor falls, there is a battlefield where it lands.

古文：又曰： 凡星所坠，国易姓。 
现代文：又说： 凡流星所坠之国必改朝换代。 
English: He also said: Wherever a meteor falls, the country changes hands.

古文：九月，渊突围，走至星坠所被斩，屠城坑其众。
现代文：九月，公孙渊突围至流星所坠之地被杀，魏军屠城活埋公孙渊之部众。
English: In September, Gongsunyuan broke through the encirclement to the place where the meteor fell and was killed. The Wei army slaughtered and buried Gongsunyuan's followers alive.

古文：景初二年十月癸巳，客星见危，逆行在离宫北，腾蛇南。
现代文：景初二年十月癸巳，客星在危宿出现，接着逆行在离宫之北，腾蛇之南。
English: In October of the second year of Keihatsu, the guest star appeared in the dangerous inn, and then retrograde in the north of the palace and the south of the snake.

古文：甲辰，犯宗星。
现代文：甲辰，犯宗星。
English: Jia Chen, guest star impinging on the main star.

古文：己酉，灭。
现代文：己酉消失。
English: The guest star disappears.

古文：占曰： 客星所出有兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 客星所出之国将有战争与丧事。
English: The fortune-teller said: Where the guest star enters and leaves, there is war and death.

古文：虚危为宗庙，又为坟墓。
现代文：虚宿、危宿代表帝王的宗庙，又代表坟墓。
English: The imaginary and dangerous lodgings symbolize the ancestral temple and the grave.

古文：客星近离宫，则宫中将有大丧，就先君于宗庙，皆王者崩殒之象也。 
现代文：客星靠近离宫预示着宫中将有大丧，就先君于宗庙，都是王者崩逝的天象。 
English: The approach of the guest star to the departing palace foretells that there will be a great mourning in the palace. The prince will be the first to go to the ancestral temple. They are all the heavenly beings of the king's demise.

古文：三年正月，明帝崩。
现代文：三年正月，明帝去世。
English: In the first month of the third year, Emperor Ming died.

古文：正始二年五月，吴将硃然围樊城，司马懿率众距却之。
现代文：正始二年五月，吴将朱然围攻樊城，司马懿率军拒而使之退却。
English: At the beginning of May of the second year, Wu placed Zhu Ran under siege in Handan, but Sima Gan and his army refused and forced him to retreat.

古文：魏齐王正始元年四月戊午，月犯昴东头第一星。
现代文：魏齐王正始元年四月戊午，月犯昴宿束头第一星。
English: Wei Qi Wang was the first star of the first month of the year in April, and the first star of the first month of the year.

古文：其年十月庚寅，月又犯昴北头第四星。
现代文：同年十月庚寅，月又犯昴宿北头第四星。
English: In October of the same year, Geng Yin and the moon also made the fourth star of Beidou.

古文：占曰： 犯昴，胡不安。 
现代文：占辞说： 月犯昴宿则胡不安宁。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "If you commit a crime once a month, you will not have peace of mind."

古文：二年六月，鲜卑阿妙兒等寇西方，敦煌太守王延斩之，并二千余级。
现代文：二年六月，鲜卑阿妙儿等侵犯西方被炖煌太守王延所杀，共二千多人。
English: In June of the second year, more than two thousand people, including Xianbei Amyeol, were killed by Wang Yan, the governor of Yanhuang, for invading the west.

古文：三年，又斩鲜卑大帅及千余级。
现代文：三年，又斩杀鲜卑大帅及其众千余人。
English: Three years later, they killed the general and more than a thousand of his men.

古文：正始元年十月乙酉，彗星见西方，在尾，长三丈，拂牵牛，犯太白。
现代文：正面元年十月乙酉，有长三丈的彗星出现于西方尾宿，掠过牵牛，犯金星。
English: On the positive side, in October of the first year of acetylene, a comet with a length of three meters appeared in the western tail lodge, passing over the cowherd and hitting Venus.

古文：十一月甲子，进犯羽林。
现代文：十一月甲子，进犯羽林。
English: In November, it moved to Katsushi, and then to Ulinza.

古文：占曰： 尾为燕，又为吴，牛亦吴、越之分。
现代文：占辞说： 尾宿代表燕地又代表吴地，牵牛亦为星、越之地的分野。
English: In the words of a fortune-teller: Oyado represents the land of swallows and the land of wuxia, while the cowherd represents the land of stars and the land of yue.

古文：太白为上将，羽林中军兵。
现代文：金星代表上将，羽林代表中军兵。
English: Venus symbolizes the admiral, and the eagle is the Chinese soldier.

古文：吴、越有兵丧，中军兵动。 
现代文：这天象预示吴、越之地将有战争及丧事，中军兵将有行动。 
English: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be war and mourning in the land of Wu and Yue, and the Chinese soldiers will take action.

古文：二年五月，吴将全琮寇芍陂，硃然围樊城，诸葛瑾入沮中。
现代文：二年五月，吴国将领全毖进攻芍腔，泰然围攻叁巡，诸姜壁进入回生。
English: In May of the second year, the general of the State of Wu, Quanzhang, attacked Zibo, calmly besieged Zibo, and Zhu Jiangbi was revived.

古文：吴太子登卒。
现代文：呈国太子遂登去世。
English: Wu Taizhong died.

古文：六月，司马懿讨诸葛恪于皖。恪焚积聚，弃城走。
现代文：六月，型征讨董姜络于鲑，诸葛恪焚烧所积聚之物弃城而走。
English: In June, Dong Jiang and Zhu Ge left the city after collecting and burning what they had gathered.

古文：三年，太尉满宠薨。
现代文：三年，魏太尉满宠逝世。
English: Three years later, Wei Taifu passed away.

古文：正始二年九月癸酉，月犯舆鬼西北星。
现代文：正始二年九月癸酉，月犯舆鬼宿西北星。
English: At the beginning of September of the second year, the ghost of the month is the northwest star.

古文：西北星主金。
现代文：西北星主管金钱。
English: The north-west star is in charge of money.

古文：三年二月丁未，又犯西南星。
现代文：三年二月丁未，月又犯舆鬼宿西南星。
English: In February of the third year, Ting Wei also attacked Southwest Star.

古文：西南星主布帛。
现代文：西南星主管布帛。
English: Bo Xuan, director of Southwest Star.

古文：占曰： 有钱令。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有关于钱的诏令。 
English: The soothsayer said: There will be a decree to give money.

古文：一曰： 大臣忧。 
现代文：另一说： 此天象预示大臣将有忧患。 
English: Another way of putting it is: the minister is worried.

古文：三年三月，太尉满宠薨。
现代文：三年三月，太尉避灶逝世。
English: In March of the third year, Taifu died.

古文：四年正月，帝加元服，赐群臣钱各有差。
现代文：四年正月，魏帝成年加冠，按等级以钱赐予群臣。
English: In the first month of the fourth year, the young emperor performed a coronation and gave money to the ministers.

古文：正始四年十月、十一月，月再犯井钺。
现代文：正始四年十月、十一月，月二次犯井宿之钹星。
English: At the beginning of the fourth year, in October and November, the star of the second-time-of-the-month Hakui-juku.

古文：是月，司马懿讨诸葛恪，恪弃城走。
现代文：当月，司马懿征讨诸葛恪，诸葛恪弃城而走。
English: In the same month, Sima Ye led a campaign against Zhuge Ke, and Zhuge Ke abandoned the city.

古文：五年三月，曹爽征蜀。
现代文：五年三月，魏曹爽征蜀。
English: In March of the fifth year, Wei Cao Shuang conquered Shu.

古文：正始五年十一月癸巳，镇星犯亢距星。
现代文：正始五年十一月癸巳，土星犯亢宿之距星。
English: At the beginning of November of the fifth year, Saturn became a distant star.

古文：占曰： 诸侯有失国者。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示诸侯中有失国的。 
English: Divination says: There are princes who have lost their fiefdoms.

古文：嘉平元年，曹爽兄弟诛。
现代文：嘉平元年，曹爽兄弟被诛杀。
English: In the first year of Jiaping, Cao Shuang's brother was beaten to death.

古文：正始六年八月戊午，彗星见七星，长二尺，色白，进至张，积二十三日灭。
现代文：正始六年八月戊午，有长二尺白色彗星出现于七星之宿，进罕张宿，持续二十三天后消失。
English: In the early afternoon of August in the sixth year, a two-foot-long white comet appeared in the seven-star inn, entered the rare Zhang inn, and lasted for 23 days before disappearing.

古文：七年十一月癸亥，又见轸，长一尺，积百五十六日灭。
现代文：七年十一月癸亥，又有长一尺的彗星出现于轸宿。持续一百五十六天后消失。
English: In November of the seventh year, the comet appeared again in Shishuku, grew one foot and disappeared for a total of 156 days.

古文：九年三月，又见昴，长六尺，色青白，芒西南指。
现代文：九年三月，又有长六尺、色青而白、光芒西南指向的彗星出现于昴宿。
English: In March of the ninth year, the comet appeared again in Oshuku. It was six feet long, pale in color, and pointed southwest.

古文：七月，又见翼，长二尺，进至轸，积四十二日灭。
现代文：七月，又有长二尺的彗星出现于翼宿进至轸宿，持续四十二天。
English: In July, the comet reappeared in Tsubasa. It was two feet long and traveled to Usuki, where it disappeared for a total of 42 days.

古文：按占， 七星、张，周分野，翼、轸为楚，昴为赵、魏，彗所以除旧布新，主兵丧也。 
现代文：考查占书可知 七星、张二宿与周地对应，翼、轸二宿为楚地，昴宿与赵、魏之地对应，彗星的出现表示除旧布新，将有战争及丧事。 
English: An examination of the account books shows that the seven stars and Zhang Erju correspond to Zhouji, the wings and Ying Erju correspond to Chuji, and the Pleiades correspond to Zhao and Wei. The appearance of the comet indicates that the old cloth will be replaced with a new one, and there will be wars and funerals.

古文：嘉平元年，司马懿诛曹爽兄弟及其党与，皆夷族，京师严兵，实始翦魏。
现代文：嘉平元年，司马懿诛杀曹爽兄弟及其同党，全部灭族，京城部署了军队，此实为司马氏剪除曹魏的开始。
English: In the first year of Jiaping, Sima Yan killed Cao Shuang's brothers and his fellow party members, exterminating the entire ethnic group, and the Beijing army was deployed. This was indeed the beginning of the Sima clan's elimination of Cao Wei.

古文：三年，诛楚王彪，又袭王凌于淮南。
现代文：三年，司马氏诛杀楚王曹彪，又袭击王浚于淮南。
English: Three years later, he killed Chu Wang Qibiao and attacked Yupeng in Handan.

古文：淮南，东楚也。
现代文：淮南属东楚之地。
English: Huainan is the land of Dongchu.

古文：幽魏诸王于鄴。
现代文：幽禁魏诸王于邺。
English: All the kings of the Wei Dynasty were confined in the castle.

古文：正始七年七月丁丑，月犯左角。
现代文：正始七年七月丁丑，月犯左角。
English: At the beginning of the seventh year, in July, Ding Chou, the left-hand corner of the moon.

古文：占曰： 天下有兵，将军死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示天下将有战争，将军死。 
English: The fortuneteller said: This celestial phenomenon foretells that there will be war in the world, and the general will die.

古文：九年正月辛亥，月犯亢南星。
现代文：九年正月辛亥，月犯亢宿之南星。
English: In the first month of the ninth year of Xinhai, the moon collided with the south star of Oshuku.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：一曰： 军将死。 
现代文：另一说： 军巾将领将死。 
English: Another said: "The turbaned general is about to die."

古文：七月乙亥，荧惑犯毕距星。
现代文：七月乙亥，火星犯毕宿距星。
English: In July, at the time of the Chinese lunar new year, the planet Mars collided with the host star.

古文：占曰： 有边兵。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示着边地有战争。 
English: The soothsayer said, "There will be war in the borderlands."

古文：一曰： 刑罚用。 
现代文：另一说： 刑罚将被动用。 
English: Another way of saying this is: a penalty will be applied.

古文：嘉平元年，曹爽等诛。
现代文：嘉平元年，直爽等被诛杀。
English: In the first year of the Jiaping era, Dadao Shuang and others were killed in a fight.

古文：三年，王凌等又诛。
现代文：三年，王凌等又被诛杀。
English: Three years later, Wang Ling and others were brutally killed.

古文：正始九年七月癸丑，镇星犯楗闭。
现代文：正始九年七月癸丑，土星犯楗闭星。
English: At the beginning of the ninth year, in July, Saturn was retrograde.

古文：占曰： 王者不宜出宫下殿。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象君王不宜出宫下殿。 
English: Divination says: The monarch is not fit to leave the palace.

古文：明年，车驾谒陵，司马懿奏诛曹爽等，天子野宿，于是失势。
现代文：第二年，魏帝出拜先帝陵墓，司马懿乘机奏请诛杀曹爽等，魏帝被迫宿于野外，从此曹氏失势。
English: In the second year, Emperor Wei came out to pay homage to the former emperor's mausoleum, and Sima Ye took the opportunity to ask Cao Shuang to kill him. Emperor Wei was forced to live in the open, and the Cao family lost power.

古文：魏齐王嘉平元年六月壬戌，太白犯东井距星。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平元年六月壬戌，金星犯束井宿距星。
English: In June of the first year of King Jiaping of Wei and Qi, Jin Xing went to live in Shuxing.

古文：二年三月己未，又犯。
现代文：二年三月己未又犯。
English: He did not commit another crime in March 2002.

古文：占曰： 国失政，大臣为乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示国政混乱，大臣作乱。 
English: Zhan said: "The imperial court has failed to govern, and ministers have caused chaos."

古文：四月辛巳，太白犯舆鬼。
现代文：四月辛巳，金星犯舆鬼宿。
English: April is hot, and Venus drives away the evil spirits.

古文：占曰： 大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有大臣被诛杀。 
English: The soothsayer said: The minister will be killed.

古文：一曰： 兵起。 
现代文：另一说： 将有战争。 
English: Another way of saying this is: War happens.

古文：三年七月，王凌与楚王彪有谋，皆伏诛。
现代文：三年五月，王凌与楚王曹彪图谋起兵自立，皆被诛杀。
English: In May of the third year, Wang Ling and the king of Chu, Cao Biao, plotted to raise an army and become independent. They were both killed.

古文：人主遂卑。
现代文：魏主失去权力。
English: Emperor Wei lost power.

古文：吴主孙权赤乌十三年五月，日北至，荧惑逆行入南斗。
现代文：吴主孙权赤乌十三年五月，夏至曰火星逆行进入南牛之宿。
English: In May 13th, the summer solstice, Mars retrograde entered the South Cow Inn.

古文：七月，犯魁第二星而东。
现代文：七月，犯魁宿第二星后向东运行。
English: In July, it runs eastward after the second star of Guan Kui.

古文：《汉晋春秋》云逆行。
现代文：《汉晋春秋》上说逆行。
English: In "Han Jin Spring and Autumn," it is said to be retrograde.

古文：按占，荧惑入南斗，三月，吴王死。
现代文：查占卜之书，火星进入南斗，三月，吴王死。
English: According to the book of divination, Mars entered the Southern Cross, and in March, King Wu died.

古文：一曰： 荧惑逆行，其地有死君。 
现代文：一说： 火星逆行，则其对应之国君死。 
English: Another way of saying this is: Mars is retrograde, and the ruler of a certain region will die.

古文：太元二年权薨，是其应也。
现代文：太元二年孙权逝世即是此天象的应验。
English: The death of Sun Quan in the 2nd year of Taigen is the fulfillment of this celestial phenomenon.

古文：故国志书于吴而不书于魏也。
现代文：所以国志书于吴国而不书于魏国。
English: Therefore, the national history was written in the State of Wu and not in the State of Wei.

古文：是时，王凌谋立楚王彪，谓斗中有星，当有暴贵者，以问知星人浩详。
现代文：当时王凌正图谋立楚王曹彪，认为斗宿之中有行星出现预示将有迅速变尊贵之人，以此询问懂得星占之人浩详。
English: At that time, Wang Ling was trying to set up King Chu Cao Biao, believing that the appearance of planets in the fighting lodges indicated that there would be people who would quickly become noble, so he asked a lot of people who knew horoscopes.

古文：详疑有故，欲说其意，不言吴有死丧，而言淮南楚分，吴、楚同占，当有王者兴，故凌计遂定。
现代文：浩详猜测王凌的询问有特殊的原因，想取悦于王凌，所以不说吴国将有丧事，而告诉王湲淮南在楚地分野，吴、楚同占，应当有王者兴起于淮南，因此王湲的计划就此决定。
English: Wang Ling's inquiry had a special reason, he wanted to please Wang Ling, so he did not say that there would be a tragedy in Wuxi, but told Wang Zhe that Huainan was in the Chu area, Wuxi and Chu were the same, there should be a king rising in Huainan, so Wang Zhe's plan was decided.

古文：魏齐王嘉平二年十月丙申，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：魏齐王嘉平二年十月丙申，月犯舆鬼宿。
English: Wei Qi Wang Jiaping was arrested in October of the second year of Xinshen.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示国家将有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：一曰： 大臣忧。 
现代文：另一说： 大臣将有忧患。 
English: Another way of putting it is: the minister is worried.

古文：三年四月戊寅，月犯东井。
现代文：三年四月戊寅，月犯束井宿。
English: In April of the third year, the moon crashed into Higashii-juku.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将领将死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：一曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：另一说： 国家将有忧患。 
English: Another way of putting it is: The country is in trouble.

古文：五月，王凌、楚王彪等诛。
现代文：五月，王凌、楚王曹彪等被诛杀。
English: In May, Wang Ling and Chu Wang Cao Biao were killed.

古文：七月，皇后甄氏崩。
现代文：七月，皇后甄氏崩逝。
English: In July, Empress Ye passed away.

古文：嘉平三年五月甲寅，月犯距星。
现代文：嘉平三年五月甲寅，月犯亢宿距星。
English: Kaiping three-year-old May Kato, a monthly offender, is far from the star.

古文：占曰： 将军死。 
现代文：占辞说： 这是将军死亡的天象。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：一曰： 为兵。 
现代文：一说： 将有战争。 
English: Another is: There will be war.

古文：是月，王凌诛。
现代文：当月，王凌被诛杀。
English: That month, Wang Ling was beaten to death.

古文：四年三月，吴将硃然、硃异为寇，镇东将军诸葛诞破走之。
现代文：四年三月，吴将朱然、朱异入侵，被镇束将军诸葛诞所破，吴军退走。
English: In March of the fourth year, the Wu general Zhu Ran and Zhu Yi invaded, but were defeated by the Zhenzhu general Zhu Ge Jie, and the Wu army retreated.

古文：嘉平三年七月己巳，月犯舆鬼。
现代文：嘉平三年七月己巳，月犯舆鬼宿。
English: In July of the third year of Jiaping's reign, he went on a month-long crime spree at a haunted house.

古文：九月乙己，又犯。
现代文：九月乙巳又犯。
English: He committed another crime in September.

古文：四年十一月丁未，又犯鬼积尸。
现代文：四年十一月丁未，月又犯鬼宿积尸。
English: In November of the fourth year, Ding Wei, the moon committed another ghostly lodging and accumulated corpses.

古文：五年七月丙午，月又犯鬼西北星。
现代文：五年七月丙午，月又犯鬼宿西北星。
English: On the afternoon of July 5th, the moon once again visited the ghost town of Northwest Star.

古文：占曰： 国有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此预示国家将有忧患。 
English: Divination says: The country is in trouble.

古文：正元元年，李丰等诛，皇后张氏废。
现代文：旦五元年，奎丰等被诛杀，皇后退匡被废黜。
English: In 1951, Kui Feng and others were killed, and Empress Taiping was deposed.

古文：九月，帝废为齐王。
现代文：九月，秀眯被废为查王。
English: In September, the Young Emperor was dethroned as the King of Qi.

古文：齐王嘉平三年十月癸未，荧惑犯亢南星。
现代文：齐王嘉平三年十月癸未，火星犯亢宿南星。
English: Qi Wang Jiaping passed away in October of the third year, and Mars was captured by the South Star.

古文：占曰： 大臣有乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为将有大臣作乱之征兆。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This is a sign that a minister will start a riot."

古文：正元元年二月，李丰等谋乱诛。
现代文：正元元年二月，李丰等阴谋作乱被诛杀。
English: In February of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Feng and other conspirators were beaten to death.

古文：嘉平三年十一月癸未，有星孛于营室，西行积九十日灭。
现代文：嘉平三年十一月癸未，有彗星出现于营室之宿，持续西行九十天后消失。
English: In late November of the third year of Jiaping, a comet appeared in the camp room of the inn and continued westward for 90 days before disappearing.

古文：占曰： 有兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 将有战事、丧事。
English: The oracle says: There will be war and death.

古文：室为后宫，后宫且有乱。 
现代文：营室代表后宫，后宫将有乱。 
English: Mansion is a sign of the harem, the harem will have a rebellion.

古文：四年二月丁酉，彗星见西方，在胃，长五六丈，色白，芒南指贯参，积二十日灭。
现代文：四年二月丁酉，彗星出现于西方胃宿，长五六丈，色白，其光芒向南指，横贯参宿，持续二十天后消失。
English: In February of the fourth year of Ding'an, the comet appeared in the western gastro-hostel. It was about five or six meters long and white in color. Its light pointed southward and traversed the gastro-hostel. It lasted for twenty days before disappearing.

古文：五年十一月，彗星又见轸，长五丈，在太微左执法西，东南指，积百九十日灭。
现代文：万年十一月，又有长五丈之彗星出现于轸宿，在太微垣左执法星之西，东南指向，持续一百九十天后消失。
English: In November of the fifth year, the comet appeared again in Poyang, with a length of five meters, living in the west of the Taiyukagaki left law enforcement star, and pointing southeast, disappearing for a total of one hundred and ninety days.

古文：按占， 胃，兗州之分，参白虎主兵，太微天子廷，执法为执政，孛彗为兵，除旧布新之象。 
现代文：考查占书可知 胃宿属兖州分野，参宿与西方白虎主宰军事，太微垣代表天子廷，执法星代表执政大臣，彗星预示战事，乃除旧布新之天象。 
English: An examination of the astrological charts shows that Gastrostel belongs to the Jingzhou sector, and that the Western White Tiger dominates the military, the Taibugaki represents the heavenly court, the law enforcement star represents the ruling minister, and the comet foreshadows the war. These are the new celestial objects.

古文：正元元年二月，李丰、丰弟兗州刺史翼、后父光禄大夫张缉等谋乱，皆诛，皇后亦废。
现代文：正元元年二月，李丰及其弟兖州刺史奎翼、皇后之父光禄大夫张缉等阴谋作乱，全部被诛杀，张皇后也被废黜。
English: In February of the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Feng and his brother, Zhang Zhou, and his father, Guanglu Doctor Zhang Jie, conspired to create a disturbance. They were all killed, and Queen Zhang was also deposed.

古文：九月，帝废为齐王，高贵乡公代立。
现代文：九月。帝被废为齐王，高贵乡公代立。
English: In September, the emperor was abolished as the king of Qi, and the noble township of Gong was established.

古文：嘉平五年六月庚辰，月犯箕。
现代文：嘉平五年六月庚辰，月犯箕宿。
English: In June of the 5th year of Jiaping, Gengchen, the monthly criminal was detained.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示军中将将死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：正元元年正月，镇东将军母丘俭反，兵败死。
现代文：正元元年正月，镇东将军毋丘俭反叛，兵败被杀。
English: In the first month of the first year of the first century, General Zhendong rebelled and was defeated and killed.

古文：嘉平五年六月戊午，太白犯角。
现代文：嘉平五年六月戊午，金星犯角宿。
English: In the afternoon of June in the 5th year of the Jiaping Dynasty, Venus came to stay in Fuzhong.

古文：占曰： 群臣谋不成。 
现代文：占辞说： 此群臣阴谋不成功之天象。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This group of ministers' conspiracy is the sign of an unsuccessful angel.

古文：正元元年，李丰等谋泄，悉诛。
现代文：正元元年，李丰等人阴谋泄露，全部被诛杀。
English: In the first year of the Yuan Dynasty, Li Feng and others leaked the plot and were all killed.

古文：嘉平五年七月，月犯井钺。
现代文：嘉平五年七月，月犯井宿之钹星。
English: In July of the 5th year of the Jiaping Dynasty, the star of the Moon Criminals' Inn appeared.

古文：正元元年二月，李丰等诛。
现代文：正元元年二月，奎丰等人被杀。
English: In February of the same year, Kui Feng and others were killed.

古文：蜀将姜维攻陇西，车骑将军郭淮讨破之。
现代文：蜀将差维进攻鹰迺，垫车骑将军郭淮讨伐而攻破之。
English: General Jiang Wei of Shu attacked Shaanxi, and the cavalry general Guo Huai defeated him.

古文：嘉平五年十一月癸酉，月犯东井距星。
现代文：嘉平五年十一月癸酉，月犯束井宿距星。
English: In November of the 5th year of Jiaping, the monthly criminal Sakui stayed away from the star.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此军中之将将死之征兆。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：至六年正月，镇东将军豫州刺史毋丘俭、前将军扬州刺史文钦反，被诛。
现代文：到六年正月，镇东将军逸州刺史坦旦俭、前将军握州刺史塞趑反叛，被诛杀。
English: By the first month of the sixth year, Zhendong General Yizhou Zhisheng and former General Shizhou Zhisheng rebelled and were killed.

古文：魏高贵乡公正元元年十一月，有白气出斗侧，广数丈，长竟天。
现代文：魏高贵乡公正五元年十一月，有白气从斗宿侧面而出，宽数丈，长竟天。
English: In November of the fifth year of Wei Gao Gui Township, there was white gas coming out from the side of the dooshu, which was as wide as it was tall, and as long as the sky.

古文：王肃曰： 蚩尤之旗也，东南其有乱乎！ 
现代文：王肃说： 此乃蚩尤之旗。东南方向将有变乱。 
English: Wang Su said, "This is the flag of Chuyu, there will probably be a rebellion in the southeast!"

古文：二年正月，毋丘俭等据淮南以叛，大将军司马师讨平之。
现代文：二年正月，毋丘俭等占据淮南反叛，大将军司马师征讨而平定之。
English: In the first month of the second year, the rebels in Huainan, led by Zhu Qujian and others, were subdued by the intervention of the great general Sima Shi.

古文：案占， 蚩尤旗见，王者征伐四方。 
现代文：考查占书可知 蚩尤旗之天象出现，则王者征伐四方 。
English: The examination of the occupation book shows that if the celestial elephant of the Yuyu banner appears, then the king will conquer the four directions.

古文：自后又征淮南，西平巴蜀。
现代文：此后又束征淮南，西平巴蜀。
English: After that, he conquered Huainan Province and subdued Bashu Province in the west.

古文：是岁，吴主孙亮五凤元年，斗牛，吴、越分。
现代文：同年即呈主玉迫互凰元年，斗牛二宿属吴、越分野。
English: In the same year, the first year of the year, the two bullfights were held in Wu and Yue.

古文：案占： 有兵丧，除旧布新之象也。 
现代文：考查占书可知 此将有战争、丧事，除旧布新之天象 。
English: An examination of the account book reveals that there will be war, a funeral, and the removal of the old and installation of a new celestial body.

古文：太平三年，孙綝盛兵围宫，废亮为会稽王，孙休代立，是其应也。
现代文：左垩三年，逐谜盛兵围宫，废孙亮为会檀王，噩体代立，是其应验。
English: Zuoying three years, the riddle of the soldiers surrounding the palace, the waste of Sun Liang as the king of the meeting, and the bad body standing in for him, is its fulfillment.

古文：故国志又书于吴。
现代文：所以《三国志》卜又书于呈。
English: Therefore, the "History of the Three Kingdoms" was rewritten.

古文：由是淮南江东同扬州地，故于时变见吴、楚之分。
现代文：因随逗塞同属摄丛之地，所以天象显示的时事变化同时出现于吴、楚分野。
English: Due to the fact that Suizhijie belongs to the same place as the shooting cluster, the changes in current affairs shown by the celestial phenomenon appear in the Wu and Chu areas at the same time.

古文：则魏之淮南，多与吴同灾，是以毋丘俭以孛为己应，遂起兵而败，又其应也。
现代文：则魏国之堕多与呈国同灾，因此丘俭认为彗星的出现是自己将要起兵的征兆，于是起兵反叛而失败，这又是前说即淮南与吴同灾的验证。
English: However, the fall of Wei mostly coincided with that of Zhen, so Qiu Jian thought that the appearance of the comet was a sign that he was going to raise an army, so he rebelled and failed to raise an army. This is also a verification of the previous saying that Huainan and Wu suffered the same disaster.

古文：后三年，即魏甘露二年，诸葛诞又反淮南，吴遣硃异救之。
现代文：后三年，即魏苴灵二年，诸葛诞又反于淮南，吴国派遣圭垦救之。
English: In the last three years, that is, the second year of Wei Yuling, the birth of Zhuge was contrary to Huainan, and the State of Wu sent Gui Yu to rescue him.

古文：及城陷，诞众吴兵死没各数万人，犹前长星之应也。
现代文：城被攻陷后，诸葛诞部众及吴兵死去各数万人，仍然是长星之应验。
English: After the fall of the city, tens of thousands of Zhuge clan members and Wu soldiers died, which is still the fulfillment of the long star.

古文：高贵乡公正元二年二月戊午，荧惑犯东井北辕西头第一星。
现代文：高贵乡公正五二年二月戊午，火星犯东井宿北辕西头第一星。
English: At noon on February 5th, 1952, the first star appeared in the west end of the North Fork of the North Fork of the North Fork of the North Fork.

古文：占曰： 群臣有家坐罪者。 
现代文：占辞说： 此群臣之中有犯罪而全家被惩罚者。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "Among this group of courtiers, there is one who has committed a crime and whose entire family has been punished."

古文：甘露元年，诸葛诞族灭。
现代文：苴雳元年，证墓诞被灭族。
English: In the first year of the year of the Rooster, the Zheng tomb was destroyed.

古文：吴孙亮太平元年九月壬辰，太白犯南斗，《吴志》所书也。
现代文：吴孙亮太平元年九月壬辰，金星犯南斗之宿，《吴志》所书。
English: Wu Sunliang, "Wu Zhi" (Wu Zhi) in September of the first year of the Taiping Dynasty, in the city of Jinchen, where Venus made the Southern Cross.

古文：占曰： 太白犯斗，国有兵，大臣有反者。 
现代文：占辞说： 金星犯斗宿，国家将有战争，大臣中有反者。 
English: The soothsayer said, "When Venus collides with the zodiac, the country is at war, and the ministers are in revolt.

古文：其明年，诸葛诞反。
现代文：第二年，诸葛诞反叛。
English: The next year, Zhuge rebelled.

古文：又明年，孙琳废亮，吴、魏并有兵事也。
现代文：再一年，孙琳废黜孙亮，吴、魏都有战事。
English: A year later, Sun Lin deposed Sun Liang, and Wu and Wei were at war.

古文：魏高贵乡公甘露元年七月乙卯，荧惑犯井钺。
现代文：魏高贵乡公旦灵元年七月乙卯，火星犯井宿之钹星。
English: Gongdanling, Gaogui Township, Wei Province, in July of the first year of the year.

古文：壬戌，月又犯钺星。
现代文：壬戌，月又犯铀星。
English: The moon also collided with the iron star of Sokujyuku.

古文：二年八月壬子，岁星犯井钺。
现代文：二年八月壬子，木星犯井铁。
English: In August of the second year, Jupiter attacked the iron well in Mianzi.

古文：九月庚寅，岁星又逆行乘钺星。
现代文：九月庚寅，木星又逆行乘铁星。
English: In September, Go-in, Jupiter retrograde again by the iron star.

古文：三年，诸葛诞夷灭。
现代文：三年，谴蔓逛被灭。
English: Three years later, punitive hanging was abolished.

古文：甘露元年八月辛亥，月犯箕。
现代文：甘露元年八月辛亥，月犯箕宿。
English: In August of the first year of the Kamloops, Xinhai, a month-long stay.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 此军中之将将死之兆。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：九月丁巳，月犯东井。
现代文：九月丁巳，月犯柬井之宿。
English: September ding-mi, moon-criminal Kamii's lodging.

古文：占曰： 军将死。 
现代文：占辞说： 军中之将将死。 
English: The diviner said: The general is dead.

古文：二年，诸葛诞诛。
现代文：二年，诸葛诞被诛杀。
English: Two years later, Zhuge Xi was killed in a fight.

古文：甘露二年六月己酉，月犯心中央大星。
现代文：甘露二年六月己酉，月犯心宿中央大星。
English: In June of the second year of the Kamloops period, he committed a crime and was sent to Chuo Daisei.

古文：景元元年五月，高贵乡公败。
现代文：景元元年五月，高贵乡公被害。
English: In May of the first year of the Jingyuan era, there was a public disaster in Gaogui Township.

古文：甘露二年十月丙寅，太白犯亢距星。
现代文：甘露二年十月丙寅，金星犯亢宿距星。
English: In October of the 2nd year of the dew, Yin Yin, Venus is a distant star.

古文：占曰： 廷臣为乱，人君忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此内廷之臣作乱，君主有忧患之兆。 
English: The fortune-teller said, "This disturbance caused by the courtiers of the Inner Court is a sign of trouble for the monarch."

古文：景元元年，有成济之变。
现代文：景元元年，有成济杀高贵乡公之变。
English: In the first year of the Jingyuan era, there was a change in Chengji's killing of the noble townsfolk.

古文：甘露二年十一月，彗星见角，色白。
现代文：甘露二年十一月，有白色彗星出现于角宿。
English: The comet appeared in Kakunodate in November of the second year of the Kanro calendar, and it was white.

古文：占曰： 彗见两角间，色白者，军起不战，邦有大丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 白色彗星出现于两角间，则军队将有行动但不交战，国家有大丧。 
English: The fortune-teller said: If a white comet appears between the two corners, the army will act but not fight, and the country will suffer a great loss.

古文：景元元年，高贵乡公帅左右兵袭晋文王，未交战，为成济所害。
现代文：景元元年，高贵楚险亲率左右之兵袭击置塞王，未交战而被盛挤所杀。
English: In the first year of the Jingyuan era, the soldiers of the noble Chu Xuan and his relatives attacked the King of Jisei, and were killed by the crowd without fighting.

古文：甘露三年三月庚子，太白犯东井。
现代文：甘露三年三月庚子，金星犯束井宿。
English: March of the third year of the nectar of the cock, Venus commits to the inn of the yam.

古文：占曰： 国失政，大臣为乱。 
现代文：占辞说： 国政混乱，大臣作乱。 
English: Zhan said: "The imperial court has failed to govern, and ministers have caused chaos."

古文：是夜，岁星又犯东井。
现代文：同夜，木星又犯东井。
English: On the night of the Consecration of Heaven, Jupiter collided with Ijuku again.

古文：占曰： 兵起。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有军事行动。 
English: The soothsayer said: Let war arise.

古文：至景元元年，高贵乡公败。
现代文：至景元元年，高贵乡公被杀。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingyuan, the nobles of Gaogui Township were defeated.

古文：甘露三年八月壬辰，岁星犯舆鬼质星。
现代文：甘露三年八月壬辰，木星犯舆鬼宿之质星。
English: The nectar of the three years of August Imjin, the quality star of Jupiter's ghost.

古文：占曰： 斧质用，大臣诛。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示斧质将被动用，大臣被诛杀。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that the axe will be used, and the minister will be killed.

古文：甘露四年四月甲申，岁星又犯舆鬼东南星。
现代文：苴雳四年四月甲申，木星又犯舆鬼宿东南星。
English: In April of the 4th year of Jiaxing, Jupiter once again invaded the ghost town of Southeast Star.

古文：占曰： 鬼东南星主兵。
现代文：占辞说： 鬼宿东南星主管军事。
English: The fortune-teller said: The ghost town of Southeast Star is in charge of the military.

古文：木入鬼，大臣诛。 
现代文：木星入鬼宿则大臣被诛杀。 
English: When Jupiter entered the haunted house, the minister was killed.

古文：景元元年，高贵乡公败，杀尚书王经。
现代文：景元元年，高贵乡公事败被害，杀尚书王经。
English: In the first year of the Jing Yuan Dynasty, Gao Gui Xiang was defeated in a public matter and killed Shang Shou Wang Jing.

古文：甘露四年十月丁丑，客星见太微中，转东南行，历轸宿，积七日灭。
现代文：甘露四年十月丁丑，客星出现于太微垣中，转向东南运行，历轸宿，持续七天后消失。
English: In October of the 4th year of Kamloops, Ding Ugly, the guest star appeared in the middle of Taiyukagaki, turned to the southeast, and continued to stay for seven days before disappearing.

古文：占曰： 客星出太微，有兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 客星出现于太微垣，将有军事、丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said: A guest star will appear in Taibugaki, and there will be war and death.

古文：景元元年，高贵乡公被害。
现代文：景五元年，高贵乡公被害。
English: In the first year of the reign of King Jingyuan, King Gao Guixiang was killed.

古文：魏陈留王景元元年二月，月犯建星。
现代文：魏陈留王量五元年二月，月犯建星。
English: Wei Chen Liu Wang Rong in February of the year 500, the moon criminal Jian Xing.

古文：案占， 月五星犯建星，大臣相谮 。
现代文：考查占书可知： 月或五大行星犯建星则大臣相害。 
English: Examination of the book of divination shows that the moon or the five planets are the culprits and the ministers are the victims.

古文：是后钟会、邓艾破蜀，会谮艾，遂皆夷灭。
现代文：此后钟会、迎墓攻破垦国，钟会诬陷塑墓，于是二人都被诛灭。
English: After that, the bell society and the tomb raiders broke through the country, and the bell society framed the plastic tomb, so they were both annihilated.

古文：景元二年四月，荧惑入太微，犯右执法。
现代文：景元二年四月，火星入太微垣，犯右执法星。
English: In April of the second year of Jingyuan, Mars entered Taibaiyuan, the star of right-wing law enforcement.

古文：占曰： 人主有大忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示君主将有大忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The sovereign is in great distress.

古文：又曰： 大臣忧。 
现代文：又说： 大臣有忧患。 
English: He also said: "The minister is worried."

古文：后四年，邓艾、钟会皆夷灭。
现代文：四年后，邓艾、钟会都被消灭。
English: Four years later, Deng Ai and the Bell Association were both eliminated.

古文：五年，帝逊位。
现代文：五年后，魏帝让位于晋。
English: Five years later, Emperor Yuan abdicated.

古文：景元三年十一月壬寅，彗星见亢，色白，长五寸，转北行，积四十五日灭。
现代文：景元三年十一月壬寅，彗星出现于亢宿，色白，长五寸，转而向北运行，四十五天后消失。
English: In November of the third year of the Jingyuan, the comet appeared in Poyang, white in color, five inches long, turned northward, and disappeared after 45 days.

古文：占为兵丧。一曰： 彗见亢，天子失德。 
现代文：占辞为有战争丧事又一说： 彗星出现于亢宿表示天子失德。 
English: Another said, "A comet appearing in Oshuku indicates that the son of heaven has lost his virtue."

古文：四年，钟会、邓艾伐蜀克之。会、艾反乱，皆诛。魏逊天下。
现代文：四年，钟会、邓艾攻克蜀国，二将皆反叛作乱被诛杀，魏让天下于晋。
English: In the fourth year, Zhonghui and Deng Ai conquered Shu, and the two generals rebelled and were killed, and Wei ceded the country to Jin.

古文：景元四年六月，大流星二，并如斗，见西方，分流南北，光照隆隆有声。
现代文：景元四年六月，有二颗像斗一样的大流星出现于西方，分别流向南北方向，明亮而且隆隆有声。
English: In June of the 4th year of Jingyuan, two large meteors like buckets appeared in the west, flowing to the north and south respectively, bright and loud.

古文：案占，流星为贵使，大者使大。
现代文：查占书可知流星代表贵使，流星大则使亦大。
English: An examination of the account book shows that the meteor represents the noble messenger, and the great meteor is also the great messenger.

古文：是年，钟、邓克蜀，二星盖二帅之象。
现代文：同年，钟会、邓艾攻占蜀国，二颗流星大概代表此两将帅。
English: In the same year, Zhonghui and Deng Ai captured the next Li, and these two stars are probably the symbol of the two soldiers.

古文：二帅相背，又分流南北之应。
现代文：两帅不和即为二颗流星分流南北之应。
English: The two leaders deviate from each other, and the two stars flow to the north and south respectively.

古文：钟会既叛，三军愤怒，隆隆有声，兵将怒之征也。
现代文：钟会反叛后三军愤怒，隆隆有声即是兵将愤怒的征兆。
English: The bell will rebel, the three armies will be angry, and there will be a loud rumble, which is a sign of the anger of soldiers and generals.

古文：景元四年十月，岁星守房。
现代文：景元四年十月，木星守房宿。
English: In October of the 4th year of the 8th month of the 7th year of the 8th month of the 9th year of the 9th month of the 10th year of the 11th month of the 12th year of the 11th month of the 12th month of the 12th year of the 12th month of the 12th year of the 13th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th year of the 13th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 13th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of the 12th month of

古文：占曰： 将相有忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将相有忧患。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that there will be sorrow.

古文：一曰： 有大赦。 
现代文：另一说： 有大赦。 
English: Another is: there will be an amnesty.

古文：明年正月，太尉邓艾、司徒钟会并诛灭，特赦益土。
现代文：第二年正月，太尉邓艾、司徒钟会都被诛减，特赦益州之地。
English: In the first month of the second year, both First Lieutenant Deng Ai and Siu Chung Kai were reduced in rank and given amnesty in Yishu.

古文：咸熙二年秋，又大赦。
现代文：咸熙二年秋天又大赦。
English: In the autumn of Han Xi's second year, there was another amnesty.

古文：陈留王咸熙二年五月，彗星见王良，长丈余，色白，东南指，积十二日灭。
现代文：陈留王咸熙二年五月，彗星出现于王良，长丈余，色白，东南指向，十二天后消失。
English: In May of the second year of Chen Liu Wang Xianxi, the comet appeared in Wang Liang, long and white, southeast-pointing, and disappeared twelve days later.

古文：占曰： 王良，天子御驷，彗星扫之，禅代之表，除旧布新之象。
现代文：占辞说： 王良代表天子的御马，彗星扫之表示将有挥让改朝换代之事，除旧布新之象。
English: The fortune-teller said: Wang Liang represents the heavenly son's horse, and the comet sweep indicates that there will be a change of dynasty, except for the old cloth and new image.

古文：白色为丧。
现代文：白色代表丧事。
English: White foreshadows mourning.

古文：王良在东壁宿，又并州之分也。 
现代文：王良在束壁宿，又属并州分野。 
English: Wang Liang lives in Sokubi, which is also a county-level division.

古文：八月，晋文王薨。
现代文：八月，晋文王去世。
English: In August, King Jinwen passed away.

古文：十二月，帝逊位于晋。
现代文：十二月，魏帝让位于晋。
English: In December, Emperor Wei gave way to Emperor Jin.

古文：晋武帝泰始四年正月丙戌，彗星见轸，青白色，西北行，又转东行。
现代文：晋武帝泰始四年正月丙戌，有青白色彗星在轸宿出现，西北方向运行，后又转向东运行。
English: In the first month of the fourth year of the reign of Emperor Jinwu, a blue-white comet appeared in Poyang, moving northwest and then turning east.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示将有战争及丧事。
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：轸又楚分也。 
现代文：轸宿又属楚分野。 
English: Shishuku also belongs to the Chu region.

古文：三月，皇太后王氏崩。
现代文：三月，皇太后王氏逝世。
English: In March, Empress Dowager Wang passed away.

古文：十月，吴将施绩寇江夏，万彧寇襄阳，后将军田璋、荆州刺史胡烈等破却之。
现代文：吴将施绩进攻丝夏，墓毖进攻塞坠，被垫后将军旦肆、型州刺史胡烈等所败。
English: Wu would attack Shixia, and Tomb Raider would attack Jiajing, but they were defeated by General Danzhu and Huli.

古文：泰始四年七月，星陨如雨，皆西流。
现代文：泰始四年七月，有流星雨都向西流。
English: In July of the first year of Taizhi, there was a meteor shower that flowed westward.

古文：占曰： 星陨为民叛，西流，吴民归晋之象也。 
现代文：占辞说： 星陨预示民众反叛，向西流为吴国之民归顺置的征兆。 
English: The soothsayer said: The star and meteorite foreshadowed the people's rebellion, and the westward flow was a sign that the people of the State of Wu would surrender.

古文：二年，吴夏口督孙秀率部曲二千余人来降。
现代文：二年，吴夏督孙秀率部曲二千多人降晋。
English: In the second year, the summer governor of Wu, Lian Xiu, led more than two thousand subordinates to surrender.

古文：泰始五年九月，有星孛于紫宫，占如上。
现代文：泰始五年九月，有彗星出现于紫宫，占辞同上。
English: In September of the fifth year of the Tai Shi, a comet appeared in the Purple Palace.

古文：紫宫，天子内宫。
现代文：紫宫代表天子内宫。
English: The Purple Palace is the inner palace of the Son of Heaven.

古文：十年，武元杨皇后崩。
现代文：十年，武元杨皇后逝世。
English: Ten years later, Empress Wuyuan Yang passed away.

古文：泰始十年十二月，有星孛于轸。占曰： 天下兵起。
现代文：泰始十年十二月，有彗星出现于轸宿占辞说： 天下将有战争。
English: In the tenth month of the twelfth year of the Tai, a comet appeared in Poyang, saying, "There will be war in the world."

古文：轸又楚分也。 
现代文：轸宿又属楚地分野。 
English: Shishuku also belongs to the Chu region.

古文：咸宁二年六月，星孛于氐。
现代文：咸宁二年六月，彗星出现于氏宿。
English: In June of the second year of the Hamanin era, a comet appeared in Ujisado.

古文：占曰： 天子失德易政。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象预示天子违德而政权变更。
English: Divination says: the Son of Heaven loses his virtue, and the regime changes.

古文：氐又兗州分。 
现代文：氐宿又属兖州分野。 
English: Bozhuang is also part of the Bozhou region.

古文：七月，星孛大角。
现代文：七月，彗星出现于大角。
English: In July, the planet Uranus appears next to the star Arcturus.

古文：大角为帝坐。
现代文：大角代表皇帝的宝座。
English: Arcturus is the seat of the celestial emperor.

古文：八月，星孛太微，至翼、北斗、三台。
现代文：八月，彗星出现于太微垣，到达翼宿、北!、三台。
English: In August, the Pleiades appeared in Taihuagaki, running to the constellation of Pleiades, the Big Dipper, and the Pleiades.

古文：占曰： 太微天子廷，大人恶之。 
现代文：占辞说： 太微是天子的位置，此王者畏惧。 
English: The fortune-teller said: "Too small is the position of the son of heaven, this king is feared."

古文：一曰： 有徙王。
现代文：另一说： 将有王被迁徙。
English: Another said: "A king will be displaced."

古文：翼又楚分也。 
现代文：翼宿又属楚地分野。 
English: Tsubasa also belongs to the Chu region.

古文： 北斗主杀罚，三台为三公。 
现代文： 北斗主管杀、罚之事，三台星代表朝廷三公 。
English: The main palm of the Big Dipper symbolizes killing and punishment, and the three pedestals symbolize the Three Kings.

古文：三年，星孛于胃。
现代文：三年，有彗星出现于胃宿。
English: In the third year, a comet appeared in the stomach.

古文：胃，徐州分。
现代文：胃宿属徐州分野。
English: The gastro-lodge corresponds to Xuzhou.

古文：四月，星孛女御。女御为后宫。
现代文：四月，彗星出现于女御女御代表后宫。
English: In April, a comet appeared in the harem of the queen's representative.

古文：五月，又孛于东方。七月，星孛紫宫。
现代文：五月，彗星出现于东方七月，彗星出现于紫宫。
English: In May, the comet appeared in the east; in July, the comet appeared in the west.

古文：占曰： 天下易主。 
现代文：占辞说： 这天象预示天下将要改朝换代。 
English: The fortune-teller said: This celestial phenomenon indicates that the world will change dynasties.

古文：五年三月，星孛于柳。
现代文：五年三月，彗星出现于柳宿。
English: In March of the fifth year, the star appeared in Yanagishuku.

古文：占曰： 外臣陵主。柳又三河分也。
现代文：占辞说： 将有外来之臣欺凌君主柳宿又属三河分野。
English: The fortune-teller said: There will be foreign subjects bullying the monarch, and Yanagi-juku belongs to the Mikawa region.

古文：大角、太微、紫宫、女御，并为王者。 
现代文：大角、太微、紫宫、女御都代表王者。 
English: Daju, Taibai, Zigu, and Nyogo all represent the king.

古文：明年吴亡，是其应也。
现代文：第二年吴国灭亡，是其应验。
English: In the following year, the State of Wu was destroyed, and this was its fulfillment.

古文：孛主兵丧，征吴之役，三河、徐、兗之兵悉出，交战于吴、楚之地。
现代文：彗星主管战争与丧事，攻打吴国之战役，置动用三回、途州、查业的全部兵力与：呈国交战于吴、楚之地。
English: Comet is in charge of war and funerals, attacking the battle of Wuzhong, deploying the full strength of the three times, Tuzhou, Chaye and: presenting the country to fight in the land of Wuzhong and Chu.

古文：吴丞相都督以下，枭戮十数，偏裨行阵之徒，馘斩万计，皆其征也。
现代文：吴国丞相都督以下官员被杀以十数，偏将、裨将及士兵被斩首以万计，此皆前面所列天象的应验。
English: Officials from the governor-general to the prime minister, Wu Guozheng, were killed by the dozen, and tens of thousands of generals, generals and soldiers were beheaded, all of which were the fulfillment of the angels listed above.

古文：《春秋》星孛北方，则齐、鲁、晋、郑、陈、宋、莒之君，并受杀乱之祸。
现代文：《春秋》上记载彗星出现于北方，则齐、鲁、晋、郑、陈、宋、莒国之君主都遭受杀乱之祸。
English: In "Spring and Autumn," it is recorded that when the comet appeared in the north, the monarchs of Qi, Lu, Jin, Zheng, Chen, Song, and He were all killed.

古文：星孛东方，则楚灭陈，三家、田氏分篡齐、晋。
现代文：彗星出现于东方，则楚减速，魏、趟、垄三家分置，旦压篡查。
English: If the comet appears in the east, Chu will slow down, Wei, Wa and Ren will be separated, and the pressure will be checked.

古文：汉文帝末，星孛西方，后吴、楚七国诛灭。
现代文：选塞查末年，彗星出现于西方，后来吴、楚等七国被诛灭考查泰始末年到太康初年，灾异多次出现。
English: In the last year of the Qing Dynasty, a comet appeared in the west. Later, Wu, Chu and other seven countries were annihilated. From the end of the first year of the Qing Dynasty to the first year of the Taikang Dynasty, disasters occurred many times.

古文：案泰始末至太康初，灾异数见，而晋氏隆盛，吴实灭，天变在吴可知矣。昔汉三年，星孛大角，项籍以亡，汉氏无事，此项氏主命故也。
现代文：但置区兴旺，呈却被消灭，如此，天象之变异应验在呈已很明确。以前汉三年，彗星出现于大角而茎签灭亡，无事，这是玺压主天命的缘故。
English: Three years before the Han Dynasty, a comet appeared in the Big Horn, but the stalks of the comet were destroyed, but nothing happened. This was the result of God's predestination.

古文：吴、晋之时，天下横分，大角孛而吴亡，是与项氏同事。
现代文：呈晋之时，天下被分为两部分，大角出现彗星而呈灭亡，这与楚选相争时情况相同。
English: At the time of presenting Jin, the world was divided into two parts, and the Great Horn appeared as a comet and was destroyed, which is the same situation as when competing for Chu Xuan.

古文：后学皆以咸宁灾为晋室，非也。
现代文：后来的占星者都以为处空时的灾变应在晋室，这是不正确的。
English: Later astrologers thought that the cataclysm of the time of the space should be in the Jin Room, which is not correct.

古文：晋武帝咸宁四年四月，蚩尤旗见。
现代文：晋武帝咸宁四年四月，天空出现蚩尤旗。
English: In April of the 4th year of Emperor Xianning of the Jin Dynasty, there was a banner in the sky.

古文：案《星传》，蚩尤旗类彗，而后曲象旗。
现代文：考查《星传》可知，蚩尤旗类似于彗星，祇是其后部像旗。
English: An examination of "The Tale of the Stars" shows that the Poyu Banner is similar to a comet, except that its back resembles a banner.

古文：汉武帝时见，长竟天。
现代文：选送童时曾经出现过，其长竞天。
English: When choosing a child to be sent away, it has appeared before, and it has been a long day of competition.

古文：献帝时又见，长十余丈，皆长星也。
现代文：汉献帝时又出现，其长十余丈，都是长星。
English: It reappeared at the time of the Han Dynasty Consecration, and its length is more than ten meters, all of which are long stars.

古文：魏高贵时则为白气。
现代文：魏高贵乡公时出现的蚩尤旗为白气组成。
English: The white flags that appeared during the reign of Wei Gao Gui Xiang were composed of white gas.

古文：案校众记，是岁无长星，宜又是异气。
现代文：考查咸宁四年时的各种记录，都没有长星出现的记载，因此这次出现的蚩尤旗又是异气。
English: An examination of the various records of Xianning in the past four years found no record of the appearance of a long star, so this appearance of the Yuyu flag is unusual.

古文：后二年，倾三方伐吴，是其应。
现代文：后二年，晋倾三方之兵伐吴，是其应验。
English: In the last two years, the troops of the three sides of the Jin and Qin Dynasties invaded Wu, which was its fulfillment.

古文：至武帝崩，天下兵又起，遂亡诸夏。
现代文：至武帝去世，天下战争又起，接着华夏亡。
English: Emperor Wu died, the world war started again, and then China died.

古文：咸宁四年九月，太白当见不见。
现代文：咸宁四年九月，金星应当出现而不出现。
English: In September of the year of Xianning, Venus should have appeared, but did not.

古文：占曰： 是谓失舍，不有破军，必有死王之墓。
现代文：占辞说： 当出现却不出现称为失舍。没有军队被破就有王死。又有国家灭亡。 
English: The fortune-teller said: "If you appear but do not appear, it is called a failure. If no army is defeated, the king will die. And the country will perish."

古文：又有亡国。 是时羊祜表求伐吴，上许之。五年十一月，兵出，太白始夕见西方。
现代文：当时羊祜上表请求伐吴，晋帝同意。五年十一月晋军出发，金星才于晚上出现于西方。
English: At that time, the Yang Di requested to attack Wu, and the Jin emperor agreed. In November of the fifth year, the Jin army set out, and Venus only appeared in the west in the evening.

古文：太康元年三月，大破吴军，孙皓面缚请死，吴国遂亡。
现代文：太康元年三月，大破吴军，孙皓反绑双手投降请死，吴国遂灭亡。
English: In March of the first year of Taikang, the Wu army was defeated, and Sun Yat-sen tied his hands in surrender and asked for death. As a result, the State of Wu was destroyed.

古文：晋武帝太康二年八月，有星孛于张。
现代文：晋武帝太康二年八月，有彗星出现于张宿。
English: In August of the second year of Emperor Taikang's reign, a comet appeared in Zhangjuku.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 此为将有战争、丧事的征兆。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：周分野，灾在洛邑。
现代文：张宿与周地上下对应，灾应在洛邑。
English: Zhangjuku and Zhou correspond to the top and bottom, and the disaster should be in Luoyang.

古文：十一月，星孛轩辕。
现代文：十一月，彗星出现于轩辕。
English: In November, the comet appeared in Xuanwu.

古文：占曰： 后宫当之。 
现代文：占辞说： 此天象之灾应在后宫。 
English: The harem, said the soothsayer, would bear the fruit of this astrological omen.

古文：四年三月戊申，星孛于西南。
现代文：四年三月戊申，彗星在西南出现。
English: In March of the 4th year of Wuxin, the shooting star appeared in the southwest.

古文：四年三月癸丑，齐王攸薨。
现代文：四年三月癸丑，齐玉司马攸逝世。
English: In March of the same year, Qi Yu, Sima You passed away.

古文：四月戊寅，任城王陵薨。
现代文：四月戊寅，任越王司马陵去世。
English: In April, Ren Yue Wang Sima passed away.

古文：五月己亥，琅邪王伷薨。
现代文：五月己亥，琅邪王司马佃去世。
English: In May of the same year, the evil king Sima Yu passed away.

古文：十一月戊午，新都王该薨。
现代文：十一月戊午。新都王司马该去世。
English: On the afternoon of November 3rd, the new capital Wang Sima passed away.

古文：太康八年三月，荧惑守心。
现代文：太康八年三月，火星守心宿。
English: In March of the eighth year of Taikang, Mars resides in the heart.

古文：占曰： 王者恶之。 太熙元年四月己酉，武帝崩。
现代文：占辞说： 此天象王者不利 太熙元年四月己酉，晋武帝去世。
English: The fortune-teller said: This day is unfavorable for the elephant king. In April of the first year of Tahei, Emperor Jinwu passed away.

古文：太康八年九月，星孛于南斗，长数十丈，十余日灭。
现代文：太康八年九月，彗星在南斗出现，长数十丈，十余日后消失。
English: In September of the 8th year of Taikang, a comet appeared in Nandou, dozens of meters long, and disappeared after more than ten days.

古文：占曰： 斗主爵禄，国有大忧。 
现代文：占辞说： 斗宿主管爵禄，国家将有大忧患。 
English: The soothsayer said: The Nanto host will receive a knighthood and a stipend, and the country will have great troubles.

古文：一曰： 孛于斗，王者疾病，臣诛其父，天下易政，大乱兵起。 太熙元年四月，客星在紫宫。
现代文：一说： 彗星在斗宿出现，预示着王者有疾病，臣诛杀其父，王位更替，大乱有战争 立压元年四月，客星出现于紫宫。
English: One said: The appearance of the comet in Dooshuku indicates that the king is ill, his vassals have killed his father, the throne has changed hands, and there is war. In April of the first year of the Rissho era, a guest star appeared in the Purple Palace.

古文：占曰： 为兵丧。 
现代文：占辞说： 将有战争及丧事。 
English: The soothsayer said, "It is a soldier's funeral."

古文：太康末，武帝耽宴游，多疾病。
现代文：太康末年，武帝沉湎于欢宴出游，多疾病。
English: In the last years of Taikang, Emperor Wu indulged in feasting and travel, and was often ill.

古文：是月乙酉，帝崩。
现代文：当月己酉，武帝去世。
English: In the same month, Emperor Wu died.

古文：永平元年，贾后诛杨骏及其党与，皆夷三族；杨太后亦见杀。
现代文：永垩元年，贾后诛杀扰堕及其同党，都被灭三族。挝太后亦被杀。
English: In the first year of the Yongle Emperor, Jia Houyi and his comrades were killed and the three ethnic groups were exterminated. The Lao empress dowager was also killed.

古文：是年，又诛汝南王亮、太保卫瓘、楚王玮，王室兵丧之应。
现代文：同年，又诛杀汝南王司马亮、太保卫瓘、楚王司马璋，此皆王室有战争及丧事的应验。
English: In the same year, he also killed King Sima Liang of Runan, King Taibowei, and King Sima Yi of Chu, all of which were wars and funerals for the royal family.

