古文：公孙丑问曰： 高子曰： 小弁，小人之诗也。  
现代文：公孙丑说： 高先生说：《小弁》，是小人写的诗。 
English: Gongsun Ugly said: Mr. Gao said: "Little Ben" is a poem written by a villain.

古文：孟子曰： 何以言之？ 
现代文：孟子说： 为什么这么说呢？ 
English: Mencius said, "Why do you say that?

古文：曰： 怨。 
现代文：公孙丑说： 诗中多怨情。 
English: Public Grandson Ugly said: There is a lot of bitterness in the poem.

古文：曰： 固哉，高叟之为诗也！
现代文：孟子说： 高老先生这样解诗未免太片面。
English: Mencius said, "Mr. Gao Lao's interpretation of the poem is too one-sided.

古文：有人于此，越人关弓而射之，则己谈笑而道之；无他，疏之也。
现代文：假如有个人在此，越国人弯弓张箭射他，他自己可以谈笑风生地讲述这件事；没有别的原因，是因为自己跟越国人关系疏远。
English: If there is a person here and a Vietnamese person shoots him with a bow and arrow, he can talk about it cheerfully; there is no other reason, because he is estranged from the Vietnamese people.

古文：其兄关弓而射之，则己垂涕泣而道之；无他，戚之也。小弁之怨，亲亲也。
现代文：如果是自己的兄长弯弓张箭而射人，那么自己就会落下眼泪来讲述这件事；没有别的原因，是因为兄长是自己的亲人。《小弁》诗中的忧怨，正是亲近亲人。
English: If it were one's own brother who shot someone with a bow and arrow, one would shed tears to tell about it; for no other reason than that one's brother was one's own relative.

古文：亲亲，仁也。
现代文：亲近亲人，就是相互亲爱。
English: To be close to relatives is to be dear to each other.

古文：固矣夫，高叟之为诗也！ 曰： 凯风何以不怨？ 
现代文：高老先生这样解诗真是片面啊。 公孙丑说： 《凯风》这首诗为什么不忧怨呢？ 
English: Mr. Gao Lao's interpretation of the poem is really one-sided. Gongsun Yuxiu said: "Why isn't the poem "The Wind" sorrowful?

古文：曰： 凯风，亲之过小者也；小弁，亲之过大者也。
现代文：孟子说： 《凯风》这首诗，是因为父母过错较小，《小弁》这首诗，是因为父母过错较大。
English: Mencius said, "The poem "Grand Wind" came into being because the parents were less at fault, and the poem "Small Valve" came into being because the parents were more at fault.

古文：亲之过大而不怨，是愈疏也；亲之过小而怨，是不可矶也。
现代文：亲人过错大，却不抱怨，是更疏远亲人的表现；亲人过错小，却要抱怨，是反而激怒自己。
English: If a relative makes a big mistake but does not complain, it is a sign of further alienation from relatives; if a relative makes a small mistake but complains, it is a sign of irritating oneself.

古文：愈疏，不孝也；不可矶，亦不孝也。
现代文：更加疏远，是不孝顺；激怒了，也是不孝顺。
English: The more estranged, the more unfilial; the more enraged, the more unfilial.

古文：孔子曰： 舜其至孝矣，五十而慕。  
现代文：孔子说： 舜是非常孝顺的人，五十岁了还爱慕父母。 
English: Confucius said, "He is a very filial person. He is fifty years old and still loves his parents.

