古文：颍水出颍川阳城县西北少室山，秦始皇十七年，灭韩，以其地为颍川郡，盖因水以著称者也。
现代文：颖水发源于颖川郡阳城县西北方的少室山，秦始皇十七年灭了韩国，在那里设置颖川郡，是以水来命名的。
English: Yingshui originated from Shomuroyama in the northwest of Yangcheng County, Yingchuan County. In the 17th year of the reign of Qin Shihuang Emperor, Korea was destroyed, and Yingchuan County was established there. It was named after water.

古文：汉高帝二年，以为韩国。王莽之左队也。
现代文：汉高帝二年前，立为韩国，王莽时改名为左队。
English: Two years ago, when Henkel became emperor of South Korea, Wang Mang changed the name to the left team.

古文：《山海经》曰：颍水出少室山。
现代文：《山海经》说：颖水发源于少室山。
English: "Sankaikyo" says: Yingshui originated from Shomuroyama.

古文：《地理志》曰：出阳城县阳乾山，今颍水有三源奇发，右水出阳乾山之颍谷。
现代文：《地理志》说：发源于阳城县阳乾山。颖水有三个源头，右边的一条发源于阳乾山的颖谷。
English: "Geography" said: Originated from Yangqian Mountain, Yangcheng County. Yingshui has three sources, and the one on the right originates from the Ying Valley of Yangqian Mountain.

古文：《春秋》颍考叔为其封人。
现代文：《春秋》记载，颖考叔任颖谷封人之职。
English: "Spring and Autumn" records that Yingkao's uncle was appointed to the post of Yinggu seal.

古文：其水东北流。
现代文：水往东北流。
English: The water flows to the northeast.

古文：中水导源少室通阜，东南流，径负黍亭东。
现代文：中间一条发源于少室山的通阜，往东南流经负黍亭东边。
English: The middle one originates from Tongfu in Mt. Shomuro, and flows southeast through the eastern side of Neusiedl.

古文：《春秋》定公六年，郑伐冯、滑、负黍者也。
现代文：《春秋》：定公六年前，郑国攻打冯、滑、负黍等地。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Six years before Ding Gong, Zheng Guo attacked Feng, Slip and Negative Yoke.

古文：冯敬通《显志赋》曰：求善卷之所在，遇许由于负黍。
现代文：冯敬通《显志赋》说：寻求高士善卷所在的地方，在负黍遇到许由。
English: Feng Jingtong's "Xian Zhi Fu" said: "Seek the place where the high-ranking scholar's good scroll is located, and meet the reason in the negative."

古文：京相璠曰：负黍在颍川阳城县西南二十七里。世谓之黄城也。
现代文：京相潘说：负黍在颖川郡阳城县西南二十七里，人们称为黄城。
English: Beijing's Minister of Foreign Affairs Pan said, "Negative molybdenum is located 27 miles southwest of Yangcheng County, Yingchuan County. People call it Huangcheng.

古文：亦或谓是水为本，东与右水合。
现代文：也有人称这条水为滁水，东流与右边那条水汇合。
English: Some people also call this water the Yangtze River, and the east stream merges with the water on the right.

古文：左水出少室南溪，东合颍水，故作者互举二山，言水所发也。
现代文：左边的一条发源于少室山的南溪，东流与颖水汇合。因此，各家作者在提到颖水的发源地时，都互举上述这两座山。
English: On the left, there is a south stream that originates from Mt. Shomuro, and the east stream merges with Yingshui. Therefore, when referring to the origin of Yingshui, each author cites the above two mountains.

古文：《吕氏春秋》曰：卞随耻受汤让，自投此水而死。
现代文：《吕氏春秋》说：卞随以接受汤的让位为耻，自投颖水而死。
English: "Lu's Spring and Autumn" said: "After being shamed into accepting the offer of soup, the dragonfly threw itself into the water and died."

古文：张显《逸民传》、嵇叔夜《高士传》并言投泂水而死，未知其孰是也。
现代文：张显《逸民传》、稽叔夜《高士传》都说卞随投洞水而死，不知道哪种说法正确。
English: Zhang Xian's "Biography of Yimin" and Jing Shuyuan's "Biography of Gao Shi" both say that the dragonfly died after being thrown into the water, but it is not known which version is correct.

古文：东南过其县南，颍水又东，五渡水注之。
现代文：往东南流过县南，颖水又往东流，五渡水注入。
English: It flows to the southeast through the south of the county, and the Ying water flows to the east, and the Wudu water is injected.

古文：其水导源崈高县东北太室东溪。
现代文：五渡水发源于岔高县东北的太室山东溪。
English: The Wudu River originates from the East Stream of Taimuro Mountain in the northeastern part of Hidaka County.

古文：县，汉武帝置，以奉太室山，俗谓之崧阳城。
现代文：金高县是汉武帝时为奉祀太室山而设置，俗称裕阳城。
English: Jinguo County was established by Emperor Hanwu to worship Mt. Taimuro, and is commonly known as Yuyang City.

古文：及春夏雨泛，水自山顶而迭相灌澍，崿流相承，为二十八浦也。
现代文：每逢春夏多雨时，一条又一条的山泉从山顶流泻而下，崖水和溪流相接，形成二十八浦。
English: Whenever there is a lot of rain in spring and summer, one mountain spring after another flows down from the top of the mountain, and the cliff water and the stream meet to form the Twenty-eight Pools.

古文：旸旱辍津，而石潭不耗，道路游憩者，惟得餐饮而已，无敢澡盥其中，苟不如法，必数日不豫，是以行者惮之。
现代文：干旱季节山涧溪流断水，但石潭仍不干涸，过路行人游客在此歇息，只能舀点水喝罢了，没有人敢在潭水洗澡或洗手，如果有人不遵守这个规矩，一定有好几天不得安宁，因此行人都有点畏惧。
English: During the dry season, the water of the mountain stream is cut off, but the stone pool is still not dry. Passing pedestrians and tourists rest here, and can only drink a little water. No one dares to take a bath or wash their hands in the pool. If someone does not follow this rule, there will be no peace for several days, so pedestrians are a little afraid.

古文：山下大潭周数里，而清深肃洁。水中有立石，高十余丈，广二十许步，上甚平整。
现代文：山下有个大潭，周围数里，潭水清深洁净，水中有一块屹立的巨石，高十余丈，顶端非常平整，宽广二十来步。
English: At the foot of the mountain there is a large pool, several miles in circumference, the pool water is clear, deep and clean. In the water there is a standing boulder, more than ten meters high, the top is very flat, and the width is about twenty paces.

古文：缁素之士，多泛舟升陟，取畅幽情。
现代文：僧俗人士常划船到那里，爬到顶岩上，情怀为之一畅。
English: Monks and lay people often row there, climb to the top rock, and feel at one with nature.

古文：其水东南径阳城西，石溜萦委，溯者五涉，故亦谓之五渡水。
现代文：五渡水往东南流经阳城西边，石涧萦回曲折，过往行人要反复涉水，因此也叫五渡水。
English: The Wudu River flows southeast through the west side of Yangcheng, winding through the rocks. Passing pedestrians have to repeatedly wade through the water, so it is also called the Wudu River.

古文：东南流入颍水。
现代文：水往东南流，注入颖水。
English: The water flows to the southeast, injecting Yingshui.

古文：颀水径其县故城南。昔舜禅禹，禹避商均，伯益避启，并于此也。亦周公以上圭测日景处。
现代文：颖水流经岔高县旧城南边，从前舜让位给禹，禹避让商均，伯益又避让启，都是在这里；这里也是周公用土圭测日影的地方。
English: Yingshui flows through the southern edge of the old city of Shigao County. In the past, Shigao gave way to Yu, Yu avoided giving way to Shangjun, and Bo Yi avoided giving way to Kai. All of this is here. This is also the place where Zhou Gong used the crane to measure the sun's shadow.

古文：汉成帝永始元年，封赵临为侯国也。
现代文：汉成帝永始元年前，把这地方封给赵临，立为侯国。
English: Before the first year of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Hancheng gave this place to Zhao Lin and established it as a principality.

古文：县南对箕山，山上有许由冢，尧所封也。
现代文：县城南对箕山，山上有许由墓，是尧时筑的。
English: On the south side of the county town, facing Lushan Mountain, there is Xu Yu's tomb on the mountain, which was built by Jie Shih.

古文：故太史公曰：余登箕山，其上有许由墓焉。
现代文：因此太史公说：我登箕山，山上有许由墓。
English: Therefore, Taishikong said, "I climbed Lushan Mountain, and there is Xu Yu's tomb on the mountain."

古文：山下有牵牛墟。
现代文：山下有牵牛墟。
English: There is a cowherd's market at the foot of the mountain.

古文：侧颍水有犊泉，是巢父还牛处也。石上犊迹存焉。
现代文：在颖水旁有一条犊泉，是巢父还牛的地方，岩石上牛的足迹还在。
English: There is a gourd spring next to the Ying Shui. It is the place where the nester returns the cattle, and the footprints of the cattle are still on the rock.

古文：又有许由庙，碑阙尚存，是汉颍川大守朱宠所立。
现代文：还有许由庙，石碑墓网都还在，是汉朝颖川太守朱宠建立的。
English: There is also the Xuyu Temple, and the network of stone tombs are still there. It was built by the Han Dynasty's Yingchuan Governor Zhu Zhu.

古文：颍水径其北，东与龙渊水合，其水导源龙渊，东南流，径阳城北，又东南入于颍。
现代文：颖水流经庙北，东流与龙渊水汇合。龙渊水发源于龙渊，往东南流经阳城北边，又往东南注入颖水。
English: Ying water flows through the north of the temple, and the east stream merges with Longyuan water. Longyuan water originates from Longyuan, flows southeast through the north of Yangcheng, and injects Ying water to the southeast.

古文：颍水又东，平洛溪水注之。
现代文：颖水又东流，平洛溪水注入。
English: Yingshui also flows to the east, and Pingluo Creek water is injected.

古文：水发玉女台下平洛涧，世谓之平洛水。
现代文：溪水发源于玉女台下的平洛涧，世人称为平洛水。
English: The water of the stream originates from Pingluo, under the Jade Maiden Plateau, and is known to the world as Pingluo Water.

古文：吕忧所谓勺水出阳城山，盖斯水也。
现代文：吕忱所说的勺水发源于阳城山，就是这条水。
English: The "spoonful of water" mentioned by Lü Zhen originates from Yangcheng Mountain, which is this water.

古文：又东甫流，注于颍。
现代文：又往东南流，注入颖水。
English: It also flows to the southeast, injecting Yingshui.

古文：颍水又东出阳关，历康城南。魏明帝封尚书右仆射卫臻为康乡侯。此即臻封邑也。
现代文：颖水又往东流出阳关，流经康城南边，魏明帝封尚书右仆射卫臻为康乡侯，这里就是他的封邑。
English: Yingshui also flows out of Yangguan to the east and flows through the southern side of Kangcheng. Wei Ming Emperor's right-hand man, Sha Wei, was named Kangxiang, and this was his fief.

古文：径繁昌故县北，曲蠡之繁阳亭也。
现代文：又往东南流过阳翟县北边。颖水往东南流经阳关聚，阳关聚夹水相对，俗称东土城和西土城。
English: Yingshui flows southeastward through the north of Yangshuo County. Yingshui flows southeastward through Yangguan agglomeration, and Yangguan agglomeration is opposite, commonly known as East Tucheng and West Tucheng.

古文：《魏书。国志》曰：文帝以汉献帝延康元年，行至曲蠡，登坛受禅于是地，改元黄初，其年以颍阴之繁阳亭为繁昌县。
现代文：颖水又流经上棘城西边，又拐弯流经城南。《春秋左传》：襄公十八年巡行到曲鑫，在此地登坛接受了帝位，改元黄初。同年，把颖阴的繁阳亭改为繁昌县。
English: Yingshui also flows through the west side of Shangcheng, and turns around and flows through the south of the city. "Spring and Autumn Legend": In the 18th year, Prince Xiang marched to Quxin, where he ascended the throne and accepted the imperial throne, and changed it to the beginning of the Yellow Dynasty. In the same year, he changed Yingyin's Shouyang Pavilion to Shouchang County.

古文：城内有三台，时人谓之繁昌台。
现代文：城内有三座台，当时人称为繁昌台。
English: There were three stages in the city, known at the time as the prosperous stage.

古文：坛前有二碑。
现代文：坛前有两块石碑。
English: In front of the altar are two stone tablets.

古文：昔魏文帝受禅于此，自坛而降。曰：舜禹之事，吾知之矣！
现代文：当年魏文帝在此受禅，从坛上走下来说：舜、禹的事情我知道了。
English: In those days, Emperor Weiwen was meditating here, and he came down from the altar and said, "I know about Yu and Yu."

古文：故其石铭曰遂于繁昌筑灵坛也。
现代文：所以石碑上的铭文说：于是就在繁昌修筑了灵坛。
English: Therefore, the inscription on the stone tablet says: Therefore, the altar was built in Prosperity.

古文：于后其碑六字生金；论者以为司马金行，故曹氏六世，迁魏而事晋也。
现代文：后来石碑上的六个字长了金，评论者认为司马氏五行属金，所以曹氏六世而魏亡晋立。
English: Later, the six characters on the stone monument became gold, and commentators believed that the five elements of the Sima clan were gold, so the sixth generation of the Cao clan died and the Jin dynasty was established.

古文：颍水又东南流，径青陵亭城北。
现代文：颖水又往东南流经青陵亭城北边，此城北对青陵破，破塘南北宽二十里，题水流绎破北，支流注入成为破塘。
English: Yingshui also flows to the southeast through the north of Qinglingting City. This north of the city is broken to Qingling, the pond is twenty miles wide from north to south, the water flow is broken to the north, and the tributary is injected into the pond.

古文：北对青陵陂，陂纵广二十里，颍水径其北，枝入为陂，陂西则漷水注之，水出囊城县之邑城下，东流注于陂，陂水又东人临颍县之狼陂。
现代文：破西有都水注入。榔水发源于襄城县的邑城下，东流注入破中。破水又往东流，注入临颖县的狼阪。
English: To the west of the breach, there is an injection of capital water. The floodwater originates in the lower part of the town in Xiangcheng County, and the eastward flow injects into the middle of the breach. The broken water then flows eastward, and injects into the Wolanshan of Linying County.

古文：颍水又东南流，而历临颍县也。
现代文：颖水又往东南流经临颖县。
English: Yingshui also flows southeast through Linying County.

古文：又东南过临颍县南，又东南过汝甫强县北，洧水从河南密县东流注之。
现代文：又往东南流过临颖县南边，又往东南流过汝南郡滩强县北边，淆水从河南郡密县东流注人。
English: It also flows southeast through the south of Linying County and southeast through the north of Dangqiang County in Runan County, and the water flows from the east of Mi County in Henan County.

古文：临颍，旧县也。
现代文：临颖是个旧县。
English: Linying is an old county.

古文：颍水自县西注，小水出焉。
现代文：颖水从县西流过，小滁水在这里流出。
English: Yingshui flows from the west of the county, and Xiaobangshui flows from here.

古文：《尔雅》曰：颍别为沙。
现代文：《尔雅》说：颖水分支为沙水。
English: "Lya" said: Yingshui branch is sand.

古文：郭景纯曰：皆大水溢出，别为小水之名也。
现代文：郭景纯说：都是大河溢出，分为小支流的名称。
English: Guo Jingjun said: They are all names of large rivers that overflow and are divided into small tributaries.

古文：亦犹江别为沱也。
现代文：也正如江水分支成为沱水一样。
English: Just as a branch of a river becomes a swamp.

古文：颍水又东南，径皋城北。郎古皋城亭矣。
现代文：颖水又往东南流经泽城北边，就是古时的皋城亭。
English: Yingshui also flows southeast through the north side of Zecheng, which is the ancient Shicheng Pavilion.

古文：《春秋经》书，公及诸侯盟于皋鼬者也。
现代文：《春秋经》记载：定公和诸侯会盟于皋融。
English: "Spring and Autumn Classic" records: Ding Gong and the alliance of lords and nobles were united.

古文：皋、泽字相似，名与字乖耳。
现代文：皋、泽字形相似，因而造成了名与字不相一致。
English: The characters  and 澤 are similar, which caused the name to be inconsistent with the character.

古文：颖水又东径阳城南。《竹书纪年》曰：孙何取阳。
现代文：颖水又往东流经滁阳城南边，《竹书纪年》说：孙何攻取滁阳。
English: Yingshui also flowed eastward through the south of Fenyang City. "The Bamboo Annals" said: Sun He conquered Fenyang.

古文：强城在东北，颍水不得径其北也。
现代文：滁癫在东北，颖水是不可能流经此城以北的。
English: In Northeast China, it is impossible for Yingshui to flow north of the city.

古文：颍水又东南，水入焉，非洧水也。
现代文：颖水又往东南流，误水注入，并非清水。
English: Yingshui also flows to the southeast, injecting water by mistake, not clean water.

古文：又东过西华县北，王莽更名之曰华望也，有东故言西矣。
现代文：又往东流过西华县北边，西华县，王莽改名为华望。因为有东华，所以此城称西华。
English: It also flowed eastward through the northern part of Xihua County, and Wang Mang was renamed Huabang in Xihua County. Because of Donghua, this city was called Xihua.

古文：世祖光武皇帝建武中，封邓晨为侯国。
现代文：世祖光武帝建武年间，把这地方封给邓晨，立为侯国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianwu, the ancestor of Emperor Guangwu, this place was given to Deng Chen and established as a principality.

古文：汉济北戴封，字平仲，为西华令，遇天旱，慨治功无感，乃积柴坐其上以自焚，火起而大雨暴至，远近叹服。
现代文：汉朝济北戴封，字平仲，当西华县县令，有一年天大早，他慨叹自己政绩平庸，没有感动上天，就堆起柴垛，坐在上面自焚，火点燃后暴雨骤降，远近都赞叹佩服他。
English: During the Han Dynasty, Ji Beibei Daifeng was a mediocre person. When Xihua County was in charge of the county, he lamented his mediocre political performance one year early in the morning. Without being moved to heaven, he piled up firewood, sat on it and set himself on fire. After the fire was lit, a rainstorm suddenly fell. People from near and far admired and admired him.

古文：永元十二年，征太常焉。
现代文：永元十三年，他被朝廷征召担任太常之职。
English: In the thirteenth year of the Yongyuan era, he was called up by the imperial court to serve as Grand Steward.

古文：县北有习阳城，颍水径其南，《经》所谓洧水流注之也。
现代文：县北有习阳城，颖水流经城南，这就是《水经》中所说的消水流注于颖水的地方。
English: There is Xiyang City in the north of the county, and Yingshui flows through the south of the city. This is the place where the effluent flow is poured into Yingshui as mentioned in the "Water Sutra."

古文：又南过女阳县北。
现代文：又往南流过女阳县北边。
English: It also flowed south through the northern part of Meiyang County.

古文：县故城南有汝水枝流，故县得厥称矣。
现代文：女阳县旧城南边有汝水支流，因此该县得到女阳的县名。
English: There is a tributary of Ru Shui in the south of the old city of Meiyang County, so the county got the name of Meiyang County.

古文：阚駰曰：本汝水别流，其后枯竭，号曰死汝水，故其字无水。
现代文：阐胭说：这条水原是汝水支流，后来枯竭了，称为死汝水，因而女阳的女字偏旁无水。
English: Elucidation said: This water source is a tributary of Ru water, which was later depleted and called dead Ru water. Therefore, there is no water next to the female character of Meiyang.

古文：余按汝、女乃方俗之音，故字随读改，未必一如阚氏之说，以穷通损字也。
现代文：按：汝、女方言读音相近，所以字也随着读音而改了，未必就像阐氏所说的那样，因水枯不通而削去原字偏旁的。
English: According to:Ru, the pronunciation of the female dialect is similar, so the characters have also changed with the pronunciation. It is not necessarily the case that the side of the original word has been cut off because the water is dry and impassable, as Mr. Yu said.

古文：颍水又东，大水注之。又东南径博阳县故城东。城在南顿县北四十里，汉宣帝封邴吉为侯国，王莽更名乐嘉。
现代文：颖水又东流，大滁水注入；又往东南流过博阳县旧城东边，此城在南顿县以北四十里，汉宣帝把它封给郁吉，立为侯国，王莽改名为乐嘉。
English: Yingshui also flows to the east, and Dafeng water is injected; it also flows to the southeast through the east of the old city of Boyang County. This city is forty miles north of Nantong County. Emperor Han Xuan gave it to Yuji and established it as a principality. Wang Mang changed its name to Lejia.

古文：又东南过南顿县北，水从西来流注之。
现代文：又往东南流过南顿县北边，滁水丛西方流来注入。
English: It also flows southeast through the northern part of Nantong County, and flows into the west of the Xinshui Cluster.

古文：水于乐嘉县入颍，不至于顿。
现代文：滁水在乐嘉县注入颖水，并没有流到南顿县。
English: Surabaya water was injected into Yingshui in Lejia County, but did not flow into Nantong County.

古文：顿，故顿子国也，周之同姓。
现代文：顿，从前是顿子国，与周同姓。
English: Tong, formerly known as Tongzi, shares the same surname as Zhou.

古文：《春秋》僖公二十五年，楚伐陈，纳顿子于顿是也。
现代文：《春秋》：傅公二十五年前，楚国讨伐陈国，把顿子送回到顿去。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twenty-five years before Fu Gong, the State of Chu fought against the State of Chen and sent Tonzi back to Ton.

古文：俗谓之颍阴城，非也。
现代文：俗称顿为颖阴城，其实不对。
English: It is commonly known as Yingyin City, but this is not true.

古文：颍水又东南径陈县南，又东南左会交口者也。
现代文：颖水又往东南流经陈县南边，又往东南流，向左边在交口汇合一条水。
English: Yingshui flows south-east through the south of Chen County, and flows south-east again, merging with a stream at the junction to the left.

古文：又东南至新阳县北，范渠水从西北来注之。
现代文：又往东南流到新阳县北边，菠蕊渠水从西北流来注人。
English: It also flows southeast to the north of Xinyang County, and the water of the pineapple canal flows from the northwest.

古文：《经》云蒗渠者，百尺沟之名别也。
现代文：《水经》说：菠蔼渠是百尺沟的别名。
English: "Water Sutra" says: "Pianian Channel" is another name for "Hundred Foot Channel."

古文：颍水南合交口，新沟自是东出。
现代文：颖水往南流，汇合交口，新沟从这里向东分支流出。
English: Yingshui flows to the south, merges with the intersection, and the new ditch branches out from here to the east.

古文：颍上有堰，谓之新阳堰，俗谓之山阳堨，非也。
现代文：颖水上有堰，称为新阳堰，俗称山阳竭，是错误的。
English: It is wrong to say that there is a weir on the Ying Shui River, known as the Xinyang Weir, commonly known as the Shanyang Exhaustion.

古文：新沟自颍北东出，县在水北，故应劭曰：县在新水之阳。
现代文：新沟从颖永北岸向东流出。新阳县在新沟水以北，所以应韵说：新阳县在新水之阳。
English: Xinyang County is to the north of Xinyang Water, so the rhyme goes: Xinyang County is to the south of Xinyang Water.

古文：今县故城在东，明颍水不出其北，盖：《经》误耳。
现代文：今天旧县城在东边，显然颖水不可能流经该县北边，《水经》是搞错了。
English: Today, the old county seat is in the east, so it is obviously impossible for the Ying Shui to flow through the northern part of the county. "Shui Jing" is mistaken.

古文：颍水自堰东南派，径项县故城北。
现代文：颖水从新阳堰往东南流经项县旧城北边。
English: Yingshui flows from Xinyang Dam to the southeast, passing through the northern part of the old city of Xiangxian County.

古文：《春秋》僖公十七年，鲁灭项是矣。
现代文：《春秋》：僖公十七年前，鲁国灭了项国。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Seventeen years ago, the Lu Kingdom destroyed the Shang Kingdom.

古文：颍水又东，右合谷水，水上承平乡诸陂，东北径南顿县故城南，侧城东注。
现代文：颖水又东流，右边与谷水汇合，谷水上源承接平乡诸破，往东北流经南顿县旧城南边，从城旁向东流去。
English: Yingshui also flows to the east, and merges with Guishui on the right. The upper source of Guishui connects with Pingxiang Zhuoba, and flows to the northeast through the south of the old city of Nantong County, and flows eastward from the city.

古文：《春秋左传》所谓顿迫于陈而奔楚，自顿徒南，故曰南顿也。
现代文：《春秋左传》说，顿受到陈的胁迫而投奔楚国，从顿南迁，所以称南顿。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" says that Dong was forced by Chen to flee to Chu and moved from Dong to the south, hence the name Nandong.

古文：今其城在顿南三十余里。
现代文：现在此城在顿南三十余里。
English: Now the city is more than 30 miles south of Don.

古文：又东径项城中，楚襄王所郭，以为别都。都内西南小城，项县故城也。旧颍州治。
现代文：水又往东流经项城中，楚襄王修筑外城，把项城作为别都，都内西南的小城就是项县的旧城，从前是颖州的治所。
English: The water also flowed eastward through Xiangcheng, and the King of Chu Xiang built the outer city and made Xiangcheng the capital. The small city in the southwest of the capital is the old city of Xiangxian County, which was once the capital of Yingzhou.

古文：谷水径小城北，又东径魏豫州刺史贾逵祠北。
现代文：谷水流经小城北边，又往东流经魏豫州刺史贾建祠北。
English: The valley water flows through the north side of the small city, and flows eastward through the north of Wei Yu Zhou Jia Jian Ancestral Hall.

古文：王隐言祠在城北，非也，庙在小城东。
现代文：王隐说：祠在城北。
English: Wang Yin said: The ancestral hall is in the north of the city.

古文：昔王凌为宣王司马懿所执，届庙而叹曰：贾梁道王凌，魏之忠臣，惟汝有灵知之。
现代文：说得不对。庙在小城东面。从前王凌被宣王司马兹抓住，到了此庙叹息道：贾梁道啊，王凌是魏的忠臣，只有你有灵才知道我啊！
English: That's not true. The temple is on the east side of the small town. Wang Ling was once caught by King Sima of Xuan, and when he came to this temple, he sighed: Jia Liang Dao, Wang Ling is a loyal subject of Wei, only you have the spirit to know me!

古文：遂仰鸩而死。
现代文：于是就饮毒酒而死。
English: So he drank poisoned wine and died.

古文：庙前有碑，碑石金生。
现代文：庙前有一块石碑，碑石上生出黄金。
English: In front of the temple there is a stone monument, on which gold grows.

古文：干宝曰：黄金可采，为晋中兴之瑞。
现代文：干宝说：黄金能采下来，这是晋朝中兴的吉祥征兆。
English: Gan Bao said: Gold can be mined, which is an auspicious sign of the rise of the Jin Dynasty.

古文：谷水又东流，出城东注颍。
现代文：谷水又东流出城，往东注入颖水。
English: The valley water flows out of the city to the east, and the ying water is injected to the east.

古文：颍水又东，侧颍有公路城。袁术所筑也，故世因以术字名城矣。
现代文：颖水又东流，岸边有公路城，是袁术所筑，所以世人用袁术的字。公路来命名。
English: Yingshui also flows to the east, and there is a highway city on the shore. It was built by Yuan Shuxu, so the world uses the word of Yuan Shuxu to name the highway.

古文：颍水又东，径临颍城北。城临水，阙南面。
现代文：颖水又往东流经临颖城北边，此城濒水，南面没有城墙。
English: Yingshui also flows eastward through the northern side of Linying City, which is on the water's edge and has no city wall on its southern side.

古文：又东径云阳二城间，南北翼水，并非所具。
现代文：又往东流经云阳二城之间，二城位于颖水南北两岸，城墙都不完全。
English: It also flows eastward through Yunyang between the two cities. The two cities are located on the north and south sides of Yingshui. The city walls are incomplete.

古文：又东径丘头。丘头南枕水，《魏书。
现代文：颖水继续往东流经丘头，丘头南面濒水。
English: Yingshui continued to flow eastward through the hilltop, and the south side of the hilltop was near the water.

古文：郡国志》曰：宣王军次丘头，王凌面缚水次，故号武丘矣。
现代文：《魏书•郡国志》说：宣王军队驻扎丘头，王凌在颖水旁自缚投降，所以又称武丘。
English: "Weishu • Guozhi" said: Wang Xuanwang's army was stationed at the top of the hill, and Wang Ling surrendered himself at the side of Yingshui, so it was also called Wuqiu.

古文：颍水又东南流，于故城北，细水注之。
现代文：颖水又往东南流，在旧城北边，细水注入。
English: Yingshui also flows to the southeast, injecting fine water in the northern part of the old city.

古文：水上承阳都陂，陂水枝分，东南出为细水，东径新阳县故城北，又东南径宋县故城北。
现代文：细水上流承接阳都阪。破水分支流出，往东南流的就是细水，往东流经新阳县旧城北边，又往东南流经宋县旧城北边。
English: The upper part of the thin water flows into Yangduhan. The branch of the broken water flows out, and the thin water flows to the southeast. It flows to the east through the north of the old city of Xinyang County, and to the southeast through the north of the old city of Song County.

古文：县即所谓郪丘者也，秦伐魏娶郪丘，谓是邑矣。
现代文：宋县就是所谓郭丘，秦国进攻魏国，夺取了都丘，说的就是这座城。
English: Song County is the so-called Guoqiu, Qin attacked Wei, captured Duqiu, and this is the city.

古文：汉成帝绥和元年，诏封殷后于沛，以存三统。
现代文：汉成帝绥和元年前，下诏将沛封给殷的后代，以便保存三统。
English: Before the reign of Emperor Han Zheng and the first year of the new year, the following edict was issued to the descendants of Yin in order to preserve the Three Kingdoms.

古文：平帝元始四年，改曰来公。
现代文：平帝元始四年，改称宋公。
English: In the first four years of the Ping Dynasty, he was renamed Song Gong.

古文：章帝建初四年。徙邑于此，故号新郪，为宋公国也，王莽之新延矣。
现代文：章帝建初四年，把封邑迁到这里，因此称新郭，是宋公国，就是王莽时的新延。
English: In the first four years of the reign of Emperor Zhang Jian, the fief moved here, so it was called Xin Guo, the Song Duchy, or Wang Mangshi's Xin Yan.

古文：细水又甫径细阳县，新沟水注之。
现代文：细水又往南流经细阳县，新沟水在此注入。
English: The thin water then flows south through Seoyang County, where the new ditch water is injected.

古文：沟首受交口，东北径新阳县故城南。
现代文：新沟水上口承接交口，往东北流经新阳县旧城南边。
English: The upper course of the Xingou Waterway follows the junction and flows northeast through the southern edge of the old city of Xinyang County.

古文：汉高帝六年，封吕青为侯国、王莽更名曰新明也，故应劭曰：县在新水之阳。今无水，故渠旧道而已。
现代文：汉高帝六年前，把这地方封给吕青，立为侯国，王莽时改名为新明。所以应劫说：新阳县在新水之阳，现在已经无水，只不过还留有旧渠道而已。
English: Six years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Luching and established it as a principality, and Wang Mang changed its name to Xinming. Therefore, it is said that: Xinyang County is now dry in the sun of new water, but it still has old channels.

古文：东入泽渚，而散流入细。
现代文：新沟水往东注入沼泽，然后散流汇入细水。
English: The water of the new ditch flows east into the swamp, and then the scattered flow merges into the thin water.

古文：细水又东南径细阳县放城南。王莽更之曰乐庆也。
现代文：细水又往东南流经细阳县旧城南边，王莽改名为乐庆。
English: The thin water flowed to the southeast through the south of the old city of Xieyang County, and Wang Mang changed his name to Leqing.

古文：世祖建武中，封岑彭子遵为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武年间一，把这地方封给岑彭的儿子岑遵，立为侯国。
English: In the first year of Jianwu, the ancestor of the Jianwu Dynasty, this place was given to Zhaopeng's son, Zhaozong, and established as a vassal state.

古文：细水又东南，积而为陂。谓之次塘，公私引裂，以供田溉。
现代文：细水又往东南流，积水成为破塘，称为次塘，公田和私田都开渠引水灌溉。
English: The thin water flows to the southeast, and the stagnant water becomes a broken pond, known as the second pond. Both public and private fields are drained for irrigation.

古文：又东南流，屈而西南人颖。
现代文：又往东南流，拐弯转向西南注入颖水。
English: It also flows to the southeast, turns to the southwest and feeds into the Yingshui River.

古文：《地理志》曰：细水出细阳县东南入颍。
现代文：《地理志》说：细水发源于细阳县，往东南注入颖水。
English: "Geography" said: fine water originated in Xieyang County and was injected into Yingshui to the southeast.

古文：颍水又东南流，径胡城东，故胡子国也。
现代文：颖水又往东南流经胡城东边，这里从前是胡子国。
English: Yingshui also flows southeast through the eastern side of Hucheng, which was once a beard country.

古文：《春秋》定公十五年，楚灭胡，以胡子豹归是也。
现代文：《春秋》：定公十五年前，楚国灭了胡子国，俘获胡子豹回来。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Fifteen years ago, Chu wiped out Beard Country and captured Beard Leopard.

古文：杜预《释地》曰：汝阴县西北有胡城也。
现代文：杜预《释地》说：汝阴县西北有胡城。
English: Du Yuan's "Interpretation" said: There is Hu City in the northwest of Ruyin County.

古文：颍水又东南，汝水枝津注之。水上承汝水别渎于奇洛，城东三十里，世谓之大水也。
现代文：颖水又往东南流，汝水支流注入，这条支流上流承接奇洛城东三十里的汝水分支，世人称为大滁水。
English: Yingshui also flows to the southeast, and is fed by a tributary of Ruishui. This tributary is upstream of the branch of Ruishui thirty miles east of Chengguiluo City, and is known to the world as Dahuishui.

古文：东南径召陵县故城南。《春秋左传》僖公四年，齐桓公师于召陵，责楚贡不入，即此处也。
现代文：此水往东南流经召陵县旧城南边，《春秋左传》：僖公四年前,齐桓公率军到了召陵，责问楚国不纳贡赋，就在这里。
English: This water flows to the southeast through the south of the old city of Zhaoling County, "Spring and Autumn Left Handed": Four years ago, Qi Huan led the army to Zhaoling and asked Chu not to pay tribute. It is here.

古文：城内有大井，径数丈，水至清深。
现代文：城内有一口大井，直径数丈，水极清幽。
English: There is a large well in the city, several meters in diameter, with extremely clear water.

古文：阚駰曰：召者，高也。
现代文：阐胭说：召，是高的意思。
English: Elucidate: "Zhao" means high.

古文：其地丘墟，井深数丈，故以名焉。
现代文：这一带空寂荒凉，有数丈深的大井，所以名为召陵。
English: This area is desolate and desolate, with large wells several meters deep, which is why it is called Zhaoling.

古文：又东南径征羌县，故召陵县之安陵乡，安陵亭也。
现代文：此水又往东南流经征羌县，这是从前召陵县的安陵乡，就是安陵亭。
English: This water also flows to the southeast through Zhengyi County, which is the former Anling Township of Zhaoling County, that is, Anling Pavilion.

古文：世祖建武十一年，以封中郎将来歙。歙以征定西羌功，故更名征羌也。
现代文：世祖建武十一年，把这里封给中郎将来敦，来款因出征定西羌有功，所以改地名为征羌。
English: In the eleventh year of Emperor Jianwu's reign, this land was given to the middle-ranking official, Future Tun. The land was renamed Seorong due to the fact that the money had been used for military purposes.

古文：阙駰引《战国策》，以为秦昭王欲易地，谓此非也。
现代文：阐驹引《战国策》认为：秦昭王想调换土地而改名，其实不是如此。
English: According to the "Warring States Policy," Qin Zhaowang wanted to change the land and change the name, but this was not the case.

古文：汝水别渎又东径公路台北，台临水方百步，袁术所筑也。
现代文：汝水支流又往东流经公路台北边，此台临水，方圆百步，是袁术所筑。
English: The Ruishui tributary also flows eastward along the Taipei side of the highway. This platform is adjacent to the water, a hundred paces around, and was built by Yuan Shu.

古文：汝水别沟又东径西门城，即南利也。
现代文：汝水支流又往东流经西门城，就是南利。
English: The Ruishui tributary also flows eastward through Ximen City, that is, Nanli.

古文：汉宣帝封广陵厉王子刘昌为侯国。
现代文：汉宣帝将这地方封给广陵厉王的儿子刘昌，立为侯国。
English: Emperor Han Xuan gave this place to Liu Chang, the son of Guangling Li Wang, and established it as a principality.

古文：县北三十里有孰城，号曰北利。
现代文：县北三十里有孰城，又称北利。
English: In the northern 30 counties of the county, there is a town called Beicheng, also known as Beili.

古文：故渎出于二利之间，间关女阳之县，世名之死女。
现代文：旧河道穿过南利和北利之间，辗转流经女阳县，世人称为死汝。
English: The old river passes through Nanli and Beili, and flows through Meiyang County. The world calls it the Dead River.

古文：县取水名，故曰女阳也，又东径南顿县故城北，又东南径鲖阳城北，又东径邪乡城北，又东径固始县故城北。
现代文：该县是因水取名的，所以叫女阳。又往东流经南顿县旧城北边，又往东南流经绸阳城北边，又往东流经邸乡城北边，又往东流经固始县旧城北边。
English: The county is named after water, so it is called Meiyang. It also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Nantong County, and south-eastward through the north of the city of Zhiyang, and eastward through the north of the city of Mansion Township, and eastward through the north of the old city of Gushi County.

古文：《地理志》：县，故寝也。
现代文：《地理志》说：固始县是从前的寝。
English: "Geography" said: Gushi County is a former dormitory.

古文：寝丘在南，故藉丘名县矣。
现代文：因为寝丘在县南，所以按丘名来取县名。
English: Because the sleeping hill is in the south of the county, the name of the county was chosen according to the name of the hill.

古文：王莽更名之曰闰治。
现代文：王莽时改名为闰治。
English: Wang Mangshi changed his name to Yue Zhi.

古文：孙叔敖以土浸薄，取而为封，故能绵嗣。
现代文：孙叔敖因为这里土地潮湿贫痔，领了它作为封地，所以能使后代绵延不绝。
English: Because the land here is damp and poor, Sun Shuxuan took it as a fiefdom, so he could make future generations stretch endlessly.

古文：城北犹有《叔敖碑》。
现代文：城北还有叔敖碑。
English: In the north of the city, there is also a monument to Uncle Xuan.

古文：建武二年，司空李通，又慕叔敖受邑，故光武以嘉之，更名固始。
现代文：建武二年，司空李通也敬慕孙叔敖，领受这地方为封邑，所以光武帝嘉奖他，并改地名为固始。
English: In the second year of Jianwu, Sikuo Li Tong also admired Sun Shuxuan and received this place as a fief, so Emperor Guangwu praised him and changed the name of the land to Gushi.

古文：别汝又东径蔡冈北。冈上有平阳侯相蔡昭冢。
现代文：汝水支流又往东流经蔡冈北边，冈上有平阳侯宰相蔡昭的坟墓。
English: The Ruishui tributary also flows eastward through the northern side of Cai Gang, where the tomb of Cai Zhao, the Pingyang marquis and prime minister, is located.

古文：昭字叔明，周后稷之胄。
现代文：蔡昭字叔明，是周朝先祖后樱的后代。
English: Cai Zhaozhe Zi Shuming is a descendant of the Zhou Dynasty ancestor Hou Ying.

古文：冢有石阙，阙前有二碑，碑字论碎，不可复识。羊虎倾低，殆存而已。
现代文：坟墓有石网，石网前有两块石碑，碑上文字已剥蚀破碎，不能辨认了，墓前的石羊石虎也已倾倒，只不过还留着罢了。
English: The grave has a stone net, and in front of the stone net there are two stone tablets. The words on the tablets have been eroded and broken, and cannot be identified. The stone goat and stone tiger in front of the tomb have also been dumped, but they are still there.

古文：枝汝又东北流径胡城南 而东历女阴县故城西北。东人颍水。
现代文：汝水支流又往东北流经胡城南边，又往东流经女阴县旧城西北，往东注入颖水。
English: The Ruishui tributary flows to the northeast through the south side of Hucheng, and flows to the east through the northwest of the old city of Meiyin County, and injects Yingshui to the east.

古文：颍水又东径女阴县故城北。《史记。高祖功臣侯者年表》曰：高祖六年，封夏侯婴为侯国。王莽更名之曰汝坟也。
现代文：颖水又往东流经女阴县旧城北边，《史记•高祖功臣侯者年表》说：高祖六年前，把这地方封给夏侯婴，立为侯国，王莽改名为汝溃。
English: Yingshui also flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Meiyin County. "The Chronicle of Gaozu the Heroic Retainer" says: Six years ago, Gaozu granted this place to Xia Houying and established it as a vassal state, and Wang Mang changed its name to Ruxu.

古文：县在汝水之阴，故以汝水纳称。
现代文：该县在汝水南面，是因汝水而得名的。
English: The county is located in the south of Ruisui, and is named after Ruisui.

古文：城西有一城，故陶丘乡也，汝阴郡治。
现代文：城西有一座城，是从前的陶丘乡，也是汝阴郡的治所。
English: To the west of the city, there is a city, which was formerly Taoqiu Township, and is also the seat of Ruyin County.

古文：城外东北隅，有旧台，翼城若丘，俗谓之女郎台，虽经颓毁，犹自广崇，上有一井。
现代文：城外东北角有座旧台，靠着城边，像小丘一样，俗称女郎台，虽然已经颓毁，但旧基还很高大，上面还有一口井。
English: In the northeast corner outside the city, there is an old platform, leaning against the edge of the city, like a small hill, commonly known as the Girl's Platform. Although it has been destroyed, the old foundation is still very tall, and there is still a well above it.

古文：疑故陶丘乡，所未详。
现代文：推想起来可能这就是以前的陶丘乡，但不很清楚。
English: It may be inferred that this is the former Taoqiu Township, but it is not very clear.

古文：又东南至慎县，东南入于淮。
现代文：又往东南流，到了慎县东面，往南注人淮水。
English: It also flows to the southeast, to the east of Shen County, and pours water to the south.

古文：颍水东南流，左合上吴、百尺二水，俱承次塘细陂，南流注于颖。
现代文：颖水往东南流，左边汇合了上吴、百尺两条水，这两条水都承接次塘细破，往南流注入颖水。
English: Yingshui flows to the southeast, and the left side is joined by Shangwu and Baishu, both of which are connected to the Second Pond, and flow southward into Yingshui.

古文：颖水又东南，江肢水注之。
现代文：颖水又往东南流，江破水注入。
English: Yingshui also flows to the southeast, and the broken water of the river is injected.

古文：水受大漴陂，陂水南流，积为江陂，南径慎城西，侧城南流入于颍。
现代文：江破水接纳了大不涤破，阪水往南流，积聚成江破，往南流经慎城西边，沿着城旁南流注入颖水。
English: The broken water of the Yangtze River received the Dabao broken water, and the Han River flowed southward, accumulating into the broken water of the Yangtze River, flowing southward through the west side of Shencheng, and injecting the Ying water along the south stream of the city.

古文：颍水又径慎县故城南，县故楚邑，白公所居以拒吴。
现代文：颖水又流经慎县旧城南边，慎县是从前的楚邑，白公据守在这里，抗拒吴国。
English: Yingshui also flows through the southern part of the old city of Sheng County. Sheng County was formerly Chuy, and Baikong was based here, resisting Wu.

古文：《春秋左传》哀公十六年，吴人伐慎，白公败之。
现代文：《春秋左传》：哀公十六年前，吴人攻慎，白公打败了他们。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Sixteen years ago, the Wu people were cautious, and Bai Gong defeated them.

古文：王莽之慎治也。
现代文：王莽时叫慎治。
English: When the king is reckless, he calls for caution.

古文：世祖建武中，封刘赐为侯国。
现代文：世祖建武年间，把这地方封给刘赐，立为侯国。
English: During the reign of Emperor Jianwu, this place was given to Liu Zi and established as a principality.

古文：颍水又东南径蜩郭东，俗谓之郑城矣。又东南入于淮。
现代文：颖水又往东南流经绸燎郭东边，民间称为郑城；又往东南流，注入淮水。
English: Yingshui also flows to the southeast through the eastern side of Silk Road, which is popularly known as Zhengcheng; it also flows to the southeast, injecting Huai Shui.

古文：《春秋》昭公十二年，楚子狩于州来，次于颍尾。盖颍水之会淮也。
现代文：《春秋》：昭公十二年前，楚子在州来狩猎，在颖尾住宿，这是颖水和淮水的汇流处。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Twelve years ago, Chu Zi came to hunt in Zhou and stayed in Yingwei. This is the confluence of the Ying and Huai Rivers.

古文：洧水出河南密县西南马领山，水出山下。亦言出颍川阳城山，山在阳城县之东北，盖马领之统目焉。
现代文：洧水发源于河南郡密县西南的马领山，洧水发源于马领山下，也有说发源于颖川阳城山，阳城山在阳城县东北，是包括马领山在内的总山名。
English: Surabaya originated from Ma Lian Shan in the southwest of Mi County, Henan County. Surabaya originated from the lower part of Ma Lian Shan. It is also said that it originated from Yangcheng Mountain in Yingchuan. Yangcheng Mountain is in the northeast of Yangcheng County. It is the total mountain name including Ma Lian Shan.

古文：洧水东南流，径一故台南，俗谓之阳子台。又东径马岭坞北，坞在山上，坞下泉流北注，亦谓洧别源也，而入于洧水。
现代文：洧水往东南流经一座旧台南边，俗称阳子台；又往东流经马领坞北边，这个坞在山上，坞下的山泉往北流，有人说这是洧水的另一个源头，注入洧水。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the southeast through the southern side of an old platform, commonly known as the Yangzi platform; it also flows to the east through the northern side of the Ma Lian dock, this dock is on the mountain, and the mountain spring under the dock flows to the north. Some people say that this is another source of Surabaya's water, injecting Surabaya's water.

古文：东南流，径汉宏农太守张伯雅墓。
现代文：洧水东流，绥水汇入。绥水发源于方山绥溪，就是《山海经》所说的浮戏之山。
English: Surabaya water flows to the east, and Surabaya water flows in. Surabaya water originates from Fangshan and Surabaya Creek, which is the mountain of floating drama mentioned in the "Sankaikyo."

古文：茔域四周，垒石为垣，隅阿相降，列于绥水之阴庚门，表二石阙，夹对石兽于阙下，累前有石庙，列植三碑。
现代文：水往东南流经汉时弘农太守张伯雅墓，墓地四周用石块砌成围墙，沿山坡巡通而下，坐落在绥水的南岸。西门有两座石阀，石网两边有两只石兽，墓前有石庙，排着三块石碑。
English: The water flows to the southeast through the tomb of Zhang Boya, the Han Dynasty's Hongnong farmer and eunuch. The cemetery is surrounded by a stone wall, which runs down the hillside and is located on the southern shore of Surabaya. There are two stone valves at the west gate, two stone beasts on both sides of the stone net, a stone temple in front of the tomb, and three stone monuments.

古文：碑云；德字伯雅，河南密人也。
现代文：碑文上说：张德字伯雅，河南密县人。
English: The inscription reads: Zhang De Zi Baiya, a native of Mixian County, Henan Province.

古文：碑侧树两石人，有数石柱及诸石兽矣。
现代文：碑旁立着两座石人，还有几根石柱和一些石兽。
English: Next to the monument stand two stone figures, as well as several stone pillars and some stone animals.

古文：旧引绥水南人茔域。而为池沼。沼在丑地，皆蟾蠩吐水，石隍承溜。
现代文：从前引了绥水往南流入墓园，蓄水造成池沼，池在墓园中央，池上有石雕蛤蟆吐水，泻入石池中。
English: In the past, salty water flowed south into the cemetery, and the water storage caused a pond. The pond is in the center of the cemetery, and there is a stone sculpture on the pond, which spits water and pours into the stone pond.

古文：池之南，又建石楼。
现代文：池沼南面又建了石楼。
English: To the south of the pond, another stone tower was built.

古文：石庙前，又翼列诸兽。但物谢时沦，调毁殆尽。
现代文：石庙前面两旁排列着各种石兽，但因年代久远，物换星移，差不多都已风化剥蚀了。
English: Various stone animals are lined up on both sides of the front of the stone temple, but due to the passage of time, almost all of them have been weathered and eroded.

古文：夫富而非义，比之浮云，况复此乎？
现代文：不义而来的富贵，正如烟云过眼，好景不常，更何况这些东西呢？
English: Riches and honours acquired by unrighteousness are a fleeting vapor, fleeting indeed. How much more these things?

古文：王孙、士安斯为达矣。
现代文：杨王孙裸葬，皇甫士安以竹席裹尸，可说旷达了。
English: Yang Wangsun was buried naked, and the empress dowager's body was wrapped in a bamboo mat, which can be said to be extravagant.

古文：绥水又东南流，径上郭亭南，东南注洧。
现代文：绥水又往东南流经上郭亭南，往东南注入消水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the southern part of Shangguoting, and is injected into the southeast to eliminate water.

古文：洧水又东，囊荷水注之。
现代文：洧水又东流，襄荷水注入。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the east, and Yangshuo's water is injected.

古文：水出北山子节溪，亦谓之子节水，东南流注于洧。
现代文：襄荷水发源于北山子节溪，也称子节水，往东南流，注入洧水。
English: The Yanghe water originates from the North Mountain Zijie Creek, also known as the Zijie water, flows southeast and is infused with brackish water.

古文：洧水又东会沥滴泉，水出深溪之侧，泉流丈余，悬水散注。故世士以沥滴称，南流入洧水也。
现代文：洧水又往东流，汇合了沥滴泉水。此水从深溪旁流出，从一丈多高的岩头散流而下，所以文人把它称为沥滴泉，南流注入洧水。
English: Surabaya's water flows eastward, joining Surabaya's spring water. This water flows out from the side of the deep stream and flows down from the top of a high rock, so the literati call it Surabaya's spring, and the south stream injects Surabaya's water.

古文：东南过其县南。
现代文：往东南流过县南。
English: It flows southeast through the southern part of the county.

古文：流水又东南流，与承云二水合，俱出承云山，二源双导，东南流注于洧。世谓之东、西承云水。
现代文：洧水又往东南流，与从承云山流出的两条山泉汇合，这两条山泉都往东南流，注入洧水，世人称为东承云水与西承云水。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, merging with two mountain springs flowing from Mount Chengyun, both of which flow to the southeast, injecting surabaya water, known to the world as East Chengyun Water and West Chengyun Water.

古文：情水又东，微水注之。
现代文：洧水又往东流，微水注入。
English: Surge water also flows eastward, injecting small amounts of water.

古文：水出微山，东北流入于洧。
现代文：微水发源于微山，往东北流，注入洧水。
English: The micro-water originates from the micro-mountain, flows to the northeast, and is infused with brackish water.

古文：洧水又东径密县故城南。
现代文：洧水又往东流经密县老城南边。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the south side of the old town of Miyakojima.

古文：《春秋》谓之新城。
现代文：密县，《春秋》称为新城。
English: In My County, "Spring and Autumn" is called Xincheng.

古文：《左传》僖公六年，会诸侯伐郑，围新密，郑所以不时城也。
现代文：《左传》：僖六年前，与诸侯会师讨伐郑国，围困了新密，因郑兴工筑城不得其时，所以兴师讨伐。
English: "Zhu Chuan": Thirty-six years ago, Zheng gathered with the princes to fight against Zheng and besieged Xinmi. Because Zheng Xinggong was too late to build the city, he fought against Xing.

古文：今县城东门南侧，有汉密令卓茂祠。
现代文：现在县城东门南侧，有汉时密县县令卓茂祠。
English: Now, on the south side of the east gate of the county seat, there is the Han Shimi County Rongzhuo Ancestral Hall.

古文：茂字子康，南阳宛人。
现代文：卓茂字子康，南阳宛人，为人温雅宽厚，待人谦恭有礼。
English: Zhuo Mao, known as Zikang, was from Nanyang. He was gentle and generous, and treated people with courtesy.

古文：温仁宽雅，恭而有札，人有认其马者，茂与之，曰：若非公马，幸至丞相府归我。
现代文：一次，有个人误认他的马是自己的，卓茂就把马给他，说：这马如果不是您的，请您送到皿相府还我。
English: Once, there was a man who mistakenly thought his horse was his own. Zhuo Mao gave him the horse and said, "If this horse is not yours, please return it to me at Sarasofu."

古文：遂挽车而去。
现代文：说罢拉着车就走了。
English: Saying nothing, he drove away.

古文：后马主得马，谢而还之。
现代文：后来那个人找回了自己的马，就把马送还了卓茂，并向他道歉。
English: Later, the man retrieved his horse and returned it to Zhuo Mao, apologizing to him.

古文：任汉黄门郎，迁密令，举善而教，口无恶言，教化大行，道不拾遗，蝗不入境，百姓为之立祠，享祀不辍矣。
现代文：卓茂曾任汉朝黄门郎，调任密县县令，他以美德来教育人，口里不出恶言，于是社会风气大为改良，道不拾遗，连蝗虫也不侵入境内。百姓为他立祠，享受祭祀从没有停止过。
English: Zhuo Mao once served as Huangmen Lang of the Han Dynasty and was transferred to the position of county magistrate of Mixian County. He educated people with virtue and never said a bad word. As a result, the social ethos was greatly improved. The Tao did not pick up the remains, and even the locusts did not invade the territory. The people built a small shrine for him, and the enjoyment of sacrifices has never stopped.

古文：洧水又左会璅泉水，水出玉亭西，北流注于洧水。
现代文：洧水又在左边与瑛泉汇合。瑛泉水发源于玉亭西边，北流注入洧水。
English: Surabaya water also merges with Eizumi on the left. Eizumi water originates from the west side of Gyokutei, and the north stream flows into Surabaya water.

古文：洧水又东南与马关水合，水出玉亭下，东北流历马关，谓之马关水。又东北注于洧。
现代文：洧水又往东南流，与马关水汇合。马关水发源于玉亭下，往东北流经马关，称为马关水；又往东北流，注入洧水。
English: The Surabaya water flows to the southeast and merges with the Maguan water. The Maguan water originates under the Jade Pavilion and flows to the northeast through the Maguan, known as the Maguan water; it flows to the northeast and injects the Surabaya water.

古文：洧水又东合武定水，水北出武定冈，西南流，又屈而东南流，径零鸟坞西，侧坞东南流。
现代文：洧水又东流，与武定水汇合。武定水发源于北方的武定冈，往西南流，又拐弯转向东南，流经零鸟坞西边，沿着坞边往东南流。
English: The Wuding Water originates from the Wuding Hill in the north, flows to the southwest, turns to the southeast, flows through the west of the Zero Bird Dock, and flows to the southeast along the dock.

古文：坞侧有水，悬流赴壑，一匹有余，直注涧下，沦积成渊。
现代文：坞旁有一挂瀑布，凌空飞泻而下，高达四丈余，直注山涧下，积成一个大深潭。
English: Next to the dock, there is a waterfall. It cascades down from the sky, reaching a height of more than four meters, and pours directly down the mountain, accumulating into a large deep pool.

古文：嬉游者瞩望，奇为佳观。俗人睹此水挂于坞侧，遂目之为零鸟水。东南流入于洧。
现代文：游人眺望，无不称为奇观；当地百姓见此水挂在坞侧，就把它称为零鸟水，水往东南流，注入洧水。
English: Tourists look at it and call it a wonder; local people see this water hanging on the dock side and call it the water of birds. The water flows to the southeast and is filled with brackish water.

古文：洧水又东与虎牍山水合，水发南山虎牍溪，东北流入洧。
现代文：洧水又东流，与虎犊山水汇合。此水发源于南山的虎犊溪，往东北流注入洧水。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the east, where it merges with the water of the Houguang Mountains. This water originates from the Houguang Creek in the Nanshan Mountains and flows into Surabaya's water from the northeast.

古文：洧水又东南，赤涧水注之。水出武定冈，东南流径皇台冈下。又历冈东，东南流注于洧。
现代文：洧水又往东南流，赤涧水注入，此水发源于武定冈，往东南流经皇台冈下，又流经冈东，往东南流注入洧水。
English: This water originates from Wuding Mountain, flows southeast through the lower part of Wangtaigang Mountain, flows through the eastern part of the mountain, and flows southeast to the south-east, where it injects the water.

古文：南水又东南流，潧水注之。
现代文：洧水又往东南流，僧水注入。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast, and monk's water is injected.

古文：洧水又东南径郐城南。《世本》曰：陆终娶于鬼方氏之妹，谓之女聩，是生六子，孕三年，启其左胁，三人出焉。破其右胁，三人出焉。
现代文：洧水又往东南流经部城南边，《世本》说：陆终娶了鬼方氏的妹妹女馈为妻，女馈怀孕三年生了六个儿子：打开她的左腋生出三个婴孩，打开右腋又生出三个婴孩。
English: The water flowed south-eastwards to the south of the city of Jingbu. "World Book" said: Lu eventually married the sister of the Kifang clan, Jiayu. Jiayu was pregnant for three years and gave birth to six sons: she opened her left womb and gave birth to three babies, and she opened her right womb and gave birth to three babies.

古文：其四曰莱言，是为郐人，郐人者，郑是也。
现代文：第四个儿子名莱，就是部人的祖先，邻人的居地就是郑。
English: The fourth son, Nam Lai, is the ancestor of the subordinates, and the neighbor's residence is Zheng.

古文：郑桓公问于史伯曰：王室多难，予安逃死乎？
现代文：郑桓公问史伯：王室多患难，我能到那里去逃命呢？
English: Zheng Huan Gong asked Shi Bo: The royal family is in a lot of trouble, where can I go to escape?

古文：史伯曰：虢、郐，公之民，迁之可也。
现代文：史伯说：藐、邻两地都是您的百姓，您可以迁到那边去。
English: Shibo said, "Your people live in my hometown and the neighboring two places. You can move there."

古文：郑氏东迁，虢、郐献十邑焉。
现代文：于是郑氏东迁，貌、会体献出了十座城。
English: As a result, the Zheng clan moved eastward, and the appearance and organization of the clan gave rise to ten cities.

古文：刘桢云：郐在豫州外方之北，北邻于虢，都荣之南，左济右洛，居两水之间，食溱、洧焉。
现代文：刘祯说：邹在豫州外方以北，北面与貌相邻，都城在荣泽南面，左边有济水，右边是洛水，居于两水之间，以漆、清为封地。
English: Liu Zhe said: Zhe is located in the north of the outlying area of Yuzhou, and is adjacent to Yu in the north. The capital city is located in the south of Rongze, with Jishui on the left and Luoshui on the right. It is located between the two waters, and is fiefed by Urushi and Qing.

古文：徐广曰：郐在密县，妘姓矣，不得在外方之北也。
现代文：徐广说：部在密县，会巧人姓坛，不可能在外方以北。
English: Xu Guang said: "Being in Mixian County, it is impossible to be successful in the north of the country.

古文：洧水又东径阴权北，水有梁焉，俗谓是济为参辰口。
现代文：洧水又往东流经阴坂北边，水上有桥，民间称这渡口为参辰口。
English: Surabaya water also flows eastward through the north side of Yinzhan. There is a bridge over the water, and people call this crossing the Sancheng.

古文：《左传》襄公九年，晋代郑，济于阴坂，次于阴口而还是也。
现代文：《左传》：襄公九年前，晋攻郑，在阴坂渡水，在阴口驻扎了几天退回。
English: "Left Biography": Nine years ago, Prince Xiang attacked Zheng, crossed the water in Yinzhan, and was stationed in Yinkou for a few days before returning.

古文：杜预曰：阴坂，洧津也。
现代文：杜预说：阴坂是洧水上的渡口。
English: Du Yu said: Yinzaka is a ferry port on the Surabaya River.

古文：服虔曰：水南曰阴。口者，水口也。参、阴声相近，盖传呼之谬耳。
现代文：服虔说：水的南面称阴，口是指水口，参、阴音相近，是由于口头相传的错误。
English: Fuxian said: the south side of the water is called yin, and the mouth refers to the water outlet. The similarity between the sounds of "sheng" and "yin" is due to an error passed down orally.

古文：又晋居参之分，实沈之土。
现代文：此外，晋国地处商宿和参宿的分野，属于实沈之星的地域；郑国地处大辰星的分野，是阔伯的土地。
English: In addition, Jin Province is located in the area of business lodgings and guesthouses, belonging to the area of the star of the real Shen; Zheng Province is located in the area of the big star, is the land of the broad.

古文：郑处大辰之野，阙伯之地，军师所次，故济得其名也。又东过郑县南，潧水从西北来注之。洧水又东径新郑县故城中。
现代文：晋军在这里驻扎过，渡口因此得名。又往东流过郑县南边，曾水从西北流来注人。洧水又往东流经新郑县旧城中。
English: Jin's army was stationed here, hence the name of the ferry. It also flowed eastward through the southern part of Zheng County, Zengshui flowed from the northwest and poured people. Surabaya water also flowed eastward through the old city of Xinzheng County.

古文：《左传》襄公元年，晋韩厥、荀偃帅诸侯伐郑，入其郛，败其徒兵于洧上是也。
现代文：《左传》：襄公元年前，晋国的韩厥、荀堰率领诸侯军攻打郑国，攻入城中，在洧水上打败了郑国的步兵。
English: "Left Biography": Xiang Before the year 1000, Han Jue and Weiyan of Jin led the vassal army to attack Zheng, entered the city, and defeated the infantry of Zheng on the floodplain.

古文：《竹书纪年》：晋文侯二年，周惠王子多父伐郐，克之，乃居郑父之丘，名之曰郑，是曰桓公。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：晋文侯二年前，周惠王的儿子多父伐邻，攻克后就住在郑父之丘，取名为郑，这就是郑桓公。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Two years before the Jin Dynasty, the son of King Zhou Hui attacked his neighbors. After the conquest, he lived in the hill of his father, and was named Zheng. This is Zheng Huan Gong.

古文：皇甫士安《帝王世纪》云：或言县故有熊氏之墟，黄帝之所都也。郑氏徙居之，故曰新郑矣。
现代文：皇甫士安《帝王世纪》说：有人说该县的有熊氏之墟，是黄帝的都城，郑氏移居到那里，所以称新郑。
English: Huang Fu Shi An from "The Century of Emperors" said: Some people say that the county has the ruins of the Xiong clan, is the capital of the Yellow Emperor, and the Zheng clan moved there, so it is called New Zheng.

古文：城内有遗祠，名曰章乘是也，洧水又东，为洧渊水。《春秋传》曰：龙斗于时门之外洧渊，即此潭也。
现代文：城内还留有一座祠庙，名叫章乘。洧水又东流，称为洧渊水，《春秋传》说：龙在时门外的洧渊相斗，就是这个水潭。
English: There is also an ancestral temple left in the city, named Zhang Rong. This water flows to the east, and is known as the Yanyuan Water. "Spring and Autumn Legend" says: Dragons fight in the Yanyuan outside the time gate, which is this water pool.

古文：今洧水自郑城西北入，而东南流，径郑城南。城之南门内，旧外蛇与内蛇斗，内蛇死。
现代文：今天浦水从郑城西北流入，往东南流经郑城南边，城的南门内，从前外蛇与内蛇曾在这里相斗，内蛇斗死。
English: Today, Pushui flows from the northwest of Zhengcheng to the southeast, passing through the southern edge of Zhengcheng, inside the southern gate of the city. In the past, the outer snake and the inner snake fought here, and the inner snake died in the fight.

古文：六年，大夫傅瑕杀郑子纳厉公，是其征也。
现代文：六年，大夫傅瑕杀了郑子，接纳了厉公，蛇斗就是这件事的征兆。
English: Six years ago, Dr. Fu Ke killed Zheng Zi and accepted Li Gong, and the snake fight was a sign of this.

古文：水南有郑庄公望母台。
现代文：水南有郑庄公的望母台。
English: There is Zheng Zhuanggong's watchtower in the south of the country.

古文：庄姜恶公寤生，与段京居。
现代文：庄姜十分讨厌庄公，因为庄姜生庄公时难产。
English: Zhuang Jiang hated Zhuang Gong very much, because Zhuang Jiang had difficulty giving birth to Zhuang Gong.

古文：段不弟，姜氏无训。
现代文：她与段一起居住在京城里。
English: She lives with Duan in the capital, Wuchang.

古文：庄公居夫人于城颍。
现代文：段对待长兄庄公不好，姜氏又不管教，于是庄公把姜氏迁往城颖去居住，发誓说：不到黄泉，决不与她相见。
English: Duan did not treat his eldest brother Zhuang Gong well, and Mr. Jiang did not teach, so Zhuang Gong moved Mr. Jiang to Chengying to live, and swore that he would never see her until he went to hell.

古文：誓曰：不及黄泉，无相见也，故成台以望母，用伸在心之思，感考叔之言，忻大隧之赋：泄泄之慈有嘉，融融之孝得常矣。洧水又东与黄水合，《经》所谓潧水，非也。
现代文：后来庄公悔悟，所以筑台望母，表示自己内心的思念。他听了颖考叔一席话，于是在隧道中与母亲相见。母子作赋，表达了融融泄泄的慈母之情和孝子之心，母子关系得以恢复，值得称颂。洧水又东流，与黄水汇合，《水经》说是僧水，其实不对。
English: Later, Zhuang Gong repented, so he built a platform to look up to his mother, expressing his inner thoughts. He listened to Ying Kao's uncle's words, so he met his mother in the tunnel. Mother and son made a gift, expressing the melting and leaking of motherly love and filial piety, and the mother-child relationship was restored, worthy of praise. Surabaya also flows east, merging with Huangshui, and "Water Sutra" says it is monk water, but it is actually wrong.

古文：黄水出太山南黄泉，东南流径华城西。
现代文：黄水发源于太山南麓的黄泉，往东南流经华城西边。
English: The yellow water originates from the Yellow Spring at the southern foot of Mount Tai and flows southeast to the west of Hwaseong.

古文：史伯谓郑桓公曰：华，君之土也。
现代文：史伯对郑桓公说：华城原是您的土地。
English: Shi Bo said to Zheng Huan Gong: Hwaseong was originally your land.

古文：韦昭曰：华，国名矣。
现代文：韦昭说：华是国名。
English: Wei Zhao said: "Hua is the name of the country.

古文：《史记》秦昭王三十三年，白起攻魏，拔华阳，走芒卯，斩首十五万。
现代文：《史记》：秦昭王三十三年前，白起进攻魏国，攻克华阳，直趋芒卯，杀了十五万人。
English: "Histories": Thirty-three years ago, Qin Zhaowang attacked Wei, conquered Huayang, and killed 150,000 people.

古文：可马彪曰：华阳，亭名，在密县。
现代文：司马彪说：华阳是亭名，在密县。
English: Sima Biao said: Huayang is the name of the pavilion, in the county.

古文：嵇叔夜常采药于山泽。学琴于古人，即此亭也。
现代文：稽叔夜常在山间和泽地采药，曾在这个亭里向古人的神灵学琴。
English: Uncle Jin often went to the mountains and marshes at night to collect medicines. In this pavilion, he once learned to play the piano from the spirits of the ancients.

古文：黄水东南流，又与一水合。
现代文：黄水往东南流，又与一水汇合。
English: The Yellow Water flows to the southeast and merges with the First Water.

古文：水出华城南冈，一源两分，泉流派别，东为七虎涧水，西流即是水也。
现代文：这水发源于华城南冈，一条源流分为两条，东边一条叫七虎涧水，西边的就是这条水。
English: This water originates from the South Hill of Hwaseong, a headstream is divided into two, the eastern one is called the Seven Tigers Water, and the western one is this water.

古文：其水西南流，注于黄水，黄即《春秋》之所谓黄崖也。
现代文：水往西南流，注入黄水。黄，就是《春秋》所说的黄崖。
English: The water flows to the southwest, injecting yellow water. Yellow is the yellow cliff mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：故杜预云：苑陵县西有黄水者也。
现代文：所以杜预说：苑陵县西有一条黄水。
English: Therefore, Du Yuan said: There is a yellow water in the west of Yuanling County.

古文：又东南流，水侧有二台，谓之积粟台，台东即二水之会也。
现代文：黄水又往东南流，水旁有两座台，称为积粟台，台东就是这两条水的汇流处。
English: The Yellow Water also flows to the southeast, and there are two platforms next to the water, known as the Cumulus Platform. Taitung is the confluence of these two waters.

古文：捕獐山水注之，水东出捕獐山，西流注于黄水。
现代文：接着，捕璋山水又注入，这水发源于东方的捕璋山，西流注入黄水。
English: Next, the water from Mount Trawangan was injected. This water originated from Mount Trawangan in the east, and the west stream was injected with yellow water.

古文：黄水又南至郑城北，东转于城之东北，与黄沟合。
现代文：黄水又往南流到郑城北边，向东转，在郑城东北与黄沟汇合。
English: The Yellow River flows south to the north of Zhengcheng, turns east, and joins the Yellow Ditch in the northeast of Zhengcheng.

古文：水出捕獐山，东南流至郑城东，北入黄水。
现代文：黄沟发源于捕璋山，往东南流到郑城东边，往北注入黄水。
English: The Yellow Ditch originates from the Fangye Mountain, flows southeast to the east of Zhengcheng, and injects yellow water to the north.

古文：黄水又东南，径龙渊东南，七里沟水注之，水出隙候亭东南平地，东注，又屈而南流，径升城东，又南历烛城西，即郑大夫烛之武邑也。
现代文：黄水又往东南流经龙渊东南，七里沟水注入。这条水发源于隙候亭东南的平地，往东流，又转弯向南流经升城东边，又往南流经烛城西边，就是郑国大夫烛之武的封邑。
English: The yellow water flowed to the southeast through the southeast of Longyuan, and the seven-mile ditch water was injected. This water originated from the flat land southeast of the gap waiting room, flowed to the east, and then turned south to flow through the east of Liangcheng, and flowed south to the west of the candle city, which is the fief of Zheng Guotong's candle.

古文：又南流注于洧水也。
现代文：又往南流注入洧水。
English: Surabaya water was also injected into the southern stream.

古文：又东南过长社县北，洧水东南流，南濮、北濮二水人焉，濮音仆。
现代文：又往东南流过长社县北边，洧水往东南流，南淮、北淮两水注入。淮音仆。
English: It also flows to the southeast across the northern edge of Chosha County, and the Suruga water flows to the southeast, and the South Huai and North Huai waters are injected.

古文：洧水又东南与龙渊水合，水出长社县西北，有故沟，上承洧水，水盛则通注龙渊，水减则律渠辍流。
现代文：洧水又往东南流，与龙渊水汇合。龙渊水发源于长社县西北，有一条旧沟，上口承接洧水，水大时就与龙渊相通，水浅时沟渠就断流。
English: The Longyuan Water originates from the northwest of Chosha County. There is an old ditch, and the upper mouth is connected to the Longyuan Water. When the water is high, it is connected to the Longyuan Water, and when the water is shallow, the ditch is cut off.

古文：其渎中泉，南注东转为渊，绿水平潭，清洁澄深，俯视游鱼，类若乘空矣，所谓渊无潜鳞也，又东径长社县故城北，郑之长葛邑也。
现代文：这条旧沟中间有一条谐泉，南流东转，形成一片深潭，绿水平波，澄洁深沉，俯视游鱼，有如在空中游动，所谓深潭里没有深藏不露的鱼，就指这情况。龙渊水又往东流经长社县旧城北边，这里原是郑国的长葛邑。
English: There is a harmonious spring in the middle of this old ditch. The south stream turns east, forming a deep pool. The green horizontal wave is clear and deep. Looking down at the fish, it is like swimming in the air. The so-called deep pool does not contain fish that are hidden. This is the case. Longyuan Water also flows eastward through the north of the old city of Changsha County. This was originally Changgeyun in Zhengzhou.

古文：《春秋》隐公五年，宋人伐郑，围长葛是也。
现代文：《春秋》：隐公五年前，宋人攻打郑国，围困长葛，就指这里。
English: "Spring and Autumn": Five years ago, the Song people attacked Zheng Guo and besieged Changge, referring to here.

古文：后社树暴长，故曰长社，魏颖川郡治也。
现代文：后来社庙前有一株树突然长高了，所以称为长社。魏时，这里是颖川郡的治所。
English: Later, a tree suddenly grew tall in front of the shrine and temple, so it was called Chosha. In the Wei Dynasty, this was the capital of Yingchuan County.

古文：余以景明中出宰兹郡，于南城西侧，修立客馆。版筑既兴，于土下得一树根，甚壮大，疑是故社怪长暴茂者也。
现代文：我于景明年间，出任该郡太守，在南城西侧修建客馆，正当兴工挖土筑墙时，从地下挖出一条树根，十分粗大，想来可能就是过去社庙前那棵暴长的怪树的根。
English: During my second year in Jing, I served as the county governor of the county and built a guest house on the west side of Nancheng. When I was digging the earth to build the wall, I dug out a tree root from the ground. It was very large, and I thought it might be the root of the strange tree that had grown out of control in front of the temple.

古文：稽之故说，县无龙渊水名，盖出近世矣。京相璠《春秋土地名》曰：长社北界有禀水。但是水导于隍堑之中，非北界之所谓。
现代文：查考旧时的有关记载，该县没有龙渊的水名，那是近代才出现的，京相潘《春秋土地名》说：长社北界有察水，但这条水流过深沟之中，并不是说在北界。
English: An examination of old-time relevant records shows that the county does not have a water name for Longyuan, which only appeared in modern times. Beijing Xiangpan "Spring and Autumn Land Names" said: There is water in the northern boundary of Chosha, but this water flows through a deep ditch, not in the northern boundary.

古文：又按京、社地名，并云：长社县北有长葛乡。斯乃县徙于南矣。
现代文：又按京、杜《地名》都说，长社县北面有长葛乡，这表明县是向南迁移了。
English: According to Beijing and Du's "place names," there is Changge Township in the north of Chosha County, which indicates that the county has moved to the south.

古文：然则是水即禀水也。
现代文：这样看来，这条水就是察水了。
English: From this point of view, this water is just water.

古文：其水又东南径棘城北。《左传》所谓楚子伐郑，救齐，次于棘泽者也。
现代文：水又往东南流经棘城北边，《左传》说：楚子伐郑救齐，驻兵于棘泽，指的就是这里。
English: The water flowed south-east again, passing through the north side of Spine City. Zuo Zhuan said: "Chu Zihua Zheng Zheqi, stationed in Spine Lake, refers to here."

古文：禀水又东，左注洧水。
现代文：察水又往东流，从左边注入洧水。
English: The surveying water flowed eastward again, injecting salty water from the left.

古文：洧水又东南，分为二水，其枝水东北流庄沙，一水东径许昌县。
现代文：洧水又往东南流，分为两条水：支流往东北流，注入沙水；另一条往东流经许昌县。
English: Surabaya's water flows to the southeast and is divided into two streams: a tributary flows to the northeast, injecting sand and water; the other flows eastward through Xuchang County.

古文：故许男国也，姜姓。四岳之后矣。
现代文：许昌从前是男爵的封国，姓姜，是四岳的后代。
English: Xu Chang was once a vassal of a baron, surnamed Jiang, and is a descendant of Si Yue.

古文：《穆天子传》所谓天子见许男于洧上者也。汉章帝建初四年，封马光为侯国。
现代文：《穆天子传》说：天子在消上会见许男。汉章帝建初四年，把这里封给马光，立为侯国。
English: "Biography of Mu Tianzi" said: "Tianzi met with Xu Man in Qianjiang. In the first four years of the Han Dynasty, Emperor Zhang gave this place to Ma Guang and established it as a principality.

古文：《春秋佐助期》曰：汉以许失天下。及魏承汉历，遂改名许昌也。
现代文：《春秋佐助期》说：汉因为许失了天下，到魏继汉而立，就改名为许昌。
English: "Spring, Autumn and Succession" said: Han lost the world because of Xu, and when Wei succeeded Han, he changed his name to Xu Chang.

古文：城内有景福殿基，魏朗帝太和中造，准价八百余万。
现代文：城内有景福殿旧基，景福殿建于魏明帝太和年间一，造价达八百多万。
English: There is the old foundation of the Gingfu Hall in the city. The Gingfu Hall was built during the reign of Emperor Taizu in the Wei and Ming dynasties, with a construction cost of more than eight million yuan.

古文：洧水又东，人汶仓城内，俗以是水为汶水，故有汶仓之名，非也，盖洧水之邸阁耳。
现代文：洧水又往东流入坟仓城内，民间把这条水叫汶水，所以有坟仓的名称，其实不对。那是清水的仓储城。
English: Surabaya water flows eastward into the graveyard city, and the people call this water Wenshui, so the name of the graveyard is actually wrong. That is the storage city of clear water.

古文：洧水又东径鄢陵县故城南。
现代文：清水又往东南流经鄙陵县旧城南边。
English: The clear water also flows southeast through the southern part of the old city of Dangling County.

古文：李奇曰：六国为安陵也。昔秦求易地，唐且受使于此。
现代文：李奇说：六国时称安陵，昔日秦国要求调换土地，唐且接受使命曾到过这里。
English: Li Qi said: the Six Kingdoms was called Anling at that time. In the past, the Qin Kingdom requested to exchange land, and the Tang Dynasty accepted the mission and came here.

古文：汉高帝十二年，封都尉朱濞为侯国。王莽更名左亭。
现代文：汉高帝十二年前，将这里封给都尉朱滇，立为侯国，王莽改名为左亭。
English: Twelve years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to Captain Zhu Xi, establishing it as a principality, and Wang Mang changed its name to Zuoting.

古文：洧水又东，鄢陵陂水注之，水出鄢陵南陂东，西南流，注于洧水也。
现代文：洧水又东流，都陵破水注入。此水出自都陵南破东边，往西南流，注入洧水。
English: Surabaya's water also flows to the east, and is injected into the broken water of the capital. This water flows from the east of the broken water of the capital to the southwest, and is injected into Surabaya's water.

古文：又东南过新汲县东北，洧水自鄢陵东径桐丘南，俗谓之天井陵，又曰冈，非也。
现代文：又往东南流经新汲县东北，洧水从都陵往东流经桐丘南，俗称天井陵，又称天井冈，都不对。
English: It also flows to the southeast through the northeast of Xinqu County, and the Surabaya River flows from the Capital Mausoleum to the east through the south of Tongqiu, commonly known as the Ceiling Mausoleum, also known as the Ceiling Hill.

古文：洧水又屈而南流，水上有梁，谓之桐门桥，藉桐丘以取称，亦言取桐门亭而著目焉。然不知亭之所在，未之详也。
现代文：洧水又转弯向南流，水上有桥，称为桐门桥，是按桐丘取名；也有人说是因桐门亭得名，但不知这亭在什么地方，这些也弄不清楚。
English: Surabaya turned south again, and there was a bridge over the water, called Tongmen Bridge, named after Tongyu; some people said it was named after Tongmen Pavilion, but I don't know where this pavilion is, and I can't figure it out.

古文：洧水又东南，径桐丘城。
现代文：清水又往东南流经桐丘城。
English: The clear water then flows southeast through Tongqiu City.

古文：《春秋左传》庄公二十八年，楚代郑。郑人将奔桐丘，即此城也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：庄公二十八年前，楚国攻打郑国，郑人逃奔到桐丘，就是此城。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Twenty-eight years before Zhuang Gong, Chu attacked Zheng, and Zheng fled to Tongqiu, which is this city.

古文：杜预《春秋释地》曰：颖川，许昌城东北，京相璠曰：郑地也。
现代文：杜预《春秋释地》说：桐丘城在颖川许昌城东北。京相潘说：桐丘是郑的地方。
English: Du Yuanyuan, "Spring and Autumn Interpretation," said: Tongqiu City is in the northeast of Yingchuan Xuchang City. Beijing Xiangpan said: Tongqiu is Zheng's place.

古文：今图无，而城见存，西南去许昌故城可三十五里。
现代文：今天地图上没有城，实际上却还在，西南距许昌旧城约三十五里，民间叫堤。
English: Today, there is no city on the map, but in fact it is still there. The southwest is about thirty-five miles from the old city of Xuchang, and people call it a dike.

古文：俗名之曰堤，其城南即长堤，固洧水之北防也。西面桐丘，其城邪长而不方，盖凭丘之称，即城之名矣。洧水又东径新汲县故城北。
现代文：城南就是长堤，是原来清水北岸的堤防。西边面对桐丘，城就是按此丘而取名的，城形呈斜长状，而不方正。洧水又往东流经新汲县旧城北边。
English: To the south of the city is the long embankment, which was originally the embankment on the north bank of the Clear Water. To the west, it faces Tongqiu Hill, after which the city was named. The shape of the city is oblique and elongated, rather than square. The Clear Water also flows eastwards through the north of the old city of Xinqu County.

古文：汉宣帝神雀二年。置于许之汲乡曲洧城，以河内有汲县，故加新也。
现代文：汉宣帝神雀二年前，在许的汲乡曲淆城设县，因为河内已有汲县，所以称新汲。
English: Two years ago, Emperor Han Xuan set up a county in Xu's Qiu Township. Because Hanoi already had a county, it was called Xinqiu.

古文：城在洧水南堤上。
现代文：城座落在消水的南堤上。
English: The city is located on the south embankment of the river Tusa.

古文：又东，洧水右迤为濩陂。
现代文：洧水又东流，向右分支流出，形成镬破。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the east, flowing out to the right branch, forming the Surabaya Gap.

古文：洧水又径匡城南，扶沟之匡亭也。
现代文：洧水又流经匡城南边，就是扶沟的匡亭。
English: Surabaya water also flows through the southern side of Kuangcheng, that is, Kuangdiao in Fuguo.

古文：又东，洧水左迤为鸭子陂，谓之大穴口也。
现代文：又往东流，洧水向左分支流出，形成鸭子破，出水口称为大穴口。
English: It also flows eastward, and the salty water flows out to the left branch, forming a duck hole, and the outlet is called a large hole.

古文：又东南过茅城邑之东北。洧水自大穴口，东南径洧阳城，西南径茅城东北又南，左合甲庚沟。
现代文：又往东南流过茅城邑东北，洧水从大穴口往东南流经清阳城西边，往南流经茅城东北；又南流，在左边与甲庚沟汇合。
English: In addition, it flows southeast through the northeast of Maocheng. The water of Lishui flows southeast from the mouth of the large hole through the west of Qingyang City and flows south through the northeast of Maocheng. It also flows south and merges with Jiagenggou on the left.

古文：沟水上承洧水于大穴口，东北枝分，东径洧阳故城南，俗谓之复阳城，非也。盖洧、复字类音读变。
现代文：沟水上流在大穴口承接洧水，往东北分出支流，往东流经淆阳旧城南边。洧阳城民间叫复阳城，其实不是，因为洧、复两字形近而误，读音也就随着字而改变了。
English: The upstream stream of the ditch joins the Sui water at the mouth of the large hole, branches off to the northeast, and flows eastward through the south of the old city of Suiyang. The people of Suiyang City call it Fuyang City, but in fact it is not, because the  and 复 are close to each other, and the pronunciation has changed with the characters.

古文：汉建安中，封司空祭酒郭奉孝为侯国，其水又东南，为鸭子陂。陂广十五里，余波南入甲庚沟，西注洧，东北泻沙。
现代文：汉朝建安年间，把这里封给司空祭酒郭奉孝，立为侯国。沟水又往东南流，形成了鸭子破，破宽广十五里，肢水向南注入甲庚沟；甲庚沟从东北导入沙水，往西注入淆水。
English: During the Jian'an period of the Han Dynasty, this place was given to the priest of the Sky Festival, Sake Guo Fengxiao, and was established as a vassal state. The ditch water also flowed to the southeast, forming a duck gap, the gap was fifteen miles wide, and the limb water was injected into the south of the Jiagong ditch; Jiagong ditch introduced sand water from the northeast, and injected muddy water to the west.

古文：洧水又南径一故城西，世谓之思乡城，西去洧水十五里，洧水又右合濩陂水，水上承洧水于新汲县，南径新汲县故城东，又南积而为陂。陂之西北，即长社城。
现代文：消水又往南流经一座旧城西边，世人称为思乡城，西距洧水十五里。洧水又在右边与菠破水汇合。此水上口在新汲县承接清水，往南流经新汲县旧城东边，又往南流，积水成为破塘，破塘西北就是长社城。
English: The Suisui also flows southward through the west side of an old city, known to the world as the homesick city, fifteen miles west of the Surabaya. The Surabaya also merges with the Spinabaya on the right. This water outlet connects the clear water in Shinkumi County, flows southward through the east side of the old city in Shinkumi County, and flows southward, the accumulated water becomes a pond, and the northwest of the pond is the Chosha City.

古文：陂水东翼洧堤。
现代文：破水的东边有清水堤防翼护，西边面对茅邑。
English: On the east side of the water break, there is a clear water dike, and on the west side, there is a cottage.

古文：西面茅邑，自城北门列筑堤道，迄于此冈，世尚谓之茅冈。
现代文：从城北门开始修筑堤道，直到山冈边，人们还称为茅冈。
English: The construction of the causeway started from the north gate of the city, until the edge of the mountain, which is also known as Mao Gang.

古文：即《经》所谓茅城邑也。
现代文：茅邑就是《水经》里所说的茅城邑。
English: Khao village is the Khao town mentioned in the "Water Sutra."

古文：陂水北出，东入洧津，西北纳异流。又东过习阳城西，折入于颍。
现代文：破水从北面流出，东流注入洧水。又往东流过习阳城西边，转弯注人颖水。
English: The broken water flows out from the north, and the east stream injects the brackish water. It also flows eastward through the west side of Xiyang City, and turns into the Jinying water.

古文：洧水又东南径辰亭东，俗谓之田城，非也。
现代文：洧水又往东南流经辰亭东边，俗称田城，说得不对。
English: Surabaya also flows southeast through the eastern side of Chenting, commonly known as Tiancheng, which is not correct.

古文：盖田、辰声相近，城亭音韵联故也。
现代文：大概是田、辰音近，城、亭韵同而音讹的缘故。
English: This is probably due to the fact that Tian (field) and Tatsune (hour) are close together, while Cheng (town) and Ting (temple) have the same rhyme scheme.

古文：《经》书：鲁宣公十一年，楚子、陈侯、郑伯盟于辰陵也。
现代文：《春秋经》载，鲁宣公十一年前，楚子、陈侯、郑伯在辰陵会盟。
English: According to the "Spring and Autumn Annals," eleven years before Lu Xuan Gong, Chu Zi, Chen Hou, and Zheng Bo formed an alliance in Chenling.

古文：京相璠曰：颍川长平有故辰亭。
现代文：京相潘说：颖川长平有旧辰亭。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: Yingchuan Changping has the old Chenting.

古文：杜预曰：长平县东南有辰亭。
现代文：杜预说：长平县东南有辰亭。
English: Du Yu said: In the southeast of Changping County, there is Chenting.

古文：今此城在长平城西北，长平城在东南，或杜氏之谬，《传》书之误耳。
现代文：今天此城在长平城西北，长平城在东南，也许杜氏的差错是因《传》里记载失误引起的吧。
English: Today, this city is in the northwest of Changping City, and Changping City is in the southeast. Perhaps Mr. Du's mistake was caused by a mistake recorded in "Biography."

古文：长平东南涝陂北畔，有一阜，东西减里，南北五十许步，俗谓之新亭台。又疑是杜氏所谓辰亭，而未之详也。
现代文：长平东南淋破北岸有一座土丘；东西长近一里，南北宽五十来步，俗称新亭台，也许就是杜氏所说的辰亭了，但不大清楚。
English: In the southeast of Changping, there is a mound of earth that breaks through the north shore. It is nearly one mile long from east to west and fifty paces wide from north to south. It is commonly known as Xin Ting Tai. It may be what Du Shi called Chenting, but it is not clear.

古文：洧水又南径长平县故城西，王莽之长正也。
现代文：洧水又往南流经长平县旧城西边，王莽时称为长正。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the west of the old city of Changping County. Wang Mangshi is called Changzheng.

古文：洧水又南，分为二水，枝分东出，谓之五梁沟，径习阳城北，又东径赭丘南，丘上有故城。
现代文：洧水又南流分为两条，向东分流的称为五梁沟，流经习阳城北边，又往东流经赫丘南边，丘上有旧城。
English: Surabaya's southern stream is divided into two, the eastern branch is called Wulianggou, flowing through the northern side of Xiyang City, and flowing eastward through the southern side of Hechu, with the old city on the hill.

古文：《郡国志》曰：长平故属汝南县，有赭丘城，即此城也。
现代文：《郡国志》说：长平从前属汝南郡，县里有储丘城，就指此城。
English: "County National History" said: Changping used to belong to Runan County, and there was a storage hill town in the county, referring to this town.

古文：又东径长平城南，东注涝陂。
现代文：淆水又往东流经长平城南边，往东注入涝破。
English: The muddied water then flows eastward through the southern side of Changping City, and flows eastward into the Ruohe Canal.

古文：洧水南出，谓之鸡笼水，故水会有笼口之名矣。
现代文：洧水向南流出，称为鸡笼水，所以汇流处有笼口的地名。
English: Surabaya water flows out to the south and is called chicken cage water, so there is a place name of cage mouth at the confluence.

古文：洧水又东径习阳城西，西南折入颍，《地理志》曰：洧水东南至长平县入颍者也。
现代文：洧水又往东流经习阳城西边，转向西南注入颖水。《地理志》说：洧水往东南流到长平县注入颖水。
English: Surabaya also flows eastward through the west side of Xiyang City, turning southwest to inject Yingshui. "Geography" said: Surabaya flows southeast to Changping County to inject Yingshui.

古文：潩水出河南密县大騩山，大騩即具茨山也。
现代文：潩水发源于河南郡密县的大騩山，大騩山就是具茨山。
English: Surabaya's water originates from Dashan Mountain in Mi County, Henan County. Dashan Mountain is also known as Guts Mountain.

古文：黄帝登具茨之山，升于洪堤上，受《神芝图》于华盖童子，即是山也。
现代文：黄帝登上具茨山，爬到洪堤上，从华盖童子手里接受了《神芝图》，就是在这座山上。
English: It was on this mountain that the Yellow Emperor ascended Mount Gutsu, climbed onto the flood embankment, and received the Shen Zhi Tu from the hands of the Huagai Boy.

古文：潩水出其阿流而为陂，俗谓之玉女池。
现代文：潩水发源于山弯里，流出后积聚成破，俗称玉女池。
English: Surabaya water originates in the mountainside, and after flowing out, it accumulates into a pond, commonly known as the Jade Lady's Pool.

古文：东径怪山北，《史记》魏襄王六年，败楚于陉山者也。
现代文：池水往东流经隆山以北，《史记》载，魏襄王六年前，在隆山打败了楚军。
English: The pond water flowed eastward through the north of Longshan. According to "Histories," Wei Xiang Wang defeated the Chu army in Longshan six years ago.

古文：山上有郑祭仲家。冢西有子产墓，累石为方坟，坟东有庙，并东北向郑城。
现代文：山上有郑祭仲墓，墓西有子产墓，用石块垒砌成方坟，坟东有一座庙，都面向东北，朝着郑城。
English: On the mountain, there are the Zheng Festival Middle Tomb, the Tomb of the Birth of a Child to the West, the Square Tomb built with stone blocks, and a temple to the East of the Tomb, all facing northeast, towards Zhengcheng.

古文：杜元凯言不忘本。
现代文：杜元凯说这是不忘本。
English: Du Yuankai said that this is a must-read.

古文：际庙旧有一枯柏树，其尘根故株之上，多生稚柏成林，列秀青青，望之，奇可嘉矣。
现代文：庙旁原来有一株枯柏树，在它的旧根残株上，长出许多小柏树，郁然成丛，满眼青翠欲滴，可称是一种奇妙的美景。
English: Originally, there was a dead cypress tree next to the temple. On its old root remnants, many small cypress trees grew up, forming a dense clump, full of green, which can be called a wonderful beauty.

古文：潩水又东南径长社城西北，甫濮、北濮二水出焉。
现代文：潩水又往东南流经长社城西北，南淮、北淮两条水都从这里流出。
English: Surabaya water also flows to the southeast through the northwest of Changsha City, and both South Huai and North Huai water flow out from here.

古文：刘澄之著《永初记》云：《水经》，濮水源出大騩山，东北流注泗，卫灵闻音于水上。
现代文：刘澄之著的《永初记》说：《水经》记载的濮水，发源于大騩山，往东北流，注入泗水。卫灵公曾在水上听到音乐。
English: Liu Cheng's "Everlasting Chronicle" says: "The spring water recorded in the Shui Jing originated from the Dafeng Mountain, flowed to the northeast, and was infused with spring water. Wei Linggong once heard music on the water.

古文：殊为乖矣。
现代文：这是完全搞错了。
English: This is completely wrong.

古文：余按《水经》为潩水，不为濮也。
现代文：我按《水经》，发源于大魄山的是潩水而不是淮水。
English: According to the "Water Canon," the water that originates from Mount Dappo is not the Huai River, but the Sui River.

古文：是水首受潩水，川渠双引，俱东注洧。
现代文：南、北淮水的上口都承接潩水，二渠并流，往东都注入洧水。
English: The upstream outlets of the South and North Huaihe Rivers both receive Surabaya water, and the two canals flow in parallel, injecting Surabaya water to the east.

古文：洧与之过沙，枝流派乱，互得通称。
现代文：洧水与淮水合流，又注入沙水，支流交错凌乱，所以可互相通称。
English: Surabaya Water and Huai Water merge, and sand is also injected, and the tributaries are interlaced and messy, so they can be called each other.

古文：是以《春秋》昭公九年，迁城父人于陈，以夷濮西田益之。
现代文：《春秋》昭公九年前，把城父人迁到陈，划了一些夷淮以西的田亩添补给他们。
English: "Spring and Autumn" Nine years ago, Emperor Akihito moved the Shichifatahito to Chen, and set aside some acres of land west of Yiwu to supplement them.

古文：京相璠曰：以夷之濮西田益也。
现代文：京相潘说：以夷的淮西田亩添补给他们。
English: Beijing's Minister of Agriculture Pan said, "We can supplement them with a mu of Huaixi's farmland."

古文：杜预亦言，以夷田在濮水西者与城父人。
现代文：杜预也说：把夷在淮水西的田地划给城父人。
English: Du Yuanyuan also said: the fields of the Yi in the west of Huai Shui should be allocated to the city fathers.

古文：服虔曰。
现代文：服虔说：淮是水名。
English: Fuxian said: Huai is a water name.

古文：濮，水名也。且字类音同，津澜邈别，不得为北濮上源。
现代文：师氏作靡靡之音的淮水与这条淮水，虽然字合音同，但此淮与彼淮互不相涉，它不是北淮的上源。
English: The Huai Shui that the master made the sweeping sound and this Huai Shui, although the word and the sound are the same, but this Huai Shui and his Huai Shui are not related to each other, it is not the source of the North Huai Shui.

古文：师氏传音于其上矣。潩水又南径钟亭西，又东南径皇台西，又东南径关亭西，又东南径宛亭西，郑大夫宛射犬之故邑也。
现代文：潩水又往南流经钟亭西边，又往东南流经皇台西边，又往东南流经关亭西边，又往东南流经苑亭西边，这是郑国大夫宛射犬的旧邑。
English: Surabaya also flows southwards through the west side of Zhongting, and south-eastwards through the west side of Wang Tai, and south-eastwards through the west side of Guan Ting, and south-eastwards through the west side of Yuan Ting. This is the old town where Dr. Zheng Guo shot a dog.

古文：潩水又南，分为二水，一水南出径胡城东，故颍阴县之狐人亭也。
现代文：潩水又南流分为两条。一条向南流出，经过胡城东边，就是旧颖阻县的狐人亭。
English: Surabaya's southern stream is divided into two. One flows southward, passing through the eastern side of Hucheng, which is the Fox Pavilion in the old Yingji County.

古文：其水南结为陂，谓之胡城陂。
现代文：水，往南流，积聚成为破塘，称为胡城破。
English: The water, flowing southward, accumulates into a pond, known as the Hucheng Pond.

古文：潩水自枝渠东径曲强城东，皇陂水注之。
现代文：漯水从支渠往东流经曲强城东边，皇破水注入。
English: Surabaya water flows from the branch canal to the east through the eastern side of Quqiangcheng, and is injected by the imperial canal.

古文：水出西北皇台七女冈北，皇陂即古长社县之浊泽也。
现代文：皇破水发源于西北的皇台七女冈北麓，皇破就是古时长社县的浊泽。
English: The source of the river is the northwestern foothills of the Seven Sisters Mountains in the northwest of Taiwan, and the source of the river is the ancient city of Heze in Chosha County.

古文：《史记》魏惠王元年，韩懿侯与赵成侯合军伐魏，战于浊泽是也。
现代文：《史记》载，魏惠王元年前,韩彭侯和赵成侯合兵进攻魏国，在浊泽开战。
English: According to "Histories," Han Penghou and Zhao Chenghou attacked Wei together and went to war in Heze before the first year of King Wei Hui.

古文：其肢北对鸡鸣城，即长社县之浊城也。
现代文：此破北面直对鸡鸣城，就是长社县的浊城。
English: This break in the north is directly opposite the city of Chiming, which is the city of Shicheng in Chosha County.

古文：陂水东南流、径胡泉城北，故颍阴县之狐宗乡也。
现代文：破水往东南流经胡泉城北边，这里是旧颖阴县的狐宗乡。
English: The breakwater flows southeast through the north side of Huquan City. This is the Foxtong Township of the old Yingyin County.

古文：又东合胡城陂水，水上承皇陂，而东南流注于黄水，谓之合作口。
现代文：又往东流，与胡城破水汇合。破水上口承接皇阪，往东南流，注入黄水，汇流处称合作口。
English: It flows eastward again, and merges with the Hucheng watershed. The watershed's upper estuary is connected to the Hunan, and flows southeastward, injecting yellow water. The confluence is called the cooperative outlet.

古文：而东径曲强城北，东流入潩水。
现代文：汇合后往东流经曲强城北边，往东流注入潩水。
English: After the confluence, the eastward flow passes through the north side of Quqiangcheng, and the eastward flow injects Surabaya.

古文：时人谓之敕水，非也。
现代文：当时人称为救水，这是不对的。
English: At that time, people called it water-saving, which is not correct.

古文：敕、潩音相类，故字从声变耳。
现代文：救、澳二字音近，因此字就随音而变了。
English: The two characters 救 and澳 are close in pronunciation, so the characters change with the sound.

古文：潩水又径东西武亭间，两城相对，疑是古之岸门，史迁所谓走犀首于岸门者也。
现代文：洪水又流经东武亭和西武亭之间，两城相对，这里可能就是古时的岸门，即史迁所说的，犀首在岸门败走的地方。
English: The flood also flowed through the area between Tobutei and Seibu-tei, on the opposite side of the two cities. This may have been the ancient quay gate, that is, the place where the head of the rhinoceros was lost at the quay gate, according to historians.

古文：徐广曰颍阴有岸亭，未知是否。
现代文：徐广说：颖阴有岸亭，不知是否就是此处。
English: Xu Guang said: Yingyin has a pier, I don't know if it is here.

古文：潩水又南径射大城东，即郑公孙射犬城也，盖俗谬耳。
现代文：潩水又往南流经犬城东边，就是郑公孙的射犬城，称犬城是民间的误传。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the east side of Inucheng, which is Zheng Gongsun's shooting dog city, saying that Inucheng is a folk misinformation.

古文：潩水又南，径颍阴县故城西。魏明帝封司空陈群为侯国。
现代文：潩水又往南流经颖阴县旧城西边，魏明帝把这里封给司空陈群，立为侯国。
English: Surabaya also flows south through the west side of the old city of Yingyin County. Emperor Wei Ming gave this place to Siku Chenqun and established it as a vassal state.

古文：其水又东南径许昌城南，又东南，与宣梁陂水合，陂上承狼陂。于颍阴城西南，陂南北二十里，东西十里。
现代文：潩水又往东南流经许昌城南；又往东南流与宣梁阪水汇合。破水上口在颖阴城西南承接狼破，狼破南北二十里，东西十里。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southeast through the south of Xuchang City; it also flows to the southeast and merges with Xuanliang Hanshui. The upper mouth of the water breaks in the southwest of Yingying City, and the wolf breaks twenty miles north and south, and ten miles east and west.

古文：《春秋左传》曰楚子伐郑，师于狼渊是也。其水东南入许昌县，径巨陵城北，郑地也。
现代文：《春秋左传》说：楚子在狼渊攻打郑军。狼渊水往东南流入许昌县，流经巨陵城北边，这是郑的地域。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn" says: Chu Zi attacked Zheng's army at the Wolf's Abyss. The water of the Wolf's Abyss flowed southeast into Xu Chang County and flowed through the north side of Juming City, which is Zheng's area.

古文：《春秋左氏传》庄公十四年，郑厉公获傅瑕于大陵。
现代文：《春秋左氏传》：庄公十四年前，郑厉公在大陵俘获傅瑕。
English: "Chunqiu Zuo's Biography": Fourteen years before Zhuang Gong, Zheng Liguo captured Fu Keh in Daling.

古文：京相璠曰：颍川临颖县东北二十五里，有故巨陵亭，古大陵也。
现代文：京相潘说：颖以临颖县东北二十五里有旧巨陵亭，就是古时的大陵。
English: Beijing Minister Pan said: There is an old giant mausoleum in the northeast 25th of Yingying County, which is the ancient Great Mausoleum.

古文：其水又东积而为陂，谓之宣梁陂也。
现代文：狼酸水又东流，积水成破，称为宣梁破。
English: The wolf acid water also flows eastward, and the stagnant water breaks, which is called Xuan Liang breaking.

古文：陂水又东南人潩水。
现代文：破水又往东南注入潩水。
English: When the water broke, the floodwaters were injected to the southeast.

古文：潩水又西南流径陶城西，又东南径陶陂东。
现代文：潩水又往西南流经陶城西边，又往东南流经陶破东边。
English: Surabaya water flows to the southwest through the west of Tucheng, and to the southeast through the east of Toba.

古文：东南入于颍。
现代文：往东南注人颖水。
English: To the south-east, pour in the Hitoying spring water.

古文：潧水出郑县西北平地，潧水出郐城西北鸡络坞下，东南流，径贾复城西。
现代文：潧水发源于郑县西北的平地上，僧水发源于邻城西北鸡络坞下，往东南流经贾复城西边，往东南流，在左边与谐水汇合。
English: The Ershui originates from the plains in the northwest of Zheng County, and the Zengshui originates from the northwest of the neighboring city of Qiluo dock, flows southeast through the west of Jiafu City, flows southeast, and merges with the Harmonic Water on the left.

古文：东南流，左合水，水出贾复城东，南流注于潧。
现代文：偕水发源于贾复城东边，往南流，注入僧水。
English: Surabaya water originates from the eastern side of Jiafu City, flows southward, and is infused with monk's water.

古文：潧水又南，左会承云山水，水出西北承云山，东南历浑子冈东注，世谓冈峡为五鸣口，东南流，注于潧。
现代文：僧水又往南流，左边与承云山水汇合。承云山水发源于西北方的承云山，往东南流过浑子冈，往东流去 人们把冈峡叫做五鸣口，往东南流，注入僧水。
English: The monk's water also flows southward, merging with the Chengyun Mountain Water on the left. The Chengyun Mountain Water originates from the Chengyun Mountain in the northwest, flows southeastward through the Hunzi Hill, and flows eastward. People call the mountain gorge the Wuming Mouth, and flows southeastward, injecting the monk's water.

古文：潧水又东南流，历下田川，径郐城西，渭之为柳泉水也。
现代文：僧水又往东南流经下田川，流过部城西边，称为柳泉水。
English: The Monk's Water also flows southeast through the Shimoda River, flowing past the west side of the castle, and is called the Willow Spring Water.

古文：故史伯答桓公曰：君以成周之众，奉辞伐罪，若克虢、郐，君之土也。
现代文：史伯回答桓公道：您就凭着成周的兵力，伸张正义，讨伐有罪，如果攻克貌、邻，那地方就是您的土地了。
English: Shi Bo replied to Huan Gongdao: You can rely on Cheng Zhou's military strength to uphold justice and fight crime. If you conquer your appearance and neighbors, that place will be your land.

古文：如前华后河，右洛左济，主芣騩而食潧洧，修典刑以守之，可以少固，即谓此矣。
现代文：到那时前有华山，后有河水，左据济水，右拥洛水，以茉骤山为家，靠僧、消二水养活；制订典章刑律来治理，国家就巩固了。说的就是这里。
English: Up to that time, there was Huashan before, and there was river water after, with Jishui on the left and Luoshui on the right. Jasmine Mountain was the home, and it was supported by monks and erasers; the establishment of rules and regulations to govern, the country was consolidated. That is what I am talking about here.

古文：潧水又南，悬流奔壑，崩注丈余，其下积水成潭，广口十许步，渊深难测，又南注于洧，《诗》所谓溱与洧者也，世亦谓之为郐水也。
现代文：僧水又南流，从悬崖上奔泻入岩壑，崖高丈余，水声轰鸣，下面积水成潭，宽约四十步，水深莫测。此水又南流注入淆水。这就是《诗经》所说的漆水与消水。世人也称为部水。
English: The monk's water also flows south, rushing down from the cliff into the ledge, the cliff is too high, the water roars, the lower area becomes a pool, about forty paces wide, the water is unfathomable. This water is also injected into the south stream. This is the lacquered water and water consumption mentioned in the "Song of Songs." The world is also known as the department of water.

古文：东过其县北，又东南过其县东，又南入于洧水。
现代文：往东流过县北，又往东南流过县东，又往南注人消水。
English: It flows eastward through the northern part of the county, southeastward through the eastern part of the county, and southward.

古文：自郐、潧东南，更无别渎，不得径新郑而会洧也。
现代文：邻水、僧水的东南方，再也没有别的河流了，僧水不可能流经新郑再与消水汇合的。
English: There is no other river in the southeast of the neighboring water, the monk water, and the monk water cannot flow through Xinzheng and meet the water.

古文：郑城东人洧者，黄崖水也。
现代文：在郑城往东注入谊水的是黄崖水，《水经》的记载是错误的。
English: In Zhengcheng, it is the Yellow Cliff Water that injects the water to the east, and the record in the "Water Sutra" is wrong.

古文：盖《经》误证耳。渠出荥阳北河，东南过中牟县之北。
现代文：渠水出自荣阳北河，往东流过中牟县北边。《风俗通》说：渠就是水所存积的地方。
English: The canal water comes from the Rongyang Beihe River and flows eastward through the northern part of Zhongmou County. "Folklore" said: The canal is where the water is stored.

古文：《风俗通》曰：渠者，水所居也，渠水自河与济乱流，东径荥泽北，东南分济，历中牟县之圃田泽北，与阳武分水。
现代文：渠水从河水分出与济水乱流，往东流经荣泽北边，往东南从济水分支而出，流经中牟县圃田泽，北边与阳武县以水为分界。
English: The canal water flows from the river water and the turbulent flow of Jishui, flows eastward through the north side of Rongze, and flows southeastward from the branch of Jishui, flowing through Pudasawa, Zhongmou County, and the north side and Yangwu County are separated by water.

古文：泽多麻黄草，故《述征记》曰：践县境便睹斯卉，穷则知逾界。
现代文：泽中多麻黄草，所以《述征记》说：一踏进县境，到处都可以看见这种草，待到草完了时事就知道过了县界了。
English: There is a lot of yellow grass in the lake, so the "Record of Demands" says: Once you step into the county, you can see this grass everywhere. When you finish the grass, you will know that you have crossed the county border.

古文：今虽不能，然谅亦非谬。
现代文：今天虽然不能分得这样清楚，但想来这话也不是乱说的。
English: Although it is not so clear today, it is not a random statement.

古文：《诗》所谓东有圃草也。
现代文：《诗经》里说的东有圃草，就指这种麻黄草。
English: The ephedra mentioned in the "Song of Songs" refers to this ephedra.

古文：皇武子曰：郑之有原圃，犹秦之有具圃。
现代文：皇武子说：郑国有原圃，就像秦国有具囿一样。
English: Empress Wu Zi said: Zhengzhou has the original garden, just as Qin has the garden.

古文：泽在中牟县西，西限长城，东极官渡，北佩渠水，东西四十许里，南北二十许里。
现代文：圃田泽在中牟县西边，西界长城，东到官渡，北连渠水，东西约四十里，南北约二十里。
English: Pudasawa is in the west of Zhongmou County, west of the Great Wall, east to Guandu, north of the canal, about forty miles east to west, and about twenty miles south.

古文：绍进临官渡，起土山地道以逼垒，公亦起高台以捍之，即中牟台也。今台北土山犹在，山之东悉绍旧营，遗基并存。渠水又东径田丰祠北，袁本初惭不纳其言，害之。时人嘉其诚谋，无辜见戮，故立祠于是，用表袁氏覆灭之宜矣。
现代文：泽中有沙冈，上下有二十四浦，河渠相通，深潭相接，各浦都有名称：有大渐、小渐、大灰、刁二灰、义鲁、练秋、大白杨、小白杨、散吓、禺中、羊圈、大鸽、小鹊、龙泽、蜜罗、大哀、小哀、大长、小长、大缩、小缩、伯丘、大盖、牛眼等等。水涨时就向北流注，渠水满溢就向南宣泄，所以《竹书纪年》载，梁惠成王十年不听田丰意见，以致战败，羞愤交加，竟把田丰杀了。当时人们赞赏田丰真心为袁绍谋划，却无辜被杀，特在此为他立祠，用以表示袁氏的覆灭是咎由自取。
English: There are sand dunes in the lake, twenty-four ponds up and down, the canals are connected, and the deep pools are connected. Each pool has a name: there are big crane, small crane, big crane, two cranes, Yilu, Lingering autumn, big poplar, small poplar, scarecrow, crane middle, sheep pen, big pigeon, small crane, dragon lake, miro, big sorrow, small sorrow, big long, small long, big shrinkage, small shrinkage, hill, big cover, cow's eye, etc. When the water rises, it flows northward, and when the canal overflows, it

古文：又东，役水注之。
现代文：渠水又往东流，役水注入。
English: The canal water flows eastward again, and the waste water is injected.

古文：水出苑陵县西，隙候亭东。世谓此亭为郤城，非也，盖隙、隙声相近耳。
现代文：役水发源于苑陵县以西、隙候亭以东，世人称此亭为却城，是不对的，那是由于隙、却两字读音相近而致误。
English: Yingshui originated in the west of Yuanling County and the east of Jiaxing Pavilion. It is not right for the world to call this pavilion Jiaocheng. It is due to the similar pronunciation of Jia and Jia.

古文：中平陂，世名之埿泉也，即古役水矣。
现代文：中平破，世人称为坚泉，就是古时的役水。
English: Zhongpingba, known to the world as Jianquan, is the water used in ancient times.

古文：《山海经》曰：役山，役水所出，北流注于河。
现代文：《山海经》说：役山是役水的发源地，北流注入河水。
English: "Shanhai Jing" said: Yanshan is the birthplace of Yanshui, and the north stream is injected into the river.

古文：疑是水也。
现代文：指的可能就是这条水。
English: The finger may be this water.

古文：东北流径苑陵县故城北、东北流径焦城东，阳丘亭西，世谓之焦沟水。
现代文：役水往东北流经苑陵县旧城北边，往东北流经焦城东边、阳丘亭西边，世人称为焦沟水。
English: The effluent water flows to the northeast through the northern part of the old city of Yuanling County, and flows to the northeast through the eastern part of Jiaocheng and the western part of Yangquting. The world is known as Jiaogou water.

古文：《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王十六年，秦公孙壮率师伐郑。围焦城，不克，即此城也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王十六年前，秦国公孙壮率军攻郑，包围了焦城，却没有攻下。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": Sixteen years before the reign of Liang Huicheng, Qin Gongsun led a strong army to attack Zheng and surrounded Jiaocheng, but failed to capture it.

古文：俗谓之驿城，非也。
现代文：指的就是此城。民间称为骚城，是不对的。
English: It refers to this city. It is wrong to call it Soocheng.

古文：役水自阳丘亭东流，径山民城北，为高榆渊。
现代文：役水从阳丘亭往东流经山民城北边，就到高榆渊。
English: The yakitori water flows eastward from Yangqiu Ting through the northern side of the mountain town and reaches Gaozhouyuan.

古文：役水又东北，埿沟水出焉。
现代文：《竹书纪年》载，梁惠成王十六年，秦公孙壮率军修筑了上积、安陵、山民等城。
English: According to the "Chronicle of Bamboo," in the 16th year of King Liang Huicheng, Qin Gongsun Zhuang led the army to build Shangye, Anling, Shanmin and other cities.

古文：又东北为八丈沟，又东，清水枝律注之，水自沈城东派，注于役水。
现代文：役水又往东北流是醉沟。又往东北流，鲁沟水分支流出；又往东北流，分出坚沟水；又往东北流是八丈沟；又往东流，清水支流注入。这条支流从沈城分出，往东注入役水。
English: The effluent water also flows to the northeast and is called the Drunken Ditch. It also flows to the northeast, and the water of the Lu Ditch branches out; it also flows to the northeast, and the water of the Jian Ditch is separated; it also flows to the northeast and is called the Hachijo Ditch; it also flows to the east, and the water of the Qing Shui tributary is injected. This tributary is separated from Shencheng, and the effluent water is injected to the east.

古文：役水又东径曹公垒南，东与沫水合。
现代文：役水又往东流经曹公垒南边，东流与沫水汇合。
English: The effluent also flows eastward through the southern side of Cao Gongye, and the eastward flow merges with the foaming water.

古文：《山海经》云：沫山，沫水所出，北流注于役。
现代文：《山海经》说：沫山是沫水的发源地，北流注入役水。
English: The "Mountains and Seas Sutra" says: Modyan is the birthplace of foam water, and the north stream injects the waste water.

古文：今是水出中牟城西南，疑即沫水也。
现代文：今天这条水发源于中牟城西南，可能就是沫水。
English: Today, this water originates from the southwest of Zhongmucheng, and may be foam water.

古文：东北流，径中牟县故城西。昔赵献侯自耿都此。
现代文：役水往东北流经中牟县旧城西边，从前赵献侯从耿迁都到这里。
English: The service water flows to the northeast through the west of the old city of Zhongmou County. In the past, Zhao Xianhou moved the capital from Geng to here.

古文：班固云：赵自邯郸徙焉。
现代文：班固说：赵从邯郸迁到这里。
English: Ban Gu said: Zhao moved here from Handan.

古文：赵襄子时，佛胖以中牟叛，置鼎于庭，不与己者烹之，田英将寨裳赴鼎处也。
现代文：赵襄子的时候，佛肝在中牟反叛，把大锅放在庭院中，不跟他走的就投入大锅里煮，这里就是田英提起衣襟走向大锅的地方。
English: During Zhao Xiangzi's time, Buddha's liver rebelled in Zhongmou and put the cauldron in the courtyard. If you didn't follow him, you were thrown into the cauldron and boiled. This is where Tian Ying lifted up his collar and walked towards the cauldron.

古文：薛瓒注《汉书》云：中牟在春秋之时，为郑之堰也。及三卿分晋，则在魏之邦土，赵自漳北，不及此也。
现代文：薛攒注《汉书》说：中牟在春秋时是郑国的疆域，到三卿分晋时，则在魏的国境内；赵在潭水以北，国界不到这里。
English: Xue Nanan annotated "Hanshu" to say: Zhongmou was the territory of Zheng in the Spring and Autumn Period, and it was in the territory of Wei when the three emperors divided Jin; Zhao was in the north of Tanshui, and the national border did not reach here.

古文：《春秋传》曰：卫侯如晋，过中牟，非卫适晋之次也。
现代文：《春秋传》说：卫侯去晋，经过中牟，但不是说在从卫去晋的路上。
English: "Spring and Autumn Legend" said: Wei Hou went to Jin, passing through Zhongmou, but not on the way from Wei to Jin.

古文：《汲郡古文》曰：齐师伐赵东鄙，围中牟。
现代文：《汲郡古文》说：齐国军队攻打赵国东部边境，围困中牟。
English: "Ku County Ancient Texts" said: The Qi army attacked the eastern border of Zhao and besieged Zhongmou.

古文：此中牟不在赵之东也。
现代文：这里的中牟不在赵国东边。
English: Zhongmou here is not in the east of Zhao.

古文：按中牟当在漯水之上矣。
现代文：按中牟应在漂水上。
English: Press the middle mouse should be on the drifting water.

古文：按《春秋》齐伐晋夷仪，晋车千乘在中牟，卫侯过中牟，中牟人欲伐之。
现代文：按《春秋》，齐国攻打晋国夷仪，晋军千余辆兵车聚集在中牟；卫侯经过中牟的时候，中牟人想攻击他。
English: According to "Spring and Autumn," Qi attacked Jin Guo Yi first, and more than a thousand military vehicles of the Jin army gathered in Zhongmou; when Wei Hou passed through Zhongmou, the people of Zhongmou wanted to attack him.

古文：卫褚师圃亡在中牟，曰：卫虽小，其君在，未可胜也。
现代文：卫国有个褚师固早先逃亡到中牟，他对中牟人说：卫国虽然是小国，但君主在，是不能取胜的。
English: One of the defenders of the country, Gong Shi Gu, had earlier fled to Zhong Mou. He said to Zhong Mou: Although the defenders of the country are small, they cannot win if the monarch is there.

古文：齐师克城而骄，遇之必败，乃败齐师。
现代文：齐军攻克城邑，已经骄傲起来了，一交战就要打败仗。后来果然打败齐军。
English: The Qi army had already become proud of conquering cities and towns, and it was necessary to defeat the war as soon as it was fought. Later, the Qi army was indeed defeated.

古文：服虔不列中牟所在。
现代文：服虔没有指出中牟在什么地方。
English: Obedience did not point out where Zhongmou was.

古文：杜预曰今荥阳有中牟，回远，疑为非也。
现代文：杜预说：今天荣阳有个中牟，路途迁回遥远，想来不是那个中牟。
English: Du Yu said: Today, there is a Zhongmou in Rongyang. The journey back is far away. I think it is not that Zhongmou.

古文：然地理参差，土无常域，随其强弱，自相吞并，疆里流移，宁可一也？
现代文：但地理状况很不一致，地域的范围又变化无常，随着各国力量的强弱消长，自相吞并，疆界也变动不定，怎么可以看作一成不变呢？
English: But the geographical situation is very inconsistent, the scope of the region is fickle, with the strength and weakness of the forces of various countries, self-absorption, the boundaries are also unstable, how can it be regarded as immutable?

古文：兵车所指，径纡难知。
现代文：当年兵车开往何处，故意迂回曲折地绕道走，也很难说。
English: It is also difficult to say where the chariot went that year, deliberately taking a tortuous detour.

古文：自魏徙大梁，赵以中牟易魏。故赵之南界，极于浮水，匪直专漳也。
现代文：自从魏迁移到大梁后，赵用中牟与魏交换土地，所以赵的南疆直到浮水为止，而不止到漳水。
English: Since Wei migrated to Daliang, Zhao used Zhongmou to exchange land with Wei, so Zhao's southern Xinjiang went as far as Buhui, not just to Surabaya.

古文：赵自西取后止中牟。
现代文：赵国自从向西扩张后，到中牟为止，齐军侵犯它的东部边境，该是无可怀疑的。
English: There is no doubt that since the westward expansion of Zhao and up to Zhongmou, the Qi army has encroached on its eastern border.

古文：齐师伐其东鄙，于宜无嫌，而瓒径指漯水，空言中牟所在，非论证也。
现代文：而薛攒却直捷地推定是在漂水，凭空断言中牟所在之处，这不是论证的方法。
English: However, Xue Nan can easily deduce that it is floating in the water, and it is not a method of argumentation to make an empty assertion as to where Zhongmou is located.

古文：汉高帝十一年，封单父圣为侯国。
现代文：汉高帝十一年前，把这里封给单父圣，立为侯国。
English: Eleven years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to the Holy Father and established it as a principality.

古文：沫水又东北，注于役水。
现代文：沫水又往东北流，注入役水。
English: The foam also flows to the northeast, injecting wastewater.

古文：昔魏太祖之背董卓也，间行出中牟，为亭长所录。
现代文：从前魏太祖离开董卓，抄小路逃出中牟，被亭长捉住。
English: Once upon a time, Wei Taizu left Dong Zhuo, took a small path to escape from Zhongmou, and was caught by the chief of the pavilion.

古文：郭长公《世语》云：为县所拘，功曹请释焉。
现代文：郭长公《世语》说；被县官拘捕，功曹请求释放他。
English: Guo Changgong was arrested by county officials, Gong Cao asked for his release, "World Language" said.

古文：役水又东北径中牟泽，即郑太叔攻萑蒲之盗于是泽也。
现代文：役水又往东流经中牟泽，郑太叔就在这片泽地中进攻蓬蒲的盗贼。
English: The water flowed eastward through the middle of the lake, and Uncle Zheng attacked the thieves in the middle of the lake.

古文：其水东流，北屈注渠。
现代文：水往东流，折向北方，注入渠水。
English: The water flows to the east, turns to the north, and feeds into the canal.

古文：《续述征记》所谓自酱魁城到酢沟十里者也，渠水又东流而左会渊水，其水上承圣女陂，陂周二百余步，水无耗竭，湛然清满，而南流注于渠。
现代文：《续述征记》说从酱魁城到醉沟路程十里，这里的醉沟就指渠水。渠水又东流，在左面与渊水汇合。渊水上口承接圣女破，此破周围二百多步，破水从不干涸，常是清泉满池。池水南流注入渠水。
English: The "Continuation of the Record" says that it is a ten-mile journey from Sao Kuicheng to Drunken Ditch. Here, Drunken Ditch refers to the canal water. The canal water also flows east and merges with the deep water on the left. The mouth of the deep water is connected to the Sainte-Geneviève Canal, which is surrounded by more than two hundred steps. The water never dries up, and is often a clear spring. The water from the south of the pond flows into the canal water.

古文：民疲而溃，秦遂取焉。
现代文：渠水又往东南向着大梁流去。
English: The canal water then flows south-east towards the girder.

古文：后魏惠王自安邑徙都之，故曰梁耳。
现代文：又往东流到浚仪县，渠水往东南流经赤城北边，戴延之以为西北的大梁亭就是赤城，这是搞错了。
English: It also flows eastward to Shunyi County, and the canal water flows southeastward through the north side of Akagi. Dai Yan thought that Dalian Pavilion in the northwest was Akagi, which was a mistake.

古文：《竹书纪年》，梁惠成王六年四月甲寅，徙都于大梁是也。
现代文：《竹书纪年》：梁惠成王二十八年四月甲寅日，迁都到大梁。
English: "The Bamboo Annals": King Liang Huicheng moved the capital to Daliang on April 28th.

古文：秦灭魏以为县。
现代文：秦灭魏后立为县。
English: It became a county after the Qin Dynasty overthrew the Wei Dynasty.

古文：汉文帝封孝王于梁，孝王以土地下湿，东都睢阳，又改曰梁。
现代文：汉文帝把梁封给孝王，孝王因为这里地势低洼潮湿，把都城移到东面的唯阳，又改称梁。
English: Emperor Hanwen sealed Liang to King Xiaowang, who moved the capital to the eastern city of Weiyang because of its low-lying and humid location, and renamed it Liang.

古文：自是置县，似大梁城广，居其东城夷门之东。
现代文：自此以后，就在这里立县。因为大梁城范围很大，就把县治设在东城夷门的东边。
English: Since then, the county has been established here. Because the area of Dalian City is very large, the county seat is located on the east side of Dongcheng Yimen.

古文：梁王增筑以为吹台，城隍夷灭，略存故迹。今层台孤立于牧泽之右矣，其台方百许步，即阮嗣宗《咏怀诗》所谓驾言发魏都，南向望吹台，萧管有遗音；梁王安在哉？晋世丧乱，乞活凭居，削堕，故基，遂成二层。上基犹方四五十步，高一丈余，世谓之乞活台，又谓之繁台城。
现代文：夷门就是当年侯赢守关的地方。《续述征记》以为此城就是师旷城，说郭缘生曾经游历过此城，到过夷门，登上吹台，这些从遥远的古代留下的遗迹，今天都还在。我以为这是梁氏的台门，魏惠王居住的地方，并不是吹台，郭氏是弄错了。《西征记》提到仪城封人，以为仪城就是此县，也不对。《竹书纪年》载，梁惠成王三十一年三月聚居在这里，台基被挖掘破坏，于是就成为两层，上层还有四五十步见方，高一丈多，民间称为乞活台，又叫繁台城。
English: Yimen was the place of Hou Yingguan in those days. "Continuation of the Record" thought that this city was Shimen City, saying that Guo Yansheng had traveled through this city, went to Yimen, and boarded the sounding board. These relics left from distant antiquity are still there today. I thought that this was the gate of the Liang clan, the place where Wei Hui Wang lived, not the sounding board, Guo clan was mistaken. "Record of the West" mentioned the sealers of Yicheng, and thought that Yicheng was this county, which was also wrong. "Bamboo Annals" recorded that Liang Huich

古文：渠水于此，有阴沟、鸿沟之称焉。
现代文：渠水到这里，有阴沟、鸿沟之称。
English: When the canal water reaches here, it is known as a gutter or a chasm.

古文：项羽与汉高分王，指是水以为东西之别。
现代文：项羽与汉高祖分地称王，就以这条水作为东西两边的分界。
English: Xiang Yu and the ancestors of the Han Dynasty ruled separately, and used this water as the boundary between the east and the west.

古文：苏秦说魏襄王曰：大王之地，南有鸿沟是也。
现代文：苏秦游说魏襄王说：大王的土地南面有鸿沟。
English: Su Qin lobbied Wei Xiang Wang and said, "There is a gap in the south of the great king's land.

古文：故尉氏县有波乡波亭，鸿沟乡鸿沟亭，皆藉水以立称也。
现代文：指的就是这里。旧尉氏县有波乡、波亭、鸿沟乡、鸿沟亭，都是以水命名的。
English: This is where it refers to. In the old Jo County, Bo Township, Bo Pavilion, Chasm Township, and Chasm Pavilion are all named after water.

古文：今萧县西亦有鸿沟亭，梁国难阳县东，有鸿口亭，先后谈者，亦指此以为楚，汉之分王，非也。
现代文：今天萧县西也有鸿沟亭，梁国唯阳县东有鸿口亭，古今许多谈及鸿沟的人，也有认为此水是楚汉的分界，这是搞错了的。
English: Today, Xiao County in the west also has the Great Divide Pavilion, and Liangguoyang County in the east has the Great Divide Pavilion. Many people who have talked about the Great Divide from ancient times to the present have also thought that this water is the boundary of Chuhan. This is a mistake.

古文：盖《春秋》之所谓红泽者矣。
现代文：实际上这是《春秋》所说的红泽。
English: In fact, this is the red glow mentioned in "Spring and Autumn."

古文：渠水右与氾水合，水上承役水于苑陵县。
现代文：渠水在西与泥水汇合，穿巳水上流在苑陵县承接役水。
English: The canal water merges with muddy water in the west, and the water flowing upstream through the meadow receives water in Yuanling County.

古文：县。故郑都也。王莽之左亭县也。
现代文：苑陵县是以前郑国的都城，就是王莽时的左亭县。
English: Yuanling County was formerly the capital of Zhengzhou, that is, Zuoting County at the time of Wang Mang.

古文：役水枝津，东派为埿水者也，而世俗谓之氾沟水也。
现代文：役水支流向东分出称为犯水，民间则称为堡沟水。
English: The eastward branching of the tributary of the Yangshuo River is called the Yangshuo River, and the people call it the Yangshuo River.

古文：《春秋左传》僖公三十年，晋侯、秦伯围郑。晋军函陵，秦军氾南，所谓东氾者也。
现代文：《春秋左传》：僖公三十年前，晋侯、秦伯包围了郑，晋军驻扎在函陵，秦军驻扎在沱南―犯南就是所谓东犯。
English: "Chunqiu Zu Chuan": Thirty years ago, the Jin and Qin armies encircled Zheng. The Jin army was stationed in Hanling, and the Qin army was stationed in the south of Fujian. The south of Fujian is the so-called east of Fujian.

古文：其水又东北径中牟县南，又东北径中牟泽，与渊水合，水出中牟县故城北，城有层台。按郭长公《世语》及干宝《晋纪》，并言：中牟县故魏任城玉台下池中，有汉时铁锥，长六尺，入地三尺，头西南指不可动，正月朔自正，以为晋氏中兴之瑞，而今不知所在。
现代文：水又往东北流经中牟县南边，又往东北流经中牟泽与渊水汇合。渊水发源于中牟县旧城北边，城里有层台，按郭长公《世语》和干宝《晋纪》，都说中牟县从前魏时任城玉台下的池中，有一把汉时的铁锥，长六尺，陷入地下三尺，锥头指向西南，扳也扳不动，但到正月初一，锥头却自动指正了方向。
English: According to Guo Changgong's "World Language" and Gan Bao's "Jin Ji," both of which say that in Zhongmou County, in the pool under the jade platform of the former Wei Dynasty Rencheng, there was a Han Dynasty iron cone, six feet long, three feet underground, with the cone head pointing to the southwest, and the wrench could not be pulled, but by the first day of the first month of the year, the cone head automatically pointed in the right direction.

古文：或言在中阳城池台，未知焉是。
现代文：人们认为这是晋朝中兴的吉兆。但今天不知道这铁锥在什么地方了。有人说在中阳城池台，不知真否。
English: People thought this was a good omen for ZTE during the Jin Dynasty, but today it is not known where this iron cone is. Some people say it is in Zhongyang City, but I don't know if this is true.

古文：渊水自池西出，屈径其城西，而东南流注于汜。
现代文：渊水从池西流出，拐弯流经城西，往东南流，注入沮水。
English: Deep water flows out from the west of the pond, flows through the west of the city, flows to the southeast, and injects dejected water.

古文：氾水又东径大梁亭南，又东径梁台南，东注渠。
现代文：拿已水又往东流经大梁亭南边，又往东流经梁台南边，往东注入渠水。
English: Take the water and flow eastward through the south side of the girders, and flow eastward through the south side of the girders, and inject the canal water to the east.

古文：渠水又东南流，径开封、县，睢、涣二水出焉。
现代文：渠水又往东南流经开封县，维水和涣水在这里分出。
English: The canal water flows to the southeast through Kaifeng County, where the Wei and Wei waters are separated.

古文：右则新沟注之。
现代文：右边有新沟水注入。
English: On the right there is a new ditch water injection.

古文：其水出逢池，池上承役水于苑陵县，别为鲁沟水，东南流，径开封县故城北。
现代文：新沟水从逢池流出，池水上源在苑陵县承接役水，分支流出，叫鲁沟水，往东南流经开封县旧城北边。
English: The new ditch water flows out of Fengchi. The upper source of the pond water receives water from Yuanling County. The branch outflow, called Lu ditch water, flows southeast through the north of the old city of Kaifeng County.

古文：汉高帝十一年，封陶舍为侯国也。
现代文：汉高帝十一年前，把这里封给陶舍，立为侯国。
English: Eleven years ago, Emperor Han Gao gave this place to the county of Taos and made it a principality.

古文：《陈留志》称：阮简，字茂宏，为开封令。
现代文：《陈留志》说：阮简，字茂弘，当开封县令。
English: "Chen Liu Zhi" said: Ruan Jian, surnamed Maohong, was the county magistrate of Kaifeng.

古文：县侧有劫贼，外白甚急数，简方围棋长啸。
现代文：县旁有强盗抢劫，外面多次报告十分紧急，阮简正在下围棋，还长声吟啸。
English: There were robberies and looting near the county, and there were many urgent reports from the outside. Nguyen Canh was playing Go and chanting loudly.

古文：吏云：劫急。
现代文：县吏说：抢劫情况紧急啊！
English: The county official said: "The robbery is an emergency!

古文：简曰：局上有劫亦甚急。
现代文：阮简回答说：棋局上有劫，也很紧急啊！
English: Ruan Jian replied: There is a disaster in the chess game, it is also very urgent!

古文：其耽乐如是。
现代文：这位县令沉溺于娱乐竟到了这样的地步！
English: The county magistrate indulged in entertainment to such an extent!

古文：故《语林》曰：王中郎以围棋为坐隐，或亦谓之为手谈，又谓之为棋圣。
现代文：所以《语林》说：王中郎把下围棋称为 坐隐 。也有人把它叫做手谈，又称善奕者为棋圣。
English: Therefore, "Wu Lin" said: Wang Zhong Lang called the game of Go "sitting in seclusion." Some people also called it "hand talk," also known as "good players are chess saints."

古文：鲁沟南际富城，东南入百尺陂，即古之逢泽也。
现代文：鲁沟南面紧靠富城，往东南流，注入百尺破，就是古时的逢泽。
English: In the south of Lugou, close to Fucheng, it flows to the southeast, injecting a hundred feet of water, which is the ancient Aizawa.

古文：徐广《史记音义》曰：秦使公于少官率师会诸侯逢泽，汲郡墓《竹书纪年》作秦孝公会诸侯于逢泽，斯其处也。
现代文：徐广《史记音义》说：秦国派遣公子少官率领军队在逢泽与诸侯相会。汲郡坟墓里发掘出来的《竹书纪年》则载：秦孝公在逢泽与诸侯相会。
English: Xu Guang's "Record of History" says: Qin dispatched a young officer to lead the army to meet with the princes in Huazawa. The "Bamboo Chronicle" unearthed in the tomb of Gu County says: Qin Xiaogong met with the princes in Huazawa.

古文：故应德琏《西征赋》曰：驾衡东指，弭节逢泽。
现代文：所说的就是这地方。所以应德琏的《西征赋》说：皇上车驾东行，停车逗留于逢泽。
English: That's what this place is all about. That's why it's said in the "Western Expedition" by Dezhao: "The emperor drove east and stopped at Heze."

古文：其水东北流为新沟。新沟又东北流，径牛首乡北，谓之牛建城。又东北注渠，即沙水也。
现代文：这条水往东北流称为新沟，新沟又往东北流经牛首乡北边，有城叫牛建城；又往东北注入渠水，也就是沙水。
English: This water flows to the northeast and is called the new ditch. The new ditch flows to the northeast and passes through the north of Niu Shou Township. If there is a town, it is called Niu Jiancheng. It also injects canal water, that is, sand water, to the northeast.

古文：音蔡，许慎正作沙音，言水散石也。从水少，水少沙见矣。
现代文：沙，音蔡，许慎正音读作沙，意思是说中流冲散石子，偏旁从水，从少，水少沙也露出来了。
English: Sha, pronounced Cai, pronounced Xu Sheng Zheng, is read as sand, which means that the middle flow scatters the stones, and the sand is also exposed from the water, from the less, and the less water.

古文：楚东有沙水，谓此水也。
现代文：楚国东部有沙水，就指这条水。
English: If there is sand and water in the eastern part of Chu, it is this water.

古文：又屈南至扶沟县北，沙水又东南，径牛首乡东南，鲁沟水出焉，亦谓之宋沟也。
现代文：又转弯南流到扶沟县北边，沙水又往东南流经牛首山东南，鲁沟水从这里分出。
English: It then turned south to the north of Fuguo County, and the sand and water flowed south-east through the south-east of Niu Shou Mountain, and the Lugou water was separated from here.

古文：又径陈留县故城南。
现代文：鲁沟也称宋沟，又流经陈留县旧城南边。
English: Lu ditch, also known as Song ditch, flows through the southern part of the old city of Chenliu County.

古文：孟康曰：留，郑邑也。后为陈所并，故曰陈留矣。
现代文：孟康说：留是郑国城邑，后来被陈国兼并，所以叫陈留。
English: Meng Kang said: Rui is a township of Zheng Guo, and was later annexed by Chen Guo, so it is called Chen Rui.

古文：鲁沟水又东南，径圉县故城北。
现代文：鲁沟水又往东南流经圃县旧城北边。
English: The Lu ditch water also flows southeast through the north side of the old city of Pu County.

古文：县苦楚难，修其干戈，以圉其患，故曰圉也。
现代文：圃县人民深受楚国侵扰之苦，打造兵器以防御入侵，因此取名为围。
English: The people of Po County suffered from the intrusion of the State of Chu and built weapons to defend against the invasion, so it was named Wai.

古文：或曰边陲之号矣。
现代文：也有人说圃就是边睡的意思。
English: Some people also say that the word "budo" means "sleeping on the side."

古文：历万人散。
现代文：鲁沟水又流经万人散。
English: The Lu ditch water flowed through tens of thousands of people.

古文：沟渎自是三分，北分为康沟，东径平陆县故城北。
现代文：王莽篡位时，东郡太守翟义兴兵讨伐王莽，王莽派遣奋威将军孙建在围县北拦击翟义。
English: When Wang Mang usurped the throne, Dong County's grand marshal Yan Yi raised an army to fight Wang Mang, and Wang Mang dispatched Fenwei General Sun Jian to block Yan Yi in the north of Wai County.

古文：高后元年，封楚元王子礼为侯国。
现代文：翟义的军队大败，被杀了万余人，道路上血流成河，因而把那地方叫万人散，百姓哀悼死难者，就为他们立祠。
English: Shanyi's army was defeated, more than ten thousand people were killed, and rivers of blood flowed on the road. As a result, the place was dispersed, and the people mourned the dead and built a shrine for them.

古文：建武元年，以户不满三千，罢为尉氏县之陵树乡。又有陵树亭，汉建安中，封尚书苟攸为陵树乡侯。
现代文：鲁沟水又流经鲁沟亭，又往东南流，到阳夏县旧城西边。汉高祖六年，封尚书荀枚为陵树乡侯。
English: The Lu ditch water also flows through the Lu ditch pavilion, and then flows to the southeast, to the west of the old city of Yangxia County. Six years after the founding of the Han Dynasty, Shang Shulan was appointed as the mayor of Lingshu Township.

古文：故《陈留风格传》曰：陵树乡，故平陆县也。
现代文：因此《陈留风俗传》说：陵树乡是过去的平陆县。
English: Therefore, "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" said: Lingshu Township is the Pinglu County of the past.

古文：北有大泽，名曰长乐厩。
现代文：北边有大泽，名为长乐厩。
English: To the north is Osawa, known as the Chouraku Stable.

古文：康沟又东径扶沟县之白亭北。
现代文：康沟水又往东流经扶沟县的白亭北边。
English: The Kanggou water also flows eastward through the northern side of Baiting in Fuguo County.

古文：《陈留风俗传》曰：扶沟县有帛乡帛亭，名在七乡十二亭中。
现代文：《陈留风俗传》说：扶沟县有帛乡、帛亭。地名在七乡十二亭之列。
English: "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" says: there are seven townships and twelve pavilions in Buzuo County. The place names are among the seven townships and twelve pavilions.

古文：康沟又东径少曲亭。
现代文：康沟水又往东流经少曲亭。
English: The water of Kanggou also flows eastward through Shaoqu Ting.

古文：《陈留风俗传》曰：尉氏县有少曲亭，俗谓之小城也。
现代文：《陈留风俗传》说：尉氏县有少曲亭，民间称为小城。
English: "Chenliu Customs and Traditions" says: There is a Shaoqu Pavilion in Jo County, which is popularly known as a small town.

古文：又东南径扶沟县故城东。而东南注沙水。
现代文：又往东南流经扶沟县旧 城东边，往东南注入沙水。
English: It also flows southeastward through the eastern side of the old city of Fuguo County, injecting sand and water to the southeast.

古文：沙水又南会南水。
现代文：沙水又往南流，与南水汇合。
English: The sand and water flowed south again, merging with the southern water.

古文：其水南流，又分为二永。
现代文：此水南流又分为两条。
English: This south-flowing stream divides into two streams.

古文：一水南径关亭东，又东南流，与左水合。
现代文：一条往南流经关亭东边，又往东南流，与左水汇合。
English: A southerly current flows through the eastern side of Guanting, and then flows to the southeast, merging with Zuoshui.

古文：其水自枝渎南径召陵亭西，疑即扶沟之亭也。
现代文：这条水从支渠往南流经召陵亭西一一召陵亭可能就是扶沟亭，往东南流，与右水汇合。
English: This water flows from the branch canal to the south through Zhao Ling Ting west - Zhao Ling Ting may be Bu Gou Ting, flows to the southeast, and merges with the right water.

古文：陂东西五里，南北十里。
现代文：世人因此水与郡陵破水并流，所以也称双沟。此水又往东南流，注入沙水。
English: As a result, the world's water flows parallel to the broken water of the county mausoleum, so it is also called double ditch. This water also flows to the southeast, injecting sand.

古文：陂水东径匡城北，城在新汲县之东北，即扶沟之匡亭也，亭在匡城乡。《春秋》文公元年，诸侯朝晋，卫成公不朝，使孔达侵郑，伐绵訾及匡，即此邑也。
现代文：沙水南流与蔡泽破水汇合。破水出自郡陵城西北。《春秋》：成公十六年文公元年前，诸侯到晋国朝见，卫成公却不去朝见，还派遣孔达入侵郑国，攻打绵警和匡―匡，就是匡城。
English: The south stream of sand and water converges with the breakwater of Cai Ze. The breakwater comes from the northwest of Guanling City. "Spring and Autumn": Chenggong sixteen years ago, the princes went to Jin to see the emperor, but Wei Chenggong did not go to see the emperor, but also sent Kunda to invade Zheng, attack Mian police and Kuang-Kuang, that is Kuangcheng.

古文：今陈留、长垣县南有匡城，即平丘之匡亭也。
现代文：现在陈留郡长垣县南有匡城，就是平丘的匡亭。
English: Now Nan You Kuangcheng, Changyuan County, Chenlu County, is the Kuangting of Pingqiu.

古文：襄邑又有承匡城，然匡居陈、卫之间，亦往往有异邑矣。
现代文：襄邑又有承匡城。然而匡在陈、卫之间，又往往有好几个不同的城。
English: However, between Chen and Wei, there are often several different cities.

古文：陂水又东南至扶沟城北，又东南入沙水。
现代文：破水又往东南流到扶沟城北，又往东南注入沙水。
English: When the water broke, it flowed southeast to the north of Fuguo, and sand and water were injected to the southeast.

古文：沙水又南，径小扶城西，而东南流也。
现代文：沙水又往南流经小扶城西边，然后转向东南流。
English: The sand and water flowed southward through the west side of Xiaofu Town, and then turned to the southeast.

古文：城即扶沟县之平周亭，东汉和帝永元中，封陈敬王子参为侯国。
现代文：小扶城就是扶沟县的平周亭，东汉和帝永元年间一，把这里封给陈敬王的儿子参，立为侯国。
English: Xiao Bu Cheng is the Ping Zhou Ting of Bu Gou County. The Eastern Han Dynasty and Emperor Yongzheng made this place a fief for the son of Chen Kei Wang, San, and established it as a vassal state.

古文：沙水又东南径大扶城西，城即扶乐故城也。
现代文：沙水又往东南流经大扶城西边，这座城就是扶乐旧城。
English: The sand and water flowed south-east to the west of Dafu Town, which is the old town of Dafu.

古文：城北二里有《袁良碑》，云：良，陈国扶乐人。
现代文：城北二里有袁良碑，碑上刻着：袁良，陈国扶乐人。
English: There is a monument to Yuan Liang in the second north of the city. It is inscribed with the following: Yuan Liang, the musician of Chen Guo.

古文：后汉世祖建武十六年，更封刘隆为扶乐侯，即此城也。
现代文：后汉世祖建武十七年，改封刘隆为扶乐侯，就是这座城。
English: After the 17th year of Jianwu, the founder of the Han Dynasty, Liu Long was given the title of Fu Le Hou. This is the city.

古文：涡水于是分焉，不得在扶沟北，便分为二水也。
现代文：涡水在这里分出，不是在扶沟以北就分为两条支流的。
English: The swirling water splits here, not north of the gully where it splits into two tributaries.

古文：其一者，东南过陈县北。
现代文：其中一条往东南流过陈县北边。
English: One of them flows southeast through the northern part of Chen County.

古文：沙水又东南径东华城西，又东南，沙水枝渎，西南达洧，谓之甲庚沟，今无水。
现代文：沙水又往东南流经东华城西边；又往东南流，沙水的一条支流往西南流到消水，称为甲庚沟，现在已经无水了。
English: The sand flowed south-east again, passing the west side of Donghua City; it flowed south-east again, and a tributary of the sand flowed south-west until it ran out of water, known as the Jia Gou, and now it has no water.

古文：沙水又南与广漕渠合，上承庞官陂，云邓艾所开也。
现代文：沙水又南流，与广潜渠汇合。广潜渠上源承接庞官破，据说是邓艾开凿的。
English: The sand and water flowed south again, merging with the broad submarine canal. The upper source of the broad submarine canal was connected to the Pangguan Canal, which is said to have been dug by Deng Ai.

古文：虽水流废兴，沟渎尚伙。
现代文：虽然水流时断时通，沟渠还是很多的。
English: Although the water flow is intermittent, there are still many ditches.

古文：昔贾逵为魏豫州刺史，通运渠二百里余，亦所谓贾侯渠也。
现代文：从前贾逢当魏豫州刺史，疏、通了这条渠道二百余里，于是也叫贾侯渠。
English: Once upon a time, Jia Feng when Wei and Yuzhou were in conflict, cleared and opened up more than 200 miles of this channel, so it was also called Jia Hou Canal.

古文：而川渠径复，交锗畛陌，无以辨之。
现代文：然而河流渠道像田间叶陌似的纵横交错，很难辨别哪些是他疏浚过的。
English: But the river channels criss-cross like the rows of leaves in a field, and it is hard to tell which ones he has dredged.

古文：沙水又东径长平县故城北，又东南径陈城北，故陈国也，伏羲、神农并都之。
现代文：沙水又往东流经长平县旧城北边，又往东南流经陈城北边，这里就是从前的陈国。伏羲、神农都在这里建都过。
English: The sand flowed eastward through the northern part of the old city of Wu in Changping County, and southeastward through the northern part of Chencheng. This is the former Chen Province. Fuxi and Shennong both built their capitals here.

古文：城东北三十许里，犹有羲城实中，舜后妫满，为周陶正。
现代文：城东北三十来里，还有一座羲城，十分坚固。
English: Thirty miles to the northeast of the city, there is another fortified city, which is very strong.

古文：武王赖其器用，妻以元女大姬，而封诸陈，以备三格。太姬好祭祀，故《诗》所谓坎其击鼓，宛丘之下。
现代文：舜的后代妨满，当周朝的陶正，武王使用他所做的陶器，因而把自己的长女太姬嫁给他为妻，并把陈封给他为食邑，这样，武王分封前三朝帝王后裔这件事―即所谓三格―就都办妥了。太姬喜欢祭祀，所以《诗经》里写道：苑丘之下，鼓声咚咚。
English: When the Zhou dynasty was at the height of its power, King Wu used the pottery he had made to marry his eldest daughter, Taiki, and gave him Chenfei as a dowry. In this way, the descendants of the emperors of the three dynasties before King Wu divided the dowry - the so-called Three Treasures - were completed. Taiki liked to make sacrifices, so the "Song of Songs" wrote: "Under the garden mound, the drums are beating."

古文：宛丘在陈城南道东。
现代文：苑丘在陈城南边的路东。
English: Yuanqiu is on the east side of the road south of Chencheng.

古文：王隐云：渐欲平，今不知所在矣。
现代文：王隐说：苑丘逐渐被削平了，今天已不知它在什么地方了。
English: Wang Yin said: "The garden mound was gradually flattened, and today I don't know where it is.

古文：楚讨陈，杀夏征舒于栗门，以为夏州后。
现代文：楚国攻陈，在栗门杀了夏征舒，在陈设置夏州。
English: Chu attacked Chen, killed Xia Zhengshu at the chestnut gate, and set up Xia Zhou in Chen.

古文：城之东门内有池，池水东西七十步，南北八十许步，水至清洁而不耗竭，不生鱼草。水中有故台处，《诗》所谓东门之池也。
现代文：城的东门内有个水池，池水东西七十步，南北约八十步，池水十分清净，从不干涸，而且也不生鱼虾水草，池心留有旧时亭台的遗址―这就是《诗经》里所说的东门之池。
English: There is a pool in the east gate of the city. The water of the pool is seventy paces from east to west and eighty paces from south to north. The water of the pool is very clean and never dries out. Moreover, it does not produce fish, shrimp, or aquatic plants. The center of the pool contains the remains of the old pavilion - this is the East Gate Pool mentioned in the "Book of Songs."

古文：城内有《汉相王君造四县邸碑》，文字剥缺，不可悉识。
现代文：城内有汉相王君造四县邸碑，碑上文字已剥落残缺，有些已看不清楚，大致意思是：现在的陈国，过去叫淮阳郡。
English: In the city, there is a monument to the residence of the four counties built by Hanso Wangjun. The words on the monument have been peeled off and are incomplete, and some are not clear. It roughly means: Chen Province now, used to be called Huaiyang County.

古文：其略曰：惟兹陈国，故曰淮阳郡云云，清惠著闻，为百姓畏爱，求贤养士，千有余人，赐与田宅。
现代文：又说：王君以清廉仁爱著称，受到百姓的敬畏爱戴。他求贤养士千余人，赐给他们田地住宅。
English: He also said: The king was known for his integrity, benevolence and love, and was feared and loved by the people. He asked for more than a thousand virtuous and healthy people and gave them houses in the fields.

古文：吏舍，自损俸钱，助之成邸。
现代文：他自己削减薪傣，帮助吏属修建房舍。
English: He cut his own salary to help his subordinates build houses.

古文：五官掾西华陈骐等二百五人，以延熹二年云云，故其颂曰：修德立功，四县回附。
现代文：五官椽西华、陈骥等二百零五人于延熹二年，等等。所以对他的颂词说：他修仁德，立功勋，四方各县百姓都来归附。
English: Two hundred and five people, including five officials such as Gong Xihua and Chen Qi, came to Yancheng in the second year of Yancheng, and so on. Therefore, his eulogy said: He cultivated benevolence and made meritorious contributions, and the people from all over the county came to join him.

古文：今碑之左右，遗塘尚存，基础犹在。
现代文：今天碑的左右还遗留着断垣残壁，基础还在。
English: On both sides of today's monument, there are still remnants of broken walls, and the foundation is still there.

古文：时人不复寻其碑证，云孔子庙学，非也。
现代文：当今人们不去寻遗碑为证，却说这是孔子庙学校，这是弄错了。
English: Nowadays, people don't look for a monument to prove it, but say it's a Confucius Temple School, which is a mistake.

古文：后楚襄王为秦所灭，徙都于此。
现代文：后来楚襄王被秦国灭掉，迁都到这里来。
English: Later, King Chu Xiang was eliminated by the Qin Dynasty, and the capital was moved here.

古文：丈颖曰西楚矣，三楚斯其一焉。
现代文：文颖说：这就是西楚。所谓三楚，这就是其中之一。
English: Wen Ying said: This is the West Chu. The so-called Three Chu, this is one of them.

古文：城南郭里，又有一城，名曰淮阳城，子产所置也。
现代文：城南城郭里面，又有一座城，名叫淮阳城，是子产修筑的。
English: In the southern part of the city, there is another city, called Huaiyang City, which was built by the descendants.

古文：汉高祖十一年，以为淮阳国。王莽更名郡为新平，县曰陈陵，故豫州治。
现代文：汉高祖十一年前，立为淮阳国，王莽时改名，郡称新平，县叫陈陵，是先前豫州的治所。
English: Eleven years before the founding of Henkel, it was established as Huaiyang Province. When Wang Mang changed its name, the county was called Xinping and the county was called Chenling. It was previously the capital of Yuzhou.

古文：王隐《晋书地道记》云，城北有故沙，名之为死沙。而今水流津通，漕运所由矣。
现代文：王隐《晋书•地道记》说：城北有从前的沙水旧道，名叫死沙，但今天水流畅通，是嘈运经过的地方。
English: Wang Yin's "Jinshu•Diary of the Land" said: North of the city, there used to be an old road of sand and water, called dead sand, but today the water flow is smooth, and it is a place where noisy traffic passes.

古文：沙水又东而南屈，径陈城东，谓之百尺沟。又南分为二水，新沟水出焉。
现代文：沙水又东流，转而向南，流经陈城东，称为百尺沟，又南流分为两条水，新沟水就在这里流出。
English: The sand and water flowed east and turned south, flowing through the east of Chencheng, known as the Hundred Foot Ditch. The south stream was divided into two streams, and the water of the new ditch flowed out here.

古文：沟水东南流，书水注之，水源上承涝陂。陂在陈城西北，南暨荦城，皆为陂矣。
现代文：沟水往东南流，谷水注入。谷水上流承接涝破，破在陈城西北，南达苹城，这一片都是湖泽。
English: The ditch water flows to the southeast, and the valley water is injected. The upper stream of the valley water is connected to the ditch, and it is broken in the northwest of Chencheng and the south of Pingcheng. This area is a lake.

古文：陂水东流，谓之谷水，东径涝城北，王隐曰荦北有谷水是也。
现代文：破水东流称为谷水，往东流经涝城北边。王隐说：牵城北有谷水。苹就是怪。
English: The eastward flow of the broken water is called valley water, and it flows eastward through the north of Lucheng. Wang Yin said: There is valley water to the north of Lucheng. Ping is strange.

古文：牵即怪矣。
现代文：《春秋经》载，僖公在怪与齐宋会盟。
English: "Spring and Autumn Annals" recorded that Zhai Gong was in a strange alliance with the Qi Song Dynasty.

古文：《经》书公会齐、宋于桂者也。
现代文：杜预说：怪就是苹，说在是陈县西北，却弄错了。
English: Du Yu said: strange is Ping, said to be in the northwest of Chen County, but got it wrong.

古文：社预曰：柽即牵也，在陈县西北，为非。柽，小城也，在陈郡西南。
现代文：怪是小城，在陈郡西南。
English: Strange is a small town in the southwest of Chen County.

古文：谷水又东径陈城南，又东流入于新沟水，又东南注于颍，谓之交口，水次有大堰，即古百尺堰也。
现代文：谷水又往东流经陈城南边，又往东流注入新沟水，又往东南注入颖水，汇流处称为交口。水旁有一条大堤堰，就是古时的百尺堰。
English: The valley water also flows eastward through the south side of Chencheng, and the eastward flow injects the new ditch water, and the southeast injects the Ying water. The confluence is called the intersection. There is a large dike weir next to the water, which was a hundred-foot weir in ancient times.

古文：《魏书》：《国志》曰，司马宣王讨太尉王凌，大军掩至百尺堨，即此堨也。
现代文：《魏书•国志》说：司马宣王讨伐太尉王凌，大军出其不意来到百尺竭，指的就是这条堤堰。
English: "Weishu • Guozhi" said: Sima Xuanwang fought against Lieutenant Wang Ling, and the great army unexpectedly came to a hundred feet exhaustion, referring to this dike.

古文：盖新水首受颖于百尺沟，故堰兼有新阳之名也，以是推之，悟故俗谓之非矣。
现代文：今天俗称山阳堰，其实不是，因新水上口在百尺沟接纳了颖水，所以这条堰又兼有新阳堰的名称。根据这一点推断，可以明白民间的称呼是错误的。
English: Today it is commonly known as the Sanyang Weir, but in fact it is not, because the new water outlet receives the Ying water in the hundred foot ditch, so this weir also has the name of the Sanyang Weir. Based on this, it can be understood that the folk name is wrong.

古文：又东南至汝南新阳县北，沙水自百尺沟，东径宁平县之故城南。
现代文：又往东南流，到了汝南郡新阳县北边，沙水从百尺沟往东流经宁平县旧城南边。
English: It also flowed to the southeast, to the north of Xinyang County, Runan County, and the sand and water flowed from the hundred-foot ditch to the east through the south of the old city of Ningping County.

古文：《晋阳秋》称：晋太傅东海王越之东奔也，石勒追之，焚尸于此。
现代文：《晋阳秋》说：晋朝太傅东海王越向东逃奔，石勒在后追击，在这里焚烧了他的尸体，部下数十万人都被围困在此，束手受戮。
English: "Jinyang Autumn" said: Jin Dynasty Taifu Donghai Wang Cang fled eastward, Shi Le chased after him and burned his body here. Hundreds of thousands of his subordinates were trapped here, handcuffed and slaughtered.

古文：数十万众，敛手受害，勒纵骑围射，尸积如山。王夷甫死焉。
现代文：石勒纵马围射，尸积如山，王夷甫也死在这里。
English: The corpses piled up like a mountain. Wang Yifu also died here.

古文：余谓俊者所以智胜群情，辨者所以丈身袪惑，夷甫虽体荷俊令，口擅雌黄，污辱君亲，获罪羯勒，史官方之华、王，谅为褒矣。
现代文：我想，才智出众的人是凭着机智胜过普通人，能言善辩的人长于文饰自己，祛除迷惑。王夷甫虽然身负英才俊士的美名，但嘴巴长于颠倒黑白，污辱君王，得罪了石勒，史官把他与华欲、王朗相比，实在还是抬高了他。
English: I think that people with outstanding talent are superior to ordinary people by virtue of their wit, and people who can speak well are better than those who can decorate themselves with literature and get rid of confusion. Wang Yifu, although he has the reputation of a talented young man, but his mouth is longer than reversing black and white, insulting the king, offending Shi Le, the historian compared him with Gaozhou and Wang Lang, and really elevated him.

古文：沙水又东，积而为陂，谓之阳都陂。
现代文：沙水又东流，积水成破，称为阳都破，明水注入。
English: Sand and water flow to the east, and the stagnant water breaks, which is called yangdu breaking, and the clear water is injected.

古文：明水注之，水上承沙水枝津，东出径汝南郡之宜禄县故城北，王莽之赏都亭也。
现代文：明水上口承接沙水支流，往东流经汝南郡宜禄县旧城北边。宜禄县就是王莽时的赏都亭。
English: The upper mouth of the Ming River receives the Shashui tributary and flows eastward through the northern part of the old city of Yiluo County, Runan County. Yiluo County is the capital of Wang Mangshi.

古文：明水又东北流注于陂，陂水东南流，谓之细水。
现代文：明水又往东北流，注入阪中。破水往东南流，称为细水。
English: The clear water flows to the northeast and is injected into the middle of Osaka. The broken water flows to the southeast and is called fine water.

古文：又东径新阳县北，又东，高陂水东出焉。
现代文：又往东流经新阳县北边，又往东流，高破水从东流出。
English: It also flows eastward through the northern part of Xinyang County, and flows eastward again, and the high water breaks out from the east.

古文：沙水又东，分为二水，即《春秋》所谓夷濮之水也。
现代文：沙水又往东流，分为两条，就是《春秋》所说的夷淮水。
English: The sand and water flowed eastward and divided into two, which is the "Spring and Autumn" said.

古文：枝津北径谯县故城西，侧城人涡。
现代文：支流往北流经谁县旧城西边，在城旁流过，注入涡水。
English: The tributary flows northward through the west side of the old city of who County, flows past the city, and injects swirling water.

古文：沙水东南径城父县西南，枝津出焉，俗谓之章水。
现代文：沙水往东南流经城父县西南，又有一条支流在此分出，俗称章水。
English: The sandy water flows south-east through the south-west of Chengdu County, and another tributary flows out here, commonly known as Zhangshui.

古文：一水东注，即濮水也。
现代文：另一条水往东流，就是淮水，俗称艾水。
English: The other water flowing eastward is Huai Shui, commonly known as Ai Shui.

古文：俗谓之艾水，东径城父县之故城南，东流注也。又东南过山桑县北，山桑故城在涡水北，沙水不得径其北明矣，《经》言过北，误也。
现代文：往东流经城父县旧城南边，往东流去。又往东南流过山桑县北边，山桑县旧城在涡水以北，沙水不可能流经城北，这是明明白白的。《水经》却说流过县北，是搞错了。
English: It flows eastward through the southern part of the old city of Chengzhu County and flows eastward. It also flows southeastward through the northern part of Shanxiang County. The old city of Shanxiang County is north of the vortex, and the sand cannot flow through the north of the city. This is clear and obvious. However, "Water Sutra" said that it flowed through the north of the county, which is a mistake.

古文：又东南过龙亢县南，沙水径故城北，又东南径白鹿城北，而东注也。
现代文：又往东南流过龙亢县南边，沙水流经旧城北边，又往东南流经白鹿城北边，然后往东流去。
English: It also flows southeast through the southern part of Longyan County, and the sand and water flow through the northern part of the old city, and then flow southeast through the northern part of Bailu City, and then flow eastward.

古文：又东南过义成县西，南纻入于淮。
现代文：又往东南流过义城县西边，往南注人淮水。
English: It also flows southeast through the west side of Yicheng County, and discharges into the south.

古文：义成县故属沛，后隶九江。
现代文：义成县从前属于沛郡，后来属于九江郡。
English: Yicheng County once belonged to Pei County and later to Jiujiang County.

古文：沙水东流，注于淮，谓之沙汭。
现代文：沙水往东流，注入淮水，称为沙呐。
English: The sandy water flows eastward and is injected into the Huai River, which is called Shana.

古文：京相璠曰：楚东地也。
现代文：京相蟠说：这里是楚国东部地域。
English: The Beijing envoy said: This is the eastern region of Chu.

古文：《春秋左传》昭公二十六年，楚令尹子常以舟师及沙汭而还。
现代文：《春秋左传》：昭公二十七年前，楚国令尹子常把水军开到沙呐后又退了回去。
English: "The Legend of Spring and Autumn": Twenty-seven years before King Zhaogong, the ruler of Chu, Yin Zichang, ordered his navy to sail to Shana and then retreat.

古文：社预曰：沙，水名也。
现代文：杜预说：沙，是水名。
English: Du Yu said: "Sand is the name of water.

