古文：张存敬，谯郡人也。
现代文：张存敬，谯郡人。
English: Zhang Cunqin, from Zhang County.

古文：性刚直，有胆勇，临危无所畏惮。
现代文：性情刚直，有胆识勇气，临危无所畏惧。
English: They are upright, courageous and fearless in the face of danger.

古文：唐中和中，从太祖赴汴，以其折节，颇见亲昵，首为右骑都将。
现代文：唐中和年间，跟从太祖奔赴汴州，因他能屈己效忠，颇与太祖亲昵，首任右骑都将。
English: During the middle and middle of the Tang Dynasty, he followed his great-grandfather to Bozhou, because he could be loyal and intimate with his great-grandfather. He was the first right-hander.

古文：从讨巢、蔡，凡历百战，多于危蹙之间，显有奇略，由是频立殊效。
现代文：跟从太祖征讨黄巢和蔡州贼寇，共经百战，多于危急之间，显现奇略，因此频立大功。
English: Following the Great Ancestor's conquest of the Yellow Nest and the Caizhou Thieves and Robbers, there have been hundreds of battles, more than between the critical, appearing strangely, so frequent great achievements.

古文：光启中，李罕之会晋军围张宗奭于盟津，太祖遣丁会、葛从周、存敬同往驰救。
现代文：光启年间，李罕之会合晋军在盟津包围张宗，太祖派丁会、葛从周、张存敬一同前往奔驰救援。
English: During the Guangqi era, the Jin army of Li Han's alliance surrounded Zhang Zong in Meitu, and Emperor Taizu sent Dinghui, Ge Cong Zhou, and Zhang Cun Rong to rescue Benz together.

古文：存敬引骑军先犯敌将，诸军翼之，敌骑大败，乃解河桥之围。
现代文：张存敬领骑兵首先攻击敌军将领，其他诸军帮助他，敌骑大败，因而解除了河桥之围。
English: Zhang Cunjing, leading the cavalry, first attacked the enemy general, other armies helped him, and the enemy cavalry was defeated, thus lifting the river bridge siege.

古文：大顺二年，为诸军都虞候，佐霍存董大军收宿州，以功奏加检校兵部尚书。
现代文：大顺二年，任各军都虞候，辅佐霍存掌领大军，收取宿州，因功上奏朝廷加封为检校兵部尚书。
English: In the second year of Dashun, he was appointed as the commander of each army, assisted by Huo Cun to lead the army, received the cantonment, and was awarded the seal of the Imperial Court for his performance as the inspector of the military department.

古文：太祖东征徐、兗，存敬屡有俘斩之功。凡受指顾，皆与机会，矢石所及，必以身先，太祖屡加优异，以为行营都指挥使、检校右仆射。
现代文：太祖东征徐州、兖州，张存敬有俘获斩杀之功，凡接受指令，都相机而动，在弓箭擂石面前，必身先士卒，太祖特别褒扬看重他，任他为行营都指挥使、检校右仆射。
English: Zhang Cunjing, the great-grandfather of the eastward expedition of Xuzhou and Luzhou, had the achievement of capturing and killing. Anyone who accepted the instruction would move with the camera. In front of the bow and arrow and stone, he must be the first. The great-grandfather especially praised and valued him. He was appointed as the commander of the camp and the right-hand man of the inspection.

古文：乾宁三年，充武宁军留后，行颍州刺史。
现代文：乾宁三年，充任武宁军留后，代理颍州刺史。
English: Qianning for three years, after serving as a military commander of the Wu Ning Army, acting governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：光化二年夏四月，幽、沧侵凌魏郡，复以存敬为都指挥使。
现代文：光化二年夏四月，幽州沧州部队侵扰魏郡，太祖又任张存敬为都指挥使。
English: In April of the summer of Gwanghwa 2nd year, the Yuzhou-Cangzhou troops invaded Wei County, and the great-grandfather appointed Zhang Cunjing as the capital commander.

古文：三年，大举，与葛从周连统诸军攻浮阳，树数十栅，围刘守文累月。
现代文：三年，大举进军，与葛从周相连统帅各军进攻浮阳，建起几十座营栅，包围刘守文几个月。
English: In three years, he marched into the army in a big way, and together with Ge Zhou, he led the army to attack Fuyang, built dozens of camp fences, and surrounded Liu Shouwen for several months.

古文：时幽州刘仁恭举兵来援，存敬潜军击之于乾宁军南老鸦堤。
现代文：这时幽州刘仁恭领兵援救，张存敬在乾宁军南边的老鸦堤偷袭。
English: At this time, Yuzhou Liu Rengong led the rescue, and Zhang Cunjing made a sneak attack on the old crow embankment on the south side of the Qianning Army.

古文：是日，燕人大败，斩首五万级，生擒马慎交已下一百余人，获马万余蹄。
现代文：这一天，燕人大败，斩首五万级，活捉马慎交以下一百多人，俘获战马一万多匹。
English: On this day, the Yan people suffered a great defeat. They beheaded 50,000 people, captured more than 100 people alive, including the horse Shen Jiao, and captured more than 10,000 horses.

古文：其年秋九月，引军收镇州，存敬勒众涉滹沲河，师人鼓行而进，逢镇之游兵数千，因逐之，直入镇之壅门，收鞍马牛驼万计。
现代文：同年秋七月，领军收复镇州，张存敬率领部众渡过滹沱河，部队击鼓前进，遇上镇州游击部队几千人，于是追击他们，一直攻入镇州城的壅门，收得鞍马牛驼数以万计。
English: In the autumn and July of the same year, the leader of the army recovered Zhenzhou. Zhang Cunjing led the troops across the Li River, and the troops marched forward to the beat of drums. They encountered several thousand Zhenzhou guerrilla troops, so they chased them and penetrated all the way into the gate of Zhenzhou City, and collected tens of thousands of horses, cows and camels.

古文：翼日，镇人纳质而旋。
现代文：第二天，在镇州人投降后旋师。
English: The next day, after the surrender of the Zhenzhou people, the division turned around.

古文：寻为宋州刺史，逾年，甚有能政。
现代文：接着任宋州刺史，一年多，很有政绩。
English: Next, he served as the governor of Songzhou for more than a year, with great political achievements.

古文：复拥众伐蓟门，数旬间连下瀛、莫、祁、景四州，擒俘不可胜纪。
现代文：又领部队攻伐蓟门，数十天间接连攻下瀛、莫、祁、景四州，俘获不可胜数。
English: He also led the troops to attack Shimen, and for dozens of days they indirectly attacked Xiamen, Mo, Handan, and Jing four states, and captured an incalculable number.

古文：自怀德驿与中山兵接战，枕尸数十里，中山开壁请降。
现代文：在怀德驿与中山的部队交战，积尸数十里，中山开城门投降。
English: In the battle between the troops of Zhongshan and Huai Deqi, the corpses piled up for dozens of miles, and Zhongshan opened the city gate and surrendered.

古文：天复元年春，太祖以河中节度使王珂与太原结亲，凭恃骄恣，命存敬统大军讨之。
现代文：天复元年春，太祖因为河中节度使王珂与太原晋人结亲，凭借靠山骄纵放肆，因而命张存敬领大军攻讨他。
English: In the spring of the first year of the Tianfu era, because of a festival in the middle of the river, the great-grandfather made Wang Ke and Taiyuan Jin people get married. With the support of the mountain, he was arrogant and presumptuous, so he ordered Zhang Cunxuan to lead a large army to attack him.

古文：即日收绛州，擒刺史陶建钊，降晋州刺史张汉瑜，二郡平。
现代文：即日收复绛州，生擒绛州刺史陶建钊，降服晋州刺史张汉瑜，二郡平定。
English: On the same day, we recovered Bozhou. Bozhou's leader, Tao Jianqian, surrendered to Jinzhou's leader, Zhang Hanyu, and the two counties were pacified.

古文：进围河中，王珂请降。
现代文：前进包围河中，王珂请求投降。
English: Advancing to encircle the middle of the river, Wang Ke requested to surrender.

古文：太祖嘉之，乃以存敬为护国军留后。
现代文：太祖嘉奖张存敬，任他为护国军留后。
English: The great-grandfather honored Zhang Cunxian and allowed him to stay behind as a member of the National Guard.

古文：未几，检校司空，寻移宋州刺史。
现代文：不久任检校司空，接着调任宋州刺史。
English: He was soon appointed as the inspector of schools, and then he was transferred to Songzhou.

古文：将之任所，寝疾，逾旬卒于河中。
现代文：将上任，病重，十多天后死在河中。
English: He was seriously ill when he took office, and died in the river more than ten days later.

古文：太祖闻之，痛惜移晷。
现代文：太祖闻讯，痛惜良久。
English: My great-grandfather heard the news and regretted it for a long time.

古文：开平初，追赠太保。
现代文：开平初年追赠为太保。
English: In the first year of Kaiping, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taiho.

古文：乾化三年，又追赠太傅。
现代文：乾化三年又追赠为太傅。
English: After three years of drying, he was posthumously awarded the title of Taifu.

古文：子仁愿，晋天福中，仕至大理。寇彦卿，字俊臣，大梁人也。祖琯，父裔，皆宣武军牙校。
现代文：寇彦卿，字俊臣，大梁人，祖父寇，父亲寇裔，都是宣武军牙校。
English: Korehiko-Kyo, Kazuchika, Daryanjin, grandfather Korehiko, father Korehiko, are all from the Xuanwu army dental school.

古文：太祖镇汴，以彦卿将家子，擢在左右。
现代文：太祖镇守汴州时，因为寇彦卿为将门子弟，便提拔他在自己身边。
English: When Taizu was in charge of the defense of Zhangzhou, he promoted Ko Yanqing to his side because he was the younger brother of the general.

古文：弱冠，选为通赞官。
现代文：成年后，被选为通赞官。
English: When he came of age, he was elected to the post of chancellor.

古文：太祖为元帅，补元帅府押牙，充四镇通赞官行首兼右长直都指挥使，累奏授检校司徒，领洺州刺史。
现代文：太祖任元帅时，寇彦卿补任元帅府押牙，兼任四镇通赞官行首兼右长直都指挥使，太祖接连上奏朝廷，授与寇彦卿检校司徒，任氵名州刺史。
English: When the great-great-grandfather was appointed as a marshal, Sir Ko Yan was appointed as a supplement to the marshal of Azusa, and also served as the head of the four towns and the commander-in-chief. The great-grandfather successively appealed to the imperial court, awarded Sir Ko Yan as a school inspector, and served as a famous state historian.

古文：罗绍威将杀牙军，遣使告于太祖，太祖命彦卿使于魏，密与绍威谋之。竟成其事，彦卿之力也。
现代文：罗绍威将要诛杀牙军时，派使者告诉太祖，太祖命寇彦卿出使魏州，与罗绍威密谋，终于办成了这件事，是寇彦卿出了大力。
English: When Rossoway was about to fight and kill the Tuscan army, he sent an envoy to tell the great-grandfather that the great-grandfather had ordered Lord Korehiko to dispatch an envoy to Weizhou to conspire with Rossoway and had finally accomplished the matter. It was Lord Korehiko who exerted great efforts.

古文：彦卿身长八尺，隆准方面，语音如钟。
现代文：寇彦卿身长八尺，高鼻梁，方脸盘，声如洪钟。
English: He is eight feet tall, with a high nose, a square face, and a voice like a bell.

古文：善骑射，好书史，复善伺太祖之旨，凡所作为，动皆云合。
现代文：善于骑马射箭，爱看书籍史传，又善于领会太祖旨意，所有作为，都与太祖相合。
English: He is good at horse riding and archery, loves reading historical books, and is good at understanding the will of his grandfather. All of his actions are in line with his grandfather.

古文：太祖每言曰： 敬翔、刘捏、寇彦卿，盖为我而生。 
现代文：太祖常说 ：敬翔、刘捍、寇彦卿，都是为我而生的啊。 
English: The great-grandfather often said: "Jingxiang, Liu Han, and Kou Yanqing were all born for me."

古文：其见重如此。
现代文：如此看重寇彦卿。
English: That's how much he values Kouhiko-chō.

古文：太祖有所乘乌马，号 一丈乌 ，尝以赐彦卿。
现代文：太祖有匹坐骑乌马，叫 一丈乌 ，曾赐给寇彦卿。
English: The great-grandfather had a horse called Ijo-U, which he gave to Lord Kōhiko.

古文：天复中，太祖迎昭宗于凤翔，累与岐军对阵。
现代文：天复年间，太祖到凤翔迎接昭宗，多次与岐下李茂贞的军队对阵。
English: During the Tenpō era, Taizu went to Fengxiang to meet Shōzō, and repeatedly faced off against the army of Li Maozhen.

古文：《九国志·硃景传》：梁祖闻景名，命寇彦卿率劲骑三千袭霍丘，图取景，且谕梁祖之意令降，景率其徒战于丘墟林泽中，射死者无数，彦卿兵折力殚而去。太祖受禅，为华州节度使，加检校太保。
现代文：当时寇彦卿任各道马军步军都排阵使，曾经亲自身穿甲胄，乘太祖所赐乌马，驰骋于战阵之前，太祖瞧着他说 ：真是神将啊！ 昭宗回到京师，赐寇彦卿为迎銮毅勇功臣名号，改任邢州刺史，接着迁任亳州团练使。太祖接受禅让帝位后，寇彦卿任华州节度使，加封检校太保。
English: At that time, Emperor Akihito appointed Kōhiko as the envoy for the formation of the marching troops of the horse armies of various provinces. He once personally wore armor and rode a horse given by the great-grandfather before the battle. The great-grandfather looked at him and said, "What a great general!" Emperor Akihito returned to the capital, gave Kōhiko the title of hero for welcoming Emperor Shōki, and appointed him as the envoy for the history of Shōshū, and then as the envoy for the training of the Shōshū regiments. After Emperor Shōkaku accepted the abdication of Emperor Zen, Kōh

古文：岁余，入为左金吾卫大将军，充街使。
现代文：一年多后，入京任左金吾卫大将军、充街使。
English: More than a year later, he entered Beijing as the General of the Left King Wu Wei and the Envoy of Zongjie.

古文：一日，过天津桥，有老人误冲其趋道者，排之，落桥而毙，为御史府所弹，太祖不得已，责授左卫中郎将。
现代文：一天，经过天津桥，有一老人误撞他的前导骑卫，被推开，掉到桥下摔死了，寇彦卿因此被御史府弹劾，太祖不得已，贬任寇彦卿为左卫中郎将。
English: One day, while crossing the Tianjin Bridge, an old man accidentally bumped into his leading cavalryman, was pushed away, fell under the bridge and died. As a result, Lord Kōhiko was impeached by the Imperial Household Agency. As a last resort, the Grandfather demoted Lord Kōhiko to Middle Captain of the Left Division.

古文：不数月，除相州防御使，依前行营诸军排阵使。
现代文：不到几个月，任相州防御使，复任行营各军排阵使旧职。
English: Less than a few months later, he was appointed as the defense envoy of Xiangzhou and resumed his former position as the platoon commander of each army in the camp.

古文：未几，授河阳节度使，加检校太傅。
现代文：不久，任河阳节度使，加封检校太傅。
English: Soon after, he was appointed as a delegate to the Heyang Festival, and was also given the title of Taifu.

古文：及太祖遇弑，彦卿追感旧恩，图御容以奠之。
现代文：到太祖被杀害，寇彦卿追感旧恩，画下太祖图形以祭奠他。
English: When the great-grandfather was killed, Kōhiko chased his old feelings and drew a picture of the great-grandfather to commemorate him.

古文：每因对客言及先朝旧事，即涕泗交流。
现代文：每当与客人随便谈起前朝旧事时，就眼泪鼻涕一起流下。
English: Whenever I casually talk to guests about the past, I shed tears along with my snot.

古文：末帝嗣位，遥领兴元节度使、东南面行营都招讨使。以拒淮寇，寻改右金吾卫上将军。
现代文：末帝即位，寇彦卿遥任兴元节度使、东南面行营都招讨使，以抵拒淮南吴国贼寇，接着改任右金吾卫上将军。
English: When the last emperor ascended to the throne, Emperor Qiao Yanqing appointed Qiao Yanqing as the envoy to the Xingyuan Festival and invited him to the southeast to resist the Huainan and Wuxi bandits, and then he was appointed as the Supreme Commander of the Right Jinwu.

古文：贞明初，授邓州节度使。
现代文：贞明初年，任邓州节度使。
English: In the first year of Zhenming, he was appointed as the chief envoy of the Dengzhou Festival.

古文：会淮人围安陆，彦卿奉诏领兵解围，大破淮贼而回。
现代文：遇上淮南吴人围困安陆，寇彦卿奉诏领兵解围，大破淮南贼寇而回。
English: When the Wu people of Huainan besieged Anlu, Emperor Qiao Yan led the troops to break the siege and defeated the Huainan bandits.

古文：四年，卒于镇，时年五十七。
现代文：四年，死于藩镇，时年五十七岁。
English: Four years later, he died in Han Town, at the age of fifty-seven.

古文：诏赠侍中。
现代文：诏令追赠为侍中。
English: He was posthumously awarded the title of samurai.

古文：彦卿贞干明敏，善事人主，然怙宠作威，多忌好杀，虽显立功名，而犹为识者之所鄙焉。
现代文：寇彦卿坚贞干练聪明敏捷，善于服事人主，然而恃宠作威作福，性多妒忌，喜欢杀戮，虽然大有功名，仍然被有识之人瞧不起。
English: Lord Korihiko is steadfast, capable, clever, and quick, and is good at serving the Lord. However, he likes to be bossed around, is jealous, and likes to kill. Although he has a great reputation, he is still looked down upon by people with insight.

