古文：文帝太祖文皇帝讳义隆，小字车兒，武帝第三子也。
现代文：太祖文皇帝号义隆，小时字东儿，武帝的第三个儿子。
English: Emperor Taizowen's name was Yilong, the third son of Emperor Wu.

古文：晋安帝义熙三年，生于京口。卢循之难，上年四岁，高祖使谘议参军刘粹辅上镇京城。
现代文：晋安帝义熙三年，出生在京口，卢循起义时，文帝年方四岁，高祖派谘议参军刘粹辅助文帝镇守京城。
English: In the third year of the reign of Emperor An of Jin, Emperor Yixi was born in Jingkou. At the time of Lu Xun's uprising, Emperor Wen was four years old. Gao Zu sent an advisory to Liu Qi to join the army to help Emperor Wen defend the capital.

古文：十一年，封彭城县公。
现代文：十一年，封为彭城县公。
English: Eleven years later, he was appointed as the Pengcheng County magistrate.

古文：高祖伐羌至彭城，将进路，板上行冠军将军留守。
现代文：高祖讨伐羌人到彭城，将出征时，任命文帝代行冠军将军留守。
English: Gaozhu went to Pengcheng to fight the Xiongnu. When he left for the war, he appointed Wen Di as the acting champion general to stay behind.

古文：晋朝加授使持节、监徐兗青冀四州诸军事、徐州刺史，将军如故。
现代文：晋朝加封文帝为使持节，总揽徐州、兖州、青州、冀州军事，徐州刺史、将军之职照旧担任。
English: In the Jin Dynasty, Emperor Wenzhou was added as the patron of the festival, and the military of Xuzhou, Zhangzhou, Qingzhou and Jizhou were taken over, and the post of Xuzhou historian and general was still held.

古文：关中平定，高祖还彭城，又授监司州豫州之淮西兗州之陈留诸军事、前将军、司州刺史，持节如故，将镇洛阳。
现代文：关中平定，高祖回彭城，又授文帝监管司州、豫州的淮西兖州的陈留军事、前将军、司州刺史。持节照旧担任，镇守洛阳。
English: Guanzhong was pacified, Gao Zu returned to Pengcheng, and Chen Ruijun, a former general and Sizhou historian, was appointed by Emperor Wen to supervise Sizhou and Huaixi Yanzhou. He held the post as usual, and guarded Luoyang.

古文：仍改授都督荆益宁雍梁秦六州豫州之河南广平扬州之义成松滋四郡诸军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史，持节如故。
现代文：后又改任都督荆、益、宁、雍、梁、秦六州，豫州的河南、广平，扬州的义成、松滋四郡军事、西中郎将、荆州刺史，持节照旧担任。
English: Later, he was reappointed as the governor of Jing, Yixing, Ning, Yong, Liang, and Qin Six Provinces, Henan and Guangping of Yuzhou, Yicheng of Yangzhou, Songzhi Military of Four Counties, West Middle Lord, and Jingzhou Historian, and continued to hold the post as before.

古文：永初元年，封宜都王，食邑三千户。
现代文：永初元年，封为宜都王，食邑三千户。
English: In the first year of the Yongchu era, he was given the title of King of Yidu, and 3,000 households in the food village left.

古文：进督北秦，并前七州。
现代文：管辖北秦，合并前面提到的七个州。
English: jurisdiction over North Qin, merging the seven states previously mentioned.

古文：进号镇西将军，给鼓吹一部。
现代文：晋升为镇西将军，拨给乐队一支。
English: He was promoted to Zhenxi General and assigned a percussion section to the band.

古文：又进督湘州，是岁入朝，时年十四。
现代文：又督理湘州。同年入朝。时年十四岁。
English: In the same year, he entered the imperial court. He was 14 years old at the time.

古文：长七尺五寸，博涉经史，善隶书。
现代文：身高七尺五寸，广泛涉猎经史，擅长隶书。
English: He is seven-feet-five-inches tall, has extensively dabbled in history, and is good at calligraphy.

古文：景平二年七月中，少帝废。
现代文：景平二年七月中旬，少帝被废。
English: In mid-July of the second year of King Jingping, the young emperor was deposed.

古文：百官备法驾奉迎，入奉皇统。
现代文：百官备车辇奉迎文帝，进京即位。
English: Hundreds of officials prepared carriages to welcome Emperor Wen, and he entered Beijing and ascended to the throne.

古文：行台至江陵，进玺绂。
现代文：行辕到江陵，献上玉玺丝带。
English: He went to Gangneung and presented a jade ribbon.

古文：侍中臣琇、散骑常侍臣嶷之、中书监尚书令护军将军建城县公臣亮、左卫将军臣景仁、给事中游击将军龙乡县侯臣隆、越骑校尉都亭侯臣纲、给事黄门侍郎臣孔璩之、散骑侍郎臣刘思考、员外散骑侍郎臣潘盛、中书侍郎臣何尚之、羽林监封阳县开国侯臣萧思话、长兼尚书左丞德阳县侯臣孙康、吏部郎中骑都尉臣张茂度、仪曹郎中臣徐长琳、仓部郎中臣庾俊之、都官郎中臣袁洵等上表曰： 臣闻否泰相革，数穷则变，天道所以不謟，卜世所以灵长。
现代文：侍中散骑常侍嶷之、中书监尚书令护军将军建城县公亮、左卫将军景仁、给事中游击将军龙乡县侯隆、越骑校尉都亭侯纲、给事黄门侍郎孔琚之、散骑侍郎刘思考、员外散骑侍郎潘盛、中书侍郎何尚之、羽林监封阳县开国侯萧思话、长兼尚书左丞德阳县侯孙康、吏部郎中骑都尉臣张茂度、仪曹郎中徐琳、仓部郎中庾俊之、都官郎中袁询等上表说： 臣闻否泰相更替，事物到了极限就会发生变化。过去运气不佳，王室艰难，高祖开创的基业，几乎被毁。
English: Among the samurai, those who rode horseback were the regular attendants, the middle-ranking inspector, the honorable inspector of books, the general of the garrison, Jiancheng Guoliang, the left-wing general, Jingren, the middle-ranking guerrilla general, Longxiang County Houlong, the yue-cavalry captain, Du Ting Hougang, the Huangmen attendant, Kong Yu, the honorable attendant of horseback riding, Liu Xie, the non-commissioned officer, the honorable attendant of horseback riding, Pan Sheng, the middle-ranking attendant of books, He Shang, the warden of

古文：上答曰： 皇运艰弊，数钟屯夷，仰惟崇基，感寻国故，永慕厥躬，悲慨交集。
现代文：幸亏根基厚恩泽深，百姓神灵都向往我家，社稷才得以安宁。陛下天生为君之品德，圣明孝悌，名声远播。
English: Fortunately, thanks to the foundation's deep benevolence, the people's deities all yearn for our home, and the community is able to live in peace. His Majesty was born with the virtue of filial piety, and his reputation has spread far and wide.

古文：赖七百祚永，股肱忠贤，故能休否以泰，天人式序。
现代文：皇上答曰： 皇室命运艰难，依靠忠贞贤达之臣，才得以否去泰来，天下有序。
English: The emperor replied: The fate of the imperial family is difficult, and it relies on loyal and virtuous vassals to be able to go to Thailand, and the world is orderly.

古文：猥以不德，谬降大命，顾己兢悸，何以克堪。
现代文：我无才无德，委以重任，内心惶恐，哪谈得胜任。
English: I have no talent, no virtue, I am entrusted with a heavy responsibility, my heart is afraid, how can I be competent?

古文：辄当暂归朝庭，展哀陵寝，并与贤彦申写所怀。
现代文：宜暂回朝廷，祭奠陵园，并与贤达书写我所思所想。
English: It is appropriate to temporarily return to the imperial court, pay tribute to the cemetery, and write what I think with the sages.

古文：望体其心，勿为辞费。 
现代文：希望能体谅我的心思，不要再多说了。 
English: I hope you can understand my thoughts and not say any more.

古文：府州佐史并称臣，请题枿诸门，一依宫省，上不许。
现代文：府州官吏一并称臣，请皇上题写门槛，依照皇宫的样子，皇上没答应。
English: The prefectural and state officials all called themselves "vassals" and asked the emperor to inscribe the threshold. According to the appearance of the imperial palace, the emperor did not agree.

古文：甲戌，发江陵。
现代文：十五日，又从江陵起程。
English: On the 15th, it set off from Gangneung again.

古文：八月丙申，车驾至京城。
现代文：八月八日，皇上到京城。
English: On August 8th, the Emperor arrived in Kyoto.

古文：丁酉，谒初宁陵，还于中堂即皇帝位。
现代文：九日，拜谒初宁陵，回中堂即皇帝位。
English: On the 9th, he paid his respects at Ning Mausoleum and returned to the center hall, the emperor's seat.

古文：元嘉元年秋八月丁酉，大赦天下，改景平二年为元嘉元年。
现代文：元嘉元年秋八月九日，大赦天下，改景平二年为元嘉元年。
English: On the 9th day of the 8th month of the autumn of the first year of the Yuan Ji, the world was amnestied, and the year of the first year of the Yuan Ji was changed to the second year.

古文：文武赐位二等，逋租宿债勿复收。
现代文：文臣武将晋爵二等，旧租旧债一律免除。
English: The second-ranked scholar-vassal-general-commander-in-chief will be promoted to second-class, and all old rents and debts will be exempted.

古文：庚子，以行抚军将军、荆州刺史谢晦为抚军将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：十二日，委任行抚军将军、荆州刺史谢晦为抚军将军荆州刺史。
English: On the 12th, General Xing Fuzhou and General Jing Zhi Shi Xie Yu were appointed as General of the General Staff of the General Staff of the General Staff of the People's Liberation Army.

古文：癸卯，司空、录尚书事、扬州刺史徐羡之进位司徒，卫将军、江州刺史王弘进位司空，中书监、护军将军傅亮加左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，抚军将军、荆州刺史谢晦进号卫将军，镇北将军、南兗州刺史檀道济进号征北将军。
现代文：十五日，晋升司空、录尚书事、扬州刺史徐羡之为司徒，卫将军、江州刺史王弘为司空，中书监、护军将军傅亮为左光禄大夫、开府仪同三司，封抚军将军、荆州刺史谢晦为卫将军，镇北将军、南兖州刺史檀道济为征北将军。
English: On the 15th, he was promoted to the following positions: Air Vice-Marshal, Chief of the Air Staff, Yangzhou Air Vice-Marshal, Jiangsu Air Vice-Marshal Wang Hong as Air Vice-Marshal, China Air Vice-Marshal Fu Liang as Air Vice-Marshal, Kaifu Air Vice-Marshal, Jingzhou Air Vice-Marshal Xie Yu as Air Vice-Marshal, Zhenbei Air Vice-Marshal, Nan'an Air Vice-Marshal Dan Daoji as Northern Expeditionary Air Vice-Marshal.

古文：甲辰，追尊所生胡婕妤为皇太后，谥曰章后。
现代文：十六日，追尊生母胡婕女予为皇太后，谥号章后。
English: On the 16th, Emperor Suizong's birth mother, Princess Hu Rong, was given the title of empress dowager, and she was given the title of empress dowager.

古文：卫将军、南徐州刺史彭城王义康进号骠骑将军，冠军将军、南豫州刺史义恭进号抚军将军，封江夏王。
现代文：卫将军、南徐州刺史彭城王义康晋升为骠骑将军，封冠军将军、南豫州刺史义恭为抚军将军、江夏王。
English: General Wei, the king of South Xuzhou, the king of Pengcheng, King Yikang, was promoted to the general of the cavalry, the general of the champion, the general of South Yuzhou, the king of the army, and the king of Jiangxia.

古文：立第六皇弟义宣为竟陵王，第七皇弟义季为衡阳王。
现代文：立第六皇弟义宣为竟陵王，第七皇弟义季为衡阳王。
English: The sixth emperor's younger brother, Yixuan, was established as the king of Jingling, and the seventh emperor's younger brother, Yizi, as the king of Hengyang.

古文：戊申，以豫州刺史刘粹为雍州刺史，骁骑将军管义之为豫州刺史，南蛮校尉到彦之为中领军。
现代文：二十日，任命豫州刺史刘粹为雍州刺史，骁骑将军管义之为豫州刺史，南蛮校尉到彦之为中领军。
English: On the 20th, he appointed Liu Zi, the military commander of Yuzhou, as the military commander of Yongzhou, Guan Yi, the general of cavalry, as the military commander of Yuzhou, and Nan Ban, the lieutenant of cavalry, as the middle leader of the army.

古文：己酉，减荆、湘二州今年税布之半。
现代文：二十一日，减免荆、湘二州当年一半赋税。
English: On the twenty-first day of the year, half of the taxes of Jing and Hunan were reduced and exempted.

古文：九月丙子，立妃袁氏为皇后。
现代文：九月十八日，立妃子袁氏为皇后。
English: On September 18, Empress Dowager Yuan became empress.

古文：二年春正月丙寅，司徒徐羡之、尚书令傅亮奉表归政，上始亲览。
现代文：元嘉二年春正月十日，司徒徐羡之、尚书令傅亮上表还政皇上，皇上从此亲自执政。
English: On the 10th day of the 1st month of the 2nd year of the Yuan Dynasty, the Emperor was restored to power by Emperor Xuanzhi and Emperor Fu Liang of Shangshu. Since then, the Emperor has been ruling in person.

古文：车驾祠南郊，大赦天下。
现代文：十五日，驾临南郊祭祀，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day, he came to the southern suburbs for a religious service, and was forgiven by the whole world.

古文：三月乙丑，左将军、徐州刺史王仲德进号安北将军。
现代文：三月十日，左将军、徐州刺史王仲德晋升为安北将军。
English: On March 10, General Zuo and Xuzhou Governor Wang Zhongde were promoted to General Anbei.

古文：夏五月戊寅，特进谢澹卒。
现代文：夏五月二十四日，特进谢澹去世。
English: On the 24th day of summer in May, Tejin Xie Yao passed away.

古文：秋八月甲申，以关中流民出汉川，置京兆、扶风、冯翊等郡。
现代文：秋八月一日，因为关中流民逃出汉川，设置京兆、扶风、冯翊等郡。
English: On the first day of August in autumn, because the Guanzhong refugees fled from Hanchuan, counties such as Keizhao, Fufeng and Fengyuan were established.

古文：乙酉，骠骑将军、南徐州刺史彭城王义康为开府仪同三司，新除司空王弘为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，以右军长史江恆为广州刺史。
现代文：二日，骠骑将军，南徐州刺史王义康晋升为开府仪同三司，委任新任司空王弘为车骑大将军、开府仪同三司，右军长史江恒为广州刺史。
English: On the second day, Wang Yikang, general of the cavalry and the southern Xuzhou cavalry, was promoted to the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and Wang Hong, the newly appointed secretary of the cavalry, was appointed as the general of the cavalry and the third secretary of the Kaifu ceremony, and Shi Jiangheng, the commander of the right army, was appointed as the Guangzhou cavalry.

古文：冬十一月癸酉，以前将军杨玄为征西将军、北秦州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月二十二日，任命前将军杨玄为征西将军、北秦州刺史。
English: On November 22nd, the former general Yang Xuan was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition and the governor of North Qin.

古文：三年春正月丙寅，司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史徐羡之，尚书令、护军将军、左光禄大夫傅亮，有罪伏诛。
现代文：元嘉三年正月十六日，司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史徐羡之，尚书令、护军将军、左光禄大夫傅亮，因罪被杀。
English: On the 16th day of the first month of the third year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Sittu, Luo Shang Shuji, Yangzhou Shishi Xu Enzhi, Shang Shuling, General of the Guards, and Zuo Guanglu Doctor Fu Liang were killed for their crimes.

古文：遣中领军到彦之、征北将军檀道济讨荆州刺史谢晦。
现代文：派遣中领军到彦之、征北将军檀道济讨伐荆州刺史谢晦，皇上亲率大军西征。
English: The leader of the army was dispatched to Hikonshi, the general of the Northern Expedition, Dando, helped to fight against Jingzhou, and the emperor's relatives led the army to the West.

古文：上亲率六师西征，大赦天下。
现代文：大赦天下。
English: Amnesty for the whole world.

古文：丁卯，以车骑大将军、江州刺史王弘为司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史，骠骑将军、南徐州刺史彭城王义康改为荆州刺史，抚军将军、南豫州刺史江夏王义恭改为南徐州刺史。
现代文：十七日，委任车骑大将军、江州刺史王弘为司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史，骠骑将军、南徐州刺史彭城王义康改任荆州刺史，抚军将军、南豫州刺史江夏王义恭改任南徐州刺史。
English: On the 17th, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Wang Hong, the governor of Jiangsu Province, was appointed as the governor, Luo Shangshu, the governor of Yangzhou Province, the general of cavalry and cavalry, Peng Cheng Wang Yi Kang, the governor of South Xuzhou Province, was appointed as the governor of Jingzhou Province, and the general of garrison, Jiangxia Wang Yi Gong, the governor of South Yuzhou Province, was appointed as the governor of South Xuzhou Province.

古文：己巳，以前护军将军赵伦之为镇军将军。
现代文：十九日，任命前护军将军赵伦之为镇军将军。
English: On the 19th, Zhao Lianwei, the former general of the garrison, was appointed as the general of the town army.

古文：闰月丙戌，皇子劭生。
现代文：闰正月六日，皇子劭出生。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the leap year, Prince Shō was born.

古文：二月乙卯，系囚见徒，一皆原赦。
现代文：二月六日，被囚禁的罪犯，赦免回原籍。
English: On February 6, the imprisoned criminals were pardoned and allowed to return to their hometowns.

古文：戊午，以金紫光禄大夫王敬弘为尚书左仆射，豫章太守郑鲜之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：九日，任命金光禄大夫王敬弘为尚书左仆射，豫章太守郑鲜之为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 9th, he appointed Wang Jinghong, the doctor of Jin Guanglu, as his right-hand man, and Zheng Xian, the governor of Yuzhang, as his left-hand man.

古文：建安太守潘盛有罪伏诛。
现代文：建安太守潘安因罪被诛。
English: Pan An, the deputy governor of Jianan, was arrested for the crime.

古文：庚申，特进范泰加光郤大夫。
现代文：十一日，特进范泰加封为光禄大夫。
English: On the 11th day of the month, the special envoy Fan Tai was appointed as the doctor of Guanglu.

古文：是日，车驾发京师。
现代文：当天，皇上离开京城。
English: On the same day, the Emperor left Kyoto.

古文：戊辰，到彦之、檀道济大破谢晦于隐矶。
现代文：十九日，到彦之、檀道济在隐矶大败谢晦。
English: On the 19th, Zuihikanzhi and Dandooji suffered a crushing defeat in Yingye.

古文：丙子，车驾自芜湖反旆。
现代文：二十七日，皇上从芜湖回师。
English: On the 27th, the emperor returned from Wuhu.

古文：己卯，擒晦于延头，送京师伏诛。
现代文：三十日，在延头擒住了谢晦，押送京城处死。
English: On the 30th, he arrested Xie Yao in Yankou and sent him to Beijing to be executed.

古文：三月辛巳，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月二日，皇上回宫。
English: On March 2, the Emperor returned to the Imperial Palace.

古文：夏五月乙未，以征北将军、南兗州刺史檀道济为征南大将军、江州刺史，中领军到彦之为南豫州刺史。
现代文：夏五月二十一日，委任征北将军、南兖州刺史檀道济为征南大将军、江州刺史，中领军到彦之为南豫州刺史。
English: On the 21st day of the fifth month of the summer, he appointed the general of the Northern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, the general of the Southern Expedition, and the general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：戊戌，以后将军长沙王义欣为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，任命后将军长沙王义欣为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 24th, after the appointment, General Changsha Wang Yixin was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：乙巳，骠骑大将军、凉州牧大沮渠蒙逊改为车骑大将军。
现代文：二十八日，骠骑大将军、凉州牧沮渠蒙逊改任车骑大将军。
English: On the 28th, the general of cavalry, Liangzhou Mu Dequ Mengxun, was reappointed as the general of cavalry.

古文：诏曰： 夫哲王宰世，广达四聪，犹巡岳省方，采风观政。
现代文：下诏说： 英明的君主治天下，广开言路扩大视听，过问诉讼巡视四方，采集民风考察政绩。
English: The next edict said: "Wise monarchs rule the world, open up the way of speech, expand audio-visual, inspect the four directions through litigation, collect folk customs, and examine political achievements."

古文：所以情伪必审，幽遐罔滞，王泽无拥，九皋有闻者也。
现代文：因此能明察真伪，下情上达，王恩浩荡，国人称颂。
English: Therefore, it can clearly see the truth and falsehood, the insinuation, the king's generosity, and the praise of the people.

古文：朕以寡薄，猥纂洪绪。虽永念治道，志存昧旦，愿言傅岩，发想宵寐，而丘园之秀，藏器未臻，物情民隐，尚隔视听。乃眷区域，辍寐忘餐。
现代文：我才能低下，愧为君主，虽然总想着治国之道，日夜思念着如何治好国家，但地方情况百姓隐瞒，还不能传于我处。每念及此，废寝忘食。
English: I am humbled and ashamed to be the monarch, although I always think about the way of governing the country, day and night thinking about how to heal the country, but the local situation is concealed by the people and cannot be transmitted to me. Every time I think about this, I lose sleep and forget to eat.

古文：今氛昆祛荡，宇内宁晏，旌贤弘化，于是乎始。
现代文：今战乱结束，天下太平，褒奖贤达弘扬教化，应该开始了。
English: Now that the war is over and the world is at peace, it is time to reward the sages and promote enlightenment.

古文：可遣大使巡行四方。
现代文：可派遣使臣巡察四方。
English: Envoys can be sent to inspect the four directions.

古文：其宰守称职之良，闺荜一介之善，详悉列奏，勿或有遗。
现代文：称职的好官，地方的善士，一一登记上奏，不要有遗漏。
English: Competent good officials, local good men, one by one, should be registered and recorded, and nothing should be omitted.

古文：若刑狱不恤，政治乖谬，伤民害教者，具以事闻。
现代文：若有冤假错案，理政荒谬，损伤百姓危害教化的，都要据实上报。
English: If there are cases of injustice, falsehood and error, absurdity in governance, harm to the people and harm to enlightenment, they should be reported truthfully.

古文：其高年、鳏寡、幼孤、六疾不能自存者，可与郡县优量赈给。
现代文：老人、鳏寡、幼孤、病残难以生存的，可同郡县一起尽力赈济。
English: The elderly, widows and widowers, young orphans, and those who are too sick to survive may work together with the county to try their best to save money.

古文：博采舆诵，广纳嘉谋，务尽衔命之旨，俾若朕亲览焉。 
现代文：博采民风，广纳良谋，尽心尽力完成使命，尤如我亲自巡察。 
English: I will draw on the wisdom of the people, listen to good advice, and do my best to fulfill my mission, especially if I personally inspect.

古文：丙午，车驾临延贤堂听讼。
现代文：二十九日，驾临延贤堂听诉讼。
English: On the 29th, he arrived at Yan Xian Hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：六月己未，以镇军将军赵伦之为左光禄大夫、领军将军。
现代文：六月十一日，任命镇军将军赵伦之为左光禄大夫、领军将军。
English: On June 11th, Zhao Lun, the general of the town army, was appointed as the doctor of the Left Guanglu and the leading general.

古文：丙寅，车驾又于延贤堂听讼。
现代文：十八日，又驾临延贤堂听诉讼。
English: On the 18th, he also came to Yan Xian Hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：丙子，又听讼。
现代文：二十八日，又听诉讼。
English: On the 28th, the court heard the case again.

古文：以右卫王华为中护军。
现代文：委任右卫王华为中护军。
English: The king of the right guard was appointed to lead the middle guard.

古文：冬十一月戊寅，以梁、南秦二州刺史吉翰为益州刺史，骠骑参军刘道产为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月三日，调梁、南秦二州刺史吉翰任益州刺史，任命骠骑参军刘道产为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: In winter, on November 3, Jixian, the governor of the two states of Southern Qin, was appointed as the governor of Yizhou, and Liu Doushan, a member of the imperial cavalry, was appointed as the governor of the two states of Southern Qin.

古文：己亥，以南蛮校尉刘遵考为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，委任南蛮校尉刘遵考为雍州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, Nanban Lieutenant Liu Zunkao was appointed to write the history of Yongzhou.

古文：十二月癸丑，以中书侍郎萧思话为青州刺史。
现代文：十二月八日，任命中书侍郎萧思话为青州刺史。
English: On December 8th, Xiao Siwei, the secretary of the Central Committee of the Communist Party of China, was appointed as the official historian of Qingzhou.

古文：壬戌，前吴郡太守徐佩之谋反，及党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十七日，前吴郡太守徐佩之谋反，徐及同谋都被处死。
English: On the 17th, Xu Pei, the former governor of Wu County, plotted a rebellion. Xu and his accomplices were all executed.

古文：四年春正月乙亥朔，曲赦都邑百里内。
现代文：元嘉四年春正月一日，赦免京师方圆百里内的罪犯。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the fourth year of Yuan Jia, he pardoned criminals within a hundred-mile radius of Beijing.

古文：昔汉章南巡，加恩元氏，况情义二三，有兼曩日。
现代文：七日，驾临南郊祭祀。二月十一日，驾临丹徒，拜谒京陵。
English: On the 7th, he came to the southern suburbs for a religious service, and on the 11th of February, he came to Dantu to pay homage to the imperial mausoleum.

古文：思播遗泽，酬慰士民。
现代文：三月三日，下诏说： 故乡丹徒，王业始兴之地，踏入丹徒乡情缠绵，感触颇多。
English: On March 3, he issued the following proclamation: My hometown Dantu, the place where Wangye first flourished, when I set foot in Dantu Township, I felt a lot of emotions.

古文：其蠲此县今年租布，五岁刑以下皆悉原遣；登城三战及大将家，随宜隐恤。 
现代文：想广播恩泽，酬谢慰劳士人百姓。免除丹徒县今年租税，判五年以下徒刑的罪犯释放回原籍；多次登城作战和大将之家，适当给以体恤。 
English: He wanted to broadcast his gratitude, reward and comfort the Lao people. Dantu County was exempted from this year's tax, and the criminals sentenced to less than five years of imprisonment were released back to their hometowns; he went to the city to fight and the general's home many times, and gave appropriate sympathy.

古文：丁亥，车驾还宫。
现代文：四日，皇上回宫。
English: On the fourth day, the emperor returned to the palace.

古文：戊子，尚书右仆射郑鲜之卒。
现代文：十五日，尚书右仆射郑鲜之去世。
English: On the 15th, Shangshu's right-hand man Zheng Xianzhi passed away.

古文：壬寅，禁断夏至日五丝命缕之属，富阳令诸葛阐之之议也。
现代文：二十九日，下令禁止夏至日搞五丝命缕之类东西，这是富阳令诸葛阐之的建议。
English: On the 29th, it was ordered to prohibit the summer solstice from engaging in things such as the five threads of life, which was a suggestion made by Zhuge Fuyang.

古文：夏四月庚戌，以廷尉王徽之为交州刺史。
现代文：夏四月七日，任命廷尉王徽之为交州刺史。
English: On the 7th day of the 4th month of the summer, Wang Hui, a courtier, was appointed as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：五月壬午，中护军王华卒。
现代文：五月十日，中护军王华去世。
English: On May 10, Wang Hua, a member of the Middle Guards, passed away.

古文：京师疾疫。甲午，遣使存问，给医药；死者若无家属，赐以棺器。
现代文：京师流行瘟疫，二十二日，派遣使者前往慰问，送去医药，死者若没亲人，赐给棺材。
English: On the 22nd, an emissary was sent to Beijing to offer condolences and send medicine. If the deceased had no relatives, they were given a coffin.

古文：六月癸卯朔，日有蚀之。庚申，以金紫光禄大夫殷穆为护军将军。
现代文：六月一日，出现日蚀。十八日，委任金紫光禄大夫殷穆为护军将军。
English: On June 1st, a solar eclipse occurred. On the 18th, Jin Zi Guanglu Doctor Yin Mu was appointed as a military escort general.

古文：五年春正月乙亥，诏曰： 朕恭承洪业，临飨四海，风化未弘，治道多昧，求之人事，鉴寐惟忧。
现代文：元嘉五年正月六日。下诏说： 我继承皇位，君临天下，教化未弘扬，治道多乖昧，探求人事，昼夜思虑。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 5th year of the Yuan Jia, the following edict was issued: I have succeeded to the imperial throne, I am the ruler of the world, I have not promoted enlightenment, I have not been prudent in my administration, I have been searching for personnel, and I have been thinking day and night.

古文：加顷阴违序，旱疫成患，仰惟灾戒，责深在予。
现代文：大自然旱灾降临，瘟疫流行，是上天用灾祸来警告，罪责在我。
English: When natural droughts come and plagues spread, it is Heaven that warns us with calamities. I am to blame.

古文：思所以侧身克念，议狱详刑，上答天谴，下恤民瘼。
现代文：我想克制私念，尽心尽力，公正处理诉讼，上答服苍天的谴责，下体恤百姓的疾苦。
English: I want to restrain my selfish thoughts, do my best, deal with lawsuits fairly, answer the condemnation of heaven, and sympathize with the sufferings of the people.

古文：群后百司，其各献谠言，指陈得失，勿有所讳。 
现代文：文武百官，要直言进谏，指陈得失，不要有所隐瞒。 
English: Civil and military officials should be forthright, point out the gains and losses, and do not hide anything.

古文：甲申，车驾临玄武馆阅武。
现代文：十六日，驾临玄武馆阅兵。
English: On the 16th, they arrived at the Xuanwu Pavilion for the military parade.

古文：戊子，京邑大火，遣使巡慰赈赐。
现代文：二十日，京邑发生火灾，派遣使者前往慰问赈济。
English: On the 20th, a fire broke out in Kyoto, and envoys were sent to offer condolences and aid.

古文：夏四月己亥，以南蛮校尉萧摹之为湘州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二日，调南蛮校尉萧摹之任湘州刺史。
English: On the 2nd of April in the summer, the history of the Battle of Hunan was written by Lieutenant Colonel Xiao Wei.

古文：戊午，以始兴太守徐豁为广州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，调始兴太守徐豁为广州刺史。
English: On the 21st day of the month, Xu Huan, the first governor of the Xing Dynasty, became the history of Guangzhou.

古文：五月己卯，以湘州刺史张邵为雍州刺史。
现代文：五月十二日，调湘州刺史张邵任雍州刺史。
English: On May 12th, Zhang Shaoren, the governor of Hunan Province, was transferred to the governor of Yongzhou Province.

古文：六月庚戌，司徒王弘降为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：六月十四日，降司徒王弘为卫将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On June 14th, Wang Hong, one of the subordinate officers, was promoted to the rank of Wei general, and was given the ceremony of opening the capital together with the other three officers.

古文：京邑大水。
现代文：京邑发生水灾。
English: Floods in Kyoto.

古文：乙卯，遣使检行赈赡。
现代文：十九日，派遣使者巡察赈济。
English: On the 19th, an envoy was sent to inspect the economy.

古文：以江夏内史程道惠为广州刺史。
现代文：调江夏内史程道惠为广州刺史。
English: Changjiang Xia Nei Shi Cheng Dao Hui is the Guangzhou stabbing history.

古文：秋八月壬戌，特进、左光禄大夫范泰卒。
现代文：秋八月二十八日，特进、左光禄大夫范泰去世。
English: On the 28th day of the 8th month of autumn, Dr. Fan Tai, a doctor of Tetsujin and Sakoroku, passed away.

古文：冬十月甲辰，车驾于延贤堂听讼。
现代文：冬十月十日，驾临延贤堂听诉讼。
English: In winter, on October 10th, he came to Yan Xian Hall to listen to the lawsuit.

古文：闰月癸未，以右军司马刘德武为豫州刺史。
现代文：闰十月十九日，任命右军司马刘德武为豫州刺史。
English: On October 19th, Liu Dewu, the Right Division of the Central Military Commission, was appointed as the Henan Provincial Historian.

古文：辛卯，安陆公相周籍之为宁州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任安陆公相周籍之为宁州刺史。
English: On the 27th, he appointed Anlu Gongxiang to be the next governor of Ningzhou.

古文：十二月庚寅，左光禄大夫、领军将军赵伦之卒。
现代文：十二月二十七日，左光禄大夫、领军将军赵伦之去世。
English: On December 27th, General Zhao Lunzhi, the doctor of the Left Guanglu and the leader of the army, passed away.

古文：是岁，天竺国遣使献方物。
现代文：这年，天竺国派使者来进献特产。
English: In this year, the country of Tianyu sent an envoy to bring in special products.

古文：六年春正月辛丑，车驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：元嘉六年正月初八，驾临南郊祭祀。
English: On the eighth day of the first month of the sixth year of the Yuan Jia, he came to the southern suburb to worship.

古文：癸丑，以骠骑将军、荆州刺史彭城王义康为司徒、录尚书事，领平北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：二十八日，委任骠骑将军、荆州刺史彭城王义康为司徒、录尚书事，兼任平北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: On the 28th, Wang Yikang, the general of Hebei Province and the governor of Jingzhou Province, was appointed as a member of the Council of State, and the records were recorded. He also served as the general of Pingbei Province and the governor of South Xuzhou Province.

古文：三月丁巳，立皇子劭为皇太子。
现代文：三月二十五日，立皇子劭为皇太子。
English: On March 25, the crown prince was enthroned.

古文：戊午，大赦天下，赐文武位一等。
现代文：二十六日，大赦天下，文臣武将各晋爵一等。
English: On the 26th, there was a general amnesty, and all civil servants and military commanders were promoted to the first class.

古文：辛酉，以左卫将军殷景仁为中领军。
现代文：二十九日，任命左卫将军殷景仁为中领军。
English: On the 29th, the left guard general Yin Jingren was appointed as the middle leader.

古文：夏四月癸亥，以尚书左仆射王敬弘为尚书令，丹阳尹临川王义庆为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书江夷为尚书右仆射。
现代文：夏四月二日，委任尚书左仆射王敬弘为尚书令，丹阳尹临川王义庆为尚书左仆射，吏部尚书江夷为尚书右仆射。
English: On April 2 of the summer, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand man, Sha Wang Jinghong, as Shangshu's second-in-command, Danyang Yin Linchuan Wang Yiqing as Shangshu's left-hand man, and Shangshu's right-hand man, Jiang Yi, as Shangshu's right-hand man.

古文：五月壬辰朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：五月一日，日蚀。
English: May 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：癸巳，以新除尚书令王敬弘为特进、左光禄大夫。
现代文：二日，任命新任尚书令王敬弘为特进、左光禄大夫。
English: On the second day of the month, Wang Jinghong, the newly-appointed Shangshurong, was appointed as a special envoy and doctor of the Left Guanglu.

古文：甲午，以抚军司马刘道济为益州刺史。
现代文：三日，委任抚军司马刘道济为益州刺史。
English: On the third day, he appointed the military commander Ma Liu Daoji as the governor of Yizhou.

古文：乙卯，于雍州置冯翊郡。
现代文：二十四日，在雍州设置冯翊郡。
English: On the 24th, Fengye County was established in Yongzhou.

古文：七月己酉，以尚书左丞孔默之为广州刺史。
现代文：七月十九日，委派尚书左丞孔默之为广州刺史。
English: On July 19th, Shangshu Zang Rong and Gong Miao were appointed as the Guangzhou historians.

古文：是月，百济王遣使献方物。
现代文：同月，百济王派使者来进献特产。
English: In the same month, the King of Baekje sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：九月戊午，于秦州置陇西、宋康二郡。
现代文：九月二十九日，在秦州设置陇西、宗康两郡。
English: On September 29, Shaanxi and Zongkang counties were established in Qinzhou.

古文：冬十月壬申，中领军殷景仁丁艰去职。
现代文：冬十月十四日，中领军殷景仁因父丧离职。
English: In the winter of October 14th, the middle leader, Yin Jingren, left his post due to the death of his father.

古文：十一月己丑朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：十一日一日，日蚀。
English: On the 11th day of the 11th month, a solar eclipse occurred.

古文：十二月丁亥，河南国、河西王遣使献方物。
现代文：十二月三十日，河南国、河西王派遣使者来进献特产。
English: On December 30th, Henan Province and the King of Hexi sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：七年春正月癸巳，以吐谷浑慕容璝为征西将军、沙州刺史。
现代文：元嘉七年正月初六，授吐谷浑慕密王贵为征西将军、沙州刺史。
English: On the 6th day of the 1st month of the 7th year of the Yuan Jia, Tu Gu Hunmu Mi Wang Gui was awarded the title of General of the Western Conquest and the history of Shazhou.

古文：是月，倭国王遣使献方物。
现代文：同月，倭国王派使者来进献特产。
English: In the same month, the king of Wa sent an envoy to offer special products.

古文：三月戊子，遣右将军到彦之北伐，水军入河。
现代文：三月二日，派右将军到彦之北伐，水师进入黄河。
English: On March 2nd, General Paizhe Yu led the Northern Expedition to Yan'an, and the sailors entered the Yellow River.

古文：甲午，以前征虏司马尹冲为司州刺史。
现代文：八日，委任前征虏司马尹冲为司州刺史。
English: On the 8th, Ma Yinchong, the pre-recruitment secretary, was appointed as the secretary of state.

古文：甲寅，以前中领军殷景仁为领军将军。
现代文：二十八日，任命前中领军殷景仁为领军将军。
English: On the 28th, Yin Jingren, the former leader of the Central Army, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：丙申，以平北谘议参军甄法护为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二十七日，诃罗单国派使者来进献特产。六月二十四日，任命冠军将军氐人杨难当为秦州刺史。
English: On the 27th day of the 4th month of the summer, Laos sent an envoy to offer special products. On the 24th day of the 6th month, the champion general Yang Nantang was appointed as the history of Qinzhou.

古文：戊戌，索虏滑台戍弃城走。
现代文：秋七月四日，索虏郂戍官兵弃城逃走。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Sori officials and soldiers abandoned the city and fled.

古文：甲寅，林邑国、诃罗佗国、师子国遣使献方物。
现代文：十二日，林邑国、诃罗拖国、狮子国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 12th, Lin's country, Miao Luo Tong's country and Lion's country sent envoys to bring special products.

古文：冬十月甲寅，罢南豫州并豫州。
现代文：冬十月一日，撤南豫州并入豫州。
English: On the first day of October in winter, the southern part of Yuzhou was withdrawn and merged into Yuzhou.

古文：以左将军竟陵王义宣为徐州刺史。
现代文：委任左将军竟陵王义宣为徐州刺史。
English: Appointed the left-wing general Qingting Wang Yixuan as the chief historian of Xuzhou.

古文：戊午，立钱署，铸四铢钱。
现代文：五日，设立钱署，铸造四铢钱。
English: On the fifth day, the money department was established and minted four yuan coins.

古文：戊寅，金墉城为索虏所陷。
现代文：二十五日，金墉城被索虏攻陷。
English: On the 25th, the city of Jinju was captured by the Sauru.

古文：十一月癸未，虎牢城复为索虏所陷。
现代文：十一月一日，虎牢城又被索虏攻破。
English: On November 1st, the city of Torao was once again breached by the Soryu army.

古文：壬辰，遣征南大将军檀道济北讨，右将军到彦之自滑台奔退。
现代文：十日，派征南大将军檀道济北伐，右将军到彦之从滑台撤退。
English: On the 10th, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army was sent to the Northern Expedition, and the right general withdrew from the slide to Hikone.

古文：十二月辛酉，以南兗州刺史长沙王义欣为豫州刺史，司徒司马吉翰为司州刺史。
现代文：十二月九日，委任南兖州刺史长沙王义欣为豫州刺史。二十三日，京邑发生火灾，烧到了土地庙的北墙。
English: On December 9th, Changsha Wang Yixin, the governor of South Luzhou, was appointed as the governor of Henan Province. On the 23rd, a fire broke out in Beijing, burning the northern wall of the Land Temple.

古文：乙亥，京邑火，延烧太社北墙。兗州刺史竺灵秀有罪伏诛。
现代文：兖州刺史竺灵秀因罪被处死。
English: Zhangzhou Zishi Yulingxiu was executed for his crime.

古文：八年春正月庚寅，于交州复立珠崖郡。
现代文：元嘉八年春正月九日，在交州又设立珠崖郡。
English: On the 9th day of the first month of the eighth year of the Yuan Jia, Zhuya County was established in Jiaozhou.

古文：癸巳，以左军将军申宣为兗州刺史。
现代文：十二日，委任左军将军申宣为兖州刺史。
English: On the 12th, General Shen Xuan of the Left Army was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：丁酉，征南大将军檀道济破索虏于东平寿张。
现代文：十六日，征南大将军檀道济在东平寿张大败索虏。
English: On the 16th, the general of the Southern Expedition, Dang Daoji, defeated Zhang in Dongping Shou.

古文：二月乙卯，以平北司马韦郎为青州刺史。
现代文：二月四日，任命平北司马韦朗为青州刺史。
English: On February 4th, the mayor of Pingbei, Sima Weilang, was appointed as the official historian of Qingzhou.

古文：戊午，以尚书右仆射江夷为湘州刺史。
现代文：七日，委任尚书右仆射江夷为湘州刺史。
English: On the 7th, he appointed Shangshu's right-hand man, Shao Jiangyi, as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：辛酉，滑台为索虏所陷。
现代文：十日，滑台被索虏所攻破。
English: On the 10th, the slide was breached by a salamander.

古文：癸酉，征南大将军檀道济引军还。
现代文：二十二日，征南大将军檀道济率军回朝。
English: On the 22nd, the general of the Southern Expeditionary Army, Dang Daoji, led the army back to the North.

古文：丁丑，青州刺史萧思话弃城走。以太子右卫率刘遵考为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，青州刺史萧思话弃城逃走，任命太子右卫帅刘遵考为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 26th day of the month, Xiao Si, the governor of Qingzhou, abandoned the city and fled, and appointed Liu Zunkao, the prince of the right guard, as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：三月甲申，车驾于延贤堂听讼。
现代文：三月四日，驾临延贤堂听诉讼。
English: On March 4, he arrived at Yanxian Hall to listen to the proceedings.

古文：戊申，诏曰： 自顷军役殷兴，国用增广，资储不给，百度尚繁。
现代文：三十日，下诏说： 由于战事频仍，军费增大，国用不足，花费甚多。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict said: Due to the frequency of war, military expenditure has increased, the state is insufficient, and it costs a lot.

古文：宜存简约，以应事实。
现代文：宜勤俭节约，以应不时之需。
English: It is advisable to be diligent, frugal and thrifty to meet the needs of the times.

古文：内外可通共详思，务令节俭。 
现代文：宫内宫外都要认真反思，一定要节俭。 
English: Both inside and outside the womb, we must seriously reflect and be frugal.

古文：一时水旱，便有罄匮，苟不深存务本，丰给靡因。郡守赋政方畿，县宰亲民之主，宜思奖训，导以良规。
现代文：夏四月四日，任命衡阳王的老师阮正龄为湘州刺史。五日，划长江之南和扬州的晋陵郡给南徐州，长江之北给兖州，任命徐州刺史竟陵王义宣为南兖州刺史，司徒司马吉翰为徐州刺史。闰六月二十一日，下诏说： 由于农事荒废，游民众多，田畴荒芜，无人耕种。
English: On the 4th day of the 4th month of the summer, Ruan Zhengling, the teacher of Hengyang Wang, was appointed as the historian of Xiangzhou. On the 5th day, Jinling County in the south of the Yangtze River and Yangzhou was assigned to South Xuzhou, and the north of the Yangtze River was assigned to Zhangzhou. The historian of Xuzhou, Jingling Wang Yixuan, was appointed as the historian of South Zhangzhou, and Stusima Jihan was appointed as the historian of Xuzhou. On the 21st day of the 6th month, the following edict said: Due to the waste of agricultural work, there are

古文：咸使肆力，地无遗利，耕蚕树艺，各尽其力。
现代文：一旦发生水旱灾害，使粮食匮乏，倘不以农为本，国家是无论如何不会富足的。郡守县宰宜劝奖百姓，以农桑为本。使百姓尽力，地无遗利，耕种树桑，各尽其力。
English: In the event of a flood and drought disaster that causes food shortages, if farmers are not taken as the basis, the country will not be rich in any case. The county magistrate should encourage the people to take the agricultural mulberry as the basis. Let the people do their best, make every effort, and cultivate mulberry trees.

古文：若有力田殊众，岁竟条名列上。 
现代文：若有耕种特别突出的，年末登记上报。 
English: If any farming is particularly outstanding, it will be registered and reported at the end of the year.

古文：扬州旱。
现代文：扬州干旱。
English: Drought in Yangzhou.

古文：乙巳，遣侍御史省狱讼，申调役。
现代文：二十六日，派遣侍御史检查诉讼，重新征收调役。
English: On the 26th, the court official was dispatched to inspect the lawsuit, and the transfer was re-imposed.

古文：丙午，以左军谘议参军刘道产为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任左军咨议参军刘道产为雍州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Liu Daoshan, who was appointed as a member of the Left Army for consultation and participation in the army, made history in Yongzhou.

古文：秋八月甲辰，临川王义庆解尚书仆射。
现代文：秋八月二十六日，解除临川王义庆的尚书仆射职务。
English: On the 26th day of the 8th month of the autumn, Wang Yiqing of Linchuan was relieved of his duties as a courtier.

古文：丁未，割豫州秦郡属南兗州。
现代文：二十九日，将豫州秦郡划给南兖州。
English: On the 29th, Qin County of Henan Province was transferred to Nan'an Province.

古文：冬十二月，罢湘州，还并荆州。
现代文：冬十二月，撤湘州并回荆州。
English: In the winter of December, it withdrew from Hunan and returned to Jingzhou.

古文：九年春三月庚戌，卫将军王弘进位太保，加中书监。
现代文：元嘉九年春三月六日，卫将军王弘晋升为太保，加封为中书监。
English: On March 6th, the spring of the ninth year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Wang Hong, the general of the Guards, was promoted to Taibao and given the additional title of Central Library Supervisor.

古文：丁巳，征南大将军、江州刺史檀道济进位司空。
现代文：十三日，征南大将军、江州刺史檀道济晋升为司空。
English: On the 13th, the general of the Southern Expedition, Jiangzhou Zishi Dangdozhi, was promoted to Sikuo.

古文：夏四月乙亥，以护军将军殷穆为特进、右光禄大夫，建昌县公到彦之为护军将军。
现代文：夏四月一日，委任护军将军殷穆为特进右光禄大夫，建昌县公到彦之为护军将军。
English: On the first day of April in the summer, Yin Mu, the general of the military escort, was appointed as the special doctor of Jianjin Uguanglu, and the general of the military escort, Jianchang County, was appointed as the general of the military escort.

古文：五月壬申，中书监、录尚书事、卫将军、扬州刺史王弘薨。
现代文：五月二十九日，中书监、录尚书事、卫将军、扬州刺史王弘去世。
English: On May 29th, Wang Hong, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, and the chief librarian of the People's Republic of China, passed away.

古文：六月甲戌，以左军谘议参军申宣为青州刺史。
现代文：六月一日，任命左军谘议参军申宜为青州刺史。
English: On June 1st, the appointment of the Left Army to consult and join the army was a good omen for Qingzhou.

古文：分青州置冀州。
现代文：从青州划出一部分设置冀州。
English: A part of Qingzhou was set aside as Jizhou.

古文：戊寅，司徒、南徐州刺史彭城王义康改领扬州刺史。
现代文：五日，调司徒、南徐州刺史彭城王义康任扬州刺史。
English: On the 5th, Wang Yikang of Pengcheng, the chief conductor of the Southern Xuzhou Orchestra, was appointed as the conductor of the Yangzhou Orchestra.

古文：己卯，以司徒参军崔諲为冀州刺史。
现代文：六日，任命司徒参军崔为冀州刺史。
English: On the 6th, he appointed Szu to join the army of Cui to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：壬午，以吐谷浑慕容延为平东将军，吐谷浑拾虔为平北将军，吐谷浑辉伐为镇军将军。
现代文：九日，任命吐谷浑慕容延为平东将军，吐谷浑拾虔为平北将军，吐谷浑辉伐为镇军将军。
English: On the 9th, he appointed Tuya Hunmu Rongyan as the general of Pingdong, Tuya Hunqian as the general of Pingbei, and Tuya Hunhuiwa as the general of the town army.

古文：癸未，诏曰： 益、梁、交、广，境域幽遐，治宜物情，或多偏拥。可更遣大使，巡求民瘼。 
现代文：十日，下诏说： 益、梁、交、广，地处偏远，应据当地情况治理，有的地方偏僻闭塞，可派使臣，征求民苦。 
English: On the tenth day, the next edict said: Yixing, Liang, Jiaotong and Guangxi are remote and should be governed according to local conditions. Some places are remote and congested. Envoys can be sent to solicit the suffering of the people.

古文：置积射、强弩将军官。
现代文：设置积射、强弩将军官。
English: Set the accretion projectile and the powerful hammer to the general officer.

古文：乙未，以征西将军、沙州刺史吐谷浑慕容璝为征西大将军、西秦河二州刺史、陇西王。
现代文：二十二日，封征西将军、沙州刺史吐谷浑慕容王贵为征西大将军、西秦河二州刺史、陇西王。
English: On the 22nd, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest, the Western General of the Conquest.

古文：北秦州刺史氐杨难当加号征西将军。
现代文：北秦州刺史氐人杨难当加封为征西将军。
English: Yang Nantang, a scholar from North Qin Province, was awarded the title of General of the Western Conquest.

古文：壬寅，以抚军将军、荆州刺史江夏王义恭为征北将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史；前将军临川王义庆为平西将军、荆州刺史；南兗州刺史竟陵王义宣为中书监、中军将军；征虏将军衡阳王义季为南徐州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，委任抚军将军，荆州刺史江夏王义恭为征北将军、开府仪同三司，南兖州刺史、前将军临川王义庆为平西将军、荆州刺史，南兖州刺史竟陵王义宣为中书监、中军将军，征虏将军衡阳王义季为南徐州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Fuzhou general, Jingzhou general Jiangxia Wang Yigong was appointed as the general of the Northern Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong as the third secretary, South Luzhou general and former general Linchuan Wang Yijing was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, Jingzhou general and South Luzhou general Jingling Wang Yixuan was appointed as the general of the Central Expedition, and Hengyang general and former general Linchuan Wang Yizi was appointed as the general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：秋七月戊辰，以尚书王仲德为镇北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：秋七月二十六日，委任尚书王仲德为镇北将军、徐州刺史。
English: On the 26th day of the 7th month of autumn, he appointed Shangshu Wang Zhongde as the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Xuzhou.

古文：庚午，以领军将军殷景仁为尚书仆射，太子詹事刘湛为领军将军。
现代文：二十八日，任命领军将军殷景仁为尚书仆射，太子詹事刘湛为领军将军。
English: On the 28th, the leading general Yin Jingren was appointed as Shang Shufu's subordinate, and the prince Zhan Zhi Liu Zhan as the leading general.

古文：壬申，河南国、河西王遣使献方物。
现代文：三十日，河南国、河西王派遣使者来进献特产。
English: On the 30th, Henan Province and the King of Hexi sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：九月，妖贼赵广寇益州，陷没郡县，州府讨平之。
现代文：九月，贼人赵广进攻益州，攻陷郡县，州府派兵讨伐，平定叛乱。
English: In September, the thief Zhao Guang attacked Yizhou, conquered counties, and the prefectural government sent troops to quell the rebellion.

古文：冬十一月壬子，以少府甄法崇为益州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月十一日，任命少府甄法崇为益州刺史。
English: In winter, on November 11th, Shofu Zhenbo Chong was appointed as the chief historian of Yishu.

古文：癸丑，于广州立宋康郡。
现代文：十二日，在广州设立宋康郡。
English: On the 12th, Songkang County was established in Guangzhou.

古文：十二月甲戌，以右军参军李秀之为交州刺史。
现代文：十二月四日，委任右军参军李秀之为交州刺史。
English: On December 4th, Li Xiujing, a right-wing military officer, was appointed to be the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：庚寅，立第五皇子绍为庐陵王，江夏王义恭子郎为南丰县王。
现代文：三十日，立第五皇子绍为庐陵王，江夏王义恭之子朗为南丰县王。
English: On the 30th, the fifth prince, Shao, was established as the King of Fuling, and the son of King Yixiong of Jiangxia, Lang, as the King of Nanfeng County.

古文：十年春正月甲寅，竟陵王义宣改封南谯王，镇北将军、徐州刺史王仲德加领兗州刺史，淮南太守段宏为青州刺史。
现代文：元嘉十年春正月四日，竟陵王义宣被改封为南谯王。镇北将军、徐州刺史王仲德兼任兖州刺史，调淮南太守段宏为青州刺史。
English: On the 4th day of the first month of the spring of the 10th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Wang Yixuan, the general of Jingling, was changed to the king of Nanxi. Wang Zhongde, the general of Zhenbei and the governor of Xuzhou, also served as the governor of Zhangzhou, and Duan Hong, the governor of Huainan, was changed to the governor of Qingzhou.

古文：己未，大赦天下。
现代文：九日，大赦天下。
English: On the 9th, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：孤老、六疾不能自存者，人赐谷五斛。
现代文：孤儿老人，身患疾病难以生存者，每人赐给谷五斛。
English: Orphans, the elderly, and those who suffer from illnesses that make it difficult for them to survive are each given five grains of barley.

古文：后将军、豫州刺史长沙王义欣进号镇军将军。
现代文：后将军、豫州刺史长沙王义欣晋升为镇军将军。
English: Afterward, the general, Yuzhou Zhangshi Changsha Wang Yixin, was promoted to the general of the town army.

古文：夏四月戊戌，青州刺史段宏加冀州刺史。
现代文：夏四月三十日，任命青州刺史段宏兼任冀州刺史。
English: On the 30th day of the 4th month of the summer, he appointed the Qingzhou chief historian Duan Hong as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：封阳县侯萧思话为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：委任封阳县侯萧思话为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: He appointed Hou Xiao Siwei of Fuyang County to be the leader and Nanqin Erzhou to be the historian.

古文：五月，林邑王遣使献方物。
现代文：五月，林邑王派遣使者来进献特产。
English: In May, King Lin sent an emissary to bring special products.

古文：六月乙亥，以前青州刺史韦郎为广州刺史。
现代文：六月八日，任命前青州刺史韦朗为广州刺史。
English: On June 8th, Wei Lang, the former mayor of Qingzhou, was appointed as the mayor of Guangzhou.

古文：阇婆州诃罗单国遣使献方物。
现代文：婆州诃罗单国派遣使者来进献特产。
English: An envoy from the state of Bharatiya Janata Party was sent to offer special products.

古文：秋七月戊戌，曲赦益、梁、秦三州。于益州立宋宁、宋兴二郡。
现代文：秋七月一日，赦免益、梁、秦三州，在益州设立宋宁、宋兴二郡。
English: On the first day of autumn in July, the three prefectures of Yizhou, Liang and Qin were pardoned, and the two counties of Songning and Songxing were established in Yizhou.

古文：八月丁丑，于青州立太原郡。
现代文：八月十一日，在青州设立太原郡。
English: On August 11, Taiyuan County was established in Qingzhou.

古文：辛巳，护军将军到彦之卒。
现代文：十五日，护军将军到彦之去世。
English: On the fifteenth day, the escort general Zuihiko passed away.

古文：冬十一月，氐杨难当寇汉川。
现代文：冬十一月，氐人杨连当进犯汉川。
English: In the winter of November, Yang Lian Dang, a man from Shandong Province, invaded Han River.

古文：丁未，梁州刺史甄法护弃城走，难当据有梁州。
现代文：十二日，梁州刺史甄法护弃城逃走，杨连当占领梁州。
English: On the 12th, Liangzhou stabbed history screening method escorted the abandoned city to escape, Yang Lian Dang occupied Liangzhou.

古文：十一年春正月，亡命马大玄群党数百人寇秦、梁，州郡讨平之。
现代文：元嘉十一年春正月，亡命之徒马大玄聚集数百人进犯泰山，州郡派兵讨伐平定了叛乱。
English: In the first month of the spring of the eleventh year of Yuan Jia, the outlaw Ma Daxuan gathered hundreds of people to attack Mount Tai, and the state and county sent troops to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：二月癸酉，以交址太守李耽之为交州刺史。
现代文：二月十日，提拔交阝止太守李耽之为交州刺史。
English: On February 10th, the promotion of Jiaozhizh to the position of the governor of Jiaozhou, Li Dangying, became history.

古文：夏四月，梁、秦二州刺史萧思话破氐杨难当，梁州平。
现代文：夏四月，梁、秦二州刺史萧思话击败氐人杨连当，平定梁州。
English: In the summer of April, Liang and Qin Erzhou stabbed Shi Xiao Si to defeat the eunuch Yang Liantang and subdue Liangzhou.

古文：五月丁卯，曲赦梁、南秦二州剑阁北。
现代文：五月五日，赦免梁、南秦二州剑阁以北地区。
English: On May 5, he pardoned Liang and the areas north of Jiange in South Qin State.

古文：戊寅，以大沮渠茂虔为征西大将军、凉州刺史。
现代文：十七日，任命大沮渠茂虔为征西大将军、凉州刺史。
English: On the seventeenth day, he appointed the Great Depressor Moqen to be the General of the Western Expedition and the Historian of Liangzhou.

古文：是月，京邑大水。
现代文：同月，京邑发洪水。
English: In the same month, flooding occurred in Kyoto.

古文：六月丁未，省魏郡。
现代文：六月四日，视察魏郡。
English: On June 4, he inspected Wei County.

古文：是岁，林邑国、扶南国、诃罗单国遣使献方物。
现代文：同年，林邑国、扶南国、诃罗单国派使节来进献特产。
English: In the same year, envoys from Lin'yi Province, Funan Province and Luo Shan Province came to offer special products.

古文：十二年春正月辛酉，大赦天下。
现代文：元嘉十二年春正月三日，大赦天下。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the 12th year of the Yuan Jia, the general amnesty came into effect.

古文：辛未，车驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：十三日，皇上到南郊祭奠。
English: On the 13th, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to pay his respects.

古文：癸酉，封黄龙国主冯弘为燕主。
现代文：十五日，封黄龙国主冯强为燕王。
English: On the 15th, Feng Qiang, the ruler of Huanglong, was crowned the King of Swans.

古文：夏四月乙酉，尚书仆射殷景仁加中护军。
现代文：夏四月二十三日，加封尚书仆射殷景仁为中护军。
English: On the 23rd day of the 4th month of the summer, Shang Shu's servant Shoin Jingren was appointed as the middle protector.

古文：丙辰，诏曰： 周宗以宁，实由多士；汉室之隆，亦资得人。
现代文：三十日，下诏说： 周朝安宁，是因为广揽士人，汉室兴隆，亦靠得人才。
English: On the 30th, the next imperial edict said: The Zhou Dynasty was peaceful because of the wide range of scholars, the prosperity of the Han Dynasty, and the talent of the Han Dynasty.

古文：朕寐寤乐贤，为日已久，而俊哲难阶，明扬莫效。用令遗才在野，管库虚朝，永怀前载，惭德深矣。
现代文：我思贤若渴，时日已久，但不见成效。如果人才散遗在荒野，而朝中空虚，对比前朝，深感惭愧。
English: I've been thinking about it for a long time, but I haven't seen any results. If talent is scattered in the wilderness, and the government is empty, compared to the previous government, I feel deeply ashamed.

古文：是夜，京郡地震。六月，丹阳、淮南、吴兴、义兴大水，京邑乘船。
现代文：举荐你所知的人才，是孔子的遗训，士人做官是先朝之惯例，通告各地，举荐人才。依据能力大小选用。 这夜，京都发生地震。六月，丹阳、淮南、吴兴、义兴发洪水，京城街上可行船。
English: It is the legacy of Confucius to recommend talents you know, and it was the practice of previous dynasties to promote officials from the ranks of officials. People from all over the country were notified and recommended talents were selected according to their ability. That night, an earthquake occurred in Kyoto. In June, floods occurred in Danyang, Huainan, Wuxing, and Yixing, and there were boats on the streets of Beijing.

古文：己酉，以徐豫南兗三州、会稽宣城二郡米数百万斛赐五郡遭水民。
现代文：二十三日，用徐、豫南、兖三州，会稽、宣城二郡米数百万斛赈济五郡遭水灾的难民。
English: On the 23rd, millions of flood-affected refugees in five counties of Handan were assisted by two counties of Xu, Henan and Handan, and two counties of Hefei and Xuancheng.

古文：是月，断酒。
现代文：同月，全国禁止饮酒。
English: In the same month, alcohol was banned throughout the country.

古文：师子国遣使献方物。
现代文：狮子国派使者来进献特产。
English: The lion country sent an emissary to offer special products.

古文：秋七月乙酉，阇婆娑达国、扶南国并遣使献方物。
现代文：秋七月六日，婆达国、扶南国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 6th day of the 7th month of autumn, Bada Province and Funan Province sent envoys to present special products.

古文：八月壬申，于益州立南晋寿、南新巳、北巴西三郡。
现代文：八月七日，在益州设立南晋寿、南新巴、北巴西三郡。
English: On August 7, the three counties of South Jinzhou, South Xinba and North Brazil were established in Yizhou.

古文：乙亥，原遭水郡诸逋负。
现代文：十一日，免去遭水灾的各郡所欠的赋税。
English: On the 11th, the tax arrears of the counties affected by the floods were exempted.

古文：九月，蜀郡贼张寻为寇。
现代文：九月，蜀郡张寻叛乱。
English: In September, there was a rebellion in Zhangxing, Shu County.

古文：冬十一月，以右军行参军苟道覆为交州刺史。
现代文：冬十一月，任命右军行参军苟道覆为交州刺史。
English: In the winter of November, he appointed the right-wing military march to the military parade to be the history of Jiaozhou.

古文：十三年春正月癸丑，上有疾，不朝会。
现代文：元嘉十三年春正月一日，皇上患病不上朝。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 13th year of Yuan Jia, the emperor fell ill and did not attend court.

古文：三月己未，司空、江州刺史檀道济有罪伏诛。
现代文：三月二日，司空、江州刺史檀道济因罪被杀。
English: On March 2nd, Siku and Jiangzhou Jishi Dang Daojie were killed for their crimes.

古文：庚申，大赦天下。
现代文：三日，大赦天下。
English: On the third day, there was a general amnesty.

古文：以中军将军南谯王义宣为镇南将军、江州刺史。
现代文：委任中军将军南谯王义宣为镇南将军、江州刺史。
English: He appointed the general of the Chinese army, Nanzhao Wang Yixuan, as the general of Zhennan and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：夏五月戊辰，镇北将军、徐兗二州刺史王仲德进号镇北大将军。
现代文：夏五月十八日，镇北将军、徐兖二州刺史王仲德晋升为镇北大将军。
English: On the 18th day of the 5th month of the summer, Zhenbei General Wang Zhongde was promoted to Zhenbei Major General.

古文：庚辰，以征北司马王方俳为兗州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命征北司马王方徘为兖州刺史。
English: On the 30th, Zhengbei Sima Wangfanguang was appointed as the governor of Zhangzhou.

古文：六月，高丽国、武都王遣使献方物。
现代文：六月，高丽国、武都王派遣使者来进献特产。
English: In June, King Budo of Goryeo sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：秋七月己未，零陵王太妃薨。
现代文：秋七月十日，零陵王太妃去世。
English: On the 10th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Princess Ziling Wang Taifeng passed away.

古文：追崇为晋皇后，葬以晋礼。
现代文：追尊为晋皇后，葬以晋礼。
English: Tsuizen was the queen of the Jin Dynasty and was buried with the Jin Rite.

古文：八月庚寅，尚书仆射、中护军殷景仁改为护军将军。
现代文：八月十一日，尚书仆射、中护军殷景仁改任护军将军。
English: On August 11th, Shang Shuxu's subordinate, Yin Jingren, who was in charge of the middle guard, was promoted to general of the guard.

古文：九月癸丑，立第二皇子浚为始兴王，第三皇子讳为武陵王。
现代文：九月五日，立第二皇子浚为始兴王，第三皇子骏为武陵王。
English: On September 5th, the second prince, Jun, was appointed as the King of Shixing, and the third prince, Zou, as the King of Wuling.

古文：十四年春正月辛卯，车驾亲祠南郊，大赦天下。
现代文：元嘉十四年春正月十五日，皇上到南郊祭奠，大赦天下。
English: On the fifteenth day of the first month of the spring of the fourteenth year of Yuan Jia, the emperor went to the southern suburbs to pay tribute and grant a general amnesty to the world.

古文：文武赐位一等；孤老、六疾不能自存者，人赐谷五斛。
现代文：文臣武将各赐爵一等；孤儿老人，病残者难以生存的，各赐谷五斛。
English: Nobles, courtiers, and generals were each given a first-class knighthood; orphans, the elderly, and the infirm, who were unable to survive, were each given five gongs.

古文：二月壬子，以步兵校尉刘道真为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：二月六日，任命步兵校尉刘真道为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On February 6th, Liu Zhendao, an infantry lieutenant, was appointed as the leader of the Southern Qin and the governor of Erzhou.

古文：夏四月丁未，以辅国将军周籍之为益州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二日，委任辅国将军周籍之为益州刺史。
English: On the 2nd of April in the summer, he appointed the general of the Auxiliary Province Zhou to be the governor of Yizhou.

古文：秋八月戊午，以尚书金部郎中徐森之为交州刺史。
现代文：秋八月十五日，任命尚书金部郎中徐森之为交州刺史。
English: On the 15th day of the 8th month in autumn, he appointed Shoshu's vice-minister of finance, Xu Sen, as the governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：冬十二月辛酉，停贺雪。
现代文：冬十二月二十日，停止大臣向皇上恭贺下雪。
English: On December 20th, the winter, the minister stopped coming to congratulate the emperor on the snow.

古文：河南国、河西王、诃罗单国并遣使献方物。
现代文：河南国、河西王、诃罗单国都派使者来进献特产。
English: Henan Province, the King of Hexi Province, and the Kingdom of Laos all sent envoys to bring special products.

古文：十五年春二月丁未，以平东将军吐谷浑慕容延为镇西将军、秦河二州刺史。
现代文：元嘉十五年春二月五日，任命平东将军吐谷浑慕容延为镇西将军、秦河二州刺史。
English: On February 5, the spring of the 15th year of Yuan Jia, he appointed the general of Pingdong, Tuya Humurongyan, as the general of Zhenxi and the governor of Qinhe Erzhou.

古文：夏四月甲辰，燕王年遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月五日，燕王弘派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 5th day of the 4th month of the summer, Yan Wanghong sent an envoy to bring in special products.

古文：立皇太子妃殷氏，赐王公以下各有差。
现代文：立殷氏为皇太子妃，王公以下各有赏赐。
English: Li Yin is the crown prince's wife, and everyone below the crown prince receives a reward.

古文：己巳，以倭国王珍为安东将军。
现代文：三十日，封倭国王珍为安东将军。
English: On the 30th, King Zhen of Wa was named General Anton.

古文：五月己丑，特进、右光禄大夫殷穆卒。辛卯，镇北大将军、徐州刺史王仲德卒。
现代文：五月二十日，特进、右光禄大夫殷穆去世，二十二日，镇北大将军、徐州刺史王仲德去世。
English: On May 20, Yin Mu, the doctor of Tejin and Uguanglu, passed away, and on the 22nd, Wang Zhongde, the general of Zhenbei and the leader of Xuzhou Jishi, passed away.

古文：壬辰，以右卫将军刘遵考为徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：二十六日任命右卫将军刘遵尧为徐、兖二州刺史。
English: On the 26th, he appointed the right guard general Liu Zunyi as the governor of the two prefectures of Xu and Handan.

古文：秋七月辛未，地震。
现代文：秋七月三日，发生地震。
English: On the 3rd of July in autumn, an earthquake occurred.

古文：甲戌，以陈、南顿二郡太守徐循为宁州刺史。
现代文：六日，委任陈、南顿二郡太守徐循为宁州刺史。
English: On the 6th, Chen and Xu Xun, the governor of the two counties of Nantong, were appointed to write the history of Ningzhou.

古文：八月辛丑，以左卫将军赵伯符为徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：八月四日，任命左卫将军赵伯符为徐、兖二州刺史。
English: On August 4, Zhao Bofu, the General of the Left Division, was appointed as the governor of the two prefectures of Xu and Handan.

古文：甲寅，以始兴内史陆徽为广州刺史。
现代文：十七日，委任始兴内史陆徽为广州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Shi Xing appointed Lu Hui, the leading historian of Inner Mongolia, as the historian of Guangzhou.

古文：丁巳，以兗州刺史王方俳为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：二十日，任命兖州刺史王方徘为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On the 20th, Wang Fanghuang was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and Wang Fanghuang was appointed as the chief historian of Qing and Hebei.

古文：是岁，武都王、河南国、高丽国、倭国、扶南国、林邑国并遣使献方物。
现代文：同年，武都王、河南国、高丽国、倭国、扶南国、林邑国派使者来进献特产。
English: In the same year, King Wudu, Henan Province, Goryeo Province, Wa Province, Funan Province and Lin'yi Province sent envoys to present special products.

古文：十六年春正月戊寅，车驾于北郊阅武。
现代文：元嘉十六年春正月十三日，皇上驾临北郊检阅军队。
English: On the 13th day of the first month of the spring of the 16th year of Yuan Jia, the emperor drove to the northern suburbs to review the army.

古文：庚寅，司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史彭城王义康进位大将军，领司徒，余如故。
现代文：二十六日，司徒、录尚书事、扬州刺史彭城王义康晋升为大将军，兼任司徒，原来职务照旧担任。
English: On the 26th, King Yikang of Yangzhou Zhishu Pengcheng was promoted to the rank of general, concurrently serving as an attendant, and the original position was still held.

古文：征北将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史江夏王义恭进位司空，刺史如故。
现代文：征北将军、开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史、江夏王义恭晋升为司空，刺史照旧担任。
English: General of the Northern Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong San Shi, Southern Zhangzhou Zhi Shi, and Jiangxia Wang Yigong were promoted to Siku, and Zhi Shi still served as before.

古文：特进、左光禄大夫王敬弘开府仪同三司。
现代文：特进、左光禄大夫王敬弘晋升为开府仪同三司。
English: Wang Jinghong, a special promotion and doctor of the Left Guanglu, was promoted to the third division of the Kaifu ceremony.

古文：癸巳，复分荆州置湘州。
现代文：二十九日，又从荆州分割出一部分设置湘州。
English: On the 29th, a part of Jingzhou was split off to form Hunan.

古文：二月己亥，以南徐州刺史衡阳王义季为安西将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：二月五日，委任南徐州刺史、衡阳王义季为安西将军、荆州刺史。
English: On February 5, Nan Xuzhou and Hengyang Wang Yi Ji were appointed as the general of Anxi and Jingzhou respectively.

古文：丁未，以始兴王浚为湘州刺史。
现代文：十三日，任命始兴王浚为湘州刺史。
English: On the 13th, Shi Xing Wang Jun was appointed as the new governor of Hunan Province.

古文：癸亥，割梁州之巴西梓潼南宕渠南汉中、南秦州之南安怀宁凡六郡，属益州。
现代文：三十日，划梁州的巴西、梓潼、南宕、渠南汉中、南秦州之南安怀宁六郡归益州。
English: On the 30th, the six counties of Brazil, Zizhi, Nantang, Quananhan Middle, and Nan'an Huaining in Zhiliang Prefecture were transferred to Yixing Prefecture.

古文：分长沙江夏郡立巴陵郡，属湘州。
现代文：从长沙江夏郡划出一部分设立巴陵郡，归属湘州。
English: A part of Xia County of the Yangtze River was carved out to establish Baling County, which belongs to Hunan.

古文：夏四月丁巳，以镇南将军、江州刺史南谯王义宣为征北将军、南徐州刺史。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，任命镇南将军、江州刺史、南谯王义宣为征北将军、南徐州刺史。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month of summer, he appointed Zhenan General, Jiangzhou Zhishi, Nanluo Wang Yixuan as the general to conquer the north, and Nanxuzhou Zhishi.

古文：平西将军临川王义庆为卫将军、江州刺史。
现代文：平西将军临川王义庆为卫将军、江州刺史。
English: The Pingxi general, Linchuan Wang Yiqing, became the Wei general and the governor of Jiangzhou.

古文：六月己酉，陇西吐谷浑慕容延改封河南王。
现代文：六月十六日，改封陇西吐谷浑慕容延为河南王。
English: On June 16th, he changed his title to King of Henan Province.

古文：癸丑，以吐谷浑拾寅为平西将军，吐谷浑繁暱为抚军将军。
现代文：二十日，任命吐谷浑拾寅为平西将军，吐谷浑繁日匿为抚军将军。
English: On the 20th, Tuya Hunshuin was appointed as the general of Pingxi, and Tuya Hunshang Rongni was appointed as the general of Fuzhou.

古文：秋八月庚子，立第四皇子铄为南平王。
现代文：秋八月八日，立第四皇子铄为南平王。
English: On the 8th day of the 8th month of autumn, the 4th prince was enthroned as the king of Nanping.

古文：闰月乙未，镇军将军、豫州刺史长沙王义欣薨。
现代文：闰九月四日，镇军将军、豫州刺史长沙王义欣去世。
English: On the 4th day of the 9th lunar month, the general of the town army and the leader of the Yuzhou army, Changsha Wang Yixin, passed away.

古文：戊戌，复分豫州之淮南为南豫州。癸卯，以左卫将军刘遵考为豫州刺史。
现代文：七日，又将豫州的淮河以南部分划出来设立南豫州，十二日，任命左卫将军刘遵考为豫州刺史。
English: On the 7th, the southern part of the Huaihe River in Yuzhou was set up as South Yuzhou, and on the 12th, the left guard general Liu Zunkao was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：戊申，以湘州刺史始兴王浚为南豫州之刺史，武陵王讳为湘州刺史。
现代文：十七日，调湘州刺史始兴王任南豫州刺史，武陵王浚任湘州刺史。
English: On the 17th, Shixing Wang was appointed as the governor of South Henan Province, and Wuling Wang was appointed as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：冬十二月乙亥，皇太子冠，大赦天下。
现代文：冬十二月十六日，皇太子举行加冠礼，大赦天下。
English: On the 16th of December, the Crown Prince held a coronation ceremony and granted amnesty to the whole world.

古文：是岁，武都王、河南王、林邑国、高丽国并遣使献方物。
现代文：同年，武都王、河南王、林邑国、高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: In the same year, the King of Wudu, the King of Henan, the State of Linyi, and the State of Goryeo sent envoys to present special products.

古文：十七年夏四月戊午朔，日有蚀之。五月癸巳，领军将军刘湛母忧去职。
现代文：元嘉十七年四月九日，日蚀。五月六日，领军将军刘湛因母病离职。
English: On the 9th day of the 4th month of the 17th year of Yuan Jia, there was a solar eclipse. On the 6th day of the 5th month, Liu Zhan, the leading general, left his post due to his mother's illness.

古文：秋七月壬寅，以征虏谘议参军杜骥为青州刺史。
现代文：秋七月十六日，任命征虏谘议参军杜骥为青州刺史。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, Du Wei, a conscript, was appointed to write the history of Qingzhou.

古文：壬子，皇后袁氏崩。
现代文：二十六日，袁皇后去世。
English: On the 26th, Empress Yuan passed away.

古文：八月，徐、兗、青、冀四州大水。
现代文：八月，徐、兖、青、冀四州发洪水。
English: In August, floods occurred in the four prefectures of Xu, Handan, Qingdao and Hebei.

古文：己未，遣使检行赈恤。
现代文：四日，派使臣巡查赈济。
English: On the fourth day, he sent envoys to inspect the economy.

古文：九月壬子，葬元皇后于长宁陵。
现代文：九月二十七日，葬袁皇后于长宁陵。
English: On September 27, Empress Yuan was buried in Changning Mausoleum.

古文：冬十月戊午，前丹阳尹刘湛有罪，及同党伏诛。
现代文：冬十月三日，前丹阳尹刘湛及其同党因罪被杀。
English: On October 3rd, the former Danyang Yin Liu Zhan and his accomplices were killed for their crimes.

古文：大赦天下，文武赐爵一级。
现代文：大赦天下，文臣武将各赐爵一等。
English: There was a general amnesty across the country, and every scholar and general was given a first-class knighthood.

古文：以大将军、领司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史彭城王义康为江州刺史，大将军如故。
现代文：任命大将军、兼任司徒、录尚书、扬州刺史、彭城王义康为江州刺史，大将军照旧担任。
English: Appointed the general, concurrently served as the magistrate, recorded the history, Yangzhou history, and Pengcheng Wang Yikang as the history of Jiangsu, the general still served.

古文：以司空、南兗州刺史江夏王义恭为司徒、录尚书事。
现代文：委任司空、南兖州刺史、江夏王义恭为司徒、录尚书事。
English: Appointed Siku, Nanluozhou Shishi, and Jiangxia Wang Yigong as scholars, and recorded their records.

古文：戊寅，卫将军临川王义庆以本号为南兗州刺史，尚书仆射、护军将军殷景仁为扬州刺史，仆射如故。
现代文：二十三日，卫将军、临川王义庆以临川王的名义任南兖州刺史，任命尚书仆射、护军将军殷景仁为扬州刺史，仆射照旧担任。
English: On the 23rd, the Wei general, Linchuan Wang Yiqing, in the name of Linchuan Wang, was appointed as the Yangzhou scribe. He appointed Shang Shuxu Bushe and the escort general Yin Jingren as Yangzhou scribes, and Bushe continued to serve as before.

古文：十一月丙戌，以尚书刘义融为领军将军，秘书监徐湛之为中护军。
现代文：十一月二日，委任尚书刘义融为领军将军，秘书监徐谌之为中护军。
English: On November 2nd, Shangshu Liu Yirong was appointed as the leading general, and the secretary and overseer Xu Bingwei was appointed as the middle guard.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 前所给扬、南徐二州百姓田粮种子，兗、两豫、青、徐诸州比年所宽租谷应督入者，悉除半。
现代文：三日，下诏说： 先前拨给扬、南徐二州百姓的粮食种子，兖、两豫、青、徐各州比照往年所应交的租税，都减一半。
English: On the third day, the next edict said: The grain seeds previously allocated to the people of Yang, Nan and Xu were reduced by half, and the taxes payable by the people of Handan, Lianyuan, Qingdao and Xu were reduced by half.

古文：自今咸依法令，务尽优允。如有不便，即依事别言，不得苟趣一时，以乖隐恤之旨。
现代文：自今日起都应依照法令来，力求宽容，如有不便执行之处，即刻据实上报，不得私处妄为，违背我的旨意。 
English: From today on, we should all act in accordance with the law, strive for tolerance, and if there is any inconvenience in implementation, immediately report it to the truth. I must not act recklessly and go against my will.

古文：主者明加宣下，称朕意焉。 癸丑，尚书仆射、扬州刺史殷景仁卒。
现代文：二十九日，尚书仆射、扬州刺史殷景仁去世。
English: On the 29th, Shang Shuxu, Yang Zhou, Yin Jingren passed away.

古文：十二月癸亥，以光禄大夫王琳为尚书仆射。
现代文：十二月九日，委任光禄大夫王球为尚书仆射。
English: On December 9, he appointed Wang Qiu, the doctor of Guanglu Hospital, as his assistant.

古文：戊辰，以南豫州刺史始兴王浚为扬州刺史，湘州刺史武陵王讳为南豫州刺史，南平王铄为湘州刺史。
现代文：十四日，任命南豫州刺史始兴王浚为扬州刺史，湘州刺史武陵王骏为南豫州刺史，南平王铄为湘州刺史。
English: On the 14th, he appointed Wang Jun from Shixing, the governor of South Henan Province, as the governor of Yangzhou Province, Wang Yao from Wuling, the governor of Hunan Province, as the governor of South Henan Province, and Wang Yao from Nanping Province as the governor of Hunan Province.

古文：是岁，武都王、河南王、百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：同年，武都王、河南王，百济国派遣使者来进献特产。
English: In the same year, the King of Wudu, the King of Henan, and the State of Baekje sent envoys to present special products.

古文：十八年春二月乙卯，以豫章太守庾登之为江州刺史。
现代文：元嘉十八年二月二日，任命豫州章太守庾登之为江州刺史。
English: On February 2nd, 18th year of the Yuan Jia Dynasty, Zhang Taizhong, the governor of Yuzhou, was appointed as the first governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：夏五月壬申，卫将军南兗州刺史临川王义庆、征北将军南徐州刺史南谯王义宣并开府仪同三司。
现代文：夏五月一日，任命卫将军南兖州刺史临川王义庆，征北将军南徐州刺史南谯王义宣同为开府仪同三司。
English: On the first day of summer in May, Wei general Nan Xuzhou stabbed Shi Linchuan Wang Yiqing, and Northern general Nan Xuzhou stabbed Shi Nan Xuzhou Wang Yi Xuan Tong were appointed as the three departments of Kaifu ceremony.

古文：癸巳，于交州置宋熙郡。
现代文：十二日，在交州设置宋熙郡。
English: On the 12th, Songxi County was established in Jiaozhou.

古文：是月，沔水泛溢。
现代文：同月沔水泛滥。
English: In the same month, floodwaters overflowed.

古文：六月戊辰，遣使巡行赈赡。
现代文：六月十七日，派遣使臣巡视赈济。
English: On June 17th, an envoy was sent to inspect Zhangji.

古文：辛未，领军将军刘义融卒。
现代文：二十日，领军将军刘义融去世。
English: On the 20th, the leading general Liu Yirong passed away.

古文：秋七月戊戌，以徐、兗二州刺史赵伯符为领军将军。
现代文：秋七月十八日，委任徐、兖二州刺史赵伯符为领军将军。
English: On the 18th day of the 7th month of autumn, Zhao Bofu, the governor of the two prefectures of Xu and Handan, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：冬十月辛亥，以巴东、建平二郡太守臧质为徐、兗二州刺史。
现代文：冬十月二日，任命巴东、建平二郡太守臧质为徐、兖二州刺史。
English: On October 2, the winter, the two counties of Badong and Jianping were appointed as the provincial governors of the two counties, and the provincial governors of the two counties were named Xu and Zou.

古文：乙卯，省南徐州之南燕、濮阳、南广平郡。
现代文：六日，撤南徐州的南弱、濮阳、南广平郡。
English: On the 6th, it evacuated Nanwe, Fenyang and Nanguangping counties in South Xuzhou.

古文：十一月戊子，尚书仆射王琳卒。
现代文：十一月十日，尚书仆射王球去世。
English: On the 10th of November, Shang Shufu Shaowangqiu passed away.

古文：己亥，以丹阳尹孟顗为尚书仆射。
现代文：二十一日，任命丹阳尹孟头为尚书仆射。
English: On the 21st, Danyang Yin Mengtou was appointed as Shang Shuxu's subordinate.

古文：氐杨难当又寇汉川。
现代文：氐人杨难当又侵犯汉川。
English: Yang Nantang, a member of the Communist Party of China (CPC), has violated the Han River again.

古文：十二月癸亥，遣龙骧将军裴方明与梁、秦二州刺史刘真道讨之。
现代文：十二月十四日，派龙骧将军裴方明与梁、秦二州刺史刘真道讨伐。
English: On December 14th, Longjing sent General Pei Fangming to fight against Liang and Liu Zhendao, the governor of Qin Erzhou.

古文：便可式遵成规，阐扬景业。 
现代文：同月，晋宁太守爨松子反叛，宁州刺史徐循讨伐平定叛乱。
English: In the same month, the governor of Jining, Zhu Songzi, rebelled, and the governor of Ningzhou, Zishi Xu Xun, led a crusade to quell the rebellion.

古文：夏四月甲戌，以久疾愈，始奉初祠，大赦天下。
现代文：同年，肃特国、高丽国、苏靡黎国、林邑国派使者进献特产。元嘉十九年正月二十八日，下诏广建学校。夏四月二十八日，久病的皇上痊愈，到祠庙祭奠，大赦天下。
English: In the same year, the emissaries of the State of Sui, the State of Goryeo, the State of Sumatra and the State of Lim were sent to present the special products. On the 28th day of the first month of the 19th year of the Yuan Jia, it was decided to build a school. On the 28th day of the 4th month of the summer, the emperor, who had been ill for a long time, recovered and went to the ancestral temple to pay tribute and forgive the world.

古文：五月庚寅，梁秦二州刺史刘真道、龙骧将军裴方明破氐杨难当，仇池平。
现代文：五月十四日，梁秦二州刺史刘真道、龙骧将军裴方明击败氐人杨难当，平定仇池。
English: On May 14th, Liang Qin Erzhou stabbed Liu Zhendao and Longqin General Pei Fangming defeated Yang Nantang, and settled the feud.

古文：闰月，京邑雨水；丁巳，遣使巡行赈恤。
现代文：闰五月，京邑发水灾，十二日，派遣使者巡视赈济。
English: In leap May, floods hit Beijing, and on the 12th, an envoy was dispatched to inspect Fuzhi.

古文：六月壬午，以大沮渠无讳为征西大将军，凉州刺史。
现代文：六月七日，任命大沮渠无讳为征西大将军、凉州刺史。
English: On June 7th, he was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition and the governor of Liangzhou.

古文：秋七月，以梁、秦二州刺史刘真道为雍州刺史，龙骧将军裴方明为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：秋七月，委任梁秦二州刺史刘真道为雍州刺史，龙骧将军裴方明为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: In autumn and July, Liu Zhendao was appointed as Liang Qin's Second Prefectural Governor of Yongzhou, and Longjing General Pei Fangming was appointed as Liang and Southern Qin's Second Prefectural Governor of Yongzhou.

古文：阙里往经寇乱，黉校残毁，并下鲁郡修复学舍，采召生徒。
现代文：六日，日蚀。冬十月十一日，芮芮国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 6th, there was a solar eclipse. In the winter, on October 11th, the country of Min sent an envoy to offer special products.

古文：昔之贤哲及一介之善，犹或卫其丘垄，禁其刍牧，况尼父德表生民，功被百代，而坟茔荒芜，荆棘弗翦。
现代文：二十六日，任命晋宁太守周万岁为宁州刺史。十二月四日，下诏说： 孔子在道德上是民众的表率，功泽百代，而坟茔荒芜，荆棘丛生。
English: On the 26th, the governor of Jinning, Zhou Wanling, was appointed as the first governor of Ningzhou. On December 4th, the next edict said: Confucius is the moral leader of the people, and he has made great contributions for hundreds of generations, but his grave is desolate and full of thorns.

古文：可蠲墓侧数户，以掌洒扫。 
现代文：可免除孔墓旁数户租税，让他们洒扫孔墓。 
English: Several households next to the hole tomb can be exempted from the tax, so that they can sprinkle the hole tomb.

古文：鲁郡上民孔景等五户居近孔子墓侧，蠲其课役，供给洒扫，并种松柏六百株。
现代文：鲁郡百姓孔景等五户住在孔子墓附近，免其税役，作为洒扫之资，并种松柏六百棵。
English: Five households, including Lu County people Kong Jing, live near the tomb of Confucius, and are exempted from paying taxes, as a means of sprinkling and sweeping, and planting 600 pine and cypress trees.

古文：是岁，婆皇国遣使献方物。
现代文：同年，婆皇国派使者来进献特产。
English: In the same year, the mother-in-law's country sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：二十年春正月，于台城东西开万春、千秋二门。
现代文：元嘉二十年春正月，在台城东西开万春、千秋二门。
English: In the first month of spring in the 20th year of Yuan Jia, two doors opened in Taichung, one to the east and one to the west.

古文：二月甲戌，江州刺史庾登之为中护军。
现代文：二月三日，委任江州刺史庾登之为中护军。
English: On February 3, he appointed Jiangzhou Zhishihong as the middle protector.

古文：庚申，以庐陵王绍为江州刺史。
现代文：九日，任命庐陵王绍为江州刺史。
English: On the 9th, Gongling Wang Shao was appointed as the chief historian of Jiangsu.

古文：仇池为索虏所没。
现代文：仇池被索虏攻陷。
English: Muechi Pond was captured by the Soryu.

古文：甲申，车驾于白下阅武。
现代文：十三日，皇上驾临白下检阅军队。
English: On the 13th, the Emperor came to inspect the troops.

古文：三月辛亥，安西将军、荆州刺史衡阳王义季进号征西大将军。
现代文：三月十一日，安西将军、荆州刺史、衡阳王义季晋升为征西大将军。
English: On March 11, General Anxi, Jingzhou Shishi and Hengyang Wang Yizi were promoted to General of the Western Expedition.

古文：以巴西、梓潼二郡太守申坦为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：任命巴西、梓潼二郡太守申坦为梁、秦二州刺史。
English: Brazil, Zizhou Er County Governor Shen Tan was appointed as the leader, and Qin Er County Governor was appointed as the historian.

古文：夏四月甲午，立第六皇子诞为广陵王。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，立第六皇子诞为广陵王。
English: On the 24th day of the 4th month of the summer, the 6th prince was born as the Guangling King.

古文：五月癸丑，中护军庾登之卒。
现代文：五月十三日，中护军庾登之去世。
English: On May 13th, Zou Dengzhi, a member of the Middle Protection Force, passed away.

古文：秋七月癸丑，以杨文德为征西将军、北秦州刺史，封武都王。
现代文：秋七月十四日，委任杨文德为征西将军、北秦州刺史，并封为武都王。
English: On the 14th day of the 7th month of autumn, Yang Wende was appointed as the general of the Western Expedition, the governor of North Qin Province, and the King of Wudu.

古文：辛酉，以南蛮校尉萧思话为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十一日，任命南蛮校尉萧思话为雍州刺史。
English: On the 21st, Nanban Captain Xiao Siwei was appointed as the Yongzhou prefect.

古文：甲子，前雍州刺史刘真道、梁南秦二州刺史裴方明有罪，下狱死。
现代文：二十四日，前雍州刺史刘真道，梁南秦二州刺史裴方明犯罪，被打入监牢处死。
English: On the 24th, Liu Zhendao, the former Yongzhou assassin, and Pei Fangming, the assassin of Liangnan Qin Erzhou, committed crimes and were sent to prison and executed.

古文：八月癸未，以廷尉陶愍祖为广州刺史。
现代文：八月十五日，委任廷尉隐愍祖为广州刺史。
English: On August 15th, he appointed the imperial lieutenant, Emperor Jingzhu, to be the official historian of Guangzhou.

古文：冬十二月庚午，以始兴内史檀和之为交州刺史。
现代文：冬十二月四日，任命始兴内史檀和之为交州刺史。
English: On the 4th of December in winter, Shi Xing Naishi appointed Danwa Kozo as the new governor of Jiaozhou.

古文：壬午，诏曰： 国以民为本，民以食为天。
现代文：十六日，下诏说： 国以民为本，民以食为天。
English: On the 16th, the following edict was issued: "The country is based on the people, and the people are based on food."

古文：游食之徒，咸令附业，考核勤惰，行其诛赏，观察能殿，严加黜陟。
现代文：故一人不耕，饥饿必至。粮仓充实，礼仪方兴。赋役苛重，则百姓愁苦怨愤，年成不好，则饥荒疾病降临。
English: Therefore, if one does not plow, hunger will surely come. Grain silos are full, etiquette is on the rise. If the service is harsh, the people will be sad and angry. If the year is not good, famine and disease will come.

古文：古者躬耕帝籍，敬供粢盛，仰瞻前王，思遵令典。
现代文：这实际上是由于政治腐败，才造成弊病，抑或是耕种不广，地利未尽，游手好闲之辈，都督促他们从事农桑，根据勤懒，进行赏罚。
English: This is actually due to political corruption, which caused the malady, or the cultivation is not extensive, the territory is not exhausted, and the idlers are urging them to engage in agricultural mulberry, and reward and punish according to the diligence.

古文：便可量处千亩，考卜元辰。
现代文：上古帝王躬耕，奉天祭地，仰瞻前王，遵奉祖训。
English: The ancient emperors cultivated, worshipped the sacred land, looked up to the previous king, and followed the ancestral teachings.

古文：朕当亲率百辟，致礼郊甸，庶几诚素，将被斯民。 
现代文：我当亲率百官，到城郊举行耕种仪式，也许一片诚心，能惠泽万民。 
English: If I, as a parent, lead hundreds of officials to the outskirts of the city to hold a cultivation ceremony, perhaps a sincere heart can benefit all the people.

古文：是岁，河西国、高丽国、百济国、倭国并遣使献方物。
现代文：同年，河西国、高丽国、百济国、倭国都派使者来进献特产。
English: In the same year, envoys from Hexi Province, Goryeo Province, Baekje Province, and Wa Province all came to offer special products.

古文：是岁，诸州郡水旱伤稼，民大饥。
现代文：同年，许多州郡发生水灾、旱灾，民间发生大饥荒。
English: In the same year, floods and droughts occurred in many states and counties, and people suffered from famine.

古文：遣使开仓赈恤，给赐粮种。
现代文：皇上派遣使臣前往各州开仓赈济灾民，并赐给灾民粮种。
English: The emperor dispatched envoys to each prefecture to open warehouses to help the victims, and gave the victims grain seeds.

古文：二十一年春正月己亥，南徐、南豫州、扬州之浙江西，并禁酒。
现代文：元嘉二十一年春正月初三，南徐州、南豫州、扬州的浙江以西地区，禁止饮酒。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the 21st year of Yuan Jia, drinking alcohol was prohibited in the areas west of Zhejiang in South Xuzhou, South Yuzhou and Yangzhou.

古文：大赦天下，诸逋债在十九年以前，一切原除。
现代文：大赦天下。元嘉十九年以前的旧债，一律免除。
English: The old debts before the 19th year of Yuan Jia were all exempted.

古文：去岁失收者，畴量申减。
现代文：去年遭灾收成不佳的，酌情减税。
English: Those who had a poor harvest last year due to natural disasters will receive tax reductions as appropriate.

古文：尤弊之处，遣使就郡县随宜赈恤。
现代文：遭灾最重的地方，派使者去放粮赈济。
English: Send emissaries to the hardest-hit areas to distribute food and supplies.

古文：凡欲附农，而种粮匮乏者，并加给贷，营千亩诸统司役人，赐布各有差。戊午，卫将军临川王义庆薨。
现代文：凡愿从事农耕，而又缺乏粮种的，朝廷借贷给他们。种田千亩的，赐给布匹。二十二日，卫将军临川王义庆去世。
English: Anyone who wanted to engage in farming, but was short of grain, was given a loan by the imperial court. Those who had a thousand mu of farmland were given cloth. On the 22nd, Wei general Linchuan Wang Yiqing passed away.

古文：辛酉，以太子詹事刘义宗为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十五日，委任太子詹事刘义宗为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 25th, the crown prince Zhan Zhi Liu Yizong was appointed as the governor of South Luzon.

古文：二月庚午，以领军将军赵伯符为豫州刺史。
现代文：二月五日，任命领军将军赵伯符为豫州刺史。
English: On February 5, Zhao Bofu, the leading general of the army, was appointed as the historian of Yuzhou.

古文：己丑，司徒、录尚书事江夏王义恭进位太尉，领司徒。
现代文：二十四日，司徒、录尚书事江夏王义恭晋升为太尉，同时兼任司徒。
English: On the 24th, Jiangxia Wang Yigong, a scholar and recorder, was promoted to the rank of lieutenant and concurrently served as a scholar.

古文：庚寅，以右卫将军沈演之为中领军。
现代文：二十五日，任命右卫将军沈演之为中领军。
English: On the 25th, he appointed the right guard general Shen Yuan as the leader of the middle army.

古文：辛卯，立第七皇子宏为建平王。
现代文：二十六日，立第七皇子宏为建平王。
English: On the 26th, the 7th Prince Hiroshi was appointed King Jianping.

古文：甲午，以广陵王诞为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十九日，委任广陵王诞为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 29th, Guangling Wang Sheng was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：夏四月，晋陵延陵民徐耕以米千斛助恤饥民。
现代文：夏四月，晋陵延陵百姓徐耕捐献千斛米帮助灾民。
English: In the summer of April, the people of Jinling and Yanling donated thousands of rice to help the victims.

古文：五月壬戌，以尚书何尚之为中护军，谘议参军刘道锡为广州刺史。
现代文：五月二十八日，任命尚书何尚之为中护军，谘议参军刘道锡为广州刺史。
English: On May 28th, Shang Shuxin was appointed as the middle protector, and Liu Daoxi, who had consulted and joined the army, was appointed as the Guangzhou historian.

古文：六月，连雨水。
现代文：六月，连降大雨。
English: In June, continuous heavy rain.

古文：丁亥，诏曰： 霖雨弥日，水潦为患，百姓积俭，易致乏匮。
现代文：二十四日，下诏说： 连降暴雨，积水成灾，百姓储存的粮少，很可能缺柴少米。
English: On the twenty-fourth day, the next edict said: Continuous rainstorms, accumulated water into a disaster, the people have less grain stored, and it is likely that there is a shortage of firewood and rice.

古文：二县官长及营署部司，各随统检实，给其柴米，必使周悉。 
现代文：各县官员，都应去了解灾情，给受灾百姓柴米，使他们得到周济。 
English: All county officials should go to understand the disaster situation, and give firewood and rice to the affected people, so that they can receive weekly aid.

古文：秋七月丁酉，扬州刺史始兴王浚加中军将军，南豫州刺史武陵王赞加抚军将军。
现代文：秋七月四日，扬州刺史始兴王浚加封为中军将军，南豫州刺史武陵王骏加封为抚军将军。
English: On the 4th day of the 7th month of the autumn, Yangzhou's Prince Shi Xing Wang Jun Jiafeng was appointed as the general of the Chinese army, and South Yu Prefecture's Prince Wuling Wang Xi Jiafeng was appointed as the general of the Fuzhou army.

古文：乙巳，诏曰： 比年谷稼伤损，淫亢成灾，亦由播殖之宜，尚有未尽，南徐、兗、豫及扬州浙江西属郡，自今悉督种麦，以助阙乏。
现代文：十二日，下诏说： 连年谷物受灾，也与耕种尚有不当之处有关。南徐、兖、豫及扬州浙江以西所属各郡，从现在起都督促种植小麦，以帮助百姓度过灾荒。
English: On the 12th, the next edict said: "The consecutive years of grain disaster is also related to improper cultivation. Nanxu, Handan, Yu and all counties west of Zhejiang in Yangzhou have urged the planting of wheat from now on to help the people get through the disaster.

古文：速运彭城下邳郡见种，委刺史贷给。
现代文：速运彭城、下邳郡粮种，交给刺史贷给百姓。
English: Rapidly transport grain from Pengcheng and Jiaozuo County, and hand it over to Zhishi to lend to the people.

古文：徐、豫土多稻田，而民间专务陆作，可符二镇，履行旧陂，相率修立，并课垦辟，使及来年。
现代文：徐州、豫州境内多水田，而民间却专门去种旱地，适合耕种旱地的，仍种旱地，并督导百姓开垦，以使来年耕作。
English: There are many paddy fields in the territory of Xuzhou and Yuzhou, but the people have specially gone to grow dry land. If it is suitable to cultivate dry land, they will still plant dry land and supervise the people to reclaim it so that they can cultivate it next year.

古文：凡诸州郡，皆令尽勤地利，劝导播殖，蚕桑麻棨，各尽其方，不得但奉行公文而已。 
现代文：各州郡，务必尽地利，劝勉百姓养殖蚕桑种麻纟宁，从各地实际出发，不得一味执行公文。 
English: All states and counties must do their best to encourage the people to cultivate silkworms, mulberries, and poppies, starting from the actual situation in various regions, and must not blindly implement the official document.

古文：八月戊辰，征西大将军、荆州刺史衡阳王义季为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南兗州刺史；征北将军、徐州刺史南谯王义宣为车骑将军、荆州刺史。南兗州刺史广陵王诞为南徐州刺史。
现代文：八月六日，任命征西大将军、荆州刺史衡阳王义季为征北大将军、开府仪同三司、南兖州刺史，征北将军、南徐州刺史南谯王义宣为车骑将军、荆州刺史，南兖州刺史广陵王诞为南徐州刺史。
English: On August 6th, Hengyang Wang Yizi was appointed the general of the Western Expedition, Jingzhou Zhishi was appointed the general of the Northern Expedition, Kaifu Yi Tong 3rd Division, Nanluozhou Zhishi was appointed the general of the Northern Expedition, Nanluozhou Zhishi was appointed the general of the Southern Expedition, Nanluozhou Zhishi was appointed the general of the Cavalry and Cavalry, Jingzhou Zhishi was appointed the general of the Southern Expedition, and Guangling Wang Sheng was appointed the general of the Southern Expedition.

古文：九月甲辰，以大沮渠安周为征西将军、凉州刺史，封河西王。
现代文：九月十二日，委任大沮渠安周为征西将军、凉州刺史，封为河西王。
English: On September 12th, An Zhou, the Great Depressor, was appointed as the General of the Western Conquest, the Prince of Liangzhou, and the King of Hexi.

古文：冬十月己卯，以左军将军徐琼为兗州刺史，大将军参军申恬为冀州刺史。
现代文：冬十月十七日，任命左军将军徐琼为兖州刺史，大将军参军申恬为冀州刺史。
English: On October 17th in winter, Xu Qiong, a general of the Left Army, was appointed as the chief historian of Zhangzhou, and Shen Qi, a general who joined the army, was appointed as the chief historian of Jizhou.

古文：二十二年春正月辛卯朔，改用御史中丞何承天元嘉新历。
现代文：元嘉二十二年春正月初一，改用御史中丞何承天制订的元嘉新历。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 22nd year of the Yuan Jia, the Yuan Jia New Calendar formulated by the imperial historian He Chengtian was used instead.

古文：壬辰，抚军将军、南豫州刺史武陵王讳改为雍州刺史，湘州刺史南平王铄为南豫州刺史。
现代文：二日，调抚军将军、南豫州刺史武陵王骏任雍州刺史，湘州刺史南平王铄任南豫州刺史。
English: On the second day, Wuling Wang Rong, the general of the General Staff of the General Staff of the Chinese People's Liberation Army, was appointed as the governor of Yongzhou, and Nanping Wang Rong, the governor of Hunan Province, was appointed as the governor of South Henan Province.

古文：二月辛巳，以侍中王僧朗为湘州刺史。
现代文：二月二十一日，任命侍中王僧朗为湘州刺史。
English: On February 21st, he appointed the chamberlain, Wang Monk Lang, as the historian of Hunan.

古文：甲戌，立第八皇子袆为东海王，第九皇子昶为义阳王。
现代文：十四日，立第八皇子礻韦为东海王，第九皇子昶为义阳王。
English: On the 14th, the eighth prince, Zou Wei, was established as the king of the East Sea, and the ninth prince, Zou, as the king of Yiyang.

古文：夏六月辛亥，以南豫州刺史南平王铄为豫州刺史。
现代文：夏六月二十四日，委任南豫州刺史南平王铄为豫州刺史。
English: On the 24th day of the 6th month of the summer, Nanping Wang Qi, the governor of South Yuzhou, was appointed as the governor of South Yuzhou.

古文：秋七月己未，以尚书仆射孟顗为尚书左仆射，中护军何尚之为尚书右仆射。
现代文：秋七月二日，委任尚书仆射孟头为尚书左仆射，中护军何尚之为尚书右仆射。
English: On the 2nd of July in autumn, Meng Tou, Shang Shuxu's servant, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's left-hand servant, and He Shang Xing, the middle protector, was appointed as Shang Shuxu's right-hand servant.

古文：雍州刺史武陵王讳讨缘沔蛮，移一万四千余口于京师。
现代文：雍州刺史武陵王骏讨伐沔蛮，迁一千四百人余人到京师。
English: More than 1,400 people were relocated from Yongzhou to Beijing to fight against the barbarian invaders.

古文：乙酉，征北大将军、南兗州刺史衡阳王义季改为徐州刺史。
现代文：二十七日调征北大将军、南兖州刺史衡阳王义季任徐州刺史。
English: On the 27th, Hengyang Wang Yi Ji was transferred to the General Staff of Peking University and appointed to the General Staff of Xuzhou.

古文：九月己未，开酒禁。
现代文：九月三日，取消禁酒令。
English: On September 3rd, the ban on alcohol was lifted.

古文：冬十月，起湖熟废田千顷。
现代文：冬十月，开发湖熟荒田千顷。
English: In winter and October, thousands of hectares of wasteland in Hukou were developed.

古文：十二月乙未，太子詹事范晔谋反，及党与皆伏诛。
现代文：十二月十一日，太子詹事范晔及其党徒谋反被杀。
English: On December 11, Prince Zhan Zhi Fan Rong and his followers were killed for plotting a rebellion.

古文：丁酉，免大将军彭城王义康为庶人。
现代文：十三日，贬大将军彭城王义康为平民。
English: On the 13th, General Pengcheng Wang Yikang was demoted to a civilian.

古文：庚戌，以前豫州刺史赵伯符为护军将军。
现代文：二十六日委任前豫州刺史赵伯符为护军将军。
English: On the 26th, Zhao Bofu, the former governor of Henan Province, was appointed as the military escort general.

古文：二十三年春正月丁巳，以长沙内史陆徽为益州刺史。
现代文：元嘉二十三年春正月初三，委任长沙内史陆徽为益州刺史。
English: On the third day of the first month of the spring of the twenty-third year of Yuan Jia, he appointed Lu Hui, a historian in Changsha, as the historian of Yizhou.

古文：庚申，尚书左仆射孟顗去职。
现代文：六日，尚书左仆射孟头离职。
English: On the 6th, Shang Shuxu's left-hand man, Sha Meng Tou, left his post.

古文：迁汉州流民于沔次。
现代文：迁汉川流民到沔。
English: Han River refugees were relocated to Handan.

古文：二月癸卯，以左卫将军刘义宾为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二月十九日，任命左卫将刘义真为南兖州刺史。
English: On February 19th, the left guard Liu Yizhen was appointed as the history of South Luzhou.

古文：三月，索虏寇兗、豫，青、冀，刺史申恬破之。
现代文：三月，索虏侵犯兖州、豫州、青州，冀州刺史申恬击败索虏。
English: In March, the Sorbs invaded Bozhou, Yuzhou, Qingzhou, and Jizhou and defeated the Sorbs.

古文：夏四月丁未，大赦天下。
现代文：夏四月二十四日，大赦天下。
English: On the 24th of April in the summer, the amnesty came into effect.

古文：六月癸未朔，日有蚀之。
现代文：六月一日，日蚀。
English: June 1st, solar eclipse.

古文：交州刺史檀和之伐林邑国，克之。
现代文：交州刺史檀和之讨伐林邑国，攻克。
English: Jiaozhou stabbed Danhe's crusade Lin's country, conquered.

古文：秋七月辛未，以散骑常侍杜坦为青州刺史。
现代文：秋七月二十日，任命散骑常侍杜坦为青州刺史。
English: On the 20th day of the 7th month of autumn, he appointed the horseback riding attendant Dutan as the history of Qingzhou.

古文：八月癸卯，揭阳赭贼攻建安郡，燔烧城府。
现代文：八月二十二日，揭阳红赋进攻建安郡，焚烧府城。
English: On August 22, Jieyang Hongfu attacked Jian'an County and burned Fucheng.

古文：九月己卯，车驾幸国子学，策试诸生，答问凡五十九人。
现代文：九月二十九日，驾临国子学，策试诸生，答问共五十九人。
English: On September 29th, a total of fifty-nine people came to the National Children's Study Center to ask questions.

古文：冬十月戊子，诏曰： 痒序兴立累载，胄子肄业有成。
现代文：冬十月八日，下诏说： 学校才兴建几年，后辈士子学业有成。
English: On the 8th day of October in winter, the following edict was issued: The school has only been under construction for a few years, and the younger generation of scholars have achieved academic success.

古文：近亲策试，睹济济之美，缅想洙、泗，永怀在昔。
现代文：近来亲自策试，看到莘莘学子济济，缅怀起洙、洄，想起往昔。
English: Recently, I have personally conducted tests, and I have seen a large number of students, reminiscing about the past.

古文：诸生答问，多可采览。
现代文：诸生所对答，很多可以采用。
English: Many of the answers given by sentient beings can be used.

古文：教授之官，并宜沾赉。 
现代文：授业的官员，都宜给予赏赐。 
English: It is appropriate to reward the officials who give education.

古文：赐帛各有差。
现代文：授业的官员依据贡献大小分别赐给帛布。
English: The officials awarding the scholarships will give them to students according to the size of their contribution.

古文：十二月丁酉，以龙骧司马萧景宪为交州刺史。
现代文：十二月十八日，委任龙骧司马萧景宪为交州刺史。
English: On December 18th, Long Yuxiang appointed Ma Xiao Jingxian, the secretary of Long Yuxiang, as the secretary of Jiaozhou.

古文：是岁，大有年。
现代文：同年，大丰收。
English: This year was a bumper harvest.

古文：筑北堤，立玄武湖，筑景阳山于华林园。
现代文：筑北堤，挖玄武湖，在华林园筑景阳山。
English: Build the north embankment, dig up the Xuanwu Lake, and build the Jingyang Mountain in the Hualin Garden.

古文：二十四年春正月甲戌，大赦天下，文武赐位一等。
现代文：元嘉二十四年春正月初六，大赦天下，文臣武将各赐爵一等。
English: On the sixth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the 24th year of Yuan Jia, the world was amnestied, and the scholars and generals were each given a first-class knighthood.

古文：系囚降宥，诸逋负宽减各有差。
现代文：囚犯减刑，旧债也减免一部分。
English: Prisoners' sentences have been reduced, and old debts have been partially forgiven.

古文：孤老、六疾不能自存，人赐谷五斛。
现代文：孤儿老人、病残难以生存者，每人赐谷五斛。
English: Orphans, the elderly, and those who are too ill to survive will each receive five grains of rice.

古文：蠲建康、秣陵二县今年田租之半。
现代文：减免建康、秣陵二县今年一半田租。
English: Jiankang and Fuling counties will be exempted from paying half of their farm rents this year.

古文：三月壬申，护军将军赵伯符迁职。
现代文：三月二十五日，护军将军赵伯符升职。
English: On March 25, Zhao Bofu, the general of the escorting army, was promoted.

古文：夏五月甲戌，青州刺史杜坦加冀州刺史。
现代文：夏五月二十七日，青州刺史杜坦加封为冀州刺史。
English: On the 27th day of summer in May, the Qingzhou embroiderer Du Tang was crowned as the embroiderer of Jizhou.

古文：六月，京邑疫疠。丙戌，使郡县及营署部司，普加履行，给以医药。
现代文：六月，京城爆发瘟疫，十日，派郡县及营署部司官员，巡视民间，给民医药。
English: In June, a plague broke out in Beijing. On the 10th, officials from the county and battalion headquarters were sent to inspect the people and give them medicine.

古文：是月，以货贵，制大钱一当两。
现代文：同月，钱贵，造大钱，以一个大钱当一两。
English: In the same month, money is expensive, make a lot of money, with a lot of money when one or two.

古文：秋七月乙卯，以林邑所获金银宝物，班赉各有差。
现代文：秋七月九日，把从林邑缴获的金银财宝，赏赐给文臣武将。
English: On the 9th day of the 7th month of the autumn, the gold, silver and treasure captured from Linyi was awarded to the general.

古文：八月乙未，征北大将军、徐州刺史衡阳王义季薨。
现代文：八月二十日，征北大将军、徐州刺史衡阳王义季去世。
English: On August 20th, Hengyang Wang Yizi, a former general of the Northern Expeditionary Force and the governor of Xuzhou, passed away.

古文：癸卯，以南兗州刺史刘义宾为徐州刺史。
现代文：二十八日，任命南兖州刺史刘义宾为徐州刺史。
English: On the 28th, Liu Yibin, the governor of South Luzhou, was appointed governor of Xuzhou.

古文：九月己未，以中领军沈演之为领军将军。
现代文：九月十四日，任命中领军沈演之为领军将军。
English: On September 14th, Shen Yuan, the leader of the middle army, was appointed as the leading general.

古文：辛未，以太子詹事徐湛之为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十六日，委任太子詹事徐湛之为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 26th, the crown prince Zhan Zhi Xu Zhan was appointed as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：冬十月壬午，豫章胡诞世反，杀太守桓隆之。前交州刺史檀和之南还至豫章，因讨平之。
现代文：冬十月八日，豫章胡诞也谋反，杀太守桓隆之，前交州刺史檀和之从南方回师豫章，乘机讨伐平定叛乱。
English: On the 8th day of October in winter, Yu Zhang Hu Xing also plotted a rebellion, killed the Tai Shou Kan Rong, and the former Jiaozhou stabbed the scholar Dan He from the south to return to Yu Zhang, and took the opportunity to fight and quell the rebellion.

古文：壬辰，以建平王宏为中护军。
现代文：十八日，任命建平王宏为中护军。
English: On the 18th, Jianping Wanghong was appointed as the middle protector.

古文：十一月甲寅，立第十皇子浑为汝阴王。
现代文：十一月十日，立第十皇子浑为汝阴王。
English: On November 10th, the 10th prince was proclaimed the King of Ruyin.

古文：二十五年春正月戊辰，诏曰： 比者冰雪经旬，薪粒贵踊，贫弊之室，多有窘罄。
现代文：元嘉二十五年春正月二十五日，下诏说： 十多天来连续下雪不断，柴米昂贵，贫困的家庭，缺米少柴。
English: On the 25th day of the first month of the spring of the 25th year of Yuan Jia, the following edict was issued: It has been snowing continuously for more than ten days, firewood is expensive, poor families, lack of rice and less firewood.

古文：可检行京邑二县及营署，赐以柴米。 
现代文：可巡察京邑二县和营署，赐给贫困的家庭柴米。 
English: They can inspect the two counties of Beijing and the battalion headquarters, and give firewood rice to poor families.

古文：二月庚寅，诏曰： 安不忘虞，经世之所同；治兵教战，有国之恆典。
现代文：二月十八日，下诏说： 居安思危，历朝如此；练兵备战，治国之宝。
English: On February 18th, the next imperial edict said: "To live in peace and think about danger is the way of all dynasties; to train soldiers and prepare for war is the treasure of governing the country."

古文：故服训明耻，然后少长知禁，顷戎政虽修，而号令未审。
现代文：小时候教育明白廉耻，长大了才知有禁令。军政虽修，但法令并未认真落实。
English: When I was a child, I was educated to understand dishonesty, and when I grew up, I learned about the ban. Although the military government was reformed, the decree was not seriously implemented.

古文：今宣武场始成，便可克日大习众军。
现代文：今宣武场建成，可在近期内挑个日子操练大军，乘此机会打猎比武。 
English: Now that the Xuanwu Stadium has been built, it will be possible to choose a day in the near future to train a large army, and take this opportunity to have a hunting competition.

古文：夏四月乙巳，新作阊阖、广莫二门，改先广莫门曰承明，开阳曰津阳。
现代文：闰二月七日，大军在宣武场打猎操练。三月九日，驾临打猎比武场。夏四月四日，新修阊阖门、广莫门，先前的广莫门改名承明门，开阳门改名为津阳门。
English: On February 7th, the army went to hunt and practice in Xuanwu Square. On March 9th, they went to hunt and practice in Xuanwu Square. In the summer, on April 4th, Xuanwu Gate and Guangmo Gate were newly repaired. The former Guangmo Gate was renamed as Shomei Gate, and the Kaiyang Gate was renamed as Tsuyang Gate.

古文：乙卯，以抚军将军、雍州刺史武陵王讳为安北将军、徐州刺史。
现代文：十四日，任命抚军将军、雍州刺史武陵王骏为安北将军、徐州刺史。
English: On the 14th, he appointed General Fuzhong and Yangzhou chief of staff Wuling Wangye as general of Anbei and Xuzhou chief of staff respectively.

古文：癸亥，以右卫将军萧思话为雍州刺史。
现代文：二十二日，委任右卫将军萧思话为雍州刺史。
English: On the 22nd, he appointed Yuwei General Xiao Siwei as the Yongzhou prefect.

古文：五月己卯，罢大钱当两。
现代文：五月十日，废除一个大钱当一两的规定。
English: On May 10th, the rule that a large sum of money should be divided into two was abolished.

古文：六月庚戌，零陵王司马元瑜薨。
现代文：六月十日，零陵王司马元瑜去世。
English: On June 10, Ziling Wang Si Ma Yuanyu passed away.

古文：庚申，安北将军、徐州刺史武陵王讳加兗州刺史。丙寅，车骑将军、荆州刺史南谯王义宣进位司空。
现代文：二十日，授安北将军、徐州刺史武陵王骏兖州刺史之职，二十六日，车骑将军、荆州刺史南谯王义宣晋升为司空。
English: On the 20th, he was awarded the position of General of Anbei, General of Xuzhou, General of Wuling, General of Bozhou, and on the 26th, General of Cavalry, General of Jingzhou, General of Nanxun, General of Yixuan.

古文：秋七月壬午，左光禄大夫王敬弘薨。
现代文：秋七月十三日，左光禄大夫王敬弘去世。
English: On the 13th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wang Jinghong, a doctor of the Left Guanglu Hospital, passed away.

古文：八月己酉，以抚军参军刘秀之为梁、南秦二州刺史。
现代文：八月十日，任命抚军参军刘秀之为梁、南秦二州刺史。
English: On August 10th, Liu Xiuyin was appointed to be a member of the Fuzhong Army and a member of the Southern Qin and Erzhou Army.

古文：甲子，立第十一皇子讳为淮南王。
现代文：二十五日，立第十一皇子为淮阳王。
English: On the 25th, the 11th prince was proclaimed King Huaiyang.

古文：九月辛未，以尚书右仆射何尚之为尚书左仆射，领军将军沈演之迁职，吴兴太守刘遵考为领军将军。
现代文：九月二日，委任尚书右仆射何尚之为尚书左仆射，领军将军沈演之升迁，吴兴太守刘遵考为领军将军。
English: On September 2nd, Shangshu's right-hand man, He Shanzhong, was appointed, Shangshu's left-hand man, the leading general, Shen Yuan, was promoted, and Wu Xingtao Liu Zunkao was appointed as the leading general.

古文：二十六年春正月辛巳，车驾亲祠南郊。
现代文：元嘉二十六年春正月十四日，驾临南郊祭祀。
English: On the 14th day of the first month of the spring of the 26th year of the Yuan Jia, he came to the southern suburb for a religious service.

古文：其大赦天下，复丹徒县侨旧今岁租布之半。
现代文：大赦天下。减免丹徒县乡亲今年一半租税。
English: Amnesty to the world. Half of this year's taxes for villagers in Dantu County will be reduced and exempted.

古文：行所经县，蠲田租之半。
现代文：途中经过各县，减免一半田租。
English: On the way through each county, half of the field rent is exempted.

古文：二千石官长并勤劳王务，宜有沾锡。
现代文：二千石官长为政勤劳的，都有奖赏。
English: There is a reward for every 2,000-koku official who works hard for the government.

古文：登城三战及大将战亡坠没之家，老病单弱者，普加赡恤。
现代文：曾多次登城作战和战亡的大将之家，年迈病弱者，朝廷都给予赡养赈济。
English: The Imperial Court has given alimony to the elderly, the infirm and the weak, who have visited the city many times to fight and the homes of generals who have died in battle.

古文：遣使巡行百姓，问所疾苦。
现代文：派遣使臣巡行百姓家，问民疾苦。
English: Sending envoys to make rounds of people's homes to ask them about their hardships.

古文：孤老、鳏寡、六疾不能自存者，人赐谷五斛。 
现代文：孤老、鳏寡、病残难以生存的，每人赐谷五斛。 
English: The elderly, widows and widowers, and those who are too ill to survive will each be given five grains of barley.

古文：遣使祭晋故司空忠肃公何无忌之墓。
现代文：派使者祭祀晋朝司空肃公何无忌之墓。
English: Envoys were sent to offer sacrifices at the tomb of the Jin Dynasty official Ku Su Gong He Mugu.

古文：乙丑，申南北沛下邳三郡复。
现代文：十八日，恢复南北沛、下邳三郡建制。
English: On the 18th, the three-county system was restored in Nanbei, Pae, and Haidian.

古文：又诏曰： 京口肇祥自古，著符近代，衿带江山，表里华甸，经涂四达，利尽淮、海，城邑高明，土风淳壹，苞总形胜，实唯名都。
现代文：又下诏说： 京口自古以来就是瑞祥之地，到了近代更是如此，靠山临江，交通方便，能收淮河、海洋之利，城池高大，民风淳厚，名胜众多，确是名城。
English: The next edict said: "Kyoguchi has been a place of auspiciousness since ancient times, and it has become even more so in modern times. It is a famous city because it is close to the mountains and rivers, has convenient transportation, is close to the Huaihe River and the ocean, has a tall castle, has a rich folk style, and has many places of interest.

古文：故能光宅灵心，克昌帝业。
现代文：所以能兴起帝业。前些年由于战乱，百姓迁徙，田地房舍，不如以前。
English: In previous years, due to the war, the people migrated, and the houses in the fields were not as good as before.

古文：先帝以桑梓根本，实同休戚，复以蒙稚，猥同艰难，情义缱绻，夷险兼备，旧物遗踪，犹存心目。
现代文：京口是皇帝的故乡，地理位置又重要，应当让其富裕，成为其他地区的榜样。可从各州征召几千家愿意迁至京口的，给他们田地房屋，并免除租税。 五月一日下诏说： 我生在京口。
English: Kyoguchi is the hometown of the emperor, and its geographical location is important. It should be made rich and become a model for other regions. Several thousand families can be recruited from various states who are willing to move to Kyoguchi, give them field houses, and exempt from taxes. On May 1, the emperor said: I was born in Kyoguchi.

古文：岁月不居，逝逾三纪，时人故老，与运零落。
现代文：卢循暴乱时，曾骚扰过京口。先帝以家乡为基地，与乡亲父老同甘苦创大业。岁月流逝，已过三十六年，当时的人有的去世了，有的年迈，零落分散。
English: The previous emperor used his hometown as a base and worked hard with his father to create a great career. Thirty-six years have passed, and some of the people at that time have passed away, some are old and scattered.

古文：眷惟既往，倍深感叹。
现代文：每想起往昔，就徒有感叹。
English: Every time I think about the past, I can't help but sigh.

古文：可搜访于时士庶文武今尚存者，具以名闻。
现代文：可向现在还活着的当时的士人百姓访问，将与先帝一起打天下的人的姓名登记起来。
English: The names of those who fought for the empire with the former emperor can be registered by visiting the people who were alive at the time.

古文：人身已亡而子孙见在，优量赐赉之。 
现代文：本人已经去世而子孙还在的，根据情况给其子孙以赏赐。 
English: If the person has passed away and the descendants are still alive, the descendants will be rewarded according to the circumstances.

古文：车驾水路发丹徒，壬午，至京师。
现代文：皇上走水路从丹徒出发，十七日，回至京城。
English: The emperor set out from Dantu by water and returned to the capital on the 17th.

古文：丙戌，婆皇国，壬辰，婆达国，并遣使献方物。
现代文：二十一日，婆皇国派使者来进献特产。二十三日，婆达国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 21st, the motherland sent an envoy to present special products. On the 23rd, the motherland sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：秋七月辛未，以江州刺史庐陵王绍为南徐州刺史，广陵王诞为雍州刺史。
现代文：秋七月七日，任命江州刺史庐陵王绍为南徐州刺史，广陵王诞为雍州刺史。
English: On the 7th day of the 7th day of the 7th month of autumn, Wang Shao, the chief historian of Jiangzhou, was appointed the chief historian of South Xuzhou, and Wang Zeng, the chief historian of Guangling, was appointed the chief historian of Yongzhou.

古文：八月己酉，以中护军建平王宏为江州刺史。
现代文：八月十六日，任命中护军建平王宏为江州刺史。
English: On August 16th, Jianping Wanghong, the leader of the Central Protection Force, was appointed as the governor of Jiangsu Province.

古文：癸丑，以南丰王朗为湘州刺史。
现代文：二十日，委任南丰朗为湘州刺史。
English: On the 20th, Nan Fenglang was appointed as the new governor of Hunan Province.

古文：冬十月，广陵王诞改封随郡王。
现代文：冬十月，改封广陵王为随郡王。
English: In the winter of October, Guangling Wang was changed to Su County King.

古文：甲辰，以中军将军、扬州刺史始兴王浚为征北将军、开府仪同三司、南徐兗二州刺史；南徐州刺史庐陵王绍为扬州刺史。
现代文：十二日，任命中军将军、扬州刺史始兴王浚为征北将军、开府仪同三司，南徐兖二州刺史、南徐州刺史庐陵王绍为扬州刺史。
English: On the 12th, the general of the Chinese army, the Yangzhou chief historian Shi Xing Wang Jun was appointed as the general of the Northern Expedition, the chief historian of Kaifu and the three departments, the southern chief historian of Xuzhou, the southern chief historian of Xuzhou, and the southern chief historian of Yulin, Wang Shao, were appointed as the chief historian of Yangzhou.

古文：二十七年春正月辛未，制交、宁二州假板郡县，俸禄听依台除。
现代文：元嘉二十七年春正月初十，制裁交、宁二州设置的假郡县，假郡县官员的俸禄听凭朝廷剥除。
English: On the tenth day of the first month of the first month of the spring of the 27th year of Yuan Jia, the fake counties and counties set up by the two states of Jiaxing and Ning were sanctioned, and the salaries of the fake county officials were stripped by the imperial court.

古文：辛卯，百济国遣使献方物。
现代文：三十日，百济国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 30th, Baekje sent an envoy to present special products.

古文：二月辛丑，右将军、豫州刺史南平王铄进号平西将军。
现代文：二月十日，右将军、豫州刺史南平王铄晋升为平西将军。
English: On February 10th, the Right General, Henan Ping Wangjun, was promoted to the West General.

古文：辛巳，索虏寇汝南诸郡，陈南顿二郡太守郑琨、汝阳颍川二郡太守郭道隐委守走。
现代文：二十日，索虏侵犯汝南各郡，陈、南顿二郡太守郑琨，汝阳颍川二郡太守郭道隐弃城逃走。
English: On the 20th, the Sorbs invaded the counties in the south of the Ryukyus. Zheng Yao, the governor of the two counties of Chen and Nantong, and Guo Dao, the governor of the two counties of the Ryukyus, fled the abandoned city.

古文：索虏攻悬瓠城，行汝南郡事陈宪拒之。
现代文：索虏攻陷悬瓠城，行汝南郡事陈宽抵抗。
English: Saurup captured Suspension City, and Chen Kuan, the governor of Runan County, resisted.

古文：以军兴减百官俸三分之一。
现代文：由于发生战祸，官员俸禄减少三分之一。
English: As a result of the war, officials' salaries were reduced by up to a third.

古文：三月乙丑，淮南太守诸葛阐求减俸禄同内百官，于是州及郡县丞尉并悉同减。
现代文：三月五日，淮南太守诸葛阐请求同京城官员一样减少俸禄，于是州郡县的官员丞尉都减少俸禄。
English: On March 5th, Zhuge Ying, the governor of Huainan Province, requested the same reduction in salary as the officials of Beijing. As a result, the officials of counties and counties all reduced their salaries.

古文：戊寅，罢国子学。
现代文：十八日，撤消国子学。
English: On the 18th, Kokushi-gaku was abolished.

古文：乙酉，以新除吏部尚书萧思话为护军将军。
现代文：二十五日，任命新任吏部尚书萧思话为护军将军。
English: On the 25th, the newly-appointed leader of the cadres, Shang Shuxu and Xiao Siwei, were appointed as the escorting generals.

古文：夏四月壬子，安北将军、徐兗二州刺史武陵王赞降号镇军将军。
现代文：夏四月二十二日，安北将军、徐兖二州刺史武陵王骏降为镇军将军。
English: On the 22nd day of the 4th month of the summer, General Anbei, Xu Xi Erzhou Zishi, and Wuling Wang Xi were demoted to the rank of general of the town army.

古文：六月丁酉，侍中萧斌为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：六月八日，任命侍中萧斌为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On June 8th, Xiao Bin, a chamberlain, was appointed as the crown prince of Qing and Jie two states.

古文：秋七月庚午，遣宁朔将军王玄谟北伐。
现代文：秋七月十二日，派遣宁朔将军王玄漠北伐。
English: On the 12th day of the 7th month of autumn, Ningshuo General Wang Xuanmai was dispatched to the Northern Expedition.

古文：太尉江夏王义恭出次彭城，总统诸军。
现代文：太尉江夏王义恭至彭城，统领各路人马。
English: Captain Jiang Xia Wang Yigong went to Pengcheng, leading all the way.

古文：乙亥，索虏碻磝戍委城走。
现代文：十七日索虏郂戍守军弃城逃走。
English: On the seventeenth day of Saurik, the defending army abandoned the city and fled.

古文：冬闰月癸亥，玄谟攻滑台，不克，为虏所败，退还碻磝。
现代文：冬闰十月七日，王玄漠进攻滑台，攻不下来，被索虏击败，退回郂。
English: On the winter intercalary day of October 7th, Wang Xuanmo attacked the slide, could not get down, was defeated by the enemy, and retreated back.

古文：辛未，雍州刺史随王诞遣军攻弘农城，克之。
现代文：十五日，雍州刺史随王诞派兵攻打弘农城，攻克。
English: On the fifteenth day of the month, Yongzhou Jishi sent troops to attack Hongnongcheng on the occasion of the king's birthday.

古文：丙戌，又克关城。
现代文：三十日，又拿下关城。
English: On the 30th, they took Guancheng again.

古文：十一月戊子，索虏陷邹山，鲁、阳平二郡太守崔邪利没。
现代文：十一月二日，索虏攻陷邹山，鲁、阳平二郡太守崔邪利覆没。
English: On November 2nd, the Sorbs captured Lushan, and the two county governors of Lu and Yangping, Cui Yali, were overthrown.

古文：甲午，随王诞所遣军又攻陕城，克之。
现代文：八日，随王诞派遣的军队又攻打陕城，攻克。
English: On the eighth day, the army dispatched by Wang Guo attacked and conquered Shaanxi City.

古文：癸卯，左军将军刘康祖于寿阳尉武戍与虏战败见杀。
现代文：十七日，左将军刘康祖在寿阳尉武戌与索虏交战战败被杀。
English: On the 17th, the left general Liu Kangzu was defeated and killed in the battle between Shouyang's lieutenant Wu Xi and Sorhu.

古文：丁未，大赦天下。
现代文：二十一日，大赦天下。
English: On the 21st, a general amnesty was declared.

古文：十二月戊午，内外纂严。
现代文：十二月三日，全国警戒。
English: On December 3, a nationwide alert was issued.

古文：乙丑，冗从仆射胡崇之、太子积弩将军臧澄之、建威将军毛熙祚于盱眙与虏战败，并见杀。
现代文：十三日，冗从仆射胡崇之、太子积弩将军臧澄之、建威将军王熙祚在目于眙与索虏交战，战败被杀。
English: On the 13th, Zhao's subordinate, Hu Chongzhi, Prince Jizong's general, Su Chengzhi, and Jianwei's general, Wang Xizhi, fought against Sorhu in the eyes of Yu Yao, and were defeated and killed.

古文：庚午，虏伪主率大众至瓜步。
现代文：十八日，索虏皇帝亲率大军至瓜步。
English: On the 18th, Emperor Shokru led a large army to Guapu.

古文：壬午，内外戒严。
现代文：三十日，全国戒严。
English: On the 30th, martial law was declared throughout the country.

古文：二十八年春正月丙戌朔，以寇逼不朝会。
现代文：元嘉二十八年春正月初一，因为外敌入侵没举行朝会。
English: On the first day of the first month of the spring of the 28th year of Yuan Jia, the imperial court did not hold a meeting because of the invasion of foreign enemies.

古文：丁亥，索虏自瓜步退走。
现代文：二日，索虏从瓜步撤走。
English: On the second day, the soldiers withdrew from Guabou.

古文：丁酉，攻围盱眙城。
现代文：二十二日，围攻目于眙城。
English: On the 22nd, the siege of the city began.

古文：是月，宁朔将军王玄谟自碻磝退还历下。二月丙辰，索虏自盱眙奔走。
现代文：同月，宁朗将军王玄谟从郂撤回历下。二月二日，索虏从目于眙撤兵。
English: In the same month, Wang Xuanmu, the general of Ninglang, withdrew from Handan. On February 2, Soru withdrew from Meizhou.

古文：癸酉，诏曰： 玁狁孔炽，难及数州，眷言念之，寤寐兴悼。
现代文：十八日，下诏说： 羯人入侵，战祸牵涉到几个州，每想到这些，寝食难安。
English: On the eighteenth day, the next edict said: With the invasion of the barbarians, and the war involving several states, it is difficult to sleep and eat when thinking about these things.

古文：凶羯痍挫，迸迹远奔，凋伤之民，宜时振理。
现代文：凶狠的羯人受挫，逃走，受战祸之灾的百姓，宜及时安抚。
English: The ferocious invaders were defeated and fled. The people who suffered from the scourge of war should be pacified in time.

古文：凡遭寇贼郡县，令还复居业，封尸掩骼，赈赡饥流。
现代文：凡是遭羯人入侵的各郡县，现在宜重回故里恢复旧业，掩埋死者，赈济饥馑的流民。
English: All counties that have been invaded by invaders should now return to their hometowns to resume their old businesses, bury the dead, and feed the hungry displaced people.

古文：东作方始，务尽劝课。
现代文：春耕刚开始，一定要劝导百姓尽力耕种。
English: At the beginning of spring ploughing, we must persuade the people to do their best in ploughing.

古文：贷给之宜，事从优厚。
现代文：优惠贷给百姓粮种。
English: preferential loans to the people for grain.

古文：其流寓江、淮者，并听即属，并蠲复税调。 
现代文：流亡至江、淮一带的百姓，任他们自由选择去处，并免除赋税。 
English: The people who were exiled to the areas around the Yangtze River and Huai River were allowed to choose their destination freely and were exempted from paying taxes.

古文：甲戌，太尉、领司徒江夏王义恭降为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
现代文：十九日，太尉、兼任司徒的江夏王义恭降为骠骑将军、开府仪同三司。
English: On the 19th, Jiangxia Wang Yigong, who was a captain and also served as a magistrate, was demoted to the general of cavalry, and the ceremony of opening the government and the three departments were held.

古文：辛巳，镇军将军、徐兗二州刺史武陵王讳降号北中郎将。
现代文：二十五日，镇军将军、徐兖二州刺史武陵王骏降为北中郎将。
English: On the 25th, the general of the township army, Xu Xi, and the two-state general, Wuling Wang, were demoted to the general of the north.

古文：壬午，车驾幸瓜步，是日解严。
现代文：二十六日，皇上驾临瓜步，同日解除戒严。
English: On the twenty-sixth day, the emperor arrived at a snail's pace, and the martial law was lifted on the same day.

古文：三月乙酉，车驾还宫。
现代文：三月一日，皇上回京城。
English: On March 1, the Emperor returned to Kyoto.

古文：壬辰，征北将军始兴王浚解南兗州。
现代文：八日，解除征北将军始兴王浚南兖州刺史职务。
English: On the 8th, the general of the Northern Expedition, Shi Xing Wang Junnan, was relieved of his duties as the governor of Luzhou.

古文：庚子，以辅国将军臧质为雍州刺史。
现代文：十六日，任命辅国将军臧质为雍州刺史。
English: On the 16th, he appointed the general of the Auxiliary Province, Jia Jiao, as the Yongzhou chief historian.

古文：戊申，徐州刺史武陵王讳为南兗州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，委任徐州刺史武陵王骏为南兖州刺史。
English: On the 24th, he appointed Wuling Wang Qi, the chief historian of Xuzhou, as the chief historian of Nan'an.

古文：甲寅，护军将军萧思话为抚军将军、徐兗二州刺史。
现代文：三十日，任命护军将军萧思话为抚军将军、徐兖二州刺史。
English: On the 30th, Xiao Siwei, the general of the escorting army, was appointed as the general of the escorting army, and Xu Xi, the general of the two states, was appointed as the general of the escorting army.

古文：夏四月癸酉，婆达国遣使献方物。
现代文：夏四月十九日，婆达国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 19th day of the 4th month of the summer, the motherland sent an envoy to bring special products.

古文：索虏伪宁南将军鲁爽、中书郎鲁秀归顺。
现代文：索虏的宁南将军鲁爽、中书郎鲁秀归顺。
English: Ningnan General Lu Shuang and Chushulang Lu Xiu surrendered.

古文：戊寅，以爽为司州刺史。
现代文：二十四日，委任鲁爽为司州刺史。
English: On the 24th, Lu Shuang was appointed as the secretary of state.

古文：五月乙酉，亡命司马顺则自号齐王，据梁邹城。
现代文：五月二日，亡命之徒司马顺则自称齐王，占据梁邹城。
English: On May 2, the outlaw Sima Shunzhe proclaimed himself the King of Qi and occupied Liangyao City.

古文：丁巳，婆皇国，戊戌，河南王，并遣使献方物。
现代文：四日，婆皇国，十五日，河南王，各派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 4th, the motherland, and on the 15th, the king of Henan, each sent envoys to present special products.

古文：己巳，骠骑将军江夏王义恭领南兗州刺史。
现代文：十六日，骠骑将军江夏王义恭兼任南兖州刺史。
English: On the 16th, the cavalry general Jiangxia Wang Yigong also served as the governor of South Luzhou.

古文：戊申，以尚书左仆射何尚之为尚书令，太子詹事徐湛之为尚书仆射、护军将军。
现代文：二十三日，任命尚书左仆射何尚之为尚书令，太子詹事徐湛之为尚书仆射、护军将军。
English: On the 23rd, he appointed Shangshu's left-hand retainer He Shangzhi as Shangshu's second-in-command, and Prince Zhan Zhi Xu Zhan as Shangshu's second-in-command and general of the garrison.

古文：壬子，以后将军随王诞为安南将军、广州刺史。
现代文：二十七日，委任后将军随王诞为安南将军、广州刺史。
English: On the 27th, after the appointment, the general followed Wang Sheng to become General Annan, the history of Guangzhou.

古文：六月壬戌，以北中郎将武陵王讳为江州刺史，以振武将军、秦郡太守刘兴祖为青、冀二州刺史。
现代文：六月九日，任命北中郎将武陵王骏为江州刺史、振武将军，秦郡太守刘兴祖为青、冀二州刺史。
English: On June 9, he appointed the general of the Northern Middle Kingdom, Wuling Wangye, as the governor of Jiangsu and the general of Zhenwu, the governor of Qin, Liu Xingzu, as the governor of Qing, and the governor of the two provinces of Hebei.

古文：秋七月甲辰，安东将军倭王倭济进号安东大将军。
现代文：秋七月二十二日，安东将军倭王倭济晋升为安东大将军。
English: On the 22nd day of the 7th month of autumn, General Anton Waozhi was promoted to General Anton.

古文：八月癸亥，梁邹平，斩司马顺则。
现代文：八月十一日，平定梁邹，斩杀司马顺则。
English: On August 11th, Liang Qi was subdued and Sima Shun Zi was beheaded.

古文：冬十月癸亥，高丽国遣使献方物。
现代文：冬十月十二日，高丽国派使者来进献特产。
English: On the 12th day of the 10th month of winter, Goryeo sent an envoy to South Korea to present special products.

古文：十一月壬寅，曲赦二兗、徐、豫、青、冀六州。
现代文：十一月二十二日，赦免南北兖、徐、豫、青、冀六州。
English: On November 22nd, he pardoned the six provinces of Nanfangye, Xu, Yu, Qing and Hebei.

古文：是冬，徙彭城流民于瓜步，淮西流民于姑孰，合万许家。
现代文：同年冬，迁徙彭城流民到瓜步，淮西流民到姑苏，共计万余家。
English: In the winter of the same year, the Pengcheng refugees migrated to Guapu, and the Huaxi refugees to Gusu, totaling more than 10,000 families.

古文：二十九年春正月甲午，诏曰： 经寇六州，居业未能，仍值灾涝，饥困荐臻。
现代文：元嘉二十九年春正月十五日，下诏说： 由于叛贼侵犯，六州荒芜，又逢涝灾，饥荒流行。
English: On the 15th day of the first month of the spring of the 29th year of Yuan Jia, the following edict was issued: Due to the encroachment of traitors, the six prefectures were deserted, and there were floods and famines.

古文：可速符诸镇，优量救恤。
现代文：速通知各地，尽力赈济。
English: Notify all regions immediately and do your best to help.

古文：今农事行兴，务尽地利。
现代文：现在正是农耕之时，一定要尽力耕种。
English: Now is the time for farming, and we must do our best to cultivate.

古文：若须田种，随宜给之。 
现代文：若要粮种，酌情供给。 
English: If grain seeds are needed, they will be provided as appropriate.

古文：二月庚申，虏帅拓跋焘死。
现代文：二月十一日，索虏王帅拓跋焘去世。
English: On February 11th, Sorru Wang Shuai died.

古文：庚午，立第十二皇子休仁为建安王。
现代文：三月九日立第十二皇子休仁为建安王。
English: On March 9th, the 12th prince, Kyujin, was enthroned as King Jianan.

古文：夏四月戊午，诃罗单国遣使献方物。以骠骑参军张永为冀州刺史。
现代文：夏四月十日，诃罗单国派使者来进献特产，任命骠骑参军张永为冀州刺史。
English: On the 10th day of the 4th month of the summer, Laos sent an envoy to offer special products and appointed Zhang Yong, a cavalryman, as a member of the army to write the history of Jizhou.

古文：五月甲午，罢湘州并荆州。
现代文：五月十七日，将湘州并入荆州。
English: On May 17th, Hunan was merged into Jingzhou.

古文：以始兴、临贺、始安三郡属广州。
现代文：划始兴、临贺、始安三郡归广州。
English: The three counties of Shixing, Linhe and Shiyan were assigned to Guangzhou.

古文：丙申，诏曰： 恶稔身灭，戎丑常数，虐虏穷凶，著于自昔。
现代文：十九日，下诏说： 多行不义必自毙，此乃天理，羌人穷凶极恶，现在尤其严重。
English: On the 19th, the next edict said: "Those who commit many injustices will die by their own hands. This is the law of heaven. It is extremely evil to persecute people. It is especially serious now."

古文：未劳资斧，已伏天诛，子孙相残，亲党离贰，关、洛伪帅，并怀内款，河朔遗民，注诚请效。
现代文：不用劳我们出动军队，上天已要灭亡他们，其子孙自相残杀，亲党离叛，在关洛的将帅，都想归附，河朔汉人，更愿效忠朝廷。
English: There is no need for us to send troops. Heaven is about to destroy them. Their children and grandchildren are killing each other, their relatives are defecting from the Party, the generals in Guanluo all want to return to China, and the Han people in Hexuo are more willing to be loyal to the imperial court.

古文：拯溺荡秽，今其会也。
现代文：拯救弱者荡除凶暴，现在到时候了。
English: Now is the time to save the weak from the violent.

古文：可符骠骑、司空二府，各部分所统，东西应接。
现代文：可命令骠骑、司空二府所辖的军队，从东西两路接应。
English: You can order the troops under the jurisdiction of the two prefectures to come from the east and west.

古文：归义建绩者，随劳酬奖。 
现代文：归附并建立功绩者，根据功劳给予奖赏。 
English: Those who attribute and establish merits will be rewarded according to their merits.

古文：是月，京邑雨水。
现代文：同月，京城降大雨。
English: In the same month, heavy rain fell in Kyoto.

古文：六月己酉，遣部司巡行，赐樵米，给船。抚军将军萧思话率众北伐。
现代文：六月二日，派遣部司巡视京城各地，赐给百姓柴米，供给船只，抚军将军萧思话率军北伐。
English: On June 2, he dispatched his department to inspect various parts of the capital, giving firewood and rice to the people, supplying ships, and dispatching General Xiao Siwu to lead the army in the Northern Expedition.

古文：以征北从事中郎刘瑀为益州刺史。
现代文：委任征北从事中郎刘王禹为益州刺史。
English: Liu Wang Yu was appointed to go to the north to engage in the middle son Liu Wang Yu for the history of Yizhou.

古文：秋七月壬辰，汝阴王浑改封武昌王，淮阳王讳改封湘东王。
现代文：秋七月十六日，汝阴王浑改封为武昌王，淮阳王改封为湘东王。
English: On the 16th day of the 7th month of autumn, King Ruyin was renamed King Wuchang, and King Huaiyang was renamed King Shandong.

古文：丁酉，省大司农、太子仆、廷尉监官。
现代文：二十一日，裁撤大司农、太子仆、廷尉监官。
English: On the twenty-first day, the posts of the chief farmer, the prince's servant, and the court lieutenant inspector were abolished.

古文：八月丁卯，萧思话攻碻磝，不拔，退还。
现代文：八月二十一日，萧思话围攻郂，没拿下，退回。
English: On August 21st, Xiao Siwei besieged Fengtong, failed to take it, and retreated.

古文：九月丁亥，以平西将军吐谷浑拾寅为安西将军、秦河二州刺史。
现代文：九月十一日，任命平西将军吐谷浑拾寅为安西将军、秦河二州刺史。
English: On September 11th, he appointed the Pingxi General Tu Gu Hunqin as the Anxi General and the Qinhe Erzhou Sashihong.

古文：己丑，抚军将军、徐兗二州刺史萧思话加冀州刺史，兗州如故。
现代文：十三日，委任抚军将军、徐兖二州刺史萧思话为冀州刺史，兖州刺史照旧担任。
English: On the 13th, General Fuzhong, Xu Xi, and two provincial governors, Xiao Siwei and Jizhou provincial governor, and Zhangzhou provincial governor, were appointed.

古文：冬十月癸亥，司州刺史鲁爽攻虎牢不拔，退还。
现代文：冬十月十八日，司州刺史鲁爽攻虎牢不下，撤回。
English: In the winter of October 18th, Sizhou Zhi Shulu, unable to resist the onslaught, withdrew.

古文：十一月壬寅，扬州刺史庐陵王绍薨。
现代文：十一月二十七日，扬州刺史庐陵王绍去世。
English: On November 27th, Wang Shao of Yangzhou Zhishi Mausoleum passed away.

古文：十二月辛未，以骠骑将军、南兗州刺史江夏王义恭为大将军、南徐州刺史，录尚书事如故。
现代文：十二月三日，委任骠骑将军、南兖州刺史江夏王义恭为大将军，南徐州刺史、录尚书事照旧担任。
English: On December 3, Jiangxia Wang Yigong, general of the Southern Xuzhou Military Region, was appointed as the general of the Southern Xuzhou Military Region, and the Southern Xuzhou Military Region and the Southern Xuzhou Military Region were appointed as the general of the Southern Xuzhou Military Region.

古文：三十年春正月戊寅，以司空、荆州刺史南谯王义宣为司徒、中军将军、扬州刺史。
现代文：元嘉三十年春正月初四，任命司空荆州刺史南谯王义宣为司徒、中军将军、扬州刺史。
English: On the fourth day of the first month of the spring of the 30th year of Yuan Jia, the governor of Jing Province, Nanluo Wang Yixuan, was appointed as the governor of Jing Province, the general of the Chinese army and the governor of Yang Province.

古文：以南兗州并南徐州。
现代文：将南兖州并入南徐州。
English: South Luzhou will be merged into South Xuzhou.

古文：庚辰，以领军将军刘遵考为平西将军、豫州刺史。
现代文：六日，委任领军将军刘遵考为平西将军、豫州刺史。
English: On the 6th, Liu Zunkao, the leading general of the army, was appointed as the general of Pingxi and the governor of Yuzhou.

古文：壬午，以征北将军、南徐州刺史始兴王浚为卫将军、荆州刺史。
现代文：八日，任命征北将军、南徐州刺史始兴王浚为卫将军、荆州刺史。
English: On the 8th, the general of the Northern Expedition and the general of the Southern Xuzhou Expedition, Shi Xing Wangjun, were appointed as the general of the Western Expedition and the general of the Jingzhou Expedition.

古文：戊子，江州刺史武陵王讳统众军伐西阳蛮。
现代文：十四日，江州刺史武陵王骏统率大军讨伐西阳蛮。
English: On the 14th, the great army led by Wang Xizhong, the ruler of Wuling in Jiangsu Province, fought against the Xiyang barbarians.

古文：癸巳，以豫州刺史南平王铄为抚军将军、领军将军。
现代文：十九日，任命豫州刺史南平王铄为抚军将军、领军将军。
English: On the 19th, the governor of Yuzhou, Nanping Wang Yao, was appointed as the general of the Fuzhou army and the leading general.

古文：青、徐州饥。二月壬子，遣运部赈恤。
现代文：青州、徐州发生饥荒，二月九日，派运部官员前往赈济。
English: A famine occurred in Qingzhou and Xuzhou. On February 9, officials from the Ministry of Transportation and Communications were dispatched to Qingzhou and Xuzhou.

古文：甲子，上崩于含章殿，时年四十七。谥曰景皇帝，庙曰中宗。
现代文：十三日，皇上驾崩含章殿，时年四十七岁，谥号景皇帝，庙号中宗。
English: On the 13th, the emperor died at the age of forty-seven, with the posthumous name of Emperor Jing and the temple name of Zhongzong.

古文：三月癸巳，葬长宁陵。
现代文：三月二十日，葬于长宁陵。
English: On March 20, he was buried in Changning Mausoleum.

古文：世祖践阼，追改谥及庙号。
现代文：世祖登位，追改太祖谥号和庙号。
English: The ancestor ascended to the throne, and the great ancestor's posthumous name and temple name were changed.

古文：史臣曰：太祖幼年特秀，顾无保傅之严，而天授和敏之姿，自禀君人之德。
现代文：史臣说：太祖幼年聪秀，不是老师教导严厉，而是上天赐给他聪敏和仁和，自己具备了为君之德。
English: Shi Zhen said: The great-great-grandfather was very bright when he was young. It was not the teacher who taught him to be strict, but God gave him wisdom and benevolence. He possessed the virtue of being a prince.

古文：及正位南面，历年长久，纲维备举，条禁明密，罚有恆科，爵无滥品。故能内清外晏，四海谧如也。
现代文：及至登基，长时间以来，国家大政实施无一遗漏，禁令严明缜密，赏罚有根有据，爵位也没有乱封的，所以能国内安宁，边境太平，四海平静。
English: Since he ascended to the throne, there have been no omissions in the implementation of state policy for a long time, the ban is strict and meticulous, the rewards and punishments are well-founded, and the titles are not indiscriminately sealed, so there can be domestic tranquility, border peace, and calm seas.

古文：昔汉氏东京常称建武、永平故事，自兹厥后，亦每以元嘉为言，斯固盛矣！
现代文：东汉时东京洛阳人常称赞建武、永平年间之兴盛，自此之后，就算元嘉年间了，可见元嘉之盛。
English: During the Eastern Han Dynasty, people in Luoyang, Tokyo, often praised the prosperity of the Jianwu and Yongping years. Since then, even if it was the Yuan Jia year, it can be seen that the Yuan Jia was prosperous.

古文：授将遣帅，乖分阃之命，才谢光武，而遥制兵略，至于攻日战时，莫不仰听成旨。
现代文：拜将授帅，违背在外将领意愿，才不如光武，却在京城制定战略，至于攻打的时间、作战的战术，莫不听从皇上的旨意。
English: It is not as good as Guangwu to appoint generals and go against the wishes of foreign generals, but to formulate strategies in Beijing. As for the time of the attack and the tactics of the battle, there is no way to disobey the emperor's will.

古文：虽覆师丧旅，将非韩、白，而延寇蹙境，抑此之由。
现代文：战败丧师，虽与将领无能有关，但外敌入侵边境吃紧，则是与皇上指挥不当分不开。
English: Although the defeat of the division is related to the incompetence of the general, but the foreign enemy's invasion of the border is tight, it is inseparable from the improper command of the emperor.

