古文：宋之问，字延清，一名少连，汾州人。
现代文：宋之问字延清，又名少连，汾州人。
English: Song Zhi Qian Zi Yanqing, also known as Shorian, was a native of Zhangzhou.

古文：父令文，高宗时为东台详正学士。
现代文：父宋令文高宗时任东台详正学士。
English: His father, Song Lingwen Gaozong, was a senior scholar of East Taiwan at the time.

古文：之问伟仪貌，雄于辩。
现代文：之问形貌魁梧，善于论辩。
English: He is a burly man and good at arguing.

古文：甫冠，武后召与杨炯分直习艺馆。
现代文：二十岁时，武后召他与杨炯分别代行掌管习艺馆。
English: At the age of twenty, Wu Hou called him and Yang Xi to take charge of the art museum on his behalf.

古文：累转尚方监丞、左奉宸内供奉。
现代文：多次迁升为尚方监丞、左奉宸内供奉。
English: He was promoted several times to Shangfang Jianzheng and Zuo Fengjunai.

古文：武后游洛南龙门，诏从臣赋诗，左史东方蚪诗先成，后赐锦袍，之问俄顷献，后览之嗟赏，更夺袍以赐。
现代文：武后游洛阳龙门，诏令从官赋诗，左史东方箈先写好，武后赐锦袍。之问随即也献，武后看后十分叹赏，把给箈的锦袍改赐给之问。
English: The Empress Dowager Wu toured the Longmen Gate of Luoyang. The imperial edict was written from the perspective of official poems and the history of the East, and the Empress Dowager Wu was given a brocade robe. The brocade robe was also presented to the Empress Dowager Wu. The Empress Dowager Wu was very impressed with the brocade robe and gave it to the Empress Dowager Wu.

古文：于时张易之等烝昵宠甚，之问与阎朝隐、沈佺期、刘允济倾心媚附，易之所赋诸篇，尽之问、朝隐所为，至为易之奉溺器。
现代文：那时张易之等受到特殊的爱宠，之问与阎朝隐、沈亻全期、刘允济倾心媚附。易之所写的各诗文全是之问、朝隐等人所做，甚而至于为易之捧尿壶。
English: At that time, Zhang Yizhi and others received special love and favor, and Zhiqin was enamored with Yan Chaoying, Shen Zheng, and Liu Yunji. All the poems written by Yizhi were written by Zhiqin, Chaoying and others, and even the urinal was held for Yizhi.

古文：及败，贬泷州，朝隐崖州，并参军事。
现代文：到易之被杀，之问贬泷州参军，朝隐贬崖州参军。
English: When Du Yi was killed, the question was whether Du Zhou should join the army, and the Emperor did not want Du Zhou to join the army.

古文：之问逃归洛阳，匿张仲之家。
现代文：之问逃归洛阳，躲在张仲之家。
English: He fled back to Luoyang and hid in Zhang Zhong's home.

古文：会武三思复用事，仲之与王同皎谋杀三思安王室，之问得其实，令兄子昙与冉祖雍上急变，因丐赎罪，由是擢鸿胪主簿，天下丑其行。
现代文：适逢武三思再次当权，张仲之与王同皎商议杀掉武三思以安王室。之问知道了，就让侄子宋昙与冉祖雍去告密，请求以功赎罪。为此提升为鸿胪主簿。世人不屑他的丑行。
English: At the right time, when Wu Sansi was once again in power, Zhang Zhongzhi and Wang Tonglu discussed killing the Wu Sansi-Ian royal family. When he learned of this, he asked his nephews Song Xi and Ran Zu Yong to inform on him and ask him to atone for his sins with his merits. For this, he was promoted to the main book of Hongzhi. The world disdained his vile deeds.

古文：景龙中，迁考功员外郎，谄事太平公主，故见用。
现代文：景龙年间，升为考功员外郎。谄媚太平公主，所以被任用。
English: During the years of Jinglong, he was promoted to the post of examiner-examiner. He was charmed by the Taiping Princess, so he was appointed.

古文：及安乐公主权盛，复往谐结，故太平深疾之。
现代文：及至安乐公主权盛，又去巴结她。太平公主因之很恨他。
English: When Prince Anle was in his prime, he courted her again, and Princess Taiping hated him for it.

古文：中宗将用为中书舍人，太平发其知贡举时赇饷狼藉，下迁汴州长史，未行，改越州长史。
现代文：中宗准备任他为中书舍人，太平公主揭发他主持贡举时收受贿赂的丑行，于是贬为汴州长史，还未去，改调越州长史。
English: Zhongzong was preparing to appoint him as the person in charge of Chinese books, but Princess Taiping exposed his scandalous behavior of accepting bribes while presiding over the tribute, so he was demoted to the position of the governor of Shandong Province. Before he left, he was transferred to the position of the governor of Yue Province.

古文：颇自力为政。
现代文：任内颇能尽力为政。
English: During his term of office, he was quite able to do his best in politics.

古文：穷历剡溪山，置酒赋诗，流布京师，人人传讽。
现代文：遍游剡地山水，饮酒赋诗。其诗流传到京师，人人传诵。
English: He traveled all over the countryside, drinking alcohol and writing poetry. His poems were passed down to the masters in Beijing, and were recited by everyone.

古文：睿宗立，以狯险盈恶诏流钦州。
现代文：睿宗立，宋之问以奸诈凶险作恶太多罪流放钦州。
English: Rui Zongli and Song Zhiwen were exiled to Qinzhou for committing too many crimes of treachery and danger.

古文：祖雍历中书舍人、刑部侍郎。
现代文：冉祖雍历任中书舍人、刑部侍郎。
English: Ran Zuyong served as a secretary in the middle school and as a waiter in the criminal investigation department.

古文：倡饮省中，为御史劾奏，贬蕲州刺史。
现代文：曾在省中拥妓饮酒，被御史揭发，贬为蕲州刺史。
English: He had been drinking alcohol with prostitutes in the middle of the province, was exposed by the official history, and was relegated to the history of Zhangzhou.

古文：至是，亦流岭南，并赐死桂州。
现代文：这时也流放岭南。两人同赐死桂州。
English: At this time, Lingnan was also exiled. Both of them died in Guizhou.

古文：之问得诏震汗，东西步，不引决。
现代文：之问得诏令后心惊肉跳，左右徘徊，不能自裁。
English: After receiving the edict, I was so shocked that I wandered from side to side, unable to make my own decisions.

古文：祖雍请使者曰： 之问有妻子，幸听诀。 
现代文：祖雍请求使者说 ：之问有妻儿，请让他与之诀别。 
English: Zou Yong asked the messenger to say, "He has a wife and child, please let him say goodbye to them."

古文：使者许之，而之问荒悸不能处家事。
现代文：使者同意，但之问慌乱失措，不能安排家事。
English: The messenger agreed, but he was so flustered that he couldn't arrange the household chores.

古文：祖雍怒曰： 与公俱负国家当死，奈何迟回邪？ 
现代文：祖雍怒，说 我与你同有负于国家，罪有应得，还有什么可迟疑的？ 
English: The ancestor was angry and said, "I share the blame for the state with you, and the crime is deserved. What else is there to hesitate about?"

古文：乃饮食洗沐就死。
现代文：于是饮酒进食洗沐后自尽。
English: He then killed himself after drinking, eating, washing and bathing.

古文：祖雍，江夏王道宗甥，及进士第，有名于时。
现代文：祖雍，是江夏王道宗的外甥，中了进士，当时很有名。
English: Zu Yong, the nephew of King Daozong of Jiangxia, was very famous at that time.

古文：魏建安后迄江左，诗律屡变，至沈约、庾信，以音韵相婉附，属对精密。
现代文：魏建安后直至南朝，诗律多次变化。到沈约、庾信，要求音韵调协、对仗精密。
English: After Wei Jian'an and up to the Southern Dynasty, the poetic rhythms changed many times. From Shenyuan and Xunxin, they required the harmony of the rhyme and the precision of the counterpoint.

古文：及之问、沈佺期，又加靡丽，回忌声病，约句准篇，如锦绣成文，学者宗之，号为 沈宋 。
现代文：到了宋之问、沈亻全期，又加浓艳婉丽，回避声韵上的疵病，规定字数、句数，使写诗如编织锦绣一样，学习者十分推崇，称之为 沈、宋 ，还说 苏、李居前，沈、宋并肩 。
English: When it came to the full-length poems of Song Zhi Qian and Shen Zheng, they also added strong color and elegance, avoided defects in sound and rhyme, stipulated the number of words and sentences, and made writing poems like weaving brocade, which was highly respected by learners. They called it Shen and Song, and also said that Su and Li Ju Qian were side by side with Shen and Song.

古文：语曰 苏李居前，沈宋比肩 ，谓苏武、李陵也。初，之问父令文，富文辞，且工书，有力绝人，世称 三绝 。
现代文：苏、李指苏武与李陵。当初，之问的父亲宋令文，擅长文辞，精研书法，还有超人之力。世人称他为 三绝 。
English: Su and Li refer to Suwu and Li Ling. At the beginning, Zhiwen's father, Song Lingwen, was good at rhetoric, studied calligraphy, and had superhuman strength. The world called him the Three Absolutes.

古文：都下有牛善触，人莫敢婴，令文直往拔取角，折其颈杀之。
现代文：京都有头牛好斗，没人敢去撩它。宋令文迎面上去拔取它的角，扭折它的颈子杀死了它。
English: There are bulls in Kyoto that are aggressive, and no one dares to beat them. Song Lingwen went up to them, pulled out their horns, and twisted their necks to kill them.

古文：既之问以文章起，其弟之悌以乔勇闻，之愻精草隶，世谓皆得父一绝。
现代文：后来宋之问以文章升官，弟之悌因骠悍知名、之訹精于书法。世人说他们兄弟各继承父亲的一绝。
English: Later, Song Zhimin was promoted to a higher post for his articles, his younger brother Zou Zou was famous for his bravery, and Zou Zou was good at calligraphy. People said that each of their brothers would inherit their father's title.

古文：之悌，长八尺。
现代文：宋之悌，身高八尺。
English: Song Zhiyao, eight feet tall.

古文：开元中，历剑南节度使、太原尹。
现代文：开元中历任剑南节度使、太原尹。
English: In the first year of the new year, Taiyuan Yin, who had served as the chief envoy to the Jiannan Festival, died.

古文：尝坐事流硃鸢，会蛮陷驩州，授总管击之。
现代文：曾犯法被流放朱鸢。正好蛮人攻陷州，任宋之悌为总管迎敌。
English: Zhu Xi was exiled for breaking the law. Just as the barbarians invaded the state, Song Zhiqi was appointed as the chief manager to meet the enemy.

古文：募壮士八人，被重甲，大呼薄贼曰： 獠动即死！ 
现代文：他召募了壮士八人，全副武装后，大声喊叫着逼近贼兵 ：谁动就死。 
English: He called up eight strong men, fully armed, and shouted loudly as he approached the bandits: "Anyone who moves will die."

古文：载言，聊城人，历凤阁舍人，专知制诰，终怀州刺史。
现代文：贼兵七百人都伏在地上不敢起身，贼乱即平。宋之訹为连州参军，刺史听说他善歌，要他教婢女。
English: Seven hundred bandits lay prostrate on the ground, not daring to get up, and the banditry was put down. Song Zhiqi joined the army for Lianzhou, and Sashi heard that he was a good singer and asked him to teach his maidservant.

古文：李邕，字泰和，扬州江都人。
现代文：他每天手执笏立在帘外，从容地吟唱。李邕字泰和，扬州江都人。
English: Every day, he stands outside the curtain with his hands clasped, calmly chanting.

古文：父善，有雅行，淹贯古今，不能属辞，故人号 书簏 。
现代文：父李善，品行好，学识贯通古今，但不善于写文章。所以人称他为 书箱 。
English: His father, Li Zhen, was a man of good character, with knowledge of ancient and modern times, but he was not good at writing articles. Therefore, people called him a bookcase.

古文：显庆中，累擢崇贤馆直学士兼沛王侍读。
现代文：显庆年间，升官至崇贤馆直学士兼沛王侍读。
English: During the Heian and Qing dynasties, he was promoted to the post of direct bachelor and attendant of King Pei of Chongxian Hall.

古文：为《文选注》，敷析渊洽，表上之，赐赉颇渥。
现代文：做《文选注》，阐述分析得精深准确。书献上后得赏赐颇为丰厚。
English: He did the "Annotation of Selected Writings," and his analysis was profound and accurate. After the book was presented, he received quite a rich reward.

古文：除潞王府记室参军，为泾城令，坐与贺兰敏之善，流姚州，遇赦还。
现代文：被委任为潞王府记室参军，授泾城令。因与贺兰敏之友好而株连流放姚州。遇赦后回。
English: He was appointed to the Warlord's Office of Records, joined the army, and was awarded the Warlord's Order. Because of his friendship with Helan Min, he was exiled to Yaozhou. After being pardoned, he returned.

古文：居汴、郑间讲授，诸生四远至，传其业，号 《文选》学 。
现代文：居住在汴、郑间教学。学生们从四方远道而来，传授其学术，称之为 文选学 。
English: The students come from far and wide to teach their academic subjects, which is called literary anthology.

古文：邕少知名。
现代文：李邕年轻时即知名。
English: When she was young, Li Yao was already famous.

古文：始善注《文选》，释事而忘意。
现代文：当初其父注《文选》，有时依词解析忽略了文意。
English: At first, his father annotated "Wenxuan," and sometimes word-by-word analysis ignored the meaning of the text.

古文：书成以问邕，邕不敢对，善诘之，邕意欲有所更，善曰： 试为我补益之。 
现代文：书成后问到李邕，邕不敢回答。
English: After the book was completed, he asked Li Qian, but Li Qian didn't dare to answer.

古文：邕附事见义，善以其不可夺，故两书并行。
现代文：李善一再追问，李邕以为要有所更改。李善说： 替我补充试试。 
English: Li Shan asked again and again. Li Yao thought that something needed to be changed. Li Shan said, "Try to make some additions for me."

古文：既冠，见特进李峤，自言 读书未遍，愿一见秘书 。
现代文：李邕据词而表述旨意。李善觉得两种解法无法决断，所以将两者并录。邕二十岁后去见特进李峤，说： 有些书还没读过，希望能读一读宫廷藏书。 
English: Li Shan felt that the two solutions could not be decided, so he recorded both of them together. After he was twenty years old, he went to see Tejin Li Shan and said, "I haven't read some books yet, and I hope to read some books from the palace collection."

古文：峤曰： 秘阁万卷，岂时日能习邪？ 
现代文：峤说 ：秘阁有万卷书，哪是短时间就能读完的？ 
English: Zou said: There are tens of thousands of books in the secret cabinet, which can be read in a short time?

古文：邕固请，乃假直秘书。
现代文：邕再三恳求，于是让他暂任秘书。
English: After repeated entreaties, Zou made him his temporary secretary.

古文：未几辞去，峤惊，试问奥篇隐帙，了辩如响。峤叹曰： 子且名家！ 
现代文：不久，邕告辞。峤很惊讶，试就秘本书及未公开的文章问他，邕对答如流，峤十分感叹： 你将来会成为名家。 
English: He was very surprised and asked him about the secret book and the unpublished article. He answered fluently, and he was very impressed: You will become a famous family in the future.

古文：峤为内史，与监察御史张廷珪荐邕文高气方直，才任谏诤，乃召拜左拾遗。
现代文：峤为内史，与监察御史张廷王圭推荐李邕文章高深，气质耿直，其才堪任谏诤。于是召他授官左拾遗。
English: He was in charge of the internal history, and Zhang Ting Wang Gui, the supervisor of the history, recommended that Li Xuan's articles were profound and his temperament was upright, and he was worthy of the post. Therefore, he was called to be an officer to collect the leftovers.

古文：御史中丞宋璟劾张昌宗等反状，武后不应，邕立阶下大言曰： 璟所陈社稷大计，陛下当听。 
现代文：御史中丞宋瞡揭发张昌宗等谋反事，武后不应。邕立在阶下大声嚷 ：瞡所陈述的是社稷大事，陛下应该听从。 
English: Emperor Wu's empress, Empress Dowager Wu, stood up and shouted, "What I have stated is a great social and political event, and Your Majesty should listen to it."

古文：后色解，即可璟奏。
现代文：武后的脸色缓和了，同意了宋瞡的奏请。
English: Wu Guo's face softened and she agreed to Song Tao's request.

古文：邕出，或让曰： 子位卑，一忤旨，祸不测。 
现代文：散朝后，有人指责邕说 ：你职位卑微，一旦触怒皇帝，会有不测之祸。 
English: After the dynasty was dispersed, some people accused Zou and said, "Your position is lowly. If you anger the emperor, there will be an unforeseen disaster."

古文：邕曰： 不如是，名亦不传。 
现代文：邕说： 不这样，我的名字也不会传闻。 
English: Zou said, "Otherwise, my name wouldn't be rumored."

古文：中宗立，郑普思以方技幸，擢秘书监。
现代文：中宗立，郑普思因善方技而得宠幸，升为秘书监。
English: Zhong Zongli, Zheng Pu Si was favored because of his good skills and was promoted to secretary supervisor.

古文：邕谏曰： 陛下躬政日浅，有九重之严，未闻道路横议。
现代文：邕劝谏 ：陛下亲自主政还不久，再加宫廷之森严，故而听不见世人的议论。
English: 劝: His Majesty himself has not been in power for long, and the palace is very strict, so he cannot hear the world's discussions.

古文：不纳。
现代文：恭请陛下审察。 
English: Chuseok did not accept his request.

古文：五王诛，坐善张柬之，出为南和令，贬富州司户参军事。
现代文：皇帝听不进。汉阳王张柬之、扶阳王桓彦范、平阳王敬晖、南阳王袁恕己、博陵王崔玄日韦五王被杀，邕受株连，被调出京任南和令，又贬为富州司户参军事。
English: The emperor did not listen. The five kings of Hanyang, Zhang Kamizhi, Fuyang, Kuan Yan Fan, Pingyang, Jing'an, Nanyang, Yuan Shiji, and Boling, Cui Xuan Ribei, were killed, and were punished by being transferred out of Beijing to serve as Nanyang warlords, and also demoted to Fuzhou steward and military officer.

古文：韦氏平，召拜左台殿中侍御史，弹劾任职，人颇惮之。
现代文：韦氏乱平，召回任左台殿中侍御史，揭发在任职官之错误，人们颇忌怕他。
English: Wei Shi ran riot, recalling the attendants of the history of the left dais, exposing the mistakes of the officials, people are quite afraid of him.

古文：谯王重福谋反，邕与洛州司马崔日知捕支党，迁户部员外郎。
现代文：谯王李重福谋反，邕与洛州司马崔日知追捕余党有功，调任户部员外郎。
English: Gong Wang Li Chongfu plotted a rebellion, Gong and Lozhou Sima Cui Nichi hunted down the rest of the party, and transferred to the household department member Geiro.

古文：岑羲、崔湜恶日用，而邕与之交，玄宗在东宫，邕及崔隐甫、倪若水同被礼遇，羲等忌之，贬邕舍城丞。
现代文：岑羲、崔厌恶崔日用，而邕与之交往。玄宗还是太子时，邕及崔隐甫、倪若水同受礼遇，岑羲等忌恨他，设法贬邕为舍城丞。
English: When Xuanzong was still crown prince, Xu and Cui Yingfu and Ni Ruoshui were treated with the same courtesy. Xu and Cui detested him and tried to make Xuanzong look like a commoner.

古文：玄宗即位，召为户部郎中。
现代文：玄宗即位，召邕为户部郎中。
English: When Emperor Xuanzong ascended to the throne, Zhaojun became a retainer of the household.

古文：张廷珪为黄门侍郎，而姜皎方幸，共援邕为御史中丞。
现代文：张廷王圭为黄门侍郎，姜日交正得宠。共荐邕为御史中丞。
English: Zhang Ting Wang Gui was Huangmen's chamberlain, and Jiang Rijichongzheng was his favorite. He was recommended as a co-star for the role of Goshi Chujo.

古文：姚崇疾邕险躁，左迁括州司马，起为陈州刺史。
现代文：宰相姚崇不喜欢邕奸险浮躁，贬他为括州司马，后征用为陈州刺史。
English: Prime Minister Yao Chong did not like the treacherous and impetuous, and relegated him to the post of the secretary of the State Council, and later requisitioned him as the secretary of the State Council.

古文：帝封泰山还，邕见帝汴州，诏献辞赋，帝悦。
现代文：皇帝封泰山归。邕在汴州拜见皇帝。诏令献辞赋，皇帝看了很高兴。
English: The emperor returned from Mount Tai. Zou met the emperor in Ganzhou. The emperor was very happy to see him.

古文：然矜肆，自谓且宰相。
现代文：因之甚自傲，自称该居宰相。
English: Because of this, he is very proud and claims to be the prime minister.

古文：邕素轻张说，与相恶。
现代文：邕一向轻视张说，张说也不喜欢他。
English: Zhai has always despised Zhang, and Zhang says she doesn't like him either.

古文：会仇人告邕赃贷枉法，下狱当死。
现代文：恰有人告邕贪赃枉法，审讯后判死罪。
English: Just then, someone was accused of corruption and sentenced to death after a trial.

古文：许昌男子孔璋上书天子曰：
现代文：许昌人孔璋上书天子说： 开明之主举用能人而不计其过错，取其才能而不问其行为。
English: Confucius, the founder of Confucianism, said: "The principle of enlightenment is to employ capable people regardless of their faults, and to take their talents regardless of their actions."

古文：明主举能而舍过，取才而弃行，烈士抗节，勇者不避死，故晋用林父不以过，汉任陈平不以行，禽息陨身不祈生，北郭碎首不爱死。向若林父诛，陈平死，百里不用，晏婴见逐，是晋无赤狄之土，汉无天子之尊，秦不强，齐不霸矣。
现代文：烈士坚持节操，勇士不避危难。所以晋用林父不计他的过错，汉任陈平不究他以前的行为。禽息宁愿一死，北郭自甘断头。过去如果林父被杀，陈平处死，不用百里奚，放逐晏婴；那么，晋就不会拥有赤狄的国土，汉也不会有天子之尊，秦国不会强盛，齐也成不了霸业。
English: In the past, if Lin's father was killed and Chen Ping was executed, there would be no need to travel hundreds of miles and exile the infant; then, Jin would not have the land of Chedi, Han would not have the Son of Heaven, Qin would not be strong, and Qi would not be able to dominate.

古文：伏见陈州刺史邕，刚毅忠烈，难不苟免。
现代文：臣下见陈州刺史李邕，刚毅忠烈，临难不以不正当手段求得免祸。
English: The vassals saw Chen Zhou stabbing Shi Li, and he was strong and loyal. When facing difficulties, he would not use improper means to avoid disaster.

古文：往者折二张之角，挫韦氏之锋，虽身受谪屈，而奸谋沮解，即邕有功于国。
现代文：过去曾斥败二张，挫折韦氏，虽屈遭贬谪，但奸人之阴谋未能得逞。这是邕有功于国。
English: In the past, there were two defeats, a setback for Wei, and although he was humiliated, the plot of the traitors did not succeed. This is a great service to the country.

古文：且邕所能者，拯孤恤穷，救乏赒急，家无私聚。
现代文：且邕所做的，是周济抚恤孤苦贫病者，家中并无私产。
English: What he did was to help the poor and the sick. There was no private property in his family.

古文：今闻坐赃下吏，死在旦夕。
现代文：今听说因受贿罪入狱，死在旦夕。
English: I just heard that he was jailed for bribery and died on the eve of his execution.

古文：臣闻生无益于国者，不若杀身以明贤。
现代文：臣听说活着无益于国的人，不如一死以表彰贤能。
English: The vassal heard that it is better to die than to live without benefiting the country.

古文：臣愿以六尺之躯膏鈇钺，以代邕死。
现代文：臣愿以六尺之躯血染斧钺以代邕死。
English: My vassal is willing to die with the blood of a six-foot-tall corpse.

古文：臣与邕生平不款曲，臣知有邕，邕不知有臣，臣不逮邕明矣。
现代文：臣与邕生平并无来往，臣知邕而邕并不认识臣。臣比不上邕是很明白的。
English: There is no contact between the vassal and the vassal in life. The vassal knows the vassal, but the vassal does not know the vassal. It is very clear that the vassal is inferior to the vassal.

古文：夫知贤而举，仁也；任人之患，义也。
现代文：人能识贤而举荐，是仁；能担当他人的患难，是义。
English: It is benevolence to be able to recognize and recommend the virtuous; it is righteousness to be able to bear the hardships of others.

古文：获二善以死，臣又何求？
现代文：能做了这两件好事而后死，臣再无企求。
English: If you can do these two good things and then die, there is nothing more I can ask of you.

古文：伏惟陛下宽邕之死，使率德改行。
现代文：恳请陛下恕邕免死，使能改过自新。
English: I implore Your Majesty to forgive me and spare my life so that I can reform myself.

古文：兴林父、曲逆之功，臣得瞑目；附禽息、北郭之迹，大愿毕矣。
现代文：能建立林父、曲逆之功，臣得以瞑目；能追随禽息、北郭的心迹，臣的大愿满足了。
English: To be able to establish the merits of Lin Zifu and Qu Xuan, the minister was able to meditate; to be able to follow the footsteps of the bird's breath and Beiguo, the minister's wish was satisfied.

古文：若以阳和方始，重行大戮，则臣请伏剑，不敢烦有司，皇天后土，实闻臣言。
现代文：倘若陛下认为时当春日不可用刑，则臣请伏剑自刎，不敢麻烦有司。皇天后土可以为证。
English: If His Majesty thinks that the punishment cannot be used, then the vassal will ask the vassal to fall on his sword and commit suicide, and will not dare to trouble the magistrate. The land of the Empress Dowager is proof of this.

古文：昔吴、楚反，汉得剧孟则不忧，夫以一贤而敌七国之众，伏惟敷含垢之道，弃瑕之义，远思剧孟，近取于邕。
现代文：过去吴楚叛乱，汉得剧孟，贼寇不足为忧，一个贤人就能敌七国之众。切望能敷设带罪立功之路，有不计瑕疵之义，远想剧孟、近赦李邕。
English: In the past, the Wu Chu rebellion, the Han drama Meng, and the thieves and robbers were not enough to worry about, and a wise man could be the enemy of the people of the seven countries. Eager to lay a road with crime and merit, there is a flawless righteousness, longing for drama Meng, and forgiving Li Yao.

古文：况告成岱宗，天地更新，赦而复论，人谁无罪，惟明主图之。
现代文：况且封泰山大礼之后，天地更新，赦而免论。人谁无过，惟明智之主能谋划恰当。
English: Moreover, after the enthronement ceremony, heaven and earth will be renewed, and there will be no question of forgiveness. No one will be at fault, but only a wise Lord can plan appropriately.

古文：臣闻士为知己者死，臣不为死者所知，而甘之死者，非特惜邕贤，亦以成陛下矜能之慈。
现代文：臣听说士为知己者死。臣不被为之而死的人所知而甘于死的原因，并不是特别爱惜邕的贤能，而是为了成就陛下爱惜才能的德行。 
English: The reason why a vassal is willing to die without being known by those who died for him is not because he is particularly fond of virtue, but in order to achieve the virtue of his majesty's fondness for ability.

古文：邕妻温，复为邕请戍边自赎，曰：
现代文：奏书送上后，邕得免死，贬为遵化尉。孔璋流放岭南。
English: After the report was submitted, Gong was spared death and demoted to the rank of Zunhua lieutenant. Kong Hao was exiled to Lingnan.

古文：邕少习文章，疾恶如仇，不容于众，邪佞切齿，诸儒侧目。
现代文：邕妻温氏又替邕请求戍边自赎： 邕幼时就学习文章，嫉恶如仇，不被众人所容。邪佞恨他，儒者也侧目而视。
English: His wife, Wen, also asked him to redeem himself: "When he was young, he studied literature, and was hated by everyone. The evil spirits hated him, and the Confucians looked sideways at him.

古文：频谪远郡，削迹朝端，不啻十载。
现代文：多次离开朝廷，贬谪远郡，几达十年。
English: He left the imperial court several times and lived in exile for several decades.

古文：岁时叹恋，闻者伤怀。
现代文：岁节都感叹恋念，听来令人伤怀。
English: Every New Year's Day, people lament their love, which sounds sad.

古文：属国家有事泰山，法驾旋路，邕献牛酒，例蒙恩私。
现代文：正逢国家祭于泰山。在法驾回归时，邕献牛酒，蒙受帝恩。
English: It coincided with the National Festival in Mount Tai. When the Dharma was returning, he offered ox wine and received divine grace.

古文：妾闻正人用则佞人忧，邕之祸端，故自此始。
现代文：妾听说聘用正人则佞人忧虑。邕的遭祸就源于此。
English: When the concubine heard that the right person had been hired, she was worried. This was the root of her misfortune.

古文：且邕比任外官，卒无一毁，天意暂顾，罪过旋生。谚曰： 士无贤不肖，入朝见疾。 
现代文：邕接连任外官，无人诋毁，偶顺天意回朝，罪过旋踵而生，正如谚语所说 士人无论贤或不肖，入朝即遭人忌恨 。
English: Foreign ministers are successively re-elected, no one slanders them, and they return to the imperial court in accordance with the will of heaven, and their sins come out one after another. As the saying goes, no matter how virtuous or dishonorable a scholar is, he will be hated as soon as he enters the imperial court.

古文：惟陛下明察。
现代文：愿陛下能明察。
English: May His Majesty see clearly.

古文：邕初蒙讯责，便系牢户，水不入口者逾五日，气息奄奄，惟吏是听。
现代文：邕开始受审讯，即被拘于狱中，有五天连水都不得入口，以致气息奄奄，只得听命于狱吏。
English: At the beginning of his trial, Yan was detained in prison. For five days, he was not even allowed to drink water, which led to shortness of breath, and he had to obey the orders of the prison guards.

古文：事生吏口，迫邕手书。
现代文：事情都是狱吏口授，迫邕书写。
English: Everything was dictated by prison officers and written down under duress.

古文：贷人蚕种，以为枉法；市罗贡奉，指为奸赃。
现代文：贷蚕种给人被说成枉法，购罗贡奉，被诬为奸赃。
English: It is said that lending silkworm seeds to people is an illegal act, and buying silkworm seeds is illegal, and they are falsely accused of being traitors.

古文：于时匦使朝堂，守捉严固，号天诉地，谁肯为闻？
现代文：呈上奏书只能投入匦中，戍边守捉严密坚实，即使呼天抢地，有谁能听。
English: Presenting the record book can only be put into the cocoon, the rim is kept tight and solid, even if you shout to the sky, who can listen.

古文：泣血去国，投身荒裔，永无还期。
现代文：泣血离国，投骨荒野，将永无归期。
English: They left the country with tears and blood, and left their bones in the wilderness. They will never be able to return.

古文：妾愿使邕得充一卒，效力王事，膏涂朔边，骨粪沙壤，成邕夙心。
现代文：妾愿让邕当一名士兵，效力王事，即使战死沙场，亦是邕的夙志。 
English: The concubine is willing to let him be a soldier and serve the king. Even if he dies on the battlefield, it is his dream.

古文：表入不省。
现代文：表呈上后不看。
English: Do not look at the form after it has been submitted.

古文：邕后从中人杨思勖讨岭南贼有功，徙澧州司马。
现代文：邕后来随宫中权臣杨思勖讨岭南贼有功，调任澧州司马。
English: Later, he followed Yang Sijian, a high-ranking official in the imperial court, to investigate the Lingnan thieves, and was transferred to the post of Zhangzhou Sima.

古文：开元二十三年，起为括州刺史，喜兴利除害。
现代文：开元二十三年，起用为括州刺史。喜欢兴利除害。
English: In the 23rd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, he was appointed as the governor of Guizhou Province.

古文：复坐诬枉，且得罪，天子识其名，诏勿劾。
现代文：后来又因诬枉犯法，被判罪。天子知道他的名字，诏令不判罪。
English: Later, he was found guilty of falsely breaking the law. Since God knew his name, he did not convict him.

古文：后历淄、滑二州刺史，上计京师。
现代文：后历任淄、滑二州刺史，送计簿入京师。
English: After that, he served as the governor of Gyeonggi Province, the governor of Gyeonggi Province, the governor of Gyeonggi Province and the governor of Gyeonggi Province.

古文：始，邕蚤有名，重义爱士，久斥外，不与士大夫接。
现代文：当初，邕早就有名望，重义爱士。被斥在朝外日久，不与士大夫交往。
English: At first, Zou had long been renowned as a man who valued righteousness. He was banished from the imperial court for a long time and did not associate with scholars.

古文：既入朝，人间传其眉目瑰异，至阡陌聚观，后生望风内谒，门巷填隘。
现代文：入朝后，人们传说他的眉眼奇特，以致出门时路人聚观。年轻人慕名去拜谒，门巷都塞满了。
English: After he entered the imperial court, people said that his eyebrows and eyes were so peculiar that passers-by gathered to watch him when he went out. Young people went to pay homage to his name, and the alleys were packed.

古文：中人临问，索所为文章，且进上。
现代文：宫中近臣来访，索要所写文章，并送给皇帝看。
English: A courtier came to visit, asked for the article and gave it to the emperor.

古文：以谗媢不得留，出为汲郡、北海太守。
现代文：由于别人的嫉妒和进谗，他不能留在朝中，出京任汲郡、北海太守。
English: Due to the jealousy and interference of others, he could not stay in the court and went to Beijing to serve as the governor of Kyushu and the North Sea.

古文：天宝中，左骁卫兵曹参军柳勣有罪下狱，邕尝遗勣马，故吉温使引邕尝以休咎相语，阴赂遗。
现代文：天宝年间，左骁卫兵曹参军柳责力有罪下狱。邕曾赠马给责力，吉温要责力牵扯邕曾与之议论国家凶吉，私下厚赂责力。
English: During the Tenpo era, the left-arm guard Cao was convicted of joining the army and was sent to prison. Zou had given a horse to Zou, Jiwen wanted Zou to be involved, Zou had discussed the country's bad luck with Zou and secretly bribed Zou.

古文：宰相李林甫素忌邕，因傅以罪。
现代文：宰相李林甫一向忌恨邕，于是连及邕也判罪。
English: Premier Li Linfu has always hated Zhai, so Lian and Zhai were also convicted.

古文：诏刑部员外郎祁顺之、监察御史罗希奭就郡杖杀之，时年七十。代宗时，赠秘书监。
现代文：诏令刑部员外郎祁顺之、监察御史罗希去邕所在郡杀了他。邕时年七十，代宗时，追赠秘书监。
English: He ordered the inspector Shiroshi to go to the county where he was stationed and kill him. Shiroshi was in his seventies at the time, and he was later awarded the position of secretary inspector in place of Munetoki.

古文：邕之文，于碑颂是所长，人奉金帛请其文，前后所受钜万计。
现代文：邕的文章长于写碑颂。
English: It is better to write a poem than a monument.

古文：邕虽诎不进，而文名天下，时称李北海。
现代文：人们带着钱物来请他写文章。前后收的钱有上万。邕虽仕途上不得意，但文章闻名天下，时人称之为李北海。
English: People came to him with money and goods to ask him to write an article. He received tens of thousands of money back and forth. Although he was not satisfied with the work, the article was famous all over the world. At that time, people called him Li Beihai.

古文：卢藏用尝谓： 邕如干将、莫邪，难与争锋，但虞伤缺耳。 
现代文：卢藏用曾说 ：邕有如干将莫邪，很难与之争锋利，但就是怕被伤残。 
English: Lu Zangyong once said: "The dragonfly is like an invincible fighter, it is difficult to compete with it, but it is afraid of being disabled."

古文：卒，赠华阴太守。
现代文：后来邕的命就如此。
English: That's how I ended up dying.

古文：尝以李善释《文选》为繁酿，与吕延济、刘良、张铣、李周翰等更为诂解，时号《五臣注》。
现代文：杜甫知道邕遭受诽谤而死，做《八哀诗》，读来会替他难过。邕天性豪放，不拘细节，收纳馈赠，游猎尽兴，终于因此而败毁。
English: Du Fu knew that Yao had been slandered and died, and wrote "Eight Lamentations," which would be sad for him to read. Yao's natural boldness, regardless of details, receiving gifts, and enjoying hunting, finally led to his downfall.

古文：王翰，字子羽，并州晋阳人。
现代文：王翰字子羽，并州晋阳人。
English: Wang Han is a Zi Yu, and a native of Jinyang.

古文：少豪健恃才，及进士第，然喜蒱酒。
现代文：年轻时豪放刚健，自恃有才，考中进士，但喜欢赌博酗酒。
English: When he was young, he was bold and courageous, boasted of being talented, and passed the middle school entrance examination, but he liked to gamble and drink.

古文：张嘉贞为本州长史，伟其人，厚遇之。
现代文：张嘉贞任并州长史，很赏识他，待他很好。
English: Zhang Jiazhen served as governor and governor of history, appreciated him very much, and treated him very well.

古文：翰自歌以舞属嘉贞，神气轩举自如。
现代文：一次王翰亲自歌舞以悦张嘉贞，气宇轩昂潇洒自如。
English: On one occasion, Wang Han personally sang and danced to please Zhang Jiazhen, and he was as cool as a cucumber.

古文：张说至，礼益加。复举直言极谏，调昌乐尉，又举超拔君类。
现代文：张说到并州，对王翰更加礼遇，又推荐他为直言极谏，调任昌乐县尉，又举荐为超拔群类。
English: Zhang said that when it came to Bianzhou, he was more polite to Wang Han, and recommended him as an outspoken person, transferred him to Changle County, and recommended him as a superior group.

古文：方说辅政，故召为秘书正字，擢通事舍人、驾部员外郎。
现代文：此时正当张说为相，所以征召王翰为秘书正字，又提升为通事舍人、驾部员外郎。
English: At this time, it was justifiable to say that Zhang was the prime minister, so Wang Han was conscripted as secretary Zheng Zi, and promoted to secretary and driver.

古文：历河中、兴元、宣武节度使，检校尚书右仆射、东都留守。
现代文：家里养着一批歌姬舞女，王翰颐指气使，以王侯自居，人们没有不厌恶他的。
English: At home, he raised a group of singers and dancers. Wang Hanxu was the leader of this group and considered himself a prince. People did not fail to detest him.

古文：而弟范亦为淄青节度使，世推显家。李白，字太白，兴圣皇帝九世孙。
现代文：张说免除宰相后，王翰被派出京为汝州长史，又调任仙州别驾，整天与才士豪侠之徒聚饮游乐打猎，击鼓尽欢，因此又贬为道州司马，不久死去。李白，字太白，兴圣皇帝九世孙。
English: Zhang said that after the prime minister was pardoned, Wang Han was sent to Beijing as the governor of the history, and he was transferred to Xianzhou, and he spent the whole day drinking, hunting, and playing drums with the talented heroes and heroines. Therefore, he was relegated to the governor of Daozhou, and he died soon. Li Bai, the word is too white, is the ninth grandchild of Emperor Xing Sheng.

古文：其先隋末以罪徙西域，神龙初，遁还，客巴西。
现代文：其父亲隋末时因犯罪被流放西域。神龙初年，偷跑回来，客居巴西。
English: At the end of the Sui Dynasty, his father was exiled to the West for a crime. In the first year of Shenlong, he sneaked back and lived in Brazil.

古文：白之生，母梦长庚星，因以命之。
现代文：李白出生时，其母梦见长庚星，就以此为名。
English: When Li Bai was born, his mother had a dream about Chang Geng Xing, hence the name.

古文：十岁通诗书，既长，隐岷山。
现代文：十岁通晓诗书，长大后隐居岷山。
English: He was fluent in poetry at the age of ten, and lived in seclusion in Shaoshan after he grew up.

古文：州举有道，不应。
现代文：州里荐举他，他不应征。
English: The state recommended that he be drafted, and he should not be drafted.

古文：苏颋为益州长史，见白异之，曰： 是子天才英特，少益以学，可比相如。 
现代文：苏廷页为益州长史，见白不凡，说 ：这人是个非一般的天才，略加培养，可与司马相如比美。 
English: "This man is an extraordinary genius. With a little training, he can be as good as Sima.

古文：然喜纵横术，击剑，为任侠，轻财重施。
现代文：但李白爱好纵横之术，喜欢击剑，轻财行侠。
English: However, Li Bai was fond of longitudinal and transverse techniques, liked fencing, and was frivolous.

古文：更客任城，与孔巢父、韩准、裴政、张叔明、陶沔居徂徠山，日沈饮，号 竹溪六逸 。
现代文：迁居任城，与孔巢父、韩准、裴政、张叔明、陶沔等人住在徂来山，每日酣饮，号曰 竹溪六逸 。
English: Moved to Rencheng, lived with Kong Xuefu, Han Zheng, Pei Zheng, Zhang Shuming, Tao Yan and others in Shulaishan, drinking tea every day, called Zhuxi Liujia.

古文：天宝初，南入会稽，与吴筠善，筠被召，故白亦至长安。
现代文：天宝初年，李白南下会稽，与吴筠友善，筠被召入京，白也到了长安。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Li Bai went to the south to audition, and he was friendly with Wu Gan. Gan was called to Beijing, and Bai also came to Chang'an.

古文：往见贺知章，知章见其文，叹曰： 子，谪仙人也！ 
现代文：白去见贺知章，知章看了他的文章，叹赏： 你，是谪仙人啊。 
English: It was no use going to see He Zhizhang. Zhizhang read his article and sighed: You, you are a fairy godmother.

古文：言于玄宗，召见金銮殿，论当世事，奏颂一篇。
现代文：遂向玄宗介绍。皇帝在金銮殿召见白，与之谈论当世事，白献颂辞一篇。
English: He then introduced him to Emperor Xuanzong. The emperor summoned Bai to meet him at the Golden Pavilion, where they discussed current affairs and Bai delivered a eulogy.

古文：帝赐食，亲为调羹，有诏供奉翰林。
现代文：皇帝赐食，亲自为他调羹。诏他供奉翰林。
English: The emperor gave him food and personally spooned it for him. He said that he would offer it to Hanlin.

古文：白犹与饮徒醉于市。
现代文：白依然与酒友在市中酣饮。
English: Bai is still drinking with his friends in the city.

古文：帝坐沈香亭子，意有所感，欲得白为乐章；召入，而白已醉，左右以水颒面，稍解，援笔成文，婉丽精切无留思。
现代文：一次皇帝在沉香子亭，见景生情，想要李白谱写乐章。召他进宫，而白已醉。左右用水洒脸，酒意稍退。给他笔，顷刻之间文即写成，写得婉丽精切。
English: Once, when the emperor was in Shenxiangzi Pavilion, he saw Jing Sheng and wanted Li Bai to compose a piece of music. He invited him into the palace, but Bai was already drunk. He splashed his face with water on both sides, and the wine was a little weak. He gave him a pen, and the text was written in an instant, and it was written beautifully and precisely.

古文：帝爱其才，数宴见。
现代文：皇帝爱其才，多次宴会时召见他。
English: The emperor loved him and invited him to many banquets.

古文：白尝侍帝，醉，使高力士脱靴。
现代文：白曾侍候皇帝而沉醉殿上，要高力士替他脱靴。
English: Bai Zeng served the emperor and fell into a drunken stupor. He asked Gao Lixi to take off his shoes for him.

古文：力士素贵，耻之，擿其诗以激杨贵妃，帝欲官白，妃辄沮止。
现代文：高力士一向尊贵，以此为耻，就挑剔他的诗句刺激杨贵妃。皇帝想封李白为官，贵妃就总是阻止。
English: Gao Lixi had always been respected, and ashamed of this, he criticized his poems to stimulate Yang Guifei. If the emperor wanted to appoint Li Bai as an official, Guifei would always stop him.

古文：白自知不为亲近所容，益骜放不自脩，与知章、李适之、汝阳王璡、崔宗之、苏晋、张旭、焦遂为 酒八仙人 。
现代文：白自知皇帝身边的人不能容他，更加放纵洒脱，毫无约束。与贺知章、李适之、汝阳王李、崔宗之、苏晋、张旭、焦遂等结为 酒八仙人 。
English: Bai Zizhi knew that the people around the emperor could not tolerate him, and he became more indulgent and unrestrained. He became the Eight Immortals of Wine with He Zizhang, Li Shizhi, Ruyang Wang Li, Cui Zongzhi, Su Jin, Zhang Xu, and Jiao Sui.

古文：恳求还山，帝赐金放还。
现代文：恳求回山，皇帝赐金放还。
English: He begged to be allowed to return to the mountain, and the emperor gave him his money back.

古文：白浮游四方，尝乘舟与崔宗之自采石至金陵，著宫锦袍坐舟中，旁若无人。
现代文：白于是云游四方。曾乘月与崔宗之自采石至金陵，穿着宫廷锦袍坐在船中，旁若无人。
English: So Bai travelled in all directions. He and Cui Zong took the moon from the quarry to Jinling, and sat in a boat wearing a royal brocade robe, as if no one was around.

古文：安禄山反，转侧宿松、匡庐间，永王璘辟为府僚佐。
现代文：安禄山叛乱，李白辗转宿松、匡庐间。永王瞞召他为幕府。
English: During the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, Li Baiyao moved between Matsu and Kuangye. Yongwang secretly summoned him to the shogunate.

古文：璘起兵，逃还彭泽，璘败，当诛。
现代文：瞞起兵，白逃回彭泽。瞞事败，白受牵连被判死罪。
English: Concealed raising an army, fled back to Penza in vain. Concealed defeat, was implicated in vain and sentenced to death.

古文：初，白游并州，见郭子仪，奇之。
现代文：当初，李白在并州，见到郭子仪，觉得他不一般。
English: At first, when Li Bai met Guo Ziyi in Bozhou, he didn't think he was ordinary.

古文：子仪尝犯法，白为救免。
现代文：子仪曾犯法，白设法救了他。
English: Ziyi had broken the law, Bai managed to save him.

古文：至是子仪请解官以赎，有诏长流夜郎。
现代文：这一次子仪请求免自己的官赎李白之罪，于是诏令流放夜郎。
English: This time, Zi Yi asked his officials to pardon him to atone for Li Bai's crime, so the imperial edict was issued to banish Yelang.

古文：会赦，还寻阳，坐事下狱。
现代文：遇到大赦，回寻阳，又因其他事下狱。
English: Encountered amnesty, returned to the search for the sun, and was released from prison for other matters.

古文：时宋若思将吴兵三千赴河南，道寻阳，释囚辟为参谋，未几辞职。
现代文：当时宋若思率领吴兵三千赴河南，经过寻阳，放了白并召他为参谋，不久即辞职。
English: At that time, Song Ruosi led 3,000 Wu soldiers to Henan. After searching for the sun, he was released and called him as a staff officer, and soon resigned.

古文：李阳冰为当涂令，白依之。
现代文：李阳冰任当涂令，白去依附他。
English: Li Yangbing was ordered to do the painting, but she did not follow him.

古文：代宗立，以左拾遗召，而白已卒，年六十余。
现代文：代宗立，召李白任左拾遗，但白已去世，年六十多岁。
English: On behalf of Zongli, Li Bai was summoned to collect the remains, but Bai had already passed away at the age of more than sixty.

古文：白晚好黄老，度牛渚矶至姑孰，悦谢家青山，欲终焉。
现代文：李白晚年爱好黄老之说。过牛渚矶到姑孰，喜爱谢家青山，想在此终老。
English: Li Bai said in his later years that he loved Huanglaozhi. He went from Niuhu to Guzheng, loved Xiejia and Qingshan, and wanted to live here until old age.

古文：及卒，葬东麓。
现代文：他死后即葬在此山东麓。
English: He was buried immediately after his death at the eastern foot of the mountain.

古文：元和末，宣歙观察使范传正祭其冢，禁樵采。
现代文：元和末年，宣歙观察使范传正来祭祀，禁止人们在坟周围斫柴。
English: At the end of the Yuan and Ming dynasties, Fan Chuanzheng, an official sent by the Emperor to observe the Xuanwu festival, forbade people to collect firewood around the tomb.

古文：访后裔，惟二孙女嫁为民妻，进止仍有风范，因泣曰： 先祖志在青山，顷葬东麓，非本意。 
现代文：去访问李白后裔，只有两个孙女嫁给平民为妻，举止仍有大家的风范。因此感伤说 ：你们的祖父志在青山。此刻葬在东麓，不是他的本意。 
English: To visit the descendants of Li Bai, only two granddaughters married commoners as wives, and their manners still have the demeanor of everyone. Therefore, he said sadly: Your grandfather aspired to be in Aoyama. It is not his intention to be buried in the eastern foothills at this time.

古文：传正为改葬，立二碑焉。
现代文：传正为他改葬，立二碑。
English: It is rumored that his funeral will be changed and two monuments will be erected.

古文：告二女，将改妻士族，辞以孤穷失身，命也，不愿更嫁。
现代文：并告诉两个孙女，将为她们改嫁士族。二女辞谢说因孤苦穷困已失身民间，这是命，故而不愿意改嫁。
English: He also told his two granddaughters that he would remarry them to a member of the warrior class. The two daughters declined, saying that they did not want to remarry because they had lost their lives due to poverty and hardship.

古文：传正嘉叹，复其夫徭役。
现代文：传正赞叹其志节，免了她们丈夫的徭役。
English: Chuan Zheng praised their dedication to the cause and relieved their husbands of their duties.

古文：文宗时，诏以白歌诗、裴旻剑舞、张旭草书为 三绝 。
现代文：文宗时，诏令将李白的诗歌、裴的剑舞、张旭的草书称之为 三绝 。
English: During the reign of Emperor Wenzong, Li Bai's poetry, Pei's sword dance, and Zhang Xu's cursive writing were called the Three Perfections.

古文：旭，苏州吴人。
现代文：张旭，苏州吴人。
English: Zhang Xu, from Suzhou, Wuzhou.

古文：嗜酒，每大醉，呼叫狂走，乃下笔，或以头濡墨而书，既醒自视，以为神，不可复得也，世呼 张颠 。
现代文：嗜酒，每次大醉，大声呼叫着跑来跑去，这才下笔写字。
English: He was an alcoholic, and every time he got very drunk, he would run around shouting loudly, and only then would he write.

古文：初，仕为常熟尉，有老人陈牒求判，宿昔又来，旭怒其烦，责之。
现代文：有时用头蘸墨汁写字。醒后自己细看，以为是神的杰作，再也写不出那么好的字。世人称他为张颠。起初，旭任常熟尉，有个老人递上状纸要求判决，第二天又来，旭讨厌他麻烦，斥责他。
English: Sometimes he would write with the ink of his head. When he woke up, he would take a closer look. He thought it was a masterpiece of God. He would never be able to write such a good character again. The world called him Zhang Bing. At first, Xu Ren Chang Rongfei, an old man handed him a piece of paper asking for a verdict. The next day, Xu hated his troubles and scolded him.

古文：老人曰： 观公笔奇妙，欲以藏家尔。 
现代文：老人说： 看您老的书法奇妙，想得到您的字收藏起来。 
English: The old man said, "Your old calligraphy is wonderful. I want to collect your calligraphy."

古文：旭因问所藏，尽出其父书，旭视之，天下奇笔也，自是尽其法。
现代文：旭于是问他收藏了些什么。老人拿出他父亲的书法。旭看去，真是天下的奇笔。由此细研揣摩，尽得其法。
English: Asahi then asked him what he had collected. The old man took out his father's calligraphy. Asahi looked at it, it really was the strangest pen in the world. He studied it in detail and tried his best.

古文：旭自言，始见公主担夫争道，又闻鼓吹，而得笔法意，观倡公孙舞《剑器》，得其神。
现代文：旭自己说，当初看见公主与挑夫争路，又听见鼓吹，由此得书法的精意。又看了公孙大娘舞剑器，学得了舞的神韵。
English: Xu himself said that he first saw the princess arguing with the porter, and then heard the preaching, from which he gained the refinement of calligraphy. He also watched his granddaughter dance with a sword, and learned the charm of dance.

古文：遣中人王承华往取，缙裒集数十百篇上之。郑虔，郑州荥阳人。
现代文：后人论书法，对欧、虞、褚、陆都有不同的观点。至于对张旭，没一个说不好的。能继承他的笔法的，只有崔邈、颜真卿。郑虔，郑州荥阳人。
English: Later generations of calligraphers have different views on Ou, Yu, Ya and Lu. As for Zhang Xu, no one has a bad word to say about him. The only people who can inherit his penmanship are Cui Yao, Yan Zhenqing and Zheng Qian, a native of Fenyang, Zhengzhou.

古文：天宝初，为协律郎，集缀当世事，著书八十余篇。
现代文：天宝初年，任协律郎采集当时世事，著书八十余篇。
English: In the first year of the Tenpo era, Ritsuro was appointed to collect information on the social affairs of the time, and wrote more than eighty books.

古文：有窥其稿者，上书告虔私撰国史，虔苍黄焚之，坐谪十年。
现代文：有人偷看了他的文稿，就上书告郑虔私自修撰国史，郑虔慌忙地烧掉了它，因此事被贬谪十年。
English: Someone sneaked a look at his manuscript and wrote a letter accusing Zheng Qian of writing the national history on his own. Zheng Qian hurriedly burned it, and as a result, the matter was shelved for ten years.

古文：还京师，玄宗爱其才，欲置左右，以不事事，更为置广文馆，以虔为博士。
现代文：后来回到京城，玄宗爱他的才华，想让他在身边任职，因为他不干事，改为安置在广文馆，以郑虔为博士。
English: Later, when he returned to Beijing, Xuanzong loved his talent and wanted him to work alongside him. Since he was not an official, he was instead placed in the Guangwen Museum, with Zheng Qian as the doctor.

古文：虔闻命，不知广文曹司何在，诉宰相，宰相曰： 上增国学，置广文馆，以居贤者，令后世言广文博士自君始，不亦美乎？ 
现代文：郑虔听到任命，不知广文馆是管什么的。问宰相，宰相说： 皇上为加强儒学，设置广文馆，以集聚贤人，使后代说广文博士之职是由你开始的，这不是一件美事吗？ 
English: When Zheng Qian heard of the appointment, he did not know what the Guangwen Hall was responsible for. When he asked the prime minister, the prime minister said: "In order to strengthen Confucianism, the emperor set up the Guangwen Hall to gather sages, so that future generations would say that the post of Guangwen Doctor began with you. Isn't this a beautiful thing?"

古文：虔乃就职。
现代文：郑虔才就职。
English: Zheng Qiancai took office.

古文：久之，雨坏庑舍，有司不复修完，寓治国子馆，自是遂废。
现代文：时间长了，雨水腐蚀了房屋，有关部门不再修葺，就寄居治事于国子馆，广文博士之职从此就废止了。
English: After a long time, rainwater corroded the house, and the relevant departments no longer repaired it, so they lived and governed in the Guozi Pavilion. Guangwen's position as a doctor has since been abolished.

古文：初，虔追故书可志者得四十余篇，国子司业苏源明名其书为《会稡》。
现代文：当初，郑虔追记辑录可以记忆的旧书得四十八篇，国子司业苏源明题其书为《会粹》。
English: At the beginning, there were forty-eight old books that could be remembered from Zheng Qian's collection of old books, and Su Yuan, the Secretary of State for Industry and Commerce, explicitly named his book as "Hei Zi."

古文：虔善图山水，好书，常苦无纸，于是慈恩寺贮柿叶数屋，遂往日取叶肄书，岁久殆遍。
现代文：郑虔善画山水，喜欢书法，常常苦于无纸，而慈恩寺贮存了几屋子柿叶，就每日去取叶练习书画，年久几乎写遍了这些柿叶。
English: Zheng Qian is good at painting landscapes and rivers, likes calligraphy, and often suffers from a lack of paper. Zi'en Temple stored several rooms of persimmon leaves, and he went to take leaves every day to practice calligraphy and painting. Over the years, he has almost written all over these persimmon leaves.

古文：尝自写其诗并画以献，帝大署其尾曰： 郑虔三绝 。
现代文：曾自写其诗及画进献，玄宗用大字在书画后写道 ：郑虔三绝。 
English: He used to write his poems and paintings himself, and Xuanzong wrote in big characters after the paintings and calligraphy: Zheng Qian San Yu Rong.

古文：迁著作郎。
现代文：升为著作郎。
English: He was promoted to Shosho-ro.

古文：安禄山反，遣张通儒劫百官置东都，伪授虔水部郎中，因称风缓，求摄市令，潜以密章达灵武。
现代文：安禄山反叛，派张通儒劫持百官置于洛阳，贼任郑虔伪职为水部郎中，因自称有风疾而未到任，要求为代理市令，暗中以秘密奏章送达灵武。
English: An Lushan rebelled and sent Zhang Tongru to kidnap 100 officials and place them in Luoyang. The thief appointed Zheng Qian as a junior official of the Ministry of Water Resources, but he did not arrive at the post because he claimed to have wind disease. He demanded to be the acting city magistrate and secretly sent Lingwu with a secret song.

古文：贼平，与张通、王维并囚宣阳里。
现代文：贼乱平定，与张通、王维一起被囚禁于宣阳里。
English: The banditry was put down, and he was imprisoned in Xuanyang together with Zhang Tong and Wang Wei.

古文：三人者，皆善画，崔圆使绘斋壁，虔等方悸死，即极思祈解于圆，卒免死，贬台州司户参军事，维止下选。
现代文：这三人都善做画，崔圆命他们在书斋中做壁画，郑虔等正惧怕被处死，就极力想求救于崔圆，终于被免了死罪，郑虔贬为台州司户参军事，王维只做降职处理。
English: All three were good at painting. Cui Yuan ordered them to do murals in the study. Zheng Qian and others were afraid of being executed, so they tried their best to seek help from Cui Yuan. Finally, they were exempted from the death penalty. Zheng Qian was demoted to Taizhou Secretary of the Household and Military, and Wang Wei was only demoted.

古文：后数年卒。
现代文：几年后郑虔死。
English: He died several years later.

古文：虔学长于地理，山川险易、方隅物产、兵戍众寡无不详。
现代文：郑虔之学长于地理，举凡山川的险易、边境要地的物产、戍边兵员的多少，无不详熟。
English: Zheng Qianzhi majored in geography. He was familiar with all the dangers of mountains and rivers, the products of important border areas, and the number of soldiers on the border.

古文：尝为《天宝军防录》，言典事该。
现代文：曾著《天宝军防录》，文字典雅，事实详备。
English: He was the author of "Tianbao Army Prevention Record," with elegant words and detailed facts.

古文：诸儒服其善著书，时号 郑广文 。
现代文：许多儒学家佩服他会写书，当时号称 郑广文 。
English: Many Confucians admired his ability to write books, and he was known as Zheng Guangwen at that time.

古文：在官贫约甚，澹如也。
现代文：居官十分清贫节俭，不求名利。
English: He is very poor and frugal, and does not seek fame and fortune.

古文：杜甫尝赠以诗曰 才名四十年，坐客寒无氈 云。
现代文：杜甫曾赠诗说： 才名四十年，坐客寒无毡。 
English: Du Fu once said in a poem: "I've only been famous for forty years, but I'm a cold-hearted host."

古文：有郑相如者，自沧州来，师事虔，虔未之礼，间问何所业，相如曰： 闻孔子称 继周者百世可知 ，仆亦能知之。 
现代文：有个叫郑相如的人，从沧州来，以师礼侍奉郑虔，虔未以礼相待，一会儿问他所习何业，郑相如说： 闻孔子说： 继周者百世可知。 我也能知道。 
English: There was a man named Zheng Xiangru, who came from Cangzhou and served Zheng Qian with great courtesy. Qian did not treat him with courtesy. After a while, he asked him what he was studying. Zheng Xiangru said, "I heard Confucius say, 'A follower of Zhou can be known for a hundred lifetimes. I can also know.'

古文：虔骇然，即曰： 开元尽三十年当改元，尽十五年天下乱，贼臣僭位，公当污伪官，愿守节，可以免。 
现代文：郑虔甚感惊骇，相如接着说： 开元三十年后当改年号，十五年后天下要乱，贼臣要僭位称帝，您会为伪官所污，希望您能谨守臣节，可以免祸。 
English: Zheng Qian was very shocked, so he went on to say: Thirty years after the founding of the Yuan Dynasty, the year will be changed, and after fifteen years, the world will be in turmoil, and the thief-vassal will be crowned emperor. You will be tainted by the fake official. I hope you can keep the Vassal Day, and you can avoid disaster.

古文：虔又问： 自谓云何？ 
现代文：郑虔又问： 你自己又会怎样呢？ 
English: Zheng Qian also asked: What will happen to you?

古文：答曰： 相如有官三年，死衢州。 
现代文：相如答说： 我可做三年官，死于衢州。 
English: He said: I can be a three-year official and die in Zhangzhou.

古文：是年及进士第，调信安尉。
现代文：这一年郑相如考中进士，任信安县尉。
English: This year, Zheng Xiangru passed the junior high school entrance examination and was appointed as the lieutenant of Xin'an County.

古文：既三年，虔询吏部，则相如果死。故虔念其言，终不附贼。
现代文：三年后，郑虔向吏部询问，相如果然死去，所以郑虔记着他的话，终于没有归附逆贼。
English: Three years later, Zheng Qian asked the cadre department if he would die, so Zheng Qian remembered his words and finally did not join the traitors.

古文：萧颖士，字茂挺，梁鄱阳王恢七世孙。
现代文：萧颖士字茂挺，梁朝鄱阳王萧恢的七世孙。
English: Xiao Ying Shih, also known as Maotian, was the seventh-generation grandson of King Xiao Wei of the Liang Dynasty.

古文：祖晶，贤而有谋，任雅相伐高丽，表为记室。
现代文：祖父萧晶，贤能而有谋略，任雅相讨伐高丽时，表奏他为记室。
English: Grandfather Xiao Jing, wise and resourceful, when Ren Yaxiang was fighting against Goryeo, played him as a recorder.

古文：越王贞举兵，杖策诣之，陈三策，王不用，晶度必败，乃亡去，客死广陵。
现代文：越王李贞兴兵，萧晶拿着简策晋见，陈述了三条计策，越王不用，萧晶忖度越王必败，于是出走，客居并死于广陵。
English: Yue Wang Li Zhenxing soldiers, Xiao Jing took a brief strategy to Jin Jin, and stated three strategies. Yue Wang did not use it, Xiao Jing was sure to defeat Yue Wang, so he ran away, lived as a guest and died in Guangling.

古文：颖士四岁属文，十岁补太学生。
现代文：颖士四岁能写文章，十岁补为太学生。
English: Ying Shi was able to write an article at the age of four, and became a student at the age of ten.

古文：观书一览即诵，通百家谱系、书籀学。
现代文：看书过目成诵，精通百家谱系与文字之学。
English: He can recite books by sight and is proficient in the study of genealogies and characters.

古文：开元二十三年，举进士，对策第一。
现代文：开元二十三年考中进士，对策考试第一。
English: In the 23rd year of the founding of the People's Republic of China, it was ranked first in the countermeasures examination.

古文：父旻，以莒丞抵罪，颖士往诉于府佐张惟一，惟一曰： 旻有佳儿，吾以旻获谴不憾。 
现代文：其父萧，做莒县丞时获罪，颖士向府佐张惟一投诉，张惟一说： 萧有好儿子，我因萧的事受责也不遗憾。 
English: His father, Xiao, was found guilty when he was the county magistrate of Jixian County. Ying Shimu made a single complaint to the prefect, Zhang Zuo. Zhang Zuo said: Xiao has a good son. I do not regret being blamed for Xiao's actions.

古文：乃平宥之。
现代文：于是平反宽宥了他。
English: Therefore, Heiban pardoned him.

古文：天宝初，颖士补秘书正字。
现代文：天宝初年，颖士任秘书正字。
English: In the first year of Tianbao, Ying Shih was appointed as secretary.

古文：于时裴耀卿、席豫、张均、宋遥、韦述皆先进，器其材，与钧礼，由是名播天下。
现代文：此时，裴耀卿、席豫、张均、宋遥、韦述等都是前辈，器重萧颖士的才干，以平等之礼相待，从此萧颖士便名扬天下。
English: At this time, Pei Yaoqing, Xi Yu, Zhang Jun, Song Yao, Wei Shu, etc. were all predecessors. They valued Xiao Yingshi's talent and treated each other with equal courtesy. From then on, Xiao Yingshi became famous all over the world.

古文：奉使括遗书赵、卫间，淹久不报，为有司劾免，留客濮阳。
现代文：奉命到赵、卫间搜求散佚之书，滞留很久不复命，被主管官员弹劾免职，留下客居濮阳。
English: He was ordered to go to Zhao and Weima to search for books that had been lost, and he stayed there for a long time before he died. He was impeached and removed from office by the responsible officials, leaving behind a guest house in Shenyang.

古文：于是尹征、王恒、卢异、卢士式、贾邕、赵匡、阎士和、柳并等皆执弟子礼，以次授业，号萧夫子。
现代文：于是尹征、王恒、卢异、卢士式、贾邕、赵匡、阎士和、柳并等都以弟子的礼节待他，萧颖士顺序讲学，被称为 萧夫子 。
English: As a result, Yin Zheng, Wang Heng, Lu Yi, Lu Shiqun, Jia Wei, Zhao Kuang, Yan Shihe, Liu Nian, etc. all treated him with the etiquette of a disciple, and Xiao Ying Shi gave lectures in sequence, and was called Xiao Fu Zi.

古文：召为集贤校理。
现代文：后奉召为集贤校理。
English: Later, he was called to be the principal of Shixian School.

古文：宰相李林甫欲见之，颖士方父丧，不诣。
现代文：宰相李林甫想见他，颖士正为父亲服丧，不去。
English: Prime Minister Li Linfu wanted to see him, but Ying Si, who was in mourning for his father, would not go.

古文：林甫尝至故人舍邀颍士，颖士前往，哭门内以待，林甫不得已，前吊乃去。
现代文：李林甫曾到朋友家邀颖士见面，颖士前往，哭于门内等待李林甫，李林甫不得已，前往萧家吊丧后就走。
English: Li Linfu once went to a friend's house to invite Ying Shih to meet him. Ying Shih went there, cried and waited for Li Linfu inside the door. Li Linfu had no choice but to go to Xiao's house for the funeral and then leave.

古文：怒其不下己，调广陵参军事，颖士急中不能堪，作《伐樱桃树赋》曰： 擢无庸之琐质，蒙本枝以自庇。虽先寝而或荐，非和羹之正味。 
现代文：怒怨颍士对自己不谦恭，调他任广陵参军事，颍士烦躁不能忍受，做《伐樱桃树赋》说： 选择无用的细枝，在支干的庇荫下以苟安，虽本无闻而有人举荐，但终究不是调味的正品。 
English: The angry and resentful magistrate was not humble and courteous to himself, and transferred him to be the commander of Guangling and participate in the military. The magistrate was impatient and could not bear it, and said in "Cherry Tree Felling": Choose useless twigs, and take refuge under the shade of the supporting trunk. Although this is unheard of and someone recommends it, it is not a genuine seasoning product after all.

古文：以讥林甫云。
现代文：以讽刺李林甫。
English: A satire on Li Linfu.

古文：君子恨其褊。
现代文：君子可惜他的心地太窄。
English: Gentleman, but his heart is too narrow.

古文：会母丧免，流播吴、越。
现代文：适逢母亲去世免职，流浪于吴越间。
English: When his mother died and he was dismissed from his job, he wandered around Wuyue.

古文：尝谓： 仲尼作《春秋》，为百王不易法，而司马迁作本纪、书、表、世家、列传，叙事依违，失褒贬体，不足以训。 
现代文：颖士曾说： 孔子做《春秋》，为百代君王不可变易的法则，而司马迁做本纪、书、表、世家、列传，叙事模棱两可，有失一字寓褒贬的笔法体例，不足为训。 
English: Ying Shih once said: Confucius wrote "Spring and Autumn" as an unchangeable rule for hundreds of kings, while Sima Qian wrote a book, a book, a table, a family, and a series of biographies. The narrative is ambiguous, and there is a penmanship example of missing a word of praise and criticism, which is not enough for training.

古文：乃起汉元年讫隋义宁编年，依《春秋》义类为传百篇。
现代文：于是从汉元年起到隋恭帝义宁年止，按编年史体例，依照《春秋》按义分类方法做传百篇。
English: Therefore, from the first year of the Han Dynasty to the end of the reign of the Sui Emperor Yining, according to the chronicle history example, according to the "Spring and Autumn" according to the meaning classification method to do a hundred articles.

古文：在魏书高贵崩，曰： 司马昭弑帝于南阙。 
现代文：记魏国高贵乡公曹髦之死时，写道 ：司马昭弑帝于南阙。 
English: When writing about the death of Gong Cao Xiang of Gao Gui Township in Wei, he wrote: Sima Zhaohui Emperor died in Nanluo.

古文：在梁书陈受禅，曰： 陈霸先反。 
现代文：记梁代陈受禅让时，写道： 陈霸先反叛。 
English: When Liang wrote of Chen's surrender to Zen, he wrote: Chen rebelled first.

古文：又自以梁枝孙，而宣帝逆取顺守，故武帝得血食三纪；昔曲沃篡晋，而文公为五伯，仲尼弗贬也。
现代文：又因自己是梁代裔孙，梁宣帝降西魏后又被立为帝，继承了梁的社稷，所以使开国之君的梁武帝又得以享受祭祀三十余年；往昔曲沃篡位为晋国国君，晋文公为五霸之一，孔子并不贬抑。
English: Moreover, because he was a descendant of the Liang dynasty, Liang Xuandi was made emperor again after the fall of the Western Wei Dynasty and inherited Liang's social power, so Liang Wudi, the founder of the country, was able to enjoy more than 30 years of sacrifices; in the past, Qu Wo usurped the throne as the ruler of Jin, and Jin Wengu was one of the five rulers, and Confucius did not disparage it.

古文：乃黜陈闰隋，以唐土德承梁火德，皆自断，诸儒不与论也。
现代文：于是贬抑陈与隋，以唐土德继承梁的火德为正统，这些都是自做论断，各儒学家不赞同他的观点。
English: As a result, he disparaged Chen and Sui, and took the fire virtue inherited from Liang as the orthodoxy. These are all self-made judgments, and various Confucian scholars do not agree with his views.

古文：有太原王绪者，僧辩裔孙，撰《永宁公辅梁书》，黜陈不帝，颖士佐之，亦著《梁萧史谱》及作《梁不禅陈论》以发绪义例，使光明云。
现代文：太原王绪，是王僧辩的后裔，撰写了《永宁王辅梁书》，贬抑陈代不称之为帝，颖士佐助他，也著《梁萧史谱》并写《梁不禅陈论》文章来阐发王绪的主旨和体例，使其论点更加鲜明。
English: Taiyuan Wangxu, a descendant of Wang Zengfei, wrote the "Book of Yongning Wang Fu Liang," disparaging Chen Dai for not calling him an emperor, and Ying Shi Sasuke him. He also wrote "History of Liang Xiao" and wrote an article "On Liang Bu Zen Chen" to explain Wangxu's theme and style, making his arguments more vivid.

古文：史官韦述荐颖士自代，召诣史馆待制，颖士乘传诣京师。
现代文：史官韦述推荐萧颖士代替自己，朝廷召他到史馆等候诏令，颖士乘传车到京城。
English: Historian Wei Shu recommended Xiao Yingzhi to replace him, the imperial court summoned him to the history museum to wait for the imperial decree, and Yingzhi took a bus to the capital.

古文：而林甫方威福自擅，颖士遂不屈，愈见疾，俄免官，往来鄠、杜间。
现代文：此时李林甫正专权，作威作福，颍士不肯屈从，更加被忌恨，不久就免官，往来于、杜两地之间。
English: At this time, Li Linfu was in a position of absolute power, acting as a tyrant for the benefit of the people. Muxi refused to yield and was even more hated. He was soon dismissed from his post and traveled back and forth between the two provinces.

古文：林甫死，更调河南府参军事。
现代文：李林甫死，又调任河南府参军事。
English: After Li Linfu's death, he was transferred to Henan to join the military.

古文：倭国遣使入朝，自陈国人愿得萧夫子为师者，中书舍人张渐等谏不可而止。
现代文：倭国派遣使臣来朝，提出倭国人希望聘请萧夫子为师，中书舍人张渐等进谏认为不可，于是作罢。
English: Wakoku dispatched an envoy to the DPRK, who proposed that the Wakoku people hoped to hire Shōfūzō as a teacher, but considered it impossible to promote Chinese calligraphers such as Zhang Qian, and therefore abandoned the idea.

古文：安禄山宠恣，颖士阴语柳并曰： 胡人负宠而骄，乱不久矣。东京其先陷乎！ 
现代文：安禄山恃宠放肆，颖士暗地里对柳并说 ：胡人得宠骄傲，不久就会作乱，洛阳也许要先陷入贼手！ 
English: Anlu Mountain favors impudence, Ying Shih secretly told Liu Rong and said: Hu people are proud to be favored, they will soon make trouble, Luoyang may have to fall into the hands of thieves first!

古文：即托疾游太室山。
现代文：就称病去游太室山。
English: He called in sick to travel to Taimuroyama.

古文：已而禄山反，颖士往见河南采访使郭纳，言御守计，纳忽不用，叹曰： 肉食者以儿戏御剧贼，难矣哉！ 
现代文：接着安禄山叛乱，颖士去见河南采访使郭纳，就防御计策进言，郭纳忽视不用，颖士叹息说： 高官们以儿戏态度抵御强寇，真难办啊！ 
English: After the Anlu Mountain Rebellion, Ying Shih went to Henan to interview Guo Na, and gave advice on defense strategies. Guo Na ignored and did not use them. Ying Shih sighed and said, "High-ranking officials resist strong invaders with a child's play attitude. It's really hard to do!"

古文：闻封常清陈兵东京，往观之，不宿而还。
现代文：听说封常清在洛阳布置军队，颖士去看了看，没过夜就回来了。
English: Hearing that Feng Changqing was deploying troops in Luoyang, Ying Shi went to have a look and came back without spending the night.

古文：因藏家书于箕、颖间，身走山南，节度使源洧辟掌书记。
现代文：于是将家里书籍藏于箕山、颖水间，只身到山南，节度使源洧征召他为掌书记。
English: As a result, he hid his family's books in Lushan and Yingshui, and went to Shannan alone. The festival made Yuan Qi recruit him as the secretary.

古文：贼别校攻南阳，洧惧，欲退保江陵，颖士说曰： 官兵守潼关，财用急，必待江、淮转饷乃足，饷道由汉、沔，则襄阳乃今天下喉襟，一日不守，则大事去矣。
现代文：贼军的一支部队进攻南阳，源洧害怕了，想退守江陵，颍士进言说 ：官兵守潼关，钱粮需用很急，必待江、淮转运粮饷才够用，而粮道经由汉江、沔水，那么襄阳就是当今天下的咽喉要地，一旦失守，就会丧失天下。
English: A unit of the invading army attacked Nanyang. Yuan Xuan was afraid and wanted to retreat to the Jiangling. The officer and soldier said, "Officers and soldiers are guarding Shouguan. Money and grain are urgently needed. It is necessary to wait for the Huaihe River to transport grain and rice. And the grain route passes through the Han River and Surabaya. Then Yangyang is today's bottleneck. Once it is lost, the world will be lost."

古文：且列郡数十，人百万，训兵攘寇，社稷之功也。
现代文：而且您现拥有州郡数十、人口百万，练兵铲除贼寇，是保卫社稷的大功啊。
English: Moreover, you now have dozens of prefectures and counties with a population of one million. Training soldiers to eradicate bandits is a great achievement in protecting society.

古文：贼方专崤、陕，公何遽轻土地，欲取笑天下乎？ 
现代文：叛贼正横行于崤、陕间，您为什么仓猝丢掉土地，想让天下人笑话吗？ 
English: Traitors are running rampant in Shan and Shanxi. Why did you suddenly lose the land and want the world to laugh at you?

古文：洧乃按甲不出。
现代文：源洧就按兵不出。
English: Geng Yao did not go to the army.

古文：亦会禄山死，贼解去。
现代文：适逢安禄山死，贼兵退去。
English: When An Lushan died, the bandits retreated.

古文：洧卒，往客金陵，永王璘召之，不见。
现代文：源洧死后，萧颖士往金陵客居。永王李瞞召见他，萧颖士不见。
English: After the death of Yuan Xuan, Xiao Yingshi went to Jinling Guest House. Yongwang Li Xie summoned him, but Xiao Yingshi disappeared.

古文：时盛王为淮南节度大使，留蜀不遣，副大使李承式玩兵不振。
现代文：这时盛王为淮南节度大使，留居蜀地不履任，副大使李承式玩忽军备、兵势不振。
English: At this time, Sheng Wang was the ambassador of Huainan Festival, but he stayed in Shu and did not perform his duties. Vice-ambassador Li Chengxi neglected armaments and the army was not strong.

古文：颖士与宰相崔圆书，以为： 今兵食所资在东南，但楚、越重山复江，自古中原扰则盗先起，宜时遣王以捍镇江淮。 
现代文：萧颖士给宰相崔圆写信说 ：现在军队的供应在东南，但楚、越在中原相隔千山万水，自古中原乱，则东南盗贼先起，应及时派遣盛王去镇守江淮。 
English: Xiao Yingshi wrote a letter to Prime Minister Cui Yuan, saying: Now the supply of the army is in the southeast, but Chu and Yue are separated by thousands of mountains and rivers in the Central Plains. Since the ancient Central Plains War, the southeastern thieves should be the first to send Sheng Wang to guard the Jianghuai in time.

古文：俄而刘展果反。
现代文：不久，刘展果然反叛。
English: Soon, Liu Zhen rebelled.

古文：贼围雍丘，胁泗上军，承式遣兵往救，大宴宾客，陈女乐。
现代文：贼兵围雍丘城，威胁泗上军，承式遣兵往救，行前大宴宾客，并安排歌姬舞女表演助酒。
English: The bandits surrounded the city of Yongqiu, threatened to attack the army, sent soldiers to the rescue, invited guests to a grand banquet, and arranged for a performance by a female singer to help with the drinking.

古文：颖士曰： 天子暴露，岂臣下尽欢时邪？
现代文：萧颖士说 ：天子流离在外，这岂是臣子尽情欢乐的时候吗？
English: Xiao Yingshi said, "The emperor is away, isn't this the time for courtiers to enjoy themselves?"

古文：夫投兵不测，乃使观听华丽，一旦思归，谁致其死哉？ 
现代文：派出的援军处于胜负未卜之境，却使他们流连声色，一旦有归心，谁能拼死效命呢？ 
English: The reinforcements sent out are in an uncertain situation, but they make them linger. Once there is a conversion, who can fight to the death?

古文：弗纳。
现代文：李承式不听。
English: Li Chengxie did not listen.

古文：崔圆闻之，即授扬州功曹参军。
现代文：宰相崔圆听到此事，就任命萧颖士为扬州功曹参军。
English: When Prime Minister Cui Yuan heard about this, he appointed Xiao Yingshi as Yangzhou Gong Cao to join the army.

古文：至官，信宿去。
现代文：到任，住了两天就走了。
English: Arrived, stayed two days and left.

古文：后客死汝南逆旅，年五十二，门人共谥曰文元先生。
现代文：后来客死于汝南旅舍，年五十二岁，弟子们共拟私谥，称为文元先生。
English: Later, the guest died at the age of fifty-two in the Runan Hostel, and his disciples made a private funeral for him, calling him Mr. Wen Yuan.

古文：颖士乐闻人善，以推引后进为己任，如李阳、李幼卿、皇甫冉、陆渭等数十人，由奖目，皆为名士。
现代文：颖士喜欢称道别人的优点，以推荐引进后辈为己任，如李阳、李幼卿、皇甫冉、陆渭等数十人，由于萧颖士的奖掖品评，都成为知名之士。
English: Ying Shih likes to praise the merits of others, and it is his duty to recommend the introduction of younger generations. Dozens of people, such as Li Yang, Li Yuqing, Wang Fu Ran, and Lu Wei, have become well-known people due to Xiao Ying Shih's award-winning evaluation.

古文：天下推知人，称萧功曹。
现代文：天下推崇他能识别人才称之为萧功曹。
English: He is known as Xiao Gong Cao for his ability to recognize others.

古文：尝兄事元德秀，而友殷寅、颜真卿、柳芳、陆据、李华、邵轸、赵骅，时人语曰 殷、颜、柳、陆，李、萧、邵、赵 ，以能全其交也。
现代文：曾以兄礼待元德秀，而以殷寅、颜真卿、柳芳、陆据、李华、邵轸、赵骅为友，当时人称为 殷、颜、柳、陆、李、萧、邵、赵 ，因为他们能一直保持友谊。
English: He treated Yuan Dexiu with brotherly courtesy, and took Yin Yin, Yan Zhenqing, Liu Fang, Lu Zheng, Li Hua, Shao Wei, Zhao Wei as friends. At that time, people were called Yin, Yan, Liu, Lu, Li, Xiao, Shao, Zhao, because they could always maintain friendship.

古文：所与游者，孔至、贾至、源行恭、张有略、族弟季遐、刘颖、韩拯、陈晋、孙益、韦建、韦收。
现代文：与他交游的还有孔至、贾至、源行恭、张有略、族弟萧季遐、刘颖、韩拯、陈晋、孙益、韦建、韦收等。
English: He also had friendships with Kong Zhi, Jia Zhi, Yuan Xing Qiong, Zhang Youliao, his brother Xiao Jizhen, Liu Ying, Han Zheng, Chen Jin, Sun Yi, Wei Jian, Wei Jie and others.

古文：独华与齐名，世号 萧、李 。
现代文：以上这些人惟有李华能与萧颖士齐名，世称 萧、李 。
English: Of all these people, only Li Hua can be as famous as Xiao Ying Shi, known as Xiao and Li in the world.

古文：尝与华、据游洛龙门，读路旁碑，颖士即诵，华再阅，据三乃能尽记。
现代文：曾与李华、陆据游洛阳龙门，读路旁碑文，萧颖士一看便能背诵，李华需读两遍，陆据要读三遍才能完全记住。
English: He and Li Hua and Lu Zhi toured Luoyang Longmen and read the roadside inscriptions. Xiao Yingshi could recite them at a glance, while Li Hua had to read them twice and Lu Zhi had to read them three times to fully memorize them.

古文：闻者谓三人才高下，此其分也。
现代文：听说此事的人认为据此可以分出三人才学的高下。
English: People who have heard about this believe that it can be used to distinguish between the three talents.

古文：有奴事颖士十年，笞楚严惨，或劝其去，答曰： 非不能，爱其才耳。 
现代文：有仆人侍候萧颖士十年，遭残酷鞭打，有人劝他离去，仆人回答 ：不是不能走，而是爱他的才罢了。 
English: There was a servant who served Xiao Yingshi for ten years. He was brutally whipped. Someone advised him to leave. The servant replied, "It's not that I can't leave, it's just that I love him."

古文：颖士数称班彪、皇甫谧、张华、刘琨、潘尼能尚古，而混流俗不自振，曹植、陆机所不逮也；又言裴子野善著书。
现代文：颖士多次说班彪、皇甫谧、张华、刘琨、潘尼能崇尚古风，虽处流俗而不动摇，是曹植、陆机所不及的。又说裴子野善于著书。
English: Ying Shih repeatedly said that Ban Biao, Wang Fuxiong, Zhang Hua, Liu Ye, and Panyi were able to advocate the old style, although they were vulgar and unshakable, which was inferior to Cao Zhi and Lu Ji. He also said that Pei Zino was good at writing books.

古文：所许可当世者，陈子昂、富嘉谟、卢藏用之文辞，董南事、孔述睿之博学而已。
现代文：当世人他能看得起的，只有陈子昂、富嘉谟、卢藏用之文章词藻，董南事、孔述睿之博学而已。
English: When the world can see him, only the words and phrases used by Chen Ziang, Fu Jia Mu, and Lu Zang, and the erudition of Dong Nanji and Kong Shurai.

古文：子存，字伯诚，亮直有父风。能文辞，与韩会、沈既济、梁肃、徐岱等善。
现代文：萧颖士之子萧存，字伯诚，忠诚耿直有其父之风；文章写得好，与韩会、沈既济、梁肃、徐岱等为好友。
English: The son of Xiao Ying Shi, Xiao Cun, the character Bo Cheng, the loyalty of Geng Zhi has the style of his father; the article is well written, and he is good friends with Han Hui, Shen Yeji, Liang Su, Xu Xi and so on.

古文：浙西观察使李栖筠表常熟主簿。
现代文：浙西观察史李栖筠表奏他为常熟主簿。
English: Western Zhejiang observes the history of Li Qishan and lists him as the master of Changshu.

古文：颜真卿在湖州，与存及陆鸿渐等讨摭古今韵字所原，作书数百篇。
现代文：颜真卿在湖州时，与萧存、陆鸿渐等探讨古今韵字的本源，做书数百篇。
English: When Yan Zhenqing was in Huzhou, he discussed the origin of ancient and modern rhymes with Xiao Cun and Lu Hongyan, and wrote hundreds of books.

古文：建中初，由殿中侍御史四迁比部郎中。
现代文：建中初年，由殿中侍御史四次升调为比部郎中。
English: In the first year of junior high school, he was promoted four times from a palace attendant to a junior high school teacher.

古文：张滂主财赋，辟存留务京师。
现代文：张滂主管财税，征召他留在京城工作。
English: Zhang Jun, who was in charge of finance and taxation, conscripted him to work in Beijing.

古文：并弟谈，字中庸，颖士爱其才，以女妻之。
现代文：裴延龄与张滂不和，萧存厌恶裴不正派，辞去官职，患手足麻痹症而死。
English: Pei Yanling did not get along with Zhang Ye, Xiao Cun detested Pei's crooked faction, resigned from his official post, and died of hand and foot paralysis.

古文：士和字伯均，著《兰陵先生诔》、《萧夫子集论》，因榷历世文章，而盛推颖士所长，以为 闻萧氏风者，五尺童子羞称曹、陆 。皇甫冉，字茂政，十岁便能属文，张九龄叹异之。
现代文：韩愈青年时为萧存所赏识，从袁州回来时，经过萧存的庐山故居，萧的几个儿子已先死，只有一个女儿尚在，韩愈在经济上接济过他的家。殷寅是陈郡人。邵轸是汝南人。皇甫冉，字茂政，十岁便能写文章，张九龄赞叹称奇。
English: Han Yu was admired by Xiao Cun when he was young. When he came back from Yuanzhou, he passed Xiao Cun's Lushan former residence. Xiao's sons had died first, only one daughter was still alive. Han Yu supported his family financially. Yin Yin is from Chen County. Shao Wei is from the south of the Ryukyus. Wang Fu Ran, known as Maozheng, was able to write articles at the age of ten. Zhang Juling was amazed.

古文：与弟曾皆善诗。
现代文：与弟皇甫曾都善于做诗。
English: He and his brother Emperor Fu were both good at writing poetry.

古文：天宝中，踵登进士，授无锡尉。
现代文：天宝年间，相继考中进士，被任命为无锡县尉。
English: During the Tenpo era, he was successively promoted to junior high school entrance examination, and was appointed as Wuxi County Lieutenant.

古文：王缙为河南元帅，表掌书记。
现代文：王缙为河南元帅，表奏他任掌书记。
English: Wang Qian was a marshal of Henan Province, and he served as the secretary.

古文：迁累右补阙，卒。
现代文：逐步升为右补阙，死去。
English: Gradually ascends to right tarsal, dies.

古文：曾，字孝常，历监察御史。
现代文：皇甫曾字孝常，曾任监察御史。
English: The crown prince was once called Takatsune and served as inspector general of history.

古文：其名与冉相上下，当时比张氏景阳、孟阳云。
现代文：其名声与皇甫冉不相上下，当时人们把他们比作张景阳、张孟阳兄弟。
English: At that time, people compared them to the brothers Zhang Jingyang and Zhang Mengyang.

